Marseilles—The Arrival Chapter 2.
The Catalans Chapter 4.
Conspiracy Chapter 5.
The Marriage Feast Chapter 6.
The Deputy Procureur du Roi Chapter 7.
The Examination Chapter 8.
The Evening of the Betrothal Chapter 10.
The King’s Closet at the Tuileries Chapter 11.
The Corsican Ogre Chapter 12.
The Two Prisoners Chapter 15.
The Treasure Chapter 19.
The Cemetery of the Château d’If Chapter 21.
The Island of Tiboulen Chapter 22.
The Smugglers Chapter 23.
The Prison Register Chapter 29.
The Fifth of September Chapter 31.
The Colosseum Chapter 35.
La Mazzolata Chapter 36.
The Carnival at Rome.
The Catacombs of Saint Sebastian Chapter 38.
The Rendezvous Chapter 39.
The Breakfast Chapter 41.
The Presentation Chapter 42.
Monsieur Bertuccio Chapter 43.
The Vendetta Chapter 45.
Unlimited Credit Chapter 47.
Ideology Chapter 49.
Toxicology Chapter 53.
Major Cavalcanti Chapter 56.
Andrea Cavalcanti Chapter 57.
Noirtier de Villefort Chapter 59.
The Telegraph Chapter 61.
How a Gardener May Get Rid of the Dormice Chapter 62.
A Conjugal Scene Chapter 66.
Matrimonial Projects Chapter 67.
The Office of the King’s Attorney Chapter 68.
The Villefort Family Vault Chapter 75.
A Signed Statement Chapter 76.
Progress of Cavalcanti the Younger Chapter 77.
The Lemonade Chapter 80.
The Accusation Chapter 81.
The Burglary Chapter 83.
Beauchamp Chapter 85.
The Challenge Chapter 88.
Valentine Chapter 94.
Maximilian’s Avowal Chapter 95.
Father and Daughter VOLUME FIVE Chapter 96.
The Contract Chapter 97.
The Departure for Belgium Chapter 98.
The Apparition Chapter 101.
Valentine Chapter 103.
Maximilian Chapter 104.
Danglars’ Signature Chapter 105.
The Cemetery of Père-Lachaise Chapter 106.
Dividing the Proceeds Chapter 107.
The Indictment Chapter 111.
Expiation Chapter 112.
The Departure Chapter 113.
Marseilles—The Arrival On the 24th of February, 1815, the look-out at Notre-Dame de la Garde signalled the three-master, the _Pharaon_ from Smyrna, Trieste, and Naples.
As usual, a pilot put off immediately, and rounding the Château d’If, got on board the vessel between Cape Morgiou and Rion island.
Immediately, and according to custom, the ramparts of Fort Saint-Jean were covered with spectators; it is always an event at Marseilles for a ship to come into port, especially when this ship, like the _Pharaon_, has been built, rigged, and laden at the old Phocée docks, and belongs to an owner of the city.
The ship drew on and had safely passed the strait, which some volcanic shock has made between the Calasareigne and Jaros islands; had doubled Pomègue, and approached the harbor under topsails, jib, and spanker, but so slowly and sedately that the idlers, with that instinct which is the forerunner of evil, asked one another what misfortune could have happened on board.
The vague disquietude which prevailed among the spectators had so much affected one of the crowd that he did not await the arrival of the vessel in harbor, but jumping into a small skiff, desired to be pulled alongside the _Pharaon_, which he reached as she rounded into La Réserve basin.
When the young man on board saw this person approach, he left his station by the pilot, and, hat in hand, leaned over the ship’s bulwarks.
He was a fine, tall, slim young fellow of eighteen or twenty, with black eyes, and hair as dark as a raven’s wing; and his whole appearance bespoke that calmness and resolution peculiar to men accustomed from their cradle to contend with danger.
“What’s the matter? and why have you such an air of sadness aboard?” “A great misfortune, M.
Morrel,” replied the young man, “a great misfortune, for me especially!
Off Civita Vecchia we lost our brave Captain Leclere.” “And the cargo?” inquired the owner, eagerly.
Morrel; and I think you will be satisfied on that head.
But poor Captain Leclere——” “What happened to him?” asked the owner, with an air of considerable resignation.
The young sailor gave a look to see that his orders were promptly and accurately obeyed, and then turned again to the owner.
“And how did this misfortune occur?” inquired the latter, resuming the interrupted conversation. 0023m “Alas, sir, in the most unexpected manner.
After a long talk with the harbor-master, Captain Leclere left Naples greatly disturbed in mind.
In twenty-four hours he was attacked by a fever, and died three days afterwards.
We performed the usual burial service, and he is at his rest, sewn up in his hammock with a thirty-six-pound shot at his head and his heels, off El Giglio island.
It was worth while, truly,” added the young man with a melancholy smile, “to make war against the English for ten years, and to die in his bed at last, like everybody else.” “Why, you see, Edmond,” replied the owner, who appeared more comforted at every moment, “we are all mortal, and the old must make way for the young.
If not, why, there would be no promotion; and since you assure me that the cargo——” “Is all safe and sound, M.
Morrel, take my word for it; and I advise you not to take 25,000 francs for the profits of the voyage.” Then, as they were just passing the Round Tower, the young man shouted: “Stand by there to lower the topsails and jib; brail up the spanker!” The order was executed as promptly as it would have been on board a man-of-war.
“Let go—and clue up!” At this last command all the sails were lowered, and the vessel moved almost imperceptibly onwards.
Morrel,” said Dantès, observing the owner’s impatience, “here is your supercargo, M.
Danglars, coming out of his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular.
As for me, I must look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning.” The owner did not wait for a second invitation.
He seized a rope which Dantès flung to him, and with an activity that would have done credit to a sailor, climbed up the side of the ship, while the young man, going to his task, left the conversation to Danglars, who now came towards the owner.
He was a man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, of unprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors, insolent to his subordinates; and this, in addition to his position as responsible agent on board, which is always obnoxious to the sailors, made him as much disliked by the crew as Edmond Dantès was beloved by them.
Morrel,” said Danglars, “you have heard of the misfortune that has befallen us?” “Yes—yes: poor Captain Leclere!
He was a brave and an honest man.” “And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and honorable service, as became a man charged with the interests of a house so important as that of Morrel & Son,” replied Danglars.
“But,” replied the owner, glancing after Dantès, who was watching the anchoring of his vessel, “it seems to me that a sailor needs not be so old as you say, Danglars, to understand his business, for our friend Edmond seems to understand it thoroughly, and not to require instruction from anyone.” “Yes,” said Danglars, darting at Edmond a look gleaming with hate.
“Yes, he is young, and youth is invariably self-confident.
Morrel, and this day and a half was lost from pure whim, for the pleasure of going ashore, and nothing else.” “Dantès,” said the shipowner, turning towards the young man, “come this way!” “In a moment, sir,” answered Dantès, “and I’m with you.” Then calling to the crew, he said, “Let go!” The anchor was instantly dropped, and the chain ran rattling through the port-hole.
Dantès continued at his post in spite of the presence of the pilot, until this manœuvre was completed, and then he added, “Half-mast the colors, and square the yards!” “You see,” said Danglars, “he fancies himself captain already, upon my word.” “And so, in fact, he is,” said the owner.
“Except your signature and your partner’s, M.
Morrel.” “And why should he not have this?” asked the owner; “he is young, it is true, but he seems to me a thorough seaman, and of full experience.” A cloud passed over Danglars’ brow.
Morrel,” said Dantès, approaching, “the vessel now rides at anchor, and I am at your service.
You hailed me, I think?” Danglars retreated a step or two.
“And what did he say to you?” “Asked me questions about the vessel, the time she left Marseilles, the course she had taken, and what was her cargo.
But I told him I was only mate, and that she belonged to the firm of Morrel & Son.
The Morrels have been shipowners from father to son; and there was a Morrel who served in the same regiment with me when I was in garrison at Valence.’” “_Pardieu!_ and that is true!” cried the owner, greatly delighted.
“And that was Policar Morrel, my uncle, who was afterwards a captain.
Dantès, you must tell my uncle that the emperor remembered him, and you will see it will bring tears into the old soldier’s eyes.
But, pardon me, here are the health officers and the customs inspectors coming alongside.” And the young man went to the gangway.
As he departed, Danglars approached, and said,— “Well, it appears that he has given you satisfactory reasons for his landing at Porto-Ferrajo?” “Yes, most satisfactory, my dear Danglars.” “Well, so much the better,” said the supercargo; “for it is not pleasant to think that a comrade has not done his duty.” “Dantès has done his,” replied the owner, “and that is not saying much.
“I was passing close to the door of the captain’s cabin, which was half open, and I saw him give the packet and letter to Dantès.” “He did not speak to me of it,” replied the shipowner; “but if there be any letter he will give it to me.” Danglars reflected for a moment.
I may have been mistaken.” At this moment the young man returned; Danglars withdrew.
“Well, my dear Dantès, are you now free?” inquired the owner.
“Yes, sir.” “You have not been long detained.” “No.
I gave the custom-house officers a copy of our bill of lading; and as to the other papers, they sent a man off with the pilot, to whom I gave them.” “Then you have nothing more to do here?” “No—everything is all right now.” “Then you can come and dine with me?” “I really must ask you to excuse me, M.
My first visit is due to my father, though I am not the less grateful for the honor you have done me.” 0029m “Right, Dantès, quite right.
I always knew you were a good son.” “And,” inquired Dantès, with some hesitation, “do you know how my father is?” “Well, I believe, my dear Edmond, though I have not seen him lately.” “Yes, he likes to keep himself shut up in his little room.” “That proves, at least, that he has wanted for nothing during your absence.” Dantès smiled.
“My father is proud, sir, and if he had not a meal left, I doubt if he would have asked anything from anyone, except from Heaven.” “Well, then, after this first visit has been made we shall count on you.” “I must again excuse myself, M.
Morrel, for after this first visit has been paid I have another which I am most anxious to pay.” “True, Dantès, I forgot that there was at the Catalans someone who expects you no less impatiently than your father—the lovely Mercédès.” Dantès blushed.
“Ah, ha,” said the shipowner, “I am not in the least surprised, for she has been to me three times, inquiring if there were any news of the _Pharaon_. _Peste!_ Edmond, you have a very handsome mistress!” “She is not my mistress,” replied the young sailor, gravely; “she is my betrothed.” “Sometimes one and the same thing,” said Morrel, with a smile.
“Well, well, my dear Edmond,” continued the owner, “don’t let me detain you.
I have a son too, and I should be very wroth with those who detained him from me after a three months’ voyage.” “Then I have your leave, sir?” “Yes, if you have nothing more to say to me.” “Nothing.” “Captain Leclere did not, before he died, give you a letter for me?” “He was unable to write, sir.
Is it really your intention to make me captain of the _Pharaon_?” “If I were sole owner we’d shake hands on it now, my dear Dantès, and call it settled; but I have a partner, and you know the Italian proverb—_Chi ha compagno ha padrone_—‘He who has a partner has a master.’ But the thing is at least half done, as you have one out of two votes.
Morrel,” exclaimed the young seaman, with tears in his eyes, and grasping the owner’s hand, “M.
There’s a providence that watches over the deserving.
Go to your father; go and see Mercédès, and afterwards come to me.” “Shall I row you ashore?” “No, thank you; I shall remain and look over the accounts with Danglars.
Have you been satisfied with him this voyage?” “That is according to the sense you attach to the question, sir.
No, for I think he never liked me since the day when I was silly enough, after a little quarrel we had, to propose to him to stop for ten minutes at the island of Monte Cristo to settle the dispute—a proposition which I was wrong to suggest, and he quite right to refuse.
If you mean as responsible agent when you ask me the question, I believe there is nothing to say against him, and that you will be content with the way in which he has performed his duty.” “But tell me, Dantès, if you had command of the _Pharaon_ should you be glad to see Danglars remain?” “Captain or mate, M.
Morrel, I shall always have the greatest respect for those who possess the owners’ confidence.” “That’s right, that’s right, Dantès!
I see you are a thoroughly good fellow, and will detain you no longer.
Go, for I see how impatient you are.” “Then I have leave?” “Go, I tell you.” “May I have the use of your skiff?” “Certainly.” “Then, for the present, M.
Morrel, farewell, and a thousand thanks!” “I hope soon to see you again, my dear Edmond.
The two oarsmen bent to their work, and the little boat glided away as rapidly as possible in the midst of the thousand vessels which choke up the narrow way which leads between the two rows of ships from the mouth of the harbor to the Quai d’Orléans.
This room was occupied by Dantès’ father.
The news of the arrival of the _Pharaon_ had not yet reached the old man, who, mounted on a chair, was amusing himself by training with trembling hand the nasturtiums and sprays of clematis that clambered over the trellis at his window.
Suddenly, he felt an arm thrown around his body, and a well-known voice behind him exclaimed, “Father—dear father!” The old man uttered a cry, and turned round; then, seeing his son, he fell into his arms, pale and trembling.
Are you ill?” inquired the young man, much alarmed.
“No, no, my dear Edmond—my boy—my son!—no; but I did not expect you; and joy, the surprise of seeing you so suddenly—Ah, I feel as if I were going to die.” “Come, come, cheer up, my dear father! ’Tis I—really I!
Come now, do smile, instead of looking at me so solemnly.
Come, tell me all the good fortune that has befallen you.” “God forgive me,” said the young man, “for rejoicing at happiness derived from the misery of others, but, Heaven knows, I did not seek this good fortune; it has happened, and I really cannot pretend to lament it.
The good Captain Leclere is dead, father, and it is probable that, with the aid of M.
Do you understand, father?
Is this not more than a poor sailor like me could have hoped for?” “Yes, my dear boy,” replied the old man, “it is very fortunate.” “Well, then, with the first money I touch, I mean you to have a small house, with a garden in which to plant clematis, nasturtiums, and honeysuckle.
Are you not well?” “’Tis nothing, nothing; it will soon pass away”—and as he said so the old man’s strength failed him, and he fell backwards.
“Yes, yes, father, tell me where it is,” and he opened two or three cupboards.
“It is no use,” said the old man, “there is no wine.” “What, no wine?” said Dantès, turning pale, and looking alternately at the hollow cheeks of the old man and the empty cupboards.
“Yet,” stammered Dantès, wiping the perspiration from his brow,—“yet I gave you two hundred francs when I left, three months ago.” “Yes, yes, Edmond, that is true, but you forgot at that time a little debt to our neighbor, Caderousse.
He reminded me of it, telling me if I did not pay for you, he would be paid by M.
Morrel; and so, you see, lest he might do you an injury——” “Well?” “Why, I paid him.” “But,” cried Dantès, “it was a hundred and forty francs I owed Caderousse.” “Yes,” stammered the old man.
“So that you have lived for three months on sixty francs,” muttered Edmond.
“What are you doing?” “You have wounded me to the heart.” “Never mind it, for I see you once more,” said the old man; “and now it’s all over—everything is all right again.” 0035m “Yes, here I am,” said the young man, “with a promising future and a little money.
Here, father, here!” he said, “take this—take it, and send for something immediately.” And he emptied his pockets on the table, the contents consisting of a dozen gold pieces, five or six five-franc pieces, and some smaller coin.
The countenance of old Dantès brightened.
“Whom does this belong to?” he inquired.
Take it; buy some provisions; be happy, and tomorrow we shall have more.” “Gently, gently,” said the old man, with a smile; “and by your leave I will use your purse moderately, for they would say, if they saw me buy too many things at a time, that I had been obliged to await your return, in order to be able to purchase them.” “Do as you please; but, first of all, pray have a servant, father.
I have some smuggled coffee and most capital tobacco, in a small chest in the hold, which you shall have tomorrow.
But, hush, here comes somebody.” “’Tis Caderousse, who has heard of your arrival, and no doubt comes to congratulate you on your fortunate return.” “Ah, lips that say one thing, while the heart thinks another,” murmured Edmond.
“But, never mind, he is a neighbor who has done us a service on a time, so he’s welcome.” As Edmond paused, the black and bearded head of Caderousse appeared at the door.
“What, is it you, Edmond, back again?” said he, with a broad Marseillaise accent, and a grin that displayed his ivory-white teeth.
“Yes, as you see, neighbor Caderousse; and ready to be agreeable to you in any and every way,” replied Dantès, but ill-concealing his coldness under this cloak of civility.
“Thanks—thanks; but, fortunately, I do not want for anything; and it chances that at times there are others who have need of me.” Dantès made a gesture.
I lent you money, and you returned it; that’s like good neighbors, and we are quits.” “We are never quits with those who oblige us,” was Dantès’ reply; “for when we do not owe them money, we owe them gratitude.” “What’s the use of mentioning that?
I had gone on the quay to match a piece of mulberry cloth, when I met friend Danglars.
‘You at Marseilles?’—‘Yes,’ says he.
“‘I thought you were at Smyrna.’—‘I was; but am now back again.’ “‘And where is the dear boy, our little Edmond?’ “‘Why, with his father, no doubt,’ replied Danglars.
And so I came,” added Caderousse, “as fast as I could to have the pleasure of shaking hands with a friend.” 0037m “Worthy Caderousse!” said the old man, “he is so much attached to us.” “Yes, to be sure I am.
But it seems you have come back rich, my boy,” continued the tailor, looking askance at the handful of gold and silver which Dantès had thrown on the table.
The young man remarked the greedy glance which shone in the dark eyes of his neighbor.
“Eh,” he said, negligently, “this money is not mine.
I was expressing to my father my fears that he had wanted many things in my absence, and to convince me he emptied his purse on the table.
Come, father” added Dantès, “put this money back in your box—unless neighbor Caderousse wants anything, and in that case it is at his service.” “No, my boy, no,” said Caderousse.
Keep your money—keep it, I say;—one never has too much;—but, at the same time, my boy, I am as much obliged by your offer as if I took advantage of it.” “It was offered with good will,” said Dantès.
Morrel I hear,—you insinuating dog, you!” “M.
Morrel has always been exceedingly kind to me,” replied Dantès.
“Then you were wrong to refuse to dine with him.” “What, did you refuse to dine with him?” said old Dantès; “and did he invite you to dine?” “Yes, my dear father,” replied Edmond, smiling at his father’s astonishment at the excessive honor paid to his son.
“And why did you refuse, my son?” inquired the old man.
Morrel, good, worthy man,” said Caderousse.
“And when you are looking forward to be captain, it was wrong to annoy the owner.” “But I explained to him the cause of my refusal,” replied Dantès, “and I hope he fully understood it.” “Yes, but to be captain one must do a little flattery to one’s patrons.” “I hope to be captain without that,” said Dantès.
Nothing will give greater pleasure to all your old friends; and I know one down there behind the Saint Nicolas citadel who will not be sorry to hear it.” “Mercédès?” said the old man.
“Come, come,” said the sailor, “I have a better opinion than you of women in general, and of Mercédès in particular; and I am certain that, captain or not, she will remain ever faithful to me.” “So much the better—so much the better,” said Caderousse.
“When one is going to be married, there is nothing like implicit confidence; but never mind that, my boy,—go and announce your arrival, and let her know all your hopes and prospects.” “I will go directly,” was Edmond’s reply; and, embracing his father, and nodding to Caderousse, he left the apartment.
Caderousse lingered for a moment, then taking leave of old Dantès, he went downstairs to rejoin Danglars, who awaited him at the corner of the Rue Senac.
“Well,” said Danglars, “did you see him?” “I have just left him,” answered Caderousse.
“Did he allude to his hope of being captain?” “He spoke of it as a thing already decided.” “Indeed!” said Danglars, “he is in too much hurry, it appears to me.” “Why, it seems M.
And is he still in love with the Catalane?” “Over head and ears; but, unless I am much mistaken, there will be a storm in that quarter.” 0041m “Explain yourself.” “Why should I?” “It is more important than you think, perhaps.
Père Pamphile had seen Dantès pass not ten minutes before; and assured that he was at the Catalans, they sat down under the budding foliage of the planes and sycamores, in the branches of which the birds were singing their welcome to one of the first days of spring.
The Catalans Beyond a bare, weather-worn wall, about a hundred paces from the spot where the two friends sat looking and listening as they drank their wine, was the village of the Catalans.
Long ago this mysterious colony quitted Spain, and settled on the tongue of land on which it is to this day.
One of its chiefs, who understood Provençal, begged the commune of Marseilles to give them this bare and barren promontory, where, like the sailors of old, they had run their boats ashore.
The request was granted; and three months afterwards, around the twelve or fifteen small vessels which had brought these gypsies of the sea, a small village sprang up.
This village, constructed in a singular and picturesque manner, half Moorish, half Spanish, still remains, and is inhabited by descendants of the first comers, who speak the language of their fathers.
For three or four centuries they have remained upon this small promontory, on which they had settled like a flight of seabirds, without mixing with the Marseillaise population, intermarrying, and preserving their original customs and the costume of their mother-country as they have preserved its language.
Our readers will follow us along the only street of this little village, and enter with us one of the houses, which is sunburned to the beautiful dead-leaf color peculiar to the buildings of the country, and within coated with whitewash, like a Spanish posada.
At three paces from her, seated in a chair which he balanced on two legs, leaning his elbow on an old worm-eaten table, was a tall young man of twenty, or two-and-twenty, who was looking at her with an air in which vexation and uneasiness were mingled.
He questioned her with his eyes, but the firm and steady gaze of the young girl controlled his look.
“You see, Mercédès,” said the young man, “here is Easter come round again; tell me, is this the moment for a wedding?” “I have answered you a hundred times, Fernand, and really you must be very stupid to ask me again.” “Well, repeat it,—repeat it, I beg of you, that I may at last believe it!
Tell me for the hundredth time that you refuse my love, which had your mother’s sanction.
Make me understand once for all that you are trifling with my happiness, that my life or death are nothing to you.
Ah, to have dreamed for ten years of being your husband, Mercédès, and to lose that hope, which was the only stay of my existence!” “At least it was not I who ever encouraged you in that hope, Fernand,” replied Mercédès; “you cannot reproach me with the slightest coquetry.
You are included in the conscription, Fernand, and are only at liberty on sufferance, liable at any moment to be called upon to take up arms.
Once a soldier, what would you do with me, a poor orphan, forlorn, without fortune, with nothing but a half-ruined hut and a few ragged nets, the miserable inheritance left by my father to my mother, and by my mother to me?
She has been dead a year, and you know, Fernand, I have subsisted almost entirely on public charity.
Sometimes you pretend I am useful to you, and that is an excuse to share with me the produce of your fishing, and I accept it, Fernand, because you are the son of my father’s brother, because we were brought up together, and still more because it would give you so much pain if I refuse.
But I feel very deeply that this fish which I go and sell, and with the produce of which I buy the flax I spin,—I feel very keenly, Fernand, that this is charity.” “And if it were, Mercédès, poor and lone as you are, you suit me as well as the daughter of the first shipowner or the richest banker of Marseilles!
What do such as we desire but a good wife and careful housekeeper, and where can I look for these better than in you?” “Fernand,” answered Mercédès, shaking her head, “a woman becomes a bad manager, and who shall say she will remain an honest woman, when she loves another man better than her husband?
Rest content with my friendship, for I say once more that is all I can promise, and I will promise no more than I can bestow.” “I understand,” replied Fernand, “you can endure your own wretchedness patiently, but you are afraid to share mine.
I could extend my occupation as a fisherman, might get a place as clerk in a warehouse, and become in time a dealer myself.” “You could do no such thing, Fernand; you are a soldier, and if you remain at the Catalans it is because there is no war; so remain a fisherman, and contented with my friendship, as I cannot give you more.” “Well, I will do better, Mercédès.
I will be a sailor; instead of the costume of our fathers, which you despise, I will wear a varnished hat, a striped shirt, and a blue jacket, with an anchor on the buttons.
I do not understand you?” “I mean, Mercédès, that you are thus harsh and cruel with me, because you are expecting someone who is thus attired; but perhaps he whom you await is inconstant, or if he is not, the sea is so to him.” “Fernand,” cried Mercédès, “I believed you were good-hearted, and I was mistaken!
Fernand, you are wicked to call to your aid jealousy and the anger of God!
Yes, I will not deny it, I do await, and I do love him of whom you speak; and, if he does not return, instead of accusing him of the inconstancy which you insinuate, I will tell you that he died loving me and me only.” The young girl made a gesture of rage.
“I understand you, Fernand; you would be revenged on him because I do not love you; you would cross your Catalan knife with his dirk.
To lose you my friendship if he were conquered, and see that friendship changed into hate if you were victor.
Believe me, to seek a quarrel with a man is a bad method of pleasing the woman who loves that man.
No, Fernand, you will not thus give way to evil thoughts.
The burning Marseilles sun, which shot into the room through the open door, covered them with a flood of light.
Their intense happiness isolated them from all the rest of the world, and they only spoke in broken words, which are the tokens of a joy so extreme that they seem rather the expression of sorrow.
Suddenly Edmond saw the gloomy, pale, and threatening countenance of Fernand, as it was defined in the shadow.
By a movement for which he could scarcely account to himself, the young Catalan placed his hand on the knife at his belt.
“Ah, your pardon,” said Dantès, frowning in his turn; “I did not perceive that there were three of us.” Then, turning to Mercédès, he inquired, “Who is this gentleman?” “One who will be your best friend, Dantès, for he is my friend, my cousin, my brother; it is Fernand—the man whom, after you, Edmond, I love the best in the world.
Do you not remember him?” “Yes!” said Dantès, and without relinquishing Mercédès’ hand clasped in one of his own, he extended the other to the Catalan with a cordial air.
But Fernand, instead of responding to this amiable gesture, remained mute and trembling.
Edmond then cast his eyes scrutinizingly at the agitated and embarrassed Mercédès, and then again on the gloomy and menacing Fernand.
If I believed that, I would place my arm under yours and go with you to Marseilles, leaving the house to return to it no more.” Fernand’s eye darted lightning.
“And should any misfortune occur to you, dear Edmond,” she continued with the same calmness which proved to Fernand that the young girl had read the very innermost depths of his sinister thought, “if misfortune should occur to you, I would ascend the highest point of the Cape de Morgiou and cast myself headlong from it.” Fernand became deadly pale.
“But you are deceived, Edmond,” she continued.
“You have no enemy here—there is no one but Fernand, my brother, who will grasp your hand as a devoted friend.” And at these words the young girl fixed her imperious look on the Catalan, who, as if fascinated by it, came slowly towards Edmond, and offered him his hand.
His hatred, like a powerless though furious wave, was broken against the strong ascendancy which Mercédès exercised over him.
Scarcely, however, had he touched Edmond’s hand when he felt he had done all he could do, and rushed hastily out of the house.
“Oh,” he exclaimed, running furiously and tearing his hair—“Oh, who will deliver me from this man?
Wretched—wretched that I am!” “Hallo, Catalan!
Hallo, Fernand! where are you running to?” exclaimed a voice.
The young man stopped suddenly, looked around him, and perceived Caderousse sitting at table with Danglars, under an arbor.
“Well”, said Caderousse, “why don’t you come?
Are you really in such a hurry that you have no time to pass the time of day with your friends?” “Particularly when they have still a full bottle before them,” added Danglars.
Fernand looked at them both with a stupefied air, but did not say a word.
“He seems besotted,” said Danglars, pushing Caderousse with his knee.
“You called me, didn’t you?” And he fell, rather than sat down, on one of the seats which surrounded the table.
“I called you because you were running like a madman, and I was afraid you would throw yourself into the sea,” said Caderousse, laughing.
“Why, when a man has friends, they are not only to offer him a glass of wine, but, moreover, to prevent his swallowing three or four pints of water unnecessarily!” Fernand gave a groan, which resembled a sob, and dropped his head into his hands, his elbows leaning on the table.
“Well, Fernand, I must say,” said Caderousse, beginning the conversation, with that brutality of the common people in which curiosity destroys all diplomacy, “you look uncommonly like a rejected lover;” and he burst into a hoarse laugh.
“Bah!” said Danglars, “a lad of his make was not born to be unhappy in love.
You are laughing at him, Caderousse.” “No,” he replied, “only hark how he sighs!
Come, come, Fernand,” said Caderousse, “hold up your head, and answer us.
It’s not polite not to reply to friends who ask news of your health.” “My health is well enough,” said Fernand, clenching his hands without raising his head.
“Poor Fernand has been dismissed,” continued Caderousse.
“Well, and what then?” said Fernand, lifting up his head, and looking at Caderousse like a man who looks for someone on whom to vent his anger; “Mercédès is not accountable to any person, is she?
Is she not free to love whomsoever she will?” “Oh, if you take it in that sense,” said Caderousse, “it is another thing.
But I thought you were a Catalan, and they told me the Catalans were not men to allow themselves to be supplanted by a rival.
It was even told me that Fernand, especially, was terrible in his vengeance.” Fernand smiled piteously.
“A lover is never terrible,” he said.
“Poor fellow!” remarked Danglars, affecting to pity the young man from the bottom of his heart.
“Why, you see, he did not expect to see Dantès return so suddenly—he thought he was dead, perhaps; or perchance faithless!
“Never mind—in the meantime he marries Mercédès—the lovely Mercédès—at least he returns to do that.” During this time Danglars fixed his piercing glance on the young man, on whose heart Caderousse’s words fell like molten lead.
“Oh, it is not yet fixed!” murmured Fernand.
“No, but it will be,” said Caderousse, “as surely as Dantès will be captain of the _Pharaon_—eh, Danglars?” Danglars shuddered at this unexpected attack, and turned to Caderousse, whose countenance he scrutinized, to try and detect whether the blow was premeditated; but he read nothing but envy in a countenance already rendered brutal and stupid by drunkenness.
“Well,” said he, filling the glasses, “let us drink to Captain Edmond Dantès, husband of the beautiful Catalane!” Caderousse raised his glass to his mouth with unsteady hand, and swallowed the contents at a gulp.
“Eh, eh, eh!” stammered Caderousse.
“What do I see down there by the wall, in the direction of the Catalans?
You know wine is a deceiver; but I should say it was two lovers walking side by side, and hand in hand.
Heaven forgive me, they do not know that we can see them, and they are actually embracing!” Danglars did not lose one pang that Fernand endured.
“It is Edmond and Mercédès!” “Ah, see there, now!” said Caderousse; “and I did not recognize them!
Come this way, and let us know when the wedding is to be, for Fernand here is so obstinate he will not tell us.” “Hold your tongue, will you?” said Danglars, pretending to restrain Caderousse, who, with the tenacity of drunkards, leaned out of the arbor.
“Try to stand upright, and let the lovers make love without interruption.
At this Fernand recollected her threat of dying if Edmond died, and dropped again heavily on his seat.
Danglars looked at the two men, one after the other, the one brutalized by liquor, the other overwhelmed with love.
“I shall get nothing from these fools,” he muttered; “and I am very much afraid of being here between a drunkard and a coward.
Yet this Catalan has eyes that glisten like those of the vengeful Spaniards, Sicilians, and Calabrians, and the other has fists big enough to crush an ox at one blow.
Unquestionably, Edmond’s star is in the ascendant, and he will marry the splendid girl—he will be captain, too, and laugh at us all, unless”—a sinister smile passed over Danglars’ lips—“unless I take a hand in the affair,” he added.
“Hallo!” continued Caderousse, half-rising, and with his fist on the table, “hallo, Edmond! do you not see your friends, or are you too proud to speak to them?” “No, my dear fellow!” replied Dantès, “I am not proud, but I am happy, and happiness blinds, I think, more than pride.” “Ah, very well, that’s an explanation!” said Caderousse.
“How do you do, Madame Dantès?” Mercédès courtesied gravely, and said—“That is not my name, and in my country it bodes ill fortune, they say, to call a young girl by the name of her betrothed before he becomes her husband.
So call me Mercédès, if you please.” “We must excuse our worthy neighbor, Caderousse,” said Dantès, “he is so easily mistaken.” “So, then, the wedding is to take place immediately, M.
Dantès,” said Danglars, bowing to the young couple.
“As soon as possible, M.
Danglars; today all preliminaries will be arranged at my father’s, and tomorrow, or next day at latest, the wedding festival here at La Réserve.
Danglars, and you, Caderousse.” “And Fernand,” said Caderousse with a chuckle; “Fernand, too, is invited!” “My wife’s brother is my brother,” said Edmond; “and we, Mercédès and I, should be very sorry if he were absent at such a time.” Fernand opened his mouth to reply, but his voice died on his lips, and he could not utter a word.
“Today the preliminaries, tomorrow or next day the ceremony!
Danglars; for when we have suffered a long time, we have great difficulty in believing in good fortune.
But it is not selfishness alone that makes me thus in haste; I must go to Paris.” “Ah, really?—to Paris! and will it be the first time you have ever been there, Dantès?” “Yes.” “Have you business there?” “Not of my own; the last commission of poor Captain Leclere; you know to what I allude, Danglars—it is sacred.
Besides, I shall only take the time to go and return.” “Yes, yes, I understand,” said Danglars, and then in a low tone, he added, “To Paris, no doubt to deliver the letter which the grand marshal gave him.
Ah; Dantès, my friend, you are not yet registered number one on board the good ship _Pharaon_;” then turning towards Edmond, who was walking away, “A pleasant journey,” he cried.
“Thank you,” said Edmond with a friendly nod, and the two lovers continued on their way, as calm and joyous as if they were the very elect of heaven.
Conspiracy Danglars followed Edmond and Mercédès with his eyes until the two lovers disappeared behind one of the angles of Fort Saint Nicolas; then, turning round, he perceived Fernand, who had fallen, pale and trembling, into his chair, while Caderousse stammered out the words of a drinking-song.
“Well, my dear sir,” said Danglars to Fernand, “here is a marriage which does not appear to make everybody happy.” “It drives me to despair,” said Fernand.
“Do you, then, love Mercédès?” “I adore her!” “For long?” “As long as I have known her—always.” “And you sit there, tearing your hair, instead of seeking to remedy your condition; I did not think that was the way of your people.” “What would you have me do?” said Fernand.
I am not in love with Mademoiselle Mercédès; but for you—in the words of the gospel, seek, and you shall find.” “I have found already.” “What?” “I would stab the man, but the woman told me that if any misfortune happened to her betrothed, she would kill herself.” “Pooh!
Women say those things, but never do them.” “You do not know Mercédès; what she threatens she will do.” “Idiot!” muttered Danglars; “whether she kill herself or not, what matter, provided Dantès is not captain?” “Before Mercédès should die,” replied Fernand, with the accents of unshaken resolution, “I would die myself!” “That’s what I call love!” said Caderousse with a voice more tipsy than ever.
“That’s love, or I don’t know what love is.” “Come,” said Danglars, “you appear to me a good sort of fellow, and hang me, I should like to help you, but——” “Yes,” said Caderousse, “but how?” “My dear fellow,” replied Danglars, “you are three parts drunk; finish the bottle, and you will be completely so.
Drink then, and do not meddle with what we are discussing, for that requires all one’s wit and cool judgment.” “I—drunk!” said Caderousse; “well that’s a good one!
Père Pamphile, more wine!” And Caderousse rattled his glass upon the table.
“You were saying, sir——” said Fernand, awaiting with great anxiety the end of this interrupted remark.
“You talk like a noodle, my friend,” said Caderousse; “and here is Danglars, who is a wide-awake, clever, deep fellow, who will prove to you that you are wrong.
I have answered for you.
Dantès, your health.” Fernand rose impatiently.
“Let him run on,” said Danglars, restraining the young man; “drunk as he is, he is not much out in what he says.
“And why, I should like to know,” persisted Caderousse, “should they put Dantès in prison? he has neither robbed, nor killed, nor murdered.” “Hold your tongue!” said Danglars.
Have you that means?” “It is to be found for the searching.
But why should I meddle in the matter? it is no affair of mine.” “I know not why you meddle,” said Fernand, seizing his arm; “but this I know, you have some motive of personal hatred against Dantès, for he who himself hates is never mistaken in the sentiments of others.” “I! motives of hatred against Dantès?
I saw you were unhappy, and your unhappiness interested me; that’s all; but since you believe I act for my own account, adieu, my dear friend, get out of the affair as best you may;” and Danglars rose as if he meant to depart.
“No, no,” said Fernand, restraining him, “stay!
It is of very little consequence to me at the end of the matter whether you have any angry feeling or not against Dantès.
Do you find the means, I will execute it, provided it is not to kill the man, for Mercédès has declared she will kill herself if Dantès is killed.” Caderousse, who had let his head drop on the table, now raised it, and looking at Fernand with his dull and fishy eyes, he said, “Kill Dantès! who talks of killing Dantès?
I won’t have Dantès killed—I won’t!” “And who has said a word about killing him, muddlehead?” replied Danglars.
“We were merely joking; drink to his health,” he added, filling Caderousse’s glass, “and do not interfere with us.” “Yes, yes, Dantès’ good health!” said Caderousse, emptying his glass, “here’s to his health! his health—hurrah!” “But the means—the means?” said Fernand.
“Have you not hit upon any?” asked Danglars.
“No!—you undertook to do so.” “True,” replied Danglars; “the French have the superiority over the Spaniards, that the Spaniards ruminate, while the French invent.” “Do you invent, then,” said Fernand impatiently.
“Waiter,” said Danglars, “pen, ink, and paper.” “Pen, ink, and paper,” muttered Fernand.
“Yes; I am a supercargo; pen, ink, and paper are my tools, and without my tools I am fit for nothing.” “Pen, ink, and paper, then,” called Fernand loudly.
“Bring them here.” The waiter did as he was desired. 0059m “When one thinks,” said Caderousse, letting his hand drop on the paper, “there is here wherewithal to kill a man more sure than if we waited at the corner of a wood to assassinate him!
I have always had more dread of a pen, a bottle of ink, and a sheet of paper, than of a sword or pistol.” “The fellow is not so drunk as he appears to be,” said Danglars.
“Give him some more wine, Fernand.” Fernand filled Caderousse’s glass, who, like the confirmed toper he was, lifted his hand from the paper and seized the glass.
The Catalan watched him until Caderousse, almost overcome by this fresh assault on his senses, rested, or rather dropped, his glass upon the table.
“Well!” resumed the Catalan, as he saw the final glimmer of Caderousse’s reason vanishing before the last glass of wine.
“Well, then, I should say, for instance,” resumed Danglars, “that if after a voyage such as Dantès has just made, in which he touched at the Island of Elba, someone were to denounce him to the king’s procureur as a Bonapartist agent——” “I will denounce him!” exclaimed the young man hastily.
“Yes, but they will make you then sign your declaration, and confront you with him you have denounced; I will supply you with the means of supporting your accusation, for I know the fact well.
But Dantès cannot remain forever in prison, and one day or other he will leave it, and the day when he comes out, woe betide him who was the cause of his incarceration!” “Oh, I should wish nothing better than that he would come and seek a quarrel with me.” “Yes, and Mercédès!
Mercédès, who will detest you if you have only the misfortune to scratch the skin of her dearly beloved Edmond!” “True!” said Fernand.
“Yes, and that’s all settled!” exclaimed Caderousse, who, by a last effort of intellect, had followed the reading of the letter, and instinctively comprehended all the misery which such a denunciation must entail.
“Yes, and that’s all settled; only it will be an infamous shame;” and he stretched out his hand to reach the letter.
“Yes,” said Danglars, taking it from beyond his reach; “and as what I say and do is merely in jest, and I, amongst the first and foremost, should be sorry if anything happened to Dantès—the worthy Dantès—look here!” And taking the letter, he squeezed it up in his hands and threw it into a corner of the arbor.
“All right!” said Caderousse.
Certainly neither I nor Fernand,” said Danglars, rising and looking at the young man, who still remained seated, but whose eye was fixed on the denunciatory sheet of paper flung into the corner.
“In this case,” replied Caderousse, “let’s have some more wine.
I wish to drink to the health of Edmond and the lovely Mercédès.” “You have had too much already, drunkard,” said Danglars; “and if you continue, you will be compelled to sleep here, because unable to stand on your legs.” “I?” said Caderousse, rising with all the offended dignity of a drunken man, “I can’t keep on my legs?
Why, I’ll wager I can go up into the belfry of the Accoules, and without staggering, too!” “Done!” said Danglars, “I’ll take your bet; but tomorrow—today it is time to return.
Give me your arm, and let us go.” “Very well, let us go,” said Caderousse; “but I don’t want your arm at all.
Come, Fernand, won’t you return to Marseilles with us?” “No,” said Fernand; “I shall return to the Catalans.” “You’re wrong.
Come with us to Marseilles—come along.” “I will not.” “What do you mean? you will not?
Come along, Danglars, and let the young gentleman return to the Catalans if he chooses.” Danglars took advantage of Caderousse’s temper at the moment, to take him off towards Marseilles by the Porte Saint-Victor, staggering as he went.
When they had advanced about twenty yards, Danglars looked back and saw Fernand stoop, pick up the crumpled paper, and putting it into his pocket then rush out of the arbor towards Pillon.
“Well,” said Caderousse, “why, what a lie he told!
He said he was going to the Catalans, and he is going to the city.
You are coming, my boy!” “Oh, you don’t see straight,” said Danglars; “he’s gone right by the road to the Vieilles Infirmeries.” “Well,” said Caderousse, “I should have sworn that he turned to the right—how treacherous wine is!” “Come, come,” said Danglars to himself, “now the thing is at work and it will effect its purpose unassisted.” Chapter 5.
The Marriage Feast The morning’s sun rose clear and resplendent, touching the foamy waves into a network of ruby-tinted light.
The feast had been made ready on the second floor at La Réserve, with whose arbor the reader is already familiar.
The apartment destined for the purpose was spacious and lighted by a number of windows, over each of which was written in golden letters for some inexplicable reason the name of one of the principal cities of France; beneath these windows a wooden balcony extended the entire length of the house.
And although the entertainment was fixed for twelve o’clock, an hour previous to that time the balcony was filled with impatient and expectant guests, consisting of the favored part of the crew of the _Pharaon_, and other personal friends of the bridegroom, the whole of whom had arrayed themselves in their choicest costumes, in order to do greater honor to the occasion.
Various rumors were afloat to the effect that the owners of the _Pharaon_ had promised to attend the nuptial feast; but all seemed unanimous in doubting that an act of such rare and exceeding condescension could possibly be intended.
Danglars, however, who now made his appearance, accompanied by Caderousse, effectually confirmed the report, stating that he had recently conversed with M.
Morrel, who had himself assured him of his intention to dine at La Réserve.
With the entrance of M.
Morrel, Danglars and Caderousse were despatched in search of the bridegroom to convey to him the intelligence of the arrival of the important personage whose coming had created such a lively sensation, and to beseech him to make haste.
Danglars and Caderousse set off upon their errand at full speed; but ere they had gone many steps they perceived a group advancing towards them, composed of the betrothed pair, a party of young girls in attendance on the bride, by whose side walked Dantès’ father; the whole brought up by Fernand, whose lips wore their usual sinister smile.
Neither Mercédès nor Edmond observed the strange expression of his countenance; they were so happy that they were conscious only of the sunshine and the presence of each other.
Having acquitted themselves of their errand, and exchanged a hearty shake of the hand with Edmond, Danglars and Caderousse took their places beside Fernand and old Dantès,—the latter of whom attracted universal notice.
The old man was attired in a suit of glistening watered silk, trimmed with steel buttons, beautifully cut and polished.
His thin but wiry legs were arrayed in a pair of richly embroidered clocked stockings, evidently of English manufacture, while from his three-cornered hat depended a long streaming knot of white and blue ribbons.
Thus he came along, supporting himself on a curiously carved stick, his aged countenance lit up with happiness, looking for all the world like one of the aged dandies of 1796, parading the newly opened gardens of the Luxembourg and Tuileries.
Dantès himself was simply, but becomingly, clad in the dress peculiar to the merchant service—a costume somewhat between a military and a civil garb; and with his fine countenance, radiant with joy and happiness, a more perfect specimen of manly beauty could scarcely be imagined.
Lovely as the Greek girls of Cyprus or Chios, Mercédès boasted the same bright flashing eyes of jet, and ripe, round, coral lips.
She moved with the light, free step of an Arlesienne or an Andalusian.
Morrel descended and came forth to meet it, followed by the soldiers and sailors there assembled, to whom he had repeated the promise already given, that Dantès should be the successor to the late Captain Leclere.
Edmond, at the approach of his patron, respectfully placed the arm of his affianced bride within that of M.
Morrel, who, forthwith conducting her up the flight of wooden steps leading to the chamber in which the feast was prepared, was gayly followed by the guests, beneath whose heavy tread the slight structure creaked and groaned for the space of several minutes.
During this time, Dantès, at the opposite side of the table, had been occupied in similarly placing his most honored guests.
Morrel was seated at his right hand, Danglars at his left; while, at a sign from Edmond, the rest of the company ranged themselves as they found it most agreeable.
Then they began to pass around the dusky, piquant, Arlesian sausages, and lobsters in their dazzling red cuirasses, prawns of large size and brilliant color, the echinus with its prickly outside and dainty morsel within, the clovis, esteemed by the epicures of the South as more than rivalling the exquisite flavor of the oyster, North.
All the delicacies, in fact, that are cast up by the wash of waters on the sandy beach, and styled by the grateful fishermen “fruits of the sea.” “A pretty silence truly!” said the old father of the bridegroom, as he carried to his lips a glass of wine of the hue and brightness of the topaz, and which had just been placed before Mercédès herself.
“Do you fear any approaching evil?
I should say that you were the happiest man alive at this instant.” “And that is the very thing that alarms me,” returned Dantès.
“Man does not appear to me to be intended to enjoy felicity so unmixed; happiness is like the enchanted palaces we read of in our childhood, where fierce, fiery dragons defend the entrance and approach; and monsters of all shapes and kinds, requiring to be overcome ere victory is ours.
I own that I am lost in wonder to find myself promoted to an honor of which I feel myself unworthy—that of being the husband of Mercédès.” “Nay, nay!” cried Caderousse, smiling, “you have not attained that honor yet.
Just assume the tone and manner of a husband, and see how she will remind you that your hour is not yet come!” The bride blushed, while Fernand, restless and uneasy, seemed to start at every fresh sound, and from time to time wiped away the large drops of perspiration that gathered on his brow.
Mercédès looked pleased and gratified, while Fernand grasped the handle of his knife with a convulsive clutch.
“In an hour?” inquired Danglars, turning pale.
“Thanks to the influence of M.
Morrel, to whom, next to my father, I owe every blessing I enjoy, every difficulty has been removed.
We have purchased permission to waive the usual delay; and at half-past two o’clock the Mayor of Marseilles will be waiting for us at the city hall.
Arrived here only yesterday morning, and married today at three o’clock!
Commend me to a sailor for going the quick way to work!” “But,” asked Danglars, in a timid tone, “how did you manage about the other formalities—the contract—the settlement?” “The contract,” answered Dantès, laughingly, “it didn’t take long to fix that.
So, you see, our papers were quickly written out, and certainly do not come very expensive.” This joke elicited a fresh burst of applause.
“So that what we presumed to be merely the betrothal feast turns out to be the actual wedding dinner!” said Danglars.
“No, no,” answered Dantès; “don’t imagine I am going to put you off in that shabby manner.
Tomorrow morning I start for Paris; four days to go, and the same to return, with one day to discharge the commission entrusted to me, is all the time I shall be absent.
Dantès, perceiving the affectionate eagerness of his father, responded by a look of grateful pleasure; while Mercédès glanced at the clock and made an expressive gesture to Edmond.
Around the table reigned that noisy hilarity which usually prevails at such a time among people sufficiently free from the demands of social position not to feel the trammels of etiquette.
Such as at the commencement of the repast had not been able to seat themselves according to their inclination rose unceremoniously, and sought out more agreeable companions.
Everybody talked at once, without waiting for a reply and each one seemed to be contented with expressing his or her own thoughts.
Fernand’s paleness appeared to have communicated itself to Danglars.
As for Fernand himself, he seemed to be enduring the tortures of the damned; unable to rest, he was among the first to quit the table, and, as though seeking to avoid the hilarious mirth that rose in such deafening sounds, he continued, in utter silence, to pace the farther end of the salon.
Caderousse approached him just as Danglars, whom Fernand seemed most anxious to avoid, had joined him in a corner of the room.
“Upon my word,” said Caderousse, from whose mind the friendly treatment of Dantès, united with the effect of the excellent wine he had partaken of, had effaced every feeling of envy or jealousy at Dantès’ good fortune,—“upon my word, Dantès is a downright good fellow, and when I see him sitting there beside his pretty wife that is so soon to be.
“Certainly,” continued Danglars, “the sacrifice was no trifling one, when the beauty of the bride is concerned.
I only wish he would let me take his place.” “Shall we not set forth?” asked the sweet, silvery voice of Mercédès; “two o’clock has just struck, and you know we are expected in a quarter of an hour.” 0071m “To be sure!—to be sure!” cried Dantès, eagerly quitting the table; “let us go directly!” His words were re-echoed by the whole party, with vociferous cheers.
At this moment Danglars, who had been incessantly observing every change in Fernand’s look and manner, saw him stagger and fall back, with an almost convulsive spasm, against a seat placed near one of the open windows.
The company looked at each other in consternation.
“I demand admittance,” said a loud voice outside the room, “in the name of the law!” As no attempt was made to prevent it, the door was opened, and a magistrate, wearing his official scarf, presented himself, followed by four soldiers and a corporal.
Uneasiness now yielded to the most extreme dread on the part of those present.
“May I venture to inquire the reason of this unexpected visit?” said M.
Morrel, addressing the magistrate, whom he evidently knew; “there is doubtless some mistake easily explained.” “If it be so,” replied the magistrate, “rely upon every reparation being made; meanwhile, I am the bearer of an order of arrest, and although I most reluctantly perform the task assigned me, it must, nevertheless, be fulfilled.
Morrel felt that further resistance or remonstrance was useless.
He saw before him an officer delegated to enforce the law, and perfectly well knew that it would be as unavailing to seek pity from a magistrate decked with his official scarf, as to address a petition to some cold marble effigy.
There are situations which the heart of a father or a mother cannot be made to understand.
He prayed and supplicated in terms so moving, that even the officer was touched, and, although firm in his duty, he kindly said, “My worthy friend, let me beg of you to calm your apprehensions.
The scene of the previous night now came back to his mind with startling clearness.
The painful catastrophe he had just witnessed appeared effectually to have rent away the veil which the intoxication of the evening before had raised between himself and his memory.
“So, so,” said he, in a hoarse and choking voice, to Danglars, “this, then, I suppose, is a part of the trick you were concerting yesterday?
“How do I know?” replied Danglars; “gone, as every prudent man ought to be, to look after his own affairs, most likely.
A carriage awaited him at the door; he got in, followed by two soldiers and the magistrate, and the vehicle drove off towards Marseilles.
“Adieu, adieu, dearest Edmond!” cried Mercédès, stretching out her arms to him from the balcony.
The prisoner heard the cry, which sounded like the sob of a broken heart, and leaning from the coach he called out, “Good-bye, Mercédès—we shall soon meet again!” Then the vehicle disappeared round one of the turnings of Fort Saint Nicholas.
Morrel; “I will take the first conveyance I find, and hurry to Marseilles, whence I will bring you word how all is going on.” “That’s right!” exclaimed a multitude of voices, “go, and return as quickly as you can!” This second departure was followed by a long and fearful state of terrified silence on the part of those who were left behind.
The old father and Mercédès remained for some time apart, each absorbed in grief; but at length the two poor victims of the same blow raised their eyes, and with a simultaneous burst of feeling rushed into each other’s arms.
Meanwhile Fernand made his appearance, poured out for himself a glass of water with a trembling hand; then hastily swallowing it, went to sit down at the first vacant place, and this was, by mere chance, placed next to the seat on which poor Mercédès had fallen half fainting, when released from the warm and affectionate embrace of old Dantès.
Instinctively Fernand drew back his chair.
“He is the cause of all this misery—I am quite sure of it,” whispered Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off Fernand, to Danglars.
“I don’t think so,” answered the other; “he’s too stupid to imagine such a scheme.
I only hope the mischief will fall upon the head of whoever wrought it.” “You don’t mention those who aided and abetted the deed,” said Caderousse.
“Surely,” answered Danglars, “one cannot be held responsible for every chance arrow shot into the air.” “You can, indeed, when the arrow lights point downward on somebody’s head.” Meantime the subject of the arrest was being canvassed in every different form.
“Now the mischief is out; depend upon it the custom-house people went rummaging about the ship in our absence, and discovered poor Dantès’ hidden treasures.” Mercédès, however, paid no heed to this explanation of her lover’s arrest.
Her grief, which she had hitherto tried to restrain, now burst out in a violent fit of hysterical sobbing.
“Come, come,” said the old man, “be comforted, my poor child; there is still hope!” “Hope!” repeated Danglars.
“Hope!” faintly murmured Fernand, but the word seemed to die away on his pale agitated lips, and a convulsive spasm passed over his countenance.
“Good news! good news!” shouted forth one of the party stationed in the balcony on the lookout.
No doubt, now, we shall hear that our friend is released!” Mercédès and the old man rushed to meet the shipowner and greeted him at the door.
“What news?” exclaimed a general burst of voices.
Morrel, with a mournful shake of his head, “the thing has assumed a more serious aspect than I expected.” “Oh, indeed—indeed, sir, he is innocent!” sobbed forth Mercédès.
“That I believe!” answered M.
Morrel; “but still he is charged——” “With what?” inquired the elder Dantès.
“With being an agent of the Bonapartist faction!” Many of our readers may be able to recollect how formidable such an accusation became in the period at which our story is dated.
A despairing cry escaped the pale lips of Mercédès; the old man sank into a chair.
“Ah, Danglars!” whispered Caderousse, “you have deceived me—the trick you spoke of last night has been played; but I cannot suffer a poor old man or an innocent girl to die of grief through your fault.
I am determined to tell them all about it.” “Be silent, you simpleton!” cried Danglars, grasping him by the arm, “or I will not answer even for your own safety.
Who can tell whether Dantès be innocent or guilty?
Now, should any letters or other documents of a compromising character be found upon him, will it not be taken for granted that all who uphold him are his accomplices?” With the rapid instinct of selfishness, Caderousse readily perceived the solidity of this mode of reasoning; he gazed, doubtfully, wistfully, on Danglars, and then caution supplanted generosity.
“Suppose we wait a while, and see what comes of it,” said he, casting a bewildered look on his companion.
“To be sure!” answered Danglars.
If he be innocent, of course he will be set at liberty; if guilty, why, it is no use involving ourselves in a conspiracy.” “Let us go, then.
I cannot stay here any longer.” “With all my heart!” replied Danglars, pleased to find the other so tractable.
“Let us take ourselves out of the way, and leave things for the present to take their course.” After their departure, Fernand, who had now again become the friend and protector of Mercédès, led the girl to her home, while some friends of Dantès conducted his father, nearly lifeless, to the Allées de Meilhan.
The rumor of Edmond’s arrest as a Bonapartist agent was not slow in circulating throughout the city.
“Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dear Danglars?” asked M.
Morrel, as, on his return to the port for the purpose of gleaning fresh tidings of Dantès, from M. de Villefort, the assistant procureur, he overtook his supercargo and Caderousse.
“Could you have believed such a thing possible?” “Why, you know I told you,” replied Danglars, “that I considered the circumstance of his having anchored at the Island of Elba as a very suspicious circumstance.” “And did you mention these suspicions to any person beside myself?” 0079m “Certainly not!” returned Danglars.
Then added in a low whisper, “You understand that, on account of your uncle, M.
Policar Morrel, who served under the _other_ government, and who does not altogether conceal what he thinks on the subject, you are strongly suspected of regretting the abdication of Napoleon.
I should have feared to injure both Edmond and yourself, had I divulged my own apprehensions to a soul.
I am too well aware that though a subordinate, like myself, is bound to acquaint the shipowner with everything that occurs, there are many things he ought most carefully to conceal from all else.” “’Tis well, Danglars—’tis well!” replied M.
“Poor Dantès!” said Caderousse.
“No one can deny his being a noble-hearted young fellow.” “But meanwhile,” continued M.
Morrel, “here is the _Pharaon_ without a captain.” “Oh,” replied Danglars, “since we cannot leave this port for the next three months, let us hope that ere the expiration of that period Dantès will be set at liberty.” “No doubt; but in the meantime?” “I am entirely at your service, M.
Morrel,” answered Danglars.
“You know that I am as capable of managing a ship as the most experienced captain in the service; and it will be so far advantageous to you to accept my services, that upon Edmond’s release from prison no further change will be requisite on board the _Pharaon_ than for Dantès and myself each to resume our respective posts.” “Thanks, Danglars—that will smooth over all difficulties.
I fully authorize you at once to assume the command of the _Pharaon_, and look carefully to the unloading of her freight.
Private misfortunes must never be allowed to interfere with business.” “Be easy on that score, M.
Morrel; but do you think we shall be permitted to see our poor Edmond?” “I will let you know that directly I have seen M. de Villefort, whom I shall endeavor to interest in Edmond’s favor.
I am aware he is a furious royalist; but, in spite of that, and of his being king’s attorney, he is a man like ourselves, and I fancy not a bad sort of one.” “Perhaps not,” replied Danglars; “but I hear that he is ambitious, and that’s rather against him.” “Well, well,” returned M.
But now hasten on board, I will join you there ere long.” So saying, the worthy shipowner quitted the two allies, and proceeded in the direction of the Palais de Justice. 0081m “You see,” said Danglars, addressing Caderousse, “the turn things have taken.
I only wish I could see it now as plainly as I saw it lying all crushed and crumpled in a corner of the arbor.” “Well, then, if you did, depend upon it, Fernand picked it up, and either copied it or caused it to be copied; perhaps, even, he did not take the trouble of recopying it.
Fortunately, for me, the handwriting was disguised.” “Then you were aware of Dantès being engaged in a conspiracy?” “Not I.
It seems, however, that I have unconsciously stumbled upon the truth.” “Still,” argued Caderousse, “I would give a great deal if nothing of the kind had happened; or, at least, that I had had no hand in it.
You will see, Danglars, that it will turn out an unlucky job for both of us.” “Nonsense!
How can we be implicated in any way?
“So far, then,” said Danglars, mentally, “all has gone as I would have it.
I am, temporarily, commander of the _Pharaon_, with the certainty of being permanently so, if that fool of a Caderousse can be persuaded to hold his tongue.
My only fear is the chance of Dantès being released.
But, there, he is in the hands of Justice; and,” added he with a smile, “she will take her own.” So saying, he leaped into a boat, desiring to be rowed on board the _Pharaon_, where M.
The Deputy Procureur du Roi In one of the aristocratic mansions built by Puget in the Rue du Grand Cours opposite the Medusa fountain, a second marriage feast was being celebrated, almost at the same hour with the nuptial repast given by Dantès.
In this case, however, although the occasion of the entertainment was similar, the company was strikingly dissimilar.
The guests were still at table, and the heated and energetic conversation that prevailed betrayed the violent and vindictive passions that then agitated each dweller of the South, where unhappily, for five centuries religious strife had long given increased bitterness to the violence of party feeling.
The magistrates freely discussed their political views; the military part of the company talked unreservedly of Moscow and Leipsic, while the women commented on the divorce of Josephine.
It was not over the downfall of the man, but over the defeat of the Napoleonic idea, that they rejoiced, and in this they foresaw for themselves the bright and cheering prospect of a revivified political existence.
An old man, decorated with the cross of Saint Louis, now rose and proposed the health of King Louis XVIII.
This toast, recalling at once the patient exile of Hartwell and the peace-loving King of France, excited universal enthusiasm; glasses were elevated in the air _à l’Anglaise_, and the ladies, snatching their bouquets from their fair bosoms, strewed the table with their floral treasures.
In a word, an almost poetical fervor prevailed.
Villefort, I beg to remind you my mother speaks to you.” “If the marquise will deign to repeat the words I but imperfectly caught, I shall be delighted to answer,” said M. de Villefort.
“Never mind, Renée,” replied the marquise, with a look of tenderness that seemed out of keeping with her harsh dry features; but, however all other feelings may be withered in a woman’s nature, there is always one bright smiling spot in the desert of her heart, and that is the shrine of maternal love.
What I was saying, Villefort, was, that the Bonapartists had not our sincerity, enthusiasm, or devotion.” “They had, however, what supplied the place of those fine qualities,” replied the young man, “and that was fanaticism.
Napoleon is the Mahomet of the West, and is worshipped by his commonplace but ambitious followers, not only as a leader and lawgiver, but also as the personification of equality.” “He!” cried the marquise: “Napoleon the type of equality!
For mercy’s sake, then, what would you call Robespierre?
Come, come, do not strip the latter of his just rights to bestow them on the Corsican, who, to my mind, has usurped quite enough.” 0085m “Nay, madame; I would place each of these heroes on his right pedestal—that of Robespierre on his scaffold in the Place Louis Quinze; that of Napoleon on the column of the Place Vendôme.
The only difference consists in the opposite character of the equality advocated by these two men; one is the equality that elevates, the other is the equality that degrades; one brings a king within reach of the guillotine, the other elevates the people to a level with the throne.
Still, marquise, it has been so with other usurpers—Cromwell, for instance, who was not half so bad as Napoleon, had his partisans and advocates.” “Do you know, Villefort, that you are talking in a most dreadfully revolutionary strain?
But I excuse it, it is impossible to expect the son of a Girondin to be free from a small spice of the old leaven.” A deep crimson suffused the countenance of Villefort.
What avails recrimination over matters wholly past recall?
For my own part, I have laid aside even the name of my father, and altogether disown his political principles.
He was—nay, probably may still be—a Bonapartist, and is called Noirtier; I, on the contrary, am a staunch royalist, and style myself de Villefort.
Let what may remain of revolutionary sap exhaust itself and die away with the old trunk, and condescend only to regard the young shoot which has started up at a distance from the parent tree, without having the power, any more than the wish, to separate entirely from the stock from which it sprung.” “Bravo, Villefort!” cried the marquis; “excellently well said!
Come, now, I have hopes of obtaining what I have been for years endeavoring to persuade the marquise to promise; namely, a perfect amnesty and forgetfulness of the past.” “With all my heart,” replied the marquise; “let the past be forever forgotten.
I promise you it affords _me_ as little pleasure to revive it as it does you.
All I ask is, that Villefort will be firm and inflexible for the future in his political principles.
Remember, also, Villefort, that we have pledged ourselves to his majesty for your fealty and strict loyalty, and that at our recommendation the king consented to forget the past, as I do” (and here she extended to him her hand)—“as I now do at your entreaty.
But bear in mind, that should there fall in your way anyone guilty of conspiring against the government, you will be so much the more bound to visit the offence with rigorous punishment, as it is known you belong to a suspected family.” “Alas, madame,” returned Villefort, “my profession, as well as the times in which we live, compels me to be severe.
I have already successfully conducted several public prosecutions, and brought the offenders to merited punishment.
But we have not done with the thing yet.” 0087m “Do you, indeed, think so?” inquired the marquise.
Napoleon, in the Island of Elba, is too near France, and his proximity keeps up the hopes of his partisans.
“An island situated on the other side of the equator, at least two thousand leagues from here,” replied the count.
“There wasn’t any trouble over treaties when it was a question of shooting the poor Duc d’Enghien.” “Well,” said the marquise, “it seems probable that, by the aid of the Holy Alliance, we shall be rid of Napoleon; and we must trust to the vigilance of M. de Villefort to purify Marseilles of his partisans.
I never was in a law-court; I am told it is so very amusing!” “Amusing, certainly,” replied the young man, “inasmuch as, instead of shedding tears as at the fictitious tale of woe produced at a theatre, you behold in a law-court a case of real and genuine distress—a drama of life.
The prisoner whom you there see pale, agitated, and alarmed, instead of—as is the case when a curtain falls on a tragedy—going home to sup peacefully with his family, and then retiring to rest, that he may recommence his mimic woes on the morrow,—is removed from your sight merely to be reconducted to his prison and delivered up to the executioner.
I leave you to judge how far your nerves are calculated to bear you through such a scene.
Of this, however, be assured, that should any favorable opportunity present itself, I will not fail to offer you the choice of being present.” “For shame, M. de Villefort!” said Renée, becoming quite pale; “don’t you see how you are frightening us?—and yet you laugh.” “What would you have? ’Tis like a duel.
Besides, one requires the excitement of being hateful in the eyes of the accused, in order to lash one’s self into a state of sufficient vehemence and power.
No; my pride is to see the accused pale, agitated, and as though beaten out of all composure by the fire of my eloquence.” Renée uttered a smothered exclamation.
“What a splendid business that last case of yours was, my dear Villefort!” remarked a third; “I mean the trial of the man for murdering his father.
Nowadays the military profession is in abeyance and the magisterial robe is the badge of honor.
There is a wise Latin proverb that is very much in point.” “_Cedant arma togæ_,” said Villefort with a bow.
“I cannot speak Latin,” responded the marquise.
“Well,” said Renée, “I cannot help regretting you had not chosen some other profession than your own—a physician, for instance.
Do you know I always felt a shudder at the idea of even a _destroying_ angel?” “Dear, good Renée,” whispered Villefort, as he gazed with unutterable tenderness on the lovely speaker.
“Let us hope, my child,” cried the marquis, “that M. de Villefort may prove the moral and political physician of this province; if so, he will have achieved a noble work.” “And one which will go far to efface the recollection of his father’s conduct,” added the incorrigible marquise.
I should myself have recommended the match, had not the noble marquis anticipated my wishes by requesting my consent to it.’” “Is it possible the king could have condescended so far as to express himself so favorably of me?” asked the enraptured Villefort.
“I give you his very words; and if the marquis chooses to be candid, he will confess that they perfectly agree with what his majesty said to him, when he went six months ago to consult him upon the subject of your espousing his daughter.” 0091m “That is true,” answered the marquis.
“How much do I owe this gracious prince!
What is there I would not do to evince my earnest gratitude!” “That is right,” cried the marquise.
If you wish to see me the king’s attorney, you must desire for me some of those violent and dangerous diseases from the cure of which so much honor redounds to the physician.” At this moment, and as though the utterance of Villefort’s wish had sufficed to effect its accomplishment, a servant entered the room, and whispered a few words in his ear.
Villefort immediately rose from table and quitted the room upon the plea of urgent business; he soon, however, returned, his whole face beaming with delight.
Renée regarded him with fond affection; and certainly his handsome features, lit up as they then were with more than usual fire and animation, seemed formed to excite the innocent admiration with which she gazed on her graceful and intelligent lover.
“You were wishing just now,” said Villefort, addressing her, “that I were a doctor instead of a lawyer.
Well, I at least resemble the disciples of Esculapius in one thing [people spoke in this style in 1815], that of not being able to call a day my own, not even that of my betrothal.” “And wherefore were you called away just now?” asked Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran, with an air of deep interest.
“For a very serious matter, which bids fair to make work for the executioner.” “How dreadful!” exclaimed Renée, turning pale.
“Is it possible?” burst simultaneously from all who were near enough to the magistrate to hear his words.
“Why, if my information prove correct, a sort of Bonapartist conspiracy has just been discovered.” “Can I believe my ears?” cried the marquise.
Ample corroboration of this statement may be obtained by arresting the above-mentioned Edmond Dantès, who either carries the letter for Paris about with him, or has it at his father’s abode.
You know we cannot yet pronounce him guilty.” “He is in safe custody,” answered Villefort; “and rely upon it, if the letter is found, he will not be likely to be trusted abroad again, unless he goes forth under the especial protection of the headsman.” “And where is the unfortunate being?” asked Renée.
“He is at my house.” “Come, come, my friend,” interrupted the marquise, “do not neglect your duty to linger with us.
“Never mind that foolish girl, Villefort,” said the marquise.
“She will soon get over these things.” So saying, Madame de Saint-Méran extended her dry bony hand to Villefort, who, while imprinting a son-in-law’s respectful salute on it, looked at Renée, as much as to say, “I must try and fancy ’tis your dear hand I kiss, as it should have been.” “These are mournful auspices to accompany a betrothal,” sighed poor Renée.
“Upon my word, child!” exclaimed the angry marquise, “your folly exceeds all bounds.
I should be glad to know what connection there can possibly be between your sickly sentimentality and the affairs of the state!” “Oh, mother!” murmured Renée.
I promise you that to make up for her want of loyalty, I will be most inflexibly severe;” then casting an expressive glance at his betrothed, which seemed to say, “Fear not, for your dear sake my justice shall be tempered with mercy,” and receiving a sweet and approving smile in return, Villefort departed with paradise in his heart.
The Examination No sooner had Villefort left the salon, than he assumed the grave air of a man who holds the balance of life and death in his hands.
Now, in spite of the nobility of his countenance, the command of which, like a finished actor, he had carefully studied before the glass, it was by no means easy for him to assume an air of judicial severity.
Except the recollection of the line of politics his father had adopted, and which might interfere, unless he acted with the greatest prudence, with his own career, Gérard de Villefort was as happy as a man could be.
Already rich, he held a high official situation, though only twenty-seven.
He was about to marry a young and charming woman, whom he loved, not passionately, but reasonably, as became a deputy attorney of the king; and besides her personal attractions, which were very great, Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran’s family possessed considerable political influence, which they would, of course, exert in his favor.
The dowry of his wife amounted to fifty thousand crowns, and he had, besides, the prospect of seeing her fortune increased to half a million at her father’s death.
These considerations naturally gave Villefort a feeling of such complete felicity that his mind was fairly dazzled in its contemplation.
At the door he met the commissary of police, who was waiting for him.
“Ah, M. de Villefort,” cried he, “I am delighted to see you.
Some of your people have committed the strangest mistake—they have just arrested Edmond Dantès, mate of my vessel.” “I know it, monsieur,” replied Villefort, “and I am now going to examine him.” “Oh,” said Morrel, carried away by his friendship, “you do not know him, and I do.
He is the most estimable, the most trustworthy creature in the world, and I will venture to say, there is not a better seaman in all the merchant service.
Oh, M. de Villefort, I beseech your indulgence for him.” Villefort, as we have seen, belonged to the aristocratic party at Marseilles, Morrel to the plebeian; the first was a royalist, the other suspected of Bonapartism.
Villefort looked disdainfully at Morrel, and replied coldly: “You are aware, monsieur, that a man may be estimable and trustworthy in private life, and the best seaman in the merchant service, and yet be, politically speaking, a great criminal.
Is it not true?” The magistrate laid emphasis on these words, as if he wished to apply them to the owner himself, while his eyes seemed to plunge into the heart of one who, interceding for another, had himself need of indulgence.
Morrel reddened, for his own conscience was not quite clear on politics; besides, what Dantès had told him of his interview with the grand-marshal, and what the emperor had said to him, embarrassed him.
He replied, however, in a tone of deep interest: “I entreat you, M. de Villefort, be, as you always are, kind and equitable, and give him back to us soon.” This _give us_ sounded revolutionary in the deputy’s ears.
“Ah, ah,” murmured he, “is Dantès then a member of some Carbonari society, that his protector thus employs the collective form?
The antechamber was full of police agents and gendarmes, in the midst of whom, carefully watched, but calm and smiling, stood the prisoner.
Villefort traversed the antechamber, cast a side glance at Dantès, and taking a packet which a gendarme offered him, disappeared, saying, “Bring in the prisoner.” Rapid as had been Villefort’s glance, it had served to give him an idea of the man he was about to interrogate.
He had recognized intelligence in the high forehead, courage in the dark eye and bent brow, and frankness in the thick lips that showed a set of pearly teeth.
Villefort’s first impression was favorable; but he had been so often warned to mistrust first impulses, that he applied the maxim to the impression, forgetting the difference between the two words.
He stifled, therefore, the feelings of compassion that were rising, composed his features, and sat down, grim and sombre, at his desk.
He was pale, but calm and collected, and saluting his judge with easy politeness, looked round for a seat, as if he had been in M.
It was then that he encountered for the first time Villefort’s look,—that look peculiar to the magistrate, who, while seeming to read the thoughts of others, betrays nothing of his own.
“Who and what are you?” demanded Villefort, turning over a pile of papers, containing information relative to the prisoner, that a police agent had given to him on his entry, and that, already, in an hour’s time, had swelled to voluminous proportions, thanks to the corrupt espionage of which “the accused” is always made the victim.
“My name is Edmond Dantès,” replied the young man calmly; “I am mate of the _Pharaon_, belonging to Messrs.
Morrel & Son.” “Your age?” continued Villefort.
“Nineteen,” returned Dantès.
“What were you doing at the moment you were arrested?” “I was at the festival of my marriage, monsieur,” said the young man, his voice slightly tremulous, so great was the contrast between that happy moment and the painful ceremony he was now undergoing; so great was the contrast between the sombre aspect of M. de Villefort and the radiant face of Mercédès.
“You were at the festival of your marriage?” said the deputy, shuddering in spite of himself.
“Yes, monsieur; I am on the point of marrying a young girl I have been attached to for three years.” Villefort, impassive as he was, was struck with this coincidence; and the tremulous voice of Dantès, surprised in the midst of his happiness, struck a sympathetic chord in his own bosom—he also was on the point of being married, and he was summoned from his own happiness to destroy that of another.
“This philosophic reflection,” thought he, “will make a great sensation at M. de Saint-Méran’s;” and he arranged mentally, while Dantès awaited further questions, the antithesis by which orators often create a reputation for eloquence.
When this speech was arranged, Villefort turned to Dantès. 0099m “Go on, sir,” said he.
“My political opinions!” replied Dantès.
“Alas, sir, I never had any opinions.
I am hardly nineteen; I know nothing; I have no part to play.
If I obtain the situation I desire, I shall owe it to M.
Thus all my opinions—I will not say public, but private—are confined to these three sentiments,—I love my father, I respect M.
This, sir, is all I can tell you, and you see how uninteresting it is.” As Dantès spoke, Villefort gazed at his ingenuous and open countenance, and recollected the words of Renée, who, without knowing who the culprit was, had besought his indulgence for him.
With the deputy’s knowledge of crime and criminals, every word the young man uttered convinced him more and more of his innocence.
This lad, for he was scarcely a man,—simple, natural, eloquent with that eloquence of the heart never found when sought for; full of affection for everybody, because he was happy, and because happiness renders even the wicked good—extended his affection even to his judge, spite of Villefort’s severe look and stern accent.
Dantès seemed full of kindness. _“Pardieu!”_ said Villefort, “he is a noble fellow.
I shall have at least a pressure of the hand in public, and a sweet kiss in private.” Full of this idea, Villefort’s face became so joyous, that when he turned to Dantès, the latter, who had watched the change on his physiognomy, was smiling also.
“Sir,” said Villefort, “have you any enemies, at least, that you know.” “I have enemies?” replied Dantès; “my position is not sufficiently elevated for that.
As for my disposition, that is, perhaps, somewhat too hasty; but I have striven to repress it.
I have had ten or twelve sailors under me, and if you question them, they will tell you that they love and respect me, not as a father, for I am too young, but as an elder brother.” “But you may have excited jealousy.
You seem a worthy young man; I will depart from the strict line of my duty to aid you in discovering the author of this accusation.
Here is the paper; do you know the writing?” As he spoke, Villefort drew the letter from his pocket, and presented it to Dantès.
A cloud passed over his brow as he said: “No, monsieur, I do not know the writing, and yet it is tolerably plain.
I am very fortunate,” added he, looking gratefully at Villefort, “to be examined by such a man as you; for this envious person is a real enemy.” And by the rapid glance that the young man’s eyes shot forth, Villefort saw how much energy lay hid beneath this mildness.
“Now,” said the deputy, “answer me frankly, not as a prisoner to a judge, but as one man to another who takes an interest in him, what truth is there in the accusation contained in this anonymous letter?” And Villefort threw disdainfully on his desk the letter Dantès had just given back to him.
I swear by my honor as a sailor, by my love for Mercédès, by the life of my father——” “Speak, monsieur,” said Villefort.
Then, internally, “If Renée could see me, I hope she would be satisfied, and would no longer call me a decapitator.” “Well, when we quitted Naples, Captain Leclere was attacked with a brain fever.
As we had no doctor on board, and he was so anxious to arrive at Elba, that he would not touch at any other port, his disorder rose to such a height, that at the end of the third day, feeling he was dying, he called me to him.
‘My dear Dantès,’ said he, ‘swear to perform what I am going to tell you, for it is a matter of the deepest importance.’ “‘I swear, captain,’ replied I.
“‘Well, as after my death the command devolves on you as mate, assume the command, and bear up for the Island of Elba, disembark at Porto-Ferrajo, ask for the grand-marshal, give him this letter—perhaps they will give you another letter, and charge you with a commission.
You will accomplish what I was to have done, and derive all the honor and profit from it.’ “‘I will do it, captain; but perhaps I shall not be admitted to the grand-marshal’s presence as easily as you expect?’ “‘Here is a ring that will obtain audience of him, and remove every difficulty,’ said the captain.
It was time—two hours after he was delirious; the next day he died.” “And what did you do then?” “What I ought to have done, and what everyone would have done in my place.
Everywhere the last requests of a dying man are sacred; but with a sailor the last requests of his superior are commands.
I sailed for the Island of Elba, where I arrived the next day; I ordered everybody to remain on board, and went on shore alone.
As I had expected, I found some difficulty in obtaining access to the grand-marshal; but I sent the ring I had received from the captain to him, and was instantly admitted.
He questioned me concerning Captain Leclere’s death; and, as the latter had told me, gave me a letter to carry on to a person in Paris.
I undertook it because it was what my captain had bade me do.
I landed here, regulated the affairs of the vessel, and hastened to visit my affianced bride, whom I found more lovely than ever.
Morrel, all the forms were got over; in a word I was, as I told you, at my marriage feast; and I should have been married in an hour, and tomorrow I intended to start for Paris, had I not been arrested on this charge which you as well as I now see to be unjust.” “Ah,” said Villefort, “this seems to me the truth.
If you have been culpable, it was imprudence, and this imprudence was in obedience to the orders of your captain.
Give up this letter you have brought from Elba, and pass your word you will appear should you be required, and go and rejoin your friends.
“I am free, then, sir?” cried Dantès joyfully.
“To whom is it addressed?” _“To Monsieur Noirtier, Rue Coq-Héron, Paris.”_ Had a thunderbolt fallen into the room, Villefort could not have been more stupefied.
He sank into his seat, and hastily turning over the packet, drew forth the fatal letter, at which he glanced with an expression of terror.
Noirtier, Rue Coq-Héron, No. 13,” murmured he, growing still paler.
“Yes,” said Dantès; “do you know him?” “No,” replied Villefort; “a faithful servant of the king does not know conspirators.” 0103m “It is a conspiracy, then?” asked Dantès, who after believing himself free, now began to feel a tenfold alarm.
“I have, however, already told you, sir, I was entirely ignorant of the contents of the letter.” “Yes; but you knew the name of the person to whom it was addressed,” said Villefort.
“I was forced to read the address to know to whom to give it.” “Have you shown this letter to anyone?” asked Villefort, becoming still more pale.
“To no one, on my honor.” “Everybody is ignorant that you are the bearer of a letter from the Island of Elba, and addressed to M.
Noirtier?” “Everybody, except the person who gave it to me.” “And that was too much, far too much,” murmured Villefort.
Villefort’s brow darkened more and more, his white lips and clenched teeth filled Dantès with apprehension.
After reading the letter, Villefort covered his face with his hands.
“Oh,” said Dantès timidly, “what is the matter?” Villefort made no answer, but raised his head at the expiration of a few seconds, and again perused the letter.
“And you say that you are ignorant of the contents of this letter?” “I give you my word of honor, sir,” said Dantès; “but what is the matter?
You are ill—shall I ring for assistance?—shall I call?” “No,” said Villefort, rising hastily; “stay where you are.
It is for me to give orders here, and not you.” “Monsieur,” replied Dantès proudly, “it was only to summon assistance for you.” “I want none; it was a temporary indisposition.
Attend to yourself; answer me.” Dantès waited, expecting a question, but in vain.
Villefort fell back on his chair, passed his hand over his brow, moist with perspiration, and, for the third time, read the letter.
“Oh, if he knows the contents of this!” murmured he, “and that Noirtier is the father of Villefort, I am lost!” And he fixed his eyes upon Edmond as if he would have penetrated his thoughts.
“Oh, it is impossible to doubt it,” cried he, suddenly.
The principal charge against you is this letter, and you see——” Villefort approached the fire, cast it in, and waited until it was entirely consumed.
“You see, I destroy it?” “Oh,” exclaimed Dantès, “you are goodness itself.” “Listen,” continued Villefort; “you can now have confidence in me after what I have done.” “Oh, command, and I will obey.” “Listen; this is not a command, but advice I give you.” “Speak, and I will follow your advice.” “I shall detain you until this evening in the Palais de Justice.
Should anyone else interrogate you, say to him what you have said to me, but do not breathe a word of this letter.” “I promise.” It was Villefort who seemed to entreat, and the prisoner who reassured him.
“You see,” continued he, glancing toward the grate, where fragments of burnt paper fluttered in the flames, “the letter is destroyed; you and I alone know of its existence; should you, therefore, be questioned, deny all knowledge of it—deny it boldly, and you are saved.” “Be satisfied; I will deny it.” “It was the only letter you had?” “It was.” “Swear it.” “I swear it.” Villefort rang.
Villefort whispered some words in his ear, to which the officer replied by a motion of his head.
“Follow him,” said Villefort to Dantès.
Dantès saluted Villefort and retired.
Hardly had the door closed when Villefort threw himself half-fainting into a chair.
“Alas, alas,” murmured he, “if the procureur himself had been at Marseilles I should have been ruined.
This accursed letter would have destroyed all my hopes.
Oh, my father, must your past career always interfere with my successes?” Suddenly a light passed over his face, a smile played round his set mouth, and his haggard eyes were fixed in thought.
Now to the work I have in hand.” And after having assured himself that the prisoner was gone, the deputy procureur hastened to the house of his betrothed. 0107m Chapter 8.
The Château d’If The commissary of police, as he traversed the antechamber, made a sign to two gendarmes, who placed themselves one on Dantès’ right and the other on his left.
A door that communicated with the Palais de Justice was opened, and they went through a long range of gloomy corridors, whose appearance might have made even the boldest shudder.
The Palais de Justice communicated with the prison,—a sombre edifice, that from its grated windows looks on the clock-tower of the Accoules.
After numberless windings, Dantès saw a door with an iron wicket.
The commissary took up an iron mallet and knocked thrice, every blow seeming to Dantès as if struck on his heart.
The door opened, the two gendarmes gently pushed him forward, and the door closed with a loud sound behind him.
The air he inhaled was no longer pure, but thick and mephitic,—he was in prison.
He was conducted to a tolerably neat chamber, but grated and barred, and its appearance, therefore, did not greatly alarm him; besides, the words of Villefort, who seemed to interest himself so much, resounded still in his ears like a promise of freedom.
It was, as we have said, the 1st of March, and the prisoner was soon buried in darkness.
The obscurity augmented the acuteness of his hearing; at the slightest sound he rose and hastened to the door, convinced they were about to liberate him, but the sound died away, and Dantès sank again into his seat.
At last, about ten o’clock, and just as Dantès began to despair, steps were heard in the corridor, a key turned in the lock, the bolts creaked, the massy oaken door flew open, and a flood of light from two torches pervaded the apartment.
By the torchlight Dantès saw the glittering sabres and carbines of four gendarmes.
He had advanced at first, but stopped at the sight of this display of force.
“Yes,” replied a gendarme.
“By the orders of the deputy procureur?” “I believe so.” The conviction that they came from M. de Villefort relieved all Dantès’ apprehensions; he advanced calmly, and placed himself in the centre of the escort.
A carriage waited at the door, the coachman was on the box, and a police officer sat beside him.
“Is this carriage for me?” said Dantès.
“It is for you,” replied a gendarme.
Dantès was about to speak; but feeling himself urged forward, and having neither the power nor the intention to resist, he mounted the steps, and was in an instant seated inside between two gendarmes; the two others took their places opposite, and the carriage rolled heavily over the stones.
The prisoner glanced at the windows—they were grated; he had changed his prison for another that was conveying him he knew not whither.
Through the grating, however, Dantès saw they were passing through the Rue Caisserie, and by the Rue Saint-Laurent and the Rue Taramis, to the quay.
Soon he saw the lights of La Consigne.
The carriage stopped, the officer descended, approached the guardhouse, a dozen soldiers came out and formed themselves in order; Dantès saw the reflection of their muskets by the light of the lamps on the quay.
“Can all this force be summoned on my account?” thought he.
The officer opened the door, which was locked, and, without speaking a word, answered Dantès’ question; for he saw between the ranks of the soldiers a passage formed from the carriage to the port.
The two gendarmes who were opposite to him descended first, then he was ordered to alight and the gendarmes on each side of him followed his example.
They advanced towards a boat, which a custom-house officer held by a chain, near the quay.
The soldiers looked at Dantès with an air of stupid curiosity.
In an instant he was placed in the stern-sheets of the boat, between the gendarmes, while the officer stationed himself at the bow; a shove sent the boat adrift, and four sturdy oarsmen impelled it rapidly towards the Pilon.
The prisoner’s first feeling was of joy at again breathing the pure air—for air is freedom; but he soon sighed, for he passed before La Réserve, where he had that morning been so happy, and now through the open windows came the laughter and revelry of a ball.
Dantès folded his hands, raised his eyes to heaven, and prayed fervently. 0111m The boat continued her voyage.
This manœuvre was incomprehensible to Dantès.
“You will soon know.” “But still——” “We are forbidden to give you any explanation.” Dantès, trained in discipline, knew that nothing would be more absurd than to question subordinates, who were forbidden to reply; and so he remained silent.
The most vague and wild thoughts passed through his mind.
He was not bound, nor had they made any attempt to handcuff him; this seemed a good augury.
Besides, had not the deputy, who had been so kind to him, told him that provided he did not pronounce the dreaded name of Noirtier, he had nothing to apprehend?
Had not Villefort in his presence destroyed the fatal letter, the only proof against him?
He waited silently, striving to pierce through the darkness.
They had left the Ile Ratonneau, where the lighthouse stood, on the right, and were now opposite the Point des Catalans.
It seemed to the prisoner that he could distinguish a feminine form on the beach, for it was there Mercédès dwelt.
How was it that a presentiment did not warn Mercédès that her lover was within three hundred yards of her?
Mercédès was the only one awake in the whole settlement.
But pride restrained him and he did not utter it.
He remained silent, his eyes fixed upon the light; the boat went on, but the prisoner thought only of Mercédès.
An intervening elevation of land hid the light.
Dantès turned and perceived that they had got out to sea.
While he had been absorbed in thought, they had shipped their oars and hoisted sail; the boat was now moving with the wind.
In spite of his repugnance to address the guards, Dantès turned to the nearest gendarme, and taking his hand, “Comrade,” said he, “I adjure you, as a Christian and a soldier, to tell me where we are going.
You see I cannot escape, even if I intended.” “Unless you are blind, or have never been outside the harbor, you must know.” “I do not.” “Look round you then.” Dantès rose and looked forward, when he saw rise within a hundred yards of him the black and frowning rock on which stands the Château d’If.
This gloomy fortress, which has for more than three hundred years furnished food for so many wild legends, seemed to Dantès like a scaffold to a malefactor.
“The Château d’If?” cried he, “what are we going there for?” The gendarme smiled.
“I am not going there to be imprisoned,” said Dantès; “it is only used for political prisoners.
I have committed no crime.
Are there any magistrates or judges at the Château d’If?” “There are only,” said the gendarme, “a governor, a garrison, turnkeys, and good thick walls.
Come, come, do not look so astonished, or you will make me think you are laughing at me in return for my good nature.” Dantès pressed the gendarme’s hand as though he would crush it.
Help, comrades, help!” By a rapid movement, which the gendarme’s practiced eye had perceived, Dantès sprang forward to precipitate himself into the sea; but four vigorous arms seized him as his feet quitted the bottom of the boat.
“Good!” said the gendarme, placing his knee on his chest; “this is the way you keep your word as a sailor!
Believe soft-spoken gentlemen again!
Hark ye, my friend, I have disobeyed my first order, but I will not disobey the second; and if you move, I will blow your brains out.” And he levelled his carbine at Dantès, who felt the muzzle against his temple.
For a moment the idea of struggling crossed his mind, and of so ending the unexpected evil that had overtaken him.
But he bethought him of M. de Villefort’s promise; and, besides, death in a boat from the hand of a gendarme seemed too terrible.
He remained motionless, but gnashing his teeth and wringing his hands with fury.
His guards, taking him by the arms and coat-collar, forced him to rise, and dragged him towards the steps that lead to the gate of the fortress, while the police officer carrying a musket with fixed bayonet followed behind.
Dantès made no resistance; he was like a man in a dream; he saw soldiers drawn up on the embankment; he knew vaguely that he was ascending a flight of steps; he was conscious that he passed through a door, and that the door closed behind him; but all this indistinctly as through a mist.
He did not even see the ocean, that terrible barrier against freedom, which the prisoners look upon with utter despair.
They halted for a minute, during which he strove to collect his thoughts.
He looked around; he was in a court surrounded by high walls; he heard the measured tread of sentinels, and as they passed before the light he saw the barrels of their muskets shine.
Certain Dantès could not escape, the gendarmes released him.
They seemed awaiting orders.
“Where is the prisoner?” said a voice.
“Here,” replied the gendarmes.
“Let him follow me; I will take him to his cell.” “Go!” said the gendarmes, thrusting Dantès forward.
The prisoner followed his guide, who led him into a room almost under ground, whose bare and reeking walls seemed as though impregnated with tears; a lamp placed on a stool illumined the apartment faintly, and showed Dantès the features of his conductor, an under-jailer, ill-clothed, and of sullen appearance. 0113m “Here is your chamber for tonight,” said he.
“It is late, and the governor is asleep.
Tomorrow, perhaps, he may change you.
In the meantime there is bread, water, and fresh straw; and that is all a prisoner can wish for.
Goodnight.” And before Dantès could open his mouth—before he had noticed where the jailer placed his bread or the water—before he had glanced towards the corner where the straw was, the jailer disappeared, taking with him the lamp and closing the door, leaving stamped upon the prisoner’s mind the dim reflection of the dripping walls of his dungeon.
Dantès was alone in darkness and in silence—cold as the shadows that he felt breathe on his burning forehead.
With the first dawn of day the jailer returned, with orders to leave Dantès where he was.
He found the prisoner in the same position, as if fixed there, his eyes swollen with weeping.
He had passed the night standing, and without sleep.
The jailer advanced; Dantès appeared not to perceive him.
He touched him on the shoulder.
“Are you hungry?” continued he.
“I do not know.” “Do you wish for anything?” “I wish to see the governor.” The jailer shrugged his shoulders and left the chamber.
Dantès followed him with his eyes, and stretched forth his hands towards the open door; but the door closed.
All his emotion then burst forth; he cast himself on the ground, weeping bitterly, and asking himself what crime he had committed that he was thus punished.
The day passed thus; he scarcely tasted food, but walked round and round the cell like a wild beast in its cage.
One thought in particular tormented him: namely, that during his journey hither he had sat so still, whereas he might, a dozen times, have plunged into the sea, and, thanks to his powers of swimming, for which he was famous, have gained the shore, concealed himself until the arrival of a Genoese or Spanish vessel, escaped to Spain or Italy, where Mercédès and his father could have joined him.
He had no fears as to how he should live—good seamen are welcome everywhere.
He spoke Italian like a Tuscan, and Spanish like a Castilian; he would have been free, and happy with Mercédès and his father, whereas he was now confined in the Château d’If, that impregnable fortress, ignorant of the future destiny of his father and Mercédès; and all this because he had trusted to Villefort’s promise.
The thought was maddening, and Dantès threw himself furiously down on his straw.
“Well,” said the jailer, “are you more reasonable today?” Dantès made no reply.
“What you ask is impossible; but if you are very well behaved you will be allowed to walk about, and some day you will meet the governor, and if he chooses to reply, that is his affair.” “But,” asked Dantès, “how long shall I have to wait?” “Ah, a month—six months—a year.” “It is too long a time.
“I am not an abbé, I am not mad; perhaps I shall be, but at present, unfortunately, I am not.
The abbé began like you, and in three days you will be like him, mad enough to tie up; but, fortunately, there are dungeons here.” Dantès whirled the stool round his head.
I will send word to the governor.” “Very well,” returned Dantès, dropping the stool and sitting on it as if he were in reality mad.
The jailer went out, and returned in an instant with a corporal and four soldiers.
“By the governor’s orders,” said he, “conduct the prisoner to the tier beneath.” “To the dungeon, then,” said the corporal.
“Yes; we must put the madman with the madmen.” The soldiers seized Dantès, who followed passively.
He descended fifteen steps, and the door of a dungeon was opened, and he was thrust in.
The door closed, and Dantès advanced with outstretched hands until he touched the wall; he then sat down in the corner until his eyes became accustomed to the darkness.
The Evening of the Betrothal Villefort had, as we have said, hastened back to Madame de Saint-Méran’s in the Place du Grand Cours, and on entering the house found that the guests whom he had left at table were taking coffee in the salon.
Renée was, with all the rest of the company, anxiously awaiting him, and his entrance was followed by a general exclamation.
“Well, Decapitator, Guardian of the State, Royalist, Brutus, what is the matter?” said one.
“Speak out.” “Are we threatened with a fresh Reign of Terror?” asked another.
“Has the Corsican ogre broken loose?” cried a third.
“Marquise,” said Villefort, approaching his future mother-in-law, “I request your pardon for thus leaving you.
Will the marquis honor me by a few moments’ private conversation?” “Ah, it is really a serious matter, then?” asked the marquis, remarking the cloud on Villefort’s brow.
“So serious that I must take leave of you for a few days; so,” added he, turning to Renée, “judge for yourself if it be not important.” “You are going to leave us?” cried Renée, unable to hide her emotion at this unexpected announcement.
“Alas,” returned Villefort, “I must!” “Where, then, are you going?” asked the marquise.
“That, madame, is an official secret; but if you have any commissions for Paris, a friend of mine is going there tonight, and will with pleasure undertake them.” The guests looked at each other.
“Well,” asked he, as soon as they were by themselves, “tell me what it is?” “An affair of the greatest importance, that demands my immediate presence in Paris.
“Now, then,” said Villefort, placing the letter in his pocketbook, “I must have another!” “To whom?” “To the king.” “To the king?” “Yes.” “I dare not write to his majesty.” “I do not ask you to write to his majesty, but ask M. de Salvieux to do so.
The keeper would leave me in the background, and take all the glory to himself.
I tell you, marquis, my fortune is made if I only reach the Tuileries the first, for the king will not forget the service I do him.” “In that case go and get ready.
“Say to the Comte de Salvieux that I would like to see him.” “Now, then, go,” said the marquis.
“I shall be gone only a few moments.” Villefort hastily quitted the apartment, but reflecting that the sight of the deputy procureur running through the streets would be enough to throw the whole city into confusion, he resumed his ordinary pace.
At his door he perceived a figure in the shadow that seemed to wait for him.
It was Mercédès, who, hearing no news of her lover, had come unobserved to inquire after him.
As Villefort drew near, she advanced and stood before him.
Dantès had spoken of Mercédès, and Villefort instantly recognized her.
Her beauty and high bearing surprised him, and when she inquired what had become of her lover, it seemed to him that she was the judge, and he the accused.
“The young man you speak of,” said Villefort abruptly, “is a great criminal, and I can do nothing for him, mademoiselle.” Mercédès burst into tears, and, as Villefort strove to pass her, again addressed him.
“But, at least, tell me where he is, that I may know whether he is alive or dead,” said she. 0125m “I do not know; he is no longer in my hands,” replied Villefort.
And desirous of putting an end to the interview, he pushed by her, and closed the door, as if to exclude the pain he felt.
But remorse is not thus banished; like Virgil’s wounded hero, he carried the arrow in his wound, and, arrived at the salon, Villefort uttered a sigh that was almost a sob, and sank into a chair.
Then the first pangs of an unending torture seized upon his heart.
The man he sacrificed to his ambition, that innocent victim immolated on the altar of his father’s faults, appeared to him pale and threatening, leading his affianced bride by the hand, and bringing with him remorse, not such as the ancients figured, furious and terrible, but that slow and consuming agony whose pangs are intensified from hour to hour up to the very moment of death.
Then he had a moment’s hesitation.
He had frequently called for capital punishment on criminals, and owing to his irresistible eloquence they had been condemned, and yet the slightest shadow of remorse had never clouded Villefort’s brow, because they were guilty; at least, he believed so; but here was an innocent man whose happiness he had destroyed.
In this case he was not the judge, but the executioner.
As he thus reflected, he felt the sensation we have described, and which had hitherto been unknown to him, arise in his bosom, and fill him with vague apprehensions.
It is thus that a wounded man trembles instinctively at the approach of the finger to his wound until it be healed, but Villefort’s was one of those that never close, or if they do, only close to reopen more agonizing than ever.
As the marquis had promised, Villefort found the marquise and Renée in waiting.
Alas, her emotions were wholly personal: she was thinking only of Villefort’s departure.
She loved Villefort, and he left her at the moment he was about to become her husband.
Villefort knew not when he should return, and Renée, far from pleading for Dantès, hated the man whose crime separated her from her lover. 0127m Meanwhile what of Mercédès?
She had met Fernand at the corner of the Rue de la Loge; she had returned to the Catalans, and had despairingly cast herself on her couch.
Fernand, kneeling by her side, took her hand, and covered it with kisses that Mercédès did not even feel.
The lamp went out for want of oil, but she paid no heed to the darkness, and dawn came, but she knew not that it was day.
“I have not quitted you since yesterday,” returned Fernand sorrowfully.
Caderousse was equally restless and uneasy, but instead of seeking, like M.
Morrel, to aid Dantès, he had shut himself up with two bottles of black currant brandy, in the hope of drowning reflection.
But he did not succeed, and became too intoxicated to fetch any more drink, and yet not so intoxicated as to forget what had happened.
With his elbows on the table he sat between the two empty bottles, while spectres danced in the light of the unsnuffed candle—spectres such as Hoffmann strews over his punch-drenched pages, like black, fantastic dust.
Danglars alone was content and joyous—he had got rid of an enemy and made his own situation on the _Pharaon_ secure.
Danglars was one of those men born with a pen behind the ear, and an inkstand in place of a heart.
Everything with him was multiplication or subtraction.
The life of a man was to him of far less value than a numeral, especially when, by taking it away, he could increase the sum total of his own desires.
Villefort, after having received M. de Salvieux’s letter, embraced Renée, kissed the marquise’s hand, and shaken that of the marquis, started for Paris along the Aix road.
The King’s Closet at the Tuileries We will leave Villefort on the road to Paris, travelling—thanks to trebled fees—with all speed, and passing through two or three apartments, enter at the Tuileries the little room with the arched window, so well known as having been the favorite closet of Napoleon and Louis XVIII., and now of Louis Philippe.
“Sire,” continued M. de Blacas, “if it only be to reassure a faithful servant, will your majesty send into Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphiné, trusty men, who will bring you back a faithful report as to the feeling in these three provinces?” “_Canimus surdis_,” replied the king, continuing the annotations in his Horace.
“Does your majesty wish me to drop the subject?” “By no means, my dear duke; but just stretch out your hand.” “Which?” “Whichever you please—there to the left.” “Here, sire?” “I tell you to the left, and you are looking to the right; I mean on my left—yes, there.
You will find yesterday’s report of the minister of police.
Dandré, announced by the chamberlain-in-waiting, entered.
“Come in,” said Louis XVIII., with repressed smile, “come in, Baron, and tell the duke all you know—the latest news of M. de Bonaparte; do not conceal anything, however serious,—let us see, the Island of Elba is a volcano, and we may expect to have issuing thence flaming and bristling war—_bella, horrida bella_.” M.
Dandré looked at Louis XVIII., who, employed in writing a note, did not even raise his head.
“Bonaparte,” continued the baron, “is mortally wearied, and passes whole days in watching his miners at work at Porto-Longone.” “And scratches himself for amusement,” added the king.
“Scratches himself?” inquired the duke, “what does your majesty mean?” “Yes, indeed, my dear duke.
Did you forget that this great man, this hero, this demigod, is attacked with a malady of the skin which worries him to death, _prurigo_?” “And, moreover, my dear duke,” continued the minister of police, “we are almost assured that, in a very short time, the usurper will be insane.” “Insane?” “Raving mad; his head becomes weaker.
Sometimes he weeps bitterly, sometimes laughs boisterously, at other time he passes hours on the seashore, flinging stones in the water and when the flint makes ‘duck-and-drake’ five or six times, he appears as delighted as if he had gained another Marengo or Austerlitz.
Now, you must agree that these are indubitable symptoms of insanity.” “Or of wisdom, my dear baron—or of wisdom,” said Louis XVIII., laughing; “the greatest captains of antiquity amused themselves by casting pebbles into the ocean—see Plutarch’s life of Scipio Africanus.” M. de Blacas pondered deeply between the confident monarch and the truthful minister.
Villefort, who did not choose to reveal the whole secret, lest another should reap all the benefit of the disclosure, had yet communicated enough to cause him the greatest uneasiness.
“Well, well, Dandré,” said Louis XVIII., “Blacas is not yet convinced; let us proceed, therefore, to the usurper’s conversion.” The minister of police bowed.
“The usurper’s conversion!” murmured the duke, looking at the king and Dandré, who spoke alternately, like Virgil’s shepherds.
“The usurper converted!” “Decidedly, my dear duke.” “In what way converted?” “To good principles.
“I say, sire, that the minister of police is greatly deceived or I am; and as it is impossible it can be the minister of police as he has the guardianship of the safety and honor of your majesty, it is probable that I am in error.
However, sire, if I might advise, your majesty will interrogate the person of whom I spoke to you, and I will urge your majesty to do him this honor.” “Most willingly, duke; under your auspices I will receive any person you please, but you must not expect me to be too confiding.
Baron, have you any report more recent than this, dated the 20th February, and this is the 3rd of March?” “No, sire, but I am hourly expecting one; it may have arrived since I left my office.” “Go thither, and if there be none—well, well,” continued Louis XVIII., “make one; that is the usual way, is it not?” and the king laughed facetiously.
“Really, M. de Blacas, I must change your armorial bearings; I will give you an eagle with outstretched wings, holding in its claws a prey which tries in vain to escape, and bearing this device—_Tenax_.” 0133m “Sire, I listen,” said De Blacas, biting his nails with impatience.
“I wish to consult you on this passage, ‘_Molli fugiens anhelitu_,’ you know it refers to a stag flying from a wolf.
Are you not a sportsman and a great wolf-hunter?
“Sire, I thought his name was unknown to your majesty.” “No, no, Blacas; he is a man of strong and elevated understanding, ambitious, too, and, _pardieu!_ you know his father’s name!” “His father?” “Yes, Noirtier.” “Noirtier the Girondin?—Noirtier the senator?” “He himself.” “And your majesty has employed the son of such a man?” “Blacas, my friend, you have but limited comprehension.
I told you Villefort was ambitious, and to attain this ambition Villefort would sacrifice everything, even his father.” “Then, sire, may I present him?” “This instant, duke!
Where is he?” “Waiting below, in my carriage.” “Seek him at once.” “I hasten to do so.” The duke left the royal presence with the speed of a young man; his really sincere royalism made him youthful again.
Louis XVIII. remained alone, and turning his eyes on his half-opened Horace, muttered: “_Justum et tenacem propositi virum_.” M. de Blacas returned as speedily as he had departed, but in the antechamber he was forced to appeal to the king’s authority.
Villefort’s dusty garb, his costume, which was not of courtly cut, excited the susceptibility of M. de Brezé, who was all astonishment at finding that this young man had the audacity to enter before the king in such attire.
The duke, however, overcame all difficulties with a word—his majesty’s order; and, in spite of the protestations which the master of ceremonies made for the honor of his office and principles, Villefort was introduced.
On opening the door, Villefort found himself facing him, and the young magistrate’s first impulse was to pause.
“Come in, M. de Villefort,” said the king, “come in.” Villefort bowed, and advancing a few steps, waited until the king should interrogate him.
Sire, the usurper is arming three ships, he meditates some project, which, however mad, is yet, perhaps, terrible.
At this moment he will have left Elba, to go whither I know not, but assuredly to attempt a landing either at Naples, or on the coast of Tuscany, or perhaps on the shores of France.
Your majesty is well aware that the sovereign of the Island of Elba has maintained his relations with Italy and France?” “I am, sir,” said the king, much agitated; “and recently we have had information that the Bonapartist clubs have had meetings in the Rue Saint-Jacques.
How did you obtain these details?” “Sire, they are the results of an examination which I have made of a man of Marseilles, whom I have watched for some time, and arrested on the day of my departure.
This person, a sailor, of turbulent character, and whom I suspected of Bonapartism, has been secretly to the Island of Elba.
For the last ten months my ministers have redoubled their vigilance, in order to watch the shore of the Mediterranean.
If Bonaparte landed at Naples, the whole coalition would be on foot before he could even reach Piombino; if he land in Tuscany, he will be in an unfriendly territory; if he land in France, it must be with a handful of men, and the result of that is easily foretold, execrated as he is by the population.
Take courage, sir; but at the same time rely on our royal gratitude.” “Ah, here is M.
At this instant the minister of police appeared at the door, pale, trembling, and as if ready to faint.
Villefort was about to retire, but M. de Blacas, taking his hand, restrained him.
The Corsican Ogre At the sight of this agitation Louis XVIII. pushed from him violently the table at which he was sitting.
“What ails you, baron?” he exclaimed.
Has your uneasiness anything to do with what M. de Blacas has told me, and M. de Villefort has just confirmed?” M. de Blacas moved suddenly towards the baron, but the fright of the courtier pleaded for the forbearance of the statesman; and besides, as matters were, it was much more to his advantage that the prefect of police should triumph over him than that he should humiliate the prefect.
“Sire,——” stammered the baron.
The minister of police, giving way to an impulse of despair, was about to throw himself at the feet of Louis XVIII., who retreated a step and frowned.
“Oh, sire, what a dreadful misfortune!
I can never forgive myself!” “Monsieur,” said Louis XVIII., “I command you to speak.” “Well, sire, the usurper left Elba on the 26th February, and landed on the 1st of March.” “And where?
“In France, sire,—at a small port, near Antibes, in the Gulf of Juan.” “The usurper landed in France, near Antibes, in the Gulf of Juan, two hundred and fifty leagues from Paris, on the 1st of March, and you only acquired this information today, the 3rd of March!
Well, sir, what you tell me is impossible.
You must have received a false report, or you have gone mad.” “Alas, sire, it is but too true!” Louis made a gesture of indescribable anger and alarm, and then drew himself up as if this sudden blow had struck him at the same moment in heart and countenance.
Who knows? they were, perhaps, in league with him.” “Oh, sire,” exclaimed the Duc de Blacas, “M.
Sire, we have all been blind, and the minister of police has shared the general blindness, that is all.” “But——” said Villefort, and then suddenly checking himself, he was silent; then he continued, “Your pardon, sire,” he said, bowing, “my zeal carried me away.
“You alone forewarned us of the evil; now try and aid us with the remedy.” “Sire,” said Villefort, “the usurper is detested in the south; and it seems to me that if he ventured into the south, it would be easy to raise Languedoc and Provence against him.” “Yes, assuredly,” replied the minister; “but he is advancing by Gap and Sisteron.” “Advancing—he is advancing!” said Louis XVIII.
“Is he then advancing on Paris?” The minister of police maintained a silence which was equivalent to a complete avowal.
“And Dauphiné, sir?” inquired the king, of Villefort.
“Do you think it possible to rouse that as well as Provence?” “Sire, I am sorry to tell your majesty a cruel fact; but the feeling in Dauphiné is quite the reverse of that in Provence or Languedoc.
The mountaineers are Bonapartists, sire.” “Then,” murmured Louis, “he was well informed.
And how many men had he with him?” “I do not know, sire,” answered the minister of police.
Have you neglected to obtain information on that point?
Of course it is of no consequence,” he added, with a withering smile.
“Sire, it was impossible to learn; the despatch simply stated the fact of the landing and the route taken by the usurper.” “And how did this despatch reach you?” inquired the king.
The minister bowed his head, and while a deep color overspread his cheeks, he stammered out: “By the telegraph, sire.” Louis XVIII. advanced a step, and folded his arms over his chest as Napoleon would have done. 0141m “So then,” he exclaimed, turning pale with anger, “seven conjoined and allied armies overthrew that man.
A miracle of heaven replaced me on the throne of my fathers after five-and-twenty years of exile.
We have learnt nothing, forgotten nothing!
If I were betrayed as he was, I would console myself; but to be in the midst of persons elevated by myself to places of honor, who ought to watch over me more carefully than over themselves,—for my fortune is theirs—before me they were nothing—after me they will be nothing, and perish miserably from incapacity—ineptitude!
Oh, yes, sir, you are right—it is fatality!” The minister quailed before this outburst of sarcasm.
M. de Blacas wiped the moisture from his brow.
Villefort smiled within himself, for he felt his increased importance.
“To fall,” continued King Louis, who at the first glance had sounded the abyss on which the monarchy hung suspended,—“to fall, and learn of that fall by telegraph!
Oh, I would rather mount the scaffold of my brother, Louis XVI., than thus descend the staircase at the Tuileries driven away by ridicule.
Ridicule, sir—why, you know not its power in France, and yet you ought to know it!” “Sire, sire,” murmured the minister, “for pity’s——” “Approach, M. de Villefort,” resumed the king, addressing the young man, who, motionless and breathless, was listening to a conversation on which depended the destiny of a kingdom.
“Approach, and tell monsieur that it is possible to know beforehand all that he has not known.” “Sire, it was really impossible to learn secrets which that man concealed from all the world.” “Really impossible!
Unfortunately, there are great words, as there are great men; I have measured them.
Really impossible for a minister who has an office, agents, spies, and fifteen hundred thousand francs for secret service money, to know what is going on at sixty leagues from the coast of France!
Well, then, see, here is a gentleman who had none of these resources at his disposal—a gentleman, only a simple magistrate, who learned more than you with all your police, and who would have saved my crown, if, like you, he had the power of directing a telegraph.” The look of the minister of police was turned with concentrated spite on Villefort, who bent his head in modest triumph.
“I do not mean that for you, Blacas,” continued Louis XVIII.; “for if you have discovered nothing, at least you have had the good sense to persevere in your suspicions.
Any other than yourself would have considered the disclosure of M. de Villefort insignificant, or else dictated by venal ambition.” These words were an allusion to the sentiments which the minister of police had uttered with so much confidence an hour before.
Villefort understood the king’s intent.
Any other person would, perhaps, have been overcome by such an intoxicating draught of praise; but he feared to make for himself a mortal enemy of the police minister, although he saw that Dandré was irrevocably lost.
In fact, the minister, who, in the plenitude of his power, had been unable to unearth Napoleon’s secret, might in despair at his own downfall interrogate Dantès and so lay bare the motives of Villefort’s plot.
Realizing this, Villefort came to the rescue of the crest-fallen minister, instead of aiding to crush him.
“Sire,” said Villefort, “the suddenness of this event must prove to your majesty that the issue is in the hands of Providence; what your majesty is pleased to attribute to me as profound perspicacity is simply owing to chance, and I have profited by that chance, like a good and devoted servant—that’s all.
Yet, speaking of reports, baron, what have you learned with regard to the affair in the Rue Saint-Jacques?” “The affair in the Rue Saint-Jacques!” exclaimed Villefort, unable to repress an exclamation.
“Everything points to the conclusion, sire,” said the minister of police, “that death was not the result of suicide, as we first believed, but of assassination.
General Quesnel, it appears, had just left a Bonapartist club when he disappeared.
“Do you not think with me, M. de Villefort, that General Quesnel, whom they believed attached to the usurper, but who was really entirely devoted to me, has perished the victim of a Bonapartist ambush?” “It is probable, sire,” replied Villefort.
“But is this all that is known?” “They are on the track of the man who appointed the meeting with him.” “On his track?” said Villefort.
“Yes, the servant has given his description.
He is a man of from fifty to fifty-two years of age, dark, with black eyes covered with shaggy eyebrows, and a thick moustache.
He was dressed in a blue frock-coat, buttoned up to the chin, and wore at his button-hole the rosette of an officer of the Legion of Honor.
“Continue to seek for this man, sir,” said the king to the minister of police; “for if, as I am all but convinced, General Quesnel, who would have been so useful to us at this moment, has been murdered, his assassins, Bonapartists or not, shall be cruelly punished.” It required all Villefort’s coolness not to betray the terror with which this declaration of the king inspired him.
“How strange,” continued the king, with some asperity; “the police think that they have disposed of the whole matter when they say, ‘A murder has been committed,’ and especially so when they can add, ‘And we are on the track of the guilty persons.’” “Sire, your majesty will, I trust, be amply satisfied on this point at least.” “We shall see.
I will no longer detain you, M. de Villefort, for you must be fatigued after so long a journey; go and rest.
Noirtier are not on the best terms possible, and that is another sacrifice made to the royal cause, and for which you should be recompensed.” “Sire, the kindness your majesty deigns to evince towards me is a recompense which so far surpasses my utmost ambition that I have nothing more to ask for.” “Never mind, sir, we will not forget you; make your mind easy.
In the meanwhile” (the king here detached the cross of the Legion of Honor which he usually wore over his blue coat, near the cross of St.
Lazare, and gave it to Villefort)—“in the meanwhile take this cross.” “Sire,” said Villefort, “your majesty mistakes; this is an officer’s cross.” “_Ma foi!_” said Louis XVIII., “take it, such as it is, for I have not the time to procure you another.
Blacas, let it be your care to see that the brevet is made out and sent to M. de Villefort.” Villefort’s eyes were filled with tears of joy and pride; he took the cross and kissed it.
Baron, send for the minister of war.
Blacas, remain.” “Ah, sir,” said the minister of police to Villefort, as they left the Tuileries, “you entered by luck’s door—your fortune is made.” “Will it be long first?” muttered Villefort, saluting the minister, whose career was ended, and looking about him for a hackney-coach.
One passed at the moment, which he hailed; he gave his address to the driver, and springing in, threw himself on the seat, and gave loose to dreams of ambition.
Ten minutes afterwards Villefort reached his hotel, ordered horses to be ready in two hours, and asked to have his breakfast brought to him.
The valet opened the door, and Villefort heard someone speak his name. 0147m “Who could know that I was here already?” said the young man.
“Well,” said Villefort, “what is it?—Who rang?—Who asked for me?” “A stranger who will not send in his name.” “A stranger who will not send in his name!
What can he want with me?” “He wishes to speak to you.” “To me?” “Yes.” “Did he mention my name?” “Yes.” “What sort of person is he?” “Why, sir, a man of about fifty.” “Short or tall?” “About your own height, sir.” “Dark or fair?” “Dark,—very dark; with black eyes, black hair, black eyebrows.” “And how dressed?” asked Villefort quickly.
“In a blue frock-coat, buttoned up close, decorated with the Legion of Honor.” “It is he!” said Villefort, turning pale. 0148m “Eh, _pardieu!_” said the individual whose description we have twice given, entering the door, “what a great deal of ceremony!
The servant quitted the apartment with evident signs of astonishment.
Noirtier—for it was, indeed, he who entered—looked after the servant until the door was closed, and then, fearing, no doubt, that he might be overheard in the antechamber, he opened the door again, nor was the precaution useless, as appeared from the rapid retreat of Germain, who proved that he was not exempt from the sin which ruined our first parents.
Noirtier then took the trouble to close and bolt the antechamber door, then that of the bedchamber, and then extended his hand to Villefort, who had followed all his motions with surprise which he could not conceal.
“Well, now, my dear Gérard,” said he to the young man, with a very significant look, “do you know, you seem as if you were not very glad to see me?” “My dear father,” said Villefort, “I am, on the contrary, delighted; but I so little expected your visit, that it has somewhat overcome me.” “But, my dear fellow,” replied M.
Noirtier, seating himself, “I might say the same thing to you, when you announce to me your wedding for the 28th of February, and on the 3rd of March you turn up here in Paris.” “And if I have come, my dear father,” said Gérard, drawing closer to M.
Noirtier, “do not complain, for it is for you that I came, and my journey will be your salvation.” “Ah, indeed!” said M.
Noirtier, stretching himself out at his ease in the chair.
Yes, I heard this news, and knew it even before you could; for three days ago I posted from Marseilles to Paris with all possible speed, half-desperate at the enforced delay.” “Three days ago?
Why, three days ago the emperor had not landed.” “No matter, I was aware of his intention.” “How did you know about it?” “By a letter addressed to you from the Island of Elba.” “To me?” “To you; and which I discovered in the pocket-book of the messenger.
Had that letter fallen into the hands of another, you, my dear father, would probably ere this have been shot.” Villefort’s father laughed.
“Come, come,” said he, “will the Restoration adopt imperial methods so promptly?
I know you too well to suppose you would allow such a thing to pass you.” “I burnt it, for fear that even a fragment should remain; for that letter must have led to your condemnation.” “And the destruction of your future prospects,” replied Noirtier; “yes, I can easily comprehend that.
Why, really, the thing becomes more and more dramatic—explain yourself.” “I must refer again to the club in the Rue Saint-Jacques.” “It appears that this club is rather a bore to the police.
Why didn’t they search more vigilantly? they would have found——” “They have not found; but they are on the track.” “Yes, that the usual phrase; I am quite familiar with it.
When the police is at fault, it declares that it is on the track; and the government patiently awaits the day when it comes to say, with a sneaking air, that the track is lost.” “Yes, but they have found a corpse; the general has been killed, and in all countries they call that a murder.” “A murder do you call it? why, there is nothing to prove that the general was murdered.
People are found every day in the Seine, having thrown themselves in, or having been drowned from not knowing how to swim.” “Father, you know very well that the general was not a man to drown himself in despair, and people do not bathe in the Seine in the month of January.
No, no, do not be deceived; this was murder in every sense of the word.” “And who thus designated it?” “The king himself.” “The king!
I thought he was philosopher enough to allow that there was no murder in politics.
In politics, my dear fellow, you know, as well as I do, there are no men, but ideas—no feelings, but interests; in politics we do not kill a man, we only remove an obstacle, that is all.
Would you like to know how matters have progressed?
It was thought reliance might be placed in General Quesnel; he was recommended to us from the Island of Elba; one of us went to him, and invited him to the Rue Saint-Jacques, where he would find some friends.
He came there, and the plan was unfolded to him for leaving Elba, the projected landing, etc.
When he had heard and comprehended all to the fullest extent, he replied that he was a royalist.
Then all looked at each other,—he was made to take an oath, and did so, but with such an ill grace that it was really tempting Providence to swear thus, and yet, in spite of that, the general was allowed to depart free—perfectly free.
A murder? really, Villefort, you surprise me.
You, a deputy procureur, to found an accusation on such bad premises!
Really, my dear Gérard, you are but a child; you think yourself well informed because the telegraph has told you, three days after the landing, ‘The usurper has landed at Cannes with several men.
You do not know at all, and in this way they will chase him to Paris, without drawing a trigger.” “Grenoble and Lyons are faithful cities, and will oppose to him an impassable barrier.” “Grenoble will open her gates to him with enthusiasm—all Lyons will hasten to welcome him.
Believe me, we are as well informed as you, and our police are as good as your own.
You gave your direction to no one but your postilion, yet I have your address, and in proof I am here the very instant you are going to sit at table.
Ring, then, if you please, for a second knife, fork, and plate, and we will dine together.” “Indeed!” replied Villefort, looking at his father with astonishment, “you really do seem very well informed.” “Eh? the thing is simple enough.
You who are in power have only the means that money produces—we who are in expectation, have those which devotion prompts.” “Devotion!” said Villefort, with a sneer.
“Yes, devotion; for that is, I believe, the phrase for hopeful ambition.” And Villefort’s father extended his hand to the bell-rope, to summon the servant whom his son had not called.
Villefort caught his arm.
“Wait, my dear father,” said the young man, “one word more.” “Say on.” “However stupid the royalist police may be, they do know one terrible thing.” “What is that?” “The description of the man who, on the morning of the day when General Quesnel disappeared, presented himself at his house.” “Oh, the admirable police have found that out, have they?
Villefort watched him with alarm not devoid of admiration.
“Well,” he said, turning towards his wondering son, when this disguise was completed, “well, do you think your police will recognize me now.” “No, father,” stammered Villefort; “at least, I hope not.” “And now, my dear boy,” continued Noirtier, “I rely on your prudence to remove all the things which I leave in your care.” “Oh, rely on me,” said Villefort.
“Yes, yes; and now I believe you are right, and that you have really saved my life; be assured I will return the favor hereafter.” Villefort shook his head.
You think he is tracked, pursued, captured; he is advancing as rapidly as his own eagles.
The soldiers you believe to be dying with hunger, worn out with fatigue, ready to desert, gather like atoms of snow about the rolling ball as it hastens onward.
Sire, go, leave France to its real master, to him who acquired it, not by purchase, but by right of conquest; go, sire, not that you incur any risk, for your adversary is powerful enough to show you mercy, but because it would be humiliating for a grandson of Saint Louis to owe his life to the man of Arcola, Marengo, Austerlitz.’ Tell him this, Gérard; or, rather, tell him nothing.
Keep your journey a secret; do not boast of what you have come to Paris to do, or have done; return with all speed; enter Marseilles at night, and your house by the back-door, and there remain, quiet, submissive, secret, and, above all, inoffensive; for this time, I swear to you, we shall act like powerful men who know their enemies.
Go, my son—go, my dear Gérard, and by your obedience to my paternal orders, or, if you prefer it, friendly counsels, we will keep you in your place.
This will be,” added Noirtier, with a smile, “one means by which you may a second time save me, if the political balance should some day take another turn, and cast you aloft while hurling me down.
Adieu, my dear Gérard, and at your next journey alight at my door.” Noirtier left the room when he had finished, with the same calmness that had characterized him during the whole of this remarkable and trying conversation.
Villefort, pale and agitated, ran to the window, put aside the curtain, and saw him pass, cool and collected, by two or three ill-looking men at the corner of the street, who were there, perhaps, to arrest a man with black whiskers, and a blue frock-coat, and hat with broad brim.
Villefort stood watching, breathless, until his father had disappeared at the Rue Bussy.
Noirtier was a true prophet, and things progressed rapidly, as he had predicted.
Everyone knows the history of the famous return from Elba, a return which was unprecedented in the past, and will probably remain without a counterpart in the future.
Louis XVIII. made but a faint attempt to parry this unexpected blow; the monarchy he had scarcely reconstructed tottered on its precarious foundation, and at a sign from the emperor the incongruous structure of ancient prejudices and new ideas fell to the ground.
Villefort, therefore, gained nothing save the king’s gratitude (which was rather likely to injure him at the present time) and the cross of the Legion of Honor, which he had the prudence not to wear, although M. de Blacas had duly forwarded the brevet.
Napoleon would, doubtless, have deprived Villefort of his office had it not been for Noirtier, who was all powerful at court, and thus the Girondin of ’93 and the Senator of 1806 protected him who so lately had been his protector.
All Villefort’s influence barely enabled him to stifle the secret Dantès had so nearly divulged.
The king’s procureur alone was deprived of his office, being suspected of royalism.
Villefort retained his place, but his marriage was put off until a more favorable opportunity.
If the emperor remained on the throne, Gérard required a different alliance to aid his career; if Louis XVIII. returned, the influence of M. de Saint-Méran, like his own, could be vastly increased, and the marriage be still more suitable.
The deputy procureur was, therefore, the first magistrate of Marseilles, when one morning his door opened, and M.
Morrel was announced.
Anyone else would have hastened to receive him; but Villefort was a man of ability, and he knew this would be a sign of weakness.
He made Morrel wait in the antechamber, although he had no one with him, for the simple reason that the king’s procureur always makes everyone wait, and after passing a quarter of an hour in reading the papers, he ordered M.
Morrel to be admitted.
Morrel expected Villefort would be dejected; he found him as he had found him six weeks before, calm, firm, and full of that glacial politeness, that most insurmountable barrier which separates the well-bred from the vulgar man.
He had entered Villefort’s office expecting that the magistrate would tremble at the sight of him; on the contrary, he felt a cold shudder all over him when he saw Villefort sitting there with his elbow on his desk, and his head leaning on his hand.
He stopped at the door; Villefort gazed at him as if he had some difficulty in recognizing him; then, after a brief interval, during which the honest shipowner turned his hat in his hands, “M.
Morrel, I believe?” said Villefort.
“Yes, sir.” “Come nearer,” said the magistrate, with a patronizing wave of the hand, “and tell me to what circumstance I owe the honor of this visit.” “Do you not guess, monsieur?” asked Morrel.
You then served Louis XVIII., and you did not show any favor—it was your duty; today you serve Napoleon, and you ought to protect him—it is equally your duty; I come, therefore, to ask what has become of him?” 0161m Villefort by a strong effort sought to control himself.
“Tell me his name.” “Edmond Dantès.” Villefort would probably have rather stood opposite the muzzle of a pistol at five-and-twenty paces than have heard this name spoken; but he did not blanch.
“Dantès,” repeated he, “Edmond Dantès.” “Yes, monsieur.” Villefort opened a large register, then went to a table, from the table turned to his registers, and then, turning to Morrel, “Are you quite sure you are not mistaken, monsieur?” said he, in the most natural tone in the world.
Had Morrel been a more quick-sighted man, or better versed in these matters, he would have been surprised at the king’s procureur answering him on such a subject, instead of referring him to the governors of the prison or the prefect of the department.
But Morrel, disappointed in his expectations of exciting fear, was conscious only of the other’s condescension.
Villefort had calculated rightly.
“No,” said Morrel; “I am not mistaken.
Do not you recollect, I came about six weeks ago to plead for clemency, as I come today to plead for justice.
You received me very coldly.
Oh, the royalists were very severe with the Bonapartists in those days.” “Monsieur,” returned Villefort, “I was then a royalist, because I believed the Bourbons not only the heirs to the throne, but the chosen of the nation.
The miraculous return of Napoleon has conquered me, the legitimate monarch is he who is loved by his people.” “That’s right!” cried Morrel.
“I like to hear you speak thus, and I augur well for Edmond from it.” “Wait a moment,” said Villefort, turning over the leaves of a register; “I have it—a sailor, who was about to marry a young Catalan girl.
I recollect now; it was a very serious charge.” “How so?” “You know that when he left here he was taken to the Palais de Justice.” “Well?” “I made my report to the authorities at Paris, and a week after he was carried off.” “Carried off!” said Morrel.
“What can they have done with him?” “Oh, he has been taken to Fenestrelles, to Pignerol, or to the Sainte-Marguérite islands.
But how is it he is not already returned?
It seems to me the first care of government should be to set at liberty those who have suffered for their adherence to it.” “Do not be too hasty, M.
Morrel,” replied Villefort.
The emperor is more strict in prison discipline than even Louis himself, and the number of prisoners whose names are not on the register is incalculable.” Had Morrel even any suspicions, so much kindness would have dispelled them.
“Well, M. de Villefort, how would you advise me to act?” asked he.
“Petition the minister.” “Oh, I know what that is; the minister receives two hundred petitions every day, and does not read three.” “That is true; but he will read a petition countersigned and presented by me.” “And will you undertake to deliver it?” “With the greatest pleasure.
Dantès was then guilty, and now he is innocent, and it is as much my duty to free him as it was to condemn him.” Villefort thus forestalled any danger of an inquiry, which, however improbable it might be, if it did take place would leave him defenceless.
“But how shall I address the minister?” “Sit down there,” said Villefort, giving up his place to Morrel, “and write what I dictate.” “Will you be so good?” “Certainly.
Only think what the poor fellow may even now be suffering.” Villefort shuddered at the suggestion; but he had gone too far to draw back.
Dantès must be crushed to gratify Villefort’s ambition.
Villefort dictated a petition, in which, from an excellent intention, no doubt, Dantès’ patriotic services were exaggerated, and he was made out one of the most active agents of Napoleon’s return.
It was evident that at the sight of this document the minister would instantly release him.
The petition finished, Villefort read it aloud.
“That will do,” said he; “leave the rest to me.” “Will the petition go soon?” “Today.” “Countersigned by you?” “The best thing I can do will be to certify the truth of the contents of your petition.” And, sitting down, Villefort wrote the certificate at the bottom.
“What more is to be done?” “I will do whatever is necessary.” This assurance delighted Morrel, who took leave of Villefort, and hastened to announce to old Dantès that he would soon see his son.
As for Villefort, instead of sending to Paris, he carefully preserved the petition that so fearfully compromised Dantès, in the hopes of an event that seemed not unlikely,—that is, a second restoration.
Dantès remained a prisoner, and heard not the noise of the fall of Louis XVIII.’s throne, or the still more tragic destruction of the empire.
Twice during the Hundred Days had Morrel renewed his demand, and twice had Villefort soothed him with promises.
At last there was Waterloo, and Morrel came no more; he had done all that was in his power, and any fresh attempt would only compromise himself uselessly.
Louis XVIII. remounted the throne; Villefort, to whom Marseilles had become filled with remorseful memories, sought and obtained the situation of king’s procureur at Toulouse, and a fortnight afterwards he married Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran, whose father now stood higher at court than ever.
And so Dantès, after the Hundred Days and after Waterloo, remained in his dungeon, forgotten of earth and heaven.
Danglars comprehended the full extent of the wretched fate that overwhelmed Dantès; and, when Napoleon returned to France, he, after the manner of mediocre minds, termed the coincidence, _a decree of Providence_.
But when Napoleon returned to Paris, Danglars’ heart failed him, and he lived in constant fear of Dantès’ return on a mission of vengeance.
He therefore informed M.
Morrel of his wish to quit the sea, and obtained a recommendation from him to a Spanish merchant, into whose service he entered at the end of March, that is, ten or twelve days after Napoleon’s return.
Fernand understood nothing except that Dantès was absent.
But Fernand was mistaken; a man of his disposition never kills himself, for he constantly hopes.
During this time the empire made its last conscription, and every man in France capable of bearing arms rushed to obey the summons of the emperor.
Fernand departed with the rest, bearing with him the terrible thought that while he was away, his rival would perhaps return and marry Mercédès.
His devotion, and the compassion he showed for her misfortunes, produced the effect they always produce on noble minds—Mercédès had always had a sincere regard for Fernand, and this was now strengthened by gratitude.
“My brother,” said she, as she placed his knapsack on his shoulders, “be careful of yourself, for if you are killed, I shall be alone in the world.” These words carried a ray of hope into Fernand’s heart.
Bathed in tears she wandered about the Catalan village.
Sometimes she stood mute and motionless as a statue, looking towards Marseilles, at other times gazing on the sea, and debating as to whether it were not better to cast herself into the abyss of the ocean, and thus end her woes.
It was not want of courage that prevented her putting this resolution into execution; but her religious feelings came to her aid and saved her.
Caderousse was, like Fernand, enrolled in the army, but, being married and eight years older, he was merely sent to the frontier.
Old Dantès, who was only sustained by hope, lost all hope at Napoleon’s downfall.
Five months after he had been separated from his son, and almost at the hour of his arrest, he breathed his last in Mercédès’ arms.
Morrel paid the expenses of his funeral, and a few small debts the poor old man had contracted.
There was more than benevolence in this action; there was courage; the south was aflame, and to assist, even on his death-bed, the father of so dangerous a Bonapartist as Dantès, was stigmatized as a crime.
The Two Prisoners A year after Louis XVIII.’s restoration, a visit was made by the inspector-general of prisons.
Dantès in his cell heard the noise of preparation,—sounds that at the depth where he lay would have been inaudible to any but the ear of a prisoner, who could hear the splash of the drop of water that every hour fell from the roof of his dungeon.
He guessed something uncommon was passing among the living; but he had so long ceased to have any intercourse with the world, that he looked upon himself as dead.
The inspector visited, one after another, the cells and dungeons of several of the prisoners, whose good behavior or stupidity recommended them to the clemency of the government.
He inquired how they were fed, and if they had any request to make.
The universal response was, that the fare was detestable, and that they wanted to be set free.
The inspector asked if they had anything else to ask for.
The inspector turned smilingly to the governor.
“I do not know what reason government can assign for these useless visits; when you see one prisoner, you see all,—always the same thing,—ill fed and innocent.
Are there any others?” “Yes; the dangerous and mad prisoners are in the dungeons.” “Let us visit them,” said the inspector with an air of fatigue.
Let us see the dungeons.” “Let us first send for two soldiers,” said the governor.
“The prisoners sometimes, through mere uneasiness of life, and in order to be sentenced to death, commit acts of useless violence, and you might fall a victim.” “Take all needful precautions,” replied the inspector.
Two soldiers were accordingly sent for, and the inspector descended a stairway, so foul, so humid, so dark, as to be loathsome to sight, smell, and respiration.
Is it not true, Antoine?” asked the governor.
“True enough; he wanted to kill me!” returned the turnkey.
“He must be mad,” said the inspector.
“He is worse than that,—he is a devil!” returned the turnkey.
“Shall I complain of him?” demanded the inspector.
Besides, he is almost mad now, and in another year he will be quite so.” “So much the better for him,—he will suffer less,” said the inspector.
He was, as this remark shows, a man full of philanthropy, and in every way fit for his office.
“You are right, sir,” replied the governor; “and this remark proves that you have deeply considered the subject.
Now we have in a dungeon about twenty feet distant, and to which you descend by another stair, an old abbé, formerly leader of a party in Italy, who has been here since 1811, and in 1813 he went mad, and the change is astonishing.
You had better see him, for his madness is amusing.” “I will see them both,” returned the inspector; “I must conscientiously perform my duty.” This was the inspector’s first visit; he wished to display his authority.
“By all means,” replied the governor, and he signed to the turnkey to open the door.
At the sound of the key turning in the lock, and the creaking of the hinges, Dantès, who was crouched in a corner of the dungeon, whence he could see the ray of light that came through a narrow iron grating above, raised his head.
Seeing a stranger, escorted by two turnkeys holding torches and accompanied by two soldiers, and to whom the governor spoke bareheaded, Dantès, who guessed the truth, and that the moment to address himself to the superior authorities was come, sprang forward with clasped hands.
The soldiers interposed their bayonets, for they thought that he was about to attack the inspector, and the latter recoiled two or three steps.
Dantès saw that he was looked upon as dangerous.
Then, infusing all the humility he possessed into his eyes and voice, he addressed the inspector, and sought to inspire him with pity.
The inspector listened attentively; then, turning to the governor, observed, “He will become religious—he is already more gentle; he is afraid, and retreated before the bayonets—madmen are not afraid of anything; I made some curious observations on this at Charenton.” Then, turning to the prisoner, “What is it you want?” said he.
“I want to know what crime I have committed—to be tried; and if I am guilty, to be shot; if innocent, to be set at liberty.” “Are you well fed?” said the inspector.
“I believe so; I don’t know; it’s of no consequence.
“The 28th of February, 1815, at half-past two in the afternoon.” “Today is the 30th of July, 1816,—why, it is but seventeen months.” “Only seventeen months,” replied Dantès.
Seventeen months’ captivity to a sailor accustomed to the boundless ocean, is a worse punishment than human crime ever merited.
Have pity on me, then, and ask for me, not intelligence, but a trial; not pardon, but a verdict—a trial, sir, I ask only for a trial; that, surely, cannot be denied to one who is accused!” “We shall see,” said the inspector; then, turning to the governor, “On my word, the poor devil touches me.
You must show me the proofs against him.” “Certainly; but you will find terrible charges.” “Monsieur,” continued Dantès, “I know it is not in your power to release me; but you can plead for me—you can have me tried—and that is all I ask.
Let me know my crime, and the reason why I was condemned.
Uncertainty is worse than all.” “Go on with the lights,” said the inspector.
“Monsieur,” cried Dantès, “I can tell by your voice you are touched with pity; tell me at least to hope.” “I cannot tell you that,” replied the inspector; “I can only promise to examine into your case.” “Oh, I am free—then I am saved!” “Who arrested you?” “M.
The door closed; but this time a fresh inmate was left with Dantès—Hope. 0173m “Will you see the register at once,” asked the governor, “or proceed to the other cell?” “Let us visit them all,” said the inspector.
I should never have the courage to come down again.” “Ah, this one is not like the other, and his madness is less affecting than this one’s display of reason.” “What is his folly?” “He fancies he possesses an immense treasure.
The first year he offered government a million of francs for his release; the second, two; the third, three; and so on progressively.
He is now in his fifth year of captivity; he will ask to speak to you in private, and offer you five millions.” “How curious!—what is his name?” “The Abbé Faria.” “No. 27,” said the inspector.
“It is here; unlock the door, Antoine.” The turnkey obeyed, and the inspector gazed curiously into the chamber of the _mad abbé_, as the prisoner was usually called.
In the centre of the cell, in a circle traced with a fragment of plaster detached from the wall, sat a man whose tattered garments scarcely covered him.
He was drawing in this circle geometrical lines, and seemed as much absorbed in his problem as Archimedes was when the soldier of Marcellus slew him.
He did not move at the sound of the door, and continued his calculations until the flash of the torches lighted up with an unwonted glare the sombre walls of his cell; then, raising his head, he perceived with astonishment the number of persons present.
He hastily seized the coverlet of his bed, and wrapped it round him.
“What is it you want?” said the inspector.
“It is for that reason I am delighted to see you,” continued the abbé, “although you have disturbed me in a most important calculation, which, if it succeeded, would possibly change Newton’s system.
Could you allow me a few words in private.” “What did I tell you?” said the governor.
“You knew him,” returned the inspector with a smile.
“What you ask is impossible, monsieur,” continued he, addressing Faria. 0175m “But,” said the abbé, “I would speak to you of a large sum, amounting to five millions.” “The very sum you named,” whispered the inspector in his turn.
“However,” continued Faria, seeing that the inspector was about to depart, “it is not absolutely necessary for us to be alone; the governor can be present.” “Unfortunately,” said the governor, “I know beforehand what you are about to say; it concerns your treasures, does it not?” Faria fixed his eyes on him with an expression that would have convinced anyone else of his sanity.
“But what if I am not liberated,” cried he, “and am detained here until my death? this treasure will be lost.
Had not government better profit by it?
I will offer six millions, and I will content myself with the rest, if they will only give me my liberty.” “On my word,” said the inspector in a low tone, “had I not been told beforehand that this man was mad, I should believe what he says.” “I am not mad,” replied Faria, with that acuteness of hearing peculiar to prisoners.
“The treasure I speak of really exists, and I offer to sign an agreement with you, in which I promise to lead you to the spot where you shall dig; and if I deceive you, bring me here again,—I ask no more.” The governor laughed.
“Is the spot far from here?” “A hundred leagues.” “It is not ill-planned,” said the governor.
“If all the prisoners took it into their heads to travel a hundred leagues, and their guardians consented to accompany them, they would have a capital chance of escaping.” “The scheme is well known,” said the inspector; “and the abbé’s plan has not even the merit of originality.” Then turning to Faria, “I inquired if you are well fed?” said he.
“Swear to me,” replied Faria, “to free me if what I tell you prove true, and I will stay here while you go to the spot.” “Are you well fed?” repeated the inspector.
“Monsieur, you run no risk, for, as I told you, I will stay here; so there is no chance of my escaping.” “You do not reply to my question,” replied the inspector impatiently.
You refuse me my liberty; God will give it me.” And the abbé, casting away his coverlet, resumed his place, and continued his calculations. 0177m “What is he doing there?” said the inspector.
“Counting his treasures,” replied the governor.
Faria replied to this sarcasm with a glance of profound contempt.
“He was wealthy once, perhaps?” said the inspector.
“Or dreamed he was, and awoke mad.” “After all,” said the inspector, “if he had been rich, he would not have been here.” So the matter ended for the Abbé Faria.
He remained in his cell, and this visit only increased the belief in his insanity.
Caligula or Nero, those treasure-seekers, those desirers of the impossible, would have accorded to the poor wretch, in exchange for his wealth, the liberty he so earnestly prayed for.
But the kings of modern times, restrained by the limits of mere probability, have neither courage nor desire.
They fear the ear that hears their orders, and the eye that scrutinizes their actions.
Formerly they believed themselves sprung from Jupiter, and shielded by their birth; but nowadays they are not inviolable.
It has always been against the policy of despotic governments to suffer the victims of their persecutions to reappear.
As the Inquisition rarely allowed its victims to be seen with their limbs distorted and their flesh lacerated by torture, so madness is always concealed in its cell, from whence, should it depart, it is conveyed to some gloomy hospital, where the doctor has no thought for man or mind in the mutilated being the jailer delivers to him.
The very madness of the Abbé Faria, gone mad in prison, condemned him to perpetual captivity.
The inspector kept his word with Dantès; he examined the register, and found the following note concerning him: _Edmond Dantès:_ Violent Bonapartist; took an active part in the return from Elba.
The greatest watchfulness and care to be exercised.
This note was in a different hand from the rest, which showed that it had been added since his confinement.
The inspector could not contend against this accusation; he simply wrote, _Nothing to be done._ This visit had infused new vigor into Dantès; he had, till then, forgotten the date; but now, with a fragment of plaster, he wrote the date, 30th July, 1816, and made a mark every day, in order not to lose his reckoning again.
Days and weeks passed away, then months—Dantès still waited; he at first expected to be freed in a fortnight.
This fortnight expired, he decided that the inspector would do nothing until his return to Paris, and that he would not reach there until his circuit was finished, he therefore fixed three months; three months passed away, then six more.
Finally ten months and a half had gone by and no favorable change had taken place, and Dantès began to fancy the inspector’s visit but a dream, an illusion of the brain.
At the expiration of a year the governor was transferred; he had obtained charge of the fortress at Ham.
He took with him several of his subordinates, and amongst them Dantès’ jailer.
A new governor arrived; it would have been too tedious to acquire the names of the prisoners; he learned their numbers instead.
This horrible place contained fifty cells; their inhabitants were designated by the numbers of their cell, and the unhappy young man was no longer called Edmond Dantès—he was now number 34.
Number 34 and Number 27 Dantès passed through all the stages of torture natural to prisoners in suspense.
He was sustained at first by that pride of conscious innocence which is the sequence to hope; then he began to doubt his own innocence, which justified in some measure the governor’s belief in his mental alienation; and then, relaxing his sentiment of pride, he addressed his supplications, not to God, but to man.
God is always the last resource.
Unfortunates, who ought to begin with God, do not have any hope in him till they have exhausted all other means of deliverance.
Dantès asked to be removed from his present dungeon into another, even if it were darker and deeper, for a change, however disadvantageous, was still a change, and would afford him some amusement.
He entreated to be allowed to walk about, to have fresh air, books, and writing materials.
His requests were not granted, but he went on asking all the same.
He accustomed himself to speaking to the new jailer, although the latter was, if possible, more taciturn than the old one; but still, to speak to a man, even though mute, was something.
Dantès spoke for the sake of hearing his own voice; he had tried to speak when alone, but the sound of his voice terrified him.
Often, before his captivity, Dantès’ mind had revolted at the idea of assemblages of prisoners, made up of thieves, vagabonds, and murderers.
He now wished to be amongst them, in order to see some other face besides that of his jailer; he sighed for the galleys, with the infamous costume, the chain, and the brand on the shoulder.
The galley-slaves breathed the fresh air of heaven, and saw each other.
He besought the jailer one day to let him have a companion, were it even the mad abbé.
The jailer, though rough and hardened by the constant sight of so much suffering, was yet a man.
At the bottom of his heart he had often had a feeling of pity for this unhappy young man who suffered so; and he laid the request of number 34 before the governor; but the latter sapiently imagined that Dantès wished to conspire or attempt an escape, and refused his request.
Dantès had exhausted all human resources, and he then turned to God.
All the pious ideas that had been so long forgotten, returned; he recollected the prayers his mother had taught him, and discovered a new meaning in every word; for in prosperity prayers seem but a mere medley of words, until misfortune comes and the unhappy sufferer first understands the meaning of the sublime language in which he invokes the pity of heaven!
He prayed, and prayed aloud, no longer terrified at the sound of his own voice, for he fell into a sort of ecstasy.
He laid every action of his life before the Almighty, proposed tasks to accomplish, and at the end of every prayer introduced the entreaty oftener addressed to man than to God: “Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.” Yet in spite of his earnest prayers, Dantès remained a prisoner.
He could not do this, he whose past life was so short, whose present so melancholy, and his future so doubtful.
Nineteen years of light to reflect upon in eternal darkness!
No distraction could come to his aid; his energetic spirit, that would have exalted in thus revisiting the past, was imprisoned like an eagle in a cage.
He clung to one idea—that of his happiness, destroyed, without apparent cause, by an unheard-of fatality; he considered and reconsidered this idea, devoured it (so to speak), as the implacable Ugolino devours the skull of Archbishop Roger in the Inferno of Dante.
Rage supplanted religious fervor.
Dantès uttered blasphemies that made his jailer recoil with horror, dashed himself furiously against the walls of his prison, wreaked his anger upon everything, and chiefly upon himself, so that the least thing,—a grain of sand, a straw, or a breath of air that annoyed him, led to paroxysms of fury.
Then the letter that Villefort had showed to him recurred to his mind, and every line gleamed forth in fiery letters on the wall like the _mene, mene, tekel upharsin_ of Belshazzar.
He told himself that it was the enmity of man, and not the vengeance of Heaven, that had thus plunged him into the deepest misery.
He consigned his unknown persecutors to the most horrible tortures he could imagine, and found them all insufficient, because after torture came death, and after death, if not repose, at least the boon of unconsciousness.
By dint of constantly dwelling on the idea that tranquillity was death, and if punishment were the end in view other tortures than death must be invented, he began to reflect on suicide.
Unhappy he, who, on the brink of misfortune, broods over ideas like these!
Before him is a dead sea that stretches in azure calm before the eye; but he who unwarily ventures within its embrace finds himself struggling with a monster that would drag him down to perdition.
Once thus ensnared, unless the protecting hand of God snatch him thence, all is over, and his struggles but tend to hasten his destruction.
This state of mental anguish is, however, less terrible than the sufferings that precede or the punishment that possibly will follow.
There is a sort of consolation at the contemplation of the yawning abyss, at the bottom of which lie darkness and obscurity.
All his sorrows, all his sufferings, with their train of gloomy spectres, fled from his cell when the angel of death seemed about to enter.
Dantès reviewed his past life with composure, and, looking forward with terror to his future existence, chose that middle line that seemed to afford him a refuge.
“Sometimes,” said he, “in my voyages, when I was a man and commanded other men, I have seen the heavens overcast, the sea rage and foam, the storm arise, and, like a monstrous bird, beating the two horizons with its wings.
Then I felt that my vessel was a vain refuge, that trembled and shook before the tempest.
Soon the fury of the waves and the sight of the sharp rocks announced the approach of death, and death then terrified me, and I used all my skill and intelligence as a man and a sailor to struggle against the wrath of God.
But I did so because I was happy, because I had not courted death, because to be cast upon a bed of rocks and seaweed seemed terrible, because I was unwilling that I, a creature made for the service of God, should serve for food to the gulls and ravens.
Two methods of self-destruction were at his disposal.
He could hang himself with his handkerchief to the window bars, or refuse food and die of starvation.
But the first was repugnant to him.
Dantès had always entertained the greatest horror of pirates, who are hung up to the yard-arm; he would not die by what seemed an infamous death.
He resolved to adopt the second, and began that day to carry out his resolve. 0185m Nearly four years had passed away; at the end of the second he had ceased to mark the lapse of time.
Dantès said, “I wish to die,” and had chosen the manner of his death, and fearful of changing his mind, he had taken an oath to die.
“When my morning and evening meals are brought,” thought he, “I will cast them out of the window, and they will think that I have eaten them.” He kept his word; twice a day he cast out, through the barred aperture, the provisions his jailer brought him—at first gayly, then with deliberation, and at last with regret.
Nothing but the recollection of his oath gave him strength to proceed.
Hunger made viands once repugnant, now acceptable; he held the plate in his hand for an hour at a time, and gazed thoughtfully at the morsel of bad meat, of tainted fish, of black and mouldy bread.
It was the last yearning for life contending with the resolution of despair; then his dungeon seemed less sombre, his prospects less desperate.
What unforseen events might not open his prison door, and restore him to liberty?
Then he raised to his lips the repast that, like a voluntary Tantalus, he refused himself; but he thought of his oath, and he would not break it.
He persisted until, at last, he had not sufficient strength to rise and cast his supper out of the loophole.
The next morning he could not see or hear; the jailer feared he was dangerously ill.
Edmond felt a sort of stupor creeping over him which brought with it a feeling almost of content; the gnawing pain at his stomach had ceased; his thirst had abated; when he closed his eyes he saw myriads of lights dancing before them like the will-o’-the-wisps that play about the marshes.
It was the twilight of that mysterious country called Death!
Suddenly, about nine o’clock in the evening, Edmond heard a hollow sound in the wall against which he was lying.
So many loathsome animals inhabited the prison, that their noise did not, in general, awake him; but whether abstinence had quickened his faculties, or whether the noise was really louder than usual, Edmond raised his head and listened.
It was a continual scratching, as if made by a huge claw, a powerful tooth, or some iron instrument attacking the stones.
Although weakened, the young man’s brain instantly responded to the idea that haunts all prisoners—liberty!
Perhaps one of those beloved ones he had so often thought of was thinking of him, and striving to diminish the distance that separated them.
No, no, doubtless he was deceived, and it was but one of those dreams that forerun death!
It lasted nearly three hours; he then heard a noise of something falling, and all was silent.
Some hours afterwards it began again, nearer and more distinct.
Edmond was intensely interested.
Suddenly the jailer entered.
The jailer brought him his breakfast.
Dantès raised himself up and began to talk about everything; about the bad quality of the food, about the coldness of his dungeon, grumbling and complaining, in order to have an excuse for speaking louder, and wearying the patience of his jailer, who out of kindness of heart had brought broth and white bread for his prisoner.
Fortunately, he fancied that Dantès was delirious; and placing the food on the rickety table, he withdrew.
Edmond listened, and the sound became more and more distinct.
“There can be no doubt about it,” thought he; “it is some prisoner who is striving to obtain his freedom.
Oh, if I were only there to help him!” Suddenly another idea took possession of his mind, so used to misfortune, that it was scarcely capable of hope—the idea that the noise was made by workmen the governor had ordered to repair the neighboring dungeon.
It was easy to ascertain this; but how could he risk the question?
It was easy to call his jailer’s attention to the noise, and watch his countenance as he listened; but might he not by this means destroy hopes far more important than the short-lived satisfaction of his own curiosity?
Unfortunately, Edmond’s brain was still so feeble that he could not bend his thoughts to anything in particular.
He saw but one means of restoring lucidity and clearness to his judgment.
He turned his eyes towards the soup which the jailer had brought, rose, staggered towards it, raised the vessel to his lips, and drank off the contents with a feeling of indescribable pleasure.
He had the resolution to stop with this.
He had often heard that shipwrecked persons had died through having eagerly devoured too much food.
Edmond replaced on the table the bread he was about to devour, and returned to his couch—he did not wish to die.
He soon felt that his ideas became again collected—he could think, and strengthen his thoughts by reasoning.
Then he said to himself: “I must put this to the test, but without compromising anybody.
If it is a workman, I need but knock against the wall, and he will cease to work, in order to find out who is knocking, and why he does so; but as his occupation is sanctioned by the governor, he will soon resume it.
If, on the contrary, it is a prisoner, the noise I make will alarm him, he will cease, and not begin again until he thinks everyone is asleep.” Edmond rose again, but this time his legs did not tremble, and his sight was clear; he went to a corner of his dungeon, detached a stone, and with it knocked against the wall where the sound came.
Edmond listened intently; an hour passed, two hours passed, and no sound was heard from the wall—all was silent there.
Full of hope, Edmond swallowed a few mouthfuls of bread and water, and, thanks to the vigor of his constitution, found himself well-nigh recovered.
The day passed away in utter silence—night came without recurrence of the noise.
“It is a prisoner,” said Edmond joyfully.
His brain was on fire, and life and energy returned.
In the morning the jailer brought him fresh provisions—he had already devoured those of the previous day; he ate these listening anxiously for the sound, walking round and round his cell, shaking the iron bars of the loophole, restoring vigor and agility to his limbs by exercise, and so preparing himself for his future destiny.
At intervals he listened to learn if the noise had not begun again, and grew impatient at the prudence of the prisoner, who did not guess he had been disturbed by a captive as anxious for liberty as himself.
At length one evening, as the jailer was visiting him for the last time that night, Dantès, with his ear for the hundredth time at the wall, fancied he heard an almost imperceptible movement among the stones.
He moved away, walked up and down his cell to collect his thoughts, and then went back and listened.
The matter was no longer doubtful.
Something was at work on the other side of the wall; the prisoner had discovered the danger, and had substituted a lever for a chisel.
Encouraged by this discovery, Edmond determined to assist the indefatigable laborer.
He began by moving his bed, and looked around for anything with which he could pierce the wall, penetrate the moist cement, and displace a stone.
He saw nothing, he had no knife or sharp instrument, the window grating was of iron, but he had too often assured himself of its solidity.
All his furniture consisted of a bed, a chair, a table, a pail, and a jug.
The bed had iron clamps, but they were screwed to the wood, and it would have required a screw-driver to take them off.
The table and chair had nothing, the pail had once possessed a handle, but that had been removed. 0189m Dantès had but one resource, which was to break the jug, and with one of the sharp fragments attack the wall.
Dantès concealed two or three of the sharpest fragments in his bed, leaving the rest on the floor.
The breaking of his jug was too natural an accident to excite suspicion.
Edmond had all the night to work in, but in the darkness he could not do much, and he soon felt that he was working against something very hard; he pushed back his bed, and waited for day.
All night he heard the subterranean workman, who continued to mine his way.
Dantès told him that the jug had fallen from his hands while he was drinking, and the jailer went grumblingly to fetch another, without giving himself the trouble to remove the fragments of the broken one.
He returned speedily, advised the prisoner to be more careful, and departed.
Dantès heard joyfully the key grate in the lock; he listened until the sound of steps died away, and then, hastily displacing his bed, saw by the faint light that penetrated into his cell, that he had labored uselessly the previous evening in attacking the stone instead of removing the plaster that surrounded it.
The damp had rendered it friable, and Dantès was able to break it off—in small morsels, it is true, but at the end of half an hour he had scraped off a handful; a mathematician might have calculated that in two years, supposing that the rock was not encountered, a passage twenty feet long and two feet broad, might be formed.
The prisoner reproached himself with not having thus employed the hours he had passed in vain hopes, prayer, and despondency.
During the six years that he had been imprisoned, what might he not have accomplished?
This idea imparted new energy, and in three days he had succeeded, with the utmost precaution, in removing the cement, and exposing the stone-work.
The wall was built of rough stones, among which, to give strength to the structure, blocks of hewn stone were at intervals imbedded.
It was one of these he had uncovered, and which he must remove from its socket.
The fragments of the jug broke, and after an hour of useless toil, Dantès paused with anguish on his brow.
Was he to be thus stopped at the beginning, and was he to wait inactive until his fellow workman had completed his task?
Suddenly an idea occurred to him—he smiled, and the perspiration dried on his forehead.
The jailer always brought Dantès’ soup in an iron saucepan; this saucepan contained soup for both prisoners, for Dantès had noticed that it was either quite full, or half empty, according as the turnkey gave it to him or to his companion first.
The handle of this saucepan was of iron; Dantès would have given ten years of his life in exchange for it. 0191m The jailer was accustomed to pour the contents of the saucepan into Dantès’ plate, and Dantès, after eating his soup with a wooden spoon, washed the plate, which thus served for every day.
The jailer, therefore, only grumbled.
Then he looked about for something to pour the soup into; Dantès’ entire dinner service consisted of one plate—there was no alternative.
“Leave the saucepan,” said Dantès; “you can take it away when you bring me my breakfast.” This advice was to the jailer’s taste, as it spared him the necessity of making another trip.
He left the saucepan.
He rapidly devoured his food, and after waiting an hour, lest the jailer should change his mind and return, he removed his bed, took the handle of the saucepan, inserted the point between the hewn stone and rough stones of the wall, and employed it as a lever.
A slight oscillation showed Dantès that all went well.
At the end of an hour the stone was extricated from the wall, leaving a cavity a foot and a half in diameter.
Dantès carefully collected the plaster, carried it into the corner of his cell, and covered it with earth.
Then, wishing to make the best use of his time while he had the means of labor, he continued to work without ceasing.
At the dawn of day he replaced the stone, pushed his bed against the wall, and lay down.
The breakfast consisted of a piece of bread; the jailer entered and placed the bread on the table.
“No,” replied the turnkey; “you destroy everything.
First you break your jug, then you make me break your plate; if all the prisoners followed your example, the government would be ruined.
I shall leave you the saucepan, and pour your soup into that.
So for the future I hope you will not be so destructive.” Dantès raised his eyes to heaven and clasped his hands beneath the coverlet.
He felt more gratitude for the possession of this piece of iron than he had ever felt for anything.
He had noticed, however, that the prisoner on the other side had ceased to labor; no matter, this was a greater reason for proceeding—if his neighbor would not come to him, he would go to his neighbor.
All day he toiled on untiringly, and by the evening he had succeeded in extracting ten handfuls of plaster and fragments of stone.
When the hour for his jailer’s visit arrived, Dantès straightened the handle of the saucepan as well as he could, and placed it in its accustomed place.
The turnkey poured his ration of soup into it, together with the fish—for thrice a week the prisoners were deprived of meat.
This would have been a method of reckoning time, had not Dantès long ceased to do so.
Dantès wished to ascertain whether his neighbor had really ceased to work.
He listened—all was silent, as it had been for the last three days.
Dantès sighed; it was evident that his neighbor distrusted him.
However, he toiled on all the night without being discouraged; but after two or three hours he encountered an obstacle.
The iron made no impression, but met with a smooth surface; Dantès touched it, and found that it was a beam.
This beam crossed, or rather blocked up, the hole Dantès had made; it was necessary, therefore, to dig above or under it.
“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured he, “I have so earnestly prayed to you, that I hoped my prayers had been heard.
After having deprived me of my liberty, after having deprived me of death, after having recalled me to existence, my God, have pity on me, and do not let me die in despair!” 0193m “Who talks of God and despair at the same time?” said a voice that seemed to come from beneath the earth, and, deadened by the distance, sounded hollow and sepulchral in the young man’s ears.
“Ah,” said he, “I hear a human voice.” Edmond had not heard anyone speak save his jailer for four or five years; and a jailer is no man to a prisoner—he is a living door, a barrier of flesh and blood adding strength to restraints of oak and iron.
“In the name of Heaven,” cried Dantès, “speak again, though the sound of your voice terrifies me.
“An unhappy prisoner,” replied Dantès, who made no hesitation in answering.
“Of what country?” “A Frenchman.” “Your name?” “Edmond Dantès.” “Your profession?” “A sailor.” “How long have you been here?” “Since the 28th of February, 1815.” “Your crime?” “I am innocent.” “But of what are you accused?” “Of having conspired to aid the emperor’s return.” “What!
For the emperor’s return?—the emperor is no longer on the throne, then?” “He abdicated at Fontainebleau in 1814, and was sent to the Island of Elba.
But how long have you been here that you are ignorant of all this?” “Since 1811.” Dantès shuddered; this man had been four years longer than himself in prison.
“Do not dig any more,” said the voice; “only tell me how high up is your excavation?” “On a level with the floor.” “How is it concealed?” “Behind my bed.” “Has your bed been moved since you have been a prisoner?” “No.” “What does your chamber open on?” “A corridor.” “And the corridor?” “On a court.” “Alas!” murmured the voice.
I took the wrong angle, and have come out fifteen feet from where I intended.
Edmond fancied he heard a bitter laugh resounding from the depths.
“Oh, I am a Christian,” cried Dantès, guessing instinctively that this man meant to abandon him.
“I swear to you by him who died for us that naught shall induce me to breathe one syllable to my jailers; but I conjure you do not abandon me.
If you do, I swear to you, for I have got to the end of my strength, that I will dash my brains out against the wall, and you will have my death to reproach yourself with.” “How old are you?
All I do know is, that I was just nineteen when I was arrested, the 28th of February, 1815.” “Not quite twenty-six!” murmured the voice; “at that age he cannot be a traitor.” “Oh, no, no,” cried Dantès.
“I swear to you again, rather than betray you, I would allow myself to be hacked in pieces!” “You have done well to speak to me, and ask for my assistance, for I was about to form another plan, and leave you; but your age reassures me.
Wait.” “How long?” “I must calculate our chances; I will give you the signal.” “But you will not leave me; you will come to me, or you will let me come to you.
You must love somebody?” “No, I am alone in the world.” “Then you will love me.
My father has not yet forgotten me, I am sure, but God alone knows if she loves me still; I shall love you as I loved my father.” “It is well,” returned the voice; “tomorrow.” These few words were uttered with an accent that left no doubt of his sincerity; Dantès rose, dispersed the fragments with the same precaution as before, and pushed his bed back against the wall.
He then gave himself up to his happiness.
He was, perhaps, about to regain his liberty; at the worst, he would have a companion, and captivity that is shared is but half captivity.
Plaints made in common are almost prayers, and prayers where two or three are gathered together invoke the mercy of heaven.
He sat down occasionally on his bed, pressing his hand on his heart.
At the slightest noise he bounded towards the door.
Once or twice the thought crossed his mind that he might be separated from this unknown, whom he loved already; and then his mind was made up—when the jailer moved his bed and stooped to examine the opening, he would kill him with his water jug.
He would be condemned to die, but he was about to die of grief and despair when this miraculous noise recalled him to life.
It seemed to him that thus he better guarded the unfinished opening.
Doubtless there was a strange expression in his eyes, for the jailer said, “Come, are you going mad again?” Dantès did not answer; he feared that the emotion of his voice would betray him.
Night came; Dantès hoped that his neighbor would profit by the silence to address him, but he was mistaken.
“Oh, yes, yes; this instant, I entreat you.” In a moment that part of the floor on which Dantès was resting his two hands, as he knelt with his head in the opening, suddenly gave way; he drew back smartly, while a mass of stones and earth disappeared in a hole that opened beneath the aperture he himself had formed.
Then from the bottom of this passage, the depth of which it was impossible to measure, he saw appear, first the head, then the shoulders, and lastly the body of a man, who sprang lightly into his cell. 0197m Chapter 16.
A Learned Italian Seizing in his arms the friend so long and ardently desired, Dantès almost carried him towards the window, in order to obtain a better view of his features by the aid of the imperfect light that struggled through the grating.
He was a man of small stature, with hair blanched rather by suffering and sorrow than by age.
He had a deep-set, penetrating eye, almost buried beneath the thick gray eyebrow, and a long (and still black) beard reaching down to his breast.
His thin face, deeply furrowed by care, and the bold outline of his strongly marked features, betokened a man more accustomed to exercise his mental faculties than his physical strength.
Large drops of perspiration were now standing on his brow, while the garments that hung about him were so ragged that one could only guess at the pattern upon which they had originally been fashioned.
The stranger might have numbered sixty or sixty-five years; but a certain briskness and appearance of vigor in his movements made it probable that he was aged more from captivity than the course of time.
He received the enthusiastic greeting of his young acquaintance with evident pleasure, as though his chilled affections were rekindled and invigorated by his contact with one so warm and ardent.
He thanked him with grateful cordiality for his kindly welcome, although he must at that moment have been suffering bitterly to find another dungeon where he had fondly reckoned on discovering a means of regaining his liberty.
“And with what did you contrive to make that?” inquired Dantès.
“With one of the clamps of my bedstead; and this very tool has sufficed me to hollow out the road by which I came hither, a distance of about fifty feet.” “Fifty feet!” responded Dantès, almost terrified.
I expected, as I told you, to reach the outer wall, pierce through it, and throw myself into the sea; I have, however, kept along the corridor on which your chamber opens, instead of going beneath it.
This adjoins the lower part of the governor’s apartments, and were we to work our way through, we should only get into some lock-up cellars, where we must necessarily be recaptured.
The fourth and last side of your cell faces on—faces on—stop a minute, now where does it face?” The wall of which he spoke was the one in which was fixed the loophole by which light was admitted to the chamber.
This loophole, which gradually diminished in size as it approached the outside, to an opening through which a child could not have passed, was, for better security, furnished with three iron bars, so as to quiet all apprehensions even in the mind of the most suspicious jailer as to the possibility of a prisoner’s escape.
As the stranger asked the question, he dragged the table beneath the window.
The young man obeyed, mounted on the table, and, divining the wishes of his companion, placed his back securely against the wall and held out both hands.
An instant afterwards he hastily drew back his head, saying, “I thought so!” and sliding from the shoulders of Dantès as dextrously as he had ascended, he nimbly leaped from the table to the ground.
“What was it that you thought?” asked the young man anxiously, in his turn descending from the table.
The elder prisoner pondered the matter.
This side of your chamber looks out upon a kind of open gallery, where patrols are continually passing, and sentries keep watch day and night.” “Are you quite sure of that?” “Certain.
I saw the soldier’s shape and the top of his musket; that made me draw in my head so quickly, for I was fearful he might also see me.” “Well?” inquired Dantès.
“You perceive then the utter impossibility of escaping through your dungeon?” “Then——” pursued the young man eagerly.
“Then,” answered the elder prisoner, “the will of God be done!” And as the old man slowly pronounced those words, an air of profound resignation spread itself over his careworn countenance.
Dantès gazed on the man who could thus philosophically resign hopes so long and ardently nourished with an astonishment mingled with admiration.
“Never have I met with so remarkable a person as yourself.” “Willingly,” answered the stranger; “if, indeed, you feel any curiosity respecting one, now, alas, powerless to aid you in any way.” “Say not so; you can console and support me by the strength of your own powerful mind.
Pray let me know who you really are?” The stranger smiled a melancholy smile.
“I am the Abbé Faria, and have been imprisoned as you know in this Château d’If since the year 1811; previously to which I had been confined for three years in the fortress of Fenestrelle.
In the year 1811 I was transferred to Piedmont in France.
It was at this period I learned that the destiny which seemed subservient to every wish formed by Napoleon, had bestowed on him a son, named king of Rome even in his cradle.
I was very far then from expecting the change you have just informed me of; namely, that four years afterwards, this colossus of power would be overthrown.
Then who reigns in France at this moment—Napoleon II.?” “No, Louis XVIII.” “The brother of Louis XVI.!
How inscrutable are the ways of Providence—for what great and mysterious purpose has it pleased Heaven to abase the man once so elevated, and raise up him who was so abased?” Dantès’ whole attention was riveted on a man who could thus forget his own misfortunes while occupying himself with the destinies of others.
“Yes, yes,” continued he, “’Twill be the same as it was in England.
After Charles I., Cromwell; after Cromwell, Charles II., and then James II., and then some son-in-law or relation, some Prince of Orange, a stadtholder who becomes a king.
Then new concessions to the people, then a constitution, then liberty.
It was the plan of Alexander VI. and Clement VII., but it will never succeed now, for they attempted it fruitlessly, and Napoleon was unable to complete his work.
Italy seems fated to misfortune.” And the old man bowed his head.
Dantès could not understand a man risking his life for such matters.
Napoleon certainly he knew something of, inasmuch as he had seen and spoken with him; but of Clement VII. and Alexander VI. he knew nothing.
“Are you not,” he asked, “the priest who here in the Château d’If is generally thought to be—ill?” “Mad, you mean, don’t you?” “I did not like to say so,” answered Dantès, smiling.
Would it not be expecting too much to hope to succeed at your first attempt?
Why not try to find an opening in another direction from that which has so unfortunately failed?” “Alas, it shows how little notion you can have of all it has cost me to effect a purpose so unexpectedly frustrated, that you talk of beginning over again.
In the first place, I was four years making the tools I possess, and have been two years scraping and digging out earth, hard as granite itself; then what toil and fatigue has it not been to remove huge stones I should once have deemed impossible to loosen.
Consider also that I fully believed I had accomplished the end and aim of my undertaking, for which I had so exactly husbanded my strength as to make it just hold out to the termination of my enterprise; and now, at the moment when I reckoned upon success, my hopes are forever dashed from me.
No, I repeat again, that nothing shall induce me to renew attempts evidently at variance with the Almighty’s pleasure.” Dantès held down his head, that the other might not see how joy at the thought of having a companion outweighed the sympathy he felt for the failure of the abbé’s plans.
The abbé sank upon Edmond’s bed, while Edmond himself remained standing.
Escape had never once occurred to him.
There are, indeed, some things which appear so impossible that the mind does not dwell on them for an instant.
But the sight of an old man clinging to life with so desperate a courage, gave a fresh turn to his ideas, and inspired him with new courage.
Another, older and less strong than he, had attempted what he had not had sufficient resolution to undertake, and had failed only because of an error in calculation.
This same person, with almost incredible patience and perseverance, had contrived to provide himself with tools requisite for so unparalleled an attempt.
Another had done all this; why, then, was it impossible to Dantès?
He could do it in an hour, and how many times had he, for pure pastime, continued in the water for more than twice as long!
At once Dantès resolved to follow the brave example of his energetic companion, and to remember that what has once been done may be done again.
We must pierce through the corridor by forming a side opening about the middle, as it were the top part of a cross.
This time you will lay your plans more accurately; we shall get out into the gallery you have described; kill the sentinel who guards it, and make our escape.
All we require to insure success is courage, and that you possess, and strength, which I am not deficient in; as for patience, you have abundantly proved yours—you shall now see me prove mine.” “One instant, my dear friend,” replied the abbé; “it is clear you do not understand the nature of the courage with which I am endowed, and what use I intend making of my strength.
As for patience, I consider that I have abundantly exercised that in beginning every morning the task of the night before, and every night renewing the task of the day.
Hitherto I have fancied myself merely waging war against circumstances, not men.
I have thought it no sin to bore through a wall, or destroy a staircase; but I cannot so easily persuade myself to pierce a heart or take away a life.” A slight movement of surprise escaped Dantès.
“Is it possible,” said he, “that where your liberty is at stake you can allow any such scruple to deter you from obtaining it?” “Tell me,” replied Faria, “what has hindered you from knocking down your jailer with a piece of wood torn from your bedstead, dressing yourself in his clothes, and endeavoring to escape?” “Simply the fact that the idea never occurred to me,” answered Dantès.
“Because,” said the old man, “the natural repugnance to the commission of such a crime prevented you from thinking of it; and so it ever is because in simple and allowable things our natural instincts keep us from deviating from the strict line of duty.
They have rarely been successful.
Those that have been crowned with full success have been long meditated upon, and carefully arranged; such, for instance, as the escape of the Duc de Beaufort from the Château de Vincennes, that of the Abbé Dubuquoi from For l’Evêque; of Latude from the Bastille.
Then there are those for which chance sometimes affords opportunity, and those are the best of all.
“When you pay me a visit in my cell, my young friend,” said he, “I will show you an entire work, the fruits of the thoughts and reflections of my whole life; many of them meditated over in the shades of the Colosseum at Rome, at the foot of St.
Mark’s column at Venice, and on the borders of the Arno at Florence, little imagining at the time that they would be arranged in order within the walls of the Château d’If.
The work I speak of is called _A Treatise on the Possibility of a General Monarchy in Italy_, and will make one large quarto volume.” “And on what have you written all this?” “On two of my shirts.
I devoted three years of my life to reading and studying these one hundred and fifty volumes, till I knew them nearly by heart; so that since I have been in prison, a very slight effort of memory has enabled me to recall their contents as readily as though the pages were open before me.
I could recite you the whole of Thucydides, Xenophon, Plutarch, Titus Livius, Tacitus, Strada, Jornandes, Dante, Montaigne, Shakespeare, Spinoza, Machiavelli, and Bossuet.
I know nearly one thousand words, which is all that is absolutely necessary, although I believe there are nearly one hundred thousand in the dictionaries.
You are aware what huge whitings are served to us on _maigre_ days.
Well, I selected the cartilages of the heads of these fishes, and you can scarcely imagine the delight with which I welcomed the arrival of each Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, as affording me the means of increasing my stock of pens; for I will freely confess that my historical labors have been my greatest solace and relief.
While retracing the past, I forget the present; and traversing at will the path of history I cease to remember that I am myself a prisoner.” “But the ink,” said Dantès; “of what did you make your ink?” “There was formerly a fireplace in my dungeon,” replied Faria, “but it was closed up long ere I became an occupant of this prison.
Still, it must have been many years in use, for it was thickly covered with a coating of soot; this soot I dissolved in a portion of the wine brought to me every Sunday, and I assure you a better ink cannot be desired.
For very important notes, for which closer attention is required, I pricked one of my fingers, and wrote with my own blood.” “And when,” asked Dantès, “may I see all this?” “Whenever you please,” replied the abbé.
“Oh, then let it be directly!” exclaimed the young man.
“Follow me, then,” said the abbé, as he re-entered the subterranean passage, in which he soon disappeared, followed by Dantès.
The Abbé’s Chamber After having passed with tolerable ease through the subterranean passage, which, however, did not admit of their holding themselves erect, the two friends reached the further end of the corridor, into which the abbé’s cell opened; from that point the passage became much narrower, and barely permitted one to creep through on hands and knees.
The floor of the abbé’s cell was paved, and it had been by raising one of the stones in the most obscure corner that Faria had been able to commence the laborious task of which Dantès had witnessed the completion.
As he entered the chamber of his friend, Dantès cast around one eager and searching glance in quest of the expected marvels, but nothing more than common met his view.
“It is well,” said the abbé; “we have some hours before us—it is now just a quarter past twelve o’clock.” Instinctively Dantès turned round to observe by what watch or clock the abbé had been able so accurately to specify the hour.
A double movement of the globe he inhabited, and of which he could feel nothing, appeared to him perfectly impossible.
Each word that fell from his companion’s lips seemed fraught with the mysteries of science, as worthy of digging out as the gold and diamonds in the mines of Guzerat and Golconda, which he could just recollect having visited during a voyage made in his earliest youth.
“Come,” said he to the abbé, “I am anxious to see your treasures.” The abbé smiled, and, proceeding to the disused fireplace, raised, by the help of his chisel, a long stone, which had doubtless been the hearth, beneath which was a cavity of considerable depth, serving as a safe depository of the articles mentioned to Dantès. 0213m “What do you wish to see first?” asked the abbé.
“Oh, your great work on the monarchy of Italy!” Faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or four rolls of linen, laid one over the other, like folds of papyrus.
These rolls consisted of slips of cloth about four inches wide and eighteen long; they were all carefully numbered and closely covered with writing, so legible that Dantès could easily read it, as well as make out the sense—it being in Italian, a language he, as a Provençal, perfectly understood.
“There,” said he, “there is the work complete.
I have torn up two of my shirts, and as many handkerchiefs as I was master of, to complete the precious pages.
Should I ever get out of prison and find in all Italy a printer courageous enough to publish what I have composed, my literary reputation is forever secured.” “I see,” answered Dantès.
Dantès examined it with intense admiration, then looked around to see the instrument with which it had been shaped so correctly into form.
“Ah, yes,” said Faria; “the penknife.
That’s my masterpiece.
I made it, as well as this larger knife, out of an old iron candlestick.” The penknife was sharp and keen as a razor; as for the other knife, it would serve a double purpose, and with it one could cut and thrust.
Dantès examined the various articles shown to him with the same attention that he had bestowed on the curiosities and strange tools exhibited in the shops at Marseilles as the works of the savages in the South Seas from whence they had been brought by the different trading vessels.
“As for the ink,” said Faria, “I told you how I managed to obtain that—and I only just make it from time to time, as I require it.” “One thing still puzzles me,” observed Dantès, “and that is how you managed to do all this by daylight?” “I worked at night also,” replied Faria.
“Night!—why, for Heaven’s sake, are your eyes like cats’, that you can see to work in the dark?” “Indeed they are not; but God has supplied man with the intelligence that enables him to overcome the limitations of natural conditions.
I furnished myself with a light.” “You did?
Pray tell me how.” “I separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it, and so made oil—here is my lamp.” So saying, the abbé exhibited a sort of torch very similar to those used in public illuminations.
Let us shut this one up.” They put the stone back in its place; the abbé sprinkled a little dust over it to conceal the traces of its having been removed, rubbed his foot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as the other, and then, going towards his bed, he removed it from the spot it stood in.
Behind the head of the bed, and concealed by a stone fitting in so closely as to defy all suspicion, was a hollow space, and in this space a ladder of cords between twenty-five and thirty feet in length.
Dantès closely and eagerly examined it; he found it firm, solid, and compact enough to bear any weight.
“I once thought,” continued Faria, “of removing these iron bars, and letting myself down from the window, which, as you see, is somewhat wider than yours, although I should have enlarged it still more preparatory to my flight; however, I discovered that I should merely have dropped into a sort of inner court, and I therefore renounced the project altogether as too full of risk and danger.
“What are you thinking of?” asked the abbé smilingly, imputing the deep abstraction in which his visitor was plunged to the excess of his awe and wonder.
“I was reflecting, in the first place,” replied Dantès, “upon the enormous degree of intelligence and ability you must have employed to reach the high perfection to which you have attained.
What would you not have accomplished if you had been free?” “Possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain would probably, in a state of freedom, have evaporated in a thousand follies; misfortune is needed to bring to light the treasures of the human intellect.
Compression is needed to explode gunpowder.
Captivity has brought my mental faculties to a focus; and you are well aware that from the collision of clouds electricity is produced—from electricity, lightning, from lightning, illumination.” “No,” replied Dantès.
You must be blessed indeed to possess the knowledge you have.” The abbé smiled.
From this point everything was a blank to Dantès—he knew nothing more, not even the length of time he had been imprisoned.
His recital finished, the abbé reflected long and earnestly.
“There is,” said he, at the end of his meditations, “a clever maxim, which bears upon what I was saying to you some little while ago, and that is, that unless wicked ideas take root in a naturally depraved mind, human nature, in a right and wholesome state, revolts at crime.
Still, from an artificial civilization have originated wants, vices, and false tastes, which occasionally become so powerful as to stifle within us all good feelings, and ultimately to lead us into guilt and wickedness.
From this view of things, then, comes the axiom that if you visit to discover the author of any bad action, seek first to discover the person to whom the perpetration of that bad action could be in any way advantageous.
Now, to apply it in your case,—to whom could your disappearance have been serviceable?” “To no one, by Heaven!
I was a very insignificant person.” “Do not speak thus, for your reply evinces neither logic nor philosophy; everything is relative, my dear young friend, from the king who stands in the way of his successor, to the employee who keeps his rival out of a place.
Now, in the event of the king’s death, his successor inherits a crown,—when the employee dies, the supernumerary steps into his shoes, and receives his salary of twelve thousand livres.
Well, these twelve thousand livres are his civil list, and are as essential to him as the twelve millions of a king.
Everyone, from the highest to the lowest degree, has his place on the social ladder, and is beset by stormy passions and conflicting interests, as in Descartes’ theory of pressure and impulsion.
But these forces increase as we go higher, so that we have a spiral which in defiance of reason rests upon the apex and not on the base.
Now let us return to your particular world.
You say you were on the point of being made captain of the _Pharaon_?” “Yes.” “And about to become the husband of a young and lovely girl?” “Yes.” “Now, could anyone have had any interest in preventing the accomplishment of these two things?
But let us first settle the question as to its being the interest of anyone to hinder you from being captain of the _Pharaon_.
I was generally liked on board, and had the sailors possessed the right of selecting a captain themselves, I feel convinced their choice would have fallen on me.
I had quarelled with him some time previously, and had even challenged him to fight me; but he refused.” “Now we are getting on.
And what was this man’s name?” “Danglars.” “What rank did he hold on board?” “He was supercargo.” “And had you been captain, should you have retained him in his employment?” “Not if the choice had remained with me, for I had frequently observed inaccuracies in his accounts.” “Good again!
Did you take anybody with you when you put into the port of Elba?” “Nobody.” “Somebody there received your packet, and gave you a letter in place of it, I think?” “Yes; the grand marshal did.” “And what did you do with that letter?” “Put it into my portfolio.” “You had your portfolio with you, then?
This proof of his guilt may be procured by his immediate arrest, as the letter will be found either about his person, at his father’s residence, or in his cabin on board the _Pharaon_.’” The abbé shrugged his shoulders.
“The thing is clear as day,” said he; “and you must have had a very confiding nature, as well as a good heart, not to have suspected the origin of the whole affair.” “Do you really think so?
Ah, that would indeed be infamous.” “How did Danglars usually write?” “In a handsome, running hand.” “And how was the anonymous letter written?” “Backhanded.” Again the abbé smiled.
“Disguised.” “It was very boldly written, if disguised.” “Stop a bit,” said the abbé, taking up what he called his pen, and, after dipping it into the ink, he wrote on a piece of prepared linen, with his left hand, the first two or three words of the accusation.
Dantès drew back, and gazed on the abbé with a sensation almost amounting to terror.
“How very astonishing!” cried he at length.
Pray, was Danglars acquainted with Fernand?” “No—yes, he was.
Now I recollect——” “What?” “To have seen them both sitting at table together under an arbor at Père Pamphile’s the evening before the day fixed for my wedding.
They were in earnest conversation.
Danglars was joking in a friendly way, but Fernand looked pale and agitated.” “Were they alone?” “There was a third person with them whom I knew perfectly well, and who had, in all probability made their acquaintance; he was a tailor named Caderousse, but he was very drunk.
Stay!—stay!—How strange that it should not have occurred to me before!
Now I remember quite well, that on the table round which they were sitting were pens, ink, and paper.
Oh, the heartless, treacherous scoundrels!” exclaimed Dantès, pressing his hand to his throbbing brows.
“Is there anything else I can assist you in discovering, besides the villany of your friends?” inquired the abbé with a laugh.
“The ways of justice are frequently too dark and mysterious to be easily penetrated.
All we have hitherto done in the matter has been child’s play.
“Old enough to be ambitious, but too young to be corrupt.
And how did he treat you?” “With more of mildness than severity.” “Did you tell him your whole story?” “I did.” “And did his conduct change at all in the course of your examination?” “He did appear much disturbed when he read the letter that had brought me into this scrape.
He seemed quite overcome by my misfortune.” “By your misfortune?” “Yes.” “Then you feel quite sure that it was your misfortune he deplored?” “He gave me one great proof of his sympathy, at any rate.” “And that?” “He burnt the sole evidence that could at all have criminated me.” “What? the accusation?” “No; the letter.” “Are you sure?” “I saw it done.” “That alters the case.
This man might, after all, be a greater scoundrel than you have thought possible.” “Upon my word,” said Dantès, “you make me shudder.
Is the world filled with tigers and crocodiles?” “Yes; and remember that two-legged tigers and crocodiles are more dangerous than the others.” “Never mind; let us go on.” “With all my heart!
You tell me he burned the letter?” “He did; saying at the same time, ‘You see I thus destroy the only proof existing against you.’” “This action is somewhat too sublime to be natural.” “You think so?” “I am sure of it.
To whom was this letter addressed?” “To M.
What was your deputy called?” “De Villefort!” The abbé burst into a fit of laughter, while Dantès gazed on him in utter astonishment.
“Do you see that ray of sunlight?” “I do.” “Well, the whole thing is more clear to me than that sunbeam is to you.
And you tell me this magistrate expressed great sympathy and commiseration for you?” “He did.” “And the worthy man destroyed your compromising letter?” “Yes.” “And then made you swear never to utter the name of Noirtier?” “Yes.” “Why, you poor short-sighted simpleton, can you not guess who this Noirtier was, whose very name he was so careful to keep concealed?
This Noirtier was his father!” Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of Dantès, or hell opened its yawning gulf before him, he could not have been more completely transfixed with horror than he was at the sound of these unexpected words.
Starting up, he clasped his hands around his head as though to prevent his very brain from bursting, and exclaimed, “His father! his father!” “Yes, his father,” replied the abbé; “his right name was Noirtier de Villefort.” At this instant a bright light shot through the mind of Dantès, and cleared up all that had been dark and obscure before.
The change that had come over Villefort during the examination, the destruction of the letter, the exacted promise, the almost supplicating tones of the magistrate, who seemed rather to implore mercy than to pronounce punishment,—all returned with a stunning force to his memory.
He cried out, and staggered against the wall like a drunken man, then he hurried to the opening that led from the abbé’s cell to his own, and said, “I must be alone, to think over all this.” When he regained his dungeon, he threw himself on his bed, where the turnkey found him in the evening visit, sitting with fixed gaze and contracted features, dumb and motionless as a statue.
During these hours of profound meditation, which to him had seemed only minutes, he had formed a fearful resolution, and bound himself to its fulfilment by a solemn oath.
Dantès was at length roused from his reverie by the voice of Faria, who, having also been visited by his jailer, had come to invite his fellow-sufferer to share his supper.
The reputation of being out of his mind, though harmlessly and even amusingly so, had procured for the abbé unusual privileges.
He was supplied with bread of a finer, whiter quality than the usual prison fare, and even regaled each Sunday with a small quantity of wine.
Now this was a Sunday, and the abbé had come to ask his young companion to share the luxuries with him.
Dantès followed him; his features were no longer contracted, and now wore their usual expression, but there was that in his whole appearance that bespoke one who had come to a fixed and desperate resolve.
Faria bent on him his penetrating eye.
“I regret now,” said he, “having helped you in your late inquiries, or having given you the information I did.” “Why so?” inquired Dantès.
“Because it has instilled a new passion in your heart—that of vengeance.” Dantès smiled.
“Let us talk of something else,” said he.
Again the abbé looked at him, then mournfully shook his head; but in accordance with Dantès’ request, he began to speak of other matters.
The elder prisoner was one of those persons whose conversation, like that of all who have experienced many trials, contained many useful and important hints as well as sound information; but it was never egotistical, for the unfortunate man never alluded to his own sorrows.
Dantès listened with admiring attention to all he said; some of his remarks corresponded with what he already knew, or applied to the sort of knowledge his nautical life had enabled him to acquire.
I can well believe that so learned a person as yourself would prefer absolute solitude to being tormented with the company of one as ignorant and uninformed as myself.
If you will only agree to my request, I promise you never to mention another word about escaping.” The abbé smiled.
“Alas, my boy,” said he, “human knowledge is confined within very narrow limits; and when I have taught you mathematics, physics, history, and the three or four modern languages with which I am acquainted, you will know as much as I do myself.
Now, it will scarcely require two years for me to communicate to you the stock of learning I possess.” “Two years!” exclaimed Dantès; “do you really believe I can acquire all these things in so short a time?” “Not their application, certainly, but their principles you may; to learn is not to know; there are the learners and the learned.
Memory makes the one, philosophy the other.” “But cannot one learn philosophy?” “Philosophy cannot be taught; it is the application of the sciences to truth; it is like the golden cloud in which the Messiah went up into heaven.” “Well, then,” said Dantès, “What shall you teach me first?
I want to learn.” “Everything,” said the abbé.
And that very evening the prisoners sketched a plan of education, to be entered upon the following day.
Dantès possessed a prodigious memory, combined with an astonishing quickness and readiness of conception; the mathematical turn of his mind rendered him apt at all kinds of calculation, while his naturally poetical feelings threw a light and pleasing veil over the dry reality of arithmetical computation, or the rigid severity of geometry.
He already knew Italian, and had also picked up a little of the Romaic dialect during voyages to the East; and by the aid of these two languages he easily comprehended the construction of all the others, so that at the end of six months he began to speak Spanish, English, and German.
In strict accordance with the promise made to the abbé, Dantès spoke no more of escape.
Perhaps the delight his studies afforded him left no room for such thoughts; perhaps the recollection that he had pledged his word (on which his sense of honor was keen) kept him from referring in any way to the possibilities of flight.
Days, even months, passed by unheeded in one rapid and instructive course.
Dantès observed, however, that Faria, in spite of the relief his society afforded, daily grew sadder; one thought seemed incessantly to harass and distract his mind.
Sometimes he would fall into long reveries, sigh heavily and involuntarily, then suddenly rise, and, with folded arms, begin pacing the confined space of his dungeon.
One day he stopped all at once, and exclaimed: “Ah, if there were no sentinel!” “There shall not be one a minute longer than you please,” said Dantès, who had followed the working of his thoughts as accurately as though his brain were enclosed in crystal so clear as to display its minutest operations.
“I have already told you,” answered the abbé, “that I loathe the idea of shedding blood.” “And yet the murder, if you choose to call it so, would be simply a measure of self-preservation.” “No matter!
I could never agree to it.” “Still, you have thought of it?” “Incessantly, alas!” cried the abbé.
“And you have discovered a means of regaining our freedom, have you not?” asked Dantès eagerly.
“I have; if it were only possible to place a deaf and blind sentinel in the gallery beyond us.” “He shall be both blind and deaf,” replied the young man, with an air of determination that made his companion shudder.
“No, no,” cried the abbé; “impossible!” Dantès endeavored to renew the subject; the abbé shook his head in token of disapproval, and refused to make any further response.
The young man, in reply, took up the chisel, bent it into the form of a horseshoe, and then as readily straightened it.
“And will you engage not to do any harm to the sentry, except as a last resort?” “I promise on my honor.” “Then,” said the abbé, “we may hope to put our design into execution.” “And how long shall we be in accomplishing the necessary work?” “At least a year.” “And shall we begin at once?” “At once.” “We have lost a year to no purpose!” cried Dantès.
“Do you consider the last twelve months to have been wasted?” asked the abbé.
“Forgive me!” cried Edmond, blushing deeply.
“Tut, tut!” answered the abbé, “man is but man after all, and you are about the best specimen of the genus I have ever known.
It consisted of a plan of his own cell and that of Dantès, with the passage which united them.
The prisoners were then to make their way through one of the gallery windows, and to let themselves down from the outer walls by means of the abbé’s ladder of cords.
Dantès’ eyes sparkled with joy, and he rubbed his hands with delight at the idea of a plan so simple, yet apparently so certain to succeed.
That very day the miners began their labors, with a vigor and alacrity proportionate to their long rest from fatigue and their hopes of ultimate success.
Nothing interrupted the progress of the work except the necessity that each was under of returning to his cell in anticipation of the turnkey’s visits.
They had learned to distinguish the almost imperceptible sound of his footsteps as he descended towards their dungeons, and happily, never failed of being prepared for his coming.
The fresh earth excavated during their present work, and which would have entirely blocked up the old passage, was thrown, by degrees and with the utmost precaution, out of the window in either Faria’s or Dantès’ cell, the rubbish being first pulverized so finely that the night wind carried it far away without permitting the smallest trace to remain.
More than a year had been consumed in this undertaking, the only tools for which had been a chisel, a knife, and a wooden lever; Faria still continuing to instruct Dantès by conversing with him, sometimes in one language, sometimes in another; at others, relating to him the history of nations and great men who from time to time have risen to fame and trodden the path of glory.
At the end of fifteen months the level was finished, and the excavation completed beneath the gallery, and the two workmen could distinctly hear the measured tread of the sentinel as he paced to and fro over their heads.
Dantès was occupied in arranging this piece of wood when he heard Faria, who had remained in Edmond’s cell for the purpose of cutting a peg to secure their rope-ladder, call to him in a tone indicative of great suffering.
Dantès hastened to his dungeon, where he found him standing in the middle of the room, pale as death, his forehead streaming with perspiration, and his hands clenched tightly together.
“Gracious heavens!” exclaimed Dantès, “what is the matter? what has happened?” “Quick! quick!” returned the abbé, “listen to what I have to say.” Dantès looked in fear and wonder at the livid countenance of Faria, whose eyes, already dull and sunken, were surrounded by purple circles, while his lips were white as those of a corpse, and his very hair seemed to stand on end.
“Alas,” faltered out the abbé, “all is over with me.
I am seized with a terrible, perhaps mortal illness; I can feel that the paroxysm is fast approaching.
I had a similar attack the year previous to my imprisonment.
Go into my cell as quickly as you can; draw out one of the feet that support the bed; you will find it has been hollowed out for the purpose of containing a small phial you will see there half-filled with a red-looking fluid.
Bring it to me—or rather—no, no!—I may be found here, therefore help me back to my room while I have the strength to drag myself along.
Who knows what may happen, or how long the attack may last?” In spite of the magnitude of the misfortune which thus suddenly frustrated his hopes, Dantès did not lose his presence of mind, but descended into the passage, dragging his unfortunate companion with him; then, half-carrying, half-supporting him, he managed to reach the abbé’s chamber, when he immediately laid the sufferer on his bed.
“Thanks,” said the poor abbé, shivering as though his veins were filled with ice.
“I am about to be seized with a fit of catalepsy; when it comes to its height I shall probably lie still and motionless as though dead, uttering neither sigh nor groan.
On the other hand, the symptoms may be much more violent, and cause me to fall into fearful convulsions, foam at the mouth, and cry out loudly.
Take care my cries are not heard, for if they are it is more than probable I should be removed to another part of the prison, and we be separated forever.
When I become quite motionless, cold, and rigid as a corpse, then, and not before,—be careful about this,—force open my teeth with the knife, pour from eight to ten drops of the liquor contained in the phial down my throat, and I may perhaps revive.” “Perhaps!” exclaimed Dantès in grief-stricken tones.
The fit lasted two hours; then, more helpless than an infant, and colder and paler than marble, more crushed and broken than a reed trampled under foot, he fell back, doubled up in one last convulsion, and became as rigid as a corpse.
Edmond waited till life seemed extinct in the body of his friend, then, taking up the knife, he with difficulty forced open the closely fixed jaws, carefully administered the appointed number of drops, and anxiously awaited the result.
An hour passed away and the old man gave no sign of returning animation.
Dantès began to fear he had delayed too long ere he administered the remedy, and, thrusting his hands into his hair, continued gazing on the lifeless features of his friend.
At length a slight color tinged the livid cheeks, consciousness returned to the dull, open eyeballs, a faint sigh issued from the lips, and the sufferer made a feeble effort to move.
“He is saved! he is saved!” cried Dantès in a paroxysm of delight.
Dantès listened, and plainly distinguished the approaching steps of the jailer.
It was therefore near seven o’clock; but Edmond’s anxiety had put all thoughts of time out of his head.
The young man sprang to the entrance, darted through it, carefully drawing the stone over the opening, and hurried to his cell.
He had scarcely done so before the door opened, and the jailer saw the prisoner seated as usual on the side of his bed.
Almost before the key had turned in the lock, and before the departing steps of the jailer had died away in the long corridor he had to traverse, Dantès, whose restless anxiety concerning his friend left him no desire to touch the food brought him, hurried back to the abbé’s chamber, and raising the stone by pressing his head against it, was soon beside the sick man’s couch.
Faria had now fully regained his consciousness, but he still lay helpless and exhausted on his miserable bed.
“Did you fancy yourself dying?” “No, I had no such idea; but, knowing that all was ready for flight, I thought you might have made your escape.” The deep glow of indignation suffused the cheeks of Dantès.
I am fearfully exhausted and debilitated by this attack.” “Be of good cheer,” replied Dantès; “your strength will return.” And as he spoke he seated himself near the bed beside Faria, and took his hands.
“The last attack I had,” said he, “lasted but half an hour, and after it I was hungry, and got up without help; now I can move neither my right arm nor leg, and my head seems uncomfortable, which shows that there has been a suffusion of blood on the brain.
The third attack will either carry me off, or leave me paralyzed for life.” “No, no,” cried Dantès; “you are mistaken—you will not die!
We shall save you another time, as we have done this, only with a better chance of success, because we shall be able to command every requisite assistance.” “My good Edmond,” answered the abbé, “be not deceived.
The attack which has just passed away, condemns me forever to the walls of a prison.
None can fly from a dungeon who cannot walk.” “Well, we will wait,—a week, a month, two months, if need be,—and meanwhile your strength will return.
Everything is in readiness for our flight, and we can select any time we choose.
“This arm is paralyzed; not for a time, but forever.
Lift it, and judge if I am mistaken.” The young man raised the arm, which fell back by its own weight, perfectly inanimate and helpless.
“You are convinced now, Edmond, are you not?” asked the abbé.
Since the first attack I experienced of this malady, I have continually reflected on it.
Indeed, I expected it, for it is a family inheritance; both my father and grandfather died of it in a third attack.
The physician who prepared for me the remedy I have twice successfully taken, was no other than the celebrated Cabanis, and he predicted a similar end for me.” 0233m “The physician may be mistaken!” exclaimed Dantès.
“And as for your poor arm, what difference will that make?
I can take you on my shoulders, and swim for both of us.” “My son,” said the abbé, “you, who are a sailor and a swimmer, must know as well as I do that a man so loaded would sink before he had done fifty strokes.
Cease, then, to allow yourself to be duped by vain hopes, that even your own excellent heart refuses to believe in.
Here I shall remain till the hour of my deliverance arrives, and that, in all human probability, will be the hour of my death.
“Then I shall also remain.” Then, rising and extending his hand with an air of solemnity over the old man’s head, he slowly added, “By the blood of Christ I swear never to leave you while you live.” Faria gazed fondly on his noble-minded, single-hearted, high-principled young friend, and read in his countenance ample confirmation of the sincerity of his devotion and the loyalty of his purpose.
“Thanks,” murmured the invalid, extending one hand.
You may one of these days reap the reward of your disinterested devotion.
But as I cannot, and you will not, quit this place, it becomes necessary to fill up the excavation beneath the soldier’s gallery; he might, by chance, hear the hollow sound of his footsteps, and call the attention of his officer to the circumstance.
That would bring about a discovery which would inevitably lead to our being separated.
Go, then, and set about this work, in which, unhappily, I can offer you no assistance; keep at it all night, if necessary, and do not return here tomorrow till after the jailer has visited me.
I shall have something of the greatest importance to communicate to you.” Dantès took the hand of the abbé in his, and affectionately pressed it.
Faria smiled encouragingly on him, and the young man retired to his task, in the spirit of obedience and respect which he had sworn to show towards his aged friend.
The Treasure When Dantès returned next morning to the chamber of his companion in captivity, he found Faria seated and looking composed.
In the ray of light which entered by the narrow window of his cell, he held open in his left hand, of which alone, it will be recollected, he retained the use, a sheet of paper, which, from being constantly rolled into a small compass, had the form of a cylinder, and was not easily kept open.
“What is that?” he inquired.
Until this day and for how long a time!—he had refrained from talking of the treasure, which had brought upon the abbé the accusation of madness.
With his instinctive delicacy Edmond had preferred avoiding any touch on this painful chord, and Faria had been equally silent.
He had taken the silence of the old man for a return to reason; and now these few words uttered by Faria, after so painful a crisis, seemed to indicate a serious relapse into mental alienation.
“Your treasure?” stammered Dantès.
“You have, indeed, a noble nature, Edmond, and I see by your paleness and agitation what is passing in your heart at this moment.
This treasure exists, Dantès, and if I have not been allowed to possess it, you will.
No one would listen or believe me, because everyone thought me mad; but you, who must know that I am not, listen to me, and believe me so afterwards if you will.” “Alas,” murmured Edmond to himself, “this is a terrible relapse!
There was only this blow wanting.” Then he said aloud, “My dear friend, your attack has, perhaps, fatigued you; had you not better repose awhile?
Tomorrow, if you will, I will hear your narrative; but today I wish to nurse you carefully.
Besides,” he said, “a treasure is not a thing we need hurry about.” “On the contrary, it is a matter of the utmost importance, Edmond!” replied the old man.
“Who knows if tomorrow, or the next day after, the third attack may not come on? and then must not all be over?
Yes, indeed, I have often thought with a bitter joy that these riches, which would make the wealth of a dozen families, will be forever lost to those men who persecute me.
This idea was one of vengeance to me, and I tasted it slowly in the night of my dungeon and the despair of my captivity.
But now I have forgiven the world for the love of you; now that I see you, young and with a promising future,—now that I think of all that may result to you in the good fortune of such a disclosure, I shudder at any delay, and tremble lest I should not assure to one as worthy as yourself the possession of so vast an amount of hidden wealth.” Edmond turned away his head with a sigh.
“You persist in your incredulity, Edmond,” continued Faria.
“My words have not convinced you.
Well, then, read this paper, which I have never shown to anyone.” “Tomorrow, my dear friend,” said Edmond, desirous of not yielding to the old man’s madness.
“25th April, 149’” “Well!” said Faria, when the young man had finished reading it.
“Steps approach—I go—adieu!” And Dantès, happy to escape the history and explanation which would be sure to confirm his belief in his friend’s mental instability, glided like a snake along the narrow passage; while Faria, restored by his alarm to a certain amount of activity, pushed the stone into place with his foot, and covered it with a mat in order the more effectually to avoid discovery.
It was the governor, who, hearing of Faria’s illness from the jailer, had come in person to see him.
Faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all gestures in order that he might conceal from the governor the paralysis that had already half stricken him with death.
His fear was lest the governor, touched with pity, might order him to be removed to better quarters, and thus separate him from his young companion.
But fortunately this was not the case, and the governor left him, convinced that the poor madman, for whom in his heart he felt a kind of affection, was only troubled with a slight indisposition.
During this time, Edmond, seated on his bed with his head in his hands, tried to collect his scattered thoughts.
Faria, since their first acquaintance, had been on all points so rational and logical, so wonderfully sagacious, in fact, that he could not understand how so much wisdom on all points could be allied with madness.
Was Faria deceived as to his treasure, or was all the world deceived as to Faria?
Dantès remained in his cell all day, not daring to return to his friend, thinking thus to defer the moment when he should be convinced, once for all, that the abbé was mad—such a conviction would be so terrible!
But, towards the evening after the hour for the customary visit had gone by, Faria, not seeing the young man appear, tried to move and get over the distance which separated them.
Edmond shuddered when he heard the painful efforts which the old man made to drag himself along; his leg was inert, and he could no longer make use of one arm.
Edmond was obliged to assist him, for otherwise he would not have been able to enter by the small aperture which led to Dantès’ chamber.
“Here I am, pursuing you remorselessly,” he said with a benignant smile.
“You thought to escape my munificence, but it is in vain.
“You know,” said the abbé, “that I was the secretary and intimate friend of Cardinal Spada, the last of the princes of that name.
I owe to this worthy lord all the happiness I ever knew.
He was not rich, although the wealth of his family had passed into a proverb, and I heard the phrase very often, ‘As rich as a Spada.’ But he, like public rumor, lived on this reputation for wealth; his palace was my paradise.
I was tutor to his nephews, who are dead; and when he was alone in the world, I tried by absolute devotion to his will, to make up to him all he had done for me during ten years of unremitting kindness.
The cardinal’s house had no secrets for me.
I had often seen my noble patron annotating ancient volumes, and eagerly searching amongst dusty family manuscripts.
One day when I was reproaching him for his unavailing searches, and deploring the prostration of mind that followed them, he looked at me, and, smiling bitterly, opened a volume relating to the History of the City of Rome.
There, in the twentieth chapter of the Life of Pope Alexander VI., were the following lines, which I can never forget:— “‘The great wars of Romagna had ended; Cæsar Borgia, who had completed his conquest, had need of money to purchase all Italy.
King of France, who was formidable still in spite of his recent reverses; and it was necessary, therefore, to have recourse to some profitable scheme, which was a matter of great difficulty in the impoverished condition of exhausted Italy.
His holiness had an idea.
He determined to make two cardinals.’ “By choosing two of the greatest personages of Rome, especially rich men—_this_ was the return the Holy Father looked for.
In the first place, he could sell the great appointments and splendid offices which the cardinals already held; and then he had the two hats to sell besides.
There was a third point in view, which will appear hereafter.
“The pope and Cæsar Borgia first found the two future cardinals; they were Giovanni Rospigliosi, who held four of the highest dignities of the Holy See, and Cæsar Spada, one of the noblest and richest of the Roman nobility; both felt the high honor of such a favor from the pope.
They were ambitious, and Cæsar Borgia soon found purchasers for their appointments.
The result was, that Rospigliosi and Spada paid for being cardinals, and eight other persons paid for the offices the cardinals held before their elevation, and thus eight hundred thousand crowns entered into the coffers of the speculators. 0239m “It is time now to proceed to the last part of the speculation.
The pope heaped attentions upon Rospigliosi and Spada, conferred upon them the insignia of the cardinalate, and induced them to arrange their affairs and take up their residence at Rome.
Then the pope and Cæsar Borgia invited the two cardinals to dinner.
Cæsar thought they could make use of one of the means which he always had ready for his friends, that is to say, in the first place, the famous key which was given to certain persons with the request that they go and open a designated cupboard.
This key was furnished with a small iron point,—a negligence on the part of the locksmith.
When this was pressed to effect the opening of the cupboard, of which the lock was difficult, the person was pricked by this small point, and died next day.
“Cæsar proposed to his father, that they should either ask the cardinals to open the cupboard, or shake hands with them; but Alexander VI. replied: ‘Now as to the worthy cardinals, Spada and Rospigliosi, let us ask both of them to dinner, something tells me that we shall get that money back.
Besides, you forget, Cæsar, an indigestion declares itself immediately, while a prick or a bite occasions a delay of a day or two.’ Cæsar gave way before such cogent reasoning, and the cardinals were consequently invited to dinner.
“The table was laid in a vineyard belonging to the pope, near San Pierdarena, a charming retreat which the cardinals knew very well by report.
Rospigliosi, quite set up with his new dignities, went with a good appetite and his most ingratiating manner.
Spada, a prudent man, and greatly attached to his only nephew, a young captain of the highest promise, took paper and pen, and made his will.
He then sent word to his nephew to wait for him near the vineyard; but it appeared the servant did not find him.
“Spada knew what these invitations meant; since Christianity, so eminently civilizing, had made progress in Rome, it was no longer a centurion who came from the tyrant with a message, ‘Cæsar wills that you die.’ but it was a legate _à latere_, who came with a smile on his lips to say from the pope, ‘His holiness requests you to dine with him.’ “Spada set out about two o’clock to San Pierdarena.
The first sight that attracted the eyes of Spada was that of his nephew, in full costume, and Cæsar Borgia paying him most marked attentions.
Spada turned pale, as Cæsar looked at him with an ironical air, which proved that he had anticipated all, and that the snare was well spread.
“They began dinner and Spada was only able to inquire of his nephew if he had received his message.
The nephew replied no; perfectly comprehending the meaning of the question.
It was too late, for he had already drunk a glass of excellent wine, placed for him expressly by the pope’s butler.
Spada at the same moment saw another bottle approach him, which he was pressed to taste.
An hour afterwards a physician declared they were both poisoned through eating mushrooms.
Spada died on the threshold of the vineyard; the nephew expired at his own door, making signs which his wife could not comprehend.
“Then Cæsar and the pope hastened to lay hands on the heritage, under pretense of seeking for the papers of the dead man.
Cæsar and his father searched, examined, scrutinized, but found nothing, or at least very little; not exceeding a few thousand crowns in plate, and about the same in ready money; but the nephew had time to say to his wife before he expired: ‘Look well among my uncle’s papers; there is a will.’ “They sought even more thoroughly than the august heirs had done, but it was fruitless.
There were two palaces and a vineyard behind the Palatine Hill; but in these days landed property had not much value, and the two palaces and the vineyard remained to the family since they were beneath the rapacity of the pope and his son.
Alexander VI. died, poisoned,—you know by what mistake.
Cæsar, poisoned at the same time, escaped by shedding his skin like a snake; but the new skin was spotted by the poison till it looked like a tiger’s.
Then, compelled to quit Rome, he went and got himself obscurely killed in a night skirmish, scarcely noticed in history.
“After the pope’s death and his son’s exile, it was supposed that the Spada family would resume the splendid position they had held before the cardinal’s time; but this was not the case.
The Spadas remained in doubtful ease, a mystery hung over this dark affair, and the public rumor was, that Cæsar, a better politician than his father, had carried off from the pope the fortune of the two cardinals.
I say the two, because Cardinal Rospigliosi, who had not taken any precaution, was completely despoiled.
“Up to this point,” said Faria, interrupting the thread of his narrative, “this seems to you very meaningless, no doubt, eh?” “Oh, my friend,” cried Dantès, “on the contrary, it seems as if I were reading a most interesting narrative; go on, I beg of you.” “I will.
The family began to get accustomed to their obscurity.
Years rolled on, and amongst the descendants some were soldiers, others diplomatists; some churchmen, some bankers; some grew rich, and some were ruined.
I come now to the last of the family, whose secretary I was—the Count of Spada.
I had often heard him complain of the disproportion of his rank with his fortune; and I advised him to invest all he had in an annuity.
The celebrated breviary remained in the family, and was in the count’s possession.
It had been handed down from father to son; for the singular clause of the only will that had been found, had caused it to be regarded as a genuine relic, preserved in the family with superstitious veneration.
It was an illuminated book, with beautiful Gothic characters, and so weighty with gold, that a servant always carried it before the cardinal on days of great solemnity.
“At the sight of papers of all sorts,—titles, contracts, parchments, which were kept in the archives of the family, all descending from the poisoned cardinal, I in my turn examined the immense bundles of documents, like twenty servitors, stewards, secretaries before me; but in spite of the most exhaustive researches, I found—nothing.
Yet I had read, I had even written a precise history of the Borgia family, for the sole purpose of assuring myself whether any increase of fortune had occurred to them on the death of the Cardinal Cæsar Spada; but could only trace the acquisition of the property of the Cardinal Rospigliosi, his companion in misfortune.
“I was then almost assured that the inheritance had neither profited the Borgias nor the family, but had remained unpossessed like the treasures of the Arabian Nights, which slept in the bosom of the earth under the eyes of the genie.
I searched, ransacked, counted, calculated a thousand and a thousand times the income and expenditure of the family for three hundred years.
I remained in my ignorance, and the Count of Spada in his poverty.
He had reserved from his annuity his family papers, his library, composed of five thousand volumes, and his famous breviary.
All these he bequeathed to me, with a thousand Roman crowns, which he had in ready money, on condition that I would have anniversary masses said for the repose of his soul, and that I would draw up a genealogical tree and history of his house.
All this I did scrupulously.
Be easy, my dear Edmond, we are near the conclusion.
I raised my head; I was in utter darkness.
I rang for a light, but, as no one came, I determined to find one for myself.
It was indeed but anticipating the simple manners which I should soon be under the necessity of adopting.
I took a wax-candle in one hand, and with the other groped about for a piece of paper (my match-box being empty), with which I proposed to get a light from the small flame still playing on the embers.
Fearing, however, to make use of any valuable piece of paper, I hesitated for a moment, then recollected that I had seen in the famous breviary, which was on the table beside me, an old paper quite yellow with age, and which had served as a marker for centuries, kept there by the request of the heirs.
I felt for it, found it, twisted it up together, and putting it into the expiring flame, set light to it.
“But beneath my fingers, as if by magic, in proportion as the fire ascended, I saw yellowish characters appear on the paper.
I grasped it in my hand, put out the flame as quickly as I could, lighted my taper in the fire itself, and opened the crumpled paper with inexpressible emotion, recognizing, when I had done so, that these characters had been traced in mysterious and sympathetic ink, only appearing when exposed to the fire; nearly one-third of the paper had been consumed by the flame.
It was that paper you read this morning; read it again, Dantès, and then I will complete for you the incomplete words and unconnected sense.” Faria, with an air of triumph, offered the paper to Dantès, who this time read the following words, traced with an ink of a reddish color resembling rust: “This 25th day of April, 1498, be...
Alexander VI., and fearing that not... he may desire to become my heir, and re... and Bentivoglio, who were poisoned,... my sole heir, that I have bu... and has visited with me, that is, in...
Island of Monte Cristo, all I poss... jewels, diamonds, gems; that I alone... may amount to nearly two mil... will find on raising the twentieth ro... creek to the east in a right line.
Two open... in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a... which treasure I bequeath and leave en... as my sole heir.
Two open...ings have been made in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...ngle in the second; which treasure I bequeath and leave en...tire to him as my sole heir.
“Cæs...ar † Spada.” “Well, do you comprehend now?” inquired Faria.
“It is the declaration of Cardinal Spada, and the will so long sought for,” replied Edmond, still incredulous.
“Yes; a thousand times, yes!” “And who completed it as it now is?” “I did.
“Now,” continued Faria, addressing Dantès with an almost paternal expression, “now, my dear fellow, you know as much as I do myself.
If we ever escape together, half this treasure is yours; if I die here, and you escape alone, the whole belongs to you.” “But,” inquired Dantès hesitating, “has this treasure no more legitimate possessor in the world than ourselves?” “No, no, be easy on that score; the family is extinct.
The last Count of Spada, moreover, made me his heir, bequeathing to me this symbolic breviary, he bequeathed to me all it contained; no, no, make your mind satisfied on that point.
If we lay hands on this fortune, we may enjoy it without remorse.” “And you say this treasure amounts to——” “Two millions of Roman crowns; nearly thirteen millions of our money.”2 “Impossible!” said Dantès, staggered at the enormous amount.
“Impossible? and why?” asked the old man.
“I have only kept this secret so long from you,” continued Faria, “that I might test your character, and then surprise you.
Had we escaped before my attack of catalepsy, I should have conducted you to Monte Cristo; now,” he added, with a sigh, “it is you who will conduct me thither.
Well, Dantès, you do not thank me?” “This treasure belongs to you, my dear friend,” replied Dantès, “and to you only.
I am no relation of yours.” “You are my son, Dantès,” exclaimed the old man.
“You are the child of my captivity.
My profession condemns me to celibacy.
God has sent you to me to console, at one and the same time, the man who could not be a father, and the prisoner who could not get free.” And Faria extended the arm of which alone the use remained to him to the young man, who threw himself upon his neck and wept.
The abbé did not know the Island of Monte Cristo; but Dantès knew it, and had often passed it, situated twenty-five miles from Pianosa, between Corsica and the Island of Elba, and had once touched there.
This island was, always had been, and still is, completely deserted.
It is a rock of almost conical form, which looks as though it had been thrust up by volcanic force from the depth to the surface of the ocean.
Dantès drew a plan of the island for Faria, and Faria gave Dantès advice as to the means he should employ to recover the treasure.
But Dantès was far from being as enthusiastic and confident as the old man.
However, as if fate resolved on depriving the prisoners of their last chance, and making them understand that they were condemned to perpetual imprisonment, a new misfortune befell them; the gallery on the sea side, which had long been in ruins, was rebuilt.
They had repaired it completely, and stopped up with vast masses of stone the hole Dantès had partly filled in.
But for this precaution, which, it will be remembered, the abbé had made to Edmond, the misfortune would have been still greater, for their attempt to escape would have been detected, and they would undoubtedly have been separated.
Thus a new, a stronger, and more inexorable barrier was interposed to cut off the realization of their hopes.
“You see,” said the young man, with an air of sorrowful resignation, to Faria, “that God deems it right to take from me any claim to merit for what you call my devotion to you.
I have promised to remain forever with you, and now I could not break my promise if I would.
The treasure will be no more mine than yours, and neither of us will quit this prison.
But my real treasure is not that, my dear friend, which awaits me beneath the sombre rocks of Monte Cristo, it is your presence, our living together five or six hours a day, in spite of our jailers; it is the rays of intelligence you have elicited from my brain, the languages you have implanted in my memory, and which have taken root there with all their philological ramifications.
These different sciences that you have made so easy to me by the depth of the knowledge you possess of them, and the clearness of the principles to which you have reduced them—this is my treasure, my beloved friend, and with this you have made me rich and happy.
Believe me, and take comfort, this is better for me than tons of gold and cases of diamonds, even were they not as problematical as the clouds we see in the morning floating over the sea, which we take for _terra firma_, and which evaporate and vanish as we draw near to them.
I owe you my real good, my present happiness; and all the sovereigns of the earth, even Cæsar Borgia himself, could not deprive me of this.” Thus, if not actually happy, yet the days these two unfortunates passed together went quickly.
Faria, who for so long a time had kept silence as to the treasure, now perpetually talked of it.
As he had prophesied would be the case, he remained paralyzed in the right arm and the left leg, and had given up all hope of ever enjoying it himself.
But he was continually thinking over some means of escape for his young companion, and anticipating the pleasure he would enjoy.
For fear the letter might be some day lost or stolen, he compelled Dantès to learn it by heart; and Dantès knew it from the first to the last word.
Then he destroyed the second portion, assured that if the first were seized, no one would be able to discover its real meaning.
Whole hours sometimes passed while Faria was giving instructions to Dantès,—instructions which were to serve him when he was at liberty.
In the meanwhile the hours passed, if not rapidly, at least tolerably.
Faria, as we have said, without having recovered the use of his hand and foot, had regained all the clearness of his understanding, and had gradually, besides the moral instructions we have detailed, taught his youthful companion the patient and sublime duty of a prisoner, who learns to make something from nothing.
They were thus perpetually employed,—Faria, that he might not see himself grow old; Dantès, for fear of recalling the almost extinct past which now only floated in his memory like a distant light wandering in the night.
So life went on for them as it does for those who are not victims of misfortune and whose activities glide along mechanically and tranquilly beneath the eye of Providence.
But beneath this superficial calm there were in the heart of the young man, and perhaps in that of the old man, many repressed desires, many stifled sighs, which found vent when Faria was left alone, and when Edmond returned to his cell.
One night Edmond awoke suddenly, believing that he heard someone calling him.
He opened his eyes upon utter darkness.
His name, or rather a plaintive voice which essayed to pronounce his name, reached him.
Undoubtedly the call came from Faria’s dungeon.
“Alas,” murmured Edmond; “can it be?” He moved his bed, drew up the stone, rushed into the passage, and reached the opposite extremity; the secret entrance was open.
By the light of the wretched and wavering lamp, of which we have spoken, Dantès saw the old man, pale, but yet erect, clinging to the bedstead.
His features were writhing with those horrible symptoms which he already knew, and which had so seriously alarmed him when he saw them for the first time.
“Alas, my dear friend,” said Faria in a resigned tone, “you understand, do you not, and I need not attempt to explain to you?” Edmond uttered a cry of agony, and, quite out of his senses, rushed towards the door, exclaiming, “Help, help!” Faria had just sufficient strength to restrain him.
We must now only think of you, my dear friend, and so act as to render your captivity supportable or your flight possible.
It would require years to do again what I have done here, and the results would be instantly destroyed if our jailers knew we had communicated with each other.
Besides, be assured, my dear Edmond, the dungeon I am about to leave will not long remain empty; some other unfortunate being will soon take my place, and to him you will appear like an angel of salvation.
Perhaps he will be young, strong, and enduring, like yourself, and will aid you in your escape, while I have been but a hindrance.
You will no longer have half a dead body tied to you as a drag to all your movements.
“See,” he exclaimed, “there remains still some of the magic draught.
Quick, quick! tell me what I must do this time; are there any fresh instructions?
These horrible chills, which make my teeth chatter and seem to dislocate my bones, begin to pervade my whole frame; in five minutes the malady will reach its height, and in a quarter of an hour there will be nothing left of me but a corpse.” “Oh!” exclaimed Dantès, his heart wrung with anguish.
“Do as you did before, only do not wait so long, all the springs of life are now exhausted in me, and death,” he continued, looking at his paralyzed arm and leg, “has but half its work to do.
“And now, my dear friend,” said Faria, “sole consolation of my wretched existence,—you whom Heaven gave me somewhat late, but still gave me, a priceless gift, and for which I am most grateful,—at the moment of separating from you forever, I wish you all the happiness and all the prosperity you so well deserve.
The treasure of the Spadas exists.
God grants me the boon of vision unrestricted by time or space.
My eyes pierce the inmost recesses of the earth, and are dazzled at the sight of so much riches.
If you do escape, remember that the poor abbé, whom all the world called mad, was not so.
Hasten to Monte Cristo—avail yourself of the fortune—for you have indeed suffered long enough.” A violent convulsion attacked the old man.
Dantès raised his head and saw Faria’s eyes injected with blood.
It seemed as if a flow of blood had ascended from the chest to the head.
“Adieu, adieu!” murmured the old man, clasping Edmond’s hand convulsively—“adieu!” “Oh, no,—no, not yet,” he cried; “do not forsake me!
Help—help—help!” “Hush! hush!” murmured the dying man, “that they may not separate us if you save me!” “You are right.
Besides, although you suffer much, you do not seem to be in such agony as you were before.” “Do not mistake!
I suffer less because there is in me less strength to endure.
At your age we have faith in life; it is the privilege of youth to believe and hope, but old men see death more clearly.
Adieu! adieu!” And raising himself by a final effort, in which he summoned all his faculties, he said,—“Monte Cristo, forget not Monte Cristo!” And he fell back on the bed.
The crisis was terrible, and a rigid form with twisted limbs, swollen eyelids, and lips flecked with bloody foam, lay on the bed of torture, in place of the intellectual being who so lately rested there.
Dantès took the lamp, placed it on a projecting stone above the bed, whence its tremulous light fell with strange and fantastic ray on the distorted countenance and motionless, stiffened body.
With steady gaze he awaited confidently the moment for administering the restorative.
When he believed that the right moment had arrived, he took the knife, pried open the teeth, which offered less resistance than before, counted one after the other twelve drops, and watched; the phial contained, perhaps, twice as much more.
Trembling, his hair erect, his brow bathed with perspiration, he counted the seconds by the beating of his heart.
Half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half elapsed, and during this period of anguish, Edmond leaned over his friend, his hand applied to his heart, and felt the body gradually grow cold, and the heart’s pulsation become more and more deep and dull, until at length it stopped; the last movement of the heart ceased, the face became livid, the eyes remained open, but the eyeballs were glazed.
It was six o’clock in the morning, the dawn was just breaking, and its feeble ray came into the dungeon, and paled the ineffectual light of the lamp.
Strange shadows passed over the countenance of the dead man, and at times gave it the appearance of life.
While the struggle between day and night lasted, Dantès still doubted; but as soon as the daylight gained the pre-eminence, he saw that he was alone with a corpse.
Then an invincible and extreme terror seized upon him, and he dared not again press the hand that hung out of bed, he dared no longer to gaze on those fixed and vacant eyes, which he tried many times to close, but in vain—they opened again as soon as shut.
He extinguished the lamp, carefully concealed it, and then went away, closing as well as he could the entrance to the secret passage by the large stone as he descended.
On this occasion he began his rounds at Dantès’ cell, and on leaving him he went on to Faria’s dungeon, taking thither breakfast and some linen.
Nothing betokened that the man knew anything of what had occurred.
Dantès was then seized with an indescribable desire to know what was going on in the dungeon of his unfortunate friend.
He therefore returned by the subterraneous gallery, and arrived in time to hear the exclamations of the turnkey, who called out for help.
Other turnkeys came, and then was heard the regular tramp of soldiers.
Last of all came the governor.
Edmond heard the creaking of the bed as they moved the corpse, heard the voice of the governor, who asked them to throw water on the dead man’s face; and seeing that, in spite of this application, the prisoner did not recover, they sent for the doctor.
The governor then went out, and words of pity fell on Dantès’ listening ears, mingled with brutal laughter.
“Well, well,” said one, “the madman has gone to look after his treasure.
Good journey to him!” “With all his millions, he will not have enough to pay for his shroud!” said another.
“Oh,” added a third voice, “the shrouds of the Château d’If are not dear!” 0257m “Perhaps,” said one of the previous speakers, “as he was a churchman, they may go to some expense in his behalf.” “They may give him the honors of the sack.” Edmond did not lose a word, but comprehended very little of what was said.
The voices soon ceased, and it seemed to him as if everyone had left the cell.
He remained, therefore, mute and motionless, hardly venturing to breathe.
At the end of an hour, he heard a faint noise, which increased.
It was the governor who returned, followed by the doctor and other attendants.
There was a moment’s silence,—it was evident that the doctor was examining the dead body.
The inquiries soon commenced.
The doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which the prisoner had succumbed, and declared that he was dead.
Questions and answers followed in a nonchalant manner that made Dantès indignant, for he felt that all the world should have for the poor abbé a love and respect equal to his own.
I will answer for that.” “You know, sir,” said the governor, persisting, “that we are not content in such cases as this with such a simple examination.
In spite of all appearances, be so kind, therefore, as to finish your duty by fulfilling the formalities described by law.” “Let the irons be heated,” said the doctor; “but really it is a useless precaution.” This order to heat the irons made Dantès shudder.
He heard hasty steps, the creaking of a door, people going and coming, and some minutes afterwards a turnkey entered, saying: “Here is the brazier, lighted.” There was a moment’s silence, and then was heard the crackling of burning flesh, of which the peculiar and nauseous smell penetrated even behind the wall where Dantès was listening in horror.
The perspiration poured forth upon the young man’s brow, and he felt as if he should faint.
“You see, sir, he is really dead,” said the doctor; “this burn in the heel is decisive.
The poor fool is cured of his folly, and delivered from his captivity.” “Wasn’t his name Faria?” inquired one of the officers who accompanied the governor. 0259m “Yes, sir; and, as he said, it was an ancient name.
He was, too, very learned, and rational enough on all points which did not relate to his treasure; but on that, indeed, he was intractable.” “It is the sort of malady which we call monomania,” said the doctor.
“You had never anything to complain of?” said the governor to the jailer who had charge of the abbé.
“Never, sir,” replied the jailer, “never; on the contrary, he sometimes amused me very much by telling me stories.
One day, too, when my wife was ill, he gave me a prescription which cured her.” “Ah, ah!” said the doctor, “I did not know that I had a rival; but I hope, governor, that you will show him all proper respect in consequence.” “Yes, yes, make your mind easy, he shall be decently interred in the newest sack we can find.
Will that satisfy you?” “Must this last formality take place in your presence, sir?” inquired a turnkey.
But make haste—I cannot stay here all day.” Other footsteps, going and coming, were now heard, and a moment afterwards the noise of rustling canvas reached Dantès’ ears, the bed creaked, and the heavy footfall of a man who lifts a weight sounded on the floor; then the bed again creaked under the weight deposited upon it.
“This evening,” said the governor.
“Will there be any mass?” asked one of the attendants.
“That is impossible,” replied the governor.
“The chaplain of the château came to me yesterday to beg for leave of absence, in order to take a trip to Hyères for a week.
I told him I would attend to the prisoners in his absence.
If the poor abbé had not been in such a hurry, he might have had his requiem.” “Pooh, pooh;” said the doctor, with the impiety usual in persons of his profession; “he is a churchman.
God will respect his profession, and not give the devil the wicked delight of sending him a priest.” A shout of laughter followed this brutal jest.
Meanwhile the operation of putting the body in the sack was going on.
“This evening,” said the governor, when the task was ended.
“At what hour?” inquired a turnkey.
Shut the dungeon as if he were alive—that is all.” Then the steps retreated, and the voices died away in the distance; the noise of the door, with its creaking hinges and bolts ceased, and a silence more sombre than that of solitude ensued,—the silence of death, which was all-pervasive, and struck its icy chill to the very soul of Dantès.
Then he raised the flag-stone cautiously with his head, and looked carefully around the chamber.
The Cemetery of the Château d’If On the bed, at full length, and faintly illuminated by the pale light that came from the window, lay a sack of canvas, and under its rude folds was stretched a long and stiffened form; it was Faria’s last winding-sheet,—a winding-sheet which, as the turnkey said, cost so little.
Everything was in readiness.
No longer could Edmond look into those wide-open eyes which had seemed to be penetrating the mysteries of death; no longer could he clasp the hand which had done so much to make his existence blessed.
Faria, the beneficent and cheerful companion, with whom he was accustomed to live so intimately, no longer breathed.
He seated himself on the edge of that terrible bed, and fell into melancholy and gloomy reverie.
Alone! he was alone again! again condemned to silence—again face to face with nothingness!
Was not Faria’s fate the better, after all—to solve the problem of life at its source, even at the risk of horrible suffering?
The idea of suicide, which his friend had driven away and kept away by his cheerful presence, now hovered like a phantom over the abbé’s dead body.
“If I could die,” he said, “I should go where he goes, and should assuredly find him again.
It is very easy,” he went on with a smile; “I will remain here, rush on the first person that opens the door, strangle him, and then they will guillotine me.” But excessive grief is like a storm at sea, where the frail bark is tossed from the depths to the top of the wave.
Dantès recoiled from the idea of so infamous a death, and passed suddenly from despair to an ardent desire for life and liberty.
“Die? oh, no,” he exclaimed—“not die now, after having lived and suffered so long and so much!
No, I want to live; I shall struggle to the very last; I will yet win back the happiness of which I have been deprived.
Before I die I must not forget that I have my executioners to punish, and perhaps, too, who knows, some friends to reward.
Yet they will forget me here, and I shall die in my dungeon like Faria.” As he said this, he became silent and gazed straight before him like one overwhelmed with a strange and amazing thought.
Suddenly he arose, lifted his hand to his brow as if his brain were giddy, paced twice or thrice round the dungeon, and then paused abruptly by the bed.
“Just God!” he muttered, “whence comes this thought?
He would have been discovered by the beating of his heart, if by any mischance the jailers had entered at that moment.
Dantès might have waited until the evening visit was over, but he was afraid that the governor would change his mind, and order the dead body to be removed earlier.
In that case his last hope would have been destroyed.
Now his plans were fully made, and this is what he intended to do.
He hoped that the weight of earth would not be so great that he could not overcome it.
If he was detected in this and the earth proved too heavy, he would be stifled, and then—so much the better, all would be over.
Dantès had not eaten since the preceding evening, but he had not thought of hunger, nor did he think of it now.
His situation was too precarious to allow him even time to reflect on any thought but one.
The first risk that Dantès ran was, that the jailer, when he brought him his supper at seven o’clock, might perceive the change that had been made; fortunately, twenty times at least, from misanthropy or fatigue, Dantès had received his jailer in bed, and then the man placed his bread and soup on the table, and went away without saying a word.
This time the jailer might not be as silent as usual, but speak to Dantès, and seeing that he received no reply, go to the bed, and thus discover all.
His hand placed upon his heart was unable to redress its throbbings, while, with the other he wiped the perspiration from his temples.
From time to time chills ran through his whole body, and clutched his heart in a grasp of ice.
Yet the hours passed on without any unusual disturbance, and Dantès knew that he had escaped the first peril.
At length, about the hour the governor had appointed, footsteps were heard on the stairs.
Edmond felt that the moment had arrived, summoned up all his courage, held his breath, and would have been happy if at the same time he could have repressed the throbbing of his veins.
The footsteps—they were double—paused at the door—and Dantès guessed that the two grave-diggers had come to seek him—this idea was soon converted into certainty, when he heard the noise they made in putting down the hand-bier.
The door opened, and a dim light reached Dantès’ eyes through the coarse sack that covered him; he saw two shadows approach his bed, a third remaining at the door with a torch in its hand.
The two men, approaching the ends of the bed, took the sack by its extremities.
“Have you tied the knot?” inquired the first speaker.
“What would be the use of carrying so much more weight?” was the reply, “I can do that when we get there.” “Yes, you’re right,” replied the companion.
They deposited the supposed corpse on the bier.
Edmond stiffened himself in order to play the part of a dead man, and then the party, lighted by the man with the torch, who went first, ascended the stairs.
Suddenly he felt the fresh and sharp night air, and Dantès knew that the mistral was blowing.
It was a sensation in which pleasure and pain were strangely mingled.
One of them went away, and Dantès heard his shoes striking on the pavement.
Dantès’ first impulse was to escape, but fortunately he did not attempt it.
“Give us a light,” said the other bearer, “or I shall never find what I am looking for.” The man with the torch complied, although not asked in the most polite terms.
“The spade, perhaps.” An exclamation of satisfaction indicated that the grave-digger had found the object of his search.
“Here it is at last,” he said, “not without some trouble, though.” “Yes,” was the answer, “but it has lost nothing by waiting.” As he said this, the man came towards Edmond, who heard a heavy metallic substance laid down beside him, and at the same moment a cord was fastened round his feet with sudden and painful violence.
“Well, have you tied the knot?” inquired the grave-digger, who was looking on.
“Move on, then.” And the bier was lifted once more, and they proceeded.
They advanced fifty paces farther, and then stopped to open a door, then went forward again.
The noise of the waves dashing against the rocks on which the château is built, reached Dantès’ ear distinctly as they went forward.
“Bad weather!” observed one of the bearers; “not a pleasant night for a dip in the sea.” “Why, yes, the abbé runs a chance of being wet,” said the other; and then there was a burst of brutal laughter.
Dantès did not comprehend the jest, but his hair stood erect on his head.
“You know very well that the last was stopped on his way, dashed on the rocks, and the governor told us next day that we were careless fellows.” They ascended five or six more steps, and then Dantès felt that they took him, one by the head and the other by the heels, and swung him to and fro.
“One!” said the grave-diggers, “two! three!” And at the same instant Dantès felt himself flung into the air like a wounded bird, falling, falling, with a rapidity that made his blood curdle.
Although drawn downwards by the heavy weight which hastened his rapid descent, it seemed to him as if the fall lasted for a century.
At last, with a horrible splash, he darted like an arrow into the ice-cold water, and as he did so he uttered a shrill cry, stifled in a moment by his immersion beneath the waves.
The sea is the cemetery of the Château d’If. 0267m Chapter 21.
The Island of Tiboulen Dantès, although stunned and almost suffocated, had sufficient presence of mind to hold his breath, and as his right hand (prepared as he was for every chance) held his knife open, he rapidly ripped up the sack, extricated his arm, and then his body; but in spite of all his efforts to free himself from the shot, he felt it dragging him down still lower.
He then bent his body, and by a desperate effort severed the cord that bound his legs, at the moment when it seemed as if he were actually strangled.
He saw overhead a black and tempestuous sky, across which the wind was driving clouds that occasionally suffered a twinkling star to appear; before him was the vast expanse of waters, sombre and terrible, whose waves foamed and roared as if before the approach of a storm.
Behind him, blacker than the sea, blacker than the sky, rose phantom-like the vast stone structure, whose projecting crags seemed like arms extended to seize their prey, and on the highest rock was a torch lighting two figures.
He fancied that these two forms were looking at the sea; doubtless these strange grave-diggers had heard his cry.
Dantès dived again, and remained a long time beneath the water.
This was an easy feat to him, for he usually attracted a crowd of spectators in the bay before the lighthouse at Marseilles when he swam there, and was unanimously declared to be the best swimmer in the port.
When he came up again the light had disappeared.
He must now get his bearings.
Ratonneau and Pomègue are the nearest islands of all those that surround the Château d’If, but Ratonneau and Pomègue are inhabited, as is also the islet of Daume.
Tiboulen and Lemaire were therefore the safest for Dantès’ venture.
The islands of Tiboulen and Lemaire are a league from the Château d’If; Dantès, nevertheless, determined to make for them.
But how could he find his way in the darkness of the night?
At this moment he saw the light of Planier, gleaming in front of him like a star.
By leaving this light on the right, he kept the Island of Tiboulen a little on the left; by turning to the left, therefore, he would find it.
Often in prison Faria had said to him, when he saw him idle and inactive: “Dantès, you must not give way to this listlessness; you will be drowned if you seek to escape, and your strength has not been properly exercised and prepared for exertion.” These words rang in Dantès’ ears, even beneath the waves; he hastened to cleave his way through them to see if he had not lost his strength.
He found with pleasure that his captivity had taken away nothing of his power, and that he was still master of that element on whose bosom he had so often sported as a boy.
Fear, that relentless pursuer, clogged Dantès’ efforts.
He listened for any sound that might be audible, and every time that he rose to the top of a wave he scanned the horizon, and strove to penetrate the darkness.
He fancied that every wave behind him was a pursuing boat, and he redoubled his exertions, increasing rapidly his distance from the château, but exhausting his strength.
He swam on still, and already the terrible château had disappeared in the darkness.
He could not see it, but he _felt_ its presence.
An hour passed, during which Dantès, excited by the feeling of freedom, continued to cleave the waves.
“Let us see,” said he, “I have swum above an hour, but as the wind is against me, that has retarded my speed; however, if I am not mistaken, I must be close to Tiboulen.
But what if I were mistaken?” A shudder passed over him.
He sought to tread water, in order to rest himself; but the sea was too violent, and he felt that he could not make use of this means of recuperation.
Suddenly the sky seemed to him to become still darker and more dense, and heavy clouds seemed to sweep down towards him; at the same time he felt a sharp pain in his knee.
He fancied for a moment that he had been shot, and listened for the report; but he heard nothing.
Then he put out his hand, and encountered an obstacle and with another stroke knew that he had gained the shore.
Before him rose a grotesque mass of rocks, that resembled nothing so much as a vast fire petrified at the moment of its most fervent combustion.
It was the Island of Tiboulen.
Dantès rose, advanced a few steps, and, with a fervent prayer of gratitude, stretched himself on the granite, which seemed to him softer than down.
Then, in spite of the wind and rain, he fell into the deep, sweet sleep of utter exhaustion.
At the expiration of an hour Edmond was awakened by the roar of thunder.
The tempest was let loose and beating the atmosphere with its mighty wings; from time to time a flash of lightning stretched across the heavens like a fiery serpent, lighting up the clouds that rolled on in vast chaotic waves.
Dantès had not been deceived—he had reached the first of the two islands, which was, in fact, Tiboulen.
He knew that it was barren and without shelter; but when the sea became more calm, he resolved to plunge into its waves again, and swim to Lemaire, equally arid, but larger, and consequently better adapted for concealment.
An overhanging rock offered him a temporary shelter, and scarcely had he availed himself of it when the tempest burst forth in all its fury.
Edmond felt the trembling of the rock beneath which he lay; the waves, dashing themselves against it, wetted him with their spray.
He was safely sheltered, and yet he felt dizzy in the midst of the warring of the elements and the dazzling brightness of the lightning.
It seemed to him that the island trembled to its base, and that it would, like a vessel at anchor, break moorings, and bear him off into the centre of the storm.
He then recollected that he had not eaten or drunk for four-and-twenty hours.
He extended his hands, and drank greedily of the rainwater that had lodged in a hollow of the rock.
As he rose, a flash of lightning, that seemed to rive the remotest heights of heaven, illumined the darkness.
By its light, between the Island of Lemaire and Cape Croiselle, a quarter of a league distant, Dantès saw a fishing-boat driven rapidly like a spectre before the power of winds and waves.
A second after, he saw it again, approaching with frightful rapidity.
Dantès cried at the top of his voice to warn them of their danger, but they saw it themselves.
Another flash showed him four men clinging to the shattered mast and the rigging, while a fifth clung to the broken rudder.
The men he beheld saw him undoubtedly, for their cries were carried to his ears by the wind.
Above the splintered mast a sail rent to tatters was waving; suddenly the ropes that still held it gave way, and it disappeared in the darkness of the night like a vast sea-bird.
At the same moment a violent crash was heard, and cries of distress.
Dantès from his rocky perch saw the shattered vessel, and among the fragments the floating forms of the hapless sailors.
Dantès ran down the rocks at the risk of being himself dashed to pieces; he listened, he groped about, but he heard and saw nothing—the cries had ceased, and the tempest continued to rage.
By degrees the wind abated, vast gray clouds rolled towards the west, and the blue firmament appeared studded with bright stars.
Soon a red streak became visible in the horizon, the waves whitened, a light played over them, and gilded their foaming crests with gold.
Dantès stood mute and motionless before this majestic spectacle, as if he now beheld it for the first time; and indeed since his captivity in the Château d’If he had forgotten that such scenes were ever to be witnessed.
He turned towards the fortress, and looked at both sea and land.
The gloomy building rose from the bosom of the ocean with imposing majesty and seemed to dominate the scene.
The sea continued to get calmer.
“In two or three hours,” thought Dantès, “the turnkey will enter my chamber, find the body of my poor friend, recognize it, seek for me in vain, and give the alarm.
Then the tunnel will be discovered; the men who cast me into the sea and who must have heard the cry I uttered, will be questioned.
Then boats filled with armed soldiers will pursue the wretched fugitive.
The cannon will warn everyone to refuse shelter to a man wandering about naked and famished.
The police of Marseilles will be on the alert by land, whilst the governor pursues me by sea.
Oh, my God, I have suffered enough surely!
Have pity on me, and do for me what I am unable to do for myself.” As Dantès (his eyes turned in the direction of the Château d’If) uttered this prayer, he saw off the farther point of the Island of Pomègue a small vessel with lateen sail skimming the sea like a gull in search of prey; and with his sailor’s eye he knew it to be a Genoese tartan.
She was coming out of Marseilles harbor, and was standing out to sea rapidly, her sharp prow cleaving through the waves.
“Oh,” cried Edmond, “to think that in half an hour I could join her, did I not fear being questioned, detected, and conveyed back to Marseilles!
What story can I invent? under pretext of trading along the coast, these men, who are in reality smugglers, will prefer selling me to doing a good action.
But I cannot—I am starving.
In a few hours my strength will be utterly exhausted; besides, perhaps I have not been missed at the fortress.
My story will be accepted, for there is no one left to contradict me.” As he spoke, Dantès looked toward the spot where the fishing-vessel had been wrecked, and started.
“I am saved!” murmured he.
And this conviction restored his strength.
For an instant he feared lest, instead of keeping in shore, she should stand out to sea; but he soon saw that she would pass, like most vessels bound for Italy, between the islands of Jaros and Calaseraigne.
However, the vessel and the swimmer insensibly neared one another, and in one of its tacks the tartan bore down within a quarter of a mile of him.
He rose on the waves, making signs of distress; but no one on board saw him, and the vessel stood on another tack.
It was then he rejoiced at his precaution in taking the timber, for without it he would have been unable, perhaps, to reach the vessel—certainly to return to shore, should he be unsuccessful in attracting attention.
Dantès, though almost sure as to what course the vessel would take, had yet watched it anxiously until it tacked and stood towards him.
Then he advanced; but before they could meet, the vessel again changed her course.
By a violent effort he rose half out of the water, waving his cap, and uttering a loud shout peculiar to sailors.
This time he was both seen and heard, and the tartan instantly steered towards him.
An instant after, the boat, rowed by two men, advanced rapidly towards him.
Dantès let go of the timber, which he now thought to be useless, and swam vigorously to meet them.
But he had reckoned too much upon his strength, and then he realized how serviceable the timber had been to him.
His arms became stiff, his legs lost their flexibility, and he was almost breathless.
The two sailors redoubled their efforts, and one of them cried in Italian, “Courage!” The word reached his ear as a wave which he no longer had the strength to surmount passed over his head.
He rose again to the surface, struggled with the last desperate effort of a drowning man, uttered a third cry, and felt himself sinking, as if the fatal cannon shot were again tied to his feet.
A convulsive movement again brought him to the surface.
Dantès was so exhausted that the exclamation of joy he uttered was mistaken for a sigh.
A sailor was rubbing his limbs with a woollen cloth; another, whom he recognized as the one who had cried out “Courage!” held a gourd full of rum to his mouth; while the third, an old sailor, at once the pilot and captain, looked on with that egotistical pity men feel for a misfortune that they have escaped yesterday, and which may overtake them tomorrow.
A few drops of the rum restored suspended animation, while the friction of his limbs restored their elasticity.
We were coming from Syracuse laden with grain.
The storm of last night overtook us at Cape Morgiou, and we were wrecked on these rocks.” “Where do you come from?” “From these rocks that I had the good luck to cling to while our captain and the rest of the crew were all lost.
I saw your vessel, and fearful of being left to perish on the desolate island, I swam off on a piece of wreckage to try and intercept your course.
You have saved my life, and I thank you,” continued Dantès.
“Alas, anything you please.
“But in his present condition he will promise anything, and take his chance of keeping it afterwards.” “I will do more than I promise,” said Dantès.
“We shall see,” returned the other, smiling.
The four seamen, who composed the crew, obeyed, while the pilot looked on.
“Belay.” This order was also executed; and the vessel passed, as Dantès had predicted, twenty fathoms to windward.
“Bravo!” repeated the sailors.
And they all looked with astonishment at this man whose eye now disclosed an intelligence and his body a vigor they had not thought him capable of showing.
“You see,” said Dantès, quitting the helm, “I shall be of some use to you, at least during the voyage.
If you do not want me at Leghorn, you can leave me there, and I will pay you out of the first wages I get, for my food and the clothes you lend me.” “Ah,” said the captain, “we can agree very well, if you are reasonable.” “Give me what you give the others, and it will be all right,” returned Dantès.
“That’s not fair,” said the seaman who had saved Dantès; “for you know more than we do.” “What is that to you, Jacopo?” returned the Captain.
“Everyone is free to ask what he pleases.” “That’s true,” replied Jacopo; “I only make a remark.” “Well, you would do much better to find him a jacket and a pair of trousers, if you have them.” “No,” said Jacopo; “but I have a shirt and a pair of trousers.” “That is all I want,” interrupted Dantès.
Jacopo dived into the hold and soon returned with what Edmond wanted.
“Now, then, do you wish for anything else?” said the patron.
“Larboard your helm,” cried the captain to the steersman.
A small white cloud, which had attracted Dantès’ attention, crowned the summit of the bastion of the Château d’If.
“A prisoner has escaped from the Château d’If, and they are firing the alarm gun,” replied Dantès.
The captain glanced at him, but he had lifted the rum to his lips and was drinking it with so much composure, that suspicions, if the captain had any, died away. 0277m “Pretty strong rum!” said Dantès, wiping his brow with his sleeve.
“At any rate,” murmured he, “if it be, so much the better, for I have made a rare acquisition.” 0279m Under pretence of being fatigued, Dantès asked to take the helm; the steersman, glad to be relieved, looked at the captain, and the latter by a sign indicated that he might abandon it to his new comrade.
Dantès could thus keep his eyes on Marseilles.
“The 28th of February.” “In what year?” “In what year—you ask me in what year?” “Yes,” replied the young man, “I ask you in what year!” “You have forgotten then?” “I got such a fright last night,” replied Dantès, smiling, “that I have almost lost my memory.
I ask you what year is it?” “The year 1829,” returned Jacopo.
It was fourteen years, day for day, since Dantès’ arrest.
He was nineteen when he entered the Château d’If; he was thirty-three when he escaped.
A sorrowful smile passed over his face; he asked himself what had become of Mercédès, who must believe him dead.
Then his eyes lighted up with hatred as he thought of the three men who had caused him so long and wretched a captivity.
He renewed against Danglars, Fernand, and Villefort the oath of implacable vengeance he had made in his dungeon.
This oath was no longer a vain menace; for the fastest sailor in the Mediterranean would have been unable to overtake the little tartan, that with every stitch of canvas set was flying before the wind to Leghorn.
The Smugglers Dantès had not been a day on board before he had a very clear idea of the men with whom his lot had been cast.
It is fair to assume that Dantès was on board a smuggler.
At first the captain had received Dantès on board with a certain degree of distrust.
He was very well known to the customs officers of the coast; and as there was between these worthies and himself a perpetual battle of wits, he had at first thought that Dantès might be an emissary of these industrious guardians of rights and duties, who perhaps employed this ingenious means of learning some of the secrets of his trade.
But the skilful manner in which Dantès had handled the lugger had entirely reassured him; and then, when he saw the light plume of smoke floating above the bastion of the Château d’If, and heard the distant report, he was instantly struck with the idea that he had on board his vessel one whose coming and going, like that of kings, was accompanied with salutes of artillery.
This made him less uneasy, it must be owned, than if the new-comer had proved to be a customs officer; but this supposition also disappeared like the first, when he beheld the perfect tranquillity of his recruit.
Edmond thus had the advantage of knowing what the owner was, without the owner knowing who he was; and however the old sailor and his crew tried to “pump” him, they extracted nothing more from him; he gave accurate descriptions of Naples and Malta, which he knew as well as Marseilles, and held stoutly to his first story.
Thus the Genoese, subtle as he was, was duped by Edmond, in whose favor his mild demeanor, his nautical skill, and his admirable dissimulation, pleaded.
Moreover, it is possible that the Genoese was one of those shrewd persons who know nothing but what they should know, and believe nothing but what they should believe.
In this state of mutual understanding, they reached Leghorn.
Here Edmond was to undergo another trial; he was to find out whether he could recognize himself, as he had not seen his own face for fourteen years.
He had preserved a tolerably good remembrance of what the youth had been, and was now to find out what the man had become.
His comrades believed that his vow was fulfilled.
As he had twenty times touched at Leghorn, he remembered a barber in St.
Ferdinand Street; he went there to have his beard and hair cut.
The barber gazed in amazement at this man with the long, thick and black hair and beard, which gave his head the appearance of one of Titian’s portraits.
At this period it was not the fashion to wear so large a beard and hair so long; now a barber would only be surprised if a man gifted with such advantages should consent voluntarily to deprive himself of them.
When the operation was concluded, and Edmond felt that his chin was completely smooth, and his hair reduced to its usual length, he asked for a looking-glass.
He was now, as we have said, three-and-thirty years of age, and his fourteen years’ imprisonment had produced a great transformation in his appearance.
Dantès had entered the Château d’If with the round, open, smiling face of a young and happy man, with whom the early paths of life have been smooth, and who anticipates a future corresponding with his past.
As to his voice, prayers, sobs, and imprecations had changed it so that at times it was of a singularly penetrating sweetness, and at others rough and almost hoarse.
Moreover, from being so long in twilight or darkness, his eyes had acquired the faculty of distinguishing objects in the night, common to the hyena and the wolf.
Edmond smiled when he beheld himself; it was impossible that his best friend—if, indeed, he had any friend left—could recognize him; he could not recognize himself.
The master of _La Jeune Amélie_, who was very desirous of retaining amongst his crew a man of Edmond’s value, had offered to advance him funds out of his future profits, which Edmond had accepted.
His next care on leaving the barber’s who had achieved his first metamorphosis was to enter a shop and buy a complete sailor’s suit—a garb, as we all know, very simple, and consisting of white trousers, a striped shirt, and a cap.
Attracted by his prepossessing appearance, he renewed his offers of an engagement to Dantès; but Dantès, who had his own projects, would not agree for a longer time than three months. _La Jeune Amélie_ had a very active crew, very obedient to their captain, who lost as little time as possible.
He had scarcely been a week at Leghorn before the hold of his vessel was filled with printed muslins, contraband cottons, English powder, and tobacco on which the excise had forgotten to put its mark.
The master was to get all this out of Leghorn free of duties, and land it on the shores of Corsica, where certain speculators undertook to forward the cargo to France.
They sailed; Edmond was again cleaving the azure sea which had been the first horizon of his youth, and which he had so often dreamed of in prison.
He left Gorgone on his right and La Pianosa on his left, and went towards the country of Paoli and Napoleon.
The next morning going on deck, as he always did at an early hour, the patron found Dantès leaning against the bulwarks gazing with intense earnestness at a pile of granite rocks, which the rising sun tinged with rosy light.
It was the Island of Monte Cristo. _La Jeune Amélie_ left it three-quarters of a league to the larboard and kept on for Corsica.
Dantès thought, as they passed so closely to the island whose name was so interesting to him, that he had only to leap into the sea and in half an hour be at the promised land.
But then what could he do without instruments to discover his treasure, without arms to defend himself?
Fortunately, Dantès had learned how to wait; he had waited fourteen years for his liberty, and now he was free he could wait at least six months or a year for wealth.
Would he not have accepted liberty without riches if it had been offered to him?
Besides, were not those riches chimerical?—offspring of the brain of the poor Abbé Faria, had they not died with him?
The next morn broke off the coast of Aleria; all day they coasted, and in the evening saw fires lighted on land; the position of these was no doubt a signal for landing, for a ship’s lantern was hung up at the mast-head instead of the streamer, and they came to within a gunshot of the shore.
Dantès noticed that the captain of _La Jeune Amélie_ had, as he neared the land, mounted two small culverins, which, without making much noise, can throw a four ounce ball a thousand paces or so.
But on this occasion the precaution was superfluous, and everything proceeded with the utmost smoothness and politeness.
Four shallops came off with very little noise alongside the lugger, which, no doubt, in acknowledgement of the compliment, lowered her own shallop into the sea, and the five boats worked so well that by two o’clock in the morning all the cargo was out of _La Jeune Amélie_ and on _terra firma_.
The same night, such a man of regularity was the patron of _La Jeune Amélie_, the profits were divided, and each man had a hundred Tuscan livres, or about eighty francs.
They turned the bowsprit towards Sardinia, where they intended to take in a cargo, which was to replace what had been discharged.
The second operation was as successful as the first, _La Jeune Amélie_ was in luck.
This new cargo was destined for the coast of the Duchy of Lucca, and consisted almost entirely of Havana cigars, sherry, and Malaga wines.
There they had a bit of a skirmish in getting rid of the duties; the excise was, in truth, the everlasting enemy of the patron of _La Jeune Amélie_.
A customs officer was laid low, and two sailors wounded; Dantès was one of the latter, a ball having touched him in the left shoulder.
Dantès was almost glad of this affray, and almost pleased at being wounded, for they were rude lessons which taught him with what eye he could view danger, and with what endurance he could bear suffering.
Dantès was on the way he desired to follow, and was moving towards the end he wished to achieve; his heart was in a fair way of petrifying in his bosom.
Jacopo, seeing him fall, had believed him killed, and rushing towards him raised him up, and then attended to him with all the kindness of a devoted comrade.
This world was not then so good as Doctor Pangloss believed it, neither was it so wicked as Dantès thought it, since this man, who had nothing to expect from his comrade but the inheritance of his share of the prize-money, manifested so much sorrow when he saw him fall.
Fortunately, as we have said, Edmond was only wounded, and with certain herbs gathered at certain seasons, and sold to the smugglers by the old Sardinian women, the wound soon closed.
Edmond then resolved to try Jacopo, and offered him in return for his attention a share of his prize-money, but Jacopo refused it indignantly.
As a result of the sympathetic devotion which Jacopo had from the first bestowed on Edmond, the latter was moved to a certain degree of affection.
But this sufficed for Jacopo, who instinctively felt that Edmond had a right to superiority of position—a superiority which Edmond had concealed from all others.
And from this time the kindness which Edmond showed him was enough for the brave seaman.
Then in the long days on board ship, when the vessel, gliding on with security over the azure sea, required no care but the hand of the helmsman, thanks to the favorable winds that swelled her sails, Edmond, with a chart in his hand, became the instructor of Jacopo, as the poor Abbé Faria had been his tutor.
He pointed out to him the bearings of the coast, explained to him the variations of the compass, and taught him to read in that vast book opened over our heads which they call heaven, and where God writes in azure with letters of diamonds.
And when Jacopo inquired of him, “What is the use of teaching all these things to a poor sailor like me?” Edmond replied, “Who knows?
Your fellow-countryman, Bonaparte, became emperor.” We had forgotten to say that Jacopo was a Corsican.
Two months and a half elapsed in these trips, and Edmond had become as skilful a coaster as he had been a hardy seaman; he had formed an acquaintance with all the smugglers on the coast, and learned all the Masonic signs by which these half pirates recognize each other.
He had passed and re-passed his Island of Monte Cristo twenty times, but not once had he found an opportunity of landing there.
He then formed a resolution.
As soon as his engagement with the patron of _La Jeune Amélie_ ended, he would hire a small vessel on his own account—for in his several voyages he had amassed a hundred piastres—and under some pretext land at the Island of Monte Cristo.
Then he would be free to make his researches, not perhaps entirely at liberty, for he would be doubtless watched by those who accompanied him.
But in this world we must risk something.
Prison had made Edmond prudent, and he was desirous of running no risk whatever.
But in vain did he rack his imagination; fertile as it was, he could not devise any plan for reaching the island without companionship.
Dantès was tossed about on these doubts and wishes, when the patron, who had great confidence in him, and was very desirous of retaining him in his service, took him by the arm one evening and led him to a tavern on the Via del’ Oglio, where the leading smugglers of Leghorn used to congregate and discuss affairs connected with their trade.
Already Dantès had visited this maritime Bourse two or three times, and seeing all these hardy free-traders, who supplied the whole coast for nearly two hundred leagues in extent, he had asked himself what power might not that man attain who should give the impulse of his will to all these contrary and diverging minds.
This time it was a great matter that was under discussion, connected with a vessel laden with Turkey carpets, stuffs of the Levant, and cashmeres.
It was necessary to find some neutral ground on which an exchange could be made, and then to try and land these goods on the coast of France.
If the venture was successful the profit would be enormous, there would be a gain of fifty or sixty piastres each for the crew.
At the mention of Monte Cristo Dantès started with joy; he rose to conceal his emotion, and took a turn around the smoky tavern, where all the languages of the known world were jumbled in a _lingua franca_.
When he again joined the two persons who had been discussing the matter, it had been decided that they should touch at Monte Cristo and set out on the following night.
Edmond, being consulted, was of opinion that the island afforded every possible security, and that great enterprises to be well done should be done quickly.
Nothing then was altered in the plan, and orders were given to get under weigh next night, and, wind and weather permitting, to make the neutral island by the following day. 0289m Chapter 23.
The Island of Monte Cristo Thus, at length, by one of the unexpected strokes of fortune which sometimes befall those who have for a long time been the victims of an evil destiny, Dantès was about to secure the opportunity he wished for, by simple and natural means, and land on the island without incurring any suspicion.
The night was one of feverish distraction, and in its progress visions, good and evil, passed through Dantès’ mind.
If he closed his eyes, he saw Cardinal Spada’s letter written on the wall in characters of flame—if he slept for a moment the wildest dreams haunted his brain.
He ascended into grottos paved with emeralds, with panels of rubies, and the roof glowing with diamond stalactites.
Pearls fell drop by drop, as subterranean waters filter in their caves.
Edmond, amazed, wonderstruck, filled his pockets with the radiant gems and then returned to daylight, when he discovered that his prizes had all changed into common pebbles.
He then endeavored to re-enter the marvellous grottos, but they had suddenly receded, and now the path became a labyrinth, and then the entrance vanished, and in vain did he tax his memory for the magic and mysterious word which opened the splendid caverns of Ali Baba to the Arabian fisherman.
All was useless, the treasure disappeared, and had again reverted to the genii from whom for a moment he had hoped to carry it off.
The day came at length, and was almost as feverish as the night had been, but it brought reason to the aid of imagination, and Dantès was then enabled to arrange a plan which had hitherto been vague and unsettled in his brain.
Night came, and with it the preparation for departure, and these preparations served to conceal Dantès’ agitation.
He had by degrees assumed such authority over his companions that he was almost like a commander on board; and as his orders were always clear, distinct, and easy of execution, his comrades obeyed him with celerity and pleasure.
The old patron did not interfere, for he too had recognized the superiority of Dantès over the crew and himself.
He saw in the young man his natural successor, and regretted that he had not a daughter, that he might have bound Edmond to him by a more secure alliance.
At seven o’clock in the evening all was ready, and at ten minutes past seven they doubled the lighthouse just as the beacon was kindled.
When the Maltese (for so they called Dantès) had said this, it was sufficient, and all went to their bunks contentedly.
This frequently happened.
Dantès, cast from solitude into the world, frequently experienced an imperious desire for solitude; and what solitude is more complete, or more poetical, than that of a ship floating in isolation on the sea during the obscurity of the night, in the silence of immensity, and under the eye of Heaven?
Now this solitude was peopled with his thoughts, the night lighted up by his illusions, and the silence animated by his anticipations.
When the patron awoke, the vessel was hurrying on with every sail set, and every sail full with the breeze.
Edmond resigned the lugger to the master’s care, and went and lay down in his hammock; but, in spite of a sleepless night, he could not close his eyes for a moment.
Two hours afterwards he came on deck, as the boat was about to double the Island of Elba.
They were just abreast of Mareciana, and beyond the flat but verdant Island of La Pianosa.
The peak of Monte Cristo reddened by the burning sun, was seen against the azure sky.
Dantès ordered the helmsman to put down his helm, in order to leave La Pianosa to starboard, as he knew that he should shorten his course by two or three knots.
About five o’clock in the evening the island was distinct, and everything on it was plainly perceptible, owing to that clearness of the atmosphere peculiar to the light which the rays of the sun cast at its setting.
Edmond gazed very earnestly at the mass of rocks which gave out all the variety of twilight colors, from the brightest pink to the deepest blue; and from time to time his cheeks flushed, his brow darkened, and a mist passed over his eyes.
Never did a gamester, whose whole fortune is staked on one cast of the die, experience the anguish which Edmond felt in his paroxysms of hope.
Night came, and at ten o’clock they anchored. _La Jeune Amélie_ was first at the rendezvous.
In spite of his usual command over himself, Dantès could not restrain his impetuosity.
He was the first to jump on shore; and had he dared, he would, like Lucius Brutus, have “kissed his mother earth.” It was dark, but at eleven o’clock the moon rose in the midst of the ocean, whose every wave she silvered, and then, “ascending high,” played in floods of pale light on the rocky hills of this second Pelion.
The island was familiar to the crew of _La Jeune Amélie_,—it was one of her regular haunts.
He questioned Jacopo.
“Where shall we pass the night?” he inquired.
“None.” For a moment Dantès was speechless; then he remembered that these caves might have been filled up by some accident, or even stopped up, for the sake of greater security, by Cardinal Spada.
The point was, then, to discover the hidden entrance.
It was useless to search at night, and Dantès therefore delayed all investigation until the morning.
Besides, a signal made half a league out at sea, and to which _La Jeune Amélie_ replied by a similar signal, indicated that the moment for business had come.
The boat that now arrived, assured by the answering signal that all was well, soon came in sight, white and silent as a phantom, and cast anchor within a cable’s length of shore.
Fortunately, as regarded this circumstance at least, his painful past gave to his countenance an indelible sadness, and the glimmerings of gayety seen beneath this cloud were indeed but transitory.
No one had the slightest suspicion; and when next day, taking a fowling-piece, powder, and shot, Dantès declared his intention to go and kill some of the wild goats that were seen springing from rock to rock, his wish was construed into a love of sport, or a desire for solitude.
However, Jacopo insisted on following him, and Dantès did not oppose this, fearing if he did so that he might incur distrust.
Scarcely, however, had they gone a quarter of a league when, having killed a kid, he begged Jacopo to take it to his comrades, and request them to cook it, and when ready to let him know by firing a gun.
This and some dried fruits and a flask of Monte Pulciano, was the bill of fare.
Having reached the summit of a rock, he saw, a thousand feet beneath him, his companions, whom Jacopo had rejoined, and who were all busy preparing the repast which Edmond’s skill as a marksman had augmented with a capital dish.
Edmond looked at them for a moment with the sad and gentle smile of a man superior to his fellows.
“In two hours’ time,” said he, “these persons will depart richer by fifty piastres each, to go and risk their lives again by endeavoring to gain fifty more; then they will return with a fortune of six hundred francs, and waste this treasure in some city with the pride of sultans and the insolence of nabobs.
At this moment hope makes me despise their riches, which seem to me contemptible.
Yet perchance tomorrow deception will so act on me, that I shall, on compulsion, consider such a contemptible possession as the utmost happiness.
Oh, no!” exclaimed Edmond, “that will not be.
The wise, unerring Faria could not be mistaken in this one thing.
Besides, it were better to die than to continue to lead this low and wretched life.” Thus Dantès, who but three months before had no desire but liberty had now not liberty enough, and panted for wealth.
The cause was not in Dantès, but in Providence, who, while limiting the power of man, has filled him with boundless desires.
Meanwhile, by a cleft between two walls of rock, following a path worn by a torrent, and which, in all human probability, human foot had never before trod, Dantès approached the spot where he supposed the grottos must have existed.
Keeping along the shore, and examining the smallest object with serious attention, he thought he could trace, on certain rocks, marks made by the hand of man.
Time, which encrusts all physical substances with its mossy mantle, as it invests all things of the mind with forgetfulness, seemed to have respected these signs, which apparently had been made with some degree of regularity, and probably with a definite purpose.
Occasionally the marks were hidden under tufts of myrtle, which spread into large bushes laden with blossoms, or beneath parasitical lichen.
So Edmond had to separate the branches or brush away the moss to know where the guide-marks were.
Might it not have been the cardinal himself who had first traced them, in order that they might serve as a guide for his nephew in the event of a catastrophe, which he could not foresee would have been so complete.
This solitary place was precisely suited to the requirements of a man desirous of burying treasure.
Only, might not these betraying marks have attracted other eyes than those for whom they were made? and had the dark and wondrous island indeed faithfully guarded its precious secret? 0295m It seemed, however, to Edmond, who was hidden from his comrades by the inequalities of the ground, that at sixty paces from the harbor the marks ceased; nor did they terminate at any grotto.
Edmond concluded that perhaps instead of having reached the end of the route he had only explored its beginning, and he therefore turned round and retraced his steps.
Meanwhile his comrades had prepared the repast, had got some water from a spring, spread out the fruit and bread, and cooked the kid.
Just at the moment when they were taking the dainty animal from the spit, they saw Edmond springing with the boldness of a chamois from rock to rock, and they fired the signal agreed upon.
The sportsman instantly changed his direction, and ran quickly towards them.
But even while they watched his daring progress, Edmond’s foot slipped, and they saw him stagger on the edge of a rock and disappear.
They all rushed towards him, for all loved Edmond in spite of his superiority; yet Jacopo reached him first.
He found Edmond lying prone, bleeding, and almost senseless.
He had rolled down a declivity of twelve or fifteen feet.
They poured a little rum down his throat, and this remedy which had before been so beneficial to him, produced the same effect as formerly.
Edmond opened his eyes, complained of great pain in his knee, a feeling of heaviness in his head, and severe pains in his loins.
They wished to carry him to the shore; but when they touched him, although under Jacopo’s directions, he declared, with heavy groans, that he could not bear to be moved.
It may be supposed that Dantès did not now think of his dinner, but he insisted that his comrades, who had not his reasons for fasting, should have their meal.
As for himself, he declared that he had only need of a little rest, and that when they returned he should be easier.
They were hungry, and the smell of the roasted kid was very savory, and your tars are not very ceremonious.
An hour afterwards they returned.
But, instead of growing easier, Dantès’ pains appeared to increase in violence.
The old patron, who was obliged to sail in the morning in order to land his cargo on the frontiers of Piedmont and France, between Nice and Fréjus, urged Dantès to try and rise.
Edmond made great exertions in order to comply; but at each effort he fell back, moaning and turning pale.
“He has broken his ribs,” said the commander, in a low voice.
“No matter; he is an excellent fellow, and we must not leave him.
We will try and carry him on board the tartan.” Dantès declared, however, that he would rather die where he was than undergo the agony which the slightest movement cost him.
“Well,” said the patron, “let what may happen, it shall never be said that we deserted a good comrade like you.
We will not go till evening.” This very much astonished the sailors, although, not one opposed it.
The patron was so strict that this was the first time they had ever seen him give up an enterprise, or even delay in its execution.
Dantès would not allow that any such infraction of regular and proper rules should be made in his favor.
“No, no,” he said to the patron, “I was awkward, and it is just that I pay the penalty of my clumsiness.
“I would rather do so,” was Edmond’s reply, “than suffer the inexpressible agonies which the slightest movement causes me.” The patron turned towards his vessel, which was rolling on the swell in the little harbor, and, with sails partly set, would be ready for sea when her toilet should be completed.
“We cannot leave you here so, and yet we cannot stay.” “Go, go!” exclaimed Dantès.
I will pay twenty-five piastres for my passage back to Leghorn.
“Listen, Captain Baldi; there’s one way of settling this,” said Jacopo.
“Do you go, and I will stay and take care of the wounded man.” “And give up your share of the venture,” said Edmond, “to remain with me?” “Yes,” said Jacopo, “and without any hesitation.” “You are a good fellow and a kind-hearted messmate,” replied Edmond, “and heaven will recompense you for your generous intentions; but I do not wish anyone to stay with me.
A day or two of rest will set me up, and I hope I shall find among the rocks certain herbs most excellent for bruises.” A peculiar smile passed over Dantès’ lips; he squeezed Jacopo’s hand warmly, but nothing could shake his determination to remain—and remain alone.
The smugglers left with Edmond what he had requested and set sail, but not without turning about several times, and each time making signs of a cordial farewell, to which Edmond replied with his hand only, as if he could not move the rest of his body.
At the end of an hour she was completely out of sight; at least, it was impossible for the wounded man to see her any longer from the spot where he was.
Then Dantès rose more agile and light than the kid among the myrtles and shrubs of these wild rocks, took his gun in one hand, his pickaxe in the other, and hastened towards the rock on which the marks he had noted terminated.
“And now,” he exclaimed, remembering the tale of the Arabian fisherman, which Faria had related to him, “now, Open Sesame!” Chapter 24.
The Secret Cave The sun had nearly reached the meridian, and his scorching rays fell full on the rocks, which seemed themselves sensible of the heat.
Thousands of grasshoppers, hidden in the bushes, chirped with a monotonous and dull note; the leaves of the myrtle and olive trees waved and rustled in the wind.
At every step that Edmond took he disturbed the lizards glittering with the hues of the emerald; afar off he saw the wild goats bounding from crag to crag.
In a word, the island was inhabited, yet Edmond felt himself alone, guided by the hand of God.
He felt an indescribable sensation somewhat akin to dread—that dread of the daylight which even in the desert makes us fear we are watched and observed.
This feeling was so strong that at the moment when Edmond was about to begin his labor, he stopped, laid down his pickaxe, seized his gun, mounted to the summit of the highest rock, and from thence gazed round in every direction.
But it was not upon Corsica, the very houses of which he could distinguish; or on Sardinia; or on the Island of Elba, with its historical associations; or upon the almost imperceptible line that to the experienced eye of a sailor alone revealed the coast of Genoa the proud, and Leghorn the commercial, that he gazed.
It was at the brigantine that had left in the morning, and the tartan that had just set sail, that Edmond fixed his eyes.
The first was just disappearing in the straits of Bonifacio; the other, following an opposite direction, was about to round the Island of Corsica.
This sight reassured him.
He saw that he was on the highest point of the island,—a statue on this vast pedestal of granite, nothing human appearing in sight, while the blue ocean beat against the base of the island, and covered it with a fringe of foam.
Then he descended with cautious and slow step, for he dreaded lest an accident similar to that he had so adroitly feigned should happen in reality.
This creek was sufficiently wide at its mouth, and deep in the centre, to admit of the entrance of a small vessel of the lugger class, which would be perfectly concealed from observation.
Then following the clew that, in the hands of the Abbé Faria, had been so skilfully used to guide him through the Dædalian labyrinth of probabilities, he thought that the Cardinal Spada, anxious not to be watched, had entered the creek, concealed his little barque, followed the line marked by the notches in the rock, and at the end of it had buried his treasure.
It was this idea that had brought Dantès back to the circular rock.
One thing only perplexed Edmond, and destroyed his theory.
Suddenly an idea flashed across his mind.
And he sprang from the rock in order to inspect the base on which it had formerly stood.
He soon perceived that a slope had been formed, and the rock had slid along this until it stopped at the spot it now occupied.
He attacked this wall, cemented by the hand of time, with his pickaxe.
Dantès went and cut the strongest olive-tree he could find, stripped off its branches, inserted it in the hole, and used it as a lever.
But the rock was too heavy, and too firmly wedged, to be moved by anyone man, were he Hercules himself.
He smiled; the infernal invention would serve him for this purpose.
With the aid of his pickaxe, Dantès, after the manner of a labor-saving pioneer, dug a mine between the upper rock and the one that supported it, filled it with powder, then made a match by rolling his handkerchief in saltpetre.
The explosion soon followed; the upper rock was lifted from its base by the terrific force of the powder; the lower one flew into pieces; thousands of insects escaped from the aperture Dantès had previously formed, and a huge snake, like the guardian demon of the treasure, rolled himself along in darkening coils, and disappeared.
Dantès approached the upper rock, which now, without any support, leaned towards the sea.
The intrepid treasure-seeker walked round it, and, selecting the spot from whence it appeared most susceptible to attack, placed his lever in one of the crevices, and strained every nerve to move the mass.
The rock, already shaken by the explosion, tottered on its base.
Dantès redoubled his efforts; he seemed like one of the ancient Titans, who uprooted the mountains to hurl against the father of the gods.
The rock yielded, rolled over, bounded from point to point, and finally disappeared in the ocean.
On the spot it had occupied was a circular space, exposing an iron ring let into a square flag-stone.
Dantès uttered a cry of joy and surprise; never had a first attempt been crowned with more perfect success.
He would fain have continued, but his knees trembled, and his heart beat so violently, and his sight became so dim, that he was forced to pause.
Edmond inserted his lever in the ring and exerted all his strength; the flag-stone yielded, and disclosed steps that descended until they were lost in the obscurity of a subterraneous grotto.
Dantès turned pale, hesitated, and reflected.
I am accustomed to adversity.
I must not be cast down by the discovery that I have been deceived.
What, then, would be the use of all I have suffered?
The heart breaks when, after having been elated by flattering hopes, it sees all its illusions destroyed.
“Now that I expect nothing, now that I no longer entertain the slightest hopes, the end of this adventure becomes simply a matter of curiosity.” And he remained again motionless and thoughtful.
“Yes, yes; this is an adventure worthy a place in the varied career of that royal bandit.
This fabulous event formed but a link in a long chain of marvels.
Yes, Borgia has been here, a torch in one hand, a sword in the other, and within twenty paces, at the foot of this rock, perhaps two guards kept watch on land and sea, while their master descended, as I am about to descend, dispelling the darkness before his awe-inspiring progress.” 0303m “But what was the fate of the guards who thus possessed his secret?” asked Dantès of himself.
“The fate,” replied he, smiling, “of those who buried Alaric, and were interred with the corpse.” “Yet, had he come,” thought Dantès, “he would have found the treasure, and Borgia, he who compared Italy to an artichoke, which he could devour leaf by leaf, knew too well the value of time to waste it in replacing this rock.
After having stood a few minutes in the cavern, the atmosphere of which was rather warm than damp, Dantès’ eye, habituated as it was to darkness, could pierce even to the remotest angles of the cavern, which was of granite that sparkled like diamonds.
“Alas,” said Edmond, smiling, “these are the treasures the cardinal has left; and the good abbé, seeing in a dream these glittering walls, has indulged in fallacious hopes.” But he called to mind the words of the will, which he knew by heart.
“In the farthest angle of the second opening,” said the cardinal’s will.
Dantès continued his search.
He reflected that this second grotto must penetrate deeper into the island; he examined the stones, and sounded one part of the wall where he fancied the opening existed, masked for precaution’s sake.
The pickaxe struck for a moment with a dull sound that drew out of Dantès’ forehead large drops of perspiration.
At last it seemed to him that one part of the wall gave forth a more hollow and deeper echo; he eagerly advanced, and with the quickness of perception that no one but a prisoner possesses, saw that there, in all probability, the opening must be.
However, he, like Cæsar Borgia, knew the value of time; and, in order to avoid fruitless toil, he sounded all the other walls with his pickaxe, struck the earth with the butt of his gun, and finding nothing that appeared suspicious, returned to that part of the wall whence issued the consoling sound he had before heard.
Then a singular thing occurred.
As he struck the wall, pieces of stucco similar to that used in the ground work of arabesques broke off, and fell to the ground in flakes, exposing a large white stone.
The aperture of the rock had been closed with stones, then this stucco had been applied, and painted to imitate granite.
Dantès struck with the sharp end of his pickaxe, which entered someway between the interstices.
But by some strange play of emotion, in proportion as the proofs that Faria, had not been deceived became stronger, so did his heart give way, and a feeling of discouragement stole over him.
This last proof, instead of giving him fresh strength, deprived him of it; the pickaxe descended, or rather fell; he placed it on the ground, passed his hand over his brow, and remounted the stairs, alleging to himself, as an excuse, a desire to be assured that no one was watching him, but in reality because he felt that he was about to faint.
The island was deserted, and the sun seemed to cover it with its fiery glance; afar off, a few small fishing boats studded the bosom of the blue ocean.
Dantès had tasted nothing, but he thought not of hunger at such a moment; he hastily swallowed a few drops of rum, and again entered the cavern.
The pickaxe that had seemed so heavy, was now like a feather in his grasp; he seized it, and attacked the wall.
After several blows he perceived that the stones were not cemented, but had been merely placed one upon the other, and covered with stucco; he inserted the point of his pickaxe, and using the handle as a lever, with joy soon saw the stone turn as if on hinges, and fall at his feet.
The aperture was already sufficiently large for him to enter, but by waiting, he could still cling to hope, and retard the certainty of deception.
At last, after renewed hesitation, Dantès entered the second grotto.
The second grotto was lower and more gloomy than the first; the air that could only enter by the newly formed opening had the mephitic smell Dantès was surprised not to find in the outer cavern.
He waited in order to allow pure air to displace the foul atmosphere, and then went on.
But to Dantès’ eye there was no darkness.
The treasure, if it existed, was buried in this corner.
He advanced towards the angle, and summoning all his resolution, attacked the ground with the pickaxe.
At the fifth or sixth blow the pickaxe struck against an iron substance.
He again struck his pickaxe into the earth, and encountered the same resistance, but not the same sound.
A wild goat had passed before the mouth of the cave, and was feeding at a little distance.
This would have been a favorable occasion to secure his dinner; but Dantès feared lest the report of his gun should attract attention.
He thought a moment, cut a branch of a resinous tree, lighted it at the fire at which the smugglers had prepared their breakfast, and descended with this torch.
He wished to see everything.
He approached the hole he had dug, and now, with the aid of the torch, saw that his pickaxe had in reality struck against iron and wood.
In an instant a space three feet long by two feet broad was cleared, and Dantès could see an oaken coffer, bound with cut steel; in the middle of the lid he saw engraved on a silver plate, which was still untarnished, the arms of the Spada family—viz., a sword, _en pale_, on an oval shield, like all the Italian armorial bearings, and surmounted by a cardinal’s hat.
Dantès easily recognized them, Faria had so often drawn them for him.
There was no longer any doubt: the treasure was there—no one would have been at such pains to conceal an empty casket.
In an instant he had cleared every obstacle away, and he saw successively the lock, placed between two padlocks, and the two handles at each end, all carved as things were carved at that epoch, when art rendered the commonest metals precious.
Dantès seized the handles, and strove to lift the coffer; it was impossible.
He sought to open it; lock and padlock were fastened; these faithful guardians seemed unwilling to surrender their trust.
Dantès inserted the sharp end of the pickaxe between the coffer and the lid, and pressing with all his force on the handle, burst open the fastenings.
The hinges yielded in their turn and fell, still holding in their grasp fragments of the wood, and the chest was open. 0307m Edmond was seized with vertigo; he cocked his gun and laid it beside him.
He then closed his eyes as children do in order that they may see in the resplendent night of their own imagination more stars than are visible in the firmament; then he re-opened them, and stood motionless with amazement.
Three compartments divided the coffer.
In the first, blazed piles of golden coin; in the second, were ranged bars of unpolished gold, which possessed nothing attractive save their value; in the third, Edmond grasped handfuls of diamonds, pearls, and rubies, which, as they fell on one another, sounded like hail against glass.
After having touched, felt, examined these treasures, Edmond rushed through the caverns like a man seized with frenzy; he leaped on a rock, from whence he could behold the sea.
He was alone—alone with these countless, these unheard-of treasures!
Was it a transient vision, or was he face to face with reality?
This time he fell on his knees, and, clasping his hands convulsively, uttered a prayer intelligible to God alone.
He soon became calmer and more happy, for only now did he begin to realize his felicity.
There were a thousand ingots of gold, each weighing from two to three pounds; then he piled up twenty-five thousand crowns, each worth about eighty francs of our money, and bearing the effigies of Alexander VI. and his predecessors; and he saw that the complement was not half empty.
And he measured ten double handfuls of pearls, diamonds, and other gems, many of which, mounted by the most famous workmen, were valuable beyond their intrinsic worth.
Dantès saw the light gradually disappear, and fearing to be surprised in the cavern, left it, his gun in his hand.
A piece of biscuit and a small quantity of rum formed his supper, and he snatched a few hours’ sleep, lying over the mouth of the cave.
It was a night of joy and terror, such as this man of stupendous emotions had already experienced twice or thrice in his lifetime.
The Unknown Day, for which Dantès had so eagerly and impatiently waited with open eyes, again dawned.
Again he climbed the rocky height he had ascended the previous evening, and strained his view to catch every peculiarity of the landscape; but it wore the same wild, barren aspect when seen by the rays of the morning sun which it had done when surveyed by the fading glimmer of eve.
This done, he impatiently awaited the return of his companions.
To wait at Monte Cristo for the purpose of watching like a dragon over the almost incalculable riches that had thus fallen into his possession satisfied not the cravings of his heart, which yearned to return to dwell among mankind, and to assume the rank, power, and influence which are always accorded to wealth—that first and greatest of all the forces within the grasp of man.
On the sixth day, the smugglers returned.
From a distance Dantès recognized the rig and handling of _La Jeune Amélie_, and dragging himself with affected difficulty towards the landing-place, he met his companions with an assurance that, although considerably better than when they quitted him, he still suffered acutely from his late accident.
He then inquired how they had fared in their trip.
To this question the smugglers replied that, although successful in landing their cargo in safety, they had scarcely done so when they received intelligence that a guard-ship had just quitted the port of Toulon and was crowding all sail towards them.
This obliged them to make all the speed they could to evade the enemy, when they could but lament the absence of Dantès, whose superior skill in the management of a vessel would have availed them so materially.
In fact, the pursuing vessel had almost overtaken them when, fortunately, night came on, and enabled them to double the Cape of Corsica, and so elude all further pursuit.
Arrived at Leghorn, he repaired to the house of a Jew, a dealer in precious stones, to whom he disposed of four of his smallest diamonds for five thousand francs each.
Dantès half feared that such valuable jewels in the hands of a poor sailor like himself might excite suspicion; but the cunning purchaser asked no troublesome questions concerning a bargain by which he gained a round profit of at least eighty per cent.
Jacopo could scarcely believe his senses at receiving this magnificent present, which Dantès hastened to account for by saying that he had merely been a sailor from whim and a desire to spite his family, who did not allow him as much money as he liked to spend; but that on his arrival at Leghorn he had come into possession of a large fortune, left him by an uncle, whose sole heir he was.
The superior education of Dantès gave an air of such extreme probability to this statement that it never once occurred to Jacopo to doubt its accuracy.
The term for which Edmond had engaged to serve on board _La Jeune Amélie_ having expired, Dantès took leave of the captain, who at first tried all his powers of persuasion to induce him to remain as one of the crew, but having been told the history of the legacy, he ceased to importune him further.
The following morning Jacopo set sail for Marseilles, with directions from Dantès to join him at the Island of Monte Cristo.
Having seen Jacopo fairly out of the harbor, Dantès proceeded to make his final adieus on board _La Jeune Amélie_, distributing so liberal a gratuity among her crew as to secure for him the good wishes of all, and expressions of cordial interest in all that concerned him.
To the captain he promised to write when he had made up his mind as to his future plans.
Then Dantès departed for Genoa.
Dantès, struck with the beauty and capability of the little vessel, applied to its owner to transfer it to him, offering sixty thousand francs, upon condition that he should be allowed to take immediate possession.
The proposal was too advantageous to be refused, the more so as the person for whom the yacht was intended had gone upon a tour through Switzerland, and was not expected back in less than three weeks or a month, by which time the builder reckoned upon being able to complete another.
A bargain was therefore struck.
Dantès led the owner of the yacht to the dwelling of a Jew; retired with the latter for a few minutes to a small back parlor, and upon their return the Jew counted out to the shipbuilder the sum of sixty thousand francs in bright gold pieces.
But their wonder was soon changed to admiration at seeing the perfect skill with which Dantès handled the helm.
The boat, indeed, seemed to be animated with almost human intelligence, so promptly did it obey the slightest touch; and Dantès required but a short trial of his beautiful craft to acknowledge that the Genoese had not without reason attained their high reputation in the art of shipbuilding.
The spectators followed the little vessel with their eyes as long as it remained visible; they then turned their conjectures upon her probable destination.
Some insisted she was making for Corsica, others the Island of Elba; bets were offered to any amount that she was bound for Spain; while Africa was positively reported by many persons as her intended course; but no one thought of Monte Cristo.
Yet thither it was that Dantès guided his vessel, and at Monte Cristo he arrived at the close of the second day; his boat had proved herself a first-class sailor, and had come the distance from Genoa in thirty-five hours.
Dantès had carefully noted the general appearance of the shore, and, instead of landing at the usual place, he dropped anchor in the little creek.
The island was utterly deserted, and bore no evidence of having been visited since he went away; his treasure was just as he had left it.
Early on the following morning he commenced the removal of his riches, and ere nightfall the whole of his immense wealth was safely deposited in the compartments of the secret locker.
Dantès employed it in manœuvring his yacht round the island, studying it as a skilful horseman would the animal he destined for some important service, till at the end of that time he was perfectly conversant with its good and bad qualities.
The former Dantès proposed to augment, the latter to remedy.
Upon the eighth day he discerned a small vessel under full sail approaching Monte Cristo.
As it drew near, he recognized it as the boat he had given to Jacopo.
He immediately signalled it.
His signal was returned, and in two hours afterwards the new-comer lay at anchor beside the yacht.
A mournful answer awaited each of Edmond’s eager inquiries as to the information Jacopo had obtained.
Old Dantès was dead, and Mercédès had disappeared.
Dantès listened to these melancholy tidings with outward calmness; but, leaping lightly ashore, he signified his desire to be quite alone.
In a couple of hours he returned.
Two of the men from Jacopo’s boat came on board the yacht to assist in navigating it, and he gave orders that she should be steered direct to Marseilles.
For his father’s death he was in some manner prepared; but he knew not how to account for the mysterious disappearance of Mercédès.
Without divulging his secret, Dantès could not give sufficiently clear instructions to an agent.
There were, besides, other particulars he was desirous of ascertaining, and those were of a nature he alone could investigate in a manner satisfactory to himself.
His looking-glass had assured him, during his stay at Leghorn, that he ran no risk of recognition; moreover, he had now the means of adopting any disguise he thought proper.
The first person to attract the attention of Dantès, as he landed on the Canebière, was one of the crew belonging to the _Pharaon_.
Edmond welcomed the meeting with this fellow—who had been one of his own sailors—as a sure means of testing the extent of the change which time had worked in his own appearance.
Going straight towards him, he propounded a variety of questions on different subjects, carefully watching the man’s countenance as he did so; but not a word or look implied that he had the slightest idea of ever having seen before the person with whom he was then conversing.
Giving the sailor a piece of money in return for his civility, Dantès proceeded onwards; but ere he had gone many steps he heard the man loudly calling him to stop.
Dantès instantly turned to meet him.
“I beg your pardon, sir,” said the honest fellow, in almost breathless haste, “but I believe you made a mistake; you intended to give me a two-franc piece, and see, you gave me a double Napoleon.” “Thank you, my good friend.
I see that I have made a trifling mistake, as you say; but by way of rewarding your honesty I give you another double Napoleon, that you may drink to my health, and be able to ask your messmates to join you.” So extreme was the surprise of the sailor, that he was unable even to thank Edmond, whose receding figure he continued to gaze after in speechless astonishment.
Dantès, meanwhile, went on his way.
Each step he trod oppressed his heart with fresh emotion; his first and most indelible recollections were there; not a tree, not a street, that he passed but seemed filled with dear and cherished memories.
And thus he proceeded onwards till he arrived at the end of the Rue de Noailles, from whence a full view of the Allées de Meilhan was obtained.
At this spot, so pregnant with fond and filial remembrances, his heart beat almost to bursting, his knees tottered under him, a mist floated over his sight, and had he not clung for support to one of the trees, he would inevitably have fallen to the ground and been crushed beneath the many vehicles continually passing there.
Recovering himself, however, he wiped the perspiration from his brows, and stopped not again till he found himself at the door of the house in which his father had lived.
The nasturtiums and other plants, which his father had delighted to train before his window, had all disappeared from the upper part of the house.
Leaning against the tree, he gazed thoughtfully for a time at the upper stories of the shabby little house.
Then he advanced to the door, and asked whether there were any rooms to be let.
Though answered in the negative, he begged so earnestly to be permitted to visit those on the fifth floor, that, in despite of the oft-repeated assurance of the _concierge_ that they were occupied, Dantès succeeded in inducing the man to go up to the tenants, and ask permission for a gentleman to be allowed to look at them.
The tenants of the humble lodging were a young couple who had been scarcely married a week; and seeing them, Dantès sighed heavily.
Nothing in the two small chambers forming the apartments remained as it had been in the time of the elder Dantès; the very paper was different, while the articles of antiquated furniture with which the rooms had been filled in Edmond’s time had all disappeared; the four walls alone remained as he had left them.
The bed belonging to the present occupants was placed as the former owner of the chamber had been accustomed to have his; and, in spite of his efforts to prevent it, the eyes of Edmond were suffused in tears as he reflected that on that spot the old man had breathed his last, vainly calling for his son.
As Edmond passed the door on the fourth floor, he paused to inquire whether Caderousse the tailor still dwelt there; but he received for reply, that the person in question had got into difficulties, and at the present time kept a small inn on the route from Bellegarde to Beaucaire.
This strange event aroused great wonder and curiosity in the neighborhood of the Allées de Meilhan, and a multitude of theories were afloat, none of which was anywhere near the truth.
But on the following day the family from whom all these particulars had been asked received a handsome present, consisting of an entirely new fishing-boat, with two seines and a tender.
The delighted recipients of these munificent gifts would gladly have poured out their thanks to their generous benefactor, but they had seen him, upon quitting the hut, merely give some orders to a sailor, and then springing lightly on horseback, leave Marseilles by the Porte d’Aix.
This modern place of entertainment stood on the left-hand side of the post road, and backed upon the Rhône.
It also boasted of what in Languedoc is styled a garden, consisting of a small plot of ground, on the side opposite to the main entrance reserved for the reception of guests.
A few dingy olives and stunted fig-trees struggled hard for existence, but their withered dusty foliage abundantly proved how unequal was the conflict.
Between these sickly shrubs grew a scanty supply of garlic, tomatoes, and eschalots; while, lone and solitary, like a forgotten sentinel, a tall pine raised its melancholy head in one of the corners of this unattractive spot, and displayed its flexible stem and fan-shaped summit dried and cracked by the fierce heat of the sub-tropical sun.
All these trees, great or small, were turned in the direction to which the Mistral blows, one of the three curses of Provence, the others being the Durance and the Parliament.
In the surrounding plain, which more resembled a dusty lake than solid ground, were scattered a few miserable stalks of wheat, the effect, no doubt, of a curious desire on the part of the agriculturists of the country to see whether such a thing as the raising of grain in those parched regions was practicable.
Each stalk served as a perch for a grasshopper, which regaled the passers-by through this Egyptian scene with its strident, monotonous note.
For about seven or eight years the little tavern had been kept by a man and his wife, with two servants,—a chambermaid named Trinette, and a hostler called Pecaud.
This small staff was quite equal to all the requirements, for a canal between Beaucaire and Aiguemortes had revolutionized transportation by substituting boats for the cart and the stagecoach.
And, as though to add to the daily misery which this prosperous canal inflicted on the unfortunate innkeeper, whose utter ruin it was fast accomplishing, it was situated between the Rhône from which it had its source and the post-road it had depleted, not a hundred steps from the inn, of which we have given a brief but faithful description.
This man was our old acquaintance, Gaspard Caderousse.
His wife, on the contrary, whose maiden name had been Madeleine Radelle, was pale, meagre, and sickly-looking.
Born in the neighborhood of Arles, she had shared in the beauty for which its women are proverbial; but that beauty had gradually withered beneath the devastating influence of the slow fever so prevalent among dwellers by the ponds of Aiguemortes and the marshes of Camargue.
During the days of his prosperity, not a festivity took place without himself and wife being among the spectators.
He dressed in the picturesque costume worn upon grand occasions by the inhabitants of the south of France, bearing equal resemblance to the style adopted both by the Catalans and Andalusians; while La Carconte displayed the charming fashion prevalent among the women of Arles, a mode of attire borrowed equally from Greece and Arabia.
At the moment Caderousse quitted his sentry-like watch before the door, the road on which he so eagerly strained his sight was void and lonely as a desert at midday.
There it lay stretching out into one interminable line of dust and sand, with its sides bordered by tall, meagre trees, altogether presenting so uninviting an appearance, that no one in his senses could have imagined that any traveller, at liberty to regulate his hours for journeying, would choose to expose himself in such a formidable Sahara.
Nevertheless, had Caderousse but retained his post a few minutes longer, he might have caught a dim outline of something approaching from the direction of Bellegarde; as the moving object drew nearer, he would easily have perceived that it consisted of a man and horse, between whom the kindest and most amiable understanding appeared to exist.
The horse was of Hungarian breed, and ambled along at an easy pace.
His rider was a priest, dressed in black, and wearing a three-cornered hat; and, despite of the ardent rays of a noonday sun, the pair came on with a fair degree of rapidity.
Having arrived before the Pont du Gard, the horse stopped, but whether for his own pleasure or that of his rider would have been difficult to say.
However that might have been, the priest, dismounting, led his steed by the bridle in search of some place to which he could secure him.
Availing himself of a handle that projected from a half-fallen door, he tied the animal safely and having drawn a red cotton handkerchief, from his pocket, wiped away the perspiration that streamed from his brow, then, advancing to the door, struck thrice with the end of his iron-shod stick.
At this unusual sound, a huge black dog came rushing to meet the daring assailant of his ordinarily tranquil abode, snarling and displaying his sharp white teeth with a determined hostility that abundantly proved how little he was accustomed to society.
At that moment a heavy footstep was heard descending the wooden staircase that led from the upper floor, and, with many bows and courteous smiles, the host of the Pont du Gard besought his guest to enter. 0319m “You are welcome, sir, most welcome!” repeated the astonished Caderousse.
“Now, then, Margotin,” cried he, speaking to the dog, “will you be quiet?
I make no doubt a glass of good wine would be acceptable this dreadfully hot day.” Then perceiving for the first time the garb of the traveller he had to entertain, Caderousse hastily exclaimed: “A thousand pardons!
What refreshment can I offer?
Caderousse?” “Yes, sir,” answered the host, even more surprised at the question than he had been by the silence which had preceded it; “I am Gaspard Caderousse, at your service.” “Gaspard Caderousse,” rejoined the priest.
“Yes,—Christian and surname are the same.
You formerly lived, I believe in the Allées de Meilhan, on the fourth floor?” 0325m “I did.” “And you followed the business of a tailor?” “True, I was a tailor, till the trade fell off.
It is so hot at Marseilles, that really I believe that the respectable inhabitants will in time go without any clothing whatever.
“Are you quite alone?” inquired the guest, as Caderousse placed before him the bottle of wine and a glass.
“Quite, quite alone,” replied the man—“or, at least, practically so, for my poor wife, who is the only person in the house besides myself, is laid up with illness, and unable to render me the least assistance, poor thing!” “You are married, then?” said the priest, with a show of interest, glancing round as he spoke at the scanty furnishings of the apartment.
“Ah, sir,” said Caderousse with a sigh, “it is easy to perceive I am not a rich man; but in this world a man does not thrive the better for being honest.” The abbé fixed on him a searching, penetrating glance.
“In the first place, I must be satisfied that you are the person I am in search of.” “What proofs do you require?” “Did you, in the year 1814 or 1815, know anything of a young sailor named Dantès?” “Dantès?
Why, Edmond Dantès and myself were intimate friends!” exclaimed Caderousse, whose countenance flushed darkly as he caught the penetrating gaze of the abbé fixed on him, while the clear, calm eye of the questioner seemed to dilate with feverish scrutiny.
“You remind me,” said the priest, “that the young man concerning whom I asked you was said to bear the name of Edmond.” “Said to bear the name!” repeated Caderousse, becoming excited and eager.
“Why, he was so called as truly as I myself bore the appellation of Gaspard Caderousse; but tell me, I pray, what has become of poor Edmond?
Is he prosperous and happy?” “He died a more wretched, hopeless, heart-broken prisoner than the felons who pay the penalty of their crimes at the galleys of Toulon.” A deadly pallor followed the flush on the countenance of Caderousse, who turned away, and the priest saw him wiping the tears from his eyes with the corner of the red handkerchief twisted round his head.
“Poor fellow, poor fellow!” murmured Caderousse.
“Well, there, sir, is another proof that good people are never rewarded on this earth, and that none but the wicked prosper.
Ah,” continued Caderousse, speaking in the highly colored language of the South, “the world grows worse and worse.
Why does not God, if he really hates the wicked, as he is said to do, send down brimstone and fire, and consume them altogether?” “You speak as though you had loved this young Dantès,” observed the abbé, without taking any notice of his companion’s vehemence.
“And so I did,” replied Caderousse; “though once, I confess, I envied him his good fortune.
But I swear to you, sir, I swear to you, by everything a man holds dear, I have, since then, deeply and sincerely lamented his unhappy fate.” There was a brief silence, during which the fixed, searching eye of the abbé was employed in scrutinizing the agitated features of the innkeeper.
“You knew the poor lad, then?” continued Caderousse.
“I was called to see him on his dying bed, that I might administer to him the consolations of religion.” “And of what did he die?” asked Caderousse in a choking voice.
“How should he have been otherwise?
“To one in Edmond’s position the diamond certainly was of great value.
It was estimated at fifty thousand francs.” “Bless me!” exclaimed Caderousse, “fifty thousand francs!
Surely the diamond was as large as a nut to be worth all that.” “No,” replied the abbé, “it was not of such a size as that; but you shall judge for yourself.
I have it with me.” The sharp gaze of Caderousse was instantly directed towards the priest’s garments, as though hoping to discover the location of the treasure.
Calmly drawing forth from his pocket a small box covered with black shagreen, the abbé opened it, and displayed to the dazzled eyes of Caderousse the sparkling jewel it contained, set in a ring of admirable workmanship.
“And that diamond,” cried Caderousse, almost breathless with eager admiration, “you say, is worth fifty thousand francs?” “It is, without the setting, which is also valuable,” replied the abbé, as he closed the box, and returned it to his pocket, while its brilliant hues seemed still to dance before the eyes of the fascinated innkeeper.
“But how comes the diamond in your possession, sir?
Did Edmond make you his heir?” “No, merely his testamentary executor.
‘I once possessed four dear and faithful friends, besides the maiden to whom I was betrothed’ he said; ‘and I feel convinced they have all unfeignedly grieved over my loss.
The name of one of the four friends is Caderousse.’” The innkeeper shivered.
‘The third of my friends, although my rival, was much attached to me,—his name was Fernand; that of my betrothed was’—Stay, stay,” continued the abbé, “I have forgotten what he called her.” “Mercédès,” said Caderousse eagerly.
“True,” said the abbé, with a stifled sigh, “Mercédès it was.” “Go on,” urged Caderousse.
Caderousse quickly performed the stranger’s bidding; and after pouring some into a glass, and slowly swallowing its contents, the abbé, resuming his usual placidity of manner, said, as he placed his empty glass on the table: “Where did we leave off?” “The name of Edmond’s betrothed was Mercédès.” “To be sure.
‘You will go to Marseilles,’ said Dantès,—for you understand, I repeat his words just as he uttered them.
Do you understand?” “Perfectly.” “‘You will sell this diamond; you will divide the money into five equal parts, and give an equal portion to these good friends, the only persons who have loved me upon earth.’” “But why into five parts?” asked Caderousse; “you only mentioned four persons.” “Because the fifth is dead, as I hear.
Can you enlighten me on that point?” “I do not know who could if I could not,” said Caderousse.
Ah, yes, about a year after the disappearance of his son the poor old man died.” “Of what did he die?” “Why, the doctors called his complaint gastro-enteritis, I believe; his acquaintances say he died of grief; but I, who saw him in his dying moments, I say he died of——” Caderousse paused.
“Of what?” asked the priest, anxiously and eagerly.
“Why, of downright starvation.” “Starvation!” exclaimed the abbé, springing from his seat.
“Why, the vilest animals are not suffered to die by such a death as that.
The very dogs that wander houseless and homeless in the streets find some pitying hand to cast them a mouthful of bread; and that a man, a Christian, should be allowed to perish of hunger in the midst of other men who call themselves Christians, is too horrible for belief.
Oh, it is impossible!—utterly impossible!” “What I have said, I have said,” answered Caderousse.
“And you are a fool for having said anything about it,” said a voice from the top of the stairs.
“Why should you meddle with what does not concern you?” The two men turned quickly, and saw the sickly countenance of La Carconte peering between the baluster rails; attracted by the sound of voices, she had feebly dragged herself down the stairs, and, seated on the lower step, head on knees, she had listened to the foregoing conversation.
“Mind your own business, wife,” replied Caderousse sharply.
“This gentleman asks me for information, which common politeness will not permit me to refuse.” “Politeness, you simpleton!” retorted La Carconte.
“What have you to do with politeness, I should like to know?
Better study a little common prudence.
How do you know the motives that person may have for trying to extract all he can from you?” “I pledge you my word, madam,” said the abbé, “that my intentions are good; and that your husband can incur no risk, provided he answers me candidly.” “Ah, that’s all very fine,” retorted the woman.
Whatever evils may befall you, they will not be occasioned by my instrumentality, that I solemnly promise you.” La Carconte muttered a few inarticulate words, then let her head again drop upon her knees, and went into a fit of ague, leaving the two speakers to resume the conversation, but remaining so as to be able to hear every word they uttered.
Again the abbé had been obliged to swallow a draught of water to calm the emotions that threatened to overpower him.
When he had sufficiently recovered himself, he said, “It appears, then, that the miserable old man you were telling me of was forsaken by everyone.
“Gaspard, Gaspard!” murmured the woman, from her seat on the stairs, “mind what you are saying!” Caderousse made no reply to these words, though evidently irritated and annoyed by the interruption, but, addressing the abbé, said, “Can a man be faithful to another whose wife he covets and desires for himself?
But Dantès was so honorable and true in his own nature, that he believed everybody’s professions of friendship.
Poor Edmond, he was cruelly deceived; but it was fortunate that he never knew, or he might have found it more difficult, when on his deathbed, to pardon his enemies.
And, whatever people may say,” continued Caderousse, in his native language, which was not altogether devoid of rude poetry, “I cannot help being more frightened at the idea of the malediction of the dead than the hatred of the living.” “Imbecile!” exclaimed La Carconte.
“Do you, then, know in what manner Fernand injured Dantès?” inquired the abbé of Caderousse.
No one better.” “Speak out then, say what it was!” “Gaspard!” cried La Carconte, “do as you will; you are master—but if you take my advice you’ll hold your tongue.” “Well, wife,” replied Caderousse, “I don’t know but what you’re right!” “So you will say nothing?” asked the abbé.
“Why, what good would it do?” asked Caderousse.
“If the poor lad were living, and came to me and begged that I would candidly tell which were his true and which his false friends, why, perhaps, I should not hesitate.
But you tell me he is no more, and therefore can have nothing to do with hatred or revenge, so let all such feeling be buried with him.” “You prefer, then,” said the abbé, “that I should bestow on men you say are false and treacherous, the reward intended for faithful friendship?” “That is true enough,” returned Caderousse.
“You say truly, the gift of poor Edmond was not meant for such traitors as Fernand and Danglars; besides, what would it be to them? no more than a drop of water in the ocean.” “Remember,” chimed in La Carconte, “those two could crush you at a single blow!” “How so?” inquired the abbé.
“Are these persons, then, so rich and powerful?” “Do you not know their history?” “I do not.
Pray relate it to me!” Caderousse seemed to reflect for a few moments, then said, “No, truly, it would take up too much time.” “Well, my good friend,” returned the abbé, in a tone that indicated utter indifference on his part, “you are at liberty, either to speak or be silent, just as you please; for my own part, I respect your scruples and admire your sentiments; so let the matter end.
I shall do my duty as conscientiously as I can, and fulfil my promise to the dying man.
My first business will be to dispose of this diamond.” So saying, the abbé again drew the small box from his pocket, opened it, and contrived to hold it in such a light, that a bright flash of brilliant hues passed before the dazzled gaze of Caderousse.
“Wife, wife!” cried he in a hoarse voice, “come here!” “Diamond!” exclaimed La Carconte, rising and descending to the chamber with a tolerably firm step; “what diamond are you talking about?” “Why, did you not hear all we said?” inquired Caderousse.
“It is a beautiful diamond left by poor Edmond Dantès, to be sold, and the money divided between his father, Mercédès, his betrothed bride, Fernand, Danglars, and myself.
The jewel is worth at least fifty thousand francs.” “Oh, what a magnificent jewel!” cried the astonished woman.
“The fifth part of the profits from this stone belongs to us then, does it not?” asked Caderousse.
“It does,” replied the abbé; “with the addition of an equal division of that part intended for the elder Dantès, which I believe myself at liberty to divide equally with the four survivors.” “And why among us four?” inquired Caderousse.
“As being the friends Edmond esteemed most faithful and devoted to him.” “I don’t call those friends who betray and ruin you,” murmured the wife in her turn, in a low, muttering voice.
“Of course not!” rejoined Caderousse quickly; “no more do I, and that was what I was observing to this gentleman just now.
I said I looked upon it as a sacrilegious profanation to reward treachery, perhaps crime.” “Remember,” answered the abbé calmly, as he replaced the jewel and its case in the pocket of his cassock, “it is your fault, not mine, that I do so.
You will have the goodness to furnish me with the address of both Fernand and Danglars, in order that I may execute Edmond’s last wishes.” The agitation of Caderousse became extreme, and large drops of perspiration rolled from his heated brow.
For my part, I wash my hands of the affair.” So saying, she once more climbed the staircase leading to her chamber, her body convulsed with chills, and her teeth rattling in her head, in spite of the intense heat of the weather.
Arrived at the top stair, she turned round, and called out, in a warning tone, to her husband, “Gaspard, consider well what you are about to do!” “I have both reflected and decided,” answered he.
La Carconte then entered her chamber, the flooring of which creaked beneath her heavy, uncertain tread, as she proceeded towards her armchair, into which she fell as though exhausted.
“Well,” asked the abbé, as he returned to the apartment below, “what have you made up your mind to do?” “To tell you all I know,” was the reply.
“I certainly think you act wisely in so doing,” said the priest.
“Not because I have the least desire to learn anything you may please to conceal from me, but simply that if, through your assistance, I could distribute the legacy according to the wishes of the testator, why, so much the better, that is all.” “I hope it may be so,” replied Caderousse, his face flushed with cupidity.
“I am all attention,” said the abbé.
“Stop a minute,” answered Caderousse; “we might be interrupted in the most interesting part of my story, which would be a pity; and it is as well that your visit hither should be made known only to ourselves.” With these words he went stealthily to the door, which he closed, and, by way of still greater precaution, bolted and barred it, as he was accustomed to do at night.
During this time the abbé had chosen his place for listening at his ease.
He removed his seat into a corner of the room, where he himself would be in deep shadow, while the light would be fully thrown on the narrator; then, with head bent down and hands clasped, or rather clenched together, he prepared to give his whole attention to Caderousse, who seated himself on the little stool, exactly opposite to him.
“Remember, this is no affair of mine,” said the trembling voice of La Carconte, as though through the flooring of her chamber she viewed the scene that was enacting below.
“Enough, enough!” replied Caderousse; “say no more about it; I will take all the consequences upon myself.” And he began his story.
The Story First, sir,” said Caderousse, “you must make me a promise.” “What is that?” inquired the abbé.
“Why, if you ever make use of the details I am about to give you, that you will never let anyone know that it was I who supplied them; for the persons of whom I am about to talk are rich and powerful, and if they only laid the tips of their fingers on me, I should break to pieces like glass.” “Make yourself easy, my friend,” replied the abbé.
“I am a priest, and confessions die in my breast.
Recollect, our only desire is to carry out, in a fitting manner, the last wishes of our friend.
Oh, yes; I can see it all before me this moment.” “Was it not his betrothal feast?” “It was and the feast that began so gayly had a very sorrowful ending; a police commissary, followed by four soldiers, entered, and Dantès was arrested.” “Yes, and up to this point I know all,” said the priest.
“Dantès himself only knew that which personally concerned him, for he never beheld again the five persons I have named to you, or heard mention of anyone of them.” “Well, when Dantès was arrested, Monsieur Morrel hastened to obtain the particulars, and they were very sad.
“The next day Mercédès came to implore the protection of M. de Villefort; she did not obtain it, however, and went to visit the old man; when she saw him so miserable and heart-broken, having passed a sleepless night, and not touched food since the previous day, she wished him to go with her that she might take care of him; but the old man would not consent.
“Ah, sir,” replied Caderousse, “we cannot console those who will not be consoled, and he was one of these; besides, I know not why, but he seemed to dislike seeing me.
“From day to day he lived on alone, and more and more solitary.
Morrel and Mercédès came to see him, but his door was closed; and, although I was certain he was at home, he would not make any answer.
At length the poor old fellow reached the end of all he had; he owed three quarters’ rent, and they threatened to turn him out; he begged for another week, which was granted to him.
I know this, because the landlord came into my apartment when he left his.
I then resolved to go up to him at all risks.
The door was closed, but I looked through the keyhole, and saw him so pale and haggard, that believing him very ill, I went and told M.
They both came immediately, M.
Morrel bringing a doctor, and the doctor said it was inflammation of the bowels, and ordered him a limited diet.
I was there, too, and I never shall forget the old man’s smile at this prescription.
“From that time he received all who came; he had an excuse for not eating any more; the doctor had put him on a diet.” The abbé uttered a kind of groan.
“The story interests you, does it not, sir?” inquired Caderousse.
“Yes,” replied the abbé, “it is very affecting.” “Mercédès came again, and she found him so altered that she was even more anxious than before to have him taken to her own home.
Morrel’s wish also, who would fain have conveyed the old man against his consent; but the old man resisted, and cried so that they were actually frightened.
Mercédès remained, therefore, by his bedside, and M.
“And you believe he died——” “Of hunger, sir, of hunger,” said Caderousse.
“I am as certain of it as that we two are Christians.” The abbé, with a shaking hand, seized a glass of water that was standing by him half-full, swallowed it at one gulp, and then resumed his seat, with red eyes and pale cheeks.
“The more so, sir, as it was men’s and not God’s doing.” “Tell me of those men,” said the abbé, “and remember too,” he added in an almost menacing tone, “you have promised to tell me everything.
Tell me, therefore, who are these men who killed the son with despair, and the father with famine?” “Two men jealous of him, sir; one from love, and the other from ambition,—Fernand and Danglars.” “How was this jealousy manifested?
Speak on.” “They denounced Edmond as a Bonapartist agent.” “Which of the two denounced him?
Which was the real delinquent?” “Both, sir; one with a letter, and the other put it in the post.” “And where was this letter written?” “At La Réserve, the day before the betrothal feast.” “’Twas so, then—’twas so, then,” murmured the abbé.
“Oh, Faria, Faria, how well did you judge men and things!” “What did you please to say, sir?” asked Caderousse.
I had only an indistinct understanding of what was passing around me.
I said all that a man in such a state could say; but they both assured me that it was a jest they were carrying on, and perfectly harmless.” “Next day—next day, sir, you must have seen plain enough what they had been doing, yet you said nothing, though you were present when Dantès was arrested.” “Yes, sir, I was there, and very anxious to speak; but Danglars restrained me.
‘If he should really be guilty,’ said he, ‘and did really put in to the Island of Elba; if he is really charged with a letter for the Bonapartist committee at Paris, and if they find this letter upon him, those who have supported him will pass for his accomplices.’ I confess I had my fears, in the state in which politics then were, and I held my tongue.
It was cowardly, I confess, but it was not criminal.” 0341m “I understand—you allowed matters to take their course, that was all.” “Yes, sir,” answered Caderousse; “and remorse preys on me night and day.
I often ask pardon of God, I swear to you, because this action, the only one with which I have seriously to reproach myself in all my life, is no doubt the cause of my abject condition.
I am expiating a moment of selfishness, and so I always say to La Carconte, when she complains, ‘Hold your tongue, woman; it is the will of God.’” And Caderousse bowed his head with every sign of real repentance.
“Well, sir,” said the abbé, “you have spoken unreservedly; and thus to accuse yourself is to deserve pardon.” “Unfortunately, Edmond is dead, and has not pardoned me.” “He did not know,” said the abbé.
“But he knows it all now,” interrupted Caderousse; “they say the dead know everything.” There was a brief silence; the abbé rose and paced up and down pensively, and then resumed his seat.
“You have two or three times mentioned a M.
Morrel,” he said; “who was he?” “The owner of the _Pharaon_ and patron of Dantès.” “And what part did he play in this sad drama?” inquired the abbé.
Twenty times he interceded for Edmond.
When the emperor returned, he wrote, implored, threatened, and so energetically, that on the second restoration he was persecuted as a Bonapartist.
Ten times, as I told you, he came to see Dantès’ father, and offered to receive him in his own house; and the night or two before his death, as I have already said, he left his purse on the mantelpiece, with which they paid the old man’s debts, and buried him decently; and so Edmond’s father died, as he had lived, without doing harm to anyone.
Morrel still alive?” “Yes,” replied Caderousse.
“In that case,” replied the abbé, “he should be a man blessed of God, rich, happy.” Caderousse smiled bitterly.
Morrel unhappy?” exclaimed the abbé.
“He is reduced almost to the last extremity—nay, he is almost at the point of dishonor.” “How?” “Yes,” continued Caderousse, “so it is; after five-and-twenty years of labor, after having acquired a most honorable name in the trade of Marseilles, M.
Morrel is utterly ruined; he has lost five ships in two years, has suffered by the bankruptcy of three large houses, and his only hope now is in that very _Pharaon_ which poor Dantès commanded, and which is expected from the Indies with a cargo of cochineal and indigo.
If this ship founders, like the others, he is a ruined man.” “And has the unfortunate man wife or children?” inquired the abbé.
“Yes, he has a wife, who through everything has behaved like an angel; he has a daughter, who was about to marry the man she loved, but whose family now will not allow him to wed the daughter of a ruined man; he has, besides, a son, a lieutenant in the army; and, as you may suppose, all this, instead of lessening, only augments his sorrows.
If he were alone in the world he would blow out his brains, and there would be an end.” “Horrible!” ejaculated the priest.
“And it is thus heaven recompenses virtue, sir,” added Caderousse.
Why, he left Marseilles, and was taken, on the recommendation of M.
He is a millionaire, and they have made him a baron, and now he is the Baron Danglars, with a fine residence in the Rue du Mont-Blanc, with ten horses in his stables, six footmen in his antechamber, and I know not how many millions in his strongbox.” “Ah!” said the abbé, in a peculiar tone, “he is happy.” “Happy?
Happiness or unhappiness is the secret known but to one’s self and the walls—walls have ears but no tongue; but if a large fortune produces happiness, Danglars is happy.” “And Fernand?” “Fernand?
Why, much the same story.” “But how could a poor Catalan fisher-boy, without education or resources, make a fortune?
I confess this staggers me.” “And it has staggered everybody.
There must have been in his life some strange secret that no one knows.” “But, then, by what visible steps has he attained this high fortune or high position?” “Both, sir—he has both fortune and position—both.” “This must be impossible!” “It would seem so; but listen, and you will understand.
The Bourbons left him quietly enough at the Catalans, but Napoleon returned, a special levy was made, and Fernand was compelled to join.
Fernand was enrolled in the active army, went to the frontier with his regiment, and was at the battle of Ligny.
The night after that battle he was sentry at the door of a general who carried on a secret correspondence with the enemy.
He proposed to Fernand to accompany him; Fernand agreed to do so, deserted his post, and followed the general.
“Fernand would have been court-martialed if Napoleon had remained on the throne, but his action was rewarded by the Bourbons.
He returned to France with the epaulet of sub-lieutenant, and as the protection of the general, who is in the highest favor, was accorded to him, he was a captain in 1823, during the Spanish war—that is to say, at the time when Danglars made his early speculations.
The war with Spain being ended, Fernand’s career was checked by the long peace which seemed likely to endure throughout Europe.
Greece only had risen against Turkey, and had begun her war of independence; all eyes were turned towards Athens—it was the fashion to pity and support the Greeks.
The French government, without protecting them openly, as you know, gave countenance to volunteer assistance.
Fernand sought and obtained leave to go and serve in Greece, still having his name kept on the army roll. 0345m Some time after, it was stated that the Comte de Morcerf (this was the name he bore) had entered the service of Ali Pasha with the rank of instructor-general.
Ali Pasha was killed, as you know, but before he died he recompensed the services of Fernand by leaving him a considerable sum, with which he returned to France, when he was gazetted lieutenant-general.” “So that now——?” inquired the abbé.
“Mercédès is at this moment one of the greatest ladies in Paris,” replied Caderousse.
“Go on,” said the abbé; “it seems as if I were listening to the story of a dream.
But I have seen things so extraordinary, that what you tell me seems less astonishing than it otherwise might.” “Mercédès was at first in the deepest despair at the blow which deprived her of Edmond.
I have told you of her attempts to propitiate M. de Villefort, her devotion to the elder Dantès.
In the midst of her despair, a new affliction overtook her.
This was the departure of Fernand—of Fernand, whose crime she did not know, and whom she regarded as her brother.
Fernand went, and Mercédès remained alone.
“Three months passed and still she wept—no news of Edmond, no news of Fernand, no companionship save that of an old man who was dying with despair.
One evening, after a day of accustomed vigil at the angle of two roads leading to Marseilles from the Catalans, she returned to her home more depressed than ever.
Suddenly she heard a step she knew, turned anxiously around, the door opened, and Fernand, dressed in the uniform of a sub-lieutenant, stood before her.
“It was not the one she wished for most, but it seemed as if a part of her past life had returned to her.
“Mercédès seized Fernand’s hands with a transport which he took for love, but which was only joy at being no longer alone in the world, and seeing at last a friend, after long hours of solitary sorrow.
And then, it must be confessed, Fernand had never been hated—he was only not precisely loved.
Another possessed all Mercédès’ heart; that other was absent, had disappeared, perhaps was dead.
Fernand saw this, and when he learned of the old man’s death he returned.
He was now a lieutenant.
At his first coming he had not said a word of love to Mercédès; at the second he reminded her that he loved her.
“Mercédès begged for six months more in which to await and mourn for Edmond.” “So that,” said the abbé, with a bitter smile, “that makes eighteen months in all.
Fernand, more happy, but not more at his ease—for I saw at this time he was in constant dread of Edmond’s return—Fernand was very anxious to get his wife away, and to depart himself.
There were too many unpleasant possibilities associated with the Catalans, and eight days after the wedding they left Marseilles.” “Did you ever see Mercédès again?” inquired the priest.
“Yes, during the Spanish war, at Perpignan, where Fernand had left her; she was attending to the education of her son.” The abbé started.
“Yes,” replied Caderousse, “little Albert.” “But, then, to be able to instruct her child,” continued the abbé, “she must have received an education herself.
I understood from Edmond that she was the daughter of a simple fisherman, beautiful but uneducated.” “Oh,” replied Caderousse, “did he know so little of his lovely betrothed?
Mercédès might have been a queen, sir, if the crown were to be placed on the heads of the loveliest and most intelligent.
Fernand’s fortune was already waxing great, and she developed with his growing fortune.
She learned drawing, music—everything.
Besides, I believe, between ourselves, she did this in order to distract her mind, that she might forget; and she only filled her head in order to alleviate the weight on her heart.
But now her position in life is assured,” continued Caderousse; “no doubt fortune and honors have comforted her; she is rich, a countess, and yet——” Caderousse paused.
“Yet, I am sure, she is not happy,” said Caderousse.
“What makes you believe this?” “Why, when I found myself utterly destitute, I thought my old friends would, perhaps, assist me.
So I went to Danglars, who would not even receive me.
I called on Fernand, who sent me a hundred francs by his valet-de-chambre.” “Then you did not see either of them?” “No, but Madame de Morcerf saw me.” “How was that?” “As I went away a purse fell at my feet—it contained five-and-twenty louis; I raised my head quickly, and saw Mercédès, who at once shut the blind.” “And M. de Villefort?” asked the abbé.
Take it, then, but in exchange——” Caderousse, who touched the diamond, withdrew his hand.
“In exchange,” he continued, “give me the red silk purse that M.
Morrel left on old Dantès’ chimney-piece, and which you tell me is still in your hands.” Caderousse, more and more astonished, went toward a large oaken cupboard, opened it, and gave the abbé a long purse of faded red silk, round which were two copper runners that had once been gilt.
The abbé took it, and in return gave Caderousse the diamond.
“Oh, you are a man of God, sir,” cried Caderousse; “for no one knew that Edmond had given you this diamond, and you might have kept it.” “Which,” said the abbé to himself, “you would have done.” The abbé rose, took his hat and gloves.
“Well,” he said, “all you have told me is perfectly true, then, and I may believe it in every particular.” “See, sir,” replied Caderousse, “in this corner is a crucifix in holy wood—here on this shelf is my wife’s testament; open this book, and I will swear upon it with my hand on the crucifix.
I will swear to you by my soul’s salvation, my faith as a Christian, I have told everything to you as it occurred, and as the recording angel will tell it to the ear of God at the day of the last judgment!” “’Tis well,” said the abbé, convinced by his manner and tone that Caderousse spoke the truth.
Adieu; I go far from men who thus so bitterly injure each other.” The abbé with difficulty got away from the enthusiastic thanks of Caderousse, opened the door himself, got out and mounted his horse, once more saluted the innkeeper, who kept uttering his loud farewells, and then returned by the road he had travelled in coming.
When Caderousse turned around, he saw behind him La Carconte, paler and trembling more than ever.
“Is, then, all that I have heard really true?” she inquired.
That he has given the diamond to us only?” inquired Caderousse, half bewildered with joy; “yes, nothing more true!
See, here it is.” The woman gazed at it a moment, and then said, in a gloomy voice, “Suppose it’s false?” Caderousse started and turned pale.
“False!” he muttered.
Why should that man give me a false diamond?” 0349m “To get your secret without paying for it, you blockhead!” Caderousse remained for a moment aghast under the weight of such an idea.
“Oh!” he said, taking up his hat, which he placed on the red handkerchief tied round his head, “we will soon find out.” “In what way?” “Why, the fair is on at Beaucaire, there are always jewellers from Paris there, and I will show it to them.
Look after the house, wife, and I shall be back in two hours,” and Caderousse left the house in haste, and ran rapidly in the direction opposite to that which the priest had taken.
“Fifty thousand francs!” muttered La Carconte when left alone; “it is a large sum of money, but it is not a fortune.” VOLUME TWO 20009m 20011m 20019m Chapter 28.
The Prison Register The day after that in which the scene we have just described had taken place on the road between Bellegarde and Beaucaire, a man of about thirty or two-and-thirty, dressed in a bright blue frock coat, nankeen trousers, and a white waistcoat, having the appearance and accent of an Englishman, presented himself before the mayor of Marseilles.
We are, and have been these ten years, connected with the house of Morrel & Son, of Marseilles.
We have a hundred thousand francs or thereabouts loaned on their securities, and we are a little uneasy at reports that have reached us that the firm is on the brink of ruin.
I have come, therefore, express from Rome, to ask you for information.” “Sir,” replied the mayor.
“I know very well that during the last four or five years misfortune has seemed to pursue M.
He has lost four or five vessels, and suffered by three or four bankruptcies; but it is not for me, although I am a creditor myself to the amount of ten thousand francs, to give any information as to the state of his finances.
Morrel, and I shall say that he is a man honorable to the last degree, and who has up to this time fulfilled every engagement with scrupulous punctuality.
M. de Boville was in his private room, and the Englishman, on perceiving him, made a gesture of surprise, which seemed to indicate that it was not the first time he had been in his presence.
As to M. de Boville, he was in such a state of despair, that it was evident all the faculties of his mind, absorbed in the thought which occupied him at the moment, did not allow either his memory or his imagination to stray to the past.
The Englishman, with the coolness of his nation, addressed him in terms nearly similar to those with which he had accosted the mayor of Marseilles.
“Oh, sir,” exclaimed M. de Boville, “your fears are unfortunately but too well founded, and you see before you a man in despair.
I had two hundred thousand francs placed in the hands of Morrel & Son; these two hundred thousand francs were the dowry of my daughter, who was to be married in a fortnight, and these two hundred thousand francs were payable, half on the 15th of this month, and the other half on the 15th of next month.
Morrel of my desire to have these payments punctually, and he has been here within the last half-hour to tell me that if his ship, the _Pharaon_, did not come into port on the 15th, he would be wholly unable to make this payment.” “But,” said the Englishman, “this looks very much like a suspension of payment.” “It looks more like bankruptcy!” exclaimed M. de Boville despairingly.
The Englishman appeared to reflect a moment, and then said, “From which it would appear, sir, that this credit inspires you with considerable apprehension?” “To tell you the truth, I consider it lost.” “Well, then, I will buy it of you!” “You?” “Yes, I!” “But at a tremendous discount, of course?” “No, for two hundred thousand francs.
Our house,” added the Englishman with a laugh, “does not do things in that way.” “And you will pay——” “Ready money.” 20023m And the Englishman drew from his pocket a bundle of bank-notes, which might have been twice the sum M. de Boville feared to lose.
A ray of joy passed across M. de Boville’s countenance, yet he made an effort at self-control, and said: “Sir, I ought to tell you that, in all probability, you will not realize six per cent of this sum.” “That’s no affair of mine,” replied the Englishman, “that is the affair of the house of Thomson & French, in whose name I act.
They have, perhaps, some motive to serve in hastening the ruin of a rival firm.
But all I know, sir, is, that I am ready to hand you over this sum in exchange for your assignment of the debt.
I only ask a brokerage.” “Of course, that is perfectly just,” cried M. de Boville.
“The commission is usually one and a half; will you have two—three—five per cent, or even more?
“Oh dear, yes, sir; the abbé’s dungeon was forty or fifty feet distant from that of one of Bonaparte’s emissaries,—one of those who had contributed the most to the return of the usurper in 1815, a very resolute and very dangerous man.” “Indeed!” said the Englishman.
“Yes,” replied M. de Boville; “I myself had occasion to see this man in 1816 or 1817, and we could only go into his dungeon with a file of soldiers.
That man made a deep impression on me; I shall never forget his countenance!” 20025m The Englishman smiled imperceptibly.
“And you say, sir,” he interposed, “that the two dungeons——” “Were separated by a distance of fifty feet; but it appears that this Edmond Dantès——” “This dangerous man’s name was——” “Edmond Dantès.
He, no doubt, thought that prisoners who died in the Château d’If were interred in an ordinary burial-ground, and he conveyed the dead man into his own cell, took his place in the sack in which they had sewed up the corpse, and awaited the moment of interment.” “It was a bold step, and one that showed some courage,” remarked the Englishman.
“As I have already told you, sir, he was a very dangerous man; and, fortunately, by his own act disembarrassed the government of the fears it had on his account.” “How was that?” “How?
Do you not comprehend?” “No.” “The Château d’If has no cemetery, and they simply throw the dead into the sea, after fastening a thirty-six-pound cannon-ball to their feet.” “Well?” observed the Englishman as if he were slow of comprehension.
“Well, they fastened a thirty-six-pound ball to his feet, and threw him into the sea.” “Really!” exclaimed the Englishman.
“Yes, sir,” continued the inspector of prisons.
“You may imagine the amazement of the fugitive when he found himself flung headlong over the rocks!
I should like to have seen his face at that moment.” “That would have been difficult.” “No matter,” replied De Boville, in supreme good-humor at the certainty of recovering his two hundred thousand francs,—“no matter, I can fancy it.” And he shouted with laughter.
“Yes, yes, the mortuary deposition.
You understand, Dantès’ relations, if he had any, might have some interest in knowing if he were dead or alive.” “So that now, if there were anything to inherit from him, they may do so with easy conscience.
He is dead, and no mistake about it.” “Oh, yes; and they may have the fact attested whenever they please.” “So be it,” said the Englishman.
“But to return to these registers.” “True, this story has diverted our attention from them.
So, sir, you wish to see all relating to the poor abbé, who really was gentleness itself.” “Yes, you will much oblige me.” “Go into my study here, and I will show it to you.” And they both entered M. de Boville’s study.
Everything was here arranged in perfect order; each register had its number, each file of papers its place.
The inspector begged the Englishman to seat himself in an armchair, and placed before him the register and documents relative to the Château d’If, giving him all the time he desired for the examination, while De Boville seated himself in a corner, and began to read his newspaper.
The Englishman easily found the entries relative to the Abbé Faria; but it seemed that the history which the inspector had related interested him greatly, for after having perused the first documents he turned over the leaves until he reached the deposition respecting Edmond Dantès.
There he found everything arranged in due order,—the accusation, examination, Morrel’s petition, M. de Villefort’s marginal notes.
This petition to Napoleon, kept back by Villefort, had become, under the second restoration, a terrible weapon against him in the hands of the king’s attorney.
He was no longer astonished when he searched on to find in the register this note, placed in a bracket against his name: Edmond Dantès.
An inveterate Bonapartist; took an active part in the return from the Island of Elba.
To be kept in strict solitary confinement, and to be closely watched and guarded.
As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that he might not disturb the Abbé Faria’s pupil in his researches, had seated himself in a corner, and was reading _Le Drapeau Blanc_.
“Thanks,” said the latter, closing the register with a slam, “I have all I want; now it is for me to perform my promise.
Give me a simple assignment of your debt; acknowledge therein the receipt of the cash, and I will hand you over the money.” He rose, gave his seat to M. de Boville, who took it without ceremony, and quickly drew up the required assignment, while the Englishman counted out the bank-notes on the other side of the desk.
The House of Morrel & Son Anyone who had quitted Marseilles a few years previously, well acquainted with the interior of Morrel’s warehouse, and had returned at this date, would have found a great change.
Instead of that air of life, of comfort, and of happiness that permeates a flourishing and prosperous business establishment—instead of merry faces at the windows, busy clerks hurrying to and fro in the long corridors—instead of the court filled with bales of goods, re-echoing with the cries and the jokes of porters, one would have immediately perceived all aspect of sadness and gloom.
Out of all the numerous clerks that used to fill the deserted corridor and the empty office, but two remained.
Cocles remained in M.
Morrel’s service, and a most singular change had taken place in his position; he had at the same time risen to the rank of cashier, and sunk to the rank of a servant.
He was, however, the same Cocles, good, patient, devoted, but inflexible on the subject of arithmetic, the only point on which he would have stood firm against the world, even against M.
Morrel; and strong in the multiplication-table, which he had at his fingers’ ends, no matter what scheme or what trap was laid to catch him.
In the midst of the disasters that befell the house, Cocles was the only one unmoved.
But this did not arise from a want of affection; on the contrary, from a firm conviction.
Like the rats that one by one forsake the doomed ship even before the vessel weighs anchor, so all the numerous clerks had by degrees deserted the office and the warehouse.
Cocles had seen them go without thinking of inquiring the cause of their departure.
Everything was as we have said, a question of arithmetic to Cocles, and during twenty years he had always seen all payments made with such exactitude, that it seemed as impossible to him that the house should stop payment, as it would to a miller that the river that had so long turned his mill should cease to flow.
Nothing had as yet occurred to shake Cocles’ belief; the last month’s payment had been made with the most scrupulous exactitude; Cocles had detected an overbalance of fourteen sous in his cash, and the same evening he had brought them to M.
Morrel, who, with a melancholy smile, threw them into an almost empty drawer, saying: “Thanks, Cocles; you are the pearl of cashiers.” Cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of M.
Morrel, himself the pearl of the honest men of Marseilles, flattered him more than a present of fifty crowns.
In order to meet the payments then due; he had collected all his resources, and, fearing lest the report of his distress should get bruited abroad at Marseilles when he was known to be reduced to such an extremity, he went to the Beaucaire fair to sell his wife’s and daughter’s jewels and a portion of his plate.
By this means the end of the month was passed, but his resources were now exhausted.
Credit, owing to the reports afloat, was no longer to be had; and to meet the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the present month, and the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the next month to M. de Boville, M.
Morrel had, in reality, no hope but the return of the _Pharaon_, of whose departure he had learnt from a vessel which had weighed anchor at the same time, and which had already arrived in harbor.
But this vessel which, like the _Pharaon_, came from Calcutta, had been in for a fortnight, while no intelligence had been received of the _Pharaon_. 20033m Such was the state of affairs when, the day after his interview with M. de Boville, the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French of Rome, presented himself at M.
Emmanuel received him; this young man was alarmed by the appearance of every new face, for every new face might be that of a new creditor, come in anxiety to question the head of the house.
The young man, wishing to spare his employer the pain of this interview, questioned the new-comer; but the stranger declared that he had nothing to say to M.
Emmanuel, and that his business was with M.
Emmanuel sighed, and summoned Cocles.
Cocles appeared, and the young man bade him conduct the stranger to M.
Cocles went first, and the stranger followed him.
On the staircase they met a beautiful girl of sixteen or seventeen, who looked with anxiety at the stranger.
Morrel is in his room, is he not, Mademoiselle Julie?” said the cashier.
“Yes; I think so, at least,” said the young girl hesitatingly.
“Go and see, Cocles, and if my father is there, announce this gentleman.” “It will be useless to announce me, mademoiselle,” returned the Englishman.
Morrel does not know my name; this worthy gentleman has only to announce the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French of Rome, with whom your father does business.” The young girl turned pale and continued to descend, while the stranger and Cocles continued to mount the staircase.
She entered the office where Emmanuel was, while Cocles, by the aid of a key he possessed, opened a door in the corner of a landing-place on the second staircase, conducted the stranger into an antechamber, opened a second door, which he closed behind him, and after having left the clerk of the house of Thomson & French alone, returned and signed to him that he could enter.
The Englishman entered, and found Morrel seated at a table, turning over the formidable columns of his ledger, which contained the list of his liabilities.
At the sight of the stranger, M.
Morrel closed the ledger, arose, and offered a seat to the stranger; and when he had seen him seated, resumed his own chair.
Fourteen years had changed the worthy merchant, who, in his thirty-sixth year at the opening of this history, was now in his fiftieth; his hair had turned white, time and sorrow had ploughed deep furrows on his brow, and his look, once so firm and penetrating, was now irresolute and wandering, as if he feared being forced to fix his attention on some particular thought or person.
The Englishman looked at him with an air of curiosity, evidently mingled with interest.
“Monsieur,” said Morrel, whose uneasiness was increased by this examination, “you wish to speak to me?” “Yes, monsieur; you are aware from whom I come?” “The house of Thomson & French; at least, so my cashier tells me.” “He has told you rightly.
The house of Thomson & French had 300,000 or 400,000 francs to pay this month in France; and, knowing your strict punctuality, have collected all the bills bearing your signature, and charged me as they became due to present them, and to employ the money otherwise.” Morrel sighed deeply, and passed his hand over his forehead, which was covered with perspiration.
“So then, sir,” said Morrel, “you hold bills of mine?” “Yes, and for a considerable sum.” “What is the amount?” asked Morrel with a voice he strove to render firm. 20035m “Here is,” said the Englishman, taking a quantity of papers from his pocket, “an assignment of 200,000 francs to our house by M. de Boville, the inspector of prisons, to whom they are due.
“Is this all?” “No, I have for the end of the month these bills which have been assigned to us by the house of Pascal, and the house of Wild & Turner of Marseilles, amounting to nearly 55,000 francs; in all, 287,500 francs.” It is impossible to describe what Morrel suffered during this enumeration.
“Two hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred francs,” repeated he.
“Yes, sir,” replied the Englishman.
“I will not,” continued he, after a moment’s silence, “conceal from you, that while your probity and exactitude up to this moment are universally acknowledged, yet the report is current in Marseilles that you are not able to meet your liabilities.” At this almost brutal speech Morrel turned deathly pale.
“Sir,” said he, “up to this time—and it is now more than four-and-twenty years since I received the direction of this house from my father, who had himself conducted it for five-and-thirty years—never has anything bearing the signature of Morrel & Son been dishonored.” “I know that,” replied the Englishman.
“But as a man of honor should answer another, tell me fairly, shall you pay these with the same punctuality?” Morrel shuddered, and looked at the man, who spoke with more assurance than he had hitherto shown.
“To questions frankly put,” said he, “a straightforward answer should be given.
Yes, I shall pay, if, as I hope, my vessel arrives safely; for its arrival will again procure me the credit which the numerous accidents, of which I have been the victim, have deprived me; but if the _Pharaon_ should be lost, and this last resource be gone——” The poor man’s eyes filled with tears.
“Well,” said the other, “if this last resource fail you?” “Well,” returned Morrel, “it is a cruel thing to be forced to say, but, already used to misfortune, I must habituate myself to shame.
I fear I shall be forced to suspend payment.” “Have you no friends who could assist you?” Morrel smiled mournfully.
Uncertainty is still hope.” Then in a low voice Morrel added,—“This delay is not natural.
The _Pharaon_ left Calcutta the 5th of February; she ought to have been here a month ago.” “What is that?” said the Englishman.
Morrel rose and advanced to the door; but his strength failed him and he sank into a chair.
The two men remained opposite one another, Morrel trembling in every limb, the stranger gazing at him with an air of profound pity.
The noise had ceased; but it seemed that Morrel expected something—something had occasioned the noise, and something must follow.
The stranger fancied he heard footsteps on the stairs; and that the footsteps, which were those of several persons, stopped at the door.
A key was inserted in the lock of the first door, and the creaking of hinges was audible.
“There are only two persons who have the key to that door,” murmured Morrel, “Cocles and Julie.” At this instant the second door opened, and the young girl, her eyes bathed with tears, appeared.
Morrel rose tremblingly, supporting himself by the arm of the chair.
“Oh, father!” said she, clasping her hands, “forgive your child for being the bearer of evil tidings.” Morrel again changed color.
“Oh, father, father!” murmured she, “courage!” “The _Pharaon_ has gone down, then?” said Morrel in a hoarse voice.
The young girl did not speak; but she made an affirmative sign with her head as she lay on her father’s breast.
“Saved,” said the girl; “saved by the crew of the vessel that has just entered the harbor.” Morrel raised his two hands to heaven with an expression of resignation and sublime gratitude.
“Thanks, my God,” said he, “at least thou strikest but me alone.” A tear moistened the eye of the phlegmatic Englishman.
“Come in, come in,” said Morrel, “for I presume you are all at the door.” Scarcely had he uttered those words when Madame Morrel entered weeping bitterly.
Emmanuel followed her, and in the antechamber were visible the rough faces of seven or eight half-naked sailors.
At the sight of these men the Englishman started and advanced a step; then restrained himself, and retired into the farthest and most obscure corner of the apartment.
Madame Morrel sat down by her husband and took one of his hands in hers, Julie still lay with her head on his shoulder, Emmanuel stood in the centre of the chamber and seemed to form the link between Morrel’s family and the sailors at the door.
“Draw nearer, Penelon,” said the young man, “and tell us all about it.” An old seaman, bronzed by the tropical sun, advanced, twirling the remains of a hat between his hands.
Morrel,” said he, as if he had just quitted Marseilles the previous evening, and had just returned from Aix or Toulon.
“Good-day, Penelon,” returned Morrel, who could not refrain from smiling through his tears, “where is the captain?” “The captain, M.
Morrel,—he has stayed behind sick at Palma; but please God, it won’t be much, and you will see him in a few days all alive and hearty.” “Well, now tell your story, Penelon.” 20039m Penelon rolled his quid in his cheek, placed his hand before his mouth, turned his head, and sent a long jet of tobacco-juice into the antechamber, advanced his foot, balanced himself, and began.
Morrel,” said he, “we were somewhere between Cape Blanc and Cape Boyador, sailing with a fair breeze, south-south-west after a week’s calm, when Captain Gaumard comes up to me—I was at the helm I should tell you—and says, ‘Penelon, what do you think of those clouds coming up over there?’ I was just then looking at them myself.
Why I think that they are rising faster than they have any business to do, and that they would not be so black if they didn’t mean mischief.’—‘That’s my opinion too,’ said the captain, ‘and I’ll take precautions accordingly.
We are carrying too much canvas.
Take in the studding-sails and stow the flying jib.’ It was time; the squall was on us, and the vessel began to heel.
‘Ah,’ said the captain, ‘we have still too much canvas set; all hands lower the mainsail!’ Five minutes after, it was down; and we sailed under mizzen-topsails and top-gallant sails.
‘Well, Penelon,’ said the captain, ‘what makes you shake your head?’ ‘Why,’ I says, ‘I still think you’ve got too much on.’ ‘I think you’re right,’ answered he, ‘we shall have a gale.’ ‘A gale?
More than that, we shall have a tempest, or I don’t know what’s what.’ You could see the wind coming like the dust at Montredon; luckily the captain understood his business.
‘Take in two reefs in the top-sails,’ cried the captain; ‘let go the bowlin’s, haul the brace, lower the top-gallant sails, haul out the reef-tackles on the yards.’” 20041m “That was not enough for those latitudes,” said the Englishman; “I should have taken four reefs in the topsails and furled the spanker.” His firm, sonorous, and unexpected voice made everyone start.
Penelon put his hand over his eyes, and then stared at the man who thus criticized the manœuvres of his captain.
“We did better than that, sir,” said the old sailor respectfully; “we put the helm up to run before the tempest; ten minutes after we struck our top-sails and scudded under bare poles.” “The vessel was very old to risk that,” said the Englishman.
“Eh, it was that that did the business; after pitching heavily for twelve hours we sprung a leak.
‘Penelon,’ said the captain, ‘I think we are sinking, give me the helm, and go down into the hold.’ I gave him the helm, and descended; there was already three feet of water.
‘I will blow the brains out of the first man who leaves the pump,’ said he.” “Well done!” said the Englishman. 20043m “There’s nothing gives you so much courage as good reasons,” continued the sailor; “and during that time the wind had abated, and the sea gone down, but the water kept rising; not much, only two inches an hour, but still it rose.
Morrel will have nothing to reproach us with, we have tried to save the ship, let us now save ourselves.
To the boats, my lads, as quick as you can.’ Now,” continued Penelon, “you see, M.
Morrel, a sailor is attached to his ship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to be told twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us, and seemed to say, ‘Get along—save yourselves.’ We soon launched the boat, and all eight of us got into it.
The captain descended last, or rather, he did not descend, he would not quit the vessel; so I took him round the waist, and threw him into the boat, and then I jumped after him.
It was time, for just as I jumped the deck burst with a noise like the broadside of a man-of-war.
As for us, we were three days without anything to eat or drink, so that we began to think of drawing lots who should feed the rest, when we saw _La Gironde_; we made signals of distress, she perceived us, made for us, and took us all on board.
Morrel, that’s the whole truth, on the honor of a sailor; is not it true, you fellows there?” A general murmur of approbation showed that the narrator had faithfully detailed their misfortunes and sufferings.
“At another time,” added he, “I should have said, Give them, besides, two hundred francs over as a present; but times are changed, and the little money that remains to me is not my own, so do not think me mean on this account.” Penelon turned to his companions, and exchanged a few words with them.
Penelon nearly swallowed his quid; fortunately he recovered.
Morrel, “I am not angry, quite the contrary, and I do not send you away; but I have no more ships, and therefore I do not want any sailors.” “No more ships!” returned Penelon; “well, then, you’ll build some; we’ll wait for you.” “I have no money to build ships with, Penelon,” said the poor owner mournfully, “so I cannot accept your kind offer.” “No more money?
Then you must not pay us; we can scud, like the _Pharaon_, under bare poles.” “Enough, enough!” cried Morrel, almost overpowered; “leave me, I pray you; we shall meet again in a happier time.
Emmanuel, go with them, and see that my orders are executed.” “At least, we shall see each other again, M.
Now go.” He made a sign to Cocles, who went first; the seamen followed him and Emmanuel brought up the rear.
“Now,” said the owner to his wife and daughter, “leave me; I wish to speak with this gentleman.” 20045m And he glanced towards the clerk of Thomson & French, who had remained motionless in the corner during this scene, in which he had taken no part, except the few words we have mentioned.
The two women looked at this person whose presence they had entirely forgotten, and retired; but, as she left the apartment, Julie gave the stranger a supplicating glance, to which he replied by a smile that an indifferent spectator would have been surprised to see on his stern features.
“Well, sir,” said Morrel, sinking into a chair, “you have heard all, and I have nothing further to tell you.” “I see,” returned the Englishman, “that a fresh and unmerited misfortune has overwhelmed you, and this only increases my desire to serve you.” “Oh, sir!” cried Morrel.
“Let me see,” continued the stranger, “I am one of your largest creditors.” “Your bills, at least, are the first that will fall due.” “Do you wish for time to pay?” “A delay would save my honor, and consequently my life.” “How long a delay do you wish for?” Morrel reflected.
“I will give you three,” replied the stranger.
“But,” asked Morrel, “will the house of Thomson & French consent?” “Oh, I take everything on myself.
Today is the 5th of June.” “Yes.” “Well, renew these bills up to the 5th of September; and on the 5th of September at eleven o’clock (the hand of the clock pointed to eleven), I shall come to receive the money.” “I shall expect you,” returned Morrel; “and I will pay you—or I shall be dead.” These last words were uttered in so low a tone that the stranger could not hear them.
The bills were renewed, the old ones destroyed, and the poor ship-owner found himself with three months before him to collect his resources.
The Englishman received his thanks with the phlegm peculiar to his nation; and Morrel, overwhelming him with grateful blessings, conducted him to the staircase.
The stranger met Julie on the stairs; she pretended to be descending, but in reality she was waiting for him.
“Oh, sir”—said she, clasping her hands.
“Mademoiselle,” said the stranger, “one day you will receive a letter signed ‘Sinbad the Sailor.’ Do exactly what the letter bids you, however strange it may appear.” “Yes, sir,” returned Julie.
Adieu, mademoiselle.
Continue to be the good, sweet girl you are at present, and I have great hopes that Heaven will reward you by giving you Emmanuel for a husband.” Julie uttered a faint cry, blushed like a rose, and leaned against the baluster.
The stranger waved his hand, and continued to descend.
“Come with me, my friend,” said the Englishman; “I wish to speak to you.” Chapter 30.
The Fifth of September The extension provided for by the agent of Thomson & French, at the moment when Morrel expected it least, was to the poor shipowner so decided a stroke of good fortune that he almost dared to believe that fate was at length grown weary of wasting her spite upon him.
The same day he told his wife, Emmanuel, and his daughter all that had occurred; and a ray of hope, if not of tranquillity, returned to the family.
Unfortunately, however, Morrel had not only engagements with the house of Thomson & French, who had shown themselves so considerate towards him; and, as he had said, in business he had correspondents, and not friends.
The bills signed by Morrel were presented at his office with scrupulous exactitude, and, thanks to the delay granted by the Englishman, were paid by Cocles with equal punctuality.
Cocles thus remained in his accustomed tranquillity.
It was Morrel alone who remembered with alarm, that if he had to repay on the 15th the 50,000 francs of M. de Boville, and on the 30th the 32,500 francs of bills, for which, as well as the debt due to the inspector of prisons, he had time granted, he must be a ruined man.
The opinion of all the commercial men was that, under the reverses which had successively weighed down Morrel, it was impossible for him to remain solvent.
Great, therefore, was the astonishment when at the end of the month, he cancelled all his obligations with his usual punctuality.
Still confidence was not restored to all minds, and the general opinion was that the complete ruin of the unfortunate shipowner had been postponed only until the end of the month.
The month passed, and Morrel made extraordinary efforts to get in all his resources.
Formerly his paper, at any date, was taken with confidence, and was even in request.
Morrel now tried to negotiate bills at ninety days only, and none of the banks would give him credit.
Fortunately, Morrel had some funds coming in on which he could rely; and, as they reached him, he found himself in a condition to meet his engagements when the end of July came.
The agent of Thomson & French had not been again seen at Marseilles; the day after, or two days after his visit to Morrel, he had disappeared; and as in that city he had had no intercourse but with the mayor, the inspector of prisons, and M.
Morrel, his departure left no trace except in the memories of these three persons.
As to the sailors of the _Pharaon_, they must have found snug berths elsewhere, for they also had disappeared.
Captain Gaumard, recovered from his illness, had returned from Palma.
He delayed presenting himself at Morrel’s, but the owner, hearing of his arrival, went to see him.
The worthy shipowner knew, from Penelon’s recital, of the captain’s brave conduct during the storm, and tried to console him.
As he descended the staircase, Morrel met Penelon, who was going up.
When he saw his employer, the worthy tar seemed much embarrassed, drew on one side into the corner of the landing-place, passed his quid from one cheek to the other, stared stupidly with his great eyes, and only acknowledged the squeeze of the hand which Morrel as usual gave him by a slight pressure in return.
Morrel attributed Penelon’s embarrassment to the elegance of his attire; it was evident the good fellow had not gone to such an expense on his own account; he was, no doubt, engaged on board some other vessel, and thus his bashfulness arose from the fact of his not having, if we may so express ourselves, worn mourning for the _Pharaon_ longer.
Perhaps he had come to tell Captain Gaumard of his good luck, and to offer him employment from his new master.
“Worthy fellows!” said Morrel, as he went away, “may your new master love you as I loved you, and be more fortunate than I have been!” 20049m August rolled by in unceasing efforts on the part of Morrel to renew his credit or revive the old.
On the 20th of August it was known at Marseilles that he had left town in the mailcoach, and then it was said that the bills would go to protest at the end of the month, and that Morrel had gone away and left his chief clerk Emmanuel, and his cashier Cocles, to meet the creditors.
But, contrary to all expectation, when the 31st of August came, the house opened as usual, and Cocles appeared behind the grating of the counter, examined all bills presented with the usual scrutiny, and, from first to last, paid all with the usual precision.
There came in, moreover, two drafts which M.
Morrel had fully anticipated, and which Cocles paid as punctually as the bills which the shipowner had accepted.
All this was incomprehensible, and then, with the tenacity peculiar to prophets of bad news, the failure was put off until the end of September.
On the 1st, Morrel returned; he was awaited by his family with extreme anxiety, for from this journey to Paris they hoped great things.
Morrel had thought of Danglars, who was now immensely rich, and had lain under great obligations to Morrel in former days, since to him it was owing that Danglars entered the service of the Spanish banker, with whom he had laid the foundations of his vast wealth.
It was said at this moment that Danglars was worth from six to eight millions of francs, and had unlimited credit.
Danglars, then, without taking a crown from his pocket, could save Morrel; he had but to pass his word for a loan, and Morrel was saved.
Morrel had long thought of Danglars, but had kept away from some instinctive motive, and had delayed as long as possible availing himself of this last resource.
And Morrel was right, for he returned home crushed by the humiliation of a refusal.
Yet, on his arrival, Morrel did not utter a complaint, or say one harsh word.
He embraced his weeping wife and daughter, pressed Emmanuel’s hand with friendly warmth, and then going to his private room on the second floor had sent for Cocles.
“Then,” said the two women to Emmanuel, “we are indeed ruined.” It was agreed in a brief council held among them, that Julie should write to her brother, who was in garrison at Nîmes, to come to them as speedily as possible.
The poor women felt instinctively that they required all their strength to support the blow that impended.
Besides, Maximilian Morrel, though hardly two-and-twenty, had great influence over his father.
At the time when he decided on his profession his father had no desire to choose for him, but had consulted young Maximilian’s taste.
He had at once declared for a military life, and had in consequence studied hard, passed brilliantly through the Polytechnic School, and left it as sub-lieutenant of the 53rd of the line.
For a year he had held this rank, and expected promotion on the first vacancy.
In his regiment Maximilian Morrel was noted for his rigid observance, not only of the obligations imposed on a soldier, but also of the duties of a man; and he thus gained the name of “the stoic.” We need hardly say that many of those who gave him this epithet repeated it because they had heard it, and did not even know what it meant.
They had not mistaken the gravity of this event, for the moment after Morrel had entered his private office with Cocles, Julie saw the latter leave it pale, trembling, and his features betraying the utmost consternation.
She would have questioned him as he passed by her, but the worthy creature hastened down the staircase with unusual precipitation, and only raised his hands to heaven and exclaimed: “Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, what a dreadful misfortune!
Who could ever have believed it!” A moment afterwards Julie saw him go upstairs carrying two or three heavy ledgers, a portfolio, and a bag of money.
Morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, and counted the money.
All his funds amounted to 6,000 or 8,000 francs, his bills receivable up to the 5th to 4,000 or 5,000, which, making the best of everything, gave him 14,000 francs to meet debts amounting to 287,500 francs.
He had not even the means for making a possible settlement on account.
However, when Morrel went down to his dinner, he appeared very calm.
This calmness was more alarming to the two women than the deepest dejection would have been.
After dinner Morrel usually went out and used to take his coffee at the club of the Phocéens, and read the _Semaphore_; this day he did not leave the house, but returned to his office.
As to Cocles, he seemed completely bewildered.
For part of the day he went into the courtyard, seated himself on a stone with his head bare and exposed to the blazing sun.
Emmanuel tried to comfort the women, but his eloquence faltered.
The young man was too well acquainted with the business of the house, not to feel that a great catastrophe hung over the Morrel family.
Night came, the two women had watched, hoping that when he left his room Morrel would come to them, but they heard him pass before their door, and trying to conceal the noise of his footsteps.
They listened; he went into his sleeping-room, and fastened the door inside.
Madame Morrel sent her daughter to bed, and half an hour after Julie had retired, she rose, took off her shoes, and went stealthily along the passage, to see through the keyhole what her husband was doing.
In the passage she saw a retreating shadow; it was Julie, who, uneasy herself, had anticipated her mother.
They had understood each other without speaking.
Madame Morrel looked again through the keyhole, Morrel was writing; but Madame Morrel remarked, what her daughter had not observed, that her husband was writing on stamped paper.
The terrible idea that he was writing his will flashed across her; she shuddered, and yet had not strength to utter a word.
Morrel seemed as calm as ever, went into his office as usual, came to his breakfast punctually, and then, after dinner, he placed his daughter beside him, took her head in his arms, and held her for a long time against his bosom.
In the evening, Julie told her mother, that although he was apparently so calm, she had noticed that her father’s heart beat violently.
On the evening of the 4th of September, M.
Morrel asked his daughter for the key of his study.
Julie trembled at this request, which seemed to her of bad omen.
Why did her father ask for this key which she always kept, and which was only taken from her in childhood as a punishment?
“What have I done wrong, father,” she said, “that you should take this key from me?” “Nothing, my dear,” replied the unhappy man, the tears starting to his eyes at this simple question,—“nothing, only I want it.” Julie made a pretence to feel for the key.
And she went out, but instead of going to her apartment she hastened to consult Emmanuel.
“Do not give this key to your father,” said he, “and tomorrow morning, if possible, do not quit him for a moment.” She questioned Emmanuel, but he knew nothing, or would not say what he knew.
During the night, between the 4th and 5th of September, Madame Morrel remained listening for every sound, and, until three o’clock in the morning, she heard her husband pacing the room in great agitation.
The mother and daughter passed the night together.
They had expected Maximilian since the previous evening.
He was calm; but the agitation of the night was legible in his pale and careworn visage.
Morrel was kinder to his wife, more affectionate to his daughter, than he had ever been.
Julie, mindful of Emmanuel’s request, was following her father when he quitted the room, but he said to her quickly: “Remain with your mother, dearest.” Julie wished to accompany him.
This was the first time Morrel had ever so spoken, but he said it in a tone of paternal kindness, and Julie did not dare to disobey.
She remained at the same spot standing mute and motionless.
An instant afterwards the door opened, she felt two arms encircle her, and a mouth pressed her forehead.
She looked up and uttered an exclamation of joy. 20053m “Maximilian, my dearest brother!” she cried.
“Mother,” said the young man, looking alternately at Madame Morrel and her daughter, “what has occurred—what has happened?
Your letter has frightened me, and I have come hither with all speed.” “Julie,” said Madame Morrel, making a sign to the young man, “go and tell your father that Maximilian has just arrived.” The young lady rushed out of the apartment, but on the first step of the staircase she found a man holding a letter in his hand.
“Are you not Mademoiselle Julie Morrel?” inquired the man, with a strong Italian accent.
“Yes, sir,” replied Julie with hesitation; “what is your pleasure?
“It concerns the best interests of your father,” said the messenger.
She opened it quickly and read: “Go this moment to the Allées de Meilhan, enter the house No. 15, ask the porter for the key of the room on the fifth floor, enter the apartment, take from the corner of the mantelpiece a purse netted in red silk, and give it to your father.
It is important that he should receive it before eleven o’clock.
You promised to obey me implicitly.
“Sinbad the Sailor.” The young girl uttered a joyful cry, raised her eyes, looked round to question the messenger, but he had disappeared.
She cast her eyes again over the note to peruse it a second time, and saw there was a postscript.
She read: “It is important that you should fulfil this mission in person and alone.
If you go accompanied by any other person, or should anyone else go in your place, the porter will reply that he does not know anything about it.” This postscript decreased greatly the young girl’s happiness.
Her innocence had kept her in ignorance of the dangers that might assail a young girl of her age.
But there is no need to know danger in order to fear it; indeed, it may be observed, that it is usually unknown perils that inspire the greatest terror.
Julie hesitated, and resolved to take counsel.
Yet, through a singular impulse, it was neither to her mother nor her brother that she applied, but to Emmanuel.
She hastened down and told him what had occurred on the day when the agent of Thomson & French had come to her father’s, related the scene on the staircase, repeated the promise she had made, and showed him the letter.
“You must go, then, mademoiselle,” said Emmanuel.
“Go there?” murmured Julie.
“Yes; I will accompany you.” “But did you not read that I must be alone?” said Julie.
“I will await you at the corner of the Rue du Musée, and if you are so long absent as to make me uneasy, I will hasten to rejoin you, and woe to him of whom you shall have cause to complain to me!” “Then, Emmanuel?” said the young girl with hesitation, “it is your opinion that I should obey this invitation?” “Yes.
Did not the messenger say your father’s safety depended upon it?” “But what danger threatens him, then, Emmanuel?” she asked.
Emmanuel hesitated a moment, but his desire to make Julie decide immediately made him reply.
During this time, Madame Morrel had told her son everything.
The young man knew quite well that, after the succession of misfortunes which had befallen his father, great changes had taken place in the style of living and housekeeping; but he did not know that matters had reached such a point.
He was thunderstruck.
Then, rushing hastily out of the apartment, he ran upstairs, expecting to find his father in his study, but he rapped there in vain.
Morrel had returned to his bedchamber, which he was only this moment quitting.
Morrel uttered a cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of whose arrival he was ignorant.
He remained motionless on the spot, pressing with his left hand something he had concealed under his coat.
Maximilian sprang down the staircase, and threw his arms round his father’s neck; but suddenly he recoiled, and placed his right hand on Morrel’s breast.
“Father,” he exclaimed, turning pale as death, “what are you going to do with that brace of pistols under your coat?” “Oh, this is what I feared!” said Morrel.
“Father, father, in Heaven’s name,” exclaimed the young man, “what are these weapons for?” “Maximilian,” replied Morrel, looking fixedly at his son, “you are a man, and a man of honor.
Come, and I will explain to you.” And with a firm step Morrel went up to his study, while Maximilian followed him, trembling as he went.
Morrel opened the door, and closed it behind his son; then, crossing the anteroom, went to his desk on which he placed the pistols, and pointed with his finger to an open ledger.
All he possessed was 15,257 francs.
The young man was overwhelmed as he read.
What need he add to such a desperate proof in figures?
“And have you done all that is possible, father, to meet this disastrous result?” asked the young man, after a moment’s pause.
“You have no money coming in on which you can rely?” “None.” “You have exhausted every resource?” “All.” “And in half an hour,” said Maximilian in a gloomy voice, “our name is dishonored!” “Blood washes out dishonor,” said Morrel.
“You are right, father; I understand you.” Then extending his hand towards one of the pistols, he said, “There is one for you and one for me—thanks!” Morrel caught his hand.
“Father,” he said, “do you reflect that you are bidding me to live?” “Yes, I do so bid you,” answered Morrel, “it is your duty.
You have a calm, strong mind, Maximilian.
Maximilian, you are no ordinary man.
I make no requests or commands; I only ask you to examine my position as if it were your own, and then judge for yourself.” The young man reflected for a moment, then an expression of sublime resignation appeared in his eyes, and with a slow and sad gesture he took off his two epaulets, the insignia of his rank.
“Be it so, then, my father,” he said, extending his hand to Morrel, “die in peace, my father; I will live.” Morrel was about to cast himself on his knees before his son, but Maximilian caught him in his arms, and those two noble hearts were pressed against each other for a moment.
“You know it is not my fault,” said Morrel. 20057m Maximilian smiled.
“I know, father, you are the most honorable man I have ever known.” “Good, my son.
Then do your best to keep our name free from dishonor.
Go to work, labor, young man, struggle ardently and courageously; live, yourself, your mother and sister, with the most rigid economy, so that from day to day the property of those whom I leave in your hands may augment and fructify.
If, on the contrary, I die, remember, Maximilian, my corpse is that of an honest but unfortunate man.
Living, my best friends would avoid my house; dead, all Marseilles will follow me in tears to my last home.
Living, you would feel shame at my name; dead, you may raise your head and say, ‘I am the son of him you killed, because, for the first time, he has been compelled to break his word.’” The young man uttered a groan, but appeared resigned.
“And now,” said Morrel, “leave me alone, and endeavor to keep your mother and sister away.” “Will you not see my sister once more?” asked Maximilian.
A last but final hope was concealed by the young man in the effect of this interview, and therefore he had suggested it.
“I saw her this morning, and bade her adieu.” “Have you no particular commands to leave with me, my father?” inquired Maximilian in a faltering voice.
“Yes; my son, and a sacred command.” “Say it, my father.” “The house of Thomson & French is the only one who, from humanity, or, it may be, selfishness—it is not for me to read men’s hearts—has had any pity for me.
Let this house be the first repaid, my son, and respect this man.” “Father, I will,” said Maximilian.
You will find my will in the secretaire in my bedroom.” The young man remained standing and motionless, having but the force of will and not the power of execution.
“Hear me, Maximilian,” said his father.
When his son had left him, Morrel remained an instant standing with his eyes fixed on the door; then putting forth his arm, he pulled the bell.
After a moment’s interval, Cocles appeared.
It was no longer the same man—the fearful revelations of the three last days had crushed him.
This thought—the house of Morrel is about to stop payment—bent him to the earth more than twenty years would otherwise have done.
“My worthy Cocles,” said Morrel in a tone impossible to describe, “do you remain in the antechamber.
When the gentleman who came three months ago—the agent of Thomson & French—arrives, announce his arrival to me.” Cocles made no reply; he made a sign with his head, went into the anteroom, and seated himself.
The hand moved on with incredible rapidity, he seemed to see its motion.
He was still comparatively young, he was surrounded by the loving care of a devoted family, but he had convinced himself by a course of reasoning, illogical perhaps, yet certainly plausible, that he must separate himself from all he held dear in the world, even life itself.
To form the slightest idea of his feelings, one must have seen his face with its expression of enforced resignation and its tear-moistened eyes raised to heaven.
The pistols were loaded; he stretched forth his hand, took one up, and murmured his daughter’s name.
It seemed to him as if he had not taken a sufficient farewell of his beloved daughter.
Then he turned again to the clock, counting time now not by minutes, but by seconds.
He took up the deadly weapon again, his lips parted and his eyes fixed on the clock, and then shuddered at the click of the trigger as he cocked the pistol.
At this moment of mortal anguish the cold sweat came forth upon his brow, a pang stronger than death clutched at his heart-strings.
He heard the door of the staircase creak on its hinges—the clock gave its warning to strike eleven—the door of his study opened.
Morrel did not turn round—he expected these words of Cocles, “The agent of Thomson & French.” He placed the muzzle of the pistol between his teeth.
Suddenly he heard a cry—it was his daughter’s voice.
“My father!” cried the young girl, out of breath, and half dead with joy—“saved, you are saved!” And she threw herself into his arms, holding in her extended hand a red, netted silk purse. 20061m “Saved, my child!” said Morrel; “what do you mean?” “Yes, saved—saved!
Morrel took the purse, and started as he did so, for a vague remembrance reminded him that it once belonged to himself.
At one end was the receipted bill for the 287,000 francs, and at the other was a diamond as large as a hazel-nut, with these words on a small slip of parchment: _Julie’s Dowry_.
“Explain, my child,” he said, “Explain, my child,” he said, “explain—where did you find this purse?” “In a house in the Allées de Meilhan, No. 15, on the corner of a mantelpiece in a small room on the fifth floor.” “But,” cried Morrel, “this purse is not yours!” Julie handed to her father the letter she had received in the morning.
“Emmanuel accompanied me, father.
He was to have waited for me at the corner of the Rue du Musée, but, strange to say, he was not there when I returned.” “Monsieur Morrel!” exclaimed a voice on the stairs; “Monsieur Morrel!” “It is his voice!” said Julie.
At this moment Emmanuel entered, his countenance full of animation and joy.
Are you mad, Emmanuel?
The _Pharaon_ is entering the harbor!” Morrel fell back in his chair, his strength was failing him; his understanding weakened by such events, refused to comprehend such incredible, unheard-of, fabulous facts.
“Father,” cried Maximilian, “how could you say the _Pharaon_ was lost?
The lookout has signalled her, and they say she is now coming into port.” 20063m “My dear friends,” said Morrel, “if this be so, it must be a miracle of heaven!
Impossible, impossible!” But what was real and not less incredible was the purse he held in his hand, the acceptance receipted—the splendid diamond.
“Ah, sir,” exclaimed Cocles, “what can it mean?—the _Pharaon_?” “Come, dear ones,” said Morrel, rising from his seat, “let us go and see, and Heaven have pity upon us if it be false intelligence!” They all went out, and on the stairs met Madame Morrel, who had been afraid to go up into the study.
And, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of Saint-Jean, was a ship bearing on her stern these words, printed in white letters, “The _Pharaon_, Morrel & Son, of Marseilles.” She was the exact duplicate of the other _Pharaon_, and loaded, as that had been, with cochineal and indigo.
To doubt any longer was impossible; there was the evidence of the senses, and ten thousand persons who came to corroborate the testimony.
“And now,” said the unknown, “farewell kindness, humanity, and gratitude!
Farewell to all the feelings that expand the heart!
I have been Heaven’s substitute to recompense the good—now the god of vengeance yields to me his power to punish the wicked!” At these words he gave a signal, and, as if only awaiting this signal, the yacht instantly put out to sea.
Italy: Sinbad the Sailor Towards the beginning of the year 1838, two young men belonging to the first society of Paris, the Viscount Albert de Morcerf and the Baron Franz d’Épinay, were at Florence.
They had agreed to see the Carnival at Rome that year, and that Franz, who for the last three or four years had inhabited Italy, should act as _cicerone_ to Albert.
As it is no inconsiderable affair to spend the Carnival at Rome, especially when you have no great desire to sleep on the Piazza del Popolo, or the Campo Vaccino, they wrote to Signor Pastrini, the proprietor of the Hôtel de Londres, Piazza di Spagna, to reserve comfortable apartments for them.
Signor Pastrini replied that he had only two rooms and a parlor on the third floor, which he offered at the low charge of a louis per diem.
They accepted his offer; but wishing to make the best use of the time that was left, Albert started for Naples.
As for Franz, he remained at Florence, and after having passed a few days in exploring the paradise of the Cascine, and spending two or three evenings at the houses of the Florentine nobility, he took a fancy into his head (having already visited Corsica, the cradle of Bonaparte) to visit Elba, the waiting-place of Napoleon.
One evening he cast off the painter of a sailboat from the iron ring that secured it to the dock at Leghorn, wrapped himself in his coat and lay down, and said to the crew,—“To the Island of Elba!” The boat shot out of the harbor like a bird and the next morning Franz disembarked at Porto-Ferrajo.
He traversed the island, after having followed the traces which the footsteps of the giant have left, and re-embarked for Marciana.
Two hours after he again landed at Pianosa, where he was assured that red partridges abounded.
The sport was bad; Franz only succeeded in killing a few partridges, and, like every unsuccessful sportsman, he returned to the boat very much out of temper.
“Ah, if your excellency chose,” said the captain, “you might have capital sport.” “Where?” “Do you see that island?” continued the captain, pointing to a conical pile rising from the indigo sea.
“Well, what is this island?” “The Island of Monte Cristo.” “But I have no permission to shoot over this island.” “Your excellency does not require a permit, for the island is uninhabited.” “Ah, indeed!” said the young man.
“A desert island in the midst of the Mediterranean must be a curiosity.” “It is very natural; this island is a mass of rocks, and does not contain an acre of land capable of cultivation.” “To whom does this island belong?” “To Tuscany.” “What game shall I find there!” “Thousands of wild goats.” “Who live upon the stones, I suppose,” said Franz with an incredulous smile.
Upon his answer in the affirmative, the sailors exchanged a few words together in a low tone.
That puts a different face on the matter.
Why, that’s as long as the Almighty took to make the world!
Too long a wait—too long.” “But who will say your excellency has been to Monte Cristo?” “Oh, I shall not,” cried Franz.
“Nor I, nor I,” chorused the sailors.
“Then steer for Monte Cristo.” The captain gave his orders, the helm was put up, and the boat was soon sailing in the direction of the island.
Franz waited until all was in order, and when the sail was filled, and the four sailors had taken their places—three forward, and one at the helm—he resumed the conversation.
“Yes, why?” “Because, in the first place, they transfer from the vessel to their own boat whatever they think worth taking, then they bind the crew hand and foot, they attach to everyone’s neck a four-and-twenty-pound ball, a large hole is chopped in the vessel’s bottom, and then they leave her.
Soon the water rushes out of the scupper-holes like a whale spouting, the vessel gives a last groan, spins round and round, and disappears, forming a vast whirlpool in the ocean, and then all is over, so that in five minutes nothing but the eye of God can see the vessel where she lies at the bottom of the sea.
Do you understand now,” said the captain, “why no complaints are made to the government, and why the vessel never reaches port?” It is probable that if Gaetano had related this previous to proposing the expedition, Franz would have hesitated, but now that they had started, he thought it would be cowardly to draw back.
He was one of those men who do not rashly court danger, but if danger presents itself, combat it with the most unalterable coolness.
Calm and resolute, he treated any peril as he would an adversary in a duel,—calculated its probable method of approach; retreated, if at all, as a point of strategy and not from cowardice; was quick to see an opening for attack, and won victory at a single thrust.
As they drew near the island seemed to lift from the sea, and the air was so clear that they could already distinguish the rocks heaped on one another, like cannon balls in an arsenal, with green bushes and trees growing in the crevices.
As for the sailors, although they appeared perfectly tranquil yet it was evident that they were on the alert, and that they carefully watched the glassy surface over which they were sailing, and on which a few fishing-boats, with their white sails, were alone visible.
They were within fifteen miles of Monte Cristo when the sun began to set behind Corsica, whose mountains appeared against the sky, showing their rugged peaks in bold relief; this mass of rock, like the giant Adamastor, rose dead ahead, a formidable barrier, and intercepting the light that gilded its massive peaks so that the voyagers were in shadow.
Fortunately, the mariners were used to these latitudes, and knew every rock in the Tuscan Archipelago; for in the midst of this obscurity Franz was not without uneasiness—Corsica had long since disappeared, and Monte Cristo itself was invisible; but the sailors seemed, like the lynx, to see in the dark, and the pilot who steered did not evince the slightest hesitation.
An hour had passed since the sun had set, when Franz fancied he saw, at a quarter of a mile to the left, a dark mass, but he could not precisely make out what it was, and fearing to excite the mirth of the sailors by mistaking a floating cloud for land, he remained silent; suddenly a great light appeared on the strand; land might resemble a cloud, but the fire was not a meteor.
“Hush!” said the captain; “it is a fire.” “But you told me the island was uninhabited?” “I said there were no fixed habitations on it, but I said also that it served sometimes as a harbor for smugglers.” “And for pirates?” “And for pirates,” returned Gaetano, repeating Franz’s words.
“It is for that reason I have given orders to pass the island, for, as you see, the fire is behind us.” “But this fire?” continued Franz.
“It seems to me rather reassuring than otherwise; men who did not wish to be seen would not light a fire.” “Oh, that goes for nothing,” said Gaetano.
“If you can guess the position of the island in the darkness, you will see that the fire cannot be seen from the side or from Pianosa, but only from the sea.” “You think, then, this fire indicates the presence of unpleasant neighbors?” “That is what we must find out,” returned Gaetano, fixing his eyes on this terrestrial star.
“How can you find out?” “You shall see.” Gaetano consulted with his companions, and after five minutes’ discussion a manœuvre was executed which caused the vessel to tack about, they returned the way they had come, and in a few minutes the fire disappeared, hidden by an elevation of the land.
The pilot again changed the course of the boat, which rapidly approached the island, and was soon within fifty paces of it.
Gaetano, who had proposed the expedition, had taken all the responsibility on himself; the four sailors fixed their eyes on him, while they got out their oars and held themselves in readiness to row away, which, thanks to the darkness, would not be difficult.
As for Franz, he examined his arms with the utmost coolness; he had two double-barrelled guns and a rifle; he loaded them, looked at the priming, and waited quietly.
This track soon disappeared; it was evident that he had touched the shore.
Everyone on board remained motionless for half an hour, when the same luminous track was again observed, and the swimmer was soon on board.
“Well?” exclaimed Franz and the sailors in unison.
“They are Spanish smugglers,” said he; “they have with them two Corsican bandits.” “And what are these Corsican bandits doing here with Spanish smugglers?” “Alas,” returned the captain with an accent of the most profound pity, “we ought always to help one another.
Very often the bandits are hard pressed by gendarmes or carbineers; well, they see a vessel, and good fellows like us on board, they come and demand hospitality of us; you can’t refuse help to a poor hunted devil; we receive them, and for greater security we stand out to sea.
This costs us nothing, and saves the life, or at least the liberty, of a fellow-creature, who on the first occasion returns the service by pointing out some safe spot where we can land our goods without interruption.” “Ah!” said Franz, “then you are a smuggler occasionally, Gaetano?” “Your excellency, we must live somehow,” returned the other, smiling impenetrably.
“Then you know the men who are now on Monte Cristo?” “Oh, yes, we sailors are like freemasons, and recognize each other by signs.” “And do you think we have nothing to fear if we land?” “Nothing at all; smugglers are not thieves.” “But these two Corsican bandits?” said Franz, calculating the chances of peril.
“It is not their fault that they are bandits, but that of the authorities.” “How so?” “Because they are pursued for having made a stiff, as if it was not in a Corsican’s nature to revenge himself.” “What do you mean by having made a stiff?—having assassinated a man?” said Franz, continuing his investigation.
“I mean that they have killed an enemy, which is a very different thing,” returned the captain.
“Well,” said the young man, “let us demand hospitality of these smugglers and bandits.
For a man who, like Franz, viewed his position in its true light, it was a grave one.
He was alone in the darkness with sailors whom he did not know, and who had no reason to be devoted to him; who knew that he had several thousand francs in his belt, and who had often examined his weapons,—which were very beautiful,—if not with envy, at least with curiosity.
On the other hand, he was about to land, without any other escort than these men, on an island which had, indeed, a very religious name, but which did not seem to Franz likely to afford him much hospitality, thanks to the smugglers and bandits.
The history of the scuttled vessels, which had appeared improbable during the day, seemed very probable at night; placed as he was between two possible sources of danger, he kept his eye on the crew, and his gun in his hand.
The sailors had again hoisted sail, and the vessel was once more cleaving the waves.
Through the darkness Franz, whose eyes were now more accustomed to it, could see the looming shore along which the boat was sailing, and then, as they rounded a rocky point, he saw the fire more brilliant than ever, and about it five or six persons seated.
The blaze illumined the sea for a hundred paces around.
Gaetano skirted the light, carefully keeping the boat in the shadow; then, when they were opposite the fire, he steered to the centre of the circle, singing a fishing song, of which his companions sung the chorus.
At the first words of the song the men seated round the fire arose and approached the landing-place, their eyes fixed on the boat, evidently seeking to know who the new-comers were and what were their intentions.
They soon appeared satisfied and returned (with the exception of one, who remained at the shore) to their fire, at which the carcass of a goat was roasting.
When the boat was within twenty paces of the shore, the man on the beach, who carried a carbine, presented arms after the manner of a sentinel, and cried, “Who comes there?” in Sardinian.
Gaetano then exchanged a few words with this man which the traveller did not understand, but which evidently concerned him.
“Will your excellency give your name, or remain _incognito_?” asked the captain.
“My name must rest unknown,” replied Franz; “merely say I am a Frenchman travelling for pleasure.” As soon as Gaetano had transmitted this answer, the sentinel gave an order to one of the men seated round the fire, who rose and disappeared among the rocks.
Not a word was spoken, everyone seemed occupied, Franz with his disembarkment, the sailors with their sails, the smugglers with their goat; but in the midst of all this carelessness it was evident that they mutually observed each other.
The sailors did not wait for a second invitation; four strokes of the oar brought them to land; Gaetano sprang to shore, exchanged a few words with the sentinel, then his comrades disembarked, and lastly came Franz.
One of his guns was swung over his shoulder, Gaetano had the other, and a sailor held his rifle; his dress, half artist, half dandy, did not excite any suspicion, and, consequently, no disquietude.
The boat was moored to the shore, and they advanced a few paces to find a comfortable bivouac; but, doubtless, the spot they chose did not suit the smuggler who filled the post of sentinel, for he cried out: “Not that way, if you please.” Gaetano faltered an excuse, and advanced to the opposite side, while two sailors kindled torches at the fire to light them on their way.
They advanced about thirty paces, and then stopped at a small esplanade surrounded with rocks, in which seats had been cut, not unlike sentry-boxes.
Around in the crevices of the rocks grew a few dwarf oaks and thick bushes of myrtles.
Franz lowered a torch, and saw by the mass of cinders that had accumulated that he was not the first to discover this retreat, which was, doubtless, one of the halting-places of the wandering visitors of Monte Cristo.
As for his suspicions, once on _terra firma_, once that he had seen the indifferent, if not friendly, appearance of his hosts, his anxiety had quite disappeared, or rather, at sight of the goat, had turned to appetite.
He mentioned this to Gaetano, who replied that nothing could be more easy than to prepare a supper when they had in their boat, bread, wine, half a dozen partridges, and a good fire to roast them by.
“Besides,” added he, “if the smell of their roast meat tempts you, I will go and offer them two of our birds for a slice.” “You are a born diplomat,” returned Franz; “go and try.” Meanwhile the sailors had collected dried sticks and branches with which they made a fire.
Franz waited impatiently, inhaling the aroma of the roasted meat, when the captain returned with a mysterious air.
Has he built one here, then?” “No, but he has a very comfortable one all the same, so they say.” “You know this chief, then?” “I have heard talk of him.” “Favorably or otherwise?” “Both.” “The deuce!—and what is this condition?” “That you are blindfolded, and do not take off the bandage until he himself bids you.” Franz looked at Gaetano, to see, if possible, what he thought of this proposal.
“What do they say?” “That this chief inhabits a cavern to which the Pitti Palace is nothing.” “What nonsense!” said Franz, reseating himself.
“It is no nonsense; it is quite true.
Gaetano departed with the reply.
Franz was prudent, and wished to learn all he possibly could concerning his host.
He turned towards the sailor, who, during this dialogue, had sat gravely plucking the partridges with the air of a man proud of his office, and asked him how these men had landed, as no vessel of any kind was visible.
“Never mind that,” returned the sailor, “I know their vessel.” “Is it a very beautiful vessel?” “I would not wish for a better to sail round the world.” “Of what burden is she?” “About a hundred tons; but she is built to stand any weather.
She is what the English call a yacht.” “Where was she built?” “I know not; but my own opinion is she is a Genoese.” “And how did a leader of smugglers,” continued Franz, “venture to build a vessel designed for such a purpose at Genoa?” “I did not say that the owner was a smuggler,” replied the sailor.
He was accompanied by two of the yacht’s crew.
Franz drew his handkerchief from his pocket, and presented it to the man who had spoken to him.
Without uttering a word, they bandaged his eyes with a care that showed their apprehensions of his committing some indiscretion.
Afterwards he was made to promise that he would not make the least attempt to raise the bandage.
Then his two guides took his arms, and he went on, guided by them, and preceded by the sentinel.
After going about thirty paces, he smelt the appetizing odor of the kid that was roasting, and knew thus that he was passing the bivouac; they then led him on about fifty paces farther, evidently advancing towards that part of the shore where they would not allow Gaetano to go—a refusal he could now comprehend.
Presently, by a change in the atmosphere, he knew that they were entering a cave; after going on for a few seconds more he heard a crackling, and it seemed to him as though the atmosphere again changed, and became balmy and perfumed.
There was a moment’s silence, and then a voice, in excellent French, although, with a foreign accent, said: “Welcome, sir.
Although of a paleness that was almost livid, this man had a remarkably handsome face; his eyes were penetrating and sparkling; his nose, quite straight, and projecting direct from the brow, was of the pure Greek type, while his teeth, as white as pearls, were set off to admiration by the black moustache that encircled them.
His pallor was so peculiar, that it seemed to pertain to one who had been long entombed, and who was incapable of resuming the healthy glow and hue of life.
He was not particularly tall, but extremely well made, and, like the men of the South, had small hands and feet.
But what astonished Franz, who had treated Gaetano’s description as a fable, was the splendor of the apartment in which he found himself.
The host gave Franz time to recover from his surprise, and, moreover, returned look for look, not even taking his eyes off him.
Let me now endeavor to make you forget this temporary unpleasantness, and offer you what no doubt you did not expect to find here—that is to say, a tolerable supper and pretty comfortable beds.” “_Ma foi_, my dear sir,” replied Franz, “make no apologies.
I have always observed that they bandage people’s eyes who penetrate enchanted palaces, for instance, those of Raoul in the _Huguenots_, and really I have nothing to complain of, for what I see makes me think of the wonders of the _Arabian Nights_.” 20079m “Alas!
I may say with Lucullus, if I could have anticipated the honor of your visit, I would have prepared for it.
But such as is my hermitage, it is at your disposal; such as is my supper, it is yours to share, if you will.
Ali, is the supper ready?” At this moment the tapestry moved aside, and a Nubian, black as ebony, and dressed in a plain white tunic, made a sign to his master that all was prepared in the dining-room.
“Now,” said the unknown to Franz, “I do not know if you are of my opinion, but I think nothing is more annoying than to remain two or three hours together without knowing by name or appellation how to address one another.
Pray observe, that I too much respect the laws of hospitality to ask your name or title.
I only request you to give me one by which I may have the pleasure of addressing you.
As for myself, that I may put you at your ease, I tell you that I am generally called ‘Sinbad the Sailor.’” “And I,” replied Franz, “will tell you, as I only require his wonderful lamp to make me precisely like Aladdin, that I see no reason why at this moment I should not be called Aladdin.
That will keep us from going away from the East whither I am tempted to think I have been conveyed by some good genius.” “Well, then, Signor Aladdin,” replied the singular Amphitryon, “you heard our repast announced, will you now take the trouble to enter the dining-room, your humble servant going first to show the way?” At these words, moving aside the tapestry, Sinbad preceded his guest.
Franz now looked upon another scene of enchantment; the table was splendidly covered, and once convinced of this important point he cast his eyes around him.
The dining-room was scarcely less striking than the room he had just left; it was entirely of marble, with antique bas-reliefs of priceless value; and at the four corners of this apartment, which was oblong, were four magnificent statues, having baskets in their hands.
These baskets contained four pyramids of most splendid fruit; there were Sicily pine-apples, pomegranates from Malaga, oranges from the Balearic Isles, peaches from France, and dates from Tunis.
The supper consisted of a roast pheasant garnished with Corsican blackbirds; a boar’s ham with jelly, a quarter of a kid with tartar sauce, a glorious turbot, and a gigantic lobster.
Between these large dishes were smaller ones containing various dainties.
The dishes were of silver, and the plates of Japanese china.
Ali alone was present to wait at table, and acquitted himself so admirably, that the guest complimented his host thereupon.
He remembers that I saved his life, and as he has a regard for his head, he feels some gratitude towards me for having kept it on his shoulders.” Ali approached his master, took his hand, and kissed it.
“Would it be impertinent, Signor Sinbad,” said Franz, “to ask you the particulars of this kindness?” 20081m “Oh, they are simple enough,” replied the host.
“It seems the fellow had been caught wandering nearer to the harem of the Bey of Tunis than etiquette permits to one of his color, and he was condemned by the Bey to have his tongue cut out, and his hand and head cut off; the tongue the first day, the hand the second, and the head the third.
I always had a desire to have a mute in my service, so learning the day his tongue was cut out, I went to the Bey, and proposed to give him for Ali a splendid double-barreled gun, which I knew he was very desirous of having.
He hesitated a moment, he was so very desirous to complete the poor devil’s punishment.
But when I added to the gun an English cutlass with which I had shivered his highness’s yataghan to pieces, the Bey yielded, and agreed to forgive the hand and head, but on condition that the poor fellow never again set foot in Tunis.
This was a useless clause in the bargain, for whenever the coward sees the first glimpse of the shores of Africa, he runs down below, and can only be induced to appear again when we are out of sight of that quarter of the globe.” Franz remained a moment silent and pensive, hardly knowing what to think of the half-kindness, half-cruelty, with which his host related the brief narrative.
“And like the celebrated sailor whose name you have assumed,” he said, by way of changing the conversation, “you pass your life in travelling?” “Yes.
I made a vow at a time when I little thought I should ever be able to accomplish it,” said the unknown with a singular smile; “and I made some others also which I hope I may fulfil in due season.” Although Sinbad pronounced these words with much calmness, his eyes gave forth gleams of extraordinary ferocity.
“You have suffered a great deal, sir?” said Franz inquiringly.
Sinbad started and looked fixedly at him, as he replied, “What makes you suppose so?” “Everything,” answered Franz,—“your voice, your look, your pallid complexion, and even the life you lead.” “I?—I live the happiest life possible, the real life of a pasha.
I am king of all creation.
I am pleased with one place, and stay there; I get tired of it, and leave it; I am free as a bird and have wings like one; my attendants obey my slightest wish.
Sometimes I amuse myself by delivering some bandit or criminal from the bonds of the law.
Then I have my mode of dispensing justice, silent and sure, without respite or appeal, which condemns or pardons, and which no one sees.
Ah, if you had tasted my life, you would not desire any other, and would never return to the world unless you had some great project to accomplish there.” “Revenge, for instance!” observed Franz.
The unknown fixed on the young man one of those looks which penetrate into the depth of the heart and thoughts.
“Because,” replied Franz, “you seem to me like a man who, persecuted by society, has a fearful account to settle with it.” “Ah!” responded Sinbad, laughing with his singular laugh, which displayed his white and sharp teeth.
Such as you see me I am, a sort of philosopher, and one day perhaps I shall go to Paris to rival Monsieur Appert, and the man in the little blue cloak.” “And will that be the first time you ever took that journey?” “Yes; it will.
The care with which Ali placed this cup on the table roused Franz’s curiosity.
He raised the cover and saw a kind of greenish paste, something like preserved angelica, but which was perfectly unknown to him.
He replaced the lid, as ignorant of what the cup contained as he was before he had looked at it, and then casting his eyes towards his host he saw him smile at his disappointment.
Are you a man for the substantials, and is gold your god? taste this, and the mines of Peru, Guzerat, and Golconda are opened to you.
Are you a man of imagination—a poet? taste this, and the boundaries of possibility disappear; the fields of infinite space open to you, you advance free in heart, free in mind, into the boundless realms of unfettered reverie.
Are you ambitious, and do you seek after the greatnesses of the earth? taste this, and in an hour you will be a king, not a king of a petty kingdom hidden in some corner of Europe like France, Spain, or England, but king of the world, king of the universe, king of creation; without bowing at the feet of Satan, you will be king and master of all the kingdoms of the earth.
Is it not tempting what I offer you, and is it not an easy thing, since it is only to do thus? look!” At these words he uncovered the small cup which contained the substance so lauded, took a teaspoonful of the magic sweetmeat, raised it to his lips, and swallowed it slowly with his eyes half shut and his head bent backwards.
Franz did not disturb him whilst he absorbed his favorite sweetmeat, but when he had finished, he inquired: “What, then, is this precious stuff?” “Did you ever hear,” he replied, “of the Old Man of the Mountain, who attempted to assassinate Philippe Auguste?” “Of course I have.” “Well, you know he reigned over a rich valley which was overhung by the mountain whence he derived his picturesque name.
In this valley were magnificent gardens planted by Hassen-ben-Sabah, and in these gardens isolated pavilions.
Into these pavilions he admitted the elect, and there, says Marco Polo, gave them to eat a certain herb, which transported them to Paradise, in the midst of ever-blooming shrubs, ever-ripe fruit, and ever-lovely virgins.
Like everything else, we must habituate the senses to a fresh impression, gentle or violent, sad or joyous.
There is a struggle in nature against this divine substance,—in nature which is not made for joy and clings to pain.
It is only by comparing the pains of actual being with the joys of the assumed existence, that you would desire to live no longer, but to dream thus forever.
When you return to this mundane sphere from your visionary world, you would seem to leave a Neapolitan spring for a Lapland winter—to quit paradise for earth—heaven for hell!
Taste the hashish, guest of mine—taste the hashish.” Franz’s only reply was to take a teaspoonful of the marvellous preparation, about as much in quantity as his host had eaten, and lift it to his mouth.
“_Diable!_” he said, after having swallowed the divine preserve.
“I do not know if the result will be as agreeable as you describe, but the thing does not appear to me as palatable as you say.” “Because your palate his not yet been attuned to the sublimity of the substances it flavors.
Tell me, the first time you tasted oysters, tea, porter, truffles, and sundry other dainties which you now adore, did you like them?
Could you comprehend how the Romans stuffed their pheasants with assafœtida, and the Chinese eat swallows’ nests?
Well, it is the same with hashish; only eat for a week, and nothing in the world will seem to you to equal the delicacy of its flavor, which now appears to you flat and distasteful.
Let us now go into the adjoining chamber, which is your apartment, and Ali will bring us coffee and pipes.” They both arose, and while he who called himself Sinbad—and whom we have occasionally named so, that we might, like his guest, have some title by which to distinguish him—gave some orders to the servant, Franz entered still another apartment.
It was simply yet richly furnished.
It was round, and a large divan completely encircled it.
Both laid themselves down on the divan; chibouques with jasmine tubes and amber mouthpieces were within reach, and all prepared so that there was no need to smoke the same pipe twice.
There was a moment’s silence, during which Sinbad gave himself up to thoughts that seemed to occupy him incessantly, even in the midst of his conversation; and Franz abandoned himself to that mute reverie, into which we always sink when smoking excellent tobacco, which seems to remove with its fume all the troubles of the mind, and to give the smoker in exchange all the visions of the soul.
“How do you take it?” inquired the unknown; “in the French or Turkish style, strong or weak, sugar or none, cool or boiling?
“And you are right,” said his host; “it shows you have a tendency for an Oriental life.
Ah, those Orientals; they are the only men who know how to live.
Well, unfurl your wings, and fly into superhuman regions; fear nothing, there is a watch over you; and if your wings, like those of Icarus, melt before the sun, we are here to ease your fall.” He then said something in Arabic to Ali, who made a sign of obedience and withdrew, but not to any distance.
As to Franz a strange transformation had taken place in him.
All the bodily fatigue of the day, all the preoccupation of mind which the events of the evening had brought on, disappeared as they do at the first approach of sleep, when we are still sufficiently conscious to be aware of the coming of slumber.
At length the boat touched the shore, but without effort, without shock, as lips touch lips; and he entered the grotto amidst continued strains of most delicious melody.
They were the same statues, rich in form, in attraction, and poesy, with eyes of fascination, smiles of love, and bright and flowing hair.
They were Phryne, Cleopatra, Messalina, those three celebrated courtesans.
Then among them glided like a pure ray, like a Christian angel in the midst of Olympus, one of those chaste figures, those calm shadows, those soft visions, which seemed to veil its virgin brow before these marble wantons.
It seemed to Franz that he closed his eyes, and in a last look about him saw the vision of modesty completely veiled; and then followed a dream of passion like that promised by the Prophet to the elect.
Lips of stone turned to flame, breasts of ice became like heated lava, so that to Franz, yielding for the first time to the sway of the drug, love was a sorrow and voluptuousness a torture, as burning mouths were pressed to his thirsty lips, and he was held in cool serpent-like embraces.
The more he strove against this unhallowed passion the more his senses yielded to its thrall, and at length, weary of a struggle that taxed his very soul, he gave way and sank back breathless and exhausted beneath the kisses of these marble goddesses, and the enchantment of his marvellous dream.
The Waking When Franz returned to himself, he seemed still to be in a dream.
He thought himself in a sepulchre, into which a ray of sunlight in pity scarcely penetrated.
He stretched forth his hand, and touched stone; he rose to his seat, and found himself lying on his bournous in a bed of dry heather, very soft and odoriferous.
The vision had fled; and as if the statues had been but shadows from the tomb, they had vanished at his waking.
He advanced several paces towards the point whence the light came, and to all the excitement of his dream succeeded the calmness of reality.
He found that he was in a grotto, went towards the opening, and through a kind of fanlight saw a blue sea and an azure sky.
The air and water were shining in the beams of the morning sun; on the shore the sailors were sitting, chatting and laughing; and at ten yards from them the boat was at anchor, undulating gracefully on the water.
There for some time he enjoyed the fresh breeze which played on his brow, and listened to the dash of the waves on the beach, that left against the rocks a lace of foam as white as silver.
He was for some time without reflection or thought for the divine charm which is in the things of nature, specially after a fantastic dream; then gradually this view of the outer world, so calm, so pure, so grand, reminded him of the illusiveness of his vision, and once more awakened memory.
He recalled his arrival on the island, his presentation to a smuggler chief, a subterranean palace full of splendor, an excellent supper, and a spoonful of hashish.
It seemed, however, even in the very face of open day, that at least a year had elapsed since all these things had passed, so deep was the impression made in his mind by the dream, and so strong a hold had it taken of his imagination.
Thus every now and then he saw in fancy amid the sailors, seated on a rock, or undulating in the vessel, one of the shadows which had shared his dream with looks and kisses.
Otherwise, his head was perfectly clear, and his body refreshed; he was free from the slightest headache; on the contrary, he felt a certain degree of lightness, a faculty for absorbing the pure air, and enjoying the bright sunshine more vividly than ever.
Franz adjusted his telescope, and directed it towards the yacht.
Gaetano was not mistaken.
At the stern the mysterious stranger was standing up looking towards the shore, and holding a spy-glass in his hand.
He was attired as he had been on the previous evening, and waved his pocket-handkerchief to his guest in token of adieu.
Franz returned the salute by shaking his handkerchief as an exchange of signals.
After a second, a slight cloud of smoke was seen at the stern of the vessel, which rose gracefully as it expanded in the air, and then Franz heard a slight report.
“There, do you hear?” observed Gaetano; “he is bidding you adieu.” The young man took his carbine and fired it in the air, but without any idea that the noise could be heard at the distance which separated the yacht from the shore.
“What are your excellency’s orders?” inquired Gaetano.
“In the first place, light me a torch.” “Ah, yes, I understand,” replied the patron, “to find the entrance to the enchanted apartment.
With much pleasure, your excellency, if it would amuse you; and I will get you the torch you ask for.
Giovanni, light a torch,” he added, “and give it to his excellency.” Giovanni obeyed.
Franz took the lamp, and entered the subterranean grotto, followed by Gaetano.
He recognized the place where he had awaked by the bed of heather that was there; but it was in vain that he carried his torch all round the exterior surface of the grotto.
He saw nothing, unless that, by traces of smoke, others had before him attempted the same thing, and, like him, in vain.
Yet he did not leave a foot of this granite wall, as impenetrable as futurity, without strict scrutiny; he did not see a fissure without introducing the blade of his hunting sword into it, or a projecting point on which he did not lean and press in the hopes it would give way.
All was vain; and he lost two hours in his attempts, which were at last utterly useless.
When Franz appeared again on the shore, the yacht only seemed like a small white speck on the horizon.
He looked again through his glass, but even then he could not distinguish anything.
Gaetano reminded him that he had come for the purpose of shooting goats, which he had utterly forgotten.
He took his fowling-piece, and began to hunt over the island with the air of a man who is fulfilling a duty, rather than enjoying a pleasure; and at the end of a quarter of an hour he had killed a goat and two kids.
These animals, though wild and agile as chamois, were too much like domestic goats, and Franz could not consider them as game.
Moreover, other ideas, much more enthralling, occupied his mind.
Since, the evening before, he had really been the hero of one of the tales of the _Thousand and One Nights_, and he was irresistibly attracted towards the grotto.
The second visit was a long one, and when he returned the kid was roasted and the repast ready.
Franz was sitting on the spot where he was on the previous evening when his mysterious host had invited him to supper; and he saw the little yacht, now like a sea-gull on the wave, continuing her flight towards Corsica.
“Why,” he remarked to Gaetano, “you told me that Signor Sinbad was going to Malaga, while it seems he is in the direction of Porto-Vecchio.” “Don’t you remember,” said the patron, “I told you that among the crew there were two Corsican brigands?” “True; and he is going to land them,” added Franz.
“Precisely so,” replied Gaetano.
“Ah, he is one who fears neither God nor Satan, they say, and would at any time run fifty leagues out of his course to do a poor devil a service.” 20093m “But such services as these might involve him with the authorities of the country in which he practices this kind of philanthropy,” said Franz.
“And what cares he for that,” replied Gaetano with a laugh, “or any authorities?
As to Franz, he had no longer any inducement to remain at Monte Cristo.
He had lost all hope of detecting the secret of the grotto; he consequently despatched his breakfast, and, his boat being ready, he hastened on board, and they were soon under way.
At the moment the boat began her course they lost sight of the yacht, as it disappeared in the gulf of Porto-Vecchio.
With it was effaced the last trace of the preceding night; and then supper, Sinbad, hashish, statues,—all became a dream for Franz.
When Franz had once again set foot on shore, he forgot, for the moment at least, the events which had just passed, while he finished his affairs of pleasure at Florence, and then thought of nothing but how he should rejoin his companion, who was awaiting him at Rome.
He set out, and on the Saturday evening reached the Place de la Douane by the mail-coach.
An apartment, as we have said, had been retained beforehand, and thus he had but to go to Signor Pastrini’s hotel.
But this was not so easy a matter, for the streets were thronged with people, and Rome was already a prey to that low and feverish murmur which precedes all great events; and at Rome there are four great events in every year,—the Carnival, Holy Week, Corpus Christi, and the Feast of St.
All the rest of the year the city is in that state of dull apathy, between life and death, which renders it similar to a kind of station between this world and the next—a sublime spot, a resting-place full of poetry and character, and at which Franz had already halted five or six times, and at each time found it more marvellous and striking.
At last he made his way through the mob, which was continually increasing and getting more and more turbulent, and reached the hotel.
On his first inquiry he was told, with the impertinence peculiar to hired hackney-coachmen and innkeepers with their houses full, that there was no room for him at the Hôtel de Londres.
Then he sent his card to Signor Pastrini, and asked for Albert de Morcerf.
This plan succeeded; and Signor Pastrini himself ran to him, excusing himself for having made his excellency wait, scolding the waiters, taking the candlestick from the porter, who was ready to pounce on the traveller and was about to lead him to Albert, when Morcerf himself appeared.
The apartment consisted of two small rooms and a parlor.
The two rooms looked on to the street—a fact which Signor Pastrini commented upon as an inappreciable advantage.
The rest of the floor was hired by a very rich gentleman who was supposed to be a Sicilian or Maltese; but the host was unable to decide to which of the two nations the traveller belonged.
“Very good, signor Pastrini,” said Franz; “but we must have some supper instantly, and a carriage for tomorrow and the following days.” “As to supper,” replied the landlord, “you shall be served immediately; but as for the carriage——” “What as to the carriage?” exclaimed Albert.
“Come, come, Signor Pastrini, no joking; we must have a carriage.” “Sir,” replied the host, “we will do all in our power to procure you one—this is all I can say.” “And when shall we know?” inquired Franz.
“Tomorrow morning,” answered the innkeeper.
At Drake’s or Aaron’s one pays twenty-five lire for common days, and thirty or thirty-five lire a day more for Sundays and feast days; add five lire a day more for extras, that will make forty, and there’s an end of it.” “I am afraid if we offer them double that we shall not procure a carriage.” “Then they must put horses to mine.
It is a little worse for the journey, but that’s no matter.” “There are no horses.” Albert looked at Franz like a man who hears a reply he does not understand.
“Do you understand that, my dear Franz—no horses?” he said, “but can’t we have post-horses?” “They have been all hired this fortnight, and there are none left but those absolutely requisite for posting.” “What are we to say to this?” asked Franz.
“I say, that when a thing completely surpasses my comprehension, I am accustomed not to dwell on that thing, but to pass to another.
Is supper ready, Signor Pastrini?” “Yes, your excellency.” “Well, then, let us sup.” “But the carriage and horses?” said Franz.
“Be easy, my dear boy; they will come in due season; it is only a question of how much shall be charged for them.” Morcerf then, with that delighted philosophy which believes that nothing is impossible to a full purse or well-lined pocketbook, supped, went to bed, slept soundly, and dreamed he was racing all over Rome at Carnival time in a coach with six horses.
Roman Bandits The next morning Franz woke first, and instantly rang the bell.
The sound had not yet died away when Signor Pastrini himself entered.
It is to pass the Carnival at Venice; there we are sure of obtaining gondolas if we cannot have carriages.” “Ah, the devil, no,” cried Albert; “I came to Rome to see the Carnival, and I will, though I see it on stilts.” “Bravo! an excellent idea.
“Excellency,” cried the _cicerone_, seeing Franz approach the window, “shall I bring the carriage nearer to the palace?” Accustomed as Franz was to the Italian phraseology, his first impulse was to look round him, but these words were addressed to him.
Franz was the “excellency,” the vehicle was the “carriage,” and the Hôtel de Londres was the “palace.” The genius for laudation characteristic of the race was in that phrase.
Franz and Albert descended, the carriage approached the palace; their excellencies stretched their legs along the seats; the _cicerone_ sprang into the seat behind.
“Where do your excellencies wish to go?” asked he.
“To Saint Peter’s first, and then to the Colosseum,” returned Albert.
Suddenly the daylight began to fade away; Franz took out his watch—it was half-past four.
They returned to the hotel; at the door Franz ordered the coachman to be ready at eight.
He wished to show Albert the Colosseum by moonlight, as he had shown him Saint Peter’s by daylight.
He was to leave the city by the Porta del Popolo, skirt the outer wall, and re-enter by the Porta San Giovanni; thus they would behold the Colosseum without finding their impressions dulled by first looking on the Capitol, the Forum, the Arch of Septimus Severus, the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, and the Via Sacra.
Signor Pastrini had promised them a banquet; he gave them a tolerable repast.
Franz thought that he came to hear his dinner praised, and began accordingly, but at the first words he was interrupted.
“Excellency,” said Pastrini, “I am delighted to have your approbation, but it was not for that I came.” “Did you come to tell us you have procured a carriage?” asked Albert, lighting his cigar.
Men in their senses do not quit their hotel in the Rue du Helder, their walk on the Boulevard de Gand, and the Café de Paris.” It is of course understood that Albert resided in the aforesaid street, appeared every day on the fashionable walk, and dined frequently at the only restaurant where you can really dine, that is, if you are on good terms with its waiters.
Signor Pastrini remained silent a short time; it was evident that he was musing over this answer, which did not seem very clear.
“But,” said Franz, in his turn interrupting his host’s meditations, “you had some motive for coming here, may I beg to know what it was?” 20099m “Ah, yes; you have ordered your carriage at eight o’clock precisely?” “I have.” “You intend visiting _Il Colosseo_.” “You mean the Colosseum?” “It is the same thing.
‘Once upon a time——’ Well, go on.” Signor Pastrini turned toward Franz, who seemed to him the more reasonable of the two; we must do him justice,—he had had a great many Frenchmen in his house, but had never been able to comprehend them.
“Because, after nightfall, you are not safe fifty yards from the gates.” “On your honor, is that true?” cried Albert.
“Count,” returned Signor Pastrini, hurt at Albert’s repeated doubts of the truth of his assertions, “I do not say this to you, but to your companion, who knows Rome, and knows, too, that these things are not to be laughed at.” “My dear fellow,” said Albert, turning to Franz, “here is an admirable adventure; we will fill our carriage with pistols, blunderbusses, and double-barrelled guns.
“And pray,” asked Franz, “where are these pistols, blunderbusses, and other deadly weapons with which you intend filling the carriage?” “Not out of my armory, for at Terracina I was plundered even of my hunting-knife.
“Your excellency knows that it is not customary to defend yourself when attacked by bandits.” “What!” cried Albert, whose courage revolted at the idea of being plundered tamely, “not make any resistance!” “No, for it would be useless.
“Well, Signor Pastrini,” said Franz, “now that my companion is quieted, and you have seen how peaceful my intentions are, tell me who is this Luigi Vampa.
Is he a shepherd or a nobleman?—young or old?—tall or short?
Signor Pastrini drew from his fob a magnificent Bréguet, bearing the name of its maker, of Parisian manufacture, and a count’s coronet.
“_Peste!_” returned Albert, “I compliment you on it; I have its fellow”—he took his watch from his waistcoat pocket—“and it cost me 3,000 francs.” “Let us hear the history,” said Franz, motioning Signor Pastrini to seat himself.
“Your excellencies permit it?” asked the host.
“_Pardieu!_” cried Albert, “you are not a preacher, to remain standing!” The host sat down, after having made each of them a respectful bow, which meant that he was ready to tell them all they wished to know concerning Luigi Vampa.
“Thanks for the comparison,” said Albert, with a bow.
“Go on, Signor Pastrini,” continued Franz, smiling at his friend’s susceptibility.
“To what class of society does he belong?” “He was a shepherd-boy attached to the farm of the Count of San-Felice, situated between Palestrina and the Lake of Gabri; he was born at Pampinara, and entered the count’s service when he was five years old; his father was also a shepherd, who owned a small flock, and lived by the wool and the milk, which he sold at Rome.
When quite a child, the little Vampa displayed a most extraordinary precocity.
The child accepted joyfully.
Every day Luigi led his flock to graze on the road that leads from Palestrina to Borgo; every day, at nine o’clock in the morning, the priest and the boy sat down on a bank by the wayside, and the little shepherd took his lesson out of the priest’s breviary.
The priest had a writing teacher at Rome make three alphabets—one large, one middling, and one small; and pointed out to him that by the help of a sharp instrument he could trace the letters on a slate, and thus learn to write.
The same evening, when the flock was safe at the farm, the little Luigi hastened to the smith at Palestrina, took a large nail, heated and sharpened it, and formed a sort of stylus.
The next morning he gathered an armful of pieces of slate and began.
The curate, astonished at his quickness and intelligence, made him a present of pens, paper, and a penknife.
This demanded new effort, but nothing compared to the first; at the end of a week he wrote as well with this pen as with the stylus.
The curate related the incident to the Count of San-Felice, who sent for the little shepherd, made him read and write before him, ordered his attendant to let him eat with the domestics, and to give him two piastres a month.
With this, Luigi purchased books and pencils.
He applied his imitative powers to everything, and, like Giotto, when young, he drew on his slate sheep, houses, and trees.
Then, with his knife, he began to carve all sorts of objects in wood; it was thus that Pinelli, the famous sculptor, had commenced. 20105m “A girl of six or seven—that is, a little younger than Vampa—tended sheep on a farm near Palestrina; she was an orphan, born at Valmontone and was named Teresa.
The two children met, sat down near each other, let their flocks mingle together, played, laughed, and conversed together; in the evening they separated the Count of San-Felice’s flock from those of Baron Cervetri, and the children returned to their respective farms, promising to meet the next morning.
The next day they kept their word, and thus they grew up together.
And yet their natural disposition revealed itself.
Beside his taste for the fine arts, which Luigi had carried as far as he could in his solitude, he was given to alternating fits of sadness and enthusiasm, was often angry and capricious, and always sarcastic.
None of the lads of Pampinara, Palestrina, or Valmontone had been able to gain any influence over him or even to become his companion.
His disposition (always inclined to exact concessions rather than to make them) kept him aloof from all friendships.
Teresa alone ruled by a look, a word, a gesture, this impetuous character, which yielded beneath the hand of a woman, and which beneath the hand of a man might have broken, but could never have been bended.
Teresa was lively and gay, but coquettish to excess.
The two piastres that Luigi received every month from the Count of San-Felice’s steward, and the price of all the little carvings in wood he sold at Rome, were expended in ear-rings, necklaces, and gold hairpins.
So that, thanks to her friend’s generosity, Teresa was the most beautiful and the best-attired peasant near Rome.
“The two children grew up together, passing all their time with each other, and giving themselves up to the wild ideas of their different characters.
Thus, in all their dreams, their wishes, and their conversations, Vampa saw himself the captain of a vessel, general of an army, or governor of a province.
Teresa saw herself rich, superbly attired, and attended by a train of liveried domestics.
Then, when they had thus passed the day in building castles in the air, they separated their flocks, and descended from the elevation of their dreams to the reality of their humble position.
“One day the young shepherd told the count’s steward that he had seen a wolf come out of the Sabine mountains, and prowl around his flock.
This gun had an excellent barrel, made at Brescia, and carrying a ball with the precision of an English rifle; but one day the count broke the stock, and had then cast the gun aside.
This, however, was nothing to a sculptor like Vampa; he examined the broken stock, calculated what change it would require to adapt the gun to his shoulder, and made a fresh stock, so beautifully carved that it would have fetched fifteen or twenty piastres, had he chosen to sell it.
But nothing could be farther from his thoughts.
“For a long time a gun had been the young man’s greatest ambition.
In every country where independence has taken the place of liberty, the first desire of a manly heart is to possess a weapon, which at once renders him capable of defence or attack, and, by rendering its owner terrible, often makes him feared.
Proud of this exploit, Vampa took the dead animal on his shoulders, and carried him to the farm.
These exploits had gained Luigi considerable reputation.
The man of superior abilities always finds admirers, go where he will.
He was spoken of as the most adroit, the strongest, and the most courageous _contadino_ for ten leagues around; and although Teresa was universally allowed to be the most beautiful girl of the Sabines, no one had ever spoken to her of love, because it was known that she was beloved by Vampa.
And yet the two young people had never declared their affection; they had grown together like two trees whose roots are mingled, whose branches intertwined, and whose intermingled perfume rises to the heavens.
Only their wish to see each other had become a necessity, and they would have preferred death to a day’s separation.
“Teresa was sixteen, and Vampa seventeen.
About this time, a band of brigands that had established itself in the Lepini mountains began to be much spoken of.
The brigands have never been really extirpated from the neighborhood of Rome.
Sometimes a chief is wanted, but when a chief presents himself he rarely has to wait long for a band of followers.
“The celebrated Cucumetto, pursued in the Abruzzo, driven out of the kingdom of Naples, where he had carried on a regular war, had crossed the Garigliano, like Manfred, and had taken refuge on the banks of the Amasine between Sonnino and Juperno.
He strove to collect a band of followers, and followed the footsteps of Decesaris and Gasparone, whom he hoped to surpass.
Many young men of Palestrina, Frascati, and Pampinara had disappeared.
Their disappearance at first caused much disquietude; but it was soon known that they had joined Cucumetto.
After some time Cucumetto became the object of universal attention; the most extraordinary traits of ferocious daring and brutality were related of him.
“One day he carried off a young girl, the daughter of a surveyor of Frosinone.
The bandit’s laws are positive; a young girl belongs first to him who carries her off, then the rest draw lots for her, and she is abandoned to their brutality until death relieves her sufferings.
When their parents are sufficiently rich to pay a ransom, a messenger is sent to negotiate; the prisoner is hostage for the security of the messenger; should the ransom be refused, the prisoner is irrevocably lost.
The young girl’s lover was in Cucumetto’s troop; his name was Carlini.
When she recognized her lover, the poor girl extended her arms to him, and believed herself safe; but Carlini felt his heart sink, for he but too well knew the fate that awaited her.
However, as he was a favorite with Cucumetto, as he had for three years faithfully served him, and as he had saved his life by shooting a dragoon who was about to cut him down, he hoped the chief would have pity on him.
He took Cucumetto one side, while the young girl, seated at the foot of a huge pine that stood in the centre of the forest, made a veil of her picturesque head-dress to hide her face from the lascivious gaze of the bandits.
There he told the chief all—his affection for the prisoner, their promises of mutual fidelity, and how every night, since he had been near, they had met in some neighboring ruins. 20109m “It so happened that night that Cucumetto had sent Carlini to a village, so that he had been unable to go to the place of meeting.
Cucumetto had been there, however, by accident, as he said, and had carried the maiden off.
Carlini besought his chief to make an exception in Rita’s favor, as her father was rich, and could pay a large ransom.
Cucumetto seemed to yield to his friend’s entreaties, and bade him find a shepherd to send to Rita’s father at Frosinone.
“Carlini flew joyfully to Rita, telling her she was saved, and bidding her write to her father, to inform him what had occurred, and that her ransom was fixed at three hundred piastres.
The instant the letter was written, Carlini seized it, and hastened to the plain to find a messenger.
He found a young shepherd watching his flock.
The natural messengers of the bandits are the shepherds who live between the city and the mountains, between civilized and savage life.
The boy undertook the commission, promising to be in Frosinone in less than an hour.
Carlini returned, anxious to see his mistress, and announce the joyful intelligence.
He found the troop in the glade, supping off the provisions exacted as contributions from the peasants; but his eye vainly sought Rita and Cucumetto among them.
“He inquired where they were, and was answered by a burst of laughter.
A cold perspiration burst from every pore, and his hair stood on end.
He repeated his question.
One of the bandits rose, and offered him a glass filled with Orvietto, saying, ‘To the health of the brave Cucumetto and the fair Rita.’ At this moment Carlini heard a woman’s cry; he divined the truth, seized the glass, broke it across the face of him who presented it, and rushed towards the spot whence the cry came.
After a hundred yards he turned the corner of the thicket; he found Rita senseless in the arms of Cucumetto.
At the sight of Carlini, Cucumetto rose, a pistol in each hand.
The two brigands looked at each other for a moment—the one with a smile of lasciviousness on his lips, the other with the pallor of death on his brow.
A terrible battle between the two men seemed imminent; but by degrees Carlini’s features relaxed, his hand, which had grasped one of the pistols in his belt, fell to his side.
“‘Well,’ said Cucumetto, ‘have you executed your commission?’ “‘Yes, captain,’ returned Carlini.
‘At nine o’clock tomorrow Rita’s father will be here with the money.’ “‘It is well; in the meantime, we will have a merry night; this young girl is charming, and does credit to your taste.
Now, as I am not egotistical, we will return to our comrades and draw lots for her.’ “‘You have determined, then, to abandon her to the common law?’ said Carlini.
“‘Why should an exception be made in her favor?’ “‘I thought that my entreaties——’ “‘What right have you, any more than the rest, to ask for an exception?’ “‘It is true.’ “‘But never mind,’ continued Cucumetto, laughing, ‘sooner or later your turn will come.’ Carlini’s teeth clenched convulsively.
“‘Now, then,’ said Cucumetto, advancing towards the other bandits, ‘are you coming?’ “‘I follow you.’ 20111m “Cucumetto departed, without losing sight of Carlini, for, doubtless, he feared lest he should strike him unawares; but nothing betrayed a hostile design on Carlini’s part.
He was standing, his arms folded, near Rita, who was still insensible.
Cucumetto fancied for a moment the young man was about to take her in his arms and fly; but this mattered little to him now Rita had been his; and as for the money, three hundred piastres distributed among the band was so small a sum that he cared little about it.
He continued to follow the path to the glade; but, to his great surprise, Carlini arrived almost as soon as himself.
“‘Let us draw lots! let us draw lots!’ cried all the brigands, when they saw the chief.
“Their demand was fair, and the chief inclined his head in sign of acquiescence.
The eyes of all shone fiercely as they made their demand, and the red light of the fire made them look like demons.
The names of all, including Carlini, were placed in a hat, and the youngest of the band drew forth a ticket; the ticket bore the name of Diavolaccio.
He was the man who had proposed to Carlini the health of their chief, and to whom Carlini replied by breaking the glass across his face.
A large wound, extending from the temple to the mouth, was bleeding profusely.
Diavolaccio, seeing himself thus favored by fortune, burst into a loud laugh.
Then sitting down by the fire, ‘My supper,’ said he; ‘my expedition has given me an appetite.’ “‘Well done, Carlini!’ cried the brigands; ‘that is acting like a good fellow;’ and they all formed a circle round the fire, while Diavolaccio disappeared.
“Carlini ate and drank as if nothing had happened.
The bandits looked on with astonishment at this singular conduct until they heard footsteps.
They turned round, and saw Diavolaccio bearing the young girl in his arms.
As they entered the circle, the bandits could perceive, by the firelight, the unearthly pallor of the young girl and of Diavolaccio.
This apparition was so strange and so solemn, that everyone rose, with the exception of Carlini, who remained seated, and ate and drank calmly.
Diavolaccio advanced amidst the most profound silence, and laid Rita at the captain’s feet.
Then everyone could understand the cause of the unearthly pallor in the young girl and the bandit.
Everyone looked at Carlini; the sheath at his belt was empty.
“‘Ah, ah,’ said the chief, ‘I now understand why Carlini stayed behind.’ “All savage natures appreciate a desperate deed.
No other of the bandits would, perhaps, have done the same; but they all understood what Carlini had done.
“‘Now, then,’ cried Carlini, rising in his turn, and approaching the corpse, his hand on the butt of one of his pistols, ‘does anyone dispute the possession of this woman with me?’ “‘No,’ returned the chief, ‘she is thine.’ “Carlini raised her in his arms, and carried her out of the circle of firelight.
Cucumetto placed his sentinels for the night, and the bandits wrapped themselves in their cloaks, and lay down before the fire.
At midnight the sentinel gave the alarm, and in an instant all were on the alert.
It was Rita’s father, who brought his daughter’s ransom in person.
“‘Here,’ said he, to Cucumetto, ‘here are three hundred piastres; give me back my child.
They both advanced beneath the trees, through whose branches streamed the moonlight.
Cucumetto stopped at last, and pointed to two persons grouped at the foot of a tree.
“‘There,’ said he, ‘demand thy child of Carlini; he will tell thee what has become of her;’ and he returned to his companions.
“The old man remained motionless; he felt that some great and unforeseen misfortune hung over his head.
At length he advanced toward the group, the meaning of which he could not comprehend.
As he approached, Carlini raised his head, and the forms of two persons became visible to the old man’s eyes.
The old man recognized his child, and Carlini recognized the old man.
“‘I expected thee,’ said the bandit to Rita’s father.
“‘Wretch!’ returned the old man, ‘what hast thou done?’ and he gazed with terror on Rita, pale and bloody, a knife buried in her bosom.
A ray of moonlight poured through the trees, and lighted up the face of the dead.
“‘Cucumetto had violated thy daughter,’ said the bandit; ‘I loved her, therefore I slew her; for she would have served as the sport of the whole band.’ The old man spoke not, and grew pale as death.
‘Now,’ continued Carlini, ‘if I have done wrongly, avenge her;’ and withdrawing the knife from the wound in Rita’s bosom, he held it out to the old man with one hand, while with the other he tore open his vest.
“‘Thou hast done well!’ returned the old man in a hoarse voice; ‘embrace me, my son.’ 20115m Carlini threw himself, sobbing like a child, into the arms of his mistress’s father.
“‘Now,’ said the old man, ‘aid me to bury my child.’ Carlini fetched two pickaxes; and the father and the lover began to dig at the foot of a huge oak, beneath which the young girl was to repose.
When the grave was formed, the father embraced her first, and then the lover; afterwards, one taking the head, the other the feet, they placed her in the grave.
Then, when they had finished, they cast the earth over the corpse, until the grave was filled.
Then, extending his hand, the old man said; ‘I thank you, my son; and now leave me alone.’ “‘Yet——’ replied Carlini.
“‘Leave me, I command you.’ “Carlini obeyed, rejoined his comrades, folded himself in his cloak, and soon appeared to sleep as soundly as the rest.
It had been resolved the night before to change their encampment.
An hour before daybreak, Cucumetto aroused his men, and gave the word to march.
He found the old man suspended from one of the branches of the oak which shaded his daughter’s grave.
He then took an oath of bitter vengeance over the dead body of the one and the tomb of the other.
But he was unable to complete this oath, for two days afterwards, in an encounter with the Roman carbineers, Carlini was killed.
There was some surprise, however, that, as he was with his face to the enemy, he should have received a ball between his shoulders.
That astonishment ceased when one of the brigands remarked to his comrades that Cucumetto was stationed ten paces in Carlini’s rear when he fell.
On the morning of the departure from the forest of Frosinone he had followed Carlini in the darkness, and heard this oath of vengeance, and, like a wise man, anticipated it.
“They told ten other stories of this bandit chief, each more singular than the other.
Thus, from Fondi to Perusia, everyone trembles at the name of Cucumetto.
“These narratives were frequently the theme of conversation between Luigi and Teresa.
The young girl trembled very much at hearing the stories; but Vampa reassured her with a smile, tapping the butt of his good fowling-piece, which threw its ball so well; and if that did not restore her courage, he pointed to a crow, perched on some dead branch, took aim, touched the trigger, and the bird fell dead at the foot of the tree.
Time passed on, and the two young people had agreed to be married when Vampa should be twenty and Teresa nineteen years of age.
They were both orphans, and had only their employers’ leave to ask, which had been already sought and obtained.
One day when they were talking over their plans for the future, they heard two or three reports of firearms, and then suddenly a man came out of the wood, near which the two young persons used to graze their flocks, and hurried towards them.
When he came within hearing, he exclaimed: ‘I am pursued; can you conceal me?’ “They knew full well that this fugitive must be a bandit; but there is an innate sympathy between the Roman brigand and the Roman peasant and the latter is always ready to aid the former.
Vampa, without saying a word, hastened to the stone that closed up the entrance to their grotto, drew it away, made a sign to the fugitive to take refuge there, in a retreat unknown to everyone, closed the stone upon him, and then went and resumed his seat by Teresa.
Instantly afterwards four carbineers, on horseback, appeared on the edge of the wood; three of them appeared to be looking for the fugitive, while the fourth dragged a brigand prisoner by the neck.
The three carbineers looked about carefully on every side, saw the young peasants, and galloping up, began to question them.
“‘That is very annoying,’ said the brigadier; for the man we are looking for is the chief.’ “‘Cucumetto?’ cried Luigi and Teresa at the same moment.
“‘Yes,’ replied the brigadier; ‘and as his head is valued at a thousand Roman crowns, there would have been five hundred for you, if you had helped us to catch him.’ The two young persons exchanged looks.
The brigadier had a moment’s hope.
Five hundred Roman crowns are three thousand lire, and three thousand lire are a fortune for two poor orphans who are going to be married.
“‘Yes, it is very annoying,’ said Vampa; ‘but we have not seen him.’ “Then the carbineers scoured the country in different directions, but in vain; then, after a time, they disappeared.
Vampa then removed the stone, and Cucumetto came out.
Through the crevices in the granite he had seen the two young peasants talking with the carbineers, and guessed the subject of their parley.
He had read in the countenances of Luigi and Teresa their steadfast resolution not to surrender him, and he drew from his pocket a purse full of gold, which he offered to them.
But Vampa raised his head proudly; as to Teresa, her eyes sparkled when she thought of all the fine gowns and gay jewellery she could buy with this purse of gold.
“Cucumetto was a cunning fiend, and had assumed the form of a brigand instead of a serpent, and this look from Teresa showed to him that she was a worthy daughter of Eve, and he returned to the forest, pausing several times on his way, under the pretext of saluting his protectors.
“Several days elapsed, and they neither saw nor heard of Cucumetto.
The time of the Carnival was at hand.
The Count of San-Felice announced a grand masked ball, to which all that were distinguished in Rome were invited.
Luigi asked permission of his protector, the steward, that she and he might be present amongst the servants of the house.
The ball was given by the Count for the particular pleasure of his daughter Carmela, whom he adored.
Carmela was precisely the age and figure of Teresa, and Teresa was as handsome as Carmela.
On the evening of the ball Teresa was attired in her best, her most brilliant ornaments in her hair, and gayest glass beads,—she was in the costume of the women of Frascati.
Luigi wore the very picturesque garb of the Roman peasant at holiday time.
They both mingled, as they had leave to do, with the servants and peasants.
“The _festa_ was magnificent; not only was the villa brilliantly illuminated, but thousands of colored lanterns were suspended from the trees in the garden; and very soon the palace overflowed to the terraces, and the terraces to the garden-walks.
At each cross-path was an orchestra, and tables spread with refreshments; the guests stopped, formed quadrilles, and danced in any part of the grounds they pleased.
Her cap was embroidered with pearls, the pins in her hair were of gold and diamonds, her girdle was of Turkey silk, with large embroidered flowers, her bodice and skirt were of cashmere, her apron of Indian muslin, and the buttons of her corset were of jewels.
Two of her companions were dressed, the one as a woman of Nettuno, and the other as a woman of La Riccia.
Four young men of the richest and noblest families of Rome accompanied them with that Italian freedom which has not its parallel in any other country in the world.
They were attired as peasants of Albano, Velletri, Civita-Castellana, and Sora.
We need hardly add that these peasant costumes, like those of the young women, were brilliant with gold and jewels.
“Carmela wished to form a quadrille, but there was one lady wanting.
Carmela looked all around her, but not one of the guests had a costume similar to her own, or those of her companions.
The Count of San-Felice pointed out Teresa, who was hanging on Luigi’s arm in a group of peasants.
“‘Certainly,’ replied the count, ‘are we not in Carnival time?’ “Carmela turned towards the young man who was talking with her, and saying a few words to him, pointed with her finger to Teresa.
The young man looked, bowed in obedience, and then went to Teresa, and invited her to dance in a quadrille directed by the count’s daughter.
Luigi slowly relinquished Teresa’s arm, which he had held beneath his own, and Teresa, accompanied by her elegant cavalier, took her appointed place with much agitation in the aristocratic quadrille.
Certainly, in the eyes of an artist, the exact and strict costume of Teresa had a very different character from that of Carmela and her companions; and Teresa was frivolous and coquettish, and thus the embroidery and muslins, the cashmere waist-girdles, all dazzled her, and the reflection of sapphires and diamonds almost turned her giddy brain.
“Luigi felt a sensation hitherto unknown arising in his mind.
It was like an acute pain which gnawed at his heart, and then thrilled through his whole body.
He followed with his eye each movement of Teresa and her cavalier; when their hands touched, he felt as though he should swoon; every pulse beat with violence, and it seemed as though a bell were ringing in his ears.
When they spoke, although Teresa listened timidly and with downcast eyes to the conversation of her cavalier, as Luigi could read in the ardent looks of the good-looking young man that his language was that of praise, it seemed as if the whole world was turning round with him, and all the voices of hell were whispering in his ears ideas of murder and assassination.
Then fearing that his paroxysm might get the better of him, he clutched with one hand the branch of a tree against which he was leaning, and with the other convulsively grasped the dagger with a carved handle which was in his belt, and which, unwittingly, he drew from the scabbard from time to time.
“He felt that, influenced by her ambitions and coquettish disposition, Teresa might escape him.
“The young peasant girl, at first timid and scared, soon recovered herself.
We have said that Teresa was handsome, but this is not all; Teresa was endowed with all those wild graces which are so much more potent than our affected and studied elegancies.
She had almost all the honors of the quadrille, and if she were envious of the Count of San-Felice’s daughter, we will not undertake to say that Carmela was not jealous of her.
And with overpowering compliments her handsome cavalier led her back to the place whence he had taken her, and where Luigi awaited her.
Twice or thrice during the dance the young girl had glanced at Luigi, and each time she saw that he was pale and that his features were agitated, once even the blade of his knife, half drawn from its sheath, had dazzled her eyes with its sinister glare.
Thus, it was almost tremblingly that she resumed her lover’s arm.
The quadrille had been most perfect, and it was evident there was a great demand for a repetition, Carmela alone objecting to it, but the Count of San-Felice besought his daughter so earnestly, that she acceded.
“One of the cavaliers then hastened to invite Teresa, without whom it was impossible for the quadrille to be formed, but the young girl had disappeared.
“The truth was, that Luigi had not felt the strength to support another such trial, and, half by persuasion and half by force, he had removed Teresa toward another part of the garden.
Teresa had yielded in spite of herself, but when she looked at the agitated countenance of the young man, she understood by his silence and trembling voice that something strange was passing within him.
She herself was not exempt from internal emotion, and without having done anything wrong, yet fully comprehended that Luigi was right in reproaching her.
Why, she did not know, but yet she did not the less feel that these reproaches were merited.
“However, to Teresa’s great astonishment, Luigi remained mute, and not a word escaped his lips the rest of the evening.
‘Do you desire it as ardently as you say?’ “‘Yes.’ “‘Well, then, you shall have it!’ “The young girl, much astonished, raised her head to look at him, but his face was so gloomy and terrible that her words froze to her lips.
Teresa followed him with her eyes into the darkness as long as she could, and when he had quite disappeared, she went into the house with a sigh. 20121m “That night a memorable event occurred, due, no doubt, to the imprudence of some servant who had neglected to extinguish the lights.
The Villa of San-Felice took fire in the rooms adjoining the very apartment of the lovely Carmela.
Awakened in the night by the light of the flames, she sprang out of bed, wrapped herself in a dressing-gown, and attempted to escape by the door, but the corridor by which she hoped to fly was already a prey to the flames.
She then returned to her room, calling for help as loudly as she could, when suddenly her window, which was twenty feet from the ground, was opened, a young peasant jumped into the chamber, seized her in his arms, and with superhuman skill and strength conveyed her to the turf of the grass-plot, where she fainted.
When she recovered, her father was by her side.
All the servants surrounded her, offering her assistance.
An entire wing of the villa was burnt down; but what of that, as long as Carmela was safe and uninjured?
“Her preserver was everywhere sought for, but he did not appear; he was inquired after, but no one had seen him.
Carmela was greatly troubled that she had not recognized him.
“As the count was immensely rich, excepting the danger Carmela had run,—and the marvellous manner in which she had escaped, made that appear to him rather a favor of Providence than a real misfortune,—the loss occasioned by the conflagration was to him but a trifle.
“The next day, at the usual hour, the two young peasants were on the borders of the forest.
He came toward Teresa in high spirits, and seemed to have completely forgotten the events of the previous evening.
The young girl was very pensive, but seeing Luigi so cheerful, she on her part assumed a smiling air, which was natural to her when she was not excited or in a passion.
The young girl, perceiving that there was something extraordinary, looked at him steadfastly.
‘Go into the grotto and dress yourself.’ “At these words he drew away the stone, and showed Teresa the grotto, lighted up by two wax lights, which burnt on each side of a splendid mirror; on a rustic table, made by Luigi, were spread out the pearl necklace and the diamond pins, and on a chair at the side was laid the rest of the costume.
“Teresa uttered a cry of joy, and, without inquiring whence this attire came, or even thanking Luigi, darted into the grotto, transformed into a dressing-room.
“Luigi pushed the stone behind her, for on the crest of a small adjacent hill which cut off the view toward Palestrina, he saw a traveller on horseback, stopping a moment, as if uncertain of his road, and thus presenting against the blue sky that perfect outline which is peculiar to distant objects in southern climes.
When he saw Luigi, he put his horse into a gallop and advanced toward him.
“Luigi was not mistaken.
The traveller, who was going from Palestrina to Tivoli, had mistaken his way; the young man directed him; but as at a distance of a quarter of a mile the road again divided into three ways, and on reaching these the traveller might again stray from his route, he begged Luigi to be his guide.
“Luigi threw his cloak on the ground, placed his carbine on his shoulder, and freed from his heavy covering, preceded the traveller with the rapid step of a mountaineer, which a horse can scarcely keep up with.
In ten minutes Luigi and the traveller reached the cross-roads.
On arriving there, with an air as majestic as that of an emperor, he stretched his hand towards that one of the roads which the traveller was to follow.
“‘That is your road, excellency, and now you cannot again mistake.’ “‘And here is your recompense,’ said the traveller, offering the young herdsman some small pieces of money.
“‘Luigi Vampa,’ replied the shepherd, with the same air as he would have replied, Alexander, King of Macedon.
‘And yours?’ “‘I,’ said the traveller, ‘am called Sinbad the Sailor.’” Franz d’Épinay started with surprise.
“Yes,” replied the narrator; “that was the name which the traveller gave to Vampa as his own.” “Well, and what may you have to say against this name?” inquired Albert; “it is a very pretty name, and the adventures of the gentleman of that name amused me very much in my youth, I must confess.” Franz said no more.
The name of Sinbad the Sailor, as may well be supposed, awakened in him a world of recollections, as had the name of the Count of Monte Cristo on the previous evening.
“Vampa put the two sequins haughtily into his pocket, and slowly returned by the way he had gone.
He listened to know whence this sound could proceed.
A moment afterwards he thought he heard his own name pronounced distinctly.
“The cry proceeded from the grotto.
He bounded like a chamois, cocking his carbine as he went, and in a moment reached the summit of a hill opposite to that on which he had perceived the traveller.
Three cries for help came more distinctly to his ear.
He cast his eyes around him and saw a man carrying off Teresa, as Nessus, the centaur, carried Deianira.
“This man, who was hastening towards the wood, was already three-quarters of the way on the road from the grotto to the forest.
Vampa measured the distance; the man was at least two hundred paces in advance of him, and there was not a chance of overtaking him.
The young shepherd stopped, as if his feet had been rooted to the ground; then he put the butt of his carbine to his shoulder, took aim at the ravisher, followed him for a second in his track, and then fired.
“The ravisher stopped suddenly, his knees bent under him, and he fell with Teresa in his arms.
The young girl rose instantly, but the man lay on the earth struggling in the agonies of death.
Vampa then rushed towards Teresa; for at ten paces from the dying man her legs had failed her, and she had dropped on her knees, so that the young man feared that the ball that had brought down his enemy, had also wounded his betrothed.
“Fortunately, she was unscathed, and it was fright alone that had overcome Teresa.
When Luigi had assured himself that she was safe and unharmed, he turned towards the wounded man.
He had just expired, with clenched hands, his mouth in a spasm of agony, and his hair on end in the sweat of death.
His eyes remained open and menacing.
Vampa approached the corpse, and recognized Cucumetto.
“From the day on which the bandit had been saved by the two young peasants, he had been enamoured of Teresa, and had sworn she should be his.
From that time he had watched them, and profiting by the moment when her lover had left her alone, had carried her off, and believed he at length had her in his power, when the ball, directed by the unerring skill of the young herdsman, had pierced his heart.
Vampa gazed on him for a moment without betraying the slightest emotion; while, on the contrary, Teresa, shuddering in every limb, dared not approach the slain ruffian but by degrees, and threw a hesitating glance at the dead body over the shoulder of her lover.
Suddenly Vampa turned toward his mistress: “‘Ah,’ said he—‘good, good!
You are dressed; it is now my turn to dress myself.’ 20125m “Teresa was clothed from head to foot in the garb of the Count of San-Felice’s daughter.
Vampa took Cucumetto’s body in his arms and conveyed it to the grotto, while in her turn Teresa remained outside.
If a second traveller had passed, he would have seen a strange thing,—a shepherdess watching her flock, clad in a cashmere grown, with ear-rings and necklace of pearls, diamond pins, and buttons of sapphires, emeralds, and rubies.
He would, no doubt, have believed that he had returned to the times of Florian, and would have declared, on reaching Paris, that he had met an Alpine shepherdess seated at the foot of the Sabine Hill.
“Teresa uttered a cry of admiration.
Vampa in this attire resembled a painting by Léopold Robert or Schnetz.
He had assumed the entire costume of Cucumetto.
The young man saw the effect produced on his betrothed, and a smile of pride passed over his lips.
“‘Now,’ he said to Teresa, ‘are you ready to share my fortune, whatever it may be?’ “‘Oh, yes!’ exclaimed the young girl enthusiastically.
“‘And follow me wherever I go?’ “‘To the world’s end.’ “‘Then take my arm, and let us on; we have no time to lose.’ “The young girl did so without questioning her lover as to where he was conducting her, for he appeared to her at this moment as handsome, proud, and powerful as a god.
“We need scarcely say that all the paths of the mountain were known to Vampa; he therefore went forward without a moment’s hesitation, although there was no beaten track, but he knew his path by looking at the trees and bushes, and thus they kept on advancing for nearly an hour and a half.
At the end of this time they had reached the thickest part of the forest.
Vampa took this wild road, which, enclosed between two ridges, and shadowed by the tufted umbrage of the pines, seemed, but for the difficulties of its descent, that path to Avernus of which Virgil speaks.
Teresa had become alarmed at the wild and deserted look of the plain around her, and pressed closely against her guide, not uttering a syllable; but as she saw him advance with even step and composed countenance, she endeavored to repress her emotion.
“Suddenly, about ten paces from them, a man advanced from behind a tree and aimed at Vampa.
“‘Not another step,’ he said, ‘or you are a dead man.’ “‘What, then,’ said Vampa, raising his hand with a gesture of disdain, while Teresa, no longer able to restrain her alarm, clung closely to him, ‘do wolves rend each other?’ “‘Who are you?’ inquired the sentinel.
“‘I am Luigi Vampa, shepherd of the San-Felice farm.’ “‘What do you want?’ “‘I would speak with your companions who are in the glade at Rocca Bianca.’ “‘Follow me, then,’ said the sentinel; ‘or, as you know your way, go first.’ “Vampa smiled disdainfully at this precaution on the part of the bandit, went before Teresa, and continued to advance with the same firm and easy step as before.
Then the bandit thrice imitated the cry of a crow; a croak answered this signal.
“‘Good!’ said the sentry, ‘you may now go on.’ “Luigi and Teresa again set forward; as they went on Teresa clung tremblingly to her lover at the sight of weapons and the glistening of carbines through the trees.
The retreat of Rocca Bianca was at the top of a small mountain, which no doubt in former days had been a volcano—an extinct volcano before the days when Remus and Romulus had deserted Alba to come and found the city of Rome.
“Teresa and Luigi reached the summit, and all at once found themselves in the presence of twenty bandits.
“‘Here is a young man who seeks and wishes to speak to you,’ said the sentinel.
“‘What has he to say?’ inquired the young man who was in command in the chief’s absence.
“‘I wish to say that I am tired of a shepherd’s life,’ was Vampa’s reply.
“‘Ah, I understand,’ said the lieutenant; ‘and you seek admittance into our ranks?’ “‘Welcome!’ cried several bandits from Ferrusino, Pampinara, and Anagni, who had recognized Luigi Vampa.
“‘Yes, but I came to ask something more than to be your companion.’ “‘And what may that be?’ inquired the bandits with astonishment.
“The bandits shouted with laughter.
“‘And what have you done to aspire to this honor?’ demanded the lieutenant.
“The explanation would be too long, my dear landlord,” replied Franz.
“And you say that Signor Vampa exercises his profession at this moment in the environs of Rome?” “And with a boldness of which no bandit before him ever gave an example.” “Then the police have vainly tried to lay hands on him?” “Why, you see, he has a good understanding with the shepherds in the plains, the fishermen of the Tiber, and the smugglers of the coast.
They seek for him in the mountains, and he is on the waters; they follow him on the waters, and he is on the open sea; then they pursue him, and he has suddenly taken refuge in the islands, at Giglio, Giannutri, or Monte Cristo; and when they hunt for him there, he reappears suddenly at Albano, Tivoli, or La Riccia.” “And how does he behave towards travellers?” “Alas! his plan is very simple.
It depends on the distance he may be from the city, whether he gives eight hours, twelve hours, or a day wherein to pay their ransom; and when that time has elapsed he allows another hour’s grace.
“Excellencies,” said he, “the coach is ready.” “Well, then,” said Franz, “let us to the Colosseum.” “By the Porta del Popolo or by the streets, your excellencies?” “By the streets, _morbleu!_ by the streets!” cried Franz.
“Ah, my dear fellow,” said Albert, rising, and lighting his third cigar, “really, I thought you had more courage.” So saying, the two young men went down the staircase, and got into the carriage. 20131m Chapter 34.
The Colosseum Franz had so managed his route, that during the ride to the Colosseum they passed not a single ancient ruin, so that no preliminary impression interfered to mitigate the colossal proportions of the gigantic building they came to admire.
The road selected was a continuation of the Via Sistina; then by cutting off the right angle of the street in which stands Santa Maria Maggiore and proceeding by the Via Urbana and San Pietro in Vincoli, the travellers would find themselves directly opposite the Colosseum.
This itinerary possessed another great advantage,—that of leaving Franz at full liberty to indulge his deep reverie upon the subject of Signor Pastrini’s story, in which his mysterious host of Monte Cristo was so strangely mixed up.
Seated with folded arms in a corner of the carriage, he continued to ponder over the singular history he had so lately listened to, and to ask himself an interminable number of questions touching its various circumstances without, however, arriving at a satisfactory reply to any of them.
But however the mind of the young man might be absorbed in these reflections, they were at once dispersed at the sight of the dark frowning ruins of the stupendous Colosseum, through the various openings of which the pale moonlight played and flickered like the unearthly gleam from the eyes of the wandering dead.
The carriage stopped near the Meta Sudans; the door was opened, and the young men, eagerly alighting, found themselves opposite a _cicerone_, who appeared to have sprung up from the ground, so unexpected was his appearance.
The usual guide from the hotel having followed them, they had paid two conductors, nor is it possible, at Rome, to avoid this abundant supply of guides; besides the ordinary _cicerone_, who seizes upon you directly you set foot in your hotel, and never quits you while you remain in the city, there is also a special _cicerone_ belonging to each monument—nay, almost to each part of a monument.
Thus, then, the young men made no attempt at resistance, but blindly and confidingly surrendered themselves into the care and custody of their conductors.
All at once his ear caught a sound resembling that of a stone rolling down the staircase opposite the one by which he had himself ascended.
There was nothing remarkable in the circumstance of a fragment of granite giving way and falling heavily below; but it seemed to him that the substance that fell gave way beneath the pressure of a foot, and also that someone, who endeavored as much as possible to prevent his footsteps from being heard, was approaching the spot where he sat.
Conjecture soon became certainty, for the figure of a man was distinctly visible to Franz, gradually emerging from the staircase opposite, upon which the moon was at that moment pouring a full tide of silvery brightness.
The stranger thus presenting himself was probably a person who, like Franz, preferred the enjoyment of solitude and his own thoughts to the frivolous gabble of the guides.
And his appearance had nothing extraordinary in it; but the hesitation with which he proceeded, stopping and listening with anxious attention at every step he took, convinced Franz that he expected the arrival of some person.
By a sort of instinctive impulse, Franz withdrew as much as possible behind his pillar.
About ten feet from the spot where he and the stranger were, the roof had given way, leaving a large round opening, through which might be seen the blue vault of heaven, thickly studded with stars.
The person whose mysterious arrival had attracted the attention of Franz stood in a kind of half-light, that rendered it impossible to distinguish his features, although his dress was easily made out.
He wore a large brown mantle, one fold of which, thrown over his left shoulder, served likewise to mask the lower part of his countenance, while the upper part was completely hidden by his broad-brimmed hat.
The man who had performed this daring act with so much indifference wore the Transtevere costume.
“I beg your excellency’s pardon for keeping you waiting,” said the man, in the Roman dialect, “but I don’t think I’m many minutes after my time, ten o’clock has just struck by the clock of Saint John Lateran.” “Say not a word about being late,” replied the stranger in purest Tuscan; “’tis I who am too soon.
But even if you had caused me to wait a little while, I should have felt quite sure that the delay was not occasioned by any fault of yours.” “Your excellency is perfectly right in so thinking,” said the man; “I came here direct from the Castle of St.
Angelo, and I had an immense deal of trouble before I could get a chance to speak to Beppo.” “And who is Beppo?” “Oh, Beppo is employed in the prison, and I give him so much a year to let me know what is going on within his holiness’s castle.” “Indeed!
You are a provident person, I see.” “Why, you see, no one knows what may happen.
Perhaps some of these days I may be entrapped, like poor Peppino and may be very glad to have some little nibbling mouse to gnaw the meshes of my net, and so help me out of prison.” “Briefly, what did you learn?” “That two executions of considerable interest will take place the day after tomorrow at two o’clock, as is customary at Rome at the commencement of all great festivals.
One of the culprits will be _mazzolato_;3 he is an atrocious villain, who murdered the priest who brought him up, and deserves not the smallest pity.
I will so advantageously bestow 2,000 piastres, that the person receiving them shall obtain a respite till next year for Peppino; and during that year, another skilfully placed 1,000 piastres will afford him the means of escaping from his prison.” “And do you feel sure of succeeding?” “_Pardieu!_” exclaimed the man in the cloak, suddenly expressing himself in French.
“What did your excellency say?” inquired the other.
“I said, my good fellow, that I would do more single-handed by the means of gold than you and all your troop could effect with stilettos, pistols, carbines, and blunderbusses included.
Leave me, then, to act, and have no fears for the result.” “At least, there can be no harm in myself and party being in readiness, in case your excellency should fail.” “None whatever.
Take what precautions you please, if it is any satisfaction to you to do so; but rely upon my obtaining the reprieve I seek.” “Remember, the execution is fixed for the day after tomorrow, and that you have but one day to work in.” “And what of that?
Now in 86,400 seconds very many things can be done.” “And how shall I know whether your excellency has succeeded or not.” “Oh, that is very easily arranged.
Adieu, your excellency; depend upon me as firmly as I do upon you.” Saying these words, the Transteverin disappeared down the staircase, while his companion, muffling his features more closely than before in the folds of his mantle, passed almost close to Franz, and descended to the arena by an outward flight of steps.
The next minute Franz heard himself called by Albert, who made the lofty building re-echo with the sound of his friend’s name.
Franz, however, did not obey the summons till he had satisfied himself that the two men whose conversation he had overheard were at a sufficient distance to prevent his encountering them in his descent.
In ten minutes after the strangers had departed, Franz was on the road to the Piazza di Spagna, listening with studied indifference to the learned dissertation delivered by Albert, after the manner of Pliny and Calpurnius, touching the iron-pointed nets used to prevent the ferocious beasts from springing on the spectators.
Franz let him proceed without interruption, and, in fact, did not hear what was said; he longed to be alone, and free to ponder over all that had occurred.
It was more especially when this man was speaking in a manner half jesting, half bitter, that Franz’s ear recalled most vividly the deep sonorous, yet well-pitched voice that had addressed him in the grotto of Monte Cristo, and which he heard for the second time amid the darkness and ruined grandeur of the Colosseum.
As we have seen, therefore, he permitted his former host to retire without attempting a recognition, but fully promising himself a rich indemnity for his present forbearance should chance afford him another opportunity.
In vain did Franz endeavor to forget the many perplexing thoughts which assailed him; in vain did he court the refreshment of sleep.
Slumber refused to visit his eyelids and the night was passed in feverish contemplation of the chain of circumstances tending to prove the identity of the mysterious visitant to the Colosseum with the inhabitant of the grotto of Monte Cristo; and the more he thought, the firmer grew his opinion on the subject.
Worn out at length, he fell asleep at daybreak, and did not awake till late.
Like a genuine Frenchman, Albert had employed his time in arranging for the evening’s diversion; he had sent to engage a box at the Teatro Argentina; and Franz, having a number of letters to write, relinquished the carriage to Albert for the whole of the day.
At five o’clock Albert returned, delighted with his day’s work; he had been occupied in leaving his letters of introduction, and had received in return more invitations to balls and routs than it would be possible for him to accept; besides this, he had seen (as he called it) all the remarkable sights at Rome.
Yes, in a single day he had accomplished what his more serious-minded companion would have taken weeks to effect.
Neither had he neglected to ascertain the name of the piece to be played that night at the Teatro Argentina, and also what performers appeared in it.
The opera of _Parisina_ was announced for representation, and the principal actors were Coselli, Moriani, and La Specchia.
The young men, therefore, had reason to consider themselves fortunate in having the opportunity of hearing one of the best works by the composer of _Lucia di Lammermoor_, supported by three of the most renowned vocalists of Italy.
Albert had never been able to endure the Italian theatres, with their orchestras from which it is impossible to see, and the absence of balconies, or open boxes; all these defects pressed hard on a man who had had his stall at the Bouffes, and had shared a lower box at the Opera.
Still, in spite of this, Albert displayed his most dazzling and effective costumes each time he visited the theatres; but, alas, his elegant toilet was wholly thrown away, and one of the most worthy representatives of Parisian fashion had to carry with him the mortifying reflection that he had nearly overrun Italy without meeting with a single adventure.
Sometimes Albert would affect to make a joke of his want of success; but internally he was deeply wounded, and his self-love immensely piqued, to think that Albert de Morcerf, the most admired and most sought after of any young person of his day, should thus be passed over, and merely have his labor for his pains.
And the thing was so much the more annoying, as, according to the characteristic modesty of a Frenchman, Albert had quitted Paris with the full conviction that he had only to show himself in Italy to carry all before him, and that upon his return he should astonish the Parisian world with the recital of his numerous love-affairs.
Yet he could not restrain a hope that in Italy, as elsewhere, there might be an exception to the general rule.
It was therefore no small mortification to him to have visited most of the principal cities in Italy without having excited the most trifling observation.
Albert, however, hoped to indemnify himself for all these slights and indifferences during the Carnival, knowing full well that among the different states and kingdoms in which this festivity is celebrated, Rome is the spot where even the wisest and gravest throw off the usual rigidity of their lives, and deign to mingle in the follies of this time of liberty and relaxation.
The Carnival was to commence on the morrow; therefore Albert had not an instant to lose in setting forth the programme of his hopes, expectations, and claims to notice.
With this design he had engaged a box in the most conspicuous part of the theatre, and exerted himself to set off his personal attractions by the aid of the most rich and elaborate toilet.
Another motive had influenced Albert’s selection of his seat,—who knew but that, thus advantageously placed, he might not in truth attract the notice of some fair Roman, and an introduction might ensue that would procure him the offer of a seat in a carriage, or a place in a princely balcony, from which he might behold the gayeties of the Carnival?
These united considerations made Albert more lively and anxious to please than he had hitherto been.
The truth was, that the anticipated pleasures of the Carnival, with the “Holy Week” that was to succeed it, so filled every fair breast, as to prevent the least attention being bestowed even on the business of the stage.
Towards the close of the first act, the door of a box which had been hitherto vacant was opened; a lady entered to whom Franz had been introduced in Paris, where indeed, he had imagined she still was.
The quick eye of Albert caught the involuntary start with which his friend beheld the new arrival, and, turning to him, he said hastily: “Do you know the woman who has just entered that box?” “Yes; what do you think of her?” “Oh, she is perfectly lovely—what a complexion!
And such magnificent hair!
Is she French?” “No; a Venetian.” “And her name is——” “Countess G——.” “Ah, I know her by name!” exclaimed Albert; “she is said to possess as much wit and cleverness as beauty.
I was to have been presented to her when I met her at Madame Villefort’s ball.” “Shall I assist you in repairing your negligence?” asked Franz.
Pray tell me, is it sympathy of heart?” “No; of taste,” continued Franz gravely.
All I can say is, if ever I should get such a chance, the living should be my theme.” 20143m “And you will probably find your theme ill-chosen.” “But,” said Albert, breaking in upon his discourse, “never mind the past; let us only remember the present.
Are you not going to keep your promise of introducing me to the fair subject of our remarks?” “Certainly, directly the curtain falls on the stage.” “What a confounded long time this first act lasts.
I believe, on my soul, that they never mean to finish it.” “Oh, yes, they will; only listen to that charming finale.
How exquisitely Coselli sings his part.” “But what an awkward, inelegant fellow he is.” “Well, then, what do you say to La Specchia?
This important task was just completed as they arrived at the countess’s box.
At the knock, the door was immediately opened, and the young man who was seated beside the countess, in obedience to the Italian custom, instantly rose and surrendered his place to the strangers, who, in turn, would be expected to retire upon the arrival of other visitors.
Franz presented Albert as one of the most distinguished young men of the day, both as regarded his position in society and extraordinary talents; nor did he say more than the truth, for in Paris and the circle in which the viscount moved, he was looked upon and cited as a model of perfection.
Franz added that his companion, deeply grieved at having been prevented the honor of being presented to the countess during her sojourn in Paris, was most anxious to make up for it, and had requested him (Franz) to remedy the past misfortune by conducting him to her box, and concluded by asking pardon for his presumption in having taken it upon himself to do so.
The countess, in reply, bowed gracefully to Albert, and extended her hand with cordial kindness to Franz; then, inviting Albert to take the vacant seat beside her, she recommended Franz to take the next best, if he wished to view the ballet, and pointed to the one behind her own chair.
Albert was soon deeply engrossed in discoursing upon Paris and Parisian matters, speaking to the countess of the various persons they both knew there.
Franz perceived how completely he was in his element; and, unwilling to interfere with the pleasure he so evidently felt, took up Albert’s glass, and began in his turn to survey the audience.
Sitting alone, in the front of a box immediately opposite, but situated on the third row, was a woman of exquisite beauty, dressed in a Greek costume, which evidently, from the ease and grace with which she wore it, was her national attire.
Behind her, but in deep shadow, was the outline of a masculine figure; but the features of this latter personage it was not possible to distinguish.
Franz could not forbear breaking in upon the apparently interesting conversation passing between the countess and Albert, to inquire of the former if she knew who was the fair Albanian opposite, since beauty such as hers was well worthy of being observed by either sex.
“All I can tell about her,” replied the countess, “is, that she has been at Rome since the beginning of the season; for I saw her where she now sits the very first night of the season, and since then she has never missed a performance.
Of this he took no heed, but was, as far as appearances might be trusted, enjoying soft repose and bright celestial dreams.
The ballet at length came to a close, and the curtain fell amid the loud, unanimous plaudits of an enthusiastic and delighted audience.
Owing to the very judicious plan of dividing the two acts of the opera with a ballet, the pauses between the performances are very short, the singers in the opera having time to repose themselves and change their costume, when necessary, while the dancers are executing their pirouettes and exhibiting their graceful steps.
The overture to the second act began; and, at the first sound of the leader’s bow across his violin, Franz observed the sleeper slowly arise and approach the Greek girl, who turned around to say a few words to him, and then, leaning forward again on the railing of her box, she became as absorbed as before in what was going on.
The countenance of the person who had addressed her remained so completely in the shade, that, though Franz tried his utmost, he could not distinguish a single feature.
The curtain rose, and the attention of Franz was attracted by the actors; and his eyes turned from the box containing the Greek girl and her strange companion to watch the business of the stage.
Most of my readers are aware that the second act of _Parisina_ opens with the celebrated and effective duet in which Parisina, while sleeping, betrays to Azzo the secret of her love for Ugo.
The injured husband goes through all the emotions of jealousy, until conviction seizes on his mind, and then, in a frenzy of rage and indignation, he awakens his guilty wife to tell her that he knows her guilt and to threaten her with his vengeance.
This duet is one of the most beautiful, expressive and terrible conceptions that has ever emanated from the fruitful pen of Donizetti.
Franz now listened to it for the third time; yet its notes, so tenderly expressive and fearfully grand as the wretched husband and wife give vent to their different griefs and passions, thrilled through the soul of Franz with an effect equal to his first emotions upon hearing it.
Excited beyond his usual calm demeanor, Franz rose with the audience, and was about to join the loud, enthusiastic applause that followed; but suddenly his purpose was arrested, his hands fell by his sides, and the half-uttered “bravos” expired on his lips.
All doubt of his identity was now at an end; his singular host evidently resided at Rome.
The surprise and agitation occasioned by this full confirmation of Franz’s former suspicion had no doubt imparted a corresponding expression to his features; for the countess, after gazing with a puzzled look at his face, burst into a fit of laughter, and begged to know what had happened.
“Countess,” returned Franz, totally unheeding her raillery, “I asked you a short time since if you knew any particulars respecting the Albanian lady opposite; I must now beseech you to inform me who and what is her husband?” “Nay,” answered the countess, “I know no more of him than yourself.” “Perhaps you never before noticed him?” “What a question—so truly French!
Do you not know that we Italians have eyes only for the man we love?” “True,” replied Franz.
“All I can say is,” continued the countess, taking up the _lorgnette_, and directing it toward the box in question, “that the gentleman, whose history I am unable to furnish, seems to me as though he had just been dug up; he looks more like a corpse permitted by some friendly grave-digger to quit his tomb for a while, and revisit this earth of ours, than anything human.
How ghastly pale he is!” “Oh, he is always as colorless as you now see him,” said Franz.
“Then you know him?” almost screamed the countess.
“I must positively find out who and what he is,” said Franz, rising from his seat.
“No, no,” cried the countess; “you must not leave me.
Oh, indeed, I cannot permit you to go.” “Is it possible,” whispered Franz, “that you entertain any fear?” “I’ll tell you,” answered the countess.
“Byron had the most perfect belief in the existence of vampires, and even assured me that he had seen them.
The description he gave me perfectly corresponds with the features and character of the man before us.
Oh, he is the exact personification of what I have been led to expect!
The coal-black hair, large bright, glittering eyes, in which a wild, unearthly fire seems burning,—the same ghastly paleness.
Then observe, too, that the woman with him is altogether unlike all others of her sex.
She is a foreigner—a stranger.
No doubt she belongs to the same horrible race he does, and is, like himself, a dealer in magical arts.
I entreat of you not to go near him—at least tonight; and if tomorrow your curiosity still continues as great, pursue your researches if you will; but tonight you neither can nor shall.
For that purpose I mean to keep you all to myself.” Franz protested he could not defer his pursuit till the following day, for many reasons.
“Listen to me,” said the countess, “and do not be so very headstrong.
I have a party at my house tonight, and therefore cannot possibly remain till the end of the opera.
Now, I cannot for one instant believe you so devoid of gallantry as to refuse a lady your escort when she even condescends to ask you for it.” There was nothing else left for Franz to do but to take up his hat, open the door of the box, and offer the countess his arm.
It was quite evident, by her manner, that her uneasiness was not feigned; and Franz himself could not resist a feeling of superstitious dread—so much the stronger in him, as it arose from a variety of corroborative recollections, while the terror of the countess sprang from an instinctive belief, originally created in her mind by the wild tales she had listened to till she believed them truths.
Franz could even feel her arm tremble as he assisted her into the carriage.
Upon arriving at her hotel, Franz perceived that she had deceived him when she spoke of expecting company; on the contrary, her own return before the appointed hour seemed greatly to astonish the servants.
“Excuse my little subterfuge,” said the countess, in reply to her companion’s half-reproachful observation on the subject; “but that horrid man had made me feel quite uncomfortable, and I longed to be alone, that I might compose my startled mind.” Franz essayed to smile.
“Nay,” said she, “do not smile; it ill accords with the expression of your countenance, and I am sure it does not spring from your heart.
However, promise me one thing.” “What is it?” “Promise me, I say.” “I will do anything you desire, except relinquish my determination of finding out who this man is.
I have more reasons than you can imagine for desiring to know who he is, from whence he came, and whither he is going.” “Where he comes from I am ignorant; but I can readily tell you where he is going to, and that is down below, without the least doubt.” “Let us only speak of the promise you wished me to make,” said Franz.
“Well, then, you must give me your word to return immediately to your hotel, and make no attempt to follow this man tonight.
There are certain affinities between the persons we quit and those we meet afterwards.
For heaven’s sake, do not serve as a conductor between that man and me.
Pursue your chase after him tomorrow as eagerly as you please; but never bring him near me, if you would not see me die of terror.
And now, good-night; go to your rooms, and try to sleep away all recollections of this evening.
For my own part, I am quite sure I shall not be able to close my eyes.” So saying, the countess quitted Franz, leaving him unable to decide whether she were merely amusing herself at his expense, or whether her fears and agitations were genuine.
Upon his return to the hotel, Franz found Albert in his dressing-gown and slippers, listlessly extended on a sofa, smoking a cigar.
“My dear fellow!” cried he, springing up, “is it really you?
Why, I did not expect to see you before tomorrow.” “My dear Albert,” replied Franz, “I am glad of this opportunity to tell you, once and forever, that you entertain a most erroneous notion concerning Italian women.
I should have thought the continual failures you have met with in all your own love affairs might have taught you better by this time.” “Upon my soul, these women would puzzle the very Devil to read them aright.
Why, here—they give you their hand—they press yours in return—they keep up a whispering conversation—permit you to accompany them home.
Why, if a Parisian were to indulge in a quarter of these marks of flattering attention, her reputation would be gone forever.” “And the very reason why the women of this fine country, ‘where sounds the _si_,’ as Dante writes, put so little restraint on their words and actions, is because they live so much in public, and have really nothing to conceal.
Besides, you must have perceived that the countess was really alarmed.” “At what?
At the sight of that respectable gentleman sitting opposite to us in the same box with the lovely Greek girl?
Now, for my part, I met them in the lobby after the conclusion of the piece; and hang me, if I can guess where you took your notions of the other world from.
I can assure you that this hobgoblin of yours is a deuced fine-looking fellow—admirably dressed.
Indeed, I feel quite sure, from the cut of his clothes, they are made by a first-rate Paris tailor—probably Blin or Humann.
He was rather too pale, certainly; but then, you know, paleness is always looked upon as a strong proof of aristocratic descent and distinguished breeding.” Franz smiled; for he well remembered that Albert particularly prided himself on the entire absence of color in his own complexion.
“Well, that tends to confirm my own ideas,” said Franz, “that the countess’s suspicions were destitute alike of sense and reason.
I don’t know whether I ever told you that when I was at college I was rather—rather strong in Greek.” “He spoke the Romaic language, did he?” “I think so.” “That settles it,” murmured Franz.
But tell me, what were you thinking about when I came in?” “Oh, I was arranging a little surprise for you.” “Indeed.
Of what nature?” “Why, you know it is quite impossible to procure a carriage.” “Certainly; and I also know that we have done all that human means afforded to endeavor to get one.” “Now, then, in this difficulty a bright idea has flashed across my brain.” Franz looked at Albert as though he had not much confidence in the suggestions of his imagination.
I dare say such a thing might be had.” “Very possibly.” “And a pair of oxen?” “As easily found as the cart.” “Then you see, my good fellow, with a cart and a couple of oxen our business can be managed.
The cart must be tastefully ornamented; and if you and I dress ourselves as Neapolitan reapers, we may get up a striking tableau, after the manner of that splendid picture by Léopold Robert.
It would add greatly to the effect if the countess would join us in the costume of a peasant from Puzzoli or Sorrento.
Our group would then be quite complete, more especially as the countess is quite beautiful enough to represent a Madonna.” “Well,” said Franz, “this time, M.
Albert, I am bound to give you credit for having hit upon a most capital idea.” “And quite a national one, too,” replied Albert with gratified pride.
“A mere masque borrowed from our own festivities.
Ha, ha, ye Romans! you thought to make us, unhappy strangers, trot at the heels of your processions, like so many lazzaroni, because no carriages or horses are to be had in your beggarly city.
But you don’t know us; when we can’t have one thing we invent another.” “And have you communicated your triumphant idea to anybody?” “Only to our host.
Upon my return home I sent for him, and I then explained to him what I wished to procure.
“_Permesso_?” inquired he.
“Certainly—certainly,” cried Franz.
“Come in, my host.” “Now, then,” asked Albert eagerly, “have you found the desired cart and oxen?” “Better than that!” replied Signor Pastrini, with the air of a man perfectly well satisfied with himself.
“Take care, my worthy host,” said Albert, “_better_ is a sure enemy to _well_.” “Let your excellencies only leave the matter to me,” returned Signor Pastrini in a tone indicative of unbounded self-confidence.
“But do you think,” asked Albert, “that we ought to accept such offers from a perfect stranger?” “What sort of person is this Count of Monte Cristo?” asked Franz of his host.
A servant, wearing a livery of considerable style and richness, appeared at the threshold, and, placing two cards in the landlord’s hands, who forthwith presented them to the two young men, he said: “Please to deliver these, from the Count of Monte Cristo to Vicomte Albert de Morcerf and M.
“That is what I call an elegant mode of attack,” said Albert, “You were quite correct in what you said, Signor Pastrini.
The Count of Monte Cristo is unquestionably a man of first-rate breeding and knowledge of the world.” “Then you accept his offer?” said the host.
“Still, I must own I am sorry to be obliged to give up the cart and the group of reapers—it would have produced such an effect!
And were it not for the windows at the Palazzo Rospoli, by way of recompense for the loss of our beautiful scheme, I don’t know but what I should have held on by my original plan.
Franz passed the night in confused dreams respecting the two meetings he had already had with his mysterious tormentor, and in waking speculations as to what the morrow would produce.
The next day must clear up every doubt; and unless his near neighbor and would-be friend, the Count of Monte Cristo, possessed the ring of Gyges, and by its power was able to render himself invisible, it was very certain he could not escape this time.
The first act of Franz was to summon his landlord, who presented himself with his accustomed obsequiousness.
Only a few minutes ago they brought me the _tavolettas_.” “What are they?” “Sort of wooden tablets hung up at the corners of streets the evening before an execution, on which is pasted up a paper containing the names of the condemned persons, their crimes, and mode of punishment.
The reason for so publicly announcing all this is, that all good and faithful Catholics may offer up their prayers for the unfortunate culprits, and, above all, beseech of Heaven to grant them a sincere repentance.” “And these tablets are brought to you that you may add your prayers to those of the faithful, are they?” asked Franz somewhat incredulously.
“Oh, dear, no, your excellency!
“Why, your excellency,” returned the landlord, chuckling and rubbing his hands with infinite complacency, “I think I may take upon myself to say I neglect nothing to deserve the support and patronage of the noble visitors to this poor hotel.” “I see that plainly enough, my most excellent host, and you may rely upon me to proclaim so striking a proof of your attention to your guests wherever I go.
John Lateran; and the latter convicted of being an accomplice of the atrocious and sanguinary bandit, Luigi Vampa, and his band.
The first-named malefactor will be _mazzolato_, the second culprit _decapitato_.
“‘The prayers of all good Christians are entreated for these unfortunate men, that it may please God to awaken them to a sense of their guilt, and to grant them a hearty and sincere repentance for their crimes.’” This was precisely what Franz had heard the evening before in the ruins of the Colosseum.
No part of the programme differed,—the names of the condemned persons, their crimes, and mode of punishment, all agreed with his previous information.
In all probability, therefore, the Transteverin was no other than the bandit Luigi Vampa himself, and the man shrouded in the mantle the same he had known as “Sinbad the Sailor,” but who, no doubt, was still pursuing his philanthropic expedition in Rome, as he had already done at Porto-Vecchio and Tunis.
Time was getting on, however, and Franz deemed it advisable to awaken Albert; but at the moment he prepared to proceed to his chamber, his friend entered the room in perfect costume for the day.
The anticipated delights of the Carnival had so run in his head as to make him leave his pillow long before his usual hour.
“Now, my excellent Signor Pastrini,” said Franz, addressing his landlord, “since we are both ready, do you think we may proceed at once to visit the Count of Monte Cristo?” “Most assuredly,” replied he.
“The Count of Monte Cristo is always an early riser; and I can answer for his having been up these two hours.” “Then you really consider we shall not be intruding if we pay our respects to him directly?” 20155m “Oh, I am quite sure.
They passed through two rooms, furnished in a luxurious manner they had not expected to see under the roof of Signor Pastrini, and were shown into an elegantly fitted-up drawing-room.
The richest Turkey carpets covered the floor, and the softest and most inviting couches, easy-chairs, and sofas, offered their high-piled and yielding cushions to such as desired repose or refreshment.
Splendid paintings by the first masters were ranged against the walls, intermingled with magnificent trophies of war, while heavy curtains of costly tapestry were suspended before the different doors of the room.
“If your excellencies will please to be seated,” said the man, “I will let the count know that you are here.” And with these words he disappeared behind one of the tapestried _portières_.
As the door opened, the sound of a _guzla_ reached the ears of the young men, but was almost immediately lost, for the rapid closing of the door merely allowed one rich swell of harmony to enter.
Franz and Albert looked inquiringly at each other, then at the gorgeous furnishings of the apartment.
Everything seemed more magnificent at a second view than it had done at their first rapid survey.
Albert instantly rose to meet him, but Franz remained, in a manner, spellbound on his chair; for in the person of him who had just entered he recognized not only the mysterious visitant to the Colosseum, and the occupant of the box at the Teatro Argentina, but also his extraordinary host of Monte Cristo. 20157m Chapter 35.
“It was the fault of that blockhead Pastrini, that I did not sooner assist you in your distress.
He did not mention a syllable of your embarrassment to me, when he knows that, alone and isolated as I am, I seek every opportunity of making the acquaintance of my neighbors.
As soon as I learned I could in any way assist you, I most eagerly seized the opportunity of offering my services.” The two young men bowed.
He resolved, therefore, to let things take their course without making any direct overture to the count.
Moreover, he had this advantage, he was master of the count’s secret, while the count had no hold on Franz, who had nothing to conceal.
However, he resolved to lead the conversation to a subject which might possibly clear up his doubts.
“Count,” said he, “you have offered us places in your carriage, and at your windows in the Rospoli Palace.
Can you tell us where we can obtain a sight of the Piazza del Popolo?” “Ah,” said the count negligently, looking attentively at Morcerf, “is there not something like an execution upon the Piazza del Popolo?” “Yes,” returned Franz, finding that the count was coming to the point he wished.
“Stay, I think I told my steward yesterday to attend to this; perhaps I can render you this slight service also.” He extended his hand, and rang the bell thrice.
“Did you ever occupy yourself,” said he to Franz, “with the employment of time and the means of simplifying the summoning your servants?
When I ring once, it is for my valet; twice, for my majordomo; thrice, for my steward,—thus I do not waste a minute or a word.
Here he is.” A man of about forty-five or fifty entered, exactly resembling the smuggler who had introduced Franz into the cavern; but he did not appear to recognize him.
“Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count, “you have procured me windows looking on the Piazza del Popolo, as I ordered you yesterday.” “Yes, excellency,” returned the steward; “but it was very late.” “Did I not tell you I wished for one?” replied the count, frowning.
“And your excellency has one, which was let to Prince Lobanieff; but I was obliged to pay a hundred——” “That will do—that will do, Monsieur Bertuccio; spare these gentlemen all such domestic arrangements.
You have the window, that is sufficient.
Give orders to the coachman; and be in readiness on the stairs to conduct us to it.” The steward bowed, and was about to quit the room.
“Ah!” continued the count, “be good enough to ask Pastrini if he has received the _tavoletta_, and if he can send us an account of the execution.” “There is no need to do that,” said Franz, taking out his tablets; “for I saw the account, and copied it down.” “Very well, you can retire, M.
Bertuccio; I need you no longer.
Let us know when breakfast is ready.
These gentlemen,” added he, turning to the two friends, “will, I trust, do me the honor to breakfast with me?” “But, my dear count,” said Albert, “we shall abuse your kindness.” “Not at all; on the contrary, you will give me great pleasure.
Bertuccio, lay covers for three.” He then took Franz’s tablets out of his hand.
“‘We announce,’ he read, in the same tone with which he would have read a newspaper, ‘that today, the 23rd of February, will be executed Andrea Rondolo, guilty of murder on the person of the respected and venerated Don César Torlini, canon of the church of St.
John Lateran, and Peppino, called Rocca Priori, convicted of complicity with the detestable bandit Luigi Vampa, and the men of his band.’ “Hum!
‘The first will be _mazzolato_, the second _decapitato_.’ Yes,” continued the count, “it was at first arranged in this way; but I think since yesterday some change has taken place in the order of the ceremony.” “Really?” said Franz.
“Yes, I passed the evening at the Cardinal Rospigliosi’s, and there mention was made of something like a pardon for one of the two men.” “For Andrea Rondolo?” asked Franz.
“No,” replied the count, carelessly; “for the other (he glanced at the tablets as if to recall the name), for Peppino, called Rocca Priori.
You are thus deprived of seeing a man guillotined; but the _mazzolata_ still remains, which is a very curious punishment when seen for the first time, and even the second, while the other, as you must know, is very simple.
The _mandaïa_6 never fails, never trembles, never strikes thirty times ineffectually, like the soldier who beheaded the Count of Chalais, and to whose tender mercy Richelieu had doubtless recommended the sufferer.
Ah,” added the count, in a contemptuous tone, “do not tell me of European punishments, they are in the infancy, or rather the old age, of cruelty.” “Really, count,” replied Franz, “one would think that you had studied the different tortures of all the nations of the world.” “There are, at least, few that I have not seen,” said the count coldly.
“And you took pleasure in beholding these dreadful spectacles?” “My first sentiment was horror, the second indifference, the third curiosity.” “Curiosity—that is a terrible word.” “Why so?
In life, our greatest preoccupation is death; is it not then, curious to study the different ways by which the soul and body can part; and how, according to their different characters, temperaments, and even the different customs of their countries, different persons bear the transition from life to death, from existence to annihilation?
But are there not a thousand tortures by which a man may be made to suffer without society taking the least cognizance of them, or offering him even the insufficient means of vengeance, of which we have just spoken?
Are there not crimes for which the impalement of the Turks, the augers of the Persians, the stake and the brand of the Iroquois Indians, are inadequate tortures, and which are unpunished by society?
Answer me, do not these crimes exist?” “Yes,” answered Franz; “and it is to punish them that duelling is tolerated.” “Ah, duelling,” cried the count; “a pleasant manner, upon my soul, of arriving at your end when that end is vengeance!
And remember, moreover, that it is often he who comes off victorious from the strife, absolved of all crime in the eyes of the world.
No, no,” continued the count, “had I to avenge myself, it is not thus I would take revenge.” “Then you disapprove of duelling?
You would not fight a duel?” asked Albert in his turn, astonished at this strange theory.
“Oh, yes,” replied the count; “understand me, I would fight a duel for a trifle, for an insult, for a blow; and the more so that, thanks to my skill in all bodily exercises, and the indifference to danger I have gradually acquired, I should be almost certain to kill my man.
What matters this punishment, as long as he is avenged?
On my word, I almost regret that in all probability this miserable Peppino will not be beheaded, as you might have had an opportunity then of seeing how short a time the punishment lasts, and whether it is worth even mentioning; but, really this is a most singular conversation for the Carnival, gentlemen; how did it arise?
Ah, I recollect, you asked for a place at my window; you shall have it; but let us first sit down to table, for here comes the servant to inform us that breakfast is ready.” As he spoke, a servant opened one of the four doors of the apartment, saying: “_Al suo commodo!_” The two young men arose and entered the breakfast-room.
As for the count, he just touched the dishes; he seemed to fulfil the duties of a host by sitting down with his guests, and awaited their departure to be served with some strange or more delicate food.
This brought back to Franz, in spite of himself, the recollection of the terror with which the count had inspired the Countess G——, and her firm conviction that the man in the opposite box was a vampire.
At the end of the breakfast Franz took out his watch.
“You will describe it to me,” replied Franz, “and the recital from your lips will make as great an impression on me as if I had witnessed it.
Recollect the ancient Romans of the Circus, and the sports where they killed three hundred lions and a hundred men.
Think of the eighty thousand applauding spectators, the sage matrons who took their daughters, and the charming Vestals who made with the thumb of their white hands the fatal sign that said, ‘Come, despatch the dying.’” “Shall you go, then, Albert?” asked Franz.
“_Ma foi_, yes; like you, I hesitated, but the count’s eloquence decides me.” “Let us go, then,” said Franz, “since you wish it; but on our way to the Piazza del Popolo, I wish to pass through the Corso.
Is this possible, count?” “On foot, yes, in a carriage, no.” “I will go on foot, then.” “Is it important that you should go that way?” “Yes, there is something I wish to see.” “Well, we will go by the Corso.
I will be with you directly.” The young men rose and returned into the salon, while the count, again apologizing, left by another door.
Albert, who was a great smoker, and who had considered it no small sacrifice to be deprived of the cigars of the Café de Paris, approached the table, and uttered a cry of joy at perceiving some veritable _puros_.
“But,” said he, “did you observe one very singular thing?” “What?” “How attentively he looked at you.” “At me?” “Yes.” Albert reflected.
“Ah,” replied he, sighing, “that is not very surprising; I have been more than a year absent from Paris, and my clothes are of a most antiquated cut; the count takes me for a provincial.
The first opportunity you have, undeceive him, I beg, and tell him I am nothing of the kind.” Franz smiled; an instant after the count entered.
“I am now quite at your service, gentlemen,” said he.
“The carriage is going one way to the Piazza del Popolo, and we will go another; and, if you please, by the Corso.
Take some more of these cigars, M. de Morcerf.” “With all my heart,” returned Albert; “Italian cigars are horrible.
Come, we have not any time to lose, it is half-past twelve—let us set off.” All three descended; the coachman received his master’s orders, and drove down the Via del Babuino.
While the three gentlemen walked along the Piazza di Spagna and the Via Frattina, which led directly between the Fiano and Rospoli palaces, Franz’s attention was directed towards the windows of that last palace, for he had not forgotten the signal agreed upon between the man in the mantle and the Transtevere peasant.
“Which are your windows?” asked he of the count, with as much indifference as he could assume.
“The three last,” returned he, with a negligence evidently unaffected, for he could not imagine with what intention the question was put.
The man in the mantle had kept his promise to the Transteverin, and there could now be no doubt that he was the count.
The three windows were still untenanted.
Preparations were making on every side; chairs were placed, scaffolds were raised, and windows were hung with flags.
The masks could not appear; the carriages could not move about; but the masks were visible behind the windows, the carriages, and the doors.
Franz, Albert, and the count continued to descend the Corso.
At the corner of the street they met the count’s steward, who was awaiting his master.
The window, let at an exorbitant price, which the count had doubtless wished to conceal from his guests, was on the second floor of the great palace, situated between the Via del Babuino and the Monte Pincio.
It consisted, as we have said, of a small dressing-room, opening into a bedroom, and, when the door of communication was shut, the inmates were quite alone.
It was the first time Franz had ever seen a guillotine,—we say guillotine, because the Roman _mandaïa_ is formed on almost the same model as the French instrument.7 The knife, which is shaped like a crescent, that cuts with the convex side, falls from a less height, and that is all the difference.
Two men, seated on the movable plank on which the victim is laid, were eating their breakfasts, while waiting for the criminal.
Their repast consisted apparently of bread and sausages.
One of them lifted the plank, took out a flask of wine, drank some, and then passed it to his companion.
These two men were the executioner’s assistants.
At this sight Franz felt the perspiration start forth upon his brow.
The prisoners, transported the previous evening from the Carceri Nuove to the little church of Santa Maria del Popolo, had passed the night, each accompanied by two priests, in a chapel closed by a grating, before which were two sentinels, who were relieved at intervals.
A double line of carbineers, placed on each side of the door of the church, reached to the scaffold, and formed a circle around it, leaving a path about ten feet wide, and around the guillotine a space of nearly a hundred feet.
Many women held their infants on their shoulders, and thus the children had the best view.
The Monte Pincio seemed a vast amphitheatre filled with spectators; the balconies of the two churches at the corner of the Via del Babuino and the Via di Ripetta were crammed; the steps even seemed a parti-colored sea, that was impelled towards the portico; every niche in the wall held its living statue.
What the count said was true—the most curious spectacle in life is that of death.
And yet, instead of the silence and the solemnity demanded by the occasion, laughter and jests arose from the crowd.
It was evident that the execution was, in the eyes of the people, only the commencement of the Carnival.
Suddenly the tumult ceased, as if by magic, and the doors of the church opened.
A brotherhood of penitents, clothed from head to foot in robes of gray sackcloth, with holes for the eyes, and holding in their hands lighted tapers, appeared first; the chief marched at the head. 20169m Behind the penitents came a man of vast stature and proportions.
He was naked, with the exception of cloth drawers at the left side of which hung a large knife in a sheath, and he bore on his right shoulder a heavy iron sledge-hammer.
This man was the executioner.
He had, moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords.
Behind the executioner came, in the order in which they were to die, first Peppino and then Andrea.
Each was accompanied by two priests.
Neither had his eyes bandaged.
Peppino walked with a firm step, doubtless aware of what awaited him.
Andrea was supported by two priests.
Each of them, from time to time, kissed the crucifix a confessor held out to them.
He looked at Albert—he was as white as his shirt, and mechanically cast away his cigar, although he had not half smoked it.
The count alone seemed unmoved—nay, more, a slight color seemed striving to rise in his pale cheeks.
His nostrils dilated like those of a wild beast that scents its prey, and his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and sharp like those of a jackal.
And yet his features wore an expression of smiling tenderness, such as Franz had never before witnessed in them; his black eyes especially were full of kindness and pity.
However, the two culprits advanced, and as they approached their faces became visible.
Peppino was a handsome young man of four or five-and-twenty, bronzed by the sun; he carried his head erect, and seemed on the watch to see on which side his liberator would appear.
Andrea was short and fat; his visage, marked with brutal cruelty, did not indicate age; he might be thirty.
In prison he had suffered his beard to grow; his head fell on his shoulder, his legs bent beneath him, and his movements were apparently automatic and unconscious.
“I thought,” said Franz to the count, “that you told me there would be but one execution.” “I told you true,” replied he coldly.
“And yet here are two culprits.” “Yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the other has many years to live.” “If the pardon is to come, there is no time to lose.” “And see, here it is,” said the count.
At the moment when Peppino reached the foot of the _mandaïa_, a priest arrived in some haste, forced his way through the soldiers, and, advancing to the chief of the brotherhood, gave him a folded paper.
The piercing eye of Peppino had noticed all.
The chief took the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his hand, “Heaven be praised, and his Holiness also,” said he in a loud voice; “here is a pardon for one of the prisoners!” “A pardon!” cried the people with one voice; “a pardon!” At this cry Andrea raised his head.
Peppino remained breathless.
“A pardon for Peppino, called Rocca Priori,” said the principal friar.
And he passed the paper to the officer commanding the carbineers, who read and returned it to him.
We ought to die together.
I was promised he should die with me.
I will not die alone—I will not!” And he broke from the priests struggling and raving like a wild beast, and striving desperately to break the cords that bound his hands.
The executioner made a sign, and his two assistants leaped from the scaffold and seized him.
“What is going on?” asked Franz of the count; for, as all the talk was in the Roman dialect, he had not perfectly understood it.
“Do you not see?” returned the count, “that this human creature who is about to die is furious that his fellow-sufferer does not perish with him? and, were he able, he would rather tear him to pieces with his teeth and nails than let him enjoy the life he himself is about to be deprived of.
Here is a man who had resigned himself to his fate, who was going to the scaffold to die—like a coward, it is true, but he was about to die without resistance.
Do you know what gave him strength? do you know what consoled him?
It was, that another partook of his punishment—that another partook of his anguish—that another was to die before him!
Lead two sheep to the butcher’s, two oxen to the slaughterhouse, and make one of them understand that his companion will not die; the sheep will bleat for pleasure, the ox will bellow with joy.
But man—man, whom God created in his own image—man, upon whom God has laid his first, his sole commandment, to love his neighbor—man, to whom God has given a voice to express his thoughts—what is his first cry when he hears his fellow-man is saved?
Honor to man, this masterpiece of nature, this king of the creation!” And the count burst into a laugh; a terrible laugh, that showed he must have suffered horribly to be able thus to laugh.
However, the struggle still continued, and it was dreadful to witness.
The two assistants carried Andrea up to the scaffold; the people all took part against Andrea, and twenty thousand voices cried, “Put him to death! put him to death!” Franz sprang back, but the count seized his arm, and held him before the window.
If you heard the cry of ‘Mad dog!’ you would take your gun—you would unhesitatingly shoot the poor beast, who, after all, was only guilty of having been bitten by another dog.
And yet you pity a man who, without being bitten by one of his race, has yet murdered his benefactor; and who, now unable to kill anyone, because his hands are bound, wishes to see his companion in captivity perish.
No, no—look, look!” 20172m The recommendation was needless.
Franz was fascinated by the horrible spectacle.
The two assistants had borne Andrea to the scaffold, and there, in spite of his struggles, his bites, and his cries, had forced him to his knees.
During this time the executioner had raised his mace, and signed to them to get out of the way; the criminal strove to rise, but, ere he had time, the mace fell on his left temple.
The executioner let fall his mace, drew his knife, and with one stroke opened his throat, and mounting on his stomach, stamped violently on it with his feet.
This time Franz could contain himself no longer, but sank, half fainting, into a seat.
Albert, with his eyes closed, was standing grasping the window-curtains.
The count was erect and triumphant, like the Avenging Angel!
The Carnival at Rome When Franz recovered his senses, he saw Albert drinking a glass of water, of which, to judge from his pallor, he stood in great need; and the count, who was assuming his masquerade costume.
He glanced mechanically towards the piazza—the scene was wholly changed; scaffold, executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the people remained, full of noise and excitement.
The bell of Monte Citorio, which only sounds on the pope’s decease and the opening of the Carnival, was ringing a joyous peal.
“Well,” asked he of the count, “what has, then, happened?” “Nothing,” replied the count; “only, as you see, the Carnival has commenced.
He profited by this distraction to slip away among the crowd, without even thanking the worthy priests who accompanied him.
Decidedly man is an ungrateful and egotistical animal.
But dress yourself; see, M. de Morcerf sets you the example.” Albert was drawing on the satin pantaloon over his black trousers and varnished boots.
“Well, Albert,” said Franz, “do you feel much inclined to join the revels?
Come, answer frankly.” “_Ma foi_, no,” returned Albert.
It must be allowed that Andrea was not very handsome, the hideous scoundrel!
Come, dress yourselves, gentlemen, dress yourselves.” Franz felt it would be ridiculous not to follow his two companions’ example.
He assumed his costume, and fastened on the mask that scarcely equalled the pallor of his own face.
Their toilet finished, they descended; the carriage awaited them at the door, filled with sweetmeats and bouquets.
They fell into the line of carriages.
It is difficult to form an idea of the perfect change that had taken place.
Instead of the spectacle of gloomy and silent death, the Piazza del Popolo presented a spectacle of gay and noisy mirth and revelry.
A crowd of masks flowed in from all sides, emerging from the doors, descending from the windows.
Franz and Albert were like men who, to drive away a violent sorrow, have recourse to wine, and who, as they drink and become intoxicated, feel a thick veil drawn between the past and the present.
They saw, or rather continued to see, the image of what they had witnessed; but little by little the general vertigo seized them, and they felt themselves obliged to take part in the noise and confusion.
A handful of confetti that came from a neighboring carriage, and which, while it covered Morcerf and his two companions with dust, pricked his neck and that portion of his face uncovered by his mask like a hundred pins, incited him to join in the general combat, in which all the masks around him were engaged.
He rose in his turn, and seizing handfuls of confetti and sweetmeats, with which the carriage was filled, cast them with all the force and skill he was master of. 20177m The strife had fairly begun, and the recollection of what they had seen half an hour before was gradually effaced from the young men’s minds, so much were they occupied by the gay and glittering procession they now beheld.
As for the Count of Monte Cristo, he had never for an instant shown any appearance of having been moved.
Imagine the large and splendid Corso, bordered from one end to the other with lofty palaces, with their balconies hung with carpets, and their windows with flags.
At these balconies are three hundred thousand spectators—Romans, Italians, strangers from all parts of the world, the united aristocracy of birth, wealth, and genius.
Lovely women, yielding to the influence of the scene, bend over their balconies, or lean from their windows, and shower down confetti, which are returned by bouquets; the air seems darkened with the falling confetti and flying flowers.
In the streets the lively crowd is dressed in the most fantastic costumes—gigantic cabbages walk gravely about, buffaloes’ heads bellow from men’s shoulders, dogs walk on their hind legs; in the midst of all this a mask is lifted, and, as in Callot’s Temptation of St.
Anthony, a lovely face is exhibited, which we would fain follow, but from which we are separated by troops of fiends.
This will give a faint idea of the Carnival at Rome.
At the second turn, the count stopped the carriage, and requested permission to withdraw, leaving the vehicle at their disposal.
Franz looked up—they were opposite the Rospoli Palace.
At the centre window, the one hung with white damask with a red cross, was a blue domino, beneath which Franz’s imagination easily pictured the beautiful Greek of the Argentina.
“Gentlemen,” said the count, springing out, “when you are tired of being actors, and wish to become spectators of this scene, you know you have places at my windows.
In the meantime, dispose of my coachman, my carriage, and my servants.” We have forgotten to mention, that the count’s coachman was attired in a bear-skin, exactly resembling Odry’s in _The Bear and the Pasha_; and the two footmen behind were dressed up as green monkeys, with spring masks, with which they made grimaces at everyone who passed.
Franz thanked the count for his attention.
As for Albert, he was busily occupied throwing bouquets at a carriage full of Roman peasants that was passing near him.
Unfortunately for him, the line of carriages moved on again, and while he descended the Piazza del Popolo, the other ascended towards the Palazzo di Venezia.
At one of these encounters, accidentally or purposely, Albert’s mask fell off.
He instantly rose and cast the remainder of the bouquets into the carriage.
Doubtless one of the charming females Albert had detected beneath their coquettish disguise was touched by his gallantry; for, as the carriage of the two friends passed her, she threw a bunch of violets.
Albert seized it, and as Franz had no reason to suppose it was meant for him, he suffered Albert to retain it.
Albert placed it in his button-hole, and the carriage went triumphantly on.
“Well,” said Franz to him; “there is the beginning of an adventure.” “Laugh if you please—I really think so.
So I will not abandon this bouquet.” “_Pardieu_,” returned Franz, laughing, “in token of your ingratitude.” The jest, however, soon appeared to become earnest; for when Albert and Franz again encountered the carriage with the _contadini_, the one who had thrown the violets to Albert, clapped her hands when she beheld them in his button-hole.
“Bravo, bravo,” said Franz; “things go wonderfully.
Perhaps you would prefer being alone?” “No,” replied he; “I will not be caught like a fool at a first disclosure by a rendezvous under the clock, as they say at the opera-balls.
Then they returned to the Rospoli Palace; but the count and the blue domino had also disappeared; the two windows, hung with yellow damask, were still occupied by the persons whom the count had invited.
At this moment the same bell that had proclaimed the beginning of the mascherata sounded the retreat.
The file on the Corso broke the line, and in a second all the carriages had disappeared.
Franz and Albert were opposite the Via delle Muratte; the coachman, without saying a word, drove up it, passed along the Piazza di Spagna and the Rospoli Palace and stopped at the door of the hotel.
Signor Pastrini came to the door to receive his guests.
Franz hastened to inquire after the count, and to express regret that he had not returned in sufficient time; but Pastrini reassured him by saying that the Count of Monte Cristo had ordered a second carriage for himself, and that it had gone at four o’clock to fetch him from the Rospoli Palace.
The count had, moreover, charged him to offer the two friends the key of his box at the Argentina.
Franz questioned Albert as to his intentions; but Albert had great projects to put into execution before going to the theatre; and instead of making any answer, he inquired if Signor Pastrini could procure him a tailor.
“A tailor,” said the host; “and for what?” “To make us between now and tomorrow two Roman peasant costumes,” returned Albert.
“To make you two costumes between now and tomorrow?
I ask your excellencies’ pardon, but this is quite a French demand; for the next week you will not find a single tailor who would consent to sew six buttons on a waistcoat if you paid him a crown a piece for each button.” “Then I must give up the idea?” “No; we have them ready-made.
Albert, as he took off his dress, carefully preserved the bunch of violets; it was his token reserved for the morrow.
The two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain from remarking the difference between the Count of Monte Cristo’s table and that of Signor Pastrini.
Truth compelled Franz, in spite of the dislike he seemed to have taken to the count, to confess that the advantage was not on Pastrini’s side.
During dessert, the servant inquired at what time they wished for the carriage.
Albert and Franz looked at each other, fearing really to abuse the count’s kindness.
The servant understood them.
During the first act, the Countess G—— entered.
Her first look was at the box where she had seen the count the previous evening, so that she perceived Franz and Albert in the place of the very person concerning whom she had expressed so strange an opinion to Franz.
Her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them, that Franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy her curiosity; and, availing himself of one of the privileges of the spectators of the Italian theatres, who use their boxes to hold receptions, the two friends went to pay their respects to the countess.
Scarcely had they entered, when she motioned to Franz to assume the seat of honor.
“What sort of a man is he?” “Ask the Vicomte de Morcerf.” “You hear, M. de Morcerf, I am referred to you,” said the countess.
“We should be very hard to please, madam,” returned Albert, “did we not think him delightful.
This morning he made two or three exits worthy of Didier or Anthony.” At this moment a fresh visitor entered, and, according to custom, Franz gave up his seat to him.
This circumstance had, moreover, the effect of changing the conversation; an hour afterwards the two friends returned to their hotel.
Signor Pastrini had already set about procuring their disguises for the morrow; and he assured them that they would be perfectly satisfied.
The next morning, at nine o’clock, he entered Franz’s room, followed by a tailor, who had eight or ten Roman peasant costumes on his arm; they selected two exactly alike, and charged the tailor to sew on each of their hats about twenty yards of ribbon, and to procure them two of the long silk sashes of different colors with which the lower orders decorate themselves on fête days.
Albert was impatient to see how he looked in his new dress—a jacket and breeches of blue velvet, silk stockings with clocks, shoes with buckles, and a silk waistcoat.
This picturesque attire set him off to great advantage; and when he had bound the scarf around his waist, and when his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let fall on his shoulder a stream of ribbons, Franz was forced to confess that costume has much to do with the physical superiority we accord to certain nations.
The Turks used to be so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but are they not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up to the chin, and their red caps, which make them look like a bottle of wine with a red seal?
Franz complimented Albert, who looked at himself in the glass with an unequivocal smile of satisfaction.
They were thus engaged when the Count of Monte Cristo entered. 20185m “Gentlemen,” said he, “although a companion is agreeable, perfect freedom is sometimes still more agreeable.
I come to say that today, and for the remainder of the Carnival, I leave the carriage entirely at your disposal.
The host will tell you I have three or four more, so that you will not inconvenience me in any way.
Make use of it, I pray you, for your pleasure or your business.” The young men wished to decline, but they could find no good reason for refusing an offer which was so agreeable to them.
The Count of Monte Cristo remained a quarter of an hour with them, conversing on all subjects with the greatest ease.
He was, as we have already said, perfectly well acquainted with the literature of all countries.
A glance at the walls of his salon proved to Franz and Albert that he was a connoisseur of pictures.
A few words he let fall showed them that he was no stranger to the sciences, and he seemed much occupied with chemistry.
The two friends did not venture to return the count the breakfast he had given them; it would have been too absurd to offer him in exchange for his excellent table the very inferior one of Signor Pastrini.
They told him so frankly, and he received their excuses with the air of a man who appreciated their delicacy.
Albert was charmed with the count’s manners, and he was only prevented from recognizing him for a perfect gentleman by reason of his varied knowledge.
The permission to do what he liked with the carriage pleased him above all, for the fair peasants had appeared in a most elegant carriage the preceding evening, and Albert was not sorry to be upon an equal footing with them.
At half-past one they descended, the coachman and footman had put on their livery over their disguises, which gave them a more ridiculous appearance than ever, and which gained them the applause of Franz and Albert.
Albert had fastened the faded bunch of violets to his button-hole.
At the first sound of the bell they hastened into the Corso by the Via Vittoria.
At the second turn, a bunch of fresh violets, thrown from a carriage filled with harlequins, indicated to Albert that, like himself and his friend, the peasants had changed their costume also; and whether it was the result of chance, or whether a similar feeling had possessed them both, while he had donned their costume, they had assumed his.
Albert placed the fresh bouquet in his button-hole, but he kept the faded one in his hand; and when he again met the calash, he raised it to his lips, an action which seemed greatly to amuse not only the fair lady who had thrown it, but her joyous companions also.
The day was as gay as the preceding one, perhaps even more animated and noisy; the count appeared for an instant at his window, but when they again passed he had disappeared.
It is almost needless to say that the flirtation between Albert and the fair peasant continued all day.
In the evening, on his return, Franz found a letter from the embassy, informing him that he would have the honor of being received by his holiness the next day.
At each previous visit he had made to Rome, he had solicited and obtained the same favor; and incited as much by a religious feeling as by gratitude, he was unwilling to quit the capital of the Christian world without laying his respectful homage at the feet of one of St.
Peter’s successors who has set the rare example of all the virtues.
He did not then think of the Carnival, for in spite of his condescension and touching kindness, one cannot incline one’s self without awe before the venerable and noble old man called Gregory XVI.
On his return from the Vatican, Franz carefully avoided the Corso; he brought away with him a treasure of pious thoughts, to which the mad gayety of the maskers would have been profanation.
At ten minutes past five Albert entered overjoyed.
The harlequin had reassumed her peasant’s costume, and as she passed she raised her mask.
Franz congratulated Albert, who received his congratulations with the air of a man conscious that they are merited.
He had recognized by certain unmistakable signs, that his fair _incognita_ belonged to the aristocracy.
Franz remarked, while he gave these details, that Albert seemed to have something to ask of him, but that he was unwilling to ask it.
He insisted upon it, declaring beforehand that he was willing to make any sacrifice the other wished.
Albert let himself be pressed just as long as friendship required, and then avowed to Franz that he would do him a great favor by allowing him to occupy the carriage alone the next day.
Albert attributed to Franz’s absence the extreme kindness of the fair peasant in raising her mask.
Franz was not sufficiently egotistical to stop Albert in the middle of an adventure that promised to prove so agreeable to his curiosity and so flattering to his vanity.
He felt assured that the perfect indiscretion of his friend would duly inform him of all that happened; and as, during three years that he had travelled all over Italy, a similar piece of good fortune had never fallen to his share, Franz was by no means sorry to learn how to act on such an occasion.
He therefore promised Albert that he would content himself the morrow with witnessing the Carnival from the windows of the Rospoli Palace.
The next morning he saw Albert pass and repass, holding an enormous bouquet, which he doubtless meant to make the bearer of his amorous epistle.
This belief was changed into certainty when Franz saw the bouquet (conspicuous by a circle of white camellias) in the hand of a charming harlequin dressed in rose-colored satin.
The evening was no longer joy, but delirium.
Franz anticipated his wishes by saying that the noise fatigued him, and that he should pass the next day in writing and looking over his journal.
Albert was not deceived, for the next evening Franz saw him enter triumphantly shaking a folded paper which he held by one corner.
“Well,” said he, “was I mistaken?” “She has answered you!” cried Franz.
“Read.” This word was pronounced in a manner impossible to describe.
Franz took the letter, and read: “Tuesday evening, at seven o’clock, descend from your carriage opposite the Via dei Pontefici, and follow the Roman peasant who snatches your torch from you.
When you arrive at the first step of the church of San Giacomo, be sure to fasten a knot of rose-colored ribbons to the shoulder of your harlequin costume, in order that you may be recognized.
“All the nobility of Rome will be present, and if your fair _incognita_ belong to the higher class of society, she must go there.” “Whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still the same,” returned Albert.
“You have read the letter?” “Yes.” “You know how imperfectly the women of the _mezzo cito_ are educated in Italy?” (This is the name of the lower class.) “Yes.” “Well, read the letter again.
Look at the writing, and find if you can, any blemish in the language or orthography.” The writing was, in reality, charming, and the orthography irreproachable.
“You are born to good fortune,” said Franz, as he returned the letter.
“I see that I shall not only go alone to the Duke of Bracciano’s, but also return to Florence alone.” “If my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful,” said Albert, “I shall fix myself at Rome for six weeks, at least.
I adore Rome, and I have always had a great taste for archæology.” 20189m “Come, two or three more such adventures, and I do not despair of seeing you a member of the Academy.” Doubtless Albert was about to discuss seriously his right to the academic chair when they were informed that dinner was ready.
Albert’s love had not taken away his appetite.
He hastened with Franz to seat himself, free to recommence the discussion after dinner.
After dinner, the Count of Monte Cristo was announced.
Signor Pastrini informed them that business had called him to Civita Vecchia.
He had started the previous evening, and had only returned an hour since.
Whether he kept a watch over himself, or whether by accident he did not sound the acrimonious chords that in other circumstances had been touched, he was tonight like everybody else.
The count must feel sure that Franz recognized him; and yet he had not let fall a single word indicating any previous acquaintance between them.
On his side, however great Franz’s desire was to allude to their former interview, the fear of being disagreeable to the man who had loaded him and his friend with kindness prevented him from mentioning it.
The count had learned that the two friends had sent to secure a box at the Argentina Theatre, and were told they were all let.
In consequence, he brought them the key of his own—at least such was the apparent motive of his visit.
Franz and Albert made some difficulty, alleging their fear of depriving him of it; but the count replied that, as he was going to the Palli Theatre, the box at the Argentina Theatre would be lost if they did not profit by it.
This assurance determined the two friends to accept it.
Franz had by degrees become accustomed to the count’s pallor, which had so forcibly struck him at their first meeting.
He could not refrain from admiring the severe beauty of his features, the only defect, or rather the principal quality of which was the pallor.
Franz could not, we will not say see him, but even think of him without imagining his stern head upon Manfred’s shoulders, or beneath Lara’s helmet.
His forehead was marked with the line that indicates the constant presence of bitter thoughts; he had the fiery eyes that seem to penetrate to the very soul, and the haughty and disdainful upper lip that gives to the words it utters a peculiar character that impresses them on the minds of those to whom they are addressed.
He was at least forty; and yet it was easy to understand that he was formed to rule the young men with whom he associated at present.
And, to complete his resemblance with the fantastic heroes of the English poet, the count seemed to have the power of fascination.
Albert was constantly expatiating on their good fortune in meeting such a man.
Franz was less enthusiastic; but the count exercised over him also the ascendency a strong mind always acquires over a mind less domineering.
He thought several times of the project the count had of visiting Paris; and he had no doubt but that, with his eccentric character, his characteristic face, and his colossal fortune, he would produce a great effect there.
The evening passed as evenings mostly pass at Italian theatres; that is, not in listening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing.
The Countess G—— wished to revive the subject of the count, but Franz announced he had something far newer to tell her, and, in spite of Albert’s demonstrations of false modesty, he informed the countess of the great event which had preoccupied them for the last three days.
As similar intrigues are not uncommon in Italy, if we may credit travellers, the comtess did not manifest the least incredulity, but congratulated Albert on his success.
They promised, upon separating, to meet at the Duke of Bracciano’s ball, to which all Rome was invited.
The heroine of the bouquet kept her word; she gave Albert no sign of her existence the morrow or the day after.
At length Tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day of the Carnival.
On Tuesday, the theatres open at ten o’clock in the morning, as Lent begins after eight at night.
On Tuesday, all those who through want of money, time, or enthusiasm, have not been to see the Carnival before, mingle in the gayety, and contribute to the noise and excitement.
From two o’clock till five Franz and Albert followed in the _fête_, exchanging handfuls of _confetti_ with the other carriages and the pedestrians, who crowded amongst the horses’ feet and the carriage wheels without a single accident, a single dispute, or a single fight.
The _fêtes_ are veritable pleasure days to the Italians.
The author of this history, who has resided five or six years in Italy, does not recollect to have ever seen a ceremony interrupted by one of those events so common in other countries.
Albert was triumphant in his harlequin costume.
A knot of rose-colored ribbons fell from his shoulder almost to the ground.
In order that there might be no confusion, Franz wore his peasant’s costume.
As the day advanced, the tumult became greater.
There was not on the pavement, in the carriages, at the windows, a single tongue that was silent, a single arm that did not move.
It was a human storm, made up of a thunder of cries, and a hail of sweetmeats, flowers, eggs, oranges, and nosegays.
At three o’clock the sound of fireworks, let off on the Piazza del Popolo and the Piazza di Venezia (heard with difficulty amid the din and confusion) announced that the races were about to begin.
The races, like the _moccoli_, are one of the episodes peculiar to the last days of the Carnival.
At the sound of the fireworks the carriages instantly broke ranks, and retired by the adjacent streets.
All these evolutions are executed with an inconceivable address and marvellous rapidity, without the police interfering in the matter.
The pedestrians ranged themselves against the walls; then the trampling of horses and the clashing of steel were heard.
A detachment of carbineers, fifteen abreast, galloped up the Corso in order to clear it for the _barberi_.
When the detachment arrived at the Piazza di Venezia, a second volley of fireworks was discharged, to announce that the street was clear.
Almost instantly, in the midst of a tremendous and general outcry, seven or eight horses, excited by the shouts of three hundred thousand spectators, passed by like lightning.
Then the Castle of Saint Angelo fired three cannon to indicate that number three had won.
Immediately, without any other signal, the carriages moved on, flowing on towards the Corso, down all the streets, like torrents pent up for a while, which again flow into the parent river; and the immense stream again continued its course between its two granite banks.
A new source of noise and movement was added to the crowd.
The sellers of _moccoletti_ entered on the scene.
The _moccoli_, or _moccoletti_, are candles which vary in size from the pascal taper to the rushlight, and which give to each actor in the great final scene of the Carnival two very serious problems to grapple with,—first, how to keep his own _moccoletto_ alight; and secondly, how to extinguish the _moccoletti_ of others.
The _moccoletto_ is like life: man has found but one means of transmitting it, and that one comes from God.
But he has discovered a thousand means of taking it away, and the devil has somewhat aided him.
The _moccoletto_ is kindled by approaching it to a light.
But who can describe the thousand means of extinguishing the _moccoletto_?—the gigantic bellows, the monstrous extinguishers, the superhuman fans.
Everyone hastened to purchase _moccoletti_—Franz and Albert among the rest.
The night was rapidly approaching; and already, at the cry of “_Moccoletti_!” repeated by the shrill voices of a thousand vendors, two or three stars began to burn among the crowd.
At the end of ten minutes fifty thousand lights glittered, descending from the Palazzo di Venezia to the Piazza del Popolo, and mounting from the Piazza del Popolo to the Palazzo di Venezia.
It seemed like the _fête_ of Jack-o’-lanterns.
It is impossible to form any idea of it without having seen it.
Suppose that all the stars had descended from the sky and mingled in a wild dance on the face of the earth; the whole accompanied by cries that were never heard in any other part of the world.
The _facchino_ follows the prince, the Transteverin the citizen, everyone blowing, extinguishing, relighting.
Had old Æolus appeared at this moment, he would have been proclaimed king of the _moccoli_, and Aquilo the heir-presumptive to the throne.
This battle of folly and flame continued for two hours; the Corso was light as day; the features of the spectators on the third and fourth stories were visible.
The two friends were in the Via dei Pontefici.
Albert sprang out, bearing his _moccoletto_ in his hand.
Two or three masks strove to knock his _moccoletto_ out of his hand; but Albert, a first-rate pugilist, sent them rolling in the street, one after the other, and continued his course towards the church of San Giacomo.
Franz followed Albert with his eyes, and saw him mount the first step.
Instantly a mask, wearing the well-known costume of a peasant woman, snatched his _moccoletto_ from him without his offering any resistance.
Franz was too far off to hear what they said; but, without doubt, nothing hostile passed, for he saw Albert disappear arm-in-arm with the peasant girl.
Suddenly the bell that gives the signal for the end of the Carnival sounded, and at the same instant all the _moccoletti_ were extinguished as if by enchantment.
It seemed as though one immense blast of the wind had extinguished everyone.
Franz found himself in utter darkness.
No sound was audible save that of the carriages that were carrying the maskers home; nothing was visible save a few lights that burnt behind the windows.
The Carnival was over. 20193m Chapter 37.
The Catacombs of Saint Sebastian In his whole life, perhaps, Franz had never before experienced so sudden an impression, so rapid a transition from gayety to sadness, as in this moment.
It seemed as though Rome, under the magic breath of some demon of the night, had suddenly changed into a vast tomb.
By a chance, which added yet more to the intensity of the darkness, the moon, which was on the wane, did not rise until eleven o’clock, and the streets which the young man traversed were plunged in the deepest obscurity.
The distance was short, and at the end of ten minutes his carriage, or rather the count’s, stopped before the Hôtel de Londres.
Signor Pastrini, who had been accustomed to see them dine together, inquired into the cause of his absence, but Franz merely replied that Albert had received on the previous evening an invitation which he had accepted.
The sudden extinction of the _moccoletti_, the darkness which had replaced the light, and the silence which had succeeded the turmoil, had left in Franz’s mind a certain depression which was not free from uneasiness.
He therefore dined very silently, in spite of the officious attention of his host, who presented himself two or three times to inquire if he wanted anything.
Franz resolved to wait for Albert as late as possible.
He ordered the carriage, therefore, for eleven o’clock, desiring Signor Pastrini to inform him the moment that Albert returned to the hotel.
Franz dressed himself, and went out, telling his host that he was going to pass the night at the Duke of Bracciano’s.
The house of the Duke of Bracciano is one of the most delightful in Rome, the duchess, one of the last heiresses of the Colonnas, does its honors with the most consummate grace, and thus their _fêtes_ have a European celebrity.
Franz and Albert had brought to Rome letters of introduction to them, and their first question on his arrival was to inquire the whereabouts of his travelling companion.
Franz replied that he had left him at the moment they were about to extinguish the _moccoli_, and that he had lost sight of him in the Via Macello.
“Then he has not returned?” said the duke.
“And do you know whither he went?” “No, not precisely; however, I think it was something very like a rendezvous.” “_Diavolo!_” said the duke, “this is a bad day, or rather a bad night, to be out late; is it not, countess?” These words were addressed to the Countess G——, who had just arrived, and was leaning on the arm of Signor Torlonia, the duke’s brother.
The night is gloomy, and the Tiber is very near the Via Macello.” Franz felt a shudder run through his veins at observing that the feeling of the duke and the countess was so much in unison with his own personal disquietude.
“I informed them at the hotel that I had the honor of passing the night here, duke,” said Franz, “and desired them to come and inform me of his return.” “Ah,” replied the duke, “here I think, is one of my servants who is seeking you.” The duke was not mistaken; when he saw Franz, the servant came up to him.
“Your excellency,” he said, “the master of the Hôtel de Londres has sent to let you know that a man is waiting for you with a letter from the Viscount of Morcerf.” “A letter from the viscount!” exclaimed Franz.
“Yes.” “And who is the man?” “I do not know.” “Why did he not bring it to me here?” “The messenger did not say.” “And where is the messenger?” “He went away directly he saw me enter the ball-room to find you.” “Oh,” said the countess to Franz, “go with all speed—poor young man!
Perhaps some accident has happened to him.” “I will hasten,” replied Franz.
“Shall we see you again to give us any information?” inquired the countess.
“Yes, if it is not any serious affair, otherwise I cannot answer as to what I may do myself.” “Be prudent, in any event,” said the countess.
He had sent away his carriage with orders for it to fetch him at two o’clock; fortunately the Palazzo Bracciano, which is on one side in the Corso, and on the other in the Square of the Holy Apostles, is hardly ten minutes’ walk from the Hôtel de Londres.
He had no doubt that it was the messenger from Albert.
He went up to him, but, to his extreme astonishment, the stranger first addressed him.
“What wants your excellency of me?” inquired the man, retreating a step or two, as if to keep on his guard.
“Yes—your friend at least hopes so.” “Come upstairs with me, and I will give it to you.” “I prefer waiting here,” said the messenger, with a smile.
“And why?” “Your excellency will know when you have read the letter.” “Shall I find you here, then?” “Certainly.” Franz entered the hotel.
On the staircase he met Signor Pastrini.
“Well?” said the landlord.
“Well—what?” responded Franz.
Light the candles in my apartment, if you please.” The innkeeper gave orders to a servant to go before Franz with a light.
The young man had found Signor Pastrini looking very much alarmed, and this had only made him the more anxious to read Albert’s letter; and so he went instantly towards the waxlight, and unfolded it.
Franz read it twice before he could comprehend what it contained.
It was thus worded: “My dear Fellow, “The moment you have received this, have the kindness to take the letter of credit from my pocket-book, which you will find in the square drawer of the _secrétaire_; add your own to it, if it be not sufficient.
Run to Torlonia, draw from him instantly four thousand piastres, and give them to the bearer.
“P.S.—I now believe in Italian _banditti_.” Below these lines were written, in a strange hand, the following in Italian: “_Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mille piastre non sono nelle mie mani, alla sette il Conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere_.
“Luigi Vampa.” “_If by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are not in my hands, by seven o’clock the Count Albert will have ceased to live_.” This second signature explained everything to Franz, who now understood the objection of the messenger to coming up into the apartment; the street was safer for him.
Albert, then, had fallen into the hands of the famous bandit chief, in whose existence he had for so long a time refused to believe.
He hastened to open the _secrétaire_, and found the pocket-book in the drawer, and in it the letter of credit.
There were in all six thousand piastres, but of these six thousand Albert had already expended three thousand.
As to Franz, he had no letter of credit, as he lived at Florence, and had only come to Rome to pass seven or eight days; he had brought but a hundred louis, and of these he had not more than fifty left.
Thus seven or eight hundred piastres were wanting to them both to make up the sum that Albert required.
True, he might in such a case rely on the kindness of Signor Torlonia.
He was, therefore, about to return to the Palazzo Bracciano without loss of time, when suddenly a luminous idea crossed his mind.
He remembered the Count of Monte Cristo.
Franz was about to ring for Signor Pastrini, when that worthy presented himself.
He was in a small room which Franz had not yet seen, and which was surrounded with divans.
It would be very kind of you.” “No; I have come to speak to you of a very serious matter.” “A serious matter,” said the count, looking at Franz with the earnestness usual to him; “and what may it be?” “Are we alone?” “Yes,” replied the count, going to the door, and returning.
“Did you see the postscript?” “I did, indeed.
“_‘Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mille piastre non sono nelle mie mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere. _ “‘Luigi Vampa.’” “What think you of that?” inquired Franz.
“Have you the money he demands?” “Yes, all but eight hundred piastres.” The count went to his _secrétaire_, opened it, and pulling out a drawer filled with gold, said to Franz, “I hope you will not offend me by applying to anyone but myself.” “You see, on the contrary, I come to you first and instantly,” replied Franz.
“Is it absolutely necessary, then, to send the money to Luigi Vampa?” asked the young man, looking fixedly in his turn at the count.
“Judge for yourself,” replied he.
“The postscript is explicit.” “I think that if you would take the trouble of reflecting, you could find a way of simplifying the negotiation,” said Franz.
“How so?” returned the count, with surprise.
“And if I went to seek Vampa, would you accompany me?” “If my society would not be disagreeable.” “Be it so.
I will summon him hither.” “It is useless; he would not come up.” “To your apartments, perhaps; but he will not make any difficulty at entering mine.” The count went to the window of the apartment that looked on to the street, and whistled in a peculiar manner.
The man in the mantle quitted the wall, and advanced into the middle of the street.
The messenger obeyed without the least hesitation, but rather with alacrity, and, mounting the steps at a bound, entered the hotel; five seconds afterwards he was at the door of the room.
But Peppino, instead of answering, threw himself on his knees, seized the count’s hand, and covered it with kisses.
“Ah,” said the count, “you have, then, not forgotten that I saved your life; that is strange, for it is a week ago.” 20203m “No, excellency; and never shall I forget it,” returned Peppino, with an accent of profound gratitude.
That is a long time; but it is something that you believe so.
Rise and answer.” Peppino glanced anxiously at Franz.
“Oh, you may speak before his excellency,” said he; “he is one of my friends.
You allow me to give you this title?” continued the count in French, “it is necessary to excite this man’s confidence.” “You can speak before me,” said Franz; “I am a friend of the count’s.” “Good!” returned Peppino.
“I am ready to answer any questions your excellency may address to me.” “How did the Viscount Albert fall into Luigi’s hands?” “Excellency, the Frenchman’s carriage passed several times the one in which was Teresa.” “The chief’s mistress?” “Yes.
The Frenchman threw her a bouquet; Teresa returned it—all this with the consent of the chief, who was in the carriage.” “What?” cried Franz, “was Luigi Vampa in the carriage with the Roman peasants?” “It was he who drove, disguised as the coachman,” replied Peppino.
“Well, then, the Frenchman took off his mask; Teresa, with the chief’s consent, did the same.
The Frenchman asked for a rendezvous; Teresa gave him one—only, instead of Teresa, it was Beppo who was on the steps of the church of San Giacomo.” “What!” exclaimed Franz, “the peasant girl who snatched his _mocoletto_ from him——” “Was a lad of fifteen,” replied Peppino.
“But it was no disgrace to your friend to have been deceived; Beppo has taken in plenty of others.” “And Beppo led him outside the walls?” said the count.
“Exactly so; a carriage was waiting at the end of the Via Macello.
Beppo got in, inviting the Frenchman to follow him, and he did not wait to be asked twice.
He gallantly offered the right-hand seat to Beppo, and sat by him.
Beppo told him he was going to take him to a villa a league from Rome; the Frenchman assured him he would follow him to the end of the world.
The coachman went up the Via di Ripetta and the Porta San Paolo; and when they were two hundred yards outside, as the Frenchman became somewhat too forward, Beppo put a brace of pistols to his head, the coachman pulled up and did the same.
At the same time, four of the band, who were concealed on the banks of the Almo, surrounded the carriage.
The Frenchman made some resistance, and nearly strangled Beppo; but he could not resist five armed men, and was forced to yield.
They made him get out, walk along the banks of the river, and then brought him to Teresa and Luigi, who were waiting for him in the catacombs of St.
Sebastian.” “Well,” said the count, turning towards Franz, “it seems to me that this is a very likely story.
What do you say to it?” “Why, that I should think it very amusing,” replied Franz, “if it had happened to anyone but poor Albert.” “And, in truth, if you had not found me here,” said the count, “it might have proved a gallant adventure which would have cost your friend dear; but now, be assured, his alarm will be the only serious consequence.” “And shall we go and find him?” inquired Franz.
“Oh, decidedly, sir.
He is in a very picturesque place—do you know the catacombs of St.
Sebastian?” “I was never in them; but I have often resolved to visit them.” “Well, here is an opportunity made to your hand, and it would be difficult to contrive a better.
Have you a carriage?” “No.” “That is of no consequence; I always have one ready, day and night.” “Always ready?” “Yes.
I am a very capricious being, and I should tell you that sometimes when I rise, or after my dinner, or in the middle of the night, I resolve on starting for some particular point, and away I go.” The count rang, and a footman appeared.
“Order out the carriage,” he said, “and remove the pistols which are in the holsters.
You need not awaken the coachman; Ali will drive.” In a very short time the noise of wheels was heard, and the carriage stopped at the door.
“We might start at five o’clock and be in time, but the delay may cause your friend to pass an uneasy night, and therefore we had better go with all speed to extricate him from the hands of the infidels.
Are you still resolved to accompany me?” “More determined than ever.” “Well, then, come along.” Franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by Peppino.
At the door they found the carriage.
Ali was on the box, in whom Franz recognized the dumb slave of the grotto of Monte Cristo.
Franz and the count got into the carriage.
Ali had received his instructions, and went down the Corso, crossed the Campo Vaccino, went up the Strada San Gregorio, and reached the gates of St.
Then the porter raised some difficulties, but the Count of Monte Cristo produced a permit from the governor of Rome, allowing him to leave or enter the city at any hour of the day or night; the portcullis was therefore raised, the porter had a louis for his trouble, and they went on their way.
The road which the carriage now traversed was the ancient Appian Way, and bordered with tombs.
From time to time, by the light of the moon, which began to rise, Franz imagined that he saw something like a sentinel appear at various points among the ruins, and suddenly retreat into the darkness on a signal from Peppino.
A short time before they reached the Baths of Caracalla the carriage stopped, Peppino opened the door, and the count and Franz alighted.
“In ten minutes,” said the count to his companion, “we shall be there.” He then took Peppino aside, gave him an order in a low voice, and Peppino went away, taking with him a torch, brought with them in the carriage.
Five minutes elapsed, during which Franz saw the shepherd going along a narrow path that led over the irregular and broken surface of the Campagna; and finally he disappeared in the midst of the tall red herbage, which seemed like the bristling mane of an enormous lion.
“Now,” said the count, “let us follow him.” Franz and the count in their turn then advanced along the same path, which, at the distance of a hundred paces, led them over a declivity to the bottom of a small valley.
They then perceived two men conversing in the obscurity.
Franz and the count advanced, and the bandit saluted them.
“Your excellency,” said Peppino, addressing the count, “if you will follow me, the opening of the catacombs is close at hand.” “Go on, then,” replied the count.
They came to an opening behind a clump of bushes and in the midst of a pile of rocks, by which a man could scarcely pass.
The count first reached an open space and Franz followed him closely.
The passageway sloped in a gentle descent, enlarging as they proceeded; still Franz and the count were compelled to advance in a stooping posture, and were scarcely able to proceed abreast of one another.
They went on a hundred and fifty paces in this way, and then were stopped by, “Who comes there?” At the same time they saw the reflection of a torch on a carbine barrel.
“A friend!” responded Peppino; and, advancing alone towards the sentry, he said a few words to him in a low tone; and then he, like the first, saluted the nocturnal visitors, making a sign that they might proceed.
Behind the sentinel was a staircase with twenty steps.
Franz and the count descended these, and found themselves in a mortuary chamber.
Five corridors diverged like the rays of a star, and the walls, dug into niches, which were arranged one above the other in the shape of coffins, showed that they were at last in the catacombs.
Down one of the corridors, whose extent it was impossible to determine, rays of light were visible.
The count laid his hand on Franz’s shoulder.
“Would you like to see a camp of bandits in repose?” he inquired.
“Exceedingly,” replied Franz.
Peppino, put out the torch.” Peppino obeyed, and Franz and the count were in utter darkness, except that fifty paces in advance of them a reddish glare, more evident since Peppino had put out his torch, was visible along the wall.
They advanced silently, the count guiding Franz as if he had the singular faculty of seeing in the dark.
Franz himself, however, saw his way more plainly in proportion as he went on towards the light, which served in some manner as a guide.
These arcades opened on one side into the corridor where the count and Franz were, and on the other into a large square chamber, entirely surrounded by niches similar to those of which we have spoken.
In the midst of this chamber were four stones, which had formerly served as an altar, as was evident from the cross which still surmounted them.
A lamp, placed at the base of a pillar, lighted up with its pale and flickering flame the singular scene which presented itself to the eyes of the two visitors concealed in the shadow.
A man was seated with his elbow leaning on the column, and was reading with his back turned to the arcades, through the openings of which the new-comers contemplated him.
Around him, and in groups, according to their fancy, lying in their mantles, or with their backs against a sort of stone bench, which went all round the columbarium, were to be seen twenty brigands or more, each having his carbine within reach.
At the other end, silent, scarcely visible, and like a shadow, was a sentinel, who was walking up and down before a grotto, which was only distinguishable because in that spot the darkness seemed more dense than elsewhere.
When the count thought Franz had gazed sufficiently on this picturesque tableau, he raised his finger to his lips, to warn him to be silent, and, ascending the three steps which led to the corridor of the columbarium, entered the chamber by the middle arcade, and advanced towards Vampa, who was so intent on the book before him that he did not hear the noise of his footsteps.
“Who comes there?” cried the sentinel, who was less abstracted, and who saw by the lamp-light a shadow approaching his chief.
At this challenge, Vampa rose quickly, drawing at the same moment a pistol from his girdle.
In a moment all the bandits were on their feet, and twenty carbines were levelled at the count.
“Was it not agreed,” asked the count, “that not only my person, but also that of my friends, should be respected by you?” “And how have I broken that treaty, your excellency?” “You have this evening carried off and conveyed hither the Viscount Albert de Morcerf.
“Why have you caused me thus to fail in my word towards a gentleman like the count, who has all our lives in his hands?
By heavens! if I thought one of you knew that the young gentleman was the friend of his excellency, I would blow his brains out with my own hand!” 20211m “Well,” said the count, turning towards Franz, “I told you there was some mistake in this.” “Are you not alone?” asked Vampa with uneasiness.
“I am with the person to whom this letter was addressed, and to whom I desired to prove that Luigi Vampa was a man of his word.
Come, your excellency,” the count added, turning to Franz, “here is Luigi Vampa, who will himself express to you his deep regret at the mistake he has committed.” Franz approached, the chief advancing several steps to meet him.
“Welcome among us, your excellency,” he said to him; “you heard what the count just said, and also my reply; let me add that I would not for the four thousand piastres at which I had fixed your friend’s ransom, that this had happened.” “But,” said Franz, looking round him uneasily, “where is the viscount?—I do not see him.” “Nothing has happened to him, I hope,” said the count frowningly.
“The prisoner is there,” replied Vampa, pointing to the hollow space in front of which the bandit was on guard, “and I will go myself and tell him he is free.” The chief went towards the place he had pointed out as Albert’s prison, and Franz and the count followed him.
“What is the prisoner doing?” inquired Vampa of the sentinel.
“_Ma foi_, captain,” replied the sentry, “I do not know; for the last hour I have not heard him stir.” “Come in, your excellency,” said Vampa.
The count and Franz ascended seven or eight steps after the chief, who drew back a bolt and opened a door.
Then, by the gleam of a lamp, similar to that which lighted the columbarium, Albert was to be seen wrapped up in a cloak which one of the bandits had lent him, lying in a corner in profound slumber.
“Come,” said the count, smiling with his own peculiar smile, “not so bad for a man who is to be shot at seven o’clock tomorrow morning.” Vampa looked at Albert with a kind of admiration; he was not insensible to such a proof of courage.
“You are right, your excellency,” he said; “this must be one of your friends.” Then going to Albert, he touched him on the shoulder, saying, “Will your excellency please to awaken?” Albert stretched out his arms, rubbed his eyelids, and opened his eyes.
I had such a delightful dream.
I was dancing the galop at Torlonia’s with the Countess G——.” Then he drew his watch from his pocket, that he might see how time sped.
“Why the devil do you rouse me at this hour?” “To tell you that you are free, your excellency.” “My dear fellow,” replied Albert, with perfect ease of mind, “remember, for the future, Napoleon’s maxim, ‘Never awaken me but for bad news;’ if you had let me sleep on, I should have finished my galop, and have been grateful to you all my life.
So, then, they have paid my ransom?” “No, your excellency.” “Well, then, how am I free?” “A person to whom I can refuse nothing has come to demand you.” “Come hither?” “Yes, hither.” “Really?
Then that person is a most amiable person.” Albert looked around and perceived Franz.
The bandit gazed on this scene with amazement; he was evidently accustomed to see his prisoners tremble before him, and yet here was one whose gay temperament was not for a moment altered; as for Franz, he was enchanted at the way in which Albert had sustained the national honor in the presence of the bandit.
“My dear Albert,” he said, “if you will make haste, we shall yet have time to finish the night at Torlonia’s.
You may conclude your interrupted galop, so that you will owe no ill-will to Signor Luigi, who has, indeed, throughout this whole affair acted like a gentleman.” “You are decidedly right, and we may reach the Palazzo by two o’clock.
Signor Luigi,” continued Albert, “is there any formality to fulfil before I take leave of your excellency?” “None, sir,” replied the bandit, “you are as free as air.” “Well, then, a happy and merry life to you.
Come, gentlemen, come.” And Albert, followed by Franz and the count, descended the staircase, crossed the square chamber, where stood all the bandits, hat in hand.
“Peppino,” said the brigand chief, “give me the torch.” “What are you going to do?” inquired the count.
“I will show you the way back myself,” said the captain; “that is the least honor that I can render to your excellency.” And taking the lighted torch from the hands of the herdsman, he preceded his guests, not as a servant who performs an act of civility, but like a king who precedes ambassadors.
On reaching the door, he bowed.
“Has your excellency anything to ask me?” said Vampa with a smile.
“Yes, I have,” replied Franz; “I am curious to know what work you were perusing with so much attention as we entered.” “Cæsar’s _Commentaries_,” said the bandit, “it is my favorite work.” “Well, are you coming?” asked Albert.
They advanced to the plain.
I am enormously anxious to finish my night at the Duke of Bracciano’s.” They found the carriage where they had left it.
Their return was quite an event, but as they entered together, all uneasiness on Albert’s account ceased instantly.
In the meanwhile Franz was considering the singular shudder that had passed over the Count of Monte Cristo at the moment when he had been, in some sort, forced to give his hand to Albert.
The Rendezvous The first words that Albert uttered to his friend, on the following morning, contained a request that Franz would accompany him on a visit to the count; true, the young man had warmly and energetically thanked the count on the previous evening; but services such as he had rendered could never be too often acknowledged.
All that, however, has nothing to do with my obligations to you, and I now come to ask you whether, in my own person, my family, or connections, I can in any way serve you?
Rothschild; but as my motive in travelling to your capital would not have been for the pleasure of dabbling in stocks, I stayed away till some favorable chance should present itself of carrying my wish into execution.
“Well, never mind how it is,” answered Albert, “it comes to the same thing in the end.
A most edifying representative I shall make of all the domestic virtues—don’t you think so?
Now promise me to remember this, and expect me the 21st of May at the same hour in the forenoon.” “Capital!” exclaimed Albert; “your breakfast shall be waiting.” “Where do you live?” “No. 27, Rue du Helder.” “Have you bachelor’s apartments there?
“That depends; when do you leave?” “Tomorrow evening, at five o’clock.” “In that case I must say adieu to you, as I am compelled to go to Naples, and shall not return hither before Saturday evening or Sunday morning.
Why, you must have lost your senses.” “Whether I am in my senses or not,” answered Franz, “that is the way I feel.” “Listen to me, Franz,” said Albert; “I am glad that the occasion has presented itself for saying this to you, for I have noticed how cold you are in your bearing towards the count, while he, on the other hand, has always been courtesy itself to us.
He dwelt with considerable force and energy on the almost magical hospitality he had received from the count, and the magnificence of his entertainment in the grotto of the _Thousand and One Nights_.
He recounted, with circumstantial exactitude, all the particulars of the supper, the hashish, the statues, the dream, and how, at his awakening, there remained no proof or trace of all these events, save the small yacht, seen in the distant horizon driving under full sail toward Porto-Vecchio.
Then he detailed the conversation overheard by him at the Colosseum, between the count and Vampa, in which the count had promised to obtain the release of the bandit Peppino,—an engagement which, as our readers are aware, he most faithfully fulfilled.
At last he arrived at the adventure of the preceding night, and the embarrassment in which he found himself placed by not having sufficient cash by six or seven hundred piastres to make up the sum required, and finally of his application to the count and the picturesque and satisfactory result that followed.
Albert listened with the most profound attention.
“Well,” said he, when Franz had concluded, “what do you find to object to in all you have related?
The count is fond of travelling, and, being rich, possesses a vessel of his own.
Go but to Portsmouth or Southampton, and you will find the harbors crowded with the yachts belonging to such of the English as can afford the expense, and have the same liking for this amusement.
Just ask yourself, my good fellow, whether there are not many persons of our acquaintance who assume the names of lands and properties they never in their lives were masters of?” “But,” said Franz, “the Corsican bandits that were among the crew of his vessel?” “Why, really the thing seems to me simple enough.
Now, then, Franz, when, for services so promptly and unhesitatingly rendered, he but asks me in return to do for him what is done daily for any Russian prince or Italian nobleman who may pass through Paris—merely to introduce him into society—would you have me refuse?
My good fellow, you must have lost your senses to think it possible I could act with such cold-blooded policy.” And this time it must be confessed that, contrary to the usual state of affairs in discussions between the young men, the effective arguments were all on Albert’s side.
“Well,” said Franz with a sigh, “do as you please my dear viscount, for your arguments are beyond my powers of refutation.
Still, in spite of all, you must admit that this Count of Monte Cristo is a most singular personage.” “He is a philanthropist,” answered the other; “and no doubt his motive in visiting Paris is to compete for the Monthyon prize, given, as you are aware, to whoever shall be proved to have most materially advanced the interests of virtue and humanity.
If my vote and interest can obtain it for him, I will readily give him the one and promise the other.
And now, my dear Franz, let us talk of something else.
Come, shall we take our luncheon, and then pay a last visit to St.
Peter’s?” Franz silently assented; and the following afternoon, at half-past five o’clock, the young men parted.
Albert de Morcerf to return to Paris, and Franz d’Épinay to pass a fortnight at Venice.
But, ere he entered his travelling carriage, Albert, fearing that his expected guest might forget the engagement he had entered into, placed in the care of a waiter at the hotel a card to be delivered to the Count of Monte Cristo, on which, beneath the name of Viscount Albert de Morcerf, he had written in pencil: “27, _Rue du Helder, on the_ 21_st May, half-past ten_ A.M.” Chapter 39.
The Guests In the house in the Rue du Helder, where Albert had invited the Count of Monte Cristo, everything was being prepared on the morning of the 21st of May to do honor to the occasion.
Albert de Morcerf inhabited a pavilion situated at the corner of a large court, and directly opposite another building, in which were the servants’ apartments.
Two windows only of the pavilion faced the street; three other windows looked into the court, and two at the back into the garden.
Between the court and the garden, built in the heavy style of the imperial architecture, was the large and fashionable dwelling of the Count and Countess of Morcerf.
A high wall surrounded the whole of the property, surmounted at intervals by vases filled with flowers, and broken in the centre by a large gate of gilded iron, which served as the carriage entrance.
A small door, close to the lodge of the _concierge_, gave ingress and egress to the servants and masters when they were on foot.
It was easy to discover that the delicate care of a mother, unwilling to part from her son, and yet aware that a young man of the viscount’s age required the full exercise of his liberty, had chosen this habitation for Albert.
There were not lacking, however, evidences of what we may call the intelligent egoism of a youth who is charmed with the indolent, careless life of an only son, and who lives as it were in a gilded cage.
By means of the two windows looking into the street, Albert could see all that passed; the sight of what is going on is necessary to young men, who always want to see the world traverse their horizon, even if that horizon is only a public thoroughfare.
Then, should anything appear to merit a more minute examination, Albert de Morcerf could follow up his researches by means of a small gate, similar to that close to the _concierge’s_ door, and which merits a particular description.
It was a little entrance that seemed never to have been opened since the house was built, so entirely was it covered with dust and dirt; but the well-oiled hinges and locks told quite another story.
This door was a mockery to the _concierge_, from whose vigilance and jurisdiction it was free, and, like that famous portal in the _Arabian Nights_, opening at the “_Sesame_” of Ali Baba, it was wont to swing backward at a cabalistic word or a concerted tap from without from the sweetest voices or whitest fingers in the world.
At the end of a long corridor, with which the door communicated, and which formed the antechamber, was, on the right, Albert’s breakfast-room, looking into the court, and on the left the salon, looking into the garden.
Shrubs and creeping plants covered the windows, and hid from the garden and court these two apartments, the only rooms into which, as they were on the ground floor, the prying eyes of the curious could penetrate.
On the floor above were similar rooms, with the addition of a third, formed out of the antechamber; these three rooms were a salon, a boudoir, and a bedroom.
The salon downstairs was only an Algerian divan, for the use of smokers.
The boudoir upstairs communicated with the bedchamber by an invisible door on the staircase; it was evident that every precaution had been taken.
Above this floor was a large _atelier_, which had been increased in size by pulling down the partitions—a pandemonium, in which the artist and the dandy strove for pre-eminence.
Over these dark and sombre chairs were thrown splendid stuffs, dyed beneath Persia’s sun, or woven by the fingers of the women of Calcutta or of Chandernagor.
What these stuffs did there, it was impossible to say; they awaited, while gratifying the eyes, a destination unknown to their owner himself; in the meantime they filled the place with their golden and silky reflections.
In the centre of the room was a Roller and Blanchet “baby grand” piano in rosewood, but holding the potentialities of an orchestra in its narrow and sonorous cavity, and groaning beneath the weight of the _chefs-d’œuvre_ of Beethoven, Weber, Mozart, Haydn, Grétry, and Porpora.
On the walls, over the doors, on the ceiling, were swords, daggers, Malay creeses, maces, battle-axes; gilded, damasked, and inlaid suits of armor; dried plants, minerals, and stuffed birds, their flame-colored wings outspread in motionless flight, and their beaks forever open.
This was Albert’s favorite lounging place.
However, the morning of the appointment, the young man had established himself in the small salon downstairs.
Albert had himself presided at the arrangement, or, rather, the symmetrical derangement, which, after coffee, the guests at a breakfast of modern days love to contemplate through the vapor that escapes from their mouths, and ascends in long and fanciful wreaths to the ceiling.
At a quarter to ten, a valet entered; he composed, with a little groom named John, and who only spoke English, all Albert’s establishment, although the cook of the hotel was always at his service, and on great occasions the count’s _chasseur_ also.
This valet, whose name was Germain, and who enjoyed the entire confidence of his young master, held in one hand a number of papers, and in the other a packet of letters, which he gave to Albert.
Albert glanced carelessly at the different missives, selected two written in a small and delicate hand, and enclosed in scented envelopes, opened them and perused their contents with some attention.
“One by the post, Madame Danglars’ footman left the other.” “Let Madame Danglars know that I accept the place she offers me in her box.
Take her six bottles of different wine—Cyprus, sherry, and Malaga, and a barrel of Ostend oysters; get them at Borel’s, and be sure you say they are for me.” “At what o’clock, sir, do you breakfast?” 20227m “What time is it now?” “A quarter to ten.” “Very well, at half past ten.
Debray will, perhaps, be obliged to go to the minister—and besides” (Albert looked at his tablets), “it is the hour I told the count, 21st May, at half past ten; and though I do not much rely upon his promise, I wish to be punctual.
Is the countess up yet?” “If you wish, I will inquire.” “Yes, ask her for one of her _liqueur_ cellarets, mine is incomplete; and tell her I shall have the honor of seeing her about three o’clock, and that I request permission to introduce someone to her.” The valet left the room.
A tall young man, with light hair, clear gray eyes, and thin and compressed lips, dressed in a blue coat with beautifully carved gold buttons, a white neckcloth, and a tortoiseshell eye-glass suspended by a silken thread, and which, by an effort of the superciliary and zygomatic muscles, he fixed in his eye, entered, with a half-official air, without smiling or speaking.
“Good-morning, Lucien, good-morning,” said Albert; “your punctuality really alarms me.
What do I say? punctuality!
You, whom I expected last, you arrive at five minutes to ten, when the time fixed was half-past!
We take him to the other side of the French frontier, and offer him hospitality at Bourges.” “At Bourges?” “Yes, he has not much to complain of; Bourges is the capital of Charles VII.
Do you not know that all Paris knew it yesterday, and the day before it had already transpired on the Bourse, and M.
Danglars (I do not know by what means that man contrives to obtain intelligence as soon as we do) made a million!” “And you another order, for I see you have a blue ribbon at your button-hole.” “Yes; they sent me the order of Charles III.,” returned Debray carelessly.
“Come, do not affect indifference, but confess you were pleased to have it.” “Oh, it is very well as a finish to the toilet.
It looks very neat on a black coat buttoned up.” “And makes you resemble the Prince of Wales or the Duke of Reichstadt.” “It is for that reason you see me so early.” “Because you have the order of Charles III., and you wish to announce the good news to me?” “No, because I passed the night writing letters,—five-and-twenty despatches.
I returned home at daybreak, and strove to sleep; but my head ached and I got up to have a ride for an hour.
At the Bois de Boulogne, _ennui_ and hunger attacked me at once,—two enemies who rarely accompany each other, and who are yet leagued against me, a sort of Carlo-republican alliance.
I then recollected you gave a breakfast this morning, and here I am.
I am hungry, feed me; I am bored, amuse me.” “It is my duty as your host,” returned Albert, ringing the bell, while Lucien turned over, with his gold-mounted cane, the papers that lay on the table.
In the meantime, my dear Lucien, here are cigars—contraband, of course—try them, and persuade the minister to sell us such instead of poisoning us with cabbage leaves.” “_Peste!_ I will do nothing of the kind; the moment they come from government you would find them execrable.
Besides, that does not concern the home but the financial department.
Address yourself to M.
Humann, section of the indirect contributions, corridor A., No. 26.” “On my word,” said Albert, “you astonish me by the extent of your knowledge.
Take a cigar.” “Really, my dear Albert,” replied Lucien, lighting a manilla at a rose-colored taper that burnt in a beautifully enamelled stand—“how happy you are to have nothing to do.
You do not know your own good fortune!” “And what would you do, my dear diplomatist,” replied Morcerf, with a slight degree of irony in his voice, “if you did nothing?
Well, I will amuse you.” “How?” “By introducing to you a new acquaintance.” “A man or a woman?” “A man.” “I know so many men already.” “But you do not know this man.” “Where does he come from—the end of the world?” “Farther still, perhaps.” “The deuce!
I hope he does not bring our breakfast with him.” “Oh, no; our breakfast comes from my father’s kitchen.
Are you hungry?” “Humiliating as such a confession is, I am.
But I dined at M. de Villefort’s, and lawyers always give you very bad dinners.
You would think they felt some remorse; did you ever remark that?” “Ah, depreciate other persons’ dinners; you ministers give such splendid ones.” “Yes; but we do not invite people of fashion.
If we were not forced to entertain a parcel of country boobies because they think and vote with us, we should never dream of dining at home, I assure you.” “Well, take another glass of sherry and another biscuit.” “Willingly.
Your Spanish wine is excellent.
Beauchamp,” announced the servant.
“Come in, come in,” said Albert, rising and advancing to meet the young man.
“Here is Debray, who detests you without reading you, so he says.” “He is quite right,” returned Beauchamp; “for I criticise him without knowing what he does.
Good-day, commander!” “Ah, you know that already,” said the private secretary, smiling and shaking hands with him.
“_Pardieu!_” “And what do they say of it in the world?” “In which world? we have so many worlds in the year of grace 1838.” “In the entire political world, of which you are one of the leaders.” “They say that it is quite fair, and that sowing so much red, you ought to reap a little blue.” “Come, come, that is not bad!” said Lucien.
“Why do you not join our party, my dear Beauchamp?
With your talents you would make your fortune in three or four years.” “I only await one thing before following your advice; that is, a minister who will hold office for six months.
Do we breakfast or dine?
I must go to the Chamber, for our life is not an idle one.” “You only breakfast; I await two persons, and the instant they arrive we shall sit down to table.” Chapter 40.
The Breakfast And what sort of persons do you expect to breakfast?” said Beauchamp.
“A gentleman, and a diplomatist.” “Then we shall have to wait two hours for the gentleman, and three for the diplomatist.
I shall come back to dessert; keep me some strawberries, coffee, and cigars.
Danglars make a speech at the Chamber of Deputies, and at his wife’s this evening I shall hear the tragedy of a peer of France.
The devil take the constitutional government, and since we had our choice, as they say, at least, how could we choose that?” “I understand; you must lay in a stock of hilarity.” “Do not run down M.
Danglars’ speeches,” said Debray; “he votes for you, for he belongs to the opposition.” “_Pardieu_, that is exactly the worst of all.
I am waiting until you send him to speak at the Luxembourg, to laugh at my ease.” “My dear friend,” said Albert to Beauchamp, “it is plain that the affairs of Spain are settled, for you are most desperately out of humor this morning.
Recollect that Parisian gossip has spoken of a marriage between myself and Mlle.
Eugénie Danglars; I cannot in conscience, therefore, let you run down the speeches of a man who will one day say to me, ‘Vicomte, you know I give my daughter two millions.’” “Ah, this marriage will never take place,” said Beauchamp.
“The king has made him a baron, and can make him a peer, but he cannot make him a gentleman, and the Count of Morcerf is too aristocratic to consent, for the paltry sum of two million francs, to a _mésalliance_.
The Viscount of Morcerf can only wed a marchioness.” “But two million francs make a nice little sum,” replied Morcerf.
“It is the social capital of a theatre on the boulevard, or a railroad from the Jardin des Plantes to La Râpée.” “Never mind what he says, Morcerf,” said Debray, “do you marry her.
You have seven martlets on your arms; give three to your wife, and you will still have four; that is one more than M. de Guise had, who so nearly became King of France, and whose cousin was Emperor of Germany.” “On my word, I think you are right, Lucien,” said Albert absently.
Maximilian Morrel,” said the servant, announcing two fresh guests.
“Now, then, to breakfast,” said Beauchamp; “for, if I remember, you told me you only expected two persons, Albert.” “Morrel,” muttered Albert—“Morrel—who is he?” But before he had finished, M. de Château-Renaud, a handsome young man of thirty, gentleman all over,—that is, with the figure of a Guiche and the wit of a Mortemart,—took Albert’s hand.
“My dear Albert,” said he, “let me introduce to you M.
Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, my friend; and what is more—however the man speaks for himself—my preserver.
Salute my hero, viscount.” And he stepped on one side to give place to a young man of refined and dignified bearing, with large and open brow, piercing eyes, and black moustache, whom our readers have already seen at Marseilles, under circumstances sufficiently dramatic not to be forgotten.
A rich uniform, half French, half Oriental, set off his graceful and stalwart figure, and his broad chest was decorated with the order of the Legion of Honor.
The young officer bowed with easy and elegant politeness.
“Monsieur,” said Albert with affectionate courtesy, “the count of Château-Renaud knew how much pleasure this introduction would give me; you are his friend, be ours also.” “Well said,” interrupted Château-Renaud; “and pray that, if you should ever be in a similar predicament, he may do as much for you as he did for me.” “What has he done?” asked Albert.
“Oh, nothing worth speaking of,” said Morrel; “M. de Château-Renaud exaggerates.” “Not worth speaking of?” cried Château-Renaud; “life is not worth speaking of!—that is rather too philosophical, on my word, Morrel.
It is very well for you, who risk your life every day, but for me, who only did so once——” “We gather from all this, baron, that Captain Morrel saved your life.” “Exactly so.” “On what occasion?” asked Beauchamp.
“Beauchamp, my good fellow, you know I am starving,” said Debray: “do not set him off on some long story.” “Well, I do not prevent your sitting down to table,” replied Beauchamp, “Château-Renaud can tell us while we eat our breakfast.” “Gentlemen,” said Morcerf, “it is only a quarter past ten, and I expect someone else.” “Ah, true, a diplomatist!” observed Debray.
“Yes? but I doubt that your object was like theirs—to rescue the Holy Sepulchre.” “You are quite right, Beauchamp,” observed the young aristocrat.
I cannot bear duelling ever since two seconds, whom I had chosen to arrange an affair, forced me to break the arm of one of my best friends, one whom you all know—poor Franz d’Épinay.” “Ah, true,” said Debray, “you did fight some time ago; about what?” 20235m “The devil take me, if I remember,” returned Château-Renaud.
“But I recollect perfectly one thing, that, being unwilling to let such talents as mine sleep, I wished to try upon the Arabs the new pistols that had been given to me.
In consequence I embarked for Oran, and went from thence to Constantine, where I arrived just in time to witness the raising of the siege.
I retreated with the rest, for eight-and-forty hours.
I endured the rain during the day, and the cold during the night tolerably well, but the third morning my horse died of cold.
Poor brute—accustomed to be covered up and to have a stove in the stable, the Arabian finds himself unable to bear ten degrees of cold in Arabia.” “That’s why you want to purchase my English horse,” said Debray, “you think he will bear the cold better.” “You are mistaken, for I have made a vow never to return to Africa.” “You were very much frightened, then?” asked Beauchamp.
“I was retreating on foot, for my horse was dead.
He had assigned himself the task of saving a man’s life that day; chance caused that man to be myself.
When I am rich I will order a statue of Chance from Klagmann or Marochetti.” “Yes,” said Morrel, smiling, “it was the 5th of September, the anniversary of the day on which my father was miraculously preserved; therefore, as far as it lies in my power, I endeavor to celebrate it by some——” 20237m “Heroic action,” interrupted Château-Renaud.
But that is not all—after rescuing me from the sword, he rescued me from the cold, not by sharing his cloak with me, like St.
Martin, but by giving me the whole; then from hunger by sharing with me—guess what?” “A Strasbourg pie?” asked Beauchamp.
“No, his horse; of which we each of us ate a slice with a hearty appetite.
It was very hard.” “The horse?” said Morcerf, laughing.
Morrel alludes,” continued Château-Renaud, “is an admirable one, which he will tell you some day when you are better acquainted with him; today let us fill our stomachs, and not our memories.
What time do you breakfast, Albert?” “At half-past ten.” “Precisely?” asked Debray, taking out his watch.
“Oh, you will give me five minutes’ grace,” replied Morcerf, “for I also expect a preserver.” “Of whom?” “Of myself,” cried Morcerf; “_parbleu!_ do you think I cannot be saved as well as anyone else, and that there are only Arabs who cut off heads?
Our breakfast is a philanthropic one, and we shall have at table—at least, I hope so—two benefactors of humanity.” “What shall we do?” said Debray; “we have only one Monthyon prize.” “Well, it will be given to someone who has done nothing to deserve it,” said Beauchamp; “that is the way the Academy mostly escapes from the dilemma.” “And where does he come from?” asked Debray.
“You have already answered the question once, but so vaguely that I venture to put it a second time.” “Really,” said Albert, “I do not know; when I invited him three months ago, he was then at Rome, but since that time who knows where he may have gone?” “And you think him capable of being exact?” demanded Debray.
“Yes there are, and most hideous, or rather most admirable ones, for I found them ugly enough to frighten me.” “Come, my dear Albert,” said Debray, “confess that your cook is behindhand, that the oysters have not arrived from Ostend or Marennes, and that, like Madame de Maintenon, you are going to replace the dish by a story.
Say so at once; we are sufficiently well-bred to excuse you, and to listen to your history, fabulous as it promises to be.” “And I say to you, fabulous as it may seem, I tell it as a true one from beginning to end.
The brigands had carried me off, and conducted me to a gloomy spot, called the Catacombs of Saint Sebastian.” “I know it,” said Château-Renaud; “I narrowly escaped catching a fever there.” “And I did more than that,” replied Morcerf, “for I caught one.
I was informed that I was prisoner until I paid the sum of 4,000 Roman crowns—about 24,000 francs.
Unfortunately, I had not above 1,500.
“I do not think so,” added Château-Renaud, with the air of a man who knows the whole of the European nobility perfectly.
“Does anyone know anything of a Count of Monte Cristo?” “He comes possibly from the Holy Land, and one of his ancestors possessed Calvary, as the Mortemarts did the Dead Sea.” “I think I can assist your researches,” said Maximilian.
“Monte Cristo is a little island I have often heard spoken of by the old sailors my father employed—a grain of sand in the centre of the Mediterranean, an atom in the infinite.” “Precisely!” cried Albert.
They seem like poor fishermen, and suddenly they open some mysterious cavern filled with the wealth of the Indies.” “Which means?” “Which means that my Count of Monte Cristo is one of those fishermen.
He has even a name taken from the book, since he calls himself Sinbad the Sailor, and has a cave filled with gold.” “And you have seen this cavern, Morcerf?” asked Beauchamp.
Franz went in with his eyes blindfolded, and was waited on by mutes and by women to whom Cleopatra was a painted strumpet.
Morrel comes to aid me; you are vexed, are you not, that he thus gives a clew to the labyrinth?” “My dear Albert,” said Debray, “what you tell us is so extraordinary.” “Ah, because your ambassadors and your consuls do not tell you of them—they have no time.
They are too much taken up with interfering in the affairs of their countrymen who travel.” “Now you get angry, and attack our poor agents.
The Chamber cuts down their salaries every day, so that now they have scarcely any.
Will you be ambassador, Albert?
I will send you to Constantinople.” “No, lest on the first demonstration I make in favor of Mehemet Ali, the Sultan send me the bowstring, and make my secretaries strangle me.” “You say very true,” responded Debray.
I saw her at the theatre, and heard her one morning when I breakfasted with the count.” “He eats, then?” “Yes; but so little, it can hardly be called eating.” “He must be a vampire.” “Laugh, if you will; the Countess G——, who knew Lord Ruthven, declared that the count was a vampire.” “Ah, capital,” said Beauchamp.
Yes, keen and cutting politeness.
This man has often made me shudder; and one day when we were viewing an execution, I thought I should faint, more from hearing the cold and calm manner in which he spoke of every description of torture, than from the sight of the executioner and the culprit.” “Did he not conduct you to the ruins of the Colosseum and suck your blood?” asked Beauchamp.
“Or, having delivered you, make you sign a flaming parchment, surrendering your soul to him as Esau did his birth-right?” “Rail on, rail on at your ease, gentlemen,” said Morcerf, somewhat piqued.
“When I look at you Parisians, idlers on the Boulevard de Gand or the Bois de Boulogne, and think of this man, it seems to me we are not of the same race.” “I am highly flattered,” returned Beauchamp.
“At the same time,” added Château-Renaud, “your Count of Monte Cristo is a very fine fellow, always excepting his little arrangements with the Italian banditti.” “There are no Italian banditti,” said Debray.
“No vampire,” cried Beauchamp.
“There is half-past ten striking, Albert.” 20243m “Confess you have dreamed this, and let us sit down to breakfast,” continued Beauchamp.
But the sound of the clock had not died away when Germain announced, “His excellency the Count of Monte Cristo.” The involuntary start everyone gave proved how much Morcerf’s narrative had impressed them, and Albert himself could not wholly refrain from manifesting sudden emotion.
He had not heard a carriage stop in the street, or steps in the antechamber; the door had itself opened noiselessly.
The count appeared, dressed with the greatest simplicity, but the most fastidious dandy could have found nothing to cavil at in his toilet.
He seemed scarcely five-and-thirty.
But what struck everybody was his extreme resemblance to the portrait Debray had drawn.
The count advanced, smiling, into the centre of the room, and approached Albert, who hastened towards him holding out his hand in a ceremonial manner.
“Punctuality,” said Monte Cristo, “is the politeness of kings, according to one of your sovereigns, I think; but it is not the same with travellers.
They are the Count of Château-Renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve peers, and whose ancestors had a place at the Round Table; M.
Lucien Debray, private secretary to the minister of the interior; M.
Beauchamp, an editor of a paper, and the terror of the French government, but of whom, in spite of his national celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in Italy, since his paper is prohibited there; and M.
Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis.” At this name the count, who had hitherto saluted everyone with courtesy, but at the same time with coldness and formality, stepped a pace forward, and a slight tinge of red colored his pale cheeks.
“You wear the uniform of the new French conquerors, monsieur,” said he; “it is a handsome uniform.” No one could have said what caused the count’s voice to vibrate so deeply, and what made his eye flash, which was in general so clear, lustrous, and limpid when he pleased.
“You have never seen our Africans, count?” said Albert.
“Never,” replied the count, who was by this time perfectly master of himself again.
“Well, beneath this uniform beats one of the bravest and noblest hearts in the whole army.” “Oh, M. de Morcerf,” interrupted Morrel.
And we have just heard,” continued Albert, “of a new deed of his, and so heroic a one, that, although I have seen him today for the first time, I request you to allow me to introduce him as my friend.” At these words it was still possible to observe in Monte Cristo the concentrated look, changing color, and slight trembling of the eyelid that show emotion.
“Ah, you have a noble heart,” said the count; “so much the better.” This exclamation, which corresponded to the count’s own thought rather than to what Albert was saying, surprised everybody, and especially Morrel, who looked at Monte Cristo with wonder.
But, at the same time, the intonation was so soft that, however strange the speech might seem, it was impossible to be offended at it. 20245m “Why should he doubt it?” said Beauchamp to Château-Renaud.
“In reality,” replied the latter, who, with his aristocratic glance and his knowledge of the world, had penetrated at once all that was penetrable in Monte Cristo, “Albert has not deceived us, for the count is a most singular being.
What say you, Morrel!” “_Ma foi_, he has an open look about him that pleases me, in spite of the singular remark he has made about me.” “Gentlemen,” said Albert, “Germain informs me that breakfast is ready.
My dear count, allow me to show you the way.” They passed silently into the breakfast-room, and everyone took his place.
“Gentlemen,” said the count, seating himself, “permit me to make a confession which must form my excuse for any improprieties I may commit.
I am a stranger, and a stranger to such a degree, that this is the first time I have ever been at Paris.
The French way of living is utterly unknown to me, and up to the present time I have followed the Eastern customs, which are entirely in contrast to the Parisian.
I beg you, therefore, to excuse if you find anything in me too Turkish, too Italian, or too Arabian.
Now, then, let us breakfast.” “With what an air he says all this,” muttered Beauchamp; “decidedly he is a great man.” “A great man in his own country,” added Debray.
The count was, it may be remembered, a most temperate guest.
Albert remarked this, expressing his fears lest, at the outset, the Parisian mode of life should displease the traveller in the most essential point.
I ought to have consulted you on the point, and have had some dishes prepared expressly.” “Did you know me better,” returned the count, smiling, “you would not give one thought of such a thing for a traveller like myself, who has successively lived on macaroni at Naples, polenta at Milan, olla podrida at Valencia, pilau at Constantinople, curry in India, and swallows’ nests in China.
“No, I slept, as I generally do when I am weary without having the courage to amuse myself, or when I am hungry without feeling inclined to eat.” “But you can sleep when you please, monsieur?” said Morrel.
“Yes.” “You have a recipe for it?” “An infallible one.” “That would be invaluable to us in Africa, who have not always any food to eat, and rarely anything to drink.” “Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “but, unfortunately, a recipe excellent for a man like myself would be very dangerous applied to an army, which might not awake when it was needed.” “May we inquire what is this recipe?” asked Debray.
“Oh, yes,” returned Monte Cristo; “I make no secret of it.
It is a mixture of excellent opium, which I fetched myself from Canton in order to have it pure, and the best hashish which grows in the East—that is, between the Tigris and the Euphrates.
These two ingredients are mixed in equal proportions, and formed into pills.
Ten minutes after one is taken, the effect is produced.
Ask Baron Franz d’Épinay; I think he tasted them one day.” “Yes,” replied Morcerf, “he said something about it to me.” “But,” said Beauchamp, who, as became a journalist, was very incredulous, “you always carry this drug about you?” “Always.” “Would it be an indiscretion to ask to see those precious pills?” continued Beauchamp, hoping to take him at a disadvantage.
“No, monsieur,” returned the count; and he drew from his pocket a marvellous casket, formed out of a single emerald and closed by a golden lid which unscrewed and gave passage to a small greenish colored pellet about the size of a pea.
This ball had an acrid and penetrating odor.
The casket passed around the table, but it was more to examine the admirable emerald than to see the pills that it passed from hand to hand.
“And is it your cook who prepares these pills?” asked Beauchamp.
“Oh, no, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo; “I do not thus betray my enjoyments to the vulgar.
I am a tolerable chemist, and prepare my pills myself.” “This is a magnificent emerald, and the largest I have ever seen,” said Château-Renaud, “although my mother has some remarkable family jewels.” “I had three similar ones,” returned Monte Cristo.
“I gave one to the Sultan, who mounted it in his sabre; another to our holy father the Pope, who had it set in his tiara, opposite to one nearly as large, though not so fine, given by the Emperor Napoleon to his predecessor, Pius VII.
I kept the third for myself, and I had it hollowed out, which reduced its value, but rendered it more commodious for the purpose I intended.” Everyone looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment; he spoke with so much simplicity that it was evident he spoke the truth, or that he was mad.
However, the sight of the emerald made them naturally incline to the former belief.
“And what did these two sovereigns give you in exchange for these magnificent presents?” asked Debray.
“The Sultan, the liberty of a woman,” replied the Count; “the Pope, the life of a man; so that once in my life I have been as powerful as if heaven had brought me into the world on the steps of a throne.” “And it was Peppino you saved, was it not?” cried Morcerf; “it was for him that you obtained pardon?” “Perhaps,” returned the count, smiling.
“My dear count, you have no idea what pleasure it gives me to hear you speak thus,” said Morcerf.
“I had announced you beforehand to my friends as an enchanter of the _Arabian Nights_, a wizard of the Middle Ages; but the Parisians are so subtle in paradoxes that they mistake for caprices of the imagination the most incontestable truths, when these truths do not form a part of their daily existence.
For example, here is Debray who reads, and Beauchamp who prints, every day, ‘A member of the Jockey Club has been stopped and robbed on the Boulevard;’ ‘four persons have been assassinated in the Rue St.
Denis’ or ‘the Faubourg St.
Germain;’ ‘ten, fifteen, or twenty thieves, have been arrested in a _café_ on the Boulevard du Temple, or in the Thermes de Julien,’—and yet these same men deny the existence of the bandits in the Maremma, the Campagna di Romana, or the Pontine Marshes.
Tell them yourself that I was taken by bandits, and that without your generous intercession I should now have been sleeping in the Catacombs of St.
Sebastian, instead of receiving them in my humble abode in the Rue du Helder.” “Ah,” said Monte Cristo “you promised me never to mention that circumstance.” “It was not I who made that promise,” cried Morcerf; “it must have been someone else whom you have rescued in the same manner, and whom you have forgotten.
Pray speak of it, for I shall not only, I trust, relate the little I do know, but also a great deal I do not know.” “It seems to me,” returned the count, smiling, “that you played a sufficiently important part to know as well as myself what happened.” 20249m “Well, you promise me, if I tell all I know, to relate, in your turn, all that I do not know?” “That is but fair,” replied Monte Cristo.
“Well,” said Morcerf, “for three days I believed myself the object of the attentions of a masque, whom I took for a descendant of Tullia or Poppæa, while I was simply the object of the attentions of a _contadina_, and I say _contadina_ to avoid saying peasant girl.
What I know is, that, like a fool, a greater fool than he of whom I spoke just now, I mistook for this peasant girl a young bandit of fifteen or sixteen, with a beardless chin and slim waist, and who, just as I was about to imprint a chaste salute on his lips, placed a pistol to my head, and, aided by seven or eight others, led, or rather dragged me, to the Catacombs of St.
Sebastian, where I found a highly educated brigand chief perusing Cæsar’s _Commentaries_, and who deigned to leave off reading to inform me, that unless the next morning, before six o’clock, four thousand piastres were paid into his account at his banker’s, at a quarter past six I should have ceased to exist.
The letter is still to be seen, for it is in Franz d’Épinay’s possession, signed by me, and with a postscript of M.
This is all I know, but I know not, count, how you contrived to inspire so much respect in the bandits of Rome who ordinarily have so little respect for anything.
I assure you, Franz and I were lost in admiration.” “Nothing more simple,” returned the count.
When he was quite a child, and only a shepherd, I gave him a few gold pieces for showing me my way, and he, in order to repay me, gave me a poniard, the hilt of which he had carved with his own hand, and which you may have seen in my collection of arms.
In after years, whether he had forgotten this interchange of presents, which ought to have cemented our friendship, or whether he did not recollect me, he sought to take me, but, on the contrary, it was I who captured him and a dozen of his band.
I might have handed him over to Roman justice, which is somewhat expeditious, and which would have been particularly so with him; but I did nothing of the sort—I suffered him and his band to depart.” “With the condition that they should sin no more,” said Beauchamp, laughing.
“I see they kept their promise.” “No, monsieur,” returned Monte Cristo “upon the simple condition that they should respect myself and my friends.
“But I am sure that the count does not regret having once deviated from the principles he has so boldly avowed.” “How have I deviated from those principles, monsieur?” asked Monte Cristo, who could not help looking at Morrel with so much intensity, that two or three times the young man had been unable to sustain that clear and piercing glance.
“Why, it seems to me,” replied Morrel, “that in delivering M. de Morcerf, whom you did not know, you did good to your neighbor and to society.” “Of which he is the brightest ornament,” said Beauchamp, drinking off a glass of champagne.
“My dear count,” cried Morcerf, “you are at fault—you, one of the most formidable logicians I know—and you must see it clearly proved that instead of being an egotist, you are a philanthropist.
You were no stranger to me, for I knew you from the time I gave up two rooms to you, invited you to breakfast with me, lent you one of my carriages, witnessed the Carnival in your company, and saw with you from a window in the Piazza del Popolo the execution that affected you so much that you nearly fainted.
I will appeal to any of these gentlemen, could I leave my guest in the hands of a hideous bandit, as you term him?
Besides, you know, I had the idea that you could introduce me into some of the Paris salons when I came to France.
You might some time ago have looked upon this resolution as a vague project, but today you see it was a reality, and you must submit to it under penalty of breaking your word.” “I will keep it,” returned Morcerf; “but I fear that you will be much disappointed, accustomed as you are to picturesque events and fantastic horizons.
Amongst us you will not meet with any of those episodes with which your adventurous existence has so familiarized you; our Chimborazo is Mortmartre, our Himalaya is Mount Valérien, our Great Desert is the plain of Grenelle, where they are now boring an artesian well to water the caravans.
We have plenty of thieves, though not so many as is said; but these thieves stand in far more dread of a policeman than a lord.
France is so prosaic, and Paris so civilized a city, that you will not find in its eighty-five departments—I say eighty-five, because I do not include Corsica—you will not find, then, in these eighty-five departments a single hill on which there is not a telegraph, or a grotto in which the commissary of police has not put up a gaslamp.
There is but one service I can render you, and for that I place myself entirely at your orders, that is, to present, or make my friends present, you everywhere; besides, you have no need of anyone to introduce you—with your name, and your fortune, and your talent” (Monte Cristo bowed with a somewhat ironical smile) “you can present yourself everywhere, and be well received.
I can be useful in one way only—if knowledge of Parisian habits, of the means of rendering yourself comfortable, or of the bazaars, can assist, you may depend upon me to find you a fitting dwelling here.
I do not dare offer to share my apartments with you, as I shared yours at Rome—I, who do not profess egotism, but am yet egotist _par excellence_; for, except myself, these rooms would not hold a shadow more, unless that shadow were feminine.” “Ah,” said the count, “that is a most conjugal reservation; I recollect that at Rome you said something of a projected marriage.
May I congratulate you?” “The affair is still in projection.” “And he who says in ‘projection,’ means already decided,” said Debray.
If the stranger expected to produce an effect on Morrel, he was not mistaken—Maximilian started as if he had been electrified.
“Thomson & French,” said he; “do you know this house, monsieur?” 20253m “They are my bankers in the capital of the Christian world,” returned the count quietly.
“Can my influence with them be of any service to you?” “Oh, count, you could assist me perhaps in researches which have been, up to the present, fruitless.
This house, in past years, did ours a great service, and has, I know not for what reason, always denied having rendered us this service.” “I shall be at your orders,” said Monte Cristo bowing.
“But,” continued Morcerf, “_à propos_ of Danglars,—we have strangely wandered from the subject.
We were speaking of a suitable habitation for the Count of Monte Cristo.
Come, gentlemen, let us all propose some place.
Where shall we lodge this new guest in our great capital?” “Faubourg Saint-Germain,” said Château-Renaud.
“The count will find there a charming hotel, with a court and garden.” “Bah!
Château-Renaud,” returned Debray, “you only know your dull and gloomy Faubourg Saint-Germain; do not pay any attention to him, count—live in the Chaussée d’Antin, that’s the real centre of Paris.” “Boulevard de l’Opéra,” said Beauchamp; “the second floor—a house with a balcony.
“Yes, monsieur, a most excellent sister.” “Married?” “Nearly nine years.” “Happy?” asked the count again.
“As happy as it is permitted to a human creature to be,” replied Maximilian.
“She married the man she loved, who remained faithful to us in our fallen fortunes—Emmanuel Herbaut.” Monte Cristo smiled imperceptibly.
“I live there during my leave of absence,” continued Maximilian; “and I shall be, together with my brother-in-law Emmanuel, at the disposition of the Count, whenever he thinks fit to honor us.” “One minute,” cried Albert, without giving Monte Cristo the time to reply.
“Take care, you are going to immure a traveller, Sinbad the Sailor, a man who comes to see Paris; you are going to make a patriarch of him.” 20255m “Oh, no,” said Morrel; “my sister is five-and-twenty, my brother-in-law is thirty, they are gay, young, and happy.
He is black, and cannot speak,” returned Monte Cristo.
“It is Ali!” cried Albert, in the midst of the general surprise.
“Yes, Ali himself, my Nubian mute, whom you saw, I think, at Rome.” “Certainly,” said Morcerf; “I recollect him perfectly.
But how could you charge a Nubian to purchase a house, and a mute to furnish it?—he will do everything wrong.” “Undeceive yourself, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo; “I am quite sure, that, on the contrary, he will choose everything as I wish.
He knows my tastes, my caprices, my wants.
He has been here a week, with the instinct of a hound, hunting by himself.
He will arrange everything for me.
He knew, that I should arrive today at ten o’clock; he was waiting for me at nine at the Barrière de Fontainebleau.
He gave me this paper; it contains the number of my new abode; read it yourself,” and Monte Cristo passed a paper to Albert.
“Ah, that is really original,” said Beauchamp.
“And very princely,” added Château-Renaud.
“No,” said Monte Cristo; “I told you I did not wish to be behind my time; I dressed myself in the carriage, and descended at the viscount’s door.” The young men looked at each other; they did not know if it was a comedy Monte Cristo was playing, but every word he uttered had such an air of simplicity, that it was impossible to suppose what he said was false—besides, why should he tell a falsehood?
“We must content ourselves, then,” said Beauchamp, “with rendering the count all the little services in our power.
I, in my quality of journalist, open all the theatres to him.” “Thanks, monsieur,” returned Monte Cristo, “my steward has orders to take a box at each theatre.” “Is your steward also a Nubian?” asked Debray.
“No, he is a countryman of yours, if a Corsican is a countryman of anyone’s.
But you know him, M. de Morcerf.” “Is it that excellent M.
Bertuccio, who understands hiring windows so well?” “Yes, you saw him the day I had the honor of receiving you; he has been a soldier, a smuggler—in fact, everything.
I would not be quite sure that he has not been mixed up with the police for some trifle—a stab with a knife, for instance.” “And you have chosen this honest citizen for your steward,” said Debray.
I am sure he answers my purpose, knows no impossibility, and so I keep him.” “Then,” continued Château-Renaud, “since you have an establishment, a steward, and a hotel in the Champs-Élysées, you only want a mistress.” Albert smiled.
He thought of the fair Greek he had seen in the count’s box at the Argentina and Valle theatres.
“I have something better than that,” said Monte Cristo; “I have a slave.
Everyone who surrounds me is free to quit me, and when they leave me will no longer have any need of me or anyone else; it is for that reason, perhaps, that they do not quit me.” They had long since passed to dessert and cigars.
Your guest is charming, but you leave the best company to go into the worst sometimes.
I must return to the minister’s.
I will tell him of the count, and we shall soon know who he is.” “Take care,” returned Albert; “no one has been able to accomplish that.” “Oh, we have three millions for our police; it is true they are almost always spent beforehand, but, no matter, we shall still have fifty thousand francs to spend for this purpose.” “And when you know, will you tell me?” “I promise you. _Au revoir_, Albert.
Gentlemen, good morning.” As he left the room, Debray called out loudly, “My carriage.” “Bravo,” said Beauchamp to Albert; “I shall not go to the Chamber, but I have something better to offer my readers than a speech of M.
Danglars.” “For heaven’s sake, Beauchamp,” returned Morcerf, “do not deprive me of the merit of introducing him everywhere.
Is he not peculiar?” “He is more than that,” replied Château-Renaud; “he is one of the most extraordinary men I ever saw in my life.
Are you coming, Morrel?” “Directly I have given my card to the count, who has promised to pay us a visit at Rue Meslay, No. 14.” “Be sure I shall not fail to do so,” returned the count, bowing.
And Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baron de Château-Renaud, leaving Monte Cristo alone with Morcerf.
The Presentation When Albert found himself alone with Monte Cristo, “My dear count,” said he, “allow me to commence my services as _cicerone_ by showing you a specimen of a bachelor’s apartment.
You, who are accustomed to the palaces of Italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square feet a young man who is not the worst lodged in Paris can live.
As we pass from one room to another, I will open the windows to let you breathe.” Monte Cristo had already seen the breakfast-room and the salon on the ground floor.
Albert led him first to his _atelier_, which was, as we have said, his favorite apartment.
Monte Cristo quickly appreciated all that Albert had collected here—old cabinets, Japanese porcelain, Oriental stuffs, Venetian glass, arms from all parts of the world—everything was familiar to him; and at the first glance he recognized their date, their country, and their origin.
Morcerf had expected he should be the guide; on the contrary, it was he who, under the count’s guidance, followed a course of archæology, mineralogy, and natural history.
They descended to the first floor; Albert led his guest into the salon.
Albert expected to have something new this time to show to the traveller, but, to his great surprise, the latter, without seeking for the signatures, many of which, indeed, were only initials, named instantly the author of every picture in such a manner that it was easy to see that each name was not only known to him, but that each style associated with it had been appreciated and studied by him.
From the salon they passed into the bedchamber; it was a model of taste and simple elegance.
A single portrait, signed by Léopold Robert, shone in its carved and gilded frame.
This portrait attracted the Count of Monte Cristo’s attention, for he made three rapid steps in the chamber, and stopped suddenly before it.
It was the portrait of a young woman of five or six-and-twenty, with a dark complexion, and light and lustrous eyes, veiled beneath long lashes.
She wore the picturesque costume of the Catalan fisherwomen, a red and black bodice, and golden pins in her hair.
She was looking at the sea, and her form was outlined on the blue ocean and sky.
The light was so faint in the room that Albert did not perceive the pallor that spread itself over the count’s visage, or the nervous heaving of his chest and shoulders.
Silence prevailed for an instant, during which Monte Cristo gazed intently on the picture.
“You have there a most charming mistress, viscount,” said the count in a perfectly calm tone; “and this costume—a ball costume, doubtless—becomes her admirably.” “Ah, monsieur,” returned Albert, “I would never forgive you this mistake if you had seen another picture beside this.
She had her portrait painted thus six or eight years ago.
This costume is a fancy one, it appears, and the resemblance is so great that I think I still see my mother the same as she was in 1830.
The countess had this portrait painted during the count’s absence.
She doubtless intended giving him an agreeable surprise; but, strange to say, this portrait seemed to displease my father, and the value of the picture, which is, as you see, one of the best works of Léopold Robert, could not overcome his dislike to it.
It is true, between ourselves, that M. de Morcerf is one of the most assiduous peers at the Luxembourg, a general renowned for theory, but a most mediocre amateur of art.
It is different with my mother, who paints exceedingly well, and who, unwilling to part with so valuable a picture, gave it to me to put here, where it would be less likely to displease M. de Morcerf, whose portrait, by Gros, I will also show you.
Excuse my talking of family matters, but as I shall have the honor of introducing you to the count, I tell you this to prevent you making any allusions to this picture.
The picture seems to have a malign influence, for my mother rarely comes here without looking at it, and still more rarely does she look at it without weeping.
This disagreement is the only one that has ever taken place between the count and countess, who are still as much united, although married more than twenty years, as on the first day of their wedding.” 20261m Monte Cristo glanced rapidly at Albert, as if to seek a hidden meaning in his words, but it was evident the young man uttered them in the simplicity of his heart.
“Now,” said Albert, “that you have seen all my treasures, allow me to offer them to you, unworthy as they are.
Consider yourself as in your own house, and to put yourself still more at your ease, pray accompany me to the apartments of M. de Morcerf, he whom I wrote from Rome an account of the services you rendered me, and to whom I announced your promised visit, and I may say that both the count and countess anxiously desire to thank you in person.
You are somewhat _blasé_ I know, and family scenes have not much effect on Sinbad the Sailor, who has seen so many others.
However, accept what I propose to you as an initiation into Parisian life—a life of politeness, visiting, and introductions.” Monte Cristo bowed without making any answer; he accepted the offer without enthusiasm and without regret, as one of those conventions of society which every gentleman looks upon as a duty.
Albert summoned his servant, and ordered him to acquaint M. and Madame de Morcerf of the arrival of the Count of Monte Cristo.
Albert followed him with the count.
When they arrived at the antechamber, above the door was visible a shield, which, by its rich ornaments and its harmony with the rest of the furniture, indicated the importance the owner attached to this blazon.
Monte Cristo stopped and examined it attentively.
“These are, doubtless, your family arms?
Except the knowledge of blazons, that enables me to decipher them, I am very ignorant of heraldry—I, a count of a fresh creation, fabricated in Tuscany by the aid of a commandery of St.
Stephen, and who would not have taken the trouble had I not been told that when you travel much it is necessary.
Besides, you must have something on the panels of your carriage, to escape being searched by the custom-house officers.
Excuse my putting such a question to you.” “It is not indiscreet,” returned Morcerf, with the simplicity of conviction.
Almost all the armed pilgrims that went to the Holy Land took for their arms either a cross, in honor of their mission, or birds of passage, in sign of the long voyage they were about to undertake, and which they hoped to accomplish on the wings of faith.
One of your ancestors had joined the Crusades, and supposing it to be only that of St.
Louis, that makes you mount to the thirteenth century, which is tolerably ancient.” “It is possible,” said Morcerf; “my father has in his study a genealogical tree which will tell you all that, and on which I made commentaries that would have greatly edified d’Hozier and Jaucourt.
At present I no longer think of it, and yet I must tell you that we are beginning to occupy ourselves greatly with these things under our popular government.” “Well, then, your government would do well to choose from the past something better than the things that I have noticed on your monuments, and which have no heraldic meaning whatever.
As for you, viscount,” continued Monte Cristo to Morcerf, “you are more fortunate than the government, for your arms are really beautiful, and speak to the imagination.
Yes, you are at once from Provence and Spain; that explains, if the portrait you showed me be like, the dark hue I so much admired on the visage of the noble Catalan.” It would have required the penetration of Œdipus or the Sphinx to have divined the irony the count concealed beneath these words, apparently uttered with the greatest politeness.
In the most conspicuous part of the salon was another portrait.
Monte Cristo was engaged in examining this portrait with no less care than he had bestowed upon the other, when another door opened, and he found himself opposite to the Count of Morcerf in person.
He was a man of forty to forty-five years, but he seemed at least fifty, and his black moustache and eyebrows contrasted strangely with his almost white hair, which was cut short, in the military fashion.
He was dressed in plain clothes, and wore at his button-hole the ribbons of the different orders to which he belonged.
He entered with a tolerably dignified step, and some little haste.
Monte Cristo, in taking the seat Morcerf offered him, placed himself in such a manner as to remain concealed in the shadow of the large velvet curtains, and read on the careworn and livid features of the count a whole history of secret griefs written in each wrinkle time had planted there.
“The countess,” said Morcerf, “was at her toilet when she was informed of the visit she was about to receive.
Made a peer at the Restoration, I served through the first campaign under the orders of Marshal Bourmont.
I could, therefore, expect a higher rank, and who knows what might have happened had the elder branch remained on the throne?
But the Revolution of July was, it seems, sufficiently glorious to allow itself to be ungrateful, and it was so for all services that did not date from the imperial period.
I tendered my resignation, for when you have gained your epaulets on the battle-field, you do not know how to manœuvre on the slippery grounds of the salons.
I have hung up my sword, and cast myself into politics.
I have devoted myself to industry; I study the useful arts.
During the twenty years I served, I often wished to do so, but I had not the time.” “These are the ideas that render your nation superior to any other,” returned Monte Cristo.
France will not, perhaps, be always ungrateful.
Monte Cristo, turned round hastily, and saw Madame de Morcerf at the entrance of the salon, at the door opposite to that by which her husband had entered, pale and motionless; when Monte Cristo turned round, she let fall her arm, which for some unknown reason had been resting on the gilded door-post.
The latter rose and bowed to the countess, who inclined herself without speaking.
“Ah! good heavens, madame,” said the count, “are you ill, or is it the heat of the room that affects you?” “Are you ill, mother?” cried the viscount, springing towards her.
“No,” returned she, “but I feel some emotion on seeing, for the first time, the man without whose intervention we should have been in tears and desolation.
Monsieur,” continued the countess, advancing with the majesty of a queen, “I owe to you the life of my son, and for this I bless you.
Now, I thank you for the pleasure you give me in thus affording me the opportunity of thanking you as I have blessed you, from the bottom of my heart.” The count bowed again, but lower than before; he was even paler than Mercédès.
“Madame,” said he, “the count and yourself recompense too generously a simple action.
M. de Morcerf approached her.
“I have already made my excuses to the count for quitting him, and I pray you to do so also.
The sitting commences at two; it is now three, and I am to speak.” “Go, then, and monsieur and I will strive our best to forget your absence,” replied the countess, with the same tone of deep feeling.
“I will not detain you, monsieur,” continued the countess; “I would not have our gratitude become indiscreet or importunate.” “My dear Count,” said Albert, “I will endeavor to return your politeness at Rome, and place my coupé at your disposal until your own be ready.” “A thousand thanks for your kindness, viscount,” returned the Count of Monte Cristo “but I suppose that M.
Monte Cristo was not deceived.
As soon as he appeared in the Count of Morcerf’s antechamber, a footman, the same who at Rome had brought the count’s card to the two young men, and announced his visit, sprang into the vestibule, and when he arrived at the door the illustrious traveller found his carriage awaiting him.
It was a _coupé_ of Koller’s building, and with horses and harness for which Drake had, to the knowledge of all the lions of Paris, refused on the previous day seven hundred guineas.
“Monsieur,” said the count to Albert, “I do not ask you to accompany me to my house, as I can only show you a habitation fitted up in a hurry, and I have, as you know, a reputation to keep up as regards not being taken by surprise.
Give me, therefore, one more day before I invite you; I shall then be certain not to fail in my hospitality.” “If you ask me for a day, count, I know what to anticipate; it will not be a house I shall see, but a palace.
When Albert returned to his mother, he found her in the boudoir reclining in a large velvet armchair, the whole room so obscure that only the shining spangle, fastened here and there to the drapery, and the angles of the gilded frames of the pictures, showed with some degree of brightness in the gloom.
Albert could not see the face of the countess, as it was covered with a thin veil she had put on her head, and which fell over her features in misty folds, but it seemed to him as though her voice had altered.
You are really ill, and just now were so pale as you came into the room——” “Was I pale, Albert?” “Yes; a pallor that suits you admirably, mother, but which did not the less alarm my father and myself.” “Did your father speak of it?” inquired Mercédès eagerly.
“No, madame; but do you not remember that he spoke of the fact to you?” 20269m “Yes, I do remember,” replied the countess.
A servant entered, summoned by Albert’s ring of the bell.
“Take these flowers into the anteroom or dressing-room,” said the viscount; “they make the countess ill.” The footman obeyed his orders.
“What is this name of Monte Cristo?” inquired the countess, when the servant had taken away the last vase of flowers, “is it a family name, or the name of the estate, or a simple title?” “I believe, mother, it is merely a title.
The count purchased an island in the Tuscan archipelago, and, as he told you today, has founded a commandery.
You know the same thing was done for Saint Stephen of Florence, Saint George Constantinian of Parma, and even for the Order of Malta.
Who knows whether or not these industrious worthies do not pay to their feudal lord some dues for his protection?” “That is possible,” said the countess, reflecting.
“Never mind,” continued the young man, “smuggler or not, you must agree, mother dear, as you have seen him, that the Count of Monte Cristo is a remarkable man, who will have the greatest success in the salons of Paris.
Why, this very morning, in my rooms, he made his _entrée_ amongst us by striking every man of us with amazement, not even excepting Château-Renaud.” “And what do you suppose is the count’s age?” inquired Mercédès, evidently attaching great importance to this question.
“Thirty-five or thirty-six, mother.” “So young,—it is impossible,” said Mercédès, replying at the same time to what Albert said as well as to her own private reflection.
Three or four times he has said to me, and certainly without the slightest premeditation, ‘at such a period I was five years old, at another ten years old, at another twelve,’ and I, induced by curiosity, which kept me alive to these details, have compared the dates, and never found him inaccurate.
The age of this singular man, who is of no age, is then, I am certain, thirty-five.
Besides, mother, remark how vivid his eye, how raven-black his hair, and his brow, though so pale, is free from wrinkles,—he is not only vigorous, but also young.” The countess bent her head, as if beneath a heavy wave of bitter thoughts.
“And has this man displayed a friendship for you, Albert?” she asked with a nervous shudder.
“I am inclined to think so.” “And—do—you—like—him?” “Why, he pleases me in spite of Franz d’Épinay, who tries to convince me that he is a being returned from the other world.” The countess shuddered.
“Albert,” she said, in a voice which was altered by emotion, “I have always put you on your guard against new acquaintances.
Now you are a man, and are able to give me advice; yet I repeat to you, Albert, be prudent.” “Why, my dear mother, it is necessary, in order to make your advice turn to account, that I should know beforehand what I have to distrust.
The count never plays, he only drinks pure water tinged with a little sherry, and is so rich that he cannot, without intending to laugh at me, try to borrow money.
What, then, have I to fear from him?” “You are right,” said the countess, “and my fears are weakness, especially when directed against a man who has saved your life.
It is necessary that we should be more than complaisant to the count.
M. de Morcerf is sometimes occupied, his business makes him reflective, and he might, without intending it——” “Nothing could be in better taste than my father’s demeanor, madame,” said Albert; “nay, more, he seemed greatly flattered at two or three compliments which the count very skilfully and agreeably paid him with as much ease as if he had known him these thirty years.
Each of these little tickling arrows must have pleased my father,” added Albert with a laugh.
“And thus they parted the best possible friends, and M. de Morcerf even wished to take him to the Chamber to hear the speakers.” The countess made no reply.
She fell into so deep a reverie that her eyes gradually closed.
The young man, standing up before her, gazed upon her with that filial affection which is so tender and endearing with children whose mothers are still young and handsome.
Then, after seeing her eyes closed, and hearing her breathe gently, he believed she had dropped asleep, and left the apartment on tiptoe, closing the door after him with the utmost precaution.
“This devil of a fellow,” he muttered, shaking his head; “I said at the time he would create a sensation here, and I measure his effect by an infallible thermometer.
My mother has noticed him, and he must therefore, perforce, be remarkable.” He went down to the stables, not without some slight annoyance, when he remembered that the Count of Monte Cristo had laid his hands on a “turnout” which sent his bays down to second place in the opinion of connoisseurs.
“Most decidedly,” said he, “men are not equal, and I must beg my father to develop this theorem in the Chamber of Peers.” Chapter 42.
Monsieur Bertuccio Meanwhile the count had arrived at his house; it had taken him six minutes to perform the distance, but these six minutes were sufficient to induce twenty young men who knew the price of the equipage they had been unable to purchase themselves, to put their horses in a gallop in order to see the rich foreigner who could afford to give 20,000 francs apiece for his horses.
The house Ali had chosen, and which was to serve as a town residence to Monte Cristo, was situated on the right hand as you ascend the Champs-Élysées.
A thick clump of trees and shrubs rose in the centre, and masked a portion of the front; around this shrubbery two alleys, like two arms, extended right and left, and formed a carriage-drive from the iron gates to a double portico, on every step of which stood a porcelain vase, filled with flowers.
This house, isolated from the rest, had, besides the main entrance, another in the Rue de Ponthieu.
Even before the coachman had hailed the _concierge_, the massy gates rolled on their hinges—they had seen the Count coming, and at Paris, as everywhere else, he was served with the rapidity of lightning.
The coachman entered and traversed the half-circle without slackening his speed, and the gates were closed ere the wheels had ceased to sound on the gravel.
The carriage stopped at the left side of the portico, two men presented themselves at the carriage-window; the one was Ali, who, smiling with an expression of the most sincere joy, seemed amply repaid by a mere look from Monte Cristo.
The other bowed respectfully, and offered his arm to assist the count in descending.
Bertuccio,” said the count, springing lightly up the three steps of the portico; “and the notary?” “He is in the small salon, excellency,” returned Bertuccio.
“And the cards I ordered to be engraved as soon as you knew the number of the house?” “Your excellency, it is done already.
I have been myself to the best engraver of the Palais Royal, who did the plate in my presence.
“These are but indifferent marbles in this antechamber,” said Monte Cristo.
“I trust all this will soon be taken away.” Bertuccio bowed.
He was a simple-looking lawyer’s clerk, elevated to the extraordinary dignity of a provincial scrivener.
“You are the notary empowered to sell the country house that I wish to purchase, monsieur?” asked Monte Cristo.
“Yes, count,” returned the notary.
“Is the deed of sale ready?” “Yes, count.” “Have you brought it?” “Here it is.” “Very well; and where is this house that I purchase?” asked the count carelessly, addressing himself half to Bertuccio, half to the notary.
The steward made a gesture that signified, “I do not know.” The notary looked at the count with astonishment.
“What!” said he, “does not the count know where the house he purchases is situated?” “No,” returned the count.
I have never before been at Paris, and it is the first time I have ever even set my foot in France.” “Ah, that is different; the house you purchase is at Auteuil.” At these words Bertuccio turned pale.
“Close by here, monsieur,” replied the notary—“a little beyond Passy; a charming situation, in the heart of the Bois de Boulogne.” “So near as that?” said the Count; “but that is not in the country.
Bertuccio?” “I,” cried the steward with a strange expression.
“His excellency did not charge me to purchase this house.
If his excellency will recollect—if he will think——” “Ah, true,” observed Monte Cristo; “I recollect now.
“It is a charming place, well supplied with spring-water and fine trees; a comfortable habitation, although abandoned for a long time, without reckoning the furniture, which, although old, is yet valuable, now that old things are so much sought after.
I suppose the count has the tastes of the day?” “To be sure,” returned Monte Cristo; “it is very convenient, then?” “It is more—it is magnificent.” “_Peste!_ let us not lose such an opportunity,” returned Monte Cristo.
Notary.” And he signed it rapidly, after having first run his eye over that part of the deed in which were specified the situation of the house and the names of the proprietors.
“Bertuccio,” said he, “give fifty-five thousand francs to monsieur.” The steward left the room with a faltering step, and returned with a bundle of bank-notes, which the notary counted like a man who never gives a receipt for money until after he is sure it is all there.
The notary left the room backwards, and bowing down to the ground; it was the first time he had ever met a similar client.
“See this gentleman out,” said the count to Bertuccio.
And the steward followed the notary out of the room.
Scarcely was the count alone, when he drew from his pocket a book closed with a lock, and opened it with a key which he wore round his neck, and which never left him.
After having sought for a few minutes, he stopped at a leaf which had several notes, and compared them with the deed of sale, which lay on the table, and recalling his _souvenirs_— “‘Auteuil, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28;’ it is indeed the same,” said he; “and now, am I to rely upon an avowal extorted by religious or physical terror?
Bertuccio!” cried he, striking a light hammer with a pliant handle on a small gong.
“Bertuccio!” The steward appeared at the door.
“Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count, “did you never tell me that you had travelled in France?” “In some parts of France—yes, excellency.” “You know the environs of Paris, then?” “No, excellency, no,” returned the steward, with a sort of nervous trembling, which Monte Cristo, a connoisseur in all emotions, rightly attributed to great disquietude.
“It is unfortunate,” returned he, “that you have never visited the environs, for I wish to see my new property this evening, and had you gone with me, you could have given me some useful information.” “To Auteuil!” cried Bertuccio, whose copper complexion became livid—“I go to Auteuil?” “Well, what is there surprising in that?
When I live at Auteuil, you must come there, as you belong to my service.” Bertuccio hung down his head before the imperious look of his master, and remained motionless, without making any answer.
“Your excellency’s carriage is at the door,” said he.
“Well, take your hat and gloves,” returned Monte Cristo.
“Am I to accompany you, your excellency?” cried Bertuccio.
“Certainly, you must give the orders, for I intend residing at the house.” 20277m It was unexampled for a servant of the count’s to dare to dispute an order of his, so the steward, without saying a word, followed his master, who got into the carriage, and signed to him to follow, which he did, taking his place respectfully on the front seat.
The House at Auteuil Monte Cristo noticed, as they descended the staircase, that Bertuccio signed himself in the Corsican manner; that is, had formed the sign of the cross in the air with his thumb, and as he seated himself in the carriage, muttered a short prayer.
Anyone but a man of exhaustless thirst for knowledge would have had pity on seeing the steward’s extraordinary repugnance for the count’s projected drive without the walls; but the count was too curious to let Bertuccio off from this little journey.
In twenty minutes they were at Auteuil; the steward’s emotion had continued to augment as they entered the village.
Bertuccio, crouched in the corner of the carriage, began to examine with a feverish anxiety every house they passed.
“Tell them to stop at Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28,” said the count, fixing his eyes on the steward, to whom he gave this order.
Bertuccio’s forehead was covered with perspiration; however, he obeyed, and, leaning out of the window, he cried to the coachman,—“Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28.” No. 28 was situated at the extremity of the village; during the drive night had set in, and darkness gave the surroundings the artificial appearance of a scene on the stage.
The carriage stopped, the footman sprang off the box and opened the door.
Bertuccio—you are going to stay in the carriage, then?
What are you thinking of this evening?” Bertuccio sprang out, and offered his shoulder to the count, who, this time, leaned upon it as he descended the three steps of the carriage.
“Knock,” said the count, “and announce me.” Bertuccio knocked, the door opened, and the concierge appeared.
And he held out to the concierge the notary’s order.
Ah, I am sure he has not sold the house for what he gave for it.” “The Marquis of Saint-Méran!” returned the count.
“The name is not unknown to me; the Marquis of Saint-Méran!” and he appeared to meditate.
“An old gentleman,” continued the concierge, “a staunch follower of the Bourbons; he had an only daughter, who married M. de Villefort, who had been the king’s attorney at Nîmes, and afterwards at Versailles.” Monte Cristo glanced at Bertuccio, who became whiter than the wall against which he leaned to prevent himself from falling.
“And is not this daughter dead?” demanded Monte Cristo; “I fancy I have heard so.” “Yes, monsieur, one-and-twenty years ago; and since then we have not seen the poor marquis three times.” “Thanks, thanks,” said Monte Cristo, judging from the steward’s utter prostration that he could not stretch the cord further without danger of breaking it.
“Give me a light.” “Shall I accompany you, monsieur?” “No, it is unnecessary; Bertuccio will show me a light.” And Monte Cristo accompanied these words by the gift of two gold pieces, which produced a torrent of thanks and blessings from the concierge.
“Ah, monsieur,” said he, after having vainly searched on the mantle-piece and the shelves, “I have not got any candles.” “Take one of the carriage-lamps, Bertuccio,” said the count, “and show me the apartments.” The steward obeyed in silence, but it was easy to see, from the manner in which the hand that held the light trembled, how much it cost him to obey.
They went over a tolerably large ground floor; a first floor consisted of a salon, a bathroom, and two bedrooms; near one of the bedrooms they came to a winding staircase that led down to the garden.
“Ah, here is a private staircase,” said the count; “that is convenient.
Bertuccio, and go first; we will see where it leads to.” “Monsieur,” replied Bertuccio, “it leads to the garden.” “And, pray, how do you know that?” “It ought to do so, at least.” “Well, let us be sure of that.” Bertuccio sighed, and went on first; the stairs did, indeed, lead to the garden.
“Go on, Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count.
But he who was addressed stood there, stupefied, bewildered, stunned; his haggard eyes glanced around, as if in search of the traces of some terrible event, and with his clenched hands he seemed striving to shut out horrible recollections.
“Well!” insisted the Count.
“No, no,” cried Bertuccio, setting down the lantern at the angle of the interior wall.
“No, monsieur, it is impossible; I can go no farther.” “What does this mean?” demanded the irresistible voice of Monte Cristo.
“Why, you must see, your excellency,” cried the steward, “that this is not natural; that, having a house to purchase, you purchase it exactly at Auteuil, and that, purchasing it at Auteuil, this house should be No. 28, Rue de la Fontaine.
I hoped your house would have been some other one than this; as if there was not another house at Auteuil than that of the assassination!” “What, what!” cried Monte Cristo, stopping suddenly, “what words do you utter?
Devil of a man, Corsican that you are—always mysteries or superstitions.
Come, take the lantern, and let us visit the garden; you are not afraid of ghosts with me, I hope?” Bertuccio raised the lantern, and obeyed.
The door, as it opened, disclosed a gloomy sky, in which the moon strove vainly to struggle through a sea of clouds that covered her with billows of vapor which she illumined for an instant, only to sink into obscurity.
“No, no, monsieur,” said Monte Cristo.
“What is the use of following the alleys?
Here is a beautiful lawn; let us go on straight forwards.” Bertuccio wiped the perspiration from his brow, but obeyed; however, he continued to take the left hand.
Monte Cristo, on the contrary, took the right hand; arrived near a clump of trees, he stopped.
The steward could not restrain himself.
“Move, monsieur—move away, I entreat you; you are exactly in the spot!” “What spot?” “Where he fell.” 20281m “My dear Monsieur Bertuccio,” said Monte Cristo, laughing, “control yourself; we are not at Sartène or at Corte.
This is not a Corsican _maquis_ but an English garden; badly kept, I own, but still you must not calumniate it for that.” “Monsieur, I implore you do not stay there!” “I think you are going mad, Bertuccio,” said the count coldly.
“If that is the case, I warn you, I shall have you put in a lunatic asylum.” “Alas! excellency,” returned Bertuccio, joining his hands, and shaking his head in a manner that would have excited the count’s laughter, had not thoughts of a superior interest occupied him, and rendered him attentive to the least revelation of this timorous conscience.
“Alas! excellency, the evil has arrived!” “M.
Bertuccio,” said the count, “I am very glad to tell you, that while you gesticulate, you wring your hands and roll your eyes like a man possessed by a devil who will not leave him; and I have always observed, that the devil most obstinate to be expelled is a secret.
I knew you were a Corsican.
I knew you were gloomy, and always brooding over some old history of the vendetta; and I overlooked that in Italy, because in Italy those things are thought nothing of.
But in France they are considered in very bad taste; there are gendarmes who occupy themselves with such affairs, judges who condemn, and scaffolds which avenge.” Bertuccio clasped his hands, and as, in all these evolutions, he did not let fall the lantern, the light showed his pale and altered countenance.
Monte Cristo examined him with the same look that, at Rome, he had bent upon the execution of Andrea, and then, in a tone that made a shudder pass through the veins of the poor steward— “The Abbé Busoni, then told me an untruth,” said he, “when, after his journey in France, in 1829, he sent you to me, with a letter of recommendation, in which he enumerated all your valuable qualities.
Well, I shall write to the abbé; I shall hold him responsible for his _protégé’s_ misconduct, and I shall soon know all about this assassination.
Only I warn you, that when I reside in a country, I conform to all its code, and I have no wish to put myself within the compass of the French laws for your sake.” “Oh, do not do that, excellency; I have always served you faithfully,” cried Bertuccio, in despair.
“I have always been an honest man, and, as far as lay in my power, I have done good.” “I do not deny it,” returned the count; “but why are you thus agitated.
The Marquis de Saint-Méran, I think, the concierge said.
What had you to revenge on the Marquis de Saint-Méran?” “Oh, it was not on him, monsieur; it was on another.” “This is strange,” returned Monte Cristo, seeming to yield to his reflections, “that you should find yourself without any preparation in a house where the event happened that causes you so much remorse.” “Monsieur,” said the steward, “it is fatality, I am sure.
First, you purchase a house at Auteuil—this house is the one where I have committed an assassination; you descend to the garden by the same staircase by which he descended; you stop at the spot where he received the blow; and two paces farther is the grave in which he had just buried his child.
This is not chance, for chance, in this case, is too much like Providence.” “Well, amiable Corsican, let us suppose it is Providence.
I always suppose anything people please, and, besides, you must concede something to diseased minds.
Come, collect yourself, and tell me all.” “I have related it but once, and that was to the Abbé Busoni.
Such things,” continued Bertuccio, shaking his head, “are only related under the seal of confession.” “Then,” said the count, “I refer you to your confessor.
Turn Chartreux or Trappist, and relate your secrets, but, as for me, I do not like anyone who is alarmed by such phantasms, and I do not choose that my servants should be afraid to walk in the garden of an evening.
I confess I am not very desirous of a visit from the commissary of police, for, in Italy, justice is only paid when silent—in France she is paid only when she speaks. _Peste!_ I thought you somewhat Corsican, a great deal smuggler, and an excellent steward; but I see you have other strings to your bow.
“Have you proof of this?” “I had it.” “And you have lost it; how stupid!” “Yes; but by careful search it might be recovered.” “Really,” returned the count, “relate it to me, for it begins to interest me.” And the count, humming an air from _Lucia_, went to sit down on a bench, while Bertuccio followed him, collecting his thoughts.
Bertuccio remained standing before him. 20285m Chapter 44.
The Vendetta At what point shall I begin my story, your excellency?” asked Bertuccio.
“Where you please,” returned Monte Cristo, “since I know nothing at all of it.” “I thought the Abbé Busoni had told your excellency.” “Some particulars, doubtless, but that is seven or eight years ago, and I have forgotten them.” “Then I can speak without fear of tiring your excellency.” “Go on, M.
Bertuccio; you will supply the want of the evening papers.” “The story begins in 1815.” “Ah,” said Monte Cristo, “1815 is not yesterday.” “No, monsieur, and yet I recollect all things as clearly as if they had happened but then.
I had a brother, an elder brother, who was in the service of the emperor; he had become lieutenant in a regiment composed entirely of Corsicans.
This brother was my only friend; we became orphans—I at five, he at eighteen.
When the emperor returned from the Island of Elba, my brother instantly joined the army, was slightly wounded at Waterloo, and retired with the army beyond the Loire.” “But that is the history of the Hundred Days, M.
Bertuccio,” said the count; “unless I am mistaken, it has been already written.” “Excuse me, excellency, but these details are necessary, and you promised to be patient.” “Go on; I will keep my word.” “One day we received a letter.
I should tell you that we lived in the little village of Rogliano, at the extremity of Cap Corse.
He told us that the army was disbanded, and that he should return by Châteauroux, Clermont-Ferrand, Le Puy, and Nîmes; and, if I had any money, he prayed me to leave it for him at Nîmes, with an innkeeper with whom I had dealings.” “In the smuggling line?” said Monte Cristo.
“Eh, your excellency?
Everyone must live.” “Certainly; go on.” “I loved my brother tenderly, as I told your excellency, and I resolved not to send the money, but to take it to him myself.
I possessed a thousand francs.
It was easy to do so, and as I had my boat and a lading to take in at sea, everything favored my project.
But, after we had taken in our cargo, the wind became contrary, so that we were four or five days without being able to enter the Rhône.
At last, however, we succeeded, and worked up to Arles.
I left the boat between Bellegarde and Beaucaire, and took the road to Nîmes.” “We are getting to the story now?” “Yes, your excellency; excuse me, but, as you will see, I only tell you what is absolutely necessary.
Just at this time the famous massacres took place in the south of France.
Three brigands, called Trestaillon, Truphemy, and Graffan, publicly assassinated everybody whom they suspected of Bonapartism.
You have doubtless heard of these massacres, your excellency?” “Vaguely; I was far from France at that period.
Go on.” “As I entered Nîmes, I literally waded in blood; at every step you encountered dead bodies and bands of murderers, who killed, plundered, and burned.
At the sight of this slaughter and devastation I became terrified, not for myself—for I, a simple Corsican fisherman, had nothing to fear; on the contrary, that time was most favorable for us smugglers—but for my brother, a soldier of the empire, returning from the army of the Loire, with his uniform and his epaulets, there was everything to apprehend.
I hastened to the innkeeper.
My misgivings had been but too true.
My brother had arrived the previous evening at Nîmes, and, at the very door of the house where he was about to demand hospitality, he had been assassinated.
I did all in my power to discover the murderers, but no one durst tell me their names, so much were they dreaded.
I then thought of that French justice of which I had heard so much, and which feared nothing, and I went to the king’s attorney.” “And this king’s attorney was named Villefort?” asked Monte Cristo carelessly.
“Yes, your excellency; he came from Marseilles, where he had been deputy procureur.
His zeal had procured him advancement, and he was said to be one of the first who had informed the government of the departure from the Island of Elba.” “Then,” said Monte Cristo “you went to him?” “‘Monsieur,’ I said, ‘my brother was assassinated yesterday in the streets of Nîmes, I know not by whom, but it is your duty to find out.
You are the representative of justice here, and it is for justice to avenge those she has been unable to protect.’ “‘Who was your brother?’ asked he.
“‘A lieutenant in the Corsican battalion.’ “‘A soldier of the usurper, then?’ “‘A soldier of the French army.’ “‘Well,’ replied he, ‘he has smitten with the sword, and he has perished by the sword.’ “‘You are mistaken, monsieur,’ I replied; ‘he has perished by the poniard.’ “‘What do you want me to do?’ asked the magistrate.
“‘I have already told you—avenge him.’ “‘On whom?’ “‘On his murderers.’ “‘How should I know who they are?’ “‘Order them to be sought for.’ “‘Why, your brother has been involved in a quarrel, and killed in a duel.
Pray, try and obtain a small government pension for her.’ “‘Every revolution has its catastrophes,’ returned M. de Villefort; ‘your brother has been the victim of this.
It is a misfortune, and government owes nothing to his family.
If we are to judge by all the vengeance that the followers of the usurper exercised on the partisans of the king, when, in their turn, they were in power, your brother would be today, in all probability, condemned to death.
What has happened is quite natural, and in conformity with the law of reprisals.’ “‘What,’ cried I, ‘do you, a magistrate, speak thus to me?’ “‘All these Corsicans are mad, on my honor,’ replied M. de Villefort; ‘they fancy that their countryman is still emperor.
You have mistaken the time, you should have told me this two months ago, it is too late now.
Go now, at once, or I shall have you put out.’ “I looked at him an instant to see if there was anything to hope from further entreaty.
I approached him, and said in a low voice, ‘Well, since you know the Corsicans so well, you know that they always keep their word.
You think that it was a good deed to kill my brother, who was a Bonapartist, because you are a royalist.
Well, I, who am a Bonapartist also, declare one thing to you, which is, that I will kill you.
From this moment I declare the vendetta against you, so protect yourself as well as you can, for the next time we meet your last hour has come.’ And before he had recovered from his surprise, I opened the door and left the room.” “Well, well,” said Monte Cristo, “such an innocent looking person as you are to do those things, M.
Bertuccio, and to a king’s attorney at that!
But did he know what was meant by the terrible word ‘vendetta’?” “He knew so well, that from that moment he shut himself in his house, and never went out unattended, seeking me high and low.
Fortunately, I was so well concealed that he could not find me.
Then he became alarmed, and dared not stay any longer at Nîmes, so he solicited a change of residence, and, as he was in reality very influential, he was nominated to Versailles.
But, as you know, a Corsican who has sworn to avenge himself cares not for distance, so his carriage, fast as it went, was never above half a day’s journey before me, who followed him on foot.
The most important thing was, not to kill him only—for I had an opportunity of doing so a hundred times—but to kill him without being discovered—at least, without being arrested.
I no longer belonged to myself, for I had my sister-in-law to protect and provide for.
“For three months I watched M. de Villefort, for three months he took not a step out-of-doors without my following him.
At length I discovered that he went mysteriously to Auteuil.
I followed him thither, and I saw him enter the house where we now are, only, instead of entering by the great door that looks into the street, he came on horseback, or in his carriage, left the one or the other at the little inn, and entered by the gate you see there.” Monte Cristo made a sign with his head to show that he could discern in the darkness the door to which Bertuccio alluded.
“As I had nothing more to do at Versailles, I went to Auteuil, and gained all the information I could.
If I wished to surprise him, it was evident this was the spot to lie in wait for him.
The house belonged, as the concierge informed your excellency, to M. de Saint-Méran, Villefort’s father-in-law.
M. de Saint-Méran lived at Marseilles, so that this country house was useless to him, and it was reported to be let to a young widow, known only by the name of ‘the Baroness.’ “One evening, as I was looking over the wall, I saw a young and handsome woman who was walking alone in that garden, which was not overlooked by any windows, and I guessed that she was awaiting M. de Villefort.
When she was sufficiently near for me to distinguish her features, I saw she was from eighteen to nineteen, tall and very fair.
As she had a loose muslin dress on and as nothing concealed her figure, I saw she would ere long become a mother.
The young woman hastened to meet him.
They threw themselves into each other’s arms, embraced tenderly, and returned together to the house.
Three days after, about seven o’clock in the evening, I saw a servant on horseback leave the house at full gallop, and take the road to Sèvres.
I concluded that he was going to Versailles, and I was not deceived.
Three hours later, the man returned covered with dust, his errand was performed, and two minutes after, another man on foot, muffled in a mantle, opened the little door of the garden, which he closed after him.
I descended rapidly; although I had not seen Villefort’s face, I recognized him by the beating of my heart.
My first care was to run to the door; he had left the key in it, taking the simple precaution of turning it twice in the lock.
Nothing, then, preventing my escape by this means, I examined the grounds.
The garden was long and narrow; a stretch of smooth turf extended down the middle, and at the corners were clumps of trees with thick and massy foliage, that made a background for the shrubs and flowers.
In order to go from the door to the house, or from the house to the door, M. de Villefort would be obliged to pass by one of these clumps of trees. 20293m “It was the end of September; the wind blew violently.
The faint glimpses of the pale moon, hidden momentarily by masses of dark clouds that were sweeping across the sky, whitened the gravel walks that led to the house, but were unable to pierce the obscurity of the thick shrubberies, in which a man could conceal himself without any fear of discovery.
I hid myself in the one nearest to the path Villefort must take, and scarcely was I there when, amidst the gusts of wind, I fancied I heard groans; but you know, or rather you do not know, your excellency, that he who is about to commit an assassination fancies that he hears low cries perpetually ringing in his ears.
Two hours passed thus, during which I imagined I heard moans repeatedly.
As the last stroke died away, I saw a faint light shine through the windows of the private staircase by which we have just descended.
The door opened, and the man in the mantle reappeared.
“The terrible moment had come, but I had so long been prepared for it that my heart did not fail in the least.
The man in the mantle advanced towards me, but as he drew near I saw that he had a weapon in his hand.
I was afraid, not of a struggle, but of a failure.
I was still unable to divine for what reason M. de Villefort had this spade in his hands, when he stopped close to the thicket where I was, glanced round, and began to dig a hole in the earth.
I then perceived that he was hiding something under his mantle, which he laid on the grass in order to dig more freely.
Then, I confess, curiosity mingled with hatred; I wished to see what Villefort was going to do there, and I remained motionless, holding my breath.
Then an idea crossed my mind, which was confirmed when I saw the procureur lift from under his mantle a box, two feet long, and six or eight inches deep.
I felt his blood gush over my face, but I was intoxicated, I was delirious, and the blood refreshed, instead of burning me.
Its purple visage, and its violet-colored hands showed that it had perished from suffocation, but as it was not yet cold, I hesitated to throw it into the water that ran at my feet.
After a moment I fancied that I felt a slight pulsation of the heart, and as I had been assistant at the hospital at Bastia, I did what a doctor would have done—I inflated the lungs by blowing air into them, and at the expiration of a quarter of an hour, it began to breathe, and cried feebly.
“‘God has not cursed me then,’ I cried, ‘since he permits me to save the life of a human creature, in exchange for the life I have taken away.’” 20295m “And what did you do with the child?” asked Monte Cristo.
“It was an embarrassing load for a man seeking to escape.” “I had not for a moment the idea of keeping it, but I knew that at Paris there was an asylum where they receive such creatures.
As I passed the city gates I declared that I had found the child on the road, and I inquired where the asylum was; the box confirmed my statement, the linen proved that the infant belonged to wealthy parents, the blood with which I was covered might have proceeded from the child as well as from anyone else.
No objection was raised, but they pointed out the asylum, which was situated at the upper end of the Rue d’Enfer, and after having taken the precaution of cutting the linen in two pieces, so that one of the two letters which marked it was on the piece wrapped around the child, while the other remained in my possession, I rang the bell, and fled with all speed.
“An H and an N, surmounted by a baron’s coronet.” “By heaven, M.
Bertuccio, you make use of heraldic terms; where did you study heraldry?” “In your service, excellency, where everything is learned.” “Go on, I am curious to know two things.” “What are they, your excellency?” “What became of this little boy? for I think you told me it was a boy, M.
Bertuccio.” “No excellency, I do not recollect telling you that.” “I thought you did; I must have been mistaken.” “No, you were not, for it was in reality a little boy.
“Partly to drown the recollections of the past that haunted me, partly to supply the wants of the poor widow, I eagerly returned to my trade of smuggler, which had become more easy since that relaxation of the laws which always follows a revolution.
The southern districts were ill-watched in particular, in consequence of the disturbances that were perpetually breaking out in Avignon, Nîmes, or Uzès.
We profited by this respite on the part of the government to make friends everywhere.
Since my brother’s assassination in the streets of Nîmes, I had never entered the town; the result was that the innkeeper with whom we were connected, seeing that we would no longer come to him, was forced to come to us, and had established a branch to his inn, on the road from Bellegarde to Beaucaire, at the sign of the Pont du Gard.
We had thus, at Aigues-Mortes, Martigues, or Bouc, a dozen places where we left our goods, and where, in case of necessity, we concealed ourselves from the gendarmes and custom-house officers.
Smuggling is a profitable trade, when a certain degree of vigor and intelligence is employed; as for myself, brought up in the mountains, I had a double motive for fearing the gendarmes and custom-house officers, as my appearance before the judges would cause an inquiry, and an inquiry always looks back into the past.
And in my past life they might find something far more grave than the selling of smuggled cigars, or barrels of brandy without a permit.
So, preferring death to capture, I accomplished the most astonishing deeds, and which, more than once, showed me that the too great care we take of our bodies is the only obstacle to the success of those projects which require rapid decision, and vigorous and determined execution.
In reality, when you have once devoted your life to your enterprises, you are no longer the equal of other men, or, rather, other men are no longer your equals, and whosoever has taken this resolution, feels his strength and resources doubled.” “Philosophy, M.
Bertuccio,” interrupted the count; “you have done a little of everything in your life.” “Oh, excellency!” “No, no; but philosophy at half-past ten at night is somewhat late; yet I have no other observation to make, for what you say is correct, which is more than can be said for all philosophy.” “My journeys became more and more extensive and more productive.
Assunta took care of all, and our little fortune increased.
One day as I was setting off on an expedition, ‘Go,’ said she; ‘at your return I will give you a surprise.’ I questioned her, but in vain; she would tell me nothing, and I departed.
Our expedition lasted nearly six weeks; we had been to Lucca to take in oil, to Leghorn for English cottons, and we ran our cargo without opposition, and returned home full of joy.
When I entered the house, the first thing I beheld in the middle of Assunta’s chamber was a cradle that might be called sumptuous compared with the rest of the furniture, and in it a baby seven or eight months old.
I uttered a cry of joy; the only moments of sadness I had known since the assassination of the procureur were caused by the recollection that I had abandoned this child.
For the assassination itself I had never felt any remorse.
She had profited by my absence, and furnished with the half of the linen, and having written down the day and hour at which I had deposited the child at the asylum, had set off for Paris, and had reclaimed it.
No objection was raised, and the infant was given up to her.
Ah, I confess, your excellency, when I saw this poor creature sleeping peacefully in its cradle, I felt my eyes filled with tears.
‘Ah, Assunta,’ cried I, ‘you are an excellent woman, and Heaven will bless you.’” “This,” said Monte Cristo, “is less correct than your philosophy,—it is only faith.” “Alas, your excellency is right,” replied Bertuccio, “and God made this infant the instrument of our punishment.
Never did a perverse nature declare itself more prematurely, and yet it was not owing to any fault in his bringing up.
He was a most lovely child, with large blue eyes, of that deep color that harmonizes so well with the blond complexion; only his hair, which was too light, gave his face a most singular expression, and added to the vivacity of his look, and the malice of his smile.
“Unfortunately, there is a proverb which says that ‘red is either altogether good or altogether bad.’ The proverb was but too correct as regarded Benedetto, and even in his infancy he manifested the worst disposition.
It is true that the indulgence of his foster-mother encouraged him.
This child, for whom my poor sister would go to the town, five or six leagues off, to purchase the earliest fruits and the most tempting sweetmeats, preferred to Palma grapes or Genoese preserves, the chestnuts stolen from a neighbor’s orchard, or the dried apples in his loft, when he could eat as well of the nuts and apples that grew in my garden.
“One day, when Benedetto was about five or six, our neighbor Wasilio, who, according to the custom of the country, never locked up his purse or his valuables—for, as your excellency knows, there are no thieves in Corsica—complained that he had lost a louis out of his purse; we thought he must have made a mistake in counting his money, but he persisted in the accuracy of his statement.
One day, Benedetto, who had been gone from the house since morning, to our great anxiety, did not return until late in the evening, dragging a monkey after him, which he said he had found chained to the foot of a tree.
For more than a month past, the mischievous child, who knew not what to wish for, had taken it into his head to have a monkey.
A boatman, who had passed by Rogliano, and who had several of these animals, whose tricks had greatly diverted him, had, doubtless, suggested this idea to him.
‘Monkeys are not found in our woods chained to trees,’ said I; ‘confess how you obtained this animal.’ Benedetto maintained the truth of what he had said, and accompanied it with details that did more honor to his imagination than to his veracity.
I became angry; he began to laugh, I threatened to strike him, and he made two steps backwards.
‘You cannot beat me,’ said he; ‘you have no right, for you are not my father.’ 20299m “We never knew who had revealed this fatal secret, which we had so carefully concealed from him; however, it was this answer, in which the child’s whole character revealed itself, that almost terrified me, and my arm fell without touching him.
“The boy triumphed, and this victory rendered him so audacious, that all the money of Assunta, whose affection for him seemed to increase as he became more unworthy of it, was spent in caprices she knew not how to contend against, and follies she had not the courage to prevent.
When I was at Rogliano everything went on properly, but no sooner was my back turned than Benedetto became master, and everything went ill.
When he was only eleven, he chose his companions from among the young men of eighteen or twenty, the worst characters in Bastia, or, indeed, in Corsica, and they had already, for some mischievous pranks, been several times threatened with a prosecution.
I became alarmed, as any prosecution might be attended with serious consequences.
I was compelled, at this period, to leave Corsica on an important expedition; I reflected for a long time, and with the hope of averting some impending misfortune, I resolved that Benedetto should accompany me.
“I hoped that the active and laborious life of a smuggler, with the severe discipline on board, would have a salutary effect on his character, which was now well-nigh, if not quite, corrupt.
I spoke to Benedetto alone, and proposed to him to accompany me, endeavoring to tempt him by all the promises most likely to dazzle the imagination of a child of twelve.
He heard me patiently, and when I had finished, burst out laughing.
Why, I have as much money as I want; mother Assunta always furnishes me when I ask for it!
You see that I should be a fool to accept your offer.’ “The arguments, and his audacity, perfectly stupefied me.
Benedetto rejoined his associates, and I saw him from a distance point me out to them as a fool.” “Sweet child,” murmured Monte Cristo.
“Oh, had he been my own son,” replied Bertuccio, “or even my nephew, I would have brought him back to the right road, for the knowledge that you are doing your duty gives you strength, but the idea that I was striking a child whose father I had killed, made it impossible for me to punish him.
I gave my sister, who constantly defended the unfortunate boy, good advice, and as she confessed that she had several times missed money to a considerable amount, I showed her a safe place in which to conceal our little treasure for the future.
Benedetto could read, write, and cipher perfectly, for when the fit seized him, he learned more in a day than others in a week.
My intention was to enter him as a clerk in some ship, and without letting him know anything of my plan, to convey him some morning on board; by this means his future treatment would depend upon his own conduct.
Our cargo was to be landed in the Gulf of Lyons, and this was a difficult thing to do because it was then the year 1829.
The most perfect tranquillity was restored, and the vigilance of the custom-house officers was redoubled, and their strictness was increased at this time, in consequence of the fair at Beaucaire. 20301m “Our expedition made a favorable beginning.
We anchored our vessel—which had a double hold, where our goods were concealed—amidst a number of other vessels that bordered the banks of the Rhône from Beaucaire to Arles.
On our arrival we began to discharge our cargo in the night, and to convey it into the town, by the help of the innkeeper with whom we were connected.
“Whether success rendered us imprudent, or whether we were betrayed, I know not; but one evening, about five o’clock, our little cabin-boy came breathlessly, to inform us that he had seen a detachment of custom-house officers advancing in our direction.
It was not their proximity that alarmed us, for detachments were constantly patrolling along the banks of the Rhône, but the care, according to the boy’s account, that they took to avoid being seen.
I had designedly taken this direction.
Of course, we made the same arrangements with the new landlord that we had with the old; and it was of this man that I intended to ask shelter.” “What was his name?” inquired the count, who seemed to become somewhat interested in Bertuccio’s story.
“Gaspard Caderousse; he had married a woman from the village of Carconte, and whom we did not know by any other name than that of her village.
She was suffering from malarial fever, and seemed dying by inches.
“My intention was, if Caderousse was alone, to acquaint him with my presence, finish the meal the custom-house officers had interrupted, and profit by the threatened storm to return to the Rhône, and ascertain the state of our vessel and its crew.
I stepped into the shed, and it was fortunate I did so, for at that moment Caderousse entered with a stranger.
“I waited patiently, not to overhear what they said, but because I could do nothing else; besides, the same thing had occurred often before.
The man who was with Caderousse was evidently a stranger to the South of France; he was one of those merchants who come to sell jewellery at the Beaucaire fair, and who during the month the fair lasts, and during which there is so great an influx of merchants and customers from all parts of Europe, often have dealings to the amount of 100,000 to 150,000 francs.
Caderousse entered hastily.
Then, seeing that the room was, as usual, empty, and only guarded by the dog, he called to his wife, ‘Hello, Carconte,’ said he, ‘the worthy priest has not deceived us; the diamond is real.’ “An exclamation of joy was heard, and the staircase creaked beneath a feeble step.
“‘I say that the diamond is real, and that this gentleman, one of the first jewellers of Paris, will give us 50,000 francs for it.
Only, in order to satisfy himself that it really belongs to us, he wishes you to relate to him, as I have done already, the miraculous manner in which the diamond came into our possession.
In the meantime please to sit down, monsieur, and I will fetch you some refreshment.’ “The jeweller examined attentively the interior of the inn and the apparent poverty of the persons who were about to sell him a diamond that seemed to have come from the casket of a prince.
“‘Relate your story, madame,’ said he, wishing, no doubt, to profit by the absence of the husband, so that the latter could not influence the wife’s story, to see if the two recitals tallied.
“‘Oh,’ returned she, ‘it was a gift of heaven.
There’s only the price we are not agreed about.’ “‘How not agreed about?’ said Caderousse.
‘I thought we agreed for the price I asked.’ “‘That is,’ replied the jeweller, ‘I offered 40,000 francs.’ ‘Forty thousand,’ cried La Carconte; ‘we will not part with it for that sum.
The abbé told us it was worth 50,000 without the setting.’ “‘What was the abbé’s name?’ asked the indefatigable questioner.
“‘The Abbé Busoni,’ said La Carconte.
“‘He was a foreigner?’ “‘An Italian from the neighborhood of Mantua, I believe.’ “‘Let me see this diamond again,’ replied the jeweller; ‘the first time you are often mistaken as to the value of a stone.’ “Caderousse took from his pocket a small case of black shagreen, opened, and gave it to the jeweller.
At the sight of the diamond, which was as large as a hazel-nut, La Carconte’s eyes sparkled with cupidity.” “And what did you think of this fine story, eavesdropper?” said Monte Cristo; “did you credit it?” “Yes, your excellency.
I did not look on Caderousse as a bad man, and I thought him incapable of committing a crime, or even a theft.” “That did more honor to your heart than to your experience, M.
However, I will not go back on my word, and I will give 45,000.’ “‘At least, replace the diamond in the ring,’ said La Carconte sharply.
“‘Ah, true,’ replied the jeweller, and he reset the stone.
“‘No matter,’ observed Caderousse, replacing the box in his pocket, ‘someone else will purchase it.’ “‘Yes,’ continued the jeweller; ‘but someone else will not be so easy as I am, or content himself with the same story.
You will have to find the Abbé Busoni; and abbés who give diamonds worth two thousand louis are rare.
The law would seize it, and put you in prison; if at the end of three or four months you are set at liberty, the ring will be lost, or a false stone, worth three francs, will be given you, instead of a diamond worth 50,000 or perhaps 55,000 francs; from which you must allow that one runs considerable risk in purchasing.’ “Caderousse and his wife looked eagerly at each other.
“‘No,’ said Caderousse, ‘we are not rich enough to lose 5,000 francs.’ “‘As you please, my dear sir,’ said the jeweller; ‘I had, however, as you see, brought you the money in bright coin.’ And he drew from his pocket a handful of gold, and held it sparkling before the dazzled eyes of the innkeeper, and in the other hand he held a packet of bank-notes.
“There was evidently a severe struggle in the mind of Caderousse; it was plain that the small shagreen case, which he turned over and over in his hand, did not seem to him commensurate in value to the enormous sum which fascinated his gaze.
‘If he returns to Beaucaire without the diamond, he will inform against us, and, as he says, who knows if we shall ever again see the Abbé Busoni?—in all probability we shall never see him.’ “‘Well, then, so I will!’ said Caderousse; ‘so you may have the diamond for 45,000 francs.
But my wife wants a gold chain, and I want a pair of silver buckles.’ “The jeweller drew from his pocket a long flat box, which contained several samples of the articles demanded.
‘Here,’ he said, ‘I am very straightforward in my dealings—take your choice.’ “The woman selected a gold chain worth about five louis, and the husband a pair of buckles, worth perhaps fifteen francs.
“‘I hope you will not complain now?’ said the jeweller.
“‘The abbé told me it was worth 50,000 francs,’ muttered Caderousse.
What a strange fellow you are,’ said the jeweller, taking the diamond from his hand.
‘I give you 45,000 francs—that is, 2,500 livres of income,—a fortune such as I wish I had myself, and you are not satisfied!’ “‘And the five-and-forty thousand francs,’ inquired Caderousse in a hoarse voice, ‘where are they?
Come—let us see them.’ “‘Here they are,’ replied the jeweller, and he counted out upon the table 15,000 francs in gold, and 30,000 francs in bank-notes.
“‘Wait whilst I light the lamp,’ said La Carconte; ‘it is growing dark, and there may be some mistake.’ In fact, night had come on during this conversation, and with night the storm which had been threatening for the last half-hour.
The thunder growled in the distance; but it was apparently not heard by the jeweller, Caderousse, or La Carconte, absorbed as they were all three with the demon of gain.
I myself felt a strange kind of fascination at the sight of all this gold and all these bank-notes; it seemed to me that I was in a dream, and, as it always happens in a dream, I felt myself riveted to the spot.
Caderousse counted and again counted the gold and the notes, then handed them to his wife, who counted and counted them again in her turn.
During this time, the jeweller made the diamond play and sparkle in the lamplight, and the gem threw out jets of light which made him unmindful of those which—precursors of the storm—began to play in at the windows.
“‘Well,’ inquired the jeweller, ‘is the cash all right?’ “‘Yes,’ said Caderousse.
‘Give me the pocket-book, La Carconte, and find a bag somewhere.’ “La Carconte went to a cupboard, and returned with an old leathern pocket-book and a bag.
From the former she took some greasy letters, and put in their place the bank-notes, and from the bag took two or three crowns of six livres each, which, in all probability, formed the entire fortune of the miserable couple.
“‘There,’ said Caderousse; ‘and now, although you have wronged us of perhaps 10,000 francs, will you have your supper with us?
I invite you with good-will.’ “‘Thank you,’ replied the jeweller, ‘it must be getting late, and I must return to Beaucaire—my wife will be getting uneasy.’ He drew out his watch, and exclaimed, ‘_Morbleu!_ nearly nine o’clock—why, I shall not get back to Beaucaire before midnight!
If the Abbé Busoni should by any accident return, think of me.’ “‘In another week you will have left Beaucaire,’ remarked Caderousse, ‘for the fair ends in a few days.’ “‘True, but that makes no difference.
I will make the journey on purpose to see him, if it is worth while.’ “At this moment there was a tremendous clap of thunder, accompanied by a flash of lightning so vivid, that it quite eclipsed the light of the lamp. 20307m “‘See here,’ exclaimed Caderousse.
‘You cannot think of going out in such weather as this.’ “‘Oh, I am not afraid of thunder,’ said the jeweller.
“‘And then there are robbers,’ said La Carconte.
‘The road is never very safe during fair time.’ “‘Oh, as to the robbers,’ said Joannes, ‘here is something for them,’ and he drew from his pocket a pair of small pistols, loaded to the muzzle.
‘Here,’ said he, ‘are dogs who bark and bite at the same time, they are for the two first who shall have a longing for your diamond, Friend Caderousse.’ “Caderousse and his wife again interchanged a meaning look.
It seemed as though they were both inspired at the same time with some horrible thought.
‘Well, then, a good journey to you,’ said Caderousse.
“‘Thanks,’ replied the jeweller.
He then took his cane, which he had placed against an old cupboard, and went out.
At the moment when he opened the door, such a gust of wind came in that the lamp was nearly extinguished.
‘Oh,’ said he, ‘this is very nice weather, and two leagues to go in such a storm.’ “‘Remain,’ said Caderousse.
‘You can sleep here.’ “‘Yes; do stay,’ added La Carconte in a tremulous voice; ‘we will take every care of you.’ “‘No; I must sleep at Beaucaire.
So, once more, good-night.’ Caderousse followed him slowly to the threshold.
‘I can see neither heaven nor earth,’ said the jeweller, who was outside the door.
‘Do I turn to the right, or to the left hand?’ “‘To the right,’ said Caderousse.
‘You cannot go wrong—the road is bordered by trees on both sides.’ “‘Good—all right,’ said a voice almost lost in the distance.
“‘Close the door,’ said La Carconte; ‘I do not like open doors when it thunders.’ “‘Particularly when there is money in the house, eh?’ answered Caderousse, double-locking the door. 20311m “He came into the room, went to the cupboard, took out the bag and pocket-book, and both began, for the third time, to count their gold and bank-notes.
I never saw such an expression of cupidity as the flickering lamp revealed in those two countenances.
The woman, especially, was hideous; her usual feverish tremulousness was intensified, her countenance had become livid, and her eyes resembled burning coals.
“‘If you had been a man, you would not have let him go from here.’ “‘Woman!’ “‘Or else he should not have reached Beaucaire.’ “‘Woman!’ “‘The road takes a turn—he is obliged to follow it—while alongside of the canal there is a shorter road.’ “‘Woman!—you offend the good God.
There—listen!’ And at this moment there was a tremendous peal of thunder, while the livid lightning illumined the room, and the thunder, rolling away in the distance, seemed to withdraw unwillingly from the cursed abode.
‘Mercy!’ said Caderousse, crossing himself. 20312m “At the same moment, and in the midst of the terrifying silence which usually follows a clap of thunder, they heard a knocking at the door.
Caderousse and his wife started and looked aghast at each other.
“‘Who’s there?’ cried Caderousse, rising, and drawing up in a heap the gold and notes scattered over the table, and which he covered with his two hands.
“‘And who are you?’ “‘Eh, _pardieu!_ Joannes, the jeweller.’ “‘Well, and you said I offended the good God,’ said La Carconte with a horrid smile.
‘Why, the good God sends him back again.’ Caderousse sank pale and breathless into his chair.
“La Carconte, on the contrary, rose, and going with a firm step towards the door, opened it, saying, as she did so: “‘Come in, dear M.
Joannes.’ “‘_Ma foi_,’ said the jeweller, drenched with rain, ‘I am not destined to return to Beaucaire tonight.
The shortest follies are best, my dear Caderousse.
You offered me hospitality, and I accept it, and have returned to sleep beneath your friendly roof.’ “Caderousse stammered out something, while he wiped away the sweat that started to his brow.
La Carconte double-locked the door behind the jeweller.” Chapter 45.
The Rain of Blood As the jeweller returned to the apartment, he cast around him a scrutinizing glance—but there was nothing to excite suspicion, if it did not exist, or to confirm it, if it were already awakened.
Caderousse’s hands still grasped the gold and bank-notes, and La Carconte called up her sweetest smiles while welcoming the reappearance of their guest.
‘Have you any other guests in your house?’ inquired he.
“‘Nobody but ourselves,’ replied Caderousse; ‘the fact is, we do not lodge travellers—indeed, our tavern is so near the town, that nobody would think of stopping here.’ “‘Then I am afraid I shall very much inconvenience you.’ “‘Inconvenience us?
Not at all, my dear sir,’ said La Carconte in her most gracious manner.
‘Not at all, I assure you.’ “‘But where will you manage to stow me?’ “‘In the chamber overhead.’ “‘Surely that is where you yourselves sleep?’ “‘Never mind that; we have a second bed in the adjoining room.’ “Caderousse stared at his wife with much astonishment.
“The jeweller, meanwhile, was humming a song as he stood warming his back at the fire La Carconte had kindled to dry the wet garments of her guest; and this done, she next occupied herself in arranging his supper, by spreading a napkin at the end of the table, and placing on it the slender remains of their dinner, to which she added three or four fresh-laid eggs.
Caderousse had once more parted with his treasure—the banknotes were replaced in the pocket-book, the gold put back into the bag, and the whole carefully locked in the cupboard.
He then began pacing the room with a pensive and gloomy air, glancing from time to time at the jeweller, who stood reeking with the steam from his wet clothes, and merely changing his place on the warm hearth, to enable the whole of his garments to be dried.
“‘There,’ said La Carconte, as she placed a bottle of wine on the table, ‘supper is ready whenever you are.’ “‘And you?’ asked Joannes.
“‘I don’t want any supper,’ said Caderousse.
“‘We dined so very late,’ hastily interposed La Carconte.
“‘Then it seems I am to eat alone,’ remarked the jeweller.
“‘Oh, we shall have the pleasure of waiting upon you,’ answered La Carconte, with an eager attention she was not accustomed to manifest even to guests who paid for what they took.
“From time to time Caderousse darted on his wife keen, searching glances, but rapid as the lightning flash.
The storm still continued.
“‘There, there,’ said La Carconte; ‘do you hear that? upon my word, you did well to come back.’ “‘Nevertheless,’ replied the jeweller, ‘if by the time I have finished my supper the tempest has at all abated, I shall make another start.’ “‘It’s the mistral,’ said Caderousse, ‘and it will be sure to last till tomorrow morning.’ He sighed heavily.
“‘Well,’ said the jeweller, as he placed himself at table, ‘all I can say is, so much the worse for those who are abroad.’ “‘Yes,’ chimed in La Carconte, ‘they will have a wretched night of it.’ “The jeweller began eating his supper, and the woman, who was ordinarily so querulous and indifferent to all who approached her, was suddenly transformed into the most smiling and attentive hostess.
Had the unhappy man on whom she lavished her assiduities been previously acquainted with her, so sudden an alteration might well have excited suspicion in his mind, or at least have greatly astonished him.
Caderousse, meanwhile, continued to pace the room in gloomy silence, sedulously avoiding the sight of his guest; but as soon as the stranger had completed his repast, the agitated innkeeper went eagerly to the door and opened it.
“But as if to contradict his statement, at that instant a violent clap of thunder seemed to shake the house to its very foundation, while a sudden gust of wind, mingled with rain, extinguished the lamp he held in his hand.
“Trembling and awe-struck, Caderousse hastily shut the door and returned to his guest, while La Carconte lighted a candle by the smouldering ashes that glimmered on the hearth.
He passed over my head and I heard the flooring creak beneath his footsteps.
The quick, eager glance of La Carconte followed him as he ascended, while Caderousse, on the contrary, turned his back, and seemed most anxiously to avoid even glancing at him.
Overhead I could accurately distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who, after making the best arrangements in his power for passing a comfortable night, threw himself on his bed, and I could hear it creak and groan beneath his weight.
“Insensibly my eyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and having no suspicion of anything wrong, I sought not to shake it off.
I looked into the kitchen once more and saw Caderousse sitting by the side of a long table upon one of the low wooden stools which in country places are frequently used instead of chairs; his back was turned towards me, so that I could not see the expression of his countenance—neither should I have been able to do so had he been placed differently, as his head was buried between his two hands.
La Carconte continued to gaze on him for some time, then shrugging her shoulders, she took her seat immediately opposite to him.
“At this moment the expiring embers threw up a fresh flame from the kindling of a piece of wood that lay near, and a bright light flashed over the room.
La Carconte still kept her eyes fixed on her husband, but as he made no sign of changing his position, she extended her hard, bony hand, and touched him on the forehead. 20317m “Caderousse shuddered.
The woman’s lips seemed to move, as though she were talking; but because she merely spoke in an undertone, or my senses were dulled by sleep, I did not catch a word she uttered.
Confused sights and sounds seemed to float before me, and gradually I fell into a deep, heavy slumber.
How long I had been in this unconscious state I know not, when I was suddenly aroused by the report of a pistol, followed by a fearful cry.
Weak and tottering footsteps resounded across the chamber above me, and the next instant a dull, heavy weight seemed to fall powerless on the staircase.
I had not yet fully recovered consciousness, when again I heard groans, mingled with half-stifled cries, as if from persons engaged in a deadly struggle.
A cry more prolonged than the others and ending in a series of groans effectually roused me from my drowsy lethargy.
Hastily raising myself on one arm, I looked around, but all was dark; and it seemed to me as if the rain must have penetrated through the flooring of the room above, for some kind of moisture appeared to fall, drop by drop, upon my forehead, and when I passed my hand across my brow, I felt that it was wet and clammy.
“To the fearful noises that had awakened me had succeeded the most perfect silence—unbroken, save by the footsteps of a man walking about in the chamber above.
The staircase creaked, he descended into the room below, approached the fire and lit a candle.
“The man was Caderousse—he was pale and his shirt was all bloody.
Having obtained the light, he hurried upstairs again, and once more I heard his rapid and uneasy footsteps.
“A moment later he came down again, holding in his hand the small shagreen case, which he opened, to assure himself it contained the diamond,—seemed to hesitate as to which pocket he should put it in, then, as if dissatisfied with the security of either pocket, he deposited it in his red handkerchief, which he carefully rolled round his head.
“After this he took from his cupboard the bank-notes and gold he had put there, thrust the one into the pocket of his trousers, and the other into that of his waistcoat, hastily tied up a small bundle of linen, and rushing towards the door, disappeared in the darkness of the night.
“Then all became clear and manifest to me, and I reproached myself with what had happened, as though I myself had done the guilty deed.
I fancied that I still heard faint moans, and imagining that the unfortunate jeweller might not be quite dead, I determined to go to his relief, by way of atoning in some slight degree, not for the crime I had committed, but for that which I had not endeavored to prevent.
For this purpose I applied all the strength I possessed to force an entrance from the cramped spot in which I lay to the adjoining room.
The poorly fastened boards which alone divided me from it yielded to my efforts, and I found myself in the house.
Hastily snatching up the lighted candle, I hurried to the staircase; about midway a body was lying quite across the stairs.
It was that of La Carconte.
The pistol I had heard had doubtless been fired at her.
The shot had frightfully lacerated her throat, leaving two gaping wounds from which, as well as the mouth, the blood was pouring in floods.
I strode past her, and ascended to the sleeping chamber, which presented an appearance of the wildest disorder.
The furniture had been knocked over in the deadly struggle that had taken place there, and the sheets, to which the unfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were dragged across the room.
The murdered man lay on the floor, his head leaning against the wall, and about him was a pool of blood which poured forth from three large wounds in his breast; there was a fourth gash, in which a long table knife was plunged up to the handle.
“I stumbled over some object; I stooped to examine—it was the second pistol, which had not gone off, probably from the powder being wet.
I approached the jeweller, who was not quite dead, and at the sound of my footsteps and the creaking of the floor, he opened his eyes, fixed them on me with an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as though trying to speak, then, overcome by the effort, fell back and expired.
“This appalling sight almost bereft me of my senses, and finding that I could no longer be of service to anyone in the house, my only desire was to fly.
I rushed towards the staircase, clutching my hair, and uttering a groan of horror.
“Upon reaching the room below, I found five or six custom-house officers, and two or three gendarmes—all heavily armed.
They threw themselves upon me.
I made no resistance; I was no longer master of my senses.
When I strove to speak, a few inarticulate sounds alone escaped my lips.
“As I noticed the significant manner in which the whole party pointed to my blood-stained garments, I involuntarily surveyed myself, and then I discovered that the thick warm drops that had so bedewed me as I lay beneath the staircase must have been the blood of La Carconte.
I pointed to the spot where I had concealed myself.
“‘What does he mean?’ asked a gendarme.
“One of the officers went to the place I directed.
“Then I saw that they took me for the assassin.
I recovered force and energy enough to free myself from the hands of those who held me, while I managed to stammer forth: “‘I did not do it!
Indeed, indeed I did not!’ “A couple of gendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against my breast.
“‘Stir but a step,’ said they, ‘and you are a dead man.’ “‘Why should you threaten me with death,’ cried I, ‘when I have already declared my innocence?’ “‘Tush, tush,’ cried the men; ‘keep your innocent stories to tell to the judge at Nîmes.
Meanwhile, come along with us; and the best advice we can give you is to do so unresistingly.’ “Alas, resistance was far from my thoughts.
I was utterly overpowered by surprise and terror; and without a word I suffered myself to be handcuffed and tied to a horse’s tail, and thus they took me to Nîmes.
“I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sight of me near the tavern; feeling certain that I intended to pass the night there, he had returned to summon his comrades, who just arrived in time to hear the report of the pistol, and to take me in the midst of such circumstantial proofs of my guilt as rendered all hopes of proving my innocence utterly futile.
One only chance was left me, that of beseeching the magistrate before whom I was taken to cause every inquiry to be made for the Abbé Busoni, who had stopped at the inn of the Pont du Gard on that morning.
“If Caderousse had invented the story relative to the diamond, and there existed no such person as the Abbé Busoni, then, indeed, I was lost past redemption, or, at least, my life hung upon the feeble chance of Caderousse himself being apprehended and confessing the whole truth.
“Two months passed away in hopeless expectation on my part, while I must do the magistrate the justice to say that he used every means to obtain information of the person I declared could exculpate me if he would.
Caderousse still evaded all pursuit, and I had resigned myself to what seemed my inevitable fate.
“You may easily imagine with what eagerness I welcomed him, and how minutely I related the whole of what I had seen and heard.
I felt some degree of nervousness as I entered upon the history of the diamond, but, to my inexpressible astonishment, he confirmed it in every particular, and to my equal surprise, he seemed to place entire belief in all I said.
That which I had done by the impulse of my best feelings produced the same effect as though it had been the result of calculation.
My voluntary confession of the assassination at Auteuil proved to him that I had not committed that of which I stood accused.
When he quitted me, he bade me be of good courage, and to rely upon his doing all in his power to convince my judges of my innocence.
“I had speedy proofs that the excellent abbé was engaged in my behalf, for the rigors of my imprisonment were alleviated by many trifling though acceptable indulgences, and I was told that my trial was to be postponed to the assizes following those now being held.
“In the interim it pleased Providence to cause the apprehension of Caderousse, who was discovered in some distant country, and brought back to France, where he made a full confession, refusing to make the fact of his wife’s having suggested and arranged the murder any excuse for his own guilt.
The wretched man was sentenced to the galleys for life, and I was immediately set at liberty.” “And then it was, I presume,” said Monte Cristo “that you came to me as the bearer of a letter from the Abbé Busoni?” “It was, your excellency; the benevolent abbé took an evident interest in all that concerned me.
“‘Your mode of life as a smuggler,’ said he to me one day, ‘will be the ruin of you; if you get out, don’t take it up again.’ “‘But how,’ inquired I, ‘am I to maintain myself and my poor sister?’ “‘A person, whose confessor I am,’ replied he, ‘and who entertains a high regard for me, applied to me a short time since to procure him a confidential servant.
If so, I will give you a letter of introduction to him.’ “‘Oh, father,’ I exclaimed, ‘you are very good.’ “‘But you must swear solemnly that I shall never have reason to repent my recommendation.’ “I extended my hand, and was about to pledge myself by any promise he would dictate, but he stopped me.
“‘It is unnecessary for you to bind yourself by any vow,’ said he; ‘I know and admire the Corsican nature too well to fear you.
How comes it, that having both a sister and an adopted son, you have never spoken to me of either?” 20323m “Alas, I have still to recount the most distressing period of my life.
Anxious as you may suppose I was to behold and comfort my dear sister, I lost no time in hastening to Corsica, but when I arrived at Rogliano I found a house of mourning, the consequences of a scene so horrible that the neighbors remember and speak of it to this day.
Acting by my advice, my poor sister had refused to comply with the unreasonable demands of Benedetto, who was continually tormenting her for money, as long as he believed there was a sou left in her possession.
One morning he threatened her with the severest consequences if she did not supply him with what he desired, and disappeared and remained away all day, leaving the kind-hearted Assunta, who loved him as if he were her own child, to weep over his conduct and bewail his absence.
Evening came, and still, with all the patient solicitude of a mother, she watched for his return.
“As the eleventh hour struck, he entered with a swaggering air, attended by two of the most dissolute and reckless of his boon companions.
Two held poor Assunta, who, unable to conceive that any harm was intended to her, smiled in the face of those who were soon to become her executioners.
The third proceeded to barricade the doors and windows, then returned, and the three united in stifling the cries of terror incited by the sight of these preparations, and then dragged Assunta feet foremost towards the brazier, expecting to wring from her an avowal of where her supposed treasure was secreted.
In the struggle her clothes caught fire, and they were obliged to let go their hold in order to preserve themselves from sharing the same fate.
Covered with flames, Assunta rushed wildly to the door, but it was fastened; she flew to the windows, but they were also secured; then the neighbors heard frightful shrieks; it was Assunta calling for help.
The cries died away in groans, and next morning, as soon as Wasilio’s wife could muster up courage to venture abroad, she caused the door of our dwelling to be opened by the public authorities, when Assunta, although dreadfully burnt, was found still breathing; every drawer and closet in the house had been forced open, and the money stolen.
Benedetto never again appeared at Rogliano, neither have I since that day either seen or heard anything concerning him.
“It was subsequently to these dreadful events that I waited on your excellency, to whom it would have been folly to have mentioned Benedetto, since all trace of him seemed entirely lost; or of my sister, since she was dead.” “And in what light did you view the occurrence?” inquired Monte Cristo.
“As a punishment for the crime I had committed,” answered Bertuccio.
“Oh, those Villeforts are an accursed race!” “Truly they are,” murmured the count in a lugubrious tone.
“And now,” resumed Bertuccio, “your excellency may, perhaps, be able to comprehend that this place, which I revisit for the first time—this garden, the actual scene of my crime—must have given rise to reflections of no very agreeable nature, and produced that gloom and depression of spirits which excited the notice of your excellency, who was pleased to express a desire to know the cause.
At this instant a shudder passes over me as I reflect that possibly I am now standing on the very grave in which lies M. de Villefort, by whose hand the ground was dug to receive the corpse of his child.” “Everything is possible,” said Monte Cristo, rising from the bench on which he had been sitting; “even,” he added in an inaudible voice, “even that the procureur be not dead.
The Abbé Busoni did right to send you to me,” he went on in his ordinary tone, “and you have done well in relating to me the whole of your history, as it will prevent my forming any erroneous opinions concerning you in future.
As for that Benedetto, who so grossly belied his name, have you never made any effort to trace out whither he has gone, or what has become of him?” “No; far from wishing to learn whither he has betaken himself, I should shun the possibility of meeting him as I would a wild beast.
Thank God, I have never heard his name mentioned by any person, and I hope and believe he is dead.” “Do not think so, Bertuccio,” replied the count; “for the wicked are not so easily disposed of, for God seems to have them under his special watch-care to make of them instruments of his vengeance.” “So be it,” responded Bertuccio, “all I ask of heaven is that I may never see him again.
And now, your excellency,” he added, bowing his head, “you know everything—you are my judge on earth, as the Almighty is in heaven; have you for me no words of consolation?” “My good friend, I can only repeat the words addressed to you by the Abbé Busoni.
Villefort merited punishment for what he had done to you, and, perhaps, to others.
Benedetto, if still living, will become the instrument of divine retribution in some way or other, and then be duly punished in his turn.
As far as you yourself are concerned, I see but one point in which you are really guilty.
Ask yourself, wherefore, after rescuing the infant from its living grave, you did not restore it to its mother?
There was the crime, Bertuccio—that was where you became really culpable.” “True, excellency, that was the crime, the real crime, for in that I acted like a coward.
Perhaps, too, the natural and instinctive love of life made me wish to avoid endangering my own.
And then, again, I am not as brave and courageous as was my poor brother.” Bertuccio hid his face in his hands as he uttered these words, while Monte Cristo fixed on him a look of inscrutable meaning.
After a brief silence, rendered still more solemn by the time and place, the count said, in a tone of melancholy wholly unlike his usual manner: “In order to bring this conversation to a fitting termination (the last we shall ever hold upon this subject), I will repeat to you some words I have heard from the lips of the Abbé Busoni.
For all evils there are two remedies—time and silence.
And now leave me, Monsieur Bertuccio, to walk alone here in the garden.
The very circumstances which inflict on you, as a principal in the tragic scene enacted here, such painful emotions, are to me, on the contrary, a source of something like contentment, and serve but to enhance the value of this dwelling in my estimation.
The chief beauty of trees consists in the deep shadow of their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures a moving multitude of shapes and forms flitting and passing beneath that shade.
Here I have a garden laid out in such a way as to afford the fullest scope for the imagination, and furnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose leafy screen a visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms at will.
This to me, who expected but to find a blank enclosure surrounded by a straight wall, is, I assure you, a most agreeable surprise.
I have no fear of ghosts, and I have never heard it said that so much harm had been done by the dead during six thousand years as is wrought by the living in a single day.
Retire within, Bertuccio, and tranquillize your mind.
Should your confessor be less indulgent to you in your dying moments than you found the Abbé Busoni, send for me, if I am still on earth, and I will soothe your ears with words that shall effectually calm and soothe your parting soul ere it goes forth to traverse the ocean called eternity.” Bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighing heavily.
Monte Cristo, left alone, took three or four steps onwards, and murmured: “Here, beneath this plane-tree, must have been where the infant’s grave was dug.
At this corner is the private staircase communicating with the sleeping apartment.
The carriage proceeded rapidly towards Paris.
That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the Champs-Élysées, the Count of Monte Cristo went over the whole building with the air of one long acquainted with each nook or corner.
Nor, although preceding the party, did he once mistake one door for another, or commit the smallest error when choosing any particular corridor or staircase to conduct him to a place or suite of rooms he desired to visit.
Ali was his principal attendant during this nocturnal survey.
Having given various orders to Bertuccio relative to the improvements and alterations he desired to make in the house, the Count, drawing out his watch, said to the attentive Nubian: “It is half-past eleven o’clock; Haydée will soon be here.
Have the French attendants been summoned to await her coming?” Ali extended his hands towards the apartments destined for the fair Greek, which were so effectually concealed by means of a tapestried entrance, that it would have puzzled the most curious to have divined their existence.
Ali, having pointed to the apartments, held up three fingers of his right hand, and then, placing it beneath his head, shut his eyes, and feigned to sleep.
“I understand,” said Monte Cristo, well acquainted with Ali’s pantomime; “you mean to tell me that three female attendants await their new mistress in her sleeping-chamber.” Ali, with considerable animation, made a sign in the affirmative.
“Madame will be tired tonight,” continued Monte Cristo, “and will, no doubt, wish to rest.
Desire the French attendants not to weary her with questions, but merely to pay their respectful duty and retire.
You will also see that the Greek servants hold no communication with those of this country.” He bowed.
Just at that moment voices were heard hailing the concierge.
The gate opened, a carriage rolled down the avenue, and stopped at the steps.
The count hastily descended, presented himself at the already opened carriage door, and held out his hand to a young woman, completely enveloped in a green silk mantle heavily embroidered with gold.
She raised the hand extended towards her to her lips, and kissed it with a mixture of love and respect.
Some few words passed between them in that sonorous language in which Homer makes his gods converse.
The young woman spoke with an expression of deep tenderness, while the count replied with an air of gentle gravity.
Preceded by Ali, who carried a rose-colored flambeau in his hand, the young lady, who was no other than the lovely Greek who had been Monte Cristo’s companion in Italy, was conducted to her apartments, while the count retired to the pavilion reserved for himself.
In another hour every light in the house was extinguished, and it might have been thought that all its inmates slept.
While waiting, the occupant of the carriage surveyed the house, the garden as far as he could distinguish it, and the livery of servants who passed to and fro, with an attention so close as to be somewhat impertinent.
The groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the window of the porter’s lodge, saying: “Pray, does not the Count of Monte Cristo live here?” “His excellency does reside here,” replied the concierge; “but——” added he, glancing an inquiring look at Ali.
Ali returned a sign in the negative.
“His excellency does not receive visitors today.” “Then here is my master’s card, the Baron Danglars.
You will take it to the count, and say that, although in haste to attend the Chamber, my master came out of his way to have the honor of calling upon him.” “I never speak to his excellency,” replied the concierge; “the valet de chambre will carry your message.” The groom returned to the carriage.
“Well?” asked Danglars.
The man, somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke he had received, repeated what the concierge had said.
“Bless me,” murmured Baron Danglars, “this must surely be a prince instead of a count by their styling him ‘excellency,’ and only venturing to address him by the medium of his valet de chambre.
“That fellow has a decidedly bad countenance,” said the count in a tone of disgust, as he shut up his glass into its ivory case.
“How comes it that all do not retreat in aversion at sight of that flat, receding, serpent-like forehead, round, vulture-shaped head, and sharp-hooked nose, like the beak of a buzzard?
Ali,” cried he, striking at the same time on the brazen gong.
“Summon Bertuccio,” said the count.
Almost immediately Bertuccio entered the apartment.
“Did your excellency desire to see me?” inquired he.
“You no doubt observed the horses standing a few minutes since at the door?” “Certainly, your excellency.
I noticed them for their remarkable beauty.” “Then how comes it,” said Monte Cristo with a frown, “that, when I desired you to purchase for me the finest pair of horses to be found in Paris, there is another pair, fully as fine as mine, not in my stables?” At the look of displeasure, added to the angry tone in which the count spoke, Ali turned pale and held down his head.
“It is not your fault, my good Ali,” said the count in the Arabic language, and with a gentleness none would have thought him capable of showing, either in voice or face—“it is not your fault.
You do not understand the points of English horses.” The countenance of poor Ali recovered its serenity.
“Permit me to assure your excellency,” said Bertuccio, “that the horses you speak of were not to be sold when I purchased yours.” Monte Cristo shrugged his shoulders.
“It seems, sir steward,” said he, “that you have yet to learn that all things are to be sold to such as care to pay the price.” “His excellency is not, perhaps, aware that M.
Danglars gave 16,000 francs for his horses?” “Very well.
Then offer him double that sum; a banker never loses an opportunity of doubling his capital.” “Is your excellency really in earnest?” inquired the steward.
Monte Cristo regarded the person who durst presume to doubt his words with the look of one equally surprised and displeased.
“I desire that these horses, with completely new harness, may be at the door with my carriage.” Bertuccio bowed, and was about to retire; but when he reached the door, he paused, and then said, “At what o’clock does your excellency wish the carriage and horses to be ready?” “At five o’clock,” replied the count.
“I beg your excellency’s pardon,” interposed the steward in a deprecating manner, “for venturing to observe that it is already two o’clock.” “I am perfectly aware of that fact,” answered Monte Cristo calmly.
Then, turning towards Ali, he said, “Let all the horses in my stables be led before the windows of your young lady, that she may select those she prefers for her carriage.
Request her also to oblige me by saying whether it is her pleasure to dine with me; if so, let dinner be served in her apartments.
Now, leave me, and desire my valet de chambre to come hither.” Scarcely had Ali disappeared when the valet entered the chamber.
“Monsieur Baptistin,” said the count, “you have been in my service one year, the time I generally give myself to judge of the merits or demerits of those about me.
You suit me very well.” Baptistin bowed low.
“It only remains for me to know whether I also suit you?” “Oh, your excellency!” exclaimed Baptistin eagerly.
“Listen, if you please, till I have finished speaking,” replied Monte Cristo.
“You receive 1,500 francs per annum for your services here—more than many a brave subaltern, who continually risks his life for his country, obtains.
You live in a manner far superior to many clerks who work ten times harder than you do for their money.
Then, though yourself a servant, you have other servants to wait upon you, take care of your clothes, and see that your linen is duly prepared for you.
Again, you make a profit upon each article you purchase for my toilet, amounting in the course of a year to a sum equalling your wages.” “Nay, indeed, your excellency.” “I am not condemning you for this, Monsieur Baptistin; but let your profits end here.
It would be long indeed ere you would find so lucrative a post as that you have now the good fortune to fill.
I neither ill-use nor ill-treat my servants by word or action.
An error I readily forgive, but wilful negligence or forgetfulness, never.
My commands are ordinarily short, clear, and precise; and I would rather be obliged to repeat my words twice, or even three times, than they should be misunderstood.
I am rich enough to know whatever I desire to know, and I can promise you I am not wanting in curiosity.
If, then, I should learn that you had taken upon yourself to speak of me to anyone favorably or unfavorably, to comment on my actions, or watch my conduct, that very instant you would quit my service.
I never caution my servants a second time—remember that.” Baptistin bowed, and was proceeding towards the door.
“I forgot to mention to you,” said the count, “that I lay yearly aside a certain sum for each servant in my establishment; those whom I am compelled to dismiss lose (as a matter of course) all participation in this money, while their portion goes to the fund accumulating for those domestics who remain with me, and among whom it will be divided at my death.
You have been in my service a year, your fund has already begun to accumulate—let it continue to do so.” This address, delivered in the presence of Ali, who, not understanding one word of the language in which it was spoken, stood wholly unmoved, produced an effect on M.
Baptistin only to be conceived by such as have occasion to study the character and disposition of French domestics.
“I assure your excellency,” said he, “that at least it shall be my study to merit your approbation in all things, and I will take M.
Ali as my model.” “By no means,” replied the count in the most frigid tones; “Ali has many faults mixed with most excellent qualities.
He cannot possibly serve you as a pattern for your conduct, not being, as you are, a paid servant, but a mere slave—a dog, who, should he fail in his duty towards me, I should not discharge from my service, but kill.” Baptistin opened his eyes with astonishment.
“You seem incredulous,” said Monte Cristo, who repeated to Ali in the Arabic language what he had just been saying to Baptistin in French.
The Nubian smiled assentingly to his master’s words, then, kneeling on one knee, respectfully kissed the hand of the count.
This corroboration of the lesson he had just received put the finishing stroke to the wonder and stupefaction of M.
The count then motioned the valet de chambre to retire, and to Ali to follow to his study, where they conversed long and earnestly together.
When Ali was wanted one stroke was given, two summoned Baptistin, and three Bertuccio.
“They are at the door harnessed to the carriage as your excellency desired.
Does your excellency wish me to accompany him?” “No, the coachman, Ali, and Baptistin will go.” The count descended to the door of his mansion, and beheld his carriage drawn by the very pair of horses he had so much admired in the morning as the property of Danglars.
“Nay, if your excellency is satisfied, it is all that I could wish.
Whither does your excellency desire to be driven?” “To the residence of Baron Danglars, Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin.” This conversation had passed as they stood upon the terrace, from which a flight of stone steps led to the carriage-drive.
As Bertuccio, with a respectful bow, was moving away, the count called him back.
“I have another commission for you, M.
Bertuccio,” said he; “I am desirous of having an estate by the seaside in Normandy—for instance, between Le Havre and Boulogne.
It will be absolutely necessary that the place you may select have a small harbor, creek, or bay, into which my corvette can enter and remain at anchor.
She must be kept in constant readiness to sail immediately I think proper to give the signal.
Make the requisite inquiries for a place of this description, and when you have met with an eligible spot, visit it, and if it possess the advantages desired, purchase it at once in your own name.
The corvette must now, I think, be on her way to Fécamp, must she not?” 20333m “Certainly, your excellency; I saw her put to sea the same evening we quitted Marseilles.” “And the yacht.” “Was ordered to remain at Martigues.” “’Tis well.
Danglars was engaged at that moment, presiding over a railroad committee.
But the meeting was nearly concluded when the name of his visitor was announced.
I confess this is the drollest thing I have ever met with in the course of my extensive foreign transactions, and you may readily suppose it has greatly roused my curiosity.
I took the trouble this morning to call on the pretended count—if he were a real count he wouldn’t be so rich.
But, would you believe it, ‘He was not receiving.’ So the master of Monte Cristo gives himself airs befitting a great millionaire or a capricious beauty.
I made inquiries, and found that the house in the Champs-Élysées is his own property, and certainly it was very decently kept up.
But,” pursued Danglars with one of his sinister smiles, “an order for unlimited credit calls for something like caution on the part of the banker to whom that order is given.
I suspect a hoax is intended, but the instigators of it little knew whom they had to deal with.
‘They laugh best who laugh last!’” Having delivered himself of this pompous address, uttered with a degree of energy that left the baron almost out of breath, he bowed to the assembled party and withdrew to his drawing-room, whose sumptuous furnishings of white and gold had caused a great sensation in the Chaussée d’Antin.
It was to this apartment he had desired his guest to be shown, with the purpose of overwhelming him at the sight of so much luxury.
He found the count standing before some copies of Albano and Fattore that had been passed off to the banker as originals; but which, mere copies as they were, seemed to feel their degradation in being brought into juxtaposition with the gaudy colors that covered the ceiling.
The count turned round as he heard the entrance of Danglars into the room.
With a slight inclination of the head, Danglars signed to the count to be seated, pointing significantly to a gilded armchair, covered with white satin embroidered with gold.
The count sat down. 20335m “I have the honor, I presume, of addressing M. de Monte Cristo.” The count bowed.
“And I of speaking to Baron Danglars, chevalier of the Legion of Honor, and member of the Chamber of Deputies?” Monte Cristo repeated all the titles he had read on the baron’s card.
Danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips.
That was a noble example to follow, monsieur.” “Why,” replied Danglars, “not entirely so; with the servants,—you understand.” “I see; to your domestics you are ‘my lord,’ the journalists style you ‘monsieur,’ while your constituents call you ‘citizen.’ These are distinctions very suitable under a constitutional government.
I understand perfectly.” Again Danglars bit his lips; he saw that he was no match for Monte Cristo in an argument of this sort, and he therefore hastened to turn to subjects more congenial.
“Permit me to inform you, Count,” said he, bowing, “that I have received a letter of advice from Thomson & French, of Rome.” “I am glad to hear it, baron,—for I must claim the privilege of addressing you after the manner of your servants.
I have acquired the bad habit of calling persons by their titles from living in a country where barons are still barons by right of birth.
But as regards the letter of advice, I am charmed to find that it has reached you; that will spare me the troublesome and disagreeable task of coming to you for money myself.
You have received a regular letter of advice?” “Yes,” said Danglars, “but I confess I didn’t quite comprehend its meaning.” “Indeed?” “And for that reason I did myself the honor of calling upon you, in order to beg for an explanation.” “Go on, monsieur.
Here I am, ready to give you any explanation you desire.” “Why,” said Danglars, “in the letter—I believe I have it about me”—here he felt in his breast-pocket—“yes, here it is.
Well, this letter gives the Count of Monte Cristo unlimited credit on our house.” “Well, baron, what is there difficult to understand about that?” “Merely the term _unlimited_—nothing else, certainly.” “Is not that word known in France?
The people who wrote are Anglo-Germans, you know.” “Oh, as for the composition of the letter, there is nothing to be said; but as regards the competency of the document, I certainly have doubts.” “Is it possible?” asked the count, assuming all air and tone of the utmost simplicity and candor.
“Is it possible that Thomson & French are not looked upon as safe and solvent bankers?
Pray tell me what you think, baron, for I feel uneasy, I can assure you, having some considerable property in their hands.” “Thomson & French are perfectly solvent,” replied Danglars, with an almost mocking smile; “but the word _unlimited_, in financial affairs, is so extremely vague.” “Is, in fact, unlimited,” said Monte Cristo.
“Precisely what I was about to say,” cried Danglars.
“Now what is vague is doubtful; and it was a wise man who said, ‘when in doubt, keep out.’” “Meaning to say,” rejoined Monte Cristo, “that however Thomson & French may be inclined to commit acts of imprudence and folly, the Baron Danglars is not disposed to follow their example.” “Not at all.” “Plainly enough; Messrs.
Thomson & French set no bounds to their engagements while those of M.
His forced politeness sat awkwardly upon him, and approached almost to impertinence.
Monte Cristo on the contrary, preserved a graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a certain degree of simplicity he could assume at pleasure, and thus possessed the advantage.
So throwing himself back in his armchair, he said, with an arrogant and purse-proud air: “Let me beg of you not to hesitate in naming your wishes; you will then be convinced that the resources of the house of Danglars, however limited, are still equal to meeting the largest demands; and were you even to require a million——” “I beg your pardon,” interposed Monte Cristo.
“I said a million,” replied Danglars, with the confidence of ignorance.
“But could I do with a million?” retorted the count.
Excuse my smiling when you speak of a sum I am in the habit of carrying in my pocket-book or dressing-case.” And with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket a small case containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders on the treasury for 500,000 francs each, payable at sight to the bearer.
A man like Danglars was wholly inaccessible to any gentler method of correction.
The effect of the present revelation was stunning; he trembled and was on the verge of apoplexy.
The pupils of his eyes, as he gazed at Monte Cristo dilated horribly.
“Come, come,” said Monte Cristo, “confess honestly that you have not perfect confidence in Thomson & French.
I understand, and foreseeing that such might be the case, I took, in spite of my ignorance of affairs, certain precautions.
See, here are two similar letters to that you have yourself received; one from the house of Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna, to Baron Rothschild, the other drawn by Baring of London, upon M.
“Oh, sir,” said Danglars, after he had convinced himself of the authenticity of the documents he held, and rising as if to salute the power of gold personified in the man before him,—“three letters of unlimited credit!
I can be no longer mistrustful, but you must pardon me, my dear count, for confessing to some degree of astonishment.” “Nay,” answered Monte Cristo, with the most gentlemanly air, “’tis not for such trifling sums as these that your banking house is to be incommoded.
Then, you can let me have some money, can you not?” “Whatever you say, my dear count; I am at your orders.” “Why,” replied Monte Cristo, “since we mutually understand each other—for such I presume is the case?” Danglars bowed assentingly.
Be kind enough, then, to send me 500,000 francs tomorrow.
I shall be at home till midday, or if not, I will leave a receipt with my steward.” “The money you desire shall be at your house by ten o’clock tomorrow morning, my dear count,” replied Danglars.
“I must confess to you, count,” said Danglars, “that I have hitherto imagined myself acquainted with the degree of all the great fortunes of Europe, and still wealth such as yours has been wholly unknown to me.
May I presume to ask whether you have long possessed it?” “It has been in the family a very long while,” returned Monte Cristo, “a sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched for a certain period of years, during which the accumulated interest has doubled the capital.
The period appointed by the testator for the disposal of these riches occurred only a short time ago, and they have only been employed by me within the last few years.
Your ignorance on the subject, therefore, is easily accounted for.
However, you will be better informed as to me and my possessions ere long.” And the count, while pronouncing these latter words, accompanied them with one of those ghastly smiles that used to strike terror into poor Franz d’Épinay.
“With your tastes, and means of gratifying them,” continued Danglars, “you will exhibit a splendor that must effectually put us poor miserable millionaires quite in the shade.
If I mistake not you are an admirer of paintings, at least I judged so from the attention you appeared to be bestowing on mine when I entered the room.
If you will permit me, I shall be happy to show you my picture gallery, composed entirely of works by the ancient masters—warranted as such.
For the present, I will confine myself (if perfectly agreeable to you) to introducing you to the Baroness Danglars—excuse my impatience, my dear count, but a client like you is almost like a member of the family.” Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered honor; Danglars rang and was answered by a servant in a showy livery.
“Is the baroness at home?” inquired Danglars.
“Yes, my lord,” answered the man.
“And alone?” “No, my lord, madame has visitors.” “Have you any objection to meet any persons who may be with madame, or do you desire to preserve a strict _incognito_?” “No, indeed,” replied Monte Cristo with a smile, “I do not arrogate to myself the right of so doing.” “And who is with madame?—M.
Debray?” inquired Danglars, with an air of indulgence and good-nature that made Monte Cristo smile, acquainted as he was with the secrets of the banker’s domestic life.
Debray is with madame.” Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to Monte Cristo, said, “M.
Lucien Debray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the Minister of the Interior.
As for my wife, I must tell you, she lowered herself by marrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancient families in France.
Her maiden name was De Servières, and her first husband was Colonel the Marquis of Nargonne.” “I have not the honor of knowing Madame Danglars; but I have already met M.
Lucien Debray.” “Ah, indeed?” said Danglars; “and where was that?” “At the house of M. de Morcerf.” “Ah! you are acquainted with the young viscount, are you?” “We were together a good deal during the Carnival at Rome.” “True, true,” cried Danglars.
“Let me see; have I not heard talk of some strange adventure with bandits or thieves hid in ruins, and of his having had a miraculous escape?
I forget how, but I know he used to amuse my wife and daughter by telling them about it after his return from Italy.” “Her ladyship is waiting to receive you, gentlemen,” said the servant, who had gone to inquire the pleasure of his mistress.
“With your permission,” said Danglars, bowing, “I will precede you, to show you the way.” “By all means,” replied Monte Cristo; “I follow you.” Chapter 47.
The Dappled Grays The baron, followed by the count, traversed a long series of apartments, in which the prevailing characteristics were heavy magnificence and the gaudiness of ostentatious wealth, until he reached the boudoir of Madame Danglars—a small octagonal-shaped room, hung with pink satin, covered with white Indian muslin.
The chairs were of ancient workmanship and materials; over the doors were painted sketches of shepherds and shepherdesses, after the style and manner of Boucher; and at each side pretty medallions in crayons, harmonizing well with the furnishings of this charming apartment, the only one throughout the great mansion in which any distinctive taste prevailed.
The truth was, it had been entirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followed out by M.
Danglars and his architect, who had been selected to aid the baron in the great work of improvement solely because he was the most fashionable and celebrated decorator of the day.
The decorations of the boudoir had then been left entirely to Madame Danglars and Lucien Debray.
Madame Danglars (who, although past the first bloom of youth, was still strikingly handsome) was now seated at the piano, a most elaborate piece of cabinet and inlaid work, while Lucien Debray, standing before a small work-table, was turning over the pages of an album.
Lucien had found time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate many particulars respecting him to Madame Danglars.
Already excited by the wonderful stories related of the count by de Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame Danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additional circumstances detailed by Debray.
This posing at the piano and over the album was only a little ruse adopted by way of precaution.
A most gracious welcome and unusual smile were bestowed on M.
Danglars; the count, in return for his gentlemanly bow, received a formal though graceful courtesy, while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of distant recognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.
“Baroness,” said Danglars, “give me leave to present to you the Count of Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to me by my correspondents at Rome.
I need but mention one fact to make all the ladies in Paris court his notice, and that is, that he has come to take up his abode in Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposes to spend six millions of money.
“And when did you arrive here?” inquired she.
“Yesterday morning, madame.” “Coming, as usual, I presume, from the extreme end of the globe?
This time I have merely come from Cadiz.” “You have selected a most unfavorable moment for your first visit.
Paris is a horrible place in summer.
Balls, parties, and _fêtes_ are over; the Italian opera is in London; the French opera everywhere except in Paris.
The only amusements left us are the indifferent races at the Champ-de-Mars and Satory.
Madame Danglars turned very pale, then exclaimed: “I cannot believe it; the thing is impossible.” “I assure you, madame,” replied the woman, “it is as I have said.” Turning impatiently towards her husband, Madame Danglars demanded, “Is this true?” “Is what true, madame?” inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.
“What my maid tells me.” “But what does she tell you?” “That when my coachman was about to harness the horses to my carriage, he discovered that they had been removed from the stables without his knowledge.
I desire to know what is the meaning of this?” “Be kind enough, madame, to listen to me,” said Danglars.
“Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious to hear what explanation you will give.
These two gentlemen shall decide between us; but, first, I will state the case to them.
Gentlemen,” continued the baroness, “among the ten horses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are two that belong exclusively to me—a pair of the handsomest and most spirited creatures to be found in Paris.
Debray, I need not give a further description, because to you my beautiful pair of dappled grays were well known.
Well, I had promised Madame de Villefort the loan of my carriage to drive tomorrow to the Bois; but when my coachman goes to fetch the grays from the stables they are gone—positively gone.
Danglars has sacrificed them to the selfish consideration of gaining some thousands of paltry francs.
You are setting up an establishment, of course?” “Why, yes,” replied the count.
They were only fit for a young man.” “I am much obliged by your kind intentions towards me,” said Monte Cristo; “but this morning I purchased a very excellent pair of carriage-horses, and I do not think they were dear.
Debray, you are a connoisseur, I believe, let me have your opinion upon them.” As Debray walked towards the window, Danglars approached his wife.
“I could not tell you before others,” said he in a low tone, “the reason of my parting with the horses; but a most enormous price was offered me this morning for them.
Some madman or fool, bent upon ruining himself as fast as he can, actually sent his steward to me to purchase them at any cost; and the fact is, I have gained 16,000 francs by the sale of them.
Wasn’t I right to part with the horses?” Madame Danglars surveyed her husband with a look of withering contempt.
“Great heavens?” suddenly exclaimed Debray.
“What is it?” asked the baroness.
“I cannot be mistaken; there are your horses!
The very animals we were speaking of, harnessed to the count’s carriage!” “My dappled grays?” demanded the baroness, springing to the window.
Danglars looked absolutely stupefied.
“How very singular,” cried Monte Cristo with well-feigned astonishment.
“I cannot believe it,” murmured the banker.
Madame Danglars whispered a few words in the ear of Debray, who approached Monte Cristo, saying, “The baroness wishes to know what you paid her husband for the horses.” “I scarcely know,” replied the count; “it was a little surprise prepared for me by my steward, and cost me—well, somewhere about 30,000 francs.” Debray conveyed the count’s reply to the baroness.
Poor Danglars looked so crest-fallen and discomfited that Monte Cristo assumed a pitying air towards him.
“See,” said the count, “how very ungrateful women are.
Your kind attention, in providing for the safety of the baroness by disposing of the horses, does not seem to have made the least impression on her.
But so it is; a woman will often, from mere wilfulness, prefer that which is dangerous to that which is safe.
“All has gone according to my wishes.
The domestic peace of this family is henceforth in my hands.
Now, then, to play another master-stroke, by which I shall gain the heart of both husband and wife—delightful!
Still,” added he, “amid all this, I have not yet been presented to Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars, whose acquaintance I should have been glad to make.
But,” he went on with his peculiar smile, “I am here in Paris, and have plenty of time before me—by and by will do for that.” With these reflections he entered his carriage and returned home.
Two hours afterwards, Madame Danglars received a most flattering epistle from the count, in which he entreated her to receive back her favorite “dappled grays,” protesting that he could not endure the idea of making his entry into the Parisian world of fashion with the knowledge that his splendid equipage had been obtained at the price of a lovely woman’s regrets.
The horses were sent back wearing the same harness she had seen on them in the morning; only, by the count’s orders, in the centre of each rosette that adorned either side of their heads, had been fastened a large diamond.
To Danglars Monte Cristo also wrote, requesting him to excuse the whimsical gift of a capricious millionaire, and to beg the baroness to pardon the Eastern fashion adopted in the return of the horses.
During the evening, Monte Cristo quitted Paris for Auteuil, accompanied by Ali.
The following day, about three o’clock, a single blow struck on the gong summoned Ali to the presence of the count.
“Ali,” observed his master, as the Nubian entered the chamber, “you have frequently explained to me how more than commonly skilful you are in throwing the lasso, have you not?” Ali drew himself up proudly, and then returned a sign in the affirmative.
With your lasso you could stop an ox?” Again Ali repeated his affirmative gesture.
“A lion even?” Ali sprung forwards, imitating the action of one throwing the lasso, then of a strangled lion.
“I understand,” said Monte Cristo; “you wish to tell me you have hunted the lion?” Ali smiled with triumphant pride as he signified that he had indeed both chased and captured many lions.
“But do you believe you could arrest the progress of two horses rushing forwards with ungovernable fury?” The Nubian smiled.
Ere long a carriage will dash past here, drawn by the pair of dappled gray horses you saw me with yesterday; now, at the risk of your own life, you must manage to stop those horses before my door.” Ali descended to the street, and marked a straight line on the pavement immediately at the entrance of the house, and then pointed out the line he had traced to the count, who was watching him.
The count patted him gently on the shoulder, his usual mode of praising Ali, who, pleased and gratified with the commission assigned him, walked calmly towards a projecting stone forming the angle of the street and house, and, seating himself thereon, began to smoke his chibouque, while Monte Cristo re-entered his dwelling, perfectly assured of the success of his plan.
Still, as five o’clock approached, and the carriage was momentarily expected by the count, the indication of more than common impatience and uneasiness might be observed in his manner.
He stationed himself in a room commanding a view of the street, pacing the chamber with restless steps, stopping merely to listen from time to time for the sound of approaching wheels, then to cast an anxious glance on Ali; but the regularity with which the Nubian puffed forth the smoke of his chibouque proved that he at least was wholly absorbed in the enjoyment of his favorite occupation.
Suddenly a distant sound of rapidly advancing wheels was heard, and almost immediately a carriage appeared, drawn by a pair of wild, ungovernable horses, while the terrified coachman strove in vain to restrain their furious speed.
Terror seemed to have deprived them even of the power of uttering a cry.
The carriage creaked and rattled as it flew over the rough stones, and the slightest obstacle under the wheels would have caused disaster; but it kept on in the middle of the road, and those who saw it pass uttered cries of terror.
Ali suddenly cast aside his chibouque, drew the lasso from his pocket, threw it so skilfully as to catch the forelegs of the near horse in its triple fold, and suffered himself to be dragged on for a few steps by the violence of the shock, then the animal fell over on the pole, which snapped, and therefore prevented the other horse from pursuing its way.
Gladly availing himself of this opportunity, the coachman leaped from his box; but Ali had promptly seized the nostrils of the second horse, and held them in his iron grasp, till the beast, snorting with pain, sunk beside his companion.
All this was achieved in much less time than is occupied in the recital.
The brief space had, however, been sufficient for a man, followed by a number of servants, to rush from the house before which the accident had occurred, and, as the coachman opened the door of the carriage, to take from it a lady who was convulsively grasping the cushions with one hand, while with the other she pressed to her bosom the young boy, who had lost consciousness.
Monte Cristo carried them both to the salon, and deposited them on a sofa.
“Compose yourself, madame,” said he; “all danger is over.” The woman looked up at these words, and, with a glance far more expressive than any entreaties could have been, pointed to her child, who still continued insensible.
“I understand the nature of your alarms, madame,” said the count, carefully examining the child, “but I assure you there is not the slightest occasion for uneasiness; your little charge has not received the least injury; his insensibility is merely the effects of terror, and will soon pass.” “Are you quite sure you do not say so to tranquillize my fears?
Scarcely had it reached them, ere the boy, though still pale as marble, opened his eyes, and eagerly gazed around him.
“Where am I?” exclaimed she; “and to whom am I indebted for so happy a termination to my late dreadful alarm?” “Madame,” answered the count, “you are under the roof of one who esteems himself most fortunate in having been able to save you from a further continuance of your sufferings.” “My wretched curiosity has brought all this about,” pursued the lady.
“All Paris rung with the praises of Madame Danglars’ beautiful horses, and I had the folly to desire to know whether they really merited the high praise given to them.” “Is it possible,” exclaimed the count with well-feigned astonishment, “that these horses belong to the baroness?” “They do, indeed.
May I inquire if you are acquainted with Madame Danglars?” 20351m “I have that honor; and my happiness at your escape from the danger that threatened you is redoubled by the consciousness that I have been the unwilling and the unintentional cause of all the peril you have incurred.
I yesterday purchased these horses of the baron; but as the baroness evidently regretted parting with them, I ventured to send them back to her, with a request that she would gratify me by accepting them from my hands.” “You are, then, doubtless, the Count of Monte Cristo, of whom Hermine has talked to me so much?” “You have rightly guessed, madame,” replied the count.
“And I am Madame Héloïse de Villefort.” The count bowed with the air of a person who hears a name for the first time.
“How grateful will M. de Villefort be for all your goodness; how thankfully will he acknowledge that to you alone he owes the existence of his wife and child!
Most certainly, but for the prompt assistance of your intrepid servant, this dear child and myself must both have perished.” “Indeed, I still shudder at the fearful danger you were placed in.” “I trust you will allow me to recompense worthily the devotion of your man.” “I beseech you, madame,” replied Monte Cristo “not to spoil Ali, either by too great praise or rewards.
I cannot allow him to acquire the habit of expecting to be recompensed for every trifling service he may render.
During the evident preoccupation of Madame de Villefort, Monte Cristo scrutinized the features and appearance of the boy she kept folded in her arms, lavishing on him the most tender endearments.
The child was small for his age, and unnaturally pale.
A mass of straight black hair, defying all attempts to train or curl it, fell over his projecting forehead, and hung down to his shoulders, giving increased vivacity to eyes already sparkling with a youthful love of mischief and fondness for every forbidden enjoyment.
His mouth was large, and the lips, which had not yet regained their color, were particularly thin; in fact, the deep and crafty look, giving a predominant expression to the child’s face, belonged rather to a boy of twelve or fourteen than to one so young.
His first movement was to free himself by a violent push from the encircling arms of his mother, and to rush forward to the casket from whence the count had taken the phial of elixir; then, without asking permission of anyone, he proceeded, in all the wilfulness of a spoiled child unaccustomed to restrain either whims or caprices, to pull the corks out of all the bottles.
“Touch nothing, my little friend,” cried the count eagerly; “some of those liquids are not only dangerous to taste, but even to inhale.” Madame de Villefort became very pale, and, seizing her son’s arm, drew him anxiously toward her; but, once satisfied of his safety, she also cast a brief but expressive glance on the casket, which was not lost upon the count.
At sight of him Madame de Villefort uttered an expression of pleasure, and, holding the child still closer towards her, she said: “Edward, dearest, do you see that good man?
He has shown very great courage and resolution, for he exposed his own life to stop the horses that were running away with us, and would certainly have dashed the carriage to pieces.
“Will you permit me to inquire,” said Madame de Villefort, as she arose to take her leave, “whether you usually reside here?” “No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo; “it is a small place I have purchased quite lately.
My place of abode is No. 30, Avenue des Champs-Élysées; but I see you have quite recovered from your fright, and are, no doubt, desirous of returning home.
Anticipating your wishes, I have desired the same horses you came with to be put to one of my carriages, and Ali, he whom you think so very ugly,” continued he, addressing the boy with a smiling air, “will have the honor of driving you home, while your coachman remains here to attend to the necessary repairs of your calash.
As soon as that important business is concluded, I will have a pair of my own horses harnessed to convey it direct to Madame Danglars.” “I dare not return with those dreadful horses,” said Madame de Villefort.
“You will see,” replied Monte Cristo, “that they will be as different as possible in the hands of Ali.
With him they will be gentle and docile as lambs.” Ali had, indeed, given proof of this; for, approaching the animals, who had been got upon their legs with considerable difficulty, he rubbed their foreheads and nostrils with a sponge soaked in aromatic vinegar, and wiped off the sweat and foam that covered their mouths.
I remember how unmercifully I laughed at what I considered your eulogistic and exaggerated praises of him; but I have now ample cause to admit that your enthusiastic description of this wonderful man fell far short of his merits.
The count then hastened to us, and took us into his house, where he speedily recalled my poor Edward to life.
He sent us home in his own carriage.
Yours will be returned to you tomorrow.
You will find your horses in bad condition, from the results of this accident; they seem thoroughly stupefied, as if sulky and vexed at having been conquered by man.
The count, however, has commissioned me to assure you that two or three days’ rest, with plenty of barley for their sole food during that time, will bring them back to as fine, that is as terrifying, a condition as they were in yesterday. 20356m Adieu!
Edward endured the accident with miraculous courage—he did not utter a single cry, but fell lifeless into my arms; nor did a tear fall from his eyes after it was over.
I doubt not you will consider these praises the result of blind maternal affection, but there is a soul of iron in that delicate, fragile body.
Valentine sends many affectionate remembrances to your dear Eugénie.
Héloïse de Villefort.
P.S.—Do pray contrive some means for me to meet the Count of Monte Cristo at your house.
I have just made M. de Villefort promise to call on him, and I hope the visit will be returned.
That night the adventure at Auteuil was talked of everywhere.
Albert related it to his mother; Château-Renaud recounted it at the Jockey Club, and Debray detailed it at length in the salons of the minister; even Beauchamp accorded twenty lines in his journal to the relation of the count’s courage and gallantry, thereby celebrating him as the greatest hero of the day in the eyes of all the feminine members of the aristocracy.
Vast was the crowd of visitors and inquiring friends who left their names at the residence of Madame de Villefort, with the design of renewing their visit at the right moment, of hearing from her lips all the interesting circumstances of this most romantic adventure.
As for M. de Villefort, he fulfilled the predictions of Héloïse to the letter,—donned his dress suit, drew on a pair of white gloves, ordered the servants to attend the carriage dressed in their full livery, and drove that same night to No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.
Ideology If the Count of Monte Cristo had been for a long time familiar with the ways of Parisian society, he would have appreciated better the significance of the step which M. de Villefort had taken.
His drawing-room, under the regenerating influence of a young wife and a daughter by his first marriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of the well-regulated Paris salons where the worship of traditional customs and the observance of rigid etiquette were carefully maintained.
A freezing politeness, a strict fidelity to government principles, a profound contempt for theories and theorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality,—these were the elements of private and public life displayed by M. de Villefort. 30023m M. de Villefort was not only a magistrate, he was almost a diplomatist.
His relations with the former court, of which he always spoke with dignity and respect, made him respected by the new one, and he knew so many things, that not only was he always carefully considered, but sometimes consulted.
Perhaps this would not have been so had it been possible to get rid of M. de Villefort; but, like the feudal barons who rebelled against their sovereign, he dwelt in an impregnable fortress.
This fortress was his post as king’s attorney, all the advantages of which he exploited with marvellous skill, and which he would not have resigned but to be made deputy, and thus to replace neutrality by opposition.
Ordinarily M. de Villefort made and returned very few visits.
To his friends M. de Villefort was a powerful protector; to his enemies, he was a silent, but bitter opponent; for those who were neither the one nor the other, he was a statue of the law-made man.
He had a haughty bearing, a look either steady and impenetrable or insolently piercing and inquisitorial.
Four successive revolutions had built and cemented the pedestal upon which his fortune was based.
M. de Villefort had the reputation of being the least curious and the least wearisome man in France.
He gave a ball every year, at which he appeared for a quarter of an hour only,—that is to say, five-and-forty minutes less than the king is visible at his balls.
He was never seen at the theatres, at concerts, or in any place of public resort.
Occasionally, but seldom, he played at whist, and then care was taken to select partners worthy of him—sometimes they were ambassadors, sometimes archbishops, or sometimes a prince, or a president, or some dowager duchess.
Such was the man whose carriage had just now stopped before the Count of Monte Cristo’s door.
The valet de chambre announced M. de Villefort at the moment when the count, leaning over a large table, was tracing on a map the route from St.
Petersburg to China.
The procureur entered with the same grave and measured step he would have employed in entering a court of justice.
He was the same man, or rather the development of the same man, whom we have heretofore seen as assistant attorney at Marseilles.
Nature, according to her way, had made no deviation in the path he had marked out for himself.
From being slender he had now become meagre; once pale, he was now yellow; his deep-set eyes were hollow, and the gold spectacles shielding his eyes seemed to be an integral portion of his face.
He dressed entirely in black, with the exception of his white tie, and his funeral appearance was only mitigated by the slight line of red ribbon which passed almost imperceptibly through his button-hole, and appeared like a streak of blood traced with a delicate brush.
“Sir,” said Villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed by magistrates in their oratorical periods, and of which they cannot, or will not, divest themselves in society, “sir, the signal service which you yesterday rendered to my wife and son has made it a duty for me to offer you my thanks.
I have come, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express to you my overwhelming gratitude.” And as he said this, the “eye severe” of the magistrate had lost nothing of its habitual arrogance.
He spoke in a voice of the procureur-general, with the rigid inflexibility of neck and shoulders which caused his flatterers to say (as we have before observed) that he was the living statue of the law.
He glanced around, in order to seize on something on which the conversation might turn, and seemed to fall easily on a topic.
He saw the map which Monte Cristo had been examining when he entered, and said: “You seem geographically engaged, sir?
It is a rich study for you, who, as I learn, have seen as many lands as are delineated on this map.” “Yes, sir,” replied the count; “I have sought to make of the human race, taken in the mass, what you practice every day on individuals—a physiological study.
I have believed it was much easier to descend from the whole to a part than to ascend from a part to the whole.
It is an algebraic axiom, which makes us proceed from a known to an unknown quantity, and not from an unknown to a known; but sit down, sir, I beg of you.” Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur was obliged to take the trouble to move forwards himself, while the count merely fell back into his own, on which he had been kneeling when M.
Thus the count was halfway turned towards his visitor, having his back towards the window, his elbow resting on the geographical chart which furnished the theme of conversation for the moment,—a conversation which assumed, as in the case of the interviews with Danglars and Morcerf, a turn analogous to the persons, if not to the situation.
Now, really, let me ask, sir, have you?—do you believe you have anything to do? or to speak in plain terms, do you really think that what you do deserves being called anything?” Villefort’s astonishment redoubled at this second thrust so forcibly made by his strange adversary.
It was a long time since the magistrate had heard a paradox so strong, or rather, to say the truth more exactly, it was the first time he had ever heard of it.
The procureur exerted himself to reply.
“Sir,” he responded, “you are a stranger, and I believe you say yourself that a portion of your life has been spent in Oriental countries, so you are not aware how human justice, so expeditious in barbarous countries, takes with us a prudent and well-studied course.” “Oh, yes—yes, I do, sir; it is the _pede claudo_ of the ancients.
It is thus that human weakness fails, from its debilitated and imperfect organs.
Tobias took the angel who restored him to light for an ordinary young man.
“Your pardon, sir,” replied Villefort, quite astounded, “but you will excuse me if, when I presented myself to you, I was unaware that I should meet with a person whose knowledge and understanding so far surpass the usual knowledge and understanding of men.
Should not a magistrate be not merely the best administrator of the law, but the most crafty expounder of the chicanery of his profession, a steel probe to search hearts, a touchstone to try the gold which in each soul is mingled with more or less of alloy?” “Sir,” said Villefort, “upon my word, you overcome me.
I really never heard a person speak as you do.” “Because you remain eternally encircled in a round of general conditions, and have never dared to raise your wings into those upper spheres which God has peopled with invisible or exceptional beings.” “And you allow then, sir, that spheres exist, and that these marked and invisible beings mingle amongst us?” “Why should they not?
Can you see the air you breathe, and yet without which you could not for a moment exist?” “Then we do not see those beings to whom you allude?” “Yes, we do; you see them whenever God pleases to allow them to assume a material form.
The dominions of kings are limited either by mountains or rivers, or a change of manners, or an alteration of language.
My kingdom is bounded only by the world, for I am not an Italian, or a Frenchman, or a Hindu, or an American, or a Spaniard—I am a cosmopolite.
I adopt all customs, speak all languages.
You believe me to be a Frenchman, for I speak French with the same facility and purity as yourself.
Well, Ali, my Nubian, believes me to be an Arab; Bertuccio, my steward, takes me for a Roman; Haydée, my slave, thinks me a Greek.
You may, therefore, comprehend, that being of no country, asking no protection from any government, acknowledging no man as my brother, not one of the scruples that arrest the powerful, or the obstacles which paralyze the weak, paralyzes or arrests me.
I have only two adversaries—I will not say two conquerors, for with perseverance I subdue even them,—they are time and distance.
There is a third, and the most terrible—that is my condition as a mortal being.
This alone can stop me in my onward career, before I have attained the goal at which I aim, for all the rest I have reduced to mathematical terms.
What men call the chances of fate—namely, ruin, change, circumstances—I have fully anticipated, and if any of these should overtake me, yet it will not overwhelm me.
Unless I die, I shall always be what I am, and therefore it is that I utter the things you have never heard, even from the mouths of kings—for kings have need, and other persons have fear of you.
For who is there who does not say to himself, in a society as incongruously organized as ours, ‘Perhaps some day I shall have to do with the king’s attorney’?” “But can you not say that, sir?
The moment you become an inhabitant of France, you are naturally subjected to the French law.” “I know it sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “but when I visit a country I begin to study, by all the means which are available, the men from whom I may have anything to hope or to fear, till I know them as well as, perhaps better than, they know themselves.
It follows from this, that the king’s attorney, be he who he may, with whom I should have to deal, would assuredly be more embarrassed than I should.” “That is to say,” replied Villefort with hesitation, “that human nature being weak, every man, according to your creed, has committed faults.” “Faults or crimes,” responded Monte Cristo with a negligent air.
“And that you alone, amongst the men whom you do not recognize as your brothers—for you have said so,” observed Villefort in a tone that faltered somewhat—“you alone are perfect.” “No, not perfect,” was the count’s reply; “only impenetrable, that’s all.
But let us leave off this strain, sir, if the tone of it is displeasing to you; I am no more disturbed by your justice than are you by my second-sight.” “No, no,—by no means,” said Villefort, who was afraid of seeming to abandon his ground.
“No; by your brilliant and almost sublime conversation you have elevated me above the ordinary level; we no longer talk, we rise to dissertation.
“I have my pride for men—serpents always ready to threaten everyone who would pass without crushing them under foot.
But I lay aside that pride before God, who has taken me from nothing to make me what I am.” “Then, count, I admire you,” said Villefort, who, for the first time in this strange conversation, used the aristocratic form to the unknown personage, whom, until now, he had only called monsieur.
“Yes, and I say to you, if you are really strong, really superior, really pious, or impenetrable, which you were right in saying amounts to the same thing—then be proud, sir, for that is the characteristic of predominance.
I wish to be Providence myself, for I feel that the most beautiful, noblest, most sublime thing in the world, is to recompense and punish.’ Satan bowed his head, and groaned.
‘You mistake,’ he said, ‘Providence does exist, only you have never seen him, because the child of God is as invisible as the parent.
You have seen nothing that resembles him, because he works by secret springs, and moves by hidden ways.
All I can do for you is to make you one of the agents of that Providence.’ The bargain was concluded.
I may sacrifice my soul, but what matters it?” added Monte Cristo.
“If the thing were to do again, I would again do it.” Villefort looked at Monte Cristo with extreme amazement.
“Count,” he inquired, “have you any relations?” “No, sir, I am alone in the world.” “So much the worse.” “Why?” asked Monte Cristo.
“Because then you might witness a spectacle calculated to break down your pride.
You say you fear nothing but death?” “I did not say that I feared it; I only said that death alone could check the execution of my plans.” “And old age?” “My end will be achieved before I grow old.” “And madness?” “I have been nearly mad; and you know the axiom,—_non bis in idem_.
It is an axiom of criminal law, and, consequently, you understand its full application.” 30031m “Sir,” continued Villefort, “there is something to fear besides death, old age, and madness.
For instance, there is apoplexy—that lightning-stroke which strikes but does not destroy you, and yet which brings everything to an end.
You are still yourself as now, and yet you are yourself no longer; you who, like Ariel, verge on the angelic, are but an inert mass, which, like Caliban, verges on the brutal; and this is called in human tongues, as I tell you, neither more nor less than apoplexy.
Come, if so you will, count, and continue this conversation at my house, any day you may be willing to see an adversary capable of understanding and anxious to refute you, and I will show you my father, M.
Well, sir, the rupture of a blood-vessel on the lobe of the brain has destroyed all this, not in a day, not in an hour, but in a second.
Noirtier, who, on the previous night, was the old Jacobin, the old senator, the old Carbonaro, laughing at the guillotine, the cannon, and the dagger—M.
Noirtier, playing with revolutions—M.
Noirtier, for whom France was a vast chess-board, from which pawns, rooks, knights, and queens were to disappear, so that the king was checkmated—M.
Noirtier, the redoubtable, was the next morning _poor M.
Noirtier_, the helpless old man, at the tender mercies of the weakest creature in the household, that is, his grandchild, Valentine; a dumb and frozen carcass, in fact, living painlessly on, that time may be given for his frame to decompose without his consciousness of its decay.” “Alas, sir,” said Monte Cristo “this spectacle is neither strange to my eye nor my thought.
I am something of a physician, and have, like my fellows, sought more than once for the soul in living and in dead matter; yet, like Providence, it has remained invisible to my eyes, although present to my heart.
A hundred writers since Socrates, Seneca, St.
Augustine, and Gall, have made, in verse and prose, the comparison you have made, and yet I can well understand that a father’s sufferings may effect great changes in the mind of a son.
I will call on you, sir, since you bid me contemplate, for the advantage of my pride, this terrible spectacle, which must have been so great a source of sorrow to your family.” “It would have been so unquestionably, had not God given me so large a compensation.
In contrast with the old man, who is dragging his way to the tomb, are two children just entering into life—Valentine, the daughter by my first wife—Mademoiselle Renée de Saint-Méran—and Edward, the boy whose life you have this day saved.” “And what is your deduction from this compensation, sir?” inquired Monte Cristo.
“My deduction is,” replied Villefort, “that my father, led away by his passions, has committed some fault unknown to human justice, but marked by the justice of God.
That God, desirous in his mercy to punish but one person, has visited this justice on him alone.” Monte Cristo with a smile on his lips, uttered in the depths of his soul a groan which would have made Villefort fly had he but heard it.
“Adieu, sir,” said the magistrate, who had risen from his seat; “I leave you, bearing a remembrance of you—a remembrance of esteem, which I hope will not be disagreeable to you when you know me better; for I am not a man to bore my friends, as you will learn.
Besides, you have made an eternal friend of Madame de Villefort.” The count bowed, and contented himself with seeing Villefort to the door of his cabinet, the procureur being escorted to his carriage by two footmen, who, on a signal from their master, followed him with every mark of attention.
When he had gone, Monte Cristo breathed a profound sigh, and said: “Enough of this poison, let me now seek the antidote.” Then sounding his bell, he said to Ali, who entered: “I am going to madame’s chamber—have the carriage ready at one o’clock.” Chapter 49.
Haydée It will be recollected that the new, or rather old, acquaintances of the Count of Monte Cristo, residing in the Rue Meslay, were no other than Maximilian, Julie, and Emmanuel.
The young Greek, as we have already said, occupied apartments wholly unconnected with those of the count.
The young girl herself generally passed her time in the chamber at the farther end of her apartments.
This was a sort of boudoir, circular, and lighted only from the roof, which consisted of rose-colored glass.
Haydée was reclining upon soft downy cushions, covered with blue satin spotted with silver; her head, supported by one of her exquisitely moulded arms, rested on the divan immediately behind her, while the other was employed in adjusting to her lips the coral tube of a rich narghile, through whose flexible pipe she drew the smoke fragrant by its passage through perfumed water.
Her attitude, though perfectly natural for an Eastern woman would, in a European, have been deemed too full of coquettish straining after effect.
She wore a blue and white-striped vest, with long open sleeves, trimmed with silver loops and buttons of pearls, and a sort of bodice, which, closing only from the centre to the waist, exhibited the whole of the ivory throat and upper part of the bosom; it was fastened with three magnificent diamond clasps.
The junction of the bodice and drawers was entirely concealed by one of the many-colored scarves, whose brilliant hues and rich silken fringe have rendered them so precious in the eyes of Parisian belles.
Tilted on one side of her head she had a small cap of gold-colored silk, embroidered with pearls; while on the other a purple rose mingled its glowing colors with the luxuriant masses of her hair, of which the blackness was so intense that it was tinged with blue.
The extreme beauty of the countenance, that shone forth in loveliness that mocked the vain attempts of dress to augment it, was peculiarly and purely Grecian; there were the large, dark, melting eyes, the finely formed nose, the coral lips, and pearly teeth, that belonged to her race and country.
And, to complete the whole, Haydée was in the very springtide and fulness of youthful charms—she had not yet numbered more than nineteen or twenty summers.
Monte Cristo summoned the Greek attendant, and bade her inquire whether it would be agreeable to her mistress to receive his visit.
Haydée’s only reply was to direct her servant by a sign to withdraw the tapestried curtain that hung before the door of her boudoir, the framework of the opening thus made serving as a sort of border to the graceful tableau presented by the young girl’s picturesque attitude and appearance.
As Monte Cristo approached, she leaned upon the elbow of the arm that held the narghile, and extending to him her other hand, said, with a smile of captivating sweetness, in the sonorous language spoken by the women of Athens and Sparta: “Why demand permission ere you enter?
Are you no longer my master, or have I ceased to be your slave?” Monte Cristo returned her smile.
“Haydée,” said he, “you well know.” “Why do you address me so coldly—so distantly?” asked the young Greek.
“Have I by any means displeased you?
Oh, if so, punish me as you will; but do not—do not speak to me in tones and manner so formal and constrained.” “Haydée,” replied the count, “you know that you are now in France, and are free.” “Free to do what?” asked the young girl.
My father said I was his ‘joy’—you style me your ‘love,’—and both of you have called me ‘my child.’” “Do you remember your father, Haydée?” The young Greek smiled.
“He is here, and here,” said she, touching her eyes and her heart.
“And where am I?” inquired Monte Cristo laughingly.
“You?” cried she, with tones of thrilling tenderness, “you are everywhere!” Monte Cristo took the delicate hand of the young girl in his, and was about to raise it to his lips, when the simple child of nature hastily withdrew it, and presented her cheek.
“You now understand, Haydée,” said the count, “that from this moment you are absolutely free; that here you exercise unlimited sway, and are at liberty to lay aside or continue the costume of your country, as it may suit your inclination.
Within this mansion you are absolute mistress of your actions, and may go abroad or remain in your apartments as may seem most agreeable to you.
A carriage waits your orders, and Ali and Myrtho will accompany you whithersoever you desire to go.
There is but one favor I would entreat of you.” “Speak.” “Guard carefully the secret of your birth.
Make no allusion to the past; nor upon any occasion be induced to pronounce the names of your illustrious father or ill-fated mother.” “I have already told you, my lord, that I shall see no one.” “It is possible, Haydée, that so perfect a seclusion, though conformable with the habits and customs of the East, may not be practicable in Paris.
In the morning, I shall rejoice in the prospect of your coming, and in the evening dwell with delight on the happiness I have enjoyed in your presence; then too, when alone, I can call forth mighty pictures of the past, see vast horizons bounded only by the towering mountains of Pindus and Olympus.
Oh, believe me, that when three great passions, such as sorrow, love, and gratitude fill the heart, _ennui_ can find no place.” “You are a worthy daughter of Epirus, Haydée, and your charming and poetical ideas prove well your descent from that race of goddesses who claim your country as their birthplace.
Depend on my care to see that your youth is not blighted, or suffered to pass away in ungenial solitude; and of this be well assured, that if you love me as a father, I love you as a child.” “You are wrong, my lord.
The love I have for you is very different from the love I had for my father.
If you were to die, I should die too.” The count, with a smile of profound tenderness, extended his hand, and she carried it to her lips.
The house was of white stone, and in a small court before it were two small beds full of beautiful flowers.
In the concierge that opened the gate the count recognized Cocles; but as he had but one eye, and that eye had become somewhat dim in the course of nine years, Cocles did not recognize the count.
The carriages that drove up to the door were compelled to turn, to avoid a fountain that played in a basin of rockwork,—an ornament that had excited the jealousy of the whole quarter, and had gained for the place the appellation of _The Little Versailles_.
It is needless to add that there were gold and silver fish in the basin.
The house, with kitchens and cellars below, had above the ground floor, two stories and attics.
The whole of the property, consisting of an immense workshop, two pavilions at the bottom of the garden, and the garden itself, had been purchased by Emmanuel, who had seen at a glance that he could make of it a profitable speculation.
He had reserved the house and half the garden, and building a wall between the garden and the workshops, had let them upon lease with the pavilions at the bottom of the garden.
So that for a trifling sum he was as well lodged, and as perfectly shut out from observation, as the inhabitants of the finest mansion in the Faubourg St.
The breakfast-room was finished in oak; the salon in mahogany, and the furnishings were of blue velvet; the bedroom was in citronwood and green damask.
There was a study for Emmanuel, who never studied, and a music-room for Julie, who never played.
The whole of the second story was set apart for Maximilian; it was precisely similar to his sister’s apartments, except that for the breakfast-parlor he had a billiard-room, where he received his friends.
He was superintending the grooming of his horse, and smoking his cigar at the entrance of the garden, when the count’s carriage stopped at the gate.
Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from the box, inquired whether Monsieur and Madame Herbault and Monsieur Maximilian Morrel would see his excellency the Count of Monte Cristo.
“The Count of Monte Cristo?” cried Morrel, throwing away his cigar and hastening to the carriage; “I should think we would see him.
Ah, a thousand thanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise.” And the young officer shook the count’s hand so warmly, that Monte Cristo could not be mistaken as to the sincerity of his joy, and he saw that he had been expected with impatience, and was received with pleasure.
“Come, come,” said Maximilian, “I will serve as your guide; such a man as you are ought not to be introduced by a servant.
My sister is in the garden plucking the dead roses; my brother is reading his two papers, _la Presse_ and _les Débats_, within six steps of her; for wherever you see Madame Herbault, you have only to look within a circle of four yards and you will find M.
Emmanuel, and ‘reciprocally,’ as they say at the Polytechnic School.” At the sound of their steps a young woman of twenty to five-and-twenty, dressed in a silk morning gown, and busily engaged in plucking the dead leaves off a noisette rose-tree, raised her head.
This was Julie, who had become, as the clerk of the house of Thomson & French had predicted, Madame Emmanuel Herbault.
She uttered a cry of surprise at the sight of a stranger, and Maximilian began to laugh.
“Don’t disturb yourself, Julie,” said he.
“The count has only been two or three days in Paris, but he already knows what a fashionable woman of the Marais is, and if he does not, you will show him.” “Ah, monsieur,” returned Julie, “it is treason in my brother to bring you thus, but he never has any regard for his poor sister.
Penelon, Penelon!” An old man, who was digging busily at one of the beds, stuck his spade in the earth, and approached, cap in hand, striving to conceal a quid of tobacco he had just thrust into his cheek.
A few locks of gray mingled with his hair, which was still thick and matted, while his bronzed features and determined glance well suited an old sailor who had braved the heat of the equator and the storms of the tropics.
“I think you hailed me, Mademoiselle Julie?” said he.
Penelon had still preserved the habit of calling his master’s daughter “Mademoiselle Julie,” and had never been able to change the name to Madame Herbault.
I assure you, you are well known in the Rue Meslay.” “Your family appears to be a very happy one,” said the count, as if speaking to himself.
Your brother-in-law is a barrister? a doctor?” “He was a merchant, monsieur, and had succeeded to the business of my poor father.
Morrel, at his death, left 500,000 francs, which were divided between my sister and myself, for we were his only children.
Her husband, who, when he married her, had no other patrimony than his noble probity, his first-rate ability, and his spotless reputation, wished to possess as much as his wife.
He labored and toiled until he had amassed 250,000 francs; six years sufficed to achieve this object.
Oh, I assure you, sir, it was a touching spectacle to see these young creatures, destined by their talents for higher stations, toiling together, and through their unwillingness to change any of the customs of their paternal house, taking six years to accomplish what less scrupulous people would have effected in two or three.
Marseilles resounded with their well-earned praises.
At last, one day, Emmanuel came to his wife, who had just finished making up the accounts.
“‘Julie,’ said he to her, ‘Cocles has just given me the last rouleau of a hundred francs; that completes the 250,000 francs we had fixed as the limits of our gains.
Can you content yourself with the small fortune which we shall possess for the future?
Our house transacts business to the amount of a million a year, from which we derive an income of 40,000 francs.
We can dispose of the business, if we please, in an hour, for I have received a letter from M.
Delaunay, in which he offers to purchase the good-will of the house, to unite with his own, for 300,000 francs.
Advise me what I had better do.’ “‘Emmanuel,’ returned my sister, ‘the house of Morrel can only be carried on by a Morrel.
Is it not worth 300,000 francs to save our father’s name from the chances of evil fortune and failure?’ “‘I thought so,’ replied Emmanuel; ‘but I wished to have your advice.’ “‘This is my counsel:—Our accounts are made up and our bills paid; all we have to do is to stop the issue of any more, and close our office.’ “This was done instantly.
It was three o’clock; at a quarter past, a merchant presented himself to insure two ships; it was a clear profit of 15,000 francs.
“‘Monsieur,’ said Emmanuel, ‘have the goodness to address yourself to M.
We have quitted business.’ “‘How long?’ inquired the astonished merchant. 30043m “‘A quarter of an hour,’ was the reply.
“And this is the reason, monsieur,” continued Maximilian, “of my sister and brother-in-law having only 25,000 francs a year.” Maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which the count’s heart had swelled within him, when Emmanuel entered wearing a hat and coat.
He saluted the count with the air of a man who is aware of the rank of his guest; then, after having led Monte Cristo around the little garden, he returned to the house.
A large vase of Japan porcelain, filled with flowers that loaded the air with their perfume, stood in the salon.
Julie, suitably dressed, and her hair arranged (she had accomplished this feat in less than ten minutes), received the count on his entrance.
The songs of the birds were heard in an aviary hard by, and the branches of laburnums and rose acacias formed an exquisite framework to the blue velvet curtains.
Everything in this charming retreat, from the warble of the birds to the smile of the mistress, breathed tranquillity and repose.
The count had felt the influence of this happiness from the moment he entered the house, and he remained silent and pensive, forgetting that he was expected to renew the conversation, which had ceased after the first salutations had been exchanged.
“Oh, all this is a family history, as Château-Renaud told you the other day,” observed Maximilian.
“This humble picture would have but little interest for you, accustomed as you are to behold the pleasures and the misfortunes of the wealthy and industrious; but such as we are, we have experienced bitter sorrows.” “And God has poured balm into your wounds, as he does into those of all who are in affliction?” said Monte Cristo inquiringly.
“Yes, count,” returned Julie, “we may indeed say he has, for he has done for us what he grants only to his chosen; he sent us one of his angels.” The count’s cheeks became scarlet, and he coughed, in order to have an excuse for putting his handkerchief to his mouth.
“Our magnificence makes you smile, count,” said Maximilian, who had followed him with his eyes.
“No, no,” returned Monte Cristo, pale as death, pressing one hand on his heart to still its throbbings, while with the other he pointed to a crystal cover, beneath which a silken purse lay on a black velvet cushion.
“I was wondering what could be the significance of this purse, with the paper at one end and the large diamond at the other.” “Count,” replied Maximilian, with an air of gravity, “those are our most precious family treasures.” “The stone seems very brilliant,” answered the count.
“Oh, my brother does not allude to its value, although it has been estimated at 100,000 francs; he means, that the articles contained in this purse are the relics of the angel I spoke of just now.” “This I do not comprehend; and yet I may not ask for an explanation, madame,” replied Monte Cristo bowing.
“Pardon me, I had no intention of committing an indiscretion.” “Indiscretion,—oh, you make us happy by giving us an excuse for expatiating on this subject.
If we wanted to conceal the noble action this purse commemorates, we should not expose it thus to view.
Oh, would we could relate it everywhere, and to everyone, so that the emotion of our unknown benefactor might reveal his presence.” “Ah, really,” said Monte Cristo in a half-stifled voice.
“Monsieur,” returned Maximilian, raising the glass cover, and respectfully kissing the silken purse, “this has touched the hand of a man who saved my father from suicide, us from ruin, and our name from shame and disgrace,—a man by whose matchless benevolence we poor children, doomed to want and wretchedness, can at present hear everyone envying our happy lot.
This letter” (as he spoke, Maximilian drew a letter from the purse and gave it to the count)—“this letter was written by him the day that my father had taken a desperate resolution, and this diamond was given by the generous unknown to my sister as her dowry.” Monte Cristo opened the letter, and read it with an indescribable feeling of delight.
It was the letter written (as our readers know) to Julie, and signed “Sinbad the Sailor.” “Unknown you say, is the man who rendered you this service—unknown to you?” “Yes; we have never had the happiness of pressing his hand,” continued Maximilian.
“We have supplicated Heaven in vain to grant us this favor, but the whole affair has had a mysterious meaning that we cannot comprehend—we have been guided by an invisible hand,—a hand as powerful as that of an enchanter.” “Oh,” cried Julie, “I have not lost all hope of some day kissing that hand, as I now kiss the purse which he has touched.
He felt convinced of his identity, but he did not venture to address him.” “An Englishman,” said Monte Cristo, who grew uneasy at the attention with which Julie looked at him.
“An Englishman you say?” “Yes,” replied Maximilian, “an Englishman, who represented himself as the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French, at Rome.
That happened, as I told you, in 1829.
“No,” returned Monte Cristo “I only guessed.
Maximilian—Emmanuel—if we do but discover him, he must believe in the gratitude of the heart!” Monte Cristo felt tears start into his eyes, and he again walked hastily up and down the room.
“In the name of Heaven,” said Maximilian, “if you know anything of him, tell us what it is.” “Alas,” cried Monte Cristo, striving to repress his emotion, “if Lord Wilmore was your unknown benefactor, I fear you will never see him again.
I parted from him two years ago at Palermo, and he was then on the point of setting out for the most remote regions; so that I fear he will never return.” “Oh, monsieur, this is cruel of you,” said Julie, much affected; and the young lady’s eyes swam with tears.
“Madame,” replied Monte Cristo gravely, and gazing earnestly on the two liquid pearls that trickled down Julie’s cheeks, “had Lord Wilmore seen what I now see, he would become attached to life, for the tears you shed would reconcile him to mankind;” and he held out his hand to Julie, who gave him hers, carried away by the look and accent of the count.
“But,” continued she, “Lord Wilmore had a family or friends, he must have known someone, can we not——” “Oh, it is useless to inquire,” returned the count; “perhaps, after all, he was not the man you seek for.
He was my friend: he had no secrets from me, and if this had been so he would have confided in me.” “And he told you nothing?” “Not a word.” “Nothing that would lead you to suppose?” “Nothing.” “And yet you spoke of him at once.” “Ah, in such a case one supposes——” “Sister, sister,” said Maximilian, coming to the count’s aid, “monsieur is quite right.
Recollect what our excellent father so often told us, ‘It was no Englishman that thus saved us.’” Monte Cristo started.
“My father thought that this action had been miraculously performed—he believed that a benefactor had arisen from the grave to save us.
Oh, it was a touching superstition, monsieur, and although I did not myself believe it, I would not for the world have destroyed my father’s faith.
“This Count of Monte Cristo is a strange man,” said Emmanuel.
“Yes,” answered Maximilian, “but I feel sure he has an excellent heart, and that he likes us.” “His voice went to my heart,” observed Julie; “and two or three times I fancied that I had heard it before.” Chapter 51.
This noble entrance, however, in spite of its striking appearance and the graceful effect of the geraniums planted in the two vases, as they waved their variegated leaves in the wind and charmed the eye with their scarlet bloom, had fallen into utter disuse.
The proprietors of the mansion had many years before thought it best to confine themselves to the possession of the house itself, with its thickly planted courtyard, opening into the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, and to the garden shut in by this gate, which formerly communicated with a fine kitchen-garden of about an acre.
For the demon of speculation drew a line, or in other words projected a street, at the farther side of the kitchen-garden.
And so, as we have said, the iron gate leading into the kitchen-garden had been closed up and left to the rust, which bade fair before long to eat off its hinges, while to prevent the ignoble glances of the diggers and delvers of the ground from presuming to sully the aristocratic enclosure belonging to the mansion, the gate had been boarded up to a height of six feet.
True, the planks were not so closely adjusted but that a hasty peep might be obtained through their interstices; but the strict decorum and rigid propriety of the inhabitants of the house left no grounds for apprehending that advantage would be taken of that circumstance.
Horticulture seemed, however, to have been abandoned in the deserted kitchen-garden; and where cabbages, carrots, radishes, peas, and melons had once flourished, a scanty crop of lucern alone bore evidence of its being deemed worthy of cultivation.
A small, low door gave egress from the walled space we have been describing into the projected street, the ground having been abandoned as unproductive by its various renters, and had now fallen so completely in general estimation as to return not even the one-half per cent it had originally paid.
Towards the house the chestnut-trees we have before mentioned rose high above the wall, without in any way affecting the growth of other luxuriant shrubs and flowers that eagerly dressed forward to fill up the vacant spaces, as though asserting their right to enjoy the boon of light and air.
At one corner, where the foliage became so thick as almost to shut out day, a large stone bench and sundry rustic seats indicated that this sheltered spot was either in general favor or particular use by some inhabitant of the house, which was faintly discernible through the dense mass of verdure that partially concealed it, though situated but a hundred paces off.
At that instant the little side-gate leading from the waste ground to the street was noiselessly opened, and a tall, powerful young man appeared.
He was dressed in a common gray blouse and velvet cap, but his carefully arranged hair, beard and moustache, all of the richest and glossiest black, ill accorded with his plebeian attire.
After casting a rapid glance around him, in order to assure himself that he was unobserved, he entered by the small gate, and, carefully closing and securing it after him, proceeded with a hurried step towards the barrier.
At the sight of him she expected, though probably not in such a costume, the young woman started in terror, and was about to make a hasty retreat.
But the eye of love had already seen, even through the narrow chinks of the wooden palisades, the movement of the white robe, and observed the fluttering of the blue sash.
Pressing his lips close to the planks, he exclaimed: “Don’t be alarmed, Valentine—it is I!” Again the timid girl found courage to return to the gate, saying, as she did so: “And why do you come so late today?
It is almost dinner-time, and I had to use no little diplomacy to get rid of my watchful stepmother, my too-devoted maid, and my troublesome brother, who is always teasing me about coming to work at my embroidery, which I am in a fair way never to get done.
If it be but to carry away with me the recollection of such sweet moments, I could even thank you for chiding me, for it leaves me a gleam of hope, that if you did not expect me (and that indeed would be worse than vanity to suppose), at least I was in your thoughts.
You asked me the cause of my being late, and why I come disguised.
I will candidly explain the reason of both, and I trust to your goodness to pardon me.
Oh, Maximilian, how can you jest at a time when we have such deep cause for uneasiness?” “Heaven keep me from jesting with that which is far dearer to me than life itself!
But listen to me, Valentine, and I will tell you all about it.
I became weary of ranging fields and scaling walls, and seriously alarmed at the idea suggested by you, that if caught hovering about here your father would very likely have me sent to prison as a thief.
That would compromise the honor of the French army, to say nothing of the fact that the continual presence of a captain of Spahis in a place where no warlike projects could be supposed to account for it might well create surprise; so I have become a gardener, and, consequently, adopted the costume of my calling.” “What excessive nonsense you talk, Maximilian!” “Nonsense?
Pray do not call what I consider the wisest action of my life by such a name.
Consider, by becoming a gardener I effectually screen our meetings from all suspicion or danger.” 30053m “I beseech of you, Maximilian, to cease trifling, and tell me what you really mean.” “Simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground on which I stand was to let, I made application for it, was readily accepted by the proprietor, and am now master of this fine crop of lucern.
Think of that, Valentine!
There is nothing now to prevent my building myself a little hut on my plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you.
Only imagine what happiness that would afford me.
I can scarcely contain myself at the bare idea.
Such felicity seems above all price—as a thing impossible and unattainable.
But would you believe that I purchase all this delight, joy, and happiness, for which I would cheerfully have surrendered ten years of my life, at the small cost of 500 francs per annum, paid quarterly?
Henceforth we have nothing to fear.
I am on my own ground, and have an undoubted right to place a ladder against the wall, and to look over when I please, without having any apprehensions of being taken off by the police as a suspicious character.
We should presume too much on our own strength, and, like others, perhaps, be led astray by our blind confidence in each other’s prudence.” “How can you for an instant entertain so unworthy a thought, dear Valentine?
Have I not, from the first blessed hour of our acquaintance, schooled all my words and actions to your sentiments and ideas?
And you have, I am sure, the fullest confidence in my honor.
When you spoke to me of experiencing a vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, I placed myself blindly and devotedly at your service, asking no other reward than the pleasure of being useful to you; and have I ever since, by word or look, given you cause of regret for having selected me from the numbers that would willingly have sacrificed their lives for you?
You told me, my dear Valentine, that you were engaged to M. d’Épinay, and that your father was resolved upon completing the match, and that from his will there was no appeal, as M. de Villefort was never known to change a determination once formed.
I kept in the background, as you wished, and waited, not for the decision of your heart or my own, but hoping that Providence would graciously interpose in our behalf, and order events in our favor.
But what cared I for delays or difficulties, Valentine, as long as you confessed that you loved me, and took pity on me?
Is it possible to find a more submissive slave than myself?
You have permitted me to converse with you from time to time, Valentine, but forbidden my ever following you in your walks or elsewhere—have I not obeyed?
And since I found means to enter this enclosure to exchange a few words with you through this gate—to be close to you without really seeing you—have I ever asked so much as to touch the hem of your gown or tried to pass this barrier which is but a trifle to one of my youth and strength?
Never has a complaint or a murmur escaped me.
I have been bound by my promises as rigidly as any knight of olden times.
You promised to bestow on me the friendly affection of a brother.
For I have no friend but yourself upon earth, who am neglected and forgotten by my father, harassed and persecuted by my stepmother, and left to the sole companionship of a paralyzed and speechless old man, whose withered hand can no longer press mine, and who can speak to me with the eye alone, although there still lingers in his heart the warmest tenderness for his poor grandchild.
Oh, how bitter a fate is mine, to serve either as a victim or an enemy to all who are stronger than myself, while my only friend and supporter is a living corpse!
Indeed, indeed, Maximilian, I am very miserable, and if you love me it must be out of pity.” “Valentine,” replied the young man, deeply affected, “I will not say you are all I love in the world, for I dearly prize my sister and brother-in-law; but my affection for them is calm and tranquil, in no manner resembling what I feel for you.
When I think of you my heart beats fast, the blood burns in my veins, and I can hardly breathe; but I solemnly promise you to restrain all this ardor, this fervor and intensity of feeling, until you yourself shall require me to render them available in serving or assisting you.
Franz is not expected to return home for a year to come, I am told; in that time many favorable and unforeseen chances may befriend us.
Let us, then, hope for the best; hope is so sweet a comforter.
Meanwhile, Valentine, while reproaching me with selfishness, think a little what you have been to me—the beautiful but cold resemblance of a marble Venus.
What promise of future reward have you made me for all the submission and obedience I have evinced?—none whatever.
What granted me?—scarcely more.
Franz d’Épinay, your betrothed lover, and you shrink from the idea of being his wife; but tell me, Valentine, is there no other sorrow in your heart?
You see me devoted to you, body and soul, my life and each warm drop that circles round my heart are consecrated to your service; you know full well that my existence is bound up in yours—that were I to lose you I would not outlive the hour of such crushing misery; yet you speak with calmness of the prospect of your being the wife of another!
A rapid change took place in the young man’s feelings.
Outwardly and in the eyes of the world, I am surrounded by kindness and affection; but the reverse is the case.
The general remark is, ‘Oh, it cannot be expected that one of so stern a character as M.
Villefort could lavish the tenderness some fathers do on their daughters.
Madame de Villefort has nothing of her own, and hates me for being so richly endowed.
Alas, how gladly would I exchange the half of this wealth for the happiness of at least sharing my father’s love.
God knows, I would prefer sacrificing the whole, so that it would obtain me a happy and affectionate home.” “Poor Valentine!” “I seem to myself as though living a life of bondage, yet at the same time am so conscious of my own weakness that I fear to break the restraint in which I am held, lest I fall utterly helpless.
Then, too, my father is not a person whose orders may be infringed with impunity; protected as he is by his high position and firmly established reputation for talent and unswerving integrity, no one could oppose him; he is all-powerful even with the king; he would crush you at a word.
The days when such distinctions were so nicely weighed and considered no longer exist in France, and the first families of the monarchy have intermarried with those of the empire.
The aristocracy of the lance has allied itself with the nobility of the cannon.
Now I belong to this last-named class; and certainly my prospects of military preferment are most encouraging as well as certain.
Well, on the day when your appointment as an officer of the Legion of Honor was announced in the papers, we were all sitting with my grandfather, M.
Danglars was there also—you recollect M.
Danglars, do you not, Maximilian, the banker, whose horses ran away with my stepmother and little brother, and very nearly killed them?
Danglars trembled too.” “‘Morrel, Morrel,’ cried my father, ‘stop a bit;’ then knitting his brows into a deep frown, he added, ‘surely this cannot be one of the Morrel family who lived at Marseilles, and gave us so much trouble from their violent Bonapartism—I mean about the year 1815.’ “‘Yes,’ replied M.
Danglars, ‘I believe he is the son of the old shipowner.’” “Indeed,” answered Maximilian; “and what did your father say then, Valentine?” “Oh, such a dreadful thing, that I don’t dare to tell you.” “Always tell me everything,” said Maximilian with a smile.
Though it certainly does cost France somewhat dear to assert her rights in that uncivilized country.’” “Brutal politics, I must confess.” said Maximilian; “but don’t attach any serious importance, dear, to what your father said.
Danglars say to this outburst on the part of the procureur?” “Oh, he laughed, and in that singular manner so peculiar to himself—half-malicious, half-ferocious; he almost immediately got up and took his leave; then, for the first time, I observed the agitation of my grandfather, and I must tell you, Maximilian, that I am the only person capable of discerning emotion in his paralyzed frame.
And I suspected that the conversation that had been carried on in his presence (for they always say and do what they like before the dear old man, without the smallest regard for his feelings) had made a strong impression on his mind; for, naturally enough, it must have pained him to hear the emperor he so devotedly loved and served spoken of in that depreciating manner.” “The name of M.
But to resume my story; I turned towards my grandfather, as though to question him as to the cause of his emotion; he looked expressively at the newspaper I had been reading.
‘What is the matter, dear grandfather?’ said I, ‘are you pleased?’ He gave me a sign in the affirmative.
‘With what my father said just now?’ He returned a sign in the negative.
Danglars said?’ Another sign in the negative.
Morrel (I didn’t dare to say Maximilian) had been made an officer of the Legion of Honor?’ He signified assent; only think of the poor old man’s being so pleased to think that you, who were a perfect stranger to him, had been made an officer of the Legion of Honor!
“Mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” exclaimed a voice from behind the trees.
“Madame is searching for you everywhere; there is a visitor in the drawing-room.” “A visitor?” inquired Valentine, much agitated; “who is it?” “Some grand personage—a prince I believe they said—the Count of Monte Cristo.” “I will come directly,” cried Valentine aloud.
The name of Monte Cristo sent an electric shock through the young man on the other side of the iron gate, to whom Valentine’s _“I am coming”_ was the customary signal of farewell.
“Now, then,” said Maximilian, leaning on the handle of his spade, “I would give a good deal to know how it comes about that the Count of Monte Cristo is acquainted with M. de Villefort.” Chapter 52.
Toxicology It was really the Count of Monte Cristo who had just arrived at Madame de Villefort’s for the purpose of returning the procureur’s visit, and at his name, as may be easily imagined, the whole house was in confusion.
But I can’t be severe with him, he is really _so_ bright.” After the usual civilities, the count inquired after M. de Villefort.
“My husband dines with the chancellor,” replied the young lady; “he has just gone, and I am sure he’ll be exceedingly sorry not to have had the pleasure of seeing you before he went.” Two visitors who were there when the count arrived, having gazed at him with all their eyes, retired after that reasonable delay which politeness admits and curiosity requires.
Madame de Villefort merely cried, “Be still, Edward!” She then added, “This young madcap is, however, very nearly right, and merely re-echoes what he has heard me say with pain a hundred times; for Mademoiselle de Villefort is, in spite of all we can do to rouse her, of a melancholy disposition and taciturn habit, which frequently injure the effect of her beauty.
Go, Edward, and see.” “Because they are looking for her where she is not to be found.” “And where are they looking for her?” “With grandpapa Noirtier.” “And do you think she is not there?” “No, no, no, no, no, she is not there,” replied Edward, singing his words.
If you know, why don’t you tell?” “She is under the big chestnut-tree,” replied the spoiled brat, as he gave, in spite of his mother’s commands, live flies to the parrot, which seemed keenly to relish such fare.
Madame de Villefort stretched out her hand to ring, intending to direct her waiting-maid to the spot where she would find Valentine, when the young lady herself entered the apartment.
She appeared much dejected; and any person who considered her attentively might have observed the traces of recent tears in her eyes.
Valentine, whom we have in the rapid march of our narrative presented to our readers without formally introducing her, was a tall and graceful girl of nineteen, with bright chestnut hair, deep blue eyes, and that reposeful air of quiet distinction which characterized her mother.
Her white and slender fingers, her pearly neck, her cheeks tinted with varying hues reminded one of the lovely Englishwomen who have been so poetically compared in their manner to the gracefulness of a swan.
She entered the apartment, and seeing near her stepmother the stranger of whom she had already heard so much, saluted him without any girlish awkwardness, or even lowering her eyes, and with an elegance that redoubled the count’s attention.
He rose to return the salutation.
“Mademoiselle de Villefort, my step-daughter,” said Madame de Villefort to Monte Cristo, leaning back on her sofa and motioning towards Valentine with her hand.
Madame de Villefort at this really did turn pale, and was very nearly angry with this household plague, who answered to the name of Edward; but the count, on the contrary, smiled, and appeared to look at the boy complacently, which caused the maternal heart to bound again with joy and enthusiasm.
“But, madame,” replied the count, continuing the conversation, and looking by turns at Madame de Villefort and Valentine, “have I not already had the honor of meeting yourself and mademoiselle before?
I could not help thinking so just now; the idea came over my mind, and as mademoiselle entered the sight of her was an additional ray of light thrown on a confused remembrance; excuse the remark.” “I do not think it likely, sir; Mademoiselle de Villefort is not very fond of society, and we very seldom go out,” said the young lady.
“Then it was not in society that I met with mademoiselle or yourself, madame, or this charming little merry boy.
Besides, the Parisian world is entirely unknown to me, for, as I believe I told you, I have been in Paris but very few days.
No,—but, perhaps, you will permit me to call to mind—stay!” The Count placed his hand on his brow as if to collect his thoughts.
“No—it was somewhere—away from here—it was—I do not know—but it appears that this recollection is connected with a lovely sky and some religious _fête_; mademoiselle was holding flowers in her hand, the interesting boy was chasing a beautiful peacock in a garden, and you, madame, were under the trellis of some arbor.
Pray come to my aid, madame; do not these circumstances appeal to your memory?” “No, indeed,” replied Madame de Villefort; “and yet it appears to me, sir, that if I had met you anywhere, the recollection of you must have been imprinted on my memory.” “Perhaps the count saw us in Italy,” said Valentine timidly.
“Yes, in Italy; it was in Italy most probably,” replied Monte Cristo; “you have travelled then in Italy, mademoiselle?” “Yes; madame and I were there two years ago.
The doctors, anxious for my lungs, had prescribed the air of Naples.
We went by Bologna, Perugia, and Rome.” “Ah, yes—true, mademoiselle,” exclaimed Monte Cristo as if this simple explanation was sufficient to revive the recollection he sought.
“I will assist your memory, madame,” continued the count; “the day had been burning hot; you were waiting for horses, which were delayed in consequence of the festival.
“It is six o’clock,” said Madame de Villefort, evidently agitated.
“Valentine, will you not go and see if your grandpapa will have his dinner?” Valentine rose, and saluting the count, left the apartment without speaking.
“Oh, madame,” said the count, when Valentine had left the room, “was it on my account that you sent Mademoiselle de Villefort away?” “By no means,” replied the young lady quickly; “but this is the hour when we usually give M.
Noirtier the unwelcome meal that sustains his pitiful existence.
You are aware, sir, of the deplorable condition of my husband’s father?” “Yes, madame, M. de Villefort spoke of it to me—a paralysis, I think.” “Alas, yes; the poor old gentleman is entirely helpless; the mind alone is still active in this human machine, and that is faint and flickering, like the light of a lamp about to expire.
But excuse me, sir, for talking of our domestic misfortunes; I interrupted you at the moment when you were telling me that you were a skilful chemist.” “No, madame, I did not say as much as that,” replied the count with a smile; “quite the contrary.
“What do you mean?—the album!” “I want the album.” “How dare you tear out the drawings?” “Oh, it amuses me.” “Go—go at once.” “I won’t go unless you give me the album,” said the boy, seating himself doggedly in an armchair, according to his habit of never giving way.
“Take it, then, and pray disturb us no longer,” said Madame de Villefort, giving the album to Edward, who then went towards the door, led by his mother.
The count followed her with his eyes.
“Let us see if she shuts the door after him,” he muttered.
Madame de Villefort closed the door carefully after the child, the count appearing not to notice her; then casting a scrutinizing glance around the chamber, the young wife returned to her chair, in which she seated herself.
“Allow me to observe, madame,” said the count, with that kind tone he could assume so well, “you are really very severe with that dear clever child.” “Oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary,” replied Madame de Villefort, with all a mother’s real firmness.
“It was his Cornelius Nepos that Master Edward was repeating when he referred to King Mithridates,” continued the count, “and you interrupted him in a quotation which proves that his tutor has by no means neglected him, for your son is really advanced for his years.” “The fact is, count,” answered the mother, agreeably flattered, “he has great aptitude, and learns all that is set before him.
Suppose you knew beforehand the poison that would be made use of against you; suppose the poison was, for instance, brucine——” “Brucine is extracted from the false angostura8 is it not?” inquired Madame de Villefort.
“Precisely, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “but I perceive I have not much to teach you.
Well, at the end of ten days you would have taken a centigramme, at the end of twenty days, increasing another milligramme, you would have taken three hundred centigrammes; that is to say, a dose which you would support without inconvenience, and which would be very dangerous for any other person who had not taken the same precautions as yourself.
Science becomes, in their hands, not only a defensive weapon, but still more frequently an offensive one; the one serves against all their physical sufferings, the other against all their enemies.
With opium, belladonna, brucea, snake-wood, and the cherry-laurel, they put to sleep all who stand in their way.
There is not one of those women, Egyptian, Turkish, or Greek, whom here you call ‘good women,’ who do not know how, by means of chemistry, to stupefy a doctor, and in psychology to amaze a confessor.” “Really,” said Madame de Villefort, whose eyes sparkled with strange fire at this conversation.
“Oh, yes, indeed, madame,” continued Monte Cristo, “the secret dramas of the East begin with a love philtre and end with a death potion—begin with paradise and end with—hell.
A man can easily be put out of the way there, then; it is, indeed, the Bagdad and Bassora of the _Thousand and One Nights_.
There, disguised under other names, and concealed under other costumes, are police agents, magistrates, attorneys-general, and bailiffs.
They hang, behead, and impale their criminals in the most agreeable possible manner; but some of these, like clever rogues, have contrived to escape human justice, and succeed in their fraudulent enterprises by cunning stratagems.
Then arrive a crowd of policemen and constables.
They fetch a doctor, who opens the dead body, and collects from the entrails and stomach a quantity of arsenic in a spoon.
Next day a hundred newspapers relate the fact, with the names of the victim and the murderer.
The same evening the grocer or grocers, druggist or druggists, come and say, ‘It was I who sold the arsenic to the gentleman;’ and rather than not recognize the guilty purchaser, they will recognize twenty.
Then the foolish criminal is taken, imprisoned, interrogated, confronted, confounded, condemned, and cut off by hemp or steel; or if she be a woman of any consideration, they lock her up for life.
This is the way in which you Northerns understand chemistry, madame.
Desrues was, however, I must confess, more skilful.” “What would you have, sir?” said the lady, laughing; “we do what we can.
All the world has not the secret of the Medicis or the Borgias.” “Now,” replied the count, shrugging his shoulders, “shall I tell you the cause of all these stupidities?
It is because, at your theatres, by what at least I could judge by reading the pieces they play, they see persons swallow the contents of a phial, or suck the button of a ring, and fall dead instantly.
Five minutes afterwards the curtain falls, and the spectators depart.
They are ignorant of the consequences of the murder; they see neither the police commissary with his badge of office, nor the corporal with his four men; and so the poor fools believe that the whole thing is as easy as lying.
The arts change about and make a tour of the world; things take a different name, and the vulgar do not follow them—that is all; but there is always the same result.
Poisons act particularly on some organ or another—one on the stomach, another on the brain, another on the intestines.
“I thought, I must confess, that these tales, were inventions of the Middle Ages.” “Yes, no doubt, but improved upon by ours.
What is the use of time, rewards of merit, medals, crosses, Monthyon prizes, if they do not lead society towards more complete perfection?
“Do you suppose that the real _savant_ addresses himself stupidly to the mere individual?
Science loves eccentricities, leaps and bounds, trials of strength, fancies, if I may be allowed so to term them.
Thus, for instance, the excellent Abbé Adelmonte, of whom I spoke just now, made in this way some marvellous experiments.” “Really?” “Yes; I will mention one to you.
He had a remarkably fine garden, full of vegetables, flowers, and fruit.
From amongst these vegetables he selected the most simple—a cabbage, for instance.
For three days he watered this cabbage with a distillation of arsenic; on the third, the cabbage began to droop and turn yellow.
In the eyes of everybody it seemed fit for table, and preserved its wholesome appearance.
It was only poisoned to the Abbé Adelmonte.
He then took the cabbage to the room where he had rabbits—for the Abbé Adelmonte had a collection of rabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs, fully as fine as his collection of vegetables, flowers, and fruit.
Well, the Abbé Adelmonte took a rabbit, and made it eat a leaf of the cabbage.
What magistrate would find, or even venture to insinuate, anything against this?
What procureur has ever ventured to draw up an accusation against M.
Flourens, in consequence of the rabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs they have killed?—not one.
This rabbit dead, the Abbé Adelmonte has its entrails taken out by his cook and thrown on the dunghill; on this dunghill is a hen, who, pecking these intestines, is in her turn taken ill, and dies next day.
At the moment when she is struggling in the convulsions of death, a vulture is flying by (there are a good many vultures in Adelmonte’s country); this bird darts on the dead fowl, and carries it away to a rock, where it dines off its prey.
Three days afterwards, this poor vulture, which has been very much indisposed since that dinner, suddenly feels very giddy while flying aloft in the clouds, and falls heavily into a fish-pond.
The pike, eels, and carp eat greedily always, as everybody knows—well, they feast on the vulture.
Now suppose that next day, one of these eels, or pike, or carp, poisoned at the fourth remove, is served up at your table.
Well, then, your guest will be poisoned at the fifth remove, and die, at the end of eight or ten days, of pains in the intestines, sickness, or abscess of the pylorus.
The doctors open the body and say with an air of profound learning, ‘The subject has died of a tumor on the liver, or of typhoid fever!’” “But,” remarked Madame de Villefort, “all these circumstances which you link thus to one another may be broken by the least accident; the vulture may not see the fowl, or may fall a hundred yards from the fish-pond.” “Ah, that is where the art comes in.
To be a great chemist in the East, one must direct chance; and this is to be achieved.” Madame de Villefort was in deep thought, yet listened attentively.
“But,” she exclaimed, suddenly, “arsenic is indelible, indestructible; in whatsoever way it is absorbed, it will be found again in the body of the victim from the moment when it has been taken in sufficient quantity to cause death.” “Precisely so,” cried Monte Cristo—“precisely so; and this is what I said to my worthy Adelmonte.
He reflected, smiled, and replied to me by a Sicilian proverb, which I believe is also a French proverb, ‘My son, the world was not made in a day—but in seven.
Return on Sunday.’ On the Sunday following I did return to him.
Instead of having watered his cabbage with arsenic, he had watered it this time with a solution of salts, having their basis in strychnine, _strychnos colubrina_, as the learned term it.
Now, the cabbage had not the slightest appearance of disease in the world, and the rabbit had not the smallest distrust; yet, five minutes afterwards, the rabbit was dead.
This time we were the vultures; so we opened the bird, and this time all special symptoms had disappeared, there were only general symptoms.
There was no peculiar indication in any organ—an excitement of the nervous system—that was it; a case of cerebral congestion—nothing more.
The fowl had not been poisoned—she had died of apoplexy.
Apoplexy is a rare disease among fowls, I believe, but very common among men.” Madame de Villefort appeared more and more thoughtful.
“It is very fortunate,” she observed, “that such substances could only be prepared by chemists; otherwise, all the world would be poisoning each other.” “By chemists and persons who have a taste for chemistry,” said Monte Cristo carelessly.
“And then,” said Madame de Villefort, endeavoring by a struggle, and with effort, to get away from her thoughts, “however skilfully it is prepared, crime is always crime, and if it avoid human scrutiny, it does not escape the eye of God.
The Orientals are stronger than we are in cases of conscience, and, very prudently, have no hell—that is the point.” 30075m “Really, madame, this is a scruple which naturally must occur to a pure mind like yours, but which would easily yield before sound reasoning.
The bad side of human thought will always be defined by the paradox of Jean Jacques Rousseau,—you remember,—the mandarin who is killed five hundred leagues off by raising the tip of the finger.
Man’s whole life passes in doing these things, and his intellect is exhausted by reflecting on them.
You will find very few persons who will go and brutally thrust a knife in the heart of a fellow-creature, or will administer to him, in order to remove him from the surface of the globe on which we move with life and animation, that quantity of arsenic of which we just now talked.
Such a thing is really out of rule—eccentric or stupid.
To attain such a point, the blood must be heated to thirty-six degrees, the pulse be, at least, at ninety, and the feelings excited beyond the ordinary limit.
“Yes,” answered Monte Cristo “happily, yes, conscience does remain; and if it did not, how wretched we should be!
After every action requiring exertion, it is conscience that saves us, for it supplies us with a thousand good excuses, of which we alone are judges; and these reasons, howsoever excellent in producing sleep, would avail us but very little before a tribunal, when we were tried for our lives.
Ah, maternal love is a great virtue, a powerful motive—so powerful that it excuses a multitude of things, even if, after Duncan’s death, Lady Macbeth had been at all pricked by her conscience.” Madame de Villefort listened with avidity to these appalling maxims and horrible paradoxes, delivered by the count with that ironical simplicity which was peculiar to him.
After a moment’s silence, the lady inquired: “Do you know, my dear count,” she said, “that you are a very terrible reasoner, and that you look at the world through a somewhat distempered medium?
Have you really measured the world by scrutinies, or through alembics and crucibles?
You know, madame, how suddenly I snatched him from those phials which he so imprudently touched?” “Is it then so terrible a poison?” “Oh, no!
“Most assuredly,” responded Madame de Villefort in the same tone.
“As for me, so nervous, and so subject to fainting fits, I should require a Doctor Adelmonte to invent for me some means of breathing freely and tranquillizing my mind, in the fear I have of dying some fine day of suffocation.
In the meanwhile, as the thing is difficult to find in France, and your abbé is not probably disposed to make a journey to Paris on my account, I must continue to use Monsieur Planche’s anti-spasmodics; and mint and Hoffman’s drops are among my favorite remedies.
Here are some lozenges which I have made up on purpose; they are compounded doubly strong.” Monte Cristo opened the tortoise-shell box, which the lady presented to him, and inhaled the odor of the lozenges with the air of an amateur who thoroughly appreciated their composition.
One drop will restore life, as you have seen; five or six will inevitably kill, and in a way the more terrible inasmuch as, poured into a glass of wine, it would not in the slightest degree affect its flavor.
But I say no more, madame; it is really as if I were prescribing for you.” The clock struck half-past six, and a lady was announced, a friend of Madame de Villefort, who came to dine with her.
I have promised to escort to the Académie a Greek princess of my acquaintance who has never seen your grand opera, and who relies on me to conduct her thither.” “Adieu, then, sir, and do not forget the prescription.” “Ah, in truth, madame, to do that I must forget the hour’s conversation I have had with you, which is indeed impossible.” Monte Cristo bowed, and left the house.
Madame de Villefort remained immersed in thought.
“He is a very strange man,” she said, “and in my opinion is himself the Adelmonte he talks about.” As to Monte Cristo the result had surpassed his utmost expectations.
“Good,” said he, as he went away; “this is a fruitful soil, and I feel certain that the seed sown will not be cast on barren ground.” Next morning, faithful to his promise, he sent the prescription requested.
Robert le Diable The pretext of an opera engagement was so much the more feasible, as there chanced to be on that very night a more than ordinary attraction at the Académie Royale.
Levasseur, who had been suffering under severe illness, made his reappearance in the character of _Bertram_, and, as usual, the announcement of the most admired production of the favorite composer of the day had attracted a brilliant and fashionable audience.
Morcerf, like most other young men of rank and fortune, had his orchestra stall, with the certainty of always finding a seat in at least a dozen of the principal boxes occupied by persons of his acquaintance; he had, moreover, his right of entry into the omnibus box.
Château-Renaud rented a stall beside his own, while Beauchamp, as a journalist, had unlimited range all over the theatre.
It happened that on this particular night the minister’s box was placed at the disposal of Lucien Debray, who offered it to the Comte de Morcerf, who again, upon his rejection of it by Mercédès, sent it to Danglars, with an intimation that he should probably do himself the honor of joining the baroness and her daughter during the evening, in the event of their accepting the box in question.
The ladies received the offer with too much pleasure to dream of a refusal.
To no class of persons is the presentation of a gratuitous opera-box more acceptable than to the wealthy millionaire, who still hugs economy while boasting of carrying a king’s ransom in his waistcoat pocket.
Danglars had, however, protested against showing himself in a ministerial box, declaring that his political principles, and his parliamentary position as member of the opposition party would not permit him so to commit himself; the baroness had, therefore, despatched a note to Lucien Debray, bidding him call for them, it being wholly impossible for her to go alone with Eugénie to the opera.
There is no gainsaying the fact that a very unfavorable construction would have been put upon the circumstance if the two women had gone without escort, while the addition of a third, in the person of her mother’s admitted lover, enabled Mademoiselle Danglars to defy malice and ill-nature.
“Surely,” said Albert, as the door of a box on the first circle opened, “that must be the Countess G——.” “And who is the Countess G——?” inquired Château-Renaud.
Now, do you know, baron, I have a great mind to pick a quarrel with you for asking it; as if all the world did not know who the Countess G—— was.” “Ah, to be sure,” replied Château-Renaud; “the lovely Venetian, is it not?” “Herself.” At this moment the countess perceived Albert, and returned his salutation with a smile.
“Franz introduced me to her at Rome,” replied Albert.
“Well, then, will you do as much for me in Paris as Franz did for you in Rome?” “With pleasure.” There was a cry of “Shut up!” from the audience.
This manifestation on the part of the spectators of their wish to be allowed to hear the music, produced not the slightest effect on the two young men, who continued their conversation.
“The countess was present at the races in the Champ-de-Mars,” said Château-Renaud.
Did you bet?” “Oh, merely a paltry fifty louis.” “And who was the winner?” “Nautilus.
I staked on him.” “But there were three races, were there not?” “Yes; there was the prize given by the Jockey Club—a gold cup, you know—and a very singular circumstance occurred about that race.” “What was it?” “Oh, shut up!” again interposed some of the audience.
“Why, it was won by a horse and rider utterly unknown on the course.” “Is that possible?” “True as day.
The fact was, nobody had observed a horse entered by the name of Vampa, or that of a jockey styled Job, when, at the last moment, a splendid roan, mounted by a jockey about as big as your fist, presented themselves at the starting-post.
And this time the tone and manner in which the command was given, betokened such growing hostility that the two young men perceived, for the first time, that the mandate was addressed to them.
Leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized the various countenances around them, as though demanding some one person who would take upon himself the responsibility of what they deemed excessive impertinence; but as no one responded to the challenge, the friends turned again to the front of the theatre, and affected to busy themselves with the stage.
At this moment the door of the minister’s box opened, and Madame Danglars, accompanied by her daughter, entered, escorted by Lucien Debray, who assiduously conducted them to their seats.
“Ha, ha,” said Château-Renaud, “here come some friends of yours, viscount!
What are you looking at there? don’t you see they are trying to catch your eye?” Albert turned round, just in time to receive a gracious wave of the fan from the baroness; as for Mademoiselle Eugénie, she scarcely vouchsafed to waste the glances of her large black eyes even upon the business of the stage.
“I tell you what, my dear fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “I cannot imagine what objection you can possibly have to Mademoiselle Danglars—that is, setting aside her want of ancestry and somewhat inferior rank, which by the way I don’t think you care very much about.
Her mouth, which might have been found fault with as too large, displayed teeth of pearly whiteness, rendered still more conspicuous by the brilliant carmine of her lips, contrasting vividly with her naturally pale complexion.
But that which completed the almost masculine look Morcerf found so little to his taste, was a dark mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaks of nature generally are, placed just at the corner of her mouth; and the effect tended to increase the expression of self-dependence that characterized her countenance.
The rest of Mademoiselle Eugénie’s person was in perfect keeping with the head just described; she, indeed, reminded one of Diana, as Château-Renaud observed, but her bearing was more haughty and resolute.
As regarded her attainments, the only fault to be found with them was the same that a fastidious connoisseur might have found with her beauty, that they were somewhat too erudite and masculine for so young a person.
She was a perfect linguist, a first-rate artist, wrote poetry, and composed music; to the study of the latter she professed to be entirely devoted, following it with an indefatigable perseverance, assisted by a schoolfellow,—a young woman without fortune whose talent promised to develop into remarkable powers as a singer.
It was rumored that she was an object of almost paternal interest to one of the principal composers of the day, who excited her to spare no pains in the cultivation of her voice, which might hereafter prove a source of wealth and independence.
But this counsel effectually decided Mademoiselle Danglars never to commit herself by being seen in public with one destined for a theatrical life; and acting upon this principle, the banker’s daughter, though perfectly willing to allow Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly (that was the name of the young virtuosa) to practice with her through the day, took especial care not to be seen in her company.
Still, though not actually received at the Hôtel Danglars in the light of an acknowledged friend, Louise was treated with far more kindness and consideration than is usually bestowed on a governess.
The curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance of Madame Danglars into her box, the band quitted the orchestra for the accustomed half-hour’s interval allowed between the acts, and the audience were left at liberty to promenade the salon or lobbies, or to pay and receive visits in their respective boxes.
Morcerf and Château-Renaud were amongst the first to avail themselves of this permission.
For an instant the idea struck Madame Danglars that this eagerness on the part of the young viscount arose from his impatience to join her party, and she whispered her expectations to her daughter, that Albert was hurrying to pay his respects to them.
Allow me to introduce my friend, Baron de Château-Renaud, one of the few true gentlemen now to be found in France, and from whom I have just learned that you were a spectator of the races in the Champ-de-Mars, yesterday.” Château-Renaud bowed to the countess.
“So you were at the races, baron?” inquired the countess eagerly.
“Yes, madame.” “Well, then,” pursued Madame G—— with considerable animation, “you can probably tell me who won the Jockey Club stakes?” “I am sorry to say I cannot,” replied the baron; “and I was just asking the same question of Albert.” “Are you very anxious to know, countess?” asked Albert.
“To know what?” “The name of the owner of the winning horse?” “Excessively; only imagine—but do tell me, viscount, whether you really are acquainted with it or no?” “I beg your pardon, madame, but you were about to relate some story, were you not?
Pray continue.” “Well, then, listen.
Imagine my surprise, when, upon returning home, the first object I met on the staircase was the identical jockey in the pink jacket!
I concluded that, by some singular chance, the owner of the winning horse must live in the same hotel as myself; but, as I entered my apartments, I beheld the very gold cup awarded as a prize to the unknown horse and rider.
Inside the cup was a small piece of paper, on which were written these words—‘From Lord Ruthven to Countess G——.’” “Precisely; I was sure of it,” said Morcerf.
Besides, his presenting you the cup under the name of Lord Ruthven——” “Oh, but that is dreadful!
Do not believe what Albert is telling you, countess; so far from the sensation excited in the Parisian circles by the appearance of the Count of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon myself to declare that it is as strong as ever.
His first astounding act upon coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth 32,000 francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, the almost miraculous preservation of Madame de Villefort’s life; now it seems that he has carried off the prize awarded by the Jockey Club.
“The one between the pillars on the first tier—it seems to have been fitted up entirely afresh.” “Did you observe anyone during the first act?” asked Château-Renaud.
It is his way, and you must take him as you find him.” At this moment the bell rang to announce the drawing up of the curtain for the second act.
“Shall I see you again?” asked the countess.
“At the end of the next act, with your permission, I will come and inquire whether there is anything I can do for you in Paris?” “Pray take notice,” said the countess, “that my present residence is 22 Rue de Rivoli, and that I am at home to my friends every Saturday evening.
So now, you are both forewarned.” The young men bowed, and quitted the box.
Upon reaching their stalls, they found the whole of the audience in the parterre standing up and directing their gaze towards the box formerly possessed by the Russian ambassador.
A man of from thirty-five to forty years of age, dressed in deep black, had just entered, accompanied by a young woman dressed after the Eastern style.
The lady was surpassingly beautiful, while the rich magnificence of her attire drew all eyes upon her.
“Hullo,” said Albert; “it is Monte Cristo and his Greek!” The strangers were, indeed, no other than the count and Haydée.
In a few moments the young girl had attracted the attention of the whole house, and even the occupants of the boxes leaned forward to scrutinize her magnificent diamonds.
The second act passed away during one continued buzz of voices—one deep whisper—intimating that some great and universally interesting event had occurred; all eyes, all thoughts, were occupied with the young and beautiful woman, whose gorgeous apparel and splendid jewels made a most extraordinary spectacle.
Upon this occasion an unmistakable sign from Madame Danglars intimated her desire to see Albert in her box directly the curtain fell on the second act, and neither the politeness nor good taste of Morcerf would permit his neglecting an invitation so unequivocally given.
At the close of the act he therefore went to the baroness.
Having bowed to the two ladies, he extended his hand to Debray.
By the baroness he was most graciously welcomed, while Eugénie received him with her accustomed coldness.
There is madame overwhelming me with questions respecting the count; she insists upon it that I can tell her his birth, education, and parentage, where he came from, and whither he is going.
“I suppose you know he has an order for unlimited credit on the baron’s banking establishment?” “I was not aware of it,” replied Albert, “but I can readily believe it.” “And, further, that he stated to M.
Danglars his intention of only staying a year in Paris, during which time he proposed to spend six millions.
“He must be the Shah of Persia, travelling _incog_.” “Have you noticed the remarkable beauty of the young woman, M.
Lucien?” inquired Eugénie.
“I really never met with one woman so ready to do justice to the charms of another as yourself,” responded Lucien, raising his lorgnette to his eye.
“A most lovely creature, upon my soul!” was his verdict.
“Indeed he does, and in a most lavish manner, I can assure you.” “I must try and persuade M.
“No, no!” exclaimed Debray; “that girl is not his wife: he told us himself she was his slave.
Do you not recollect, Morcerf, his telling us so at your breakfast?” “Well, then,” said the baroness, “if slave she be, she has all the air and manner of a princess.” “Of the ‘Arabian Nights’.” “If you like; but tell me, my dear Lucien, what it is that constitutes a princess.
Why, diamonds—and she is covered with them.” “To me she seems overloaded,” observed Eugénie; “she would look far better if she wore fewer, and we should then be able to see her finely formed throat and wrists.” “See how the artist peeps out!” exclaimed Madame Danglars.
“My poor Eugénie, you must conceal your passion for the fine arts.” “I admire all that is beautiful,” returned the young lady.
“What do you think of the count?” inquired Debray; “he is not much amiss, according to my ideas of good looks.” “The count,” repeated Eugénie, as though it had not occurred to her to observe him sooner; “the count?—oh, he is so dreadfully pale.” “I quite agree with you,” said Morcerf; “and the secret of that very pallor is what we want to find out.
The Countess G—— insists upon it that he is a vampire.” “Then the Countess G—— has returned to Paris, has she?” inquired the baroness.
“Is that she, mamma?” asked Eugénie; “almost opposite to us, with that profusion of beautiful light hair?” “Yes,” said Madame Danglars, “that is she.
Why, to converse with him, of course.
Have you really no desire to meet him?” “None whatever,” replied Eugénie.
“Strange child,” murmured the baroness.
“He will very probably come of his own accord,” said Morcerf.
“There; do you see, madame, he recognizes you, and bows.” The baroness returned the salute in the most smiling and graceful manner.
“Well,” said Morcerf, “I may as well be magnanimous, and tear myself away to forward your wishes.
Adieu; I will go and try if there are any means of speaking to him.” “Go straight to his box; that will be the simplest plan.” “But I have never been presented.” “Presented to whom?” “To the beautiful Greek.” “You say she is only a slave?” “While you assert that she is a queen, or at least a princess.
No; I hope that when he sees me leave you, he will come out.” “That is possible—go.” “I am going,” said Albert, as he made his parting bow.
After giving some directions to Ali, who stood in the lobby, the count took Albert’s arm.
Carefully closing the box door, Ali placed himself before it, while a crowd of spectators assembled round the Nubian.
“Upon my word,” said Monte Cristo, “Paris is a strange city, and the Parisians a very singular people.
See that cluster of persons collected around poor Ali, who is as much astonished as themselves; really one might suppose he was the only Nubian they had ever beheld.
Now I can promise you, that a Frenchman might show himself in public, either in Tunis, Constantinople, Bagdad, or Cairo, without being treated in that way.” “That shows that the Eastern nations have too much good sense to waste their time and attention on objects undeserving of either.
However, as far as Ali is concerned, I can assure you, the interest he excites is merely from the circumstance of his being your attendant—you, who are at this moment the most celebrated and fashionable person in Paris.” “Really? and what has procured me so flattering a distinction?” “What? why, yourself, to be sure!
Why, if you sought concealment, did you call your horse Vampa?” “That was an oversight, certainly,” replied the count; “but tell me, does the Count of Morcerf never visit the Opera?
I have been looking for him, but without success.” “He will be here tonight.” “In what part of the house?” “In the baroness’s box, I believe.” “That charming young woman with her is her daughter?” “Yes.” “I congratulate you.” Morcerf smiled.
The conditions are favorable; what else was opera invented for?” “No, thank you.
Your orchestra is too noisy.
To sleep after the manner I speak of, absolute calm and silence are necessary, and then a certain preparation——” “I know—the famous hashish!” “Precisely.
So, my dear viscount, whenever you wish to be regaled with music come and sup with me.” “I have already enjoyed that treat when breakfasting with you,” said Morcerf.
“Do you mean at Rome?” “I do.” “Ah, then, I suppose you heard Haydée’s guzla; the poor exile frequently beguiles a weary hour in playing over to me the airs of her native land.” Morcerf did not pursue the subject, and Monte Cristo himself fell into a silent reverie.
“You will excuse my leaving you,” said the count, turning in the direction of his box.
The Count of Morcerf was not a person to excite either interest or curiosity in a place of public amusement; his presence, therefore, was wholly unnoticed, save by the occupants of the box in which he had just seated himself.
Haydée, whose soul seemed centred in the business of the stage, like all unsophisticated natures, delighted in whatever addressed itself to the eye or ear. 30099m The third act passed off as usual.
Mesdemoiselles Noblet, Julia, and Leroux executed the customary pirouettes; Robert duly challenged the Prince of Granada; and the royal father of the princess Isabella, taking his daughter by the hand, swept round the stage with majestic strides, the better to display the rich folds of his velvet robe and mantle.
After which the curtain again fell, and the spectators poured forth from the theatre into the lobbies and salon.
The count left his box, and a moment later was saluting the Baronne Danglars, who could not restrain a cry of mingled pleasure and surprise.
“You are welcome, count!” she exclaimed, as he entered.
“I have been most anxious to see you, that I might repeat orally the thanks writing can so ill express.” “Surely so trifling a circumstance cannot deserve a place in your remembrance.
Believe me, madame, I had entirely forgotten it.” “But it is not so easy to forget, monsieur, that the very next day after your princely gift you saved the life of my dear friend, Madame de Villefort, which was endangered by the very animals your generosity restored to me.” 30101m “This time, at least, I do not deserve your thanks.
May I beg of you, baroness, to honor me with an introduction to your daughter?” “Oh, you are no stranger—at least not by name,” replied Madame Danglars, “and the last two or three days we have really talked of nothing but you.
Eugénie,” continued the baroness, turning towards her daughter, “this is the Count of Monte Cristo.” The count bowed, while Mademoiselle Danglars bent her head slightly.
“You have a charming young person with you tonight, count,” said Eugénie.
“Is she your daughter?” “No, mademoiselle,” said Monte Cristo, astonished at the coolness and freedom of the question.
“She is a poor unfortunate Greek left under my care.” “And what is her name?” “Haydée,” replied Monte Cristo.
“A Greek?” murmured the Count of Morcerf.
“Where?” stammered Morcerf.
“There,” said Monte Cristo placing his arms around the count, and leaning with him over the front of the box, just as Haydée, whose eyes were occupied in examining the theatre in search of her guardian, perceived his pale features close to Morcerf’s face.
She bent forwards as though to assure herself of the reality of what she saw, then, uttering a faint cry, threw herself back in her seat.
The sound was heard by the people about Ali, who instantly opened the box-door.
“Why, count,” exclaimed Eugénie, “what has happened to your ward? she seems to have been taken suddenly ill.
“Very probably,” answered the count.
Haydée’s nervous system is delicately organized, and she is peculiarly susceptible to the odors even of flowers—nay, there are some which cause her to faint if brought into her presence.
However,” continued Monte Cristo, drawing a small phial from his pocket, “I have an infallible remedy.” So saying, he bowed to the baroness and her daughter, exchanged a parting shake of the hand with Debray and the count, and left Madame Danglars’ box.
“With the Count of Morcerf,” answered Monte Cristo.
“He tells me he served your illustrious father, and that he owes his fortune to him.” “Wretch!” exclaimed Haydée, her eyes flashing with rage; “he sold my father to the Turks, and the fortune he boasts of was the price of his treachery!
Did not you know that, my dear lord?” “Something of this I heard in Epirus,” said Monte Cristo; “but the particulars are still unknown to me.
They are, no doubt, both curious and interesting.” “Yes, yes; but let us go.
I feel as though it would kill me to remain long near that dreadful man.” So saying, Haydée arose, and wrapping herself in her burnouse of white cashmere embroidered with pearls and coral, she hastily quitted the box at the moment when the curtain was rising upon the fourth act.
“Do you observe,” said the Countess G—— to Albert, who had returned to her side, “that man does nothing like other people; he listens most devoutly to the third act of _Robert le Diable_, and when the fourth begins, takes his departure.” Chapter 54.
A Flurry in Stocks Some days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited the Count of Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs-Élysées, which had already assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences.
He came to renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which had been already conveyed to the count through the medium of a letter, signed “Baronne Danglars, _née_ Hermine de Servieux.” Albert was accompanied by Lucien Debray, who, joining in his friend’s conversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which the count’s talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess.
He was convinced that Lucien’s visit was due to a double feeling of curiosity, the larger half of which sentiment emanated from the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin.
But the count did not appear to suspect that there could be the slightest connection between Lucien’s visit and the curiosity of the baroness.
“You are in constant communication with the Baron Danglars?” the count inquired of Albert de Morcerf.
“Yes, count, you know what I told you?” “All remains the same, then, in that quarter?” “It is more than ever a settled thing,” said Lucien,—and, considering that this remark was all that he was at that time called upon to make, he adjusted the glass to his eye, and biting the top of his gold headed cane, began to make the tour of the apartment, examining the arms and the pictures.
“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “I did not expect that the affair would be so promptly concluded.” “Oh, things take their course without our assistance.
While we are forgetting them, they are falling into their appointed order; and when, again, our attention is directed to them, we are surprised at the progress they have made towards the proposed end.
Danglars served together in Spain, my father in the army and M.
Danglars in the commissariat department.
It was there that my father, ruined by the revolution, and M.
Danglars, who never had possessed any patrimony, both laid the foundations of their different fortunes.” “Yes,” said Monte Cristo “I think M.
“Really,” said Monte Cristo, lowering his voice, “you do not appear to me to be very enthusiastic on the subject of this marriage.” “Mademoiselle Danglars is too rich for me,” replied Morcerf, “and that frightens me.” “Bah,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “that’s a fine reason to give.
Are you not rich yourself?” “My father’s income is about 50,000 francs per annum; and he will give me, perhaps, ten or twelve thousand when I marry.” “That, perhaps, might not be considered a large sum, in Paris especially,” said the count; “but everything does not depend on wealth, and it is a fine thing to have a good name, and to occupy a high station in society.
Your name is celebrated, your position magnificent; and then the Comte de Morcerf is a soldier, and it is pleasing to see the integrity of a Bayard united to the poverty of a Duguesclin; disinterestedness is the brightest ray in which a noble sword can shine.
As for me, I consider the union with Mademoiselle Danglars a most suitable one; she will enrich you, and you will ennoble her.” Albert shook his head, and looked thoughtful.
“There is still something else,” said he.
There was to have been a meeting six weeks ago in order to talk over and settle the affair; but I had such a sudden attack of indisposition——” “Real?” interrupted the count, smiling.
“Oh, real enough, from anxiety doubtless,—at any rate they postponed the matter for two months.
I am not yet twenty-one, and Eugénie is only seventeen; but the two months expire next week.
My dear count, you cannot imagine how my mind is harassed.
What prevents you from being so?” “Oh, it will be too great a disappointment to my father if I do not marry Mademoiselle Danglars.” “Marry her then,” said the count, with a significant shrug of the shoulders.
“Yes,” replied Morcerf, “but that will plunge my mother into positive grief.” “Then do not marry her,” said the count.
I will try and think over what is the best thing to be done; you will give me your advice, will you not, and if possible extricate me from my unpleasant position?
I think, rather than give pain to my dear mother, I would run the risk of offending the count.” Monte Cristo turned away; he seemed moved by this last remark.
“Ah,” said he to Debray, who had thrown himself into an easy-chair at the farthest extremity of the salon, and who held a pencil in his right hand and an account book in his left, “what are you doing there?
Are you making a sketch after Poussin?” “Oh, no,” was the tranquil response; “I am too fond of art to attempt anything of that sort.
“Ah, Haitians,—that is quite another thing!
Haitians are the _écarté_ of French stock-jobbing.
We may like bouillotte, delight in whist, be enraptured with boston, and yet grow tired of them all; but we always come back to _écarté_—it is not only a game, it is a _hors-d’œuvre_!
Danglars sold yesterday at 405, and pockets 300,000 francs.
“I am profoundly ignorant of all these stock-jobbing intrigues.” “Because,” said Albert, laughing, “one piece of news follows another, and there is often great dissimilarity between them.” “Ah,” said the count, “I see that M.
“How can I, if her husband fails in controlling her?” asked Lucien; “you know the character of the baroness—no one has any influence with her, and she does precisely what she pleases.” “Ah, if I were in your place——” said Albert.
“Well?” “I would reform her; it would be rendering a service to her future son-in-law.” “How would you set about it?” “Ah, that would be easy enough—I would give her a lesson.” “A lesson?” “Yes.
Your position as secretary to the minister renders your authority great on the subject of political news; you never open your mouth but the stockbrokers immediately stenograph your words.
Cause her to lose a hundred thousand francs, and that would teach her prudence.” “I do not understand,” stammered Lucien.
“It is very clear, notwithstanding,” replied the young man, with an artlessness wholly free from affectation; “tell her some fine morning an unheard-of piece of intelligence—some telegraphic despatch, of which you alone are in possession; for instance, that Henri IV. was seen yesterday at Gabrielle’s.
That would boom the market; she will buy heavily, and she will certainly lose when Beauchamp announces the following day, in his gazette, ‘The report circulated by some usually well-informed persons that the king was seen yesterday at Gabrielle’s house, is totally without foundation.
We can positively assert that his majesty did not quit the Pont-Neuf.’” Lucien half smiled.
Monte Cristo, although apparently indifferent, had not lost one word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye had even read a hidden secret in the embarrassed manner of the secretary.
This embarrassment had completely escaped Albert, but it caused Lucien to shorten his visit; he was evidently ill at ease.
The count, in taking leave of him, said something in a low voice, to which he answered, “Willingly, count; I accept.” The count returned to young Morcerf.
“Do you not think, on reflection,” said he to him, “that you have done wrong in thus speaking of your mother-in-law in the presence of M.
Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort has overwhelmed me with politeness in return for a service which a casual piece of good fortune enabled me to render him.
I predict from all this an avalanche of dinners and routs.
Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be beforehand with them, I have, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting M. and Madame Danglars, and M. and Madame de Villefort, to my country-house at Auteuil.
If I were to invite you and the Count and Countess of Morcerf to this dinner, I should give it the appearance of being a matrimonial meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf would look upon the affair in that light, especially if Baron Danglars did me the honor to bring his daughter.
In that case your mother would hold me in aversion, and I do not at all wish that; on the contrary, I desire to stand high in her esteem.” “Indeed, count,” said Morcerf, “I thank you sincerely for having used so much candor towards me, and I gratefully accept the exclusion which you propose.
You say you desire my mother’s good opinion; I assure you it is already yours to a very unusual extent.” 30111m “Do you think so?” said Monte Cristo, with interest.
If my mother could know of this attention on your part—and I will venture to tell her—I am sure that she will be most grateful to you; it is true that my father will be equally angry.” The count laughed.
“Well,” said he to Morcerf, “but I think your father will not be the only angry one; M. and Madame Danglars will think me a very ill-mannered person.
They know that I am intimate with you—that you are, in fact; one of the oldest of my Parisian acquaintances—and they will not find you at my house; they will certainly ask me why I did not invite you.
Be sure to provide yourself with some previous engagement which shall have a semblance of probability, and communicate the fact to me by a line in writing.
You know that with bankers nothing but a written document will be valid.” “I will do better than that,” said Albert; “my mother is wishing to go to the sea-side—what day is fixed for your dinner?” “Saturday.” “This is Tuesday—well, tomorrow evening we leave, and the day after we shall be at Tréport.
Really, count, you have a delightful way of setting people at their ease.” “Indeed, you give me more credit than I deserve; I only wish to do what will be agreeable to you, that is all.” “When shall you send your invitations?” “This very day.” “Well, I will immediately call on M.
Danglars, and tell him that my mother and myself must leave Paris tomorrow.
I have not seen you, consequently I know nothing of your dinner.” “How foolish you are!
Have you forgotten that M.
You were only a charming man before, but, if you accede to my proposal, you will be adorable.” “What must I do to attain such sublimity?” “You are today free as air—come and dine with me; we shall be a small party—only yourself, my mother, and I.
You have scarcely seen my mother; you shall have an opportunity of observing her more closely.
She is a remarkable woman, and I only regret that there does not exist another like her, about twenty years younger; in that case, I assure you, there would very soon be a Countess and Viscountess of Morcerf.
As to my father, you will not see him; he is officially engaged, and dines with the chief referendary.
We will talk over our travels; and you, who have seen the whole world, will relate your adventures—you shall tell us the history of the beautiful Greek who was with you the other night at the Opera, and whom you call your slave, and yet treat like a princess.
Come, accept my invitation, and my mother will thank you.” “A thousand thanks,” said the count, “your invitation is most gracious, and I regret exceedingly that it is not in my power to accept it.
I am not so much at liberty as you suppose; on the contrary, I have a most important engagement.” “Ah, take care, you were teaching me just now how, in case of an invitation to dinner, one might creditably make an excuse.
I require the proof of a pre-engagement.
Danglars, but I am quite as incredulous as he is.” “I am going to give you a proof,” replied the count, and he rang the bell.
“Oh, you do not mean that,” said he; “besides, here comes the confirmation of my assertion.” Baptistin entered, and remained standing at the door.
“No, no, I wish to do away with that mysterious reputation that you have given me, my dear viscount; it is tiresome to be always acting Manfred.
Go on, Baptistin.” “Then to admit no one except Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and his son.” “You hear—Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti—a man who ranks amongst the most ancient nobility of Italy, whose name Dante has celebrated in the tenth canto of _The Inferno_, you remember it, do you not?
Then there is his son, Andrea, a charming young man, about your own age, viscount, bearing the same title as yourself, and who is making his entry into the Parisian world, aided by his father’s millions.
The major will bring his son with him this evening, the _contino_, as we say in Italy; he confides him to my care.
If he proves himself worthy of it, I will do what I can to advance his interests.
You will assist me in the work, will you not?” “Most undoubtedly.
This Major Cavalcanti is an old friend of yours, then?” “By no means.
He is a perfect nobleman, very polite, modest, and agreeable, such as may be found constantly in Italy, descendants of very ancient families.
I have met him several times at Florence, Bologna and Lucca, and he has now communicated to me the fact of his arrival in Paris.
The acquaintances one makes in travelling have a sort of claim on one; they everywhere expect to receive the same attention which you once paid them by chance, as though the civilities of a passing hour were likely to awaken any lasting interest in favor of the man in whose society you may happen to be thrown in the course of your journey.
This good Major Cavalcanti is come to take a second view of Paris, which he only saw in passing through in the time of the Empire, when he was on his way to Moscow.
I shall give him a good dinner, he will confide his son to my care, I will promise to watch over him, I shall let him follow in whatever path his folly may lead him, and then I shall have done my part.” “Certainly; I see you are a model Mentor,” said Albert “Good-bye, we shall return on Sunday.
By the way, I have received news of Franz.” “Have you?
Is he still amusing himself in Italy?” “I believe so; however, he regrets your absence extremely.
He is, I think, the son of General d’Épinay?” “He is.” “The same who was so shamefully assassinated in 1815?” “By the Bonapartists.” “Yes.
Really I like him extremely; is there not also a matrimonial engagement contemplated for him?” “Yes, he is to marry Mademoiselle de Villefort.” “Indeed?” 30115m “And you know I am to marry Mademoiselle Danglars,” said Albert, laughing.
“You smile.” “Yes.” “Why do you do so?” “I smile because there appears to me to be about as much inclination for the consummation of the engagement in question as there is for my own.
But really, my dear count, we are talking as much of women as they do of us; it is unpardonable.” Albert rose.
“Are you going?” “Really, that is a good idea!—two hours have I been boring you to death with my company, and then you, with the greatest politeness, ask me if I am going.
Indeed, count, you are the most polished man in the world.
And your servants, too, how very well behaved they are; there is quite a style about them.
Monsieur Baptistin especially; I could never get such a man as that.
My servants seem to imitate those you sometimes see in a play, who, because they have only a word or two to say, aquit themselves in the most awkward manner possible.
Therefore, if you part with M.
I should like you a hundred times better if, by your intervention, I could manage to remain a bachelor, even were it only for ten years.” “Nothing is impossible,” gravely replied Monte Cristo; and taking leave of Albert, he returned into the house, and struck the gong three times.
“Monsieur Bertuccio, you understand that I intend entertaining company on Saturday at Auteuil.” Bertuccio slightly started.
“I shall require your services to see that all be properly arranged.
It is a beautiful house, or at all events may be made so.” “There must be a good deal done before it can deserve that title, your excellency, for the tapestried hangings are very old.” “Let them all be taken away and changed, then, with the exception of the sleeping-chamber which is hung with red damask; you will leave that exactly as it is.” Bertuccio bowed.
“You will not touch the garden either; as to the yard, you may do what you please with it; I should prefer that being altered beyond all recognition.” “I will do everything in my power to carry out your wishes, your excellency.
I should be glad, however, to receive your excellency’s commands concerning the dinner.” “Really, my dear M.
Bertuccio,” said the count, “since you have been in Paris, you have become quite nervous, and apparently out of your element; you no longer seem to understand me.” “But surely your excellency will be so good as to inform me whom you are expecting to receive?” “I do not yet know myself, neither is it necessary that you should do so.
‘Lucullus dines with Lucullus,’ that is quite sufficient.” Bertuccio bowed, and left the room.
Major Cavalcanti Both the count and Baptistin had told the truth when they announced to Morcerf the proposed visit of the major, which had served Monte Cristo as a pretext for declining Albert’s invitation.
Bertuccio, according to the command which had been given him, had two hours before left for Auteuil, when a cab stopped at the door, and after depositing its occupant at the gate, immediately hurried away, as if ashamed of its employment.
The visitor was about fifty-two years of age, dressed in one of the green surtouts, ornamented with black frogs, which have so long maintained their popularity all over Europe.
He wore trousers of blue cloth, boots tolerably clean, but not of the brightest polish, and a little too thick in the soles, buckskin gloves, a hat somewhat resembling in shape those usually worn by the gendarmes, and a black cravat striped with white, which, if the proprietor had not worn it of his own free will, might have passed for a halter, so much did it resemble one.
Such was the picturesque costume of the person who rang at the gate, and demanded if it was not at No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Élysées that the Count of Monte Cristo lived, and who, being answered by the porter in the affirmative, entered, closed the gate after him, and began to ascend the steps.
The small and angular head of this man, his white hair and thick gray moustaches, caused him to be easily recognized by Baptistin, who had received an exact description of the expected visitor, and who was awaiting him in the hall.
Therefore, scarcely had the stranger time to pronounce his name before the count was apprised of his arrival.
His visitor appeared slightly uneasy.
“Let me see,” said the count; “are you not the Marquis Bartolomeo Cavalcanti?” “Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,” joyfully replied the Italian; “yes, I am really he.” “Ex-major in the Austrian service?” “Was I a major?” timidly asked the old soldier.
“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “you were a major; that is the title the French give to the post which you filled in Italy.” “Very good,” said the major, “I do not demand more, you understand——” “Your visit here today is not of your own suggestion, is it?” said Monte Cristo.
“No, certainly not.” “You were sent by some other person?” “Yes.” “By the excellent Abbé Busoni?” “Exactly so,” said the delighted major.
The major looked at the count with his large staring eyes, and then took a survey of the apartment, but his gaze almost immediately reverted to the proprietor of the room.
‘Major Cavalcanti, a worthy patrician of Lucca, a descendant of the Cavalcanti of Florence,’” continued Monte Cristo, reading aloud, “‘possessing an income of half a million.’” Monte Cristo raised his eyes from the paper, and bowed.
“Half a million,” said he, “magnificent!” “Half a million, is it?” said the major.
“Yes, in so many words; and it must be so, for the abbé knows correctly the amount of all the largest fortunes in Europe.” “Be it half a million, then; but on my word of honor, I had no idea that it was so much.” “Because you are robbed by your steward.
You must make some reformation in that quarter.” “You have opened my eyes,” said the Italian gravely; “I will show the gentlemen the door.” Monte Cristo resumed the perusal of the letter: “‘And who only needs one thing more to make him happy.’” “Yes, indeed but one!” said the major with a sigh.
The count continued: “‘I have given him renewed life and hope, in the assurance that you have the power of restoring the son whom he has vainly sought for fifteen years.’” The major looked at the count with an indescribable expression of anxiety.
The major recovered his self-possession.
“He said ‘very good,’” muttered the major, “then—sir——” replied he.
“Then the postscript——” “Well; what of the postscript?” “Then the postscript is as favorably received by you as the rest of the letter?” “Certainly; the Abbé Busoni and myself have a small account open between us.
I do not remember if it is exactly 48,000 francs, which I am still owing him, but I dare say we shall not dispute the difference.
“But then you yourself are known to others?” “Yes, I am known, so that——” “Proceed, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti.” “So that you will remit to me these 48,000 francs?” “Certainly, at your first request.” The major’s eyes dilated with pleasing astonishment.
“But sit down,” said Monte Cristo; “really I do not know what I have been thinking of—I have positively kept you standing for the last quarter of an hour.” “Don’t mention it.” The major drew an armchair towards him, and proceeded to seat himself.
“Now,” said the count, “what will you take—a glass of sherry, port, or Alicante?” “Alicante, if you please; it is my favorite wine.” “I have some that is very good.
You will take a biscuit with it, will you not?” “Yes, I will take a biscuit, as you are so obliging.” Monte Cristo rang; Baptistin appeared.
The count advanced to meet him.
“Into what room did you take him?” “Into the blue drawing-room, according to your excellency’s orders.” “That’s right; now bring the Alicante and some biscuits.” Baptistin left the room.
Baptistin re-entered with glasses, wine, and biscuits.
The bottle was covered with spiders’ webs, and all the other signs which indicate the age of wine more truly than do wrinkles on a man’s face.
The count told Baptistin to leave the plate within reach of his guest, who began by sipping the Alicante with an expression of great satisfaction, and then delicately steeped his biscuit in the wine. 30123m “So, sir, you lived at Lucca, did you?
You were rich, noble, held in great esteem—had all that could render a man happy?” “All,” said the major, hastily swallowing his biscuit, “positively all.” “And yet there was one thing wanting in order to complete your happiness?” “Only one thing,” said the Italian.
“And that one thing, your lost child.” “Ah,” said the major, taking a second biscuit, “that consummation of my happiness was indeed wanting.” The worthy major raised his eyes to heaven and sighed.
“Let me hear, then,” said the count, “who this deeply regretted son was; for I always understood you were a bachelor.” “That was the general opinion, sir,” said the major, “and I——” “Yes,” replied the count, “and you confirmed the report.
“Yes,” said the major, “I did wish this fault to be hidden from every eye.” “Not on your own account, surely,” replied Monte Cristo; “for a man is above that sort of thing?” “Oh, no, certainly not on my own account,” said the major with a smile and a shake of the head.
“Take some more wine, my dear Cavalcanti,” said the count, pouring out for him a second glass of Alicante; “your emotion has quite overcome you.” “His poor mother,” murmured the major, trying to get the lachrymal gland in operation, so as to moisten the corner of his eye with a false tear.
“She belonged to one of the first families in Italy, I think, did she not?” “She was of a noble family of Fiesole, count.” “And her name was——” “Do you desire to know her name——?” “Oh,” said Monte Cristo “it would be quite superfluous for you to tell me, for I already know it.” “The count knows everything,” said the Italian, bowing.
“Oliva Corsinari, was it not?” “Oliva Corsinari!” “A marchioness?” “A marchioness!” “And you married her at last, notwithstanding the opposition of her family?” “Yes, that was the way it ended.” “And you have doubtless brought all your papers with you?” said Monte Cristo.
“What papers?” “The certificate of your marriage with Oliva Corsinari, and the register of your child’s birth.” “The register of my child’s birth?” “The register of the birth of Andrea Cavalcanti—of your son; is not his name Andrea?” “I believe so,” said the major.
You believe so?” “I dare not positively assert it, as he has been lost for so long a time.” “Well, then,” said Monte Cristo “you have all the documents with you?” “Your excellency, I regret to say that, not knowing it was necessary to come provided with these papers, I neglected to bring them.” “That is unfortunate,” returned Monte Cristo.
“Were they, then, so necessary?” “They were indispensable.” The major passed his hand across his brow.
You see I have not these necessary papers.” “Fortunately, I have them, though,” said Monte Cristo.
“You married Oliva Corsinari in the church of San Paolo del Monte-Cattini; here is the priest’s certificate.” “Yes indeed, there it is truly,” said the Italian, looking on with astonishment.
“And here is Andrea Cavalcanti’s baptismal register, given by the curé of Saravezza.” “All quite correct.” “Take these documents, then; they do not concern me.
“In that case,” replied the major, “it would be necessary to write to the curé for duplicates, and it would be some time before they could be obtained.” “It would be a difficult matter to arrange,” said Monte Cristo.
“Almost an impossibility,” replied the major.
“I am very glad to see that you understand the value of these papers.” “I regard them as invaluable.” “Now,” said Monte Cristo “as to the mother of the young man——” “As to the mother of the young man——” repeated the Italian, with anxiety.
“As regards the Marchesa Corsinari——” “Really,” said the major, “difficulties seem to thicken upon us; will she be wanted in any way?” “No, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “besides, has she not——” “Yes, sir,” said the major, “she has——” 30127m “Paid the last debt of nature?” “Alas, yes,” returned the Italian.
“I knew that,” said Monte Cristo; “she has been dead these ten years.” “And I am still mourning her loss,” exclaimed the major, drawing from his pocket a checked handkerchief, and alternately wiping first the left and then the right eye.
Now, you understand, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti, that it is useless for you to tell people in France that you have been separated from your son for fifteen years.
Stories of gypsies, who steal children, are not at all in vogue in this part of the world, and would not be believed.
You sent him for his education to a college in one of the provinces, and now you wish him to complete his education in the Parisian world.
That will be sufficient.” “You think so?” “Certainly.” “Very well, then.” “If they should hear of the separation——” “Ah, yes; what could I say?” “That an unfaithful tutor, bought over by the enemies of your family——” “By the Corsinari?” “Precisely.
Had stolen away this child, in order that your name might become extinct.” “That is reasonable, since he is an only son.” “Well, now that all is arranged, do not let these newly awakened remembrances be forgotten.
You have, doubtless, already guessed that I was preparing a surprise for you?” “An agreeable one?” asked the Italian.
“Ah, I see the eye of a father is no more to be deceived than his heart.” “Hum!” said the major.
“Someone has told you the secret; or, perhaps, you guessed that he was here.” “That who was here?” “Your child—your son—your Andrea!” “I did guess it,” replied the major with the greatest possible coolness.
“Then he is here?” “He is,” said Monte Cristo; “when the valet de chambre came in just now, he told me of his arrival.” “Ah, very well, very well,” said the major, clutching the buttons of his coat at each exclamation.
“My dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “I understand your emotion; you must have time to recover yourself.
I will, in the meantime, go and prepare the young man for this much-desired interview, for I presume that he is not less impatient for it than yourself.” “I should quite imagine that to be the case,” said Cavalcanti.
You carry your goodness so far as even to present him to me yourself?” “No; I do not wish to come between a father and son.
Your interview will be private.
But do not be uneasy; even if the powerful voice of nature should be silent, you cannot well mistake him; he will enter by this door.
He is a fine young man, of fair complexion—a little too fair, perhaps—pleasing in manners; but you will see and judge for yourself.” “By the way,” said the major, “you know I have only the 2,000 francs which the Abbé Busoni sent me; this sum I have expended upon travelling expenses, and——” “And you want money; that is a matter of course, my dear M.
Well, here are 8,000 francs on account.” The major’s eyes sparkled brilliantly.
“Does your excellency wish for a receipt?” said the major, at the same time slipping the money into the inner pocket of his coat.
“I thought you might want it to show the Abbé Busoni.” “Well, when you receive the remaining 40,000, you shall give me a receipt in full.
Between honest men such excessive precaution is, I think, quite unnecessary.” “Yes, so it is, between perfectly upright people.” “One word more,” said Monte Cristo.
“Say on.” “You will permit me to make one remark?” “Certainly; pray do so.” “Then I should advise you to leave off wearing that style of dress.” “Indeed,” said the major, regarding himself with an air of complete satisfaction.
It may be worn at Via Reggio; but that costume, however elegant in itself, has long been out of fashion in Paris.” “That’s unfortunate.” “Oh, if you really are attached to your old mode of dress; you can easily resume it when you leave Paris.” “But what shall I wear?” “What you find in your trunks.” “In my trunks?
I have but one portmanteau.” “I dare say you have nothing else with you.
Besides an old soldier always likes to march with as little baggage as possible.” “That is just the case—precisely so.” “But you are a man of foresight and prudence, therefore you sent your luggage on before you.
It has arrived at the Hôtel des Princes, Rue de Richelieu.
It is there you are to take up your quarters.” “Then, in these trunks——” “I presume you have given orders to your valet de chambre to put in all you are likely to need,—your plain clothes and your uniform.
On grand occasions you must wear your uniform; that will look very well.
They still laugh at them in France, and yet always wear them, for all that.” “Very well, very well,” said the major, who was in ecstasy at the attention paid him by the count.
“Now,” said Monte Cristo, “that you have fortified yourself against all painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear M.
Cavalcanti, to meet your lost Andrea.” Saying which Monte Cristo bowed, and disappeared behind the tapestry, leaving the major fascinated beyond expression with the delightful reception which he had received at the hands of the count.
Andrea Cavalcanti The Count of Monte Cristo entered the adjoining room, which Baptistin had designated as the drawing-room, and found there a young man, of graceful demeanor and elegant appearance, who had arrived in a cab about half an hour previously.
Baptistin had not found any difficulty in recognizing the person who presented himself at the door for admittance.
He was certainly the tall young man with light hair, red beard, black eyes, and brilliant complexion, whom his master had so particularly described to him.
When the count entered the room the young man was carelessly stretched on a sofa, tapping his boot with the gold-headed cane which he held in his hand.
On perceiving the count he rose quickly.
“Yes, sir, and I think I have the honor of addressing Count Andrea Cavalcanti?” “Count Andrea Cavalcanti,” repeated the young man, accompanying his words with a bow.
“You are charged with a letter of introduction addressed to me, are you not?” said the count.
“I did not mention that, because the signature seemed to me so strange.” “The letter signed ‘Sinbad the Sailor,’ is it not?” “Exactly so.
Now, as I have never known any Sinbad, with the exception of the one celebrated in the _Thousand and One Nights_——” “Well, it is one of his descendants, and a great friend of mine; he is a very rich Englishman, eccentric almost to insanity, and his real name is Lord Wilmore.” “Ah, indeed?
Then that explains everything that is extraordinary,” said Andrea.
“He is, then, the same Englishman whom I met—at—ah—yes, indeed.
Well, monsieur, I am at your service.” “If what you say be true,” replied the count, smiling, “perhaps you will be kind enough to give me some account of yourself and your family?” “Certainly, I will do so,” said the young man, with a quickness which gave proof of his ready invention.
“I am (as you have said) the Count Andrea Cavalcanti, son of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, a descendant of the Cavalcanti whose names are inscribed in the golden book at Florence.
Our family, although still rich (for my father’s income amounts to half a million), has experienced many misfortunes, and I myself was, at the age of five years, taken away by the treachery of my tutor, so that for fifteen years I have not seen the author of my existence.
Since I have arrived at years of discretion and become my own master, I have been constantly seeking him, but all in vain.
Is my father here?” “Most undoubtedly,” replied Monte Cristo; “your father, Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti.” The expression of terror which, for the moment, had overspread the features of the young man, had now disappeared.
“Ah, yes, that is the name, certainly.
Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti.
And you really mean to say; monsieur, that my dear father is here?” “Yes, sir; and I can even add that I have only just left his company.
The history which he related to me of his lost son touched me to the quick; indeed, his griefs, hopes, and fears on that subject might furnish material for a most touching and pathetic poem.
At length, he one day received a letter, stating that the abductors of his son now offered to restore him, or at least to give notice where he might be found, on condition of receiving a large sum of money, by way of ransom.
Your father did not hesitate an instant, and the sum was sent to the frontier of Piedmont, with a passport signed for Italy.
You were in the south of France, I think?” “Yes,” replied Andrea, with an embarrassed air, “I was in the south of France.” “A carriage was to await you at Nice?” “Precisely so; and it conveyed me from Nice to Genoa, from Genoa to Turin, from Turin to Chambéry, from Chambéry to Pont-de-Beauvoisin, and from Pont-de-Beauvoisin to Paris.” 30133m “Indeed?
Then your father ought to have met with you on the road, for it is exactly the same route which he himself took, and that is how we have been able to trace your journey to this place.” “But,” said Andrea, “if my father had met me, I doubt if he would have recognized me; I must be somewhat altered since he last saw me.” “Oh, the voice of nature,” said Monte Cristo.
I believe he found you in some unpleasant position, but do not know of what nature, for I did not ask, not being inquisitive.
Your misfortunes engaged his sympathies, so you see you must have been interesting.
He told me that he was anxious to restore you to the position which you had lost, and that he would seek your father until he found him.
He did seek, and has found him, apparently, since he is here now; and, finally, my friend apprised me of your coming, and gave me a few other instructions relative to your future fortune.
I am quite aware that my friend Wilmore is peculiar, but he is sincere, and as rich as a gold mine, consequently, he may indulge his eccentricities without any fear of their ruining him, and I have promised to adhere to his instructions.
Now, sir, pray do not be offended at the question I am about to put to you, as it comes in the way of my duty as your patron.
Those who took me from my father, and who always intended, sooner or later, to sell me again to my original proprietor, as they have now done, calculated that, in order to make the most of their bargain, it would be politic to leave me in possession of all my personal and hereditary worth, and even to increase the value, if possible.
I have, therefore, received a very good education, and have been treated by these kidnappers very much as the slaves were treated in Asia Minor, whose masters made them grammarians, doctors, and philosophers, in order that they might fetch a higher price in the Roman market.” Monte Cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared as if he had not expected so much from M.
Your history is quite a romance, and the world, which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangely mistrusts those which are bound in living parchment, even though they be gilded like yourself.
This is the kind of difficulty which I wished to represent to you, my dear count.
You would hardly have recited your touching history before it would go forth to the world, and be deemed unlikely and unnatural.
You would be no longer a lost child found, but you would be looked upon as an upstart, who had sprung up like a mushroom in the night.
You must resolve upon one simple and single line of conduct, and for a man of your intelligence, this plan is as easy as it is necessary; you must form honorable friendships, and by that means counteract the prejudice which may attach to the obscurity of your former life.” Andrea visibly changed countenance.
Ah,” said the count, watching Andrea’s countenance, “I do not demand any confession from you; it is precisely to avoid that necessity that your father was sent for from Lucca.
He is a little stiff and pompous in his manner, and he is disfigured by his uniform; but when it becomes known that he has been for eighteen years in the Austrian service, all that will be pardoned.
We are not generally very severe with the Austrians.
“But,” said he, “so long as I do remain in Paris, and nothing forces me to quit it, do you mean to tell me that I may rely on receiving the sum you just now mentioned to me?” “You may.” “Shall I receive it from my father?” asked Andrea, with some uneasiness.
“Yes, you will receive it from your father personally, but Lord Wilmore will be the security for the money.
Danglars’, which is one of the safest banks in Paris.” “And does my father mean to remain long in Paris?” asked Andrea.
“His service does not allow him to absent himself more than two or three weeks together.” “Ah, my dear father!” exclaimed Andrea, evidently charmed with the idea of his speedy departure.
“Therefore,” said Monte Cristo feigning to mistake his meaning—“therefore I will not, for another instant, retard the pleasure of your meeting.
Are you prepared to embrace your worthy father?” “I hope you do not doubt it.” 30137m “Go, then, into the drawing-room, my young friend, where you will find your father awaiting you.” Andrea made a low bow to the count, and entered the adjoining room.
Monte Cristo watched him till he disappeared, and then touched a spring in a panel made to look like a picture, which, in sliding partly from the frame, discovered to view a small opening, so cleverly contrived that it revealed all that was passing in the drawing-room now occupied by Cavalcanti and Andrea.
The young man closed the door behind him, and advanced towards the major, who had risen when he heard steps approaching him.
“Then we are once more reunited?” said Andrea.
When he had perused the documents, an indefinable expression of pleasure lighted up his countenance, and looking at the major with a most peculiar smile, he said, in very excellent Tuscan: “Then there is no longer any such thing, in Italy as being condemned to the galleys?” The major drew himself up to his full height.
“Why?—what do you mean by that question?” “I mean that if there were, it would be impossible to draw up with impunity two such deeds as these.
In France, my dear sir, half such a piece of effrontery as that would cause you to be quickly despatched to Toulon for five years, for change of air.” “Will you be good enough to explain your meaning?” said the major, endeavoring as much as possible to assume an air of the greatest majesty.
“Most palpable proofs,” said he, “as you may perceive.” “You think, then, that I may rely on the count’s promises?” “Certainly I do.” “You are sure he will keep his word with me?” “To the letter, but at the same time, remember, we must continue to play our respective parts.
Andrea read in a low voice: “‘You are poor; a miserable old age awaits you.
Would you like to become rich, or at least independent?
Set out immediately for Paris, and demand of the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées, No. 30, the son whom you had by the Marchesa Corsinari, and who was taken from you at five years of age.
This son is named Andrea Cavalcanti.
In order that you may not doubt the kind intention of the writer of this letter, you will find enclosed an order for 2,400 francs, payable in Florence, at Signor Gozzi’s; also a letter of introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, on whom I give you a draft of 48,000 francs.
Remember to go to the count on the 26th May at seven o’clock in the evening.
Do you wish for a name? should you like to be rich, and your own master?’” “_Parbleu!_” said the young man; “was it possible there could be two answers to such a question?” “‘Take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at the Porte de Gênes, as you enter Nice; pass through Turin, Chambéry, and Pont-de-Beauvoisin.
You are the son of the Marchese Cavalcanti and the Marchesa Oliva Corsinari.
The marquis will give you some papers which will certify this fact, and authorize you to appear under that name in the Parisian world.
As to your rank, an annual income of 50,000 livres will enable you to support it admirably.
Ferrea, banker at Nice, and also a letter of introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, whom I have directed to supply all your wants.
You have seen the count, you say?” “I have only just left him.” “And has he conformed to all that the letter specified?” “He has.” “Do you understand it?” “Not in the least.” “There is a dupe somewhere.” “At all events, it is neither you nor I.” “Certainly not.” “Well, then——” “Why, it does not much concern us, do you think it does?” “No; I agree with you there.
We must play the game to the end, and consent to be blindfolded.” “Ah, you shall see; I promise you I will sustain my part to admiration.” “I never once doubted your doing so.” Monte Cristo chose this moment for re-entering the drawing-room.
On hearing the sound of his footsteps, the two men threw themselves in each other’s arms, and while they were in the midst of this embrace, the count entered.
“Well, marquis,” said Monte Cristo, “you appear to be in no way disappointed in the son whom your good fortune has restored to you.” “Ah, your excellency, I am overwhelmed with delight.” “And what are your feelings?” said Monte Cristo, turning to the young man.
“As for me, my heart is overflowing with happiness.” “Happy father, happy son!” said the count.
“There is only one thing which grieves me,” observed the major, “and that is the necessity for my leaving Paris so soon.” “Ah, my dear M.
Cavalcanti, I trust you will not leave before I have had the honor of presenting you to some of my friends.” “I am at your service, sir,” replied the major.
“Now, sir,” said Monte Cristo, addressing Andrea, “make your confession.” “To whom?” “Tell M.
Cavalcanti something of the state of your finances.” “_Ma foi!_ monsieur, you have touched upon a tender chord.” “Do you hear what he says, major?” “Certainly I do.” “But do you understand?” “I do.” “Your son says he requires money.” “Well, what would you have me do?” said the major.
“I?” “Yes, you,” said the count, at the same time advancing towards Andrea, and slipping a packet of bank-notes into the young man’s hand.
Well, then, he deputes me to give you this.” “Am I to consider this as part of my income on account?” “No, it is for the first expenses of your settling in Paris.” “Ah, how good my dear father is!” “Silence,” said Monte Cristo; “he does not wish you to know that it comes from him.” “I fully appreciate his delicacy,” said Andrea, cramming the notes hastily into his pocket.
“And now, gentlemen, I wish you good-morning,” said Monte Cristo.
“And when shall we have the honor of seeing you again, your excellency?” asked Cavalcanti.
“Ah,” said Andrea, “when may we hope for that pleasure?” “On Saturday, if you will—Yes.—Let me see—Saturday—I am to dine at my country house, at Auteuil, on that day, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28.
Danglars, your banker.
I will introduce you to him, for it will be necessary he should know you, as he is to pay your money.” “Full dress?” said the major, half aloud.
“Oh, yes, certainly,” said the count; “uniform, cross, knee-breeches.” “And how shall I be dressed?” demanded Andrea. 30145m “Oh, very simply; black trousers, patent leather boots, white waistcoat, either a black or blue coat, and a long cravat.
Baptistin will tell you where, if you do not know their address.
The less pretension there is in your attire, the better will be the effect, as you are a rich man.
If you mean to buy any horses, get them of Devedeux, and if you purchase a phaeton, go to Baptiste for it.” “At what hour shall we come?” asked the young man.
The two Cavalcanti bowed to the count, and left the house.
Monte Cristo went to the window, and saw them crossing the street, arm in arm.
“There go two miscreants;” said he, “it is a pity they are not really related!” Then, after an instant of gloomy reflection, “Come, I will go to see the Morrels,” said he; “I think that disgust is even more sickening than hatred.” 30147m Chapter 57.
In the Lucern Patch Our readers must now allow us to transport them again to the enclosure surrounding M. de Villefort’s house, and, behind the gate, half screened from view by the large chestnut-trees, which on all sides spread their luxuriant branches, we shall find some people of our acquaintance.
This time Maximilian was the first to arrive.
He was intently watching for a shadow to appear among the trees, and awaiting with anxiety the sound of a light step on the gravel walk.
At length, the long-desired sound was heard, and instead of one figure, as he had expected, he perceived that two were approaching him.
The delay had been occasioned by a visit from Madame Danglars and Eugénie, which had been prolonged beyond the time at which Valentine was expected.
That she might not appear to fail in her promise to Maximilian, she proposed to Mademoiselle Danglars that they should take a walk in the garden, being anxious to show that the delay, which was doubtless a cause of vexation to him, was not occasioned by any neglect on her part.
The young man, with the intuitive perception of a lover, quickly understood the circumstances in which she was involuntarily placed, and he was comforted.
Besides, although she avoided coming within speaking distance, Valentine arranged so that Maximilian could see her pass and repass, and each time she went by, she managed, unperceived by her companion, to cast an expressive look at the young man, which seemed to say, “Have patience!
You see it is not my fault.” And Maximilian was patient, and employed himself in mentally contrasting the two girls,—one fair, with soft languishing eyes, a figure gracefully bending like a weeping willow; the other a brunette, with a fierce and haughty expression, and as straight as a poplar.
It is unnecessary to state that, in the eyes of the young man, Valentine did not suffer by the contrast.
In about half an hour the girls went away, and Maximilian understood that Mademoiselle Danglars’ visit had at last come to an end.
In a few minutes Valentine re-entered the garden alone.
For fear that anyone should be observing her return, she walked slowly; and instead of immediately directing her steps towards the gate, she seated herself on a bench, and, carefully casting her eyes around, to convince herself that she was not watched, she presently arose, and proceeded quickly to join Maximilian.
“Good-evening, Valentine,” said a well-known voice.
“Good-evening, Maximilian; I know I have kept you waiting, but you saw the cause of my delay.” “Yes, I recognized Mademoiselle Danglars.
I was not aware that you were so intimate with her.” “Who told you we were intimate, Maximilian?” “No one, but you appeared to be so.
You possess a quality which can never belong to Mademoiselle Danglars.
It is that indefinable charm which is to a woman what perfume is to the flower and flavor to the fruit, for the beauty of either is not the only quality we seek.” “It is your love which makes you look upon everything in that light.” “No, Valentine, I assure you such is not the case.
It only proves how little indulgence we may expect from your sex,” interrupted Valentine.
“You cannot, at least, deny that you are very harsh judges of each other.” “If we are so, it is because we generally judge under the influence of excitement.
But return to your question.” 30151m “Does Mademoiselle Danglars object to this marriage with M. de Morcerf on account of loving another?” “I told you I was not on terms of strict intimacy with Eugénie.” “Yes, but girls tell each other secrets without being particularly intimate; own, now, that you did question her on the subject.
“Nothing,” replied Maximilian.
“Then why did you smile?” “Why, you know very well that you are reflecting on yourself, Valentine.” “Do you want me to go away?” “Ah, no, no.
But do not let us lose time; you are the subject on which I wish to speak.” “True, we must be quick, for we have scarcely ten minutes more to pass together.” “_Ma foi!_” said Maximilian, in consternation.
What a life I cause you to lead, poor Maximilian, you who are formed for happiness!
I bitterly reproach myself, I assure you.” “Well, what does it signify, Valentine, so long as I am satisfied, and feel that even this long and painful suspense is amply repaid by five minutes of your society, or two words from your lips?
And I have also a deep conviction that heaven would not have created two hearts, harmonizing as ours do, and almost miraculously brought us together, to separate us at last.” “Those are kind and cheering words.
You must hope for us both, Maximilian; that will make me at least partly happy.” “But why must you leave me so soon?” “I do not know particulars.
I can only tell you that Madame de Villefort sent to request my presence, as she had a communication to make on which a part of my fortune depended.
Let them take my fortune, I am already too rich; and, perhaps, when they have taken it, they will leave me in peace and quietness.
You would love me as much if I were poor, would you not, Maximilian?” “Oh, I shall always love you.
What should I care for either riches or poverty, if my Valentine was near me, and I felt certain that no one could deprive me of her?
But do you not fear that this communication may relate to your marriage?” “I do not think that is the case.” “However it may be, Valentine, you must not be alarmed.
I assure you that, as long as I live, I shall never love anyone else!” “Do you think to reassure me when you say that, Maximilian?” “Pardon me, you are right.
But I was going to tell you that I met M. de Morcerf the other day.” “Well?” “Monsieur Franz is his friend, you know.” “What then?” “Monsieur de Morcerf has received a letter from Franz, announcing his immediate return.” Valentine turned pale, and leaned her hand against the gate.
But no, the communication would not come through Madame de Villefort.” “Why not?” “Because—I scarcely know why—but it has appeared as if Madame de Villefort secretly objected to the marriage, although she did not choose openly to oppose it.” “Is it so?
Then I feel as if I could adore Madame de Villefort.” “Do not be in such a hurry to do that,” said Valentine, with a sad smile.
“If she objects to your marrying M. d’Épinay, she would be all the more likely to listen to any other proposition.” “No, Maximilian, it is not suitors to which Madame de Villefort objects, it is marriage itself.” “Marriage?
If she dislikes that so much, why did she ever marry herself?” “You do not understand me, Maximilian.
About a year ago, I talked of retiring to a convent.
Madame de Villefort, in spite of all the remarks which she considered it her duty to make, secretly approved of the proposition, my father consented to it at her instigation, and it was only on account of my poor grandfather that I finally abandoned the project.
You can form no idea of the expression of that old man’s eye when he looks at me, the only person in the world whom he loves, and, I had almost said, by whom he is beloved in return.
When he learned my resolution, I shall never forget the reproachful look which he cast on me, and the tears of utter despair which chased each other down his lifeless cheeks.
Ah, Maximilian, I experienced, at that moment, such remorse for my intention, that, throwing myself at his feet, I exclaimed,—‘Forgive me, pray forgive me, my dear grandfather; they may do what they will with me, I will never leave you.’ When I had ceased speaking, he thankfully raised his eyes to heaven, but without uttering a word.
But tell me what interest Madame de Villefort can have in your remaining unmarried?” “Did I not tell you just now that I was rich, Maximilian—too rich?
I possess nearly 50,000 livres in right of my mother; my grandfather and my grandmother, the Marquis and Marquise de Saint-Méran, will leave me as much, and M.
Noirtier evidently intends making me his heir.
My brother Edward, who inherits nothing from his mother, will, therefore, be poor in comparison with me.
No human being, not even my sister, is aware of its existence.
Valentine, will you permit me to make a confidant of a friend and reveal to him the love I bear you?” Valentine started.
“A friend, Maximilian; and who is this friend?
I tremble to give my permission.” “Listen, Valentine.
Have you never experienced for anyone that sudden and irresistible sympathy which made you feel as if the object of it had been your old and familiar friend, though, in reality, it was the first time you had ever met?
Ah, Maximilian, I had hoped you set a higher value on the title of friend.” “Your logic is most powerful, Valentine, but say what you will, I can never renounce the sentiment which has instinctively taken possession of my mind.
I feel as if it were ordained that this man should be associated with all the good which the future may have in store for me, and sometimes it really seems as if his eye was able to see what was to come, and his hand endowed with the power of directing events according to his own will.” “He must be a prophet, then,” said Valentine, smiling.
It cannot be; surely, Valentine, you are mistaken?” “No, indeed, I am not; for I assure you, his power over our household is almost unlimited.
He meets Albert de Morcerf in Italy—it is to rescue him from the hands of the banditti; he introduces himself to Madame Danglars—it is that he may give her a royal present; your step-mother and her son pass before his door—it is that his Nubian may save them from destruction.
This man evidently possesses the power of influencing events, both as regards men and things.
I never saw more simple tastes united to greater magnificence.
His smile is so sweet when he addresses me, that I forget it ever can be bitter to others.
Ah, Valentine, tell me, if he ever looked on you with one of those sweet smiles? if so, depend on it, you will be happy.” “Me?” said the young girl, “he never even glances at me; on the contrary, if I accidentally cross his path, he appears rather to avoid me.
Ah, he is not generous, neither does he possess that supernatural penetration which you attribute to him, for if he did, he would have perceived that I was unhappy; and if he had been generous, seeing me sad and solitary, he would have used his influence to my advantage, and since, as you say, he resembles the sun, he would have warmed my heart with one of his life-giving rays.
You say he loves you, Maximilian; how do you know that he does?
Who knows but that, in order to please Madame de Villefort and my father, he may not persecute me by every means in his power?
Ah, forgive me,” said Valentine, perceiving the effect which her words were producing on Maximilian: “I have done wrong, for I have given utterance to thoughts concerning that man which I did not even know existed in my heart.
I do not deny the influence of which you speak, or that I have not myself experienced it, but with me it has been productive of evil rather than good.” “Well, Valentine,” said Morrel with a sigh, “we will not discuss the matter further.
I will not make a confidant of him.” “Alas!” said Valentine, “I see that I have given you pain.
I can only say how sincerely I ask pardon for having grieved you.
But, indeed, I am not prejudiced beyond the power of conviction.
Tell me what this Count of Monte Cristo has done for you.” 30157m “I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for I cannot say that the count has rendered me any ostensible service.
Still, as I have already told you, I have an instinctive affection for him, the source of which I cannot explain to you.
Has the sun done anything for me?
Has such and such a perfume done anything for me?
My friendship for him is as strange and unaccountable as his for me.
A secret voice seems to whisper to me that there must be something more than chance in this unexpected reciprocity of friendship.
In his most simple actions, as well as in his most secret thoughts, I find a relation to my own.
You will perhaps smile at me when I tell you that, ever since I have known this man, I have involuntarily entertained the idea that all the good fortune which has befallen me originated from him.
However, I have managed to live thirty years without this protection, you will say; but I will endeavor a little to illustrate my meaning.
He invited me to dine with him on Saturday, which was a very natural thing for him to do.
That your mother and M. de Villefort are both coming to this dinner.
I shall meet them there, and who knows what future advantages may result from the interview?
This may appear to you to be no unusual combination of circumstances; nevertheless, I perceive some hidden plot in the arrangement—something, in fact, more than is apparent on a casual view of the subject.
Is it possible that you can see anything more than the merest chance in this meeting?
My father, who never goes out, has several times been on the point of refusing this invitation; Madame de Villefort, on the contrary, is burning with the desire of seeing this extraordinary nabob in his own house, therefore, she has with great difficulty prevailed on my father to accompany her.
“It is, nevertheless, conclusive to my mind.
“You know that my means are limited, and that I am what would be designated a man of moderate pretensions.
Well, I went to a horse dealer’s, where I saw this magnificent horse, which I have named Médéah.
I was, therefore, obliged to give it up, as you may imagine, but I own I went away with rather a heavy heart, for the horse had looked at me affectionately, had rubbed his head against me and, when I mounted him, had pranced in the most delightful way imaginable, so that I was altogether fascinated with him.
They proposed a game of _bouillotte_.
I never play, for I am not rich enough to afford to lose, or sufficiently poor to desire to gain.
But I was at my own house, you understand, so there was nothing to be done but to send for the cards, which I did.
I am almost ashamed to say that my gains amounted to 5,000 francs.
We separated at midnight.
I could not defer my pleasure, so I took a cabriolet and drove to the horse dealer’s.
Feverish and excited, I rang at the door.
Médéah was standing at the rack, eating his hay.
I immediately put on the saddle and bridle, to which operation he lent himself with the best grace possible; then, putting the 4,500 francs into the hands of the astonished dealer, I proceeded to fulfil my intention of passing the night in riding in the Champs-Élysées.
As I rode by the count’s house I perceived a light in one of the windows, and fancied I saw the shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain.
Now, Valentine, I firmly believe that he knew of my wish to possess this horse, and that he lost expressly to give me the means of procuring him.” “My dear Maximilian, you are really too fanciful; you will not love even me long.
A man who accustoms himself to live in such a world of poetry and imagination must find far too little excitement in a common, every-day sort of attachment such as ours.
Maximilian uttered a cry of delight, and, springing forwards, seized the hand extended towards him, and imprinted on it a fervent and impassioned kiss.
The little hand was then immediately withdrawn, and the young man saw Valentine hurrying towards the house, as though she were almost terrified at her own sensations.
Noirtier de Villefort We will now relate what was passing in the house of the king’s attorney after the departure of Madame Danglars and her daughter, and during the time of the conversation between Maximilian and Valentine, which we have just detailed.
M. de Villefort entered his father’s room, followed by Madame de Villefort.
Both of the visitors, after saluting the old man and speaking to Barrois, a faithful servant, who had been twenty-five years in his service, took their places on either side of the paralytic.
Noirtier was sitting in an armchair, which moved upon casters, in which he was wheeled into the room in the morning, and in the same way drawn out again at night.
He was placed before a large glass, which reflected the whole apartment, and so, without any attempt to move, which would have been impossible, he could see all who entered the room and everything which was going on around him.
Noirtier, although almost as immovable as a corpse, looked at the new-comers with a quick and intelligent expression, perceiving at once, by their ceremonious courtesy, that they were come on business of an unexpected and official character.
He commanded with it; it was the medium through which his thanks were conveyed.
In short, his whole appearance produced on the mind the impression of a corpse with living eyes, and nothing could be more startling than to observe the expression of anger or joy suddenly lighting up these organs, while the rest of the rigid and marble-like features were utterly deprived of the power of participation.
Three persons only could understand this language of the poor paralytic; these were Villefort, Valentine, and the old servant of whom we have already spoken.
But as Villefort saw his father but seldom, and then only when absolutely obliged, and as he never took any pains to please or gratify him when he was there, all the old man’s happiness was centred in his granddaughter.
Valentine, by means of her love, her patience, and her devotion, had learned to read in Noirtier’s look all the varied feelings which were passing in his mind.
Valentine had solved the problem, and was able easily to understand his thoughts, and to convey her own in return, and, through her untiring and devoted assiduity, it was seldom that, in the ordinary transactions of every-day life, she failed to anticipate the wishes of the living, thinking mind, or the wants of the almost inanimate body.
As to the servant, he had, as we have said, been with his master for five-and-twenty years, therefore he knew all his habits, and it was seldom that Noirtier found it necessary to ask for anything, so prompt was he in administering to all the necessities of the invalid.
Villefort did not need the help of either Valentine or the domestic in order to carry on with his father the strange conversation which he was about to begin.
As we have said, he perfectly understood the old man’s vocabulary, and if he did not use it more often, it was only indifference and _ennui_ which prevented him from so doing.
Madame de Villefort and I have a communication to make to you.” Noirtier’s face remained perfectly passive during this long preamble, while, on the contrary, Villefort’s eye was endeavoring to penetrate into the inmost recesses of the old man’s heart.
“This communication,” continued the procureur, in that cold and decisive tone which seemed at once to preclude all discussion, “will, we are sure, meet with your approbation.” The eye of the invalid still retained that vacancy of expression which prevented his son from obtaining any knowledge of the feelings which were passing in his mind; he listened, nothing more.
“Sir,” resumed Villefort, “we are thinking of marrying Valentine.” Had the old man’s face been moulded in wax it could not have shown less emotion at this news than was now to be traced there.
“The marriage will take place in less than three months,” said Villefort.
Noirtier’s eye still retained its inanimate expression.
Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversation and added: “We thought this news would possess an interest for you, sir, who have always entertained a great affection for Valentine; it therefore only now remains for us to tell you the name of the young man for whom she is destined.
It is one of the most desirable connections which could possibly be formed; he possesses fortune, a high rank in society, and every personal qualification likely to render Valentine supremely happy,—his name, moreover, cannot be wholly unknown to you.
Franz de Quesnel, Baron d’Épinay.” While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly watched the old man’s countenance.
When Madame de Villefort pronounced the name of Franz, the pupil of M.
Noirtier’s eye began to dilate, and his eyelids trembled with the same movement that may be perceived on the lips of an individual about to speak, and he darted a lightning glance at Madame de Villefort and his son.
The procureur, who knew the political hatred which had formerly existed between M.
Noirtier and the elder d’Épinay, well understood the agitation and anger which the announcement had produced; but, feigning not to perceive either, he immediately resumed the narrative begun by his wife.
“Sir,” said he, “you are aware that Valentine is about to enter her nineteenth year, which renders it important that she should lose no time in forming a suitable alliance.
Villefort quietly opened a window, saying, “It is very warm, and the heat affects M.
Noirtier.” He then returned to his place, but did not sit down.
“Yes, I understand,” was the reply contained in his look; and this look expressed a feeling of strong indignation, mixed with profound contempt.
Villefort fully understood his father’s meaning, and answered by a slight shrug of his shoulders.
He then motioned to his wife to take leave.
“Now sir,” said Madame de Villefort, “I must bid you farewell.
Would you like me to send Edward to you for a short time?” It had been agreed that the old man should express his approbation by closing his eyes, his refusal by winking them several times, and if he had some desire or feeling to express, he raised them to heaven.
If he wanted Valentine, he closed his right eye only, and if Barrois, the left.
At Madame de Villefort’s proposition he instantly winked his eyes.
Provoked by a complete refusal, she bit her lip and said, “Then shall I send Valentine to you?” The old man closed his eyes eagerly, thereby intimating that such was his wish.
M. and Madame de Villefort bowed and left the room, giving orders that Valentine should be summoned to her grandfather’s presence, and feeling sure that she would have much to do to restore calmness to the perturbed spirit of the invalid.
Valentine, with a color still heightened by emotion, entered the room just after her parents had quitted it.
One look was sufficient to tell her that her grandfather was suffering, and that there was much on his mind which he was wishing to communicate to her.
“Dear grandpapa,” cried she, “what has happened?
They have vexed you, and you are angry?” The paralytic closed his eyes in token of assent.
“Who has displeased you?
Is it my father?” “No.” “Madame de Villefort?” “No.” “Me?” The former sign was repeated.
“Are you displeased with me?” cried Valentine in astonishment.
Noirtier again closed his eyes.
“And what have I done, dear grandpapa, that you should be angry with me?” cried Valentine.
There was no answer, and she continued: “I have not seen you all day.
Has anyone been speaking to you against me?” “Yes,” said the old man’s look, with eagerness.
I do assure you, grandpapa—Ah—M. and Madame de Villefort have just left this room, have they not?” “Yes.” “And it was they who told you something which made you angry?
May I go and ask them, that I may have the opportunity of making my peace with you?” “No, no,” said Noirtier’s look.
“Ah, you frighten me.
“Ah, I know,” said she, lowering her voice and going close to the old man.
“They have been speaking of my marriage,—have they not?” “Yes,” replied the angry look.
“I understand; you are displeased at the silence I have preserved on the subject.
The reason of it was, that they had insisted on my keeping the matter a secret, and begged me not to tell you anything of it.
They did not even acquaint me with their intentions, and I only discovered them by chance, that is why I have been so reserved with you, dear grandpapa.
Pray forgive me.” But there was no look calculated to reassure her; all it seemed to say was, “It is not only your reserve which afflicts me.” “What is it, then?” asked the young girl.
“Perhaps you think I shall abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that I shall forget you when I am married?” “No.” “They told you, then, that M. d’Épinay consented to our all living together?” “Yes.” “Then why are you still vexed and grieved?” The old man’s eyes beamed with an expression of gentle affection.
“Yes, I understand,” said Valentine; “it is because you love me.” The old man assented.
Franz?” The eyes repeated several times, “No, no, no.” “Then you are vexed with the engagement?” “Yes.” “Well, listen,” said Valentine, throwing herself on her knees, and putting her arm round her grandfather’s neck, “I am vexed, too, for I do not love M.
Franz d’Épinay.” An expression of intense joy illumined the old man’s eyes.
“When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember how angry you were with me?” A tear trembled in the eye of the invalid.
“Well,” continued Valentine, “the reason of my proposing it was that I might escape this hateful marriage, which drives me to despair.” Noirtier’s breathing came thick and short.
“Then the idea of this marriage really grieves you too?
Ah, if you could but help me—if we could both together defeat their plan!
But you are unable to oppose them,—you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will is so firm are nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest as I am myself.
Alas, you, who would have been such a powerful protector to me in the days of your health and strength, can now only sympathize in my joys and sorrows, without being able to take any active part in them.
However, this is much, and calls for gratitude and Heaven has not taken away all my blessings when it leaves me your sympathy and kindness.” At these words there appeared in Noirtier’s eye an expression of such deep meaning that the young girl thought she could read these words there: “You are mistaken; I can still do much for you.” “Do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine.
“Yes.” Noirtier raised his eyes, it was the sign agreed on between him and Valentine when he wanted anything.
When she arrived at that letter the paralytic made her understand that she had spoken the initial letter of the thing he wanted.
“Ah,” said Valentine, “the thing you desire begins with the letter N; it is with N that we have to do, then.
“Ah, it is No, then?” “Yes.” Valentine fetched a dictionary, which she placed on a desk before Noirtier; she opened it, and, seeing that the old man’s eye was thoroughly fixed on its pages, she ran her finger quickly up and down the columns.
At the word _Notary_, Noirtier made a sign to her to stop. 30169m “Notary,” said she, “do you want a notary, dear grandpapa?” The old man again signified that it was a notary he desired.
“You would wish a notary to be sent for then?” said Valentine.
“Yes.” “Shall my father be informed of your wish?” “Yes.” “Do you wish the notary to be sent for immediately?” “Yes.” “Then they shall go for him directly, dear grandpapa.
Is that all you want?” “Yes.” Valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant to tell Monsieur or Madame de Villefort that they were requested to come to M.
“Are you satisfied now?” inquired Valentine.
“Yes.” “I am sure you are; it is not very difficult to discover that.” And the young girl smiled on her grandfather, as if he had been a child.
M. de Villefort entered, followed by Barrois.
“What do you want me for, sir?” demanded he of the paralytic.
“Sir,” said Valentine, “my grandfather wishes for a notary.” At this strange and unexpected demand M. de Villefort and his father exchanged looks.
“Yes,” motioned the latter, with a firmness which seemed to declare that with the help of Valentine and his old servant, who both knew what his wishes were, he was quite prepared to maintain the contest.
“Do you wish for a notary?” asked Villefort.
“Yes.” “What to do?” Noirtier made no answer.
“What do you want with a notary?” again repeated Villefort.
The invalid’s eye remained fixed, by which expression he intended to intimate that his resolution was unalterable.
Do you think it is worth while?” said Villefort.
“Still,” said Barrois, with the freedom and fidelity of an old servant, “if M.
The Will As soon as Barrois had left the room, Noirtier looked at Valentine with a malicious expression that said many things.
The young girl perfectly understood the look, and so did Villefort, for his countenance became clouded, and he knitted his eyebrows angrily.
Noirtier saw him seat himself with an appearance of perfect indifference, at the same time giving a side look at Valentine, which made her understand that she also was to remain in the room.
Three-quarters of an hour after, Barrois returned, bringing the notary with him.
“Sir,” said Villefort, after the first salutations were over, “you were sent for by M.
Noirtier, whom you see here.
All his limbs have become completely paralysed, he has lost his voice also, and we ourselves find much trouble in endeavoring to catch some fragments of his meaning.” Noirtier cast an appealing look on Valentine, which look was at once so earnest and imperative, that she answered immediately.
The first thing necessary to render an act valid is, that the notary should be thoroughly convinced that he has faithfully interpreted the will and wishes of the person dictating the act.
Now I cannot be sure of the approbation or disapprobation of a client who cannot speak, and as the object of his desire or his repugnance cannot be clearly proved to me, on account of his want of speech, my services here would be quite useless, and cannot be legally exercised.” The notary then prepared to retire.
An imperceptible smile of triumph was expressed on the lips of the procureur.
Noirtier looked at Valentine with an expression so full of grief, that she arrested the departure of the notary.
“Sir,” said she, “the language which I speak with my grandfather may be easily learnt, and I can teach you in a few minutes, to understand it almost as well as I can myself.
Will you tell me what you require, in order to set your conscience quite at ease on the subject?” “In order to render an act valid, I must be certain of the approbation or disapprobation of my client.
Illness of body would not affect the validity of the deed, but sanity of mind is absolutely requisite.” “Well, sir, by the help of two signs, with which I will acquaint you presently, you may ascertain with perfect certainty that my grandfather is still in the full possession of all his mental faculties.
Noirtier, being deprived of voice and motion, is accustomed to convey his meaning by closing his eyes when he wishes to signify ‘yes,’ and to wink when he means ‘no.’ You now know quite enough to enable you to converse with M.
Noirtier;—try.” Noirtier gave Valentine such a look of tenderness and gratitude that it was comprehended even by the notary himself.
“You have heard and understood what your granddaughter has been saying, sir, have you?” asked the notary.
Noirtier closed his eyes.
“And you approve of what she said—that is to say, you declare that the signs which she mentioned are really those by means of which you are accustomed to convey your thoughts?” “Yes.” “It was you who sent for me?” “Yes.” “To make your will?” “Yes.” “And you do not wish me to go away without fulfilling your original intentions?” The old man winked violently.
“Well, sir,” said the young girl, “do you understand now, and is your conscience perfectly at rest on the subject?” But before the notary could answer, Villefort had drawn him aside.
“Sir,” said he, “do you suppose for a moment that a man can sustain a physical shock, such as M.
Noirtier has received, without any detriment to his mental faculties?” “It is not exactly that, sir,” said the notary, “which makes me uneasy, but the difficulty will be in wording his thoughts and intentions, so as to be able to get his answers.” “You must see that to be an utter impossibility,” said Villefort.
Valentine and the old man heard this conversation, and Noirtier fixed his eye so earnestly on Valentine that she felt bound to answer to the look.
“Sir,” said she, “that need not make you uneasy, however difficult it may at first sight appear to be.
I can discover and explain to you my grandfather’s thoughts, so as to put an end to all your doubts and fears on the subject.
Noirtier, and let him tell you if ever once, during that time, he has entertained a thought which he was unable to make me understand.” “No,” signed the old man.
“You accept this young lady as your interpreter, M.
Noirtier?” “Yes.” “Well, sir, what do you require of me, and what document is it that you wish to be drawn up?” Valentine named all the letters of the alphabet until she came to W.
At this letter the eloquent eye of Noirtier gave her notice that she was to stop.
Noirtier wants,” said the notary.
“Wait,” said Valentine; and, turning to her grandfather, she repeated, “Wa—We—Wi——” The old man stopped her at the last syllable.
Valentine then took the dictionary, and the notary watched her while she turned over the pages.
Noirtier’s eye bade her stop.
Noirtier is desirous of making his will.” “Yes, yes, yes,” motioned the invalid.
“Really, sir, you must allow that this is most extraordinary,” said the astonished notary, turning to M. de Villefort.
“Yes,” said the procureur, “and I think the will promises to be yet more extraordinary, for I cannot see how it is to be drawn up without the intervention of Valentine, and she may, perhaps, be considered as too much interested in its contents to allow of her being a suitable interpreter of the obscure and ill-defined wishes of her grandfather.” “No, no, no,” replied the eye of the paralytic.
As to the time, it will not require very much more than the generality of wills.
There are certain forms necessary to be gone through, and which are always the same.
As to the details, the greater part will be furnished afterwards by the state in which we find the affairs of the testator, and by yourself, who, having had the management of them, can doubtless give full information on the subject.
But besides all this, in order that the instrument may not be contested, I am anxious to give it the greatest possible authenticity, therefore, one of my colleagues will help me, and, contrary to custom, will assist in the dictation of the testament.
Are you satisfied, sir?” continued the notary, addressing the old man. 30175m “Yes,” looked the invalid, his eye beaming with delight at the ready interpretation of his meaning.
“What is he going to do?” thought Villefort, whose position demanded much reserve, but who was longing to know what his father’s intentions were.
The procureur then told his wife to come up.
In the course of a quarter of an hour everyone had assembled in the chamber of the paralytic; the second notary had also arrived.
A few words sufficed for a mutual understanding between the two officers of the law.
Never had the struggle between mind and matter been more apparent than now, and if it was not a sublime, it was, at least, a curious spectacle.
They had formed a circle round the invalid; the second notary was sitting at a table, prepared for writing, and his colleague was standing before the testator in the act of interrogating him on the subject to which we have alluded.
Noirtier made a sign that it did.
“Do you possess 400,000 francs?” inquired the notary.
Noirtier’s eye remained immovable.
“500,000?” The same expression continued.
“600,000—700,000—800,000—900,000?” Noirtier stopped him at the last-named sum.
“You are then in possession of 900,000 francs?” asked the notary.
“Yes.” “In landed property?” “No.” “In stock?” “Yes.” “The stock is in your own hands?” The look which M.
Noirtier cast on Barrois showed that there was something wanting which he knew where to find.
The old servant left the room, and presently returned, bringing with him a small casket.
Noirtier gave his assent.
The first notary handed over each note, as he examined it, to his colleague.
Noirtier had stated.
“Is it, then, to Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort that you leave these 900,000 francs?” demanded the notary, thinking he had only to insert this clause, but waiting first for the assent of Noirtier, which it was necessary should be given before all the witnesses of this singular scene.
Valentine, when her name was made the subject of discussion, had stepped back, to escape unpleasant observation; her eyes were cast down, and she was crying.
The old man looked at her for an instant with an expression of the deepest tenderness, then, turning towards the notary, he significantly winked his eye in token of dissent.
“What,” said the notary, “do you not intend making Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort your residuary legatee?” “No.” “You are not making any mistake, are you?” said the notary; “you really mean to declare that such is not your intention?” “No,” repeated Noirtier; “No.” Valentine raised her head, struck dumb with astonishment.
It was not so much the conviction that she was disinherited that caused her grief, but her total inability to account for the feelings which had provoked her grandfather to such an act.
But Noirtier looked at her with so much affectionate tenderness that she exclaimed: “Oh, grandpapa, I see now that it is only your fortune of which you deprive me; you still leave me the love which I have always enjoyed.” “Ah, yes, most assuredly,” said the eyes of the paralytic, for he closed them with an expression which Valentine could not mistake.
“Thank you, thank you,” murmured she.
The old man’s declaration that Valentine was not the destined inheritor of his fortune had excited the hopes of Madame de Villefort; she gradually approached the invalid, and said: “Then, doubtless, dear M.
Noirtier, you intend leaving your fortune to your grandson, Edward de Villefort?” The winking of the eyes which answered this speech was most decided and terrible, and expressed a feeling almost amounting to hatred.
“No?” said the notary; “then, perhaps, it is to your son, M. de Villefort?” “No.” The two notaries looked at each other in mute astonishment and inquiry as to what were the real intentions of the testator.
Villefort and his wife both grew red, one from shame, the other from anger.
“What have we all done, then, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine; “you no longer seem to love any of us?” The old man’s eyes passed rapidly from Villefort and his wife, and rested on Valentine with a look of unutterable fondness.
“Well,” said she; “if you love me, grandpapa, try and bring that love to bear upon your actions at this present moment.
Explain yourself, then.” Noirtier fixed his intelligent eyes on Valentine’s hand.
“Yes.” “Her hand!” exclaimed everyone.
“Oh, gentlemen, you see it is all useless, and that my father’s mind is really impaired,” said Villefort.
“Ah,” cried Valentine suddenly, “I understand.
It is my marriage you mean, is it not, dear grandpapa?” “Yes, yes, yes,” signed the paralytic, casting on Valentine a look of joyful gratitude for having guessed his meaning. 30179m “You are angry with us all on account of this marriage, are you not?” “Yes?” “Really, this is too absurd,” said Villefort.
“Excuse me, sir,” replied the notary; “on the contrary, the meaning of M.
Noirtier is quite evident to me, and I can quite easily connect the train of ideas passing in his mind.” “You do not wish me to marry M.
Franz d’Épinay?” observed Valentine.
“I do not wish it,” said the eye of her grandfather.
“And you disinherit your granddaughter,” continued the notary, “because she has contracted an engagement contrary to your wishes?” “Yes.” “So that, but for this marriage, she would have been your heir?” “Yes.” There was a profound silence.
The two notaries were holding a consultation as to the best means of proceeding with the affair.
Valentine was looking at her grandfather with a smile of intense gratitude, and Villefort was biting his lips with vexation, while Madame de Villefort could not succeed in repressing an inward feeling of joy, which, in spite of herself, appeared in her whole countenance.
“But,” said Villefort, who was the first to break the silence, “I consider that I am the best judge of the propriety of the marriage in question.
I am the only person possessing the right to dispose of my daughter’s hand.
Franz d’Épinay—and she shall marry him.” Valentine sank weeping into a chair.
“Sir,” said the notary, “how do you intend disposing of your fortune in case Mademoiselle de Villefort still determines on marrying M.
“You will, of course, dispose of it in some way or other?” “Yes.” “In favor of some member of your family?” “No.” “Do you intend devoting it to charitable purposes, then?” pursued the notary.
“Yes.” “But,” said the notary, “you are aware that the law does not allow a son to be entirely deprived of his patrimony?” “Yes.” “You only intend, then, to dispose of that part of your fortune which the law allows you to subtract from the inheritance of your son?” Noirtier made no answer.
“Do you still wish to dispose of all?” “Yes.” “But they will contest the will after your death?” “No.” “My father knows me,” replied Villefort; “he is quite sure that his wishes will be held sacred by me; besides, he understands that in my position I cannot plead against the poor.” The eye of Noirtier beamed with triumph.
“What do you decide on, sir?” asked the notary of Villefort.
“Nothing, sir; it is a resolution which my father has taken and I know he never alters his mind.
I am quite resigned.
These 900,000 francs will go out of the family in order to enrich some hospital; but it is ridiculous thus to yield to the caprices of an old man, and I shall, therefore, act according to my conscience.” Having said this, Villefort quitted the room with his wife, leaving his father at liberty to do as he pleased.
The same day the will was made, the witnesses were brought, it was approved by the old man, sealed in the presence of all and given in charge to M.
Deschamps, the family notary.
The Telegraph M. and Madame de Villefort found on their return that the Count of Monte Cristo, who had come to visit them in their absence, had been ushered into the drawing-room, and was still awaiting them there.
Madame de Villefort, who had not yet sufficiently recovered from her late emotion to allow of her entertaining visitors so immediately, retired to her bedroom, while the procureur, who could better depend upon himself, proceeded at once to the salon.
Although M. de Villefort flattered himself that, to all outward view, he had completely masked the feelings which were passing in his mind, he did not know that the cloud was still lowering on his brow, so much so that the count, whose smile was radiant, immediately noticed his sombre and thoughtful air.
“_Ma foi!_” said Monte Cristo, after the first compliments were over, “what is the matter with you, M. de Villefort?
Have I arrived at the moment when you were drawing up an indictment for a capital crime?” Villefort tried to smile.
It is I who lose my cause, and it is ill-luck, obstinacy, and folly which have caused it to be decided against me.” “To what do you refer?” said Monte Cristo with well-feigned interest.
It is indeed a sum which might be regretted even by a philosopher.
And who is the cause of all this annoyance?” “My father, as I told you.” “M.
But I thought you told me he had become entirely paralyzed, and that all his faculties were completely destroyed?” “Yes, his bodily faculties, for he can neither move nor speak, nevertheless he thinks, acts, and wills in the manner I have described.
Madame de Villefort acknowledged the salutation with one of her most gracious smiles.
“What is this that M. de Villefort has been telling me?” demanded Monte Cristo “and what incomprehensible misfortune——” “Incomprehensible is the word!” interrupted the procureur, shrugging his shoulders.
“My dear,” said Villefort, in answer to his wife, “you know I have never been accustomed to play the patriarch in my family, nor have I ever considered that the fate of a universe was to be decided by my nod.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should be respected in my family, and that the folly of an old man and the caprice of a child should not be allowed to overturn a project which I have entertained for so many years.
The Baron d’Épinay was my friend, as you know, and an alliance with his son is the most suitable thing that could possibly be arranged.” “Do you think,” said Madame de Villefort, “that Valentine is in league with him?
“That is a serious thing.” Monte Cristo, who pretended not to be listening, heard however, every word that was said. 30185m “Madame,” replied Villefort “I can truly say that I have always entertained a high respect for my father, because, to the natural feeling of relationship was added the consciousness of his moral superiority.
The name of father is sacred in two senses; he should be reverenced as the author of our being and as a master whom we ought to obey.
But, under the present circumstances, I am justified in doubting the wisdom of an old man who, because he hated the father, vents his anger on the son.
It would be ridiculous in me to regulate my conduct by such caprices.
I shall still continue to preserve the same respect toward M.
Noirtier; I will suffer, without complaint, the pecuniary deprivation to which he has subjected me; but I shall remain firm in my determination, and the world shall see which party has reason on his side.
Consequently I shall marry my daughter to the Baron Franz d’Épinay, because I consider it would be a proper and eligible match for her to make, and, in short, because I choose to bestow my daughter’s hand on whomever I please.” “What?” said the count, the approbation of whose eye Villefort had frequently solicited during this speech.
Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to marry M. le Baron Franz d’Épinay?” “Yes, sir, that is the reason,” said Villefort, shrugging his shoulders.
“The apparent reason, at least,” said Madame de Villefort.
“The _real_ reason, madame, I can assure you; I know my father.” “But I want to know in what way M. d’Épinay can have displeased your father more than any other person?” “I believe I know M.
Franz d’Épinay,” said the count; “is he not the son of General de Quesnel, who was created Baron d’Épinay by Charles X.?” “The same,” said Villefort.
“Well, but he is a charming young man, according to my ideas.” “He is, which makes me believe that it is only an excuse of M.
Noirtier to prevent his granddaughter marrying; old men are always so selfish in their affection,” said Madame de Villefort.
“But,” said Monte Cristo “do you not know any cause for this hatred?” “Ah, _ma foi!_ who is to know?” “Perhaps it is some political difference?” “My father and the Baron d’Épinay lived in the stormy times of which I only saw the ending,” said Villefort.
“Was not your father a Bonapartist?” asked Monte Cristo; “I think I remember that you told me something of that kind.” “My father has been a Jacobin more than anything else,” said Villefort, carried by his emotion beyond the bounds of prudence; “and the senator’s robe, which Napoleon cast on his shoulders, only served to disguise the old man without in any degree changing him.
When my father conspired, it was not for the emperor, it was against the Bourbons; for M.
Although General d’Épinay served under Napoleon, did he not still retain royalist sentiments?
And was he not the person who was assassinated one evening on leaving a Bonapartist meeting to which he had been invited on the supposition that he favored the cause of the emperor?” Villefort looked at the count almost with terror.
“Am I mistaken, then?” said Monte Cristo.
“No, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated,” said Madame de Villefort; “and it was to prevent the renewal of old feuds that M. de Villefort formed the idea of uniting in the bonds of affection the two children of these inveterate enemies.” “It was a sublime and charitable thought,” said Monte Cristo, “and the whole world should applaud it.
It would be noble to see Mademoiselle Noirtier de Villefort assuming the title of Madame Franz d’Épinay.” Villefort shuddered and looked at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read in his countenance the real feelings which had dictated the words he had just uttered.
But the count completely baffled the procureur, and prevented him from discovering anything beneath the never-varying smile he was so constantly in the habit of assuming.
“Although,” said Villefort, “it will be a serious thing for Valentine to lose her grandfather’s fortune, I do not think that M. d’Épinay will be frightened at this pecuniary loss.
He will, perhaps, hold me in greater esteem than the money itself, seeing that I sacrifice everything in order to keep my word with him.
Besides, he knows that Valentine is rich in right of her mother, and that she will, in all probability, inherit the fortune of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran, her mother’s parents, who both love her tenderly.” “And who are fully as well worth loving and tending as M.
Noirtier,” said Madame de Villefort; “besides, they are to come to Paris in about a month, and Valentine, after the affront she has received, need not consider it necessary to continue to bury herself alive by being shut up with M.
Noirtier.” The count listened with satisfaction to this tale of wounded self-love and defeated ambition.
Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to marry a man whose father he detested, he cannot have the same cause of complaint against this dear Edward.” “True,” said Madame de Villefort, with an intonation of voice which it is impossible to describe; “is it not unjust—shamefully unjust?
Noirtier’s grandchild as Valentine, and yet, if she had not been going to marry M.
Noirtier would have left her all his money; and supposing Valentine to be disinherited by her grandfather, she will still be three times richer than he.” The count listened and said no more.
“Count,” said Villefort, “we will not entertain you any longer with our family misfortunes.
It is true that my patrimony will go to endow charitable institutions, and my father will have deprived me of my lawful inheritance without any reason for doing so, but I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that I have acted like a man of sense and feeling.
“Undoubtedly,” said Villefort, moderating the tones of his voice, “a marriage once concerted and then broken off, throws a sort of discredit on a young lady; then again, the old reports, which I was so anxious to put an end to, will instantly gain ground.
I will answer for the success of a project which will reflect so much honor on M. de Villefort.” The procureur arose, delighted with the proposition, but his wife slightly changed color.
“Well, that is all that I wanted, and I will be guided by a counsellor such as you are,” said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo.
“Are you going to leave us, count?” said Madame de Villefort.
Near Paris, is it not?” “Very near, only half a league from the Barriers,—it is at Auteuil.” “At Auteuil?” said Villefort; “true, Madame de Villefort told me you lived at Auteuil, since it was to your house that she was taken.
And in what part of Auteuil do you reside?” “Rue de la Fontaine.” “Rue de la Fontaine!” exclaimed Villefort in an agitated tone; “at what number?” “No. 28.” “Then,” cried Villefort, “was it you who bought M. de Saint-Méran’s house!” “Did it belong to M. de Saint-Méran?” demanded Monte Cristo.
“But I hope you will not carry your antipathy so far as to deprive me of the pleasure of your company, sir,” said Monte Cristo.
“No, count,—I hope—I assure you I shall do my best,” stammered Villefort.
On Saturday, at six o’clock.
I shall be expecting you, and if you fail to come, I shall think—for how do I know to the contrary?—that this house, which has remained uninhabited for twenty years, must have some gloomy tradition or dreadful legend connected with it.” “I will come, count,—I will be sure to come,” said Villefort eagerly.
So now I have told my secret.” “A telegraph?” repeated Madame de Villefort.
I began to think of genii, sylphs, gnomes, in short, of all the ministers of the occult sciences, until I laughed aloud at the freaks of my own imagination.
Now, it never occurred to me to wish for a nearer inspection of these large insects, with their long black claws, for I always feared to find under their stone wings some little human genius fagged to death with cabals, factions, and government intrigues.
I shall, therefore, not visit either of these telegraphs, but one in the open country where I shall find a good-natured simpleton, who knows no more than the machine he is employed to work.” “You are a singular man,” said Villefort.
“What line would you advise me to study?” “The one that is most in use just at this time.” “The Spanish one, you mean, I suppose?” “Yes; should you like a letter to the minister that they might explain to you——” “No,” said Monte Cristo; “since, as I told you before, I do not wish to comprehend it.
The moment I understand it there will no longer exist a telegraph for me; it will be nothing more than a sign from M.
Montalivet, transmitted to the prefect of Bayonne, mystified by two Greek words, _têle_, _graphein_.
It is the insect with black claws, and the awful word which I wish to retain in my imagination in all its purity and all its importance.” “Go then; for in the course of two hours it will be dark, and you will not be able to see anything.” “_Ma foi!_ you frighten me.
Bayonne?” “Yes; the road to Bayonne.” “And afterwards the road to Châtillon?” “Yes.” “By the tower of Montlhéry, you mean?” “Yes.” “Thank you.
On Saturday I will tell you my impressions concerning the telegraph.” At the door the count was met by the two notaries, who had just completed the act which was to disinherit Valentine, and who were leaving under the conviction of having done a thing which could not fail of redounding considerably to their credit.
How a Gardener May Get Rid of the Dormice that Eat His Peaches Not on the same night as he had stated, but the next morning, the Count of Monte Cristo went out by the Barrière d’Enfer, taking the road to Orléans.
Leaving the village of Linas, without stopping at the telegraph, which flourished its great bony arms as he passed, the count reached the tower of Montlhéry, situated, as everyone knows, upon the highest point of the plain of that name.
At the foot of the hill the count dismounted and began to ascend by a little winding path, about eighteen inches wide; when he reached the summit he found himself stopped by a hedge, upon which green fruit had succeeded to red and white flowers.
Monte Cristo looked for the entrance to the enclosure, and was not long in finding a little wooden gate, working on willow hinges, and fastened with a nail and string.
The count soon mastered the mechanism, the gate opened, and he then found himself in a little garden, about twenty feet long by twelve wide, bounded on one side by part of the hedge, which contained the ingenious contrivance we have called a gate, and on the other by the old tower, covered with ivy and studded with wall-flowers.
No one would have thought in looking at this old, weather-beaten, floral-decked tower (which might be likened to an elderly dame dressed up to receive her grandchildren at a birthday feast) that it would have been capable of telling strange things, if,—in addition to the menacing ears which the proverb says all walls are provided with,—it had also a voice.
The garden was crossed by a path of red gravel, edged by a border of thick box, of many years’ growth, and of a tone and color that would have delighted the heart of Delacroix, our modern Rubens.
This path was formed in the shape of the figure of 8, thus, in its windings, making a walk of sixty feet in a garden of only twenty.
Never had Flora, the fresh and smiling goddess of gardeners, been honored with a purer or more scrupulous worship than that which was paid to her in this little enclosure.
In fact, of the twenty rose-trees which formed the _parterre_, not one bore the mark of the slug, nor were there evidences anywhere of the clustering aphis which is so destructive to plants growing in a damp soil.
There was not a blade of grass to be seen in the paths, or a weed in the flower-beds; no fine lady ever trained and watered her geraniums, her cacti, and her rhododendrons, in her porcelain _jardinière_ with more pains than this hitherto unseen gardener bestowed upon his little enclosure.
Monte Cristo stopped after having closed the gate and fastened the string to the nail, and cast a look around.
He had twelve leaves and about as many strawberries, which, on rising suddenly, he let fall from his hand.
But I am not surprised; the spring has been warm this year, and strawberries require heat, sir.
This is the reason that, instead of the sixteen I had last year, I have this year, you see, eleven, already plucked—twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen.
It must be the son of Mère Simon who has stolen them; I saw him strolling about here this morning.
Ah, the young rascal—stealing in a garden—he does not know where that may lead him to.” “Certainly, it is wrong,” said Monte Cristo, “but you should take into consideration the youth and greediness of the delinquent.” “Of course,” said the gardener, “but that does not make it the less unpleasant.
Did the Romans eat them?” said the gardener—“ate dormice?” “I have read so in Petronius,” said the count.
They can’t be nice, though they do say ‘as fat as a dormouse.’ It is not a wonder they are fat, sleeping all day, and only waking to eat all night.
Last year I had four apricots—they stole one, I had one nectarine, only one—well, sir, they ate half of it on the wall; a splendid nectarine—I never ate a better.” “You ate it?” “That is to say, the half that was left—you understand; it was exquisite, sir.
Ah, those gentlemen never choose the worst morsels; like Mère Simon’s son, who has not chosen the worst strawberries.
But this year,” continued the horticulturist, “I’ll take care it shall not happen, even if I should be forced to sit by the whole night to watch when the strawberries are ripe.” Monte Cristo had seen enough.
Every man has a devouring passion in his heart, as every fruit has its worm; that of the telegraph man was horticulture.
He began gathering the grape-leaves which screened the sun from the grapes, and won the heart of the gardener.
“Did you come here, sir, to see the telegraph?” he said.
“Yes, if it isn’t contrary to the rules.” “Oh, no,” said the gardener; “not in the least, since there is no danger that anyone can possibly understand what we are saying.” “I have been told,” said the count, “that you do not always yourselves understand the signals you repeat.” “That is true, sir, and that is what I like best,” said the man, smiling.
“Why do you like that best?” “Because then I have no responsibility.
I am a machine then, and nothing else, and so long as I work, nothing more is required of me.” “Is it possible,” said Monte Cristo to himself, “that I can have met with a man that has no ambition?
That would spoil my plans.” “Sir,” said the gardener, glancing at the sun-dial, “the ten minutes are almost up; I must return to my post.
The tower contained implements, such as spades, rakes, watering-pots, hung against the wall; this was all the furniture.
“Does it require much study to learn the art of telegraphing?” asked Monte Cristo.
“The study does not take long; it was acting as a supernumerary that was so tedious.” “And what is the pay?” “A thousand francs, sir.” “It is nothing.” “No; but then we are lodged, as you perceive.” Monte Cristo looked at the room.
They passed to the third story; it was the telegraph room.
“It is very interesting,” he said, “but it must be very tedious for a lifetime.” “Yes.
“I was saying it was very interesting.” “What was?” “All you were showing me.
And you really understand none of these signals?” “None at all.” “And have you never tried to understand them?” “Never.
“Has it ever happened to you?” said Monte Cristo.
“Once, sir, when I was grafting a rose-tree.” “Well, suppose you were to alter a signal, and substitute another?” “Ah, that is another case; I should be turned off, and lose my pension.” “Three hundred francs?” “A hundred crowns, yes, sir; so you see that I am not likely to do any of these things.” “Not even for fifteen years’ wages?
Come, it is worth thinking about?” “For fifteen thousand francs?” “Yes.” “Sir, you alarm me.” “Nonsense.” “Sir, you are tempting me?” “Just so; fifteen thousand francs, do you understand?” “Sir, let me see my right-hand correspondent.” “On the contrary, do not look at him, but at this.” “What is it?” “What?
Do you not know these bits of paper?” “Bank-notes!” “Exactly; there are fifteen of them.” “And whose are they?” “Yours, if you like.” “Mine?” exclaimed the man, half-suffocated.
“Yes; yours—your own property.” “Sir, my right-hand correspondent is signalling.” “Let him signal.” “Sir, you have distracted me; I shall be fined.” “That will cost you a hundred francs; you see it is your interest to take my bank-notes.” “Sir, my right-hand correspondent redoubles his signals; he is impatient.” “Never mind—take these;” and the count placed the packet in the man’s hands.
“Now this is not all,” he said; “you cannot live upon your fifteen thousand francs.” “I shall still have my place.” “No, you will lose it, for you are going to alter your correspondent’s message.” “Oh, sir, what are you proposing?” “A jest.” “Sir, unless you force me——” “I think I can effectually force you;” and Monte Cristo drew another packet from his pocket.
“Here are ten thousand more francs,” he said, “with the fifteen thousand already in your pocket, they will make twenty-five thousand.
With five thousand you can buy a pretty little house with two acres of land; the remaining twenty thousand will bring you in a thousand francs a year.” “A garden with two acres of land!” “And a thousand francs a year.” “Oh, heavens!” “Come, take them,” and Monte Cristo forced the bank-notes into his hand.
“What am I to do?” “Nothing very difficult.” “But what is it?” “To repeat these signs.” Monte Cristo took a paper from his pocket, upon which were drawn three signs, with numbers to indicate the order in which they were to be worked.
As to the left-hand one, he conscientiously repeated the same signals, which were finally transmitted to the Minister of the Interior.
“I do not wish to cause you any remorse; believe me, then, when I swear to you that you have wronged no man, but on the contrary have benefited mankind.” The man looked at the bank-notes, felt them, counted them, turned pale, then red, then rushed into his room to drink a glass of water, but he had no time to reach the water-jug, and fainted in the midst of his dried herbs.
Five minutes after the new telegram reached the minister, Debray had the horses put to his carriage, and drove to Danglars’ house.
“Has your husband any Spanish bonds?” he asked of the baroness.
He has six millions’ worth.” “He must sell them at whatever price.” “Why?” “Because Don Carlos has fled from Bourges, and has returned to Spain.” 30203m “How do you know?” Debray shrugged his shoulders.
The baroness did not wait for a repetition; she ran to her husband, who immediately hastened to his agent, and ordered him to sell at any price.
When it was seen that Danglars sold, the Spanish funds fell directly.
Danglars lost five hundred thousand francs; but he rid himself of all his Spanish shares.
The same evening the following was read in _Le Messager_: “[By telegraph.] The king, Don Carlos, has escaped the vigilance of his guardians at Bourges, and has returned to Spain by the Catalonian frontier.
Barcelona has risen in his favor.” All that evening nothing was spoken of but the foresight of Danglars, who had sold his shares, and of the luck of the stock-jobber, who only lost five hundred thousand francs by such a blow.
Those who had kept their shares, or bought those of Danglars, looked upon themselves as ruined, and passed a very bad night.
Next morning _Le Moniteur_ contained the following: “It was without any foundation that _Le Messager_ yesterday announced the flight of Don Carlos and the revolt of Barcelona.
The king (Don Carlos) has not left Bourges, and the peninsula is in the enjoyment of profound peace.
A telegraphic signal, improperly interpreted, owing to the fog, was the cause of this error.” The funds rose one per cent higher than before they had fallen.
This, reckoning his loss, and what he had missed gaining, made the difference of a million to Danglars.
“Good,” said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his house when the news arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of which Danglars had been the victim, “I have just made a discovery for twenty-five thousand francs, for which I would have paid a hundred thousand.” “What have you discovered?” asked Morrel.
“I have just discovered how a gardener may get rid of the dormice that eat his peaches.” Chapter 62.
Ghosts At first sight, the exterior of the house at Auteuil gave no indications of splendor, nothing one would expect from the destined residence of the magnificent Count of Monte Cristo; but this simplicity was according to the will of its master, who positively ordered nothing to be altered outside.
The splendor was within.
Bertuccio had outdone himself in the taste displayed in furnishing, and in the rapidity with which it was executed.
Bertuccio planted an entirely bare court with poplars, large spreading sycamores to shade the different parts of the house, and in the foreground, instead of the usual paving-stones, half hidden by the grass, there extended a lawn but that morning laid down, and upon which the water was yet glistening.
For the rest, the orders had been issued by the count; he himself had given a plan to Bertuccio, marking the spot where each tree was to be planted, and the shape and extent of the lawn which was to take the place of the paving-stones.
Thus the house had become unrecognizable, and Bertuccio himself declared that he scarcely knew it, encircled as it was by a framework of trees.
The overseer would not have objected, while he was about it, to have made some improvements in the garden, but the count had positively forbidden it to be touched.
Bertuccio made amends, however, by loading the antechambers, staircases, and mantle-pieces with flowers.
The library was divided into two parts on either side of the wall, and contained upwards of two thousand volumes; one division was entirely devoted to novels, and even the volume which had been published but the day before was to be seen in its place in all the dignity of its red and gold binding.
On the other side of the house, to match with the library, was the conservatory, ornamented with rare flowers, that bloomed in china jars; and in the midst of the greenhouse, marvellous alike to sight and smell, was a billiard-table which looked as if it had been abandoned during the past hour by players who had left the balls on the cloth.
One chamber alone had been respected by the magnificent Bertuccio.
Before this room, to which you could ascend by the grand, and go out by the back staircase, the servants passed with curiosity, and Bertuccio with terror.
At five o’clock precisely, the count arrived before the house at Auteuil, followed by Ali.
Bertuccio was awaiting this arrival with impatience, mingled with uneasiness; he hoped for some compliments, while, at the same time, he feared to have frowns.
Monte Cristo descended into the courtyard, walked all over the house, without giving any sign of approbation or pleasure, until he entered his bedroom, situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then he approached a little piece of furniture, made of rosewood, which he had noticed at a previous visit.
“Will your excellency deign to open it?” said the delighted Bertuccio, “and you will find gloves in it.” Elsewhere the count found everything he required—smelling-bottles, cigars, knick-knacks. 30207m “Good,” he said; and M.
Bertuccio left enraptured, so great, so powerful, and real was the influence exercised by this man over all who surrounded him.
At precisely six o’clock the clatter of horses’ hoofs was heard at the entrance door; it was our captain of Spahis, who had arrived on Médéah.
“I am sure I am the first,” cried Morrel; “I did it on purpose to have you a minute to myself, before everyone came.
Julie and Emmanuel have a thousand things to tell you.
Ah, really this is magnificent!
But tell me, count, will your people take care of my horse?” “Do not alarm yourself, my dear Maximilian—they understand.” “I mean, because he wants petting.
Certainly not,” replied the count.
“No; I should only regret if the horse had not proved good.” “It is so good, that I have distanced M. de Château-Renaud, one of the best riders in France, and M.
Debray, who both mount the minister’s Arabians; and close on their heels are the horses of Madame Danglars, who always go at six leagues an hour.” “Then they follow you?” asked Monte Cristo.
“See, they are here.” And at the same minute a carriage with smoking horses, accompanied by two mounted gentlemen, arrived at the gate, which opened before them.
The carriage drove round, and stopped at the steps, followed by the horsemen.
The instant Debray had touched the ground, he was at the carriage-door.
He offered his hand to the baroness, who, descending, took it with a peculiarity of manner imperceptible to everyone but Monte Cristo.
But nothing escaped the count’s notice, and he observed a little note, passed with the facility that indicates frequent practice, from the hand of Madame Danglars to that of the minister’s secretary.
After his wife the banker descended, as pale as though he had issued from his tomb instead of his carriage.
The count understood him.
“Ah, madame,” he said, “why did you not make that request of me?” “With you, sir,” replied the baroness, “one can wish for nothing, one is so sure to obtain it.
Morrel——” “Unfortunately,” replied the count, “I am witness that M.
You understand now that if he were to get rid of the animal before the time named, he would not only lose his bet, but people would say he was afraid; and a brave captain of Spahis cannot risk this, even to gratify a pretty woman, which is, in my opinion, one of the most sacred obligations in the world.” “You see my position, madame,” said Morrel, bestowing a grateful smile on Monte Cristo.
“It seems to me,” said Danglars, in his coarse tone, ill-concealed by a forced smile, “that you have already got horses enough.” Madame Danglars seldom allowed remarks of this kind to pass unnoticed, but, to the surprise of the young people, she pretended not to hear it, and said nothing.
Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and showed her two immense porcelain jars, over which wound marine plants, of a size and delicacy that nature alone could produce.
The baroness was astonished.
“Why,” said she, “you could plant one of the chestnut-trees in the Tuileries inside!
How can such enormous jars have been manufactured?” “Ah! madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “you must not ask of us, the manufacturers of fine porcelain, such a question.
It is the work of another age, constructed by the genii of earth and water.” “How so?—at what period can that have been?” “I do not know; I have only heard that an emperor of China had an oven built expressly, and that in this oven twelve jars like this were successively baked.
The sea, knowing what was required of her, threw over them her weeds, encircled them with coral, and encrusted them with shells; the whole was cemented by two hundred years beneath these almost impervious depths, for a revolution carried away the emperor who wished to make the trial, and only left the documents proving the manufacture of the jars and their descent into the sea.
At the end of two hundred years the documents were found, and they thought of bringing up the jars.
Divers descended in machines, made expressly on the discovery, into the bay where they were thrown; but of ten three only remained, the rest having been broken by the waves.
I am fond of these jars, upon which, perhaps, misshapen, frightful monsters have fixed their cold, dull eyes, and in which myriads of small fish have slept, seeking a refuge from the pursuit of their enemies.” Meanwhile, Danglars, who had cared little for curiosities, was mechanically tearing off the blossoms of a splendid orange-tree, one after another.
When he had finished with the orange-tree, he began at the cactus; but this, not being so easily plucked as the orange-tree, pricked him dreadfully.
He shuddered, and rubbed his eyes as though awaking from a dream.
“You pretend not to know,—because government was not rich enough.” “Ah, pardon me,” said Château-Renaud; “I have heard of these things every day during the last eight years, and I cannot understand them yet.” “You will, by and by,” said Debray.
“Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and Count Andrea Cavalcanti,” announced Baptistin.
A black satin stock, fresh from the maker’s hands, gray moustaches, a bold eye, a major’s uniform, ornamented with three medals and five crosses—in fact, the thorough bearing of an old soldier—such was the appearance of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, that tender father with whom we are already acquainted.
Close to him, dressed in entirely new clothes, advanced smilingly Count Andrea Cavalcanti, the dutiful son, whom we also know.
The three young people were talking together.
On the entrance of the new-comers, their eyes glanced from father to son, and then, naturally enough, rested on the latter, whom they began criticising.
“Cavalcanti!” said Debray.
“Yes,” said Château-Renaud, “these Italians are well named and badly dressed.” “You are fastidious, Château-Renaud,” replied Debray; “those clothes are well cut and quite new.” “That is just what I find fault with.
That gentleman appears to be well dressed for the first time in his life.” “Who are those gentlemen?” asked Danglars of Monte Cristo.
“You heard—Cavalcanti.” “That tells me their name, and nothing else.” “Ah! true.
You do not know the Italian nobility; the Cavalcanti are all descended from princes.” “Have they any fortune?” “An enormous one.” “What do they do?” “Try to spend it all.
They have some business with you, I think, from what they told me the day before yesterday.
I will introduce you to them.” “But they appear to speak French with a very pure accent,” said Danglars.
“The son has been educated in a college in the south; I believe near Marseilles.
You will find him quite enthusiastic.” “Upon what subject?” asked Madame Danglars.
He has made up his mind to take a wife from Paris.” “A fine idea that of his,” said Danglars, shrugging his shoulders.
Madame Danglars looked at her husband with an expression which, at any other time, would have indicated a storm, but for the second time she controlled herself.
“The baron appears thoughtful today,” said Monte Cristo to her; “are they going to put him in the ministry?” “Not yet, I think.
More likely he has been speculating on the Bourse, and has lost money.” “M. and Madame de Villefort,” cried Baptistin.
M. de Villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, was visibly affected, and when Monte Cristo touched his hand, he felt it tremble.
“Certainly, women alone know how to dissimulate,” said Monte Cristo to himself, glancing at Madame Danglars, who was smiling on the procureur, and embracing his wife.
After a short time, the count saw Bertuccio, who, until then, had been occupied on the other side of the house, glide into an adjoining room.
Bertuccio?” said he.
“Your excellency has not stated the number of guests.” “Ah, true.” “How many covers?” “Count for yourself.” “Is everyone here, your excellency?” “Yes.” Bertuccio glanced through the door, which was ajar.
“Good heavens!” he exclaimed.
“That woman—that woman!” “Which?” “The one with a white dress and so many diamonds—the fair one.” “Madame Danglars?” “I do not know her name; but it is she, sir, it is she!” “Whom do you mean?” “The woman of the garden!—she that was _enceinte_—she who was walking while she waited for——” Bertuccio stood at the open door, with his eyes starting and his hair on end.
“Waiting for whom?” Bertuccio, without answering, pointed to Villefort with something of the gesture Macbeth uses to point out Banquo.
“Oh, oh!” he at length muttered, “do you see?” “What?
Who?” “Him!” “Him!—M. de Villefort, the king’s attorney?
Certainly I see him.” “Then I did not kill him?” “Really, I think you are going mad, good Bertuccio,” said the count.
Instead of striking between the sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen do, you must have struck higher or lower, and life is very tenacious in these lawyers, or rather there is no truth in anything you have told me—it was a fright of the imagination, a dream of your fancy.
You went to sleep full of thoughts of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon your stomach; you had the nightmare—that’s all.
Come, calm yourself, and reckon them up—M. and Madame de Villefort, two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Château-Renaud, M.
Morrel, seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, eight.” “Eight!” repeated Bertuccio.
You are in a shocking hurry to be off—you forget one of my guests.
Andrea Cavalcanti, the young man in a black coat, looking at Murillo’s ‘Madonna’; now he is turning.” This time Bertuccio would have uttered an exclamation, had not a look from Monte Cristo silenced him.
“Benedetto?” he muttered; “fatality!” “Half-past six o’clock has just struck, M.
Bertuccio,” said the count severely; “I ordered dinner at that hour, and I do not like to wait;” and he returned to his guests, while Bertuccio, leaning against the wall, succeeded in reaching the dining-room.
Five minutes afterwards the doors of the drawing-room were thrown open, and Bertuccio appearing said, with a violent effort, “The dinner waits.” The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame de Villefort.
“M. de Villefort,” he said, “will you conduct the Baroness Danglars?” Villefort complied, and they passed on to the dining-room.
The Dinner It was evident that one sentiment affected all the guests on entering the dining-room.
Each one asked what strange influence had brought them to this house, and yet astonished, even uneasy though they were, they still felt that they would not like to be absent.
The recent events, the solitary and eccentric position of the count, his enormous, nay, almost incredible fortune, should have made men cautious, and have altogether prevented ladies visiting a house where there was no one of their own sex to receive them; and yet curiosity had been enough to lead them to overleap the bounds of prudence and decorum.
And all present, even including Cavalcanti and his son, notwithstanding the stiffness of the one and the carelessness of the other, were thoughtful, on finding themselves assembled at the house of this incomprehensible man.
Madame Danglars had started when Villefort, on the count’s invitation, offered his arm; and Villefort felt that his glance was uneasy beneath his gold spectacles, when he felt the arm of the baroness press upon his own.
None of this had escaped the count, and even by this mere contact of individuals the scene had already acquired considerable interest for an observer.
M. de Villefort had on the right hand Madame Danglars, on his left Morrel.
The count was seated between Madame de Villefort and Danglars; the other seats were filled by Debray, who was placed between the two Cavalcanti, and by Château-Renaud, seated between Madame de Villefort and Morrel.
The repast was magnificent; Monte Cristo had endeavored completely to overturn the Parisian ideas, and to feed the curiosity as much as the appetite of his guests.
It was an Oriental feast that he offered to them, but of such a kind as the Arabian fairies might be supposed to prepare.
Every delicious fruit that the four quarters of the globe could provide was heaped in vases from China and jars from Japan.
Monte Cristo noticed the general astonishment, and began laughing and joking about it.
“Gentlemen,” he said, “you will admit that, when arrived at a certain degree of fortune, the superfluities of life are all that can be desired; and the ladies will allow that, after having risen to a certain eminence of position, the ideal alone can be more exalted.
Now, to follow out this reasoning, what is the marvellous?—that which we do not understand.
Now, to see things which I cannot understand, to procure impossibilities, these are the study of my life.
I take as much interest in the pursuit of some whim as you do, M.
Danglars, in promoting a new railway line; you, M. de Villefort, in condemning a culprit to death; you, M.
Debray, in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de Château-Renaud, in pleasing a woman; and you, Morrel, in breaking a horse that no one can ride.
Petersburg, the other five leagues from Naples.
Is it not amusing to see them both on the same table?” “What are the two fish?” asked Danglars.
Château-Renaud, who has lived in Russia, will tell you the name of one, and Major Cavalcanti, who is an Italian, will tell you the name of the other.” “This one is, I think, a sterlet,” said Château-Renaud.
Danglars, ask these gentlemen where they are caught.” “Sterlets,” said Château-Renaud, “are only found in the Volga.” “And,” said Cavalcanti, “I know that Lake Fusaro alone supplies lampreys of that size.” “Exactly; one comes from the Volga, and the other from Lake Fusaro.” “Impossible!” cried all the guests simultaneously.
“I am like Nero—_cupitor impossibilium_; and that is what is amusing you at this moment.
This fish, which seems so exquisite to you, is very likely no better than perch or salmon; but it seemed impossible to procure it, and here it is.” “But how could you have these fish brought to France?” “Oh, nothing more easy.
Danglars!” “I cannot help doubting,” answered Danglars with his stupid smile.
“Baptistin,” said the count, “have the other fish brought in—the sterlet and the lamprey which came in the other casks, and which are yet alive.” Danglars opened his bewildered eyes; the company clapped their hands.
Four servants carried in two casks covered with aquatic plants, and in each of which was breathing a fish similar to those on the table.
“But why have two of each sort?” asked Danglars.
“Merely because one might have died,” carelessly answered Monte Cristo.
“You are certainly an extraordinary man,” said Danglars; “and philosophers may well say it is a fine thing to be rich.” “And to have ideas,” added Madame Danglars.
“Oh, do not give me credit for this, madame; it was done by the Romans, who much esteemed them, and Pliny relates that they sent slaves from Ostia to Rome, who carried on their heads fish which he calls the _mulus_, and which, from the description, must probably be the goldfish.
It was also considered a luxury to have them alive, it being an amusing sight to see them die, for, when dying, they change color three or four times, and like the rainbow when it disappears, pass through all the prismatic shades, after which they were sent to the kitchen.
“All this is very extraordinary,” said Château-Renaud; “still, what I admire the most, I confess, is the marvellous promptitude with which your orders are executed.
Is it not true that you only bought this house five or six days ago?” “Certainly not longer.” “Well, I am sure it is quite transformed since last week.
If I remember rightly, it had another entrance, and the courtyard was paved and empty; while today we have a splendid lawn, bordered by trees which appear to be a hundred years old.” “Why not?
I recollect coming for my mother to look at it when M. de Saint-Méran advertised it for sale two or three years ago.” “M. de Saint-Méran?” said Madame de Villefort; “then this house belonged to M. de Saint-Méran before you bought it?” “It appears so,” replied Monte Cristo.
“Is it possible that you do not know of whom you purchased it?” “Quite so; my steward transacts all this business for me.” “It is certainly ten years since the house had been occupied,” said Château-Renaud, “and it was quite melancholy to look at it, with the blinds closed, the doors locked, and the weeds in the court.
Really, if the house had not belonged to the father-in-law of the procureur, one might have thought it some accursed place where a horrible crime had been committed.” Villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three or four glasses of rare wine which were placed before him, here took one, and drank it off.
Monte Cristo allowed a short time to elapse, and then said: “It is singular, baron, but the same idea came across me the first time I came here; it looked so gloomy I should never have bought it if my steward had not taken the matter into his own hands.
Perhaps the fellow had been bribed by the notary.” “It is probable,” stammered out Villefort, trying to smile; “but I can assure you that I had nothing to do with any such proceeding.
This house is part of Valentine’s marriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Méran wished to sell it; for if it had remained another year or two uninhabited it would have fallen to ruin.” It was Morrel’s turn to become pale.
“There was, above all, one room,” continued Monte Cristo, “very plain in appearance, hung with red damask, which, I know not why, appeared to me quite dramatic.” “Why so?” said Danglars; “why dramatic?” “Can we account for instinct?” said Monte Cristo.
It is a chain of recollections—an idea which carries you back to other times, to other places—which, very likely, have no connection with the present time and place.
And there is something in this room which reminds me forcibly of the chamber of the Marquise de Ganges10 or Desdemona.
Stay, since we have finished dinner, I will show it to you, and then we will take coffee in the garden.
After dinner, the play.” Monte Cristo looked inquiringly at his guests.
Madame de Villefort rose, Monte Cristo did the same, and the rest followed their example.
Villefort and Madame Danglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to their seats; they questioned each other with vague and stupid glances.
“Did you hear?” said Madame Danglars.
“We must go,” replied Villefort, offering his arm.
The others, attracted by curiosity, were already scattered in different parts of the house; for they thought the visit would not be limited to the one room, and that, at the same time, they would obtain a view of the rest of the building, of which Monte Cristo had created a palace.
Monte Cristo waited for the two who remained; then, when they had passed, he brought up the rear, and on his face was a smile, which, if they could have understood it, would have alarmed them much more than a visit to the room they were about to enter.
They began by walking through the apartments, many of which were fitted up in the Eastern style, with cushions and divans instead of beds, and pipes instead of furniture.
The drawing-rooms were decorated with the rarest pictures by the old masters, the boudoirs hung with draperies from China, of fanciful colors, fantastic design, and wonderful texture.
There was nothing particular about it, excepting that, although daylight had disappeared, it was not lighted, and everything in it was old-fashioned, while the rest of the rooms had been redecorated.
“Oh.” cried Madame de Villefort, “it is really frightful.” Madame Danglars tried to utter a few words, but was not heard.
Many observations were made, the import of which was a unanimous opinion that there was something sinister about the room. 30221m “Is it not so?” asked Monte Cristo.
And those two crayon portraits, that have faded from the dampness; do they not seem to say, with their pale lips and staring eyes, ‘We have seen’?” Villefort became livid; Madame Danglars fell into a long seat placed near the chimney.
“Oh,” said Madame de Villefort, smiling, “are you courageous enough to sit down upon the very seat perhaps upon which the crime was committed?” Madame Danglars rose suddenly.
“And then,” said Monte Cristo, “this is not all.” “What is there more?” said Debray, who had not failed to notice the agitation of Madame Danglars.
“Ah, what else is there?” said Danglars; “for, at present, I cannot say that I have seen anything extraordinary.
Cavalcanti?” “Ah,” said he, “we have at Pisa, Ugolino’s tower; at Ferrara, Tasso’s prison; at Rimini, the room of Francesca and Paolo.” “Yes, but you have not this little staircase,” said Monte Cristo, opening a door concealed by the drapery.
“Look at it, and tell me what you think of it.” “What a wicked-looking, crooked staircase,” said Château-Renaud with a smile.
“I do not know whether the wine of Chios produces melancholy, but certainly everything appears to me black in this house,” said Debray.
Ever since Valentine’s dowry had been mentioned, Morrel had been silent and sad.
“Can you imagine,” said Monte Cristo, “some Othello or Abbé de Ganges, one stormy, dark night, descending these stairs step by step, carrying a load, which he wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not from God?” Madame Danglars half fainted on the arm of Villefort, who was obliged to support himself against the wall.
“Ah, madame,” cried Debray, “what is the matter with you? how pale you look!” “It is very evident what is the matter with her,” said Madame de Villefort; “M. de Monte Cristo is relating horrible stories to us, doubtless intending to frighten us to death.” “Yes,” said Villefort, “really, count, you frighten the ladies.” “What is the matter?” asked Debray, in a whisper, of Madame Danglars.
“I want air, that is all.” “Will you come into the garden?” said Debray, advancing towards the back staircase.
“No, no,” she answered, “I would rather remain here.” “Are you really frightened, madame?” said Monte Cristo.
“Oh, no, sir,” said Madame Danglars; “but you suppose scenes in a manner which gives them the appearance of reality.” 30223m “Ah, yes,” said Monte Cristo smiling; “it is all a matter of imagination.
Why should we not imagine this the apartment of an honest mother?
And this bed with red hangings, a bed visited by the goddess Lucina?
And that mysterious staircase, the passage through which, not to disturb their sleep, the doctor and nurse pass, or even the father carrying the sleeping child?” Here Madame Danglars, instead of being calmed by the soft picture, uttered a groan and fainted.
“Madame Danglars is ill,” said Villefort; “it would be better to take her to her carriage.” “Oh, _mon Dieu!_” said Monte Cristo, “and I have forgotten my smelling-bottle!” “I have mine,” said Madame de Villefort; and she passed over to Monte Cristo a bottle full of the same kind of red liquid whose good properties the count had tested on Edward.
“Yes,” she said, “at your advice I have made the trial.” “And have you succeeded?” “I think so.” Madame Danglars was carried into the adjoining room; Monte Cristo dropped a very small portion of the red liquid upon her lips; she returned to consciousness.
“Ah,” she cried, “what a frightful dream!” Villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not a dream.
Danglars, but, as he was not especially interested in poetical ideas, he had gone into the garden, and was talking with Major Cavalcanti on the projected railway from Leghorn to Florence.
He took the arm of Madame Danglars, and conducted her into the garden, where they found Danglars taking coffee between the Cavalcanti.
“Really, madame,” he said, “did I alarm you much?” “Oh, no, sir,” she answered; “but you know, things impress us differently, according to the mood of our minds.” Villefort forced a laugh.
“Yes, before witnesses.” “Oh, this is very interesting,” said Debray; “if there really has been a crime, we will investigate it.” “There has been a crime,” said Monte Cristo.
“Come this way, gentlemen; come, M.
Villefort, for a declaration to be available, should be made before the competent authorities.” He then took Villefort’s arm, and, at the same time, holding that of Madame Danglars under his own, he dragged the procureur to the plantain-tree, where the shade was thickest.
All the other guests followed.
“Stay,” said Monte Cristo, “here, in this very spot” (and he stamped upon the ground), “I had the earth dug up and fresh mould put in, to refresh these old trees; well, my man, digging, found a box, or rather, the iron-work of a box, in the midst of which was the skeleton of a newly born infant.” 30225m Monte Cristo felt the arm of Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of Villefort trembled.
“A newly born infant,” repeated Debray; “this affair becomes serious!” “Well,” said Château-Renaud, “I was not wrong just now then, when I said that houses had souls and faces like men, and that their exteriors carried the impress of their characters.
This house was gloomy because it was remorseful: it was remorseful because it concealed a crime.” “Who said it was a crime?” asked Villefort, with a last effort.
This garden has never been a cemetery.” “What is done to infanticides in this country?” asked Major Cavalcanti innocently.
“Oh, their heads are soon cut off,” said Danglars.
“Ah, indeed?” said Cavalcanti.
“I think so; am I not right, M. de Villefort?” asked Monte Cristo.
“Yes, count,” replied Villefort, in a voice now scarcely human.
Monte Cristo, seeing that the two persons for whom he had prepared this scene could scarcely endure it, and not wishing to carry it too far, said: “Come, gentlemen,—some coffee, we seem to have forgotten it,” and he conducted the guests back to the table on the lawn.
“Indeed, count,” said Madame Danglars, “I am ashamed to own it, but all your frightful stories have so upset me, that I must beg you to let me sit down;” and she fell into a chair.
Monte Cristo bowed, and went to Madame de Villefort.
“I think Madame Danglars again requires your bottle,” he said.
But before Madame de Villefort could reach her friend, the procureur had found time to whisper to Madame Danglars, “I must speak to you.” “When?” “Tomorrow.” “Where?” “In my office, or in the court, if you like,—that is the surest place.” “I will be there.” At this moment Madame de Villefort approached.
“Thanks, my dear friend,” said Madame Danglars, trying to smile; “it is over now, and I am much better.” Chapter 64.
The Beggar The evening passed on; Madame de Villefort expressed a desire to return to Paris, which Madame Danglars had not dared to do, notwithstanding the uneasiness she experienced.
On his wife’s request, M. de Villefort was the first to give the signal of departure.
He offered a seat in his landau to Madame Danglars, that she might be under the care of his wife.
Danglars, absorbed in an interesting conversation with M.
Cavalcanti, he paid no attention to anything that was passing.
While Monte Cristo had begged the smelling-bottle of Madame de Villefort, he had noticed the approach of Villefort to Madame Danglars, and he soon guessed all that had passed between them, though the words had been uttered in so low a voice as hardly to be heard by Madame Danglars.
Without opposing their arrangements, he allowed Morrel, Château-Renaud, and Debray to leave on horseback, and the ladies in M. de Villefort’s carriage.
Danglars, more and more delighted with Major Cavalcanti, had offered him a seat in his carriage.
Andrea Cavalcanti found his tilbury waiting at the door; the groom, in every respect a caricature of the English fashion, was standing on tiptoe to hold a large iron-gray horse.
Andrea had spoken very little during dinner; he was an intelligent lad, and he feared to utter some absurdity before so many grand people, amongst whom, with dilating eyes, he saw the king’s attorney.
Then he had been seized upon by Danglars, who, with a rapid glance at the stiff-necked old major and his modest son, and taking into consideration the hospitality of the count, made up his mind that he was in the society of some nabob come to Paris to finish the worldly education of his heir.
He contemplated with unspeakable delight the large diamond which shone on the major’s little finger; for the major, like a prudent man, in case of any accident happening to his bank-notes, had immediately converted them into an available asset.
One thing above all the rest heightened the respect, nay almost the veneration, of Danglars for Cavalcanti.
The latter, faithful to the principle of Horace, _nil admirari_, had contented himself with showing his knowledge by declaring in what lake the best lampreys were caught.
Then he had eaten some without saying a word more; Danglars, therefore, concluded that such luxuries were common at the table of the illustrious descendant of the Cavalcanti, who most likely in Lucca fed upon trout brought from Switzerland, and lobsters sent from England, by the same means used by the count to bring the lampreys from Lake Fusaro, and the sterlet from the Volga.
Thus it was with much politeness of manner that he heard Cavalcanti pronounce these words: “Tomorrow, sir, I shall have the honor of waiting upon you on business.” “And I, sir,” said Danglars, “shall be most happy to receive you.” Upon which he offered to take Cavalcanti in his carriage to the Hôtel des Princes, if it would not be depriving him of the company of his son.
To this Cavalcanti replied by saying that for some time past his son had lived independently of him, that he had his own horses and carriages, and that not having come together, it would not be difficult for them to leave separately.
The major seated himself, therefore, by the side of Danglars, who was more and more charmed with the ideas of order and economy which ruled this man, and yet who, being able to allow his son 60,000 francs a year, might be supposed to possess a fortune of 500,000 or 600,000 livres.
As for Andrea, he began, by way of showing off, to scold his groom, who, instead of bringing the tilbury to the steps of the house, had taken it to the outer door, thus giving him the trouble of walking thirty steps to reach it.
The groom heard him with humility, took the bit of the impatient animal with his left hand, and with the right held out the reins to Andrea, who, taking them from him, rested his polished boot lightly on the step.
At that moment a hand touched his shoulder.
The young man turned round, thinking that Danglars or Monte Cristo had forgotten something they wished to tell him, and had returned just as they were starting.
But instead of either of these, he saw nothing but a strange face, sunburnt, and encircled by a beard, with eyes brilliant as carbuncles, and a smile upon the mouth which displayed a perfect set of white teeth, pointed and sharp as the wolf’s or jackal’s.
We cannot say; but only relate the fact that he shuddered and stepped back suddenly.
“Pardon me, my friend, if I disturb you,” said the man with the red handkerchief, “but I want to speak to you.” “You have no right to beg at night,” said the groom, endeavoring to rid his master of the troublesome intruder.
“I am not begging, my fine fellow,” said the unknown to the servant, with so ironical an expression of the eye, and so frightful a smile, that he withdrew; “I only wish to say two or three words to your master, who gave me a commission to execute about a fortnight ago.” “Come,” said Andrea, with sufficient nerve for his servant not to perceive his agitation, “what do you want?
I am very tired, and as I have not eaten so good a dinner as you, I can scarcely stand.” The young man shuddered at this strange familiarity.
“Tell me,” he said—“tell me what you want?” “Well, then, I want you to take me up in your fine carriage, and carry me back.” Andrea turned pale, but said nothing.
“Oh, as for that, I’ll take you to a splendid place,” said the man with the handkerchief; and taking the horse’s bit he led the tilbury where it was certainly impossible for anyone to witness the honor that Andrea conferred upon him.
“Don’t think I want the glory of riding in your fine carriage,” said he; “oh, no, it’s only because I am tired, and also because I have a little business to talk over with you.” “Come, step in,” said the young man.
It was a pity this scene had not occurred in daylight, for it was curious to see this rascal throwing himself heavily down on the cushion beside the young and elegant driver of the tilbury.
Andrea drove past the last house in the village without saying a word to his companion, who smiled complacently, as though well-pleased to find himself travelling in so comfortable a vehicle.
Once out of Auteuil, Andrea looked around, in order to assure himself that he could neither be seen nor heard, and then, stopping the horse and crossing his arms before the man, he asked: “Now, tell me why you come to disturb my tranquillity?” “Let me ask you why you deceived me?” “How have I deceived you?” “‘How,’ do you ask?
I thought you were earning a living in Tuscany or Piedmont by acting as _facchino_ or _cicerone_, and I pitied you sincerely, as I would a child of my own.
You know I always did call you my child.” “Come, come, what then?” “Patience—patience!” “I am patient, but go on.” “All at once I see you pass through the barrier with a groom, a tilbury, and fine new clothes.
You have a quick horse, a light tilbury, you are naturally as slippery as an eel; if I had missed you tonight, I might not have had another chance.” “You see, I do not conceal myself.” “You are lucky; I wish I could say as much, for I do conceal myself; and then I was afraid you would not recognize me, but you did,” added Caderousse with his unpleasant smile.
“It was very polite of you.” “Come,” said Andrea, “what do you want?” “You do not speak affectionately to me, Benedetto, my old friend, that is not right—take care, or I may become troublesome.” This menace smothered the young man’s passion.
“You should not speak so to an old friend like me, Caderousse, as you said just now; you are a native of Marseilles, I am——” “Do you know then now what you are?” “No, but I was brought up in Corsica; you are old and obstinate, I am young and wilful.
Between people like us threats are out of place, everything should be amicably arranged.
Good, so much the better,” said Caderousse, his eyes sparkling with avarice.
“Oh, you knew that well enough before speaking to me,” said Andrea, becoming more and more excited.
“If I had been wearing a handkerchief like yours on my head, rags on my back, and worn-out shoes on my feet, you would not have known me.” “You wrong me, my boy; now I have found you, nothing prevents my being as well-dressed as anyone, knowing, as I do, the goodness of your heart.
“What an appetite you used to have!
Is it as good now?” “Oh, yes,” replied Andrea, laughing.
“How did you come to be dining with that prince whose house you have just left?” “He is not a prince; simply a count.” “A count, and a rich one too, eh?” “Yes; but you had better not have anything to say to him, for he is not a very good-tempered gentleman.” “Oh, be easy!
I have no design upon your count, and you shall have him all to yourself.
“Apply to the steward on the first day of every month, and you will receive the same sum.” “There now, again you degrade me.” “How so?” “By making me apply to the servants, when I want to transact business with you alone.” “Well, be it so, then.
Take it from me then, and so long at least as I receive my income, you shall be paid yours.” “Come, come; I always said you were a fine fellow, and it is a blessing when good fortune happens to such as you.
But tell me all about it?” “Why do you wish to know?” asked Cavalcanti.
What is his name?” “Major Cavalcanti.” “Is he pleased with you?” “So far I have appeared to answer his purpose.” “And who found this father for you?” “The Count of Monte Cristo.” “The man whose house you have just left?” “Yes.” “I wish you would try and find me a situation with him as grandfather, since he holds the money-chest!” “Well, I will mention you to him.
Meanwhile, what are you going to do?” “I?” “Yes, you.” “It is very kind of you to trouble yourself about me.” “Since you interest yourself in my affairs, I think it is now my turn to ask you some questions.” “Ah, true.
Well; I shall rent a room in some respectable house, wear a decent coat, shave every day, and go and read the papers in a café.
That is what I want.” “Come, if you will only put this scheme into execution, and be steady, nothing could be better.” “Do you think so, M.
A peer of France?” “Ah,” said Andrea, “who knows?” “Major Cavalcanti is already one, perhaps; but then, hereditary rank is abolished.” “No politics, Caderousse.
And now that you have all you want, and that we understand each other, jump down from the tilbury and disappear.” “Not at all, my good friend.” “How?
Not at all?” “Why, just think for a moment; with this red handkerchief on my head, with scarcely any shoes, no papers, and ten gold napoleons in my pocket, without reckoning what was there before—making in all about two hundred francs,—why, I should certainly be arrested at the barriers.
Then, to justify myself, I should say that you gave me the money; this would cause inquiries, it would be found that I left Toulon without giving due notice, and I should then be escorted back to the shores of the Mediterranean.
Then I should become simply No. 106, and good-bye to my dream of resembling the retired baker!
No, no, my boy; I prefer remaining honorably in the capital.” Andrea scowled.
Certainly, as he had himself owned, the reputed son of Major Cavalcanti was a wilful fellow.
He drew up for a minute, threw a rapid glance around him, and then his hand fell instantly into his pocket, where it began playing with a pistol.
But, meanwhile, Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off his companion, passed his hand behind his back, and opened a long Spanish knife, which he always carried with him, to be ready in case of need.
The two friends, as we see, were worthy of and understood one another.
Andrea’s hand left his pocket inoffensively, and was carried up to the red moustache, which it played with for some time.
“Good Caderousse,” he said, “how happy you will be.” “I will do my best,” said the innkeeper of the Pont du Gard, shutting up his knife.
But how will you pass through the barrier without exciting suspicion?
It seems to me that you are in more danger riding than on foot.” “Wait,” said Caderousse, “we shall see.” He then took the greatcoat with the large collar, which the groom had left behind in the tilbury, and put it on his back; then he took off Cavalcanti’s hat, which he placed upon his own head, and finally he assumed the careless attitude of a servant whose master drives himself.
“But, tell me,” said Andrea, “am I to remain bareheaded?” “Pooh,” said Caderousse; “it is so windy that your hat can easily appear to have blown off.” “Come, come; enough of this,” said Cavalcanti.
“What are you waiting for?” said Caderousse.
They passed the barrier without accident.
At the first cross street Andrea stopped his horse, and Caderousse leaped out.
“Well!” said Andrea,—“my servant’s coat and my hat?” “Ah,” said Caderousse, “you would not like me to risk taking cold?” “But what am I to do?” “You?
Oh, you are young while I am beginning to get old. _Au revoir_, Benedetto;” and running into a court, he disappeared.
“Alas,” said Andrea, sighing, “one cannot be completely happy in this world!” Chapter 65.
A Conjugal Scene At the Place Louis XV. the three young people separated—that is to say, Morrel went to the Boulevards, Château-Renaud to the Pont de la Révolution, and Debray to the Quai.
Most probably Morrel and Château-Renaud returned to their “domestic hearths,” as they say in the gallery of the Chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the theatre of the Rue Richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was not the case with Debray.
When he reached the wicket of the Louvre, he turned to the left, galloped across the Carrousel, passed through the Rue Saint-Roch, and, issuing from the Rue de la Michodière, he arrived at M.
Danglars’ door just at the same time that Villefort’s landau, after having deposited him and his wife at the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, stopped to leave the baroness at her own house.
Debray, with the air of a man familiar with the house, entered first into the court, threw his bridle into the hands of a footman, and returned to the door to receive Madame Danglars, to whom he offered his arm, to conduct her to her apartments.
The gate once closed, and Debray and the baroness alone in the court, he asked: “What was the matter with you, Hermine? and why were you so affected at that story, or rather fable, which the count related?” “Because I have been in such shocking spirits all the evening, my friend,” said the baroness.
“No, Hermine,” replied Debray; “you cannot make me believe that; on the contrary, you were in excellent spirits when you arrived at the count’s.
Danglars was disagreeable, certainly, but I know how much you care for his ill-humor.
Being a man who knew that the former of these symptoms was one of the inherent penalties of womanhood, he did not then press his inquiries, but waited for a more appropriate opportunity when he should again interrogate her, or receive an avowal _proprio motu_.
At the door of her apartment the baroness met Mademoiselle Cornélie, her confidential maid.
“What is my daughter doing?” asked Madame Danglars.
“She practiced all the evening, and then went to bed,” replied Mademoiselle Cornélie.
“Yet I think I hear her piano.” “It is Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, who is playing while Mademoiselle Danglars is in bed.” “Well,” said Madame Danglars, “come and undress me.” They entered the bedroom.
Debray stretched himself upon a large couch, and Madame Danglars passed into her dressing-room with Mademoiselle Cornélie.
Really, I never saw such an infatuation for music; it is quite ridiculous for a young lady of fashion.” Debray smiled.
“Well,” said he, “let her come, with your consent and that of the baron, and we will try and give her an engagement, though we are very poor to pay such talent as hers.” “Go, Cornélie,” said Madame Danglars, “I do not require you any longer.” Cornélie obeyed, and the next minute Madame Danglars left her room in a charming loose dress, and came and sat down close to Debray.
Then she began thoughtfully to caress the little spaniel.
“Come, Hermine,” he said, after a short time, “answer candidly,—something vexes you—is it not so?” 30239m “Nothing,” answered the baroness.
And yet, as she could scarcely breathe, she rose and went towards a looking-glass.
“I am frightful tonight,” she said.
Debray rose, smiling, and was about to contradict the baroness upon this latter point, when the door opened suddenly.
Danglars appeared; Debray reseated himself.
At the noise of the door Madame Danglars turned round, and looked upon her husband with an astonishment she took no trouble to conceal.
Debray.” Probably the baroness thought this unexpected visit signified a desire to make up for the sharp words he had uttered during the day.
Assuming a dignified air, she turned round to Debray, without answering her husband.
“Read me something, M.
Debray, who was slightly disturbed at this visit, recovered himself when he saw the calmness of the baroness, and took up a book marked by a mother-of-pearl knife inlaid with gold.
“Excuse me,” said the banker, “but you will tire yourself, baroness, by such late hours, and M.
Debray lives some distance from here.” Debray was petrified, not only to hear Danglars speak so calmly and politely, but because it was apparent that beneath outward politeness there really lurked a determined spirit of opposition to anything his wife might wish to do.
The baroness was also surprised, and showed her astonishment by a look which would doubtless have had some effect upon her husband if he had not been intently occupied with the paper, where he was looking to see the closing stock quotations.
The result was, that the proud look entirely failed of its purpose.
Lucien,” said the baroness, “I assure you I have no desire to sleep, and that I have a thousand things to tell you this evening, which you must listen to, even though you slept while hearing me.” “I am at your service, madame,” replied Lucien coldly.
“Do not think I wish to turn you out, my dear Debray,” continued Danglars; “oh, no, not at all.
An unexpected occurrence forces me to ask my wife to have a little conversation with me; it is so rarely I make such a request, I am sure you cannot grudge it to me.” Debray muttered something, bowed and went out, knocking himself against the edge of the door, like Nathan in _Athalie_.
The animal uttered a cry during the transit, but, arrived at its destination, it crouched behind the cushions, and stupefied at such unusual treatment remained silent and motionless.
“Do you know, sir,” asked the baroness, “that you are improving?
Generally you are only rude, but tonight you are brutal.” “It is because I am in a worse humor than usual,” replied Danglars.
These glances frequently exasperated the pride of Danglars, but this evening he took no notice of them.
“And what have I to do with your ill-humor?” said the baroness, irritated at the impassibility of her husband; “do these things concern me?
Keep your ill-humor at home in your money boxes, or, since you have clerks whom you pay, vent it upon them.” “Not so,” replied Danglars; “your advice is wrong, so I shall not follow it.
My money boxes are my Pactolus, as, I think, M.
Demoustier says, and I will not retard its course, or disturb its calm.
My clerks are honest men, who earn my fortune, whom I pay much below their deserts, if I may value them according to what they bring in; therefore I shall not get into a passion with them; those with whom I will be in a passion are those who eat my dinners, mount my horses, and exhaust my fortune.” “And pray who are the persons who exhaust your fortune?
Explain yourself more clearly, I beg, sir.” “Oh, make yourself easy!—I am not speaking riddles, and you will soon know what I mean.
The people who exhaust my fortune are those who draw out 700,000 francs in the course of an hour.” “I do not understand you, sir,” said the baroness, trying to disguise the agitation of her voice and the flush of her face.
I only know one thing I dislike more, which is the sound of your voice.” “Really?” said Danglars.
“Well, this surprises me, for I thought you took the liveliest interest in all my affairs!” 30243m “I?
What could put such an idea into your head?” “Yourself.” “Ah?—what next?” “Most assuredly.” “I should like to know upon what occasion?” “Oh, _mon Dieu!_ that is very easily done.
Last February you were the first who told me of the Haitian funds.
I know how clear-sighted your dreams are; I therefore purchased immediately as many shares as I could of the Haitian debt, and I gained 400,000 francs by it, of which 100,000 have been honestly paid to you.
You spent it as you pleased; that was your business.
In March there was a question about a grant to a railway.
Three companies presented themselves, each offering equal securities.
You told me that your instinct,—and although you pretend to know nothing about speculations, I think on the contrary, that your comprehension is very clear upon certain affairs,—well, you told me that your instinct led you to believe the grant would be given to the company called the Southern.
I bought two thirds of the shares of that company; as you had foreseen, the shares trebled in value, and I picked up a million, from which 250,000 francs were paid to you for pin-money.
How have you spent this 250,000 francs?—it is no business of mine.” “When are you coming to the point?” cried the baroness, shivering with anger and impatience.
“Patience, madame, I am coming to it.” “That’s fortunate.” “In April you went to dine at the minister’s.
You heard a private conversation respecting Spanish affairs—on the expulsion of Don Carlos.
The expulsion took place and I pocketed 600,000 francs the day Charles V. repassed the Bidassoa.
They were yours, you disposed of them according to your fancy, and I asked no questions; but it is not the less true that you have this year received 500,000 livres.” “Well, sir, and what then?” “Ah, yes, it was just after this that you spoiled everything.” “Really, your manner of speaking——” “It expresses my meaning, and that is all I want.
Well, three days after that you talked politics with M.
Debray, and you fancied from his words that Don Carlos had returned to Spain.
Debray is one of your friends.” 30245m “For shame!” exclaimed the baroness.
“Wretch!” she cried, “will you dare to tell me you did not know what you now reproach me with?” “I do not say that I did know it, and I do not say that I did not know it.
I merely tell you to look into my conduct during the last four years that we have ceased to be husband and wife, and see whether it has not always been consistent.
Some time after our rupture, you wished to study music, under the celebrated baritone who made such a successful appearance at the Théâtre Italien; at the same time I felt inclined to learn dancing of the _danseuse_ who acquired such a reputation in London.
I said nothing, for we must have peace in the house; and 100,000 francs for a lady and gentleman to be properly instructed in music and dancing are not too much.
Well, you soon become tired of singing, and you take a fancy to study diplomacy with the minister’s secretary.
You understand, it signifies nothing to me so long as you pay for your lessons out of your own cash box.
But today I find you are drawing on mine, and that your apprenticeship may cost me 700,000 francs per month.
Either the diplomatist must give his lessons gratis, and I will tolerate him, or he must never set his foot again in my house;—do you understand, madame?” “Oh, this is too much,” cried Hermine, choking, “you are worse than despicable.” “But,” continued Danglars, “I find you did not even pause there——” “Insults!” “You are right; let us leave these facts alone, and reason coolly.
I have never interfered in your affairs excepting for your good; treat me in the same way.
Besides, how do I know that this was not a political trick, that the minister enraged at seeing me in the opposition, and jealous of the popular sympathy I excite, has not concerted with M.
Debray to ruin me?” “A probable thing!” “Why not?
Who ever heard of such an occurrence as this?—a false telegraphic despatch—it is almost impossible for wrong signals to be made as they were in the last two telegrams.
It was done on purpose for me—I am sure of it.” “Sir,” said the baroness humbly, “are you not aware that the man employed there was dismissed, that they talked of going to law with him, that orders were issued to arrest him and that this order would have been put into execution if he had not escaped by flight, which proves that he was either mad or guilty?
It was a mistake.” “Yes, which made fools laugh, which caused the minister to have a sleepless night, which has caused the minister’s secretaries to blacken several sheets of paper, but which has cost me 700,000 francs.” “But, sir,” said Hermine suddenly, “if all this is, as you say, caused by M.
Debray?—do I wish to know him?—do I wish to know that he gives advice?—do I wish to follow it?—do I speculate?
No; you do all this, not I.” “Still it seems to me, that as you profit by it——” Danglars shrugged his shoulders.
“Foolish creature,” he exclaimed.
“Women fancy they have talent because they have managed two or three intrigues without being the talk of Paris!
But know that if you had even hidden your irregularities from your husband, who has but the commencement of the art—for generally husbands _will_ not see—you would then have been but a faint imitation of most of your friends among the women of the world.
You may, perhaps, have hidden a thought; but not a step, not an action, not a fault, has escaped me, while you flattered yourself upon your address, and firmly believed you had deceived me.
What has been the result?—that, thanks to my pretended ignorance, there is none of your friends, from M. de Villefort to M.
Debray, who has not trembled before me.
“M. de Villefort!—What do you mean?” “I mean that M. de Nargonne, your first husband, being neither a philosopher nor a banker, or perhaps being both, and seeing there was nothing to be got out of a king’s attorney, died of grief or anger at finding, after an absence of nine months, that you had been _enceinte_ six.
I am brutal,—I not only allow it, but boast of it; it is one of the reasons of my success in commercial business.
Debray has made me lose 700,000 francs; let him bear his share of the loss, and we will go on as before; if not, let him become bankrupt for the 250,000 livres, and do as all bankrupts do—disappear.
Danglars did not even look at her, though she did her best to faint.
He shut the bedroom door after him, without adding another word, and returned to his apartments; and when Madame Danglars recovered from her half-fainting condition, she could almost believe that she had had a disagreeable dream.
Matrimonial Projects The day following this scene, at the hour Debray usually chose to pay a visit to Madame Danglars on his way to his office, his _coupé_ did not appear.
At this time, that is, about half-past twelve, Madame Danglars ordered her carriage, and went out.
Danglars, hidden behind a curtain, watched the departure he had been waiting for.
He gave orders that he should be informed as soon as Madame Danglars appeared; but at two o’clock she had not returned.
He then called for his horses, drove to the Chamber, and inscribed his name to speak against the budget.
From twelve to two o’clock Danglars had remained in his study, unsealing his dispatches, and becoming more and more sad every minute, heaping figure upon figure, and receiving, among other visits, one from Major Cavalcanti, who, as stiff and exact as ever, presented himself precisely at the hour named the night before, to terminate his business with the banker.
On leaving the Chamber, Danglars, who had shown violent marks of agitation during the sitting, and been more bitter than ever against the ministry, re-entered his carriage, and told the coachman to drive to the Avenue des Champs-Élysées, No. 30.
Monte Cristo was at home; only he was engaged with someone and begged Danglars to wait for a moment in the drawing-room.
While the banker was waiting in the anteroom, the door opened, and a man dressed as an abbé and doubtless more familiar with the house than he was, came in and instead of waiting, merely bowed, passed on to the farther apartments, and disappeared.
A minute after the door by which the priest had entered reopened, and Monte Cristo appeared.
You look careworn; really, you alarm me.
Melancholy in a capitalist, like the appearance of a comet, presages some misfortune to the world.” “I have been in ill-luck for several days,” said Danglars, “and I have heard nothing but bad news.” “Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo.
I am only annoyed about a bankrupt of Trieste.” “Really?
Does it happen to be Jacopo Manfredi?” “Exactly so.
Imagine a man who has transacted business with me for I don’t know how long, to the amount of 800,000 or 900,000 francs during the year.
Well, I was a million in advance with him, and now my fine Jacopo Manfredi suspends payment!” “Really?” “It is an unheard-of fatality.
I draw upon him for 600,000 francs, my bills are returned unpaid, and, more than that, I hold bills of exchange signed by him to the value of 400,000 francs, payable at his correspondent’s in Paris at the end of this month.
I present them; but my correspondent has disappeared.
She dreamed Don Carlos had returned to Spain; she believes in dreams.
It is magnetism, she says, and when she dreams a thing it is sure to happen, she assures me.
On this conviction I allow her to speculate, she having her bank and her stockbroker; she speculated and lost.
It is true she speculates with her own money, not mine; nevertheless, you can understand that when 700,000 francs leave the wife’s pocket, the husband always finds it out.
Why, the thing has made a tremendous noise.” “Yes, I heard it spoken of, but I did not know the details, and then no one can be more ignorant than I am of the affairs in the Bourse.” 30251m “Then you do not speculate?” “I?—How could I speculate when I already have so much trouble in regulating my income?
But touching these Spanish affairs, I think that the baroness did not dream the whole of the Don Carlos matter.
I think this is about your position, is it not?” “Confound it, yes!” replied Danglars.
“The result, then, of six more such months as this would be to reduce the third-rate house to despair.” “Oh,” said Danglars, becoming very pale, how you are running on!” “Let us imagine seven such months,” continued Monte Cristo, in the same tone.
“Tell me, have you ever thought that seven times 1,700,000 francs make nearly twelve millions?
No, you have not;—well, you are right, for if you indulged in such reflections, you would never risk your principal, which is to the speculator what the skin is to civilized man.
Well, out of the five or six millions which form your real capital, you have just lost nearly two millions, which must, of course, in the same degree diminish your credit and fictitious fortune; to follow out my simile, your skin has been opened by bleeding, and this if repeated three or four times will cause death—so pay attention to it, my dear Monsieur Danglars.
Do you wish me to lend you some?” 30253m “What a bad calculator you are!” exclaimed Danglars, calling to his assistance all his philosophy and dissimulation.
“I have made money at the same time by speculations which have succeeded.
I have made up the loss of blood by nutrition.
I lost a battle in Spain, I have been defeated in Trieste, but my naval army in India will have taken some galleons, and my Mexican pioneers will have discovered some mine.” “Very good, very good!
I congratulate you, my dear M.
Danglars,” said Monte Cristo; “I see I was deceived, and that you belong to the class of second-rate fortunes.” “I think I may aspire to that honor,” said Danglars with a smile, which reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons which bad artists are so fond of daubing into their pictures of ruins.
“But, while we are speaking of business,” Danglars added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing the subject, “tell me what I am to do for M.
Cavalcanti.” “Give him money, if he is recommended to you, and the recommendation seems good.” “Excellent; he presented himself this morning with a bond of 40,000 francs, payable at sight, on you, signed by Busoni, and returned by you to me, with your endorsement—of course, I immediately counted him over the forty bank-notes.” Monte Cristo nodded his head in token of assent.
“But that is not all,” continued Danglars; “he has opened an account with my house for his son.” “May I ask how much he allows the young man?” “Five thousand francs per month.” “Sixty thousand francs per year.
I thought I was right in believing that Cavalcanti to be a stingy fellow.
How can a young man live upon 5,000 francs a month?” “But you understand that if the young man should want a few thousands more——” “Do not advance it; the father will never repay it.
You do not know these ultramontane millionaires; they are regular misers.
And by whom were they recommended to you?” “Oh, by the house of Fenzi, one of the best in Florence.” “I do not mean to say you will lose, but, nevertheless, mind you hold to the terms of the agreement.” “Would you not trust the Cavalcanti?” “I? oh, I would advance ten millions on his signature.
I was only speaking in reference to the second-rate fortunes we were mentioning just now.” “And with all this, how unassuming he is!
I should never have taken him for anything more than a mere major.” “And you would have flattered him, for certainly, as you say, he has no manner.
The first time I saw him he appeared to me like an old lieutenant who had grown mouldy under his epaulets.
But all the Italians are the same; they are like old Jews when they are not glittering in Oriental splendor.” “The young man is better,” said Danglars.
“Yes; a little nervous, perhaps, but, upon the whole, he appeared tolerable.
I was uneasy about him.” “Why?” “Because you met him at my house, just after his introduction into the world, as they told me.
He has been travelling with a very severe tutor, and had never been to Paris before.” “Ah, I believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do they not?” asked Danglars carelessly; “they like to unite their fortunes.” “It is usual, certainly; but Cavalcanti is an original who does nothing like other people.
Oh, as I told you before, I think the old fellow is very close.” “Come, you do not flatter him.” “I scarcely know him; I think I have seen him three times in my life; all I know relating to him is through Busoni and himself.
He was telling me this morning that, tired of letting his property lie dormant in Italy, which is a dead nation, he wished to find a method, either in France or England, of multiplying his millions, but remember, that though I place great confidence in Busoni, I am not responsible for this.” “Never mind; accept my thanks for the client you have sent me.
It is a fine name to inscribe on my ledgers, and my cashier was quite proud of it when I explained to him who the Cavalcanti were.
By the way, this is merely a simple question, when this sort of people marry their sons, do they give them any fortune?” “Oh, that depends upon circumstances.
I know an Italian prince, rich as a gold mine, one of the noblest families in Tuscany, who, when his sons married according to his wish, gave them millions; and when they married against his consent, merely allowed them thirty crowns a month.
Should Andrea marry according to his father’s views, he will, perhaps, give him one, two, or three millions.
Andrea Cavalcanti to M.
You know I have made the most of my arms, though I never forgot my origin.” “A proof of great humility or great pride,” said Monte Cristo.
I have heard that name in Greece.” “In conjunction with the affairs of Ali Pasha?” “Exactly so.” “This is the mystery,” said Danglars.
The Office of the King’s Attorney Let us leave the banker driving his horses at their fullest speed, and follow Madame Danglars in her morning excursion.
We have said that at half-past twelve o’clock Madame Danglars had ordered her horses, and had left home in the carriage.
She directed her course towards the Faubourg Saint Germain, went down the Rue Mazarine, and stopped at the Passage du Pont-Neuf.
She descended, and went through the passage.
At the Rue Guénégaud she called a cab, and directed the driver to go to the Rue de Harlay.
She then replaced the bonnet, and saw with pleasure, in a little pocket-mirror, that her white complexion and brilliant eyes were alone visible.
The cab crossed the Pont-Neuf and entered the Rue de Harlay by the Place Dauphine; the driver was paid as the door opened, and stepping lightly up the stairs Madame Danglars soon reached the Salle des Pas-Perdus.
There was a great deal going on that morning, and many business-like persons at the Palais; business-like persons pay very little attention to women, and Madame Danglars crossed the hall without exciting any more attention than any other woman calling upon her lawyer.
There was a great press of people in M. de Villefort’s antechamber, but Madame Danglars had no occasion even to pronounce her name.
The instant she appeared the door-keeper rose, came to her, and asked her whether she was not the person with whom the procureur had made an appointment; and on her affirmative answer being given, he conducted her by a private passage to M. de Villefort’s office.
The magistrate was seated in an armchair, writing, with his back towards the door; he did not move as he heard it open, and the door-keeper pronounce the words, “Walk in, madame,” and then reclose it; but no sooner had the man’s footsteps ceased, than he started up, drew the bolts, closed the curtains, and examined every corner of the room.
“It is true, then,” he said, rather uttering his thoughts aloud than addressing his companion,—“it is true, then, that all our actions leave their traces—some sad, others bright—on our paths; it is true that every step in our lives is like the course of an insect on the sands;—it leaves its track!
Alas, to many the path is traced by tears.” “Sir,” said Madame Danglars, “you can feel for my emotion, can you not?
When I look at this room,—whence so many guilty creatures have departed, trembling and ashamed, when I look at that chair before which I now sit trembling and ashamed,—oh, it requires all my reason to convince me that I am not a very guilty woman and you a menacing judge.” Villefort dropped his head and sighed.
“And I,” he said, “I feel that my place is not in the judge’s seat, but on the prisoner’s bench.” 30263m “You?” said Madame Danglars.
“Yes, I.” “I think, sir, you exaggerate your situation,” said Madame Danglars, whose beautiful eyes sparkled for a moment.
“The paths of which you were just speaking have been traced by all young men of ardent imaginations.
Besides the pleasure, there is always remorse from the indulgence of our passions, and, after all, what have you men to fear from all this? the world excuses, and notoriety ennobles you.” “Madame,” replied Villefort, “you know that I am no hypocrite, or, at least, that I never deceive without a reason.
If my brow be severe, it is because many misfortunes have clouded it; if my heart be petrified, it is that it might sustain the blows it has received.
I was not so in my youth, I was not so on the night of the betrothal, when we were all seated around a table in the Rue du Cours at Marseilles.
But since then everything has changed in and about me; I am accustomed to brave difficulties, and, in the conflict to crush those who, by their own free will, or by chance, voluntarily or involuntarily, interfere with me in my career.
It is generally the case that what we most ardently desire is as ardently withheld from us by those who wish to obtain it, or from whom we attempt to snatch it.
Thus, the greater number of a man’s errors come before him disguised under the specious form of necessity; then, after error has been committed in a moment of excitement, of delirium, or of fear, we see that we might have avoided and escaped it.
Collect all your courage, for you have not yet heard all.” “Ah,” exclaimed Madame Danglars, alarmed, “what is there more to hear?” “You only look back to the past, and it is, indeed, bad enough.
Well, picture to yourself a future more gloomy still—certainly frightful, perhaps sanguinary!” The baroness knew how calm Villefort naturally was, and his present excitement frightened her so much that she opened her mouth to scream, but the sound died in her throat.
Is it not by chance that the unfortunate child was disinterred under the trees?—that poor innocent offspring of mine, which I never even kissed, but for whom I wept many, many tears.
Ah, my heart clung to the count when he mentioned the dear spoil found beneath the flowers.” “Well, no, madame,—this is the terrible news I have to tell you,” said Villefort in a hollow voice—“no, nothing was found beneath the flowers; there was no child disinterred—no.
You must not weep, no, you must not groan, you must tremble!” “What can you mean?” asked Madame Danglars, shuddering.
“I mean that M. de Monte Cristo, digging underneath these trees, found neither skeleton nor chest, because neither of them was there!” “Neither of them there?” repeated Madame Danglars, her staring, wide-open eyes expressing her alarm.
“Neither of them there!” she again said, as though striving to impress herself with the meaning of the words which escaped her.
“No,” said Villefort, burying his face in his hands, “no, a hundred times no!” “Then you did not bury the poor child there, sir?
But listen to me—listen—and you will pity me who has for twenty years alone borne the heavy burden of grief I am about to reveal, without casting the least portion upon you.” “Oh, you frighten me!
But speak; I will listen.” “You recollect that sad night, when you were half-expiring on that bed in the red damask room, while I, scarcely less agitated than you, awaited your delivery.
The child was born, was given to me—motionless, breathless, voiceless; we thought it dead.” Madame Danglars moved rapidly, as though she would spring from her chair, but Villefort stopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore her attention.
“We thought it dead,” he repeated; “I placed it in the chest, which was to take the place of a coffin; I descended to the garden, I dug a hole, and then flung it down in haste.
Scarcely had I covered it with earth, when the arm of the Corsican was stretched towards me; I saw a shadow rise, and, at the same time, a flash of light.
I felt pain; I wished to cry out, but an icy shiver ran through my veins and stifled my voice; I fell lifeless, and fancied myself killed.
Never shall I forget your sublime courage, when, having returned to consciousness, I dragged myself to the foot of the stairs, and you, almost dying yourself, came to meet me.
We were obliged to keep silent upon the dreadful catastrophe.
You had the fortitude to regain the house, assisted by your nurse.
Though we scarcely expected it, our secret remained in our own keeping alone.
I was taken to Versailles; for three months I struggled with death; at last, as I seemed to cling to life, I was ordered to the South.
Four men carried me from Paris to Châlons, walking six leagues a day; Madame de Villefort followed the litter in her carriage.
At Châlons I was put upon the Saône, thence I passed on to the Rhône, whence I descended, merely with the current, to Arles; at Arles I was again placed on my litter, and continued my journey to Marseilles.
My recovery lasted six months.
I never heard you mentioned, and I did not dare inquire for you.
When I returned to Paris, I learned that you, the widow of M. de Nargonne, had married M.
“What was the subject of my thoughts from the time consciousness returned to me?
Always the same—always the child’s corpse, coming every night in my dreams, rising from the earth, and hovering over the grave with menacing look and gesture.
I inquired immediately on my return to Paris; the house had not been inhabited since we left it, but it had just been let for nine years.
I pretended that I disliked the idea that a house belonging to my wife’s father and mother should pass into the hands of strangers.
I offered to pay them for cancelling the lease; they demanded 6,000 francs.
I had the money with me; I made the tenant sign the deed of resilition, and when I had obtained what I so much wanted, I galloped to Auteuil.
“It was five o’clock in the afternoon; I ascended into the red room, and waited for night.
There all the thoughts which had disturbed me during my year of constant agony came back with double force.
The Corsican, who had declared the vendetta against me, who had followed me from Nîmes to Paris, who had hid himself in the garden, who had struck me, had seen me dig the grave, had seen me inter the child,—he might become acquainted with your person,—nay, he might even then have known it.
Would he not one day make you pay for keeping this terrible secret?
It was therefore necessary, before everything else, and at all risks, that I should cause all traces of the past to disappear—that I should destroy every material vestige; too much reality would always remain in my recollection.
It was for this I had annulled the lease—it was for this I had come—it was for this I was waiting.
I was without a light in that room; when the wind shook all the doors, behind which I continually expected to see some spy concealed, I trembled.
I seemed everywhere to hear your moans behind me in the bed, and I dared not turn around.
My heart beat so violently that I feared my wound would open.
At length, one by one, all the noises in the neighborhood ceased.
I understood that I had nothing to fear, that I should neither be seen nor heard, so I decided upon descending to the garden.
At last I mastered my agitation.
I descended the staircase step by step; the only thing I could not conquer was a strange trembling in my knees.
I grasped the railings; if I had relaxed my hold for a moment, I should have fallen.
Outside this door a spade was placed against the wall; I took it, and advanced towards the thicket.
I had provided myself with a dark lantern.
In the middle of the lawn I stopped to light it, then I continued my path.
“It was the end of November, all the verdure of the garden had disappeared, the trees were nothing more than skeletons with their long bony arms, and the dead leaves sounded on the gravel under my feet.
My terror overcame me to such a degree as I approached the thicket, that I took a pistol from my pocket and armed myself.
I fancied continually that I saw the figure of the Corsican between the branches.
I examined the thicket with my dark lantern; it was empty.
I looked carefully around; I was indeed alone,—no noise disturbed the silence but the owl, whose piercing cry seemed to be calling up the phantoms of the night.
Still one place where the grass was thin attracted my attention; it evidently was there I had turned up the ground.
How I worked, how I hoped, how I struck every piece of turf, thinking to find some resistance to my spade!
I thought I had been deceived—had mistaken the spot.
A cold, sharp wind whistled through the leafless branches, and yet the drops fell from my forehead.
I recollected that I was stabbed just as I was trampling the ground to fill up the hole; while doing so I had leaned against a laburnum; behind me was an artificial rockery, intended to serve as a resting-place for persons walking in the garden; in falling, my hand, relaxing its hold of the laburnum, felt the coldness of the stone.
I stood in the same attitude, and threw myself down.
I rose, and again began digging and enlarging the hole; still I found nothing, nothing—the chest was no longer there!” 30269m “The chest no longer there?” murmured Madame Danglars, choking with fear.
“Think not I contented myself with this one effort,” continued Villefort.
“No; I searched the whole thicket.
I thought the assassin, having discovered the chest, and supposing it to be a treasure, had intended carrying it off, but, perceiving his error, had dug another hole, and deposited it there; but I could find nothing.
Then the idea struck me that he had not taken these precautions, and had simply thrown it in a corner.
In the last case I must wait for daylight to renew my search.
I remained in the room and waited.” “Oh, Heaven!” 30271m When daylight dawned I went down again.
I hoped to find some traces which had escaped me in the darkness.
A laborer would not have done in a day what occupied me an hour.
But I could find nothing—absolutely nothing.
Supposing it had been thrown aside, it would probably be on the path which led to the little gate; but this examination was as useless as the first, and with a bursting heart I returned to the thicket, which now contained no hope for me.” “Oh,” cried Madame Danglars, “it was enough to drive you mad!” “I hoped for a moment that it might,” said Villefort; “but that happiness was denied me.
However, recovering my strength and my ideas, ‘Why,’ said I, ‘should that man have carried away the corpse?’” “But you said,” replied Madame Danglars, “he would require it as a proof.” “Ah, no, madame, that could not be.
Dead bodies are not kept a year; they are shown to a magistrate, and the evidence is taken.
Now, nothing of the kind has happened.” “What then?” asked Hermine, trembling violently.
“Something more terrible, more fatal, more alarming for us—the child was, perhaps, alive, and the assassin may have saved it!” Madame Danglars uttered a piercing cry, and, seizing Villefort’s hands, exclaimed, “My child was alive?” said she; “you buried my child alive?
Ah——” Madame Danglars had risen, and stood before the procureur, whose hands she wrung in her feeble grasp.
“I know not; I merely suppose so, as I might suppose anything else,” replied Villefort with a look so fixed, it indicated that his powerful mind was on the verge of despair and madness.
“Ah, my child, my poor child!” cried the baroness, falling on her chair, and stifling her sobs in her handkerchief.
Villefort, becoming somewhat reassured, perceived that to avert the maternal storm gathering over his head, he must inspire Madame Danglars with the terror he felt.
“You understand, then, that if it were so,” said he, rising in his turn, and approaching the baroness, to speak to her in a lower tone, “we are lost.
This child lives, and someone knows it lives—someone is in possession of our secret; and since Monte Cristo speaks before us of a child disinterred, when that child could not be found, it is he who is in possession of our secret.” “Just God, avenging God!” murmured Madame Danglars.
Villefort’s only answer was a stifled groan.
“But the child—the child, sir?” repeated the agitated mother.
“How I have searched for him,” replied Villefort, wringing his hands; “how I have called him in my long sleepless nights; how I have longed for royal wealth to purchase a million of secrets from a million of men, and to find mine among them!
At last, one day, when for the hundredth time I took up my spade, I asked myself again and again what the Corsican could have done with the child.
This portion of the napkin was marked with half a baron’s crown, and the letter H.” “Truly, truly,” said Madame Danglars, “all my linen is marked thus; Monsieur de Nargonne was a baron, and my name is Hermine.
Where is the child?” Villefort shrugged his shoulders.
“Do I know?” said he; “and do you believe that if I knew I would relate to you all its trials and all its adventures as would a dramatist or a novel writer?
This woman gave all the requisite particulars, and it was intrusted to her.” “But you should have inquired for the woman; you should have traced her.” “And what do you think I did?
I feigned a criminal process, and employed all the most acute bloodhounds and skilful agents in search of her.
They traced her to Châlons, and there they lost her.” “They lost her?” “Yes, forever.” Madame Danglars had listened to this recital with a sigh, a tear, or a shriek for every detail.
“And this is all?” said she; “and you stopped there?” “Oh, no,” said Villefort; “I never ceased to search and to inquire.
But now I will begin with more perseverance and fury than ever, since fear urges me, not my conscience.” “But,” replied Madame Danglars, “the Count of Monte Cristo can know nothing, or he would not seek our society as he does.” “Oh, the wickedness of man is very great,” said Villefort, “since it surpasses the goodness of God.
Did you observe that man’s eyes while he was speaking to us?” “No.” “But have you ever watched him carefully?” “Doubtless he is capricious, but that is all; one thing alone struck me,—of all the exquisite things he placed before us, he touched nothing.
I might have suspected he was poisoning us.” “And you see you would have been deceived.” “Yes, doubtless.” “But believe me, that man has other projects.
For that reason I wished to see you, to speak to you, to warn you against everyone, but especially against him.
Do you keep a journal?” “No, my life has been passed in frivolity; I wish to forget it myself.” “Do you talk in your sleep?” 30275m “I sleep soundly, like a child; do you not remember?” The color mounted to the baroness’s face, and Villefort turned awfully pale.
“Well?” said the baroness.
“Well, I understand what I now have to do,” replied Villefort.
“In less than one week from this time I will ascertain who this M. de Monte Cristo is, whence he comes, where he goes, and why he speaks in our presence of children that have been disinterred in a garden.” Villefort pronounced these words with an accent which would have made the count shudder had he heard him.
Then he pressed the hand the baroness reluctantly gave him, and led her respectfully back to the door.
Madame Danglars returned in another cab to the passage, on the other side of which she found her carriage, and her coachman sleeping peacefully on his box while waiting for her.
A Summer Ball The same day during the interview between Madame Danglars and the procureur, a travelling-carriage entered the Rue du Helder, passed through the gateway of No. 27, and stopped in the yard.
In a moment the door was opened, and Madame de Morcerf alighted, leaning on her son’s arm.
Albert soon left her, ordered his horses, and having arranged his toilet, drove to the Champs-Élysées, to the house of Monte Cristo.
The count received him with his habitual smile.
It was a strange thing that no one ever appeared to advance a step in that man’s favor.
Those who would, as it were, force a passage to his heart, found an impassable barrier.
Morcerf, who ran towards him with open arms, was chilled as he drew near, in spite of the friendly smile, and simply held out his hand.
Monte Cristo shook it coldly, according to his invariable practice.
“Here I am, dear count.” “Welcome home again.” “I arrived an hour since.” “From Dieppe?” “No, from Tréport.” “Indeed?” “And I have come at once to see you.” “That is extremely kind of you,” said Monte Cristo with a tone of perfect indifference.
“And what is the news?” “You should not ask a stranger, a foreigner, for news.” “I know it, but in asking for news, I mean, have you done anything for me?” “Had you commissioned me?” said Monte Cristo, feigning uneasiness.
“Come, come,” said Albert, “do not assume so much indifference.
It is said, sympathy travels rapidly, and when at Tréport, I felt the electric shock; you have either been working for me or thinking of me.” “Possibly,” said Monte Cristo, “I have indeed thought of you, but the magnetic wire I was guiding acted, indeed, without my knowledge.” 30277m “Indeed!
Pray tell me how it happened.” “Willingly.
Danglars dined with me.” “I know it; to avoid meeting him, my mother and I left town.” “But he met here M.
Andrea Cavalcanti.” “Your Italian prince?” “Not so fast; M.
I, of course, give him the same title, and everyone else does likewise.” “What a strange man you are!
Danglars dined here?” “Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father, Madame Danglars, M. and Madame de Villefort,—charming people,—M.
Debray, Maximilian Morrel, and M. de Château-Renaud.” “Did they speak of me?” “Not a word.” “So much the worse.” “Why so?
I thought you wished them to forget you?” “If they did not speak of me, I am sure they thought about me, and I am in despair.” “How will that affect you, since Mademoiselle Danglars was not among the number here who thought of you?
Truly, she might have thought of you at home.” “I have no fear of that; or, if she did, it was only in the same way in which I think of her.” “Touching sympathy!
“Listen,” said Morcerf—“if Mademoiselle Danglars were disposed to take pity on my supposed martyrdom on her account, and would dispense with all matrimonial formalities between our two families, I am ready to agree to the arrangement.
In a word, Mademoiselle Danglars would make a charming mistress—but a wife—_diable!_” “And this,” said Monte Cristo, “is your opinion of your intended spouse?” “Yes; it is rather unkind, I acknowledge, but it is true.
But as this dream cannot be realized, since Mademoiselle Danglars must become my lawful wife, live perpetually with me, sing to me, compose verses and music within ten paces of me, and that for my whole life, it frightens me.
One may forsake a mistress, but a wife,—good heavens!
There she must always be; and to marry Mademoiselle Danglars would be awful.” “You are difficult to please, viscount.” “Yes, for I often wish for what is impossible.” “What is that?” “To find such a wife as my father found.” Monte Cristo turned pale, and looked at Albert, while playing with some magnificent pistols.
“Your father was fortunate, then?” said he.
“You know my opinion of my mother, count; look at her,—still beautiful, witty, more charming than ever.
Have you ever noticed how much a thing is heightened in value when we obtain possession of it?
The diamond which glittered in the window at Marlé’s or Fossin’s shines with more splendor when it is our own; but if we are compelled to acknowledge the superiority of another, and still must retain the one that is inferior, do you not know what we have to endure?” “Worldling,” murmured the count.
“Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugénie perceives I am but a pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she has millions.” Monte Cristo smiled.
“Apropos,” continued he, “Franz is coming soon, but it will not interest you; you dislike him, I think?” “I?” said Monte Cristo; “my dear viscount, how have you discovered that I did not like M.
I like everyone.” “And you include me in the expression everyone—many thanks!” “Let us not mistake,” said Monte Cristo; “I love everyone as God commands us to love our neighbor, as Christians; but I thoroughly hate but a few.
Did you say he was coming?” “Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as anxious to get Mademoiselle Valentine married as M.
Danglars is to see Mademoiselle Eugénie settled.
It must be a very irksome office to be the father of a grown-up daughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one’s pulse to ninety beats a minute until the deed is done.” “But M. d’Épinay, unlike you, bears his misfortune patiently.” “Still more, he talks seriously about the matter, puts on a white tie, and speaks of his family.
He entertains a very high opinion of M. and Madame de Villefort.” “Which they deserve, do they not?” “I believe they do.
M. de Villefort has always passed for a severe but a just man.” “There is, then, one,” said Monte Cristo, “whom you do not condemn like poor Danglars?” “Because I am not compelled to marry his daughter perhaps,” replied Albert, laughing.
“Indeed, my dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “you are revoltingly foppish.” “I foppish? how do you mean?” “Yes; pray take a cigar, and cease to defend yourself, and to struggle to escape marrying Mademoiselle Danglars.
“Doubtless, my dear viscount, you will not be taken by force; and seriously, do you wish to break off your engagement?” “I would give a hundred thousand francs to be able to do so.” “Then make yourself quite easy.
Danglars would give double that sum to attain the same end.” “Am I, indeed, so happy?” said Albert, who still could not prevent an almost imperceptible cloud passing across his brow.
Danglars any reason?” “Ah! there is your proud and selfish nature.
You would expose the self-love of another with a hatchet, but you shrink if your own is attacked with a needle.” “But yet, M.
Danglars appeared——” “Delighted with you, was he not?
Well, he is a man of bad taste, and is still more enchanted with another.
I know not whom; look and judge for yourself.” “Thank you, I understand.
But my mother—no, not my mother; I mistake—my father intends giving a ball.” “A ball at this season?” “Summer balls are fashionable.” “If they were not, the countess has only to wish it, and they would become so.” “You are right; You know they are select affairs; those who remain in Paris in July must be true Parisians.
Will you take charge of our invitation to Messieurs Cavalcanti?” “When will it take place?” “On Saturday.” “M.
Cavalcanti’s father will be gone.” “But the son will be here; will you invite young M.
Cavalcanti?” “I do not know him, viscount.” “You do not know him?” “No, I never saw him until a few days since, and am not responsible for him.” “But you receive him at your house?” “That is another thing: he was recommended to me by a good abbé, who may be deceived.
Give him a direct invitation, but do not ask me to present him.
“Ah, count,” said Albert, “I assure you Madame de Morcerf speaks freely to me, and if you have not felt those sympathetic fibres of which I spoke just now thrill within you, you must be entirely devoid of them, for during the last four days we have spoken of no one else.” “You have talked of me?” “Yes, that is the penalty of being a living puzzle!” “Then I am also a puzzle to your mother?
I should have thought her too reasonable to be led by imagination.” “A problem, my dear count, for everyone—for my mother as well as others; much studied, but not solved, you still remain an enigma, do not fear.
My mother is only astonished that you remain so long unsolved.
I believe, while the Countess G—— takes you for Lord Ruthven, my mother imagines you to be Cagliostro or the Count Saint-Germain.
The first opportunity you have, confirm her in her opinion; it will be easy for you, as you have the philosophy of the one and the wit of the other.” “I thank you for the warning,” said the count; “I shall endeavor to be prepared for all suppositions.” “You will, then, come on Saturday?” “Yes, since Madame de Morcerf invites me.” “You are very kind.” “Will M.
Danglars be there?” “He has already been invited by my father.
We shall try to persuade the great d’Aguesseau,11 M. de Villefort, to come, but have not much hope of seeing him.” “‘Never despair of anything,’ says the proverb.” “Do you dance, count?” “I dance?” “Yes, you; it would not be astonishing.” “That is very well before one is over forty.
Does Madame de Morcerf dance?” “Never; you can talk to her, she so delights in your conversation.” “Indeed?” 30283m “Yes, truly; and I assure you.
You are the only man of whom I have heard her speak with interest.” Albert rose and took his hat; the count conducted him to the door.
“I have one thing to reproach myself with,” said he, stopping Albert on the steps.
“What is it?” “I have spoken to you indiscreetly about Danglars.” “On the contrary, speak to me always in the same strain about him.” “I am glad to be reassured on that point.
Apropos, when do you aspect M. d’Épinay?” “Five or six days hence at the latest.” “And when is he to be married?” “Immediately on the arrival of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran.” “Bring him to see me.
Although you say I do not like him, I assure you I shall be happy to see him.” “I will obey your orders, my lord.” “Good-bye.” “Until Saturday, when I may expect you, may I not?” “Yes, I promised you.” The Count watched Albert, waving his hand to him.
When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte Cristo turned, and seeing Bertuccio, “What news?” said he.
“Did she stay long there?” “An hour and a half.” “Did she return home?” “Directly.” “Well, my dear Bertuccio,” said the count, “I now advise you to go in quest of the little estate I spoke to you of in Normandy.” Bertuccio bowed, and as his wishes were in perfect harmony with the order he had received, he started the same evening.
The Inquiry M. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to Madame Danglars, to endeavor to find out how the Count of Monte Cristo had discovered the history of the house at Auteuil.
He wrote the same day for the required information to M. de Boville, who, from having been an inspector of prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; and the latter begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely to give him full particulars.
The two lower rooms consisted of a dining-room, with a table, chairs, and side-board of walnut, and a wainscoted parlor, without ornaments, carpet, or timepiece.
It was evident that the abbé limited himself to objects of strict necessity.
He preferred to use the sitting-room upstairs, which was more library than parlor, and was furnished with theological books and parchments, in which he delighted to bury himself for months at a time, according to his valet de chambre.
His valet looked at the visitors through a sort of wicket; and if their faces were unknown to him or displeased him, he replied that the abbé was not in Paris, an answer which satisfied most persons, because the abbé was known to be a great traveller.
Besides, whether at home or not, whether in Paris or Cairo, the abbé always left something to give away, which the valet distributed through this wicket in his master’s name.
A bed without curtains, four armchairs, and a couch, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, composed, with a _prie-Dieu_, all its furniture.
“Lord Wilmore resided in Rue Fontaine-Saint-Georges.
He was one of those English tourists who consume a large fortune in travelling.
He hired the apartment in which he lived furnished, passed only a few hours in the day there, and rarely slept there.
One of his peculiarities was never to speak a word of French, which he however wrote with great facility.” The day after this important information had been given to the king’s attorney, a man alighted from a carriage at the corner of the Rue Férou, and rapping at an olive-green door, asked if the Abbé Busoni were within.
“I might not always be content with that answer,” replied the visitor, “for I come from one to whom everyone must be at home.
But have the kindness to give the Abbé Busoni——” “I told you he was not at home,” repeated the valet.
Will he be at home at eight o’clock this evening?” “Doubtless, unless he is at work, which is the same as if he were out.” “I will come again at that time,” replied the visitor, who then retired.
At the appointed hour the same man returned in the same carriage, which, instead of stopping this time at the end of the Rue Férou, drove up to the green door.
He knocked, and it opened immediately to admit him.
From the signs of respect the valet paid him, he saw that his note had produced a good effect.
The stranger ascended a rough staircase, and before a table, illumined by a lamp whose light was concentrated by a large shade while the rest of the apartment was in partial darkness, he perceived the abbé in a monk’s dress, with a cowl on his head such as was used by learned men of the Middle Ages.
“Have I the honor of addressing the Abbé Busoni?” asked the visitor.
“Yes, sir,” replied the abbé; “and you are the person whom M. de Boville, formerly an inspector of prisons, sends to me from the prefect of police?” “Exactly, sir.” “One of the agents appointed to secure the safety of Paris?” “Yes, sir” replied the stranger with a slight hesitation, and blushing.
The abbé replaced the large spectacles, which covered not only his eyes but his temples, and sitting down motioned to his visitor to do the same.
“The mission with which I am charged, sir,” replied the visitor, speaking with hesitation, “is a confidential one on the part of him who fulfils it, and him by whom he is employed.” The abbé bowed.
“Your probity,” replied the stranger, “is so well known to the prefect that he wishes as a magistrate to ascertain from you some particulars connected with the public safety, to ascertain which I am deputed to see you.
It is hoped that no ties of friendship or humane consideration will induce you to conceal the truth.” “Provided, sir, the particulars you wish for do not interfere with my scruples or my conscience.
I am a priest, sir, and the secrets of confession, for instance, must remain between me and God, and not between me and human justice.” “Do not alarm yourself, monsieur, we will duly respect your conscience.” At this moment the abbé pressed down his side of the shade and so raised it on the other, throwing a bright light on the stranger’s face, while his own remained obscured.
“Now, sir, I am listening—go on.” “I will come at once to the point.
Do you know the Count of Monte Cristo?” “You mean Monsieur Zaccone, I presume?” “Zaccone?—is not his name Monte Cristo?” “Monte Cristo is the name of an estate, or, rather, of a rock, and not a family name.” “Well, be it so—let us not dispute about words; and since M. de Monte Cristo and M.
Zaccone are the same——” “Absolutely the same.” “Let us speak of M.
In Italy one must have territorial possessions to be a count.” “You have, doubtless, heard the adventures of M.
“He passes for a very charitable man.
Do you know about that institution?” “I have heard of it.” “It is a magnificent charity.” Having said this, the abbé bowed to imply he wished to pursue his studies.
The visitor either understood the abbé’s meaning, or had no more questions to ask; he arose, and the abbé accompanied him to the door.
An hour afterwards the carriage was again ordered, and this time it went to the Rue Fontaine-Saint-Georges, and stopped at No. 5, where Lord Wilmore lived.
The stranger had written to Lord Wilmore, requesting an interview, which the latter had fixed for ten o’clock.
As the envoy of the prefect of police arrived ten minutes before ten, he was told that Lord Wilmore, who was precision and punctuality personified, was not yet come in, but that he would be sure to return as the clock struck.
The visitor was introduced into the drawing-room, which was like all other furnished drawing-rooms.
A mantle-piece, with two modern Sèvres vases, a timepiece representing Cupid with his bent bow, a mirror with an engraving on each side—one representing Homer carrying his guide, the other, Belisarius begging—a grayish paper; red and black tapestry—such was the appearance of Lord Wilmore’s drawing-room.
It was illuminated by lamps with ground-glass shades which gave only a feeble light, as if out of consideration for the envoy’s weak sight.
After ten minutes’ expectation the clock struck ten; at the fifth stroke the door opened and Lord Wilmore appeared.
He was rather above the middle height, with thin reddish whiskers, light complexion and light hair, turning rather gray.
He was dressed with all the English peculiarity, namely, in a blue coat, with gilt buttons and high collar, in the fashion of 1811, a white kerseymere waistcoat, and nankeen pantaloons, three inches too short, but which were prevented by straps from slipping up to the knee.
His first remark on entering was: “You know, sir, I do not speak French?” “I know you do not like to converse in our language,” replied the envoy.
“But you may use it,” replied Lord Wilmore; “I understand it.” “And I,” replied the visitor, changing his idiom, “know enough of English to keep up the conversation.
Do not put yourself to the slightest inconvenience.” “Aw?” said Lord Wilmore, with that tone which is only known to natives of Great Britain.
The envoy presented his letter of introduction, which the latter read with English coolness, and having finished: “I understand,” said he, “perfectly.” 30293m Then began the questions, which were similar to those which had been addressed to the Abbé Busoni.
But as Lord Wilmore, in the character of the count’s enemy, was less restrained in his answers, they were more numerous; he described the youth of Monte Cristo, who he said, at ten years of age, entered the service of one of the petty sovereigns of India who make war on the English.
It was there Wilmore had first met him and fought against him; and in that war Zaccone had been taken prisoner, sent to England, and consigned to the hulks, whence he had escaped by swimming.
Then began his travels, his duels, his caprices; then the insurrection in Greece broke out, and he had served in the Grecian ranks.
While in that service he had discovered a silver mine in the mountains of Thessaly, but he had been careful to conceal it from everyone.
After the battle of Navarino, when the Greek government was consolidated, he asked of King Otho a mining grant for that district, which was given him.
Hence that immense fortune, which, in Lord Wilmore’s opinion, possibly amounted to one or two millions per annum,—a precarious fortune, which might be momentarily lost by the failure of the mine.
“But,” asked the visitor, “do you know why he came to France?” “He is speculating in railways,” said Lord Wilmore, “and as he is an expert chemist and physicist, he has invented a new system of telegraphy, which he is seeking to bring to perfection.” “How much does he spend yearly?” asked the prefect.
“Not more than five or six hundred thousand francs,” said Lord Wilmore; “he is a miser.” Hatred evidently inspired the Englishman, who, knowing no other reproach to bring on the count, accused him of avarice.
“Do you know his house at Auteuil?” “Certainly.” “What do you know respecting it?” “Do you wish to know why he bought it?” “Yes.” “The count is a speculator, who will certainly ruin himself in experiments.
He supposes there is in the neighborhood of the house he has bought a mineral spring equal to those at Bagnères, Luchon, and Cauterets.
He has already dug up all the garden two or three times to find the famous spring, and, being unsuccessful, he will soon purchase all the contiguous houses.
“So that, you see, there is a deadly feud between us.” “But,” said the envoy, “you do not go about it in the right way to kill him, if I understand you correctly.” “Aw?” said the Englishman, “I practice shooting every day, and every other day Grisier comes to my house.” This was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather, all the Englishman appeared to know.
The agent arose, and having bowed to Lord Wilmore, who returned his salutation with the stiff politeness of the English, he retired.
Lord Wilmore, having heard the door close after him, returned to his bedroom, where with one hand he pulled off his light hair, his red whiskers, his false jaw, and his wound, to resume the black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teeth of the Count of Monte Cristo.
It was M. de Villefort, and not the prefect, who returned to the house of M. de Villefort.
The procureur felt more at ease, although he had learned nothing really satisfactory, and, for the first time since the dinner-party at Auteuil, he slept soundly.
The Ball It was in the warmest days of July, when in due course of time the Saturday arrived upon which the ball was to take place at M. de Morcerf’s.
It was ten o’clock at night; the branches of the great trees in the garden of the count’s house stood out boldly against the azure canopy of heaven, which was studded with golden stars, but where the last fleeting clouds of a vanishing storm yet lingered.
From the apartments on the ground floor might be heard the sound of music, with the whirl of the waltz and galop, while brilliant streams of light shone through the openings of the Venetian blinds.
At this moment the garden was only occupied by about ten servants, who had just received orders from their mistress to prepare the supper, the serenity of the weather continuing to increase.
Until now, it had been undecided whether the supper should take place in the dining-room, or under a long tent erected on the lawn, but the beautiful blue sky, studded with stars, had settled the question in favor of the lawn.
Madame Danglars, in whom the events we have related had caused deep anxiety, had hesitated about going to Madame de Morcerf’s, when during the morning her carriage happened to meet that of Villefort.
The latter made a sign, and when the carriages had drawn close together, said: “You are going to Madame de Morcerf’s, are you not?” “No,” replied Madame Danglars, “I am too ill.” “You are wrong,” replied Villefort, significantly; “it is important that you should be seen there.” “Do you think so?” asked the baroness.
“I do.” “In that case I will go.” And the two carriages passed on towards their different destinations.
Madame Danglars therefore came, not only beautiful in person, but radiant with splendor; she entered by one door at the time when Mercédès appeared at the door.
The countess took Albert to meet Madame Danglars.
He approached, paid her some well merited compliments on her toilet, and offered his arm to conduct her to a seat.
“You are looking for my daughter?” said the baroness, smiling.
“Could you have been so cruel as not to bring her?” “Calm yourself.
She has met Mademoiselle de Villefort, and has taken her arm; see, they are following us, both in white dresses, one with a bouquet of camellias, the other with one of myosotis.
But tell me——” “Well, what do you wish to know?” “Will not the Count of Monte Cristo be here tonight?” “Seventeen!” replied Albert.
“What do you mean?” “I only mean that the count seems the rage,” replied the viscount, smiling, “and that you are the seventeenth person that has asked me the same question.
The count is in fashion; I congratulate him upon it.” “And have you replied to everyone as you have to me?” “Ah, to be sure, I have not answered you; be satisfied, we shall have this ‘lion’; we are among the privileged ones.” “Were you at the Opera yesterday?” “No.” “He was there.” “Ah, indeed?
And did the eccentric person commit any new originality?” “Can he be seen without doing so?
Elssler was dancing in _Le Diable boiteux_; the Greek princess was in ecstasies.
After the cachucha he placed a magnificent ring on the stem of a bouquet, and threw it to the charming danseuse, who, in the third act, to do honor to the gift, reappeared with it on her finger.
And the Greek princess,—will she be here?” “No, you will be deprived of that pleasure; her position in the count’s establishment is not sufficiently understood.” “Wait; leave me here, and go and speak to Madame de Villefort, who is trying to attract your attention.” Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards Madame de Villefort, whose lips opened as he approached.
“I wager anything,” said Albert, interrupting her, “that I know what you were about to say.” “Well, what is it?” “If I guess rightly, will you confess it?” “Yes.” “On your honor?” “On my honor.” “You were going to ask me if the Count of Monte Cristo had arrived, or was expected.” “Not at all.
It is not of him that I am now thinking.
“The son of a shipowner.” “Really, you should relate all this aloud, you would have the greatest success.” “He served in India, discovered a mine in Thessaly, and comes to Paris to establish a mineral water-cure at Auteuil.” “Well, I’m sure,” said Morcerf, “this is indeed news!
Am I allowed to repeat it?” “Yes, but cautiously, tell one thing at a time, and do not say I told you.” “Why so?” “Because it is a secret just discovered.” “By whom?” “The police.” “Then the news originated——” “At the prefect’s last night.
Paris, you can understand, is astonished at the sight of such unusual splendor, and the police have made inquiries.” “Well, well!
Nothing more is wanting than to arrest the count as a vagabond, on the pretext of his being too rich.” “Indeed, that doubtless would have happened if his credentials had not been so favorable.” “Poor count!
And is he aware of the danger he has been in?” “I think not.” “Then it will be but charitable to inform him.
When he arrives, I will not fail to do so.” Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and glossy moustache, respectfully bowed to Madame de Villefort.
Albert extended his hand.
Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, one of our best, and, above all, of our bravest officers.” “I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at Auteuil, at the house of the Count of Monte Cristo,” replied Madame de Villefort, turning away with marked coldness of manner.
This answer, and especially the tone in which it was uttered, chilled the heart of poor Morrel.
But a recompense was in store for him; turning around, he saw near the door a beautiful fair face, whose large blue eyes were, without any marked expression, fixed upon him, while the bouquet of myosotis was gently raised to her lips.
The salutation was so well understood that Morrel, with the same expression in his eyes, placed his handkerchief to his mouth; and these two living statues, whose hearts beat so violently under their marble aspect, separated from each other by the whole length of the room, forgot themselves for a moment, or rather forgot the world in their mutual contemplation.
They might have remained much longer lost in one another, without anyone noticing their abstraction.
We have already said that there was something in the count which attracted universal attention wherever he appeared.
Many men might have been handsomer, but certainly there could be none whose appearance was more _significant_, if the expression may be used.
Everything about the count seemed to have its meaning, for the constant habit of thought which he had acquired had given an ease and vigor to the expression of his face, and even to the most trifling gesture, scarcely to be understood.
No doubt she fancied the count would speak to her, while on his side the count thought she was about to address him; but both remained silent, and after a mere bow, Monte Cristo directed his steps to Albert, who received him cordially.
“I have just had the pleasure,” replied the count; “but I have not seen your father.” “See, he is down there, talking politics with that little group of great geniuses.” “Indeed?” said Monte Cristo; “and so those gentlemen down there are men of great talent.
And for what kind of talent are they celebrated?
You know there are different sorts.” “That tall, harsh-looking man is very learned, he discovered, in the neighborhood of Rome, a kind of lizard with a vertebra more than lizards usually have, and he immediately laid his discovery before the Institute.
The thing was discussed for a long time, but finally decided in his favor.
I can assure you the vertebra made a great noise in the learned world, and the gentleman, who was only a knight of the Legion of Honor, was made an officer.” “Come,” said Monte Cristo, “this cross seems to me to be wisely awarded.
I suppose, had he found another additional vertebra, they would have made him a commander.” “Very likely,” said Albert.
I believe he thrusts pins through the heads of rabbits, he makes fowls eat madder, and punches the spinal marrow out of dogs with whalebone.” “And he is made a member of the Academy of Sciences for this?” “No; of the French Academy.” “But what has the French Academy to do with all this?” “I was going to tell you.
It seems——” “That his experiments have very considerably advanced the cause of science, doubtless?” “No; that his style of writing is very good.” “This must be very flattering to the feelings of the rabbits into whose heads he has thrust pins, to the fowls whose bones he has dyed red, and to the dogs whose spinal marrow he has punched out?” Albert laughed.
“And the other one?” demanded the count.
“That one?” “Yes, the third.” “The one in the dark blue coat?” “Yes.” “He is a colleague of the count, and one of the most active opponents to the idea of providing the Chamber of Peers with a uniform.
He was very successful upon that question.
He stood badly with the Liberal papers, but his noble opposition to the wishes of the court is now getting him into favor with the journalists.
They talk of making him an ambassador.” 30303m “And what are his claims to the peerage?” “He has composed two or three comic operas, written four or five articles in the _Siècle_, and voted five or six years on the ministerial side.” “Bravo, viscount,” said Monte Cristo, smiling; “you are a delightful _cicerone_.
And now you will do me a favor, will you not?” “What is it?” “Do not introduce me to any of these gentlemen; and should they wish it, you will warn me.” Just then the count felt his arm pressed.
He turned round; it was Danglars.
“Why do you call me baron?” said Danglars; “you know that I care nothing for my title.
I am not like you, viscount; you like your title, do you not?” “Certainly,” replied Albert, “seeing that without my title I should be nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, would still remain the millionaire.” “Which seems to me the finest title under the royalty of July,” replied Danglars.
“Unfortunately,” said Monte Cristo, “one’s title to a millionaire does not last for life, like that of baron, peer of France, or academician; for example, the millionaires Franck & Poulmann, of Frankfurt, who have just become bankrupts.” “Indeed?” said Danglars, becoming pale.
“Yes; I received the news this evening by a courier.
Cavalcanti;” after which he smiled, and turned towards the young man in question.
Albert had left the count to speak to his mother, Danglars to converse with young Cavalcanti; Monte Cristo was for an instant alone.
Meanwhile the heat became excessive.
The footmen were hastening through the rooms with waiters loaded with ices.
Monte Cristo wiped the perspiration from his forehead, but drew back when the waiter was presented to him; he took no refreshment.
“Approach him,” said she, “and when the next waiter passes, insist upon his taking something.” “But why, mother?” “Just to please me, Albert,” said Mercédès.
Another salver passed, loaded like the preceding ones; she saw Albert attempt to persuade the count, but he obstinately refused.
Albert rejoined his mother; she was very pale.
“Well,” said she, “you see he refuses?” “Yes; but why need this annoy you?” “You know, Albert, women are singular creatures.
I should like to have seen the count take something in my house, if only an ice.
A minute afterwards the blinds were thrown open, and through the jessamine and clematis that overhung the window one could see the garden ornamented with lanterns, and the supper laid under the tent.
Dancers, players, talkers, all uttered an exclamation of joy—everyone inhaled with delight the breeze that floated in.
At the same time Mercédès reappeared, paler than before, but with that imperturbable expression of countenance which she sometimes wore.
She went straight to the group of which her husband formed the centre.
It was only a momentary glance, but it seemed to the countess to have lasted for a century, so much was expressed in that one look.
He offered his arm to the countess; she took it, or rather just touched it with her little hand, and they together descended the steps, lined with rhododendrons and camellias.
Behind them, by another outlet, a group of about twenty persons rushed into the garden with loud exclamations of delight.
Bread and Salt Madame de Morcerf entered an archway of trees with her companion.
It led through a grove of lindens to a conservatory.
“Yes, madame; and it was an excellent idea of yours to open the doors and the blinds.” As he ceased speaking, the count felt the hand of Mercédès tremble.
“But you,” he said, “with that light dress, and without anything to cover you but that gauze scarf, perhaps you feel cold?” “Do you know where I am leading you?” said the countess, without replying to the question.
“No, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “but you see I make no resistance.” “We are going to the greenhouse that you see at the other end of the grove.” The count looked at Mercédès as if to interrogate her, but she continued to walk on in silence, and he refrained from speaking.
They reached the building, ornamented with magnificent fruits, which ripen at the beginning of July in the artificial temperature which takes the place of the sun, so frequently absent in our climate.
The countess left the arm of Monte Cristo, and gathered a bunch of Muscatel grapes.
“See, count,” she said, with a smile so sad in its expression that one could almost detect the tears on her eyelids—“see, our French grapes are not to be compared, I know, with yours of Sicily and Cyprus, but you will make allowance for our northern sun.” The count bowed, but stepped back.
“Do you refuse?” said Mercédès, in a tremulous voice.
“Pray excuse me, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “but I never eat Muscatel grapes.” Mercédès let them fall, and sighed.
A magnificent peach was hanging against an adjoining wall, ripened by the same artificial heat.
“What, again?” she exclaimed, in so plaintive an accent that it seemed to stifle a sob; “really, you pain me.” A long silence followed; the peach, like the grapes, fell to the ground.
“Certainly, we are friends,” he replied; “why should we not be?” The answer was so little like the one Mercédès desired, that she turned away to give vent to a sigh, which sounded more like a groan.
They went the whole length of the garden without uttering a word.
“Sir,” suddenly exclaimed the countess, after their walk had continued ten minutes in silence, “is it true that you have seen so much, travelled so far, and suffered so deeply?” “I have suffered deeply, madame,” answered Monte Cristo.
“But now you are happy?” “Doubtless,” replied the count, “since no one hears me complain.” “And your present happiness, has it softened your heart?” “My present happiness equals my past misery,” said the count.
“Are you not married?” asked the countess.
“I, married?” exclaimed Monte Cristo, shuddering; “who could have told you so?” “No one told me you were, but you have frequently been seen at the Opera with a young and lovely woman.” “She is a slave whom I bought at Constantinople, madame, the daughter of a prince.
I have adopted her as my daughter, having no one else to love in the world.” “You live alone, then?” “I do.” “You have no sister—no son—no father?” “I have no one.” “How can you exist thus without anyone to attach you to life?” “It is not my fault, madame.
At Malta, I loved a young girl, was on the point of marrying her, when war came and carried me away.
I thought she loved me well enough to wait for me, and even to remain faithful to my memory.
When I returned she was married.
Perhaps my heart was weaker than the hearts of most men, and I suffered more than they would have done in my place; that is all.” The countess stopped for a moment, as if gasping for breath.
Not at all; why should I?” The countess placed herself before Monte Cristo, still holding in her hand a portion of the perfumed grapes.
“Madame, I never eat Muscatel grapes,” replied Monte Cristo, as if the subject had not been mentioned before.
The countess dashed the grapes into the nearest thicket, with a gesture of despair.
“Inflexible man!” she murmured.
Monte Cristo remained as unmoved as if the reproach had not been addressed to him.
“Oh, mother,” he exclaimed, “such a misfortune has happened!” “What?
What has happened?” asked the countess, as though awakening from a sleep to the realities of life; “did you say a misfortune?
Indeed, I should expect misfortunes.” “M. de Villefort is here.” “Well?” “He comes to fetch his wife and daughter.” “Why so?” “Because Madame de Saint-Méran is just arrived in Paris, bringing the news of M. de Saint-Méran’s death, which took place on the first stage after he left Marseilles.
Madame de Villefort, who was in very good spirits, would neither believe nor think of the misfortune, but Mademoiselle Valentine, at the first words, guessed the whole truth, notwithstanding all the precautions of her father; the blow struck her like a thunderbolt, and she fell senseless.” “And how was M. de Saint-Méran related to Mademoiselle de Villefort?” said the count.
“He was her grandfather on the mother’s side.
He was coming here to hasten her marriage with Franz.” “Ah, indeed!” “So Franz must wait.
Why was not M. de Saint-Méran also grandfather to Mademoiselle Danglars?” “Albert, Albert,” said Madame de Morcerf, in a tone of mild reproof, “what are you saying?
Monte Cristo watched her with an air so thoughtful, and so full of affectionate admiration, that she turned back and grasped his hand; at the same time she seized that of her son, and joined them together.
“Oh, madame, I do not presume to call myself your friend, but at all times I am your most respectful servant.” The countess left with an indescribable pang in her heart, and before she had taken ten steps the count saw her raise her handkerchief to her eyes.
“Do not my mother and you agree?” asked Albert, astonished.
“On the contrary,” replied the count, “did you not hear her declare that we were friends?” They re-entered the drawing-room, which Valentine and Madame de Villefort had just quitted.
It is perhaps needless to add that Morrel departed almost at the same time.
Madame de Saint-Méran A gloomy scene had indeed just passed at the house of M. de Villefort.
After the ladies had departed for the ball, whither all the entreaties of Madame de Villefort had failed in persuading him to accompany them, the procureur had shut himself up in his study, according to his custom, with a heap of papers calculated to alarm anyone else, but which generally scarcely satisfied his inordinate desires.
Villefort had secluded himself, not to study, but to reflect; and with the door locked and orders given that he should not be disturbed excepting for important business, he sat down in his armchair and began to ponder over the events, the remembrance of which had during the last eight days filled his mind with so many gloomy thoughts and bitter recollections.
Then, instead of plunging into the mass of documents piled before him, he opened the drawer of his desk, touched a spring, and drew out a parcel of cherished memoranda, amongst which he had carefully arranged, in characters only known to himself, the names of all those who, either in his political career, in money matters, at the bar, or in his mysterious love affairs, had become his enemies.
Their number was formidable, now that he had begun to fear, and yet these names, powerful though they were, had often caused him to smile with the same kind of satisfaction experienced by a traveller who from the summit of a mountain beholds at his feet the craggy eminences, the almost impassable paths, and the fearful chasms, through which he has so perilously climbed.
When he had run over all these names in his memory, again read and studied them, commenting meanwhile upon his lists, he shook his head.
“No,” he murmured, “none of my enemies would have waited so patiently and laboriously for so long a space of time, that they might now come and crush me with this secret.
Sometimes, as Hamlet says: ‘Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes;’ but, like a phosphoric light, they rise but to mislead.
The story has been told by the Corsican to some priest, who in his turn has repeated it.
M. de Monte Cristo may have heard it, and to enlighten himself—— “But why should he wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?” asked Villefort, after a moment’s reflection, “what interest can this M. de Monte Cristo or M.
Zaccone,—son of a shipowner of Malta, discoverer of a mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for the first time,—what interest, I say, can he take in discovering a gloomy, mysterious, and useless fact like this?
However, among all the incoherent details given to me by the Abbé Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend and that enemy, one thing appears certain and clear in my opinion—that in no period, in no case, in no circumstance, could there have been any contact between him and me.” But Villefort uttered words which even he himself did not believe.
He dreaded not so much the revelation, for he could reply to or deny its truth;—he cared little for that _mene, mene, tekel upharsin_, which appeared suddenly in letters of blood upon the wall;—but what he was really anxious for was to discover whose hand had traced them.
He drew back the bolt of his door, and almost directly an old lady entered, unannounced, carrying her shawl on her arm, and her bonnet in her hand.
The white hair was thrown back from her yellow forehead, and her eyes, already sunken by the furrows of age, now almost disappeared beneath the eyelids swollen with grief.
“Oh, sir,” she said; “oh, sir, what a misfortune!
I shall die of it; oh, yes, I shall certainly die of it!” And then, falling upon the chair nearest the door, she burst into a paroxysm of sobs.
The servants, standing in the doorway, not daring to approach nearer, were looking at Noirtier’s old servant, who had heard the noise from his master’s room, and run there also, remaining behind the others.
Villefort rose, and ran towards his mother-in-law, for it was she.
“Why, what can have happened?” he exclaimed, “what has thus disturbed you?
Is M. de Saint-Méran with you?” “M. de Saint-Méran is dead,” answered the old marchioness, without preface and without expression; she appeared to be stupefied.
Villefort drew back, and clasping his hands together, exclaimed: “Dead!—so suddenly?” “A week ago,” continued Madame de Saint-Méran, “we went out together in the carriage after dinner.
M. de Saint-Méran had been unwell for some days; still, the idea of seeing our dear Valentine again inspired him with courage, and notwithstanding his illness he would leave.
At six leagues from Marseilles, after having eaten some of the lozenges he is accustomed to take, he fell into such a deep sleep, that it appeared to me unnatural; still I hesitated to wake him, although I fancied that his face was flushed, and that the veins of his temples throbbed more violently than usual.
However, as it became dark, and I could no longer see, I fell asleep; I was soon aroused by a piercing shriek, as from a person suffering in his dreams, and he suddenly threw his head back violently.
I called the valet, I stopped the postilion, I spoke to M. de Saint-Méran, I applied my smelling-salts; but all was over, and I arrived at Aix by the side of a corpse.” Villefort stood with his mouth half open, quite stupefied.
I had him put into a leaden coffin, and I am preceding him by a few days.” “Oh! my poor mother!” said Villefort, “to have such duties to perform at your age after such a blow!” “God has supported me through all; and then, my dear marquis, he would certainly have done everything for me that I performed for him.
Where is Valentine, sir?
It is on her account I am here; I wish to see Valentine.” 30315m Villefort thought it would be terrible to reply that Valentine was at a ball; so he only said that she had gone out with her step-mother, and that she should be fetched.
Villefort placed the arm of Madame de Saint-Méran within his own, and conducted her to his apartment.
“Rest yourself, mother,” he said.
The marchioness raised her head at this word, and beholding the man who so forcibly reminded her of her deeply-regretted child, who still lived for her in Valentine, she felt touched at the name of mother, and bursting into tears, she fell on her knees before an armchair, where she buried her venerable head.
Villefort left her to the care of the women, while old Barrois ran, half-scared, to his master; for nothing frightens old people so much as when death relaxes its vigilance over them for a moment in order to strike some other old person.
Then, while Madame de Saint-Méran remained on her knees, praying fervently, Villefort sent for a cab, and went himself to fetch his wife and daughter from Madame de Morcerf’s.
He was so pale when he appeared at the door of the ball-room, that Valentine ran to him, saying: “Oh, father, some misfortune has happened!” “Your grandmamma has just arrived, Valentine,” said M. de Villefort.
“And grandpapa?” inquired the young girl, trembling with apprehension.
M. de Villefort only replied by offering his arm to his daughter.
It was just in time, for Valentine’s head swam, and she staggered; Madame de Villefort instantly hastened to her assistance, and aided her husband in dragging her to the carriage, saying: “What a singular event!
Ah, yes, it is indeed strange!” And the wretched family departed, leaving a cloud of sadness hanging over the rest of the evening.
At the foot of the stairs, Valentine found Barrois awaiting her.
Noirtier wishes to see you tonight, he said, in an undertone.
“Tell him I will come when I leave my dear grandmamma,” she replied, feeling, with true delicacy, that the person to whom she could be of the most service just then was Madame de Saint-Méran.
Valentine found her grandmother in bed; silent caresses, heartwrung sobs, broken sighs, burning tears, were all that passed in this sad interview, while Madame de Villefort, leaning on her husband’s arm, maintained all outward forms of respect, at least towards the poor widow.
She soon whispered to her husband: “I think it would be better for me to retire, with your permission, for the sight of me appears still to afflict your mother-in-law.” Madame de Saint-Méran heard her.
“Yes, yes,” she said softly to Valentine, “let her leave; but do you stay.” Madame de Villefort left, and Valentine remained alone beside the bed, for the procureur, overcome with astonishment at the unexpected death, had followed his wife.
Meanwhile, Barrois had returned for the first time to old Noirtier, who having heard the noise in the house, had, as we have said, sent his old servant to inquire the cause; on his return, his quick intelligent eye interrogated the messenger.
“Alas, sir,” exclaimed Barrois, “a great misfortune has happened.
Madame de Saint-Méran has arrived, and her husband is dead!” M. de Saint-Méran and Noirtier had never been on strict terms of friendship; still, the death of one old man always considerably affects another.
Noirtier let his head fall upon his chest, apparently overwhelmed and thoughtful; then he closed one eye, in token of inquiry.
Barrois asked, “Mademoiselle Valentine?” Noirtier nodded his head.
“She is at the ball, as you know, since she came to say good-bye to you in full dress.” Noirtier again closed his left eye.
“Do you wish to see her?” Noirtier again made an affirmative sign.
Barrois, therefore, as we have seen, watched for Valentine, and informed her of her grandfather’s wish.
Consequently, Valentine came up to Noirtier, on leaving Madame de Saint-Méran, who in the midst of her grief had at last yielded to fatigue and fallen into a feverish sleep.
Within reach of her hand they placed a small table upon which stood a bottle of orangeade, her usual beverage, and a glass.
Valentine kissed the old man, who looked at her with such tenderness that her eyes again filled with tears, whose sources he thought must be exhausted.
The old gentleman continued to dwell upon her with the same expression.
“Yes, yes,” said Valentine, “you mean that I have yet a kind grandfather left, do you not.” The old man intimated that such was his meaning.
“Ah, yes, happily I have,” replied Valentine.
Barrois, who wished to go to bed himself, observed that after such sad events everyone stood in need of rest.
Noirtier would not say that the only rest he needed was to see his child, but wished her good-night, for grief and fatigue had made her appear quite ill.
The next morning she found her grandmother in bed; the fever had not abated, on the contrary her eyes glistened and she appeared to be suffering from violent nervous irritability.
“Oh, dear grandmamma, are you worse?” exclaimed Valentine, perceiving all these signs of agitation.
“No, my child, no,” said Madame de Saint-Méran; “but I was impatiently waiting for your arrival, that I might send for your father.” “My father?” inquired Valentine, uneasily.
“Yes, I wish to speak to him.” Valentine durst not oppose her grandmother’s wish, the cause of which she did not know, and an instant afterwards Villefort entered.
“Sir,” said Madame de Saint-Méran, without using any circumlocution, and as if fearing she had no time to lose, “you wrote to me concerning the marriage of this child?” “Yes, madame,” replied Villefort, “it is not only projected but arranged.” “Your intended son-in-law is named M.
Noirtier, and will meet him, if not with pleasure, at least with indifference.” “Is it a suitable match?” “In every respect.” “And the young man?” “Is regarded with universal esteem.” “You approve of him?” “He is one of the most well-bred young men I know.” During the whole of this conversation Valentine had remained silent.
“Well, sir,” said Madame de Saint-Méran, after a few minutes’ reflection, “I must hasten the marriage, for I have but a short time to live.” “You, madame?” “You, dear mamma?” exclaimed M. de Villefort and Valentine at the same time.
“I know what I am saying,” continued the marchioness; “I must hurry you, so that, as she has no mother, she may at least have a grandmother to bless her marriage.
I am all that is left to her belonging to my poor Renée, whom you have so soon forgotten, sir.” “Ah, madame,” said Villefort, “you forget that I was obliged to give a mother to my child.” “A stepmother is never a mother, sir.
But this is not to the purpose,—our business concerns Valentine, let us leave the dead in peace.” All this was said with such exceeding rapidity, that there was something in the conversation that seemed like the beginning of delirium.
“It shall be as you wish, madame,” said Villefort; “more especially since your wishes coincide with mine, and as soon as M. d’Épinay arrives in Paris——” 30319m “My dear grandmother,” interrupted Valentine, “consider decorum—the recent death.
You would not have me marry under such sad auspices?” “My child,” exclaimed the old lady sharply, “let us hear none of the conventional objections that deter weak minds from preparing for the future.
I also was married at the death-bed of my mother, and certainly I have not been less happy on that account.” “Still that idea of death, madame,” said Villefort.
I tell you I am going to die—do you understand?
I wish to tell him to make my child happy; I wish to read in his eyes whether he intends to obey me;—in fact, I will know him—I will!” continued the old lady, with a fearful expression, “that I may rise from the depths of my grave to find him, if he should not fulfil his duty!” “Madame,” said Villefort, “you must lay aside these exalted ideas, which almost assume the appearance of madness.
The dead, once buried in their graves, rise no more.” “And I tell you, sir, that you are mistaken.
“It was the fever that disturbed you, madame,” said Villefort. 30321m “Doubt, if you please, but I am sure of what I say.
We must be expeditious.
And then I also wish to see a notary, that I may be assured that all our property returns to Valentine.” “Ah, grandmamma,” murmured Valentine, pressing her lips on the burning brow, “do you wish to kill me?
The marchioness drained the glass at a single draught, and then turned on her pillow, repeating, “The notary, the notary!” M. de Villefort left the room, and Valentine seated herself at the bedside of her grandmother.
The poor child appeared herself to require the doctor she had recommended to her aged relative.
A bright spot burned in either cheek, her respiration was short and difficult, and her pulse beat with feverish excitement.
She was thinking of the despair of Maximilian, when he should be informed that Madame de Saint-Méran, instead of being an ally, was unconsciously acting as his enemy.
More than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she would not have hesitated a moment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named Albert de Morcerf or Raoul de Château-Renaud; but Morrel was of plebeian extraction, and Valentine knew how the haughty Marquise de Saint-Méran despised all who were not noble.
Her secret had each time been repressed when she was about to reveal it, by the sad conviction that it would be useless to do so; for, were it once discovered by her father and mother, all would be lost.
Two hours passed thus; Madame de Saint-Méran was in a feverish sleep, and the notary had arrived.
Though his coming was announced in a very low tone, Madame de Saint-Méran arose from her pillow.
“The notary!” she exclaimed, “let him come in.” The notary, who was at the door, immediately entered.
“Go, Valentine,” said Madame de Saint-Méran, “and leave me with this gentleman.” “But, grandmamma——” “Leave me—go!” The young girl kissed her grandmother, and left with her handkerchief to her eyes; at the door she found the valet de chambre, who told her that the doctor was waiting in the dining-room.
Valentine instantly ran down.
The doctor was a friend of the family, and at the same time one of the cleverest men of the day, and very fond of Valentine, whose birth he had witnessed.
He had himself a daughter about her age, but whose life was one continued source of anxiety and fear to him from her mother having been consumptive.
“Oh,” said Valentine, “we have been waiting for you with such impatience, dear M. d’Avrigny.
But, first of all, how are Madeleine and Antoinette?” Madeleine was the daughter of M. d’Avrigny, and Antoinette his niece.
“Antoinette is very well,” he said, “and Madeleine tolerably so.
It is not your father or Madame de Villefort who is ill.
As for you, although we doctors cannot divest our patients of nerves, I fancy you have no further need of me than to recommend you not to allow your imagination to take too wide a field.” Valentine colored.
M. d’Avrigny carried the science of divination almost to a miraculous extent, for he was one of the physicians who always work upon the body through the mind. 30325m “No,” she replied, “it is for my poor grandmother.
You know the calamity that has happened to us, do you not?” “I know nothing.” said M. d’Avrigny.
“Alas,” said Valentine, restraining her tears, “my grandfather is dead.” “M. de Saint-Méran?” “Yes.” “Suddenly?” “From an apoplectic stroke.” “An apoplectic stroke?” repeated the doctor.
“Yes, and my poor grandmother fancies that her husband, whom she never left, has called her, and that she must go and join him.
Oh, M. d’Avrigny, I beseech you, do something for her!” “Where is she?” “In her room with the notary.” “And M.
Noirtier?” “Just as he was, his mind perfectly clear, but the same incapability of moving or speaking.” “And the same love for you—eh, my dear child?” “Yes,” said Valentine, “he was very fond of me.” “Who does not love you?” Valentine smiled sadly.
“What are your grandmother’s symptoms?” “An extreme nervous excitement and a strangely agitated sleep; she fancied this morning in her sleep that her soul was hovering above her body, which she at the same time watched.
“Go upstairs,” she said to the doctor.
“And you?” “Oh, I dare not—she forbade my sending for you; and, as you say, I am myself agitated, feverish and out of sorts.
I will go and take a turn in the garden to recover myself.” The doctor pressed Valentine’s hand, and while he visited her grandmother, she descended the steps.
We need not say which portion of the garden was her favorite walk.
After remaining for a short time in the parterre surrounding the house, and gathering a rose to place in her waist or hair, she turned into the dark avenue which led to the bench; then from the bench she went to the gate.
As usual, Valentine strolled for a short time among her flowers, but without gathering them.
The mourning in her heart forbade her assuming this simple ornament, though she had not yet had time to put on the outward semblance of woe. 30327m She then turned towards the avenue.
As she advanced she fancied she heard a voice speaking her name.
She stopped astonished, then the voice reached her ear more distinctly, and she recognized it to be that of Maximilian.
The Promise It was indeed Maximilian Morrel, who had passed a wretched existence since the previous day.
With the instinct peculiar to lovers he had anticipated after the return of Madame de Saint-Méran and the death of the marquis, that something would occur at M. de Villefort’s in connection with his attachment for Valentine.
His presentiments were realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings had goaded him pale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees.
Valentine was ignorant of the cause of this sorrow and anxiety, and as it was not his accustomed hour for visiting her, she had gone to the spot simply by accident or perhaps through sympathy.
“Yes, my poor girl,” replied Morrel; “I come to bring and to hear bad tidings.” “This is, indeed, a house of mourning,” said Valentine; “speak, Maximilian, although the cup of sorrow seems already full.” “Dear Valentine,” said Morrel, endeavoring to conceal his own emotion, “listen, I entreat you; what I am about to say is very serious.
When are you to be married?” “I will tell you all,” said Valentine; “from you I have nothing to conceal.
This morning the subject was introduced, and my dear grandmother, on whom I depended as my only support, not only declared herself favorable to it, but is so anxious for it, that they only await the arrival of M. d’Épinay, and the following day the contract will be signed.” A deep sigh escaped the young man, who gazed long and mournfully at her he loved.
“Alas,” replied he, “it is dreadful thus to hear my condemnation from your own lips.
The sentence is passed, and, in a few hours, will be executed; it must be so, and I will not endeavor to prevent it.
But, since you say nothing remains but for M. d’Épinay to arrive that the contract may be signed, and the following day you will be his, tomorrow you will be engaged to M. d’Épinay, for he came this morning to Paris.” Valentine uttered a cry.
“I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since,” said Morrel; “we were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced, and I of your grief, when a carriage rolled into the courtyard.
Never, till then, had I placed any confidence in presentiments, but now I cannot help believing them, Valentine.
At the sound of that carriage I shuddered; soon I heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me as much as the footsteps of the commander did Don Juan.
The door at last opened; Albert de Morcerf entered first, and I began to hope my fears were vain, when, after him, another young man advanced, and the count exclaimed: ‘Ah, here is the Baron Franz d’Épinay!’ I summoned all my strength and courage to my support.
Perhaps I turned pale and trembled, but certainly I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without having heard one word that had passed.” “Poor Maximilian!” murmured Valentine.
“Valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me.
And remember my life depends on your answer.
What do you intend doing?” Valentine held down her head; she was overwhelmed.
“Listen,” said Morrel; “it is not the first time you have contemplated our present position, which is a serious and urgent one; I do not think it is a moment to give way to useless sorrow; leave that for those who like to suffer at their leisure and indulge their grief in secret.
There are such in the world, and God will doubtless reward them in heaven for their resignation on earth, but those who mean to contend must not lose one precious moment, but must return immediately the blow which fortune strikes.
Do you intend to struggle against our ill-fortune?
Tell me, Valentine for it is that I came to know.” Valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement.
The idea of resisting her father, her grandmother, and all the family, had never occurred to her.
“What do you say, Maximilian?” asked Valentine.
“What do you mean by a struggle?
Oh, it would be a sacrilege.
I resist my father’s order, and my dying grandmother’s wish?
Impossible!” Morrel started.
“You are too noble not to understand me, and you understand me so well that you already yield, dear Maximilian.
No, no; I shall need all my strength to struggle with myself and support my grief in secret, as you say.
But to grieve my father—to disturb my grandmother’s last moments—never!” “You are right,” said Morrel, calmly.
“In what a tone you speak!” cried Valentine.
“I speak as one who admires you, mademoiselle.” “Mademoiselle,” cried Valentine; “mademoiselle!
Oh, selfish man! he sees me in despair, and pretends he cannot understand me!” “You mistake—I understand you perfectly.
Villefort, you will not displease the marchioness, and tomorrow you will sign the contract which will bind you to your husband.” “But, _mon Dieu!_ tell me, how can I do otherwise?” “Do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; I shall be a bad judge in such a case; my selfishness will blind me,” replied Morrel, whose low voice and clenched hands announced his growing desperation.
Oh, if you refuse my advice——” “What do you advise?” said Valentine, raising her eyes to heaven and sighing.
“I am free,” replied Maximilian, “and rich enough to support you.
I swear to make you my lawful wife before my lips even shall have approached your forehead.” “You make me tremble!” said the young girl.
We will embark for Algiers, for England, for America, or, if you prefer it, retire to the country and only return to Paris when our friends have reconciled your family.” Valentine shook her head.
“I feared it, Maximilian,” said she; “it is the counsel of a madman, and I should be more mad than you, did I not stop you at once with the word ‘Impossible, Morrel, impossible!’” “You will then submit to what fate decrees for you without even attempting to contend with it?” said Morrel sorrowfully.
“Yes,—if I die!” “Well, Valentine,” resumed Maximilian, “I can only say again that you are right.
I appreciate your calm reasoning.
It is then understood that tomorrow you will be irrevocably promised to M.
Franz d’Épinay, not only by that theatrical formality invented to heighten the effect of a comedy called the signature of the contract, but your own will?” “Again you drive me to despair, Maximilian,” said Valentine, “again you plunge the dagger into the wound!
What would you do, tell me, if your sister listened to such a proposition?” “Mademoiselle,” replied Morrel with a bitter smile, “I am selfish—you have already said so—and as a selfish man I think not of what others would do in my situation, but of what I intend doing myself.
From the day I first saw you, all my hopes of happiness have been in securing your affection.
One day you acknowledged that you loved me, and since that day my hope of future happiness has rested on obtaining you, for to gain you would be life to me.
It is an every-day occurrence for a gambler to lose not only what he possesses but also what he has not.” Morrel pronounced these words with perfect calmness; Valentine looked at him a moment with her large, scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not to let Morrel discover the grief which struggled in her heart.
“I am going to have the honor of taking my leave of you, mademoiselle, solemnly assuring you that I wish your life may be so calm, so happy, and so fully occupied, that there may be no place for me even in your memory.” “Oh!” murmured Valentine.
“Adieu, Valentine, adieu!” said Morrel, bowing.
“Speak, speak!” said Valentine; “I entreat you.” “Has your resolution changed, Valentine?” “It cannot change, unhappy man; you know it must not!” cried the young girl.
“Then adieu, Valentine!” Valentine shook the gate with a strength of which she could not have been supposed to be possessed, as Morrel was going away, and passing both her hands through the opening, she clasped and wrung them.
“Where are you going?” “Oh, fear not,” said Maximilian, stopping at a short distance, “I do not intend to render another man responsible for the rigorous fate reserved for me.
Another might threaten to seek M.
He saw me this morning for the first time, and has already forgotten he has seen me.
He did not even know I existed when it was arranged by your two families that you should be united.
Franz, and promise you the punishment shall not fall on him.” “On whom, then!—on me?” “On you?
Woman is sacred; the woman one loves is holy.” “On yourself, then, unhappy man; on yourself?” “I am the only guilty person, am I not?” said Maximilian.
“Maximilian!” said Valentine, “Maximilian, come back, I entreat you!” He drew near with his sweet smile, and but for his paleness one might have thought him in his usual happy mood.
“Listen, my dear, my adored Valentine,” said he in his melodious and grave tone; “those who, like us, have never had a thought for which we need blush before the world, such may read each other’s hearts.
I never was romantic, and am no melancholy hero.
I imitate neither Manfred nor Anthony; but without words, protestations, or vows, my life has entwined itself with yours; you leave me, and you are right in doing so,—I repeat it, you are right; but in losing you, I lose my life.
The moment you leave me, Valentine, I am alone in the world.
This is what I shall do; I will wait until the very moment you are married, for I will not lose the shadow of one of those unexpected chances which are sometimes reserved for us, since M.
Franz may, after all, die before that time, a thunderbolt may fall even on the altar as you approach it,—nothing appears impossible to one condemned to die, and miracles appear quite reasonable when his escape from death is concerned.
The young man stood before her, sorrowful and resolute.
“Oh, for pity’s sake,” said she, “you will live, will you not?” “No, on my honor,” said Maximilian; “but that will not affect you.
You have done your duty, and your conscience will be at rest.” Valentine fell on her knees, and pressed her almost bursting heart.
“Maximilian,” said she, “Maximilian, my friend, my brother on earth, my true husband in heaven, I entreat you, do as I do, live in suffering; perhaps we may one day be united.” “Adieu, Valentine,” repeated Morrel.
“My God,” said Valentine, raising both her hands to heaven with a sublime expression, “I have done my utmost to remain a submissive daughter; I have begged, entreated, implored; he has regarded neither my prayers, my entreaties, nor my tears.
It is done,” cried she, wiping away her tears, and resuming her firmness, “I am resolved not to die of remorse, but rather of shame.
Live, Maximilian, and I will be yours.
Speak, command, I will obey.” Morrel, who had already gone some few steps away, again returned, and pale with joy extended both hands towards Valentine through the opening.
“Valentine,” said he, “dear Valentine, you must not speak thus—rather let me die.
Why should I obtain you by violence, if our love is mutual?
Is it from mere humanity you bid me live?
I would then rather die.” “Truly,” murmured Valentine, “who on this earth cares for me, if he does not?
Who has consoled me in my sorrow but he?
On whom does my bleeding heart repose?
Yes, you are right, Maximilian, I will follow you.
I will leave the paternal home, I will give up all.
Oh, ungrateful girl that I am,” cried Valentine, sobbing, “I will give up all, even my dear old grandfather, whom I had nearly forgotten.” “No,” said Maximilian, “you shall not leave him.
Noirtier has evinced, you say, a kind feeling towards me.
Well, before you leave, tell him all; his consent would be your justification in God’s sight.
You have told me how you talk to him and how he answers you; I shall very soon learn that language by signs, Valentine, and I promise you solemnly, that instead of despair, it is happiness that awaits us.” “Oh, see, Maximilian, see the power you have over me, you almost make me believe you; and yet, what you tell me is madness, for my father will curse me—he is inflexible—he will never pardon me.
It is a miracle, it is a providence that we have not been discovered.
If we were surprised, if it were known that we met thus, we should have no further resource.” “You are right, Valentine; but how shall I ascertain?” “From the notary, M.
Deschamps.” “I know him.” “And for myself—I will write to you, depend on me.
I dread this marriage, Maximilian, as much as you.” “Thank you, my adored Valentine, thank you; that is enough.
“My adored Valentine, words cannot express one half of my satisfaction.” Valentine had approached, or rather, had placed her lips so near the fence, that they nearly touched those of Morrel, which were pressed against the other side of the cold and inexorable barrier.
“Adieu, then, till we meet again,” said Valentine, tearing herself away.
“I shall hear from you?” “Yes.” “Thanks, thanks, dear love, adieu!” The sound of a kiss was heard, and Valentine fled through the avenue.
Morrel listened to catch the last sound of her dress brushing the branches, and of her footstep on the gravel, then raised his eyes with an ineffable smile of thankfulness to heaven for being permitted to be thus loved, and then also disappeared.
The young man returned home and waited all the evening and all the next day without getting any message.
It was only on the following day, at about ten o’clock in the morning, as he was starting to call on M.
Deschamps, the notary, that he received from the postman a small billet, which he knew to be from Valentine, although he had not before seen her writing.
It was to this effect: “Tears, entreaties, prayers, have availed me nothing.
Yesterday, for two hours, I was at the church of Saint-Philippe-du-Roule, and for two hours I prayed most fervently.
Heaven is as inflexible as man, and the signature of the contract is fixed for this evening at nine o’clock.
“Your betrothed, “Valentine de Villefort.” “P.S.—My poor grandmother gets worse and worse; yesterday her fever amounted to delirium; today her delirium is almost madness.
I think it is kept a secret from grandpapa Noirtier, that the contract is to be signed this evening.” Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the contract was to be signed that evening.
Franz had been to announce the ceremony, and Madame de Villefort had also written to beg the count to excuse her not inviting him; the death of M. de Saint-Méran and the dangerous illness of his widow would cast a gloom over the meeting which she would regret should be shared by the count whom she wished every happiness.
The day before Franz had been presented to Madame de Saint-Méran, who had left her bed to receive him, but had been obliged to return to it immediately after.
It is easy to suppose that Morrel’s agitation would not escape the count’s penetrating eye.
Monte Cristo was more affectionate than ever,—indeed, his manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on the point of telling him all.
But he recalled the promise he had made to Valentine, and kept his secret.
The young man read Valentine’s letter twenty times in the course of the day.
It was her first, and on what an occasion!
How great is the power of a woman who has made so courageous a resolution!
What devotion does she deserve from him for whom she has sacrificed everything!
How ought she really to be supremely loved!
She becomes at once a queen and a wife, and it is impossible to thank and love her sufficiently.
Occasionally he shuddered; he thought of the moment when, from the top of that wall, he should protect the descent of his dear Valentine, pressing in his arms for the first time her of whom he had yet only kissed the delicate hand.
When the afternoon arrived and he felt that the hour was drawing near, he wished for solitude, his agitation was extreme; a simple question from a friend would have irritated him.
He shut himself in his room, and tried to read, but his eye glanced over the page without understanding a word, and he threw away the book, and for the second time sat down to sketch his plan, the ladders and the fence.
Never did a man deeply in love allow the clocks to go on peacefully.
Morrel tormented his so effectually that they struck eight at half-past six.
He then said, “It is time to start; the signature was indeed fixed to take place at nine o’clock, but perhaps Valentine will not wait for that.” Consequently, Morrel, having left the Rue Meslay at half-past eight by his timepiece, entered the clover-field while the clock of Saint-Philippe-du-Roule was striking eight.
The horse and cabriolet were concealed behind a small ruin, where Morrel had often waited.
The night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the garden assumed a deeper hue.
The clock struck half-past eight, and still another half-hour was passed in waiting, while Morrel walked to and fro, and gazed more and more frequently through the opening.
The garden became darker still, but in the darkness he looked in vain for the white dress, and in the silence he vainly listened for the sound of footsteps.
The house, which was discernible through the trees, remained in darkness, and gave no indication that so important an event as the signature of a marriage-contract was going on.
Morrel looked at his watch, which wanted a quarter to ten; but soon the same clock he had already heard strike two or three times rectified the error by striking half-past nine.
This was already half an hour past the time Valentine had fixed.
It was a terrible moment for the young man.
The slightest rustling of the foliage, the least whistling of the wind, attracted his attention, and drew the perspiration to his brow; then he tremblingly fixed his ladder, and, not to lose a moment, placed his foot on the first step.
Amidst all these alternations of hope and fear, the clock struck ten.
“It is impossible,” said Maximilian, “that the signing of a contract should occupy so long a time without unexpected interruptions.
I have weighed all the chances, calculated the time required for all the forms; something must have happened.” And then he walked rapidly to and fro, and pressed his burning forehead against the fence.
Had Valentine fainted? or had she been discovered and stopped in her flight?
These were the only obstacles which appeared possible to the young man.
The idea that her strength had failed her in attempting to escape, and that she had fainted in one of the paths, was the one that most impressed itself upon his mind.
“In that case,” said he, “I should lose her, and by my own fault.” He dwelt on this idea for a moment, then it appeared reality.
He even thought he could perceive something on the ground at a distance; he ventured to call, and it seemed to him that the wind wafted back an almost inarticulate sigh.
It was impossible to wait longer, his temples throbbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; he passed one leg over the wall, and in a moment leaped down on the other side.
He was on Villefort’s premises—had arrived there by scaling the wall.
What might be the consequences?
However, he had not ventured thus far to draw back.
He followed a short distance close under the wall, then crossed a path, hid entered a clump of trees.
In a moment he had passed through them, and could see the house distinctly. 30341m Then Morrel saw that he had been right in believing that the house was not illuminated.
Instead of lights at every window, as is customary on days of ceremony, he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a cloud, which at that moment obscured the moon’s feeble light.
Another remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in Madame de Villefort’s bedroom.
So many times, in order to follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he made her describe the whole house, that without having seen it he knew it all.
This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than Valentine’s absence had done.
Almost mad with grief, and determined to venture everything in order to see Valentine once more, and be certain of the misfortune he feared, Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and was going to pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden, when the sound of a voice, still at some distance, but which was borne upon the wind, reached him.
At this sound, as he was already partially exposed to view, he stepped back and concealed himself completely, remaining perfectly motionless.
He had formed his resolution.
If it was Valentine alone, he would speak as she passed; if she was accompanied, and he could not speak, still he should see her, and know that she was safe; if they were strangers, he would listen to their conversation, and might understand something of this hitherto incomprehensible mystery.
The moon had just then escaped from behind the cloud which had concealed it, and Morrel saw Villefort come out upon the steps, followed by a gentleman in black.
They descended, and advanced towards the clump of trees, and Morrel soon recognized the other gentleman as Doctor d’Avrigny. 30339m The young man, seeing them approach, drew back mechanically, until he found himself stopped by a sycamore-tree in the centre of the clump; there he was compelled to remain.
Soon the two gentlemen stopped also.
“Ah, my dear doctor,” said the procureur, “Heaven declares itself against my house!
What a dreadful death—what a blow!
Seek not to console me; alas, nothing can alleviate so great a sorrow—the wound is too deep and too fresh!
Dead, dead!” The cold sweat sprang to the young man’s brow, and his teeth chattered.
Who could be dead in that house, which Villefort himself had called accursed?
“My dear M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, with a tone which redoubled the terror of the young man, “I have not led you here to console you; on the contrary——” “What can you mean?” asked the procureur, alarmed.
“I mean that behind the misfortune which has just happened to you, there is another, perhaps, still greater.” “Can it be possible?” murmured Villefort, clasping his hands.
“What are you going to tell me?” “Are we quite alone, my friend?” “Yes, quite; but why all these precautions?” “Because I have a terrible secret to communicate to you,” said the doctor.
“Let us sit down.” Villefort fell, rather than seated himself.
The doctor stood before him, with one hand placed on his shoulder.
Morrel, horrified, supported his head with one hand, and with the other pressed his heart, lest its beatings should be heard.
“Dead, dead!” repeated he within himself; and he felt as if he were also dying.
“Speak, doctor—I am listening,” said Villefort; “strike—I am prepared for everything!” “Madame de Saint-Méran was, doubtless, advancing in years, but she enjoyed excellent health.” Morrel began again to breathe freely, which he had not done during the last ten minutes.
“Grief has consumed her,” said Villefort—“yes, grief, doctor!
After living forty years with the marquis——” “It is not grief, my dear Villefort,” said the doctor; “grief may kill, although it rarely does, and never in a day, never in an hour, never in ten minutes.” Villefort answered nothing, he simply raised his head, which had been cast down before, and looked at the doctor with amazement.
“Were you present during the last struggle?” asked M. d’Avrigny.
“I was,” replied the procureur; “you begged me not to leave.” “Did you notice the symptoms of the disease to which Madame de Saint-Méran has fallen a victim?” “I did.
Madame de Saint-Méran had three successive attacks, at intervals of some minutes, each one more serious than the former.
When you arrived, Madame de Saint-Méran had already been panting for breath some minutes; she then had a fit, which I took to be simply a nervous attack, and it was only when I saw her raise herself in the bed, and her limbs and neck appear stiffened, that I became really alarmed.
Then I understood from your countenance there was more to fear than I had thought.
This crisis past, I endeavored to catch your eye, but could not.
This was more terrible than the first; the same nervous movements were repeated, and the mouth contracted and turned purple.” “And at the third she expired.” “At the end of the first attack I discovered symptoms of tetanus; you confirmed my opinion.” “Yes, before others,” replied the doctor; “but now we are alone——” “What are you going to say?
Oh, spare me!” “That the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances are the same.” M. de Villefort started from his seat, then in a moment fell down again, silent and motionless.
Morrel knew not if he were dreaming or awake.
“Listen,” said the doctor; “I know the full importance of the statement I have just made, and the disposition of the man to whom I have made it.” “Do you speak to me as a magistrate or as a friend?” asked Villefort.
The similarity in the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances is so great, that were I obliged to affirm by oath what I have now stated, I should hesitate; I therefore repeat to you, I speak not to a magistrate, but to a friend.
Madame de Saint-Méran succumbed to a powerful dose of brucine or of strychnine, which by some mistake, perhaps, has been given to her.” Villefort seized the doctor’s hand.
“Oh, it is impossible,” said he, “I must be dreaming!
It is frightful to hear such things from such a man as you!
Tell me, I entreat you, my dear doctor, that you may be deceived.” “Doubtless I may, but——” “But?” 30345m “But I do not think so.” “Have pity on me doctor!
Oh, if such a thought could present itself, I would stab myself to punish my heart for having for one instant harbored it.” “Indeed, my dear friend,” said M. d’Avrigny, “I would not accuse anyone; I speak only of an accident, you understand,—of a mistake,—but whether accident or mistake, the fact is there; it is on my conscience and compels me to speak aloud to you.
Make inquiry.” “Of whom?—how?—of what?” “May not Barrois, the old servant, have made a mistake, and have given Madame de Saint-Méran a dose prepared for his master?” “For my father?” “Yes.” “But how could a dose prepared for M.
Noirtier poison Madame de Saint-Méran?” “Nothing is more simple.
You know poisons become remedies in certain diseases, of which paralysis is one.
For instance, having tried every other remedy to restore movement and speech to M.
Noirtier, I resolved to try one last means, and for three months I have been giving him brucine; so that in the last dose I ordered for him there were six grains.
This quantity, which is perfectly safe to administer to the paralyzed frame of M.
Noirtier, which has become gradually accustomed to it, would be sufficient to kill another person.” “My dear doctor, there is no communication between M.
Noirtier’s apartment and that of Madame de Saint-Méran, and Barrois never entered my mother-in-law’s room.
Still,” continued the procureur, looking at the doctor with uneasiness, “if you wish it—if you demand it, why then it shall be done.
But, doctor, you see me already so grieved—how can I introduce into my house so much scandal, after so much sorrow?
My wife and my daughter would die of it!
And I, doctor—you know a man does not arrive at the post I occupy—one has not been king’s attorney twenty-five years without having amassed a tolerable number of enemies; mine are numerous.
Doctor, pray recall your words; you have said nothing, have you?” “My dear M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, “my first duty is to humanity.
Let us bury this terrible secret in the deepest recesses of our hearts; I am willing, if anyone should suspect this, that my silence on the subject should be imputed to my ignorance.
Meanwhile, sir, watch always—watch carefully, for perhaps the evil may not stop here.
And when you have found the culprit, if you find him, I will say to you, ‘You are a magistrate, do as you will!’” “I thank you, doctor,” said Villefort with indescribable joy; “I never had a better friend than you.” And, as if he feared Doctor d’Avrigny would recall his promise, he hurried him towards the house.
When they were gone, Morrel ventured out from under the trees, and the moon shone upon his face, which was so pale it might have been taken for that of a ghost.
“I am manifestly protected in a most wonderful, but most terrible manner,” said he; “but Valentine, poor girl, how will she bear so much sorrow?” As he thought thus, he looked alternately at the window with red curtains and the three windows with white curtains.
The light had almost disappeared from the former; doubtless Madame de Villefort had just put out her lamp, and the nightlamp alone reflected its dull light on the window.
At the extremity of the building, on the contrary, he saw one of the three windows open.
Morrel shuddered; he thought he heard a sob.
It cannot be wondered at that his mind, generally so courageous, but now disturbed by the two strongest human passions, love and fear, was weakened even to the indulgence of superstitious thoughts.
Although it was impossible that Valentine should see him, hidden as he was, he thought he heard the shadow at the window call him; his disturbed mind told him so.
Valentine had not seen him.
Her eyes, raised towards heaven, were watching a silvery cloud gliding over the azure, its form that of a shadow mounting towards heaven.
Her poetic and excited mind pictured it as the soul of her grandmother.
Meanwhile, Morrel had traversed the anteroom and found the staircase, which, being carpeted, prevented his approach being heard, and he had regained that degree of confidence that the presence of M. de Villefort even would not have alarmed him.
He was quite prepared for any such encounter.
He would at once approach Valentine’s father and acknowledge all, begging Villefort to pardon and sanction the love which united two fond and loving hearts.
Now, especially, did he find the description Valentine had given of the interior of the house useful to him; he arrived safely at the top of the staircase, and while he was feeling his way, a sob indicated the direction he was to take.
At the other end of the room, under a white sheet which covered it, lay the corpse, still more alarming to Morrel since the account he had so unexpectedly overheard.
By its side, on her knees, and with her head buried in the cushion of an easy-chair, was Valentine, trembling and sobbing, her hands extended above her head, clasped and stiff.
She had turned from the window, which remained open, and was praying in accents that would have affected the most unfeeling; her words were rapid, incoherent, unintelligible, for the burning weight of grief almost stopped her utterance.
The moon shining through the open blinds made the lamp appear to burn paler, and cast a sepulchral hue over the whole scene.
Morrel could not resist this; he was not exemplary for piety, he was not easily impressed, but Valentine suffering, weeping, wringing her hands before him, was more than he could bear in silence.
He sighed, and whispered a name, and the head bathed in tears and pressed on the velvet cushion of the chair—a head like that of a Magdalen by Correggio—was raised and turned towards him.
Valentine perceived him without betraying the least surprise.
A heart overwhelmed with one great grief is insensible to minor emotions.
Valentine, as her only apology for not having met him, pointed to the corpse under the sheet, and began to sob again.
They hesitated to break the silence which death seemed to impose; at length Valentine ventured.
Alas, I would say you are welcome, had not death opened the way for you into this house.” “Valentine,” said Morrel with a trembling voice, “I had waited since half-past eight, and did not see you come; I became uneasy, leaped the wall, found my way through the garden, when voices conversing about the fatal event——” “What voices?” asked Valentine.
Morrel shuddered as he thought of the conversation of the doctor and M. de Villefort, and he thought he could see through the sheet the extended hands, the stiff neck, and the purple lips.
“Your servants,” said he, “who were repeating the whole of the sorrowful story; from them I learned it all.” “But it was risking the failure of our plan to come up here, love.” “Forgive me,” replied Morrel; “I will go away.” “No,” said Valentine, “you might meet someone; stay.” “But if anyone should come here——” The young girl shook her head.
“No one will come,” said she; “do not fear, there is our safeguard,” pointing to the bed.
Franz arrived to sign the contract just as my dear grandmother was dying.” “Alas,” said Morrel with a feeling of selfish joy; for he thought this death would cause the wedding to be postponed indefinitely.
“But what redoubles my sorrow,” continued the young girl, as if this feeling was to receive its immediate punishment, “is that the poor old lady, on her death-bed, requested that the marriage might take place as soon as possible; she also, thinking to protect me, was acting against me.” “Hark!” said Morrel.
They both listened; steps were distinctly heard in the corridor and on the stairs.
“It is my father, who has just left his study.” “To accompany the doctor to the door,” added Morrel.
“How do you know it is the doctor?” asked Valentine, astonished.
“I imagined it must be,” said Morrel.
Valentine looked at the young man; they heard the street door close, then M. de Villefort locked the garden door, and returned upstairs.
He stopped a moment in the anteroom, as if hesitating whether to turn to his own apartment or into Madame de Saint-Méran’s; Morrel concealed himself behind a door; Valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to deprive her of all fear.
M. de Villefort passed on to his own room.
“Now,” said Valentine, “you can neither go out by the front door nor by the garden.” Morrel looked at her with astonishment.
“There is but one way left you that is safe,” said she; “it is through my grandfather’s room.” She rose.
“Where?” asked Maximilian.
“To my grandfather’s room.” “I in M.
Noirtier’s apartment?” “Yes.” “Can you mean it, Valentine?” “I have long wished it; he is my only remaining friend and we both need his help,—come.” “Be careful, Valentine,” said Morrel, hesitating to comply with the young girl’s wishes; “I now see my error—I acted like a madman in coming in here.
Are you sure you are more reasonable?” “Yes,” said Valentine; “and I have but one scruple,—that of leaving my dear grandmother’s remains, which I had undertaken to watch.” “Valentine,” said Morrel, “death is in itself sacred.” “Yes,” said Valentine; “besides, it will not be for long.” She then crossed the corridor, and led the way down a narrow staircase to M.
Noirtier’s room; Morrel followed her on tiptoe; at the door they found the old servant.
“Barrois,” said Valentine, “shut the door, and let no one come in.” She passed first.
Noirtier, seated in his chair, and listening to every sound, was watching the door; he saw Valentine, and his eye brightened.
There was something grave and solemn in the approach of the young girl which struck the old man, and immediately his bright eye began to interrogate.
“Dear grandfather.” said she hurriedly, “you know poor grandmamma died an hour since, and now I have no friend in the world but you.” His expressive eyes evinced the greatest tenderness.
“To you alone, then, may I confide my sorrows and my hopes?” The paralytic motioned “Yes.” Valentine took Maximilian’s hand.
“Look attentively, then, at this gentleman.” The old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze with slight astonishment on Morrel.
Maximilian Morrel,” said she; “the son of that good merchant of Marseilles, whom you doubtless recollect.” “Yes,” said the old man.
“He brings an irreproachable name, which Maximilian is likely to render glorious, since at thirty years of age he is a captain, an officer of the Legion of Honor.” The old man signified that he recollected him.
“Well, grandpapa,” said Valentine, kneeling before him, and pointing to Maximilian, “I love him, and will be only his; were I compelled to marry another, I would destroy myself.” The eyes of the paralytic expressed a multitude of tumultuous thoughts.
Maximilian Morrel, do you not, grandpapa?” asked Valentine.
“Yes.” “And you will protect us, who are your children, against the will of my father?” Noirtier cast an intelligent glance at Morrel, as if to say, “perhaps I may.” Maximilian understood him.
“Mademoiselle,” said he, “you have a sacred duty to fulfil in your deceased grandmother’s room, will you allow me the honor of a few minutes’ conversation with M.
Noirtier?” “That is it,” said the old man’s eye.
Then he looked anxiously at Valentine.
“Do you fear he will not understand?” “Yes.” “Oh, we have so often spoken of you, that he knows exactly how I talk to you.” Then turning to Maximilian, with an adorable smile; although shaded by sorrow,—“He knows everything I know,” said she.
Valentine arose, placed a chair for Morrel, requested Barrois not to admit anyone, and having tenderly embraced her grandfather, and sorrowfully taken leave of Morrel, she went away.
To prove to Noirtier that he was in Valentine’s confidence and knew all their secrets, Morrel took the dictionary, a pen, and some paper, and placed them all on a table where there was a light.
“But first,” said Morrel, “allow me, sir, to tell you who I am, how much I love Mademoiselle Valentine, and what are my designs respecting her.” Noirtier made a sign that he would listen.
It was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparently a mere useless burden, becoming the sole protector, support, and adviser of the lovers who were both young, beautiful, and strong.
His remarkably noble and austere expression struck Morrel, who began his story with trembling.
He related the manner in which he had become acquainted with Valentine, and how he had loved her, and that Valentine, in her solitude and her misfortune, had accepted the offer of his devotion.
He told him his birth, his position, his fortune, and more than once, when he consulted the look of the paralytic, that look answered, “That is good, proceed.” “And now,” said Morrel, when he had finished the first part of his recital, “now I have told you of my love and my hopes, may I inform you of my intentions?” “Yes,” signified the old man.
“This was our resolution; a cabriolet was in waiting at the gate, in which I intended to carry off Valentine to my sister’s house, to marry her, and to wait respectfully M. de Villefort’s pardon.” “No,” said Noirtier.
“We must not do so?” “No.” “You do not sanction our project?” “No.” “There is another way,” said Morrel.
The old man’s interrogative eye said, “Which?” “I will go,” continued Maximilian, “I will seek M.
Franz d’Épinay—I am happy to be able to mention this in Mademoiselle de Villefort’s absence—and will conduct myself toward him so as to compel him to challenge me.” Noirtier’s look continued to interrogate.
Still, when Morrel had finished, he shut his eyes several times, which was his manner of saying “No.” “No?” said Morrel; “you disapprove of this second project, as you did of the first?” “I do,” signified the old man.
“Madame de Saint-Méran’s last request was, that the marriage might not be delayed; must I let things take their course?” Noirtier did not move.
“I understand,” said Morrel; “I am to wait.” “Yes.” “But delay may ruin our plan, sir,” replied the young man.
“Alone, Valentine has no power; she will be compelled to submit.
I am here almost miraculously, and can scarcely hope for so good an opportunity to occur again.
Believe me, there are only the two plans I have proposed to you; forgive my vanity, and tell me which you prefer.
Do you authorize Mademoiselle Valentine to intrust herself to my honor?” “No.” “Do you prefer I should seek M. d’Épinay?” “No.” “Whence then will come the help we need—from chance?” resumed Morrel.
“No.” “From you?” “Yes.” “You thoroughly understand me, sir?
Pardon my eagerness, for my life depends on your answer.
Will our help come from you?” “Yes.” “You are sure of it?” “Yes.” There was so much firmness in the look which gave this answer, no one could, at any rate, doubt his will, if they did his power.
“Oh, thank you a thousand times!
But how, unless a miracle should restore your speech, your gesture, your movement, how can you, chained to that armchair, dumb and motionless, oppose this marriage?” A smile lit up the old man’s face, a strange smile of the eyes in a paralyzed face.
“Yes.” “But the contract?” The same smile returned.
“Will you assure me it shall not be signed?” “Yes,” said Noirtier.
“The contract shall not be signed!” cried Morrel.
“Oh, pardon me, sir; I can scarcely realize so great a happiness.
Will they not sign it?” “No,” said the paralytic.
Notwithstanding that assurance, Morrel still hesitated.
This promise of an impotent old man was so strange that, instead of being the result of the power of his will, it might emanate from enfeebled organs.
Is it not natural that the madman, ignorant of his folly, should attempt things beyond his power?
The weak man talks of burdens he can raise, the timid of giants he can confront, the poor of treasures he spends, the most humble peasant, in the height of his pride, calls himself Jupiter.
Whether Noirtier understood the young man’s indecision, or whether he had not full confidence in his docility, he looked uneasily at him.
“What do you wish, sir?” asked Morrel; “that I should renew my promise of remaining tranquil?” Noirtier’s eye remained fixed and firm, as if to imply that a promise did not suffice; then it passed from his face to his hands.
“Shall I swear to you, sir?” asked Maximilian.
“Yes,” said the paralytic with the same solemnity.
Morrel understood that the old man attached great importance to an oath.
He extended his hand.
“I swear to you, on my honor,” said he, “to await your decision respecting the course I am to pursue with M. d’Épinay.” “That is right,” said the old man.
“Now,” said Morrel, “do you wish me to retire?” “Yes.” “Without seeing Mademoiselle Valentine?” “Yes.” Morrel made a sign that he was ready to obey.
“But,” said he, “first allow me to embrace you as your daughter did just now.” Noirtier’s expression could not be understood.
The young man pressed his lips on the same spot, on the old man’s forehead, where Valentine’s had been.
He found outside the door the old servant, to whom Valentine had given directions.
Morrel was conducted along a dark passage, which led to a little door opening on the garden, soon found the spot where he had entered, with the assistance of the shrubs gained the top of the wall, and by his ladder was in an instant in the clover-field where his cabriolet was still waiting for him.
He got in it, and thoroughly wearied by so many emotions, arrived about midnight in the Rue Meslay, threw himself on his bed and slept soundly.
The Villefort Family Vault Two days after, a considerable crowd was assembled, towards ten o’clock in the morning, around the door of M. de Villefort’s house, and a long file of mourning-coaches and private carriages extended along the Faubourg Saint-Honoré and the Rue de la Pépinière.
Among them was one of a very singular form, which appeared to have come from a distance.
Inquiry was made, and it was ascertained that, by a strange coincidence, this carriage contained the corpse of the Marquis de Saint-Méran, and that those who had come thinking to attend one funeral would follow two.
The Marquis de Saint-Méran, one of the most zealous and faithful dignitaries of Louis XVIII. and King Charles X., had preserved a great number of friends, and these, added to the personages whom the usages of society gave Villefort a claim on, formed a considerable body.
Due information was given to the authorities, and permission obtained that the two funerals should take place at the same time.
A second hearse, decked with the same funereal pomp, was brought to M. de Villefort’s door, and the coffin removed into it from the post-wagon.
The two bodies were to be interred in the cemetery of Père-Lachaise, where M. de Villefort had long since had a tomb prepared for the reception of his family.
The remains of poor Renée were already deposited there, and now, after ten years of separation, her father and mother were to be reunited with her.
The Parisians, always curious, always affected by funereal display, looked on with religious silence while the splendid procession accompanied to their last abode two of the number of the old aristocracy—the greatest protectors of commerce and sincere devotees to their principles.
In one of the mourning-coaches Beauchamp, Debray, and Château-Renaud were talking of the very sudden death of the marchioness.
“I saw Madame de Saint-Méran only last year at Marseilles, when I was coming back from Algiers,” said Château-Renaud; “she looked like a woman destined to live to be a hundred years old, from her apparent sound health and great activity of mind and body.
But she has not died of old age, but of grief; it appears that since the death of the marquis, which affected her very deeply, she has not completely recovered her reason.” “But of what disease, then, did she die?” asked Debray.
“It is said to have been a congestion of the brain, or apoplexy, which is the same thing, is it not?” “Nearly.” “It is difficult to believe that it was apoplexy,” said Beauchamp.
“_Tenacem propositi virum_.
I think he must have made an agreement with death to outlive all his heirs, and he appears likely to succeed.
He resembles the old Conventionalist of ’93, who said to Napoleon, in 1814, ‘You bend because your empire is a young stem, weakened by rapid growth.
Take the Republic for a tutor; let us return with renewed strength to the battle-field, and I promise you 500,000 soldiers, another Marengo, and a second Austerlitz.
Ideas do not become extinct, sire; they slumber sometimes, but only revive the stronger before they sleep entirely.’” “Ideas and men appeared the same to him,” said Albert.
“One thing only puzzles me, namely, how Franz d’Épinay will like a grandfather who cannot be separated from his wife.
But where is Franz?” “In the first carriage, with M. de Villefort, who considers him already as one of the family.” 40024m Such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; these two sudden deaths, so quickly following each other, astonished everyone, but no one suspected the terrible secret which M. d’Avrigny had communicated, in his nocturnal walk to M. de Villefort.
They arrived in about an hour at the cemetery; the weather was mild, but dull, and in harmony with the funeral ceremony.
Among the groups which flocked towards the family vault, Château-Renaud recognized Morrel, who had come alone in a cabriolet, and walked silently along the path bordered with yew-trees.
“You here?” said Château-Renaud, passing his arms through the young captain’s; “are you a friend of Villefort’s?
How is it that I have never met you at his house?” “I am no acquaintance of M. de Villefort’s,” answered Morrel, “but I was of Madame de Saint-Méran.” Albert came up to them at this moment with Franz.
“The time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction.” said Albert; “but we are not superstitious.
Franz d’Épinay, a delightful travelling companion, with whom I made the tour of Italy.
“Mademoiselle de Villefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?” said Debray to Franz.
“Extremely,” replied he; “she looked so pale this morning, I scarcely knew her.” These apparently simple words pierced Morrel to the heart.
This man had seen Valentine, and spoken to her!
The young and high-spirited officer required all his strength of mind to resist breaking his oath.
He took the arm of Château-Renaud, and turned towards the vault, where the attendants had already placed the two coffins.
“This is a magnificent habitation,” said Beauchamp, looking towards the mausoleum; “a summer and winter palace.
You will, in turn, enter it, my dear d’Épinay, for you will soon be numbered as one of the family.
I, as a philosopher, should like a little country-house, a cottage down there under the trees, without so many free-stones over my poor body.
In dying, I will say to those around me what Voltaire wrote to Piron: ‘_Eo rus_, and all will be over.’ But come, Franz, take courage, your wife is an heiress.” “Indeed, Beauchamp, you are unbearable.
Politics has made you laugh at everything, and political men have made you disbelieve everything.
But when you have the honor of associating with ordinary men, and the pleasure of leaving politics for a moment, try to find your affectionate heart, which you leave with your stick when you go to the Chamber.” “But tell me,” said Beauchamp, “what is life?
Is it not a halt in Death’s anteroom?” 40026m “I am prejudiced against Beauchamp,” said Albert, drawing Franz away, and leaving the former to finish his philosophical dissertation with Debray.
The Villefort vault formed a square of white stones, about twenty feet high; an interior partition separated the two families, and each apartment had its entrance door.
Here were not, as in other tombs, ignoble drawers, one above another, where thrift bestows its dead and labels them like specimens in a museum; all that was visible within the bronze gates was a gloomy-looking room, separated by a wall from the vault itself.
The two doors before mentioned were in the middle of this wall, and enclosed the Villefort and Saint-Méran coffins.
There grief might freely expend itself without being disturbed by the trifling loungers who came from a picnic party to visit Père-Lachaise, or by lovers who make it their rendezvous.
The two coffins were placed on trestles previously prepared for their reception in the right-hand crypt belonging to the Saint-Méran family.
Villefort, Franz, and a few near relatives alone entered the sanctuary.
As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and there was no address given, the party all separated; Château-Renaud, Albert, and Morrel, went one way, and Debray and Beauchamp the other.
Franz remained with M. de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel made an excuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get into the same mourning-coach, and thought this meeting forboded evil.
He then returned to Paris, and although in the same carriage with Château-Renaud and Albert, he did not hear one word of their conversation.
As Franz was about to take leave of M. de Villefort, “When shall I see you again?” said the latter.
“As soon as possible.” “I am at your command, sir; shall we return together?” “If not unpleasant to you.” “On the contrary, I shall feel much pleasure.” Thus, the future father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage, and Morrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy.
Villefort and Franz returned to the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.
You know the affairs of the deceased are in perfect order, and her will bequeaths to Valentine the entire property of the Saint-Méran family; the notary showed me the documents yesterday, which will enable us to draw up the contract immediately.
The contract was to have been signed three days since; we shall find it all ready, and can sign it today.” “But the mourning?” said Franz, hesitating.
“Don’t be uneasy on that score,” replied Villefort; “no ceremony will be neglected in my house.
Mademoiselle de Villefort may retire during the prescribed three months to her estate of Saint-Méran; I say hers, for she inherits it today.
There, after a few days, if you like, the civil marriage shall be celebrated without pomp or ceremony.
Madame de Saint-Méran wished her daughter should be married there.
When that is over, you, sir, can return to Paris, while your wife passes the time of her mourning with her mother-in-law.” “As you please, sir,” said Franz.
“Then,” replied M. de Villefort, “have the kindness to wait half an hour; Valentine shall come down into the drawing-room.
Scarcely had the door closed, when M. de Villefort sent to tell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in half an hour, as he expected the notary and M. d’Épinay and his witnesses.
The news caused a great sensation throughout the house; Madame de Villefort would not believe it, and Valentine was thunderstruck.
She looked around for help, and would have gone down to her grandfather’s room, but on the stairs she met M. de Villefort, who took her arm and led her into the drawing-room.
In the anteroom, Valentine met Barrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant.
A moment later, Madame de Villefort entered the drawing-room with her little Edward.
It was evident that she had shared the grief of the family, for she was pale and looked fatigued.
She sat down, took Edward on her knees, and from time to time pressed this child, on whom her affections appeared centred, almost convulsively to her bosom.
Two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard.
In a moment the whole party was assembled.
Valentine was so pale one might trace the blue veins from her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks.
Franz was deeply affected.
Château-Renaud and Albert looked at each other with amazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had not appeared more sorrowful than did that which was about to begin.
Madame de Villefort had placed herself in the shadow behind a velvet curtain, and as she constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the expression of her face.
M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.
The notary, after having, according to the customary method, arranged the papers on the table, taken his place in an armchair, and raised his spectacles, turned towards Franz: “Are you M.
Franz de Quesnel, baron d’Épinay?” asked he, although he knew it perfectly.
“I have, then, to inform you, sir, at the request of M. de Villefort, that your projected marriage with Mademoiselle de Villefort has changed the feeling of M.
Noirtier towards his grandchild, and that he disinherits her entirely of the fortune he would have left her.
My family has sought consideration in this alliance with M. de Villefort; all I seek is happiness.” Valentine imperceptibly thanked him, while two silent tears rolled down her cheeks.
“Besides, sir,” said Villefort, addressing himself to his future son-in-law, “excepting the loss of a portion of your hopes, this unexpected will need not personally wound you; M.
Noirtier’s weakness of mind sufficiently explains it.
It is not because Mademoiselle Valentine is going to marry you that he is angry, but because she will marry, a union with any other would have caused him the same sorrow.
Old age is selfish, sir, and Mademoiselle de Villefort has been a faithful companion to M.
Noirtier, which she cannot be when she becomes the Baroness d’Épinay.
My father’s melancholy state prevents our speaking to him on any subjects, which the weakness of his mind would incapacitate him from understanding, and I am perfectly convinced that at the present time, although, he knows that his granddaughter is going to be married, M.
Noirtier has even forgotten the name of his intended grandson.” M. de Villefort had scarcely said this, when the door opened, and Barrois appeared.
“Gentlemen,” said he, in a tone strangely firm for a servant speaking to his masters under such solemn circumstances,—“gentlemen, M.
Noirtier de Villefort wishes to speak immediately to M.
Franz de Quesnel, baron d’Épinay.” He, as well as the notary, that there might be no mistake in the person, gave all his titles to the bridegroom elect.
Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from her knees, Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue.
Albert and Château-Renaud exchanged a second look, more full of amazement than the first.
The notary looked at Villefort.
“It is impossible,” said the procureur.
“M. d’Épinay cannot leave the drawing-room at present.” “It is at this moment,” replied Barrois with the same firmness, “that M.
Noirtier, my master, wishes to speak on important subjects to M.
Franz d’Épinay.” “Grandpapa Noirtier can speak now, then,” said Edward, with his habitual quickness.
However, his remark did not make Madame de Villefort even smile, so much was every mind engaged, and so solemn was the situation.
Nortier,” resumed Villefort, “that what he demands is impossible.” “Then, M.
Nortier gives notice to these gentlemen,” replied Barrois, “that he will give orders to be carried to the drawing-room.” Astonishment was at its height.
Something like a smile was perceptible on Madame de Villefort’s countenance.
Valentine instinctively raised her eyes, as if to thank heaven.
“Pray go, Valentine,” said; M. de Villefort, “and see what this new fancy of your grandfather’s is.” Valentine rose quickly, and was hastening joyfully towards the door, when M. de Villefort altered his intention.
Noirtier sent for me, I am ready to attend to his wish; besides, I shall be happy to pay my respects to him, not having yet had the honor of doing so.” “Pray, sir,” said Villefort with marked uneasiness, “do not disturb yourself.” 40032m “Forgive me, sir,” said Franz in a resolute tone.
“I would not lose this opportunity of proving to M.
Noirtier how wrong it would be of him to encourage feelings of dislike to me, which I am determined to conquer, whatever they may be, by my devotion.” And without listening to Villefort he arose, and followed Valentine, who was running downstairs with the joy of a shipwrecked mariner who finds a rock to cling to.
M. de Villefort followed them.
Château-Renaud and Morcerf exchanged a third look of still increasing wonder.
A Signed Statement Noirtier was prepared to receive them, dressed in black, and installed in his armchair.
When the three persons he expected had entered, he looked at the door, which his valet immediately closed.
“Listen,” whispered Villefort to Valentine, who could not conceal her joy; “if M.
Noirtier wishes to communicate anything which would delay your marriage, I forbid you to understand him.” Valentine blushed, but did not answer.
Villefort, approached Noirtier.
Franz d’Épinay,” said he; “you requested to see him.
We have all wished for this interview, and I trust it will convince you how ill-formed are your objections to Valentine’s marriage.” Noirtier answered only by a look which made Villefort’s blood run cold.
He motioned to Valentine to approach.
In a moment, thanks to her habit of conversing with her grandfather, she understood that he asked for a key.
She opened the drawer, and found a key; and, understanding that was what he wanted, again watched his eyes, which turned toward an old secretaire which had been neglected for many years and was supposed to contain nothing but useless documents.
“Shall I open the secretaire?” asked Valentine.
“And the drawers?” “Yes.” “Those at the side?” “No.” “The middle one?” “Yes.” Valentine opened it and drew out a bundle of papers.
“No.” She took successively all the other papers out till the drawer was empty.
Noirtier’s eye was fixed on the dictionary.
“Yes, I understand, grandfather,” said the young girl. 40036m She pointed to each letter of the alphabet.
She opened, and found the word “secret.” “Ah! is there a secret spring?” said Valentine.
“Yes,” said Noirtier.
“And who knows it?” Noirtier looked at the door where the servant had gone out.
“Yes.” “Shall I call him?” “Yes.” Valentine went to the door, and called Barrois.
Villefort’s impatience during this scene made the perspiration roll from his forehead, and Franz was stupefied.
“Barrois,” said Valentine, “my grandfather has told me to open that drawer in the secretaire, but there is a secret spring in it, which you know—will you open it?” Barrois looked at the old man.
“Obey,” said Noirtier’s intelligent eye.
“Yes.” “Shall I give these papers to M. de Villefort?” “No.” “To Mademoiselle Valentine?” “No.” “To M.
Franz d’Épinay?” “Yes.” Franz, astonished, advanced a step.
“Yes.” Franz took them from Barrois and casting a glance at the cover, read: “‘To be given, after my death, to General Durand, who shall bequeath the packet to his son, with an injunction to preserve it as containing an important document.’ “Well, sir,” asked Franz, “what do you wish me to do with this paper?” “To preserve it, sealed up as it is, doubtless,” said the procureur.
“No,” replied Noirtier eagerly.
“Do you wish him to read it?” said Valentine.
“You understand, baron, my grandfather wishes you to read this paper,” said Valentine.
“Then let us sit down,” said Villefort impatiently, “for it will take some time.” “Sit down,” said the old man.
Villefort took a chair, but Valentine remained standing by her father’s side, and Franz before him, holding the mysterious paper in his hand.
Franz untied it, and in the midst of the most profound silence read: 40038m “‘_Extract of the report of a meeting of the Bonapartist Club in the Rue Saint-Jacques, held February 5th, 1815_.’” Franz stopped.
The note indicated neither the street nor the number of the house where the meeting was to be held; it bore no signature, but it announced to the general that someone would call for him if he would be ready at nine o’clock.
The meetings were always held from that time till midnight.
At nine o’clock the president of the club presented himself; the general was ready, the president informed him that one of the conditions of his introduction was that he should be eternally ignorant of the place of meeting, and that he would allow his eyes to be bandaged, swearing that he would not endeavor to take off the bandage.
General de Quesnel accepted the condition, and promised on his honor not to seek to discover the road they took.
The general’s carriage was ready, but the president told him it was impossible for him to use it, since it was useless to blindfold the master if the coachman knew through what streets he went.
“What must be done then?” asked the general.—“I have my carriage here,” said the president.
When they were seated in the carriage the president reminded the general of his promise to allow his eyes to be bandaged, to which he made no opposition.
On the road the president thought he saw the general make an attempt to remove the handkerchief, and reminded him of his oath.
The carriage stopped at an alley leading out of the Rue Saint-Jacques.
The general alighted, leaning on the arm of the president, of whose dignity he was not aware, considering him simply as a member of the club; they went through the alley, mounted a flight of stairs, and entered the assembly-room.
“‘The deliberations had already begun.
The members, apprised of the sort of presentation which was to be made that evening, were all in attendance.
When in the middle of the room the general was invited to remove his bandage, he did so immediately, and was surprised to see so many well-known faces in a society of whose existence he had till then been ignorant.
They questioned him as to his sentiments, but he contented himself with answering, that the letters from the Island of Elba ought to have informed them——’” Franz interrupted himself by saying, “My father was a royalist; they need not have asked his sentiments, which were well known.” “And hence,” said Villefort, “arose my affection for your father, my dear M.
Opinions held in common are a ready bond of union.” “Read again,” said the old man.
Franz continued: “‘The president then sought to make him speak more explicitly, but M. de Quesnel replied that he wished first to know what they wanted with him.
He was then informed of the contents of the letter from the Island of Elba, in which he was recommended to the club as a man who would be likely to advance the interests of their party.
One paragraph spoke of the return of Bonaparte and promised another letter and further details, on the arrival of the _Pharaon_ belonging to the shipbuilder Morrel, of Marseilles, whose captain was entirely devoted to the emperor.
During all this time, the general, on whom they thought to have relied as on a brother, manifested evidently signs of discontent and repugnance.
When the reading was finished, he remained silent, with knitted brows.
“‘“Well,” asked the president, “what do you say to this letter, general?” “‘“I say that it is too soon after declaring myself for Louis XVIII. to break my vow in behalf of the ex-emperor.” This answer was too clear to permit of any mistake as to his sentiments.
The communication has been made to you in consequence of the confidence placed in you, and which does you honor.
Now we discover our error; a title and promotion attach you to the government we wish to overturn.
We will not constrain you to help us; we enroll no one against his conscience, but we will compel you to act generously, even if you are not disposed to do so.” “‘“You would call acting generously, knowing your conspiracy and not informing against you, that is what I should call becoming your accomplice.
You see I am more candid than you.”’” “Ah, my father!” said Franz, interrupting himself.
“I understand now why they murdered him.” Valentine could not help casting one glance towards the young man, whose filial enthusiasm it was delightful to behold.
Villefort walked to and fro behind them.
Noirtier watched the expression of each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding attitude.
Franz returned to the manuscript, and continued: “‘“Sir,” said the president, “you have been invited to join this assembly—you were not forced here; it was proposed to you to come blindfolded—you accepted.
When you complied with this twofold request you well knew we did not wish to secure the throne of Louis XVIII., or we should not take so much care to avoid the vigilance of the police.
It would be conceding too much to allow you to put on a mask to aid you in the discovery of our secret, and then to remove it that you may ruin those who have confided in you.
M. d’Épinay became very pale; he looked round him a second time, several members of the club were whispering, and getting their arms from under their cloaks.
Then the general advanced, and making a violent effort to control his feelings,—“I have a son,” said he, “and I ought to think of him, finding myself among assassins.” “‘“General,” said the chief of the assembly, “one man may insult fifty—it is the privilege of weakness.
But he does wrong to use his privilege.
Follow my advice, swear, and do not insult.” The general, again daunted by the superiority of the chief, hesitated a moment; then advancing to the president’s desk,—“What is the form, said he.
The president rose, appointed three members to accompany him, and got into the carriage with the general after bandaging his eyes.
One of those three members was the coachman who had driven them there.
The other members silently dispersed.
“Where do you wish to be taken?” asked the president.—“Anywhere out of your presence,” replied M. d’Épinay.
“Beware, sir,” replied the president, “you are no longer in the assembly, and have only to do with individuals; do not insult them unless you wish to be held responsible.” But instead of listening, M. d’Épinay went on,—“You are still as brave in your carriage as in your assembly because you are still four against one.” The president stopped the coach.
“‘“Because, sir,” said the president, “you have insulted a man, and that man will not go one step farther without demanding honorable reparation.” “‘“Another method of assassination?” said the general, shrugging his shoulders.
“‘“Make no noise, sir, unless you wish me to consider you as one of the men of whom you spoke just now as cowards, who take their weakness for a shield.
You are alone, one alone shall answer you; you have a sword by your side, I have one in my cane; you have no witness, one of these gentlemen will serve you.
Now, if you please, remove your bandage.” The general tore the handkerchief from his eyes.
“At last,” said he, “I shall know with whom I have to do.” They opened the door and the four men alighted.’” Franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold drops from his brow; there was something awful in hearing the son read aloud in trembling pallor these details of his father’s death, which had hitherto been a mystery.
Valentine clasped her hands as if in prayer.
Noirtier looked at Villefort with an almost sublime expression of contempt and pride.
Franz continued: “‘It was, as we said, the fifth of February.
For three days the mercury had been five or six degrees below freezing and the steps were covered with ice.
The general was stout and tall, the president offered him the side of the railing to assist him in getting down.
The two witnesses followed.
The ground from the steps to the river was covered with snow and hoarfrost, the water of the river looked black and deep.
One of the seconds went for a lantern in a coal-barge near, and by its light they examined the weapons.
The president’s sword, which was simply, as he had said, one he carried in his cane, was five inches shorter than the general’s, and had no guard.
The general proposed to cast lots for the swords, but the president said it was he who had given the provocation, and when he had given it he had supposed each would use his own arms.
The witnesses endeavored to insist, but the president bade them be silent.
The lantern was placed on the ground, the two adversaries took their stations, and the duel began.
The light made the two swords appear like flashes of lightning; as for the men, they were scarcely perceptible, the darkness was so great. 40044m “‘General d’Épinay passed for one of the best swordsmen in the army, but he was pressed so closely in the onset that he missed his aim and fell.
The witnesses thought he was dead, but his adversary, who knew he had not struck him, offered him the assistance of his hand to rise.
The circumstance irritated instead of calming the general, and he rushed on his adversary.
But his opponent did not allow his guard to be broken.
He received him on his sword and three times the general drew back on finding himself too closely engaged, and then returned to the charge.
They thought he slipped, as at first, and the witnesses, seeing he did not move, approached and endeavored to raise him, but the one who passed his arm around the body found it was moistened with blood.
“Ah,” said he, “they have sent some fencing-master to fight with me.” The president, without answering, approached the witness who held the lantern, and raising his sleeve, showed him two wounds he had received in his arm; then opening his coat, and unbuttoning his waistcoat, displayed his side, pierced with a third wound.
General d’Épinay died five minutes after.’” Franz read these last words in a voice so choked that they were hardly audible, and then stopped, passing his hand over his eyes as if to dispel a cloud; but after a moment’s silence, he continued: “‘The president went up the steps, after pushing his sword into his cane; a track of blood on the snow marked his course.
He had scarcely arrived at the top when he heard a heavy splash in the water—it was the general’s body, which the witnesses had just thrown into the river after ascertaining that he was dead.
The general fell, then, in a loyal duel, and not in ambush as it might have been reported.
In proof of this we have signed this paper to establish the truth of the facts, lest the moment should arrive when either of the actors in this terrible scene should be accused of premeditated murder or of infringement of the laws of honor.
“Mademoiselle,” said Franz, turning towards Valentine, “unite your efforts with mine to find out the name of the man who made me an orphan at two years of age.” Valentine remained dumb and motionless.
“Hold, sir,” said Villefort, “do not prolong this dreadful scene.
The names have been purposely concealed; my father himself does not know who this president was, and if he knows, he cannot tell you; proper names are not in the dictionary.” “Oh, misery,” cried Franz: “the only hope which sustained me and enabled me to read to the end was that of knowing, at least, the name of him who killed my father!
Sir, sir,” cried he, turning to Noirtier, “do what you can—make me understand in some way!” “Yes,” replied Noirtier.
“Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” cried Franz, “your grandfather says he can indicate the person.
Help me,—lend me your assistance!” Noirtier looked at the dictionary.
Franz took it with a nervous trembling, and repeated the letters of the alphabet successively, until he came to M.
At that letter the old man signified “Yes.” “M,” repeated Franz.
The young man’s finger, glided over the words, but at each one Noirtier answered by a negative sign.
Valentine hid her head between her hands.
Noirtier—you killed my father?” “Yes!” replied Noirtier, fixing a majestic look on the young man.
Franz fell powerless on a chair; Villefort opened the door and escaped, for the idea had entered his mind to stifle the little remaining life in the heart of this terrible old man.
Progress of Cavalcanti the Younger Meanwhile M.
Cavalcanti the elder had returned to his service, not in the army of his majesty the Emperor of Austria, but at the gaming-table of the baths of Lucca, of which he was one of the most assiduous courtiers.
He had spent every farthing that had been allowed for his journey as a reward for the majestic and solemn manner in which he had maintained his assumed character of father.
Andrea at his departure inherited all the papers which proved that he had indeed the honor of being the son of the Marquis Bartolomeo and the Marchioness Oliva Corsinari.
He was now fairly launched in that Parisian society which gives such ready access to foreigners, and treats them, not as they really are, but as they wish to be considered.
Besides, what is required of a young man in Paris?
To speak its language tolerably, to make a good appearance, to be a good gamester, and to pay in cash.
They are certainly less particular with a foreigner than with a Frenchman.
Andrea had, then, in a fortnight, attained a very fair position.
He was called count, he was said to possess 50,000 livres per annum; and his father’s immense riches, buried in the quarries of Saravezza, were a constant theme.
A learned man, before whom the last circumstance was mentioned as a fact, declared he had seen the quarries in question, which gave great weight to assertions hitherto somewhat doubtful, but which now assumed the garb of reality.
Danglars was out, but the count was asked to go and see the baroness, and he accepted the invitation.
It was never without a nervous shudder, since the dinner at Auteuil, and the events which followed it, that Madame Danglars heard Monte Cristo’s name announced.
If he did not come, the painful sensation became most intense; if, on the contrary, he appeared, his noble countenance, his brilliant eyes, his amiability, his polite attention even towards Madame Danglars, soon dispelled every impression of fear.
Cavalcanti, his presence soon produced its usual effect, and it was with smiles that the baroness received the count, although she had been a little disconcerted at the announcement of his name.
The baroness was partially reclining on a sofa, Eugénie sat near her, and Cavalcanti was standing.
Cavalcanti, dressed in black, like one of Goethe’s heroes, with varnished shoes and white silk open-worked stockings, passed a white and tolerably nice-looking hand through his light hair, and so displayed a sparkling diamond, that in spite of Monte Cristo’s advice the vain young man had been unable to resist putting on his little finger.
This movement was accompanied by killing glances at Mademoiselle Danglars, and by sighs launched in the same direction.
Mademoiselle Danglars was still the same—cold, beautiful, and satirical.
Not one of these glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her; they might have been said to fall on the shield of Minerva, which some philosophers assert protected sometimes the breast of Sappho.
Eugénie bowed coldly to the count, and availed herself of the first moment when the conversation became earnest to escape to her study, whence very soon two cheerful and noisy voices being heard in connection with occasional notes of the piano assured Monte Cristo that Mademoiselle Danglars preferred to his society and to that of M.
Cavalcanti the company of Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, her singing teacher.
It was then, especially while conversing with Madame Danglars, and apparently absorbed by the charm of the conversation, that the count noticed M.
Andrea Cavalcanti’s solicitude, his manner of listening to the music at the door he dared not pass, and of manifesting his admiration.
The banker soon returned.
His first look was certainly directed towards Monte Cristo, but the second was for Andrea.
As for his wife, he bowed to her, as some husbands do to their wives, but in a way that bachelors will never comprehend, until a very extensive code is published on conjugal life.
“Have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?” said Danglars to Andrea.
“Alas, no, sir,” replied Andrea with a sigh, still more remarkable than the former ones.
Danglars immediately advanced towards the door and opened it. 40050m The two young ladies were seen seated on the same chair, at the piano, accompanying themselves, each with one hand, a fancy to which they had accustomed themselves, and performed admirably.
Mademoiselle d’Armilly, whom they then perceived through the open doorway, formed with Eugénie one of the _tableaux vivants_ of which the Germans are so fond.
She was somewhat beautiful, and exquisitely formed—a little fairy-like figure, with large curls falling on her neck, which was rather too long, as Perugino sometimes makes his Virgins, and her eyes dull from fatigue.
Monte Cristo cast one rapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it was the first time he had ever seen Mademoiselle d’Armilly, of whom he had heard much.
“Well,” said the banker to his daughter, “are we then all to be excluded?” He then led the young man into the study, and either by chance or manœuvre the door was partially closed after Andrea, so that from the place where they sat neither the Count nor the baroness could see anything; but as the banker had accompanied Andrea, Madame Danglars appeared to take no notice of it.
The count soon heard Andrea’s voice, singing a Corsican song, accompanied by the piano.
While the count smiled at hearing this song, which made him lose sight of Andrea in the recollection of Benedetto, Madame Danglars was boasting to Monte Cristo of her husband’s strength of mind, who that very morning had lost three or four hundred thousand francs by a failure at Milan.
The praise was well deserved, for had not the count heard it from the baroness, or by one of those means by which he knew everything, the baron’s countenance would not have led him to suspect it.
Danglars is so skilful, he will soon regain at the Bourse what he loses elsewhere.” “I see that you participate in a prevalent error,” said Madame Danglars.
Danglars speculates, whereas he never does.” “Truly, madame, I recollect M.
I have seen nothing of him the last three or four days.” “Nor I,” said Madame Danglars; “but you began a sentence, sir, and did not finish.” “Which?” “M.
Debray had told you——” “Ah, yes; he told me it was you who sacrificed to the demon of speculation.” “I was once very fond of it, but I do not indulge now.” “Then you are wrong, madame.
Fortune is precarious; and if I were a woman and fate had made me a banker’s wife, whatever might be my confidence in my husband’s good fortune, still in speculation you know there is great risk.
Well, I would secure for myself a fortune independent of him, even if I acquired it by placing my interests in hands unknown to him.” Madame Danglars blushed, in spite of all her efforts.
Is it broken off?” “Yesterday morning, it appears, Franz declined the honor.” “Indeed?
And is the reason known?” “No.” “How extraordinary!
And how does M. de Villefort bear it?” “As usual.
Like a philosopher.” Danglars returned at this moment alone.
“Well,” said the baroness, “do you leave M.
Cavalcanti with your daughter?” “And Mademoiselle d’Armilly,” said the banker; “do you consider her no one?” Then, turning to Monte Cristo, he said, “Prince Cavalcanti is a charming young man, is he not?
“His father was introduced to me as a marquis, so he ought to be a count; but I do not think he has much claim to that title.” “Why?” said the banker.
“If he is a prince, he is wrong not to maintain his rank; I do not like anyone to deny his origin.” “Oh, you are a thorough democrat,” said Monte Cristo, smiling.
“But do you see to what you are exposing yourself?” said the baroness.
“If, perchance, M. de Morcerf came, he would find M.
Cavalcanti in that room, where he, the betrothed of Eugénie, has never been admitted.” “You may well say, perchance,” replied the banker; “for he comes so seldom, it would seem only chance that brings him.” “But should he come and find that young man with your daughter, he might be displeased.” “He?
Albert would not do us the honor to be jealous; he does not like Eugénie sufficiently.
Besides, I care not for his displeasure.” “Still, situated as we are——” “Yes, do you know how we are situated?
Cavalcanti three times, and he took no notice of it.” The valet announced the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf.
The baroness rose hastily, and was going into the study, when Danglars stopped her.
She looked at him in amazement.
Monte Cristo appeared to be unconscious of what passed.
Albert entered, looking very handsome and in high spirits.
He bowed politely to the baroness, familiarly to Danglars, and affectionately to Monte Cristo.
Then turning to the baroness: “May I ask how Mademoiselle Danglars is?” said he.
“She is quite well,” replied Danglars quickly; “she is at the piano with M.
Cavalcanti.” Albert retained his calm and indifferent manner; he might feel perhaps annoyed, but he knew Monte Cristo’s eye was on him.
Cavalcanti has a fine tenor voice,” said he, “and Mademoiselle Eugénie a splendid soprano, and then she plays the piano like Thalberg.
The concert must be a delightful one.” “They suit each other remarkably well,” said Danglars.
Albert appeared not to notice this remark, which was, however, so rude that Madame Danglars blushed.
“I, too,” said the young man, “am a musician—at least, my masters used to tell me so; but it is strange that my voice never would suit any other, and a soprano less than any.” Danglars smiled, and seemed to say, “It is of no consequence.” Then, hoping doubtless to effect his purpose, he said,—“The prince and my daughter were universally admired yesterday.
“Prince Cavalcanti,” said Danglars, who persisted in giving the young man that title.
And Prince Cavalcanti sang with Mademoiselle Eugénie yesterday?
It must have been charming, indeed.
But I was unable to accept your invitation, having promised to accompany my mother to a German concert given by the Baroness of Château-Renaud.” This was followed by rather an awkward silence.
“May I also be allowed,” said Morcerf, “to pay my respects to Mademoiselle Danglars?” “Wait a moment,” said the banker, stopping the young man; “do you hear that delightful cavatina?
Ta, ta, ta, ti, ta, ti, ta, ta; it is charming, let them finish—one moment.
Bravo, bravi, brava!” The banker was enthusiastic in his applause. 40054m “Indeed,” said Albert, “it is exquisite; it is impossible to understand the music of his country better than Prince Cavalcanti does.
But he can easily become one, if he is not already; it is no uncommon thing in Italy.
But to return to the charming musicians—you should give us a treat, Danglars, without telling them there is a stranger.
Ask them to sing one more song; it is so delightful to hear music in the distance, when the musicians are unrestrained by observation.” Danglars was quite annoyed by the young man’s indifference.
But, then your word is given.” “Yes, doubtless I have promised to give my daughter to a man who loves her, but not to one who does not.
“Why do you doubt?” “The past—that obscurity on the past.” “But that does not affect the son.” “Very true.” “Now, I beg of you, don’t go off your head.
It’s a month now that you have been thinking of this marriage, and you must see that it throws some responsibility on me, for it was at my house you met this young Cavalcanti, whom I do not really know at all.” “But I do.” “Have you made inquiry?” “Is there any need of that!
Does not his appearance speak for him?
And he is very rich.” “I am not so sure of that.” “And yet you said he had money.” “Fifty thousand livres—a mere trifle.” “He is well educated.” “Hem,” said Monte Cristo in his turn.
“He is a musician.” “So are all Italians.” “Come, count, you do not do that young man justice.” “Well, I acknowledge it annoys me, knowing your connection with the Morcerf family, to see him throw himself in the way.” Danglars burst out laughing.
“What a Puritan you are!” said he; “that happens every day.” “But you cannot break it off in this way; the Morcerfs are depending on this union.” “Indeed.” “Positively.” “Then let them explain themselves; you should give the father a hint, you are so intimate with the family.” “I?—where the devil did you find out that?” “At their ball; it was apparent enough.
If he demands my daughter let him fix the day—declare his conditions; in short, let us either understand each other, or quarrel.
You understand—no more delay.” “Yes, sir, I will give my attention to the subject.” “I do not say that I await with pleasure his decision, but I do await it.
A banker must, you know, be a slave to his promise.” And Danglars sighed as M.
Cavalcanti had done half an hour before.
“Bravi! bravo! brava!” cried Morcerf, parodying the banker, as the selection came to an end.
Danglars began to look suspiciously at Morcerf, when someone came and whispered a few words to him.
I shall, perhaps, have something to say to you.” And he went out.
The baroness took advantage of her husband’s absence to push open the door of her daughter’s study, and M.
Andrea, who was sitting before the piano with Mademoiselle Eugénie, started up like a jack-in-the-box.
Albert bowed with a smile to Mademoiselle Danglars, who did not appear in the least disturbed, and returned his bow with her usual coolness.
Cavalcanti was evidently embarrassed; he bowed to Morcerf, who replied with the most impertinent look possible.
Then Albert launched out in praise of Mademoiselle Danglars’ voice, and on his regret, after what he had just heard, that he had been unable to be present the previous evening.
Cavalcanti, being left alone, turned to Monte Cristo.
“Come,” said Madame Danglars, “leave music and compliments, and let us go and take tea.” “Come, Louise,” said Mademoiselle Danglars to her friend.
They passed into the next drawing-room, where tea was prepared.
Just as they were beginning, in the English fashion, to leave the spoons in their cups, the door again opened and Danglars entered, visibly agitated.
Monte Cristo observed it particularly, and by a look asked the banker for an explanation.
“I have just received my courier from Greece,” said Danglars.
“Ah, yes,” said the count; “that was the reason of your running away from us.” “Yes.” “How is King Otho getting on?” asked Albert in the most sprightly tone.
Danglars cast another suspicious look towards him without answering, and Monte Cristo turned away to conceal the expression of pity which passed over his features, but which was gone in a moment.
“We shall go together, shall we not?” said Albert to the count.
I shall compliment Mademoiselle Danglars on her cameo, while the father talks to you.” “If you compliment her at all, let it be on her voice, at least,” said Monte Cristo.
“No, everyone would do that.” “My dear viscount, you are dreadfully impertinent.” Albert advanced towards Eugénie, smiling.
Meanwhile, Danglars, stooping to Monte Cristo’s ear, “Your advice was excellent,” said he; “there is a whole history connected with the names Fernand and Yanina.” “Indeed?” said Monte Cristo.
“Yes, I will tell you all; but take away the young man; I cannot endure his presence.” “He is going with me.
Shall I send the father to you?” “Immediately.” “Very well.” The count made a sign to Albert and they bowed to the ladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectly indifferent to Mademoiselle Danglars’ contempt, Monte Cristo reiterating his advice to Madame Danglars on the prudence a banker’s wife should exercise in providing for the future.
Cavalcanti remained master of the field.
Haydée Scarcely had the count’s horses cleared the angle of the boulevard, when Albert, turning towards the count, burst into a loud fit of laughter—much too loud in fact not to give the idea of its being rather forced and unnatural.
“Well,” said he, “I will ask you the same question which Charles IX. put to Catherine de’ Medici, after the massacre of Saint Bartholomew: ‘How have I played my little part?’” “To what do you allude?” asked Monte Cristo.
“To the installation of my rival at M.
Danglars’.” “What rival?” “_Ma foi!_ what rival?
Andrea Cavalcanti!” “Ah, no joking, viscount, if you please; I do not patronize M.
Andrea—at least, not as concerns M.
Danglars.” “And you would be to blame for not assisting him, if the young man really needed your help in that quarter, but, happily for me, he can dispense with it.” “What, do you think he is paying his addresses?” “I am certain of it; his languishing looks and modulated tones when addressing Mademoiselle Danglars fully proclaim his intentions.
He aspires to the hand of the proud Eugénie.” “What does that signify, so long as they favor your suit?” “But it is not the case, my dear count: on the contrary.
I am repulsed on all sides.” “What!” “It is so indeed; Mademoiselle Eugénie scarcely answers me, and Mademoiselle d’Armilly, her confidant, does not speak to me at all.” “But the father has the greatest regard possible for you,” said Monte Cristo.
Oh, no, he has plunged a thousand daggers into my heart, tragedy-weapons, I own, which instead of wounding sheathe their points in their own handles, but daggers which he nevertheless believed to be real and deadly.” “Jealousy indicates affection.” “True; but I am not jealous.” “He is.” “Of whom?—of Debray?” “No, of you.” “Of me?
“You surely will not do that, my dear count?” “Certainly I shall, Albert, as I have promised to do it.” “Well,” said Albert, with a sigh, “it seems you are determined to marry me.” “I am determined to try and be on good terms with everybody, at all events,” said Monte Cristo.
“But apropos of Debray, how is it that I have not seen him lately at the baron’s house?” “There has been a misunderstanding.” “What, with the baroness?” “No, with the baron.” “Has he perceived anything?” “Ah, that is a good joke!” “Do you think he suspects?” said Monte Cristo with charming artlessness.
“From Congo, if you will.” “It must be farther off than even that.” “But what do I know of your Parisian husbands?” “Oh, my dear count, husbands are pretty much the same everywhere; an individual husband of any country is a pretty fair specimen of the whole race.” “But then, what can have led to the quarrel between Danglars and Debray?
They seemed to understand each other so well,” said Monte Cristo with renewed energy.
“Ah, now you are trying to penetrate into the mysteries of Isis, in which I am not initiated.
Andrea Cavalcanti has become one of the family, you can ask him that question.” The carriage stopped.
“Here we are,” said Monte Cristo; “it is only half-past ten o’clock, come in.” “Certainly, I will.” “My carriage shall take you back.” “No, thank you; I gave orders for my _coupé_ to follow me.” “There it is, then,” said Monte Cristo, as he stepped out of the carriage.
“You will make tea for us, Baptistin,” said the count.
Baptistin left the room without waiting to answer, and in two seconds reappeared, bringing on a tray, all that his master had ordered, ready prepared, and appearing to have sprung from the ground, like the repasts which we read of in fairy tales.
For instance, you shall see; how do you wish to occupy yourself during tea-time?” “_Ma foi_, I should like to smoke.” Monte Cristo took the gong and struck it once.
In about the space of a second a private door opened, and Ali appeared, bringing two chibouques filled with excellent latakia.
“It is quite wonderful,” said Albert.
“Oh no, it is as simple as possible,” replied Monte Cristo.
“_Ma foi_, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music this evening; you have only escaped from Mademoiselle Danglars’ piano, to be attacked by Haydée’s guzla.” “Haydée—what an adorable name!
Are there, then, really women who bear the name of Haydée anywhere but in Byron’s poems?” “Certainly there are.
Haydée is a very uncommon name in France, but is common enough in Albania and Epirus; it is as if you said, for example, Chastity, Modesty, Innocence,—it is a kind of baptismal name, as you Parisians call it.” “Oh, that is charming,” said Albert, “how I should like to hear my countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness, Mademoiselle Silence, Mademoiselle Christian Charity!
“It is not to be called amiability, it is her duty; a slave does not dictate to a master.” “Come; you are joking yourself now.
Are there any more slaves to be had who bear this beautiful name?” “Undoubtedly.” “Really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like other people.
Why, it is a rank of itself in France, and from the way in which you lavish money, it is a place that must be worth a hundred thousand francs a year.” “A hundred thousand francs!
The poor girl originally possessed much more than that; she was born to treasures in comparison with which those recorded in the _Thousand and One Nights_ would seem but poverty.” “She must be a princess then.” “You are right; and she is one of the greatest in her country too.” “I thought so.
But how did it happen that such a great princess became a slave?” “How was it that Dionysius the Tyrant became a schoolmaster?
Really, my dear count, you seem to throw a sort of magic influence over all in which you are concerned; when I listen to you, existence no longer seems reality, but a waking dream.
“Tell Haydée,” said he, “that I will take coffee with her, and give her to understand that I desire permission to present one of my friends to her.” Ali bowed and left the room.
“Now, understand me,” said the count, “no direct questions, my dear Morcerf; if you wish to know anything, tell me, and I will ask her.” “Agreed.” Ali reappeared for the third time, and drew back the tapestried hanging which concealed the door, to signify to his master and Albert that they were at liberty to pass on.
Albert passed his hand through his hair, and curled his moustache, then, having satisfied himself as to his personal appearance, followed the count into the room, the latter having previously resumed his hat and gloves.
Ali was stationed as a kind of advanced guard, and the door was kept by the three French attendants, commanded by Myrtho.
Haydée was awaiting her visitors in the first room of her apartments, which was the drawing-room.
Her large eyes were dilated with surprise and expectation, for it was the first time that any man, except Monte Cristo, had been accorded an entrance into her presence.
She was sitting on a sofa placed in an angle of the room, with her legs crossed under her in the Eastern fashion, and seemed to have made for herself, as it were, a kind of nest in the rich Indian silks which enveloped her.
Near her was the instrument on which she had just been playing; it was elegantly fashioned, and worthy of its mistress.
On perceiving Monte Cristo, she arose and welcomed him with a smile peculiar to herself, expressive at once of the most implicit obedience and also of the deepest love.
Monte Cristo advanced towards her and extended his hand, which she as usual raised to her lips. 40064m Albert had proceeded no farther than the door, where he remained rooted to the spot, being completely fascinated by the sight of such surpassing beauty, beheld as it was for the first time, and of which an inhabitant of more northern climes could form no adequate idea.
“Whom do you bring?” asked the young girl in Romaic, of Monte Cristo; “is it a friend, a brother, a simple acquaintance, or an enemy.” “A friend,” said Monte Cristo in the same language.
“What is his name?” “Count Albert; it is the same man whom I rescued from the hands of the banditti at Rome.” “In what language would you like me to converse with him?” Monte Cristo turned to Albert.
“Alas! no,” said Albert; “nor even ancient Greek, my dear count; never had Homer or Plato a more unworthy scholar than myself.” “Then,” said Haydée, proving by her remark that she had quite understood Monte Cristo’s question and Albert’s answer, “then I will speak either in French or Italian, if my lord so wills it.” Monte Cristo reflected one instant.
Then, turning towards Albert,—“It is a pity you do not understand either ancient or modern Greek, both of which Haydée speaks so fluently; the poor child will be obliged to talk to you in Italian, which will give you but a very false idea of her powers of conversation.” The count made a sign to Haydée to address his visitor.
“Sir,” she said to Morcerf, “you are most welcome as the friend of my lord and master.” This was said in excellent Tuscan, and with that soft Roman accent which makes the language of Dante as sonorous as that of Homer.
Then, turning to Ali, she directed him to bring coffee and pipes, and when he had left the room to execute the orders of his young mistress she beckoned Albert to approach nearer to her.
Monte Cristo and Morcerf drew their seats towards a small table, on which were arranged music, drawings, and vases of flowers.
Ali then entered bringing coffee and chibouques; as to M.
Baptistin, this portion of the building was interdicted to him.
“Oh, take it—take it,” said the count; “Haydée is almost as civilized as a Parisian; the smell of a Havana is disagreeable to her, but the tobacco of the East is a most delicious perfume, you know.” Ali left the room.
The cups of coffee were all prepared, with the addition of sugar, which had been brought for Albert.
Monte Cristo and Haydée took the beverage in the original Arabian manner, that is to say, without sugar.
Haydée took the porcelain cup in her little slender fingers and conveyed it to her mouth with all the innocent artlessness of a child when eating or drinking something which it likes.
At this moment two women entered, bringing salvers filled with ices and sherbet, which they placed on two small tables appropriated to that purpose.
“My dear host, and you, signora,” said Albert, in Italian, “excuse my apparent stupidity.
I am quite bewildered, and it is natural that it should be so.
Here I am in the heart of Paris; but a moment ago I heard the rumbling of the omnibuses and the tinkling of the bells of the lemonade-sellers, and now I feel as if I were suddenly transported to the East; not such as I have seen it, but such as my dreams have painted it.
“And have you any recollection of your country?” “When I shut my eyes and think, I seem to see it all again.
“Then you remember everything that went on about you from the time when you were three years old?” said Albert.
“Everything.” “Count,” said Albert, in a low tone to Monte Cristo, “do allow the signora to tell me something of her history.
“What are you saying to her?” said Morcerf in an undertone.
Under the oldest and thickest of these trees, reclining on cushions, sat my father; my mother was at his feet, and I, childlike, amused myself by playing with his long white beard which descended to his girdle, or with the diamond-hilt of the scimitar attached to his girdle.
“Well, I was but four years old when one night I was suddenly awakened by my mother.
We were in the palace of Yanina; she snatched me from the cushions on which I was sleeping, and on opening my eyes I saw hers filled with tears.
She took me away without speaking.
At other times in spite of maternal endearments or threats, I had with a child’s caprice been accustomed to indulge my feelings of sorrow or anger by crying as much as I felt inclined; but on this occasion there was an intonation of such extreme terror in my mother’s voice when she enjoined me to silence, that I ceased crying as soon as her command was given.
“I saw then that we were descending a large staircase; around us were all my mother’s servants carrying trunks, bags, ornaments, jewels, purses of gold, with which they were hurrying away in the greatest distraction.
You may imagine there was something startling and ominous,” said Haydée, shaking her head and turning pale at the mere remembrance of the scene, “in this long file of slaves and women only half-aroused from sleep, or at least so they appeared to me, who was myself scarcely awake.
Here and there on the walls of the staircase, were reflected gigantic shadows, which trembled in the flickering light of the pine-torches till they seemed to reach to the vaulted roof above.
This voice made everyone bow before it, resembling in its effect the wind passing over a field of wheat, by its superior strength forcing every ear to yield obeisance.
He came last, clothed in his splendid robes and holding in his hand the carbine which your emperor presented him.
He was leaning on the shoulder of his favorite Selim, and he drove us all before him, as a shepherd would his straggling flock.
“Soon,” said Haydée, “we halted on our march, and found ourselves on the borders of a lake.
My mother pressed me to her throbbing heart, and at the distance of a few paces I saw my father, who was glancing anxiously around.
Four marble steps led down to the water’s edge, and below them was a boat floating on the tide. 40070m “From where we stood I could see in the middle of the lake a large blank mass; it was the kiosk to which we were going.
This kiosk appeared to me to be at a considerable distance, perhaps on account of the darkness of the night, which prevented any object from being more than partially discerned.
I remember well that the oars made no noise whatever in striking the water, and when I leaned over to ascertain the cause I saw that they were muffled with the sashes of our Palikares.14 Besides the rowers, the boat contained only the women, my father, mother, Selim, and myself.
The Palikares had remained on the shore of the lake, ready to cover our retreat; they were kneeling on the lowest of the marble steps, and in that manner intended making a rampart of the three others, in case of pursuit.
Hush, we are flying!’ I did not understand.
Why should my father fly?—he, the all-powerful—he, before whom others were accustomed to fly—he, who had taken for his device, ‘They hate me; then they fear me!’ “It was, indeed, a flight which my father was trying to effect.
I have been told since that the garrison of the castle of Yanina, fatigued with long service——” Here Haydée cast a significant glance at Monte Cristo, whose eyes had been riveted on her countenance during the whole course of her narrative.
The young girl then continued, speaking slowly, like a person who is either inventing or suppressing some feature of the history which he is relating.
“No,” said she, “I do not remember it just at this moment; but if it should occur to me presently, I will tell you.” Albert was on the point of pronouncing his father’s name, when Monte Cristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach; the young man recollected his promise, and was silent.
A ground floor, ornamented with arabesques, bathing its terraces in the water, and another floor, looking on the lake, was all which was visible to the eye.
But beneath the ground floor, stretching out into the island, was a large subterranean cavern, to which my mother, myself, and the women were conducted.
In this place were together 60,000 pouches and 200 barrels; the pouches contained 25,000,000 of money in gold, and the barrels were filled with 30,000 pounds of gunpowder.
“Near the barrels stood Selim, my father’s favorite, whom I mentioned to you just now.
He stood watch day and night with a lance provided with a lighted slowmatch in his hand, and he had orders to blow up everything—kiosk, guards, women, gold, and Ali Tepelini himself—at the first signal given by my father.
I remember well that the slaves, convinced of the precarious tenure on which they held their lives, passed whole days and nights in praying, crying, and groaning.
As for me, I can never forget the pale complexion and black eyes of the young soldier, and whenever the angel of death summons me to another world, I am quite sure I shall recognize Selim.
I cannot tell you how long we remained in this state; at that period I did not even know what time meant.
Sometimes, but very rarely, my father summoned me and my mother to the terrace of the palace; these were hours of recreation for me, as I never saw anything in the dismal cavern but the gloomy countenances of the slaves and Selim’s fiery lance.
The heights of Pindus towered above us; the castle of Yanina rose white and angular from the blue waters of the lake, and the immense masses of black vegetation which, viewed in the distance, gave the idea of lichens clinging to the rocks, were in reality gigantic fir-trees and myrtles.
“One morning my father sent for us; my mother had been crying all the night, and was very wretched; we found the pasha calm, but paler than usual.
‘Take courage, Vasiliki,’ said he; ‘today arrives the firman of the master, and my fate will be decided.
If my pardon be complete, we shall return triumphant to Yanina; if the news be inauspicious, we must fly this night.’—‘But supposing our enemy should not allow us to do so?’ said my mother.
‘Oh, make yourself easy on that head,’ said Ali, smiling; ‘Selim and his flaming lance will settle that matter.
They would be glad to see me dead, but they would not like themselves to die with me.’ “My mother only answered by sighs to consolations which she knew did not come from my father’s heart.
Presently he made such a sudden movement that I was paralyzed with fear.
Then, without taking his eyes from the object which had first attracted his attention, he asked for his telescope.
‘A boat!—two!—three!’ murmured my, father;—‘four!’ He then arose, seizing his arms and priming his pistols.
‘Vasiliki,’ said he to my mother, trembling perceptibly, ‘the instant approaches which will decide everything.
Go into the cavern with Haydée.’—‘I will not quit you,’ said Vasiliki; ‘if you die, my lord, I will die with you.’—‘Go to Selim!’ cried my father.
‘Adieu, my lord,’ murmured my mother, determining quietly to await the approach of death.
‘Take away Vasiliki!’ said my father to his Palikares.
“As for me, I had been forgotten in the general confusion; I ran toward Ali Tepelini; he saw me hold out my arms to him, and he stooped down and pressed my forehead with his lips.
Oh, how distinctly I remember that kiss!—it was the last he ever gave me, and I feel as if it were still warm on my forehead.
On descending, we saw through the lattice-work several boats which were gradually becoming more distinct to our view.
At first they appeared like black specks, and now they looked like birds skimming the surface of the waves.
During this time, in the kiosk at my father’s feet, were seated twenty Palikares, concealed from view by an angle of the wall and watching with eager eyes the arrival of the boats.
They were armed with their long guns inlaid with mother-of-pearl and silver, and cartridges in great numbers were lying scattered on the floor.
My father looked at his watch, and paced up and down with a countenance expressive of the greatest anguish.
This was the scene which presented itself to my view as I quitted my father after that last kiss.
“My mother and I traversed the gloomy passage leading to the cavern.
We fetched our cushions from the other end of the cavern, and sat down by Selim.
Monte Cristo looked at her with an indescribable expression of interest and pity.
“Go on, my child,” said the count in the Romaic language. 40074m Haydée looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of Monte Cristo’s voice had awakened her from a dream; and she resumed her narrative.
“It was about four o’clock in the afternoon, and although the day was brilliant out-of-doors, we were enveloped in the gloomy darkness of the cavern.
One single, solitary light was burning there, and it appeared like a star set in a heaven of blackness; it was Selim’s flaming lance.
My mother was a Christian, and she prayed.
Selim repeated from time to time the sacred words: ‘God is great!’ However, my mother had still some hope.
As she was coming down, she thought she recognized the French officer who had been sent to Constantinople, and in whom my father placed so much confidence; for he knew that all the soldiers of the French emperor were naturally noble and generous.
She advanced some steps towards the staircase, and listened.
‘They are approaching,’ said she; ‘perhaps they bring us peace and liberty!’ “‘What do you fear, Vasiliki?’ said Selim, in a voice at once so gentle and yet so proud.
“My mother experienced the same sensations, for I felt her tremble.
‘Mamma, mamma,’ said I, ‘are we really to be killed?’ And at the sound of my voice the slaves redoubled their cries and prayers and lamentations.
‘My child,’ said Vasiliki, ‘may God preserve you from ever wishing for that death which today you so much dread!’ Then, whispering to Selim, she asked what were her master’s orders.
“Suddenly we heard loud cries; and, listening, discerned that they were cries of joy.
The name of the French officer who had been sent to Constantinople resounded on all sides amongst our Palikares; it was evident that he brought the answer of the emperor, and that it was favorable.” “And do you not remember the Frenchman’s name?” said Morcerf, quite ready to aid the memory of the narrator.
“I do not recollect it,” said Haydée.
“The noise increased; steps were heard approaching nearer and nearer; they were descending the steps leading to the cavern.
Soon a figure appeared in the gray twilight at the entrance of the cave, formed by the reflection of the few rays of daylight which had found their way into this gloomy retreat.
‘He grants a full pardon to the Vizier Ali, and not only gives him his life, but restores to him his fortune and his possessions.’ My mother uttered a cry of joy, and clasped me to her bosom.
‘Stop,’ said Selim, seeing that she was about to go out; ‘you see I have not yet received the ring,’—‘True,’ said my mother.
Selim had also recognized him, but the brave young man only acknowledged one duty, which was to obey.
“Oh, how our hearts palpitated; for it did, indeed, seem to be a ring which was placed there.
But was it my father’s ring? that was the question.
Selim, still holding in his hand the lighted match, walked towards the opening in the cavern, and, aided by the faint light which streamed in through the mouth of the cave, picked up the token.
“‘It is well,’ said he, kissing it; ‘it is my master’s ring!’ And throwing the match on the ground, he trampled on it and extinguished it.
The messenger uttered a cry of joy and clapped his hands.
At this signal four soldiers of the Seraskier Kourchid suddenly appeared, and Selim fell, pierced by five blows.
Each man had stabbed him separately, and, intoxicated by their crime, though still pale with fear, they sought all over the cavern to discover if there was any fear of fire, after which they amused themselves by rolling on the bags of gold.
At this moment my mother seized me in her arms, and hurrying noiselessly along numerous turnings and windings known only to ourselves, she arrived at a private staircase of the kiosk, where was a scene of frightful tumult and confusion.
The lower rooms were entirely filled with Kourchid’s troops; that is to say, with our enemies.
Just as my mother was on the point of pushing open a small door, we heard the voice of the pasha sounding in a loud and threatening tone.
My mother applied her eye to the crack between the boards; I luckily found a small opening which afforded me a view of the apartment and what was passing within.
‘What do you want?’ said my father to some people who were holding a paper inscribed with characters of gold.
‘What we want,’ replied one, ‘is to communicate to you the will of his highness.
‘Well, read it; he demands your head.’ 40078m “My father answered with a loud laugh, which was more frightful than even threats would have been, and he had not ceased when two reports of a pistol were heard; he had fired them himself, and had killed two men.
The Palikares, who were prostrated at my father’s feet, now sprang up and fired, and the room was filled with fire and smoke.
At the same instant the firing began on the other side, and the balls penetrated the boards all round us.
Oh, how noble did the grand vizier my father look at that moment, in the midst of the flying bullets, his scimitar in his hand, and his face blackened with the powder of his enemies! and how he terrified them, even then, and made them fly before him!
‘Selim, Selim!’ cried he, ‘guardian of the fire, do your duty!’—‘Selim is dead,’ replied a voice which seemed to come from the depths of the earth, ‘and you are lost, Ali!’ At the same moment an explosion was heard, and the flooring of the room in which my father was sitting was suddenly torn up and shivered to atoms—the troops were firing from underneath.
Three or four Palikares fell with their bodies literally ploughed with wounds.
But immediately through this opening twenty more shots were fired, and the flame, rushing up like fire from the crater of a volcano, soon reached the tapestry, which it quickly devoured.
In the midst of all this frightful tumult and these terrific cries, two reports, fearfully distinct, followed by two shrieks more heartrending than all, froze me with terror.
These two shots had mortally wounded my father, and it was he who had given utterance to these frightful cries.
However, he remained standing, clinging to a window.
My mother tried to force the door, that she might go and die with him, but it was fastened on the inside.
All around him were lying the Palikares, writhing in convulsive agonies, while two or three who were only slightly wounded were trying to escape by springing from the windows.
At this crisis the whole flooring suddenly gave way, my father fell on one knee, and at the same moment twenty hands were thrust forth, armed with sabres, pistols, and poniards—twenty blows were instantaneously directed against one man, and my father disappeared in a whirlwind of fire and smoke kindled by these demons, and which seemed like hell itself opening beneath his feet.
I felt myself fall to the ground, my mother had fainted.” Haydée’s arms fell by her side, and she uttered a deep groan, at the same time looking towards the count as if to ask if he were satisfied with her obedience to his commands.
Then, patting the young girl on the head, he continued, “Haydée is very courageous, and she sometimes even finds consolation in the recital of her misfortunes.” “Because, my lord,” said Haydée eagerly, “my miseries recall to me the remembrance of your goodness.” Albert looked at her with curiosity, for she had not yet related what he most desired to know,—how she had become the slave of the count.
Haydée saw at a glance the same expression pervading the countenances of her two auditors; she continued: “When my mother recovered her senses we were before the seraskier.
‘Kill,’ said she, ‘but spare the honor of the widow of Ali.’—‘It is not to me to whom you must address yourself,’ said Kourchid.
“‘To whom, then?’—‘To your new master.’ “‘Who and where is he?’—‘He is here.’ “And Kourchid pointed out one who had more than any contributed to the death of my father,” said Haydée, in a tone of chastened anger.
“Then,” said Albert, “you became the property of this man?” 40080m “No,” replied Haydée, “he did not dare to keep us, so we were sold to some slave-merchants who were going to Constantinople.
We traversed Greece, and arrived half dead at the imperial gates.
I was taken to the slave-market, and was purchased by a rich Armenian.
We hear From Yanina If Valentine could have seen the trembling step and agitated countenance of Franz when he quitted the chamber of M.
Noirtier, even she would have been constrained to pity him.
Villefort had only just given utterance to a few incoherent sentences, and then retired to his study, where he received about two hours afterwards the following letter: “After all the disclosures which were made this morning, M.
Noirtier de Villefort must see the utter impossibility of any alliance being formed between his family and that of M.
And in justice to Villefort, it must be understood that M.
This harsh letter, coming as it did from a man generally so polite and respectful, struck a mortal blow at the pride of Villefort.
The sudden departure of Franz, after being summoned by M.
Noirtier, had so much astonished everyone, that the position of Madame de Villefort, left alone with the notary and the witnesses, became every moment more embarrassing.
Determined to bear it no longer, she arose and left the room; saying she would go and make some inquiries into the cause of his sudden disappearance.
M. de Villefort’s communications on the subject were very limited and concise; he told her, in fact, that an explanation had taken place between M.
Noirtier, M. d’Épinay, and himself, and that the marriage of Valentine and Franz would consequently be broken off.
This was an awkward and unpleasant thing to have to report to those who were waiting.
She therefore contented herself with saying that M.
Noirtier having at the commencement of the discussion been attacked by a sort of apoplectic fit, the affair would necessarily be deferred for some days longer.
This news, false as it was following so singularly in the train of the two similar misfortunes which had so recently occurred, evidently astonished the auditors, and they retired without a word.
During this time Valentine, at once terrified and happy, after having embraced and thanked the feeble old man for thus breaking with a single blow the chain which she had been accustomed to consider as irrefragable, asked leave to retire to her own room, in order to recover her composure.
Noirtier looked the permission which she solicited.
But instead of going to her own room, Valentine, having once gained her liberty, entered the gallery, and, opening a small door at the end of it, found herself at once in the garden.
In the midst of all the strange events which had crowded one on the other, an indefinable sentiment of dread had taken possession of Valentine’s mind.
She expected every moment that she should see Morrel appear, pale and trembling, to forbid the signing of the contract, like the Laird of Ravenswood in _The Bride of Lammermoor_.
It was high time for her to make her appearance at the gate, for Maximilian had long awaited her coming.
He had half guessed what was going on when he saw Franz quit the cemetery with M. de Villefort.
He followed M. d’Épinay, saw him enter, afterwards go out, and then re-enter with Albert and Château-Renaud.
He had no longer any doubts as to the nature of the conference; he therefore quickly went to the gate in the clover-patch, prepared to hear the result of the proceedings, and very certain that Valentine would hasten to him the first moment she should be set at liberty.
He was not mistaken; peering through the crevices of the wooden partition, he soon discovered the young girl, who cast aside all her usual precautions and walked at once to the barrier.
The first glance which Maximilian directed towards her entirely reassured him, and the first words she spoke made his heart bound with delight.
“We are saved!” said Valentine.
“Saved?” repeated Morrel, not being able to conceive such intense happiness; “by whom?” “By my grandfather.
Oh, Morrel, pray love him for all his goodness to us!” Morrel swore to love him with all his soul; and at that moment he could safely promise to do so, for he felt as though it were not enough to love him merely as a friend or even as a father, he worshiped him as a god.
“But tell me, Valentine, how has it all been effected?
However, he would not leave without the promise of seeing Valentine again the next night.
Valentine promised all that Morrel required of her, and certainly it was less difficult now for her to believe that she should marry Maximilian than it was an hour ago to assure herself that she should not marry Franz.
During the time occupied by the interview we have just detailed, Madame de Villefort had gone to visit M.
The old man looked at her with that stern and forbidding expression with which he was accustomed to receive her.
“Sir,” said she, “it is superfluous for me to tell you that Valentine’s marriage is broken off, since it was here that the affair was concluded.” Noirtier’s countenance remained immovable.
“But one thing I can tell you, of which I do not think you are aware; that is, that I have always been opposed to this marriage, and that the contract was entered into entirely without my consent or approbation.” Noirtier regarded his daughter-in-law with the look of a man desiring an explanation.
“Now that this marriage, which I know you so much disliked, is done away with, I come to you on an errand which neither M. de Villefort nor Valentine could consistently undertake.” Noirtier’s eyes demanded the nature of her mission.
“May I hope, sir,” said Madame de Villefort, “that your intentions accord with my request?” Noirtier made a sign that they did.
“In that case, sir,” rejoined Madame de Villefort, “I will leave you overwhelmed with gratitude and happiness at your prompt acquiescence to my wishes.” She then bowed to M.
Noirtier and retired.
Noirtier sent for the notary; the first will was torn up and a second made, in which he left the whole of his fortune to Valentine, on condition that she should never be separated from him.
It was then generally reported that Mademoiselle de Villefort, the heiress of the marquis and marchioness of Saint-Méran, had regained the good graces of her grandfather, and that she would ultimately be in possession of an income of 300,000 livres.
While all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of the marriage-contract were being carried on at the house of M. de Villefort, Monte Cristo had paid his visit to the Count of Morcerf, who, in order to lose no time in responding to M.
Danglars’ wishes, and at the same time to pay all due deference to his position in society, donned his uniform of lieutenant-general, which he ornamented with all his crosses, and thus attired, ordered his finest horses and drove to the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin.
Danglars was balancing his monthly accounts, and it was perhaps not the most favorable moment for finding him in his best humor.
At the first sight of his old friend, Danglars assumed his majestic air, and settled himself in his easy-chair.
“To what do you allude, monsieur?” said Danglars; as if he were trying in vain to guess at the possible meaning of the general’s words.
“Ah,” said Morcerf, “I see you are a stickler for forms, my dear sir, and you would remind me that the ceremonial rites should not be omitted. _Ma foi_, I beg your pardon, but as I have but one son, and it is the first time I have ever thought of marrying him, I am still serving my apprenticeship, you know; come, I will reform.” And Morcerf with a forced smile arose, and, making a low bow to M.
A cloud settled on his brow, evincing decided anxiety and uneasiness, instead of the expression of offended pride which had lately reigned there.
“My dear Danglars,” said Morcerf, “we have been acquainted for many years, and consequently we ought to make some allowance for each other’s failings.
You owe me an explanation, and really it is but fair that I should know what circumstance has occurred to deprive my son of your favor.” “It is from no personal ill-feeling towards the viscount, that is all I can say, sir,” replied Danglars, who resumed his insolent manner as soon as he perceived that Morcerf was a little softened and calmed down.
“And towards whom do you bear this personal ill-feeling, then?” said Morcerf, turning pale with anger.
Is it Madame de Morcerf who has displeased you?
Is it my fortune which you find insufficient?
Is it because my opinions differ from yours?” “Nothing of the kind, sir,” replied Danglars: “if such had been the case, I only should have been to blame, inasmuch as I was aware of all these things when I made the engagement.
No, do not seek any longer to discover the reason.
I really am quite ashamed to have been the cause of your undergoing such severe self-examination; let us drop the subject, and adopt the middle course of delay, which implies neither a rupture nor an engagement. _Ma foi_, there is no hurry.
My daughter is only seventeen years old, and your son twenty-one.
While we wait, time will be progressing, events will succeed each other; things which in the evening look dark and obscure, appear but too clearly in the light of morning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, or the lapse of a single day, will reveal the most cruel calumnies.” “Calumnies, did you say, sir?” cried Morcerf, turning livid with rage.
Danglars observed that during the whole conversation Morcerf had never once dared to ask if it was on his own account that Danglars recalled his word.
That evening he had a long conference with several friends; and M.
Cavalcanti, who had remained in the drawing-room with the ladies, was the last to leave the banker’s house.
The next morning, as soon as he awoke, Danglars asked for the newspapers; they were brought to him; he laid aside three or four, and at last fixed on _l’Impartial_, the paper of which Beauchamp was the chief editor.
When he presented himself at the gate the porter informed him that the Count had gone out about half an hour previously.
“Did he take Baptistin with him?” “No, my lord.” “Call him, then; I wish to speak to him.” The concierge went to seek the valet de chambre, and returned with him in an instant.
“My good friend,” said Albert, “I beg pardon for my intrusion, but I was anxious to know from your own mouth if your master was really out or not.” “He is really out, sir,” replied Baptistin.
“Out, even to me?” “I know how happy my master always is to receive the vicomte,” said Baptistin; “and I should therefore never think of including him in any general order.” “You are right; and now I wish to see him on an affair of great importance.
Do you think it will be long before he comes in?” “No, I think not, for he ordered his breakfast at ten o’clock.” “Well, I will go and take a turn in the Champs-Élysées, and at ten o’clock I will return here; meanwhile, if the count should come in, will you beg him not to go out again without seeing me?” “You may depend on my doing so, sir,” said Baptistin.
Albert left the cab in which he had come at the count’s door, intending to take a turn on foot.
As he was passing the Allée des Veuves, he thought he saw the count’s horses standing at Gosset’s shooting-gallery; he approached, and soon recognized the coachman.
“Is the count shooting in the gallery?” said Morcerf.
“Yes, sir,” replied the coachman.
While he was speaking, Albert had heard the report of two or three pistol-shots.
“Excuse me, my lord,” said the lad; “but will you have the kindness to wait a moment?” “What for, Philip?” asked Albert, who, being a constant visitor there, did not understand this opposition to his entrance.
“Because the person who is now in the gallery prefers being alone, and never practices in the presence of anyone.” “Not even before you, Philip?
Then who loads his pistol?” “His servant.” “A Nubian?” “A negro.” “It is he, then.” “Do you know this gentleman?” “Yes, and I am come to look for him; he is a friend of mine.” “Oh, that is quite another thing, then.
I will go immediately and inform him of your arrival.” And Philip, urged by his own curiosity, entered the gallery; a second afterwards, Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold.
“I ask your pardon, my dear count,” said Albert, “for following you here, and I must first tell you that it was not the fault of your servants that I did so; I alone am to blame for the indiscretion.
I went to your house, and they told me you were out, but that they expected you home at ten o’clock to breakfast.
People fight for all sorts of reasons, you know.” “I fight in the cause of honor.” “Ah, that is something serious.” “So serious, that I come to beg you to render me a service.” “What is it?” “To be my second.” “That is a serious matter, and we will not discuss it here; let us speak of nothing till we get home.
Ali, bring me some water.” The count turned up his sleeves, and passed into the little vestibule where the gentlemen were accustomed to wash their hands after shooting.
“Come in, my lord,” said Philip in a low tone, “and I will show you something droll.” Morcerf entered, and in place of the usual target, he saw some playing-cards fixed against the wall.
At a distance Albert thought it was a complete suit, for he counted from the ace to the ten.
“Ah, ha,” said Albert, “I see you were preparing for a game of cards.” “No,” said the count, “I was making a suit.” “How?” said Albert.
“Those are really aces and twos which you see, but my shots have turned them into threes, fives, sevens, eights, nines, and tens.” Albert approached.
In fact, the bullets had actually pierced the cards in the exact places which the painted signs would otherwise have occupied, the lines and distances being as regularly kept as if they had been ruled with pencil.
In going up to the target Morcerf picked up two or three swallows that had been rash enough to come within the range of the count’s pistol.
“What would you have, my dear viscount?” said Monte Cristo, wiping his hands on the towel which Ali had brought him; “I must occupy my leisure moments in some way or other.
But come, I am waiting for you.” Both men entered Monte Cristo’s carriage, which in the course of a few minutes deposited them safely at No. 30.
Monte Cristo took Albert into his study, and pointing to a seat, placed another for himself.
“You see I am perfectly composed,” said Albert.
They have allowed all this time to elapse, and then all of a sudden rake up events which have been forgotten to furnish materials for scandal, in order to tarnish the lustre of our high position.
I inherit my father’s name, and I do not choose that the shadow of disgrace should darken it.
I am going to Beauchamp, in whose journal this paragraph appears, and I shall insist on his retracting the assertion before two witnesses.” “Beauchamp will never retract.” “Then we must fight.” “No you will not, for he will tell you, what is very true, that perhaps there were fifty officers in the Greek army bearing the same name.” “We will fight, nevertheless.
I will efface that blot on my father’s character.
If one’s lot is cast among fools, it is necessary to study folly.
I shall perhaps find myself one day called out by some harebrained scamp, who has no more real cause of quarrel with me than you have with Beauchamp; he may take me to task for some foolish trifle or other, he will bring his witnesses, or will insult me in some public place, and I am expected to kill him for all that.” “You admit that you would fight, then?
Well, if so, why do you object to my doing so?” “I do not say that you ought not to fight, I only say that a duel is a serious thing, and ought not to be undertaken without due reflection.” “Did he reflect before he insulted my father?” “If he spoke hastily, and owns that he did so, you ought to be satisfied.” “Ah, my dear count, you are far too indulgent.” “And you are far too exacting.
If Beauchamp be disposed to retract, you ought at least to give him the opportunity of doing it of his own free will,—the satisfaction to you will be the same.
If, on the contrary, he refuses to do so, it will then be quite time enough to admit two strangers into your secret.” “They will not be strangers, they will be friends.” “Ah, but the friends of today are the enemies of tomorrow; Beauchamp, for instance.” “So you recommend——” “I recommend you to be prudent.” “Then you advise me to go alone to Beauchamp?” “I do, and I will tell you why.
He found his carriage at the door, and doing his utmost to restrain his anger he went at once to find Beauchamp, who was in his office.
It was a gloomy, dusty-looking apartment, such as journalists’ offices have always been from time immemorial.
The servant announced M.
Beauchamp repeated the name to himself, as though he could scarcely believe that he had heard aright, and then gave orders for him to be admitted.
Beauchamp uttered an exclamation of surprise on seeing his friend leap over and trample under foot all the newspapers which were strewed about the room.
“Are you out of your senses, or do you come peaceably to take breakfast with me?
Try and find a seat—there is one by that geranium, which is the only thing in the room to remind me that there are other leaves in the world besides leaves of paper.” “Beauchamp,” said Albert, “it is of your journal that I come to speak.” “Indeed?
What do you wish to say about it?” “I desire that a statement contained in it should be rectified.” “To what do you refer?
Baptiste, give me yesterday’s paper,” cried Beauchamp.
Beauchamp took the paper, and read the article to which Albert pointed in an undertone.
“You see it is a serious annoyance,” said Morcerf, when Beauchamp had finished the perusal of the paragraph.
“Is the officer referred to a relation of yours, then?” demanded the journalist.
“Yes,” said Albert, blushing.
“Well, what do you wish me to do for you?” said Beauchamp mildly.
“My dear Beauchamp, I wish you to contradict this statement.” Beauchamp looked at Albert with a benevolent expression.
“Come,” said he, “this matter will want a good deal of talking over; a retractation is always a serious thing, you know.
Sit down, and I will read it again.” Albert resumed his seat, and Beauchamp read, with more attention than at first, the lines denounced by his friend.
“Well,” said Albert in a determined tone, “you see that your paper has insulted a member of my family, and I insist on a retractation being made.” “You insist?” “Yes, I insist.” “Permit me to remind you that you are not in the Chamber, my dear viscount.” “Nor do I wish to be there,” replied the young man, rising.
“I repeat that I am determined to have the announcement of yesterday contradicted.
You are irritated and vexed—tell me how this Fernand is related to you?” “He is merely my father,” said Albert—“M.
Fernand Mondego, Count of Morcerf, an old soldier who has fought in twenty battles and whose honorable scars they would denounce as badges of disgrace.” “Is it your father?” said Beauchamp; “that is quite another thing.
Then I can well understand your indignation, my dear Albert.
I will look at it again;” and he read the paragraph for the third time, laying a stress on each word as he proceeded.
“But the paper nowhere identifies this Fernand with your father.” 40100m “No; but the connection will be seen by others, and therefore I will have the article contradicted.” At the words _I will_, Beauchamp steadily raised his eyes to Albert’s countenance, and then as gradually lowering them, he remained thoughtful for a few moments.
“You will retract this assertion, will you not, Beauchamp?” said Albert with increased though stifled anger.
“Yes,” replied Beauchamp.
“Immediately?” said Albert.
“When I am convinced that the statement is false.” “What?” “The thing is worth looking into, and I will take pains to investigate the matter thoroughly.” “But what is there to investigate, sir?” said Albert, enraged beyond measure at Beauchamp’s last remark.
“If you do not believe that it is my father, say so immediately; and if, on the contrary, you believe it to be him, state your reasons for doing so.” Beauchamp looked at Albert with the smile which was so peculiar to him, and which in its numerous modifications served to express every varied emotion of his mind.
“Sir,” replied he, “if you came to me with the idea of demanding satisfaction, you should have gone at once to the point, and not have entertained me with the idle conversation to which I have been patiently listening for the last half hour.
Am I to put this construction on your visit?” “Yes, if you will not consent to retract that infamous calumny.” “Wait a moment—no threats, if you please, M.
Fernand Mondego, Vicomte de Morcerf; I never allow them from my enemies, and therefore shall not put up with them from my friends.
You insist on my contradicting the article relating to General Fernand, an article with which, I assure you on my word of honor, I had nothing whatever to do?” “Yes, I insist on it,” said Albert, whose mind was beginning to get bewildered with the excitement of his feelings.
“And if I refuse to retract, you wish to fight, do you?” said Beauchamp in a calm tone.
“Well,” said Beauchamp, “here is my answer, my dear sir.
I know you to be well skilled in the management of the sword, while I am only moderately so; I know, too, that you are a good marksman—there we are about equal.
I do not therefore wish either to kill you, or to be killed myself without a cause.
Now, I am going to put a question to you, and one very much to the purpose too.
Albert de Morcerf,” said Beauchamp, rising in his turn, “I cannot throw you out of window for three weeks—that is to say, for twenty-four days to come—nor have you any right to split my skull open till that time has elapsed.
He was passing the Chinese Baths, and appeared to have come from the direction of the Porte Saint-Martin, and to be going towards the Madeleine.
“Ah,” said Morcerf, “there goes a happy man!” And it so happened Albert was not mistaken in his opinion.
The Lemonade Morrel was, in fact, very happy.
Noirtier had just sent for him, and he was in such haste to know the reason of his doing so that he had not stopped to take a cab, placing infinitely more dependence on his own two legs than on the four legs of a cab-horse.
He had therefore set off at a furious rate from the Rue Meslay, and was hastening with rapid strides in the direction of the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.
Morrel advanced with a firm, manly tread, and poor Barrois followed him as he best might.
Morrel was only thirty-one, Barrois was sixty years of age; Morrel was deeply in love, and Barrois was dying with heat and exertion.
These two men, thus opposed in age and interests, resembled two parts of a triangle, presenting the extremes of separation, yet nevertheless possessing their point of union.
This point of union was Noirtier, and it was he who had just sent for Morrel, with the request that the latter would lose no time in coming to him—a command which Morrel obeyed to the letter, to the great discomfiture of Barrois.
On arriving at the house, Morrel was not even out of breath, for love lends wings to our desires; but Barrois, who had long forgotten what it was to love, was sorely fatigued by the expedition he had been constrained to use.
The old servant introduced Morrel by a private entrance, closed the door of the study, and soon the rustling of a dress announced the arrival of Valentine.
She looked marvellously beautiful in her deep mourning dress, and Morrel experienced such intense delight in gazing upon her that he felt as if he could almost have dispensed with the conversation of her grandfather.
But the easy-chair of the old man was heard rolling along the floor, and he soon made his appearance in the room.
Noirtier acknowledged by a look of extreme kindness and benevolence the thanks which Morrel lavished on him for his timely intervention on behalf of Valentine and himself—an intervention which had saved them from despair.
Morrel then cast on the invalid an interrogative look as to the new favor which he designed to bestow on him.
Valentine was sitting at a little distance from them, timidly awaiting the moment when she should be obliged to speak.
Noirtier fixed his eyes on her.
“Am I to say what you told me?” asked Valentine.
Noirtier made a sign that she was to do so.
“Monsieur Morrel,” said Valentine to the young man, who was regarding her with the most intense interest, “my grandfather, M.
Noirtier, had a thousand things to say, which he told me three days ago; and now, he has sent for you, that I may repeat them to you.
“My grandfather intends leaving this house,” said she, “and Barrois is looking out for suitable apartments for him in another.” “But you, Mademoiselle de Villefort,—you, who are necessary to M.
Noirtier’s happiness——” “I?” interrupted Valentine; “I shall not leave my grandfather,—that is an understood thing between us.
My apartment will be close to his.
Now, M. de Villefort must either give his consent to this plan or his refusal; in the first case, I shall leave directly, and in the second, I shall wait till I am of age, which will be in about ten months.
Then I shall be free, I shall have an independent fortune, and”— “And what?” demanded Morrel.
“And with my grandfather’s consent I shall fulfil the promise which I have made you.” Valentine pronounced these last few words in such a low tone, that nothing but Morrel’s intense interest in what she was saying could have enabled him to hear them.
“Have I not explained your wishes, grandpapa?” said Valentine, addressing Noirtier.
“Once under my grandfather’s roof, M.
Morrel can visit me in the presence of my good and worthy protector, if we still feel that the union we contemplated will be likely to insure our future comfort and happiness; in that case I shall expect M.
Noirtier regarded the lovers with a look of ineffable tenderness, while Barrois, who had remained in the room in the character of a man privileged to know everything that passed, smiled on the youthful couple as he wiped the perspiration from his bald forehead.
“How hot you look, my good Barrois,” said Valentine.
“Ah, I have been running very fast, mademoiselle, but I must do M.
Morrel the justice to say that he ran still faster.” Noirtier directed their attention to a waiter, on which was placed a decanter containing lemonade and a glass.
The decanter was nearly full, with the exception of a little, which had been already drunk by M.
Valentine and Morrel were exchanging their adieux in the presence of Noirtier when a ring was heard at the door-bell.
Valentine looked at her watch.
“It is past noon,” said she, “and today is Saturday; I dare say it is the doctor, grandpapa.” Noirtier looked his conviction that she was right in her supposition.
Morrel had better go,—do you not think so, grandpapa?” “Yes,” signed the old man.
“Barrois,” cried Valentine, “Barrois!” “I am coming, mademoiselle,” replied he.
“Barrois will open the door for you,” said Valentine, addressing Morrel.
“And now remember one thing, Monsieur Officer, that my grandfather commands you not to take any rash or ill-advised step which would be likely to compromise our happiness.” 40108m “I promised him to wait,” replied Morrel; “and I will wait.” At this moment Barrois entered.
“Who rang?” asked Valentine.
“Doctor d’Avrigny,” said Barrois, staggering as if he would fall.
“What is the matter, Barrois?” said Valentine.
The old man did not answer, but looked at his master with wild staring eyes, while with his cramped hand he grasped a piece of furniture to enable him to stand upright.
The rigors which had attacked Barrois gradually increased, the features of the face became quite altered, and the convulsive movement of the muscles appeared to indicate the approach of a most serious nervous disorder.
Noirtier, seeing Barrois in this pitiable condition, showed by his looks all the various emotions of sorrow and sympathy which can animate the heart of man.
I am suffering—I cannot see.
A thousand fiery darts are piercing my brain.
Ah, don’t touch me, pray don’t.” By this time his haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready to start from their sockets; his head fell back, and the lower extremities of the body began to stiffen.
Valentine uttered a cry of horror; Morrel took her in his arms, as if to defend her from some unknown danger.
“Help, help!” Barrois turned round and with a great effort stumbled a few steps, then fell at the feet of Noirtier, and resting his hand on the knee of the invalid, exclaimed: “My master, my good master!” At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on the threshold.
Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and retreating to a distant corner of the room remained half hidden behind a curtain.
Pale as if he had been gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on the agonized sufferer.
Noirtier, burning with impatience and terror, was in despair at his utter inability to help his old domestic, whom he regarded more in the light of a friend than a servant.
One might by the fearful swelling of the veins of his forehead and the contraction of the muscles round the eye, trace the terrible conflict which was going on between the living energetic mind and the inanimate and helpless body.
Barrois, his features convulsed, his eyes suffused with blood, and his head thrown back, was lying at full length, beating the floor with his hands, while his legs had become so stiff, that they looked as if they would break rather than bend.
A slight appearance of foam was visible around the mouth, and he breathed painfully, and with extreme difficulty.
Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained gazing intently on the scene before him without uttering a word.
“Oh! come! come!” “But where is the doctor?” exclaimed Villefort; “where is he?” Madame de Villefort now deliberately descended the staircase.
In one hand she held her handkerchief, with which she appeared to be wiping her face, and in the other a bottle of English smelling-salts.
Her first look on entering the room was at Noirtier, whose face, independent of the emotion which such a scene could not fail of producing, proclaimed him to be in possession of his usual health; her second glance was at the dying man.
“In the name of heaven, madame,” said Villefort, “where is the doctor?
You see this is a fit of apoplexy, and he might be saved if he could but be bled!” “Has he eaten anything lately?” asked Madame de Villefort, eluding her husband’s question.
“Madame,” replied Valentine, “he has not even breakfasted.
He has been running very fast on an errand with which my grandfather charged him, and when he returned, took nothing but a glass of lemonade.” “Ah,” said Madame de Villefort, “why did he not take wine?
Lemonade was a very bad thing for him.” “Grandpapa’s bottle of lemonade was standing just by his side; poor Barrois was very thirsty, and was thankful to drink anything he could find.” Madame de Villefort started.
Noirtier looked at her with a glance of the most profound scrutiny.
“Madame,” said Villefort, “I ask where is M. d’Avrigny?
In God’s name answer me!” “He is with Edward, who is not quite well,” replied Madame de Villefort, no longer being able to avoid answering.
Villefort rushed upstairs to fetch him.
“Take this,” said Madame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to Valentine.
“They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire, for I cannot endure the sight of blood;” and she followed her husband upstairs.
Morrel now emerged from his hiding-place, where he had remained quite unperceived, so great had been the general confusion.
“Go away as quick as you can, Maximilian,” said Valentine, “and stay till I send for you.
Go.” Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire.
The old man, who had preserved all his usual coolness, made a sign to him to do so.
The young man pressed Valentine’s hand to his lips, and then left the house by a back staircase.
At the same moment that he quitted the room, Villefort and the doctor entered by an opposite door.
Barrois was now showing signs of returning consciousness.
D’Avrigny and Villefort laid him on a couch.
“What do you prescribe, doctor?” demanded Villefort.
You have some in the house, have you not?” “Yes.” “Send for some oil of turpentine and tartar emetic.” Villefort immediately despatched a messenger.
“And now let everyone retire.” “Must I go too?” asked Valentine timidly.
“Yes, mademoiselle, you especially,” replied the doctor abruptly.
Valentine looked at M. d’Avrigny with astonishment, kissed her grandfather on the forehead, and left the room.
“Look, look, doctor,” said Villefort, “he is quite coming round again; I really do not think, after all, it is anything of consequence.” M. d’Avrigny answered by a melancholy smile.
“Where is this lemonade?” asked the doctor eagerly.
“Downstairs in the decanter.” “Whereabouts downstairs?” “In the kitchen.” “Shall I go and fetch it, doctor?” inquired Villefort.
I will go myself and fetch the lemonade.” D’Avrigny bounded towards the door, flew down the back staircase, and almost knocked down Madame de Villefort, in his haste, who was herself going down to the kitchen.
She cried out, but d’Avrigny paid no attention to her; possessed with but one idea, he cleared the last four steps with a bound, and rushed into the kitchen, where he saw the decanter about three parts empty still standing on the waiter, where it had been left.
Panting with loss of breath, he returned to the room he had just left.
Madame de Villefort was slowly ascending the steps which led to her room.
“Is this the decanter you spoke of?” asked d’Avrigny.
“Yes, doctor.” “Is this the same lemonade of which you partook?” “I believe so.” “What did it taste like?” “It had a bitter taste.” The doctor poured some drops of the lemonade into the palm of his hand, put his lips to it, and after having rinsed his mouth as a man does when he is tasting wine, he spat the liquor into the fireplace.
Noirtier?” “Yes.” “And did you also discover a bitter taste?” “Yes.” “Oh, doctor,” cried Barrois, “the fit is coming on again.
Oh, do something for me.” The doctor flew to his patient.
“That emetic, Villefort—see if it is coming.” Villefort sprang into the passage, exclaiming, “The emetic! the emetic!—is it come yet?” No one answered.
The most profound terror reigned throughout the house.
“If I had anything by means of which I could inflate the lungs,” said d’Avrigny, looking around him, “perhaps I might prevent suffocation.
There was one lying on the table; he endeavored to introduce it into the mouth of the patient, who, in the midst of his convulsions, was making vain attempts to vomit; but the jaws were so clenched that the pen could not pass them.
This second attack was much more violent than the first, and he had slipped from the couch to the ground, where he was writhing in agony.
Noirtier, and returned to the sick man.
“Barrois,” said the doctor, “can you speak?” Barrois muttered a few unintelligible words.
Barrois reopened his bloodshot eyes.
“Who made the lemonade?” “I did.” “Did you bring it to your master directly it was made?” “No.” “You left it somewhere, then, in the meantime?” “Yes; I left it in the pantry, because I was called away.” “Who brought it into this room, then?” “Mademoiselle Valentine.” D’Avrigny struck his forehead with his hand.
“Gracious heaven,” exclaimed he.
“Here is a glass with one already prepared,” said Villefort, entering the room.
“Who prepared it?” “The chemist who came here with me.” 40116m “Drink it,” said the doctor to Barrois.
“Impossible, doctor; it is too late; my throat is closing up.
Ah, my head!—Oh, what agony!—Shall I suffer like this long?” “No, no, friend,” replied the doctor, “you will soon cease to suffer.” “Ah, I understand you,” said the unhappy man.
“My God, have mercy upon me!” and, uttering a fearful cry, Barrois fell back as if he had been struck by lightning.
“Well?” said Villefort.
“Go to the kitchen and get me some syrup of violets.” Villefort went immediately.
Noirtier,” said d’Avrigny; “I am going to take my patient into the next room to bleed him; this sort of attack is very frightful to witness.” And taking Barrois under the arms, he dragged him into an adjoining room; but almost immediately he returned to fetch the lemonade.
Noirtier closed his right eye.
“You want Valentine, do you not?
I will tell them to send her to you.” Villefort returned, and d’Avrigny met him in the passage.
“Is he still in a fit?” said the procureur.
“He is dead.” Villefort drew back a few steps, and, clasping his hands, exclaimed, with real amazement and sympathy, “Dead?—and so soon too!” “Yes, it is very soon,” said the doctor, looking at the corpse before him; “but that ought not to astonish you; Monsieur and Madame de Saint-Méran died as soon.
“There is a poison which destroys life almost without leaving any perceptible traces.
I know it well; I have studied it in all its forms and in the effects which it produces.
I recognized the presence of this poison in the case of poor Barrois as well as in that of Madame de Saint-Méran.
There is a way of detecting its presence.
It restores the blue color of litmus-paper reddened by an acid, and it turns syrup of violets green.
M. d’Avrigny opened the door, and took from the hands of the chambermaid a cup which contained two or three spoonfuls of the syrup, he then carefully closed the door.
“Look,” said he to the procureur, whose heart beat so loudly that it might almost be heard, “here is in this cup some syrup of violets, and this decanter contains the remainder of the lemonade of which M.
Noirtier and Barrois partook.
If the lemonade be pure and inoffensive, the syrup will retain its color; if, on the contrary, the lemonade be drugged with poison, the syrup will become green.
Look closely!” The doctor then slowly poured some drops of the lemonade from the decanter into the cup, and in an instant a light cloudy sediment began to form at the bottom of the cup; this sediment first took a blue shade, then from the color of sapphire it passed to that of opal, and from opal to emerald.
The result of the experiment left no doubt whatever on the mind.
“The unfortunate Barrois has been poisoned,” said d’Avrigny, “and I will maintain this assertion before God and man.” Villefort said nothing, but he clasped his hands, opened his haggard eyes, and, overcome with his emotion, sank into a chair.
The Accusation M. d’Avrigny soon restored the magistrate to consciousness, who had looked like a second corpse in that chamber of death.
“Oh, death is in my house!” cried Villefort.
“M. d’Avrigny,” cried Villefort, “I cannot tell you all I feel at this moment,—terror, grief, madness.” “Yes,” said M. d’Avrigny, with an imposing calmness, “but I think it is now time to act.
I think it is time to stop this torrent of mortality.
I can no longer bear to be in possession of these secrets without the hope of seeing the victims and society generally revenged.” Villefort cast a gloomy look around him.
“In my house,” murmured he, “in my house!” “Come, magistrate,” said M. d’Avrigny, “show yourself a man; as an interpreter of the law, do honor to your profession by sacrificing your selfish interests to it.” “You make me shudder, doctor.
Do you talk of a sacrifice?” “I do.” “Do you then suspect anyone?” “I suspect no one; death raps at your door—it enters—it goes, not blindfolded, but circumspectly, from room to room.
Locusta and Agrippina, living at the same time, were an exception, and proved the determination of Providence to effect the entire ruin of the Roman empire, sullied by so many crimes.
Brunhilda and Fredegund were the results of the painful struggle of civilization in its infancy, when man was learning to control mind, were it even by an emissary from the realms of darkness.
All these women had been, or were, beautiful.
The same flower of innocence had flourished, or was still flourishing, on their brow, that is seen on the brow of the culprit in your house.” 40120m Villefort shrieked, clasped his hands, and looked at the doctor with a supplicating air.
But the latter went on without pity: “‘Seek whom the crime will profit,’ says an axiom of jurisprudence.” “Doctor,” cried Villefort, “alas, doctor, how often has man’s justice been deceived by those fatal words.
I know not why, but I feel that this crime——” “You acknowledge, then, the existence of the crime?” “Yes, I see too plainly that it does exist.
But it seems that it is intended to affect me personally.
I fear an attack myself, after all these disasters.” “Oh, man!” murmured d’Avrigny, “the most selfish of all animals, the most personal of all creatures, who believes the earth turns, the sun shines, and death strikes for him alone,—an ant cursing God from the top of a blade of grass!
Noirtier?” “Yes; think you it was the poor servant’s life was coveted?
No, no; like Shakespeare’s Polonius, he died for another.
It was Noirtier the lemonade was intended for—it is Noirtier, logically speaking, who drank it.
Noirtier brucine for his paralytic affection, while the assassin is not ignorant, for he has proved that brucine is a violent poison.” “Oh, have pity—have pity!” murmured Villefort, wringing his hands.
“Follow the culprit’s steps; he first kills M. de Saint-Méran——” “Oh, doctor!” “I would swear to it; what I heard of his symptoms agrees too well with what I have seen in the other cases.” Villefort ceased to contend; he only groaned.
“He first kills M. de Saint-Méran,” repeated the doctor, “then Madame de Saint-Méran,—a double fortune to inherit.” Villefort wiped the perspiration from his forehead.
“Listen attentively.” “Alas,” stammered Villefort, “I do not lose a single word.” “M.
Noirtier,” resumed M. d’Avrigny in the same pitiless tone,—“M.
Noirtier had once made a will against you—against your family—in favor of the poor, in fact; M.
Noirtier is spared, because nothing is expected from him.
But he has no sooner destroyed his first will and made a second, than, for fear he should make a third, he is struck down.
The will was made the day before yesterday, I believe; you see there has been no time lost.” “Oh, mercy, M. d’Avrigny!” “No mercy, sir!
The physician has a sacred mission on earth; and to fulfil it he begins at the source of life, and goes down to the mysterious darkness of the tomb.
When crime has been committed, and God, doubtless in anger, turns away his face, it is for the physician to bring the culprit to justice.” 40122m “Have mercy on my child, sir,” murmured Villefort.
“You see it is yourself who have first named her—you, her father.” “Have pity on Valentine!
Listen, it is impossible.
I would as willingly accuse myself!
Valentine, whose heart is pure as a diamond or a lily!” “No pity, procureur; the crime is fragrant.
Mademoiselle herself packed all the medicines which were sent to M. de Saint-Méran; and M. de Saint-Méran is dead.
Mademoiselle de Villefort prepared all the cooling draughts which Madame de Saint-Méran took, and Madame de Saint-Méran is dead.
Mademoiselle de Villefort took from the hands of Barrois, who was sent out, the lemonade which M.
Noirtier had every morning, and he has escaped by a miracle.
Mademoiselle de Villefort is the culprit—she is the poisoner!
To you, as the king’s attorney, I denounce Mademoiselle de Villefort, do your duty.” “Doctor, I resist no longer—I can no longer defend myself—I believe you; but, for pity’s sake, spare my life, my honor!” “M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, with increased vehemence, “there are occasions when I dispense with all foolish human circumspection.
Woe to you, M. de Villefort, if you do not strike first!’ This is what I would say had she only killed two persons but she has seen three deaths,—has contemplated three murdered persons,—has knelt by three corpses!
To the scaffold with the poisoner—to the scaffold!
Do what I tell you, and immortality awaits you!” Villefort fell on his knees.
“Listen,” said he; “I have not the strength of mind you have, or rather that which you would not have, if instead of my daughter Valentine your daughter Madeleine were concerned.” The doctor turned pale.
“Doctor, every son of woman is born to suffer and to die; I am content to suffer and to await death.” “Beware,” said M. d’Avrigny, “it may come slowly; you will see it approach after having struck your father, your wife, perhaps your son.” Villefort, suffocating, pressed the doctor’s arm. 40124m “Listen,” cried he; “pity me—help me!
No, my daughter is not guilty.
If you drag us both before a tribunal I will still say, ‘No, my daughter is not guilty;—there is no crime in my house.
I will not acknowledge a crime in my house; for when crime enters a dwelling, it is like death—it does not come alone.’ Listen.
What does it signify to you if I am murdered?
No, you are a physician!
Well, I tell you I will not drag my daughter before a tribunal, and give her up to the executioner!
And if you were mistaken, doctor—if it were not my daughter—if I should come one day, pale as a spectre, and say to you, ‘Assassin, you have killed my child!’—hold—if that should happen, although I am a Christian, M. d’Avrigny, I should kill myself.” “Well,” said the doctor, after a moment’s silence, “I will wait.” Villefort looked at him as if he had doubted his words.
“Only,” continued M. d’Avrigny, with a slow and solemn tone, “if anyone falls ill in your house, if you feel yourself attacked, do not send for me, for I will come no more.
I will consent to share this dreadful secret with you, but I will not allow shame and remorse to grow and increase in my conscience, as crime and misery will in your house.” “Then you abandon me, doctor?” “Yes, for I can follow you no farther, and I only stop at the foot of the scaffold.
Some further discovery will be made, which will bring this dreadful tragedy to a close.
Adieu.” “I entreat you, doctor!” “All the horrors that disturb my thoughts make your house odious and fatal.
You go, leaving me in all the horror of my situation, after increasing it by what you have revealed to me.
But what will be reported of the sudden death of the poor old servant?” “True,” said M. d’Avrigny; “we will return.” The doctor went out first, followed by M. de Villefort.
The terrified servants were on the stairs and in the passage where the doctor would pass.
“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, so loud that all might hear, “poor Barrois has led too sedentary a life of late; accustomed formerly to ride on horseback, or in the carriage, to the four corners of Europe, the monotonous walk around that armchair has killed him—his blood has thickened.
He was stout, had a short, thick neck; he was attacked with apoplexy, and I was called in too late.
By the way,” added he in a low tone, “take care to throw away that cup of syrup of violets in the ashes.” The doctor, without shaking hands with Villefort, without adding a word to what he had said, went out, amid the tears and lamentations of the whole household.
The same evening all Villefort’s servants, who had assembled in the kitchen, and had a long consultation, came to tell Madame de Villefort that they wished to leave.
No entreaty, no proposition of increased wages, could induce them to remain; to every argument they replied, “We must go, for death is in this house.” They all left, in spite of prayers and entreaties, testifying their regret at leaving so good a master and mistress, and especially Mademoiselle Valentine, so good, so kind, and so gentle.
Villefort looked at Valentine as they said this.
She was in tears, and, strange as it was, in spite of the emotions he felt at the sight of these tears, he looked also at Madame de Villefort, and it appeared to him as if a slight gloomy smile had passed over her thin lips, like a meteor seen passing inauspiciously between two clouds in a stormy sky.
The Room of the Retired Baker The evening of the day on which the Count of Morcerf had left Danglars’ house with feelings of shame and anger at the rejection of the projected alliance, M.
Andrea Cavalcanti, with curled hair, moustaches in perfect order, and white gloves which fitted admirably, had entered the courtyard of the banker’s house in Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin.
He had not been more than ten minutes in the drawing-room before he drew Danglars aside into the recess of a bow-window, and, after an ingenious preamble, related to him all his anxieties and cares since his noble father’s departure.
He acknowledged the extreme kindness which had been shown him by the banker’s family, in which he had been received as a son, and where, besides, his warmest affections had found an object on which to centre in Mademoiselle Danglars.
Danglars listened with the most profound attention; he had expected this declaration for the last two or three days, and when at last it came his eyes glistened as much as they had lowered on listening to Morcerf.
He would not, however, yield immediately to the young man’s request, but made a few conscientious objections.
Andrea, to think of marrying?” “I think not, sir,” replied M.
Cavalcanti; “in Italy the nobility generally marry young.
Life is so uncertain, that we ought to secure happiness while it is within our reach.” “Well, sir,” said Danglars, “in case your proposals, which do me honor, are accepted by my wife and daughter, by whom shall the preliminary arrangements be settled?
So important a negotiation should, I think, be conducted by the respective fathers of the young people.” “Sir, my father is a man of great foresight and prudence.
Thinking that I might wish to settle in France, he left me at his departure, together with the papers establishing my identity, a letter promising, if he approved of my choice, 150,000 livres per annum from the day I was married.
So far as I can judge, I suppose this to be a quarter of my father’s revenue.” “I,” said Danglars, “have always intended giving my daughter 500,000 francs as her dowry; she is, besides, my sole heiress.” “All would then be easily arranged if the baroness and her daughter are willing.
Correcting himself immediately, he said, “Excuse me, sir; hope alone makes me almost mad,—what will not reality do?” “But,” said Danglars, who, on his part, did not perceive how soon the conversation, which was at first disinterested, was turning to a business transaction, “there is, doubtless, a part of your fortune your father could not refuse you?” “Which?” asked the young man.
“Well, sir,” said Andrea, bowing to the banker respectfully, “may I hope?” “You may not only hope,” said Danglars, “but consider it a settled thing, if no obstacle arises on your part.” “I am, indeed, rejoiced,” said Andrea.
“But,” said Danglars thoughtfully, “how is it that your patron, M. de Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal for you?” Andrea blushed imperceptibly.
“I have just left the count, sir,” said he; “he is, doubtless, a delightful man but inconceivably peculiar in his ideas.
He even told me he had not the slightest doubt that my father would give me the capital instead of the interest of my property.
He has promised to use his influence to obtain it for me; but he also declared that he never had taken on himself the responsibility of making proposals for another, and he never would.
I must, however, do him the justice to add that he assured me if ever he had regretted the repugnance he felt to such a step it was on this occasion, because he thought the projected union would be a happy and suitable one.
Besides, if he will do nothing officially, he will answer any questions you propose to him.
And now,” continued he, with one of his most charming smiles, “having finished talking to the father-in-law, I must address myself to the banker.” “And what may you have to say to him?” said Danglars, laughing in his turn.
“That the day after tomorrow I shall have to draw upon you for about four thousand francs; but the count, expecting my bachelor’s revenue could not suffice for the coming month’s outlay, has offered me a draft for twenty thousand francs.
It bears his signature, as you see, which is all-sufficient.” “Bring me a million such as that,” said Danglars, “I shall be well pleased,” putting the draft in his pocket.
He went out chiefly to avoid this dangerous enemy, and returned as late as possible in the evening.
But scarcely had he stepped out of his carriage when the porter met him with a parcel in his hand.
“Sir,” said he, “that man has been here.” “What man?” said Andrea carelessly, apparently forgetting him whom he but too well recollected.
“Him to whom your excellency pays that little annuity.” “Oh,” said Andrea, “my father’s old servant.
Well, you gave him the two hundred francs I had left for him?” “Yes, your excellency.” Andrea had expressed a wish to be thus addressed.
“But,” continued the porter, “he would not take them.” Andrea turned pale, but as it was dark his pallor was not perceptible.
“Poor man, he is a worthy creature.” He left the porter to ponder on these words, not knowing which most to admire, the master or the servant.
In two seconds the young man had reached his room and burnt Caderousse’s letter.
The servant entered just as he had finished.
“I have that honor, your excellency.” “You had a new livery yesterday?” “Yes, sir.” “I have an engagement with a pretty little girl for this evening, and do not wish to be known; lend me your livery till tomorrow.
Five minutes after, Andrea left the hotel, completely disguised, took a cabriolet, and ordered the driver to take him to the Cheval Rouge, at Picpus.
The next morning he left that inn as he had left the Hôtel des Princes, without being noticed, walked down the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, along the boulevard to Rue Ménilmontant, and stopping at the door of the third house on the left looked for someone of whom to make inquiry in the porter’s absence.
“For whom are you looking, my fine fellow?” asked the fruiteress on the opposite side.
“Monsieur Pailletin, if you please, my good woman,” replied Andrea.
“A retired baker?” asked the fruiteress.
“Exactly.” “He lives at the end of the yard, on the left, on the third story.” 40132m Andrea went as she directed him, and on the third floor he found a hare’s paw, which, by the hasty ringing of the bell, it was evident he pulled with considerable ill-temper.
A moment after Caderousse’s face appeared at the grating in the door.
“Ah! you are punctual,” said he, as he drew back the door.
“Confound you and your punctuality!” said Andrea, throwing himself into a chair in a manner which implied that he would rather have flung it at the head of his host.
See, I have thought about you—look at the good breakfast we are going to have; nothing but what you are fond of.” Andrea, indeed, inhaled the scent of something cooking which was not unwelcome to him, hungry as he was; it was that mixture of fat and garlic peculiar to Provençal kitchens of an inferior order, added to that of dried fish, and above all, the pungent smell of musk and cloves.
In an adjoining room Andrea saw also a tolerably clean table prepared for two, two bottles of wine sealed, the one with green, the other with yellow, a supply of brandy in a decanter, and a measure of fruit in a cabbage-leaf, cleverly arranged on an earthenware plate.
“What do you think of it, my little fellow?” said Caderousse.
You know I used to be a good cook; do you recollect how you used to lick your fingers?
You were among the first who tasted any of my dishes, and I think you relished them tolerably.” While speaking, Caderousse went on peeling a fresh supply of onions.
“But,” said Andrea, ill-temperedly, “by my faith, if it was only to breakfast with you, that you disturbed me, I wish the devil had taken you!” “My boy,” said Caderousse sententiously, “one can talk while eating.
And then, you ungrateful being, you are not pleased to see an old friend?
I am weeping with joy.” He was truly crying, but it would have been difficult to say whether joy or the onions produced the greatest effect on the lachrymal glands of the old innkeeper of the Pont-du-Gard.
“Hold your tongue, hypocrite,” said Andrea; “you love me!” “Yes, I do, or may the devil take me.
I know it is a weakness,” said Caderousse, “but it overpowers me.” “And yet it has not prevented your sending for me to play me some trick.” “Come,” said Caderousse, wiping his large knife on his apron, “if I did not like you, do you think I should endure the wretched life you lead me?
You have your servant’s clothes on—you therefore keep a servant; I have none, and am obliged to prepare my own meals.
Because I would not annoy my little Benedetto.
Come, just acknowledge that I could, eh?” This address was accompanied by a look which was by no means difficult to understand.
“Well,” said Andrea, “admitting your love, why do you want me to breakfast with you?” “That I may have the pleasure of seeing you, my little fellow.” “What is the use of seeing me after we have made all our arrangements?” “Eh, dear friend,” said Caderousse, “are wills ever made without codicils?
But you first came to breakfast, did you not?
Well, sit down, and let us begin with these pilchards, and this fresh butter; which I have put on some vine-leaves to please you, wicked one.
This is not the Hôtel des Princes.” “Come, you are growing discontented, you are no longer happy; you, who only wish to live like a retired baker.” Caderousse sighed.
“Well, what have you to say? you have seen your dream realized.” “I can still say it is a dream; a retired baker, my poor Benedetto, is rich—he has an annuity.” “Well, you have an annuity.” “I have?” 40134m “Yes, since I bring you your two hundred francs.” Caderousse shrugged his shoulders.
“It is humiliating,” said he, “thus to receive money given grudgingly,—an uncertain supply which may soon fail.
You see I am obliged to economize, in case your prosperity should cease.
Well, my friend, fortune is inconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment said.
I know your prosperity is great, you rascal; you are to marry the daughter of Danglars.” “What? of Danglars?” “Yes, to be sure; must I say Baron Danglars?
I might as well say Count Benedetto.
I have dined many times with him and the Count of Morcerf, so you see I have some high connections and were I to cultivate them a little, we might meet in the same drawing-rooms.” “Come, your jealousy represents everything to you in the wrong light.” “That is all very fine, Benedetto mio, but I know what I am saying.
Perhaps I may one day put on my best coat, and presenting myself at the great gate, introduce myself.
Meanwhile let us sit down and eat.” Caderousse set the example and attacked the breakfast with good appetite, praising each dish he set before his visitor.
The latter seemed to have resigned himself; he drew the corks, and partook largely of the fish with the garlic and fat.
“Ah, mate,” said Caderousse, “you are getting on better terms with your old landlord!” “Faith, yes,” replied Andrea, whose hunger prevailed over every other feeling.
“It is miserable—do you see?—always to wait till the end of the month.” “Oh,” said Andrea philosophically, determined to watch his companion narrowly, “does not life pass in waiting?
Do I, for instance, fare better?
Well, I wait patiently, do I not?” “Yes; because instead of expecting two hundred wretched francs, you expect five or six thousand, perhaps ten, perhaps even twelve, for you take care not to let anyone know the utmost.
Down there, you always had little presents and Christmas-boxes, which you tried to hide from your poor friend Caderousse.
Fortunately he is a cunning fellow, that friend Caderousse.” “There you are beginning again to ramble, to talk again and again of the past!
But what is the use of teasing me with going all over that again?” “Ah, you are only one-and-twenty, and can forget the past; I am fifty, and am obliged to recollect it.
Why do you not realize a six months’, a year’s advance even, and retire to Brussels?
Instead of living the retired baker, you might live as a bankrupt, using his privileges; that would be very good.” “But how the devil would you have me retire on twelve hundred francs?” “Ah, Caderousse,” said Andrea, “how covetous you are!
Two months ago you were dying with hunger.” “The appetite grows by what it feeds on,” said Caderousse, grinning and showing his teeth, like a monkey laughing or a tiger growling.
“And,” added he, biting off with his large white teeth an enormous mouthful of bread, “I have formed a plan.” Caderousse’s plans alarmed Andrea still more than his ideas; ideas were but the germ, the plan was reality.
Who formed the plan by which we left the establishment of M——! eh? was it not I? and it was no bad one I believe, since here we are!” “I do not say,” replied Andrea, “that you never make a good one; but let us see your plan.” “Well,” pursued Caderousse, “can you without expending one sou, put me in the way of getting fifteen thousand francs?
“Come, Caderousse, no nonsense!” said he.
“Don’t alarm yourself, my little Benedetto, but just point out to me some means of gaining those thirty thousand francs without your assistance, and I will contrive it.” “Well, I’ll see—I’ll try to contrive some way,” said Andrea.
“Meanwhile you will raise my monthly allowance to five hundred francs, my little fellow?
I have a fancy, and mean to get a housekeeper.” “Well, you shall have your five hundred francs,” said Andrea; “but it is very hard for me, my poor Caderousse—you take advantage——” “Bah,” said Caderousse, “when you have access to countless stores.” One would have said Andrea anticipated his companion’s words, so did his eye flash like lightning, but it was but for a moment.
“True,” he replied, “and my protector is very kind.” “That dear protector,” said Caderousse; “and how much does he give you monthly?” “Five thousand francs.” “As many thousands as you give me hundreds!
Truly, it is only bastards who are thus fortunate.
Five thousand francs per month!
What the devil can you do with all that?” “Oh, it is no trouble to spend that; and I am like you, I want capital.” “Capital?—yes—I understand—everyone would like capital.” “Well, and I shall get it.” “Who will give it to you—your prince?” “Yes, my prince.
But unfortunately I must wait.” 40138m “You must wait for what?” asked Caderousse.
“For his death.” “The death of your prince?” “Yes.” “How so?” “Because he has made his will in my favor.” “Indeed?” “On my honor.” “For how much?” “For five hundred thousand.” “Only that?
It’s little enough.” “But so it is.” “No, it cannot be!” “Are you my friend, Caderousse?” “Yes, in life or death.” “Well, I will tell you a secret.” “What is it?” “But remember——” “Ah! _pardieu!_ mute as a carp.” “Well, I think——” Andrea stopped and looked around.
Do not fear; _pardieu!_ we are alone.” “I think I have discovered my father.” “Your true father?” “Yes.” “Not old Cavalcanti?” “No, for he has gone again; the true one, as you say.” “And that father is——” “Well, Caderousse, it is Monte Cristo.” “Bah!” “Yes, you understand, that explains all.
He cannot acknowledge me openly, it appears, but he does it through M.
Cavalcanti, and gives him fifty thousand francs for it.” “Fifty thousand francs for being your father?
I would have done it for half that, for twenty thousand, for fifteen thousand; why did you not think of me, ungrateful man?” “Did I know anything about it, when it was all done when I was down there?” “Ah, truly?
And you say that by his will——” “He leaves me five hundred thousand livres.” “Are you sure of it?” “He showed it me; but that is not all—there is a codicil, as I said just now.” “Probably.” “And in that codicil he acknowledges me.” “Oh, the good father, the brave father, the very honest father!” said Caderousse, twirling a plate in the air between his two hands.
“Now, say if I conceal anything from you?” “No, and your confidence makes you honorable in my opinion; and your princely father, is he rich, very rich?” “Yes, he is that; he does not himself know the amount of his fortune.” “Is it possible?” “It is evident enough to me, who am always at his house.
The other day a banker’s clerk brought him fifty thousand francs in a portfolio about the size of your plate; yesterday his banker brought him a hundred thousand francs in gold.” Caderousse was filled with wonder; the young man’s words sounded to him like metal, and he thought he could hear the rushing of cascades of louis.
“When I like.” Caderousse was thoughtful for a moment.
It was easy to perceive he was revolving some unfortunate idea in his mind.
Then suddenly,— “How I should like to see all that,” cried he; “how beautiful it must be!” “It is, in fact, magnificent,” said Andrea.
“And does he not live in the Champs-Élysées?” “Yes, No. 30.” “Ah,” said Caderousse, “No. 30.” “Yes, a fine house standing alone, between a courtyard and a garden,—you must know it.” “Possibly; but it is not the exterior I care for, it is the interior.
What beautiful furniture there must be in it!” “Have you ever seen the Tuileries?” “No.” “Well, it surpasses that.” “It must be worth one’s while to stoop, Andrea, when that good M.
Monte Cristo lets fall his purse.” “It is not worthwhile to wait for that,” said Andrea; “money is as plentiful in that house as fruit in an orchard.” “But you should take me there one day with you.” “How can I?
I must absolutely see it; I shall find a way.” “No nonsense, Caderousse!” “I will offer myself as floor-polisher.” “The rooms are all carpeted.” “Well, then, I must be contented to imagine it.” “That is the best plan, believe me.” “Try, at least, to give me an idea of what it is.” “How can I?” “Nothing is easier.
Is it large?” “Middling.” “How is it arranged?” “Faith, I should require pen, ink, and paper to make a plan.” “They are all here,” said Caderousse, briskly.
He fetched from an old secretaire a sheet of white paper and pen and ink.
“Here,” said Caderousse, “draw me all that on the paper, my boy.” Andrea took the pen with an imperceptible smile and began.
“The house, as I said, is between the court and the garden; in this way, do you see?” Andrea drew the garden, the court and the house. 40142m “High walls?” “Not more than eight or ten feet.” “That is not prudent,” said Caderousse.
“In the court are orange-trees in pots, turf, and clumps of flowers.” “And no steel-traps?” “No.” “The stables?” “Are on either side of the gate, which you see there.” And Andrea continued his plan.
“Let us see the ground floor,” said Caderousse.
“On the ground floor, dining-room, two drawing-rooms, billiard-room, staircase in the hall, and a little back staircase.” “Windows?” “Magnificent windows, so beautiful, so large, that I believe a man of your size should pass through each frame.” “Why the devil have they any stairs with such windows?” “Luxury has everything.” “But shutters?” “Yes, but they are never used.
That Count of Monte Cristo is an original, who loves to look at the sky even at night.” “And where do the servants sleep?” “Oh, they have a house to themselves.
Picture to yourself a pretty coach-house at the right-hand side where the ladders are kept.
Well, over that coach-house are the servants’ rooms, with bells corresponding with the different apartments.” “Ah, _diable!_ bells did you say?” “What do you mean?” “Oh, nothing!
I was told there were such at the last exhibition.” “He has simply a mahogany secretaire, in which the key is always kept.” “And he is not robbed?” “No; his servants are all devoted to him.” “There ought to be some money in that secretaire?” “There may be.
“On the first story, do you see, there is the anteroom and the drawing-room; to the right of the drawing-room, a library and a study; to the left, a bedroom and a dressing-room.
The famous secretaire is in the dressing-room.” “Is there a window in the dressing-room?” “Two,—one here and one there.” Andrea sketched two windows in the room, which formed an angle on the plan, and appeared as a small square added to the rectangle of the bedroom.
Caderousse became thoughtful.
“When do you want your twelve hundred francs?” said he to Caderousse.
“Yellow boys?” said Caderousse; “no, I thank you.” “Oh, you despise them.” “On the contrary, I esteem them, but will not have them.” “You can change them, idiot; gold is worth five sous.” “Exactly; and he who changes them will follow friend Caderousse, lay hands on him, and demand what farmers pay him their rent in gold.
No nonsense, my good fellow; silver simply, round coins with the head of some monarch or other on them.
I will call for them.” “Today?” “No, tomorrow; I shall not have time today.” “Well, tomorrow I will leave them when I go to Auteuil.” “May I depend on it?” “Certainly.” “Because I shall secure my housekeeper on the strength of it.” “Now see here, will that be all?
And will you not torment me any more?” “Never.” Caderousse had become so gloomy that Andrea feared he should be obliged to notice the change.
He redoubled his gayety and carelessness.
“How sprightly you are,” said Caderousse; “One would say you were already in possession of your property.” “No, unfortunately; but when I do obtain it——” “Well?” “I shall remember old friends, I can tell you that.” “Yes, since you have such a good memory.” “What do you want?
You will ruin both yourself and me by your folly.” “How so?” said Andrea.
You put on a livery, you disguise yourself as a servant, and yet keep a diamond on your finger worth four or five thousand francs.” “You guess well.” “I know something of diamonds; I have had some.” “You do well to boast of it,” said Andrea, who, without becoming angry, as Caderousse feared, at this new extortion, quietly resigned the ring.
Caderousse looked so closely at it that Andrea well knew that he was examining to see if all the edges were perfect.
“It is a false diamond,” said Caderousse.
“Do not be angry, we can try it.” Caderousse went to the window, touched the glass with it, and found it would cut.
“_Confiteor!_” said Caderousse, putting the diamond on his little finger; “I was mistaken; but those thieves of jewellers imitate so well that it is no longer worthwhile to rob a jeweller’s shop—it is another branch of industry paralyzed.” “Have you finished?” said Andrea,—“do you want anything more?—will you have my waistcoat or my hat?
Make free, now you have begun.” “No; you are, after all, a good companion; I will not detain you, and will try to cure myself of my ambition.” “But take care the same thing does not happen to you in selling the diamond you feared with the gold.” “I shall not sell it—do not fear.” “Not at least till the day after tomorrow,” thought the young man.
“Happy rogue,” said Caderousse; “you are going to find your servants, your horses, your carriage, and your betrothed!” “Yes,” said Andrea.
“Well, I hope you will make a handsome wedding-present the day you marry Mademoiselle Danglars.” “I have already told you it is a fancy you have taken in your head.” “What fortune has she?” “But I tell you——” “A million?” Andrea shrugged his shoulders.
“Let it be a million,” said Caderousse; “you can never have so much as I wish you.” “Thank you,” said the young man.
“Oh, I wish it you with all my heart!” added Caderousse with his hoarse laugh.
“Stop, let me show you the way.” “It is not worthwhile.” “Yes, it is.” “Why?” “Because there is a little secret, a precaution I thought it desirable to take, one of Huret & Fichet’s locks, revised and improved by Gaspard Caderousse; I will manufacture you a similar one when you are a capitalist.” “Thank you,” said Andrea; “I will let you know a week beforehand.” They parted.
Caderousse remained on the landing until he had not only seen Andrea go down the three stories, but also cross the court.
Then he returned hastily, shut his door carefully, and began to study, like a clever architect, the plan Andrea had left him.
“Dear Benedetto,” said he, “I think he will not be sorry to inherit his fortune, and he who hastens the day when he can touch his five hundred thousand will not be his worst friend.” Chapter 82.
The Burglary The day following that on which the conversation we have related took place, the Count of Monte Cristo set out for Auteuil, accompanied by Ali and several attendants, and also taking with him some horses whose qualities he was desirous of ascertaining.
He was induced to undertake this journey, of which the day before he had not even thought and which had not occurred to Andrea either, by the arrival of Bertuccio from Normandy with intelligence respecting the house and sloop.
The house was ready, and the sloop which had arrived a week before lay at anchor in a small creek with her crew of six men, who had observed all the requisite formalities and were ready again to put to sea.
The count praised Bertuccio’s zeal, and ordered him to prepare for a speedy departure, as his stay in France would not be prolonged more than a month.
“Now,” said he, “I may require to go in one night from Paris to Tréport; let eight fresh horses be in readiness on the road, which will enable me to go fifty leagues in ten hours.” “Your highness had already expressed that wish,” said Bertuccio, “and the horses are ready.
I have bought them, and stationed them myself at the most desirable posts, that is, in villages, where no one generally stops.” “That’s well,” said Monte Cristo; “I remain here a day or two—arrange accordingly.” As Bertuccio was leaving the room to give the requisite orders, Baptistin opened the door: he held a letter on a silver waiter.
“What are you doing here?” asked the count, seeing him covered with dust; “I did not send for you, I think?” Baptistin, without answering, approached the count, and presented the letter.
“Important and urgent,” said he.
The count opened the letter, and read: “‘M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man will enter his house in the Champs-Élysées with the intention of carrying off some papers supposed to be in the secretaire in the dressing-room.
The count’s well-known courage will render unnecessary the aid of the police, whose interference might seriously affect him who sends this advice.
The count, by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing himself in the dressing-room, would be able to defend his property himself.
He was on the point of sending the letter to the commissary of police, notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, or perhaps because of that advice, when suddenly the idea occurred to him that it might be some personal enemy, whom he alone should recognize and over whom, if such were the case, he alone would gain any advantage, as Fiesco17 had done over the Moor who would have killed him.
We know the count’s vigorous and daring mind, denying anything to be impossible, with that energy which marks the great man.
From his past life, from his resolution to shrink from nothing, the count had acquired an inconceivable relish for the contests in which he had engaged, sometimes against nature, that is to say, against God, and sometimes against the world, that is, against the devil.
“They do not want my papers,” said Monte Cristo, “they want to kill me; they are no robbers, but assassins.
I will not allow the prefect of police to interfere with my private affairs.
I am rich enough, forsooth, to distribute his authority on this occasion.” The count recalled Baptistin, who had left the room after delivering the letter.
“Return to Paris,” said he; “assemble the servants who remain there.
I want all my household at Auteuil.” “But will no one remain in the house, my lord?” asked Baptistin.
“Yes, the porter.” “My lord will remember that the lodge is at a distance from the house.” “Well?” “The house might be stripped without his hearing the least noise.” “By whom?” “By thieves.” “You are a fool, M.
Thieves might strip the house—it would annoy me less than to be disobeyed.” Baptistin bowed. 40150m “You understand me?” said the count.
“Bring your comrades here, one and all; but let everything remain as usual, only close the shutters of the ground floor.” “And those of the first floor?” “You know they are never closed.
Go!” The count signified his intention of dining alone, and that no one but Ali should attend him.
Having dined with his usual tranquillity and moderation, the count, making a signal to Ali to follow him, went out by the side-gate and on reaching the Bois de Boulogne turned, apparently without design towards Paris and at twilight; found himself opposite his house in the Champs-Élysées.
All was dark; one solitary, feeble light was burning in the porter’s lodge, about forty paces distant from the house, as Baptistin had said.
Monte Cristo leaned against a tree, and with that scrutinizing glance which was so rarely deceived, looked up and down the avenue, examined the passers-by, and carefully looked down the neighboring streets, to see that no one was concealed.
Ten minutes passed thus, and he was convinced that no one was watching him.
He hastened to the side-door with Ali, entered hurriedly, and by the servants’ staircase, of which he had the key, gained his bedroom without opening or disarranging a single curtain, without even the porter having the slightest suspicion that the house, which he supposed empty, contained its chief occupant.
Arrived in his bedroom, the count motioned to Ali to stop; then he passed into the dressing-room, which he examined.
Everything appeared as usual—the precious secretaire in its place, and the key in the secretaire.
He double locked it, took the key, returned to the bedroom door, removed the double staple of the bolt, and went in.
Meanwhile Ali had procured the arms the count required—namely, a short carbine and a pair of double-barrelled pistols, with which as sure an aim might be taken as with a single-barrelled one.
The count and Ali ate in haste a crust of bread and drank a glass of Spanish wine; then Monte Cristo slipped aside one of the movable panels, which enabled him to see into the adjoining room.
He had within his reach his pistols and carbine, and Ali, standing near him, held one of the small Arabian hatchets, whose form has not varied since the Crusades.
Through one of the windows of the bedroom, on a line with that in the dressing-room, the count could see into the street.
It was intensely dark; still Ali, thanks to his wild nature, and the count, thanks doubtless to his long confinement, could distinguish in the darkness the slightest movement of the trees.
It might be expected that the attack, if indeed an attack was projected, would be made from the staircase of the ground floor, and not from a window; in Monte Cristo’s opinion, the villains sought his life, not his money.
It would be his bedroom they would attack, and they must reach it by the back staircase, or by the window in the dressing-room.
The clock of the Invalides struck a quarter to twelve; the west wind bore on its moistened gusts the doleful vibration of the three strokes. 40152m As the last stroke died away, the count thought he heard a slight noise in the dressing-room; this first sound, or rather this first grinding, was followed by a second, then a third; at the fourth, the count knew what to expect.
A firm and well-practised hand was engaged in cutting the four sides of a pane of glass with a diamond.
Inured as men may be to danger, forewarned as they may be of peril, they understand, by the fluttering of the heart and the shuddering of the frame, the enormous difference between a dream and a reality, between the project and the execution.
However, Monte Cristo only made a sign to apprise Ali, who, understanding that danger was approaching from the other side, drew nearer to his master.
Monte Cristo was eager to ascertain the strength and number of his enemies.
The window whence the noise proceeded was opposite the opening by which the count could see into the dressing-room.
He fixed his eyes on that window—he distinguished a shadow in the darkness; then one of the panes became quite opaque, as if a sheet of paper were stuck on the outside, then the square cracked without falling.
Through the opening an arm was passed to find the fastening, then a second; the window turned on its hinges, and a man entered.
“That’s a daring rascal,” whispered the count.
At that moment Ali touched him slightly on the shoulder.
“I see!” said he, “there are two of them; one does the work while the other stands guard.” He made a sign to Ali not to lose sight of the man in the street, and turned to the one in the dressing-room.
The glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, his arms stretched out before him.
At last he appeared to have made himself familiar with his surroundings.
When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo expected that he was coming in, and raised one of his pistols; but he simply heard the sound of the bolts sliding in their copper rings.
It was only a precaution.
The nocturnal visitor, ignorant of the fact that the count had removed the staples, might now think himself at home, and pursue his purpose with full security.
Alone and free to act as he wished, the man then drew from his pocket something which the count could not discern, placed it on a stand, then went straight to the secretaire, felt the lock, and contrary to his expectation found that the key was missing.
But the glass-cutter was a prudent man who had provided for all emergencies.
The count soon heard the rattling of a bunch of skeleton keys, such as the locksmith brings when called to force a lock, and which thieves call nightingales, doubtless from the music of their nightly song when they grind against the bolt.
“Ah, ha,” whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of disappointment, “he is only a thief.” But the man in the dark could not find the right key.
He reached the instrument he had placed on the stand, touched a spring, and immediately a pale light, just bright enough to render objects distinct, was reflected on his hands and countenance.
“By heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, starting back, “it is——” Ali raised his hatchet.
“Don’t stir,” whispered Monte Cristo, “and put down your hatchet; we shall require no arms.” 40154m Then he added some words in a low tone, for the exclamation which surprise had drawn from the count, faint as it had been, had startled the man who remained in the pose of the old knife-grinder.
It was an order the count had just given, for immediately Ali went noiselessly, and returned, bearing a black dress and a three-cornered hat.
Meanwhile Monte Cristo had rapidly taken off his greatcoat, waistcoat, and shirt, and one might distinguish by the glimmering through the open panel that he wore a pliant tunic of steel mail, of which the last in France, where daggers are no longer dreaded, was worn by King Louis XVI., who feared the dagger at his breast, and whose head was cleft with a hatchet.
The tunic soon disappeared under a long cassock, as did his hair under a priest’s wig; the three-cornered hat over this effectually transformed the count into an abbé.
The man, hearing nothing more, stood erect, and while Monte Cristo was completing his disguise had advanced straight to the secretaire, whose lock was beginning to crack under his nightingale.
“Try again,” whispered the count, who depended on the secret spring, which was unknown to the picklock, clever as he might be—“try again, you have a few minutes’ work there.” And he advanced to the window.
The man whom he had seen seated on a fence had got down, and was still pacing the street; but, strange as it appeared, he cared not for those who might pass from the avenue of the Champs-Élysées or by the Faubourg Saint-Honoré; his attention was engrossed with what was passing at the count’s, and his only aim appeared to be to discern every movement in the dressing-room.
Monte Cristo suddenly struck his finger on his forehead and a smile passed over his lips; then drawing near to Ali, he whispered: “Remain here, concealed in the dark, and whatever noise you hear, whatever passes, only come in or show yourself if I call you.” Ali bowed in token of strict obedience.
Monte Cristo then drew a lighted taper from a closet, and when the thief was deeply engaged with his lock, silently opened the door, taking care that the light should shine directly on his face.
The door opened so quietly that the thief heard no sound; but, to his astonishment, the room was suddenly illuminated.
Caderousse,” said Monte Cristo; “what are you doing here, at such an hour?” 40156m “The Abbé Busoni!” exclaimed Caderousse; and, not knowing how this strange apparition could have entered when he had bolted the doors, he let fall his bunch of keys, and remained motionless and stupefied.
The count placed himself between Caderousse and the window, thus cutting off from the thief his only chance of retreat.
“The Abbé Busoni!” repeated Caderousse, fixing his haggard gaze on the count.
“Yes, undoubtedly, the Abbé Busoni himself,” replied Monte Cristo.
“And I am very glad you recognize me, dear M.
Caderousse; it proves you have a good memory, for it must be about ten years since we last met.” This calmness of Busoni, combined with his irony and boldness, staggered Caderousse.
“The abbé, the abbé!” murmured he, clenching his fists, and his teeth chattering.
“So you would rob the Count of Monte Cristo?” continued the false abbé.
“Reverend sir,” murmured Caderousse, seeking to regain the window, which the count pitilessly blocked—“reverend sir, I don’t know—believe me—I take my oath——” “A pane of glass out,” continued the count, “a dark lantern, a bunch of false keys, a secretaire half forced—it is tolerably evident——” Caderousse was choking; he looked around for some corner to hide in, some way of escape.
“Alas, yes!” said Caderousse very uneasily.
So much the worse, so much the worse—_diavolo!_ as they say in my country.” “Reverend sir, I am impelled——” “Every criminal says the same thing.” “Poverty——” “Pshaw!” said Busoni disdainfully; “poverty may make a man beg, steal a loaf of bread at a baker’s door, but not cause him to open a secretaire in a house supposed to be inhabited.
Do you know Saint-Mandrier?” “I do.” “In the hour of rest, between noon and one o’clock——” “Galley-slaves having a nap after dinner!
“Nay,” said Caderousse, “one can’t always work—one is not a dog.” “So much the better for the dogs,” said Monte Cristo.
“You lie,” said the Abbé Busoni, with a tone of irresistible authority.
“Reverend sir!” “You lie!
This man is still your friend, and you, perhaps, make use of him as your accomplice.” 40160m “Oh, reverend sir!” “Since you left Toulon what have you lived on?
Answer me!” “On what I could get.” “You lie,” repeated the abbé a third time, with a still more imperative tone.
Caderousse, terrified, looked at the count.
“You have lived on the money he has given you.” “True,” said Caderousse; “Benedetto has become the son of a great lord.” “How can he be the son of a great lord?” “A natural son.” “And what is that great lord’s name?” “The Count of Monte Cristo, the very same in whose house we are.” “Benedetto the count’s son?” replied Monte Cristo, astonished in his turn.
Danglars, it is I.” “Do not do so, reverend sir.” “Why not?” “Because you would bring us to ruin.” “And you think that to save such villains as you I will become an abettor of their plot, an accomplice in their crimes?” “Reverend sir,” said Caderousse, drawing still nearer.
Danglars.” “By Heaven!” cried Caderousse, drawing from his waistcoat an open knife, and striking the count in the breast, “you shall disclose nothing, reverend sir!” To Caderousse’s great astonishment, the knife, instead of piercing the count’s breast, flew back blunted.
At the same moment the count seized with his left hand the assassin’s wrist, and wrung it with such strength that the knife fell from his stiffened fingers, and Caderousse uttered a cry of pain.
But the count, disregarding his cry, continued to wring the bandit’s wrist, until, his arm being dislocated, he fell first on his knees, then flat on the floor.
The count then placed his foot on his head, saying, “I know not what restrains me from crushing thy skull, rascal.” “Ah, mercy—mercy!” cried Caderousse.
The count withdrew his foot. 40162m “Rise!” said he.
“What a wrist you have, reverend sir!” said Caderousse, stroking his arm, all bruised by the fleshy pincers which had held it; “what a wrist!” “Silence!
God gives me strength to overcome a wild beast like you; in the name of that God I act,—remember that, wretch,—and to spare thee at this moment is still serving him.” “Oh!” said Caderousse, groaning with pain.
“Take this pen and paper, and write what I dictate.” “I don’t know how to write, reverend sir.” “You lie!
Take this pen, and write!” Caderousse, awed by the superior power of the abbé, sat down and wrote: “Sir,—The man whom you are receiving at your house, and to whom you intend to marry your daughter, is a felon who escaped with me from confinement at Toulon.
He was called Benedetto, but he is ignorant of his real name, having never known his parents.” “Sign it!” continued the count.
“But would you ruin me?” “If I sought your ruin, fool, I should drag you to the first guard-house; besides, when that note is delivered, in all probability you will have no more to fear.
Sign it, then!” Caderousse signed it.
“The address, ‘To monsieur the Baron Danglars, banker, Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin.’” Caderousse wrote the address.
I have tried to make you a happy man, and you have turned out a murderer.” “Oh, monsieur,” said Caderousse, “make one more attempt—try me once more!” “I will,” said the count.
“Listen—you know if I may be relied on.” “Yes,” said Caderousse.
Caderousse, scarcely yet relying on this promise, put his legs out of the window and stood on the ladder.
Understanding he had nothing more to fear from him, Caderousse began to go down.
“What are you doing, reverend sir?
Suppose a watchman should pass?” And he blew out the light.
He then descended, but it was only when he felt his foot touch the ground that he was satisfied of his safety.
Monte Cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidly from the garden to the street, he saw first Caderousse, who after walking to the end of the garden, fixed his ladder against the wall at a different part from where he came in.
The count then looking over into the street, saw the man who appeared to be waiting run in the same direction, and place himself against the angle of the wall where Caderousse would come over.
Caderousse climbed the ladder slowly, and looked over the coping to see if the street was quiet.
The clock of the Invalides struck one.
Then Caderousse sat astride the coping, and drawing up his ladder passed it over the wall; then he began to descend, or rather to slide down by the two stanchions, which he did with an ease which proved how accustomed he was to the exercise.
Before he could defend himself that arm struck him so violently in the back that he let go the ladder, crying, “Help!” A second blow struck him almost immediately in the side, and he fell, calling, “Help, murder!” Then, as he rolled on the ground, his adversary seized him by the hair, and struck him a third blow in the chest.
This time Caderousse endeavored to call again, but he could only utter a groan, and he shuddered as the blood flowed from his three wounds.
The assassin, finding that he no longer cried out, lifted his head up by the hair; his eyes were closed, and the mouth was distorted.
The murderer, supposing him dead, let fall his head and disappeared.
Then Caderousse, feeling that he was leaving him, raised himself on his elbow, and with a dying voice cried with great effort: “Murder!
Help, reverend sir,—help!” This mournful appeal pierced the darkness.
The door of the back-staircase opened, then the side-gate of the garden, and Ali and his master were on the spot with lights.
The Hand of God Caderousse continued to call piteously, “Help, reverend sir, help!” “What is the matter?” asked Monte Cristo.
“Help,” cried Caderousse; “I am murdered!” “We are here;—take courage.” “Ah, it’s all over!
Ali and his master conveyed the wounded man into a room.
Monte Cristo motioned to Ali to undress him, and he then examined his dreadful wounds.
“My God!” he exclaimed, “thy vengeance is sometimes delayed, but only that it may fall the more effectually.” Ali looked at his master for further instructions.
“Bring here immediately the king’s attorney, M. de Villefort, who lives in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.
As you pass the lodge, wake the porter, and send him for a surgeon.” Ali obeyed, leaving the abbé alone with Caderousse, who had not yet revived.
When the wretched man again opened his eyes, the count looked at him with a mournful expression of pity, and his lips moved as if in prayer.
“A surgeon, reverend sir—a surgeon!” said Caderousse.
“I know he cannot save my life, but he may strengthen me to give my evidence.” “Against whom?” “Against my murderer.” “Did you recognize him?” “Yes; it was Benedetto.” “The young Corsican?” “Himself.” “Your comrade?” “Yes.
After giving me the plan of this house, doubtless hoping I should kill the count and he thus become his heir, or that the count would kill me and I should be out of his way, he waylaid me, and has murdered me.” “I have also sent for the procureur.” “He will not come in time; I feel my life fast ebbing.” “Wait a moment,” said Monte Cristo.
He left the room, and returned in five minutes with a phial.
“Hasten, reverend sir, hasten!
I shall faint again!” Monte Cristo approached, and dropped on his purple lips three or four drops of the contents of the phial.
Caderousse drew a deep breath.
“Oh, send for someone to whom I can denounce the wretch!” “Shall I write your deposition?
You can sign it.” “Yes, yes,” said Caderousse; and his eyes glistened at the thought of this posthumous revenge.
Monte Cristo wrote: “I die, murdered by the Corsican Benedetto, my comrade in the galleys at Toulon, No. 59.” “Quick, quick!” said Caderousse, “or I shall be unable to sign it.” Monte Cristo gave the pen to Caderousse, who collected all his strength, signed it, and fell back on his bed, saying: “You will relate all the rest, reverend sir; you will say he calls himself Andrea Cavalcanti.
The abbé made him smell the contents of the phial, and he again opened his eyes.
His desire for revenge had not forsaken him.
“Ah, you will tell all I have said, will you not, reverend sir?” “Yes, and much more.” “What more will you say?” “I will say he had doubtless given you the plan of this house, in the hope the count would kill you.
I will say, likewise, he had apprised the count, by a note, of your intention, and, the count being absent, I read the note and sat up to await you.” “And he will be guillotined, will he not?” said Caderousse.
“You knew I should be killed on leaving this house, and did not warn me!” 40168m “No; for I saw God’s justice placed in the hands of Benedetto, and should have thought it sacrilege to oppose the designs of Providence.” “God’s justice!
Speak not of it, reverend sir.
If God were just, you know how many would be punished who now escape.” “Patience,” said the abbé, in a tone which made the dying man shudder; “have patience!” Caderousse looked at him with amazement.
“Besides,” said the abbé, “God is merciful to all, as he has been to you; he is first a father, then a judge.” “Do you then believe in God?” said Caderousse.
“Had I been so unhappy as not to believe in him until now,” said Monte Cristo, “I must believe on seeing you.” Caderousse raised his clenched hands towards heaven.
“Listen,” said the abbé, extending his hand over the wounded man, as if to command him to believe; “this is what the God in whom, on your death-bed, you refuse to believe, has done for you—he gave you health, strength, regular employment, even friends—a life, in fact, which a man might enjoy with a calm conscience.
Listen, then.” “Ah,” murmured Caderousse, “what a strange priest you are; you drive the dying to despair, instead of consoling them.” “Listen,” continued the abbé.
“When you had betrayed your friend, God began not to strike, but to warn you.
Poverty overtook you.
You had already passed half your life in coveting that which you might have honorably acquired; and already you contemplated crime under the excuse of want, when God worked a miracle in your behalf, sending you, by my hands, a fortune—brilliant, indeed, for you, who had never possessed any.
But this unexpected, unhoped-for, unheard-of fortune sufficed you no longer when you once possessed it; you wished to double it, and how?—by a murder!
The coward who feared death rejoiced at perpetual disgrace; for like all galley-slaves, you said, ‘I may escape from prison, I cannot from the grave.’ And you said truly; the way was opened for you unexpectedly.
An Englishman visited Toulon, who had vowed to rescue two men from infamy, and his choice fell on you and your companion.
You received a second fortune, money and tranquillity were restored to you, and you, who had been condemned to a felon’s life, might live as other men.
Then, wretched creature, then you tempted God a third time.
‘I have not enough,’ you said, when you had more than you before possessed, and you committed a third crime, without reason, without excuse.
God is wearied; he has punished you.” Caderousse was fast sinking.
“And yet that villain, Benedetto, will escape!” “No one, I tell you, will escape; Benedetto will be punished.” “Then, you, too, will be punished, for you did not do your duty as a priest—you should have prevented Benedetto from killing me.” “I?” said the count, with a smile which petrified the dying man, “when you had just broken your knife against the coat of mail which protected my breast!
Yet perhaps if I had found you humble and penitent, I might have prevented Benedetto from killing you; but I found you proud and blood-thirsty, and I left you in the hands of God.” “I do not believe there is a God,” howled Caderousse; “you do not believe it; you lie—you lie!” “Silence,” said the abbé; “you will force the last drop of blood from your veins.
What! you do not believe in God when he is striking you dead? you will not believe in him, who requires but a prayer, a word, a tear, and he will forgive?
God, who might have directed the assassin’s dagger so as to end your career in a moment, has given you this quarter of an hour for repentance.
Reflect, then, wretched man, and repent.” “No,” said Caderousse, “no; I will not repent.
“Well, the abbé—the Abbé Busoni.” Monte Cristo took off the wig which disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much to the beauty of his pallid features.
“Oh?” said Caderousse, thunderstruck, “but for that black hair, I should say you were the Englishman, Lord Wilmore.” “I am neither the Abbé Busoni nor Lord Wilmore,” said Monte Cristo; “think again,—do you not recollect me?” There was a magic effect in the count’s words, which once more revived the exhausted powers of the miserable man.
“Yes, indeed,” said he; “I think I have seen you and known you formerly.” “Yes, Caderousse, you have seen me; you knew me once.” “Who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let me die?” “Because nothing can save you; your wounds are mortal.
He knew this was the last struggle.
He approached the dying man, and, leaning over him with a calm and melancholy look, he whispered, “I am—I am——” And his almost closed lips uttered a name so low that the count himself appeared afraid to hear it.
Caderousse, who had raised himself on his knees, and stretched out his arm, tried to draw back, then clasping his hands, and raising them with a desperate effort, “Oh, my God, my God!” said he, “pardon me for having denied thee; thou dost exist, thou art indeed man’s father in heaven, and his judge on earth.
My God, my Lord, I have long despised thee!
Pardon me, my God; receive me, Oh, my Lord!” Caderousse sighed deeply, and fell back with a groan.
“_One!_” said the count mysteriously, his eyes fixed on the corpse, disfigured by so awful a death.
Ten minutes afterwards the surgeon and the procureur arrived, the one accompanied by the porter, the other by Ali, and were received by the Abbé Busoni, who was praying by the side of the corpse.
Beauchamp The daring attempt to rob the count was the topic of conversation throughout Paris for the next fortnight.
The dying man had signed a deposition declaring Benedetto to be the assassin.
The police had orders to make the strictest search for the murderer.
Caderousse’s knife, dark lantern, bunch of keys, and clothing, excepting the waistcoat, which could not be found, were deposited at the registry; the corpse was conveyed to the morgue.
The count told everyone that this adventure had happened during his absence at Auteuil, and that he only knew what was related by the Abbé Busoni, who that evening, by mere chance, had requested to pass the night in his house, to examine some valuable books in his library.
Bertuccio alone turned pale whenever Benedetto’s name was mentioned in his presence, but there was no reason why anyone should notice his doing so.
Villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was preparing his brief with the same ardor that he was accustomed to exercise when required to speak in criminal cases.
But three weeks had already passed, and the most diligent search had been unsuccessful; the attempted robbery and the murder of the robber by his comrade were almost forgotten in anticipation of the approaching marriage of Mademoiselle Danglars to the Count Andrea Cavalcanti.
It was expected that this wedding would shortly take place, as the young man was received at the banker’s as the betrothed.
Letters had been despatched to M.
Cavalcanti, as the count’s father, who highly approved of the union, regretted his inability to leave Parma at that time, and promised a wedding gift of a hundred and fifty thousand livres.
It was agreed that the three millions should be intrusted to Danglars to invest; some persons had warned the young man of the circumstances of his future father-in-law, who had of late sustained repeated losses; but with sublime disinterestedness and confidence the young man refused to listen, or to express a single doubt to the baron.
The baron adored Count Andrea Cavalcanti; not so Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars.
With an instinctive hatred of matrimony, she suffered Andrea’s attentions in order to get rid of Morcerf; but when Andrea urged his suit, she betrayed an entire dislike to him.
The baron might possibly have perceived it, but, attributing it to a caprice, feigned ignorance.
The delay demanded by Beauchamp had nearly expired.
Morcerf appreciated the advice of Monte Cristo to let things die away of their own accord.
No one had taken up the remark about the general, and no one had recognized in the officer who betrayed the castle of Yanina the noble count in the House of Peers.
Albert, however, felt no less insulted; the few lines which had irritated him were certainly intended as an insult.
Besides, the manner in which Beauchamp had closed the conference left a bitter recollection in his heart.
He cherished the thought of the duel, hoping to conceal its true cause even from his seconds.
Beauchamp had not been seen since the day he visited Albert, and those of whom the latter inquired always told him he was out on a journey which would detain him some days.
One morning Albert was awakened by his valet de chambre, who announced Beauchamp.
Albert rubbed his eyes, ordered his servant to introduce him into the small smoking-room on the ground floor, dressed himself quickly, and went down.
He found Beauchamp pacing the room; on perceiving him Beauchamp stopped.
I reasoned thus—money, time, and fatigue are nothing compared with the reputation and interests of a whole family; probabilities will not suffice, only facts will justify a deadly combat with a friend.
Will you believe the government of a republic, a kingdom, and an empire?” Albert cast his eyes on the passport, then raised them in astonishment to Beauchamp.
“Albert, had you been a stranger, a foreigner, a simple lord, like that Englishman who came to demand satisfaction three or four months since, and whom I killed to get rid of, I should not have taken this trouble; but I thought this mark of consideration due to you.
I took a week to go, another to return, four days of quarantine, and forty-eight hours to stay there; that makes three weeks.
I returned last night, and here I am.” “What circumlocution!
How long you are before you tell me what I most wish to know?” “Because, in truth, Albert——” “You hesitate?” “Yes,—I fear.” “You fear to acknowledge that your correspondent has deceived you?
Oh, no self-love, Beauchamp.
Acknowledge it, Beauchamp; your courage cannot be doubted.” “Not so,” murmured the journalist; “on the contrary——” Albert turned frightfully pale; he endeavored to speak, but the words died on his lips.
“My friend,” said Beauchamp, in the most affectionate tone, “I should gladly make an apology; but, alas!——” “But what?” “The paragraph was correct, my friend.” “What?
That French officer——” “Yes.” “Fernand?” “Yes.” “The traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whose service he was——” “Pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!” Albert advanced furiously towards Beauchamp, but the latter restrained him more by a mild look than by his extended hand.
“My friend,” said he, “here is a proof of it.” 40176m Albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable inhabitants of Yanina, proving that Colonel Fernand Mondego, in the service of Ali Tepelini, had surrendered the castle for two million crowns.
The signatures were perfectly legal.
Albert tottered and fell overpowered in a chair.
After a moment’s mournful silence, his heart overflowed, and he gave way to a flood of tears.
Beauchamp, who had watched with sincere pity the young man’s paroxysm of grief, approached him.
“Now, Albert,” said he, “you understand me—do you not?
I wished to see all, and to judge of everything for myself, hoping the explanation would be in your father’s favor, and that I might do him justice.
But, on the contrary, the particulars which are given prove that Fernand Mondego, raised by Ali Pasha to the rank of governor-general, is no other than Count Fernand of Morcerf; then, recollecting the honor you had done me, in admitting me to your friendship, I hastened to you.” Albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face with both hands, as if to prevent the light from reaching him.
“I hastened to you,” continued Beauchamp, “to tell you, Albert, that in this changing age, the faults of a father cannot revert upon his children.
Few have passed through this revolutionary period, in the midst of which we were born, without some stain of infamy or blood to soil the uniform of the soldier, or the gown of the magistrate.
Now I have these proofs, Albert, and I am in your confidence, no human power can force me to a duel which your own conscience would reproach you with as criminal, but I come to offer you what you can no longer demand of me.
Do you wish these proofs, these attestations, which I alone possess, to be destroyed?
Do you wish this frightful secret to remain with us?
Confided to me, it shall never escape my lips; say, Albert, my friend, do you wish it?” Albert threw himself on Beauchamp’s neck.
“Take these,” said Beauchamp, presenting the papers to Albert.
Albert seized them with a convulsive hand, tore them in pieces, and trembling lest the least vestige should escape and one day appear to confront him, he approached the wax-light, always kept burning for cigars, and burned every fragment.
“Dear, excellent friend,” murmured Albert, still burning the papers.
I could not have killed her by the same blow,—I should have fled from my country.” “Dear Albert,” said Beauchamp.
But this sudden and factitious joy soon forsook the young man, and was succeeded by a still greater grief.
“Well,” said Beauchamp, “what still oppresses you, my friend?” 40178m “I am broken-hearted,” said Albert.
I cannot thus, in a moment relinquish the respect, the confidence, and pride with which a father’s untarnished name inspires a son.
Oh, Beauchamp, Beauchamp, how shall I now approach mine?
Shall I draw back my forehead from his embrace, or withhold my hand from his?
I am the most wretched of men.
Ah, my mother, my poor mother!” said Albert, gazing through his tears at his mother’s portrait; “if you know this, how much must you suffer!” “Come,” said Beauchamp, taking both his hands, “take courage, my friend.” “But how came that first note to be inserted in your journal?
Some unknown enemy—an invisible foe—has done this.” “The more must you fortify yourself, Albert.
Let no trace of emotion be visible on your countenance, bear your grief as the cloud bears within it ruin and death—a fatal secret, known only when the storm bursts.
Go, my friend, reserve your strength for the moment when the crash shall come.” 40179m “You think, then, all is not over yet?” said Albert, horror-stricken.
“I think nothing, my friend; but all things are possible.
By the way——” “What?” said Albert, seeing that Beauchamp hesitated.
“Are you going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?” “Why do you ask me now?” “Because the rupture or fulfilment of this engagement is connected with the person of whom we were speaking.” “How?” said Albert, whose brow reddened; “you think M.
Danglars——” “I ask you only how your engagement stands?
Pray put no construction on my words I do not mean they should convey, and give them no undue weight.” “No.” said Albert, “the engagement is broken off.” “Well,” said Beauchamp.
Then, seeing the young man was about to relapse into melancholy, “Let us go out, Albert,” said he; “a ride in the wood in the phaeton, or on horseback, will refresh you; we will then return to breakfast, and you shall attend to your affairs, and I to mine.” “Willingly,” said Albert; “but let us walk.
I think a little exertion would do me good.” The two friends walked out on the fortress.
When they arrived at the Madeleine: “Since we are out,” said Beauchamp, “let us call on M. de Monte Cristo; he is admirably adapted to revive one’s spirits, because he never interrogates, and in my opinion those who ask no questions are the best comforters.” “Gladly,” said Albert; “let us call—I love him.” Chapter 85.
The Journey Monte Cristo uttered a joyful exclamation on seeing the young men together.
“Ah, ha!” said he, “I hope all is over, explained and settled.” “Yes,” said Beauchamp; “the absurd reports have died away, and should they be renewed, I would be the first to oppose them; so let us speak no more of it.” “Albert will tell you,” replied the count “that I gave him the same advice.
“I am finishing the most execrable morning’s work.” “What is it?” said Albert; “arranging your papers, apparently.” “My papers, thank God, no,—my papers are all in capital order, because I have none; but M.
Cavalcanti’s?” asked Beauchamp.
“Yes; do you not know that this is a young man whom the count is introducing?” said Morcerf.
“Let us not misunderstand each other,” replied Monte Cristo; “I introduce no one, and certainly not M.
Cavalcanti.” “And who,” said Albert with a forced smile, “is to marry Mademoiselle Danglars instead of me, which grieves me cruelly.” “What?
Cavalcanti is going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?” asked Beauchamp.
“Certainly! do you come from the end of the world?” said Monte Cristo; “you, a journalist, the husband of renown?
It is the talk of all Paris.” “And you, count, have made this match?” asked Beauchamp.
Silence, purveyor of gossip, do not spread that report.
No, you do not know me; I have done all in my power to oppose it.” “Ah, I understand,” said Beauchamp, “on our friend Albert’s account.” “On my account?” said the young man; “oh, no, indeed, the count will do me the justice to assert that I have, on the contrary, always entreated him to break off my engagement, and happily it is ended.
I do not know the young man; he is said to be of good family and rich, but I never trust to vague assertions.
Danglars of it till I am tired, but he is fascinated with his Luccanese.
I have even informed him of a circumstance I consider very serious; the young man was either charmed by his nurse, stolen by gypsies, or lost by his tutor, I scarcely know which.
They have commissioned me to write to the major to demand papers, and here they are.
I send them, but like Pilate—washing my hands.” “And what does Mademoiselle d’Armilly say to you for robbing her of her pupil?” “Oh, well, I don’t know; but I understand that she is going to Italy.
Madame Danglars asked me for letters of recommendation for the _impresari_; I gave her a few lines for the director of the Valle Theatre, who is under some obligation to me.
But what is the matter, Albert? you look dull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with Mademoiselle Eugénie?” “I am not aware of it,” said Albert, smiling sorrowfully.
Beauchamp turned to look at some paintings.
“But,” continued Monte Cristo, “you are not in your usual spirits?” “I have a dreadful headache,” said Albert.
“Well, my dear viscount,” said Monte Cristo, “I have an infallible remedy to propose to you.” “What is that?” asked the young man.
“Yes; and as I am just now excessively annoyed, I shall go from home.
Shall we go together?” “You annoyed, count?” said Beauchamp; “and by what?” “Ah, you think very lightly of it; I should like to see you with a brief preparing in your house.” “What brief?” “The one M. de Villefort is preparing against my amiable assassin—some brigand escaped from the gallows apparently.” “True,” said Beauchamp; “I saw it in the paper.
Who is this Caderousse?” “Some Provençal, it appears.
M. de Villefort heard of him at Marseilles, and M.
Danglars recollects having seen him.
I am resolved to desert them and go to some remote corner of the earth, and shall be happy if you will accompany me, viscount.” “Willingly.” “Then it is settled?” “Yes, but where?” “I have told you, where the air is pure, where every sound soothes, where one is sure to be humbled, however proud may be his nature.
I love that humiliation, I, who am master of the universe, as was Augustus.” “But where are you really going?” “To sea, viscount; you know I am a sailor.
Beauchamp, it holds four very well, will you accompany us?” “Thank you, I have just returned from sea.” “What? you have been to sea?” “Yes; I have just made a little excursion to the Borromean Islands18.” “What of that? come with us,” said Albert.
“No, dear Morcerf; you know I only refuse when the thing is impossible.
Besides, it is important,” added he in a low tone, “that I should remain in Paris just now to watch the paper.” “Ah, you are a good and an excellent friend,” said Albert; “yes, you are right; watch, watch, Beauchamp, and try to discover the enemy who made this disclosure.” Albert and Beauchamp parted, the last pressure of their hands expressing what their tongues could not before a stranger.
“Beauchamp is a worthy fellow,” said Monte Cristo, when the journalist was gone; “is he not, Albert?” “Yes, and a sincere friend; I love him devotedly.
“You see, then,” said Albert, “that instead of opposing, she will encourage me.” “Adieu, then, until five o’clock; be punctual, and we shall arrive at twelve or one.” “At Tréport?” “Yes; or in the neighborhood.” “But can we travel forty-eight leagues in eight hours?” “Easily,” said Monte Cristo.
“You are certainly a prodigy; you will soon not only surpass the railway, which would not be very difficult in France, but even the telegraph.” “But, viscount, since we cannot perform the journey in less than seven or eight hours, do not keep me waiting.” “Do not fear, I have little to prepare.” Monte Cristo smiled as he nodded to Albert, then remained a moment absorbed in deep meditation.
But passing his hand across his forehead as if to dispel his reverie, he rang the bell twice and Bertuccio entered.
“Bertuccio,” said he, “I intend going this evening to Normandy, instead of tomorrow or the next day.
You will have sufficient time before five o’clock; despatch a messenger to apprise the grooms at the first station.
M. de Morcerf will accompany me.” Bertuccio obeyed and despatched a courier to Pontoise to say the travelling-carriage would arrive at six o’clock.
From Pontoise another express was sent to the next stage, and in six hours all the horses stationed on the road were ready.
Before his departure, the count went to Haydée’s apartments, told her his intention, and resigned everything to her care.
Albert was punctual.
The journey soon became interesting from its rapidity, of which Morcerf had formed no previous idea.
The carriage rolled with a thundering noise over the pavement, and everyone turned to notice the dazzling meteor.
Ali, smiling, repeated the sound, grasped the reins with a firm hand, and spurred his horses, whose beautiful manes floated in the breeze.
This child of the desert was in his element, and with his black face and sparkling eyes appeared, in the cloud of dust he raised, like the genius of the simoom and the god of the hurricane.
“I never knew till now the delight of speed,” said Morcerf, and the last cloud disappeared from his brow; “but where the devil do you get such horses?
Are they made to order?” “Precisely,” said the count; “six years since I bought a horse in Hungary remarkable for its swiftness.
My dear count, if you tell me many more marvellous things, I warn you I shall not believe them.” “I countenance nothing that is marvellous, M.
Tell me, why does a steward rob his master?” “Because, I suppose, it is his nature to do so, for the love of robbing.” “You are mistaken; it is because he has a wife and family, and ambitious desires for himself and them.
Also because he is not sure of always retaining his situation, and wishes to provide for the future.
At midnight they arrived at the gate of a beautiful park.
The porter was in attendance; he had been apprised by the groom of the last stage of the count’s approach.
At half past two in the morning Morcerf was conducted to his apartments, where a bath and supper were prepared.
The servant who had travelled at the back of the carriage waited on him; Baptistin, who rode in front, attended the count.
All night he was lulled by the melancholy noise of the surf.
Around the schooner lay a number of small fishing-boats belonging to the fishermen of the neighboring village, like humble subjects awaiting orders from their queen.
There, as in every spot where Monte Cristo stopped, if but for two days, luxury abounded and life went on with the utmost ease.
Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the accoutrements for hunting; a lofty room on the ground floor containing all the ingenious instruments the English—eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are patient and sluggish—have invented for fishing.
The day passed in pursuing those exercises in which Monte Cristo excelled.
They killed a dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout in the stream, dined in a summer-house overlooking the ocean, and took tea in the library.
Albert, completely exhausted with the exercise which invigorated Monte Cristo, was sleeping in an armchair near the window, while the count was designing with his architect the plan of a conservatory in his house, when the sound of a horse at full speed on the high road made Albert look up.
He was disagreeably surprised to see his own valet de chambre, whom he had not brought, that he might not inconvenience Monte Cristo. 40188m “Florentin here!” cried he, starting up; “is my mother ill?” And he hastened to the door.
Monte Cristo watched and saw him approach the valet, who drew a small sealed parcel from his pocket, containing a newspaper and a letter.
Beauchamp,” replied Florentin.
“Did he send you?” “Yes, sir; he sent for me to his house, gave me money for my journey, procured a horse, and made me promise not to stop till I had reached you, I have come in fifteen hours.” Albert opened the letter with fear, uttered a shriek on reading the first line, and seized the paper.
His sight was dimmed, his legs sank under him, and he would have fallen had not Florentin supported him.
Beauchamp’s, I found madame in tears; she had sent for me to know when you would return.
Beauchamp; she first extended her arms to prevent me, but after a moment’s reflection, ‘Yes, go, Florentin,’ said she, ‘and may he come quickly.’” “Yes, my mother,” said Albert, “I will return, and woe to the infamous wretch!
Five minutes had sufficed to make a complete transformation in his appearance.
His voice had become rough and hoarse; his face was furrowed with wrinkles; his eyes burned under the blue-veined lids, and he tottered like a drunken man.
“Count,” said he, “I thank you for your hospitality, which I would gladly have enjoyed longer; but I must return to Paris.” “What has happened?” “A great misfortune, more important to me than life.
Don’t question me, I beg of you, but lend me a horse.” “My stables are at your command, viscount; but you will kill yourself by riding on horseback.
Take a post-chaise or a carriage.” “No, it would delay me, and I need the fatigue you warn me of; it will do me good.” Albert reeled as if he had been shot, and fell on a chair near the door.
Monte Cristo did not see this second manifestation of physical exhaustion; he was at the window, calling: “Ali, a horse for M. de Morcerf—quick! he is in a hurry!” 40190m These words restored Albert; he darted from the room, followed by the count.
“Thank you!” cried he, throwing himself on his horse.
“Return as soon as you can, Florentin.
Must I use any password to procure a horse?” “Only dismount; another will be immediately saddled.” Albert hesitated a moment.
“You may think my departure strange and foolish,” said the young man; “you do not know how a paragraph in a newspaper may exasperate one.
Read that,” said he, “when I am gone, that you may not be witness of my anger.” While the count picked up the paper he put spurs to his horse, which leaped in astonishment at such an unusual stimulus, and shot away with the rapidity of an arrow.
He now calls himself the Count of Morcerf, and ranks among the peers.” Thus the terrible secret, which Beauchamp had so generously destroyed, appeared again like an armed phantom; and another paper, deriving its information from some malicious source, had published two days after Albert’s departure for Normandy the few lines which had rendered the unfortunate young man almost crazy.
The Trial At eight o’clock in the morning Albert had arrived at Beauchamp’s door.
The valet de chambre had received orders to usher him in at once.
Beauchamp was in his bath.
“Well, my poor friend,” replied Beauchamp, “I expected you.” “I need not say I think you are too faithful and too kind to have spoken of that painful circumstance.
Your having sent for me is another proof of your affection.
So, without losing time, tell me, have you the slightest idea whence this terrible blow proceeds?” “I think I have some clew.” “But first tell me all the particulars of this shameful plot.” Beauchamp proceeded to relate to the young man, who was overwhelmed with shame and grief, the following facts.
Two days previously, the article had appeared in another paper besides _ l’Impartial_, and, what was more serious, one that was well known as a government paper.
Beauchamp was breakfasting when he read the paragraph.
He sent immediately for a cabriolet, and hastened to the publisher’s office.
Although professing diametrically opposite principles from those of the editor of the other paper, Beauchamp—as it sometimes, we may say often, happens—was his intimate friend.
The editor was reading, with apparent delight, a leading article in the same paper on beet-sugar, probably a composition of his own.
“Ah, _pardieu!_” said Beauchamp, “with the paper in your hand, my friend, I need not tell you the cause of my visit.” “Are you interested in the sugar question?” asked the editor of the ministerial paper.
“No,” replied Beauchamp, “I have not considered the question; a totally different subject interests me.” “What is it?” “The article relative to Morcerf.” “Indeed?
“Who, then, has so correctly informed you?” asked he; “for my paper, which gave the first information on the subject, has been obliged to stop for want of proof; and yet we are more interested than you in exposing M. de Morcerf, as he is a peer of France, and we are of the opposition.” “Oh, that is very simple; we have not sought to scandalize.
A man arrived yesterday from Yanina, bringing a formidable array of documents; and when we hesitated to publish the accusatory article, he told us it should be inserted in some other paper.” Beauchamp understood that nothing remained but to submit, and left the office to despatch a courier to Morcerf.
But he had been unable to send to Albert the following particulars, as the events had transpired after the messenger’s departure; namely, that the same day a great agitation was manifest in the House of Peers among the usually calm members of that dignified assembly.
Everyone had arrived almost before the usual hour, and was conversing on the melancholy event which was to attract the attention of the public towards one of their most illustrious colleagues.
Some were perusing the article, others making comments and recalling circumstances which substantiated the charges still more.
The Count of Morcerf was no favorite with his colleagues.
Like all upstarts, he had had recourse to a great deal of haughtiness to maintain his position.
The true nobility laughed at him, the talented repelled him, and the honorable instinctively despised him.
He was, in fact, in the unhappy position of the victim marked for sacrifice; the finger of God once pointed at him, everyone was prepared to raise the hue and cry.
The Count of Morcerf alone was ignorant of the news.
He did not take in the paper containing the defamatory article, and had passed the morning in writing letters and in trying a horse.
He arrived at his usual hour, with a proud look and insolent demeanor; he alighted, passed through the corridors, and entered the house without observing the hesitation of the door-keepers or the coolness of his colleagues. 40194m Business had already been going on for half an hour when he entered.
Everyone held the accusing paper, but, as usual, no one liked to take upon himself the responsibility of the attack.
At length an honorable peer, Morcerf’s acknowledged enemy, ascended the tribune with that solemnity which announced that the expected moment had arrived.
There was an impressive silence; Morcerf alone knew not why such profound attention was given to an orator who was not always listened to with so much complacency.
The count did not notice the introduction, in which the speaker announced that his communication would be of that vital importance that it demanded the undivided attention of the House; but at the mention of Yanina and Colonel Fernand, he turned so frightfully pale that every member shuddered and fixed his eyes upon him.
Moral wounds have this peculiarity,—they may be hidden, but they never close; always painful, always ready to bleed when touched, they remain fresh and open in the heart.
The article having been read during the painful hush that followed, a universal shudder pervaded the assembly, and immediately the closest attention was given to the orator as he resumed his remarks.
He stated his scruples and the difficulties of the case; it was the honor of M. de Morcerf, and that of the whole House, he proposed to defend, by provoking a debate on personal questions, which are always such painful themes of discussion.
He concluded by calling for an investigation, which might dispose of the calumnious report before it had time to spread, and restore M. de Morcerf to the position he had long held in public opinion.
Morcerf was so completely overwhelmed by this great and unexpected calamity that he could scarcely stammer a few words as he looked around on the assembly.
This timidity, which might proceed from the astonishment of innocence as well as the shame of guilt, conciliated some in his favor; for men who are truly generous are always ready to compassionate when the misfortune of their enemy surpasses the limits of their hatred.
The president put it to the vote, and it was decided that the investigation should take place.
The count was asked what time he required to prepare his defence.
Morcerf’s courage had revived when he found himself alive after this horrible blow.
“My lords,” answered he, “it is not by time I could repel the attack made on me by enemies unknown to me, and, doubtless, hidden in obscurity; it is immediately, and by a thunderbolt, that I must repel the flash of lightning which, for a moment, startled me.
Oh, that I could, instead of taking up this defence, shed my last drop of blood to prove to my noble colleagues that I am their equal in worth.” These words made a favorable impression on behalf of the accused.
“I demand, then, that the examination shall take place as soon as possible, and I will furnish the house with all necessary information.” “What day do you fix?” asked the president.
The president rang the bell.
“Does the House approve that the examination should take place today?” 40196m “Yes,” was the unanimous answer.
A committee of twelve members was chosen to examine the proofs brought forward by Morcerf.
The investigation would begin at eight o’clock that evening in the committee-room, and if postponement were necessary, the proceedings would be resumed each evening at the same hour.
Morcerf asked leave to retire; he had to collect the documents he had long been preparing against this storm, which his sagacity had foreseen.
Beauchamp related to the young man all the facts we have just narrated; his story, however, had over ours all the advantage of the animation of living things over the coldness of dead things.
Albert listened, trembling now with hope, then with anger, and then again with shame, for from Beauchamp’s confidence he knew his father was guilty, and he asked himself how, since he was guilty, he could prove his innocence.
Beauchamp hesitated to continue his narrative.
Must you know all?” “Absolutely; and rather from your lips than another’s.” “Muster up all your courage, then, for never have you required it more.” Albert passed his hand over his forehead, as if to try his strength, as a man who is preparing to defend his life proves his shield and bends his sword.
“The evening arrived; all Paris was in expectation.
Many said your father had only to show himself to crush the charge against him; many others said he would not appear; while some asserted that they had seen him start for Brussels; and others went to the police-office to inquire if he had taken out a passport.
I used all my influence with one of the committee, a young peer of my acquaintance, to get admission to one of the galleries.
I was concealed by a column, and might witness the whole of the terrible scene which was about to take place.
He held some papers in his hand; his countenance was calm, and his step firm, and he was dressed with great care in his military uniform, which was buttoned completely up to the chin.
His presence produced a good effect.
The committee was made up of Liberals, several of whom came forward to shake hands with him.” Albert felt his heart bursting at these particulars, but gratitude mingled with his sorrow: he would gladly have embraced those who had given his father this proof of esteem at a moment when his honor was so powerfully attacked.
“At this moment one of the door-keepers brought in a letter for the president.
‘You are at liberty to speak, M. de Morcerf,’ said the president, as he unsealed the letter; and the count began his defence, I assure you, Albert, in a most eloquent and skilful manner.
He produced documents proving that the Vizier of Yanina had up to the last moment honored him with his entire confidence, since he had interested him with a negotiation of life and death with the emperor.
He produced the ring, his mark of authority, with which Ali Pasha generally sealed his letters, and which the latter had given him, that he might, on his return at any hour of the day or night, gain access to the presence, even in the harem.
Unfortunately, the negotiation failed, and when he returned to defend his benefactor, he was dead.
‘But,’ said the count, ‘so great was Ali Pasha’s confidence, that on his death-bed he resigned his favorite mistress and her daughter to my care.’” Albert started on hearing these words; the history of Haydée recurred to him, and he remembered what she had said of that message and the ring, and the manner in which she had been sold and made a slave.
“And what effect did this discourse produce?” anxiously inquired Albert.
“I acknowledge it affected me, and, indeed, all the committee also,” said Beauchamp.
“Meanwhile, the president carelessly opened the letter which had been brought to him; but the first lines aroused his attention; he read them again and again, and fixing his eyes on M. de Morcerf, ‘Count,’ said he, ‘you have said that the Vizier of Yanina confided his wife and daughter to your care?’—‘Yes, sir,’ replied Morcerf; ‘but in that, like all the rest, misfortune pursued me.
On my return, Vasiliki and her daughter Haydée had disappeared.’—‘Did you know them?’—‘My intimacy with the pasha and his unlimited confidence had gained me an introduction to them, and I had seen them above twenty times.’ “‘Have you any idea what became of them?’—‘Yes, sir; I heard they had fallen victims to their sorrow, and, perhaps, to their poverty.
I was not rich; my life was in constant danger; I could not seek them, to my great regret.’ The president frowned imperceptibly.
‘Gentlemen,’ said he, ‘you have heard the Comte de Morcerf’s defence.
Can you, sir, produce any witnesses to the truth of what you have asserted?’—‘Alas, no, monsieur,’ replied the count; ‘all those who surrounded the vizier, or who knew me at his court, are either dead or gone away, I know not where.
I believe that I alone, of all my countrymen, survived that dreadful war.
It only remained to put it to the vote, when the president resumed: ‘Gentlemen and you, monsieur,—you will not be displeased, I presume, to listen to one who calls himself a very important witness, and who has just presented himself.
He is, doubtless, come to prove the perfect innocence of our colleague.
Here is a letter I have just received on the subject; shall it be read, or shall it be passed over? and shall we take no notice of this incident?’ M. de Morcerf turned pale, and clenched his hands on the papers he held.
The committee decided to hear the letter; the count was thoughtful and silent.
The president read: “‘Mr.
President,—I can furnish the committee of inquiry into the conduct of the Lieutenant-General the Count of Morcerf in Epirus and in Macedonia with important particulars.’ “The president paused, and the count turned pale.
The president looked at his auditors.
The president resumed: “‘I was on the spot at the death of Ali Pasha.
I know what is become of Vasiliki and Haydée.
I am at the command of the committee, and even claim the honor of being heard.
I shall be in the lobby when this note is delivered to you.’ “‘And who is this witness, or rather this enemy?’ asked the count, in a tone in which there was a visible alteration.
‘We shall know, sir,’ replied the president.
‘Is the committee willing to hear this witness?’—‘Yes, yes,’ they all said at once.
‘Is there anyone in the lobby?’ said the president.
“‘Yes, sir.’—‘Who is it?’—‘A woman, accompanied by a servant.’ Everyone looked at his neighbor.
‘Bring her in,’ said the president.
Five minutes after the door-keeper again appeared; all eyes were fixed on the door, and I,” said Beauchamp, “shared the general expectation and anxiety.
Behind the door-keeper walked a woman enveloped in a large veil, which completely concealed her.
It was evident, from her figure and the perfumes she had about her, that she was young and fastidious in her tastes, but that was all.
The president requested her to throw aside her veil, and it was then seen that she was dressed in the Grecian costume, and was remarkably beautiful.” “Ah,” said Albert, “it was she.” “Who?” “Haydée.” “Who told you that?” “Alas, I guess it.
But go on, Beauchamp.
And yet we must be drawing near the disclosure.” “M. de Morcerf,” continued Beauchamp, “looked at this woman with surprise and terror.
Her lips were about to pass his sentence of life or death.
To the committee the adventure was so extraordinary and curious, that the interest they had felt for the count’s safety became now quite a secondary matter.
The president himself advanced to place a seat for the young lady; but she declined availing herself of it.
“‘Madame,’ said the president, ‘you have engaged to furnish the committee with some important particulars respecting the affair at Yanina, and you have stated that you were an eyewitness of the event.’—‘I was, indeed,’ said the stranger, with a tone of sweet melancholy, and with the sonorous voice peculiar to the East.
“‘But allow me to say that you must have been very young then.’—‘I was four years old; but as those events deeply concerned me, not a single detail has escaped my memory.’—‘In what manner could these events concern you? and who are you, that they should have made so deep an impression on you?’—‘On them depended my father’s life,’ replied she.
‘I am Haydée, the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, and of Vasiliki, his beloved wife.’ 40202m “The blush of mingled pride and modesty which suddenly suffused the cheeks of the young woman, the brilliancy of her eye, and her highly important communication, produced an indescribable effect on the assembly.
As for the count, he could not have been more overwhelmed if a thunderbolt had fallen at his feet and opened an immense gulf before him.
“Haydée, still calm, but with a calmness more dreadful than the anger of another would have been, handed to the president the record of her sale, written in Arabic.
It had been supposed some of the papers might be in the Arabian, Romaic, or Turkish language, and the interpreter of the House was in attendance.
The above-mentioned purchase was made on his highness’s account, whose mandate I had, for the sum of four hundred thousand francs.
“‘Given at Constantinople, by authority of his highness, in the year 1247 of the Hegira.
“‘Signed, El-Kobbir.’ “‘That this record should have all due authority, it shall bear the imperial seal, which the vendor is bound to have affixed to it.’ “Near the merchant’s signature there was, indeed, the seal of the sublime emperor.
A dreadful silence followed the reading of this document; the count could only stare, and his gaze, fixed as if unconsciously on Haydée, seemed one of fire and blood.
Although a Christian, may God forgive me, I have always sought to revenge my illustrious father.
Since I set my foot in France, and knew the traitor lived in Paris, I have watched carefully.
I live retired in the house of my noble protector, but I do it from choice.
I love retirement and silence, because I can live with my thoughts and recollections of past days.
But the Count of Monte Cristo surrounds me with every paternal care, and I am ignorant of nothing which passes in the world.
But it is a glorious day for me,’ continued the young girl, raising her ardent gaze to heaven, ‘that on which I find at last an opportunity of avenging my father!’ “The count had not uttered one word the whole of this time.
His colleagues looked at him, and doubtless pitied his prospects, blighted under the perfumed breath of a woman.
His misery was depicted in sinister lines on his countenance.
‘M. de Morcerf,’ said the president, ‘do you recognize this lady as the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina?’—‘No,’ said Morcerf, attempting to rise, ‘it is a base plot, contrived by my enemies.’ Haydée, whose eyes had been fixed on the door, as if expecting someone, turned hastily, and, seeing the count standing, shrieked, ‘You do not know me?’ said she.
‘Well, I fortunately recognize you!
It is you who surrendered the castle of Yanina!
It is you who, sent by him to Constantinople, to treat with the emperor for the life or death of your benefactor, brought back a false mandate granting full pardon!
It is you who, with that mandate, obtained the pasha’s ring, which gave you authority over Selim, the fire-keeper!
It is you who sold us, my mother and me, to the merchant, El-Kobbir!
Assassin, assassin, assassin, you have still on your brow your master’s blood!
Look, gentlemen, all!’ “These words had been pronounced with such enthusiasm and evident truth, that every eye was fixed on the count’s forehead, and he himself passed his hand across it, as if he felt Ali’s blood still lingering there.
‘You positively recognize M. de Morcerf as the officer, Fernand Mondego?’—‘Indeed I do!’ cried Haydée.
‘Oh, my mother, it was you who said, “You were free, you had a beloved father, you were destined to be almost a queen.
Look well at his right hand, on which he has a large wound; if you forgot his features, you would know him by that hand, into which fell, one by one, the gold pieces of the merchant El-Kobbir!” I know him!
Ah, let him say now if he does not recognize me!’ Each word fell like a dagger on Morcerf, and deprived him of a portion of his energy; as she uttered the last, he hid his mutilated hand hastily in his bosom, and fell back on his seat, overwhelmed by wretchedness and despair.
This scene completely changed the opinion of the assembly respecting the accused count.
“‘Count of Morcerf,’ said the president, ‘do not allow yourself to be cast down; answer.
The justice of the court is supreme and impartial as that of God; it will not suffer you to be trampled on by your enemies without giving you an opportunity of defending yourself.
Shall further inquiries be made?
They knew the count’s energetic and violent temper; it must be, indeed, a dreadful blow which would deprive him of courage to defend himself.
They expected that his stupefied silence would be followed by a fiery outburst.
‘Well,’ asked the president, ‘what is your decision?’ 40206m “‘I have no reply to make,’ said the count in a low tone.
“‘Has the daughter of Ali Tepelini spoken the truth?’ said the president.
‘Is she, then, the terrible witness to whose charge you dare not plead “Not guilty”?
Have you really committed the crimes of which you are accused?’ The count looked around him with an expression which might have softened tigers, but which could not disarm his judges.
Then he raised his eyes towards the ceiling, but withdrew then, immediately, as if he feared the roof would open and reveal to his distressed view that second tribunal called heaven, and that other judge named God.
Then, with a hasty movement, he tore open his coat, which seemed to stifle him, and flew from the room like a madman; his footstep was heard one moment in the corridor, then the rattling of his carriage-wheels as he was driven rapidly away.
‘Gentlemen,’ said the president, when silence was restored, ‘is the Count of Morcerf convicted of felony, treason, and conduct unbecoming a member of this House?’—‘Yes,’ replied all the members of the committee of inquiry with a unanimous voice.
“Haydée had remained until the close of the meeting.
She heard the count’s sentence pronounced without betraying an expression of joy or pity; then drawing her veil over her face she bowed majestically to the councillors, and left with that dignified step which Virgil attributes to his goddesses.” Chapter 87.
The Challenge Then,” continued Beauchamp, “I took advantage of the silence and the darkness to leave the house without being seen.
The usher who had introduced me was waiting for me at the door, and he conducted me through the corridors to a private entrance opening into the Rue de Vaugirard.
I left with mingled feelings of sorrow and delight.
Excuse me, Albert,—sorrow on your account, and delight with that noble girl, thus pursuing paternal vengeance.
Yes, Albert, from whatever source the blow may have proceeded—it may be from an enemy, but that enemy is only the agent of Providence.” Albert held his head between his hands; he raised his face, red with shame and bathed in tears, and seizing Beauchamp’s arm: “My friend,” said he, “my life is ended.
I cannot calmly say with you, ‘Providence has struck the blow;’ but I must discover who pursues me with this hatred, and when I have found him I shall kill him, or he will kill me.
I rely on your friendship to assist me, Beauchamp, if contempt has not banished it from your heart.” “Contempt, my friend?
How does this misfortune affect you?
No, happily that unjust prejudice is forgotten which made the son responsible for the father’s actions.
Review your life, Albert; although it is only just beginning, did a lovely summer’s day ever dawn with greater purity than has marked the commencement of your career?
You are young and rich—leave Paris—all is soon forgotten in this great Babylon of excitement and changing tastes.
You will return after three or four years with a Russian princess for a bride, and no one will think more of what occurred yesterday than if it had happened sixteen years ago.” “Thank you, my dear Beauchamp, thank you for the excellent feeling which prompts your advice; but it cannot be.
I have told you my wish, or rather my determination.
You understand that, interested as I am in this affair, I cannot see it in the same light as you do.
What appears to you to emanate from a celestial source, seems to me to proceed from one far less pure.
Providence appears to me to have no share in this affair; and happily so, for instead of the invisible, impalpable agent of celestial rewards and punishments, I shall find one both palpable and visible, on whom I shall revenge myself, I assure you, for all I have suffered during the last month.
Each moment’s delay is an eternity for me.
At the first word, before I had even mentioned your father’s name”— “‘Ah,’ said he.
‘I guess what brings you here.’ “‘How, and why?’ “‘Because a fortnight since I was questioned on the same subject.’ “‘By whom?’ “‘By a banker of Paris, my correspondent.’ “‘Whose name is——’ “‘Danglars.’” “He!” cried Albert; “yes, it is indeed he who has so long pursued my father with jealous hatred.
Oh, no, he was afraid to encounter him face to face.” “I do not condemn you, Albert; I only restrain you.
Act prudently.” “Oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me.
Beauchamp, solemn transactions should be sanctioned by a witness.
Danglars is guilty, he shall cease to live, or I shall die. _Pardieu_, Beauchamp, mine shall be a splendid funeral!” “When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should be promptly executed.
Let us go immediately.” They sent for a cabriolet.
On entering the banker’s mansion, they perceived the phaeton and servant of M.
Danglars will not fight with me, I will kill his son-in-law; Cavalcanti will certainly fight.” The servant announced the young man; but the banker, recollecting what had transpired the day before, did not wish him admitted.
It was, however, too late; Albert had followed the footman, and, hearing the order given, forced the door open, and followed by Beauchamp found himself in the banker’s study.
“And you, too,” said he, “come, if you like, monsieur; you have a claim, being almost one of the family, and I will give as many rendezvous of that kind as I can find persons willing to accept them.” Cavalcanti looked at Danglars with a stupefied air, and the latter, making an effort, arose and stepped between the two young men.
Albert’s attack on Andrea had placed him on a different footing, and he hoped this visit had another cause than that he had at first supposed.
“Indeed, sir,” said he to Albert, “if you are come to quarrel with this gentleman because I have preferred him to you, I shall resign the case to the king’s attorney.” “You mistake, sir,” said Morcerf with a gloomy smile; “I am not referring in the least to matrimony, and I only addressed myself to M.
Cavalcanti because he appeared disposed to interfere between us.
In one respect you are right, for I am ready to quarrel with everyone today; but you have the first claim, M.
Danglars.” 40212m “Sir,” replied Danglars, pale with anger and fear, “I warn you, when I have the misfortune to meet with a mad dog, I kill it; and far from thinking myself guilty of a crime, I believe I do society a kindness.
Is it my fault that your father has dishonored himself?” “Yes, miserable wretch!” cried Morcerf, “it is your fault.” Danglars retreated a few steps.
Have I travelled in that country?
Did I advise your father to sell the castle of Yanina—to betray——” “Silence!” said Albert, with a thundering voice.
“No; it is not you who have directly made this exposure and brought this sorrow on us, but you hypocritically provoked it.” “I?” “Yes; you!
Who wrote for particulars concerning my father?” “I imagine anyone may write to Yanina.” “But one person only wrote!” “One only?” “Yes; and that was you!” “I, doubtless, wrote.
It appears to me that when about to marry your daughter to a young man, it is right to make some inquiries respecting his family; it is not only a right, but a duty.” “You wrote, sir, knowing what answer you would receive.” “I, indeed?
I assure you,” cried Danglars, with a confidence and security proceeding less from fear than from the interest he really felt for the young man, “I solemnly declare to you, that I should never have thought of writing to Yanina, did I know anything of Ali Pasha’s misfortunes.” “Who, then, urged you to write?
I was speaking of your father’s past history.
I said the origin of his fortune remained obscure.
The person to whom I addressed my scruples asked me where your father had acquired his property?
I answered, ‘In Greece.’—‘Then,’ said he, ‘write to Yanina.’” “And who thus advised you?” “No other than your friend, Monte Cristo.” “The Count of Monte Cristo told you to write to Yanina?” “Yes; and I wrote, and will show you my correspondence, if you like.” Albert and Beauchamp looked at each other.
When, the day after the arrival of this answer, your father came by the advice of Monte Cristo to ask my daughter’s hand for you, I decidedly refused him, but without any explanation or exposure.
How did the honor or disgrace of M. de Morcerf affect me?
It neither increased nor decreased my income.” Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no doubt upon the subject.
Danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same time with the assurance, of a man who speaks the truth, at least in part, if not wholly—not for conscience’ sake, but through fear.
It was not whether Danglars or Monte Cristo was more or less guilty; it was a man who would answer for the offence, whether trifling or serious; it was a man who would fight, and it was evident Danglars would not fight.
In addition to this, everything forgotten or unperceived before presented itself now to his recollection.
Monte Cristo knew everything, as he had bought the daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he had advised Danglars to write to Yanina.
The answer known, he had yielded to Albert’s wish to be introduced to Haydée, and allowed the conversation to turn on the death of Ali, and had not opposed Haydée’s recital (but having, doubtless, warned the young girl, in the few Romaic words he spoke to her, not to implicate Morcerf’s father).
Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandy when he knew the final blow was near.
There could be no doubt that all had been calculated and previously arranged; Monte Cristo then was in league with his father’s enemies.
Albert took Beauchamp aside, and communicated these ideas to him.
Danglars has only been a secondary agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. de Monte Cristo that you must demand an explanation.” Albert turned.
“Sir,” said he to Danglars, “understand that I do not take a final leave of you; I must ascertain if your insinuations are just, and am going now to inquire of the Count of Monte Cristo.” He bowed to the banker, and went out with Beauchamp, without appearing to notice Cavalcanti.
Danglars accompanied him to the door, where he again assured Albert that no motive of personal hatred had influenced him against the Count of Morcerf.
The Insult At the banker’s door Beauchamp stopped Morcerf.
“Listen,” said he; “just now I told you it was of M. de Monte Cristo you must demand an explanation.” “Yes; and we are going to his house.” “Reflect, Morcerf, one moment before you go.” “On what shall I reflect?” “On the importance of the step you are taking.” “Is it more serious than going to M.
Danglars is a money-lover, and those who love money, you know, think too much of what they risk to be easily induced to fight a duel.
The other is, on the contrary, to all appearance a true nobleman; but do you not fear to find him a bully?” “I only fear one thing; namely, to find a man who will not fight.” “Do not be alarmed,” said Beauchamp; “he will meet you.
Beauchamp wished to go in alone, but Albert observed that as this was an unusual circumstance he might be allowed to deviate from the usual etiquette of duels.
The cause which the young man espoused was one so sacred that Beauchamp had only to comply with all his wishes; he yielded and contented himself with following Morcerf.
He was received by Baptistin.
The count had, indeed, just arrived, but he was in his bath, and had forbidden that anyone should be admitted.
“Quite, sir; my master has ordered his horses at eight o’clock precisely.” “Very good,” replied Albert; “that is all I wished to know.” Then, turning towards Beauchamp, “If you have anything to attend to, Beauchamp, do it directly; if you have any appointment for this evening, defer it till tomorrow.
I depend on you to accompany me to the Opera; and if you can, bring Château-Renaud with you.” Beauchamp availed himself of Albert’s permission, and left him, promising to call for him at a quarter before eight.
On his return home, Albert expressed his wish to Franz Debray, and Morrel, to see them at the Opera that evening.
He found her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this public humiliation.
The sight of Albert produced the effect which might naturally be expected on Mercédès; she pressed her son’s hand and sobbed aloud, but her tears relieved her.
Albert stood one moment speechless by the side of his mother’s bed.
It was evident from his pale face and knit brows that his resolution to revenge himself was growing weaker.
“My dear mother,” said he, “do you know if M. de Morcerf has any enemy?” Mercédès started; she noticed that the young man did not say “my father.” “My son,” she said, “persons in the count’s situation have many secret enemies.
Those who are known are not the most dangerous.” “I know it, and appeal to your penetration.
You are of so superior a mind, nothing escapes you.” “Why do you say so?” “Because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of the ball we gave, that M. de Monte Cristo would eat nothing in our house.” Mercédès raised herself on her feverish arm.
M. de Monte Cristo has only shown us kindness.
M. de Monte Cristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us.
Oh, I entreat you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it; and my counsel to you—nay, my prayer—is to retain his friendship.” “Mother,” replied the young man, “you have special reasons for telling me to conciliate that man.” “I?” said Mercédès, blushing as rapidly as she had turned pale, and again becoming paler than ever.
“Yes, doubtless; and is it not that he may never do us any harm?” Mercédès shuddered, and, fixing on her son a scrutinizing gaze, “You speak strangely,” said she to Albert, “and you appear to have some singular prejudices.
Three days since you were with him in Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our best friend.” An ironical smile passed over Albert’s lips.
Mercédès saw it and with the double instinct of woman and mother guessed all; but as she was prudent and strong-minded she concealed both her sorrows and her fears.
Albert was silent; an instant after, the countess resumed: “You came to inquire after my health; I will candidly acknowledge that I am not well.
You should install yourself here, and cheer my solitude.
I do not wish to be left alone.” “Mother,” said the young man, “you know how gladly I would obey your wish, but an urgent and important affair obliges me to leave you for the whole evening.” “Well,” replied Mercédès, sighing, “go, Albert; I will not make you a slave to your filial piety.” Albert pretended he did not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her.
Scarcely had he shut her door, when Mercédès called a confidential servant, and ordered him to follow Albert wherever he should go that evening, and to come and tell her immediately what he observed.
Then she rang for her lady’s maid, and, weak as she was, she dressed, in order to be ready for whatever might happen.
At ten minutes to eight Beauchamp arrived; he had seen Château-Renaud, who had promised to be in the orchestra before the curtain was raised.
Both got into Albert’s _coupé_; and, as the young man had no reason to conceal where he was going, he called aloud, “To the Opera.” In his impatience he arrived before the beginning of the performance. 40221m Château-Renaud was at his post; apprised by Beauchamp of the circumstances, he required no explanation from Albert.
The conduct of the son in seeking to avenge his father was so natural that Château-Renaud did not seek to dissuade him, and was content with renewing his assurances of devotion.
Albert wandered about the theatre until the curtain was drawn up.
The bell summoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra with Château-Renaud and Beauchamp.
But his eyes scarcely quitted the box between the columns, which remained obstinately closed during the whole of the first act.
At last, as Albert was looking at his watch for about the hundredth time, at the beginning of the second act the door opened, and Monte Cristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over the front of the box, looked around the pit.
Morrel followed him, and looked also for his sister and brother in-law; he soon discovered them in another box, and kissed his hand to them.
The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale face and threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain his attention.
He recognized Albert, but thought it better not to notice him, as he looked so angry and discomposed.
Without communicating his thoughts to his companion, he sat down, drew out his opera-glass, and looked another way.
Although apparently not noticing Albert, he did not, however, lose sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end of the second act, he saw him leave the orchestra with his two friends.
Then his head was seen passing at the back of the boxes, and the count knew that the approaching storm was intended to fall on him.
He was at the moment conversing cheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for what might happen.
The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turning round, saw Albert, pale and trembling, followed by Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.
“Well,” cried he, with that benevolent politeness which distinguished his salutation from the common civilities of the world, “my cavalier has attained his object.
Good-evening, M. de Morcerf.” The countenance of this man, who possessed such extraordinary control over his feelings, expressed the most perfect cordiality.
Morrel only then recollected the letter he had received from the viscount, in which, without assigning any reason, he begged him to go to the Opera, but he understood that something terrible was brooding.
“We are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocritical expressions of politeness, or false professions of friendship,” said Albert, “but to demand an explanation.” The young man’s trembling voice was scarcely audible.
“An explanation at the Opera?” said the count, with that calm tone and penetrating eye which characterize the man who knows his cause is good.
Thus the attention of many was attracted by this altercation.
“ said Monte Cristo “You do not appear to be in the possession of your senses.” “Provided I understand your perfidy, sir, and succeed in making you understand that I will be revenged, I shall be reasonable enough,” said Albert furiously.
“I do not understand you, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “and if I did, your tone is too high.
Leave the box, sir!” Monte Cristo pointed towards the door with the most commanding dignity.
“Ah, I shall know how to make you leave your home!” replied Albert, clasping in his convulsed grasp the glove, which Monte Cristo did not lose sight of.
It is in poor taste to make a display of a challenge.
Display is not becoming to everyone, M. de Morcerf.” At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around the group of spectators of this scene.
Albert understood the allusion in a moment, and was about to throw his glove at the count, when Morrel seized his hand, while Beauchamp and Château-Renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the limits of a challenge, held him back.
But Monte Cristo, without rising, and leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched out his arm and, taking the damp, crushed glove from the clenched hand of the young man: “Sir,” said he in a solemn tone, “I consider your glove thrown, and will return it to you wrapped around a bullet.
Now leave me or I will summon my servants to throw you out at the door.” Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albert stepped back, and Morrel closed the door.
Monte Cristo took up his glass again as if nothing had happened; his face was like marble, and his heart was like bronze.
Morrel whispered, “What have you done to him?” “I?
Nothing—at least personally,” said Monte Cristo.
“But there must be some cause for this strange scene.” “The Count of Morcerf’s adventure exasperates the young man.” “Have you anything to do with it?” “It was through Haydée that the Chamber was informed of his father’s treason.” “Indeed?” said Morrel.
“I had been told, but would not credit it, that the Grecian slave I have seen with you here in this very box was the daughter of Ali Pasha.” “It is true, nevertheless.” “Then,” said Morrel, “I understand it all, and this scene was premeditated.” “How so?” “Yes.
Albert wrote to request me to come to the Opera, doubtless that I might be a witness to the insult he meant to offer you.” “Probably,” said Monte Cristo with his imperturbable tranquillity.
As certainly, Maximilian, as I now press your hand, I shall kill him before ten o’clock tomorrow morning.” Morrel, in his turn, took Monte Cristo’s hand in both of his, and he shuddered to feel how cold and steady it was.
“Ah, count,” said he, “his father loves him so much!” “Do not speak to me of that,” said Monte Cristo, with the first movement of anger he had betrayed; “I will make him suffer.” Morrel, amazed, let fall Monte Cristo’s hand.
“Dear Maximilian,” interrupted the count, “listen how adorably Duprez is singing that line,— ‘O Mathilde! idole de mon âme!’ “I was the first to discover Duprez at Naples, and the first to applaud him.
Bravo, bravo!” Morrel saw it was useless to say more, and refrained.
“Come in,” said Monte Cristo with a voice that betrayed not the least emotion; and immediately Beauchamp appeared.
Beauchamp,” said Monte Cristo, as if this was the first time he had seen the journalist that evening; “be seated.” Beauchamp bowed, and, sitting down, “Sir,” said he, “I just now accompanied M. de Morcerf, as you saw.” “And that means,” replied Monte Cristo, laughing, “that you had, probably, just dined together.
Beauchamp, that you are more sober than he was.” “Sir,” said M.
Beauchamp, “Albert was wrong, I acknowledge, to betray so much anger, and I come, on my own account, to apologize for him.
And having done so, entirely on my own account, be it understood, I would add that I believe you too gentlemanly to refuse giving him some explanation concerning your connection with Yanina.
Then I will add two words about the young Greek girl.” Monte Cristo motioned him to be silent.
“Come,” said he, laughing, “there are all my hopes about to be destroyed.” “How so?” asked Beauchamp.
“Doubtless you wish to make me appear a very eccentric character.
I am, in your opinion, a Lara, a Manfred, a Lord Ruthven; then, just as I am arriving at the climax, you defeat your own end, and seek to make an ordinary man of me.
You bring me down to your own level, and demand explanations!
Beauchamp, it is quite laughable.” “Yet,” replied Beauchamp haughtily, “there are occasions when probity commands——” “M.
Beauchamp,” interposed this strange man, “the Count of Monte Cristo bows to none but the Count of Monte Cristo himself.
Beauchamp, and it is always well done.” “Sir,” replied the young man, “honest men are not to be paid with such coin.
I require honorable guaranties.” “I am, sir, a living guaranty,” replied Monte Cristo, motionless, but with a threatening look; “we have both blood in our veins which we wish to shed—that is our mutual guaranty.
Tell the viscount so, and that tomorrow, before ten o’clock, I shall see what color his is.” “Then I have only to make arrangements for the duel,” said Beauchamp.
“It is quite immaterial to me,” said Monte Cristo, “and it was very unnecessary to disturb me at the Opera for such a trifle.
In France people fight with the sword or pistol, in the colonies with the carbine, in Arabia with the dagger.
Tell your client that, although I am the insulted party, in order to carry out my eccentricity, I leave him the choice of arms, and will accept without discussion, without dispute, anything, even combat by drawing lots, which is always stupid, but with me different from other people, as I am sure to gain.” “Sure to gain!” repeated Beauchamp, looking with amazement at the count.
“Certainly,” said Monte Cristo, slightly shrugging his shoulders; “otherwise I would not fight with M. de Morcerf.
Only by a single line this evening at my house let me know the arms and the hour; I do not like to be kept waiting.” “Pistols, then, at eight o’clock, in the Bois de Vincennes,” said Beauchamp, quite disconcerted, not knowing if he was dealing with an arrogant braggadocio or a supernatural being.
“Now all that is settled, do let me see the performance, and tell your friend Albert not to come any more this evening; he will hurt himself with all his ill-chosen barbarisms: let him go home and go to sleep.” Beauchamp left the box, perfectly amazed.
Do you think Emmanuel would oblige me?” “I will answer for him, count.” “Well? that is all I require.
Tomorrow morning, at seven o’clock, you will be with me, will you not?” “We will.” “Hush, the curtain is rising.
The Night Monte Cristo waited, according to his usual custom, until Duprez had sung his famous “_Suivez-moi!_” then he rose and went out.
Morrel took leave of him at the door, renewing his promise to be with him the next morning at seven o’clock, and to bring Emmanuel.
No one who knew the count could mistake his expression when, on entering, he said: “Ali, bring me my pistols with the ivory cross.” Ali brought the box to his master, who examined the weapons with a solicitude very natural to a man who is about to intrust his life to a little powder and shot.
These were pistols of an especial pattern, which Monte Cristo had had made for target practice in his own room.
A cap was sufficient to drive out the bullet, and from the adjoining room no one would have suspected that the count was, as sportsmen would say, keeping his hand in.
He was just taking one up and looking for the point to aim at on a little iron plate which served him as a target, when his study door opened, and Baptistin entered.
Before he had spoken a word, the count saw in the next room a veiled woman, who had followed closely after Baptistin, and now, seeing the count with a pistol in his hand and swords on the table, rushed in.
Baptistin looked at his master, who made a sign to him, and he went out, closing the door after him.
“Who are you, madame?” said the count to the veiled woman. 40227m The stranger cast one look around her, to be certain that they were quite alone; then bending as if she would have knelt, and joining her hands, she said with an accent of despair: “Edmond, you will not kill my son!” The count retreated a step, uttered a slight exclamation, and let fall the pistol he held.
“What name did you pronounce then, Madame de Morcerf?” said he.
“Yours!” cried she, throwing back her veil,—“yours, which I alone, perhaps, have not forgotten.
“You see, Edmond, I am not mistaken, and have cause to say, ‘Spare my son!’” “And who told you, madame, that I have any hostile intentions against your son?” “No one, in truth; but a mother has twofold sight.
I guessed all; I followed him this evening to the Opera, and, concealed in a parquet box, have seen all.” “If you have seen all, madame, you know that the son of Fernand has publicly insulted me,” said Monte Cristo with awful calmness.
“Oh, for pity’s sake!” “You have seen that he would have thrown his glove in my face if Morrel, one of my friends, had not stopped him.” “Listen to me, my son has also guessed who you are,—he attributes his father’s misfortunes to you.” “Madame, you are mistaken, they are not misfortunes,—it is a punishment.
It is not I who strike M. de Morcerf; it is Providence which punishes him.” “And why do you represent Providence?” cried Mercédès.
“Why do you remember when it forgets?
What injury has Fernand Mondego done you in betraying Ali Tepelini?” “Ah, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “all this is an affair between the French captain and the daughter of Vasiliki.
And why were you alone?” 40231m “Because you had been arrested, Edmond, and were a prisoner.” “And why was I arrested?
Why was I a prisoner?” “I do not know,” said Mercédès.
It was Danglars’ letter to the king’s attorney, which the Count of Monte Cristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of Thomson & French, had taken from the file against Edmond Dantès, on the day he had paid the two hundred thousand francs to M. de Boville.
Mercédès read with terror the following lines: “The king’s attorney is informed by a friend to the throne and religion that one Edmond Dantès, second in command on board the _Pharaon_, this day arrived from Smyrna, after having touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, is the bearer of a letter from Murat to the usurper, and of another letter from the usurper to the Bonapartist club in Paris.
You do not know that I remained for fourteen years within a quarter of a league of you, in a dungeon in the Château d’If.
You do not know that every day of those fourteen years I renewed the vow of vengeance which I had made the first day; and yet I was not aware that you had married Fernand, my calumniator, and that my father had died of hunger!” “Can it be?” cried Mercédès, shuddering.
Compared with such things, what is the letter you have just read?—a lover’s deception, which the woman who has married that man ought certainly to forgive; but not so the lover who was to have married her.
Well, the French did not avenge themselves on the traitor, the Spaniards did not shoot the traitor, Ali in his tomb left the traitor unpunished; but I, betrayed, sacrificed, buried, have risen from my tomb, by the grace of God, to punish that man.
Her forehead almost touched the carpet, when the count sprang forward and raised her.
Then seated on a chair, she looked at the manly countenance of Monte Cristo, on which grief and hatred still impressed a threatening expression.
“Not crush that accursed race?” murmured he; “abandon my purpose at the moment of its accomplishment?
Impossible, madame, impossible!” “Edmond,” said the poor mother, who tried every means, “when I call you Edmond, why do you not call me Mercédès?” “Mercédès!” repeated Monte Cristo; “Mercédès!
Well yes, you are right; that name has still its charms, and this is the first time for a long period that I have pronounced it so distinctly.
Oh, Mercédès, I have uttered your name with the sigh of melancholy, with the groan of sorrow, with the last effort of despair; I have uttered it when frozen with cold, crouched on the straw in my dungeon; I have uttered it, consumed with heat, rolling on the stone floor of my prison.
Mercédès, I must revenge myself, for I suffered fourteen years,—fourteen years I wept, I cursed; now I tell you, Mercédès, I must revenge myself.” The count, fearing to yield to the entreaties of her he had so ardently loved, called his sufferings to the assistance of his hatred.
“Revenge yourself, then, Edmond,” cried the poor mother; “but let your vengeance fall on the culprits,—on him, on me, but not on my son!” “It is written in the good book,” said Monte Cristo, “that the sins of the fathers shall fall upon their children to the third and fourth generation.
Since God himself dictated those words to his prophet, why should I seek to make myself better than God?” “Edmond,” continued Mercédès, with her arms extended towards the count, “since I first knew you, I have adored your name, have respected your memory.
Edmond, my friend, do not compel me to tarnish that noble and pure image reflected incessantly on the mirror of my heart.
Edmond, if you knew all the prayers I have addressed to God for you while I thought you were living and since I have thought you must be dead!
I imagined your dead body buried at the foot of some gloomy tower, or cast to the bottom of a pit by hateful jailers, and I wept!
I had been told that you had endeavored to escape; that you had taken the place of another prisoner; that you had slipped into the winding sheet of a dead body; that you had been thrown alive from the top of the Château d’If, and that the cry you uttered as you dashed upon the rocks first revealed to your jailers that they were your murderers.
Well, Edmond, I swear to you, by the head of that son for whom I entreat your pity,—Edmond, for ten years I saw every night every detail of that frightful tragedy, and for ten years I heard every night the cry which awoke me, shuddering and cold.
The lion was daunted; the avenger was conquered.
Well, he shall live!” Mercédès uttered a cry which made the tears start from Monte Cristo’s eyes; but these tears disappeared almost instantaneously, for, doubtless, God had sent some angel to collect them—far more precious were they in his eyes than the richest pearls of Guzerat and Ophir.
Death is about to return to the tomb, the phantom to retire in darkness.” “What do you say, Edmond?” “I say, since you command me, Mercédès, I must die.” “Die? and why so?
Whence have you these ideas of death?” “You do not suppose that, publicly outraged in the face of a whole theatre, in the presence of your friends and those of your son—challenged by a boy who will glory in my forgiveness as if it were a victory—you do not suppose that I can for one moment wish to live.
What I most loved after you, Mercédès, was myself, my dignity, and that strength which rendered me superior to other men; that strength was my life.
While waiting his assistance I trust to your word; you have said that my son should live, have you not?” “Yes, madame, he shall live,” said Monte Cristo, surprised that without more emotion Mercédès had accepted the heroic sacrifice he made for her.
Mercédès extended her hand to the count.
Ah, believe me, Edmond, as I told you, I too have suffered much; I repeat, it is melancholy to pass one’s life without having one joy to recall, without preserving a single hope; but that proves that all is not yet over.
No, it is not finished; I feel it by what remains in my heart.
Oh, I repeat it, Edmond; what you have just done is beautiful—it is grand; it is sublime.” “Do you say so now, Mercédès?—then what would you say if you knew the extent of the sacrifice I make to you?
Monte Cristo pressed his forehead on his burning hands, as if his brain could no longer bear alone the weight of its thoughts.
“Edmond,” said Mercédès, “I have but one word more to say to you.” The count smiled bitterly.
“Edmond,” continued she, “you will see that if my face is pale, if my eyes are dull, if my beauty is gone; if Mercédès, in short, no longer resembles her former self in her features, you will see that her heart is still the same.
Adieu, then, Edmond; I have nothing more to ask of heaven—I have seen you again, and have found you as noble and as great as formerly you were.
Mercédès opened the door of the study and had disappeared before he had recovered from the painful and profound reverie into which his thwarted vengeance had plunged him.
The clock of the Invalides struck one when the carriage which conveyed Madame de Morcerf rolled away on the pavement of the Champs-Élysées, and made Monte Cristo raise his head.
“What a fool I was,” said he, “not to tear my heart out on the day when I resolved to avenge myself!” Chapter 90.
The Meeting After Mercédès had left Monte Cristo, he fell into profound gloom.
Around him and within him the flight of thought seemed to have stopped; his energetic mind slumbered, as the body does after extreme fatigue.
“What?” said he to himself, while the lamp and the wax lights were nearly burnt out, and the servants were waiting impatiently in the anteroom; “what? this edifice which I have been so long preparing, which I have reared with so much care and toil, is to be crushed by a single touch, a word, a breath!
Yes, this self, of whom I thought so much, of whom I was so proud, who had appeared so worthless in the dungeons of the Château d’If, and whom I had succeeded in making so great, will be but a lump of clay tomorrow.
Alas, it is not the death of the body I regret; for is not the destruction of the vital principle, the repose to which everything is tending, to which every unhappy being aspires,—is not this the repose of matter after which I so long sighed, and which I was seeking to attain by the painful process of starvation when Faria appeared in my dungeon?
No, it is not existence, then, that I regret, but the ruin of projects so slowly carried out, so laboriously framed.
Providence is now opposed to them, when I most thought it would be propitious.
It is not God’s will that they should be accomplished.
This burden, almost as heavy as a world, which I had raised, and I had thought to bear to the end, was too great for my strength, and I was compelled to lay it down in the middle of my career.
Oh, shall I then, again become a fatalist, whom fourteen years of despair and ten of hope had rendered a believer in Providence?
“And all this—all this, because my heart, which I thought dead, was only sleeping; because it has awakened and has begun to beat again, because I have yielded to the pain of the emotion excited in my breast by a woman’s voice.
“Yet,” continued the count, becoming each moment more absorbed in the anticipation of the dreadful sacrifice for the morrow, which Mercédès had accepted, “yet, it is impossible that so noble-minded a woman should thus through selfishness consent to my death when I am in the prime of life and strength; it is impossible that she can carry to such a point maternal love, or rather delirium.
There are virtues which become crimes by exaggeration.
No, she must have conceived some pathetic scene; she will come and throw herself between us; and what would be sublime here will there appear ridiculous.” The blush of pride mounted to the count’s forehead as this thought passed through his mind.
“Ridiculous?” repeated he; “and the ridicule will fall on me.
No, I would rather die.” By thus exaggerating to his own mind the anticipated ill-fortune of the next day, to which he had condemned himself by promising Mercédès to spare her son, the count at last exclaimed: “Folly, folly, folly!—to carry generosity so far as to put myself up as a mark for that young man to aim at.
He will never believe that my death was suicide; and yet it is important for the honor of my memory,—and this surely is not vanity, but a justifiable pride,—it is important the world should know that I have consented, by my free will, to stop my arm, already raised to strike, and that with the arm which has been so powerful against others I have struck myself.
It must be; it shall be.” Seizing a pen, he drew a paper from a secret drawer in his desk, and wrote at the bottom of the document (which was no other than his will, made since his arrival in Paris) a sort of codicil, clearly explaining the nature of his death.
I have during ten years considered myself the agent of thy vengeance, and other wretches, like Morcerf, Danglars, Villefort, even Morcerf himself, must not imagine that chance has freed them from their enemy.
He turned his head, looked around him, and saw no one; but the sound was repeated distinctly enough to convince him of its reality.
He arose, and quietly opening the door of the drawing-room, saw Haydée, who had fallen on a chair, with her arms hanging down and her beautiful head thrown back.
She had been standing at the door, to prevent his going out without seeing her, until sleep, which the young cannot resist, had overpowered her frame, wearied as she was with watching.
The noise of the door did not awaken her, and Monte Cristo gazed at her with affectionate regret.
“She remembered that she had a son,” said he; “and I forgot I had a daughter.” Then, shaking his head sorrowfully, “Poor Haydée,” said he; “she wished to see me, to speak to me; she has feared or guessed something.
These twenty millions are concealed in my grotto at Monte Cristo, of which Bertuccio knows the secret.
If his heart is free, and he will marry Haydée, the daughter of Ali Pasha of Yanina, whom I have brought up with the love of a father, and who has shown the love and tenderness of a daughter for me, he will thus accomplish my last wish.
This will has already constituted Haydée heiress of the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds in England, Austria, and Holland, furniture in my different palaces and houses, and which without the twenty millions and the legacies to my servants, may still amount to sixty millions.” 40241m He was finishing the last line when a cry behind him made him start, and the pen fell from his hand.
Why are you bequeathing all your fortune to me?
Are you going to leave me?” “I am going on a journey, dear child,” said Monte Cristo, with an expression of infinite tenderness and melancholy; “and if any misfortune should happen to me——” The count stopped.
“Well?” asked the young girl, with an authoritative tone the count had never observed before, and which startled him.
“Well, if any misfortune happen to me,” replied Monte Cristo, “I wish my daughter to be happy.” Haydée smiled sorrowfully, and shook her head.
“The wise man, my child, has said, ‘It is good to think of death.’” “Well, if you die,” said she, “bequeath your fortune to others, for if you die I shall require nothing;” and, taking the paper, she tore it in four pieces, and threw it into the middle of the room.
Then, the effort having exhausted her strength, she fell, not asleep this time, but fainting on the floor.
The count leaned over her and raised her in his arms; and seeing that sweet pale face, those lovely eyes closed, that beautiful form motionless and to all appearance lifeless, the idea occurred to him for the first time, that perhaps she loved him otherwise than as a daughter loves a father.
“Alas,” murmured he, with intense suffering, “I might, then, have been happy yet.” Then he carried Haydée to her room, resigned her to the care of her attendants, and returning to his study, which he shut quickly this time, he again copied the destroyed will.
As he was finishing, the sound of a cabriolet entering the yard was heard.
Monte Cristo approached the window, and saw Maximilian and Emmanuel alight.
A moment afterwards he heard a noise in the drawing-room, and went to open the door himself.
Morrel was there; he had come twenty minutes before the time appointed.
“I am perhaps come too soon, count,” said he, “but I frankly acknowledge that I have not closed my eyes all night, nor has anyone in my house.
I need to see you strong in your courageous assurance, to recover myself.” Monte Cristo could not resist this proof of affection; he not only extended his hand to the young man, but flew to him with open arms.
Good-morning, Emmanuel; you will come with me then, Maximilian?” “Did you doubt it?” said the young captain.
When I am dead, you will go and examine it.” “What?” said Morrel, “you dead?” “Yes; must I not be prepared for everything, dear friend?
But what did you do yesterday after you left me?” “I went to Tortoni’s, where, as I expected, I found Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.
He examined the bullets with which Monte Cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw that they were no larger than buckshot.
“It is astonishing,” said he.
“Look, Emmanuel.” Then turning towards Monte Cristo, “Count,” said he, “in the name of all that is dear to you, I entreat you not to kill Albert!—the unhappy youth has a mother.” “You are right,” said Monte Cristo; “and I have none.” These words were uttered in a tone which made Morrel shudder.
“You are the offended party, count.” “Doubtless; what does that imply?” “That you will fire first.” “I fire first?” “Oh, I obtained, or rather claimed that; we had conceded enough for them to yield us that.” “And at what distance?” “Twenty paces.” A smile of terrible import passed over the count’s lips.
“As I told you, my dear Morrel, M. de Morcerf will kill me.” Morrel looked at him in utter amazement.
“But what has happened, then, since last evening, count?” “The same thing that happened to Brutus the night before the battle of Philippi; I have seen a ghost.” “And that ghost——” “Told me, Morrel, that I had lived long enough.” Maximilian and Emmanuel looked at each other.
“Let us go,” said he; “it is five minutes past seven, and the appointment was for eight o’clock.” A carriage was in readiness at the door.
He had stopped a moment in the passage to listen at a door, and Maximilian and Emmanuel, who had considerately passed forward a few steps, thought they heard him answer by a sigh to a sob from within.
“Excuse me, sir,” said Baptistin, who had followed his master with indescribable terror, “but I think I see a carriage down there under the trees.” Monte Cristo sprang lightly from the carriage, and offered his hand to assist Emmanuel and Maximilian.
The latter retained the count’s hand between his.
“I like,” said he, “to feel a hand like this, when its owner relies on the goodness of his cause.” “It seems to me,” said Emmanuel, “that I see two young men down there, who are evidently, waiting.” Monte Cristo drew Morrel a step or two behind his brother-in-law.
“Maximilian,” said he, “are your affections disengaged?” Morrel looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment.
“I do not seek your confidence, my dear friend.
I only ask you a simple question; answer it;—that is all I require.” “I love a young girl, count.” “Do you love her much?” “More than my life.” “Another hope defeated!” said the count.
Then, with a sigh, “Poor Haydée!” murmured he.
“To tell the truth, count, if I knew less of you, I should think that you were less brave than you are.” “Because I sigh when thinking of someone I am leaving?
Moreover, do not alarm yourself, Morrel; this weakness, if it is such, is betrayed to you alone.
I know the world is a drawing-room, from which we must retire politely and honestly; that is, with a bow, and our debts of honor paid.” “That is to the purpose.
I hope these gentlemen have theirs.” “I will inquire,” said Morrel.
“Do; but make no treaty—you understand me?” “You need not fear.” Morrel advanced towards Beauchamp and Château-Renaud, who, seeing his intention, came to meet him.
The three young men bowed to each other courteously, if not affably.
“Excuse me, gentlemen,” said Morrel, “but I do not see M. de Morcerf.” “He sent us word this morning,” replied Château-Renaud, “that he would meet us on the ground.” “Ah,” said Morrel.
Beauchamp pulled out his watch.
“It is only five minutes past eight,” said he to Morrel; “there is not much time lost yet.” “Oh, I made no allusion of that kind,” replied Morrel.
“There is a carriage coming,” said Château-Renaud.
It advanced rapidly along one of the avenues leading towards the open space where they were assembled.
“You are doubtless provided with pistols, gentlemen?
M. de Monte Cristo yields his right of using his.” “We had anticipated this kindness on the part of the count,” said Beauchamp, “and I have brought some weapons which I bought eight or ten days since, thinking to want them on a similar occasion.
Beauchamp, if you assure me that M. de Morcerf does not know these pistols, you may readily believe that your word will be quite sufficient.” “Gentlemen,” said Château-Renaud, “it is not Morcerf coming in that carriage;—faith, it is Franz and Debray!” The two young men he announced were indeed approaching.
“What chance brings you here, gentlemen?” said Château-Renaud, shaking hands with each of them.
“Because,” said Debray, “Albert sent this morning to request us to come.” Beauchamp and Château-Renaud exchanged looks of astonishment.
“I think I understand his reason,” said Morrel.
“What is it?” “Yesterday afternoon I received a letter from M. de Morcerf, begging me to attend the Opera.” “And I,” said Debray.
“And we, too,” added Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.
“Having wished you all to witness the challenge, he now wishes you to be present at the combat.” “Exactly so,” said the young men; “you have probably guessed right.” “But, after all these arrangements, he does not come himself,” said Château-Renaud.
“Albert is ten minutes after time.” “There he comes,” said Beauchamp, “on horseback, at full gallop, followed by a servant.” “How imprudent,” said Château-Renaud, “to come on horseback to fight a duel with pistols, after all the instructions I had given him.” “And besides,” said Beauchamp, “with a collar above his cravat, an open coat and white waistcoat!
Why has he not painted a spot upon his heart?—it would have been more simple.” Meanwhile Albert had arrived within ten paces of the group formed by the five young men.
A shade of melancholy gravity overspread his countenance, which was not natural to him.
“I thank you, gentlemen,” said he, “for having complied with my request; I feel extremely grateful for this mark of friendship.” Morrel had stepped back as Morcerf approached, and remained at a short distance.
Come, there cannot be too many.” 40248m “Sir,” said Maximilian, “you are not perhaps aware that I am M. de Monte Cristo’s friend?” “I was not sure, but I thought it might be so.
So much the better; the more honorable men there are here the better I shall be satisfied.” “M.
Morrel,” said Château-Renaud, “will you apprise the Count of Monte Cristo that M. de Morcerf is arrived, and we are at his disposal?” Morrel was preparing to fulfil his commission.
Beauchamp had meanwhile drawn the box of pistols from the carriage.
“Stop, gentlemen,” said Albert; “I have two words to say to the Count of Monte Cristo.” “In private?” asked Morrel.
“No, sir; before all who are here.” Albert’s witnesses looked at each other.
Franz and Debray exchanged some words in a whisper, and Morrel, rejoiced at this unexpected incident, went to fetch the count, who was walking in a retired path with Emmanuel.
“I do not know, but he wishes to speak to you.” “Ah?” said Monte Cristo, “I trust he is not going to tempt me by some fresh insult!” “I do not think that such is his intention,” said Morrel.
The count advanced, accompanied by Maximilian and Emmanuel.
His calm and serene look formed a singular contrast to Albert’s grief-stricken face, who approached also, followed by the other four young men.
“Approach, gentlemen,” said Albert; “I wish you not to lose one word of what I am about to have the honor of saying to the Count of Monte Cristo, for it must be repeated by you to all who will listen to it, strange as it may appear to you.” “Proceed, sir,” said the count.
“Sir,” said Albert, at first with a tremulous voice, but which gradually became firmer, “I reproached you with exposing the conduct of M. de Morcerf in Epirus, for guilty as I knew he was, I thought you had no right to punish him; but I have since learned that you had that right.
As for Monte Cristo, his eyes slowly rose towards heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude.
He could not understand how Albert’s fiery nature, of which he had seen so much among the Roman bandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation.
He recognized the influence of Mercédès, and saw why her noble heart had not opposed the sacrifice she knew beforehand would be useless.
“Now, sir,” said Albert, “if you think my apology sufficient, pray give me your hand.
Next to the merit of infallibility which you appear to possess, I rank that of candidly acknowledging a fault.
But this confession concerns me only.
An angel alone could have saved one of us from death—that angel came from heaven, if not to make us friends (which, alas, fatality renders impossible), at least to make us esteem each other.” Monte Cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lips half open, extended to Albert a hand which the latter pressed with a sentiment resembling respectful fear.
“Gentlemen,” said he, “M. de Monte Cristo receives my apology.
Hasty actions are generally bad ones.
Now my fault is repaired.
I hope the world will not call me cowardly for acting as my conscience dictated.
But if anyone should entertain a false opinion of me,” added he, drawing himself up as if he would challenge both friends and enemies, “I shall endeavor to correct his mistake.” “What happened during the night?” asked Beauchamp of Château-Renaud; “we appear to make a very sorry figure here.” “In truth, what Albert has just done is either very despicable or very noble,” replied the baron.
“The Count of Monte Cristo acts dishonorably to M. de Morcerf, and is justified by his son!
Had I ten Yaninas in my family, I should only consider myself the more bound to fight ten times.” As for Monte Cristo, his head was bent down, his arms were powerless.
“Providence still,” murmured he; “now only am I fully convinced of being the emissary of God!” Chapter 91.
Mother and Son The Count of Monte Cristo bowed to the five young men with a melancholy and dignified smile, and got into his carriage with Maximilian and Emmanuel.
Albert, Beauchamp, and Château-Renaud remained alone.
Albert looked at his two friends, not timidly, but in a way that appeared to ask their opinion of what he had just done.
“Indeed, my dear friend,” said Beauchamp first, who had either the most feeling or the least dissimulation, “allow me to congratulate you; this is a very unhoped-for conclusion of a very disagreeable affair.” Albert remained silent and wrapped in thought.
Château-Renaud contented himself with tapping his boot with his flexible cane.
“Are we not going?” said he, after this embarrassing silence.
“When you please,” replied Beauchamp; “allow me only to compliment M. de Morcerf, who has given proof today of rare chivalric generosity.” “Oh, yes,” said Château-Renaud.
“It is magnificent,” continued Beauchamp, “to be able to exercise so much self-control!” “Assuredly; as for me, I should have been incapable of it,” said Château-Renaud, with most significant coolness.
May I give you a friendly counsel?
Petersburg—calm countries, where the point of honor is better understood than among our hot-headed Parisians.
Seek quietude and oblivion, so that you may return peaceably to France after a few years.
Am I not right, M. de Château-Renaud?” 40252m “That is quite my opinion,” said the gentleman; “nothing induces serious duels so much as a duel forsworn.” “Thank you, gentlemen,” replied Albert, with a smile of indifference; “I shall follow your advice—not because you give it, but because I had before intended to quit France.
I thank you equally for the service you have rendered me in being my seconds.
It is deeply engraved on my heart, and, after what you have just said, I remember that only.” Château-Renaud and Beauchamp looked at each other; the impression was the same on both of them, and the tone in which Morcerf had just expressed his thanks was so determined that the position would have become embarrassing for all if the conversation had continued.
“Good-bye, Albert,” said Beauchamp suddenly, carelessly extending his hand to the young man.
The latter did not appear to arouse from his lethargy; in fact, he did not notice the offered hand.
“Good-bye,” said Château-Renaud in his turn, keeping his little cane in his left hand, and saluting with his right.
Albert’s lips scarcely whispered “Good-bye,” but his look was more explicit; it expressed a whole poem of restrained anger, proud disdain, and generous indignation.
He preserved his melancholy and motionless position for some time after his two friends had regained their carriage; then suddenly unfastening his horse from the little tree to which his servant had tied it, he mounted and galloped off in the direction of Paris.
In a quarter of an hour he was entering the house in the Rue du Helder.
As he alighted, he thought he saw his father’s pale face behind the curtain of the count’s bedroom.
Albert turned away his head with a sigh, and went to his own apartments.
He cast one lingering look on all the luxuries which had rendered life so easy and so happy since his infancy; he looked at the pictures, whose faces seemed to smile, and the landscapes, which appeared painted in brighter colors.
Then he took away his mother’s portrait, with its oaken frame, leaving the gilt frame from which he took it black and empty.
At the beginning of this work, his servant, notwithstanding orders to the contrary, came to his room.
“What do you want?” asked he, with a more sorrowful than angry tone.
“Pardon me, sir,” replied the valet; “you had forbidden me to disturb you, but the Count of Morcerf has called me.” “Well!” said Albert.
“I did not like to go to him without first seeing you.” “Why?” “Because the count is doubtless aware that I accompanied you to the meeting this morning.” 40254m “It is probable,” said Albert.
“And since he has sent for me, it is doubtless to question me on what happened there.
What must I answer?” “The truth.” “Then I shall say the duel did not take place?” “You will say I apologized to the Count of Monte Cristo.
Go.” The valet bowed and retired, and Albert returned to his inventory.
As he was finishing this work, the sound of horses prancing in the yard, and the wheels of a carriage shaking his window, attracted his attention.
He approached the window, and saw his father get into it, and drive away.
The door was scarcely closed when Albert bent his steps to his mother’s room; and, no one being there to announce him, he advanced to her bedchamber, and distressed by what he saw and guessed, stopped for one moment at the door.
As if the same idea had animated these two beings, Mercédès was doing the same in her apartments that he had just done in his.
Everything was in order,—laces, dresses, jewels, linen, money, all were arranged in the drawers, and the countess was carefully collecting the keys.
Albert saw all these preparations and understood them, and exclaiming, “My mother!” he threw his arms around her neck.
The artist who could have depicted the expression of these two countenances would certainly have made of them a beautiful picture.
All these proofs of an energetic resolution, which Albert did not fear on his own account, alarmed him for his mother.
“Oh, my mother!” exclaimed Albert, so overcome he could scarcely speak; “it is not the same with you and me—you cannot have made the same resolution I have, for I have come to warn you that I bid adieu to your house, and—and to you.” “I also,” replied Mercédès, “am going, and I acknowledge I had depended on your accompanying me; have I deceived myself?” “Mother,” said Albert with firmness.
I must live henceforth without rank and fortune, and to begin this hard apprenticeship I must borrow from a friend the loaf I shall eat until I have earned one.
Oh, do not say so; it will break my resolutions.” “But not mine, mother,” replied Albert.
“I am young and strong; I believe I am courageous, and since yesterday I have learned the power of will.
Alas, my dear mother, some have suffered so much, and yet live, and have raised a new fortune on the ruin of all the promises of happiness which heaven had made them—on the fragments of all the hope which God had given them!
I have seen that, mother; I know that from the gulf in which their enemies have plunged them they have risen with so much vigor and glory that in their turn they have ruled their former conquerors, and have punished them.
You had friends, Albert; break off their acquaintance.
But do not despair; you have life before you, my dear Albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two years old; and as a pure heart like yours wants a spotless name, take my father’s—it was Herrera.
I am sure, my dear Albert, whatever may be your career, you will soon render that name illustrious.
Then, my son, return to the world still more brilliant because of your former sorrows; and if I am wrong, still let me cherish these hopes, for I have no future to look forward to.
For me the grave opens when I pass the threshold of this house.” “I will fulfil all your wishes, my dear mother,” said the young man.
“Yes, I share your hopes; the anger of Heaven will not pursue us, since you are pure and I am innocent.
But, since our resolution is formed, let us act promptly.
M. de Morcerf went out about half an hour ago; the opportunity is favorable to avoid an explanation.” “I am ready, my son,” said Mercédès.
Albert ran to fetch a carriage.
He recollected that there was a small furnished house to let in the Rue des Saints-Pères, where his mother would find a humble but decent lodging, and thither he intended conducting the countess.
As the carriage stopped at the door, and Albert was alighting, a man approached and gave him a letter.
Albert recognized the bearer.
“From the count,” said Bertuccio.
Albert took the letter, opened, and read it, then looked round for Bertuccio, but he was gone.
He returned to Mercédès with tears in his eyes and heaving breast, and without uttering a word he gave her the letter.
Mercédès read: “Albert,—While showing you that I have discovered your plans, I hope also to convince you of my delicacy.
Keep the struggle for yourself, bear all the suffering, but spare her the trial of poverty which must accompany your first efforts; for she deserves not even the shadow of the misfortune which has this day fallen on her, and Providence is not willing that the innocent should suffer for the guilty.
I know you are going to leave the Rue du Helder without taking anything with you.
Do not seek to know how I discovered it; I know it—that is sufficient.
Twenty-four years ago I returned, proud and joyful, to my country.
I had a betrothed, Albert, a lovely girl whom I adored, and I was bringing to my betrothed a hundred and fifty louis, painfully amassed by ceaseless toil.
This money was for her; I destined it for her, and, knowing the treachery of the sea I buried our treasure in the little garden of the house my father lived in at Marseilles, on the Allées de Meilhan.
A short time since I passed through Marseilles, and went to see the old place, which revived so many painful recollections; and in the evening I took a spade and dug in the corner of the garden where I had concealed my treasure.
The iron box was there—no one had touched it—under a beautiful fig-tree my father had planted the day I was born, which overshadowed the spot.
Well, Albert, this money, which was formerly designed to promote the comfort and tranquillity of the woman I adored, may now, through strange and painful circumstances, be devoted to the same purpose.
“Oh, feel for me, who could offer millions to that poor woman, but who return her only the piece of black bread forgotten under my poor roof since the day I was torn from her I loved.
Mercédès turned her eyes with an ineffable look towards heaven.
“I accept it,” said she; “he has a right to pay the dowry, which I shall take with me to some convent!” Putting the letter in her bosom, she took her son’s arm, and with a firmer step than she even herself expected she went downstairs.
The Suicide Meanwhile Monte Cristo had also returned to town with Emmanuel and Maximilian.
Their return was cheerful.
Emmanuel did not conceal his joy at the peaceful termination of the affair, and was loud in his expressions of delight.
Morrel, in a corner of the carriage, allowed his brother-in-law’s gayety to expend itself in words, while he felt equal inward joy, which, however, betrayed itself only in his countenance.
At the Barrière du Trône they met Bertuccio, who was waiting there, motionless as a sentinel at his post.
Monte Cristo put his head out of the window, exchanged a few words with him in a low tone, and the steward disappeared.
“Count,” said Emmanuel, when they were at the end of the Place Royale, “put me down at my door, that my wife may not have a single moment of needless anxiety on my account or yours.” “If it were not ridiculous to make a display of our triumph, said Morrel, I would invite the count to our house; besides that, he doubtless has some trembling heart to comfort.
So we will take leave of our friend, and let him hasten home.” “Stop a moment,” said Monte Cristo; “do not let me lose both my companions.
Return, Emmanuel, to your charming wife, and present my best compliments to her; and do you, Morrel, accompany me to the Champs-Élysées.” “Willingly,” said Maximilian; “particularly as I have business in that quarter.” “Shall we wait breakfast for you?” asked Emmanuel.
The door was closed, and the carriage proceeded.
“Have you not thought so?” “Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “for that reason I wished to keep you near me.” “It is miraculous!” continued Morrel, answering his own thoughts.
“What has just happened.” “Yes,” said the Count, “you are right—it is miraculous.” “For Albert is brave,” resumed Morrel.
“Very brave,” said Monte Cristo; “I have seen him sleep with a sword suspended over his head.” “And I know he has fought two duels,” said Morrel.
“How can you reconcile that with his conduct this morning?” “All owing to your influence,” replied Monte Cristo, smiling.
“Come,” said the count mildly, “do not entertain the prejudices of ordinary men, Morrel!
“No; I must leave you at ten o’clock.” “Your engagement was for breakfast, then?” said the count.
“Still you must breakfast somewhere.” “But if I am not hungry?” said the young man.
“Oh,” said the count, “I only know two things which destroy the appetite,—grief—and as I am happy to see you very cheerful, it is not that—and love.
Now after what you told me this morning of your heart, I may believe——” “Well, count,” replied Morrel gayly, “I will not dispute it.” “But you will not make me your confidant, Maximilian?” said the count, in a tone which showed how gladly he would have been admitted to the secret.
“I showed you this morning that I had a heart, did I not, count?” Monte Cristo only answered by extending his hand to the young man.
When I need your assistance, and the moment arrives, I will come to you, count.” “Well, I rely upon your promise.
Monte Cristo opened the carriage-door, Morrel sprang out on the pavement, Bertuccio was waiting on the steps.
Morrel disappeared down the Avenue de Marigny, and Monte Cristo hastened to join Bertuccio.
“And her son?” “Florentin, his valet, thinks he is going to do the same.” “Come this way.” Monte Cristo took Bertuccio into his study, wrote the letter we have seen, and gave it to the steward.
“But first, let Haydée be informed that I have returned.” “Here I am,” said the young girl, who at the sound of the carriage had run downstairs and whose face was radiant with joy at seeing the count return safely.
Every transport of a daughter finding a father, all the delight of a mistress seeing an adored lover, were felt by Haydée during the first moments of this meeting, which she had so eagerly expected.
Doubtless, although less evident, Monte Cristo’s joy was not less intense.
Joy to hearts which have suffered long is like the dew on the ground after a long drought; both the heart and the ground absorb that beneficent moisture falling on them, and nothing is outwardly apparent.
Monte Cristo was beginning to think, what he had not for a long time dared to believe, that there were two Mercédès in the world, and he might yet be happy.
His eye, elate with happiness, was reading eagerly the tearful gaze of Haydée, when suddenly the door opened.
“M. de Morcerf!” said Baptistin, as if that name sufficed for his excuse.
In fact, the count’s face brightened.
“By my father’s tomb,” said he, extending his hand over the head of the young girl, “I swear to you, Haydée, that if any misfortune happens, it will not be to me.” “I believe you, my lord, as implicitly as if God had spoken to me,” said the young girl, presenting her forehead to him.
Monte Cristo pressed on that pure beautiful forehead a kiss which made two hearts throb at once, the one violently, the other secretly.
“Oh,” murmured the count, “shall I then be permitted to love again?
Ask M. de Morcerf into the drawing-room,” said he to Baptistin, while he led the beautiful Greek girl to a private staircase.
We must explain this visit, which although expected by Monte Cristo, is unexpected to our readers.
While Mercédès, as we have said, was making a similar inventory of her property to Albert’s, while she was arranging her jewels, shutting her drawers, collecting her keys, to leave everything in perfect order, she did not perceive a pale and sinister face at a glass door which threw light into the passage, from which everything could be both seen and heard.
He who was thus looking, without being heard or seen, probably heard and saw all that passed in Madame de Morcerf’s apartments.
From that glass door the pale-faced man went to the count’s bedroom and raised with a constricted hand the curtain of a window overlooking the courtyard.
He remained there ten minutes, motionless and dumb, listening to the beating of his own heart.
It was then Albert, returning from his meeting with the count, perceived his father watching for his arrival behind a curtain, and turned aside.
The count’s eye expanded; he knew Albert had insulted the count dreadfully, and that in every country in the world such an insult would lead to a deadly duel.
Albert returned safely—then the count was revenged.
An indescribable ray of joy illumined that wretched countenance like the last ray of the sun before it disappears behind the clouds which bear the aspect, not of a downy couch, but of a tomb.
But as we have said, he waited in vain for his son to come to his apartment with the account of his triumph.
He easily understood why his son did not come to see him before he went to avenge his father’s honor; but when that was done, why did not his son come and throw himself into his arms?
It was then, when the count could not see Albert, that he sent for his servant, who he knew was authorized not to conceal anything from him.
Ten minutes afterwards, General Morcerf was seen on the steps in a black coat with a military collar, black pantaloons, and black gloves.
He had apparently given previous orders, for as he reached the bottom step his carriage came from the coach-house ready for him.
The valet threw into the carriage his military cloak, in which two swords were wrapped, and, shutting the door, he took his seat by the side of the coachman.
The coachman stooped down for his orders.
M. de Morcerf opened the door himself, and as the carriage rolled away he passed up the walk, rang, and entered the open door with his servant.
A moment afterwards, Baptistin announced the Count of Morcerf to Monte Cristo, and the latter, leading Haydée aside, ordered that Morcerf be asked into the drawing-room.
The general was pacing the room the third time when, in turning, he perceived Monte Cristo at the door.
“Ah, it is M. de Morcerf,” said Monte Cristo quietly; “I thought I had not heard aright.” “Yes, it is I,” said the count, whom a frightful contraction of the lips prevented from articulating freely.
“May I know the cause which procures me the pleasure of seeing M. de Morcerf so early?” “Had you not a meeting with my son this morning?” asked the general.
I came to tell you that I hate you instinctively; that it seems as if I had always known you, and always hated you; and, in short, since the young people of the present day will not fight, it remains for us to do so.
Do you think so, sir?” “Certainly.
And when I told you I had foreseen the result, it is the honor of your visit I alluded to.” “So much the better.
Are you prepared?” “Yes, sir.” “You know that we shall fight till one of us is dead,” said the general, whose teeth were clenched with rage. 40262m “Until one of us dies,” repeated Monte Cristo, moving his head slightly up and down.
“Let us start, then; we need no witnesses.” “Very true,” said Monte Cristo; “it is unnecessary, we know each other so well!” “On the contrary,” said the count, “we know so little of each other.” “Indeed?” said Monte Cristo, with the same indomitable coolness; “let us see.
Are you not the soldier Fernand who deserted on the eve of the battle of Waterloo?
Are you not the Lieutenant Fernand who served as guide and spy to the French army in Spain?
Are you not the Captain Fernand who betrayed, sold, and murdered his benefactor, Ali?
And have not all these Fernands, united, made Lieutenant-General, the Count of Morcerf, peer of France?” “Oh,” cried the general, as if branded with a hot iron, “wretch,—to reproach me with my shame when about, perhaps, to kill me!
No, I did not say I was a stranger to you.
I know well, demon, that you have penetrated into the darkness of the past, and that you have read, by the light of what torch I know not, every page of my life; but perhaps I may be more honorable in my shame than you under your pompous coverings.
No—no, I am aware you know me; but I know you only as an adventurer sewn up in gold and jewellery.
You call yourself, in Paris, the Count of Monte Cristo; in Italy, Sinbad the Sailor; in Malta, I forget what.
But it is your real name I want to know, in the midst of your hundred names, that I may pronounce it when we meet to fight, at the moment when I plunge my sword through your heart.” The Count of Monte Cristo turned dreadfully pale; his eye seemed to burn with a devouring fire.
He leaped towards a dressing-room near his bedroom, and in less than a moment, tearing off his cravat, his coat and waistcoat, he put on a sailor’s jacket and hat, from beneath which rolled his long black hair.
He returned thus, formidable and implacable, advancing with his arms crossed on his breast, towards the general, who could not understand why he had disappeared, but who on seeing him again, and feeling his teeth chatter and his legs sink under him, drew back, and only stopped when he found a table to support his clenched hand.
“Fernand,” cried he, “of my hundred names I need only tell you one, to overwhelm you!
But you guess it now, do you not?—or, rather, you remember it?
He stopped at a short distance from the house and alighted.
The door was wide open, a hackney-coach was standing in the middle of the yard—a strange sight before so noble a mansion; the count looked at it with terror, but without daring to inquire its meaning, he rushed towards his apartment.
They passed close by the unhappy being, who, concealed behind the damask curtain, almost felt Mercédès dress brush past him, and his son’s warm breath, pronouncing these words: “Courage, mother!
Come, this is no longer our home!” The words died away, the steps were lost in the distance.
The general drew himself up, clinging to the curtain; he uttered the most dreadful sob which ever escaped from the bosom of a father abandoned at the same time by his wife and son.
He soon heard the clatter of the iron step of the hackney-coach, then the coachman’s voice, and then the rolling of the heavy vehicle shook the windows.
He darted to his bedroom to see once more all he had loved in the world; but the hackney-coach drove on and the head of neither Mercédès nor her son appeared at the window to take a last look at the house or the deserted father and husband.
And at the very moment when the wheels of that coach crossed the gateway a report was heard, and a thick smoke escaped through one of the panes of the window, which was broken by the explosion. 40270m Chapter 93.
Valentine We may easily conceive where Morrel’s appointment was.
On leaving Monte Cristo he walked slowly towards Villefort’s; we say slowly, for Morrel had more than half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he had hastened to take leave of Monte Cristo because he wished to be alone with his thoughts.
He knew his time well—the hour when Valentine was giving Noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to be disturbed in the performance of this pious duty.
Noirtier and Valentine had given him leave to go twice a week, and he was now availing himself of that permission.
He arrived; Valentine was expecting him.
Uneasy and almost crazed, she seized his hand and led him to her grandfather.
This uneasiness, amounting almost to frenzy, arose from the report Morcerf’s adventure had made in the world, for the affair at the Opera was generally known.
No one at Villefort’s doubted that a duel would ensue from it.
Valentine, with her woman’s instinct, guessed that Morrel would be Monte Cristo’s second, and from the young man’s well-known courage and his great affection for the count, she feared that he would not content himself with the passive part assigned to him.
We may easily understand how eagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and received; and Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes of his beloved, when she knew that the termination of this affair was as happy as it was unexpected.
“Now,” said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down near her grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,—“now let us talk about our own affairs.
“Oh, whatever may be M.
Noirtier’s reason,” answered Morrel, “I can readily believe it to be a good one.” “An excellent one,” said Valentine.
“He pretends the air of the Faubourg Saint-Honoré is not good for me.” “Indeed?” said Morrel; “in that M.
Noirtier may be right; you have not seemed to be well for the last fortnight.” “Not very,” said Valentine.
“And grandpapa has become my physician, and I have the greatest confidence in him, because he knows everything.” “Do you then really suffer?” asked Morrel quickly.
“Oh, it must not be called suffering; I feel a general uneasiness, that is all.
I have lost my appetite, and my stomach feels as if it were struggling to get accustomed to something.” Noirtier did not lose a word of what Valentine said.
“And what treatment do you adopt for this singular complaint?” “A very simple one,” said Valentine.
“I swallow every morning a spoonful of the mixture prepared for my grandfather.
When I say one spoonful, I began by one—now I take four.
Grandpapa says it is a panacea.” Valentine smiled, but it was evident that she suffered.
Maximilian, in his devotedness, gazed silently at her.
She was very beautiful, but her usual pallor had increased; her eyes were more brilliant than ever, and her hands, which were generally white like mother-of-pearl, now more resembled wax, to which time was adding a yellowish hue.
From Valentine the young man looked towards Noirtier.
The latter watched with strange and deep interest the young girl, absorbed by her affection, and he also, like Morrel, followed those traces of inward suffering which was so little perceptible to a common observer that they escaped the notice of everyone but the grandfather and the lover.
“But,” said Morrel, “I thought this mixture, of which you now take four spoonfuls, was prepared for M.
Noirtier?” “I know it is very bitter,” said Valentine; “so bitter, that all I drink afterwards appears to have the same taste.” Noirtier looked inquiringly at his granddaughter.
“Yes, grandpapa,” said Valentine; “it is so.
Just now, before I came down to you, I drank a glass of sugared water; I left half, because it seemed so bitter.” Noirtier turned pale, and made a sign that he wished to speak.
Valentine rose to fetch the dictionary.
Noirtier watched her with evident anguish.
In fact, the blood was rushing to the young girl’s head already, her cheeks were becoming red.
“Oh,” cried she, without losing any of her cheerfulness, “this is singular!
“The sun is not shining,” said Morrel, more alarmed by Noirtier’s expression than by Valentine’s indisposition.
“Cheer up,” said she to Noirtier.
“Do not be alarmed, Maximilian; it is nothing, and has already passed away.
Do I not hear a carriage in the courtyard?” She opened Noirtier’s door, ran to a window in the passage, and returned hastily.
“Yes,” said she, “it is Madame Danglars and her daughter, who have come to call on us.
Good-bye;—I must run away, for they would send here for me, or, rather, farewell till I see you again.
Stay with grandpapa, Maximilian; I promise you not to persuade them to stay.” 40274m Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascend the little staircase which led both to Madame de Villefort’s apartments and to hers.
As soon as she was gone, Noirtier made a sign to Morrel to take the dictionary.
Morrel obeyed; guided by Valentine, he had learned how to understand the old man quickly.
The servant soon returned.
The decanter and the glass were completely empty.
Noirtier made a sign that he wished to speak.
“Why are the glass and decanter empty?” asked he; “Valentine said she only drank half the glassful.” The translation of this new question occupied another five minutes.
“I do not know,” said the servant, “but the housemaid is in Mademoiselle Valentine’s room: perhaps she has emptied them.” “Ask her,” said Morrel, translating Noirtier’s thought this time by his look.
The servant went out, but returned almost immediately.
“Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the room to go to Madame de Villefort’s,” said he; “and in passing, as she was thirsty, she drank what remained in the glass; as for the decanter, Master Edward had emptied that to make a pond for his ducks.” Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as a gambler does who stakes his all on one stroke.
It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whom Valentine had seen; they had been ushered into Madame de Villefort’s room, who had said she would receive them there.
That is why Valentine passed through her room, which was on a level with Valentine’s, and only separated from it by Edward’s.
The two ladies entered the drawing-room with that sort of official stiffness which preludes a formal communication.
Among worldly people manner is contagious.
Madame de Villefort received them with equal solemnity.
Valentine entered at this moment, and the formalities were resumed.
“My dear friend,” said the baroness, while the two young people were shaking hands, “I and Eugénie are come to be the first to announce to you the approaching marriage of my daughter with Prince Cavalcanti.” Danglars kept up the title of prince.
The popular banker found that it answered better than count.
“Allow me to present you my sincere congratulations,” replied Madame de Villefort.
“Prince Cavalcanti appears to be a young man of rare qualities.” 40276m “Listen,” said the baroness, smiling; “speaking to you as a friend I can say that the prince does not yet appear all he will be.
He has about him a little of that foreign manner by which French persons recognize, at first sight, the Italian or German nobleman.
Besides, he gives evidence of great kindness of disposition, much keenness of wit, and as to suitability, M.
Danglars assures me that his fortune is majestic—that is his word.” “And then,” said Eugénie, while turning over the leaves of Madame de Villefort’s album, “add that you have taken a great fancy to the young man.” “And,” said Madame de Villefort, “I need not ask you if you share that fancy.” “I?” replied Eugénie with her usual candor.
My wish was not to confine myself to domestic cares, or the caprices of any man, but to be an artist, and consequently free in heart, in person, and in thought.” Eugénie pronounced these words with so firm a tone that the color mounted to Valentine’s cheeks.
The timid girl could not understand that vigorous nature which appeared to have none of the timidities of woman.
“At any rate,” said she, “since I am to be married whether I will or not, I ought to be thankful to Providence for having released me from my engagement with M.
Albert de Morcerf, or I should this day have been the wife of a dishonored man.” “It is true,” said the baroness, with that strange simplicity sometimes met with among fashionable ladies, and of which plebeian intercourse can never entirely deprive them,—“it is very true that had not the Morcerfs hesitated, my daughter would have married Monsieur Albert.
The general depended much on it; he even came to force M.
We have had a narrow escape.” “But,” said Valentine, timidly, “does all the father’s shame revert upon the son?
Monsieur Albert appears to me quite innocent of the treason charged against the general.” “Excuse me,” said the implacable young girl, “Monsieur Albert claims and well deserves his share.
It appears that after having challenged M. de Monte Cristo at the Opera yesterday, he apologized on the ground today.” “Impossible,” said Madame de Villefort.
“Ah, my dear friend,” said Madame Danglars, with the same simplicity we before noticed, “it is a fact.
Debray, who was present at the explanation.” Valentine also knew the truth, but she did not answer.
A single word had reminded her that Morrel was expecting her in M.
Deeply engaged with a sort of inward contemplation, Valentine had ceased for a moment to join in the conversation.
She would, indeed, have found it impossible to repeat what had been said the last few minutes, when suddenly Madame Danglars’ hand, pressed on her arm, aroused her from her lethargy.
“What is it?” said she, starting at Madame Danglars’ touch as she would have done from an electric shock.
“It is, my dear Valentine,” said the baroness, “that you are, doubtless, suffering.” 40280m “I?” said the young girl, passing her hand across her burning forehead.
“Yes, look at yourself in that glass; you have turned pale and then red successively, three or four times in one minute.” “Indeed,” cried Eugénie, “you are very pale!” “Oh, do not be alarmed; I have been so for many days.” Artless as she was, the young girl knew that this was an opportunity to leave, and besides, Madame de Villefort came to her assistance.
“Retire, Valentine,” said she; “you are really suffering, and these ladies will excuse you; drink a glass of pure water, it will restore you.” Valentine kissed Eugénie, bowed to Madame Danglars, who had already risen to take her leave, and went out.
“That poor child,” said Madame de Villefort when Valentine was gone, “she makes me very uneasy, and I should not be astonished if she had some serious illness.” Meanwhile, Valentine, in a sort of excitement which she could not quite understand, had crossed Edward’s room without noticing some trick of the child, and through her own had reached the little staircase.
She was within three steps of the bottom; she already heard Morrel’s voice, when suddenly a cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened foot missed the step, her hands had no power to hold the baluster, and falling against the wall she lost her balance wholly and toppled to the floor.
Morrel bounded to the door, opened it, and found Valentine stretched out at the bottom of the stairs.
Valentine opened her eyes.
“Oh, what a clumsy thing I am,” said she with feverish volubility; “I don’t know my way.
I forgot there were three more steps before the landing.” “You have hurt yourself, perhaps,” said Morrel.
“What can I do for you, Valentine?” Valentine looked around her; she saw the deepest terror depicted in Noirtier’s eyes.
“Don’t worry, dear grandpapa,” said she, endeavoring to smile; “it is nothing—it is nothing; I was giddy, that is all.” “Another attack of giddiness,” said Morrel, clasping his hands.
“Oh, attend to it, Valentine, I entreat you.” “But no,” said Valentine,—“no, I tell you it is all past, and it was nothing.
Now, let me tell you some news; Eugénie is to be married in a week, and in three days there is to be a grand feast, a betrothal festival.
We are all invited, my father, Madame de Villefort, and I—at least, I understood it so.” “When will it be our turn to think of these things?
Oh, Valentine, you who have so much influence over your grandpapa, try to make him answer—Soon.” “And do you,” said Valentine, “depend on me to stimulate the tardiness and arouse the memory of grandpapa?” “Yes,” cried Morrel, “make haste.
So long as you are not mine, Valentine, I shall always think I may lose you.” “Oh,” replied Valentine with a convulsive movement, “oh, indeed, Maximilian, you are too timid for an officer, for a soldier who, they say, never knows fear.
Ha, ha, ha!” She burst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened and twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and she remained motionless.
The cry of terror which was stopped on Noirtier’s lips, seemed to start from his eyes.
Morrel understood it; he knew he must call assistance.
The young man rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been in Mademoiselle Valentine’s room, and the servant who had replaced Barrois, ran in at the same moment.
Valentine was so pale, so cold, so inanimate that without listening to what was said to them they were seized with the fear which pervaded that house, and they flew into the passage crying for help.
Madame Danglars and Eugénie were going out at that moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance.
“I told you so!” exclaimed Madame de Villefort.
Maximilian’s Avowal At the same moment M. de Villefort’s voice was heard calling from his study, “What is the matter?” Morrel looked at Noirtier who had recovered his self-command, and with a glance indicated the closet where once before under somewhat similar circumstances, he had taken refuge.
He had only time to get his hat and throw himself breathless into the closet when the procureur’s footstep was heard in the passage.
Villefort sprang into the room, ran to Valentine, and took her in his arms.
“A physician, a physician,—M. d’Avrigny!” cried Villefort; “or rather I will go for him myself.” He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the same moment darted out at the other door.
He had been struck to the heart by a frightful recollection—the conversation he had heard between the doctor and Villefort the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death, recurred to him; these symptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which had preceded the death of Barrois.
At the same time Monte Cristo’s voice seemed to resound in his ear with the words he had heard only two hours before, “Whatever you want, Morrel, come to me; I have great power.” More rapidly than thought, he darted down the Rue Matignon, and thence to the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.
Meanwhile M. de Villefort arrived in a hired cabriolet at M. d’Avrigny’s door.
He rang so violently that the porter was alarmed.
Villefort ran upstairs without saying a word.
The porter knew him, and let him pass, only calling to him: “In his study, Monsieur Procureur—in his study!” Villefort pushed, or rather forced, the door open.
“Ah,” said the doctor, “is it you?” “Yes,” said Villefort, closing the door after him, “it is I, who am come in my turn to ask you if we are quite alone.
Doctor, my house is accursed!” “What?” said the latter with apparent coolness, but with deep emotion, “have you another invalid?” “Yes, doctor,” cried Villefort, clutching his hair, “yes!” D’Avrigny’s look implied, “I told you it would be so.” Then he slowly uttered these words, “Who is now dying in your house?
What new victim is going to accuse you of weakness before God?” A mournful sob burst from Villefort’s heart; he approached the doctor, and seizing his arm,—“Valentine,” said he, “it is Valentine’s turn!” 40284m “Your daughter!” cried d’Avrigny with grief and surprise.
“You see you were deceived,” murmured the magistrate; “come and see her, and on her bed of agony entreat her pardon for having suspected her.” “Each time you have applied to me,” said the doctor, “it has been too late; still I will go.
But let us make haste, sir; with the enemies you have to do with there is no time to be lost.” “Oh, this time, doctor, you shall not have to reproach me with weakness.
This time I will know the assassin, and will pursue him.” “Let us try first to save the victim before we think of revenging her,” said d’Avrigny.
“Come.” The same cabriolet which had brought Villefort took them back at full speed, and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte Cristo’s door.
The count was in his study and was reading with an angry look something which Bertuccio had brought in haste.
“What is the matter, Maximilian?” asked he; “you are pale, and the perspiration rolls from your forehead.” Morrel fell into a chair.
“Yes,” said he, “I came quickly; I wanted to speak to you.” “Are all your family well?” asked the count, with an affectionate benevolence, whose sincerity no one could for a moment doubt.
“Thank you, count—thank you,” said the young man, evidently embarrassed how to begin the conversation; “yes, everyone in my family is well.” “So much the better; yet you have something to tell me?” replied the count with increased anxiety.
“No,” said Morrel; “is someone dead in his house?” “The general has just blown his brains out,” replied Monte Cristo with great coolness.
“Oh, what a dreadful event!” cried Maximilian.
“Not for the countess, or for Albert,” said Monte Cristo; “a dead father or husband is better than a dishonored one,—blood washes out shame.” “Poor countess,” said Maximilian, “I pity her very much; she is so noble a woman!” “Pity Albert also, Maximilian; for believe me he is the worthy son of the countess.
But let us return to yourself.
You have hastened to me—can I have the happiness of being useful to you?” 40286m “Yes, I need your help: that is I thought like a madman that you could lend me your assistance in a case where God alone can succor me.” “Tell me what it is,” replied Monte Cristo.
“Oh,” said Morrel, “I know not, indeed, if I may reveal this secret to mortal ears, but fatality impels me, necessity constrains me, count——” Morrel hesitated.
“Do you think I love you?” said Monte Cristo, taking the young man’s hand affectionately in his.
“Oh, you encourage me, and something tells me there,” placing his hand on his heart, “that I ought to have no secret from you.” “You are right, Morrel; God is speaking to your heart, and your heart speaks to you.
Tell me what it says.” “Count, will you allow me to send Baptistin to inquire after someone you know?” “I am at your service, and still more my servants.” “Oh, I cannot live if she is not better.” “Shall I ring for Baptistin?” “No, I will go and speak to him myself.” Morrel went out, called Baptistin, and whispered a few words to him.
The valet ran directly.
One evening I was in a garden; a clump of trees concealed me; no one suspected I was there.
Two persons passed near me—allow me to conceal their names for the present; they were speaking in an undertone, and yet I was so interested in what they said that I did not lose a single word.” “This is a gloomy introduction, if I may judge from your pallor and shuddering, Morrel.” “Oh, yes, very gloomy, my friend.
Someone had just died in the house to which that garden belonged.
One of the persons whose conversation I overheard was the master of the house; the other, the physician.
“Yes,” continued Morrel, “death had entered that house twice within one month.” “And what did the doctor answer?” asked Monte Cristo.
“Well,” said Maximilian, “death came a third time, and neither the master of the house nor the doctor said a word.
Death is now, perhaps, striking a fourth blow.
Count, what am I bound to do, being in possession of this secret?” “My dear friend,” said Monte Cristo, “you appear to be relating an adventure which we all know by heart.
I know the house where you heard it, or one very similar to it; a house with a garden, a master, a physician, and where there have been three unexpected and sudden deaths.
Well, I have not intercepted your confidence, and yet I know all that as well as you, and I have no conscientious scruples.
You say an exterminating angel appears to have devoted that house to God’s anger—well, who says your supposition is not reality?
Do not notice things which those whose interest it is to see them pass over.
If it is God’s justice, instead of his anger, which is walking through that house, Maximilian, turn away your face and let his justice accomplish its purpose.” Morrel shuddered.
There was something mournful, solemn, and terrible in the count’s manner.
“Besides,” continued he, in so changed a tone that no one would have supposed it was the same person speaking—“besides, who says that it will begin again?” “It has returned, count,” exclaimed Morrel; “that is why I hastened to you.” “Well, what do you wish me to do?
Do you wish me, for instance, to give information to the procureur?” Monte Cristo uttered the last words with so much meaning that Morrel, starting up, cried out: “You know of whom I speak, count, do you not?” “Perfectly well, my good friend; and I will prove it to you by putting the dots to the _i_, or rather by naming the persons.
You were walking one evening in M. de Villefort’s garden; from what you relate, I suppose it to have been the evening of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death.
You heard M. de Villefort talking to M. d’Avrigny about the death of M. de Saint-Méran, and that no less surprising, of the countess.
M. d’Avrigny said he believed they both proceeded from poison; and you, honest man, have ever since been asking your heart and sounding your conscience to know if you ought to expose or conceal this secret.
We are no longer in the Middle Ages; there is no longer a Vehmgericht, or Free Tribunals; what do you want to ask these people?
‘Conscience, what hast thou to do with me?’ as Sterne said.
My dear fellow, let them sleep on, if they are asleep; let them grow pale in their drowsiness, if they are disposed to do so, and pray do you remain in peace, who have no remorse to disturb you.” Deep grief was depicted on Morrel’s features; he seized Monte Cristo’s hand.
“But it is beginning again, I say!” “Well,” said the Count, astonished at his perseverance, which he could not understand, and looking still more earnestly at Maximilian, “let it begin again,—it is like the house of the Atreidae;19 God has condemned them, and they must submit to their punishment.
They will all disappear, like the fabrics children build with cards, and which fall, one by one, under the breath of their builder, even if there are two hundred of them.
Faith, no, for between the culprit and the victim I have no choice.” “But I,” cried Morrel, groaning with sorrow, “I love her!” “You love?—whom?” cried Monte Cristo, starting to his feet, and seizing the two hands which Morrel was raising towards heaven.
“I love most fondly—I love madly—I love as a man who would give his life-blood to spare her a tear—I love Valentine de Villefort, who is being murdered at this moment!
Do you understand me?
I love her; and I ask God and you how I can save her?” Monte Cristo uttered a cry which those only can conceive who have heard the roar of a wounded lion.
“Unhappy man,” cried he, wringing his hands in his turn; “you love Valentine,—that daughter of an accursed race!” Never had Morrel witnessed such an expression—never had so terrible an eye flashed before his face—never had the genius of terror he had so often seen, either on the battle-field or in the murderous nights of Algeria, shaken around him more dreadful fire.
He drew back terrified.
As for Monte Cristo, after this ebullition he closed his eyes as if dazzled by internal light.
In a moment he restrained himself so powerfully that the tempestuous heaving of his breast subsided, as turbulent and foaming waves yield to the sun’s genial influence when the cloud has passed.
This silence, self-control, and struggle lasted about twenty seconds, then the count raised his pallid face.
“See,” said he, “my dear friend, how God punishes the most thoughtless and unfeeling men for their indifference, by presenting dreadful scenes to their view.
I, who was looking on, an eager and curious spectator,—I, who was watching the working of this mournful tragedy,—I, who like a wicked angel was laughing at the evil men committed protected by secrecy (a secret is easily kept by the rich and powerful), I am in my turn bitten by the serpent whose tortuous course I was watching, and bitten to the heart!” Morrel groaned.
“Come, come,” continued the count, “complaints are unavailing, be a man, be strong, be full of hope, for I am here and will watch over you.” Morrel shook his head sorrowfully.
Do you understand me?” cried Monte Cristo.
“Remember that I never uttered a falsehood and am never deceived.
It is twelve o’clock, Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather than in the evening, or tomorrow morning.
Listen, Morrel—it is noon; if Valentine is not now dead, she will not die.” “How so?” cried Morrel, “when I left her dying?” Monte Cristo pressed his hands to his forehead.
What was passing in that brain, so loaded with dreadful secrets?
What does the angel of light or the angel of darkness say to that mind, at once implacable and generous?
“Maximilian,” said he, “return home.
I command you not to stir—attempt nothing, not to let your countenance betray a thought, and I will send you tidings.
Go.” “Oh, count, you overwhelm me with that coolness.
Are you an angel?” And the young man, who had never shrunk from danger, shrank before Monte Cristo with indescribable terror.
But Monte Cristo looked at him with so melancholy and sweet a smile, that Maximilian felt the tears filling his eyes.
“Go; I must be alone.” Morrel, subdued by the extraordinary ascendancy Monte Cristo exercised over everything around him, did not endeavor to resist it.
He stopped one moment at the door for Baptistin, whom he saw in the Rue Matignon, and who was running.
Meanwhile, Villefort and d’Avrigny had made all possible haste, Valentine had not revived from her fainting fit on their arrival, and the doctor examined the invalid with all the care the circumstances demanded, and with an interest which the knowledge of the secret intensified twofold.
Villefort, closely watching his countenance and his lips, awaited the result of the examination.
Noirtier, paler than even the young girl, more eager than Villefort for the decision, was watching also intently and affectionately.
At last d’Avrigny slowly uttered these words: “She is still alive!” “Still?” cried Villefort; “oh, doctor, what a dreadful word is that.” “Yes,” said the physician, “I repeat it; she is still alive, and I am astonished at it.” “But is she safe?” asked the father.
“Yes, since she lives.” At that moment d’Avrigny’s glance met Noirtier’s eye.
It glistened with such extraordinary joy, so rich and full of thought, that the physician was struck.
He placed the young girl again on the chair,—her lips were scarcely discernible, they were so pale and white, as well as her whole face,—and remained motionless, looking at Noirtier, who appeared to anticipate and commend all he did.
“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, “call Mademoiselle Valentine’s maid, if you please.” Villefort went himself to find her; and d’Avrigny approached Noirtier.
“Have you something to tell me?” asked he.
The old man winked his eyes expressively, which we may remember was his only way of expressing his approval.
“Privately?” “Yes.” “Well, I will remain with you.” At this moment Villefort returned, followed by the lady’s maid; and after her came Madame de Villefort.
“What is the matter, then, with this dear child? she has just left me, and she complained of being indisposed, but I did not think seriously of it.” The young woman with tears in her eyes and every mark of affection of a true mother, approached Valentine and took her hand.
D’Avrigny continued to look at Noirtier; he saw the eyes of the old man dilate and become round, his cheeks turn pale and tremble; the perspiration stood in drops upon his forehead.
“Ah,” said he, involuntarily following Noirtier’s eyes, which were fixed on Madame de Villefort, who repeated: “This poor child would be better in bed.
Come, Fanny, we will put her to bed.” M. d’Avrigny, who saw that would be a means of his remaining alone with Noirtier, expressed his opinion that it was the best thing that could be done; but he forbade that anything should be given to her except what he ordered.
They carried Valentine away; she had revived, but could scarcely move or speak, so shaken was her frame by the attack.
She had, however, just power to give one parting look to her grandfather, who in losing her seemed to be resigning his very soul.
D’Avrigny followed the invalid, wrote a prescription, ordered Villefort to take a cabriolet, go in person to a chemist’s to get the prescribed medicine, bring it himself, and wait for him in his daughter’s room.
Then, having renewed his injunction not to give Valentine anything, he went down again to Noirtier, shut the doors carefully, and after convincing himself that no one was listening: “Do you,” said he, “know anything of this young lady’s illness?” “Yes,” said the old man.
“We have no time to lose; I will question, and do you answer me.” Noirtier made a sign that he was ready to answer.
“Did you anticipate the accident which has happened to your granddaughter?” “Yes.” D’Avrigny reflected a moment; then approaching Noirtier: “Pardon what I am going to say,” added he, “but no indication should be neglected in this terrible situation.
Did you see poor Barrois die?” Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven.
“Do you know of what he died!” asked d’Avrigny, placing his hand on Noirtier’s shoulder.
“Do you think he died a natural death?” A sort of smile was discernible on the motionless lips of Noirtier.
“Then you have thought that Barrois was poisoned?” “Yes.” “Do you think the poison he fell a victim to was intended for him?” “No.” “Do you think the same hand which unintentionally struck Barrois has now attacked Valentine?” “Yes.” “Then will she die too?” asked d’Avrigny, fixing his penetrating gaze on Noirtier.
He watched the effect of this question on the old man.
“Then you hope?” said d’Avrigny, with surprise.
“Yes.” “What do you hope?” The old man made him understand with his eyes that he could not answer.
“Ah, yes, it is true,” murmured d’Avrigny.
Then, turning to Noirtier,—“Do you hope the assassin will be tried?” “No.” “Then you hope the poison will take no effect on Valentine?” “Yes.” “It is no news to you,” added d’Avrigny, “to tell you that an attempt has been made to poison her?” The old man made a sign that he entertained no doubt upon the subject.
“Then how do you hope Valentine will escape?” Noirtier kept his eyes steadfastly fixed on the same spot.
D’Avrigny followed the direction and saw that they were fixed on a bottle containing the mixture which he took every morning.
“Ah, indeed?” said d’Avrigny, struck with a sudden thought, “has it occurred to you”—Noirtier did not let him finish.
“To prepare her system to resist poison?” “Yes.” “By accustoming her by degrees——” “Yes, yes, yes,” said Noirtier, delighted to be understood.
I had told you that there was brucine in the mixture I give you.” “Yes.” “And by accustoming her to that poison, you have endeavored to neutralize the effect of a similar poison?” Noirtier’s joy continued.
“And you have succeeded,” exclaimed d’Avrigny.
“Without that precaution Valentine would have died before assistance could have been procured.
The dose has been excessive, but she has only been shaken by it; and this time, at any rate, Valentine will not die.” A superhuman joy expanded the old man’s eyes, which were raised towards heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude.
At this moment Villefort returned.
“Here, doctor,” said he, “is what you sent me for.” “Was this prepared in your presence?” “Yes,” replied the procureur.
“Have you not let it go out of your hands?” “No.” D’Avrigny took the bottle, poured some drops of the mixture it contained in the hollow of his hand, and swallowed them.
“Well,” said he, “let us go to Valentine; I will give instructions to everyone, and you, M. de Villefort, will yourself see that no one deviates from them.” 40294m At the moment when d’Avrigny was returning to Valentine’s room, accompanied by Villefort, an Italian priest, of serious demeanor and calm and firm tone, hired for his use the house adjoining the hotel of M. de Villefort.
About two hours afterwards its foundation was reported to be unsafe; but the report did not prevent the new occupant establishing himself there with his modest furniture the same day at five o’clock.
The lease was drawn up for three, six, or nine years by the new tenant, who, according to the rule of the proprietor, paid six months in advance.
Workmen were immediately called in, and that same night the passengers at the end of the faubourg saw with surprise that carpenters and masons were occupied in repairing the lower part of the tottering house.
Father and Daughter We saw in a preceding chapter how Madame Danglars went formally to announce to Madame de Villefort the approaching marriage of Eugénie Danglars and M.
This formal announcement, which implied or appeared to imply, the approval of all the persons concerned in this momentous affair, had been preceded by a scene to which our readers must be admitted.
We beg them to take one step backward, and to transport themselves, the morning of that day of great catastrophes, into the showy, gilded salon we have before shown them, and which was the pride of its owner, Baron Danglars.
In this room, at about ten o’clock in the morning, the banker himself had been walking to and fro for some minutes thoughtfully and in evident uneasiness, watching both doors, and listening to every sound.
When his patience was exhausted, he called his valet.
“Étienne,” said he, “see why Mademoiselle Eugénie has asked me to meet her in the drawing-room, and why she makes me wait so long.” Having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron became more calm; Mademoiselle Danglars had that morning requested an interview with her father, and had fixed on the gilded drawing-room as the spot.
The singularity of this step, and above all its formality, had not a little surprised the banker, who had immediately obeyed his daughter by repairing first to the drawing-room. Étienne soon returned from his errand.
“Mademoiselle’s lady’s maid says, sir, that mademoiselle is finishing her toilette, and will be here shortly.” Danglars nodded, to signify that he was satisfied.
To the world and to his servants Danglars assumed the character of the good-natured man and the indulgent father.
This was one of his parts in the popular comedy he was performing,—a make-up he had adopted and which suited him about as well as the masks worn on the classic stage by paternal actors, who seen from one side, were the image of geniality, and from the other showed lips drawn down in chronic ill-temper.
Let us hasten to say that in private the genial side descended to the level of the other, so that generally the indulgent man disappeared to give place to the brutal husband and domineering father.
“Why the devil does that foolish girl, who pretends to wish to speak to me, not come into my study? and why on earth does she want to speak to me at all?” He was turning this thought over in his brain for the twentieth time, when the door opened and Eugénie appeared, attired in a figured black satin dress, her hair dressed and gloves on, as if she were going to the Italian Opera.
“Well, Eugénie, what is it you want with me? and why in this solemn drawing-room when the study is so comfortable?” “I quite understand why you ask, sir,” said Eugénie, making a sign that her father might be seated, “and in fact your two questions suggest fully the theme of our conversation.
I will answer them both, and contrary to the usual method, the last first, because it is the least difficult.
I have chosen the drawing-room, sir, as our place of meeting, in order to avoid the disagreeable impressions and influences of a banker’s study.
Those gilded cashbooks, drawers locked like gates of fortresses, heaps of bank-bills, come from I know not where, and the quantities of letters from England, Holland, Spain, India, China, and Peru, have generally a strange influence on a father’s mind, and make him forget that there is in the world an interest greater and more sacred than the good opinion of his correspondents.
I have, therefore, chosen this drawing-room, where you see, smiling and happy in their magnificent frames, your portrait, mine, my mother’s, and all sorts of rural landscapes and touching pastorals.
I rely much on external impressions; perhaps, with regard to you, they are immaterial, but I should be no artist if I had not some fancies.” “Very well,” replied M.
Danglars, who had listened to all this preamble with imperturbable coolness, but without understanding a word, since like every man burdened with thoughts of the past, he was occupied with seeking the thread of his own ideas in those of the speaker.
“There is, then, the second point cleared up, or nearly so,” said Eugénie, without the least confusion, and with that masculine pointedness which distinguished her gesture and her language; “and you appear satisfied with the explanation.
However, this time, my tranquillity, or passiveness as philosophers say, proceeded from another source; it proceeded from a wish, like a submissive and devoted daughter” (a slight smile was observable on the purple lips of the young girl), “to practice obedience.” “Well?” asked Danglars.
“Well, it is not that the man is more ugly, more foolish, or more disagreeable than any other; no, M.
Andrea Cavalcanti may appear to those who look at men’s faces and figures as a very good specimen of his kind.
It is not, either, that my heart is less touched by him than any other; that would be a schoolgirl’s reason, which I consider quite beneath me.
I actually love no one, sir; you know it, do you not?
I do not then see why, without real necessity, I should encumber my life with a perpetual companion.
I have been taught these two aphorisms in Latin and in Greek; one is, I believe, from Phædrus, and the other from Bias.
No, indeed; the exclamation appears quite theatrical and affected.
Happy, on the contrary, for what am I in want of?
The world calls me beautiful.
It is something to be well received.
I like a favorable reception; it expands the countenance, and those around me do not then appear so ugly.
I possess a share of wit, and a certain relative sensibility, which enables me to draw from life in general, for the support of mine, all I meet with that is good, like the monkey who cracks the nut to get at its contents.
I am rich, for you have one of the first fortunes in France.
I am your only daughter, and you are not so exacting as the fathers of the Porte Saint-Martin and Gaîté, who disinherit their daughters for not giving them grandchildren.
Besides, the provident law has deprived you of the power to disinherit me, at least entirely, as it has also of the power to compel me to marry Monsieur This or Monsieur That.
And so—being, beautiful, witty, somewhat talented, as the comic operas say, and rich—and that is happiness, sir—why do you call me unhappy?” Danglars, seeing his daughter smiling, and proud even to insolence, could not entirely repress his brutal feelings, but they betrayed themselves only by an exclamation.
Under the fixed and inquiring gaze levelled at him from under those beautiful black eyebrows, he prudently turned away, and calmed himself immediately, daunted by the power of a resolute mind.
“Truly, my daughter,” replied he with a smile, “you are all you boast of being, excepting one thing; I will not too hastily tell you which, but would rather leave you to guess it.” Eugénie looked at Danglars, much surprised that one flower of her crown of pride, with which she had so superbly decked herself, should be disputed.
“My daughter,” continued the banker, “you have perfectly explained to me the sentiments which influence a girl like you, who is determined she will not marry; now it remains for me to tell you the motives of a father like me, who has decided that his daughter shall marry.” Eugénie bowed, not as a submissive daughter, but as an adversary prepared for a discussion.
“My daughter,” continued Danglars, “when a father asks his daughter to choose a husband, he has always some reason for wishing her to marry.
Some are affected with the mania of which you spoke just now, that of living again in their grandchildren.
This is not my weakness, I tell you at once; family joys have no charm for me.
I may acknowledge this to a daughter whom I know to be philosophical enough to understand my indifference, and not to impute it to me as a crime.” “This is not to the purpose,” said Eugénie; “let us speak candidly, sir; I admire candor.” “Oh,” said Danglars, “I can, when circumstances render it desirable, adopt your system, although it may not be my general practice.
I will therefore proceed.
I do not willingly enter into arithmetical explanations with an artist like you, who fears to enter my study lest she should imbibe disagreeable or anti-poetic impressions and sensations.
But in that same banker’s study, where you very willingly presented yourself yesterday to ask for the thousand francs I give you monthly for pocket-money, you must know, my dear young lady, that many things may be learned, useful even to a girl who will not marry.
There one may learn, for instance, what, out of regard to your nervous susceptibility, I will inform you of in the drawing-room, namely, that the credit of a banker is his physical and moral life; that credit sustains him as breath animates the body; and M. de Monte Cristo once gave me a lecture on that subject, which I have never forgotten.
There we may learn that as credit sinks, the body becomes a corpse, and this is what must happen very soon to the banker who is proud to own so good a logician as you for his daughter.” But Eugénie, instead of stooping, drew herself up under the blow.
“Exactly, my daughter; that is precisely what I mean,” said Danglars, almost digging his nails into his breast, while he preserved on his harsh features the smile of the heartless though clever man; “ruined—yes, that is it.” “Ah!” said Eugénie.
Now it is revealed, this secret so full of horror, as the tragic poet says.
Now, my daughter, learn from my lips how you may alleviate this misfortune, so far as it will affect you.” “Oh,” cried Eugénie, “you are a bad physiognomist, if you imagine I deplore on my own account the catastrophe of which you warn me.
And if I do not possess that talent, which your smiles prove to me you doubt, should I not still have that ardent love of independence, which will be a substitute for wealth, and which in my mind supersedes even the instinct of self-preservation?
No, I grieve not on my own account, I shall always find a resource; my books, my pencils, my piano, all the things which cost but little, and which I shall be able to procure, will remain my own.
“Do you think that I sorrow for Madame Danglars?
Undeceive yourself again; either I am greatly mistaken, or she has provided against the catastrophe which threatens you, and, which will pass over without affecting her.
She has taken care for herself,—at least I hope so,—for her attention has not been diverted from her projects by watching over me.
She has fostered my independence by professedly indulging my love for liberty.
Oh, no, sir; from my childhood I have seen too much, and understood too much, of what has passed around me, for misfortune to have an undue power over me.
From my earliest recollections, I have been beloved by no one—so much the worse; that has naturally led me to love no one—so much the better—now you have my profession of faith.” “Then,” said Danglars, pale with anger, which was not at all due to offended paternal love,—“then, mademoiselle, you persist in your determination to accelerate my ruin?” “Your ruin?
I accelerate your ruin?
I do not understand you.” “So much the better, I have a ray of hope left; listen.” “I am all attention,” said Eugénie, looking so earnestly at her father that it was an effort for the latter to endure her unrelenting gaze.
Cavalcanti,” continued Danglars, “is about to marry you, and will place in my hands his fortune, amounting to three million livres.” “That is admirable!” said Eugénie with sovereign contempt, smoothing her gloves out one upon the other.
“You think I shall deprive you of those three millions,” said Danglars; “but do not fear it.
They are destined to produce at least ten.
I and a brother banker have obtained a grant of a railway, the only industrial enterprise which in these days promises to make good the fabulous prospects that Law once held out to the eternally deluded Parisians, in the fantastic Mississippi scheme.
As I look at it, a millionth part of a railway is worth fully as much as an acre of waste land on the banks of the Ohio.
We make in our case a deposit, on a mortgage, which is an advance, as you see, since we gain at least ten, fifteen, twenty, or a hundred livres’ worth of iron in exchange for our money.
That deposit may be at any moment withdrawn, and if I had employed it for another purpose, I should bring on me a disgraceful bankruptcy.
I do not despise bankruptcies, believe me, but they must be those which enrich, not those which ruin.
Cavalcanti, and I get the three millions, or even if it is thought I am going to get them, my credit will be restored, and my fortune, which for the last month or two has been swallowed up in gulfs which have been opened in my path by an inconceivable fatality, will revive.
Do you understand me?” “Perfectly; you pledge me for three millions, do you not?” “The greater the amount, the more flattering it is to you; it gives you an idea of your value.” “Thank you.
Cavalcanti will bring without touching the money?
This is no act of selfishness, but of delicacy.
I am willing to help rebuild your fortune, but I will not be an accomplice in the ruin of others.” “But since I tell you,” cried Danglars, “that with these three million——” “Do you expect to recover your position, sir, without touching those three million?” “I hope so, if the marriage should take place and confirm my credit.” “Shall you be able to pay M.
Cavalcanti the five hundred thousand francs you promise for my dowry?” “He shall receive them on returning from the mayor’s20.” “Very well!” “What next? what more do you want?” “I wish to know if, in demanding my signature, you leave me entirely free in my person?” “Absolutely.” “Then, as I said before, sir,—very well; I am ready to marry M.
Cavalcanti.” “But what are you up to?” “Ah, that is my affair.
What advantage should I have over you, if knowing your secret I were to tell you mine?” Danglars bit his lips.
“Then,” said he, “you are ready to pay the official visits, which are absolutely indispensable?” “Yes,” replied Eugénie.
“And to sign the contract in three days?” “Yes.” “Then, in my turn, I also say, very well!” Danglars pressed his daughter’s hand in his.
But, extraordinary to relate, the father did not say, “Thank you, my child,” nor did the daughter smile at her father.
“Is the conference ended?” asked Eugénie, rising.
Danglars motioned that he had nothing more to say.
Five minutes afterwards the piano resounded to the touch of Mademoiselle d’Armilly’s fingers, and Mademoiselle Danglars was singing Brabantio’s malediction on Desdemona.
At the end of the piece Étienne entered, and announced to Eugénie that the horses were to the carriage, and that the baroness was waiting for her to pay her visits.
We have seen them at Villefort’s; they proceeded then on their course. 40306m VOLUME FIVE 50009m 50011m 50019m Chapter 96.
While his horses were impatiently pawing the ground, held in by the coachman, who had been seated a quarter of an hour on his box, the elegant phaeton with which we are familiar rapidly turned the angle of the entrance-gate, and cast out on the doorsteps M.
Andrea Cavalcanti, as decked up and gay as if he were going to marry a princess.
He inquired after the count with his usual familiarity, and ascending lightly to the first story met him at the top of the stairs.
As for Andrea, he was launched, and when he was once launched nothing stopped him.
Andrea,” said the latter, with his half-jesting tone; “how do you do?” “Charmingly, as you see.
Andrea; we can chat better in-doors, and there is no coachman to overhear our conversation.” The count returned to a small drawing-room on the first floor, sat down, and crossing his legs motioned to the young man to take a seat also.
“You know, my dear count,” said he, “the ceremony is to take place this evening.
At nine o’clock the contract is to be signed at my father-in-law’s.” “Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo.
Danglars informed you of the ceremony?” “Oh, yes,” said the count; “I received a letter from him yesterday, but I do not think the hour was mentioned.” “Possibly my father-in-law trusted to its general notoriety.” “Well,” said Monte Cristo, “you are fortunate, M.
Cavalcanti; it is a most suitable alliance you are contracting, and Mademoiselle Danglars is a handsome girl.” “Yes, indeed she is,” replied Cavalcanti, in a very modest tone.
“Doubtless; it is said M.
Danglars conceals at least half of his fortune.” “And he acknowledges fifteen or twenty millions,” said Andrea with a look sparkling with joy.
“Without reckoning,” added Monte Cristo, “that he is on the eve of entering into a sort of speculation already in vogue in the United States and in England, but quite novel in France.” “Yes, yes, I know what you mean,—the railway, of which he has obtained the grant, is it not?” “Precisely; it is generally believed he will gain ten millions by that affair.” “Ten millions!
It is magnificent!” said Cavalcanti, who was quite confounded at the metallic sound of these golden words.
“Without reckoning,” replied Monte Cristo, “that all his fortune will come to you, and justly too, since Mademoiselle Danglars is an only daughter.
Besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, is almost equal to that of your betrothed.
Andrea, I think you have managed this affair rather skilfully?” “Not badly, by any means,” said the young man; “I was born for a diplomatist.” “Well, you must become a diplomatist; diplomacy, you know, is something that is not to be acquired; it is instinctive.
“Is your love returned?” “I suppose so,” said Andrea with a triumphant smile, “since I am accepted.
But I must not forget one grand point.” “Which?” “That I have been singularly assisted.” “Nonsense.” “I have, indeed.” “By circumstances?” “No; by you.” “By me?
Are not your name, your social position, and your merit sufficient?” “No,” said Andrea,—“no; it is useless for you to say so, count.
What encouraged me not to become your surety, but to patronize you?—your father’s name, so well known in Italy and so highly honored.
Personally, I do not know you.” This calm tone and perfect ease made Andrea feel that he was, for the moment, restrained by a more muscular hand than his own, and that the restraint could not be easily broken through.
“Do you know if the marriage settlement he promised me has come?” “I have been advised of it.” “But the three millions?” “The three millions are probably on the road.” “Then I shall really have them?” “Oh, well,” said the count, “I do not think you have yet known the want of money.” Andrea was so surprised that he pondered the matter for a moment.
Then, arousing from his reverie: “Now, sir, I have one request to make to you, which you will understand, even if it should be disagreeable to you.” “Proceed,” said Monte Cristo.
“I have formed an acquaintance, thanks to my good fortune, with many noted persons, and have, at least for the moment, a crowd of friends.
What?—after the varied relations I have had the happiness to sustain towards you, can it be that you know me so little as to ask such a thing?
Ask me to lend you half a million and, although such a loan is somewhat rare, on my honor, you would annoy me less!
Know, then, what I thought I had already told you, that in participation in this world’s affairs, more especially in their moral aspects, the Count of Monte Cristo has never ceased to entertain the scruples and even the superstitions of the East.
I, who have a seraglio at Cairo, one at Smyrna, and one at Constantinople, preside at a wedding?—never!” “Then you refuse me?” “Decidedly; and were you my son or my brother I would refuse you in the same way.” “But what must be done?” said Andrea, disappointed.
“You said just now that you had a hundred friends.” “Very true, but you introduced me at M.
Danglars’.” “Not at all!
You met him at a dinner party at my house, and you introduced yourself at his house; that is a totally different affair.” “Yes, but, by my marriage, you have forwarded that.” “I?—not in the least, I beg you to believe.
Recollect what I told you when you asked me to propose you.
‘Oh, I never make matches, my dear prince, it is my settled principle.’” Andrea bit his lips. 50025m “But, at least, you will be there?” “Will all Paris be there?” “Oh, certainly.” “Well, like all Paris, I shall be there too,” said the count.
“And will you sign the contract?” “I see no objection to that; my scruples do not go thus far.” “Well, since you will grant me no more, I must be content with what you give me.
But one word more, count.” “What is it?” “Advice.” “Be careful; advice is worse than a service.” “Oh, you can give me this without compromising yourself.” “Tell me what it is.” “Is my wife’s fortune five hundred thousand livres?” “That is the sum M.
Baron Danglars is a good father, and knows how to calculate.” “In that case,” said Andrea, “everything is all right, excepting your refusal, which quite grieves me.” “You must attribute it only to natural scruples under similar circumstances.” “Well,” said Andrea, “let it be as you wish.
This evening, then, at nine o’clock.” “Adieu till then.” Notwithstanding a slight resistance on the part of Monte Cristo, whose lips turned pale, but who preserved his ceremonious smile, Andrea seized the count’s hand, pressed it, jumped into his phaeton, and disappeared.
The four or five remaining hours before nine o’clock arrived, Andrea employed in riding, paying visits,—designed to induce those of whom he had spoken to appear at the banker’s in their gayest equipages,—dazzling them by promises of shares in schemes which have since turned every brain, and in which Danglars was just taking the initiative.
In fact, at half-past eight in the evening the grand salon, the gallery adjoining, and the three other drawing-rooms on the same floor, were filled with a perfumed crowd, who sympathized but little in the event, but who all participated in that love of being present wherever there is anything fresh to be seen.
Mademoiselle Eugénie was dressed with elegant simplicity in a figured white silk dress, and a white rose half concealed in her jet black hair was her only ornament, unaccompanied by a single jewel.
Her eyes, however, betrayed that perfect confidence which contradicted the girlish simplicity of this modest attire.
Madame Danglars was chatting at a short distance with Debray, Beauchamp, and Château-Renaud.
Debray was admitted to the house for this grand ceremony, but on the same plane with everyone else, and without any particular privilege.
Danglars, surrounded by deputies and men connected with the revenue, was explaining a new theory of taxation which he intended to adopt when the course of events had compelled the government to call him into the ministry.
Andrea, on whose arm hung one of the most consummate dandies of the Opera, was explaining to him rather cleverly, since he was obliged to be bold to appear at ease, his future projects, and the new luxuries he meant to introduce to Parisian fashions with his hundred and seventy-five thousand livres per annum.
The crowd moved to and fro in the rooms like an ebb and flow of turquoises, rubies, emeralds, opals, and diamonds.
As usual, the oldest women were the most decorated, and the ugliest the most conspicuous.
If there was a beautiful lily, or a sweet rose, you had to search for it, concealed in some corner behind a mother with a turban, or an aunt with a bird-of-paradise.
At each moment, in the midst of the crowd, the buzzing, and the laughter, the door-keeper’s voice was heard announcing some name well known in the financial department, respected in the army, or illustrious in the literary world, and which was acknowledged by a slight movement in the different groups.
But for one whose privilege it was to agitate that ocean of human waves, how many were received with a look of indifference or a sneer of disdain!
At the moment when the hand of the massive time-piece, representing Endymion asleep, pointed to nine on its golden face, and the hammer, the faithful type of mechanical thought, struck nine times, the name of the Count of Monte Cristo resounded in its turn, and as if by an electric shock all the assembly turned towards the door.
The count was dressed in black and with his habitual simplicity; his white waistcoat displayed his expansive noble chest and his black stock was singularly noticeable because of its contrast with the deadly paleness of his face.
His only jewellery was a chain, so fine that the slender gold thread was scarcely perceptible on his white waistcoat.
A circle was immediately formed around the door.
The count perceived at one glance Madame Danglars at one end of the drawing-room, M.
Danglars at the other, and Eugénie in front of him.
He first advanced towards the baroness, who was chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come alone, Valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside, so clear was the road left for him, he passed from the baroness to Eugénie, whom he complimented in such rapid and measured terms, that the proud artist was quite struck.
Near her was Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, who thanked the count for the letters of introduction he had so kindly given her for Italy, which she intended immediately to make use of.
On leaving these ladies he found himself with Danglars, who had advanced to meet him.
Having accomplished these three social duties, Monte Cristo stopped, looking around him with that expression peculiar to a certain class, which seems to say, “I have done my duty, now let others do theirs.” Andrea, who was in an adjoining room, had shared in the sensation caused by the arrival of Monte Cristo, and now came forward to pay his respects to the count.
He found him completely surrounded; all were eager to speak to him, as is always the case with those whose words are few and weighty.
The solicitors arrived at this moment and arranged their scrawled papers on the velvet cloth embroidered with gold which covered the table prepared for the signature; it was a gilt table supported on lions’ claws.
One of the notaries sat down, the other remained standing.
They were about to proceed to the reading of the contract, which half Paris assembled was to sign.
All took their places, or rather the ladies formed a circle, while the gentlemen (more indifferent to the restraints of what Boileau calls the _style énergique_) commented on the feverish agitation of Andrea, on M.
Danglars’ riveted attention, Eugénie’s composure, and the light and sprightly manner in which the baroness treated this important affair.
The contract was read during a profound silence.
Mademoiselle Danglars’ charms were heightened in the opinion of the young men, and for the moment seemed to outvie the sun in splendor.
As for the ladies, it is needless to say that while they coveted the millions, they thought they did not need them for themselves, as they were beautiful enough without them.
Andrea, surrounded by his friends, complimented, flattered, beginning to believe in the reality of his dream, was almost bewildered.
The notary solemnly took the pen, flourished it above his head, and said: “Gentlemen, we are about to sign the contract.” The baron was to sign first, then the representative of M.
Cavalcanti, senior, then the baroness, afterwards the “future couple,” as they are styled in the abominable phraseology of legal documents.
The baron took the pen and signed, then the representative.
The baroness approached, leaning on Madame de Villefort’s arm.
“My dear,” said she, as she took the pen, “is it not vexatious?
An unexpected incident, in the affair of murder and theft at the Count of Monte Cristo’s, in which he nearly fell a victim, deprives us of the pleasure of seeing M. de Villefort.” “Indeed?” said M.
Danglars, in the same tone in which he would have said, “Oh, well, what do I care?” “As a matter of fact,” said Monte Cristo, approaching, “I am much afraid that I am the involuntary cause of his absence.” “What, you, count?” said Madame Danglars, signing; “if you are, take care, for I shall never forgive you.” Andrea pricked up his ears.
“But it is not my fault, as I shall endeavor to prove.” Everyone listened eagerly; Monte Cristo who so rarely opened his lips, was about to speak.
“You remember,” said the count, during the most profound silence, “that the unhappy wretch who came to rob me died at my house; the supposition is that he was stabbed by his accomplice, on attempting to leave it.” “Yes,” said Danglars.
“In order that his wounds might be examined he was undressed, and his clothes were thrown into a corner, where the police picked them up, with the exception of the waistcoat, which they overlooked.” Andrea turned pale, and drew towards the door; he saw a cloud rising in the horizon, which appeared to forebode a coming storm.
“Well, this waistcoat was discovered today, covered with blood, and with a hole over the heart.” The ladies screamed, and two or three prepared to faint.
No one could guess what the dirty rag could be; I alone suspected that it was the waistcoat of the murdered man.
My valet, in examining this mournful relic, felt a paper in the pocket and drew it out; it was a letter addressed to you, baron.” “To me?” cried Danglars.
“Yes, indeed, to you; I succeeded in deciphering your name under the blood with which the letter was stained,” replied Monte Cristo, amid the general outburst of amazement.
“But,” asked Madame Danglars, looking at her husband with uneasiness, “how could that prevent M. de Villefort——” “In this simple way, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “the waistcoat and the letter were both what is termed circumstantial evidence; I therefore sent them to the king’s attorney.
You understand, my dear baron, that legal methods are the safest in criminal cases; it was, perhaps, some plot against you.” Andrea looked steadily at Monte Cristo and disappeared in the second drawing-room.
“Possibly,” said Danglars; “was not this murdered man an old galley-slave?” 50025m “Yes,” replied the count; “a felon named Caderousse.” Danglars turned slightly pale; Andrea reached the anteroom beyond the little drawing-room.
“But go on signing,” said Monte Cristo; “I perceive that my story has caused a general emotion, and I beg to apologize to you, baroness, and to Mademoiselle Danglars.” The baroness, who had signed, returned the pen to the notary.
“Prince Cavalcanti,” said the latter; “Prince Cavalcanti, where are you?” “Andrea, Andrea,” repeated several young people, who were already on sufficiently intimate terms with him to call him by his Christian name.
“Call the prince; inform him that it is his turn to sign,” cried Danglars to one of the floorkeepers.
But at the same instant the crowd of guests rushed in alarm into the principal salon as if some frightful monster had entered the apartments, _quærens quem devoret_.
An officer was placing two soldiers at the door of each drawing-room, and was advancing towards Danglars, preceded by a commissary of police, girded with his scarf.
Madame Danglars uttered a scream and fainted.
Danglars, who thought himself threatened (certain consciences are never calm),—Danglars even before his guests showed a countenance of abject terror.
“What is the matter, sir?” asked Monte Cristo, advancing to meet the commissioner.
“Which of you gentlemen,” asked the magistrate, without replying to the count, “answers to the name of Andrea Cavalcanti?” A cry of astonishment was heard from all parts of the room.
They searched; they questioned.
“But who then is Andrea Cavalcanti?” asked Danglars in amazement.
“A galley-slave, escaped from confinement at Toulon.” “And what crime has he committed?” “He is accused,” said the commissary with his inflexible voice, “of having assassinated the man named Caderousse, his former companion in prison, at the moment he was making his escape from the house of the Count of Monte Cristo.” Monte Cristo cast a rapid glance around him.
The Departure for Belgium A few minutes after the scene of confusion produced in the salons of M.
Danglars by the unexpected appearance of the brigade of soldiers, and by the disclosure which had followed, the mansion was deserted with as much rapidity as if a case of plague or of cholera morbus had broken out among the guests.
In a few minutes, through all the doors, down all the staircases, by every exit, everyone hastened to retire, or rather to fly; for it was a situation where the ordinary condolences,—which even the best friends are so eager to offer in great catastrophes,—were seen to be utterly futile.
There remained in the banker’s house only Danglars, closeted in his study, and making his statement to the officer of gendarmes; Madame Danglars, terrified, in the boudoir with which we are acquainted; and Eugénie, who with haughty air and disdainful lip had retired to her room with her inseparable companion, Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.
As for the numerous servants (more numerous that evening than usual, for their number was augmented by cooks and butlers from the Café de Paris), venting on their employers their anger at what they termed the insult to which they had been subjected, they collected in groups in the hall, in the kitchens, or in their rooms, thinking very little of their duty, which was thus naturally interrupted.
Of all this household, only two persons deserve our notice; these are Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars and Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.
The betrothed had retired, as we said, with haughty air, disdainful lip, and the demeanor of an outraged queen, followed by her companion, who was paler and more disturbed than herself.
On reaching her room Eugénie locked her door, while Louise fell on a chair.
“Ah, what a dreadful thing,” said the young musician; “who would have suspected it?
Andrea Cavalcanti a murderer—a galley-slave escaped—a convict!” An ironical smile curled the lip of Eugénie.
“I escaped the Morcerf only to fall into the Cavalcanti.” “Oh, do not confound the two, Eugénie.” “Hold your tongue!
The men are all infamous, and I am happy to be able now to do more than detest them—I despise them.” “What shall we do?” asked Louise.
“What shall we do?” “Yes.” “Why, the same we had intended doing three days since—set off.” “What?—although you are not now going to be married, you intend still——” “Listen, Louise.
I hate this life of the fashionable world, always ordered, measured, ruled, like our music-paper.
What I have always wished for, desired, and coveted, is the life of an artist, free and independent, relying only on my own resources, and accountable only to myself.
Debray, perhaps, as it was once proposed.
This evening’s adventure will serve for my excuse.
God sends me this, and I hail it joyfully!” “How strong and courageous you are!” said the fair, frail girl to her brunette companion.
The post-chaise——” “Was happily bought three days since.” “Have you had it sent where we are to go for it?” “Yes.” “Our passport?” “Here it is.” And Eugénie, with her usual precision, opened a printed paper, and read: “M.
Léon d’Armilly, twenty years of age; profession, artist; hair black, eyes black; travelling with his sister.” “Capital!
Instead of that, Louise—do you understand?—air, liberty, melody of birds, plains of Lombardy, Venetian canals, Roman palaces, the Bay of Naples.
How much have we, Louise?” The young girl to whom this question was addressed drew from an inlaid secretaire a small portfolio with a lock, in which she counted twenty-three bank-notes.
“Twenty-three thousand francs,” said she.
“And as much, at least, in pearls, diamonds, and jewels,” said Eugénie.
With forty-five thousand francs we can live like princesses for two years, and comfortably for four; but before six months—you with your music, and I with my voice—we shall double our capital.
Come, you shall take charge of the money, I of the jewel-box; so that if one of us had the misfortune to lose her treasure, the other would still have hers left.
Now, the portmanteau—let us make haste—the portmanteau!” “Stop!” said Louise, going to listen at Madame Danglars’ door.
“What do you fear?” “That we may be discovered.” “The door is locked.” “They may tell us to open it.” “They may if they like, but we will not.” “You are a perfect Amazon, Eugénie!” And the two young girls began to heap into a trunk all the things they thought they should require.
“There now,” said Eugénie, “while I change my costume do you lock the portmanteau.” Louise pressed with all the strength of her little hands on the top of the portmanteau.
“But I cannot,” said she; “I am not strong enough; do you shut it.” “Ah, you do well to ask,” said Eugénie, laughing; “I forgot that I was Hercules, and you only the pale Omphale!” And the young girl, kneeling on the top, pressed the two parts of the portmanteau together, and Mademoiselle d’Armilly passed the bolt of the padlock through.
When this was done, Eugénie opened a drawer, of which she kept the key, and took from it a wadded violet silk travelling cloak.
“Here,” said she, “you see I have thought of everything; with this cloak you will not be cold.” “But you?” “Oh, I am never cold, you know!
Besides, with these men’s clothes——” “Will you dress here?” “Certainly.” “Shall you have time?” “Do not be uneasy, you little coward!
All our servants are busy, discussing the grand affair.
Besides, what is there astonishing, when you think of the grief I ought to be in, that I shut myself up?—tell me!” “No, truly—you comfort me.” “Come and help me.” From the same drawer she took a man’s complete costume, from the boots to the coat, and a provision of linen, where there was nothing superfluous, but every requisite.
Then, with a promptitude which indicated that this was not the first time she had amused herself by adopting the garb of the opposite sex, Eugénie drew on the boots and pantaloons, tied her cravat, buttoned her waistcoat up to the throat, and put on a coat which admirably fitted her beautiful figure.
“Oh, that is very good—indeed, it is very good!” said Louise, looking at her with admiration; “but that beautiful black hair, those magnificent braids, which made all the ladies sigh with envy,—will they go under a man’s hat like the one I see down there?” “You shall see,” said Eugénie.
And with her left hand seizing the thick mass, which her long fingers could scarcely grasp, she took in her right hand a pair of long scissors, and soon the steel met through the rich and splendid hair, which fell in a cluster at her feet as she leaned back to keep it from her coat.
Then she grasped the front hair, which she also cut off, without expressing the least regret; on the contrary, her eyes sparkled with greater pleasure than usual under her ebony eyebrows. 50039m “Oh, the magnificent hair!” said Louise, with regret.
“And am I not a hundred times better thus?” cried Eugénie, smoothing the scattered curls of her hair, which had now quite a masculine appearance; “and do you not think me handsomer so?” “Oh, you are beautiful—always beautiful!” cried Louise.
“Now, where are you going?” “To Brussels, if you like; it is the nearest frontier.
We can go to Brussels, Liège, Aix-la-Chapelle; then up the Rhine to Strasbourg.
We will cross Switzerland, and go down into Italy by the Saint-Gothard.
Will that do?” “Yes.” “What are you looking at?” “I am looking at you; indeed you are adorable like that!
One would say you were carrying me off.” “And they would be right, _pardieu!_” “Oh, I think you swore, Eugénie.” And the two young girls, whom everyone might have thought plunged in grief, the one on her own account, the other from interest in her friend, burst out laughing, as they cleared away every visible trace of the disorder which had naturally accompanied the preparations for their escape.
Then, having blown out the lights, the two fugitives, looking and listening eagerly, with outstretched necks, opened the door of a dressing-room which led by a side staircase down to the yard,—Eugénie going first, and holding with one arm the portmanteau, which by the opposite handle Mademoiselle d’Armilly scarcely raised with both hands.
The yard was empty; the clock was striking twelve.
Eugénie approached softly, and saw the old man sleeping soundly in an armchair in his lodge.
She returned to Louise, took up the portmanteau, which she had placed for a moment on the ground, and they reached the archway under the shadow of the wall.
Eugénie concealed Louise in an angle of the gateway, so that if the porter chanced to awake he might see but one person.
Then placing herself in the full light of the lamp which lit the yard: “Gate!” cried she, with her finest contralto voice, and rapping at the window.
The porter got up as Eugénie expected, and even advanced some steps to recognize the person who was going out, but seeing a young man striking his boot impatiently with his riding-whip, he opened it immediately.
Eugénie, apparently calm, although in all probability her heart beat somewhat faster than usual, went out in her turn.
A porter was passing and they gave him the portmanteau; then the two young girls, having told him to take it to No. 36, Rue de la Victoire, walked behind this man, whose presence comforted Louise.
They arrived at the appointed spot.
Eugénie ordered the porter to put down the portmanteau, gave him some pieces of money, and having rapped at the shutter sent him away.
The shutter where Eugénie had rapped was that of a little laundress, who had been previously warned, and was not yet gone to bed.
“Mademoiselle,” said Eugénie, “let the porter get the post-chaise from the coach-house, and fetch some post-horses from the hotel.
Here are five francs for his trouble.” “Indeed,” said Louise, “I admire you, and I could almost say respect you.” The laundress looked on in astonishment, but as she had been promised twenty louis, she made no remark.
In a quarter of an hour the porter returned with a post-boy and horses, which were harnessed, and put in the post-chaise in a minute, while the porter fastened the portmanteau on with the assistance of a cord and strap.
“Here is the passport,” said the postilion, “which way are we going, young gentleman?” “To Fontainebleau,” replied Eugénie with an almost masculine voice.
“I am giving them the slip,” said Eugénie; “this woman to whom we have given twenty louis may betray us for forty; we will soon alter our direction.” And the young girl jumped into the britzka, which was admirably arranged for sleeping in, without scarcely touching the step.
A quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having been put in the right road, passed with a crack of his whip through the gateway of the Barrière Saint-Martin.
“Ah,” said Louise, breathing freely, “here we are out of Paris.” “Yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact,” replied Eugénie.
“Yes, and without violence,” said Louise.
“I shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance,” replied Eugénie.
These words were lost in the noise which the carriage made in rolling over the pavement of La Villette.
Danglars no longer had a daughter.
The Bell and Bottle Tavern And now let us leave Mademoiselle Danglars and her friend pursuing their way to Brussels, and return to poor Andrea Cavalcanti, so inopportunely interrupted in his rise to fortune.
Notwithstanding his youth, Master Andrea was a very skilful and intelligent boy.
We have seen that on the first rumor which reached the salon he had gradually approached the door, and crossing two or three rooms at last disappeared.
But we have forgotten to mention one circumstance, which nevertheless ought not to be omitted; in one of the rooms he crossed, the _trousseau_ of the bride-elect was on exhibition.
Furnished with this plunder, Andrea leaped with a lighter heart from the window, intending to slip through the hands of the gendarmes.
Tall and well proportioned as an ancient gladiator, and muscular as a Spartan, he walked for a quarter of an hour without knowing where to direct his steps, actuated by the sole idea of getting away from the spot where if he lingered he knew that he would surely be taken.
Having passed through the Rue du Mont-Blanc, guided by the instinct which leads thieves always to take the safest path, he found himself at the end of the Rue La Fayette.
There he stopped, breathless and panting.
He was quite alone; on one side was the vast wilderness of the Saint-Lazare, on the other, Paris enshrouded in darkness.
“Am I to be captured?” he cried; “no, not if I can use more activity than my enemies.
My safety is now a mere question of speed.” At this moment he saw a cab at the top of the Faubourg Poissonnière.
The dull driver, smoking his pipe, was plodding along toward the limits of the Faubourg Saint-Denis, where no doubt he ordinarily had his station.
“Ho, friend!” said Benedetto.
Four wretched fares, and twenty sous over, making in all seven francs, are all that I have earned, and I ought to take ten to the owner.” “Will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?” “With pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised.
Tell me what I am to do for this.” “A very easy thing, if your horse isn’t tired.” “I tell you he’ll go like the wind,—only tell me which way to drive.” “Towards the Louvres.” “Ah, I know the way—you get good sweetened rum over there.” “Exactly so; I merely wish to overtake one of my friends, with whom I am going to hunt tomorrow at Chapelle-en-Serval.
Who-o-o-pla!” Andrea got into the cab, which passed rapidly through the Faubourg Saint-Denis, along the Faubourg Saint-Martin, crossed the barrier, and threaded its way through the interminable Villette.
They never overtook the chimerical friend, yet Andrea frequently inquired of people on foot whom he passed and at the inns which were not yet closed, for a green cabriolet and bay horse; and as there are a great many cabriolets to be seen on the road to the Low Countries, and as nine-tenths of them are green, the inquiries increased at every step.
Everyone had just seen it pass; it was only five hundred, two hundred, one hundred steps in advance; at length they reached it, but it was not the friend.
“Ah,” said Cavalcanti to himself, “if I only had that britzka, those two good post-horses, and above all the passport that carries them on!” And he sighed deeply.
The calash contained Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle d’Armilly.
“Hurry, hurry!” said Andrea, “we must overtake him soon.” And the poor horse resumed the desperate gallop it had kept up since leaving the barrier, and arrived steaming at Louvres.
“Certainly,” said Andrea, “I shall not overtake my friend, but I shall kill your horse, therefore I had better stop.
The cabman joyfully pocketed the sum, and turned back on his road to Paris.
Andrea pretended to go towards the hotel of the _Cheval Rouge_, but after leaning an instant against the door, and hearing the last sound of the cab, which was disappearing from view, he went on his road, and with a lusty stride soon traversed the space of two leagues.
Then he rested; he must be near Chapelle-en-Serval, where he pretended to be going.
It was not fatigue that stayed Andrea here; it was that he might form some resolution, adopt some plan.
It would be impossible to make use of a diligence, equally so to engage post-horses; to travel either way a passport was necessary.
It was still more impossible to remain in the department of the Oise, one of the most open and strictly guarded in France; this was quite out of the question, especially to a man like Andrea, perfectly conversant with criminal matters.
He sat down by the side of the moat, buried his face in his hands and reflected.
Ten minutes after he raised his head; his resolution was made.
He threw some dust over the topcoat, which he had found time to unhook from the antechamber and button over his ball costume, and going to Chapelle-en-Serval he knocked loudly at the door of the only inn in the place.
“My friend,” said Andrea, “I was coming from Mortefontaine to Senlis, when my horse, which is a troublesome creature, stumbled and threw me.
Could you let me hire a horse of you?” An innkeeper has always a horse to let, whether it be good or bad.
The host called the stable-boy, and ordered him to saddle _Le Blanc_ then he awoke his son, a child of seven years, whom he ordered to ride before the gentleman and bring back the horse.
Andrea gave the innkeeper twenty francs, and in taking them from his pocket dropped a visiting card.
There is an excellent tavern at Compiègne, well remembered by those who have ever been there.
“My friend,” said Andrea, “I have been dining at Saint-Jean-aux-Bois, and expected to catch the coach which passes by at midnight, but like a fool I have lost my way, and have been walking for the last four hours in the forest.
While the waiter was preparing his room, the hostess arose; Andrea assumed his most charming smile, and asked if he could have No. 3, which he had occupied on his last stay at Compiègne.
Unfortunately, No. 3 was engaged by a young man who was travelling with his sister.
Andrea appeared in despair, but consoled himself when the hostess assured him that No. 7, prepared for him, was situated precisely the same as No. 3, and while warming his feet and chatting about the last races at Chantilly, he waited until they announced his room to be ready.
Andrea had not spoken without cause of the pretty rooms looking out upon the court of the Bell Hotel, which with its triple galleries like those of a theatre, with the jessamine and clematis twining round the light columns, forms one of the prettiest entrances to an inn that you can imagine.
The fowl was tender, the wine old, the fire clear and sparkling, and Andrea was surprised to find himself eating with as good an appetite as though nothing had happened.
Then he went to bed and almost immediately fell into that deep sleep which is sure to visit men of twenty years of age, even when they are torn with remorse.
This was the plan which had appealed to him to afford the best chance of his security.
Once past the frontier, Andrea proposed making money of his diamonds; and by uniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes he always carried about with him in case of accident, he would then find himself possessor of about 50,000 livres, which he philosophically considered as no very deplorable condition after all.
Moreover, he reckoned much on the interest of the Danglars to hush up the rumor of their own misadventures.
In order that he might wake early he did not close the shutters, but contented himself with bolting the door and placing on the table an unclasped and long-pointed knife, whose temper he well knew, and which was never absent from him.
About seven in the morning Andrea was awakened by a ray of sunlight, which played, warm and brilliant, upon his face.
In all well-organized brains, the predominating idea—and there always is one—is sure to be the last thought before sleeping, and the first upon waking in the morning.
Andrea had scarcely opened his eyes when his predominating idea presented itself, and whispered in his ear that he had slept too long.
A gendarme was crossing the court.
A gendarme is one of the most striking objects in the world, even to a man void of uneasiness; but for one who has a timid conscience, and with good cause too, the yellow, blue, and white uniform is really very alarming.
“Why is that gendarme there?” asked Andrea of himself.
Then, all at once, he replied, with that logic which the reader has, doubtless, remarked in him, “There is nothing astonishing in seeing a gendarme at an inn; instead of being astonished, let me dress myself.” And the youth dressed himself with a facility his valet de chambre had failed to rob him of during the two months of fashionable life he had led in Paris.
“Now then,” said Andrea, while dressing himself, “I’ll wait till he leaves, and then I’ll slip away.” 50047m And, saying this, Andrea, who had now put on his boots and cravat, stole gently to the window, and a second time lifted up the muslin curtain.
Not only was the first gendarme still there, but the young man now perceived a second yellow, blue, and white uniform at the foot of the staircase, the only one by which he could descend, while a third, on horseback, holding a musket in his fist, was posted as a sentinel at the great street-door which alone afforded the means of egress.
The appearance of the third gendarme settled the matter, for a crowd of curious loungers was extended before him, effectually blocking the entrance to the hotel.
“_Diable!_” A pallor overspread the young man’s forehead, and he looked around him with anxiety.
His room, like all those on the same floor, had but one outlet to the gallery in the sight of everybody.
“I am lost!” was his second thought; and, indeed, for a man in Andrea’s situation, an arrest meant the assizes, trial, and death,—death without mercy or delay.
For a moment he convulsively pressed his head within his hands, and during that brief period he became nearly mad with terror; but soon a ray of hope glimmered in the multitude of thoughts which bewildered his mind, and a faint smile played upon his white lips and pallid cheeks.
With forced composure he dipped the pen in the ink, and wrote the following lines upon a sheet of paper: “I have no money to pay my bill, but I am not a dishonest man; I leave behind me as a pledge this pin, worth ten times the amount.
I shall be excused for leaving at daybreak, for I was ashamed.” He then drew the pin from his cravat and placed it on the paper.
At this precise time, the first gendarme Andrea had noticed walked upstairs, preceded by the commissary of police, and supported by the second gendarme who guarded the staircase and was himself reinforced by the one stationed at the door.
Andrea was indebted for this visit to the following circumstances.
At daybreak, the telegraphs were set at work in all directions, and almost immediately the authorities in every district had exerted their utmost endeavors to arrest the murderer of Caderousse.
Compiègne, that royal residence and fortified town, is well furnished with authorities, gendarmes, and commissaries of police; they therefore began operations as soon as the telegraphic despatch arrived, and the Bell and Bottle being the best-known hotel in the town, they had naturally directed their first inquiries there.
Now, besides the reports of the sentinels guarding the Hôtel de Ville, which is next door to the Bell and Bottle, it had been stated by others that a number of travellers had arrived during the night.
The sentinel who was relieved at six o’clock in the morning, remembered perfectly that, just as he was taking his post a few minutes past four, a young man arrived on horseback, with a little boy before him.
The young man, having dismissed the boy and horse, knocked at the door of the hotel, which was opened, and again closed after his entrance.
This late arrival had attracted much suspicion, and the young man being no other than Andrea, the commissary and gendarme, who was a brigadier, directed their steps towards his room.
“Oh, oh,” said the brigadier, who thoroughly understood the trick; “a bad sign to find the door open!
I would rather find it triply bolted.” And, indeed, the little note and pin upon the table confirmed, or rather corroborated, the sad truth.
We say corroborated, because the brigadier was too experienced to be convinced by a single proof.
He glanced around, looked in the bed, shook the curtains, opened the closets, and finally stopped at the chimney.
Andrea had taken the precaution to leave no traces of his feet in the ashes, but still it was an outlet, and in this light was not to be passed over without serious investigation.
The brigadier sent for some sticks and straw, and having filled the chimney with them, set a light to it.
The fire crackled, and the smoke ascended like the dull vapor from a volcano; but still no prisoner fell down, as they expected.
It was now his turn to look about him; the Hôtel de Ville, a massive sixteenth century building, was on his right; anyone could descend from the openings in the tower, and examine every corner of the roof below, and Andrea expected momentarily to see the head of a gendarme appear at one of these openings.
If once discovered, he knew he would be lost, for the roof afforded no chance of escape; he therefore resolved to descend, not through the same chimney by which he had come up, but by a similar one conducting to another room.
He looked around for a chimney from which no smoke issued, and having reached it, he disappeared through the orifice without being seen by anyone.
At the same minute, one of the little windows of the Hôtel de Ville was thrown open, and the head of a gendarme appeared.
For an instant it remained motionless as one of the stone decorations of the building, then after a long sigh of disappointment the head disappeared.
The brigadier, calm and dignified as the law he represented, passed through the crowd, without answering the thousand questions addressed to him, and re-entered the hotel.
“Well?” asked the two gendarmes.
“Ah, what is that?” cried the brigadier.
“Some traveller seems impatient,” said the host.
“What number was it that rang?” “Number 3.” “Run, waiter!” At this moment the screams and ringing were redoubled.
“Aha!” said the brigadier, stopping the servant, “the person who is ringing appears to want something more than a waiter; we will attend upon him with a gendarme.
Who occupies Number 3?” “The little fellow who arrived last night in a post-chaise with his sister, and who asked for an apartment with two beds.” The bell here rang for the third time, with another shriek of anguish.
Commissary!” said the brigadier; “tread in my steps.” “Wait an instant,” said the host; “Number 3 has two staircases,—inside and outside.” “Good,” said the brigadier.
Are the carbines loaded?” “Yes, brigadier.” “Well, you guard the exterior, and if he attempts to fly, fire upon him; he must be a great criminal, from what the telegraph says.” The brigadier, followed by the commissary, disappeared by the inside staircase, accompanied by the noise which his assertions respecting Andrea had excited in the crowd.
This is what had happened: Andrea had very cleverly managed to descend two-thirds of the chimney, but then his foot slipped, and notwithstanding his endeavors, he came into the room with more speed and noise than he intended.
It would have signified little had the room been empty, but unfortunately it was occupied.
Two ladies, sleeping in one bed, were awakened by the noise, and fixing their eyes upon the spot whence the sound proceeded, they saw a man.
One of these ladies, the fair one, uttered those terrible shrieks which resounded through the house, while the other, rushing to the bell-rope, rang with all her strength.
Andrea, as we can see, was surrounded by misfortune.
“For pity’s sake,” he cried, pale and bewildered, without seeing whom he was addressing,—“for pity’s sake do not call assistance!
Save me!—I will not harm you.” “Andrea, the murderer!” cried one of the ladies.
Mademoiselle Danglars!” exclaimed Andrea, stupefied.
“Help, help!” cried Mademoiselle d’Armilly, taking the bell from her companion’s hand, and ringing it yet more violently.
“Save me, I am pursued!” said Andrea, clasping his hands.
“Well, conceal me somewhere; you can say you were needlessly alarmed; you can turn their suspicions and save my life!” 50053m The two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawing the bedclothes tightly around them, remained silent to this supplicating voice, repugnance and fear taking possession of their minds.
I see him!” The brigadier had put his eye to the keyhole, and had discovered Andrea in a posture of entreaty.
Andrea ran to the other door, leading to the gallery, ready to rush out; but he was stopped short, and he stood with his body a little thrown back, pale, and with the useless knife in his clenched hand.
“Fly, then!” cried Mademoiselle d’Armilly, whose pity returned as her fears diminished; “fly!” “Or kill yourself!” said Eugénie (in a tone which a Vestal in the amphitheatre would have used, when urging the victorious gladiator to finish his vanquished adversary).
Andrea shuddered, and looked on the young girl with an expression which proved how little he understood such ferocious honor.
“Kill myself?” he cried, throwing down his knife; “why should I do so?” “Why, you said,” answered Mademoiselle Danglars, “that you would be condemned to die like the worst criminals.” 50055m “Bah,” said Cavalcanti, crossing his arms, “one has friends.” The brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand.
“Come, come,” said Andrea, “sheathe your sword, my fine fellow; there is no occasion to make such a fuss, since I give myself up;” and he held out his hands to be manacled.
The two girls looked with horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the man of the world shaking off his covering and appearing as a galley-slave.
Andrea turned towards them, and with an impertinent smile asked, “Have you any message for your father, Mademoiselle Danglars, for in all probability I shall return to Paris?” Eugénie covered her face with her hands.
Was I not nearly your husband?” 50056m And with this raillery Andrea went out, leaving the two girls a prey to their own feelings of shame, and to the comments of the crowd.
An hour after they stepped into their calash, both dressed in feminine attire.
The gate of the hotel had been closed to screen them from sight, but they were forced, when the door was open, to pass through a throng of curious glances and whispering voices.
Eugénie closed her eyes; but though she could not see, she could hear, and the sneers of the crowd reached her in the carriage.
“Oh, why is not the world a wilderness?” she exclaimed, throwing herself into the arms of Mademoiselle d’Armilly, her eyes sparkling with the same kind of rage which made Nero wish that the Roman world had but one neck, that he might sever it at a single blow.
The next day they stopped at the Hôtel de Flandre, at Brussels.
The same evening Andrea was incarcerated in the Conciergerie.
The Law We have seen how quietly Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle d’Armilly accomplished their transformation and flight; the fact being that everyone was too much occupied in his or her own affairs to think of theirs.
We will leave the banker contemplating the enormous magnitude of his debt before the phantom of bankruptcy, and follow the baroness, who after being momentarily crushed under the weight of the blow which had struck her, had gone to seek her usual adviser, Lucien Debray.
The baroness had looked forward to this marriage as a means of ridding her of a guardianship which, over a girl of Eugénie’s character, could not fail to be rather a troublesome undertaking; for in the tacit relations which maintain the bond of family union, the mother, to maintain her ascendancy over her daughter, must never fail to be a model of wisdom and a type of perfection.
Unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person views things through a certain medium, and so is prevented from seeing in the same light as others, and Madame Danglars, therefore, very much regretted that the marriage of Eugénie had not taken place, not only because the match was good, and likely to insure the happiness of her child, but because it would also set her at liberty.
She ran therefore to Debray, who, after having, like the rest of Paris, witnessed the contract scene and the scandal attending it, had retired in haste to his club, where he was chatting with some friends upon the events which served as a subject of conversation for three-fourths of that city known as the capital of the world.
Debray did not defend himself very warmly, for the idea had sometimes crossed his mind; still, when he recollected the independent, proud spirit of Eugénie, he positively rejected it as utterly impossible, though the same thought again continually recurred and found a resting-place in his heart.
Tea, play, and the conversation, which had become interesting during the discussion of such serious affairs, lasted till one o’clock in the morning.
Meanwhile Madame Danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited the return of Debray in the little green room, seated between two baskets of flowers, which she had that morning sent, and which, it must be confessed, Debray had himself arranged and watered with so much care that his absence was half excused in the eyes of the poor woman.
At twenty minutes to twelve, Madame Danglars, tired of waiting, returned home.
Women of a certain grade are like prosperous grisettes in one respect, they seldom return home after twelve o’clock.
The baroness returned to the hotel with as much caution as Eugénie used in leaving it; she ran lightly upstairs, and with an aching heart entered her apartment, contiguous, as we know, to that of Eugénie.
She was fearful of exciting any remark, and believed firmly in her daughter’s innocence and fidelity to the paternal roof.
She listened at Eugénie’s door, and hearing no sound tried to enter, but the bolts were in place.
Madame Danglars then concluded that the young girl had been overcome with the terrible excitement of the evening, and had gone to bed and to sleep.
She called the maid and questioned her.
In proportion as her memory became clearer, the occurrences of the evening were revealed in their true light; what she had taken for confusion was a tumult; what she had regarded as something distressing, was in reality a disgrace.
And then the baroness remembered that she had felt no pity for poor Mercédès, who had been afflicted with as severe a blow through her husband and son.
The affair, as it will be reported, will cover us with shame; for in a society such as ours satire inflicts a painful and incurable wound.
How fortunate that Eugénie is possessed of that strange character which has so often made me tremble!” And her glance was turned towards heaven, where a mysterious Providence disposes all things, and out of a fault, nay, even a vice, sometimes produces a blessing.
And then her thoughts, cleaving through space like a bird in the air, rested on Cavalcanti.
This Andrea was a wretch, a robber, an assassin, and yet his manners showed the effects of a sort of education, if not a complete one; he had been presented to the world with the appearance of an immense fortune, supported by an honorable name.
How could she extricate herself from this labyrinth?
To whom would she apply to help her out of this painful situation?
Debray, to whom she had run, with the first instinct of a woman towards the man she loves, and who yet betrays her,—Debray could but give her advice, she must apply to someone more powerful than he.
The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort.
It was M. de Villefort who had remorselessly brought misfortune into her family, as though they had been strangers.
And since Villefort, the friend of Danglars, had acted in this way, no one could suppose that he had been previously acquainted with, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea’s intrigues.
Villefort’s conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared to the baroness as if shaped for their mutual advantage.
But the inflexibility of the procureur should stop there; she would see him the next day, and if she could not make him fail in his duties as a magistrate, she would, at least, obtain all the indulgence he could allow.
She would invoke the past, recall old recollections; she would supplicate him by the remembrance of guilty, yet happy days.
M. de Villefort would stifle the affair; he had only to turn his eyes on one side, and allow Andrea to fly, and follow up the crime under that shadow of guilt called contempt of court.
And after this reasoning she slept easily.
At nine o’clock next morning she arose, and without ringing for her maid or giving the least sign of her activity, she dressed herself in the same simple style as on the previous night; then running downstairs, she left the hotel, walked to the Rue de Provence, called a cab, and drove to M. de Villefort’s house.
For the last month this wretched house had presented the gloomy appearance of a lazaretto infected with the plague.
Three times did the bell ring with a dull, heavy sound, seeming to participate, in the general sadness, before the concierge appeared and peeped through the door, which he opened just wide enough to allow his words to be heard.
He saw a lady, a fashionable, elegantly dressed lady, and yet the door remained almost closed.
“Do you intend opening the door?” said the baroness.
You know me well enough.” “We no longer know anyone, madame.” “You must be mad, my friend,” said the baroness.
Your name?” “The baroness Danglars; you have seen me twenty times.” “Possibly, madame.
And now, what do you want?” “Oh, how extraordinary!
I shall complain to M. de Villefort of the impertinence of his servants.” “Madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; no one enters here without an order from M. d’Avrigny, or without speaking to the procureur.” “Well, I have business with the procureur.” “Is it pressing business?” “You can imagine so, since I have not even brought my carriage out yet.
But enough of this—here is my card, take it to your master.” “Madame will await my return?” “Yes; go.” The concierge closed the door, leaving Madame Danglars in the street.
She had not long to wait; directly afterwards the door was opened wide enough to admit her, and when she had passed through, it was again shut.
Without losing sight of her for an instant, the concierge took a whistle from his pocket as soon as they entered the court, and blew it.
The valet de chambre appeared on the door-steps.
“You will excuse this poor fellow, madame,” he said, as he preceded the baroness, “but his orders are precise, and M. de Villefort begged me to tell you that he could not act otherwise.” In the court showing his merchandise, was a tradesman who had been admitted with the same precautions.
The baroness ascended the steps; she felt herself strongly infected with the sadness which seemed to magnify her own, and still guided by the valet de chambre, who never lost sight of her for an instant, she was introduced to the magistrate’s study.
Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object of her visit, the treatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so insulting, that she began by complaining of it.
But Villefort, raising his head, bowed down by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smile that her complaints died upon her lips.
“Forgive my servants,” he said, “for a terror I cannot blame them for; from being suspected they have become suspicious.” Madame Danglars had often heard of the terror to which the magistrate alluded, but without the evidence of her own eyesight she could never have believed that the sentiment had been carried so far.
“Yes, madame,” replied the magistrate.
“Then you pity me!” “Sincerely, madame.” “And you understand what brings me here?” “You wish to speak to me about the circumstance which has just happened?” “Yes, sir,—a fearful misfortune.” “You mean a mischance.” “A mischance?” repeated the baroness.
“Alas, madame,” said the procureur with his imperturbable calmness of manner, “I consider those alone misfortunes which are irreparable.” “And do you suppose this will be forgotten?” “Everything will be forgotten, madame,” said Villefort.
“Your daughter will be married tomorrow, if not today—in a week, if not tomorrow; and I do not think you can regret the intended husband of your daughter.” Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him so almost insultingly calm.
“Am I come to a friend?” she asked in a tone full of mournful dignity.
“You know that you are, madame,” said Villefort, whose pale cheeks became slightly flushed as he gave her the assurance.
And truly this assurance carried him back to different events from those now occupying the baroness and him.
“Well, then, be more affectionate, my dear Villefort,” said the baroness.
“Speak to me not as a magistrate, but as a friend; and when I am in bitter anguish of spirit, do not tell me that I ought to be gay.” Villefort bowed.
“When I hear misfortunes named, madame,” he said, “I have within the last few months contracted the bad habit of thinking of my own, and then I cannot help drawing up an egotistical parallel in my mind.
That is the reason that by the side of my misfortunes yours appear to me mere mischances; that is why my dreadful position makes yours appear enviable.
You were saying, madame——” “I came to ask you, my friend,” said the baroness, “what will be done with this impostor?” “Impostor,” repeated Villefort; “certainly, madame, you appear to extenuate some cases, and exaggerate others.
Impostor, indeed!—M.
Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather M.
Benedetto, is nothing more nor less than an assassin!” “Sir, I do not deny the justice of your correction, but the more severely you arm yourself against that unfortunate man, the more deeply will you strike our family.
Come, forget him for a moment, and instead of pursuing him, let him go.” “You are too late, madame; the orders are issued.” “Well, should he be arrested—do they think they will arrest him?” “I hope so.” “If they should arrest him (I know that sometimes prisons afford means of escape), will you leave him in prison?” The procureur shook his head.
“At least keep him there till my daughter be married.” “Impossible, madame; justice has its formalities.” “What, even for me?” said the baroness, half jesting, half in earnest.
“For all, even for myself among the rest,” replied Villefort. 50063m “Ah!” exclaimed the baroness, without expressing the ideas which the exclamation betrayed.
Villefort looked at her with that piercing glance which reads the secrets of the heart.
“Yes, I know what you mean,” he said; “you refer to the terrible rumors spread abroad in the world, that the deaths which have kept me in mourning for the last three months, and from which Valentine has only escaped by a miracle, have not happened by natural means.” “I was not thinking of that,” replied Madame Danglars quickly.
“Yes, you were thinking of it, and with justice.
You could not help thinking of it, and saying to yourself, ‘you, who pursue crime so vindictively, answer now, why are there unpunished crimes in your dwelling?’” The baroness became pale.
“Villefort,” she exclaimed in her softest and most captivating manner.
“For Heaven’s sake, madame,” said Villefort, with a firmness of expression not altogether free from harshness—“for Heaven’s sake, do not ask pardon of me for a guilty wretch!
Has the law a memory for all those soft recollections you endeavor to recall?
No, madame; the law has commanded, and when it commands it strikes.
No, madame, they struck me, always struck me! 50065m “Woman, siren that you are, do you persist in fixing on me that fascinating eye, which reminds me that I ought to blush?
But having sinned myself,—it may be more deeply than others,—I never rest till I have torn the disguises from my fellow-creatures, and found out their weaknesses.
I have always found them; and more,—I repeat it with joy, with triumph,—I have always found some proof of human perversity or error.
Every criminal I condemn seems to me living evidence that I am not a hideous exception to the rest.
Alas, alas, alas; all the world is wicked; let us therefore strike at wickedness!” Villefort pronounced these last words with a feverish rage, which gave a ferocious eloquence to his words.
“At least, delay the trial till the next assizes; we shall then have six months before us.” “No, madame,” said Villefort; “instructions have been given.
Do you not think that I also long for forgetfulness?
Madame Danglars trembled with fear; Villefort started with joy.
“Arrested!” he exclaimed; “he was taken at Compiègne, and all is over.” Madame Danglars rose from her seat, pale and cold.
“Adieu, madame,” replied the king’s attorney, as in an almost joyful manner he conducted her to the door.
Then, turning to his desk, he said, striking the letter with the back of his right hand: “Come, I had a forgery, three robberies, and two cases of arson, I only wanted a murder, and here it is.
It will be a splendid session!” Chapter 100.
The Apparition As the procureur had told Madame Danglars, Valentine was not yet recovered.
Bowed down with fatigue, she was indeed confined to her bed; and it was in her own room, and from the lips of Madame de Villefort, that she heard all the strange events we have related; we mean the flight of Eugénie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather Benedetto, together with the accusation of murder pronounced against him.
But Valentine was so weak that this recital scarcely produced the same effect it would have done had she been in her usual state of health.
Indeed, her brain was only the seat of vague ideas, and confused forms, mingled with strange fancies, alone presented themselves before her eyes.
During the daytime Valentine’s perceptions remained tolerably clear, owing to the constant presence of M.
Noirtier, who caused himself to be carried to his granddaughter’s room, and watched her with his paternal tenderness; Villefort also, on his return from the law courts, frequently passed an hour or two with his father and child.
At six o’clock Villefort retired to his study, at eight M. d’Avrigny himself arrived, bringing the night draught prepared for the young girl, and then M.
Noirtier was carried away.
A nurse of the doctor’s choice succeeded them, and never left till about ten or eleven o’clock, when Valentine was asleep.
As she went downstairs she gave the keys of Valentine’s room to M. de Villefort, so that no one could reach the sick-room excepting through that of Madame de Villefort and little Edward.
Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news of Valentine, and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day found him less uneasy.
Certainly, though Valentine still labored under dreadful nervous excitement, she was better; and moreover, Monte Cristo had told him when, half distracted, he had rushed to the count’s house, that if she were not dead in two hours she would be saved.
Now four days had elapsed, and Valentine still lived.
The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentine even in her sleep, or rather in that state of somnolence which succeeded her waking hours; it was then, in the silence of night, in the dim light shed from the alabaster lamp on the chimney-piece, that she saw the shadows pass and repass which hover over the bed of sickness, and fan the fever with their trembling wings.
On the evening of the day on which Valentine had learned of the flight of Eugénie and the arrest of Benedetto,—Villefort having retired as well as Noirtier and d’Avrigny,—her thoughts wandered in a confused maze, alternately reviewing her own situation and the events she had just heard.
The nurse, having placed the beverage prepared by the doctor within reach of the patient, and locked the door, was listening with terror to the comments of the servants in the kitchen, and storing her memory with all the horrible stories which had for some months past amused the occupants of the antechambers in the house of the king’s attorney.
Meanwhile an unexpected scene was passing in the room which had been so carefully locked.
Ten minutes had elapsed since the nurse had left; Valentine, who for the last hour had been suffering from the fever which returned nightly, incapable of controlling her ideas, was forced to yield to the excitement which exhausted itself in producing and reproducing a succession and recurrence of the same fancies and images.
The night-lamp threw out countless rays, each resolving itself into some strange form to her disordered imagination, when suddenly by its flickering light Valentine thought she saw the door of her library, which was in the recess by the chimney-piece, open slowly, though she in vain listened for the sound of the hinges on which it turned.
At any other time Valentine would have seized the silken bell-pull and summoned assistance, but nothing astonished her in her present situation.
Her reason told her that all the visions she beheld were but the children of her imagination, and the conviction was strengthened by the fact that in the morning no traces remained of the nocturnal phantoms, who disappeared with the coming of daylight.
From behind the door a human figure appeared, but the girl was too familiar with such apparitions to be alarmed, and therefore only stared, hoping to recognize Morrel.
The figure advanced towards the bed and appeared to listen with profound attention.
At this moment a ray of light glanced across the face of the midnight visitor.
“It is not he,” she murmured, and waited, in the assurance that this was but a dream, for the man to disappear or assume some other form.
Still, she felt her pulse, and finding it throb violently she remembered that the best method of dispelling such illusions was to drink, for a draught of the beverage prepared by the doctor to allay her fever seemed to cause a reaction of the brain, and for a short time she suffered less.
Valentine therefore reached her hand towards the glass, but as soon as her trembling arm left the bed the apparition advanced more quickly towards her, and approached the young girl so closely that she fancied she heard his breath, and felt the pressure of his hand.
This time the illusion, or rather the reality, surpassed anything Valentine had before experienced; she began to believe herself really alive and awake, and the belief that her reason was this time not deceived made her shudder.
The pressure she felt was evidently intended to arrest her arm, and she slowly withdrew it.
Then the figure, from whom she could not detach her eyes, and who appeared more protecting than menacing, took the glass, and walking towards the night-light held it up, as if to test its transparency.
This did not seem sufficient; the man, or rather the ghost—for he trod so softly that no sound was heard—then poured out about a spoonful into the glass, and drank it.
Valentine witnessed this scene with a sentiment of stupefaction.
Every minute she had expected that it would vanish and give place to another vision; but the man, instead of dissolving like a shadow, again approached her, and said in an agitated voice, “Now you may drink.” Valentine shuddered.
It was the first time one of these visions had ever addressed her in a living voice, and she was about to utter an exclamation.
“The Count of Monte Cristo!” she murmured.
It was easy to see that no doubt now remained in the young girl’s mind as to the reality of the scene; her eyes started with terror, her hands trembled, and she rapidly drew the bedclothes closer to her.
Still, the presence of Monte Cristo at such an hour, his mysterious, fanciful, and extraordinary entrance into her room through the wall, might well seem impossibilities to her shattered reason.
“Maximilian!” she exclaimed, and so sweet did the sound appear to her, that she repeated it—“Maximilian!—has he then owned all to you?” “Everything.
He told me your life was his, and I have promised him that you shall live.” “You have promised him that I shall live?” “Yes.” “But, sir, you spoke of vigilance and protection.
Are you a doctor?” “Yes; the best you could have at the present time, believe me.” “But you say you have watched?” said Valentine uneasily; “where have you been?—I have not seen you.” The count extended his hand towards the library.
But drink some of this;” and the count took a bottle from his pocket, containing a red liquid, of which he poured a few drops into the glass.
“Drink this, and then take nothing more tonight.” Valentine stretched out her hand, but scarcely had she touched the glass when she drew back in fear.
Monte Cristo took the glass, drank half its contents, and then presented it to Valentine, who smiled and swallowed the rest.
“Oh, yes,” she exclaimed, “I recognize the flavor of my nocturnal beverage which refreshed me so much, and seemed to ease my aching brain.
Thank you, sir, thank you!” “This is how you have lived during the last four nights, Valentine,” said the count.
“You saw the person?” repeated the young girl.
“Yes,” repeated the count.
“What you tell me is horrible, sir.
You wish to make me believe something too dreadful.
What?—attempt to murder me in my father’s house, in my room, on my bed of sickness?
Oh, leave me, sir; you are tempting me—you make me doubt the goodness of Providence—it is impossible, it cannot be!” “Are you the first that this hand has stricken?
“Your grandfather knows, then, that a poisoner lives here; perhaps he even suspects the person.
He has been fortifying you, his beloved child, against the fatal effects of the poison, which has failed because your system was already impregnated with it.
But even this would have availed little against a more deadly medium of death employed four days ago, which is generally but too fatal.” “But who, then, is this assassin, this murderer?” “Let me also ask you a question.
“How do you mean?” said Valentine, looking anxiously around.
“Because you are not feverish or delirious tonight, but thoroughly awake; midnight is striking, which is the hour murderers choose.” “Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, wiping off the drops which ran down her forehead.
Midnight struck slowly and sadly; every hour seemed to strike with leaden weight upon the heart of the poor girl.
“Valentine,” said the count, “summon up all your courage; still the beatings of your heart; do not let a sound escape you, and feign to be asleep; then you will see.” Valentine seized the count’s hand.
“I think I hear a noise,” she said; “leave me.” “Good-bye, for the present,” replied the count, walking upon tiptoe towards the library door, and smiling with an expression so sad and paternal that the young girl’s heart was filled with gratitude.
Before closing the door he turned around once more, and said, “Not a movement—not a word; let them think you asleep, or perhaps you may be killed before I have the power of helping you.” And with this fearful injunction the count disappeared through the door, which noiselessly closed after him.
Locusta Valentine was alone; two other clocks, slower than that of Saint-Philippe-du-Roule, struck the hour of midnight from different directions, and excepting the rumbling of a few carriages all was silent.
Then Valentine’s attention was engrossed by the clock in her room, which marked the seconds.
She began counting them, remarking that they were much slower than the beatings of her heart; and still she doubted,—the inoffensive Valentine could not imagine that anyone should desire her death.
One terrible idea pressed upon her mind,—that someone existed in the world who had attempted to assassinate her, and who was about to endeavor to do so again.
Supposing this person, wearied at the inefficacy of the poison, should, as Monte Cristo intimated, have recourse to steel!—What if the count should have no time to run to her rescue!—What if her last moments were approaching, and she should never again see Morrel!
When this terrible chain of ideas presented itself, Valentine was nearly persuaded to ring the bell, and call for help.
But through the door she fancied she saw the luminous eye of the count—that eye which lived in her memory, and the recollection overwhelmed her with so much shame that she asked herself whether any amount of gratitude could ever repay his adventurous and devoted friendship.
Valentine had raised herself upon her elbow, and had scarcely time to throw herself down on the bed and shade her eyes with her arm; then, trembling, agitated, and her heart beating with indescribable terror, she awaited the event.
Someone approached the bed and drew back the curtains.
Valentine summoned every effort, and breathed with that regular respiration which announces tranquil sleep.
“Valentine!” said a low voice.
The girl shuddered to the heart but did not reply.
“Valentine,” repeated the same voice.
Still silent: Valentine had promised not to wake.
Then everything was still, excepting that Valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of some liquid being poured into the glass she had just emptied.
Then she ventured to open her eyelids, and glance over her extended arm.
She saw a woman in a white dressing-gown pouring a liquor from a phial into her glass.
During this short time Valentine must have held her breath, or moved in some slight degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped and leaned over the bed, in order the better to ascertain whether Valentine slept: it was Madame de Villefort.
On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress a shudder, which caused a vibration in the bed.
Madame de Villefort instantly stepped back close to the wall, and there, shaded by the bed-curtains, she silently and attentively watched the slightest movement of Valentine.
The latter recollected the terrible caution of Monte Cristo; she fancied that the hand not holding the phial clasped a long sharp knife.
Then collecting all her remaining strength, she forced herself to close her eyes; but this simple operation upon the most delicate organs of our frame, generally so easy to accomplish, became almost impossible at this moment, so much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelid open and learn the truth.
Madame de Villefort, however, reassured by the silence, which was alone disturbed by the regular breathing of Valentine, again extended her hand, and half hidden by the curtains succeeded in emptying the contents of the phial into the glass.
Then she retired so gently that Valentine did not know she had left the room.
She only witnessed the withdrawal of the arm—the fair round arm of a woman but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread death around her. 50077m It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by Valentine during the minute and a half Madame de Villefort remained in the room.
The grating against the library-door aroused the young girl from the stupor in which she was plunged, and which almost amounted to insensibility.
The noiseless door again turned on its hinges, and the Count of Monte Cristo reappeared.
“Well,” said he, “do you still doubt?” “Oh,” murmured the young girl.
“Have you seen?” “Alas!” “Did you recognize?” Valentine groaned.
“Oh, yes;” she said, “I saw, but I cannot believe!” “Would you rather die, then, and cause Maximilian’s death?” “Oh,” repeated the young girl, almost bewildered, “can I not leave the house?—can I not escape?” “Valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue you everywhere; your servants will be seduced with gold, and death will be offered to you disguised in every shape.
You will find it in the water you drink from the spring, in the fruit you pluck from the tree.” “But did you not say that my kind grandfather’s precaution had neutralized the poison?” “Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will be changed, and the quantity increased.” He took the glass and raised it to his lips.
“It is already done,” he said; “brucine is no longer employed, but a simple narcotic!
I can recognize the flavor of the alcohol in which it has been dissolved.
The fortune is not her gift, but is inherited from my relations.” “Certainly; and that is why M. and Madame de Saint-Méran have died; that is why M.
Noirtier was sentenced the day he made you his heir; that is why you, in your turn, are to die—it is because your father would inherit your property, and your brother, his only son, succeed to his.” “Edward?
“No; and yet your father, a man accustomed to judicial accusations, ought to have known that all these deaths have not happened naturally; it is he who should have watched over you—he should have occupied my place—he should have emptied that glass—he should have risen against the assassin.
Spectre against spectre!” he murmured in a low voice, as he concluded his sentence.
I alone can save you, and I will.” Valentine in the extremity of her terror joined her hands,—for she felt that the moment had arrived to ask for courage,—and began to pray, and while uttering little more than incoherent words, she forgot that her white shoulders had no other covering than her long hair, and that the pulsations of her heart could be seen through the lace of her nightdress.
Monte Cristo gently laid his hand on the young girl’s arm, drew the velvet coverlet close to her throat, and said with a paternal smile: “My child, believe in my devotion to you as you believe in the goodness of Providence and the love of Maximilian.” Valentine gave him a look full of gratitude, and remained as docile as a child.
Then he drew from his waistcoat-pocket the little emerald box, raised the golden lid, and took from it a pastille about the size of a pea, which he placed in her hand.
She took it, and looked attentively on the count; there was an expression on the face of her intrepid protector which commanded her veneration.
She evidently interrogated him by her look.
Valentine carried the pastille to her mouth, and swallowed it.
I will try and gain a little sleep, for you are saved.” “Go,” said Valentine, “whatever happens, I promise you not to fear.” Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young girl, who gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects of the narcotic the count had given her.
Then he took the glass, emptied three parts of the contents in the fireplace, that it might be supposed Valentine had taken it, and replaced it on the table; then he disappeared, after throwing a farewell glance on Valentine, who slept with the confidence and innocence of an angel at the feet of the Lord.
Valentine The night-light continued to burn on the chimney-piece, exhausting the last drops of oil which floated on the surface of the water.
The globe of the lamp appeared of a reddish hue, and the flame, brightening before it expired, threw out the last flickerings which in an inanimate object have been so often compared with the convulsions of a human creature in its final agonies.
A dull and dismal light was shed over the bedclothes and curtains surrounding the young girl.
All noise in the streets had ceased, and the silence was frightful.
It was then that the door of Edward’s room opened, and a head we have before noticed appeared in the glass opposite; it was Madame de Villefort, who came to witness the effects of the drink she had prepared.
She stopped in the doorway, listened for a moment to the flickering of the lamp, the only sound in that deserted room, and then advanced to the table to see if Valentine’s glass were empty.
Madame de Villefort emptied the contents into the ashes, which she disturbed that they might the more readily absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsed the glass, and wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it on the table.
If anyone could have looked into the room just then he would have noticed the hesitation with which Madame de Villefort approached the bed and looked fixedly on Valentine.
The dim light, the profound silence, and the gloomy thoughts inspired by the hour, and still more by her own conscience, all combined to produce a sensation of fear; the poisoner was terrified at the contemplation of her own work.
At length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, and leaning over the pillow gazed intently on Valentine.
The young girl no longer breathed, no breath issued through the half-closed teeth; the white lips no longer quivered—the eyes were suffused with a bluish vapor, and the long black lashes rested on a cheek white as wax.
Madame de Villefort gazed upon the face so expressive even in its stillness; then she ventured to raise the coverlet and press her hand upon the young girl’s heart.
It was cold and motionless.
She only felt the pulsation in her own fingers, and withdrew her hand with a shudder.
One arm was hanging out of the bed; from shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms of Germain Pillon’s “Graces,”23 but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly distorted by convulsion, and the hand, so delicately formed, was resting with stiff outstretched fingers on the framework of the bed.
Madame de Villefort had no longer any doubt; all was over—she had consummated the last terrible work she had to accomplish.
There was no more to do in the room, so the poisoner retired stealthily, as though fearing to hear the sound of her own footsteps; but as she withdrew she still held aside the curtain, absorbed in the irresistible attraction always exerted by the picture of death, so long as it is merely mysterious and does not excite disgust.
The minutes passed; Madame de Villefort could not drop the curtain which she held like a funeral pall over the head of Valentine.
Just then the lamp again flickered; the noise startled Madame de Villefort, who shuddered and dropped the curtain.
Immediately afterwards the light expired, and the room was plunged in frightful obscurity, while the clock at that minute struck half-past four.
Overpowered with agitation, the poisoner succeeded in groping her way to the door, and reached her room in an agony of fear.
The darkness lasted two hours longer; then by degrees a cold light crept through the Venetian blinds, until at length it revealed the objects in the room.
To the tender eye of a father or a lover, the first glance would have sufficed to reveal Valentine’s condition; but to this hireling, Valentine only appeared to sleep.
“Good,” she exclaimed, approaching the table, “she has taken part of her draught; the glass is three-quarters empty.” Then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, and although she had just left her bed, she could not resist the temptation offered by Valentine’s sleep, so she threw herself into an armchair to snatch a little more rest.
The clock striking eight awoke her.
Astonished at the prolonged slumber of the patient, and frightened to see that the arm was still hanging out of the bed, she advanced towards Valentine, and for the first time noticed the white lips.
She tried to replace the arm, but it moved with a frightful rigidity which could not deceive a sick-nurse.
She screamed aloud; then running to the door exclaimed: “Help, help!” 50083m “What is the matter?” asked M. d’Avrigny, at the foot of the stairs, it being the hour he usually visited her.
“What is it?” asked Villefort, rushing from his room.
“Doctor, do you hear them call for help?” “Yes, yes; let us hasten up; it was in Valentine’s room.” But before the doctor and the father could reach the room, the servants who were on the same floor had entered, and seeing Valentine pale and motionless on her bed, they lifted up their hands towards heaven and stood transfixed, as though struck by lightening.
“Call Madame de Villefort!—Wake Madame de Villefort!” cried the procureur from the door of his chamber, which apparently he scarcely dared to leave.
But instead of obeying him, the servants stood watching M. d’Avrigny, who ran to Valentine, and raised her in his arms.
“What?—this one, too?” he exclaimed.
“Oh, where will be the end?” Villefort rushed into the room.
“What are you saying, doctor?” he exclaimed, raising his hands to heaven.
“I say that Valentine is dead!” replied d’Avrigny, in a voice terrible in its solemn calmness. 50085m M. de Villefort staggered and buried his head in the bed.
On the exclamation of the doctor and the cry of the father, the servants all fled with muttered imprecations; they were heard running down the stairs and through the long passages, then there was a rush in the court, afterwards all was still; they had, one and all, deserted the accursed house.
Just then, Madame de Villefort, in the act of slipping on her dressing-gown, threw aside the drapery and for a moment stood motionless, as though interrogating the occupants of the room, while she endeavored to call up some rebellious tears.
On a sudden she stepped, or rather bounded, with outstretched arms, towards the table.
She saw d’Avrigny curiously examining the glass, which she felt certain of having emptied during the night.
It was now a third full, just as it was when she threw the contents into the ashes.
The spectre of Valentine rising before the poisoner would have alarmed her less.
It was, indeed, the same color as the draught she had poured into the glass, and which Valentine had drunk; it was indeed the poison, which could not deceive M. d’Avrigny, which he now examined so closely; it was doubtless a miracle from heaven, that, notwithstanding her precautions, there should be some trace, some proof remaining to reveal the crime.
While Madame de Villefort remained rooted to the spot like a statue of terror, and Villefort, with his head hidden in the bedclothes, saw nothing around him, d’Avrigny approached the window, that he might the better examine the contents of the glass, and dipping the tip of his finger in, tasted it.
“Ah,” he exclaimed, “it is no longer brucine that is used; let me see what it is!” Then he ran to one of the cupboards in Valentine’s room, which had been transformed into a medicine closet, and taking from its silver case a small bottle of nitric acid, dropped a little of it into the liquor, which immediately changed to a blood-red color.
“Ah,” exclaimed d’Avrigny, in a voice in which the horror of a judge unveiling the truth was mingled with the delight of a student making a discovery.
Madame de Villefort was overpowered; her eyes first flashed and then swam, she staggered towards the door and disappeared.
Directly afterwards the distant sound of a heavy weight falling on the ground was heard, but no one paid any attention to it; the nurse was engaged in watching the chemical analysis, and Villefort was still absorbed in grief.
M. d’Avrigny alone had followed Madame de Villefort with his eyes, and watched her hurried retreat.
He lifted up the drapery over the entrance to Edward’s room, and his eye reaching as far as Madame de Villefort’s apartment, he beheld her extended lifeless on the floor.
“Go to the assistance of Madame de Villefort,” he said to the nurse.
“Madame de Villefort is ill.” 50087m “But Mademoiselle de Villefort——” stammered the nurse.
“Mademoiselle de Villefort no longer requires help,” said d’Avrigny, “since she is dead.” “Dead,—dead!” groaned forth Villefort, in a paroxysm of grief, which was the more terrible from the novelty of the sensation in the iron heart of that man.
“Dead!” repeated a third voice.
“Who said Valentine was dead?” The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at the door, pale and terror-stricken.
This is what had happened.
At the usual time, Morrel had presented himself at the little door leading to Noirtier’s room.
Contrary to custom, the door was open, and having no occasion to ring he entered.
Noirtier; but no one answered, the servants having, as we know, deserted the house.
Morrel had no particular reason for uneasiness; Monte Cristo had promised him that Valentine should live, and so far he had always fulfilled his word.
Every night the count had given him news, which was the next morning confirmed by Noirtier.
Still this extraordinary silence appeared strange to him, and he called a second and third time; still no answer.
Then he determined to go up.
Noirtier’s room was opened, like all the rest.
The first thing he saw was the old man sitting in his armchair in his usual place, but his eyes expressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor which overspread his features.
“How are you, sir?” asked Morrel, with a sickness of heart.
“Well,” answered the old man, by closing his eyes; but his appearance manifested increasing uneasiness.
“You are thoughtful, sir,” continued Morrel; “you want something; shall I call one of the servants?” “Yes,” replied Noirtier.
Morrel pulled the bell, but though he nearly broke the cord no one answered.
He turned towards Noirtier; the pallor and anguish expressed on his countenance momentarily increased.
“Oh,” exclaimed Morrel, “why do they not come?
Is anyone ill in the house?” The eyes of Noirtier seemed as though they would start from their sockets.
Valentine?” “Yes, yes,” signed Noirtier.
Maximilian tried to speak, but he could articulate nothing; he staggered, and supported himself against the wainscot.
“Yes, yes, yes!” continued the old man. 50089m Maximilian rushed up the little staircase, while Noirtier’s eyes seemed to say,—“Quicker, quicker!” In a minute the young man darted through several rooms, till at length he reached Valentine’s.
There was no occasion to push the door, it was wide open.
He saw as though in a mist, a black figure kneeling and buried in a confused mass of white drapery.
A terrible fear transfixed him.
It was then he heard a voice exclaim “Valentine is dead!” and another voice which, like an echo repeated: “Dead,—dead!” 50090m Chapter 103.
Maximilian Villefort rose, half-ashamed of being surprised in such a paroxysm of grief.
The terrible office he had held for twenty-five years had succeeded in making him more or less than man.
His glance, at first wandering, fixed itself upon Morrel.
“Who are you, sir,” he asked, “that forget that this is not the manner to enter a house stricken with death?
Go, sir, go!” But Morrel remained motionless; he could not detach his eyes from that disordered bed, and the pale corpse of the young girl who was lying on it.
“Go!—do you hear?” said Villefort, while d’Avrigny advanced to lead Morrel out.
Morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman strength, the armchair containing Noirtier upstairs.
When he reached the landing he placed the armchair on the floor and rapidly rolled it into Valentine’s room.
This could only have been accomplished by means of unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement.
But the most fearful spectacle was Noirtier being pushed towards the bed, his face expressing all his meaning, and his eyes supplying the want of every other faculty.
That pale face and flaming glance appeared to Villefort like a frightful apparition.
Each time he had been brought into contact with his father, something terrible had happened.
“See what they have done!” cried Morrel, with one hand leaning on the back of the chair, and the other extended towards Valentine.
“See, my father, see!” Villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on the young man, who, almost a stranger to him, called Noirtier his father.
At this moment the whole soul of the old man seemed centred in his eyes which became bloodshot; the veins of the throat swelled; his cheeks and temples became purple, as though he was struck with epilepsy; nothing was wanting to complete this but the utterance of a cry.
And the cry issued from his pores, if we may thus speak—a cry frightful in its silence.
D’Avrigny rushed towards the old man and made him inhale a powerful restorative.
“Sir,” cried Morrel, seizing the moist hand of the paralytic, “they ask me who I am, and what right I have to be here.
As for the old man, his chest heaved with his panting respiration.
One could have thought that he was undergoing the agonies preceding death.
At length, happier than the young man, who sobbed without weeping, tears glistened in the eyes of Noirtier.
“Tell them,” said Morrel in a hoarse voice, “tell them that I am her betrothed.
Tell them she was my beloved, my noble girl, my only blessing in the world.
Tell them—oh, tell them, that corpse belongs to me!” The young man overwhelmed by the weight of his anguish, fell heavily on his knees before the bed, which his fingers grasped with convulsive energy.
D’Avrigny, unable to bear the sight of this touching emotion, turned away; and Villefort, without seeking any further explanation, and attracted towards him by the irresistible magnetism which draws us towards those who have loved the people for whom we mourn, extended his hand towards the young man.
But Morrel saw nothing; he had grasped the hand of Valentine, and unable to weep vented his agony in groans as he bit the sheets.
For some time nothing was heard in that chamber but sobs, exclamations, and prayers.
At length Villefort, the most composed of all, spoke: “Sir,” said he to Maximilian, “you say you loved Valentine, that you were betrothed to her.
I knew nothing of this engagement, of this love, yet I, her father, forgive you, for I see that your grief is real and deep; and besides my own sorrow is too great for anger to find a place in my heart.
But you see that the angel whom you hoped for has left this earth—she has nothing more to do with the adoration of men.
Take a last farewell, sir, of her sad remains; take the hand you expected to possess once more within your own, and then separate yourself from her forever.
“I tell you, sir, that two persons exist in you; the father has mourned sufficiently, now let the procureur fulfil his office.” The eyes of Noirtier glistened, and d’Avrigny approached.
“Gentlemen,” said Morrel, reading all that passed through the minds of the witnesses to the scene, “I know what I am saying, and you know as well as I do what I am about to say—Valentine has been assassinated!” Villefort hung his head, d’Avrigny approached nearer, and Noirtier said “Yes” with his eyes.
“Now, sir,” continued Morrel, “in these days no one can disappear by violent means without some inquiries being made as to the cause of her disappearance, even were she not a young, beautiful, and adorable creature like Valentine.
Now, M. le Procureur du Roi,” said Morrel with increasing vehemence, “no mercy is allowed; I denounce the crime; it is your place to seek the assassin.” The young man’s implacable eyes interrogated Villefort, who, on his side, glanced from Noirtier to d’Avrigny.
But instead of finding sympathy in the eyes of the doctor and his father, he only saw an expression as inflexible as that of Maximilian.
“Yes,” indicated the old man.
“Assuredly,” said d’Avrigny.
“Sir,” said Villefort, striving to struggle against this triple force and his own emotion,—“sir, you are deceived; no one commits crimes here.
I am stricken by fate.
It is horrible, indeed, but no one assassinates.” The eyes of Noirtier lighted up with rage, and d’Avrigny prepared to speak.
Morrel, however, extended his arm, and commanded silence.
“And I say that murders _are_ committed here,” said Morrel, whose voice, though lower in tone, lost none of its terrible distinctness: “I tell you that this is the fourth victim within the last four months.
I tell you, Valentine’s life was attempted by poison four days ago, though she escaped, owing to the precautions of M.
I tell you that the dose has been double, the poison changed, and that this time it has succeeded.
I tell you that you know these things as well as I do, since this gentleman has forewarned you, both as a doctor and as a friend.” “Oh, you rave, sir,” exclaimed Villefort, in vain endeavoring to escape the net in which he was taken. 50095m “I rave?” said Morrel; “well, then, I appeal to M. d’Avrigny himself.
Ask him, sir, if he recollects the words he uttered in the garden of this house on the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death.
You thought yourselves alone, and talked about that tragical death, and the fatality you mentioned then is the same which has caused the murder of Valentine.” Villefort and d’Avrigny exchanged looks.
“Yes, yes,” continued Morrel; “recall the scene, for the words you thought were only given to silence and solitude fell into my ears.
Certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolence manifested by M. de Villefort towards his own relations, I ought to have denounced him to the authorities; then I should not have been an accomplice to thy death, as I now am, sweet, beloved Valentine; but the accomplice shall become the avenger.
“And I, too,” he exclaimed in a low voice, “I unite with M.
Morrel in demanding justice for crime; my blood boils at the idea of having encouraged a murderer by my cowardly concession.” “Oh, merciful Heavens!” murmured Villefort.
Morrel raised his head, and reading the eyes of the old man, which gleamed with unnatural lustre,— “Stay,” he said, “M.
Noirtier wishes to speak.” “Yes,” indicated Noirtier, with an expression the more terrible, from all his faculties being centred in his glance.
“Do you know the assassin?” asked Morrel.
“Yes,” replied Noirtier.
“And will you direct us?” exclaimed the young man.
“Listen, M. d’Avrigny, listen!” Noirtier looked upon Morrel with one of those melancholy smiles which had so often made Valentine happy, and thus fixed his attention.
Then, having riveted the eyes of his interlocutor on his own, he glanced towards the door.
“Alas, alas, sir, have pity on me!” The old man’s eyes remained fixed on the door.
The procureur?” “No.” “The doctor?” “Yes.” “You wish to remain alone with M. de Villefort?” “Yes.” “But can he understand you?” “Yes.” “Oh,” said Villefort, inexpressibly delighted to think that the inquiries were to be made by him alone,—“oh, be satisfied, I can understand my father.” While uttering these words with this expression of joy, his teeth clashed together violently.
A more than deathlike silence then reigned in the house.
At the end of a quarter of an hour a faltering footstep was heard, and Villefort appeared at the door of the apartment where d’Avrigny and Morrel had been staying, one absorbed in meditation, the other in grief.
“You can come,” he said, and led them back to Noirtier.
Morrel looked attentively on Villefort.
His face was livid, large drops rolled down his face, and in his fingers he held the fragments of a quill pen which he had torn to atoms.
“Gentlemen,” he said in a hoarse voice, “give me your word of honor that this horrible secret shall forever remain buried amongst ourselves!” The two men drew back.
“I entreat you——” continued Villefort.
“But,” said Morrel, “the culprit—the murderer—the assassin.” “Do not alarm yourself, sir; justice will be done,” said Villefort.
“My father has revealed the culprit’s name; my father thirsts for revenge as much as you do, yet even he conjures you as I do to keep this secret.
Do you not, father?” “Yes,” resolutely replied Noirtier.
Morrel suffered an exclamation of horror and surprise to escape him.
“Oh, sir,” said Villefort, arresting Maximilian by the arm, “if my father, the inflexible man, makes this request, it is because he knows, be assured, that Valentine will be terribly revenged.
Is it not so, father?” The old man made a sign in the affirmative.
Villefort continued: “He knows me, and I have pledged my word to him.
Rest assured, gentlemen, that within three days, in a less time than justice would demand, the revenge I shall have taken for the murder of my child will be such as to make the boldest heart tremble;” and as he spoke these words he ground his teeth, and grasped the old man’s senseless hand.
“Will this promise be fulfilled, M.
Noirtier?” asked Morrel, while d’Avrigny looked inquiringly.
“Yes,” replied Noirtier with an expression of sinister joy.
“Swear, then,” said Villefort, joining the hands of Morrel and d’Avrigny, “swear that you will spare the honor of my house, and leave me to avenge my child.” D’Avrigny turned round and uttered a very feeble “Yes,” but Morrel, disengaging his hand, rushed to the bed, and after having pressed the cold lips of Valentine with his own, hurriedly left, uttering a long, deep groan of despair and anguish.
We have before stated that all the servants had fled.
M. de Villefort was therefore obliged to request M. d’Avrigny to superintend all the arrangements consequent upon a death in a large city, more especially a death under such suspicious circumstances.
It was something terrible to witness the silent agony, the mute despair of Noirtier, whose tears silently rolled down his cheeks.
Villefort retired to his study, and d’Avrigny left to summon the doctor of the mayoralty, whose office it is to examine bodies after decease, and who is expressly named “the doctor of the dead.” M.
Noirtier could not be persuaded to quit his grandchild.
At the end of a quarter of an hour M. d’Avrigny returned with his associate; they found the outer gate closed, and not a servant remaining in the house; Villefort himself was obliged to open to them.
The two doctors, therefore, entered the room alone.
Noirtier was near the bed, pale, motionless, and silent as the corpse.
The district doctor approached with the indifference of a man accustomed to spend half his time amongst the dead; he then lifted the sheet which was placed over the face, and just unclosed the lips.
“Alas,” said d’Avrigny, “she is indeed dead, poor child!” 50099m “Yes,” answered the doctor laconically, dropping the sheet he had raised.
Noirtier uttered a kind of hoarse, rattling sound; the old man’s eyes sparkled, and the good doctor understood that he wished to behold his child.
He therefore approached the bed, and while his companion was dipping the fingers with which he had touched the lips of the corpse in chloride of lime, he uncovered the calm and pale face, which looked like that of a sleeping angel.
A tear, which appeared in the old man’s eye, expressed his thanks to the doctor.
The doctor of the dead then laid his permit on the corner of the table, and having fulfilled his duty, was conducted out by d’Avrigny.
Villefort met them at the door of his study; having in a few words thanked the district doctor, he turned to d’Avrigny, and said: “And now the priest.” “Is there any particular priest you wish to pray with Valentine?” asked d’Avrigny.
“No.” said Villefort; “fetch the nearest.” “The nearest,” said the district doctor, “is a good Italian abbé, who lives next door to you.
Shall I call on him as I pass?” “D’Avrigny,” said Villefort, “be so kind, I beseech you, as to accompany this gentleman.
Here is the key of the door, so that you can go in and out as you please; you will bring the priest with you, and will oblige me by introducing him into my child’s room.” 50101m “Do you wish to see him?” “I only wish to be alone.
A priest can understand a father’s grief.” And M. de Villefort, giving the key to d’Avrigny, again bade farewell to the strange doctor, and retired to his study, where he began to work.
For some temperaments work is a remedy for all afflictions.
As the doctors entered the street, they saw a man in a cassock standing on the threshold of the next door.
D’Avrigny accosted the priest.
“Sir,” he said, “are you disposed to confer a great obligation on an unhappy father who has just lost his daughter?
I mean M. de Villefort, the king’s attorney.” “Ah,” said the priest, in a marked Italian accent; “yes, I have heard that death is in that house.” “Then I need not tell you what kind of service he requires of you.” “I was about to offer myself, sir,” said the priest; “it is our mission to forestall our duties.” “It is a young girl.” “I know it, sir; the servants who fled from the house informed me.
I also know that her name is Valentine, and I have already prayed for her.” “Thank you, sir,” said d’Avrigny; “since you have commenced your sacred office, deign to continue it.
Come and watch by the dead, and all the wretched family will be grateful to you.” “I am going, sir; and I do not hesitate to say that no prayers will be more fervent than mine.” D’Avrigny took the priest’s hand, and without meeting Villefort, who was engaged in his study, they reached Valentine’s room, which on the following night was to be occupied by the undertakers.
On entering the room, Noirtier’s eyes met those of the abbé, and no doubt he read some particular expression in them, for he remained in the room.
D’Avrigny recommended the attention of the priest to the living as well as to the dead, and the abbé promised to devote his prayers to Valentine and his attentions to Noirtier.
In order, doubtless, that he might not be disturbed while fulfilling his sacred mission, the priest rose as soon as d’Avrigny departed, and not only bolted the door through which the doctor had just left, but also that leading to Madame de Villefort’s room.
Danglars’ Signature The next morning dawned dull and cloudy.
During the night the undertakers had executed their melancholy office, and wrapped the corpse in the winding-sheet, which, whatever may be said about the equality of death, is at least a last proof of the luxury so pleasing in life.
This winding-sheet was nothing more than a beautiful piece of cambric, which the young girl had bought a fortnight before.
During the evening two men, engaged for the purpose, had carried Noirtier from Valentine’s room into his own, and contrary to all expectation there was no difficulty in withdrawing him from his child.
The Abbé Busoni had watched till daylight, and then left without calling anyone.
D’Avrigny returned about eight o’clock in the morning; he met Villefort on his way to Noirtier’s room, and accompanied him to see how the old man had slept.
They found him in the large armchair, which served him for a bed, enjoying a calm, nay, almost a smiling sleep.
They both stood in amazement at the door.
“See,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, “nature knows how to alleviate the deepest sorrow.
Noirtier did not love his child, and yet he sleeps.” “Yes, you are right,” replied Villefort, surprised; “he sleeps, indeed!
And this is the more strange, since the least contradiction keeps him awake all night.” “Grief has stunned him,” replied d’Avrigny; and they both returned thoughtfully to the procureur’s study.
“See, I have not slept,” said Villefort, showing his undisturbed bed; “grief does not stun me.
I have filled those papers, and have made out the accusation against the assassin Benedetto.
Oh, work, work,—my passion, my joy, my delight,—it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!” and he convulsively grasped the hand of d’Avrigny.
“Do you require my services now?” asked d’Avrigny.
“No,” said Villefort; “only return again at eleven o’clock; at twelve the—the—oh, Heavens, my poor, poor child!” and the procureur again becoming a man, lifted up his eyes and groaned.
“Shall you be present in the reception-room?” “No; I have a cousin who has undertaken this sad office.
I shall work, doctor—when I work I forget everything.” And, indeed, no sooner had the doctor left the room, than he was again absorbed in work.
On the doorsteps d’Avrigny met the cousin whom Villefort had mentioned, a personage as insignificant in our story as in the world he occupied—one of those beings designed from their birth to make themselves useful to others.
He was punctual, dressed in black, with crape around his hat, and presented himself at his cousin’s with a face made up for the occasion, and which he could alter as might be required.
At eleven o’clock the mourning-coaches rolled into the paved court, and the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré was filled with a crowd of idlers, equally pleased to witness the festivities or the mourning of the rich, and who rush with the same avidity to a funeral procession as to the marriage of a duchess.
Gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our old friends made their appearance—we mean Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp, accompanied by all the leading men of the day at the bar, in literature, or the army, for M. de Villefort moved in the first Parisian circles, less owing to his social position than to his personal merit.
The cousin standing at the door ushered in the guests, and it was rather a relief to the indifferent to see a person as unmoved as themselves, and who did not exact a mournful face or force tears, as would have been the case with a father, a brother, or a lover.
Those who were acquainted soon formed into little groups.
One of them was made of Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp.
“Poor girl,” said Debray, like the rest, paying an involuntary tribute to the sad event,—“poor girl, so young, so rich, so beautiful!
Could you have imagined this scene, Château-Renaud, when we saw her, at the most three weeks ago, about to sign that contract?” “Indeed, no,” said Château-Renaud.” “Did you know her?” “I spoke to her once or twice at Madame de Morcerf’s, among the rest; she appeared to me charming, though rather melancholy.
Where is her stepmother?
Do you know?” “She is spending the day with the wife of the worthy gentleman who is receiving us.” 50105m “Who is he?” “Whom do you mean?” “The gentleman who receives us?
I am condemned to witness those gentlemen every day,” said Beauchamp; “but he is perfectly unknown to me.” “Have you mentioned this death in your paper?” “It has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed, I doubt if it will please M.
Villefort, for it says that if four successive deaths had happened anywhere else than in the house of the king’s attorney, he would have interested himself somewhat more about it.” “Still,” said Château-Renaud, “Dr. d’Avrigny, who attends my mother, declares he is in despair about it.
“I met him on the boulevard, on my way here,” said Beauchamp.
Danglars is his banker, is he not?” asked Château-Renaud of Debray.
“I believe so,” replied the secretary with slight uneasiness.
“I think he has only been introduced to Madame de Villefort.” “Still, he ought to have been here,” said Debray; “I wonder what will be talked about tonight; this funeral is the news of the day.
But hush, here comes our minister of justice; he will feel obliged to make some little speech to the cousin,” and the three young men drew near to listen.
Beauchamp told the truth when he said that on his way to the funeral he had met Monte Cristo, who was directing his steps towards the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin, to M.
The banker saw the carriage of the count enter the courtyard, and advanced to meet him with a sad, though affable smile.
“Well,” said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo, “I suppose you have come to sympathize with me, for indeed misfortune has taken possession of my house.
Do you know, count, that persons of our time of life—not that you belong to the class, you are still a young man,—but as I was saying, persons of our time of life have been very unfortunate this year.
For example, look at the puritanical procureur, who has just lost his daughter, and in fact nearly all his family, in so singular a manner; Morcerf dishonored and dead; and then myself covered with ridicule through the villany of Benedetto; besides——” “Besides what?” asked the Count.
“Alas, do you not know?” “What new calamity?” “My daughter——” “Mademoiselle Danglars?” “Eugénie has left us!” “Good heavens, what are you telling me?” “The truth, my dear count.
Oh, how happy you must be in not having either wife or children!” “Do you think so?” “Indeed I do.” “And so Mademoiselle Danglars——” “She could not endure the insult offered to us by that wretch, so she asked permission to travel.” “And is she gone?” “The other night she left.” “With Madame Danglars?” “No, with a relation.
But still, we have quite lost our dear Eugénie; for I doubt whether her pride will ever allow her to return to France.” “Still, baron,” said Monte Cristo, “family griefs, or indeed any other affliction which would crush a man whose child was his only treasure, are endurable to a millionaire.
Philosophers may well say, and practical men will always support the opinion, that money mitigates many trials; and if you admit the efficacy of this sovereign balm, you ought to be very easily consoled—you, the king of finance, the focus of immeasurable power.” Danglars looked at him askance, as though to ascertain whether he spoke seriously.
“Yes,” he answered, “if a fortune brings consolation, I ought to be consoled; I am rich.” “So rich, dear sir, that your fortune resembles the pyramids; if you wished to demolish them you could not, and if it were possible, you would not dare!” Danglars smiled at the good-natured pleasantry of the count.
“That reminds me,” he said, “that when you entered I was on the point of signing five little bonds; I have already signed two: will you allow me to do the same to the others?” “Pray do so.” There was a moment’s silence, during which the noise of the banker’s pen was alone heard, while Monte Cristo examined the gilt mouldings on the ceiling.
“Are they Spanish, Haitian, or Neapolitan bonds?” said Monte Cristo.
“No,” said Danglars, smiling, “they are bonds on the bank of France, payable to bearer.
Stay, count,” he added, “you, who may be called the emperor, if I claim the title of king of finance, have you many pieces of paper of this size, each worth a million?” The count took into his hands the papers, which Danglars had so proudly presented to him, and read:— “‘To the Governor of the Bank.
Please pay to my order, from the fund deposited by me, the sum of a million, and charge the same to my account.
“Baron Danglars.’” “One, two, three, four, five,” said Monte Cristo; “five millions—why what a Crœsus you are!” “This is how I transact business,” said Danglars.
“It is really wonderful,” said the count; “above all, if, as I suppose, it is payable at sight.” “It is, indeed,” said Danglars.
Five millions on five little scraps of paper!—it must be seen to be believed.” “You do not doubt it?” “No!” “You say so with an accent—stay, you shall be convinced; take my clerk to the bank, and you will see him leave it with an order on the Treasury for the same sum.” “No,” said Monte Cristo folding the five notes, “most decidedly not; the thing is so curious, I will make the experiment myself.
I am credited on you for six millions.
I have drawn nine hundred thousand francs, you therefore still owe me five millions and a hundred thousand francs.
I will take the five scraps of paper that I now hold as bonds, with your signature alone, and here is a receipt in full for the six millions between us.
I had prepared it beforehand, for I am much in want of money today.” And Monte Cristo placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand, while with the other he held out the receipt to Danglars.
If a thunderbolt had fallen at the banker’s feet, he could not have experienced greater terror.
“What,” he stammered, “do you mean to keep that money?
But here are your bonds; pay me differently;” and he held the bonds towards Danglars, who seized them like a vulture extending its claws to withhold the food that is being wrested from its grasp.
“Yes, keep it—keep it.” Monte Cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with that indescribable expression which seemed to say, “Come, reflect; if you repent there is still time.” “No,” said Danglars, “no, decidedly no; keep my signatures.
But you know none are so formal as bankers in transacting business; I intended this money for the charity fund, and I seemed to be robbing them if I did not pay them with these precise bonds.
Excuse me;” and he began to laugh loudly, but nervously.
“Certainly, I excuse you,” said Monte Cristo graciously, “and pocket them.” And he placed the bonds in his pocket-book.
“But,” said Danglars, “there is still a sum of one hundred thousand francs?” “Oh, a mere nothing,” said Monte Cristo.
Monte Cristo exchanged a ceremonious bow with M. de Boville, who was standing in the waiting-room, and who was introduced into Danglars’ room as soon as the count had left.
The count’s serious face was illumined by a faint smile, as he noticed the portfolio which the receiver-general held in his hand.
At the door he found his carriage, and was immediately driven to the bank.
Meanwhile Danglars, repressing all emotion, advanced to meet the receiver-general.
We need not say that a smile of condescension was stamped upon his lips.
“Good-morning, creditor,” said he; “for I wager anything it is the creditor who visits me.” “You are right, baron,” answered M. de Boville; “the charities present themselves to you through me; the widows and orphans depute me to receive alms to the amount of five millions from you.” “And yet they say orphans are to be pitied,” said Danglars, wishing to prolong the jest.
My funds are deposited there, and you can understand that if I draw out ten millions on the same day it will appear rather strange to the governor.
Two days will be a different thing,” said Danglars, smiling.
“Come,” said Boville, with a tone of entire incredulity, “five millions to that gentleman who just left, and who bowed to me as though he knew me?” “Perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; M. de Monte Cristo knows everybody.” “Five millions!” “Here is his receipt.
Believe your own eyes.” M. de Boville took the paper Danglars presented him, and read: “Received of Baron Danglars the sum of five million one hundred thousand francs, to be repaid on demand by the house of Thomson & French of Rome.” “It is really true,” said M. de Boville.
“Do you know the house of Thomson & French?” “Yes, I once had business to transact with it to the amount of 200,000 francs; but since then I have not heard it mentioned.” “It is one of the best houses in Europe,” said Danglars, carelessly throwing down the receipt on his desk.
“And he had five millions in your hands alone!
Why, this Count of Monte Cristo must be a nabob?” “Indeed I do not know what he is; he has three unlimited credits—one on me, one on Rothschild, one on Lafitte; and, you see,” he added carelessly, “he has given me the preference, by leaving a balance of 100,000 francs.” M. de Boville manifested signs of extraordinary admiration.
“I must visit him,” he said, “and obtain some pious grant from him.” “Oh, you may make sure of him; his charities alone amount to 20,000 francs a month.” “It is magnificent!
But to return to our millions.” “Certainly,” said Danglars, in the most natural tone in the world.
“Are you then pressed for this money?” “Yes; for the examination of our cash takes place tomorrow.” “Tomorrow?
At what hour does the examination take place?” “At two o’clock.” “Send at twelve,” said Danglars, smiling.
M. de Boville said nothing, but nodded his head, and took up the portfolio.
“Now I think of it, you can do better,” said Danglars.
“How do you mean?” “The receipt of M. de Monte Cristo is as good as money; take it to Rothschild’s or Lafitte’s, and they will take it off your hands at once.” “What, though payable at Rome?” “Certainly; it will only cost you a discount of 5,000 or 6,000 francs.” The receiver started back.
“_Ma foi!_” he said, “I prefer waiting till tomorrow.
What a proposition!” “I thought, perhaps,” said Danglars with supreme impertinence, “that you had a deficiency to make up?” “Indeed,” said the receiver.
“And if that were the case it would be worth while to make some sacrifice.” “Thank you, no, sir.” “Then it will be tomorrow.” “Yes; but without fail.” “Ah, you are laughing at me; send tomorrow at twelve, and the bank shall be notified.” “I will come myself.” “Better still, since it will afford me the pleasure of seeing you.” They shook hands.
“By the way,” said M. de Boville, “are you not going to the funeral of poor Mademoiselle de Villefort, which I met on my road here?” “No,” said the banker; “I have appeared rather ridiculous since that affair of Benedetto, so I remain in the background.” “Bah, you are wrong.
How were you to blame in that affair?” “Listen—when one bears an irreproachable name, as I do, one is rather sensitive.” “Everybody pities you, sir; and, above all, Mademoiselle Danglars!” “Poor Eugénie!” said Danglars; “do you know she is going to embrace a religious life?” “No.” “Alas, it is unhappily but too true.
The day after the event, she decided on leaving Paris with a nun of her acquaintance; they are gone to seek a very strict convent in Italy or Spain.” “Oh, it is terrible!” and M. de Boville retired with this exclamation, after expressing acute sympathy with the father.
Then taking a passport from his drawer he said,—“Good, it is available for two months longer.” Chapter 105.
The Cemetery of Père-Lachaise M. de Boville had indeed met the funeral procession which was taking Valentine to her last home on earth.
The weather was dull and stormy, a cold wind shook the few remaining yellow leaves from the boughs of the trees, and scattered them among the crowd which filled the boulevards.
M. de Villefort, a true Parisian, considered the cemetery of Père-Lachaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remains of a Parisian family; there alone the corpses belonging to him would be surrounded by worthy associates.
He had therefore purchased a vault, which was quickly occupied by members of his family.
On the front of the monument was inscribed: “The families of Saint-Méran and Villefort,” for such had been the last wish expressed by poor Renée, Valentine’s mother.
The pompous procession therefore wended its way towards Père-Lachaise from the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.
Having crossed Paris, it passed through the Faubourg du Temple, then leaving the exterior boulevards, it reached the cemetery.
As they left Paris, an equipage with four horses, at full speed, was seen to draw up suddenly; it contained Monte Cristo.
The count left the carriage and mingled in the crowd who followed on foot.
Château-Renaud perceived him and immediately alighting from his _coupé_, joined him; Beauchamp did the same.
The count looked attentively through every opening in the crowd; he was evidently watching for someone, but his search ended in disappointment. 50119m “Where is Morrel?” he asked; “do either of these gentlemen know where he is?” “We have already asked that question,” said Château-Renaud, “for none of us has seen him.” The count was silent, but continued to gaze around him.
At length they arrived at the cemetery.
The piercing eye of Monte Cristo glanced through clusters of bushes and trees, and was soon relieved from all anxiety, for seeing a shadow glide between the yew-trees, Monte Cristo recognized him whom he sought.
One funeral is generally very much like another in this magnificent metropolis.
Black figures are seen scattered over the long white avenues; the silence of earth and heaven is alone broken by the noise made by the crackling branches of hedges planted around the monuments; then follows the melancholy chant of the priests, mingled now and then with a sob of anguish, escaping from some woman concealed behind a mass of flowers.
The shadow Monte Cristo had noticed passed rapidly behind the tomb of Abélard and Héloïse, placed itself close to the heads of the horses belonging to the hearse, and following the undertaker’s men, arrived with them at the spot appointed for the burial.
Each person’s attention was occupied.
Monte Cristo saw nothing but the shadow, which no one else observed.
Twice the count left the ranks to see whether the object of his interest had any concealed weapon beneath his clothes.
When the procession stopped, this shadow was recognized as Morrel, who, with his coat buttoned up to his throat, his face livid, and convulsively crushing his hat between his fingers, leaned against a tree, situated on an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so that none of the funeral details could escape his observation.
Everything was conducted in the usual manner.
Monte Cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather he only saw Morrel, whose calmness had a frightful effect on those who knew what was passing in his heart.
“See,” said Beauchamp, pointing out Morrel to Debray.
“What is he doing up there?” And they called Château-Renaud’s attention to him.
“How pale he is!” said Château-Renaud, shuddering.
“Not at all,” said Château-Renaud, slowly; “I think he is violently agitated.
He is very susceptible.” “Bah,” said Debray; “he scarcely knew Mademoiselle de Villefort; you said so yourself.” “True.
Still I remember he danced three times with her at Madame de Morcerf’s.
Do you recollect that ball, count, where you produced such an effect?” 50121m “No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo, without even knowing of what or to whom he was speaking, so much was he occupied in watching Morrel, who was holding his breath with emotion.
“The discourse is over; farewell, gentlemen,” said the count, unceremoniously.
And he disappeared without anyone seeing whither he went.
The funeral being over, the guests returned to Paris.
Château-Renaud looked for a moment for Morrel; but while they were watching the departure of the count, Morrel had quitted his post, and Château-Renaud, failing in his search, joined Debray and Beauchamp.
Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb and awaited the arrival of Morrel, who by degrees approached the tomb now abandoned by spectators and workmen.
Morrel threw a glance around, but before it reached the spot occupied by Monte Cristo the latter had advanced yet nearer, still unperceived.
The count, with outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitude ready to pounce upon Morrel upon the first occasion.
“No, thank you.” “Do you wish anything?” “Leave me to pray.” The count withdrew without opposition, but it was only to place himself in a situation where he could watch every movement of Morrel, who at length arose, brushed the dust from his knees, and turned towards Paris, without once looking back.
He walked slowly down the Rue de la Roquette.
The count, dismissing his carriage, followed him about a hundred paces behind.
Maximilian crossed the canal and entered the Rue Meslay by the boulevards.
Five minutes after the door had been closed on Morrel’s entrance, it was again opened for the count.
Julie was at the entrance of the garden, where she was attentively watching Penelon, who, entering with zeal into his profession of gardener, was very busy grafting some Bengal roses.
“Ah, count,” she exclaimed, with the delight manifested by every member of the family whenever he visited the Rue Meslay.
“Maximilian has just returned, has he not, madame?” asked the count. 50123m “Yes, I think I saw him pass; but pray, call Emmanuel.” “Excuse me, madame, but I must go up to Maximilian’s room this instant,” replied Monte Cristo, “I have something of the greatest importance to tell him.” “Go, then,” she said with a charming smile, which accompanied him until he had disappeared.
Monte Cristo soon ran up the staircase conducting from the ground floor to Maximilian’s room; when he reached the landing he listened attentively, but all was still.
Like many old houses occupied by a single family, the room door was panelled with glass; but it was locked, Maximilian was shut in, and it was impossible to see what was passing in the room, because a red curtain was drawn before the glass.
The count’s anxiety was manifested by a bright color which seldom appeared on the face of that imperturbable man.
“What shall I do!” he uttered, and reflected for a moment; “shall I ring?
“I beg a thousand pardons,” said the count, “there is nothing the matter, but I slipped down and broke one of your panes of glass with my elbow.
Since it is opened, I will take advantage of it to enter your room; do not disturb yourself—do not disturb yourself!” And passing his hand through the broken glass, the count opened the door.
Morrel, evidently discomposed, came to meet Monte Cristo less with the intention of receiving him than to exclude his entry.
“_Ma foi_,” said Monte Cristo, rubbing his elbow, “it’s all your servant’s fault; your stairs are so polished, it is like walking on glass.” “Are you hurt, sir?” coldly asked Morrel.
I do sometimes, soldier though I am.” Monte Cristo advanced into the room; Maximilian was obliged to let him pass, but he followed him.
“You were writing?” said Monte Cristo with a searching look.
“Your pistols are beside your desk,” said Monte Cristo, pointing with his finger to the pistols on the table.
“I am on the point of starting on a journey,” replied Morrel disdainfully.
“My friend,” exclaimed Monte Cristo in a tone of exquisite sweetness.
“Sir?” “My friend, my dear Maximilian, do not make a hasty resolution, I entreat you.” “I make a hasty resolution?” said Morrel, shrugging his shoulders; “is there anything extraordinary in a journey?” 50125m “Maximilian,” said the count, “let us both lay aside the mask we have assumed.
You no more deceive me with that false calmness than I impose upon you with my frivolous solicitude.
You can understand, can you not, that to have acted as I have done, to have broken that glass, to have intruded on the solitude of a friend—you can understand that, to have done all this, I must have been actuated by real uneasiness, or rather by a terrible conviction.
Morrel, you are going to destroy yourself!” “Indeed, count,” said Morrel, shuddering; “what has put this into your head?” “I tell you that you are about to destroy yourself,” continued the count, “and here is proof of what I say;” and, approaching the desk, he removed the sheet of paper which Morrel had placed over the letter he had begun, and took the latter in his hands.
Morrel rushed forward to tear it from him, but Monte Cristo perceiving his intention, seized his wrist with his iron grasp.
“You wish to destroy yourself,” said the count; “you have written it.” “Well,” said Morrel, changing his expression of calmness for one of violence—“well, and if I do intend to turn this pistol against myself, who shall prevent me—who will dare prevent me?
All my hopes are blighted, my heart is broken, my life a burden, everything around me is sad and mournful; earth has become distasteful to me, and human voices distract me.
When, sir, I tell you all this with tears of heartfelt anguish, can you reply that I am wrong, can you prevent my putting an end to my miserable existence?
You, who pretend to understand everything, even the hidden sources of knowledge,—and who enact the part of a guardian angel upon earth, and could not even find an antidote to a poison administered to a young girl!
Ah, sir, indeed you would inspire me with pity, were you not hateful in my eyes.” “Morrel——” “Yes; you tell me to lay aside the mask, and I will do so, be satisfied!
When you spoke to me at the cemetery, I answered you—my heart was softened; when you arrived here, I allowed you to enter.
But since you abuse my confidence, since you have devised a new torture after I thought I had exhausted them all, then, Count of Monte Cristo my pretended benefactor—then, Count of Monte Cristo, the universal guardian, be satisfied, you shall witness the death of your friend;” and Morrel, with a maniacal laugh, again rushed towards the pistols.
“And I again repeat, you shall not commit suicide.” “Prevent me, then!” replied Morrel, with another struggle, which, like the first, failed in releasing him from the count’s iron grasp.
“I will prevent you.” 50127m “And who are you, then, that arrogate to yourself this tyrannical right over free and rational beings?” “Who am I?” repeated Monte Cristo.
“Listen; I am the only man in the world having the right to say to you, ‘Morrel, your father’s son shall not die today;’” and Monte Cristo, with an expression of majesty and sublimity, advanced with arms folded toward the young man, who, involuntarily overcome by the commanding manner of this man, recoiled a step.
Then his admirable nature underwent a complete and sudden revulsion; he arose, rushed out of the room and to the stairs, exclaiming energetically, “Julie, Julie—Emmanuel, Emmanuel!” Monte Cristo endeavored also to leave, but Maximilian would have died rather than relax his hold of the handle of the door, which he closed upon the count.
Julie, Emmanuel, and some of the servants, ran up in alarm on hearing the cries of Maximilian.
Morrel seized their hands, and opening the door exclaimed in a voice choked with sobs: “On your knees—on your knees—he is our benefactor—the saviour of our father!
He is——” He would have added “Edmond Dantès,” but the count seized his arm and prevented him.
Julie threw herself into the arms of the count; Emmanuel embraced him as a guardian angel; Morrel again fell on his knees, and struck the ground with his forehead.
For a while nothing was heard in the room but a succession of sobs, while the incense from their grateful hearts mounted to heaven.
Julie had scarcely recovered from her deep emotion when she rushed out of the room, descended to the next floor, ran into the drawing-room with childlike joy and raised the crystal globe which covered the purse given by the unknown of the Allées de Meilhan.
Meanwhile, Emmanuel in a broken voice said to the count: “Oh, count, how could you, hearing us so often speak of our unknown benefactor, seeing us pay such homage of gratitude and adoration to his memory,—how could you continue so long without discovering yourself to us?
Oh, it was cruel to us, and—dare I say it?—to you also.” “Listen, my friends,” said the count—“I may call you so since we have really been friends for the last eleven years—the discovery of this secret has been occasioned by a great event which you must never know.
I wished to bury it during my whole life in my own bosom, but your brother Maximilian wrested it from me by a violence he repents of now, I am sure.” Then turning around, and seeing that Morrel, still on his knees, had thrown himself into an armchair, he added in a low voice, pressing Emmanuel’s hand significantly, “Watch over him.” “Why so?” asked the young man, surprised.
“I cannot explain myself; but watch over him.” Emmanuel looked around the room and caught sight of the pistols; his eyes rested on the weapons, and he pointed to them.
Emmanuel went towards the pistols.
Then walking towards Morrel, he took his hand; the tumultuous agitation of the young man was succeeded by a profound stupor.
Julie returned, holding the silken purse in her hands, while tears of joy rolled down her cheeks, like dewdrops on the rose.
“Here is the relic,” she said; “do not think it will be less dear to us now we are acquainted with our benefactor!” “My child,” said Monte Cristo, coloring, “allow me to take back that purse?
Since you now know my face, I wish to be remembered alone through the affection I hope you will grant me.
He then saw that he must make another struggle against the grief of his friend, and taking the hands of Emmanuel and Julie, which he pressed within his own, he said with the mild authority of a father: “My kind friends, leave me alone with Maximilian.” Julie saw the means offered of carrying off her precious relic, which Monte Cristo had forgotten.
The count was alone with Morrel, who remained motionless as a statue.
“Come,” said Monte-Cristo, touching his shoulder with his finger, “are you a man again, Maximilian?” “Yes; for I begin to suffer again.” The count frowned, apparently in gloomy hesitation.
One day, in a moment of despair like yours, since it led to a similar resolution, I also wished to kill myself; one day your father, equally desperate, wished to kill himself too.
There are no tears in my eyes, nor is there fever in my veins, yet I see you suffer—you, Maximilian, whom I love as my own son.
Well, does not this tell you that in grief, as in life, there is always something to look forward to beyond?
Now, if I entreat, if I order you to live, Morrel, it is in the conviction that one day you will thank me for having preserved your life.” “Oh, heavens,” said the young man, “oh, heavens—what are you saying, count?
You see, I have been a soldier ever since I attained manhood.
I reached the age of twenty-nine without loving, for none of the feelings I before then experienced merit the appellation of love.
Well, at twenty-nine I saw Valentine; for two years I have loved her, for two years I have seen written in her heart, as in a book, all the virtues of a daughter and wife.
Count, to possess Valentine would have been a happiness too infinite, too ecstatic, too complete, too divine for this world, since it has been denied me; but without Valentine the earth is desolate.” “I have told you to hope,” said the count.
“Then have a care, I repeat, for you seek to persuade me, and if you succeed I should lose my reason, for I should hope that I could again behold Valentine.” The count smiled.
“My friend, my father,” said Morrel with excitement, “have a care, I again repeat, for the power you wield over me alarms me.
Weigh your words before you speak, for my eyes have already become brighter, and my heart beats strongly; be cautious, or you will make me believe in supernatural agencies.
I must obey you, though you bade me call forth the dead or walk upon the water.” “Hope, my friend,” repeated the count.
“Ah,” said Morrel, falling from the height of excitement to the abyss of despair—“ah, you are playing with me, like those good, or rather selfish mothers who soothe their children with honeyed words, because their screams annoy them.
No, my friend, I was wrong to caution you; do not fear, I will bury my grief so deep in my heart, I will disguise it so, that you shall not even care to sympathize with me.
Adieu, my friend, adieu!” “On the contrary,” said the count, “after this time you must live with me—you must not leave me, and in a week we shall have left France behind us.” “And you still bid me hope?” “I tell you to hope, because I have a method of curing you.” “Count, you render me sadder than before, if it be possible.
You think the result of this blow has been to produce an ordinary grief, and you would cure it by an ordinary remedy—change of scene.” And Morrel dropped his head with disdainful incredulity.
“I have confidence in the remedy I propose, and only ask you to permit me to assure you of its efficacy.” “Count, you prolong my agony.” “Then,” said the count, “your feeble spirit will not even grant me the trial I request?
Come—do you know of what the Count of Monte Cristo is capable? do you know that he holds terrestrial beings under his control? nay, that he can almost work a miracle?
Well, wait for the miracle I hope to accomplish, or——” “Or?” repeated Morrel.
“I not only promise, but swear it!” said Monte Cristo extending his hand.
“In a month, then, on your honor, if I am not consoled, you will let me take my life into my own hands, and whatever may happen you will not call me ungrateful?” “In a month, to the day, the very hour and the date is a sacred one, Maximilian.
I do not know whether you remember that this is the 5th of September; it is ten years today since I saved your father’s life, who wished to die.” Morrel seized the count’s hand and kissed it; the count allowed him to pay the homage he felt due to him.
“In a month you will find on the table, at which we shall be then sitting, good pistols and a delicious draught; but, on the other hand, you must promise me not to attempt your life before that time.” “Oh, I also swear it!” Monte Cristo drew the young man towards him, and pressed him for some time to his heart.
“And now,” he said, “after today, you will come and live with me; you can occupy Haydée’s apartment, and my daughter will at least be replaced by my son.” “Haydée?” said Morrel, “what has become of her?” “She departed last night.” “To leave you?” “To wait for me.
Hold yourself ready then to join me at the Champs-Élysées, and lead me out of this house without anyone seeing my departure.” Maximilian hung his head, and obeyed with childlike reverence.
Dividing the Proceeds The apartment on the first floor of the house in the Rue Saint-Germain-des-Prés, where Albert de Morcerf had selected a home for his mother, was let to a very mysterious person.
This was a man whose face the concierge himself had never seen, for in the winter his chin was buried in one of the large red handkerchiefs worn by gentlemen’s coachmen on a cold night, and in the summer he made a point of always blowing his nose just as he approached the door.
Contrary to custom, this gentleman had not been watched, for as the report ran that he was a person of high rank, and one who would allow no impertinent interference, his _incognito_ was strictly respected.
His visits were tolerably regular, though occasionally he appeared a little before or after his time, but generally, both in summer and winter, he took possession of his apartment about four o’clock, though he never spent the night there.
At half-past three in the winter the fire was lighted by the discreet servant, who had the superintendence of the little apartment, and in the summer ices were placed on the table at the same hour.
At four o’clock, as we have already stated, the mysterious personage arrived.
Twenty minutes afterwards a carriage stopped at the house, a lady alighted in a black or dark blue dress, and always thickly veiled; she passed like a shadow through the lodge, and ran upstairs without a sound escaping under the touch of her light foot.
Her face, therefore, like that of the gentleman, was perfectly unknown to the two concierges, who were perhaps unequalled throughout the capital for discretion.
Then she tapped in a peculiar manner at a door, which after being opened to admit her was again fastened, and curiosity penetrated no farther.
They used the same precautions in leaving as in entering the house.
The lady always left first, and as soon as she had stepped into her carriage, it drove away, sometimes towards the right hand, sometimes to the left; then about twenty minutes afterwards the gentleman would also leave, buried in his cravat or concealed by his handkerchief.
The day after Monte Cristo had called upon Danglars, the mysterious lodger entered at ten o’clock in the morning instead of four in the afternoon.
Almost directly afterwards, without the usual interval of time, a cab arrived, and the veiled lady ran hastily upstairs.
The door opened, but before it could be closed, the lady exclaimed: “Oh, Lucien—oh, my friend!” The concierge therefore heard for the first time that the lodger’s name was Lucien; still, as he was the very perfection of a door-keeper, he made up his mind not to tell his wife.
“Well, what is the matter, my dear?” asked the gentleman whose name the lady’s agitation revealed; “tell me what is the matter.” “Oh, Lucien, can I confide in you?” “Of course, you know you can do so.
Your note of this morning has completely bewildered me.
This precipitation—this unusual appointment.
Come, ease me of my anxiety, or else frighten me at once.” “Lucien, a great event has happened!” said the lady, glancing inquiringly at Lucien,—“M.
Danglars left last night!” “Left?—M.
Debray paused a moment before reading, as if trying to guess its contents, or perhaps while making up his mind how to act, whatever it might contain.
No doubt his ideas were arranged in a few minutes, for he began reading the letter which caused so much uneasiness in the heart of the baroness, and which ran as follows: “‘Madame and most faithful wife.’” Debray mechanically stopped and looked at the baroness, whose face became covered with blushes.
Debray continued: “‘When you receive this, you will no longer have a husband.
Oh, you need not be alarmed, you will only have lost him as you have lost your daughter; I mean that I shall be travelling on one of the thirty or forty roads leading out of France.
I owe you some explanations for my conduct, and as you are a woman that can perfectly understand me, I will give them.
I received this morning five millions which I paid away; almost directly afterwards another demand for the same sum was presented to me; I put this creditor off till tomorrow and I intend leaving today, to escape that tomorrow, which would be rather too unpleasant for me to endure.
You understand this, do you not, my most precious wife?
I say you understand this, because you are as conversant with my affairs as I am; indeed, I think you understand them better, since I am ignorant of what has become of a considerable portion of my fortune, once very tolerable, while I am sure, madame, that you know perfectly well.
For women have infallible instincts; they can even explain the marvellous by an algebraic calculation they have invented; but I, who only understand my own figures, know nothing more than that one day these figures deceived me.
Have you admired the rapidity of my fall?
Have you been slightly dazzled at the sudden fusion of my ingots?
With this consoling idea, I leave you, madame, and most prudent wife, without any conscientious reproach for abandoning you; you have friends left, and the ashes I have already mentioned, and above all the liberty I hasten to restore to you.
And here, madame, I must add another word of explanation.
So long as I hoped you were working for the good of our house and for the fortune of our daughter, I philosophically closed my eyes; but as you have transformed that house into a vast ruin I will not be the foundation of another man’s fortune.
You were rich when I married you, but little respected.
Excuse me for speaking so very candidly, but as this is intended only for ourselves, I do not see why I should weigh my words.
I have augmented our fortune, and it has continued to increase during the last fifteen years, till extraordinary and unexpected catastrophes have suddenly overturned it,—without any fault of mine, I can honestly declare.
You, madame, have only sought to increase your own, and I am convinced that you have succeeded.
I leave you, therefore, as I took you,—rich, but little respected.
Accept my acknowledgments for the example you have set me, and which I intend following.
“‘Your very devoted husband, “‘Baron Danglars.’” The baroness had watched Debray while he read this long and painful letter, and saw him, notwithstanding his self-control, change color once or twice.
When he had ended the perusal, he folded the letter and resumed his pensive attitude.
“Well?” asked Madame Danglars, with an anxiety easy to be understood.
“Well, madame?” unhesitatingly repeated Debray.
“With what ideas does that letter inspire you?” “Oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires me with the idea that M.
Danglars has left suspiciously.” “Certainly; but is this all you have to say to me?” “I do not understand you,” said Debray with freezing coldness.
I know his character; he is inflexible in any resolutions formed for his own interests.
If he could have made any use of me, he would have taken me with him; he leaves me in Paris, as our separation will conduce to his benefit;—therefore he has gone, and I am free forever,” added Madame Danglars, in the same supplicating tone.
Debray, instead of answering, allowed her to remain in an attitude of nervous inquiry.
“Well?” she said at length, “do you not answer me?” “I have but one question to ask you,—what do you intend to do?” “I was going to ask you,” replied the baroness with a beating heart.
“Ah, then, you wish to ask advice of me?” “Yes; I do wish to ask your advice,” said Madame Danglars with anxious expectation.
“Then if you wish to take my advice,” said the young man coldly, “I would recommend you to travel.” “To travel!” she murmured.
Danglars says, you are rich, and perfectly free.
In my opinion, a withdrawal from Paris is absolutely necessary after the double catastrophe of Mademoiselle Danglars’ broken contract and M.
Danglars’ disappearance.
The world will think you abandoned and poor, for the wife of a bankrupt would never be forgiven, were she to keep up an appearance of opulence.
You have only to remain in Paris for about a fortnight, telling the world you are abandoned, and relating the details of this desertion to your best friends, who will soon spread the report.
Then you can quit your house, leaving your jewels and giving up your jointure, and everyone’s mouth will be filled with praises of your disinterestedness.
They will know you are deserted, and think you also poor, for I alone know your real financial position, and am quite ready to give up my accounts as an honest partner.” The dread with which the pale and motionless baroness listened to this, was equalled by the calm indifference with which Debray had spoken.
“Deserted?” she repeated; “ah, yes, I am, indeed, deserted!
You are right, sir, and no one can doubt my position.” These were the only words that this proud and violently enamoured woman could utter in response to Debray. 50137m “But then you are rich,—very rich, indeed,” continued Debray, taking out some papers from his pocket-book, which he spread upon the table.
Madame Danglars did not see them; she was engaged in stilling the beatings of her heart, and restraining the tears which were ready to gush forth.
At length a sense of dignity prevailed, and if she did not entirely master her agitation, she at least succeeded in preventing the fall of a single tear.
“Madame,” said Debray, “it is nearly six months since we have been associated.
You furnished a principal of 100,000 francs.
Our partnership began in the month of April.
In May we commenced operations, and in the course of the month gained 450,000 francs.
In June the profit amounted to 900,000.
In August we lost 300,000 francs at the beginning of the month, but on the 13th we made up for it, and we now find that our accounts, reckoning from the first day of partnership up to yesterday, when I closed them, showed a capital of 2,400,000 francs, that is, 1,200,000 for each of us.
Now, madame,” said Debray, delivering up his accounts in the methodical manner of a stockbroker, “there are still 80,000 francs, the interest of this money, in my hands.” “But,” said the baroness, “I thought you never put the money out to interest.” “Excuse me, madame,” said Debray coldly, “I had your permission to do so, and I have made use of it.
There are, then, 40,000 francs for your share, besides the 100,000 you furnished me to begin with, making in all 1,340,000 francs for your portion.
Now, madame, I took the precaution of drawing out your money the day before yesterday; it is not long ago, you see, and I was in continual expectation of being called on to deliver up my accounts.
I say _there_, for as I did not consider my house safe enough, or lawyers sufficiently discreet, and as landed property carries evidence with it, and moreover since you have no right to possess anything independent of your husband, I have kept this sum, now your whole fortune, in a chest concealed under that closet, and for greater security I myself concealed it there.
“Now, madame,” continued Debray, first opening the closet, then the chest;—“now, madame, here are 800 notes of 1,000 francs each, resembling, as you see, a large book bound in iron; to this I add a certificate in the funds of 25,000 francs; then, for the odd cash, making I think about 110,000 francs, here is a check upon my banker, who, not being M.
Danglars, will pay you the amount, you may rest assured.” Madame Danglars mechanically took the check, the bond, and the heap of bank-notes.
This enormous fortune made no great appearance on the table.
Madame Danglars, with tearless eyes, but with her breast heaving with concealed emotion, placed the bank-notes in her bag, put the certificate and check into her pocket-book, and then, standing pale and mute, awaited one kind word of consolation.
“Now, madame,” said Debray, “you have a splendid fortune, an income of about 60,000 livres a year, which is enormous for a woman who cannot keep an establishment here for a year, at least.
“Bah,” said Debray, when she had left, “these are fine projects!
She will remain at home, read novels, and speculate at cards, since she can no longer do so on the Bourse.” Then taking up his account book, he cancelled with the greatest care all the entries of the amounts he had just paid away.
“I have 1,060,000 francs remaining,” he said.
“What a pity Mademoiselle de Villefort is dead!
She suited me in every respect, and I would have married her.” And he calmly waited until the twenty minutes had elapsed after Madame Danglars’ departure before he left the house.
During this time he occupied himself in making figures, with his watch by his side.
Asmodeus—that diabolical personage, who would have been created by every fertile imagination if Le Sage had not acquired the priority in his great masterpiece—would have enjoyed a singular spectacle, if he had lifted up the roof of the little house in the Rue Saint-Germain-des-Prés, while Debray was casting up his figures.
Above the room in which Debray had been dividing two millions and a half with Madame Danglars was another, inhabited by persons who have played too prominent a part in the incidents we have related for their appearance not to create some interest.
It was not poverty which had broken her spirit; it was not a want of courage which rendered her poverty burdensome.
Albert, too, was ill at ease; the remains of luxury prevented him from sinking into his actual position.
If he wished to go out without gloves, his hands appeared too white; if he wished to walk through the town, his boots seemed too highly polished.
Amongst the Catalans, Mercédès wished for a thousand things, but still she never really wanted any.
And then, shut out from friendship, having but one affection, which could not be mixed up with her ordinary pursuits, she thought of herself—of no one but herself.
Upon the little she earned she lived as well as she could; now there were two to be supported, and nothing to live upon.
Mercédès had no fire in that cold and naked room—she, who was accustomed to stoves which heated the house from the hall to the boudoir; she had not even one little flower—she whose apartment had been a conservatory of costly exotics.
Hitherto the excitement of fulfilling a duty had sustained them.
Excitement, like enthusiasm, sometimes renders us unconscious to the things of earth.
But the excitement had calmed down, and they felt themselves obliged to descend from dreams to reality; after having exhausted the ideal, they found they must talk of the actual.
“Mother,” exclaimed Albert, just as Madame Danglars was descending the stairs, “let us reckon our riches, if you please; I want capital to build my plans upon.” “Capital—nothing!” replied Mercédès with a mournful smile.
And I have an idea of our leading a delightful life upon this 3,000 francs.” “Child!” sighed Mercédès.
“Alas, dear mother,” said the young man, “I have unhappily spent too much of your money not to know the value of it.
These 3,000 francs are enormous, and I intend building upon this foundation a miraculous certainty for the future.” “You say this, my dear boy; but do you think we ought to accept these 3,000 francs?” said Mercédès, coloring.
“I think so,” answered Albert in a firm tone.
“We will accept them the more readily, since we have them not here; you know they are buried in the garden of the little house in the Allées de Meilhan, at Marseilles.
With 200 francs we can reach Marseilles.” “With 200 francs?—are you sure, Albert?” “Oh, as for that, I have made inquiries respecting the diligences and steamboats, and my calculations are made.
You see, mother, I treat you handsomely for thirty-five francs.” Albert then took a pen, and wrote: Frs. _Coupé_, thirty-five francs........ .............. ........ 35.
From Châlons to Lyons you will go on by the steamboat.. 6.
From Lyons to Avignon (still by steamboat).... ......... 16.
From Avignon to Marseilles, seven francs........ ....... 7.
Expenses on the road, about fifty francs........ ....... 50.
“You see I am generous, am I not, mother?” “But you, my poor child?” “I? do you not see that I reserve eighty francs for myself?
A young man does not require luxuries; besides, I know what travelling is.” “With a post-chaise and valet de chambre?” “Any way, mother.” “Well, be it so.
How fortunate that the ornaments were worth more than the watch.
Still the same story of superfluities!
Now I think we are rich, since instead of the 114 francs we require for the journey we find ourselves in possession of 250.” “But we owe something in this house?” “Thirty francs; but I pay that out of my 150 francs,—that is understood,—and as I require only eighty francs for my journey, you see I am overwhelmed with luxury.
What do you say to this, mother?” And Albert took out of a little pocket-book with golden clasps, a remnant of his old fancies, or perhaps a tender souvenir from one of the mysterious and veiled ladies who used to knock at his little door,—Albert took out of this pocket-book a note of 1,000 francs.
“A thousand francs.” “But whence have you obtained them?” “Listen to me, mother, and do not yield too much to agitation.” And Albert, rising, kissed his mother on both cheeks, then stood looking at her.
“You cannot imagine, mother, how beautiful I think you!” said the young man, impressed with a profound feeling of filial love.
“You are, indeed, the most beautiful and most noble woman I ever saw!” “Dear child!” said Mercédès, endeavoring in vain to restrain a tear which glistened in the corner of her eye.
“Indeed, you only wanted misfortune to change my love for you to admiration.
Do you know the decision we have come to, mother?” “Have we come to any?” “Yes; it is decided that you are to live at Marseilles, and that I am to leave for Africa, where I will earn for myself the right to use the name I now bear, instead of the one I have thrown aside.” Mercédès sighed.
“Well, mother, I yesterday engaged myself as substitute in the Spahis,”25 added the young man, lowering his eyes with a certain feeling of shame, for even he was unconscious of the sublimity of his self-abasement.
I yesterday took the place of another.
I sold myself for more than I thought I was worth,” he added, attempting to smile; “I fetched 2,000 francs.” “Then these 1,000 francs——” said Mercédès, shuddering.
“Are the half of the sum, mother; the other will be paid in a year.” Mercédès raised her eyes to heaven with an expression it would be impossible to describe, and tears, which had hitherto been restrained, now yielded to her emotion, and ran down her cheeks.
“The price of his blood!” she murmured.
“Yes, if I am killed,” said Albert, laughing.
“But I assure you, mother, I have a strong intention of defending my person, and I never felt half so strong an inclination to live as I do now.” “Merciful Heavens!” “Besides, mother, why should you make up your mind that I am to be killed?
Has Lamoricière, that Ney of the South, been killed?
Has Changarnier been killed?
Think of your joy, mother, when you see me return with an embroidered uniform!
I declare, I expect to look magnificent in it, and chose that regiment only from vanity.” Mercédès sighed while endeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt that she ought not to allow the whole weight of the sacrifice to fall upon her son.
“Well, now you understand, mother!” continued Albert; “here are more than 4,000 francs settled on you; upon these you can live at least two years.” “Do you think so?” said Mercédès.
Are we not two despairing creatures?
What is life to me?—Very little without you, mother; for believe me, but for you I should have ceased to live on the day I doubted my father and renounced his name.
Well, I will live, if you promise me still to hope; and if you grant me the care of your future prospects, you will redouble my strength.
Then I will go to the governor of Algeria; he has a royal heart, and is essentially a soldier; I will tell him my gloomy story.
I will beg him to turn his eyes now and then towards me, and if he keep his word and interest himself for me, in six months I shall be an officer, or dead.
If I am an officer, your fortune is certain, for I shall have money enough for both, and, moreover, a name we shall both be proud of, since it will be our own.
If I am killed—well then mother, you can also die, and there will be an end of our misfortunes.” “It is well,” replied Mercédès, with her eloquent glance; “you are right, my love; let us prove to those who are watching our actions that we are worthy of compassion.” “But let us not yield to gloomy apprehensions,” said the young man; “I assure you we are, or rather we shall be, very happy.
You are a woman at once full of spirit and resignation; I have become simple in my tastes, and am without passion, I hope.
Let us strive, I beseech you,—let us strive to be cheerful.” “Yes, let us strive, for you ought to live, and to be happy, Albert.” “And so our division is made, mother,” said the young man, affecting ease of mind.
“We can now part; come, I shall engage your passage.” “And you, my dear boy?” “I shall stay here for a few days longer; we must accustom ourselves to parting.
I want recommendations and some information relative to Africa.
I will join you again at Marseilles.” “Well, be it so—let us part,” said Mercédès, folding around her shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, and which accidentally happened to be a valuable black cashmere.
Albert gathered up his papers hastily, rang the bell to pay the thirty francs he owed to the landlord, and offering his arm to his mother, they descended the stairs.
Someone was walking down before them, and this person, hearing the rustling of a silk dress, turned around.
“Debray!” muttered Albert.
“You, Morcerf?” replied the secretary, resting on the stairs.
Curiosity had vanquished the desire of preserving his _incognito_, and he was recognized.
It was, indeed, strange in this unknown spot to find the young man whose misfortunes had made so much noise in Paris.
“Morcerf!” repeated Debray.
Then noticing in the dim light the still youthful and veiled figure of Madame de Morcerf: “Pardon me,” he added with a smile, “I leave you, Albert.” Albert understood his thoughts.
Debray, secretary of the Minister for the Interior, once a friend of mine.” “How once?” stammered Debray; “what do you mean?” “I say so, M.
I thank you for having recognized me, sir.” Debray stepped forward, and cordially pressed the hand of his interlocutor.
“Believe me, dear Albert,” he said, with all the emotion he was capable of feeling,—“believe me, I feel deeply for your misfortunes, and if in any way I can serve you, I am yours.” “Thank you, sir,” said Albert, smiling.
“In the midst of our misfortunes, we are still rich enough not to require assistance from anyone.
This parallel disturbed his usual politeness, the philosophy he witnessed appalled him, he muttered a few words of general civility and ran downstairs.
That day the minister’s clerks and the subordinates had a great deal to put up with from his ill-humor.
But that same night, he found himself the possessor of a fine house, situated on the Boulevard de la Madeleine, and an income of 50,000 livres.
The next day, just as Debray was signing the deed, that is about five o’clock in the afternoon, Madame de Morcerf, after having affectionately embraced her son, entered the _coupé_ of the diligence, which closed upon her.
A man was hidden in Lafitte’s banking-house, behind one of the little arched windows which are placed above each desk; he saw Mercédès enter the diligence, and he also saw Albert withdraw.
Then he passed his hand across his forehead, which was clouded with doubt.
“Alas,” he exclaimed, “how can I restore the happiness I have taken away from these poor innocent creatures?
The Lions’ Den One division of La Force, in which the most dangerous and desperate prisoners are confined, is called the court of Saint-Bernard.
The prisoners, in their expressive language, have named it the “Lions’ Den,” probably because the captives possess teeth which frequently gnaw the bars, and sometimes the keepers also.
It is a prison within a prison; the walls are double the thickness of the rest.
The gratings are every day carefully examined by jailers, whose herculean proportions and cold pitiless expression prove them to have been chosen to reign over their subjects for their superior activity and intelligence.
The courtyard of this quarter is enclosed by enormous walls, over which the sun glances obliquely, when it deigns to penetrate into this gulf of moral and physical deformity.
On this paved yard are to be seen,—pacing to and fro from morning till night, pale, careworn, and haggard, like so many shadows,—the men whom justice holds beneath the steel she is sharpening.
There, crouched against the side of the wall which attracts and retains the most heat, they may be seen sometimes talking to one another, but more frequently alone, watching the door, which sometimes opens to call forth one from the gloomy assemblage, or to throw in another outcast from society.
The court of Saint-Bernard has its own particular apartment for the reception of guests; it is a long rectangle, divided by two upright gratings placed at a distance of three feet from one another to prevent a visitor from shaking hands with or passing anything to the prisoners.
It is a wretched, damp, nay, even horrible spot, more especially when we consider the agonizing conferences which have taken place between those iron bars.
And yet, frightful though this spot may be, it is looked upon as a kind of paradise by the men whose days are numbered; it is so rare for them to leave the Lions’ Den for any other place than the barrier Saint-Jacques, the galleys! or solitary confinement.
In the court which we have attempted to describe, and from which a damp vapor was rising, a young man with his hands in his pockets, who had excited much curiosity among the inhabitants of the “Den,” might be seen walking.
The cut of his clothes would have made him pass for an elegant man, if those clothes had not been torn to shreds; still they did not show signs of wear, and the fine cloth, beneath the careful hands of the prisoner, soon recovered its gloss in the parts which were still perfect, for the wearer tried his best to make it assume the appearance of a new coat.
He bestowed the same attention upon the cambric front of a shirt, which had considerably changed in color since his entrance into the prison, and he polished his varnished boots with the corner of a handkerchief embroidered with initials surmounted by a coronet.
Some of the inmates of the “Lions’ Den” were watching the operations of the prisoner’s toilet with considerable interest.
“He’s a fine looking fellow,” said another; “if he had only a comb and hair-grease, he’d take the shine off the gentlemen in white kids.” “His coat looks nearly new, and his boots are brilliant.
It is pleasant to have such well-dressed brethren; and those gendarmes behaved shamefully.
What jealousy; to tear such clothes!” “He looks like a big-bug,” said another; “dresses in fine style.
Oh, what larks!” Meanwhile the object of this hideous admiration approached the wicket, against which one of the keepers was leaning.
Remember, I have relations who possess more millions than you have deniers.
Come, I beseech you, lend me twenty francs, so that I may buy a dressing-gown; it is intolerable always to be in a coat and boots!
And what a coat, sir, for a prince of the Cavalcanti!” The keeper turned his back, and shrugged his shoulders; he did not even laugh at what would have caused anyone else to do so; he had heard so many utter the same things,—indeed, he heard nothing else.
“Come,” said Andrea, “you are a man void of compassion; I’ll have you turned out.” This made the keeper turn around, and he burst into a loud laugh.
The prisoners then approached and formed a circle.
The latter, sure of quelling the tempest when the waves became too violent, allowed them to rise to a certain pitch that he might be revenged on the importunate Andrea, and besides it would afford him some recreation during the long day.
The thieves had already approached Andrea, some screaming, _“La savate—La savate!”_26 a cruel operation, which consists in cuffing a comrade who may have fallen into disgrace, not with an old shoe, but with an iron-heeled one.
Others proposed the _anguille_, another kind of recreation, in which a handkerchief is filled with sand, pebbles, and two-sous pieces, when they have them, which the wretches beat like a flail over the head and shoulders of the unhappy sufferer.
“Let us horsewhip the fine gentleman!” said others.
But Andrea, turning towards them, winked his eyes, rolled his tongue around his cheeks, and smacked his lips in a manner equivalent to a hundred words among the bandits when forced to be silent.
It was a Masonic sign Caderousse had taught him.
He was immediately recognized as one of them; the handkerchief was thrown down, and the iron-heeled shoe replaced on the foot of the wretch to whom it belonged.
Some voices were heard to say that the gentleman was right; that he intended to be civil, in his way, and that they would set the example of liberty of conscience,—and the mob retired.
The keeper was so stupefied at this scene that he took Andrea by the hands and began examining his person, attributing the sudden submission of the inmates of the Lions’ Den to something more substantial than mere fascination.
Andrea made no resistance, although he protested against it.
Suddenly a voice was heard at the wicket.
“Benedetto!” exclaimed an inspector.
“To the visitors’ room!” said the same voice.
Ah, my dear sir, you will see whether a Cavalcanti is to be treated like a common person!” And Andrea, gliding through the court like a black shadow, rushed out through the wicket, leaving his comrades, and even the keeper, lost in wonder.
An unhappy lapse of fortune and the absence of my protector have cast me down, certainly, but not forever.
The hand which has retreated for a while will be again stretched forth to save me at the very moment when I shall think myself sinking into the abyss.
Why should I risk an imprudent step?
It might alienate my protector.
He has two means of extricating me from this dilemma,—the one by a mysterious escape, managed through bribery; the other by buying off my judges with gold.
I will say and do nothing until I am convinced that he has quite abandoned me, and then——” Andrea had formed a plan which was tolerably clever.
The unfortunate youth was intrepid in the attack, and rude in the defence.
He had borne with the public prison, and with privations of all sorts; still, by degrees nature, or rather custom, had prevailed, and he suffered from being naked, dirty, and hungry.
It was at this moment of discomfort that the inspector’s voice called him to the visiting-room.
It was too soon for a visit from the examining magistrate, and too late for one from the director of the prison, or the doctor; it must, then, be the visitor he hoped for.
Behind the grating of the room into which Andrea had been led, he saw, while his eyes dilated with surprise, the dark and intelligent face of M.
Bertuccio, who was also gazing with sad astonishment upon the iron bars, the bolted doors, and the shadow which moved behind the other grating.
“Ah,” said Andrea, deeply affected.
“Good morning, Benedetto,” said Bertuccio, with his deep, hollow voice.
“You—you?” said the young man, looking fearfully around him.
“Do you not recognize me, unhappy child?” “Silence,—be silent!” said Andrea, who knew the delicate sense of hearing possessed by the walls; “for Heaven’s sake, do not speak so loud!” “You wish to speak with me alone, do you not?” said Bertuccio.
“Oh, yes.” “That is well.” And Bertuccio, feeling in his pocket, signed to a keeper whom he saw through the window of the wicket.
Then he mentally added,—“Still my unknown protector!
They wish for secrecy, since we are to converse in a private room.
I understand, Bertuccio has been sent by my protector.” The keeper spoke for a moment with an official, then opened the iron gates and conducted Andrea to a room on the first floor.
The room was whitewashed, as is the custom in prisons, but it looked quite brilliant to a prisoner, though a stove, a bed, a chair, and a table formed the whole of its sumptuous furniture.
Bertuccio sat down upon the chair, Andrea threw himself upon the bed; the keeper retired.
You have continued your course of villany; you have robbed—you have assassinated.” “Well, I should say!
If you had me taken to a private room only to tell me this, you might have saved yourself the trouble.
But there are some with which, on the contrary, I am not acquainted.
Benedetto!” “Yes, and to the point.
Let us dispense with useless words.
Who sends you?” “No one.” “How did you know I was in prison?” “I recognized you, some time since, as the insolent dandy who so gracefully mounted his horse in the Champs-Élysées.” “Oh, the Champs-Élysées?
Ah, yes; we burn, as they say at the game of pincette.
Come, speak, my worthy Corsican, speak!” “What do you wish me to say?” “I will help you.
You were speaking of the Champs-Élysées just now, worthy foster-father.” “Well?” “Well, in the Champs-Élysées there resides a very rich gentleman.” “At whose house you robbed and murdered, did you not?” “I believe I did.” “The Count of Monte Cristo?” “’Tis you who have named him, as M.
I will say——” “Do you think you are engaged with a pygmy like yourself?” said Bertuccio, in so calm a tone, and with so steadfast a look, that Andrea was moved to the very soul.
Benedetto, you are fallen into terrible hands; they are ready to open for you—make use of them.
Do not play with the thunderbolt they have laid aside for a moment, but which they can take up again instantly, if you attempt to intercept their movements.” 50157m “My father—I will know who my father is,” said the obstinate youth; “I will perish if I must, but I _will_ know it.
What possessions, what reputation, what ‘pull,’ as Beauchamp says,—have I?
You great people always lose something by scandal, notwithstanding your millions.
Come, who is my father?” “I came to tell you.” “Ah,” cried Benedetto, his eyes sparkling with joy.
Just then the door opened, and the jailer, addressing himself to Bertuccio, said: “Excuse me, sir, but the examining magistrate is waiting for the prisoner.” “And so closes our interview,” said Andrea to the worthy steward; “I wish the troublesome fellow were at the devil!” “I will return tomorrow,” said Bertuccio.
Gendarmes, I am at your service.
Ah, sir, do leave a few crowns for me at the gate that I may have some things I am in need of!” “It shall be done,” replied Bertuccio.
Andrea extended his hand; Bertuccio kept his own in his pocket, and merely jingled a few pieces of money.
“That’s what I mean,” said Andrea, endeavoring to smile, quite overcome by the strange tranquillity of Bertuccio.
“Can I be deceived?” he murmured, as he stepped into the oblong and grated vehicle which they call “the salad basket.” “Never mind, we shall see!
Tomorrow, then!” he added, turning towards Bertuccio.
“Tomorrow!” replied the steward.
The Judge We remember that the Abbé Busoni remained alone with Noirtier in the chamber of death, and that the old man and the priest were the sole guardians of the young girl’s body.
Perhaps it was the Christian exhortations of the abbé, perhaps his kind charity, perhaps his persuasive words, which had restored the courage of Noirtier, for ever since he had conversed with the priest his violent despair had yielded to a calm resignation which surprised all who knew his excessive affection for Valentine.
M. de Villefort had not seen his father since the morning of the death.
The whole establishment had been changed; another valet was engaged for himself, a new servant for Noirtier, two women had entered Madame de Villefort’s service,—in fact, everywhere, to the concierge and coachmen, new faces were presented to the different masters of the house, thus widening the division which had always existed between the members of the same family.
The assizes, also, were about to begin, and Villefort, shut up in his room, exerted himself with feverish anxiety in drawing up the case against the murderer of Caderousse.
This affair, like all those in which the Count of Monte Cristo had interfered, caused a great sensation in Paris.
The proofs were certainly not convincing, since they rested upon a few words written by an escaped galley-slave on his death-bed, and who might have been actuated by hatred or revenge in accusing his companion.
But the mind of the procureur was made up; he felt assured that Benedetto was guilty, and he hoped by his skill in conducting this aggravated case to flatter his self-love, which was about the only vulnerable point left in his frozen heart.
The case was therefore prepared owing to the incessant labor of Villefort, who wished it to be the first on the list in the coming assizes.
He had been obliged to seclude himself more than ever, to evade the enormous number of applications presented to him for the purpose of obtaining tickets of admission to the court on the day of trial.
And then so short a time had elapsed since the death of poor Valentine, and the gloom which overshadowed the house was so recent, that no one wondered to see the father so absorbed in his professional duties, which were the only means he had of dissipating his grief.
Once only had Villefort seen his father; it was the day after that upon which Bertuccio had paid his second visit to Benedetto, when the latter was to learn his father’s name.
The magistrate, harassed and fatigued, had descended to the garden of his house, and in a gloomy mood, similar to that in which Tarquin lopped off the tallest poppies, he began knocking off with his cane the long and dying branches of the rose-trees, which, placed along the avenue, seemed like the spectres of the brilliant flowers which had bloomed in the past season.
While doing so, he observed M.
Noirtier at one of the open windows, where the old man had been placed that he might enjoy the last rays of the sun which yet yielded some heat, and was now shining upon the dying flowers and red leaves of the creeper which twined around the balcony.
The eye of the old man was riveted upon a spot which Villefort could scarcely distinguish.
His glance was so full of hate, of ferocity, and savage impatience, that Villefort turned out of the path he had been pursuing, to see upon what person this dark look was directed.
Then he saw beneath a thick clump of linden-trees, which were nearly divested of foliage, Madame de Villefort sitting with a book in her hand, the perusal of which she frequently interrupted to smile upon her son, or to throw back his elastic ball, which he obstinately threw from the drawing-room into the garden.
Villefort became pale; he understood the old man’s meaning.
Noirtier continued to look at the same object, but suddenly his glance was transferred from the wife to the husband, and Villefort himself had to submit to the searching investigation of eyes, which, while changing their direction and even their language, had lost none of their menacing expression.
Madame de Villefort, unconscious of the passions that exhausted their fire over her head, at that moment held her son’s ball, and was making signs to him to reclaim it with a kiss.
Edward begged for a long while, the maternal kiss probably not offering sufficient recompense for the trouble he must take to obtain it; however at length he decided, leaped out of the window into a cluster of heliotropes and daisies, and ran to his mother, his forehead streaming with perspiration.
Madame de Villefort wiped his forehead, pressed her lips upon it, and sent him back with the ball in one hand and some bonbons in the other.
Villefort, drawn by an irresistible attraction, like that of the bird to the serpent, walked towards the house.
As he approached it, Noirtier’s gaze followed him, and his eyes appeared of such a fiery brightness that Villefort felt them pierce to the depths of his heart.
In that earnest look might be read a deep reproach, as well as a terrible menace.
Then Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as though to remind his son of a forgotten oath.
“It is well, sir,” replied Villefort from below,—“it is well; have patience but one day longer; what I have said I will do.” Noirtier seemed to be calmed by these words, and turned his eyes with indifference to the other side.
Villefort violently unbuttoned his greatcoat, which seemed to strangle him, and passing his livid hand across his forehead, entered his study.
The morning dawned dull and gloomy, and Villefort saw the dim gray light shine upon the lines he had traced in red ink.
The magistrate had slept for a short time while the lamp sent forth its final struggles; its flickerings awoke him, and he found his fingers as damp and purple as though they had been dipped in blood.
In the clover-fields beyond the chestnut-trees, a lark was mounting up to heaven, while pouring out her clear morning song.
The damps of the dew bathed the head of Villefort, and refreshed his memory.
“Today,” he said with an effort,—“today the man who holds the blade of justice must strike wherever there is guilt.” Involuntarily his eyes wandered towards the window of Noirtier’s room, where he had seen him the preceding night.
The curtain was drawn, and yet the image of his father was so vivid to his mind that he addressed the closed window as though it had been open, and as if through the opening he had beheld the menacing old man.
“Yes,” he murmured,—“yes, be satisfied.” His head dropped upon his chest, and in this position he paced his study; then he threw himself, dressed as he was, upon a sofa, less to sleep than to rest his limbs, cramped with cold and study.
By degrees everyone awoke.
Villefort, from his study, heard the successive noises which accompany the life of a house,—the opening and shutting of doors, the ringing of Madame de Villefort’s bell, to summon the waiting-maid, mingled with the first shouts of the child, who rose full of the enjoyment of his age.
Villefort also rang; his new valet brought him the papers, and with them a cup of chocolate.
“What are you bringing me?” said he.
“A cup of chocolate.” “I did not ask for it.
Who has paid me this attention?” “My mistress, sir.
She said you would have to speak a great deal in the murder case, and that you should take something to keep up your strength;” and the valet placed the cup on the table nearest to the sofa, which was, like all the rest, covered with papers.
Villefort looked for an instant with a gloomy expression, then, suddenly, taking it up with a nervous motion, he swallowed its contents at one draught.
It might have been thought that he hoped the beverage would be mortal, and that he sought for death to deliver him from a duty which he would rather die than fulfil.
He then rose, and paced his room with a smile it would have been terrible to witness.
The chocolate was inoffensive, for M. de Villefort felt no effects.
The breakfast-hour arrived, but M. de Villefort was not at table.
“Tell your mistress,” he at length answered, “that I wish to speak to her, and I beg she will wait for me in her own room.” “Yes, sir.” “Then come to dress and shave me.” “Directly, sir.” The valet re-appeared almost instantly, and, having shaved his master, assisted him to dress entirely in black.
When he had finished, he said: “My mistress said she should expect you, sir, as soon as you had finished dressing.” “I am going to her.” And Villefort, with his papers under his arm and hat in hand, directed his steps toward the apartment of his wife.
Madame de Villefort was sitting on an ottoman and impatiently turning over the leaves of some newspapers and pamphlets which young Edward, by way of amusing himself, was tearing to pieces before his mother could finish reading them.
“Ah, here you are, monsieur,” she said in her naturally calm voice; “but how pale you are!
Why did you not come down to breakfast?
Well, will you take me, or shall I take Edward?” Madame de Villefort had multiplied her questions in order to gain one answer, but to all her inquiries M. de Villefort remained mute and cold as a statue.
“Edward,” said Villefort, fixing an imperious glance on the child, “go and play in the drawing-room, my dear; I wish to speak to your mamma.” Madame de Villefort shuddered at the sight of that cold countenance, that resolute tone, and the awfully strange preliminaries.
Edward raised his head, looked at his mother, and then, finding that she did not confirm the order, began cutting off the heads of his leaden soldiers.
“Edward,” cried M. de Villefort, so harshly that the child started up from the floor, “do you hear me?—Go!” The child, unaccustomed to such treatment, arose, pale and trembling; it would be difficult to say whether his emotion were caused by fear or passion.
His father went up to him, took him in his arms, and kissed his forehead.
M. de Villefort went to the door, which he closed behind the child, and bolted.
“Dear me!” said the young woman, endeavoring to read her husband’s inmost thoughts, while a smile passed over her countenance which froze the impassibility of Villefort; “what is the matter?” “Madame, where do you keep the poison you generally use?” said the magistrate, without any introduction, placing himself between his wife and the door.
Madame de Villefort must have experienced something of the sensation of a bird which, looking up, sees the murderous trap closing over its head.
“Monsieur,” she said, “I—I do not understand you.” And, in her first paroxysm of terror, she had raised herself from the sofa, in the next, stronger very likely than the other, she fell down again on the cushions.
“To the judge—to the judge, madame!” It was terrible to behold the frightful pallor of that woman, the anguish of her look, the trembling of her whole frame.
“Ah, sir,” she muttered, “ah, sir,” and this was all.
“You do not answer, madame!” exclaimed the terrible interrogator.
Then he added, with a smile yet more terrible than his anger, “It is true, then; you do not deny it!” She moved forward.
“And you cannot deny it!” added Villefort, extending his hand toward her, as though to seize her in the name of justice.
“You have accomplished these different crimes with impudent address, but which could only deceive those whose affections for you blinded them.
Since the death of Madame de Saint-Méran, I have known that a poisoner lived in my house.
“Oh, sir,” she stammered, “I beseech you, do not believe appearances.” “Are you, then, a coward?” cried Villefort, in a contemptuous voice.
“But I have always observed that poisoners were cowards.
Can you be a coward, you, who have had the courage to witness the death of two old men and a young girl murdered by you?” “Sir! sir!” “Can you be a coward?” continued Villefort, with increasing excitement, “you, who could count, one by one, the minutes of four death agonies? _You_, who have arranged your infernal plans, and removed the beverages with a talent and precision almost miraculous?
Have you, then, who have calculated everything with such nicety, have you forgotten to calculate one thing—I mean where the revelation of your crimes will lead you to?
Oh, it is impossible—you must have saved some surer, more subtle and deadly poison than any other, that you might escape the punishment that you deserve.
You have done this—I hope so, at least.” Madame de Villefort stretched out her hands, and fell on her knees.
“I understand,” he said, “you confess; but a confession made to the judges, a confession made at the last moment, extorted when the crime cannot be denied, diminishes not the punishment inflicted on the guilty!” “The punishment?” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, “the punishment, monsieur?
Twice you have pronounced that word!” “Certainly.
“Oh, do not fear the scaffold, madame,” said the magistrate; “I will not dishonor you, since that would be dishonor to myself; no, if you have heard me distinctly, you will understand that you are not to die on the scaffold.” “No, I do not understand; what do you mean?” stammered the unhappy woman, completely overwhelmed.
“I mean that the wife of the first magistrate in the capital shall not, by her infamy, soil an unblemished name; that she shall not, with one blow, dishonor her husband and her child.” “No, no—oh, no!” “Well, madame, it will be a laudable action on your part, and I will thank you for it!” “You will thank me—for what?” “For what you have just said.” “What did I say?
Oh, my brain whirls; I no longer understand anything.
Oh, my God, my God!” And she rose, with her hair dishevelled, and her lips foaming.
“Have you answered the question I put to you on entering the room?—where do you keep the poison you generally use, madame?” Madame de Villefort raised her arms to heaven, and convulsively struck one hand against the other.
“No, no,” she vociferated, “no, you cannot wish that!” 50169m “What I do not wish, madame, is that you should perish on the scaffold.
Do you understand?” asked Villefort.
“Oh, mercy, mercy, monsieur!” “What I require is, that justice be done.
I am on the earth to punish, madame,” he added, with a flaming glance; “any other woman, were it the queen herself, I would send to the executioner; but to you I shall be merciful.
To you I will say, ‘Have you not, madame, put aside some of the surest, deadliest, most speedy poison?’” 50170m “Oh, pardon me, sir; let me live!” “She is cowardly,” said Villefort.
“Reflect that I am your wife!” “You are a poisoner.” “In the name of Heaven!” “No!” “In the name of the love you once bore me!” “No, no!” “In the name of our child!
Ah, for the sake of our child, let me live!” 50167m “No, no, no, I tell you; one day, if I allow you to live, you will perhaps kill him, as you have the others!” “I?—I kill my boy?” cried the distracted mother, rushing toward Villefort; “I kill my son?
Ha, ha, ha!” and a frightful, demoniac laugh finished the sentence, which was lost in a hoarse rattle.
Madame de Villefort fell at her husband’s feet.
“Think of it, madame,” he said; “if, on my return, justice has not been satisfied, I will denounce you with my own mouth, and arrest you with my own hands!” She listened, panting, overwhelmed, crushed; her eye alone lived, and glared horribly.
“Do you understand me?” he said.
“I am going down there to pronounce the sentence of death against a murderer.
If I find you alive on my return, you shall sleep tonight in the conciergerie.” Madame de Villefort sighed; her nerves gave way, and she sunk on the carpet.
The king’s attorney seemed to experience a sensation of pity; he looked upon her less severely, and, bowing to her, said slowly: “Farewell, madame, farewell!” That farewell struck Madame de Villefort like the executioner’s knife.
The procureur went out, after having double-locked the door.
The Assizes The Benedetto affair, as it was called at the Palais, and by people in general, had produced a tremendous sensation.
Frequenting the Café de Paris, the Boulevard de Gand, and the Bois de Boulogne, during his brief career of splendor, the false Cavalcanti had formed a host of acquaintances.
The papers had related his various adventures, both as the man of fashion and the galley-slave; and as everyone who had been personally acquainted with Prince Andrea Cavalcanti experienced a lively curiosity in his fate, they all determined to spare no trouble in endeavoring to witness the trial of M.
Benedetto for the murder of his comrade in chains.
In the eyes of many, Benedetto appeared, if not a victim to, at least an instance of, the fallibility of the law.
Cavalcanti, his father, had been seen in Paris, and it was expected that he would re-appear to claim the illustrious outcast.
Many, also, who were not aware of the circumstances attending his withdrawal from Paris, were struck with the worthy appearance, the gentlemanly bearing, and the knowledge of the world displayed by the old patrician, who certainly played the nobleman very well, so long as he said nothing, and made no arithmetical calculations.
As for the accused himself, many remembered him as being so amiable, so handsome, and so liberal, that they chose to think him the victim of some conspiracy, since in this world large fortunes frequently excite the malevolence and jealousy of some unknown enemy.
Everyone, therefore, ran to the court; some to witness the sight, others to comment upon it.
From seven o’clock in the morning a crowd was stationed at the iron gates, and an hour before the trial commenced the hall was full of the privileged.
Before the entrance of the magistrates, and indeed frequently afterwards, a court of justice, on days when some especial trial is to take place, resembles a drawing-room where many persons recognize each other and converse if they can do so without losing their seats; or, if they are separated by too great a number of lawyers, communicate by signs.
It was one of the magnificent autumn days which make amends for a short summer; the clouds which M. de Villefort had perceived at sunrise had all disappeared as if by magic, and one of the softest and most brilliant days of September shone forth in all its splendor.
Beauchamp, one of the kings of the press, and therefore claiming the right of a throne everywhere, was eying everybody through his monocle.
He perceived Château-Renaud and Debray, who had just gained the good graces of a sergeant-at-arms, and who had persuaded the latter to let them stand before, instead of behind him, as they ought to have done.
The worthy sergeant had recognized the minister’s secretary and the millionnaire, and, by way of paying extra attention to his noble neighbors, promised to keep their places while they paid a visit to Beauchamp.
“Well,” said Beauchamp, “we shall see our friend!” “Yes, indeed!” replied Debray.
Deuce take those Italian princes!” “A man, too, who could boast of Dante for a genealogist, and could reckon back to the _Divina Comedia_.” “A nobility of the rope!” said Château-Renaud phlegmatically.
“He will be condemned, will he not?” asked Debray of Beauchamp.
“My dear fellow, I think we should ask you that question; you know such news much better than we do.
“The idea of thinking ministers understand anything about princes!” “There is something in what you have just said,” said Beauchamp, laughing.
“But,” said Debray to Beauchamp, “if I spoke to the president, _you_ must have been with the procureur.” “It was an impossibility; for the last week M. de Villefort has secluded himself.
It is natural enough; this strange chain of domestic afflictions, followed by the no less strange death of his daughter——” “Strange?
What do you mean, Beauchamp?” “Oh, yes; do you pretend that all this has been unobserved at the minister’s?” said Beauchamp, placing his eye-glass in his eye, where he tried to make it remain.
“My dear sir,” said Château-Renaud, “allow me to tell you that you do not understand that manœuvre with the eye-glass half so well as Debray.
Give him a lesson, Debray.” “Stay,” said Beauchamp, “surely I am not deceived.” “What is it?” “It is she!” “Whom do you mean?” “They said she had left.” “Mademoiselle Eugénie?” said Château-Renaud; “has she returned?” “No, but her mother.” “Madame Danglars?
Impossible!” said Château-Renaud; “only ten days after the flight of her daughter, and three days from the bankruptcy of her husband?” Debray colored slightly, and followed with his eyes the direction of Beauchamp’s glance.
“Come,” he said, “it is only a veiled lady, some foreign princess, perhaps the mother of Cavalcanti.
But you were just speaking on a very interesting topic, Beauchamp.” “I?” “Yes; you were telling us about the extraordinary death of Valentine.” “Ah, yes, so I was.
But how is it that Madame de Villefort is not here?” “Poor, dear woman,” said Debray, “she is no doubt occupied in distilling balm for the hospitals, or in making cosmetics for herself or friends.
Do you know she spends two or three thousand crowns a year in this amusement?
I detest her, from antipathy.” “Or, rather, by instinct.” “Perhaps so.
But to return to what you were saying, Beauchamp.” “Well, do you know why they die so multitudinously at M. de Villefort’s?” “‘Multitudinously’ is good,” said Château-Renaud.
“My good fellow, you’ll find the word in Saint-Simon.” “But the thing itself is at M. de Villefort’s; but let’s get back to the subject.” “Talking of that,” said Debray, “Madame was making inquiries about that house, which for the last three months has been hung with black.” “Who is Madame?” asked Château-Renaud.
“The minister’s wife, _pardieu!_” “Oh, your pardon!
“And who is the assassin;” they asked together.
“Young Edward!” A burst of laughter from the auditors did not in the least disconcert the speaker, who continued,—“Yes, gentlemen; Edward, the infant phenomenon, who is quite an adept in the art of killing.” “You are jesting.” “Not at all.
I yesterday engaged a servant, who had just left M. de Villefort—I intend sending him away tomorrow, for he eats so enormously, to make up for the fast imposed upon him by his terror in that house.
Well, now listen.” “We are listening.” “It appears the dear child has obtained possession of a bottle containing some drug, which he every now and then uses against those who have displeased him.
First, M. and Madame de Saint-Méran incurred his displeasure, so he poured out three drops of his elixir—three drops were sufficient; then followed Barrois, the old servant of M.
Noirtier, who sometimes rebuffed this little wretch—he therefore received the same quantity of the elixir; the same happened to Valentine, of whom he was jealous; he gave her the same dose as the others, and all was over for her as well as the rest.” “Why, what nonsense are you telling us?” said Château-Renaud.
“Yes, it is an extraordinary story,” said Beauchamp; “is it not?” “It is absurd,” said Debray.
“Ah,” said Beauchamp, “you doubt me?
Well, you can ask my servant, or rather him who will no longer be my servant tomorrow, it was the talk of the house.” “And this elixir, where is it? what is it?” “The child conceals it.” “But where did he find it?” “In his mother’s laboratory.” “Does his mother then, keep poisons in her laboratory?” “How can I tell?
You are questioning me like a king’s attorney.
I only repeat what I have been told, and like my informant I can do no more.
The poor devil would eat nothing, from fear.” “It is incredible!” “No, my dear fellow, it is not at all incredible.
You saw the child pass through the Rue Richelieu last year, who amused himself with killing his brothers and sisters by sticking pins in their ears while they slept.
The generation who follow us are very precocious.” “Come, Beauchamp,” said Château-Renaud, “I will bet anything you do not believe a word of all you have been telling us.
Still, his sister did not seem uneasy, and told me that though she had not seen him for two or three days, she was sure he was well.” “Ah, now I think of it, the Count of Monte Cristo cannot appear in the hall,” said Beauchamp.
“Why not?” “Because he is an actor in the drama.” “Has he assassinated anyone, then?” “No, on the contrary, they wished to assassinate him.
You know that it was in leaving his house that M. de Caderousse was murdered by his friend Benedetto.
You know that the famous waistcoat was found in his house, containing the letter which stopped the signature of the marriage-contract.
Do you see the waistcoat?
The Indictment The judges took their places in the midst of the most profound silence; the jury took their seats; M. de Villefort, the object of unusual attention, and we had almost said of general admiration, sat in the armchair and cast a tranquil glance around him.
Everyone looked with astonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calm expression personal griefs had been unable to disturb, and the aspect of a man who was a stranger to all human emotions excited something very like terror.
“Gendarmes,” said the president, “lead in the accused.” At these words the public attention became more intense, and all eyes were turned towards the door through which Benedetto was to enter.
The door soon opened and the accused appeared.
The same impression was experienced by all present, and no one was deceived by the expression of his countenance.
His features bore no sign of that deep emotion which stops the beating of the heart and blanches the cheek.
His hands, gracefully placed, one upon his hat, the other in the opening of his white waistcoat, were not at all tremulous; his eye was calm and even brilliant.
Scarcely had he entered the hall when he glanced at the whole body of magistrates and assistants; his eye rested longer on the president, and still more so on the king’s attorney.
By the side of Andrea was stationed the lawyer who was to conduct his defence, and who had been appointed by the court, for Andrea disdained to pay any attention to those details, to which he appeared to attach no importance.
The lawyer was a young man with light hair whose face expressed a hundred times more emotion than that which characterized the prisoner. 50181m The president called for the indictment, revised as we know, by the clever and implacable pen of Villefort.
During the reading of this, which was long, the public attention was continually drawn towards Andrea, who bore the inspection with Spartan unconcern.
Villefort had never been so concise and eloquent.
The crime was depicted in the most vivid colors; the former life of the prisoner, his transformation, a review of his life from the earliest period, were set forth with all the talent that a knowledge of human life could furnish to a mind like that of the procureur.
Benedetto was thus forever condemned in public opinion before the sentence of the law could be pronounced.
Andrea paid no attention to the successive charges which were brought against him.
M. de Villefort, who examined him attentively, and who no doubt practiced upon him all the psychological studies he was accustomed to use, in vain endeavored to make him lower his eyes, notwithstanding the depth and profundity of his gaze.
At length the reading of the indictment was ended.
“Accused,” said the president, “your name and surname?” Andrea arose.
President,” he said, in a clear voice, “but I see you are going to adopt a course of questions through which I cannot follow you.
I have an idea, which I will explain by and by, of making an exception to the usual form of accusation.
Allow me, then, if you please, to answer in different order, or I will not do so at all.” The astonished president looked at the jury, who in turn looked at Villefort.
The whole assembly manifested great surprise, but Andrea appeared quite unmoved.
“Your age?” said the president; “will you answer that question?” “I will answer that question, as well as the rest, Mr.
President, but in its turn.” “Your age?” repeated the president.
“I am twenty-one years old, or rather I shall be in a few days, as I was born the night of the 27th of September, 1817.” M. de Villefort, who was busy taking down some notes, raised his head at the mention of this date.
“Where were you born?” continued the president.
“At Auteuil, near Paris.” M. de Villefort a second time raised his head, looked at Benedetto as if he had been gazing at the head of Medusa, and became livid.
As for Benedetto, he gracefully wiped his lips with a fine cambric pocket-handkerchief.
“Your profession?” “First I was a forger,” answered Andrea, as calmly as possible; “then I became a thief, and lately have become an assassin.” A murmur, or rather storm, of indignation burst from all parts of the assembly.
The judges themselves appeared to be stupefied, and the jury manifested tokens of disgust for a cynicism so unexpected in a man of fashion.
M. de Villefort pressed his hand upon his brow, which, at first pale, had become red and burning; then he suddenly arose and looked around as though he had lost his senses—he wanted air. 50183m “Are you looking for anything, Mr.
Procureur?” asked Benedetto, with his most ingratiating smile.
M. de Villefort answered nothing, but sat, or rather threw himself down again upon his chair.
“And now, prisoner, will you consent to tell your name?” said the president.
“The brutal affectation with which you have enumerated and classified your crimes calls for a severe reprimand on the part of the court, both in the name of morality, and for the respect due to humanity.
You appear to consider this a point of honor, and it may be for this reason, that you have delayed acknowledging your name.
You wished it to be preceded by all these titles.” “It is quite wonderful, Mr.
President, how entirely you have read my thoughts,” said Benedetto, in his softest voice and most polite manner.
“This is, indeed, the reason why I begged you to alter the order of the questions.” The public astonishment had reached its height.
The audience felt that a startling revelation was to follow this ominous prelude.
“Well,” said the president; “your name?” “I cannot tell you my name, since I do not know it; but I know my father’s, and can tell it to you.” A painful giddiness overwhelmed Villefort; great drops of acrid sweat fell from his face upon the papers which he held in his convulsed hand.
“Repeat your father’s name,” said the president.
Not a whisper, not a breath, was heard in that vast assembly; everyone waited anxiously.
The exclamations, the insults addressed to Benedetto, who remained perfectly unconcerned, the energetic gestures, the movement of the gendarmes, the sneers of the scum of the crowd always sure to rise to the surface in case of any disturbance—all this lasted five minutes, before the door-keepers and magistrates were able to restore silence.
In the midst of this tumult the voice of the president was heard to exclaim: “Are you playing with justice, accused, and do you dare set your fellow-citizens an example of disorder which even in these times has never been equalled?” Several persons hurried up to M. de Villefort, who sat half bowed over in his chair, offering him consolation, encouragement, and protestations of zeal and sympathy.
Order was re-established in the hall, except that a few people still moved about and whispered to one another.
A lady, it was said, had just fainted; they had supplied her with a smelling-bottle, and she had recovered.
During the scene of tumult, Andrea had turned his smiling face towards the assembly; then, leaning with one hand on the oaken rail of the dock, in the most graceful attitude possible, he said: “Gentlemen, I assure you I had no idea of insulting the court, or of making a useless disturbance in the presence of this honorable assembly.
They ask my name, I cannot give it, since my parents abandoned me.
But though I cannot give my own name, not possessing one, I can tell them my father’s.
Now I repeat, my father is named M. de Villefort, and I am ready to prove it.” There was an energy, a conviction, and a sincerity in the manner of the young man, which silenced the tumult.
All eyes were turned for a moment towards the procureur, who sat as motionless as though a thunderbolt had changed him into a corpse.
I now repeat that I was born at Auteuil on the night of the 27th of September, 1817, and that I am the son of the procureur, M. de Villefort.
I was born in No. 28, Rue de la Fontaine, in a room hung with red damask; my father took me in his arms, telling my mother I was dead, wrapped me in a napkin marked with an H and an N, and carried me into a garden, where he buried me alive.” A shudder ran through the assembly when they saw that the confidence of the prisoner increased in proportion to the terror of M. de Villefort.
“But how have you become acquainted with all these details?” asked the president.
A man who had sworn vengeance against my father, and had long watched his opportunity to kill him, had introduced himself that night into the garden in which my father buried me.
He was concealed in a thicket; he saw my father bury something in the ground, and stabbed him; then thinking the deposit might contain some treasure he turned up the ground, and found me still living.
The man carried me to the foundling asylum, where I was registered under the number 37.
Three months afterwards, a woman travelled from Rogliano to Paris to fetch me, and having claimed me as her son, carried me away.
Thus, you see, though born in Paris, I was brought up in Corsica.” There was a moment’s silence, during which one could have fancied the hall empty, so profound was the stillness.
“Proceed,” said the president.
“Certainly, I might have lived happily amongst those good people, who adored me, but my perverse disposition prevailed over the virtues which my adopted mother endeavored to instil into my heart.
I increased in wickedness till I committed crime.
One day when I cursed Providence for making me so wicked, and ordaining me to such a fate, my adopted father said to me, ‘Do not blaspheme, unhappy child, the crime is that of your father, not yours,—of your father, who consigned you to hell if you died, and to misery if a miracle preserved you alive.’ After that I ceased to blaspheme, but I cursed my father.
That is why I have uttered the words for which you blame me; that is why I have filled this whole assembly with horror.
If I have committed an additional crime, punish me, but if you will allow that ever since the day of my birth my fate has been sad, bitter, and lamentable, then pity me.” “But your mother?” asked the president.
I did not even wish to know her name, nor do I know it.” Just then a piercing cry, ending in a sob, burst from the centre of the crowd, who encircled the lady who had before fainted, and who now fell into a violent fit of hysterics.
She was carried out of the hall, the thick veil which concealed her face dropped off, and Madame Danglars was recognized.
Notwithstanding his shattered nerves, the ringing sensation in his ears, and the madness which turned his brain, Villefort rose as he perceived her.
The whole assembly uttered a long murmur of astonishment.
“Father,” said Benedetto, “I am asked for proofs, do you wish me to give them?” “No, no, it is useless,” stammered M. de Villefort in a hoarse voice; “no, it is useless!” “How useless?” cried the president, “what do you mean?” “I mean that I feel it impossible to struggle against this deadly weight which crushes me.
Gentlemen, I know I am in the hands of an avenging God!
We need no proofs; everything relating to this young man is true.” A dull, gloomy silence, like that which precedes some awful phenomenon of nature, pervaded the assembly, who shuddered in dismay.
“What, M. de Villefort,” cried the president, “do you yield to an hallucination?
What, are you no longer in possession of your senses?
This strange, unexpected, terrible accusation has disordered your reason.
Come, recover.” The procureur dropped his head; his teeth chattered like those of a man under a violent attack of fever, and yet he was deadly pale.
“I am in possession of all my senses, sir,” he said; “my body alone suffers, as you may suppose.
I acknowledge myself guilty of all the young man has brought against me, and from this hour hold myself under the authority of the procureur who will succeed me.” And as he spoke these words with a hoarse, choking voice, he staggered towards the door, which was mechanically opened by a door-keeper.
The whole assembly were dumb with astonishment at the revelation and confession which had produced a catastrophe so different from that which had been expected during the last fortnight by the Parisian world.
“Well,” said Beauchamp, “let them now say that drama is unnatural!” “_Ma foi!_” said Château-Renaud, “I would rather end my career like M. de Morcerf; a pistol-shot seems quite delightful compared with this catastrophe.” “And moreover, it kills,” said Beauchamp.
“And to think that I had an idea of marrying his daughter,” said Debray.
“She did well to die, poor girl!” “The sitting is adjourned, gentlemen,” said the president; “fresh inquiries will be made, and the case will be tried next session by another magistrate.” As for Andrea, who was calm and more interesting than ever, he left the hall, escorted by gendarmes, who involuntarily paid him some attention.
“Well, what do you think of this, my fine fellow?” asked Debray of the sergeant-at-arms, slipping a louis into his hand.
“There will be extenuating circumstances,” he replied.
Expiation Notwithstanding the density of the crowd, M. de Villefort saw it open before him.
There is something so awe-inspiring in great afflictions that even in the worst times the first emotion of a crowd has generally been to sympathize with the sufferer in a great catastrophe.
Many people have been assassinated in a tumult, but even criminals have rarely been insulted during trial.
Thus Villefort passed through the mass of spectators and officers of the Palais, and withdrew.
Though he had acknowledged his guilt, he was protected by his grief.
There are some situations which men understand by instinct, but which reason is powerless to explain; in such cases the greatest poet is he who gives utterance to the most natural and vehement outburst of sorrow.
Those who hear the bitter cry are as much impressed as if they listened to an entire poem, and when the sufferer is sincere they are right in regarding his outburst as sublime.
It would be difficult to describe the state of stupor in which Villefort left the Palais.
Every pulse beat with feverish excitement, every nerve was strained, every vein swollen, and every part of his body seemed to suffer distinctly from the rest, thus multiplying his agony a thousand-fold.
He made his way along the corridors through force of habit; he threw aside his magisterial robe, not out of deference to etiquette, but because it was an unbearable burden, a veritable garb of Nessus, insatiate in torture.
Having staggered as far as the Rue Dauphine, he perceived his carriage, awoke his sleeping coachman by opening the door himself, threw himself on the cushions, and pointed towards the Faubourg Saint-Honoré; the carriage drove on.
All the weight of his fallen fortune seemed suddenly to crush him; he could not foresee the consequences; he could not contemplate the future with the indifference of the hardened criminal who merely faces a contingency already familiar.
“God,” he murmured, not knowing what he said,—“God—God!” Behind the event that had overwhelmed him he saw the hand of God.
The carriage rolled rapidly onward.
Villefort, while turning restlessly on the cushions, felt something press against him.
He put out his hand to remove the object; it was a fan which Madame de Villefort had left in the carriage; this fan awakened a recollection which darted through his mind like lightning.
He thought of his wife. 50189m “Oh!” he exclaimed, as though a red-hot iron were piercing his heart.
During the last hour his own crime had alone been presented to his mind; now another object, not less terrible, suddenly presented itself.
He had just acted the inexorable judge with her, he had condemned her to death, and she, crushed by remorse, struck with terror, covered with the shame inspired by the eloquence of _his_ irreproachable virtue,—she, a poor, weak woman, without help or the power of defending herself against his absolute and supreme will,—she might at that very moment, perhaps, be preparing to die!
An hour had elapsed since her condemnation; at that moment, doubtless, she was recalling all her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon for her sins; perhaps she was even writing a letter imploring forgiveness from her virtuous husband—a forgiveness she was purchasing with her death!
Villefort again groaned with anguish and despair.
“Ah,” he exclaimed, “that woman became criminal only from associating with me!
I carried the infection of crime with me, and she has caught it as she would the typhus fever, the cholera, the plague!
And yet I have punished her—I have dared to tell her—_I_ have—‘Repent and die!’ But no, she must not die; she shall live, and with me.
I told her of the scaffold; oh, Heavens, I forgot that it awaits me also!
How could I pronounce that word?
Yes, we will fly; I will confess all to her,—I will tell her daily that I also have committed a crime!—Oh, what an alliance—the tiger and the serpent; worthy wife of such as I am!
She _must_ live that my infamy may diminish hers.” And Villefort dashed open the window in front of the carriage.
“Faster, faster!” he cried, in a tone which electrified the coachman.
The horses, impelled by fear, flew towards the house.
“Yes, yes,” repeated Villefort, as he approached his home—“yes, that woman must live; she must repent, and educate my son, the sole survivor, with the exception of the indestructible old man, of the wreck of my house.
She loves him; it was for his sake she has committed these crimes.
We ought never to despair of softening the heart of a mother who loves her child.
The events which have taken place in my house, though they now occupy the public mind, will be forgotten in time, or if, indeed, a few enemies should persist in remembering them, why then I will add them to my list of crimes.
My wife and child shall escape from this gulf, carrying treasures with them; she will live and may yet be happy, since her child, in whom all her love is centred, will be with her.
I shall have performed a good action, and my heart will be lighter.” And the procureur breathed more freely than he had done for some time. 50191m The carriage stopped at the door of the house.
Villefort leaped out of the carriage, and saw that his servants were surprised at his early return; he could read no other expression on their features.
Noirtier’s room, he perceived two figures through the half-open door; but he experienced no curiosity to know who was visiting his father; anxiety carried him on further.
“Come,” he said, as he ascended the stairs leading to his wife’s room, “nothing is changed here.” He then closed the door of the landing.
“No one must disturb us,” he said; “I must speak freely to her, accuse myself, and say”—he approached the door, touched the crystal handle, which yielded to his hand.
“Not locked,” he cried; “that is well.” And he entered the little room in which Edward slept; for though the child went to school during the day, his mother could not allow him to be separated from her at night.
With a single glance Villefort’s eye ran through the room.
“Not here,” he said; “doubtless she is in her bedroom.” He rushed towards the door, found it bolted, and stopped, shuddering.
He fancied he heard the sound of a piece of furniture being removed.
“Héloïse!” he repeated.
“Who is there?” answered the voice of her he sought.
“Open the door!” cried Villefort.
“Open; it is I.” But notwithstanding this request, notwithstanding the tone of anguish in which it was uttered, the door remained closed.
Villefort burst it open with a violent blow.
At the entrance of the room which led to her boudoir, Madame de Villefort was standing erect, pale, her features contracted, and her eyes glaring horribly.
Speak!” The young woman extended her stiff white hands towards him.
“It is done, monsieur,” she said with a rattling noise which seemed to tear her throat.
Villefort ran to her and seized her hand, which convulsively clasped a crystal bottle with a golden stopper.
Madame de Villefort was dead.
Villefort, maddened with horror, stepped back to the threshhold of the door, fixing his eyes on the corpse.
“My son!” he exclaimed suddenly, “where is my son?—Edward, Edward!” and he rushed out of the room, still crying, “Edward, Edward!” The name was pronounced in such a tone of anguish that the servants ran up.
“Where is my son?” asked Villefort; “let him be removed from the house, that he may not see——” “Master Edward is not downstairs, sir,” replied the valet.
“Then he must be playing in the garden; go and see.” 50193m “No, sir; Madame de Villefort sent for him half an hour ago; he went into her room, and has not been downstairs since.” A cold perspiration burst out on Villefort’s brow; his legs trembled, and his thoughts flew about madly in his brain like the wheels of a disordered watch.
“In Madame de Villefort’s room?” he murmured and slowly returned, with one hand wiping his forehead, and with the other supporting himself against the wall.
To enter the room he must again see the body of his unfortunate wife.
To call Edward he must reawaken the echo of that room which now appeared like a sepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the silence of the tomb.
His tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.
“Edward!” he stammered—“Edward!” The child did not answer.
Where, then, could he be, if he had entered his mother’s room and not since returned?
The corpse of Madame de Villefort was stretched across the doorway leading to the room in which Edward must be; those glaring eyes seemed to watch over the threshold, and the lips bore the stamp of a terrible and mysterious irony.
Through the open door was visible a portion of the boudoir, containing an upright piano and a blue satin couch.
Villefort stepped forward two or three paces, and beheld his child lying—no doubt asleep—on the sofa.
The unhappy man uttered an exclamation of joy; a ray of light seemed to penetrate the abyss of despair and darkness.
Villefort was no longer the civilized man; he was a tiger hurt unto death, gnashing his teeth in his wound.
He no longer feared realities, but phantoms.
He took the child in his arms, embraced him, shook him, called him, but the child made no response.
He pressed his burning lips to the cheeks, but they were icy cold and pale; he felt the stiffened limbs; he pressed his hand upon the heart, but it no longer beat,—the child was dead.
Villefort, thunderstruck, fell upon his knees; the child dropped from his arms, and rolled on the floor by the side of its mother.
He picked up the paper, and, recognizing his wife’s writing, ran his eyes rapidly over its contents; it ran as follows: “You know that I was a good mother, since it was for my son’s sake I became criminal.
A good mother cannot depart without her son.” Villefort could not believe his eyes,—he could not believe his reason; he dragged himself towards the child’s body, and examined it as a lioness contemplates its dead cub.
Then a piercing cry escaped from his breast, and he cried, “Still the hand of God.” The presence of the two victims alarmed him; he could not bear solitude shared only by two corpses.
Until then he had been sustained by rage, by his strength of mind, by despair, by the supreme agony which led the Titans to scale the heavens, and Ajax to defy the gods.
He now arose, his head bowed beneath the weight of grief, and, shaking his damp, dishevelled hair, he who had never felt compassion for anyone determined to seek his father, that he might have someone to whom he could relate his misfortunes,—someone by whose side he might weep. 50195m He descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and entered Noirtier’s room.
The old man appeared to be listening attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would allow to the Abbé Busoni, who looked cold and calm, as usual.
Villefort, perceiving the abbé, passed his hand across his brow.
He recollected the call he had made upon him after the dinner at Auteuil, and then the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on the day of Valentine’s death.
“You here, sir!” he exclaimed; “do you, then, never appear but to act as an escort to death?” Busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitement depicted on the magistrate’s face, the savage lustre of his eyes, he understood that the revelation had been made at the assizes; but beyond this he was ignorant.
“It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!” exclaimed the procureur, with a haggard expression.
Procureur; you must go farther back.” “That voice, that voice!—where did I first hear it?” “You heard it for the first time at Marseilles, twenty-three years ago, the day of your marriage with Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran.
Oh, heavens! you are, then, some secret, implacable, and mortal enemy!
I must have wronged you in some way at Marseilles.
Oh, woe to me!” “Yes; you are now on the right path,” said the count, crossing his arms over his broad chest; “search—search!” “But what have I done to you?” exclaimed Villefort, whose mind was balancing between reason and insanity, in that cloud which is neither a dream nor reality; “what have I done to you?
Speak!” “You condemned me to a horrible, tedious death; you killed my father; you deprived me of liberty, of love, and happiness.” “Who are you, then?
Who are you?” “I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons of the Château d’If.
“My child,” cried Villefort, “he carries away the body of my child!
Oh, curses, woe, death to you!” He tried to follow Monte Cristo; but as though in a dream he was transfixed to the spot,—his eyes glared as though they were starting through the sockets; he griped the flesh on his chest until his nails were stained with blood; the veins of his temples swelled and boiled as though they would burst their narrow boundary, and deluge his brain with living fire.
This lasted several minutes, until the frightful overturn of reason was accomplished; then uttering a loud cry followed by a burst of laughter, he rushed down the stairs.
A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine’s room opened, and Monte Cristo reappeared.
Pale, with a dull eye and heavy heart, all the noble features of that face, usually so calm and serene, were overcast by grief.
Bending on one knee, he placed it reverently by the side of its mother, with its head upon her breast.
Then, rising, he went out, and meeting a servant on the stairs, he asked: “Where is M. de Villefort?” The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden.
Monte Cristo ran down the steps, and advancing towards the spot designated beheld Villefort, encircled by his servants, with a spade in his hand, and digging the earth with fury.
Monte Cristo approached him, and said in a low voice, with an expression almost humble: “Sir, you have indeed lost a son; but——” Villefort interrupted him; he had neither listened nor heard.
“Oh,” he said, “he is mad!” And as though he feared that the walls of the accursed house would crumble around him, he rushed into the street, for the first time doubting whether he had the right to do as he had done.
“Oh, enough of this,—enough of this,” he cried; “let me save the last.” On entering his house, he met Morrel, who wandered about like a ghost awaiting the heavenly mandate for return to the tomb.
“Prepare yourself, Maximilian,” he said with a smile; “we leave Paris tomorrow.” “Have you nothing more to do there?” asked Morrel.
“No,” replied Monte Cristo; “God grant I may not have done too much already.” The next day they indeed left, accompanied only by Baptistin.
Haydée had taken away Ali, and Bertuccio remained with Noirtier.
The Departure The recent events formed the theme of conversation throughout all Paris.
Emmanuel and his wife conversed with natural astonishment in their little apartment in the Rue Meslay upon the three successive, sudden, and most unexpected catastrophes of Morcerf, Danglars, and Villefort.
Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened to their conversation, or rather was present at it, plunged in his accustomed state of apathy.
“What dreadful sufferings!” said Julie, remembering Valentine, but whom, with a delicacy natural to women, she did not name before her brother.
“If the Supreme Being has directed the fatal blow,” said Emmanuel, “it must be that he in his great goodness has perceived nothing in the past lives of these people to merit mitigation of their awful punishment.” “Do you not form a very rash judgment, Emmanuel?” said Julie.
“When my father, with a pistol in his hand, was once on the point of committing suicide, had anyone then said, ‘This man deserves his misery,’ would not that person have been deceived?” “Yes; but your father was not allowed to fall.
A being was commissioned to arrest the fatal hand of death about to descend on him.” Emmanuel had scarcely uttered these words when the sound of the bell was heard, the well-known signal given by the porter that a visitor had arrived.
Nearly at the same instant the door was opened and the Count of Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold.
The young people uttered a cry of joy, while Maximilian raised his head, but let it fall again immediately. 50201m “Maximilian,” said the count, without appearing to notice the different impressions which his presence produced on the little circle, “I come to seek you.” “To seek me?” repeated Morrel, as if awakening from a dream.
“Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “has it not been agreed that I should take you with me, and did I not tell you yesterday to prepare for departure?” “I am ready,” said Maximilian; “I came expressly to wish them farewell.” “Whither are you going, count?” asked Julie.
“In the first instance to Marseilles, madame.” “To Marseilles!” exclaimed the young couple.
“Yes, and I take your brother with me.” “Oh, count.” said Julie, “will you restore him to us cured of his melancholy?” Morrel turned away to conceal the confusion of his countenance.
“You perceive, then, that he is not happy?” said the count.
“Yes,” replied the young woman; “and fear much that he finds our home but a dull one.” “I will undertake to divert him,” replied the count.
“I am ready to accompany you, sir,” said Maximilian.
“Good,” said Monte Cristo, smiling; “in these prompt arrangements we recognize the order of a well-disciplined soldier.” “And you leave us,” said Julie, “at a moment’s warning? you do not give us a day—no, not even an hour before your departure?” “My carriage is at the door, madame, and I must be in Rome in five days.” “But does Maximilian go to Rome?” exclaimed Emmanuel.
“I am going wherever it may please the count to take me,” said Morrel, with a smile full of grief; “I am under his orders for the next month.” “Oh, heavens, how strangely he expresses himself, count!” said Julie.
“Maximilian goes with _me_,” said the count, in his kindest and most persuasive manner; “therefore do not make yourself uneasy on your brother’s account.” “Once more farewell, my dear sister; Emmanuel, adieu!” Morrel repeated.
“His carelessness and indifference touch me to the heart,” said Julie.
“Oh, Maximilian, Maximilian, you are certainly concealing something from us.” “Pshaw!” said Monte Cristo, “you will see him return to you gay, smiling, and joyful.” Maximilian cast a look of disdain, almost of anger, on the count.
“We must leave you,” said Monte Cristo. 50203m “Before you quit us, count,” said Julie, “will you permit us to express to you all that the other day——” “Madame,” interrupted the count, taking her two hands in his, “all that you could say in words would never express what I read in your eyes; the thoughts of your heart are fully understood by mine.
Like benefactors in romances, I should have left you without seeing you again, but that would have been a virtue beyond my strength, because I am a weak and vain man, fond of the tender, kind, and thankful glances of my fellow-creatures.
On the eve of departure I carry my egotism so far as to say, ‘Do not forget me, my kind friends, for probably you will never see me again.’” “Never see you again?” exclaimed Emmanuel, while two large tears rolled down Julie’s cheeks, “never behold you again?
It is not a man, then, but some angel that leaves us, and this angel is on the point of returning to heaven after having appeared on earth to do good.” “Say not so,” quickly returned Monte Cristo—“say not so, my friends; angels never err, celestial beings remain where they wish to be.
Fate is not more powerful than they; it is they who, on the contrary, overcome fate.
“Restore my brother to peace and happiness,” whispered Julie to Monte Cristo.
And the count pressed her hand in reply, as he had done eleven years before on the staircase leading to Morrel’s study.
“Well, then, sleep in peace, and put your trust in the Lord.” As we have before said, the post-chaise was waiting; four powerful horses were already pawing the ground with impatience, while Ali, apparently just arrived from a long walk, was standing at the foot of the steps, his face bathed in perspiration.
“Well,” asked the count in Arabic, “have you been to see the old man?” Ali made a sign in the affirmative.
“And have you placed the letter before him, as I ordered you to do?” The slave respectfully signalized that he had.
“And what did he say, or rather do?” Ali placed himself in the light, so that his master might see him distinctly, and then imitating in his intelligent manner the countenance of the old man, he closed his eyes, as Noirtier was in the custom of doing when saying “Yes.” “Good; he accepts,” said Monte Cristo.
“Now let us go.” 50205m These words had scarcely escaped him, when the carriage was on its way, and the feet of the horses struck a shower of sparks from the pavement.
Maximilian settled himself in his corner without uttering a word.
Half an hour had passed when the carriage stopped suddenly; the count had just pulled the silken check-string, which was fastened to Ali’s finger.
The Nubian immediately descended and opened the carriage door.
The count stood alone, and at a sign from his hand, the carriage went on for a short distance.
When he had fixed his piercing look on this modern Babylon, which equally engages the contemplation of the religious enthusiast, the materialist, and the scoffer,— “Great city,” murmured he, inclining his head, and joining his hands as if in prayer, “less than six months have elapsed since first I entered thy gates.
I believe that the Spirit of God led my steps to thee and that he also enables me to quit thee in triumph; the secret cause of my presence within thy walls I have confided alone to him who only has had the power to read my heart.
God only knows that I retire from thee without pride or hatred, but not without many regrets; he only knows that the power confided to me has never been made subservient to my personal good or to any useless cause.
Oh, great city, it is in thy palpitating bosom that I have found that which I sought; like a patient miner, I have dug deep into thy very entrails to root out evil thence.
Now my work is accomplished, my mission is terminated, now thou canst neither afford me pain nor pleasure.
Adieu, Paris, adieu!” His look wandered over the vast plain like that of some genius of the night; he passed his hand over his brow, got into the carriage, the door was closed on him, and the vehicle quickly disappeared down the other side of the hill in a whirlwind of dust and noise.
Morrel was dreaming, and Monte Cristo was looking at the dreamer.
I have two friends, who in this way never depart from me; the one who gave me being, and the other who conferred knowledge and intelligence on me.
I consult them when doubtful, and if I ever do any good, it is due to their beneficent counsels.
Listen to the voice of your heart, Morrel, and ask it whether you ought to preserve this melancholy exterior towards me.” “My friend,” said Maximilian, “the voice of my heart is very sorrowful, and promises me nothing but misfortune.” “It is the way of weakened minds to see everything through a black cloud.
The soul forms its own horizons; your soul is darkened, and consequently the sky of the future appears stormy and unpromising.” “That may possibly be true,” said Maximilian, and he again subsided into his thoughtful mood.
The journey was performed with that marvellous rapidity which the unlimited power of the count ever commanded.
Towns fled from them like shadows on their path, and trees shaken by the first winds of autumn seemed like giants madly rushing on to meet them, and retreating as rapidly when once reached.
The following morning they arrived at Châlons, where the count’s steamboat waited for them.
Without the loss of an instant, the carriage was placed on board and the two travellers embarked without delay.
Morrel was not insensible to that sensation of delight which is generally experienced in passing rapidly through the air, and the wind which occasionally raised the hair from his forehead seemed on the point of dispelling momentarily the clouds collected there.
As the distance increased between the travellers and Paris, almost superhuman serenity appeared to surround the count; he might have been taken for an exile about to revisit his native land.
Ere long Marseilles presented herself to view,—Marseilles, white, fervid, full of life and energy,—Marseilles, the younger sister of Tyre and Carthage, the successor to them in the empire of the Mediterranean,—Marseilles, old, yet always young.
Powerful memories were stirred within them by the sight of the round tower, Fort Saint-Nicolas, the City Hall designed by Puget,28 the port with its brick quays, where they had both played in childhood, and it was with one accord that they stopped on the Canebière.
A vessel was setting sail for Algiers, on board of which the bustle usually attending departure prevailed.
“Here,” said he, leaning heavily on the arm of Monte Cristo,—“here is the spot where my father stopped, when the _Pharaon_ entered the port; it was here that the good old man, whom you saved from death and dishonor, threw himself into my arms.
I yet feel his warm tears on my face, and his were not the only tears shed, for many who witnessed our meeting wept also.” Monte Cristo gently smiled and said,—“I was there;” at the same time pointing to the corner of a street.
As he spoke, and in the very direction he indicated, a groan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard, and a woman was seen waving her hand to a passenger on board the vessel about to sail.
Monte Cristo looked at her with an emotion that must have been remarked by Morrel had not his eyes been fixed on the vessel.
Turning to his friend: “Dear Maximilian,” said the count, “have you nothing to do in this land?” “I have to weep over the grave of my father,” replied Morrel in a broken voice.
“Well, then, go,—wait for me there, and I will soon join you.” “You leave me, then?” “Yes; I also have a pious visit to pay.” Morrel allowed his hand to fall into that which the count extended to him; then with an inexpressibly sorrowful inclination of the head he quitted the count and bent his steps to the east of the city.
Monte Cristo remained on the same spot until Maximilian was out of sight; he then walked slowly towards the Allées de Meilhan to seek out a small house with which our readers were made familiar at the beginning of this story.
It yet stood, under the shade of the fine avenue of lime-trees, which forms one of the most frequent walks of the idlers of Marseilles, covered by an immense vine, which spreads its aged and blackened branches over the stone front, burnt yellow by the ardent sun of the south.
Two stone steps worn away by the friction of many feet led to the door, which was made of three planks; the door had never been painted or varnished, so great cracks yawned in it during the dry season to close again when the rains came on.
The house, with all its crumbling antiquity and apparent misery, was yet cheerful and picturesque, and was the same that old Dantès formerly inhabited—the only difference being that the old man occupied merely the garret, while the whole house was now placed at the command of Mercédès by the count.
The woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with so much regret entered this house; she had scarcely closed the door after her when Monte Cristo appeared at the corner of a street, so that he found and lost her again almost at the same instant.
The worn out steps were old acquaintances of his; he knew better than anyone else how to open that weather-beaten door with the large headed nail which served to raise the latch within.
He entered without knocking, or giving any other intimation of his presence, as if he had been a friend or the master of the place.
At the end of a passage paved with bricks, was a little garden, bathed in sunshine, and rich in warmth and light.
In this garden Mercédès had found, at the place indicated by the count, the sum of money which he, through a sense of delicacy, had described as having been placed there twenty-four years previously.
Monte Cristo, on stepping into the house, heard a sigh that was almost a deep sob; he looked in the direction whence it came, and there under an arbor of Virginia jessamine,29 with its thick foliage and beautiful long purple flowers, he saw Mercédès seated, with her head bowed, and weeping bitterly.
She had raised her veil, and with her face hidden by her hands was giving free scope to the sighs and tears which had been so long restrained by the presence of her son.
Monte Cristo advanced a few steps, which were heard on the gravel.
Mercédès raised her head, and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a man before her. 50211m “Madame,” said the count, “it is no longer in my power to restore you to happiness, but I offer you consolation; will you deign to accept it as coming from a friend?” “I am, indeed, most wretched,” replied Mercédès.
“Alone in the world, I had but my son, and he has left me!” “He possesses a noble heart, madame,” replied the count, “and he has acted rightly.
He feels that every man owes a tribute to his country; some contribute their talents, others their industry; these devote their blood, those their nightly labors, to the same cause.
Had he remained with you, his life must have become a hateful burden, nor would he have participated in your griefs.
He will increase in strength and honor by struggling with adversity, which he will convert into prosperity.
Leave him to build up the future for you, and I venture to say you will confide it to safe hands.” “Oh,” replied the wretched woman, mournfully shaking her head, “the prosperity of which you speak, and which, from the bottom of my heart, I pray God in his mercy to grant him, I can never enjoy.
The bitter cup of adversity has been drained by me to the very dregs, and I feel that the grave is not far distant.
You have acted kindly, count, in bringing me back to the place where I have enjoyed so much bliss.
I ought to meet death on the same spot where happiness was once all my own.” “Alas,” said Monte Cristo, “your words sear and embitter my heart, the more so as you have every reason to hate me.
I have been the cause of all your misfortunes; but why do you pity, instead of blaming me?
Hate, reproach, the man that has spared my son’s life!
For was it not your fatal and sanguinary intention to destroy that son of whom M. de Morcerf was so proud?
Oh, look at me closely, and discover, if you can, even the semblance of a reproach in me.” The count looked up and fixed his eyes on Mercédès, who arose partly from her seat and extended both her hands towards him.
“Oh, look at me,” continued she, with a feeling of profound melancholy, “my eyes no longer dazzle by their brilliancy, for the time has long fled since I used to smile on Edmond Dantès, who anxiously looked out for me from the window of yonder garret, then inhabited by his old father.
I neither reproach you nor hate you, my friend.
Oh, miserable creature that I am!” cried she, clasping her hands, and raising her eyes to heaven.
“I once possessed piety, innocence, and love, the three ingredients of the happiness of angels, and now what am I?” Monte Cristo approached her, and silently took her hand.
“No,” said she, withdrawing it gently—“no, my friend, touch me not.
You have spared me, yet of all those who have fallen under your vengeance I was the most guilty.
They were influenced by hatred, by avarice, and by self-love; but I was base, and for want of courage acted against my judgment.
Nay, do not press my hand, Edmond; you are thinking, I am sure, of some kind speech to console me, but do not utter it to me, reserve it for others more worthy of your kindness.
See” (and she exposed her face completely to view)—“see, misfortune has silvered my hair, my eyes have shed so many tears that they are encircled by a rim of purple, and my brow is wrinkled.
You, Edmond, on the contrary,—you are still young, handsome, dignified; it is because you have had faith; because you have had strength, because you have had trust in God, and God has sustained you.
But as for me, I have been a coward; I have denied God and he has abandoned me.” 50213m Mercédès burst into tears; her woman’s heart was breaking under its load of memories.
Monte Cristo took her hand and imprinted a kiss on it; but she herself felt that it was a kiss of no greater warmth than he would have bestowed on the hand of some marble statue of a saint.
“It often happens,” continued she, “that a first fault destroys the prospects of a whole life.
I believed you dead; why did I survive you?
What good has it done me to mourn for you eternally in the secret recesses of my heart?—only to make a woman of thirty-nine look like a woman of fifty.
Why, having recognized you, and I the only one to do so—why was I able to save my son alone?
Ought I not also to have rescued the man that I had accepted for a husband, guilty though he were?
Oh, merciful heavens, was I not accessory to his death by my supine insensibility, by my contempt for him, not remembering, or not willing to remember, that it was for my sake he had become a traitor and a perjurer?
In what am I benefited by accompanying my son so far, since I now abandon him, and allow him to depart alone to the baneful climate of Africa?
Oh, I have been base, cowardly, I tell you; I have abjured my affections, and like all renegades I am of evil omen to those who surround me!” “No, Mercédès,” said Monte Cristo, “no; you judge yourself with too much severity.
You are a noble-minded woman, and it was your grief that disarmed me.
Still I was but an agent, led on by an invisible and offended Deity, who chose not to withhold the fatal blow that I was destined to hurl.
I take that God to witness, at whose feet I have prostrated myself daily for the last ten years, that I would have sacrificed my life to you, and with my life the projects that were indissolubly linked with it.
Examine the past and the present, and endeavor to dive into futurity, and then say whether I am not a divine instrument.
From that time I looked upon this fortune as something confided to me for a particular purpose.
Not a thought was given to a life which you once, Mercédès, had the power to render blissful; not one hour of peaceful calm was mine; but I felt myself driven on like an exterminating angel.
Like adventurous captains about to embark on some enterprise full of danger, I laid in my provisions, I loaded my weapons, I collected every means of attack and defence; I inured my body to the most violent exercises, my soul to the bitterest trials; I taught my arm to slay, my eyes to behold excruciating sufferings, and my mouth to smile at the most horrid spectacles.
Good-natured, confiding, and forgiving as I had been, I became revengeful, cunning, and wicked, or rather, immovable as fate.
Then I launched out into the path that was opened to me.
I overcame every obstacle, and reached the goal; but woe to those who stood in my pathway!” 50215m “Enough,” said Mercédès; “enough, Edmond!
Believe me, that she who alone recognized you has been the only one to comprehend you; and had she crossed your path, and you had crushed her like glass, still, Edmond, still she must have admired you!
Like the gulf between me and the past, there is an abyss between you, Edmond, and the rest of mankind; and I tell you freely that the comparison I draw between you and other men will ever be one of my greatest tortures.
No, there is nothing in the world to resemble you in worth and goodness!
But we must say farewell, Edmond, and let us part.” “Before I leave you, Mercédès, have you no request to make?” said the count.
“I desire but one thing in this world, Edmond,—the happiness of my son.” “Pray to the Almighty to spare his life, and I will take upon myself to promote his happiness.” “Thank you, Edmond.” “But have you no request to make for yourself, Mercédès?” “For myself I want nothing.
That word ill becomes my faded lip now, but it is a memory dear to my heart, and one that I would not lose for all that the world contains.
I approve of the deed, but I must pray for the dead.” “Your son shall be happy, Mercédès,” repeated the count.
“Then I shall enjoy as much happiness as this world can possibly confer.” “But what are your intentions?” Mercédès smiled sadly.
I have no longer the strength to do anything but to spend my days in prayer.
However, I shall have no occasion to work, for the little sum of money buried by you, and which I found in the place you mentioned, will be sufficient to maintain me.
I will make myself acquainted with his intentions and will submit to them.
But if he be willing to accept my offers, will you oppose them?” “You well know, Edmond, that I am no longer a reasoning creature; I have no will, unless it be the will never to decide.
I have been so overwhelmed by the many storms that have broken over my head, that I am become passive in the hands of the Almighty, like a sparrow in the talons of an eagle.
I live, because it is not ordained for me to die.
It is not so we should evince our resignation to the will of heaven; on the contrary, we are all free agents.” “Alas!” exclaimed Mercédès, “if it were so, if I possessed free-will, but without the power to render that will efficacious, it would drive me to despair.” Monte Cristo dropped his head and shrank from the vehemence of her grief.
“On the contrary, we shall meet again,” said Mercédès, pointing to heaven with solemnity.
“I tell you so to prove to you that I still hope.” And after pressing her own trembling hand upon that of the count, Mercédès rushed up the stairs and disappeared.
But Mercédès did not witness his departure, although she was seated at the little window of the room which had been occupied by old Dantès.
Her eyes were straining to see the ship which was carrying her son over the vast sea; but still her voice involuntarily murmured softly: “Edmond, Edmond, Edmond!” Chapter 113.
The Past The count departed with a sad heart from the house in which he had left Mercédès, probably never to behold her again.
Having reached the summit of his vengeance by a long and tortuous path, he saw an abyss of doubt yawning before him.
More than this, the conversation which had just taken place between Mercédès and himself had awakened so many recollections in his heart that he felt it necessary to combat with them.
A man of the count’s temperament could not long indulge in that melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which destroys superior ones.
He thought he must have made an error in his calculations if he now found cause to blame himself.
“I cannot have deceived myself,” he said; “I must look upon the past in a false light.
What!” he continued, “can I have been following a false path?—can the end which I proposed be a mistaken end?—can one hour have sufficed to prove to an architect that the work upon which he founded all his hopes was an impossible, if not a sacrilegious, undertaking?
I cannot reconcile myself to this idea—it would madden me.
The reason why I am now dissatisfied is that I have not a clear appreciation of the past.
The past, like the country through which we walk, becomes indistinct as we advance.
My position is like that of a person wounded in a dream; he feels the wound, though he cannot recollect when he received it.
“Come, then, thou regenerate man, thou extravagant prodigal, thou awakened sleeper, thou all-powerful visionary, thou invincible millionaire,—once again review thy past life of starvation and wretchedness, revisit the scenes where fate and misfortune conducted, and where despair received thee.
Too many diamonds, too much gold and splendor, are now reflected by the mirror in which Monte Cristo seeks to behold Dantès.
Hide thy diamonds, bury thy gold, shroud thy splendor, exchange riches for poverty, liberty for a prison, a living body for a corpse!” As he thus reasoned, Monte Cristo walked down the Rue de la Caisserie.
It was the same through which, twenty-four years ago, he had been conducted by a silent and nocturnal guard; the houses, today so smiling and animated, were on that night dark, mute, and closed.
“And yet they were the same,” murmured Monte Cristo, “only now it is broad daylight instead of night; it is the sun which brightens the place, and makes it appear so cheerful.” He proceeded towards the quay by the Rue Saint-Laurent, and advanced to the Consigne; it was the point where he had embarked.
A pleasure-boat with striped awning was going by.
Monte Cristo called the owner, who immediately rowed up to him with the eagerness of a boatman hoping for a good fare.
The weather was magnificent, and the excursion a treat.
The sun, red and flaming, was sinking into the embrace of the welcoming ocean.
The sea, smooth as crystal, was now and then disturbed by the leaping of fish, which were pursued by some unseen enemy and sought for safety in another element; while on the extreme verge of the horizon might be seen the fishermen’s boats, white and graceful as the sea-gull, or the merchant vessels bound for Corsica or Spain.
But notwithstanding the serene sky, the gracefully formed boats, and the golden light in which the whole scene was bathed, the Count of Monte Cristo, wrapped in his cloak, could think only of this terrible voyage, the details of which were one by one recalled to his memory.
The solitary light burning at the Catalans; that first sight of the Château d’If, which told him whither they were leading him; the struggle with the gendarmes when he wished to throw himself overboard; his despair when he found himself vanquished, and the sensation when the muzzle of the carbine touched his forehead—all these were brought before him in vivid and frightful reality.
Like the streams which the heat of the summer has dried up, and which after the autumnal storms gradually begin oozing drop by drop, so did the count feel his heart gradually fill with the bitterness which formerly nearly overwhelmed Edmond Dantès.
Clear sky, swift-flitting boats, and brilliant sunshine disappeared; the heavens were hung with black, and the gigantic structure of the Château d’If seemed like the phantom of a mortal enemy.
As they reached the shore, the count instinctively shrunk to the extreme end of the boat, and the owner was obliged to call out, in his sweetest tone of voice: “Sir, we are at the landing.” Monte Cristo remembered that on that very spot, on the same rock, he had been violently dragged by the guards, who forced him to ascend the slope at the points of their bayonets.
Each stroke of the oar seemed to awaken a new throng of ideas, which sprang up with the flying spray of the sea. 50219m There had been no prisoners confined in the Château d’If since the revolution of July; it was only inhabited by a guard, kept there for the prevention of smuggling.
A concierge waited at the door to exhibit to visitors this monument of curiosity, once a scene of terror.
The count inquired whether any of the ancient jailers were still there; but they had all been pensioned, or had passed on to some other employment.
The concierge who attended him had only been there since 1830.
He again beheld the dull light vainly endeavoring to penetrate the narrow opening.
His eyes rested upon the spot where had stood his bed, since then removed, and behind the bed the new stones indicated where the breach made by the Abbé Faria had been.
He had almost forgotten his name and face, but at the mention of the name he recalled his person as he used to see it, the face encircled by a beard, wearing the brown jacket, the bunch of keys, the jingling of which he still seemed to hear.
The count turned around, and fancied he saw him in the corridor, rendered still darker by the torch carried by the concierge.
“Would you like to hear the story, sir?” “Yes; relate it,” said Monte Cristo, pressing his hand to his heart to still its violent beatings; he felt afraid of hearing his own history.
“This dungeon,” said the concierge, “was, it appears, some time ago occupied by a very dangerous prisoner, the more so since he was full of industry.
Another person was confined in the Château at the same time, but he was not wicked, he was only a poor mad priest.” “Ah, indeed?—mad!” repeated Monte Cristo; “and what was his mania?” “He offered millions to anyone who would set him at liberty.” Monte Cristo raised his eyes, but he could not see the heavens; there was a stone veil between him and the firmament.
He thought that there had been no less thick a veil before the eyes of those to whom Faria offered the treasures.
“Could the prisoners see each other?” he asked.
“However, be that as it may, the young man made a tunnel, how or by what means no one knows; but he made it, and there is the evidence yet remaining of his work.
“The result was that the two men communicated with one another; how long they did so, nobody knows.
Now guess what the young one did?” “Tell me.” “He carried off the corpse, which he placed in his own bed with its face to the wall; then he entered the empty dungeon, closed the entrance, and slipped into the sack which had contained the dead body.
Did you ever hear of such an idea?” Monte Cristo closed his eyes, and seemed again to experience all the sensations he had felt when the coarse canvas, yet moist with the cold dews of death, had touched his face.
The jailer continued: “Now this was his project.
He fancied that they buried the dead at the Château d’If, and imagining they would not expend much labor on the grave of a prisoner, he calculated on raising the earth with his shoulders, but unfortunately their arrangements at the Château frustrated his projects.
They never buried the dead; they merely attached a heavy cannon-ball to the feet, and then threw them into the sea.
“No,” he muttered, “the doubt I felt was but the commencement of forgetfulness; but here the wound reopens, and the heart again thirsts for vengeance.
And the prisoner,” he continued aloud, “was he ever heard of afterwards?” “Oh, no; of course not.
You can understand that one of two things must have happened; he must either have fallen flat, in which case the blow, from a height of ninety feet, must have killed him instantly, or he must have fallen upright, and then the weight would have dragged him to the bottom, where he remained—poor fellow!” “Then you pity him?” said the count.
“_Ma foi_, yes; though he was in his own element.” “What do you mean?” “The report was that he had been a naval officer, who had been confined for plotting with the Bonapartists.” “Great is truth,” muttered the count, “fire cannot burn, nor water drown it!
“Yes, especially if you will show me the poor abbé’s room.” “Ah!
No. 27.” “Yes; No. 27.” repeated the count, who seemed to hear the voice of the abbé answering him in those very words through the wall when asked his name.
“Come, sir.” “Wait,” said Monte Cristo, “I wish to take one final glance around this room.” “This is fortunate,” said the guide; “I have forgotten the other key.” “Go and fetch it.” “I will leave you the torch, sir.” “No, take it away; I can see in the dark.” “Why, you are like No. 34.
They said he was so accustomed to darkness that he could see a pin in the darkest corner of his dungeon.” “He spent fourteen years to arrive at that,” muttered the count.
The count had spoken correctly.
Scarcely had a few seconds elapsed, ere he saw everything as distinctly as by daylight.
Then he looked around him, and really recognized his dungeon.
“Yes,” he said, “there is the stone upon which I used to sit; there is the impression made by my shoulders on the wall; there is the mark of my blood made when one day I dashed my head against the wall.
Oh, those figures, how well I remember them!
I made them one day to calculate the age of my father, that I might know whether I should find him still living, and that of Mercédès, to know if I should find her still free.
After finishing that calculation, I had a minute’s hope.
I did not reckon upon hunger and infidelity!” and a bitter laugh escaped the count.
He saw in fancy the burial of his father, and the marriage of Mercédès.
On the other side of the dungeon he perceived an inscription, the white letters of which were still visible on the green wall: “‘_Oh, God!_’” he read, “‘_preserve my memory!_’” “Oh, yes,” he cried, “that was my only prayer at last; I no longer begged for liberty, but memory; I dreaded to become mad and forgetful.
Oh, God, thou hast preserved my memory; I thank thee, I thank thee!” At this moment the light of the torch was reflected on the wall; the guide was coming; Monte Cristo went to meet him.
“Follow me, sir;” and without ascending the stairs the guide conducted him by a subterraneous passage to another entrance.
There, again, Monte Cristo was assailed by a multitude of thoughts.
The first thing that met his eye was the meridian, drawn by the abbé on the wall, by which he calculated the time; then he saw the remains of the bed on which the poor prisoner had died.
The sight of this, instead of exciting the anguish experienced by the count in the dungeon, filled his heart with a soft and grateful sentiment, and tears fell from his eyes.
“This is where the mad abbé was kept, sir, and that is where the young man entered;” and the guide pointed to the opening, which had remained unclosed.
“From the appearance of the stone,” he continued, “a learned gentleman discovered that the prisoners might have communicated together for ten years.
Those must have been ten weary years.” Dantès took some louis from his pocket, and gave them to the man who had twice unconsciously pitied him.
The guide took them, thinking them merely a few pieces of little value; but the light of the torch revealed their true worth.
“Sir,” he said, “you have made a mistake; you have given me gold.” “I know it.” The concierge looked upon the count with surprise.
“Sir,” he cried, scarcely able to believe his good fortune—“sir, I cannot understand your generosity!” “Oh, it is very simple, my good fellow; I have been a sailor, and your story touched me more than it would others.” “Then, sir, since you are so liberal, I ought to offer you something.” 50227m “What have you to offer to me, my friend?
Thank you!” “No, sir, neither of those; something connected with this story.” “Really?
What is it?” “Listen,” said the guide; “I said to myself, ‘Something is always left in a cell inhabited by one prisoner for fifteen years,’ so I began to sound the wall.” “Ah,” cried Monte Cristo, remembering the abbé’s two hiding-places.
“After some search, I found that the floor gave a hollow sound near the head of the bed, and at the hearth.” “Yes,” said the count, “yes.” “I raised the stones, and found——” “A rope-ladder and some tools?” “How do you know that?” asked the guide in astonishment.
“I do not know—I only guess it, because that sort of thing is generally found in prisoners’ cells.” “Yes, sir, a rope-ladder and tools.” “And have you them yet?” “No, sir; I sold them to visitors, who considered them great curiosities; but I have still something left.” “What is it?” asked the count, impatiently.
Then the count knelt down by the side of the bed, which death had converted into an altar.
Remove from me the remains of doubt, which, if it change not to conviction, must become remorse!” The count bowed his head, and clasped his hands together.
Monte Cristo shuddered, and arose.
The concierge held out the strips of cloth upon which the Abbé Faria had spread the riches of his mind.
The manuscript was the great work by the Abbé Faria upon the kingdoms of Italy.
The count seized it hastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the epigraph, and he read: “Thou shalt tear out the dragons’ teeth, and shall trample the lions under foot, saith the Lord.” “Ah,” he exclaimed, “here is my answer.
Thanks, father, thanks.” And feeling in his pocket, he took thence a small pocket-book, which contained ten bank-notes, each of 1,000 francs.
“Here,” he said, “take this pocket-book.” “Do you give it to me?” “Yes; but only on condition that you will not open it till I am gone;” and placing in his breast the treasure he had just found, which was more valuable to him than the richest jewel, he rushed out of the corridor, and reaching his boat, cried, “To Marseilles!” Then, as he departed, he fixed his eyes upon the gloomy prison.
“Woe,” he cried, “to those who confined me in that wretched prison; and woe to those who forgot that I was there!” 50229m As he repassed the Catalans, the count turned around and burying his head in his cloak murmured the name of a woman.
The victory was complete; twice he had overcome his doubts.
The name he pronounced, in a voice of tenderness, amounting almost to love, was that of Haydée.
On landing, the count turned towards the cemetery, where he felt sure of finding Morrel.
He, who returned to France with millions, had been unable to find the grave of his father, who had perished from hunger.
Morrel had indeed placed a cross over the spot, but it had fallen down and the grave-digger had burnt it, as he did all the old wood in the churchyard.
The worthy merchant had been more fortunate.
Dying in the arms of his children, he had been by them laid by the side of his wife, who had preceded him in eternity by two years.
Two large slabs of marble, on which were inscribed their names, were placed on either side of a little enclosure, railed in, and shaded by four cypress-trees.
Morrel was leaning against one of these, mechanically fixing his eyes on the graves.
His grief was so profound that he was nearly unconscious. 50231m “Maximilian,” said the count, “you should not look on the graves, but there;” and he pointed upwards.
“The dead are everywhere,” said Morrel; “did you not yourself tell me so as we left Paris?” “Maximilian,” said the count, “you asked me during the journey to allow you to remain some days at Marseilles.
I am so unhappy.” “I have known a man much more unfortunate than you, Morrel.” “Impossible!” “Alas,” said Monte Cristo, “it is the infirmity of our nature always to believe ourselves much more unhappy than those who groan by our sides!” “What can be more wretched than the man who has lost all he loved and desired in the world?” “Listen, Morrel, and pay attention to what I am about to tell you.
I knew a man who like you had fixed all his hopes of happiness upon a woman.
He was young, he had an old father whom he loved, a betrothed bride whom he adored.
Maximilian shuddered.
“Fourteen years!” he muttered.
“Fourteen years!” repeated the count.
He also, Morrel, like you, considered himself the unhappiest of men.” “Well?” asked Morrel.
“Well, at the height of his despair God assisted him through human means.
At first, perhaps, he did not recognize the infinite mercy of the Lord, but at last he took patience and waited.
One day he miraculously left the prison, transformed, rich, powerful.
“Yes; but your father died in your arms, happy, respected, rich, and full of years; his father died poor, despairing, almost doubtful of Providence; and when his son sought his grave ten years afterwards, his tomb had disappeared, and no one could say, ‘There sleeps the father you so well loved.’” “Oh!” exclaimed Morrel.
“He was, then, a more unhappy son than you, Morrel, for he could not even find his father’s grave.” “But then he had the woman he loved still remaining?” “You are deceived, Morrel, that woman——” “She was dead?” “Worse than that, she was faithless, and had married one of the persecutors of her betrothed.
You see, then, Morrel, that he was a more unhappy lover than you.” “And has he found consolation?” “He has at least found peace.” “And does he ever expect to be happy?” “He hopes so, Maximilian.” The young man’s head fell on his breast.
“You have my promise,” he said, after a minute’s pause, extending his hand to Monte Cristo.
“Only remember——” “On the 5th of October, Morrel, I shall expect you at the Island of Monte Cristo.
It is understood—is it not?” “But, count, do you remember that the 5th of October——” “Child,” replied the count, “not to know the value of a man’s word!
Morrel, farewell!” “Do you leave me?” “Yes; I have business in Italy.
I leave you alone in your struggle with misfortune—alone with that strong-winged eagle which God sends to bear aloft the elect to his feet.
The story of Ganymede, Maximilian, is not a fable, but an allegory.” “When do you leave?” “Immediately; the steamer waits, and in an hour I shall be far from you.
Will you accompany me to the harbor, Maximilian?” 50233m “I am entirely yours, count.” Morrel accompanied the count to the harbor.
The white steam was ascending like a plume of feathers from the black chimney.
The steamer soon disappeared, and in an hour afterwards, as the count had said, was scarcely distinguishable in the horizon amidst the fogs of the night.
Peppino At the same time that the steamer disappeared behind Cape Morgiou, a man travelling post on the road from Florence to Rome had just passed the little town of Aquapendente.
He was travelling fast enough to cover a great deal of ground without exciting suspicion.
This man was dressed in a greatcoat, or rather a surtout, a little worse for the journey, but which exhibited the ribbon of the Legion of Honor still fresh and brilliant, a decoration which also ornamented the under coat.
He might be recognized, not only by these signs, but also from the accent with which he spoke to the postilion, as a Frenchman.
Another proof that he was a native of the universal country was apparent in the fact of his knowing no other Italian words than the terms used in music, and which like the “goddam” of Figaro, served all possible linguistic requirements.
“_Allegro!_” he called out to the postilions at every ascent.
“_Moderato!_” he cried as they descended.
And heaven knows there are hills enough between Rome and Florence by the way of Aquapendente!
These two words greatly amused the men to whom they were addressed.
On reaching La Storta, the point from whence Rome is first visible, the traveller evinced none of the enthusiastic curiosity which usually leads strangers to stand up and endeavor to catch sight of the dome of Saint Peter’s, which may be seen long before any other object is distinguishable.
No, he merely drew a pocketbook from his pocket, and took from it a paper folded in four, and after having examined it in a manner almost reverential, he said: “Good!
I have it still!” 50235m The carriage entered by the Porta del Popolo, turned to the left, and stopped at the Hôtel d’Espagne.
Old Pastrini, our former acquaintance, received the traveller at the door, hat in hand.
The traveller alighted, ordered a good dinner, and inquired the address of the house of Thomson & French, which was immediately given to him, as it was one of the most celebrated in Rome.
It was situated in the Via dei Banchi, near St.
In Rome, as everywhere else, the arrival of a post-chaise is an event.
Ten young descendants of Marius and the Gracchi, barefooted and out at elbows, with one hand resting on the hip and the other gracefully curved above the head, stared at the traveller, the post-chaise, and the horses; to these were added about fifty little vagabonds from the Papal States, who earned a pittance by diving into the Tiber at high water from the bridge of St.
Now, as these street Arabs of Rome, more fortunate than those of Paris, understand every language, more especially the French, they heard the traveller order an apartment, a dinner, and finally inquire the way to the house of Thomson & French.
The result was that when the new-comer left the hotel with the _cicerone_, a man detached himself from the rest of the idlers, and without having been seen by the traveller, and appearing to excite no attention from the guide, followed the stranger with as much skill as a Parisian police agent would have used.
The Frenchman had been so impatient to reach the house of Thomson & French that he would not wait for the horses to be harnessed, but left word for the carriage to overtake him on the road, or to wait for him at the bankers’ door.
He reached it before the carriage arrived.
The Frenchman entered, leaving in the anteroom his guide, who immediately entered into conversation with two or three of the industrious idlers who are always to be found in Rome at the doors of banking-houses, churches, museums, or theatres.
With the Frenchman, the man who had followed him entered too; the Frenchman knocked at the inner door, and entered the first room; his shadow did the same.
Thomson & French?” inquired the stranger.
An attendant arose at a sign from a confidential clerk at the first desk.
“Whom shall I announce?” said the attendant.
“Baron Danglars.” “Follow me,” said the man.
A door opened, through which the attendant and the baron disappeared.
The man who had followed Danglars sat down on a bench.
The clerk continued to write for the next five minutes; the man preserved profound silence, and remained perfectly motionless.
Then the pen of the clerk ceased to move over the paper; he raised his head, and appearing to be perfectly sure of privacy: “Ah, ha,” he said, “here you are, Peppino!” “Yes,” was the laconic reply.
Was it the Englishman who carried off 3,000 crowns from here the other day?” 50237m “No; he really had 3,000 crowns, and we found them.
I mean the Russian prince, who you said had 30,000 livres, and we only found 22,000.” “You must have searched badly.” “Luigi Vampa himself searched.” “In that case he must either have paid his debts——” “A Russian do that?” “Or spent the money?” “Possibly, after all.” “Certainly.
But you must let me make my observations, or the Frenchman will transact his business without my knowing the sum.” Peppino nodded, and taking a rosary from his pocket began to mutter a few prayers while the clerk disappeared through the same door by which Danglars and the attendant had gone out.
At the expiration of ten minutes the clerk returned with a beaming countenance.
“Joy, joy—the sum is large!” “Five or six millions, is it not?” “Yes, you know the amount.” “On the receipt of the Count of Monte Cristo?” “Why, how came you to be so well acquainted with all this?” “I told you we were informed beforehand.” “Then why do you apply to me?” “That I may be sure I have the right man.” “Yes, it is indeed he.
Five millions—a pretty sum, eh, Peppino?” “Hush—here is our man!” The clerk seized his pen, and Peppino his beads; one was writing and the other praying when the door opened.
Danglars looked radiant with joy; the banker accompanied him to the door.
Peppino followed Danglars.
According to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting at the door.
Guides are useful people, who will turn their hands to anything.
Danglars leaped into the carriage like a young man of twenty.
The _cicerone_ reclosed the door, and sprang up by the side of the coachman.
“Will your excellency visit Saint Peter’s?” asked the _cicerone_.
“I did not come to Rome to see,” said Danglars aloud; then he added softly, with an avaricious smile, “I came to touch!” and he rapped his pocket-book, in which he had just placed a letter.
Danglars was tired and sleepy; he therefore went to bed, placing his pocketbook under his pillow.
Peppino had a little spare time, so he had a game of _morra_ with the facchini, lost three crowns, and then to console himself drank a bottle of Orvieto.
The next morning Danglars awoke late, though he went to bed so early; he had not slept well for five or six nights, even if he had slept at all.
He breakfasted heartily, and caring little, as he said, for the beauties of the Eternal City, ordered post-horses at noon.
But Danglars had not reckoned upon the formalities of the police and the idleness of the posting-master.
The horses only arrived at two o’clock, and the _cicerone_ did not bring the passport till three.
All these preparations had collected a number of idlers round the door of Signor Pastrini’s; the descendants of Marius and the Gracchi were also not wanting.
The baron walked triumphantly through the crowd, who for the sake of gain styled him “your excellency.” As Danglars had hitherto contented himself with being called a baron, he felt rather flattered at the title of excellency, and distributed a dozen silver coins among the beggars, who were ready, for twelve more, to call him “your highness.” “Which road?” asked the postilion in Italian.
Signor Pastrini interpreted the question and answer, and the horses galloped off.
Danglars intended travelling to Venice, where he would receive one part of his fortune, and then proceeding to Vienna, where he would find the rest, he meant to take up his residence in the latter town, which he had been told was a city of pleasure.
He had scarcely advanced three leagues out of Rome when daylight began to disappear.
Danglars had not intended starting so late, or he would have remained; he put his head out and asked the postilion how long it would be before they reached the next town.
“_Non capisco_” (do not understand), was the reply.
Danglars bent his head, which he meant to imply, “Very well.” The carriage again moved on.
“I will stop at the first posting-house,” said Danglars to himself.
He still felt the same self-satisfaction which he had experienced the previous evening, and which had procured him so good a night’s rest.
He was luxuriously stretched in a good English calash, with double springs; he was drawn by four good horses, at full gallop; he knew the relay to be at a distance of seven leagues.
What subject of meditation could present itself to the banker, so fortunately become bankrupt?
Danglars thought for ten minutes about his wife in Paris; another ten minutes about his daughter travelling with Mademoiselle d’Armilly; the same period was given to his creditors, and the manner in which he intended spending their money; and then, having no subject left for contemplation, he shut his eyes, and fell asleep.
Now and then a jolt more violent than the rest caused him to open his eyes; then he felt that he was still being carried with great rapidity over the same country, thickly strewn with broken aqueducts, which looked like granite giants petrified while running a race.
But the night was cold, dull, and rainy, and it was much more pleasant for a traveller to remain in the warm carriage than to put his head out of the window to make inquiries of a postilion whose only answer was “_Non capisco_.” 50241m Danglars therefore continued to sleep, saying to himself that he would be sure to awake at the posting-house.
The carriage stopped.
Danglars fancied that they had reached the long-desired point; he opened his eyes and looked through the window, expecting to find himself in the midst of some town, or at least village; but he saw nothing except what seemed like a ruin, where three or four men went and came like shadows.
Danglars waited a moment, expecting the postilion to come and demand payment with the termination of his stage.
He intended taking advantage of the opportunity to make fresh inquiries of the new conductor; but the horses were unharnessed, and others put in their places, without anyone claiming money from the traveller.
Danglars, astonished, opened the door; but a strong hand pushed him back, and the carriage rolled on.
The baron was completely roused.
“Eh?” he said to the postilion, “eh, _mio caro?_” This was another little piece of Italian the baron had learned from hearing his daughter sing Italian duets with Cavalcanti.
Danglars then opened the window.
“Come, my friend,” he said, thrusting his hand through the opening, “where are we going?” “_Dentro la testa!_” answered a solemn and imperious voice, accompanied by a menacing gesture.
Danglars thought _dentro la testa_ meant, “Put in your head!” He was making rapid progress in Italian.
He obeyed, not without some uneasiness, which, momentarily increasing, caused his mind, instead of being as unoccupied as it was when he began his journey, to fill with ideas which were very likely to keep a traveller awake, more especially one in such a situation as Danglars.
His eyes acquired that quality which in the first moment of strong emotion enables them to see distinctly, and which afterwards fails from being too much taxed.
Before we are alarmed, we see correctly; when we are alarmed, we see double; and when we have been alarmed, we see nothing but trouble.
Danglars observed a man in a cloak galloping at the right hand of the carriage.
“Some gendarme!” he exclaimed.
“Can I have been intercepted by French telegrams to the pontifical authorities?” He resolved to end his anxiety.
“_Dentro la testa_,” replied the same voice, with the same menacing accent.
Danglars turned to the left; another man on horseback was galloping on that side.
“Decidedly,” said Danglars, with the perspiration on his forehead, “I must be under arrest.” And he threw himself back in the calash, not this time to sleep, but to think.
Directly afterwards the moon rose.
He then saw the great aqueducts, those stone phantoms which he had before remarked, only then they were on the right hand, now they were on the left.
He understood that they had described a circle, and were bringing him back to Rome.
“Oh, unfortunate!” he cried, “they must have obtained my arrest.” The carriage continued to roll on with frightful speed.
At length he saw a dark mass, against which it seemed as if the carriage was about to dash; but the vehicle turned to one side, leaving the barrier behind and Danglars saw that it was one of the ramparts encircling Rome. 50243m “_Mon dieu!_” cried Danglars, “we are not returning to Rome; then it is not justice which is pursuing me!
Gracious heavens; another idea presents itself—what if they should be——” His hair stood on end.
He remembered those interesting stories, so little believed in Paris, respecting Roman bandits; he remembered the adventures that Albert de Morcerf had related when it was intended that he should marry Mademoiselle Eugénie.
“They are robbers, perhaps,” he muttered.
Just then the carriage rolled on something harder than gravel road.
Danglars hazarded a look on both sides of the road, and perceived monuments of a singular form, and his mind now recalled all the details Morcerf had related, and comparing them with his own situation, he felt sure that he must be on the Appian Way.
On the left, in a sort of valley, he perceived a circular excavation.
It was Caracalla’s circus.
On a word from the man who rode at the side of the carriage, it stopped.
“_Scendi!_” exclaimed a commanding voice.
Danglars instantly descended; although he did not yet speak Italian, he understood it very well.
Four men surrounded him, besides the postilion.
“_Di quà_,” said one of the men, descending a little path leading out of the Appian Way.
Danglars followed his guide without opposition, and had no occasion to turn around to see whether the three others were following him.
Still it appeared as though they were stationed at equal distances from one another, like sentinels.
After walking for about ten minutes, during which Danglars did not exchange a single word with his guide, he found himself between a hillock and a clump of high weeds; three men, standing silent, formed a triangle, of which he was the centre.
“_Avanti!_” said the same sharp and imperative voice.
This time Danglars had double reason to understand, for if the word and gesture had not explained the speaker’s meaning, it was clearly expressed by the man walking behind him, who pushed him so rudely that he struck against the guide.
This guide was our friend Peppino, who dashed into the thicket of high weeds, through a path which none but lizards or polecats could have imagined to be an open road.
Peppino stopped before a rock overhung by thick hedges; the rock, half open, afforded a passage to the young man, who disappeared like the evil spirits in the fairy tales.
The voice and gesture of the man who followed Danglars ordered him to do the same.
There was no longer any doubt, the bankrupt was in the hands of Roman banditti.
Danglars acquitted himself like a man placed between two dangerous positions, and who is rendered brave by fear.
Notwithstanding his large stomach, certainly not intended to penetrate the fissures of the Campagna, he slid down like Peppino, and closing his eyes fell upon his feet.
Peppino, who cared little for being recognized now that he was in his own territories, struck a light and lit a torch.
Two other men descended after Danglars forming the rearguard, and pushing Danglars whenever he happened to stop, they came by a gentle declivity to the intersection of two corridors.
The walls were hollowed out in sepulchres, one above the other, and which seemed in contrast with the white stones to open their large dark eyes, like those which we see on the faces of the dead.
A sentinel struck the rings of his carbine against his left hand.
“A friend, a friend!” said Peppino; “but where is the captain?” “There,” said the sentinel, pointing over his shoulder to a spacious crypt, hollowed out of the rock, the lights from which shone into the passage through the large arched openings.
“Fine spoil, captain, fine spoil!” said Peppino in Italian, and taking Danglars by the collar of his coat he dragged him to an opening resembling a door, through which they entered the apartment which the captain appeared to have made his dwelling-place.
“Is this the man?” asked the captain, who was attentively reading Plutarch’s _Life of Alexander_.
“Himself, captain—himself.” “Very well, show him to me.” At this rather impertinent order, Peppino raised his torch to the face of Danglars, who hastily withdrew that he might not have his eyelashes burnt.
His agitated features presented the appearance of pale and hideous terror.
The banker uttered a groan and followed his guide; he neither supplicated nor exclaimed.
He no longer possessed strength, will, power, or feeling; he followed where they led him.
At length he found himself at the foot of a staircase, and he mechanically lifted his foot five or six times.
Then a low door was opened before him, and bending his head to avoid striking his forehead he entered a small room cut out of the rock.
The cell was clean, though empty, and dry, though situated at an immeasurable distance under the earth.
Danglars brightened up on beholding it, fancying that it gave some promise of safety.
“_Ecco!_” said the guide, and pushing Danglars into the cell, he closed the door upon him.
A bolt grated and Danglars was a prisoner.
If there had been no bolt, it would have been impossible for him to pass through the midst of the garrison who held the catacombs of St.
Sebastian, encamped round a master whom our readers must have recognized as the famous Luigi Vampa.
Danglars, too, had recognized the bandit, whose existence he would not believe when Albert de Morcerf mentioned him in Paris; and not only did he recognize him, but the cell in which Albert had been confined, and which was probably kept for the accommodation of strangers.
These recollections were dwelt upon with some pleasure by Danglars, and restored him to some degree of tranquillity.
Since the bandits had not despatched him at once, he felt that they would not kill him at all.
They had arrested him for the purpose of robbery, and as he had only a few louis about him, he doubted not he would be ransomed.
He remembered that Morcerf had been taxed at 4,000 crowns, and as he considered himself of much greater importance than Morcerf he fixed his own price at 8,000 crowns.
Eight thousand crowns amounted to 48,000 livres; he would then have about 5,050,000 francs left.
With this sum he could manage to keep out of difficulties.
Therefore, tolerably secure in being able to extricate himself from his position, provided he were not rated at the unreasonable sum of 5,050,000 francs, he stretched himself on his bed, and after turning over two or three times, fell asleep with the tranquillity of the hero whose life Luigi Vampa was studying.
Luigi Vampa’s Bill of Fare We awake from every sleep except the one dreaded by Danglars.
To a Parisian accustomed to silken curtains, walls hung with velvet drapery, and the soft perfume of burning wood, the white smoke of which diffuses itself in graceful curves around the room, the appearance of the whitewashed cell which greeted his eyes on awakening seemed like the continuation of some disagreeable dream.
But in such a situation a single moment suffices to change the strongest doubt into certainty.
“Yes, yes,” he murmured, “I am in the hands of the brigands of whom Albert de Morcerf spoke.” His first idea was to breathe, that he might know whether he was wounded.
He borrowed this from _Don Quixote_, the only book he had ever read, but which he still slightly remembered.
They were untouched; the hundred louis he had reserved for his journey from Rome to Venice were in his trousers pocket, and in that of his greatcoat he found the little note-case containing his letter of credit for 5,050,000 francs.
“Singular bandits!” he exclaimed; “they have left me my purse and pocket-book.
As I was saying last night, they intend me to be ransomed.
Let me see what time it is.” Danglars’ watch, one of Breguet’s repeaters, which he had carefully wound up on the previous night, struck half past five.
Without this, Danglars would have been quite ignorant of the time, for daylight did not reach his cell.
Should he demand an explanation from the bandits, or should he wait patiently for them to propose it?
The last alternative seemed the most prudent, so he waited until twelve o’clock.
During all this time a sentinel, who had been relieved at eight o’clock, had been watching his door. 50249m Danglars suddenly felt a strong inclination to see the person who kept watch over him.
He had noticed that a few rays, not of daylight, but from a lamp, penetrated through the ill-joined planks of the door; he approached just as the brigand was refreshing himself with a mouthful of brandy, which, owing to the leathern bottle containing it, sent forth an odor which was extremely unpleasant to Danglars.
“Faugh!” he exclaimed, retreating to the farther corner of his cell.
At twelve this man was replaced by another functionary, and Danglars, wishing to catch sight of his new guardian, approached the door again.
He was an athletic, gigantic bandit, with large eyes, thick lips, and a flat nose; his red hair fell in dishevelled masses like snakes around his shoulders.
“Ah, ha,” cried Danglars, “this fellow is more like an ogre than anything else; however, I am rather too old and tough to be very good eating!” We see that Danglars was collected enough to jest; at the same time, as though to disprove the ogreish propensities, the man took some black bread, cheese, and onions from his wallet, which he began devouring voraciously.
“May I be hanged,” said Danglars, glancing at the bandit’s dinner through the crevices of the door,—“may I be hanged if I can understand how people can eat such filth!” and he withdrew to seat himself upon his goat-skin, which reminded him of the smell of the brandy.
But the mysteries of nature are incomprehensible, and there are certain invitations contained in even the coarsest food which appeal very irresistibly to a fasting stomach.
Danglars knew that he was heard, so he redoubled his blows.
“Come, come,” said Danglars, tapping his fingers against the door, “I think it is quite time to think of giving me something to eat!” But whether he did not understand him, or whether he had received no orders respecting the nourishment of Danglars, the giant, without answering, went on with his dinner.
Danglars’ feelings were hurt, and not wishing to put himself under obligations to the brute, the banker threw himself down again on his goat-skin and did not breathe another word.
Four hours passed by and the giant was replaced by another bandit.
Danglars, who really began to experience sundry gnawings at the stomach, arose softly, again applied his eye to the crack of the door, and recognized the intelligent countenance of his guide.
It was, indeed, Peppino who was preparing to mount guard as comfortably as possible by seating himself opposite to the door, and placing between his legs an earthen pan, containing chick-peas stewed with bacon.
Near the pan he also placed a pretty little basket of Villetri grapes and a flask of Orvieto.
Peppino was decidedly an epicure.
Danglars watched these preparations and his mouth watered.
“Come,” he said to himself, “let me try if he will be more tractable than the other;” and he tapped gently at the door.
“_On y va_,” (coming) exclaimed Peppino, who from frequenting the house of Signor Pastrini understood French perfectly in all its idioms.
Then he added aloud, “Yes, sir, I am hungry—very hungry.” “And your excellency wants something to eat?” “At once, if possible” “Nothing easier,” said Peppino.
“Here you can get anything you want; by paying for it, of course, as among honest folk.” “Of course!” cried Danglars.
“Although, in justice, the people who arrest and imprison you, ought, at least, to feed you.” “That is not the custom, excellency,” said Peppino.
“A bad reason,” replied Danglars, who reckoned on conciliating his keeper; “but I am content.
What would your excellency like?” And Peppino placed his pan on the ground, so that the steam rose directly under the nostrils of Danglars.
“Give your orders.” “Have you kitchens here?” “Kitchens?—of course—complete ones.” “And cooks?” “Excellent!” “Well, a fowl, fish, game,—it signifies little, so that I eat.” “As your excellency pleases.
You mentioned a fowl, I think?” “Yes, a fowl.” Peppino, turning around, shouted, “A fowl for his excellency!” His voice yet echoed in the archway when a handsome, graceful, and half-naked young man appeared, bearing a fowl in a silver dish on his head, without the assistance of his hands.
“I could almost believe myself at the Café de Paris,” murmured Danglars.
“Here, your excellency,” said Peppino, taking the fowl from the young bandit and placing it on the worm-eaten table, which with the stool and the goat-skin bed formed the entire furniture of the cell.
Danglars asked for a knife and fork.
“Here, excellency,” said Peppino, offering him a little blunt knife and a boxwood fork.
Danglars took the knife in one hand and the fork in the other, and was about to cut up the fowl.
“Pardon me, excellency,” said Peppino, placing his hand on the banker’s shoulder; “people pay here before they eat.
They might not be satisfied, and——” “Ah, ha,” thought Danglars, “this is not so much like Paris, except that I shall probably be skinned!
I have always heard how cheap poultry is in Italy; I should think a fowl is worth about twelve sous at Rome.—There,” he said, throwing a louis down.
Peppino picked up the louis, and Danglars again prepared to carve the fowl.
“Very droll,” he muttered, “very droll indeed,” and he again began to carve the fowl, when Peppino stopped the baron’s right hand with his left, and held out his other hand.
“Is it not a joke?” said Danglars.
A hundred thousand francs for a fowl!” “Ah, excellency, you cannot imagine how hard it is to rear fowls in these horrible caves!” “Come, come, this is very droll—very amusing—I allow; but, as I am very hungry, pray allow me to eat.
Stay, here is another louis for you.” “Then that will make only 4,998 louis more,” said Peppino with the same indifference.
“I shall get them all in time.” “Oh, as for that,” said Danglars, angry at this prolongation of the jest,—“as for that you won’t get them at all.
Danglars threw himself upon his goat-skin, and Peppino, reclosing the door, again began eating his peas and bacon.
Though Danglars could not see Peppino, the noise of his teeth allowed no doubt as to his occupation.
He was certainly eating, and noisily too, like an ill-bred man.
“Brute!” said Danglars.
Peppino pretended not to hear him, and without even turning his head continued to eat slowly.
Danglars’ stomach felt so empty, that it seemed as if it would be impossible ever to fill it again; still he had patience for another half-hour, which appeared to him like a century.
“Come, sir, do not keep me starving here any longer, but tell me what they want.” “Nay, your excellency, it is you who should tell us what you want.
Give your orders, and we will execute them.” “Then open the door directly.” Peppino obeyed.
“Now look here, I want something to eat!
To eat—do you hear?” “Are you hungry?” “Come, you understand me.” “What would your excellency like to eat?” “A piece of dry bread, since the fowls are beyond all price in this accursed place.” “Bread?
“How much?” asked Danglars.
“Four thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight louis,” said Peppino; “You have paid two louis in advance.” 50255m “What?
One hundred thousand francs for a loaf?” “One hundred thousand francs,” repeated Peppino.
“But you only asked 100,000 francs for a fowl!” “We have a fixed price for all our provisions.
It signifies nothing whether you eat much or little—whether you have ten dishes or one—it is always the same price.” “What, still keeping up this silly jest?
My dear fellow, it is perfectly ridiculous—stupid!
You had better tell me at once that you intend starving me to death.” “Oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commit suicide.
Pay and eat.” “And what am I to pay with, brute?” said Danglars, enraged.
“Do you suppose I carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?” “Your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; that will be fifty fowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half a fowl for the 50,000.” Danglars shuddered.
The bandage fell from his eyes, and he understood the joke, which he did not think quite so stupid as he had done just before.
“Come,” he said, “if I pay you the 100,000 francs, will you be satisfied, and allow me to eat at my ease?” “Certainly,” said Peppino.
Thomson & French, Via dei Banchi, Rome; give me a draft for 4,998 louis on these gentlemen, and our banker shall take it.” Danglars thought it as well to comply with a good grace, so he took the pen, ink, and paper Peppino offered him, wrote the draft, and signed it.
“Here,” he said, “here is a draft at sight.” “And here is your fowl.” Danglars sighed while he carved the fowl; it appeared very thin for the price it had cost.
As for Peppino, he examined the paper attentively, put it into his pocket, and continued eating his peas.
The Pardon The next day Danglars was again hungry; certainly the air of that dungeon was very provocative of appetite.
The prisoner expected that he would be at no expense that day, for like an economical man he had concealed half of his fowl and a piece of the bread in the corner of his cell.
But he had no sooner eaten than he felt thirsty; he had forgotten that.
He struggled against his thirst till his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth; then, no longer able to resist, he called out.
The sentinel opened the door; it was a new face.
He thought it would be better to transact business with his old acquaintance, so he sent for Peppino.
“Here I am, your excellency,” said Peppino, with an eagerness which Danglars thought favorable to him.
“What do you want?” “Something to drink.” “Your excellency knows that wine is beyond all price near Rome.” “Then give me water,” cried Danglars, endeavoring to parry the blow.
“Oh, water is even more scarce than wine, your excellency,—there has been such a drought.” “Come,” thought Danglars, “it is the same old story.” And while he smiled as he attempted to regard the affair as a joke, he felt his temples get moist with perspiration.
“You sent for me?” he said to the prisoner.
“Are you, sir, the chief of the people who brought me here?” “Yes, your excellency.
What then?” “How much do you require for my ransom?” “Merely the 5,000,000 you have about you.” Danglars felt a dreadful spasm dart through his heart.
I will give them to you on condition that you let me go.” “Why do you offer me 4,000,000 for what is worth 5,000,000?
This is a kind of usury, banker, that I do not understand.” “Take all, then—take all, I tell you, and kill me!” “Come, come, calm yourself.
You will excite your blood, and that would produce an appetite it would require a million a day to satisfy.
Be more economical.” “But when I have no more money left to pay you?” asked the infuriated Danglars.
“Then you must suffer hunger.” “Suffer hunger?” said Danglars, becoming pale.
“But you say you do not wish to kill me?” “No.” “And yet you will let me perish with hunger?” “Ah, that is a different thing.” “Well, then, wretches,” cried Danglars, “I will defy your infamous calculations—I would rather die at once!
You may torture, torment, kill me, but you shall not have my signature again!” “As your excellency pleases,” said Vampa, as he left the cell.
Danglars, raving, threw himself on the goat-skin.
Who was the invisible chief?
What could be his intentions towards him?
And why, when everyone else was allowed to be ransomed, might he not also be?
Oh, yes; certainly a speedy, violent death would be a fine means of deceiving these remorseless enemies, who appeared to pursue him with such incomprehensible vengeance.
Danglars meditated an escape; but the walls were solid rock, a man was sitting reading at the only outlet to the cell, and behind that man shapes armed with guns continually passed.
His resolution not to sign lasted two days, after which he offered a million for some food.
They sent him a magnificent supper, and took his million.
From this time the prisoner resolved to suffer no longer, but to have everything he wanted.
At the end of twelve days, after having made a splendid dinner, he reckoned his accounts, and found that he had only 50,000 francs left.
Then a strange reaction took place; he who had just abandoned 5,000,000 endeavored to save the 50,000 francs he had left, and sooner than give them up he resolved to enter again upon a life of privation—he was deluded by the hopefulness that is a premonition of madness.
He, who for so long a time had forgotten God, began to think that miracles were possible—that the accursed cavern might be discovered by the officers of the Papal States, who would release him; that then he would have 50,000 remaining, which would be sufficient to save him from starvation; and finally he prayed that this sum might be preserved to him, and as he prayed he wept.
Three days passed thus, during which his prayers were frequent, if not heartfelt.
Sometimes he was delirious, and fancied he saw an old man stretched on a pallet; he, also, was dying of hunger.
He had picked up every crumb that had been left from his former meals, and was beginning to eat the matting which covered the floor of his cell.
Then he entreated Peppino, as he would a guardian angel, to give him food; he offered him 1,000 francs for a mouthful of bread.
“Are you not a Christian?” he said, falling on his knees.
“Do you wish to assassinate a man who, in the eyes of Heaven, is a brother?
Oh, my former friends, my former friends!” he murmured, and fell with his face to the ground.
He struck his forehead on the ground and groaned.
“Yes,” he said, “there have been some who have suffered more than I have, but then they must have been martyrs at least.” “Do you repent?” asked a deep, solemn voice, which caused Danglars’ hair to stand on end.
His feeble eyes endeavored to distinguish objects, and behind the bandit he saw a man enveloped in a cloak, half lost in the shadow of a stone column.
“Of what must I repent?” stammered Danglars.
“Oh, yes; oh, yes, I do indeed repent.” And he struck his breast with his emaciated fist.
“Then I forgive you,” said the man, dropping his cloak, and advancing to the light.
“The Count of Monte Cristo!” said Danglars, more pale from terror than he had been just before from hunger and misery.
“Rise,” said the count, “your life is safe; the same good fortune has not happened to your accomplices—one is mad, the other dead.
The 5,000,000 you stole from the hospitals has been restored to them by an unknown hand.
And now eat and drink; I will entertain you tonight.
Vampa, when this man is satisfied, let him be free.” Danglars remained prostrate while the count withdrew; when he raised his head he saw disappearing down the passage nothing but a shadow, before which the bandits bowed.
According to the count’s directions, Danglars was waited on by Vampa, who brought him the best wine and fruits of Italy; then, having conducted him to the road, and pointed to the post-chaise, left him leaning against a tree.
He remained there all night, not knowing where he was.
When daylight dawned he saw that he was near a stream; he was thirsty, and dragged himself towards it.
As he stooped down to drink, he saw that his hair had become entirely white.
The Fifth of October It was about six o’clock in the evening; an opal-colored light, through which an autumnal sun shed its golden rays, descended on the blue ocean.
The heat of the day had gradually decreased, and a light breeze arose, seeming like the respiration of nature on awakening from the burning siesta of the south.
A delicious zephyr played along the coasts of the Mediterranean, and wafted from shore to shore the sweet perfume of plants, mingled with the fresh smell of the sea.
A light yacht, chaste and elegant in its form, was gliding amidst the first dews of night over the immense lake, extending from Gibraltar to the Dardanelles, and from Tunis to Venice.
The vessel resembled a swan with its wings opened towards the wind, gliding on the water.
It advanced swiftly and gracefully, leaving behind it a glittering stretch of foam.
By degrees the sun disappeared behind the western horizon; but as though to prove the truth of the fanciful ideas in heathen mythology, its indiscreet rays reappeared on the summit of every wave, as if the god of fire had just sunk upon the bosom of Amphitrite, who in vain endeavored to hide her lover beneath her azure mantle.
The yacht moved rapidly on, though there did not appear to be sufficient wind to ruffle the curls on the head of a young girl.
Standing on the prow was a tall man, of a dark complexion, who saw with dilating eyes that they were approaching a dark mass of land in the shape of a cone, which rose from the midst of the waves like the hat of a Catalan.
“Is that Monte Cristo?” asked the traveller, to whose orders the yacht was for the time submitted, in a melancholy voice.
“Yes, your excellency,” said the captain, “we have reached it.” “We have reached it!” repeated the traveller in an accent of indescribable sadness.
Then he added, in a low tone, “Yes; that is the haven.” And then he again plunged into a train of thought, the character of which was better revealed by a sad smile, than it would have been by tears.
A few minutes afterwards a flash of light, which was extinguished instantly, was seen on the land, and the sound of firearms reached the yacht.
“Your excellency,” said the captain, “that was the land signal, will you answer yourself?” “What signal?” The captain pointed towards the island, up the side of which ascended a volume of smoke, increasing as it rose.
“Give it to me.” The captain gave him a loaded carbine; the traveller slowly raised it, and fired in the air.
Ten minutes afterwards, the sails were furled, and they cast anchor about a hundred fathoms from the little harbor.
The gig was already lowered, and in it were four oarsmen and a coxswain.
The traveller descended, and instead of sitting down at the stern of the boat, which had been decorated with a blue carpet for his accommodation, stood up with his arms crossed.
The rowers waited, their oars half lifted out of the water, like birds drying their wings. 50265m “Give way,” said the traveller.
The eight oars fell into the sea simultaneously without splashing a drop of water, and the boat, yielding to the impulsion, glided forward.
In an instant they found themselves in a little harbor, formed in a natural creek; the boat grounded on the fine sand.
“Will your excellency be so good as to mount the shoulders of two of our men, they will carry you ashore?” The young man answered this invitation with a gesture of indifference, and stepped out of the boat; the sea immediately rose to his waist.
“Ah, your excellency,” murmured the pilot, “you should not have done so; our master will scold us for it.” The young man continued to advance, following the sailors, who chose a firm footing.
Just as he turned, a hand rested on his shoulder, and a voice which made him shudder exclaimed: “Good-evening, Maximilian; you are punctual, thank you!” “Ah, is it you, count?” said the young man, in an almost joyful accent, pressing Monte Cristo’s hand with both his own.
But you are dripping, my dear fellow; you must change your clothes, as Calypso said to Telemachus.
Come, I have a habitation prepared for you in which you will soon forget fatigue and cold.” Monte Cristo perceived that the young man had turned around; indeed, Morrel saw with surprise that the men who had brought him had left without being paid, or uttering a word.
Already the sound of their oars might be heard as they returned to the yacht.
“Oh, yes,” said the count, “you are looking for the sailors.” “Yes, I paid them nothing, and yet they are gone.” “Never mind that, Maximilian,” said Monte Cristo, smiling.
“I have made an agreement with the navy, that the access to my island shall be free of all charge.
I have made a bargain.” Morrel looked at the count with surprise.
“You are right to recall me to myself, Maximilian,” he said; “I was delighted to see you again, and forgot for the moment that all happiness is fleeting.” “Oh, no, no, count,” cried Maximilian, seizing the count’s hands, “pray laugh; be happy, and prove to me, by your indifference, that life is endurable to sufferers.
Oh, how charitable, kind, and good you are; you affect this gayety to inspire me with courage.” “You are wrong, Morrel; I was really happy.” “Then you forget me, so much the better.” “How so?” “Yes; for as the gladiator said to the emperor, when he entered the arena, ‘He who is about to die salutes you.’” “Then you are not consoled?” asked the count, surprised.
“Oh,” exclaimed Morrel, with a glance full of bitter reproach, “do you think it possible that I could be?” “Listen,” said the count.
“Do you understand the meaning of my words?
You cannot take me for a commonplace man, a mere rattle, emitting a vague and senseless noise.
When I ask you if you are consoled, I speak to you as a man for whom the human heart has no secrets.
Do you still feel the same feverish impatience of grief which made you start like a wounded lion?
Have you still that devouring thirst which can only be appeased in the grave?
Are you still actuated by the regret which drags the living to the pursuit of death; or are you only suffering from the prostration of fatigue and the weariness of hope deferred?
Has the loss of memory rendered it impossible for you to weep?
Oh, my dear friend, if this be the case,—if you can no longer weep, if your frozen heart be dead, if you put all your trust in God, then, Maximilian, you are consoled—do not complain.” “Count,” said Morrel, in a firm and at the same time soft voice, “listen to me, as to a man whose thoughts are raised to heaven, though he remains on earth; I come to die in the arms of a friend.
Certainly, there are people whom I love.
I love my sister Julie,—I love her husband Emmanuel; but I require a strong mind to smile on my last moments.
My sister would be bathed in tears and fainting; I could not bear to see her suffer.
Emmanuel would tear the weapon from my hand, and alarm the house with his cries.
You, count, who are more than mortal, will, I am sure, lead me to death by a pleasant path, will you not?” 50267m “My friend,” said the count, “I have still one doubt,—are you weak enough to pride yourself upon your sufferings?” “No, indeed,—I am calm,” said Morrel, giving his hand to the count; “my pulse does not beat slower or faster than usual.
You told me to wait and hope; do you know what you did, unfortunate adviser?
I waited a month, or rather I suffered for a month!
I did hope (man is a poor wretched creature), I did hope.
What I cannot tell,—something wonderful, an absurdity, a miracle,—of what nature he alone can tell who has mingled with our reason that folly we call hope.
Yes, I did wait—yes, I did hope, count, and during this quarter of an hour we have been talking together, you have unconsciously wounded, tortured my heart, for every word you have uttered proved that there was no hope for me.
Oh, count, I shall sleep calmly, deliciously in the arms of death.” Morrel uttered these words with an energy which made the count shudder.
“My friend,” continued Morrel, “you named the fifth of October as the end of the period of waiting,—today is the fifth of October,” he took out his watch, “it is now nine o’clock,—I have yet three hours to live.” “Be it so,” said the count, “come.” Morrel mechanically followed the count, and they had entered the grotto before he perceived it.
He felt a carpet under his feet, a door opened, perfumes surrounded him, and a brilliant light dazzled his eyes.
Morrel hesitated to advance; he dreaded the enervating effect of all that he saw.
“Why should we not spend the last three hours remaining to us of life, like those ancient Romans, who when condemned by Nero, their emperor and heir, sat down at a table covered with flowers, and gently glided into death, amid the perfume of heliotropes and roses?” Morrel smiled.
“As you please,” he said; “death is always death,—that is forgetfulness, repose, exclusion from life, and therefore from grief.” He sat down, and Monte Cristo placed himself opposite to him.
They were in the marvellous dining-room before described, where the statues had baskets on their heads always filled with fruits and flowers.
Morrel had looked carelessly around, and had probably noticed nothing.
I am almost inclined to ask you, as though you had experienced death, ‘is it painful to die?’” Monte Cristo looked upon Morrel with indescribable tenderness.
“Yes,” he said, “yes, doubtless it is painful, if you violently break the outer covering which obstinately begs for life.
“Now I understand,” he said, “why you had me brought here to this desolate spot, in the midst of the ocean, to this subterranean palace; it was because you loved me, was it not, count?
“What,” said the count, “do you still regret anything in the world, and yet die?” “Oh, I entreat you,” exclaimed Morrel in a low voice, “do not speak another word, count; do not prolong my punishment.” The count fancied that he was yielding, and this belief revived the horrible doubt that had overwhelmed him at the Château d’If.
“I am endeavoring,” he thought, “to make this man happy; I look upon this restitution as a weight thrown into the scale to balance the evil I have wrought.
Now, supposing I am deceived, supposing this man has not been unhappy enough to merit happiness.
“Count,” he said, “I swear to you my soul is no longer my own.” “Maximilian, you know I have no relation in the world.
I have accustomed myself to regard you as my son: well, then, to save my son, I will sacrifice my life, nay, even my fortune.” “What do you mean?” “I mean, that you wish to quit life because you do not understand all the enjoyments which are the fruits of a large fortune.
Morrel, I possess nearly a hundred millions and I give them to you; with such a fortune you can attain every wish.
Overturn the world, change its character, yield to mad ideas, be even criminal—but live.” “Count, I have your word,” said Morrel coldly; then taking out his watch, he added, “It is half-past eleven.” “Morrel, can you intend it in my house, under my very eyes?” “Then let me go,” said Maximilian, “or I shall think you did not love me for my own sake, but for yours;” and he arose.
“It is well,” said Monte Cristo whose countenance brightened at these words; “you wish it—you are inflexible.
Yes, as you said, you are indeed wretched and a miracle alone can cure you.
Sit down, Morrel, and wait.” Morrel obeyed; the count arose, and unlocking a closet with a key suspended from his gold chain, took from it a little silver casket, beautifully carved and chased, the corners of which represented four bending figures, similar to the Caryatides, the forms of women, symbols of the angels aspiring to heaven.
This box contained an unctuous substance partly solid, of which it was impossible to discover the color, owing to the reflection of the polished gold, sapphires, rubies, emeralds, which ornamented the box.
The count took out a small quantity of this with a gilt spoon, and offered it to Morrel, fixing a long steadfast glance upon him.
It was then observable that the substance was greenish.
“This is what you asked for,” he said, “and what I promised to give you.” “I thank you from the depths of my heart,” said the young man, taking the spoon from the hands of Monte Cristo.
“What are you going to do, my friend?” asked Morrel, arresting his hand.
“Well, the fact is, Morrel, I was thinking that I too am weary of life, and since an opportunity presents itself——” “Stay!” said the young man.
Adieu, my noble and generous friend, adieu; I will go and tell Valentine what you have done for me.” And slowly, though without any hesitation, only waiting to press the count’s hand fervently, he swallowed the mysterious substance offered by Monte Cristo.
Ali, mute and attentive, brought the pipes and coffee, and disappeared.
By degrees, the light of the lamps gradually faded in the hands of the marble statues which held them, and the perfumes appeared less powerful to Morrel.
Seated opposite to him, Monte Cristo watched him in the shadow, and Morrel saw nothing but the bright eyes of the count.
An overpowering sadness took possession of the young man, his hands relaxed their hold, the objects in the room gradually lost their form and color, and his disturbed vision seemed to perceive doors and curtains open in the wall. 50273m “Friend,” he cried, “I feel that I am dying; thanks!” He made a last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerless beside him.
Then it appeared to him that Monte Cristo smiled, not with the strange and fearful expression which had sometimes revealed to him the secrets of his heart, but with the benevolent kindness of a father for a child.
At the same time the count appeared to increase in stature, his form, nearly double its usual height, stood out in relief against the red tapestry, his black hair was thrown back, and he stood in the attitude of an avenging angel.
Morrel, overpowered, turned around in the armchair; a delicious torpor permeated every vein.
A change of ideas presented themselves to his brain, like a new design on the kaleidoscope.
Enervated, prostrate, and breathless, he became unconscious of outward objects; he seemed to be entering that vague delirium preceding death.
He wished once again to press the count’s hand, but his own was immovable.
He wished to articulate a last farewell, but his tongue lay motionless and heavy in his throat, like a stone at the mouth of a sepulchre.
Involuntarily his languid eyes closed, and still through his eyelashes a well-known form seemed to move amid the obscurity with which he thought himself enveloped.
Immediately a brilliant light from the next room, or rather from the palace adjoining, shone upon the room in which he was gently gliding into his last sleep.
Then he saw a woman of marvellous beauty appear on the threshold of the door separating the two rooms.
Pale, and sweetly smiling, she looked like an angel of mercy conjuring the angel of vengeance.
“Is it heaven that opens before me?” thought the dying man; “that angel resembles the one I have lost.” Monte Cristo pointed out Morrel to the young woman, who advanced towards him with clasped hands and a smile upon her lips.
“Valentine, Valentine!” he mentally ejaculated; but his lips uttered no sound, and as though all his strength were centred in that internal emotion, he sighed and closed his eyes.
Valentine rushed towards him; his lips again moved.
“He is calling you,” said the count; “he to whom you have confided your destiny—he from whom death would have separated you, calls you to him.
Happily, I vanquished death.
Henceforth, Valentine, you will never again be separated on earth, since he has rushed into death to find you.
“Oh, yes, with all my soul.” “Well, then, listen, Valentine,” said the count; “I have a favor to ask of you.” “Of me?
“Because tomorrow, Haydée, you will be free; you will then assume your proper position in society, for I will not allow my destiny to overshadow yours.
“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting the head of Morrel on her shoulder, “do you not see how pale she is?
Do you not see how she suffers?” Haydée answered with a heartrending expression, “Why should he understand this, my sister?
He is my master, and I am his slave; he has the right to notice nothing.” The count shuddered at the tones of a voice which penetrated the inmost recesses of his heart; his eyes met those of the young girl and he could not bear their brilliancy.
“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “can my suspicions be correct?
Haydée, would it please you not to leave me?” “I am young,” gently replied Haydée; “I love the life you have made so sweet to me, and I should be sorry to die.” “You mean, then, that if I leave you, Haydée——” “I should die; yes, my lord.” “Do you then love me?” “Oh, Valentine, he asks if I love him.
Valentine, tell him if you love Maximilian.” The count felt his heart dilate and throb; he opened his arms, and Haydée, uttering a cry, sprang into them.
I love you as my life, for you are the best, the noblest of created beings!” 50277m “Let it be, then, as you wish, sweet angel; God has sustained me in my struggle with my enemies, and has given me this reward; he will not let me end my triumph in suffering; I wished to punish myself, but he has pardoned me.
“Have I discovered the truth?” he said; “but whether it be for recompense or punishment, I accept my fate.
Come, Haydée, come!” and throwing his arm around the young girl’s waist, he pressed the hand of Valentine, and disappeared. 50279m An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine, breathless and motionless, watched steadfastly over Morrel.
At length she felt his heart beat, a faint breath played upon his lips, a slight shudder, announcing the return of life, passed through the young man’s frame.
At length his eyes opened, but they were at first fixed and expressionless; then sight returned, and with it feeling and grief.
“Oh,” he cried, in an accent of despair, “the count has deceived me; I am yet living;” and extending his hand towards the table, he seized a knife.
“Dearest,” exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile, “awake, and look at me!” Morrel uttered a loud exclamation, and frantic, doubtful, dazzled, as though by a celestial vision, he fell upon his knees.
The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were walking arm-in-arm on the seashore, Valentine relating how Monte Cristo had appeared in her room, explained everything, revealed the crime, and, finally, how he had saved her life by enabling her to simulate death.
They had found the door of the grotto opened, and gone forth; on the azure dome of heaven still glittered a few remaining stars.
Morrel soon perceived a man standing among the rocks, apparently awaiting a sign from them to advance, and pointed him out to Valentine.
“Ah, it is Jacopo,” she said, “the captain of the yacht;” and she beckoned him towards them.
“I have a letter to give you from the count.” “From the count!” murmured the two young people.
“Yes; read it.” 50281m Morrel opened the letter, and read: “My Dear Maximilian, “There is a felucca for you at anchor.
Jacopo will carry you to Leghorn, where Monsieur Noirtier awaits his granddaughter, whom he wishes to bless before you lead her to the altar.
All that is in this grotto, my friend, my house in the Champs-Élysées, and my château at Tréport, are the marriage gifts bestowed by Edmond Dantès upon the son of his old master, Morrel.
Mademoiselle de Villefort will share them with you; for I entreat her to give to the poor the immense fortune reverting to her from her father, now a madman, and her brother who died last September with his mother.
Tell the angel who will watch over your future destiny, Morrel, to pray sometimes for a man, who, like Satan, thought himself for an instant equal to God, but who now acknowledges with Christian humility that God alone possesses supreme power and infinite wisdom.
There is neither happiness nor misery in the world; there is only the comparison of one state with another, nothing more.
He who has felt the deepest grief is best able to experience supreme happiness.
We must have felt what it is to die, Morrel, that we may appreciate the enjoyments of living.
Morrel looked around uneasily.
“But,” he said, “the count’s generosity is too overwhelming; Valentine will be satisfied with my humble fortune.
“What do you mean?” asked Valentine.
The eyes of both were fixed upon the spot indicated by the sailor, and on the blue line separating the sky from the Mediterranean Sea, they perceived a large white sail.
“Gone,” said Morrel; “gone!—adieu, my friend—adieu, my father!” “Gone,” murmured Valentine; “adieu, my sweet Haydée—adieu, my sister!” “Who can say whether we shall ever see them again?” said Morrel with tearful eyes.
By diplomacy and success in arms he became almost supreme ruler of Albania, Epirus, and adjacent territory.
Having aroused the enmity of the Sultan, he was proscribed and put to death by treachery in 1822, at the age of eighty.—Ed. [14] Greek militiamen in the war for independence.—Ed. [15] A Turkish pasha in command of the troops of a province.—Ed. [16] The god of fruitfulness in Grecian mythology.
In Crete he was supposed to be slain in winter with the decay of vegetation and to revive in the spring.
Haydée’s learned reference is to the behavior of an actor in the Dionysian festivals.—Ed. [17] The Genoese conspirator. [18] Lake Maggiore. [19] In the old Greek legend the Atreidae, or children of Atreus, were doomed to punishment because of the abominable crime of their father.
The _Agamemnon_ of Aeschylus is based on this legend. [20] The performance of the civil marriage. [21] In Molière’s comedy, _Le Misanthrope_. [22] Literally, “the basket,” because wedding gifts were originally brought in such a receptacle. [23] Germain Pillon was a famous French sculptor (1535-1598).
The reference is no doubt to the _Wistaria frutescens_.—Ed. [30] The miser in Molière’s comedy of _L’Avare_.—Ed.
Marriott Contents INTRODUCTION YOUTH Æt. 1-25—1469-94 OFFICE Æt. 25-43—1494-1512 LITERATURE AND DEATH Æt. 43-58—1512-27 THE MAN AND HIS WORKS DEDICATION THE PRINCE CHAPTER I.
HOW MANY KINDS OF PRINCIPALITIES THERE ARE, AND BY WHAT MEANS THEY ARE ACQUIRED CHAPTER II.
CONCERNING HEREDITARY PRINCIPALITIES CHAPTER III.
CONCERNING MIXED PRINCIPALITIES CHAPTER IV.
WHY THE KINGDOM OF DARIUS, CONQUERED BY ALEXANDER, DID NOT REBEL AGAINST THE SUCCESSORS OF ALEXANDER AT HIS DEATH CHAPTER V.
CONCERNING THE WAY TO GOVERN CITIES OR PRINCIPALITIES WHICH LIVED UNDER THEIR OWN LAWS BEFORE THEY WERE ANNEXED CHAPTER VI.
CONCERNING NEW PRINCIPALITIES WHICH ARE ACQUIRED BY ONE’S OWN ARMS AND ABILITY CHAPTER VII.
CONCERNING NEW PRINCIPALITIES WHICH ARE ACQUIRED EITHER BY THE ARMS OF OTHERS OR BY GOOD FORTUNE CHAPTER VIII.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO HAVE OBTAINED A PRINCIPALITY BY WICKEDNESS CHAPTER IX.
CONCERNING A CIVIL PRINCIPALITY CHAPTER X.
CONCERNING THE WAY IN WHICH THE STRENGTH OF ALL PRINCIPALITIES OUGHT TO BE MEASURED CHAPTER XI.
CONCERNING ECCLESIASTICAL PRINCIPALITIES CHAPTER XII.
HOW MANY KINDS OF SOLDIERY THERE ARE AND CONCERNING MERCENARIES CHAPTER XIII.
CONCERNING AUXILIARIES, MIXED SOLDIERY, AND ONE’S OWN CHAPTER XIV.
THAT WHICH CONCERNS A PRINCE ON THE SUBJECT OF WAR CHAPTER XV.
CONCERNING THINGS FOR WHICH MEN, AND ESPECIALLY PRINCES, ARE PRAISED OR BLAMED CHAPTER XVI.
CONCERNING LIBERALITY AND MEANNESS CHAPTER XVII.
CONCERNING CRUELTY AND CLEMENCY, AND WHETHER IT IS BETTER TO BE LOVED THAN FEARED CHAPTER XVIII.
CONCERNING THE WAY IN WHICH PRINCES SHOULD KEEP FAITH CHAPTER XIX.
THAT ONE SHOULD AVOID BEING DESPISED AND HATED CHAPTER XX.
ARE FORTRESSES, AND MANY OTHER THINGS TO WHICH PRINCES OFTEN RESORT, ADVANTAGEOUS OR HURTFUL?
CONCERNING THE SECRETARIES OF PRINCES CHAPTER XXIII.
HOW FLATTERERS SHOULD BE AVOIDED CHAPTER XXIV.
WHAT FORTUNE CAN EFFECT IN HUMAN AFFAIRS AND HOW TO WITHSTAND HER CHAPTER XXVI.
AN EXHORTATION TO LIBERATE ITALY FROM THE BARBARIANS DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODS ADOPTED BY THE DUKE VALENTINO WHEN MURDERING VITELLOZZO VITELLI, OLIVEROTTO DA FERMO, THE SIGNOR PAGOLO, AND THE DUKE DI GRAVINA ORSINI THE LIFE OF CASTRUCCIO CASTRACANI OF LUCCA _ Nicolo Machiavelli, born at Florence on 3rd May 1469.
From 1494 to 1512 held an official post at Florence which included diplomatic missions to various European courts.
Imprisoned in Florence, 1512; later exiled and returned to San Casciano.
Died at Florence on 22nd June 1527._ INTRODUCTION Nicolo Machiavelli was born at Florence on 3rd May 1469.
He was the second son of Bernardo di Nicolo Machiavelli, a lawyer of some repute, and of Bartolommea di Stefano Nelli, his wife.
Both parents were members of the old Florentine nobility.
His life falls naturally into three periods, each of which singularly enough constitutes a distinct and important era in the history of Florence.
His youth was concurrent with the greatness of Florence as an Italian power under the guidance of Lorenzo de’ Medici, Il Magnifico.
The downfall of the Medici in Florence occurred in 1494, in which year Machiavelli entered the public service.
During his official career Florence was free under the government of a Republic, which lasted until 1512, when the Medici returned to power, and Machiavelli lost his office.
The Medici again ruled Florence from 1512 until 1527, when they were once more driven out.
This was the period of Machiavelli’s literary activity and increasing influence; but he died, within a few weeks of the expulsion of the Medici, on 22nd June 1527, in his fifty-eighth year, without having regained office.
YOUTH — Æt. 1-25—1469-94 Although there is little recorded of the youth of Machiavelli, the Florence of those days is so well known that the early environment of this representative citizen may be easily imagined.
Florence has been described as a city with two opposite currents of life, one directed by the fervent and austere Savonarola, the other by the splendour-loving Lorenzo.
Savonarola’s influence upon the young Machiavelli must have been slight, for although at one time he wielded immense power over the fortunes of Florence, he only furnished Machiavelli with a subject of a gibe in _The Prince_, where he is cited as an example of an unarmed prophet who came to a bad end.
Whereas the magnificence of the Medicean rule during the life of Lorenzo appeared to have impressed Machiavelli strongly, for he frequently recurs to it in his writings, and it is to Lorenzo’s grandson that he dedicates _The Prince_.
Machiavelli, in his “History of Florence,” gives us a picture of the young men among whom his youth was passed.
Therefore, my son, if you wish to please me, and to bring success and honour to yourself, do right and study, because others will help you if you help yourself.” OFFICE — Æt. 25-43—1494-1512 The second period of Machiavelli’s life was spent in the service of the free Republic of Florence, which flourished, as stated above, from the expulsion of the Medici in 1494 until their return in 1512.
After serving four years in one of the public offices he was appointed Chancellor and Secretary to the Second Chancery, the Ten of Liberty and Peace.
Here we are on firm ground when dealing with the events of Machiavelli’s life, for during this time he took a leading part in the affairs of the Republic, and we have its decrees, records, and dispatches to guide us, as well as his own writings.
A mere recapitulation of a few of his transactions with the statesmen and soldiers of his time gives a fair indication of his activities, and supplies the sources from which he drew the experiences and characters which illustrate _The Prince_.
His first mission was in 1499 to Catherina Sforza, “my lady of Forli” of _The Prince_, from whose conduct and fate he drew the moral that it is far better to earn the confidence of the people than to rely on fortresses.
This is a very noticeable principle in Machiavelli, and is urged by him in many ways as a matter of vital importance to princes.
In 1500 he was sent to France to obtain terms from Louis XII for continuing the war against Pisa: this king it was who, in his conduct of affairs in Italy, committed the five capital errors in statecraft summarized in _The Prince_, and was consequently driven out.
He, also, it was who made the dissolution of his marriage a condition of support to Pope Alexander VI; which leads Machiavelli to refer those who urge that such promises should be kept to what he has written concerning the faith of princes.
Machiavelli’s public life was largely occupied with events arising out of the ambitions of Pope Alexander VI and his son, Cesare Borgia, the Duke Valentino, and these characters fill a large space of _The Prince_.
Machiavelli never hesitates to cite the actions of the duke for the benefit of usurpers who wish to keep the states they have seized; he can, indeed, find no precepts to offer so good as the pattern of Cesare Borgia’s conduct, insomuch that Cesare is acclaimed by some critics as the “hero” of _The Prince_.
On the death of Pius III, in 1503, Machiavelli was sent to Rome to watch the election of his successor, and there he saw Cesare Borgia cheated into allowing the choice of the College to fall on Giuliano delle Rovere (Julius II), who was one of the cardinals that had most reason to fear the duke.
Machiavelli, when commenting on this election, says that he who thinks new favours will cause great personages to forget old injuries deceives himself.
It was to Julius II that Machiavelli was sent in 1506, when that pontiff was commencing his enterprise against Bologna; which he brought to a successful issue, as he did many of his other adventures, owing chiefly to his impetuous character.
It is in reference to Pope Julius that Machiavelli moralizes on the resemblance between Fortune and women, and concludes that it is the bold rather than the cautious man that will win and hold them both.
It is impossible to follow here the varying fortunes of the Italian states, which in 1507 were controlled by France, Spain, and Germany, with results that have lasted to our day; we are concerned with those events, and with the three great actors in them, so far only as they impinge on the personality of Machiavelli.
He had several meetings with Louis XII of France, and his estimate of that monarch’s character has already been alluded to.
Machiavelli has painted Ferdinand of Aragon as the man who accomplished great things under the cloak of religion, but who in reality had no mercy, faith, humanity, or integrity; and who, had he allowed himself to be influenced by such motives, would have been ruined.
The remaining years of Machiavelli’s official career were filled with events arising out of the League of Cambrai, made in 1508 between the three great European powers already mentioned and the pope, with the object of crushing the Venetian Republic.
This result was attained in the battle of Vaila, when Venice lost in one day all that she had won in eight hundred years.
Florence had a difficult part to play during these events, complicated as they were by the feud which broke out between the pope and the French, because friendship with France had dictated the entire policy of the Republic.
When, in 1511, Julius II finally formed the Holy League against France, and with the assistance of the Swiss drove the French out of Italy, Florence lay at the mercy of the Pope, and had to submit to his terms, one of which was that the Medici should be restored.
The return of the Medici to Florence on 1st September 1512, and the consequent fall of the Republic, was the signal for the dismissal of Machiavelli and his friends, and thus put an end to his public career, for, as we have seen, he died without regaining office.
LITERATURE AND DEATH — Æt. 43-58—1512-27 On the return of the Medici, Machiavelli, who for a few weeks had vainly hoped to retain his office under the new masters of Florence, was dismissed by decree dated 7th November 1512.
Shortly after this he was accused of complicity in an abortive conspiracy against the Medici, imprisoned, and put to the question by torture.
The new Medicean pope, Leo X, procured his release, and he retired to his small property at San Casciano, near Florence, where he devoted himself to literature.
In a letter to Francesco Vettori, dated 13th December 1513, he has left a very interesting description of his life at this period, which elucidates his methods and his motives in writing _The Prince_.
Filippo Casavecchio has seen it; he will be able to tell you what is in it, and of the discourses I have had with him; nevertheless, I am still enriching and polishing it.” The “little book” suffered many vicissitudes before attaining the form in which it has reached us.
Various mental influences were at work during its composition; its title and patron were changed; and for some unknown reason it was finally dedicated to Lorenzo de’ Medici.
Although Machiavelli discussed with Casavecchio whether it should be sent or presented in person to the patron, there is no evidence that Lorenzo ever received or even read it: he certainly never gave Machiavelli any employment.
Although it was plagiarized during Machiavelli’s lifetime, _The Prince_ was never published by him, and its text is still disputable.
Machiavelli concludes his letter to Vettori thus: “And as to this little thing [his book], when it has been read it will be seen that during the fifteen years I have given to the study of statecraft I have neither slept nor idled; and men ought ever to desire to be served by one who has reaped experience at the expense of others.
These and several minor works occupied him until the year 1518, when he accepted a small commission to look after the affairs of some Florentine merchants at Genoa.
In 1519 the Medicean rulers of Florence granted a few political concessions to her citizens, and Machiavelli with others was consulted upon a new constitution under which the Great Council was to be restored; but on one pretext or another it was not promulgated.
It is somewhat remarkable that, as, in 1513, Machiavelli had written _The Prince_ for the instruction of the Medici after they had just regained power in Florence, so, in 1525, he dedicated the “History of Florence” to the head of the family when its ruin was now at hand.
In that year the battle of Pavia destroyed the French rule in Italy, and left Francis I a prisoner in the hands of his great rival, Charles V.
This was followed by the sack of Rome, upon the news of which the popular party at Florence threw off the yoke of the Medici, who were once more banished.
Machiavelli was absent from Florence at this time, but hastened his return, hoping to secure his former office of secretary to the “Ten of Liberty and Peace.” Unhappily he was taken ill soon after he reached Florence, where he died on 22nd June 1527.
THE MAN AND HIS WORKS No one can say where the bones of Machiavelli rest, but modern Florence has decreed him a stately cenotaph in Santa Croce, by the side of her most famous sons; recognizing that, whatever other nations may have found in his works, Italy found in them the idea of her unity and the germs of her renaissance among the nations of Europe.
Whilst it is idle to protest against the world-wide and evil signification of his name, it may be pointed out that the harsh construction of his doctrine which this sinister reputation implies was unknown to his own day, and that the researches of recent times have enabled us to interpret him more reasonably.
It is due to these inquiries that the shape of an “unholy necromancer,” which so long haunted men’s vision, has begun to fade.
Machiavelli was undoubtedly a man of great observation, acuteness, and industry; noting with appreciative eye whatever passed before him, and with his supreme literary gift turning it to account in his enforced retirement from affairs.
He does not present himself, nor is he depicted by his contemporaries, as a type of that rare combination, the successful statesman and author, for he appears to have been only moderately prosperous in his several embassies and political employments.
He was misled by Catherina Sforza, ignored by Louis XII, overawed by Cesare Borgia; several of his embassies were quite barren of results; his attempts to fortify Florence failed, and the soldiery that he raised astonished everybody by their cowardice.
In the conduct of his own affairs he was timid and time-serving; he dared not appear by the side of Soderini, to whom he owed so much, for fear of compromising himself; his connection with the Medici was open to suspicion, and Giuliano appears to have recognized his real forte when he set him to write the “History of Florence,” rather than employ him in the state.
And it is on the literary side of his character, and there alone, that we find no weakness and no failure.
Although the light of almost four centuries has been focused on _The Prince_, its problems are still debatable and interesting, because they are the eternal problems between the ruled and their rulers.
Such as they are, its ethics are those of Machiavelli’s contemporaries; yet they cannot be said to be out of date so long as the governments of Europe rely on material rather than on moral forces.
Its historical incidents and personages become interesting by reason of the uses which Machiavelli makes of them to illustrate his theories of government and conduct.
Leaving out of consideration those maxims of state which still furnish some European and eastern statesmen with principles of action, _The Prince_ is bestrewn with truths that can be proved at every turn.
Men are still the dupes of their simplicity and greed, as they were in the days of Alexander VI.
The cloak of religion still conceals the vices which Machiavelli laid bare in the character of Ferdinand of Aragon.
In politics there are no perfectly safe courses; prudence consists in choosing the least dangerous ones.
Then—to pass to a higher plane—Machiavelli reiterates that, although crimes may win an empire, they do not win glory.
Necessary wars are just wars, and the arms of a nation are hallowed when it has no other resource but to fight.
It is the cry of a far later day than Machiavelli’s that government should be elevated into a living moral force, capable of inspiring the people with a just recognition of the fundamental principles of society; to this “high argument” _The Prince_ contributes but little.
Machiavelli always refused to write either of men or of governments otherwise than as he found them, and he writes with such skill and insight that his work is of abiding value.
But what invests _The Prince_ with more than a merely artistic or historical interest is the incontrovertible truth that it deals with the great principles which still guide nations and rulers in their relationship with each other and their neighbours.
In translating _The Prince_ my aim has been to achieve at all costs an exact literal rendering of the original, rather than a fluent paraphrase adapted to the modern notions of style and expression.
Machiavelli was no facile phrasemonger; the conditions under which he wrote obliged him to weigh every word; his themes were lofty, his substance grave, his manner nobly plain and serious. _Quis eo fuit unquam in partiundis rebus, in definiendis, in explanandis pressior?_ In _The Prince_, it may be truly said, there is reason assignable, not only for every word, but for the position of every word.
To an Englishman of Shakespeare’s time the translation of such a treatise was in some ways a comparatively easy task, for in those times the genius of the English more nearly resembled that of the Italian language; to the Englishman of to-day it is not so simple.
I have tried to preserve the pithy brevity of the Italian so far as was consistent with an absolute fidelity to the sense.
If the result be an occasional asperity I can only hope that the reader, in his eagerness to reach the author’s meaning, may overlook the roughness of the road that leads him to it.
The following is a list of the works of Machiavelli: Principal works.
Other poems include Sonetti, Canzoni, Ottave, and Canti carnascialeschi.
Aldo, Venice, 1546; della Tertina, 1550; Cambiagi, Florence, 6 vols., 1782-5; dei Classici, Milan, 10 1813; Silvestri, 9 vols., 1820-2; Passerini, Fanfani, Milanesi, 6 vols. only published, 1873-7.
Polidori, 1852; Lettere familiari, ed.
Alvisi, 1883, 2 editions, one with excisions; Credited Writings, ed.
Canestrini, 1857; Letters to F.
Ridolfi, Pensieri intorno allo scopo di N.
Machiavelli nel libro Il Principe, etc.; D.
Ferrara, The Private Correspondence of Nicolo Machiavelli, 1929.
DEDICATION To the Magnificent Lorenzo Di Piero De’ Medici Those who strive to obtain the good graces of a prince are accustomed to come before him with such things as they hold most precious, or in which they see him take most delight; whence one often sees horses, arms, cloth of gold, precious stones, and similar ornaments presented to princes, worthy of their greatness.
Take then, your Magnificence, this little gift in the spirit in which I send it; wherein, if it be diligently read and considered by you, you will learn my extreme desire that you should attain that greatness which fortune and your other attributes promise.
And if your Magnificence from the summit of your greatness will sometimes turn your eyes to these lower regions, you will see how unmeritedly I suffer a great and continued malignity of fortune.
HOW MANY KINDS OF PRINCIPALITIES THERE ARE, AND BY WHAT MEANS THEY ARE ACQUIRED All states, all powers, that have held and hold rule over men have been and are either republics or principalities.
Principalities are either hereditary, in which the family has been long established; or they are new.
The new are either entirely new, as was Milan to Francesco Sforza, or they are, as it were, members annexed to the hereditary state of the prince who has acquired them, as was the kingdom of Naples to that of the King of Spain.
Such dominions thus acquired are either accustomed to live under a prince, or to live in freedom; and are acquired either by the arms of the prince himself, or of others, or else by fortune or by ability.
CONCERNING HEREDITARY PRINCIPALITIES I will leave out all discussion on republics, inasmuch as in another place I have written of them at length, and will address myself only to principalities.
In doing so I will keep to the order indicated above, and discuss how such principalities are to be ruled and preserved.
We have in Italy, for example, the Duke of Ferrara, who could not have withstood the attacks of the Venetians in ’84, nor those of Pope Julius in ’10, unless he had been long established in his dominions.
CONCERNING MIXED PRINCIPALITIES But the difficulties occur in a new principality.
This follows also on another natural and common necessity, which always causes a new prince to burden those who have submitted to him with his soldiery and with infinite other hardships which he must put upon his new acquisition.
In this way you have enemies in all those whom you have injured in seizing that principality, and you are not able to keep those friends who put you there because of your not being able to satisfy them in the way they expected, and you cannot take strong measures against them, feeling bound to them.
For, although one may be very strong in armed forces, yet in entering a province one has always need of the goodwill of the natives.
For these reasons Louis the Twelfth, King of France, quickly occupied Milan, and as quickly lost it; and to turn him out the first time it only needed Lodovico’s own forces; because those who had opened the gates to him, finding themselves deceived in their hopes of future benefit, would not endure the ill-treatment of the new prince.
It is very true that, after acquiring rebellious provinces a second time, they are not so lightly lost afterwards, because the prince, with little reluctance, takes the opportunity of the rebellion to punish the delinquents, to clear out the suspects, and to strengthen himself in the weakest places.
Nevertheless Milan was taken from France both the first and the second time.
The general reasons for the first have been discussed; it remains to name those for the second, and to see what resources he had, and what any one in his situation would have had for maintaining himself more securely in his acquisition than did the King of France.
Now I say that those dominions which, when acquired, are added to an ancient state by him who acquires them, are either of the same country and language, or they are not.
He who has annexed them, if he wishes to hold them, has only to bear in mind two considerations: the one, that the family of their former lord is extinguished; the other, that neither their laws nor their taxes are altered, so that in a very short time they will become entirely one body with the old principality.
But when states are acquired in a country differing in language, customs, or laws, there are difficulties, and good fortune and great energy are needed to hold them, and one of the greatest and most real helps would be that he who has acquired them should go and reside there.
This would make his position more secure and durable, as it has made that of the Turk in Greece, who, notwithstanding all the other measures taken by him for holding that state, if he had not settled there, would not have been able to keep it.
Because, if one is on the spot, disorders are seen as they spring up, and one can quickly remedy them; but if one is not at hand, they are heard of only when they are great, and then one can no longer remedy them.
Besides this, the country is not pillaged by your officials; the subjects are satisfied by prompt recourse to the prince; thus, wishing to be good, they have more cause to love him, and wishing to be otherwise, to fear him.
He who would attack that state from the outside must have the utmost caution; as long as the prince resides there it can only be wrested from him with the greatest difficulty.
The other and better course is to send colonies to one or two places, which may be as keys to that state, for it is necessary either to do this or else to keep there a great number of cavalry and infantry.
In conclusion, I say that these colonies are not costly, they are more faithful, they injure less, and the injured, as has been said, being poor and scattered, cannot hurt.
Upon this, one has to remark that men ought either to be well treated or crushed, because they can avenge themselves of lighter injuries, of more serious ones they cannot; therefore the injury that is to be done to a man ought to be of such a kind that one does not stand in fear of revenge.
For every reason, therefore, such guards are as useless as a colony is useful.
The Romans were brought into Greece by the Ætolians; and in every other country where they obtained a footing they were brought in by the inhabitants.
And the usual course of affairs is that, as soon as a powerful foreigner enters a country, all the subject states are drawn to him, moved by the hatred which they feel against the ruling power.
So that in respect to those subject states he has not to take any trouble to gain them over to himself, for the whole of them quickly rally to the state which he has acquired there.
He has only to take care that they do not get hold of too much power and too much authority, and then with his own forces, and with their goodwill, he can easily keep down the more powerful of them, so as to remain entirely master in the country.
And he who does not properly manage this business will soon lose what he has acquired, and whilst he does hold it he will have endless difficulties and troubles.
The Romans, in the countries which they annexed, observed closely these measures; they sent colonies and maintained friendly relations with[2] the minor powers, without increasing their strength; they kept down the greater, and did not allow any strong foreign powers to gain authority.
Greece appears to me sufficient for an example.
Thus it happens in affairs of state, for when the evils that arise have been foreseen (which it is only given to a wise man to see), they can be quickly redressed, but when, through not having been foreseen, they have been permitted to grow in a way that every one can see them, there is no longer a remedy.
King Louis was brought into Italy by the ambition of the Venetians, who desired to obtain half the state of Lombardy by his intervention.
I will not blame the course taken by the king, because, wishing to get a foothold in Italy, and having no friends there—seeing rather that every door was shut to him owing to the conduct of Charles—he was forced to accept those friendships which he could get, and he would have succeeded very quickly in his design if in other matters he had not made some mistakes.
The king, however, having acquired Lombardy, regained at once the authority which Charles had lost: Genoa yielded; the Florentines became his friends; the Marquess of Mantua, the Duke of Ferrara, the Bentivogli, my lady of Forli, the Lords of Faenza, of Pesaro, of Rimini, of Camerino, of Piombino, the Lucchese, the Pisans, the Sienese—everybody made advances to him to become his friend.
Then could the Venetians realize the rashness of the course taken by them, which, in order that they might secure two towns in Lombardy, had made the king master of two-thirds of Italy.
But he was no sooner in Milan than he did the contrary by assisting Pope Alexander to occupy the Romagna.
It never occurred to him that by this action he was weakening himself, depriving himself of friends and of those who had thrown themselves into his lap, whilst he aggrandized the Church by adding much temporal power to the spiritual, thus giving it greater authority.
And having committed this prime error, he was obliged to follow it up, so much so that, to put an end to the ambition of Alexander, and to prevent his becoming the master of Tuscany, he was himself forced to come into Italy.
Therefore, if France could have attacked Naples with her own forces she ought to have done so; if she could not, then she ought not to have divided it.
And if the partition which she made with the Venetians in Lombardy was justified by the excuse that by it she got a foothold in Italy, this other partition merited blame, for it had not the excuse of that necessity.
Therefore Louis made these five errors: he destroyed the minor powers, he increased the strength of one of the greater powers in Italy, he brought in a foreign power, he did not settle in the country, he did not send colonies.
And if any one should say: “King Louis yielded the Romagna to Alexander and the kingdom to Spain to avoid war,” I answer for the reasons given above that a blunder ought never to be perpetrated to avoid war, because it is not to be avoided, but is only deferred to your disadvantage.
He was Georges d’Amboise, created a cardinal by Alexander VI.
Thus King Louis lost Lombardy by not having followed any of the conditions observed by those who have taken possession of countries and wished to retain them.
Nor is there any miracle in this, but much that is reasonable and quite natural.
And on these matters I spoke at Nantes with Rouen, when Valentino, as Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander, was usually called, occupied the Romagna, and on Cardinal Rouen observing to me that the Italians did not understand war, I replied to him that the French did not understand statecraft, meaning that otherwise they would not have allowed the Church to reach such greatness.
And in fact it has been seen that the greatness of the Church and of Spain in Italy has been caused by France, and her ruin may be attributed to them.
From this a general rule is drawn which never or rarely fails: that he who is the cause of another becoming powerful is ruined; because that predominancy has been brought about either by astuteness or else by force, and both are distrusted by him who has been raised to power.
I answer that the principalities of which one has record are found to be governed in two different ways; either by a prince, with a body of servants, who assist him to govern the kingdom as ministers by his favour and permission; or by a prince and barons, who hold that dignity by antiquity of blood and not by the grace of the prince.
Such barons have states and their own subjects, who recognize them as lords and hold them in natural affection.
Those states that are governed by a prince and his servants hold their prince in more consideration, because in all the country there is no one who is recognized as superior to him, and if they yield obedience to another they do it as to a minister and official, and they do not bear him any particular affection.
The examples of these two governments in our time are the Turk and the King of France.
The entire monarchy of the Turk is governed by one lord, the others are his servants; and, dividing his kingdom into sanjaks, he sends there different administrators, and shifts and changes them as he chooses.
But the King of France is placed in the midst of an ancient body of lords, acknowledged by their own subjects, and beloved by them; they have their own prerogatives, nor can the king take these away except at his peril.
Therefore, he who considers both of these states will recognize great difficulties in seizing the state of the Turk, but, once it is conquered, great ease in holding it.
The causes of the difficulties in seizing the kingdom of the Turk are that the usurper cannot be called in by the princes of the kingdom, nor can he hope to be assisted in his designs by the revolt of those whom the lord has around him.
This arises from the reasons given above; for his ministers, being all slaves and bondmen, can only be corrupted with great difficulty, and one can expect little advantage from them when they have been corrupted, as they cannot carry the people with them, for the reasons assigned.
The contrary happens in kingdoms governed like that of France, because one can easily enter there by gaining over some baron of the kingdom, for one always finds malcontents and such as desire a change.
Such men, for the reasons given, can open the way into the state and render the victory easy; but if you wish to hold it afterwards, you meet with infinite difficulties, both from those who have assisted you and from those you have crushed.
Nor is it enough for you to have exterminated the family of the prince, because the lords that remain make themselves the heads of fresh movements against you, and as you are unable either to satisfy or exterminate them, that state is lost whenever time brings the opportunity.
Now if you will consider what was the nature of the government of Darius, you will find it similar to the kingdom of the Turk, and therefore it was only necessary for Alexander, first to overthrow him in the field, and then to take the country from him.
After which victory, Darius being killed, the state remained secure to Alexander, for the above reasons.
And if his successors had been united they would have enjoyed it securely and at their ease, for there were no tumults raised in the kingdom except those they provoked themselves.
But it is impossible to hold with such tranquillity states constituted like that of France.
Hence arose those frequent rebellions against the Romans in Spain, France, and Greece, owing to the many principalities there were in these states, of which, as long as the memory of them endured, the Romans always held an insecure possession; but with the power and long continuance of the empire the memory of them passed away, and the Romans then became secure possessors.
And when fighting afterwards amongst themselves, each one was able to attach to himself his own parts of the country, according to the authority he had assumed there; and the family of the former lord being exterminated, none other than the Romans were acknowledged.
When these things are remembered no one will marvel at the ease with which Alexander held the Empire of Asia, or at the difficulties which others have had to keep an acquisition, such as Pyrrhus and many more; this is not occasioned by the little or abundance of ability in the conqueror, but by the want of uniformity in the subject state.
Because such a government, being created by the prince, knows that it cannot stand without his friendship and interest, and does its utmost to support him; and therefore he who would keep a city accustomed to freedom will hold it more easily by the means of its own citizens than in any other way.
There are, for example, the Spartans and the Romans.
The Spartans held Athens and Thebes, establishing there an oligarchy: nevertheless they lost them.
The Romans, in order to hold Capua, Carthage, and Numantia, dismantled them, and did not lose them.
They wished to hold Greece as the Spartans held it, making it free and permitting its laws, and did not succeed.
So to hold it they were compelled to dismantle many cities in the country, for in truth there is no safe way to retain them otherwise than by ruining them.
And he who becomes master of a city accustomed to freedom and does not destroy it, may expect to be destroyed by it, for in rebellion it has always the watchword of liberty and its ancient privileges as a rallying point, which neither time nor benefits will ever cause it to forget.
And whatever you may do or provide against, they never forget that name or their privileges unless they are disunited or dispersed, but at every chance they immediately rally to them, as Pisa after the hundred years she had been held in bondage by the Florentines.
But when cities or countries are accustomed to live under a prince, and his family is exterminated, they, being on the one hand accustomed to obey and on the other hand not having the old prince, cannot agree in making one from amongst themselves, and they do not know how to govern themselves.
But in republics there is more vitality, greater hatred, and more desire for vengeance, which will never permit them to allow the memory of their former liberty to rest; so that the safest way is to destroy them or to reside there.
Let him act like the clever archers who, designing to hit the mark which yet appears too far distant, and knowing the limits to which the strength of their bow attains, take aim much higher than the mark, not to reach by their strength or arrow to so great a height, but to be able with the aid of so high an aim to hit the mark they wish to reach.
I say, therefore, that in entirely new principalities, where there is a new prince, more or less difficulty is found in keeping them, accordingly as there is more or less ability in him who has acquired the state.
Now, as the fact of becoming a prince from a private station presupposes either ability or fortune, it is clear that one or other of these things will mitigate in some degree many difficulties.
Nevertheless, he who has relied least on fortune is established the strongest.
Further, it facilitates matters when the prince, having no other state, is compelled to reside there in person.
But to come to those who, by their own ability and not through fortune, have risen to be princes, I say that Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus, and such like are the most excellent examples.
And although one may not discuss Moses, he having been a mere executor of the will of God, yet he ought to be admired, if only for that favour which made him worthy to speak with God.
But in considering Cyrus and others who have acquired or founded kingdoms, all will be found admirable; and if their particular deeds and conduct shall be considered, they will not be found inferior to those of Moses, although he had so great a preceptor.
And in examining their actions and lives one cannot see that they owed anything to fortune beyond opportunity, which brought them the material to mould into the form which seemed best to them.
Without that opportunity their powers of mind would have been extinguished, and without those powers the opportunity would have come in vain.
It was necessary, therefore, to Moses that he should find the people of Israel in Egypt enslaved and oppressed by the Egyptians, in order that they should be disposed to follow him so as to be delivered out of bondage.
It was necessary that Romulus should not remain in Alba, and that he should be abandoned at his birth, in order that he should become King of Rome and founder of the fatherland.
It was necessary that Cyrus should find the Persians discontented with the government of the Medes, and the Medes soft and effeminate through their long peace.
Theseus could not have shown his ability had he not found the Athenians dispersed.
These opportunities, therefore, made those men fortunate, and their high ability enabled them to recognize the opportunity whereby their country was ennobled and made famous.
Those who by valorous ways become princes, like these men, acquire a principality with difficulty, but they keep it with ease.
The difficulties they have in acquiring it rise in part from the new rules and methods which they are forced to introduce to establish their government and its security.
And it ought to be remembered that there is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous to conduct, or more uncertain in its success, than to take the lead in the introduction of a new order of things, because the innovator has for enemies all those who have done well under the old conditions, and lukewarm defenders in those who may do well under the new.
This coolness arises partly from fear of the opponents, who have the laws on their side, and partly from the incredulity of men, who do not readily believe in new things until they have had a long experience of them.
Thus it happens that whenever those who are hostile have the opportunity to attack they do it like partisans, whilst the others defend lukewarmly, in such wise that the prince is endangered along with them.
It is necessary, therefore, if we desire to discuss this matter thoroughly, to inquire whether these innovators can rely on themselves or have to depend on others: that is to say, whether, to consummate their enterprise, have they to use prayers or can they use force?
In the first instance they always succeed badly, and never compass anything; but when they can rely on themselves and use force, then they are rarely endangered.
Hence it is that all armed prophets have conquered, and the unarmed ones have been destroyed.
Besides the reasons mentioned, the nature of the people is variable, and whilst it is easy to persuade them, it is difficult to fix them in that persuasion.
And thus it is necessary to take such measures that, when they believe no longer, it may be possible to make them believe by force.
If Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus had been unarmed they could not have enforced their constitutions for long—as happened in our time to Fra Girolamo Savonarola, who was ruined with his new order of things immediately the multitude believed in him no longer, and he had no means of keeping steadfast those who believed or of making the unbelievers to believe.
Therefore such as these have great difficulties in consummating their enterprise, for all their dangers are in the ascent, yet with ability they will overcome them; but when these are overcome, and those who envied them their success are exterminated, they will begin to be respected, and they will continue afterwards powerful, secure, honoured, and happy.
This man abolished the old soldiery, organized the new, gave up old alliances, made new ones; and as he had his own soldiers and allies, on such foundations he was able to build any edifice: thus, whilst he had endured much trouble in acquiring, he had but little in keeping. [1] Hiero II, born about 307 B.C., died 216 B.C.
CONCERNING NEW PRINCIPALITIES WHICH ARE ACQUIRED EITHER BY THE ARMS OF OTHERS OR BY GOOD FORTUNE Those who solely by good fortune become princes from being private citizens have little trouble in rising, but much in keeping atop; they have not any difficulties on the way up, because they fly, but they have many when they reach the summit.
Such are those to whom some state is given either for money or by the favour of him who bestows it; as happened to many in Greece, in the cities of Ionia and of the Hellespont, where princes were made by Darius, in order that they might hold the cities both for his security and his glory; as also were those emperors who, by the corruption of the soldiers, from being citizens came to empire.
Such stand simply elevated upon the goodwill and the fortune of him who has elevated them—two most inconstant and unstable things.
Neither have they the knowledge requisite for the position; because, unless they are men of great worth and ability, it is not reasonable to expect that they should know how to command, having always lived in a private condition; besides, they cannot hold it because they have not forces which they can keep friendly and faithful.
Concerning these two methods of rising to be a prince by ability or fortune, I wish to adduce two examples within our own recollection, and these are Francesco Sforza[2] and Cesare Borgia.
Francesco, by proper means and with great ability, from being a private person rose to be Duke of Milan, and that which he had acquired with a thousand anxieties he kept with little trouble.
He married Bianca Maria Visconti, a natural daughter of Filippo Visconti, the Duke of Milan, on whose death he procured his own elevation to the duchy.
Because, as is stated above, he who has not first laid his foundations may be able with great ability to lay them afterwards, but they will be laid with trouble to the architect and danger to the building.
Alexander the Sixth, in wishing to aggrandize the duke, his son, had many immediate and prospective difficulties.
Firstly, he did not see his way to make him master of any state that was not a state of the Church; and if he was willing to rob the Church he knew that the Duke of Milan and the Venetians would not consent, because Faenza and Rimini were already under the protection of the Venetians.
Besides this, he saw the arms of Italy, especially those by which he might have been assisted, in hands that would fear the aggrandizement of the Pope, namely, the Orsini and the Colonnesi and their following.
It behoved him, therefore, to upset this state of affairs and embroil the powers, so as to make himself securely master of part of their states.
This was easy for him to do, because he found the Venetians, moved by other reasons, inclined to bring back the French into Italy; he would not only not oppose this, but he would render it more easy by dissolving the former marriage of King Louis.
Therefore the king came into Italy with the assistance of the Venetians and the consent of Alexander.
He was no sooner in Milan than the Pope had soldiers from him for the attempt on the Romagna, which yielded to him on the reputation of the king.
Of the Orsini he had a warning when, after taking Faenza and attacking Bologna, he saw them go very unwillingly to that attack.
And as to the king, he learned his mind when he himself, after taking the Duchy of Urbino, attacked Tuscany, and the king made him desist from that undertaking; hence the duke decided to depend no more upon the arms and the luck of others.
For the first thing he weakened the Orsini and Colonnesi parties in Rome, by gaining to himself all their adherents who were gentlemen, making them his gentlemen, giving them good pay, and, according to their rank, honouring them with office and command in such a way that in a few months all attachment to the factions was destroyed and turned entirely to the duke.
After this he awaited an opportunity to crush the Orsini, having scattered the adherents of the Colonna house.
This came to him soon and he used it well; for the Orsini, perceiving at length that the aggrandizement of the duke and the Church was ruin to them, called a meeting of the Magione in Perugia.
From this sprung the rebellion at Urbino and the tumults in the Romagna, with endless dangers to the duke, all of which he overcame with the help of the French.
And as this point is worthy of notice, and to be imitated by others, I am not willing to leave it out. [3] Sinigalia, 31st December 1502.
When the duke occupied the Romagna he found it under the rule of weak masters, who rather plundered their subjects than ruled them, and gave them more cause for disunion than for union, so that the country was full of robbery, quarrels, and every kind of violence; and so, wishing to bring back peace and obedience to authority, he considered it necessary to give it a good governor.
Thereupon he promoted Messer Ramiro d’Orco,[4] a swift and cruel man, to whom he gave the fullest power.
This man in a short time restored peace and unity with the greatest success.
Afterwards the duke considered that it was not advisable to confer such excessive authority, for he had no doubt but that he would become odious, so he set up a court of judgment in the country, under a most excellent president, wherein all cities had their advocates.
And because he knew that the past severity had caused some hatred against himself, so, to clear himself in the minds of the people, and gain them entirely to himself, he desired to show that, if any cruelty had been practised, it had not originated with him, but in the natural sternness of the minister.
Under this pretence he took Ramiro, and one morning caused him to be executed and left on the piazza at Cesena with the block and a bloody knife at his side.
The barbarity of this spectacle caused the people to be at once satisfied and dismayed. [4] Ramiro d’Orco.
I say that the duke, finding himself now sufficiently powerful and partly secured from immediate dangers by having armed himself in his own way, and having in a great measure crushed those forces in his vicinity that could injure him if he wished to proceed with his conquest, had next to consider France, for he knew that the king, who too late was aware of his mistake, would not support him.
And from this time he began to seek new alliances and to temporize with France in the expedition which she was making towards the kingdom of Naples against the Spaniards who were besieging Gaeta.
It was his intention to secure himself against them, and this he would have quickly accomplished had Alexander lived.
But as to the future he had to fear, in the first place, that a new successor to the Church might not be friendly to him and might seek to take from him that which Alexander had given him, so he decided to act in four ways.
Firstly, by exterminating the families of those lords whom he had despoiled, so as to take away that pretext from the Pope.
Secondly, by winning to himself all the gentlemen of Rome, so as to be able to curb the Pope with their aid, as has been observed.
Thirdly, by converting the college more to himself.
Fourthly, by acquiring so much power before the Pope should die that he could by his own measures resist the first shock.
Of these four things, at the death of Alexander, he had accomplished three.
For he had killed as many of the dispossessed lords as he could lay hands on, and few had escaped; he had won over the Roman gentlemen, and he had the most numerous party in the college.
And as to any fresh acquisition, he intended to become master of Tuscany, for he already possessed Perugia and Piombino, and Pisa was under his protection.
And as he had no longer to study France (for the French were already driven out of the kingdom of Naples by the Spaniards, and in this way both were compelled to buy his goodwill), he pounced down upon Pisa.
But Alexander died five years after he had first drawn the sword.
He left the duke with the state of Romagna alone consolidated, with the rest in the air, between two most powerful hostile armies, and sick unto death.
Yet there were in the duke such boldness and ability, and he knew so well how men are to be won or lost, and so firm were the foundations which in so short a time he had laid, that if he had not had those armies on his back, or if he had been in good health, he would have overcome all difficulties.
And it is seen that his foundations were good, for the Romagna awaited him for more than a month.
In Rome, although but half alive, he remained secure; and whilst the Baglioni, the Vitelli, and the Orsini might come to Rome, they could not effect anything against him.
But if he had been in sound health at the death of Alexander,[5] everything would have been different to him.
When all the actions of the duke are recalled, I do not know how to blame him, but rather it appears to be, as I have said, that I ought to offer him for imitation to all those who, by the fortune or the arms of others, are raised to government.
Because he, having a lofty spirit and far-reaching aims, could not have regulated his conduct otherwise, and only the shortness of the life of Alexander and his own sickness frustrated his designs.
Only can he be blamed for the election of Julius the Second, in whom he made a bad choice, because, as is said, not being able to elect a Pope to his own mind, he could have hindered any other from being elected Pope; and he ought never to have consented to the election of any cardinal whom he had injured or who had cause to fear him if they became pontiffs.
Those whom he had injured, amongst others, were San Pietro ad Vincula, Colonna, San Giorgio, and Ascanio.[7] The rest, in becoming Pope, had to fear him, Rouen and the Spaniards excepted; the latter from their relationship and obligations, the former from his influence, the kingdom of France having relations with him.
Therefore, above everything, the duke ought to have created a Spaniard Pope, and, failing him, he ought to have consented to Rouen and not San Pietro ad Vincula.
He who believes that new benefits will cause great personages to forget old injuries is deceived.
Therefore, the duke erred in his choice, and it was the cause of his ultimate ruin. [7] San Giorgio is Raffaello Riario.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO HAVE OBTAINED A PRINCIPALITY BY WICKEDNESS Although a prince may rise from a private station in two ways, neither of which can be entirely attributed to fortune or genius, yet it is manifest to me that I must not be silent on them, although one could be more copiously treated when I discuss republics.
These methods are when, either by some wicked or nefarious ways, one ascends to the principality, or when by the favour of his fellow-citizens a private person becomes the prince of his country.
And speaking of the first method, it will be illustrated by two examples—one ancient, the other modern—and without entering further into the subject, I consider these two examples will suffice those who may be compelled to follow them.
Agathocles, the Sicilian,[1] became King of Syracuse not only from a private but from a low and abject position.
This man, the son of a potter, through all the changes in his fortunes always led an infamous life.
Nevertheless, he accompanied his infamies with so much ability of mind and body that, having devoted himself to the military profession, he rose through its ranks to be Praetor of Syracuse.
Being established in that position, and having deliberately resolved to make himself prince and to seize by violence, without obligation to others, that which had been conceded to him by assent, he came to an understanding for this purpose with Amilcar, the Carthaginian, who, with his army, was fighting in Sicily.
One morning he assembled the people and the senate of Syracuse, as if he had to discuss with them things relating to the Republic, and at a given signal the soldiers killed all the senators and the richest of the people; these dead, he seized and held the princedom of that city without any civil commotion.
And although he was twice routed by the Carthaginians, and ultimately besieged, yet not only was he able to defend his city, but leaving part of his men for its defence, with the others he attacked Africa, and in a short time raised the siege of Syracuse.
The Carthaginians, reduced to extreme necessity, were compelled to come to terms with Agathocles, and, leaving Sicily to him, had to be content with the possession of Africa. [1] Agathocles the Sicilian, born 361 B.C., died 289 B.C.
Therefore, he who considers the actions and the genius of this man will see nothing, or little, which can be attributed to fortune, inasmuch as he attained pre-eminence, as is shown above, not by the favour of any one, but step by step in the military profession, which steps were gained with a thousand troubles and perils, and were afterwards boldly held by him with many hazardous dangers.
Yet it cannot be called talent to slay fellow-citizens, to deceive friends, to be without faith, without mercy, without religion; such methods may gain empire, but not glory.
Still, if the courage of Agathocles in entering into and extricating himself from dangers be considered, together with his greatness of mind in enduring and overcoming hardships, it cannot be seen why he should be esteemed less than the most notable captain.
Nevertheless, his barbarous cruelty and inhumanity with infinite wickedness do not permit him to be celebrated among the most excellent men.
What he achieved cannot be attributed either to fortune or genius.
In our times, during the rule of Alexander the Sixth, Oliverotto da Fermo, having been left an orphan many years before, was brought up by his maternal uncle, Giovanni Fogliani, and in the early days of his youth sent to fight under Pagolo Vitelli, that, being trained under his discipline, he might attain some high position in the military profession.
After Pagolo died, he fought under his brother Vitellozzo, and in a very short time, being endowed with wit and a vigorous body and mind, he became the first man in his profession.
But it appearing a paltry thing to serve under others, he resolved, with the aid of some citizens of Fermo, to whom the slavery of their country was dearer than its liberty, and with the help of the Vitelleschi, to seize Fermo.
Giovanni, therefore, did not fail in any attentions due to his nephew, and he caused him to be honourably received by the Fermians, and he lodged him in his own house, where, having passed some days, and having arranged what was necessary for his wicked designs, Oliverotto gave a solemn banquet to which he invited Giovanni Fogliani and the chiefs of Fermo.
No sooner were they seated than soldiers issued from secret places and slaughtered Giovanni and the rest.
After these murders Oliverotto, mounted on horseback, rode up and down the town and besieged the chief magistrate in the palace, so that in fear the people were forced to obey him, and to form a government, of which he made himself the prince.
He killed all the malcontents who were able to injure him, and strengthened himself with new civil and military ordinances, in such a way that, in the year during which he held the principality, not only was he secure in the city of Fermo, but he had become formidable to all his neighbours.
And his destruction would have been as difficult as that of Agathocles if he had not allowed himself to be overreached by Cesare Borgia, who took him with the Orsini and Vitelli at Sinigalia, as was stated above.
Thus one year after he had committed this parricide, he was strangled, together with Vitellozzo, whom he had made his leader in valour and wickedness.
Some may wonder how it can happen that Agathocles, and his like, after infinite treacheries and cruelties, should live for long secure in his country, and defend himself from external enemies, and never be conspired against by his own citizens; seeing that many others, by means of cruelty, have never been able even in peaceful times to hold the state, still less in the doubtful times of war.
I believe that this follows from severities[2] being badly or properly used.
Those may be called properly used, if of evil it is possible to speak well, that are applied at one blow and are necessary to one’s security, and that are not persisted in afterwards unless they can be turned to the advantage of the subjects.
The badly employed are those which, notwithstanding they may be few in the commencement, multiply with time rather than decrease.
Those who practise the first system are able, by aid of God or man, to mitigate in some degree their rule, as Agathocles did.
He who does otherwise, either from timidity or evil advice, is always compelled to keep the knife in his hand; neither can he rely on his subjects, nor can they attach themselves to him, owing to their continued and repeated wrongs.
For injuries ought to be done all at one time, so that, being tasted less, they offend less; benefits ought to be given little by little, so that the flavour of them may last longer.
And above all things, a prince ought to live amongst his people in such a way that no unexpected circumstances, whether of good or evil, shall make him change; because if the necessity for this comes in troubled times, you are too late for harsh measures; and mild ones will not help you, for they will be considered as forced from you, and no one will be under any obligation to you for them.
CONCERNING A CIVIL PRINCIPALITY But coming to the other point—where a leading citizen becomes the prince of his country, not by wickedness or any intolerable violence, but by the favour of his fellow citizens—this may be called a civil principality: nor is genius or fortune altogether necessary to attain to it, but rather a happy shrewdness.
I say then that such a principality is obtained either by the favour of the people or by the favour of the nobles.
Because in all cities these two distinct parties are found, and from this it arises that the people do not wish to be ruled nor oppressed by the nobles, and the nobles wish to rule and oppress the people; and from these two opposite desires there arises in cities one of three results, either a principality, self-government, or anarchy.
A principality is created either by the people or by the nobles, accordingly as one or other of them has the opportunity; for the nobles, seeing they cannot withstand the people, begin to cry up the reputation of one of themselves, and they make him a prince, so that under his shadow they can give vent to their ambitions.
The people, finding they cannot resist the nobles, also cry up the reputation of one of themselves, and make him a prince so as to be defended by his authority.
He who obtains sovereignty by the assistance of the nobles maintains himself with more difficulty than he who comes to it by the aid of the people, because the former finds himself with many around him who consider themselves his equals, and because of this he can neither rule nor manage them to his liking.
But he who reaches sovereignty by popular favour finds himself alone, and has none around him, or few, who are not prepared to obey him.
Besides this, one cannot by fair dealing, and without injury to others, satisfy the nobles, but you can satisfy the people, for their object is more righteous than that of the nobles, the latter wishing to oppress, while the former only desire not to be oppressed.
The worst that a prince may expect from a hostile people is to be abandoned by them; but from hostile nobles he has not only to fear abandonment, but also that they will rise against him; for they, being in these affairs more far-seeing and astute, always come forward in time to save themselves, and to obtain favours from him whom they expect to prevail.
Further, the prince is compelled to live always with the same people, but he can do well without the same nobles, being able to make and unmake them daily, and to give or take away authority when it pleases him.
Therefore, to make this point clearer, I say that the nobles ought to be looked at mainly in two ways: that is to say, they either shape their course in such a way as binds them entirely to your fortune, or they do not.
But when for their own ambitious ends they shun binding themselves, it is a token that they are giving more thought to themselves than to you, and a prince ought to guard against such, and to fear them as if they were open enemies, because in adversity they always help to ruin him.
Therefore, one who becomes a prince through the favour of the people ought to keep them friendly, and this he can easily do seeing they only ask not to be oppressed by him.
But one who, in opposition to the people, becomes a prince by the favour of the nobles, ought, above everything, to seek to win the people over to himself, and this he may easily do if he takes them under his protection.
Nabis,[1] Prince of the Spartans, sustained the attack of all Greece, and of a victorious Roman army, and against them he defended his country and his government; and for the overcoming of this peril it was only necessary for him to make himself secure against a few, but this would not have been sufficient had the people been hostile.
This event is to be found in Machiavelli’s “Florentine History,” Book III.
These principalities are liable to danger when they are passing from the civil to the absolute order of government, for such princes either rule personally or through magistrates.
For such a prince cannot rely upon what he observes in quiet times, when citizens have need of the state, because then every one agrees with him; they all promise, and when death is far distant they all wish to die for him; but in troubled times, when the state has need of its citizens, then he finds but few.
And so much the more is this experiment dangerous, inasmuch as it can only be tried once.
Therefore a wise prince ought to adopt such a course that his citizens will always in every sort and kind of circumstance have need of the state and of him, and then he will always find them faithful.
CONCERNING THE WAY IN WHICH THE STRENGTH OF ALL PRINCIPALITIES OUGHT TO BE MEASURED It is necessary to consider another point in examining the character of these principalities: that is, whether a prince has such power that, in case of need, he can support himself with his own resources, or whether he has always need of the assistance of others.
The first case has been discussed, but we will speak of it again should it recur.
In the second case one can say nothing except to encourage such princes to provision and fortify their towns, and not on any account to defend the country.
And whoever shall fortify his town well, and shall have managed the other concerns of his subjects in the way stated above, and to be often repeated, will never be attacked without great caution, for men are always adverse to enterprises where difficulties can be seen, and it will be seen not to be an easy thing to attack one who has his town well fortified, and is not hated by his people.
And beyond this, to keep the people quiet and without loss to the state, they always have the means of giving work to the community in those labours that are the life and strength of the city, and on the pursuit of which the people are supported; they also hold military exercises in repute, and moreover have many ordinances to uphold them.
Therefore, a prince who has a strong city, and had not made himself odious, will not be attacked, or if any one should attack he will only be driven off with disgrace; again, because that the affairs of this world are so changeable, it is almost impossible to keep an army a whole year in the field without being interfered with.
For it is the nature of men to be bound by the benefits they confer as much as by those they receive.
Therefore, if everything is well considered, it will not be difficult for a wise prince to keep the minds of his citizens steadfast from first to last, when he does not fail to support and defend them.
These princes alone have states and do not defend them; and they have subjects and do not rule them; and the states, although unguarded, are not taken from them, and the subjects, although not ruled, do not care, and they have neither the desire nor the ability to alienate themselves.
Such principalities only are secure and happy.
But being upheld by powers, to which the human mind cannot reach, I shall speak no more of them, because, being exalted and maintained by God, it would be the act of a presumptuous and rash man to discuss them.
Before Charles, King of France, passed into Italy,[1] this country was under the dominion of the Pope, the Venetians, the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines.
These potentates had two principal anxieties: the one, that no foreigner should enter Italy under arms; the other, that none of themselves should seize more territory.
Those about whom there was the most anxiety were the Pope and the Venetians.
To restrain the Venetians the union of all the others was necessary, as it was for the defence of Ferrara; and to keep down the Pope they made use of the barons of Rome, who, being divided into two factions, Orsini and Colonnesi, had always a pretext for disorder, and, standing with arms in their hands under the eyes of the Pontiff, kept the pontificate weak and powerless.
And although there might arise sometimes a courageous pope, such as Sixtus, yet neither fortune nor wisdom could rid him of these annoyances.
And the short life of a pope is also a cause of weakness; for in the ten years, which is the average life of a pope, he can with difficulty lower one of the factions; and if, so to speak, one people should almost destroy the Colonnesi, another would arise hostile to the Orsini, who would support their opponents, and yet would not have time to ruin the Orsini.
This was the reason why the temporal powers of the pope were little esteemed in Italy. [1] Charles VIII invaded Italy in 1494.
Alexander the Sixth arose afterwards, who of all the pontiffs that have ever been showed how a pope with both money and arms was able to prevail; and through the instrumentality of the Duke Valentino, and by reason of the entry of the French, he brought about all those things which I have discussed above in the actions of the duke.
And although his intention was not to aggrandize the Church, but the duke, nevertheless, what he did contributed to the greatness of the Church, which, after his death and the ruin of the duke, became the heir to all his labours.
Pope Julius came afterwards and found the Church strong, possessing all the Romagna, the barons of Rome reduced to impotence, and, through the chastisements of Alexander, the factions wiped out; he also found the way open to accumulate money in a manner such as had never been practised before Alexander’s time.
Such things Julius not only followed, but improved upon, and he intended to gain Bologna, to ruin the Venetians, and to drive the French out of Italy.
All of these enterprises prospered with him, and so much the more to his credit, inasmuch as he did everything to strengthen the Church and not any private person.
He kept also the Orsini and Colonnesi factions within the bounds in which he found them; and although there was among them some mind to make disturbance, nevertheless he held two things firm: the one, the greatness of the Church, with which he terrified them; and the other, not allowing them to have their own cardinals, who caused the disorders among them.
For whenever these factions have their cardinals they do not remain quiet for long, because cardinals foster the factions in Rome and out of it, and the barons are compelled to support them, and thus from the ambitions of prelates arise disorders and tumults among the barons.
For these reasons his Holiness Pope Leo[2] found the pontificate most powerful, and it is to be hoped that, if others made it great in arms, he will make it still greater and more venerated by his goodness and infinite other virtues. [2] Pope Leo X was the Cardinal de’ Medici.
We have seen above how necessary it is for a prince to have his foundations well laid, otherwise it follows of necessity he will go to ruin.
The chief foundations of all states, new as well as old or composite, are good laws and good arms; and as there cannot be good laws where the state is not well armed, it follows that where they are well armed they have good laws.
I shall leave the laws out of the discussion and shall speak of the arms.
I say, therefore, that the arms with which a prince defends his state are either his own, or they are mercenaries, auxiliaries, or mixed.
The fact is, they have no other attraction or reason for keeping the field than a trifle of stipend, which is not sufficient to make them willing to die for you.
Thus it was that Charles, King of France, was allowed to seize Italy with chalk in hand;[1] and he who told us that our sins were the cause of it told the truth, but they were not the sins he imagined, but those which I have related.
And as they were the sins of princes, it is the princes who have also suffered the penalty. [1] “With chalk in hand,” “col gesso.” This is one of the _bons mots_ of Alexander VI, and refers to the ease with which Charles VIII seized Italy, implying that it was only necessary for him to send his quartermasters to chalk up the billets for his soldiers to conquer the country. _Cf_.
“The History of Henry VII,” by Lord Bacon: “King Charles had conquered the realm of Naples, and lost it again, in a kind of a felicity of a dream.
He passed the whole length of Italy without resistance: so that it was true what Pope Alexander was wont to say: That the Frenchmen came into Italy with chalk in their hands, to mark up their lodgings, rather than with swords to fight.” I wish to demonstrate further the infelicity of these arms.
The mercenary captains are either capable men or they are not; if they are, you cannot trust them, because they always aspire to their own greatness, either by oppressing you, who are their master, or others contrary to your intentions; but if the captain is not skilful, you are ruined in the usual way.
And experience has shown princes and republics, single-handed, making the greatest progress, and mercenaries doing nothing except damage; and it is more difficult to bring a republic, armed with its own arms, under the sway of one of its citizens than it is to bring one armed with foreign arms.
The Switzers are completely armed and quite free.
Of ancient mercenaries, for example, there are the Carthaginians, who were oppressed by their mercenary soldiers after the first war with the Romans, although the Carthaginians had their own citizens for captains.
After the death of Epaminondas, Philip of Macedon was made captain of their soldiers by the Thebans, and after victory he took away their liberty.
Duke Filippo being dead, the Milanese enlisted Francesco Sforza against the Venetians, and he, having overcome the enemy at Caravaggio,[2] allied himself with them to crush the Milanese, his masters.
His father, Sforza, having been engaged by Queen Johanna[3] of Naples, left her unprotected, so that she was forced to throw herself into the arms of the King of Aragon, in order to save her kingdom.
One who did not conquer was Giovanni Acuto,[4] and since he did not conquer his fidelity cannot be proved; but every one will acknowledge that, had he conquered, the Florentines would have stood at his discretion.
Sforza had the Bracceschi always against him, so they watched each other.
Francesco turned his ambition to Lombardy; Braccio against the Church and the kingdom of Naples.
But let us come to that which happened a short while ago.
The Florentines appointed as their captain Pagolo Vitelli, a most prudent man, who from a private position had risen to the greatest renown.
If this man had taken Pisa, nobody can deny that it would have been proper for the Florentines to keep in with him, for if he became the soldier of their enemies they had no means of resisting, and if they held to him they must obey him.
The Venetians, if their achievements are considered, will be seen to have acted safely and gloriously so long as they sent to war their own men, when with armed gentlemen and plebians they did valiantly.
This was before they turned to enterprises on land, but when they began to fight on land they forsook this virtue and followed the custom of Italy.
They had afterwards for their captains Bartolomeo da Bergamo, Roberto da San Severino, the count of Pitigliano,[6] and the like, under whom they had to dread loss and not gain, as happened afterwards at Vaila,[7] where in one battle they lost that which in eight hundred years they had acquired with so much trouble.
Because from such arms conquests come but slowly, long delayed and inconsiderable, but the losses sudden and portentous. [2] Battle of Caravaggio, 15th September 1448. [3] Johanna II of Naples, the widow of Ladislao, King of Naples. [4] Giovanni Acuto.
An English knight whose name was Sir John Hawkwood.
He fought in the English wars in France, and was knighted by Edward III; afterwards he collected a body of troops and went into Italy.
These became the famous “White Company.” He took part in many wars, and died in Florence in 1394.
He was born about 1320 at Sible Hedingham, a village in Essex.
He married Domnia, a daughter of Bernabo Visconti. [5] Carmignuola.
Francesco Bussone, born at Carmagnola about 1390, executed at Venice, 5th May 1432. [6] Bartolomeo Colleoni of Bergamo; died 1457.
Roberto of San Severino; died fighting for Venice against Sigismund, Duke of Austria, in 1487.
“Primo capitano in Italia.”—Machiavelli.
Count of Pitigliano; Nicolo Orsini, born 1442, died 1510. [7] Battle of Vaila in 1509.
And as with these examples I have reached Italy, which has been ruled for many years by mercenaries, I wish to discuss them more seriously, in order that, having seen their rise and progress, one may be better prepared to counteract them.
From this it came to pass that Italy fell partly into the hands of the Church and of republics, and, the Church consisting of priests and the republic of citizens unaccustomed to arms, both commenced to enlist foreigners.
The first who gave renown to this soldiery was Alberigo da Conio,[8] the Romagnian.
From the school of this man sprang, among others, Braccio and Sforza, who in their time were the arbiters of Italy.
After these came all the other captains who till now have directed the arms of Italy; and the end of all their valour has been, that she has been overrun by Charles, robbed by Louis, ravaged by Ferdinand, and insulted by the Switzers.
The principle that has guided them has been, first, to lower the credit of infantry so that they might increase their own.
They had, besides this, used every art to lessen fatigue and danger to themselves and their soldiers, not killing in the fray, but taking prisoners and liberating without ransom.
They did not attack towns at night, nor did the garrisons of the towns attack encampments at night; they did not surround the camp either with stockade or ditch, nor did they campaign in the winter.
All these things were permitted by their military rules, and devised by them to avoid, as I have said, both fatigue and dangers; thus they have brought Italy to slavery and contempt. [8] Alberigo da Conio.
Alberico da Barbiano, Count of Cunio in Romagna.
He was the leader of the famous “Company of St George,” composed entirely of Italian soldiers.
These arms may be useful and good in themselves, but for him who calls them in they are always disadvantageous; for losing, one is undone, and winning, one is their captive. [1] Ferdinand V (F.
III of Naples), surnamed “The Catholic,” born 1452, died 1516.
And although ancient histories may be full of examples, I do not wish to leave this recent one of Pope Julius the Second, the peril of which cannot fail to be perceived; for he, wishing to get Ferrara, threw himself entirely into the hands of the foreigner.
The Florentines, being entirely without arms, sent ten thousand Frenchmen to take Pisa, whereby they ran more danger than at any other time of their troubles.
The Emperor of Constantinople,[2] to oppose his neighbours, sent ten thousand Turks into Greece, who, on the war being finished, were not willing to quit; this was the beginning of the servitude of Greece to the infidels. [2] Joannes Cantacuzenus, born 1300, died 1383.
In conclusion, in mercenaries dastardy is most dangerous; in auxiliaries, valour.
The wise prince, therefore, has always avoided these arms and turned to his own; and has been willing rather to lose with them than to conquer with the others, not deeming that a real victory which is gained with the arms of others.
I shall never hesitate to cite Cesare Borgia and his actions.
I was not intending to go beyond Italian and recent examples, but I am unwilling to leave out Hiero, the Syracusan, he being one of those I have named above.
This man, as I have said, made head of the army by the Syracusans, soon found out that a mercenary soldiery, constituted like our Italian condottieri, was of no use; and it appearing to him that he could neither keep them nor let them go, he had them all cut to pieces, and afterwards made war with his own forces and not with aliens.
I wish also to recall to memory an instance from the Old Testament applicable to this subject.
David offered himself to Saul to fight with Goliath, the Philistine champion, and, to give him courage, Saul armed him with his own weapons; which David rejected as soon as he had them on his back, saying he could make no use of them, and that he wished to meet the enemy with his sling and his knife.
In conclusion, the arms of others either fall from your back, or they weigh you down, or they bind you fast.
Charles the Seventh,[3] the father of King Louis the Eleventh,[4] having by good fortune and valour liberated France from the English, recognized the necessity of being armed with forces of his own, and he established in his kingdom ordinances concerning men-at-arms and infantry.
Hence it arises that the French cannot stand against the Switzers, and without the Switzers they do not come off well against others.
The armies of the French have thus become mixed, partly mercenary and partly national, both of which arms together are much better than mercenaries alone or auxiliaries alone, but much inferior to one’s own forces.
And this example proves it, for the kingdom of France would be unconquerable if the ordinance of Charles had been enlarged or maintained. [3] Charles VII of France, surnamed “The Victorious,” born 1403, died 1461. [4] Louis XI, son of the above, born 1423, died 1483.
But the scanty wisdom of man, on entering into an affair which looks well at first, cannot discern the poison that is hidden in it, as I have said above of hectic fevers.
Therefore, if he who rules a principality cannot recognize evils until they are upon him, he is not truly wise; and this insight is given to few.
I conclude, therefore, that no principality is secure without having its own forces; on the contrary, it is entirely dependent on good fortune, not having the valour which in adversity would defend it.
And it has always been the opinion and judgment of wise men that nothing can be so uncertain or unstable as fame or power not founded on its own strength.
And one’s own forces are those which are composed either of subjects, citizens, or dependents; all others are mercenaries or auxiliaries.
And the way to make ready one’s own forces will be easily found if the rules suggested by me shall be reflected upon, and if one will consider how Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, and many republics and princes have armed and organized themselves, to which rules I entirely commit myself.
THAT WHICH CONCERNS A PRINCE ON THE SUBJECT OF THE ART OF WAR A prince ought to have no other aim or thought, nor select anything else for his study, than war and its rules and discipline; for this is the sole art that belongs to him who rules, and it is of such force that it not only upholds those who are born princes, but it often enables men to rise from a private station to that rank.
And, on the contrary, it is seen that when princes have thought more of ease than of arms they have lost their states.
Francesco Sforza, through being martial, from a private person became Duke of Milan; and the sons, through avoiding the hardships and troubles of arms, from dukes became private persons.
For among other evils which being unarmed brings you, it causes you to be despised, and this is one of those ignominies against which a prince ought to guard himself, as is shown later on.
Because there is nothing proportionate between the armed and the unarmed; and it is not reasonable that he who is armed should yield obedience willingly to him who is unarmed, or that the unarmed man should be secure among armed servants.
Because, there being in the one disdain and in the other suspicion, it is not possible for them to work well together.
And therefore a prince who does not understand the art of war, over and above the other misfortunes already mentioned, cannot be respected by his soldiers, nor can he rely on them.
He ought never, therefore, to have out of his thoughts this subject of war, and in peace he should addict himself more to its exercise than in war; this he can do in two ways, the one by action, the other by study.
Which knowledge is useful in two ways.
And the prince that lacks this skill lacks the essential which it is desirable that a captain should possess, for it teaches him to surprise his enemy, to select quarters, to lead armies, to array the battle, to besiege towns to advantage.
Philopoemen,[1] Prince of the Achaeans, among other praises which writers have bestowed on him, is commended because in time of peace he never had anything in his mind but the rules of war; and when he was in the country with friends, he often stopped and reasoned with them: “If the enemy should be upon that hill, and we should find ourselves here with our army, with whom would be the advantage?
And whoever reads the life of Cyrus, written by Xenophon, will recognize afterwards in the life of Scipio how that imitation was his glory, and how in chastity, affability, humanity, and liberality Scipio conformed to those things which have been written of Cyrus by Xenophon.
A wise prince ought to observe some such rules, and never in peaceful times stand idle, but increase his resources with industry in such a way that they may be available to him in adversity, so that if fortune chances it may find him prepared to resist her blows.
CONCERNING THINGS FOR WHICH MEN, AND ESPECIALLY PRINCES, ARE PRAISED OR BLAMED It remains now to see what ought to be the rules of conduct for a prince towards subject and friends.
And as I know that many have written on this point, I expect I shall be considered presumptuous in mentioning it again, especially as in discussing it I shall depart from the methods of other people.
Hence it is necessary for a prince wishing to hold his own to know how to do wrong, and to make use of it or not according to necessity.
And again, he need not make himself uneasy at incurring a reproach for those vices without which the state can only be saved with difficulty, for if everything is considered carefully, it will be found that something which looks like virtue, if followed, would be his ruin; whilst something else, which looks like vice, yet followed brings him security and prosperity.
CONCERNING LIBERALITY AND MEANNESS Commencing then with the first of the above-named characteristics, I say that it would be well to be reputed liberal.
Nevertheless, liberality exercised in a way that does not bring you the reputation for it, injures you; for if one exercises it honestly and as it should be exercised, it may not become known, and you will not avoid the reproach of its opposite.
Therefore, any one wishing to maintain among men the name of liberal is obliged to avoid no attribute of magnificence; so that a prince thus inclined will consume in such acts all his property, and will be compelled in the end, if he wish to maintain the name of liberal, to unduly weigh down his people, and tax them, and do everything he can to get money.
This will soon make him odious to his subjects, and becoming poor he will be little valued by any one; thus, with his liberality, having offended many and rewarded few, he is affected by the very first trouble and imperilled by whatever may be the first danger; recognizing this himself, and wishing to draw back from it, he runs at once into the reproach of being miserly.
We have not seen great things done in our time except by those who have been considered mean; the rest have failed.
Pope Julius the Second was assisted in reaching the papacy by a reputation for liberality, yet he did not strive afterwards to keep it up, when he made war on the King of France; and he made many wars without imposing any extraordinary tax on his subjects, for he supplied his additional expenses out of his long thriftiness.
The present King of Spain would not have undertaken or conquered in so many enterprises if he had been reputed liberal.
A prince, therefore, provided that he has not to rob his subjects, that he can defend himself, that he does not become poor and abject, that he is not forced to become rapacious, ought to hold of little account a reputation for being mean, for it is one of those vices which will enable him to govern.
And if any one should say: Caesar obtained empire by liberality, and many others have reached the highest positions by having been liberal, and by being considered so, I answer: Either you are a prince in fact, or in a way to become one.
In the first case this liberality is dangerous, in the second it is very necessary to be considered liberal; and Caesar was one of those who wished to become pre-eminent in Rome; but if he had survived after becoming so, and had not moderated his expenses, he would have destroyed his government.
And if any one should reply: Many have been princes, and have done great things with armies, who have been considered very liberal, I reply: Either a prince spends that which is his own or his subjects’ or else that of others.
In the first case he ought to be sparing, in the second he ought not to neglect any opportunity for liberality.
And to the prince who goes forth with his army, supporting it by pillage, sack, and extortion, handling that which belongs to others, this liberality is necessary, otherwise he would not be followed by soldiers.
And of that which is neither yours nor your subjects’ you can be a ready giver, as were Cyrus, Caesar, and Alexander; because it does not take away your reputation if you squander that of others, but adds to it; it is only squandering your own that injures you.
And there is nothing wastes so rapidly as liberality, for even whilst you exercise it you lose the power to do so, and so become either poor or despised, or else, in avoiding poverty, rapacious and hated.
And a prince should guard himself, above all things, against being despised and hated; and liberality leads you to both.
Therefore it is wiser to have a reputation for meanness which brings reproach without hatred, than to be compelled through seeking a reputation for liberality to incur a name for rapacity which begets reproach with hatred.
CONCERNING CRUELTY AND CLEMENCY, AND WHETHER IT IS BETTER TO BE LOVED THAN FEARED Coming now to the other qualities mentioned above, I say that every prince ought to desire to be considered clement and not cruel.
Nevertheless he ought to take care not to misuse this clemency.
Cesare Borgia was considered cruel; notwithstanding, his cruelty reconciled the Romagna, unified it, and restored it to peace and loyalty.
And of all princes, it is impossible for the new prince to avoid the imputation of cruelty, owing to new states being full of dangers.
Upon this a question arises: whether it be better to be loved than feared or feared than loved?
It may be answered that one should wish to be both, but, because it is difficult to unite them in one person, it is much safer to be feared than loved, when, of the two, either must be dispensed with.
Because this is to be asserted in general of men, that they are ungrateful, fickle, false, cowardly, covetous, and as long as you succeed they are yours entirely; they will offer you their blood, property, life, and children, as is said above, when the need is far distant; but when it approaches they turn against you.
Nevertheless a prince ought to inspire fear in such a way that, if he does not win love, he avoids hatred; because he can endure very well being feared whilst he is not hated, which will always be as long as he abstains from the property of his citizens and subjects and from their women.
But when it is necessary for him to proceed against the life of someone, he must do it on proper justification and for manifest cause, but above all things he must keep his hands off the property of others, because men more quickly forget the death of their father than the loss of their patrimony.
Besides, pretexts for taking away the property are never wanting; for he who has once begun to live by robbery will always find pretexts for seizing what belongs to others; but reasons for taking life, on the contrary, are more difficult to find and sooner lapse.
But when a prince is with his army, and has under control a multitude of soldiers, then it is quite necessary for him to disregard the reputation of cruelty, for without it he would never hold his army united or disposed to its duties.
Among the wonderful deeds of Hannibal this one is enumerated: that having led an enormous army, composed of many various races of men, to fight in foreign lands, no dissensions arose either among them or against the prince, whether in his bad or in his good fortune.
This arose from nothing else than his inhuman cruelty, which, with his boundless valour, made him revered and terrible in the sight of his soldiers, but without that cruelty, his other virtues were not sufficient to produce this effect.
And short-sighted writers admire his deeds from one point of view and from another condemn the principal cause of them.
That it is true his other virtues would not have been sufficient for him may be proved by the case of Scipio, that most excellent man, not only of his own times but within the memory of man, against whom, nevertheless, his army rebelled in Spain; this arose from nothing but his too great forbearance, which gave his soldiers more license than is consistent with military discipline.
For this he was upbraided in the Senate by Fabius Maximus, and called the corrupter of the Roman soldiery.
The Locrians were laid waste by a legate of Scipio, yet they were not avenged by him, nor was the insolence of the legate punished, owing entirely to his easy nature.
Insomuch that someone in the Senate, wishing to excuse him, said there were many men who knew much better how not to err than to correct the errors of others.
This disposition, if he had been continued in the command, would have destroyed in time the fame and glory of Scipio; but, he being under the control of the Senate, this injurious characteristic not only concealed itself, but contributed to his glory.
Returning to the question of being feared or loved, I come to the conclusion that, men loving according to their own will and fearing according to that of the prince, a wise prince should establish himself on that which is in his own control and not in that of others; he must endeavour only to avoid hatred, as is noted.
CHAPTER XVIII.[1] CONCERNING THE WAY IN WHICH PRINCES SHOULD KEEP FAITH [1] “The present chapter has given greater offence than any other portion of Machiavelli’s writings.” Burd, “Il Principe,” p. 297.
Every one admits how praiseworthy it is in a prince to keep faith, and to live with integrity and not with craft.
Nevertheless our experience has been that those princes who have done great things have held good faith of little account, and have known how to circumvent the intellect of men by craft, and in the end have overcome those who have relied on their word.
You must know there are two ways of contesting,[2] the one by the law, the other by force; the first method is proper to men, the second to beasts; but because the first is frequently not sufficient, it is necessary to have recourse to the second.
Therefore it is necessary for a prince to understand how to avail himself of the beast and the man.
A prince, therefore, being compelled knowingly to adopt the beast, ought to choose the fox and the lion; because the lion cannot defend himself against snares and the fox cannot defend himself against wolves.
Therefore, it is necessary to be a fox to discover the snares and a lion to terrify the wolves.
Those who rely simply on the lion do not understand what they are about.
Therefore a wise lord cannot, nor ought he to, keep faith when such observance may be turned against him, and when the reasons that caused him to pledge it exist no longer.
If men were entirely good this precept would not hold, but because they are bad, and will not keep faith with you, you too are not bound to observe it with them.
Nor will there ever be wanting to a prince legitimate reasons to excuse this non-observance.
Of this endless modern examples could be given, showing how many treaties and engagements have been made void and of no effect through the faithlessness of princes; and he who has known best how to employ the fox has succeeded best. [2] “Contesting,” _i.e_.
Alexander never did what he said, Cesare never said what he did.
Therefore it is unnecessary for a prince to have all the good qualities I have enumerated, but it is very necessary to appear to have them.
And I shall dare to say this also, that to have them and always to observe them is injurious, and that to appear to have them is useful; to appear merciful, faithful, humane, religious, upright, and to be so, but with a mind so framed that should you require not to be so, you may be able and know how to change to the opposite.
And you have to understand this, that a prince, especially a new one, cannot observe all those things for which men are esteemed, being often forced, in order to maintain the state, to act contrary to fidelity,[4] friendship, humanity, and religion.
Therefore it is necessary for him to have a mind ready to turn itself accordingly as the winds and variations of fortune force it, yet, as I have said above, not to diverge from the good if he can avoid doing so, but, if compelled, then to know how to set about it. [4] “Contrary to fidelity” or “faith,” “contro alla fede,” and “tutto fede,” “altogether faithful,” in the next paragraph.
It is noteworthy that these two phrases, “contro alla fede” and “tutto fede,” were omitted in the Testina edition, which was published with the sanction of the papal authorities.
It may be that the meaning attached to the word “fede” was “the faith,” _i.e_. the Catholic creed, and not as rendered here “fidelity” and “faithful.” Observe that the word “religione” was suffered to stand in the text of the Testina, being used to signify indifferently every shade of belief, as witness “the religion,” a phrase inevitably employed to designate the Huguenot heresy.
There is nothing more necessary to appear to have than this last quality, inasmuch as men judge generally more by the eye than by the hand, because it belongs to everybody to see you, to few to come in touch with you.
Every one sees what you appear to be, few really know what you are, and those few dare not oppose themselves to the opinion of the many, who have the majesty of the state to defend them; and in the actions of all men, and especially of princes, which it is not prudent to challenge, one judges by the result.
For that reason, let a prince have the credit of conquering and holding his state, the means will always be considered honest, and he will be praised by everybody; because the vulgar are always taken by what a thing seems to be and by what comes of it; and in the world there are only the vulgar, for the few find a place there only when the many have no ground to rest on.
One prince[5] of the present time, whom it is not well to name, never preaches anything else but peace and good faith, and to both he is most hostile, and either, if he had kept it, would have deprived him of reputation and kingdom many a time. [5] Ferdinand of Aragon.
“When Machiavelli was writing _The Prince_ it would have been clearly impossible to mention Ferdinand’s name here without giving offence.” Burd’s “Il Principe,” p. 308.
It makes him hated above all things, as I have said, to be rapacious, and to be a violator of the property and women of his subjects, from both of which he must abstain.
And when neither their property nor their honor is touched, the majority of men live content, and he has only to contend with the ambition of a few, whom he can curb with ease in many ways.
That prince is highly esteemed who conveys this impression of himself, and he who is highly esteemed is not easily conspired against; for, provided it is well known that he is an excellent man and revered by his people, he can only be attacked with difficulty.
For this reason a prince ought to have two fears, one from within, on account of his subjects, the other from without, on account of external powers.
But concerning his subjects, when affairs outside are disturbed he has only to fear that they will conspire secretly, from which a prince can easily secure himself by avoiding being hated and despised, and by keeping the people satisfied with him, which it is most necessary for him to accomplish, as I said above at length.
And one of the most efficacious remedies that a prince can have against conspiracies is not to be hated and despised by the people, for he who conspires against a prince always expects to please them by his removal; but when the conspirator can only look forward to offending them, he will not have the courage to take such a course, for the difficulties that confront a conspirator are infinite.
For whereas in general the conspirator has to fear before the execution of his plot, in this case he has also to fear the sequel to the crime; because on account of it he has the people for an enemy, and thus cannot hope for any escape.
Endless examples could be given on this subject, but I will be content with one, brought to pass within the memory of our fathers.
Messer Annibale Bentivogli, who was prince in Bologna (grandfather of the present Annibale), having been murdered by the Canneschi, who had conspired against him, not one of his family survived but Messer Giovanni,[1] who was in childhood: immediately after his assassination the people rose and murdered all the Canneschi.
Machiavelli’s strong condemnation of conspiracies may get its edge from his own very recent experience (February 1513), when he had been arrested and tortured for his alleged complicity in the Boscoli conspiracy.
For this reason I consider that a prince ought to reckon conspiracies of little account when his people hold him in esteem; but when it is hostile to him, and bears hatred towards him, he ought to fear everything and everybody.
And well-ordered states and wise princes have taken every care not to drive the nobles to desperation, and to keep the people satisfied and contented, for this is one of the most important objects a prince can have.
Neither could you have a better or a more prudent arrangement, or a greater source of security to the king and kingdom.
From this one can draw another important conclusion, that princes ought to leave affairs of reproach to the management of others, and keep those of grace in their own hands.
And further, I consider that a prince ought to cherish the nobles, but not so as to make himself hated by the people.
It may appear, perhaps, to some who have examined the lives and deaths of the Roman emperors that many of them would be an example contrary to my opinion, seeing that some of them lived nobly and showed great qualities of soul, nevertheless they have lost their empire or have been killed by subjects who have conspired against them.
Wishing, therefore, to answer these objections, I will recall the characters of some of the emperors, and will show that the causes of their ruin were not different to those alleged by me; at the same time I will only submit for consideration those things that are noteworthy to him who studies the affairs of those times.
It seems to me sufficient to take all those emperors who succeeded to the empire from Marcus the philosopher down to Maximinus; they were Marcus and his son Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus and his son Antoninus Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander, and Maximinus.
Hence it arose that those emperors were always overthrown who, either by birth or training, had no great authority, and most of them, especially those who came new to the principality, recognizing the difficulty of these two opposing humours, were inclined to give satisfaction to the soldiers, caring little about injuring the people.
Which course was necessary, because, as princes cannot help being hated by someone, they ought, in the first place, to avoid being hated by every one, and when they cannot compass this, they ought to endeavour with the utmost diligence to avoid the hatred of the most powerful.
Therefore, those emperors who through inexperience had need of special favour adhered more readily to the soldiers than to the people; a course which turned out advantageous to them or not, accordingly as the prince knew how to maintain authority over them.
But Pertinax was created emperor against the wishes of the soldiers, who, being accustomed to live licentiously under Commodus, could not endure the honest life to which Pertinax wished to reduce them; thus, having given cause for hatred, to which hatred there was added contempt for his old age, he was overthrown at the very beginning of his administration.
But let us come to Alexander, who was a man of such great goodness, that among the other praises which are accorded him is this, that in the fourteen years he held the empire no one was ever put to death by him unjudged; nevertheless, being considered effeminate and a man who allowed himself to be governed by his mother, he became despised, the army conspired against him, and murdered him.
And because the actions of this man, as a new prince, were great, I wish to show briefly that he knew well how to counterfeit the fox and the lion, which natures, as I said above, it is necessary for a prince to imitate.
Knowing the sloth of the Emperor Julian, he persuaded the army in Sclavonia, of which he was captain, that it would be right to go to Rome and avenge the death of Pertinax, who had been killed by the praetorian soldiers; and under this pretext, without appearing to aspire to the throne, he moved the army on Rome, and reached Italy before it was known that he had started.
After this there remained for Severus, who wished to make himself master of the whole empire, two difficulties; one in Asia, where Niger, head of the Asiatic army, had caused himself to be proclaimed emperor; the other in the west where Albinus was, who also aspired to the throne.
And as he considered it dangerous to declare himself hostile to both, he decided to attack Niger and to deceive Albinus.
To the latter he wrote that, being elected emperor by the Senate, he was willing to share that dignity with him and sent him the title of Caesar; and, moreover, that the Senate had made Albinus his colleague; which things were accepted by Albinus as true.
But after Severus had conquered and killed Niger, and settled oriental affairs, he returned to Rome and complained to the Senate that Albinus, little recognizing the benefits that he had received from him, had by treachery sought to murder him, and for this ingratitude he was compelled to punish him.
Afterwards he sought him out in France, and took from him his government and life.
But his son Antoninus was a most eminent man, and had very excellent qualities, which made him admirable in the sight of the people and acceptable to the soldiers, for he was a warlike man, most enduring of fatigue, a despiser of all delicate food and other luxuries, which caused him to be beloved by the armies.
Nevertheless, his ferocity and cruelties were so great and so unheard of that, after endless single murders, he killed a large number of the people of Rome and all those of Alexandria.
He became hated by the whole world, and also feared by those he had around him, to such an extent that he was murdered in the midst of his army by a centurion.
And here it must be noted that such-like deaths, which are deliberately inflicted with a resolved and desperate courage, cannot be avoided by princes, because any one who does not fear to die can inflict them; but a prince may fear them the less because they are very rare; he has only to be careful not to do any grave injury to those whom he employs or has around him in the service of the state.
Antoninus had not taken this care, but had contumeliously killed a brother of that centurion, whom also he daily threatened, yet retained in his bodyguard; which, as it turned out, was a rash thing to do, and proved the emperor’s ruin.
It remains to discuss the character of Maximinus.
He was a very warlike man, and the armies, being disgusted with the effeminacy of Alexander, of whom I have already spoken, killed him and elected Maximinus to the throne.
First Africa rebelled, then the Senate with all the people of Rome, and all Italy conspired against him, to which may be added his own army; this latter, besieging Aquileia and meeting with difficulties in taking it, were disgusted with his cruelties, and fearing him less when they found so many against him, murdered him.
From the above I have excepted the Turk, who always keeps round him twelve thousand infantry and fifteen thousand cavalry on which depend the security and strength of the kingdom, and it is necessary that, putting aside every consideration for the people, he should keep them his friends.
The kingdom of the Soldan is similar; being entirely in the hands of soldiers, it follows again that, without regard to the people, he must keep them his friends.
But you must note that the state of the Soldan is unlike all other principalities, for the reason that it is like the Christian pontificate, which cannot be called either an hereditary or a newly formed principality; because the sons of the old prince are not the heirs, but he who is elected to that position by those who have authority, and the sons remain only noblemen.
And this being an ancient custom, it cannot be called a new principality, because there are none of those difficulties in it that are met with in new ones; for although the prince is new, the constitution of the state is old, and it is framed so as to receive him as if he were its hereditary lord.
But returning to the subject of our discourse, I say that whoever will consider it will acknowledge that either hatred or contempt has been fatal to the above-named emperors, and it will be recognized also how it happened that, a number of them acting in one way and a number in another, only one in each way came to a happy end and the rest to unhappy ones.
Because it would have been useless and dangerous for Pertinax and Alexander, being new princes, to imitate Marcus, who was heir to the principality; and likewise it would have been utterly destructive to Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximinus to have imitated Severus, they not having sufficient valour to enable them to tread in his footsteps.
Therefore a prince, new to the principality, cannot imitate the actions of Marcus, nor, again, is it necessary to follow those of Severus, but he ought to take from Severus those parts which are necessary to found his state, and from Marcus those which are proper and glorious to keep a state that may already be stable and firm.
ARE FORTRESSES, AND MANY OTHER THINGS TO WHICH PRINCES OFTEN RESORT, ADVANTAGEOUS OR HURTFUL? 1.
Some princes, so as to hold securely the state, have disarmed their subjects; others have kept their subject towns distracted by factions; others have fostered enmities against themselves; others have laid themselves out to gain over those whom they distrusted in the beginning of their governments; some have built fortresses; some have overthrown and destroyed them.
And although one cannot give a final judgment on all of these things unless one possesses the particulars of those states in which a decision has to be made, nevertheless I will speak as comprehensively as the matter of itself will admit. 2.
There never was a new prince who has disarmed his subjects; rather when he has found them disarmed he has always armed them, because, by arming them, those arms become yours, those men who were distrusted become faithful, and those who were faithful are kept so, and your subjects become your adherents.
And whereas all subjects cannot be armed, yet when those whom you do arm are benefited, the others can be handled more freely, and this difference in their treatment, which they quite understand, makes the former your dependents, and the latter, considering it to be necessary that those who have the most danger and service should have the most reward, excuse you.
But when you disarm them, you at once offend them by showing that you distrust them, either for cowardice or for want of loyalty, and either of these opinions breeds hatred against you.
And because you cannot remain unarmed, it follows that you turn to mercenaries, which are of the character already shown; even if they should be good they would not be sufficient to defend you against powerful enemies and distrusted subjects.
Therefore, as I have said, a new prince in a new principality has always distributed arms.
Histories are full of examples.
Our forefathers, and those who were reckoned wise, were accustomed to say that it was necessary to hold Pistoia by factions and Pisa by fortresses; and with this idea they fostered quarrels in some of their tributary towns so as to keep possession of them the more easily.
The Venetians, moved, as I believe, by the above reasons, fostered the Guelph and Ghibelline factions in their tributary cities; and although they never allowed them to come to bloodshed, yet they nursed these disputes amongst them, so that the citizens, distracted by their differences, should not unite against them.
Which, as we saw, did not afterwards turn out as expected, because, after the rout at Vaila, one party at once took courage and seized the state.
Such methods argue, therefore, weakness in the prince, because these factions will never be permitted in a vigorous principality; such methods for enabling one the more easily to manage subjects are only useful in times of peace, but if war comes this policy proves fallacious. 4.
For this reason many consider that a wise prince, when he has the opportunity, ought with craft to foster some animosity against himself, so that, having crushed it, his renown may rise higher. 5.
Princes, especially new ones, have found more fidelity and assistance in those men who in the beginning of their rule were distrusted than among those who in the beginning were trusted.
Pandolfo Petrucci, Prince of Siena, ruled his state more by those who had been distrusted than by others.
And weighing well the reasons for this in those examples which can be taken from ancient and modern affairs, we shall find that it is easier for the prince to make friends of those men who were contented under the former government, and are therefore his enemies, than of those who, being discontented with it, were favourable to him and encouraged him to seize it. 6.
It has been a custom with princes, in order to hold their states more securely, to build fortresses that may serve as a bridle and bit to those who might design to work against them, and as a place of refuge from a first attack.
I praise this system because it has been made use of formerly.
Fortresses, therefore, are useful or not according to circumstances; if they do you good in one way they injure you in another.
And this question can be reasoned thus: the prince who has more to fear from the people than from foreigners ought to build fortresses, but he who has more to fear from foreigners than from the people ought to leave them alone.
The castle of Milan, built by Francesco Sforza, has made, and will make, more trouble for the house of Sforza than any other disorder in the state.
For this reason the best possible fortress is—not to be hated by the people, because, although you may hold the fortresses, yet they will not save you if the people hate you, for there will never be wanting foreigners to assist a people who have taken arms against you.
It has not been seen in our times that such fortresses have been of use to any prince, unless to the Countess of Forli,[1] when the Count Girolamo, her consort, was killed; for by that means she was able to withstand the popular attack and wait for assistance from Milan, and thus recover her state; and the posture of affairs was such at that time that the foreigners could not assist the people.
But fortresses were of little value to her afterwards when Cesare Borgia attacked her, and when the people, her enemy, were allied with foreigners.
Therefore, it would have been safer for her, both then and before, not to have been hated by the people than to have had the fortresses.
All these things considered then, I shall praise him who builds fortresses as well as him who does not, and I shall blame whoever, trusting in them, cares little about being hated by the people. [1] Catherine Sforza, a daughter of Galeazzo Sforza and Lucrezia Landriani, born 1463, died 1509.
It was to the Countess of Forli that Machiavelli was sent as envoy on 1499.
A letter from Fortunati to the countess announces the appointment: “I have been with the signori,” wrote Fortunati, “to learn whom they would send and when.
They tell me that Nicolo Machiavelli, a learned young Florentine noble, secretary to my Lords of the Ten, is to leave with me at once.” _Cf_.
“Catherine Sforza,” by Count Pasolini, translated by P.
HOW A PRINCE SHOULD CONDUCT HIMSELF SO AS TO GAIN RENOWN Nothing makes a prince so much esteemed as great enterprises and setting a fine example.
We have in our time Ferdinand of Aragon, the present King of Spain.
He can almost be called a new prince, because he has risen, by fame and glory, from being an insignificant king to be the foremost king in Christendom; and if you will consider his deeds you will find them all great and some of them extraordinary.
In the beginning of his reign he attacked Granada, and this enterprise was the foundation of his dominions.
He did this quietly at first and without any fear of hindrance, for he held the minds of the barons of Castile occupied in thinking of the war and not anticipating any innovations; thus they did not perceive that by these means he was acquiring power and authority over them.
He was able with the money of the Church and of the people to sustain his armies, and by that long war to lay the foundation for the military skill which has since distinguished him.
Further, always using religion as a plea, so as to undertake greater schemes, he devoted himself with pious cruelty to driving out and clearing his kingdom of the Moors; nor could there be a more admirable example, nor one more rare.
Under this same cloak he assailed Africa, he came down on Italy, he has finally attacked France; and thus his achievements and designs have always been great, and have kept the minds of his people in suspense and admiration and occupied with the issue of them.
And his actions have arisen in such a way, one out of the other, that men have never been given time to work steadily against him.
Again, it much assists a prince to set unusual examples in internal affairs, similar to those which are related of Messer Bernabo da Milano, who, when he had the opportunity, by any one in civil life doing some extraordinary thing, either good or bad, would take some method of rewarding or punishing him, which would be much spoken about.
And a prince ought, above all things, always endeavour in every action to gain for himself the reputation of being a great and remarkable man.
In either case it will always be more advantageous for you to declare yourself and to make war strenuously; because, in the first case, if you do not declare yourself, you will invariably fall a prey to the conqueror, to the pleasure and satisfaction of him who has been conquered, and you will have no reasons to offer, nor anything to protect or to shelter you.
Because he who conquers does not want doubtful friends who will not aid him in the time of trial; and he who loses will not harbour you because you did not willingly, sword in hand, court his fate.
Antiochus went into Greece, being sent for by the Ætolians to drive out the Romans.
He sent envoys to the Achaeans, who were friends of the Romans, exhorting them to remain neutral; and on the other hand the Romans urged them to take up arms.
This question came to be discussed in the council of the Achaeans, where the legate of Antiochus urged them to stand neutral.
And irresolute princes, to avoid present dangers, generally follow the neutral path, and are generally ruined.
But when a prince declares himself gallantly in favour of one side, if the party with whom he allies himself conquers, although the victor may be powerful and may have him at his mercy, yet he is indebted to him, and there is established a bond of amity; and men are never so shameless as to become a monument of ingratitude by oppressing you.
Victories after all are never so complete that the victor must not show some regard, especially to justice.
But if he with whom you ally yourself loses, you may be sheltered by him, and whilst he is able he may aid you, and you become companions on a fortune that may rise again.
In the second case, when those who fight are of such a character that you have no anxiety as to who may conquer, so much the more is it greater prudence to be allied, because you assist at the destruction of one by the aid of another who, if he had been wise, would have saved him; and conquering, as it is impossible that he should not do with your assistance, he remains at your discretion.
And here it is to be noted that a prince ought to take care never to make an alliance with one more powerful than himself for the purposes of attacking others, unless necessity compels him, as is said above; because if he conquers you are at his discretion, and princes ought to avoid as much as possible being at the discretion of any one.
The Venetians joined with France against the Duke of Milan, and this alliance, which caused their ruin, could have been avoided.
But when it cannot be avoided, as happened to the Florentines when the Pope and Spain sent armies to attack Lombardy, then in such a case, for the above reasons, the prince ought to favour one of the parties.
Never let any Government imagine that it can choose perfectly safe courses; rather let it expect to have to take very doubtful ones, because it is found in ordinary affairs that one never seeks to avoid one trouble without running into another; but prudence consists in knowing how to distinguish the character of troubles, and for choice to take the lesser evil.
A prince ought also to show himself a patron of ability, and to honour the proficient in every art.
Florio: “Arte . . . a whole company of any trade in any city or corporation town.” The guilds of Florence are most admirably described by Mr Edgcumbe Staley in his work on the subject (Methuen, 1906).
Institutions of a somewhat similar character, called “artel,” exist in Russia to-day, _cf_.
Sir Mackenzie Wallace’s “Russia,” ed. 1905: “The sons . . . were always during the working season members of an artel.
“Tribu” were possibly gentile groups, united by common descent, and included individuals connected by marriage.
Perhaps our words “sects” or “clans” would be most appropriate.
CONCERNING THE SECRETARIES OF PRINCES The choice of servants is of no little importance to a prince, and they are good or not according to the discrimination of the prince.
And the first opinion which one forms of a prince, and of his understanding, is by observing the men he has around him; and when they are capable and faithful he may always be considered wise, because he has known how to recognize the capable and to keep them faithful.
But when they are otherwise one cannot form a good opinion of him, for the prime error which he made was in choosing them.
There were none who knew Messer Antonio da Venafro as the servant of Pandolfo Petrucci, Prince of Siena, who would not consider Pandolfo to be a very clever man in having Venafro for his servant.
Because there are three classes of intellects: one which comprehends by itself; another which appreciates what others comprehended; and a third which neither comprehends by itself nor by the showing of others; the first is the most excellent, the second is good, the third is useless.
Therefore, it follows necessarily that, if Pandolfo was not in the first rank, he was in the second, for whenever one has judgment to know good and bad when it is said and done, although he himself may not have the initiative, yet he can recognize the good and the bad in his servant, and the one he can praise and the other correct; thus the servant cannot hope to deceive him, and is kept honest.
On the other hand, to keep his servant honest the prince ought to study him, honouring him, enriching him, doing him kindnesses, sharing with him the honours and cares; and at the same time let him see that he cannot stand alone, so that many honours may not make him desire more, many riches make him wish for more, and that many cares may make him dread chances.
When, therefore, servants, and princes towards servants, are thus disposed, they can trust each other, but when it is otherwise, the end will always be disastrous for either one or the other.
HOW FLATTERERS SHOULD BE AVOIDED I do not wish to leave out an important branch of this subject, for it is a danger from which princes are with difficulty preserved, unless they are very careful and discriminating.
It is that of flatterers, of whom courts are full, because men are so self-complacent in their own affairs, and in a way so deceived in them, that they are preserved with difficulty from this pest, and if they wish to defend themselves they run the danger of falling into contempt.
Because there is no other way of guarding oneself from flatterers except letting men understand that to tell you the truth does not offend you; but when every one may tell you the truth, respect for you abates.
Therefore a wise prince ought to hold a third course by choosing the wise men in his state, and giving to them only the liberty of speaking the truth to him, and then only of those things of which he inquires, and of none others; but he ought to question them upon everything, and listen to their opinions, and afterwards form his own conclusions.
With these councillors, separately and collectively, he ought to carry himself in such a way that each of them should know that, the more freely he shall speak, the more he shall be preferred; outside of these, he should listen to no one, pursue the thing resolved on, and be steadfast in his resolutions.
He who does otherwise is either overthrown by flatterers, or is so often changed by varying opinions that he falls into contempt.
Fra Luca, the man of affairs to Maximilian,[1] the present emperor, speaking of his majesty, said: He consulted with no one, yet never got his own way in anything.
This arose because of his following a practice the opposite to the above; for the emperor is a secretive man—he does not communicate his designs to any one, nor does he receive opinions on them.
But as in carrying them into effect they become revealed and known, they are at once obstructed by those men whom he has around him, and he, being pliant, is diverted from them.
Hence it follows that those things he does one day he undoes the next, and no one ever understands what he wishes or intends to do, and no one can rely on his resolutions. [1] Maximilian I, born in 1459, died 1519, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
He married, first, Mary, daughter of Charles the Bold; after her death, Bianca Sforza; and thus became involved in Italian politics.
In this case indeed he may be well governed, but it would not be for long, because such a governor would in a short time take away his state from him.
But if a prince who is not inexperienced should take counsel from more than one he will never get united counsels, nor will he know how to unite them.
Each of the counsellors will think of his own interests, and the prince will not know how to control them or to see through them.
And they are not to be found otherwise, because men will always prove untrue to you unless they are kept honest by constraint.
Therefore it must be inferred that good counsels, whencesoever they come, are born of the wisdom of the prince, and not the wisdom of the prince from good counsels.
WHY THE PRINCES OF ITALY HAVE LOST THEIR STATES The previous suggestions, carefully observed, will enable a new prince to appear well established, and render him at once more secure and fixed in the state than if he had been long seated there.
Thus it will be a double glory for him to have established a new principality, and adorned and strengthened it with good laws, good arms, good allies, and with a good example; so will it be a double disgrace to him who, born a prince, shall lose his state by want of wisdom.
This course, when others fail, may be good, but it is very bad to have neglected all other expedients for that, since you would never wish to fall because you trusted to be able to find someone later on to restore you.
This again either does not happen, or, if it does, it will not be for your security, because that deliverance is of no avail which does not depend upon yourself; those only are reliable, certain, and durable that depend on yourself and your valour.
This opinion has been more credited in our times because of the great changes in affairs which have been seen, and may still be seen, every day, beyond all human conjecture.
Sometimes pondering over this, I am in some degree inclined to their opinion.
So it happens with fortune, who shows her power where valour has not prepared to resist her, and thither she turns her forces where she knows that barriers and defences have not been raised to constrain her.
And if you will consider Italy, which is the seat of these changes, and which has given to them their impulse, you will see it to be an open country without barriers and without any defence.
For if it had been defended by proper valour, as are Germany, Spain, and France, either this invasion would not have made the great changes it has made or it would not have come at all.
And this I consider enough to say concerning resistance to fortune in general.
But confining myself more to the particular, I say that a prince may be seen happy to-day and ruined to-morrow without having shown any change of disposition or character.
This, I believe, arises firstly from causes that have already been discussed at length, namely, that the prince who relies entirely on fortune is lost when it changes.
I believe also that he will be successful who directs his actions according to the spirit of the times, and that he whose actions do not accord with the times will not be successful.
Because men are seen, in affairs that lead to the end which every man has before him, namely, glory and riches, to get there by various methods; one with caution, another with haste; one by force, another by skill; one by patience, another by its opposite; and each one succeeds in reaching the goal by a different method.
One can also see of two cautious men the one attain his end, the other fail; and similarly, two men by different observances are equally successful, the one being cautious, the other impetuous; all this arises from nothing else than whether or not they conform in their methods to the spirit of the times.
This follows from what I have said, that two men working differently bring about the same effect, and of two working similarly, one attains his object and the other does not.
Changes in estate also issue from this, for if, to one who governs himself with caution and patience, times and affairs converge in such a way that his administration is successful, his fortune is made; but if times and affairs change, he is ruined if he does not change his course of action.
Pope Julius the Second went to work impetuously in all his affairs, and found the times and circumstances conform so well to that line of action that he always met with success.
Consider his first enterprise against Bologna, Messer Giovanni Bentivogli being still alive.
Therefore Julius with his impetuous action accomplished what no other pontiff with simple human wisdom could have done; for if he had waited in Rome until he could get away, with his plans arranged and everything fixed, as any other pontiff would have done, he would never have succeeded.
Because the King of France would have made a thousand excuses, and the others would have raised a thousand fears.
I will leave his other actions alone, as they were all alike, and they all succeeded, for the shortness of his life did not let him experience the contrary; but if circumstances had arisen which required him to go cautiously, his ruin would have followed, because he would never have deviated from those ways to which nature inclined him.
I conclude, therefore that, fortune being changeful and mankind steadfast in their ways, so long as the two are in agreement men are successful, but unsuccessful when they fall out.
For my part I consider that it is better to be adventurous than cautious, because fortune is a woman, and if you wish to keep her under it is necessary to beat and ill-use her; and it is seen that she allows herself to be mastered by the adventurous rather than by those who go to work more coldly.
She is, therefore, always, woman-like, a lover of young men, because they are less cautious, more violent, and with more audacity command her.
It is seen how she entreats God to send someone who shall deliver her from these wrongs and barbarous insolencies.
Nor is there to be seen at present one in whom she can place more hope than in your illustrious house,[1] with its valour and fortune, favoured by God and by the Church of which it is now the chief, and which could be made the head of this redemption.
This will not be difficult if you will recall to yourself the actions and lives of the men I have named.
And although they were great and wonderful men, yet they were men, and each one of them had no more opportunity than the present offers, for their enterprises were neither more just nor easier than this, nor was God more their friend than He is yours. [1] Giuliano de Medici.
He had just been created a cardinal by Leo X.
In 1523 Giuliano was elected Pope, and took the title of Clement VII.
With us there is great justice, because that war is just which is necessary, and arms are hallowed when there is no other hope but in them.
Here there is the greatest willingness, and where the willingness is great the difficulties cannot be great if you will only follow those men to whom I have directed your attention.
Further than this, how extraordinarily the ways of God have been manifested beyond example: the sea is divided, a cloud has led the way, the rock has poured forth water, it has rained manna, everything has contributed to your greatness; you ought to do the rest.
God is not willing to do everything, and thus take away our free will and that share of glory which belongs to us.
And it is not to be wondered at if none of the above-named Italians have been able to accomplish all that is expected from your illustrious house; and if in so many revolutions in Italy, and in so many campaigns, it has always appeared as if military virtue were exhausted, this has happened because the old order of things was not good, and none of us have known how to find a new one.
And nothing honours a man more than to establish new laws and new ordinances when he himself was newly risen.
Such things when they are well founded and dignified will make him revered and admired, and in Italy there are not wanting opportunities to bring such into use in every form.
Look attentively at the duels and the hand-to-hand combats, how superior the Italians are in strength, dexterity, and subtlety.
But when it comes to armies they do not bear comparison, and this springs entirely from the insufficiency of the leaders, since those who are capable are not obedient, and each one seems to himself to know, there having never been any one so distinguished above the rest, either by valour or fortune, that others would yield to him.
If, therefore, your illustrious house wishes to follow these remarkable men who have redeemed their country, it is necessary before all things, as a true foundation for every enterprise, to be provided with your own forces, because there can be no more faithful, truer, or better soldiers.
And although singly they are good, altogether they will be much better when they find themselves commanded by their prince, honoured by him, and maintained at his expense.
Therefore it is necessary to be prepared with such arms, so that you can be defended against foreigners by Italian valour.
And although Swiss and Spanish infantry may be considered very formidable, nevertheless there is a defect in both, by reason of which a third order would not only be able to oppose them, but might be relied upon to overthrow them.
For the Spaniards cannot resist cavalry, and the Switzers are afraid of infantry whenever they encounter them in close combat.
Owing to this, as has been and may again be seen, the Spaniards are unable to resist French cavalry, and the Switzers are overthrown by Spanish infantry.
It is possible, therefore, knowing the defects of both these infantries, to invent a new one, which will resist cavalry and not be afraid of infantry; this need not create a new order of arms, but a variation upon the old.
And these are the kind of improvements which confer reputation and power upon a new prince.
This opportunity, therefore, ought not to be allowed to pass for letting Italy at last see her liberator appear.
Nor can one express the love with which he would be received in all those provinces which have suffered so much from these foreign scourings, with what thirst for revenge, with what stubborn faith, with what devotion, with what tears.
Who would refuse obedience to him?
To all of us this barbarous dominion stinks.
Let, therefore, your illustrious house take up this charge with that courage and hope with which all just enterprises are undertaken, so that under its standard our native country may be ennobled, and under its auspices may be verified that saying of Petrarch: Virtu contro al Furore Prendera l’arme, e fia il combatter corto: Che l’antico valore Negli italici cuor non e ancor morto.
Virtue against fury shall advance the fight, And it i’ th’ combat soon shall put to flight: For the old Roman valour is not dead, Nor in th’ Italians’ brests extinguished.
These matters coming to the knowledge of the Vitelli and Orsini and their following, it appeared to them that the duke would become too powerful, and it was feared that, having seized Bologna, he would seek to destroy them in order that he might become supreme in Italy.
Upon this a meeting was called at Magione in the district of Perugia, to which came the cardinal, Pagolo, and the Duke di Gravina Orsini, Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, Gianpagolo Baglioni, the tyrant of Perugia, and Messer Antonio da Venafro, sent by Pandolfo Petrucci, the Prince of Siena.
Here were discussed the power and courage of the duke and the necessity of curbing his ambitions, which might otherwise bring danger to the rest of being ruined.
And they decided not to abandon the Bentivogli, but to strive to win over the Florentines; and they sent their men to one place and another, promising to one party assistance and to another encouragement to unite with them against the common enemy.
This meeting was at once reported throughout all Italy, and those who were discontented under the duke, among whom were the people of Urbino, took hope of effecting a revolution.
Thus it arose that, men’s minds being thus unsettled, it was decided by certain men of Urbino to seize the fortress of San Leo, which was held for the duke, and which they captured by the following means.
The castellan was fortifying the rock and causing timber to be taken there; so the conspirators watched, and when certain beams which were being carried to the rock were upon the bridge, so that it was prevented from being drawn up by those inside, they took the opportunity of leaping upon the bridge and thence into the fortress.
Upon this capture being effected, the whole state rebelled and recalled the old duke, being encouraged in this, not so much by the capture of the fort, as by the Diet at Magione, from whom they expected to get assistance.
Those who heard of the rebellion at Urbino thought they would not lose the opportunity, and at once assembled their men so as to take any town, should any remain in the hands of the duke in that state; and they sent again to Florence to beg that republic to join with them in destroying the common firebrand, showing that the risk was lessened and that they ought not to wait for another opportunity.
But the Florentines, from hatred, for sundry reasons, of the Vitelli and Orsini, not only would not ally themselves, but sent Nicolo Machiavelli, their secretary, to offer shelter and assistance to the duke against his enemies.
The duke was found full of fear at Imola, because, against everybody’s expectation, his soldiers had at once gone over to the enemy and he found himself disarmed and war at his door.
But recovering courage from the offers of the Florentines, he decided to temporize before fighting with the few soldiers that remained to him, and to negotiate for a reconciliation, and also to get assistance.
This latter he obtained in two ways, by sending to the King of France for men and by enlisting men-at-arms and others whom he turned into cavalry of a sort: to all he gave money.
Notwithstanding this, his enemies drew near to him, and approached Fossombrone, where they encountered some men of the duke and, with the aid of the Orsini and Vitelli, routed them.
When this happened, the duke resolved at once to see if he could not close the trouble with offers of reconciliation, and being a most perfect dissembler he did not fail in any practices to make the insurgents understand that he wished every man who had acquired anything to keep it, as it was enough for him to have the title of prince, whilst others might have the principality.
And the duke succeeded so well in this that they sent Signor Pagolo to him to negotiate for a reconciliation, and they brought their army to a standstill.
But the duke did not stop his preparations, and took every care to provide himself with cavalry and infantry, and that such preparations might not be apparent to the others, he sent his troops in separate parties to every part of the Romagna.
In the meanwhile there came also to him five hundred French lancers, and although he found himself sufficiently strong to take vengeance on his enemies in open war, he considered that it would be safer and more advantageous to outwit them, and for this reason he did not stop the work of reconciliation.
And that this might be effected the duke concluded a peace with them in which he confirmed their former covenants; he gave them four thousand ducats at once; he promised not to injure the Bentivogli; and he formed an alliance with Giovanni; and moreover he would not force them to come personally into his presence unless it pleased them to do so.
On the other hand, they promised to restore to him the duchy of Urbino and other places seized by them, to serve him in all his expeditions, and not to make war against or ally themselves with any one without his permission.
This reconciliation being completed, Guido Ubaldo, the Duke of Urbino, again fled to Venice, having first destroyed all the fortresses in his state; because, trusting in the people, he did not wish that the fortresses, which he did not think he could defend, should be held by the enemy, since by these means a check would be kept upon his friends.
To this the duke replied that he did not wish to enter into war with Tuscany, and thus become hostile to the Florentines, but that he was very willing to proceed against Sinigalia.
It happened that not long afterwards the town surrendered, but the fortress would not yield to them because the castellan would not give it up to any one but the duke in person; therefore they exhorted him to come there.
This appeared a good opportunity to the duke, as, being invited by them, and not going of his own will, he would awaken no suspicions.
And the more to reassure them, he allowed all the French men-at-arms who were with him in Lombardy to depart, except the hundred lancers under Mons. di Candales, his brother-in-law.
He left Cesena about the middle of December, and went to Fano, and with the utmost cunning and cleverness he persuaded the Vitelli and Orsini to wait for him at Sinigalia, pointing out to them that any lack of compliance would cast a doubt upon the sincerity and permanency of the reconciliation, and that he was a man who wished to make use of the arms and councils of his friends.
But Vitellozzo remained very stubborn, for the death of his brother warned him that he should not offend a prince and afterwards trust him; nevertheless, persuaded by Pagolo Orsini, whom the duke had corrupted with gifts and promises, he agreed to wait.
The duke afterwards ordered all his horsemen and infantry, of which there were more than two thousand cavalry and ten thousand footmen, to assemble by daybreak at the Metauro, a river five miles distant from Fano, and await him there.
He found himself, therefore, on the last day of December at the Metauro with his men, and having sent a cavalcade of about two hundred horsemen before him, he then moved forward the infantry, whom he accompanied with the rest of the men-at-arms.
Fano and Sinigalia are two cities of La Marca situated on the shore of the Adriatic Sea, fifteen miles distant from each other, so that he who goes towards Sinigalia has the mountains on his right hand, the bases of which are touched by the sea in some places.
The city of Sinigalia is distant from the foot of the mountains a little more than a bow-shot and from the shore about a mile.
On the side opposite to the city runs a little river which bathes that part of the walls looking towards Fano, facing the high road.
Thus he who draws near to Sinigalia comes for a good space by road along the mountains, and reaches the river which passes by Sinigalia.
If he turns to his left hand along the bank of it, and goes for the distance of a bow-shot, he arrives at a bridge which crosses the river; he is then almost abreast of the gate that leads into Sinigalia, not by a straight line, but transversely.
Before this gate there stands a collection of houses with a square to which the bank of the river forms one side.
Matters having been thus arranged, the Duke Valentino left for Sinigalia, and when the leaders of the cavalry reached the bridge they did not pass over, but having opened it, one portion wheeled towards the river and the other towards the country, and a way was left in the middle through which the infantry passed, without stopping, into the town.
Vitellozzo, Pagolo, and the Duke di Gravina on mules, accompanied by a few horsemen, went towards the duke; Vitellozo, unarmed and wearing a cape lined with green, appeared very dejected, as if conscious of his approaching death—a circumstance which, in view of the ability of the man and his former fortune, caused some amazement.
And it is said that when he parted from his men before setting out for Sinigalia to meet the duke he acted as if it were his last parting from them.
He recommended his house and its fortunes to his captains, and advised his nephews that it was not the fortune of their house, but the virtues of their fathers that should be kept in mind.
These three, therefore, came before the duke and saluted him respectfully, and were received by him with goodwill; they were at once placed between those who were commissioned to look after them.
But the duke noticing that Oliverotto, who had remained with his band in Sinigalia, was missing—for Oliverotto was waiting in the square before his quarters near the river, keeping his men in order and drilling them—signalled with his eye to Don Michelle, to whom the care of Oliverotto had been committed, that he should take measures that Oliverotto should not escape.
Therefore Don Michele rode off and joined Oliverotto, telling him that it was not right to keep his men out of their quarters, because these might be taken up by the men of the duke; and he advised him to send them at once to their quarters and to come himself to meet the duke.
And Oliverotto, having taken this advice, came before the duke, who, when he saw him, called to him; and Oliverotto, having made his obeisance, joined the others.
So the whole party entered Sinigalia, dismounted at the duke’s quarters, and went with him into a secret chamber, where the duke made them prisoners; he then mounted on horseback, and issued orders that the men of Oliverotto and the Orsini should be stripped of their arms.
Those of Oliverotto, being at hand, were quickly settled, but those of the Orsini and Vitelli, being at a distance, and having a presentiment of the destruction of their masters, had time to prepare themselves, and bearing in mind the valour and discipline of the Orsinian and Vitellian houses, they stood together against the hostile forces of the country and saved themselves.
But the duke’s soldiers, not being content with having pillaged the men of Oliverotto, began to sack Sinigalia, and if the duke had not repressed this outrage by killing some of them they would have completely sacked it.
Night having come and the tumult being silenced, the duke prepared to kill Vitellozzo and Oliverotto; he led them into a room and caused them to be strangled.
Neither of them used words in keeping with their past lives: Vitellozzo prayed that he might ask of the pope full pardon for his sins; Oliverotto cringed and laid the blame for all injuries against the duke on Vitellozzo.
Pagolo and the Duke di Gravina Orsini were kept alive until the duke heard from Rome that the pope had taken the Cardinal Orsino, the Archbishop of Florence, and Messer Jacopo da Santa Croce.
After which news, on 18th January 1502, in the castle of Pieve, they also were strangled in the same way.
They have either been exposed to the mercy of wild beasts, or they have had so mean a parentage that in shame they have given themselves out to be sons of Jove or of some other deity.
It would be wearisome to relate who these persons may have been because they are well known to everybody, and, as such tales would not be particularly edifying to those who read them, they are omitted.
I believe that these lowly beginnings of great men occur because Fortune is desirous of showing to the world that such men owe much to her and little to wisdom, because she begins to show her hand when wisdom can really take no part in their career: thus all success must be attributed to her.
Castruccio Castracani of Lucca was one of those men who did great deeds, if he is measured by the times in which he lived and the city in which he was born; but, like many others, he was neither fortunate nor distinguished in his birth, as the course of this history will show.
It appeared to be desirable to recall his memory, because I have discerned in him such indications of valour and fortune as should make him a great exemplar to men.
I think also that I ought to call your attention to his actions, because you of all men I know delight most in noble deeds.
The family of Castracani was formerly numbered among the noble families of Lucca, but in the days of which I speak it had somewhat fallen in estate, as so often happens in this world.
To this family was born a son Antonio, who became a priest of the order of San Michele of Lucca, and for this reason was honoured with the title of Messer Antonio.
He had an only sister, who had been married to Buonaccorso Cenami, but Buonaccorso dying she became a widow, and not wishing to marry again went to live with her brother.
Messer Antonio had a vineyard behind the house where he resided, and as it was bounded on all sides by gardens, any person could have access to it without difficulty.
One morning, shortly after sunrise, Madonna Dianora, as the sister of Messer Antonio was called, had occasion to go into the vineyard as usual to gather herbs for seasoning the dinner, and hearing a slight rustling among the leaves of a vine she turned her eyes in that direction, and heard something resembling the cry of an infant.
Whereupon she went towards it, and saw the hands and face of a baby who was lying enveloped in the leaves and who seemed to be crying for its mother.
Partly wondering and partly fearing, yet full of compassion, she lifted it up and carried it to the house, where she washed it and clothed it with clean linen as is customary, and showed it to Messer Antonio when he returned home.
When he heard what had happened and saw the child he was not less surprised or compassionate than his sister.
They discussed between themselves what should be done, and seeing that he was priest and that she had no children, they finally determined to bring it up.
They baptized it, and gave it the name of Castruccio after their father.
As the years passed Castruccio grew very handsome, and gave evidence of wit and discretion, and learnt with a quickness beyond his years those lessons which Messer Antonio imparted to him.
Messer Antonio intended to make a priest of him, and in time would have inducted him into his canonry and other benefices, and all his instruction was given with this object; but Antonio discovered that the character of Castruccio was quite unfitted for the priesthood.
As soon as Castruccio reached the age of fourteen he began to take less notice of the chiding of Messer Antonio and Madonna Dianora and no longer to fear them; he left off reading ecclesiastical books, and turned to playing with arms, delighting in nothing so much as in learning their uses, and in running, leaping, and wrestling with other boys.
In all exercises he far excelled his companions in courage and bodily strength, and if at any time he did turn to books, only those pleased him which told of wars and the mighty deeds of men.
Messer Antonio beheld all this with vexation and sorrow.
There lived in the city of Lucca a gentleman of the Guinigi family, named Messer Francesco, whose profession was arms and who in riches, bodily strength, and valour excelled all other men in Lucca.
He had often fought under the command of the Visconti of Milan, and as a Ghibelline was the valued leader of that party in Lucca.
This gentleman resided in Lucca and was accustomed to assemble with others most mornings and evenings under the balcony of the Podesta, which is at the top of the square of San Michele, the finest square in Lucca, and he had often seen Castruccio taking part with other children of the street in those games of which I have spoken.
Noticing that Castruccio far excelled the other boys, and that he appeared to exercise a royal authority over them, and that they loved and obeyed him, Messer Francesco became greatly desirous of learning who he was.
Being informed of the circumstances of the bringing up of Castruccio he felt a greater desire to have him near to him.
Therefore he called him one day and asked him whether he would more willingly live in the house of a gentleman, where he would learn to ride horses and use arms, or in the house of a priest, where he would learn nothing but masses and the services of the Church.
Messer Francesco could see that it pleased Castruccio greatly to hear horses and arms spoken of, even though he stood silent, blushing modestly; but being encouraged by Messer Francesco to speak, he answered that, if his master were agreeable, nothing would please him more than to give up his priestly studies and take up those of a soldier.
This reply delighted Messer Francesco, and in a very short time he obtained the consent of Messer Antonio, who was driven to yield by his knowledge of the nature of the lad, and the fear that he would not be able to hold him much longer.
Thus Castruccio passed from the house of Messer Antonio the priest to the house of Messer Francesco Guinigi the soldier, and it was astonishing to find that in a very short time he manifested all that virtue and bearing which we are accustomed to associate with a true gentleman.
In the first place he became an accomplished horseman, and could manage with ease the most fiery charger, and in all jousts and tournaments, although still a youth, he was observed beyond all others, and he excelled in all exercises of strength and dexterity.
But what enhanced so much the charm of these accomplishments, was the delightful modesty which enabled him to avoid offence in either act or word to others, for he was deferential to the great men, modest with his equals, and courteous to his inferiors.
When Castruccio had reached his eighteenth year, the Ghibellines were driven from Pavia by the Guelphs, and Messer Francesco was sent by the Visconti to assist the Ghibellines, and with him went Castruccio, in charge of his forces.
Castruccio gave ample proof of his prudence and courage in this expedition, acquiring greater reputation than any other captain, and his name and fame were known, not only in Pavia, but throughout all Lombardy.
Castruccio, having returned to Lucca in far higher estimation than he left it, did not omit to use all the means in his power to gain as many friends as he could, neglecting none of those arts which are necessary for that purpose.
About this time Messer Francesco died, leaving a son thirteen years of age named Pagolo, and having appointed Castruccio to be his son’s tutor and administrator of his estate.
Before he died Francesco called Castruccio to him, and prayed him to show Pagolo that goodwill which he (Francesco) had always shown to HIM, and to render to the son the gratitude which he had not been able to repay to the father.
Upon the death of Francesco, Castruccio became the governor and tutor of Pagolo, which increased enormously his power and position, and created a certain amount of envy against him in Lucca in place of the former universal goodwill, for many men suspected him of harbouring tyrannical intentions.
This man hoped after the death of Messer Francesco to become the chief man in Lucca, but it seemed to him that Castruccio, with the great abilities which he already showed, and holding the position of governor, deprived him of his opportunity; therefore he began to sow those seeds which should rob Castruccio of his eminence.
Castruccio at first treated this with scorn, but afterwards he grew alarmed, thinking that Messer Giorgio might be able to bring him into disgrace with the deputy of King Ruberto of Naples and have him driven out of Lucca.
The Lord of Pisa at that time was Uguccione of the Faggiuola of Arezzo, who being in the first place elected their captain afterwards became their lord.
There resided in Paris some exiled Ghibellines from Lucca, with whom Castruccio held communications with the object of effecting their restoration by the help of Uguccione.
Castruccio also brought into his plans friends from Lucca who would not endure the authority of the Opizi.
Having fixed upon a plan to be followed, Castruccio cautiously fortified the tower of the Onesti, filling it with supplies and munitions of war, in order that it might stand a siege for a few days in case of need.
When the night came which had been agreed upon with Uguccione, who had occupied the plain between the mountains and Pisa with many men, the signal was given, and without being observed Uguccione approached the gate of San Piero and set fire to the portcullis.
Castruccio raised a great uproar within the city, calling the people to arms and forcing open the gate from his side.
Uguccione entered with his men, poured through the town, and killed Messer Giorgio with all his family and many of his friends and supporters.
The governor was driven out, and the government reformed according to the wishes of Uguccione, to the detriment of the city, because it was found that more than one hundred families were exiled at that time.
Of those who fled, part went to Florence and part to Pistoia, which city was the headquarters of the Guelph party, and for this reason it became most hostile to Uguccione and the Lucchese.
As it now appeared to the Florentines and others of the Guelph party that the Ghibellines absorbed too much power in Tuscany, they determined to restore the exiled Guelphs to Lucca.
They assembled a large army in the Val di Nievole, and seized Montecatini; from thence they marched to Montecarlo, in order to secure the free passage into Lucca.
Upon this Uguccione assembled his Pisan and Lucchese forces, and with a number of German cavalry which he drew out of Lombardy, he moved against the quarters of the Florentines, who upon the appearance of the enemy withdrew from Montecarlo, and posted themselves between Montecatini and Pescia.
Uguccione now took up a position near to Montecarlo, and within about two miles of the enemy, and slight skirmishes between the horse of both parties were of daily occurrence.
Owing to the illness of Uguccione, the Pisans and Lucchese delayed coming to battle with the enemy.
Uguccione, finding himself growing worse, went to Montecarlo to be cured, and left the command of the army in the hands of Castruccio.
This change brought about the ruin of the Guelphs, who, thinking that the hostile army having lost its captain had lost its head, grew over-confident.
Castruccio observed this, and allowed some days to pass in order to encourage this belief; he also showed signs of fear, and did not allow any of the munitions of the camp to be used.
On the other side, the Guelphs grew more insolent the more they saw these evidences of fear, and every day they drew out in the order of battle in front of the army of Castruccio.
Presently, deeming that the enemy was sufficiently emboldened, and having mastered their tactics, he decided to join battle with them.
First he spoke a few words of encouragement to his soldiers, and pointed out to them the certainty of victory if they would but obey his commands.
Castruccio had noticed how the enemy had placed all his best troops in the centre of the line of battle, and his less reliable men on the wings of the army; whereupon he did exactly the opposite, putting his most valiant men on the flanks, while those on whom he could not so strongly rely he moved to the centre.
Observing this order of battle, he drew out of his lines and quickly came in sight of the hostile army, who, as usual, had come in their insolence to defy him.
He then commanded his centre squadrons to march slowly, whilst he moved rapidly forward those on the wings.
Thus, when they came into contact with the enemy, only the wings of the two armies became engaged, whilst the center battalions remained out of action, for these two portions of the line of battle were separated from each other by a long interval and thus unable to reach each other.
By this expedient the more valiant part of Castruccio’s men were opposed to the weaker part of the enemy’s troops, and the most efficient men of the enemy were disengaged; and thus the Florentines were unable to fight with those who were arrayed opposite to them, or to give any assistance to their own flanks.
So, without much difficulty, Castruccio put the enemy to flight on both flanks, and the centre battalions took to flight when they found themselves exposed to attack, without having a chance of displaying their valour.
The defeat was complete, and the loss in men very heavy, there being more than ten thousand men killed with many officers and knights of the Guelph party in Tuscany, and also many princes who had come to help them, among whom were Piero, the brother of King Ruberto, and Carlo, his nephew, and Filippo, the lord of Taranto.
On the part of Castruccio the loss did not amount to more than three hundred men, among whom was Francesco, the son of Uguccione, who, being young and rash, was killed in the first onset.
This victory so greatly increased the reputation of Castruccio that Uguccione conceived some jealousy and suspicion of him, because it appeared to Uguccione that this victory had given him no increase of power, but rather than diminished it.
Being of this mind, he only waited for an opportunity to give effect to it.
This occurred on the death of Pier Agnolo Micheli, a man of great repute and abilities in Lucca, the murderer of whom fled to the house of Castruccio for refuge.
On the sergeants of the captain going to arrest the murderer, they were driven off by Castruccio, and the murderer escaped.
This affair coming to the knowledge of Uguccione, who was then at Pisa, it appeared to him a proper opportunity to punish Castruccio.
He therefore sent for his son Neri, who was the governor of Lucca, and commissioned him to take Castruccio prisoner at a banquet and put him to death.
Castruccio, fearing no evil, went to the governor in a friendly way, was entertained at supper, and then thrown into prison.
But Neri, fearing to put him to death lest the people should be incensed, kept him alive, in order to hear further from his father concerning his intentions.
Ugucionne cursed the hesitation and cowardice of his son, and at once set out from Pisa to Lucca with four hundred horsemen to finish the business in his own way; but he had not yet reached the baths when the Pisans rebelled and put his deputy to death and created Count Gaddo della Gherardesca their lord.
Before Uguccione reached Lucca he heard of the occurrences at Pisa, but it did not appear wise to him to turn back, lest the Lucchese with the example of Pisa before them should close their gates against him.
But the Lucchese, having heard of what had happened at Pisa, availed themselves of this opportunity to demand the liberation of Castruccio, notwithstanding that Uguccione had arrived in their city.
They first began to speak of it in private circles, afterwards openly in the squares and streets; then they raised a tumult, and with arms in their hands went to Uguccione and demanded that Castruccio should be set at liberty.
Uguccione, fearing that worse might happen, released him from prison.
Whereupon Castruccio gathered his friends around him, and with the help of the people attacked Uguccione; who, finding he had no resource but in flight, rode away with his friends to Lombardy, to the lords of Scale, where he died in poverty.
But Castruccio from being a prisoner became almost a prince in Lucca, and he carried himself so discreetly with his friends and the people that they appointed him captain of their army for one year.
Having obtained this, and wishing to gain renown in war, he planned the recovery of the many towns which had rebelled after the departure of Uguccione, and with the help of the Pisans, with whom he had concluded a treaty, he marched to Serezzana.
To capture this place he constructed a fort against it, which is called to-day Zerezzanello; in the course of two months Castruccio captured the town.
With the reputation gained at that siege, he rapidly seized Massa, Carrara, and Lavenza, and in a short time had overrun the whole of Lunigiana.
In order to close the pass which leads from Lombardy to Lunigiana, he besieged Pontremoli and wrested it from the hands of Messer Anastagio Palavicini, who was the lord of it.
After this victory he returned to Lucca, and was welcomed by the whole people.
And now Castruccio, deeming it imprudent any longer to defer making himself a prince, got himself created the lord of Lucca by the help of Pazzino del Poggio, Puccinello dal Portico, Francesco Boccansacchi, and Cecco Guinigi, all of whom he had corrupted; and he was afterwards solemnly and deliberately elected prince by the people.
At this time Frederick of Bavaria, the King of the Romans, came into Italy to assume the Imperial crown, and Castruccio, in order that he might make friends with him, met him at the head of five hundred horsemen.
Castruccio had left as his deputy in Lucca, Pagolo Guinigi, who was held in high estimation, because of the people’s love for the memory of his father.
Castruccio was received in great honour by Frederick, and many privileges were conferred upon him, and he was appointed the emperor’s lieutenant in Tuscany.
At this time the Pisans were in great fear of Gaddo della Gherardesca, whom they had driven out of Pisa, and they had recourse for assistance to Frederick.
Frederick created Castruccio the lord of Pisa, and the Pisans, in dread of the Guelph party, and particularly of the Florentines, were constrained to accept him as their lord.
Frederick, having appointed a governor in Rome to watch his Italian affairs, returned to Germany.
All the Tuscan and Lombardian Ghibellines, who followed the imperial lead, had recourse to Castruccio for help and counsel, and all promised him the governorship of his country, if enabled to recover it with his assistance.
Among these exiles were Matteo Guidi, Nardo Scolari, Lapo Uberti, Gerozzo Nardi, and Piero Buonaccorsi, all exiled Florentines and Ghibellines.
Castruccio had the secret intention of becoming the master of all Tuscany by the aid of these men and of his own forces; and in order to gain greater weight in affairs, he entered into a league with Messer Matteo Visconti, the Prince of Milan, and organized for him the forces of his city and the country districts.
As Lucca had five gates, he divided his own country districts into five parts, which he supplied with arms, and enrolled the men under captains and ensigns, so that he could quickly bring into the field twenty thousand soldiers, without those whom he could summon to his assistance from Pisa.
While he surrounded himself with these forces and allies, it happened at Messer Matteo Visconti was attacked by the Guelphs of Piacenza, who had driven out the Ghibellines with the assistance of a Florentine army and the King Ruberto.
Messer Matteo called upon Castruccio to invade the Florentines in their own territories, so that, being attacked at home, they should be compelled to draw their army out of Lombardy in order to defend themselves.
Castruccio invaded the Valdarno, and seized Fucecchio and San Miniato, inflicting immense damage upon the country.
Whereupon the Florentines recalled their army, which had scarcely reached Tuscany, when Castruccio was forced by other necessities to return to Lucca.
There resided in the city of Lucca the Poggio family, who were so powerful that they could not only elevate Castruccio, but even advance him to the dignity of prince; and it appearing to them they had not received such rewards for their services as they deserved, they incited other families to rebel and to drive Castruccio out of Lucca.
They found their opportunity one morning, and arming themselves, they set upon the lieutenant whom Castruccio had left to maintain order and killed him.
They endeavoured to raise the people in revolt, but Stefano di Poggio, a peaceable old man who had taken no hand in the rebellion, intervened and compelled them by his authority to lay down their arms; and he offered to be their mediator with Castruccio to obtain from him what they desired.
Therefore they laid down their arms with no greater intelligence than they had taken them up.
Castruccio, having heard the news of what had happened at Lucca, at once put Pagolo Guinigi in command of the army, and with a troop of cavalry set out for home.
Contrary to his expectations, he found the rebellion at an end, yet he posted his men in the most advantageous places throughout the city.
As it appeared to Stefano that Castruccio ought to be very much obliged to him, he sought him out, and without saying anything on his own behalf, for he did not recognize any need for doing so, he begged Castruccio to pardon the other members of his family by reason of their youth, their former friendships, and the obligations which Castruccio was under to their house.
To this Castruccio graciously responded, and begged Stefano to reassure himself, declaring that it gave him more pleasure to find the tumult at an end than it had ever caused him anxiety to hear of its inception.
He encouraged Stefano to bring his family to him, saying that he thanked God for having given him the opportunity of showing his clemency and liberality.
Upon the word of Stefano and Castruccio they surrendered, and with Stefano were immediately thrown into prison and put to death.
Meanwhile the Florentines had recovered San Miniato, whereupon it seemed advisable to Castruccio to make peace, as it did not appear to him that he was sufficiently secure at Lucca to leave him.
He approached the Florentines with the proposal of a truce, which they readily entertained, for they were weary of the war, and desirous of getting rid of the expenses of it.
A treaty was concluded with them for two years, by which both parties agreed to keep the conquests they had made.
Then for his further security he raised a fortress in Lucca with the stones of the towers of those whom he had killed or hunted out of the state.
Whilst Castruccio made peace with the Florentines, and strengthened his position in Lucca, he neglected no opportunity, short of open war, of increasing his importance elsewhere.
It appeared to him that if he could get possession of Pistoia, he would have one foot in Florence, which was his great desire.
He, therefore, in various ways made friends with the mountaineers, and worked matters so in Pistoia that both parties confided their secrets to him.
Pistoia was divided, as it always had been, into the Bianchi and Neri parties; the head of the Bianchi was Bastiano di Possente, and of the Neri, Jacopo da Gia.
Each of these men held secret communications with Castruccio, and each desired to drive the other out of the city; and, after many threatenings, they came to blows.
Jacopo fortified himself at the Florentine gate, Bastiano at that of the Lucchese side of the city; both trusted more in Castruccio than in the Florentines, because they believed that Castruccio was far more ready and willing to fight than the Florentines, and they both sent to him for assistance.
He gave promises to both, saying to Bastiano that he would come in person, and to Jacopo that he would send his pupil, Pagolo Guinigi.
At the appointed time he sent forward Pagolo by way of Pisa, and went himself direct to Pistoia; at midnight both of them met outside the city, and both were admitted as friends.
Thus the two leaders entered, and at a signal given by Castruccio, one killed Jacopo da Gia, and the other Bastiano di Possente, and both took prisoners or killed the partisans of either faction.
Without further opposition Pistoia passed into the hands of Castruccio, who, having forced the Signoria to leave the palace, compelled the people to yield obedience to him, making them many promises and remitting their old debts.
The countryside flocked to the city to see the new prince, and all were filled with hope and quickly settled down, influenced in a great measure by his great valour.
About this time great disturbances arose in Rome, owing to the dearness of living which was caused by the absence of the pontiff at Avignon.
The German governor, Enrico, was much blamed for what happened—murders and tumults following each other daily, without his being able to put an end to them.
Having no nearer friend to whom he could apply for help than Castruccio, he sent to him, begging him not only to give him assistance, but also to come in person to Rome.
Castruccio considered that he ought not to hesitate to render the emperor this service, because he believed that he himself would not be safe if at any time the emperor ceased to hold Rome.
Leaving Pagolo Guinigi in command at Lucca, Castruccio set out for Rome with six hundred horsemen, where he was received by Enrico with the greatest distinction.
In a short time the presence of Castruccio obtained such respect for the emperor that, without bloodshed or violence, good order was restored, chiefly by reason of Castruccio having sent by sea from the country round Pisa large quantities of corn, and thus removed the source of the trouble.
When he had chastised some of the Roman leaders, and admonished others, voluntary obedience was rendered to Enrico.
Castruccio received many honours, and was made a Roman senator.
Among the exiled Pistoians in Florence were Baldo Cecchi and Jacopo Baldini, both men of leading and ready to face danger.
These men kept up communications with their friends in Pistoia, and with the aid of the Florentines entered the city by night, and after driving out some of Castruccio’s officials and partisans, and killing others, they restored the city to its freedom.
The news of this greatly angered Castruccio, and taking leave of Enrico, he pressed on in great haste to Pistoia.
When the Florentines heard of his return, knowing that he would lose no time, they decided to intercept him with their forces in the Val di Nievole, under the belief that by doing so they would cut off his road to Pistoia.
Assembling a great army of the supporters of the Guelph cause, the Florentines entered the Pistoian territories.
On the other hand, Castruccio reached Montecarlo with his army; and having heard where the Florentines’ lay, he decided not to encounter it in the plains of Pistoia, nor to await it in the plains of Pescia, but, as far as he possibly could, to attack it boldly in the Pass of Serravalle.
He believed that if he succeeded in this design, victory was assured, although he was informed that the Florentines had thirty thousand men, whilst he had only twelve thousand.
Although he had every confidence in his own abilities and the valour of his troops, yet he hesitated to attack his enemy in the open lest he should be overwhelmed by numbers.
Serravalle is a castle between Pescia and Pistoia, situated on a hill which blocks the Val di Nievole, not in the exact pass, but about a bowshot beyond; the pass itself is in places narrow and steep, whilst in general it ascends gently, but is still narrow, especially at the summit where the waters divide, so that twenty men side by side could hold it.
The lord of Serravalle was Manfred, a German, who, before Castruccio became lord of Pistoia, had been allowed to remain in possession of the castle, it being common to the Lucchese and the Pistoians, and unclaimed by either—neither of them wishing to displace Manfred as long as he kept his promise of neutrality, and came under obligations to no one.
For these reasons, and also because the castle was well fortified, he had always been able to maintain his position.
It was here that Castruccio had determined to fall upon his enemy, for here his few men would have the advantage, and there was no fear lest, seeing the large masses of the hostile force before they became engaged, they should not stand.
As soon as this trouble with Florence arose, Castruccio saw the immense advantage which possession of this castle would give him, and having an intimate friendship with a resident in the castle, he managed matters so with him that four hundred of his men were to be admitted into the castle the night before the attack on the Florentines, and the castellan put to death.
Castruccio, having prepared everything, had now to encourage the Florentines to persist in their desire to carry the seat of war away from Pistoia into the Val di Nievole, therefore he did not move his army from Montecarlo.
Thus the Florentines hurried on until they reached their encampment under Serravalle, intending to cross the hill on the following morning.
In the meantime, Castruccio had seized the castle at night, had also moved his army from Montecarlo, and marching from thence at midnight in dead silence, had reached the foot of Serravalle: thus he and the Florentines commenced the ascent of the hill at the same time in the morning.
Castruccio sent forward his infantry by the main road, and a troop of four hundred horsemen by a path on the left towards the castle.
The Florentines sent forward four hundred cavalry ahead of their army which was following, never expecting to find Castruccio in possession of the hill, nor were they aware of his having seized the castle.
Thus it happened that the Florentine horsemen mounting the hill were completely taken by surprise when they discovered the infantry of Castruccio, and so close were they upon it they had scarcely time to pull down their visors.
It was a case of unready soldiers being attacked by ready, and they were assailed with such vigour that with difficulty they could hold their own, although some few of them got through.
When the noise of the fighting reached the Florentine camp below, it was filled with confusion.
The cavalry and infantry became inextricably mixed: the captains were unable to get their men either backward or forward, owing to the narrowness of the pass, and amid all this tumult no one knew what ought to be done or what could be done.
In a short time the cavalry who were engaged with the enemy’s infantry were scattered or killed without having made any effective defence because of their unfortunate position, although in sheer desperation they had offered a stout resistance.
Retreat had been impossible, with the mountains on both flanks, whilst in front were their enemies, and in the rear their friends.
When Castruccio saw that his men were unable to strike a decisive blow at the enemy and put them to flight, he sent one thousand infantrymen round by the castle, with orders to join the four hundred horsemen he had previously dispatched there, and commanded the whole force to fall upon the flank of the enemy.
These orders they carried out with such fury that the Florentines could not sustain the attack, but gave way, and were soon in full retreat—conquered more by their unfortunate position than by the valour of their enemy.
The defeat was complete and very sanguinary.
Many captains were taken prisoners, among whom were Bandini dei Rossi, Francesco Brunelleschi, and Giovanni della Tosa, all Florentine noblemen, with many Tuscans and Neapolitans who fought on the Florentine side, having been sent by King Ruberto to assist the Guelphs.
Immediately the Pistoians heard of this defeat they drove out the friends of the Guelphs, and surrendered to Castruccio.
He was not content with occupying Prato and all the castles on the plains on both sides of the Arno, but marched his army into the plain of Peretola, about two miles from Florence.
Here he remained many days, dividing the spoils, and celebrating his victory with feasts and games, holding horse races, and foot races for men and women.
He also struck medals in commemoration of the defeat of the Florentines.
He endeavoured to corrupt some of the citizens of Florence, who were to open the city gates at night; but the conspiracy was discovered, and the participators in it taken and beheaded, among whom were Tommaso Lupacci and Lambertuccio Frescobaldi.
This defeat caused the Florentines great anxiety, and despairing of preserving their liberty, they sent envoys to King Ruberto of Naples, offering him the dominion of their city; and he, knowing of what immense importance the maintenance of the Guelph cause was to him, accepted it.
He agreed with the Florentines to receive from them a yearly tribute of two hundred thousand florins, and he sent his son Carlo to Florence with four thousand horsemen.
Shortly after this the Florentines were relieved in some degree of the pressure of Castruccio’s army, owing to his being compelled to leave his positions before Florence and march on Pisa, in order to suppress a conspiracy that had been raised against him by Benedetto Lanfranchi, one of the first men in Pisa, who could not endure that his fatherland should be under the dominion of the Lucchese.
He had formed this conspiracy, intending to seize the citadel, kill the partisans of Castruccio, and drive out the garrison.
As, however, in a conspiracy paucity of numbers is essential to secrecy, so for its execution a few are not sufficient, and in seeking more adherents to his conspiracy Lanfranchi encountered a person who revealed the design to Castruccio.
This betrayal cannot be passed by without severe reproach to Bonifacio Cerchi and Giovanni Guidi, two Florentine exiles who were suffering their banishment in Pisa.
Thereupon Castruccio seized Benedetto and put him to death, and beheaded many other noble citizens, and drove their families into exile.
It now appeared to Castruccio that both Pisa and Pistoia were thoroughly disaffected; he employed much thought and energy upon securing his position there, and this gave the Florentines their opportunity to reorganize their army, and to await the coming of Carlo, the son of the King of Naples.
When Carlo arrived they decided to lose no more time, and assembled a great army of more than thirty thousand infantry and ten thousand cavalry—having called to their aid every Guelph there was in Italy.
They consulted whether they should attack Pistoia or Pisa first, and decided that it would be better to march on the latter—a course, owing to the recent conspiracy, more likely to succeed, and of more advantage to them, because they believed that the surrender of Pistoia would follow the acquisition of Pisa.
In the early part of May 1328, the Florentines put in motion this army and quickly occupied Lastra, Signa, Montelupo, and Empoli, passing from thence on to San Miniato.
When Castruccio heard of the enormous army which the Florentines were sending against him, he was in no degree alarmed, believing that the time had now arrived when Fortune would deliver the empire of Tuscany into his hands, for he had no reason to think that his enemy would make a better fight, or had better prospects of success, than at Pisa or Serravalle.
He assembled twenty thousand foot soldiers and four thousand horsemen, and with this army went to Fucecchio, whilst he sent Pagolo Guinigi to Pisa with five thousand infantry.
Fucecchio has a stronger position than any other town in the Pisan district, owing to its situation between the rivers Arno and Gusciana and its slight elevation above the surrounding plain.
Moreover, the enemy could not hinder its being victualled unless they divided their forces, nor could they approach it either from the direction of Lucca or Pisa, nor could they get through to Pisa, or attack Castruccio’s forces except at a disadvantage.
In one case they would find themselves placed between his two armies, the one under his own command and the other under Pagolo, and in the other case they would have to cross the Arno to get to close quarters with the enemy, an undertaking of great hazard.
In order to tempt the Florentines to take this latter course, Castruccio withdrew his men from the banks of the river and placed them under the walls of Fucecchio, leaving a wide expanse of land between them and the river.
The Florentines, having occupied San Miniato, held a council of war to decide whether they should attack Pisa or the army of Castruccio, and, having weighed the difficulties of both courses, they decided upon the latter.
The river Arno was at that time low enough to be fordable, yet the water reached to the shoulders of the infantrymen and to the saddles of the horsemen.
On the morning of 10 June 1328, the Florentines commenced the battle by ordering forward a number of cavalry and ten thousand infantry.
Castruccio, whose plan of action was fixed, and who well knew what to do, at once attacked the Florentines with five thousand infantry and three thousand horsemen, not allowing them to issue from the river before he charged them; he also sent one thousand light infantry up the river bank, and the same number down the Arno.
When the Florentine captains saw the difficulties their men were meeting, they withdrew them and moved higher up the river, hoping to find the river bed less treacherous and the banks more adapted for landing.
These men were met at the bank by the forces which Castruccio had already sent forward, who, being light armed with bucklers and javelins in their hands, let fly with tremendous shouts into the faces and bodies of the cavalry.
The horses, alarmed by the noise and the wounds, would not move forward, and trampled each other in great confusion.
The fight between the men of Castruccio and those of the enemy who succeeded in crossing was sharp and terrible; both sides fought with the utmost desperation and neither would yield.
The soldiers of Castruccio fought to drive the others back into the river, whilst the Florentines strove to get a footing on land in order to make room for the others pressing forward, who if they could but get out of the water would be able to fight, and in this obstinate conflict they were urged on by their captains.
Castruccio shouted to his men that these were the same enemies whom they had before conquered at Serravalle, whilst the Florentines reproached each other that the many should be overcome by the few.
This cleared a space of which the Florentines at once took advantage, and thus gained possession of a portion of the battlefield.
But when these tired soldiers found themselves at close quarters with Castruccio’s reserves they could not stand against them and at once fell back into the river.
The cavalry of either side had not as yet gained any decisive advantage over the other, because Castruccio, knowing his inferiority in this arm, had commanded his leaders only to stand on the defensive against the attacks of their adversaries, as he hoped that when he had overcome the infantry he would be able to make short work of the cavalry.
This fell out as he had hoped, for when he saw the Florentine army driven back across the river he ordered the remainder of his infantry to attack the cavalry of the enemy.
This they did with lance and javelin, and, joined by their own cavalry, fell upon the enemy with the greatest fury and soon put him to flight.
The Florentine captains, having seen the difficulty their cavalry had met with in crossing the river, had attempted to make their infantry cross lower down the river, in order to attack the flanks of Castruccio’s army.
But here, also, the banks were steep and already lined by the men of Castruccio, and this movement was quite useless.
Thus the Florentines were so completely defeated at all points that scarcely a third of them escaped, and Castruccio was again covered with glory.
Many captains were taken prisoners, and Carlo, the son of King Ruberto, with Michelagnolo Falconi and Taddeo degli Albizzi, the Florentine commissioners, fled to Empoli.
If the spoils were great, the slaughter was infinitely greater, as might be expected in such a battle.
Of the Florentines there fell twenty thousand two hundred and thirty-one men, whilst Castruccio lost one thousand five hundred and seventy men.
But Fortune growing envious of the glory of Castruccio took away his life just at the time when she should have preserved it, and thus ruined all those plans which for so long a time he had worked to carry into effect, and in the successful prosecution of which nothing but death could have stopped him.
Castruccio was in the thick of the battle the whole of the day; and when the end of it came, although fatigued and overheated, he stood at the gate of Fucecchio to welcome his men on their return from victory and personally thank them.
He was also on the watch for any attempt of the enemy to retrieve the fortunes of the day; he being of the opinion that it was the duty of a good general to be the first man in the saddle and the last out of it.
Here Castruccio stood exposed to a wind which often rises at midday on the banks of the Arno, and which is often very unhealthy; from this he took a chill, of which he thought nothing, as he was accustomed to such troubles; but it was the cause of his death.
On the following night he was attacked with high fever, which increased so rapidly that the doctors saw it must prove fatal.
I should neither have subjugated the Pistoians, nor outraged the Florentines with so many injuries.
But I would have made both these peoples my friends, and I should have lived, if no longer, at least more peacefully, and have left you a state without a doubt smaller, but one more secure and established on a surer foundation.
But Fortune, who insists upon having the arbitrament of human affairs, did not endow me with sufficient judgment to recognize this from the first, nor the time to surmount it.
When thy good father came to die, he committed thee and all his possessions to my care, and I have brought thee up with that love, and increased thy estate with that care, which I was bound to show.
And in order that thou shouldst not only possess the estate which thy father left, but also that which my fortune and abilities have gained, I have never married, so that the love of children should never deflect my mind from that gratitude which I owed to the children of thy father.
Thus I leave thee a vast estate, of which I am well content, but I am deeply concerned, inasmuch as I leave it thee unsettled and insecure.
Thou hast the city of Lucca on thy hands, which will never rest contented under thy government.
Thou hast also Pisa, where the men are of nature changeable and unreliable, who, although they may be sometimes held in subjection, yet they will ever disdain to serve under a Lucchese.
Pistoia is also disloyal to thee, she being eaten up with factions and deeply incensed against thy family by reason of the wrongs recently inflicted upon them.
Thou hast for neighbours the offended Florentines, injured by us in a thousand ways, but not utterly destroyed, who will hail the news of my death with more delight than they would the acquisition of all Tuscany.
In the Emperor and in the princes of Milan thou canst place no reliance, for they are far distant, slow, and their help is very long in coming.
Therefore, thou hast no hope in anything but in thine own abilities, and in the memory of my valour, and in the prestige which this latest victory has brought thee; which, as thou knowest how to use it with prudence, will assist thee to come to terms with the Florentines, who, as they are suffering under this great defeat, should be inclined to listen to thee.
And whereas I have sought to make them my enemies, because I believed that war with them would conduce to my power and glory, thou hast every inducement to make friends of them, because their alliance will bring thee advantages and security.
It is of the greatest important in this world that a man should know himself, and the measure of his own strength and means; and he who knows that he has not a genius for fighting must learn how to govern by the arts of peace.
And thou wilt be doubly indebted to me, in that I have left thee this realm and have taught thee how to keep it.” After this there came to Castruccio those citizens of Pisa, Pistoia, and Lucca, who had been fighting at his side, and whilst recommending Pagolo to them, and making them swear obedience to him as his successor, he died.
He left a happy memory to those who had known him, and no prince of those times was ever loved with such devotion as he was.
His obsequies were celebrated with every sign of mourning, and he was buried in San Francesco at Lucca.
Fortune was not so friendly to Pagolo Guinigi as she had been to Castruccio, for he had not the abilities.
Not long after the death of Castruccio, Pagolo lost Pisa, and then Pistoia, and only with difficulty held on to Lucca.
This latter city continued in the family of Guinigi until the time of the great-grandson of Pagolo.
From what has been related here it will be seen that Castruccio was a man of exceptional abilities, not only measured by men of his own time, but also by those of an earlier date.
In stature he was above the ordinary height, and perfectly proportioned.
He was of a gracious presence, and he welcomed men with such urbanity that those who spoke with him rarely left him displeased.
His hair was inclined to be red, and he wore it cut short above the ears, and, whether it rained or snowed, he always went without a hat.
He was delightful among friends, but terrible to his enemies; just to his subjects; ready to play false with the unfaithful, and willing to overcome by fraud those whom he desired to subdue, because he was wont to say that it was the victory that brought the glory, not the methods of achieving it.
No one was bolder in facing danger, none more prudent in extricating himself.
He was accustomed to say that men ought to attempt everything and fear nothing; that God is a lover of strong men, because one always sees that the weak are chastised by the strong.
He was also wonderfully sharp or biting though courteous in his answers; and as he did not look for any indulgence in this way of speaking from others, so he was not angered with others did not show it to him.
It has often happened that he has listened quietly when others have spoken sharply to him, as on the following occasions.
He had caused a ducat to be given for a partridge, and was taken to task for doing so by a friend, to whom Castruccio had said: “You would not have given more than a penny.” “That is true,” answered the friend.
Castruccio answered that he did not wonder at that, since every man valued his soul for what is was worth.
Being asked by one what he ought to do to gain estimation, he said: “When thou goest to a banquet take care that thou dost not seat one piece of wood upon another.” To a person who was boasting that he had read many things, Castruccio said: “He knows better than to boast of remembering many things.” Someone bragged that he could drink much without becoming intoxicated.
Castruccio used to say that the way to hell was an easy one, seeing that it was in a downward direction and you travelled blindfolded.
Castruccio praised greatly those men who intended to take a wife and then did not do so, saying that they were like men who said they would go to sea, and then refused when the time came.
He said that it always struck him with surprise that whilst men in buying an earthen or glass vase would sound it first to learn if it were good, yet in choosing a wife they were content with only looking at her.
“Is this king of yours a bad man or a good one?” asked Castruccio, and was told that he was a good one, whereupon he said, “Why should you suggest that I should be afraid of a good man?” I could recount many other stories of his sayings both witty and weighty, but I think that the above will be sufficient testimony to his high qualities.
And as he was surrounded by many evidences of his good fortune, so he also desired to have near him some memorials of his bad fortune; therefore the manacles with which he was chained in prison are to be seen to this day fixed up in the tower of his residence, where they were placed by him to testify forever to his days of adversity.
As in his life he was inferior neither to Philip of Macedon, the father of Alexander, nor to Scipio of Rome, so he died in the same year of his age as they did, and he would doubtless have excelled both of them had Fortune decreed that he should be born, not in Lucca, but in Macedonia or Rome.
THE THREE PRESENTS OF D’ARTAGNAN THE ELDER Chapter II.
THE ANTECHAMBER OF M.
THE AUDIENCE Chapter IV.
THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THE HANDKERCHIEF OF ARAMIS Chapter V.
THE KING’S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL’S GUARDS Chapter VI.
THE INTERIOR OF THE MUSKETEERS Chapter VIII.
CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE Chapter IX.
D’ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF Chapter X.
A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY Chapter XI.
IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS Chapter XII.
GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM Chapter XIII.
MONSIEUR BONACIEUX Chapter XIV.
BONACIEUX AT HOME Chapter XVIII.
PLAN OF CAMPAIGN Chapter XX.
THE COUNTESS DE WINTER Chapter XXII.
THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON Chapter XXIII.
THE RENDEZVOUS Chapter XXIV.
THE PAVILION Chapter XXV.
HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS Chapter XXX.
D’ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN Chapter XXXI.
A PROCURATOR’S DINNER Chapter XXXIII.
SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS Chapter XXXIV.
IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF Chapter XXXV.
DREAM OF VENGEANCE Chapter XXXVII.
HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT Chapter XXXIX.
A TERRIBLE VISION Chapter XLI.
THE SIEGE OF LA ROCHELLE Chapter XLII.
THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES Chapter XLV.
A CONJUGAL SCENE Chapter XLVI.
THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS Chapter XLVIII.
CAPTIVITY: THE FIRST DAY Chapter LIII.
CAPTIVITY: THE SECOND DAY Chapter LIV.
CAPTIVITY: THE THIRD DAY Chapter LV.
CAPTIVITY: THE FOURTH DAY Chapter LVI.
CAPTIVITY: THE FIFTH DAY Chapter LVII.
MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY Chapter LVIII.
WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH AUGUST 23, 1628 Chapter LX.
THE CARMELITE CONVENT AT BÉTHUNE Chapter LXII.
TWO VARIETIES OF DEMONS Chapter LXIII.
EXECUTION Chapter LXVII.
CONCLUSION EPILOGUE AUTHOR’S PREFACE In which it is proved that, notwithstanding their names’ ending in _os_ and _is_, the heroes of the story which we are about to have the honor to relate to our readers have nothing mythological about them.
A short time ago, while making researches in the Royal Library for my History of Louis XIV., I stumbled by chance upon the Memoirs of M. d’Artagnan, printed—as were most of the works of that period, in which authors could not tell the truth without the risk of a residence, more or less long, in the Bastille—at Amsterdam, by Pierre Rouge.
The title attracted me; I took them home with me, with the permission of the guardian, and devoured them.
It is not my intention here to enter into an analysis of this curious work; and I shall satisfy myself with referring such of my readers as appreciate the pictures of the period to its pages.
They will therein find portraits penciled by the hand of a master; and although these squibs may be, for the most part, traced upon the doors of barracks and the walls of cabarets, they will not find the likenesses of Louis XIII., Anne of Austria, Richelieu, Mazarin, and the courtiers of the period, less faithful than in the history of M.
But, it is well known, what strikes the capricious mind of the poet is not always what affects the mass of readers.
Now, while admiring, as others doubtless will admire, the details we have to relate, our main preoccupation concerned a matter to which no one before ourselves had given a thought.
D’Artagnan relates that on his first visit to M. de Tréville, captain of the king’s Musketeers, he met in the antechamber three young men, serving in the illustrious corps into which he was soliciting the honor of being received, bearing the names of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
We must confess these three strange names struck us; and it immediately occurred to us that they were but pseudonyms, under which D’Artagnan had disguised names perhaps illustrious, or else that the bearers of these borrowed names had themselves chosen them on the day in which, from caprice, discontent, or want of fortune, they had donned the simple Musketeer’s uniform.
From that moment we had no rest till we could find some trace in contemporary works of these extraordinary names which had so strongly awakened our curiosity.
The catalogue alone of the books we read with this object would fill a whole chapter, which, although it might be very instructive, would certainly afford our readers but little amusement.
The discovery of a completely unknown manuscript at a period in which historical science is carried to such a high degree appeared almost miraculous.
We hastened, therefore, to obtain permission to print it, with the view of presenting ourselves someday with the pack of others at the doors of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, if we should not succeed—a very probable thing, by the by—in gaining admission to the Académie Française with our own proper pack.
This permission, we feel bound to say, was graciously granted; which compels us here to give a public contradiction to the slanderers who pretend that we live under a government but moderately indulgent to men of letters.
Now, this is the first part of this precious manuscript which we offer to our readers, restoring it to the title which belongs to it, and entering into an engagement that if (of which we have no doubt) this first part should obtain the success it merits, we will publish the second immediately.
In the meanwhile, as the godfather is a second father, we beg the reader to lay to our account, and not to that of the Comte de la Fère, the pleasure or the _ennui_ he may experience.
This being understood, let us proceed with our history.
The Three Musketeers Chapter I.
THE THREE PRESENTS OF D’ARTAGNAN THE ELDER On the first Monday of the month of April, 1625, the market town of Meung, in which the author of _Romance of the Rose_ was born, appeared to be in as perfect a state of revolution as if the Huguenots had just made a second La Rochelle of it.
Many citizens, seeing the women flying toward the High Street, leaving their children crying at the open doors, hastened to don the cuirass, and supporting their somewhat uncertain courage with a musket or a partisan, directed their steps toward the hostelry of the Jolly Miller, before which was gathered, increasing every minute, a compact group, vociferous and full of curiosity.
In those times panics were common, and few days passed without some city or other registering in its archives an event of this kind.
There were nobles, who made war against each other; there was the king, who made war against the cardinal; there was Spain, which made war against the king.
Then, in addition to these concealed or public, secret or open wars, there were robbers, mendicants, Huguenots, wolves, and scoundrels, who made war upon everybody.
The citizens always took up arms readily against thieves, wolves or scoundrels, often against nobles or Huguenots, sometimes against the king, but never against the cardinal or Spain.
It resulted, then, from this habit that on the said first Monday of April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and seeing neither the red-and-yellow standard nor the livery of the Duc de Richelieu, rushed toward the hostel of the Jolly Miller.
When arrived there, the cause of the hubbub was apparent to all.
A young man—we can sketch his portrait at a dash.
Too big for a youth, too small for a grown man, an experienced eye might have taken him for a farmer’s son upon a journey had it not been for the long sword which, dangling from a leather baldric, hit against the calves of its owner as he walked, and against the rough side of his steed when he was on horseback.
For our young man had a steed which was the observed of all observers.
It was a Béarn pony, from twelve to fourteen years old, yellow in his hide, without a hair in his tail, but not without windgalls on his legs, which, though going with his head lower than his knees, rendering a martingale quite unnecessary, contrived nevertheless to perform his eight leagues a day.
Unfortunately, the qualities of this horse were so well concealed under his strange-colored hide and his unaccountable gait, that at a time when everybody was a connoisseur in horseflesh, the appearance of the aforesaid pony at Meung—which place he had entered about a quarter of an hour before, by the gate of Beaugency—produced an unfavorable feeling, which extended to his rider.
And this feeling had been more painfully perceived by young D’Artagnan—for so was the Don Quixote of this second Rosinante named—from his not being able to conceal from himself the ridiculous appearance that such a steed gave him, good horseman as he was.
He had sighed deeply, therefore, when accepting the gift of the pony from M. d’Artagnan the elder.
He was not ignorant that such a beast was worth at least twenty livres; and the words which had accompanied the present were above all price.
“My son,” said the old Gascon gentleman, in that pure Béarn _patois_ of which Henry IV. could never rid himself, “this horse was born in the house of your father about thirteen years ago, and has remained in it ever since, which ought to make you love it.
Never sell it; allow it to die tranquilly and honorably of old age, and if you make a campaign with it, take as much care of it as you would of an old servant.
At court, provided you have ever the honor to go there,” continued M. d’Artagnan the elder, “—an honor to which, remember, your ancient nobility gives you the right—sustain worthily your name of gentleman, which has been worthily borne by your ancestors for five hundred years, both for your own sake and the sake of those who belong to you.
By the latter I mean your relatives and friends.
Endure nothing from anyone except Monsieur the Cardinal and the king.
It is by his courage, please observe, by his courage alone, that a gentleman can make his way nowadays.
Whoever hesitates for a second perhaps allows the bait to escape which during that exact second fortune held out to him.
Never fear quarrels, but seek adventures.
Fight on all occasions.
Fight the more for duels being forbidden, since consequently there is twice as much courage in fighting.
I have nothing to give you, my son, but fifteen crowns, my horse, and the counsels you have just heard.
Your mother will add to them a recipe for a certain balsam, which she had from a Bohemian and which has the miraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach the heart.
Take advantage of all, and live happily and long.
I have but one word to add, and that is to propose an example to you—not mine, for I myself have never appeared at court, and have only taken part in religious wars as a volunteer; I speak of Monsieur de Tréville, who was formerly my neighbor, and who had the honor to be, as a child, the play-fellow of our king, Louis XIII., whom God preserve!
Sometimes their play degenerated into battles, and in these battles the king was not always the stronger.
The blows which he received increased greatly his esteem and friendship for Monsieur de Tréville.
Afterward, Monsieur de Tréville fought with others: in his first journey to Paris, five times; from the death of the late king till the young one came of age, without reckoning wars and sieges, seven times; and from that date up to the present day, a hundred times, perhaps!
So that in spite of edicts, ordinances, and decrees, there he is, captain of the Musketeers; that is to say, chief of a legion of Cæsars, whom the king holds in great esteem and whom the cardinal dreads—he who dreads nothing, as it is said.
Still further, Monsieur de Tréville gains ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great noble.
Go to him with this letter, and make him your model in order that you may do as he has done.” Upon which M. d’Artagnan the elder girded his own sword round his son, kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him his benediction.
On leaving the paternal chamber, the young man found his mother, who was waiting for him with the famous recipe of which the counsels we have just repeated would necessitate frequent employment.
The adieux were on this side longer and more tender than they had been on the other—not that M. d’Artagnan did not love his son, who was his only offspring, but M. d’Artagnan was a man, and he would have considered it unworthy of a man to give way to his feelings; whereas Mme.
D’Artagnan was a woman, and still more, a mother.
She wept abundantly; and—let us speak it to the praise of M. d’Artagnan the younger—notwithstanding the efforts he made to remain firm, as a future Musketeer ought, nature prevailed, and he shed many tears, of which he succeeded with great difficulty in concealing the half.
The same day the young man set forward on his journey, furnished with the three paternal gifts, which consisted, as we have said, of fifteen crowns, the horse, and the letter for M. de Tréville—the counsels being thrown into the bargain.
With such a _vade mecum_ D’Artagnan was morally and physically an exact copy of the hero of Cervantes, to whom we so happily compared him when our duty of an historian placed us under the necessity of sketching his portrait.
Don Quixote took windmills for giants, and sheep for armies; D’Artagnan took every smile for an insult, and every look as a provocation—whence it resulted that from Tarbes to Meung his fist was constantly doubled, or his hand on the hilt of his sword; and yet the fist did not descend upon any jaw, nor did the sword issue from its scabbard.
D’Artagnan, then, remained majestic and intact in his susceptibility, till he came to this unlucky city of Meung.
But there, as he was alighting from his horse at the gate of the Jolly Miller, without anyone—host, waiter, or hostler—coming to hold his stirrup or take his horse, D’Artagnan spied, though an open window on the ground floor, a gentleman, well-made and of good carriage, although of rather a stern countenance, talking with two persons who appeared to listen to him with respect.
D’Artagnan fancied quite naturally, according to his custom, that he must be the object of their conversation, and listened.
This time D’Artagnan was only in part mistaken; he himself was not in question, but his horse was.
The gentleman appeared to be enumerating all his qualities to his auditors; and, as I have said, the auditors seeming to have great deference for the narrator, they every moment burst into fits of laughter.
Now, as a half-smile was sufficient to awaken the irascibility of the young man, the effect produced upon him by this vociferous mirth may be easily imagined.
Nevertheless, D’Artagnan was desirous of examining the appearance of this impertinent personage who ridiculed him.
He fixed his haughty eye upon the stranger, and perceived a man of from forty to forty-five years of age, with black and piercing eyes, pale complexion, a strongly marked nose, and a black and well-shaped mustache.
He was dressed in a doublet and hose of a violet color, with aiguillettes of the same color, without any other ornaments than the customary slashes, through which the shirt appeared.
This doublet and hose, though new, were creased, like traveling clothes for a long time packed in a portmanteau.
D’Artagnan made all these remarks with the rapidity of a most minute observer, and doubtless from an instinctive feeling that this stranger was destined to have a great influence over his future life.
Now, as at the moment in which D’Artagnan fixed his eyes upon the gentleman in the violet doublet, the gentleman made one of his most knowing and profound remarks respecting the Béarnese pony, his two auditors laughed even louder than before, and he himself, though contrary to his custom, allowed a pale smile (if I may be allowed to use such an expression) to stray over his countenance.
This time there could be no doubt; D’Artagnan was really insulted.
Full, then, of this conviction, he pulled his cap down over his eyes, and endeavoring to copy some of the court airs he had picked up in Gascony among young traveling nobles, he advanced with one hand on the hilt of his sword and the other resting on his hip.
Unfortunately, as he advanced, his anger increased at every step; and instead of the proper and lofty speech he had prepared as a prelude to his challenge, he found nothing at the tip of his tongue but a gross personality, which he accompanied with a furious gesture.
The stranger looked at him again with a slight smile, and retiring from the window, came out of the hostelry with a slow step, and placed himself before the horse, within two paces of D’Artagnan.
His quiet manner and the ironical expression of his countenance redoubled the mirth of the persons with whom he had been talking, and who still remained at the window.
D’Artagnan, seeing him approach, drew his sword a foot out of the scabbard.
“This horse is decidedly, or rather has been in his youth, a buttercup,” resumed the stranger, continuing the remarks he had begun, and addressing himself to his auditors at the window, without paying the least attention to the exasperation of D’Artagnan, who, however, placed himself between him and them.
“It is a color very well known in botany, but till the present time very rare among horses.” “There are people who laugh at the horse that would not dare to laugh at the master,” cried the young emulator of the furious Tréville.
But, D’Artagnan was not of a character to allow a man to escape him thus who had the insolence to ridicule him.
He drew his sword entirely from the scabbard, and followed him, crying, “Turn, turn, Master Joker, lest I strike you behind!” “Strike me!” said the other, turning on his heels, and surveying the young man with as much astonishment as contempt.
“Why, my good fellow, you must be mad!” Then, in a suppressed tone, as if speaking to himself, “This is annoying,” continued he.
“What a godsend this would be for his Majesty, who is seeking everywhere for brave fellows to recruit for his Musketeers!” He had scarcely finished, when D’Artagnan made such a furious lunge at him that if he had not sprung nimbly backward, it is probable he would have jested for the last time.
The stranger, then perceiving that the matter went beyond raillery, drew his sword, saluted his adversary, and seriously placed himself on guard.
But at the same moment, his two auditors, accompanied by the host, fell upon D’Artagnan with sticks, shovels and tongs.
This caused so rapid and complete a diversion from the attack that D’Artagnan’s adversary, while the latter turned round to face this shower of blows, sheathed his sword with the same precision, and instead of an actor, which he had nearly been, became a spectator of the fight—a part in which he acquitted himself with his usual impassiveness, muttering, nevertheless, “A plague upon these Gascons!
Replace him on his orange horse, and let him begone!” “Not before I have killed you, poltroon!” cried D’Artagnan, making the best face possible, and never retreating one step before his three assailants, who continued to shower blows upon him.
“Another gasconade!” murmured the gentleman.
“By my honor, these Gascons are incorrigible!
When he is tired, he will perhaps tell us that he has had enough of it.” But the stranger knew not the headstrong personage he had to do with; D’Artagnan was not the man ever to cry for quarter.
The fight was therefore prolonged for some seconds; but at length D’Artagnan dropped his sword, which was broken in two pieces by the blow of a stick.
Another blow full upon his forehead at the same moment brought him to the ground, covered with blood and almost fainting.
It was at this moment that people came flocking to the scene of action from all sides.
The host, fearful of consequences, with the help of his servants carried the wounded man into the kitchen, where some trifling attentions were bestowed upon him.
As to the gentleman, he resumed his place at the window, and surveyed the crowd with a certain impatience, evidently annoyed by their remaining undispersed.
“Well, how is it with this madman?” exclaimed he, turning round as the noise of the door announced the entrance of the host, who came in to inquire if he was unhurt.
“Your Excellency is safe and sound?” asked the host.
Perfectly safe and sound, my good host; and I wish to know what has become of our young man.” “He is better,” said the host, “he fainted quite away.” “Indeed!” said the gentleman.
“But before he fainted, he collected all his strength to challenge you, and to defy you while challenging you.” “Why, this fellow must be the devil in person!” cried the stranger.
Now, my dear host, while your young man was insensible, you did not fail, I am quite sure, to ascertain what that pocket contained.
What was there in it?” “A letter addressed to Monsieur de Tréville, captain of the Musketeers.” “Indeed!” “Exactly as I have the honor to tell your Excellency.” The host, who was not endowed with great perspicacity, did not observe the expression which his words had given to the physiognomy of the stranger.
The latter rose from the front of the window, upon the sill of which he had leaned with his elbow, and knitted his brow like a man disquieted.
“The devil!” murmured he, between his teeth.
He is very young; but a sword thrust is a sword thrust, whatever be the age of him who gives it, and a youth is less to be suspected than an older man,” and the stranger fell into a reverie which lasted some minutes.
“A weak obstacle is sometimes sufficient to overthrow a great design.
“Host,” said he, “could you not contrive to get rid of this frantic boy for me?
In conscience, I cannot kill him; and yet,” added he, with a coldly menacing expression, “he annoys me.
Where is he?” “In my wife’s chamber, on the first flight, where they are dressing his wounds.” “His things and his bag are with him?
Has he taken off his doublet?” “On the contrary, everything is in the kitchen.
He causes a disturbance in your hostelry, which respectable people cannot put up with.
Go; make out my bill and notify my servant.” “What, monsieur, will you leave us so soon?” “You know that very well, as I gave my order to saddle my horse.
Have they not obeyed me?” “It is done; as your Excellency may have observed, your horse is in the great gateway, ready saddled for your departure.” “That is well; do as I have directed you, then.” “What the devil!” said the host to himself.
“Can he be afraid of this boy?” But an imperious glance from the stranger stopped him short; he bowed humbly and retired.
“It is not necessary for Milady* to be seen by this fellow,” continued the stranger.
I had better get on horseback, and go and meet her.
I should like, however, to know what this letter addressed to Tréville contains.” And the stranger, muttering to himself, directed his steps toward the kitchen. * We are well aware that this term, milady, is only properly used when followed by a family name.
But we find it thus in the manuscript, and we do not choose to take upon ourselves to alter it.
In the meantime, the host, who entertained no doubt that it was the presence of the young man that drove the stranger from his hostelry, re-ascended to his wife’s chamber, and found D’Artagnan just recovering his senses.
Giving him to understand that the police would deal with him pretty severely for having sought a quarrel with a great lord—for in the opinion of the host the stranger could be nothing less than a great lord—he insisted that notwithstanding his weakness D’Artagnan should get up and depart as quickly as possible.
D’Artagnan, half stupefied, without his doublet, and with his head bound up in a linen cloth, arose then, and urged by the host, began to descend the stairs; but on arriving at the kitchen, the first thing he saw was his antagonist talking calmly at the step of a heavy carriage, drawn by two large Norman horses.
His interlocutor, whose head appeared through the carriage window, was a woman of from twenty to two-and-twenty years.
We have already observed with what rapidity D’Artagnan seized the expression of a countenance.
He perceived then, at a glance, that this woman was young and beautiful; and her style of beauty struck him more forcibly from its being totally different from that of the southern countries in which D’Artagnan had hitherto resided.
She was pale and fair, with long curls falling in profusion over her shoulders, had large, blue, languishing eyes, rosy lips, and hands of alabaster.
She was talking with great animation with the stranger.
“His Eminence, then, orders me—” said the lady.
“To return instantly to England, and to inform him as soon as the duke leaves London.” “And as to my other instructions?” asked the fair traveler.
“They are contained in this box, which you will not open until you are on the other side of the Channel.” “Very well; and you—what will you do?” “I—I return to Paris.” “What, without chastising this insolent boy?” asked the lady.
The stranger was about to reply; but at the moment he opened his mouth, D’Artagnan, who had heard all, precipitated himself over the threshold of the door.
“This insolent boy chastises others,” cried he; “and I hope that this time he whom he ought to chastise will not escape him as before.” “Will not escape him?” replied the stranger, knitting his brow.
“No; before a woman you would dare not fly, I presume?” “Remember,” said Milady, seeing the stranger lay his hand on his sword, “the least delay may ruin everything.” “You are right,” cried the gentleman; “begone then, on your part, and I will depart as quickly on mine.” And bowing to the lady, he sprang into his saddle, while her coachman applied his whip vigorously to his horses.
The two interlocutors thus separated, taking opposite directions, at full gallop.
“Pay him, booby!” cried the stranger to his servant, without checking the speed of his horse; and the man, after throwing two or three silver pieces at the foot of mine host, galloped after his master.
“Base coward! false gentleman!” cried D’Artagnan, springing forward, in his turn, after the servant.
But his wound had rendered him too weak to support such an exertion.
“Yes, a base coward,” murmured D’Artagnan; “but she—she was very beautiful.” “What _she?_” demanded the host.
“Milady,” faltered D’Artagnan, and fainted a second time.
“Ah, it’s all one,” said the host; “I have lost two customers, but this one remains, of whom I am pretty certain for some days to come.
There will be eleven crowns gained.” It is to be remembered that eleven crowns was just the sum that remained in D’Artagnan’s purse.
The host had reckoned upon eleven days of confinement at a crown a day, but he had reckoned without his guest.
“My letter of recommendation!” cried D’Artagnan, “my letter of recommendation! or, the holy blood, I will spit you all like ortolans!” Unfortunately, there was one circumstance which created a powerful obstacle to the accomplishment of this threat; which was, as we have related, that his sword had been in his first conflict broken in two, and which he had entirely forgotten.
Hence, it resulted when D’Artagnan proceeded to draw his sword in earnest, he found himself purely and simply armed with a stump of a sword about eight or ten inches in length, which the host had carefully placed in the scabbard.
But this deception would probably not have stopped our fiery young man if the host had not reflected that the reclamation which his guest made was perfectly just.
“But, after all,” said he, lowering the point of his spit, “where is this letter?” “Yes, where is this letter?” cried D’Artagnan.
“In the first place, I warn you that that letter is for Monsieur de Tréville, and it must be found, or if it is not found, he will know how to find it.” His threat completed the intimidation of the host.
After the king and the cardinal, M. de Tréville was the man whose name was perhaps most frequently repeated by the military, and even by citizens.
There was, to be sure, Father Joseph, but his name was never pronounced but with a subdued voice, such was the terror inspired by his Gray Eminence, as the cardinal’s familiar was called.
Throwing down his spit, and ordering his wife to do the same with her broom handle, and the servants with their sticks, he set the first example of commencing an earnest search for the lost letter.
“Does the letter contain anything valuable?” demanded the host, after a few minutes of useless investigation.
I think it does indeed!” cried the Gascon, who reckoned upon this letter for making his way at court.
“It contained my fortune!” “Bills upon Spain?” asked the disturbed host.
“Bills upon his Majesty’s private treasury,” answered D’Artagnan, who, reckoning upon entering into the king’s service in consequence of this recommendation, believed he could make this somewhat hazardous reply without telling of a falsehood.
“But it’s of no importance,” continued D’Artagnan, with natural assurance; “it’s of no importance.
The money is nothing; that letter was everything.
I would rather have lost a thousand pistoles than have lost it.” He would not have risked more if he had said twenty thousand; but a certain juvenile modesty restrained him.
“What!” cried D’Artagnan.
By whom?” “By the gentleman who was here yesterday.
He remained there some time alone.
I would lay a wager he has stolen it.” “Do you think so?” answered D’Artagnan, but little convinced, as he knew better than anyone else how entirely personal the value of this letter was, and saw nothing in it likely to tempt cupidity.
The fact was that none of his servants, none of the travelers present, could have gained anything by being possessed of this paper.
“Do you say,” resumed D’Artagnan, “that you suspect that impertinent gentleman?” “I tell you I am sure of it,” continued the host.
“When I informed him that your lordship was the _protégé_ of Monsieur de Tréville, and that you even had a letter for that illustrious gentleman, he appeared to be very much disturbed, and asked me where that letter was, and immediately came down into the kitchen, where he knew your doublet was.” “Then that’s my thief,” replied D’Artagnan.
“I will complain to Monsieur de Tréville, and Monsieur de Tréville will complain to the king.” He then drew two crowns majestically from his purse and gave them to the host, who accompanied him, cap in hand, to the gate, and remounted his yellow horse, which bore him without any further accident to the gate of St.
Antoine at Paris, where his owner sold him for three crowns, which was a very good price, considering that D’Artagnan had ridden him hard during the last stage.
Thus the dealer to whom D’Artagnan sold him for the nine livres did not conceal from the young man that he only gave that enormous sum for him on the account of the originality of his color.
Thus D’Artagnan entered Paris on foot, carrying his little packet under his arm, and walked about till he found an apartment to be let on terms suited to the scantiness of his means.
This chamber was a sort of garret, situated in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, near the Luxembourg.
As soon as the earnest money was paid, D’Artagnan took possession of his lodging, and passed the remainder of the day in sewing onto his doublet and hose some ornamental braiding which his mother had taken off an almost-new doublet of the elder M. d’Artagnan, and which she had given her son secretly.
After this, satisfied with the way in which he had conducted himself at Meung, without remorse for the past, confident in the present, and full of hope for the future, he retired to bed and slept the sleep of the brave.
This sleep, provincial as it was, brought him to nine o’clock in the morning; at which hour he rose, in order to repair to the residence of M. de Tréville, the third personage in the kingdom, in the paternal estimation.
His insolent bravery, his still more insolent success at a time when blows poured down like hail, had borne him to the top of that difficult ladder called Court Favor, which he had climbed four steps at a time.
He was the friend of the king, who honored highly, as everyone knows, the memory of his father, Henry IV.
This was a great matter in the way of honor, but very little in the way of wealth; so that when the illustrious companion of the great Henry died, the only inheritance he was able to leave his son was his sword and his motto.
Thus Louis XIII. had a real liking for Tréville—a royal liking, a self-interested liking, it is true, but still a liking.
At that unhappy period it was an important consideration to be surrounded by such men as Tréville.
Many might take for their device the epithet _strong_, which formed the second part of his motto, but very few gentlemen could lay claim to the _faithful_, which constituted the first.
His was one of those rare organizations, endowed with an obedient intelligence like that of the dog; with a blind valor, a quick eye, and a prompt hand; to whom sight appeared only to be given to see if the king were dissatisfied with anyone, and the hand to strike this displeasing personage, whether a Besme, a Maurevers, a Poltiot de Méré, or a Vitry.
In short, up to this period nothing had been wanting to Tréville but opportunity; but he was ever on the watch for it, and he faithfully promised himself that he would not fail to seize it by its three hairs whenever it came within reach of his hand.
At last Louis XIII. made Tréville the captain of his Musketeers, who were to Louis XIII. in devotedness, or rather in fanaticism, what his Ordinaries had been to Henry III., and his Scotch Guard to Louis XI.
On his part, the cardinal was not behind the king in this respect.
When he saw the formidable and chosen body with which Louis XIII. had surrounded himself, this second, or rather this first king of France, became desirous that he, too, should have his guard.
He had his Musketeers therefore, as Louis XIII. had his, and these two powerful rivals vied with each other in procuring, not only from all the provinces of France, but even from all foreign states, the most celebrated swordsmen.
It was not uncommon for Richelieu and Louis XIII. to dispute over their evening game of chess upon the merits of their servants.
While exclaiming loudly against duels and brawls, they excited them secretly to quarrel, deriving an immoderate satisfaction or genuine regret from the success or defeat of their own combatants.
We learn this from the memoirs of a man who was concerned in some few of these defeats and in many of these victories.
Tréville had grasped the weak side of his master; and it was to this address that he owed the long and constant favor of a king who has not left the reputation behind him of being very faithful in his friendships.
He paraded his Musketeers before the Cardinal Armand Duplessis with an insolent air which made the gray moustache of his Eminence curl with ire.
Tréville understood admirably the war method of that period, in which he who could not live at the expense of the enemy must live at the expense of his compatriots.
His soldiers formed a legion of devil-may-care fellows, perfectly undisciplined toward all but himself.
Thus M. de Tréville was praised to the highest note by these men, who adored him, and who, ruffians as they were, trembled before him like scholars before their master, obedient to his least word, and ready to sacrifice themselves to wash out the smallest insult.
M. de Tréville employed this powerful weapon for the king, in the first place, and the friends of the king—and then for himself and his own friends.
For the rest, in the memoirs of this period, which has left so many memoirs, one does not find this worthy gentleman blamed even by his enemies; and he had many such among men of the pen as well as among men of the sword.
In no instance, let us say, was this worthy gentleman accused of deriving personal advantage from the cooperation of his minions.
Endowed with a rare genius for intrigue which rendered him the equal of the ablest intriguers, he remained an honest man.
The captain of the Musketeers was therefore admired, feared, and loved; and this constitutes the zenith of human fortune.
Louis XIV. absorbed all the smaller stars of his court in his own vast radiance; but his father, a sun _pluribus impar_, left his personal splendor to each of his favorites, his individual value to each of his courtiers.
In addition to the levees of the king and the cardinal, there might be reckoned in Paris at that time more than two hundred smaller but still noteworthy levees.
The court of his hôtel, situated in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier, resembled a camp from by six o’clock in the morning in summer and eight o’clock in winter.
From fifty to sixty Musketeers, who appeared to replace one another in order always to present an imposing number, paraded constantly, armed to the teeth and ready for anything.
On one of those immense staircases, upon whose space modern civilization would build a whole house, ascended and descended the office seekers of Paris, who ran after any sort of favor—gentlemen from the provinces anxious to be enrolled, and servants in all sorts of liveries, bringing and carrying messages between their masters and M. de Tréville.
In the antechamber, upon long circular benches, reposed the elect; that is to say, those who were called.
In this apartment a continued buzzing prevailed from morning till night, while M. de Tréville, in his office contiguous to this antechamber, received visits, listened to complaints, gave his orders, and like the king in his balcony at the Louvre, had only to place himself at the window to review both his men and arms.
The day on which D’Artagnan presented himself the assemblage was imposing, particularly for a provincial just arriving from his province.
It is true that this provincial was a Gascon; and that, particularly at this period, the compatriots of D’Artagnan had the reputation of not being easily intimidated.
When he had once passed the massive door covered with long square-headed nails, he fell into the midst of a troop of swordsmen, who crossed one another in their passage, calling out, quarreling, and playing tricks one with another.
In order to make one’s way amid these turbulent and conflicting waves, it was necessary to be an officer, a great noble, or a pretty woman.
It was, then, into the midst of this tumult and disorder that our young man advanced with a beating heart, ranging his long rapier up his lanky leg, and keeping one hand on the edge of his cap, with that half-smile of the embarrassed provincial who wishes to put on a good face.
When he had passed one group he began to breathe more freely; but he could not help observing that they turned round to look at him, and for the first time in his life D’Artagnan, who had till that day entertained a very good opinion of himself, felt ridiculous.
Arrived at the staircase, it was still worse.
There were four Musketeers on the bottom steps, amusing themselves with the following exercise, while ten or twelve of their comrades waited upon the landing place to take their turn in the sport.
One of them, stationed upon the top stair, naked sword in hand, prevented, or at least endeavored to prevent, the three others from ascending.
D’Artagnan at first took these weapons for foils, and believed them to be buttoned; but he soon perceived by certain scratches that every weapon was pointed and sharpened, and that at each of these scratches not only the spectators, but even the actors themselves, laughed like so many madmen.
He who at the moment occupied the upper step kept his adversaries marvelously in check.
The conditions required that at every hit the man touched should quit the game, yielding his turn for the benefit of the adversary who had hit him.
In five minutes three were slightly wounded, one on the hand, another on the ear, by the defender of the stair, who himself remained intact—a piece of skill which was worth to him, according to the rules agreed upon, three turns of favor.
However difficult it might be, or rather as he pretended it was, to astonish our young traveler, this pastime really astonished him.
He had seen in his province—that land in which heads become so easily heated—a few of the preliminaries of duels; but the daring of these four fencers appeared to him the strongest he had ever heard of even in Gascony.
He believed himself transported into that famous country of giants into which Gulliver afterward went and was so frightened; and yet he had not gained the goal, for there were still the landing place and the antechamber.
On the landing they were no longer fighting, but amused themselves with stories about women, and in the antechamber, with stories about the court.
On the landing D’Artagnan blushed; in the antechamber he trembled.
His warm and fickle imagination, which in Gascony had rendered him formidable to young chambermaids, and even sometimes their mistresses, had never dreamed, even in moments of delirium, of half the amorous wonders or a quarter of the feats of gallantry which were here set forth in connection with names the best known and with details the least concealed.
But if his morals were shocked on the landing, his respect for the cardinal was scandalized in the antechamber.
There, to his great astonishment, D’Artagnan heard the policy which made all Europe tremble criticized aloud and openly, as well as the private life of the cardinal, which so many great nobles had been punished for trying to pry into.
That great man who was so revered by D’Artagnan the elder served as an object of ridicule to the Musketeers of Tréville, who cracked their jokes upon his bandy legs and his crooked back.
Some sang ballads about Mme. d’Aguillon, his mistress, and Mme.
Cambalet, his niece; while others formed parties and plans to annoy the pages and guards of the cardinal duke—all things which appeared to D’Artagnan monstrous impossibilities.
Nevertheless, when the name of the king was now and then uttered unthinkingly amid all these cardinal jests, a sort of gag seemed to close for a moment on all these jeering mouths.
They looked hesitatingly around them, and appeared to doubt the thickness of the partition between them and the office of M. de Tréville; but a fresh allusion soon brought back the conversation to his Eminence, and then the laughter recovered its loudness and the light was not withheld from any of his actions.
“Certes, these fellows will all either be imprisoned or hanged,” thought the terrified D’Artagnan, “and I, no doubt, with them; for from the moment I have either listened to or heard them, I shall be held as an accomplice.
Although he was a perfect stranger in the court of M. de Tréville’s courtiers, and this his first appearance in that place, he was at length noticed, and somebody came and asked him what he wanted.
At this demand D’Artagnan gave his name very modestly, emphasized the title of compatriot, and begged the servant who had put the question to him to request a moment’s audience of M. de Tréville—a request which the other, with an air of protection, promised to transmit in due season.
D’Artagnan, a little recovered from his first surprise, had now leisure to study costumes and physiognomy.
The center of the most animated group was a Musketeer of great height and haughty countenance, dressed in a costume so peculiar as to attract general attention.
He did not wear the uniform cloak—which was not obligatory at that epoch of less liberty but more independence—but a cerulean-blue doublet, a little faded and worn, and over this a magnificent baldric, worked in gold, which shone like water ripples in the sun.
A long cloak of crimson velvet fell in graceful folds from his shoulders, disclosing in front the splendid baldric, from which was suspended a gigantic rapier.
This Musketeer had just come off guard, complained of having a cold, and coughed from time to time affectedly.
It was for this reason, as he said to those around him, that he had put on his cloak; and while he spoke with a lofty air and twisted his mustache disdainfully, all admired his embroidered baldric, and D’Artagnan more than anyone.
“What would you have?” said the Musketeer.
Besides, one must lay out one’s inheritance somehow.” “Ah, Porthos!” cried one of his companions, “don’t try to make us believe you obtained that baldric by paternal generosity.
Honoré.” “No, upon honor and by the faith of a gentleman, I bought it with the contents of my own purse,” answered he whom they designated by the name Porthos.
“Yes; about in the same manner,” said another Musketeer, “that I bought this new purse with what my mistress put into the old one.” “It’s true, though,” said Porthos; “and the proof is that I paid twelve pistoles for it.” The wonder was increased, though the doubt continued to exist.
“Is it not true, Aramis?” said Porthos, turning toward another Musketeer.
This other Musketeer formed a perfect contrast to his interrogator, who had just designated him by the name of Aramis.
He was a stout man, of about two- or three-and-twenty, with an open, ingenuous countenance, a black, mild eye, and cheeks rosy and downy as an autumn peach.
His delicate mustache marked a perfectly straight line upon his upper lip; he appeared to dread to lower his hands lest their veins should swell, and he pinched the tips of his ears from time to time to preserve their delicate pink transparency.
Habitually he spoke little and slowly, bowed frequently, laughed without noise, showing his teeth, which were fine and of which, as the rest of his person, he appeared to take great care.
He answered the appeal of his friend by an affirmative nod of the head.
This affirmation appeared to dispel all doubts with regard to the baldric.
They continued to admire it, but said no more about it; and with a rapid change of thought, the conversation passed suddenly to another subject.
“What do you think of the story Chalais’s esquire relates?” asked another Musketeer, without addressing anyone in particular, but on the contrary speaking to everybody.
“And what does he say?” asked Porthos, in a self-sufficient tone.
“He relates that he met at Brussels Rochefort, the _âme damnée_ of the cardinal disguised as a Capuchin, and that this cursed Rochefort, thanks to his disguise, had tricked Monsieur de Laigues, like a ninny as he is.” “A ninny, indeed!” said Porthos; “but is the matter certain?” “I had it from Aramis,” replied the Musketeer.
“I told you of it yesterday.
“Say no more about it! _Peste!_ You come to your conclusions quickly.
The cardinal sets a spy upon a gentleman, has his letters stolen from him by means of a traitor, a brigand, a rascal—has, with the help of this spy and thanks to this correspondence, Chalais’s throat cut, under the stupid pretext that he wanted to kill the king and marry Monsieur to the queen!
You unraveled it yesterday to the great satisfaction of all; and while we are still gaping with wonder at the news, you come and tell us today, ‘Let us say no more about it.’” “Well, then, let us talk about it, since you desire it,” replied Aramis, patiently.
“This Rochefort,” cried Porthos, “if I were the esquire of poor Chalais, should pass a minute or two very uncomfortably with me.” “And you—you would pass rather a sad quarter-hour with the Red Duke,” replied Aramis.
The Red Duke!” cried Porthos, clapping his hands and nodding his head.
I’ll circulate that saying, be assured, my dear fellow.
What a misfortune it is you did not follow your first vocation; what a delicious abbé you would have made!” “Oh, it’s only a temporary postponement,” replied Aramis; “I shall be one someday.
You very well know, Porthos, that I continue to study theology for that purpose.” “He will be one, as he says,” cried Porthos; “he will be one, sooner or later.” “Sooner,” said Aramis.
“He only waits for one thing to determine him to resume his cassock, which hangs behind his uniform,” said another Musketeer.
“Only till the queen has given an heir to the crown of France.” “No jesting upon that subject, gentlemen,” said Porthos; “thank God the queen is still of an age to give one!” “They say that Monsieur de Buckingham is in France,” replied Aramis, with a significant smile which gave to this sentence, apparently so simple, a tolerably scandalous meaning.
“Aramis, my good friend, this time you are wrong,” interrupted Porthos.
“Your wit is always leading you beyond bounds; if Monsieur de Tréville heard you, you would repent of speaking thus.” “Are you going to give me a lesson, Porthos?” cried Aramis, from whose usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning.
“My dear fellow, be a Musketeer or an abbé.
“You know what Athos told you the other day; you eat at everybody’s mess.
You go to Madame d’Aguillon’s, and you pay your court to her; you go to Madame de Bois-Tracy’s, the cousin of Madame de Chevreuse, and you pass for being far advanced in the good graces of that lady.
Don’t trouble yourself to reveal your good luck; no one asks for your secret—all the world knows your discretion.
Let whoever likes talk of the king and the cardinal, and how he likes; but the queen is sacred, and if anyone speaks of her, let it be respectfully.” “Porthos, you are as vain as Narcissus; I plainly tell you so,” replied Aramis.
“You know I hate moralizing, except when it is done by Athos.
As to you, good sir, you wear too magnificent a baldric to be strong on that head.
In the meanwhile I am a Musketeer; in that quality I say what I please, and at this moment it pleases me to say that you weary me.” “Aramis!” “Porthos!” “Gentlemen!
Gentlemen!” cried the surrounding group.
“Monsieur de Tréville awaits Monsieur d’Artagnan,” cried a servant, throwing open the door of the cabinet.
At this announcement, during which the door remained open, everyone became mute, and amid the general silence the young man crossed part of the length of the antechamber, and entered the apartment of the captain of the Musketeers, congratulating himself with all his heart at having so narrowly escaped the end of this strange quarrel.
Aramis!” The two Musketeers with whom we have already made acquaintance, and who answered to the last of these three names, immediately quitted the group of which they had formed a part, and advanced toward the cabinet, the door of which closed after them as soon as they had entered.
Their appearance, although it was not quite at ease, excited by its carelessness, at once full of dignity and submission, the admiration of D’Artagnan, who beheld in these two men demigods, and in their leader an Olympian Jupiter, armed with all his thunders.
“He told me that he should henceforth recruit his Musketeers from among the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal.” “The Guards of the cardinal!
“Because he plainly perceives that his piquette* stands in need of being enlivened by a mixture of good wine.” * A watered liquor, made from the second pressing of the grape.
The two Musketeers reddened to the whites of their eyes.
D’Artagnan did not know where he was, and wished himself a hundred feet underground.
“Yes, yes,” continued M. de Tréville, growing warmer as he spoke, “and his majesty was right; for, upon my honor, it is true that the Musketeers make but a miserable figure at court.
Don’t deny it; you were recognized, and the cardinal named you.
And of what malady?” “It is feared that it may be the smallpox, sir,” replied Porthos, desirous of taking his turn in the conversation; “and what is serious is that it will certainly spoil his face.” “The smallpox!
Sick of the smallpox at his age!
Messieurs Musketeers, I will not have this haunting of bad places, this quarreling in the streets, this swordplay at the crossways; and above all, I will not have occasion given for the cardinal’s Guards, who are brave, quiet, skillful men who never put themselves in a position to be arrested, and who, besides, never allow themselves to be arrested, to laugh at you!
I am sure of it—they would prefer dying on the spot to being arrested or taking back a step.
To save yourselves, to scamper away, to flee—that is good for the king’s Musketeers!” Porthos and Aramis trembled with rage.
They could willingly have strangled M. de Tréville, if, at the bottom of all this, they had not felt it was the great love he bore them which made him speak thus.
All without had heard, as we have said, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis called, and had guessed, from M. de Tréville’s tone of voice, that he was very angry about something.
Ten curious heads were glued to the tapestry and became pale with fury; for their ears, closely applied to the door, did not lose a syllable of what he said, while their mouths repeated as he went on, the insulting expressions of the captain to all the people in the antechamber.
The king’s Musketeers are arrested by the Guards of the cardinal, are they?” continued M. de Tréville, as furious at heart as his soldiers, but emphasizing his words and plunging them, one by one, so to say, like so many blows of a stiletto, into the bosoms of his auditors.
Six of his Eminence’s Guards arrest six of his Majesty’s Musketeers! _Morbleu!_ My part is taken!
I will go straight to the Louvre; I will give in my resignation as captain of the king’s Musketeers to take a lieutenancy in the cardinal’s Guards, and if he refuses me, _morbleu!_ I will turn abbé.” At these words, the murmur without became an explosion; nothing was to be heard but oaths and blasphemies.
The _morbleus_, the _sang Dieus_, the _morts touts les diables_, crossed one another in the air.
D’Artagnan looked for some tapestry behind which he might hide himself, and felt an immense inclination to crawl under the table.
But we were not captured by fair means; and before we had time to draw our swords, two of our party were dead, and Athos, grievously wounded, was very little better.
Well, Captain, he endeavored twice to get up, and fell again twice.
And we did not surrender—no!
As for Athos, they believed him to be dead, and left him very quiet on the field of battle, not thinking it worth the trouble to carry him away.
The great Pompey lost that of Pharsalia; and Francis the First, who was, as I have heard say, as good as other folks, nevertheless lost the Battle of Pavia.” “And I have the honor of assuring you that I killed one of them with his own sword,” said Aramis; “for mine was broken at the first parry.
Killed him, or poniarded him, sir, as is most agreeable to you.” “I did not know that,” replied M. de Tréville, in a somewhat softened tone.
“The cardinal exaggerated, as I perceive.” “But pray, sir,” continued Aramis, who, seeing his captain become appeased, ventured to risk a prayer, “do not say that Athos is wounded.
He would be in despair if that should come to the ears of the king; and as the wound is very serious, seeing that after crossing the shoulder it penetrates into the chest, it is to be feared—” At this instant the tapestry was raised and a noble and handsome head, but frightfully pale, appeared under the fringe.
“Athos!” cried the two Musketeers.
“Athos!” repeated M. de Tréville himself.
“You have sent for me, sir,” said Athos to M. de Tréville, in a feeble yet perfectly calm voice, “you have sent for me, as my comrades inform me, and I have hastened to receive your orders.
I am here; what do you want with me?” And at these words, the Musketeer, in irreproachable costume, belted as usual, with a tolerably firm step, entered the cabinet.
“I was about to say to these gentlemen,” added he, “that I forbid my Musketeers to expose their lives needlessly; for brave men are very dear to the king, and the king knows that his Musketeers are the bravest on the earth.
Your hand, Athos!” And without waiting for the answer of the newcomer to this proof of affection, M. de Tréville seized his right hand and pressed it with all his might, without perceiving that Athos, whatever might be his self-command, allowed a slight murmur of pain to escape him, and if possible, grew paler than he was before.
A burst of satisfaction hailed the last words of the captain; and two or three heads, carried away by the enthusiasm of the moment, appeared through the openings of the tapestry.
M. de Tréville was about to reprehend this breach of the rules of etiquette, when he felt the hand of Athos, who had rallied all his energies to contend against pain, at length overcome by it, fell upon the floor as if he were dead.
Or, s’blood, my brave Athos will die!” At the cries of M. de Tréville, the whole assemblage rushed into the cabinet, he not thinking to shut the door against anyone, and all crowded round the wounded man.
But all this eager attention might have been useless if the doctor so loudly called for had not chanced to be in the hôtel.
He pushed through the crowd, approached Athos, still insensible, and as all this noise and commotion inconvenienced him greatly, he required, as the first and most urgent thing, that the Musketeer should be carried into an adjoining chamber.
Immediately M. de Tréville opened and pointed the way to Porthos and Aramis, who bore their comrade in their arms.
The cabinet of M. de Tréville, generally held so sacred, became in an instant the annex of the antechamber.
Everyone spoke, harangued, and vociferated, swearing, cursing, and consigning the cardinal and his Guards to all the devils.
An instant after, Porthos and Aramis re-entered, the surgeon and M. de Tréville alone remaining with the wounded.
At length, M. de Tréville himself returned.
The injured man had recovered his senses.
The surgeon declared that the situation of the Musketeer had nothing in it to render his friends uneasy, his weakness having been purely and simply caused by loss of blood.
Then M. de Tréville made a sign with his hand, and all retired except D’Artagnan, who did not forget that he had an audience, and with the tenacity of a Gascon remained in his place.
The event which had occurred had in some degree broken the thread of his ideas.
He inquired what was the will of his persevering visitor.
D’Artagnan then repeated his name, and in an instant recovering all his remembrances of the present and the past, M. de Tréville grasped the situation.
“Pardon me,” said he, smiling, “pardon me my dear compatriot, but I had wholly forgotten you.
A captain is nothing but a father of a family, charged with even a greater responsibility than the father of an ordinary family.
Soldiers are big children; but as I maintain that the orders of the king, and more particularly the orders of the cardinal, should be executed—” D’Artagnan could not restrain a smile.
By this smile M. de Tréville judged that he had not to deal with a fool, and changing the conversation, came straight to the point.
“I respected your father very much,” said he.
“But,” continued M. de Tréville, fixing upon his compatriot a look so piercing that it might be said he wished to read the thoughts of his heart, “on account of my old companion, your father, as I have said, I will do something for you, young man.
Our recruits from Béarn are not generally very rich, and I have no reason to think matters have much changed in this respect since I left the province.
I dare say you have not brought too large a stock of money with you?” D’Artagnan drew himself up with a proud air which plainly said, “I ask alms of no man.” “Oh, that’s very well, young man,” continued M. de Tréville, “that’s all very well.
I know these airs; I myself came to Paris with four crowns in my purse, and would have fought with anyone who dared to tell me I was not in a condition to purchase the Louvre.” D’Artagnan’s bearing became still more imposing.
Thanks to the sale of his horse, he commenced his career with four more crowns than M. de Tréville possessed at the commencement of his.
“You ought, I say, then, to husband the means you have, however large the sum may be; but you ought also to endeavor to perfect yourself in the exercises becoming a gentleman.
I will write a letter today to the Director of the Royal Academy, and tomorrow he will admit you without any expense to yourself.
Our best-born and richest gentlemen sometimes solicit it without being able to obtain it.
You will learn horsemanship, swordsmanship in all its branches, and dancing.
You will make some desirable acquaintances; and from time to time you can call upon me, just to tell me how you are getting on, and to say whether I can be of further service to you.” D’Artagnan, stranger as he was to all the manners of a court, could not but perceive a little coldness in this reception.
“This is all very strange,” said M. de Tréville, after meditating a minute; “you mentioned my name, then, aloud?” “Yes, sir, I certainly committed that imprudence; but why should I have done otherwise?
Judge if I should not put myself under its protection.” Flattery was at that period very current, and M. de Tréville loved incense as well as a king, or even a cardinal.
If I ever find him again—and I will find him, I swear, were it in hell!” “He was waiting for a woman,” continued Tréville.
“He departed immediately after having conversed for a minute with her whom he awaited.” “You know not the subject of their conversation?” “He gave her a box, told her not to open it except in London.” “Was this woman English?” “He called her Milady.” “It is he; it must be he!” murmured Tréville.
“I believed him still at Brussels.” “Oh, sir, if you know who this man is,” cried D’Artagnan, “tell me who he is, and whence he is.
I will then release you from all your promises—even that of procuring my admission into the Musketeers; for before everything, I wish to avenge myself.” “Beware, young man!” cried Tréville.
Do not cast yourself against such a rock; he would break you like glass.” “That will not prevent me,” replied D’Artagnan, “if ever I find him.” “In the meantime,” said Tréville, “seek him not—if I have a right to advise you.” All at once the captain stopped, as if struck by a sudden suspicion.
This great hatred which the young traveler manifested so loudly for this man, who—a rather improbable thing—had stolen his father’s letter from him—was there not some perfidy concealed under this hatred?
Might not this young man be sent by his Eminence?
This pretended D’Artagnan—was he not an emissary of the cardinal, whom the cardinal sought to introduce into Tréville’s house, to place near him, to win his confidence, and afterward to ruin him as had been done in a thousand other instances?
He fixed his eyes upon D’Artagnan even more earnestly than before.
He was moderately reassured, however, by the aspect of that countenance, full of astute intelligence and affected humility.
“I know he is a Gascon,” reflected he, “but he may be one for the cardinal as well as for me.
Let us try him.” “My friend,” said he, slowly, “I wish, as the son of an ancient friend—for I consider this story of the lost letter perfectly true—I wish, I say, in order to repair the coldness you may have remarked in my reception of you, to discover to you the secrets of our policy.
The king and the cardinal are the best of friends; their apparent bickerings are only feints to deceive fools.
I am not willing that a compatriot, a handsome cavalier, a brave youth, quite fit to make his way, should become the dupe of all these artifices and fall into the snare after the example of so many others who have been ruined by it.
Be assured that I am devoted to both these all-powerful masters, and that my earnest endeavors have no other aim than the service of the king, and also the cardinal—one of the most illustrious geniuses that France has ever produced.
“Now, young man, regulate your conduct accordingly; and if you entertain, whether from your family, your relations, or even from your instincts, any of these enmities which we see constantly breaking out against the cardinal, bid me adieu and let us separate.
I will aid you in many ways, but without attaching you to my person.
I hope that my frankness at least will make you my friend; for you are the only young man to whom I have hitherto spoken as I have done to you.” Tréville said to himself: “If the cardinal has set this young fox upon me, he will certainly not have failed—he, who knows how bitterly I execrate him—to tell his spy that the best means of making his court to me is to rail at him.
Therefore, in spite of all my protestations, if it be as I suspect, my cunning gossip will assure me that he holds his Eminence in horror.” It, however, proved otherwise.
D’Artagnan answered, with the greatest simplicity: “I came to Paris with exactly such intentions.
My father advised me to stoop to nobody but the king, the cardinal, and yourself—whom he considered the first three personages in France.” D’Artagnan added M. de Tréville to the others, as may be perceived; but he thought this addition would do no harm.
“I have the greatest veneration for the cardinal,” continued he, “and the most profound respect for his actions.
So much the better for me, sir, if you speak to me, as you say, with frankness—for then you will do me the honor to esteem the resemblance of our opinions; but if you have entertained any doubt, as naturally you may, I feel that I am ruining myself by speaking the truth.
But I still trust you will not esteem me the less for it, and that is my object beyond all others.” M. de Tréville was surprised to the greatest degree.
So much penetration, so much frankness, created admiration, but did not entirely remove his suspicions.
The more this young man was superior to others, the more he was to be dreaded if he meant to deceive him.
Nevertheless, he pressed D’Artagnan’s hand, and said to him: “You are an honest youth; but at the present moment I can only do for you that which I just now offered.
Hereafter, being able to ask for me at all hours, and consequently to take advantage of all opportunities, you will probably obtain that which you desire.” “That is to say,” replied D’Artagnan, “that you will wait until I have proved myself worthy of it.
Well, be assured,” added he, with the familiarity of a Gascon, “you shall not wait long.” And he bowed in order to retire, and as if he considered the future in his own hands.
“But wait a minute,” said M. de Tréville, stopping him.
“I promised you a letter for the director of the Academy.
While he was doing this, D’Artagnan, having no better employment, amused himself with beating a march upon the window and with looking at the Musketeers, who went away, one after another, following them with his eyes until they disappeared.
M. de Tréville, after having written the letter, sealed it, and rising, approached the young man in order to give it to him.
But at the very moment when D’Artagnan stretched out his hand to receive it, M. de Tréville was highly astonished to see his _protégé_ make a sudden spring, become crimson with passion, and rush from the cabinet crying, “S’blood, he shall not escape me this time!” “And who?” asked M. de Tréville.
“He, my thief!” replied D’Artagnan.
“Ah, the traitor!” and he disappeared.
“The devil take the madman!” murmured M. de Tréville, “unless,” added he, “this is a cunning mode of escaping, seeing that he had failed in his purpose!” Chapter IV.
“Excuse me,” said D’Artagnan, endeavoring to resume his course, “excuse me, but I am in a hurry.” Scarcely had he descended the first stair, when a hand of iron seized him by the belt and stopped him.
“You are in a hurry?” said the Musketeer, as pale as a sheet.
“Under that pretense you run against me!
You say, ‘Excuse me,’ and you believe that is sufficient?
Do you fancy because you have heard Monsieur de Tréville speak to us a little cavalierly today that other people are to treat us as he speaks to us?
Undeceive yourself, comrade, you are not Monsieur de Tréville.” “My faith!” replied D’Artagnan, recognizing Athos, who, after the dressing performed by the doctor, was returning to his own apartment.
“I did not do it intentionally, and not doing it intentionally, I said ‘Excuse me.’ It appears to me that this is quite enough.
Leave your hold, then, I beg of you, and let me go where my business calls me.” “Monsieur,” said Athos, letting him go, “you are not polite; it is easy to perceive that you come from a distance.” D’Artagnan had already strode down three or four stairs, but at Athos’s last remark he stopped short.
“_Morbleu_, monsieur!” said he, “however far I may come, it is not you who can give me a lesson in good manners, I warn you.” “Perhaps,” said Athos.
If I were not in such haste, and if I were not running after someone,” said D’Artagnan.
“Monsieur Man-in-a-hurry, you can find me without running—_me_, you understand?” “And where, I pray you?” “Near the Carmes-Deschaux.” “At what hour?” “About noon.” “About noon?
That will do; I will be there.” “Endeavor not to make me wait; for at quarter past twelve I will cut off your ears as you run.” “Good!” cried D’Artagnan, “I will be there ten minutes before twelve.” And he set off running as if the devil possessed him, hoping that he might yet find the stranger, whose slow pace could not have carried him far.
D’Artagnan thought it would suffice for him, and he sprang forward like a dart between them.
But D’Artagnan had reckoned without the wind.
As he was about to pass, the wind blew out Porthos’s long cloak, and D’Artagnan rushed straight into the middle of it.
Without doubt, Porthos had reasons for not abandoning this part of his vestments, for instead of quitting his hold on the flap in his hand, he pulled it toward him, so that D’Artagnan rolled himself up in the velvet by a movement of rotation explained by the persistency of Porthos.
D’Artagnan, hearing the Musketeer swear, wished to escape from the cloak, which blinded him, and sought to find his way from under the folds of it.
He was particularly anxious to avoid marring the freshness of the magnificent baldric we are acquainted with; but on timidly opening his eyes, he found himself with his nose fixed between the two shoulders of Porthos—that is to say, exactly upon the baldric.
Alas, like most things in this world which have nothing in their favor but appearances, the baldric was glittering with gold in the front, but was nothing but simple buff behind.
Vainglorious as he was, Porthos could not afford to have a baldric wholly of gold, but had at least half.
One could comprehend the necessity of the cold and the urgency of the cloak.
“Bless me!” cried Porthos, making strong efforts to disembarrass himself of D’Artagnan, who was wriggling about his back; “you must be mad to run against people in this manner.” “Excuse me,” said D’Artagnan, reappearing under the shoulder of the giant, “but I am in such haste—I was running after someone and—” “And do you always forget your eyes when you run?” asked Porthos.
Porthos foamed with rage, and made a movement to rush after D’Artagnan.
“Presently, presently,” cried the latter, “when you haven’t your cloak on.” “At one o’clock, then, behind the Luxembourg.” “Very well, at one o’clock, then,” replied D’Artagnan, turning the angle of the street.
But neither in the street he had passed through, nor in the one which his eager glance pervaded, could he see anyone; however slowly the stranger had walked, he was gone on his way, or perhaps had entered some house.
D’Artagnan inquired of everyone he met with, went down to the ferry, came up again by the Rue de Seine, and the Red Cross; but nothing, absolutely nothing!
This chase was, however, advantageous to him in one sense, for in proportion as the perspiration broke from his forehead, his heart began to cool.
He began to reflect upon the events that had passed; they were numerous and inauspicious.
It was scarcely eleven o’clock in the morning, and yet this morning had already brought him into disgrace with M. de Tréville, who could not fail to think the manner in which D’Artagnan had left him a little cavalier.
Besides this, he had drawn upon himself two good duels with two men, each capable of killing three D’Artagnans—with two Musketeers, in short, with two of those beings whom he esteemed so greatly that he placed them in his mind and heart above all other men.
Sure of being killed by Athos, it may easily be understood that the young man was not very uneasy about Porthos.
As hope, however, is the last thing extinguished in the heart of man, he finished by hoping that he might survive, even though with terrible wounds, in both these duels; and in case of surviving, he made the following reprehensions upon his own conduct: “What a madcap I was, and what a stupid fellow I am!
That brave and unfortunate Athos was wounded on that very shoulder against which I must run head foremost, like a ram.
The only thing that astonishes me is that he did not strike me dead at once.
He had good cause to do so; the pain I gave him must have been atrocious.
As to Porthos—oh, as to Porthos, faith, that’s a droll affair!” And in spite of himself, the young man began to laugh aloud, looking round carefully, however, to see that his solitary laugh, without a cause in the eyes of passers-by, offended no one.
“As to Porthos, that is certainly droll; but I am not the less a giddy fool.
He would have pardoned me, he would certainly have pardoned me, if I had not said anything to him about that cursed baldric—in ambiguous words, it is true, but rather drolly ambiguous.
Friend D’Artagnan,” continued he, speaking to himself with all the amenity that he thought due himself, “if you escape, of which there is not much chance, I would advise you to practice perfect politeness for the future.
You must henceforth be admired and quoted as a model of it.
To be obliging and polite does not necessarily make a man a coward.
Look at Aramis, now; Aramis is mildness and grace personified.
No, certainly not, and from this moment I will endeavor to model myself after him.
D’Artagnan, on the contrary, quite full of his plans of conciliation and courtesy, approached the young men with a profound bow, accompanied by a most gracious smile.
All four, besides, immediately broke off their conversation.
D’Artagnan was not so dull as not to perceive that he was one too many; but he was not sufficiently broken into the fashions of the gay world to know how to extricate himself gallantly from a false position, like that of a man who begins to mingle with people he is scarcely acquainted with and in a conversation that does not concern him.
He was seeking in his mind, then, for the least awkward means of retreat, when he remarked that Aramis had let his handkerchief fall, and by mistake, no doubt, had placed his foot upon it.
This appeared to be a favorable opportunity to repair his intrusion.
He stooped, and with the most gracious air he could assume, drew the handkerchief from under the foot of the Musketeer in spite of the efforts the latter made to detain it, and holding it out to him, said, “I believe, monsieur, that this is a handkerchief you would be sorry to lose?” The handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered, and had a coronet and arms at one of its corners.
Aramis blushed excessively, and snatched rather than took the handkerchief from the hand of the Gascon.
“Ah, ah!” cried one of the Guards, “will you persist in saying, most discreet Aramis, that you are not on good terms with Madame de Bois-Tracy, when that gracious lady has the kindness to lend you one of her handkerchiefs?” Aramis darted at D’Artagnan one of those looks which inform a man that he has acquired a mortal enemy.
This time D’Artagnan was not hasty.
He perceived his mistake; but the friends of Aramis were not at all convinced by his denial, and one of them addressed the young Musketeer with affected seriousness.
He had his foot upon it, that is all; and I thought from having his foot upon it the handkerchief was his.” “And you were deceived, my dear sir,” replied Aramis, coldly, very little sensible to the reparation.
Then turning toward that one of the guards who had declared himself the friend of Bois-Tracy, “Besides,” continued he, “I have reflected, my dear intimate of Bois-Tracy, that I am not less tenderly his friend than you can possibly be; so that decidedly this handkerchief is as likely to have fallen from your pocket as mine.” “No, upon my honor!” cried his Majesty’s Guardsman.
Now, here, Montaran, we will do better than that—let each take a half.” “Of the handkerchief?” “Yes.” “Perfectly just,” cried the other two Guardsmen, “the judgment of King Solomon!
Aramis, you certainly are full of wisdom!” The young men burst into a laugh, and as may be supposed, the affair had no other sequel.
In a moment or two the conversation ceased, and the three Guardsmen and the Musketeer, after having cordially shaken hands, separated, the Guardsmen going one way and Aramis another.
Paris is not paved with cambric!” “Monsieur, you act wrongly in endeavoring to mortify me,” said D’Artagnan, in whom the natural quarrelsome spirit began to speak more loudly than his pacific resolutions.
And being a Musketeer but for a time, I only fight when I am forced to do so, and always with great repugnance; but this time the affair is serious, for here is a lady compromised by you.” “By _us_, you mean!” cried D’Artagnan.
“Why did you so maladroitly restore me the handkerchief?” “Why did you so awkwardly let it fall?” “I have said, monsieur, and I repeat, that the handkerchief did not fall from my pocket.” “And thereby you have lied twice, monsieur, for I saw it fall.” “Ah, you take it with that tone, do you, Master Gascon?
Well, I will teach you how to behave yourself.” “And I will send you back to your Mass book, Master Abbé.
Draw, if you please, and instantly—” “Not so, if you please, my good friend—not here, at least.
Do you not perceive that we are opposite the Hôtel d’Arguillon, which is full of the cardinal’s creatures?
How do I know that this is not his Eminence who has honored you with the commission to procure my head?
Now, I entertain a ridiculous partiality for my head, it seems to suit my shoulders so correctly.
I wish to kill you, be at rest as to that, but to kill you quietly in a snug, remote place, where you will not be able to boast of your death to anybody.” “I agree, monsieur; but do not be too confident.
Take your handkerchief; whether it belongs to you or another, you may perhaps stand in need of it.” “Monsieur is a Gascon?” asked Aramis.
Monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence?” “Prudence, monsieur, is a virtue sufficiently useless to Musketeers, I know, but indispensable to churchmen; and as I am only a Musketeer provisionally, I hold it good to be prudent.
At two o’clock I shall have the honor of expecting you at the hôtel of Monsieur de Tréville.
There I will indicate to you the best place and time.” The two young men bowed and separated, Aramis ascending the street which led to the Luxembourg, while D’Artagnan, perceiving the appointed hour was approaching, took the road to the Carmes-Deschaux, saying to himself, “Decidedly I can’t draw back; but at least, if I am killed, I shall be killed by a Musketeer.” Chapter V.
THE KING’S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL’S GUARDS D’Artagnan was acquainted with nobody in Paris.
He went therefore to his appointment with Athos without a second, determined to be satisfied with those his adversary should choose.
Now, we must have badly painted the character of our adventure seeker, or our readers must have already perceived that D’Artagnan was not an ordinary man; therefore, while repeating to himself that his death was inevitable, he did not make up his mind to die quietly, as one less courageous and less restrained might have done in his place.
He reflected upon the different characters of those with whom he was going to fight, and began to view his situation more clearly.
He flattered himself he should be able to frighten Porthos with the adventure of the baldric, which he might, if not killed upon the spot, relate to everybody a recital which, well managed, would cover Porthos with ridicule.
As to the astute Aramis, he did not entertain much dread of him; and supposing he should be able to get so far, he determined to dispatch him in good style or at least, by hitting him in the face, as Cæsar recommended his soldiers do to those of Pompey, to damage forever the beauty of which he was so proud.
When D’Artagnan arrived in sight of the bare spot of ground which extended along the foot of the monastery, Athos had been waiting about five minutes, and twelve o’clock was striking.
He was, then, as punctual as the Samaritan woman, and the most rigorous casuist with regard to duels could have nothing to say.
Athos, who still suffered grievously from his wound, though it had been dressed anew by M. de Tréville’s surgeon, was seated on a post and waiting for his adversary with hat in hand, his feather even touching the ground.
“You know no one but Monsieur de Tréville?” he asked.
But I will take the left hand—it is my custom in such circumstances.
And it will be even a disadvantage to you; a left-handed man is very troublesome to people who are not prepared for it.
I regret I did not inform you sooner of this circumstance.” “You have truly, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, bowing again, “a courtesy, for which, I assure you, I am very grateful.” “You confuse me,” replied Athos, with his gentlemanly air; “let us talk of something else, if you please.
My shoulder quite burns.” “If you would permit me—” said D’Artagnan, with timidity.
“_Pardieu_, monsieur!” said Athos, “that’s a proposition that pleases me; not that I can accept it, but a league off it savors of the gentleman.
Thus spoke and acted the gallant knights of the time of Charlemagne, in whom every cavalier ought to seek his model.
Unfortunately, we do not live in the times of the great emperor, we live in the times of the cardinal; and three days hence, however well the secret might be guarded, it would be known, I say, that we were to fight, and our combat would be prevented.
I think these fellows will never come.” “If you are in haste, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, with the same simplicity with which a moment before he had proposed to him to put off the duel for three days, “and if it be your will to dispatch me at once, do not inconvenience yourself, I pray you.” “There is another word which pleases me,” cried Athos, with a gracious nod to D’Artagnan.
Monsieur, I love men of your kidney; and I foresee plainly that if we don’t kill each other, I shall hereafter have much pleasure in your conversation.
We will wait for these gentlemen, so please you; I have plenty of time, and it will be more correct.
Ah, here is one of them, I believe.” In fact, at the end of the Rue Vaugirard the gigantic Porthos appeared.
“What!” cried D’Artagnan, “is your first witness Monsieur Porthos?” “Yes, that disturbs you?” “By no means.” “And here is the second.” D’Artagnan turned in the direction pointed to by Athos, and perceived Aramis.
“What!” cried he, in an accent of greater astonishment than before, “your second witness is Monsieur Aramis?” “Doubtless!
Are you not aware that we are never seen one without the others, and that we are called among the Musketeers and the Guards, at court and in the city, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, or the Three Inseparables?
And yet, as you come from Dax or Pau—” “From Tarbes,” said D’Artagnan.
“It is probable you are ignorant of this little fact,” said Athos.
“My faith!” replied D’Artagnan, “you are well named, gentlemen; and my adventure, if it should make any noise, will prove at least that your union is not founded upon contrasts.” In the meantime, Porthos had come up, waved his hand to Athos, and then turning toward D’Artagnan, stood quite astonished.
Let us say in passing that he had changed his baldric and relinquished his cloak.
“Ah, ah!” said he, “what does this mean?” “This is the gentleman I am going to fight with,” said Athos, pointing to D’Artagnan with his hand and saluting him with the same gesture.
“But not before one o’clock,” replied D’Artagnan.
“And I also am to fight with this gentleman,” said Aramis, coming in his turn onto the place.
“But not until two o’clock,” said D’Artagnan, with the same calmness.
He hurt my shoulder.
I am going to fight—because I am going to fight,” answered Porthos, reddening.
Athos, whose keen eye lost nothing, perceived a faintly sly smile pass over the lips of the young Gascon as he replied, “We had a short discussion upon dress.” “And you, Aramis?” asked Athos.
“Oh, ours is a theological quarrel,” replied Aramis, making a sign to D’Artagnan to keep secret the cause of their duel.
Athos indeed saw a second smile on the lips of D’Artagnan.
Augustine, upon which we could not agree,” said the Gascon.
“Decidedly, this is a clever fellow,” murmured Athos.
“And now you are assembled, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, “permit me to offer you my apologies.” At this word _apologies_, a cloud passed over the brow of Athos, a haughty smile curled the lip of Porthos, and a negative sign was the reply of Aramis.
“You do not understand me, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, throwing up his head, the sharp and bold lines of which were at the moment gilded by a bright ray of the sun.
“I asked to be excused in case I should not be able to discharge my debt to all three; for Monsieur Athos has the right to kill me first, which must much diminish the face-value of your bill, Monsieur Porthos, and render yours almost null, Monsieur Aramis.
And now, gentlemen, I repeat, excuse me, but on that account only, and—on guard!” At these words, with the most gallant air possible, D’Artagnan drew his sword.
The blood had mounted to the head of D’Artagnan, and at that moment he would have drawn his sword against all the Musketeers in the kingdom as willingly as he now did against Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
I will therefore fight in my doublet, like yourself.” “Come, come, enough of such compliments!” cried Porthos.
“Remember, we are waiting for our turns.” “Speak for yourself when you are inclined to utter such incongruities,” interrupted Aramis.
“For my part, I think what they say is very well said, and quite worthy of two gentlemen.” “When you please, monsieur,” said Athos, putting himself on guard.
“I waited your orders,” said D’Artagnan, crossing swords.
But scarcely had the two rapiers clashed, when a company of the Guards of his Eminence, commanded by M. de Jussac, turned the corner of the convent.
“The cardinal’s Guards!” cried Aramis and Porthos at the same time.
“Sheathe your swords, gentlemen, sheathe your swords!” But it was too late.
The two combatants had been seen in a position which left no doubt of their intentions.
“Halloo!” cried Jussac, advancing toward them and making a sign to his men to do so likewise, “halloo, Musketeers?
Fighting here, are you?
What is become of them?” “You are very generous, gentlemen of the Guards,” said Athos, full of rancor, for Jussac was one of the aggressors of the preceding day.
“If we were to see you fighting, I can assure you that we would make no effort to prevent you.
Leave us alone, then, and you will enjoy a little amusement without cost to yourselves.” “Gentlemen,” said Jussac, “it is with great regret that I pronounce the thing impossible.
Duty before everything.
Sheathe, then, if you please, and follow us.” “Monsieur,” said Aramis, parodying Jussac, “it would afford us great pleasure to obey your polite invitation if it depended upon ourselves; but unfortunately the thing is impossible—Monsieur de Tréville has forbidden it.
Pass on your way, then; it is the best thing to do.” This raillery exasperated Jussac.
“We will charge upon you, then,” said he, “if you disobey.” “There are five of them,” said Athos, half aloud, “and we are but three; we shall be beaten again, and must die on the spot, for, on my part, I declare I will never appear again before the captain as a conquered man.” Athos, Porthos, and Aramis instantly drew near one another, while Jussac drew up his soldiers.
This short interval was sufficient to determine D’Artagnan on the part he was to take.
It was one of those events which decide the life of a man; it was a choice between the king and the cardinal—the choice made, it must be persisted in.
To fight, that was to disobey the law, that was to risk his head, that was to make at one blow an enemy of a minister more powerful than the king himself.
All this the young man perceived, and yet, to his praise we speak it, he did not hesitate a second.
Turning towards Athos and his friends, “Gentlemen,” said he, “allow me to correct your words, if you please.
“That’s true,” replied D’Artagnan; “I have not the uniform, but I have the spirit.
My heart is that of a Musketeer; I feel it, monsieur, and that impels me on.” “Withdraw, young man,” cried Jussac, who doubtless, by his gestures and the expression of his countenance, had guessed D’Artagnan’s design.
Save your skin; begone quickly.” D’Artagnan did not budge.
“Decidedly, you are a brave fellow,” said Athos, pressing the young man’s hand.
“Well,” said Porthos to Aramis, “we must do something.” “Monsieur is full of generosity,” said Athos.
But all three reflected upon the youth of D’Artagnan, and dreaded his inexperience.
“We should only be three, one of whom is wounded, with the addition of a boy,” resumed Athos; “and yet it will not be the less said we were four men.” “Yes, but to yield!” said Porthos.
“That _is_ difficult,” replied Athos.
D’Artagnan comprehended their irresolution.
“Try me, gentlemen,” said he, “and I swear to you by my honor that I will not go hence if we are conquered.” “What is your name, my brave fellow?” said Athos.
“D’Artagnan, monsieur.” “Well, then, Athos, Porthos, Aramis, and D’Artagnan, forward!” cried Athos.
“Come, gentlemen, have you decided?” cried Jussac for the third time.
“It is done, gentlemen,” said Athos.
“We are about to have the honor of charging you,” replied Aramis, lifting his hat with one hand and drawing his sword with the other.
“S’blood; does that astonish you?” And the nine combatants rushed upon each other with a fury which however did not exclude a certain degree of method.
Athos fixed upon a certain Cahusac, a favorite of the cardinal’s.
Porthos had Bicarat, and Aramis found himself opposed to two adversaries.
As to D’Artagnan, he sprang toward Jussac himself.
The heart of the young Gascon beat as if it would burst through his side—not from fear, God be thanked, he had not the shade of it, but with emulation; he fought like a furious tiger, turning ten times round his adversary, and changing his ground and his guard twenty times.
Jussac was, as was then said, a fine blade, and had had much practice; nevertheless it required all his skill to defend himself against an adversary who, active and energetic, departed every instant from received rules, attacking him on all sides at once, and yet parrying like a man who had the greatest respect for his own epidermis.
This contest at length exhausted Jussac’s patience.
Furious at being held in check by one whom he had considered a boy, he became warm and began to make mistakes.
D’Artagnan, who though wanting in practice had a sound theory, redoubled his agility.
Jussac, anxious to put an end to this, springing forward, aimed a terrible thrust at his adversary, but the latter parried it; and while Jussac was recovering himself, glided like a serpent beneath his blade, and passed his sword through his body.
D’Artagnan then cast an anxious and rapid glance over the field of battle.
Aramis had killed one of his adversaries, but the other pressed him warmly.
Nevertheless, Aramis was in a good situation, and able to defend himself.
Bicarat and Porthos had just made counterhits.
Porthos had received a thrust through his arm, and Bicarat one through his thigh.
But neither of these two wounds was serious, and they only fought more earnestly.
Athos, wounded anew by Cahusac, became evidently paler, but did not give way a foot.
According to the laws of dueling at that period, D’Artagnan was at liberty to assist whom he pleased.
While he was endeavoring to find out which of his companions stood in greatest need, he caught a glance from Athos.
The glance was of sublime eloquence.
Athos would have died rather than appeal for help; but he could look, and with that look ask assistance.
D’Artagnan interpreted it; with a terrible bound he sprang to the side of Cahusac, crying, “To me, Monsieur Guardsman; I will slay you!” Cahusac turned.
It was time; for Athos, whose great courage alone supported him, sank upon his knee.
“S’blood!” cried he to D’Artagnan, “do not kill him, young man, I beg of you.
Very well done!” The exclamation was drawn from Athos by seeing the sword of Cahusac fly twenty paces from him.
D’Artagnan and Cahusac sprang forward at the same instant, the one to recover, the other to obtain, the sword; but D’Artagnan, being the more active, reached it first and placed his foot upon it.
Cahusac immediately ran to the Guardsman whom Aramis had killed, seized his rapier, and returned toward D’Artagnan; but on his way he met Athos, who during his relief which D’Artagnan had procured him had recovered his breath, and who, for fear that D’Artagnan would kill his enemy, wished to resume the fight.
D’Artagnan perceived that it would be disobliging Athos not to leave him alone; and in a few minutes Cahusac fell, with a sword thrust through his throat.
There only then remained Porthos and Bicarat.
Porthos made a thousand flourishes, asking Bicarat what o’clock it could be, and offering him his compliments upon his brother’s having just obtained a company in the regiment of Navarre; but, jest as he might, he gained nothing.
Nevertheless, it was necessary to finish.
The watch might come up and take all the combatants, wounded or not, royalists or cardinalists.
Athos, Aramis, and D’Artagnan surrounded Bicarat, and required him to surrender.
“As you are my commander, it is my duty to obey.” And springing backward, he broke his sword across his knee to avoid the necessity of surrendering it, threw the pieces over the convent wall, and crossed his arms, whistling a cardinalist air.
Bravery is always respected, even in an enemy.
The Musketeers saluted Bicarat with their swords, and returned them to their sheaths.
D’Artagnan did the same.
Then, assisted by Bicarat, the only one left standing, they bore Jussac, Cahusac, and one of Aramis’s adversaries who was only wounded, under the porch of the convent.
They then rang the bell, and carrying away four swords out of five, they took their road, intoxicated with joy, toward the hôtel of M. de Tréville.
They walked arm in arm, occupying the whole width of the street and taking in every Musketeer they met, so that in the end it became a triumphal march.
The heart of D’Artagnan swam in delirium; he marched between Athos and Porthos, pressing them tenderly.
“If I am not yet a Musketeer,” said he to his new friends, as he passed through the gateway of M. de Tréville’s hôtel, “at least I have entered upon my apprenticeship, haven’t I?” Chapter VI.
M. de Tréville scolded his Musketeers in public, and congratulated them in private; but as no time was to be lost in gaining the king, M. de Tréville hastened to report himself at the Louvre.
The king was closeted with the cardinal, and M. de Tréville was informed that the king was busy and could not receive him at that moment.
In the evening M. de Tréville attended the king’s gaming table.
The king was winning; and as he was very avaricious, he was in an excellent humor.
Perceiving M. de Tréville at a distance— “Come here, Monsieur Captain,” said he, “come here, that I may growl at you.
Do you know that his Eminence has been making fresh complaints against your Musketeers, and that with so much emotion, that this evening his Eminence is indisposed?
Ah, these Musketeers of yours are very devils—fellows to be hanged.” “No, sire,” replied Tréville, who saw at the first glance how things would go, “on the contrary, they are good creatures, as meek as lambs, and have but one desire, I’ll be their warranty.
And that is that their swords may never leave their scabbards but in your majesty’s service.
The Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal are forever seeking quarrels with them, and for the honor of the corps even, the poor young men are obliged to defend themselves.” “Listen to Monsieur de Tréville,” said the king; “listen to him!
Would not one say he was speaking of a religious community?
In truth, my dear Captain, I have a great mind to take away your commission and give it to Mademoiselle de Chemerault, to whom I promised an abbey.
The king therefore arose a minute after, and putting the money which lay before him into his pocket, the major part of which arose from his winnings, “La Vieuville,” said he, “take my place; I must speak to Monsieur de Tréville on an affair of importance.
Ah, I had eighty louis before me; put down the same sum, so that they who have lost may have nothing to complain of.
Justice before everything.” Then turning toward M. de Tréville and walking with him toward the embrasure of a window, “Well, monsieur,” continued he, “you say it is his Eminence’s Guards who have sought a quarrel with your Musketeers?” “Yes, sire, as they always do.” “And how did the thing happen?
In the most simple and natural manner possible.
Three of my best soldiers, whom your Majesty knows by name, and whose devotedness you have more than once appreciated, and who have, I dare affirm to the king, his service much at heart—three of my best soldiers, I say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, had made a party of pleasure with a young fellow from Gascony, whom I had introduced to them the same morning.
Germain, I believe, and they had appointed to meet at the Carmes-Deschaux, when they were disturbed by de Jussac, Cahusac, Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did not go there in such a numerous company without some ill intention against the edicts.” “Ah, ah!
You say, then, that the Guardsmen sought a quarrel with the Musketeers?” “I say that it is probable that things have fallen out so, but I will not swear to it, sire.
You know how difficult it is to discover the truth; and unless a man be endowed with that admirable instinct which causes Louis XIII. to be named the Just—” “You are right, Tréville; but they were not alone, your Musketeers.
Tell me how, Tréville—you know how I delight in accounts of war and fighting.” And Louis XIII. twisted his mustache proudly, placing his hand upon his hip.
“Sire,” resumed Tréville, “as I told you, Monsieur d’Artagnan is little more than a boy; and as he has not the honor of being a Musketeer, he was dressed as a citizen.
The Guards of the cardinal, perceiving his youth and that he did not belong to the corps, invited him to retire before they attacked.” “So you may plainly see, Tréville,” interrupted the king, “it was they who attacked?” “That is true, sire; there can be no more doubt on that head.
They called upon him then to retire; but he answered that he was a Musketeer at heart, entirely devoted to your Majesty, and that therefore he would remain with Messieurs the Musketeers.” “Brave young man!” murmured the king.
“Well, he did remain with them; and your Majesty has in him so firm a champion that it was he who gave Jussac the terrible sword thrust which has made the cardinal so angry.” “He who wounded Jussac!” cried the king, “he, a boy!
Devoted men are so rare, Tréville, by the back staircase.
It is useless to let the cardinal know.” “Yes, sire.” “You understand, Tréville—an edict is still an edict, it is forbidden to fight, after all.” “But this encounter, sire, is quite out of the ordinary conditions of a duel.
That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honor accorded them.
As they had long been acquainted with the king, they were not much excited; but D’Artagnan, with his Gascon imagination, saw in it his future fortune, and passed the night in golden dreams.
By eight o’clock in the morning he was at the apartment of Athos.
D’Artagnan found the Musketeer dressed and ready to go out.
As the hour to wait upon the king was not till twelve, he had made a party with Porthos and Aramis to play a game at tennis in a tennis court situated near the stables of the Luxembourg.
Athos invited D’Artagnan to follow them; and although ignorant of the game, which he had never played, he accepted, not knowing what to do with his time from nine o’clock in the morning, as it then scarcely was, till twelve.
The two Musketeers were already there, and were playing together.
Athos, who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed with D’Artagnan to the opposite side and challenged them; but at the first effort he made, although he played with his left hand, he found that his wound was yet too recent to allow of such exertion.
D’Artagnan remained, therefore, alone; and as he declared he was too ignorant of the game to play it regularly they only continued giving balls to one another without counting.
But one of these balls, launched by Porthos’ herculean hand, passed so close to D’Artagnan’s face that he thought that if, instead of passing near, it had hit him, his audience would have been probably lost, as it would have been impossible for him to present himself before the king.
Now, as upon this audience, in his Gascon imagination, depended his future life, he saluted Aramis and Porthos politely, declaring that he would not resume the game until he should be prepared to play with them on more equal terms, and went and took his place near the cord and in the gallery.
Unfortunately for D’Artagnan, among the spectators was one of his Eminence’s Guardsmen, who, still irritated by the defeat of his companions, which had happened only the day before, had promised himself to seize the first opportunity of avenging it.
He believed this opportunity was now come and addressed his neighbor: “It is not astonishing that that young man should be afraid of a ball, for he is doubtless a Musketeer apprentice.” D’Artagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him, and fixed his eyes intensely upon the Guardsman who had just made this insolent speech.
“_Pardieu_,” resumed the latter, twisting his mustache, “look at me as long as you like, my little gentleman!
I have said what I have said.” “And as since that which you have said is too clear to require any explanation,” replied D’Artagnan, in a low voice, “I beg you to follow me.” “And when?” asked the Guardsman, with the same jeering air.
You must be aware that for our undertaking, company would be in the way.” “That’s true,” said the Guardsman, astonished that his name had not produced more effect upon the young man.
Indeed, the name of Bernajoux was known to all the world, D’Artagnan alone excepted, perhaps; for it was one of those which figured most frequently in the daily brawls which all the edicts of the cardinal could not repress.
Porthos and Aramis were so engaged with their game, and Athos was watching them with so much attention, that they did not even perceive their young companion go out, who, as he had told the Guardsman of his Eminence, stopped outside the door.
An instant after, the Guardsman descended in his turn.
As D’Artagnan had no time to lose, on account of the audience of the king, which was fixed for midday, he cast his eyes around, and seeing that the street was empty, said to his adversary, “My faith!
It is fortunate for you, although your name is Bernajoux, to have only to deal with an apprentice Musketeer.
On guard!” “But,” said he whom D’Artagnan thus provoked, “it appears to me that this place is badly chosen, and that we should be better behind the Abbey St.
Germain or in the Pré-aux-Clercs.” “What you say is full of sense,” replied D’Artagnan; “but unfortunately I have very little time to spare, having an appointment at twelve precisely.
On guard, then, monsieur, on guard!” Bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment paid to him twice.
In an instant his sword glittered in his hand, and he sprang upon his adversary, whom, thanks to his great youthfulness, he hoped to intimidate.
But D’Artagnan had on the preceding day served his apprenticeship.
Fresh sharpened by his victory, full of hopes of future favor, he was resolved not to recoil a step.
So the two swords were crossed close to the hilts, and as D’Artagnan stood firm, it was his adversary who made the retreating step; but D’Artagnan seized the moment at which, in this movement, the sword of Bernajoux deviated from the line.
He freed his weapon, made a lunge, and touched his adversary on the shoulder.
D’Artagnan immediately made a step backward and raised his sword; but Bernajoux cried out that it was nothing, and rushing blindly upon him, absolutely spitted himself upon D’Artagnan’s sword.
But Athos, Porthos, and Aramis quickly appeared in their turn, and the moment the two Guardsmen attacked their young companion, drove them back.
Bernajoux now fell, and as the Guardsmen were only two against four, they began to cry, “To the rescue!
The Hôtel de la Trémouille!” At these cries, all who were in the hôtel rushed out and fell upon the four companions, who on their side cried aloud, “To the rescue, Musketeers!” This cry was generally heeded; for the Musketeers were known to be enemies of the cardinal, and were beloved on account of the hatred they bore to his Eminence.
Thus the soldiers of other companies than those which belonged to the Red Duke, as Aramis had called him, often took part with the king’s Musketeers in these quarrels.
Of three Guardsmen of the company of M.
Dessessart who were passing, two came to the assistance of the four companions, while the other ran toward the hôtel of M. de Tréville, crying, “To the rescue, Musketeers!
To the rescue!” As usual, this hôtel was full of soldiers of this company, who hastened to the succor of their comrades.
The _mêlée_ became general, but strength was on the side of the Musketeers.
The cardinal’s Guards and M. de la Trémouille’s people retreated into the hôtel, the doors of which they closed just in time to prevent their enemies from entering with them.
Excitement was at its height among the Musketeers and their allies, and they even began to deliberate whether they should not set fire to the hôtel to punish the insolence of M. de la Trémouille’s domestics in daring to make a _sortie_ upon the king’s Musketeers.
The proposition had been made, and received with enthusiasm, when fortunately eleven o’clock struck.
D’Artagnan and his companions remembered their audience, and as they would very much have regretted that such an opportunity should be lost, they succeeded in calming their friends, who contented themselves with hurling some paving stones against the gates; but the gates were too strong.
Besides, those who must be considered the leaders of the enterprise had quit the group and were making their way toward the hôtel of M. de Tréville, who was waiting for them, already informed of this fresh disturbance.
“Quick to the Louvre,” said he, “to the Louvre without losing an instant, and let us endeavor to see the king before he is prejudiced by the cardinal.
We will describe the thing to him as a consequence of the affair of yesterday, and the two will pass off together.” M. de Tréville, accompanied by the four young fellows, directed his course toward the Louvre; but to the great astonishment of the captain of the Musketeers, he was informed that the king had gone stag hunting in the forest of St.
M. de Tréville required this intelligence to be repeated to him twice, and each time his companions saw his brow become darker.
“Had his Majesty,” asked he, “any intention of holding this hunting party yesterday?” “No, your Excellency,” replied the valet de chambre, “the Master of the Hounds came this morning to inform him that he had marked down a stag.
At first the king answered that he would not go; but he could not resist his love of sport, and set out after dinner.” “And the king has seen the cardinal?” asked M. de Tréville.
“In all probability he has,” replied the valet, “for I saw the horses harnessed to his Eminence’s carriage this morning, and when I asked where he was going, they told me, ‘To St.
Germain.’” “He is beforehand with us,” said M. de Tréville.
“Gentlemen, I will see the king this evening; but as to you, I do not advise you to risk doing so.” This advice was too reasonable, and moreover came from a man who knew the king too well, to allow the four young men to dispute it.
M. de Tréville recommended everyone to return home and wait for news.
On entering his hôtel, M. de Tréville thought it best to be first in making the complaint.
He sent one of his servants to M. de la Trémouille with a letter in which he begged of him to eject the cardinal’s Guardsmen from his house, and to reprimand his people for their audacity in making _sortie_ against the king’s Musketeers.
But M. de la Trémouille—already prejudiced by his esquire, whose relative, as we already know, Bernajoux was—replied that it was neither for M. de Tréville nor the Musketeers to complain, but, on the contrary, for him, whose people the Musketeers had assaulted and whose hôtel they had endeavored to burn.
Now, as the debate between these two nobles might last a long time, each becoming, naturally, more firm in his own opinion, M. de Tréville thought of an expedient which might terminate it quietly.
He repaired, therefore, immediately to his hôtel, and caused himself to be announced.
The two nobles saluted each other politely, for if no friendship existed between them, there was at least esteem.
Both were men of courage and honor; and as M. de la Trémouille—a Protestant, and seeing the king seldom—was of no party, he did not, in general, carry any bias into his social relations.
This time, however, his address, although polite, was cooler than usual.
In addition to the sword thrust in his arm, which is not dangerous, he has received another right through his lungs, of which the doctor says bad things.” “But has the wounded man retained his senses?” “Perfectly.” “Does he talk?” “With difficulty, but he can speak.” “Well, monsieur, let us go to him.
I will take him for judge in his own cause, monsieur, and will believe what he will say.” M. de la Trémouille reflected for an instant; then as it was difficult to suggest a more reasonable proposal, he agreed to it.
Both descended to the chamber in which the wounded man lay.
The latter, on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him, endeavored to raise himself up in his bed; but he was too weak, and exhausted by the effort, he fell back again almost senseless.
M. de la Trémouille approached him, and made him inhale some salts, which recalled him to life.
Then M. de Tréville, unwilling that it should be thought that he had influenced the wounded man, requested M. de la Trémouille to interrogate him himself.
That happened which M. de Tréville had foreseen.
Placed between life and death, as Bernajoux was, he had no idea for a moment of concealing the truth; and he described to the two nobles the affair exactly as it had passed.
He wished Bernajoux a speedy convalescence, took leave of M. de la Trémouille, returned to his hôtel, and immediately sent word to the four friends that he awaited their company at dinner.
M. de Tréville entertained good company, wholly anticardinalist, though.
It may easily be understood, therefore, that the conversation during the whole of dinner turned upon the two checks that his Eminence’s Guardsmen had received.
Now, as D’Artagnan had been the hero of these two fights, it was upon him that all the felicitations fell, which Athos, Porthos, and Aramis abandoned to him, not only as good comrades, but as men who had so often had their turn that they could very well afford him his.
Toward six o’clock M. de Tréville announced that it was time to go to the Louvre; but as the hour of audience granted by his Majesty was past, instead of claiming the _entrée_ by the back stairs, he placed himself with the four young men in the antechamber.
The king had not yet returned from hunting.
Our young men had been waiting about half an hour, amid a crowd of courtiers, when all the doors were thrown open, and his Majesty was announced.
At his announcement D’Artagnan felt himself tremble to the very marrow of his bones.
The coming instant would in all probability decide the rest of his life.
His eyes therefore were fixed in a sort of agony upon the door through which the king must enter.
Louis XIII. appeared, walking fast.
At the first glance, D’Artagnan judged that the mind of the king was stormy.
This disposition, visible as it was in his Majesty, did not prevent the courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway.
In royal antechambers it is worth more to be viewed with an angry eye than not to be seen at all.
The three Musketeers therefore did not hesitate to make a step forward.
D’Artagnan on the contrary remained concealed behind them; but although the king knew Athos, Porthos, and Aramis personally, he passed before them without speaking or looking—indeed, as if he had never seen them before.
As for M. de Tréville, when the eyes of the king fell upon him, he sustained the look with so much firmness that it was the king who dropped his eyes; after which his Majesty, grumbling, entered his apartment.
M. de Tréville entered the king’s cabinet boldly, and found his Majesty in a very ill humor, seated on an armchair, beating his boot with the handle of his whip.
This, however, did not prevent his asking, with the greatest coolness, after his Majesty’s health.
“Bad, monsieur, bad!” replied the king; “I am bored.” This was, in fact, the worst complaint of Louis XIII., who would sometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say, “Monsieur So-and-so, let us weary ourselves together.” “How!
Have you not enjoyed the pleasures of the chase today?” “A fine pleasure, indeed, monsieur!
Upon my soul, everything degenerates; and I don’t know whether it is the game which leaves no scent, or the dogs that have no noses.
We started a stag of ten branches.
Ah, I am an unfortunate king, Monsieur de Tréville!
I had but one gerfalcon, and he died day before yesterday.” “Indeed, sire, I wholly comprehend your disappointment.
The misfortune is great; but I think you have still a good number of falcons, sparrow hawks, and tiercels.” “And not a man to instruct them.
Falconers are declining.
I know no one but myself who is acquainted with the noble art of venery.
But there is the cardinal always at hand, who does not leave me a moment’s repose; who talks to me about Spain, who talks to me about Austria, who talks to me about England!
Ah! _à propos_ of the cardinal, Monsieur de Tréville, I am vexed with you!” This was the chance at which M. de Tréville waited for the king.
He knew the king of old, and he knew that all these complaints were but a preface—a sort of excitation to encourage himself—and that he had now come to his point at last.
“And in what have I been so unfortunate as to displease your Majesty?” asked M. de Tréville, feigning the most profound astonishment.
“Is it thus you perform your charge, monsieur?” continued the king, without directly replying to de Tréville’s question.
“Is it for this I name you captain of my Musketeers, that they should assassinate a man, disturb a whole quarter, and endeavor to set fire to Paris, without your saying a word?
But yet,” continued the king, “undoubtedly my haste accuses you wrongfully; without doubt the rioters are in prison, and you come to tell me justice is done.” “Sire,” replied M. de Tréville, calmly, “on the contrary, I come to demand it of you.” “And against whom?” cried the king.
“Against calumniators,” said M. de Tréville.
This is something new,” replied the king.
“Will you tell me that your three damned Musketeers, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, and your youngster from Béarn, have not fallen, like so many furies, upon poor Bernajoux, and have not maltreated him in such a fashion that probably by this time he is dead?
Will you tell me that they did not lay siege to the hôtel of the Duc de la Trémouille, and that they did not endeavor to burn it?—which would not, perhaps, have been a great misfortune in time of war, seeing that it is nothing but a nest of Huguenots, but which is, in time of peace, a frightful example.
“Who has told me this fine story, monsieur?
Come, speak; avow freely that you accuse him!” “No, sire, but I say that he deceives himself.
I say that he is ill-informed.
I say that he has hastily accused your Majesty’s Musketeers, toward whom he is unjust, and that he has not obtained his information from good sources.” “The accusation comes from Monsieur de la Trémouille, from the duke himself.
You will bind yourself,” cried the king, “by what Monsieur de la Trémouille shall say?” “Yes, sire.” “You will accept his judgment?” “Undoubtedly.” “And you will submit to the reparation he may require?” “Certainly.” “La Chesnaye,” said the king.
“La Chesnaye!” Louis XIII.’s confidential valet, who never left the door, entered in reply to the call.
I sleep no longer, monsieur.
I sometimes dream, that’s all.
Come, then, as early as you like—at seven o’clock; but beware, if you and your Musketeers are guilty.” “If my Musketeers are guilty, sire, the guilty shall be placed in your Majesty’s hands, who will dispose of them at your good pleasure.
Does your Majesty require anything further?
Speak, I am ready to obey.” “No, monsieur, no; I am not called Louis the Just without reason.
Tomorrow, then, monsieur—tomorrow.” “Till then, God preserve your Majesty!” However ill the king might sleep, M. de Tréville slept still worse.
He had ordered his three Musketeers and their companion to be with him at half past six in the morning.
He took them with him, without encouraging them or promising them anything, and without concealing from them that their luck, and even his own, depended upon the cast of the dice.
If the king was still irritated against them, they would depart without being seen; if the king consented to see them, they would only have to be called.
On arriving at the king’s private antechamber, M. de Tréville found La Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not been able to find M. de la Trémouille on the preceding evening at his hôtel, that he returned too late to present himself at the Louvre, that he had only that moment arrived and that he was at that very hour with the king.
This circumstance pleased M. de Tréville much, as he thus became certain that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself between M. de la Trémouille’s testimony and himself.
In fact, ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door of the king’s closet opened, and M. de Tréville saw M. de la Trémouille come out.
The duke came straight up to him, and said: “Monsieur de Tréville, his Majesty has just sent for me in order to inquire respecting the circumstances which took place yesterday at my hôtel.
Since I have the good fortune to meet you, I beg you to receive them, and to hold me always as one of your friends.” “Monsieur the Duke,” said M. de Tréville, “I was so confident of your loyalty that I required no other defender before his Majesty than yourself.
Tell him all this for me, for these are things which a king cannot say for himself.” “Thanks, sire, thanks,” said the duke; “but your Majesty may be assured that it is not those—I do not speak of Monsieur de Tréville—whom your Majesty sees at all hours of the day that are most devoted to you.” “Ah!
So much the better, Duke, so much the better,” said the king, advancing toward the door.
Where are your Musketeers?
I told you the day before yesterday to bring them with you; why have you not done so?” “They are below, sire, and with your permission La Chesnaye will bid them come up.” “Yes, yes, let them come up immediately.
Go, Monsieur Duke, and return often.
At the moment he opened the door, the three Musketeers and D’Artagnan, conducted by La Chesnaye, appeared at the top of the staircase.
“Come in, my braves,” said the king, “come in; I am going to scold you.” The Musketeers advanced, bowing, D’Artagnan following closely behind them.
“What the devil!” continued the king.
“Seven of his Eminence’s Guards placed _hors de combat_ by you four in two days!
That’s too many, gentlemen, too many!
If you go on so, his Eminence will be forced to renew his company in three weeks, and I to put the edicts in force in all their rigor.
One now and then I don’t say much about; but seven in two days, I repeat, it is too many, it is far too many!” “Therefore, sire, your Majesty sees that they are come, quite contrite and repentant, to offer you their excuses.” “Quite contrite and repentant!
“I place no confidence in their hypocritical faces.
In particular, there is one yonder of a Gascon look.
Come hither, monsieur.” D’Artagnan, who understood that it was to him this compliment was addressed, approached, assuming a most deprecating air.
But at this sort of work, many doublets must be slashed and many swords broken.
Now, Gascons are always poor, are they not?” “Sire, I can assert that they have hitherto discovered no gold mines in their mountains; though the Lord owes them this miracle in recompense for the manner in which they supported the pretensions of the king your father.” “Which is to say that the Gascons made a king of me, myself, seeing that I am my father’s son, is it not, Tréville?
La Chesnaye, go and see if by rummaging all my pockets you can find forty pistoles; and if you can find them, bring them to me.
“This is all very well,” murmured the king, “yes, this is just the account the duke gave me of the affair.
But that’s quite enough, gentlemen; please to understand, that’s enough.
You have taken your revenge for the Rue Férou, and even exceeded it; you ought to be satisfied.” “If your Majesty is so,” said Tréville, “we are.” “Oh, yes; I am,” added the king, taking a handful of gold from La Chesnaye, and putting it into the hand of D’Artagnan.
“Here,” said he, “is a proof of my satisfaction.” At this epoch, the ideas of pride which are in fashion in our days did not prevail.
A gentleman received, from hand to hand, money from the king, and was not the least in the world humiliated.
D’Artagnan put his forty pistoles into his pocket without any scruple—on the contrary, thanking his Majesty greatly.
Thanks for your devotedness, gentlemen.
I may continue to rely upon it, may I not?” “Oh, sire!” cried the four companions, with one voice, “we would allow ourselves to be cut to pieces in your Majesty’s service.” “Well, well, but keep whole; that will be better, and you will be more useful to me.
Tréville,” added the king, in a low voice, as the others were retiring, “as you have no room in the Musketeers, and as we have besides decided that a novitiate is necessary before entering that corps, place this young man in the company of the Guards of Monsieur Dessessart, your brother-in-law.
I enjoy beforehand the face the cardinal will make.
I am doing what is right.” The king waved his hand to Tréville, who left him and rejoined the Musketeers, whom he found sharing the forty pistoles with D’Artagnan.
The cardinal, as his Majesty had said, was really furious, so furious that during eight days he absented himself from the king’s gaming table.
This did not prevent the king from being as complacent to him as possible whenever he met him, or from asking in the kindest tone, “Well, Monsieur Cardinal, how fares it with that poor Jussac and that poor Bernajoux of yours?” Chapter VII.
THE INTERIOR OF THE MUSKETEERS When D’Artagnan was out of the Louvre, and consulted his friends upon the use he had best make of his share of the forty pistoles, Athos advised him to order a good repast at the Pomme-de-Pin, Porthos to engage a lackey, and Aramis to provide himself with a suitable mistress.
The repast had been ordered by Athos, and the lackey furnished by Porthos.
He was a Picard, whom the glorious Musketeer had picked up on the Bridge Tournelle, making rings and plashing in the water.
Porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflective and contemplative organization, and he had brought him away without any other recommendation.
The noble carriage of this gentleman, for whom he believed himself to be engaged, had won Planchet—that was the name of the Picard.
He felt a slight disappointment, however, when he saw that this place was already taken by a compeer named Mousqueton, and when Porthos signified to him that the state of his household, though great, would not support two servants, and that he must enter into the service of D’Artagnan.
Nevertheless, when he waited at the dinner given by his master, and saw him take out a handful of gold to pay for it, he believed his fortune made, and returned thanks to heaven for having thrown him into the service of such a Crœsus.
He preserved this opinion even after the feast, with the remnants of which he repaired his own long abstinence; but when in the evening he made his master’s bed, the chimeras of Planchet faded away.
The bed was the only one in the apartment, which consisted of an antechamber and a bedroom.
Planchet slept in the antechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of D’Artagnan, and which D’Artagnan from that time made shift to do without.
Athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in his service in a thoroughly peculiar fashion, and who was named Grimaud.
He was very taciturn, this worthy signor.
Be it understood we are speaking of Athos.
During the five or six years that he had lived in the strictest intimacy with his companions, Porthos and Aramis, they could remember having often seen him smile, but had never heard him laugh.
His words were brief and expressive, conveying all that was meant, and no more; no embellishments, no embroidery, no arabesques.
His conversation was a matter of fact, without a single romance.
Although Athos was scarcely thirty years old, and was of great personal beauty and intelligence of mind, no one knew whether he had ever had a mistress.
He certainly did not prevent others from speaking of them before him, although it was easy to perceive that this kind of conversation, in which he only mingled by bitter words and misanthropic remarks, was very disagreeable to him.
His reserve, his roughness, and his silence made almost an old man of him.
He had, then, in order not to disturb his habits, accustomed Grimaud to obey him upon a simple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips.
He never spoke to him, except under the most extraordinary occasions.
Sometimes, Grimaud, who feared his master as he did fire, while entertaining a strong attachment to his person and a great veneration for his talents, believed he perfectly understood what he wanted, flew to execute the order received, and did precisely the contrary.
Athos then shrugged his shoulders, and, without putting himself in a passion, thrashed Grimaud.
Porthos, as we have seen, had a character exactly opposite to that of Athos.
He not only talked much, but he talked loudly, little caring, we must render him that justice, whether anybody listened to him or not.
He talked for the pleasure of talking and for the pleasure of hearing himself talk.
He spoke upon all subjects except the sciences, alleging in this respect the inveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his childhood.
He had not so noble an air as Athos, and the commencement of their intimacy often rendered him unjust toward that gentleman, whom he endeavored to eclipse by his splendid dress.
But with his simple Musketeer’s uniform and nothing but the manner in which he threw back his head and advanced his foot, Athos instantly took the place which was his due and consigned the ostentatious Porthos to the second rank.
Porthos consoled himself by filling the antechamber of M. de Tréville and the guardroom of the Louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes, after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies, from the lawyer’s dame to the baroness, there was question of nothing less with Porthos than a foreign princess, who was enormously fond of him.
An old proverb says, “Like master, like man.” Let us pass, then, from the valet of Athos to the valet of Porthos, from Grimaud to Mousqueton.
Mousqueton was a Norman, whose pacific name of Boniface his master had changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of Mousqueton.
He had entered the service of Porthos upon condition that he should only be clothed and lodged, though in a handsome manner; but he claimed two hours a day to himself, consecrated to an employment which would provide for his other wants.
Porthos agreed to the bargain; the thing suited him wonderfully well.
He had doublets cut out of his old clothes and cast-off cloaks for Mousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent tailor, who made his clothes look as good as new by turning them, and whose wife was suspected of wishing to make Porthos descend from his aristocratic habits, Mousqueton made a very good figure when attending on his master.
As for Aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explained the character—a character which, like that of his companions, we shall be able to follow in its development—his lackey was called Bazin.
Thanks to the hopes which his master entertained of someday entering into orders, he was always clothed in black, as became the servant of a churchman.
He was a Berrichon, thirty-five or forty years old, mild, peaceable, sleek, employing the leisure his master left him in the perusal of pious works, providing rigorously for two a dinner of few dishes, but excellent.
For the rest, he was dumb, blind, and deaf, and of unimpeachable fidelity.
And now that we are acquainted, superficially at least, with the masters and the valets, let us pass on to the dwellings occupied by each of them.
Athos dwelt in the Rue Férou, within two steps of the Luxembourg.
His apartment consisted of two small chambers, very nicely fitted up, in a furnished house, the hostess of which, still young and still really handsome, cast tender glances uselessly at him.
Some fragments of past splendor appeared here and there upon the walls of this modest lodging; a sword, for example, richly embossed, which belonged by its make to the times of Francis I, the hilt of which alone, encrusted with precious stones, might be worth two hundred pistoles, and which, nevertheless, in his moments of greatest distress Athos had never pledged or offered for sale.
It had long been an object of ambition for Porthos.
One day, when he had an appointment with a duchess, he endeavored even to borrow it of Athos.
Athos, without saying anything, emptied his pockets, got together all his jewels, purses, aiguillettes, and gold chains, and offered them all to Porthos; but as to the sword, he said it was sealed to its place and should never quit it until its master should himself quit his lodgings.
In addition to the sword, there was a portrait representing a nobleman of the time of Henry III., dressed with the greatest elegance, and who wore the Order of the Holy Ghost; and this portrait had certain resemblances of lines with Athos, certain family likenesses which indicated that this great noble, a knight of the Order of the King, was his ancestor.
Besides these, a casket of magnificent goldwork, with the same arms as the sword and the portrait, formed a middle ornament to the mantelpiece, and assorted badly with the rest of the furniture.
Athos always carried the key of this coffer about him; but he one day opened it before Porthos, and Porthos was convinced that this coffer contained nothing but letters and papers—love letters and family papers, no doubt.
Porthos lived in an apartment, large in size and of very sumptuous appearance, in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier.
Every time he passed with a friend before his windows, at one of which Mousqueton was sure to be placed in full livery, Porthos raised his head and his hand, and said, “That is my abode!” But he was never to be found at home; he never invited anybody to go up with him, and no one could form an idea of what his sumptuous apartment contained in the shape of real riches.
As to Aramis, he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir, an eating room, and a bedroom, which room, situated, as the others were, on the ground floor, looked out upon a little fresh green garden, shady and impenetrable to the eyes of his neighbors.
With regard to D’Artagnan, we know how he was lodged, and we have already made acquaintance with his lackey, Master Planchet.
D’Artagnan, who was by nature very curious—as people generally are who possess the genius of intrigue—did all he could to make out who Athos, Porthos, and Aramis really were (for under these pseudonyms each of these young men concealed his family name)—Athos in particular, who, a league away, savored of nobility.
He addressed himself then to Porthos to gain information respecting Athos and Aramis, and to Aramis in order to learn something of Porthos.
Unfortunately Porthos knew nothing of the life of his silent companion but what revealed itself.
It was said Athos had met with great crosses in love, and that a frightful treachery had forever poisoned the life of this gallant man.
What could this treachery be?
All the world was ignorant of it.
As to Porthos, except his real name (as was the case with those of his two comrades), his life was very easily known.
Vain and indiscreet, it was as easy to see through him as through a crystal.
The only thing to mislead the investigator would have been belief in all the good things he said of himself.
With respect to Aramis, though having the air of having nothing secret about him, he was a young fellow made up of mysteries, answering little to questions put to him about others, and having learned from him the report which prevailed concerning the success of the Musketeer with a princess, wished to gain a little insight into the amorous adventures of his interlocutor.
“And you, my dear companion,” said he, “you speak of the baronesses, countesses, and princesses of others?” “_Pardieu!_ I spoke of them because Porthos talked of them himself, because he had paraded all these fine things before me.
The handkerchief you saw had not been given to me, but it had been forgotten and left at my house by one of my friends.
I was obliged to pick it up in order not to compromise him and the lady he loves.
As for myself, I neither have, nor desire to have, a mistress, following in that respect the very judicious example of Athos, who has none any more than I have.” “But what the devil!
You are not a priest, you are a Musketeer!” “A Musketeer for a time, my friend, as the cardinal says, a Musketeer against my will, but a churchman at heart, believe me.
I had, at the moment of being ordained, a little difficulty with—But that would not interest you, and I am taking up your valuable time.” “Not at all; it interests me very much,” cried D’Artagnan; “and at this moment I have absolutely nothing to do.” “Yes, but I have my breviary to repeat,” answered Aramis; “then some verses to compose, which Madame d’Aiguillon begged of me.
Honoré in order to purchase some rouge for Madame de Chevreuse.
So you see, my dear friend, that if you are not in a hurry, I am very much in a hurry.” Aramis held out his hand in a cordial manner to his young companion, and took leave of him.
Notwithstanding all the pains he took, D’Artagnan was unable to learn any more concerning his three new-made friends.
He formed, therefore, the resolution of believing for the present all that was said of their past, hoping for more certain and extended revelations in the future.
In the meanwhile, he looked upon Athos as an Achilles, Porthos as an Ajax, and Aramis as a Joseph.
Athos played, and that as a rule unfortunately.
Nevertheless, he never borrowed a sou of his companions, although his purse was ever at their service; and when he had played upon honor, he always awakened his creditor by six o’clock the next morning to pay the debt of the preceding evening.
On the days when he won he was insolent and ostentatious; if he lost, he disappeared completely for several days, after which he reappeared with a pale face and thinner person, but with money in his purse.
He was the worst Musketeer and the most unconvivial companion imaginable.
He had always something or other to do.
Sometimes in the midst of dinner, when everyone, under the attraction of wine and in the warmth of conversation, believed they had two or three hours longer to enjoy themselves at table, Aramis looked at his watch, arose with a bland smile, and took leave of the company, to go, as he said, to consult a casuist with whom he had an appointment.
At other times he would return home to write a treatise, and requested his friends not to disturb him.
At this Athos would smile, with his charming, melancholy smile, which so became his noble countenance, and Porthos would drink, swearing that Aramis would never be anything but a village _curé_.
Planchet, D’Artagnan’s valet, supported his good fortune nobly.
He received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned to his lodgings gay as a chaffinch, and affable toward his master.
When the wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping of the Rue des Fossoyeurs—that is to say, when the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII. were consumed or nearly so—he commenced complaints which Athos thought nauseous, Porthos indecent, and Aramis ridiculous.
Athos counseled D’Artagnan to dismiss the fellow; Porthos was of the opinion that he should give him a good thrashing first; and Aramis contended that a master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.
Reflect upon it.” D’Artagnan did reflect, and resolved to thrash Planchet provisionally; which he did with the conscientiousness that D’Artagnan carried into everything.
After having well beaten him, he forbade him to leave his service without his permission.
“For,” added he, “the future cannot fail to mend; I inevitably look for better times.
Your fortune is therefore made if you remain with me, and I am too good a master to allow you to miss such a chance by granting you the dismissal you require.” This manner of acting roused much respect for D’Artagnan’s policy among the Musketeers.
Planchet was equally seized with admiration, and said no more about going away.
The life of the four young men had become fraternal.
D’Artagnan, who had no settled habits of his own, as he came from his province into the midst of a world quite new to him, fell easily into the habits of his friends.
They rose about eight o’clock in the winter, about six in summer, and went to take the countersign and see how things went on at M. de Tréville’s.
D’Artagnan, although he was not a Musketeer, performed the duty of one with remarkable punctuality.
He was well known at the Hôtel of the Musketeers, where everyone considered him a good comrade.
M. de Tréville, who had appreciated him at the first glance and who bore him a real affection, never ceased recommending him to the king.
On their side, the three Musketeers were much attached to their young comrade.
The friendship which united these four men, and the need they felt of seeing another three or four times a day, whether for dueling, business, or pleasure, caused them to be continually running after one another like shadows; and the Inseparables were constantly to be met with seeking one another, from the Luxembourg to the Place St.
Sulpice, or from the Rue du Vieux-Colombier to the Luxembourg.
In the meanwhile the promises of M. de Tréville went on prosperously.
One fine morning the king commanded M. de Chevalier Dessessart to admit D’Artagnan as a cadet in his company of Guards.
D’Artagnan, with a sigh, donned his uniform, which he would have exchanged for that of a Musketeer at the expense of ten years of his existence.
But M. de Tréville promised this favor after a novitiate of two years—a novitiate which might besides be abridged if an opportunity should present itself for D’Artagnan to render the king any signal service, or to distinguish himself by some brilliant action.
Upon this promise D’Artagnan withdrew, and the next day he began service.
Then it became the turn of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis to mount guard with D’Artagnan when he was on duty.
The company of M. le Chevalier Dessessart thus received four instead of one when it admitted D’Artagnan.
CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE In the meantime, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII., like all other things of this world, after having had a beginning had an end, and after this end our four companions began to be somewhat embarrassed.
At first, Athos supported the association for a time with his own means.
Porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearances to which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wants of all for a fortnight.
At last it became Aramis’s turn, who performed it with a good grace and who succeeded—as he said, by selling some theological books—in procuring a few pistoles.
Then, as they had been accustomed to do, they had recourse to M. de Tréville, who made some advances on their pay; but these advances could not go far with three Musketeers who were already much in arrears and a Guardsman who as yet had no pay at all.
At length when they found they were likely to be really in want, they got together, as a last effort, eight or ten pistoles, with which Porthos went to the gaming table.
Unfortunately he was in a bad vein; he lost all, together with twenty-five pistoles for which he had given his word.
Then the inconvenience became distress.
The hungry friends, followed by their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guard rooms, picking up among their friends abroad all the dinners they could meet with; for according to the advice of Aramis, it was prudent to sow repasts right and left in prosperity, in order to reap a few in time of need.
Porthos had six occasions, and contrived in the same manner that his friends should partake of them; Aramis had eight of them.
He was a man, as must have been already perceived, who made but little noise, and yet was much sought after.
As to D’Artagnan, who as yet knew nobody in the capital, he only found one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his own province, and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the Guards.
He fancied himself a burden to the society, forgetting in his perfectly juvenile good faith that he had fed this society for a month; and he set his mind actively to work.
He reflected that this coalition of four young, brave, enterprising, and active men ought to have some other object than swaggering walks, fencing lessons, and practical jokes, more or less witty.
The only thing that astonished D’Artagnan was that his friends had never thought of this.
He was thinking by himself, and even seriously racking his brain to find a direction for this single force four times multiplied, with which he did not doubt, as with the lever for which Archimedes sought, they should succeed in moving the world, when someone tapped gently at his door.
D’Artagnan awakened Planchet and ordered him to open it.
From this phrase, “D’Artagnan awakened Planchet,” the reader must not suppose it was night, or that day was hardly come.
Planchet, two hours before, had asked his master for some dinner, and he had answered him with the proverb, “He who sleeps, dines.” And Planchet dined by sleeping.
A man was introduced of simple mien, who had the appearance of a tradesman.
Planchet, by way of dessert, would have liked to hear the conversation; but the citizen declared to D’Artagnan that, what he had to say being important and confidential, he desired to be left alone with him.
D’Artagnan dismissed Planchet, and requested his visitor to be seated.
There was a moment of silence, during which the two men looked at each other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance, after which D’Artagnan bowed, as a sign that he listened.
“I have heard Monsieur d’Artagnan spoken of as a very brave young man,” said the citizen; “and this reputation which he justly enjoys had decided me to confide a secret to him.” “Speak, monsieur, speak,” said D’Artagnan, who instinctively scented something advantageous.
The citizen made a fresh pause and continued, “I have a wife who is seamstress to the queen, monsieur, and who is not deficient in either virtue or beauty.
I was induced to marry her about three years ago, although she had but very little dowry, because Monsieur Laporte, the queen’s cloak bearer, is her godfather, and befriends her.” “Well, monsieur?” asked D’Artagnan.
Act, then, as you think proper; there is still time to withdraw.” “No, monsieur, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and I will have confidence in you.
I believe, then, that it is not on account of any intrigues of her own that my wife has been arrested, but because of those of a lady much greater than herself.” “Ah, ah!
Can it be on account of the amours of Madame de Bois-Tracy?” said D’Artagnan, wishing to have the air, in the eyes of the citizen, of being posted as to court affairs.
“Higher, monsieur, higher.” “Of Madame d’Aiguillon?” “Still higher.” “Of Madame de Chevreuse?” “Higher, much higher.” “Of the—” D’Artagnan checked himself.
“Yes, monsieur,” replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so low that he was scarcely audible.
“And with whom?” “With whom can it be, if not the Duke of—” “The Duke of—” “Yes, monsieur,” replied the citizen, giving a still fainter intonation to his voice.
No half-confidence, or—you understand!” “I know it from my wife, monsieur—from my wife herself.” “Who learns it from whom?” “From Monsieur Laporte.
Did I not tell you that she was the goddaughter of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of the queen?
Well, Monsieur Laporte placed her near her Majesty in order that our poor queen might at least have someone in whom she could place confidence, abandoned as she is by the king, watched as she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she is by everybody.” “Ah, ah!
It begins to develop itself,” said D’Artagnan.
“Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur.
One of her conditions was that she should come and see me twice a week; for, as I had the honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly—my wife, then, came and confided to me that the queen at that very moment entertained great fears.” “Truly!” “Yes.
The cardinal, as it appears, pursues her and persecutes her more than ever.
He cannot pardon her the history of the Saraband.
You know the history of the Saraband?” “_Pardieu!_ Know it!” replied D’Artagnan, who knew nothing about it, but who wished to appear to know everything that was going on.
“So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance.” “Indeed!” “And the queen believes—” “Well, what does the queen believe?” “She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckingham in her name.” “In the queen’s name?” “Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, to draw him into some snare.” “The devil!
On the contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly.
If your man is mine, with one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that’s all; but where to find this man?” “I know not.” “Have you no information as to his abiding place?” “None.
One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre, he was coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me.” “The devil!
The devil!” murmured D’Artagnan; “all this is vague enough.
“Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux—” “You call yourself Bonacieux?” interrupted D’Artagnan.
“Yes, that is my name.” “You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux.
Pardon me for interrupting you, but it appears to me that that name is familiar to me.” “Possibly, monsieur.
I am your landlord.” “Ah, ah!” said D’Artagnan, half rising and bowing; “you are my landlord?” “Yes, monsieur, yes.
“Which I received this morning.” D’Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he approached the window to read it.
The citizen followed him.
“‘Do not seek your wife,’” read D’Artagnan; “‘she will be restored to you when there is no longer occasion for her.
If you make a single step to find her you are lost.’ “That’s pretty positive,” continued D’Artagnan; “but after all, it is but a menace.” “Yes; but that menace terrifies me.
I am not a fighting man at all, monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille.” “Hum!” said D’Artagnan.
“I have no greater regard for the Bastille than you.
You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?” “I am comfortably off, monsieur, that’s all; I have scraped together some such things as an income of two or three thousand crowns in the haberdashery business, but more particularly in venturing some funds in the last voyage of the celebrated navigator Jean Moquet; so that you understand, monsieur—But!—” cried the citizen.
“What!” demanded D’Artagnan.
“Whom do I see yonder?” “Where?” “In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that door—a man wrapped in a cloak.” “It is he!” cried D’Artagnan and the citizen at the same time, each having recognized his man.
“Ah, this time,” cried D’Artagnan, springing to his sword, “this time he will not escape me!” Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of the apartment.
On the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who were coming to see him.
They separated, and D’Artagnan rushed between them like a dart.
Where are you going?” cried the two Musketeers in a breath.
“The man of Meung!” replied D’Artagnan, and disappeared.
D’Artagnan had more than once related to his friends his adventure with the stranger, as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner, to whom this man had confided some important missive.
The opinion of Athos was that D’Artagnan had lost his letter in the skirmish.
A gentleman, in his opinion—and according to D’Artagnan’s portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman—would be incapable of the baseness of stealing a letter.
Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by a lady to a cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had been disturbed by the presence of D’Artagnan and his yellow horse.
Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, it was better not to fathom them.
They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from D’Artagnan, what affair was in hand, and as they thought that overtaking his man, or losing sight of him, D’Artagnan would return to his rooms, they kept on their way.
When they entered D’Artagnan’s chamber, it was empty; the landlord, dreading the consequences of the encounter which was doubtless about to take place between the young man and the stranger, had, consistent with the character he had given himself, judged it prudent to decamp.
D’ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a half hour, D’Artagnan returned.
He had again missed his man, who had disappeared as if by enchantment.
D’Artagnan had run, sword in hand, through all the neighboring streets, but had found nobody resembling the man he sought for.
While D’Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at doors, Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning home D’Artagnan found the reunion complete.
“Well!” cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeing D’Artagnan enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his countenance upset with anger.
“Well!” cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, “this man must be the devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom, like a shade, like a specter.” “Do you believe in apparitions?” asked Athos of Porthos.
As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented himself with interrogating D’Artagnan by a look.
“Planchet,” said D’Artagnan to his domestic, who just then insinuated his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of the conversation, “go down to my landlord, Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask him to send me half a dozen bottles of Beaugency wine; I prefer that.” “Ah, ah!
You have credit with your landlord, then?” asked Porthos.
“Yes,” replied D’Artagnan, “from this very day; and mind, if the wine is bad, we will send him to find better.” “We must use, and not abuse,” said Aramis, sententiously.
“I always said that D’Artagnan had the longest head of the four,” said Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which D’Artagnan replied with a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence.
“Your affair is not bad,” said Athos, after having tasted like a connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine good; “and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man.
Then there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty pistoles are worth the risk of four heads.” “But observe,” cried D’Artagnan, “that there is a woman in the affair—a woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened, tortured perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her mistress.” “Beware, D’Artagnan, beware,” said Aramis.
“You grow a little too warm, in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux.
Woman was created for our destruction, and it is from her we inherit all our miseries.” At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and he bit his lips.
As to the second reproach, I have heard it said that she does not love the English, but an Englishman.” “Well, and by my faith,” said Athos, “it must be acknowledged that this Englishman is worthy of being loved.
I never saw a man with a nobler air than his.” “Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can,” said Porthos.
“I was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered his pearls; and, _pardieu_, I picked up two that I sold for ten pistoles each.
Do you know him, Aramis?” “As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seized him in the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, the queen’s equerry, introduced me.
“What for?” demanded Porthos.
“Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances.” “And now I am convinced,” said D’Artagnan, “that this abduction of the queen’s woman is connected with the events of which we are speaking, and perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris.” “The Gascon is full of ideas,” said Porthos, with admiration.
“I like to hear him talk,” said Athos; “his dialect amuses me.” “Gentlemen,” cried Aramis, “listen to this.” “Listen to Aramis,” said his three friends.
“Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom I sometimes consult about my studies.” Athos smiled.
“He resides in a quiet quarter,” continued Aramis; “his tastes and his profession require it.
“Well,” cried his auditors; “at the moment you left his house?” Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who, in the full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped by some unforeseen obstacle; but the eyes of his three companions were fixed upon him, their ears were wide open, and there were no means of retreat.
“This doctor has a niece,” continued Aramis.
“Ah, he has a niece!” interrupted Porthos.
“A very respectable lady,” said Aramis.
The three friends burst into laughter.
“Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me,” replied Aramis, “you shall know nothing.” “We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones,” said Athos.
“I will continue, then,” resumed Aramis.
“This niece comes sometimes to see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that I was, and it was my duty to offer to conduct her to her carriage.” “Ah!
She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?” interrupted Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness of tongue.
“A nice acquaintance, my friend!” “Porthos,” replied Aramis, “I have had the occasion to observe to you more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that is injurious to you among the women.” “Gentlemen, gentlemen,” cried D’Artagnan, who began to get a glimpse of the result of the adventure, “the thing is serious.
Go on Aramis, go on.” “All at once, a tall, dark gentleman—just like yours, D’Artagnan.” “The same, perhaps,” said he.
“He took her for the queen!” said D’Artagnan.
“The Gascon is the devil!” cried Athos; “nothing escapes him.” “The fact is,” said Porthos, “Aramis is of the same height, and something of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appears to me that the dress of a Musketeer—” “I wore an enormous cloak,” said Aramis.
“Is the doctor afraid that you may be recognized?” “I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the person; but the face—” “I had a large hat,” said Aramis.
“Oh, good lord,” cried Porthos, “what precautions for the study of theology!” “Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, “do not let us lose our time in jesting.
Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer’s wife—that is the key of the intrigue.” “A woman of such inferior condition!
Can you believe so?” said Porthos, protruding his lips with contempt.
“She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of the queen.
Have I not told you so, gentlemen?
Besides, it has perhaps been her Majesty’s calculation to seek on this occasion for support so lowly.
“Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!” cried he.
“A moment,” cried D’Artagnan, making them a sign to replace in the scabbard their half-drawn swords.
“It is not courage that is needed; it is prudence.” “And yet,” cried Porthos, “we will not leave—” “You will leave D’Artagnan to act as he thinks proper,” said Athos.
Do as you think best, D’Artagnan.” At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of the antechamber, but seeing four Musketeers standing, and their swords by their sides, they hesitated about going farther.
“Come in, gentlemen, come in,” called D’Artagnan; “you are here in my apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king and cardinal.” “Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we have received?” asked one who appeared to be the leader of the party.
“On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it were necessary.” “What does he say?” grumbled Porthos.
“You are a simpleton,” said Athos.
“Silence!” “But you promised me—” whispered the poor mercer.
“We can only save you by being free ourselves,” replied D’Artagnan, in a rapid, low tone; “and if we appear inclined to defend you, they will arrest us with you.” “It seems, nevertheless—” “Come, gentlemen, come!” said D’Artagnan, aloud; “I have no motive for defending Monsieur.
I saw him today for the first time, and he can tell you on what occasion; he came to demand the rent of my lodging.
Is that not true, Monsieur Bonacieux?
Answer!” “That is the very truth,” cried the mercer; “but Monsieur does not tell you—” “Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my friends; silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin everybody without saving yourself!
Come, come, gentlemen, remove the fellow.” And D’Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer among the Guards, saying to him, “You are a shabby old fellow, my dear.
You come to demand money of me—of a Musketeer!
Gentlemen, once more, take him to prison, and keep him under key as long as possible; that will give me time to pay him.” The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey.
As they were going down D’Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of their leader.
“May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?” said D’Artagnan, filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which he had obtained from the liberality of M.
“That will do me great honor,” said the leader of the posse, “and I accept thankfully.” “Then to yours, monsieur—what is your name?” “Boisrenard.” “Monsieur Boisrenard.” “To yours, my gentlemen!
What is your name, in your turn, if you please?” “D’Artagnan.” “To yours, monsieur.” “And above all others,” cried D’Artagnan, as if carried away by his enthusiasm, “to that of the king and the cardinal.” The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of D’Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good, and he was convinced.
“What diabolical villainy you have performed here,” said Porthos, when the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found themselves alone.
“Shame, shame, for four Musketeers to allow an unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst!
And a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!” “Porthos,” said Aramis, “Athos has already told you that you are a simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion.
Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthos stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one voice the formula dictated by D’Artagnan: “All for one, one for all.” “That’s well!
Now let us everyone retire to his own home,” said D’Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life; “and attention!
For from this moment we are at feud with the cardinal.” Chapter X.
A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; as soon as societies, in forming, had invented any kind of police, that police invented mousetraps.
As perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the Rue de Jerusalem, and as it is fifteen years since we applied this word for the first time to this thing, allow us to explain to them what is a mousetrap.
When in a house, of whatever kind it may be, an individual suspected of any crime is arrested, the arrest is held secret.
Four or five men are placed in ambuscade in the first room.
It is closed after them, and they are arrested; so that at the end of two or three days they have in their power almost all the _habitués_ of the establishment.
And that is a mousetrap.
Bonacieux, then, became a mousetrap; and whoever appeared there was taken and interrogated by the cardinal’s people.
It must be observed that as a separate passage led to the first floor, in which D’Artagnan lodged, those who called on him were exempted from this detention.
Besides, nobody came thither but the three Musketeers; they had all been engaged in earnest search and inquiries, but had discovered nothing.
Athos had even gone so far as to question M. de Tréville—a thing which, considering the habitual reticence of the worthy Musketeer, had very much astonished his captain.
But M. de Tréville knew nothing, except that the last time he had seen the cardinal, the king, and the queen, the cardinal looked very thoughtful, the king uneasy, and the redness of the queen’s eyes donated that she had been sleepless or tearful.
But this last circumstance was not striking, as the queen since her marriage had slept badly and wept much.
M. de Tréville requested Athos, whatever might happen, to be observant of his duty to the king, but particularly to the queen, begging him to convey his desires to his comrades.
As to D’Artagnan, he did not budge from his apartment.
He converted his chamber into an observatory.
From his windows he saw all the visitors who were caught.
Then, having removed a plank from his floor, and nothing remaining but a simple ceiling between him and the room beneath, in which the interrogatories were made, he heard all that passed between the inquisitors and the accused.
The interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated upon the persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: “Has Madame Bonacieux sent anything to you for her husband, or any other person?
Has Monsieur Bonacieux sent anything to you for his wife, or for any other person?
Has either of them confided anything to you by word of mouth?” “If they knew anything, they would not question people in this manner,” said D’Artagnan to himself.
Why, they want to know if the Duke of Buckingham is in Paris, and if he has had, or is likely to have, an interview with the queen.” D’Artagnan held onto this idea, which, from what he had heard, was not wanting in probability.
In the meantime, the mousetrap continued in operation, and likewise D’Artagnan’s vigilance.
On the evening of the day after the arrest of poor Bonacieux, as Athos had just left D’Artagnan to report at M. de Tréville’s, as nine o’clock had just struck, and as Planchet, who had not yet made the bed, was beginning his task, a knocking was heard at the street door.
The door was instantly opened and shut; someone was taken in the mousetrap.
D’Artagnan flew to his hole, laid himself down on the floor at full length, and listened.
Cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared to be endeavoring to stifle.
There were no questions.
“The devil!” said D’Artagnan to himself.
They search her; she resists; they use force—the scoundrels!” In spite of his prudence, D’Artagnan restrained himself with great difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going on below.
“But I tell you that I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen!
I tell you I am Madame Bonacieux; I tell you I belong to the queen!” cried the unfortunate woman.
“Madame Bonacieux!” murmured D’Artagnan.
“Can I be so lucky as to find what everybody is seeking for?” The voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movement shook the partition.
The victim resisted as much as a woman could resist four men.
“Pardon, gentlemen—par—” murmured the voice, which could now only be heard in inarticulate sounds.
“They are binding her; they are going to drag her away,” cried D’Artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor.
Planchet!” “Monsieur.” “Run and seek Athos, Porthos and Aramis.
One of the three will certainly be at home, perhaps all three.
Ah, I remember, Athos is at Monsieur de Tréville’s.” “But where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?” “I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner,” cried D’Artagnan.
“You put back the boards, sweep the floor, go out at the door, and run as I told you.” “Oh, monsieur!
You will kill yourself,” cried Planchet.
“Hold your tongue, stupid fellow,” said D’Artagnan; and laying hold of the casement, he let himself gently down from the first story, which fortunately was not very elevated, without doing himself the slightest injury.
He then went straight to the door and knocked, murmuring, “I will go myself and be caught in the mousetrap, but woe be to the cats that shall pounce upon such a mouse!” The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man before the tumult ceased, steps approached, the door was opened, and D’Artagnan, sword in hand, rushed into the rooms of M.
Bonacieux, the door of which, doubtless acted upon by a spring, closed after him.
Then those who dwelt in Bonacieux’s unfortunate house, together with the nearest neighbors, heard loud cries, stamping of feet, clashing of swords, and breaking of furniture.
A moment after, those who, surprised by this tumult, had gone to their windows to learn the cause of it, saw the door open, and four men, clothed in black, not _come_ out of it, but _fly_, like so many frightened crows, leaving on the ground and on the corners of the furniture, feathers from their wings; that is to say, patches of their clothes and fragments of their cloaks.
D’Artagnan was conqueror—without much effort, it must be confessed, for only one of the officers was armed, and even he defended himself for form’s sake.
It is true that the three others had endeavored to knock the young man down with chairs, stools, and crockery; but two or three scratches made by the Gascon’s blade terrified them.
Ten minutes sufficed for their defeat, and D’Artagnan remained master of the field of battle.
The neighbors who had opened their windows, with the coolness peculiar to the inhabitants of Paris in these times of perpetual riots and disturbances, closed them again as soon as they saw the four men in black flee—their instinct telling them that for the time all was over.
Besides, it began to grow late, and then, as today, people went to bed early in the quarter of the Luxembourg.
Bonacieux, D’Artagnan turned toward her; the poor woman reclined where she had been left, half-fainting upon an armchair.
D’Artagnan examined her with a rapid glance.
She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six years, with dark hair, blue eyes, and a nose slightly turned up, admirable teeth, and a complexion marbled with rose and opal.
There, however, ended the signs which might have confounded her with a lady of rank.
The hands were white, but without delicacy; the feet did not bespeak the woman of quality.
Happily, D’Artagnan was not yet acquainted with such niceties.
While D’Artagnan was examining Mme.
Bonacieux, and was, as we have said, close to her, he saw on the ground a fine cambric handkerchief, which he picked up, as was his habit, and at the corner of which he recognized the same cipher he had seen on the handkerchief which had nearly caused him and Aramis to cut each other’s throat.
From that time, D’Artagnan had been cautious with respect to handkerchiefs with arms on them, and he therefore placed in the pocket of Mme.
Bonacieux the one he had just picked up.
Bonacieux recovered her senses.
She opened her eyes, looked around her with terror, saw that the apartment was empty and that she was alone with her liberator.
She extended her hands to him with a smile.
Bonacieux had the sweetest smile in the world.
“Ah, monsieur!” said she, “you have saved me; permit me to thank you.” “Madame,” said D’Artagnan, “I have only done what every gentleman would have done in my place; you owe me no thanks.” “Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that you have not served an ingrate.
But what could these men, whom I at first took for robbers, want with me, and why is Monsieur Bonacieux not here?” “Madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers could have been, for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as to your husband, Monsieur Bonacieux, he is not here because he was yesterday evening conducted to the Bastille.” “My husband in the Bastille!” cried Mme.
Poor dear man, he is innocence itself!” And something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrified features of the young woman.
“What has he done, madame?” said D’Artagnan.
“I believe that his only crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and the misfortune to be your husband.” “But, monsieur, you know then—” “I know that you have been abducted, madame.” “And by whom?
Oh, if you know him, tell me!” “By a man of from forty to forty-five years, with black hair, a dark complexion, and a scar on his left temple.” “That is he, that is he; but his name?” “Ah, his name?
I do not know that.” “And did my husband know I had been carried off?” “He was informed of it by a letter, written to him by the abductor himself.” “And does he suspect,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, with some embarrassment, “the cause of this event?” “He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause.” “I doubted from the first; and now I think entirely as he does.
Then my dear Monsieur Bonacieux has not suspected me a single instant?” “So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and above all, of your love.” A second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips of the pretty young woman.
“But,” continued D’Artagnan, “how did you escape?” “I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as I had known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the help of the sheets I let myself down from the window.
Then, as I believed my husband would be at home, I hastened hither.” “To place yourself under his protection?” “Oh, no, poor dear man!
I knew very well that he was incapable of defending me; but as he could serve us in other ways, I wished to inform him.” “Of what?” “Oh, that is not my secret; I must not, therefore, tell you.” “Besides,” said D’Artagnan, “pardon me, madame, if, guardsman as I am, I remind you of prudence—besides, I believe we are not here in a very proper place for imparting confidences.
The men I have put to flight will return reinforced; if they find us here, we are lost.
You are right,” cried the affrighted Mme.
Bonacieux; “let us fly!
Let us save ourselves.” At these words she passed her arm under that of D’Artagnan, and urged him forward eagerly.
“But whither shall we fly—whither escape?” “Let us first withdraw from this house; afterward we shall see.” The young woman and the young man, without taking the trouble to shut the door after them, descended the Rue des Fossoyeurs rapidly, turned into the Rue des Fossés-Monsieur-le-Prince, and did not stop till they came to the Place St.
“And now what are we to do, and where do you wish me to conduct you?” asked D’Artagnan.
Bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man.
“And if I give you this password,” said she, “would you forget it as soon as you used it?” “By my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!” said D’Artagnan, with an accent so truthful that no one could mistake it.
You appear to be a brave young man; besides, your fortune may perhaps be the result of your devotedness.” “I will do, without a promise and voluntarily, all that I can do to serve the king and be agreeable to the queen.
Dispose of me, then, as a friend.” “But I—where shall I go meanwhile?” “Is there nobody from whose house Monsieur Laporte can come and fetch you?” “No, I can trust nobody.” “Stop,” said D’Artagnan; “we are near Athos’s door.
Besides, we are in a situation to overlook ceremony.” “Come, then, let us go to your friend’s house.
As D’Artagnan had foreseen, Athos was not within.
He took the key, which was customarily given him as one of the family, ascended the stairs, and introduced Mme.
Bonacieux into the little apartment of which we have given a description.
“Remain here, fasten the door inside, and open it to nobody unless you hear three taps like this;” and he tapped thrice—two taps close together and pretty hard, the other after an interval, and lighter.
Bonacieux, darting at her the most loving glance that he could possibly concentrate upon her charming little person; and while he descended the stairs, he heard the door closed and double-locked.
All the events we have described had taken place within a half hour.
Everything fell out as Mme.
Bonacieux prophesied.
On hearing the password, Germain bowed.
In a few minutes, Laporte was at the lodge; in two words D’Artagnan informed him where Mme.
Laporte assured himself, by having it twice repeated, of the accurate address, and set off at a run.
Hardly, however, had he taken ten steps before he returned.
“Young man,” said he to D’Artagnan, “a suggestion.” “What?” “You may get into trouble by what has taken place.” “You believe so?” “Yes.
Have you any friend whose clock is too slow?” “Well?” “Go and call upon him, in order that he may give evidence of your having been with him at half past nine.
In a court of justice that is called an alibi.” D’Artagnan found his advice prudent.
He took to his heels, and was soon at M. de Tréville’s; but instead of going into the saloon with the rest of the crowd, he asked to be introduced to M. de Tréville’s office.
As D’Artagnan so constantly frequented the hôtel, no difficulty was made in complying with his request, and a servant went to inform M. de Tréville that his young compatriot, having something important to communicate, solicited a private audience.
Five minutes after, M. de Tréville was asking D’Artagnan what he could do to serve him, and what caused his visit at so late an hour.
But what can I do for you?” Then D’Artagnan told M. de Tréville a long history about the queen.
He expressed to him the fears he entertained with respect to her Majesty; he related to him what he had heard of the projects of the cardinal with regard to Buckingham, and all with a tranquillity and candor of which M. de Tréville was the more the dupe, from having himself, as we have said, observed something fresh between the cardinal, the king, and the queen.
As ten o’clock was striking, D’Artagnan left M. de Tréville, who thanked him for his information, recommended him to have the service of the king and queen always at heart, and returned to the saloon; but at the foot of the stairs, D’Artagnan remembered he had forgotten his cane.
He consequently sprang up again, re-entered the office, with a turn of his finger set the clock right again, that it might not be perceived the next day that it had been put wrong, and certain from that time that he had a witness to prove his alibi, he ran downstairs and soon found himself in the street.
IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS His visit to M. de Tréville being paid, the pensive D’Artagnan took the longest way homeward.
On what was D’Artagnan thinking, that he strayed thus from his path, gazing at the stars of heaven, and sometimes sighing, sometimes smiling?
He was thinking of Mme.
For an apprentice Musketeer the young woman was almost an ideal of love.
Pretty, mysterious, initiated in almost all the secrets of the court, which reflected such a charming gravity over her pleasing features, it might be surmised that she was not wholly unmoved; and this is an irresistible charm to novices in love.
Moreover, D’Artagnan had delivered her from the hands of the demons who wished to search and ill treat her; and this important service had established between them one of those sentiments of gratitude which so easily assume a more tender character.
D’Artagnan already fancied himself, so rapid is the flight of our dreams upon the wings of imagination, accosted by a messenger from the young woman, who brought him some billet appointing a meeting, a gold chain, or a diamond.
We have observed that young cavaliers received presents from their king without shame.
Let us add that in these times of lax morality they had no more delicacy with respect to the mistresses; and that the latter almost always left them valuable and durable remembrances, as if they essayed to conquer the fragility of their sentiments by the solidity of their gifts.
Without a blush, men made their way in the world by the means of women blushing.
D’Artagnan owned nothing.
Provincial diffidence, that slight varnish, the ephemeral flower, that down of the peach, had evaporated to the winds through the little orthodox counsels which the three Musketeers gave their friend.
D’Artagnan, following the strange custom of the times, considered himself at Paris as on a campaign, neither more nor less than if he had been in Flanders—Spain yonder, woman here.
In each there was an enemy to contend with, and contributions to be levied.
But, we must say, at the present moment D’Artagnan was ruled by a feeling much more noble and disinterested.
Bonacieux; and interest was almost foreign to this commencement of love, which had been the consequence of it.
We say _almost_, for the idea that a young, handsome, kind, and witty woman is at the same time rich takes nothing from the beginning of love, but on the contrary strengthens it.
There are in affluence a crowd of aristocratic cares and caprices which are highly becoming to beauty.
A fine and white stocking, a silken robe, a lace kerchief, a pretty slipper on the foot, a tasty ribbon on the head do not make an ugly woman pretty, but they make a pretty woman beautiful, without reckoning the hands, which gain by all this; the hands, among women particularly, to be beautiful must be idle.
Then D’Artagnan, as the reader, from whom we have not concealed the state of his fortune, very well knows—D’Artagnan was not a millionaire; he hoped to become one someday, but the time which in his own mind he fixed upon for this happy change was still far distant.
In the meanwhile, how disheartening to see the woman one loves long for those thousands of nothings which constitute a woman’s happiness, and be unable to give her those thousands of nothings.
At least, when the woman is rich and the lover is not, that which he cannot offer she offers to herself; and although it is generally with her husband’s money that she procures herself this indulgence, the gratitude for it seldom reverts to him.
Then D’Artagnan, disposed to become the most tender of lovers, was at the same time a very devoted friend.
In the midst of his amorous projects for the mercer’s wife, he did not forget his friends.
Bonacieux was just the woman to walk with in the Plain St.
Germain, in company with Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, to whom D’Artagnan had often remarked this.
Then one could enjoy charming little dinners, where one touches on one side the hand of a friend, and on the other the foot of a mistress.
Besides, on pressing occasions, in extreme difficulties, D’Artagnan would become the preserver of his friends.
Bonacieux, whom D’Artagnan had pushed into the hands of the officers, denying him aloud although he had promised in a whisper to save him?
We are compelled to admit to our readers that D’Artagnan thought nothing about him in any way; or that if he did think of him, it was only to say to himself that he was very well where he was, wherever it might be.
Love is the most selfish of all the passions.
Let our readers reassure themselves.
If D’Artagnan forgets his host, or appears to forget him, under the pretense of not knowing where he has been carried, we will not forget him, and we know where he is.
D’Artagnan, reflecting on his future amours, addressing himself to the beautiful night, and smiling at the stars, ascended the Rue Cherish-Midi, or Chase-Midi, as it was then called.
As he found himself in the quarter in which Aramis lived, he took it into his head to pay his friend a visit in order to explain the motives which had led him to send Planchet with a request that he would come instantly to the mousetrap.
Now, if Aramis had been at home when Planchet came to his abode, he had doubtless hastened to the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and finding nobody there but his other two companions perhaps, they would not be able to conceive what all this meant.
This mystery required an explanation; at least, so D’Artagnan declared to himself.
He likewise thought this was an opportunity for talking about pretty little Mme.
Bonacieux, of whom his head, if not his heart, was already full.
We must never look for discretion in first love.
First love is accompanied by such excessive joy that unless the joy be allowed to overflow, it will stifle you.
Eleven o’clock sounded from all the clocks of the Faubourg St.
It was delightful weather.
D’Artagnan was passing along a lane on the spot where the Rue d’Assas is now situated, breathing the balmy emanations which were borne upon the wind from the Rue de Vaugirard, and which arose from the gardens refreshed by the dews of evening and the breeze of night.
From a distance resounded, deadened, however, by good shutters, the songs of the tipplers, enjoying themselves in the cabarets scattered along the plain.
Arrived at the end of the lane, D’Artagnan turned to the left.
The house in which Aramis dwelt was situated between the Rue Cassette and the Rue Servandoni.
D’Artagnan had just passed the Rue Cassette, and already perceived the door of his friend’s house, shaded by a mass of sycamores and clematis which formed a vast arch opposite the front of it, when he perceived something like a shadow issuing from the Rue Servandoni.
This something was enveloped in a cloak, and D’Artagnan at first believed it was a man; but by the smallness of the form, the hesitation of the walk, and the indecision of the step, he soon discovered that it was a woman.
Further, this woman, as if not certain of the house she was seeking, lifted up her eyes to look around her, stopped, went backward, and then returned again.
D’Artagnan was perplexed.
“Shall I go and offer her my services?” thought he.
But a woman who wanders in the streets at this hour only ventures out to meet her lover.
If I should disturb a rendezvous, that would not be the best means of commencing an acquaintance.” Meantime the young woman continued to advance, counting the houses and windows.
This was neither long nor difficult.
There were but three hôtels in this part of the street; and only two windows looking toward the road, one of which was in a pavilion parallel to that which Aramis occupied, the other belonging to Aramis himself.
“_Pardieu!_” said D’Artagnan to himself, to whose mind the niece of the theologian reverted, “_pardieu_, it would be droll if this belated dove should be in search of our friend’s house.
Ah, my dear Aramis, this time I shall find you out.” And D’Artagnan, making himself as small as he could, concealed himself in the darkest side of the street near a stone bench placed at the back of a niche.
The young woman continued to advance; and in addition to the lightness of her step, which had betrayed her, she emitted a little cough which denoted a sweet voice.
D’Artagnan believed this cough to be a signal.
Nevertheless, whether the cough had been answered by a similar signal which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker, or whether without this aid she saw that she had arrived at the end of her journey, she resolutely drew near to Aramis’s shutter, and tapped, at three equal intervals, with her bent finger.
“This is all very fine, dear Aramis,” murmured D’Artagnan.
“Ah, Monsieur Hypocrite, I understand how you study theology.” The three blows were scarcely struck, when the inside blind was opened and a light appeared through the panes of the outside shutter.
“Ah, ah!” said the listener, “not through doors, but through windows!
Ah, this visit was expected.
We shall see the windows open, and the lady enter by escalade.
Very pretty!” But to the great astonishment of D’Artagnan, the shutter remained closed.
Still more, the light which had shone for an instant disappeared, and all was again in obscurity.
D’Artagnan thought this could not last long, and continued to look with all his eyes and listen with all his ears.
It may be judged whether D’Artagnan looked or listened with avidity.
Unfortunately the light had been removed into another chamber; but the eyes of the young man were accustomed to the night.
Besides, the eyes of the Gascons have, as it is asserted, like those of cats, the faculty of seeing in the dark.
D’Artagnan then saw that the young woman took from her pocket a white object, which she unfolded quickly, and which took the form of a handkerchief.
She made her interlocutor observe the corner of this unfolded object.
This immediately recalled to D’Artagnan’s mind the handkerchief which he had found at the feet of Mme.
Bonacieux, which had reminded him of that which he had dragged from under the feet of Aramis.
“What the devil could that handkerchief signify?” Placed where he was, D’Artagnan could not perceive the face of Aramis.
We say Aramis, because the young man entertained no doubt that it was his friend who held this dialogue from the interior with the lady of the exterior.
Curiosity prevailed over prudence; and profiting by the preoccupation into which the sight of the handkerchief appeared to have plunged the two personages now on the scene, he stole from his hiding place, and quick as lightning, but stepping with utmost caution, he ran and placed himself close to the angle of the wall, from which his eye could pierce the interior of Aramis’s room.
Upon gaining this advantage D’Artagnan was near uttering a cry of surprise; it was not Aramis who was conversing with the nocturnal visitor, it was a woman!
D’Artagnan, however, could only see enough to recognize the form of her vestments, not enough to distinguish her features.
At the same instant the woman inside drew a second handkerchief from her pocket, and exchanged it for that which had just been shown to her.
The woman who was outside the window turned round, and passed within four steps of D’Artagnan, pulling down the hood of her mantle; but the precaution was too late, D’Artagnan had already recognized Mme.
The suspicion that it was she had crossed the mind of D’Artagnan when she drew the handkerchief from her pocket; but what probability was there that Mme.
Bonacieux, who had sent for M.
Laporte in order to be reconducted to the Louvre, should be running about the streets of Paris at half past eleven at night, at the risk of being abducted a second time?
This must be, then, an affair of importance; and what is the most important affair to a woman of twenty-five!
This was a question the young man asked himself, whom the demon of jealousy already gnawed, being in heart neither more nor less than an accepted lover.
There was a very simple means of satisfying himself whither Mme.
Bonacieux was going; that was to follow her.
This method was so simple that D’Artagnan employed it quite naturally and instinctively.
But at the sight of the young man, who detached himself from the wall like a statue walking from its niche, and at the noise of the steps which she heard resound behind her, Mme.
Bonacieux uttered a little cry and fled.
D’Artagnan ran after her.
It was not difficult for him to overtake a woman embarrassed with her cloak.
He came up with her before she had traversed a third of the street.
These protestations were nothing for Mme.
Bonacieux, for such protestations may be made with the worst intentions in the world; but the voice was all.
Bonacieux thought she recognized the sound of that voice; she reopened her eyes, cast a quick glance upon the man who had terrified her so, and at once perceiving it was D’Artagnan, she uttered a cry of joy, “Oh, it is you, it is you!
Thank God, thank God!” “Yes, it is I,” said D’Artagnan, “it is I, whom God has sent to watch over you.” “Was it with that intention you followed me?” asked the young woman, with a coquettish smile, whose somewhat bantering character resumed its influence, and with whom all fear had disappeared from the moment in which she recognized a friend in one she had taken for an enemy.
“No,” said D’Artagnan; “no, I confess it.
It was chance that threw me in your way; I saw a woman knocking at the window of one of my friends.” “One of your friends?” interrupted Mme.
Who is he?” “Come, come, you won’t tell me you don’t know Aramis?” “This is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced.” “It is the first time, then, that you ever went to that house?” “Undoubtedly.” “And you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man?” “No.” “By a Musketeer?” “No, indeed!” “It was not he, then, you came to seek?” “Not the least in the world.
But what I know is that I promise to do all you wish if you allow me to accompany you where you are going.” “And you will leave me then?” “Yes.” “Without waiting for my coming out again?” “Yes.” “Word of honor?” “By the faith of a gentleman.
Take my arm, and let us go.” D’Artagnan offered his arm to Mme.
Bonacieux, who willingly took it, half laughing, half trembling, and both gained the top of Rue de la Harpe.
Arriving there, the young woman seemed to hesitate, as she had before done in the Rue Vaugirard.
She seemed, however, by certain signs, to recognize a door, and approaching that door, “And now, monsieur,” said she, “it is here I have business; a thousand thanks for your honorable company, which has saved me from all the dangers to which, alone, I was exposed.
But the moment is come to keep your word; I have reached my destination.” “And you will have nothing to fear on your return?” “I shall have nothing to fear but robbers.” “And that is nothing?” “What could they take from me?
I have not a penny about me.” “You forget that beautiful handkerchief with the coat of arms.” “Which?” “That which I found at your feet, and replaced in your pocket.” “Hold your tongue, imprudent man!
Come, come, madame!” cried D’Artagnan, seizing her hands, and surveying her with an ardent glance, “come, be more generous.
Have you not read in my eyes that there is nothing but devotion and sympathy in my heart?” “Yes,” replied Mme.
Bonacieux; “therefore, ask my own secrets, and I will reveal them to you; but those of others—that is quite another thing.” “Very well,” said D’Artagnan, “I shall discover them; as these secrets may have an influence over your life, these secrets must become mine.” “Beware of what you do!” cried the young woman, in a manner so serious as to make D’Artagnan start in spite of himself.
“Oh, meddle in nothing which concerns me.
Do not seek to assist me in that which I am accomplishing.
This I ask of you in the name of the interest with which I inspire you, in the name of the service you have rendered me and which I never shall forget while I have life.
Have no more concern about me; I exist no longer for you, any more than if you had never seen me.” “Must Aramis do as much as I, madame?” said D’Artagnan, deeply piqued.
“This is the second or third time, monsieur, that you have repeated that name, and yet I have told you that I do not know him.” “You do not know the man at whose shutter you have just knocked?
Indeed, madame, you believe me too credulous!” “Confess that it is for the sake of making me talk that you invent this story and create this personage.” “I invent nothing, madame; I create nothing.
We have nothing to fear from those who love us.” “You speak very suddenly of love, monsieur,” said the young woman, shaking her head.
“That is because love has come suddenly upon me, and for the first time; and because I am only twenty.” The young woman looked at him furtively.
“Listen; I am already upon the scent,” resumed D’Artagnan.
The initials are only mine—C.
B., Constance Bonacieux.” “Or Camille de Bois-Tracy.” “Silence, monsieur!
Ah, since the dangers I incur on my own account cannot stop you, think of those you may yourself run!” “Me?” “Yes; there is peril of imprisonment, risk of life in knowing me.” “Then I will not leave you.” “Monsieur!” said the young woman, supplicating him and clasping her hands together, “monsieur, in the name of heaven, by the honor of a soldier, by the courtesy of a gentleman, depart!
There, there midnight sounds!
That is the hour when I am expected.” “Madame,” said the young man, bowing; “I can refuse nothing asked of me thus.
Be content; I will depart.” “But you will not follow me; you will not watch me?” “I will return home instantly.” “Ah, I was quite sure you were a good and brave young man,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, holding out her hand to him, and placing the other upon the knocker of a little door almost hidden in the wall.
D’Artagnan seized the hand held out to him, and kissed it ardently.
I wish I had never seen you!” cried D’Artagnan, with that ingenuous roughness which women often prefer to the affectations of politeness, because it betrays the depths of the thought and proves that feeling prevails over reason.
Bonacieux, in a voice almost caressing, and pressing the hand of D’Artagnan, who had not relinquished hers, “well: I will not say as much as you do; what is lost for today may not be lost forever.
Who knows, when I shall be at liberty, that I may not satisfy your curiosity?” “And will you make the same promise to my love?” cried D’Artagnan, beside himself with joy.
That depends upon the sentiments with which you may inspire me.” “Then today, madame—” “Oh, today, I am no further than gratitude.” “Ah!
You are too charming,” said D’Artagnan, sorrowfully; “and you abuse my love.” “No, I use your generosity, that’s all.
But be of good cheer; with certain people, everything comes round.” “Oh, you render me the happiest of men!
Do not forget this evening—do not forget that promise.” “Be satisfied.
In the proper time and place I will remember everything.
I was expected at sharp midnight, and I am late.” “By five minutes.” “Yes; but in certain circumstances five minutes are five ages.” “When one loves.” “Well!
And who told you I had no affair with a lover?” “It is a man, then, who expects you?” cried D’Artagnan.
“A man!” “The discussion is going to begin again!” said Mme.
Bonacieux, with a half-smile which was not exempt from a tinge of impatience.
I believe in you, and I would have all the merit of my devotion, even if that devotion were stupidity.
Adieu, madame, adieu!” And as if he only felt strength to detach himself by a violent effort from the hand he held, he sprang away, running, while Mme.
Bonacieux knocked, as at the shutter, three light and regular taps.
The door had been opened, and shut again; the mercer’s pretty wife had disappeared.
D’Artagnan pursued his way.
Bonacieux, and if his life had depended upon the spot to which she was going or upon the person who should accompany her, D’Artagnan would have returned home, since he had so promised.
Five minutes later he was in the Rue des Fossoyeurs.
He will have fallen asleep waiting for me, or else he will have returned home, where he will have learned that a woman had been there.
After all,” continued D’Artagnan, “there was certainly one with Aramis.
All this is very strange; and I am curious to know how it will end.” “Badly, monsieur, badly!” replied a voice which the young man recognized as that of Planchet; for, soliloquizing aloud, as very preoccupied people do, he had entered the alley, at the end of which were the stairs which led to his chamber.
What do you mean by that, you idiot?” asked D’Artagnan.
“What has happened?” “All sorts of misfortunes.” “What?” “In the first place, Monsieur Athos is arrested.” “Arrested!
What for?” “He was found in your lodging; they took him for you.” “And by whom was he arrested?” “By Guards brought by the men in black whom you put to flight.” “Why did he not tell them his name?
Why did he not tell them he knew nothing about this affair?” “He took care not to do so, monsieur; on the contrary, he came up to me and said, ‘It is your master that needs his liberty at this moment and not I, since he knows everything and I know nothing.
They will believe he is arrested, and that will give him time; in three days I will tell them who I am, and they cannot fail to let me go.’” “Bravo, Athos!
Noble heart!” murmured D’Artagnan.
And what did the officers do?” “Four conveyed him away, I don’t know where—to the Bastille or Fort l’Evêque.
Two remained with the men in black, who rummaged every place and took all the papers.
The last two mounted guard at the door during this examination; then, when all was over, they went away, leaving the house empty and exposed.” “And Porthos and Aramis?” “I could not find them; they did not come.” “But they may come any moment, for you left word that I awaited them?” “Yes, monsieur.” “Well, don’t budge, then; if they come, tell them what has happened.
Here it would be dangerous; the house may be watched.
I will run to Monsieur de Tréville to tell them all this, and will meet them there.” “Very well, monsieur,” said Planchet.
“But you will remain; you are not afraid?” said D’Artagnan, coming back to recommend courage to his lackey.
“Be easy, monsieur,” said Planchet; “you do not know me yet.
It is all in beginning.
Besides, I am a Picard.” “Then it is understood,” said D’Artagnan; “you would rather be killed than desert your post?” “Yes, monsieur; and there is nothing I would not do to prove to Monsieur that I am attached to him.” “Good!” said D’Artagnan to himself.
“It appears that the method I have adopted with this boy is decidedly the best.
I shall use it again upon occasion.” And with all the swiftness of his legs, already a little fatigued, however, with the perambulations of the day, D’Artagnan directed his course toward M. de Tréville’s.
It was necessary to reach M. de Tréville; it was important that he should be informed of what was passing.
D’Artagnan resolved to try and enter the Louvre.
His costume of Guardsman in the company of M.
Dessessart ought to be his passport.
He therefore went down the Rue des Petits Augustins, and came up to the quay, in order to take the New Bridge.
He had at first an idea of crossing by the ferry; but on gaining the riverside, he had mechanically put his hand into his pocket, and perceived that he had not wherewithal to pay his passage.
As he gained the top of the Rue Guénegaud, he saw two persons coming out of the Rue Dauphine whose appearance very much struck him.
Of the two persons who composed this group, one was a man and the other a woman.
Bonacieux; the man resembled Aramis so much as to be mistaken for him.
Besides, the woman wore that black mantle which D’Artagnan could still see outlined on the shutter of the Rue de Vaugirard and on the door of the Rue de la Harpe; still further, the man wore the uniform of a Musketeer.
The woman’s hood was pulled down, and the man held a handkerchief to his face.
Both, as this double precaution indicated, had an interest in not being recognized.
That was D’Artagnan’s road, as he was going to the Louvre.
D’Artagnan followed them.
He had not gone twenty steps before he became convinced that the woman was really Mme.
Bonacieux and that the man was Aramis.
He felt at that instant all the suspicions of jealousy agitating his heart.
He felt himself doubly betrayed, by his friend and by her whom he already loved like a mistress.
Bonacieux had declared to him, by all the gods, that she did not know Aramis; and a quarter of an hour after having made this assertion, he found her hanging on the arm of Aramis.
D’Artagnan did not reflect that he had only known the mercer’s pretty wife for three hours; that she owed him nothing but a little gratitude for having delivered her from the men in black, who wished to carry her off, and that she had promised him nothing.
He considered himself an outraged, betrayed, and ridiculed lover.
Blood and anger mounted to his face; he was resolved to unravel the mystery.
The young man and young woman perceived they were watched, and redoubled their speed.
D’Artagnan determined upon his course.
He passed them, then returned so as to meet them exactly before the Samaritaine, which was illuminated by a lamp which threw its light over all that part of the bridge.
D’Artagnan stopped before them, and they stopped before him.
“What do you want, monsieur?” demanded the Musketeer, recoiling a step, and with a foreign accent, which proved to D’Artagnan that he was deceived in one of his conjectures.
“No, monsieur, it is not Aramis; and by your exclamation I perceive you have mistaken me for another, and pardon you.” “You pardon me?” cried D’Artagnan.
“Yes,” replied the stranger.
“Allow me, then, to pass on, since it is not with me you have anything to do.” “You are right, monsieur, it is not with you that I have anything to do; it is with Madame.” “With Madame!
You do not know her,” replied the stranger.
“You are deceived, monsieur; I know her very well.” “Ah,” said Mme.
Bonacieux; in a tone of reproach, “ah, monsieur, I had your promise as a soldier and your word as a gentleman.
I hoped to be able to rely upon that.” “And I, madame!” said D’Artagnan, embarrassed; “you promised me—” “Take my arm, madame,” said the stranger, “and let us continue our way.” D’Artagnan, however, stupefied, cast down, annihilated by all that happened, stood, with crossed arms, before the Musketeer and Mme.
The Musketeer advanced two steps, and pushed D’Artagnan aside with his hand.
D’Artagnan made a spring backward and drew his sword.
At the same time, and with the rapidity of lightning, the stranger drew his.
Bonacieux, throwing herself between the combatants and seizing the swords with her hands.
“My Lord!” cried D’Artagnan, enlightened by a sudden idea, “my Lord!
Pardon me, monsieur, but you are not—” “My Lord the Duke of Buckingham,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, in an undertone; “and now you may ruin us all.” “My Lord, Madame, I ask a hundred pardons!
Pardon me, and then tell me how I can risk my life to serve your Grace?” “You are a brave young man,” said Buckingham, holding out his hand to D’Artagnan, who pressed it respectfully.
“You offer me your services; with the same frankness I accept them.
Follow us at a distance of twenty paces, as far as the Louvre, and if anyone watches us, slay him!” D’Artagnan placed his naked sword under his arm, allowed the duke and Mme.
Bonacieux to take twenty steps ahead, and then followed them, ready to execute the instructions of the noble and elegant minister of Charles I.
Fortunately, he had no opportunity to give the duke this proof of his devotion, and the young woman and the handsome Musketeer entered the Louvre by the wicket of the Echelle without any interference.
As for D’Artagnan, he immediately repaired to the cabaret of the Pomme-de-Pin, where he found Porthos and Aramis awaiting him.
Without giving them any explanation of the alarm and inconvenience he had caused them, he told them that he had terminated the affair alone in which he had for a moment believed he should need their assistance.
Meanwhile, carried away as we are by our narrative, we must leave our three friends to themselves, and follow the Duke of Buckingham and his guide through the labyrinths of the Louvre.
GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM Mme.
Bonacieux and the duke entered the Louvre without difficulty.
Bonacieux was known to belong to the queen; the duke wore the uniform of the Musketeers of M. de Tréville, who, as we have said, were that evening on guard.
Besides, Germain was in the interests of the queen; and if anything should happen, Mme.
Bonacieux would be accused of having introduced her lover into the Louvre, that was all.
Her reputation would be lost, it is true; but of what value in the world was the reputation of the little wife of a mercer?
Once within the interior of the court, the duke and the young woman followed the wall for the space of about twenty-five steps.
Bonacieux pushed a little servants’ door, open by day but generally closed at night.
Both entered, and found themselves in darkness; but Mme.
Bonacieux was acquainted with all the turnings and windings of this part of the Louvre, appropriated for the people of the household.
She closed the door after her, took the duke by the hand, and after a few experimental steps, grasped a balustrade, put her foot upon the bottom step, and began to ascend the staircase.
She then turned to the right, followed the course of a long corridor, descended a flight, went a few steps farther, introduced a key into a lock, opened a door, and pushed the duke into an apartment lighted only by a lamp, saying, “Remain here, my Lord Duke; someone will come.” She then went out by the same door, which she locked, so that the duke found himself literally a prisoner.
Nevertheless, isolated as he was, we must say that the Duke of Buckingham did not experience an instant of fear.
One of the salient points of his character was the search for adventures and a love of romance.
Brave, rash, and enterprising, this was not the first time he had risked his life in such attempts.
He had learned that the pretended message from Anne of Austria, upon the faith of which he had come to Paris, was a snare; but instead of regaining England, he had, abusing the position in which he had been placed, declared to the queen that he would not depart without seeing her.
The queen had at first positively refused; but at length became afraid that the duke, if exasperated, would commit some folly.
She had already decided upon seeing him and urging his immediate departure, when, on the very evening of coming to this decision, Mme.
Bonacieux, who was charged with going to fetch the duke and conducting him to the Louvre, was abducted.
For two days no one knew what had become of her, and everything remained in suspense; but once free, and placed in communication with Laporte, matters resumed their course, and she accomplished the perilous enterprise which, but for her arrest, would have been executed three days earlier.
Buckingham, left alone, walked toward a mirror.
His Musketeer’s uniform became him marvelously.
At thirty-five, which was then his age, he passed, with just title, for the handsomest gentleman and the most elegant cavalier of France or England.
The favorite of two kings, immensely rich, all-powerful in a kingdom which he disordered at his fancy and calmed again at his caprice, George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, had lived one of those fabulous existences which survive, in the course of centuries, to astonish posterity.
Sure of himself, convinced of his own power, certain that the laws which rule other men could not reach him, he went straight to the object he aimed at, even were this object so elevated and so dazzling that it would have been madness for any other even to have contemplated it.
It was thus he had succeeded in approaching several times the beautiful and proud Anne of Austria, and in making himself loved by dazzling her.
George Villiers placed himself before the glass, as we have said, restored the undulations to his beautiful hair, which the weight of his hat had disordered, twisted his mustache, and, his heart swelling with joy, happy and proud at being near the moment he had so long sighed for, he smiled upon himself with pride and hope.
At this moment a door concealed in the tapestry opened, and a woman appeared.
Buckingham saw this apparition in the glass; he uttered a cry.
Anne of Austria was then twenty-six or twenty-seven years of age; that is to say, she was in the full splendor of her beauty.
Her carriage was that of a queen or a goddess; her eyes, which cast the brilliancy of emeralds, were perfectly beautiful, and yet were at the same time full of sweetness and majesty.
Her mouth was small and rosy; and although her underlip, like that of all princes of the House of Austria, protruded slightly beyond the other, it was eminently lovely in its smile, but as profoundly disdainful in its contempt.
Her skin was admired for its velvety softness; her hands and arms were of surpassing beauty, all the poets of the time singing them as incomparable.
Lastly, her hair, which, from being light in her youth, had become chestnut, and which she wore curled very plainly, and with much powder, admirably set off her face, in which the most rigid critic could only have desired a little less rouge, and the most fastidious sculptor a little more fineness in the nose.
Buckingham remained for a moment dazzled.
Never had Anne of Austria appeared to him so beautiful, amid balls, fêtes, or carousals, as she appeared to him at this moment, dressed in a simple robe of white satin, and accompanied by Donna Estafania—the only one of her Spanish women who had not been driven from her by the jealousy of the king or by the persecutions of Richelieu.
Buckingham threw himself at her feet, and before the queen could prevent him, kissed the hem of her robe.
“I know that I must have been mad, senseless, to believe that snow would become animated or marble warm; but what then!
Besides, I have lost nothing by this journey because I see you.” “Yes,” replied Anne, “but you know why and how I see you; because, insensible to all my sufferings, you persist in remaining in a city where, by remaining, you run the risk of your life, and make me run the risk of my honor.
I see you to tell you that everything separates us—the depths of the sea, the enmity of kingdoms, the sanctity of vows.
It is sacrilege to struggle against so many things, my Lord.
In short, I see you to tell you that we must never see each other again.” “Speak on, madame, speak on, Queen,” said Buckingham; “the sweetness of your voice covers the harshness of your words.
You talk of sacrilege!
Why, the sacrilege is the separation of two hearts formed by God for each other.” “My Lord,” cried the queen, “you forget that I have never said that I love you.” “But you have never told me that you did not love me; and truly, to speak such words to me would be, on the part of your Majesty, too great an ingratitude.
For tell me, where can you find a love like mine—a love which neither time, nor absence, nor despair can extinguish, a love which contents itself with a lost ribbon, a stray look, or a chance word?
Shall I tell you each ornament of your toilet?
You were seated upon cushions in the Spanish fashion; you wore a robe of green satin embroidered with gold and silver, hanging sleeves knotted upon your beautiful arms—those lovely arms—with large diamonds.
I shut my eyes, and I can see you as you then were; I open them again, and I see what you are now—a hundred times more beautiful!” “What folly,” murmured Anne of Austria, who had not the courage to find fault with the duke for having so well preserved her portrait in his heart, “what folly to feed a useless passion with such remembrances!” “And upon what then must I live?
It is my happiness, my treasure, my hope.
This is the fourth which you have let fall and I have picked up; for in three years, madame, I have only seen you four times—the first, which I have described to you; the second, at the mansion of Madame de Chevreuse; the third, in the gardens of Amiens.” “Duke,” said the queen, blushing, “never speak of that evening.” “Oh, let us speak of it; on the contrary, let us speak of it!
That is the most happy and brilliant evening of my life!
You remember what a beautiful night it was?
How soft and perfumed was the air; how lovely the blue heavens and star-enameled sky!
Then you were about to tell me all—the isolation of your life, the griefs of your heart.
I felt, in bending my head toward you, your beautiful hair touch my cheek; and every time that it touched me I trembled from head to foot.
You do not know what felicity from heaven, what joys from paradise, are comprised in a moment like that.
For that night, madame, that night you loved me, I will swear it.” “My Lord, yes; it is possible that the influence of the place, the charm of the beautiful evening, the fascination of your look—the thousand circumstances, in short, which sometimes unite to destroy a woman—were grouped around me on that fatal evening; but, my Lord, you saw the queen come to the aid of the woman who faltered.
You believed that you would fly from me by returning to Paris; you believed that I would not dare to quit the treasure over which my master had charged me to watch.
What to me were all the treasures in the world, or all the kings of the earth!
I did not even touch your hand, and you pardoned me on seeing me so submissive and so repentant.” “Yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which I took no part, as you well know, my Lord.
The king, excited by the cardinal, made a terrible clamor.
Madame de Vernet was driven from me, Putange was exiled, Madame de Chevreuse fell into disgrace, and when you wished to come back as ambassador to France, the king himself—remember, my lord—the king himself opposed it.” “Yes, and France is about to pay for her king’s refusal with a war.
What object, think you, have this expedition to Ré and this league with the Protestants of La Rochelle which I am projecting?
The pleasure of seeing you.
I have no hope of penetrating, sword in hand, to Paris, I know that well.
But this war may bring round a peace; this peace will require a negotiator; that negotiator will be me.
Thousands of men, it is true, will have to pay for my happiness with their lives; but what is that to me, provided I see you again!
All this is perhaps folly—perhaps insanity; but tell me what woman has a lover more truly in love; what queen a servant more ardent?” “My Lord, my Lord, you invoke in your defense things which accuse you more strongly.
If you loved me, you would view all this otherwise.
If you loved me, oh, if you loved me, that would be too great happiness, and I should run mad.
Ah, Madame de Chevreuse was less cruel than you.
Holland loved her, and she responded to his love.” “Madame de Chevreuse was not queen,” murmured Anne of Austria, overcome, in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound a passion.
I can believe that it is the dignity of your rank alone which makes you cruel to me; I can believe that, had you been Madame de Chevreuse, poor Buckingham might have hoped.
Oh, my beautiful sovereign, a hundred times, thanks!” “Oh, my Lord!
You have ill understood, wrongly interpreted; I did not mean to say—” “Silence, silence!” cried the duke.
You have told me yourself, madame, that I have been drawn into a snare; I, perhaps, may leave my life in it—for, although it may be strange, I have for some time had a presentiment that I should shortly die.” And the duke smiled, with a smile at once sad and charming.
“Oh, my God!” cried Anne of Austria, with an accent of terror which proved how much greater an interest she took in the duke than she ventured to tell.
“I do not tell you this, madame, to terrify you; no, it is even ridiculous for me to name it to you, and, believe me, I take no heed of such dreams.
But the words you have just spoken, the hope you have almost given me, will have richly paid all—were it my life.” “Oh, but I,” said Anne, “I also, duke, have had presentiments; I also have had dreams.
I dreamed that I saw you lying bleeding, wounded.” “In the left side, was it not, and with a knife?” interrupted Buckingham.
Who can possibly have told you I had had that dream?
I have imparted it to no one but my God, and that in my prayers.” “I ask for no more.
Should we have the same presentiments if our existences did not touch at the heart?
You love me, my beautiful queen, and you will weep for me?” “Oh, my God, my God!” cried Anne of Austria, “this is more than I can bear.
I do not know whether I love you or love you not; but what I know is that I will not be perjured.
Depart then, depart, I implore you!” “Oh, how beautiful you are thus!
Oh, how I love you!” said Buckingham.
“Go, go, I implore you, and return hereafter!
“Here, my Lord, here,” said she, “keep this in memory of me.” Buckingham took the casket, and fell a second time on his knees.
“You have promised me to go,” said the queen.
Your hand, madame, your hand, and I depart!” Anne of Austria stretched forth her hand, closing her eyes, and leaning with the other upon Estafania, for she felt that her strength was about to fail her.
Buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand, and then rising, said, “Within six months, if I am not dead, I shall have seen you again, madame—even if I have to overturn the world.” And faithful to the promise he had made, he rushed out of the apartment.
In the corridor he met Mme.
Bonacieux, who waited for him, and who, with the same precautions and the same good luck, conducted him out of the Louvre.
MONSIEUR BONACIEUX There was in all this, as may have been observed, one personage concerned, of whom, notwithstanding his precarious position, we have appeared to take but very little notice.
This personage was M.
Bonacieux, the respectable martyr of the political and amorous intrigues which entangled themselves so nicely together at this gallant and chivalric period.
Fortunately, the reader may remember, or may not remember—fortunately we have promised not to lose sight of him.
The officers who arrested him conducted him straight to the Bastille, where he passed trembling before a party of soldiers who were loading their muskets.
Thence, introduced into a half-subterranean gallery, he became, on the part of those who had brought him, the object of the grossest insults and the harshest treatment.
The officers perceived that they had not to deal with a gentleman, and they treated him like a very peasant.
At the end of half an hour or thereabouts, a clerk came to put an end to his tortures, but not to his anxiety, by giving the order to conduct M.
Bonacieux to the Chamber of Examination.
Ordinarily, prisoners were interrogated in their cells; but they did not do so with M.
Two guards attended the mercer who made him traverse a court and enter a corridor in which were three sentinels, opened a door and pushed him unceremoniously into a low room, where the only furniture was a table, a chair, and a commissary.
The commissary was seated in the chair, and was writing at the table.
The two guards led the prisoner toward the table, and upon a sign from the commissary drew back so far as to be unable to hear anything.
The commissary, who had till this time held his head down over his papers, looked up to see what sort of person he had to do with.
This commissary was a man of very repulsive mien, with a pointed nose, with yellow and salient cheek bones, with eyes small but keen and penetrating, and an expression of countenance resembling at once the polecat and the fox.
His head, supported by a long and flexible neck, issued from his large black robe, balancing itself with a motion very much like that of the tortoise thrusting his head out of his shell.
Bonacieux his name, age, condition, and abode.
The accused replied that his name was Jacques Michel Bonacieux, that he was fifty-one years old, a retired mercer, and lived Rue des Fossoyeurs, No. 14.
The commissary then, instead of continuing to interrogate him, made him a long speech upon the danger there is for an obscure citizen to meddle with public matters.
He complicated this exordium by an exposition in which he painted the power and the deeds of the cardinal, that incomparable minister, that conqueror of past ministers, that example for ministers to come—deeds and power which none could thwart with impunity.
After this second part of his discourse, fixing his hawk’s eye upon poor Bonacieux, he bade him reflect upon the gravity of his situation.
The reflections of the mercer were already made; he cursed the instant when M.
Laporte formed the idea of marrying him to his goddaughter, and particularly the moment when that goddaughter had been received as Lady of the Linen to her Majesty.
At bottom the character of M.
Bonacieux was one of profound selfishness mixed with sordid avarice, the whole seasoned with extreme cowardice.
The love with which his young wife had inspired him was a secondary sentiment, and was not strong enough to contend with the primitive feelings we have just enumerated.
Bonacieux indeed reflected on what had just been said to him.
“But, Monsieur Commissary,” said he, calmly, “believe that I know and appreciate, more than anybody, the merit of the incomparable eminence by whom we have the honor to be governed.” “Indeed?” asked the commissary, with an air of doubt.
How is it possible for a poor mercer, who detests Huguenots and who abhors Spaniards, to be accused of high treason?
What have you done with her, then, if you have her no longer?” “They have abducted her, monsieur.” “They have abducted her?
Ah!” Bonacieux inferred from this “Ah” that the affair grew more and more intricate.
“They have abducted her,” added the commissary; “and do you know the man who has committed this deed?” “I think I know him.” “Who is he?” “Remember that I affirm nothing, Monsieur the Commissary, and that I only suspect.” “Whom do you suspect?
Bonacieux was in the greatest perplexity possible.
Had he better deny everything or tell everything?
By denying all, it might be suspected that he must know too much to avow; by confessing all he might prove his good will.
“I suspect,” said he, “a tall, dark man, of lofty carriage, who has the air of a great lord.
He has followed us several times, as I think, when I have waited for my wife at the wicket of the Louvre to escort her home.” The commissary now appeared to experience a little uneasiness.
“Oh, as to his name, I know nothing about it; but if I were ever to meet him, I should recognize him in an instant, I will answer for it, were he among a thousand persons.” The face of the commissary grew still darker.
“You should recognize him among a thousand, say you?” continued he.
“That is to say,” cried Bonacieux, who saw he had taken a false step, “that is to say—” “You have answered that you should recognize him,” said the commissary.
“That is all very well, and enough for today; before we proceed further, someone must be informed that you know the ravisher of your wife.” “But I have not told you that I know him!” cried Bonacieux, in despair.
“I told you, on the contrary—” “Take away the prisoner,” said the commissary to the two guards.
“Where must we place him?” demanded the chief.
In the first one handy, provided it is safe,” said the commissary, with an indifference which penetrated poor Bonacieux with horror.
“Alas, alas!” said he to himself, “misfortune is over my head; my wife must have committed some frightful crime.
They believe me her accomplice, and will punish me with her.
She must have spoken; she must have confessed everything—a woman is so weak!
A night is soon passed; and tomorrow to the wheel, to the gallows!
Oh, my God, my God, have pity on me!” Without listening the least in the world to the lamentations of M.
Bonacieux—lamentations to which, besides, they must have been pretty well accustomed—the two guards took the prisoner each by an arm, and led him away, while the commissary wrote a letter in haste and dispatched it by an officer in waiting.
Bonacieux could not close his eyes; not because his dungeon was so very disagreeable, but because his uneasiness was so great.
He sat all night on his stool, starting at the least noise; and when the first rays of the sun penetrated into his chamber, the dawn itself appeared to him to have taken funereal tints.
All at once he heard his bolts drawn, and made a terrified bound.
He believed they were come to conduct him to the scaffold; so that when he saw merely and simply, instead of the executioner he expected, only his commissary of the preceding evening, attended by his clerk, he was ready to embrace them both.
“Your affair has become more complicated since yesterday evening, my good man, and I advise you to tell the whole truth; for your repentance alone can remove the anger of the cardinal.” “Why, I am ready to tell everything,” cried Bonacieux, “at least, all that I know.
Interrogate me, I entreat you!” “Where is your wife, in the first place?” “Why, did not I tell you she had been stolen from me?” “Yes, but yesterday at five o’clock in the afternoon, thanks to you, she escaped.” “My wife escaped!” cried Bonacieux.
“Oh, unfortunate creature!
Monsieur, if she has escaped, it is not my fault, I swear.” “What business had you, then, to go into the chamber of Monsieur d’Artagnan, your neighbor, with whom you had a long conference during the day?” “Ah, yes, Monsieur Commissary; yes, that is true, and I confess that I was in the wrong.
I did go to Monsieur d’Artagnan’s.” “What was the aim of that visit?” “To beg him to assist me in finding my wife.
I believed I had a right to endeavor to find her.
I was deceived, as it appears, and I ask your pardon.” “And what did Monsieur d’Artagnan reply?” “Monsieur d’Artagnan promised me his assistance; but I soon found out that he was betraying me.” “You impose upon justice.
Monsieur d’Artagnan made a compact with you; and in virtue of that compact put to flight the police who had arrested your wife, and has placed her beyond reach.” “M. d’Artagnan has abducted my wife!
Come now, what are you telling me?” “Fortunately, Monsieur d’Artagnan is in our hands, and you shall be confronted with him.” “By my faith, I ask no better,” cried Bonacieux; “I shall not be sorry to see the face of an acquaintance.” “Bring in the Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the commissary to the guards.
“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the commissary, addressing Athos, “declare all that passed yesterday between you and Monsieur.” “But,” cried Bonacieux, “this is not Monsieur d’Artagnan whom you show me.” “What!
Not Monsieur d’Artagnan?” exclaimed the commissary.
“Not the least in the world,” replied Bonacieux.
“What is this gentleman’s name?” asked the commissary.
You don’t know him?” “No.” “Did you never see him?” “Yes, I have seen him, but I don’t know what he calls himself.” “Your name?” replied the commissary.
“Athos,” replied the Musketeer.
“But that is not a man’s name; that is the name of a mountain,” cried the poor questioner, who began to lose his head.
“But you said that your name was D’Artagnan.” “Who, I?” “Yes, you.” “Somebody said to me, ‘You are Monsieur d’Artagnan?’ I answered, ‘You think so?’ My guards exclaimed that they were sure of it.
I did not wish to contradict them; besides, I might be deceived.” “Monsieur, you insult the majesty of justice.” “Not at all,” said Athos, calmly.
“You are Monsieur d’Artagnan.” “You see, monsieur, that you say it again.” “But I tell you, Monsieur Commissary,” cried Bonacieux, in his turn, “there is not the least doubt about the matter.
Monsieur d’Artagnan is my tenant, although he does not pay me my rent—and even better on that account ought I to know him.
Monsieur d’Artagnan is a young man, scarcely nineteen or twenty, and this gentleman must be thirty at least.
Monsieur d’Artagnan is in Monsieur Dessessart’s Guards, and this gentleman is in the company of Monsieur de Tréville’s Musketeers.
Look at his uniform, Monsieur Commissary, look at his uniform!” “That’s true,” murmured the commissary; “_pardieu_, that’s true.” At this moment the door was opened quickly, and a messenger, introduced by one of the gatekeepers of the Bastille, gave a letter to the commissary.
“Oh, unhappy woman!” cried the commissary.
It is not of my wife, I hope!” “On the contrary, it is of her.
Your Monsieur Bonacieux is very tiresome.” The commissary designated by the same gesture Athos and Bonacieux, “Let them be guarded more closely than ever.” “And yet,” said Athos, with his habitual calmness, “if it be Monsieur d’Artagnan who is concerned in this matter, I do not perceive how I can take his place.” “Do as I bade you,” cried the commissary, “and preserve absolute secrecy.
You understand!” Athos shrugged his shoulders, and followed his guards silently, while M.
Bonacieux uttered lamentations enough to break the heart of a tiger.
Bonacieux wept all day, like a true mercer, not being at all a military man, as he himself informed us.
In the evening, about nine o’clock, at the moment he had made up his mind to go to bed, he heard steps in his corridor.
These steps drew near to his dungeon, the door was thrown open, and the guards appeared.
“Follow you!” cried Bonacieux, “follow you at this hour!
Where, my God?” “Where we have orders to lead you.” “But that is not an answer.” “It is, nevertheless, the only one we can give.” “Ah, my God, my God!” murmured the poor mercer, “now, indeed, I am lost!” And he followed the guards who came for him, mechanically and without resistance.
He passed along the same corridor as before, crossed one court, then a second side of a building; at length, at the gate of the entrance court he found a carriage surrounded by four guards on horseback.
They made him enter this carriage, the officer placed himself by his side, the door was locked, and they were left in a rolling prison.
The carriage was put in motion as slowly as a funeral car.
Through the closely fastened windows the prisoner could perceive the houses and the pavement, that was all; but, true Parisian as he was, Bonacieux could recognize every street by the milestones, the signs, and the lamps.
At the moment of arriving at St.
Paul—the spot where such as were condemned at the Bastille were executed—he was near fainting and crossed himself twice.
He thought the carriage was about to stop there.
The carriage, however, passed on.
Farther on, a still greater terror seized him on passing by the cemetery of St.
Jean, where state criminals were buried.
One thing, however, reassured him; he remembered that before they were buried their heads were generally cut off, and he felt that his head was still on his shoulders.
But when he saw the carriage take the way to La Grêve, when he perceived the pointed roof of the Hôtel de Ville, and the carriage passed under the arcade, he believed it was over with him.
He wished to confess to the officer, and upon his refusal, uttered such pitiable cries that the officer told him that if he continued to deafen him thus, he should put a gag in his mouth.
This measure somewhat reassured Bonacieux.
If they meant to execute him at La Grêve, it could scarcely be worth while to gag him, as they had nearly reached the place of execution.
Indeed, the carriage crossed the fatal spot without stopping.
There remained, then, no other place to fear but the Traitor’s Cross; the carriage was taking the direct road to it.
This time there was no longer any doubt; it was at the Traitor’s Cross that lesser criminals were executed.
Bonacieux had flattered himself in believing himself worthy of St.
He could not yet see that dreadful cross, but he felt somehow as if it were coming to meet him.
When he was within twenty paces of it, he heard a noise of people and the carriage stopped.
This was more than poor Bonacieux could endure, depressed as he was by the successive emotions which he had experienced; he uttered a feeble groan which might have been taken for the last sigh of a dying man, and fainted.
THE MAN OF MEUNG The crowd was caused, not by the expectation of a man to be hanged, but by the contemplation of a man who was hanged.
The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed its way, passed through the crowd, threaded the Rue St.
The door opened; two guards received Bonacieux in their arms from the officer who supported him.
They carried him through an alley, up a flight of stairs, and deposited him in an antechamber.
All these movements had been effected mechanically, as far as he was concerned.
His ears had perceived sounds without comprehending them; he might have been executed at that moment without his making a single gesture in his own defense or uttering a cry to implore mercy.
He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the wall and his hands hanging down, exactly on the spot where the guards placed him.
At this movement, which nobody opposed, he resumed a little courage, and ventured to draw up one leg and then the other.
At this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door, continued to exchange some words with a person in the next chamber and then came up to the prisoner.
“Is your name Bonacieux?” said he.
“Yes, Monsieur Officer,” stammered the mercer, more dead than alive, “at your service.” “Come in,” said the officer.
The latter obeyed without reply, and entered the chamber, where he appeared to be expected.
It was a large cabinet, close and stifling, with the walls furnished with arms offensive and defensive, and in which there was already a fire, although it was scarcely the end of the month of September.
A square table, covered with books and papers, upon which was unrolled an immense plan of the city of La Rochelle, occupied the center of the room.
Standing before the chimney was a man of middle height, of a haughty, proud mien; with piercing eyes, a large brow, and a thin face, which was made still longer by a _royal_ (or _imperial_, as it is now called), surmounted by a pair of mustaches.
Although this man was scarcely thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age, hair, mustaches, and royal, all began to be gray.
This man, except a sword, had all the appearance of a soldier; and his buff boots, still slightly covered with dust, indicated that he had been on horseback in the course of the day.
At first sight, nothing denoted the cardinal; and it was impossible for those who did not know his face to guess in whose presence they were.
The poor mercer remained standing at the door, while the eyes of the personage we have just described were fixed upon him, and appeared to wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past.
“Is this that Bonacieux?” asked he, after a moment of silence.
“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the officer.
Bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of the Bastille.
From time to time the man by the chimney raised his eyes from the writings, and plunged them like poniards into the heart of the poor mercer.
At the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of examination, the cardinal was satisfied.
“That head has never conspired,” murmured he, “but it matters not; we will see.” “You are accused of high treason,” said the cardinal, slowly.
“So I have been told already, monseigneur,” cried Bonacieux, giving his interrogator the title he had heard the officer give him, “but I swear to you that I know nothing about it.” The cardinal repressed a smile.
“You have conspired with your wife, with Madame de Chevreuse, and with my Lord Duke of Buckingham.” “Indeed, monseigneur,” responded the mercer, “I have heard her pronounce all those names.” “And on what occasion?” “She said that the Cardinal de Richelieu had drawn the Duke of Buckingham to Paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen.” “She said that?” cried the cardinal, with violence.
“Yes, monseigneur, but I told her she was wrong to talk about such things; and that his Eminence was incapable—” “Hold your tongue!
You are stupid,” replied the cardinal.
“That’s exactly what my wife said, monseigneur.” “Do you know who carried off your wife?” “No, monseigneur.” “You have suspicions, nevertheless?” “Yes, monseigneur; but these suspicions appeared to be disagreeable to Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer have them.” “Your wife has escaped.
Did you know that?” “No, monseigneur.
I learned it since I have been in prison, and that from the conversation of Monsieur the Commissary—an amiable man.” The cardinal repressed another smile.
“Then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since her flight.” “Absolutely, monseigneur; but she has most likely returned to the Louvre.” “At one o’clock this morning she had not returned.” “My God!
“He calls me his dear Monsieur,” said the mercer to himself.
“_Peste!_ Matters are going all right.” “Should you know those doors again?” “Yes.” “Do you know the numbers?” “Yes.” “What are they?” “No. 25 in the Rue de Vaugirard; 75 in the Rue de la Harpe.” “That’s well,” said the cardinal.
“Go,” said he, in a subdued voice, “and find Rochefort.
Tell him to come to me immediately, if he has returned.” “The count is here,” said the officer, “and requests to speak with your Eminence instantly.” “Let him come in, then!” said the cardinal, quickly.
The officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity which all the servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him.
“To your Eminence!” murmured Bonacieux, rolling his eyes round in astonishment.
Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the officer, when the door opened, and a new personage entered.
“It is he!” cried Bonacieux.
What he?” asked the cardinal.
“The man who abducted my wife.” The cardinal rang a second time.
The officer reappeared.
“Place this man in the care of his guards again, and let him wait till I send for him.” “No, monseigneur, no, it is not he!” cried Bonacieux; “no, I was deceived.
This is quite another man, and does not resemble him at all.
Monsieur is, I am sure, an honest man.” “Take away that fool!” said the cardinal.
The officer took Bonacieux by the arm, and led him into the antechamber, where he found his two guards.
The newly introduced personage followed Bonacieux impatiently with his eyes till he had gone out; and the moment the door closed, “They have seen each other;” said he, approaching the cardinal eagerly.
“Who?” asked his Eminence.
“He and she.” “The queen and the duke?” cried Richelieu.
“Yes.” “Where?” “At the Louvre.” “Are you sure of it?” “Perfectly sure.” “Who told you of it?” “Madame de Lannoy, who is devoted to your Eminence, as you know.” “Why did she not let me know sooner?” “Whether by chance or mistrust, the queen made Madame de Surgis sleep in her chamber, and detained her all day.” “Well, we are beaten!
They were, one in the Rue de Vaugirard, No. 25; the other in the Rue de la Harpe, No. 75.” “Does your Eminence command that they both be instantly arrested?” “It will be too late; they will be gone.” “But still, we can make sure that they are so.” “Take ten men of my Guardsmen, and search the two houses thoroughly.” “Instantly, monseigneur.” And Rochefort went hastily out of the apartment.
The cardinal, being left alone, reflected for an instant and then rang the bell a third time.
The same officer appeared.
“Bring the prisoner in again,” said the cardinal.
Bonacieux was introduced afresh, and upon a sign from the cardinal, the officer retired.
“You have deceived me!” said the cardinal, sternly.
“I,” cried Bonacieux, “I deceive your Eminence!” “Your wife, in going to Rue de Vaugirard and Rue de la Harpe, did not go to find linen drapers.” “Then why did she go, just God?” “She went to meet the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of Buckingham.” “Yes,” cried Bonacieux, recalling all his remembrances of the circumstances, “yes, that’s it.
Your Eminence is right.
I told my wife several times that it was surprising that linen drapers should live in such houses as those, in houses that had no signs; but she always laughed at me.
I have touched the hand of the great man!” cried Bonacieux.
“The great man has called me his friend!” “Yes, my friend, yes,” said the cardinal, with that paternal tone which he sometimes knew how to assume, but which deceived none who knew him; “and as you have been unjustly suspected, well, you must be indemnified.
Here, take this purse of a hundred pistoles, and pardon me.” “I pardon you, monseigneur!” said Bonacieux, hesitating to take the purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but a pleasantry.
“But you are able to have me arrested, you are able to have me tortured, you are able to have me hanged; you are the master, and I could not have the least word to say.
Pardon you, monseigneur!
You cannot mean that!” “Ah, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, you are generous in this matter.
Thus, then, you will take this bag, and you will go away without being too malcontent.” “I go away enchanted.” “Farewell, then, or rather, _au revoir_, for I hope we shall meet again.” “Whenever Monseigneur wishes, I am always at at his Eminence’s orders.” “That will be frequently, I assure you, for I have found something extremely agreeable in your conversation.” “Oh!
Monseigneur!” “_Au revoir_, Monsieur Bonacieux, _au revoir!_” And the cardinal made him a sign with his hand, to which Bonacieux replied by bowing to the ground.
He then went out backward, and when he was in the antechamber the cardinal heard him, in his enthusiasm, crying aloud, “Long life to the Monseigneur!
Long life to his Eminence!
Long life to the great cardinal!” The cardinal listened with a smile to this vociferous manifestation of the feelings of M.
As he was in the deepest of his strategic meditations, the door opened, and Rochefort returned.
“Well?” said the cardinal, eagerly, rising with a promptitude which proved the degree of importance he attached to the commission with which he had charged the count.
“Well,” said the latter, “a young woman of about twenty-six or twenty-eight years of age, and a man of from thirty-five to forty, have indeed lodged at the two houses pointed out by your Eminence; but the woman left last night, and the man this morning.” “It was they!” cried the cardinal, looking at the clock; “and now it is too late to have them pursued.
The duchess is at Tours, and the duke at Boulogne.
It is in London they must be found.” “What are your Eminence’s orders?” “Not a word of what has passed.
Let the queen remain in perfect security; let her be ignorant that we know her secret.
Let her believe that we are in search of some conspiracy or other.
Send me the keeper of the seals, Séguier.” “And that man, what has your Eminence done with him?” “What man?” asked the cardinal.
“That Bonacieux.” “I have done with him all that could be done.
I have made him a spy upon his wife.” The Comte de Rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges the superiority of the master as great, and retired.
Left alone, the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter, which he secured with his special seal.
Here is an order for two hundred pistoles; call upon my treasurer and get the money.
You shall have as much again if you are back within six days, and have executed your commission well.” The messenger, without replying a single word, bowed, took the letter, with the order for the two hundred pistoles, and retired.
Here is what the letter contained: MILADY, Be at the first ball at which the Duke of Buckingham shall be present.
As soon as these studs shall be in your possession, inform me.
MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD On the day after these events had taken place, Athos not having reappeared, M. de Tréville was informed by D’Artagnan and Porthos of the circumstance.
As to Aramis, he had asked for leave of absence for five days, and was gone, it was said, to Rouen on family business.
M. de Tréville was the father of his soldiers.
He repaired, then, instantly to the office of the _lieutenant-criminel_.
The officer who commanded the post of the Red Cross was sent for, and by successive inquiries they learned that Athos was then lodged in Fort l’Evêque.
Athos had passed through all the examinations we have seen Bonacieux undergo.
We were present at the scene in which the two captives were confronted with each other.
Athos, who had till that time said nothing for fear that D’Artagnan, interrupted in his turn, should not have the time necessary, from this moment declared that his name was Athos, and not D’Artagnan.
Bonacieux; that he had never spoken to the one or the other; that he had come, at about ten o’clock in the evening, to pay a visit to his friend M. d’Artagnan, but that till that hour he had been at M. de Tréville’s, where he had dined.
“Twenty witnesses,” added he, “could attest the fact”; and he named several distinguished gentlemen, and among them was M. le Duc de la Trémouille.
The second commissary was as much bewildered as the first had been by the simple and firm declaration of the Musketeer, upon whom he was anxious to take the revenge which men of the robe like at all times to gain over men of the sword; but the name of M. de Tréville, and that of M. de la Trémouille, commanded a little reflection.
Athos was then sent to the cardinal; but unfortunately the cardinal was at the Louvre with the king.
It was precisely at this moment that M. de Tréville, on leaving the residence of the _lieutenant-criminel_ and the governor of Fort l’Evêque without being able to find Athos, arrived at the palace.
As captain of the Musketeers, M. de Tréville had the right of entry at all times.
It is well known how violent the king’s prejudices were against the queen, and how carefully these prejudices were kept up by the cardinal, who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitely more than men.
One of the grand causes of this prejudice was the friendship of Anne of Austria for Mme. de Chevreuse.
These two women gave him more uneasiness than the war with Spain, the quarrel with England, or the embarrassment of the finances.
In his eyes and to his conviction, Mme. de Chevreuse not only served the queen in her political intrigues, but, what tormented him still more, in her amorous intrigues.
At the first word the cardinal spoke of Mme. de Chevreuse—who, though exiled to Tours and believed to be in that city, had come to Paris, remained there five days, and outwitted the police—the king flew into a furious passion.
Capricious and unfaithful, the king wished to be called Louis the Just and Louis the Chaste.
Posterity will find a difficulty in understanding this character, which history explains only by facts and never by reason.
And yet, in all this, the cardinal had not yet said a word about the Duke of Buckingham.
At this instant M. de Tréville entered, cool, polite, and in irreproachable costume.
Informed of what had passed by the presence of the cardinal and the alteration in the king’s countenance, M. de Tréville felt himself something like Samson before the Philistines.
Louis XIII. had already placed his hand on the knob of the door; at the noise of M. de Tréville’s entrance he turned round.
“You arrive in good time, monsieur,” said the king, who, when his passions were raised to a certain point, could not dissemble; “I have learned some fine things concerning your Musketeers.” “And I,” said Tréville, coldly, “I have some pretty things to tell your Majesty concerning these gownsmen.” “What?” said the king, with hauteur.
“A written examination attests it,” said the cardinal, replying aloud to the mute interrogation of his Majesty; “and the ill-treated people have drawn up the following, which I have the honor to present to your Majesty.” “And is the written report of the gownsmen to be placed in comparison with the word of honor of a swordsman?” replied Tréville haughtily.
Besides, D’Artagnan passed the evening with me.” “Well,” said the cardinal, “everybody seems to have passed the evening with you.” “Does your Eminence doubt my word?” said Tréville, with a brow flushed with anger.
“And the next day, Bernajoux.
“That concerns your Majesty more than me,” said the cardinal.
“I should affirm the culpability.” “And I deny it,” said Tréville.
“Send the case before the judges; it is their business to judge, and they shall judge.” “Only,” replied Tréville, “it is a sad thing that in the unfortunate times in which we live, the purest life, the most incontestable virtue, cannot exempt a man from infamy and persecution.
The army, I will answer for it, will be but little pleased at being exposed to rigorous treatment on account of police affairs.” The expression was imprudent; but M. de Tréville launched it with knowledge of his cause.
He was desirous of an explosion, because in that case the mine throws forth fire, and fire enlightens.
And what do you know about them, Monsieur?
Meddle with your Musketeers, and do not annoy me in this way.
It appears, according to your account, that if by mischance a Musketeer is arrested, France is in danger.
What a noise about a Musketeer!
I would arrest ten of them, _ventrebleu_, a hundred, even, all the company, and I would not allow a whisper.” “From the moment they are suspected by your Majesty,” said Tréville, “the Musketeers are guilty; therefore, you see me prepared to surrender my sword—for after having accused my soldiers, there can be no doubt that Monsieur the Cardinal will end by accusing me.
It is best to constitute myself at once a prisoner with Athos, who is already arrested, and with D’Artagnan, who most probably will be.” “Gascon-headed man, will you have done?” said the king.
“Sire,” replied Tréville, without lowering his voice in the least, “either order my Musketeer to be restored to me, or let him be tried.” “He shall be tried,” said the cardinal.
“Well, so much the better; for in that case I shall demand of his Majesty permission to plead for him.” The king feared an outbreak.
“If we release the prisoner thus, we shall never know the truth.” “Athos may always be found,” replied Tréville, “ready to answer, when it shall please the gownsmen to interrogate him.
He will not desert, Monsieur the Cardinal, be assured of that; I will answer for him.” “No, he will not desert,” said the king; “he can always be found, as Tréville says.
Besides,” added he, lowering his voice and looking with a suppliant air at the cardinal, “let us give them apparent security; that is policy.” This policy of Louis XIII. made Richelieu smile.
“Order it as you please, sire; you possess the right of pardon.” “The right of pardoning only applies to the guilty,” said Tréville, who was determined to have the last word, “and my Musketeer is innocent.
“Yes, sire, in solitary confinement, in a dungeon, like the lowest criminal.” “The devil!” murmured the king; “what must be done?” “Sign an order for his release, and all will be said,” replied the cardinal.
“I believe with your Majesty that Monsieur de Tréville’s guarantee is more than sufficient.” Tréville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixed with fear; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on the part of the cardinal to this sudden yielding.
As he was about to leave the presence, the cardinal gave him a friendly smile, and said, “A perfect harmony reigns, sire, between the leaders and the soldiers of your Musketeers, which must be profitable for the service and honorable to all.” “He will play me some dog’s trick or other, and that immediately,” said Tréville.
But let us be quick—the king may change his mind in an hour; and at all events it is more difficult to replace a man in the Fort l’Evêque or the Bastille who has got out, than to keep a prisoner there who is in.” M. de Tréville made his entrance triumphantly into the Fort l’Evêque, whence he delivered the Musketeer, whose peaceful indifference had not for a moment abandoned him.
The first time he saw D’Artagnan, “You have come off well,” said he to him; “there is your Jussac thrust paid for.
There still remains that of Bernajoux, but you must not be too confident.” As to the rest, M. de Tréville had good reason to mistrust the cardinal and to think that all was not over, for scarcely had the captain of the Musketeers closed the door after him, than his Eminence said to the king, “Now that we are at length by ourselves, we will, if your Majesty pleases, converse seriously.
Sire, Buckingham has been in Paris five days, and only left this morning.” Chapter XVI.
SÉGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THAN ONCE FOR THE BELL It is impossible to form an idea of the impression these few words made upon Louis XIII.
He grew pale and red alternately; and the cardinal saw at once that he had recovered by a single blow all the ground he had lost.
“Buckingham in Paris!” cried he, “and why does he come?” “To conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the Huguenots and the Spaniards.” “No, _pardieu_, no!
To conspire against my honor with Madame de Chevreuse, Madame de Longueville, and the Condés.” “Oh, sire, what an idea!
Madame de Lannoy, whom, according to your Majesty’s command, I have frequently interrogated, told me this morning that the night before last her Majesty sat up very late, that this morning she wept much, and that she was writing all day.” “That’s it!” cried the king; “to him, no doubt.
Cardinal, I must have the queen’s papers.” “But how to take them, sire?
It seems to me that it is neither your Majesty nor myself who can charge himself with such a mission.” “How did they act with regard to the Maréchale d’Ancre?” cried the king, in the highest state of choler; “first her closets were thoroughly searched, and then she herself.” “The Maréchale d’Ancre was no more than the Maréchale d’Ancre.
A Florentine adventurer, sire, and that was all; while the august spouse of your Majesty is Anne of Austria, Queen of France—that is to say, one of the greatest princesses in the world.” “She is not the less guilty, Monsieur Duke!
The more she has forgotten the high position in which she was placed, the more degrading is her fall.
Besides, I long ago determined to put an end to all these petty intrigues of policy and love.
She has near her a certain Laporte.” “Who, I believe, is the mainspring of all this, I confess,” said the cardinal.
“You think then, as I do, that she deceives me?” said the king.
“I believe, and I repeat it to your Majesty, that the queen conspires against the power of the king, but I have not said against his honor.” “And I—I tell you against both.
I tell you the queen does not love me; I tell you she loves another; I tell you she loves that infamous Buckingham!
Why did you not have him arrested while in Paris?” “Arrest the Duke!
Arrest the prime minister of King Charles I.!
No. 75.” “Where is that?” “By the side of the Luxembourg.” “And you are certain that the queen and he did not see each other?” “I believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty, sire.” “But they have corresponded; it is to him that the queen has been writing all the day.
Monsieur Duke, I must have those letters!” “Sire, notwithstanding—” “Monsieur Duke, at whatever price it may be, I will have them.” “I would, however, beg your Majesty to observe—” “Do you, then, also join in betraying me, Monsieur Cardinal, by thus always opposing my will?
Are you also in accord with Spain and England, with Madame de Chevreuse and the queen?” “Sire,” replied the cardinal, sighing, “I believed myself secure from such a suspicion.” “Monsieur Cardinal, you have heard me; I will have those letters.” “There is but one way.” “What is that?” “That would be to charge Monsieur de Séguier, the keeper of the seals, with this mission.
The matter enters completely into the duties of the post.” “Let him be sent for instantly.” “He is most likely at my hôtel.
I will go to the queen.” And Louis XIII., opening the door of communication, passed into the corridor which led from his apartments to those of Anne of Austria.
The queen was in the midst of her women—Mme. de Guitaut, Mme. de Sable, Mme. de Montbazon, and Mme. de Guémené.
In a corner was the Spanish companion, Donna Estafania, who had followed her from Madrid.
Guémené was reading aloud, and everybody was listening to her with attention with the exception of the queen, who had, on the contrary, desired this reading in order that she might be able, while feigning to listen, to pursue the thread of her own thoughts.
These thoughts, gilded as they were by a last reflection of love, were not the less sad.
Like those unfortunate persons endowed with a fatal gift, she brought misfortune upon everything she touched.
Her friendship was a fatal sign which called down persecution.
Mme. de Chevreuse and Mme. de Bernet were exiled, and Laporte did not conceal from his mistress that he expected to be arrested every instant.
It was at the moment when she was plunged in the deepest and darkest of these reflections that the door of the chamber opened, and the king entered.
The reader hushed herself instantly.
All the ladies rose, and there was a profound silence.
As to the king, he made no demonstration of politeness, only stopping before the queen.
“Madame,” said he, “you are about to receive a visit from the chancellor, who will communicate certain matters to you with which I have charged him.” The unfortunate queen, who was constantly threatened with divorce, exile, and trial even, turned pale under her rouge, and could not refrain from saying, “But why this visit, sire?
What can the chancellor have to say to me that your Majesty could not say yourself?” The king turned upon his heel without reply, and almost at the same instant the captain of the Guards, M. de Guitant, announced the visit of the chancellor.
When the chancellor appeared, the king had already gone out by another door.
The chancellor entered, half smiling, half blushing.
As we shall probably meet with him again in the course of our history, it may be well for our readers to be made at once acquainted with him.
This chancellor was a pleasant man.
He was Des Roches le Masle, canon of Notre Dame, who had formerly been valet of a bishop, who introduced him to his Eminence as a perfectly devout man.
The cardinal trusted him, and therein found his advantage.
After a wild youth, he had retired into a convent, there to expiate, at least for some time, the follies of adolescence.
On entering this holy place, the poor penitent was unable to shut the door so close as to prevent the passions he fled from entering with him.
He was incessantly attacked by them, and the superior, to whom he had confided this misfortune, wishing as much as in him lay to free him from them, had advised him, in order to conjure away the tempting demon, to have recourse to the bell rope, and ring with all his might.
At the denunciating sound, the monks would be rendered aware that temptation was besieging a brother, and all the community would go to prayers.
This advice appeared good to the future chancellor.
He conjured the evil spirit with abundance of prayers offered up by the monks.
But the devil does not suffer himself to be easily dispossessed from a place in which he has fixed his garrison.
In proportion as they redoubled the exorcisms he redoubled the temptations; so that day and night the bell was ringing full swing, announcing the extreme desire for mortification which the penitent experienced.
By day they did nothing but ascend and descend the steps which led to the chapel; at night, in addition to complines and matins, they were further obliged to leap twenty times out of their beds and prostrate themselves on the floor of their cells.
It is not known whether it was the devil who gave way, or the monks who grew tired; but within three months the penitent reappeared in the world with the reputation of being the most terrible _possessed_ that ever existed.
Truly, this is an indignity!” “Be kind enough to pardon me, madame; but in this circumstance I am but the instrument which the king employs.
Has not his Majesty just left you, and has he not himself asked you to prepare for this visit?” “Search, then, monsieur!
I am a criminal, as it appears.
Estafania, give up the keys of my drawers and my desks.” For form’s sake the chancellor paid a visit to the pieces of furniture named; but he well knew that it was not in a piece of furniture that the queen would place the important letter she had written that day.
When the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawers of the secretaries, it became necessary, whatever hesitation he might experience—it became necessary, I say, to come to the conclusion of the affair; that is to say, to search the queen herself.
The chancellor advanced, therefore, toward Anne of Austria, and said with a very perplexed and embarrassed air, “And now it remains for me to make the principal examination.” “What is that?” asked the queen, who did not understand, or rather was not willing to understand.
This letter is not in your table nor in your secretary; and yet this letter must be somewhere.” “Would you dare to lift your hand to your queen?” said Anne of Austria, drawing herself up to her full height, and fixing her eyes upon the chancellor with an expression almost threatening.
“I am a faithful subject of the king, madame, and all that his Majesty commands I shall do.” “Well, it is true!” said Anne of Austria; “and the spies of the cardinal have served him faithfully.
The letter is here.” And the queen laid her beautiful hand on her bosom.
“Then give me that letter, madame,” said the chancellor.
“I will give it to none but the king, monsieur,” said Anne.
“If the king had desired that the letter should be given to him, madame, he would have demanded it of you himself.
But I repeat to you, I am charged with reclaiming it; and if you do not give it up—” “Well?” “He has, then, charged me to take it from you.” “How!
What do you say?” “That my orders go far, madame; and that I am authorized to seek for the suspected paper, even on the person of your Majesty.” “What horror!” cried the queen.
“Be kind enough, then, madame, to act more compliantly.” “The conduct is infamously violent!
Do you know that, monsieur?” “The king commands it, madame; excuse me.” “I will not suffer it!
No, no, I would rather die!” cried the queen, in whom the imperious blood of Spain and Austria began to rise.
The chancellor made a profound reverence.
Then, with the intention quite patent of not drawing back a foot from the accomplishment of the commission with which he was charged, and as the attendant of an executioner might have done in the chamber of torture, he approached Anne of Austria, from whose eyes at the same instant sprang tears of rage.
The commission might well be called delicate; and the king had reached, in his jealousy of Buckingham, the point of not being jealous of anyone else.
Without doubt the chancellor Séguier looked about at that moment for the rope of the famous bell; but not finding it he summoned his resolution, and stretched forth his hands toward the place where the queen had acknowledged the paper was to be found.
Anne of Austria took one step backward, became so pale that it might be said she was dying, and leaning with her left hand upon a table behind her to keep herself from falling, she with her right hand drew the paper from her bosom and held it out to the keeper of the seals.
“There, monsieur, there is that letter!” cried the queen, with a broken and trembling voice; “take it, and deliver me from your odious presence.” The chancellor, who, on his part, trembled with an emotion easily to be conceived, took the letter, bowed to the ground, and retired.
The door was scarcely closed upon him, when the queen sank, half fainting, into the arms of her women.
The chancellor carried the letter to the king without having read a single word of it.
The king took it with a trembling hand, looked for the address, which was wanting, became very pale, opened it slowly, then seeing by the first words that it was addressed to the King of Spain, he read it rapidly.
It was nothing but a plan of attack against the cardinal.
The queen pressed her brother and the Emperor of Austria to appear to be wounded, as they really were, by the policy of Richelieu—the eternal object of which was the abasement of the house of Austria—to declare war against France, and as a condition of peace, to insist upon the dismissal of the cardinal; but as to love, there was not a single word about it in all the letter.
The king, quite delighted, inquired if the cardinal was still at the Louvre; he was told that his Eminence awaited the orders of his Majesty in the business cabinet.
The king went straight to him.
The whole intrigue is political, and there is not the least question of love in this letter; but, on the other hand, there is abundant question of you.” The cardinal took the letter, and read it with the greatest attention; then, when he had arrived at the end of it, he read it a second time.
In your place, in truth, sire, I should yield to such powerful instance; and on my part, it would be a real happiness to withdraw from public affairs.” “What say you, Duke?” “I say, sire, that my health is sinking under these excessive struggles and these never-ending labors.
You would be the happier for it at home, sire, and I do not doubt you would be the greater for it abroad.” “Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “I understand you.
Be satisfied, all who are named in that letter shall be punished as they deserve, even the queen herself.” “What do you say, sire?
God forbid that the queen should suffer the least inconvenience or uneasiness on my account!
She has always believed me, sire, to be her enemy; although your Majesty can bear witness that I have always taken her part warmly, even against you.
And even if she were to be seriously offended, I could well understand it; your Majesty has treated her with a severity—” “It is thus I will always treat my enemies and yours, Duke, however high they may be placed, and whatever peril I may incur in acting severely toward them.” “The queen is my enemy, but is not yours, sire; on the contrary, she is a devoted, submissive, and irreproachable wife.
Allow me, then, sire, to intercede for her with your Majesty.” “Let her humble herself, then, and come to me first.” “On the contrary, sire, set the example.
You have committed the first wrong, since it was you who suspected the queen.” “What!
I make the first advances?” said the king.
“Never!” “Sire, I entreat you to do so.” “Besides, in what manner can I make advances first?” “By doing a thing which you know will be agreeable to her.” “What is that?” “Give a ball; you know how much the queen loves dancing.
Clemency is a royal virtue; employ it, and you will find that you derive advantage therein.” Thereupon the cardinal, hearing the clock strike eleven, bowed low, asking permission of the king to retire, and supplicating him to come to a good understanding with the queen.
Anne of Austria, who, in consequence of the seizure of her letter, expected reproaches, was much astonished the next day to see the king make some attempts at reconciliation with her.
Her first movement was repellent.
Her womanly pride and her queenly dignity had both been so cruelly offended that she could not come round at the first advance; but, overpersuaded by the advice of her women, she at last had the appearance of beginning to forget.
The king took advantage of this favorable moment to tell her that he had the intention of shortly giving a fête.
A fête was so rare a thing for poor Anne of Austria that at this announcement, as the cardinal had predicted, the last trace of her resentment disappeared, if not from her heart, at least from her countenance.
She asked upon what day this fête would take place, but the king replied that he must consult the cardinal upon that head.
Indeed, every day the king asked the cardinal when this fête should take place; and every day the cardinal, under some pretext, deferred fixing it.
On the eighth day after the scene we have described, the cardinal received a letter with the London stamp which only contained these lines: “I have them; but I am unable to leave London for want of money.
Send me five hundred pistoles, and four or five days after I have received them I shall be in Paris.” On the same day the cardinal received this letter the king put his customary question to him.
Richelieu counted on his fingers, and said to himself, “She will arrive, she says, four or five days after having received the money.
It will require four or five days for the transmission of the money, four or five days for her to return; that makes ten days.
Now, allowing for contrary winds, accidents, and a woman’s weakness, there are twelve days.” “Well, Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “have you made your calculations?” “Yes, sire.
Today is the twentieth of September.
The aldermen of the city give a fête on the third of October.
That will fall in wonderfully well; you will not appear to have gone out of your way to please the queen.” Then the cardinal added, “_A propos_, sire, do not forget to tell her Majesty the evening before the fête that you should like to see how her diamond studs become her.” Chapter XVII.
BONACIEUX AT HOME It was the second time the cardinal had mentioned these diamond studs to the king.
Louis XIII. was struck with this insistence, and began to fancy that this recommendation concealed some mystery.
More than once the king had been humiliated by the cardinal, whose police, without having yet attained the perfection of the modern police, were excellent, being better informed than himself, even upon what was going on in his own household.
He hoped, then, in a conversation with Anne of Austria, to obtain some information from that conversation, and afterward to come upon his Eminence with some secret which the cardinal either knew or did not know, but which, in either case, would raise him infinitely in the eyes of his minister.
He went then to the queen, and according to custom accosted her with fresh menaces against those who surrounded her.
Anne of Austria lowered her head, allowed the torrent to flow on without replying, hoping that it would cease of itself; but this was not what Louis XIII. meant.
Louis XIII. wanted a discussion from which some light or other might break, convinced as he was that the cardinal had some afterthought and was preparing for him one of those terrible surprises which his Eminence was so skillful in getting up.
He arrived at this end by his persistence in accusation.
Let me know what crime I have committed.
It is impossible that your Majesty can make all this ado about a letter written to my brother.” The king, attacked in a manner so direct, did not know what to answer; and he thought that this was the moment for expressing the desire which he was not going to have made until the evening before the fête.
I wish, in order to honor our worthy aldermen, you should appear in ceremonial costume, and above all, ornamented with the diamond studs which I gave you on your birthday.
That is my answer.” The answer was terrible.
Anne of Austria believed that Louis XIII. knew all, and that the cardinal had persuaded him to employ this long dissimulation of seven or eight days, which, likewise, was characteristic.
She became excessively pale, leaned her beautiful hand upon a _console_, which hand appeared then like one of wax, and looking at the king with terror in her eyes, she was unable to reply by a single syllable.
“You hear, madame,” said the king, who enjoyed the embarrassment to its full extent, but without guessing the cause.
“You hear, madame?” “Yes, sire, I hear,” stammered the queen.
“You will appear at this ball?” “Yes.” “With those studs?” “Yes.” The queen’s paleness, if possible, increased; the king perceived it, and enjoyed it with that cold cruelty which was one of the worst sides of his character.
Louis XIII. felt instinctively that he ought not to reply to this question, the queen having put it in an almost dying voice.
“Oh, very shortly, madame,” said he; “but I do not precisely recollect the date of the day.
I will ask the cardinal.” “It was the cardinal, then, who informed you of this fête?” “Yes, madame,” replied the astonished king; “but why do you ask that?” “It was he who told you to invite me to appear with these studs?” “That is to say, madame—” “It was he, sire, it was he!” “Well, and what does it signify whether it was he or I?
Is there any crime in this request?” “No, sire.” “Then you will appear?” “Yes, sire.” “That is well,” said the king, retiring, “that is well; I count upon it.” The queen made a curtsy, less from etiquette than because her knees were sinking under her.
The king went away enchanted.
“I am lost,” murmured the queen, “lost!—for the cardinal knows all, and it is he who urges on the king, who as yet knows nothing but will soon know everything.
My God, my God, my God!” She knelt upon a cushion and prayed, with her head buried between her palpitating arms.
In fact, her position was terrible.
Buckingham had returned to London; Mme. de Chevreuse was at Tours.
More closely watched than ever, the queen felt certain, without knowing how to tell which, that one of her women had betrayed her.
Thus, while contemplating the misfortune which threatened her and the abandonment in which she was left, she broke out into sobs and tears.
“Can I be of service to your Majesty?” said all at once a voice full of sweetness and pity.
The queen turned sharply round, for there could be no deception in the expression of that voice; it was a friend who spoke thus.
In fact, at one of the doors which opened into the queen’s apartment appeared the pretty Mme.
She had been engaged in arranging the dresses and linen in a closet when the king entered; she could not get out and had heard all.
The queen uttered a piercing cry at finding herself surprised—for in her trouble she did not at first recognize the young woman who had been given to her by Laporte.
“Oh, fear nothing, madame!” said the young woman, clasping her hands and weeping herself at the queen’s sorrows; “I am your Majesty’s, body and soul, and however far I may be from you, however inferior may be my position, I believe I have discovered a means of extricating your Majesty from your trouble.” “You, oh, heaven, you!” cried the queen; “but look me in the face.
I am betrayed on all sides.
Can I trust in you?” “Oh, madame!” cried the young woman, falling on her knees; “upon my soul, I am ready to die for your Majesty!” This expression sprang from the very bottom of the heart, and, like the first, there was no mistaking it.
“Yes,” continued Mme.
Bonacieux, “yes, there are traitors here; but by the holy name of the Virgin, I swear that no one is more devoted to your Majesty than I am.
Those studs which the king speaks of, you gave them to the Duke of Buckingham, did you not?
Those studs were enclosed in a little rosewood box which he held under his arm?
Is it not so, madame?” “Oh, my God, my God!” murmured the queen, whose teeth chattered with fright.
“Well, those studs,” continued Mme.
Bonacieux, “we must have them back again.” “Yes, without doubt, it is necessary,” cried the queen; “but how am I to act?
How can it be effected?” “Someone must be sent to the duke.” “But who, who?
In whom can I trust?” “Place confidence in me, madame; do me that honor, my queen, and I will find a messenger.” “But I must write.” “Oh, yes; that is indispensable.
Two words from the hand of your Majesty and your private seal.” “But these two words would bring about my condemnation, divorce, exile!” “Yes, if they fell into infamous hands.
But I will answer for these two words being delivered to their address.” “Oh, my God!
I must then place my life, my honor, my reputation, in your hands?” “Yes, yes, madame, you must; and I will save them all.” “But how?
He is a worthy, honest man who entertains neither love nor hatred for anybody.
He will do anything I wish.
He will set out upon receiving an order from me, without knowing what he carries, and he will carry your Majesty’s letter, without even knowing it is from your Majesty, to the address which is on it.” The queen took the two hands of the young woman with a burst of emotion, gazed at her as if to read her very heart, and, seeing nothing but sincerity in her beautiful eyes, embraced her tenderly.
“Do that,” cried she, “and you will have saved my life, you will have saved my honor!” “Do not exaggerate the service I have the happiness to render your Majesty.
I have nothing to save for your Majesty; you are only the victim of perfidious plots.” “That is true, that is true, my child,” said the queen, “you are right.” “Give me then, that letter, madame; time presses.” The queen ran to a little table, on which were ink, paper, and pens.
“And now,” said the queen, “we are forgetting one very necessary thing.” “What is that, madame?” “Money.” Mme.
Is that what you would say?” “He has some, but he is very avaricious; that is his fault.
Nevertheless, let not your Majesty be uneasy, we will find means.” “And I have none, either,” said the queen.
Those who have read the _Memoirs_ of Mme. de Motteville will not be astonished at this reply.
Take this ring; raise money with it, and let your husband set out.” “In an hour you shall be obeyed.” “You see the address,” said the queen, speaking so low that Mme.
Bonacieux could hardly hear what she said, “To my Lord Duke of Buckingham, London.” “The letter shall be given to himself.” “Generous girl!” cried Anne of Austria.
Bonacieux kissed the hands of the queen, concealed the paper in the bosom of her dress, and disappeared with the lightness of a bird.
Ten minutes afterward she was at home.
Bonacieux alone; the poor man was recovering with difficulty the order in his house, in which he had found most of the furniture broken and the closets nearly emptied—justice not being one of the three things which King Solomon names as leaving no traces of their passage.
Terror had had such an effect upon the poor girl that she had never ceased walking from Paris till she reached Burgundy, her native place.
The worthy mercer had, immediately upon re-entering his house, informed his wife of his happy return, and his wife had replied by congratulating him, and telling him that the first moment she could steal from her duties should be devoted to paying him a visit.
This first moment had been delayed five days, which, under any other circumstances, might have appeared rather long to M.
Bonacieux; but he had, in the visit he had made to the cardinal and in the visits Rochefort had made him, ample subjects for reflection, and as everybody knows, nothing makes time pass more quickly than reflection.
This was the more so because Bonacieux’s reflections were all rose-colored.
Rochefort called him his friend, his dear Bonacieux, and never ceased telling him that the cardinal had a great respect for him.
Bonacieux had also reflected; but, it must be admitted, upon something widely different from ambition.
In spite of herself her thoughts constantly reverted to that handsome young man who was so brave and appeared to be so much in love.
Married at eighteen to M.
Bonacieux, having always lived among her husband’s friends—people little capable of inspiring any sentiment whatever in a young woman whose heart was above her position—Mme.
Bonacieux had remained insensible to vulgar seductions; but at this period the title of gentleman had great influence with the citizen class, and D’Artagnan was a gentleman.
Besides, he wore the uniform of the Guards, which, next to that of the Musketeers, was most admired by the ladies.
He was, we repeat, handsome, young, and bold; he spoke of love like a man who did love and was anxious to be loved in return.
There was certainly enough in all this to turn a head only twenty-three years old, and Mme.
Bonacieux had just attained that happy period of life.
The couple, then, although they had not seen each other for eight days, and during that time serious events had taken place in which both were concerned, accosted each other with a degree of preoccupation.
Nevertheless, Bonacieux manifested real joy, and advanced toward his wife with open arms.
Madame Bonacieux presented her cheek to him.
“How!” said Bonacieux, astonished.
“Yes, I have something of the highest importance to tell you.” “True,” said he, “and I have some questions sufficiently serious to put to you.
Describe to me your abduction, I pray you.” “Oh, that’s of no consequence just now,” said Mme.
“Do you know that I was plunged during a day and night in a dungeon of the Bastille?” “Oh, a day and night soon pass away.
Is it not the desire of seeing a husband again from whom you have been separated for a week?” asked the mercer, piqued to the quick.
There is good and holy action to be performed, monsieur, and much money to be gained at the same time.” Mme.
Bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband, she took him on his weak side.
But a man, were he even a mercer, when he had talked for ten minutes with Cardinal Richelieu, is no longer the same man.
“Much money to be gained?” said Bonacieux, protruding his lip.
“Yes, much.” “About how much?” “A thousand pistoles, perhaps.” “What you demand of me is serious, then?” “It is indeed.” “What must be done?” “You must go away immediately.
I have no business in London.” “But others wish that you should go there.” “But who are those others?
I warn you that I will never again work in the dark, and that I will know not only to what I expose myself, but for whom I expose myself.” “An illustrious person sends you; an illustrious person awaits you.
The recompense will exceed your expectations; that is all I promise you.” “More intrigues!
Nothing but intrigues!
Thank you, madame, I am aware of them now; Monsieur Cardinal has enlightened me on that head.” “The cardinal?” cried Mme.
“Have you seen the cardinal?” “He sent for me,” answered the mercer, proudly.
“And you responded to his bidding, you imprudent man?” “Well, I can’t say I had much choice of going or not going, for I was taken to him between two guards.
It is true also, that as I did not then know his Eminence, if I had been able to dispense with the visit, I should have been enchanted.” “He ill-treated you, then; he threatened you?” “He gave me his hand, and called me his friend.
I am the friend of the great cardinal!” “Of the great cardinal!” “Perhaps you would contest his right to that title, madame?” “I would contest nothing; but I tell you that the favor of a minister is ephemeral, and that a man must be mad to attach himself to a minister.
Nevertheless, knowing the weakness of her husband, and more particularly his cupidity, she did not despair of bringing him round to her purpose.
“Ah, you are a cardinalist, then, monsieur, are you?” cried she; “and you serve the party of those who maltreat your wife and insult your queen?” “Private interests are as nothing before the interests of all.
I am for those who save the state,” said Bonacieux, emphatically.
Bonacieux, shrugging her shoulders.
“Be satisfied with being a plain, straightforward citizen, and turn to that side which offers the most advantages.” “Eh, eh!” said Bonacieux, slapping a plump, round bag, which returned of sound a money; “what do you think of this, Madame Preacher?” “Whence comes that money?” “You do not guess?” “From the cardinal?” “From him, and from my friend the Comte de Rochefort.” “The Comte de Rochefort!
Bonacieux, who saw she was regaining some little influence over her husband.
“You meddle with politics, do you—and still more, with cardinalist politics?
Why, you sell yourself, body and soul, to the demon, the devil, for money!” “No, to the cardinal.” “It’s the same thing,” cried the young woman.
“Who calls Richelieu calls Satan.” “Hold your tongue, hold your tongue, madame!
You may be overheard.” “Yes, you are right; I should be ashamed for anyone to know your baseness.” “But what do you require of me, then?
You must depart instantly, monsieur.
You must accomplish loyally the commission with which I deign to charge you, and on that condition I pardon everything, I forget everything; and what is more,” and she held out her hand to him, “I restore my love.” Bonacieux was cowardly and avaricious, but he loved his wife.
Bonacieux saw that he hesitated.
London is far from Paris, very far, and perhaps the commission with which you charge me is not without dangers?” “What matters it, if you avoid them?” “Hold, Madame Bonacieux,” said the mercer, “hold!
I positively refuse; intrigues terrify me.
I have seen the Bastille.
That’s a frightful place, that Bastille!
They threatened me with torture.
No, positively I will not go.
And, _morbleu_, why do you not go yourself?
For in truth, I think I have hitherto been deceived in you.
I really believe you are a man, and a violent one, too.” “And you, you are a woman—a miserable woman, stupid and brutal.
Well, if you do not go this very instant, I will have you arrested by the queen’s orders, and I will have you placed in the Bastille which you dread so much.” Bonacieux fell into a profound reflection.
He weighed the two angers in his brain—that of the cardinal and that of the queen; that of the cardinal predominated enormously.
“Have me arrested on the part of the queen,” said he, “and I—I will appeal to his Eminence.” At once Mme.
Bonacieux saw that she had gone too far, and she was terrified at having communicated so much.
She for a moment contemplated with fright that stupid countenance, impressed with the invincible resolution of a fool that is overcome by fear.
“Perhaps, when all is considered, you are right.
In the long run, a man knows more about politics than a woman, particularly such as, like you, Monsieur Bonacieux, have conversed with the cardinal.
And yet it is very hard,” added she, “that a man upon whose affection I thought I might depend, treats me thus unkindly and will not comply with any of my fancies.” “That is because your fancies go too far,” replied the triumphant Bonacieux, “and I mistrust them.” “Well, I will give it up, then,” said the young woman, sighing.
“It is well as it is; say no more about it.” “At least you should tell me what I should have to do in London,” replied Bonacieux, who remembered a little too late that Rochefort had desired him to endeavor to obtain his wife’s secrets.
“It is of no use for you to know anything about it,” said the young woman, whom an instinctive mistrust now impelled to draw back.
“It was about one of those purchases that interest women—a purchase by which much might have been gained.” But the more the young woman excused herself, the more important Bonacieux thought the secret which she declined to confide to him.
He resolved then to hasten immediately to the residence of the Comte de Rochefort, and tell him that the queen was seeking for a messenger to send to London.
“Pardon me for quitting you, my dear Madame Bonacieux,” said he; “but, not knowing you would come to see me, I had made an engagement with a friend.
I shall soon return; and if you will wait only a few minutes for me, as soon as I have concluded my business with that friend, as it is growing late, I will come back and reconduct you to the Louvre.” “Thank you, monsieur, you are not brave enough to be of any use to me whatever,” replied Mme.
“I shall return very safely to the Louvre all alone.” “As you please, Madame Bonacieux,” said the ex-mercer.
“Shall I see you again soon?” “Next week I hope my duties will afford me a little liberty, and I will take advantage of it to come and put things in order here, as they must necessarily be much deranged.” “Very well; I shall expect you.
You are not angry with me?” “Not the least in the world.” “Till then, then?” “Till then.” Bonacieux kissed his wife’s hand, and set off at a quick pace.
Bonacieux, when her husband had shut the street door and she found herself alone; “that imbecile lacked but one thing: to become a cardinalist.
And I, who have answered for him to the queen—I, who have promised my poor mistress—ah, my God, my God!
She will take me for one of those wretches with whom the palace swarms and who are placed about her as spies!
Ah, Monsieur Bonacieux, I never did love you much, but now it is worse than ever.
I hate you, and on my word you shall pay for this!” At the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made her raise her head, and a voice which reached her through the ceiling cried, “Dear Madame Bonacieux, open for me the little door on the alley, and I will come down to you.” Chapter XVIII.
LOVER AND HUSBAND Ah, Madame,” said D’Artagnan, entering by the door which the young woman opened for him, “allow me to tell you that you have a bad sort of a husband.” “You have, then, overheard our conversation?” asked Mme.
Bonacieux, eagerly, and looking at D’Artagnan with disquiet.
“The whole.” “But how, my God?” “By a mode of proceeding known to myself, and by which I likewise overheard the more animated conversation which he had with the cardinal’s police.” “And what did you understand by what we said?” “A thousand things.
In the first place, that, unfortunately, your husband is a simpleton and a fool; in the next place, you are in trouble, of which I am very glad, as it gives me an opportunity of placing myself at your service, and God knows I am ready to throw myself into the fire for you; finally, that the queen wants a brave, intelligent, devoted man to make a journey to London for her.
I have at least two of the three qualities you stand in need of, and here I am.” Mme.
Bonacieux made no reply; but her heart beat with joy and secret hope shone in her eyes.
“And what guarantee will you give me,” asked she, “if I consent to confide this message to you?” “My love for you.
What is to be done?” “My God, my God!” murmured the young woman, “ought I to confide such a secret to you, monsieur?
You are almost a boy.” “I see that you require someone to answer for me?” “I admit that would reassure me greatly.” “Do you know Athos?” “No.” “Porthos?” “No.” “Aramis?” “No.
Who are these gentleman?” “Three of the king’s Musketeers.
Do you know Monsieur de Tréville, their captain?” “Oh, yes, him!
“As one confides a letter to the hollow of a tree, to the wing of a pigeon, to the collar of a dog.” “And yet, me—you see plainly that I love you.” “You say so.” “I am an honorable man.” “You say so.” “I am a gallant fellow.” “I believe it.” “I am brave.” “Oh, I am sure of that!” “Then, put me to the proof.” Mme.
Bonacieux looked at the young man, restrained for a minute by a last hesitation; but there was such an ardor in his eyes, such persuasion in his voice, that she felt herself constrained to confide in him.
Besides, she found herself in circumstances where everything must be risked for the sake of everything.
The queen might be as much injured by too much reticence as by too much confidence; and—let us admit it—the involuntary sentiment which she felt for her young protector decided her to speak.
“Listen,” said she; “I yield to your protestations, I yield to your assurances.
This was their mutual declaration of love.
D’Artagnan was radiant with joy and pride.
This secret which he possessed, this woman whom he loved!
Confidence and love made him a giant.
Bonacieux; “and your regiment, your captain?” “By my soul, you had made me forget all that, dear Constance!
Yes, you are right; a furlough is needful.” “Still another obstacle,” murmured Mme.
Bonacieux, sorrowfully.
“As to that,” cried D’Artagnan, after a moment of reflection, “I shall surmount it, be assured.” “How so?” “I will go this very evening to Tréville, whom I will request to ask this favor for me of his brother-in-law, Monsieur Dessessart.” “But another thing.” “What?” asked D’Artagnan, seeing that Mme.
Bonacieux hesitated to continue.
“You have, perhaps, no money?” “_Perhaps_ is too much,” said D’Artagnan, smiling.
Bonacieux, opening a cupboard and taking from it the very bag which a half hour before her husband had caressed so affectionately, “take this bag.” “The cardinal’s?” cried D’Artagnan, breaking into a loud laugh, he having heard, as may be remembered, thanks to the broken boards, every syllable of the conversation between the mercer and his wife.
“The cardinal’s,” replied Mme.
“You see it makes a very respectable appearance.” “_Pardieu_,” cried D’Artagnan, “it will be a double amusing affair to save the queen with the cardinal’s money!” “You are an amiable and charming young man,” said Mme.
“Be assured you will not find her Majesty ungrateful.” “Oh, I am already grandly recompensed!” cried D’Artagnan.
“I love you; you permit me to tell you that I do—that is already more happiness than I dared to hope.” “Silence!” said Mme.
Bonacieux, starting.
Yes, I recognize it!” D’Artagnan ran to the door and pushed the bolt.
And the disappearance of his money; how am I to justify it if I am here?” “You are right; we must go out.” “Go out?
Bonacieux, “you speak that in a tone that frightens me!” Mme.
Bonacieux pronounced these words with tears in her eyes.
D’Artagnan saw those tears, and much disturbed, softened, he threw himself at her feet.
“With me you will be as safe as in a temple; I give you my word of a gentleman.” “Let us go,” said she, “I place full confidence in you, my friend!” D’Artagnan drew back the bolt with precaution, and both, light as shadows, glided through the interior door into the passage, ascended the stairs as quietly as possible, and entered D’Artagnan’s chambers.
Once there, for greater security, the young man barricaded the door.
They both approached the window, and through a slit in the shutter they saw Bonacieux talking with a man in a cloak.
At sight of this man, D’Artagnan started, and half drawing his sword, sprang toward the door.
Bonacieux; “you will ruin us all!” “But I have sworn to kill that man!” said D’Artagnan.
In the name of the queen I forbid you to throw yourself into any peril which is foreign to that of your journey.” “And do you command nothing in your own name?” “In my name,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, with great emotion, “in my name I beg you!
But listen; they appear to be speaking of me.” D’Artagnan drew near the window, and lent his ear.
Bonacieux had opened his door, and seeing the apartment, had returned to the man in the cloak, whom he had left alone for an instant.
Go.” “I will ask his servant.” Bonacieux re-entered the house, passed through the same door that had afforded a passage for the two fugitives, went up to D’Artagnan’s door, and knocked.
Porthos, in order to make a greater display, had that evening borrowed Planchet.
As to D’Artagnan, he took care not to give the least sign of existence.
The moment the hand of Bonacieux sounded on the door, the two young people felt their hearts bound within them.
“There is nobody within,” said Bonacieux.
Let us return to your apartment.
We shall be safer there than in the doorway.” “Ah, my God!” whispered Mme.
Bonacieux, “we shall hear no more.” “On the contrary,” said D’Artagnan, “we shall hear better.” D’Artagnan raised the three or four boards which made his chamber another ear of Dionysius, spread a carpet on the floor, went upon his knees, and made a sign to Mme.
Bonacieux to stoop as he did toward the opening.
“You are sure there is nobody there?” said the stranger.
“I will answer for it,” said Bonacieux.
“Silence!” said D’Artagnan, taking her hand, which, without thinking of it, she abandoned to him.
“Never mind,” continued the man in the cloak; “you were a fool not to have pretended to accept the mission.
You would then be in present possession of the letter.
The state, which is now threatened, would be safe, and you—” “And I?” “Well you—the cardinal would have given you letters of nobility.” “Did he tell you so?” “Yes, I know that he meant to afford you that agreeable surprise.” “Be satisfied,” replied Bonacieux; “my wife adores me, and there is yet time.” “The ninny!” murmured Mme.
“Silence!” said D’Artagnan, pressing her hand more closely.
Bonacieux; I say that I have reflected; I renew the affair; I obtain the letter, and I run directly to the cardinal.” “Well, go quickly!
I will return soon to learn the result of your trip.” The stranger went out.
“Infamous!” said Mme.
Bonacieux, addressing this epithet to her husband.
“Silence!” said D’Artagnan, pressing her hand still more warmly.
A terrible howling interrupted these reflections of D’Artagnan and Mme.
It was her husband, who had discovered the disappearance of the moneybag, and was crying “Thieves!” “Oh, my God!” cried Mme.
Bonacieux, “he will rouse the whole quarter.” Bonacieux called a long time; but as such cries, on account of their frequency, brought nobody in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and as lately the mercer’s house had a bad name, finding that nobody came, he went out continuing to call, his voice being heard fainter and fainter as he went in the direction of the Rue du Bac.
“Courage, my friend, but above all, prudence, and think what you owe to the queen.” “To her and to you!” cried D’Artagnan.
“Be satisfied, beautiful Constance.
I shall become worthy of her gratitude; but shall I likewise return worthy of your love?” The young woman only replied by the beautiful glow which mounted to her cheeks.
A few seconds afterward D’Artagnan also went out enveloped in a large cloak, which ill-concealed the sheath of a long sword.
Bonacieux followed him with her eyes, with that long, fond look with which he had turned the angle of the street, she fell on her knees, and clasping her hands, “Oh, my God,” cried she, “protect the queen, protect me!” Chapter XIX.
PLAN OF CAMPAIGN D’Artagnan went straight to M. de Tréville’s.
He had reflected that in a few minutes the cardinal would be warned by this cursed stranger, who appeared to be his agent, and he judged, with reason, he had not a moment to lose.
The heart of the young man overflowed with joy.
An opportunity presented itself to him in which there would be at the same time glory to be acquired, and money to be gained; and as a far higher encouragement, it brought him into close intimacy with a woman he adored.
This chance did, then, for him at once more than he would have dared to ask of Providence.
M. de Tréville was in his saloon with his habitual court of gentlemen.
D’Artagnan, who was known as a familiar of the house, went straight to his office, and sent word that he wished to see him on something of importance.
D’Artagnan had been there scarcely five minutes when M. de Tréville entered.
At the first glance, and by the joy which was painted on his countenance, the worthy captain plainly perceived that something new was on foot.
All the way along D’Artagnan had been consulting with himself whether he should place confidence in M. de Tréville, or whether he should only ask him to give him _carte blanche_ for some secret affair.
But M. de Tréville had always been so thoroughly his friend, had always been so devoted to the king and queen, and hated the cardinal so cordially, that the young man resolved to tell him everything.
I tell you so, by the faith of de Tréville.” “How so?” “You will be assassinated.” “And I shall die in the performance of my duty.” “But your mission will not be accomplished.” “That is true,” replied D’Artagnan.
Besides, you can tell them that you have full confidence in me, and they will not be more incredulous than you.” “I can send to each of them leave of absence for fifteen days, that is all—to Athos, whose wound still makes him suffer, to go to the waters of Forges; to Porthos and Aramis to accompany their friend, whom they are not willing to abandon in such a painful condition.
Sending their leave of absence will be proof enough that I authorize their journey.” “Thanks, monsieur.
You are a hundred times too good.” “Begone, then, find them instantly, and let all be done tonight!
But first write your request to Dessessart.
Perhaps you had a spy at your heels; and your visit, if it should ever be known to the cardinal, will thus seem legitimate.” D’Artagnan drew up his request, and M. de Tréville, on receiving it, assured him that by two o’clock in the morning the four leaves of absence should be at the respective domiciles of the travelers.
“Have the goodness to send mine to Athos’s residence.
I should dread some disagreeable encounter if I were to go home.” “Be easy.
Adieu, and a prosperous voyage. _A propos_,” said M. de Tréville, calling him back.
D’Artagnan returned.
“Have you any money?” D’Artagnan tapped the bag he had in his pocket.
“Three hundred pistoles.” “Oh, plenty!
Begone, then!” D’Artagnan saluted M. de Tréville, who held out his hand to him; D’Artagnan pressed it with a respect mixed with gratitude.
Since his first arrival at Paris, he had had constant occasion to honor this excellent man, whom he had always found worthy, loyal, and great.
His first visit was to Aramis, at whose residence he had not been since the famous evening on which he had followed Mme.
Still further, he had seldom seen the young Musketeer; but every time he had seen him, he had remarked a deep sadness imprinted on his countenance.
This evening, especially, Aramis was melancholy and thoughtful.
D’Artagnan asked some questions about this prolonged melancholy.
Aramis pleaded as his excuse a commentary upon the eighteenth chapter of St.
Augustine, which he was forced to write in Latin for the following week, and which preoccupied him a good deal.
After the two friends had been chatting a few moments, a servant from M. de Tréville entered, bringing a sealed packet.
“The leave of absence Monsieur has asked for,” replied the lackey.
I have asked for no leave of absence.” “Hold your tongue and take it!” said D’Artagnan.
“And you, my friend, there is a demipistole for your trouble; you will tell Monsieur de Tréville that Monsieur Aramis is very much obliged to him.
Go.” The lackey bowed to the ground and departed.
“Pack up all you want for a journey of a fortnight, and follow me.” “But I cannot leave Paris just now without knowing—” Aramis stopped.
I suppose you mean—” continued D’Artagnan.
“The woman who was here—the woman with the embroidered handkerchief.” “Who told you there was a woman here?” replied Aramis, becoming as pale as death.
“Since you appear to know so many things, can you tell me what is become of that woman?” “I presume that she has returned to Tours.” “To Tours?
You evidently know her.
But why did she return to Tours without telling me anything?” “Because she was in fear of being arrested.” “Why has she not written to me, then?” “Because she was afraid of compromising you.” “D’Artagnan, you restore me to life!” cried Aramis.
“I fancied myself despised, betrayed.
I was so delighted to see her again!
I could not have believed she would risk her liberty for me, and yet for what other cause could she have returned to Paris?” “For the cause which today takes us to England.” “And what is this cause?” demanded Aramis.
“Oh, you’ll know it someday, Aramis; but at present I must imitate the discretion of ‘the doctor’s niece.’” Aramis smiled, as he remembered the tale he had told his friends on a certain evening.
“Well, then, since she has left Paris, and you are sure of it, D’Artagnan, nothing prevents me, and I am ready to follow you.
At all events, it is best that he should follow us to Athos’s.” Aramis called Bazin, and, after having ordered him to join them at Athos’s residence, said “Let us go then,” at the same time taking his cloak, sword, and three pistols, opening uselessly two or three drawers to see if he could not find stray coin.
When well assured this search was superfluous, he followed D’Artagnan, wondering to himself how this young Guardsman should know so well who the lady was to whom he had given hospitality, and that he should know better than himself what had become of her.
Only as they went out Aramis placed his hand upon the arm of D’Artagnan, and looking at him earnestly, “You have not spoken of this lady?” said he.
“To nobody in the world.” “Not even to Athos or Porthos?” “I have not breathed a syllable to them.” “Good enough!” Tranquil on this important point, Aramis continued his way with D’Artagnan, and both soon arrived at Athos’s dwelling.
“Can you explain to me what signify this leave of absence and this letter, which I have just received?” said the astonished Athos.
MY DEAR ATHOS, I wish, as your health absolutely requires it, that you should rest for a fortnight.
Go, then, and take the waters of Forges, or any that may be more agreeable to you, and recuperate yourself as quickly as possible.
Yours affectionate, DE TRÉVILLE “Well, this leave of absence and that letter mean that you must follow me, Athos.” “To the waters of Forges?” “There or elsewhere.” “In the king’s service?” “Either the king’s or the queen’s.
Are we not their Majesties’ servants?” At that moment Porthos entered.
Since when, I wonder, in the Musketeers, did they grant men leave of absence without their asking for it?” “Since,” said D’Artagnan, “they have friends who ask it for them.” “Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “it appears there’s something fresh here.” “Yes, we are going—” said Aramis.
“To what country?” demanded Porthos.
“Ask D’Artagnan.” “To London, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan.
“To London!” cried Porthos; “and what the devil are we going to do in London?” “That is what I am not at liberty to tell you, gentlemen; you must trust to me.” “But in order to go to London,” added Porthos, “money is needed, and I have none.” “Nor I,” said Aramis.
“I have,” replied D’Artagnan, pulling out his treasure from his pocket, and placing it on the table.
“There are in this bag three hundred pistoles.
Besides, make yourselves easy; we shall not all arrive at London.” “Why so?” “Because, in all probability, some one of us will be left on the road.” “Is this, then, a campaign upon which we are now entering?” “One of a most dangerous kind, I give you notice.” “Ah!
“And yet,” said Aramis, “I am somewhat of Porthos’s opinion.” “Is the king accustomed to give you such reasons?
He says to you jauntily, ‘Gentlemen, there is fighting going on in Gascony or in Flanders; go and fight,’ and you go there.
You need give yourselves no more uneasiness about this.” “D’Artagnan is right,” said Athos; “here are our three leaves of absence which came from Monsieur de Tréville, and here are three hundred pistoles which came from I don’t know where.
Is life worth the trouble of so many questions?
D’Artagnan, I am ready to follow you.” “And I also,” said Porthos.
“And, indeed, I am not sorry to quit Paris; I had need of distraction.” “Well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured,” said D’Artagnan.
“Immediately,” replied D’Artagnan; “we have not a minute to lose.” “Hello, Grimaud!
Bazin!” cried the four young men, calling their lackeys, “clean my boots, and fetch the horses from the hôtel.” Each Musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hôtel, as at a barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey.
Planchet, Grimaud, Mousqueton, and Bazin set off at full speed.
“Now let us lay down the plan of campaign,” said Porthos.
“Where do we go first?” “To Calais,” said D’Artagnan; “that is the most direct line to London.” “Well,” said Porthos, “this is my advice—” “Speak!” “Four men traveling together would be suspected.
D’Artagnan will give each of us his instructions.
A secret may, by chance, be betrayed by gentlemen; but it is almost always sold by lackeys.” “Porthos’s plan appears to me to be impracticable,” said D’Artagnan, “inasmuch as I am myself ignorant of what instructions I can give you.
This letter is here, in this pocket,” and he pointed to the pocket which contained the letter.
“If I should be killed, one of you must take it, and continue the route; if he be killed, it will be another’s turn, and so on—provided a single one arrives, that is all that is required.” “Bravo, D’Artagnan, your opinion is mine,” cried Athos, “Besides, we must be consistent; I am going to take the waters, you will accompany me.
If anyone wishes to stop us, I will show Monsieur de Tréville’s letter, and you will show your leaves of absence.
If we are attacked, we will defend ourselves; if we are tried, we will stoutly maintain that we were only anxious to dip ourselves a certain number of times in the sea.
They would have an easy bargain of four isolated men; whereas four men together make a troop.
We will arm our four lackeys with pistols and musketoons; if they send an army out against us, we will give battle, and the survivor, as D’Artagnan says, will carry the letter.” “Well said,” cried Aramis; “you don’t often speak, Athos, but when you do speak, it is like St.
And you, Porthos?” “I agree to it, too,” said Porthos, “if D’Artagnan approves of it.
D’Artagnan, being the bearer of the letter, is naturally the head of the enterprise; let him decide, and we will execute.” “Well,” said D’Artagnan, “I decide that we should adopt Athos’s plan, and that we set off in half an hour.” “Agreed!” shouted the three Musketeers in chorus.
Each one, stretching out his hand to the bag, took his seventy-five pistoles, and made his preparations to set out at the time appointed.
THE JOURNEY At two o’clock in the morning, our four adventurers left Paris by the Barrière St.
As long as it was dark they remained silent; in spite of themselves they submitted to the influence of the obscurity, and apprehended ambushes on every side.
With the first rays of day their tongues were loosened; with the sun gaiety revived.
Besides, the appearance of the caravan was formidable.
The black horses of the Musketeers, their martial carriage, with the regimental step of these noble companions of the soldier, would have betrayed the most strict incognito.
The lackeys followed, armed to the teeth.
All went well till they arrived at Chantilly, which they reached about eight o’clock in the morning.
They needed breakfast, and alighted at the door of an _auberge_, recommended by a sign representing St.
They ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle the horses, and to hold themselves in readiness to set off again immediately.
They entered the common hall, and placed themselves at table.
A gentleman, who had just arrived by the route of Dammartin, was seated at the same table, and was breakfasting.
He opened the conversation about rain and fine weather; the travelers replied.
He drank to their good health, and the travelers returned his politeness.
But at the moment Mousqueton came to announce that the horses were ready, and they were arising from table, the stranger proposed to Porthos to drink the health of the cardinal.
Porthos replied that he asked no better if the stranger, in his turn, would drink the health of the king.
The stranger cried that he acknowledged no other king but his Eminence.
Porthos called him drunk, and the stranger drew his sword.
“You have committed a piece of folly,” said Athos, “but it can’t be helped; there is no drawing back.
Kill the fellow, and rejoin us as soon as you can.” All three remounted their horses, and set out at a good pace, while Porthos was promising his adversary to perforate him with all the thrusts known in the fencing schools.
“Because, as Porthos was talking louder than the rest of us, he took him for the chief,” said D’Artagnan.
“I always said that this cadet from Gascony was a well of wisdom,” murmured Athos; and the travelers continued their route.
At Beauvais they stopped two hours, as well to breathe their horses a little as to wait for Porthos.
At a league from Beauvais, where the road was confined between two high banks, they fell in with eight or ten men who, taking advantage of the road being unpaved in this spot, appeared to be employed in digging holes and filling up the ruts with mud.
Aramis, not liking to soil his boots with this artificial mortar, apostrophized them rather sharply.
Athos wished to restrain him, but it was too late.
The laborers began to jeer the travelers and by their insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the cool Athos, who urged on his horse against one of them.
Then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch, from which each took a concealed musket; the result was that our seven travelers were outnumbered in weapons.
Aramis received a ball which passed through his shoulder, and Mousqueton another ball which lodged in the fleshy part which prolongs the lower portion of the loins.
Therefore Mousqueton alone fell from his horse, not because he was severely wounded, but not being able to see the wound, he judged it to be more serious than it really was.
“It was an ambuscade!” shouted D’Artagnan.
Mousqueton’s horse rejoined them, and galloped by the side of his companions.
“I would rather have had a hat,” said D’Artagnan.
By my faith, it is very fortunate that the letter was not in it.” “They’ll kill poor Porthos when he comes up,” said Aramis.
“If Porthos were on his legs, he would have rejoined us by this time,” said Athos.
“My opinion is that on the ground the drunken man was not intoxicated.” They continued at their best speed for two hours, although the horses were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soon refuse service.
The travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they might meet with less interruption; but at Crèvecœur, Aramis declared he could proceed no farther.
In fact, it required all the courage which he concealed beneath his elegant form and polished manners to bear him so far.
They lifted him off at the door of a cabaret, left Bazin with him, who, besides, in a skirmish was more embarrassing than useful, and set forward again in the hope of sleeping at Amiens.
“_Morbleu_,” said Athos, as soon as they were again in motion, “reduced to two masters and Grimaud and Planchet! _Morbleu!_ I won’t be their dupe, I will answer for it.
I swear by—” “Don’t waste time in swearing,” said D’Artagnan; “let us gallop, if our horses will consent.” And the travelers buried their rowels in their horses’ flanks, who thus vigorously stimulated recovered their energies.
They arrived at Amiens at midnight, and alighted at the _auberge_ of the Golden Lily.
The host had the appearance of as honest a man as any on earth.
He received the travelers with his candlestick in one hand and his cotton nightcap in the other.
He wished to lodge the two travelers each in a charming chamber; but unfortunately these charming chambers were at the opposite extremities of the hôtel.
D’Artagnan and Athos refused them.
The host replied that he had no other worthy of their Excellencies; but the travelers declared they would sleep in the common chamber, each on a mattress which might be thrown upon the ground.
The host insisted; but the travelers were firm, and he was obliged to do as they wished.
They had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door within, when someone knocked at the yard shutter; they demanded who was there, and recognizing the voices of their lackeys, opened the shutter.
It was indeed Planchet and Grimaud.
“Grimaud can take care of the horses,” said Planchet.
“If you are willing, gentlemen, I will sleep across your doorway, and you will then be certain that nobody can reach you.” “And on what will you sleep?” said D’Artagnan.
“Here is my bed,” replied Planchet, producing a bundle of straw.
“Come, then,” said D’Artagnan, “you are right.
Mine host’s face does not please me at all; it is too gracious.” “Nor me either,” said Athos.
Planchet mounted by the window and installed himself across the doorway, while Grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable, undertaking that by five o’clock in the morning he and the four horses should be ready.
Toward two o’clock in the morning somebody endeavored to open the door; but as Planchet awoke in an instant and cried, “Who goes there?” somebody replied that he was mistaken, and went away.
At four o’clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in the stables.
When they opened the window, they saw the poor lad lying senseless, with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork.
Planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle the horses; but the horses were all used up.
Mousqueton’s horse which had traveled for five or six hours without a rider the day before, might have been able to pursue the journey; but by an inconceivable error the veterinary surgeon, who had been sent for, as it appeared, to bleed one of the host’s horses, had bled Mousqueton’s.
This began to be annoying.
All these successive accidents were perhaps the result of chance; but they might be the fruits of a plot.
Athos and D’Artagnan went out, while Planchet was sent to inquire if there were not three horses for sale in the neighborhood.
At the door stood two horses, fresh, strong, and fully equipped.
He asked where their masters were, and was informed that they had passed the night in the inn, and were then settling their bill with the host.
Athos went down to pay the reckoning, while D’Artagnan and Planchet stood at the street door.
The host was in a lower and back room, to which Athos was requested to go.
Athos entered without the least mistrust, and took out two pistoles to pay the bill.
He took the money which Athos offered to him, and after turning and turning it over and over in his hands, suddenly cried out that it was bad, and that he would have him and his companions arrested as forgers.
“You blackguard!” cried Athos, going toward him, “I’ll cut your ears off!” At the same instant, four men, armed to the teeth, entered by side doors, and rushed upon Athos.
D’Artagnan and Planchet did not require twice bidding; they unfastened the two horses that were waiting at the door, leaped upon them, buried their spurs in their sides, and set off at full gallop.
“Do you know what has become of Athos?” asked D’Artagnan of Planchet, as they galloped on.
“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, “I saw one fall at each of his two shots, and he appeared to me, through the glass door, to be fighting with his sword with the others.” “Brave Athos!” murmured D’Artagnan, “and to think that we are compelled to leave him; maybe the same fate awaits us two paces hence.
Forward, Planchet, forward!
You are a brave fellow.” “As I told you, monsieur,” replied Planchet, “Picards are found out by being used.
Omer they breathed their horses with the bridles passed under their arms for fear of accident, and ate a morsel from their hands on the stones of the street, after they departed again.
At a hundred paces from the gates of Calais, D’Artagnan’s horse gave out, and could not by any means be made to get up again, the blood flowing from his eyes and his nose.
There still remained Planchet’s horse; but he stopped short, and could not be made to move a step.
Fortunately, as we have said, they were within a hundred paces of the city; they left their two nags upon the high road, and ran toward the quay.
Planchet called his master’s attention to a gentleman who had just arrived with his lackey, and only preceded them by about fifty paces.
They made all speed to come up to this gentleman, who appeared to be in great haste.
His boots were covered with dust, and he inquired if he could not instantly cross over to England.
Look, you may see it from here—at the foot of that little hill, that slated roof.” “Very well,” said the gentleman.
And, with his lackey, he took the road to the governor’s country house.
D’Artagnan and Planchet followed the gentleman at a distance of five hundred paces.
Once outside the city, D’Artagnan overtook the gentleman as he was entering a little wood.
“My own service!” said D’Artagnan.
“Go on with your affair, monsieur,” cried Planchet; “I have finished mine.” Seeing this, the gentleman drew his sword, and sprang upon D’Artagnan; but he had too strong an adversary.
In three seconds D’Artagnan had wounded him three times, exclaiming at each thrust, “One for Athos, one for Porthos; and one for Aramis!” At the third hit the gentleman fell like a log.
This time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted.
D’Artagnan searched his pockets, and took from one of them the order for the passage.
Then, casting a glance on the handsome young man, who was scarcely twenty-five years of age, and whom he was leaving in his gore, deprived of sense and perhaps dead, he gave a sigh for that unaccountable destiny which leads men to destroy each other for the interests of people who are strangers to them and who often do not even know that they exist.
But he was soon aroused from these reflections by Lubin, who uttered loud cries and screamed for help with all his might.
Planchet grasped him by the throat, and pressed as hard as he could.
“Monsieur,” said he, “as long as I hold him in this manner, he can’t cry, I’ll be bound; but as soon as I let go he will howl again.
I know him for a Norman, and Normans are obstinate.” In fact, tightly held as he was, Lubin endeavored still to cry out.
“Stay!” said D’Artagnan; and taking out his handkerchief, he gagged him.
“Now,” said Planchet, “let us bind him to a tree.” This being properly done, they drew the Comte de Wardes close to his servant; and as night was approaching, and as the wounded man and the bound man were at some little distance within the wood, it was evident they were likely to remain there till the next day.
“And now,” said D’Artagnan, “to the Governor’s.” “But you are wounded, it seems,” said Planchet.
Let us attend to what is more pressing first, and then we will attend to my wound; besides, it does not seem very dangerous.” And they both set forward as fast as they could toward the country house of the worthy functionary.
The Comte de Wardes was announced, and D’Artagnan was introduced.
“You have an order signed by the cardinal?” said the governor.
“Yes, monsieur,” replied D’Artagnan; “here it is.” “Ah, ah!
It is quite regular and explicit,” said the governor.
“Most likely,” said D’Artagnan; “I am one of his most faithful servants.” “It appears that his Eminence is anxious to prevent someone from crossing to England?” “Yes; a certain D’Artagnan, a Béarnese gentleman who left Paris in company with three of his friends, with the intention of going to London.” “Do you know him personally?” asked the governor.
“Whom?” “This D’Artagnan.” “Perfectly well.” “Describe him to me, then.” “Nothing more easy.” And D’Artagnan gave, feature for feature, a description of the Comte de Wardes.
D’Artagnan lost no time in useless compliments.
He thanked the governor, bowed, and departed.
Once outside, he and Planchet set off as fast as they could; and by making a long detour avoided the wood and reentered the city by another gate.
“Well?” said he, on perceiving D’Artagnan.
“Here is my pass countersigned,” said the latter.
“And that other gentleman?
“He will not go today,” said D’Artagnan; “but here, I’ll pay you for us two.” “In that case let us go,” said the shipmaster.
“Let us go,” repeated D’Artagnan.
He leaped with Planchet into the boat, and five minutes after they were on board.
It was time; for they had scarcely sailed half a league, when D’Artagnan saw a flash and heard a detonation.
It was the cannon which announced the closing of the port.
Fortunately, as D’Artagnan had thought, it was not dangerous.
D’Artagnan was worn out with fatigue.
A mattress was laid upon the deck for him.
The breeze had been so light all night, they had made but little progress.
At ten o’clock the vessel cast anchor in the harbor of Dover, and at half past ten D’Artagnan placed his foot on English land, crying, “Here I am at last!” But that was not all; they must get to London.
D’Artagnan and Planchet took each a post horse, and a postillion rode before them.
D’Artagnan did not know London; he did not know a word of English; but he wrote the name of Buckingham on a piece of paper, and everyone pointed out to him the way to the duke’s hôtel.
D’Artagnan inquired for the confidential valet of the duke, who, having accompanied him in all his voyages, spoke French perfectly well; he told him that he came from Paris on an affair of life and death, and that he must speak with his master instantly.
The confidence with which D’Artagnan spoke convinced Patrick, which was the name of this minister of the minister.
He ordered two horses to be saddled, and himself went as guide to the young Guardsman.
As for Planchet, he had been lifted from his horse as stiff as a rush; the poor lad’s strength was almost exhausted.
D’Artagnan seemed iron.
On their arrival at the castle they learned that Buckingham and the king were hawking in the marshes two or three leagues away.
“Whom must I announce to my Lord Duke?” asked Patrick.
“The young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on the Pont Neuf, opposite the Samaritaine.” “A singular introduction!” “You will find that it is as good as another.” Patrick galloped off, reached the duke, and announced to him in the terms directed that a messenger awaited him.
Buckingham at once remembered the circumstance, and suspecting that something was going on in France of which it was necessary he should be informed, he only took the time to inquire where the messenger was, and recognizing from afar the uniform of the Guards, he put his horse into a gallop, and rode straight up to D’Artagnan.
Patrick discreetly kept in the background.
“No misfortune has happened to the queen?” cried Buckingham, the instant he came up, throwing all his fear and love into the question.
“I believe not; nevertheless I believe she runs some great peril from which your Grace alone can extricate her.” “I!” cried Buckingham.
Speak, speak!” “Take this letter,” said D’Artagnan.
From whom comes this letter?” “From her Majesty, as I think.” “From her Majesty!” said Buckingham, becoming so pale that D’Artagnan feared he would faint as he broke the seal.
“What is this rent?” said he, showing D’Artagnan a place where it had been pierced through.
“Ah,” said D’Artagnan, “I did not see that; it was the sword of the Comte de Wardes which made that hole, when he gave me a good thrust in the breast.” “You are wounded?” asked Buckingham, as he opened the letter.
“Oh, nothing but a scratch,” said D’Artagnan.
“Patrick, remain here, or rather join the king, wherever he may be, and tell his Majesty that I humbly beg him to excuse me, but an affair of the greatest importance recalls me to London.
Come, monsieur, come!” and both set off towards the capital at full gallop.
THE COUNTESS DE WINTER As they rode along, the duke endeavored to draw from D’Artagnan, not all that had happened, but what D’Artagnan himself knew.
By adding all that he heard from the mouth of the young man to his own remembrances, he was enabled to form a pretty exact idea of a position of the seriousness of which, for the rest, the queen’s letter, short but explicit, gave him the clue.
But that which astonished him most was that the cardinal, so deeply interested in preventing this young man from setting his foot in England, had not succeeded in arresting him on the road.
It was then, upon the manifestation of this astonishment, that D’Artagnan related to him the precaution taken, and how, thanks to the devotion of his three friends, whom he had left scattered and bleeding on the road, he had succeeded in coming off with a single sword thrust, which had pierced the queen’s letter and for which he had repaid M. de Wardes with such terrible coin.
While he was listening to this recital, delivered with the greatest simplicity, the duke looked from time to time at the young man with astonishment, as if he could not comprehend how so much prudence, courage, and devotedness could be allied with a countenance which indicated not more than twenty years.
D’Artagnan imagined that on arriving in town the duke would slacken his pace, but it was not so.
He kept on his way at the same rate, heedless about upsetting those whom he met on the road.
In fact, in crossing the city two or three accidents of this kind happened; but Buckingham did not even turn his head to see what became of those he had knocked down.
D’Artagnan followed him amid cries which strongly resembled curses.
On entering the court of his hôtel, Buckingham sprang from his horse, and without thinking what became of the animal, threw the bridle on his neck, and sprang toward the vestibule.
D’Artagnan did the same, with a little more concern, however, for the noble creatures, whose merits he fully appreciated; but he had the satisfaction of seeing three or four grooms run from the kitchens and the stables, and busy themselves with the steeds.
The duke walked so fast that D’Artagnan had some trouble in keeping up with him.
He passed through several apartments, of an elegance of which even the greatest nobles of France had not even an idea, and arrived at length in a bedchamber which was at once a miracle of taste and of richness.
In the alcove of this chamber was a door concealed in the tapestry which the duke opened with a little gold key which he wore suspended from his neck by a chain of the same metal.
With discretion D’Artagnan remained behind; but at the moment when Buckingham crossed the threshold, he turned round, and seeing the hesitation of the young man, “Come in!” cried he, “and if you have the good fortune to be admitted to her Majesty’s presence, tell her what you have seen.” Encouraged by this invitation, D’Artagnan followed the duke, who closed the door after them.
The two found themselves in a small chapel covered with a tapestry of Persian silk worked with gold, and brilliantly lighted with a vast number of candles.
Over a species of altar, and beneath a canopy of blue velvet, surmounted by white and red plumes, was a full-length portrait of Anne of Austria, so perfect in its resemblance that D’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise on beholding it.
On the altar, and beneath the portrait, was the casket containing the diamond studs.
The duke approached the altar, knelt as a priest might have done before a crucifix, and opened the casket.
“There,” said he, drawing from the casket a large bow of blue ribbon all sparkling with diamonds, “there are the precious studs which I have taken an oath should be buried with me.
The queen gave them to me, the queen requires them again.
All at once he uttered a terrible cry.
“What is the matter?” exclaimed D’Artagnan, anxiously; “what has happened to you, my Lord?” “All is lost!” cried Buckingham, becoming as pale as a corpse; “two of the studs are wanting, there are only ten.” “Can you have lost them, my Lord, or do you think they have been stolen?” “They have been stolen,” replied the duke, “and it is the cardinal who has dealt this blow.
The ribbons which held them have been cut with scissors.” “If my Lord suspects they have been stolen, perhaps the person who stole them still has them in his hands.” “Wait, wait!” said the duke.
The Comtesse de Winter, with whom I had quarreled, became reconciled to me at that ball.
That reconciliation was nothing but the vengeance of a jealous woman.
The woman is an agent of the cardinal.” “He has agents, then, throughout the world?” cried D’Artagnan.
“Oh, yes,” said Buckingham, grating his teeth with rage.
“Yes, he is a terrible antagonist.
Patrick!” cried the duke, opening the door of the chapel, “Patrick!” His confidential valet appeared.
“My jeweler and my secretary.” The valet went out with a mute promptitude which showed him accustomed to obey blindly and without reply.
But although the jeweler had been mentioned first, it was the secretary who first made his appearance.
He found Buckingham seated at a table in his bedchamber, writing orders with his own hand.
Jackson,” said he, “go instantly to the Lord Chancellor, and tell him that I charge him with the execution of these orders.
Jackson,” replied Buckingham.
“He will say, in that case, to the king that I am determined on war, and that this measure is my first act of hostility against France.” The secretary bowed and retired.
“We are safe on that side,” said Buckingham, turning toward D’Artagnan.
Buckingham saw by the expression of the young man’s face what was passing in his mind, and he smiled.
She asked me not to send the Protestants of La Rochelle the assistance I promised them; I have not done so.
I broke my word, it is true; but what signifies that?
I obeyed my love; and have I not been richly paid for that obedience?
It was to that obedience I owe her portrait.” D’Artagnan was amazed to note by what fragile and unknown threads the destinies of nations and the lives of men are suspended.
He was lost in these reflections when the goldsmith entered.
He was an Irishman—one of the most skillful of his craft, and who himself confessed that he gained a hundred thousand livres a year by the Duke of Buckingham.
O’Reilly,” said the duke, leading him into the chapel, “look at these diamond studs, and tell me what they are worth apiece.” The goldsmith cast a glance at the elegant manner in which they were set, calculated, one with another, what the diamonds were worth, and without hesitation said, “Fifteen hundred pistoles each, my Lord.” “How many days would it require to make two studs exactly like them?
You see there are two wanting.” “Eight days, my Lord.” “I will give you three thousand pistoles apiece if I can have them by the day after tomorrow.” “My Lord, they shall be yours.” “You are a jewel of a man, Mr.
These studs cannot be trusted to anybody; it must be done in the palace.” “Impossible, my Lord!
There is no one but myself can so execute them that one cannot tell the new from the old.” “Therefore, my dear Mr.
O’Reilly, you are my prisoner.
Name to me such of your workmen as you need, and point out the tools they must bring.” The goldsmith knew the duke.
He knew all objection would be useless, and instantly determined how to act.
“May I be permitted to inform my wife?” said he.
Your captivity shall be mild, be assured; and as every inconvenience deserves its indemnification, here is, in addition to the price of the studs, an order for a thousand pistoles, to make you forget the annoyance I cause you.” D’Artagnan could not get over the surprise created in him by this minister, who thus open-handed, sported with men and millions.
As to the goldsmith, he wrote to his wife, sending her the order for the thousand pistoles, and charging her to send him, in exchange, his most skillful apprentice, an assortment of diamonds, of which he gave the names and the weight, and the necessary tools.
Buckingham conducted the goldsmith to the chamber destined for him, and which, at the end of half an hour, was transformed into a workshop.
Then he placed a sentinel at each door, with an order to admit nobody upon any pretense but his _valet de chambre_, Patrick.
We need not add that the goldsmith, O’Reilly, and his assistant, were prohibited from going out under any pretext.
This point, settled, the duke turned to D’Artagnan.
What do you desire?” “A bed, my Lord,” replied D’Artagnan.
“At present, I confess, that is the thing I stand most in need of.” Buckingham gave D’Artagnan a chamber adjoining his own.
He wished to have the young man at hand—not that he at all mistrusted him, but for the sake of having someone to whom he could constantly talk of the queen.
In one hour after, the ordinance was published in London that no vessel bound for France should leave port, not even the packet boat with letters.
In the eyes of everybody this was a declaration of war between the two kingdoms.
On the day after the morrow, by eleven o’clock, the two diamond studs were finished, and they were so completely imitated, so perfectly alike, that Buckingham could not tell the new ones from the old ones, and experts in such matters would have been deceived as he was.
He immediately called D’Artagnan.
“Here,” said he to him, “are the diamond studs that you came to bring; and be my witness that I have done all that human power could do.” “Be satisfied, my Lord, I will tell all that I have seen.
But does your Grace mean to give me the studs without the casket?” “The casket would encumber you.
Besides, the casket is the more precious from being all that is left to me.
You will say that I keep it.” “I will perform your commission, word for word, my Lord.” “And now,” resumed Buckingham, looking earnestly at the young man, “how shall I ever acquit myself of the debt I owe you?” D’Artagnan blushed up to the whites of his eyes.
He saw that the duke was searching for a means of making him accept something and the idea that the blood of his friends and himself was about to be paid for with English gold was strangely repugnant to him.
“Let us understand each other, my Lord,” replied D’Artagnan, “and let us make things clear beforehand in order that there may be no mistake.
I am in the service of the King and Queen of France, and form part of the company of Monsieur Dessessart, who, as well as his brother-in-law, Monsieur de Tréville, is particularly attached to their Majesties.
And still further, it is very probable I should not have done anything of this, if it had not been to make myself agreeable to someone who is my lady, as the queen is yours.” “Yes,” said the duke, smiling, “and I even believe that I know that other person; it is—” “My Lord, I have not named her!” interrupted the young man, warmly.
“And we say, ‘Proud as a Gascon,’” replied D’Artagnan.
“The Gascons are the Scots of France.” D’Artagnan bowed to the duke, and was retiring.
When you have arrived there you will go to a mean tavern, without a name and without a sign—a mere fisherman’s hut.
You cannot be mistaken; there is but one.” “Afterward?” “You will ask for the host, and will repeat to him the word ‘Forward!’” “Which means?” “In French, _En avant_.
You already know two of them, and you appeared to appreciate them like a judge.
They were those we rode on; and you may rely upon me for the others not being inferior to them.
These horses are equipped for the field.
However proud you may be, you will not refuse to accept one of them, and to request your three companions to accept the others—that is, in order to make war against us.
Besides, the end justified the means, as you Frenchmen say, does it not?” “Yes, my Lord, I accept them,” said D’Artagnan; “and if it please God, we will make a good use of your presents.” “Well, now, your hand, young man.
Perhaps we shall soon meet on the field of battle; but in the meantime we shall part good friends, I hope.” “Yes, my Lord; but with the hope of soon becoming enemies.” “Be satisfied; I promise you that.” “I depend upon your word, my Lord.” D’Artagnan bowed to the duke, and made his way as quickly as possible to the riverside.
Opposite the Tower of London he found the vessel that had been named to him, delivered his letter to the captain, who after having it examined by the governor of the port made immediate preparations to sail.
Passing alongside one of them, D’Artagnan fancied he perceived on board it the woman of Meung—the same whom the unknown gentleman had called Milady, and whom D’Artagnan had thought so handsome; but thanks to the current of the stream and a fair wind, his vessel passed so quickly that he had little more than a glimpse of her.
D’Artagnan went instantly in search of the inn, and easily discovered it by the riotous noise which resounded from it.
War between England and France was talked of as near and certain, and the jolly sailors were having a carousal.
D’Artagnan made his way through the crowd, advanced toward the host, and pronounced the word “Forward!” The host instantly made him a sign to follow, went out with him by a door which opened into a yard, led him to the stable, where a saddled horse awaited him, and asked him if he stood in need of anything else.
“I want to know the route I am to follow,” said D’Artagnan.
At Neufchâtel, go to the tavern of the Golden Harrow, give the password to the landlord, and you will find, as you have here, a horse ready saddled.” “Have I anything to pay?” demanded D’Artagnan.
“Everything is paid,” replied the host, “and liberally.
He strictly followed the instructions he had received.
Valery, he found a horse quite ready and awaiting him.
He was about to remove the pistols from the saddle he had quit to the one he was about to fill, but he found the holsters furnished with similar pistols.
“Your address at Paris?” “Hôtel of the Guards, company of Dessessart.” “Enough,” replied the questioner.
“Which route must I take?” demanded D’Artagnan, in his turn.
Don’t condemn it from appearances; you will find a horse in the stables quite as good as this.” “The same password?” “Exactly.” “Adieu, master!” “A good journey, gentlemen!
Do you want anything?” D’Artagnan shook his head, and set off at full speed.
At Eccuis, the same scene was repeated.
He found as provident a host and a fresh horse.
He left his address as he had done before, and set off again at the same pace for Pontoise.
At Pontoise he changed his horse for the last time, and at nine o’clock galloped into the yard of Tréville’s hôtel.
M. de Tréville received him as if he had seen him that same morning; only, when pressing his hand a little more warmly than usual, he informed him that the company of Dessessart was on duty at the Louvre, and that he might repair at once to his post.
THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON On the morrow, nothing was talked of in Paris but the ball which the aldermen of the city were to give to the king and queen, and in which their Majesties were to dance the famous La Merlaison—the favorite ballet of the king.
Eight days had been occupied in preparations at the Hôtel de Ville for this important evening.
The city carpenters had erected scaffolds upon which the invited ladies were to be placed; the city grocer had ornamented the chambers with two hundred _flambeaux_ of white wax, a piece of luxury unheard of at that period; and twenty violins were ordered, and the price for them fixed at double the usual rate, upon condition, said the report, that they should be played all night.
At ten o’clock in the morning the Sieur de la Coste, ensign in the king’s Guards, followed by two officers and several archers of that body, came to the city registrar, named Clement, and demanded of him all the keys of the rooms and offices of the hôtel.
These keys were given up to him instantly.
Each of them had a ticket attached to it, by which it might be recognized; and from that moment the Sieur de la Coste was charged with the care of all the doors and all the avenues.
At eleven o’clock came in his turn Duhallier, captain of the Guards, bringing with him fifty archers, who were distributed immediately through the Hôtel de Ville, at the doors assigned them.
At three o’clock came two companies of the Guards, one French, the other Swiss.
The company of French guards was composed of half of M.
Duhallier’s men and half of M.
As fast as they entered, they were placed in the grand saloon, on the platforms prepared for them.
As next to the queen, she was the most considerable personage of the fête, she was received by the city officials, and placed in a box opposite to that which the queen was to occupy.
At ten o’clock, the king’s collation, consisting of preserves and other delicacies, was prepared in the little room on the side of the church of St.
At midnight great cries and loud acclamations were heard.
It was the king, who was passing through the streets which led from the Louvre to the Hôtel de Ville, and which were all illuminated with colored lanterns.
His Majesty, in full dress, was accompanied by his royal Highness, M. le Comte de Soissons, by the Grand Prior, by the Duc de Longueville, by the Duc d’Eubœuf, by the Comte d’Harcourt, by the Comte de la Roche-Guyon, by M. de Liancourt, by M. de Baradas, by the Comte de Cramail, and by the Chevalier de Souveray.
Everybody noticed that the king looked dull and preoccupied.
A private room had been prepared for the king and another for Monsieur.
In each of these closets were placed masquerade dresses.
The same had been done for the queen and Madame the President.
The nobles and ladies of their Majesties’ suites were to dress, two by two, in chambers prepared for the purpose.
Before entering his closet the king desired to be informed the moment the cardinal arrived.
Half an hour after the entrance of the king, fresh acclamations were heard; these announced the arrival of the queen.
The aldermen did as they had done before, and preceded by their sergeants, advanced to receive their illustrious guest.
The queen entered the great hall; and it was remarked that, like the king, she looked dull and even weary.
At the moment she entered, the curtain of a small gallery which to that time had been closed, was drawn, and the pale face of the cardinal appeared, he being dressed as a Spanish cavalier.
His eyes were fixed upon those of the queen, and a smile of terrible joy passed over his lips; the queen did not wear her diamond studs.
The queen remained for a short time to receive the compliments of the city dignitaries and to reply to the salutations of the ladies.
All at once the king appeared with the cardinal at one of the doors of the hall.
The cardinal was speaking to him in a low voice, and the king was very pale.
The king made his way through the crowd without a mask, and the ribbons of his doublet scarcely tied.
He went straight to the queen, and in an altered voice said, “Why, madame, have you not thought proper to wear your diamond studs, when you know it would give me so much gratification?” The queen cast a glance around her, and saw the cardinal behind, with a diabolical smile on his countenance.
“Sire,” replied the queen, with a faltering voice, “because, in the midst of such a crowd as this, I feared some accident might happen to them.” “And you were wrong, madame.
If I made you that present it was that you might adorn yourself therewith.
I tell you that you were wrong.” The voice of the king was tremulous with anger.
Everybody looked and listened with astonishment, comprehending nothing of what passed.
“Sire,” said the queen, “I can send for them to the Louvre, where they are, and thus your Majesty’s wishes will be complied with.” “Do so, madame, do so, and that at once; for within an hour the ballet will commence.” The queen bent in token of submission, and followed the ladies who were to conduct her to her room.
On his part the king returned to his apartment.
There was a moment of trouble and confusion in the assembly.
Everybody had remarked that something had passed between the king and queen; but both of them had spoken so low that everybody, out of respect, withdrew several steps, so that nobody had heard anything.
The violins began to sound with all their might, but nobody listened to them.
He was in a most elegant hunting costume; and Monsieur and the other nobles were dressed like him.
So dressed, he really appeared the first gentleman of his kingdom.
The cardinal drew near to the king, and placed in his hand a small casket.
“What does this mean?” demanded he of the cardinal.
“Nothing,” replied the latter; “only, if the queen has the studs, which I very much doubt, count them, sire, and if you only find ten, ask her Majesty who can have stolen from her the two studs that are here.” The king looked at the cardinal as if to interrogate him; but he had not time to address any question to him—a cry of admiration burst from every mouth.
If the king appeared to be the first gentleman of his kingdom, the queen was without doubt the most beautiful woman in France.
It is true that the habit of a huntress became her admirably.
She wore a beaver hat with blue feathers, a surtout of gray-pearl velvet, fastened with diamond clasps, and a petticoat of blue satin, embroidered with silver.
On her left shoulder sparkled the diamond studs, on a bow of the same color as the plumes and the petticoat.
The king trembled with joy and the cardinal with vexation; although, distant as they were from the queen, they could not count the studs.
The only question was, had she ten or twelve?
The king advanced toward Madame the President, with whom he was to dance, and his Highness Monsieur with the queen.
The king danced facing the queen, and every time he passed by her, he devoured with his eyes those studs of which he could not ascertain the number.
A cold sweat covered the brow of the cardinal.
The ballet ended amid the applause of the whole assemblage, and everyone reconducted his lady to her place; but the king took advantage of the privilege he had of leaving his lady, to advance eagerly toward the queen.
“I thank you, madame,” said he, “for the deference you have shown to my wishes, but I think you want two of the studs, and I bring them back to you.” With these words he held out to the queen the two studs the cardinal had given him.
“How, sire?” cried the young queen, affecting surprise, “you are giving me, then, two more: I shall have fourteen.” In fact the king counted them, and the twelve studs were all on her Majesty’s shoulder.
The king called the cardinal.
“What does this mean, Monsieur Cardinal?” asked the king in a severe tone.
The queen had just regained her chamber, and D’Artagnan was about to retire, when he felt his shoulder lightly touched.
The face of this young woman was covered with a black velvet mask; but notwithstanding this precaution, which was in fact taken rather against others than against him, he at once recognized his usual guide, the light and intelligent Mme.
On the evening before, they had scarcely seen each other for a moment at the apartment of the Swiss guard, Germain, whither D’Artagnan had sent for her.
The haste which the young woman was in to convey to the queen the excellent news of the happy return of her messenger prevented the two lovers from exchanging more than a few words.
D’Artagnan therefore followed Mme.
Bonacieux moved by a double sentiment—love and curiosity.
Bonacieux opened the door of a closet, which was entirely dark, and led D’Artagnan into it.
There she made a fresh sign of silence, and opened a second door concealed by tapestry.
The opening of this door disclosed a brilliant light, and she disappeared.
The young man waited in comparative darkness and listened.
The queen appeared cheerful and happy, which seemed to astonish the persons who surrounded her and who were accustomed to see her almost always sad and full of care.
The queen attributed this joyous feeling to the beauty of the fête, to the pleasure she had experienced in the ballet; and as it is not permissible to contradict a queen, whether she smile or weep, everybody expatiated on the gallantry of the aldermen of the city of Paris.
Although D’Artagnan did not at all know the queen, he soon distinguished her voice from the others, at first by a slightly foreign accent, and next by that tone of domination naturally impressed upon all royal words.
He heard her approach and withdraw from the partially open door; and twice or three times he even saw the shadow of a person intercept the light.
At length a hand and an arm, surpassingly beautiful in their form and whiteness, glided through the tapestry.
D’Artagnan at once comprehended that this was his recompense.
He cast himself on his knees, seized the hand, and touched it respectfully with his lips.
Then the hand was withdrawn, leaving in his an object which he perceived to be a ring.
The door immediately closed, and D’Artagnan found himself again in complete obscurity.
D’Artagnan placed the ring on his finger, and again waited; it was evident that all was not yet over.
After the reward of his devotion, that of his love was to come.
Besides, although the ballet was danced, the evening had scarcely begun.
Jean had struck three quarters past two.
The sound of voices diminished by degrees in the adjoining chamber.
The company was then heard departing; then the door of the closet in which D’Artagnan was, was opened, and Mme.
“You at last?” cried D’Artagnan.
“Silence!” said the young woman, placing her hand upon his lips; “silence, and go the same way you came!” “But where and when shall I see you again?” cried D’Artagnan.
Begone, begone!” At these words she opened the door of the corridor, and pushed D’Artagnan out of the room.
D’Artagnan obeyed like a child, without the least resistance or objection, which proved that he was really in love.
THE RENDEZVOUS D’Artagnan ran home immediately, and although it was three o’clock in the morning and he had some of the worst quarters of Paris to traverse, he met with no misadventure.
Everyone knows that drunkards and lovers have a protecting deity.
Planchet*, whom he had sent home two hours before from the Hôtel de Ville, telling him to sit up for him, opened the door for him. * The reader may ask, “How came Planchet here?” when he was left “stiff as a rush” in London.
In the intervening time Buckingham perhaps sent him to Paris, as he did the horses.
“Has anyone brought a letter for me?” asked D’Artagnan, eagerly.
“No one has _brought_ a letter, monsieur,” replied Planchet; “but one has come of itself.” “What do you mean, blockhead?” “I mean to say that when I came in, although I had the key of your apartment in my pocket, and that key had never quit me, I found a letter on the green table cover in your bedroom.” “And where is that letter?” “I left it where I found it, monsieur.
If the window had been open or even ajar, I should think nothing of it; but, no—all was hermetically sealed.
Beware, monsieur; there is certainly some magic underneath.” Meanwhile, the young man had darted in to his chamber, and opened the letter.
Bonacieux, and was expressed in these terms: “There are many thanks to be offered to you, and to be transmitted to you.
Cloud, in front of the pavilion which stands at the corner of the house of M. d’Estrées.—C.B.” While reading this letter, D’Artagnan felt his heart dilated and compressed by that delicious spasm which tortures and caresses the hearts of lovers.
It was the first billet he had received; it was the first rendezvous that had been granted him.
His heart, swelled by the intoxication of joy, felt ready to dissolve away at the very gate of that terrestrial paradise called Love!
“Well, monsieur,” said Planchet, who had observed his master grow red and pale successively, “did I not guess truly?
“My dear Planchet, I am the happiest of men!” “And I may profit by Monsieur’s happiness, and go to bed?” “Yes, go.” “May the blessings of heaven fall upon Monsieur!
But it is not the less true that that letter—” And Planchet retired, shaking his head with an air of doubt, which the liberality of D’Artagnan had not entirely effaced.
Left alone, D’Artagnan read and reread his billet.
Then he kissed and rekissed twenty times the lines traced by the hand of his beautiful mistress.
At seven o’clock in the morning he arose and called Planchet, who at the second summons opened the door, his countenance not yet quite freed from the anxiety of the preceding night.
“Planchet,” said D’Artagnan, “I am going out for all day, perhaps.
You are, therefore, your own master till seven o’clock in the evening; but at seven o’clock you must hold yourself in readiness with two horses.” “There!” said Planchet.
“We are going again, it appears, to have our hides pierced in all sorts of ways.” “You will take your musketoon and your pistols.” “There, now!
Didn’t I say so?” cried Planchet.
“I was sure of it—the cursed letter!” “Don’t be afraid, you idiot; there is nothing in hand but a party of pleasure.” “Ah, like the charming journey the other day, when it rained bullets and produced a crop of steel traps!” “Well, if you are really afraid, Monsieur Planchet,” resumed D’Artagnan, “I will go without you.
Bonacieux was at his door.
D’Artagnan’s intention was to go out without speaking to the worthy mercer; but the latter made so polite and friendly a salutation that his tenant felt obliged, not only to stop, but to enter into conversation with him.
Besides, how is it possible to avoid a little condescension toward a husband whose pretty wife has appointed a meeting with you that same evening at St.
Cloud, opposite D’Estrées’s pavilion?
D’Artagnan approached him with the most amiable air he could assume.
The conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of the poor man.
But you,” continued M.
Bonacieux, in a tone of perfect good fellowship, “what has become of you all these days?
I have not seen you nor your friends, and I don’t think you could gather all that dust that I saw Planchet brush off your boots yesterday from the pavement of Paris.” “You are right, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, my friends and I have been on a little journey.” “Far from here?” “Oh, Lord, no!
We went to take Monsieur Athos to the waters of Forges, where my friends still remain.” “And you have returned, have you not?” replied M.
Bonacieux, giving to his countenance a most sly air.
“A handsome young fellow like you does not obtain long leaves of absence from his mistress; and we were impatiently waited for at Paris, were we not?” “My faith!” said the young man, laughing, “I confess it, and so much more the readily, my dear Bonacieux, as I see there is no concealing anything from you.
Yes, I was expected, and very impatiently, I acknowledge.” A slight shade passed over the brow of Bonacieux, but so slight that D’Artagnan did not perceive it.
“And we are going to be recompensed for our diligence?” continued the mercer, with a trifling alteration in his voice—so trifling, indeed, that D’Artagnan did not perceive it any more than he had the momentary shade which, an instant before, had darkened the countenance of the worthy man.
“Ah, may you be a true prophet!” said D’Artagnan, laughing.
“No; what I say,” replied Bonacieux, “is only that I may know whether I am delaying you.” “Why that question, my dear host?” asked D’Artagnan.
“Do you intend to sit up for me?” “No; but since my arrest and the robbery that was committed in my house, I am alarmed every time I hear a door open, particularly in the night.
I am no swordsman.” “Well, don’t be alarmed if I return at one, two or three o’clock in the morning; indeed, do not be alarmed if I do not come at all.” This time Bonacieux became so pale that D’Artagnan could not help perceiving it, and asked him what was the matter.
“Nothing,” replied Bonacieux, “nothing.
Since my misfortunes I have been subject to faintnesses, which seize me all at once, and I have just felt a cold shiver.
Pay no attention to it; you have nothing to occupy yourself with but being happy.” “Then I have full occupation, for I am so.” “Not yet; wait a little!
And perhaps you look for it with as much impatience as I do; perhaps this evening Madame Bonacieux will visit the conjugal domicile.” “Madame Bonacieux is not at liberty this evening,” replied the husband, seriously; “she is detained at the Louvre this evening by her duties.” “So much the worse for you, my dear host, so much the worse!
When I am happy, I wish all the world to be so; but it appears that is not possible.” The young man departed, laughing at the joke, which he thought he alone could comprehend.
“Amuse yourself well!” replied Bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.
But D’Artagnan was too far off to hear him; and if he had heard him in the disposition of mind he then enjoyed, he certainly would not have remarked it.
He took his way toward the hôtel of M. de Tréville; his visit of the day before, it is to be remembered, had been very short and very little explicative.
He had thought the king and queen charming at the ball.
It is true the cardinal had been particularly ill-tempered.
He had retired at one o’clock under the pretense of being indisposed.
As to their Majesties, they did not return to the Louvre till six o’clock in the morning.
“Now,” said Tréville, lowering his voice, and looking into every corner of the apartment to see if they were alone, “now let us talk about yourself, my young friend; for it is evident that your happy return has something to do with the joy of the king, the triumph of the queen, and the humiliation of his Eminence.
You must look out for yourself.” “What have I to fear,” replied D’Artagnan, “as long as I shall have the luck to enjoy the favor of their Majesties?” “Everything, believe me.
The cardinal is not the man to forget a mystification until he has settled account with the mystifier; and the mystifier appears to me to have the air of being a certain young Gascon of my acquaintance.” “Do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself, and knows that I have been to London?” “The devil!
Was it from London you brought that beautiful diamond that glitters on your finger?
Beware, my dear D’Artagnan!
Stop!” “Yes, doubtless,” replied D’Artagnan, who had never been able to cram the first rudiments of that language into his head, and who had by his ignorance driven his master to despair, “yes, doubtless there is one.” “There certainly is one,” said M. de Tréville, who had a tincture of literature, “and Monsieur de Benserade was quoting it to me the other day.
Stop a minute—ah, this is it: ‘Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes,’ which means, ‘Beware of the enemy who makes you presents.” “This diamond does not come from an enemy, monsieur,” replied D’Artagnan, “it comes from the queen.” “From the queen!
“Why, it is indeed a true royal jewel, which is worth a thousand pistoles if it is worth a denier.
By whom did the queen send you this jewel?” “She gave it to me herself.” “Where?” “In the room adjoining the chamber in which she changed her toilet.” “How?” “Giving me her hand to kiss.” “You have kissed the queen’s hand?” said M. de Tréville, looking earnestly at D’Artagnan.
“Her Majesty did me the honor to grant me that favor.” “And that in the presence of witnesses!
Imprudent, thrice imprudent!” “No, monsieur, be satisfied; nobody saw her,” replied D’Artagnan, and he related to M. de Tréville how the affair came to pass.
“I know them by their romantic imagination.
Everything that savors of mystery charms them.
“Listen,” said M. de Tréville; “shall I give you counsel, good counsel, the counsel of a friend?” “You will do me honor, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan.
“Well, then, off to the nearest goldsmith’s, and sell that diamond for the highest price you can get from him.
However much of a Jew he may be, he will give you at least eight hundred pistoles.
Pistoles have no name, young man, and that ring has a terrible one, which may betray him who wears it.” “Sell this ring, a ring which comes from my sovereign?
Never!” said D’Artagnan.
“Then, at least turn the gem inside, you silly fellow; for everybody must be aware that a cadet from Gascony does not find such stones in his mother’s jewel case.” “You think, then, I have something to dread?” asked D’Artagnan.
“I mean to say, young man, that he who sleeps over a mine the match of which is already lighted, may consider himself in safety in comparison with you.” “The devil!” said D’Artagnan, whom the positive tone of M. de Tréville began to disquiet, “the devil!
The cardinal has a tenacious memory and a long arm; you may depend upon it, he will repay you by some ill turn.” “But of what sort?” “Eh!
The least that can be expected is that you will be arrested.” “What!
Do not lull yourself in security, or you will be lost; but, on the contrary—and it is I who say it—see enemies in all directions.
Mistrust everybody, your friend, your brother, your mistress—your mistress above all.” D’Artagnan blushed.
“My mistress above all,” repeated he, mechanically; “and why her rather than another?” “Because a mistress is one of the cardinal’s favorite means; he has not one that is more expeditious.
A woman will sell you for ten pistoles, witness Delilah.
You are acquainted with the Scriptures?” D’Artagnan thought of the appointment Mme.
Bonacieux had made with him for that very evening; but we are bound to say, to the credit of our hero, that the bad opinion entertained by M. de Tréville of women in general, did not inspire him with the least suspicion of his pretty hostess.
De Wardes, one of the cardinal’s men, a cousin of Rochefort!
Stop, my friend, I have an idea.” “Speak, monsieur.” “In your place, I would do one thing.” “What?” “While his Eminence was seeking for me in Paris, I would take, without sound of drum or trumpet, the road to Picardy, and would go and make some inquiries concerning my three companions.
They merit richly that piece of attention on your part.” “The advice is good, monsieur, and tomorrow I will set out.” “Tomorrow!
Any why not this evening?” “This evening, monsieur, I am detained in Paris by indispensable business.” “Ah, young man, young man, some flirtation or other.
Take my advice and set out this evening.” “Impossible, monsieur.” “You have given your word, then?” “Yes, monsieur.” “Ah, that’s quite another thing; but promise me, if you should not be killed tonight, that you will go tomorrow.” “I promise it.” “Do you need money?” “I have still fifty pistoles.
That, I think, is as much as I shall want.” “But your companions?” “I don’t think they can be in need of any.
We left Paris, each with seventy-five pistoles in his pocket.” “Shall I see you again before your departure?” “I think not, monsieur, unless something new should happen.” “Well, a pleasant journey.” “Thanks, monsieur.” D’Artagnan left M. de Tréville, touched more than ever by his paternal solicitude for his Musketeers.
He called successively at the abodes of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
Neither of them had returned.
Their lackeys likewise were absent, and nothing had been heard of either the one or the other.
He would have inquired after them of their mistresses, but he was neither acquainted with Porthos’s nor Aramis’s, and as to Athos, he had none.
Planchet, all astonishment, was busy grooming them, and had already finished two.
“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, on perceiving D’Artagnan, “how glad I am to see you.” “Why so, Planchet?” asked the young man.
“Do you place confidence in our landlord—Monsieur Bonacieux?” “I?
What must come is written.” “Monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening?” “Quite the contrary, Planchet; the more ill will I have toward Monsieur Bonacieux, the more punctual I shall be in keeping the appointment made by that letter which makes you so uneasy.” “Then that is Monsieur’s determination?” “Undeniably, my friend.
At nine o’clock, then, be ready here at the hôtel, I will come and take you.” Planchet seeing there was no longer any hope of making his master renounce his project, heaved a profound sigh and set to work to groom the third horse.
As to D’Artagnan, being at bottom a prudent youth, instead of returning home, went and dined with the Gascon priest, who, at the time of the distress of the four friends, had given them a breakfast of chocolate.
THE PAVILION At nine o’clock D’Artagnan was at the Hôtel des Gardes; he found Planchet all ready.
Planchet was armed with his musketoon and a pistol.
D’Artagnan had his sword and placed two pistols in his belt; then both mounted and departed quietly.
Planchet took place behind his master, and kept at a distance of ten paces from him.
D’Artagnan crossed the quays, went out by the gate of La Conférence and followed the road, much more beautiful then than it is now, which leads to St.
As long as he was in the city, Planchet kept at the respectful distance he had imposed upon himself; but as soon as the road began to be more lonely and dark, he drew softly nearer, so that when they entered the Bois de Boulogne he found himself riding quite naturally side by side with his master.
In fact, we must not dissemble that the oscillation of the tall trees and the reflection of the moon in the dark underwood gave him serious uneasiness.
Yes, monsieur.” “Afraid of being heard!
Had we not better lower our heads?” “In truth,” murmured D’Artagnan, to whom M. de Tréville’s recommendation recurred, “this animal will end by making me afraid.” And he put his horse into a trot.
Planchet followed the movements of his master as if he had been his shadow, and was soon trotting by his side.
“Are we going to continue this pace all night?” asked Planchet.
“No; you are at your journey’s end.” “How, monsieur!
Tomorrow morning.” D’Artagnan sprang from his horse, threw the bridle to Planchet, and departed at a quick pace, folding his cloak around him.
“Good Lord, how cold I am!” cried Planchet, as soon as he had lost sight of his master; and in such haste was he to warm himself that he went straight to a house set out with all the attributes of a suburban tavern, and knocked at the door.
In the meantime D’Artagnan, who had plunged into a bypath, continued his route and reached St.
Cloud; but instead of following the main street he turned behind the château, reached a sort of retired lane, and found himself soon in front of the pavilion named.
It was situated in a very private spot.
A high wall, at the angle of which was the pavilion, ran along one side of this lane, and on the other was a little garden connected with a poor cottage which was protected by a hedge from passers-by.
He gained the place appointed, and as no signal had been given him by which to announce his presence, he waited.
Not the least noise was to be heard; it might be imagined that he was a hundred miles from the capital.
D’Artagnan leaned against the hedge, after having cast a glance behind it.
Beyond that hedge, that garden, and that cottage, a dark mist enveloped with its folds that immensity where Paris slept—a vast void from which glittered a few luminous points, the funeral stars of that hell!
But for D’Artagnan all aspects were clothed happily, all ideas wore a smile, all shades were diaphanous.
The appointed hour was about to strike.
Cloud let fall slowly ten strokes from its sonorous jaws.
There was something melancholy in this brazen voice pouring out its lamentations in the middle of the night; but each of those strokes, which made up the expected hour, vibrated harmoniously to the heart of the young man.
His eyes were fixed upon the little pavilion situated at the angle of the wall, of which all the windows were closed with shutters, except one on the first story.
Through this window shone a mild light which silvered the foliage of two or three linden trees which formed a group outside the park.
There could be no doubt that behind this little window, which threw forth such friendly beams, the pretty Mme.
Bonacieux expected him.
Wrapped in this sweet idea, D’Artagnan waited half an hour without the least impatience, his eyes fixed upon that charming little abode of which he could perceive a part of the ceiling with its gilded moldings, attesting the elegance of the rest of the apartment.
This time, without knowing why, D’Artagnan felt a cold shiver run through his veins.
Perhaps the cold began to affect him, and he took a perfectly physical sensation for a moral impression.
Then the idea seized him that he had read incorrectly, and that the appointment was for eleven o’clock.
He drew near to the window, and placing himself so that a ray of light should fall upon the letter as he held it, he drew it from his pocket and read it again; but he had not been mistaken, the appointment was for ten o’clock.
He went and resumed his post, beginning to be rather uneasy at this silence and this solitude.
D’Artagnan began now really to fear that something had happened to Mme.
He clapped his hands three times—the ordinary signal of lovers; but nobody replied to him, not even an echo.
He then thought, with a touch of vexation, that perhaps the young woman had fallen asleep while waiting for him.
He approached the wall, and tried to climb it; but the wall had been recently pointed, and D’Artagnan could get no hold.
At that moment he thought of the trees, upon whose leaves the light still shone; and as one of them drooped over the road, he thought that from its branches he might get a glimpse of the interior of the pavilion.
Besides, D’Artagnan was but twenty years old, and consequently had not yet forgotten his schoolboy habits.
In an instant he was among the branches, and his keen eyes plunged through the transparent panes into the interior of the pavilion.
It was a strange thing, and one which made D’Artagnan tremble from the sole of his foot to the roots of his hair, to find that this soft light, this calm lamp, enlightened a scene of fearful disorder.
A table, which had been covered with an elegant supper, was overturned.
The decanters broken in pieces, and the fruits crushed, strewed the floor.
Everything in the apartment gave evidence of a violent and desperate struggle.
D’Artagnan even fancied he could recognize amid this strange disorder, fragments of garments, and some bloody spots staining the cloth and the curtains.
He hastened to descend into the street, with a frightful beating at his heart; he wished to see if he could find other traces of violence.
The little soft light shone on in the calmness of the night.
D’Artagnan then perceived a thing that he had not before remarked—for nothing had led him to the examination—that the ground, trampled here and hoofmarked there, presented confused traces of men and horses.
Besides, the wheels of a carriage, which appeared to have come from Paris, had made a deep impression in the soft earth, which did not extend beyond the pavilion, but turned again toward Paris.
At length D’Artagnan, in pursuing his researches, found near the wall a woman’s torn glove.
This glove, wherever it had not touched the muddy ground, was of irreproachable odor.
It was one of those perfumed gloves that lovers like to snatch from a pretty hand.
As D’Artagnan pursued his investigations, a more abundant and more icy sweat rolled in large drops from his forehead; his heart was oppressed by a horrible anguish; his respiration was broken and short.
And yet he said, to reassure himself, that this pavilion perhaps had nothing in common with Mme.
Bonacieux; that the young woman had made an appointment with him before the pavilion, and not in the pavilion; that she might have been detained in Paris by her duties, or perhaps by the jealousy of her husband.
But all these reasons were combated, destroyed, overthrown, by that feeling of intimate pain which, on certain occasions, takes possession of our being, and cries to us so as to be understood unmistakably that some great misfortune is hanging over us.
Then D’Artagnan became almost wild.
He ran along the high road, took the path he had before taken, and reaching the ferry, interrogated the boatman.
About seven o’clock in the evening, the boatman had taken over a young woman, wrapped in a black mantle, who appeared to be very anxious not to be recognized; but entirely on account of her precautions, the boatman had paid more attention to her and discovered that she was young and pretty.
Cloud, and who had reasons for not being seen, and yet D’Artagnan did not for an instant doubt that it was Mme.
Bonacieux whom the boatman had noticed.
D’Artagnan took advantage of the lamp which burned in the cabin of the ferryman to read the billet of Mme.
Bonacieux once again, and satisfy himself that he had not been mistaken, that the appointment was at St.
Cloud and not elsewhere, before the D’Estrées’s pavilion and not in another street.
Everything conspired to prove to D’Artagnan that his presentiments had not deceived him, and that a great misfortune had happened.
It appeared to him that something might have happened at the pavilion in his absence, and that fresh information awaited him.
The lane was still deserted, and the same calm soft light shone through the window.
D’Artagnan then thought of that cottage, silent and obscure, which had no doubt seen all, and could tell its tale.
The gate of the enclosure was shut; but he leaped over the hedge, and in spite of the barking of a chained-up dog, went up to the cabin.
No one answered to his first knocking.
A silence of death reigned in the cabin as in the pavilion; but as the cabin was his last resource, he knocked again.
It soon appeared to him that he heard a slight noise within—a timid noise which seemed to tremble lest it should be heard.
Then D’Artagnan ceased knocking, and prayed with an accent so full of anxiety and promises, terror and cajolery, that his voice was of a nature to reassure the most fearful.
At length an old, worm-eaten shutter was opened, or rather pushed ajar, but closed again as soon as the light from a miserable lamp which burned in the corner had shone upon the baldric, sword belt, and pistol pommels of D’Artagnan.
Nevertheless, rapid as the movement had been, D’Artagnan had had time to get a glimpse of the head of an old man.
Has anything particular happened in the neighborhood?
Speak!” The window was again opened slowly, and the same face appeared, only it was now still more pale than before.
D’Artagnan related his story simply, with the omission of names.
He told how he had a rendezvous with a young woman before that pavilion, and how, not seeing her come, he had climbed the linden tree, and by the light of the lamp had seen the disorder of the chamber.
The old man listened attentively, making a sign only that it was all so; and then, when D’Artagnan had ended, he shook his head with an air that announced nothing good.
“What do you mean?” cried D’Artagnan.
“In the name of heaven, explain yourself!” “Oh!
Monsieur,” said the old man, “ask me nothing; for if I dared tell you what I have seen, certainly no good would befall me.” “You have, then, seen something?” replied D’Artagnan.
In the shadow was a carriage with two horses, and some saddlehorses.
These horses evidently belonged to the three men, who were dressed as cavaliers.
‘Ah, my worthy gentlemen,’ cried I, ‘what do you want?’ ‘You must have a ladder?’ said he who appeared to be the leader of the party.
‘Yes, monsieur, the one with which I gather my fruit.’ ‘Lend it to us, and go into your house again; there is a crown for the annoyance we have caused you.
Only remember this—if you speak a word of what you may see or what you may hear (for you will look and you will listen, I am quite sure, however we may threaten you), you are lost.’ At these words he threw me a crown, which I picked up, and he took the ladder.
After shutting the gate behind them, I pretended to return to the house, but I immediately went out a back door, and stealing along in the shade of the hedge, I gained yonder clump of elder, from which I could hear and see everything.
The little old man remained at the coach door; the coachman took care of his horses, the lackey held the saddlehorses.
All at once great cries resounded in the pavilion, and a woman came to the window, and opened it, as if to throw herself out of it; but as soon as she perceived the other two men, she fell back and they went into the chamber.
Then I saw no more; but I heard the noise of breaking furniture.
The woman screamed, and cried for help; but her cries were soon stifled.
Two of the men appeared, bearing the woman in their arms, and carried her to the carriage, into which the little old man got after her.
The leader closed the window, came out an instant after by the door, and satisfied himself that the woman was in the carriage.
His two companions were already on horseback.
He sprang into his saddle; the lackey took his place by the coachman; the carriage went off at a quick pace, escorted by the three horsemen, and all was over.
From that moment I have neither seen nor heard anything.” D’Artagnan, entirely overcome by this terrible story, remained motionless and mute, while all the demons of anger and jealousy were howling in his heart.
He is my demon, apparently.
And the other?” “Which?” “The short one.” “Oh, he was not a gentleman, I’ll answer for it; besides, he did not wear a sword, and the others treated him with small consideration.” “Some lackey,” murmured D’Artagnan.
“Poor woman, poor woman, what have they done with you?” “You have promised to be secret, my good monsieur?” said the old man.
Be easy, I am a gentleman.
A gentleman has but his word, and I have given you mine.” With a heavy heart, D’Artagnan again bent his way toward the ferry.
Sometimes he hoped it could not be Mme.
Bonacieux, and that he should find her next day at the Louvre; sometimes he feared she had had an intrigue with another, who, in a jealous fit, had surprised her and carried her off.
“Oh, if I had my three friends here,” cried he, “I should have, at least, some hopes of finding her; but who knows what has become of them?” It was past midnight; the next thing was to find Planchet.
D’Artagnan went successively into all the cabarets in which there was a light, but could not find Planchet in any of them.
D’Artagnan had appointed six o’clock in the morning for his lackey, and wherever he might be, he was right.
Besides, it came into the young man’s mind that by remaining in the environs of the spot on which this sad event had passed, he would, perhaps, have some light thrown upon the mysterious affair.
He was compelled, then, after having swallowed the contents of his bottle, to pass the time as well as to evade suspicion, to fall into the easiest position in his corner and to sleep, whether well or ill.
D’Artagnan, be it remembered, was only twenty years old, and at that age sleep has its imprescriptible rights which it imperiously insists upon, even with the saddest hearts.
Toward six o’clock D’Artagnan awoke with that uncomfortable feeling which generally accompanies the break of day after a bad night.
He examined himself to see if advantage had been taken of his sleep, and having found his diamond ring on his finger, his purse in his pocket, and his pistols in his belt, he rose, paid for his bottle, and went out to try if he could have any better luck in his search after his lackey than he had had the night before.
The first thing he perceived through the damp gray mist was honest Planchet, who, with the two horses in hand, awaited him at the door of a little blind cabaret, before which D’Artagnan had passed without even a suspicion of its existence.
PORTHOS Instead of returning directly home, D’Artagnan alighted at the door of M. de Tréville, and ran quickly up the stairs.
M. de Tréville would doubtless give him good advice as to the whole affair.
Besides, as M. de Tréville saw the queen almost daily, he might be able to draw from her Majesty some intelligence of the poor young woman, whom they were doubtless making pay very dearly for her devotedness to her mistress.
M. de Tréville listened to the young man’s account with a seriousness which proved that he saw something else in this adventure besides a love affair.
When D’Artagnan had finished, he said, “Hum!
All this savors of his Eminence, a league off.” “But what is to be done?” said D’Artagnan.
“Nothing, absolutely nothing, at present, but quitting Paris, as I told you, as soon as possible.
I will see the queen; I will relate to her the details of the disappearance of this poor woman, of which she is no doubt ignorant.
Rely on me.” D’Artagnan knew that, although a Gascon, M. de Tréville was not in the habit of making promises, and that when by chance he did promise, he more than kept his word.
He bowed to him, then, full of gratitude for the past and for the future; and the worthy captain, who on his side felt a lively interest in this young man, so brave and so resolute, pressed his hand kindly, wishing him a pleasant journey.
Determined to put the advice of M. de Tréville in practice instantly, D’Artagnan directed his course toward the Rue des Fossoyeurs, in order to superintend the packing of his valise.
On approaching the house, he perceived M.
Bonacieux in morning costume, standing at his threshold.
All that the prudent Planchet had said to him the preceding evening about the sinister character of the old man recurred to the mind of D’Artagnan, who looked at him with more attention than he had done before.
In fact, in addition to that yellow, sickly paleness which indicates the insinuation of the bile in the blood, and which might, besides, be accidental, D’Artagnan remarked something perfidiously significant in the play of the wrinkled features of his countenance.
A rogue does not laugh in the same way that an honest man does; a hypocrite does not shed the tears of a man of good faith.
All falsehood is a mask; and however well made the mask may be, with a little attention we may always succeed in distinguishing it from the true face.
It appeared, then, to D’Artagnan that M.
Bonacieux wore a mask, and likewise that that mask was most disagreeable to look upon.
In consequence of this feeling of repugnance, he was about to pass without speaking to him, but, as he had done the day before, M.
Bonacieux accosted him.
Seven o’clock in the morning! _Peste!_ You seem to reverse ordinary customs, and come home at the hour when other people are going out.” “No one can reproach you for anything of the kind, Monsieur Bonacieux,” said the young man; “you are a model for regular people.
It is true that when a man possesses a young and pretty wife, he has no need to seek happiness elsewhere.
Happiness comes to meet him, does it not, Monsieur Bonacieux?” Bonacieux became as pale as death, and grinned a ghastly smile.
“Ah, ah!” said Bonacieux, “you are a jocular companion!
It does not appear to be very clean in the crossroads.” D’Artagnan glanced down at his boots, all covered with mud; but that same glance fell upon the shoes and stockings of the mercer, and it might have been said they had been dipped in the same mud heap.
Both were stained with splashes of mud of the same appearance.
Then a sudden idea crossed the mind of D’Artagnan.
That little stout man, short and elderly, that sort of lackey, dressed in dark clothes, treated without ceremony by the men wearing swords who composed the escort, was Bonacieux himself.
The husband had presided at the abduction of his wife.
A terrible inclination seized D’Artagnan to grasp the mercer by the throat and strangle him; but, as we have said, he was a very prudent youth, and he restrained himself.
However, the revolution which appeared upon his countenance was so visible that Bonacieux was terrified at it, and he endeavored to draw back a step or two; but as he was standing before the half of the door which was shut, the obstacle compelled him to keep his place.
“Ah, but you are joking, my worthy man!” said D’Artagnan.
“It appears to me that if my boots need a sponge, your stockings and shoes stand in equal need of a brush.
May you not have been philandering a little also, Monsieur Bonacieux?
That’s unpardonable in a man of your age, and who besides, has such a pretty wife as yours.” “Oh, Lord! no,” said Bonacieux, “but yesterday I went to St.
Mandé to make some inquiries after a servant, as I cannot possibly do without one; and the roads were so bad that I brought back all this mud, which I have not yet had time to remove.” The place named by Bonacieux as that which had been the object of his journey was a fresh proof in support of the suspicions D’Artagnan had conceived.
Bonacieux had named Mandé because Mandé was in an exactly opposite direction from St.
This probability afforded him his first consolation.
If Bonacieux knew where his wife was, one might, by extreme means, force the mercer to open his teeth and let his secret escape.
The question, then, was how to change this probability into a certainty.
“Pardon, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, if I don’t stand upon ceremony,” said D’Artagnan, “but nothing makes one so thirsty as want of sleep.
Allow me to take a glass of water in your apartment; you know that is never refused among neighbors.” Without waiting for the permission of his host, D’Artagnan went quickly into the house, and cast a rapid glance at the bed.
Bonacieux had not been abed.
He had only been back an hour or two; he had accompanied his wife to the place of her confinement, or else at least to the first relay.
“Thanks, Monsieur Bonacieux,” said D’Artagnan, emptying his glass, “that is all I wanted of you.
I will now go up into my apartment.
I will make Planchet brush my boots; and when he has done, I will, if you like, send him to you to brush your shoes.” He left the mercer quite astonished at his singular farewell, and asking himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate.
At the top of the stairs he found Planchet in a great fright.
“Ah, monsieur!” cried Planchet, as soon as he perceived his master, “here is more trouble.
I thought you would never come in.” “What’s the matter now, Planchet?” demanded D’Artagnan.
I give you a hundred, I give you a thousand times to guess, monsieur, the visit I received in your absence.” “When?” “About half an hour ago, while you were at Monsieur de Tréville’s.” “Who has been here?
“Oh, I saw the snare, and I answered you would be quite in despair on your return.
“‘Where has he gone?’ asked Monsieur de Cavois.
“‘To Troyes, in Champagne,’ I answered.
“‘And when did he set out?’ “‘Yesterday evening.’” “Planchet, my friend,” interrupted D’Artagnan, “you are really a precious fellow.” “You will understand, monsieur, I thought there would be still time, if you wish, to see Monsieur de Cavois to contradict me by saying you were not yet gone.
The falsehood would then lie at my door, and as I am not a gentleman, I may be allowed to lie.” “Be of good heart, Planchet, you shall preserve your reputation as a veracious man.
In a quarter of an hour we set off.” “That’s the advice I was about to give Monsieur; and where are we going, may I ask, without being too curious?” _“Pardieu!_ In the opposite direction to that which you said I was gone.
Besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of Grimaud, Mousqueton, and Bazin as I am to know what has become of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis?” “Yes, monsieur,” said Planchet, “and I will go as soon as you please.
Indeed, I think provincial air will suit us much better just now than the air of Paris.
So then—” “So then, pack up our luggage, Planchet, and let us be off.
On my part, I will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothing may be suspected.
By the way, Planchet, I think you are right with respect to our host, and that he is decidedly a frightfully low wretch.” “Ah, monsieur, you may take my word when I tell you anything.
I am a physiognomist, I assure you.” D’Artagnan went out first, as had been agreed upon.
Then, in order that he might have nothing to reproach himself with, he directed his steps, for the last time, toward the residences of his three friends.
No news had been received of them; only a letter, all perfumed and of an elegant writing in small characters, had come for Aramis.
D’Artagnan took charge of it.
Ten minutes afterward Planchet joined him at the stables of the Hôtel des Gardes.
D’Artagnan, in order that there might be no time lost, had saddled his horse himself.
“That’s well,” said he to Planchet, when the latter added the portmanteau to the equipment.
“Now saddle the other three horses.” “Do you think, then, monsieur, that we shall travel faster with two horses apiece?” said Planchet, with his shrewd air.
“No, Monsieur Jester,” replied D’Artagnan; “but with our four horses we may bring back our three friends, if we should have the good fortune to find them living.” “Which is a great chance,” replied Planchet, “but we must not despair of the mercy of God.” “Amen!” said D’Artagnan, getting into his saddle.
As they went from the Hôtel des Gardes, they separated, leaving the street at opposite ends, one having to quit Paris by the Barrière de la Villette and the other by the Barrière Montmartre, to meet again beyond St.
Denis—a strategic maneuver which, having been executed with equal punctuality, was crowned with the most fortunate results.
D’Artagnan and Planchet entered Pierrefitte together.
Planchet was more courageous, it must be admitted, by day than by night.
His natural prudence, however, never forsook him for a single instant.
He had forgotten not one of the incidents of the first journey, and he looked upon everybody he met on the road as an enemy.
It followed that his hat was forever in his hand, which procured him some severe reprimands from D’Artagnan, who feared that his excess of politeness would lead people to think he was the lackey of a man of no consequence.
Nevertheless, whether the passengers were really touched by the urbanity of Planchet or whether this time nobody was posted on the young man’s road, our two travelers arrived at Chantilly without any accident, and alighted at the tavern of Great St.
The host, on seeing a young man followed by a lackey with two extra horses, advanced respectfully to the door.
Now, as they had already traveled eleven leagues, D’Artagnan thought it time to stop, whether Porthos were or were not in the inn.
Perhaps it would not be prudent to ask at once what had become of the Musketeer.
D’Artagnan was therefore served with miraculous celerity.
The regiment of the Guards was recruited among the first gentlemen of the kingdom; and D’Artagnan, followed by a lackey, and traveling with four magnificent horses, despite the simplicity of his uniform, could not fail to make a sensation.
The host desired himself to serve him; which D’Artagnan perceiving, ordered two glasses to be brought, and commenced the following conversation.
“My faith, my good host,” said D’Artagnan, filling the two glasses, “I asked for a bottle of your best wine, and if you have deceived me, you will be punished in what you have sinned; for seeing that I hate drinking by myself, you shall drink with me.
But what shall we drink to, so as to avoid wounding any susceptibility?
Let us drink to the prosperity of your establishment.” “Your Lordship does me much honor,” said the host, “and I thank you sincerely for your kind wish.” “But don’t mistake,” said D’Artagnan, “there is more selfishness in my toast than perhaps you may think—for it is only in prosperous establishments that one is well received.
In hôtels that do not flourish, everything is in confusion, and the traveler is a victim to the embarrassments of his host.
Now, I travel a great deal, particularly on this road, and I wish to see all innkeepers making a fortune.” “It seems to me,” said the host, “that this is not the first time I have had the honor of seeing Monsieur.” “Bah, I have passed perhaps ten times through Chantilly, and out of the ten times I have stopped three or four times at your house at least.
I was conducting some friends, Musketeers, one of whom, by the by, had a dispute with a stranger—a man who sought a quarrel with him, for I don’t know what.” “Exactly so,” said the host; “I remember it perfectly.
It is not Monsieur Porthos that your Lordship means?” “Yes, that is my companion’s name.
We have made considerable advances; and this very morning the surgeon declared that if Monsieur Porthos did not pay him, he should look to me, as it was I who had sent for him.” “Porthos is wounded, then?” “I cannot tell you, monsieur.” “What!
Surely you ought to be able to tell me better than any other person.” “Yes; but in our situation we must not say all we know—particularly as we have been warned that our ears should answer for our tongues.” “Well, can I see Porthos?” “Certainly, monsieur.
Only warn him that it is you.” “Why should I do that?” “Because, monsieur, some mischief might happen to you.” “Of what kind, in the name of wonder?” “Monsieur Porthos may imagine you belong to the house, and in a fit of passion might run his sword through you or blow out your brains.” “What have you done to him, then?” “We have asked him for money.” “The devil!
Ah, I can understand that.
It is a demand that Porthos takes very ill when he is not in funds; but I know he must be so at present.” “We thought so, too, monsieur.
As our house is carried on very regularly, and we make out our bills every week, at the end of eight days we presented our account; but it appeared we had chosen an unlucky moment, for at the first word on the subject, he sent us to all the devils.
And with whom?” “Lord, who can say, monsieur?
With some gentleman who was traveling this way, to whom he proposed a game of _lansquenet_.” “That’s it, then, and the foolish fellow lost all he had?” “Even to his horse, monsieur; for when the gentleman was about to set out, we perceived that his lackey was saddling Monsieur Porthos’s horse, as well as his master’s.
When we observed this to him, he told us all to trouble ourselves about our own business, as this horse belonged to him.
We also informed Monsieur Porthos of what was going on; but he told us we were scoundrels to doubt a gentleman’s word, and that as he had said the horse was his, it must be so.” “That’s Porthos all over,” murmured D’Artagnan.
“Then,” continued the host, “I replied that as from the moment we seemed not likely to come to a good understanding with respect to payment, I hoped that he would have at least the kindness to grant the favor of his custom to my brother host of the Golden Eagle; but Monsieur Porthos replied that, my house being the best, he should remain where he was.
This reply was too flattering to allow me to insist on his departure.
Since that time, monsieur, nobody entered his chamber but his servant.” “What!
Mousqueton is here, then?” “Oh, yes, monsieur.
Five days after your departure, he came back, and in a very bad condition, too.
It appears that he had met with disagreeableness, likewise, on his journey.
By the word of a gentleman, you shall have no cause to repent of your confidence.” “Well, monsieur, you understand that uneasiness makes us do many things.” “What have you done?” “Oh, nothing which was not right in the character of a creditor.” “Well?” “Monsieur Porthos gave us a note for his duchess, ordering us to put it in the post.
As he could not leave his chamber, it was necessary to charge us with this commission.” “And then?” “Instead of putting the letter in the post, which is never safe, I took advantage of the journey of one of my lads to Paris, and ordered him to convey the letter to this duchess himself.
This was fulfilling the intentions of Monsieur Porthos, who had desired us to be so careful of this letter, was it not?” “Nearly so.” “Well, monsieur, do you know who this great lady is?” “No; I have heard Porthos speak of her, that’s all.” “Do you know who this pretended duchess is?
“I repeat to you, I don’t know her.” “Why, she is the old wife of a procurator* of the Châtelet, monsieur, named Madame Coquenard, who, although she is at least fifty, still gives herself jealous airs.
It struck me as very odd that a princess should live in the Rue aux Ours.” * Attorney “But how do you know all this?” “Because she flew into a great passion on receiving the letter, saying that Monsieur Porthos was a weathercock, and that she was sure it was for some woman he had received this wound.” “Has he been wounded, then?” “Oh, good Lord!
What have I said?” “You said that Porthos had received a sword cut.” “Yes, but he has forbidden me so strictly to say so.” “And why so.” “Zounds, monsieur!
Because he had boasted that he would perforate the stranger with whom you left him in dispute; whereas the stranger, on the contrary, in spite of all his rodomontades quickly threw him on his back.
As Monsieur Porthos is a very boastful man, he insists that nobody shall know he has received this wound except the duchess, whom he endeavored to interest by an account of his adventure.” “It is a wound that confines him to his bed?” “Ah, and a master stroke, too, I assure you.
Your friend’s soul must stick tight to his body.” “Were you there, then?” “Monsieur, I followed them from curiosity, so that I saw the combat without the combatants seeing me.” “And what took place?” “Oh!
They placed themselves on guard; the stranger made a feint and a lunge, and that so rapidly that when Monsieur Porthos came to the _parade_, he had already three inches of steel in his breast.
He immediately fell backward.
The stranger placed the point of his sword at his throat; and Monsieur Porthos, finding himself at the mercy of his adversary, acknowledged himself conquered.
Porthos’s chamber is, you say, on the first story, Number One?” “Yes, monsieur, the handsomest in the inn—a chamber that I could have let ten times over.” “Bah!
Yesterday he wrote again; but it was his servant who this time put the letter in the post.” “Do you say the procurator’s wife is old and ugly?” “Fifty at least, monsieur, and not at all handsome, according to Pathaud’s account.” “In that case, you may be quite at ease; she will soon be softened.
Twenty good pistoles, already, without reckoning the doctor.
He denies himself nothing; it may easily be seen he has been accustomed to live well.” “Never mind; if his mistress abandons him, he will find friends, I will answer for it.
At the top of the stairs, upon the most conspicuous door of the corridor, was traced in black ink a gigantic number “1.” D’Artagnan knocked, and upon the bidding to come in which came from inside, he entered the chamber.
Porthos was in bed, and was playing a game at _lansquenet_ with Mousqueton, to keep his hand in; while a spit loaded with partridges was turning before the fire, and on each side of a large chimneypiece, over two chafing dishes, were boiling two stewpans, from which exhaled a double odor of rabbit and fish stews, rejoicing to the smell.
In addition to this he perceived that the top of a wardrobe and the marble of a commode were covered with empty bottles.
At the sight of his friend, Porthos uttered a loud cry of joy; and Mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his place to him, and went to give an eye to the two stewpans, of which he appeared to have the particular inspection.
“Ah, _pardieu!_ Is that you?” said Porthos to D’Artagnan.
Excuse my not coming to meet you; but,” added he, looking at D’Artagnan with a certain degree of uneasiness, “you know what has happened to me?” “No.” “Has the host told you nothing, then?” “I asked after you, and came up as soon as I could.” Porthos seemed to breathe more freely.
“And what has happened to you, my dear Porthos?” continued D’Artagnan.
“Why, on making a thrust at my adversary, whom I had already hit three times, and whom I meant to finish with the fourth, I put my foot on a stone, slipped, and strained my knee.” “Truly?” “Honor!
But you, my dear D’Artagnan, what has happened to you?” “So that this strain of the knee,” continued D’Artagnan, “my dear Porthos, keeps you in bed?” “My God, that’s all.
I shall be about again in a few days.” “Why did you not have yourself conveyed to Paris?
You must be cruelly bored here.” “That was my intention; but, my dear friend, I have one thing to confess to you.” “What’s that?” “It is that as I was cruelly bored, as you say, and as I had the seventy-five pistoles in my pocket which you had distributed to me, in order to amuse myself I invited a gentleman who was traveling this way to walk up, and proposed a cast of dice.
He accepted my challenge, and, my faith, my seventy-five pistoles passed from my pocket to his, without reckoning my horse, which he won into the bargain.
But you, my dear D’Artagnan?” “What can you expect, my dear Porthos; a man is not privileged in all ways,” said D’Artagnan.
“You know the proverb ‘Unlucky at play, lucky in love.’ You are too fortunate in your love for play not to take its revenge.
What consequence can the reverses of fortune be to you?
Have you not, happy rogue that you are—have you not your duchess, who cannot fail to come to your aid?” “Well, you see, my dear D’Artagnan, with what ill luck I play,” replied Porthos, with the most careless air in the world.
“I wrote to her to send me fifty louis or so, of which I stood absolutely in need on account of my accident.” “Well?” “Well, she must be at her country seat, for she has not answered me.” “Truly?” “No; so I yesterday addressed another epistle to her, still more pressing than the first.
I confess I began to be very uneasy on your account.” “But your host behaves very well toward you, as it appears, my dear Porthos,” said D’Artagnan, directing the sick man’s attention to the full stewpans and the empty bottles.
“Only three or four days ago the impertinent jackanapes gave me his bill, and I was forced to turn both him and his bill out of the door; so that I am here something in the fashion of a conqueror, holding my position, as it were, my conquest.
So you see, being in constant fear of being forced from that position, I am armed to the teeth.” “And yet,” said D’Artagnan, laughing, “it appears to me that from time to time you must make _sorties_.” And he again pointed to the bottles and the stewpans.
“Not I, unfortunately!” said Porthos.
“This miserable strain confines me to my bed; but Mousqueton forages, and brings in provisions.
Friend Mousqueton, you see that we have a reinforcement, and we must have an increase of supplies.” “Mousqueton,” said D’Artagnan, “you must render me a service.” “What, monsieur?” “You must give your recipe to Planchet.
I may be besieged in my turn, and I shall not be sorry for him to be able to let me enjoy the same advantages with which you gratify your master.” “Lord, monsieur!
There is nothing more easy,” said Mousqueton, with a modest air.
Now, he was accustomed to walk with his fowling piece on his shoulder, behind the hedges which border the roads, and when he saw a Catholic coming alone, the Protestant religion immediately prevailed in his mind.
He lowered his gun in the direction of the traveler; then, when he was within ten paces of him, he commenced a conversation which almost always ended by the traveler’s abandoning his purse to save his life.
It goes without saying that when he saw a Huguenot coming, he felt himself filled with such ardent Catholic zeal that he could not understand how, a quarter of an hour before, he had been able to have any doubts upon the superiority of our holy religion.
For my part, monsieur, I am Catholic—my father, faithful to his principles, having made my elder brother a Huguenot.” “And what was the end of this worthy man?” asked D’Artagnan.
“Oh, of the most unfortunate kind, monsieur.
One day he was surprised in a lonely road between a Huguenot and a Catholic, with both of whom he had before had business, and who both knew him again; so they united against him and hanged him on a tree.
Then they came and boasted of their fine exploit in the cabaret of the next village, where my brother and I were drinking.” “And what did you do?” said D’Artagnan.
“We let them tell their story out,” replied Mousqueton.
“Then, as in leaving the cabaret they took different directions, my brother went and hid himself on the road of the Catholic, and I on that of the Huguenot.
Two hours after, all was over; we had done the business of both, admiring the foresight of our poor father, who had taken the precaution to bring each of us up in a different religion.” “Well, I must allow, as you say, your father was a very intelligent fellow.
And you say in his leisure moments the worthy man was a poacher?” “Yes, monsieur, and it was he who taught me to lay a snare and ground a line.
The consequence is that when I saw our laborers, which did not at all suit two such delicate stomachs as ours, I had recourse to a little of my old trade.
While walking near the wood of Monsieur le Prince, I laid a few snares in the runs; and while reclining on the banks of his Highness’s pieces of water, I slipped a few lines into his fish ponds.
So that now, thanks be to God, we do not want, as Monsieur can testify, for partridges, rabbits, carp or eels—all light, wholesome food, suitable for the sick.” “But the wine,” said D’Artagnan, “who furnishes the wine?
Your host?” “That is to say, yes and no.” “How yes and no?” “He furnishes it, it is true, but he does not know that he has that honor.” “Explain yourself, Mousqueton; your conversation is full of instructive things.” “That is it, monsieur.
It has so chanced that I met with a Spaniard in my peregrinations who had seen many countries, and among them the New World.” “What connection can the New World have with the bottles which are on the commode and the wardrobe?” “Patience, monsieur, everything will come in its turn.” “This Spaniard had in his service a lackey who had accompanied him in his voyage to Mexico.
This lackey was my compatriot; and we became the more intimate from there being many resemblances of character between us.
We loved sporting of all kinds better than anything; so that he related to me how in the plains of the Pampas the natives hunt the tiger and the wild bull with simple running nooses which they throw to a distance of twenty or thirty paces the end of a cord with such nicety; but in face of the proof I was obliged to acknowledge the truth of the recital.
My friend placed a bottle at the distance of thirty paces, and at each cast he caught the neck of the bottle in his running noose.
I practiced this exercise, and as nature has endowed me with some faculties, at this day I can throw the lasso with any man in the world.
Well, do you understand, monsieur?
Our host has a well-furnished cellar the key of which never leaves him; only this cellar has a ventilating hole.
Now through this ventilating hole I throw my lasso, and as I now know in which part of the cellar is the best wine, that’s my point for sport.
You see, monsieur, what the New World has to do with the bottles which are on the commode and the wardrobe.
Now, will you taste our wine, and without prejudice say what you think of it?” “Thank you, my friend, thank you; unfortunately, I have just breakfasted.” “Well,” said Porthos, “arrange the table, Mousqueton, and while we breakfast, D’Artagnan will relate to us what has happened to him during the ten days since he left us.” “Willingly,” said D’Artagnan.
But there the confidence of D’Artagnan stopped.
He only added that on his return from Great Britain he had brought back four magnificent horses—one for himself, and one for each of his companions; then he informed Porthos that the one intended for him was already installed in the stable of the tavern.
At this moment Planchet entered, to inform his master that the horses were sufficiently refreshed and that it would be possible to sleep at Clermont.
As D’Artagnan was tolerably reassured with regard to Porthos, and as he was anxious to obtain news of his two other friends, he held out his hand to the wounded man, and told him he was about to resume his route in order to continue his researches.
For the rest, as he reckoned upon returning by the same route in seven or eight days, if Porthos were still at the Great St.
Porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would not permit him to depart yet awhile.
Besides, it was necessary he should stay at Chantilly to wait for the answer from his duchess.
D’Artagnan wished that answer might be prompt and favorable; and having again recommended Porthos to the care of Mousqueton, and paid his bill to the host, he resumed his route with Planchet, already relieved of one of his led horses.
ARAMIS AND HIS THESIS D’Artagnan had said nothing to Porthos of his wound or of his procurator’s wife.
Consequently he had appeared to believe all that the vainglorious Musketeer had told him, convinced that no friendship will hold out against a surprised secret.
Besides, we feel always a sort of mental superiority over those whose lives we know better than they suppose.
In his projects of intrigue for the future, and determined as he was to make his three friends the instruments of his fortune, D’Artagnan was not sorry at getting into his grasp beforehand the invisible strings by which he reckoned upon moving them.
And yet, as he journeyed along, a profound sadness weighed upon his heart.
Bonacieux who was to have paid him the price of his devotedness; but let us hasten to say that this sadness possessed the young man less from the regret of the happiness he had missed, than from the fear he entertained that some serious misfortune had befallen the poor woman.
For himself, he had no doubt she was a victim of the cardinal’s vengeance; and, as was well known, the vengeance of his Eminence was terrible.
How he had found grace in the eyes of the minister, he did not know; but without doubt M. de Cavois would have revealed this to him if the captain of the Guards had found him at home.
Nothing makes time pass more quickly or more shortens a journey than a thought which absorbs in itself all the faculties of the organization of him who thinks.
External existence then resembles a sleep of which this thought is the dream.
By its influence, time has no longer measure, space has no longer distance.
Of the interval passed, nothing remains in the memory but a vague mist in which a thousand confused images of trees, mountains, and landscapes are lost.
It was as a prey to this hallucination that D’Artagnan traveled, at whatever pace his horse pleased, the six or eight leagues that separated Chantilly from Crèvecœur, without his being able to remember on his arrival in the village any of the things he had passed or met with on the road.
There only his memory returned to him.
He shook his head, perceived the cabaret at which he had left Aramis, and putting his horse to the trot, he shortly pulled up at the door.
This time it was not a host but a hostess who received him.
D’Artagnan was a physiognomist.
His eye took in at a glance the plump, cheerful countenance of the mistress of the place, and he at once perceived there was no occasion for dissembling with her, or of fearing anything from one blessed with such a joyous physiognomy.
“My good dame,” asked D’Artagnan, “can you tell me what has become of one of my friends, whom we were obliged to leave here about a dozen days ago?” “A handsome young man, three- or four-and-twenty years old, mild, amiable, and well made?” “That is he—wounded in the shoulder.” “Just so.
Well, monsieur, he is still here.” “Ah, _pardieu!_ My dear dame,” said D’Artagnan, springing from his horse, and throwing the bridle to Planchet, “you restore me to life; where is this dear Aramis?
Let me embrace him, I am in a hurry to see him again.” “Pardon, monsieur, but I doubt whether he can see you at this moment.” “Why so?
Bazin was stationed in the corridor, and barred his passage with the more intrepidity that, after many years of trial, Bazin found himself near a result of which he had ever been ambitious.
In fact, the dream of poor Bazin had always been to serve a churchman; and he awaited with impatience the moment, always in the future, when Aramis would throw aside the uniform and assume the cassock.
The daily-renewed promise of the young man that the moment would not long be delayed, had alone kept him in the service of a Musketeer—a service in which, he said, his soul was in constant jeopardy.
In all probability, this time his master would not retract.
The union of physical pain with moral uneasiness had produced the effect so long desired.
Aramis, suffering at once in body and mind, had at length fixed his eyes and his thoughts upon religion, and he had considered as a warning from heaven the double accident which had happened to him; that is to say, the sudden disappearance of his mistress and the wound in his shoulder.
It may be easily understood that in the present disposition of his master nothing could be more disagreeable to Bazin than the arrival of D’Artagnan, which might cast his master back again into that vortex of mundane affairs which had so long carried him away.
He resolved, then, to defend the door bravely; and as, betrayed by the mistress of the inn, he could not say that Aramis was absent, he endeavored to prove to the newcomer that it would be the height of indiscretion to disturb his master in his pious conference, which had commenced with the morning and would not, as Bazin said, terminate before night.
But D’Artagnan took very little heed of the eloquent discourse of M.
Bazin; and as he had no desire to support a polemic discussion with his friend’s valet, he simply moved him out of the way with one hand, and with the other turned the handle of the door of Number Five.
The door opened, and D’Artagnan went into the chamber.
Aramis, in a black gown, his head enveloped in a sort of round flat cap, not much unlike a _calotte_, was seated before an oblong table, covered with rolls of paper and enormous volumes in folio.
At his right hand was placed the superior of the Jesuits, and on his left the curate of Montdidier.
The curtains were half drawn, and only admitted the mysterious light calculated for beatific reveries.
All the mundane objects that generally strike the eye on entering the room of a young man, particularly when that young man is a Musketeer, had disappeared as if by enchantment; and for fear, no doubt, that the sight of them might bring his master back to ideas of this world, Bazin had laid his hands upon sword, pistols, plumed hat, and embroideries and laces of all kinds and sorts.
In their stead D’Artagnan thought he perceived in an obscure corner a discipline cord suspended from a nail in the wall.
At the noise made by D’Artagnan in entering, Aramis lifted up his head, and beheld his friend; but to the great astonishment of the young man, the sight of him did not produce much effect upon the Musketeer, so completely was his mind detached from the things of this world.
“Good day, dear D’Artagnan,” said Aramis; “believe me, I am glad to see you.” “So am I delighted to see you,” said D’Artagnan, “although I am not yet sure that it is Aramis I am speaking to.” “To himself, my friend, to himself!
But what makes you doubt it?” “I was afraid I had made a mistake in the chamber, and that I had found my way into the apartment of some churchman.
Then another error seized me on seeing you in company with these gentlemen—I was afraid you were dangerously ill.” The two men in black, who guessed D’Artagnan’s meaning, darted at him a glance which might have been thought threatening; but D’Artagnan took no heed of it.
“I disturb you, perhaps, my dear Aramis,” continued D’Artagnan, “for by what I see, I am led to believe that you are confessing to these gentlemen.” Aramis colored imperceptibly.
Oh, quite the contrary, dear friend, I swear; and as a proof of what I say, permit me to declare I am rejoiced to see you safe and sound.” “Ah, he’ll come round,” thought D’Artagnan; “that’s not bad!” “This gentleman, who is my friend, has just escaped from a serious danger,” continued Aramis, with unction, pointing to D’Artagnan with his hand, and addressing the two ecclesiastics.
“Praise God, monsieur,” replied they, bowing together.
“I have not failed to do so, your Reverences,” replied the young man, returning their salutation.
“You arrive in good time, dear D’Artagnan,” said Aramis, “and by taking part in our discussion may assist us with your intelligence.
“On the contrary,” replied Aramis, “your opinion will be very valuable.
The question is this: Monsieur the Principal thinks that my thesis ought to be dogmatic and didactic.” “Your thesis!
“In the examination which precedes ordination, a thesis is always a requisite.” “Ordination!” cried D’Artagnan, who could not believe what the hostess and Bazin had successively told him; and he gazed, half stupefied, upon the three persons before him.
“Which means,” resumed Aramis, that he might perfectly understand, “‘The two hands are indispensable for priests of the inferior orders, when they bestow the benediction.’” “An admirable subject!” cried the Jesuit.
“Admirable and dogmatic!” repeated the curate, who, about as strong as D’Artagnan with respect to Latin, carefully watched the Jesuit in order to keep step with him, and repeated his words like an echo.
As to D’Artagnan, he remained perfectly insensible to the enthusiasm of the two men in black.
“Yes, admirable! _prorsus admirabile!_” continued Aramis; “but which requires a profound study of both the Scriptures and the Fathers.
Now, I have confessed to these learned ecclesiastics, and that in all humility, that the duties of mounting guard and the service of the king have caused me to neglect study a little.
I should find myself, therefore, more at my ease, _facilius natans_, in a subject of my own choice, which would be to these hard theological questions what morals are to metaphysics in philosophy.” D’Artagnan began to be tired, and so did the curate.
“See what an exordium!” cried the Jesuit.
“Exordium,” repeated the curate, for the sake of saying something.
“_Quemadmodum inter cœlorum immensitatem_.” Aramis cast a glance upon D’Artagnan to see what effect all this produced, and found his friend gaping enough to split his jaws.
“Let us speak French, my father,” said he to the Jesuit; “Monsieur d’Artagnan will enjoy our conversation better.” “Yes,” replied D’Artagnan; “I am fatigued with reading, and all this Latin confuses me.” “Certainly,” replied the Jesuit, a little put out, while the curate, greatly delighted, turned upon D’Artagnan a look full of gratitude.
Moses, the servant of God—he was but a servant, please to understand—Moses blessed with the hands; he held out both his arms while the Hebrews beat their enemies, and then he blessed them with his two hands.
Besides, what does the Gospel say? _Imponite manus_, and not _manum_—place the _hands_, not the _hand_.” “Place the _hands_,” repeated the curate, with a gesture.
Peter, on the contrary, of whom the Popes are the successors,” continued the Jesuit; “_porrige digitos_—present the fingers.
The Pope, therefore blesses with the fingers.
With _three_ fingers, to be sure—one for the Father, one for the Son, and one for the Holy Ghost.” All crossed themselves.
D’Artagnan thought it was proper to follow this example.
“The Pope is the successor of St.
Peter, and represents the three divine powers; the rest—_ordines inferiores_—of the ecclesiastical hierarchy bless in the name of the holy archangels and angels.
The most humble clerks such as our deacons and sacristans, bless with holy water sprinklers, which resemble an infinite number of blessing fingers.
There is the subject simplified. _Argumentum omni denudatum ornamento_.
I could make of that subject two volumes the size of this,” continued the Jesuit; and in his enthusiasm he struck a St.
Chrysostom in folio, which made the table bend beneath its weight.
D’Artagnan trembled.
“_Certes_,” said Aramis, “I do justice to the beauties of this thesis; but at the same time I perceive it would be overwhelming for me.
I had chosen this text—tell me, dear D’Artagnan, if it is not to your taste—‘_Non inutile est desiderium in oblatione_’; that is, ‘A little regret is not unsuitable in an offering to the Lord.’” “Stop there!” cried the Jesuit, “for that thesis touches closely upon heresy.
There is a proposition almost like it in the _Augustinus_ of the heresiarch Jansenius, whose book will sooner or later be burned by the hands of the executioner.
You are inclining toward false doctrines, my young friend; you will be lost.” “You will be lost,” said the curate, shaking his head sorrowfully.
“You approach that famous point of free will which is a mortal rock.
You face the insinuations of the Pelagians and the semi-Pelagians.” “But, my Reverend—” replied Aramis, a little amazed by the shower of arguments that poured upon his head.
“How will you prove,” continued the Jesuit, without allowing him time to speak, “that we ought to regret the world when we offer ourselves to God?
To regret the world is to regret the devil; that is my conclusion.” “And that is mine also,” said the curate.
“_Desideras diabolum_, unhappy man!” cried the Jesuit.
Ah, my young friend,” added the curate, groaning, “do not regret the devil, I implore you!” D’Artagnan felt himself bewildered.
It seemed to him as though he were in a madhouse, and was becoming as mad as those he saw.
He was, however, forced to hold his tongue from not comprehending half the language they employed.
“But listen to me, then,” resumed Aramis with politeness mingled with a little impatience.
“I do not say I regret; no, I will never pronounce that sentence, which would not be orthodox.” The Jesuit raised his hands toward heaven, and the curate did the same.
“No; but pray grant me that it is acting with an ill grace to offer to the Lord only that with which we are perfectly disgusted!
Don’t you think so, D’Artagnan?” “I think so, indeed,” cried he.
“This is the point of departure; it is a syllogism.
The world is not wanting in attractions.
I quit the world; then I make a sacrifice.
Now, the Scripture says positively, ‘Make a sacrifice unto the Lord.’” “That is true,” said his antagonists.
“And then,” said Aramis, pinching his ear to make it red, as he rubbed his hands to make them white, “and then I made a certain _rondeau_ upon it last year, which I showed to Monsieur Voiture, and that great man paid me a thousand compliments.” “A _rondeau!_” said the Jesuit, disdainfully.
“A _rondeau!_” said the curate, mechanically.
Repeat it!” cried D’Artagnan; “it will make a little change.” “Not so, for it is religious,” replied Aramis; “it is theology in verse.” “The devil!” said D’Artagnan.
The Jesuit persisted in his opinion.
“Beware of a profane taste in your theological style.
What says Augustine on this subject: ‘_Severus sit clericorum verbo_.’” “Yes, let the sermon be clear,” said the curate.
“Now,” hastily interrupted the Jesuit, on seeing that his acolyte was going astray, “now your thesis would please the ladies; it would have the success of one of Monsieur Patru’s pleadings.” “Please God!” cried Aramis, transported.
You follow the world, my young friend, and I tremble lest grace prove not efficacious.” “Be satisfied, my reverend father, I can answer for myself.” “Mundane presumption!” “I know myself, Father; my resolution is irrevocable.” “Then you persist in continuing that thesis?” “I feel myself called upon to treat that, and no other.
“Farewell, my son,” said the curate, “till tomorrow.” “Till tomorrow, rash youth,” said the Jesuit.
Heaven grant that this light prove not a devouring fire!” D’Artagnan, who for an hour past had been gnawing his nails with impatience, was beginning to attack the quick.
The two men in black rose, bowed to Aramis and D’Artagnan, and advanced toward the door.
Bazin, who had been standing listening to all this controversy with a pious jubilation, sprang toward them, took the breviary of the curate and the missal of the Jesuit, and walked respectfully before them to clear their way.
Aramis conducted them to the foot of the stairs, and then immediately came up again to D’Artagnan, whose senses were still in a state of confusion.
When left alone, the two friends at first kept an embarrassed silence.
It however became necessary for one of them to break it first, and as D’Artagnan appeared determined to leave that honor to his companion, Aramis said, “you see that I am returned to my fundamental ideas.” “Yes, efficacious grace has touched you, as that gentleman said just now.” “Oh, these plans of retreat have been formed for a long time.
Oh, D’Artagnan!” “The devil!
Why, people jest with death.” “And people are wrong, D’Artagnan; for death is the door which leads to perdition or to salvation.” “Granted; but if you please, let us not theologize, Aramis.
As for me, I have almost forgotten the little Latin I have ever known.
Then I confess to you that I have eaten nothing since ten o’clock this morning, and I am devilish hungry.” “We will dine directly, my friend; only you must please to remember that this is Friday.
If you can be satisfied with my dinner—it consists of cooked tetragones and fruits.” “What do you mean by tetragones?” asked D’Artagnan, uneasily.
What will Monsieur de Tréville say?
They will treat you as a deserter, I warn you.” “I do not enter the Church; I re-enter it.
I deserted the Church for the world, for you know that I forced myself when I became a Musketeer.” “I?
I know nothing about it.” “You don’t know I quit the seminary?” “Not at all.” “This is my story, then.
Besides, the Scriptures say, ‘Confess yourselves to one another,’ and I confess to you, D’Artagnan.” “And I give you absolution beforehand.
You see I am a good sort of a man.” “Do not jest about holy things, my friend.” “Go on, then, I listen.” “I had been at the seminary from nine years old; in three days I should have been twenty.
I was about to become an abbé, and all was arranged.
One evening I went, according to custom, to a house which I frequented with much pleasure: when one is young, what can be expected?—one is weak.
An officer who saw me, with a jealous eye, reading the _Lives of the Saints_ to the mistress of the house, entered suddenly and without being announced.
That evening I had translated an episode of Judith, and had just communicated my verses to the lady, who gave me all sorts of compliments, and leaning on my shoulder, was reading them a second time with me.
He said nothing; but when I went out he followed, and quickly came up with me.
‘Monsieur the Abbé,’ said he, ‘do you like blows with a cane?’ ‘I cannot say, monsieur,’ answered I; ‘no one has ever dared to give me any.’ ‘Well, listen to me, then, Monsieur the Abbé!
If you venture again into the house in which I have met you this evening, I will dare it myself.’ I really think I must have been frightened.
I returned to the seminary.
“I am a gentleman born, and my blood is warm, as you may have remarked, my dear D’Artagnan.
The insult was terrible, and although unknown to the rest of the world, I felt it live and fester at the bottom of my heart.
I informed my superiors that I did not feel myself sufficiently prepared for ordination, and at my request the ceremony was postponed for a year.
I sought out the best fencing master in Paris, I made an agreement with him to take a lesson every day, and every day for a year I took that lesson.
Then, on the anniversary of the day on which I had been insulted, I hung my cassock on a peg, assumed the costume of a cavalier, and went to a ball given by a lady friend of mine and to which I knew my man was invited.
It was in the Rue des France-Bourgeois, close to La Force.
As I expected, my officer was there.
I went up to him as he was singing a love ditty and looking tenderly at a lady, and interrupted him exactly in the middle of the second couplet.
‘Monsieur,’ said I, ‘does it still displease you that I should frequent a certain house of La Rue Payenne?
The officer looked at me with astonishment, and then said, ‘What is your business with me, monsieur?
I do not know you.’ ‘I am,’ said I, ‘the little abbé who reads _Lives of the Saints_, and translates Judith into verse.’ ‘Ah, ah!
I recollect now,’ said the officer, in a jeering tone; ‘well, what do you want with me?’ ‘I want you to spare time to take a walk with me.’ ‘Tomorrow morning, if you like, with the greatest pleasure.’ ‘No, not tomorrow morning, if you please, but immediately.’ ‘If you absolutely insist.’ ‘I do insist upon it.’ ‘Come, then.
Ladies,’ said the officer, ‘do not disturb yourselves; allow me time just to kill this gentleman, and I will return and finish the last couplet.’ “We went out.
I took him to the Rue Payenne, to exactly the same spot where, a year before, at the very same hour, he had paid me the compliment I have related to you.
It was a superb moonlight night.
We immediately drew, and at the first pass I laid him stark dead.” “The devil!” cried D’Artagnan.
“Now,” continued Aramis, “as the ladies did not see the singer come back, and as he was found in the Rue Payenne with a great sword wound through his body, it was supposed that I had accommodated him thus; and the matter created some scandal which obliged me to renounce the cassock for a time.
Athos, whose acquaintance I made about that period, and Porthos, who had in addition to my lessons taught me some effective tricks of fence, prevailed upon me to solicit the uniform of a Musketeer.
The king entertained great regard for my father, who had fallen at the siege of Arras, and the uniform was granted.
You may understand that the moment has come for me to re-enter the bosom of the Church.” “And why today, rather than yesterday or tomorrow?
What has happened to you today, to raise all these melancholy ideas?” “This wound, my dear D’Artagnan, has been a warning to me from heaven.” “This wound?
Bah, it is now nearly healed, and I am sure it is not that which gives you the most pain.” “What, then?” said Aramis, blushing.
“Ah,” said he, dissembling his emotion under a feigned carelessness, “do not talk of such things, and suffer love pains? _Vanitas vanitatum!_ According to your idea, then, my brain is turned.
And for whom—for some _grisette_, some chambermaid with whom I have trifled in some garrison?
And who am I, to nourish such ambition?
A poor Musketeer, a beggar, an unknown—who hates slavery, and finds himself ill-placed in the world.” “Aramis, Aramis!” cried D’Artagnan, looking at his friend with an air of doubt.
Life is full of humiliations and sorrows,” continued he, becoming still more melancholy; “all the ties which attach him to life break in the hand of man, particularly the golden ties.
Oh, my dear D’Artagnan,” resumed Aramis, giving to his voice a slight tone of bitterness, “trust me!
Beware of giving anyone the clue to your griefs; the curious suck our tears as flies suck the blood of a wounded hart.” “Alas, my dear Aramis,” said D’Artagnan, in his turn heaving a profound sigh, “that is my story you are relating!” “How?” “Yes; a woman whom I love, whom I adore, has just been torn from me by force.
I do not know where she is or whither they have conducted her.
You are my friend today; tomorrow you will be no more to me than a shadow, or rather, even, you will no longer exist.
As for the world, it is a sepulcher and nothing else.” “The devil!
My vocation commands me; it carries me away.” D’Artagnan smiled, but made no answer.
Aramis continued, “And yet, while I do belong to the earth, I wish to speak of you—of our friends.” “And on my part,” said D’Artagnan, “I wished to speak of you, but I find you so completely detached from everything!
The world is a sepulcher!’” “Alas, you will find it so yourself,” said Aramis, with a sigh.
“Well, then, let us say no more about it,” said D’Artagnan; “and let us burn this letter, which, no doubt, announces to you some fresh infidelity of your _grisette_ or your chambermaid.” “What letter?” cried Aramis, eagerly.
I must have lost it,” said the young man maliciously, pretending to search for it.
“But fortunately the world is a sepulcher; the men, and consequently the women, are but shadows, and love is a sentiment to which you cry, ‘Fie!
Fie!’” “D’Artagnan, D’Artagnan,” cried Aramis, “you are killing me!” “Well, here it is at last!” said D’Artagnan, as he drew the letter from his pocket.
Aramis made a bound, seized the letter, read it, or rather devoured it, his countenance radiant.
“This same waiting maid seems to have an agreeable style,” said the messenger, carelessly.
“Thanks, D’Artagnan, thanks!” cried Aramis, almost in a state of delirium.
“She was forced to return to Tours; she is not faithless; she still loves me!
Happiness almost stifles me!” The two friends began to dance around the venerable St.
Chrysostom, kicking about famously the sheets of the thesis, which had fallen on the floor.
“Be off, you wretch!” cried Aramis, throwing his skullcap in his face.
“Return whence you came; take back those horrible vegetables, and that poor kickshaw!
Order a larded hare, a fat capon, mutton leg dressed with garlic, and four bottles of old Burgundy.” Bazin, who looked at his master, without comprehending the cause of this change, in a melancholy manner, allowed the omelet to slip into the spinach, and the spinach onto the floor.
“Now this is the moment to consecrate your existence to the King of kings,” said D’Artagnan, “if you persist in offering him a civility. _Non inutile desiderium oblatione_.” “Go to the devil with your Latin.
Let us drink, my dear D’Artagnan, _morbleu!_ Let us drink while the wine is fresh!
Let us drink heartily, and while we do so, tell me a little of what is going on in the world yonder.” Chapter XXVII.
THE WIFE OF ATHOS We have now to search for Athos,” said D’Artagnan to the vivacious Aramis, when he had informed him of all that had passed since their departure from the capital, and an excellent dinner had made one of them forget his thesis and the other his fatigue.
“Do you think, then, that any harm can have happened to him?” asked Aramis.
“Athos is so cool, so brave, and handles his sword so skillfully.” “No doubt.
This is why I wish to set out again as soon as possible.” “I will try to accompany you,” said Aramis, “though I scarcely feel in a condition to mount on horseback.
Yesterday I undertook to employ that cord which you see hanging against the wall, but pain prevented my continuing the pious exercise.” “That’s the first time I ever heard of anybody trying to cure gunshot wounds with cat-o’-nine-tails; but you were ill, and illness renders the head weak, therefore you may be excused.” “When do you mean to set out?” “Tomorrow at daybreak.
Sleep as soundly as you can tonight, and tomorrow, if you can, we will take our departure together.” “Till tomorrow, then,” said Aramis; “for iron-nerved as you are, you must need repose.” The next morning, when D’Artagnan entered Aramis’s chamber, he found him at the window.
“What are you looking at?” asked D’Artagnan.
I am admiring three magnificent horses which the stable boys are leading about.
It would be a pleasure worthy of a prince to travel upon such horses.” “Well, my dear Aramis, you may enjoy that pleasure, for one of those three horses is yours.” “Ah, bah!
On my soul, handsome stirrups! _Holà_, Bazin, come here this minute.” Bazin appeared on the threshold, dull and spiritless.
“That last order is useless,” interrupted D’Artagnan; “there are loaded pistols in your holsters.” Bazin sighed.
“Come, Monsieur Bazin, make yourself easy,” said D’Artagnan; “people of all conditions gain the kingdom of heaven.” “Monsieur was already such a good theologian,” said Bazin, almost weeping; “he might have become a bishop, and perhaps a cardinal.” “Well, but my poor Bazin, reflect a little.
Of what use is it to be a churchman, pray?
You do not avoid going to war by that means; you see, the cardinal is about to make the next campaign, helm on head and partisan in hand.
And Monsieur de Nogaret de la Valette, what do you say of him?
He is a cardinal likewise.
“I know it, monsieur; everything is turned topsy-turvy in the world nowadays.” While this dialogue was going on, the two young men and the poor lackey descended.
“Hold my stirrup, Bazin,” cried Aramis; and Aramis sprang into the saddle with his usual grace and agility, but after a few vaults and curvets of the noble animal his rider felt his pains come on so insupportably that he turned pale and became unsteady in his seat.
D’Artagnan, who, foreseeing such an event, had kept his eye on him, sprang toward him, caught him in his arms, and assisted him to his chamber.
“That’s all right, my dear Aramis, take care of yourself,” said he; “I will go alone in search of Athos.” “You are a man of brass,” replied Aramis.
No more theses, no more glosses upon the fingers or upon benedictions, hey?” Aramis smiled.
“Yes, I dare say; verses perfumed with the odor of the billet from the attendant of Madame de Chevreuse.
As to the horse, ride him a little every day, and that will accustom you to his maneuvers.” “Oh, make yourself easy on that head,” replied Aramis.
“You will find me ready to follow you.” They took leave of each other, and in ten minutes, after having commended his friend to the cares of the hostess and Bazin, D’Artagnan was trotting along in the direction of Amiens.
The position in which he had left him was critical.
He probably had succumbed.
This idea, while darkening his brow, drew several sighs from him, and caused him to formulate to himself a few vows of vengeance.
Of all his friends, Athos was the eldest, and the least resembling him in appearance, in his tastes and sympathies.
Yet he entertained a marked preference for this gentleman.
Indeed, when placed beside M. de Tréville, the elegant and noble courtier, Athos in his most cheerful days might advantageously sustain a comparison.
He was of middle height; but his person was so admirably shaped and so well proportioned that more than once in his struggles with Porthos he had overcome the giant whose physical strength was proverbial among the Musketeers.
His head, with piercing eyes, a straight nose, a chin cut like that of Brutus, had altogether an indefinable character of grandeur and grace.
His hands, of which he took little care, were the despair of Aramis, who cultivated his with almond paste and perfumed oil.
The sound of his voice was at once penetrating and melodious; and then, that which was inconceivable in Athos, who was always retiring, was that delicate knowledge of the world and of the usages of the most brilliant society—those manners of a high degree which appeared, as if unconsciously to himself, in his least actions.
If a repast were on foot, Athos presided over it better than any other, placing every guest exactly in the rank which his ancestors had earned for him or that he had made for himself.
If a question in heraldry were started, Athos knew all the noble families of the kingdom, their genealogy, their alliances, their coats of arms, and the origin of them.
Etiquette had no minutiæ unknown to him.
He was profoundly versed in hunting and falconry, and had one day when conversing on this great art astonished even Louis XIII. himself, who took a pride in being considered a past master therein.
Like all the great nobles of that period, Athos rode and fenced to perfection.
But still further, his education had been so little neglected, even with respect to scholastic studies, so rare at this time among gentlemen, that he smiled at the scraps of Latin which Aramis sported and which Porthos pretended to understand.
Two or three times, even, to the great astonishment of his friends, he had, when Aramis allowed some rudimental error to escape him, replaced a verb in its right tense and a noun in its case.
Besides, his probity was irreproachable, in an age in which soldiers compromised so easily with their religion and their consciences, lovers with the rigorous delicacy of our era, and the poor with God’s Seventh Commandment.
This Athos, then, was a very extraordinary man.
And yet this nature so distinguished, this creature so beautiful, this essence so fine, was seen to turn insensibly toward material life, as old men turn toward physical and moral imbecility.
Athos, in his hours of gloom—and these hours were frequent—was extinguished as to the whole of the luminous portion of him, and his brilliant side disappeared as into profound darkness.
Then the demigod vanished; he remained scarcely a man.
His head hanging down, his eye dull, his speech slow and painful, Athos would look for hours together at his bottle, his glass, or at Grimaud, who, accustomed to obey him by signs, read in the faint glance of his master his least desire, and satisfied it immediately.
If the four friends were assembled at one of these moments, a word, thrown forth occasionally with a violent effort, was the share Athos furnished to the conversation.
In exchange for his silence Athos drank enough for four, and without appearing to be otherwise affected by wine than by a more marked constriction of the brow and by a deeper sadness.
D’Artagnan, whose inquiring disposition we are acquainted with, had not—whatever interest he had in satisfying his curiosity on this subject—been able to assign any cause for these fits, or for the periods of their recurrence.
Athos never received any letters; Athos never had concerns which all his friends did not know.
It could not be said that it was wine which produced this sadness; for in truth he only drank to combat this sadness, which wine however, as we have said, rendered still darker.
This excess of bilious humor could not be attributed to play; for unlike Porthos, who accompanied the variations of chance with songs or oaths, Athos when he won remained as unmoved as when he lost.
Neither was it, as with our neighbors, the English, an atmospheric influence which darkened his countenance; for the sadness generally became more intense toward the fine season of the year.
June and July were the terrible months with Athos.
He shrugged his shoulders when people spoke of the future.
His secret, then, was in the past, as had often been vaguely said to D’Artagnan.
This mysterious shade, spread over his whole person, rendered still more interesting the man whose eyes or mouth, even in the most complete intoxication, had never revealed anything, however skillfully questions had been put to him.
“Well,” thought D’Artagnan, “poor Athos is perhaps at this moment dead, and dead by my fault—for it was I who dragged him into this affair, of which he did not know the origin, of which he is ignorant of the result, and from which he can derive no advantage.” “Without reckoning, monsieur,” added Planchet to his master’s audibly expressed reflections, “that we perhaps owe our lives to him.
Do you remember how he cried, ‘On, D’Artagnan, on, I am taken’?
And when he had discharged his two pistols, what a terrible noise he made with his sword!
One might have said that twenty men, or rather twenty mad devils, were fighting.” These words redoubled the eagerness of D’Artagnan, who urged his horse, though he stood in need of no incitement, and they proceeded at a rapid pace.
About eleven o’clock in the morning they perceived Amiens, and at half past eleven they were at the door of the cursed inn.
D’Artagnan had often meditated against the perfidious host one of those hearty vengeances which offer consolation while they are hoped for.
He entered the hostelry with his hat pulled over his eyes, his left hand on the pommel of the sword, and cracking his whip with his right hand.
“Do you remember me?” said he to the host, who advanced to greet him.
“I have not that honor, monseigneur,” replied the latter, his eyes dazzled by the brilliant style in which D’Artagnan traveled.
“What, you don’t know me?” “No, monseigneur.” “Well, two words will refresh your memory.
What have you done with that gentleman against whom you had the audacity, about twelve days ago, to make an accusation of passing false money?” The host became as pale as death; for D’Artagnan had assumed a threatening attitude, and Planchet modeled himself after his master.
“Ah, monseigneur, do not mention it!” cried the host, in the most pitiable voice imaginable.
“Ah, monseigneur, how dearly have I paid for that fault, unhappy wretch as I am!” “That gentleman, I say, what has become of him?” “Deign to listen to me, monseigneur, and be merciful!
Sit down, in mercy!” D’Artagnan, mute with anger and anxiety, took a seat in the threatening attitude of a judge.
Planchet glared fiercely over the back of his armchair.
“Here is the story, monseigneur,” resumed the trembling host; “for I now recollect you.
Monseigneur, I was furnished with a description of your horses, your lackeys, your countenances—nothing was omitted.” “Go on, go on!” said D’Artagnan, who quickly understood whence such an exact description had come.
“I took then, in conformity with the orders of the authorities, who sent me a reinforcement of six men, such measures as I thought necessary to get possession of the persons of the pretended coiners.” “Again!” said D’Artagnan, whose ears chafed terribly under the repetition of this word _coiners_.
“Pardon me, monseigneur, for saying such things, but they form my excuse.
The authorities had terrified me, and you know that an innkeeper must keep on good terms with the authorities.” “But once again, that gentleman—where is he?
Is he living?” “Patience, monseigneur, we are coming to it.
There happened then that which you know, and of which your precipitate departure,” added the host, with an acuteness that did not escape D’Artagnan, “appeared to authorize the issue.
That gentleman, your friend, defended himself desperately.
His lackey, who, by an unforeseen piece of ill luck, had quarreled with the officers, disguised as stable lads—” “Miserable scoundrel!” cried D’Artagnan, “you were all in the plot, then!
And I really don’t know what prevents me from exterminating you all.” “Alas, monseigneur, we were not in the plot, as you will soon see.
As we were sure of finding him there, we left him alone.” “Yes,” said D’Artagnan, “you did not really wish to kill; you only wished to imprison him.” “Good God!
To imprison him, monseigneur?
Why, he imprisoned himself, I swear to you he did.
In the first place he had made rough work of it; one man was killed on the spot, and two others were severely wounded.
The dead man and the two wounded were carried off by their comrades, and I have heard nothing of either of them since.
As for myself, as soon as I recovered my senses I went to Monsieur the Governor, to whom I related all that had passed, and asked, what I should do with my prisoner.
Monsieur the Governor was all astonishment.
He told me he knew nothing about the matter, that the orders I had received did not come from him, and that if I had the audacity to mention his name as being concerned in this disturbance he would have me hanged.
Ah, monsieur, he was no longer a man, he was a devil!
To my offer of liberty, he replied that it was nothing but a snare, and that before he came out he intended to impose his own conditions.
I told him very humbly—for I could not conceal from myself the scrape I had got into by laying hands on one of his Majesty’s Musketeers—I told him I was quite ready to submit to his conditions.
“‘In the first place,’ said he, ‘I wish my lackey placed with me, fully armed.’ We hastened to obey this order; for you will please to understand, monsieur, we were disposed to do everything your friend could desire.
Monsieur Grimaud (he told us his name, although he does not talk much)—Monsieur Grimaud, then, went down to the cellar, wounded as he was; then his master, having admitted him, barricaded the door afresh, and ordered us to remain quietly in our own bar.” “But where is Athos now?” cried D’Artagnan.
“Where is Athos?” “In the cellar, monsieur.” “What, you scoundrel!
Have you kept him in the cellar all this time?” “Merciful heaven!
If you could but persuade him to come out, monsieur, I should owe you the gratitude of my whole life; I should adore you as my patron saint!” “Then he is there?
I shall find him there?” “Without doubt you will, monsieur; he persists in remaining there.
It is not of bread and meat of which he makes the greatest consumption.
I once endeavored to go down with two of my servants; but he flew into terrible rage.
I heard the noise he made in loading his pistols, and his servant in loading his musketoon.
Then, when we asked them what were their intentions, the master replied that he had forty charges to fire, and that he and his lackey would fire to the last one before he would allow a single soul of us to set foot in the cellar.
Upon this I went and complained to the governor, who replied that I only had what I deserved, and that it would teach me to insult honorable gentlemen who took up their abode in my house.” “So that since that time—” replied D’Artagnan, totally unable to refrain from laughing at the pitiable face of the host.
“So from that time, monsieur,” continued the latter, “we have led the most miserable life imaginable; for you must know, monsieur, that all our provisions are in the cellar.
There is our wine in bottles, and our wine in casks; the beer, the oil, and the spices, the bacon, and sausages.
And as we are prevented from going down there, we are forced to refuse food and drink to the travelers who come to the house; so that our hostelry is daily going to ruin.
Could you not perceive by our appearance that we were people of quality, and not coiners—say?” “Yes, monsieur, you are right,” said the host.
There he is!” “Somebody has disturbed him, without doubt,” said D’Artagnan.
“But he must be disturbed,” cried the host; “Here are two English gentlemen just arrived.” “Well?” “Well, the English like good wine, as you may know, monsieur; these have asked for the best.
My wife has perhaps requested permission of Monsieur Athos to go into the cellar to satisfy these gentlemen; and he, as usual, has refused.
There is the hullabaloo louder than ever!” D’Artagnan, in fact, heard a great noise on the side next the cellar.
He rose, and preceded by the host wringing his hands, and followed by Planchet with his musketoon ready for use, he approached the scene of action.
The two gentlemen were exasperated; they had had a long ride, and were dying with hunger and thirst.
One might have thought there was in that cellar one of those famished ogres—the gigantic heroes of popular legends, into whose cavern nobody could force their way with impunity.
There was a moment of silence; but at length the two Englishmen felt ashamed to draw back, and the angrier one descended the five or six steps which led to the cellar, and gave a kick against the door enough to split a wall.
“Planchet,” said D’Artagnan, cocking his pistols, “I will take charge of the one at the top; you look to the one below.
Ah, gentlemen, you want battle; and you shall have it.” “Good God!” cried the hollow voice of Athos, “I can hear D’Artagnan, I think.” “Yes,” cried D’Artagnan, raising his voice in turn, “I am here, my friend.” “Ah, good, then,” replied Athos, “we will teach them, these door breakers!” The gentlemen had drawn their swords, but they found themselves taken between two fires.
They still hesitated an instant; but, as before, pride prevailed, and a second kick split the door from bottom to top.
“Stand on one side, D’Artagnan, stand on one side,” cried Athos.
“I am going to fire!” “Gentlemen,” exclaimed D’Artagnan, whom reflection never abandoned, “gentlemen, think of what you are about.
You will then have our swords, with which, I can assure you, my friend and I can play tolerably well.
Let me conduct your business and my own.
You shall soon have something to drink; I give you my word.” “If there is any left,” grumbled the jeering voice of Athos.
‘If there is any left!’” murmured he.
There must be plenty left,” replied D’Artagnan.
“Be satisfied of that; these two cannot have drunk all the cellar.
Gentlemen, return your swords to their scabbards.” “Well, provided you replace your pistols in your belt.” “Willingly.” And D’Artagnan set the example.
Then, turning toward Planchet, he made him a sign to uncock his musketoon.
The Englishmen, convinced of these peaceful proceedings, sheathed their swords grumblingly.
The history of Athos’s imprisonment was then related to them; and as they were really gentlemen, they pronounced the host in the wrong.
“Now, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, “go up to your room again; and in ten minutes, I will answer for it, you shall have all you desire.” The Englishmen bowed and went upstairs.
“Now I am alone, my dear Athos,” said D’Artagnan; “open the door, I beg of you.” “Instantly,” said Athos.
Then was heard a great noise of fagots being removed and of the groaning of posts; these were the counterscarps and bastions of Athos, which the besieged himself demolished.
An instant after, the broken door was removed, and the pale face of Athos appeared, who with a rapid glance took a survey of the surroundings.
D’Artagnan threw himself on his neck and embraced him tenderly.
He then tried to draw him from his moist abode, but to his surprise he perceived that Athos staggered.
I am dead drunk, that’s all, and never did a man more strongly set about getting so.
It is running now.” D’Artagnan burst into a laugh which changed the shiver of the host into a burning fever.
In the meantime, Grimaud appeared in his turn behind his master, with the musketoon on his shoulder, and his head shaking.
Like one of those drunken satyrs in the pictures of Rubens.
He was moistened before and behind with a greasy liquid which the host recognized as his best olive oil.
The four crossed the public room and proceeded to take possession of the best apartment in the house, which D’Artagnan occupied with authority.
In the meantime the host and his wife hurried down with lamps into the cellar, which had so long been interdicted to them and where a frightful spectacle awaited them.
“The image of devastation and death,” as the ancient poet says, “reigned as over a field of battle.” Of fifty large sausages, suspended from the joists, scarcely ten remained.
Then the lamentations of the host and hostess pierced the vault of the cellar.
D’Artagnan himself was moved by them.
To grief succeeded rage.
The host armed himself with a spit, and rushed into the chamber occupied by the two friends.
“Some wine!” said Athos, on perceiving the host.
“Some wine!” cried the stupefied host, “some wine?
Why you have drunk more than a hundred pistoles’ worth!
I am a ruined man, lost, destroyed!” “Bah,” said Athos, “we were always dry.” “If you had been contented with drinking, well and good; but you have broken all the bottles.” “You pushed me upon a heap which rolled down.
That was your fault.” “All my oil is lost!” “Oil is a sovereign balm for wounds; and my poor Grimaud here was obliged to dress those you had inflicted on him.” “All my sausages are gnawed!” “There is an enormous quantity of rats in that cellar.” “You shall pay me for all this,” cried the exasperated host.
“Triple ass!” said Athos, rising; but he sank down again immediately.
He had tried his strength to the utmost.
D’Artagnan came to his relief with his whip in his hand.
“This will teach you,” said D’Artagnan, “to treat the guests God sends you in a more courteous fashion.” “God?
Say the devil!” “My dear friend,” said D’Artagnan, “if you annoy us in this manner we will all four go and shut ourselves up in your cellar, and we will see if the mischief is as great as you say.” “Oh, gentlemen,” said the host, “I have been wrong.
You are gentlemen, and I am a poor innkeeper.
Come hither, and let us talk.” The host approached with hesitation.
“Come hither, I say, and don’t be afraid,” continued Athos.
“At the very moment when I was about to pay you, I had placed my purse on the table.” “Yes, monsieur.” “That purse contained sixty pistoles; where is it?” “Deposited with the justice; they said it was bad money.” “Very well; get me my purse back and keep the sixty pistoles.” “But Monseigneur knows very well that justice never lets go that which it once lays hold of.
If it were bad money, there might be some hopes; but unfortunately, those were all good pieces.” “Manage the matter as well as you can, my good man; it does not concern me, the more so as I have not a livre left.” “Come,” said D’Artagnan, “let us inquire further.
Athos’s horse, where is that?” “In the stable.” “How much is it worth?” “Fifty pistoles at most.” “It’s worth eighty.
And pray upon what shall I make my campaign; upon Grimaud?” “I have brought you another,” said D’Artagnan.
“Another?” “And a magnificent one!” cried the host.
“Well, since there is another finer and younger, why, you may take the old one; and let us drink.” “What?” asked the host, quite cheerful again.
As he finished, the host entered with the wine ordered and a ham which, fortunately for him, had been left out of the cellar.
But you, D’Artagnan, what is the matter with you, and what has happened to you personally?
You have a sad air.” “Alas,” said D’Artagnan, “it is because I am the most unfortunate.” “Tell me.” “Presently,” said D’Artagnan.
D’Artagnan, remember this!
Speak, then, I am all ears.” D’Artagnan related his adventure with Mme.
Athos listened to him without a frown; and when he had finished, said, “Trifles, only trifles!” That was his favorite word.
“You always say _trifles_, my dear Athos!” said D’Artagnan, “and that comes very ill from you, who have never loved.” The drink-deadened eye of Athos flashed out, but only for a moment; it became as dull and vacant as before.
“That’s true,” said he, quietly, “for my part I have never loved.” “Acknowledge, then, you stony heart,” said D’Artagnan, “that you are wrong to be so hard upon us tender hearts.” “Tender hearts!
You are very fortunate to have lost, believe me, my dear D’Artagnan.
Let us drink!” “But then, philosopher that you are,” said D’Artagnan, “instruct me, support me.
“The two things agree marvelously well.” “I am all attention,” said D’Artagnan.
Athos collected himself, and in proportion as he did so, D’Artagnan saw that he became pale.
He was at that period of intoxication in which vulgar drinkers fall on the floor and go to sleep.
He kept himself upright and dreamed, without sleeping.
This somnambulism of drunkenness had something frightful in it.
“You particularly wish it?” asked he.
“I pray for it,” said D’Artagnan.
One of my friends—one of my friends, please to observe, not myself,” said Athos, interrupting himself with a melancholy smile, “one of the counts of my province—that is to say, of Berry—noble as a Dandolo or a Montmorency, at twenty-five years of age fell in love with a girl of sixteen, beautiful as fancy can paint.
Through the ingenuousness of her age beamed an ardent mind, not of the woman, but of the poet.
She did not please; she intoxicated.
Both had recently come into the country.
They were said, however, to be of good extraction.
My friend, who was seigneur of the country, might have seduced her, or taken her by force, at his will—for he was master.
Who would have come to the assistance of two strangers, two unknown persons?
Unfortunately he was an honorable man; he married her.
The idiot!” “How so, if he loved her?” asked D’Artagnan.
“He took her to his château, and made her the first lady in the province; and in justice it must be allowed that she supported her rank becomingly.” “Well?” asked D’Artagnan.
“Well, one day when she was hunting with her husband,” continued Athos, in a low voice, and speaking very quickly, “she fell from her horse and fainted.
The count flew to her to help, and as she appeared to be oppressed by her clothes, he ripped them open with his poniard, and in so doing laid bare her shoulder.
D’Artagnan,” said Athos, with a maniacal burst of laughter, “guess what she had on her shoulder.” “How can I tell?” said D’Artagnan.
“Horror!” cried D’Artagnan.
The angel was a demon; the poor young girl had stolen the sacred vessels from a church.” “And what did the count do?” “The count was of the highest nobility.
He had on his estates the rights of high and low tribunals.
He tore the dress of the countess to pieces; he tied her hands behind her, and hanged her on a tree.” “Heavens, Athos, a murder?” cried D’Artagnan.
“But methinks I need wine!” and he seized by the neck the last bottle that was left, put it to his mouth, and emptied it at a single draught, as he would have emptied an ordinary glass.
Then he let his head sink upon his two hands, while D’Artagnan stood before him, stupefied.
“That has cured me of beautiful, poetical, and loving women,” said Athos, after a considerable pause, raising his head, and forgetting to continue the fiction of the count.
Let us drink.” “Then she is dead?” stammered D’Artagnan.
Some ham, my boy, or we can’t drink.” “And her brother?” added D’Artagnan, timidly.
“Yes, the priest.” “Oh, I inquired after him for the purpose of hanging him likewise; but he was beforehand with me, he had quit the curacy the night before.” “Was it ever known who this miserable fellow was?” “He was doubtless the first lover and accomplice of the fair lady.
A worthy man, who had pretended to be a curate for the purpose of getting his mistress married, and securing her a position.
He has been hanged and quartered, I hope.” “My God, my God!” cried D’Artagnan, quite stunned by the relation of this horrible adventure.
“Taste some of this ham, D’Artagnan; it is exquisite,” said Athos, cutting a slice, which he placed on the young man’s plate.
I could have drunk fifty bottles more.” D’Artagnan could no longer endure this conversation, which had made him bewildered.
Allowing his head to sink upon his two hands, he pretended to sleep.
THE RETURN D’Artagnan was astounded by the terrible confidence of Athos; yet many things appeared very obscure to him in this half revelation.
In the first place it had been made by a man quite drunk to one who was half drunk; and yet, in spite of the incertainty which the vapor of three or four bottles of Burgundy carries with it to the brain, D’Artagnan, when awaking on the following morning, had all the words of Athos as present to his memory as if they then fell from his mouth—they had been so impressed upon his mind.
All this doubt only gave rise to a more lively desire of arriving at a certainty, and he went into his friend’s chamber with a fixed determination of renewing the conversation of the preceding evening; but he found Athos quite himself again—that is to say, the most shrewd and impenetrable of men.
Besides which, the Musketeer, after having exchanged a hearty shake of the hand with him, broached the matter first.
“I was pretty drunk yesterday, D’Artagnan,” said he, “I can tell that by my tongue, which was swollen and hot this morning, and by my pulse, which was very tremulous.
I wager that I uttered a thousand extravagances.” While saying this he looked at his friend with an earnestness that embarrassed him.
“No,” replied D’Artagnan, “if I recollect well what you said, it was nothing out of the common way.” “Ah, you surprise me.
I thought I had told you a most lamentable story.” And he looked at the young man as if he would read the bottom of his heart.
“My faith,” said D’Artagnan, “it appears that I was more drunk than you, since I remember nothing of the kind.” Athos did not trust this reply, and he resumed; “you cannot have failed to remark, my dear friend, that everyone has his particular kind of drunkenness, sad or gay.
My drunkenness is always sad, and when I am thoroughly drunk my mania is to relate all the lugubrious stories which my foolish nurse inculcated into my brain.
That is my failing—a capital failing, I admit; but with that exception, I am a good drinker.” Athos spoke this in so natural a manner that D’Artagnan was shaken in his conviction.
“It is that, then,” replied the young man, anxious to find out the truth, “it is that, then, I remember as we remember a dream.
We were speaking of hanging.” “Ah, you see how it is,” said Athos, becoming still paler, but yet attempting to laugh; “I was sure it was so—the hanging of people is my nightmare.” “Yes, yes,” replied D’Artagnan.
“Well, you see how a man may compromise himself when he does not know what he says,” replied Athos, shrugging his shoulders as if he thought himself an object of pity.
“I certainly never will get drunk again, D’Artagnan; it is too bad a habit.” D’Artagnan remained silent; and then changing the conversation all at once, Athos said: “By the by, I thank you for the horse you have brought me.” “Is it to your mind?” asked D’Artagnan.
“Yes; but it is not a horse for hard work.” “You are mistaken; I rode him nearly ten leagues in less than an hour and a half, and he appeared no more distressed than if he had only made the tour of the Place St.
You were still fast asleep, and I did not know what to do with myself; I was still stupid from our yesterday’s debauch.
As I came into the public room, I saw one of our Englishman bargaining with a dealer for a horse, his own having died yesterday from bleeding.
I drew near, and found he was bidding a hundred pistoles for a chestnut nag.
‘_Pardieu_,’ said I, ‘my good gentleman, I have a horse to sell, too.’ ‘Ay, and a very fine one!
I saw him yesterday; your friend’s lackey was leading him.’ ‘Do you think he is worth a hundred pistoles?’ ‘Yes!
But please to observe I won back the equipage,” cried Athos.
D’Artagnan looked much disconcerted.
“Well, I must confess it does,” replied D’Artagnan.
“That horse was to have identified us in the day of battle.
It was a pledge, a remembrance.
Athos, you have done wrong.” “But, my dear friend, put yourself in my place,” replied the Musketeer.
If it is only to be recognized, why the saddle will suffice for that; it is quite remarkable enough.
As to the horse, we can easily find some excuse for its disappearance.
A horse is mortal; suppose mine had had the glanders or the farcy?” D’Artagnan did not smile.
“I threw, and I lost.” “What, my horse?” “Your horse, seven against eight; a point short—you know the proverb.” “Athos, you are not in your right senses, I swear.” “My dear lad, that was yesterday, when I was telling you silly stories, it was proper to tell me that, and not this morning.
I lost him then, with all his appointments and furniture.” “Really, this is frightful.” “Stop a minute; you don’t know all yet.
I should make an excellent gambler if I were not too hot-headed; but I was hot-headed, just as if I had been drinking.
You had nothing left?” “Oh, yes, my friend; there was still that diamond left which sparkles on your finger, and which I had observed yesterday.” “This diamond!” said D’Artagnan, placing his hand eagerly on his ring.
“I mentioned your diamond then to my adversary, who had likewise remarked it.
Impossible!” “Go on, go on, my dear fellow!” said D’Artagnan; “for upon my honor, you will kill me with your indifference.” “We divided, then, this diamond into ten parts of a hundred pistoles each.” “You are laughing at me, and want to try me!” said D’Artagnan, whom anger began to take by the hair, as Minerva takes Achilles, in the _Iliad_.
I had been fifteen days without seeing a human face, and had been left to brutalize myself in the company of bottles.” “That was no reason for staking my diamond!” replied D’Artagnan, closing his hand with a nervous spasm.
Ten parts of a hundred pistoles each, in ten throws, without revenge; in thirteen throws I had lost all—in thirteen throws.
The number thirteen was always fatal to me; it was on the thirteenth of July that—” “_Ventrebleu!_” cried D’Artagnan, rising from the table, the story of the present day making him forget that of the preceding one.
“Patience!” said Athos; “I had a plan.
The Englishman was an original; I had seen him conversing that morning with Grimaud, and Grimaud had told me that he had made him proposals to enter into his service.
I staked Grimaud, the silent Grimaud, divided into ten portions.” “Well, what next?” said D’Artagnan, laughing in spite of himself.
“Grimaud himself, understand; and with the ten parts of Grimaud, which are not worth a ducatoon, I regained the diamond.
Tell me, now, if persistence is not a virtue?” “My faith!
But this is droll,” cried D’Artagnan, consoled, and holding his sides with laughter.
“You may guess, finding the luck turned, that I again staked the diamond.” “The devil!” said D’Artagnan, becoming angry again.
In brief, I regained your harness and then mine.
That was a superb throw, so I left off there.” D’Artagnan breathed as if the whole hostelry had been removed from his breast.
“Intact, my dear friend; besides the harness of your Bucephalus and mine.” “But what is the use of harnesses without horses?” “I have an idea about them.” “Athos, you make me shudder.” “Listen to me.
You have not played for a long time, D’Artagnan.” “And I have no inclination to play.” “Swear to nothing.
You have not played for a long time, I said; you ought, then, to have a good hand.” “Well, what then?” “Well; the Englishman and his companion are still here.
I remarked that he regretted the horse furniture very much.
In your place I would stake the furniture against the horse.” “But he will not wish for only one harness.” “Stake both, _pardieu!_ I am not selfish, as you are.” “You would do so?” said D’Artagnan, undecided, so strongly did the confidence of Athos begin to prevail, in spite of himself.
“On my honor, in one single throw.” “But having lost the horses, I am particularly anxious to preserve the harnesses.” “Stake your diamond, then.” “This?
“I would propose to you to stake Planchet, but as that has already been done, the Englishman would not, perhaps, be willing.” “Decidedly, my dear Athos,” said D’Artagnan, “I should like better not to risk anything.” “That’s a pity,” said Athos, coolly.
“The Englishman is overflowing with pistoles.
One throw is soon made!” “And if I lose?” “You will win.” “But if I lose?” “Well, you will surrender the harnesses.” “Have with you for one throw!” said D’Artagnan.
Athos went in quest of the Englishman, whom he found in the stable, examining the harnesses with a greedy eye.
The opportunity was good.
He proposed the conditions—the two harnesses, either against one horse or a hundred pistoles.
The Englishman calculated fast; the two harnesses were worth three hundred pistoles.
D’Artagnan threw the dice with a trembling hand, and turned up the number three; his paleness terrified Athos, who, however, consented himself with saying, “That’s a sad throw, comrade; you will have the horses fully equipped, monsieur.” The Englishman, quite triumphant, did not even give himself the trouble to shake the dice.
He threw them on the table without looking at them, so sure was he of victory; D’Artagnan turned aside to conceal his ill humor.
“Hold, hold, hold!” said Athos, wit his quiet tone; “that throw of the dice is extraordinary.
Two aces!” The Englishman looked, and was seized with astonishment.
D’Artagnan looked, and was seized with pleasure.
“Certainly,” said D’Artagnan.
“Then there is no revenge?” “Our conditions said, ‘No revenge,’ you will please to recollect.” “That is true; the horse shall be restored to your lackey, monsieur.” “A moment,” said Athos; “with your permission, monsieur, I wish to speak a word with my friend.” “Say on.” Athos drew D’Artagnan aside.
“Well, Tempter, what more do you want with me?” said D’Artagnan.
I would take the hundred pistoles.
You know you have staked the harnesses against the horse or a hundred pistoles, at your choice.” “Yes.” “Well, then, I repeat, you are wrong.
You cannot think of humiliating me by prancing along by my side on that magnificent charger.
For my part, I should not hesitate a moment; I should take the hundred pistoles.
We want money for our return to Paris.” “I am much attached to that horse, Athos.” “And there again you are wrong.
A horse slips and injures a joint; a horse stumbles and breaks his knees to the bone; a horse eats out of a manger in which a glandered horse has eaten.
There is a horse, while on the contrary, the hundred pistoles feed their master.” “But how shall we get back?” “Upon our lackey’s horses, _pardieu_.
Anybody may see by our bearing that we are people of condition.” “Pretty figures we shall cut on ponies while Aramis and Porthos caracole on their steeds.” “Aramis!
“What is it?” asked D’Artagnan, who did not at all comprehend the hilarity of his friend.
Go on!” “Your advice, then?” “To take the hundred pistoles, D’Artagnan.
With the hundred pistoles we can live well to the end of the month.
We have undergone a great deal of fatigue, remember, and a little rest will do no harm.” “I rest?
Once in Paris, I shall prosecute my search for that unfortunate woman!” “Well, you may be assured that your horse will not be half so serviceable to you for that purpose as good golden louis.
Take the hundred pistoles, my friend; take the hundred pistoles!” D’Artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied.
This last reason appeared convincing.
Besides, he feared that by resisting longer he should appear selfish in the eyes of Athos.
He acquiesced, therefore, and chose the hundred pistoles, which the Englishman paid down on the spot.
They then determined to depart.
Peace with the landlord, in addition to Athos’s old horse, cost six pistoles.
D’Artagnan and Athos took the nags of Planchet and Grimaud, and the two lackeys started on foot, carrying the saddles on their heads.
However ill our two friends were mounted, they were soon far in advance of their servants, and arrived at Crèvecœur.
From a distance they perceived Aramis, seated in a melancholy manner at his window, looking out, like Sister Anne, at the dust in the horizon.
“Ah, is that you, D’Artagnan, and you, Athos?” said the young man.
“I was reflecting upon the rapidity with which the blessings of this world leave us.
My English horse, which has just disappeared amid a cloud of dust, has furnished me with a living image of the fragility of the things of the earth.
Life itself may be resolved into three words: _Erat, est, fuit_.” “Which means—” said D’Artagnan, who began to suspect the truth.
“Which means that I have just been duped—sixty louis for a horse which by the manner of his gait can do at least five leagues an hour.” D’Artagnan and Athos laughed aloud.
“My dear D’Artagnan,” said Aramis, “don’t be too angry with me, I beg.
Necessity has no law; besides, I am the person punished, as that rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis, at least.
Ah, you fellows are good managers!
You ride on our lackey’s horses, and have your own gallant steeds led along carefully by hand, at short stages.” At the same instant a market cart, which some minutes before had appeared upon the Amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and Planchet and Grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads.
The cart was returning empty to Paris, and the two lackeys had agreed, for their transport, to slake the wagoner’s thirst along the route.
“Nothing but saddles?” “Now do you understand?” said Athos.
I retained my harness by instinct. _Holà_, Bazin!
Bring my new saddle and carry it along with those of these gentlemen.” “And what have you done with your ecclesiastics?” asked D’Artagnan.
Then the curate forbade me to quit my uniform, and the Jesuit entreated me to get him made a Musketeer.” “Without a thesis?” cried D’Artagnan, “without a thesis?
I demand the suppression of the thesis.” “Since then,” continued Aramis, “I have lived very agreeably.
I have begun a poem in verses of one syllable.
That is rather difficult, but the merit in all things consists in the difficulty.
It has four hundred lines, and lasts a minute.” “My faith, my dear Aramis,” said D’Artagnan, who detested verses almost as much as he did Latin, “add to the merit of the difficulty that of the brevity, and you are sure that your poem will at least have two merits.” “You will see,” continued Aramis, “that it breathes irreproachable passion.
You can’t think how I have missed him, the great simpleton.
To see him so self-satisfied reconciles me with myself.
I think I can see him now, mounted upon his superb animal and seated in his handsome saddle.
Aramis discharged his bill, placed Bazin in the cart with his comrades, and they set forward to join Porthos.
They found him up, less pale than when D’Artagnan left him after his first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he was alone, was spread enough for four persons.
This dinner consisted of meats nicely dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit.
“Ah, _pardieu!_” said he, rising, “you come in the nick of time, gentlemen.
I was just beginning the soup, and you will dine with me.” “Oh, oh!” said D’Artagnan, “Mousqueton has not caught these bottles with his lasso.
Besides, here is a piquant _fricandeau_ and a fillet of beef.” “I am recruiting myself,” said Porthos, “I am recruiting myself.
Nothing weakens a man more than these devilish strains.
Though I remember, in our affair of the Rue Férou, I received a sword wound which at the end of fifteen or eighteen days produced the same effect.” “But this dinner was not intended for you alone, Porthos?” said Aramis.
“No,” said Porthos, “I expected some gentlemen of the neighborhood, who have just sent me word they could not come.
You will take their places and I shall not lose by the exchange. _Holà_, Mousqueton, seats, and order double the bottles!” “Do you know what we are eating here?” said Athos, at the end of ten minutes.
“_Pardieu!_” replied D’Artagnan, “for my part, I am eating veal garnished with shrimps and vegetables.” “And I some lamb chops,” said Porthos.
“You are all mistaken, gentlemen,” answered Athos, gravely; “you are eating horse.” “Eating what?” said D’Artagnan.
And perhaps his saddle, therewith.” “No, gentlemen, I have kept the harness,” said Porthos.
“This horse made my visitors ashamed of theirs, and I don’t like to humiliate people.” “Then your duchess is still at the waters?” asked D’Artagnan.
“And, my faith, the governor of the province—one of the gentlemen I expected today—seemed to have such a wish for him, that I gave him to him.” “Gave him?” cried D’Artagnan.
“Yes, without the saddle.” “You will observe, gentlemen,” said Athos, “that Porthos has made the best bargain of any of us.” And then commenced a roar of laughter in which they all joined, to the astonishment of poor Porthos; but when he was informed of the cause of their hilarity, he shared it vociferously according to his custom.
“There is one comfort, we are all in cash,” said D’Artagnan.
That has weakened my purse.” “And I,” said Aramis, “imagined that I had given almost my last sou to the church of Montdidier and the Jesuits of Amiens, with whom I had made engagements which I ought to have kept.
How much have you left of your hundred pistoles, D’Artagnan?” “Of my hundred pistoles?
I recollect.” “Then I paid the host six.” “What a brute of a host!
Why did you give him six pistoles?” “You told me to give them to him.” “It is true; I am too good-natured.
In brief, how much remains?” “Twenty-five pistoles,” said D’Artagnan.
So little that it is not worth reckoning with the general stock.” “Now, then, let us calculate how much we posses in all.” “Porthos?” “Thirty crowns.” “Aramis?” “Ten pistoles.” “And you, D’Artagnan?” “Twenty-five.” “That makes in all?” said Athos.
“Four hundred and seventy-five livres,” said D’Artagnan, who reckoned like Archimedes.
“On our arrival in Paris, we shall still have four hundred, besides the harnesses,” said Porthos.
With the four hundred livres we will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and then we will give the turnings out of our pockets to D’Artagnan, who has a steady hand, and will go and play in the first gaming house we come to.
There!” “Let us dine, then,” said Porthos; “it is getting cold.” The friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the repast, the remains of which were abandoned to Mousqueton, Bazin, Planchet, and Grimaud.
On arriving in Paris, D’Artagnan found a letter from M. de Tréville, which informed him that, at his request, the king had promised that he should enter the company of the Musketeers.
As this was the height of D’Artagnan’s worldly ambition—apart, be it well understood, from his desire of finding Mme.
Bonacieux—he ran, full of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had left only half an hour before, but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied.
They were assembled in council at the residence of Athos, which always indicated an event of some gravity.
M. de Tréville had intimated to them his Majesty’s fixed intention to open the campaign on the first of May, and they must immediately prepare their outfits.
The four philosophers looked at one another in a state of bewilderment.
M. de Tréville never jested in matters relating to discipline.
“And what do you reckon your outfit will cost?” said D’Artagnan.
“Oh, we can scarcely say.
We have made our calculations with Spartan economy, and we each require fifteen hundred livres.” “Four times fifteen makes sixty—six thousand livres,” said Athos.
“It seems to me,” said D’Artagnan, “with a thousand livres each—I do not speak as a Spartan, but as a procurator—” This word _procurator_ roused Porthos.
“Stop,” said he, “I have an idea.” “Well, that’s something, for I have not the shadow of one,” said Athos coolly; “but as to D’Artagnan, gentlemen, the idea of belonging to _ours_ has driven him out of his senses.
For my part, I declare I want two thousand.” “Four times two makes eight,” then said Aramis; “it is eight thousand that we want to complete our outfits, toward which, it is true, we have already the saddles.” “Besides,” said Athos, waiting till D’Artagnan, who went to thank Monsieur de Tréville, had shut the door, “besides, there is that beautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend.
D’Artagnan is too good a comrade to leave his brothers in embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king on his finger.” Chapter XXIX.
To this preoccupation of his vanity, D’Artagnan at this moment joined an uneasiness much less selfish.
Notwithstanding all his inquiries respecting Mme.
Bonacieux, he could obtain no intelligence of her.
The queen was ignorant where the mercer’s young wife was, but had promised to have her sought for; but this promise was very vague and did not at all reassure D’Artagnan.
It will then be said of me that I died for the king; so that I shall have performed my duty without the expense of an outfit.” Porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him, tossing his head and repeating, “I shall follow up on my idea.” Aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.
It may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in the community.
The lackeys on their part, like the coursers of Hippolytus, shared the sadness of their masters.
Mousqueton collected a store of crusts; Bazin, who had always been inclined to devotion, never quit the churches; Planchet watched the flight of flies; and Grimaud, whom the general distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master, heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.
The three friends—for, as we have said, Athos had sworn not to stir a foot to equip himself—went out early in the morning, and returned late at night.
They wandered about the streets, looking at the pavement as if to see whether the passengers had not left a purse behind them.
They might have been supposed to be following tracks, so observant were they wherever they went.
When they met they looked desolately at one another, as much as to say, “Have you found anything?” However, as Porthos had first found an idea, and had thought of it earnestly afterward, he was the first to act.
He was a man of execution, this worthy Porthos.
D’Artagnan perceived him one day walking toward the church of St.
Leu, and followed him instinctively.
He entered, after having twisted his mustache and elongated his imperial, which always announced on his part the most triumphant resolutions.
As D’Artagnan took some precautions to conceal himself, Porthos believed he had not been seen.
D’Artagnan entered behind him.
D’Artagnan, still unperceived, supported himself against the other side.
There happened to be a sermon, which made the church very full of people.
Porthos took advantage of this circumstance to ogle the women.
Thanks to the cares of Mousqueton, the exterior was far from announcing the distress of the interior.
His hat was a little napless, his feather was a little faded, his gold lace was a little tarnished, his laces were a trifle frayed; but in the obscurity of the church these things were not seen, and Porthos was still the handsome Porthos.
D’Artagnan observed, on the bench nearest to the pillar against which Porthos leaned, a sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow and rather dry, but erect and haughty under her black hood.
The eyes of Porthos were furtively cast upon this lady, and then roved about at large over the nave.
On her side the lady, who from time to time blushed, darted with the rapidity of lightning a glance toward the inconstant Porthos; and then immediately the eyes of Porthos wandered anxiously.
It was plain that this mode of proceeding piqued the lady in the black hood, for she bit her lips till they bled, scratched the end of her nose, and could not sit still in her seat.
The lady with the black hood followed through all their wanderings the looks of Porthos, and perceived that they rested upon the lady with the velvet cushion, the little Negro, and the maid-servant.
It was almost imperceptible motions of his eyes, fingers placed upon the lips, little assassinating smiles, which really did assassinate the disdained beauty.
Then she cried, “Ahem!” under cover of the _mea culpa_, striking her breast so vigorously that everybody, even the lady with the red cushion, turned round toward her.
Porthos paid no attention.
Nevertheless, he understood it all, but was deaf.
D’Artagnan, without losing sight of the lady of the red cushion, continued to watch the proceedings of Porthos, which amused him greatly.
He guessed that the lady of the black hood was the procurator’s wife of the Rue aux Ours, which was the more probable from the church of St.
Leu being not far from that locality.
He guessed, likewise, by induction, that Porthos was taking his revenge for the defeat of Chantilly, when the procurator’s wife had proved so refractory with respect to her purse.
Amid all this, D’Artagnan remarked also that not one countenance responded to the gallantries of Porthos.
There were only chimeras and illusions; but for real love, for true jealousy, is there any reality except illusions and chimeras?
The sermon over, the procurator’s wife advanced toward the holy font.
The procurator’s wife smiled, thinking that it was for her Porthos had put himself to this trouble; but she was cruelly and promptly undeceived.
When she was only about three steps from him, he turned his head round, fixing his eyes steadfastly upon the lady with the red cushion, who had risen and was approaching, followed by her black boy and her woman.
When the lady of the red cushion came close to Porthos, Porthos drew his dripping hand from the font.
The fair worshipper touched the great hand of Porthos with her delicate fingers, smiled, made the sign of the cross, and left the church.
This was too much for the procurator’s wife; she doubted not there was an intrigue between this lady and Porthos.
If she had been a great lady she would have fainted; but as she was only a procurator’s wife, she contented herself saying to the Musketeer with concentrated fury, “Eh, Monsieur Porthos, you don’t offer me any holy water?” Porthos, at the sound of that voice, started like a man awakened from a sleep of a hundred years.
How is your husband, our dear Monsieur Coquenard?
Where can my eyes have been not to have seen you during the two hours of the sermon?” “I was within two paces of you, monsieur,” replied the procurator’s wife; “but you did not perceive me because you had no eyes but for the pretty lady to whom you just now gave the holy water.” Porthos pretended to be confused.
I have something to say to you.” “Certainly, madame,” said Porthos, winking to himself, as a gambler does who laughs at the dupe he is about to pluck.
At that moment D’Artagnan passed in pursuit of Milady; he cast a passing glance at Porthos, and beheld this triumphant look.
“Eh, eh!” said he, reasoning to himself according to the strangely easy morality of that gallant period, “there is one who will be equipped in good time!” Porthos, yielding to the pressure of the arm of the procurator’s wife, as a bark yields to the rudder, arrived at the cloister St.
Magloire—a little-frequented passage, enclosed with a turnstile at each end.
In the daytime nobody was seen there but mendicants devouring their crusts, and children at play.
“Ah, Monsieur Porthos,” cried the procurator’s wife, when she was assured that no one who was a stranger to the population of the locality could either see or hear her, “ah, Monsieur Porthos, you are a great conqueror, as it appears!” “I, madame?” said Porthos, drawing himself up proudly; “how so?” “The signs just now, and the holy water!
But that must be a princess, at least—that lady with her Negro boy and her maid!” “My God!
Madame, you are deceived,” said Porthos; “she is simply a duchess.” “And that running footman who waited at the door, and that carriage with a coachman in grand livery who sat waiting on his seat?” Porthos had seen neither the footman nor the carriage, but with the eye of a jealous woman, Mme.
Coquenard had seen everything.
Porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of the red cushion a princess.
“Ah, you are quite the pet of the ladies, Monsieur Porthos!” resumed the procurator’s wife, with a sigh.
“Well,” responded Porthos, “you may imagine, with the physique with which nature has endowed me, I am not in want of good luck.” “Good Lord, how quickly men forget!” cried the procurator’s wife, raising her eyes toward heaven.
“Less quickly than the women, it seems to me,” replied Porthos; “for I, madame, I may say I was your victim, when wounded, dying, I was abandoned by the surgeons.
“I, who had sacrificed for you the Baronne de—” “I know it well.” “The Comtesse de—” “Monsieur Porthos, be generous!” “You are right, madame, and I will not finish.” “But it was my husband who would not hear of lending.” “Madame Coquenard,” said Porthos, “remember the first letter you wrote me, and which I preserve engraved in my memory.” The procurator’s wife uttered a groan.
“Besides,” said she, “the sum you required me to borrow was rather large.” “Madame Coquenard, I gave you the preference.
I had but to write to the Duchesse—but I won’t repeat her name, for I am incapable of compromising a woman; but this I know, that I had but to write to her and she would have sent me fifteen hundred.” The procurator’s wife shed a tear.
“Monsieur Porthos,” said she, “I can assure you that you have severely punished me; and if in the time to come you should find yourself in a similar situation, you have but to apply to me.” “Fie, madame, fie!” said Porthos, as if disgusted.
“Let us not talk about money, if you please; it is humiliating.” “Then you no longer love me!” said the procurator’s wife, slowly and sadly.
Porthos maintained a majestic silence.
Alas, I understand.” “Think of the offense you have committed toward me, madame!
It remains _here!_” said Porthos, placing his hand on his heart, and pressing it strongly.
“I will repair it, indeed I will, my dear Porthos.” “Besides, what did I ask of you?” resumed Porthos, with a movement of the shoulders full of good fellowship.
After all, I am not an unreasonable man.
I know you are not rich, Madame Coquenard, and that your husband is obliged to bleed his poor clients to squeeze a few paltry crowns from them.
If you were a duchess, a marchioness, or a countess, it would be quite a different thing; it would be unpardonable.” The procurator’s wife was piqued.
I am not precisely rich, though I am pretty well off.” “Hold, madame,” said Porthos, “let us say no more upon the subject, I beg of you.
You have misunderstood me, all sympathy is extinct between us.” “Ingrate that you are!” “Ah!
I advise you to complain!” said Porthos.
“Begone, then, to your beautiful duchess; I will detain you no longer.” “And she is not to be despised, in my opinion.” “Now, Monsieur Porthos, once more, and this is the last!
Do you love me still?” “Ah, madame,” said Porthos, in the most melancholy tone he could assume, “when we are about to enter upon a campaign—a campaign, in which my presentiments tell me I shall be killed—” “Oh, don’t talk of such things!” cried the procurator’s wife, bursting into tears.
“Something whispers me so,” continued Porthos, becoming more and more melancholy.
No object affects me; and I even feel here, at the bottom of my heart, something which speaks for you.
But in fifteen days, as you know, or as you do not know, this fatal campaign is to open.
I shall be fearfully preoccupied with my outfit.
Then I must make a journey to see my family, in the lower part of Brittany, to obtain the sum necessary for my departure.” Porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice.
“And as,” continued he, “the duchess whom you saw at the church has estates near to those of my family, we mean to make the journey together.
Journeys, you know, appear much shorter when we travel two in company.” “Have you no friends in Paris, then, Monsieur Porthos?” said the procurator’s wife.
“I thought I had,” said Porthos, resuming his melancholy air; “but I have been taught my mistake.” “You have some!” cried the procurator’s wife, in a transport that surprised even herself.
“Come to our house tomorrow.
You are the son of my aunt, consequently my cousin; you come from Noyon, in Picardy; you have several lawsuits and no attorney.
Can you recollect all that?” “Perfectly, madame.” “Come at dinnertime.” “Very well.” “And be upon your guard before my husband, who is rather shrewd, notwithstanding his seventy-six years.” “Seventy-six years! _Peste!_ That’s a fine age!” replied Porthos.
“A great age, you mean, Monsieur Porthos.
Yes, the poor man may be expected to leave me a widow, any hour,” continued she, throwing a significant glance at Porthos.
“Fortunately, by our marriage contract, the survivor takes everything.” “All?” “Yes, all.” “You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard,” said Porthos, squeezing the hand of the procurator’s wife tenderly.
“We are then reconciled, dear Monsieur Porthos?” said she, simpering.
“Till we meet again, then, dear traitor!” “Till we meet again, my forgetful charmer!” “Tomorrow, my angel!” “Tomorrow, flame of my life!” Chapter XXX.
D’ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN D’Artagnan followed Milady without being perceived by her.
He saw her get into her carriage, and heard her order the coachman to drive to St.
It was useless to try to keep pace on foot with a carriage drawn by two powerful horses.
D’Artagnan therefore returned to the Rue Férou.
In the Rue de Seine he met Planchet, who had stopped before the house of a pastry cook, and was contemplating with ecstasy a cake of the most appetizing appearance.
He ordered him to go and saddle two horses in M. de Tréville’s stables—one for himself, D’Artagnan, and one for Planchet—and bring them to Athos’s place.
Once for all, Tréville had placed his stable at D’Artagnan’s service.
Planchet proceeded toward the Rue du Colombier, and D’Artagnan toward the Rue Férou.
Athos was at home, emptying sadly a bottle of the famous Spanish wine he had brought back with him from his journey into Picardy.
He made a sign for Grimaud to bring a glass for D’Artagnan, and Grimaud obeyed as usual.
D’Artagnan related to Athos all that had passed at the church between Porthos and the procurator’s wife, and how their comrade was probably by that time in a fair way to be equipped.
“As for me,” replied Athos to this recital, “I am quite at my ease; it will not be women that will defray the expense of my outfit.” “Handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear Athos, neither princesses nor queens would be secure from your amorous solicitations.” “How young this D’Artagnan is!” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders; and he made a sign to Grimaud to bring another bottle.
At that moment Planchet put his head modestly in at the half-open door, and told his master that the horses were ready.
“Two horses that Monsieur de Tréville lends me at my pleasure, and with which I am now going to take a ride to St.
Germain?” then demanded Athos.
Then D’Artagnan described the meeting which he had at the church, and how he had found that lady who, with the seigneur in the black cloak and with the scar near his temple, filled his mind constantly.
“That is to say, you are in love with this lady as you were with Madame Bonacieux,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders contemptuously, as if he pitied human weakness.
“I? not at all!” said D’Artagnan.
“I am only curious to unravel the mystery to which she is attached.
I do not know why, but I imagine that this woman, wholly unknown to me as she is, and wholly unknown to her as I am, has an influence over my life.” “Well, perhaps you are right,” said Athos.
Madame Bonacieux is lost; so much the worse for her if she is found.” “No, Athos, no, you are mistaken,” said D’Artagnan; “I love my poor Constance more than ever, and if I knew the place in which she is, were it at the end of the world, I would go to free her from the hands of her enemies; but I am ignorant.
All my researches have been useless.
I must divert my attention!” “Amuse yourself with Milady, my dear D’Artagnan; I wish you may with all my heart, if that will amuse you.” “Hear me, Athos,” said D’Artagnan.
“Instead of shutting yourself up here as if you were under arrest, get on horseback and come and take a ride with me to St.
Germain.” “My dear fellow,” said Athos, “I ride horses when I have any; when I have none, I go afoot.” “Well,” said D’Artagnan, smiling at the misanthropy of Athos, which from any other person would have offended him, “I ride what I can get; I am not so proud as you.
So _au revoir_, dear Athos.” “_Au revoir_,” said the Musketeer, making a sign to Grimaud to uncork the bottle he had just brought.
D’Artagnan and Planchet mounted, and took the road to St.
All along the road, what Athos had said respecting Mme.
Bonacieux recurred to the mind of the young man.
Although D’Artagnan was not of a very sentimental character, the mercer’s pretty wife had made a real impression upon his heart.
Meantime, he was going to try to find out Milady.
Milady had spoken to the man in the black cloak; therefore she knew him.
Now, in the opinion of D’Artagnan, it was certainly the man in the black cloak who had carried off Mme.
Bonacieux the second time, as he had carried her off the first.
D’Artagnan then only half-lied, which is lying but little, when he said that by going in search of Milady he at the same time went in search of Constance.
Thinking of all this, and from time to time giving a touch of the spur to his horse, D’Artagnan completed his short journey, and arrived at St.
He had just passed by the pavilion in which ten years later Louis XIV. was born.
He rode up a very quiet street, looking to the right and the left to see if he could catch any vestige of his beautiful Englishwoman, when from the ground floor of a pretty house, which, according to the fashion of the time, had no window toward the street, he saw a face peep out with which he thought he was acquainted.
This person walked along the terrace, which was ornamented with flowers.
Planchet recognized him first.
“Eh, monsieur!” said he, addressing D’Artagnan, “don’t you remember that face which is blinking yonder?” “No,” said D’Artagnan, “and yet I am certain it is not the first time I have seen that visage.” “_Parbleu_, I believe it is not,” said Planchet.
“Why, it is poor Lubin, the lackey of the Comte de Wardes—he whom you took such good care of a month ago at Calais, on the road to the governor’s country house!” “So it is!” said D’Artagnan; “I know him now.
At the end of an instant’s observation he heard the noise of a vehicle, and saw Milady’s carriage stop opposite to him.
He could not be mistaken; Milady was in it.
D’Artagnan leaned upon the neck of his horse, in order that he might see without being seen.
Milady put her charming blond head out at the window, and gave her orders to her maid.
The latter—a pretty girl of about twenty or twenty-two years, active and lively, the true _soubrette_ of a great lady—jumped from the step upon which, according to the custom of the time, she was seated, and took her way toward the terrace upon which D’Artagnan had perceived Lubin.
D’Artagnan followed the _soubrette_ with his eyes, and saw her go toward the terrace; but it happened that someone in the house called Lubin, so that Planchet remained alone, looking in all directions for the road where D’Artagnan had disappeared.
The maid approached Planchet, whom she took for Lubin, and holding out a little billet to him said, “For your master.” “For my master?” replied Planchet, astonished.
“Yes, and important.
Take it quickly.” Thereupon she ran toward the carriage, which had turned round toward the way it came, jumped upon the step, and the carriage drove off.
Planchet turned and returned the billet.
Then, accustomed to passive obedience, he jumped down from the terrace, ran toward the lane, and at the end of twenty paces met D’Artagnan, who, having seen all, was coming to him.
“For you, monsieur,” said Planchet, presenting the billet to the young man.
“For me?” said D’Artagnan; “are you sure of that?” “_Pardieu_, monsieur, I can’t be more sure.
The _soubrette_ said, ‘For your master.’ I have no other master but you; so—a pretty little lass, my faith, is that _soubrette!_” D’Artagnan opened the letter, and read these words: “A person who takes more interest in you than she is willing to confess wishes to know on what day it will suit you to walk in the forest?
Tomorrow, at the Hôtel Field of the Cloth of Gold, a lackey in black and red will wait for your reply.” “Oh!” said D’Artagnan, “this is rather warm; it appears that Milady and I are anxious about the health of the same person.
Well, Planchet, how is the good Monsieur de Wardes?
He is not dead, then?” “No, monsieur, he is as well as a man can be with four sword wounds in his body; for you, without question, inflicted four upon the dear gentleman, and he is still very weak, having lost almost all his blood.
As I said, monsieur, Lubin did not know me, and told me our adventure from one end to the other.” “Well done, Planchet! you are the king of lackeys.
Now jump onto your horse, and let us overtake the carriage.” This did not take long.
At the end of five minutes they perceived the carriage drawn up by the roadside; a cavalier, richly dressed, was close to the door.
The conversation between Milady and the cavalier was so animated that D’Artagnan stopped on the other side of the carriage without anyone but the pretty _soubrette_ perceiving his presence.
The conversation took place in English—a language which D’Artagnan could not understand; but by the accent the young man plainly saw that the beautiful Englishwoman was in a great rage.
She terminated it by an action which left no doubt as to the nature of this conversation; this was a blow with her fan, applied with such force that the little feminine weapon flew into a thousand pieces.
The cavalier laughed aloud, which appeared to exasperate Milady still more.
D’Artagnan thought this was the moment to interfere.
He approached the other door, and taking off his hat respectfully, said, “Madame, will you permit me to offer you my services?
It appears to me that this cavalier has made you very angry.
Speak one word, madame, and I take upon myself to punish him for his want of courtesy.” At the first word Milady turned, looking at the young man with astonishment; and when he had finished, she said in very good French, “Monsieur, I should with great confidence place myself under your protection if the person with whom I quarrel were not my brother.” “Ah, excuse me, then,” said D’Artagnan.
“You must be aware that I was ignorant of that, madame.” “What is that stupid fellow troubling himself about?” cried the cavalier whom Milady had designated as her brother, stooping down to the height of the coach window.
“Why does not he go about his business?” “Stupid fellow yourself!” said D’Artagnan, stooping in his turn on the neck of his horse, and answering on his side through the carriage window.
“I do not go on because it pleases me to stop here.” The cavalier addressed some words in English to his sister.
“I speak to you in French,” said D’Artagnan; “be kind enough, then, to reply to me in the same language.
The carriage went on, and left the two men facing each other; no material obstacle separated them.
The cavalier made a movement as if to follow the carriage; but D’Artagnan, whose anger, already excited, was much increased by recognizing in him the Englishman of Amiens who had won his horse and had been very near winning his diamond of Athos, caught at his bridle and stopped him.
“Well, monsieur,” said he, “you appear to be more stupid than I am, for you forget there is a little quarrel to arrange between us two.” “Ah,” said the Englishman, “is it you, my master?
We will see, my dear monsieur, if you can handle a sword as skillfully as you can a dice box.” “You see plainly that I have no sword,” said the Englishman.
Three is just my number!” “Now, then, who are you?” asked the Englishman.
“I am Monsieur d’Artagnan, a Gascon gentleman, serving in the king’s Musketeers.
And you?” “I am Lord de Winter, Baron Sheffield.” “Well, then, I am your servant, Monsieur Baron,” said D’Artagnan, “though you have names rather difficult to recollect.” And touching his horse with the spur, he cantered back to Paris.
As he was accustomed to do in all cases of any consequence, D’Artagnan went straight to the residence of Athos.
He found Athos reclining upon a large sofa, where he was waiting, as he said, for his outfit to come and find him.
Athos was delighted to find he was going to fight an Englishman.
They immediately sent their lackeys for Porthos and Aramis, and on their arrival made them acquainted with the situation.
Porthos drew his sword from the scabbard, and made passes at the wall, springing back from time to time, and making contortions like a dancer.
Aramis, who was constantly at work at his poem, shut himself up in Athos’s closet, and begged not to be disturbed before the moment of drawing swords.
D’Artagnan employed himself in arranging a little plan, of which we shall hereafter see the execution, and which promised him some agreeable adventure, as might be seen by the smiles which from time to time passed over his countenance, whose thoughtfulness they animated.
ENGLISH AND FRENCH The hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to a spot behind the Luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats.
Athos threw a piece of money to the goatkeeper to withdraw.
The lackeys were ordered to act as sentinels.
A silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure, entered, and joined the Musketeers.
Then, according to foreign custom, the presentations took place.
The Englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the odd names of their adversaries were for them not only a matter of surprise, but of annoyance.
We cannot fight with such names; they are names of shepherds.” “Therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed names,” said Athos.
“Which only gives us a greater desire to know the real ones,” replied the Englishman.
“You played very willingly with us without knowing our names,” said Athos, “by the same token that you won our horses.” “That is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; this time we risk our blood.
One plays with anybody; but one fights only with equals.” “And that is but just,” said Athos, and he took aside the one of the four Englishmen with whom he was to fight, and communicated his name in a low voice.
“Does that satisfy you?” said Athos to his adversary.
“Do you find me of sufficient rank to do me the honor of crossing swords with me?” “Yes, monsieur,” said the Englishman, bowing.
“Well! now shall I tell you something?” added Athos, coolly.
“What?” replied the Englishman.
“Gentlemen,” said Athos, addressing at the same time his companions and their adversaries, “are we ready?” “Yes!” answered the Englishmen and the Frenchmen, as with one voice.
Immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of the setting sun, and the combat began with an animosity very natural between men twice enemies.
Athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he had been practicing in a fencing school.
Porthos, abated, no doubt, of his too-great confidence by his adventure of Chantilly, played with skill and prudence.
Athos killed his adversary first.
He hit him but once, but as he had foretold, that hit was a mortal one; the sword pierced his heart.
Second, Porthos stretched his upon the grass with a wound through his thigh, As the Englishman, without making any further resistance, then surrendered his sword, Porthos took him up in his arms and bore him to his carriage.
Aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fifty paces, the man ended by fairly taking to his heels, and disappeared amid the hooting of the lackeys.
As to D’Artagnan, he fought purely and simply on the defensive; and when he saw his adversary pretty well fatigued, with a vigorous side thrust sent his sword flying.
The baron, finding himself disarmed, took two or three steps back, but in this movement his foot slipped and he fell backward.
D’Artagnan was over him at a bound, and said to the Englishman, pointing his sword to his throat, “I could kill you, my Lord, you are completely in my hands; but I spare your life for the sake of your sister.” D’Artagnan was at the height of joy; he had realized the plan he had imagined beforehand, whose picturing had produced the smiles we noted upon his face.
The Englishman, delighted at having to do with a gentleman of such a kind disposition, pressed D’Artagnan in his arms, and paid a thousand compliments to the three Musketeers, and as Porthos’s adversary was already installed in the carriage, and as Aramis’s had taken to his heels, they had nothing to think about but the dead.
As Porthos and Aramis were undressing him, in the hope of finding his wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from his clothes.
D’Artagnan picked it up and offered it to Lord de Winter.
“What the devil would you have me do with that?” said the Englishman.
“You can restore it to his family,” said D’Artagnan.
His family will inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him.
Keep the purse for your lackeys.” D’Artagnan put the purse into his pocket.
At this time Athos came up to D’Artagnan.
“What do you mean to do with that purse?” whispered he.
They are the spoils of victory.” “I, the heir of an enemy!” said Athos; “for whom, then, do you take me?” “It is the custom in war,” said D’Artagnan, “why should it not be the custom in a duel?” “Even on the field of battle, I have never done that.” Porthos shrugged his shoulders; Aramis by a movement of his lips endorsed Athos.
“Then,” said D’Artagnan, “let us give the money to the lackeys, as Lord de Winter desired us to do.” “Yes,” said Athos; “let us give the money to the lackeys—not to our lackeys, but to the lackeys of the Englishmen.” Athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman.
“For you and your comrades.” This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even Porthos; and this French generosity, repeated by Lord de Winter and his friend, was highly applauded, except by MM.
Grimaud, Bazin, Mousqueton and Planchet.
Lord de Winter, on quitting D’Artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
She lived in the Place Royale—then the fashionable quarter—at Number 6, and he undertook to call and take D’Artagnan with him in order to introduce him.
D’Artagnan appointed eight o’clock at Athos’s residence.
This introduction to Milady Clarik occupied the head of our Gascon greatly.
He remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto been mixed up in his destiny.
According to his conviction, she was some creature of the cardinal, and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn toward her by one of those sentiments for which we cannot account.
His only fear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meung and of Dover.
Then she knew that he was one of the friends of M. de Tréville, and consequently, that he belonged body and soul to the king; which would make him lose a part of his advantage, since when known to Milady as he knew her, he played only an equal game with her.
As to the commencement of an intrigue between her and M. de Wardes, our presumptuous hero gave but little heed to that, although the marquis was young, handsome, rich, and high in the cardinal’s favor.
D’Artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, then returned to Athos’s, and according to custom, related everything to him.
Athos listened to his projects, then shook his head, and recommended prudence to him with a shade of bitterness.
“What!” said he, “you have just lost one woman, whom you call good, charming, perfect; and here you are, running headlong after another.” D’Artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.
“I loved Madame Bonacieux with my heart, while I only love Milady with my head,” said he.
“In getting introduced to her, my principal object is to ascertain what part she plays at court.” “The part she plays, _pardieu!_ It is not difficult to divine that, after all you have told me.
She is some emissary of the cardinal; a woman who will draw you into a snare in which you will leave your head.” “The devil! my dear Athos, you view things on the dark side, methinks.” “My dear fellow, I mistrust women.
Can it be otherwise?
I bought my experience dearly—particularly fair women.
Milady is fair, you say?” “She has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!” “Ah, my poor D’Artagnan!” said Athos.
I want to be enlightened on a subject; then, when I shall have learned what I desire to know, I will withdraw.” “Be enlightened!” said Athos, phlegmatically.
Lord de Winter arrived at the appointed time; but Athos, being warned of his coming, went into the other chamber.
He therefore found D’Artagnan alone, and as it was nearly eight o’clock he took the young man with him.
An elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by two excellent horses, they were soon at the Place Royale.
Milady Clarik received D’Artagnan ceremoniously.
Her hôtel was remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of the English had quit, or were about to quit, France on account of the war, Milady had just been laying out much money upon her residence; which proved that the general measure which drove the English from France did not affect her.
“You see,” said Lord de Winter, presenting D’Artagnan to his sister, “a young gentleman who has held my life in his hands, and who has not abused his advantage, although we have been twice enemies, although it was I who insulted him, and although I am an Englishman.
Thank him, then, madame, if you have any affection for me.” Milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passed over her brow, and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her lips that the young man, who saw and observed this triple shade, almost shuddered at it.
The brother did not perceive this; he had turned round to play with Milady’s favorite monkey, which had pulled him by the doublet.
“You are welcome, monsieur,” said Milady, in a voice whose singular sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill-humor which D’Artagnan had just remarked; “you have today acquired eternal rights to my gratitude.” The Englishman then turned round and described the combat without omitting a single detail.
Milady listened with the greatest attention, and yet it was easily to be perceived, whatever effort she made to conceal her impressions, that this recital was not agreeable to her.
The blood rose to her head, and her little foot worked with impatience beneath her robe.
Lord de Winter perceived nothing of this.
When he had finished, he went to a table upon which was a salver with Spanish wine and glasses.
He filled two glasses, and by a sign invited D’Artagnan to drink.
D’Artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an Englishman to refuse to pledge him.
He therefore drew near to the table and took the second glass.
He did not, however, lose sight of Milady, and in a mirror he perceived the change that came over her face.
Now that she believed herself to be no longer observed, a sentiment resembling ferocity animated her countenance.
She bit her handkerchief with her beautiful teeth.
That pretty little _soubrette_ whom D’Artagnan had already observed then came in.
She spoke some words to Lord de Winter in English, who thereupon requested D’Artagnan’s permission to retire, excusing himself on account of the urgency of the business that had called him away, and charging his sister to obtain his pardon.
D’Artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with Lord de Winter, and then returned to Milady.
Her countenance, with surprising mobility, had recovered its gracious expression; but some little red spots on her handkerchief indicated that she had bitten her lips till the blood came.
Those lips were magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.
The conversation took a cheerful turn.
Milady appeared to have entirely recovered.
She told D’Artagnan that Lord de Winter was her brother-in-law, and not her brother.
All this showed D’Artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something; but he could not yet see under this veil.
In addition to this, after a half hour’s conversation D’Artagnan was convinced that Milady was his compatriot; she spoke French with an elegance and a purity that left no doubt on that head.
D’Artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations of devotion.
To all the simple things which escaped our Gascon, Milady replied with a smile of kindness.
D’Artagnan took leave of Milady, and left the saloon the happiest of men.
On the staircase he met the pretty _soubrette_, who brushed gently against him as she passed, and then, blushing to the eyes, asked his pardon for having touched him in a voice so sweet that the pardon was granted instantly.
D’Artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still better received than on the evening before.
She appeared to take a great interest in him, asked him whence he came, who were his friends, and whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself to the cardinal.
D’Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent for a young man of twenty, then remembered his suspicions regarding Milady.
He launched into a eulogy of his Eminence, and said that he should not have failed to enter into the Guards of the cardinal instead of the king’s Guards if he had happened to know M. de Cavois instead of M. de Tréville.
Milady changed the conversation without any appearance of affectation, and asked D’Artagnan in the most careless manner possible if he had ever been in England.
D’Artagnan replied that he had been sent thither by M. de Tréville to treat for a supply of horses, and that he had brought back four as specimens.
Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit her lips; she had to deal with a Gascon who played close.
At the same hour as on the preceding evening, D’Artagnan retired.
In the corridor he again met the pretty Kitty; that was the name of the _soubrette_.
She looked at him with an expression of kindness which it was impossible to mistake; but D’Artagnan was so preoccupied by the mistress that he noticed absolutely nothing but her.
D’Artagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that, and each day Milady gave him a more gracious reception.
Every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the stairs, he met the pretty _soubrette_.
But, as we have said, D’Artagnan paid no attention to this persistence of poor Kitty.
A PROCURATOR’S DINNER However brilliant had been the part played by Porthos in the duel, it had not made him forget the dinner of the procurator’s wife.
On the morrow he received the last touches of Mousqueton’s brush for an hour, and took his way toward the Rue aux Ours with the steps of a man who was doubly in favor with fortune.
His heart beat, but not like D’Artagnan’s with a young and impatient love.
No; a more material interest stirred his blood.
He was about at last to pass that mysterious threshold, to climb those unknown stairs by which, one by one, the old crowns of M.
Coquenard had ascended.
He was about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had twenty times beheld the image in his dreams—a coffer long and deep, locked, bolted, fastened in the wall; a coffer of which he had so often heard, and which the hands—a little wrinkled, it is true, but still not without elegance—of the procurator’s wife were about to open to his admiring looks.
And yet, at the very door the Musketeer began to entertain some doubts.
The approach was not such as to prepossess people—an ill-smelling, dark passage, a staircase half-lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer from a neighboring yard; on the first floor a low door studded with enormous nails, like the principal gate of the Grand Châtelet.
A tall, pale clerk, his face shaded by a forest of virgin hair, opened the door, and bowed with the air of a man forced at once to respect in another lofty stature, which indicated strength, the military dress, which indicated rank, and a ruddy countenance, which indicated familiarity with good living.
A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behind the second, a stripling of a dozen years rising behind the third.
In all, three clerks and a half, which, for the time, argued a very extensive clientage.
Although the Musketeer was not expected before one o’clock, the procurator’s wife had been on the watch ever since midday, reckoning that the heart, or perhaps the stomach, of her lover would bring him before his time.
Coquenard therefore entered the office from the house at the same moment her guest entered from the stairs, and the appearance of the worthy lady relieved him from an awkward embarrassment.
The clerks surveyed him with great curiosity, and he, not knowing well what to say to this ascending and descending scale, remained tongue-tied.
“It is my cousin!” cried the procurator’s wife.
“Come in, come in, Monsieur Porthos!” The name of Porthos produced its effect upon the clerks, who began to laugh; but Porthos turned sharply round, and every countenance quickly recovered its gravity.
They reached the office of the procurator after having passed through the antechamber in which the clerks were, and the study in which they ought to have been.
This last apartment was a sort of dark room, littered with papers.
On quitting the study they left the kitchen on the right, and entered the reception room.
All these rooms, which communicated with one another, did not inspire Porthos favorably.
Words might be heard at a distance through all these open doors.
Then, while passing, he had cast a rapid, investigating glance into the kitchen; and he was obliged to confess to himself, to the shame of the procurator’s wife and his own regret, that he did not see that fire, that animation, that bustle, which when a good repast is on foot prevails generally in that sanctuary of good living.
The procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit, as he expressed no surprise at the sight of Porthos, who advanced toward him with a sufficiently easy air, and saluted him courteously.
“We are cousins, it appears, Monsieur Porthos?” said the procurator, rising, yet supporting his weight upon the arms of his cane chair.
The old man, wrapped in a large black doublet, in which the whole of his slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry.
His little gray eyes shone like carbuncles, and appeared, with his grinning mouth, to be the only part of his face in which life survived.
Unfortunately the legs began to refuse their service to this bony machine.
During the last five or six months that this weakness had been felt, the worthy procurator had nearly become the slave of his wife.
The cousin was received with resignation, that was all.
Coquenard, firm upon his legs, would have declined all relationship with M.
“Yes, monsieur, we are cousins,” said Porthos, without being disconcerted, as he had never reckoned upon being received enthusiastically by the husband.
“By the female side, I believe?” said the procurator, maliciously.
Porthos did not feel the ridicule of this, and took it for a piece of simplicity, at which he laughed in his large mustache.
Coquenard, who knew that a simple-minded procurator was a very rare variety in the species, smiled a little, and colored a great deal.
Coquenard had, since the arrival of Porthos, frequently cast his eyes with great uneasiness upon a large chest placed in front of his oak desk.
Porthos comprehended that this chest, although it did not correspond in shape with that which he had seen in his dreams, must be the blessed coffer, and he congratulated himself that the reality was several feet higher than the dream.
Coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigations any further; but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest and fixing it upon Porthos, he contented himself with saying, “Monsieur our cousin will do us the favor of dining with us once before his departure for the campaign, will he not, Madame Coquenard?” This time Porthos received the blow right in his stomach, and felt it.
It appeared likewise that Mme.
This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which he was attacked in his gastronomic hopes, inspired much gratitude in the Musketeer toward the procurator’s wife.
They passed into the eating room—a large dark room situated opposite the kitchen.
The clerks, who, as it appeared, had smelled unusual perfumes in the house, were of military punctuality, and held their stools in hand quite ready to sit down.
Their jaws moved preliminarily with fearful threatenings.
“Indeed!” thought Porthos, casting a glance at the three hungry clerks—for the errand boy, as might be expected, was not admitted to the honors of the magisterial table, “in my cousin’s place, I would not keep such gourmands!
They look like shipwrecked sailors who have not eaten for six weeks.” M.
Coquenard entered, pushed along upon his armchair with casters by Mme.
Coquenard, whom Porthos assisted in rolling her husband up to the table.
He had scarcely entered when he began to agitate his nose and his jaws after the example of his clerks.
“Oh, oh!” said he; “here is a soup which is rather inviting.” “What the devil can they smell so extraordinary in this soup?” said Porthos, at the sight of a pale liquid, abundant but entirely free from meat, on the surface of which a few crusts swam about as rare as the islands of an archipelago.
Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyone eagerly took his seat.
Coquenard was served first, then Porthos.
Coquenard filled her own plate, and distributed the crusts without soup to the impatient clerks.
At this moment the door of the dining room unclosed with a creak, and Porthos perceived through the half-open flap the little clerk who, not being allowed to take part in the feast, ate his dry bread in the passage with the double odor of the dining room and kitchen.
After the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl—a piece of magnificence which caused the eyes of the diners to dilate in such a manner that they seemed ready to burst.
“One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,” said the procurator, with a smile that was almost tragic.
“You are certainly treating your cousin very handsomely!” The poor fowl was thin, and covered with one of those thick, bristly skins through which the teeth cannot penetrate with all their efforts.
I respect old age, but I don’t much like it boiled or roasted.” And he looked round to see if anybody partook of his opinion; but on the contrary, he saw nothing but eager eyes which were devouring, in anticipation, that sublime fowl which was the object of his contempt.
In the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made its appearance—an enormous dish in which some bones of mutton that at first sight one might have believed to have some meat on them pretended to show themselves.
But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and their lugubrious looks settled down into resigned countenances.
Coquenard distributed this dish to the young men with the moderation of a good housewife.
Coquenard poured from a very small stone bottle the third of a glass for each of the young men, served himself in about the same proportion, and passed the bottle to Porthos and Mme.
The young men filled up their third of a glass with water; then, when they had drunk half the glass, they filled it up again, and continued to do so.
This brought them, by the end of the repast, to swallowing a drink which from the color of the ruby had passed to that of a pale topaz.
Porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly, and shuddered when he felt the knee of the procurator’s wife under the table, as it came in search of his.
He also drank half a glass of this sparingly served wine, and found it to be nothing but that horrible Montreuil—the terror of all expert palates.
Coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted, and sighed deeply.
Coquenard, in that tone which says, “Take my advice, don’t touch them.” “Devil take me if I taste one of them!” murmured Porthos to himself, and then said aloud, “Thank you, my cousin, I am no longer hungry.” There was silence.
Porthos could hardly keep his countenance.
The procurator repeated several times, “Ah, Madame Coquenard!
Accept my compliments; your dinner has been a real feast.
Coquenard had eaten his soup, the black feet of the fowl, and the only mutton bone on which there was the least appearance of meat.
Porthos fancied they were mystifying him, and began to curl his mustache and knit his eyebrows; but the knee of Mme.
Coquenard gently advised him to be patient.
This silence and this interruption in serving, which were unintelligible to Porthos, had, on the contrary, a terrible meaning for the clerks.
Upon a look from the procurator, accompanied by a smile from Mme.
Coquenard, they arose slowly from the table, folded their napkins more slowly still, bowed, and retired.
“Go, young men! go and promote digestion by working,” said the procurator, gravely.
Coquenard rose and took from a buffet a piece of cheese, some preserved quinces, and a cake which she had herself made of almonds and honey.
Coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too many good things.
Porthos bit his lips because he saw not the wherewithal to dine.
He looked to see if the dish of beans was still there; the dish of beans had disappeared.
“A positive feast!” cried M.
Coquenard, turning about in his chair, “a real feast, _epulœ epulorum_.
Lucullus dines with Lucullus.” Porthos looked at the bottle, which was near him, and hoped that with wine, bread, and cheese, he might make a dinner; but wine was wanting, the bottle was empty.
Coquenard did not seem to observe it.
“This is fine!” said Porthos to himself; “I am prettily caught!” He passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves, and stuck his teeth into the sticky pastry of Mme.
“Now,” said he, “the sacrifice is consummated!
Ah! if I had not the hope of peeping with Madame Coquenard into her husband’s chest!” M.
Coquenard, after the luxuries of such a repast, which he called an excess, felt the want of a siesta.
Porthos began to hope that the thing would take place at the present sitting, and in that same locality; but the procurator would listen to nothing, he would be taken to his room, and was not satisfied till he was close to his chest, upon the edge of which, for still greater precaution, he placed his feet.
The procurator’s wife took Porthos into an adjoining room, and they began to lay the basis of a reconciliation.
“Thanks, madame!” said Porthos, “but I don’t like to abuse your kindness; besides, I must think of my outfit!” “That’s true,” said the procurator’s wife, groaning, “that unfortunate outfit!” “Alas, yes,” said Porthos, “it is so.” “But of what, then, does the equipment of your company consist, Monsieur Porthos?” “Oh, of many things!” said Porthos.
“The Musketeers are, as you know, picked soldiers, and they require many things useless to the Guardsmen or the Swiss.” “But yet, detail them to me.” “Why, they may amount to—“, said Porthos, who preferred discussing the total to taking them one by one.
The procurator’s wife waited tremblingly.
“Oh, no,” said Porthos, “it does not exceed two thousand five hundred livres!
I even think that with economy I could manage it with two thousand livres.” “Good God!” cried she, “two thousand livres!
Why, that is a fortune!” Porthos made a most significant grimace; Mme.
Coquenard understood it.
“I wished to know the detail,” said she, “because, having many relatives in business, I was almost sure of obtaining things at a hundred per cent less than you would pay yourself.” “Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “that is what you meant to say!” “Yes, dear Monsieur Porthos.
Thus, for instance, don’t you in the first place want a horse?” “Yes, a horse.” “Well, then!
I can just suit you.” “Ah!” said Porthos, brightening, “that’s well as regards my horse; but I must have the appointments complete, as they include objects which a Musketeer alone can purchase, and which will not amount, besides, to more than three hundred livres.” “Three hundred livres?
Then put down three hundred livres,” said the procurator’s wife, with a sigh.
It may be remembered that he had the saddle which came from Buckingham.
These three hundred livres he reckoned upon putting snugly into his pocket.
“Then,” continued he, “there is a horse for my lackey, and my valise.
But then you understand, Madame Coquenard, a mule with feathers and bells.” “Be satisfied,” said the procurator’s wife.
There is one in particular which he prefers in his journeys, large enough to hold all the world.” “Your valise is then empty?” asked Porthos, with simplicity.
“Certainly it is empty,” replied the procurator’s wife, in real innocence.
Coquenard was in the dilemma of Harpagan.
Finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debated in the same manner; and the result of the sitting was that the procurator’s wife should give eight hundred livres in money, and should furnish the horse and the mule which should have the honor of carrying Porthos and Mousqueton to glory.
These conditions being agreed to, Porthos took leave of Mme.
The latter wished to detain him by darting certain tender glances; but Porthos urged the commands of duty, and the procurator’s wife was obliged to give place to the king.
The Musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.
SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS Meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of his conscience and the wise counsels of Athos, D’Artagnan became hourly more in love with Milady.
Thus he never failed to pay his diurnal court to her; and the self-satisfied Gascon was convinced that sooner or later she could not fail to respond.
One day, when he arrived with his head in the air, and as light at heart as a man who awaits a shower of gold, he found the _soubrette_ under the gateway of the hôtel; but this time the pretty Kitty was not contented with touching him as he passed, she took him gently by the hand.
“Good!” thought D’Artagnan, “She is charged with some message for me from her mistress; she is about to appoint some rendezvous of which she had not courage to speak.” And he looked down at the pretty girl with the most triumphant air imaginable.
“I wish to say three words to you, Monsieur Chevalier,” stammered the _soubrette_.
“Speak, my child, speak,” said D’Artagnan; “I listen.” “Here?
That which I have to say is too long, and above all, too secret.” “Well, what is to be done?” “If Monsieur Chevalier would follow me?” said Kitty, timidly.
“Where you please, my dear child.” “Come, then.” And Kitty, who had not let go the hand of D’Artagnan, led him up a little dark, winding staircase, and after ascending about fifteen steps, opened a door.
“Come in here, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she; “here we shall be alone, and can talk.” “And whose room is this, my dear child?” “It is mine, Monsieur Chevalier; it communicates with my mistress’s by that door.
She will not hear what we say; she never goes to bed before midnight.” D’Artagnan cast a glance around him.
The little apartment was charming for its taste and neatness; but in spite of himself, his eyes were directed to that door which Kitty said led to Milady’s chamber.
“You love my mistress, then, very dearly, Monsieur Chevalier?” said she.
I am mad for her!” Kitty breathed a second sigh.
“Alas, monsieur,” said she, “that is too bad.” “What the devil do you see so bad in it?” said D’Artagnan.
“For me?” said D’Artagnan, seizing the letter.
“No; for another.” “For another?” “Yes.” “His name; his name!” cried D’Artagnan.
“Read the address.” “Monsieur El Comte de Wardes.” The remembrance of the scene at St.
Germain presented itself to the mind of the presumptuous Gascon.
“Oh, good Lord, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she, “what are you doing?” “I?” said D’Artagnan; “nothing,” and he read, “You have not answered my first note.
Are you indisposed, or have you forgotten the glances you favored me with at the ball of Mme. de Guise?
You have an opportunity now, Count; do not allow it to escape.” D’Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his _self_-love: he thought that it was in his _love_.
“Poor dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Kitty, in a voice full of compassion, and pressing anew the young man’s hand.
“You pity me, little one?” said D’Artagnan.
“Oh, yes, and with all my heart; for I know what it is to be in love.” “You know what it is to be in love?” said D’Artagnan, looking at her for the first time with much attention.
“Alas, yes.” “Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much better to assist me in avenging myself on your mistress.” “And what sort of revenge would you take?” “I would triumph over her, and supplant my rival.” “I will never help you in that, Monsieur Chevalier,” said Kitty, warmly.
“And why not?” demanded D’Artagnan.
“For two reasons.” “What ones?” “The first is that my mistress will never love you.” “How do you know that?” “You have cut her to the heart.” “I?
In what can I have offended her—I who ever since I have known her have lived at her feet like a slave?
Speak, I beg you!” “I will never confess that but to the man—who should read to the bottom of my soul!” D’Artagnan looked at Kitty for the second time.
The young girl had freshness and beauty which many duchesses would have purchased with their coronets.
“Kitty,” said he, “I will read to the bottom of your soul whenever you like; don’t let that disturb you.” And he gave her a kiss at which the poor girl became as red as a cherry.
But this time our Gascon saw at a glance all the advantage to be derived from the love which Kitty had just confessed so innocently, or so boldly: the interception of letters addressed to the Comte de Wardes, news on the spot, entrance at all hours into Kitty’s chamber, which was contiguous to her mistress’s.
The perfidious deceiver was, as may plainly be perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poor girl in order to obtain Milady, willy-nilly.
Nevertheless, to D’Artagnan’s great astonishment, the pretty Kitty defended herself resolutely.
Time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks and defenses.
Midnight sounded, and almost at the same time the bell was rung in Milady’s chamber.
“Good God,” cried Kitty, “there is my mistress calling me!
Go; go directly!” D’Artagnan rose, took his hat, as if it had been his intention to obey, then, opening quickly the door of a large closet instead of that leading to the staircase, he buried himself amid the robes and dressing gowns of Milady.
D’Artagnan, who had secured the key, shut himself up in the closet without reply.
“Are you asleep, that you don’t answer when I ring?” And D’Artagnan heard the door of communication opened violently.
“Here am I, Milady, here am I!” cried Kitty, springing forward to meet her mistress.
Both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communication remained open, D’Artagnan could hear Milady for some time scolding her maid.
She was at length appeased, and the conversation turned upon him while Kitty was assisting her mistress.
“Can he be inconstant before being happy?” “Oh, no; he must have been prevented by Monsieur de Tréville or Monsieur Dessessart.
I understand my game, Kitty; I have this one safe.” “What will you do with him, madame?” “What will I do with him?
Be easy, Kitty, there is something between that man and me that he is quite ignorant of: he nearly made me lose my credit with his Eminence.
Oh, I will be revenged!” “I believed that Madame loved him.” “I love him?
“For all this,” continued Milady, “I should long ago have revenged myself on him if, and I don’t know why, the cardinal had not requested me to conciliate him.” “Oh, yes; but Madame has not conciliated that little woman he was so fond of.” “What, the mercer’s wife of the Rue des Fossoyeurs?
Has he not already forgotten she ever existed?
Fine vengeance that, on my faith!” A cold sweat broke from D’Artagnan’s brow.
He resumed his listening, but unfortunately the toilet was finished.
“That will do,” said Milady; “go into your own room, and tomorrow endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter I gave you.” “For Monsieur de Wardes?” said Kitty.
“To be sure; for Monsieur de Wardes.” “Now, there is one,” said Kitty, “who appears to me quite a different sort of a man from that poor Monsieur d’Artagnan.” “Go to bed, mademoiselle,” said Milady; “I don’t like comments.” D’Artagnan heard the door close; then the noise of two bolts by which Milady fastened herself in.
On her side, but as softly as possible, Kitty turned the key of the lock, and then D’Artagnan opened the closet door.
How pale you are!” “The abominable creature,” murmured D’Artagnan.
“There is nothing but a wainscot between my chamber and Milady’s; every word that is uttered in one can be heard in the other.” “That’s exactly the reason I won’t go,” said D’Artagnan.
“What!” said Kitty, blushing.
She had the less motive to resist, resistance would make so much noise.
Therefore Kitty surrendered.
It was a movement of vengeance upon Milady.
D’Artagnan believed it right to say that vengeance is the pleasure of the gods.
With a little more heart, he might have been contented with this new conquest; but the principal features of his character were ambition and pride.
It must, however, be confessed in his justification that the first use he made of his influence over Kitty was to try and find out what had become of Mme.
Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon the crucifix to D’Artagnan that she was entirely ignorant on that head, her mistress never admitting her into half her secrets—only she believed she could say she was not dead.
As to the cause which was near making Milady lose her credit with the cardinal, Kitty knew nothing about it; but this time D’Artagnan was better informed than she was.
As he had seen Milady on board a vessel at the moment he was leaving England, he suspected that it was, almost without a doubt, on account of the diamond studs.
But what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred, the profound hatred, the inveterate hatred of Milady, was increased by his not having killed her brother-in-law.
D’Artagnan came the next day to Milady’s, and finding her in a very ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answer from M. de Wardes that provoked her thus.
The poor girl ventured a glance at D’Artagnan which said, “See how I suffer on your account!” Toward the end of the evening, however, the beautiful lioness became milder; she smilingly listened to the soft speeches of D’Artagnan, and even gave him her hand to kiss.
D’Artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but as he was a youth who did not easily lose his head, while continuing to pay his court to Milady, he had framed a little plan in his mind.
He found Kitty at the gate, and, as on the preceding evening, went up to her chamber.
Kitty had been accused of negligence and severely scolded.
Milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the Comte de Wardes, and she ordered Kitty to come at nine o’clock in the morning to take a third letter.
D’Artagnan made Kitty promise to bring him that letter on the following morning.
The poor girl promised all her lover desired; she was mad.
D’Artagnan concealed himself in his closet; Milady called, undressed, sent away Kitty, and shut the door.
As the night before, D’Artagnan did not return home till five o’clock in the morning.
This time the poor girl did not even argue with D’Artagnan; she gave it to him at once.
She belonged body and soul to her handsome soldier.
D’Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows: This is the third time I have written to you to tell you that I love you.
D’Artagnan colored and grew pale several times in reading this billet.
“Oh, you love her still,” said Kitty, who had not taken her eyes off the young man’s countenance for an instant.
“No, Kitty, you are mistaken.
I do not love her, but I will avenge myself for her contempt.” “Oh, yes, I know what sort of vengeance!
You know it is you alone whom I love.” “How can I know that?” “By the scorn I will throw upon her.” D’Artagnan took a pen and wrote: MADAME, Until the present moment I could not believe that it was to me your first two letters were addressed, so unworthy did I feel myself of such an honor; besides, I was so seriously indisposed that I could not in any case have replied to them.
But now I am forced to believe in the excess of your kindness, since not only your letter but your servant assures me that I have the good fortune to be beloved by you.
She has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of spirit may obtain his pardon.
From him whom you have rendered the happiest of men, COMTE DE WARDES This note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewise an indelicacy.
It was even, according to our present manners, something like an infamous action; but at that period people did not manage affairs as they do today.
Besides, D’Artagnan from her own admission knew Milady culpable of treachery in matters more important, and could entertain no respect for her.
And yet, notwithstanding this want of respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for this woman boiling in his veins—passion drunk with contempt; but passion or thirst, as the reader pleases.
D’Artagnan’s plan was very simple.
By Kitty’s chamber he could gain that of her mistress.
He would take advantage of the first moment of surprise, shame, and terror, to triumph over her.
He might fail, but something must be left to chance.
In eight days the campaign would open, and he would be compelled to leave Paris; D’Artagnan had no time for a prolonged love siege.
It is the count’s reply.” Poor Kitty became as pale as death; she suspected what the letter contained.
“Listen, my dear girl,” said D’Artagnan; “you cannot but perceive that all this must end, some way or other.
Milady may discover that you gave the first billet to my lackey instead of to the count’s; that it is I who have opened the others which ought to have been opened by de Wardes.
Milady will then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not the woman to limit her vengeance.” “Alas!” said Kitty, “for whom have I exposed myself to all that?” “For me, I well know, my sweet girl,” said D’Artagnan.
“But I am grateful, I swear to you.” “But what does this note contain?” “Milady will tell you.” “Ah, you do not love me!” cried Kitty, “and I am very wretched.” To this reproach there is always one response which deludes women.
D’Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kitty remained in her great delusion.
Although she cried freely before deciding to transmit the letter to her mistress, she did at last so decide, which was all D’Artagnan wished.
Finally he promised that he would leave her mistress’s presence at an early hour that evening, and that when he left the mistress he would ascend with the maid.
This promise completed poor Kitty’s consolation.
IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF Since the four friends had been each in search of his equipments, there had been no fixed meeting between them.
They dined apart from one another, wherever they might happen to be, or rather where they could.
Duty likewise on its part took a portion of that precious time which was gliding away so rapidly—only they had agreed to meet once a week, about one o’clock, at the residence of Athos, seeing that he, in agreement with the vow he had formed, did not pass over the threshold of his door.
This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kitty came to find D’Artagnan.
Soon as Kitty left him, D’Artagnan directed his steps toward the Rue Férou.
He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing.
Aramis had some slight inclination to resume the cassock.
Athos, according to his system, neither encouraged nor dissuaded him.
Athos believed that everyone should be left to his own free will.
He never gave advice but when it was asked, and even then he required to be asked twice.
“People, in general,” he said, “only ask advice not to follow it; or if they do follow it, it is for the sake of having someone to blame for having given it.” Porthos arrived a minute after D’Artagnan.
The four friends were reunited.
The four countenances expressed four different feelings: that of Porthos, tranquillity; that of D’Artagnan, hope; that of Aramis, uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.
At the end of a moment’s conversation, in which Porthos hinted that a lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his embarrassment, Mousqueton entered.
He came to request his master to return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously said.
“Is it my equipment?” “Yes and no,” replied Mousqueton.
“Well, but can’t you speak?” “Come, monsieur.” Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton.
An instant after, Bazin made his appearance at the door.
“What do you want with me, my friend?” said Aramis, with that mildness of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were directed toward the Church.
“A man wishes to see Monsieur at home,” replied Bazin.
What man?” “A mendicant.” “Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner.” “This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends that you will be very glad to see him.” “Has he sent no particular message for me?” “Yes.
If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come,” he said, “tell him I am from Tours.” “From Tours!” cried Aramis.
“A thousand pardons, gentlemen; but no doubt this man brings me the news I expected.” And rising also, he went off at a quick pace.
There remained Athos and D’Artagnan.
“I believe these fellows have managed their business.
What do you think, D’Artagnan?” said Athos.
“I know that Porthos was in a fair way,” replied D’Artagnan; “and as to Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never been seriously uneasy on his account.
I have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux.” “Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you court another.
It is the longest road, but certainly the most amusing.” D’Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but one consideration restrained him.
Athos was a gentleman, punctilious in points of honor; and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for Milady, he was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this Puritan.
He was therefore silent; and as Athos was the least inquisitive of any man on earth, D’Artagnan’s confidence stopped there.
We will therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing important to say to each other, and follow Aramis.
Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came from Tours, we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed, or rather went before, Bazin; he ran without stopping from the Rue Férou to the Rue de Vaugirard.
On entering he found a man of short stature and intelligent eyes, but covered with rags.
“You have asked for me?” said the Musketeer.
“I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis.
Is that your name, monsieur?” “My very own.
You have brought me something?” “Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief.” “Here it is,” said Aramis, taking a small key from his breast and opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pearl, “here it is.
Look.” “That is right,” replied the mendicant; “dismiss your lackey.” In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could want with his master, kept pace with him as well as he could, and arrived almost at the same time he did; but his quickness was not of much use to him.
At the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he was obliged to obey.
Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be sure that nobody could either see or hear him, and opening his ragged vest, badly held together by a leather strap, he began to rip the upper part of his doublet, from which he drew a letter.
Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed the superscription with an almost religious respect, and opened the epistle, which contained what follows: “My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still for some time separated; but the delightful days of youth are not lost beyond return.
Perform your duty in camp; I will do mine elsewhere.
Accept that which the bearer brings you; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman, and think of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes.
“Adieu; or rather, _au revoir_.” The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew from amid his rags a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles, which he laid down on the table; then he opened the door, bowed, and went out before the young man, stupefied by his letter, had ventured to address a word to him.
Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a postscript: PS.
You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count and a grandee of Spain!
“Oh, beautiful life!
My love, my blood, my life! all, all, all, are thine, my adored mistress!” And he kissed the letter with passion, without even vouchsafing a look at the gold which sparkled on the table.
Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer any reason to exclude him, he bade him come in.
Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot that he came to announce D’Artagnan, who, curious to know who the mendicant could be, came to Aramis on leaving Athos.
Now, as D’Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing that Bazin forgot to announce him, he announced himself.
“The devil! my dear Aramis,” said D’Artagnan, “if these are the prunes that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you will make my compliments to the gardener who gathers them.” “You are mistaken, friend D’Artagnan,” said Aramis, always on his guard; “this is from my publisher, who has just sent me the price of that poem in one-syllable verse which I began yonder.” “Ah, indeed,” said D’Artagnan.
“Well, your publisher is very generous, my dear Aramis, that’s all I can say.” “How, monsieur?” cried Bazin, “a poem sell so dear as that!
Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you like; you may become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and Monsieur de Benserade.
Monsieur Aramis, become a poet, I beg of you.” “Bazin, my friend,” said Aramis, “I believe you meddle with my conversation.” Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.
“Ah!” said D’Artagnan with a smile, “you sell your productions at their weight in gold.
You are very fortunate, my friend; but take care or you will lose that letter which is peeping from your doublet, and which also comes, no doubt, from your publisher.” Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, and re-buttoned his doublet.
“My dear D’Artagnan,” said he, “if you please, we will join our friends; as I am rich, we will today begin to dine together again, expecting that you will be rich in your turn.” “My faith!” said D’Artagnan, with great pleasure.
“It is long since we have had a good dinner; and I, for my part, have a somewhat hazardous expedition for this evening, and shall not be sorry, I confess, to fortify myself with a few glasses of good old Burgundy.” “Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection to that,” said Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold had removed, as by magic, his ideas of conversion.
And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer the needs of the moment, he placed the others in the ebony box, inlaid with mother of pearl, in which was the famous handkerchief which served him as a talisman.
The two friends repaired to Athos’s, and he, faithful to his vow of not going out, took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them.
As he was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy, D’Artagnan and Aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him.
They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bac met Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving before him a mule and a horse.
D’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite free from joy.
“Aramis, look at that horse!” “Oh, the frightful brute!” said Aramis.
“Ah, my dear,” replied D’Artagnan, “upon that very horse I came to Paris.” “What, does Monsieur know this horse?” said Mousqueton.
“It is of an original color,” said Aramis; “I never saw one with such a hide in my life.” “I can well believe it,” replied D’Artagnan, “and that was why I got three crowns for him.
It must have been for his hide, for, _certes_, the carcass is not worth eighteen livres.
But how did this horse come into your hands, Mousqueton?” “Pray,” said the lackey, “say nothing about it, monsieur; it is a frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!” “How is that, Mousqueton?” “Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of quality, the Duchesse de—but, your pardon; my master has commanded me to be discreet.
She had forced us to accept a little souvenir, a magnificent Spanish _genet_ and an Andalusian mule, which were beautiful to look upon.
The husband heard of the affair; on their way he confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, and substituted these horrible animals.” “Which you are taking back to him?” said D’Artagnan.
“Exactly!” replied Mousqueton.
“You may well believe that we will not accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been promised to us.” “No, _pardieu;_ though I should like to have seen Porthos on my yellow horse.
But don’t let us hinder you, Mousqueton; go and perform your master’s orders.
Is he at home?” “Yes, monsieur,” said Mousqueton, “but in a very ill humor.
Get up!” He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins, while the two friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate Porthos.
He, having seen them crossing the yard, took care not to answer, and they rang in vain.
Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the Pont Neuf, still driving the two sorry animals before him, he reached the Rue aux Ours.
Arrived there, he fastened, according to the orders of his master, both horse and mule to the knocker of the procurator’s door; then, without taking any thought for their future, he returned to Porthos, and told him that his commission was completed.
In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had not eaten anything since the morning, made such a noise in raising and letting fall the knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged.
Coquenard recognized her present, and could not at first comprehend this restitution; but the visit of Porthos soon enlightened her.
The anger which fired the eyes of the Musketeer, in spite of his efforts to suppress it, terrified his sensitive inamorata.
In fact, Mousqueton had not concealed from his master that he had met D’Artagnan and Aramis, and that D’Artagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the Béarnese pony upon which he had come to Paris, and which he had sold for three crowns.
Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the procurator’s wife in the cloister of St.
The procurator, seeing he was going, invited him to dinner—an invitation which the Musketeer refused with a majestic air.
Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St.
Magloire, for she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there; but she was fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.
All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fall in the shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of a woman Porthos let fall upon the bowed head of the procurator’s wife.
One of our clients is a horsedealer; he owes money to the office, and is backward in his pay.
I took the mule and the horse for what he owed us; he assured me that they were two noble steeds.” “Well, madame,” said Porthos, “if he owed you more than five crowns, your horsedealer is a thief.” “There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur Porthos,” said the procurator’s wife, seeking to excuse herself.
“No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy things cheap ought to permit others to seek more generous friends.” And Porthos, turning on his heel, made a step to retire.
Monsieur Porthos!” cried the procurator’s wife.
I ought not to have driven a bargain when it was to equip a cavalier like you.” Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step.
The procurator’s wife fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud, all surrounded by duchesses and marchionesses, who cast bags of money at his feet.
“Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!” cried she.
“Stop, and let us talk.” “Talking with you brings me misfortune,” said Porthos.
“But, tell me, what do you ask?” “Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I asked you for something.” The procurator’s wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and in the violence of her grief she cried out, “Monsieur Porthos, I am ignorant of all such matters!
How should I know what horse furniture is?” “You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what they are; but you wished to be frugal, and consequently to lend at usury.” “It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair that wrong, upon my word of honor.” “How so?” asked the Musketeer.
Coquenard is going to the house of the Duc de Chaulnes, who has sent for him.
It is for a consultation, which will last three hours at least.
We shall be alone, and can make up our accounts.” “In good time.
Now you talk, my dear.” “You pardon me?” “We shall see,” said Porthos, majestically; and the two separated saying, “Till this evening.” “The devil!” thought Porthos, as he walked away, “it appears I am getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard’s strongbox at last.” Chapter XXXV.
A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by D’Artagnan at last arrived.
As was his custom, D’Artagnan presented himself at Milady’s at about nine o’clock.
He found her in a charming humor.
Never had he been so well received.
Our Gascon knew, by the first glance of his eye, that his billet had been delivered, and that this billet had had its effect.
Her mistress put on a charming face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the poor girl was so sad that she did not even notice Milady’s condescension.
D’Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and was forced to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature had made a mistake in their formation.
To the great lady she had given a heart vile and venal; to the _soubrette_ she had given the heart of a duchess.
At ten o’clock Milady began to appear restless.
D’Artagnan knew what she wanted.
She looked at the clock, rose, reseated herself, smiled at D’Artagnan with an air which said, “You are very amiable, no doubt, but you would be _charming_ if you would only depart.” D’Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand to kiss.
The young man felt her press his hand, and comprehended that this was a sentiment, not of coquetry, but of gratitude because of his departure.
“She loves him devilishly,” he murmured.
This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the antechamber, nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great door.
It was necessary that D’Artagnan should find alone the staircase and the little chamber.
As D’Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady in a delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by way of recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the commission, she had given Kitty a purse.
Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a corner, where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet.
The poor girl, under the caresses of D’Artagnan, lifted her head.
D’Artagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance.
She joined her hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a word.
As little sensitive as was the heart of D’Artagnan, he was touched by this mute sorrow; but he held too tenaciously to his projects, above all to this one, to change the program which he had laid out in advance.
He did not therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch; only he represented his action as one of simple vengeance.
For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady, doubtless to conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered Kitty to extinguish all the lights in the apartment, and even in the little chamber itself.
Before daybreak M. de Wardes must take his departure, still in obscurity.
Presently they heard Milady retire to her room.
D’Artagnan slipped into the wardrobe.
Hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded.
Kitty went to her mistress, and did not leave the door open; but the partition was so thin that one could hear nearly all that passed between the two women.
Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the smallest details of the pretended interview of the _soubrette_ with De Wardes when he received the letter; how he had responded; what was the expression of his face; if he seemed very amorous.
And to all these questions poor Kitty, forced to put on a pleasant face, responded in a stifled voice whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark, solely because happiness is egotistical.
Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count approached, Milady had everything about her darkened, and ordered Kitty to return to her own chamber, and introduce De Wardes whenever he presented himself.
Kitty’s detention was not long.
Hardly had D’Artagnan seen, through a crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty reclosed the door of communication.
“What is that noise?” demanded Milady.
“It is I,” said D’Artagnan in a subdued voice, “I, the Comte de Wardes.” “Oh, my God, my God!” murmured Kitty, “he has not even waited for the hour he himself named!” “Well,” said Milady, in a trembling voice, “why do you not enter?
Count, Count,” added she, “you know that I wait for you.” At this appeal D’Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and slipped into the chamber.
If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to his happy rival.
D’Artagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had not foreseen.
Jealousy gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much as poor Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber.
“Yes, Count,” said Milady, in her softest voice, and pressing his hand in her own, “I am happy in the love which your looks and your words have expressed to me every time we have met.
Oh, tomorrow, tomorrow, I must have some pledge from you which will prove that you think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!” and she slipped a ring from her finger onto D’Artagnan’s.
D’Artagnan remembered having seen this ring on the finger of Milady; it was a magnificent sapphire, encircled with brilliants.
The first movement of D’Artagnan was to return it, but Milady added, “No, no!
Besides, in accepting it,” she added, in a voice full of emotion, “you render me a much greater service than you imagine.” “This woman is full of mysteries,” murmured D’Artagnan to himself.
He even opened his mouth to tell Milady who he was, and with what a revengeful purpose he had come; but she added, “Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon barely failed to kill.” The monster was himself.
“Oh,” continued Milady, “do your wounds still make you suffer?” “Yes, much,” said D’Artagnan, who did not well know how to answer.
“Be tranquil,” murmured Milady; “I will avenge you—and cruelly!” “_Peste!_” said D’Artagnan to himself, “the moment for confidences has not yet come.” It took some time for D’Artagnan to resume this little dialogue; but then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had completely vanished.
This woman exercised over him an unaccountable power; he hated and adored her at the same time.
He would not have believed that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same heart, and by their union constitute a passion so strange, and as it were, diabolical.
Presently it sounded one o’clock.
It was necessary to separate.
D’Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt only the liveliest regret at the parting; and as they addressed each other in a reciprocally passionate adieu, another interview was arranged for the following week.
Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to D’Artagnan when he passed through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted him through the darkness, and only quit him at the staircase.
The next morning D’Artagnan ran to find Athos.
He was engaged in an adventure so singular that he wished for counsel.
He therefore told him all.
“Your Milady,” said he, “appears to be an infamous creature, but not the less you have done wrong to deceive her.
In one fashion or another you have a terrible enemy on your hands.” While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with diamonds which had taken, on D’Artagnan’s finger, the place of the queen’s ring, carefully kept in a casket.
“Yes,” said Athos, “it reminds me of a family jewel.” “It is beautiful, is it not?” said D’Artagnan.
“Yes,” said Athos, “magnificent.
I did not think two sapphires of such a fine water existed.
It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather Frenchwoman—for I am convinced she was born in France, though I have not questioned her.” “That ring comes from Milady?” cried Athos, with a voice in which it was easy to detect strong emotion.
Here it is,” replied D’Artagnan, taking it from his finger.
Athos examined it and became very pale.
A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of this gentleman.
“It is impossible it can be she,” said he.
And yet it is difficult to suppose such a resemblance should exist between two jewels.” “Do you know this ring?” said D’Artagnan.
“I thought I did,” replied Athos; “but no doubt I was mistaken.” And he returned D’Artagnan the ring without, however, ceasing to look at it.
“Pray, D’Artagnan,” said Athos, after a minute, “either take off that ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such cruel recollections that I shall have no head to converse with you.
Don’t ask me for counsel; don’t tell me you are perplexed what to do.
But stop! let me look at that sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its faces scratched by accident.” D’Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.
“Look,” said he, “is it not strange?” and he pointed out to D’Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.
“But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?” “From my mother, who inherited it from her mother.
As I told you, it is an old family jewel.” “And you—sold it?” asked D’Artagnan, hesitatingly.
“No,” replied Athos, with a singular smile.
“I gave it away in a night of love, as it has been given to you.” D’Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if there were abysses in Milady’s soul whose depths were dark and unknown.
“D’Artagnan,” said Athos, taking his hand, “you know I love you; if I had a son I could not love him better.
Take my advice, renounce this woman.
I do not know her, but a sort of intuition tells me she is a lost creature, and that there is something fatal about her.” “You are right,” said D’Artagnan; “I will have done with her.
I own that this woman terrifies me.” “Shall you have the courage?” said Athos.
On reaching home D’Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him.
A month of fever could not have changed her more than this one night of sleeplessness and sorrow.
She was sent by her mistress to the false De Wardes.
Her mistress was mad with love, intoxicated with joy.
She wished to know when her lover would meet her a second night; and poor Kitty, pale and trembling, awaited D’Artagnan’s reply.
The counsels of his friend, joined to the cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again.
As a reply, he wrote the following letter: Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting.
Since my convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that I am forced to regulate them a little.
COMTE DE WARDES Not a word about the sapphire.
Was the Gascon determined to keep it as a weapon against Milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve the sapphire as a last resource for his outfit?
That which would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that time quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the best families were frequently supported by their mistresses.
D’Artagnan gave the open letter to Kitty, who at first was unable to comprehend it, but who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time.
She could scarcely believe in her happiness; and D’Artagnan was forced to renew with the living voice the assurances which he had written.
And whatever might be—considering the violent character of Milady—the danger which the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her mistress, she ran back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.
The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival.
Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty’s in bringing it; but at the first words she read she became livid.
She crushed the paper in her hand, and turning with flashing eyes upon Kitty, she cried, “What is this letter?” “The answer to Madame’s,” replied Kitty, all in a tremble.
“Impossible!” cried Milady.
“It is impossible a gentleman could have written such a letter to a woman.” Then all at once, starting, she cried, “My God! can he have—” and she stopped.
She tried to go toward the window for air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, and she sank into an armchair.
Kitty, fearing she was ill, hastened toward her and was beginning to open her dress; but Milady started up, pushing her away.
“What do you want with me?” said she, “and why do you place your hand on me?” “I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her help,” responded the maid, frightened at the terrible expression which had come over her mistress’s face.
When I am insulted I do not faint; I avenge myself!” And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.
DREAM OF VENGEANCE That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d’Artagnan came as usual, he should be immediately admitted; but he did not come.
The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and related to him all that had passed on the preceding evening.
D’Artagnan smiled; this jealous anger of Milady was his revenge.
That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the preceding evening.
She renewed the order relative to the Gascon; but as before she expected him in vain.
The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at D’Artagnan’s, she was no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days; but on the contrary sad as death.
D’Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her; but she, as her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him.
This letter was in Milady’s handwriting; only this time it was addressed to M. d’Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.
D’ARTAGNAN, It is wrong thus to neglect your friends, particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a time.
My brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day before, but in vain.
Your very grateful, MILADY CLARIK “That’s all very simple,” said D’Artagnan; “I expected this letter.
“Listen to me, my dear girl,” said the Gascon, who sought for an excuse in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made Athos; “you must understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive invitation.
Milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman would go?” “Oh, my God!” said Kitty, “you know how to represent things in such a way that you are always in the right.
You are going now to pay your court to her again, and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in your own name and with your own face, it will be much worse than before.” Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen.
D’Artagnan reassured her as well as he could, and promised to remain insensible to the seductions of Milady.
He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be more grateful for her kindnesses than he was, and that he would be obedient to her orders.
He did not dare to write for fear of not being able—to such experienced eyes as those of Milady—to disguise his writing sufficiently.
As nine o’clock sounded, D’Artagnan was at the Place Royale.
It was evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned, for as soon as D’Artagnan appeared, before even he had asked if Milady were visible, one of them ran to announce him.
“Show him in,” said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing that D’Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.
D’Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady.
She was pale, and looked fatigued, either from tears or want of sleep.
The number of lights had been intentionally diminished, but the young woman could not conceal the traces of the fever which had devoured her for two days.
D’Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry.
She then made an extraordinary effort to receive him, but never did a more distressed countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile.
To the questions which D’Artagnan put concerning her health, she replied, “Bad, very bad.” “Then,” replied he, “my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt, stand in need of repose, and I will withdraw.” “No, no!” said Milady.
“On the contrary, stay, Monsieur d’Artagnan; your agreeable company will divert me.” “Oh, oh!” thought D’Artagnan.
On guard!” Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and conversed with more than her usual brilliancy.
At the same time the fever, which for an instant abandoned her, returned to give luster to her eyes, color to her cheeks, and vermillion to her lips.
D’Artagnan was again in the presence of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her enchantments.
His love, which he believed to be extinct but which was only asleep, awoke again in his heart.
Milady smiled, and D’Artagnan felt that he could damn himself for that smile.
There was a moment at which he felt something like remorse.
By degrees, Milady became more communicative.
She asked D’Artagnan if he had a mistress.
“Alas!” said D’Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he could assume, “can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me—to me, who, from the moment I saw you, have only breathed and sighed through you and for you?” Milady smiled with a strange smile.
Have you not perceived it?” “It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture, the more difficult they are to be won.” “Oh, difficulties do not affright me,” said D’Artagnan.
“I shrink before nothing but impossibilities.” “Nothing is impossible,” replied Milady, “to true love.” “Nothing, madame?” “Nothing,” replied Milady.
“The devil!” thought D’Artagnan.
Is she going to fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me for De Wardes?” D’Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady’s.
“Well, now,” she said, “let us see what you would do to prove this love of which you speak.” “All that could be required of me.
Order; I am ready.” “For everything?” “For everything,” cried D’Artagnan, who knew beforehand that he had not much to risk in engaging himself thus.
“Well, now let us talk a little seriously,” said Milady, in her turn drawing her armchair nearer to D’Artagnan’s chair.
“I am all attention, madame,” said he.
Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then, as if appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, “I have an enemy.” “You, madame!” said D’Artagnan, affecting surprise; “is that possible, my God?—good and beautiful as you are!” “A mortal enemy.” “Indeed!” “An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is war to the death.
May I reckon on you as an auxiliary?” D’Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature wished to reach.
“You may, madame,” said he, with emphasis.
“My arm and my life belong to you, like my love.” “Then,” said Milady, “since you are as generous as you are loving—” She stopped.
“Well?” demanded D’Artagnan.
“Well,” replied Milady, after a moment of silence, “from the present time, cease to talk of impossibilities.” “Do not overwhelm me with happiness,” cried D’Artagnan, throwing himself on his knees, and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to him.
“You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Milady.
“I could interpret one of your looks.” “Then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so much renown?” “Instantly!” “But on my part,” said Milady, “how should I repay such a service?
They are men who do nothing for nothing.” “You know the only reply that I desire,” said D’Artagnan, “the only one worthy of you and of me!” And he drew nearer to her.
She scarcely resisted.
“Interested man!” cried she, smiling.
“Ah,” cried D’Artagnan, really carried away by the passion this woman had the power to kindle in his heart, “ah, that is because my happiness appears so impossible to me; and I have such fear that it should fly away from me like a dream that I pant to make a reality of it.” “Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!” “I am at your orders,” said D’Artagnan.
“Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your beautiful eyes!” “Who told you that I had been weeping?” said she.
“It appeared to me—” “Such women as I never weep,” said Milady.
Come, tell me his name!” “Remember that his name is all my secret.” “Yet I must know his name.” “Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!” “You overwhelm me with joy.
What is his name?” “You know him.” “Indeed.” “Yes.” “It is surely not one of my friends?” replied D’Artagnan, affecting hesitation in order to make her believe him ignorant.
“If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?” cried Milady; and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.
“Not if it were my own brother!” cried D’Artagnan, as if carried away by his enthusiasm.
Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that was meant.
“I love your devotedness,” said Milady.
“Alas, do you love nothing else in me?” asked D’Artagnan.
The warm pressure made D’Artagnan tremble, as if by the touch that fever which consumed Milady attacked himself.
Her lips were cold; it appeared to D’Artagnan that he had embraced a statue.
He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by love.
He almost believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the crime of De Wardes.
Milady seized the occasion.
“De Wardes; I know it,” cried D’Artagnan.
“And how do you know it?” asked Milady, seizing both his hands, and endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart.
D’Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away, and that he had committed an error.
“Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say,” repeated Milady, “how do you know it?” “How do I know it?” said D’Artagnan.
“Yes.” “I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon where I was, showed a ring which he said he had received from you.” “Wretch!” cried Milady.
The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the very bottom of D’Artagnan’s heart.
“Well?” continued she.
“Well, I will avenge you of this wretch,” replied D’Artagnan, giving himself the airs of Don Japhet of Armenia.
“Thanks, my brave friend!” cried Milady; “and when shall I be avenged?” “Tomorrow—immediately—when you please!” Milady was about to cry out, “Immediately,” but she reflected that such precipitation would not be very gracious toward D’Artagnan.
Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand counsels to give to her defender, in order that he might avoid explanations with the count before witnesses.
All this was answered by an expression of D’Artagnan’s.
“Tomorrow,” said he, “you will be avenged, or I shall be dead.” “No,” said she, “you will avenge me; but you will not be dead.
I know something of him.” “But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in your contest with him.” “Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn her back tomorrow.” “Which means that you now hesitate?” “No, I do not hesitate; God forbid!
But would it be just to allow me to go to a possible death without having given me at least something more than hope?” Milady answered by a glance which said, “Is that all?—speak, then.” And then accompanying the glance with explanatory words, “That is but too just,” said she, tenderly.
“Oh, you are an angel!” exclaimed the young man.
“Except that which I ask of you, dear love.” “But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?” “I cannot wait till tomorrow.” “Silence!
It will be useless for him to find you here.” She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.
“Go out this way,” said she, opening a small private door, “and come back at eleven o’clock; we will then terminate this conversation.
“Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing there like a statue?
Do as I bid you: show the chevalier out; and this evening at eleven o’clock—you have heard what I said.” “It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven o’clock,” thought D’Artagnan; “that’s a settled custom.” Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.
“But,” said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from the reproaches of Kitty, “I must not play the fool.
This woman is certainly a great liar.
MILADY’S SECRET D’Artagnan left the hôtel instead of going up at once to Kitty’s chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do—and that for two reasons: the first, because by this means he should escape reproaches, recriminations, and prayers; the second, because he was not sorry to have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if possible, to fathom those of this woman.
What was most clear in the matter was that D’Artagnan loved Milady like a madman, and that she did not love him at all.
In an instant D’Artagnan perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he and De Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same, and that consequently he could not undertake, without committing suicide, to kill the Comte de Wardes.
But he also was spurred on by a ferocious desire of vengeance.
He wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it, he could not make up his mind to renounce it.
He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning at every ten steps to look at the light in Milady’s apartment, which was to be seen through the blinds.
It was evident that this time the young woman was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the first.
At length the light disappeared.
With this light was extinguished the last irresolution in the heart of D’Artagnan.
He recalled to his mind the details of the first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on fire he re-entered the hôtel and flew toward Kitty’s chamber.
The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs, wished to delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the watch, had heard the noise D’Artagnan had made, and opening the door, said, “Come in.” All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous effrontery, that D’Artagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what he heard.
He imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic intrigues one meets in dreams.
He, however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady, yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises over iron.
Jealousy, fury, offended pride, all the passions in short that dispute the heart of an outraged woman in love, urged her to make a revelation; but she reflected that she would be totally lost if she confessed having assisted in such a machination, and above all, that D’Artagnan would also be lost to her forever.
This last thought of love counseled her to make this last sacrifice.
D’Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his wishes.
It was no longer a rival who was beloved; it was himself who was apparently beloved.
A secret voice whispered to him, at the bottom of his heart, that he was but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressed till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but madness silenced this voice and stifled its murmurs.
And then our Gascon, with that large quantity of conceit which we know he possessed, compared himself with De Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for himself?
He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment.
Milady was no longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment terrified him; she was an ardent, passionate mistress, abandoning herself to love which she also seemed to feel.
When the transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who had not the same motives for forgetfulness that D’Artagnan had, was the first to return to reality, and asked the young man if the means which were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and De Wardes were already arranged in his mind.
But D’Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course, forgot himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it was too late to think about duels and sword thrusts.
This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind terrified Milady, whose questions became more pressing.
Then D’Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this impossible duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he could not succeed.
Milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her irresistible spirit and her iron will.
D’Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady to renounce, by pardoning De Wardes, the furious projects she had formed.
We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but D’Artagnan believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through the window blinds, and invaded the chamber with its paleness.
Seeing D’Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her on the Comte de Wardes.
“I am quite ready,” said D’Artagnan; “but in the first place I should like to be certain of one thing.” “And what is that?” asked Milady.
“That is, whether you really love me?” “I have given you proof of that, it seems to me.” “And I am yours, body and soul!” “Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must, in your turn, satisfy me of yours.
The pale light of the first rays of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.
“Really,” said she, “I believe you now begin to hesitate.” “No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de Wardes, since you have ceased to love him.
I think that a man must be so severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no other chastisement.” “Who told you that I loved him?” asked Milady, sharply.
“At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity, that you love another,” said the young man, in a caressing tone, “and I repeat that I am really interested for the count.” “You?” asked Milady.
“Yes, I.” “And why _you?_” “Because I alone know—” “What?” “That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty toward you as he appears.” “Indeed!” said Milady, in an anxious tone; “explain yourself, for I really cannot tell what you mean.” And she looked at D’Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly, with eyes which seemed to burn themselves away.
“This confession,” said she, growing paler, “what is this confession?” “You gave De Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did you not?” “No, no!
It is not true,” said Milady, in a tone of voice so firm, and with a countenance so unchanged, that if D’Artagnan had not been in such perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.
“Do not lie, my angel,” said D’Artagnan, smiling; “that would be useless.” “What do you mean?
Speak! you kill me.” “Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have already pardoned you.” “What next? what next?” “De Wardes cannot boast of anything.” “How is that?
You told me yourself that that ring—” “That ring I have!
The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the D’Artagnan of today are the same person.” The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame—a slight storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely deceived, and his error was not of long duration.
Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed D’Artagnan’s attempted embrace by a violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.
It was almost broad daylight.
D’Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India linen, to implore her pardon; but she, with a strong movement, tried to escape.
Then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders; and on one of those lovely shoulders, round and white, D’Artagnan recognized, with inexpressible astonishment, the _fleur-de-lis_—that indelible mark which the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted.
“Great God!” cried D’Artagnan, loosing his hold of her dress, and remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.
But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror.
He had doubtless seen all.
The young man now knew her secret, her terrible secret—the secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of which all the world was ignorant, except himself.
“Ah, wretch!” cried she, “you have basely betrayed me, and still more, you have my secret!
You shall die.” And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing table, opened it with a feverish and trembling hand, drew from it a small poniard, with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade, and then threw herself with a bound upon D’Artagnan.
Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was terrified at that wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and those bleeding lips.
He recoiled to the other side of the room as he would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his sword coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost unconsciously from the scabbard.
But without taking any heed of the sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him, and did not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat.
She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but D’Artagnan kept it free from her grasp, and presenting the point, sometimes at her eyes, sometimes at her breast, compelled her to glide behind the bedstead, while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty’s apartment.
Milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury, screaming in a formidable way.
As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel, D’Artagnan began to recover himself little by little.
“Well, beautiful lady, very well,” said he; “but, _pardieu_, if you don’t calm yourself, I will design a second _fleur-de-lis_ upon one of those pretty cheeks!” “Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!” howled Milady.
But D’Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to Kitty’s door.
At the noise they made, she in overturning the furniture in her efforts to get at him, he in screening himself behind the furniture to keep out of her reach, Kitty opened the door.
D’Artagnan, who had unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three paces from it.
With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the door, and placed all his weight against it, while Kitty pushed the bolts.
Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a strength apparently above that of a woman; but finding she could not accomplish this, she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard, the point of which repeatedly glittered through the wood.
Every blow was accompanied with terrible imprecations.
“Quick, Kitty, quick!” said D’Artagnan, in a low voice, as soon as the bolts were fast, “let me get out of the hôtel; for if we leave her time to turn round, she will have me killed by the servants.” “But you can’t go out so,” said Kitty; “you are naked.” “That’s true,” said D’Artagnan, then first thinking of the costume he found himself in, “that’s true.
In a turn of the hand she muffled him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a cloak.
She gave him some slippers, in which he placed his naked feet, and then conducted him down the stairs.
The porter was drawing the cord at the moment Milady cried from her window, “Don’t open!” The young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent gesture.
The moment she lost sight of him, Milady tumbled fainting into her chamber.
HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT D’Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed across half Paris, and did not stop till he came to Athos’s door.
The confusion of his mind, the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who, notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him precipitate his course.
He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos’s apartment, and knocked at the door enough to break it down.
Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons, and D’Artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to overturn the astonished lackey.
In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his speech.
“Holloa, there!” cried he; “what do you want, you strumpet?
What’s your business here, you hussy?” D’Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds of the cloak.
At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor devil perceived he had to deal with a man.
He then concluded it must be an assassin.
“Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!” said the young man; “I am D’Artagnan; don’t you know me?
Where is your master?” “You, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried Grimaud, “impossible.” “Grimaud,” said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown, “Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting yourself to speak?” “Ah, monsieur, it is—” “Silence!” Grimaud contented himself with pointing D’Artagnan out to his master with his finger.
Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his eyes—petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and mustaches stiff with agitation.
“Don’t laugh, my friend!” cried D’Artagnan; “for heaven’s sake, don’t laugh, for upon my soul, it’s no laughing matter!” And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying, “Are you wounded, my friend?
How pale you are!” “No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure!
Are you alone, Athos?” “_Parbleu!_ whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?” “Well, well!” and D’Artagnan rushed into Athos’s chamber.
“Come, speak!” said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that they might not be disturbed.
Have you killed the cardinal?
Come, come, tell me; I am dying with curiosity and uneasiness!” “Athos,” said D’Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and appearing in his shirt, “prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an unheard-of story.” “Well, but put on this dressing gown first,” said the Musketeer to his friend.
D’Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.
“Well,” replied D’Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos’s ear, and lowering his voice, “Milady is marked with a _fleur-de-lis_ upon her shoulder!” “Ah!” cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.
“Let us see,” said D’Artagnan.
“Are you _sure_ that the _other_ is dead?” “_The other?_” said Athos, in so stifled a voice that D’Artagnan scarcely heard him.
“This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years.” “Fair,” said Athos, “is she not?” “Very.” “Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and eyebrows?” “Yes.” “Tall, well-made?
She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the left?” “Yes.” “The _fleur-de-lis_ is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had been made to efface it by the application of poultices?” “Yes.” “But you say she is English?” “She is called Milady, but she may be French.
Lord de Winter is only her brother-in-law.” “I will see her, D’Artagnan!” “Beware, Athos, beware.
You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return you the like, and not to fail.” “She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself.” “She is capable of anything or everything.
Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!” D’Artagnan then related all—the mad passion of Milady and her menaces of death.
“Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris.
We are going according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone—” “She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes you.
Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!” “My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?” said Athos.
“Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?” “There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this woman is one of the cardinal’s spies, I am sure of that.” “In that case, take care!
If the cardinal does not hold you in high admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and as hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it’s a cardinal’s hatred, take care of yourself.
If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat, use every precaution.
Mistrust everything, in short, even your own shadow.” “Fortunately,” said D’Artagnan, “all this will be only necessary till after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I hope, only men to dread.” “In the meantime,” said Athos, “I renounce my plan of seclusion, and wherever you go, I will go with you.
You must return to the Rue des Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you.” “But however near it may be,” replied D’Artagnan, “I cannot go thither in this guise.” “That’s true,” said Athos, and he rang the bell.
Athos made him a sign to go to D’Artagnan’s residence, and bring back some clothes.
Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood perfectly, and set off.
“All this will not advance your outfit,” said Athos; “for if I am not mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you.
Fortunately, you have the sapphire.” “The jewel is yours, my dear Athos!
Did you not tell me it was a family jewel?” “Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told me.
It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is magnificent.
My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch.” “Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much value.” “I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that infamous creature?
Never; that ring is defiled, D’Artagnan.” “Sell it, then.” “Sell a jewel which came from my mother!
I vow I should consider it a profanation.” “Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it.
With that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the hands of usurers.” Athos smiled.
“You are a capital companion, D’Artagnan,” said he; “your never-failing cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction.
Well, let us pledge the ring, but upon one condition.” “What?” “That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred crowns for me.” “Don’t dream it, Athos.
A horse for Planchet, that’s all.
Besides, you forget that I have a ring likewise.” “To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least, I have thought so.” “Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger.
It is not only a valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman.” “I don’t at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
You shall take half the sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine; and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us.” “Well, I will take it, then,” said D’Artagnan.
At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter, anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him, had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.
D’Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same.
When the two were ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim, and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to follow his master.
They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs.
Bonacieux was standing at the door, and looked at D’Artagnan hatefully.
“Make haste, dear lodger,” said he; “there is a very pretty girl waiting for you upstairs; and you know women don’t like to be kept waiting.” “That’s Kitty!” said D’Artagnan to himself, and darted into the passage.
Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and crouching against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a tremble.
As soon as she perceived him, she cried, “You have promised your protection; you have promised to save me from her anger.
Remember, it is you who have ruined me!” “Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty,” said D’Artagnan; “be at ease, my girl.
But what happened after my departure?” “How can I tell!” said Kitty.
There exist no imprecations she did not pour out against you.
Then I thought she would remember it was through my chamber you had penetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I was your accomplice; so I took what little money I had and the best of my things, and I got away.
I am going away the day after tomorrow.” “Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier.
Help me out of Paris; help me out of France!” “I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle,” said D’Artagnan.
“No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of your acquaintance—in your own country, for instance.” “My dear little love!
In my country the ladies do without chambermaids.
I can manage your business for you.
Planchet, go and find Aramis.
Request him to come here directly.
We have something very important to say to him.” “I understand,” said Athos; “but why not Porthos?
I should have thought that his duchess—” “Oh, Porthos’s duchess is dressed by her husband’s clerks,” said D’Artagnan, laughing.
Isn’t it so, Kitty?” “I do not care where I live,” said Kitty, “provided I am well concealed, and nobody knows where I am.” “Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you are no longer jealous of me—” “Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near,” said Kitty, “I shall always love you.” “Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?” murmured Athos.
“And I, also,” said D’Artagnan, “I also.
I attach great importance to the question I am about to put to you.
Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman still?” “No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her—Monsieur Athos, this gentleman here.” “I?” cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is about to tread upon an adder.
“You, to be sure!” said D’Artagnan, pressing Athos’s hand.
“You know the interest we both take in this poor little Madame Bonacieux.
You understand, my dear girl,” continued D’Artagnan, “she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw at the door as you came in.” “Oh, my God!
About what time?” “Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago.” “Exactly so.” “And yesterday evening he came again.” “Yesterday evening?” “Yes, just before you came.” “My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies.
And do you believe he knew you again, Kitty?” “I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it was too late.” “Go down, Athos—he mistrusts you less than me—and see if he be still at his door.” Athos went down and returned immediately.
“He has gone,” said he, “and the house door is shut.” “He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the pigeons are at this moment in the dovecot.” “Well, then, let us all fly,” said Athos, “and leave nobody here but Planchet to bring us news.” “A minute.
The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave him to understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for Kitty.
Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring, “Will it be really rendering you a service, D’Artagnan?” “I shall be grateful to you all my life.” “Very well.
Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her friends who resides in the provinces, I believe, for a trustworthy maid.
If you can, my dear D’Artagnan, answer for Mademoiselle—” “Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted to the person who will give me the means of quitting Paris.” “Then,” said Aramis, “this falls out very well.” He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.
“And now, my dear girl,” said D’Artagnan, “you know that it is not good for any of us to be here.
Therefore let us separate.
We shall meet again in better days.” “And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may be,” said Kitty, “you will find me loving you as I love you today.” “Dicers’ oaths!” said Athos, while D’Artagnan went to conduct Kitty downstairs.
An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing to meet again at four o’clock with Athos, and leaving Planchet to guard the house.
Aramis returned home, and Athos and D’Artagnan busied themselves about pledging the sapphire.
As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three hundred pistoles on the ring.
Still further, the Jew told them that if they would sell it to him, as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings, he would give five hundred pistoles for it.
Athos and D’Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and the knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three hours to purchase the entire equipment of the Musketeer.
When a thing suited him he paid the price demanded, without thinking to ask for any abatement.
D’Artagnan would have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his shoulder, with a smile, and D’Artagnan understood that it was all very well for such a little Gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain, but not for a man who had the bearing of a prince.
The Musketeer met with a superb Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean and elegant, rising six years.
He examined him, and found him sound and without blemish.
They asked a thousand livres for him.
He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while D’Artagnan was discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money on the table.
But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased, Athos had not a sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles.
D’Artagnan offered his friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.
But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.
“How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased it?” said Athos.
“Five hundred pistoles.” “That is to say, two hundred more—a hundred pistoles for you and a hundred pistoles for me.
Well, now, that would be a real fortune to us, my friend; let us go back to the Jew’s again.” “What! will you—” “This ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then we shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain.
Go and tell him the ring is his, D’Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred pistoles with you.” “Reflect, Athos!” “Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to make sacrifices.
Go, D’Artagnan, go; Grimaud will accompany you with his musketoon.” A half hour afterward, D’Artagnan returned with the two thousand livres, and without having met with any accident.
It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not expect.
A VISION At four o’clock the four friends were all assembled with Athos.
Their anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared, and each countenance only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet—for behind all present happiness is concealed a fear for the future.
Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters for D’Artagnan.
The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a pretty seal in green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a green branch.
The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with the terrible arms of his Eminence the cardinal duke.
At the sight of the little letter the heart of D’Artagnan bounded, for he believed he recognized the handwriting, and although he had seen that writing but once, the memory of it remained at the bottom of his heart.
He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened it eagerly.
“That’s a snare,” said Athos; “don’t go, D’Artagnan.” “And yet,” replied D’Artagnan, “I think I recognize the writing.” “It may be counterfeit,” said Athos.
“Between six and seven o’clock the road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might as well go and ride in the forest of Bondy.” “But suppose we all go,” said D’Artagnan; “what the devil!
They won’t devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms, and all!” “And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our new equipments,” said Porthos.
Besides, we must try our own arms.” “Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure,” said Aramis, with his mild and careless manner.
“Gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, “it is half past four, and we have scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six.” “Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us,” said Porthos, “and that will be a pity.
Let us get ready, gentlemen.” “But this second letter,” said Athos, “you forget that; it appears to me, however, that the seal denotes that it deserves to be opened.
For my part, I declare, D’Artagnan, I think it of much more consequence than the little piece of waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your bosom.” D’Artagnan blushed.
“Well,” said he, “let us see, gentlemen, what are his Eminence’s commands,” and D’Artagnan unsealed the letter and read, “M. d’Artagnan, of the king’s Guards, company Dessessart, is expected at the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eight o’clock.
“LA HOUDINIERE, _Captain of the Guards_” “The devil!” said Athos; “here’s a rendezvous much more serious than the other.” “I will go to the second after attending the first,” said D’Artagnan.
“A gallant knight cannot decline a rendezvous with a lady; but a prudent gentleman may excuse himself from not waiting on his Eminence, particularly when he has reason to believe he is not invited to make his compliments.” “I am of Aramis’s opinion,” said Porthos.
“Gentlemen,” replied D’Artagnan, “I have already received by Monsieur de Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence.
I neglected it, and on the morrow a serious misfortune happened to me—Constance disappeared.
Whatever may ensue, I will go.” “If you are determined,” said Athos, “do so.” “But the Bastille?” said Aramis.
“Bah! you will get me out if they put me there,” said D’Artagnan.
“To be sure we will,” replied Aramis and Porthos, with admirable promptness and decision, as if that were the simplest thing in the world, “to be sure we will get you out; but meantime, as we are to set off the day after tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this Bastille.” “Let us do better than that,” said Athos; “do not let us leave him during the whole evening.
Let each of us wait at a gate of the palace with three Musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all suspicious in appearance, come out, let us fall upon it.
It is a long time since we have had a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal; Monsieur de Tréville must think us dead.” “To a certainty, Athos,” said Aramis, “you were meant to be a general of the army!
What do you think of the plan, gentlemen?” “Admirable!” replied the young men in chorus.
“Well,” said Porthos, “I will run to the hôtel, and engage our comrades to hold themselves in readiness by eight o’clock; the rendezvous, the Place du Palais-Cardinal.
Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the horses.” “I have no horse,” said D’Artagnan; “but that is of no consequence, I can take one of Monsieur de Tréville’s.” “That is not worth while,” said Aramis, “you can have one of mine.” “One of yours! how many have you, then?” asked D’Artagnan.
I cannot comprehend what induced you to buy three!” “Therefore I only purchased two,” said Aramis.
“The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?” “No, the third was brought to me this very morning by a groom out of livery, who would not tell me in whose service he was, and who said he had received orders from his master.” “Or his mistress,” interrupted D’Artagnan.
“That makes no difference,” said Aramis, coloring; “and who affirmed, as I said, that he had received orders from his master or mistress to place the horse in my stable, without informing me whence it came.” “It is only to poets that such things happen,” said Athos, gravely.
“Well, in that case, we can manage famously,” said D’Artagnan; “which of the two horses will you ride—that which you bought or the one that was given to you?” “That which was given to me, assuredly.
You cannot for a moment imagine, D’Artagnan, that I would commit such an offense toward—” “The unknown giver,” interrupted D’Artagnan.
“Or the mysterious benefactress,” said Athos.
“The one you bought will then become useless to you?” “Nearly so.” “And you selected it yourself?” “With the greatest care.
Richest, my dear fellow!” And D’Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket.
“Send your saddle, then, to the hôtel of the Musketeers, and your horse can be brought back with ours.” “Very well; but it is already five o’clock, so make haste.” A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end of the Rue Férou on a very handsome _genet_.
Mousqueton followed him upon an Auvergne horse, small but very handsome.
Porthos was resplendent with joy and pride.
At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the other end of the street upon a superb English charger.
Bazin followed him upon a roan, holding by the halter a vigorous Mecklenburg horse; this was D’Artagnan’s mount.
The two Musketeers met at the gate.
Athos and D’Artagnan watched their approach from the window.
“The devil!” cried Aramis, “you have a magnificent horse there, Porthos.” “Yes,” replied Porthos, “it is the one that ought to have been sent to me at first.
A bad joke of the husband’s substituted the other; but the husband has been punished since, and I have obtained full satisfaction.” Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their masters’ steeds.
D’Artagnan and Athos put themselves into saddle with their companions, and all four set forward; Athos upon a horse he owed to a woman, Aramis on a horse he owed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he owed to his procurator’s wife, and D’Artagnan on a horse he owed to his good fortune—the best mistress possible.
The lackeys followed.
As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good effect; and if Mme.
Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what a superb appearance he made upon his handsome Spanish _genet_, she would not have regretted the bleeding she had inflicted upon the strongbox of her husband.
Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Tréville, who was returning from St.
Germain; he stopped them to offer his compliments upon their appointments, which in an instant drew round them a hundred gapers.
D’Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. de Tréville of the letter with the great red seal and the cardinal’s arms.
It is well understood that he did not breathe a word about the other.
M. de Tréville approved of the resolution he had adopted, and assured him that if on the morrow he did not appear, he himself would undertake to find him, let him be where he might.
At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; the four friends pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. de Tréville.
A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the day began to decline, carriages were passing and repassing.
D’Artagnan, keeping at some distance from his friends, darted a scrutinizing glance into every carriage that appeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.
At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as twilight was beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared, coming at a quick pace on the road of Sèvres.
A presentiment instantly told D’Artagnan that this carriage contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; the young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so violently.
Almost instantly a female head was put out at the window, with two fingers placed upon her mouth, either to enjoin silence or to send him a kiss.
D’Artagnan uttered a slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather this apparition—for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision—was Mme.
By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction given, D’Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a few strides overtook the carriage; but the window was hermetically closed, the vision had disappeared.
D’Artagnan then remembered the injunction: “If you value your own life or that of those who love you, remain motionless, and as if you had seen nothing.” He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the poor woman who had evidently exposed herself to great danger by appointing this rendezvous.
The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace, till it dashed into Paris, and disappeared.
D’Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and not knowing what to think.
Bonacieux and if she was returning to Paris, why this fugitive rendezvous, why this simple exchange of a glance, why this lost kiss?
If, on the other side, it was not she—which was still quite possible—for the little light that remained rendered a mistake easy—might it not be the commencement of some plot against him through the allurement of this woman, for whom his love was known?
His three companions joined him.
The opinion of Athos was that it was indeed she; but less preoccupied by that pretty face than D’Artagnan, he had fancied he saw a second head, a man’s head, inside the carriage.
“If that be the case,” said D’Artagnan, “they are doubtless transporting her from one prison to another.
But what can they intend to do with the poor creature, and how shall I ever meet her again?” “Friend,” said Athos, gravely, “remember that it is the dead alone with whom we are not likely to meet again on this earth.
You know something of that, as well as I do, I think.
Now, if your mistress is not dead, if it is she we have just seen, you will meet with her again some day or other.
And perhaps, my God!” added he, with that misanthropic tone which was peculiar to him, “perhaps sooner than you wish.” Half past seven had sounded.
The carriage had been twenty minutes behind the time appointed.
D’Artagnan’s friends reminded him that he had a visit to pay, but at the same time bade him observe that there was yet time to retract.
But D’Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious.
He had made up his mind that he would go to the Palais-Cardinal, and that he would learn what his Eminence had to say to him.
Honoré, and in the Place du Palais-Cardinal they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walking about in expectation of their comrades.
There only they explained to them the matter in hand.
D’Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the king’s Musketeers, in which it was known he would one day take his place; he was considered beforehand as a comrade.
It resulted from these antecedents that everyone entered heartily into the purpose for which they met; besides, it would not be unlikely that they would have an opportunity of playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn, and for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always ready.
Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command of one, gave the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos; and then each group went and took their watch near an entrance.
D’Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principal gate.
Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was not without a little uneasiness as he ascended the great staircase, step by step.
His conduct toward Milady bore a strong resemblance to treachery, and he was very suspicious of the political relations which existed between that woman and the cardinal.
Still further, De Wardes, whom he had treated so ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; and D’Artagnan knew that while his Eminence was terrible to his enemies, he was strongly attached to his friends.
“If De Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal, which is not to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as is probable, I may consider myself almost as a condemned man,” said D’Artagnan, shaking his head.
Milady has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made the cup overflow.” “Fortunately,” added he, “my good friends are down yonder, and they will not allow me to be carried away without a struggle.
Nevertheless, Monsieur de Tréville’s company of Musketeers alone cannot maintain a war against the cardinal, who disposes of the forces of all France, and before whom the queen is without power and the king without will.
D’Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you have excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!” He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber.
He placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty, who led him into the waiting room and passed on into the interior of the palace.
In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinal’s Guards, who recognized D’Artagnan, and knowing that it was he who had wounded Jussac, they looked upon him with a smile of singular meaning.
This smile appeared to D’Artagnan to be of bad augury.
Only, as our Gascon was not easily intimidated—or rather, thanks to a great pride natural to the men of his country, he did not allow one easily to see what was passing in his mind when that which was passing at all resembled fear—he placed himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the Guards, and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by no means deficient in majesty.
The usher returned and made a sign to D’Artagnan to follow him.
It appeared to the young man that the Guards, on seeing him depart, chuckled among themselves.
He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a library, and found himself in the presence of a man seated at a desk and writing.
The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking a word.
D’Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.
D’Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with some judge examining his papers; but he perceived that the man at the desk wrote, or rather corrected, lines of unequal length, scanning the words on his fingers.
At the end of an instant the poet closed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written “Mirame, a Tragedy in Five Acts,” and raised his head.
D’Artagnan recognized the cardinal.
A TERRIBLE VISION The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheek upon his hand, and looked intently at the young man for a moment.
No one had a more searching eye than the Cardinal de Richelieu, and D’Artagnan felt this glance run through his veins like a fever.
He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in his hand and awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, without too much assurance, but also without too much humility.
“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “are you a D’Artagnan from Béarn?” “Yes, monseigneur,” replied the young man.
“There are several branches of the D’Artagnans at Tarbes and in its environs,” said the cardinal; “to which do you belong?” “I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars under the great King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty.” “That is well.
It is you who set out seven or eight months ago from your country to seek your fortune in the capital?” “Yes, monseigneur.” “You came through Meung, where something befell you.
I don’t very well know what, but still something.” “Monseigneur,” said D’Artagnan, “this was what happened to me—” “Never mind, never mind!” resumed the cardinal, with a smile which indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it.
“You were recommended to Monsieur de Tréville, were you not?” “Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at Meung—” “The letter was lost,” replied his Eminence; “yes, I know that.
But Monsieur de Tréville is a skilled physiognomist, who knows men at first sight; and he placed you in the company of his brother-in-law, Monsieur Dessessart, leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter the Musketeers.” “Monseigneur is correctly informed,” said D’Artagnan.
“Since that time many things have happened to you.
You were walking one day behind the Chartreux, when it would have been better if you had been elsewhere.
Then you took with your friends a journey to the waters of Forges; they stopped on the road, but you continued yours.
That is all very simple: you had business in England.” “Monseigneur,” said D’Artagnan, quite confused, “I went—” “Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere—that concerns nobody.
I know, because it is my office to know everything.
On your return you were received by an august personage, and I perceive with pleasure that you preserve the souvenir she gave you.” D’Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen’s diamond, which he wore, and quickly turned the stone inward; but it was too late.
“The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois,” resumed the cardinal.
You have not returned that visit, and you were wrong.” “Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with your Eminence.” “How could that be, monsieur?
Could you incur my displeasure by having followed the orders of your superiors with more intelligence and courage than another would have done?
As a proof, remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to come to me, and seek in your memory for what happened to you that very night.” That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme.
Bonacieux took place.
D’Artagnan trembled; and he likewise recollected that during the past half hour the poor woman had passed close to him, without doubt carried away by the same power that had caused her disappearance.
“In short,” continued the cardinal, “as I have heard nothing of you for some time past, I wished to know what you were doing.
You must yourself have remarked how much you have been considered in all the circumstances.” D’Artagnan bowed with respect.
“That,” continued the cardinal, “arose not only from a feeling of natural equity, but likewise from a plan I have marked out with respect to you.” D’Artagnan became more and more astonished.
“I wished to explain this plan to you on the day you received my first invitation; but you did not come.
Fortunately, nothing is lost by this delay, and you are now about to hear it.
Sit down there, before me, D’Artagnan; you are gentleman enough not to listen standing.” And the cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young man, who was so astonished at what was passing that he awaited a second sign from his interlocutor before he obeyed.
“You are brave, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” continued his Eminence; “you are prudent, which is still better.
But young as you are, and scarcely entering into the world, you have powerful enemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroy you.” “Alas, monseigneur!” replied the young man, “very easily, no doubt, for they are strong and well supported, while I am alone.” “Yes, that’s true; but alone as you are, you have done much already, and will do still more, I don’t doubt.
Yet you have need, I believe, to be guided in the adventurous career you have undertaken; for, if I mistake not, you came to Paris with the ambitious idea of making your fortune.” “I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur,” said D’Artagnan.
“There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you are a man of understanding.
Now, what would you say to an ensign’s commission in my Guards, and a company after the campaign?” “Ah, monseigneur.” “You accept it, do you not?” “Monseigneur,” replied D’Artagnan, with an embarrassed air.
You refuse?” cried the cardinal, with astonishment.
“I am in his Majesty’s Guards, monseigneur, and I have no reason to be dissatisfied.” “But it appears to me that my Guards—mine—are also his Majesty’s Guards; and whoever serves in a French corps serves the king.” “Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words.” “You want a pretext, do you not?
Well, you have this excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, the opportunity which I offer you—so much for the world.
As regards yourself, the need of protection; for it is fit you should know, Monsieur d’Artagnan, that I have received heavy and serious complaints against you.
You do not consecrate your days and nights wholly to the king’s service.” D’Artagnan colored.
“In fact,” said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundle of papers, “I have here a whole pile which concerns you.
I know you to be a man of resolution; and your services, well directed, instead of leading you to ill, might be very advantageous to you.
Come; reflect, and decide.” “Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur,” replied D’Artagnan, “and I am conscious of a greatness of soul in your Eminence that makes me mean as an earthworm; but since Monseigneur permits me to speak freely—” D’Artagnan paused.
“Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind to me; and on the contrary, I think I have not proved myself worthy of your goodness.
The siege of La Rochelle is about to be resumed, monseigneur.
I shall serve under the eye of your Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to conduct myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your attention, then I shall at least leave behind me some brilliant action to justify the protection with which you honor me.
Everything is best in its time, monseigneur.
We owe nothing to our enemies; and let me give you a piece of advice; take care of yourself, Monsieur d’Artagnan, for from the moment I withdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an _obolus_ for your life.” “I will try to do so, monseigneur,” replied the Gascon, with a noble confidence.
I will have my eye upon you, for I shall be there,” replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger to a magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, “and on our return, well—we will settle our account!” “Ah, monseigneur,” cried D’Artagnan, “spare me the weight of your displeasure.
Remain neutral monseigneur, if you find that I act as becomes a gallant man.” “Young man,” said Richelieu, “if I shall be able to say to you at another time what I have said to you today, I promise you to do so.” This last expression of Richelieu’s conveyed a terrible doubt; it alarmed D’Artagnan more than a menace would have done, for it was a warning.
The cardinal, then, was seeking to preserve him from some misfortune which threatened him.
He opened his mouth to reply, but with a haughty gesture the cardinal dismissed him.
D’Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failed him, and he felt inclined to return.
Then the noble and severe countenance of Athos crossed his mind; if he made the compact with the cardinal which he required, Athos would no more give him his hand—Athos would renounce him.
It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is the influence of a truly great character on all that surrounds it.
D’Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he had entered, and found Athos and the four Musketeers waiting his appearance, and beginning to grow uneasy.
With a word, D’Artagnan reassured them; and Planchet ran to inform the other sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer, as his master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.
Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquired eagerly the cause of the strange interview; but D’Artagnan confined himself to telling them that M. de Richelieu had sent for him to propose to him to enter into his guards with the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.
Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing.
But when they were alone he said, “You have done that which you ought to have done, D’Artagnan; but perhaps you have been wrong.” D’Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to a secret voice of his soul, which told him that great misfortunes awaited him.
The whole of the next day was spent in preparations for departure.
D’Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Tréville.
At that time it was believed that the separation of the Musketeers and the Guards would be but momentary, the king holding his Parliament that very day and proposing to set out the day after.
M. de Tréville contented himself with asking D’Artagnan if he could do anything for him, but D’Artagnan answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.
That night brought together all those comrades of the Guards of M.
Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. de Tréville who had been accustomed to associate together.
That night, then, was somewhat riotous, as may be imagined.
In such cases extreme preoccupation is only to be combated by extreme carelessness.
At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends separated; the Musketeers hastening to the hôtel of M. de Tréville, the Guards to that of M.
Each of the captains then led his company to the Louvre, where the king held his review.
The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a little from his usual lofty bearing.
In fact, the evening before, a fever had seized him in the midst of the Parliament, while he was holding his Bed of Justice.
He had, not the less, decided upon setting out that same evening; and in spite of the remonstrances that had been offered to him, he persisted in having the review, hoping by setting it at defiance to conquer the disease which began to lay hold upon him.
The review over, the Guards set forward alone on their march, the Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowed Porthos time to go and take a turn in his superb equipment in the Rue aux Ours.
The procurator’s wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on his fine horse.
She loved Porthos too dearly to allow him to part thus; she made him a sign to dismount and come to her.
Porthos was magnificent; his spurs jingled, his cuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against his ample limbs.
This time the clerks evinced no inclination to laugh, such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.
The Musketeer was introduced to M.
Coquenard, whose little gray eyes sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all blazing new.
Nevertheless, one thing afforded him inward consolation; it was expected by everybody that the campaign would be a severe one.
He whispered a hope to himself that this beloved relative might be killed in the field.
Porthos paid his compliments to M.
Coquenard and bade him farewell.
Coquenard wished him all sorts of prosperities.
Coquenard, she could not restrain her tears; but no evil impressions were taken from her grief as she was known to be very much attached to her relatives, about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with her husband.
Coquenard’s chamber; they were heartrending.
As long as the procurator’s wife could follow him with her eyes, she waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far out of the window as to lead people to believe she wished to precipitate herself.
Porthos received all these attentions like a man accustomed to such demonstrations, only on turning the corner of the street he lifted his hat gracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.
In the meantime D’Artagnan was defiling with his company.
Arriving at the Faubourg St.
Antoine, he turned round to look gaily at the Bastille; but as it was the Bastille alone he looked at, he did not observe Milady, who, mounted upon a light chestnut horse, designated him with her finger to two ill-looking men who came close up to the ranks to take notice of him.
To a look of interrogation which they made, Milady replied by a sign that it was he.
Then, certain that there could be no mistake in the execution of her orders, she started her horse and disappeared.
The two men followed the company, and on leaving the Faubourg St.
Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped, which a servant without livery had waiting for them.
THE SIEGE OF LA ROCHELLE The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political events of the reign of Louis XIII., and one of the great military enterprises of the cardinal.
It is, then, interesting and even necessary that we should say a few words about it, particularly as many details of this siege are connected in too important a manner with the story we have undertaken to relate to allow us to pass it over in silence.
The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were extensive.
Let us unfold them first, and then pass on to the private plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his Eminence than the others.
Of the important cities given up by Henry IV. to the Huguenots as places of safety, there only remained La Rochelle.
It became necessary, therefore, to destroy this last bulwark of Calvinism—a dangerous leaven with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly mingling.
Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers of all nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect, flocked at the first summons under the standard of the Protestants, and organized themselves like a vast association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts of Europe.
La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of dissensions and ambition.
Moreover, its port was the last in the kingdom of France open to the English, and by closing it against England, our eternal enemy, the cardinal completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.
The cannonade of the Isle of Ré presaged to him the dragonnades of the Cévennes; the taking of La Rochelle was the preface to the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.
We have hinted that by the side of these views of the leveling and simplifying minister, which belong to history, the chronicler is forced to recognize the lesser motives of the amorous man and jealous rival.
Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen.
Was this love a simple political affair, or was it naturally one of those profound passions which Anne of Austria inspired in those who approached her?
That we are not able to say; but at all events, we have seen, by the anterior developments of this story, that Buckingham had the advantage over him, and in two or three circumstances, particularly that of the diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three Musketeers and the courage and conduct of D’Artagnan, cruelly mystified him.
It was, then, Richelieu’s object, not only to get rid of an enemy of France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but this vengeance must be grand and striking and worthy in every way of a man who held in his hand, as his weapon for combat, the forces of a kingdom.
Richelieu knew that in combating England he combated Buckingham; that in triumphing over England he triumphed over Buckingham—in short, that in humiliating England in the eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham in the eyes of the queen.
On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honor of England, was moved by interests exactly like those of the cardinal.
Buckingham also was pursuing a private vengeance.
Buckingham could not under any pretense be admitted into France as an ambassador; he wished to enter it as a conqueror.
It resulted from this that the real stake in this game, which two most powerful kingdoms played for the good pleasure of two amorous men, was simply a kind look from Anne of Austria.
The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham.
Arriving unexpectedly in sight of the Isle of Ré with ninety vessels and nearly twenty thousand men, he had surprised the Comte de Toiras, who commanded for the king in the Isle, and he had, after a bloody conflict, effected his landing.
Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished the Baron de Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen months old, and that this little girl was afterward Mme. de Sévigné.
Martin with his garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fort called the fort of La Prée.
This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; and till the king and he could take the command of the siege of La Rochelle, which was determined, he had sent Monsieur to direct the first operations, and had ordered all the troops he could dispose of to march toward the theater of war.
It was of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our friend D’Artagnan formed a part.
The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bed of Justice had been held; but on rising from his Bed of Justice on the twenty-eighth of June, he felt himself attacked by fever.
He was, notwithstanding, anxious to set out; but his illness becoming more serious, he was forced to stop at Villeroy.
Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted.
It followed that D’Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simply in the Guards, found himself, for the time at least, separated from his good friends—Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
This separation, which was no more than an unpleasant circumstance, would have certainly become a cause of serious uneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknown dangers he was surrounded.
He, however, arrived without accident in the camp established before La Rochelle, on the tenth of the month of September of the year 1627.
Everything was in the same state.
The Duke of Buckingham and his English, masters of the Isle of Ré, continued to besiege, but without success, the citadel St.
Martin and the fort of La Prée; and hostilities with La Rochelle had commenced, two or three days before, about a fort which the Duc d’Angoulême had caused to be constructed near the city.
Dessessart, took up their quarters at the Minimes; but, as we know, D’Artagnan, possessed with ambition to enter the Musketeers, had formed but few friendships among his comrades, and he felt himself isolated and given up to his own reflections.
His reflections were not very cheerful.
From the time of his arrival in Paris, he had been mixed up with public affairs; but his own private affairs had made no great progress, either in love or fortune.
Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able to discover what had become of her.
As to fortune, he had made—he, humble as he was—an enemy of the cardinal; that is to say, of a man before whom trembled the greatest men of the kingdom, beginning with the king.
For a mind so perspicuous as that of D’Artagnan, this indulgence was a light by which he caught a glimpse of a better future.
Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared, he thought; but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not to be despised.
In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection and good will of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an additional cause of persecution, and her protection, as it was known, protected badly—as witness Chalais and Mme.
What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond, worth five or six thousand livres, which he wore on his finger; and even this diamond—supposing that D’Artagnan, in his projects of ambition, wished to keep it, to make it someday a pledge for the gratitude of the queen—had not in the meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more value than the gravel he trod under his feet.
We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for D’Artagnan made these reflections while walking solitarily along a pretty little road which led from the camp to the village of Angoutin.
Now, these reflections had led him further than he intended, and the day was beginning to decline when, by the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the barrel of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.
D’Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding.
He comprehended that the musket had not come there of itself, and that he who bore it had not concealed himself behind a hedge with any friendly intentions.
He determined, therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he could when, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock, he perceived the extremity of another musket.
This was evidently an ambuscade.
The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw, with a certain degree of inquietude, that it was leveled in his direction; but as soon as he perceived that the orifice of the barrel was motionless, he threw himself upon the ground.
At the same instant the gun was fired, and he heard the whistling of a ball pass over his head.
D’Artagnan sprang up with a bound, and at the same instant the ball from the other musket tore up the gravel on the very spot on the road where he had thrown himself with his face to the ground.
D’Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a ridiculous death in order that it may be said of them that they did not retreat a single step.
Besides, courage was out of the question here; D’Artagnan had fallen into an ambush.
As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as he ran, and arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of breath.
This event might have three causes: The first and the most natural was that it might be an ambuscade of the Rochellais, who might not be sorry to kill one of his Majesty’s Guards, because it would be an enemy the less, and this enemy might have a well-furnished purse in his pocket.
D’Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball, and shook his head.
The ball was not a musket ball—it was an arquebus ball.
The accuracy of the aim had first given him the idea that a special weapon had been employed.
This could not, then, be a military ambuscade, as the ball was not of the regular caliber.
This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal.
It may be observed that at the very moment when, thanks to the ray of the sun, he perceived the gun barrel, he was thinking with astonishment on the forbearance of his Eminence with respect to him.
But D’Artagnan again shook his head.
For people toward whom he had but to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarely recourse to such means.
It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.
He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of the assassins; he had escaped so rapidly that he had not had leisure to notice anything.
“Ah, my poor friends!” murmured D’Artagnan; “where are you?
And that you should fail me!” D’Artagnan passed a very bad night.
Three or four times he started up, imagining that a man was approaching his bed for the purpose of stabbing him.
Nevertheless, day dawned without darkness having brought any accident.
But D’Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferred was not relinquished.
D’Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as a reason to himself that the weather was bad.
The guards were under arms, and D’Artagnan took his place in the midst of his comrades.
Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all the superior officers approached him to pay their compliments, M.
Dessessart, captain of the Guards, as well as the others.
At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared to D’Artagnan that M.
Dessessart made him a sign to approach.
He waited for a fresh gesture on the part of his superior, for fear he might be mistaken; but this gesture being repeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive orders.
“Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for a dangerous mission, but one which will do honor to those who shall accomplish it; and I made you a sign in order that you might hold yourself in readiness.” “Thanks, my captain!” replied D’Artagnan, who wished for nothing better than an opportunity to distinguish himself under the eye of the lieutenant general.
In fact the Rochellais had made a _sortie_ during the night, and had retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gained possession two days before.
The matter was to ascertain, by reconnoitering, how the enemy guarded this bastion.
At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, and said, “I want for this mission three or four volunteers, led by a man who can be depended upon.” “As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under my hand, monsieur,” said M.
Dessessart, pointing to D’Artagnan; “and as to the four or five volunteers, Monsieur has but to make his intentions known, and the men will not be wanting.” “Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!” said D’Artagnan, raising his sword.
Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang forward, and two other soldiers having joined them, the number was deemed sufficient.
D’Artagnan declined all others, being unwilling to take the first chance from those who had the priority.
It was not known whether, after the taking of the bastion, the Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it; the object then was to examine the place near enough to verify the reports.
D’Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followed the trench; the two Guards marched abreast with him, and the two soldiers followed behind.
They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench, till they came within a hundred paces of the bastion.
There, on turning round, D’Artagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared.
He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayed behind, and he continued to advance.
At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves within about sixty paces of the bastion.
They saw no one, and the bastion seemed abandoned.
The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating whether they should proceed any further, when all at once a circle of smoke enveloped the giant of stone, and a dozen balls came whistling around D’Artagnan and his companions.
A longer stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence.
D’Artagnan and his two companions turned their backs, and commenced a retreat which resembled a flight.
On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve them as a rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell.
The other, who was safe and sound, continued his way toward the camp.
D’Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus, and stooped to raise him and assist him in regaining the lines; but at this moment two shots were fired.
One ball struck the head of the already-wounded guard, and the other flattened itself against a rock, after having passed within two inches of D’Artagnan.
The idea of the two soldiers who had abandoned him occurred to his mind, and with them he remembered the assassins of two evenings before.
He resolved this time to know with whom he had to deal, and fell upon the body of his comrade as if he were dead.
He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work within thirty paces of him; they were the heads of the two soldiers.
D’Artagnan had not been deceived; these two men had only followed for the purpose of assassinating him, hoping that the young man’s death would be placed to the account of the enemy.
As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime, they came up to him with the purpose of making sure.
Fortunately, deceived by D’Artagnan’s trick, they neglected to reload their guns.
When they were within ten paces of him, D’Artagnan, who in falling had taken care not to let go his sword, sprang up close to them.
The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp without having killed their man, they should be accused by him; therefore their first idea was to join the enemy.
He aimed a terrible blow at D’Artagnan, who avoided it by springing to one side; but by this movement he left a passage free to the bandit, who darted off toward the bastion.
As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion were ignorant of the intentions of the man they saw coming toward them, they fired upon him, and he fell, struck by a ball which broke his shoulder.
Meantime D’Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier, attacking him with his sword.
The conflict was not long; the wretch had nothing to defend himself with but his discharged arquebus.
The sword of the Guardsman slipped along the barrel of the now-useless weapon, and passed through the thigh of the assassin, who fell.
D’Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his throat.
“Pardon, pardon, my officer, and I will tell you all.” “Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your life for it?” asked the young man, withholding his arm.
“Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man of twenty, as you are, and who may hope for everything, being handsome and brave, as you are.” “Wretch,” cried D’Artagnan, “speak quickly!
Who employed you to assassinate me?” “A woman whom I don’t know, but who is called Milady.” “But if you don’t know this woman, how do you know her name?” “My comrade knows her, and called her so.
Well, that was a temptation for two wretches like you.
I understand why you accepted it, and I grant you my pardon; but upon one condition.” “What is that?” said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving that all was not over.
How can I go and fetch that letter under the fire of the bastion?” “You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it, or I swear you shall die by my hand.” “Pardon, monsieur; pity!
In the name of that young lady you love, and whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!” cried the bandit, throwing himself upon his knees and leaning upon his hand—for he began to lose his strength with his blood.
“And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, and that I believed that woman dead?” asked D’Artagnan.
“By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket.” “You see, then,” said D’Artagnan, “that I must have that letter.
So no more delay, no more hesitation; or else whatever may be my repugnance to soiling my sword a second time with the blood of a wretch like you, I swear by my faith as an honest man—” and at these words D’Artagnan made so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up.
“Stop, stop!” cried he, regaining strength by force of terror.
“I will go—I will go!” D’Artagnan took the soldier’s arquebus, made him go on before him, and urged him toward his companion by pricking him behind with his sword.
It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a long track of blood on the ground he passed over, pale with approaching death, trying to drag himself along without being seen to the body of his accomplice, which lay twenty paces from him.
Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with a cold sweat, that D’Artagnan took pity on him, and casting upon him a look of contempt, “Stop,” said he, “I will show you the difference between a man of courage and such a coward as you.
Stay where you are; I will go myself.” And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing the movements of the enemy and taking advantage of the accidents of the ground, D’Artagnan succeeded in reaching the second soldier.
D’Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted the assassin onto his shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.
A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls which penetrated the flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony, proved to D’Artagnan that the would-be assassin had saved his life.
D’Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse beside the wounded man, who was as pale as death.
A leather pocketbook, a purse, in which was evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had received, with a dice box and dice, completed the possessions of the dead man.
He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse to the wounded man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.
Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter, that which he had sought at the risk of his life: “Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in safety in the convent, which you should never have allowed her to reach, try, at least, not to miss the man.
If you do, you know that my hand stretches far, and that you shall pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have from me.” No signature.
Nevertheless it was plain the letter came from Milady.
He consequently kept it as a piece of evidence, and being in safety behind the angle of the trench, he began to interrogate the wounded man.
He confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade—the same who was killed—to carry off a young woman who was to leave Paris by the Barrière de La Villette; but having stopped to drink at a cabaret, they had missed the carriage by ten minutes.
“But what were you to do with that woman?” asked D’Artagnan, with anguish.
“We were to have conveyed her to a hôtel in the Place Royale,” said the wounded man.
“Yes, yes!” murmured D’Artagnan; “that’s the place—Milady’s own residence!” Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible thirst for vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, as well as all who loved him, and how well she must be acquainted with the affairs of the court, since she had discovered all.
There could be no doubt she owed this information to the cardinal.
But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy, that the queen must have discovered the prison in which poor Mme.
Bonacieux was explaining her devotion, and that she had freed her from that prison; and the letter he had received from the young woman, and her passage along the road of Chaillot like an apparition, were now explained.
Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to find Mme.
Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.
This idea completely restored clemency to his heart.
He turned toward the wounded man, who had watched with intense anxiety all the various expressions of his countenance, and holding out his arm to him, said, “Come, I will not abandon you thus.
The Guardsman who had returned at the first discharge announced the death of his four companions.
They were therefore much astonished and delighted in the regiment when they saw the young man come back safe and sound.
D’Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a _sortie_ which he improvised.
He described the death of the other soldier, and the perils they had encountered.
This recital was for him the occasion of veritable triumph.
The whole army talked of this expedition for a day, and Monsieur paid him his compliments upon it.
Besides this, as every great action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploit of D’Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility he had lost.
In fact, D’Artagnan believed that he might be tranquil, as one of his two enemies was killed and the other devoted to his interests.
This tranquillity proved one thing—that D’Artagnan did not yet know Milady.
THE ANJOU WINE After the most disheartening news of the king’s health, a report of his convalescence began to prevail in the camp; and as he was very anxious to be in person at the siege, it was said that as soon as he could mount a horse he would set forward.
Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the other he might expect to be removed from his command by the Duc d’Angoulême, by Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were all eager for his post, did but little, lost his days in wavering, and did not dare to attempt any great enterprise to drive the English from the Isle of Ré, where they still besieged the citadel St.
Martin and the fort of La Prée, as on their side the French were besieging La Rochelle.
D’Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, as always happens after a past danger, particularly when the danger seems to have vanished.
He only felt one uneasiness, and that was at not hearing any tidings from his friends.
But one morning at the commencement of the month of November everything was explained to him by this letter, dated from Villeroy: M.
Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after having had an entertainment at my house and enjoying themselves very much, created such a disturbance that the provost of the castle, a rigid man, has ordered them to be confined for some days; but I accomplish the order they have given me by forwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou wine, with which they are much pleased.
They are desirous that you should drink to their health in their favorite wine.
I have done this, and am, monsieur, with great respect, Your very humble and obedient servant, GODEAU, _Purveyor of the Musketeers_ “That’s all well!” cried D’Artagnan.
“They think of me in their pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles.
Well, I will certainly drink to their health with all my heart, but I will not drink alone.” And D’Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he had formed greater intimacy than with the others, to invite them to enjoy with him this present of delicious Anjou wine which had been sent him from Villeroy.
One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, and another the next, so the meeting was fixed for the day after that.
D’Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine to the refreshment room of the Guards, with strict orders that great care should be taken of it; and then, on the day appointed, as the dinner was fixed for midday D’Artagnan sent Planchet at nine in the morning to assist in preparing everything for the entertainment.
The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived, took their places, and the dishes were arranged on the table.
Planchet waited, towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the bottles; and Brisemont, which was the name of the convalescent, poured the wine, which was a little shaken by its journey, carefully into decanters.
Of this wine, the first bottle being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemont poured the lees into a glass, and D’Artagnan desired him to drink it, for the poor devil had not yet recovered his strength.
The Guardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some unexpected attack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang to their swords.
D’Artagnan, not less forward than they, did likewise, and all ran out, in order to repair to their posts.
But scarcely were they out of the room before they were made aware of the cause of this noise.
Live the cardinal!” resounded on every side, and the drums were beaten in all directions.
In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come by forced marches, and had that moment arrived with all his household and a reinforcement of ten thousand troops.
His Musketeers proceeded and followed him.
D’Artagnan, placed in line with his company, saluted with an expressive gesture his three friends, whose eyes soon discovered him, and M. de Tréville, who detected him at once.
The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soon in one another’s arms.
“_Pardieu!_” cried D’Artagnan, “you could not have arrived in better time; the dinner cannot have had time to get cold!
Can it, gentlemen?” added the young man, turning to the two Guards, whom he introduced to his friends.
“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “it appears we are feasting!” “I hope,” said Aramis, “there are no women at your dinner.” “Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?” asked Athos.
“Well, _pardieu!_ there is yours, my dear friend,” replied D’Artagnan.
“Our wine!” said Athos, astonished.
“Yes, that you sent me.” “We sent you wine?” “You know very well—the wine from the hills of Anjou.” “Yes, I know what brand you are talking about.” “The wine you prefer.” “Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you must content yourselves with that.” “And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent you some Anjou wine?” said Porthos.
“Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order.” “On our account?” said the three Musketeers.
“No; and you, Porthos?” “No; and you, Athos?” “No!” “If it was not you, it was your purveyor,” said D’Artagnan.
“Our purveyor!” “Yes, your purveyor, Godeau—the purveyor of the Musketeers.” “My faith! never mind where it comes from,” said Porthos, “let us taste it, and if it is good, let us drink it.” “No,” said Athos; “don’t let us drink wine which comes from an unknown source.” “You are right, Athos,” said D’Artagnan.
“Did none of you charge your purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?” “No!
And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?” “Here is his letter,” said D’Artagnan, and he presented the note to his comrades.
“I am acquainted with it; before we left Villeroy I settled the accounts of the regiment.” “A false letter altogether,” said Porthos, “we have not been disciplined.” “D’Artagnan,” said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, “how could you believe that we had made a disturbance?” D’Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook all his limbs.
“Thou alarmest me!” said Athos, who never used _thee_ and _thou_ but upon very particular occasions, “what has happened?” “Look you, my friends!” cried D’Artagnan, “a horrible suspicion crosses my mind!
Can this be another vengeance of that woman?” It was now Athos who turned pale.
D’Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the three Musketeers and the two Guards following him.
The first object that met the eyes of D’Artagnan on entering the room was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground and rolling in horrible convulsions.
Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to give him succor; but it was plain that all assistance was useless—all the features of the dying man were distorted with agony.
“Ah!” cried he, on perceiving D’Artagnan, “ah! this is frightful!
You pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!” “I!” cried D’Artagnan.
I say you wished to avenge yourself on me, and I say that it is horrible!” “Do not think so, Brisemont,” said D’Artagnan; “do not think so.
My God, grant that he may one day suffer what I suffer!” “Upon the Gospel,” said D’Artagnan, throwing himself down by the dying man, “I swear to you that the wine was poisoned and that I was going to drink of it as you did.” “I do not believe you,” cried the soldier, and he expired amid horrible tortures.
“Frightful! frightful!” murmured Athos, while Porthos broke the bottles and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, that a confessor should be sent for.
“Oh, my friends,” said D’Artagnan, “you come once more to save my life, not only mine but that of these gentlemen.
Gentlemen,” continued he, addressing the Guardsmen, “I request you will be silent with regard to this adventure.
When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers were without witnesses, they looked at one another with an air which plainly expressed that each of them perceived the gravity of their situation.
“In the first place,” said Athos, “let us leave this chamber; the dead are not agreeable company, particularly when they have died a violent death.” “Planchet,” said D’Artagnan, “I commit the corpse of this poor devil to your care.
Let him be interred in holy ground.
He committed a crime, it is true; but he repented of it.” And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet and Fourreau the duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.
The host gave them another chamber, and served them with fresh eggs and some water, which Athos went himself to draw at the fountain.
In a few words, Porthos and Aramis were posted as to the situation.
“Well,” said D’Artagnan to Athos, “you see, my dear friend, that this is war to the death.” Athos shook his head.
“The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hanging eternally over his head,” said Athos.
“We must extricate ourselves from this position.” “But how?” “Listen!
You must try to see her, and have an explanation with her.
My word as a gentleman never to say anything of you, never to do anything against you; on your side, a solemn oath to remain neutral with respect to me.
The more we have ventured the more we gain, when we know how to wait.” “Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners.” “Bah!” said Athos.
“God has preserved us hitherto, God will preserve us still.” “Yes, we.
Besides, we are men; and everything considered, it is our lot to risk our lives; but _she_,” asked he, in an undertone.
“Constance.” “Madame Bonacieux!
“My poor friend, I had forgotten you were in love.” “Well, but,” said Aramis, “have you not learned by the letter you found on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent?
One may be very comfortable in a convent; and as soon as the siege of La Rochelle is terminated, I promise you on my part—” “Good,” cried Athos, “good!
Yes, my dear Aramis, we all know that your views have a religious tendency.” “I am only temporarily a Musketeer,” said Aramis, humbly.
“It is some time since we heard from his mistress,” said Athos, in a low voice.
“But take no notice; we know all about that.” “Well,” said Porthos, “it appears to me that the means are very simple.” “What?” asked D’Artagnan.
“Don’t you say, dear D’Artagnan, that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her?” “I believe so, at least.” “In that case Porthos will assist us.” “And how so, if you please?” “Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess.
“I believe her to be a cardinalist; she must know nothing of the matter.” “Then,” said Aramis, “I take upon myself to obtain intelligence of her.” “You, Aramis?” cried the three friends.
And how?” “By the queen’s almoner, to whom I am very intimately allied,” said Aramis, coloring.
And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finished their modest repast, separated, with the promise of meeting again that evening.
D’Artagnan returned to less important affairs, and the three Musketeers repaired to the king’s quarters, where they had to prepare their lodging.
Bassompierre and Schomberg, against the Duc d’Angoulême.
Bassompierre and Schomberg were marshals of France, and claimed their right of commanding the army under the orders of the king; but the cardinal, who feared that Bassompierre, a Huguenot at heart, might press but feebly the English and Rochellais, his brothers in religion, supported the Duc d’Angoulême, whom the king, at his instigation, had named lieutenant general.
Bassompierre and Schomberg from deserting the army, a separate command had to be given to each.
Bassompierre took up his quarters on the north of the city, between Leu and Dompierre; the Duc d’Angoulême on the east, from Dompierre to Perigny; and M. de Schomberg on the south, from Perigny to Angoutin.
The quarters of Monsieur were at Dompierre; the quarters of the king were sometimes at Estrée, sometimes at Jarrie; the cardinal’s quarters were upon the downs, at the bridge of La Pierre, in a simple house without any entrenchment.
So that Monsieur watched Bassompierre; the king, the Duc d’Angoulême; and the cardinal, M. de Schomberg.
As soon as this organization was established, they set about driving the English from the Isle.
The juncture was favorable.
The English, who require, above everything, good living in order to be good soldiers, only eating salt meat and bad biscuit, had many invalids in their camp.
Still further, the sea, very rough at this period of the year all along the sea coast, destroyed every day some little vessel; and the shore, from the point of l’Aiguillon to the trenches, was at every tide literally covered with the wrecks of pinnacles, _roberges_, and feluccas.
The result was that even if the king’s troops remained quietly in their camp, it was evident that some day or other, Buckingham, who only continued in the Isle from obstinacy, would be obliged to raise the siege.
But as M. de Toiras gave information that everything was preparing in the enemy’s camp for a fresh assault, the king judged that it would be best to put an end to the affair, and gave the necessary orders for a decisive action.
As it is not our intention to give a journal of the siege, but on the contrary only to describe such of the events of it as are connected with the story we are relating, we will content ourselves with saying in two words that the expedition succeeded, to the great astonishment of the king and the great glory of the cardinal.
The English, repulsed foot by foot, beaten in all encounters, and defeated in the passage of the Isle of Loie, were obliged to re-embark, leaving on the field of battle two thousand men, among whom were five colonels, three lieutenant colonels, two hundred and fifty captains, twenty gentlemen of rank, four pieces of cannon, and sixty flags, which were taken to Paris by Claude de St.
Simon, and suspended with great pomp in the arches of Notre Dame.
Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughout France.
The cardinal was left free to carry on the siege, without having, at least at the present, anything to fear on the part of the English.
But it must be acknowledged, this response was but momentary.
An envoy of the Duke of Buckingham, named Montague, was taken, and proof was obtained of a league between the German Empire, Spain, England, and Lorraine.
This league was directed against France.
Still further, in Buckingham’s lodging, which he had been forced to abandon more precipitately than he expected, papers were found which confirmed this alliance and which, as the cardinal asserts in his memoirs, strongly compromised Mme. de Chevreuse and consequently the queen.
It was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell, for one is not a despotic minister without responsibility.
All, therefore, of the vast resources of his genius were at work night and day, engaged in listening to the least report heard in any of the great kingdoms of Europe.
The cardinal was acquainted with the activity, and more particularly the hatred, of Buckingham.
If the league which threatened France triumphed, all his influence would be lost.
Spanish policy and Austrian policy would have their representatives in the cabinet of the Louvre, where they had as yet but partisans; and he, Richelieu—the French minister, the national minister—would be ruined.
The king, even while obeying him like a child, hated him as a child hates his master, and would abandon him to the personal vengeance of Monsieur and the queen.
All this must be prepared against.
Courtiers, becoming every instant more numerous, succeeded one another, day and night, in the little house of the bridge of La Pierre, in which the cardinal had established his residence.
There were monks who wore the frock with such an ill grace that it was easy to perceive they belonged to the church militant; women a little inconvenienced by their costume as pages and whose large trousers could not entirely conceal their rounded forms; and peasants with blackened hands but with fine limbs, savoring of the man of quality a league off.
There were also less agreeable visits—for two or three times reports were spread that the cardinal had nearly been assassinated.
It is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it was he himself who set these bungling assassins to work, in order to have, if wanted, the right of using reprisals; but we must not believe everything ministers say, nor everything their enemies say.
These attempts did not prevent the cardinal, to whom his most inveterate detractors have never denied personal bravery, from making nocturnal excursions, sometimes to communicate to the Duc d’Angoulême important orders, sometimes to confer with the king, and sometimes to have an interview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see at home.
On their part the Musketeers, who had not much to do with the siege, were not under very strict orders and led a joyous life.
This was the more easy for our three companions in particular; for being friends of M. de Tréville, they obtained from him special permission to be absent after the closing of the camp.
They immediately all three halted, closed in, and waited, occupying the middle of the road.
In an instant, and as the moon broke from behind a cloud, they saw at a turning of the road two horsemen who, on perceiving them, stopped in their turn, appearing to deliberate whether they should continue their route or go back.
The hesitation created some suspicion in the three friends, and Athos, advancing a few paces in front of the others, cried in a firm voice, “Who goes there?” “Who goes there, yourselves?” replied one of the horsemen.
Answer, or we charge.” “Beware of what you are about, gentlemen!” said a clear voice which seemed accustomed to command.
“It is some superior officer making his night rounds,” said Athos.
“What do you wish, gentlemen?” “Who are you?” said the same voice, in the same commanding tone.
“Answer in your turn, or you may repent of your disobedience.” “King’s Musketeers,” said Athos, more and more convinced that he who interrogated them had the right to do so.
“What company?” “Company of Tréville.” “Advance, and give an account of what you are doing here at this hour.” The three companions advanced rather humbly—for all were now convinced that they had to do with someone more powerful than themselves—leaving Athos the post of speaker.
One of the two riders, he who had spoken second, was ten paces in front of his companion.
Athos made a sign to Porthos and Aramis also to remain in the rear, and advanced alone.
“Your pardon, my officer,” said Athos; “but we were ignorant with whom we had to do, and you may see that we were keeping good guard.” “Your name?” said the officer, who covered a part of his face with his cloak.
“But yourself, monsieur,” said Athos, who began to be annoyed by this inquisition, “give me, I beg you, the proof that you have the right to question me.” “Your name?” repeated the cavalier a second time, letting his cloak fall, and leaving his face uncovered.
“Monsieur the Cardinal!” cried the stupefied Musketeer.
“Your name?” cried his Eminence, for the third time.
“Athos,” said the Musketeer.
The cardinal made a sign to his attendant, who drew near.
“These three Musketeers shall follow us,” said he, in an undertone.
“I am not willing it should be known I have left the camp; and if they follow us we shall be certain they will tell nobody.” “We are gentlemen, monseigneur,” said Athos; “require our parole, and give yourself no uneasiness.
Thank God, we can keep a secret.” The cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageous speaker.
“You have a quick ear, Monsieur Athos,” said the cardinal; “but now listen to this.
It is not from mistrust that I request you to follow me, but for my security.
Your companions are no doubt Messieurs Porthos and Aramis.” “Yes, your Eminence,” said Athos, while the two Musketeers who had remained behind advanced hat in hand.
“I know you, gentlemen,” said the cardinal, “I know you.
I know you are not quite my friends, and I am sorry you are not so; but I know you are brave and loyal gentlemen, and that confidence may be placed in you.
Monsieur Athos, do me, then, the honor to accompany me; you and your two friends, and then I shall have an escort to excite envy in his Majesty, if we should meet him.” The three Musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses.
“My friend, Aramis, here, has received a slight sword wound in the arm, but not enough to prevent him, as your Eminence may see, from mounting to the assault tomorrow, if your Eminence orders an escalade.” “But you are not the men to allow sword wounds to be inflicted upon you thus,” said the cardinal.
“Come, be frank, gentlemen, you have settled accounts with somebody!
Confess; you know I have the right of giving absolution.” “I, monseigneur?” said Athos.
“I did not even draw my sword, but I took him who offended me round the body, and threw him out of the window.
Then I admit my patience failed me; I drew my sword in my turn, and as he came back to the charge, I fancied I felt that in throwing himself upon me, he let it pass through his body.
I only know for a certainty that he fell; and it seemed to me that he was borne away with his two companions.” “The devil, gentlemen!” said the cardinal, “three men placed _hors de combat_ in a cabaret squabble!
And pray what was this quarrel about?” “These fellows were drunk,” said Athos, “and knowing there was a lady who had arrived at the cabaret this evening, they wanted to force her door.” “Force her door!” said the cardinal, “and for what purpose?” “To do her violence, without doubt,” said Athos.
“I have had the honor of informing your Eminence that these men were drunk.” “And was this lady young and handsome?” asked the cardinal, with a certain degree of anxiety.
“We did not see her, monseigneur,” said Athos.
Ah, very well,” replied the cardinal, quickly.
“And now, gentlemen, that’s well,” continued the cardinal.
“I know what I wish to know; follow me.” The three Musketeers passed behind his Eminence, who again enveloped his face in his cloak, and put his horse in motion, keeping from eight to ten paces in advance of his four companions.
They soon arrived at the silent, solitary inn.
No doubt the host knew what illustrious visitor was expected, and had consequently sent intruders out of the way.
Ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to his esquire and the three Musketeers to halt.
A saddled horse was fastened to the window shutter.
The cardinal knocked three times, and in a peculiar manner.
A man, enveloped in a cloak, came out immediately, and exchanged some rapid words with the cardinal; after which he mounted his horse, and set off in the direction of Surgères, which was likewise the way to Paris.
“Advance, gentlemen,” said the cardinal.
“You have told me the truth, my gentlemen,” said he, addressing the Musketeers, “and it will not be my fault if our encounter this evening be not advantageous to you.
In the meantime, follow me.” The cardinal alighted; the three Musketeers did likewise.
The cardinal threw the bridle of his horse to his esquire; the three Musketeers fastened the horses to the shutters.
For him, the cardinal was only an officer coming to visit a lady.
“Have you any chamber on the ground floor where these gentlemen can wait near a good fire?” said the cardinal.
The host opened the door of a large room, in which an old stove had just been replaced by a large and excellent chimney.
“That will do,” replied the cardinal.
“Enter, gentlemen, and be kind enough to wait for me; I shall not be more than half an hour.” And while the three Musketeers entered the ground floor room, the cardinal, without asking further information, ascended the staircase like a man who has no need of having his road pointed out to him.
THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES It was evident that without suspecting it, and actuated solely by their chivalrous and adventurous character, our three friends had just rendered a service to someone the cardinal honored with his special protection.
That was the question the three Musketeers put to one another.
Porthos and Aramis placed themselves at the table and began to play.
Athos walked about in a contemplative mood.
While thinking and walking, Athos passed and repassed before the pipe of the stove, broken in halves, the other extremity passing into the chamber above; and every time he passed and repassed he heard a murmur of words, which at length fixed his attention.
Athos went close to it, and distinguished some words that appeared to merit so great an interest that he made a sign to his friends to be silent, remaining himself bent with his ear directed to the opening of the lower orifice.
“Listen, Milady,” said the cardinal, “the affair is important.
Sit down, and let us talk it over.” “Milady!” murmured Athos.
“I listen to your Eminence with greatest attention,” replied a female voice which made the Musketeer start.
“A small vessel with an English crew, whose captain is on my side, awaits you at the mouth of Charente, at Fort La Pointe*.
He will set sail tomorrow morning.” * Fort La Pointe, or Fort Vasou, was not built until 1672, nearly 50 years later.
“I must go thither tonight?” “Instantly!
That is to say, when you have received my instructions.
You will allow me to leave first; then, after half an hour, you can go away in your turn.” “Yes, monseigneur.
Now let us return to the mission with which you wish to charge me; and as I desire to continue to merit the confidence of your Eminence, deign to unfold it to me in terms clear and precise, that I may not commit an error.” There was an instant of profound silence between the two interlocutors.
It was evident that the cardinal was weighing beforehand the terms in which he was about to speak, and that Milady was collecting all her intellectual faculties to comprehend the things he was about to say, and to engrave them in her memory when they should be spoken.
Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two companions to fasten the door inside, and to make them a sign to come and listen with him.
The two Musketeers, who loved their ease, brought a chair for each of themselves and one for Athos.
All three then sat down with their heads together and their ears on the alert.
“You will go to London,” continued the cardinal.
“Yes, frankly and loyally,” replied the cardinal, in the same tone.
“All this negotiation must be carried on openly.” “I will follow your Eminence’s instructions to the letter.
And you will tell him I will publish the report of Bois-Robert and the Marquis de Beautru, upon the interview which the duke had at the residence of Madame the Constable with the queen on the evening Madame the Constable gave a masquerade.
You recollect perfectly all I have told you, do you not?” “Your Eminence will judge: the ball of Madame the Constable; the night at the Louvre; the evening at Amiens; the arrest of Montague; the letter of Madame de Chevreuse.” “That’s it,” said the cardinal, “that’s it.
You have an excellent memory, Milady.” “But,” resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed this flattering compliment, “if, in spite of all these reasons, the duke does not give way and continues to menace France?” “The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly,” replied Richelieu, with great bitterness.
“Like the ancient paladins, he has only undertaken this war to obtain a look from his lady love.
If he becomes certain that this war will cost the honor, and perhaps the liberty, of the lady of his thoughts, as he says, I will answer for it he will look twice.” “And yet,” said Milady, with a persistence that proved she wished to see clearly to the end of the mission with which she was about to be charged, “if he persists?” “If he persists?” said the cardinal.
“That is not probable.” “It is possible,” said Milady.
Why should not the king of France have the same chance as the emperor?” “Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Rue de la Feronnerie?” “Precisely,” said the cardinal.
“Does not your Eminence fear that the punishment inflicted upon Ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the idea of imitating him?” “There will be, in all times and in all countries, particularly if religious divisions exist in those countries, fanatics who ask nothing better than to become martyrs.
Ay, and observe—it just occurs to me that the Puritans are furious against Buckingham, and their preachers designate him as the Antichrist.” “Well?” said Milady.
“Well,” continued the cardinal, in an indifferent tone, “the only thing to be sought for at this moment is some woman, handsome, young, and clever, who has cause of quarrel with the duke.
The Palace of Justice would not be burned down for everybody, monseigneur.” “You think, then, that the fire at the Palace of Justice was not caused by chance?” asked Richelieu, in the tone with which he would have put a question of no importance.
“I, monseigneur?” replied Milady.
Only I say that if I were named Madame de Montpensier, or the Queen Marie de Médicis, I should use less precautions than I take, being simply called Milady Clarik.” “That is just,” said Richelieu.
“What do you require, then?” “I require an order which would ratify beforehand all that I should think proper to do for the greatest good of France.” “But in the first place, this woman I have described must be found who is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke.” “She is found,” said Milady.
Then, if he persists, notwithstanding all this—as that is, as I have said, the limit of my mission—I shall have nothing to do but to pray God to work a miracle for the salvation of France.
That is it, is it not, monseigneur, and I shall have nothing else to do?” “That is it,” replied the cardinal, dryly.
“And now,” said Milady, without appearing to remark the change of the duke’s tone toward her—“now that I have received the instructions of your Eminence as concerns your enemies, Monseigneur will permit me to say a few words to him of mine?” “Have you enemies, then?” asked Richelieu.
“Yes, monseigneur, enemies against whom you owe me all your support, for I made them by serving your Eminence.” “Who are they?” replied the duke.
“In the first place, there is a little _intrigante_ named Bonacieux.” “She is in the prison of Nantes.” “That is to say, she was there,” replied Milady; “but the queen has obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed to a convent.” “To a convent?” said the duke.
“Yes, to a convent.” “And to which?” “I don’t know; the secret has been well kept.” “But _I_ will know!” “And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is?” “I can see nothing inconvenient in that,” said the cardinal.
“Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this little Madame Bonacieux.” “Who is that?” “Her lover.” “What is his name?” “Oh, your Eminence knows him well,” cried Milady, carried away by her anger.
“Ah, _pardieu!_” continued he, “if it were as easy for me to get rid of my enemy as it is easy to get rid of yours, and if it were against such people you require impunity—” “Monseigneur,” replied Milady, “a fair exchange.
“Here they are, monseigneur.” There was a moment of silence, which proved that the cardinal was employed in seeking the terms in which he should write the note, or else in writing it.
Athos, who had not lost a word of the conversation, took his two companions by the hand, and led them to the other end of the room.
“Well,” said Porthos, “what do you want, and why do you not let us listen to the end of the conversation?” “Hush!” said Athos, speaking in a low voice.
I will say two words about it to the cardinal’s esquire likewise.
The rest concerns myself; don’t be uneasy about that.” “Be prudent, Athos,” said Aramis.
“Be easy on that head,” replied Athos; “you know I am cool enough.” Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.
As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took his horse, which was tied with those of his friends to the fastenings of the shutters, in four words convinced the attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for their return, carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew his sword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.
A CONJUGAL SCENE As Athos had foreseen, it was not long before the cardinal came down.
He opened the door of the room in which the Musketeers were, and found Porthos playing an earnest game of dice with Aramis.
He cast a rapid glance around the room, and perceived that one of his men was missing.
“What has become of Monseigneur Athos?” asked he.
At a short distance a group of two men and three horses appeared in the shade.
These were the two men who were to conduct Milady to Fort La Pointe, and superintend her embarkation.
The attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the two Musketeers had already said with respect to Athos.
The cardinal made an approving gesture, and retraced his route with the same precautions he had used in coming.
Let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected by his esquire and the two Musketeers, and return to Athos.
For a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which he started; but when out of sight he turned his horse to the right, made a circuit, and came back within twenty paces of a high hedge to watch the passage of the little troop.
Having recognized the laced hats of his companions and the golden fringe of the cardinal’s cloak, he waited till the horsemen had turned the angle of the road, and having lost sight of them, he returned at a gallop to the inn, which was opened to him without hesitation.
The host recognized him.
“My officer,” said Athos, “has forgotten to give a piece of very important information to the lady, and has sent me back to repair his forgetfulness.” “Go up,” said the host; “she is still in her chamber.” Athos availed himself of the permission, ascended the stairs with his lightest step, gained the landing, and through the open door perceived Milady putting on her hat.
Athos was standing before the door, enveloped in his cloak, with his hat pulled down over his eyes.
On seeing this figure, mute and immovable as a statue, Milady was frightened.
“Humph,” murmured Athos, “it is certainly she!” And letting fall his cloak and raising his hat, he advanced toward Milady.
“So far, well,” said Athos, “I perceive you know me.” “The Comte de la Fère!” murmured Milady, becoming exceedingly pale, and drawing back till the wall prevented her from going any farther.
“Yes, Milady,” replied Athos; “the Comte de la Fère in person, who comes expressly from the other world to have the pleasure of paying you a visit.
Sit down, madame, and let us talk, as the cardinal said.” Milady, under the influence of inexpressible terror, sat down without uttering a word.
“You certainly are a demon sent upon the earth!” said Athos.
“Your power is great, I know; but you also know that with the help of God men have often conquered the most terrible demons.
You have once before thrown yourself in my path.
I thought I had crushed you, madame; but either I was deceived or hell has resuscitated you!” Milady at these words, which recalled frightful remembrances, hung down her head with a suppressed groan.
“Yes, hell has resuscitated you,” continued Athos.
“Hell has made you rich, hell has given you another name, hell has almost made you another face; but it has neither effaced the stains from your soul nor the brand from your body.” Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyes flashed lightning.
Athos remained sitting.
“You believed me to be dead, did you not, as I believed you to be?
And the name of Athos as well concealed the Comte de la Fère, as the name Milady Clarik concealed Anne de Breuil.
Our position is truly a strange one,” continued Athos, laughing.
In short, it was you who have but now in this chamber, seated in this chair I now fill, made an engagement with Cardinal Richelieu to cause the Duke of Buckingham to be assassinated, in exchange for the promise he has made you to allow you to assassinate D’Artagnan.” Milady was livid.
Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him to be assassinated—I care very little about that!
Besides, he is an Englishman.
But do not touch with the tip of your finger a single hair of D’Artagnan, who is a faithful friend whom I love and defend, or I swear to you by the head of my father the crime which you shall have endeavored to commit, or shall have committed, shall be the last.” “Monsieur d’Artagnan has cruelly insulted me,” said Milady, in a hollow tone; “Monsieur d’Artagnan shall die!” “Indeed!
Is it possible to insult you, madame?” said Athos, laughing; “he has insulted you, and he shall die!” “He shall die!” replied Milady; “she first, and he afterward.” Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo.
The sight of this creature, who had nothing of the woman about her, recalled awful remembrances.
He thought how one day, in a less dangerous situation than the one in which he was now placed, he had already endeavored to sacrifice her to his honor.
His desire for blood returned, burning his brain and pervading his frame like a raging fever; he arose in his turn, reached his hand to his belt, drew forth a pistol, and cocked it.
Milady, pale as a corpse, endeavored to cry out; but her swollen tongue could utter no more than a hoarse sound which had nothing human in it and resembled the rattle of a wild beast.
Motionless against the dark tapestry, with her hair in disorder, she appeared like a horrid image of terror.
Nevertheless, she remained motionless.
Milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that the trigger was about to be pulled; she reached her hand quickly to her bosom, drew out a paper, and held it toward Athos.
“Take it,” said she, “and be accursed!” Athos took the paper, returned the pistol to his belt, approached the lamp to be assured that it was the paper, unfolded it, and read: “Dec. 3, 1627 “It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this has done what he has done.
“RICHELIEU” “And now,” said Athos, resuming his cloak and putting on his hat, “now that I have drawn your teeth, viper, bite if you can.” And he left the chamber without once looking behind him.
“Gentlemen,” said he, “Monseigneur’s order is, you know, to conduct that woman, without losing time, to Fort La Pointe, and never to leave her till she is on board.” As these words agreed wholly with the order they had received, they bowed their heads in sign of assent.
With regard to Athos, he leaped lightly into the saddle and set out at full gallop; only instead of following the road, he went across the fields, urging his horse to the utmost and stopping occasionally to listen.
He had no doubt it was the cardinal and his escort.
He immediately made a new point in advance, rubbed his horse down with some heath and leaves of trees, and placed himself across the road, about two hundred paces from the camp.
“Who goes there?” cried he, as soon as he perceived the horsemen.
“That is our brave Musketeer, I think,” said the cardinal.
“Yes, monseigneur,” said Porthos, “it is he.” “Monsieur Athos,” said Richelieu, “receive my thanks for the good guard you have kept.
Gentlemen, we are arrived; take the gate on the left.
The watchword is, ‘King and Ré.’” Saying these words, the cardinal saluted the three friends with an inclination of his head, and took the right hand, followed by his attendant—for that night he himself slept in the camp.
“Well!” said Porthos and Aramis together, as soon as the cardinal was out of hearing, “well, he signed the paper she required!” “I know it,” said Athos, coolly, “since here it is.” And the three friends did not exchange another word till they reached their quarters, except to give the watchword to the sentinels.
Only they sent Mousqueton to tell Planchet that his master was requested, the instant that he left the trenches, to come to the quarters of the Musketeers.
Milady, as Athos had foreseen, on finding the two men that awaited her, made no difficulty in following them.
She had had for an instant an inclination to be reconducted to the cardinal, and relate everything to him; but a revelation on her part would bring about a revelation on the part of Athos.
She thought it was best to preserve silence, to discreetly set off to accomplish her difficult mission with her usual skill; and then, all things being accomplished to the satisfaction of the cardinal, to come to him and claim her vengeance.
In consequence, after having traveled all night, at seven o’clock she was at the fort of the Point; at eight o’clock she had embarked; and at nine, the vessel, which with letters of marque from the cardinal was supposed to be sailing for Bayonne, raised anchor, and steered its course toward England.
THE BASTION SAINT-GERVAIS On arriving at the lodgings of his three friends, D’Artagnan found them assembled in the same chamber.
Athos was meditating; Porthos was twisting his mustache; Aramis was saying his prayers in a charming little Book of Hours, bound in blue velvet.
“_Pardieu_, gentlemen,” said he.
“I hope what you have to tell me is worth the trouble, or else, I warn you, I will not pardon you for making me come here instead of getting a little rest after a night spent in taking and dismantling a bastion.
Ah, why were you not there, gentlemen?
It was warm work.” “We were in a place where it was not very cold,” replied Porthos, giving his mustache a twist which was peculiar to him.
“Oh, oh!” said D’Artagnan, comprehending the slight frown of the Musketeer.
“It appears there is something fresh aboard.” “Aramis,” said Athos, “you went to breakfast the day before yesterday at the inn of the Parpaillot, I believe?” “Yes.” “How did you fare?” “For my part, I ate but little.
The day before yesterday was a fish day, and they had nothing but meat.” “What,” said Athos, “no fish at a seaport?” “They say,” said Aramis, resuming his pious reading, “that the dyke which the cardinal is making drives them all out into the open sea.” “But that is not quite what I mean to ask you, Aramis,” replied Athos.
“I want to know if you were left alone, and nobody interrupted you.” “Why, I think there were not many intruders.
Yes, Athos, I know what you mean: we shall do very well at the Parpaillot.” “Let us go to the Parpaillot, then, for here the walls are like sheets of paper.” D’Artagnan, who was accustomed to his friend’s manner of acting, and who perceived immediately, by a word, a gesture, or a sign from him, that the circumstances were serious, took Athos’s arm, and went out without saying anything.
Porthos followed, chatting with Aramis.
Grimaud, according to custom, obeyed in silence; the poor lad had nearly come to the pass of forgetting how to speak.
They arrived at the drinking room of the Parpaillot.
It was seven o’clock in the morning, and daylight began to appear.
The three friends ordered breakfast, and went into a room in which the host said they would not be disturbed.
Unfortunately, the hour was badly chosen for a private conference.
The morning drum had just been beaten; everyone shook off the drowsiness of night, and to dispel the humid morning air, came to take a drop at the inn.
Dragoons, Swiss, Guardsmen, Musketeers, light-horsemen, succeeded one another with a rapidity which might answer the purpose of the host very well, but agreed badly with the views of the four friends.
Thus they applied very curtly to the salutations, healths, and jokes of their companions.
D’Artagnan, tell us what sort of a night you have had, and we will describe ours afterward.” “Ah, yes,” said a light-horseman, with a glass of brandy in his hand, which he sipped slowly.
“I hear you gentlemen of the Guards have been in the trenches tonight, and that you did not get much the best of the Rochellais.” D’Artagnan looked at Athos to know if he ought to reply to this intruder who thus mixed unasked in their conversation.
“Well,” said Athos, “don’t you hear Monsieur de Busigny, who does you the honor to ask you a question?
Relate what has passed during the night, since these gentlemen desire to know it.” “Have you not taken a bastion?” said a Swiss, who was drinking rum out of a beer glass.
“Yes, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, bowing, “we have had that honor.
We even have, as you may have heard, introduced a barrel of powder under one of the angles, which in blowing up made a very pretty breach.
Without reckoning that as the bastion was not built yesterday all the rest of the building was badly shaken.” “And what bastion is it?” asked a dragoon, with his saber run through a goose which he was taking to be cooked.
Gervais,” replied D’Artagnan, “from behind which the Rochellais annoyed our workmen.” “Was that affair hot?” “Yes, moderately so.
We lost five men, and the Rochellais eight or ten.” “_Balzempleu!_” said the Swiss, who, notwithstanding the admirable collection of oaths possessed by the German language, had acquired a habit of swearing in French.
“But it is probable,” said the light-horseman, “that they will send pioneers this morning to repair the bastion.” “Yes, that’s probable,” said D’Artagnan.
“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “a wager!” “Ah, _wooi_, a vager!” cried the Swiss.
“What is it?” said the light-horseman.
“Stop a bit,” said the dragoon, placing his saber like a spit upon the two large iron dogs which held the firebrands in the chimney, “stop a bit, I am in it.
You cursed host! a dripping pan immediately, that I may not lose a drop of the fat of this estimable bird.” “You was right,” said the Swiss; “goose grease is kood with basdry.” “There!” said the dragoon.
We listen, Monsieur Athos.” “Yes, the wager!” said the light-horseman.
“Well, Monsieur de Busigny, I will bet you,” said Athos, “that my three companions, Messieurs Porthos, Aramis, and D’Artagnan, and myself, will go and breakfast in the bastion St.
Gervais, and we will remain there an hour, by the watch, whatever the enemy may do to dislodge us.” Porthos and Aramis looked at each other; they began to comprehend.
Will that do?” “Capitally,” replied M. de Busigny.
“Perfectly,” said the dragoon.
The fourth auditor, who during all this conversation had played a mute part, made a sign of the head in proof that he acquiesced in the proposition.
“The breakfast for these gentlemen is ready,” said the host.
Grimaud understood that it was to be a breakfast on the grass, took the basket, packed up the viands, added the bottles, and then took the basket on his arm.
“But where are you going to eat my breakfast?” asked the host.
“What matter, if you are paid for it?” said Athos, and he threw two pistoles majestically on the table.
“No, only add two bottles of champagne, and the difference will be for the napkins.” The host had not quite so good a bargain as he at first hoped for, but he made amends by slipping in two bottles of Anjou wine instead of two bottles of champagne.
Gervais, followed by Grimaud, who carried the basket, ignorant of where he was going but in the passive obedience which Athos had taught him not even thinking of asking.
As long as they were within the circle of the camp, the four friends did not exchange one word; besides, they were followed by the curious, who, hearing of the wager, were anxious to know how they would come out of it.
But when once they passed the line of circumvallation and found themselves in the open plain, D’Artagnan, who was completely ignorant of what was going forward, thought it was time to demand an explanation.
Better, then, pursue our enterprise; from which, besides, we cannot retreat without shame.
We have made a wager—a wager which could not have been foreseen, and of which I defy anyone to divine the true cause.
Either we shall be attacked, or not.
If we are not, we shall have all the time to talk, and nobody will hear us—for I guarantee the walls of the bastion have no ears; if we are, we will talk of our affairs just the same.
Moreover, in defending ourselves, we shall cover ourselves with glory.
You see that everything is to our advantage.” “Yes,” said D’Artagnan; “but we shall indubitably attract a ball.” “Well, my dear,” replied Athos, “you know well that the balls most to be dreaded are not from the enemy.” “But for such an expedition we surely ought to have brought our muskets.” “You are stupid, friend Porthos.
Why should we load ourselves with a useless burden?” “I don’t find a good musket, twelve cartridges, and a powder flask very useless in the face of an enemy.” “Well,” replied Athos, “have you not heard what D’Artagnan said?” “What did he say?” demanded Porthos.
“D’Artagnan said that in the attack of last night eight or ten Frenchmen were killed, and as many Rochellais.” “What then?” “The bodies were not plundered, were they?
It appears the conquerors had something else to do.” “Well?” “Well, we shall find their muskets, their cartridges, and their flasks; and instead of four musketoons and twelve balls, we shall have fifteen guns and a hundred charges to fire.” “Oh, Athos!” said Aramis, “truly you are a great man.” Porthos nodded in sign of agreement.
D’Artagnan alone did not seem convinced.
Grimaud no doubt shared the misgivings of the young man, for seeing that they continued to advance toward the bastion—something he had till then doubted—he pulled his master by the skirt of his coat.
Athos took a pistol from his belt, looked to see if it was properly primed, cocked it, and placed the muzzle close to Grimaud’s ear.
All that Grimaud gained by this momentary pantomime was to pass from the rear guard to the vanguard.
More than three hundred soldiers of all kinds were assembled at the gate of the camp; and in a separate group might be distinguished M. de Busigny, the dragoon, the Swiss, and the fourth bettor.
All the spectators returned him his salute, accompanying this courtesy with a loud hurrah which was audible to the four; after which all four disappeared in the bastion, whither Grimaud had preceded them.
THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS As Athos had foreseen, the bastion was only occupied by a dozen corpses, French and Rochellais.
“Gentlemen,” said Athos, who had assumed the command of the expedition, “while Grimaud spreads the table, let us begin by collecting the guns and cartridges together.
We can talk while performing that necessary task.
“You are mad, dear friend.” “Judge not rashly, say the gospel and the cardinal,” replied Athos.
“How many guns, gentlemen?” “Twelve,” replied Aramis.
Let us load the guns.” The four Musketeers went to work; and as they were loading the last musket Grimaud announced that the breakfast was ready.
Athos replied, always by gestures, that that was well, and indicated to Grimaud, by pointing to a turret that resembled a pepper caster, that he was to stand as sentinel.
Only, to alleviate the tediousness of the duty, Athos allowed him to take a loaf, two cutlets, and a bottle of wine.
The four friends seated themselves on the ground with their legs crossed like Turks, or even tailors.
“And now,” said D’Artagnan, “as there is no longer any fear of being overheard, I hope you are going to let me into your secret.” “I hope at the same time to procure you amusement and glory, gentlemen,” said Athos.
“I have induced you to take a charming promenade; here is a delicious breakfast; and yonder are five hundred persons, as you may see through the loopholes, taking us for heroes or madmen—two classes of imbeciles greatly resembling each other.” “But the secret!” said D’Artagnan.
“The secret is,” said Athos, “that I saw Milady last night.” D’Artagnan was lifting a glass to his lips; but at the name of Milady, his hand trembled so, that he was obliged to put the glass on the ground again for fear of spilling the contents.” “You saw your wi—” “Hush!” interrupted Athos.
“You forget, my dear, you forget that these gentlemen are not initiated into my family affairs like yourself.
I have seen Milady.” “Where?” demanded D’Artagnan.
“Within two leagues of this place, at the inn of the Red Dovecot.” “In that case I am lost,” said D’Artagnan.
“Not so bad yet,” replied Athos; “for by this time she must have quit the shores of France.” D’Artagnan breathed again.
“But after all,” asked Porthos, “who is Milady?” “A charming woman!” said Athos, sipping a glass of sparkling wine.
“Villainous host!” cried he, “he has given us Anjou wine instead of champagne, and fancies we know no better!
“Then,” said D’Artagnan, letting his arm fall with discouragement, “it is useless to struggle longer.
I may as well blow my brains out, and all will be over.” “That’s the last folly to be committed,” said Athos, “seeing it is the only one for which there is no remedy.” “But I can never escape,” said D’Artagnan, “with such enemies.
First, my stranger of Meung; then De Wardes, to whom I have given three sword wounds; next Milady, whose secret I have discovered; finally, the cardinal, whose vengeance I have balked.” “Well,” said Athos, “that only makes four; and we are four—one for one. _Pardieu!_ if we may believe the signs Grimaud is making, we are about to have to do with a very different number of people.
Considering the gravity of the occasion, I permit you to speak, my friend; but be laconic, I beg.
What do you see?” “A troop.” “Of how many persons?” “Twenty men.” “What sort of men?” “Sixteen pioneers, four soldiers.” “How far distant?” “Five hundred paces.” “Good!
We have just time to finish this fowl and to drink one glass of wine to your health, D’Artagnan.” “To your health!” repeated Porthos and Aramis.
“Well, then, to my health! although I am very much afraid that your good wishes will not be of great service to me.” “Bah!” said Athos, “God is great, as say the followers of Mohammed, and the future is in his hands.” Then, swallowing the contents of his glass, which he put down close to him, Athos arose carelessly, took the musket next to him, and drew near to one of the loopholes.
Porthos, Aramis and D’Artagnan followed his example.
As to Grimaud, he received orders to place himself behind the four friends in order to reload their weapons.
“_Pardieu!_” said Athos, “it was hardly worth while to distribute ourselves for twenty fellows armed with pickaxes, mattocks, and shovels.
Grimaud had only to make them a sign to go away, and I am convinced they would have left us in peace.” “I doubt that,” replied D’Artagnan, “for they are advancing very resolutely.
Besides, in addition to the pioneers, there are four soldiers and a brigadier, armed with muskets.” “That’s because they don’t see us,” said Athos.
“My faith,” said Aramis, “I must confess I feel a great repugnance to fire on these poor devils of civilians.” “He is a bad priest,” said Porthos, “who has pity for heretics.” “In truth,” said Athos, “Aramis is right.
I will warn them.” “What the devil are you going to do?” cried D’Artagnan, “you will be shot.” But Athos heeded not his advice.
Mounting on the breach, with his musket in one hand and his hat in the other, he said, bowing courteously and addressing the soldiers and the pioneers, who, astonished at this apparition, stopped fifty paces from the bastion: “Gentlemen, a few friends and myself are about to breakfast in this bastion.
Now, you know nothing is more disagreeable than being disturbed when one is at breakfast.
Four shots replied to them almost instantaneously, but much better aimed than those of the aggressors; three soldiers fell dead, and one of the pioneers was wounded.
“Grimaud,” said Athos, still on the breach, “another musket!” Grimaud immediately obeyed.
On their part, the three friends had reloaded their arms; a second discharge followed the first.
The brigadier and two pioneers fell dead; the rest of the troop took to flight.
“Now, gentlemen, a _sortie!_” cried Athos.
And the four friends rushed out of the fort, gained the field of battle, picked up the four muskets of the privates and the half-pike of the brigadier, and convinced that the fugitives would not stop till they reached the city, turned again toward the bastion, bearing with them the trophies of their victory.
“Reload the muskets, Grimaud,” said Athos, “and we, gentlemen, will go on with our breakfast, and resume our conversation.
Where were we?” “I recollect you were saying,” said D’Artagnan, “that after having demanded my head of the cardinal, Milady had quit the shores of France.
Whither goes she?” added he, strongly interested in the route Milady followed.
“With what view?” “With the view of assassinating, or causing to be assassinated, the Duke of Buckingham.” D’Artagnan uttered an exclamation of surprise and indignation.
“But this is infamous!” cried he.
Now you have done, Grimaud, take our brigadier’s half-pike, tie a napkin to it, and plant it on top of our bastion, that these rebels of Rochellais may see that they have to deal with brave and loyal soldiers of the king.” Grimaud obeyed without replying.
An instant afterward, the white flag was floating over the heads of the four friends.
A thunder of applause saluted its appearance; half the camp was at the barrier.
“How?” replied D’Artagnan, “you care little if she kills Buckingham or causes him to be killed?
“A moment,” said D’Artagnan.
“I will not abandon Buckingham thus.
He gave us some very fine horses.” “And moreover, very handsome saddles,” said Porthos, who at the moment wore on his cloak the lace of his own.
“And this _carte blanche_,” said D’Artagnan, “this _carte blanche_, does it remain in her hands?” “No, it passed into mine; I will not say without trouble, for if I did I should tell a lie.” “My dear Athos, I shall no longer count the number of times I am indebted to you for my life.” “Then it was to go to her that you left us?” said Aramis.
“Exactly.” “And you have that letter of the cardinal?” said D’Artagnan.
“Here it is,” said Athos; and he took the invaluable paper from the pocket of his uniform.
D’Artagnan unfolded it with one hand, whose trembling he did not even attempt to conceal, to read: “Dec. 3, 1627 “It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this has done what he has done.
“RICHELIEU” “In fact,” said Aramis, “it is an absolution according to rule.” “That paper must be torn to pieces,” said D’Artagnan, who fancied he read in it his sentence of death.
“On the contrary,” said Athos, “it must be preserved carefully.
“Why,” replied Athos, carelessly, “she is probably going to write to the cardinal that a damned Musketeer, named Athos, has taken her safe-conduct from her by force; she will advise him in the same letter to get rid of his two friends, Aramis and Porthos, at the same time.
The cardinal will remember that these are the same men who have often crossed his path; and then some fine morning he will arrest D’Artagnan, and for fear he should feel lonely, he will send us to keep him company in the Bastille.” “Go to!
“Do you know,” said Porthos, “that to twist that damned Milady’s neck would be a smaller sin than to twist those of these poor devils of Huguenots, who have committed no other crime than singing in French the psalms we sing in Latin?” “What says the abbé?” asked Athos, quietly.
“I say I am entirely of Porthos’s opinion,” replied Aramis.
“And I, too,” said D’Artagnan.
“Fortunately, she is far off,” said Porthos, “for I confess she would worry me if she were here.” “She worries me in England as well as in France,” said Athos.
“She worries me everywhere,” said D’Artagnan.
“But when you held her in your power, why did you not drown her, strangle her, hang her?” said Porthos.
“It is only the dead who do not return.” “You think so, Porthos?” replied the Musketeer, with a sad smile which D’Artagnan alone understood.
“I have an idea,” said D’Artagnan.
“What is it?” said the Musketeers.
This time a small troop advanced, consisting of from twenty to twenty-five men; but they were not pioneers, they were soldiers of the garrison.
“I don’t think the sides are equal.” “Impossible, for three reasons,” replied Athos.
“The first, that we have not finished breakfast; the second, that we still have some very important things to say; and the third, that it yet wants ten minutes before the lapse of the hour.” “Well, then,” said Aramis, “we must form a plan of battle.” “That’s very simple,” replied Athos.
If they continue to advance, we must fire again.
If those who remain of the troop persist in coming to the assault, we will allow the besiegers to get as far as the ditch, and then we will push down upon their heads that strip of wall which keeps its perpendicular by a miracle.” “Bravo!” cried Porthos.
“Decidedly, Athos, you were born to be a general, and the cardinal, who fancies himself a great soldier, is nothing beside you.” “Gentlemen,” said Athos, “no divided attention, I beg; let each one pick out his man.” “I cover mine,” said D’Artagnan.
The drum immediately beat, and the little troop advanced at charging pace.
Then the shots were repeated without regularity, but always aimed with the same accuracy.
Nevertheless, as if they had been aware of the numerical weakness of the friends, the Rochellais continued to advance in quick time.
With every three shots at least two men fell; but the march of those who remained was not slackened.
A last discharge welcomed them, but did not stop them; they jumped into the ditch, and prepared to scale the breach.
To the wall; to the wall!” And the four friends, seconded by Grimaud, pushed with the barrels of their muskets an enormous sheet of the wall, which bent as if pushed by the wind, and detaching itself from its base, fell with a horrible crash into the ditch.
“Can we have destroyed them all, from the first to the last?” said Athos.
“My faith, it appears so!” said D’Artagnan.
“No,” cried Porthos; “there go three or four, limping away.” In fact, three or four of these unfortunate men, covered with dirt and blood, fled along the hollow way, and at length regained the city.
“Gentlemen,” said he, “we have been here an hour, and our wager is won; but we will be fair players.
Besides, D’Artagnan has not told us his idea yet.” And the Musketeer, with his usual coolness, reseated himself before the remains of the breakfast.
“My idea?” said D’Artagnan.
“Oh, I remember,” said D’Artagnan.
“Well, I will go to England a second time; I will go and find Buckingham.” “You shall not do that, D’Artagnan,” said Athos, coolly.
At that period Buckingham was an ally, and not an enemy.
What you would now do amounts to treason.” D’Artagnan perceived the force of this reasoning, and was silent.
“But,” said Porthos, “I think I have an idea, in my turn.” “Silence for Monsieur Porthos’s idea!” said Aramis.
“I will ask leave of absence of Monsieur de Tréville, on some pretext or other which you must invent; I am not very clever at pretexts.
Milady does not know me; I will get access to her without her suspecting me, and when I catch my beauty, I will strangle her.” “Well,” replied Athos, “I am not far from approving the idea of Monsieur Porthos.” “For shame!” said Aramis.
No, listen to me; I have the true idea.” “Let us see your idea, Aramis,” said Athos, who felt much deference for the young Musketeer.
“We must inform the queen.” “Ah, my faith, yes!” said Porthos and D’Artagnan, at the same time; “we are coming nearer to it now.” “Inform the queen!” said Athos; “and how?
Have we relations with the court?
From here to Paris it is a hundred and forty leagues; before our letter was at Angers we should be in a dungeon.” “As to remitting a letter with safety to her Majesty,” said Aramis, coloring, “I will take that upon myself.
“Well, do you not adopt this means, Athos?” said D’Artagnan.
“They are beating the general alarm.” The four friends listened, and the sound of the drum plainly reached them.
“You see, they are going to send a whole regiment against us,” said Athos.
“You don’t think of holding out against a whole regiment, do you?” said Porthos.
“Why not?” said the Musketeer.
“I feel myself quite in a humor for it; and I would hold out before an army if we had taken the precaution to bring a dozen more bottles of wine.” “Upon my word, the drum draws near,” said D’Artagnan.
“It is a quarter of an hour’s journey from here to the city, consequently a quarter of an hour’s journey from the city to hither.
If we go from this place we shall never find another so suitable.
I have it, gentlemen; the right idea has just occurred to me.” “Tell us.” “Allow me to give Grimaud some indispensable orders.” Athos made a sign for his lackey to approach.
“Grimaud,” said Athos, pointing to the bodies which lay under the wall of the bastion, “take those gentlemen, set them up against the wall, put their hats upon their heads, and their guns in their hands.” “Oh, the great man!” cried D’Artagnan.
“I comprehend now.” “You comprehend?” said Porthos.
“And do you comprehend, Grimaud?” said Aramis.
Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.
“That’s all that is necessary,” said Athos; “now for my idea.” “I should like, however, to comprehend,” said Porthos.
Athos’s idea!” cried Aramis and D’Artagnan, at the same time.
“This Milady, this woman, this creature, this demon, has a brother-in-law, as I think you told me, D’Artagnan?” “Yes, I know him very well; and I also believe that he has not a very warm affection for his sister-in-law.” “There is no harm in that.
If he detested her, it would be all the better,” replied Athos.
“What is her brother-in-law’s name?” “Lord de Winter.” “Where is he now?” “He returned to London at the first sound of war.” “Well, there’s just the man we want,” said Athos.
We will have him informed that his sister-in-law is on the point of having someone assassinated, and beg him not to lose sight of her.
There is in London, I hope, some establishment like that of the Magdalens, or of the Repentant Daughters.
He must place his sister in one of these, and we shall be in peace.” “Yes,” said D’Artagnan, “till she comes out.” “Ah, my faith!” said Athos, “you require too much, D’Artagnan.
“And I for Planchet,” said D’Artagnan.
“Have you any money?” The four friends looked at one another, and a cloud came over the brows which but lately had been so cheerful.
“Look out!” cried D’Artagnan, “I see black points and red points moving yonder.
Why did you talk of a regiment, Athos?
It is a veritable army!” “My faith, yes,” said Athos; “there they are.
Ah, ah! have you finished, Grimaud?” Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative, and pointed to a dozen bodies which he had set up in the most picturesque attitudes.
Some carried arms, others seemed to be taking aim, and the remainder appeared merely to be sword in hand.
“Bravo!” said Athos; “that does honor to your imagination.” “All very well,” said Porthos, “but I should like to understand.” “Let us decamp first, and you will understand afterward.” “A moment, gentlemen, a moment; give Grimaud time to clear away the breakfast.” “Ah, ah!” said Aramis, “the black points and the red points are visibly enlarging.
I am of D’Artagnan’s opinion; we have no time to lose in regaining our camp.” “My faith,” said Athos, “I have nothing to say against a retreat.
Nothing can be said; let us be off, gentlemen, let us be off!” Grimaud was already ahead, with the basket and the dessert.
The four friends followed, ten paces behind him.
“What the devil shall we do now, gentlemen?” cried Athos.
“Have you forgotten anything?” said Aramis.
“The white flag, _morbleu!_ We must not leave a flag in the hands of the enemy, even if that flag be but a napkin.” And Athos ran back to the bastion, mounted the platform, and bore off the flag; but as the Rochellais had arrived within musket range, they opened a terrible fire upon this man, who appeared to expose himself for pleasure’s sake.
The balls passed and whistled all around him; not one struck him.
Athos waved his flag, turning his back on the guards of the city, and saluting those of the camp.
On both sides loud cries arose—on the one side cries of anger, on the other cries of enthusiasm.
A second discharge followed the first, and three balls, by passing through it, made the napkin really a flag.
Cries were heard from the camp, “Come down! come down!” Athos came down; his friends, who anxiously awaited him, saw him returned with joy.
“Come along, Athos, come along!” cried D’Artagnan; “now we have found everything except money, it would be stupid to be killed.” But Athos continued to march majestically, whatever remarks his companions made; and they, finding their remarks useless, regulated their pace by his.
At the end of an instant they heard a furious fusillade.
“But the dead cannot return their fire.” “Certainly not!
They will then fancy it is an ambuscade, they will deliberate; and by the time they have found out the pleasantry, we shall be out of the range of their balls.
That renders it useless to get a pleurisy by too much haste.” “Oh, I comprehend now,” said the astonished Porthos.
“That’s lucky,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders.
On their part, the French, on seeing the four friends return at such a step, uttered cries of enthusiasm.
At length a fresh discharge was heard, and this time the balls came rattling among the stones around the four friends, and whistling sharply in their ears.
The Rochellais had at last taken possession of the bastion.
“These Rochellais are bungling fellows,” said Athos; “how many have we killed of them—a dozen?” “Or fifteen.” “How many did we crush under the wall?” “Eight or ten.” “And in exchange for all that not even a scratch!
Ah, but what is the matter with your hand, D’Artagnan?
It bleeds, seemingly.” “Oh, it’s nothing,” said D’Artagnan.
“A spent ball?” “Not even that.” “What is it, then?” We have said that Athos loved D’Artagnan like a child, and this somber and inflexible personage felt the anxiety of a parent for the young man.
“Only grazed a little,” replied D’Artagnan; “my fingers were caught between two stones—that of the wall and that of my ring—and the skin was broken.” “That comes of wearing diamonds, my master,” said Athos, disdainfully.
Why the devil, then, do we plague ourselves about money, when there is a diamond?” “Stop a bit!” said Aramis.
“Well thought of, Porthos; this time you have an idea.” “Undoubtedly,” said Porthos, drawing himself up at Athos’s compliment; “as there is a diamond, let us sell it.” “But,” said D’Artagnan, “it is the queen’s diamond.” “The stronger reason why it should be sold,” replied Athos.
“The queen saving Monsieur de Buckingham, her lover; nothing more just.
What says Monsieur the Abbé?
I don’t ask Porthos; his opinion has been given.” “Why, I think,” said Aramis, blushing as usual, “that his ring not coming from a mistress, and consequently not being a love token, D’Artagnan may sell it.” “My dear Aramis, you speak like theology personified.
“Well, then,” said D’Artagnan, gaily, “let us sell the diamond, and say no more about it.” The fusillade continued; but the four friends were out of reach, and the Rochellais only fired to appease their consciences.
Here we are at the camp; therefore, gentlemen, not a word more of this affair.
We are observed; they are coming to meet us.
More than two thousand persons had assisted, as at a spectacle, in this fortunate but wild undertaking of the four friends—an undertaking of which they were far from suspecting the real motive.
Nothing was heard but cries of “Live the Musketeers!
Live the Guards!” M. de Busigny was the first to come and shake Athos by the hand, and acknowledge that the wager was lost.
The dragoon and the Swiss followed him, and all their comrades followed the dragoon and the Swiss.
There was nothing but felicitations, pressures of the hand, and embraces; there was no end to the inextinguishable laughter at the Rochellais.
The tumult at length became so great that the cardinal fancied there must be some riot, and sent La Houdinière, his captain of the Guards, to inquire what was going on.
The affair was described to the messenger with all the effervescence of enthusiasm.
“Well?” asked the cardinal, on seeing La Houdinière return.
“Well, monseigneur,” replied the latter, “three Musketeers and a Guardsman laid a wager with Monsieur de Busigny that they would go and breakfast in the bastion St.
Gervais; and while breakfasting they held it for two hours against the enemy, and have killed I don’t know how many Rochellais.” “Did you inquire the names of those three Musketeers?” “Yes, monseigneur.” “What are their names?” “Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.” “Still my three brave fellows!” murmured the cardinal.
“And the Guardsman?” “D’Artagnan.” “Still my young scapegrace.
Positively, these four men must be on my side.” The same evening the cardinal spoke to M. de Tréville of the exploit of the morning, which was the talk of the whole camp.
M. de Tréville, who had received the account of the adventure from the mouths of the heroes of it, related it in all its details to his Eminence, not forgetting the episode of the napkin.
“That’s well, Monsieur de Tréville,” said the cardinal; “pray let that napkin be sent to me.
I will have three _fleur-de-lis_ embroidered on it in gold, and will give it to your company as a standard.” “Monseigneur,” said M. de Tréville, “that will be unjust to the Guardsmen.
Monsieur d’Artagnan is not with me; he serves under Monsieur Dessessart.” “Well, then, take him,” said the cardinal; “when four men are so much attached to one another, it is only fair that they should serve in the same company.” That same evening M. de Tréville announced this good news to the three Musketeers and D’Artagnan, inviting all four to breakfast with him next morning.
D’Artagnan was beside himself with joy.
We know that the dream of his life had been to become a Musketeer.
The three friends were likewise greatly delighted.
“My faith,” said D’Artagnan to Athos, “you had a triumphant idea!
As you said, we have acquired glory, and were enabled to carry on a conversation of the highest importance.” “Which we can resume now without anybody suspecting us, for, with the help of God, we shall henceforth pass for cardinalists.” That evening D’Artagnan went to present his respects to M.
Dessessart, and inform him of his promotion.
Dessessart, who esteemed D’Artagnan, made him offers of help, as this change would entail expenses for equipment.
D’Artagnan refused; but thinking the opportunity a good one, he begged him to have the diamond he put into his hand valued, as he wished to turn it into money.
Dessessart’s valet came to D’Artagnan’s lodging, and gave him a bag containing seven thousand livres.
A FAMILY AFFAIR Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.
A family affair was not subject to the investigation of the cardinal; a family affair concerned nobody.
People might employ themselves in a family affair before all the world.
Therefore Athos had invented the phrase, _family affair_.
Aramis had discovered the idea, _the lackeys_.
Porthos had discovered the means, _the diamond_.
D’Artagnan alone had discovered nothing—he, ordinarily the most inventive of the four; but it must be also said that the very name of Milady paralyzed him.
Ah! no, we were mistaken; he had discovered a purchaser for his diamond.
The breakfast at M. de Tréville’s was as gay and cheerful as possible.
D’Artagnan already wore his uniform—for being nearly of the same size as Aramis, and as Aramis was so liberally paid by the publisher who purchased his poem as to allow him to buy everything double, he sold his friend a complete outfit.
D’Artagnan would have been at the height of his wishes if he had not constantly seen Milady like a dark cloud hovering in the horizon.
After breakfast, it was agreed that they should meet again in the evening at Athos’s lodging, and there finish their plans.
D’Artagnan passed the day in exhibiting his Musketeer’s uniform in every street of the camp.
In the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met.
There only remained three things to decide—what they should write to Milady’s brother; what they should write to the clever person at Tours; and which should be the lackeys to carry the letters.
Everyone offered his own.
Athos talked of the discretion of Grimaud, who never spoke a word but when his master unlocked his mouth.
Porthos boasted of the strength of Mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four men of ordinary size.
Aramis, confiding in the address of Bazin, made a pompous eulogium on his candidate.
Finally, D’Artagnan had entire faith in the bravery of Planchet, and reminded them of the manner in which he had conducted himself in the ticklish affair of Boulogne.
These four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time, and gave birth to magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they should be deemed too long.
“Unfortunately,” said Athos, “he whom we send must possess in himself alone the four qualities united.” “But where is such a lackey to be found?” “Not to be found!” cried Athos.
“I know it well, so take Grimaud.” “Take Mousqueton.” “Take Bazin.” “Take Planchet.
Monsieur Abbé, you are a great moralist.” “Doubtless,” said Aramis, “for we not only require to be well served in order to succeed, but moreover, not to fail; for in case of failure, heads are in question, not for our lackeys—” “Speak lower, Aramis,” said Athos.
Are our lackeys sufficiently devoted to us to risk their lives for us?
No.” “My faith,” said D’Artagnan.
“I would almost answer for Planchet.” “Well, my dear friend, add to his natural devotedness a good sum of money, and then, instead of answering for him once, answer for him twice.” “Why, good God! you will be deceived just the same,” said Athos, who was an optimist when things were concerned, and a pessimist when men were in question.
“They will promise everything for the sake of the money, and on the road fear will prevent them from acting.
Once taken, they will be pressed; when pressed, they will confess everything.
What the devil! we are not children.
To reach England”—Athos lowered his voice—“all France, covered with spies and creatures of the cardinal, must be crossed.
A passport for embarkation must be obtained; and the party must be acquainted with English in order to ask the way to London.
Really, I think the thing very difficult.” “Not at all,” cried D’Artagnan, who was anxious the matter should be accomplished; “on the contrary, I think it very easy.
It would be, no doubt, _parbleu_, if we write to Lord de Winter about affairs of vast importance, of the horrors of the cardinal—” “Speak lower!” said Athos.
“—of intrigues and secrets of state,” continued D’Artagnan, complying with the recommendation.
“There can be no doubt we would all be broken on the wheel; but for God’s sake, do not forget, as you yourself said, Athos, that we only write to him concerning a family affair; that we only write to him to entreat that as soon as Milady arrives in London he will put it out of her power to injure us.
I will write to him, then, nearly in these terms.” “Let us see,” said Athos, assuming in advance a critical look.
“_Monsieur and dear friend_—” “Ah, yes! _Dear friend_ to an Englishman,” interrupted Athos; “well commenced!
Only with that word you would be quartered instead of being broken on the wheel.” “Well, perhaps.
I will say, then, _Monsieur_, quite short.” “You may even say, _My Lord_,” replied Athos, who stickled for propriety.
“_My Lord, do you remember the little goat pasture of the Luxembourg?_” “Good, _the Luxembourg!_ One might believe this is an allusion to the queen-mother!
That’s ingenious,” said Athos.
“Well, then, we will put simply, _My Lord, do you remember a certain little enclosure where your life was spared?_” “My dear D’Artagnan, you will never make anything but a very bad secretary. _Where your life was spared!_ For shame! that’s unworthy.
A man of spirit is not to be reminded of such services.
A benefit reproached is an offense committed.” “The devil!” said D’Artagnan, “you are insupportable.
If the letter must be written under your censure, my faith, I renounce the task.” “And you will do right.
You will come off splendidly at those two exercises; but pass the pen over to Monsieur Abbé.
That’s his province.” “Ay, ay!” said Porthos; “pass the pen to Aramis, who writes theses in Latin.” “Well, so be it,” said D’Artagnan.
“Draw up this note for us, Aramis; but by our Holy Father the Pope, cut it short, for I shall prune you in my turn, I warn you.” “I ask no better,” said Aramis, with that ingenious air of confidence which every poet has in himself; “but let me be properly acquainted with the subject.
I have obtained proof of it by listening to her conversation with the cardinal.” “Lower! _sacré bleu!_” said Athos.
“But,” continued Aramis, “the details escape me.” “And me also,” said Porthos.
D’Artagnan and Athos looked at each other for some time in silence.
At length Athos, after serious reflection and becoming more pale than usual, made a sign of assent to D’Artagnan, who by it understood he was at liberty to speak.
“Well, this is what you have to say,” said D’Artagnan: “_My Lord, your sister-in-law is an infamous woman, who wished to have you killed that she might inherit your wealth; but she could not marry your brother, being already married in France, and having been_—” D’Artagnan stopped, as if seeking for the word, and looked at Athos.
“Repudiated by her husband,” said Athos.
“Because she had been branded,” continued D’Artagnan.
“Yes.” “And her husband found out that she had a _fleur-de-lis_ on her shoulder?” cried Porthos.
“Yes.” These three _yeses_ had been pronounced by Athos, each with a sadder intonation.
“And who has seen this _fleur-de-lis?_” inquired Aramis.
Or rather, to observe the chronological order, I and D’Artagnan,” replied Athos.
“And does the husband of this frightful creature still live?” said Aramis.
“He still lives.” “Are you quite sure of it?” “I am he.” There was a moment of cold silence, during which everyone was affected according to his nature.
“This time,” said Athos, first breaking the silence, “D’Artagnan has given us an excellent program, and the letter must be written at once.” “The devil!
You are right, Athos,” said Aramis; “and it is a rather difficult matter.
The chancellor himself would be puzzled how to write such a letter, and yet the chancellor draws up an official report very readily.
Be silent, I will write.” Aramis accordingly took the quill, reflected for a few moments, wrote eight or ten lines in a charming little female hand, and then with a voice soft and slow, as if each word had been scrupulously weighed, he read the following: “My Lord, The person who writes these few lines had the honor of crossing swords with you in the little enclosure of the Rue d’Enfer.
As you have several times since declared yourself the friend of that person, he thinks it his duty to respond to that friendship by sending you important information.
Twice you have nearly been the victim of a near relative, whom you believe to be your heir because you are ignorant that before she contracted a marriage in England she was already married in France.
Your relative left La Rochelle for England during the night.
Watch her arrival, for she has great and terrible projects.
If you require to know positively what she is capable of, read her past history on her left shoulder.” “Well, now that will do wonderfully well,” said Athos.
“My dear Aramis, you have the pen of a secretary of state.
Lord de Winter will now be upon his guard if the letter should reach him; and even if it should fall into the hands of the cardinal, we shall not be compromised.
But as the lackey who goes may make us believe he has been to London and may stop at Châtellerault, let us give him only half the sum promised him, with the letter, with an agreement that he shall have the other half in exchange for the reply.
Have you the diamond?” continued Athos.
I have the price;” and D’Artagnan threw the bag upon the table.
As to Athos, he remained unmoved.
“How much in that little bag?” “Seven thousand livres, in louis of twelve francs.” “Seven thousand livres!” cried Porthos.
“That poor little diamond was worth seven thousand livres?” “It appears so,” said Athos, “since here they are.
I don’t suppose that our friend D’Artagnan has added any of his own to the amount.” “But, gentlemen, in all this,” said D’Artagnan, “we do not think of the queen.
Let us take some heed of the welfare of her dear Buckingham.
That is the least we owe her.” “That’s true,” said Athos; “but that concerns Aramis.” “Well,” replied the latter, blushing, “what must I say?” “Oh, that’s simple enough!” replied Athos.
“Write a second letter for that clever personage who lives at Tours.” Aramis resumed his pen, reflected a little, and wrote the following lines, which he immediately submitted to the approbation of his friends.
“This clever person is your relative, then?” “Cousin-german.” “Go on, to your cousin, then!” Aramis continued: “MY DEAR COUSIN, His Eminence, the cardinal, whom God preserve for the happiness of France and the confusion of the enemies of the kingdom, is on the point of putting an end to the hectic rebellion of La Rochelle.
It is probable that the succor of the English fleet will never even arrive in sight of the place.
I will even venture to say that I am certain M. de Buckingham will be prevented from setting out by some great event.
His Eminence is the most illustrious politician of times past, of times present, and probably of times to come.
He would extinguish the sun if the sun incommoded him.
I have dreamed that the unlucky Englishman was dead.
I cannot recollect whether it was by steel or by poison; only of this I am sure, I have dreamed he was dead, and you know my dreams never deceive me.
You speak like the Apocalypse, and you are as true as the Gospel.
He folded the letter fancifully, and took up his pen and wrote: “_To Mlle.
Michon, seamstress, Tours_.” The three friends looked at one another and laughed; they were caught.
“Now,” said Aramis, “you will please to understand, gentlemen, that Bazin alone can carry this letter to Tours.
My cousin knows nobody but Bazin, and places confidence in nobody but him; any other person would fail.
Besides, Bazin is ambitious and learned; Bazin has read history, gentlemen, he knows that Sixtus the Fifth became Pope after having kept pigs.
Well, as he means to enter the Church at the same time as myself, he does not despair of becoming Pope in his turn, or at least a cardinal.
You can understand that a man who has such views will never allow himself to be taken, or if taken, will undergo martyrdom rather than speak.” “Very well,” said D’Artagnan, “I consent to Bazin with all my heart, but grant me Planchet.
Milady had him one day turned out of doors, with sundry blows of a good stick to accelerate his motions.
Now, Planchet has an excellent memory; and I will be bound that sooner than relinquish any possible means of vengeance, he will allow himself to be beaten to death.
If your arrangements at Tours are your arrangements, Aramis, those of London are mine.
I request, then, that Planchet may be chosen, more particularly as he has already been to London with me, and knows how to speak correctly: _London, sir, if you please, and my master, Lord D’Artagnan_.
With that you may be satisfied he can make his way, both going and returning.” “In that case,” said Athos, “Planchet must receive seven hundred livres for going, and seven hundred livres for coming back; and Bazin, three hundred livres for going, and three hundred livres for returning—that will reduce the sum to five thousand livres.
We will each take a thousand livres to be employed as seems good, and we will leave a fund of a thousand livres under the guardianship of Monsieur Abbé here, for extraordinary occasions or common wants.
Will that do?” “My dear Athos,” said Aramis, “you speak like Nestor, who was, as everyone knows, the wisest among the Greeks.” “Well, then,” said Athos, “it is agreed.
Planchet and Bazin shall go.
Everything considered, I am not sorry to retain Grimaud; he is accustomed to my ways, and I am particular.
Yesterday’s affair must have shaken him a little; his voyage would upset him quite.” Planchet was sent for, and instructions were given him.
The matter had been named to him by D’Artagnan, who in the first place pointed out the money to him, then the glory, and then the danger.
“I will carry the letter in the lining of my coat,” said Planchet; “and if I am taken I will swallow it.” “Well, but then you will not be able to fulfill your commission,” said D’Artagnan.
“You will give me a copy this evening, which I shall know by heart tomorrow.” D’Artagnan looked at his friends, as if to say, “Well, what did I tell you?” “Now,” continued he, addressing Planchet, “you have eight days to get an interview with Lord de Winter; you have eight days to return—in all sixteen days.
If, on the sixteenth day after your departure, at eight o’clock in the evening you are not here, no money—even if it be but five minutes past eight.” “Then, monsieur,” said Planchet, “you must buy me a watch.” “Take this,” said Athos, with his usual careless generosity, giving him his own, “and be a good lad.
Remember, if you talk, if you babble, if you get drunk, you risk your master’s head, who has so much confidence in your fidelity, and who answers for you.
But remember, also, that if by your fault any evil happens to D’Artagnan, I will find you, wherever you may be, for the purpose of ripping up your belly.” “Oh, monsieur!” said Planchet, humiliated by the suspicion, and moreover, terrified at the calm air of the Musketeer.
“And I,” said Porthos, rolling his large eyes, “remember, I will skin you alive.” “Ah, monsieur!” “And I,” said Aramis, with his soft, melodius voice, “remember that I will roast you at a slow fire, like a savage.” “Ah, monsieur!” Planchet began to weep.
We will not venture to say whether it was from terror created by the threats or from tenderness at seeing four friends so closely united.
D’Artagnan took his hand.
He gained just twelve hours by this engagement; he was to be back on the sixteenth day, by eight o’clock in the evening.
In the morning, as he was mounting his horse, D’Artagnan, who felt at the bottom of his heart a partiality for the duke, took Planchet aside.
“When you have given the letter to Lord de Winter and he has read it, you will further say to him: _Watch over his Grace Lord Buckingham, for they wish to assassinate him_.
Bazin set out the next day for Tours, and was allowed eight days for performing his commission.
The four friends, during the period of these two absences, had, as may well be supposed, the eye on the watch, the nose to the wind, and the ear on the hark.
Their days were passed in endeavoring to catch all that was said, in observing the proceeding of the cardinal, and in looking out for all the couriers who arrived.
More than once an involuntary trembling seized them when called upon for some unexpected service.
They had, besides, to look constantly to their own proper safety; Milady was a phantom which, when it had once appeared to people, did not allow them to sleep very quietly.
On the morning of the eighth day, Bazin, fresh as ever, and smiling, according to custom, entered the cabaret of the Parpaillot as the four friends were sitting down to breakfast, saying, as had been agreed upon: “Monsieur Aramis, the answer from your cousin.” The four friends exchanged a joyful glance; half of the work was done.
Aramis, blushing in spite of himself, took the letter, which was in a large, coarse hand and not particular for its orthography.
“Good God!” cried he, laughing, “I quite despair of my poor Michon; she will never write like Monsieur de Voiture.” “What does you mean by boor Michon?” said the Swiss, who was chatting with the four friends when the letter came.
“Oh, _pardieu_, less than nothing,” said Aramis; “a charming little seamstress, whom I love dearly and from whose hand I requested a few lines as a sort of keepsake.” “The duvil!” said the Swiss, “if she is as great a lady as her writing is large, you are a lucky fellow, gomrade!” Aramis read the letter, and passed it to Athos.
Athos cast a glance over the epistle, and to disperse all the suspicions that might have been created, read aloud: “MY COUSIN, My sister and I are skillful in interpreting dreams, and even entertain great fear of them; but of yours it may be said, I hope, every dream is an illusion.
Take care of yourself, and act so that we may from time to time hear you spoken of.
“MARIE MICHON” “And what dream does she mean?” asked the dragoon, who had approached during the reading.
“Well, _pardieu!_” said Aramis, “it was only this: I had a dream, and I related it to her.” “Yez, yez,” said the Swiss; “it’s simple enough to dell a dream, but I neffer dream.” “You are very fortunate,” said Athos, rising; “I wish I could say as much!” “Neffer,” replied the Swiss, enchanted that a man like Athos could envy him anything.
“Neffer, neffer!” D’Artagnan, seeing Athos rise, did likewise, took his arm, and went out.
Porthos and Aramis remained behind to encounter the jokes of the dragoon and the Swiss.
As to Bazin, he went and lay down on a truss of straw; and as he had more imagination than the Swiss, he dreamed that Aramis, having become pope, adorned his head with a cardinal’s hat.
But, as we have said, Bazin had not, by his fortunate return, removed more than a part of the uneasiness which weighed upon the four friends.
The days of expectation are long, and D’Artagnan, in particular, would have wagered that the days were forty-four hours.
He forgot the necessary slowness of navigation; he exaggerated to himself the power of Milady.
He credited this woman, who appeared to him the equal of a demon, with agents as supernatural as herself; at the least noise, he imagined himself about to be arrested, and that Planchet was being brought back to be confronted with himself and his friends.
Still further, his confidence in the worthy Picard, at one time so great, diminished day by day.
This anxiety became so great that it even extended to Aramis and Porthos.
Athos alone remained unmoved, as if no danger hovered over him, and as if he breathed his customary atmosphere.
On the sixteenth day, in particular, these signs were so strong in D’Artagnan and his two friends that they could not remain quiet in one place, and wandered about like ghosts on the road by which Planchet was expected.
“Really,” said Athos to them, “you are not men but children, to let a woman terrify you so!
Well, but we should be taken out of prison; Madame Bonacieux was released.
Why, every day in the trenches we go cheerfully to expose ourselves to worse than that—for a bullet may break a leg, and I am convinced a surgeon would give us more pain in cutting off a thigh than an executioner in cutting off a head.
Wait quietly, then; in two hours, in four, in six hours at latest, Planchet will be here.
He promised to be here, and I have very great faith in Planchet, who appears to me to be a very good lad.” “But if he does not come?” said D’Artagnan.
He may have fallen from his horse, he may have cut a caper from the deck; he may have traveled so fast against the wind as to have brought on a violent catarrh.
Eh, gentlemen, let us reckon upon accidents!
Life is a chaplet of little miseries which the philosopher counts with a smile.
Be philosophers, as I am, gentlemen; sit down at the table and let us drink.
Nothing makes the future look so bright as surveying it through a glass of chambertin.” “That’s all very well,” replied D’Artagnan; “but I am tired of fearing when I open a fresh bottle that the wine may come from the cellar of Milady.” “You are very fastidious,” said Athos; “such a beautiful woman!” “A woman of mark!” said Porthos, with his loud laugh.
Athos started, passed his hand over his brow to remove the drops of perspiration that burst forth, and rose in his turn with a nervous movement he could not repress.
The bars were filled with drinkers.
Athos, who had pocketed his share of the diamond, seldom quit the Parpaillot.
He had found in M. de Busigny, who, by the by, had given them a magnificent dinner, a partner worthy of his company.
They were playing together, as usual, when seven o’clock sounded; the patrol was heard passing to double the posts.
“We are lost,” said D’Artagnan, in the ear of Athos.
“You mean to say we _have lost_,” said Athos, quietly, drawing four pistoles from his pocket and throwing them upon the table.
“Come, gentlemen,” said he, “they are beating the tattoo.
Let us to bed!” And Athos went out of the Parpaillot, followed by D’Artagnan.
Aramis mumbled verses to himself, and Porthos from time to time pulled a hair or two from his mustache, in sign of despair.
But all at once a shadow appeared in the darkness the outline of which was familiar to D’Artagnan, and a well-known voice said, “Monsieur, I have brought your cloak; it is chilly this evening.” “Planchet!” cried D’Artagnan, beside himself with joy.
“Planchet!” repeated Aramis and Porthos.
“Well, yes, Planchet, to be sure,” said Athos, “what is there so astonishing in that?
He promised to be back by eight o’clock, and eight is striking.
Bravo, Planchet, you are a lad of your word, and if ever you leave your master, I will promise you a place in my service.” “Oh, no, never,” said Planchet, “I will never leave Monsieur d’Artagnan.” At the same time D’Artagnan felt that Planchet slipped a note into his hand.
D’Artagnan felt a strong inclination to embrace Planchet as he had embraced him on his departure; but he feared lest this mark of affection, bestowed upon his lackey in the open street, might appear extraordinary to passers-by, and he restrained himself.
“That’s well,” said Athos, “let us go home and read it.” The note burned the hand of D’Artagnan.
He wished to hasten their steps; but Athos took his arm and passed it under his own, and the young man was forced to regulate his pace by that of his friend.
At length they reached the tent, lit a lamp, and while Planchet stood at the entrance that the four friends might not be surprised, D’Artagnan, with a trembling hand, broke the seal and opened the so anxiously expected letter.
It contained half a line, in a hand perfectly British, and with a conciseness as perfectly Spartan: _Thank you; be easy_.
D’Artagnan translated this for the others.
Athos took the letter from the hands of D’Artagnan, approached the lamp, set fire to the paper, and did not let go till it was reduced to a cinder.
Then, calling Planchet, he said, “Now, my lad, you may claim your seven hundred livres, but you did not run much risk with such a note as that.” “I am not to blame for having tried every means to compress it,” said Planchet.
“Well!” cried D’Artagnan, “tell us all about it.” “_Dame_, that’s a long job, monsieur.” “You are right, Planchet,” said Athos; “besides, the tattoo has been sounded, and we should be observed if we kept a light burning much longer than the others.” “So be it,” said D’Artagnan.
“Go to bed, Planchet, and sleep soundly.” “My faith, monsieur! that will be the first time I have done so for sixteen days.” “And me, too!” said D’Artagnan.
FATALITY Meantime Milady, drunk with passion, roaring on the deck like a lioness that has been embarked, had been tempted to throw herself into the sea that she might regain the coast, for she could not get rid of the thought that she had been insulted by D’Artagnan, threatened by Athos, and that she had quit France without being revenged on them.
But the wind was contrary, the sea bad; they tacked and kept offshore.
Nine days after leaving the Charente, pale with fatigue and vexation, Milady saw only the blue coasts of Finisterre appear.
She calculated that to cross this corner of France and return to the cardinal it would take her at least three days.
Add these four to the nine others, that would be thirteen days lost—thirteen days, during which so many important events might pass in London.
She reflected likewise that the cardinal would be furious at her return, and consequently would be more disposed to listen to the complaints brought against her than to the accusations she brought against others.
She allowed the vessel to pass Lorient and Brest without repeating her request to the captain, who, on his part, took care not to remind her of it.
Milady therefore continued her voyage, and on the very day that Planchet embarked at Portsmouth for France, the messenger of his Eminence entered the port in triumph.
All the city was agitated by an extraordinary movement.
Four large vessels, recently built, had just been launched.
At the end of the jetty, his clothes richly laced with gold, glittering, as was customary with him, with diamonds and precious stones, his hat ornamented with a white feather which drooped upon his shoulder, Buckingham was seen surrounded by a staff almost as brilliant as himself.
It was one of those rare and beautiful days in winter when England remembers that there is a sun.
The star of day, pale but nevertheless still splendid, was setting in the horizon, glorifying at once the heavens and the sea with bands of fire, and casting upon the towers and the old houses of the city a last ray of gold which made the windows sparkle like the reflection of a conflagration.
They entered the roadstead; but as they drew near in order to cast anchor, a little cutter, looking like a coastguard formidably armed, approached the merchant vessel and dropped into the sea a boat which directed its course to the ladder.
This boat contained an officer, a mate, and eight rowers.
The officer alone went on board, where he was received with all the deference inspired by the uniform.
The officer conversed a few instants with the captain, gave him several papers, of which he was the bearer, to read, and upon the order of the merchant captain the whole crew of the vessel, both passengers and sailors, were called upon deck.
When this species of summons was made the officer inquired aloud the point of the brig’s departure, its route, its landings; and to all these questions the captain replied without difficulty and without hesitation.
Then the officer began to pass in review all the people, one after the other, and stopping when he came to Milady, surveyed her very closely, but without addressing a single word to her.
He then returned to the captain, said a few words to him, and as if from that moment the vessel was under his command, he ordered a maneuver which the crew executed immediately.
Then the vessel resumed its course, still escorted by the little cutter, which sailed side by side with it, menacing it with the mouths of its six cannon.
The boat followed in the wake of the ship, a speck near the enormous mass.
During the examination of Milady by the officer, as may well be imagined, Milady on her part was not less scrutinizing in her glances.
But however great was the power of this woman with eyes of flame in reading the hearts of those whose secrets she wished to divine, she met this time with a countenance of such impassivity that no discovery followed her investigation.
The fog increased the darkness, and formed round the sternlights and lanterns of the jetty a circle like that which surrounds the moon when the weather threatens to become rainy.
The air they breathed was heavy, damp, and cold.
Milady, that woman so courageous and firm, shivered in spite of herself.
The officer desired to have Milady’s packages pointed out to him, and ordered them to be placed in the boat.
When this operation was complete, he invited her to descend by offering her his hand.
Milady looked at this man, and hesitated.
“Who are you, sir,” asked she, “who has the kindness to trouble yourself so particularly on my account?” “You may perceive, madame, by my uniform, that I am an officer in the English navy,” replied the young man.
Nevertheless, they had not the power of convincing Milady.
“But I am not a foreigner, sir,” said she, with an accent as pure as ever was heard between Portsmouth and Manchester; “my name is Lady Clarik, and this measure—” “This measure is general, madame; and you will seek in vain to evade it.” “I will follow you, then, sir.” Accepting the hand of the officer, she began the descent of the ladder, at the foot of which the boat waited.
The officer followed her.
A large cloak was spread at the stern; the officer requested her to sit down upon this cloak, and placed himself beside her.
A carriage was in waiting.
“Is this carriage for us?” asked Milady.
“The hôtel, then, is far away?” “At the other end of the town.” “Very well,” said Milady; and she resolutely entered the carriage.
The officer saw that the baggage was fastened carefully behind the carriage; and this operation ended, he took his place beside Milady, and shut the door.
Immediately, without any order being given or his place of destination indicated, the coachman set off at a rapid pace, and plunged into the streets of the city.
So strange a reception naturally gave Milady ample matter for reflection; so seeing that the young officer did not seem at all disposed for conversation, she reclined in her corner of the carriage, and one after the other passed in review all the surmises which presented themselves to her mind.
At the end of a quarter of an hour, however, surprised at the length of the journey, she leaned forward toward the door to see whither she was being conducted.
Houses were no longer to be seen; trees appeared in the darkness like great black phantoms chasing one another.
The young officer preserved silence.
“I beg you to understand, sir, I will go no farther unless you tell me whither you are taking me.” This threat brought no reply.
“Help! help!” No voice replied to hers; the carriage continued to roll on with rapidity; the officer seemed a statue.
Milady looked at the officer with one of those terrible expressions peculiar to her countenance, and which so rarely failed of their effect; anger made her eyes flash in the darkness.
The young man remained immovable.
“Take care, madame,” said the young man, coolly, “you will kill yourself in jumping.” Milady reseated herself, foaming.
The officer leaned forward, looked at her in his turn, and appeared surprised to see that face, just before so beautiful, distorted with passion and almost hideous.
At length after a journey of nearly an hour, the carriage stopped before an iron gate, which closed an avenue leading to a castle severe in form, massive, and isolated.
Then, as the wheels rolled over a fine gravel, Milady could hear a vast roaring, which she at once recognized as the noise of the sea dashing against some steep cliff.
The carriage passed under two arched gateways, and at length stopped in a court large, dark, and square.
Almost immediately the door of the carriage was opened, the young man sprang lightly out and presented his hand to Milady, who leaned upon it, and in her turn alighted with tolerable calmness.
“Still, then, I am a prisoner,” said Milady, looking around her, and bringing back her eyes with a most gracious smile to the young officer; “but I feel assured it will not be for long,” added she.
“My own conscience and your politeness, sir, are the guarantees of that.” However flattering this compliment, the officer made no reply; but drawing from his belt a little silver whistle, such as boatswains use in ships of war, he whistled three times, with three different modulations.
Immediately several men appeared, who unharnessed the smoking horses, and put the carriage into a coach house.
Then the officer, with the same calm politeness, invited his prisoner to enter the house.
She, with a still-smiling countenance, took his arm, and passed with him under a low arched door, which by a vaulted passage, lighted only at the farther end, led to a stone staircase around an angle of stone.
They then came to a massive door, which after the introduction into the lock of a key which the young man carried with him, turned heavily upon its hinges, and disclosed the chamber destined for Milady.
With a single glance the prisoner took in the apartment in its minutest details.
It was a chamber whose furniture was at once appropriate for a prisoner or a free man; and yet bars at the windows and outside bolts at the door decided the question in favor of the prison.
In an instant all the strength of mind of this creature, though drawn from the most vigorous sources, abandoned her; she sank into a large easy chair, with her arms crossed, her head lowered, and expecting every instant to see a judge enter to interrogate her.
But no one entered except two or three marines, who brought her trunks and packages, deposited them in a corner, and retired without speaking.
The officer superintended all these details with the same calmness Milady had constantly seen in him, never pronouncing a word himself, and making himself obeyed by a gesture of his hand or a sound of his whistle.
It might have been said that between this man and his inferiors spoken language did not exist, or had become useless.
Put an end to my doubts; I have courage enough for any danger I can foresee, for every misfortune which I understand.
If I am a prisoner, what crime have I committed?” “You are here in the apartment destined for you, madame.
I received orders to go and take charge of you on the sea, and to conduct you to this castle.
This order I believe I have accomplished with all the exactness of a soldier, but also with the courtesy of a gentleman.
There terminates, at least to the present moment, the duty I had to fulfill toward you; the rest concerns another person.” “And who is that other person?” asked Milady, warmly.
“Can you not tell me his name?” At the moment a great jingling of spurs was heard on the stairs.
Some voices passed and faded away, and the sound of a single footstep approached the door.
“That person is here, madame,” said the officer, leaving the entrance open, and drawing himself up in an attitude of respect.
At the same time the door opened; a man appeared on the threshold.
He was without a hat, carried a sword, and flourished a handkerchief in his hand.
Milady thought she recognized this shadow in the gloom; she supported herself with one hand upon the arm of the chair, and advanced her head as if to meet a certainty.
The stranger advanced slowly, and as he advanced, after entering into the circle of light projected by the lamp, Milady involuntarily drew back.
Then when she had no longer any doubt, she cried, in a state of stupor, “What, my brother, is it you?” “Yes, fair lady!” replied Lord de Winter, making a bow, half courteous, half ironical; “it is I, myself.” “But this castle, then?” “Is mine.” “This chamber?” “Is yours.” “I am, then, your prisoner?” “Nearly so.” “But this is a frightful abuse of power!” “No high-sounding words!
CHAT BETWEEN BROTHER AND SISTER During the time which Lord de Winter took to shut the door, close a shutter, and draw a chair near to his sister-in-law’s _fauteuil_, Milady, anxiously thoughtful, plunged her glance into the depths of possibility, and discovered all the plan, of which she could not even obtain a glance as long as she was ignorant into whose hands she had fallen.
She knew her brother-in-law to be a worthy gentleman, a bold hunter, an intrepid player, enterprising with women, but by no means remarkable for his skill in intrigues.
How had he discovered her arrival, and caused her to be seized?
Athos had dropped some words which proved that the conversation she had with the cardinal had fallen into outside ears; but she could not suppose that he had dug a countermine so promptly and so boldly.
She rather feared that her preceding operations in England might have been discovered.
Buckingham might have guessed that it was she who had cut off the two studs, and avenge himself for that little treachery; but Buckingham was incapable of going to any excess against a woman, particularly if that woman was supposed to have acted from a feeling of jealousy.
This supposition appeared to her most reasonable.
It seemed to her that they wanted to revenge the past, and not to anticipate the future.
At all events, she congratulated herself upon having fallen into the hands of her brother-in-law, with whom she reckoned she could deal very easily, rather than into the hands of an acknowledged and intelligent enemy.
“Yes, let us chat, brother,” said she, with a kind of cheerfulness, decided as she was to draw from the conversation, in spite of all the dissimulation Lord de Winter could bring, the revelations of which she stood in need to regulate her future conduct.
“You have, then, decided to come to England again,” said Lord de Winter, “in spite of the resolutions you so often expressed in Paris never to set your feet on British ground?” Milady replied to this question by another question.
“To begin with, tell me,” said she, “how have you watched me so closely as to be aware beforehand not only of my arrival, but even of the day, the hour, and the port at which I should arrive?” Lord de Winter adopted the same tactics as Milady, thinking that as his sister-in-law employed them they must be the best.
“But tell me, my dear sister,” replied he, “what makes you come to England?” “I come to see you,” replied Milady, without knowing how much she aggravated by this reply the suspicions to which D’Artagnan’s letter had given birth in the mind of her brother-in-law, and only desiring to gain the good will of her auditor by a falsehood.
“Ah, to see me?” said de Winter, cunningly.
What is there astonishing in that?” “And you had no other object in coming to England but to see me?” “No.” “So it was for me alone you have taken the trouble to cross the Channel?” “For you alone.” “The deuce!
What tenderness, my sister!” “But am I not your nearest relative?” demanded Milady, with a tone of the most touching ingenuousness.
Whatever command she had over herself, Milady could not help starting; and as in pronouncing the last words Lord de Winter placed his hand upon the arm of his sister, this start did not escape him.
The first idea that occurred to Milady’s mind was that she had been betrayed by Kitty, and that she had recounted to the baron the selfish aversion toward himself of which she had imprudently allowed some marks to escape before her servant.
She also recollected the furious and imprudent attack she had made upon D’Artagnan when he spared the life of her brother.
“I do not understand, my Lord,” said she, in order to gain time and make her adversary speak out.
Is there any secret meaning concealed beneath your words?” “Oh, my God, no!” said Lord de Winter, with apparent good nature.
What is there more astonishing in all that I have said to you than in what you have told me?” “No; what I think astonishing is that you should expect my coming.” “And yet that is the most simple thing in the world, my dear sister.
Have you not observed that the captain of your little vessel, on entering the roadstead, sent forward, in order to obtain permission to enter the port, a little boat bearing his logbook and the register of his voyagers?
I am commandant of the port.
I recognized your name in it.
My heart told me what your mouth has just confirmed—that is to say, with what view you have exposed yourself to the dangers of a sea so perilous, or at least so troublesome at this moment—and I sent my cutter to meet you.
“My brother,” continued she, “was not that my Lord Buckingham whom I saw on the jetty this evening as we arrived?” “Himself.
Ah, I can understand how the sight of him struck you,” replied Lord de Winter.
“You came from a country where he must be very much talked of, and I know that his armaments against France greatly engage the attention of your friend the cardinal.” “My friend the cardinal!” cried Milady, seeing that on this point as on the other Lord de Winter seemed well instructed.
“Is he not your friend?” replied the baron, negligently.
I thought so; but we will return to my Lord Duke presently.
Let us not depart from the sentimental turn our conversation had taken.
You came, you say, to see me?” “Yes.” “Well, I reply that you shall be served to the height of your wishes, and that we shall see each other every day.” “Am I, then, to remain here eternally?” demanded Milady, with a certain terror.
“Do you find yourself badly lodged, sister?
Demand anything you want, and I will hasten to have you furnished with it.” “But I have neither my women nor my servants.” “You shall have all, madame.
Tell me on what footing your household was established by your first husband, and although I am only your brother-in-law, I will arrange one similar.” “My first husband!” cried Milady, looking at Lord de Winter with eyes almost starting from their sockets.
If you have forgotten, as he is still living, I can write to him and he will send me information on the subject.” A cold sweat burst from the brow of Milady.
“Do I look so?” asked the baron, rising and going a step backward.
“Or rather you insult me,” continued she, pressing with her stiffened hands the two arms of her easy chair, and raising herself upon her wrists.
“I insult you!” said Lord de Winter, with contempt.
“In truth, madame, do you think that can be possible?” “Indeed, sir,” said Milady, “you must be either drunk or mad.
Leave the room, and send me a woman.” “Women are very indiscreet, my sister.
By that means all our secrets will remain in the family.” “Insolent!” cried Milady; and as if acted upon by a spring, she bounded toward the baron, who awaited her attack with his arms crossed, but nevertheless with one hand on the hilt of his sword.
“I know you are accustomed to assassinate people; but I warn you I shall defend myself, even against you.” “You are right,” said Milady.
“You have all the appearance of being cowardly enough to lift your hand against a woman.” “Perhaps so; and I have an excuse, for mine would not be the first hand of a man that has been placed upon you, I imagine.” And the baron pointed, with a slow and accusing gesture, to the left shoulder of Milady, which he almost touched with his finger.
Milady uttered a deep, inward shriek, and retreated to a corner of the room like a panther which crouches for a spring.
“Oh, growl as much as you please,” cried Lord de Winter, “but don’t try to bite, for I warn you that it would be to your disadvantage.
There are here no procurators who regulate successions beforehand.
There is no knight-errant to come and seek a quarrel with me on account of the fair lady I detain a prisoner; but I have judges quite ready who will quickly dispose of a woman so shameless as to glide, a bigamist, into the bed of Lord de Winter, my brother.
And these judges, I warn you, will soon send you to an executioner who will make both your shoulders alike.” The eyes of Milady darted such flashes that although he was a man and armed before an unarmed woman, he felt the chill of fear glide through his whole frame.
However, he continued all the same, but with increasing warmth: “Yes, I can very well understand that after having inherited the fortune of my brother it would be very agreeable to you to be my heir likewise; but know beforehand, if you kill me or cause me to be killed, my precautions are taken.
And could you not stop your fatal career, if you did not do evil for the infinite and supreme joy of doing it?
Oh, be assured, if the memory of my brother were not sacred to me, you should rot in a state dungeon or satisfy the curiosity of sailors at Tyburn.
I will be silent, but you must endure your captivity quietly.
In fifteen or twenty days I shall set out for La Rochelle with the army; but on the eve of my departure a vessel which I shall see depart will take you hence and convey you to our colonies in the south.
And be assured that you shall be accompanied by one who will blow your brains out at the first attempt you make to return to England or the Continent.” Milady listened with an attention that dilated her inflamed eyes.
“Yes, at present,” continued Lord de Winter, “you will remain in this castle.
The walls are thick, the doors strong, and the bars solid; besides, your window opens immediately over the sea.
The men of my crew, who are devoted to me for life and death, mount guard around this apartment, and watch all the passages that lead to the courtyard.
The order is positive.
A step, a gesture, a word, on your part, denoting an effort to escape, and you are to be fired upon.
If they kill you, English justice will be under an obligation to me for having saved it trouble.
I see your features regain their calmness, your countenance recovers its assurance.
You are saying to yourself: ‘Fifteen days, twenty days?
I have an inventive mind; before that is expired some idea will occur to me.
I have an infernal spirit.
Before fifteen days are gone by I shall be away from here.’ Ah, try it!” Milady, finding her thoughts betrayed, dug her nails into her flesh to subdue every emotion that might give to her face any expression except agony.
Lord de Winter continued: “The officer who commands here in my absence you have already seen, and therefore know him.
He knows how, as you must have observed, to obey an order—for you did not, I am sure, come from Portsmouth hither without endeavoring to make him speak.
Could a statue of marble have been more impassive and more mute?
You have already tried the power of your seductions upon many men, and unfortunately you have always succeeded; but I give you leave to try them upon this one. _Pardieu!_ if you succeed with him, I pronounce you the demon himself.” He went toward the door and opened it hastily.
“Wait a minute longer, and I will introduce him to you.” There followed between these two personages a strange silence, during which the sound of a slow and regular step was heard approaching.
Shortly a human form appeared in the shade of the corridor, and the young lieutenant, with whom we are already acquainted, stopped at the threshold to receive the orders of the baron.
She is young; she is beautiful; she possesses all earthly seductions.
Well, she is a monster, who, at twenty-five years of age, has been guilty of as many crimes as you could read of in a year in the archives of our tribunals.
Her voice prejudices her hearers in her favor; her beauty serves as a bait to her victims; her body even pays what she promises—I must do her that justice.
I have extricated you from misery, Felton; I have caused you to be named lieutenant; I once saved your life, you know on what occasion.
I am for you not only a protector, but a friend; not only a benefactor, but a father.
This woman has come back again into England for the purpose of conspiring against my life.
Well, I call you, and say to you: Friend Felton, John, my child, guard me, and more particularly guard yourself, against this woman.
Swear, by your hopes of salvation, to keep her safely for the chastisement she has merited.
John Felton, I put faith in your loyalty!” “My Lord,” said the young officer, summoning to his mild countenance all the hatred he could find in his heart, “my Lord, I swear all shall be done as you desire.” Milady received this look like a resigned victim; it was impossible to imagine a more submissive or a more mild expression than that which prevailed on her beautiful countenance.
Lord de Winter himself could scarcely recognize the tigress who, a minute before, prepared apparently for a fight.
“She is not to leave this chamber, understand, John,” continued the baron.
“She is to correspond with nobody; she is to speak to no one but you—if you will do her the honor to address a word to her.” “That is sufficient, my Lord!
I have sworn.” “And now, madame, try to make your peace with God, for you are judged by men!” Milady let her head sink, as if crushed by this sentence.
Lord de Winter went out, making a sign to Felton, who followed him, shutting the door after him.
One instant after, the heavy step of a marine who served as sentinel was heard in the corridor—his ax in his girdle and his musket on his shoulder.
Milady remained for some minutes in the same position, for she thought they might perhaps be examining her through the keyhole; she then slowly raised her head, which had resumed its formidable expression of menace and defiance, ran to the door to listen, looked out of her window, and returning to bury herself again in her large armchair, she reflected.
OFFICER Meanwhile, the cardinal looked anxiously for news from England; but no news arrived that was not annoying and threatening.
Although La Rochelle was invested, however certain success might appear—thanks to the precautions taken, and above all to the dyke, which prevented the entrance of any vessel into the besieged city—the blockade might last a long time yet.
This was a great affront to the king’s army, and a great inconvenience to the cardinal, who had no longer, it is true, to embroil Louis XIII. with Anne of Austria—for that affair was over—but he had to adjust matters for M. de Bassompierre, who was embroiled with the Duc d’Angoulême.
As to Monsieur, who had begun the siege, he left to the cardinal the task of finishing it.
The city, notwithstanding the incredible perseverance of its mayor, had attempted a sort of mutiny for a surrender; the mayor had hanged the mutineers.
This execution quieted the ill-disposed, who resolved to allow themselves to die of hunger—this death always appearing to them more slow and less sure than strangulation.
On their side, from time to time, the besiegers took the messengers which the Rochellais sent to Buckingham, or the spies which Buckingham sent to the Rochellais.
The cardinal pronounced the single word, “Hanged!” The king was invited to come and see the hanging.
He came languidly, placing himself in a good situation to see all the details.
This amused him sometimes a little, and made him endure the siege with patience; but it did not prevent his getting very tired, or from talking at every moment of returning to Paris—so that if the messengers and the spies had failed, his Eminence, notwithstanding all his inventiveness, would have found himself much embarrassed.
Nevertheless, time passed on, and the Rochellais did not surrender.
This letter told Buckingham that the city was at an extremity; but instead of adding, “If your succor does not arrive within fifteen days, we will surrender,” it added, quite simply, “If your succor comes not within fifteen days, we shall all be dead with hunger when it comes.” The Rochellais, then, had no hope but in Buckingham.
Buckingham was their Messiah.
It was evident that if they one day learned positively that they must not count on Buckingham, their courage would fail with their hope.
The cardinal looked, then, with great impatience for the news from England which would announce to him that Buckingham would not come.
The question of carrying the city by assault, though often debated in the council of the king, had been always rejected.
In the first place, La Rochelle appeared impregnable.
Then the cardinal, whatever he said, very well knew that the horror of bloodshed in this encounter, in which Frenchman would combat against Frenchman, was a retrograde movement of sixty years impressed upon his policy; and the cardinal was at that period what we now call a man of progress.
In fact, the sack of La Rochelle, and the assassination of three of four thousand Huguenots who allowed themselves to be killed, would resemble too closely, in 1628, the massacre of St.
Bartholomew in 1572; and then, above all this, this extreme measure, which was not at all repugnant to the king, good Catholic as he was, always fell before this argument of the besieging generals—La Rochelle is impregnable except to famine.
The cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear he entertained of his terrible emissary—for he comprehended the strange qualities of this woman, sometimes a serpent, sometimes a lion.
Had she betrayed him?
He knew her well enough in all cases to know that, whether acting for or against him, as a friend or an enemy, she would not remain motionless without great impediments; but whence did these impediments arise?
And yet he reckoned, and with reason, on Milady.
He had divined in the past of this woman terrible things which his red mantle alone could cover; and he felt, from one cause or another, that this woman was his own, as she could look to no other but himself for a support superior to the danger which threatened her.
He resolved, then, to carry on the war alone, and to look for no success foreign to himself, but as we look for a fortunate chance.
He continued to press the raising of the famous dyke which was to starve La Rochelle.
Meanwhile, he cast his eyes over that unfortunate city, which contained so much deep misery and so many heroic virtues, and recalling the saying of Louis XI., his political predecessor, as he himself was the predecessor of Robespierre, he repeated this maxim of Tristan’s gossip: “Divide in order to reign.” Henry IV., when besieging Paris, had loaves and provisions thrown over the walls.
The cardinal had little notes thrown over in which he represented to the Rochellais how unjust, selfish, and barbarous was the conduct of their leaders.
These leaders had corn in abundance, and would not let them partake of it; they adopted as a maxim—for they, too, had maxims—that it was of very little consequence that women, children, and old men should die, so long as the men who were to defend the walls remained strong and healthy.
Up to that time, whether from devotedness or from want of power to act against it, this maxim, without being generally adopted, nevertheless passed from theory into practice; but the notes did it injury.
The notes reminded the men that the children, women, and old men whom they allowed to die were their sons, their wives, and their fathers, and that it would be more just for everyone to be reduced to the common misery, in order that equal conditions should give birth to unanimous resolutions.
These notes had all the effect that he who wrote them could expect, in that they induced a great number of the inhabitants to open private negotiations with the royal army.
Still further, Buckingham announced to the mayor that at length the great league was about to declare itself against France, and that the kingdom would be at once invaded by the English, Imperial, and Spanish armies.
This letter was read publicly in all parts of the city.
Copies were put up at the corners of the streets; and even they who had begun to open negotiations interrupted them, being resolved to await the succor so pompously announced.
This unexpected circumstance brought back Richelieu’s former anxiety, and forced him in spite of himself once more to turn his eyes to the other side of the sea.
During this time, exempt from the anxiety of its only and true chief, the royal army led a joyous life, neither provisions nor money being wanting in the camp.
All the corps rivaled one another in audacity and gaiety.
To take spies and hang them, to make hazardous expeditions upon the dyke or the sea, to imagine wild plans, and to execute them coolly—such were the pastimes which made the army find these days short which were not only so long to the Rochellais, a prey to famine and anxiety, but even to the cardinal, who blockaded them so closely.
One day when oppressed with a mortal weariness of mind, without hope in the negotiations with the city, without news from England, the cardinal went out, without any other aim than to be out of doors, and accompanied only by Cahusac and La Houdinière, strolled along the beach.
Mingling the immensity of his dreams with the immensity of the ocean, he came, his horse going at a foot’s pace, to a hill from the top of which he perceived behind a hedge, reclining on the sand and catching in its passage one of those rays of the sun so rare at this period of the year, seven men surrounded by empty bottles.
Four of these men were our Musketeers, preparing to listen to a letter one of them had just received.
This letter was so important that it made them forsake their cards and their dice on the drumhead.
The other three were occupied in opening an enormous flagon of Collicure wine; these were the lackeys of these gentlemen.
The cardinal was, as we have said, in very low spirits; and nothing when he was in that state of mind increased his depression so much as gaiety in others.
Making a sign to La Houdinière and Cahusac to stop, he alighted from his horse, and went toward these suspected merry companions, hoping, by means of the sand which deadened the sound of his steps and of the hedge which concealed his approach, to catch some words of this conversation which appeared so interesting.
At ten paces from the hedge he recognized the talkative Gascon; and as he had already perceived that these men were Musketeers, he did not doubt that the three others were those called the Inseparables; that is to say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
It may be supposed that his desire to hear the conversation was augmented by this discovery.
His eyes took a strange expression, and with the step of a tiger-cat he advanced toward the hedge; but he had not been able to catch more than a few vague syllables without any positive sense, when a sonorous and short cry made him start, and attracted the attention of the Musketeers.
“You are speaking, you scoundrel!” said Athos, rising upon his elbow, and transfixing Grimaud with his flaming look.
Grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech, but contented himself with pointing his index finger in the direction of the hedge, announcing by this gesture the cardinal and his escort.
With a single bound the Musketeers were on their feet, and saluted with respect.
The cardinal seemed furious.
“It appears that Messieurs the Musketeers keep guard,” said he.
“Lackeys who have the order to warn their masters when anyone passes are not lackeys, they are sentinels.” “Your Eminence may perceive that if we had not taken this precaution, we should have been exposed to allowing you to pass without presenting you our respects or offering you our thanks for the favor you have done us in uniting us.
D’Artagnan,” continued Athos, “you, who but lately were so anxious for such an opportunity for expressing your gratitude to Monseigneur, here it is; avail yourself of it.” These words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm which distinguished Athos in the hour of danger, and with that excessive politeness which made of him at certain moments a king more majestic than kings by birth.
D’Artagnan came forward and stammered out a few words of gratitude which soon expired under the gloomy looks of the cardinal.
“It does not signify, gentlemen,” continued the cardinal, without appearing to be in the least swerved from his first intention by the diversion which Athos had started, “it does not signify, gentlemen.
I do not like to have simple soldiers, because they have the advantage of serving in a privileged corps, thus to play the great lords; discipline is the same for them as for everybody else.” Athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely, and bowed in sign of assent.
Then he resumed in his turn: “Discipline, Monseigneur, has, I hope, in no way been forgotten by us.
We are not on duty, and we believed that not being on duty we were at liberty to dispose of our time as we pleased.
If we are so fortunate as to have some particular duty to perform for your Eminence, we are ready to obey you.
Your Eminence may perceive,” continued Athos, knitting his brow, for this sort of investigation began to annoy him, “that we have not come out without our arms.” And he showed the cardinal, with his finger, the four muskets piled near the drum, on which were the cards and dice.
“Your Eminence may believe,” added D’Artagnan, “that we would have come to meet you, if we could have supposed it was Monseigneur coming toward us with so few attendants.” The cardinal bit his mustache, and even his lips a little.
“Do you know what you look like, all together, as you are armed and guarded by your lackeys?” said the cardinal.
“You look like four conspirators.” “Oh, as to that, Monseigneur, it is true,” said Athos; “we do conspire, as your Eminence might have seen the other morning.
Only we conspire against the Rochellais.” “Ah, you gentlemen of policy!” replied the cardinal, knitting his brow in his turn, “the secret of many unknown things might perhaps be found in your brains, if we could read them as you read that letter which you concealed as soon as you saw me coming.” The color mounted to the face of Athos, and he made a step toward his Eminence.
“One might think you really suspected us, monseigneur, and we were undergoing a real interrogatory.
If it be so, we trust your Eminence will deign to explain yourself, and we should then at least be acquainted with our real position.” “And if it were an interrogatory!” replied the cardinal.
Athos saw the movement; he made a step toward the muskets, upon which the other three friends had fixed their eyes, like men ill-disposed to allow themselves to be taken.
The cardinalists were three; the Musketeers, lackeys included, were seven.
He judged that the match would be so much the less equal, if Athos and his companions were really plotting; and by one of those rapid turns which he always had at command, all his anger faded away into a smile.
“Well, well!” said he, “you are brave young men, proud in daylight, faithful in darkness.
We can find no fault with you for watching over yourselves, when you watch so carefully over others.
Gentlemen, I have not forgotten the night in which you served me as an escort to the Red Dovecot.
If there were any danger to be apprehended on the road I am going, I would request you to accompany me; but as there is none, remain where you are, finish your bottles, your game, and your letter.
Adieu, gentlemen!” And remounting his horse, which Cahusac led to him, he saluted them with his hand, and rode away.
The four young men, standing and motionless, followed him with their eyes without speaking a single word until he had disappeared.
The countenances of all gave evidence of terror, for notwithstanding the friendly adieu of his Eminence, they plainly perceived that the cardinal went away with rage in his heart.
Athos alone smiled, with a self-possessed, disdainful smile.
When the cardinal was out of hearing and sight, “That Grimaud kept bad watch!” cried Porthos, who had a great inclination to vent his ill-humor on somebody.
“Would you have given up the letter, Aramis?” said D’Artagnan.
“I,” said Aramis, in his most flutelike tone, “I had made up my mind.
If he had insisted upon the letter being given up to him, I would have presented the letter to him with one hand, and with the other I would have run my sword through his body.” “I expected as much,” said Athos; “and that was why I threw myself between you and him.
Indeed, this man is very much to blame for talking thus to other men; one would say he had never had to do with any but women and children.” “My dear Athos, I admire you, but nevertheless we were in the wrong, after all.” “How, in the wrong?” said Athos.
Whose is the sand upon which we were reclining?
Whose is that letter of your mistress?
Do these belong to the cardinal?
There you stood, stammering, stupefied, annihilated.
One might have supposed the Bastille appeared before you, and that the gigantic Medusa had converted you into stone.
Is being in love conspiring?
You are in love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up, and you wish to get her out of the hands of the cardinal.
That’s a match you are playing with his Eminence; this letter is your game.
Why should you expose your game to your adversary?
We can find out his!” “Well, that’s all very sensible, Athos,” said D’Artagnan.
“In that case, let there be no more question of what’s past, and let Aramis resume the letter from his cousin where the cardinal interrupted him.” Aramis drew the letter from his pocket; the three friends surrounded him, and the three lackeys grouped themselves again near the wine jar.
“You had only read a line or two,” said D’Artagnan; “read the letter again from the commencement.” “Willingly,” said Aramis.
“MY DEAR COUSIN, I think I shall make up my mind to set out for Béthune, where my sister has placed our little servant in the convent of the Carmelites; this poor child is quite resigned, as she knows she cannot live elsewhere without the salvation of her soul being in danger.
Nevertheless, if the affairs of our family are arranged, as we hope they will be, I believe she will run the risk of being damned, and will return to those she regrets, particularly as she knows they are always thinking of her.
Meanwhile, she is not very wretched; what she most desires is a letter from her intended.
I know that such viands pass with difficulty through convent gratings; but after all, as I have given you proofs, my dear cousin, I am not unskilled in such affairs, and I will take charge of the commission.
My sister thanks you for your good and eternal remembrance.
She has experienced much anxiety; but she is now at length a little reassured, having sent her secretary away in order that nothing may happen unexpectedly.
Tell us news of yourself as often as you can; that is to say, as often as you can with safety.
“MARIE MICHON” “Oh, what do I not owe you, Aramis?” said D’Artagnan.
I have at length, then, intelligence of you.
Where is Béthune, Athos?” “Why, upon the frontiers of Artois and of Flanders.
The siege once over, we shall be able to make a tour in that direction.” “And that will not be long, it is to be hoped,” said Porthos; “for they have this morning hanged a spy who confessed that the Rochellais were reduced to the leather of their shoes.
Supposing that after having eaten the leather they eat the soles, I cannot see much that is left unless they eat one another.” “Poor fools!” said Athos, emptying a glass of excellent Bordeaux wine which, without having at that period the reputation it now enjoys, merited it no less, “poor fools!
As if the Catholic religion was not the most advantageous and the most agreeable of all religions!
But what the devil are you about, Aramis?” continued Athos.
“Why, you are squeezing that letter into your pocket!” “Yes,” said D’Artagnan, “Athos is right, it must be burned.
And yet if we burn it, who knows whether Monsieur Cardinal has not a secret to interrogate ashes?” “He must have one,” said Athos.
“As a punishment for having spoken without permission, my friend, you will please to eat this piece of paper; then to recompense you for the service you will have rendered us, you shall afterward drink this glass of wine.
Eat heartily.” Grimaud smiled; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass which Athos held in his hand, he ground the paper well between his teeth and then swallowed it.
“Bravo, Monsieur Grimaud!” said Athos; “and now take this.
We dispense with your saying grace.” Grimaud silently swallowed the glass of Bordeaux wine; but his eyes, raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation, spoke a language which, though mute, was not the less expressive.
“And now,” said Athos, “unless Monsieur Cardinal should form the ingenious idea of ripping up Grimaud, I think we may be pretty much at our ease respecting the letter.” Meantime, his Eminence continued his melancholy ride, murmuring between his mustaches, “These four men must positively be mine.” Chapter LII.
CAPTIVITY: THE FIRST DAY Let us return to Milady, whom a glance thrown upon the coast of France has made us lose sight of for an instant.
We shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we left her, plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection—a dark hell at the gate of which she has almost left hope behind, because for the first time she doubts, for the first time she fears.
On two occasions her fortune has failed her, on two occasions she has found herself discovered and betrayed; and on these two occasions it was to one fatal genius, sent doubtlessly by the Lord to combat her, that she has succumbed.
D’Artagnan has conquered her—her, that invincible power of evil.
He has deceived her in her love, humbled her in her pride, thwarted her in her ambition; and now he ruins her fortune, deprives her of liberty, and even threatens her life.
Still more, he has lifted the corner of her mask—that shield with which she covered herself and which rendered her so strong.
D’Artagnan has turned aside from Buckingham, whom she hates as she hates everyone she has loved, the tempest with which Richelieu threatened him in the person of the queen.
D’Artagnan had passed himself upon her as De Wardes, for whom she had conceived one of those tigerlike fancies common to women of her character.
D’Artagnan knows that terrible secret which she has sworn no one shall know without dying.
In short, at the moment in which she has just obtained from Richelieu a _carte blanche_ by the means of which she is about to take vengeance on her enemy, this precious paper is torn from her hands, and it is D’Artagnan who holds her prisoner and is about to send her to some filthy Botany Bay, some infamous Tyburn of the Indian Ocean.
All this she owes to D’Artagnan, without doubt.
From whom can come so many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him?
He alone could have transmitted to Lord de Winter all these frightful secrets which he has discovered, one after another, by a train of fatalities.
What hatred she distills!
Motionless, with her burning and fixed glances, in her solitary apartment, how well the outbursts of passion which at times escape from the depths of her chest with her respiration, accompany the sound of the surf which rises, growls, roars, and breaks itself like an eternal and powerless despair against the rocks on which is built this dark and lofty castle!
How many magnificent projects of vengeance she conceives by the light of the flashes which her tempestuous passion casts over her mind against Mme.
Bonacieux, against Buckingham, but above all against D’Artagnan—projects lost in the distance of the future.
And to be free, a prisoner has to pierce a wall, detach bars, cut through a floor—all undertakings which a patient and strong man may accomplish, but before which the feverish irritations of a woman must give way.
Besides, to do all this, time is necessary—months, years; and she has ten or twelve days, as Lord de Winter, her fraternal and terrible jailer, has told her.
And yet, if she were a man she would attempt all this, and perhaps might succeed; why, then, did heaven make the mistake of placing that manlike soul in that frail and delicate body?
The first moments of her captivity were terrible; a few convulsions of rage which she could not suppress paid her debt of feminine weakness to nature.
But by degrees she overcame the outbursts of her mad passion; and nervous tremblings which agitated her frame disappeared, and she remained folded within herself like a fatigued serpent in repose.
I must have been mad to allow myself to be carried away so,” says she, gazing into the glass, which reflects back to her eyes the burning glance by which she appears to interrogate herself.
“No violence; violence is the proof of weakness.
In the first place, I have never succeeded by that means.
Perhaps if I employed my strength against women I might perchance find them weaker than myself, and consequently conquer them; but it is with men that I struggle, and I am but a woman to them.
Let me fight like a woman, then; my strength is in my weakness.” Then, as if to render an account to herself of the changes she could place upon her countenance, so mobile and so expressive, she made it take all expressions from that of passionate anger, which convulsed her features, to that of the most sweet, most affectionate, and most seducing smile.
Then her hair assumed successively, under her skillful hands, all the undulations she thought might assist the charms of her face.
At length she murmured, satisfied with herself, “Come, nothing is lost; I am still beautiful.” It was then nearly eight o’clock in the evening.
Milady perceived a bed; she calculated that the repose of a few hours would not only refresh her head and her ideas, but still further, her complexion.
She had heard something said about supper.
She had already been an hour in this apartment; they could not long delay bringing her a repast.
The prisoner did not wish to lose time; and she resolved to make that very evening some attempts to ascertain the nature of the ground she had to work upon, by studying the characters of the men to whose guardianship she was committed.
A light appeared under the door; this light announced the reappearance of her jailers.
Milady, who had arisen, threw herself quickly into the armchair, her head thrown back, her beautiful hair unbound and disheveled, her bosom half bare beneath her crumpled lace, one hand on her heart, and the other hanging down.
“Place that table there,” said a voice which the prisoner recognized as that of Felton.
The order was executed.
“You will bring lights, and relieve the sentinel,” continued Felton.
And this double order which the young lieutenant gave to the same individuals proved to Milady that her servants were the same men as her guards; that is to say, soldiers.
Felton’s orders were, for the rest, executed with a silent rapidity that gave a good idea of the way in which he maintained discipline.
“But, my lieutenant,” said a soldier, less stoical than his chief, and who had approached Milady, “this woman is not asleep.” “What, not asleep!” said Felton; “what is she doing, then?” “She has fainted.
Her face is very pale, and I have listened in vain; I do not hear her breathe.” “You are right,” said Felton, after having looked at Milady from the spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her.
“Go and tell Lord de Winter that his prisoner has fainted—for this event not having been foreseen, I don’t know what to do.” The soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer.
Felton sat down upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, and waited without speaking a word, without making a gesture.
Milady possessed that great art, so much studied by women, of looking through her long eyelashes without appearing to open the lids.
She perceived Felton, who sat with his back toward her.
She continued to look at him for nearly ten minutes, and in these ten minutes the immovable guardian never turned round once.
She then thought that Lord de Winter would come, and by his presence give fresh strength to her jailer.
Her first trial was lost; she acted like a woman who reckons up her resources.
If you want anything you can ring.” “Oh, my God, my God! how I have suffered!” said Milady, in that harmonious voice which, like that of the ancient enchantresses, charmed all whom she wished to destroy.
And she assumed, upon sitting up in the armchair, a still more graceful and abandoned position than when she reclined.
If that does not suit you, you can point out what other hours you prefer, and in this respect your wishes will be complied with.” “But am I to remain always alone in this vast and dismal chamber?” asked Milady.
“A woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for, who will be tomorrow at the castle, and will return as often as you desire her presence.” “I thank you, sir,” replied the prisoner, humbly.
Felton made a slight bow, and directed his steps toward the door.
At the moment he was about to go out, Lord de Winter appeared in the corridor, followed by the soldier who had been sent to inform him of the swoon of Milady.
“Well, what is it—what is going on here?” said he, in a jeering voice, on seeing the prisoner sitting up and Felton about to go out.
She has a fruitful imagination, and the second act of the comedy will not delay its steps after the first.” And at these words Lord de Winter passed his arm through that of Felton, and led him out, laughing.
“Oh, I will be a match for you!” murmured Milady, between her teeth; “be assured of that, you poor spoiled monk, you poor converted soldier, who has cut his uniform out of a monk’s frock!” “By the way,” resumed de Winter, stopping at the threshold of the door, “you must not, Milady, let this check take away your appetite.
On my honor, they are not poisoned.
I have a very good cook, and he is not to be my heir; I have full and perfect confidence in him.
Her hands clutched her armchair; she ground her teeth inwardly; her eyes followed the motion of the door as it closed behind Lord de Winter and Felton, and the moment she was alone a fresh fit of despair seized her.
She cast her eyes upon the table, saw the glittering of a knife, rushed toward it and clutched it; but her disappointment was cruel.
The blade was round, and of flexible silver.
A burst of laughter resounded from the other side of the ill-closed door, and the door reopened.
Observe, this is one of her peculiarities, to get rid thus, after one fashion or another, of all the people who bother her.
If I had listened to you, the knife would have been pointed and of steel.
Then no more of Felton; she would have cut your throat, and after that everybody else’s.
See, John, see how well she knows how to handle a knife.” In fact, Milady still held the harmless weapon in her clenched hand; but these last words, this supreme insult, relaxed her hands, her strength, and even her will.
“You were right, my Lord,” said Felton, with a tone of profound disgust which sounded to the very bottom of the heart of Milady, “you were right, my Lord, and I was wrong.” And both again left the room.
But this time Milady lent a more attentive ear than the first, and she heard their steps die away in the distance of the corridor.
“I am lost,” murmured she; “I am lost!
I am in the power of men upon whom I can have no more influence than upon statues of bronze or granite; they know me by heart, and are steeled against all my weapons.
It is, however, impossible that this should end as they have decreed!” In fact, as this last reflection indicated—this instinctive return to hope—sentiments of weakness or fear did not dwell long in her ardent spirit.
Milady sat down to table, ate from several dishes, drank a little Spanish wine, and felt all her resolution return.
Before she went to bed she had pondered, analyzed, turned on all sides, examined on all points, the words, the steps, the gestures, the signs, and even the silence of her interlocutors; and of this profound, skillful, and anxious study the result was that Felton, everything considered, appeared the more vulnerable of her two persecutors.
One expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner: “If I had listened to you,” Lord de Winter had said to Felton.
“Weak or strong,” repeated Milady, “that man has, then, a spark of pity in his soul; of that spark I will make a flame that shall devour him.
It is useless, then, to attempt anything with him.
He is a young, ingenuous, pure man who seems virtuous; him there are means of destroying.” And Milady went to bed and fell asleep with a smile upon her lips.
Anyone who had seen her sleeping might have said she was a young girl dreaming of the crown of flowers she was to wear on her brow at the next festival.
CAPTIVITY: THE SECOND DAY Milady dreamed that she at length had D’Artagnan in her power, that she was present at his execution; and it was the sight of his odious blood, flowing beneath the ax of the headsman, which spread that charming smile upon her lips.
She slept as a prisoner sleeps, rocked by his first hope.
Felton remained in the corridor.
He brought with him the woman of whom he had spoken the evening before, and who had just arrived; this woman entered, and approaching Milady’s bed, offered her services.
Milady was habitually pale; her complexion might therefore deceive a person who saw her for the first time.
Are you likely to be more humane to me than others were yesterday?
All I ask is permission to remain abed.” “Would you like to have a physician called?” said the woman.
Felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word.
Milady reflected that the more people she had around her the more she would have to work upon, and Lord de Winter would redouble his watch.
Besides, the physician might declare the ailment feigned; and Milady, after having lost the first trick, was not willing to lose the second.
“Go and fetch a physician?” said she.
These gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was a comedy; it would be just the same today, no doubt—for since yesterday evening they have had plenty of time to send for a doctor.” “Then,” said Felton, who became impatient, “say yourself, madame, what treatment you wish followed.” “Eh, how can I tell?
Give me anything you like, it is of little consequence.” “Go and fetch Lord de Winter,” said Felton, tired of these eternal complaints.
I am well, I want nothing; do not call him.” She gave so much vehemence, such magnetic eloquence to this exclamation, that Felton in spite of himself advanced some steps into the room.
“Meanwhile, madame, if you really suffer,” said Felton, “a physician shall be sent for; and if you deceive us—well, it will be the worse for you.
But at least we shall not have to reproach ourselves with anything.” Milady made no reply, but turning her beautiful head round upon her pillow, she burst into tears, and uttered heartbreaking sobs.
Felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness; then, seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged, he went out.
The woman followed him, and Lord de Winter did not appear.
“I fancy I begin to see my way,” murmured Milady, with a savage joy, burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybody who might be watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.
I have but ten days, and this evening two of them will be gone.” In the morning, when they entered Milady’s chamber they had brought her breakfast.
Now, she thought, they could not long delay coming to clear the table, and that Felton would then reappear.
Milady was not deceived.
Felton reappeared, and without observing whether Milady had or had not touched her repast, made a sign that the table should be carried out of the room, it having been brought in ready spread.
Felton remained behind; he held a book in his hand.
Milady, reclining in an armchair near the chimney, beautiful, pale, and resigned, looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom.
By that plain arrangement of the hair, by that costume of extreme simplicity, by the brow polished like marble and as hard and impenetrable, she recognized one of those gloomy Puritans she had so often met, not only in the court of King James, but in that of the King of France, where, in spite of the remembrance of the St.
Bartholomew, they sometimes came to seek refuge.
She then had one of those sudden inspirations which only people of genius receive in great crises, in supreme moments which are to decide their fortunes or their lives.
“I will tell it,” cried Milady, with a feigned exultation, “on the day when I shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith.” The look of Felton revealed to Milady the full extent of the space she had opened for herself by this single word.
The young officer, however, remained mute and motionless; his look alone had spoken.
“I am in the hands of my enemies,” continued she, with that tone of enthusiasm which she knew was familiar to the Puritans.
She received him like a woman who had already recovered all her advantages.
“It appears,” said the baron, seating himself in the armchair opposite that occupied by Milady, and stretching out his legs carelessly upon the hearth, “it appears we have made a little apostasy!” “What do you mean, sir!” “I mean to say that since we last met you have changed your religion.
You have not by chance married a Protestant for a third husband, have you?” “Explain yourself, my Lord,” replied the prisoner, with majesty; “for though I hear your words, I declare I do not understand them.” “Then you have no religion at all; I like that best,” replied Lord de Winter, laughing.
“Certainly that is most in accord with your own principles,” replied Milady, frigidly.
“Oh, I confess it is all the same to me.” “Oh, you need not avow this religious indifference, my Lord; your debaucheries and crimes would vouch for it.” “What, you talk of debaucheries, Madame Messalina, Lady Macbeth!
Either I misunderstand you or you are very shameless!” “You only speak thus because you are overheard,” coolly replied Milady; “and you wish to interest your jailers and your hangmen against me.” “My jailers and my hangmen!
Heyday, madame! you are taking a poetical tone, and the comedy of yesterday turns to a tragedy this evening.
As to the rest, in eight days you will be where you ought to be, and my task will be completed.” “Infamous task! impious task!” cried Milady, with the exultation of a victim who provokes his judge.
Come, come, calm yourself, Madame Puritan, or I’ll remove you to a dungeon.
But never mind; that sort of intoxication is not dangerous, and will have no bad effects.” And Lord de Winter retired swearing, which at that period was a very knightly habit.
“Yes, go, go!” said she to her brother; “the effects _are_ drawing near, on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see them until it is too late to shun them.” Silence was re-established.
She appeared to be in ecstasy, and did not pay the least attention to what was going on around her.
Felton made a sign that she should not be disturbed; and when all was arranged, he went out quietly with the soldiers.
Milady knew she might be watched, so she continued her prayers to the end; and it appeared to her that the soldier who was on duty at her door did not march with the same step, and seemed to listen.
An hour after, her table was cleared; but Milady remarked that this time Felton did not accompany the soldiers.
She turned toward the wall to smile—for there was in this smile such an expression of triumph that this smile alone would have betrayed her.
While singing, Milady listened.
Milady was then able to judge of the effect she had produced.
Then she continued her singing with inexpressible fervor and feeling.
It appeared to her that the sounds spread to a distance beneath the vaulted roofs, and carried with them a magic charm to soften the hearts of her jailers.
It however likewise appeared that the soldier on duty—a zealous Catholic, no doubt—shook off the charm, for through the door he called: “Hold your tongue, madame!
Your song is as dismal as a ‘De profundis’; and if besides the pleasure of being in garrison here, we must hear such things as these, no mortal can hold out.” “Silence!” then exclaimed another stern voice which Milady recognized as that of Felton.
“What are you meddling with, stupid?
You were told to guard her—to fire at her if she attempted to fly.
If she flies, kill her; but don’t exceed your orders.” An expression of unspeakable joy lightened the countenance of Milady; but this expression was fleeting as the reflection of lightning.
Felton believed he heard the singing of the angel who consoled the three Hebrews in the furnace.
Milady continued: “One day our doors will ope, With God come our desire; And if betrays that hope, To death we can aspire.” This verse, into which the terrible enchantress threw her whole soul, completed the trouble which had seized the heart of the young officer.
He opened the door quickly; and Milady saw him appear, pale as usual, but with his eye inflamed and almost wild.
“Your pardon, sir,” said Milady, with mildness.
I have perhaps offended you in your creed; but it was without wishing to do so, I swear.
Pardon me, then, a fault which is perhaps great, but which certainly was involuntary.” Milady was so beautiful at this moment, the religious ecstasy in which she appeared to be plunged gave such an expression to her countenance, that Felton was so dazzled that he fancied he beheld the angel whom he had only just before heard.
“Yes, yes,” said he; “you disturb, you agitate the people who live in the castle.” The poor, senseless young man was not aware of the incoherence of his words, while Milady was reading with her lynx’s eyes the very depths of his heart.
“I will be silent, then,” said Milady, casting down her eyes with all the sweetness she could give to her voice, with all the resignation she could impress upon her manner.
“No, no, madame,” said Felton, “only do not sing so loud, particularly at night.” And at these words Felton, feeling that he could not long maintain his severity toward his prisoner, rushed out of the room.
“You have done right, Lieutenant,” said the soldier.
“Such songs disturb the mind; and yet we become accustomed to them, her voice is so beautiful.” Chapter LIV.
CAPTIVITY: THE THIRD DAY Felton had fallen; but there was still another step to be taken.
He must be retained, or rather he must be left quite alone; and Milady but obscurely perceived the means which could lead to this result.
He must be made to speak, in order that he might be spoken to—for Milady very well knew that her greatest seduction was in her voice, which so skillfully ran over the whole gamut of tones from human speech to language celestial.
Yet in spite of all this seduction Milady might fail—for Felton was forewarned, and that against the least chance.
From that moment she watched all his actions, all his words, from the simplest glance of his eyes to his gestures—even to a breath that could be interpreted as a sigh.
In short, she studied everything, as a skillful comedian does to whom a new part has been assigned in a line to which he is not accustomed.
She had laid that down the preceding evening.
To remain silent and dignified in his presence; from time to time to irritate him by affected disdain, by a contemptuous word; to provoke him to threats and violence which would produce a contrast with her own resignation—such was her plan.
In the morning, Felton came as usual; but Milady allowed him to preside over all the preparations for breakfast without addressing a word to him.
At the moment when he was about to retire, she was cheered with a ray of hope, for she thought he was about to speak; but his lips moved without any sound leaving his mouth, and making a powerful effort to control himself, he sent back to his heart the words that were about to escape from his lips, and went out.
It was a tolerably fine winter’s day, and a ray of that pale English sun which lights but does not warm came through the bars of her prison.
Milady was looking out at the window, and pretended not to hear the door as it opened.
“Ah, ah!” said Lord de Winter, “after having played comedy, after having played tragedy, we are now playing melancholy?” The prisoner made no reply.
“Yes, yes,” continued Lord de Winter, “I understand.
You would like very well to be in a good ship dancing upon the waves of that emerald-green sea; you would like very well, either on land or on the ocean, to lay for me one of those nice little ambuscades you are so skillful in planning.
At the moment he went out a piercing glance darted through the opening of the nearly closed door, and she perceived Felton, who drew quickly to one side to prevent being seen by her.
“My God, my God!” said she, “thou knowest in what holy cause I suffer; give me, then, strength to suffer.” The door opened gently; the beautiful supplicant pretended not to hear the noise, and in a voice broken by tears, she continued: “God of vengeance!
God of goodness! wilt thou allow the frightful projects of this man to be accomplished?” Then only she pretended to hear the sound of Felton’s steps, and rising quick as thought, she blushed, as if ashamed of being surprised on her knees.
“I do not like to disturb those who pray, madame,” said Felton, seriously; “do not disturb yourself on my account, I beseech you.” “How do you know I was praying, sir?” said Milady, in a voice broken by sobs.
“You were deceived, sir; I was not praying.” “Do you think, then, madame,” replied Felton, in the same serious voice, but with a milder tone, “do you think I assume the right of preventing a creature from prostrating herself before her Creator?
Besides, repentance becomes the guilty; whatever crimes they may have committed, for me the guilty are sacred at the feet of God!” “Guilty?
I?” said Milady, with a smile which might have disarmed the angel of the last judgment.
Say I am condemned, sir, if you please; but you know that God, who loves martyrs, sometimes permits the innocent to be condemned.” “Were you condemned, were you innocent, were you a martyr,” replied Felton, “the greater would be the necessity for prayer; and I myself would aid you with my prayers.” “Oh, you are a just man!” cried Milady, throwing herself at his feet.
“I can hold out no longer, for I fear I shall be wanting in strength at the moment when I shall be forced to undergo the struggle, and confess my faith.
Listen, then, to the supplication of a despairing woman.
You are abused, sir; but that is not the question.
I only ask you one favor; and if you grant it me, I will bless you in this world and in the next.” “Speak to the master, madame,” said Felton; “happily I am neither charged with the power of pardoning nor punishing.
It is upon one higher placed than I am that God has laid this responsibility.” “To you—no, to you alone!
Listen to me, rather than add to my destruction, rather than add to my ignominy!” “If you have merited this shame, madame, if you have incurred this ignominy, you must submit to it as an offering to God.” “What do you say?
Oh, you do not understand me!
When I speak of ignominy, you think I speak of some chastisement, of imprisonment or death.
Of what consequence to me is imprisonment or death?” “It is I who no longer understand you, madame,” said Felton.
“Or, rather, who pretend not to understand me, sir!” replied the prisoner, with a smile of incredulity.
“Are there, then, in England two men to whom such an epithet can be applied?” “You mean George Villiers?” asked Felton, whose looks became excited.
“Whom Pagans and unbelieving Gentiles call Duke of Buckingham,” replied Milady.
“Oh, my God, my God!” cried Milady; “when I supplicate thee to pour upon this man the chastisement which is his due, thou knowest it is not my own vengeance I pursue, but the deliverance of a whole nation that I implore!” “Do you know him, then?” asked Felton.
“At length he interrogates me!” said Milady to herself, at the height of joy at having obtained so quickly such a great result.
Yes, yes! to my misfortune, to my eternal misfortune!” and Milady twisted her arms as if in a paroxysm of grief.
Felton no doubt felt within himself that his strength was abandoning him, and he made several steps toward the door; but the prisoner, whose eye never left him, sprang in pursuit of him and stopped him.
That knife, which the fatal prudence of the baron deprived me of, because he knows the use I would make of it!
You shall shut the door that you may be certain I contemplate no injury to you!
My God! to you—the only just, good, and compassionate being I have met with!
To you—my preserver, perhaps!
Felton, and you will have saved my honor!” “To kill yourself?” cried Felton, with terror, forgetting to withdraw his hands from the hands of the prisoner, “to kill yourself?” “I have told, sir,” murmured Milady, lowering her voice, and allowing herself to sink overpowered to the ground; “I have told my secret!
My God, I am lost!” Felton remained standing, motionless and undecided.
“He still doubts,” thought Milady; “I have not been earnest enough.” Someone was heard in the corridor; Milady recognized the step of Lord de Winter.
Felton recognized it also, and made a step toward the door.
“Oh, not a word,” said she in a concentrated voice, “not a word of all that I have said to you to this man, or I am lost, and it would be you—you—” Then as the steps drew near, she became silent for fear of being heard, applying, with a gesture of infinite terror, her beautiful hand to Felton’s mouth.
Felton gently repulsed Milady, and she sank into a chair.
Lord de Winter passed before the door without stopping, and they heard the noise of his footsteps soon die away.
Felton, as pale as death, remained some instants with his ear bent and listening; then, when the sound was quite extinct, he breathed like a man awaking from a dream, and rushed out of the apartment.
“Ah!” said Milady, listening in her turn to the noise of Felton’s steps, which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of Lord de Winter; “at length you are mine!” Then her brow darkened.
“If he tells the baron,” said she, “I am lost—for the baron, who knows very well that I shall not kill myself, will place me before him with a knife in my hand, and he will discover that all this despair is but acted.” She placed herself before the glass, and regarded herself attentively; never had she appeared more beautiful.
“Oh, yes,” said she, smiling, “but we won’t tell him!” In the evening Lord de Winter accompanied the supper.
“Sir,” said Milady, “is your presence an indispensable accessory of my captivity?
Could you not spare me the increase of torture which your visits cause me?” “How, dear sister!” said Lord de Winter.
“Did not you sentimentally inform me with that pretty mouth of yours, so cruel to me today, that you came to England solely for the pleasure of seeing me at your ease, an enjoyment of which you told me you so sensibly felt the deprivation that you had risked everything for it—seasickness, tempest, captivity?
Well, here I am; be satisfied.
Besides, this time, my visit has a motive.” Milady trembled; she thought Felton had told all.
Perhaps never in her life had this woman, who had experienced so many opposite and powerful emotions, felt her heart beat so violently.
Then taking a paper out of his pocket, he unfolded it slowly.
“Here,” said he, “I want to show you the kind of passport which I have drawn up, and which will serve you henceforward as the rule of order in the life I consent to leave you.” Then turning his eyes from Milady to the paper, he read: “‘Order to conduct—’ The name is blank,” interrupted Lord de Winter.
“If you have any preference you can point it out to me; and if it be not within a thousand leagues of London, attention will be paid to your wishes.
I will begin again, then: “‘Order to conduct to—the person named Charlotte Backson, branded by the justice of the kingdom of France, but liberated after chastisement.
She will receive five shillings per day for lodging and food’”.
Have you a name, then?” “I bear that of your brother.” “Ay, but you are mistaken.
Tell me his name, and I will put it in the place of the name of Charlotte Backson.
Well, then you must be registered as Charlotte Backson.” Milady remained silent; only this time it was no longer from affectation, but from terror.
She believed the order ready for execution.
She thought that Lord de Winter had hastened her departure; she thought she was condemned to set off that very evening.
Everything in her mind was lost for an instant; when all at once she perceived that no signature was attached to the order.
The joy she felt at this discovery was so great she could not conceal it.
“Yes, yes,” said Lord de Winter, who perceived what was passing in her mind; “yes, you look for the signature, and you say to yourself: ‘All is not lost, for that order is not signed.
It is only shown to me to terrify me, that’s all.’ You are mistaken.
Tomorrow this order will be sent to the Duke of Buckingham.
The day after tomorrow it will return signed by his hand and marked with his seal; and four-and-twenty hours afterward I will answer for its being carried into execution.
That is all I had to say to you.” “And I reply to you, sir, that this abuse of power, this exile under a fictitious name, are infamous!” “Would you like better to be hanged in your true name, Milady?
You know that the English laws are inexorable on the abuse of marriage.
Although my name, or rather that of my brother, would be mixed up with the affair, I will risk the scandal of a public trial to make myself certain of getting rid of you.” Milady made no reply, but became as pale as a corpse.
“Oh, I see you prefer peregrination.
That’s well madame; and there is an old proverb that says, ‘Traveling trains youth.’ My faith! you are not wrong after all, and life is sweet.
There only remains, then, the question of the five shillings to be settled.
You think me rather parsimonious, don’t you?
That’s because I don’t care to leave you the means of corrupting your jailers.
Employ them, if your check with regard to Felton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind.” “Felton has not told him,” said Milady to herself.
Tomorrow I will come and announce to you the departure of my messenger.” Lord de Winter rose, saluted her ironically, and went out.
Milady breathed again.
Four days would quite suffice to complete the seduction of Felton.
A terrible idea, however, rushed into her mind.
She thought that Lord de Winter would perhaps send Felton himself to get the order signed by the Duke of Buckingham.
In that case Felton would escape her—for in order to secure success, the magic of a continuous seduction was necessary.
Nevertheless, as we have said, one circumstance reassured her.
As she would not appear to be agitated by the threats of Lord de Winter, she placed herself at the table and ate.
Then, as she had done the evening before, she fell on her knees and repeated her prayers aloud.
Soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel, which came from the end of the corridor and stopped before her door.
And she began the same religious chant which had so strongly excited Felton the evening before.
But although her voice—sweet, full, and sonorous—vibrated as harmoniously and as affectingly as ever, the door remained shut.
It appeared however to Milady that in one of the furtive glances she darted from time to time at the grating of the door she thought she saw the ardent eyes of the young man through the narrow opening.
But whether this was reality or vision, he had this time sufficient self-command not to enter.
However, a few instants after she had finished her religious song, Milady thought she heard a profound sigh.
Then the same steps she had heard approach slowly withdrew, as if with regret.
CAPTIVITY: THE FOURTH DAY The next day, when Felton entered Milady’s apartment he found her standing, mounted upon a chair, holding in her hands a cord made by means of torn cambric handkerchiefs, twisted into a kind of rope one with another, and tied at the ends.
At the noise Felton made in entering, Milady leaped lightly to the ground, and tried to conceal behind her the improvised cord she held in her hand.
The young man was more pale than usual, and his eyes, reddened by want of sleep, denoted that he had passed a feverish night.
Nevertheless, his brow was armed with a severity more austere than ever.
He advanced slowly toward Milady, who had seated herself, and taking an end of the murderous rope which by neglect, or perhaps by design, she allowed to be seen, “What is this, madame?” he asked coldly.
Nothing,” said Milady, smiling with that painful expression which she knew so well how to give to her smile.
“Ennui is the mortal enemy of prisoners; I had ennui, and I amused myself with twisting that rope.” Felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of the apartment before which he had found Milady standing in the armchair in which she was now seated, and over her head he perceived a gilt-headed screw, fixed in the wall for the purpose of hanging up clothes or weapons.
He started, and the prisoner saw that start—for though her eyes were cast down, nothing escaped her.
“What were you doing on that armchair?” asked he.
“Of what consequence?” replied Milady.
“But,” replied Felton, “I wish to know.” “Do not question me,” said the prisoner; “you know that we who are true Christians are forbidden to lie.” “Well, then,” said Felton, “I will tell you what you were doing, or rather what you meant to do; you were going to complete the fatal project you cherish in your mind.
Remember, madame, if our God forbids falsehood, he much more severely condemns suicide.” “When God sees one of his creatures persecuted unjustly, placed between suicide and dishonor, believe me, sir,” replied Milady, in a tone of deep conviction, “God pardons suicide, for then suicide becomes martyrdom.” “You say either too much or too little; speak, madame.
In the name of heaven, explain yourself.” “That I may relate my misfortunes for you to treat them as fables; that I may tell you my projects for you to go and betray them to my persecutor?
Besides, of what importance to you is the life or death of a condemned wretch?
You are only responsible for my body, is it not so?
And provided you produce a carcass that may be recognized as mine, they will require no more of you; nay, perhaps you will even have a double reward.” “I, madame, I?” cried Felton.
“Every soldier must be ambitious, must he not?
You are a lieutenant?
Well, you will follow me to the grave with the rank of captain.” “What have I, then, done to you,” said Felton, much agitated, “that you should load me with such a responsibility before God and before men?
Cruel enough, if I am guilty; but what name can you give it, what name will the Lord give it, if I am innocent?” “I am a soldier, madame, and fulfill the orders I have received.” “Do you believe, then, that at the day of the Last Judgment God will separate blind executioners from iniquitous judges?
To see this woman, so beautiful, fair as the brightest vision, to see her by turns overcome with grief and threatening; to resist at once the ascendancy of grief and beauty—it was too much for a visionary; it was too much for a brain weakened by the ardent dreams of an ecstatic faith; it was too much for a heart furrowed by the love of heaven that burns, by the hatred of men that devours.
She felt by intuition the flame of the opposing passions which burned with the blood in the veins of the young fanatic.
From th’ abyss he’ll give ear to my moan.” Felton stood before this strange apparition like one petrified.
Who art thou?” cried he, clasping his hands.
“Art thou a messenger from God; art thou a minister from hell; art thou an angel or a demon; callest thou thyself Eloa or Astarte?” “Do you not know me, Felton?
I am neither an angel nor a demon; I am a daughter of earth, I am a sister of thy faith, that is all.” “Yes, yes!” said Felton, “I doubted, but now I believe.” “You believe, and still you are an accomplice of that child of Belial who is called Lord de Winter!
You believe, and yet you deliver me up to him who fills and defiles the world with his heresies and debaucheries—to that infamous Sardanapalus whom the blind call the Duke of Buckingham, and whom believers name Antichrist!” “I deliver you up to Buckingham?
“Yes, I recognize the voice which speaks to me in my dreams; yes, I recognize the features of the angel who appears to me every night, crying to my soul, which cannot sleep: ‘Strike, save England, save thyself—for thou wilt die without having appeased God!’ Speak, speak!” cried Felton, “I can understand you now.” A flash of terrible joy, but rapid as thought, gleamed from the eyes of Milady.
However fugitive this homicide flash, Felton saw it, and started as if its light had revealed the abysses of this woman’s heart.
He recalled, all at once, the warnings of Lord de Winter, the seductions of Milady, her first attempts after her arrival.
He drew back a step, and hung down his head, without, however, ceasing to look at her, as if, fascinated by this strange creature, he could not detach his eyes from her eyes.
Milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of this hesitation.
Under her apparent emotions her icy coolness never abandoned her.
Before Felton replied, and before she should be forced to resume this conversation, so difficult to be sustained in the same exalted tone, she let her hands fall; and as if the weakness of the woman overpowered the enthusiasm of the inspired fanatic, she said: “But no, it is not for me to be the Judith to deliver Bethulia from this Holofernes.
Allow me, then, to avoid dishonor by death; let me take refuge in martyrdom.
I do not ask you for liberty, as a guilty one would, nor for vengeance, as would a pagan.
I supplicate you, I implore you on my knees—let me die, and my last sigh shall be a blessing for my preserver.” Hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, so timid and downcast, Felton reproached himself.
By degrees the enchantress had clothed herself with that magic adornment which she assumed and threw aside at will; that is to say, beauty, meekness, and tears—and above all, the irresistible attraction of mystical voluptuousness, the most devouring of all voluptuousness.
But Lord de Winter makes cruel accusations against you.
You are a Christian; you are my sister in religion.
I feel myself drawn toward you—I, who have never loved anyone but my benefactor—I who have met with nothing but traitors and impious men.
Oh,” continued she, placing her hand modestly over her beautiful eyes, “never! never!—I could not!” “To me, to a brother?” said Felton.
Milady looked at him for some time with an expression which the young man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing but observation, or rather the wish to fascinate.
Felton, in his turn a suppliant, clasped his hands.
“Well, then,” said Milady, “I confide in my brother; I will dare to—” At this moment the steps of Lord de Winter were heard; but this time the terrible brother-in-law of Milady did not content himself, as on the preceding day, with passing before the door and going away again.
He paused, exchanged two words with the sentinel; then the door opened, and he appeared.
During the exchange of these two words Felton drew back quickly, and when Lord de Winter entered, he was several paces from the prisoner.
The baron entered slowly, sending a scrutinizing glance from Milady to the young officer.
“Has this woman been relating her crimes to you?
In that case I can comprehend the length of the conversation.” Felton started; and Milady felt she was lost if she did not come to the assistance of the disconcerted Puritan.
“Ah, you fear your prisoner should escape!” said she.
“Well, ask your worthy jailer what favor I this instant solicited of him.” “You demanded a favor?” said the baron, suspiciously.
“Yes, my Lord,” replied the young man, confused.
“A knife, which she would return to me through the grating of the door a minute after she had received it,” replied Felton.
“There is someone, then, concealed here whose throat this amiable lady is desirous of cutting,” said de Winter, in an ironical, contemptuous tone.
Believe me, the cord is more certain than the knife.” Felton grew pale, and made a step forward, remembering that at the moment he entered Milady had a rope in her hand.
“You are right,” said she, “I have often thought of it.” Then she added in a low voice, “And I will think of it again.” Felton felt a shudder run to the marrow of his bones; probably Lord de Winter perceived this emotion.
“Mistrust yourself, John,” said he.
“I have placed reliance upon you, my friend.
But be of good courage, my lad; in three days we shall be delivered from this creature, and where I shall send her she can harm nobody.” “You hear him!” cried Milady, with vehemence, so that the baron might believe she was addressing heaven, and that Felton might understand she was addressing him.
Felton lowered his head and reflected.
The baron took the young officer by the arm, and turned his head over his shoulder, so as not to lose sight of Milady till he was gone out.
“Well,” said the prisoner, when the door was shut, “I am not so far advanced as I believed.
De Winter has changed his usual stupidity into a strange prudence.
It is the desire of vengeance, and how desire molds a man!
As to Felton, he hesitates.
Ah, he is not a man like that cursed D’Artagnan.
A Puritan only adores virgins, and he adores them by clasping his hands.
A Musketeer loves women, and he loves them by clasping his arms round them.” Milady waited, then, with much impatience, for she feared the day would pass away without her seeing Felton again.
At last, in an hour after the scene we have just described, she heard someone speaking in a low voice at the door.
Presently the door opened, and she perceived Felton.
The young man advanced rapidly into the chamber, leaving the door open behind him, and making a sign to Milady to be silent; his face was much agitated.
“I have just sent away the sentinel that I might remain here without anybody knowing it, in order to speak to you without being overheard.
The baron has just related a frightful story to me.” Milady assumed her smile of a resigned victim, and shook her head.
“Either you are a demon,” continued Felton, “or the baron—my benefactor, my father—is a monster.
I therefore may hesitate between you.
Be not alarmed at what I say; I want to be convinced.
Tonight, after twelve, I will come and see you, and you shall convince me.” “No, Felton, no, my brother,” said she; “the sacrifice is too great, and I feel what it must cost you.
Are you satisfied?” “Well,” said Felton, “till tonight.” And he darted out of the room, shut the door, and waited in the corridor, the soldier’s half-pike in his hand, and as if he had mounted guard in his place.
The soldier returned, and Felton gave him back his weapon.
Then, through the grating to which she had drawn near, Milady saw the young man make a sign with delirious fervor, and depart in an apparent transport of joy.
As for her, she returned to her place with a smile of savage contempt upon her lips, and repeated, blaspheming, that terrible name of God, by whom she had just sworn without ever having learned to know Him.
“My God,” said she, “what a senseless fanatic!
CAPTIVITY: THE FIFTH DAY Milady had however achieved a half-triumph, and success doubled her forces.
It was not difficult to conquer, as she had hitherto done, men prompt to let themselves be seduced, and whom the gallant education of a court led quickly into her net.
Milady was handsome enough not to find much resistance on the part of the flesh, and she was sufficiently skillful to prevail over all the obstacles of the mind.
But this time she had to contend with an unpolished nature, concentrated and insensible by force of austerity.
Religion and its observances had made Felton a man inaccessible to ordinary seductions.
There fermented in that sublimated brain plans so vast, projects so tumultuous, that there remained no room for any capricious or material love—that sentiment which is fed by leisure and grows with corruption.
Milady had, then, made a breach by her false virtue in the opinion of a man horribly prejudiced against her, and by her beauty in the heart of a man hitherto chaste and pure.
In short, she had taken the measure of motives hitherto unknown to herself, through this experiment, made upon the most rebellious subject that nature and religion could submit to her study.
Many a time, nevertheless, during the evening she despaired of fate and of herself.
She did not invoke God, we very well know, but she had faith in the genius of evil—that immense sovereignty which reigns in all the details of human life, and by which, as in the Arabian fable, a single pomegranate seed is sufficient to reconstruct a ruined world.
Milady, being well prepared for the reception of Felton, was able to erect her batteries for the next day.
To be a woman condemned to a painful and disgraceful punishment is no impediment to beauty, but it is an obstacle to the recovery of power.
Poverty was repugnant to her; degradation took away two-thirds of her greatness.
The pleasure of satisfied pride was necessary to her domination.
To command inferior beings was rather a humiliation than a pleasure for her.
She should certainly return from her exile—she did not doubt that a single instant; but how long might this exile last?
For an active, ambitious nature, like that of Milady, days not spent in climbing are inauspicious days.
What word, then, can be found to describe the days which they occupy in descending?
To lose a year, two years, three years, is to talk of an eternity; to return after the death or disgrace of the cardinal, perhaps; to return when D’Artagnan and his friends, happy and triumphant, should have received from the queen the reward they had well acquired by the services they had rendered her—these were devouring ideas that a woman like Milady could not endure.
For the rest, the storm which raged within her doubled her strength, and she would have burst the walls of her prison if her body had been able to take for a single instant the proportions of her mind.
Then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of all this was the remembrance of the cardinal.
What must the mistrustful, restless, suspicious cardinal think of her silence—the cardinal, not merely her only support, her only prop, her only protector at present, but still further, the principal instrument of her future fortune and vengeance?
She knew him; she knew that at her return from a fruitless journey it would be in vain to tell him of her imprisonment, in vain to enlarge upon the sufferings she had undergone.
Time, however, passed away; the hours, one after another, seemed to awaken the clock as they passed, and every blow of the brass hammer resounded upon the heart of the prisoner.
At nine o’clock, Lord de Winter made his customary visit, examined the window and the bars, sounded the floor and the walls, looked to the chimney and the doors, without, during this long and minute examination, he or Milady pronouncing a single word.
Doubtless both of them understood that the situation had become too serious to lose time in useless words and aimless wrath.
“Well,” said the baron, on leaving her “you will not escape tonight!” At ten o’clock Felton came and placed the sentinel.
Milady recognized his step.
She was as well acquainted with it now as a mistress is with that of the lover of her heart; and yet Milady at the same time detested and despised this weak fanatic.
That was not the appointed hour.
Two hours after, as midnight sounded, the sentinel was relieved.
This time it _was_ the hour, and from this moment Milady waited with impatience.
The new sentinel commenced his walk in the corridor.
At the expiration of ten minutes Felton came.
Milady was all attention.
“Listen,” said the young man to the sentinel.
“On no pretense leave the door, for you know that last night my Lord punished a soldier for having quit his post for an instant, although I, during his absence, watched in his place.” “Yes, I know it,” said the soldier.
“I recommend you therefore to keep the strictest watch.
For my part I am going to pay a second visit to this woman, who I fear entertains sinister intentions upon her own life, and I have received orders to watch her.” “Good!” murmured Milady; “the austere Puritan lies.” As to the soldier, he only smiled.
“Zounds, Lieutenant!” said he; “you are not unlucky in being charged with such commissions, particularly if my Lord has authorized you to look into her bed.” Felton blushed.
Under any other circumstances he would have reprimanded the soldier for indulging in such pleasantry, but his conscience murmured too loud for his mouth to dare speak.
“If anyone comes, call me.” “I will, Lieutenant,” said the soldier.
Felton entered Milady’s apartment.
“I promised to come,” said Felton, “and I have come.” “You promised me something else.” “What, my God!” said the young man, who in spite of his self-command felt his knees tremble and the sweat start from his brow.
“You promised to bring a knife, and to leave it with me after our interview.” “Say no more of that, madame,” said Felton.
“There is no situation, however terrible it may be, which can authorize a creature of God to inflict death upon himself.
I have reflected, and I cannot, must not be guilty of such a sin.” “Ah, you have reflected!” said the prisoner, sitting down in her armchair, with a smile of disdain; “and I also have reflected.” “Upon what?” “That I can have nothing to say to a man who does not keep his word.” “Oh, my God!” murmured Felton.
“I will not talk.” “Here is the knife,” said Felton, drawing from his pocket the weapon which he had brought, according to his promise, but which he hesitated to give to his prisoner.
“For what purpose?” “Upon my honor, I will instantly return it to you.
You shall place it on that table, and you may remain between it and me.” Felton offered the weapon to Milady, who examined the temper of it attentively, and who tried the point on the tip of her finger.
“Well,” said she, returning the knife to the young officer, “this is fine and good steel.
You are a faithful friend, Felton.” Felton took back the weapon, and laid it upon the table, as he had agreed with the prisoner.
Milady followed him with her eyes, and made a gesture of satisfaction.
“Now,” said she, “listen to me.” The request was needless.
The young officer stood upright before her, awaiting her words as if to devour them.
“Felton,” said Milady, with a solemnity full of melancholy, “imagine that your sister, the daughter of your father, speaks to you.
While yet young, unfortunately handsome, I was dragged into a snare.
Ambushes and violences multiplied around me, but I resisted.
The religion I serve, the God I adore, were blasphemed because I called upon that religion and that God, but still I resisted.
Then outrages were heaped upon me, and as my soul was not subdued they wished to defile my body forever.
“Finally,” said Felton, “finally, what did they do?” “At length, one evening my enemy resolved to paralyze the resistance he could not conquer.
One evening he mixed a powerful narcotic with my water.
Scarcely had I finished my repast, when I felt myself sink by degrees into a strange torpor.
Although I was without mistrust, a vague fear seized me, and I tried to struggle against sleepiness.
It appeared as if the ceiling sank upon my head and crushed me with its weight.
I stretched out my arms.
I could only utter inarticulate sounds, and irresistible faintness came over me.
I supported myself by a chair, feeling that I was about to fall, but this support was soon insufficient on account of my weak arms.
God doubtless neither heard nor saw me, and I sank upon the floor a prey to a slumber which resembled death.
“Of all that passed in that sleep, or the time which glided away while it lasted, I have no remembrance.
The only thing I recollect is that I awoke in bed in a round chamber, the furniture of which was sumptuous, and into which light only penetrated by an opening in the ceiling.
No door gave entrance to the room.
It might be called a magnificent prison.
“It was a long time before I was able to make out what place I was in, or to take account of the details I describe.
My mind appeared to strive in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of the sleep from which I could not rouse myself.
I had vague perceptions of space traversed, of the rolling of a carriage, of a horrible dream in which my strength had become exhausted; but all this was so dark and so indistinct in my mind that these events seemed to belong to another life than mine, and yet mixed with mine in fantastic duality.
“At times the state into which I had fallen appeared so strange that I believed myself dreaming.
My clothes were near me on a chair; I neither remembered having undressed myself nor going to bed.
“I dressed myself as quickly as possible; my slow and stiff motions all attested that the effects of the narcotic were not yet entirely dissipated.
The chamber was evidently furnished for the reception of a woman; and the most finished coquette could not have formed a wish, but on casting her eyes about the apartment, she would have found that wish accomplished.
“Certainly I was not the first captive that had been shut up in this splendid prison; but you may easily comprehend, Felton, that the more superb the prison, the greater was my terror.
I sounded all the walls, in the hopes of discovering a door, but everywhere the walls returned a full and flat sound.
I sank exhausted with fatigue and terror into an armchair.
“Meantime, night came on rapidly, and with night my terrors increased.
It appeared that I was surrounded with unknown dangers into which I was about to fall at every instant.
Although I had eaten nothing since the evening before, my fears prevented my feeling hunger.
“No noise from without by which I could measure the time reached me; I only supposed it must be seven or eight o’clock in the evening, for it was in the month of October and it was quite dark.
A globe of fire appeared above the glazed opening of the ceiling, casting a strong light into my chamber; and I perceived with terror that a man was standing within a few paces of me.
“A table, with two covers, bearing a supper ready prepared, stood, as if by magic, in the middle of the apartment.
“That man was he who had pursued me during a whole year, who had vowed my dishonor, and who, by the first words that issued from his mouth, gave me to understand he had accomplished it the preceding night.” “Scoundrel!” murmured Felton.
“Oh, yes, scoundrel!” cried Milady, seeing the interest which the young officer, whose soul seemed to hang on her lips, took in this strange recital.
“Oh, yes, scoundrel!
He believed, having triumphed over me in my sleep, that all was completed.
He came, hoping that I would accept my shame, as my shame was consummated; he came to offer his fortune in exchange for my love.
“All that the heart of a woman could contain of haughty contempt and disdainful words, I poured out upon this man.
Doubtless he was accustomed to such reproaches, for he listened to me calm and smiling, with his arms crossed over his breast.
Then, when he thought I had said all, he advanced toward me; I sprang toward the table, I seized a knife, I placed it to my breast.
“Take one step more,” said I, “and in addition to my dishonor, you shall have my death to reproach yourself with.” “There was, no doubt, in my look, my voice, my whole person, that sincerity of gesture, of attitude, of accent, which carries conviction to the most perverse minds, for he paused.
“‘Your death?’ said he; ‘oh, no, you are too charming a mistress to allow me to consent to lose you thus, after I have had the happiness to possess you only a single time.
Adieu, my charmer; I will wait to pay you my next visit till you are in a better humor.’ “At these words he blew a whistle; the globe of fire which lighted the room reascended and disappeared.
I found myself again in complete darkness.
The same noise of a door opening and shutting was repeated the instant afterward; the flaming globe descended afresh, and I was completely alone.
“This moment was frightful; if I had any doubts as to my misfortune, these doubts had vanished in an overwhelming reality.
I was in the power of a man whom I not only detested, but despised—of a man capable of anything, and who had already given me a fatal proof of what he was able to do.” “But who, then, was this man?” asked Felton.
“I passed the night on a chair, starting at the least noise, for toward midnight the lamp went out, and I was again in darkness.
But the night passed away without any fresh attempt on the part of my persecutor.
Day came; the table had disappeared, only I had still the knife in my hand.
Sleeplessness inflamed my eyes; I had not dared to sleep a single instant.
The light of day reassured me; I went and threw myself on the bed, without parting with the emancipating knife, which I concealed under my pillow.
“This time, in spite of my terrors, in spite of my agony, I began to feel a devouring hunger.
It was forty-eight hours since I had taken any nourishment.
I ate some bread and some fruit; then, remembering the narcotic mixed with the water I had drunk, I would not touch that which was placed on the table, but filled my glass at a marble fountain fixed in the wall over my dressing table.
“And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for some time in a terrible agitation of mind.
But my fears were this time ill-founded; I passed the day without experiencing anything of the kind I dreaded.
“I took the precaution to half empty the _carafe_, in order that my suspicions might not be noticed.
“The evening came on, and with it darkness; but however profound was this darkness, my eyes began to accustom themselves to it.
I saw, amid the shadows, the table sink through the floor; a quarter of an hour later it reappeared, bearing my supper.
“I was determined to eat only such things as could not possibly have anything soporific introduced into them.
Two eggs and some fruit composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water from my protecting fountain, and drank it.
“At the first swallow, it appeared to me not to have the same taste as in the morning.
Suspicion instantly seized me.
“No doubt some invisible witness had seen me draw the water from that fountain, and had taken advantage of my confidence in it, the better to assure my ruin, so coolly resolved upon, so cruelly pursued.
“Half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began to appear; but as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, I contended longer, and instead of falling entirely asleep, I sank into a state of drowsiness which left me a perception of what was passing around me, while depriving me of the strength either to defend myself or to fly.
I sank on my knees, my hands clasped round one of the bedposts; then I felt that I was lost.” Felton became frightfully pale, and a convulsive tremor crept through his whole body.
“And what was most frightful,” continued Milady, her voice altered, as if she still experienced the same agony as at that awful minute, “was that at this time I retained a consciousness of the danger that threatened me; was that my soul, if I may say so, waked in my sleeping body; was that I saw, that I heard.
It is true that all was like a dream, but it was not the less frightful.
“I saw the lamp ascend, and leave me in darkness; then I heard the well-known creaking of the door although I had heard that door open but twice.
“I felt instinctively that someone approached me; it is said that the doomed wretch in the deserts of America thus feels the approach of the serpent.
“I wished to make an effort; I attempted to cry out.
By an incredible effort of will I even raised myself up, but only to sink down again immediately, and to fall into the arms of my persecutor.” “Tell me who this man was!” cried the young officer.
Milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings she inspired in Felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital; but she would not spare him a single pang.
The more profoundly she wounded his heart, the more certainly he would avenge her.
She continued, then, as if she had not heard his exclamation, or as if she thought the moment was not yet come to reply to it.
I have told you that without being able to regain the complete exercise of my faculties, I retained the sense of my danger.
I struggled, then, with all my strength, and doubtless opposed, weak as I was, a long resistance, for I heard him cry out, ‘These miserable Puritans!
I knew very well that they tired out their executioners, but I did not believe them so strong against their lovers!’ “Alas! this desperate resistance could not last long.
I felt my strength fail, and this time it was not my sleep that enabled the coward to prevail, but my swoon.” Felton listened without uttering any word or sound, except an inward expression of agony.
The sweat streamed down his marble forehead, and his hand, under his coat, tore his breast.
“My first impulse, on coming to myself, was to feel under my pillow for the knife I had not been able to reach; if it had not been useful for defense, it might at least serve for expiation.
“But on taking this knife, Felton, a terrible idea occurred to me.
I have promised you the truth; I will tell it, were it to destroy me.” “The idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man, did it not?” cried Felton.
“The idea was not that of a Christian, I knew; but without doubt, that eternal enemy of our souls, that lion roaring constantly around us, breathed it into my mind.
In short, what shall I say to you, Felton?” continued Milady, in the tone of a woman accusing herself of a crime.
“This idea occurred to me, and did not leave me; it is of this homicidal thought that I now bear the punishment.” “Continue, continue!” said Felton; “I am eager to see you attain your vengeance!” “Oh, I resolved that it should take place as soon as possible.
I had no doubt he would return the following night.
“When the hour of breakfast came, therefore, I did not hesitate to eat and drink.
I had determined to make believe sup, but to eat nothing.
I was forced, then, to combat the fast of the evening with the nourishment of the morning.
“Only I concealed a glass of water, which remained after my breakfast, thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when I remained forty-eight hours without eating or drinking.
“The day passed away without having any other influence on me than to strengthen the resolution I had formed; only I took care that my face should not betray the thoughts of my heart, for I had no doubt I was watched.
Felton, I dare not tell you at what idea I smiled; you would hold me in horror—” “Go on! go on!” said Felton; “you see plainly that I listen, and that I am anxious to know the end.” “Evening came; the ordinary events took place.
During the darkness, as before, my supper was brought.
I pretended to pour out water from the jug, but I only drank that which I had saved in my glass.
The substitution was made so carefully that my spies, if I had any, could have no suspicion of it.
“After supper I exhibited the same marks of languor as on the preceding evening; but this time, as I yielded to fatigue, or as if I had become familiarized with danger, I dragged myself toward my bed, let my robe fall, and lay down.
“I found my knife where I had placed it, under my pillow, and while feigning to sleep, my hand grasped the handle of it convulsively.
“Two hours passed away without anything fresh happening.
“At length I saw the lamp rise softly, and disappear in the depths of the ceiling; my chamber was filled with darkness and obscurity, but I made a strong effort to penetrate this darkness and obscurity.
I implored heaven that he might come.
I looked upon myself as another Judith; I gathered myself up, my knife in my hand, and when I saw him near me, stretching out his arms to find his victim, then, with the last cry of agony and despair, I struck him in the middle of his breast.
“The miserable villain!
He had foreseen all.
“‘Ah, ah!’ cried he, seizing my arm, and wresting from me the weapon that had so badly served me, ‘you want to take my life, do you, my pretty Puritan?
But that’s more than dislike, that’s ingratitude!
Come, come, calm yourself, my sweet girl!
I thought you had softened.
With my usual fatuity I doubted it; now I am convinced.
Tomorrow you shall be free.’ “I had but one wish; that was that he should kill me.
“‘Beware!’ said I, ‘for my liberty is your dishonor.’ “‘Explain yourself, my pretty sibyl!’ “‘Yes; for as soon as I leave this place I will tell everything.
I will proclaim the violence you have used toward me.
I will describe my captivity.
I will denounce this place of infamy.
Above you there is the king; above the king there is God!’ “However perfect master he was over himself, my persecutor allowed a movement of anger to escape him.
I could not see the expression of his countenance, but I felt the arm tremble upon which my hand was placed.
“‘Very well,’ cried I, ‘then the place of my punishment will be that of my tomb.
I will die here, and you will see if a phantom that accuses is not more terrible than a living being that threatens!’ “‘You shall have no weapon left in your power.’ “‘There is a weapon which despair has placed within the reach of every creature who has the courage to use it.
I will restore you to liberty this moment; I will proclaim you a piece of immaculate virtue; I will name you the Lucretia of England.’ “‘And I will say that you are the Sextus.
I will denounce you before men, as I have denounced you before God; and if it be necessary that, like Lucretia, I should sign my accusation with my blood, I will sign it.’ “‘Ah!’ said my enemy, in a jeering tone, ‘that’s quite another thing.
My faith! everything considered, you are very well off here.
You shall want for nothing, and if you let yourself die of hunger that will be your own fault.’ “At these words he retired.
I heard the door open and shut, and I remained overwhelmed, less, I confess it, by my grief than by the mortification of not having avenged myself.
I was, as I told him, resolved to die of hunger.
“The second night the door opened; I was lying on the floor, for my strength began to abandon me.
“‘Well,’ said a voice which vibrated in too terrible a manner in my ear not to be recognized, ‘well!
Are we softened a little?
Come, I am a good sort of a prince,’ added he, ‘and although I like not Puritans I do them justice; and it is the same with Puritanesses, when they are pretty.
Come, take a little oath for me on the cross; I won’t ask anything more of you.’ “‘On the cross,’ cried I, rising, for at that abhorred voice I had recovered all my strength, ‘on the cross I swear that no promise, no menace, no force, no torture, shall close my mouth!
On the cross I swear to denounce you everywhere as a murderer, as a thief of honor, as a base coward!
On the cross I swear, if I ever leave this place, to call down vengeance upon you from the whole human race!’ “‘Beware!’ said the voice, in a threatening accent that I had never yet heard.
‘I have an extraordinary means which I will not employ but in the last extremity to close your mouth, or at least to prevent anyone from believing a word you may utter.’ “I mustered all my strength to reply to him with a burst of laughter.
“He saw that it was a merciless war between us—a war to the death.
‘I give you the rest of tonight and all day tomorrow.
Reflect: promise to be silent, and riches, consideration, even honor, shall surround you; threaten to speak, and I will condemn you to infamy.’ “‘You?’ cried I.
‘You?’ “‘To interminable, ineffaceable infamy!’ “‘You?’ repeated I.
Till tomorrow evening, then!’ “‘Till tomorrow evening, then!’ replied I, allowing myself to fall, and biting the carpet with rage.” Felton leaned for support upon a piece of furniture; and Milady saw, with the joy of a demon, that his strength would fail him perhaps before the end of her recital.
MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY After a moment of silence employed by Milady in observing the young man who listened to her, Milady continued her recital.
“It was nearly three days since I had eaten or drunk anything.
I suffered frightful torments.
At times there passed before me clouds which pressed my brow, which veiled my eyes; this was delirium.
Terror recalled me to myself.
“He entered the apartment followed by a man in a mask.
He was masked likewise; but I knew his step, I knew his voice, I knew him by that imposing bearing which hell has bestowed upon his person for the curse of humanity.
“‘Well,’ said he to me, ‘have you made your mind up to take the oath I requested of you?’ “‘You have said Puritans have but one word.
Mine you have heard, and that is to pursue you—on earth to the tribunal of men, in heaven to the tribunal of God.’ “‘You persist, then?’ “‘I swear it before the God who hears me.
I will take the whole world as a witness of your crime, and that until I have found an avenger.’ “‘You are a prostitute,’ said he, in a voice of thunder, ‘and you shall undergo the punishment of prostitutes!
Branded in the eyes of the world you invoke, try to prove to that world that you are neither guilty nor mad!’ “Then, addressing the man who accompanied him, ‘Executioner,’ said he, ‘do your duty.’” “Oh, his name, his name!” cried Felton.
“His name, tell it me!” “Then in spite of my cries, in spite of my resistance—for I began to comprehend that there was a question of something worse than death—the executioner seized me, threw me on the floor, fastened me with his bonds, and suffocated by sobs, almost without sense, invoking God, who did not listen to me, I uttered all at once a frightful cry of pain and shame.
A burning fire, a red-hot iron, the iron of the executioner, was imprinted on my shoulder.” Felton uttered a groan.
“Here,” said Milady, rising with the majesty of a queen, “here, Felton, behold the new martyrdom invented for a pure young girl, the victim of the brutality of a villain.
Learn to know the heart of men, and henceforth make yourself less easily the instrument of their unjust vengeance.” Milady, with a rapid gesture, opened her robe, tore the cambric that covered her bosom, and red with feigned anger and simulated shame, showed the young man the ineffaceable impression which dishonored that beautiful shoulder.
“But,” cried Felton, “that is a _fleur-de-lis_ which I see there.” “And therein consisted the infamy,” replied Milady.
“The brand of England!—it would be necessary to prove what tribunal had imposed it on me, and I could have made a public appeal to all the tribunals of the kingdom; but the brand of France!—oh, by that, by _that_ I was branded indeed!” This was too much for Felton.
Pale, motionless, overwhelmed by this frightful revelation, dazzled by the superhuman beauty of this woman who unveiled herself before him with an immodesty which appeared to him sublime, he ended by falling on his knees before her as the early Christians did before those pure and holy martyrs whom the persecution of the emperors gave up in the circus to the sanguinary sensuality of the populace.
The brand disappeared; the beauty alone remained.
“Pardon me for having joined with your persecutors.” Milady held out her hand to him.
“So beautiful! so young!” cried Felton, covering that hand with his kisses.
Felton was a Puritan; he abandoned the hand of this woman to kiss her feet.
When this crisis was past, when Milady appeared to have resumed her self-possession, which she had never lost; when Felton had seen her recover with the veil of chastity those treasures of love which were only concealed from him to make him desire them the more ardently, he said, “Ah, now!
I have only one thing to ask of you; that is, the name of your true executioner.
For to me there is but one; the other was an instrument, that was all.” “What, brother!” cried Milady, “must I name him again?
What—the truly guilty?” “The truly guilty,” said Milady, “is the ravager of England, the persecutor of true believers, the base ravisher of the honor of so many women—he who, to satisfy a caprice of his corrupt heart, is about to make England shed so much blood, who protects the Protestants today and will betray them tomorrow—” “Buckingham!
It is, then, Buckingham!” cried Felton, in a high state of excitement.
Milady concealed her face in her hands, as if she could not endure the shame which this name recalled to her.
“Buckingham, the executioner of this angelic creature!” cried Felton.
And thou hast left him noble, honored, powerful, for the ruin of us all!” “God abandons him who abandons himself,” said Milady.
“But he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for the damned!” said Felton, with increasing exultation.
“He wills that human vengeance should precede celestial justice.” “Men fear him and spare him.” “I,” said Felton, “I do not fear him, nor will I spare him.” The soul of Milady was bathed in an infernal joy.
“But how can Lord de Winter, my protector, my father,” asked Felton, “possibly be mixed up with all this?” “Listen, Felton,” resumed Milady, “for by the side of base and contemptible men there are often found great and generous natures.
I had an affianced husband, a man whom I loved, and who loved me—a heart like yours, Felton, a man like you.
He was a nobleman, a man equal to Buckingham in every respect.
He said nothing; he only girded on his sword, wrapped himself in his cloak, and went straight to Buckingham Palace.
“Yes, yes,” said Felton; “I understand how he would act.
But with such men it is not the sword that should be employed; it is the poniard.” “Buckingham had left England the day before, sent as ambassador to Spain, to demand the hand of the Infanta for King Charles I., who was then only Prince of Wales.
My affianced husband returned.
“‘Hear me,’ said he; ‘this man has gone, and for the moment has consequently escaped my vengeance; but let us be united, as we were to have been, and then leave it to Lord de Winter to maintain his own honor and that of his wife.’” “Lord de Winter!” cried Felton.
“Yes,” said Milady, “Lord de Winter; and now you can understand it all, can you not?
Buckingham remained nearly a year absent.
“Lord de Winter died without revealing anything to his brother.
The terrible secret was to be concealed till it burst, like a clap of thunder, over the head of the guilty.
Your protector had seen with pain this marriage of his elder brother with a portionless girl.
I was sensible that I could look for no support from a man disappointed in his hopes of an inheritance.
I went to France, with a determination to remain there for the rest of my life.
Communication being closed by the war, I was in want of everything.
Six days ago, I landed at Portsmouth.” “Well?” said Felton.
“Well; Buckingham heard by some means, no doubt, of my return.
He spoke of me to Lord de Winter, already prejudiced against me, and told him that his sister-in-law was a prostitute, a branded woman.
Lord de Winter believed all that was told him with so much the more ease that it was his interest to believe it.
He caused me to be arrested, had me conducted hither, and placed me under your guard.
The day after tomorrow he banishes me, he transports me; the day after tomorrow he exiles me among the infamous.
“No, you shall live honored and pure; you shall live to triumph over your enemies.” Milady put him from her slowly with her hand, while drawing him nearer with her look; but Felton, in his turn, embraced her more closely, imploring her like a divinity.
“Oh, death, death!” said she, lowering her voice and her eyelids, “oh, death, rather than shame!
Felton, my brother, my friend, I conjure you!” “No,” cried Felton, “no; you shall live and you shall be avenged.” “Felton, I bring misfortune to all who surround me!
Felton, let me die!” “Well, then, we will live and die together!” cried he, pressing his lips to those of the prisoner.
Several strokes resounded on the door; this time Milady really pushed him away from her.
“Hark,” said she, “we have been overheard!
We are lost!” “No,” said Felton; it is only the sentinel warning me that they are about to change the guard.” “Then run to the door, and open it yourself.” Felton obeyed; this woman was now his whole thought, his whole soul.
He found himself face to face with a sergeant commanding a watch-patrol.
“Well, what is the matter?” asked the young lieutenant.
I heard you cry out, without understanding what you said.
I tried to open the door, but it was locked inside; then I called the sergeant.” “And here I am,” said the sergeant.
Felton, quite bewildered, almost mad, stood speechless.
Milady plainly perceived that it was now her turn to take part in the scene.
She ran to the table, and seizing the knife which Felton had laid down, exclaimed, “And by what right will you prevent me from dying?” “Great God!” exclaimed Felton, on seeing the knife glitter in her hand.
At that moment a burst of ironical laughter resounded through the corridor.
The baron, attracted by the noise, in his chamber gown, his sword under his arm, stood in the doorway.
You see, Felton, the drama has gone through all the phases I named; but be easy, no blood will flow.” Milady perceived that all was lost unless she gave Felton an immediate and terrible proof of her courage.
“You are mistaken, my Lord, blood will flow; and may that blood fall back on those who cause it to flow!” Felton uttered a cry, and rushed toward her.
But the knife had fortunately, we ought to say skillfully, come in contact with the steel busk, which at that period, like a cuirass, defended the chests of women.
It had glided down it, tearing the robe, and had penetrated slantingly between the flesh and the ribs.
Felton snatched away the knife.
Be tranquil, and go wait for me in my chamber.” “But, my Lord—” “Go, sir, I command you!” At this injunction from his superior, Felton obeyed; but in going out, he put the knife into his bosom.
As to Lord de Winter, he contented himself with calling the woman who waited on Milady, and when she was come, he recommended the prisoner, who was still fainting, to her care, and left them alone.
Meanwhile, all things considered and notwithstanding his suspicions, as the wound might be serious, he immediately sent off a mounted man to find a physician.
ESCAPE As Lord de Winter had thought, Milady’s wound was not dangerous.
So soon as she was left alone with the woman whom the baron had summoned to her assistance she opened her eyes.
It was, however, necessary to affect weakness and pain—not a very difficult task for so finished an actress as Milady.
Thus the poor woman was completely the dupe of the prisoner, whom, notwithstanding her hints, she persisted in watching all night.
But the presence of this woman did not prevent Milady from thinking.
There was no longer a doubt that Felton was convinced; Felton was hers.
If an angel appeared to that young man as an accuser of Milady, he would take him, in the mental disposition in which he now found himself, for a messenger sent by the devil.
The doctor could therefore measure neither the direction nor the depth of it; he only satisfied himself by Milady’s pulse that the case was not serious.
In the morning Milady, under the pretext that she had not slept well in the night and wanted rest, sent away the woman who attended her.
She had one hope, which was that Felton would appear at the breakfast hour; but Felton did not come.
Were her fears realized?
Was Felton, suspected by the baron, about to fail her at the decisive moment?
Lord de Winter had announced her embarkation for the twenty-third, and it was now the morning of the twenty-second.
Nevertheless she still waited patiently till the hour for dinner.
Although she had eaten nothing in the morning, the dinner was brought in at its usual time.
Milady then perceived, with terror, that the uniform of the soldiers who guarded her was changed.
Then she ventured to ask what had become of Felton.
She was told that he had left the castle an hour before on horseback.
She inquired if the baron was still at the castle.
The soldier replied that he was, and that he had given orders to be informed if the prisoner wished to speak to him.
Felton was then mistrusted.
This was the last blow to the prisoner.
The bed, which she had kept from prudence and that they might believe her seriously wounded, burned her like a bed of fire.
He no doubt feared that by this opening she might still by some diabolical means corrupt her guards.
She was free now to give way to her transports without being observed.
She traversed her chamber with the excitement of a furious maniac or of a tigress shut up in an iron cage. _Certes_, if the knife had been left in her power, she would now have thought, not of killing herself, but of killing the baron.
This man, in whom Milady till that time had only seen a very simple gentleman, had become an admirable jailer.
He appeared to foresee all, to divine all, to anticipate all.
A single look at Milady apprised him of all that was passing in her mind.
He was yielding to your infernal influence; but I will save him.
Get your clothes together.
Tomorrow you will go.
I had fixed the embarkation for the twenty-fourth; but I have reflected that the more promptly the affair takes place the more sure it will be.
Tomorrow, by twelve o’clock, I shall have the order for your exile, signed, _Buckingham_.
If you speak a single word to anyone before going aboard ship, my sergeant will blow your brains out.
Tomorrow I will see you again, to take my leave.” With these words the baron went out.
Milady had listened to all this menacing tirade with a smile of disdain on her lips, but rage in her heart.
Milady felt that she stood in need of all her strength.
She did not know what might take place during this night which approached so menacingly—for large masses of cloud rolled over the face of the sky, and distant lightning announced a storm.
Milady felt a consolation in seeing nature partake of the disorder of her heart.
The thunder growled in the air like the passion and anger in her thoughts.
It appeared to her that the blast as it swept along disheveled her brow, as it bowed the branches of the trees and bore away their leaves.
She howled as the hurricane howled; and her voice was lost in the great voice of nature, which also seemed to groan with despair.
All at once she heard a tap at her window, and by the help of a flash of lightning she saw the face of a man appear behind the bars.
“They have closed up the grating with a board.” “That is well; God has made them senseless,” said Felton.
But will you be able to follow me?” “Oh, yes!” “Your wound?” “Gives me pain, but will not prevent my walking.” “Be ready, then, at the first signal.” Milady shut the window, extinguished the lamp, and went, as Felton had desired her, to lie down on the bed.
Amid the moaning of the storm she heard the grinding of the file upon the bars, and by the light of every flash she perceived the shadow of Felton through the panes.
She passed an hour without breathing, panting, with a cold sweat upon her brow, and her heart oppressed by frightful agony at every movement she heard in the corridor.
At the expiration of an hour, Felton tapped again.
Must I take anything with me?” “Money, if you have any.” “Yes; fortunately they have left me all I had.” “So much the better, for I have expended all mine in chartering a vessel.” “Here!” said Milady, placing a bag full of louis in Felton’s hands.
She saw the young officer suspended over the abyss by a ladder of ropes.
For the first time an emotion of terror reminded her that she was a woman.
The dark space frightened her.
“I expected this,” said Felton.
“I will descend with my eyes shut.” “Have you confidence in me?” said Felton.
“You ask that?” “Put your two hands together.
Cross them; that’s right!” Felton tied her two wrists together with his handkerchief, and then with a cord over the handkerchief.
“What are you doing?” asked Milady, with surprise.
Despite the weight of two bodies, the blast of the hurricane shook them in the air.
“Silence,” said Felton, “I hear footsteps.” “We are discovered!” There was a silence of several seconds.
“No,” said Felton, “it is nothing.” “But what, then, is the noise?” “That of the patrol going their rounds.” “Where is their road?” “Just under us.” “They will discover us!” “No, if it does not lighten.” “But they will run against the bottom of the ladder.” “Fortunately it is too short by six feet.” “Here they are!
My God!” “Silence!” Both remained suspended, motionless and breathless, within twenty paces of the ground, while the patrol passed beneath them laughing and talking.
This was a terrible moment for the fugitives.
The noise of their retreating footsteps and the murmur of their voices soon died away.
“Now,” said Felton, “we are safe.” Milady breathed a deep sigh and fainted.
Felton continued to descend.
Near the bottom of the ladder, when he found no more support for his feet, he clung with his hands; at length, arrived at the last step, he let himself hang by the strength of his wrists, and touched the ground.
Then he took Milady in his arms, and set off briskly in the direction opposite to that which the patrol had taken.
He soon left the pathway of the patrol, descended across the rocks, and when arrived on the edge of the sea, whistled.
A similar signal replied to him; and five minutes after, a boat appeared, rowed by four men.
The boat approached as near as it could to the shore; but there was not depth enough of water for it to touch land.
Felton walked into the sea up to his middle, being unwilling to trust his precious burden to anybody.
Fortunately the storm began to subside, but still the sea was disturbed.
However, they left the castle behind; that was the principal thing.
The night was extremely dark.
It was almost impossible to see the shore from the boat; they would therefore be less likely to see the boat from the shore.
While the boat was advancing with all the speed its four rowers could give it, Felton untied the cord and then the handkerchief which bound Milady’s hands together.
When her hands were loosed he took some sea water and sprinkled it over her face.
Milady breathed a sigh, and opened her eyes.
“Alas!” said Felton, looking at those beautiful hands, and shaking his head sorrowfully.
“I remember now.” Milady looked around her, as if in search of something.
“It is there,” said Felton, touching the bag of money with his foot.
“The one I have hired for you.” “Where will it take me?” “Where you please, after you have put me on shore at Portsmouth.” “What are you going to do at Portsmouth?” asked Milady.
“Accomplish the orders of Lord de Winter,” said Felton, with a gloomy smile.
“You do not understand?” asked Felton.
“No; explain yourself, I beg.” “As he mistrusted me, he determined to guard you himself, and sent me in his place to get Buckingham to sign the order for your transportation.” “But if he mistrusted you, how could he confide such an order to you?” “How could I know what I was the bearer of?” “That’s true!
And you are going to Portsmouth?” “I have no time to lose.
Tomorrow is the twenty-third, and Buckingham sets sail tomorrow with his fleet.” “He sets sail tomorrow!
Where for?” “For La Rochelle.” “He need not sail!” cried Milady, forgetting her usual presence of mind.
“Be satisfied,” replied Felton; “he will not sail.” Milady started with joy.
She could read to the depths of the heart of this young man; the death of Buckingham was written there at full length.
“Felton,” cried she, “you are as great as Judas Maccabeus!
Felton mounted the ladder first, and gave his hand to Milady, while the sailors supported her, for the sea was still much agitated.
“Captain,” said Felton, “this is the person of whom I spoke to you, and whom you must convey safe and sound to France.” “For a thousand pistoles,” said the captain.
During this passage, Felton related everything to Milady—how, instead of going to London, he had chartered the little vessel; how he had returned; how he had scaled the wall by fastening cramps in the interstices of the stones, as he ascended, to give him foothold; and how, when he had reached the bars, he fastened his ladder.
On her side, Milady tried to encourage Felton in his project; but at the first words which issued from her mouth, she plainly saw that the young fanatic stood more in need of being moderated than urged.
In that case, and supposing he was at liberty, he was to rejoin her in France, at the convent of the Carmelites at Béthune.
WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH AUGUST 23, 1628 Felton took leave of Milady as a brother about to go for a mere walk takes leave of his sister, kissing her hand.
His whole body appeared in its ordinary state of calmness, only an unusual fire beamed from his eyes, like the effects of a fever; his brow was more pale than it generally was; his teeth were clenched, and his speech had a short dry accent which indicated that something dark was at work within him.
As long as he remained in the boat which conveyed him to land, he kept his face toward Milady, who, standing on the deck, followed him with her eyes.
Both were free from the fear of pursuit; nobody ever came into Milady’s apartment before nine o’clock, and it would require three hours to go from the castle to London.
He immediately ran in the direction of Portsmouth, which he saw at nearly half a league before him, standing out in the haze of the morning, with its houses and towers.
Beyond Portsmouth the sea was covered with vessels whose masts, like a forest of poplars despoiled by the winter, bent with each breath of the wind.
Felton, in his rapid walk, reviewed in his mind all the accusations against the favorite of James I. and Charles I., furnished by two years of premature meditation and a long sojourn among the Puritans.
When he compared the public crimes of this minister—startling crimes, European crimes, if so we may say—with the private and unknown crimes with which Milady had charged him, Felton found that the more culpable of the two men which formed the character of Buckingham was the one of whom the public knew not the life.
This was because his love, so strange, so new, and so ardent, made him view the infamous and imaginary accusations of Milady de Winter as, through a magnifying glass, one views as frightful monsters atoms in reality imperceptible by the side of an ant.
The rapidity of his walk heated his blood still more; the idea that he left behind him, exposed to a frightful vengeance, the woman he loved, or rather whom he adored as a saint, the emotion he had experienced, present fatigue—all together exalted his mind above human feeling.
He entered Portsmouth about eight o’clock in the morning.
The whole population was on foot; drums were beating in the streets and in the port; the troops about to embark were marching toward the sea.
Felton arrived at the palace of the Admiralty, covered with dust, and streaming with perspiration.
His countenance, usually so pale, was purple with heat and passion.
The sentinel wanted to repulse him; but Felton called to the officer of the post, and drawing from his pocket the letter of which he was the bearer, he said, “A pressing message from Lord de Winter.” At the name of Lord de Winter, who was known to be one of his Grace’s most intimate friends, the officer of the post gave orders to let Felton pass, who, besides, wore the uniform of a naval officer.
At the moment he entered the vestibule, another man was entering likewise, dusty, out of breath, leaving at the gate a post horse, which, on reaching the palace, tumbled on his foreknees.
Felton and he addressed Patrick, the duke’s confidential lackey, at the same moment.
Felton named Lord de Winter; the unknown would not name anybody, and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would make himself known.
Each was anxious to gain admission before the other.
Patrick, who knew Lord de Winter was in affairs of the service, and in relations of friendship with the duke, gave the preference to the one who came in his name.
The valet led Felton through a large hall in which waited the deputies from La Rochelle, headed by the Prince de Soubise, and introduced him into a closet where Buckingham, just out of the bath, was finishing his toilet, upon which, as at all times, he bestowed extraordinary attention.
“Lieutenant Felton, from Lord de Winter,” said Patrick.
“From Lord de Winter!” repeated Buckingham; “let him come in.” Felton entered.
At that moment Buckingham was throwing upon a couch a rich toilet robe, worked with gold, in order to put on a blue velvet doublet embroidered with pearls.
“Why didn’t the baron come himself?” demanded Buckingham.
“I expected him this morning.” “He desired me to tell your Grace,” replied Felton, “that he very much regretted not having that honor, but that he was prevented by the guard he is obliged to keep at the castle.” “Yes, I know that,” said Buckingham; “he has a prisoner.” “It is of that prisoner that I wish to speak to your Grace,” replied Felton.
“Well, then, speak!” “That which I have to say of her can only be heard by yourself, my Lord!” “Leave us, Patrick,” said Buckingham; “but remain within sound of the bell.
I shall call you presently.” Patrick went out.
“We are alone, sir,” said Buckingham; “speak!” “My Lord,” said Felton, “the Baron de Winter wrote to you the other day to request you to sign an order of embarkation relative to a young woman named Charlotte Backson.” “Yes, sir; and I answered him, to bring or send me that order and I would sign it.” “Here it is, my Lord.” “Give it to me,” said the duke.
And taking it from Felton, he cast a rapid glance over the paper, and perceiving that it was the one that had been mentioned to him, he placed it on the table, took a pen, and prepared to sign it.
“Pardon, my Lord,” said Felton, stopping the duke; “but does your Grace know that the name of Charlotte Backson is not the true name of this young woman?” “Yes, sir, I know it,” replied the duke, dipping the quill in the ink.
“Do you know, sir, that you are asking me very strange questions, and that I am very foolish to answer them?” “Reply to them, my Lord,” said Felton; “the circumstances are more serious than you perhaps believe.” Buckingham reflected that the young man, coming from Lord de Winter, undoubtedly spoke in his name, and softened.
“The baron knows, as well as myself, that Milady de Winter is a very guilty woman, and it is treating her very favorably to commute her punishment to transportation.” The duke put his pen to the paper.
And why not?” “Because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to the lady.” “I should do her justice by sending her to Tyburn,” said Buckingham.
“This lady is infamous.” “My Lord, Milady de Winter is an angel; you know that she is, and I demand her liberty of you.” “Bah!
Are you mad, to talk to me thus?” said Buckingham.
I speak as I can; I restrain myself.
God pardon me!” cried Buckingham, “I really think he threatens me!” “No, my Lord, I still plead.
And I say to you: one drop of water suffices to make the full vase overflow; one slight fault may draw down punishment upon the head spared, despite many crimes.” “Mr.
Felton,” said Buckingham, “you will withdraw, and place yourself at once under arrest.” “You will hear me to the end, my Lord.
You have seduced this young girl; you have outraged, defiled her.
Repair your crimes toward her; let her go free, and I will exact nothing else from you.” “You will exact!” said Buckingham, looking at Felton with astonishment, and dwelling upon each syllable of the three words as he pronounced them.
“My Lord,” continued Felton, becoming more excited as he spoke, “my Lord, beware!
All England is tired of your iniquities; my Lord, you have abused the royal power, which you have almost usurped; my Lord, you are held in horror by God and men.
God will punish you hereafter, but I will punish you here!” “Ah, this is too much!” cried Buckingham, making a step toward the door.
“I ask it humbly of you, my Lord,” said he; “sign the order for the liberation of Milady de Winter.
Remember that she is a woman whom you have dishonored.” “Withdraw, sir,” said Buckingham, “or I will call my attendant, and have you placed in irons.” “You shall not call,” said Felton, throwing himself between the duke and the bell placed on a stand encrusted with silver.
“Beware, my Lord, you are in the hands of God!” “In the hands of the devil, you mean!” cried Buckingham, raising his voice so as to attract the notice of his people, without absolutely shouting.
“Sign, my Lord; sign the liberation of Milady de Winter,” said Felton, holding out a paper to the duke.
At that moment Patrick entered the room, crying, “A letter from France, my Lord.” “From France!” cried Buckingham, forgetting everything in thinking from whom that letter came.
Felton took advantage of this moment, and plunged the knife into his side up to the handle.
“Ah, traitor,” cried Buckingham, “you have killed me!” “Murder!” screamed Patrick.
But too late by a minute, unfortunate, unfortunate that I am!” Felton made no resistance.
Lord de Winter placed him in the hands of the guards, who led him, while awaiting further orders, to a little terrace commanding the sea; and then the baron hastened to the duke’s chamber.
At the cry uttered by the duke and the scream of Patrick, the man whom Felton had met in the antechamber rushed into the chamber.
He found the duke reclining upon a sofa, with his hand pressed upon the wound.
“Laporte,” said the duke, in a dying voice, “Laporte, do you come from her?” “Yes, monseigneur,” replied the faithful cloak bearer of Anne of Austria, “but too late, perhaps.” “Silence, Laporte, you may be overheard.
Meanwhile, Lord de Winter, the deputies, the leaders of the expedition, the officers of Buckingham’s household, had all made their way into the chamber.
Cries of despair resounded on all sides.
The news, which filled the palace with tears and groans, soon became known, and spread itself throughout the city.
The report of a cannon announced that something new and unexpected had taken place.
He recovered a little, reopened his eyes, and hope revived in all hearts.
“Gentlemen,” said he, “leave me alone with Patrick and Laporte—ah, is that you, De Winter?
See the state in which he has put me.” “Oh, my Lord!” cried the baron, “I shall never console myself.” “And you would be quite wrong, my dear De Winter,” said Buckingham, holding out his hand to him.
“I do not know the man who deserves being regretted during the whole life of another man; but leave us, I pray you.” The baron went out sobbing.
There only remained in the closet of the wounded duke Laporte and Patrick.
A physician was sought for, but none was yet found.
“You will live, my Lord, you will live!” repeated the faithful servant of Anne of Austria, on his knees before the duke’s sofa.
“What has she written to me?” said Buckingham, feebly, streaming with blood, and suppressing his agony to speak of her he loved, “what has she written to me?
“Obey, Laporte, do you not see I have no time to lose?” Laporte broke the seal, and placed the paper before the eyes of the duke; but Buckingham in vain tried to make out the writing.
This war may not only bring great catastrophes upon England and France, but misfortune upon you, my Lord, for which I should never console myself.
“She likewise charged me to tell you that she still loved you.” “Ah,” said Buckingham, “God be praised!
My death, then, will not be to her as the death of a stranger!” Laporte burst into tears.
“Patrick,” said the duke, “bring me the casket in which the diamond studs were kept.” Patrick brought the object desired, which Laporte recognized as having belonged to the queen.
“Now the scent bag of white satin, on which her cipher is embroidered in pearls.” Patrick again obeyed.
“Here, Laporte,” said Buckingham, “these are the only tokens I ever received from her—this silver casket and these two letters.
You will restore them to her Majesty; and as a last memorial”—he looked round for some valuable object—“you will add—” He still sought; but his eyes, darkened by death, encountered only the knife which had fallen from the hand of Felton, still smoking with the blood spread over its blade.
“And you will add to them this knife,” said the duke, pressing the hand of Laporte.
He had just strength enough to place the scent bag at the bottom of the silver casket, and to let the knife fall into it, making a sign to Laporte that he was no longer able to speak; then, in a last convulsion, which this time he had not the power to combat, he slipped from the sofa to the floor.
Buckingham tried to smile a last time; but death checked his thought, which remained engraved on his brow like a last kiss of love.
At this moment the duke’s surgeon arrived, quite terrified; he was already on board the admiral’s ship, where they had been obliged to seek him.
He approached the duke, took his hand, held it for an instant in his own, and letting it fall, “All is useless,” said he, “he is dead.” “Dead, dead!” cried Patrick.
At this cry all the crowd re-entered the apartment, and throughout the palace and town there was nothing but consternation and tumult.
As soon as Lord de Winter saw Buckingham was dead, he ran to Felton, whom the soldiers still guarded on the terrace of the palace.
“Wretch!” said he to the young man, who since the death of Buckingham had regained that coolness and self-possession which never after abandoned him, “wretch! what have you done?” “I have avenged myself!” said he.
“Avenged yourself,” said the baron.
“Rather say that you have served as an instrument to that accursed woman; but I swear to you that this crime shall be her last.” “I don’t know what you mean,” replied Felton, quietly, “and I am ignorant of whom you are speaking, my Lord.
I killed the Duke of Buckingham because he twice refused you yourself to appoint me captain; I have punished him for his injustice, that is all.” De Winter, stupefied, looked on while the soldiers bound Felton, and could not tell what to think of such insensibility.
At every noise he heard, the simple Puritan fancied he recognized the step and voice of Milady coming to throw herself into his arms, to accuse herself, and die with him.
His eyes became fixed upon a point of the sea, commanded by the terrace where he was.
With the eagle glance of a sailor he had recognized there, where another would have seen only a gull hovering over the waves, the sail of a sloop which was directed toward the coast of France.
He grew deadly pale, placed his hand upon his heart, which was breaking, and at once perceived all the treachery.
“What?” asked his Lordship.
Milady had hastened her departure by an hour and a half.
As soon as she heard the cannon which announced the fatal event, she had ordered the anchor to be weighed.
The vessel was making way under a blue sky, at great distance from the coast.
“God has so willed it!” said he, with the resignation of a fanatic; but without, however, being able to take his eyes from that ship, on board of which he doubtless fancied he could distinguish the white outline of her to whom he had sacrificed his life.
De Winter followed his look, observed his feelings, and guessed all.
“Be punished _alone_, for the first, miserable man!” said Lord de Winter to Felton, who was being dragged away with his eyes turned toward the sea; “but I swear to you by the memory of my brother whom I have loved so much that your accomplice is not saved.” Felton lowered his head without pronouncing a syllable.
As to Lord de Winter, he descended the stairs rapidly, and went straight to the port.
He carried the strictness of this order so far as to detain in England the ambassadors of Denmark, who had taken their leave, and the regular ambassador of Holland, who was to take back to the port of Flushing the Indian merchantmen of which Charles I. had made restitution to the United Provinces.
But as he did not think of giving this order till five hours after the event—that is to say, till two o’clock in the afternoon—two vessels had already left the port, the one bearing, as we know, Milady, who, already anticipating the event, was further confirmed in that belief by seeing the black flag flying at the masthead of the admiral’s ship.
As to the second vessel, we will tell hereafter whom it carried, and how it set sail.
During this time nothing new occurred in the camp at La Rochelle; only the king, who was bored, as always, but perhaps a little more so in camp than elsewhere, resolved to go incognito and spend the festival of St.
Germain, and asked the cardinal to order him an escort of only twenty Musketeers.
The cardinal, who sometimes became weary of the king, granted this leave of absence with great pleasure to his royal lieutenant, who promised to return about the fifteenth of September.
M. de Tréville, being informed of this by his Eminence, packed his portmanteau; and as without knowing the cause he knew the great desire and even imperative need which his friends had of returning to Paris, it goes without saying that he fixed upon them to form part of the escort.
The four young men heard the news a quarter of an hour after M. de Tréville, for they were the first to whom he communicated it.
It was then that D’Artagnan appreciated the favor the cardinal had conferred upon him in making him at last enter the Musketeers—for without that circumstance he would have been forced to remain in the camp while his companions left it.
It goes without saying that this impatience to return toward Paris had for a cause the danger which Mme.
Bonacieux would run of meeting at the convent of Béthune with Milady, her mortal enemy.
Aramis therefore had written immediately to Marie Michon, the seamstress at Tours who had such fine acquaintances, to obtain from the queen authority for Mme.
Bonacieux to leave the convent, and to retire either into Lorraine or Belgium.
Eight or ten days afterward Aramis received the following letter: “MY DEAR COUSIN, Here is the authorization from my sister to withdraw our little servant from the convent of Béthune, the air of which you think is bad for her.
My sister sends you this authorization with great pleasure, for she is very partial to the little girl, to whom she intends to be more serviceable hereafter.
“I salute you, “MARIE MICHON” To this letter was added an order, conceived in these terms: “At the Louvre, August 10, 1628 “The superior of the convent of Béthune will place in the hands of the person who shall present this note to her the novice who entered the convent upon my recommendation and under my patronage.
There was no further question, therefore, about Marie Michon among the four Musketeers, who besides had what they wanted: that was, the order to withdraw Mme.
Bonacieux from the convent of the Carmelites of Béthune.
It was true that this order would not be of great use to them while they were in camp at La Rochelle; that is to say, at the other end of France.
Therefore D’Artagnan was going to ask leave of absence of M. de Tréville, confiding to him candidly the importance of his departure, when the news was transmitted to him as well as to his three friends that the king was about to set out for Paris with an escort of twenty Musketeers, and that they formed part of the escort.
The lackeys were sent on before with the baggage, and they set out on the morning of the sixteenth.
The cardinal accompanied his Majesty from Surgères to Mauzes; and there the king and his minister took leave of each other with great demonstrations of friendship.
The king, however, who sought distraction, while traveling as fast as possible—for he was anxious to be in Paris by the twenty-third—stopped from time to time to fly the magpie, a pastime for which the taste had been formerly inspired in him by de Luynes, and for which he had always preserved a great predilection.
Out of the twenty Musketeers sixteen, when this took place, rejoiced greatly at this relaxation; but the other four cursed it heartily.
D’Artagnan, in particular, had a perpetual buzzing in his ears, which Porthos explained thus: “A very great lady has told me that this means that somebody is talking of you somewhere.” At length the escort passed through Paris on the twenty-third, in the night.
The king thanked M. de Tréville, and permitted him to distribute furloughs for four days, on condition that the favored parties should not appear in any public place, under penalty of the Bastille.
The first four furloughs granted, as may be imagined, were to our four friends.
Still further, Athos obtained of M. de Tréville six days instead of four, and introduced into these six days two more nights—for they set out on the twenty-fourth at five o’clock in the evening, and as a further kindness M. de Tréville post-dated the leave to the morning of the twenty-fifth.
“Good Lord!” said D’Artagnan, who, as we have often said, never stumbled at anything.
I present my letter from the queen to the superior, and I bring back the dear treasure I go to seek—not into Lorraine, not into Belgium, but to Paris, where she will be much better concealed, particularly while the cardinal is at La Rochelle.
Well, once returned from the country, half by the protection of her cousin, half through what we have personally done for her, we shall obtain from the queen what we desire.
Remain, then, where you are, and do not exhaust yourselves with useless fatigue.
Myself and Planchet are all that such a simple expedition requires.” To this Athos replied quietly: “We also have money left—for I have not yet drunk all my share of the diamond, and Porthos and Aramis have not eaten all theirs.
We can therefore use up four horses as well as one.
But consider, D’Artagnan,” added he, in a tone so solemn that it made the young man shudder, “consider that Béthune is a city where the cardinal has given rendezvous to a woman who, wherever she goes, brings misery with her.
If you had only to deal with four men, D’Artagnan, I would allow you to go alone.
We four will go; and I hope to God that with our four lackeys we may be in sufficient number.” “You terrify me, Athos!” cried D’Artagnan.
“My God! what do you fear?” “Everything!” replied Athos.
D’Artagnan examined the countenances of his companions, which, like that of Athos, wore an impression of deep anxiety; and they continued their route as fast as their horses could carry them, but without adding another word.
On the evening of the twenty-fifth, as they were entering Arras, and as D’Artagnan was dismounting at the inn of the Golden Harrow to drink a glass of wine, a horseman came out of the post yard, where he had just had a relay, started off at a gallop, and with a fresh horse took the road to Paris.
At the moment he passed through the gateway into the street, the wind blew open the cloak in which he was wrapped, although it was in the month of August, and lifted his hat, which the traveler seized with his hand the moment it had left his head, pulling it eagerly over his eyes.
D’Artagnan, who had his eyes fixed upon this man, became very pale, and let his glass fall.
“What is the matter, monsieur?” said Planchet.
“Oh, come, gentlemen, my master is ill!” The three friends hastened toward D’Artagnan, who, instead of being ill, ran toward his horse.
“It is he!” cried D’Artagnan, pale with anger, and with the sweat on his brow, “it is he! let me overtake him!” “He?
“He, that man!” “What man?” “That cursed man, my evil genius, whom I have always met with when threatened by some misfortune, he who accompanied that horrible woman when I met her for the first time, he whom I was seeking when I offended our Athos, he whom I saw on the very morning Madame Bonacieux was abducted.
I recognized him when the wind blew upon his cloak.” “The devil!” said Athos, musingly.
“To saddle, gentlemen! to saddle!
Let us pursue him, and we shall overtake him!” “My dear friend,” said Aramis, “remember that he goes in an opposite direction from that in which we are going, that he has a fresh horse, and ours are fatigued, so that we shall disable our own horses without even a chance of overtaking him.
Let the man go, D’Artagnan; let us save the woman.” “Monsieur, monsieur!” cried a hostler, running out and looking after the stranger, “monsieur, here is a paper which dropped out of your hat!
Eh, monsieur, eh!” “Friend,” said D’Artagnan, “a half-pistole for that paper!” “My faith, monsieur, with great pleasure!
Here it is!” The hostler, enchanted with the good day’s work he had done, returned to the yard.
D’Artagnan unfolded the paper.
“Well?” eagerly demanded all his three friends.
“Nothing but one word!” said D’Artagnan.
“Come on, come on!” said D’Artagnan; “let us keep that paper carefully, perhaps I have not thrown away my half-pistole.
THE CARMELITE CONVENT AT BÉTHUNE Great criminals bear about them a kind of predestination which makes them surmount all obstacles, which makes them escape all dangers, up to the moment which a wearied Providence has marked as the rock of their impious fortunes.
She escaped the cruisers of both nations, and arrived at Boulogne without accident.
When landing at Portsmouth, Milady was an Englishwoman whom the persecutions of the French drove from La Rochelle; when landing at Boulogne, after a two days’ passage, she passed for a Frenchwoman whom the English persecuted at Portsmouth out of their hatred for France.
Milady had, likewise, the best of passports—her beauty, her noble appearance, and the liberality with which she distributed her pistoles.
Freed from the usual formalities by the affable smile and gallant manners of an old governor of the port, who kissed her hand, she only remained long enough at Boulogne to put into the post a letter, conceived in the following terms: “_To his Eminence Monseigneur the Cardinal Richelieu, in his camp before La Rochelle_.
“MONSEIGNEUR, Let your Eminence be reassured.
His Grace the Duke of Buckingham _will not set out_ for France.
“MILADY DE —— “BOULOGNE, evening of the twenty-fifth.
“P.S.—According to the desire of your Eminence, I report to the convent of the Carmelites at Béthune, where I will await your orders.” Accordingly, that same evening Milady commenced her journey.
Night overtook her; she stopped, and slept at an inn.
At five o’clock the next morning she again proceeded, and in three hours after entered Béthune.
She inquired for the convent of the Carmelites, and went thither immediately.
The superior met her; Milady showed her the cardinal’s order.
The abbess assigned her a chamber, and had breakfast served.
All the past was effaced from the eyes of this woman; and her looks, fixed on the future, beheld nothing but the high fortunes reserved for her by the cardinal, whom she had so successfully served without his name being in any way mixed up with the sanguinary affair.
The ever-new passions which consumed her gave to her life the appearance of those clouds which float in the heavens, reflecting sometimes azure, sometimes fire, sometimes the opaque blackness of the tempest, and which leave no traces upon the earth behind them but devastation and death.
After breakfast, the abbess came to pay her a visit.
There is very little amusement in the cloister, and the good superior was eager to make the acquaintance of her new boarder.
This was a very easy matter for a woman so really superior as she was.
She tried to be agreeable, and she was charming, winning the good superior by her varied conversation and by the graces of her whole personality.
The abbess, who was the daughter of a noble house, took particular delight in stories of the court, which so seldom travel to the extremities of the kingdom, and which, above all, have so much difficulty in penetrating the walls of convents, at whose threshold the noise of the world dies away.
Milady, on the contrary, was quite conversant with all aristocratic intrigues, amid which she had constantly lived for five or six years.
But the abbess contented herself with listening and smiling without replying a word.
Milady, however, saw that this sort of narrative amused her very much, and kept at it; only she now let her conversation drift toward the cardinal.
But she was greatly embarrassed.
She did not know whether the abbess was a royalist or a cardinalist; she therefore confined herself to a prudent middle course.
But the abbess, on her part, maintained a reserve still more prudent, contenting herself with making a profound inclination of the head every time the fair traveler pronounced the name of his Eminence.
Milady began to think she should soon grow weary of a convent life; she resolved, then, to risk something in order that she might know how to act afterward.
Desirous of seeing how far the discretion of the good abbess would go, she began to tell a story, obscure at first, but very circumstantial afterward, about the cardinal, relating the amours of the minister with Mme. d’Aiguillon, Marion de Lorme, and several other gay women.
The abbess listened more attentively, grew animated by degrees, and smiled.
“Good,” thought Milady; “she takes a pleasure in my conversation.
If she is a cardinalist, she has no fanaticism, at least.” She then went on to describe the persecutions exercised by the cardinal upon his enemies.
The abbess only crossed herself, without approving or disapproving.
This confirmed Milady in her opinion that the abbess was rather royalist than cardinalist.
Milady therefore continued, coloring her narrations more and more.
“I am very ignorant of these matters,” said the abbess, at length; “but however distant from the court we may be, however remote from the interests of the world we may be placed, we have very sad examples of what you have related.
And one of our boarders has suffered much from the vengeance and persecution of the cardinal!” “One of your boarders?” said Milady; “oh, my God!
Imprisonment, menaces, ill treatment—she has suffered everything.
But after all,” resumed the abbess, “Monsieur Cardinal has perhaps plausible motives for acting thus; and though she has the look of an angel, we must not always judge people by the appearance.” “Good!” said Milady to herself; “who knows!
I am about, perhaps, to discover something here; I am in the vein.” She tried to give her countenance an appearance of perfect candor.
It is said that we must not trust to the face; but in what, then, shall we place confidence, if not in the most beautiful work of the Lord?
“At what?” said Milady, with the utmost ingenuousness.
“At the language you use.” “What do you find so astonishing in that language?” said Milady, smiling.
“You are the friend of the cardinal, for he sends you hither, and yet—” “And yet I speak ill of him,” replied Milady, finishing the thought of the superior.
“At least you don’t speak well of him.” “That is because I am not his friend,” said she, sighing, “but his victim!” “But this letter in which he recommends you to me?” “Is an order for me to confine myself to a sort of prison, from which he will release me by one of his satellites.” “But why have you not fled?” “Whither should I go?
Do you believe there is a spot on the earth which the cardinal cannot reach if he takes the trouble to stretch forth his hand?
If I were a man, that would barely be possible; but what can a woman do?
This young boarder of yours, has she tried to fly?” “No, that is true; but she—that is another thing; I believe she is detained in France by some love affair.” “Ah,” said Milady, with a sigh, “if she loves she is not altogether wretched.” “Then,” said the abbess, looking at Milady with increasing interest, “I behold another poor victim?” “Alas, yes,” said Milady.
The abbess looked at her for an instant with uneasiness, as if a fresh thought suggested itself to her mind.
“You are not an enemy of our holy faith?” said she, hesitatingly.
“Who—I?” cried Milady; “I a Protestant?
I call to witness the God who hears us, that on the contrary I am a fervent Catholic!” “Then, madame,” said the abbess, smiling, “be reassured; the house in which you are shall not be a very hard prison, and we will do all in our power to make you cherish your captivity.
You will find here, moreover, the young woman of whom I spoke, who is persecuted, no doubt, in consequence of some court intrigue.
I have not tried to discover her other name.” “Kitty!” cried Milady.
Do you know her?” Milady smiled to herself at the idea which had occurred to her that this might be her old chambermaid.
There was connected with the remembrance of this girl a remembrance of anger; and a desire of vengeance disordered the features of Milady, which, however, immediately recovered the calm and benevolent expression which this woman of a hundred faces had for a moment allowed them to lose.
“And when can I see this young lady, for whom I already feel so great a sympathy?” asked Milady.
But you have been traveling these four days, as you told me yourself.
Go to bed and sleep; at dinnertime we will rouse you.” Although Milady would very willingly have gone without sleep, sustained as she was by all the excitements which a new adventure awakened in her heart, ever thirsting for intrigues, she nevertheless accepted the offer of the superior.
During the last fifteen days she had experienced so many and such various emotions that if her frame of iron was still capable of supporting fatigue, her mind required repose.
She therefore took leave of the abbess, and went to bed, softly rocked by the ideas of vengeance which the name of Kitty had naturally brought to her thoughts.
She remembered that almost unlimited promise which the cardinal had given her if she succeeded in her enterprise.
She had succeeded; D’Artagnan was then in her power!
One thing alone frightened her; that was the remembrance of her husband, the Comte de la Fère, whom she had believed dead, or at least expatriated, and whom she found again in Athos—the best friend of D’Artagnan.
But alas, if he was the friend of D’Artagnan, he must have lent him his assistance in all the proceedings by whose aid the queen had defeated the project of his Eminence; if he was the friend of D’Artagnan, he was the enemy of the cardinal; and she doubtless would succeed in involving him in the vengeance by which she hoped to destroy the young Musketeer.
All these hopes were so many sweet thoughts for Milady; so, rocked by them, she soon fell asleep.
She was awakened by a soft voice which sounded at the foot of her bed.
She opened her eyes, and saw the abbess, accompanied by a young woman with light hair and delicate complexion, who fixed upon her a look full of benevolent curiosity.
The face of the young woman was entirely unknown to her.
Each examined the other with great attention, while exchanging the customary compliments; both were very handsome, but of quite different styles of beauty.
Milady, however, smiled in observing that she excelled the young woman by far in her high air and aristocratic bearing.
It is true that the habit of a novice, which the young woman wore, was not very advantageous in a contest of this kind.
The abbess introduced them to each other.
When this formality was ended, as her duties called her to chapel, she left the two young women alone.
The novice, seeing Milady in bed, was about to follow the example of the superior; but Milady stopped her.
“How, madame,” said she, “I have scarcely seen you, and you already wish to deprive me of your company, upon which I had counted a little, I must confess, for the time I have to pass here?” “No, madame,” replied the novice, “only I thought I had chosen my time ill; you were asleep, you are fatigued.” “Well,” said Milady, “what can those who sleep wish for—a happy awakening?
This awakening you have given me; allow me, then, to enjoy it at my ease,” and taking her hand, she drew her toward the armchair by the bedside.
“How unfortunate I am!” said she; “I have been here six months without the shadow of recreation.
You arrive, and your presence was likely to afford me delightful company; yet I expect, in all probability, to quit the convent at any moment.” “How, you are going soon?” asked Milady.
“At least I hope so,” said the novice, with an expression of joy which she made no effort to disguise.
“I think I learned you had suffered persecutions from the cardinal,” continued Milady; “that would have been another motive for sympathy between us.” “What I have heard, then, from our good mother is true; you have likewise been a victim of that wicked priest.” “Hush!” said Milady; “let us not, even here, speak thus of him.
All my misfortunes arise from my having said nearly what you have said before a woman whom I thought my friend, and who betrayed me.
The queen herself does not dare to oppose the terrible minister.
I have proof that her Majesty, notwithstanding her excellent heart, has more than once been obliged to abandon to the anger of his Eminence persons who had served her.” “Trust me, madame; the queen may appear to have abandoned those persons, but we must not put faith in appearances.
The more they are persecuted, the more she thinks of them; and often, when they least expect it, they have proof of a kind remembrance.” “Alas!” said Milady, “I believe so; the queen is so good!” “Oh, you know her, then, that lovely and noble queen, that you speak of her thus!” cried the novice, with enthusiasm.
“That is to say,” replied Milady, driven into her entrenchment, “that I have not the honor of knowing her personally; but I know a great number of her most intimate friends.
I am acquainted with Monsieur de Putange; I met Monsieur Dujart in England; I know Monsieur de Tréville.” “Monsieur de Tréville!” exclaimed the novice, “do you know Monsieur de Tréville?” “Yes, perfectly well—intimately even.” “The captain of the king’s Musketeers?” “The captain of the king’s Musketeers.” “Why, then, only see!” cried the novice; “we shall soon be well acquainted, almost friends.
If you know Monsieur de Tréville, you must have visited him?” “Often!” said Milady, who, having entered this track, and perceiving that falsehood succeeded, was determined to follow it to the end.
“With him, then, you must have seen some of his Musketeers?” “All those he is in the habit of receiving!” replied Milady, for whom this conversation began to have a real interest.
Good God!” asked the poor woman, “have I said anything that has wounded you?” “No; but the name struck me, because I also have known that gentleman, and it appeared strange to me to meet with a person who appears to know him well.” “Oh, yes, very well; not only him, but some of his friends, Messieurs Porthos and Aramis!” “Indeed! you know them likewise?
I know them,” cried Milady, who began to feel a chill penetrate her heart.
“Well, if you know them, you know that they are good and free companions.
Why do you not apply to them, if you stand in need of help?” “That is to say,” stammered Milady, “I am not really very intimate with any of them.
I know them from having heard one of their friends, Monsieur d’Artagnan, say a great deal about them.” “You know Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried the novice, in her turn seizing the hands of Milady and devouring her with her eyes.
Then remarking the strange expression of Milady’s countenance, she said, “Pardon me, madame; you know him by what title?” “Why,” replied Milady, embarrassed, “why, by the title of friend.” “You deceive me, madame,” said the novice; “you have been his mistress!” “It is you who have been his mistress, madame!” cried Milady, in her turn.
You are Madame Bonacieux!” The young woman drew back, filled with surprise and terror.
Answer!” continued Milady.
“Well, yes, madame,” said the novice, “Are we rivals?” The countenance of Milady was illumined by so savage a joy that under any other circumstances Mme.
Bonacieux would have fled in terror; but she was absorbed by jealousy.
Bonacieux, with an energy of which she might not have been believed capable.
“Have you been, or are you, his mistress?” “Oh, no!” cried Milady, with an accent that admitted no doubt of her truth.
Bonacieux; “but why, then, did you cry out so?” “Do you not understand?” said Milady, who had already overcome her agitation and recovered all her presence of mind.
“How can I understand?
I know nothing.” “Can you not understand that Monsieur d’Artagnan, being my friend, might take me into his confidence?” “Truly?” “Do you not perceive that I know all—your abduction from the little house at St.
Germain, his despair, that of his friends, and their useless inquiries up to this moment?
How could I help being astonished when, without having the least expectation of such a thing, I meet you face to face—you, of whom we have so often spoken together, you whom he loves with all his soul, you whom he had taught me to love before I had seen you!
Ah, dear Constance, I have found you, then; I see you at last!” And Milady stretched out her arms to Mme.
Bonacieux, who, convinced by what she had just said, saw nothing in this woman whom an instant before she had believed her rival but a sincere and devoted friend.
“Oh, pardon me, pardon me!” cried she, sinking upon the shoulders of Milady.
Certainly, if Milady’s strength had been equal to her hatred, Mme.
Bonacieux would never have left that embrace alive.
“Oh, you beautiful, good little creature!” said Milady.
“How delighted I am to have found you!
Let me look at you!” and while saying these words, she absolutely devoured her by her looks.
I recognize you perfectly.” The poor young woman could not possibly suspect what frightful cruelty was behind the rampart of that pure brow, behind those brilliant eyes in which she read nothing but interest and compassion.
“Then you know what I have suffered,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, “since he has told you what he has suffered; but to suffer for him is happiness.” Milady replied mechanically, “Yes, that is happiness.” She was thinking of something else.
“And then,” continued Mme.
Bonacieux, “my punishment is drawing to a close.
Tomorrow, this evening, perhaps, I shall see him again; and then the past will no longer exist.” “This evening?” asked Milady, roused from her reverie by these words.
D’Artagnan here?” “Himself!” “But that’s impossible!
He is at the siege of La Rochelle with the cardinal.
But is there anything impossible for my D’Artagnan, the noble and loyal gentleman?” “Oh, I cannot believe you!” “Well, read, then!” said the unhappy young woman, in the excess of her pride and joy, presenting a letter to Milady.
“The writing of Madame de Chevreuse!” said Milady to herself.
“Ah, I always thought there was some secret understanding in that quarter!” And she greedily read the following few lines: MY DEAR CHILD, Hold yourself ready. _Our friend_ will see you soon, and he will only see you to release you from that imprisonment in which your safety required you should be concealed.
Prepare, then, for your departure, and never despair of us.
Our charming Gascon has just proved himself as brave and faithful as ever.
Tell him that certain parties are grateful for the warning he has given.
Do you know what that warning was?” “No, I only suspect he has warned the queen against some fresh machinations of the cardinal.” “Yes, that’s it, no doubt!” said Milady, returning the letter to Mme.
Bonacieux, and letting her head sink pensively upon her bosom.
Bonacieux, darting to the window, “can it be he?” Milady remained still in bed, petrified by surprise; so many unexpected things happened to her all at once that for the first time she was at a loss.
“He, he!” murmured she; “can it be he?” And she remained in bed with her eyes fixed.
Bonacieux; “it is a man I don’t know, although he seems to be coming here.
“Yes, yes, very sure!” “Perhaps you did not see well.” “Oh, if I were to see the plume of his hat, the end of his cloak, I should know _him!_” Milady was dressing herself all the time.
“Yes, he has entered.” “It is for you or me!” “My God, how agitated you seem!” “Yes, I admit it.
I have not your confidence; I fear the cardinal.” “Hush!” said Mme.
Bonacieux; “somebody is coming.” Immediately the door opened, and the superior entered.
“Did you come from Boulogne?” demanded she of Milady.
“Yes,” replied she, trying to recover her self-possession.
“Who wants me?” “A man who will not tell his name, but who comes from the cardinal.” “And who wishes to speak with me?” “Who wishes to speak to a lady recently come from Boulogne.” “Then let him come in, if you please.” “Oh, my God, my God!” cried Mme.
“Can it be bad news?” “I fear it.” “I will leave you with this stranger; but as soon as he is gone, if you will permit me, I will return.” “_Permit_ you?
I _beseech_ you.” The superior and Mme.
Milady remained alone, with her eyes fixed upon the door.
An instant later, the jingling of spurs was heard upon the stairs, steps drew near, the door opened, and a man appeared.
Milady uttered a cry of joy; this man was the Comte de Rochefort—the demoniacal tool of his Eminence.
TWO VARIETIES OF DEMONS Ah,” cried Milady and Rochefort together, “it is you!” “Yes, it is I.” “And you come?” asked Milady.
“From La Rochelle; and you?” “From England.” “Buckingham?” “Dead or desperately wounded, as I left without having been able to hear anything of him.
A fanatic has just assassinated him.” “Ah,” said Rochefort, with a smile; “this is a fortunate chance—one that will delight his Eminence!
Have you informed him of it?” “I wrote to him from Boulogne.
Monsieur Cardinal is indeed a privileged man!” “Imagine my astonishment,” continued Milady, “when I found myself face to face with this woman!” “Does she know you?” “No.” “Then she looks upon you as a stranger?” Milady smiled.
“I am her best friend.” “Upon my honor,” said Rochefort, “it takes you, my dear countess, to perform such miracles!” “And it is well I can, Chevalier,” said Milady, “for do you know what is going on here?” “No.” “They will come for her tomorrow or the day after, with an order from the queen.” “Indeed!
And who?” “D’Artagnan and his friends.” “Indeed, they will go so far that we shall be obliged to send them to the Bastille.” “Why is it not done already?” “What would you?
The cardinal has a weakness for these men which I cannot comprehend.” “Indeed!” “Yes.” “Well, then, tell him this, Rochefort.
What’s to be done?” “What did the cardinal say about me?” “I was to take your dispatches, written or verbal, and return by post; and when he shall know what you have done, he will advise what you have to do.” “I must, then, remain here?” “Here, or in the neighborhood.” “You cannot take me with you?” “No, the order is imperative.
I may then tell the cardinal, with respect to this little woman—” “That he may be at ease.” “Is that all?” “He will know what that means.” “He will guess, at least.
Now, then, what had I better do?” “Return instantly.
It appears to me that the news you bear is worth the trouble of a little diligence.” “My chaise broke down coming into Lilliers.” “Capital!” “What, _capital?_” “Yes, I want your chaise.” “And how shall I travel, then?” “On horseback.” “You talk very comfortably,—a hundred and eighty leagues!” “What’s that?” “One can do it!
Afterward?” “Afterward?
It is necessary to inspire confidence in that poor little Madame Bonacieux.” “That’s true.
Now, will you make me a report of all that has happened?” “Why, I have related the events to you.
A paper may be lost.” “You are right; only let me know where to find you that I may not run needlessly about the neighborhood.” “That’s correct; wait!” “Do you want a map?” “Oh, I know this country marvelously!” “You?
When were you here?” “I was brought up here.” “Truly?” “It is worth something, you see, to have been brought up somewhere.” “You will wait for me, then?” “Let me reflect a little!
There is nothing compromising in the name of a town.
Never mind,” said Milady, writing the name on half a sheet of paper; “I will compromise myself.” “Well,” said Rochefort, taking the paper from Milady, folding it, and placing it in the lining of his hat, “you may be easy.
I will do as children do, for fear of losing the paper—repeat the name along the route.
Is that all, then?” “In truth, my dear Chevalier, you are a miracle of memory. _A propos_, add one thing—” “What?” “I saw some very pretty woods which almost touch the convent garden.
Say that I am permitted to walk in those woods.
Perhaps I shall stand in need of a back door for retreat.” “You think of everything.” “And you forget one thing.” “What?” “To ask me if I want money.” “That’s true.
How much do you want?” “All you have in gold.” “I have five hundred pistoles, or thereabouts.” “I have as much.
With a thousand pistoles one may face everything.
Adieu, Chevalier.” “Adieu, Countess.” “Commend me to the cardinal.” “Commend me to Satan.” Milady and Rochefort exchanged a smile and separated.
An hour afterward Rochefort set out at a grand gallop; five hours after that he passed through Arras.
Our readers already know how he was recognized by D’Artagnan, and how that recognition by inspiring fear in the four Musketeers had given fresh activity to their journey.
THE DROP OF WATER Rochefort had scarcely departed when Mme.
Bonacieux re-entered.
She found Milady with a smiling countenance.
“Well,” said the young woman, “what you dreaded has happened.
This evening, or tomorrow, the cardinal will send someone to take you away.” “Who told you that, my dear?” asked Milady.
“I heard it from the mouth of the messenger himself.” “Come and sit down close to me,” said Milady.
“Here I am.” “Wait till I assure myself that nobody hears us.” “Why all these precautions?” “You shall know.” Milady arose, went to the door, opened it, looked in the corridor, and then returned and seated herself close to Mme.
“Then,” said she, “he has well played his part.” “Who has?” “He who just now presented himself to the abbess as a messenger from the cardinal.” “It was, then, a part he was playing?” “Yes, my child.” “That man, then, was not—” “That man,” said Milady, lowering her voice, “is my brother.” “Your brother!” cried Mme.
“No one must know this secret, my dear, but yourself.
If you reveal it to anyone in the world, I shall be lost, and perhaps yourself likewise.” “Oh, my God!” “Listen.
This is what has happened: My brother, who was coming to my assistance to take me away by force if it were necessary, met with the emissary of the cardinal, who was coming in search of me.
At a solitary and retired part of the road he drew his sword, and required the messenger to deliver up to him the papers of which he was the bearer.
The messenger resisted; my brother killed him.” “Oh!” said Mme.
Bonacieux, shuddering.
“Remember, that was the only means.
Then my brother determined to substitute cunning for force.
He took the papers, and presented himself here as the emissary of the cardinal, and in an hour or two a carriage will come to take me away by the orders of his Eminence.” “I understand.
It is your brother who sends this carriage.” “Exactly; but that is not all.
That letter you have received, and which you believe to be from Madame de Chevreuse—” “Well?” “It is a forgery.” “How can that be?” “Yes, a forgery; it is a snare to prevent your making any resistance when they come to fetch you.” “But it is D’Artagnan that will come.” “Do not deceive yourself.
D’Artagnan and his friends are detained at the siege of La Rochelle.” “How do you know that?” “My brother met some emissaries of the cardinal in the uniform of Musketeers.
You would have been summoned to the gate; you would have believed yourself about to meet friends; you would have been abducted, and conducted back to Paris.” “Oh, my God!
My senses fail me amid such a chaos of iniquities.
I feel, if this continues,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, raising her hands to her forehead, “I shall go mad!” “Stop—” “What?” “I hear a horse’s steps; it is my brother setting off again.
Bonacieux to join her.
The young woman complied.
Rochefort passed at a gallop.
The chevalier raised his head, saw the two young women, and without stopping, waved his hand in a friendly way to Milady.
“The good George!” said she, closing the window with an expression of countenance full of affection and melancholy.
And she resumed her seat, as if plunged in reflections entirely personal.
Bonacieux, “pardon me for interrupting you; but what do you advise me to do?
You have more experience than I have.
Speak; I will listen.” “In the first place,” said Milady, “it is possible I may be deceived, and that D’Artagnan and his friends may really come to your assistance.” “Oh, that would be too much!” cried Mme.
Bonacieux, “so much happiness is not in store for me!” “Then you comprehend it would be only a question of time, a sort of race, which should arrive first.
If your friends are the more speedy, you are to be saved; if the satellites of the cardinal, you are lost.” “Oh, yes, yes; lost beyond redemption!
What to do?” “There would be a very simple means, very natural—” “Tell me what!” “To wait, concealed in the neighborhood, and assure yourself who are the men who come to ask for you.” “But where can I wait?” “Oh, there is no difficulty in that.
Well, I take you with me; we conceal ourselves, and wait together.” “But I shall not be allowed to go; I am almost a prisoner.” “As they believe that I go in consequence of an order from the cardinal, no one will believe you anxious to follow me.” “Well?” “Well!
The carriage is at the door; you bid me adieu; you mount the step to embrace me a last time; my brother’s servant, who comes to fetch me, is told how to proceed; he makes a sign to the postillion, and we set off at a gallop.” “But D’Artagnan!
D’Artagnan! if he comes?” “Shall we not know it?” “How?” “Nothing easier.
He shall assume a disguise, and place himself in front of the convent.
If the emissaries of the cardinal arrive, he will take no notice; if it is Monsieur d’Artagnan and his friends, he will bring them to us.” “He knows them, then?” “Doubtless.
Has he not seen Monsieur d’Artagnan at my house?” “Oh, yes, yes; you are right.
In this way we shall not be separated for an instant.” “Well, go down to her, then, to make your request.
I feel my head a little confused; I will take a turn in the garden.” “Go; and where shall I find you?” “Here, in an hour.” “Here, in an hour.
Oh, you are so kind, and I am so grateful!” “How can I avoid interesting myself for one who is so beautiful and so amiable?
Are you not the beloved of one of my best friends?” “Dear D’Artagnan!
Now, then, all is agreed; let us go down.” “You are going into the garden?” “Yes.” “Go along this corridor, down a little staircase, and you are in it.” “Excellent; thank you!” And the two women parted, exchanging charming smiles.
Milady had told the truth—her head was confused, for her ill-arranged plans clashed one another like chaos.
She required to be alone that she might put her thoughts a little into order.
She saw vaguely the future; but she stood in need of a little silence and quiet to give all her ideas, as yet confused, a distinct form and a regular plan.
What was most pressing was to get Mme.
Bonacieux away, and convey her to a place of safety, and there, if matters required, make her a hostage.
Milady began to have doubts of the issue of this terrible duel, in which her enemies showed as much perseverance as she did animosity.
Besides, she felt as we feel when a storm is coming on—that this issue was near, and could not fail to be terrible.
The principal thing for her, then, was, as we have said, to keep Mme.
Bonacieux in her power.
Bonacieux was the very life of D’Artagnan.
This was more than his life, the life of the woman he loved; this was, in case of ill fortune, a means of temporizing and obtaining good conditions.
Bonacieux, without any suspicion, accompanied her.
Once concealed with her at Armentières, it would be easy to make her believe that D’Artagnan had not come to Béthune.
In fifteen days at most, Rochefort would be back; besides, during that fifteen days she would have time to think how she could best avenge herself on the four friends.
She would not be weary, thank God! for she should enjoy the sweetest pastime such events could accord a woman of her character—perfecting a beautiful vengeance.
Revolving all this in her mind, she cast her eyes around her, and arranged the topography of the garden in her head.
Milady was like a good general who contemplates at the same time victory and defeat, and who is quite prepared, according to the chances of the battle, to march forward or to beat a retreat.
The good abbess had naturally consented to her request; and as a commencement, they were to sup together.
On reaching the courtyard, they heard the noise of a carriage which stopped at the gate.
“Do you hear anything?” said she.
“Yes, the rolling of a carriage.” “It is the one my brother sends for us.” “Oh, my God!” “Come, come! courage!” The bell of the convent gate was sounded; Milady was not mistaken.
Bonacieux; “you have perhaps some jewels you would like to take.” “I have his letters,” said she.
“Well, go and fetch them, and come to my apartment.
We will snatch some supper; we shall perhaps travel part of the night, and must keep our strength up.” “Great God!” said Mme.
Bonacieux, placing her hand upon her bosom, “my heart beats so I cannot walk.” “Courage, courage! remember that in a quarter of an hour you will be safe; and think that what you are about to do is for _his_ sake.” “Yes, yes, everything for him.
You have restored my courage by a single word; go, I will rejoin you.” Milady ran up to her apartment quickly; she there found Rochefort’s lackey, and gave him his instructions.
He was to wait at the gate; if by chance the Musketeers should appear, the carriage was to set off as fast as possible, pass around the convent, and go and wait for Milady at a little village which was situated at the other side of the wood.
As we have already said, Milady was admirably acquainted with this part of France.
If the Musketeers did not appear, things were to go on as had been agreed; Mme.
Bonacieux was to get into the carriage as if to bid her adieu, and she was to take away Mme.
Bonacieux came in; and to remove all suspicion, if she had any, Milady repeated to the lackey, before her, the latter part of her instructions.
Milady asked some questions about the carriage.
It was a chaise drawn by three horses, driven by a postillion; Rochefort’s lackey would precede it, as courier.
Bonacieux would have any suspicion.
The poor young woman was too pure to suppose that any female could be guilty of such perfidy; besides, the name of the Comtesse de Winter, which she had heard the abbess pronounce, was wholly unknown to her, and she was even ignorant that a woman had had so great and so fatal a share in the misfortune of her life.
“You see,” said she, when the lackey had gone out, “everything is ready.
The abbess suspects nothing, and believes that I am taken by order of the cardinal.
Bonacieux, mechanically, “yes, let us be gone.” Milady made her a sign to sit down opposite, poured her a small glass of Spanish wine, and helped her to the wing of a chicken.
“See,” said she, “if everything does not second us!
Here is night coming on; by daybreak we shall have reached our retreat, and nobody can guess where we are.
Come, courage! take something.” Mme.
Bonacieux ate a few mouthfuls mechanically, and just touched the glass with her lips.
“Come, come!” said Milady, lifting hers to her mouth, “do as I do.” But at the moment the glass touched her lips, her hand remained suspended; she heard something on the road which sounded like the rattling of a distant gallop.
Then it grew nearer, and it seemed to her, almost at the same time, that she heard the neighing of horses.
Bonacieux, rising all in a tremble, supported herself upon her chair to avoid falling.
Nothing was yet to be seen, only they heard the galloping draw nearer.
Bonacieux, “what is that noise?” “That of either our friends or our enemies,” said Milady, with her terrible coolness.
Bonacieux remained standing, mute, motionless, and pale as a statue.
The noise became so distinct that the horses might be counted by the rattle of their hoofs.
Milady gazed with all the power of her attention; it was just light enough for her to see who was coming.
All at once, at the turning of the road she saw the glitter of laced hats and the waving of feathers; she counted two, then five, then eight horsemen.
One of them preceded the rest by double the length of his horse.
In the first horseman she recognized D’Artagnan.
Bonacieux, “what is it?” “It is the uniform of the cardinal’s Guards.
Fly, fly!” “Yes, yes, let us fly!” repeated Mme.
Bonacieux, but without being able to make a step, glued as she was to the spot by terror.
They heard the horsemen pass under the windows.
Bonacieux tried to walk, made two steps, and sank upon her knees.
At this moment they heard the rolling of the carriage, which at the approach of the Musketeers set off at a gallop.
“Oh, my God, my God! you see my strength fails me; you see plainly I cannot walk.
Bonacieux’s glass the contents of a ring which she opened with singular quickness.
It was a grain of a reddish color, which dissolved immediately.
This wine will give you strength, drink!” And she put the glass to the lips of the young woman, who drank mechanically.
“This is not the way that I wished to avenge myself,” said Milady, replacing the glass upon the table, with an infernal smile, “but, my faith! we do what we can!” And she rushed out of the room.
Bonacieux saw her go without being able to follow her; she was like people who dream they are pursued, and who in vain try to walk.
Bonacieux expected to see Milady, but she did not return.
At length she heard the grating of the hinges of the opening gates; the noise of boots and spurs resounded on the stairs.
There was a great murmur of voices which continued to draw near, amid which she seemed to hear her own name pronounced.
All at once she uttered a loud cry of joy, and darted toward the door; she had recognized the voice of D’Artagnan.
D’Artagnan!” cried she, “is it you?
This way! this way!” “Constance?
Constance?” replied the young man, “where are you? where are you?
Bonacieux had sunk into an armchair, without the power of moving.
D’Artagnan threw down a yet-smoking pistol which he held in his hand, and fell on his knees before his mistress.
Athos replaced his in his belt; Porthos and Aramis, who held their drawn swords in their hands, returned them to their scabbards.
“Oh, D’Artagnan, my beloved D’Artagnan!
You have not deceived me!
It is indeed thee!” “Yes, yes, Constance.
Reunited!” “Oh, it was in vain she told me you would not come!
“_She!_ What she?” asked D’Artagnan.
She who out of friendship for me wished to take me from my persecutors.
She who, mistaking you for the cardinal’s Guards, has just fled away.” “Your companion!” cried D’Artagnan, becoming more pale than the white veil of his mistress.
“Of what companion are you speaking, dear Constance?” “Of her whose carriage was at the gate; of a woman who calls herself your friend; of a woman to whom you have told everything.” “Her name, her name!” cried D’Artagnan.
“My God, can you not remember her name?” “Yes, it was pronounced in my hearing once.
I cannot see!” “Help, help, my friends! her hands are icy cold,” cried D’Artagnan.
“Oh!” said Athos, “oh, no, it is impossible!
God would not permit such a crime!” “Water, water!” cried D’Artagnan.
“Water!” “Oh, poor woman, poor woman!” murmured Athos, in a broken voice.
Bonacieux opened her eyes under the kisses of D’Artagnan.
“Oh, my God, my God, I thank thee!” “Madame!” said Athos, “madame, in the name of heaven, whose empty glass is this?” “Mine, monsieur,” said the young woman, in a dying voice.
“But who poured the wine for you that was in this glass?” “She.” “But who is _she?_” “Oh, I remember!” said Mme.
Bonacieux, “the Comtesse de Winter.” The four friends uttered one and the same cry, but that of Athos dominated all the rest.
At that moment the countenance of Mme.
Bonacieux became livid; a fearful agony pervaded her frame, and she sank panting into the arms of Porthos and Aramis.
D’Artagnan seized the hands of Athos with an anguish difficult to be described.
“I believe everything,” said Athos, biting his lips till the blood sprang to avoid sighing.
“D’Artagnan, D’Artagnan!” cried Mme.
Bonacieux, “where art thou?
You see I am dying!” D’Artagnan released the hands of Athos which he still held clasped in both his own, and hastened to her.
Her beautiful face was distorted with agony; her glassy eyes had no longer their sight; a convulsive shuddering shook her whole body; the sweat rolled from her brow.
For the poison which _she_ pours there is no antidote.” “Yes, yes!
Help, help!” murmured Mme.
Bonacieux; “help!” Then, collecting all her strength, she took the head of the young man between her hands, looked at him for an instant as if her whole soul passed into that look, and with a sobbing cry pressed her lips to his.
“Constance, Constance!” cried D’Artagnan.
Bonacieux, and dwelt for an instant on the lips of D’Artagnan.
That sigh was the soul, so chaste and so loving, which reascended to heaven.
D’Artagnan pressed nothing but a corpse in his arms.
The young man uttered a cry, and fell by the side of his mistress as pale and as icy as herself.
At that moment a man appeared in the doorway, almost as pale as those in the chamber.
Bonacieux dead, and D’Artagnan in a swoon.
He appeared just at that moment of stupor which follows great catastrophes.
“I was not deceived,” said he; “here is Monsieur d’Artagnan; and you are his friends, Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.” The persons whose names were thus pronounced looked at the stranger with astonishment.
“Gentlemen,” resumed the newcomer, “you are, as I am, in search of a woman who,” added he, with a terrible smile, “must have passed this way, for I see a corpse.” The three friends remained mute—for although the voice as well as the countenance reminded them of someone they had seen, they could not remember under what circumstances.
“Gentlemen,” continued the stranger, “since you do not recognize a man who probably owes his life to you twice, I must name myself.
I am Lord de Winter, brother-in-law of that _woman_.” The three friends uttered a cry of surprise.
Athos rose, and offering him his hand, “Be welcome, my Lord,” said he, “you are one of us.” “I set out five hours after her from Portsmouth,” said Lord de Winter.
“I arrived three hours after her at Boulogne.
Finally, at Lilliers I lost all trace of her.
I was going about at random, inquiring of everybody, when I saw you gallop past.
I recognized Monsieur d’Artagnan.
I called to you, but you did not answer me; I wished to follow you, but my horse was too much fatigued to go at the same pace with yours.
And yet it appears, in spite of all your diligence, you have arrived too late.” “You see!” said Athos, pointing to Mme.
Bonacieux dead, and to D’Artagnan, whom Porthos and Aramis were trying to recall to life.
“No,” replied Athos, “fortunately Monsieur d’Artagnan has only fainted.” “Ah, indeed, so much the better!” said Lord de Winter.
At that moment D’Artagnan opened his eyes.
He tore himself from the arms of Porthos and Aramis, and threw himself like a madman on the corpse of his mistress.
Athos rose, walked toward his friend with a slow and solemn step, embraced him tenderly, and as he burst into violent sobs, he said to him with his noble and persuasive voice, “Friend, be a man!
Women weep for the dead; men avenge them!” “Oh, yes!” cried D’Artagnan, “yes!
If it be to avenge her, I am ready to follow you.” Athos profited by this moment of strength which the hope of vengeance restored to his unfortunate friend to make a sign to Porthos and Aramis to go and fetch the superior.
The two friends met her in the corridor, greatly troubled and much upset by such strange events; she called some of the nuns, who against all monastic custom found themselves in the presence of five men.
“Madame,” said Athos, passing his arm under that of D’Artagnan, “we abandon to your pious care the body of that unfortunate woman.
We will return someday to pray over her grave.” D’Artagnan concealed his face in the bosom of Athos, and sobbed aloud.
Alas, would I could weep like you!” And he drew away his friend, as affectionate as a father, as consoling as a priest, noble as a man who has suffered much.
All five, followed by their lackeys leading their horses, took their way to the town of Béthune, whose outskirts they perceived, and stopped before the first inn they came to.
“But,” said D’Artagnan, “shall we not pursue that woman?” “Later,” said Athos.
“I have measures to take.” “She will escape us,” replied the young man; “she will escape us, and it will be your fault, Athos.” “I will be accountable for her,” said Athos.
D’Artagnan had so much confidence in the word of his friend that he lowered his head, and entered the inn without reply.
Porthos and Aramis regarded each other, not understanding this assurance of Athos.
Lord de Winter believed he spoke in this manner to soothe the grief of D’Artagnan.
“Now, gentlemen,” said Athos, when he had ascertained there were five chambers free in the hôtel, “let everyone retire to his own apartment.
D’Artagnan needs to be alone, to weep and to sleep.
I take charge of everything; be easy.” “It appears, however,” said Lord de Winter, “if there are any measures to take against the countess, it concerns me; she is my sister-in-law.” “And me,” said Athos, “—she is my wife!” D’Artagnan smiled—for he understood that Athos was sure of his vengeance when he revealed such a secret.
“Now, retire to your chambers,” said Athos, “and leave me to act.
You must perceive that in my quality of a husband this concerns me.
Only, D’Artagnan, if you have not lost it, give me the paper which fell from that man’s hat, upon which is written the name of the village of—” “Ah,” said D’Artagnan, “I comprehend! that name written in her hand.” “You see, then,” said Athos, “there is a god in heaven still!” Chapter LXIV.
THE MAN IN THE RED CLOAK The despair of Athos had given place to a concentrated grief which only rendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinary man.
Possessed by one single thought—that of the promise he had made, and of the responsibility he had taken—he retired last to his chamber, begged the host to procure him a map of the province, bent over it, examined every line traced upon it, perceived that there were four different roads from Béthune to Armentières, and summoned the lackeys.
Planchet, Grimaud, Bazin, and Mousqueton presented themselves, and received clear, positive, and serious orders from Athos.
They must set out the next morning at daybreak, and go to Armentières—each by a different route.
Planchet, the most intelligent of the four, was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon which the four friends had fired, and which was accompanied, as may be remembered, by Rochefort’s servant.
Athos set the lackeys to work first because, since these men had been in the service of himself and his friends he had discovered in each of them different and essential qualities.
Then, lackeys who ask questions inspire less mistrust than masters, and meet with more sympathy among those to whom they address themselves.
Besides, Milady knew the masters, and did not know the lackeys; on the contrary, the lackeys knew Milady perfectly.
If they had discovered Milady’s retreat, three were to remain on guard; the fourth was to return to Béthune in order to inform Athos and serve as a guide to the four friends.
These arrangements made, the lackeys retired.
Athos then arose from his chair, girded on his sword, enveloped himself in his cloak, and left the hôtel.
At ten o’clock in the evening, it is well known, the streets in provincial towns are very little frequented.
Athos nevertheless was visibly anxious to find someone of whom he could ask a question.
At length he met a belated passenger, went up to him, and spoke a few words to him.
The man he addressed recoiled with terror, and only answered the few words of the Musketeer by pointing.
Athos offered the man half a pistole to accompany him, but the man refused.
Athos then plunged into the street the man had indicated with his finger; but arriving at four crossroads, he stopped again, visibly embarrassed.
Nevertheless, as the crossroads offered him a better chance than any other place of meeting somebody, he stood still.
Athos repeated to him the same question he had asked the first person he met.
The night watch evinced the same terror, refused, in his turn, to accompany Athos, and only pointed with his hand to the road he was to take.
Athos walked in the direction indicated, and reached the suburb situated at the opposite extremity of the city from that by which he and his friends had entered it.
There he again appeared uneasy and embarrassed, and stopped for the third time.
Fortunately, a mendicant passed, who, coming up to Athos to ask charity, Athos offered him half a crown to accompany him where he was going.
The mendicant hesitated at first, but at the sight of the piece of silver which shone in the darkness he consented, and walked on before Athos.
Arrived at the angle of a street, he pointed to a small house, isolated, solitary, and dismal.
Athos went toward the house, while the mendicant, who had received his reward, left as fast as his legs could carry him.
Athos went round the house before he could distinguish the door, amid the red color in which the house was painted.
No light appeared through the chinks of the shutters; no noise gave reason to believe that it was inhabited.
Three times Athos knocked without receiving an answer.
The door at length was opened, and a man appeared, of high stature, pale complexion, and black hair and beard.
Athos and he exchanged some words in a low voice, then the tall man made a sign to the Musketeer that he might come in.
Athos immediately profited by the permission, and the door was closed behind him.
The man whom Athos had come so far to seek, and whom he had found with so much trouble, introduced him into his laboratory, where he was engaged in fastening together with iron wire the dry bones of a skeleton.
All the frame was adjusted except the head, which lay on the table.
All the rest of the furniture indicated that the dweller in this house occupied himself with the study of natural science.
There were large bottles filled with serpents, ticketed according to their species; dried lizards shone like emeralds set in great squares of black wood, and bunches of wild odoriferous herbs, doubtless possessed of virtues unknown to common men, were fastened to the ceiling and hung down in the corners of the apartment.
There was no family, no servant; the tall man alone inhabited this house.
Athos cast a cold and indifferent glance upon the objects we have described, and at the invitation of him whom he came to seek sat down near him.
Then he explained to him the cause of his visit, and the service he required of him.
But scarcely had he expressed his request when the unknown, who remained standing before the Musketeer, drew back with signs of terror, and refused.
Then Athos took from his pocket a small paper, on which two lines were written, accompanied by a signature and a seal, and presented them to him who had made too prematurely these signs of repugnance.
The tall man had scarcely read these lines, seen the signature, and recognized the seal, when he bowed to denote that he had no longer any objection to make, and that he was ready to obey.
Athos required no more.
He arose, bowed, went out, returned by the same way he came, re-entered the hôtel, and went to his apartment.
At daybreak D’Artagnan entered the chamber, and demanded what was to be done.
Some minutes after, the superior of the convent sent to inform the Musketeers that the burial would take place at midday.
As to the poisoner, they had heard no tidings of her whatever, only that she must have made her escape through the garden, on the sand of which her footsteps could be traced, and the door of which had been found shut.
As to the key, it had disappeared.
At the hour appointed, Lord de Winter and the four friends repaired to the convent; the bells tolled, the chapel was open, the grating of the choir was closed.
In the middle of the choir the body of the victim, clothed in her novitiate dress, was exposed.
On each side of the choir and behind the gratings opening into the convent was assembled the whole community of the Carmelites, who listened to the divine service, and mingled their chant with the chant of the priests, without seeing the profane, or being seen by them.
At the door of the chapel D’Artagnan felt his courage fall anew, and returned to look for Athos; but Athos had disappeared.
Faithful to his mission of vengeance, Athos had requested to be conducted to the garden; and there upon the sand following the light steps of this woman, who left sharp tracks wherever she went, he advanced toward the gate which led into the wood, and causing it to be opened, he went out into the forest.
Then all his suspicions were confirmed; the road by which the carriage had disappeared encircled the forest.
Athos followed the road for some time, his eyes fixed upon the ground; slight stains of blood, which came from the wound inflicted upon the man who accompanied the carriage as a courier, or from one of the horses, dotted the road.
At the end of three-quarters of a league, within fifty paces of Festubert, a larger bloodstain appeared; the ground was trampled by horses.
Between the forest and this accursed spot, a little behind the trampled ground, was the same track of small feet as in the garden; the carriage had stopped here.
At this spot Milady had come out of the wood, and entered the carriage.
Satisfied with this discovery which confirmed all his suspicions, Athos returned to the hôtel, and found Planchet impatiently waiting for him.
Everything was as Athos had foreseen.
Planchet had followed the road; like Athos, he had discovered the stains of blood; like Athos, he had noted the spot where the horses had halted.
But he had gone farther than Athos—for at the village of Festubert, while drinking at an inn, he had learned without needing to ask a question that the evening before, at half-past eight, a wounded man who accompanied a lady traveling in a post-chaise had been obliged to stop, unable to go further.
The accident was set down to the account of robbers, who had stopped the chaise in the wood.
The man remained in the village; the woman had had a relay of horses, and continued her journey.
Planchet went in search of the postillion who had driven her, and found him.
He had taken the lady as far as Fromelles; and from Fromelles she had set out for Armentières.
Planchet took the crossroad, and by seven o’clock in the morning he was at Armentières.
Planchet went and presented himself as a lackey out of a place, who was in search of a situation.
He had not chatted ten minutes with the people of the tavern before he learned that a woman had come there alone about eleven o’clock the night before, had engaged a chamber, had sent for the master of the hôtel, and told him she desired to remain some time in the neighborhood.
Planchet had no need to learn more.
He hastened to the rendezvous, found the lackeys at their posts, placed them as sentinels at all the outlets of the hôtel, and came to find Athos, who had just received this information when his friends returned.
All their countenances were melancholy and gloomy, even the mild countenance of Aramis.
“What is to be done?” asked D’Artagnan.
Each retired to his own apartment.
At eight o’clock in the evening Athos ordered the horses to be saddled, and Lord de Winter and his friends notified that they must prepare for the expedition.
Each examined his arms, and put them in order.
Athos came down last, and found D’Artagnan already on horseback, and growing impatient.
“Patience!” cried Athos; “one of our party is still wanting.” The four horsemen looked round them with astonishment, for they sought vainly in their minds to know who this other person could be.
At this moment Planchet brought out Athos’s horse; the Musketeer leaped lightly into the saddle.
In a quarter of an hour he returned, accompanied by a tall man, masked, and wrapped in a large red cloak.
Lord de Winter and the three Musketeers looked at one another inquiringly.
Neither could give the others any information, for all were ignorant who this man could be; nevertheless, they felt convinced that all was as it should be, as it was done by the order of Athos.
At nine o’clock, guided by Planchet, the little cavalcade set out, taking the route the carriage had taken.
It was a melancholy sight—that of these six men, traveling in silence, each plunged in his own thoughts, sad as despair, gloomy as chastisement.
TRIAL It was a stormy and dark night; vast clouds covered the heavens, concealing the stars; the moon would not rise till midnight.
Occasionally, by the light of a flash of lightning which gleamed along the horizon, the road stretched itself before them, white and solitary; the flash extinct, all remained in darkness.
Every minute Athos was forced to restrain D’Artagnan, constantly in advance of the little troop, and to beg him to keep in the line, which in an instant he again departed from.
They passed in silence through the little village of Festubert, where the wounded servant was, and then skirted the wood of Richebourg.
At Herlier, Planchet, who led the column, turned to the left.
Several times Lord de Winter, Porthos, or Aramis tried to talk with the man in the red cloak; but to every interrogation which they put to him he bowed, without response.
The travelers then comprehended that there must be some reason why the unknown preserved such a silence, and ceased to address themselves to him.
The storm increased, the flashes succeeded one another more rapidly, the thunder began to growl, and the wind, the precursor of a hurricane, whistled in the plumes and the hair of the horsemen.
The cavalcade trotted on more sharply.
A little before they came to Fromelles the storm burst.
There remained three leagues to travel, and they did it amid torrents of rain.
D’Artagnan took off his hat, and could not be persuaded to make use of his cloak.
He found pleasure in feeling the water trickle over his burning brow and over his body, agitated by feverish shudders.
The moment the little troop passed Goskal and were approaching the Post, a man sheltered beneath a tree detached himself from the trunk with which he had been confounded in the darkness, and advanced into the middle of the road, putting his finger on his lips.
Athos recognized Grimaud.
“Has she left Armentières?” Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.
D’Artagnan ground his teeth.
“Silence, D’Artagnan!” said Athos.
It is for me, then, to interrogate Grimaud.” “Where is she?” asked Athos.
Grimaud extended his hands in the direction of the Lys.
Grimaud showed his master his forefinger bent.
“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “she is alone within half a league of us, in the direction of the river.” “That’s well,” said D’Artagnan.
“Lead us, Grimaud.” Grimaud took his course across the country, and acted as guide to the cavalcade.
By the aid of the lightning they perceived the village of Erquinheim.
Grimaud shook his head negatively.
And the troop continued their route.
Another flash illuminated all around them.
Grimaud extended his arm, and by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished a little isolated house on the banks of the river, within a hundred paces of a ferry.
At this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up and came towards them.
“You are good and faithful servants.” Athos sprang from his horse, gave the bridle to Grimaud, and advanced toward the window, after having made a sign to the rest of the troop to go toward the door.
The little house was surrounded by a low, quickset hedge, two or three feet high.
Athos sprang over the hedge and went up to the window, which was without shutters, but had the half-curtains closely drawn.
He mounted the skirting stone that his eyes might look over the curtain.
He could not distinguish her countenance, but a sinister smile passed over the lips of Athos.
He was not deceived; it was she whom he sought.
Milady raised her head, saw close to the panes the pale face of Athos, and screamed.
Athos, perceiving that she knew him, pushed the window with his knee and hand.
The squares were broken to shivers; and Athos, like the spectre of vengeance, leaped into the room.
More pale and menacing than Athos, D’Artagnan stood on the threshold.
Milady recoiled, uttering a cry.
D’Artagnan, believing she might have means of flight and fearing she should escape, drew a pistol from his belt; but Athos raised his hand.
“Put back that weapon, D’Artagnan!” said he; “this woman must be tried, not assassinated.
Wait an instant, my friend, and you shall be satisfied.
Come in, gentlemen.” D’Artagnan obeyed; for Athos had the solemn voice and the powerful gesture of a judge sent by the Lord himself.
Behind D’Artagnan entered Porthos, Aramis, Lord de Winter, and the man in the red cloak.
Milady had sunk into a chair, with her hands extended, as if to conjure this terrible apparition.
Perceiving her brother-in-law, she uttered a terrible cry.
“What do you want?” screamed Milady.
“We want,” said Athos, “Charlotte Backson, who first was called Comtesse de la Fère, and afterwards Milady de Winter, Baroness of Sheffield.” “That is I! that is I!” murmured Milady, in extreme terror; “what do you want?” “We wish to judge you according to your crime,” said Athos; “you shall be free to defend yourself.
Justify yourself if you can.
M. d’Artagnan, it is for you to accuse her first.” D’Artagnan advanced.
“Before God and before men,” said he, “I accuse this woman of having poisoned Constance Bonacieux, who died yesterday evening.” He turned towards Porthos and Aramis.
“We bear witness to this,” said the two Musketeers, with one voice.
D’Artagnan continued: “Before God and before men, I accuse this woman of having attempted to poison me, in wine which she sent me from Villeroy, with a forged letter, as if that wine came from my friends.
God preserved me, but a man named Brisemont died in my place.” “We bear witness to this,” said Porthos and Aramis, in the same manner as before.
“Before God and before men, I accuse this woman of having urged me to the murder of the Baron de Wardes; but as no one else can attest the truth of this accusation, I attest it myself.
I have done.” And D’Artagnan passed to the other side of the room with Porthos and Aramis.
“Before God and before men,” said he, “I accuse this woman of having caused the assassination of the Duke of Buckingham.” “The Duke of Buckingham assassinated!” cried all present, with one voice.
“Yes,” said the baron, “assassinated.
On receiving the warning letter you wrote to me, I had this woman arrested, and gave her in charge to a loyal servant.
She corrupted this man; she placed the poniard in his hand; she made him kill the duke.
And at this moment, perhaps, Felton is paying with his head for the crime of this fury!” A shudder crept through the judges at the revelation of these unknown crimes.
“My brother, who made you his heir, died in three hours of a strange disorder which left livid traces all over the body.
“Assassin of Buckingham, assassin of Felton, assassin of my brother, I demand justice upon you, and I swear that if it be not granted to me, I will execute it myself.” And Lord de Winter ranged himself by the side of D’Artagnan, leaving the place free for another accuser.
Milady let her head sink between her two hands, and tried to recall her ideas, whirling in a mortal vertigo.
“My turn,” said Athos, himself trembling as the lion trembles at the sight of the serpent—“my turn.
I married that woman when she was a young girl; I married her in opposition to the wishes of all my family; I gave her my wealth, I gave her my name; and one day I discovered that this woman was branded—this woman was marked with a _fleur-de-lis_ on her left shoulder.” “Oh,” said Milady, raising herself, “I defy you to find any tribunal which pronounced that infamous sentence against me.
I defy you to find him who executed it.” “Silence!” said a hollow voice.
What man is that?” cried Milady, suffocated by terror, her hair loosening itself, and rising above her livid countenance as if alive.
Even Athos looked at him with as much stupefaction as the others, for he knew not how he could in any way find himself mixed up with the horrible drama then unfolded.
After approaching Milady with a slow and solemn step, so that the table alone separated them, the unknown took off his mask.
Milady for some time examined with increasing terror that pale face, framed with black hair and whiskers, the only expression of which was icy impassibility.
Then she suddenly cried, “Oh, no, no!” rising and retreating to the very wall.
“No, no! it is an infernal apparition!
Help, help!” screamed she, turning towards the wall, as if she would tear an opening with her hands.
“Who are you, then?” cried all the witnesses of this scene.
“Ask that woman,” said the man in the red cloak, “for you may plainly see she knows me!” “The executioner of Lille, the executioner of Lille!” cried Milady, a prey to insensate terror, and clinging with her hands to the wall to avoid falling.
Everyone drew back, and the man in the red cloak remained standing alone in the middle of the room.
Yes, I am the executioner of Lille, and this is my history.” All eyes were fixed upon this man, whose words were listened to with anxious attention.
“That woman was once a young girl, as beautiful as she is today.
She was a nun in the convent of the Benedictines of Templemar.
A young priest, with a simple and trustful heart, performed the duties of the church of that convent.
She undertook his seduction, and succeeded; she would have seduced a saint.
“Their vows were sacred and irrevocable.
Their connection could not last long without ruining both.
She prevailed upon him to leave the country; but to leave the country, to fly together, to reach another part of France, where they might live at ease because unknown, money was necessary.
The priest stole the sacred vases, and sold them; but as they were preparing to escape together, they were both arrested.
The young priest was condemned to ten years of imprisonment, and to be branded.
I was executioner of the city of Lille, as this woman has said.
I was obliged to brand the guilty one; and he, gentlemen, was my brother!
“I then swore that this woman who had ruined him, who was more than his accomplice, since she had urged him to the crime, should at least share his punishment.
I suspected where she was concealed.
I followed her, I caught her, I bound her; and I imprinted the same disgraceful mark upon her that I had imprinted upon my poor brother.
“The day after my return to Lille, my brother in his turn succeeded in making his escape; I was accused of complicity, and was condemned to remain in his place till he should be again a prisoner.
My poor brother was ignorant of this sentence.
He rejoined this woman; they fled together into Berry, and there he obtained a little curacy.
“The Lord of the estate on which the chapel of the curacy was situated saw this pretend sister, and became enamoured of her—amorous to such a degree that he proposed to marry her.
Then she quitted him she had ruined for him she was destined to ruin, and became the Comtesse de la Fère—” All eyes were turned towards Athos, whose real name that was, and who made a sign with his head that all was true which the executioner had said.
“Then,” resumed he, “mad, desperate, determined to get rid of an existence from which she had stolen everything, honor and happiness, my poor brother returned to Lille, and learning the sentence which had condemned me in his place, surrendered himself, and hanged himself that same night from the iron bar of the loophole of his prison.
“To do justice to them who had condemned me, they kept their word.
As soon as the identity of my brother was proved, I was set at liberty.
“That is the crime of which I accuse her; that is the cause for which she was branded.” “Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Athos, “what is the penalty you demand against this woman?” “The punishment of death,” replied D’Artagnan.
“My Lord de Winter,” continued Athos, “what is the penalty you demand against this woman?” “The punishment of death,” replied Lord de Winter.
“Messieurs Porthos and Aramis,” repeated Athos, “you who are her judges, what is the sentence you pronounce upon this woman?” “The punishment of death,” replied the Musketeers, in a hollow voice.
Milady uttered a frightful shriek, and dragged herself along several paces upon her knees toward her judges.
Athos stretched out his hand toward her.
“Charlotte Backson, Comtesse de la Fère, Milady de Winter,” said he, “your crimes have wearied men on earth and God in heaven.
If you know a prayer, say it—for you are condemned, and you shall die.” At these words, which left no hope, Milady raised herself in all her pride, and wished to speak; but her strength failed her.
She felt that a powerful and implacable hand seized her by the hair, and dragged her away as irrevocably as fatality drags humanity.
She did not, therefore, even attempt the least resistance, and went out of the cottage.
Lord de Winter, D’Artagnan, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, went out close behind her.
The lackeys followed their masters, and the chamber was left solitary, with its broken window, its open door, and its smoky lamp burning sadly on the table.
EXECUTION It was near midnight; the moon, lessened by its decline, and reddened by the last traces of the storm, arose behind the little town of Armentières, which showed against its pale light the dark outline of its houses, and the skeleton of its high belfry.
In front of them the Lys rolled its waters like a river of molten tin; while on the other side was a black mass of trees, profiled on a stormy sky, invaded by large coppery clouds which created a sort of twilight amid the night.
On the left was an old abandoned mill, with its motionless wings, from the ruins of which an owl threw out its shrill, periodical, and monotonous cry.
On the right and on the left of the road, which the dismal procession pursued, appeared a few low, stunted trees, which looked like deformed dwarfs crouching down to watch men traveling at this sinister hour.
From time to time a broad sheet of lightning opened the horizon in its whole width, darted like a serpent over the black mass of trees, and like a terrible scimitar divided the heavens and the waters into two parts.
Not a breath of wind now disturbed the heavy atmosphere.
A deathlike silence oppressed all nature.
The soil was humid and glittering with the rain which had recently fallen, and the refreshed herbs sent forth their perfume with additional energy.
The executioner walked behind them, and Lord de Winter, D’Artagnan, Porthos, and Aramis walked behind the executioner.
Planchet and Bazin came last.
The two lackeys conducted Milady to the bank of the river.
Her mouth was mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence, supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.
Being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, “A thousand pistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if you deliver me up to your masters, I have near at hand avengers who will make you pay dearly for my death.” Grimaud hesitated.
Mousqueton trembled in all his members.
They are no longer sure.” Planchet and Bazin were called, and took the places of Grimaud and Mousqueton.
On the bank of the river the executioner approached Milady, and bound her hands and feet.
Then she broke the silence to cry out, “You are cowards, miserable assassins—ten men combined to murder one woman.
“You do not belong to the human species; you are a demon escaped from hell, whither we send you back again.” “Ah, you virtuous men!” said Milady; “please to remember that he who shall touch a hair of my head is himself an assassin.” “The executioner may kill, without being on that account an assassin,” said the man in the red cloak, rapping upon his immense sword.
“This is the last judge; that is all. _Nachrichter_, as say our neighbors, the Germans.” And as he bound her while saying these words, Milady uttered two or three savage cries, which produced a strange and melancholy effect in flying away into the night, and losing themselves in the depths of the woods.
“If I am guilty, if I have committed the crimes you accuse me of,” shrieked Milady, “take me before a tribunal.
“Why did you not accept it?” “Because I am not willing to die!” cried Milady, struggling.
“Because I am too young to die!” “The woman you poisoned at Béthune was still younger than you, madame, and yet she is dead,” said D’Artagnan.
“I will enter a cloister; I will become a nun,” said Milady.
“You were in a cloister,” said the executioner, “and you left it to ruin my brother.” Milady uttered a cry of terror and sank upon her knees.
The executioner took her up in his arms and was carrying her toward the boat.
“Oh, my God!” cried she, “my God! are you going to drown me?” These cries had something so heartrending in them that M. d’Artagnan, who had been at first the most eager in pursuit of Milady, sat down on the stump of a tree and hung his head, covering his ears with the palms of his hands; and yet, notwithstanding, he could still hear her cry and threaten.
D’Artagnan was the youngest of all these men.
“Oh, I cannot behold this frightful spectacle!” said he.
“D’Artagnan, D’Artagnan!” cried she; “remember that I loved you!” The young man rose and took a step toward her.
But Athos rose likewise, drew his sword, and placed himself in the way.
“If you take one step farther, D’Artagnan,” said he, “we shall cross swords together.” D’Artagnan sank on his knees and prayed.
“Come,” continued Athos, “executioner, do your duty.” “Willingly, monseigneur,” said the executioner; “for as I am a good Catholic, I firmly believe I am acting justly in performing my functions on this woman.” “That’s well.” Athos made a step toward Milady.
I pardon you for my blasted future, my lost honor, my defiled love, and my salvation forever compromised by the despair into which you have cast me.
Die in peace!” Lord de Winter advanced in his turn.
“I pardon you,” said he, “for the poisoning of my brother, and the assassination of his Grace, Lord Buckingham.
I pardon you for the death of poor Felton; I pardon you for the attempts upon my own person.
Die in peace!” “And I,” said M. d’Artagnan.
“Pardon me, madame, for having by a trick unworthy of a gentleman provoked your anger; and I, in exchange, pardon you the murder of my poor love and your cruel vengeance against me.
Die in peace!” “I am lost!” murmured Milady in English.
“I must die!” Then she arose of herself, and cast around her one of those piercing looks which seemed to dart from an eye of flame.
She saw nothing; she listened, and she heard nothing.
“On the other bank,” replied the executioner.
“Here,” said he, “is the price of the execution, that it may be plain we act as judges.” “That is correct,” said the executioner; “and now in her turn, let this woman see that I am not fulfilling my trade, but my debt.” And he threw the money into the river.
The boat moved off toward the left-hand shore of the Lys, bearing the guilty woman and the executioner; all the others remained on the right-hand bank, where they fell on their knees.
The troop of friends saw it gain the opposite bank; the figures were defined like black shadows on the red-tinted horizon.
Milady, during the passage had contrived to untie the cord which fastened her feet.
But the soil was moist; on reaching the top of the bank, she slipped and fell upon her knees.
She was struck, no doubt, with a superstitious idea; she conceived that heaven denied its aid, and she remained in the attitude in which she had fallen, her head drooping and her hands clasped.
Then they saw from the other bank the executioner raise both his arms slowly; a moonbeam fell upon the blade of the large sword.
The two arms fell with a sudden force; they heard the hissing of the scimitar and the cry of the victim, then a truncated mass sank beneath the blow.
The executioner then took off his red cloak, spread it upon the ground, laid the body in it, threw in the head, tied all up by the four corners, lifted it on his back, and entered the boat again.
In the middle of the stream he stopped the boat, and suspending his burden over the water cried in a loud voice, “Let the justice of God be done!” and he let the corpse drop into the depths of the waters, which closed over it.
Three days afterward the four Musketeers were in Paris; they had not exceeded their leave of absence, and that same evening they went to pay their customary visit to M. de Tréville.
“Well, gentlemen,” said the brave captain, “I hope you have been well amused during your excursion.” “Prodigiously,” replied Athos in the name of himself and his comrades.
CONCLUSION On the sixth of the following month the king, in compliance with the promise he had made the cardinal to return to La Rochelle, left his capital still in amazement at the news which began to spread itself of Buckingham’s assassination.
He did not even give himself the trouble to dissemble, and displayed it with affectation before the queen.
Louis XIII., like every weak mind, was wanting in generosity.
But the king soon again became dull and indisposed; his brow was not one of those that long remain clear.
He felt that in returning to camp he should re-enter slavery; nevertheless, he did return.
The cardinal was for him the fascinating serpent, and himself the bird which flies from branch to branch without power to escape.
The return to La Rochelle, therefore, was profoundly dull.
Our four friends, in particular, astonished their comrades; they traveled together, side by side, with sad eyes and heads lowered.
Athos alone from time to time raised his expansive brow; a flash kindled in his eyes, and a bitter smile passed over his lips, then, like his comrades, he sank again into reverie.
As soon as the escort arrived in a city, when they had conducted the king to his quarters the four friends either retired to their own or to some secluded cabaret, where they neither drank nor played; they only conversed in a low voice, looking around attentively to see that no one overheard them.
One day, when the king had halted to fly the magpie, and the four friends, according to their custom, instead of following the sport had stopped at a cabaret on the high road, a man coming from la Rochelle on horseback pulled up at the door to drink a glass of wine, and darted a searching glance into the room where the four Musketeers were sitting.
“Holloa, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” said he, “is not that you whom I see yonder?” D’Artagnan raised his head and uttered a cry of joy.
It was the man he called his phantom; it was his stranger of Meung, of the Rue des Fossoyeurs and of Arras.
D’Artagnan drew his sword, and sprang toward the door.
But this time, instead of avoiding him the stranger jumped from his horse, and advanced to meet D’Artagnan.
“Ah, monsieur!” said the young man, “I meet you, then, at last!
This time you shall not escape me!” “Neither is it my intention, monsieur, for this time I was seeking you; in the name of the king, I arrest you.” “How! what do you say?” cried D’Artagnan.
“I say that you must surrender your sword to me, monsieur, and that without resistance.
This concerns your head, I warn you.” “Who are you, then?” demanded D’Artagnan, lowering the point of his sword, but without yet surrendering it.
“Return to camp and you shall know.” Rochefort remained for a moment in thought; then, as they were only a day’s journey from Surgères, whither the cardinal was to come to meet the king, he resolved to follow the advice of Athos and go with them.
Besides, this return offered him the advantage of watching his prisoner.
On the morrow, at three o’clock in the afternoon, they arrived at Surgères.
The cardinal there awaited Louis XIII.
The minister and the king exchanged numerous caresses, felicitating each other upon the fortunate chance which had freed France from the inveterate enemy who set all Europe against her.
After which, the cardinal, who had been informed that D’Artagnan was arrested and who was anxious to see him, took leave of the king, inviting him to come the next day to view the work already done upon the dyke.
On returning in the evening to his quarters at the bridge of La Pierre, the cardinal found, standing before the house he occupied, D’Artagnan, without his sword, and the three Musketeers armed.
This time, as he was well attended, he looked at them sternly, and made a sign with his eye and hand for D’Artagnan to follow him.
“We shall wait for you, D’Artagnan,” said Athos, loud enough for the cardinal to hear him.
His Eminence bent his brow, stopped for an instant, and then kept on his way without uttering a single word.
D’Artagnan entered after the cardinal, and behind D’Artagnan the door was guarded.
His Eminence entered the chamber which served him as a study, and made a sign to Rochefort to bring in the young Musketeer.
Rochefort obeyed and retired.
D’Artagnan remained alone in front of the cardinal; this was his second interview with Richelieu, and he afterward confessed that he felt well assured it would be his last.
Richelieu remained standing, leaning against the mantelpiece; a table was between him and D’Artagnan.
“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “you have been arrested by my orders.” “So they tell me, monseigneur.” “Do you know why?” “No, monseigneur, for the only thing for which I could be arrested is still unknown to your Eminence.” Richelieu looked steadfastly at the young man.
“Holloa!” said he, “what does that mean?” “If Monseigneur will have the goodness to tell me, in the first place, what crimes are imputed to me, I will then tell him the deeds I have really done.” “Crimes are imputed to you which had brought down far loftier heads than yours, monsieur,” said the cardinal.
“What, monseigneur?” said D’Artagnan, with a calmness which astonished the cardinal himself.
Did you not say she was dead?” “Three times she attempted to kill me, and I pardoned her; but she murdered the woman I loved.
Then my friends and I took her, tried her, and condemned her.” D’Artagnan then related the poisoning of Mme.
Bonacieux in the convent of the Carmelites at Béthune, the trial in the isolated house, and the execution on the banks of the Lys.
A shudder crept through the body of the cardinal, who did not shudder readily.
But all at once, as if undergoing the influence of an unspoken thought, the countenance of the cardinal, till then gloomy, cleared up by degrees, and recovered perfect serenity.
“So,” said the cardinal, in a tone that contrasted strongly with the severity of his words, “you have constituted yourselves judges, without remembering that they who punish without license to punish are assassins?” “Monseigneur, I swear to you that I never for an instant had the intention of defending my head against you.
I willingly submit to any punishment your Eminence may please to inflict upon me.
I do not hold life dear enough to be afraid of death.” “Yes, I know you are a man of a stout heart, monsieur,” said the cardinal, with a voice almost affectionate; “I can therefore tell you beforehand you shall be tried, and even condemned.” “Another might reply to your Eminence that he had his pardon in his pocket.
I content myself with saying: Command, monseigneur; I am ready.” “Your pardon?” said Richelieu, surprised.
“Yes, monseigneur,” said D’Artagnan.
“And signed by whom—by the king?” And the cardinal pronounced these words with a singular expression of contempt.
“No, by your Eminence.” “By me?
You are insane, monsieur.” “Monseigneur will doubtless recognize his own handwriting.” And D’Artagnan presented to the cardinal the precious piece of paper which Athos had forced from Milady, and which he had given to D’Artagnan to serve him as a safeguard.
His Eminence took the paper, and read in a slow voice, dwelling upon every syllable: “Dec. 3, 1627 “It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this has done what he has done.
“RICHELIEU” The cardinal, after having read these two lines, sank into a profound reverie; but he did not return the paper to D’Artagnan.
“He is meditating by what sort of punishment he shall cause me to die,” said the Gascon to himself.
“Well, my faith! he shall see how a gentleman can die.” The young Musketeer was in excellent disposition to die heroically.
Richelieu still continued thinking, rolling and unrolling the paper in his hands.
On the other side, the crimes, the power, and the infernal genius of Milady had more than once terrified him.
He felt something like a secret joy at being forever relieved of this dangerous accomplice.
Richelieu slowly tore the paper which D’Artagnan had generously relinquished.
“I am lost!” said D’Artagnan to himself.
And he bowed profoundly before the cardinal, like a man who says, “Lord, Thy will be done!” The cardinal approached the table, and without sitting down, wrote a few lines upon a parchment of which two-thirds were already filled, and affixed his seal.
“That is my condemnation,” thought D’Artagnan; “he will spare me the _ennui_ of the Bastille, or the tediousness of a trial.
That’s very kind of him.” “Here, monsieur,” said the cardinal to the young man.
The name is wanting in this commission; you can write it yourself.” D’Artagnan took the paper hesitatingly and cast his eyes over it; it was a lieutenant’s commission in the Musketeers.
D’Artagnan fell at the feet of the cardinal.
“Monseigneur,” said he, “my life is yours; henceforth dispose of it.
I have three friends who are more meritorious and more worthy—” “You are a brave youth, D’Artagnan,” interrupted the cardinal, tapping him familiarly on the shoulder, charmed at having vanquished this rebellious nature.
“Do with this commission what you will; only remember, though the name be blank, it is to you I give it.” “I shall never forget it,” replied D’Artagnan.
“Your Eminence may be certain of that.” The cardinal turned and said in a loud voice, “Rochefort!” The chevalier, who no doubt was near the door, entered immediately.
“Rochefort,” said the cardinal, “you see Monsieur d’Artagnan.
Greet each other, then; and be wise if you wish to preserve your heads.” Rochefort and D’Artagnan coolly greeted each other with their lips; but the cardinal was there, observing them with his vigilant eye.
“We shall meet again, shall we not, monsieur?” “When you please,” said D’Artagnan.
“An opportunity will come,” replied Rochefort.
“Hey?” said the cardinal, opening the door.
The two men smiled at each other, shook hands, and saluted his Eminence.
“We were beginning to grow impatient,” said Athos.
“Here I am, my friends,” replied D’Artagnan; “not only free, but in favor.” “Tell us about it.” “This evening; but for the moment, let us separate.” Accordingly, that same evening D’Artagnan repaired to the quarters of Athos, whom he found in a fair way to empty a bottle of Spanish wine—an occupation which he religiously accomplished every night.
D’Artagnan related what had taken place between the cardinal and himself, and drawing the commission from his pocket, said, “Here, my dear Athos, this naturally belongs to you.” Athos smiled with one of his sweet and expressive smiles.
Keep the commission; it is yours.
Alas! you have purchased it dearly enough.” D’Artagnan left Athos’s chamber and went to that of Porthos.
He found him clothed in a magnificent dress covered with splendid embroidery, admiring himself before a glass.
“Ah, ah! is that you, dear friend?” exclaimed Porthos.
“How do you think these garments fit me?” “Wonderfully,” said D’Artagnan; “but I come to offer you a dress which will become you still better.” “What?” asked Porthos.
“That of a lieutenant of Musketeers.” D’Artagnan related to Porthos the substance of his interview with the cardinal, and said, taking the commission from his pocket, “Here, my friend, write your name upon it and become my chief.” Porthos cast his eyes over the commission and returned it to D’Artagnan, to the great astonishment of the young man.
“Yes,” said he, “yes, that would flatter me very much; but I should not have time enough to enjoy the distinction.
During our expedition to Béthune the husband of my duchess died; so, my dear, the coffer of the defunct holding out its arms to me, I shall marry the widow.
Keep the lieutenancy, my dear, keep it.” The young man then entered the apartment of Aramis.
He found him kneeling before a _priedieu_, with his head leaning on an open prayer book.
He described to him his interview with the cardinal, and said, for the third time drawing his commission from his pocket, “You, our friend, our intelligence, our invisible protector, accept this commission.
You have merited it more than any of us by your wisdom and your counsels, always followed by such happy results.” “Alas, dear friend!” said Aramis, “our late adventures have disgusted me with military life.
This time my determination is irrevocably taken.
After the siege I shall enter the house of the Lazarists.
Keep the commission, D’Artagnan; the profession of arms suits you.
You will be a brave and adventurous captain.” D’Artagnan, his eye moist with gratitude though beaming with joy, went back to Athos, whom he found still at table contemplating the charms of his last glass of Malaga by the light of his lamp.
“Well,” said he, “they likewise have refused me.” “That, dear friend, is because nobody is more worthy than yourself.” He took a quill, wrote the name of D’Artagnan in the commission, and returned it to him.
“Alas! nothing but bitter recollections.” And he let his head sink upon his hands, while two large tears rolled down his cheeks.
“You are young,” replied Athos; “and your bitter recollections have time to change themselves into sweet remembrances.” EPILOGUE La Rochelle, deprived of the assistance of the English fleet and of the diversion promised by Buckingham, surrendered after a siege of a year.
On the twenty-eighth of October, 1628, the capitulation was signed.
The king made his entrance into Paris on the twenty-third of December of the same year.
He was received in triumph, as if he came from conquering an enemy and not Frenchmen.
He entered by the Faubourg St.
D’Artagnan took possession of his command.
Porthos left the service, and in the course of the following year married Mme.
Coquenard; the coffer so much coveted contained eight hundred thousand livres.
Mousqueton had a magnificent livery, and enjoyed the satisfaction of which he had been ambitious all his life—that of standing behind a gilded carriage.
Aramis, after a journey into Lorraine, disappeared all at once, and ceased to write to his friends; they learned at a later period through Mme. de Chevreuse, who told it to two or three of her intimates, that, yielding to his vocation, he had retired into a convent—only into which, nobody knew.
Athos remained a Musketeer under the command of D’Artagnan till the year 1633, at which period, after a journey he made to Touraine, he also quit the service, under the pretext of having inherited a small property in Roussillon.
Grimaud followed Athos.
D’Artagnan fought three times with Rochefort, and wounded him three times.
“I shall probably kill you the fourth,” said he to him, holding out his hand to assist him to rise.
“It is much better both for you and for me to stop where we are,” answered the wounded man.
“_Corbleu!_ I am more your friend than you think—for after our very first encounter, I could by saying a word to the cardinal have had your throat cut!” They this time embraced heartily, and without retaining any malice.
Planchet obtained from Rochefort the rank of sergeant in the Piedmont regiment.
Bonacieux lived on very quietly, wholly ignorant of what had become of his wife, and caring very little about it.
One day he had the imprudence to recall himself to the memory of the cardinal.
The cardinal had him informed that he would provide for him so that he should never want for anything in future.
Bonacieux, having left his house at seven o’clock in the evening to go to the Louvre, never appeared again in the Rue des Fossoyeurs; the opinion of those who seemed to be best informed was that he was fed and lodged in some royal castle, at the expense of his generous Eminence.
Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys’ house.
The wife had discovered that the husband was carrying on an intrigue with a French girl, who had been a governess in their family, and she had announced to her husband that she could not go on living in the same house with him.
This position of affairs had now lasted three days, and not only the husband and wife themselves, but all the members of their family and household, were painfully conscious of it.
Every person in the house felt that there was no sense in their living together, and that the stray people brought together by chance in any inn had more in common with one another than they, the members of the family and household of the Oblonskys.
The children ran wild all over the house; the English governess quarreled with the housekeeper, and wrote to a friend asking her to look out for a new situation for her; the man-cook had walked off the day before just at dinner time; the kitchen-maid, and the coachman had given warning.
Three days after the quarrel, Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch Oblonsky—Stiva, as he was called in the fashionable world—woke up at his usual hour, that is, at eight o’clock in the morning, not in his wife’s bedroom, but on the leather-covered sofa in his study.
He turned over his stout, well-cared-for person on the springy sofa, as though he would sink into a long sleep again; he vigorously embraced the pillow on the other side and buried his face in it; but all at once he jumped up, sat up on the sofa, and opened his eyes.
Alabin was giving a dinner at Darmstadt; no, not Darmstadt, but something American.
Yes, but then, Darmstadt was in America.
Yes, Alabin was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the tables sang, _Il mio tesoro_—not _Il mio tesoro_ though, but something better, and there were some sort of little decanters on the table, and they were women, too,” he remembered.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes twinkled gaily, and he pondered with a smile.
There was a great deal more that was delightful, only there’s no putting it into words, or even expressing it in one’s thoughts awake.” And noticing a gleam of light peeping in beside one of the serge curtains, he cheerfully dropped his feet over the edge of the sofa, and felt about with them for his slippers, a present on his last birthday, worked for him by his wife on gold-colored morocco.
And, as he had done every day for the last nine years, he stretched out his hand, without getting up, towards the place where his dressing-gown always hung in his bedroom.
And thereupon he suddenly remembered that he was not sleeping in his wife’s room, but in his study, and why: the smile vanished from his face, he knitted his brows.
Oo!...” he muttered, recalling everything that had happened.
And again every detail of his quarrel with his wife was present to his imagination, all the hopelessness of his position, and worst of all, his own fault.
That’s the point of the whole situation,” he reflected.
“Oh, oh, oh!” he kept repeating in despair, as he remembered the acutely painful sensations caused him by this quarrel.
Most unpleasant of all was the first minute when, on coming, happy and good-humored, from the theater, with a huge pear in his hand for his wife, he had not found his wife in the drawing-room, to his surprise had not found her in the study either, and saw her at last in her bedroom with the unlucky letter that revealed everything in her hand.
She, his Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over household details, and limited in her ideas, as he considered, was sitting perfectly still with the letter in her hand, looking at him with an expression of horror, despair, and indignation.
“What’s this? this?” she asked, pointing to the letter.
And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so often the case, was not so much annoyed at the fact itself as at the way in which he had met his wife’s words.
There happened to him at that instant what does happen to people when they are unexpectedly caught in something very disgraceful.
He did not succeed in adapting his face to the position in which he was placed towards his wife by the discovery of his fault.
Instead of being hurt, denying, defending himself, begging forgiveness, instead of remaining indifferent even—anything would have been better than what he did do—his face utterly involuntarily (reflex spinal action, reflected Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was fond of physiology)—utterly involuntarily assumed its habitual, good-humored, and therefore idiotic smile.
Catching sight of that smile, Dolly shuddered as though at physical pain, broke out with her characteristic heat into a flood of cruel words, and rushed out of the room.
“It’s that idiotic smile that’s to blame for it all,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Chapter 2 Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful man in his relations with himself.
He was incapable of deceiving himself and persuading himself that he repented of his conduct.
He could not at this date repent of the fact that he, a handsome, susceptible man of thirty-four, was not in love with his wife, the mother of five living and two dead children, and only a year younger than himself.
All he repented of was that he had not succeeded better in hiding it from his wife.
But he felt all the difficulty of his position and was sorry for his wife, his children, and himself.
Possibly he might have managed to conceal his sins better from his wife if he had anticipated that the knowledge of them would have had such an effect on her.
He had never clearly thought out the subject, but he had vaguely conceived that his wife must long ago have suspected him of being unfaithful to her, and shut her eyes to the fact.
He had even supposed that she, a worn-out woman no longer young or good-looking, and in no way remarkable or interesting, merely a good mother, ought from a sense of fairness to take an indulgent view.
“Oh, it’s awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!” Stepan Arkadyevitch kept repeating to himself, and he could think of nothing to be done.
She was contented and happy in her children; I never interfered with her in anything; I let her manage the children and the house just as she liked.
It’s true it’s bad _her_ having been a governess in our house.
There’s something common, vulgar, in flirting with one’s governess.
But what a governess!” (He vividly recalled the roguish black eyes of Mlle.
But what, what is to be done?” There was no solution, but that universal solution which life gives to all questions, even the most complex and insoluble.
To forget himself in sleep was impossible now, at least till nighttime; he could not go back now to the music sung by the decanter-women; so he must forget himself in the dream of daily life.
“Then we shall see,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to himself, and getting up he put on a gray dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied the tassels in a knot, and, drawing a deep breath of air into his broad, bare chest, he walked to the window with his usual confident step, turning out his feet that carried his full frame so easily.
It was at once answered by the appearance of an old friend, his valet, Matvey, carrying his clothes, his boots, and a telegram.
Matvey was followed by the barber with all the necessaries for shaving.
“Are there any papers from the office?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking the telegram and seating himself at the looking-glass.
“On the table,” replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring sympathy at his master; and, after a short pause, he added with a sly smile, “They’ve sent from the carriage-jobbers.” Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, he merely glanced at Matvey in the looking-glass.
In the glance, in which their eyes met in the looking-glass, it was clear that they understood one another.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes asked: “Why do you tell me that? don’t you know?” Matvey put his hands in his jacket pockets, thrust out one leg, and gazed silently, good-humoredly, with a faint smile, at his master.
“I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to trouble you or themselves for nothing,” he said.
He had obviously prepared the sentence beforehand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a joke and attract attention to himself.
Tearing open the telegram, he read it through, guessing at the words, misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and his face brightened.
“Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow,” he said, checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cutting a pink path through his long, curly whiskers.
“Thank God!” said Matvey, showing by this response that he, like his master, realized the significance of this arrival—that is, that Anna Arkadyevna, the sister he was so fond of, might bring about a reconciliation between husband and wife.
“Alone, or with her husband?” inquired Matvey.
Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber was at work on his upper lip, and he raised one finger.
Is the room to be got ready upstairs?” “Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where she orders.” “Darya Alexandrovna?” Matvey repeated, as though in doubt.
Here, take the telegram; give it to her, and then do what she tells you.” “You want to try it on,” Matvey understood, but he only said, “Yes, sir.” Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed and ready to be dressed, when Matvey, stepping deliberately in his creaky boots, came back into the room with the telegram in his hand.
“Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that she is going away.
Let him do—that is you—as he likes,” he said, laughing only with his eyes, and putting his hands in his pockets, he watched his master with his head on one side.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was silent a minute.
Then a good-humored and rather pitiful smile showed itself on his handsome face.
Who’s there?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, hearing the rustle of a woman’s dress at the door.
“It’s I,” said a firm, pleasant, woman’s voice, and the stern, pockmarked face of Matrona Philimonovna, the nurse, was thrust in at the doorway.
“Well, what is it, Matrona?” queried Stepan Arkadyevitch, going up to her at the door.
Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the wrong as regards his wife, and was conscious of this himself, almost everyone in the house (even the nurse, Darya Alexandrovna’s chief ally) was on his side.
“Well, what now?” he asked disconsolately.
She is suffering so, it’s sad to see her; and besides, everything in the house is topsy-turvy.
You must have pity, sir, on the children.
Beg her forgiveness, sir.
One must take the consequences....” “But she won’t see me.” “You do your part.
God is merciful; pray to God, sir, pray to God.” “Come, that’ll do, you can go,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, blushing suddenly.
“Well now, do dress me.” He turned to Matvey and threw off his dressing-gown decisively.
Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse’s collar, and, blowing off some invisible speck, he slipped it with obvious pleasure over the well-groomed body of his master.
One was very unpleasant, from a merchant who was buying a forest on his wife’s property.
To sell this forest was absolutely essential; but at present, until he was reconciled with his wife, the subject could not be discussed.
The most unpleasant thing of all was that his pecuniary interests should in this way enter into the question of his reconciliation with his wife.
And the idea that he might be led on by his interests, that he might seek a reconciliation with his wife on account of the sale of the forest—that idea hurt him.
When he had finished his letters, Stepan Arkadyevitch moved the office-papers close to him, rapidly looked through two pieces of business, made a few notes with a big pencil, and pushing away the papers, turned to his coffee.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper, not an extreme one, but one advocating the views held by the majority.
And in spite of the fact that science, art, and politics had no special interest for him, he firmly held those views on all these subjects which were held by the majority and by his paper, and he only changed them when the majority changed them—or, more strictly speaking, he did not change them, but they imperceptibly changed of themselves within him.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen his political opinions or his views; these political opinions and views had come to him of themselves, just as he did not choose the shapes of his hat and coat, but simply took those that were being worn.
And for him, living in a certain society—owing to the need, ordinarily developed at years of discretion, for some degree of mental activity—to have views was just as indispensable as to have a hat.
If there was a reason for his preferring liberal to conservative views, which were held also by many of his circle, it arose not from his considering liberalism more rational, but from its being in closer accordance with his manner of life.
The liberal party said that in Russia everything is wrong, and certainly Stepan Arkadyevitch had many debts and was decidedly short of money.
The liberal party said that marriage is an institution quite out of date, and that it needs reconstruction; and family life certainly afforded Stepan Arkadyevitch little gratification, and forced him into lying and hypocrisy, which was so repulsive to his nature.
And with all this, Stepan Arkadyevitch, who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a plain man by saying that if he prided himself on his origin, he ought not to stop at Rurik and disown the first founder of his family—the monkey.
And so Liberalism had become a habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s, and he liked his newspaper, as he did his cigar after dinner, for the slight fog it diffused in his brain.
He read another article, too, a financial one, which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and dropped some innuendoes reflecting on the ministry.
With his characteristic quickwittedness he caught the drift of each innuendo, divined whence it came, at whom and on what ground it was aimed, and that afforded him, as it always did, a certain satisfaction.
But today that satisfaction was embittered by Matrona Philimonovna’s advice and the unsatisfactory state of the household.
He read, too, that Count Beist was rumored to have left for Wiesbaden, and that one need have no more gray hair, and of the sale of a light carriage, and of a young person seeking a situation; but these items of information did not give him, as usual, a quiet, ironical gratification.
Having finished the paper, a second cup of coffee and a roll and butter, he got up, shaking the crumbs of the roll off his waistcoat; and, squaring his broad chest, he smiled joyously: not because there was anything particularly agreeable in his mind—the joyous smile was evoked by a good digestion.
But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to him, and he grew thoughtful.
Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized the voices of Grisha, his youngest boy, and Tanya, his eldest girl) were heard outside the door.
They were carrying something, and dropped it.
“I told you not to sit passengers on the roof,” said the little girl in English; “there, pick them up!” “Everything’s in confusion,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch; “there are the children running about by themselves.” And going to the door, he called them.
They threw down the box, that represented a train, and came in to their father.
The little girl, her father’s favorite, ran up boldly, embraced him, and hung laughingly on his neck, enjoying as she always did the smell of scent that came from his whiskers.
At last the little girl kissed his face, which was flushed from his stooping posture and beaming with tenderness, loosed her hands, and was about to run away again; but her father held her back.
“How is mamma?” he asked, passing his hand over his daughter’s smooth, soft little neck.
He was conscious that he loved the boy less, and always tried to be fair; but the boy felt it, and did not respond with a smile to his father’s chilly smile.
She is up,” answered the girl.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed.
“Well, is she cheerful?” The little girl knew that there was a quarrel between her father and mother, and that her mother could not be cheerful, and that her father must be aware of this, and that he was pretending when he asked about it so lightly.
He at once perceived it, and blushed too.
“She did not say we must do our lessons, but she said we were to go for a walk with Miss Hoole to grandmamma’s.” “Well, go, Tanya, my darling.
Oh, wait a minute, though,” he said, still holding her and stroking her soft little hand.
He took off the mantelpiece, where he had put it yesterday, a little box of sweets, and gave her two, picking out her favorites, a chocolate and a fondant.
“For Grisha?” said the little girl, pointing to the chocolate.
“Yes, yes.” And still stroking her little shoulder, he kissed her on the roots of her hair and neck, and let her go.
“The carriage is ready,” said Matvey; “but there’s someone to see you with a petition.” “Been here long?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Half an hour.” “How many times have I told you to tell me at once?” “One must let you drink your coffee in peace, at least,” said Matvey, in the affectionately gruff tone with which it was impossible to be angry.
“Well, show the person up at once,” said Oblonsky, frowning with vexation.
Having got rid of the staff captain’s widow, Stepan Arkadyevitch took his hat and stopped to recollect whether he had forgotten anything.
It appeared that he had forgotten nothing except what he wanted to forget—his wife.
“Ah, yes!” He bowed his head, and his handsome face assumed a harassed expression.
“To go, or not to go!” he said to himself; and an inner voice told him he must not go, that nothing could come of it but falsity; that to amend, to set right their relations was impossible, because it was impossible to make her attractive again and able to inspire love, or to make him an old man, not susceptible to love.
He squared his chest, took out a cigarette, took two whiffs at it, flung it into a mother-of-pearl ashtray, and with rapid steps walked through the drawing-room, and opened the other door into his wife’s bedroom.
Hearing her husband’s steps, she stopped, looking towards the door, and trying assiduously to give her features a severe and contemptuous expression.
She felt she was afraid of him, and afraid of the coming interview.
She still continued to tell herself that she should leave him, but she was conscious that this was impossible; it was impossible because she could not get out of the habit of regarding him as her husband and loving him.
Besides this, she realized that if even here in her own house she could hardly manage to look after her five children properly, they would be still worse off where she was going with them all.
As it was, even in the course of these three days, the youngest was unwell from being given unwholesome soup, and the others had almost gone without their dinner the day before.
She was conscious that it was impossible to go away; but, cheating herself, she went on all the same sorting out her things and pretending she was going.
Seeing her husband, she dropped her hands into the drawer of the bureau as though looking for something, and only looked round at him when he had come quite up to her.
But her face, to which she tried to give a severe and resolute expression, betrayed bewilderment and suffering.
He bent his head towards his shoulder and tried to look pitiful and humble, but for all that he was radiant with freshness and health.
In a rapid glance she scanned his figure that beamed with health and freshness.
And that disgusting good nature, which everyone likes him for and praises—I hate that good nature of his,” she thought.
Her mouth stiffened, the muscles of the cheek contracted on the right side of her pale, nervous face.
“What do you want?” she said in a rapid, deep, unnatural voice.
“Dolly!” he repeated, with a quiver in his voice.
“But you must, really, Dolly....” “Go away, go away, go away!” she shrieked, not looking at him, as though this shriek were called up by physical pain.
Remember, cannot nine years of my life atone for an instant....” She dropped her eyes and listened, expecting what he would say, as it were beseeching him in some way or other to make her believe differently.
“—instant of passion?” he said, and would have gone on, but at that word, as at a pang of physical pain, her lips stiffened again, and again the muscles of her right cheek worked.
“Go away, go out of the room!” she shrieked still more shrilly, “and don’t talk to me of your passion and your loathsomeness.” She tried to go out, but tottered, and clung to the back of a chair to support herself.
His face relaxed, his lips swelled, his eyes were swimming with tears.
“Dolly!” he said, sobbing now; “for mercy’s sake, think of the children; they are not to blame!
Anything I can do, I am ready to do anything!
He listened to her hard, heavy breathing, and he was unutterably sorry for her.
“You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them; but I remember them, and know that this means their ruin,” she said—obviously one of the phrases she had more than once repeated to herself in the course of the last few days.
She had called him “Stiva,” and he glanced at her with gratitude, and moved to take her hand, but she drew back from him with aversion.
“I think of the children, and for that reason I would do anything in the world to save them, but I don’t myself know how to save them.
Tell me, after what ... has happened, can we live together?
Tell me, eh, is it possible?” she repeated, raising her voice, “after my husband, the father of my children, enters into a love affair with his own children’s governess?” “But what could I do? what could I do?” he kept saying in a pitiful voice, not knowing what he was saying, as his head sank lower and lower.
“You are loathsome to me, repulsive!” she shrieked, getting more and more heated.
You have never loved me; you have neither heart nor honorable feeling!
You are hateful to me, disgusting, a stranger—yes, a complete stranger!” With pain and wrath she uttered the word so terrible to herself—_stranger_.
He looked at her, and the fury expressed in her face alarmed and amazed him.
He did not understand how his pity for her exasperated her.
She saw in him sympathy for her, but not love.
At that moment in the next room a child began to cry; probably it had fallen down.
Darya Alexandrovna listened, and her face suddenly softened.
She seemed to be pulling herself together for a few seconds, as though she did not know where she was, and what she was doing, and getting up rapidly, she moved towards the door.
“Well, she loves my child,” he thought, noticing the change of her face at the child’s cry, “my child: how can she hate me?” “Dolly, one word more,” he said, following her.
“If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the children!
They may all know you are a scoundrel!
I am going away at once, and you may live here with your mistress!” And she went out, slamming the door.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped his face, and with a subdued tread walked out of the room.
Ah, oh, how horrible it is!
And how vulgarly she shouted,” he said to himself, remembering her shriek and the words—“scoundrel” and “mistress.” “And very likely the maids were listening!
Horribly vulgar! horrible!” Stepan Arkadyevitch stood a few seconds alone, wiped his face, squared his chest, and walked out of the room.
It was Friday, and in the dining-room the German watchmaker was winding up the clock.
Stepan Arkadyevitch remembered his joke about this punctual, bald watchmaker, “that the German was wound up for a whole lifetime himself, to wind up watches,” and he smiled.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was fond of a joke: “And maybe she will come round!
That’s a good expression, ‘_come round,_’” he thought.
“Arrange everything with Darya in the sitting room for Anna Arkadyevna,” he said to Matvey when he came in.
“Yes, sir.” Stepan Arkadyevitch put on his fur coat and went out onto the steps.
But here’s for the housekeeping,” he said, taking ten roubles from his pocketbook.
“That’ll be enough.” “Enough or not enough, we must make it do,” said Matvey, slamming the carriage door and stepping back onto the steps.
Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having pacified the child, and knowing from the sound of the carriage that he had gone off, went back again to her bedroom.
It was her solitary refuge from the household cares which crowded upon her directly she went out from it.
Even now, in the short time she had been in the nursery, the English governess and Matrona Philimonovna had succeeded in putting several questions to her, which did not admit of delay, and which only she could answer: “What were the children to put on for their walk?
Should not a new cook be sent for?” “Ah, let me alone, let me alone!” she said, and going back to her bedroom she sat down in the same place as she had sat when talking to her husband, clasping tightly her thin hands with the rings that slipped down on her bony fingers, and fell to going over in her memory all the conversation.
No, no, reconciliation is impossible.
Even if we remain in the same house, we are strangers—strangers forever!” She repeated again with special significance the word so dreadful to her.
The most horrible thing is,” she began, but did not finish her thought, because Matrona Philimonovna put her head in at the door.
“Let us send for my brother,” she said; “he can get a dinner anyway, or we shall have the children getting nothing to eat till six again, like yesterday.” “Very well, I will come directly and see about it.
But did you send for some new milk?” And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the day, and drowned her grief in them for a time.
Chapter 5 Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school, thanks to his excellent abilities, but he had been idle and mischievous, and therefore was one of the lowest in his class.
But in spite of his habitually dissipated mode of life, his inferior grade in the service, and his comparative youth, he occupied the honorable and lucrative position of president of one of the government boards at Moscow.
This post he had received through his sister Anna’s husband, Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin, who held one of the most important positions in the ministry to whose department the Moscow office belonged.
But if Karenin had not got his brother-in-law this berth, then through a hundred other personages—brothers, sisters, cousins, uncles, and aunts—Stiva Oblonsky would have received this post, or some other similar one, together with the salary of six thousand absolutely needful for him, as his affairs, in spite of his wife’s considerable property, were in an embarrassed condition.
Half Moscow and Petersburg were friends and relations of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
He was born in the midst of those who had been and are the powerful ones of this world.
One-third of the men in the government, the older men, had been friends of his father’s, and had known him in petticoats; another third were his intimate chums, and the remainder were friendly acquaintances.
Consequently the distributors of earthly blessings in the shape of places, rents, shares, and such, were all his friends, and could not overlook one of their own set; and Oblonsky had no need to make any special exertion to get a lucrative post.
He had only not to refuse things, not to show jealousy, not to be quarrelsome or take offense, all of which from his characteristic good nature he never did.
It would have struck him as absurd if he had been told that he would not get a position with the salary he required, especially as he expected nothing out of the way; he only wanted what the men of his own age and standing did get, and he was no worse qualified for performing duties of the kind than any other man.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely liked by all who knew him for his good humor, but for his bright disposition, and his unquestionable honesty.
In him, in his handsome, radiant figure, his sparkling eyes, black hair and eyebrows, and the white and red of his face, there was something which produced a physical effect of kindliness and good humor on the people who met him.
Even though it happened at times that after a conversation with him it seemed that nothing particularly delightful had happened, the next day, and the next, everyone was just as delighted at meeting him again.
After filling for three years the post of president of one of the government boards at Moscow, Stepan Arkadyevitch had won the respect, as well as the liking, of his fellow-officials, subordinates, and superiors, and all who had had business with him.
On reaching the offices of the board, Stepan Arkadyevitch, escorted by a deferential porter with a portfolio, went into his little private room, put on his uniform, and went into the boardroom.
The clerks and copyists all rose, greeting him with good-humored deference.
Stepan Arkadyevitch moved quickly, as ever, to his place, shook hands with his colleagues, and sat down.
He made a joke or two, and talked just as much as was consistent with due decorum, and began work.
No one knew better than Stepan Arkadyevitch how to hit on the exact line between freedom, simplicity, and official stiffness necessary for the agreeable conduct of business.
A secretary, with the good-humored deference common to everyone in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s office, came up with papers, and began to speak in the familiar and easy tone which had been introduced by Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“We have succeeded in getting the information from the government department of Penza.
Here, would you care?...” “You’ve got them at last?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laying his finger on the paper.
“Now, gentlemen....” And the sitting of the board began.
“If they knew,” he thought, bending his head with a significant air as he listened to the report, “what a guilty little boy their president was half an hour ago.” And his eyes were laughing during the reading of the report.
Till two o’clock the sitting would go on without a break, and at two o’clock there would be an interval and luncheon.
It was not yet two, when the large glass doors of the boardroom suddenly opened and someone came in.
All the officials sitting on the further side under the portrait of the Tsar and the eagle, delighted at any distraction, looked round at the door; but the doorkeeper standing at the door at once drove out the intruder, and closed the glass door after him.
When the case had been read through, Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and stretched, and by way of tribute to the liberalism of the times took out a cigarette in the boardroom and went into his private room.
Two of the members of the board, the old veteran in the service, Nikitin, and the _Kammerjunker_ Grinevitch, went in with him.
“We shall have time to finish after lunch,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“A pretty sharp fellow this Fomin must be,” said Grinevitch of one of the persons taking part in the case they were examining.
Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned at Grinevitch’s words, giving him thereby to understand that it was improper to pass judgment prematurely, and made him no reply.
“Who was that came in?” he asked the doorkeeper.
“Someone, your excellency, crept in without permission directly my back was turned.
That is he,” said the doorkeeper, pointing to a strongly built, broad-shouldered man with a curly beard, who, without taking off his sheepskin cap, was running lightly and rapidly up the worn steps of the stone staircase.
One of the members going down—a lean official with a portfolio—stood out of his way and looked disapprovingly at the legs of the stranger, then glanced inquiringly at Oblonsky.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was standing at the top of the stairs.
His good-naturedly beaming face above the embroidered collar of his uniform beamed more than ever when he recognized the man coming up.
“Why, it’s actually you, Levin, at last!” he said with a friendly mocking smile, scanning Levin as he approached.
“How is it you have deigned to look me up in this den?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and not content with shaking hands, he kissed his friend.
“Have you been here long?” “I have just come, and very much wanted to see you,” said Levin, looking shyly and at the same time angrily and uneasily around.
“Well, let’s go into my room,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who knew his friend’s sensitive and irritable shyness, and, taking his arm, he drew him along, as though guiding him through dangers.
He was the familiar friend of everyone with whom he took a glass of champagne, and he took a glass of champagne with everyone, and when in consequence he met any of his disreputable chums, as he used in joke to call many of his friends, in the presence of his subordinates, he well knew how, with his characteristic tact, to diminish the disagreeable impression made on them.
Levin was not a disreputable chum, but Oblonsky, with his ready tact, felt that Levin fancied he might not care to show his intimacy with him before his subordinates, and so he made haste to take him off into his room.
Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their intimacy did not rest merely on champagne.
Levin had been the friend and companion of his early youth.
They were fond of one another in spite of the difference of their characters and tastes, as friends are fond of one another who have been together in early youth.
But in spite of this, each of them—as is often the way with men who have selected careers of different kinds—though in discussion he would even justify the other’s career, in his heart despised it.
It seemed to each of them that the life he led himself was the only real life, and the life led by his friend was a mere phantasm.
Oblonsky could not restrain a slight mocking smile at the sight of Levin.
How often he had seen him come up to Moscow from the country where he was doing something, but what precisely Stepan Arkadyevitch could never quite make out, and indeed he took no interest in the matter.
Levin arrived in Moscow always excited and in a hurry, rather ill at ease and irritated by his own want of ease, and for the most part with a perfectly new, unexpected view of things.
Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed at this, and liked it.
In the same way Levin in his heart despised the town mode of life of his friend, and his official duties, which he laughed at, and regarded as trifling.
But the difference was that Oblonsky, as he was doing the same as everyone did, laughed complacently and good-humoredly, while Levin laughed without complacency and sometimes angrily.
“We have long been expecting you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going into his room and letting Levin’s hand go as though to show that here all danger was over.
When did you come?” Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of Oblonsky’s two companions, and especially at the hand of the elegant Grinevitch, which had such long white fingers, such long yellow filbert-shaped nails, and such huge shining studs on the shirt-cuff, that apparently they absorbed all his attention, and allowed him no freedom of thought.
Oblonsky noticed this at once, and smiled.
“Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you,” he said.
“My colleagues: Philip Ivanitch Nikitin, Mihail Stanislavitch Grinevitch”—and turning to Levin—“a district councilor, a modern district councilman, a gymnast who lifts thirteen stone with one hand, a cattle-breeder and sportsman, and my friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, the brother of Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev.” “Delighted,” said the veteran.
“I have the honor of knowing your brother, Sergey Ivanovitch,” said Grinevitch, holding out his slender hand with its long nails.
Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned to Oblonsky.
Though he had a great respect for his half-brother, an author well known to all Russia, he could not endure it when people treated him not as Konstantin Levin, but as the brother of the celebrated Koznishev.
“No, I am no longer a district councilor.
I have quarreled with them all, and don’t go to the meetings any more,” he said, turning to Oblonsky.
“You’ve been quick about it!” said Oblonsky with a smile.
“Well, to put it shortly, I was convinced that nothing was really done by the district councils, or ever could be,” he began, as though someone had just insulted him.
“On one side it’s a plaything; they play at being a parliament, and I’m neither young enough nor old enough to find amusement in playthings; and on the other side” (he stammered) “it’s a means for the coterie of the district to make money.
Formerly they had wardships, courts of justice, now they have the district council—not in the form of bribes, but in the form of unearned salary,” he said, as hotly as though someone of those present had opposed his opinion.
You’re in a new phase again, I see—a conservative,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
But I wanted to see you,” said Levin, looking with hatred at Grinevitch’s hand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch gave a scarcely perceptible smile.
“How was it you used to say you would never wear European dress again?” he said, scanning his new suit, obviously cut by a French tailor.
I see: a new phase.” Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown men blush, slightly, without being themselves aware of it, but as boys blush, feeling that they are ridiculous through their shyness, and consequently ashamed of it and blushing still more, almost to the point of tears.
And it was so strange to see this sensible, manly face in such a childish plight, that Oblonsky left off looking at him.
Oblonsky seemed to ponder.
I am free till three.” “No,” answered Levin, after an instant’s thought, “I have got to go on somewhere else.” “All right, then, let’s dine together.” “Dine together?
But I have nothing very particular, only a few words to say, and a question I want to ask you, and we can have a talk afterwards.” “Well, say the few words, then, at once, and we’ll gossip after dinner.” “Well, it’s this,” said Levin; “but it’s of no importance, though.” His face all at once took an expression of anger from the effort he was making to surmount his shyness.
“What are the Shtcherbatskys doing?
Everything as it used to be?” he said.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with his sister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and his eyes sparkled merrily.
Excuse me a minute....” A secretary came in, with respectful familiarity and the modest consciousness, characteristic of every secretary, of superiority to his chief in the knowledge of their business; he went up to Oblonsky with some papers, and began, under pretense of asking a question, to explain some objection.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, without hearing him out, laid his hand genially on the secretary’s sleeve.
“No, you do as I told you,” he said, softening his words with a smile, and with a brief explanation of his view of the matter he turned away from the papers, and said: “So do it that way, if you please, Zahar Nikititch.” The secretary retired in confusion.
During the consultation with the secretary Levin had completely recovered from his embarrassment.
He was standing with his elbows on the back of a chair, and on his face was a look of ironical attention.
“I don’t understand it, I don’t understand it,” he said.
“What don’t you understand?” said Oblonsky, smiling as brightly as ever, and picking up a cigarette.
He expected some queer outburst from Levin.
“I don’t understand what you are doing,” said Levin, shrugging his shoulders.
“How can you do it seriously?” “Why not?” “Why, because there’s nothing in it.” “You think so, but we’re overwhelmed with work.” “On paper.
“That’s to say, you think there’s a lack of something in me?” “Perhaps so,” said Levin.
“But all the same I admire your grandeur, and am proud that I’ve a friend in such a great person.
You’ve not answered my question, though,” he went on, with a desperate effort looking Oblonsky straight in the face.
You wait a bit, and you’ll come to this yourself.
It’s very nice for you to have over six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district, and such muscles, and the freshness of a girl of twelve; still you’ll be one of us one day.
Yes, as to your question, there is no change, but it’s a pity you’ve been away so long.” “Oh, why so?” Levin queried, panic-stricken.
“Oh, nothing,” responded Oblonsky.
But what’s brought you up to town?” “Oh, we’ll talk about that, too, later on,” said Levin, reddening again up to his ears.
I see,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
But I tell you what; if you want to see them, they’re sure now to be at the Zoological Gardens from four to five.
You drive along there, and I’ll come and fetch you, and we’ll go and dine somewhere together.” “Capital.
So good-bye till then.” “Now mind, you’ll forget, I know you, or rush off home to the country!” Stepan Arkadyevitch called out laughing.
“No, truly!” And Levin went out of the room, only when he was in the doorway remembering that he had forgotten to take leave of Oblonsky’s colleagues.
“That gentleman must be a man of great energy,” said Grinevitch, when Levin had gone away.
“Yes, my dear boy,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, nodding his head, “he’s a lucky fellow!
Over six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district; everything before him; and what youth and vigor!
Not like some of us.” “You have a great deal to complain of, haven’t you, Stepan Arkadyevitch?” “Ah, yes, I’m in a poor way, a bad way,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a heavy sigh.
Chapter 6 When Oblonsky asked Levin what had brought him to town, Levin blushed, and was furious with himself for blushing, because he could not answer, “I have come to make your sister-in-law an offer,” though that was precisely what he had come for.
The families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble Moscow families, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms.
This intimacy had grown still closer during Levin’s student days.
He had both prepared for the university with the young Prince Shtcherbatsky, the brother of Kitty and Dolly, and had entered at the same time with him.
In those days Levin used often to be in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and he was in love with the Shtcherbatsky household.
Strange as it may appear, it was with the household, the family, that Konstantin Levin was in love, especially with the feminine half of the household.
Levin did not remember his own mother, and his only sister was older than he was, so that it was in the Shtcherbatskys’ house that he saw for the first time that inner life of an old, noble, cultivated, and honorable family of which he had been deprived by the death of his father and mother.
All the members of that family, especially the feminine half, were pictured by him, as it were, wrapped about with a mysterious poetical veil, and he not only perceived no defects whatever in them, but under the poetical veil that shrouded them he assumed the existence of the loftiest sentiments and every possible perfection.
In his student days he had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly, but she was soon married to Oblonsky.
But Natalia, too, had hardly made her appearance in the world when she married the diplomat Lvov.
Kitty was still a child when Levin left the university.
Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy, was drowned in the Baltic, and Levin’s relations with the Shtcherbatskys, in spite of his friendship with Oblonsky, became less intimate.
But when early in the winter of this year Levin came to Moscow, after a year in the country, and saw the Shtcherbatskys, he realized which of the three sisters he was indeed destined to love.
One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for him, a man of good family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to make the young Princess Shtcherbatskaya an offer of marriage; in all likelihood he would at once have been looked upon as a good match.
But Levin was in love, and so it seemed to him that Kitty was so perfect in every respect that she was a creature far above everything earthly; and that he was a creature so low and so earthly that it could not even be conceived that other people and she herself could regard him as worthy of her.
After spending two months in Moscow in a state of enchantment, seeing Kitty almost every day in society, into which he went so as to meet her, he abruptly decided that it could not be, and went back to the country.
Levin’s conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that in the eyes of her family he was a disadvantageous and worthless match for the charming Kitty, and that Kitty herself could not love him.
In her family’s eyes he had no ordinary, definite career and position in society, while his contemporaries by this time, when he was thirty-two, were already, one a colonel, and another a professor, another director of a bank and railways, or president of a board like Oblonsky.
But he (he knew very well how he must appear to others) was a country gentleman, occupied in breeding cattle, shooting game, and building barns; in other words, a fellow of no ability, who had not turned out well, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas of the world, is done by people fit for nothing else.
The mysterious, enchanting Kitty herself could not love such an ugly person as he conceived himself to be, and, above all, such an ordinary, in no way striking person.
Moreover, his attitude to Kitty in the past—the attitude of a grown-up person to a child, arising from his friendship with her brother—seemed to him yet another obstacle to love.
An ugly, good-natured man, as he considered himself, might, he supposed, be liked as a friend; but to be loved with such a love as that with which he loved Kitty, one would need to be a handsome and, still more, a distinguished man.
He had heard that women often did care for ugly and ordinary men, but he did not believe it, for he judged by himself, and he could not himself have loved any but beautiful, mysterious, and exceptional women.
And he had now come to Moscow with a firm determination to make an offer, and get married if he were accepted.
Or ... he could not conceive what would become of him if he were rejected.
Chapter 7 On arriving in Moscow by a morning train, Levin had put up at the house of his elder half-brother, Koznishev.
After changing his clothes he went down to his brother’s study, intending to talk to him at once about the object of his visit, and to ask his advice; but his brother was not alone.
With him there was a well-known professor of philosophy, who had come from Harkov expressly to clear up a difference that had arisen between them on a very important philosophical question.
The professor was carrying on a hot crusade against materialists.
Sergey Koznishev had been following this crusade with interest, and after reading the professor’s last article, he had written him a letter stating his objections.
He accused the professor of making too great concessions to the materialists.
And the professor had promptly appeared to argue the matter out.
The point in discussion was the question then in vogue: Is there a line to be drawn between psychological and physiological phenomena in man? and if so, where?
Sergey Ivanovitch met his brother with the smile of chilly friendliness he always had for everyone, and introducing him to the professor, went on with the conversation.
A little man in spectacles, with a narrow forehead, tore himself from the discussion for an instant to greet Levin, and then went on talking without paying any further attention to him.
Levin sat down to wait till the professor should go, but he soon began to get interested in the subject under discussion.
Levin had come across the magazine articles about which they were disputing, and had read them, interested in them as a development of the first principles of science, familiar to him as a natural science student at the university.
But he had never connected these scientific deductions as to the origin of man as an animal, as to reflex action, biology, and sociology, with those questions as to the meaning of life and death to himself, which had of late been more and more often in his mind.
“I cannot admit it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, with his habitual clearness, precision of expression, and elegance of phrase.
“I cannot in any case agree with Keiss that my whole conception of the external world has been derived from perceptions.
The most fundamental idea, the idea of existence, has not been received by me through sensation; indeed, there is no special sense-organ for the transmission of such an idea.” “Yes, but they—Wurt, and Knaust, and Pripasov—would answer that your consciousness of existence is derived from the conjunction of all your sensations, that that consciousness of existence is the result of your sensations.
Wurt, indeed, says plainly that, assuming there are no sensations, it follows that there is no idea of existence.” “I maintain the contrary,” began Sergey Ivanovitch.
But here it seemed to Levin that just as they were close upon the real point of the matter, they were again retreating, and he made up his mind to put a question to the professor.
“According to that, if my senses are annihilated, if my body is dead, I can have no existence of any sort?” he queried.
The professor, in annoyance, and, as it were, mental suffering at the interruption, looked round at the strange inquirer, more like a bargeman than a philosopher, and turned his eyes upon Sergey Ivanovitch, as though to ask: What’s one to say to him?
“No,” he said; “I would point out the fact that if, as Pripasov directly asserts, perception is based on sensation, then we are bound to distinguish sharply between these two conceptions.” Levin listened no more, and simply waited for the professor to go.
Chapter 8 When the professor had gone, Sergey Ivanovitch turned to his brother.
“Delighted that you’ve come.
How’s your farming getting on?” Levin knew that his elder brother took little interest in farming, and only put the question in deference to him, and so he only told him about the sale of his wheat and money matters.
Levin had meant to tell his brother of his determination to get married, and to ask his advice; he had indeed firmly resolved to do so.
But after seeing his brother, listening to his conversation with the professor, hearing afterwards the unconsciously patronizing tone in which his brother questioned him about agricultural matters (their mother’s property had not been divided, and Levin took charge of both their shares), Levin felt that he could not for some reason begin to talk to him of his intention of marrying.
“Well, how is your district council doing?” asked Sergey Ivanovitch, who was greatly interested in these local boards and attached great importance to them.
Why, surely you’re a member of the board?” “No, I’m not a member now; I’ve resigned,” answered Levin, “and I no longer attend the meetings.” “What a pity!” commented Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning.
Levin in self-defense began to describe what took place in the meetings in his district.
“That’s how it always is!” Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.
“We Russians are always like that.
Perhaps it’s our strong point, really, the faculty of seeing our own shortcomings; but we overdo it, we comfort ourselves with irony which we always have on the tip of our tongues.
All I say is, give such rights as our local self-government to any other European people—why, the Germans or the English would have worked their way to freedom from them, while we simply turn them into ridicule.” “But how can it be helped?” said Levin penitently.
I’m no good at it.” “It’s not that you’re no good at it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch; “it is that you don’t look at it as you should.” “Perhaps not,” Levin answered dejectedly.
“Oh! do you know brother Nikolay’s turned up again?” This brother Nikolay was the elder brother of Konstantin Levin, and half-brother of Sergey Ivanovitch; a man utterly ruined, who had dissipated the greater part of his fortune, was living in the strangest and lowest company, and had quarreled with his brothers.
Do you know?” Levin got up from his chair, as though on the point of starting off at once.
“I am sorry I told you,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head at his younger brother’s excitement.
This is the answer he sent me.” And Sergey Ivanovitch took a note from under a paper-weight and handed it to his brother.
Levin read in the queer, familiar handwriting: “I humbly beg you to leave me in peace.
That’s the only favor I ask of my gracious brothers.—Nikolay Levin.” Levin read it, and without raising his head stood with the note in his hands opposite Sergey Ivanovitch.
There was a struggle in his heart between the desire to forget his unhappy brother for the time, and the consciousness that it would be base to do so.
“He obviously wants to offend me,” pursued Sergey Ivanovitch; “but he cannot offend me, and I should have wished with all my heart to assist him, but I know it’s impossible to do that.” “Yes, yes,” repeated Levin.
“I understand and appreciate your attitude to him; but I shall go and see him.” “If you want to, do; but I shouldn’t advise it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
You can’t do him any good; still, do as you please.” “Very likely I can’t do any good, but I feel—especially at such a moment—but that’s another thing—I feel I could not be at peace.” “Well, that I don’t understand,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“One thing I do understand,” he added; “it’s a lesson in humility.
I have come to look very differently and more charitably on what is called infamous since brother Nikolay has become what he is ... you know what he did....” “Oh, it’s awful, awful!” repeated Levin.
After obtaining his brother’s address from Sergey Ivanovitch’s footman, Levin was on the point of setting off at once to see him, but on second thought he decided to put off his visit till the evening.
The first thing to do to set his heart at rest was to accomplish what he had come to Moscow for.
From his brother’s Levin went to Oblonsky’s office, and on getting news of the Shtcherbatskys from him, he drove to the place where he had been told he might find Kitty.
Chapter 9 At four o’clock, conscious of his throbbing heart, Levin stepped out of a hired sledge at the Zoological Gardens, and turned along the path to the frozen mounds and the skating ground, knowing that he would certainly find her there, as he had seen the Shtcherbatskys’ carriage at the entrance.
Rows of carriages, sledges, drivers, and policemen were standing in the approach.
Crowds of well-dressed people, with hats bright in the sun, swarmed about the entrance and along the well-swept little paths between the little houses adorned with carving in the Russian style.
The old curly birches of the gardens, all their twigs laden with snow, looked as though freshly decked in sacred vestments.
Be quiet, stupid,” he conjured his heart.
And the more he tried to compose himself, the more breathless he found himself.
An acquaintance met him and called him by his name, but Levin did not even recognize him.
She was standing talking to a lady at the opposite end of the ground.
There was apparently nothing striking either in her dress or her attitude.
Everything was made bright by her.
“Is it possible I can go over there on the ice, go up to her?” he thought.
The place where she stood seemed to him a holy shrine, unapproachable, and there was one moment when he was almost retreating, so overwhelmed was he with terror.
He walked down, for a long while avoiding looking at her as at the sun, but seeing her, as one does the sun, without looking.
On that day of the week and at that time of day people of one set, all acquainted with one another, used to meet on the ice.
There were crack skaters there, showing off their skill, and learners clinging to chairs with timid, awkward movements, boys, and elderly people skating with hygienic motives.
They seemed to Levin an elect band of blissful beings because they were here, near her.
All the skaters, it seemed, with perfect self-possession, skated towards her, skated by her, even spoke to her, and were happy, quite apart from her, enjoying the capital ice and the fine weather.
Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in a short jacket and tight trousers, was sitting on a garden seat with his skates on.
First-rate ice—do put your skates on.” “I haven’t got my skates,” Levin answered, marveling at this boldness and ease in her presence, and not for one second losing sight of her, though he did not look at her.
She was in a corner, and turning out her slender feet in their high boots with obvious timidity, she skated towards him.
A boy in Russian dress, desperately waving his arms and bowed down to the ground, overtook her.
She skated a little uncertainly; taking her hands out of the little muff that hung on a cord, she held them ready for emergency, and looking towards Levin, whom she had recognized, she smiled at him, and at her own fears.
When she had got round the turn, she gave herself a push off with one foot, and skated straight up to Shtcherbatsky.
Clutching at his arm, she nodded smiling to Levin.
She was more splendid than he had imagined her.
When he thought of her, he could call up a vivid picture of her to himself, especially the charm of that little fair head, so freely set on the shapely girlish shoulders, and so full of childish brightness and good humor.
The childishness of her expression, together with the delicate beauty of her figure, made up her special charm, and that he fully realized.
But what always struck him in her as something unlooked for, was the expression of her eyes, soft, serene, and truthful, and above all, her smile, which always transported Levin to an enchanted world, where he felt himself softened and tender, as he remembered himself in some days of his early childhood.
“Thank you,” she added, as he picked up the handkerchief that had fallen out of her muff.
I’ve not long ... yesterday ...
I arrived,” answered Levin, in his emotion not at once understanding her question.
“I was meaning to come and see you,” he said; and then, recollecting with what intention he was trying to see her, he was promptly overcome with confusion and blushed.
“I didn’t know you could skate, and skate so well.” She looked at him earnestly, as though wishing to make out the cause of his confusion.
The tradition is kept up here that you are the best of skaters,” she said, with her little black-gloved hand brushing a grain of hoarfrost off her muff.
“Yes, I used once to skate with passion; I wanted to reach perfection.” “You do everything with passion, I think,” she said smiling.
Put on skates, and let us skate together.” “Skate together!
Can that be possible?” thought Levin, gazing at her.
“I’ll put them on directly,” he said.
“It’s a long while since we’ve seen you here, sir,” said the attendant, supporting his foot, and screwing on the heel of the skate.
“Except you, there’s none of the gentlemen first-rate skaters.
Will that be all right?” said he, tightening the strap.
“Oh, yes, yes; make haste, please,” answered Levin, with difficulty restraining the smile of rapture which would overspread his face.
“Yes,” he thought, “this now is life, this is happiness! _Together,_ she said; _let us skate together!_ Speak to her now?
Away with weakness!” Levin rose to his feet, took off his overcoat, and scurrying over the rough ice round the hut, came out on the smooth ice and skated without effort, as it were, by simple exercise of will, increasing and slackening speed and turning his course.
He approached with timidity, but again her smile reassured him.
“With you I should soon learn; I somehow feel confidence in you,” she said to him.
“And I have confidence in myself when you are leaning on me,” he said, but was at once panic-stricken at what he had said, and blushed.
And indeed, no sooner had he uttered these words, when all at once, like the sun going behind a cloud, her face lost all its friendliness, and Levin detected the familiar change in her expression that denoted the working of thought; a crease showed on her smooth brow.
“Is there anything troubling you?—though I’ve no right to ask such a question,” he added hurriedly.
No, I have nothing to trouble me,” she responded coldly; and she added immediately: “You haven’t seen Mlle.
I have offended her.
Lord help me!” thought Levin, and he flew towards the old Frenchwoman with the gray ringlets, who was sitting on a bench.
“Yes, you see we’re growing up,” she said to him, glancing towards Kitty, “and growing old. _Tiny bear_ has grown big now!” pursued the Frenchwoman, laughing, and she reminded him of his joke about the three young ladies whom he had compared to the three bears in the English nursery tale.
“Do you remember that’s what you used to call them?” He remembered absolutely nothing, but she had been laughing at the joke for ten years now, and was fond of it.
Our Kitty has learned to skate nicely, hasn’t she?” When Levin darted up to Kitty her face was no longer stern; her eyes looked at him with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levin fancied that in her friendliness there was a certain note of deliberate composure.
And he felt depressed.
After talking a little of her old governess and her peculiarities, she questioned him about his life.
“No, I’m not dull, I am very busy,” he said, feeling that she was holding him in check by her composed tone, which he would not have the force to break through, just as it had been at the beginning of the winter.
“Are you going to stay in town long?” Kitty questioned him.
“I don’t know,” he answered, not thinking of what he was saying.
The thought that if he were held in check by her tone of quiet friendliness he would end by going back again without deciding anything came into his mind, and he resolved to make a struggle against it.
It depends upon you,” he said, and was immediately horror-stricken at his own words.
Whether it was that she had heard his words, or that she did not want to hear them, she made a sort of stumble, twice struck out, and hurriedly skated away from him.
Linon, said something to her, and went towards the pavilion where the ladies took off their skates.
Merciful God! help me, guide me,” said Levin, praying inwardly, and at the same time, feeling a need of violent exercise, he skated about describing inner and outer circles.
At that moment one of the young men, the best of the skaters of the day, came out of the coffee-house in his skates, with a cigarette in his mouth.
Taking a run, he dashed down the steps in his skates, crashing and bounding up and down.
He flew down, and without even changing the position of his hands, skated away over the ice.
“Ah, that’s a new trick!” said Levin, and he promptly ran up to the top to do this new trick.
“Don’t break your neck! it needs practice!” Nikolay Shtcherbatsky shouted after him.
Levin went to the steps, took a run from above as best he could, and dashed down, preserving his balance in this unwonted movement with his hands.
On the last step he stumbled, but barely touching the ice with his hand, with a violent effort recovered himself, and skated off, laughing.
“How splendid, how nice he is!” Kitty was thinking at that time, as she came out of the pavilion with Mlle.
Linon, and looked towards him with a smile of quiet affection, as though he were a favorite brother.
“And can it be my fault, can I have done anything wrong?
They talk of flirtation.
Catching sight of Kitty going away, and her mother meeting her at the steps, Levin, flushed from his rapid exercise, stood still and pondered a minute.
He took off his skates, and overtook the mother and daughter at the entrance of the gardens.
“Delighted to see you,” said Princess Shtcherbatskaya.
“On Thursdays we are home, as always.” “Today, then?” “We shall be pleased to see you,” the princess said stiffly.
This stiffness hurt Kitty, and she could not resist the desire to smooth over her mother’s coldness.
She turned her head, and with a smile said: “Good-bye till this evening.” At that moment Stepan Arkadyevitch, his hat cocked on one side, with beaming face and eyes, strode into the garden like a conquering hero.
But as he approached his mother-in-law, he responded in a mournful and crestfallen tone to her inquiries about Dolly’s health.
After a little subdued and dejected conversation with his mother-in-law, he threw out his chest again, and put his arm in Levin’s.
“I’ve been thinking about you all this time, and I’m very, very glad you’ve come,” he said, looking him in the face with a significant air.
“Yes, come along,” answered Levin in ecstasy, hearing unceasingly the sound of that voice saying, “Good-bye till this evening,” and seeing the smile with which it was said.
“To the England or the Hermitage?” “I don’t mind which.” “All right, then, the England,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, selecting that restaurant because he owed more there than at the Hermitage, and consequently considered it mean to avoid it.
That’s first-rate, for I sent my carriage home.” The friends hardly spoke all the way.
“You like turbot, don’t you?” he said to Levin as they were arriving.
“Eh?” responded Levin.
Yes, I’m _awfully_ fond of turbot.” Chapter 10 When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, he could not help noticing a certain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrained radiance, about the face and whole figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Oblonsky took off his overcoat, and with his hat over one ear walked into the dining-room, giving directions to the Tatar waiters, who were clustered about him in evening coats, bearing napkins.
Bowing to right and left to the people he met, and here as everywhere joyously greeting acquaintances, he went up to the sideboard for a preliminary appetizer of fish and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked in ribbons, lace, and ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusing that even that Frenchwoman was moved to genuine laughter.
Levin for his part refrained from taking any vodka simply because he felt such a loathing of that Frenchwoman, all made up, it seemed, of false hair, _poudre de riz,_ and _vinaigre de toilette_.
His whole soul was filled with memories of Kitty, and there was a smile of triumph and happiness shining in his eyes.
“This way, your excellency, please.
Your excellency won’t be disturbed here,” said a particularly pertinacious, white-headed old Tatar with immense hips and coat-tails gaping widely behind.
“Walk in, your excellency,” he said to Levin; by way of showing his respect to Stepan Arkadyevitch, being attentive to his guest as well.
Instantly flinging a fresh cloth over the round table under the bronze chandelier, though it already had a table cloth on it, he pushed up velvet chairs, and came to a standstill before Stepan Arkadyevitch with a napkin and a bill of fare in his hands, awaiting his commands.
“If you prefer it, your excellency, a private room will be free directly; Prince Golistin with a lady.
Fresh oysters have come in.” “Ah! oysters.” Stepan Arkadyevitch became thoughtful.
And his face expressed serious hesitation.
Mind now.” “They’re Flensburg, your excellency.
We’ve no Ostend.” “Flensburg will do, but are they fresh?” “Only arrived yesterday.” “Well, then, how if we were to begin with oysters, and so change the whole program?
I should like cabbage soup and porridge better than anything; but of course there’s nothing like that here.” “_Porridge à la Russe,_ your honor would like?” said the Tatar, bending down to Levin, like a nurse speaking to a child.
“No, joking apart, whatever you choose is sure to be good.
And don’t imagine,” he added, detecting a look of dissatisfaction on Oblonsky’s face, “that I shan’t appreciate your choice.
After all, it’s one of the pleasures of life,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Well, then, my friend, you give us two—or better say three—dozen oysters, clear soup with vegetables....” “_Printanière,_” prompted the Tatar.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch apparently did not care to allow him the satisfaction of giving the French names of the dishes.
“With vegetables in it, you know.
Champagne,” said Levin.
Do you like the white seal?” “_Cachet blanc,_” prompted the Tatar.
And _your_ cheese, your excellency?” “Oh, yes, Parmesan.
Or would you like another?” “No, it’s all the same to me,” said Levin, unable to suppress a smile.
Stepan Arkadyevitch crushed the starchy napkin, tucked it into his waistcoat, and settling his arms comfortably, started on the oysters.
“Not bad,” he said, stripping the oysters from the pearly shell with a silver fork, and swallowing them one after another.
“Not bad,” he repeated, turning his dewy, brilliant eyes from Levin to the Tatar.
But he was admiring Oblonsky.
Even the Tatar, uncorking the bottle and pouring the sparkling wine into the delicate glasses, glanced at Stepan Arkadyevitch, and settled his white cravat with a perceptible smile of satisfaction.
“You don’t care much for oysters, do you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, emptying his wine-glass, “or you’re worried about something.
With what he had in his soul, he felt sore and uncomfortable in the restaurant, in the midst of private rooms where men were dining with ladies, in all this fuss and bustle; the surroundings of bronzes, looking-glasses, gas, and waiters—all of it was offensive to him.
He was afraid of sullying what his soul was brimful of.
“You can’t conceive how queer it all seems to a country person like me, as queer as that gentleman’s nails I saw at your place....” “Yes, I saw how much interested you were in poor Grinevitch’s nails,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing.
“It’s too much for me,” responded Levin.
“Do try, now, and put yourself in my place, take the point of view of a country person.
We in the country try to bring our hands into such a state as will be most convenient for working with.
So we cut our nails; sometimes we turn up our sleeves.
And here people purposely let their nails grow as long as they will, and link on small saucers by way of studs, so that they can do nothing with their hands.” Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled gaily.
But still it’s queer to me, just as at this moment it seems queer to me that we country folks try to get our meals over as soon as we can, so as to be ready for our work, while here are we trying to drag out our meal as long as possible, and with that object eating oysters....” “Why, of course,” objected Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“But that’s just the aim of civilization—to make everything a source of enjoyment.” “Well, if that’s its aim, I’d rather be a savage.” “And so you are a savage.
He remembered his brother Nikolay, and felt ashamed and sore, and he scowled; but Oblonsky began speaking of a subject which at once drew his attention.
“Oh, I say, are you going tonight to our people, the Shtcherbatskys’, I mean?” he said, his eyes sparkling significantly as he pushed away the empty rough shells, and drew the cheese towards him.
“Yes, I shall certainly go,” replied Levin; “though I fancied the princess was not very warm in her invitation.” “What nonsense!
That’s her manner—_grande dame,_” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“I’m coming, too, but I have to go to the Countess Bonina’s rehearsal.
How do you explain the sudden way in which you vanished from Moscow?
The Shtcherbatskys were continually asking me about you, as though I ought to know.
Only, my savageness is not in having gone away, but in coming now.
Now I have come....” “Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!” broke in Stepan Arkadyevitch, looking into Levin’s eyes.
“Why?” “‘I know a gallant steed by tokens sure, And by his eyes I know a youth in love,’” declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Everything is before you.” “Why, is it over for you already?” “No; not over exactly, but the future is yours, and the present is mine, and the present—well, it’s not all that it might be.” “How so?” “Oh, things go wrong.
But I don’t want to talk of myself, and besides I can’t explain it all,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“You guess?” responded Levin, his eyes like deep wells of light fixed on Stepan Arkadyevitch.
You can see by that whether I guess right or wrong,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gazing at Levin with a subtle smile.
“Well, and what have you to say to me?” said Levin in a quivering voice, feeling that all the muscles of his face were quivering too.
“How do you look at the question?” Stepan Arkadyevitch slowly emptied his glass of Chablis, never taking his eyes off Levin.
“I?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “there’s nothing I desire so much as that—nothing!
You know what we’re speaking of?” said Levin, piercing him with his eyes.
“You think it’s possible?” “I think it’s possible.
Why not possible?” “No! do you really think it’s possible?
Indeed I feel sure....” “Why should you think that?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling at his excitement.
“It seems so to me sometimes.
Every girl’s proud of an offer.” “Yes, every girl, but not she.” Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled.
He so well knew that feeling of Levin’s, that for him all the girls in the world were divided into two classes: one class—all the girls in the world except her, and those girls with all sorts of human weaknesses, and very ordinary girls: the other class—she alone, having no weaknesses of any sort and higher than all humanity.
Levin obediently helped himself to sauce, but would not let Stepan Arkadyevitch go on with his dinner.
“You must understand that it’s a question of life and death for me.
You know we’re utterly unlike each other, different tastes and views and everything; but I know you’re fond of me and understand me, and that’s why I like you awfully.
But for God’s sake, be quite straightforward with me.” “I tell you what I think,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
“But I’ll say more: my wife is a wonderful woman....” Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, remembering his position with his wife, and, after a moment’s silence, resumed—“She has a gift of foreseeing things.
She sees right through people; but that’s not all; she knows what will come to pass, especially in the way of marriages.
She foretold, for instance, that Princess Shahovskaya would marry Brenteln.
And she’s on your side.” “How do you mean?” “It’s not only that she likes you—she says that Kitty is certain to be your wife.” At these words Levin’s face suddenly lighted up with a smile, a smile not far from tears of emotion.
“I always said she was exquisite, your wife.
“You must understand,” said he, “it’s not love.
It’s not my feeling, but a sort of force outside me has taken possession of me.
I went away, you see, because I made up my mind that it could never be, you understand, as a happiness that does not come on earth; but I’ve struggled with myself, I see there’s no living without it.
Ah, the thoughts that come crowding on one!
The questions one must ask oneself!
I’m so happy that I’ve become positively hateful; I’ve forgotten everything.
I had even forgotten him.
The world’s made so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“The one comfort is like that prayer, which I always liked: ‘Forgive me not according to my unworthiness, but according to Thy loving-kindness.’ That’s the only way she can forgive me.” Chapter 11 Levin emptied his glass, and they were silent for a while.
Do you know Vronsky?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Levin.
Why do you ask?” “Give us another bottle,” Stepan Arkadyevitch directed the Tatar, who was filling up their glasses and fidgeting round them just when he was not wanted.
“Why you ought to know Vronsky is that he’s one of your rivals.” “Who’s Vronsky?” said Levin, and his face was suddenly transformed from the look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just been admiring to an angry and unpleasant expression.
“Vronsky is one of the sons of Count Kirill Ivanovitch Vronsky, and one of the finest specimens of the gilded youth of Petersburg.
I made his acquaintance in Tver when I was there on official business, and he came there for the levy of recruits.
Fearfully rich, handsome, great connections, an aide-de-camp, and with all that a very nice, good-natured fellow.
But he’s more than simply a good-natured fellow, as I’ve found out here—he’s a cultivated man, too, and very intelligent; he’s a man who’ll make his mark.” Levin scowled and was dumb.
“Well, he turned up here soon after you’d gone, and as I can see, he’s over head and ears in love with Kitty, and you know that her mother....” “Excuse me, but I know nothing,” said Levin, frowning gloomily.
And immediately he recollected his brother Nikolay and how hateful he was to have been able to forget him.
“You wait a bit, wait a bit,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling and touching his hand.
“I’ve told you what I know, and I repeat that in this delicate and tender matter, as far as one can conjecture, I believe the chances are in your favor.” Levin dropped back in his chair; his face was pale.
“But I would advise you to settle the thing as soon as may be,” pursued Oblonsky, filling up his glass.
Come, tell me how are you getting on?” he went on, obviously anxious to change the conversation.
“One word more: in any case I advise you to settle the question soon.
Tonight I don’t advise you to speak,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Go round tomorrow morning, make an offer in due form, and God bless you....” “Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting?
Now his whole soul was full of remorse that he had begun this conversation with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
A feeling such as his was profaned by talk of the rivalry of some Petersburg officer, of the suppositions and the counsels of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled.
“But women, my boy, they’re the pivot everything turns upon.
Suppose you’re married, you love your wife, but you’re fascinated by another woman....” “Excuse me, but I’m absolutely unable to comprehend how ... just as I can’t comprehend how I could now, after my dinner, go straight to a baker’s shop and steal a roll.” Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled more than usual.
A roll will sometimes smell so good one can’t resist it.” “Himmlisch ist’s, wenn ich bezwungen Meine irdische Begier; Aber doch wenn’s nich gelungen Hatt’ ich auch recht hübsch Plaisir!” As he said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly.
“Yes, but joking apart,” resumed Stepan Arkadyevitch, “you must understand that the woman is a sweet, gentle loving creature, poor and lonely, and has sacrificed everything.
Now, when the thing’s done, don’t you see, can one possibly cast her off?
Even supposing one parts from her, so as not to break up one’s family life, still, can one help feeling for her, setting her on her feet, softening her lot?” “Well, you must excuse me there.
I’ve never seen exquisite fallen beings, and I never shall see them, but such creatures as that painted Frenchwoman at the counter with the ringlets are vermin to my mind, and all fallen women are the same.” “But the Magdalen?” “Ah, drop that!
Of all the Gospel those words are the only ones remembered.
I have a loathing for fallen women.
Most likely you’ve not made a study of spiders and don’t know their character; and so it is with me.” “It’s very well for you to talk like that; it’s very much like that gentleman in Dickens who used to fling all difficult questions over his right shoulder.
And then all at once love turns up, and you’re done for, done for,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said with weary despair.
“Yes, you’re done for,” resumed Oblonsky.
“But what’s to be done?” “Don’t steal rolls.” Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed outright.
But you must understand, there are two women; one insists only on her rights, and those rights are your love, which you can’t give her; and the other sacrifices everything for you and asks for nothing.
There’s a fearful tragedy in it.” “If you care for my profession of faith as regards that, I’ll tell you that I don’t believe there was any tragedy about it.
To my mind, love ... both the sorts of love, which you remember Plato defines in his Banquet, served as the test of men.
Some men only understand one sort, and some only the other.
And those who only know the non-platonic love have no need to talk of tragedy.
‘I’m much obliged for the gratification, my humble respects’—that’s all the tragedy.
And in platonic love there can be no tragedy, because in that love all is clear and pure, because....” At that instant Levin recollected his own sins and the inner conflict he had lived through.
And he added unexpectedly: “But perhaps you are right.
I don’t know, I don’t know.” “It’s this, don’t you see,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “you’re very much all of a piece.
You have a character that’s all of a piece, and you want the whole of life to be of a piece too—but that’s not how it is.
You despise public official work because you want the reality to be invariably corresponding all the while with the aim—and that’s not how it is.
You want a man’s work, too, always to have a defined aim, and love and family life always to be undivided—and that’s not how it is.
He was thinking of his own affairs, and did not hear Oblonsky.
And suddenly both of them felt that though they were friends, though they had been dining and drinking together, which should have drawn them closer, yet each was thinking only of his own affairs, and they had nothing to do with one another.
Oblonsky had more than once experienced this extreme sense of aloofness, instead of intimacy, coming on after dinner, and he knew what to do in such cases.
“Bill!” he called, and he went into the next room where he promptly came across an aide-de-camp of his acquaintance and dropped into conversation with him about an actress and her protector.
And at once in the conversation with the aide-de-camp Oblonsky had a sense of relaxation and relief after the conversation with Levin, which always put him to too great a mental and spiritual strain.
When the Tatar appeared with a bill for twenty-six roubles and odd kopecks, besides a tip for himself, Levin, who would another time have been horrified, like anyone from the country, at his share of fourteen roubles, did not notice it, paid, and set off homewards to dress and go to the Shtcherbatskys’ there to decide his fate.
Chapter 12 The young Princess Kitty Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen.
Her success in society had been greater than that of either of her elder sisters, and greater even than her mother had anticipated.
To say nothing of the young men who danced at the Moscow balls being almost all in love with Kitty, two serious suitors had already this first winter made their appearance: Levin, and immediately after his departure, Count Vronsky.
Levin’s appearance at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits, and evident love for Kitty, had led to the first serious conversations between Kitty’s parents as to her future, and to disputes between them.
When Levin had abruptly departed, the princess was delighted, and said to her husband triumphantly: “You see I was right.” When Vronsky appeared on the scene, she was still more delighted, confirmed in her opinion that Kitty was to make not simply a good, but a brilliant match.
In the mother’s eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky and Levin.
She disliked in Levin his strange and uncompromising opinions and his shyness in society, founded, as she supposed, on his pride and his queer sort of life, as she considered it, absorbed in cattle and peasants.
And suddenly, without doing so, he disappeared.
“It’s as well he’s not attractive enough for Kitty to have fallen in love with him,” thought the mother.
Vronsky satisfied all the mother’s desires.
Very wealthy, clever, of aristocratic family, on the highroad to a brilliant career in the army and at court, and a fascinating man.
Vronsky openly flirted with Kitty at balls, danced with her, and came continually to the house, consequently there could be no doubt of the seriousness of his intentions.
But, in spite of that, the mother had spent the whole of that winter in a state of terrible anxiety and agitation.
Princess Shtcherbatskaya had herself been married thirty years ago, her aunt arranging the match.
Her husband, about whom everything was well known beforehand, had come, looked at his future bride, and been looked at.
The matchmaking aunt had ascertained and communicated their mutual impression.
That impression had been favorable.
Afterwards, on a day fixed beforehand, the expected offer was made to her parents, and accepted.
So it seemed, at least, to the princess.
But over her own daughters she had felt how far from simple and easy is the business, apparently so commonplace, of marrying off one’s daughters.
The panics that had been lived through, the thoughts that had been brooded over, the money that had been wasted, and the disputes with her husband over marrying the two elder girls, Darya and Natalia!
Now, since the youngest had come out, she was going through the same terrors, the same doubts, and still more violent quarrels with her husband than she had over the elder girls.
The old prince, like all fathers indeed, was exceedingly punctilious on the score of the honor and reputation of his daughters.
He was irrationally jealous over his daughters, especially over Kitty, who was his favorite.
At every turn he had scenes with the princess for compromising her daughter.
The princess had grown accustomed to this already with her other daughters, but now she felt that there was more ground for the prince’s touchiness.
She saw that of late years much was changed in the manners of society, that a mother’s duties had become still more difficult.
She saw that girls of Kitty’s age formed some sort of clubs, went to some sort of lectures, mixed freely in men’s society; drove about the streets alone, many of them did not curtsey, and, what was the most important thing, all the girls were firmly convinced that to choose their husbands was their own affair, and not their parents’.
“Marriages aren’t made nowadays as they used to be,” was thought and said by all these young girls, and even by their elders.
But how marriages were made now, the princess could not learn from anyone.
The French fashion—of the parents arranging their children’s future—was not accepted; it was condemned.
The English fashion of the complete independence of girls was also not accepted, and not possible in Russian society.
The Russian fashion of matchmaking by the offices of intermediate persons was for some reason considered unseemly; it was ridiculed by everyone, and by the princess herself.
Everyone with whom the princess had chanced to discuss the matter said the same thing: “Mercy on us, it’s high time in our day to cast off all that old-fashioned business.
And, however much it was instilled into the princess that in our times young people ought to arrange their lives for themselves, she was unable to believe it, just as she would have been unable to believe that, at any time whatever, the most suitable playthings for children five years old ought to be loaded pistols.
And so the princess was more uneasy over Kitty than she had been over her elder sisters.
Now she was afraid that Vronsky might confine himself to simply flirting with her daughter.
She saw that her daughter was in love with him, but tried to comfort herself with the thought that he was an honorable man, and would not do this.
But at the same time she knew how easy it is, with the freedom of manners of today, to turn a girl’s head, and how lightly men generally regard such a crime.
The week before, Kitty had told her mother of a conversation she had with Vronsky during a mazurka.
This conversation had partly reassured the princess; but perfectly at ease she could not be.
Vronsky had told Kitty that both he and his brother were so used to obeying their mother that they never made up their minds to any important undertaking without consulting her.
“And just now, I am impatiently awaiting my mother’s arrival from Petersburg, as peculiarly fortunate,” he told her.
Kitty had repeated this without attaching any significance to the words.
But her mother saw them in a different light.
She knew that the old lady was expected from day to day, that she would be pleased at her son’s choice, and she felt it strange that he should not make his offer through fear of vexing his mother.
However, she was so anxious for the marriage itself, and still more for relief from her fears, that she believed it was so.
Bitter as it was for the princess to see the unhappiness of her eldest daughter, Dolly, on the point of leaving her husband, her anxiety over the decision of her youngest daughter’s fate engrossed all her feelings.
Today, with Levin’s reappearance, a fresh source of anxiety arose.
She was afraid that her daughter, who had at one time, as she fancied, a feeling for Levin, might, from extreme sense of honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin’s arrival might generally complicate and delay the affair so near being concluded.
“Why, has he been here long?” the princess asked about Levin, as they returned home.
“He came today, mamma.” “There’s one thing I want to say....” began the princess, and from her serious and alert face, Kitty guessed what it would be.
“Mamma,” she said, flushing hotly and turning quickly to her, “please, please don’t say anything about that.
“I only want to say that to raise hopes....” “Mamma, darling, for goodness’ sake, don’t talk about it.
It’s so horrible to talk about it.” “I won’t,” said her mother, seeing the tears in her daughter’s eyes; “but one thing, my love; you promised me you would have no secrets from me.
You won’t?” “Never, mamma, none,” answered Kitty, flushing a little, and looking her mother straight in the face, “but there’s no use in my telling you anything, and I ...
I don’t know....” “No, she could not tell an untruth with those eyes,” thought the mother, smiling at her agitation and happiness.
The princess smiled that what was taking place just now in her soul seemed to the poor child so immense and so important.
Chapter 13 After dinner, and till the beginning of the evening, Kitty was feeling a sensation akin to the sensation of a young man before a battle.
Her heart throbbed violently, and her thoughts would not rest on anything.
And she was continually picturing them to herself, at one moment each separately, and then both together.
When she mused on the past, she dwelt with pleasure, with tenderness, on the memories of her relations with Levin.
The memories of childhood and of Levin’s friendship with her dead brother gave a special poetic charm to her relations with him.
His love for her, of which she felt certain, was flattering and delightful to her; and it was pleasant for her to think of Levin.
In her memories of Vronsky there always entered a certain element of awkwardness, though he was in the highest degree well-bred and at ease, as though there were some false note—not in Vronsky, he was very simple and nice, but in herself, while with Levin she felt perfectly simple and clear.
But, on the other hand, directly she thought of the future with Vronsky, there arose before her a perspective of brilliant happiness; with Levin the future seemed misty.
When she went upstairs to dress, and looked into the looking-glass, she noticed with joy that it was one of her good days, and that she was in complete possession of all her forces,—she needed this so for what lay before her: she was conscious of external composure and free grace in her movements.
At half-past seven she had only just gone down into the drawing-room, when the footman announced, “Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin.” The princess was still in her room, and the prince had not come in.
She was horrified at her paleness, as she glanced into the looking-glass.
And only then for the first time the whole thing presented itself in a new, different aspect; only then she realized that the question did not affect her only—with whom she would be happy, and whom she loved—but that she would have that moment to wound a man whom she liked.
No, that’s impossible.
Here he is,” she said to herself, seeing his powerful, shy figure, with his shining eyes fixed on her.
She looked straight into his face, as though imploring him to spare her, and gave her hand.
“It’s not time yet; I think I’m too early,” he said glancing round the empty drawing-room.
When he saw that his expectations were realized, that there was nothing to prevent him from speaking, his face became gloomy.
“Mamma will be down directly.
Yesterday....” She talked on, not knowing what her lips were uttering, and not taking her supplicating and caressing eyes off him.
He glanced at her; she blushed, and ceased speaking.
“I told you I did not know whether I should be here long ... that it depended on you....” She dropped her head lower and lower, not knowing herself what answer she should make to what was coming.
“That it depended on you,” he repeated.
I came for this ... to be my wife!” he brought out, not knowing what he was saying; but feeling that the most terrible thing was said, he stopped short and looked at her....
She was breathing heavily, not looking at him.
Her soul was flooded with happiness.
She had never anticipated that the utterance of love would produce such a powerful effect on her.
She remembered Vronsky.
She lifted her clear, truthful eyes, and seeing his desperate face, she answered hastily: “That cannot be ... forgive me.” A moment ago, and how close she had been to him, of what importance in his life!
Chapter 14 But at that very moment the princess came in.
There was a look of horror on her face when she saw them alone, and their disturbed faces.
“Thank God, she has refused him,” thought the mother, and her face lighted up with the habitual smile with which she greeted her guests on Thursdays.
She sat down and began questioning Levin about his life in the country.
He sat down again, waiting for other visitors to arrive, in order to retreat unnoticed.
Five minutes later there came in a friend of Kitty’s, married the preceding winter, Countess Nordston.
She was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous woman, with brilliant black eyes.
She was fond of Kitty, and her affection for her showed itself, as the affection of married women for girls always does, in the desire to make a match for Kitty after her own ideal of married happiness; she wanted her to marry Vronsky.
Levin she had often met at the Shtcherbatskys’ early in the winter, and she had always disliked him.
Her invariable and favorite pursuit, when they met, consisted in making fun of him.
“I do like it when he looks down at me from the height of his grandeur, or breaks off his learned conversation with me because I’m a fool, or is condescending to me.
I like that so; to see him condescending!
She was right, for Levin actually could not bear her, and despised her for what she was proud of and regarded as a fine characteristic—her nervousness, her delicate contempt and indifference for everything coarse and earthly.
The Countess Nordston and Levin got into that relation with one another not seldom seen in society, when two persons, who remain externally on friendly terms, despise each other to such a degree that they cannot even take each other seriously, and cannot even be offended by each other.
The Countess Nordston pounced upon Levin at once.
“Ah, Konstantin Dmitrievitch!
So you’ve come back to our corrupt Babylon,” she said, giving him her tiny, yellow hand, and recalling what he had chanced to say early in the winter, that Moscow was a Babylon.
“Come, is Babylon reformed, or have you degenerated?” she added, glancing with a simper at Kitty.
“It’s very flattering for me, countess, that you remember my words so well,” responded Levin, who had succeeded in recovering his composure, and at once from habit dropped into his tone of joking hostility to the Countess Nordston.
“They must certainly make a great impression on you.” “Oh, I should think so!
Awkward as it was for Levin to withdraw now, it would still have been easier for him to perpetrate this awkwardness than to remain all the evening and see Kitty, who glanced at him now and then and avoided his eyes.
He was on the point of getting up, when the princess, noticing that he was silent, addressed him.
You’re busy with the district council, though, aren’t you, and can’t be away for long?” “No, princess, I’m no longer a member of the council,” he said.
“I have come up for a few days.” “There’s something the matter with him,” thought Countess Nordston, glancing at his stern, serious face.
“He isn’t in his old argumentative mood.
I do love making a fool of him before Kitty, and I’ll do it.” “Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” she said to him, “do explain to me, please, what’s the meaning of it.
At home in our village of Kaluga all the peasants and all the women have drunk up all they possessed, and now they can’t pay us any rent.
You always praise the peasants so.” At that instant another lady came into the room, and Levin got up.
“Excuse me, countess, but I really know nothing about it, and can’t tell you anything,” he said, and looked round at the officer who came in behind the lady.
And simply from the look in her eyes, that grew unconsciously brighter, Levin knew that she loved that man, knew it as surely as if she had told him so in words.
There are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no matter in what, are at once disposed to turn their backs on everything good in him, and to see only what is bad.
There are people, on the other hand, who desire above all to find in that lucky rival the qualities by which he has outstripped them, and seek with a throbbing ache at heart only what is good.
Levin belonged to the second class.
But he had no difficulty in finding what was good and attractive in Vronsky.
It was apparent at the first glance.
Vronsky was a squarely built, dark man, not very tall, with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calm and resolute face.
Everything about his face and figure, from his short-cropped black hair and freshly shaven chin down to his loosely fitting, brand-new uniform, was simple and at the same time elegant.
Making way for the lady who had come in, Vronsky went up to the princess and then to Kitty.
As he approached her, his beautiful eyes shone with a specially tender light, and with a faint, happy, and modestly triumphant smile (so it seemed to Levin), bowing carefully and respectfully over her, he held out his small broad hand to her.
Greeting and saying a few words to everyone, he sat down without once glancing at Levin, who had never taken his eyes off him.
“Let me introduce you,” said the princess, indicating Levin.
“Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, Count Alexey Kirillovitch Vronsky.” Vronsky got up and, looking cordially at Levin, shook hands with him.
“I believe I was to have dined with you this winter,” he said, smiling his simple and open smile; “but you had unexpectedly left for the country.” “Konstantin Dmitrievitch despises and hates town and us townspeople,” said Countess Nordston.
“My words must make a deep impression on you, since you remember them so well,” said Levin, and, suddenly conscious that he had said just the same thing before, he reddened.
Vronsky looked at Levin and Countess Nordston, and smiled.
“Are you always in the country?” he inquired.
“I should think it must be dull in the winter.” “It’s not dull if one has work to do; besides, one’s not dull by oneself,” Levin replied abruptly.
“I am fond of the country,” said Vronsky, noticing, and affecting not to notice, Levin’s tone.
“But I hope, count, you would not consent to live in the country always,” said Countess Nordston.
I experienced a queer feeling once,” he went on.
“I never longed so for the country, Russian country, with bast shoes and peasants, as when I was spending a winter with my mother in Nice.
And indeed, Naples and Sorrento are only pleasant for a short time.
And it’s just there that Russia comes back to me most vividly, and especially the country.
It’s as though....” He talked on, addressing both Kitty and Levin, turning his serene, friendly eyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what came into his head.
Noticing that Countess Nordston wanted to say something, he stopped short without finishing what he had begun, and listened attentively to her.
The conversation did not flag for an instant, so that the princess, who always kept in reserve, in case a subject should be lacking, two heavy guns—the relative advantages of classical and of modern education, and universal military service—had not to move out either of them, while Countess Nordston had not a chance of chaffing Levin.
Levin wanted to, and could not, take part in the general conversation; saying to himself every instant, “Now go,” he still did not go, as though waiting for something.
The conversation fell upon table-turning and spirits, and Countess Nordston, who believed in spiritualism, began to describe the marvels she had seen.
“Ah, countess, you really must take me, for pity’s sake do take me to see them!
I have never seen anything extraordinary, though I am always on the lookout for it everywhere,” said Vronsky, smiling.
“Very well, next Saturday,” answered Countess Nordston.
“But you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch, do you believe in it?” she asked Levin.
You know what I shall say.” “But I want to hear your opinion.” “My opinion,” answered Levin, “is only that this table-turning simply proves that educated society—so called—is no higher than the peasants.
They believe in the evil eye, and in witchcraft and omens, while we....” “Oh, then you don’t believe in it?” “I can’t believe in it, countess.” “But if I’ve seen it myself?” “The peasant women too tell us they have seen goblins.” “Then you think I tell a lie?” And she laughed a mirthless laugh.
“Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said he could not believe in it,” said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still more exasperated, would have answered, but Vronsky with his bright frank smile rushed to the support of the conversation, which was threatening to become disagreeable.
“You do not admit the conceivability at all?” he queried.
We admit the existence of electricity, of which we know nothing.
Why should there not be some new force, still unknown to us, which....” “When electricity was discovered,” Levin interrupted hurriedly, “it was only the phenomenon that was discovered, and it was unknown from what it proceeded and what were its effects, and ages passed before its applications were conceived.
But the spiritualists have begun with tables writing for them, and spirits appearing to them, and have only later started saying that it is an unknown force.” Vronsky listened attentively to Levin, as he always did listen, obviously interested in his words.
“Yes, but the spiritualists say we don’t know at present what this force is, but there is a force, and these are the conditions in which it acts.
Let the scientific men find out what the force consists in.
“Do let us try at once, countess,” he said; but Levin would finish saying what he thought.
“I think,” he went on, “that this attempt of the spiritualists to explain their marvels as some sort of new natural force is most futile.
They boldly talk of spiritual force, and then try to subject it to material experiment.” Everyone was waiting for him to finish, and he felt it.
“And I think you would be a first-rate medium,” said Countess Nordston; “there’s something enthusiastic in you.” Levin opened his mouth, was about to say something, reddened, and said nothing.
“Princess, will you allow it?” And Vronsky stood up, looking for a little table.
She felt for him with her whole heart, the more because she was pitying him for suffering of which she was herself the cause.
“If you can forgive me, forgive me,” said her eyes, “I am so happy.” “I hate them all, and you, and myself,” his eyes responded, and he took up his hat.
But he was not destined to escape.
Just as they were arranging themselves round the table, and Levin was on the point of retiring, the old prince came in, and after greeting the ladies, addressed Levin.
“Ah!” he began joyously.
Very glad to see you.” The old prince embraced Levin, and talking to him did not observe Vronsky, who had risen, and was serenely waiting till the prince should turn to him.
Kitty felt how distasteful her father’s warmth was to Levin after what had happened.
She saw, too, how coldly her father responded at last to Vronsky’s bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at her father, as though trying and failing to understand how and why anyone could be hostilely disposed towards him, and she flushed.
“Prince, let us have Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said Countess Nordston; “we want to try an experiment.” “What experiment?
Well, you must excuse me, ladies and gentlemen, but to my mind it is better fun to play the ring game,” said the old prince, looking at Vronsky, and guessing that it had been his suggestion.
“There’s some sense in that, anyway.” Vronsky looked wonderingly at the prince with his resolute eyes, and, with a faint smile, began immediately talking to Countess Nordston of the great ball that was to come off next week.
As soon as the old prince turned away from him, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impression he carried away with him of that evening was the smiling, happy face of Kitty answering Vronsky’s inquiry about the ball.
Chapter 15 At the end of the evening Kitty told her mother of her conversation with Levin, and in spite of all the pity she felt for Levin, she was glad at the thought that she had received an _offer_.
One impression pursued her relentlessly.
It was Levin’s face, with his scowling brows, and his kind eyes looking out in dark dejection below them, as he stood listening to her father, and glancing at her and at Vronsky.
But immediately she thought of the man for whom she had given him up.
She vividly recalled his manly, resolute face, his noble self-possession, and the good nature conspicuous in everything towards everyone.
She remembered the love for her of the man she loved, and once more all was gladness in her soul, and she lay on the pillow, smiling with happiness.
It’s not my fault,” she said to herself; but an inner voice told her something else.
But her happiness was poisoned by doubts.
“Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us!” she repeated to herself, till she fell asleep.
Meanwhile there took place below, in the prince’s little library, one of the scenes so often repeated between the parents on account of their favorite daughter.
I’ll tell you what!” shouted the prince, waving his arms, and at once wrapping his squirrel-lined dressing-gown round him again.
“That you’ve no pride, no dignity; that you’re disgracing, ruining your daughter by this vulgar, stupid matchmaking!” “But, really, for mercy’s sake, prince, what have I done?” said the princess, almost crying.
She, pleased and happy after her conversation with her daughter, had gone to the prince to say good-night as usual, and though she had no intention of telling him of Levin’s offer and Kitty’s refusal, still she hinted to her husband that she fancied things were practically settled with Vronsky, and that he would declare himself so soon as his mother arrived.
And thereupon, at those words, the prince had all at once flown into a passion, and began to use unseemly language.
First of all, you’re trying to catch an eligible gentleman, and all Moscow will be talking of it, and with good reason.
If you have evening parties, invite everyone, don’t pick out the possible suitors.
Engage a piano player, and let them dance, and not as you do things nowadays, hunting up good matches.
Levin’s a thousand times the better man.
As for this little Petersburg swell, they’re turned out by machinery, all on one pattern, and all precious rubbish.
But if he were a prince of the blood, my daughter need not run after anyone.” “But what have I done?” “Why, you’ve....” The prince was crying wrathfully.
“I know if one were to listen to you,” interrupted the princess, “we should never marry our daughter.
And how if she really is in love, and he’s no more thinking of marriage than I am!...
Ah! the ball!” And the prince, imagining that he was mimicking his wife, made a mincing curtsey at each word.
“And this is how we’re preparing wretchedness for Kitty; and she’s really got the notion into her head....” “But what makes you suppose so?” “I don’t suppose; I know.
I see a man who has serious intentions, that’s Levin: and I see a peacock, like this feather-head, who’s only amusing himself.” “Oh, well, when once you get an idea into your head!...” “Well, you’ll remember my words, but too late, just as with Dolly.” “Well, well, we won’t talk of it,” the princess stopped him, recollecting her unlucky Dolly.
“By all means, and good-night!” And signing each other with the cross, the husband and wife parted with a kiss, feeling that they each remained of their own opinion.
The princess had at first been quite certain that that evening had settled Kitty’s future, and that there could be no doubt of Vronsky’s intentions, but her husband’s words had disturbed her.
And returning to her own room, in terror before the unknown future, she, too, like Kitty, repeated several times in her heart, “Lord, have pity; Lord, have pity; Lord, have pity.” Chapter 16 Vronsky had never had a real home life.
His mother had been in her youth a brilliant society woman, who had had during her married life, and still more afterwards, many love affairs notorious in the whole fashionable world.
His father he scarcely remembered, and he had been educated in the Corps of Pages.
Leaving the school very young as a brilliant officer, he had at once got into the circle of wealthy Petersburg army men.
Although he did go more or less into Petersburg society, his love affairs had always hitherto been outside it.
In Moscow he had for the first time felt, after his luxurious and coarse life at Petersburg, all the charm of intimacy with a sweet and innocent girl of his own rank, who cared for him.
It never even entered his head that there could be any harm in his relations with Kitty.
At balls he danced principally with her.
He was a constant visitor at their house.
He talked to her as people commonly do talk in society—all sorts of nonsense, but nonsense to which he could not help attaching a special meaning in her case.
Although he said nothing to her that he could not have said before everybody, he felt that she was becoming more and more dependent upon him, and the more he felt this, the better he liked it, and the tenderer was his feeling for her.
He did not know that his mode of behavior in relation to Kitty had a definite character, that it is courting young girls with no intention of marriage, and that such courting is one of the evil actions common among brilliant young men such as he was.
It seemed to him that he was the first who had discovered this pleasure, and he was enjoying his discovery.
If he could have heard what her parents were saying that evening, if he could have put himself at the point of view of the family and have heard that Kitty would be unhappy if he did not marry her, he would have been greatly astonished, and would not have believed it.
He could not believe that what gave such great and delicate pleasure to him, and above all to her, could be wrong.
Still less could he have believed that he ought to marry.
Marriage had never presented itself to him as a possibility.
He not only disliked family life, but a family, and especially a husband was, in accordance with the views general in the bachelor world in which he lived, conceived as something alien, repellant, and, above all, ridiculous.
But though Vronsky had not the least suspicion what the parents were saying, he felt on coming away from the Shtcherbatskys’ that the secret spiritual bond which existed between him and Kitty had grown so much stronger that evening that some step must be taken.
And how secretly, simply, and most of all, how trustfully!
It’s good for me, and good for her.” And he began wondering where to finish the evening.
“Club? a game of bezique, champagne with Ignatov?
No, I’m not going. _Château des Fleurs_; there I shall find Oblonsky, songs, the cancan.
That’s why I like the Shtcherbatskys’, that I’m growing better.
I’ll go home.” He went straight to his room at Dussots’ Hotel, ordered supper, and then undressed, and as soon as his head touched the pillow, fell into a sound sleep.
Chapter 17 Next day at eleven o’clock in the morning Vronsky drove to the station of the Petersburg railway to meet his mother, and the first person he came across on the great flight of steps was Oblonsky, who was expecting his sister by the same train.
“Ah! your excellency!” cried Oblonsky, “whom are you meeting?” “My mother,” Vronsky responded, smiling, as everyone did who met Oblonsky.
He shook hands with him, and together they ascended the steps.
“She is to be here from Petersburg today.” “I was looking out for you till two o’clock last night.
Where did you go after the Shtcherbatskys’?” “Home,” answered Vronsky.
“I must own I felt so well content yesterday after the Shtcherbatskys’ that I didn’t care to go anywhere.” “I know a gallant steed by tokens sure, And by his eyes I know a youth in love,” declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch, just as he had done before to Levin.
Vronsky smiled with a look that seemed to say that he did not deny it, but he promptly changed the subject.
I’ve come to meet a pretty woman,” said Oblonsky.
“You don’t say so!” “_Honi soit qui mal y pense!_ My sister Anna.” “Ah! that’s Madame Karenina,” said Vronsky.
I really am not sure,” Vronsky answered heedlessly, with a vague recollection of something stiff and tedious evoked by the name Karenina.
“But Alexey Alexandrovitch, my celebrated brother-in-law, you surely must know.
All the world knows him.” “I know him by reputation and by sight.
I know that he’s clever, learned, religious somewhat....
“Yes, he’s a very remarkable man; rather a conservative, but a splendid man,” observed Stepan Arkadyevitch, “a splendid man.” “Oh, well, so much the better for him,” said Vronsky smiling.
“Oh, you’ve come,” he said, addressing a tall old footman of his mother’s, standing at the door; “come here.” Besides the charm Oblonsky had in general for everyone, Vronsky had felt of late specially drawn to him by the fact that in his imagination he was associated with Kitty.
I’m collecting subscriptions.
Oh, did you make the acquaintance of my friend Levin?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Yes; but he left rather early.” “He’s a capital fellow,” pursued Oblonsky.
“Isn’t he?” “I don’t know why it is,” responded Vronsky, “in all Moscow people—present company of course excepted,” he put in jestingly, “there’s something uncompromising.
They are all on the defensive, lose their tempers, as though they all want to make one feel something....” “Yes, that’s true, it is so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing good-humoredly.
“Will the train soon be in?” Vronsky asked a railway official.
“The train’s signaled,” answered the man.
The approach of the train was more and more evident by the preparatory bustle in the station, the rush of porters, the movement of policemen and attendants, and people meeting the train.
Through the frosty vapor could be seen workmen in short sheepskins and soft felt boots crossing the rails of the curving line.
The hiss of the boiler could be heard on the distant rails, and the rumble of something heavy.
“No,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination to tell Vronsky of Levin’s intentions in regard to Kitty.
“No, you’ve not got a true impression of Levin.
He’s a very nervous man, and is sometimes out of humor, it’s true, but then he is often very nice.
But yesterday there were special reasons,” pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a meaning smile, totally oblivious of the genuine sympathy he had felt the day before for his friend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky.
“Yes, there were reasons why he could not help being either particularly happy or particularly unhappy.” Vronsky stood still and asked directly: “How so?
Do you mean he made your _belle-sœur_ an offer yesterday?” “Maybe,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“I fancied something of the sort yesterday.
“Yes, that is a hateful position!
But here’s the train.” The engine had already whistled in the distance.
A few instants later the platform was quivering, and with puffs of steam hanging low in the air from the frost, the engine rolled up, with the lever of the middle wheel rhythmically moving up and down, and the stooping figure of the engine-driver covered with frost.
Behind the tender, setting the platform more and more slowly swaying, came the luggage van with a dog whining in it.
At last the passenger carriages rolled in, oscillating before coming to a standstill.
A smart guard jumped out, giving a whistle, and after him one by one the impatient passengers began to get down: an officer of the guards, holding himself erect, and looking severely about him; a nimble little merchant with a satchel, smiling gaily; a peasant with a sack over his shoulder.
Vronsky, standing beside Oblonsky, watched the carriages and the passengers, totally oblivious of his mother.
What he had just heard about Kitty excited and delighted him.
Unconsciously he arched his chest, and his eyes flashed.
He felt himself a conqueror.
“Countess Vronskaya is in that compartment,” said the smart guard, going up to Vronsky.
The guard’s words roused him, and forced him to think of his mother and his approaching meeting with her.
Chapter 18 Vronsky followed the guard to the carriage, and at the door of the compartment he stopped short to make room for a lady who was getting out.
With the insight of a man of the world, from one glance at this lady’s appearance Vronsky classified her as belonging to the best society.
He begged pardon, and was getting into the carriage, but felt he must glance at her once more; not that she was very beautiful, not on account of the elegance and modest grace which were apparent in her whole figure, but because in the expression of her charming face, as she passed close by him, there was something peculiarly caressing and soft.
Her shining gray eyes, that looked dark from the thick lashes, rested with friendly attention on his face, as though she were recognizing him, and then promptly turned away to the passing crowd, as though seeking someone.
In that brief look Vronsky had time to notice the suppressed eagerness which played over her face, and flitted between the brilliant eyes and the faint smile that curved her red lips.
It was as though her nature were so brimming over with something that against her will it showed itself now in the flash of her eyes, and now in her smile.
Deliberately she shrouded the light in her eyes, but it shone against her will in the faintly perceptible smile.
Vronsky stepped into the carriage.
His mother, a dried-up old lady with black eyes and ringlets, screwed up her eyes, scanning her son, and smiled slightly with her thin lips.
Getting up from the seat and handing her maid a bag, she gave her little wrinkled hand to her son to kiss, and lifting his head from her hand, kissed him on the cheek.
“You got my telegram?
Thank God.” “You had a good journey?” said her son, sitting down beside her, and involuntarily listening to a woman’s voice outside the door.
“It’s the Petersburg view, madame.” “Not Petersburg, but simply feminine,” she responded.
“Well, well, allow me to kiss your hand.” “Good-bye, Ivan Petrovitch.
And could you see if my brother is here, and send him to me?” said the lady in the doorway, and stepped back again into the compartment.
“Well, have you found your brother?” said Countess Vronskaya, addressing the lady.
Vronsky understood now that this was Madame Karenina.
“Your brother is here,” he said, standing up.
“Excuse me, I did not know you, and, indeed, our acquaintance was so slight,” said Vronsky, bowing, “that no doubt you do not remember me.” “Oh, no,” said she, “I should have known you because your mother and I have been talking, I think, of nothing but you all the way.” As she spoke she let the eagerness that would insist on coming out show itself in her smile.
“And still no sign of my brother.” “Do call him, Alexey,” said the old countess.
Vronsky stepped out onto the platform and shouted: “Oblonsky!
Here!” Madame Karenina, however, did not wait for her brother, but catching sight of him she stepped out with her light, resolute step.
And as soon as her brother had reached her, with a gesture that struck Vronsky by its decision and its grace, she flung her left arm around his neck, drew him rapidly to her, and kissed him warmly.
But recollecting that his mother was waiting for him, he went back again into the carriage.
“She’s very sweet, isn’t she?” said the countess of Madame Karenina.
“Her husband put her with me, and I was delighted to have her.
Tant mieux, mon cher, tant mieux._” “I don’t know what you are referring to, maman,” he answered coldly.
“Come, maman, let us go.” Madame Karenina entered the carriage again to say good-bye to the countess.
“Well, countess, you have met your son, and I my brother,” she said.
“And all my gossip is exhausted.
I should have nothing more to tell you.” “Oh, no,” said the countess, taking her hand.
You are one of those delightful women in whose company it’s sweet to be silent as well as to talk.
Now please don’t fret over your son; you can’t expect never to be parted.” Madame Karenina stood quite still, holding herself very erect, and her eyes were smiling.
“Anna Arkadyevna,” the countess said in explanation to her son, “has a little son eight years old, I believe, and she has never been parted from him before, and she keeps fretting over leaving him.” “Yes, the countess and I have been talking all the time, I of my son and she of hers,” said Madame Karenina, and again a smile lighted up her face, a caressing smile intended for him.
“I am afraid that you must have been dreadfully bored,” he said, promptly catching the ball of coquetry she had flung him.
But apparently she did not care to pursue the conversation in that strain, and she turned to the old countess.
Good-bye, countess.” “Good-bye, my love,” answered the countess.
I speak plainly, at my age, and I tell you simply that I’ve lost my heart to you.” Stereotyped as the phrase was, Madame Karenina obviously believed it and was delighted by it.
She flushed, bent down slightly, and put her cheek to the countess’s lips, drew herself up again, and with the same smile fluttering between her lips and her eyes, she gave her hand to Vronsky.
He pressed the little hand she gave him, and was delighted, as though at something special, by the energetic squeeze with which she freely and vigorously shook his hand.
She went out with the rapid step which bore her rather fully-developed figure with such strange lightness.
“Very charming,” said the countess.
That was just what her son was thinking.
His eyes followed her till her graceful figure was out of sight, and then the smile remained on his face.
He saw out of the window how she went up to her brother, put her arm in his, and began telling him something eagerly, obviously something that had nothing to do with him, Vronsky, and at that he felt annoyed.
“Well, maman, are you perfectly well?” he repeated, turning to his mother.
“Everything has been delightful.
Alexander has been very good, and Marie has grown very pretty.
She’s very interesting.” And she began telling him again of what interested her most—the christening of her grandson, for which she had been staying in Petersburg, and the special favor shown her elder son by the Tsar.
“Here’s Lavrenty,” said Vronsky, looking out of the window; “now we can go, if you like.” The old butler, who had traveled with the countess, came to the carriage to announce that everything was ready, and the countess got up to go.
Vronsky gave his mother his arm; but just as they were getting out of the carriage several men ran suddenly by with panic-stricken faces.
The station-master, too, ran by in his extraordinary colored cap.
Obviously something unusual had happened.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his sister on his arm, turned back.
They too looked scared, and stopped at the carriage door to avoid the crowd.
The ladies got in, while Vronsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch followed the crowd to find out details of the disaster.
Before Vronsky and Oblonsky came back the ladies heard the facts from the butler.
Oblonsky and Vronsky had both seen the mutilated corpse.
Oblonsky was evidently upset.
Vronsky did not speak; his handsome face was serious, but perfectly composed.
“Oh, if you had seen it, countess,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
How awful!” “Couldn’t one do anything for her?” said Madame Karenina in an agitated whisper.
Vronsky glanced at her, and immediately got out of the carriage.
“I’ll be back directly, maman,” he remarked, turning round in the doorway.
When he came back a few minutes later, Stepan Arkadyevitch was already in conversation with the countess about the new singer, while the countess was impatiently looking towards the door, waiting for her son.
They went out together.
Behind walked Madame Karenina with her brother.
Just as they were going out of the station the station-master overtook Vronsky.
“You gave my assistant two hundred roubles.
Would you kindly explain for whose benefit you intend them?” “For the widow,” said Vronsky, shrugging his shoulders.
“I should have thought there was no need to ask.” “You gave that?” cried Oblonsky, behind, and, pressing his sister’s hand, he added: “Very nice, very nice!
Isn’t he a splendid fellow?
Good-bye, countess.” And he and his sister stood still, looking for her maid.
When they went out the Vronsky’s carriage had already driven away.
People coming in were still talking of what happened.
“What a horrible death!” said a gentleman, passing by.
“They say he was cut in two pieces.” “On the contrary, I think it’s the easiest—instantaneous,” observed another.
“How is it they don’t take proper precautions?” said a third.
Madame Karenina seated herself in the carriage, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw with surprise that her lips were quivering, and she was with difficulty restraining her tears.
“What nonsense!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
You can’t conceive how I’m resting my hopes on you.” “Have you known Vronsky long?” she asked.
“Come now, let us talk of you,” she added, tossing her head, as though she would physically shake off something superfluous oppressing her.
I got your letter, and here I am.” “Yes, all my hopes are in you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Well, tell me all about it.” And Stepan Arkadyevitch began to tell his story.
On reaching home Oblonsky helped his sister out, sighed, pressed her hand, and set off to his office.
As the boy read, he kept twisting and trying to tear off a button that was nearly off his jacket.
“Keep your hands still, Grisha,” she said, and she took up her work, a coverlet she had long been making.
She always set to work on it at depressed moments, and now she knitted at it nervously, twitching her fingers and counting the stitches.
Though she had sent word the day before to her husband that it was nothing to her whether his sister came or not, she had made everything ready for her arrival, and was expecting her sister-in-law with emotion.
Dolly was crushed by her sorrow, utterly swallowed up by it.
Still she did not forget that Anna, her sister-in-law, was the wife of one of the most important personages in Petersburg, and was a Petersburg _grande dame_.
And, thanks to this circumstance, she did not carry out her threat to her husband—that is to say, she remembered that her sister-in-law was coming.
“I know nothing of her except the very best, and I have seen nothing but kindness and affection from her towards myself.” It was true that as far as she could recall her impressions at Petersburg at the Karenins’, she did not like their household itself; there was something artificial in the whole framework of their family life.
“All consolation and counsel and Christian forgiveness, all that I have thought over a thousand times, and it’s all no use.” All these days Dolly had been alone with her children.
She knew that in one way or another she would tell Anna everything, and she was alternately glad at the thought of speaking freely, and angry at the necessity of speaking of her humiliation with her, his sister, and of hearing her ready-made phrases of good advice and comfort.
She had been on the lookout for her, glancing at her watch every minute, and, as so often happens, let slip just that minute when her visitor arrived, so that she did not hear the bell.
Catching a sound of skirts and light steps at the door, she looked round, and her care-worn face unconsciously expressed not gladness, but wonder.
She got up and embraced her sister-in-law.
“Dolly, how glad I am to see you!” “I am glad, too,” said Dolly, faintly smiling, and trying by the expression of Anna’s face to find out whether she knew.
“Most likely she knows,” she thought, noticing the sympathy in Anna’s face.
“Well, come along, I’ll take you to your room,” she went on, trying to defer as long as possible the moment of confidences.
“No, please, let us stay here.” She took off her kerchief and her hat, and catching it in a lock of her black hair, which was a mass of curls, she tossed her head and shook her hair down.
“You are radiant with health and happiness!” said Dolly, almost with envy.
“Merciful heavens, Tanya!
You’re the same age as my Seryozha,” she added, addressing the little girl as she ran in.
“Delightful child, delightful!
Show me them all.” She mentioned them, not only remembering the names, but the years, months, characters, illnesses of all the children, and Dolly could not but appreciate that.
“It’s a pity Vassya’s asleep.” After seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the drawing-room, to coffee.
“Dolly,” she said, “he has told me.” Dolly looked coldly at Anna; she was waiting now for phrases of conventional sympathy, but Anna said nothing of the sort.
“Dolly, dear,” she said, “I don’t want to speak for him to you, nor to try to comfort you; that’s impossible.
But, darling, I’m simply sorry, sorry from my heart for you!” Under the thick lashes of her shining eyes tears suddenly glittered.
She moved nearer to her sister-in-law and took her hand in her vigorous little hand.
Dolly did not shrink away, but her face did not lose its frigid expression.
She said: “To comfort me’s impossible.
Everything’s lost after what has happened, everything’s over!” And directly she had said this, her face suddenly softened.
How is it best to act in this awful position—that’s what you must think of.” “All’s over, and there’s nothing more,” said Dolly.
“And the worst of all is, you see, that I can’t cast him off: there are the children, I am tied.
And I can’t live with him! it’s a torture to me to see him.” “Dolly, darling, he has spoken to me, but I want to hear it from you: tell me about it.” Dolly looked at her inquiringly.
Sympathy and love unfeigned were visible on Anna’s face.
“But I will tell you it from the beginning.
With the education mamma gave us I was more than innocent, I was stupid.
I know they say men tell their wives of their former lives, but Stiva”—she corrected herself—“Stepan Arkadyevitch told me nothing.
You’ll hardly believe it, but till now I imagined that I was the only woman he had known.
You must understand that I was so far from suspecting infidelity, I regarded it as impossible, and then—try to imagine it—with such ideas, to find out suddenly all the horror, all the loathsomeness....
You must try and understand me.
To be fully convinced of one’s happiness, and all at once....” continued Dolly, holding back her sobs, “to get a letter ... his letter to his mistress, my governess.
No, it’s too awful!” She hastily pulled out her handkerchief and hid her face in it.
“I can understand being carried away by feeling,” she went on after a brief silence, “but deliberately, slyly deceiving me ... and with whom?...
To go on being my husband together with her ... it’s awful!
You can’t understand....” “Oh, yes, I understand!
Dolly, dearest, I do understand,” said Anna, pressing her hand.
“And do you imagine he realizes all the awfulness of my position?” Dolly resumed.
He’s happy and contented.” “Oh, no!” Anna interposed quickly.
“He’s to be pitied, he’s weighed down by remorse....” “Is he capable of remorse?” Dolly interrupted, gazing intently into her sister-in-law’s face.
He’s good-hearted, but he’s proud, and now he’s so humiliated.
What touched me most....” (and here Anna guessed what would touch Dolly most) “he’s tortured by two things: that he’s ashamed for the children’s sake, and that, loving you—yes, yes, loving you beyond everything on earth,” she hurriedly interrupted Dolly, who would have answered—“he has hurt you, pierced you to the heart.
‘No, no, she cannot forgive me,’ he keeps saying.” Dolly looked dreamily away beyond her sister-in-law as she listened to her words.
“Yes, I can see that his position is awful; it’s worse for the guilty than the innocent,” she said, “if he feels that all the misery comes from his fault.
But as though of set design, each time she was softened she began to speak again of what exasperated her.
By him and his children.
I have worked for him, and all I had has gone in his service, and now of course any fresh, vulgar creature has more charm for him.
No doubt they talked of me together, or, worse still, they were silent.
Do you understand?” Again her eyes glowed with hatred.
No, everything is over, everything that once made my comfort, the reward of my work, and my sufferings....
Would you believe it, I was teaching Grisha just now: once this was a joy to me, now it is a torture.
Why are the children here?
What’s so awful is that all at once my heart’s turned, and instead of love and tenderness, I have nothing but hatred for him; yes, hatred.
I could kill him.” “Darling Dolly, I understand, but don’t torture yourself.
You are so distressed, so overwrought, that you look at many things mistakenly.” Dolly grew calmer, and for two minutes both were silent.
I have thought over everything, and I see nothing.” Anna could think of nothing, but her heart responded instantly to each word, to each change of expression of her sister-in-law.
“I am his sister, I know his character, that faculty of forgetting everything, everything” (she waved her hand before her forehead), “that faculty for being completely carried away, but for completely repenting too.
He cannot believe it, he cannot comprehend now how he can have acted as he did.” “No; he understands, he understood!” Dolly broke in.
“But I ... you are forgetting me ... does it make it easier for me?” “Wait a minute.
When he told me, I will own I did not realize all the awfulness of your position.
I felt sorry for him, but after talking to you, I see it, as a woman, quite differently.
But, Dolly, darling, I fully realize your sufferings, only there is one thing I don’t know; I don’t know ...
If there is, forgive him!” “No,” Dolly was beginning, but Anna cut her short, kissing her hand once more.
That never happened.
Such men are unfaithful, but their home and wife are sacred to them.
Somehow or other these women are still looked on with contempt by them, and do not touch on their feeling for their family.
They draw a sort of line that can’t be crossed between them and their families.
I don’t understand it, but it is so.” “Yes, but he has kissed her....” “Dolly, hush, darling.
I remember the time when he came to me and cried, talking of you, and all the poetry and loftiness of his feeling for you, and I know that the longer he has lived with you the loftier you have been in his eyes.
You know we have sometimes laughed at him for putting in at every word: ‘Dolly’s a marvelous woman.’ You have always been a divinity for him, and you are that still, and this has not been an infidelity of the heart....” “But if it is repeated?” “It cannot be, as I understand it....” “Yes, but could you forgive it?” “I don’t know, I can’t judge....
Yes, I can,” said Anna, thinking a moment; and grasping the position in her thought and weighing it in her inner balance, she added: “Yes, I can, I can, I can.
I could not be the same, no; but I could forgive it, and forgive it as though it had never been, never been at all....” “Oh, of course,” Dolly interposed quickly, as though saying what she had more than once thought, “else it would not be forgiveness.
If one forgives, it must be completely, completely.
Come, let us go; I’ll take you to your room,” she said, getting up, and on the way she embraced Anna.
It has made things better, ever so much better.” Chapter 20 The whole of that day Anna spent at home, that’s to say at the Oblonskys’, and received no one, though some of her acquaintances had already heard of her arrival, and came to call the same day.
Anna spent the whole morning with Dolly and the children.
“Come, God is merciful,” she wrote.
Oblonsky did dine at home: the conversation was general, and his wife, speaking to him, addressed him as “Stiva,” as she had not done before.
In the relations of the husband and wife the same estrangement still remained, but there was no talk now of separation, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the possibility of explanation and reconciliation.
Immediately after dinner Kitty came in.
She knew Anna Arkadyevna, but only very slightly, and she came now to her sister’s with some trepidation, at the prospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburg lady, whom everyone spoke so highly of.
But she made a favorable impression on Anna Arkadyevna—she saw that at once.
Anna was unmistakably admiring her loveliness and her youth: before Kitty knew where she was she found herself not merely under Anna’s sway, but in love with her, as young girls do fall in love with older and married women.
Anna was not like a fashionable lady, nor the mother of a boy of eight years old.
In the elasticity of her movements, the freshness and the unflagging eagerness which persisted in her face, and broke out in her smile and her glance, she would rather have passed for a girl of twenty, had it not been for a serious and at times mournful look in her eyes, which struck and attracted Kitty.
Kitty felt that Anna was perfectly simple and was concealing nothing, but that she had another higher world of interests inaccessible to her, complex and poetic.
After dinner, when Dolly went away to her own room, Anna rose quickly and went up to her brother, who was just lighting a cigar.
“Stiva,” she said to him, winking gaily, crossing him and glancing towards the door, “go, and God help you.” He threw down the cigar, understanding her, and departed through the doorway.
When Stepan Arkadyevitch had disappeared, she went back to the sofa where she had been sitting, surrounded by the children.
Either because the children saw that their mother was fond of this aunt, or that they felt a special charm in her themselves, the two elder ones, and the younger following their lead, as children so often do, had clung about their new aunt since before dinner, and would not leave her side.
And it had become a sort of game among them to sit as close as possible to their aunt, to touch her, hold her little hand, kiss it, play with her ring, or even touch the flounce of her skirt.
“Come, come, as we were sitting before,” said Anna Arkadyevna, sitting down in her place.
And again Grisha poked his little face under her arm, and nestled with his head on her gown, beaming with pride and happiness.
“Next week, and a splendid ball.
At the Bobrishtchevs’ one always enjoys oneself, and at the Nikitins’ too, while at the Mezhkovs’ it’s always dull.
Haven’t you noticed it?” “No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoys oneself,” said Anna, and Kitty detected in her eyes that mysterious world which was not open to her.
“For me there are some less dull and tiresome.” “How can _you_ be dull at a ball?” “Why should not _I_ be dull at a ball?” inquired Anna.
Kitty perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.
“Because you always look nicer than anyone.” Anna had the faculty of blushing.
She blushed a little, and said: “In the first place it’s never so; and secondly, if it were, what difference would it make to me?” “Are you coming to this ball?” asked Kitty.
“I imagine it won’t be possible to avoid going.
I should so like to see you at a ball.” “Anyway, if I do go, I shall comfort myself with the thought that it’s a pleasure to you ...
It’s untidy enough without that,” she said, putting up a straying lock, which Grisha had been playing with.
“I imagine you at the ball in lilac.” “And why in lilac precisely?” asked Anna, smiling.
“Now, children, run along, run along.
Miss Hoole is calling you to tea,” she said, tearing the children from her, and sending them off to the dining-room.
You expect a great deal of this ball, and you want everyone to be there to take part in it.” “How do you know?
“I remember, and I know that blue haze like the mist on the mountains in Switzerland.
That mist which covers everything in that blissful time when childhood is just ending, and out of that vast circle, happy and gay, there is a path growing narrower and narrower, and it is delightful and alarming to enter the ballroom, bright and splendid as it is....
Who has not been through it?” Kitty smiled without speaking.
How I should like to know all her love story!” thought Kitty, recalling the unromantic appearance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her husband.
Stiva told me, and I congratulate you.
I liked him so much,” Anna continued.
“I met Vronsky at the railway station.” “Oh, was he there?” asked Kitty, blushing.
“What was it Stiva told you?” “Stiva gossiped about it all.
I traveled yesterday with Vronsky’s mother,” she went on; “and his mother talked without a pause of him, he’s her favorite.
And I know that he’s her favorite; still one can see how chivalrous he is....
Well, for instance, she told me that he had wanted to give up all his property to his brother, that he had done something extraordinary when he was quite a child, saved a woman out of the water.
He’s a hero, in fact,” said Anna, smiling and recollecting the two hundred roubles he had given at the station.
For some reason it was disagreeable to her to think of it.
She felt that there was something that had to do with her in it, and something that ought not to have been.
“She pressed me very much to go and see her,” Anna went on; “and I shall be glad to go to see her tomorrow.
Stiva is staying a long while in Dolly’s room, thank God,” Anna added, changing the subject, and getting up, Kitty fancied, displeased with something.
No, I!” screamed the children, who had finished tea, running up to their Aunt Anna.
“All together,” said Anna, and she ran laughing to meet them, and embraced and swung round all the throng of swarming children, shrieking with delight.
Stepan Arkadyevitch did not come out.
“I am afraid you’ll be cold upstairs,” observed Dolly, addressing Anna; “I want to move you downstairs, and we shall be nearer.” “Oh, please, don’t trouble about me,” answered Anna, looking intently into Dolly’s face, trying to make out whether there had been a reconciliation or not.
“It will be lighter for you here,” answered her sister-in-law.
“I assure you that I sleep everywhere, and always like a marmot.” “What’s the question?” inquired Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out of his room and addressing his wife.
From his tone both Kitty and Anna knew that a reconciliation had taken place.
“I want to move Anna downstairs, but we must hang up blinds.
No one knows how to do it; I must see to it myself,” answered Dolly addressing him.
“God knows whether they are fully reconciled,” thought Anna, hearing her tone, cold and composed.
“Oh, nonsense, Dolly, always making difficulties,” answered her husband.
“Come, I’ll do it all, if you like....” “Yes, they must be reconciled,” thought Anna.
“I know how you do everything,” answered Dolly.
“You tell Matvey to do what can’t be done, and go away yourself, leaving him to make a muddle of everything,” and her habitual, mocking smile curved the corners of Dolly’s lips as she spoke.
“Full, full reconciliation, full,” thought Anna; “thank God!” and rejoicing that she was the cause of it, she went up to Dolly and kissed her.
Why do you always look down on me and Matvey?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling hardly perceptibly, and addressing his wife.
The whole evening Dolly was, as always, a little mocking in her tone to her husband, while Stepan Arkadyevitch was happy and cheerful, but not so as to seem as though, having been forgiven, he had forgotten his offense.
At half-past nine o’clock a particularly joyful and pleasant family conversation over the tea-table at the Oblonskys’ was broken up by an apparently simple incident.
But this simple incident for some reason struck everyone as strange.
Talking about common acquaintances in Petersburg, Anna got up quickly.
“She is in my album,” she said; “and, by the way, I’ll show you my Seryozha,” she added, with a mother’s smile of pride.
Towards ten o’clock, when she usually said good-night to her son, and often before going to a ball put him to bed herself, she felt depressed at being so far from him; and whatever she was talking about, she kept coming back in thought to her curly-headed Seryozha.
She longed to look at his photograph and talk of him.
Seizing the first pretext, she got up, and with her light, resolute step went for her album.
The stairs up to her room came out on the landing of the great warm main staircase.
“It’s early for me to be fetched, and for anyone else it’s late,” observed Kitty.
“Sure to be someone with papers for me,” put in Stepan Arkadyevitch.
When Anna was passing the top of the staircase, a servant was running up to announce the visitor, while the visitor himself was standing under a lamp.
Anna glancing down at once recognized Vronsky, and a strange feeling of pleasure and at the same time of dread of something stirred in her heart.
He was standing still, not taking off his coat, pulling something out of his pocket.
At the instant when she was just facing the stairs, he raised his eyes, caught sight of her, and into the expression of his face there passed a shade of embarrassment and dismay.
With a slight inclination of her head she passed, hearing behind her Stepan Arkadyevitch’s loud voice calling him to come up, and the quiet, soft, and composed voice of Vronsky refusing.
When Anna returned with the album, he was already gone, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling them that he had called to inquire about the dinner they were giving next day to a celebrity who had just arrived.
What a queer fellow he is!” added Stepan Arkadyevitch.
There was nothing either exceptional or strange in a man’s calling at half-past nine on a friend to inquire details of a proposed dinner party and not coming in, but it seemed strange to all of them.
Chapter 22 The ball was only just beginning as Kitty and her mother walked up the great staircase, flooded with light, and lined with flowers and footmen in powder and red coats.
From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, as from a hive, and the rustle of movement; and while on the landing between trees they gave last touches to their hair and dresses before the mirror, they heard from the ballroom the careful, distinct notes of the fiddles of the orchestra beginning the first waltz.
A little old man in civilian dress, arranging his gray curls before another mirror, and diffusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them on the stairs, and stood aside, evidently admiring Kitty, whom he did not know.
A beardless youth, one of those society youths whom the old Prince Shtcherbatsky called “young bucks,” in an exceedingly open waistcoat, straightening his white tie as he went, bowed to them, and after running by, came back to ask Kitty for a quadrille.
As the first quadrille had already been given to Vronsky, she had to promise this youth the second.
An officer, buttoning his glove, stood aside in the doorway, and stroking his mustache, admired rosy Kitty.
When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, her mother, tried to turn right side out of the ribbon of her sash, Kitty had drawn back a little.
She felt that everything must be right of itself, and graceful, and nothing could need setting straight.
Her dress was not uncomfortable anywhere; her lace berthe did not droop anywhere; her rosettes were not crushed nor torn off; her pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heels did not pinch, but gladdened her feet; and the thick rolls of fair chignon kept up on her head as if they were her own hair.
All the three buttons buttoned up without tearing on the long glove that covered her hand without concealing its lines.
The black velvet of her locket nestled with special softness round her neck.
That velvet was delicious; at home, looking at her neck in the looking-glass, Kitty had felt that that velvet was speaking.
About all the rest there might be a doubt, but the velvet was delicious.
Her bare shoulders and arms gave Kitty a sense of chill marble, a feeling she particularly liked.
Her eyes sparkled, and her rosy lips could not keep from smiling from the consciousness of her own attractiveness.
She had scarcely entered the ballroom and reached the throng of ladies, all tulle, ribbons, lace, and flowers, waiting to be asked to dance—Kitty was never one of that throng—when she was asked for a waltz, and asked by the best partner, the first star in the hierarchy of the ballroom, a renowned director of dances, a married man, handsome and well-built, Yegorushka Korsunsky.
He had only just left the Countess Bonina, with whom he had danced the first half of the waltz, and, scanning his kingdom—that is to say, a few couples who had started dancing—he caught sight of Kitty, entering, and flew up to her with that peculiar, easy amble which is confined to directors of balls.
Without even asking her if she cared to dance, he put out his arm to encircle her slender waist.
“How nice you’ve come in good time,” he said to her, embracing her waist; “such a bad habit to be late.” Bending her left hand, she laid it on his shoulder, and her little feet in their pink slippers began swiftly, lightly, and rhythmically moving over the slippery floor in time to the music.
“It’s exquisite—such lightness, precision.” He said to her the same thing he said to almost all his partners whom he knew well.
She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over his shoulder.
She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all faces in the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland.
And she was not a girl who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in the ballroom was familiar and tiresome.
But she was in the middle stage between these two; she was excited, and at the same time she had sufficient self-possession to be able to observe.
In the left corner of the ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together.
There—incredibly naked—was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky’s wife; there was the lady of the house; there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to be found where the best people were.
In that direction gazed the young men, not venturing to approach.
There, too, she descried Stiva, and there she saw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in a black velvet gown.
You’re not tired?” said Korsunsky, a little out of breath.
Korsunsky bowed, set straight his open shirt front, and gave her his arm to conduct her to Anna Arkadyevna.
Anna was not in lilac, as Kitty had so urgently wished, but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing her full throat and shoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory, and her rounded arms, with tiny, slender wrists.
The whole gown was trimmed with Venetian guipure.
On her head, among her black hair—her own, with no false additions—was a little wreath of pansies, and a bouquet of the same in the black ribbon of her sash among white lace.
Her coiffure was not striking.
All that was noticeable was the little wilful tendrils of her curly hair that would always break free about her neck and temples.
Kitty had been seeing Anna every day; she adored her, and had pictured her invariably in lilac.
She saw her now as someone quite new and surprising to her.
Now she understood that Anna could not have been in lilac, and that her charm was just that she always stood out against her attire, that her dress could never be noticeable on her.
And her black dress, with its sumptuous lace, was not noticeable on her; it was only the frame, and all that was seen was she—simple, natural, elegant, and at the same time gay and eager.
She was standing holding herself, as always, very erect, and when Kitty drew near the group she was speaking to the master of the house, her head slightly turned towards him.
“No, I don’t throw stones,” she was saying, in answer to something, “though I can’t understand it,” she went on, shrugging her shoulders, and she turned at once with a soft smile of protection towards Kitty.
With a flying, feminine glance she scanned her attire, and made a movement of her head, hardly perceptible, but understood by Kitty, signifying approval of her dress and her looks.
“This is one of my most faithful supporters,” said Korsunsky, bowing to Anna Arkadyevna, whom he had not yet seen.
“The princess helps to make balls happy and successful.
Anna Arkadyevna, a waltz?” he said, bending down to her.
“Why, have you met?” inquired their host.
My wife and I are like white wolves—everyone knows us,” answered Korsunsky.
“A waltz, Anna Arkadyevna?” “I don’t dance when it’s possible not to dance,” she said.
“But tonight it’s impossible,” answered Korsunsky.
“Well, since it’s impossible tonight, let us start,” she said, not noticing Vronsky’s bow, and she hastily put her hand on Korsunsky’s shoulder.
“What is she vexed with him about?” thought Kitty, discerning that Anna had intentionally not responded to Vronsky’s bow.
Vronsky went up to Kitty reminding her of the first quadrille, and expressing his regret that he had not seen her all this time.
Kitty gazed in admiration at Anna waltzing, and listened to him.
She expected him to ask her for a waltz, but he did not, and she glanced wonderingly at him.
He flushed slightly, and hurriedly asked her to waltz, but he had only just put his arm round her waist and taken the first step when the music suddenly stopped.
Kitty looked into his face, which was so close to her own, and long afterwards—for several years after—that look, full of love, to which he made no response, cut her to the heart with an agony of shame.
“_Pardon! pardon!_ Waltz! waltz!” shouted Korsunsky from the other side of the room, and seizing the first young lady he came across he began dancing himself.
After the first waltz Kitty went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few words to Countess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the first quadrille.
During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said: there was disjointed talk between them of the Korsunskys, husband and wife, whom he described very amusingly, as delightful children at forty, and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation touched her to the quick, when he asked her about Levin, whether he was here, and added that he liked him so much.
But Kitty did not expect much from the quadrille.
She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be decided.
The fact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurka did not trouble her.
The whole ball up to the last quadrille was for Kitty an enchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds, and motions.
But as she was dancing the last quadrille with one of the tiresome young men whom she could not refuse, she chanced to be _vis-à-vis_ with Vronsky and Anna.
She had not been near Anna again since the beginning of the evening, and now again she saw her suddenly quite new and surprising.
She saw in her the signs of that excitement of success she knew so well in herself; she saw that she was intoxicated with the delighted admiration she was exciting.
She knew that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them in Anna; saw the quivering, flashing light in her eyes, and the smile of happiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and the deliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements.
“All or one?” And not assisting the harassed young man she was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of which he had lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed with external liveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all into the _grand rond_, and then into the _chaîne_, and at the same time she kept watch with a growing pang at her heart.
“No, it’s not the admiration of the crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of one.
And that one? can it be he?” Every time he spoke to Anna the joyous light flashed into her eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red lips.
She seemed to make an effort to control herself, to try not to show these signs of delight, but they came out on her face of themselves.
What was pictured so clearly to Kitty in the mirror of Anna’s face she saw in him.
What had become of his always self-possessed resolute manner, and the carelessly serene expression of his face?
Now every time he turned to her, he bent his head, as though he would have fallen at her feet, and in his eyes there was nothing but humble submission and dread.
They were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivial conversation, but to Kitty it seemed that every word they said was determining their fate and hers.
And strange it was that they were actually talking of how absurd Ivan Ivanovitch was with his French, and how the Eletsky girl might have made a better match, yet these words had all the while consequence for them, and they were feeling just as Kitty did.
The whole ball, the whole world, everything seemed lost in fog in Kitty’s soul.
Nothing but the stern discipline of her bringing-up supported her and forced her to do what was expected of her, that is, to dance, to answer questions, to talk, even to smile.
But before the mazurka, when they were beginning to rearrange the chairs and a few couples moved out of the smaller rooms into the big room, a moment of despair and horror came for Kitty.
She had refused five partners, and now she was not dancing the mazurka.
She had not even a hope of being asked for it, because she was so successful in society that the idea would never occur to anyone that she had remained disengaged till now.
She would have to tell her mother she felt ill and go home, but she had not the strength to do this.
She went to the furthest end of the little drawing-room and sank into a low chair.
Her light, transparent skirts rose like a cloud about her slender waist; one bare, thin, soft, girlish arm, hanging listlessly, was lost in the folds of her pink tunic; in the other she held her fan, and with rapid, short strokes fanned her burning face.
But while she looked like a butterfly, clinging to a blade of grass, and just about to open its rainbow wings for fresh flight, her heart ached with a horrible despair.
“But perhaps I am wrong, perhaps it was not so?” And again she recalled all she had seen.
“Kitty, what is it?” said Countess Nordston, stepping noiselessly over the carpet towards her.
“I don’t understand it.” Kitty’s lower lip began to quiver; she got up quickly.
“He asked her for the mazurka before me,” said Countess Nordston, knowing Kitty would understand who were “he” and “her.” “She said: ‘Why, aren’t you going to dance it with Princess Shtcherbatskaya?’” “Oh, I don’t care!” answered Kitty.
No one but she herself understood her position; no one knew that she had just refused the man whom perhaps she loved, and refused him because she had put her faith in another.
Countess Nordston found Korsunsky, with whom she was to dance the mazurka, and told him to ask Kitty.
Kitty danced in the first couple, and luckily for her she had not to talk, because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing the figure.
Vronsky and Anna sat almost opposite her.
She saw them with her long-sighted eyes, and saw them, too, close by, when they met in the figures, and the more she saw of them the more convinced was she that her unhappiness was complete.
She saw that they felt themselves alone in that crowded room.
And on Vronsky’s face, always so firm and independent, she saw that look that had struck her, of bewilderment and humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent dog when it has done wrong.
Anna smiled, and her smile was reflected by him.
She grew thoughtful, and he became serious.
Some supernatural force drew Kitty’s eyes to Anna’s face.
She was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinating were her round arms with their bracelets, fascinating was her firm neck with its thread of pearls, fascinating the straying curls of her loose hair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of her little feet and hands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there was something terrible and cruel in her fascination.
Kitty admired her more than ever, and more and more acute was her suffering.
Kitty felt overwhelmed, and her face showed it.
When Vronsky saw her, coming across her in the mazurka, he did not at once recognize her, she was so changed.
“Delightful ball!” he said to her, for the sake of saying something.
“Yes,” she answered.
In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newly invented by Korsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle, chose two gentlemen, and summoned a lady and Kitty.
Anna looked at her with drooping eyelids, and smiled, pressing her hand.
But, noticing that Kitty only responded to her smile by a look of despair and amazement, she turned away from her, and began gaily talking to the other lady.
“Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in her,” Kitty said to herself.
“Nonsense, Anna Arkadyevna,” said Korsunsky, drawing her bare arm under the sleeve of his dress coat, “I’ve such an idea for a _cotillion!
Un bijou!_” And he moved gradually on, trying to draw her along with him.
Their host smiled approvingly.
“No, I am not going to stay,” answered Anna, smiling, but in spite of her smile, both Korsunsky and the master of the house saw from her resolute tone that she would not stay.
“No; why, as it is, I have danced more at your ball in Moscow than I have all the winter in Petersburg,” said Anna, looking round at Vronsky, who stood near her.
“I must rest a little before my journey.” “Are you certainly going tomorrow then?” asked Vronsky.
“Yes, I suppose so,” answered Anna, as it were wondering at the boldness of his question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance of her eyes and her smile set him on fire as she said it.
Anna Arkadyevna did not stay to supper, but went home.
Chapter 24 “Yes, there is something in me hateful, repulsive,” thought Levin, as he came away from the Shtcherbatskys’, and walked in the direction of his brother’s lodgings.
If I had any pride, I should not have put myself in such a position.” And he pictured to himself Vronsky, happy, good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never placed in the awful position in which he had been that evening.
So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone or anything.
A nobody, not wanted by anyone, nor of use to anybody.” And he recalled his brother Nikolay, and dwelt with pleasure on the thought of him.
“Isn’t he right that everything in the world is base and loathsome?
And are we fair in our judgment of brother Nikolay?
Of course, from the point of view of Prokofy, seeing him in a torn cloak and tipsy, he’s a despicable person.
But I know him differently.
And I, instead of going to seek him out, went out to dinner, and came here.” Levin walked up to a lamppost, read his brother’s address, which was in his pocketbook, and called a sledge.
All the long way to his brother’s, Levin vividly recalled all the facts familiar to him of his brother Nikolay’s life.
He remembered how his brother, while at the university, and for a year afterwards, had, in spite of the jeers of his companions, lived like a monk, strictly observing all religious rites, services, and fasts, and avoiding every sort of pleasure, especially women.
And afterwards, how he had all at once broken out: he had associated with the most horrible people, and rushed into the most senseless debauchery.
He remembered later the scandal over a boy, whom he had taken from the country to bring up, and, in a fit of rage, had so violently beaten that proceedings were brought against him for unlawfully wounding.
Then he recalled the scandal with a sharper, to whom he had lost money, and given a promissory note, and against whom he had himself lodged a complaint, asserting that he had cheated him. (This was the money Sergey Ivanovitch had paid.) Then he remembered how he had spent a night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in the street.
He remembered the shameful proceedings he had tried to get up against his brother Sergey Ivanovitch, accusing him of not having paid him his share of his mother’s fortune, and the last scandal, when he had gone to a western province in an official capacity, and there had got into trouble for assaulting a village elder....
It was all horribly disgusting, yet to Levin it appeared not at all in the same disgusting light as it inevitably would to those who did not know Nikolay, did not know all his story, did not know his heart.
Levin remembered that when Nikolay had been in the devout stage, the period of fasts and monks and church services, when he was seeking in religion a support and a curb for his passionate temperament, everyone, far from encouraging him, had jeered at him, and he, too, with the others.
They had teased him, called him Noah, and monk; and, when he had broken out, no one had helped him, but everyone had turned away from him with horror and disgust.
Levin felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of his life, his brother Nikolay, in his soul, in the very depths of his soul, was no more in the wrong than the people who despised him.
He was not to blame for having been born with his unbridled temperament and his somehow limited intelligence.
“I will tell him everything, without reserve, and I will make him speak without reserve, too, and I’ll show him that I love him, and so understand him,” Levin resolved to himself, as, towards eleven o’clock, he reached the hotel of which he had the address.
“At the top, 12 and 13,” the porter answered Levin’s inquiry.
As he went in the door, the unknown voice was saying: “It all depends with how much judgment and knowledge the thing’s done.” Konstantin Levin looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was a young man with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, and that a pockmarked woman in a woolen gown, without collar or cuffs, was sitting on the sofa.
Konstantin felt a sharp pang at his heart at the thought of the strange company in which his brother spent his life.
No one had heard him, and Konstantin, taking off his galoshes, listened to what the gentleman in the jerkin was saying.
He was speaking of some enterprise.
“Well, the devil flay them, the privileged classes,” his brother’s voice responded, with a cough.
“Masha! get us some supper and some wine if there’s any left; or else go and get some.” The woman rose, came out from behind the screen, and saw Konstantin.
“There’s some gentleman, Nikolay Dmitrievitch,” she said.
“It’s I,” answered Konstantin Levin, coming forward into the light.
He could be heard getting up hurriedly, stumbling against something, and Levin saw, facing him in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, and the huge, thin, stooping figure of his brother, so familiar, and yet astonishing in its weirdness and sickliness.
He was even thinner than three years before, when Konstantin Levin had seen him last.
His hair had grown thinner, the same straight mustaches hid his lips, the same eyes gazed strangely and naïvely at his visitor.
“Ah, Kostya!” he exclaimed suddenly, recognizing his brother, and his eyes lit up with joy.
But the same second he looked round at the young man, and gave the nervous jerk of his head and neck that Konstantin knew so well, as if his neckband hurt him; and a quite different expression, wild, suffering, and cruel, rested on his emaciated face.
“I wrote to you and Sergey Ivanovitch both that I don’t know you and don’t want to know you.
What is it you want?” He was not at all the same as Konstantin had been fancying him.
The worst and most tiresome part of his character, what made all relations with him so difficult, had been forgotten by Konstantin Levin when he thought of him, and now, when he saw his face, and especially that nervous twitching of his head, he remembered it all.
“I didn’t want to see you for anything,” he answered timidly.
“I’ve simply come to see you.” His brother’s timidity obviously softened Nikolay.
Do you know who this is?” he said, addressing his brother, and indicating the gentleman in the jerkin: “This is Mr.
Kritsky, my friend from Kiev, a very remarkable man.
He’s persecuted by the police, of course, because he’s not a scoundrel.” And he looked round in the way he always did at everyone in the room.
“You’re of the Kiev university?” said Konstantin Levin to Kritsky, to break the awkward silence that followed.
“Yes, I was of Kiev,” Kritsky replied angrily, his face darkening.
“And this woman,” Nikolay Levin interrupted him, pointing to her, “is the partner of my life, Marya Nikolaevna.
I took her out of a bad house,” and he jerked his neck saying this; “but I love her and respect her, and anyone who wants to know me,” he added, raising his voice and knitting his brows, “I beg to love her and respect her.
And if you think you’re lowering yourself, well, here’s the floor, there’s the door.” And again his eyes traveled inquiringly over all of them.
“Why I should be lowering myself, I don’t understand.” “Then, Masha, tell them to bring supper; three portions, spirits and wine....
Go along.” Chapter 25 “So you see,” pursued Nikolay Levin, painfully wrinkling his forehead and twitching.
It was obviously difficult for him to think of what to say and do.
He pointed to some sort of iron bars, fastened together with strings, lying in a corner of the room.
That’s the beginning of a new thing we’re going into.
It’s a productive association....” Konstantin scarcely heard him.
He looked into his sickly, consumptive face, and he was more and more sorry for him, and he could not force himself to listen to what his brother was telling him about the association.
He saw that this association was a mere anchor to save him from self-contempt.
Nikolay Levin went on talking: “You know that capital oppresses the laborer.
The laborers with us, the peasants, bear all the burden of labor, and are so placed that however much they work they can’t escape from their position of beasts of burden.
All the profits of labor, on which they might improve their position, and gain leisure for themselves, and after that education, all the surplus values are taken from them by the capitalists.
And society’s so constituted that the harder they work, the greater the profit of the merchants and landowners, while they stay beasts of burden to the end.
And that state of things must be changed,” he finished up, and he looked questioningly at his brother.
“Yes, of course,” said Konstantin, looking at the patch of red that had come out on his brother’s projecting cheekbones.
“And so we’re founding a locksmiths’ association, where all the production and profit and the chief instruments of production will be in common.” “Where is the association to be?” asked Konstantin Levin.
“In the village of Vozdrem, Kazan government.” “But why in a village?
In the villages, I think, there is plenty of work as it is.
Why a locksmiths’ association in a village?” “Why?
Because the peasants are just as much slaves as they ever were, and that’s why you and Sergey Ivanovitch don’t like people to try and get them out of their slavery,” said Nikolay Levin, exasperated by the objection.
Konstantin Levin sighed, looking meanwhile about the cheerless and dirty room.
This sigh seemed to exasperate Nikolay still more.
“I know your and Sergey Ivanovitch’s aristocratic views.
I know that he applies all the power of his intellect to justify existing evils.” “No; and what do you talk of Sergey Ivanovitch for?” said Levin, smiling.
I’ll tell you what for!” Nikolay Levin shrieked suddenly at the name of Sergey Ivanovitch.
You look down on this, and you’re welcome to,—and go away, in God’s name go away!” he shrieked, getting up from his chair.
“And go away, and go away!” “I don’t look down on it at all,” said Konstantin Levin timidly.
“I don’t even dispute it.” At that instant Marya Nikolaevna came back.
She went quickly to him, and whispered something.
“I’m not well; I’ve grown irritable,” said Nikolay Levin, getting calmer and breathing painfully; “and then you talk to me of Sergey Ivanovitch and his article.
It’s such rubbish, such lying, such self-deception.
Have you read his article?” he asked Kritsky, sitting down again at the table, and moving back off half of it the scattered cigarettes, so as to clear a space.
“I’ve not read it,” Kritsky responded gloomily, obviously not desiring to enter into the conversation.
“Why not?” said Nikolay Levin, now turning with exasperation upon Kritsky.
But with me, it’s another thing; I see through his ideas, and I know where its weakness lies.” Everyone was mute.
Kritsky got up deliberately and reached his cap.
Come round tomorrow with the locksmith.” Kritsky had hardly gone out when Nikolay Levin smiled and winked.
Left alone with Marya Nikolaevna, Levin turned to her.
Nikolay Dmitrievitch’s health has become very poor.
Nikolay Dmitrievitch drinks a great deal,” she said.
“That is ... how does he drink?” “Drinks vodka, and it’s bad for him.” “And a great deal?” whispered Levin.
“Yes,” she said, looking timidly towards the doorway, where Nikolay Levin had reappeared.
“What were you talking about?” he said, knitting his brows, and turning his scared eyes from one to the other.
“What was it?” “Oh, nothing,” Konstantin answered in confusion.
She’s a wench, and you’re a gentleman,” he said with a jerk of the neck.
“You understand everything, I see, and have taken stock of everything, and look with commiseration on my shortcomings,” he began again, raising his voice.
“Nikolay Dmitrievitch, Nikolay Dmitrievitch,” whispered Marya Nikolaevna, again going up to him.
“Here, set it here,” he added angrily, and promptly seizing the vodka, he poured out a glassful and drank it greedily.
“Well, enough of Sergey Ivanovitch.
After all’s said and done, we’re not strangers.
Tell me what you’re doing,” he went on, greedily munching a piece of bread, and pouring out another glassful.
I’m busy looking after the land,” answered Konstantin, watching with horror the greediness with which his brother ate and drank, and trying to conceal that he noticed it.
“Why don’t you get married?” “It hasn’t happened so,” Konstantin answered, reddening a little.
For me now ... everything’s at an end!
But this I’ve said, and I say still, that if my share had been given me when I needed it, my whole life would have been different.” Konstantin made haste to change the conversation.
“Do you know your little Vanya’s with me, a clerk in the countinghouse at Pokrovskoe.” Nikolay jerked his neck, and sank into thought.
“Yes, tell me what’s going on at Pokrovskoe.
Is the house standing still, and the birch trees, and our schoolroom?
And Philip the gardener, is he living?
How I remember the arbor and the seat!
Now mind and don’t alter anything in the house, but make haste and get married, and make everything as it used to be again.
“How nicely we would arrange it!” “I’d come and see you if I were sure I should not find Sergey Ivanovitch.” “You wouldn’t find him there.
I live quite independently of him.” “Yes, but say what you like, you will have to choose between me and him,” he said, looking timidly into his brother’s face.
This timidity touched Konstantin.
“If you want to hear my confession of faith on the subject, I tell you that in your quarrel with Sergey Ivanovitch I take neither side.
You’re more wrong externally, and he inwardly.” “Ah, ah!
You see that, you see that!” Nikolay shouted joyfully.
“But I personally value friendly relations with you more because....” “Why, why?” Konstantin could not say that he valued it more because Nikolay was unhappy, and needed affection.
But Nikolay knew that this was just what he meant to say, and scowling he took up the vodka again.
“Enough, Nikolay Dmitrievitch!” said Marya Nikolaevna, stretching out her plump, bare arm towards the decanter.
Marya Nikolaevna smiled a sweet and good-humored smile, which was at once reflected on Nikolay’s face, and she took the bottle.
“And do you suppose she understands nothing?” said Nikolay.
“She understands it all better than any of us.
Isn’t it true there’s something good and sweet in her?” “Were you never before in Moscow?” Konstantin said to her, for the sake of saying something.
No one ever spoke to her so but the justices of the peace who tried her for trying to get out of a house of ill-fame.
Mercy on us, the senselessness in the world!” he cried suddenly.
“These new institutions, these justices of the peace, rural councils, what hideousness it all is!” And he began to enlarge on his encounters with the new institutions.
Konstantin Levin heard him, and the disbelief in the sense of all public institutions, which he shared with him, and often expressed, was distasteful to him now from his brother’s lips.
“In another world we shall understand it all,” he said lightly.
“Here one would think that to get out of all the baseness and the mess, one’s own and other people’s, would be a good thing, and yet I’m afraid of death, awfully afraid of death.” He shuddered.
“But do drink something.
Would you like some champagne?
Or shall we go somewhere?
Do you know I have got so fond of the Gypsies and Russian songs.” His speech had begun to falter, and he passed abruptly from one subject to another.
Konstantin with the help of Masha persuaded him not to go out anywhere, and got him to bed hopelessly drunk.
Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to persuade Nikolay Levin to go and stay with his brother.
Chapter 26 In the morning Konstantin Levin left Moscow, and towards evening he reached home.
On the journey in the train he talked to his neighbors about politics and the new railways, and, just as in Moscow, he was overcome by a sense of confusion of ideas, dissatisfaction with himself, shame of something or other.
In the first place he resolved that from that day he would give up hoping for any extraordinary happiness, such as marriage must have given him, and consequently he would not so disdain what he really had.
Secondly, he would never again let himself give way to low passion, the memory of which had so tortured him when he had been making up his mind to make an offer.
Then remembering his brother Nikolay, he resolved to himself that he would never allow himself to forget him, that he would follow him up, and not lose sight of him, so as to be ready to help when things should go ill with him.
Then, too, his brother’s talk of communism, which he had treated so lightly at the time, now made him think.
He considered a revolution in economic conditions nonsense.
But he always felt the injustice of his own abundance in comparison with the poverty of the peasants, and now he determined that so as to feel quite in the right, though he had worked hard and lived by no means luxuriously before, he would now work still harder, and would allow himself even less luxury.
And all this seemed to him so easy a conquest over himself that he spent the whole drive in the pleasantest daydreams.
With a resolute feeling of hope in a new, better life, he reached home before nine o’clock at night.
The snow of the little quadrangle before the house was lit up by a light in the bedroom windows of his old nurse, Agafea Mihalovna, who performed the duties of housekeeper in his house.
Kouzma, waked up by her, came sidling sleepily out onto the steps.
A setter bitch, Laska, ran out too, almost upsetting Kouzma, and whining, turned round about Levin’s knees, jumping up and longing, but not daring, to put her forepaws on his chest.
“You’re soon back again, sir,” said Agafea Mihalovna.
“I got tired of it, Agafea Mihalovna.
With friends, one is well; but at home, one is better,” he answered, and went into his study.
The familiar details came out: the stag’s horns, the bookshelves, the looking-glass, the stove with its ventilator, which had long wanted mending, his father’s sofa, a large table, on the table an open book, a broken ashtray, a manuscript book with his handwriting.
As he saw all this, there came over him for an instant a doubt of the possibility of arranging the new life, of which he had been dreaming on the road.
And hearing that voice, he went into the corner where stood his two heavy dumbbells, and began brandishing them like a gymnast, trying to restore his confident temper.
He hastily put down the dumbbells.
The bailiff came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing well; but informed him that the buckwheat in the new drying machine had been a little scorched.
This piece of news irritated Levin.
The new drying machine had been constructed and partly invented by Levin.
The bailiff had always been against the drying machine, and now it was with suppressed triumph that he announced that the buckwheat had been scorched.
Levin was firmly convinced that if the buckwheat had been scorched, it was only because the precautions had not been taken, for which he had hundreds of times given orders.
He was annoyed, and reprimanded the bailiff.
But there had been an important and joyful event: Pava, his best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, had calved.
“Kouzma, give me my sheepskin.
The cowhouse for the more valuable cows was just behind the house.
Walking across the yard, passing a snowdrift by the lilac tree, he went into the cowhouse.
There was the warm, steamy smell of dung when the frozen door was opened, and the cows, astonished at the unfamiliar light of the lantern, stirred on the fresh straw.
He caught a glimpse of the broad, smooth, black and piebald back of Hollandka.
Pava, a perfect beauty, huge as a hippopotamus, with her back turned to them, prevented their seeing the calf, as she sniffed her all over.
Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lifted the red and spotted calf onto her long, tottering legs.
The calf, fumbling, poked her nose under her mother’s udder, and stiffened her tail out straight.
“Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way,” said Levin, examining the calf.
Vassily Fedorovitch, isn’t she splendid?” he said to the bailiff, quite forgiving him for the buckwheat under the influence of his delight in the calf.
Oh, Semyon the contractor came the day after you left.
You must settle with him, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said the bailiff.
“I did inform you about the machine.” This question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of his work on the estate, which was on a large scale, and complicated.
He went straight from the cowhouse to the counting house, and after a little conversation with the bailiff and Semyon the contractor, he went back to the house and straight upstairs to the drawing-room.
Chapter 27 The house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though he lived alone, had the whole house heated and used.
He knew that this was stupid, he knew that it was positively not right, and contrary to his present new plans, but this house was a whole world to Levin.
They had lived just the life that to Levin seemed the ideal of perfection, and that he had dreamed of beginning with his wife, his family.
Levin scarcely remembered his mother.
His conception of her was for him a sacred memory, and his future wife was bound to be in his imagination a repetition of that exquisite, holy ideal of a woman that his mother had been.
He was so far from conceiving of love for woman apart from marriage that he positively pictured to himself first the family, and only secondarily the woman who would give him a family.
His ideas of marriage were, consequently, quite unlike those of the great majority of his acquaintances, for whom getting married was one of the numerous facts of social life.
For Levin it was the chief affair of life, on which its whole happiness turned.
When he had gone into the little drawing-room, where he always had tea, and had settled himself in his armchair with a book, and Agafea Mihalovna had brought him tea, and with her usual, “Well, I’ll stay a while, sir,” had taken a chair in the window, he felt that, however strange it might be, he had not parted from his daydreams, and that he could not live without them.
He was reading a book, and thinking of what he was reading, and stopping to listen to Agafea Mihalovna, who gossiped away without flagging, and yet with all that, all sorts of pictures of family life and work in the future rose disconnectedly before his imagination.
He felt that in the depth of his soul something had been put in its place, settled down, and laid to rest.
He heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgotten his duty to God, and with the money Levin had given him to buy a horse, had been drinking without stopping, and had beaten his wife till he’d half killed her.
He listened, and read his book, and recalled the whole train of ideas suggested by his reading.
It was Tyndall’s _Treatise on Heat_.
He recalled his own criticisms of Tyndall of his complacent satisfaction in the cleverness of his experiments, and for his lack of philosophic insight.
And suddenly there floated into his mind the joyful thought: “In two years’ time I shall have two Dutch cows; Pava herself will perhaps still be alive, a dozen young daughters of Berkoot and the three others—how lovely!” He took up his book again.
“Very good, electricity and heat are the same thing; but is it possible to substitute the one quantity for the other in the equation for the solution of any problem?
The connection between all the forces of nature is felt instinctively....
It’s particulary nice if Pava’s daughter should be a red-spotted cow, and all the herd will take after her, and the other three, too!
To go out with my wife and visitors to meet the herd....
My wife says, ‘Kostya and I looked after that calf like a child.’ ‘How can it interest you so much?’ says a visitor.
‘Everything that interests him, interests me.’ But who will she be?” And he remembered what had happened at Moscow....
But now everything shall go on in a new way.
It’s nonsense to pretend that life won’t let one, that the past won’t let one.
One must struggle to live better, much better.”...
He raised his head, and fell to dreaming.
Old Laska, who had not yet fully digested her delight at his return, and had run out into the yard to bark, came back wagging her tail, and crept up to him, bringing in the scent of fresh air, put her head under his hand, and whined plaintively, asking to be stroked.
“There, who’d have thought it?” said Agafea Mihalovna.
“The dog now ... why, she understands that her master’s come home, and that he’s low-spirited.” “Why low-spirited?” “Do you suppose I don’t see it, sir?
It’s nothing, sir, so long as there’s health and a clear conscience.” Levin looked intently at her, surprised at how well she knew his thought.
He stroked her, and she promptly curled up at his feet, laying her head on a hindpaw.
And in token of all now being well and satisfactory, she opened her mouth a little, smacked her lips, and settling her sticky lips more comfortably about her old teeth, she sank into blissful repose.
Levin watched all her movements attentively.
All’s well.” Chapter 28 After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her husband a telegram that she was leaving Moscow the same day.
“No, I must go, I must go”; she explained to her sister-in-law the change in her plans in a tone that suggested that she had to remember so many things that there was no enumerating them: “no, it had really better be today!” Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but he promised to come and see his sister off at seven o’clock.
Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache.
Dolly and Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess.
Whether it was that the children were fickle, or that they had acute senses, and felt that Anna was quite different that day from what she had been when they had taken such a fancy to her, that she was not now interested in them,—but they had abruptly dropped their play with their aunt, and their love for her, and were quite indifferent that she was going away.
Anna was absorbed the whole morning in preparations for her departure.
She wrote notes to her Moscow acquaintances, put down her accounts, and packed.
Altogether Dolly fancied she was not in a placid state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew well with herself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most part covers dissatisfaction with self.
After dinner, Anna went up to her room to dress, and Dolly followed her.
I am like that sometimes.
It’s very stupid, but it’ll pass off,” said Anna quickly, and she bent her flushed face over a tiny bag in which she was packing a nightcap and some cambric handkerchiefs.
Her eyes were particularly bright, and were continually swimming with tears.
“In the same way I didn’t want to leave Petersburg, and now I don’t want to go away from here.” “You came here and did a good deed,” said Dolly, looking intently at her.
In your heart there was found love enough to forgive....” “If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened!
“Everything is clear and good in your heart.” “Every heart has its own _skeletons_, as the English say.” “You have no sort of _skeleton_, have you?
Everything is so clear in you.” “I have!” said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after her tears, a sly, ironical smile curved her lips.
“Come, he’s amusing, anyway, your _skeleton_, and not depressing,” said Dolly, smiling.
“No, he’s depressing.
Do you know why I’m going today instead of tomorrow?
It’s a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it to you,” said Anna, letting herself drop definitely into an armchair, and looking straight into Dolly’s face.
And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her ears, up to the curly black ringlets on her neck.
I’ve been the cause of that ball being a torture to her instead of a pleasure.
But truly, truly, it’s not my fault, or only my fault a little bit,” she said, daintily drawling the words “a little bit.” “Oh, how like Stiva you said that!” said Dolly, laughing.
I’m not Stiva,” she said, knitting her brows.
But at the very moment she was uttering the words, she felt that they were not true.
She was not merely doubting herself, she felt emotion at the thought of Vronsky, and was going away sooner than she had meant, simply to avoid meeting him.
“Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with him, and that he....” “You can’t imagine how absurdly it all came about.
I only meant to be matchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite differently.
Possibly against my own will....” She crimsoned and stopped.
“Oh, they feel it directly?” said Dolly.
“But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on his side,” Anna interrupted her.
“And I am certain it will all be forgotten, and Kitty will leave off hating me.” “All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxious for this marriage for Kitty.
And it’s better it should come to nothing, if he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day.” “Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!” said Anna, and again a deep flush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, that absorbed her, put into words.
Eh?” Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile.
She loved Anna, but she enjoyed seeing that she too had her weaknesses.
“Ah, how silly I am today!” She passed her handkerchief over her face and began dressing.
At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late, rosy and good-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.
Anna’s emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced her sister-in-law for the last time, she whispered: “Remember, Anna, what you’ve done for me—I shall never forget.
And remember that I love you, and shall always love you as my dearest friend!” “I don’t know why,” said Anna, kissing her and hiding her tears.
“You understood me, and you understand.
Good-bye, my darling!” Chapter 29 “Come, it’s all over, and thank God!” was the first thought that came to Anna Arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last time to her brother, who had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till the third bell rang.
She sat down on her lounge beside Annushka, and looked about her in the twilight of the sleeping-carriage.
“Thank God! tomorrow I shall see Seryozha and Alexey Alexandrovitch, and my life will go on in the old way, all nice and as usual.” Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that day, Anna took pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with great care.
With her little deft hands she opened and shut her little red bag, took out a cushion, laid it on her knees, and carefully wrapping up her feet, settled herself comfortably.
Two other ladies began talking to Anna, and a stout elderly lady tucked up her feet, and made observations about the heating of the train.
Anna answered a few words, but not foreseeing any entertainment from the conversation, she asked Annushka to get a lamp, hooked it onto the arm of her seat, and took from her bag a paper-knife and an English novel.
At first her reading made no progress.
The fuss and bustle were disturbing; then when the train had started, she could not help listening to the noises; then the snow beating on the left window and sticking to the pane, and the sight of the muffled guard passing by, covered with snow on one side, and the conversations about the terrible snowstorm raging outside, distracted her attention.
Farther on, it was continually the same again and again: the same shaking and rattling, the same snow on the window, the same rapid transitions from steaming heat to cold, and back again to heat, the same passing glimpses of the same figures in the twilight, and the same voices, and Anna began to read and to understand what she read.
Annushka was already dozing, the red bag on her lap, clutched by her broad hands, in gloves, of which one was torn.
Anna Arkadyevna read and understood, but it was distasteful to her to read, that is, to follow the reflection of other people’s lives.
But there was no chance of doing anything; and twisting the smooth paper-knife in her little hands, she forced herself to read.
The hero of the novel was already almost reaching his English happiness, a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a desire to go with him to the estate, when she suddenly felt that _he_ ought to feel ashamed, and that she was ashamed of the same thing.
“What have I to be ashamed of?” she asked herself in injured surprise.
She laid down the book and sank against the back of the chair, tightly gripping the paper-cutter in both hands.
She went over all her Moscow recollections.
All were good, pleasant.
She remembered the ball, remembered Vronsky and his face of slavish adoration, remembered all her conduct with him: there was nothing shameful.
And for all that, at the same point in her memories, the feeling of shame was intensified, as though some inner voice, just at the point when she thought of Vronsky, were saying to her, “Warm, very warm, hot.” “Well, what is it?” she said to herself resolutely, shifting her seat in the lounge.
Am I afraid to look it straight in the face?
Can it be that between me and this officer boy there exist, or can exist, any other relations than such as are common with every acquaintance?” She laughed contemptuously and took up her book again; but now she was definitely unable to follow what she read.
She felt as though her nerves were strings being strained tighter and tighter on some sort of screwing peg.
She felt her eyes opening wider and wider, her fingers and toes twitching nervously, something within oppressing her breathing, while all shapes and sounds seemed in the uncertain half-light to strike her with unaccustomed vividness.
Moments of doubt were continually coming upon her, when she was uncertain whether the train were going forwards or backwards, or were standing still altogether; whether it were Annushka at her side or a stranger.
Myself or some other woman?” She was afraid of giving way to this delirium.
But something drew her towards it, and she could yield to it or resist it at will.
For a moment she regained her self-possession, and realized that the thin peasant who had come in wearing a long overcoat, with buttons missing from it, was the stoveheater, that he was looking at the thermometer, that it was the wind and snow bursting in after him at the door; but then everything grew blurred again....
That peasant with the long waist seemed to be gnawing something on the wall, the old lady began stretching her legs the whole length of the carriage, and filling it with a black cloud; then there was a fearful shrieking and banging, as though someone were being torn to pieces; then there was a blinding dazzle of red fire before her eyes and a wall seemed to rise up and hide everything.
But it was not terrible, but delightful.
The voice of a man muffled up and covered with snow shouted something in her ear.
She got up and pulled herself together; she realized that they had reached a station and that this was the guard.
She asked Annushka to hand her the cape she had taken off and her shawl, put them on and moved towards the door.
“Do you wish to get out?” asked Annushka.
The driving snow and the wind rushed to meet her and struggled with her over the door.
But she enjoyed the struggle.
The wind seemed as though lying in wait for her; with gleeful whistle it tried to snatch her up and bear her off, but she clung to the cold door post, and holding her skirt got down onto the platform and under the shelter of the carriages.
The wind had been powerful on the steps, but on the platform, under the lee of the carriages, there was a lull.
With enjoyment she drew deep breaths of the frozen, snowy air, and standing near the carriage looked about the platform and the lighted station.
Chapter 30 The raging tempest rushed whistling between the wheels of the carriages, about the scaffolding, and round the corner of the station.
The carriages, posts, people, everything that was to be seen was covered with snow on one side, and was getting more and more thickly covered.
For a moment there would come a lull in the storm, but then it would swoop down again with such onslaughts that it seemed impossible to stand against it.
Meanwhile men ran to and fro, talking merrily together, their steps crackling on the platform as they continually opened and closed the big doors.
“Hand over that telegram!” came an angry voice out of the stormy darkness on the other side.
No. 28!” several different voices shouted again, and muffled figures ran by covered with snow.
Two gentlemen with lighted cigarettes passed by her.
She drew one more deep breath of the fresh air, and had just put her hand out of her muff to take hold of the door post and get back into the carriage, when another man in a military overcoat, quite close beside her, stepped between her and the flickering light of the lamp post.
She looked round, and the same instant recognized Vronsky’s face.
Putting his hand to the peak of his cap, he bowed to her and asked, Was there anything she wanted?
She gazed rather a long while at him without answering, and, in spite of the shadow in which he was standing, she saw, or fancied she saw, both the expression of his face and his eyes.
It was again that expression of reverential ecstasy which had so worked upon her the day before.
More than once she had told herself during the past few days, and again only a few moments before, that Vronsky was for her only one of the hundreds of young men, forever exactly the same, that are met everywhere, that she would never allow herself to bestow a thought upon him.
She knew as certainly as if he had told her that he was here to be where she was.
And irrepressible delight and eagerness shone in her face.
“What am I coming for?” he repeated, looking straight into her eyes.
“You know that I have come to be where you are,” he said; “I can’t help it.” At that moment the wind, as it were, surmounting all obstacles, sent the snow flying from the carriage roofs, and clanked some sheet of iron it had torn off, while the hoarse whistle of the engine roared in front, plaintively and gloomily.
All the awfulness of the storm seemed to her more splendid now.
She made no answer, and in her face he saw conflict.
He had spoken courteously, deferentially, yet so firmly, so stubbornly, that for a long while she could make no answer.
“Not one word, not one gesture of yours shall I, could I, ever forget....” “Enough, enough!” she cried trying assiduously to give a stern expression to her face, into which he was gazing greedily.
And clutching at the cold door post, she clambered up the steps and got rapidly into the corridor of the carriage.
But in the little corridor she paused, going over in her imagination what had happened.
Though she could not recall her own words or his, she realized instinctively that the momentary conversation had brought them fearfully closer; and she was panic-stricken and blissful at it.
After standing still a few seconds, she went into the carriage and sat down in her place.
The overstrained condition which had tormented her before did not only come back, but was intensified, and reached such a pitch that she was afraid every minute that something would snap within her from the excessive tension.
But in that nervous tension, and in the visions that filled her imagination, there was nothing disagreeable or gloomy: on the contrary there was something blissful, glowing, and exhilarating.
Towards morning Anna sank into a doze, sitting in her place, and when she waked it was daylight and the train was near Petersburg.
At once thoughts of home, of husband and of son, and the details of that day and the following came upon her.
At Petersburg, as soon as the train stopped and she got out, the first person that attracted her attention was her husband.
“Oh, mercy! why do his ears look like that?” she thought, looking at his frigid and imposing figure, and especially the ears that struck her at the moment as propping up the brim of his round hat.
Catching sight of her, he came to meet her, his lips falling into their habitual sarcastic smile, and his big, tired eyes looking straight at her.
An unpleasant sensation gripped at her heart when she met his obstinate and weary glance, as though she had expected to see him different.
She was especially struck by the feeling of dissatisfaction with herself that she experienced on meeting him.
That feeling was an intimate, familiar feeling, like a consciousness of hypocrisy, which she experienced in her relations with her husband.
But hitherto she had not taken note of the feeling, now she was clearly and painfully aware of it.
“Yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the first year after marriage, burned with impatience to see you,” he said in his deliberate, high-pitched voice, and in that tone which he almost always took with her, a tone of jeering at anyone who should say in earnest what he said.
“Is Seryozha quite well?” she asked.
He sat in his armchair, looking straight before him or scanning the people who got in and out.
If he had indeed on previous occasions struck and impressed people who did not know him by his air of unhesitating composure, he seemed now more haughty and self-possessed than ever.
A nervous young man, a clerk in a law court, sitting opposite him, hated him for that look.
The young man asked him for a light, and entered into conversation with him, and even pushed against him, to make him feel that he was not a thing, but a person.
But Vronsky gazed at him exactly as he did at the lamp, and the young man made a wry face, feeling that he was losing his self-possession under the oppression of this refusal to recognize him as a person.
He felt himself a king, not because he believed that he had made an impression on Anna—he did not yet believe that,—but because the impression she had made on him gave him happiness and pride.
He felt that all his forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were centered on one thing, and bent with fearful energy on one blissful goal.
He knew only that he had told her the truth, that he had come where she was, that all the happiness of his life, the only meaning in life for him, now lay in seeing and hearing her.
And when he got out of the carriage at Bologova to get some seltzer water, and caught sight of Anna, involuntarily his first word had told her just what he thought.
And he was glad he had told her it, that she knew it now and was thinking of it.
When he was back in the carriage, he kept unceasingly going over every position in which he had seen her, every word she had uttered, and before his fancy, making his heart faint with emotion, floated pictures of a possible future.
When he got out of the train at Petersburg, he felt after his sleepless night as keen and fresh as after a cold bath.
He paused near his compartment, waiting for her to get out.
“Once more,” he said to himself, smiling unconsciously, “once more I shall see her walk, her face; she will say something, turn her head, glance, smile, maybe.” But before he caught sight of her, he saw her husband, whom the station-master was deferentially escorting through the crowd.
The husband.” Only now for the first time did Vronsky realize clearly the fact that there was a person attached to her, a husband.
He knew that she had a husband, but had hardly believed in his existence, and only now fully believed in him, with his head and shoulders, and his legs clad in black trousers; especially when he saw this husband calmly take her arm with a sense of property.
Seeing Alexey Alexandrovitch with his Petersburg face and severely self-confident figure, in his round hat, with his rather prominent spine, he believed in him, and was aware of a disagreeable sensation, such as a man might feel tortured by thirst, who, on reaching a spring, should find a dog, a sheep, or a pig, who has drunk of it and muddied the water.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s manner of walking, with a swing of the hips and flat feet, particularly annoyed Vronsky.
He could recognize in no one but himself an indubitable right to love her.
But she was still the same, and the sight of her affected him the same way, physically reviving him, stirring him, and filling his soul with rapture.
At the moment when he was approaching Anna Arkadyevna he noticed too with joy that she was conscious of his being near, and looked round, and seeing him, turned again to her husband.
“Have you passed a good night?” he asked, bowing to her and her husband together, and leaving it up to Alexey Alexandrovitch to accept the bow on his own account, and to recognize it or not, as he might see fit.
“Thank you, very good,” she answered.
Her face looked weary, and there was not that play of eagerness in it, peeping out in her smile and her eyes; but for a single instant, as she glanced at him, there was a flash of something in her eyes, and although the flash died away at once, he was happy for that moment.
Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at Vronsky with displeasure, vaguely recalling who this was.
Vronsky’s composure and self-confidence here struck, like a scythe against a stone, upon the cold self-confidence of Alexey Alexandrovitch.
We are acquainted, I believe,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, giving his hand.
“You set off with the mother and you return with the son,” he said, articulating each syllable, as though each were a separate favor he was bestowing.
“You’re back from leave, I suppose?” he said, and without waiting for a reply, he turned to his wife in his jesting tone: “Well, were a great many tears shed at Moscow at parting?” By addressing his wife like this he gave Vronsky to understand that he wished to be left alone, and, turning slightly towards him, he touched his hat; but Vronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced with his weary eyes at Vronsky.
“Delighted,” he said coldly.
Most fortunate,” he said to his wife, dismissing Vronsky altogether, “that I should just have half an hour to meet you, so that I can prove my devotion,” he went on in the same jesting tone.
“You lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it much,” she responded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily listening to the sound of Vronsky’s steps behind them.
“But what has it to do with me?” she said to herself, and she began asking her husband how Seryozha had got on without her.
Mariette says he has been very good, And ...
I must disappoint you ... but he has not missed you as your husband has.
Our dear _Samovar_ will be delighted.” (He used to call the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, well known in society, a samovar, because she was always bubbling over with excitement.) “She has been continually asking after you.
You know how she takes everything to heart.
Just now, with all her own cares, she’s anxious about the Oblonskys being brought together.” The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of her husband’s, and the center of that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world with which Anna was, through her husband, in the closest relations.
Well, Kondraty will take you in the carriage, while I go to my committee.
I shall not be alone at dinner again,” Alexey Alexandrovitch went on, no longer in a sarcastic tone.
“You wouldn’t believe how I’ve missed....” And with a long pressure of her hand and a meaning smile, he put her in her carriage.
He dashed down the stairs to her, in spite of the governess’s call, and with desperate joy shrieked: “Mother! mother!” Running up to her, he hung on her neck.
“I told you it was mother!” he shouted to the governess.
“I knew!” And her son, like her husband, aroused in Anna a feeling akin to disappointment.
She had imagined him better than he was in reality.
But even as he was, he was charming, with his fair curls, his blue eyes, and his plump, graceful little legs in tightly pulled-up stockings.
Anna experienced almost physical pleasure in the sensation of his nearness, and his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met his simple, confiding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions.
Anna took out the presents Dolly’s children had sent him, and told her son what sort of little girl was Tanya at Moscow, and how Tanya could read, and even taught the other children.
“Why, am I not so nice as she?” asked Seryozha.
“To me you’re nicer than anyone in the world.” “I know that,” said Seryozha, smiling.
Anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the Countess Lidia Ivanovna was announced.
The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall, stout woman, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black eyes.
“Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?” inquired Countess Lidia Ivanovna, as soon as she came into the room.
“Yes, it’s all over, but it was all much less serious than we had supposed,” answered Anna.
“My _belle-sœur_ is in general too hasty.” But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in everything that did not concern her, had a habit of never listening to what interested her; she interrupted Anna: “Yes, there’s plenty of sorrow and evil in the world.
I am so worried today.” “Oh, why?” asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.
“I’m beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth, and sometimes I’m quite unhinged by it.
The Society of the Little Sisters” (this was a religiously-patriotic, philanthropic institution) “was going splendidly, but with these gentlemen it’s impossible to do anything,” added Countess Lidia Ivanovna in a tone of ironical submission to destiny.
“They pounce on the idea, and distort it, and then work it out so pettily and unworthily.
Two or three people, your husband among them, understand all the importance of the thing, but the others simply drag it down.
Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me....” Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna described the purport of his letter.
Then the countess told her of more disagreements and intrigues against the work of the unification of the churches, and departed in haste, as she had that day to be at the meeting of some society and also at the Slavonic committee.
“Or has she been very much irritated today?
It’s really ludicrous; her object is doing good; she a Christian, yet she’s always angry; and she always has enemies, and always enemies in the name of Christianity and doing good.” After Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a chief secretary, who told her all the news of the town.
At three o’clock she too went away, promising to come to dinner.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was at the ministry.
Anna, left alone, spent the time till dinner in assisting at her son’s dinner (he dined apart from his parents) and in putting her things in order, and in reading and answering the notes and letters which had accumulated on her table.
The feeling of causeless shame, which she had felt on the journey, and her excitement, too, had completely vanished.
In the habitual conditions of her life she felt again resolute and irreproachable.
She recalled with wonder her state of mind on the previous day.
Vronsky said something silly, which it was easy to put a stop to, and I answered as I ought to have done.
To speak of it to my husband would be unnecessary and out of the question.
Chapter 33 Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers at four o’clock, but as often happened, he had not time to come in to her.
He went into his study to see the people waiting for him with petitions, and to sign some papers brought him by his chief secretary.
At dinner time (there were always a few people dining with the Karenins) there arrived an old lady, a cousin of Alexey Alexandrovitch, the chief secretary of the department and his wife, and a young man who had been recommended to Alexey Alexandrovitch for the service.
Precisely at five o’clock, before the bronze Peter the First clock had struck the fifth stroke, Alexey Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening coat with two stars, as he had to go out directly after dinner.
Every minute of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s life was portioned out and occupied.
And to make time to get through all that lay before him every day, he adhered to the strictest punctuality.
“Unhasting and unresting,” was his motto.
He came into the dining hall, greeted everyone, and hurriedly sat down, smiling to his wife.
“Yes, my solitude is over.
You wouldn’t believe how uncomfortable” (he laid stress on the word _uncomfortable_) “it is to dine alone.” At dinner he talked a little to his wife about Moscow matters, and, with a sarcastic smile, asked her after Stepan Arkadyevitch; but the conversation was for the most part general, dealing with Petersburg official and public news.
After dinner he spent half an hour with his guests, and again, with a smile, pressed his wife’s hand, withdrew, and drove off to the council.
Anna did not go out that evening either to the Princess Betsy Tverskaya, who, hearing of her return, had invited her, nor to the theater, where she had a box for that evening.
She did not go out principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not ready.
Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of her guests, to the consideration of her attire, was very much annoyed.
She was generally a mistress of the art of dressing well without great expense, and before leaving Moscow she had given her dressmaker three dresses to transform.
The dresses had to be altered so that they could not be recognized, and they ought to have been ready three days before.
It appeared that two dresses had not been done at all, while the other one had not been altered as Anna had intended.
The dressmaker came to explain, declaring that it would be better as she had done it, and Anna was so furious that she felt ashamed when she thought of it afterwards.
To regain her serenity completely she went into the nursery, and spent the whole evening with her son, put him to bed herself, signed him with the cross, and tucked him up.
She was glad she had not gone out anywhere, and had spent the evening so well.
She felt so light-hearted and serene, she saw so clearly that all that had seemed to her so important on her railway journey was only one of the common trivial incidents of fashionable life, and that she had no reason to feel ashamed before anyone else or before herself.
“Here you are at last!” she observed, holding out her hand to him.
“Altogether then, I see your visit was a success,” he said to her.
“Oh, yes,” she said, and she began telling him about everything from the beginning: her journey with Countess Vronskaya, her arrival, the accident at the station.
Then she described the pity she had felt, first for her brother, and afterwards for Dolly.
“I imagine one cannot exonerate such a man from blame, though he is your brother,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.
She knew that he said that simply to show that family considerations could not prevent him from expressing his genuine opinion.
She knew that characteristic in her husband, and liked it.
“I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are back again,” he went on.
“Come, what do they say about the new act I have got passed in the council?” Anna had heard nothing of this act, and she felt conscience-stricken at having been able so readily to forget what was to him of such importance.
“Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation,” he said, with a complacent smile.
She saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell her something pleasant to him about it, and she brought him by questions to telling it.
With the same complacent smile he told her of the ovations he had received in consequence of the act he had passed.
It shows that at last a reasonable and steady view of the matter is becoming prevalent among us.” Having drunk his second cup of tea with cream, and bread, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, and was going towards his study.
“And you’ve not been anywhere this evening?
“Oh, no!” she answered, getting up after him and accompanying him across the room to his study.
“Just now I’m reading Duc de Lille, _Poésie des Enfers,_” he answered.
“A very remarkable book.” Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they love, and, putting her hand under his, she escorted him to the door of the study.
She knew his habit, that had grown into a necessity, of reading in the evening.
She knew, too, that in spite of his official duties, which swallowed up almost the whole of his time, he considered it his duty to keep up with everything of note that appeared in the intellectual world.
She knew, too, that he was really interested in books dealing with politics, philosophy, and theology, that art was utterly foreign to his nature; but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it, Alexey Alexandrovitch never passed over anything in the world of art, but made it his duty to read everything.
She knew that in politics, in philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often had doubts, and made investigations; but on questions of art and poetry, and, above all, of music, of which he was totally devoid of understanding, he had the most distinct and decided opinions.
He was fond of talking about Shakespeare, Raphael, Beethoven, of the significance of new schools of poetry and music, all of which were classified by him with very conspicuous consistency.
“Well, God be with you,” she said at the door of the study, where a shaded candle and a decanter of water were already put by his armchair.
“All the same he’s a good man; truthful, good-hearted, and remarkable in his own line,” Anna said to herself going back to her room, as though she were defending him to someone who had attacked him and said that one could not love him.
“But why is it his ears stick out so strangely?
Or has he had his hair cut?” Precisely at twelve o’clock, when Anna was still sitting at her writing-table, finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the sound of measured steps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly washed and combed, with a book under his arm, came in to her.
“And what right had he to look at him like that?” thought Anna, recalling Vronsky’s glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Undressing, she went into the bedroom; but her face had none of the eagerness which, during her stay in Moscow, had fairly flashed from her eyes and her smile; on the contrary, now the fire seemed quenched in her, hidden somewhere far away.
Chapter 34 When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, he had left his large set of rooms in Morskaia to his friend and favorite comrade Petritsky.
Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly well-connected, and not merely not wealthy, but always hopelessly in debt.
Towards evening he was always drunk, and he had often been locked up after all sorts of ludicrous and disgraceful scandals, but he was a favorite both of his comrades and his superior officers.
On arriving at twelve o’clock from the station at his flat, Vronsky saw, at the outer door, a hired carriage familiar to him.
While still outside his own door, as he rang, he heard masculine laughter, the lisp of a feminine voice, and Petritsky’s voice.
“If that’s one of the villains, don’t let him in!” Vronsky told the servant not to announce him, and slipped quietly into the first room.
Baroness Shilton, a friend of Petritsky’s, with a rosy little face and flaxen hair, resplendent in a lilac satin gown, and filling the whole room, like a canary, with her Parisian chatter, sat at the round table making coffee.
Petritsky, in his overcoat, and the cavalry captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probably just come from duty, were sitting each side of her.
Vronsky!” shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping his chair.
Baroness, some coffee for him out of the new coffee pot.
Hope you’re satisfied with the ornament of your study,” he said, indicating the baroness.
“You know each other, of course?” “I should think so,” said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressing the baroness’s little hand.
I’m an old friend.” “You’re home after a journey,” said the baroness, “so I’m flying.
Oh, I’ll be off this minute, if I’m in the way.” “You’re home, wherever you are, baroness,” said Vronsky.
“How do you do, Kamerovsky?” he added, coldly shaking hands with Kamerovsky.
“There, you never know how to say such pretty things,” said the baroness, turning to Petritsky.
Well, then, I’ll make you some coffee, so go and wash and get ready,” said the baroness, sitting down again, and anxiously turning the screw in the new coffee pot.
“Pierre, give me the coffee,” she said, addressing Petritsky, whom she called Pierre as a contraction of his surname, making no secret of her relations with him.
Well, and your wife?” said the baroness suddenly, interrupting Vronsky’s conversation with his comrade.
“We’ve been marrying you here.
Have you brought your wife?” “No, baroness.
I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall die.” “So much the better, so much the better.
Shake hands on it.” And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling him, with many jokes, about her last new plans of life, asking his advice.
“He persists in refusing to give me a divorce!
Kamerovsky, look after the coffee; it’s boiling over.
You see, I’m engrossed with business!
I want a lawsuit, because I must have my property.
Do you understand the folly of it, that on the pretext of my being unfaithful to him,” she said contemptuously, “he wants to get the benefit of my fortune.” Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prattle of a pretty woman, agreed with her, gave her half-joking counsel, and altogether dropped at once into the tone habitual to him in talking to such women.
In his Petersburg world all people were divided into utterly opposed classes.
One, the lower class, vulgar, stupid, and, above all, ridiculous people, who believe that one husband ought to live with the one wife whom he has lawfully married; that a girl should be innocent, a woman modest, and a man manly, self-controlled, and strong; that one ought to bring up one’s children, earn one’s bread, and pay one’s debts; and various similar absurdities.
This was the class of old-fashioned and ridiculous people.
To this class they all belonged, and in it the great thing was to be elegant, generous, plucky, gay, to abandon oneself without a blush to every passion, and to laugh at everything else.
For the first moment only, Vronsky was startled after the impression of a quite different world that he had brought with him from Moscow.
But immediately as though slipping his feet into old slippers, he dropped back into the light-hearted, pleasant world he had always lived in.
The coffee was never really made, but spluttered over everyone, and boiled away, doing just what was required of it—that is, providing much cause for much noise and laughter, and spoiling a costly rug and the baroness’s gown.
“Well now, good-bye, or you’ll never get washed, and I shall have on my conscience the worst sin a gentleman can commit.
He’ll kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily,” answered Vronsky.
“So at the Français!” and, with a rustle of her skirts, she vanished.
Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for him to go, shook hands and went off to his dressing-room.
While he was washing, Petritsky described to him in brief outlines his position, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had left Petersburg.
His tailor was trying to get him locked up, and another fellow, too, was threatening to get him locked up.
The colonel of the regiment had announced that if these scandals did not cease he would have to leave.
As for the baroness, he was sick to death of her, especially since she’d taken to offering continually to lend him money.
But he had found a girl—he’d show her to Vronsky—a marvel, exquisite, in the strict Oriental style, “genre of the slave Rebecca, don’t you know.” He’d had a row, too, with Berkoshov, and was going to send seconds to him, but of course it would come to nothing.
Altogether everything was supremely amusing and jolly.
And, not letting his comrade enter into further details of his position, Petritsky proceeded to tell him all the interesting news.
As he listened to Petritsky’s familiar stories in the familiar setting of the rooms he had spent the last three years in, Vronsky felt a delightful sense of coming back to the careless Petersburg life that he was used to.
“Impossible!” he cried, letting down the pedal of the washing basin in which he had been sousing his healthy red neck.
“Impossible!” he cried, at the news that Laura had flung over Fertinghof and had made up to Mileev.
Well, and how’s Buzulukov?” “Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov—simply lovely!” cried Petritsky.
“You know his weakness for balls, and he never misses a single court ball.
Well, so he’s standing....
No, I say, do listen.” “I am listening,” answered Vronsky, rubbing himself with a rough towel.
“Up comes the Grand Duchess with some ambassador or other, and, as ill-luck would have it, she begins talking to him about the new helmets.
The Grand Duchess positively wanted to show the new helmet to the ambassador.
They see our friend standing there.” (Petritsky mimicked how he was standing with the helmet.) “The Grand Duchess asked him to give her the helmet; he doesn’t give it to her.
Well, everyone’s winking at him, nodding, frowning—give it to her, do!
Well, the ... what’s his name, whatever he was ... tries to take the helmet from him ... he won’t give it up!...
‘Here, your Highness,’ says he, ‘is the new helmet.’ She turned the helmet the other side up, And—just picture it!—plop went a pear and sweetmeats out of it, two pounds of sweetmeats!...
He’d been storing them up, the darling!” Vronsky burst into roars of laughter.
And long afterwards, when he was talking of other things, he broke out into his healthy laugh, showing his strong, close rows of teeth, when he thought of the helmet.
Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of his valet, got into his uniform, and went off to report himself.
He intended, when he had done that, to drive to his brother’s and to Betsy’s and to pay several visits with a view to beginning to go into that society where he might meet Madame Karenina.
As he always did in Petersburg, he left home not meaning to return till late at night.
PART TWO Chapter 1 At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, a consultation was being held, which was to pronounce on the state of Kitty’s health and the measures to be taken to restore her failing strength.
The family doctor gave her cod liver oil, then iron, then nitrate of silver, but as the first and the second and the third were alike in doing no good, and as his advice when spring came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician was called in.
The celebrated physician, a very handsome man, still youngish, asked to examine the patient.
He maintained, with peculiar satisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic of barbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a man still youngish to handle a young girl naked.
He thought it natural because he did it every day, and felt and thought, as it seemed to him, no harm as he did it and consequently he considered modesty in the girl not merely as a relic of barbarism, but also as an insult to himself.
There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the doctors had studied in the same school, had read the same books, and learned the same science, and though some people said this celebrated doctor was a bad doctor, in the princess’s household and circle it was for some reason accepted that this celebrated doctor alone had some special knowledge, and that he alone could save Kitty.
After a careful examination and sounding of the bewildered patient, dazed with shame, the celebrated doctor, having scrupulously washed his hands, was standing in the drawing-room talking to the prince.
The prince frowned and coughed, listening to the doctor.
As a man who had seen something of life, and neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in medicine, and in his heart was furious at the whole farce, specially as he was perhaps the only one who fully comprehended the cause of Kitty’s illness.
“Conceited blockhead!” he thought, as he listened to the celebrated doctor’s chatter about his daughter’s symptoms.
The doctor was meantime with difficulty restraining the expression of his contempt for this old gentleman, and with difficulty condescending to the level of his intelligence.
He perceived that it was no good talking to the old man, and that the principal person in the house was the mother.
At that instant the princess came into the drawing-room with the family doctor.
The prince withdrew, trying not to show how ridiculous he thought the whole performance.
The princess was distracted, and did not know what to do.
“Well, doctor, decide our fate,” said the princess.
“Tell me everything.” “Is there hope?” she meant to say, but her lips quivered, and she could not utter the question.
“Well, doctor?” “Immediately, princess.
I will talk it over with my colleague, and then I will have the honor of laying my opinion before you.” “So we had better leave you?” “As you please.” The princess went out with a sigh.
When the doctors were left alone, the family doctor began timidly explaining his opinion, that there was a commencement of tuberculous trouble, but ... and so on.
The celebrated doctor listened to him, and in the middle of his sentence looked at his big gold watch.
“But....” The family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of his observations.
“The commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you are aware, able to define; till there are cavities, there is nothing definite.
And there are indications; malnutrition, nervous excitability, and so on.
The question stands thus: in presence of indications of tuberculous process, what is to be done to maintain nutrition?” “But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the back in these cases,” the family doctor permitted himself to interpolate with a subtle smile.
“Yes, that’s an understood thing,” responded the celebrated physician, again glancing at his watch.
So we were saying the problem may be put thus: to maintain nutrition and to give tone to the nerves.
The one is in close connection with the other, one must attack both sides at once.” “And how about a tour abroad?” asked the family doctor.
And take note: if there is an early stage of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be certain, a foreign tour will be of no use.
What is wanted is means of improving nutrition, and not for lowering it.” And the celebrated doctor expounded his plan of treatment with Soden waters, a remedy obviously prescribed primarily on the ground that they could do no harm.
The family doctor listened attentively and respectfully.
“But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of habits, the removal from conditions calling up reminiscences.
Only, those German quacks are mischievous....
They ought to be persuaded....
The celebrated doctor announced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from him dictated his doing so) that he ought to see the patient once more.
“What! another examination!” cried the mother, with horror.
“Oh, no, only a few details, princess.” “Come this way.” And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing-room to Kitty.
Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in her eyes, left there by the agony of shame she had been put through, Kitty stood in the middle of the room.
All her illness and treatment struck her as a thing so stupid, ludicrous even!
Doctoring her seemed to her as absurd as putting together the pieces of a broken vase.
But she could not grieve her mother, especially as her mother considered herself to blame.
“May I trouble you to sit down, princess?” the celebrated doctor said to her.
He sat down with a smile, facing her, felt her pulse, and again began asking her tiresome questions.
She answered him, and all at once got up, furious.
This is the third time you’ve asked me the same thing.” The celebrated doctor did not take offense.
“Nervous irritability,” he said to the princess, when Kitty had left the room.
“However, I had finished....” And the doctor began scientifically explaining to the princess, as an exceptionally intelligent woman, the condition of the young princess, and concluded by insisting on the drinking of the waters, which were certainly harmless.
At the question: Should they go abroad? the doctor plunged into deep meditation, as though resolving a weighty problem.
Finally his decision was pronounced: they were to go abroad, but to put no faith in foreign quacks, and to apply to him in any need.
The mother was much more cheerful when she went back to her daughter, and Kitty pretended to be more cheerful.
She had often, almost always, to be pretending now.
But if you want to go abroad, let’s go!” she said, and trying to appear interested in the proposed tour, she began talking of the preparations for the journey.
She knew that there was to be a consultation that day, and though she was only just up after her confinement (she had another baby, a little girl, born at the end of the winter), though she had trouble and anxiety enough of her own, she had left her tiny baby and a sick child, to come and hear Kitty’s fate, which was to be decided that day.
Good news, then?” They tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it appeared that though the doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great length, it was utterly impossible to report what he had said.
The only point of interest was that it was settled they should go abroad.
And her life was not a cheerful one.
Her relations with Stepan Arkadyevitch after their reconciliation had become humiliating.
The union Anna had cemented turned out to be of no solid character, and family harmony was breaking down again at the same point.
There had been nothing definite, but Stepan Arkadyevitch was hardly ever at home; money, too, was hardly ever forthcoming, and Dolly was continually tortured by suspicions of infidelity, which she tried to dismiss, dreading the agonies of jealousy she had been through already.
The first onslaught of jealousy, once lived through, could never come back again, and even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect her as it had the first time.
Such a discovery now would only mean breaking up family habits, and she let herself be deceived, despising him and still more herself, for the weakness.
Besides this, the care of her large family was a constant worry to her: first, the nursing of her young baby did not go well, then the nurse had gone away, now one of the children had fallen ill.
“Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own.
Lili is ill, and I’m afraid it’s scarlatina.
I have come here now to hear about Kitty, and then I shall shut myself up entirely, if—God forbid—it should be scarlatina.” The old prince too had come in from his study after the doctor’s departure, and after presenting his cheek to Dolly, and saying a few words to her, he turned to his wife: “How have you settled it? you’re going?
Well, and what do you mean to do with me?” “I suppose you had better stay here, Alexander,” said his wife.
It always seemed to her that he understood her better than anyone in the family, though he did not say much about her.
Being the youngest, she was her father’s favorite, and she fancied that his love gave him insight.
When now her glance met his blue kindly eyes looking intently at her, it seemed to her that he saw right through her, and understood all that was not good that was passing within her.
Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting a kiss, but he only patted her hair and said: “These stupid chignons!
There’s no getting at the real daughter.
One simply strokes the bristles of dead women.
Well, Dolinka,” he turned to his elder daughter, “what’s your young buck about, hey?” “Nothing, father,” answered Dolly, understanding that her husband was meant.
“He’s always out; I scarcely ever see him,” she could not resist adding with a sarcastic smile.
“And I tell you what, Katia,” he went on to his younger daughter, “you must wake up one fine day and say to yourself: Why, I’m quite well, and merry, and going out again with father for an early morning walk in the frost.
Hey?” What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kitty became confused and overcome like a detected criminal.
“Yes, he sees it all, he understands it all, and in these words he’s telling me that though I’m ashamed, I must get over my shame.” She could not pluck up spirit to make any answer.
“See what comes of your jokes!” the princess pounced down on her husband.
“You’re always....” she began a string of reproaches.
The prince listened to the princess’s scolding rather a long while without speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.
“She’s so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied, and you don’t feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest reference to the cause of it.
Ah! to be so mistaken in people!” said the princess, and by the change in her tone both Dolly and the prince knew she was speaking of Vronsky.
“I don’t know why there aren’t laws against such base, dishonorable people.” “Ah, I can’t bear to hear you!” said the prince gloomily, getting up from his low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet stopping in the doorway.
“There are laws, madam, and since you’ve challenged me to it, I’ll tell you who’s to blame for it all: you and you, you and nobody else.
Laws against such young gallants there have always been, and there still are!
Yes, and now you physic her and call in these quacks.” The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the princess heard his tone she subsided at once, and became penitent, as she always did on serious occasions.
“Alexander, Alexander,” she whispered, moving to him and beginning to weep.
You’re wretched too, I know.
God is merciful ... thanks....” he said, not knowing what he was saying, as he responded to the tearful kiss of the princess that he felt on his hand.
Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears, Dolly, with her motherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here a woman’s work lay before her, and she prepared to do it.
She took off her hat, and, morally speaking, tucked up her sleeves and prepared for action.
While her mother was attacking her father, she tried to restrain her mother, so far as filial reverence would allow.
During the prince’s outburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and tender towards her father for so quickly being kind again.
“I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did you know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was here the last time?
I don’t understand....” “So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?...
And then, he has deceived her so horribly.” It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned against her daughter, and she broke out angrily.
“Oh, I really don’t understand!
Nowadays they will all go their own way, and mothers haven’t a word to say in anything, and then....” “Mamma, I’ll go up to her.” “Well, do.
Chapter 3 When she went into Kitty’s little room, a pretty, pink little room, full of knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink, and white, and gay as Kitty herself had been two months ago, Dolly remembered how they had decorated the room the year before together, with what love and gaiety.
Her heart turned cold when she saw Kitty sitting on a low chair near the door, her eyes fixed immovably on a corner of the rug.
Kitty glanced at her sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered expression of her face did not change.
“What should it be, but your trouble?” “I have no trouble.” “Nonsense, Kitty.
And believe me, it’s of so little consequence....
We’ve all been through it.” Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.
“He’s not worth your grieving over him,” pursued Darya Alexandrovna, coming straight to the point.
“No, because he has treated me with contempt,” said Kitty, in a breaking voice.
I’m certain he was in love with you, and would still be in love with you, if it hadn’t....” “Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!” shrieked Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion.
Dolly knew this trick her sister had of clenching her hands when she was much excited; she knew, too, that in moments of excitement Kitty was capable of forgetting herself and saying a great deal too much, and Dolly would have soothed her, but it was too late.
And this is said to me by my own sister, who imagines that ... that ... that she’s sympathizing with me!...
I don’t want these condolences and humbug!” “Kitty, you’re unjust.” “Why are you tormenting me?” “But I ... quite the contrary ...
“I’ve nothing to grieve over and be comforted about.
Tell me the truth,” said Darya Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: “tell me, did Levin speak to you?...” The mention of Levin’s name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last vestige of self-control.
She leaped up from her chair, and flinging her clasp on the ground, she gesticulated rapidly with her hands and said: “Why bring Levin in too?
I can’t understand what you want to torment me for.
I’ve told you, and I say it again, that I have some pride, and never, _never_ would I do as you’re doing—go back to a man who’s deceived you, who has cared for another woman.
I can’t understand it!
You may, but I can’t!” And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that Dolly sat silent, her head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of running out of the room as she had meant to do, sat down near the door, and hid her face in her handkerchief.
The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of herself.
That humiliation of which she was always conscious came back to her with a peculiar bitterness when her sister reminded her of it.
But suddenly she heard the rustle of a skirt, and with it the sound of heart-rending, smothered sobbing, and felt arms about her neck.
“Dolinka, I am so, so wretched!” she whispered penitently.
And the sweet face covered with tears hid itself in Darya Alexandrovna’s skirt.
As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machinery of mutual confidence could not run smoothly between the two sisters, the sisters after their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in their minds, but, though they talked of outside matters, they understood each other.
Kitty knew that the words she had uttered in anger about her husband’s infidelity and her humiliating position had cut her poor sister to the heart, but that she had forgiven her.
She felt certain that her surmises were correct; that Kitty’s misery, her inconsolable misery, was due precisely to the fact that Levin had made her an offer and she had refused him, and Vronsky had deceived her, and that she was fully prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky.
Kitty said not a word of that; she talked of nothing but her spiritual condition.
“I have nothing to make me miserable,” she said, getting calmer; “but can you understand that everything has become hateful, loathsome, coarse to me, and I myself most of all?
You can’t imagine what loathsome thoughts I have about everything.” “Why, whatever loathsome thoughts can you have?” asked Dolly, smiling.
“The most utterly loathsome and coarse: I can’t tell you.
It’s not unhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse.
As though everything that was good in me was all hidden away, and nothing was left but the most loathsome.
“Father began saying something to me just now....
I know it’s not the truth, but I can’t drive away such thoughts.
Eligible suitors, as they call them—I can’t bear to see them.
In old days to go anywhere in a ball dress was a simple joy to me, I admired myself; now I feel ashamed and awkward.
Then....” Kitty hesitated; she wanted to say further that ever since this change had taken place in her, Stepan Arkadyevitch had become insufferably repulsive to her, and that she could not see him without the grossest and most hideous conceptions rising before her imagination.
“Oh, well, everything presents itself to me, in the coarsest, most loathsome light,” she went on.
I’m never happy except with the children at your house.” “What a pity you can’t be with me!” “Oh, yes, I’m coming.
I’ve had scarlatina, and I’ll persuade mamma to let me.” Kitty insisted on having her way, and went to stay at her sister’s and nursed the children all through the scarlatina, for scarlatina it turned out to be.
The two sisters brought all the six children successfully through it, but Kitty was no better in health, and in Lent the Shtcherbatskys went abroad.
Chapter 4 The highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone knows everyone else, everyone even visits everyone else.
But this great set has its subdivisions.
Anna Arkadyevna Karenina had friends and close ties in three different circles of this highest society.
One circle was her husband’s government official set, consisting of his colleagues and subordinates, brought together in the most various and capricious manner, and belonging to different social strata.
Anna found it difficult now to recall the feeling of almost awe-stricken reverence which she had at first entertained for these persons.
Now she knew all of them as people know one another in a country town; she knew their habits and weaknesses, and where the shoe pinched each one of them.
She knew their relations with one another and with the head authorities, knew who was for whom, and how each one maintained his position, and where they agreed and disagreed.
But the circle of political, masculine interests had never interested her, in spite of countess Lidia Ivanovna’s influence, and she avoided it.
Another little set with which Anna was in close relations was the one by means of which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made his career.
The center of this circle was the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
It was a set made up of elderly, ugly, benevolent, and godly women, and clever, learned, and ambitious men.
One of the clever people belonging to the set had called it “the conscience of Petersburg society.” Alexey Alexandrovitch had the highest esteem for this circle, and Anna with her special gift for getting on with everyone, had in the early days of her life in Petersburg made friends in this circle also.
Now, since her return from Moscow, she had come to feel this set insufferable.
It seemed to her that both she and all of them were insincere, and she felt so bored and ill at ease in that world that she went to see the Countess Lidia Ivanovna as little as possible.
The third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently the fashionable world—the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses, the world that hung on to the court with one hand, so as to avoid sinking to the level of the demi-monde.
For the demi-monde the members of that fashionable world believed that they despised, though their tastes were not merely similar, but in fact identical.
Her connection with this circle was kept up through Princess Betsy Tverskaya, her cousin’s wife, who had an income of a hundred and twenty thousand roubles, and who had taken a great fancy to Anna ever since she first came out, showed her much attention, and drew her into her set, making fun of Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s coterie.
“When I’m old and ugly I’ll be the same,” Betsy used to say; “but for a pretty young woman like you it’s early days for that house of charity.” Anna had at first avoided as far as she could Princess Tverskaya’s world, because it necessitated an expenditure beyond her means, and besides in her heart she preferred the first circle.
But since her visit to Moscow she had done quite the contrary.
She avoided her serious-minded friends, and went out into the fashionable world.
There she met Vronsky, and experienced an agitating joy at those meetings.
She met Vronsky specially often at Betsy’s for Betsy was a Vronsky by birth and his cousin.
Vronsky was everywhere where he had any chance of meeting Anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of his love.
She gave him no encouragement, but every time she met him there surged up in her heart that same feeling of quickened life that had come upon her that day in the railway carriage when she saw him for the first time.
She was conscious herself that her delight sparkled in her eyes and curved her lips into a smile, and she could not quench the expression of this delight.
At first Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him for daring to pursue her.
Soon after her return from Moscow, on arriving at a _soirée_ where she had expected to meet him, and not finding him there, she realized distinctly from the rush of disappointment that she had been deceiving herself, and that this pursuit was not merely not distasteful to her, but that it made the whole interest of her life.
The celebrated singer was singing for the second time, and all the fashionable world was in the theater.
But come after the opera.” Vronsky looked inquiringly at her.
“But how I remember your jeers!” continued Princess Betsy, who took a peculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a successful issue.
You’re caught, my dear boy.” “That’s my one desire, to be caught,” answered Vronsky, with his serene, good-humored smile.
“If I complain of anything it’s only that I’m not caught enough, to tell the truth.
I begin to lose hope.” “Why, whatever hope can you have?” said Betsy, offended on behalf of her friend.
“_Entendons nous...._” But in her eyes there were gleams of light that betrayed that she understood perfectly and precisely as he did what hope he might have.
“None whatever,” said Vronsky, laughing and showing his even rows of teeth.
“Excuse me,” he added, taking an opera-glass out of her hand, and proceeding to scrutinize, over her bare shoulder, the row of boxes facing them.
“I’m afraid I’m becoming ridiculous.” He was very well aware that he ran no risk of being ridiculous in the eyes of Betsy or any other fashionable people.
He was very well aware that in their eyes the position of an unsuccessful lover of a girl, or of any woman free to marry, might be ridiculous.
But the position of a man pursuing a married woman, and, regardless of everything, staking his life on drawing her into adultery, has something fine and grand about it, and can never be ridiculous; and so it was with a proud and gay smile under his mustaches that he lowered the opera-glass and looked at his cousin.
“But why was it you didn’t come to dinner?” she said, admiring him.
I was busily employed, and doing what, do you suppose?
I’ll give you a hundred guesses, a thousand ... you’d never guess.
I’ve been reconciling a husband with a man who’d insulted his wife.
“Come to me in the next _entr’acte._” “I can’t; I’m going to the French theater.” “From Nilsson?” Betsy queried in horror, though she could not herself have distinguished Nilsson’s voice from any chorus girl’s.
I’ve an appointment there, all to do with my mission of peace.” “‘Blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom of heaven,’” said Betsy, vaguely recollecting she had heard some similar saying from someone.
Chapter 5 “This is rather indiscreet, but it’s so good it’s an awful temptation to tell the story,” said Vronsky, looking at her with his laughing eyes.
“I’m not going to mention any names.” “But I shall guess, so much the better.” “Well, listen: two festive young men were driving—” “Officers of your regiment, of course?” “I didn’t say they were officers,—two young men who had been lunching.” “In other words, drinking.” “Possibly.
And they beheld a pretty woman in a hired sledge; she overtakes them, looks round at them, and, so they fancy anyway, nods to them and laughs.
To their amazement, the fair one alights at the entrance of the very house to which they were going.
The fair one darts upstairs to the top story.
They get a glimpse of red lips under a short veil, and exquisite little feet.” “You describe it with such feeling that I fancy you must be one of the two.” “And after what you said, just now!
Well, the young men go in to their comrade’s; he was giving a farewell dinner.
There they certainly did drink a little too much, as one always does at farewell dinners.
No one knows; only their host’s valet, in answer to their inquiry whether any ‘young ladies’ are living on the top floor, answered that there were a great many of them about there.
They compose an ardent epistle, a declaration in fact, and they carry the letter upstairs themselves, so as to elucidate whatever might appear not perfectly intelligible in the letter.” “Why are you telling me these horrible stories?
The maid, stupefied, carries in their messages.
All at once a gentleman appears with whiskers like sausages, as red as a lobster, announces that there is no one living in the flat except his wife, and sends them both about their business.” “How do you know he had whiskers like sausages, as you say?” “Ah, you shall hear.
I’ve just been to make peace between them.” “Well, and what then?” “That’s the most interesting part of the story.
It appears that it’s a happy couple, a government clerk and his lady.
The government clerk lodges a complaint, and I became a mediator, and such a mediator!...
I assure you Talleyrand couldn’t hold a candle to me.” “Why, where was the difficulty?” “Ah, you shall hear....
We apologize in due form: we are in despair, we entreat forgiveness for the unfortunate misunderstanding.
The government clerk with the sausages begins to melt, but he, too, desires to express his sentiments, and as soon as ever he begins to express them, he begins to get hot and say nasty things, and again I’m obliged to trot out all my diplomatic talents.
I allowed that their conduct was bad, but I urged him to take into consideration their heedlessness, their youth; then, too, the young men had only just been lunching together.
They regret it deeply, and beg you to overlook their misbehavior.’ The government clerk was softened once more.
‘I consent, count, and am ready to overlook it; but you perceive that my wife—my wife’s a respectable woman—has been exposed to the persecution, and insults, and effrontery of young upstarts, scoundrels....’ And you must understand, the young upstarts are present all the while, and I have to keep the peace between them.
Again I call out all my diplomacy, and again as soon as the thing was about at an end, our friend the government clerk gets hot and red, and his sausages stand on end with wrath, and once more I launch out into diplomatic wiles.” “Ah, he must tell you this story!” said Betsy, laughing, to a lady who came into her box.
“He has been making me laugh so.” “Well, _bonne chance_!” she added, giving Vronsky one finger of the hand in which she held her fan, and with a shrug of her shoulders she twitched down the bodice of her gown that had worked up, so as to be duly naked as she moved forward towards the footlights into the light of the gas, and the sight of all eyes.
Vronsky drove to the French theater, where he really had to see the colonel of his regiment, who never missed a single performance there.
He wanted to see him, to report on the result of his mediation, which had occupied and amused him for the last three days.
Petritsky, whom he liked, was implicated in the affair, and the other culprit was a capital fellow and first-rate comrade, who had lately joined the regiment, the young Prince Kedrov.
And what was most important, the interests of the regiment were involved in it too.
The colonel of the regiment was waited upon by the government clerk, Venden, with a complaint against his officers, who had insulted his wife.
His young wife, so Venden told the story—he had been married half a year—was at church with her mother, and suddenly overcome by indisposition, arising from her interesting condition, she could not remain standing, she drove home in the first sledge, a smart-looking one, she came across.
On the spot the officers set off in pursuit of her; she was alarmed, and feeling still more unwell, ran up the staircase home.
Venden himself, on returning from his office, heard a ring at their bell and voices, went out, and seeing the intoxicated officers with a letter, he had turned them out.
He asked for exemplary punishment.
“Petritsky’s becoming impossible.
This government clerk won’t let it drop, he’ll go on with the thing.” Vronsky saw all the thanklessness of the business, and that there could be no question of a duel in it, that everything must be done to soften the government clerk, and hush the matter up.
The colonel had called in Vronsky just because he knew him to be an honorable and intelligent man, and, more than all, a man who cared for the honor of the regiment.
They talked it over, and decided that Petritsky and Kedrov must go with Vronsky to Venden’s to apologize.
The colonel and Vronsky were both fully aware that Vronsky’s name and rank would be sure to contribute greatly to the softening of the injured husband’s feelings.
And these two influences were not in fact without effect; though the result remained, as Vronsky had described, uncertain.
On reaching the French theater, Vronsky retired to the foyer with the colonel, and reported to him his success, or non-success.
“It’s a disgraceful story, but killing.
Kedrov really can’t fight the gentleman!
Was he so awfully hot?” he commented, laughing.
She’s marvelous,” he went on, speaking of a new French actress.
“However often you see her, every day she’s different.
It’s only the French who can do that.” Chapter 6 Princess Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the end of the last act.
She had only just time to go into her dressing-room, sprinkle her long, pale face with powder, rub it, set her dress to rights, and order tea in the big drawing-room, when one after another carriages drove up to her huge house in Bolshaia Morskaia.
Her guests stepped out at the wide entrance, and the stout porter, who used to read the newspapers in the mornings behind the glass door, to the edification of the passers-by, noiselessly opened the immense door, letting the visitors pass by him into the house.
Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged coiffure and freshened face, walked in at one door and her guests at the other door of the drawing-room, a large room with dark walls, downy rugs, and a brightly lighted table, gleaming with the light of candles, white cloth, silver samovar, and transparent china tea-things.
Chairs were set with the aid of footmen, moving almost imperceptibly about the room; the party settled itself, divided into two groups: one round the samovar near the hostess, the other at the opposite end of the drawing-room, round the handsome wife of an ambassador, in black velvet, with sharply defined black eyebrows.
In both groups conversation wavered, as it always does, for the first few minutes, broken up by meetings, greetings, offers of tea, and as it were, feeling about for something to rest upon.
“She’s exceptionally good as an actress; one can see she’s studied Kaulbach,” said a diplomatic attaché in the group round the ambassador’s wife.
No one can possibly say anything new about her,” said a fat, red-faced, flaxen-headed lady, without eyebrows and chignon, wearing an old silk dress.
This was Princess Myakaya, noted for her simplicity and the roughness of her manners, and nicknamed _enfant terrible_.
Princess Myakaya, sitting in the middle between the two groups, and listening to both, took part in the conversation first of one and then of the other.
“Three people have used that very phrase about Kaulbach to me today already, just as though they had made a compact about it.
And I can’t see why they liked that remark so.” The conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new subject had to be thought of again.
“Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful,” said the ambassador’s wife, a great proficient in the art of that elegant conversation called by the English _small talk_.
She addressed the attaché, who was at a loss now what to begin upon.
“They say that that’s a difficult task, that nothing’s amusing that isn’t spiteful,” he began with a smile.
If a subject’s given me, it’s easy to spin something round it.
I often think that the celebrated talkers of the last century would have found it difficult to talk cleverly now.
Everything clever is so stale....” “That has been said long ago,” the ambassador’s wife interrupted him, laughing.
The conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, it came to a stop again.
They had to have recourse to the sure, never-failing topic—gossip.
“Don’t you think there’s something Louis Quinze about Tushkevitch?” he said, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired young man, standing at the table.
He’s in the same style as the drawing-room and that’s why it is he’s so often here.” This conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to what could not be talked of in that room—that is to say, of the relations of Tushkevitch with their hostess.
Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhile vacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: the latest piece of public news, the theater, and scandal.
“Have you heard the Maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not the daughter—has ordered a costume in _diable rose_ color?” “Nonsense!
No, that’s too lovely!” “I wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, you know—that she doesn’t see how funny she is.” Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless Madame Maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a burning faggot-stack.
The husband of Princess Betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardent collector of engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came into the drawing-room before going to his club.
Stepping noiselessly over the thick rugs, he went up to Princess Myakaya.
How you startled me!” she responded.
I’d better meet you on your own ground, and talk about your majolica and engravings.
Come now, what treasure have you been buying lately at the old curiosity shops?” “Would you like me to show you?
But you don’t understand such things.” “Oh, do show me!
I’ve been learning about them at those—what’s their names?... the bankers ... they’ve some splendid engravings.
They asked my husband and me to dinner, and told us the sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds,” Princess Myakaya said, speaking loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; “and very nasty sauce it was, some green mess.
We had to ask them, and I made them sauce for eighteen pence, and everybody was very much pleased with it.
“Marvelous!” said someone.
In the society in which she lived such plain statements produced the effect of the wittiest epigram.
Princess Myakaya could never see why it had that effect, but she knew it had, and took advantage of it.
As everyone had been listening while Princess Myakaya spoke, and so the conversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, Princess Betsy tried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’s wife.
You should come over here by us.” “No, we’re very happy here,” the ambassador’s wife responded with a smile, and she went on with the conversation that had been begun.
It was a very agreeable conversation.
They were criticizing the Karenins, husband and wife.
There’s something strange about her,” said her friend.
“The great change is that she brought back with her the shadow of Alexey Vronsky,” said the ambassador’s wife.
And that’s his punishment for something.
I never could understand how it was a punishment.
“Bad luck to your tongue!” said Princess Myakaya suddenly.
“Madame Karenina’s a splendid woman.
He’s such a remarkable man,” said the ambassador’s wife.
“My husband says there are few statesmen like him in Europe.” “And my husband tells me just the same, but I don’t believe it,” said Princess Myakaya.
“If our husbands didn’t talk to us, we should see the facts as they are.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking, is simply a fool.
I say it in a whisper ... but doesn’t it really make everything clear?
Before, when I was told to consider him clever, I kept looking for his ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing it; but directly I said, _he’s a fool,_ though only in a whisper, everything’s explained, isn’t it?” “How spiteful you are today!” “Not a bit.
And, well, you know one can’t say that of oneself.” “‘No one is satisfied with his fortune, and everyone is satisfied with his wit.’” The attaché repeated the French saying.
“That’s just it, just it,” Princess Myakaya turned to him.
She’s so nice, so charming.
“If no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof that we’ve any right to blame her.” And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up, and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table, where the conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.
“About the Karenins.
The princess gave us a sketch of Alexey Alexandrovitch,” said the ambassador’s wife with a smile, as she sat down at the table.
“Pity we didn’t hear it!” said Princess Betsy, glancing towards the door.
Vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom he was meeting here; he saw them all every day; and so he came in with the quiet manner with which one enters a room full of people from whom one has only just parted.
“Where do I come from?” he said, in answer to a question from the ambassador’s wife.
I do believe I’ve seen it a hundred times, and always with fresh enjoyment.
I know it’s disgraceful, but I go to sleep at the opera, and I sit out the _opera bouffe_ to the last minute, and enjoy it.
This evening....” He mentioned a French actress, and was going to tell something about her; but the ambassador’s wife, with playful horror, cut him short.
“Please don’t tell us about that horror.” “All right, I won’t especially as everyone knows those horrors.” “And we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correct thing, like the opera,” chimed in Princess Myakaya.
Chapter 7 Steps were heard at the door, and Princess Betsy, knowing it was Madame Karenina, glanced at Vronsky.
He was looking towards the door, and his face wore a strange new expression.
Joyfully, intently, and at the same time timidly, he gazed at the approaching figure, and slowly he rose to his feet.
Holding herself extremely erect, as always, looking straight before her, and moving with her swift, resolute, and light step, that distinguished her from all other society women, she crossed the short space to her hostess, shook hands with her, smiled, and with the same smile looked around at Vronsky.
She acknowledged this only by a slight nod, flushed a little, and frowned.
But immediately, while rapidly greeting her acquaintances, and shaking the hands proffered to her, she addressed Princess Betsy: “I have been at Countess Lidia’s, and meant to have come here earlier, but I stayed on.
He’s very interesting.” “Oh, that’s this missionary?” “Yes; he told us about the life in India, most interesting things.” The conversation, interrupted by her coming in, flickered up again like the light of a lamp being blown out.
The Vlassieva girl’s quite in love with him.” “And is it true the younger Vlassieva girl’s to marry Topov?” “Yes, they say it’s quite a settled thing.” “I wonder at the parents!
They say it’s a marriage for love.” “For love?
What antediluvian notions you have!
Can one talk of love in these days?” said the ambassador’s wife.
The only happy marriages I know are marriages of prudence.” “Yes, but then how often the happiness of these prudent marriages flies away like dust just because that passion turns up that they have refused to recognize,” said Vronsky.
“But by marriages of prudence we mean those in which both parties have sown their wild oats already.
That’s like scarlatina—one has to go through it and get it over.” “Then they ought to find out how to vaccinate for love, like smallpox.” “I was in love in my young days with a deacon,” said the Princess Myakaya.
“I don’t know that it did me any good.” “No; I imagine, joking apart, that to know love, one must make mistakes and then correct them,” said Princess Betsy.
“Even after marriage?” said the ambassador’s wife playfully.
“‘It’s never too late to mend.’” The attaché repeated the English proverb.
“Just so,” Betsy agreed; “one must make mistakes and correct them.
What do you think about it?” she turned to Anna, who, with a faintly perceptible resolute smile on her lips, was listening in silence to the conversation.
“I think,” said Anna, playing with the glove she had taken off, “I think ... of so many men, so many minds, certainly so many hearts, so many kinds of love.” Vronsky was gazing at Anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for what she would say.
Anna suddenly turned to him.
They write me that Kitty Shtcherbatskaya’s very ill.” “Really?” said Vronsky, knitting his brows.
“That doesn’t interest you?” “On the contrary, it does, very much.
What was it exactly they told you, if I may know?” he questioned.
“Give me a cup of tea,” she said, standing at her table.
“What is it they write to you?” he repeated.
“I often think men have no understanding of what’s not honorable though they’re always talking of it,” said Anna, without answering him.
“I don’t quite understand the meaning of your words,” he said, handing her the cup.
She glanced towards the sofa beside her, and he instantly sat down.
But who was the cause of my doing so?” “What do you say that to me for?” she said, glancing severely at him.
“You know what for,” he answered boldly and joyfully, meeting her glance and not dropping his eyes.
Not he, but she, was confused.
“What you spoke of just now was a mistake, and not love.” “Remember that I have forbidden you to utter that word, that hateful word,” said Anna, with a shudder.
But at once she felt that by that very word “forbidden” she had shown that she acknowledged certain rights over him, and by that very fact was encouraging him to speak of love.
“I have long meant to tell you this,” she went on, looking resolutely into his eyes, and hot all over from the burning flush on her cheeks.
I have never blushed before anyone, and you force me to feel to blame for something.” He looked at her and was struck by a new spiritual beauty in her face.
“What do you wish of me?” he said simply and seriously.
“I want you to go to Moscow and ask for Kitty’s forgiveness,” she said.
“If you love me, as you say,” she whispered, “do so that I may be at peace.” His face grew radiant.
I see a chance of despair, of wretchedness ... or I see a chance of bliss, what bliss!...
Can it be there’s no chance of it?” he murmured with his lips; but she heard.
She strained every effort of her mind to say what ought to be said.
“When I was beginning to despair, and it seemed there would be no end—it’s come!
She owns it!” “Then do this for me: never say such things to me, and let us be friends,” she said in words; but her eyes spoke quite differently.
“Friends we shall never be, you know that yourself.
Whether we shall be the happiest or the wretchedest of people—that’s in your hands.” She would have said something, but he interrupted her.
But if even that cannot be, command me to disappear, and I disappear.
You shall not see me if my presence is distasteful to you.” “I don’t want to drive you away.” “Only don’t change anything, leave everything as it is,” he said in a shaky voice.
“Here’s your husband.” At that instant Alexey Alexandrovitch did in fact walk into the room with his calm, awkward gait.
Glancing at his wife and Vronsky, he went up to the lady of the house, and sitting down for a cup of tea, began talking in his deliberate, always audible voice, in his habitual tone of banter, ridiculing someone.
“Your Rambouillet is in full conclave,” he said, looking round at all the party; “the graces and the muses.” But Princess Betsy could not endure that tone of his—“sneering,” as she called it, using the English word, and like a skillful hostess she at once brought him into a serious conversation on the subject of universal conscription.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was immediately interested in the subject, and began seriously defending the new imperial decree against Princess Betsy, who had attacked it.
“This is getting indecorous,” whispered one lady, with an expressive glance at Madame Karenina, Vronsky, and her husband.
But not only those ladies, almost everyone in the room, even the Princess Myakaya and Betsy herself, looked several times in the direction of the two who had withdrawn from the general circle, as though that were a disturbing fact.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was the only person who did not once look in that direction, and was not diverted from the interesting discussion he had entered upon.
Noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone, Princess Betsy slipped someone else into her place to listen to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and went up to Anna.
“I’m always amazed at the clearness and precision of your husband’s language,” she said.
“The most transcendental ideas seem to be within my grasp when he’s speaking.” “Oh, yes!” said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and not understanding a word of what Betsy had said.
She crossed over to the big table and took part in the general conversation.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, after staying half an hour, went up to his wife and suggested that they should go home together.
But she answered, not looking at him, that she was staying to supper.
Alexey Alexandrovitch made his bows and withdrew.
The fat old Tatar, Madame Karenina’s coachman, was with difficulty holding one of her pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing at the entrance.
A footman stood opening the carriage door.
Anna Arkadyevna, with her quick little hand, was unfastening the lace of her sleeve, caught in the hook of her fur cloak, and with bent head listening to the words Vronsky murmured as he escorted her down.
“_Au revoir!_” She gave him her hand, and with her rapid, springy step she passed by the porter and vanished into the carriage.
He kissed the palm of his hand where she had touched it, and went home, happy in the sense that he had got nearer to the attainment of his aims that evening than during the last two months.
Chapter 8 Alexey Alexandrovitch had seen nothing striking or improper in the fact that his wife was sitting with Vronsky at a table apart, in eager conversation with him about something.
But he noticed that to the rest of the party this appeared something striking and improper, and for that reason it seemed to him too to be improper.
On reaching home Alexey Alexandrovitch went to his study, as he usually did, seated himself in his low chair, opened a book on the Papacy at the place where he had laid the paper-knife in it, and read till one o’clock, just as he usually did.
But from time to time he rubbed his high forehead and shook his head, as though to drive away something.
Anna Arkadyevna had not yet come in.
With a book under his arm he went upstairs.
But this evening, instead of his usual thoughts and meditations upon official details, his thoughts were absorbed by his wife and something disagreeable connected with her.
Contrary to his usual habit, he did not get into bed, but fell to walking up and down the rooms with his hands clasped behind his back.
He could not go to bed, feeling that it was absolutely needful for him first to think thoroughly over the position that had just arisen.
When Alexey Alexandrovitch had made up his mind that he must talk to his wife about it, it had seemed a very easy and simple matter.
But now, when he began to think over the question that had just presented itself, it seemed to him very complicated and difficult.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not jealous.
Jealousy according to his notions was an insult to one’s wife, and one ought to have confidence in one’s wife.
Why one ought to have confidence—that is to say, complete conviction that his young wife would always love him—he did not ask himself.
But he had no experience of lack of confidence, because he had confidence in her, and told himself that he ought to have it.
Now, though his conviction that jealousy was a shameful feeling and that one ought to feel confidence, had not broken down, he felt that he was standing face to face with something illogical and irrational, and did not know what was to be done.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was standing face to face with life, with the possibility of his wife’s loving someone other than himself, and this seemed to him very irrational and incomprehensible because it was life itself.
All his life Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived and worked in official spheres, having to do with the reflection of life.
And every time he had stumbled against life itself he had shrunk away from it.
Now he experienced a feeling akin to that of a man who, while calmly crossing a precipice by a bridge, should suddenly discover that the bridge is broken, and that there is a chasm below.
That chasm was life itself, the bridge that artificial life in which Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived.
For the first time the question presented itself to him of the possibility of his wife’s loving someone else, and he was horrified at it.
At each turn in his walk, especially at the parquet of the lighted dining-room, he halted and said to himself, “Yes, this I must decide and put a stop to; I must express my view of it and my decision.” And he turned back again.
“But express what—what decision?” he said to himself in the drawing-room, and he found no reply.
“But after all,” he asked himself before turning into the boudoir, “what has occurred?
And then, jealousy means lowering both myself and her,” he told himself as he went into her boudoir; but this dictum, which had always had such weight with him before, had now no weight and no meaning at all.
And from the bedroom door he turned back again; but as he entered the dark drawing-room some inner voice told him that it was not so, and that if others noticed it that showed that there was something.
His thoughts, like his body, went round a complete circle, without coming upon anything new.
He noticed this, rubbed his forehead, and sat down in her boudoir.
There, looking at her table, with the malachite blotting case lying at the top and an unfinished letter, his thoughts suddenly changed.
He began to think of her, of what she was thinking and feeling.
For the first time he pictured vividly to himself her personal life, her ideas, her desires, and the idea that she could and should have a separate life of her own seemed to him so alarming that he made haste to dispel it.
To put himself in thought and feeling in another person’s place was a spiritual exercise not natural to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
He looked on this spiritual exercise as a harmful and dangerous abuse of the fancy.
“And the worst of it all,” thought he, “is that just now, at the very moment when my great work is approaching completion” (he was thinking of the project he was bringing forward at the time), “when I stand in need of all my mental peace and all my energies, just now this stupid worry should fall foul of me.
I’m not one of those men who submit to uneasiness and worry without having the force of character to face them.
“I must think it over, come to a decision, and put it out of my mind,” he said aloud.
“The question of her feelings, of what has passed and may be passing in her soul, that’s not my affair; that’s the affair of her conscience, and falls under the head of religion,” he said to himself, feeling consolation in the sense that he had found to which division of regulating principles this new circumstance could be properly referred.
“And so,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, “questions as to her feelings, and so on, are questions for her conscience, with which I can have nothing to do.
As the head of the family, I am a person bound in duty to guide her, and consequently, in part the person responsible; I am bound to point out the danger I perceive, to warn her, even to use my authority.
I ought to speak plainly to her.” And everything that he would say tonight to his wife took clear shape in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s head.
Thinking over what he would say, he somewhat regretted that he should have to use his time and mental powers for domestic consumption, with so little to show for it, but, in spite of that, the form and contents of the speech before him shaped itself as clearly and distinctly in his head as a ministerial report.
This trick, a bad habit, the cracking of his fingers, always soothed him, and gave precision to his thoughts, so needful to him at this juncture.
There was the sound of a carriage driving up to the front door.
Alexey Alexandrovitch halted in the middle of the room.
A woman’s step was heard mounting the stairs.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, ready for his speech, stood compressing his crossed fingers, waiting to see if the crack would not come again.
Already, from the sound of light steps on the stairs, he was aware that she was close, and though he was satisfied with his speech, he felt frightened of the explanation confronting him....
Her face was brilliant and glowing; but this glow was not one of brightness; it suggested the fearful glow of a conflagration in the midst of a dark night.
What a wonder!” she said, letting fall her hood, and without stopping, she went on into the dressing-room.
“It’s late, Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, when she had gone through the doorway.
“Anna, it’s necessary for me to have a talk with you.” “With me?” she said, wonderingly.
She came out from behind the door of the dressing-room, and looked at him.
“Well, let’s talk, if it’s so necessary.
But it would be better to get to sleep.” Anna said what came to her lips, and marveled, hearing herself, at her own capacity for lying.
She felt herself clad in an impenetrable armor of falsehood.
She felt that some unseen force had come to her aid and was supporting her.
“Of what?” She looked at him so simply, so brightly, that anyone who did not know her as her husband knew her could not have noticed anything unnatural, either in the sound or the sense of her words.
But to him, knowing her, knowing that whenever he went to bed five minutes later than usual, she noticed it, and asked him the reason; to him, knowing that every joy, every pleasure and pain that she felt she communicated to him at once; to him, now to see that she did not care to notice his state of mind, that she did not care to say a word about herself, meant a great deal.
He saw that the inmost recesses of her soul, that had always hitherto lain open before him, were closed against him.
More than that, he saw from her tone that she was not even perturbed at that, but as it were said straight out to him: “Yes, it’s shut up, and so it must be, and will be in future.” Now he experienced a feeling such as a man might have, returning home and finding his own house locked up.
“But perhaps the key may yet be found,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“I want to warn you,” he said in a low voice, “that through thoughtlessness and lack of caution you may cause yourself to be talked about in society.
Your too animated conversation this evening with Count Vronsky” (he enunciated the name firmly and with deliberate emphasis) “attracted attention.” He talked and looked at her laughing eyes, which frightened him now with their impenetrable look, and, as he talked, he felt all the uselessness and idleness of his words.
“You’re always like that,” she answered, as though completely misapprehending him, and of all he had said only taking in the last phrase.
Does that offend you?” Alexey Alexandrovitch shivered, and bent his hands to make the joints crack.
“Anna, is this you?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, quietly making an effort over himself, and restraining the motion of his fingers.
“What do you want of me?” Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, and rubbed his forehead and his eyes.
He saw that instead of doing as he had intended—that is to say, warning his wife against a mistake in the eyes of the world—he had unconsciously become agitated over what was the affair of her conscience, and was struggling against the barrier he fancied between them.
“This is what I meant to say to you,” he went on coldly and composedly, “and I beg you to listen to it.
I consider jealousy, as you know, a humiliating and degrading feeling, and I shall never allow myself to be influenced by it; but there are certain rules of decorum which cannot be disregarded with impunity.
This evening it was not I observed it, but judging by the impression made on the company, everyone observed that your conduct and deportment were not altogether what could be desired.” “I positively don’t understand,” said Anna, shrugging her shoulders—“He doesn’t care,” she thought.
“But other people noticed it, and that’s what upsets him.”—“You’re not well, Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she added, and she got up, and would have gone towards the door; but he moved forward as though he would stop her.
His face was ugly and forbidding, as Anna had never seen him.
She stopped, and bending her head back and on one side, began with her rapid hand taking out her hairpins.
“Well, I’m listening to what’s to come,” she said, calmly and ironically; “and indeed I listen with interest, for I should like to understand what’s the matter.” She spoke, and marveled at the confident, calm, and natural tone in which she was speaking, and the choice of the words she used.
“To enter into all the details of your feelings I have no right, and besides, I regard that as useless and even harmful,” began Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Ferreting in one’s soul, one often ferrets out something that might have lain there unnoticed.
Your feelings are an affair of your own conscience; but I am in duty bound to you, to myself, and to God, to point out to you your duties.
That union can only be severed by a crime, and a crime of that nature brings its own chastisement.” “I don’t understand a word.
And, oh dear! how sleepy I am, unluckily,” she said, rapidly passing her hand through her hair, feeling for the remaining hairpins.
“Perhaps I am mistaken, but believe me, what I say, I say as much for myself as for you.
He doesn’t even know what love is.” “Alexey Alexandrovitch, really I don’t understand,” she said.
But I am not speaking of myself; the most important persons in this matter are our son and yourself.
It may very well be, I repeat, that my words seem to you utterly unnecessary and out of place; it may be that they are called forth by my mistaken impression.
But if you are conscious yourself of even the smallest foundation for them, then I beg you to think a little, and if your heart prompts you, to speak out to me....” Alexey Alexandrovitch was unconsciously saying something utterly unlike what he had prepared.
And besides,” she said hurriedly, with difficulty repressing a smile, “it’s really time to be in bed.” Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, and, without saying more, went into the bedroom.
His lips were sternly compressed, and his eyes looked away from her.
Anna got into her bed, and lay expecting every minute that he would begin to speak to her again.
She both feared his speaking and wished for it.
She waited for a long while without moving, and had forgotten about him.
She thought of that other; she pictured him, and felt how her heart was flooded with emotion and guilty delight at the thought of him.
Suddenly she heard an even, tranquil snore.
For the first instant Alexey Alexandrovitch seemed, as it were, appalled at his own snoring, and ceased; but after an interval of two breathings the snore sounded again, with a new tranquil rhythm.
“It’s late, it’s late,” she whispered with a smile.
A long while she lay, not moving, with open eyes, whose brilliance she almost fancied she could herself see in the darkness.
Chapter 10 From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for his wife.
Nothing special happened.
Anna went out into society, as she had always done, was particularly often at Princess Betsy’s, and met Vronsky everywhere.
Alexey Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do nothing.
All his efforts to draw her into open discussion she confronted with a barrier which he could not penetrate, made up of a sort of amused perplexity.
Outwardly everything was the same, but their inner relations were completely changed.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, a man of great power in the world of politics, felt himself helpless in this.
Like an ox with head bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he felt was lifted over him.
Every time he began to think about it, he felt that he must try once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and persuasion there was still hope of saving her, of bringing her back to herself, and every day he made ready to talk to her.
But every time he began talking to her, he felt that the spirit of evil and deceit, which had taken possession of her, had possession of him too, and he talked to her in a tone quite unlike that in which he had meant to talk.
Involuntarily he talked to her in his habitual tone of jeering at anyone who should say what he was saying.
And in that tone it was impossible to say what needed to be said to her.
Chapter 11 That which for Vronsky had been almost a whole year the one absorbing desire of his life, replacing all his old desires; that which for Anna had been an impossible, terrible, and even for that reason more entrancing dream of bliss, that desire had been fulfilled.
He stood before her, pale, his lower jaw quivering, and besought her to be calm, not knowing how or why.
Anna!” he said with a choking voice, “Anna, for pity’s sake!...” But the louder he spoke, the lower she dropped her once proud and gay, now shame-stricken head, and she bowed down and sank from the sofa where she was sitting, down on the floor, at his feet; she would have fallen on the carpet if he had not held her.
Forgive me!” she said, sobbing, pressing his hands to her bosom.
She felt so sinful, so guilty, that nothing was left her but to humiliate herself and beg forgiveness; and as now there was no one in her life but him, to him she addressed her prayer for forgiveness.
Looking at him, she had a physical sense of her humiliation, and she could say nothing more.
He felt what a murderer must feel, when he sees the body he has robbed of life.
There was something awful and revolting in the memory of what had been bought at this fearful price of shame.
Shame at their spiritual nakedness crushed her and infected him.
But in spite of all the murderer’s horror before the body of his victim, he must hack it to pieces, hide the body, must use what he has gained by his murder.
And with fury, as it were with passion, the murderer falls on the body, and drags it and hacks at it; so he covered her face and shoulders with kisses.
Yes, and one hand, which will always be mine—the hand of my accomplice.” She lifted up that hand and kissed it.
Her face was still as beautiful, but it was only the more pitiful for that.
Remember that.” “I can never forget what is my whole life.
For one instant of this happiness....” “Happiness!” she said with horror and loathing and her horror unconsciously infected him.
“Not a word more,” she repeated, and with a look of chill despair, incomprehensible to him, she parted from him.
She felt that at that moment she could not put into words the sense of shame, of rapture, and of horror at this stepping into a new life, and she did not want to speak of it, to vulgarize this feeling by inappropriate words.
But later too, and the next day and the third day, she still found no words in which she could express the complexity of her feelings; indeed, she could not even find thoughts in which she could clearly think out all that was in her soul.
She said to herself: “No, just now I can’t think of it, later on, when I am calmer.” But this calm for thought never came; every time the thought rose of what she had done and what would happen to her, and what she ought to do, a horror came over her and she drove those thoughts away.
“Later, later,” she said—“when I am calmer.” But in dreams, when she had no control over her thoughts, her position presented itself to her in all its hideous nakedness.
She dreamed that both were her husbands at once, that both were lavishing caresses on her.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was weeping, kissing her hands, and saying, “How happy we are now!” And Alexey Vronsky was there too, and he too was her husband.
And she was marveling that it had once seemed impossible to her, was explaining to them, laughing, that this was ever so much simpler, and that now both of them were happy and contented.
But this dream weighed on her like a nightmare, and she awoke from it in terror.
And yet, now that years have passed, I recall it and wonder that it could distress me so much.
He could not be at peace because after dreaming so long of family life, and feeling himself so ripe for it, he was still not married, and was further than ever from marriage.
He was painfully conscious himself, as were all about him, that at his years it is not well for man to be alone.
He remembered how before starting for Moscow he had once said to his cowman Nikolay, a simple-hearted peasant, whom he liked talking to: “Well, Nikolay!
I mean to get married,” and how Nikolay had promptly answered, as of a matter on which there could be no possible doubt: “And high time too, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.” But marriage had now become further off than ever.
The place was taken, and whenever he tried to imagine any of the girls he knew in that place, he felt that it was utterly impossible.
Moreover, the recollection of the rejection and the part he had played in the affair tortured him with shame.
However often he told himself that he was in no wise to blame in it, that recollection, like other humiliating reminiscences of a similar kind, made him twinge and blush.
There had been in his past, as in every man’s, actions, recognized by him as bad, for which his conscience ought to have tormented him; but the memory of these evil actions was far from causing him so much suffering as those trivial but humiliating reminiscences.
And with these memories was now ranged his rejection and the pitiful position in which he must have appeared to others that evening.
Bitter memories were more and more covered up by the incidents—paltry in his eyes, but really important—of his country life.
He was impatiently looking forward to the news that she was married, or just going to be married, hoping that such news would, like having a tooth out, completely cure him.
Meanwhile spring came on, beautiful and kindly, without the delays and treacheries of spring,—one of those rare springs in which plants, beasts, and man rejoice alike.
This lovely spring roused Levin still more, and strengthened him in his resolution of renouncing all his past and building up his lonely life firmly and independently.
Though many of the plans with which he had returned to the country had not been carried out, still his most important resolution—that of purity—had been kept by him.
He was free from that shame, which had usually harassed him after a fall; and he could look everyone straight in the face.
In February he had received a letter from Marya Nikolaevna telling him that his brother Nikolay’s health was getting worse, but that he would not take advice, and in consequence of this letter Levin went to Moscow to his brother’s and succeeded in persuading him to see a doctor and to go to a watering-place abroad.
He succeeded so well in persuading his brother, and in lending him money for the journey without irritating him, that he was satisfied with himself in that matter.
Thus, in spite of his solitude, or in consequence of his solitude, his life was exceedingly full.
Only rarely he suffered from an unsatisfied desire to communicate his stray ideas to someone besides Agafea Mihalovna.
With her indeed he not infrequently fell into discussion upon physics, the theory of agriculture, and especially philosophy; philosophy was Agafea Mihalovna’s favorite subject.
Spring was slow in unfolding.
For the last few weeks it had been steadily fine frosty weather.
There was such a frozen surface on the snow that they drove the wagons anywhere off the roads.
On Thursday the wind dropped, and a thick gray fog brooded over the land as though hiding the mysteries of the transformations that were being wrought in nature.
Behind the fog there was the flowing of water, the cracking and floating of ice, the swift rush of turbid, foaming torrents; and on the following Monday, in the evening, the fog parted, the storm clouds split up into little curling crests of cloud, the sky cleared, and the real spring had come.
In the morning the sun rose brilliant and quickly wore away the thin layer of ice that covered the water, and all the warm air was quivering with the steam that rose up from the quickened earth.
The old grass looked greener, and the young grass thrust up its tiny blades; the buds of the guelder-rose and of the currant and the sticky birch-buds were swollen with sap, and an exploring bee was humming about the golden blossoms that studded the willow.
Larks trilled unseen above the velvety green fields and the ice-covered stubble-land; peewits wailed over the low lands and marshes flooded by the pools; cranes and wild geese flew high across the sky uttering their spring calls.
The cattle, bald in patches where the new hair had not grown yet, lowed in the pastures; the bowlegged lambs frisked round their bleating mothers.
Nimble children ran about the drying paths, covered with the prints of bare feet.
There was a merry chatter of peasant women over their linen at the pond, and the ring of axes in the yard, where the peasants were repairing ploughs and harrows.
Chapter 13 Levin put on his big boots, and, for the first time, a cloth jacket, instead of his fur cloak, and went out to look after his farm, stepping over streams of water that flashed in the sunshine and dazzled his eyes, and treading one minute on ice and the next into sticky mud.
Spring is the time of plans and projects.
And, as he came out into the farmyard, Levin, like a tree in spring that knows not what form will be taken by the young shoots and twigs imprisoned in its swelling buds, hardly knew what undertakings he was going to begin upon now in the farm work that was so dear to him.
But he felt that he was full of the most splendid plans and projects.
The cows had been let out into their paddock, and their smooth sides were already shining with their new, sleek, spring coats; they basked in the sunshine and lowed to go to the meadow.
Levin gazed admiringly at the cows he knew so intimately to the minutest detail of their condition, and gave orders for them to be driven out into the meadow, and the calves to be let into the paddock.
The herdsman ran gaily to get ready for the meadow.
The cowherd girls, picking up their petticoats, ran splashing through the mud with bare legs, still white, not yet brown from the sun, waving brush wood in their hands, chasing the calves that frolicked in the mirth of spring.
After admiring the young ones of that year, who were particularly fine—the early calves were the size of a peasant’s cow, and Pava’s daughter, at three months old, was as big as a yearling—Levin gave orders for a trough to be brought out and for them to be fed in the paddock.
But it appeared that as the paddock had not been used during the winter, the hurdles made in the autumn for it were broken.
He sent for the carpenter, who, according to his orders, ought to have been at work at the thrashing machine.
But it appeared that the carpenter was repairing the harrows, which ought to have been repaired before Lent.
This was very annoying to Levin.
It was annoying to come upon that everlasting slovenliness in the farm work against which he had been striving with all his might for so many years.
The hurdles, as he ascertained, being not wanted in winter, had been carried to the cart-horses’ stable; and there broken, as they were of light construction, only meant for feeding calves.
Moreover, it was apparent also that the harrows and all the agricultural implements, which he had directed to be looked over and repaired in the winter, for which very purpose he had hired three carpenters, had not been put into repair, and the harrows were being repaired when they ought to have been harrowing the field.
Levin sent for his bailiff, but immediately went off himself to look for him.
The bailiff, beaming all over, like everyone that day, in a sheepskin bordered with astrachan, came out of the barn, twisting a bit of straw in his hands.
“Why isn’t the carpenter at the thrashing machine?” “Oh, I meant to tell you yesterday, the harrows want repairing.
Here it’s time they got to work in the fields.” “But what were they doing in the winter, then?” “But what did you want the carpenter for?” “Where are the hurdles for the calves’ paddock?” “I ordered them to be got ready.
What would you have with those peasants!” said the bailiff, with a wave of his hand.
“It’s not those peasants but this bailiff!” said Levin, getting angry.
But, bethinking himself that this would not help matters, he stopped short in the middle of a sentence, and merely sighed.
“Behind Turkin tomorrow or the next day they might begin.” “And the clover?” “I’ve sent Vassily and Mishka; they’re sowing.
That they were only sowing the clover on fifteen acres, not on all the forty-five, was still more annoying to him.
Clover, as he knew, both from books and from his own experience, never did well except when it was sown as early as possible, almost in the snow.
What would you have with such a set of peasants?
And there’s Semyon....” “Well, you should have taken some men from the thatching.” “And so I have, as it is.” “Where are the peasants, then?” “Five are making compôte” (which meant compost), “four are shifting the oats for fear of a touch of mildew, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.” Levin knew very well that “a touch of mildew” meant that his English seed oats were already ruined.
“Don’t put yourself out; we shall get it all done in time.” Levin waved his hand angrily, went into the granary to glance at the oats, and then to the stable.
But the peasants were carrying the oats in spades when they might simply let them slide down into the lower granary; and arranging for this to be done, and taking two workmen from there for sowing clover, Levin got over his vexation with the bailiff.
“Ignat!” he called to the coachman, who, with his sleeves tucked up, was washing the carriage wheels, “saddle me....” “Which, sir?” “Well, let it be Kolpik.” “Yes, sir.” While they were saddling his horse, Levin again called up the bailiff, who was hanging about in sight, to make it up with him, and began talking to him about the spring operations before them, and his plans for the farm.
And the ploughing of the further land to go on without a break so as to let it ripen lying fallow.
The bailiff listened attentively, and obviously made an effort to approve of his employer’s projects.
But still he had that look Levin knew so well that always irritated him, a look of hopelessness and despondency.
That look said: “That’s all very well, but as God wills.” Nothing mortified Levin so much as that tone.
But it was the tone common to all the bailiffs he had ever had.
They had all taken up that attitude to his plans, and so now he was not angered by it, but mortified, and felt all the more roused to struggle against this, as it seemed, elemental force continually ranged against him, for which he could find no other expression than “as God wills.” “If we can manage it, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said the bailiff.
“Why ever shouldn’t you manage it?” “We positively must have another fifteen laborers.
Again he was brought face to face with that opposing force.
He knew that however much they tried, they could not hire more than forty—thirty-seven perhaps or thirty-eight—laborers for a reasonable sum.
But still he could not help struggling against it.
“Send to Sury, to Tchefirovka; if they don’t come we must look for them.” “Oh, I’ll send, to be sure,” said Vassily Fedorovitch despondently.
I know, of course,” Levin added laughing, “you always want to do with as little and as poor quality as possible; but this year I’m not going to let you have things your own way.
I’ll see to everything myself.” “Why, I don’t think you take much rest as it is.
I’ll go and have a look at them,” he said, getting on to the little bay cob, Kolpik, who was led up by the coachman.
“You can’t get across the streams, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” the coachman shouted.
“All right, I’ll go by the forest.” And Levin rode through the slush of the farmyard to the gate and out into the open country, his good little horse, after his long inactivity, stepping out gallantly, snorting over the pools, and asking, as it were, for guidance.
If Levin had felt happy before in the cattle pens and farmyard, he felt happier yet in the open country.
Swaying rhythmically with the ambling paces of his good little cob, drinking in the warm yet fresh scent of the snow and the air, as he rode through his forest over the crumbling, wasted snow, still left in parts, and covered with dissolving tracks, he rejoiced over every tree, with the moss reviving on its bark and the buds swelling on its shoots.
When he came out of the forest, in the immense plain before him, his grass fields stretched in an unbroken carpet of green, without one bare place or swamp, only spotted here and there in the hollows with patches of melting snow.
He was not put out of temper even by the sight of the peasants’ horses and colts trampling down his young grass (he told a peasant he met to drive them out), nor by the sarcastic and stupid reply of the peasant Ipat, whom he met on the way, and asked, “Well, Ipat, shall we soon be sowing?” “We must get the ploughing done first, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” answered Ipat.
And then eight hundred acres of wheat, three hundred of potatoes, and four hundred of clover, and not one acre exhausted.
Absorbed in such dreams, carefully keeping his horse by the hedges, so as not to trample his young crops, he rode up to the laborers who had been sent to sow clover.
A cart with the seed in it was standing, not at the edge, but in the middle of the crop, and the winter corn had been torn up by the wheels and trampled by the horse.
Both the laborers were sitting in the hedge, probably smoking a pipe together.
The earth in the cart, with which the seed was mixed, was not crushed to powder, but crusted together or adhering in clods.
This was not as it should be, but with the laborers Levin seldom lost his temper.
“It’s all right, sir, it’ll spring up again,” responded Vassily.
“Please don’t argue,” said Levin, “but do as you’re told.” “Yes, sir,” answered Vassily, and he took the horse’s head.
“What a sowing, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said, hesitating; “first rate.
“Well, we crumble it up,” answered Vassily, taking up some seed and rolling the earth in his palms.
Vassily was not to blame for their having filled up his cart with unsifted earth, but still it was annoying.
Levin had more than once already tried a way he knew for stifling his anger, and turning all that seemed dark right again, and he tried that way now.
He watched how Mishka strode along, swinging the huge clods of earth that clung to each foot; and getting off his horse, he took the sieve from Vassily and started sowing himself.
“Where did you stop?” Vassily pointed to the mark with his foot, and Levin went forward as best he could, scattering the seed on the land.
Walking was as difficult as on a bog, and by the time Levin had ended the row he was in a great heat, and he stopped and gave up the sieve to Vassily.
“Eh?” said Levin cheerily, already feeling the effect of his method.
It’ll look different.
I do my best, Konstantin Dmitrievitch, d’ye see, as I would for my own father.
To look out yonder now,” said Vassily, pointing, “it does one’s heart good.” “It’s a lovely spring, Vassily.” “Why, it’s a spring such as the old men don’t remember the like of.
You gave me two measures.
And if there’s a good crop you shall have half a rouble for every acre.” “Humbly thankful.
We are very well content, sir, as it is.” Levin got on his horse and rode towards the field where was last year’s clover, and the one which was ploughed ready for the spring corn.
The crop of clover coming up in the stubble was magnificent.
It had survived everything, and stood up vividly green through the broken stalks of last year’s wheat.
The horse sank in up to the pasterns, and he drew each hoof with a sucking sound out of the half-thawed ground.
Over the ploughland riding was utterly impossible; the horse could only keep a foothold where there was ice, and in the thawing furrows he sank deep in at each step.
The ploughland was in splendid condition; in a couple of days it would be fit for harrowing and sowing.
Everything was capital, everything was cheering.
And he did in fact get across, and startled two ducks.
“There must be snipe too,” he thought, and just as he reached the turning homewards he met the forest keeper, who confirmed his theory about the snipe.
Chapter 14 As he rode up to the house in the happiest frame of mind, Levin heard the bell ring at the side of the principal entrance of the house.
He did say: ‘Maybe I’ll go to the waters, or maybe I’ll come down to you.’” He felt dismayed and vexed for the first minute, that his brother Nikolay’s presence should come to disturb his happy mood of spring.
But he felt ashamed of the feeling, and at once he opened, as it were, the arms of his soul, and with a softened feeling of joy and expectation, now he hoped with all his heart that it was his brother.
He pricked up his horse, and riding out from behind the acacias he saw a hired three-horse sledge from the railway station, and a gentleman in a fur coat.
“Ah,” cried Levin joyfully, flinging up both his hands.
“Here’s a delightful visitor!
Ah, how glad I am to see you!” he shouted, recognizing Stepan Arkadyevitch.
And on that delicious spring day he felt that the thought of her did not hurt him at all.
“Well, you didn’t expect me, eh?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting out of the sledge, splashed with mud on the bridge of his nose, on his cheek, and on his eyebrows, but radiant with health and good spirits.
“I’ve come to see you in the first place,” he said, embracing and kissing him, “to have some stand-shooting second, and to sell the forest at Ergushovo third.” “Delightful!
How ever did you get along in a sledge?” “In a cart it would have been worse still, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” answered the driver, who knew him.
“Well, I’m very, very glad to see you,” said Levin, with a genuine smile of childlike delight.
Levin led his friend to the room set apart for visitors, where Stepan Arkadyevitch’s things were carried also—a bag, a gun in a case, a satchel for cigars.
Leaving him there to wash and change his clothes, Levin went off to the counting house to speak about the ploughing and clover.
Agafea Mihalovna, always very anxious for the credit of the house, met him in the hall with inquiries about dinner.
“Do just as you like, only let it be as soon as possible,” he said, and went to the bailiff.
When he came back, Stepan Arkadyevitch, washed and combed, came out of his room with a beaming smile, and they went upstairs together.
Now I shall understand what the mysterious business is that you are always absorbed in here.
So bright, so cheerful!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting that it was not always spring and fine weather like that day.
“And your nurse is simply charming!
A pretty maid in an apron might be even more agreeable, perhaps; but for your severe monastic style it does very well.” Stepan Arkadyevitch told him many interesting pieces of news; especially interesting to Levin was the news that his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, was intending to pay him a visit in the summer.
Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kitty and the Shtcherbatskys; he merely gave him greetings from his wife.
Levin was grateful to him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visitor.
As always happened with him during his solitude, a mass of ideas and feelings had been accumulating within him, which he could not communicate to those about him.
And now he poured out upon Stepan Arkadyevitch his poetic joy in the spring, and his failures and plans for the land, and his thoughts and criticisms on the books he had been reading, and the idea of his own book, the basis of which really was, though he was unaware of it himself, a criticism of all the old books on agriculture.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, always charming, understanding everything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on this visit, and Levin noticed in him a special tenderness, as it were, and a new tone of respect that flattered him.
But though Stepan Arkadyevitch was accustomed to very different dinners, he thought everything excellent: the herb brandy, and the bread, and the butter, and above all the salt goose and the mushrooms, and the nettle soup, and the chicken in white sauce, and the white Crimean wine—everything was superb and delicious.
“Splendid, splendid!” he said, lighting a fat cigar after the roast.
“I feel as if, coming to you, I had landed on a peaceful shore after the noise and jolting of a steamer.
And so you maintain that the laborer himself is an element to be studied and to regulate the choice of methods in agriculture.
Of course, I’m an ignorant outsider; but I should fancy theory and its application will have its influence on the laborer too.” “Yes, but wait a bit.
I’m not talking of political economy, I’m talking of the science of agriculture.
It ought to be like the natural sciences, and to observe given phenomena and the laborer in his economic, ethnographical....” At that instant Agafea Mihalovna came in with jam.
“Oh, Agafea Mihalovna,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, kissing the tips of his plump fingers, “what salt goose, what herb brandy!...
“Kouzma, get ready the trap,” and he ran downstairs.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, going down, carefully took the canvas cover off his varnished gun case with his own hands, and opening it, began to get ready his expensive new-fashioned gun.
Kouzma, who already scented a big tip, never left Stepan Arkadyevitch’s side, and put on him both his stockings and boots, a task which Stepan Arkadyevitch readily left him.
“Kostya, give orders that if the merchant Ryabinin comes ...
I told him to come today, he’s to be brought in and to wait for me....” “Why, do you mean to say you’re selling the forest to Ryabinin?” “Yes.
I have had to do business with him, ‘positively and conclusively.’” Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed.
“Positively and conclusively” were the merchant’s favorite words.
“Yes, it’s wonderfully funny the way he talks.
“I told them to bring the trap round; or would you rather walk?” “No, we’d better drive,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting into the trap.
A cigar is a sort of thing, not exactly a pleasure, but the crown and outward sign of pleasure.
This is how I should like to live!” “Why, who prevents you?” said Levin, smiling.
You’ve got everything you like.
You like horses—and you have them; dogs—you have them; shooting—you have it; farming—you have it.” “Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don’t fret for what I haven’t,” said Levin, thinking of Kitty.
Stepan Arkadyevitch comprehended, looked at him, but said nothing.
Levin was grateful to Oblonsky for noticing, with his never-failing tact, that he dreaded conversation about the Shtcherbatskys, and so saying nothing about them.
But now Levin was longing to find out what was tormenting him so, yet he had not the courage to begin.
“Come, tell me how things are going with you,” said Levin, bethinking himself that it was not nice of him to think only of himself.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled merrily.
“You don’t admit, I know, that one can be fond of new rolls when one has had one’s rations of bread—to your mind it’s a crime; but I don’t count life as life without love,” he said, taking Levin’s question his own way.
And really, one does so little harm to anyone, and gives oneself so much pleasure....” “What! is there something new, then?” queried Levin.
Well, these women are sometimes to be met in reality ... and these women are terrible.
Woman, don’t you know, is such a subject that however much you study it, it’s always perfectly new.” “Well, then, it would be better not to study it.” “No.
Some mathematician has said that enjoyment lies in the search for truth, not in the finding it.” Levin listened in silence, and in spite of all the efforts he made, he could not in the least enter into the feelings of his friend and understand his sentiments and the charm of studying such women.
Chapter 15 The place fixed on for the stand-shooting was not far above a stream in a little aspen copse.
On reaching the copse, Levin got out of the trap and led Oblonsky to a corner of a mossy, swampy glade, already quite free from snow.
He went back himself to a double birch tree on the other side, and leaning his gun on the fork of a dead lower branch, he took off his full overcoat, fastened his belt again, and worked his arms to see if they were free.
Gray old Laska, who had followed them, sat down warily opposite him and pricked up her ears.
The sun was setting behind a thick forest, and in the glow of sunset the birch trees, dotted about in the aspen copse, stood out clearly with their hanging twigs, and their buds swollen almost to bursting.
From the thickest parts of the copse, where the snow still remained, came the faint sound of narrow winding threads of water running away.
Tiny birds twittered, and now and then fluttered from tree to tree.
In the pauses of complete stillness there came the rustle of last year’s leaves, stirred by the thawing of the earth and the growth of the grass.
One can hear and see the grass growing!” Levin said to himself, noticing a wet, slate-colored aspen leaf moving beside a blade of young grass.
He stood, listened, and gazed sometimes down at the wet mossy ground, sometimes at Laska listening all alert, sometimes at the sea of bare tree tops that stretched on the slope below him, sometimes at the darkening sky, covered with white streaks of cloud.
A hawk flew high over a forest far away with slow sweep of its wings; another flew with exactly the same motion in the same direction and vanished.
The birds twittered more and more loudly and busily in the thicket.
An owl hooted not far off, and Laska, starting, stepped cautiously a few steps forward, and putting her head on one side, began to listen intently.
“Imagine! the cuckoo already!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out from behind a bush.
“Yes, I hear it,” answered Levin, reluctantly breaking the stillness with his voice, which sounded disagreeable to himself.
“Now it’s coming!” Stepan Arkadyevitch’s figure again went behind the bush, and Levin saw nothing but the bright flash of a match, followed by the red glow and blue smoke of a cigarette.
“Tchk! tchk!” came the snapping sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch cocking his gun.
“What’s that cry?” asked Oblonsky, drawing Levin’s attention to a prolonged cry, as though a colt were whinnying in a high voice, in play.
Listen, it’s flying!” almost shrieked Levin, cocking his gun.
They heard a shrill whistle in the distance, and in the exact time, so well known to the sportsman, two seconds later—another, a third, and after the third whistle the hoarse, guttural cry could be heard.
Levin looked about him to right and to left, and there, just facing him against the dusky blue sky above the confused mass of tender shoots of the aspens, he saw the flying bird.
It was flying straight towards him; the guttural cry, like the even tearing of some strong stuff, sounded close to his ear; the long beak and neck of the bird could be seen, and at the very instant when Levin was taking aim, behind the bush where Oblonsky stood, there was a flash of red lightning: the bird dropped like an arrow, and darted upwards again.
Again came the red flash and the sound of a blow, and fluttering its wings as though trying to keep up in the air, the bird halted, stopped still an instant, and fell with a heavy splash on the slushy ground.
“Can I have missed it?” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, who could not see for the smoke.
“Here it is!” said Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one ear raised, wagging the end of her shaggy tail, came slowly back as though she would prolong the pleasure, and as it were smiling, brought the dead bird to her master.
“Well, I’m glad you were successful,” said Levin, who, at the same time, had a sense of envy that he had not succeeded in shooting the snipe.
“It was a bad shot from the right barrel,” responded Stepan Arkadyevitch, loading his gun.
“Sh... it’s flying!” The shrill whistles rapidly following one another were heard again.
Two snipe, playing and chasing one another, and only whistling, not crying, flew straight at the very heads of the sportsmen.
There was the report of four shots, and like swallows the snipe turned swift somersaults in the air and vanished from sight.
The stand-shooting was capital.
Stepan Arkadyevitch shot two more birds and Levin two, of which one was not found.
Venus, bright and silvery, shone with her soft light low down in the west behind the birch trees, and high up in the east twinkled the red lights of Arcturus.
The snipe had ceased flying; but Levin resolved to stay a little longer, till Venus, which he saw below a branch of birch, should be above it, and the stars of the Great Bear should be perfectly plain.
“Isn’t it time to go home?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
It was quite still now in the copse, and not a bird was stirring.
“Let’s stay a little while,” answered Levin.
“As you like.” They were standing now about fifteen paces from one another.
“Stiva!” said Levin unexpectedly; “how is it you don’t tell me whether your sister-in-law’s married yet, or when she’s going to be?” Levin felt so resolute and serene that no answer, he fancied, could affect him.
But he had never dreamed of what Stepan Arkadyevitch replied.
“She’s never thought of being married, and isn’t thinking of it; but she’s very ill, and the doctors have sent her abroad.
They’re positively afraid she may not live.” “What!” cried Levin.
How has she...?” While they were saying this, Laska, with ears pricked up, was looking upwards at the sky, and reproachfully at them.
“They have chosen a time to talk,” she was thinking.
But at that very instant both suddenly heard a shrill whistle which, as it were, smote on their ears, and both suddenly seized their guns and two flashes gleamed, and two bangs sounded at the very same instant.
The snipe flying high above instantly folded its wings and fell into a thicket, bending down the delicate shoots.
Together!” cried Levin, and he ran with Laska into the thicket to look for the snipe.
“Oh, yes, what was it that was unpleasant?” he wondered.
Chapter 16 On the way home Levin asked all details of Kitty’s illness and the Shtcherbatskys’ plans, and though he would have been ashamed to admit it, he was pleased at what he heard.
He was pleased that there was still hope, and still more pleased that she should be suffering who had made him suffer so much.
But when Stepan Arkadyevitch began to speak of the causes of Kitty’s illness, and mentioned Vronsky’s name, Levin cut him short.
“I have no right whatever to know family matters, and, to tell the truth, no interest in them either.” Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled hardly perceptibly, catching the instantaneous change he knew so well in Levin’s face, which had become as gloomy as it had been bright a minute before.
“Have you quite settled about the forest with Ryabinin?” asked Levin.
The price is magnificent; thirty-eight thousand.
Eight straight away, and the rest in six years.
I’ve been bothering about it for ever so long.
No one would give more.” “Then you’ve as good as given away your forest for nothing,” said Levin gloomily.
“How do you mean for nothing?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a good-humored smile, knowing that nothing would be right in Levin’s eyes now.
“Because the forest is worth at least a hundred and fifty roubles the acre,” answered Levin.
“Oh, these farmers!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch playfully.
“Your tone of contempt for us poor townsfolk!...
But when it comes to business, we do it better than anyone.
I assure you I have reckoned it all out,” he said, “and the forest is fetching a very good price—so much so that I’m afraid of this fellow’s crying off, in fact.
You know it’s not ‘timber,’” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, hoping by this distinction to convince Levin completely of the unfairness of his doubts.
“And it won’t run to more than twenty-five yards of fagots per acre, and he’s giving me at the rate of seventy roubles the acre.” Levin smiled contemptuously.
“I know,” he thought, “that fashion not only in him, but in all city people, who, after being twice in ten years in the country, pick up two or three phrases and use them in season and out of season, firmly persuaded that they know all about it.
‘_Timber, run to so many yards the acre._’ He says those words without understanding them himself.” “I wouldn’t attempt to teach you what you write about in your office,” said he, “and if need arose, I should come to you to ask about it.
But you’re so positive you know all the lore of the forest.
Have you counted the trees?” “How count the trees?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing, still trying to draw his friend out of his ill-temper.
Some higher power might do it.” “Oh, well, the higher power of Ryabinin can.
Not a single merchant ever buys a forest without counting the trees, unless they get it given them for nothing, as you’re doing now.
I go there every year shooting, and your forest’s worth a hundred and fifty roubles an acre paid down, while he’s giving you sixty by installments.
So that in fact you’re making him a present of thirty thousand.” “Come, don’t let your imagination run away with you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch piteously.
“Why was it none would give it, then?” “Why, because he has an understanding with the merchants; he’s bought them off.
They’re not merchants, you know: they’re speculators.
You’re out of temper.” “Not the least,” said Levin gloomily, as they drove up to the house.
At the steps there stood a trap tightly covered with iron and leather, with a sleek horse tightly harnessed with broad collar-straps.
In the trap sat the chubby, tightly belted clerk who served Ryabinin as coachman.
Ryabinin himself was already in the house, and met the friends in the hall.
Ryabinin was a tall, thinnish, middle-aged man, with mustache and a projecting clean-shaven chin, and prominent muddy-looking eyes.
He was dressed in a long-skirted blue coat, with buttons below the waist at the back, and wore high boots wrinkled over the ankles and straight over the calf, with big galoshes drawn over them.
He rubbed his face with his handkerchief, and wrapping round him his coat, which sat extremely well as it was, he greeted them with a smile, holding out his hand to Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though he wanted to catch something.
“So here you are,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, giving him his hand.
“That’s capital.” “I did not venture to disregard your excellency’s commands, though the road was extremely bad.
I positively walked the whole way, but I am here at my time.
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, my respects”; he turned to Levin, trying to seize his hand too.
But Levin, scowling, made as though he did not notice his hand, and took out the snipe.
“Your honors have been diverting yourselves with the chase?
What kind of bird may it be, pray?” added Ryabinin, looking contemptuously at the snipe: “a great delicacy, I suppose.” And he shook his head disapprovingly, as though he had grave doubts whether this game were worth the candle.
“Would you like to go into my study?” Levin said in French to Stepan Arkadyevitch, scowling morosely.
“Go into my study; you can talk there.” “Quite so, where you please,” said Ryabinin with contemptuous dignity, as though wishing to make it felt that others might be in difficulties as to how to behave, but that he could never be in any difficulty about anything.
On entering the study Ryabinin looked about, as his habit was, as though seeking the holy picture, but when he had found it, he did not cross himself.
He scanned the bookcases and bookshelves, and with the same dubious air with which he had regarded the snipe, he smiled contemptuously and shook his head disapprovingly, as though by no means willing to allow that this game were worth the candle.
“Well, have you brought the money?” asked Oblonsky.
But do sit down.” “I don’t mind if I do,” said Ryabinin, sitting down and leaning his elbows on the back of his chair in a position of the intensest discomfort to himself.
The money is ready conclusively to the last farthing.
As to paying the money down, there’ll be no hitch there.” Levin, who had meanwhile been putting his gun away in the cupboard, was just going out of the door, but catching the merchant’s words, he stopped.
“He came to me too late, or I’d have fixed the price for him.” Ryabinin got up, and in silence, with a smile, he looked Levin down and up.
“Very close about money is Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said with a smile, turning to Stepan Arkadyevitch; “there’s positively no dealing with him.
I was bargaining for some wheat of him, and a pretty price I offered too.” “Why should I give you my goods for nothing?
I didn’t pick it up on the ground, nor steal it either.” “Mercy on us! nowadays there’s no chance at all of stealing.
With the open courts and everything done in style, nowadays there’s no question of stealing.
We are just talking things over like gentlemen.
His excellency’s asking too much for the forest.
I must ask for a little concession.” “But is the thing settled between you or not?
If it’s settled, it’s useless haggling; but if it’s not,” said Levin, “I’ll buy the forest.” The smile vanished at once from Ryabinin’s face.
A hawklike, greedy, cruel expression was left upon it.
With rapid, bony fingers he unbuttoned his coat, revealing a shirt, bronze waistcoat buttons, and a watch chain, and quickly pulled out a fat old pocketbook.
“Here you are, the forest is mine,” he said, crossing himself quickly, and holding out his hand.
That’s Ryabinin’s way of doing business; he doesn’t haggle over every half-penny,” he added, scowling and waving the pocketbook.
“Come, really,” said Oblonsky in surprise.
“I’ve given my word, you know.” Levin went out of the room, slamming the door.
Ryabinin looked towards the door and shook his head with a smile.
“It’s all youthfulness—positively nothing but boyishness.
Why, I’m buying it, upon my honor, simply, believe me, for the glory of it, that Ryabinin, and no one else, should have bought the copse of Oblonsky.
If you would kindly sign the title-deed....” Within an hour the merchant, stroking his big overcoat neatly down, and hooking up his jacket, with the agreement in his pocket, seated himself in his tightly covered trap, and drove homewards.
“Ugh, these gentlefolks!” he said to the clerk.
“They—they’re a nice lot!” “That’s so,” responded the clerk, handing him the reins and buttoning the leather apron.
“But I can congratulate you on the purchase, Mihail Ignatitch?” “Well, well....” Chapter 17 Stepan Arkadyevitch went upstairs with his pocket bulging with notes, which the merchant had paid him for three months in advance.
The business of the forest was over, the money in his pocket; their shooting had been excellent, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was in the happiest frame of mind, and so he felt specially anxious to dissipate the ill-humor that had come upon Levin.
He wanted to finish the day at supper as pleasantly as it had been begun.
Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all his desire to be affectionate and cordial to his charming visitor, he could not control his mood.
The intoxication of the news that Kitty was not married had gradually begun to work upon him.
Kitty was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a man who had slighted her.
This slight, as it were, rebounded upon him.
Vronsky had slighted her, and she had slighted him, Levin.
Consequently Vronsky had the right to despise Levin, and therefore he was his enemy.
He vaguely felt that there was something in it insulting to him, and he was not angry now at what had disturbed him, but he fell foul of everything that presented itself.
The stupid sale of the forest, the fraud practiced upon Oblonsky and concluded in his house, exasperated him.
“Well, finished?” he said, meeting Stepan Arkadyevitch upstairs.
What an appetite I get in the country!
Why didn’t you offer Ryabinin something?” “Oh, damn him!” “Still, how you do treat him!” said Oblonsky.
Why not shake hands with him?” “Because I don’t shake hands with a waiter, and a waiter’s a hundred times better than he is.” “What a reactionist you are, really!
What about the amalgamation of classes?” said Oblonsky.
“Anyone who likes amalgamating is welcome to it, but it sickens me.” “You’re a regular reactionist, I see.” “Really, I have never considered what I am.
I am Konstantin Levin, and nothing else.” “And Konstantin Levin very much out of temper,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
Because—excuse me—of your stupid sale....” Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned good-humoredly, like one who feels himself teased and attacked for no fault of his own.
“When did anybody ever sell anything without being told immediately after the sale, ‘It was worth much more’?
But when one wants to sell, no one will give anything....
No, I see you’ve a grudge against that unlucky Ryabinin.” “Maybe I have.
You’ll say again that I’m a reactionist, or some other terrible word; but all the same it does annoy and anger me to see on all sides the impoverishing of the nobility to which I belong, and, in spite of the amalgamation of classes, I’m glad to belong.
And their impoverishment is not due to extravagance—that would be nothing; living in good style—that’s the proper thing for noblemen; it’s only the nobles who know how to do it.
Now the peasants about us buy land, and I don’t mind that.
The gentleman does nothing, while the peasant works and supplants the idle man.
But I do mind seeing the process of impoverishment from a sort of—I don’t know what to call it—innocence.
Here a Polish speculator bought for half its value a magnificent estate from a young lady who lives in Nice.
And there a merchant will get three acres of land, worth ten roubles, as security for the loan of one rouble.
Here, for no kind of reason, you’ve made that rascal a present of thirty thousand roubles.” “Well, what should I have done?
You didn’t count them, but Ryabinin did.
Ryabinin’s children will have means of livelihood and education, while yours maybe will not!” “Well, you must excuse me, but there’s something mean in this counting.
We have our business and they have theirs, and they must make their profit.
And here come some poached eggs, my favorite dish.
And Agafea Mihalovna will give us that marvelous herb-brandy....” Stepan Arkadyevitch sat down at the table and began joking with Agafea Mihalovna, assuring her that it was long since he had tasted such a dinner and such a supper.
“Well, you do praise it, anyway,” said Agafea Mihalovna, “but Konstantin Dmitrievitch, give him what you will—a crust of bread—he’ll eat it and walk away.” Though Levin tried to control himself, he was gloomy and silent.
He wanted to put one question to Stepan Arkadyevitch, but he could not bring himself to the point, and could not find the words or the moment in which to put it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down to his room, undressed, again washed, and attired in a nightshirt with goffered frills, he had got into bed, but Levin still lingered in his room, talking of various trifling matters, and not daring to ask what he wanted to know.
“How wonderfully they make this soap,” he said gazing at a piece of soap he was handling, which Agafea Mihalovna had put ready for the visitor but Oblonsky had not used.
“Only look; why, it’s a work of art.” “Yes, everything’s brought to such a pitch of perfection nowadays,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a moist and blissful yawn.
“The theater, for instance, and the entertainments ... a—a—a!” he yawned.
“The electric light everywhere ... a—a—a!” “Yes, the electric light,” said Levin.
Oh, and where’s Vronsky now?” he asked suddenly, laying down the soap.
“Vronsky?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, checking his yawn; “he’s in Petersburg.
And do you know, Kostya, I’ll tell you the truth,” he went on, leaning his elbow on the table, and propping on his hand his handsome ruddy face, in which his moist, good-natured, sleepy eyes shone like stars.
I told you at the time that....” He yawned inwardly, without opening his mouth.
“Does he know, or doesn’t he, that I did make an offer?” Levin wondered, gazing at him.
“Yes, there’s something humbugging, diplomatic in his face,” and feeling he was blushing, he looked Stepan Arkadyevitch straight in the face without speaking.
“If there was anything on her side at the time, it was nothing but a superficial attraction,” pursued Oblonsky.
“His being such a perfect aristocrat, don’t you know, and his future position in society, had an influence not with her, but with her mother.” Levin scowled.
The humiliation of his rejection stung him to the heart, as though it were a fresh wound he had only just received.
“Stay, stay,” he began, interrupting Oblonsky.
“You talk of his being an aristocrat.
But allow me to ask what it consists in, that aristocracy of Vronsky or of anybody else, beside which I can be looked down upon?
You consider Vronsky an aristocrat, but I don’t.
A man whose father crawled up from nothing at all by intrigue, and whose mother—God knows whom she wasn’t mixed up with....
No, excuse me, but I consider myself aristocratic, and people like me, who can point back in the past to three or four honorable generations of their family, of the highest degree of breeding (talent and intellect, of course that’s another matter), and have never curried favor with anyone, never depended on anyone for anything, like my father and my grandfather.
You think it mean of me to count the trees in my forest, while you make Ryabinin a present of thirty thousand; but you get rents from your lands and I don’t know what, while I don’t and so I prize what’s come to me from my ancestors or been won by hard work....
We are aristocrats, and not those who can only exist by favor of the powerful of this world, and who can be bought for twopence halfpenny.” “Well, but whom are you attacking?
I agree with you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, sincerely and genially; though he was aware that in the class of those who could be bought for twopence halfpenny Levin was reckoning him too.
Levin’s warmth gave him genuine pleasure.
“Whom are you attacking?
I tell you straight out, if I were you, I should go back with me to Moscow, and....” “No; I don’t know whether you know it or not, but I don’t care.
And I tell you—I did make an offer and was rejected, and Katerina Alexandrovna is nothing now to me but a painful and humiliating reminiscence.” “What ever for?
What nonsense!” “But we won’t talk about it.
And do you know, stand-shooting in the morning is unusually good—why not go?
I couldn’t sleep the night anyway, but I might go straight from shooting to the station.” “Capital.” Chapter 18 Although all Vronsky’s inner life was absorbed in his passion, his external life unalterably and inevitably followed along the old accustomed lines of his social and regimental ties and interests.
The interests of his regiment took an important place in Vronsky’s life, both because he was fond of the regiment, and because the regiment was fond of him.
They were not only fond of Vronsky in his regiment, they respected him too, and were proud of him; proud that this man, with his immense wealth, his brilliant education and abilities, and the path open before him to every kind of success, distinction, and ambition, had disregarded all that, and of all the interests of life had the interests of his regiment and his comrades nearest to his heart.
Vronsky was aware of his comrades’ view of him, and in addition to his liking for the life, he felt bound to keep up that reputation.
It need not be said that he did not speak of his love to any of his comrades, nor did he betray his secret even in the wildest drinking bouts (though indeed he was never so drunk as to lose all control of himself).
And he shut up any of his thoughtless comrades who attempted to allude to his connection.
But in spite of that, his love was known to all the town; everyone guessed with more or less confidence at his relations with Madame Karenina.
The majority of the younger men envied him for just what was the most irksome factor in his love—the exalted position of Karenin, and the consequent publicity of their connection in society.
The greater number of the young women, who envied Anna and had long been weary of hearing her called _virtuous_, rejoiced at the fulfillment of their predictions, and were only waiting for a decisive turn in public opinion to fall upon her with all the weight of their scorn.
They were already making ready their handfuls of mud to fling at her when the right moment arrived.
The greater number of the middle-aged people and certain great personages were displeased at the prospect of the impending scandal in society.
But she had heard of late that her son had refused a position offered him of great importance to his career, simply in order to remain in the regiment, where he could be constantly seeing Madame Karenina.
She learned that great personages were displeased with him on this account, and she changed her opinion.
She was vexed, too, that from all she could learn of this connection it was not that brilliant, graceful, worldly _liaison_ which she would have welcomed, but a sort of Wertherish, desperate passion, so she was told, which might well lead him into imprudence.
She had not seen him since his abrupt departure from Moscow, and she sent her elder son to bid him come to see her.
This elder son, too, was displeased with his younger brother.
He did not distinguish what sort of love his might be, big or little, passionate or passionless, lasting or passing (he kept a ballet girl himself, though he was the father of a family, so he was lenient in these matters), but he knew that this love affair was viewed with displeasure by those whom it was necessary to please, and therefore he did not approve of his brother’s conduct.
Besides the service and society, Vronsky had another great interest—horses; he was passionately fond of horses.
That year races and a steeplechase had been arranged for the officers.
Vronsky had put his name down, bought a thoroughbred English mare, and in spite of his love affair, he was looking forward to the races with intense, though reserved, excitement....
These two passions did not interfere with one another.
On the contrary, he needed occupation and distraction quite apart from his love, so as to recruit and rest himself from the violent emotions that agitated him.
Chapter 19 On the day of the races at Krasnoe Selo, Vronsky had come earlier than usual to eat beefsteak in the common messroom of the regiment.
He had no need to be strict with himself, as he had very quickly been brought down to the required light weight; but still he had to avoid gaining flesh, and so he eschewed farinaceous and sweet dishes.
He sat with his coat unbuttoned over a white waistcoat, resting both elbows on the table, and while waiting for the steak he had ordered he looked at a French novel that lay open on his plate.
He was only looking at the book to avoid conversation with the officers coming in and out; he was thinking.
He was thinking of Anna’s promise to see him that day after the races.
But he had not seen her for three days, and as her husband had just returned from abroad, he did not know whether she would be able to meet him today or not, and he did not know how to find out.
He had had his last interview with her at his cousin Betsy’s summer villa.
He visited the Karenins’ summer villa as rarely as possible.
Now he wanted to go there, and he pondered the question how to do it.
And as he vividly pictured the happiness of seeing her, his face lighted up.
“Send to my house, and tell them to have out the carriage and three horses as quick as they can,” he said to the servant, who handed him the steak on a hot silver dish, and moving the dish up he began eating.
From the billiard room next door came the sound of balls knocking, of talk and laughter.
Two officers appeared at the entrance-door: one, a young fellow, with a feeble, delicate face, who had lately joined the regiment from the Corps of Pages; the other, a plump, elderly officer, with a bracelet on his wrist, and little eyes, lost in fat.
Vronsky glanced at them, frowned, and looking down at his book as though he had not noticed them, he proceeded to eat and read at the same time.
Fortifying yourself for your work?” said the plump officer, sitting down beside him.
“As you see,” responded Vronsky, knitting his brows, wiping his mouth, and not looking at the officer.
“You’re not afraid of getting fat?” “Waiter, sherry!” said Vronsky, without replying, and moving the book to the other side of him, he went on reading.
“Rhine wine, please,” said the young officer, stealing a timid glance at Vronsky, and trying to pull his scarcely visible mustache.
“Let’s go into the billiard room,” he said.
The plump officer rose submissively, and they moved towards the door.
Nodding with an air of lofty contempt to the two officers, he went up to Vronsky.
“Ah! here he is!” he cried, bringing his big hand down heavily on his epaulet.
Vronsky looked round angrily, but his face lighted up immediately with his characteristic expression of genial and manly serenity.
“That’s it, Alexey,” said the captain, in his loud baritone.
“You must just eat a mouthful, now, and drink only one tiny glass.” “Oh, I’m not hungry.” “There go the inseparables,” Yashvin dropped, glancing sarcastically at the two officers who were at that instant leaving the room.
And he bent his long legs, swathed in tight riding breeches, and sat down in the chair, too low for him, so that his knees were cramped up in a sharp angle.
“Why didn’t you turn up at the Red Theater yesterday?
Numerova wasn’t at all bad.
Where were you?” “I was late at the Tverskoys’,” said Vronsky.
“Ah!” responded Yashvin.
Yashvin, a gambler and a rake, a man not merely without moral principles, but of immoral principles, Yashvin was Vronsky’s greatest friend in the regiment.
Vronsky respected and liked Yashvin particularly because he felt Yashvin liked him, not for his name and his money, but for himself.
He felt that Yashvin, in spite of his apparent contempt for every sort of feeling, was the only man who could, so he fancied, comprehend the intense passion which now filled his whole life.
Moreover, he felt certain that Yashvin, as it was, took no delight in gossip and scandal, and interpreted his feeling rightly, that is to say, knew and believed that this passion was not a jest, not a pastime, but something more serious and important.
Vronsky had never spoken to him of his passion, but he was aware that he knew all about it, and that he put the right interpretation on it, and he was glad to see that in his eyes.
“Ah! yes,” he said, to the announcement that Vronsky had been at the Tverskoys’; and his black eyes shining, he plucked at his left mustache, and began twisting it into his mouth, a bad habit he had.
“Well, and what did you do yesterday?
Win anything?” asked Vronsky.
But three don’t count; he won’t pay up.” “Oh, then you can afford to lose over me,” said Vronsky, laughing. (Yashvin had bet heavily on Vronsky in the races.) “No chance of my losing.
Mahotin’s the only one that’s risky.” And the conversation passed to forecasts of the coming race, the only thing Vronsky could think of just now.
“Come along, I’ve finished,” said Vronsky, and getting up he went to the door.
Yashvin got up too, stretching his long legs and his long back.
I’ll come along directly.
“No, all right,” he shouted again immediately after.
Chapter 20 Vronsky was staying in a roomy, clean, Finnish hut, divided into two by a partition.
Petritsky lived with him in camp too.
Petritsky was asleep when Vronsky and Yashvin came into the hut.
“Get up, don’t go on sleeping,” said Yashvin, going behind the partition and giving Petritsky, who was lying with ruffled hair and with his nose in the pillow, a prod on the shoulder.
Petritsky jumped up suddenly onto his knees and looked round.
“You’d better tell me what to drink; such a nasty taste in my mouth, that....” “Brandy’s better than anything,” boomed Yashvin.
“Tereshtchenko! brandy for your master and cucumbers,” he shouted, obviously taking pleasure in the sound of his own voice.
Eh?” queried Petritsky, blinking and rubbing his eyes.
“And you’ll drink something?
All right then, we’ll have a drink together!
Vronsky, have a drink?” said Petritsky, getting up and wrapping the tiger-skin rug round him.
He went to the door of the partition wall, raised his hands, and hummed in French, “There was a king in Thule.” “Vronsky, will you have a drink?” “Go along,” said Vronsky, putting on the coat his valet handed to him.
“Oh, here are your three horses,” he added, seeing the carriage drive up.
“To the stables, and I’ve got to see Bryansky, too, about the horses,” said Vronsky.
Vronsky had as a fact promised to call at Bryansky’s, some eight miles from Peterhof, and to bring him some money owing for some horses; and he hoped to have time to get that in too.
But his comrades were at once aware that he was not only going there.
Petritsky, still humming, winked and made a pout with his lips, as though he would say: “Oh, yes, we know your Bryansky.” “Mind you’re not late!” was Yashvin’s only comment; and to change the conversation: “How’s my roan? is he doing all right?” he inquired, looking out of the window at the middle one of the three horses, which he had sold Vronsky.
“Stop!” cried Petritsky to Vronsky as he was just going out.
That’s just the question!” said Petritsky solemnly, moving his forefinger upwards from his nose.
Here somewhere about.” “Come, enough fooling!
Where is the letter?” “No, I’ve forgotten really.
If you’d drunk four bottles yesterday as I did you’d forget where you were lying.
Wait a bit, I’ll remember!” Petritsky went behind the partition and lay down on his bed.
This was how I was lying, and this was how he was standing.
Here it is!”—and Petritsky pulled a letter out from under the mattress, where he had hidden it.
It was the letter he was expecting—from his mother, reproaching him for not having been to see her—and the note was from his brother to say that he must have a little talk with him.
“What business is it of theirs!” thought Vronsky, and crumpling up the letters he thrust them between the buttons of his coat so as to read them carefully on the road.
In the porch of the hut he was met by two officers; one of his regiment and one of another.
Vronsky’s quarters were always a meeting place for all the officers.
“Where are you off to?” “I must go to Peterhof.” “Has the mare come from Tsarskoe?” “Yes, but I’ve not seen her yet.” “They say Mahotin’s Gladiator’s lame.” “Nonsense!
“Here are my saviors!” cried Petritsky, seeing them come in.
Before him stood the orderly with a tray of brandy and salted cucumbers.
“Here’s Yashvin ordering me to drink a pick-me-up.” “Well, you did give it to us yesterday,” said one of those who had come in; “you didn’t let us get a wink of sleep all night.” “Oh, didn’t we make a pretty finish!” said Petritsky.
I said: ‘Let’s have music, the funeral march!’ He fairly dropped asleep on the roof over the funeral march.” “Drink it up; you positively must drink the brandy, and then seltzer water and a lot of lemon,” said Yashvin, standing over Petritsky like a mother making a child take medicine, “and then a little champagne—just a small bottle.” “Come, there’s some sense in that.
“Well?” “You’d better get your hair cut, it’ll weigh you down, especially at the top.” Vronsky was in fact beginning, prematurely, to get a little bald.
He laughed gaily, showing his even teeth, and pulling his cap over the thin place, went out and got into his carriage.
“To the stables!” he said, and was just pulling out the letters to read them through, but he thought better of it, and put off reading them so as not to distract his attention before looking at the mare.
“Later!” Chapter 21 The temporary stable, a wooden shed, had been put up close to the race course, and there his mare was to have been taken the previous day.
During the last few days he had not ridden her out for exercise himself, but had put her in the charge of the trainer, and so now he positively did not know in what condition his mare had arrived yesterday and was today.
He had scarcely got out of his carriage when his groom, the so-called “stable boy,” recognizing the carriage some way off, called the trainer.
A dry-looking Englishman, in high boots and a short jacket, clean-shaven, except for a tuft below his chin, came to meet him, walking with the uncouth gait of jockey, turning his elbows out and swaying from side to side.
“All right, sir,” the Englishman’s voice responded somewhere in the inside of his throat.
“Better not go in,” he added, touching his hat.
I want to look at her.” “Come along, then,” said the Englishman, frowning, and speaking with his mouth shut, and, with swinging elbows, he went on in front with his disjointed gait.
A stable boy, spruce and smart in his holiday attire, met them with a broom in his hand, and followed them.
In the shed there were five horses in their separate stalls, and Vronsky knew that his chief rival, Gladiator, a very tall chestnut horse, had been brought there, and must be standing among them.
Even more than his mare, Vronsky longed to see Gladiator, whom he had never seen.
But he knew that by the etiquette of the race course it was not merely impossible for him to see the horse, but improper even to ask questions about him.
Just as he was passing along the passage, the boy opened the door into the second horse-box on the left, and Vronsky caught a glimpse of a big chestnut horse with white legs.
He knew that this was Gladiator, but, with the feeling of a man turning away from the sight of another man’s open letter, he turned round and went into Frou-Frou’s stall.
“The horse is here belonging to Mak...
I never can say the name,” said the Englishman, over his shoulder, pointing his big finger and dirty nail towards Gladiator’s stall.
“If you were riding him,” said the Englishman, “I’d bet on you.” “Frou-Frou’s more nervous; he’s stronger,” said Vronsky, smiling at the compliment to his riding.
“In a steeplechase it all depends on riding and on pluck,” said the Englishman.
Of pluck—that is, energy and courage—Vronsky did not merely feel that he had enough; what was of far more importance, he was firmly convinced that no one in the world could have more of this “pluck” than he had.
“Don’t you think I want more thinning down?” “Oh, no,” answered the Englishman.
The mare’s fidgety,” he added, nodding towards the horse-box, before which they were standing, and from which came the sound of restless stamping in the straw.
Looking round him in the twilight of the horse-box, Vronsky unconsciously took in once more in a comprehensive glance all the points of his favorite mare.
Frou-Frou was a beast of medium size, not altogether free from reproach, from a breeder’s point of view.
She was small-boned all over; though her chest was extremely prominent in front, it was narrow.
Her hind-quarters were a little drooping, and in her fore-legs, and still more in her hind-legs, there was a noticeable curvature.
The muscles of both hind- and fore-legs were not very thick; but across her shoulders the mare was exceptionally broad, a peculiarity specially striking now that she was lean from training.
The bones of her legs below the knees looked no thicker than a finger from in front, but were extraordinarily thick seen from the side.
She looked altogether, except across the shoulders, as it were, pinched in at the sides and pressed out in depth.
But she had in the highest degree the quality that makes all defects forgotten: that quality was _blood_, the blood _that tells_, as the English expression has it.
The muscles stood up sharply under the network of sinews, covered with the delicate, mobile skin, soft as satin, and they were hard as bone.
Her clean-cut head, with prominent, bright, spirited eyes, broadened out at the open nostrils, that showed the red blood in the cartilage within.
About all her figure, and especially her head, there was a certain expression of energy, and, at the same time, of softness.
She was one of those creatures which seem only not to speak because the mechanism of their mouth does not allow them to.
To Vronsky, at any rate, it seemed that she understood all he felt at that moment, looking at her.
Directly Vronsky went towards her, she drew in a deep breath, and, turning back her prominent eye till the white looked bloodshot, she started at the approaching figures from the opposite side, shaking her muzzle, and shifting lightly from one leg to the other.
“There, you see how fidgety she is,” said the Englishman.
There!” said Vronsky, going up to the mare and speaking soothingly to her.
Only when he stood by her head, she was suddenly quieter, while the muscles quivered under her soft, delicate coat.
Vronsky patted her strong neck, straightened over her sharp withers a stray lock of her mane that had fallen on the other side, and moved his face near her dilated nostrils, transparent as a bat’s wing.
She drew a loud breath and snorted out through her tense nostrils, started, pricked up her sharp ear, and put out her strong, black lip towards Vronsky, as though she would nip hold of his sleeve.
But remembering the muzzle, she shook it and again began restlessly stamping one after the other her shapely legs.
“Quiet, darling, quiet!” he said, patting her again over her hind-quarters; and with a glad sense that his mare was in the best possible condition, he went out of the horse-box.
The mare’s excitement had infected Vronsky.
He felt that his heart was throbbing, and that he, too, like the mare, longed to move, to bite; it was both dreadful and delicious.
“Well, I rely on you, then,” he said to the Englishman; “half-past six on the ground.” “All right,” said the Englishman.
“Oh, where are you going, my lord?” he asked suddenly, using the title “my lord,” which he had scarcely ever used before.
Vronsky in amazement raised his head, and stared, as he knew how to stare, not into the Englishman’s eyes, but at his forehead, astounded at the impertinence of his question.
But realizing that in asking this the Englishman had been looking at him not as an employer, but as a jockey, he answered: “I’ve got to go to Bryansky’s; I shall be home within an hour.” “How often I’m asked that question today!” he said to himself, and he blushed, a thing which rarely happened to him.
The Englishman looked gravely at him; and, as though he, too, knew where Vronsky was going, he added: “The great thing’s to keep quiet before a race,” said he; “don’t get out of temper or upset about anything.” “All right,” answered Vronsky, smiling; and jumping into his carriage, he told the man to drive to Peterhof.
Before he had driven many paces away, the dark clouds that had been threatening rain all day broke, and there was a heavy downpour of rain.
“What a pity!” thought Vronsky, putting up the roof of the carriage.
“It was muddy before, now it will be a perfect swamp.” As he sat in solitude in the closed carriage, he took out his mother’s letter and his brother’s note, and read them through.
Everyone, his mother, his brother, everyone thought fit to interfere in the affairs of his heart.
This interference aroused in him a feeling of angry hatred—a feeling he had rarely known before.
“What business is it of theirs?
Why does everybody feel called upon to concern himself about me?
Just because they see that this is something they can’t understand.
If it were a common, vulgar, worldly intrigue, they would have left me alone.
They feel that this is something different, that this is not a mere pastime, that this woman is dearer to me than life.
And this is incomprehensible, and that’s why it annoys them.
Whatever our destiny is or may be, we have made it ourselves, and we do not complain of it,” he said, in the word _we_ linking himself with Anna.
They haven’t an idea of what happiness is; they don’t know that without our love, for us there is neither happiness nor unhappiness—no life at all,” he thought.
He was angry with all of them for their interference just because he felt in his soul that they, all these people, were right.
He felt that the love that bound him to Anna was not a momentary impulse, which would pass, as worldly intrigues do pass, leaving no other traces in the life of either but pleasant or unpleasant memories.
He felt all the torture of his own and her position, all the difficulty there was for them, conspicuous as they were in the eye of all the world, in concealing their love, in lying and deceiving; and in lying, deceiving, feigning, and continually thinking of others, when the passion that united them was so intense that they were both oblivious of everything else but their love.
He vividly recalled all the constantly recurring instances of inevitable necessity for lying and deceit, which were so against his natural bent.
He recalled particularly vividly the shame he had more than once detected in her at this necessity for lying and deceit.
And he experienced the strange feeling that had sometimes come upon him since his secret love for Anna.
This was a feeling of loathing for something—whether for Alexey Alexandrovitch, or for himself, or for the whole world, he could not have said.
Now, too, he shook it off and continued the thread of his thoughts.
And for the first time the idea clearly presented itself that it was essential to put an end to this false position, and the sooner the better.
“Throw up everything, she and I, and hide ourselves somewhere alone with our love,” he said to himself.
He thought no more of the shower spoiling the race course, but was rejoicing now that—thanks to the rain—he would be sure to find her at home and alone, as he knew that Alexey Alexandrovitch, who had lately returned from a foreign watering place, had not moved from Petersburg.
Hoping to find her alone, Vronsky alighted, as he always did, to avoid attracting attention, before crossing the bridge, and walked to the house.
“Has your master come?” he asked a gardener.
The mistress is at home.
But will you please go to the front door; there are servants there,” the gardener answered.
“They’ll open the door.” “No, I’ll go in from the garden.” And feeling satisfied that she was alone, and wanting to take her by surprise, since he had not promised to be there today, and she would certainly not expect him to come before the races, he walked, holding his sword and stepping cautiously over the sandy path, bordered with flowers, to the terrace that looked out upon the garden.
Vronsky forgot now all that he had thought on the way of the hardships and difficulties of their position.
He thought of nothing but that he would see her directly, not in imagination, but living, all of her, as she was in reality.
He was just going in, stepping on his whole foot so as not to creak, up the worn steps of the terrace, when he suddenly remembered what he always forgot, and what caused the most torturing side of his relations with her, her son with his questioning—hostile, as he fancied—eyes.
When he was present, both Vronsky and Anna did not merely avoid speaking of anything that they could not have repeated before everyone; they did not even allow themselves to refer by hints to anything the boy did not understand.
They had made no agreement about this, it had settled itself.
They would have felt it wounding themselves to deceive the child.
In his presence they talked like acquaintances.
But in spite of this caution, Vronsky often saw the child’s intent, bewildered glance fixed upon him, and a strange shyness, uncertainty, at one time friendliness, at another, coldness and reserve, in the boy’s manner to him; as though the child felt that between this man and his mother there existed some important bond, the significance of which he could not understand.
As a fact, the boy did feel that he could not understand this relation, and he tried painfully, and was not able to make clear to himself what feeling he ought to have for this man.
With a child’s keen instinct for every manifestation of feeling, he saw distinctly that his father, his governess, his nurse,—all did not merely dislike Vronsky, but looked on him with horror and aversion, though they never said anything about him, while his mother looked on him as her greatest friend.
And this was what caused his dubious, inquiring, sometimes hostile, expression, and the shyness and uncertainty which Vronsky found so irksome.
This child’s presence always and infallibly called up in Vronsky that strange feeling of inexplicable loathing which he had experienced of late.
This child, with his innocent outlook upon life, was the compass that showed them the point to which they had departed from what they knew, but did not want to know.
This time Seryozha was not at home, and she was completely alone.
She had sent a manservant and a maid out to look for him.
Dressed in a white gown, deeply embroidered, she was sitting in a corner of the terrace behind some flowers, and did not hear him.
Bending her curly black head, she pressed her forehead against a cool watering pot that stood on the parapet, and both her lovely hands, with the rings he knew so well, clasped the pot.
The beauty of her whole figure, her head, her neck, her hands, struck Vronsky every time as something new and unexpected.
But, directly he would have made a step to come nearer to her, she was aware of his presence, pushed away the watering pot, and turned her flushed face towards him.
He would have run to her, but remembering that there might be spectators, he looked round towards the balcony door, and reddened a little, as he always reddened, feeling that he had to be afraid and be on his guard.
“No, I’m quite well,” she said, getting up and pressing his outstretched hand tightly.
“You startled me,” she said.
“I’m alone, and expecting Seryozha; he’s out for a walk; they’ll come in from this side.” But, in spite of her efforts to be calm, her lips were quivering.
“Forgive me for coming, but I couldn’t pass the day without seeing you,” he went on, speaking French, as he always did to avoid using the stiff Russian plural form, so impossibly frigid between them, and the dangerously intimate singular.
“What were you thinking of?” “Always the same thing,” she said, with a smile.
If ever at any moment she had been asked what she was thinking of, she could have answered truly: of the same thing, of her happiness and her unhappiness.
She was thinking, just when he came upon her, of this: why was it, she wondered, that to others, to Betsy (she knew of her secret connection with Tushkevitch) it was all easy, while to her it was such torture?
Today this thought gained special poignancy from certain other considerations.
He answered her questions, and, seeing that she was agitated, trying to calm her, he began telling her in the simplest tone the details of his preparations for the races.
“Tell him or not tell him?” she thought, looking into his quiet, affectionate eyes.
He saw it, and his face expressed that utter subjection, that slavish devotion, which had done so much to win her.
“I see something has happened.
Tell me, for God’s sake,” he repeated imploringly.
Better not tell; why put him to the proof?” she thought, still staring at him in the same way, and feeling the hand that held the leaf was trembling more and more.
“For God’s sake!” he repeated, taking her hand.
“Shall I tell you?” “Yes, yes, yes....” “I’m with child,” she said, softly and deliberately.
The leaf in her hand shook more violently, but she did not take her eyes off him, watching how he would take it.
He turned white, would have said something, but stopped; he dropped her hand, and his head sank on his breast.
“Yes, he realizes all the gravity of it,” she thought, and gratefully she pressed his hand.
But she was mistaken in thinking he realized the gravity of the fact as she, a woman, realized it.
On hearing it, he felt come upon him with tenfold intensity that strange feeling of loathing of someone.
But at the same time, he felt that the turning-point he had been longing for had come now; that it was impossible to go on concealing things from her husband, and it was inevitable in one way or another that they should soon put an end to their unnatural position.
But, besides that, her emotion physically affected him in the same way.
He looked at her with a look of submissive tenderness, kissed her hand, got up, and, in silence, paced up and down the terrace.
“Yes,” he said, going up to her resolutely.
“Neither you nor I have looked on our relations as a passing amusement, and now our fate is sealed.
It is absolutely necessary to put an end”—he looked round as he spoke—“to the deception in which we are living.” “Put an end?
“Leave your husband and make our life one.” “It is one as it is,” she answered, scarcely audibly.
“Yes, but altogether; altogether.” “But how, Alexey, tell me how?” she said in melancholy mockery at the hopelessness of her own position.
“Is there any way out of such a position?
Am I not the wife of my husband?” “There is a way out of every position.
“Anything’s better than the position in which you’re living.
Of course, I see how you torture yourself over everything—the world and your son and your husband.” “Oh, not over my husband,” she said, with a quiet smile.
He doesn’t exist.” “You’re not speaking sincerely.
You worry about him too.” “Oh, he doesn’t even know,” she said, and suddenly a hot flush came over her face; her cheeks, her brow, her neck crimsoned, and tears of shame came into her eyes.
“But we won’t talk of him.” Chapter 23 Vronsky had several times already, though not so resolutely as now, tried to bring her to consider their position, and every time he had been confronted by the same superficiality and triviality with which she met his appeal now.
It was as though there were something in this which she could not or would not face, as though directly she began to speak of this, she, the real Anna, retreated somehow into herself, and another strange and unaccountable woman came out, whom he did not love, and whom he feared, and who was in opposition to him.
But today he was resolved to have it out.
“Whether he knows or not,” said Vronsky, in his usual quiet and resolute tone, “that’s nothing to do with us.
We cannot ... you cannot stay like this, especially now.” “What’s to be done, according to you?” she asked with the same frivolous irony.
She who had so feared he would take her condition too lightly was now vexed with him for deducing from it the necessity of taking some step.
“Tell him everything, and leave him.” “Very well, let us suppose I do that,” she said.
I can tell you it all beforehand,” and a wicked light gleamed in her eyes, that had been so soft a minute before.
“‘Eh, you love another man, and have entered into criminal intrigues with him?’” (Mimicking her husband, she threw an emphasis on the word “criminal,” as Alexey Alexandrovitch did.) “‘I warned you of the results in the religious, the civil, and the domestic relation.
You have not listened to me.
Now I cannot let you disgrace my name,—’” “and my son,” she had meant to say, but about her son she could not jest,—“‘disgrace my name, and’—and more in the same style,” she added.
“In general terms, he’ll say in his official manner, and with all distinctness and precision, that he cannot let me go, but will take all measures in his power to prevent scandal.
And he will calmly and punctually act in accordance with his words.
He’s not a man, but a machine, and a spiteful machine when he’s angry,” she added, recalling Alexey Alexandrovitch as she spoke, with all the peculiarities of his figure and manner of speaking, and reckoning against him every defect she could find in him, softening nothing for the great wrong she herself was doing him.
“But, Anna,” said Vronsky, in a soft and persuasive voice, trying to soothe her, “we absolutely must, anyway, tell him, and then be guided by the line he takes.” “What, run away?” “And why not run away?
And not for my sake—I see that you suffer.” “Yes, run away, and become your mistress,” she said angrily.
“Anna,” he said, with reproachful tenderness.
“Yes,” she went on, “become your mistress, and complete the ruin of....” Again she would have said “my son,” but she could not utter that word.
Vronsky could not understand how she, with her strong and truthful nature, could endure this state of deceit, and not long to get out of it.
But he did not suspect that the chief cause of it was the word—_son_, which she could not bring herself to pronounce.
When she thought of her son, and his future attitude to his mother, who had abandoned his father, she felt such terror at what she had done, that she could not face it; but, like a woman, could only try to comfort herself with lying assurances that everything would remain as it always had been, and that it was possible to forget the fearful question of how it would be with her son.
“I beg you, I entreat you,” she said suddenly, taking his hand, and speaking in quite a different tone, sincere and tender, “never speak to me of that!” “But, Anna....” “Never.
I know all the baseness, all the horror of my position; but it’s not so easy to arrange as you think.
No, no, promise!...” “I promise everything, but I can’t be at peace, especially after what you have told me.
I can’t be at peace, when you can’t be at peace....” “I?” she repeated.
“Yes, I am worried sometimes; but that will pass, if you will never talk about this.
When you talk about it—it’s only then it worries me.” “I don’t understand,” he said.
“I know,” she interrupted him, “how hard it is for your truthful nature to lie, and I grieve for you.
I often think that you have ruined your whole life for me.” “I was just thinking the very same thing,” he said; “how could you sacrifice everything for my sake?
I can’t forgive myself that you’re unhappy!” “I unhappy?” she said, coming closer to him, and looking at him with an ecstatic smile of love.
No, this is my unhappiness....” She could hear the sound of her son’s voice coming towards them, and glancing swiftly round the terrace, she got up impulsively.
Her eyes glowed with the fire he knew so well; with a rapid movement she raised her lovely hands, covered with rings, took his head, looked a long look into his face, and, putting up her face with smiling, parted lips, swiftly kissed his mouth and both eyes, and pushed him away.
“When?” he murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at her.
“Tonight, at one o’clock,” she whispered, and, with a heavy sigh, she walked with her light, swift step to meet her son.
Seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and he and his nurse had taken shelter in an arbor.
Betsy promised to fetch me.” Vronsky, looking at his watch, went away hurriedly.
Chapter 24 When Vronsky looked at his watch on the Karenins’ balcony, he was so greatly agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the figures on the watch’s face, but could not take in what time it was.
He came out on to the highroad and walked, picking his way carefully through the mud, to his carriage.
He was so completely absorbed in his feeling for Anna, that he did not even think what o’clock it was, and whether he had time to go to Bryansky’s.
He had left him, as often happens, only the external faculty of memory, that points out each step one has to take, one after the other.
He went up to his coachman, who was dozing on the box in the shadow, already lengthening, of a thick limetree; he admired the shifting clouds of midges circling over the hot horses, and, waking the coachman, he jumped into the carriage, and told him to drive to Bryansky’s.
It was only after driving nearly five miles that he had sufficiently recovered himself to look at his watch, and realize that it was half-past five, and he was late.
There were several races fixed for that day: the Mounted Guards’ race, then the officers’ mile-and-a-half race, then the three-mile race, and then the race for which he was entered.
He could still be in time for his race, but if he went to Bryansky’s he could only just be in time, and he would arrive when the whole of the court would be in their places.
But he had promised Bryansky to come, and so he decided to drive on, telling the coachman not to spare the horses.
He reached Bryansky’s, spent five minutes there, and galloped back.
All that was painful in his relations with Anna, all the feeling of indefiniteness left by their conversation, had slipped out of his mind.
He was thinking now with pleasure and excitement of the race, of his being anyhow, in time, and now and then the thought of the blissful interview awaiting him that night flashed across his imagination like a flaming light.
The excitement of the approaching race gained upon him as he drove further and further into the atmosphere of the races, overtaking carriages driving up from the summer villas or out of Petersburg.
At his quarters no one was left at home; all were at the races, and his valet was looking out for him at the gate.
While he was changing his clothes, his valet told him that the second race had begun already, that a lot of gentlemen had been to ask for him, and a boy had twice run up from the stables.
Dressing without hurry (he never hurried himself, and never lost his self-possession), Vronsky drove to the sheds.
From the sheds he could see a perfect sea of carriages, and people on foot, soldiers surrounding the race course, and pavilions swarming with people.
The second race was apparently going on, for just as he went into the sheds he heard a bell ringing.
Going towards the stable, he met the white-legged chestnut, Mahotin’s Gladiator, being led to the race-course in a blue forage horsecloth, with what looked like huge ears edged with blue.
All right!” said the Englishman; “don’t upset yourself!” Vronsky once more took in in one glance the exquisite lines of his favorite mare; who was quivering all over, and with an effort he tore himself from the sight of her, and went out of the stable.
He went towards the pavilions at the most favorable moment for escaping attention.
The mile-and-a-half race was just finishing, and all eyes were fixed on the horse-guard in front and the light hussar behind, urging their horses on with a last effort close to the winning post.
From the center and outside of the ring all were crowding to the winning post, and a group of soldiers and officers of the horse-guards were shouting loudly their delight at the expected triumph of their officer and comrade.
Vronsky moved into the middle of the crowd unnoticed, almost at the very moment when the bell rang at the finish of the race, and the tall, mudspattered horse-guard who came in first, bending over the saddle, let go the reins of his panting gray horse that looked dark with sweat.
The horse, stiffening out its legs, with an effort stopped its rapid course, and the officer of the horse-guards looked round him like a man waking up from a heavy sleep, and just managed to smile.
A crowd of friends and outsiders pressed round him.
Vronsky intentionally avoided that select crowd of the upper world, which was moving and talking with discreet freedom before the pavilions.
He knew that Madame Karenina was there, and Betsy, and his brother’s wife, and he purposely did not go near them for fear of something distracting his attention.
But he was continually met and stopped by acquaintances, who told him about the previous races, and kept asking him why he was so late.
At the time when the racers had to go to the pavilion to receive the prizes, and all attention was directed to that point, Vronsky’s elder brother, Alexander, a colonel with heavy fringed epaulets, came up to him.
He was not tall, though as broadly built as Alexey, and handsomer and rosier than he; he had a red nose, and an open, drunken-looking face.
“There’s never any finding you.” Alexander Vronsky, in spite of the dissolute life, and in especial the drunken habits, for which he was notorious, was quite one of the court circle.
Now, as he talked to his brother of a matter bound to be exceedingly disagreeable to him, knowing that the eyes of many people might be fixed upon him, he kept a smiling countenance, as though he were jesting with his brother about something of little moment.
“I got it, and I really can’t make out what _you_ are worrying yourself about,” said Alexey.
Being a man of very warm heart, he was seldom angry; but when he was angry, and when his chin quivered, then, as Alexander Vronsky knew, he was dangerous.
Alexander Vronsky smiled gaily.
Answer it, and don’t worry about anything just before the race. _Bonne chance,_” he added, smiling and he moved away from him.
But after him another friendly greeting brought Vronsky to a standstill.
“So you won’t recognize your friends!
How are you, _mon cher?_” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, as conspicuously brilliant in the midst of all the Petersburg brilliance as he was in Moscow, his face rosy, and his whiskers sleek and glossy.
“I came up yesterday, and I’m delighted that I shall see your triumph.
When shall we meet?” “Come tomorrow to the messroom,” said Vronsky, and squeezing him by the sleeve of his coat, with apologies, he moved away to the center of the race course, where the horses were being led for the great steeplechase.
The horses who had run in the last race were being led home, steaming and exhausted, by the stable-boys, and one after another the fresh horses for the coming race made their appearance, for the most part English racers, wearing horsecloths, and looking with their drawn-up bellies like strange, huge birds.
On the right was led in Frou-Frou, lean and beautiful, lifting up her elastic, rather long pasterns, as though moved by springs.
Not far from her they were taking the rug off the lop-eared Gladiator.
The strong, exquisite, perfectly correct lines of the stallion, with his superb hind-quarters and excessively short pasterns almost over his hoofs, attracted Vronsky’s attention in spite of himself.
He would have gone up to his mare, but he was again detained by an acquaintance.
“Oh, there’s Karenin!” said the acquaintance with whom he was chatting.
“He’s looking for his wife, and she’s in the middle of the pavilion.
Didn’t you see her?” “No,” answered Vronsky, and without even glancing round towards the pavilion where his friend was pointing out Madame Karenina, he went up to his mare.
Vronsky had not had time to look at the saddle, about which he had to give some direction, when the competitors were summoned to the pavilion to receive their numbers and places in the row at starting.
Seventeen officers, looking serious and severe, many with pale faces, met together in the pavilion and drew the numbers.
The cry was heard: “Mount!” Feeling that with the others riding in the race, he was the center upon which all eyes were fastened, Vronsky walked up to his mare in that state of nervous tension in which he usually became deliberate and composed in his movements.
Cord, in honor of the races, had put on his best clothes, a black coat buttoned up, a stiffly starched collar, which propped up his cheeks, a round black hat, and top boots.
He was calm and dignified as ever, and was with his own hands holding Frou-Frou by both reins, standing straight in front of her.
Frou-Frou was still trembling as though in a fever.
Her eye, full of fire, glanced sideways at Vronsky.
The mare glanced aslant at him, drew up her lip, and twitched her ear.
The Englishman puckered up his lips, intending to indicate a smile that anyone should verify his saddling.
Galtsin, a friend of Vronsky’s and one of his more formidable rivals, was moving round a bay horse that would not let him mount.
A little light hussar in tight riding breeches rode off at a gallop, crouched up like a cat on the saddle, in imitation of English jockeys.
Prince Kuzovlev sat with a white face on his thoroughbred mare from the Grabovsky stud, while an English groom led her by the bridle.
Vronsky and all his comrades knew Kuzovlev and his peculiarity of “weak nerves” and terrible vanity.
They knew that he was afraid of everything, afraid of riding a spirited horse.
But now, just because it was terrible, because people broke their necks, and there was a doctor standing at each obstacle, and an ambulance with a cross on it, and a sister of mercy, he had made up his mind to take part in the race.
Their eyes met, and Vronsky gave him a friendly and encouraging nod.
Only one he did not see, his chief rival, Mahotin on Gladiator.
“Don’t be in a hurry,” said Cord to Vronsky, “and remember one thing: don’t hold her in at the fences, and don’t urge her on; let her go as she likes.” “All right, all right,” said Vronsky, taking the reins.
“If you can, lead the race; but don’t lose heart till the last minute, even if you’re behind.” Before the mare had time to move, Vronsky stepped with an agile, vigorous movement into the steel-toothed stirrup, and lightly and firmly seated himself on the creaking leather of the saddle.
Getting his right foot in the stirrup, he smoothed the double reins, as he always did, between his fingers, and Cord let go.
As though she did not know which foot to put first, Frou-Frou started, dragging at the reins with her long neck, and as though she were on springs, shaking her rider from side to side.
Cord quickened his step, following him.
They were just reaching the dammed-up stream on their way to the starting point.
Several of the riders were in front and several behind, when suddenly Vronsky heard the sound of a horse galloping in the mud behind him, and he was overtaken by Mahotin on his white-legged, lop-eared Gladiator.
He did not like him, and regarded him now as his most formidable rival.
He was angry with him for galloping past and exciting his mare.
Frou-Frou started into a gallop, her left foot forward, made two bounds, and fretting at the tightened reins, passed into a jolting trot, bumping her rider up and down.
Cord, too, scowled, and followed Vronsky almost at a trot.
Chapter 25 There were seventeen officers in all riding in this race.
The race course was a large three-mile ring of the form of an ellipse in front of the pavilion.
But the race began not in the ring, but two hundred yards away from it, and in that part of the course was the first obstacle, a dammed-up stream, seven feet in breadth, which the racers could leap or wade through as they preferred.
The umpire who was starting them, Colonel Sestrin, was beginning to lose his temper, when at last for the fourth time he shouted “Away!” and the racers started.
Every eye, every opera-glass, was turned on the brightly colored group of riders at the moment they were in line to start.
They’re starting!” was heard on all sides after the hush of expectation.
And little groups and solitary figures among the public began running from place to place to get a better view.
In the very first minute the close group of horsemen drew out, and it could be seen that they were approaching the stream in twos and threes and one behind another.
To the spectators it seemed as though they had all started simultaneously, but to the racers there were seconds of difference that had great value to them.
Up to the first obstacle, the stream, he could not guide the motions of his mare.
But Frou-Frou drew up her legs and back in the very act of leaping, like a falling cat, and, clearing the other mare, alighted beyond her.
After crossing the stream Vronsky had complete control of his mare, and began holding her in, intending to cross the great barrier behind Mahotin, and to try to overtake him in the clear ground of about five hundred yards that followed it.
The great barrier stood just in front of the imperial pavilion.
Vronsky was aware of those eyes fastened upon him from all sides, but he saw nothing except the ears and neck of his own mare, the ground racing to meet him, and the back and white legs of Gladiator beating time swiftly before him, and keeping always the same distance ahead.
Gladiator rose, with no sound of knocking against anything.
With a wave of his short tail he disappeared from Vronsky’s sight.
Without the slightest change in her action his mare flew over it; the palings vanished, and he heard only a crash behind him.
The mare, excited by Gladiator’s keeping ahead, had risen too soon before the barrier, and grazed it with her hind hoofs.
But her pace never changed, and Vronsky, feeling a spatter of mud in his face, realized that he was once more the same distance from Gladiator.
Once more he perceived in front of him the same back and short tail, and again the same swiftly moving white legs that got no further away.
At the very moment when Vronsky thought that now was the time to overtake Mahotin, Frou-Frou herself, understanding his thoughts, without any incitement on his part, gained ground considerably, and began getting alongside of Mahotin on the most favorable side, close to the inner cord.
Vronsky had hardly formed the thought that he could perhaps pass on the outer side, when Frou-Frou shifted her pace and began overtaking him on the other side.
Frou-Frou’s shoulder, beginning by now to be dark with sweat, was even with Gladiator’s back.
But before the obstacle they were approaching, Vronsky began working at the reins, anxious to avoid having to take the outer circle, and swiftly passed Mahotin just upon the declivity.
Vronsky passed Mahotin, but he was immediately aware of him close upon him, and he never ceased hearing the even-thudding hoofs and the rapid and still quite fresh breathing of Gladiator.
The next two obstacles, the water course and the barrier, were easily crossed, but Vronsky began to hear the snorting and thud of Gladiator closer upon him.
He urged on his mare, and to his delight felt that she easily quickened her pace, and the thud of Gladiator’s hoofs was again heard at the same distance away.
His excitement, his delight, and his tenderness for Frou-Frou grew keener and keener.
He longed to look round again, but he did not dare do this, and tried to be cool and not to urge on his mare so to keep the same reserve of force in her as he felt that Gladiator still kept.
There remained only one obstacle, the most difficult; if he could cross it ahead of the others he would come in first.
He was flying towards the Irish barricade, Frou-Frou and he both together saw the barricade in the distance, and both the man and the mare had a moment’s hesitation.
He saw the uncertainty in the mare’s ears and lifted the whip, but at the same time felt that his fears were groundless; the mare knew what was wanted.
She quickened her pace and rose smoothly, just as he had fancied she would, and as she left the ground gave herself up to the force of her rush, which carried her far beyond the ditch; and with the same rhythm, without effort, with the same leg forward, Frou-Frou fell back into her pace again.
“Bravo, Vronsky!” he heard shouts from a knot of men—he knew they were his friends in the regiment—who were standing at the obstacle.
He could not fail to recognize Yashvin’s voice though he did not see him.
“O my sweet!” he said inwardly to Frou-Frou, as he listened for what was happening behind.
“He’s cleared it!” he thought, catching the thud of Gladiator’s hoofs behind him.
There remained only the last ditch, filled with water and five feet wide.
He felt that the mare was at her very last reserve of strength; not her neck and shoulders merely were wet, but the sweat was standing in drops on her mane, her head, her sharp ears, and her breath came in short, sharp gasps.
But he knew that she had strength left more than enough for the remaining five hundred yards.
It was only from feeling himself nearer the ground and from the peculiar smoothness of his motion that Vronsky knew how greatly the mare had quickened her pace.
She flew over the ditch as though not noticing it.
She flew over it like a bird; but at the same instant Vronsky, to his horror, felt that he had failed to keep up with the mare’s pace, that he had, he did not know how, made a fearful, unpardonable mistake, in recovering his seat in the saddle.
All at once his position had shifted and he knew that something awful had happened.
He could not yet make out what had happened, when the white legs of a chestnut horse flashed by close to him, and Mahotin passed at a swift gallop.
Vronsky was touching the ground with one foot, and his mare was sinking on that foot.
He just had time to free his leg when she fell on one side, gasping painfully, and, making vain efforts to rise with her delicate, soaking neck, she fluttered on the ground at his feet like a shot bird.
The clumsy movement made by Vronsky had broken her back.
At that moment he knew only that Mahotin had flown swiftly by, while he stood staggering alone on the muddy, motionless ground, and Frou-Frou lay gasping before him, bending her head back and gazing at him with her exquisite eyes.
Still unable to realize what had happened, Vronsky tugged at his mare’s reins.
Again she struggled all over like a fish, and her shoulders setting the saddle heaving, she rose on her front legs but unable to lift her back, she quivered all over and again fell on her side.
With a face hideous with passion, his lower jaw trembling, and his cheeks white, Vronsky kicked her with his heel in the stomach and again fell to tugging at the rein.
She did not stir, but thrusting her nose into the ground, she simply gazed at her master with her speaking eyes.
“A—a—a!” groaned Vronsky, clutching at his head.
And my fault! shameful, unpardonable!
Ah! what have I done!” A crowd of men, a doctor and his assistant, the officers of his regiment, ran up to him.
Vronsky could not answer questions, could not speak to anyone.
He felt utterly wretched.
For the first time in his life he knew the bitterest sort of misfortune, misfortune beyond remedy, and caused by his own fault.
Yashvin overtook him with his cap, and led him home, and half an hour later Vronsky had regained his self-possession.
But the memory of that race remained for long in his heart, the cruelest and bitterest memory of his life.
Chapter 26 The external relations of Alexey Alexandrovitch and his wife had remained unchanged.
The sole difference lay in the fact that he was more busily occupied than ever.
As in former years, at the beginning of the spring he had gone to a foreign watering-place for the sake of his health, deranged by the winter’s work that every year grew heavier.
And just as always he returned in July and at once fell to work as usual with increased energy.
As usual, too, his wife had moved for the summer to a villa out of town, while he remained in Petersburg.
From the date of their conversation after the party at Princess Tverskaya’s he had never spoken again to Anna of his suspicions and his jealousies, and that habitual tone of his bantering mimicry was the most convenient tone possible for his present attitude to his wife.
He simply seemed to be slightly displeased with her for that first midnight conversation, which she had repelled.
In his attitude to her there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more.
“You would not be open with me,” he seemed to say, mentally addressing her; “so much the worse for you.
So much the worse for you!” he said mentally, like a man who, after vainly attempting to extinguish a fire, should fly in a rage with his vain efforts and say, “Oh, very well then! you shall burn for this!” This man, so subtle and astute in official life, did not realize all the senselessness of such an attitude to his wife.
He did not realize it, because it was too terrible to him to realize his actual position, and he shut down and locked and sealed up in his heart that secret place where lay hid his feelings towards his family, that is, his wife and son.
He who had been such a careful father, had from the end of that winter become peculiarly frigid to his son, and adopted to him just the same bantering tone he used with his wife.
“Aha, young man!” was the greeting with which he met him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch asserted and believed that he had never in any previous year had so much official business as that year.
But he was not aware that he sought work for himself that year, that this was one of the means for keeping shut that secret place where lay hid his feelings towards his wife and son and his thoughts about them, which became more terrible the longer they lay there.
If anyone had had the right to ask Alexey Alexandrovitch what he thought of his wife’s behavior, the mild and peaceable Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made no answer, but he would have been greatly angered with any man who should question him on that subject.
For this reason there positively came into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face a look of haughtiness and severity whenever anyone inquired after his wife’s health.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to think at all about his wife’s behavior, and he actually succeeded in not thinking about it at all.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s permanent summer villa was in Peterhof, and the Countess Lidia Ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, close to Anna, and constantly seeing her.
That year Countess Lidia Ivanovna declined to settle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna’s, and in conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitability of Anna’s close intimacy with Betsy and Vronsky.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sternly cut her short, roundly declaring his wife to be above suspicion, and from that time began to avoid Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
He did not want to see, and did not see, that many people in society cast dubious glances on his wife; he did not want to understand, and did not understand, why his wife had so particularly insisted on staying at Tsarskoe, where Betsy was staying, and not far from the camp of Vronsky’s regiment.
He did not allow himself to think about it, and he did not think about it; but all the same though he never admitted it to himself, and had no proofs, not even suspicious evidence, in the bottom of his heart he knew beyond all doubt that he was a deceived husband, and he was profoundly miserable about it.
Since his return from abroad Alexey Alexandrovitch had twice been at their country villa.
Once he dined there, another time he spent the evening there with a party of friends, but he had not once stayed the night there, as it had been his habit to do in previous years.
The day of the races had been a very busy day for Alexey Alexandrovitch; but when mentally sketching out the day in the morning, he made up his mind to go to their country house to see his wife immediately after dinner, and from there to the races, which all the Court were to witness, and at which he was bound to be present.
He was going to see his wife, because he had determined to see her once a week to keep up appearances.
And besides, on that day, as it was the fifteenth, he had to give his wife some money for her expenses, according to their usual arrangement.
With his habitual control over his thoughts, though he thought all this about his wife, he did not let his thoughts stray further in regard to her.
That morning was a very full one for Alexey Alexandrovitch.
The evening before, Countess Lidia Ivanovna had sent him a pamphlet by a celebrated traveler in China, who was staying in Petersburg, and with it she enclosed a note begging him to see the traveler himself, as he was an extremely interesting person from various points of view, and likely to be useful.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had not had time to read the pamphlet through in the evening, and finished it in the morning.
Then people began arriving with petitions, and there came the reports, interviews, appointments, dismissals, apportionment of rewards, pensions, grants, notes, the workaday round, as Alexey Alexandrovitch called it, that always took up so much time.
Then there was private business of his own, a visit from the doctor and the steward who managed his property.
He simply gave Alexey Alexandrovitch the money he needed together with a brief statement of the position of his affairs, which was not altogether satisfactory, as it had happened that during that year, owing to increased expenses, more had been paid out than usual, and there was a deficit.
But the doctor, a celebrated Petersburg doctor, who was an intimate acquaintance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, took up a great deal of time.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had not expected him that day, and was surprised at his visit, and still more so when the doctor questioned him very carefully about his health, listened to his breathing, and tapped at his liver.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not know that his friend Lidia Ivanovna, noticing that he was not as well as usual that year, had begged the doctor to go and examine him.
“Do this for my sake,” the Countess Lidia Ivanovna had said to him.
“I will do it for the sake of Russia, countess,” replied the doctor.
“A priceless man!” said the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
The doctor was extremely dissatisfied with Alexey Alexandrovitch.
He found the liver considerably enlarged, and the digestive powers weakened, while the course of mineral waters had been quite without effect.
He prescribed more physical exercise as far as possible, and as far as possible less mental strain, and above all no worry—in other words, just what was as much out of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s power as abstaining from breathing.
Then he withdrew, leaving in Alexey Alexandrovitch an unpleasant sense that something was wrong with him, and that there was no chance of curing it.
As he was coming away, the doctor chanced to meet on the staircase an acquaintance of his, Sludin, who was secretary of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department.
They had been comrades at the university, and though they rarely met, they thought highly of each other and were excellent friends, and so there was no one to whom the doctor would have given his opinion of a patient so freely as to Sludin.
Well, what do you think of him?” “I’ll tell you,” said the doctor, beckoning over Sludin’s head to his coachman to bring the carriage round.
“It’s just this,” said the doctor, taking a finger of his kid glove in his white hands and pulling it, “if you don’t strain the strings, and then try to break them, you’ll find it a difficult job; but strain a string to its very utmost, and the mere weight of one finger on the strained string will snap it.
And with his close assiduity, his conscientious devotion to his work, he’s strained to the utmost; and there’s some outside burden weighing on him, and not a light one,” concluded the doctor, raising his eyebrows significantly.
“Will you be at the races?” he added, as he sank into his seat in the carriage.
“Yes, yes, to be sure; it does waste a lot of time,” the doctor responded vaguely to some reply of Sludin’s he had not caught.
Directly after the doctor, who had taken up so much time, came the celebrated traveler, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, by means of the pamphlet he had only just finished reading and his previous acquaintance with the subject, impressed the traveler by the depth of his knowledge of the subject and the breadth and enlightenment of his view of it.
At the same time as the traveler there was announced a provincial marshal of nobility on a visit to Petersburg, with whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had to have some conversation.
After his departure, he had to finish the daily routine of business with his secretary, and then he still had to drive round to call on a certain great personage on a matter of grave and serious import.
Alexey Alexandrovitch only just managed to be back by five o’clock, his dinner-hour, and after dining with his secretary, he invited him to drive with him to his country villa and to the races.
Though he did not acknowledge it to himself, Alexey Alexandrovitch always tried nowadays to secure the presence of a third person in his interviews with his wife.
Chapter 27 Anna was upstairs, standing before the looking-glass, and, with Annushka’s assistance, pinning the last ribbon on her gown when she heard carriage wheels crunching the gravel at the entrance.
“It’s too early for Betsy,” she thought, and glancing out of the window she caught sight of the carriage and the black hat of Alexey Alexandrovitch, and the ears that she knew so well sticking up each side of it.
“Ah, how nice of you!” she said, giving her husband her hand, and greeting Sludin, who was like one of the family, with a smile.
“You’re staying the night, I hope?” was the first word the spirit of falsehood prompted her to utter; “and now we’ll go together.
Only it’s a pity I’ve promised Betsy.
She’s coming for me.” Alexey Alexandrovitch knit his brows at Betsy’s name.
“Oh, I’m not going to separate the inseparables,” he said in his usual bantering tone.
“I’m going with Mihail Vassilievitch.
I’m ordered exercise by the doctors too.
“Bring in tea, and tell Seryozha that Alexey Alexandrovitch is here.
Mihail Vassilievitch, you’ve not been to see me before.
She spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast.
She was the more aware of this from noticing in the inquisitive look Mihail Vassilievitch turned on her that he was, as it were, keeping watch on her.
Mihail Vassilievitch promptly went out on the terrace.
I feel that someone of our friends must have sent him: my health’s so precious, it seems.” “No; what did he say?” She questioned him about his health and what he had been doing, and tried to persuade him to take a rest and come out to her.
All this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in her eyes.
But Alexey Alexandrovitch did not now attach any special significance to this tone of hers.
And he answered simply, though jestingly.
There was nothing remarkable in all this conversation, but never after could Anna recall this brief scene without an agonizing pang of shame.
Seryozha came in preceded by his governess.
If Alexey Alexandrovitch had allowed himself to observe he would have noticed the timid and bewildered eyes with which Seryozha glanced first at his father and then at his mother.
But he would not see anything, and he did not see it.
Seryozha had been shy of his father before, and now, ever since Alexey Alexandrovitch had taken to calling him young man, and since that insoluble question had occurred to him whether Vronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father.
Meanwhile, Alexey Alexandrovitch was holding his son by the shoulder while he was speaking to the governess, and Seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable that Anna saw he was on the point of tears.
Anna, who had flushed a little the instant her son came in, noticing that Seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy, led him out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.
“It’s time to start, though,” said she, glancing at her watch.
“How is it Betsy doesn’t come?...” “Yes,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and getting up, he folded his hands and cracked his fingers.
“I’ve come to bring you some money, too, for nightingales, we know, can’t live on fairy tales,” he said.
“You want it, I expect?” “No, I don’t ... yes, I do,” she said, not looking at him, and crimsoning to the roots of her hair.
“But you’ll come back here after the races, I suppose?” “Oh, yes!” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“And here’s the glory of Peterhof, Princess Tverskaya,” he added, looking out of the window at the elegant English carriage with the tiny seats placed extremely high.
Well, let us be starting too, then.” Princess Tverskaya did not get out of her carriage, but her groom, in high boots, a cape, and black hat, darted out at the entrance.
“I’m going; good-bye!” said Anna, and kissing her son, she went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch and held out her hand to him.
“It was ever so nice of you to come.” Alexey Alexandrovitch kissed her hand.
You’ll come back for some tea; that’s delightful!” she said, and went out, gay and radiant.
But as soon as she no longer saw him, she was aware of the spot on her hand that his lips had touched, and she shuddered with repulsion.
Chapter 28 When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course, Anna was already sitting in the pavilion beside Betsy, in that pavilion where all the highest society had gathered.
She caught sight of her husband in the distance.
Two men, her husband and her lover, were the two centers of her existence, and unaided by her external senses she was aware of their nearness.
She was aware of her husband approaching a long way off, and she could not help following him in the surging crowd in the midst of which he was moving.
She watched his progress towards the pavilion, saw him now responding condescendingly to an ingratiating bow, now exchanging friendly, nonchalant greetings with his equals, now assiduously trying to catch the eye of some great one of this world, and taking off his big round hat that squeezed the tips of his ears.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch!” Princess Betsy called to him; “I’m sure you don’t see your wife: here she is.” He smiled his chilly smile.
“There’s so much splendor here that one’s eyes are dazzled,” he said, and he went into the pavilion.
He smiled to his wife as a man should smile on meeting his wife after only just parting from her, and greeted the princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what was due—that is to say, jesting with the ladies and dealing out friendly greetings among the men.
Below, near the pavilion, was standing an adjutant-general of whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had a high opinion, noted for his intelligence and culture.
Alexey Alexandrovitch entered into conversation with him.
There was an interval between the races, and so nothing hindered conversation.
The adjutant-general expressed his disapproval of races.
Alexey Alexandrovitch replied defending them.
Anna heard his high, measured tones, not losing one word, and every word struck her as false, and stabbed her ears with pain.
When the three-mile steeplechase was beginning, she bent forward and gazed with fixed eyes at Vronsky as he went up to his horse and mounted, and at the same time she heard that loathsome, never-ceasing voice of her husband.
She was in an agony of terror for Vronsky, but a still greater agony was the never-ceasing, as it seemed to her, stream of her husband’s shrill voice with its familiar intonations.
“I’m a wicked woman, a lost woman,” she thought; “but I don’t like lying, I can’t endure falsehood, while as for _him_ (her husband) it’s the breath of his life—falsehood.
No, all he wants is falsehood and propriety,” Anna said to herself, not considering exactly what it was she wanted of her husband, and how she would have liked to see him behave.
She did not understand either that Alexey Alexandrovitch’s peculiar loquacity that day, so exasperating to her, was merely the expression of his inward distress and uneasiness.
As a child that has been hurt skips about, putting all his muscles into movement to drown the pain, in the same way Alexey Alexandrovitch needed mental exercise to drown the thoughts of his wife that in her presence and in Vronsky’s, and with the continual iteration of his name, would force themselves on his attention.
And it was as natural for him to talk well and cleverly, as it is natural for a child to skip about.
He was saying: “Danger in the races of officers, of cavalry men, is an essential element in the race.
If England can point to the most brilliant feats of cavalry in military history, it is simply owing to the fact that she has historically developed this force both in beasts and in men.
Sport has, in my opinion, a great value, and as is always the case, we see nothing but what is most superficial.” “It’s not superficial,” said Princess Tverskaya.
“One of the officers, they say, has broken two ribs.” Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled his smile, which uncovered his teeth, but revealed nothing more.
“We’ll admit, princess, that that’s not superficial,” he said, “but internal.
But that’s not the point,” and he turned again to the general with whom he was talking seriously; “we mustn’t forget that those who are taking part in the race are military men, who have chosen that career, and one must allow that every calling has its disagreeable side.
It forms an integral part of the duties of an officer.
Low sports, such as prize-fighting or Spanish bull-fights, are a sign of barbarity.
But specialized trials of skill are a sign of development.” “No, I shan’t come another time; it’s too upsetting,” said Princess Betsy.
“Isn’t it, Anna?” “It is upsetting, but one can’t tear oneself away,” said another lady.
At that moment a tall general walked through the pavilion.
Breaking off what he was saying, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though with dignity, and bowed low to the general.
“You’re not racing?” the officer asked, chaffing him.
“My race is a harder one,” Alexey Alexandrovitch responded deferentially.
And though the answer meant nothing, the general looked as though he had heard a witty remark from a witty man, and fully relished _la pointe de la sauce_.
“There are two aspects,” Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed: “those who take part and those who look on; and love for such spectacles is an unmistakable proof of a low degree of development in the spectator, I admit, but....” “Princess, bets!” sounded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice from below, addressing Betsy.
“Who’s your favorite?” “Anna and I are for Kuzovlev,” replied Betsy.
A pair of gloves?” “Done!” “But it is a pretty sight, isn’t it?” Alexey Alexandrovitch paused while there was talking about him, but he began again directly.
“I admit that manly sports do not....” he was continuing.
But at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased.
Alexey Alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned towards the stream.
Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race, and so he did not watch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning the spectators with his weary eyes.
She was obviously seeing nothing and no one but one man.
Her hand had convulsively clutched her fan, and she held her breath.
He looked at her and hastily turned away, scrutinizing other faces.
“But here’s this lady too, and others very much moved as well; it’s very natural,” Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself.
He tried not to look at her, but unconsciously his eyes were drawn to her.
He examined that face again, trying not to read what was so plainly written on it, and against his own will, with horror read on it what he did not want to know.
The first fall—Kuzovlev’s, at the stream—agitated everyone, but Alexey Alexandrovitch saw distinctly on Anna’s pale, triumphant face that the man she was watching had not fallen.
When, after Mahotin and Vronsky had cleared the worst barrier, the next officer had been thrown straight on his head at it and fatally injured, and a shudder of horror passed over the whole public, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did not even notice it, and had some difficulty in realizing what they were talking of about her.
But more and more often, and with greater persistence, he watched her.
Anna, wholly engrossed as she was with the race, became aware of her husband’s cold eyes fixed upon her from one side.
She glanced round for an instant, looked inquiringly at him, and with a slight frown turned away again.
The race was an unlucky one, and of the seventeen officers who rode in it more than half were thrown and hurt.
Towards the end of the race everyone was in a state of agitation, which was intensified by the fact that the Tsar was displeased.
Chapter 29 Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating a phrase someone had uttered—“The lions and gladiators will be the next thing,” and everyone was feeling horrified; so that when Vronsky fell to the ground, and Anna moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the way in it.
But afterwards a change came over Anna’s face which really was beyond decorum.
She began fluttering like a caged bird, at one moment would have got up and moved away, at the next turned to Betsy.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and courteously offered her his arm.
“Let us go, if you like,” he said in French, but Anna was listening to the general and did not notice her husband.
“This is beyond everything.” Without answering her husband, Anna lifted her opera-glass and gazed towards the place where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far off, and there was such a crowd of people about it, that she could make out nothing.
She laid down the opera-glass, and would have moved away, but at that moment an officer galloped up and made some announcement to the Tsar.
Anna craned forward, listening.
“Once more I offer you my arm if you want to be going,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, reaching towards her hand.
She drew back from him with aversion, and without looking in his face answered: “No, no, let me be, I’ll stay.” She saw now that from the place of Vronsky’s accident an officer was running across the course towards the pavilion.
Betsy waved her handkerchief to him.
On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan.
Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that she was weeping, and could not control her tears, nor even the sobs that were shaking her bosom.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stood so as to screen her, giving her time to recover herself.
Princess Betsy came to her rescue.
“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take her home,” put in Betsy.
“Excuse me, princess,” he said, smiling courteously but looking her very firmly in the face, “but I see that Anna’s not very well, and I wish her to come home with me.” Anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up submissively, and laid her hand on her husband’s arm.
“I’ll send to him and find out, and let you know,” Betsy whispered to her.
As they left the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as always, talked to those he met, and Anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but she was utterly beside herself, and moved hanging on her husband’s arm as though in a dream.
Shall I see him today?” she was thinking.
She took her seat in her husband’s carriage in silence, and in silence drove out of the crowd of carriages.
In spite of all he had seen, Alexey Alexandrovitch still did not allow himself to consider his wife’s real condition.
He merely saw the outward symptoms.
He saw that she was behaving unbecomingly, and considered it his duty to tell her so.
But it was very difficult for him not to say more, to tell her nothing but that.
He opened his mouth to tell her she had behaved unbecomingly, but he could not help saying something utterly different.
“What an inclination we all have, though, for these cruel spectacles,” he said.
I don’t understand,” said Anna contemptuously.
He was offended, and at once began to say what he had meant to say.
“So now we are to have it out,” she thought, and she felt frightened.
“I am obliged to tell you that your behavior has been unbecoming today,” he said to her in French.
“In what way has my behavior been unbecoming?” she said aloud, turning her head swiftly and looking him straight in the face, not with the bright expression that seemed covering something, but with a look of determination, under which she concealed with difficulty the dismay she was feeling.
“Mind,” he said, pointing to the open window opposite the coachman.
“What did you consider unbecoming?” she repeated.
“The despair you were unable to conceal at the accident to one of the riders.” He waited for her to answer, but she was silent, looking straight before her.
“I have already begged you so to conduct yourself in society that even malicious tongues can find nothing to say against you.
There was a time when I spoke of your inward attitude, but I am not speaking of that now.
Now I speak only of your external attitude.
You have behaved improperly, and I would wish it not to occur again.” She did not hear half of what he was saying; she felt panic-stricken before him, and was thinking whether it was true that Vronsky was not killed.
Was it of him they were speaking when they said the rider was unhurt, but the horse had broken its back?
She merely smiled with a pretense of irony when he finished, and made no reply, because she had not heard what he said.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had begun to speak boldly, but as he realized plainly what he was speaking of, the dismay she was feeling infected him too.
He saw the smile, and a strange misapprehension came over him.
“She is smiling at my suspicions.
Yes, she will tell me directly what she told me before; that there is no foundation for my suspicions, that it’s absurd.” At that moment, when the revelation of everything was hanging over him, there was nothing he expected so much as that she would answer mockingly as before that his suspicions were absurd and utterly groundless.
So terrible to him was what he knew that now he was ready to believe anything.
But the expression of her face, scared and gloomy, did not now promise even deception.
“Possibly I was mistaken,” said he.
“If so, I beg your pardon.” “No, you were not mistaken,” she said deliberately, looking desperately into his cold face.
“You were not mistaken.
I hear you, but I am thinking of him.
I love him, I am his mistress; I can’t bear you; I’m afraid of you, and I hate you....
You can do what you like to me.” And dropping back into the corner of the carriage, she broke into sobs, hiding her face in her hands.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not stir, and kept looking straight before him.
But his whole face suddenly bore the solemn rigidity of the dead, and his expression did not change during the whole time of the drive home.
On reaching the house he turned his head to her, still with the same expression.
But I expect a strict observance of the external forms of propriety till such time”—his voice shook—“as I may take measures to secure my honor and communicate them to you.” He got out first and helped her to get out.
Before the servants he pressed her hand, took his seat in the carriage, and drove back to Petersburg.
Immediately afterwards a footman came from Princess Betsy and brought Anna a note.
She had still three hours to wait, and the memories of their last meeting set her blood in flame.
It’s dreadful, but I do love to see his face, and I do love this fantastic light....
Well, thank God! everything’s over with him.” Chapter 30 In the little German watering-place to which the Shtcherbatskys had betaken themselves, as in all places indeed where people are gathered together, the usual process, as it were, of the crystallization of society went on, assigning to each member of that society a definite and unalterable place.
There was visiting the watering-place that year a real German Fürstin, in consequence of which the crystallizing process went on more vigorously than ever.
Princess Shtcherbatskaya wished, above everything, to present her daughter to this German princess, and the day after their arrival she duly performed this rite.
Kitty made a low and graceful curtsey in the _very simple_, that is to say, very elegant frock that had been ordered her from Paris.
The German princess said, “I hope the roses will soon come back to this pretty little face,” and for the Shtcherbatskys certain definite lines of existence were at once laid down from which there was no departing.
The Shtcherbatskys made the acquaintance too of the family of an English Lady Somebody, and of a German countess and her son, wounded in the last war, and of a learned Swede, and of M.
When all this was so firmly established, Kitty began to be very much bored, especially as the prince went away to Carlsbad and she was left alone with her mother.
She took no interest in the people she knew, feeling that nothing fresh would come of them.
Her chief mental interest in the watering-place consisted in watching and making theories about the people she did not know.
It was characteristic of Kitty that she always imagined everything in people in the most favorable light possible, especially so in those she did not know.
And now as she made surmises as to who people were, what were their relations to one another, and what they were like, Kitty endowed them with the most marvelous and noble characters, and found confirmation of her idea in her observations.
Of these people the one that attracted her most was a Russian girl who had come to the watering-place with an invalid Russian lady, Madame Stahl, as everyone called her.
Madame Stahl belonged to the highest society, but she was so ill that she could not walk, and only on exceptionally fine days made her appearance at the springs in an invalid carriage.
But it was not so much from ill-health as from pride—so Princess Shtcherbatskaya interpreted it—that Madame Stahl had not made the acquaintance of anyone among the Russians there.
The Russian girl looked after Madame Stahl, and besides that, she was, as Kitty observed, on friendly terms with all the invalids who were seriously ill, and there were many of them at the springs, and looked after them in the most natural way.
This Russian girl was not, as Kitty gathered, related to Madame Stahl, nor was she a paid attendant.
Madame Stahl called her Varenka, and other people called her “Mademoiselle Varenka.” Apart from the interest Kitty took in this girl’s relations with Madame Stahl and with other unknown persons, Kitty, as often happened, felt an inexplicable attraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and was aware when their eyes met that she too liked her.
Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that she had passed her first youth, but she was, as it were, a creature without youth; she might have been taken for nineteen or for thirty.
If her features were criticized separately, she was handsome rather than plain, in spite of the sickly hue of her face.
She would have been a good figure, too, if it had not been for her extreme thinness and the size of her head, which was too large for her medium height.
But she was not likely to be attractive to men.
She was like a fine flower, already past its bloom and without fragrance, though the petals were still unwithered.
Moreover, she would have been unattractive to men also from the lack of just what Kitty had too much of—of the suppressed fire of vitality, and the consciousness of her own attractiveness.
She always seemed absorbed in work about which there could be no doubt, and so it seemed she could not take interest in anything outside it.
It was just this contrast with her own position that was for Kitty the great attraction of Mademoiselle Varenka.
Kitty felt that in her, in her manner of life, she would find an example of what she was now so painfully seeking: interest in life, a dignity in life—apart from the worldly relations of girls with men, which so revolted Kitty, and appeared to her now as a shameful hawking about of goods in search of a purchaser.
The more attentively Kitty watched her unknown friend, the more convinced she was this girl was the perfect creature she fancied her, and the more eagerly she wished to make her acquaintance.
Are you really the exquisite creature I imagine you to be?
But for goodness’ sake don’t suppose,” her eyes added, “that I would force my acquaintance on you, I simply admire you and like you.” “I like you too, and you’re very, very sweet.
And I should like you better still, if I had time,” answered the eyes of the unknown girl.
Either she was taking the children of a Russian family home from the springs, or fetching a shawl for a sick lady, and wrapping her up in it, or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or selecting and buying cakes for tea for someone.
Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the morning crowd at the springs two persons who attracted universal and unfavorable attention.
These were a tall man with a stooping figure, and huge hands, in an old coat too short for him, with black, simple, and yet terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking woman, very badly and tastelessly dressed.
Recognizing these persons as Russians, Kitty had already in her imagination begun constructing a delightful and touching romance about them.
But the princess, having ascertained from the visitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya Nikolaevna, explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin was, and all her fancies about these two people vanished.
Not so much from what her mother told her, as from the fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pair suddenly seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant.
This Levin, with his continual twitching of his head, aroused in her now an irrepressible feeling of disgust.
It seemed to her that his big, terrible eyes, which persistently pursued her, expressed a feeling of hatred and contempt, and she tried to avoid meeting him.
Chapter 31 It was a wet day; it had been raining all the morning, and the invalids, with their parasols, had flocked into the arcades.
Kitty was walking there with her mother and the Moscow colonel, smart and jaunty in his European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort.
Varenka, in her dark dress, in a black hat with a turn-down brim, was walking up and down the whole length of the arcade with a blind Frenchwoman, and, every time she met Kitty, they exchanged friendly glances.
“Mamma, couldn’t I speak to her?” said Kitty, watching her unknown friend, and noticing that she was going up to the spring, and that they might come there together.
“Oh, if you want to so much, I’ll find out about her first and make her acquaintance myself,” answered her mother.
A companion, she must be.
If you like, I’ll make acquaintance with Madame Stahl; I used to know her _belle-sœur_,” added the princess, lifting her head haughtily.
Kitty knew that the princess was offended that Madame Stahl had seemed to avoid making her acquaintance.
“How wonderfully sweet she is!” she said, gazing at Varenka just as she handed a glass to the Frenchwoman.
“Look how natural and sweet it all is.” “It’s so funny to see your _engouements_,” said the princess.
“No, we’d better go back,” she added, noticing Levin coming towards them with his companion and a German doctor, to whom he was talking very noisily and angrily.
They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, but shouting.
Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and the doctor, too, was excited.
A crowd gathered about them.
The princess and Kitty beat a hasty retreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to find out what was the matter.
A few minutes later the colonel overtook them.
“What was it?” inquired the princess.
“Scandalous and disgraceful!” answered the colonel.
“The one thing to be dreaded is meeting Russians abroad.
That tall gentleman was abusing the doctor, flinging all sorts of insults at him because he wasn’t treating him quite as he liked, and he began waving his stick at him.
It’s simply a scandal!” “Oh, how unpleasant!” said the princess.
“Well, and how did it end?” “Luckily at that point that ... the one in the mushroom hat ... intervened.
“Mademoiselle Varenka?” asked Kitty.
She came to the rescue before anyone; she took the man by the arm and led him away.” “There, mamma,” said Kitty; “you wonder that I’m enthusiastic about her.” The next day, as she watched her unknown friend, Kitty noticed that Mademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and his companion as with her other _protégés_.
She went up to them, entered into conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the woman, who could not speak any foreign language.
Kitty began to entreat her mother still more urgently to let her make friends with Varenka.
And, disagreeable as it was to the princess to seem to take the first step in wishing to make the acquaintance of Madame Stahl, who thought fit to give herself airs, she made inquiries about Varenka, and, having ascertained particulars about her tending to prove that there could be no harm though little good in the acquaintance, she herself approached Varenka and made acquaintance with her.
Choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the spring, while Varenka had stopped outside the baker’s, the princess went up to her.
“Allow me to make your acquaintance,” she said, with her dignified smile.
“My daughter has lost her heart to you,” she said.
“Possibly you do not know me.
I am....” “That feeling is more than reciprocal, princess,” Varenka answered hurriedly.
“What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor compatriot!” said the princess.
I don’t think I did anything,” she said.
“Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable consequences.” “Yes, _sa compagne_ called me, and I tried to pacify him, he’s very ill, and was dissatisfied with the doctor.
I’m used to looking after such invalids.” “Yes, I’ve heard you live at Mentone with your aunt—I think—Madame Stahl: I used to know her _belle-sœur_.” “No, she’s not my aunt.
I call her mamma, but I am not related to her; I was brought up by her,” answered Varenka, flushing a little again.
This was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful and candid expression of her face, that the princess saw why Kitty had taken such a fancy to Varenka.
“Well, and what’s this Levin going to do?” asked the princess.
“He’s going away,” answered Varenka.
At that instant Kitty came up from the spring beaming with delight that her mother had become acquainted with her unknown friend.
“Well, see, Kitty, your intense desire to make friends with Mademoiselle....” “Varenka,” Varenka put in smiling, “that’s what everyone calls me.” Kitty blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without speaking, pressed her new friend’s hand, which did not respond to her pressure, but lay motionless in her hand.
The hand did not respond to her pressure, but the face of Mademoiselle Varenka glowed with a soft, glad, though rather mournful smile, that showed large but handsome teeth.
“But you are so busy.” “Oh, no, I’m not at all busy,” answered Varenka, but at that moment she had to leave her new friends because two little Russian girls, children of an invalid, ran up to her.
Chapter 32 The particulars which the princess had learned in regard to Varenka’s past and her relations with Madame Stahl were as follows: Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that she had worried her husband out of his life, while others said it was he who had made her wretched by his immoral behavior, had always been a woman of weak health and enthusiastic temperament.
When, after her separation from her husband, she gave birth to her only child, the child had died almost immediately, and the family of Madame Stahl, knowing her sensibility, and fearing the news would kill her, had substituted another child, a baby born the same night and in the same house in Petersburg, the daughter of the chief cook of the Imperial Household.
Madame Stahl learned later on that Varenka was not her own child, but she went on bringing her up, especially as very soon afterwards Varenka had not a relation of her own living.
Madame Stahl had now been living more than ten years continuously abroad, in the south, never leaving her couch.
And some people said that Madame Stahl had made her social position as a philanthropic, highly religious woman; other people said she really was at heart the highly ethical being, living for nothing but the good of her fellow creatures, which she represented herself to be.
No one knew what her faith was—Catholic, Protestant, or Orthodox.
But one fact was indubitable—she was in amicable relations with the highest dignitaries of all the churches and sects.
Varenka lived with her all the while abroad, and everyone who knew Madame Stahl knew and liked Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone called her.
After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and more fascinated by her friend, and every day she discovered new virtues in her.
The princess, hearing that Varenka had a good voice, asked her to come and sing to them in the evening.
“Kitty plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it’s true, but you will give us so much pleasure,” said the princess with her affected smile, which Kitty disliked particularly just then, because she noticed that Varenka had no inclination to sing.
The princess had invited Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter and the colonel.
Varenka seemed quite unaffected by there being persons present she did not know, and she went directly to the piano.
She could not accompany herself, but she could sing music at sight very well.
Kitty, who played well, accompanied her.
“You have an extraordinary talent,” the princess said to her after Varenka had sung the first song extremely well.
Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter expressed their thanks and admiration.
“Look,” said the colonel, looking out of the window, “what an audience has collected to listen to you.” There actually was quite a considerable crowd under the windows.
“I am very glad it gives you pleasure,” Varenka answered simply.
She was enchanted by her talent, and her voice, and her face, but most of all by her manner, by the way Varenka obviously thought nothing of her singing and was quite unmoved by their praises.
How delighted I should have been to see that crowd under the windows!
Her only motive is to avoid refusing and to please mamma.
What is it gives her the power to look down on everything, to be calm independently of everything?
The princess asked Varenka to sing again, and Varenka sang another song, also smoothly, distinctly, and well, standing erect at the piano and beating time on it with her thin, dark-skinned hand.
“Let’s skip that,” said Varenka, flushing a little.
“Very well, the next one,” she said hurriedly, turning over the pages, and at once feeling that there was something connected with the song.
“No,” answered Varenka with a smile, laying her hand on the music, “no, let’s have that one.” And she sang it just as quietly, as coolly, and as well as the others.
When she had finished, they all thanked her again, and went off to tea.
Kitty and Varenka went out into the little garden that adjoined the house.
“Am I right, that you have some reminiscences connected with that song?” said Kitty.
I’ll tell you simply,” said Varenka, and, without waiting for a reply, she went on: “Yes, it brings up memories, once painful ones.
I cared for someone once, and I used to sing him that song.” Kitty with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently, sympathetically at Varenka.
He’s living now not far from us, and I see him sometimes.
You didn’t think I had a love story too,” she said, and there was a faint gleam in her handsome face of that fire which Kitty felt must once have glowed all over her.
Only I can’t understand how he could, to please his mother, forget you and make you unhappy; he had no heart.” “Oh, no, he’s a very good man, and I’m not unhappy; quite the contrary, I’m very happy.
“How good you are! how good you are!” cried Kitty, and stopping her, she kissed her.
“In that case he would have done wrong, and I should not have regretted him,” answered Varenka, evidently realizing that they were now talking not of her, but of Kitty.
“But the humiliation,” said Kitty, “the humiliation one can never forget, can never forget,” she said, remembering her look at the last ball during the pause in the music.
“Where is the humiliation?
Why, you did nothing wrong?” “Worse than wrong—shameful.” Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kitty’s hand.
“Why, what is there shameful?” she said.
The whole point is whether you love him now or not,” said Varenka, who called everything by its name.
“I hate him; I can’t forgive myself.” “Why, what for?” “The shame, the humiliation!” “Oh! if everyone were as sensitive as you are!” said Varenka.
And it’s all so unimportant.” “Why, what is important?” said Kitty, looking into her face with inquisitive wonder.
“Oh, there’s so much that’s important,” said Varenka, smiling.
“Why, what?” “Oh, so much that’s more important,” answered Varenka, not knowing what to say.
But at that instant they heard the princess’s voice from the window.
“I have to go on to Madame Berthe’s; she asked me to.” Kitty held her by the hand, and with passionate curiosity and entreaty her eyes asked her: “What is it, what is this of such importance that gives you such tranquillity?
She went indoors, collected her music, and saying good-bye to everyone, was about to go.
“Yes, how can you go alone at night like this?” chimed in the princess.
“Anyway, I’ll send Parasha.” Kitty saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea that she needed an escort.
And kissing Kitty once more, without saying what was important, she stepped out courageously with the music under her arm and vanished into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with her her secret of what was important and what gave her the calm and dignity so much to be envied.
Chapter 33 Kitty made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and this acquaintance, together with her friendship with Varenka, did not merely exercise a great influence on her, it also comforted her in her mental distress.
She found this comfort through a completely new world being opened to her by means of this acquaintance, a world having nothing in common with her past, an exalted, noble world, from the height of which she could contemplate her past calmly.
It was revealed to her that besides the instinctive life to which Kitty had given herself up hitherto there was a spiritual life.
This life was disclosed in religion, but a religion having nothing in common with that one which Kitty had known from childhood, and which found expression in litanies and all-night services at the Widow’s Home, where one might meet one’s friends, and in learning by heart Slavonic texts with the priest.
This was a lofty, mysterious religion connected with a whole series of noble thoughts and feelings, which one could do more than merely believe because one was told to, which one could love.
Madame Stahl talked to Kitty as to a charming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory of one’s youth, and only once she said in passing that in all human sorrows nothing gives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight of Christ’s compassion for us no sorrow is trifling—and immediately talked of other things.
But in every gesture of Madame Stahl, in every word, in every heavenly—as Kitty called it—look, and above all in the whole story of her life, which she heard from Varenka, Kitty recognized that something “that was important,” of which, till then, she had known nothing.
Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl’s character was, touching as was her story, and exalted and moving as was her speech, Kitty could not help detecting in her some traits which perplexed her.
She noticed that when questioning her about her family, Madame Stahl had smiled contemptuously, which was not in accord with Christian meekness.
She noticed, too, that when she had found a Catholic priest with her, Madame Stahl had studiously kept her face in the shadow of the lamp-shade and had smiled in a peculiar way.
Trivial as these two observations were, they perplexed her, and she had her doubts as to Madame Stahl.
But on the other hand Varenka, alone in the world, without friends or relations, with a melancholy disappointment in the past, desiring nothing, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of which Kitty dared hardly dream.
In Varenka she realized that one has but to forget oneself and love others, and one will be calm, happy, and noble.
Seeing now clearly what was _the most important_, Kitty was not satisfied with being enthusiastic over it; she at once gave herself up with her whole soul to the new life that was opening to her.
From Varenka’s accounts of the doings of Madame Stahl and other people whom she mentioned, Kitty had already constructed the plan of her own future life.
She would, like Madame Stahl’s niece, Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to her a great deal, seek out those who were in trouble, wherever she might be living, help them as far as she could, give them the Gospel, read the Gospel to the sick, to criminals, to the dying.
The idea of reading the Gospel to criminals, as Aline did, particularly fascinated Kitty.
While awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a large scale, however, Kitty, even then at the springs, where there were so many people ill and unhappy, readily found a chance for practicing her new principles in imitation of Varenka.
At first the princess noticed nothing but that Kitty was much under the influence of her _engouement_, as she called it, for Madame Stahl, and still more for Varenka.
She saw that Kitty did not merely imitate Varenka in her conduct, but unconsciously imitated her in her manner of walking, of talking, of blinking her eyes.
But later on the princess noticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind of serious spiritual change was taking place in her daughter.
The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a French testament that Madame Stahl had given her—a thing she had never done before; that she avoided society acquaintances and associated with the sick people who were under Varenka’s protection, and especially one poor family, that of a sick painter, Petrov.
Kitty was unmistakably proud of playing the part of a sister of mercy in that family.
All this was well enough, and the princess had nothing to say against it, especially as Petrov’s wife was a perfectly nice sort of woman, and that the German princess, noticing Kitty’s devotion, praised her, calling her an angel of consolation.
All this would have been very well, if there had been no exaggeration.
But the princess saw that her daughter was rushing into extremes, and so indeed she told her.
Her daughter made her no reply, only in her heart she thought that one could not talk about exaggeration where Christianity was concerned.
What exaggeration could there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein one was bidden to turn the other cheek when one was smitten, and give one’s cloak if one’s coat were taken?
But the princess disliked this exaggeration, and disliked even more the fact that she felt her daughter did not care to show her all her heart.
Kitty did in fact conceal her new views and feelings from her mother.
She concealed them not because she did not respect or did not love her mother, but simply because she was her mother.
She would have revealed them to anyone sooner than to her mother.
“How is it Anna Pavlovna’s not been to see us for so long?” the princess said one day of Madame Petrova.
“I’ve asked her, but she seems put out about something.” “No, I’ve not noticed it, maman,” said Kitty, flushing hotly.
“Is it long since you went to see them?” “We’re meaning to make an expedition to the mountains tomorrow,” answered Kitty.
“Well, you can go,” answered the princess, gazing at her daughter’s embarrassed face and trying to guess the cause of her embarrassment.
That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna had changed her mind and given up the expedition for the morrow.
And the princess noticed again that Kitty reddened.
“Kitty, haven’t you had some misunderstanding with the Petrovs?” said the princess, when they were left alone.
“Why has she given up sending the children and coming to see us?” Kitty answered that nothing had happened between them, and that she could not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her.
Kitty answered perfectly truly.
She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had changed to her, but she guessed it.
She guessed at something which she could not tell her mother, which she did not put into words to herself.
It was one of those things which one knows but which one can never speak of even to oneself, so terrible and shameful would it be to be mistaken.
Again and again she went over in her memory all her relations with the family.
She remembered the simple delight expressed on the round, good-humored face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered their secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw him away from the work which was forbidden him, and to get him out-of-doors; the devotion of the youngest boy, who used to call her “my Kitty,” and would not go to bed without her.
Then she recalled the thin, terribly thin figure of Petrov, with his long neck, in his brown coat, his scant, curly hair, his questioning blue eyes that were so terrible to Kitty at first, and his painful attempts to seem hearty and lively in her presence.
She recalled the efforts she had made at first to overcome the repugnance she felt for him, as for all consumptive people, and the pains it had cost her to think of things to say to him.
She recalled the timid, softened look with which he gazed at her, and the strange feeling of compassion and awkwardness, and later of a sense of her own goodness, which she had felt at it.
Now, a few days ago, everything was suddenly spoiled.
Anna Pavlovna had met Kitty with affected cordiality, and had kept continual watch on her and on her husband.
Could that touching pleasure he showed when she came near be the cause of Anna Pavlovna’s coolness?
“Yes,” she mused, “there was something unnatural about Anna Pavlovna, and utterly unlike her good nature, when she said angrily the day before yesterday: ‘There, he will keep waiting for you; he wouldn’t drink his coffee without you, though he’s grown so dreadfully weak.’” “Yes, perhaps, too, she didn’t like it when I gave him the rug.
It was all so simple, but he took it so awkwardly, and was so long thanking me, that I felt awkward too.
And then that portrait of me he did so well.
And most of all that look of confusion and tenderness!
Yes, yes, that’s it!” Kitty repeated to herself with horror.
He’s so much to be pitied!” she said to herself directly after.
This doubt poisoned the charm of her new life.
Chapter 34 Before the end of the course of drinking the waters, Prince Shtcherbatsky, who had gone on from Carlsbad to Baden and Kissingen to Russian friends—to get a breath of Russian air, as he said—came back to his wife and daughter.
The views of the prince and of the princess on life abroad were completely opposed.
The princess thought everything delightful, and in spite of her established position in Russian society, she tried abroad to be like a European fashionable lady, which she was not—for the simple reason that she was a typical Russian gentlewoman; and so she was affected, which did not altogether suit her.
The prince, on the contrary, thought everything foreign detestable, got sick of European life, kept to his Russian habits, and purposely tried to show himself abroad less European than he was in reality.
The prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on his cheeks, but in the most cheerful frame of mind.
His good humor was even greater when he saw Kitty completely recovered.
The news of Kitty’s friendship with Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the princess gave him of some kind of change she had noticed in Kitty, troubled the prince and aroused his habitual feeling of jealousy of everything that drew his daughter away from him, and a dread that his daughter might have got out of the reach of his influence into regions inaccessible to him.
But these unpleasant matters were all drowned in the sea of kindliness and good humor which was always within him, and more so than ever since his course of Carlsbad waters.
The day after his arrival the prince, in his long overcoat, with his Russian wrinkles and baggy cheeks propped up by a starched collar, set off with his daughter to the spring in the greatest good humor.
It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses with their little gardens, the sight of the red-faced, red-armed, beer-drinking German waitresses, working away merrily, did the heart good.
But the nearer they got to the springs the oftener they met sick people; and their appearance seemed more pitiable than ever among the everyday conditions of prosperous German life.
Kitty was no longer struck by this contrast.
The bright sun, the brilliant green of the foliage, the strains of the music were for her the natural setting of all these familiar faces, with their changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence, for which she watched.
But to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the June morning, and the sound of the orchestra playing a gay waltz then in fashion, and above all, the appearance of the healthy attendants, seemed something unseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with these slowly moving, dying figures gathered together from all parts of Europe.
In spite of his feeling of pride and, as it were, of the return of youth, with his favorite daughter on his arm, he felt awkward, and almost ashamed of his vigorous step and his sturdy, stout limbs.
“Present me to your new friends,” he said to his daughter, squeezing her hand with his elbow.
Only it’s melancholy, very melancholy here.
Who’s that?” Kitty mentioned the names of all the people they met, with some of whom she was acquainted and some not.
At the entrance of the garden they met the blind lady, Madame Berthe, with her guide, and the prince was delighted to see the old Frenchwoman’s face light up when she heard Kitty’s voice.
She at once began talking to him with French exaggerated politeness, applauding him for having such a delightful daughter, extolling Kitty to the skies before her face, and calling her a treasure, a pearl, and a consoling angel.
“she calls Mademoiselle Varenka angel number one.” “Oh!
Mademoiselle Varenka, she’s a real angel, allez,” Madame Berthe assented.
She was walking rapidly towards them carrying an elegant red bag.
Varenka made—simply and naturally as she did everything—a movement between a bow and a curtsey, and immediately began talking to the prince, without shyness, naturally, as she talked to everyone.
“Of course I know you; I know you very well,” the prince said to her with a smile, in which Kitty detected with joy that her father liked her friend.
“Come, so we shall see all your friends,” he went on, “even Madame Stahl, if she deigns to recognize me.” “Why, did you know her, papa?” Kitty asked apprehensively, catching the gleam of irony that kindled in the prince’s eyes at the mention of Madame Stahl.
“I used to know her husband, and her too a little, before she’d joined the Pietists.” “What is a Pietist, papa?” asked Kitty, dismayed to find that what she prized so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.
I only know that she thanks God for everything, for every misfortune, and thanks God too that her husband died.
And that’s rather droll, as they didn’t get on together.” “Who’s that?
What a piteous face!” he asked, noticing a sick man of medium height sitting on a bench, wearing a brown overcoat and white trousers that fell in strange folds about his long, fleshless legs.
This man lifted his straw hat, showed his scanty curly hair and high forehead, painfully reddened by the pressure of the hat.
“That’s Petrov, an artist,” answered Kitty, blushing.
“And that’s his wife,” she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who, as though on purpose, at the very instant they approached walked away after a child that had run off along a path.
He wanted to speak to you.” “Well, let us go, then,” said Kitty, turning round resolutely.
“This is my daughter,” said the prince.
“Let me introduce myself.” The painter bowed and smiled, showing his strangely dazzling white teeth.
“We expected you yesterday, princess,” he said to Kitty.
He staggered as he said this, and then repeated the motion, trying to make it seem as if it had been intentional.
“I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna sent word you were not going.” “Not going!” said Petrov, blushing, and immediately beginning to cough, and his eyes sought his wife.
Anna Pavlovna came up.
“So you sent word to the princess that we weren’t going!” he whispered to her angrily, losing his voice.
“Good morning, princess,” said Anna Pavlovna, with an assumed smile utterly unlike her former manner.
“Very glad to make your acquaintance,” she said to the prince.
“You’ve long been expected, prince.” “What did you send word to the princess that we weren’t going for?” the artist whispered hoarsely once more, still more angrily, obviously exasperated that his voice failed him so that he could not give his words the expression he would have liked to.
I thought we weren’t going,” his wife answered crossly.
The prince took off his hat and moved away with his daughter.
“Oh, poor things!” “Yes, papa,” answered Kitty.
“And you must know they’ve three children, no servant, and scarcely any means.
He gets something from the Academy,” she went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the queer change in Anna Pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.
“Oh, here’s Madame Stahl,” said Kitty, indicating an invalid carriage, where, propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying under a sunshade.
Behind her stood the gloomy, healthy-looking German workman who pushed the carriage.
Close by was standing a flaxen-headed Swedish count, whom Kitty knew by name.
Several invalids were lingering near the low carriage, staring at the lady as though she were some curiosity.
The prince went up to her, and Kitty detected that disconcerting gleam of irony in his eyes.
He went up to Madame Stahl, and addressed her with extreme courtesy and affability in that excellent French that so few speak nowadays.
“I don’t know if you remember me, but I must recall myself to thank you for your kindness to my daughter,” he said, taking off his hat and not putting it on again.
“Prince Alexander Shtcherbatsky,” said Madame Stahl, lifting upon him her heavenly eyes, in which Kitty discerned a look of annoyance.
I have taken a great fancy to your daughter.” “You are still in weak health?” “Yes; I’m used to it,” said Madame Stahl, and she introduced the prince to the Swedish count.
“You are scarcely changed at all,” the prince said to her.
“It’s ten or eleven years since I had the honor of seeing you.” “Yes; God sends the cross and sends the strength to bear it.
The other side!” she said angrily to Varenka, who had rearranged the rug over her feet not to her satisfaction.
“To do good, probably,” said the prince with a twinkle in his eye.
“That is not for us to judge,” said Madame Stahl, perceiving the shade of expression on the prince’s face.
I’m very grateful to you,” she said to the young Swede.
“Ah!” cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow colonel standing near, and with a bow to Madame Stahl he walked away with his daughter and the Moscow colonel, who joined them.
“That’s our aristocracy, prince!” the Moscow colonel said with ironical intention.
He cherished a grudge against Madame Stahl for not making his acquaintance.
She’s a very bad figure.” “Papa, it’s not possible!” cried Kitty.
“Oh, these invalid ladies!” “Oh, no, papa!” Kitty objected warmly.
“Varenka worships her.
Everyone knows her and Aline Stahl.” “Perhaps so,” said the prince, squeezing her hand with his elbow; “but it’s better when one does good so that you may ask everyone and no one knows.” Kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but because she did not care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father.
All that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay down because she had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka for not arranging her rug to her liking.
And by no effort of the imagination could Kitty bring back the former Madame Stahl.
Chapter 35 The prince communicated his good humor to his own family and his friends, and even to the German landlord in whose rooms the Shtcherbatskys were staying.
On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the prince, who had asked the colonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have coffee with them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken into the garden under the chestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there.
The landlord and the servants, too, grew brisker under the influence of his good spirits.
They knew his open-handedness; and half an hour later the invalid doctor from Hamburg, who lived on the top floor, looked enviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy Russians assembled under the chestnut tree.
In the trembling circles of shadow cast by the leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and set with coffeepot, bread-and-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the princess in a high cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and bread-and-butter.
At the other end sat the prince, eating heartily, and talking loudly and merrily.
The princess laughed at her husband for his Russian ways, but she was more lively and good-humored than she had been all the while she had been at the waters.
The colonel smiled, as he always did, at the prince’s jokes, but as far as regards Europe, of which he believed himself to be making a careful study, he took the princess’s side.
The simple-hearted Marya Yevgenyevna simply roared with laughter at everything absurd the prince said, and his jokes made Varenka helpless with feeble but infectious laughter, which was something Kitty had never seen before.
She could not solve the problem her father had unconsciously set her by his good-humored view of her friends, and of the life that had so attracted her.
To this doubt there was joined the change in her relations with the Petrovs, which had been so conspicuously and unpleasantly marked that morning.
Everyone was good-humored, but Kitty could not feel good-humored, and this increased her distress.
She felt a feeling such as she had known in childhood, when she had been shut in her room as a punishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughter outside.
“Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?” said the princess, smiling, and handing her husband a cup of coffee.
‘_Erlaucht, Durchlaucht?_’ Directly they say ‘_Durchlaucht_,’ I can’t hold out.
I lose ten thalers.” “It’s simply from boredom,” said the princess.
There’s so much that’s interesting now in Germany,” said Marya Yevgenyevna.
“But I know everything that’s interesting: the plum soup I know, and the pea sausages I know.
I know everything.” “No, you may say what you like, prince, there’s the interest of their institutions,” said the colonel.
“But what is there interesting about it?
They’re all as pleased as brass halfpence.
They’ve conquered everybody, and why am I to be pleased at that?
I haven’t conquered anyone; and I’m obliged to take off my own boots, yes, and put them away too; in the morning, get up and dress at once, and go to the dining-room to drink bad tea!
How different it is at home!
Why, there’s time one would give a month of for sixpence, and time you wouldn’t give half an hour of for any money.
What is it? why are you so depressed?” “I’m not depressed.” “Where are you off to?
When she had recovered, she said good-bye, and went into the house to get her hat.
Even Varenka struck her as different.
She was not worse, but different from what she had fancied her before.
“Oh, dear! it’s a long while since I’ve laughed so much!” said Varenka, gathering up her parasol and her bag.
“Yes,” answered Varenka.
“They’re getting ready to go away, so I promised to help them pack.” “Well, I’ll come too, then.” “No, why should you?” “Why not? why not? why not?” said Kitty, opening her eyes wide, and clutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to let her go.
“No, please tell me!” “Tell you everything?” asked Varenka.
“Everything, everything!” Kitty assented.
“Well, there’s really nothing of any consequence; only that Mihail Alexeyevitch” (that was the artist’s name) “had meant to leave earlier, and now he doesn’t want to go away,” said Varenka, smiling.
“Well, well!” Kitty urged impatiently, looking darkly at Varenka.
“Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told him that he didn’t want to go because you are here.
Of course, that was nonsense; but there was a dispute over it—over you.
You know how irritable these sick people are.” Kitty, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and Varenka went on speaking alone, trying to soften or soothe her, and seeing a storm coming—she did not know whether of tears or of words.
You understand; you won’t be offended?...” “And it serves me right!
And it serves me right!” Kitty cried quickly, snatching the parasol out of Varenka’s hand, and looking past her friend’s face.
Varenka felt inclined to smile, looking at her childish fury, but she was afraid of wounding her.
I don’t understand,” she said.
What business had I to interfere with outsiders?
There was no need whatever for me....
Nothing but sham!” she said, opening and shutting the parasol.
“But with what object?” “To seem better to people, to myself, to God; to deceive everyone.
I’ll be bad; but anyway not a liar, a cheat.” “But who is a cheat?” said Varenka reproachfully.
Yes, yes, I know you’re all perfection; but what am I to do if I’m bad?
What have I to do with Anna Pavlovna?
I can’t be different....
And yet it’s not that, it’s not that.” “What is not that?” asked Varenka in bewilderment.
I can’t act except from the heart, and you act from principle.
“But I’m not speaking of other people, I’m speaking of myself.” “Kitty,” they heard her mother’s voice, “come here, show papa your necklace.” Kitty, with a haughty air, without making peace with her friend, took the necklace in a little box from the table and went to her mother.
“Nothing,” she answered.
“I’ll be back directly,” and she ran back.
Varenka in her hat and with the parasol in her hands was sitting at the table examining the spring which Kitty had broken.
“Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me,” whispered Kitty, going up to her.
“I don’t remember what I said.
But with her father’s coming all the world in which she had been living was transformed for Kitty.
She did not give up everything she had learned, but she became aware that she had deceived herself in supposing she could be what she wanted to be.
Her eyes were, it seemed, opened; she felt all the difficulty of maintaining herself without hypocrisy and self-conceit on the pinnacle to which she had wished to mount.
Moreover, she became aware of all the dreariness of the world of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in which she had been living.
The efforts she had made to like it seemed to her intolerable, and she felt a longing to get back quickly into the fresh air, to Russia, to Ergushovo, where, as she knew from letters, her sister Dolly had already gone with her children.
But her affection for Varenka did not wane.
Mind now, remember your promise,” said Kitty.
The doctor’s prediction was fulfilled.
Kitty returned home to Russia cured.
She was not so gay and thoughtless as before, but she was serene.
Her Moscow troubles had become a memory to her.
PART THREE Chapter 1 Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from mental work, and instead of going abroad as he usually did, he came towards the end of May to stay in the country with his brother.
In his judgment the best sort of life was a country life.
Konstantin Levin was very glad to have him, especially as he did not expect his brother Nikolay that summer.
But in spite of his affection and respect for Sergey Ivanovitch, Konstantin Levin was uncomfortable with his brother in the country.
It made him uncomfortable, and it positively annoyed him to see his brother’s attitude to the country.
To Konstantin Levin the country was the background of life, that is of pleasures, endeavors, labor.
To Sergey Ivanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the other a valuable antidote to the corrupt influences of town, which he took with satisfaction and a sense of its utility.
To Konstantin Levin the country was good first because it afforded a field for labor, of the usefulness of which there could be no doubt.
To Sergey Ivanovitch the country was particularly good, because there it was possible and fitting to do nothing.
Moreover, Sergey Ivanovitch’s attitude to the peasants rather piqued Konstantin.
Sergey Ivanovitch used to say that he knew and liked the peasantry, and he often talked to the peasants, which he knew how to do without affectation or condescension, and from every such conversation he would deduce general conclusions in favor of the peasantry and in confirmation of his knowing them.
Konstantin Levin did not like such an attitude to the peasants.
If he had been asked whether he liked or didn’t like the peasants, Konstantin Levin would have been absolutely at a loss what to reply.
He liked and did not like the peasants, just as he liked and did not like men in general.
Of course, being a good-hearted man, he liked men rather than he disliked them, and so too with the peasants.
But like or dislike “the people” as something apart he could not, not only because he lived with “the people,” and all his interests were bound up with theirs, but also because he regarded himself as a part of “the people,” did not see any special qualities or failings distinguishing himself and “the people,” and could not contrast himself with them.
Moreover, although he had lived so long in the closest relations with the peasants, as farmer and arbitrator, and what was more, as adviser (the peasants trusted him, and for thirty miles round they would come to ask his advice), he had no definite views of “the people,” and would have been as much at a loss to answer the question whether he knew “the people” as the question whether he liked them.
For him to say he knew the peasantry would have been the same as to say he knew men.
He was continually watching and getting to know people of all sorts, and among them peasants, whom he regarded as good and interesting people, and he was continually observing new points in them, altering his former views of them and forming new ones.
With Sergey Ivanovitch it was quite the contrary.
Just as he liked and praised a country life in comparison with the life he did not like, so too he liked the peasantry in contradistinction to the class of men he did not like, and so too he knew the peasantry as something distinct from and opposed to men generally.
In his methodical brain there were distinctly formulated certain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly from that life itself, but chiefly from contrast with other modes of life.
He never changed his opinion of the peasantry and his sympathetic attitude towards them.
In the discussions that arose between the brothers on their views of the peasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got the better of his brother, precisely because Sergey Ivanovitch had definite ideas about the peasant—his character, his qualities, and his tastes.
Konstantin Levin had no definite and unalterable idea on the subject, and so in their arguments Konstantin was readily convicted of contradicting himself.
In Sergey Ivanovitch’s eyes his younger brother was a capital fellow, _with his heart in the right place_ (as he expressed it in French), but with a mind which, though fairly quick, was too much influenced by the impressions of the moment, and consequently filled with contradictions.
With all the condescension of an elder brother he sometimes explained to him the true import of things, but he derived little satisfaction from arguing with him because he got the better of him too easily.
Konstantin Levin regarded his brother as a man of immense intellect and culture, as generous in the highest sense of the word, and possessed of a special faculty for working for the public good.
The better he knew his brother, the more he noticed that Sergey Ivanovitch, and many other people who worked for the public welfare, were not led by an impulse of the heart to care for the public good, but reasoned from intellectual considerations that it was a right thing to take interest in public affairs, and consequently took interest in them.
Levin was confirmed in this generalization by observing that his brother did not take questions affecting the public welfare or the question of the immortality of the soul a bit more to heart than he did chess problems, or the ingenious construction of a new machine.
Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at his ease with his brother, because in summer in the country Levin was continually busy with work on the land, and the long summer day was not long enough for him to get through all he had to do, while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday.
But though he was taking a holiday now, that is to say, he was doing no writing, he was so used to intellectual activity that he liked to put into concise and eloquent shape the ideas that occurred to him, and liked to have someone to listen to him.
His most usual and natural listener was his brother.
And so in spite of the friendliness and directness of their relations, Konstantin felt an awkwardness in leaving him alone.
Sergey Ivanovitch liked to stretch himself on the grass in the sun, and to lie so, basking and chatting lazily.
“You wouldn’t believe,” he would say to his brother, “what a pleasure this rural laziness is to me.
“Come, you’ve done enough trudging about in the heat,” Sergey Ivanovitch would say to him.
“No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a minute,” Levin would answer, and he would run off to the fields.
Chapter 2 Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the old nurse and housekeeper, in carrying to the cellar a jar of mushrooms she had just pickled, slipped, fell, and sprained her wrist.
The district doctor, a talkative young medical student, who had just finished his studies, came to see her.
He examined the wrist, said it was not broken, was delighted at a chance of talking to the celebrated Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev, and to show his advanced views of things told him all the scandal of the district, complaining of the poor state into which the district council had fallen.
Sergey Ivanovitch listened attentively, asked him questions, and, roused by a new listener, he talked fluently, uttered a few keen and weighty observations, respectfully appreciated by the young doctor, and was soon in that eager frame of mind his brother knew so well, which always, with him, followed a brilliant and eager conversation.
After the departure of the doctor, he wanted to go with a fishing rod to the river.
Sergey Ivanovitch was fond of angling, and was, it seemed, proud of being able to care for such a stupid occupation.
Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the plough land and meadows, had come to take his brother in the trap.
It was the time when there comes a brief pause in the toil of the fields before the beginning of the labors of harvest—every year recurring, every year straining every nerve of the peasants.
The crop was a splendid one, and bright, hot summer days had set in with short, dewy nights.
The brothers had to drive through the woods to reach the meadows.
Sergey Ivanovitch was all the while admiring the beauty of the woods, which were a tangled mass of leaves, pointing out to his brother now an old lime tree on the point of flowering, dark on the shady side, and brightly spotted with yellow stipules, now the young shoots of this year’s saplings brilliant with emerald.
Konstantin Levin did not like talking and hearing about the beauty of nature.
He assented to what his brother said, but he could not help beginning to think of other things.
When they came out of the woods, all his attention was engrossed by the view of the fallow land on the upland, in parts yellow with grass, in parts trampled and checkered with furrows, in parts dotted with ridges of dung, and in parts even ploughed.
Levin counted the carts, and was pleased that all that were wanted had been brought, and at the sight of the meadows his thoughts passed to the mowing.
He always felt something special moving him to the quick at the hay-making.
On reaching the meadow Levin stopped the horse.
The morning dew was still lying on the thick undergrowth of the grass, and that he might not get his feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked his brother to drive him in the trap up to the willow tree from which the carp was caught.
Sorry as Konstantin Levin was to crush down his mowing grass, he drove him into the meadow.
The high grass softly turned about the wheels and the horse’s legs, leaving its seeds clinging to the wet axles and spokes of the wheels.
His brother seated himself under a bush, arranging his tackle, while Levin led the horse away, fastened him up, and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grass unstirred by the wind.
Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto the road, and met an old man with a swollen eye, carrying a skep on his shoulder.
“No, indeed, Konstantin Dmitrich!
They were ploughing your field.
They unyoked the horses and galloped after them.” “Well, what do you say, Fomitch—start mowing or wait a bit?” “Eh, well.
Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but he was not bored, and seemed in the most cheerful frame of mind.
Levin saw that, stimulated by his conversation with the doctor, he wanted to talk.
Levin, on the other hand, would have liked to get home as soon as possible to give orders about getting together the mowers for next day, and to set at rest his doubts about the mowing, which greatly absorbed him.
How exquisite this steely water is!” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“These riverside banks always remind me of the riddle—do you know it?
‘The grass says to the water: we quiver and we quiver.’” “I don’t know the riddle,” answered Levin wearily.
Chapter 3 “Do you know, I’ve been thinking about you,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“It’s beyond everything what’s being done in the district, according to what this doctor tells me.
He’s a very intelligent fellow.
And as I’ve told you before, I tell you again: it’s not right for you not to go to the meetings, and altogether to keep out of the district business.
We pay the money, and it all goes in salaries, and there are no schools, nor district nurses, nor midwives, nor drugstores—nothing.” “Well, I did try, you know,” Levin said slowly and unwillingly.
Indifference, incapacity—I won’t admit; surely it’s not simply laziness?” “None of those things.
Looking towards the plough land across the river, he made out something black, but he could not distinguish whether it was a horse or the bailiff on horseback.
How can you have so little self-respect?” “Self-respect!” said Levin, stung to the quick by his brother’s words; “I don’t understand.
If they’d told me at college that other people understood the integral calculus, and I didn’t, then pride would have come in.
“I don’t think it important; it does not take hold of me, I can’t help it,” answered Levin, making out that what he saw was the bailiff, and that the bailiff seemed to be letting the peasants go off the ploughed land.
“Can they have finished ploughing?” he wondered.
“Come, really though,” said the elder brother, with a frown on his handsome, clever face, “there’s a limit to everything.
It’s very well to be original and genuine, and to dislike everything conventional—I know all about that; but really, what you’re saying either has no meaning, or it has a very wrong meaning.
How can you think it a matter of no importance whether the peasant, whom you love as you assert....” “I never did assert it,” thought Konstantin Levin.
Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to him but to submit, or to confess to a lack of zeal for the public good.
And this mortified him and hurt his feelings.
“It’s both,” he said resolutely: “I don’t see that it was possible....” “What! was it impossible, if the money were properly laid out, to provide medical aid?” “Impossible, as it seems to me....
For the three thousand square miles of our district, what with our thaws, and the storms, and the work in the fields, I don’t see how it is possible to provide medical aid all over.
And besides, I don’t believe in medicine.” “Oh, well, that’s unfair ...
I can quote to you thousands of instances....
Can there be two opinions of the advantage of education?
If it’s a good thing for you, it’s a good thing for everyone.” Konstantin Levin felt himself morally pinned against a wall, and so he got hot, and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of his indifference to public business.
“Perhaps it may all be very good; but why should I worry myself about establishing dispensaries which I shall never make use of, and schools to which I shall never send my children, to which even the peasants don’t want to send their children, and to which I’ve no very firm faith that they ought to send them?” said he.
Sergey Ivanovitch was for a minute surprised at this unexpected view of the subject; but he promptly made a new plan of attack.
In the first place, the dispensary is needed.
We ourselves sent for the district doctor for Agafea Mihalovna.” “Oh, well, but I fancy her wrist will never be straight again.” “That remains to be proved....
Next, the peasant who can read and write is as a workman of more use and value to you.” “No, you can ask anyone you like,” Konstantin Levin answered with decision, “the man that can read and write is much inferior as a workman.
And mending the highroads is an impossibility; and as soon as they put up bridges they’re stolen.” “Still, that’s not the point,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning.
He disliked contradiction, and still more, arguments that were continually skipping from one thing to another, introducing new and disconnected points, so that there was no knowing to which to reply.
“Do you admit that education is a benefit for the people?” “Yes, I admit it,” said Levin without thinking, and he was conscious immediately that he had said what he did not think.
He felt that if he admitted that, it would be proved that he had been talking meaningless rubbish.
How it would be proved he could not tell, but he knew that this would inevitably be logically proved to him, and he awaited the proofs.
The argument turned out to be far simpler than he had expected.
“If you admit that it is a benefit,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “then, as an honest man, you cannot help caring about it and sympathizing with the movement, and so wishing to work for it.” “But I still do not admit this movement to be just,” said Konstantin Levin, reddening a little.
“I can’t see where philosophy comes in,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, in a tone, Levin fancied, as though he did not admit his brother’s right to talk about philosophy.
And that irritated Levin.
“I’ll tell you, then,” he said with heat, “I imagine the mainspring of all our actions is, after all, self-interest.
Now in the local institutions I, as a nobleman, see nothing that could conduce to my prosperity, and the roads are not better and could not be better; my horses carry me well enough over bad ones.
Doctors and dispensaries are no use to me.
An arbitrator of disputes is no use to me.
The schools are no good to me, but positively harmful, as I told you.
There self-interest did come in.
But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged his shoulders.
“Well, what do you mean to say, then?” “I simply mean to say that those rights that touch me ... my interest, I shall always defend to the best of my ability; that when they made raids on us students, and the police read our letters, I was ready to defend those rights to the utmost, to defend my rights to education and freedom.
I can understand compulsory military service, which affects my children, my brothers, and myself, I am ready to deliberate on what concerns me; but deliberating on how to spend forty thousand roubles of district council money, or judging the half-witted Alioshka—I don’t understand, and I can’t do it.” Konstantin Levin spoke as though the floodgates of his speech had burst open.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
“But tomorrow it’ll be your turn to be tried; would it have suited your tastes better to be tried in the old criminal tribunal?” “I’m not going to be tried.
“Excuse me, but you know one really can’t argue in that way,” he observed.
But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify himself for the failing, of which he was conscious, of lack of zeal for the public welfare, and he went on.
“I imagine,” he said, “that no sort of activity is likely to be lasting if it is not founded on self-interest, that’s a universal principle, a philosophical principle,” he said, repeating the word “philosophical” with determination, as though wishing to show that he had as much right as anyone else to talk of philosophy.
“He too has a philosophy of his own at the service of his natural tendencies,” he thought.
“Come, you’d better let philosophy alone,” he said.
“The chief problem of the philosophy of all ages consists just in finding the indispensable connection which exists between individual and social interests.
But that’s not to the point; what is to the point is a correction I must make in your comparison.
The birches are not simply stuck in, but some are sown and some are planted, and one must deal carefully with them.
“As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that’s simply our Russian sloth and old serf-owner’s ways, and I’m convinced that in you it’s a temporary error and will pass.” Konstantin was silent.
He felt himself vanquished on all sides, but he felt at the same time that what he wanted to say was unintelligible to his brother.
Only he could not make up his mind whether it was unintelligible because he was not capable of expressing his meaning clearly, or because his brother would not or could not understand him.
But he did not pursue the speculation, and without replying, he fell to musing on a quite different and personal matter.
Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the horse, and they drove off.
Chapter 4 The personal matter that absorbed Levin during his conversation with his brother was this.
Once in a previous year he had gone to look at the mowing, and being made very angry by the bailiff he had recourse to his favorite means for regaining his temper,—he took a scythe from a peasant and began mowing.
He had cut the whole of the meadow in front of his house, and this year ever since the early spring he had cherished a plan for mowing for whole days together with the peasants.
But as he drove into the meadow, and recalled the sensations of mowing, he came near deciding that he would go mowing.
After the irritating discussion with his brother, he pondered over this intention again.
“I must have physical exercise, or my temper’ll certainly be ruined,” he thought, and he determined he would go mowing, however awkward he might feel about it with his brother or the peasants.
Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his counting house, gave directions as to the work to be done, and sent about the village to summon the mowers for the morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, the largest and best of his grass lands.
“And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for him to set it, and bring it round tomorrow.
I shall maybe do some mowing myself too,” he said, trying not to be embarrassed.
Tomorrow I shall start mowing.” “I’m so fond of that form of field labor,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
I sometimes mow myself with the peasants, and tomorrow I want to try mowing the whole day.” Sergey Ivanovitch lifted his head, and looked with interest at his brother.
Just like one of the peasants, all day long?” “Yes, it’s very pleasant,” said Levin.
“It’s splendid as exercise, only you’ll hardly be able to stand it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.
But tell me, how do the peasants look at it?
I suppose they laugh in their sleeves at their master’s being such a queer fish?” “No, I don’t think so; but it’s so delightful, and at the same time such hard work, that one has no time to think about it.” “But how will you do about dining with them?
To send you a bottle of Lafitte and roast turkey out there would be a little awkward.” “No, I’ll simply come home at the time of their noonday rest.” Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than usual, but he was detained giving directions on the farm, and when he reached the mowing grass the mowers were already at their second row.
Gradually, as he rode towards the meadow, the peasants came into sight, some in coats, some in their shirts mowing, one behind another in a long string, swinging their scythes differently.
Levin recognized some of his own men.
Here was old Yermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to swing a scythe; there was a young fellow, Vaska, who had been a coachman of Levin’s, taking every row with a wide sweep.
Here, too, was Tit, Levin’s preceptor in the art of mowing, a thin little peasant.
Levin got off his mare, and fastening her up by the roadside went to meet Tit, who took a second scythe out of a bush and gave it to him.
As they finished their rows, the mowers, hot and good-humored, came out into the road one after another, and, laughing a little, greeted the master.
They all stared at him, but no one made any remark, till a tall old man, with a wrinkled, beardless face, wearing a short sheepskin jacket, came out into the road and accosted him.
“Look’ee now, master, once take hold of the rope there’s no letting it go!” he said, and Levin heard smothered laughter among the mowers.
“Mind’ee,” repeated the old man.
The grass was short close to the road, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long while, and was disconcerted by the eyes fastened upon him, cut badly for the first moments, though he swung his scythe vigorously.
You swing it too wide, you’ll tire yourself out....
For such work us fellows would catch it!” The grass became softer, and Levin, listening without answering, followed Tit, trying to do the best he could.
Tit kept moving on, without stopping, not showing the slightest weariness, but Levin was already beginning to be afraid he would not be able to keep it up: he was so tired.
He felt as he swung his scythe that he was at the very end of his strength, and was making up his mind to ask Tit to stop.
But at that very moment Tit stopped of his own accord, and stooping down picked up some grass, rubbed his scythe, and began whetting it.
Levin straightened himself, and drawing a deep breath looked round.
Behind him came a peasant, and he too was evidently tired, for he stopped at once without waiting to mow up to Levin, and began whetting his scythe.
Tit sharpened his scythe and Levin’s, and they went on.
Tit moved on with sweep after sweep of his scythe, not stopping nor showing signs of weariness.
Levin followed him, trying not to get left behind, and he found it harder and harder: the moment came when he felt he had no strength left, but at that very moment Tit stopped and whetted the scythes.
What delighted him particularly was that now he knew he would be able to hold out.
His pleasure was only disturbed by his row not being well cut.
“I will swing less with my arm and more with my whole body,” he thought, comparing Tit’s row, which looked as if it had been cut with a line, with his own unevenly and irregularly lying grass.
The first row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed specially quickly, probably wishing to put his master to the test, and the row happened to be a long one.
The next rows were easier, but still Levin had to strain every nerve not to drop behind the peasants.
He thought of nothing, wished for nothing, but not to be left behind the peasants, and to do his work as well as possible.
He heard nothing but the swish of scythes, and saw before him Tit’s upright figure mowing away, the crescent-shaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and flower heads slowly and rhythmically falling before the blade of his scythe, and ahead of him the end of the row, where would come the rest.
Suddenly, in the midst of his toil, without understanding what it was or whence it came, he felt a pleasant sensation of chill on his hot, moist shoulders.
He glanced at the sky in the interval for whetting the scythes.
A heavy, lowering storm cloud had blown up, and big raindrops were falling.
Some of the peasants went to their coats and put them on; others—just like Levin himself—merely shrugged their shoulders, enjoying the pleasant coolness of it.
Another row, and yet another row, followed—long rows and short rows, with good grass and with poor grass.
A change began to come over his work, which gave him immense satisfaction.
But so soon as he recollected what he was doing, and began trying to do better, he was at once conscious of all the difficulty of his task, and the row was badly mown.
On finishing yet another row he would have gone back to the top of the meadow again to begin the next, but Tit stopped, and going up to the old man said something in a low voice to him.
“What are they talking about, and why doesn’t he go back?” thought Levin, not guessing that the peasants had been mowing no less than four hours without stopping, and it was time for their lunch.
That’s right; lunch, then.” Levin gave his scythe to Tit, and together with the peasants, who were crossing the long stretch of mown grass, slightly sprinkled with rain, to get their bread from the heap of coats, he went towards his house.
Only then he suddenly awoke to the fact that he had been wrong about the weather and the rain was drenching his hay.
Sergey Ivanovitch was only just getting up.
When he had drunk his coffee, Levin rode back again to the mowing before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress and come down to the dining-room.
Chapter 5 After lunch Levin was not in the same place in the string of mowers as before, but stood between the old man who had accosted him jocosely, and now invited him to be his neighbor, and a young peasant, who had only been married in the autumn, and who was mowing this summer for the first time.
The old man, holding himself erect, moved in front, with his feet turned out, taking long, regular strides, and with a precise and regular action which seemed to cost him no more effort than swinging one’s arms in walking, as though it were in play, he laid down the high, even row of grass.
It was as though it were not he but the sharp scythe of itself swishing through the juicy grass.
His pretty, boyish face, with a twist of fresh grass bound round his hair, was all working with effort; but whenever anyone looked at him he smiled.
The perspiration with which he was drenched cooled him, while the sun, that burned his back, his head, and his arms, bare to the elbow, gave a vigor and dogged energy to his labor; and more and more often now came those moments of unconsciousness, when it was possible not to think what one was doing.
Still more delightful were the moments when they reached the stream where the rows ended, and the old man rubbed his scythe with the wet, thick grass, rinsed its blade in the fresh water of the stream, ladled out a little in a tin dipper, and offered Levin a drink.
And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as this warm water with green bits floating in it, and a taste of rust from the tin dipper.
And immediately after this came the delicious, slow saunter, with his hand on the scythe, during which he could wipe away the streaming sweat, take deep breaths of air, and look about at the long string of mowers and at what was happening around in the forest and the country.
The longer Levin mowed, the oftener he felt the moments of unconsciousness in which it seemed not his hands that swung the scythe, but the scythe mowing of itself, a body full of life and consciousness of its own, and as though by magic, without thinking of it, the work turned out regular and well-finished of itself.
These were the most blissful moments.
It was only hard work when he had to break off the motion, which had become unconscious, and to think; when he had to mow round a hillock or a tuft of sorrel.
For both Levin and the young peasant behind him, such changes of position were difficult.
Both of them, repeating over and over again the same strained movement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and were incapable of shifting their position and at the same time watching what was before them.
As they were walking back over the cut grass, the old man called Levin’s attention to the little girls and boys who were coming from different directions, hardly visible through the long grass, and along the road towards the mowers, carrying sacks of bread dragging at their little hands and pitchers of the sour rye-beer, with cloths wrapped round them.
“Look’ee, the little emmets crawling!” he said, pointing to them, and he shaded his eyes with his hand to look at the sun.
And on reaching the stream the mowers moved off across the lines of cut grass towards their pile of coats, where the children who had brought their dinners were sitting waiting for them.
The peasants gathered into groups—those further away under a cart, those nearer under a willow bush.
Levin sat down by them; he felt disinclined to go away.
All constraint with the master had disappeared long ago.
The peasants got ready for dinner.
Some washed, the young lads bathed in the stream, others made a place comfortable for a rest, untied their sacks of bread, and uncovered the pitchers of rye-beer.
The old man crumbled up some bread in a cup, stirred it with the handle of a spoon, poured water on it from the dipper, broke up some more bread, and having seasoned it with salt, he turned to the east to say his prayer.
“Come, master, taste my sop,” said he, kneeling down before the cup.
He dined with the old man, and talked to him about his family affairs, taking the keenest interest in them, and told him about his own affairs and all the circumstances that could be of interest to the old man.
He felt much nearer to him than to his brother, and could not help smiling at the affection he felt for this man.
When the old man got up again, said his prayer, and lay down under a bush, putting some grass under his head for a pillow, Levin did the same, and in spite of the clinging flies that were so persistent in the sunshine, and the midges that tickled his hot face and body, he fell asleep at once and only waked when the sun had passed to the other side of the bush and reached him.
The old man had been awake a long while, and was sitting up whetting the scythes of the younger lads.
Levin looked about him and hardly recognized the place, everything was so changed.
The immense stretch of meadow had been mown and was sparkling with a peculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of already sweet-smelling grass in the slanting rays of the evening sun.
And the bushes about the river had been cut down, and the river itself, not visible before, now gleaming like steel in its bends, and the moving, ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass of the unmown part of the meadow, and the hawks hovering over the stripped meadow—all was perfectly new.
Raising himself, Levin began considering how much had been cut and how much more could still be done that day.
The work done was exceptionally much for forty-two men.
Only the corners remained to do, where the rows were short.
But Levin felt a longing to get as much mowing done that day as possible, and was vexed with the sun sinking so quickly in the sky.
He felt no weariness; all he wanted was to get his work done more and more quickly and as much done as possible.
A little vodka for the lads?” At the afternoon rest, when they were sitting down again, and those who smoked had lighted their pipes, the old man told the men that “Mashkin Upland’s to be cut—there’ll be some vodka.” “Why not cut it?
“Get along, get along!” said the old man, hurrying after him and easily overtaking him, “I’ll mow you down, look out!” And young and old mowed away, as though they were racing with one another.
The last of the mowers were just ending their rows while the foremost snatched up their coats onto their shoulders, and crossed the road towards Mashkin Upland.
The sun was already sinking into the trees when they went with their jingling dippers into the wooded ravine of Mashkin Upland.
The grass was up to their waists in the middle of the hollow, soft, tender, and feathery, spotted here and there among the trees with wild heart’s-ease.
After a brief consultation—whether to take the rows lengthwise or diagonally—Prohor Yermilin, also a renowned mower, a huge, black-haired peasant, went on ahead.
He went up to the top, turned back again and started mowing, and they all proceeded to form in line behind him, going downhill through the hollow and uphill right up to the edge of the forest.
The dew was falling by now; the mowers were in the sun only on the hillside, but below, where a mist was rising, and on the opposite side, they mowed into the fresh, dewy shade.
The grass cut with a juicy sound, and was at once laid in high, fragrant rows.
The mowers from all sides, brought closer together in the short row, kept urging one another on to the sound of jingling dippers and clanging scythes, and the hiss of the whetstones sharpening them, and good-humored shouts.
The old man, who had put on his short sheepskin jacket, was just as good-humored, jocose, and free in his movements.
Among the trees they were continually cutting with their scythes the so-called “birch mushrooms,” swollen fat in the succulent grass.
But the old man bent down every time he came across a mushroom, picked it up and put it in his bosom.
Swinging his scythe just as ever, and moving his feet in their big, plaited shoes with firm, little steps, he climbed slowly up the steep place, and though his breeches hanging out below his smock, and his whole frame trembled with effort, he did not miss one blade of grass or one mushroom on his way, and kept making jokes with the peasants and Levin.
Levin walked after him and often thought he must fall, as he climbed with a scythe up a steep cliff where it would have been hard work to clamber without anything.
He felt as though some external force were moving him.
Chapter 6 Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row finished, the peasants had put on their coats and were gaily trudging home.
Levin got on his horse and, parting regretfully from the peasants, rode homewards.
On the hillside he looked back; he could not see them in the mist that had risen from the valley; he could only hear rough, good-humored voices, laughter, and the sound of clanking scythes.
Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and was drinking iced lemon and water in his own room, looking through the reviews and papers which he had only just received by post, when Levin rushed into the room, talking merrily, with his wet and matted hair sticking to his forehead, and his back and chest grimed and moist.
Oh, it is nice, delicious!
And how have you been getting on?” said Levin, completely forgetting the disagreeable conversation of the previous day.
“Mercy! what do you look like!” said Sergey Ivanovitch, for the first moment looking round with some dissatisfaction.
“You must have let in a dozen at least.” Sergey Ivanovitch could not endure flies, and in his own room he never opened the window except at night, and carefully kept the door shut.
You wouldn’t believe what a pleasure it is!
Kouzma has got everything ready for you.” “No, I don’t feel hungry even.
I had something to eat there.
But I’ll go and wash.” “Yes, go along, go along, and I’ll come to you directly,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head as he looked at his brother.
“Go along, make haste,” he added smiling, and gathering up his books, he prepared to go too.
He, too, felt suddenly good-humored and disinclined to leave his brother’s side.
Why, there was scarcely a drop.
Five minutes later the brothers met in the dining-room.
Although it seemed to Levin that he was not hungry, and he sat down to dinner simply so as not to hurt Kouzma’s feelings, yet when he began to eat the dinner struck him as extraordinarily good.
Sergey Ivanovitch watched him with a smile.
And mind you shut the doors.” The letter was from Oblonsky.
Oblonsky wrote to him from Petersburg: “I have had a letter from Dolly; she’s at Ergushovo, and everything seems going wrong there.
I will certainly ride over to her,” said Levin.
“Or we’ll go together.
She’s such a splendid woman, isn’t she?” “They’re not far from here, then?” “Twenty-five miles.
Capital, we’ll drive over.” “I shall be delighted,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, still smiling.
The sight of his younger brother’s appearance had immediately put him in a good humor.
“Well, you have an appetite!” he said, looking at his dark-red, sunburnt face and neck bent over the plate.
You can’t imagine what an effectual remedy it is for every sort of foolishness.
I want to enrich medicine with a new word: _Arbeitskur_.” “Well, but you don’t need it, I should fancy.” “No, but for all sorts of nervous invalids.” “Yes, it ought to be tried.
I had meant to come to the mowing to look at you, but it was so unbearably hot that I got no further than the forest.
I sat there a little, and went on by the forest to the village, met your old nurse, and sounded her as to the peasants’ view of you.
She said: ‘It’s not a gentleman’s work.’ Altogether, I fancy that in the people’s ideas there are very clear and definite notions of certain, as they call it, ‘gentlemanly’ lines of action.
And they don’t sanction the gentry’s moving outside bounds clearly laid down in their ideas.” “Maybe so; but anyway it’s a pleasure such as I have never known in my life.
Is there?” answered Levin.
Eh?” “Altogether,” pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, “you’re satisfied with your day?” “Quite satisfied.
And such a splendid old man I made friends with there!
You can’t fancy how delightful he was!” “Well, so you’re content with your day.
First, I solved two chess problems, and one a very pretty one—a pawn opening.
And then—I thought over our conversation yesterday.” “Eh! our conversation yesterday?” said Levin, blissfully dropping his eyelids and drawing deep breaths after finishing his dinner, and absolutely incapable of recalling what their conversation yesterday was about.
Our difference of opinion amounts to this, that you make the mainspring self-interest, while I suppose that interest in the common weal is bound to exist in every man of a certain degree of advancement.
Possibly you are right too, that action founded on material interest would be more desirable.
You are altogether, as the French say, too _primesautière_ a nature; you must have intense, energetic action, or nothing.” Levin listened to his brother and did not understand a single word, and did not want to understand.
He was only afraid his brother might ask him some question which would make it evident he had not heard.
“So that’s what I think it is, my dear boy,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, touching him on the shoulder.
I won’t stand up for my view,” answered Levin, with a guilty, childlike smile.
“Whatever was it I was disputing about?” he wondered.
Only I must go round to the counting house and see to things.” He got up, stretching and smiling.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled too.
“If you want to go out, let’s go together,” he said, disinclined to be parted from his brother, who seemed positively breathing out freshness and energy.
“Come, we’ll go to the counting house, if you have to go there.” “Oh, heavens!” shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey Ivanovitch was quite frightened.
“What, what is the matter?” “How’s Agafea Mihalovna’s hand?” said Levin, slapping himself on the head.
“I’d positively forgotten her even.” “It’s much better.” “Well, anyway I’ll run down to her.
Before you’ve time to get your hat on, I’ll be back.” And he ran downstairs, clattering with his heels like a spring-rattle.
Meanwhile Dolly and the children had moved into the country, to cut down expenses as much as possible.
She had gone to Ergushovo, the estate that had been her dowry, and the one where in spring the forest had been sold.
It was nearly forty miles from Levin’s Pokrovskoe.
The big, old house at Ergushovo had been pulled down long ago, and the old prince had had the lodge done up and built on to.
Twenty years before, when Dolly was a child, the lodge had been roomy and comfortable, though, like all lodges, it stood sideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the south.
But by now this lodge was old and dilapidated.
When Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down in the spring to sell the forest, Dolly had begged him to look over the house and order what repairs might be needed.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, like all unfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous for his wife’s comfort, and he had himself looked over the house, and given instructions about everything that he considered necessary.
What he considered necessary was to cover all the furniture with cretonne, to put up curtains, to weed the garden, to make a little bridge on the pond, and to plant flowers.
But he forgot many other essential matters, the want of which greatly distressed Darya Alexandrovna later on.
In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s efforts to be an attentive father and husband, he never could keep in his mind that he had a wife and children.
He had bachelor tastes, and it was in accordance with them that he shaped his life.
On his return to Moscow he informed his wife with pride that everything was ready, that the house would be a little paradise, and that he advised her most certainly to go.
His wife’s staying away in the country was very agreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitch from every point of view: it did the children good, it decreased expenses, and it left him more at liberty.
Darya Alexandrovna regarded staying in the country for the summer as essential for the children, especially for the little girl, who had not succeeded in regaining her strength after the scarlatina, and also as a means of escaping the petty humiliations, the little bills owing to the wood-merchant, the fishmonger, the shoemaker, which made her miserable.
Besides this, she was pleased to go away to the country because she was dreaming of getting her sister Kitty to stay with her there.
Kitty was to be back from abroad in the middle of the summer, and bathing had been prescribed for her.
Kitty wrote that no prospect was so alluring as to spend the summer with Dolly at Ergushovo, full of childish associations for both of them.
The first days of her existence in the country were very hard for Dolly.
She used to stay in the country as a child, and the impression she had retained of it was that the country was a refuge from all the unpleasantness of the town, that life there, though not luxurious—Dolly could easily make up her mind to that—was cheap and comfortable; that there was plenty of everything, everything was cheap, everything could be got, and children were happy.
But now coming to the country as the head of a family, she perceived that it was all utterly unlike what she had fancied.
The day after their arrival there was a heavy fall of rain, and in the night the water came through in the corridor and in the nursery, so that the beds had to be carried into the drawing-room.
There was no kitchen maid to be found; of the nine cows, it appeared from the words of the cowherd-woman that some were about to calve, others had just calved, others were old, and others again hard-uddered; there was not butter nor milk enough even for the children.
They could get no fowls; old, purplish, stringy cocks were all they had for roasting and boiling.
Impossible to get women to scrub the floors—all were potato-hoeing.
Driving was out of the question, because one of the horses was restive, and bolted in the shafts.
There was no place where they could bathe; the whole of the river-bank was trampled by the cattle and open to the road; even walks were impossible, for the cattle strayed into the garden through a gap in the hedge, and there was one terrible bull, who bellowed, and therefore might be expected to gore somebody.
There were no proper cupboards for their clothes; what cupboards there were either would not close at all, or burst open whenever anyone passed by them.
There were no pots and pans; there was no copper in the washhouse, nor even an ironing-board in the maids’ room.
Finding instead of peace and rest all these, from her point of view, fearful calamities, Darya Alexandrovna was at first in despair.
She exerted herself to the utmost, felt the hopelessness of the position, and was every instant suppressing the tears that started into her eyes.
The bailiff, a retired quartermaster, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had taken a fancy to and had appointed bailiff on account of his handsome and respectful appearance as a hall-porter, showed no sympathy for Darya Alexandrovna’s woes.
He said respectfully, “nothing can be done, the peasants are such a wretched lot,” and did nothing to help her.
The position seemed hopeless.
But in the Oblonskys’ household, as in all families indeed, there was one inconspicuous but most valuable and useful person, Marya Philimonovna.
She soothed her mistress, assured her that everything would _come round_ (it was her expression, and Matvey had borrowed it from her), and without fuss or hurry proceeded to set to work herself.
She had immediately made friends with the bailiff’s wife, and on the very first day she drank tea with her and the bailiff under the acacias, and reviewed all the circumstances of the position.
Very soon Marya Philimonovna had established her club, so to say, under the acacias, and there it was, in this club, consisting of the bailiff’s wife, the village elder, and the counting-house clerk, that the difficulties of existence were gradually smoothed away, and in a week’s time everything actually had come round.
“Just see, now, and you were quite in despair,” said Marya Philimonovna, pointing to the ironing-board.
Lily began to bathe, and Darya Alexandrovna began to realize, if only in part, her expectations, if not of a peaceful, at least of a comfortable, life in the country.
Peaceful with six children Darya Alexandrovna could not be.
One would fall ill, another might easily become so, a third would be without something necessary, a fourth would show symptoms of a bad disposition, and so on.
But these cares and anxieties were for Darya Alexandrovna the sole happiness possible.
And besides, hard though it was for the mother to bear the dread of illness, the illnesses themselves, and the grief of seeing signs of evil propensities in her children—the children themselves were even now repaying her in small joys for her sufferings.
Those joys were so small that they passed unnoticed, like gold in sand, and at bad moments she could see nothing but the pain, nothing but sand; but there were good moments too when she saw nothing but the joy, nothing but gold.
Now in the solitude of the country, she began to be more and more frequently aware of those joys.
Often, looking at them, she would make every possible effort to persuade herself that she was mistaken, that she as a mother was partial to her children.
All the same, she could not help saying to herself that she had charming children, all six of them in different ways, but a set of children such as is not often to be met with, and she was happy in them, and proud of them.
Chapter 8 Towards the end of May, when everything had been more or less satisfactorily arranged, she received her husband’s answer to her complaints of the disorganized state of things in the country.
He wrote begging her forgiveness for not having thought of everything before, and promised to come down at the first chance.
This chance did not present itself, and till the beginning of June Darya Alexandrovna stayed alone in the country.
Peter’s week Darya Alexandrovna drove to mass for all her children to take the sacrament.
Darya Alexandrovna in her intimate, philosophical talks with her sister, her mother, and her friends very often astonished them by the freedom of her views in regard to religion.
She had a strange religion of transmigration of souls all her own, in which she had firm faith, troubling herself little about the dogmas of the Church.
But in her family she was strict in carrying out all that was required by the Church—and not merely in order to set an example, but with all her heart in it.
The fact that the children had not been at the sacrament for nearly a year worried her extremely, and with the full approval and sympathy of Marya Philimonovna she decided that this should take place now in the summer.
For several days before, Darya Alexandrovna was busily deliberating on how to dress all the children.
Frocks were made or altered and washed, seams and flounces were let out, buttons were sewn on, and ribbons got ready.
One dress, Tanya’s, which the English governess had undertaken, cost Darya Alexandrovna much loss of temper.
The English governess in altering it had made the seams in the wrong place, had taken up the sleeves too much, and altogether spoilt the dress.
It was so narrow on Tanya’s shoulders that it was quite painful to look at her.
But Marya Philimonovna had the happy thought of putting in gussets, and adding a little shoulder-cape.
The dress was set right, but there was nearly a quarrel with the English governess.
On the morning, however, all was happily arranged, and towards ten o’clock—the time at which they had asked the priest to wait for them for the mass—the children in their new dresses, with beaming faces, stood on the step before the carriage waiting for their mother.
To the carriage, instead of the restive Raven, they had harnessed, thanks to the representations of Marya Philimonovna, the bailiff’s horse, Brownie, and Darya Alexandrovna, delayed by anxiety over her own attire, came out and got in, dressed in a white muslin gown.
Darya Alexandrovna had done her hair, and dressed with care and excitement.
Later on, as she got older, dress became more and more distasteful to her.
But now she began to feel pleasure and interest in dress again.
Now she did not dress for her own sake, not for the sake of her own beauty, but simply that as the mother of those exquisite creatures she might not spoil the general effect.
And looking at herself for the last time in the looking-glass she was satisfied with herself.
In the church there was no one but the peasants, the servants and their women-folk.
The children were not only beautiful to look at in their smart little dresses, but they were charming in the way they behaved.
Aliosha, it is true, did not stand quite correctly; he kept turning round, trying to look at his little jacket from behind; but all the same he was wonderfully sweet.
And the smallest, Lily, was bewitching in her naïve astonishment at everything, and it was difficult not to smile when, after taking the sacrament, she said in English, “Please, some more.” On the way home the children felt that something solemn had happened, and were very sedate.
Everything went happily at home too; but at lunch Grisha began whistling, and, what was worse, was disobedient to the English governess, and was forbidden to have any tart.
Darya Alexandrovna would not have let things go so far on such a day had she been present; but she had to support the English governess’s authority, and she upheld her decision that Grisha should have no tart.
Grisha cried, declaring that Nikolinka had whistled too, and he was not punished, and that he wasn’t crying for the tart—he didn’t care—but at being unjustly treated.
This was really too tragic, and Darya Alexandrovna made up her mind to persuade the English governess to forgive Grisha, and she went to speak to her.
But on the way, as she passed the drawing-room, she beheld a scene, filling her heart with such pleasure that the tears came into her eyes, and she forgave the delinquent herself.
The culprit was sitting at the window in the corner of the drawing-room; beside him was standing Tanya with a plate.
On the pretext of wanting to give some dinner to her dolls, she had asked the governess’s permission to take her share of tart to the nursery, and had taken it instead to her brother.
While still weeping over the injustice of his punishment, he was eating the tart, and kept saying through his sobs, “Eat yourself; let’s eat it together ... together.” Tanya had at first been under the influence of her pity for Grisha, then of a sense of her noble action, and tears were standing in her eyes too; but she did not refuse, and ate her share.
On catching sight of their mother they were dismayed, but, looking into her face, they saw they were not doing wrong.
They burst out laughing, and, with their mouths full of tart, they began wiping their smiling lips with their hands, and smearing their radiant faces all over with tears and jam.
Grisha!” said their mother, trying to save the frock, but with tears in her eyes, smiling a blissful, rapturous smile.
The new frocks were taken off, and orders were given for the little girls to have their blouses put on, and the boys their old jackets, and the wagonette to be harnessed; with Brownie, to the bailiff’s annoyance, again in the shafts, to drive out for mushroom picking and bathing.
A roar of delighted shrieks arose in the nursery, and never ceased till they had set off for the bathing-place.
They gathered a whole basketful of mushrooms; even Lily found a birch mushroom.
It had always happened before that Miss Hoole found them and pointed them out to her; but this time she found a big one quite of herself, and there was a general scream of delight, “Lily has found a mushroom!” Then they reached the river, put the horses under the birch trees, and went to the bathing-place.
The coachman, Terenty, fastened the horses, who kept whisking away the flies, to a tree, and, treading down the grass, lay down in the shade of a birch and smoked his shag, while the never-ceasing shrieks of delight of the children floated across to him from the bathing-place.
To go over all those fat little legs, pulling on their stockings, to take in her arms and dip those little naked bodies, and to hear their screams of delight and alarm, to see the breathless faces with wide-open, scared, and happy eyes of all her splashing cherubs, was a great pleasure to her.
When half the children had been dressed, some peasant women in holiday dress, out picking herbs, came up to the bathing-shed and stopped shyly.
Marya Philimonovna called one of them and handed her a sheet and a shirt that had dropped into the water for her to dry them, and Darya Alexandrovna began to talk to the women.
At first they laughed behind their hands and did not understand her questions, but soon they grew bolder and began to talk, winning Darya Alexandrovna’s heart at once by the genuine admiration of the children that they showed.
“My, what a beauty! as white as sugar,” said one, admiring Tanitchka, and shaking her head; “but thin....” “Yes, she has been ill.” “And so they’ve been bathing you too,” said another to the baby.
“No; he’s only three months old,” answered Darya Alexandrovna with pride.
“You don’t say so!” “And have you any children?” “I’ve had four; I’ve two living—a boy and a girl.
I weaned her last carnival.” “How old is she?” “Why, two years old.” “Why did you nurse her so long?” “It’s our custom; for three fasts....” And the conversation became most interesting to Darya Alexandrovna.
Darya Alexandrovna felt disinclined to leave the peasant women, so interesting to her was their conversation, so completely identical were all their interests.
What pleased her most of all was that she saw clearly what all the women admired more than anything was her having so many children, and such fine ones.
The peasant women even made Darya Alexandrovna laugh, and offended the English governess, because she was the cause of the laughter she did not understand.
One of the younger women kept staring at the Englishwoman, who was dressing after all the rest, and when she put on her third petticoat she could not refrain from the remark, “My, she keeps putting on and putting on, and she’ll never have done!” she said, and they all went off into roars.
She was glad to see him at any time, but at this moment she was specially glad he should see her in all her glory.
No one was better able to appreciate her grandeur than Levin.
Seeing her, he found himself face to face with one of the pictures of his daydream of family life.
“You’re like a hen with your chickens, Darya Alexandrovna.” “Ah, how glad I am to see you!” she said, holding out her hand to him.
I got a note from Stiva that you were here.” “From Stiva?” Darya Alexandrovna asked with surprise.
“Yes; he writes that you are here, and that he thinks you might allow me to be of use to you,” said Levin, and as he said it he became suddenly embarrassed, and, stopping abruptly, he walked on in silence by the wagonette, snapping off the buds of the lime trees and nibbling them.
He was embarrassed through a sense that Darya Alexandrovna would be annoyed by receiving from an outsider help that should by rights have come from her own husband.
Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not like this little way of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s of foisting his domestic duties on others.
It was just for this fineness of perception, for this delicacy, that Darya Alexandrovna liked Levin.
“I know, of course,” said Levin, “that that simply means that you would like to see me, and I’m exceedingly glad.
Though I can fancy that, used to town housekeeping as you are, you must feel in the wilds here, and if there’s anything wanted, I’m altogether at your disposal.” “Oh, no!” said Dolly.
“At first things were rather uncomfortable, but now we’ve settled everything capitally—thanks to my old nurse,” she said, indicating Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing that they were speaking of her, smiled brightly and cordially to Levin.
Children, who’d like to race the horses with me?” The children knew Levin very little, and could not remember when they had seen him, but they experienced in regard to him none of that strange feeling of shyness and hostility which children so often experience towards hypocritical, grown-up people, and for which they are so often and miserably punished.
Hypocrisy in anything whatever may deceive the cleverest and most penetrating man, but the least wide-awake of children recognizes it, and is revolted by it, however ingeniously it may be disguised.
Whatever faults Levin had, there was not a trace of hypocrisy in him, and so the children showed him the same friendliness that they saw in their mother’s face.
On his invitation, the two elder ones at once jumped out to him and ran with him as simply as they would have done with their nurse or Miss Hoole or their mother.
Lily, too, began begging to go to him, and her mother handed her to him; he sat her on his shoulder and ran along with her.
“Don’t be afraid, don’t be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna!” he said, smiling good-humoredly to the mother; “there’s no chance of my hurting or dropping her.” And, looking at his strong, agile, assiduously careful and needlessly wary movements, the mother felt her mind at rest, and smiled gaily and approvingly as she watched him.
Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya Alexandrovna, with whom he was in sympathy, Levin was in a mood not infrequent with him, of childlike light-heartedness that she particularly liked in him.
As he ran with the children, he taught them gymnastic feats, set Miss Hoole laughing with his queer English accent, and talked to Darya Alexandrovna of his pursuits in the country.
After dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, sitting alone with him on the balcony, began to speak of Kitty.
“You know, Kitty’s coming here, and is going to spend the summer with me.” “Really,” he said, flushing, and at once, to change the conversation, he said: “Then I’ll send you two cows, shall I?
We can manage very well now.” “Oh, well, then, I’ll have a look at your cows, and if you’ll allow me, I’ll give directions about their food.
Everything depends on their food.” And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to Darya Alexandrovna the theory of cow-keeping, based on the principle that the cow is simply a machine for the transformation of food into milk, and so on.
He talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more of Kitty, and, at the same time, was afraid of hearing it.
He dreaded the breaking up of the inward peace he had gained with such effort.
“Yes, but still all this has to be looked after, and who is there to look after it?” Darya Alexandrovna responded, without interest.
She had by now got her household matters so satisfactorily arranged, thanks to Marya Philimonovna, that she was disinclined to make any change in them; besides, she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge of farming.
General principles, as to the cow being a machine for the production of milk, she looked on with suspicion.
It seemed to her that such principles could only be a hindrance in farm management.
It all seemed to her a far simpler matter: all that was needed, as Marya Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and Whitebreast more food and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchen slops to the laundry maid’s cow.
But general propositions as to feeding on meal and on grass were doubtful and obscure.
And, what was most important, she wanted to talk about Kitty.
Chapter 10 “Kitty writes to me that there’s nothing she longs for so much as quiet and solitude,” Dolly said after the silence that had followed.
“And how is she—better?” Levin asked in agitation.
I never believed her lungs were affected.” “Oh, I’m very glad!” said Levin, and Dolly fancied she saw something touching, helpless, in his face as he said this and looked silently into her face.
“Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling her kindly and rather mocking smile, “why is it you are angry with Kitty?” “I?
Why was it you did not come to see us nor them when you were in Moscow?” “Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, blushing up to the roots of his hair, “I wonder really that with your kind heart you don’t feel this.
How it is you feel no pity for me, if nothing else, when you know....” “What do I know?” “You know I made an offer and that I was refused,” said Levin, and all the tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty a minute before was replaced by a feeling of anger for the slight he had suffered.
“What makes you suppose I know?” “Because everybody knows it....” “That’s just where you are mistaken; I did not know it, though I had guessed it was so.” “Well, now you know it.” “All I knew was that something had happened that made her dreadfully miserable, and that she begged me never to speak of it.
And if she would not tell me, she would certainly not speak of it to anyone else.
Tell me.” “I have told you.” “When was it?” “When I was at their house the last time.” “Do you know that,” said Darya Alexandrovna, “I am awfully, awfully sorry for her.
You suffer only from pride....” “Perhaps so,” said Levin, “but....” She interrupted him.
Now I see it all.” “Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me,” he said, getting up.
“Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we meet again.” “No, wait a minute,” she said, clutching him by the sleeve.
“Wait a minute, sit down.” “Please, please, don’t let us talk of this,” he said, sitting down, and at the same time feeling rise up and stir within his heart a hope he had believed to be buried.
“If I did not like you,” she said, and tears came into her eyes; “if I did not know you, as I do know you....” The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up and took possession of Levin’s heart.
“Yes, I understand it all now,” said Darya Alexandrovna.
“You can’t understand it; for you men, who are free and make your own choice, it’s always clear whom you love.
She is expected to make her choice, and yet she cannot choose, she can only answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’” “Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky,” thought Levin, and the dead thing that had come to life within him died again, and only weighed on his heart and set it aching.
“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, “that’s how one chooses a new dress or some purchase or other, not love.
And there can be no repeating it.” “Ah, pride, pride!” said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising him for the baseness of this feeling in comparison with that other feeling which only women know.
“At the time when you made Kitty an offer she was just in a position in which she could not answer.
Supposing she had been older ...
I, for instance, in her place could have felt no doubt.
I always disliked him, and so it has turned out.” Levin recalled Kitty’s answer.
She had said: “_No, that cannot be_....” “Darya Alexandrovna,” he said dryly, “I appreciate your confidence in me; I believe you are making a mistake.
But whether I am right or wrong, that pride you so despise makes any thought of Katerina Alexandrovna out of the question for me,—you understand, utterly out of the question.” “I will only say one thing more: you know that I am speaking of my sister, whom I love as I love my own children.
But he’s dead, dead, dead!...” “How absurd you are!” said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with mournful tenderness at Levin’s excitement.
“Yes, I see it all more and more clearly,” she went on musingly.
Of course I won’t avoid meeting Katerina Alexandrovna, but as far as I can, I will try to save her the annoyance of my presence.” “You are very, very absurd,” repeated Darya Alexandrovna, looking with tenderness into his face.
“Where’s my spade, mamma?” “I speak French, and you must too.” The little girl tried to say it in French, but could not remember the French for spade; the mother prompted her, and then told her in French where to look for the spade.
And this made a disagreeable impression on Levin.
Everything in Darya Alexandrovna’s house and children struck him now as by no means so charming as a little while before.
“And what does she talk French with the children for?” he thought; “how unnatural and false it is!
And the children feel it so: Learning French and unlearning sincerity,” he thought to himself, unaware that Darya Alexandrovna had thought all that over twenty times already, and yet, even at the cost of some loss of sincerity, believed it necessary to teach her children French in that way.
Do stay a little.” Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished, and he felt ill at ease.
After tea he went out into the hall to order his horses to be put in, and, when he came back, he found Darya Alexandrovna greatly disturbed, with a troubled face, and tears in her eyes.
While Levin had been outside, an incident had occurred which had utterly shattered all the happiness she had been feeling that day, and her pride in her children.
Grisha and Tanya had been fighting over a ball.
Darya Alexandrovna, hearing a scream in the nursery, ran in and saw a terrible sight.
Tanya was pulling Grisha’s hair, while he, with a face hideous with rage, was beating her with his fists wherever he could get at her.
Something snapped in Darya Alexandrovna’s heart when she saw this.
It was as if darkness had swooped down upon her life; she felt that these children of hers, that she was so proud of, were not merely most ordinary, but positively bad, ill-bred children, with coarse, brutal propensities—wicked children.
She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not speak to Levin of her misery.
Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her, saying that it showed nothing bad, that all children fight; but, even as he said it, he was thinking in his heart: “No, I won’t be artificial and talk French with my children; but my children won’t be like that.
All one has to do is not spoil children, not to distort their nature, and they’ll be delightful.
No, my children won’t be like that.” He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try to keep him.
Chapter 11 In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin’s sister’s estate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came to Levin to report on how things were going there and on the hay.
The chief source of income on his sister’s estate was from the riverside meadows.
In former years the hay had been bought by the peasants for twenty roubles the three acres.
When Levin took over the management of the estate, he thought on examining the grasslands that they were worth more, and he fixed the price at twenty-five roubles the three acres.
The peasants would not give that price, and, as Levin suspected, kept off other purchasers.
Then Levin had driven over himself, and arranged to have the grass cut, partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a certain proportion of the crop.
His own peasants put every hindrance they could in the way of this new arrangement, but it was carried out, and the first year the meadows had yielded a profit almost double.
The previous year—which was the third year—the peasants had maintained the same opposition to the arrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system.
This year the peasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the hay crop, and the village elder had come now to announce that the hay had been cut, and that, fearing rain, they had invited the counting-house clerk over, had divided the crop in his presence, and had raked together eleven stacks as the owner’s share.
From the vague answers to his question how much hay had been cut on the principal meadow, from the hurry of the village elder who had made the division, not asking leave, from the whole tone of the peasant, Levin perceived that there was something wrong in the division of the hay, and made up his mind to drive over himself to look into the matter.
Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse at the cottage of an old friend of his, the husband of his brother’s wet-nurse, Levin went to see the old man in his bee-house, wanting to find out from him the truth about the hay.
Parmenitch, a talkative, comely old man, gave Levin a very warm welcome, showed him all he was doing, told him everything about his bees and the swarms of that year; but gave vague and unwilling answers to Levin’s inquiries about the mowing.
This confirmed Levin still more in his suspicions.
He went to the hay fields and examined the stacks.
The haystacks could not possibly contain fifty wagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants Levin ordered the wagons that had carried the hay to be brought up directly, to lift one stack, and carry it into the barn.
In spite of the village elder’s assertions about the compressibility of hay, and its having settled down in the stacks, and his swearing that everything had been done in the fear of God, Levin stuck to his point that the hay had been divided without his orders, and that, therefore, he would not accept that hay as fifty loads to a stack.
After a prolonged dispute the matter was decided by the peasants taking these eleven stacks, reckoning them as fifty loads each.
The arguments and the division of the haycocks lasted the whole afternoon.
When the last of the hay had been divided, Levin, intrusting the superintendence of the rest to the counting-house clerk, sat down on a haycock marked off by a stake of willow, and looked admiringly at the meadow swarming with peasants.
In front of him, in the bend of the river beyond the marsh, moved a bright-colored line of peasant women, and the scattered hay was being rapidly formed into gray winding rows over the pale green stubble.
After the women came the men with pitchforks, and from the gray rows there were growing up broad, high, soft haycocks.
To the left, carts were rumbling over the meadow that had been already cleared, and one after another the haycocks vanished, flung up in huge forkfuls, and in their place there were rising heavy cartloads of fragrant hay hanging over the horses’ hind-quarters.
What hay it’ll be!” said an old man, squatting down beside Levin.
It’s like scattering grain to the ducks, the way they pick it up!” he added, pointing to the growing haycocks.
“Since dinner time they’ve carried a good half of it.” “The last load, eh?” he shouted to a young peasant, who drove by, standing in the front of an empty cart, shaking the cord reins.
Philip’s day.” “Any children?” “Children indeed!
Why, for over a year he was innocent as a babe himself, and bashful too,” answered the old man.
It’s as fragrant as tea!” he repeated, wishing to change the subject.
Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and his wife.
Ivan Parmenov was standing on the cart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down the huge bundles of hay, which his pretty young wife deftly handed up to him, at first in armfuls, and then on the pitchfork.
The young wife worked easily, merrily, and dexterously.
First she gathered it together, stuck the fork into it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the whole weight of her body on it, and at once with a bend of her back under the red belt she drew herself up, and arching her full bosom under the white smock, with a smart turn swung the fork in her arms, and flung the bundle of hay high onto the cart.
Ivan, obviously doing his best to save her every minute of unnecessary labor, made haste, opening his arms to clutch the bundle and lay it in the cart.
As she raked together what was left of the hay, the young wife shook off the bits of hay that had fallen on her neck, and straightening the red kerchief that had dropped forward over her white brow, not browned like her face by the sun, she crept under the cart to tie up the load.
Ivan directed her how to fasten the cord to the cross-piece, and at something she said he laughed aloud.
In the expressions of both faces was to be seen vigorous, young, freshly awakened love.
The young wife flung the rake up on the load, and with a bold step, swinging her arms, she went to join the women, who were forming a ring for the haymakers’ dance.
The peasant women, with their rakes on their shoulders, gay with bright flowers, and chattering with ringing, merry voices, walked behind the hay cart.
One wild untrained female voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through a verse, and then the same verse was taken up and repeated by half a hundred strong healthy voices, of all sorts, coarse and fine, singing in unison.
The women, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and he felt as though a storm were swooping down upon him with a thunder of merriment.
The storm swooped down, enveloped him and the haycock on which he was lying, and the other haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and the whole meadow and distant fields all seemed to be shaking and singing to the measures of this wild merry song with its shouts and whistles and clapping.
Levin felt envious of this health and mirthfulness; he longed to take part in the expression of this joy of life.
When the peasants, with their singing, had vanished out of sight and hearing, a weary feeling of despondency at his own isolation, his physical inactivity, his alienation from this world, came over Levin.
Some of the very peasants who had been most active in wrangling with him over the hay, some whom he had treated with contumely, and who had tried to cheat him, those very peasants had greeted him good-humoredly, and evidently had not, were incapable of having any feeling of rancor against him, any regret, any recollection even of having tried to deceive him.
God gave the day, God gave the strength.
And the day and the strength were consecrated to labor, and that labor was its own reward.
These were idle considerations—beside the point.
The old man who had been sitting beside him had long ago gone home; the people had all separated.
Those who lived near had gone home, while those who came from far were gathered into a group for supper, and to spend the night in the meadow.
Levin, unobserved by the peasants, still lay on the haycock, and still looked on and listened and mused.
The peasants who remained for the night in the meadow scarcely slept all the short summer night.
At first there was the sound of merry talk and laughing all together over the supper, then singing again and laughter.
All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but lightness of heart.
Nothing was to be heard but the night sounds of the frogs that never ceased in the marsh, and the horses snorting in the mist that rose over the meadow before the morning.
How am I to set about it?” he said to himself, trying to express to himself all the thoughts and feelings he had passed through in that brief night.
All the thoughts and feelings he had passed through fell into three separate trains of thought.
One was the renunciation of his old life, of his utterly useless education.
This renunciation gave him satisfaction, and was easy and simple.
Another series of thoughts and mental images related to the life he longed to live now.
The simplicity, the purity, the sanity of this life he felt clearly, and he was convinced he would find in it the content, the peace, and the dignity, of the lack of which he was so miserably conscious.
But a third series of ideas turned upon the question how to effect this transition from the old life to the new.
Have work and the necessity of work?
Become a member of a peasant community?
“It’s all ever so much simpler and better....” “How beautiful!” he thought, looking at the strange, as it were, mother-of-pearl shell of white fleecy cloudlets resting right over his head in the middle of the sky.
“How exquisite it all is in this exquisite night!
Yes, and so imperceptibly too my views of life changed!” He went out of the meadow and walked along the highroad towards the village.
The gloomy moment had come that usually precedes the dawn, the full triumph of light over darkness.
Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the ground.
Someone coming,” he thought, catching the tinkle of bells, and lifting his head.
Forty paces from him a carriage with four horses harnessed abreast was driving towards him along the grassy road on which he was walking.
The shaft-horses were tilted against the shafts by the ruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on the box held the shaft over the ruts, so that the wheels ran on the smooth part of the road.
This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could be, he gazed absently at the coach.
In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and at the window, evidently only just awake, sat a young girl holding in both hands the ribbons of a white cap.
At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing, the truthful eyes glanced at him.
She recognized him, and her face lighted up with wondering delight.
He could not be mistaken.
There was only one creature in the world that could concentrate for him all the brightness and meaning of life.
He understood that she was driving to Ergushovo from the railway station.
And everything that had been stirring Levin during that sleepless night, all the resolutions he had made, all vanished at once.
He recalled with horror his dreams of marrying a peasant girl.
There only, in the carriage that had crossed over to the other side of the road, and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he find the solution of the riddle of his life, which had weighed so agonizingly upon him of late.
The sound of the carriage-springs was no longer audible, the bells could scarcely be heard.
The barking of dogs showed the carriage had reached the village, and all that was left was the empty fields all round, the village in front, and he himself isolated and apart from it all, wandering lonely along the deserted highroad.
He glanced at the sky, expecting to find there the cloud shell he had been admiring and taking as the symbol of the ideas and feelings of that night.
There, in the remote heights above, a mysterious change had been accomplished.
There was no trace of shell, and there was stretched over fully half the sky an even cover of tiny and ever tinier cloudlets.
The sky had grown blue and bright; and with the same softness, but with the same remoteness, it met his questioning gaze.
“No,” he said to himself, “however good that life of simplicity and toil may be, I cannot go back to it.
I love _her_.” Chapter 13 None but those who were most intimate with Alexey Alexandrovitch knew that, while on the surface the coldest and most reasonable of men, he had one weakness quite opposed to the general trend of his character.
Alexey Alexandrovitch could not hear or see a child or woman crying without being moved.
The sight of tears threw him into a state of nervous agitation, and he utterly lost all power of reflection.
The chief secretary of his department and his private secretary were aware of this, and used to warn women who came with petitions on no account to give way to tears, if they did not want to ruin their chances.
And as a fact, in such cases the emotional disturbance set up in Alexey Alexandrovitch by the sight of tears found expression in hasty anger.
Kindly leave the room!” he would commonly cry in such cases.
When returning from the races Anna had informed him of her relations with Vronsky, and immediately afterwards had burst into tears, hiding her face in her hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for all the fury aroused in him against her, was aware at the same time of a rush of that emotional disturbance always produced in him by tears.
Conscious of it, and conscious that any expression of his feelings at that minute would be out of keeping with the position, he tried to suppress every manifestation of life in himself, and so neither stirred nor looked at her.
This was what had caused that strange expression of deathlike rigidity in his face which had so impressed Anna.
When they reached the house he helped her to get out of the carriage, and making an effort to master himself, took leave of her with his usual urbanity, and uttered that phrase that bound him to nothing; he said that tomorrow he would let her know his decision.
His wife’s words, confirming his worst suspicions, had sent a cruel pang to the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch.
That pang was intensified by the strange feeling of physical pity for her set up by her tears.
But when he was all alone in the carriage Alexey Alexandrovitch, to his surprise and delight, felt complete relief both from this pity and from the doubts and agonies of jealousy.
He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a tooth out after suffering long from toothache.
After a fearful agony and a sense of something huge, bigger than the head itself, being torn out of his jaw, the sufferer, hardly able to believe in his own good luck, feels all at once that what has so long poisoned his existence and enchained his attention, exists no longer, and that he can live and think again, and take interest in other things besides his tooth.
This feeling Alexey Alexandrovitch was experiencing.
The agony had been strange and terrible, but now it was over; he felt that he could live again and think of something other than his wife.
“No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt woman.
And it actually seemed to him that he always had seen it: he recalled incidents of their past life, in which he had never seen anything wrong before—now these incidents proved clearly that she had always been a corrupt woman.
She does not exist for me....” Everything relating to her and her son, towards whom his sentiments were as much changed as towards her, ceased to interest him.
The only thing that interested him now was the question of in what way he could best, with most propriety and comfort for himself, and thus with most justice, extricate himself from the mud with which she had spattered him in her fall, and then proceed along his path of active, honorable, and useful existence.
“I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a contemptible woman has committed a crime.
I have only to find the best way out of the difficult position in which she has placed me.
And I shall find it,” he said to himself, frowning more and more.
“I’m not the first nor the last.” And to say nothing of historical instances dating from the “Fair Helen” of Menelaus, recently revived in the memory of all, a whole list of contemporary examples of husbands with unfaithful wives in the highest society rose before Alexey Alexandrovitch’s imagination.
“Daryalov, Poltavsky, Prince Karibanov, Count Paskudin, Dram....
Semyonov, Tchagin, Sigonin,” Alexey Alexandrovitch remembered.
“It is a misfortune which may befall anyone.
And this misfortune has befallen me.
The only thing to be done is to make the best of the position.” And he began passing in review the methods of proceeding of men who had been in the same position that he was in.
“Daryalov fought a duel....” The duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of Alexey Alexandrovitch in his youth, just because he was physically a coward, and was himself well aware of the fact.
Alexey Alexandrovitch could not without horror contemplate the idea of a pistol aimed at himself, and had never made use of any weapon in his life.
This horror had in his youth set him pondering on dueling, and picturing himself in a position in which he would have to expose his life to danger.
“There’s no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it’s not the same in England) that very many”—and among these were those whose opinion Alexey Alexandrovitch particularly valued—“look favorably on the duel; but what result is attained by it?
Suppose I call him out,” Alexey Alexandrovitch went on to himself, and vividly picturing the night he would spend after the challenge, and the pistol aimed at him, he shuddered, and knew that he never would do it—“suppose I call him out.
Suppose I am taught,” he went on musing, “to shoot; I press the trigger,” he said to himself, closing his eyes, “and it turns out I have killed him,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, and he shook his head as though to dispel such silly ideas.
“What sense is there in murdering a man in order to define one’s relation to a guilty wife and son?
But what is more probable and what would doubtless occur—I should be killed or wounded.
I, the innocent person, should be the victim—killed or wounded.
It’s even more senseless.
But apart from that, a challenge to fight would be an act hardly honest on my side.
Don’t I know perfectly well that my friends would never allow me to fight a duel—would never allow the life of a statesman, needed by Russia, to be exposed to danger?
Knowing perfectly well beforehand that the matter would never come to real danger, it would amount to my simply trying to gain a certain sham reputation by such a challenge.
That would be dishonest, that would be false, that would be deceiving myself and others.
A duel is quite irrational, and no one expects it of me.
My aim is simply to safeguard my reputation, which is essential for the uninterrupted pursuit of my public duties.” Official duties, which had always been of great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes, seemed of special importance to his mind at this moment.
Considering and rejecting the duel, Alexey Alexandrovitch turned to divorce—another solution selected by several of the husbands he remembered.
Passing in mental review all the instances he knew of divorces (there were plenty of them in the very highest society with which he was very familiar), Alexey Alexandrovitch could not find a single example in which the object of divorce was that which he had in view.
In all these instances the husband had practically ceded or sold his unfaithful wife, and the very party which, being in fault, had not the right to contract a fresh marriage, had formed counterfeit, pseudo-matrimonial ties with a self-styled husband.
In his own case, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that a legal divorce, that is to say, one in which only the guilty wife would be repudiated, was impossible of attainment.
He saw that the complex conditions of the life they led made the coarse proofs of his wife’s guilt, required by the law, out of the question; he saw that a certain refinement in that life would not admit of such proofs being brought forward, even if he had them, and that to bring forward such proofs would damage him in the public estimation more than it would her.
An attempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a public scandal, which would be a perfect godsend to his enemies for calumny and attacks on his high position in society.
His chief object, to define the position with the least amount of disturbance possible, would not be attained by divorce either.
Moreover, in the event of divorce, or even of an attempt to obtain a divorce, it was obvious that the wife broke off all relations with the husband and threw in her lot with the lover.
And in spite of the complete, as he supposed, contempt and indifference he now felt for his wife, at the bottom of his heart Alexey Alexandrovitch still had one feeling left in regard to her—a disinclination to see her free to throw in her lot with Vronsky, so that her crime would be to her advantage.
The mere notion of this so exasperated Alexey Alexandrovitch, that directly it rose to his mind he groaned with inward agony, and got up and changed his place in the carriage, and for a long while after, he sat with scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and bony legs in the fleecy rug.
“Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like Karibanov, Paskudin, and that good fellow Dram—that is, separate from one’s wife,” he went on thinking, when he had regained his composure.
But this step too presented the same drawback of public scandal as a divorce, and what was more, a separation, quite as much as a regular divorce, flung his wife into the arms of Vronsky.
“No, it’s out of the question, out of the question!” he said again, twisting his rug about him again.
“I cannot be unhappy, but neither she nor he ought to be happy.” The feeling of jealousy, which had tortured him during the period of uncertainty, had passed away at the instant when the tooth had been with agony extracted by his wife’s words.
But that feeling had been replaced by another, the desire, not merely that she should not be triumphant, but that she should get due punishment for her crime.
He did not acknowledge this feeling, but at the bottom of his heart he longed for her to suffer for having destroyed his peace of mind—his honor.
And going once again over the conditions inseparable from a duel, a divorce, a separation, and once again rejecting them, Alexey Alexandrovitch felt convinced that there was only one solution,—to keep her with him, concealing what had happened from the world, and using every measure in his power to break off the intrigue, and still more—though this he did not admit to himself—to punish her.
“By such a course only shall I be acting in accordance with the dictates of religion,” he told himself.
He was pleased to think that, even in such an important crisis in life, no one would be able to say that he had not acted in accordance with the principles of that religion whose banner he had always held aloft amid the general coolness and indifference.
As he pondered over subsequent developments, Alexey Alexandrovitch did not see, indeed, why his relations with his wife should not remain practically the same as before.
No doubt, she could never regain his esteem, but there was not, and there could not be, any sort of reason that his existence should be troubled, and that he should suffer because she was a bad and faithless wife.
“Yes, time will pass; time, which arranges all things, and the old relations will be reestablished,” Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself; “so far reestablished, that is, that I shall not be sensible of a break in the continuity of my life.
She is bound to be unhappy, but I am not to blame, and so I cannot be unhappy.” Chapter 14 As he neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not only adhered entirely to his decision, but was even composing in his head the letter he would write to his wife.
Going into the porter’s room, Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at the letters and papers brought from his office, and directed that they should be brought to him in his study.
“The horses can be taken out and I will see no one,” he said in answer to the porter, with a certain pleasure, indicative of his agreeable frame of mind, emphasizing the words, “see no one.” In his study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and down twice, and stopped at an immense writing-table, on which six candles had already been lighted by the valet who had preceded him.
He cracked his knuckles and sat down, sorting out his writing appurtenances.
He wrote without using any form of address to her, and wrote in French, making use of the plural “_vous_,” which has not the same note of coldness as the corresponding Russian form.
“At our last conversation, I notified you of my intention to communicate to you my decision in regard to the subject of that conversation.
Having carefully considered everything, I am writing now with the object of fulfilling that promise.
My decision is as follows.
Whatever your conduct may have been, I do not consider myself justified in breaking the ties in which we are bound by a Higher Power.
The family cannot be broken up by a whim, a caprice, or even by the sin of one of the partners in the marriage, and our life must go on as it has done in the past.
This is essential for me, for you, and for our son.
I am fully persuaded that you have repented and do repent of what has called forth the present letter, and that you will cooperate with me in eradicating the cause of our estrangement, and forgetting the past.
In the contrary event, you can conjecture what awaits you and your son.
All this I hope to discuss more in detail in a personal interview.
As the season is drawing to a close, I would beg you to return to Petersburg as quickly as possible, not later than Tuesday.
All necessary preparations shall be made for your arrival here.
I beg you to note that I attach particular significance to compliance with this request.
Karenin “_P.S._—I enclose the money which may be needed for your expenses.” He read the letter through and felt pleased with it, and especially that he had remembered to enclose money: there was not a harsh word, not a reproach in it, nor was there undue indulgence.
Folding the letter and smoothing it with a massive ivory knife, and putting it in an envelope with the money, he rang the bell with the gratification it always afforded him to use the well arranged appointments of his writing-table.
“Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna tomorrow at the summer villa,” he said, getting up.
“Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the study?” Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, and playing with the massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair, near which there had been placed ready for him a lamp and the French work on Egyptian hieroglyphics that he had begun.
Over the easy chair there hung in a gold frame an oval portrait of Anna, a fine painting by a celebrated artist.
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at it.
The unfathomable eyes gazed ironically and insolently at him.
Insufferably insolent and challenging was the effect in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes of the black lace about the head, admirably touched in by the painter, the black hair and handsome white hand with one finger lifted, covered with rings.
After looking at the portrait for a minute, Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered so that his lips quivered and he uttered the sound “brrr,” and turned away.
He tried to read, but he could not revive the very vivid interest he had felt before in Egyptian hieroglyphics.
He looked at the book and thought of something else.
He thought not of his wife, but of a complication that had arisen in his official life, which at the time constituted the chief interest of it.
He felt that he had penetrated more deeply than ever before into this intricate affair, and that he had originated a leading idea—he could say it without self-flattery—calculated to clear up the whole business, to strengthen him in his official career, to discomfit his enemies, and thereby to be of the greatest benefit to the government.
Directly the servant had set the tea and left the room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and went to the writing-table.
Moving into the middle of the table a portfolio of papers, with a scarcely perceptible smile of self-satisfaction, he took a pencil from a rack and plunged into the perusal of a complex report relating to the present complication.
It happened that the famous Commission of the 2nd of June had set on foot an inquiry into the irrigation of lands in the Zaraisky province, which fell under Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department, and was a glaring example of fruitless expenditure and paper reforms.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this.
The irrigation of these lands in the Zaraisky province had been initiated by the predecessor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s predecessor.
And vast sums of money had actually been spent and were still being spent on this business, and utterly unproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to nothing whatever.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on entering office, and would have liked to lay hands on the Board of Irrigation.
But at first, when he did not yet feel secure in his position, he knew it would affect too many interests, and would be injudicious.
Later on he had been engrossed in other questions, and had simply forgotten the Board of Irrigation.
However, now that the glove had been thrown down to him, he had boldly picked it up and demanded the appointment of a special commission to investigate and verify the working of the Board of Irrigation of the lands in the Zaraisky province.
But in compensation he gave no quarter to the enemy either.
He demanded the appointment of another special commission to inquire into the question of the Native Tribes Organization Committee.
The question of the Native Tribes had been brought up incidentally in the Commission of the 2nd of June, and had been pressed forward actively by Alexey Alexandrovitch as one admitting of no delay on account of the deplorable condition of the native tribes.
In the commission this question had been a ground of contention between several departments.
The department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitch proved that the condition of the native tribes was exceedingly flourishing, that the proposed reconstruction might be the ruin of their prosperity, and that if there were anything wrong, it arose mainly from the failure on the part of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department to carry out the measures prescribed by law.
A flash of eagerness suffused the face of Alexey Alexandrovitch as he rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for his own benefit.
Having filled a sheet of paper, he got up, rang, and sent a note to the chief secretary of his department to look up certain necessary facts for him.
Getting up and walking about the room, he glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled contemptuously.
After reading a little more of the book on Egyptian hieroglyphics, and renewing his interest in it, Alexey Alexandrovitch went to bed at eleven o’clock, and recollecting as he lay in bed the incident with his wife, he saw it now in by no means such a gloomy light.
Chapter 15 Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted Vronsky when he told her their position was impossible, at the bottom of her heart she regarded her own position as false and dishonorable, and she longed with her whole soul to change it.
On the way home from the races she had told her husband the truth in a moment of excitement, and in spite of the agony she had suffered in doing so, she was glad of it.
After her husband had left her, she told herself that she was glad, that now everything was made clear, and at least there would be no more lying and deception.
It seemed to her beyond doubt that her position was now made clear forever.
It might be bad, this new position, but it would be clear; there would be no indefiniteness or falsehood about it.
The pain she had caused herself and her husband in uttering those words would be rewarded now by everything being made clear, she thought.
That evening she saw Vronsky, but she did not tell him of what had passed between her and her husband, though, to make the position definite, it was necessary to tell him.
When she woke up next morning the first thing that rose to her mind was what she had said to her husband, and those words seemed to her so awful that she could not conceive now how she could have brought herself to utter those strange, coarse words, and could not imagine what would come of it.
But the words were spoken, and Alexey Alexandrovitch had gone away without saying anything.
Why was it I wanted to tell him and did not tell him?” And in answer to this question a burning blush of shame spread over her face.
Her position, which had seemed to her simplified the night before, suddenly struck her now as not only not simple, but as absolutely hopeless.
She felt terrified at the disgrace, of which she had not ever thought before.
Directly she thought of what her husband would do, the most terrible ideas came to her mind.
She had a vision of being turned out of the house, of her shame being proclaimed to all the world.
When she thought of Vronsky, it seemed to her that he did not love her, that he was already beginning to be tired of her, that she could not offer herself to him, and she felt bitter against him for it.
It seemed to her that the words that she had spoken to her husband, and had continually repeated in her imagination, she had said to everyone, and everyone had heard them.
She could not bring herself to look those of her own household in the face.
She could not bring herself to call her maid, and still less go downstairs and see her son and his governess.
The maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came into her room of her own accord.
Anna glanced inquiringly into her face, and blushed with a scared look.
Betsy reminded her that Liza Merkalova and Baroness Shtoltz were coming to play croquet with her that morning with their adorers, Kaluzhsky and old Stremov.
I shall expect you,” she finished.
“Nothing, I need nothing,” she said to Annushka, who was rearranging the bottles and brushes on the dressing table.
I need nothing.” Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in the same position, her head and hands hanging listlessly, and every now and then she shivered all over, seemed as though she would make some gesture, utter some word, and sank back into lifelessness again.
She repeated continually, “My God! my God!” But neither “God” nor “my” had any meaning to her.
The idea of seeking help in her difficulty in religion was as remote from her as seeking help from Alexey Alexandrovitch himself, although she had never had doubts of the faith in which she had been brought up.
She knew that the support of religion was possible only upon condition of renouncing what made up for her the whole meaning of life.
She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm at the new spiritual condition, never experienced before, in which she found herself.
She felt as though everything were beginning to be double in her soul, just as objects sometimes appear double to over-tired eyes.
Whether she feared or desired what had happened, or what was going to happen, and exactly what she longed for, she could not have said.
“The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting,” said Annushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same position.
What about Seryozha?” Anna asked, with sudden eagerness, recollecting her son’s existence for the first time that morning.
“He’s been naughty, I think,” answered Annushka with a smile.
I think he slipped in and ate one of them on the sly.” The recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from the helpless condition in which she found herself.
She recalled the partly sincere, though greatly exaggerated, rôle of the mother living for her child, which she had taken up of late years, and she felt with joy that in the plight in which she found herself she had a support, quite apart from her relation to her husband or to Vronsky.
In whatever position she might be placed, she could not lose her son.
Her husband might put her to shame and turn her out, Vronsky might grow cold to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of him again with bitterness and reproach); she could not leave her son.
And she must act; act to secure this relation to her son, so that he might not be taken from her.
Quickly indeed, as quickly as possible, she must take action before he was taken from her.
She needed consolation.
She must be calm, and get out of this insufferable position.
The thought of immediate action binding her to her son, of going away somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.
She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walked into the drawing-room, where she found, as usual, waiting for her, the coffee, Seryozha, and his governess.
Seryozha, all in white, with his back and head bent, was standing at a table under a looking-glass, and with an expression of intense concentration which she knew well, and in which he resembled his father, he was doing something to the flowers he carried.
The governess had a particularly severe expression.
Seryozha screamed shrilly, as he often did, “Ah, mamma!” and stopped, hesitating whether to go to greet his mother and put down the flowers, or to finish making the wreath and go with the flowers.
The governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and detailed account of Seryozha’s naughtiness, but Anna did not hear her; she was considering whether she would take her with her or not.
“I’ll go alone with my child.” “Yes, it’s very wrong,” said Anna, and taking her son by the shoulder she looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance that bewildered and delighted the boy, and she kissed him.
“Leave him to me,” she said to the astonished governess, and not letting go of her son, she sat down at the table, where coffee was set ready for her.
I ... didn’t....” he said, trying to make out from her expression what was in store for him in regard to the peaches.
“Seryozha,” she said, as soon as the governess had left the room, “that was wrong, but you’ll never do it again, will you?...
“Can I help loving him?” she said to herself, looking deeply into his scared and at the same time delighted eyes.
“And can he ever join his father in punishing me?
Is it possible he will not feel for me?” Tears were already flowing down her face, and to hide them she got up abruptly and almost ran out on to the terrace.
The air was cold in the bright sun that filtered through the freshly washed leaves.
She shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which had clutched her with fresh force in the open air.
“Run along, run along to Mariette,” she said to Seryozha, who had followed her out, and she began walking up and down on the straw matting of the terrace.
“Can it be that they won’t forgive me, won’t understand how it all couldn’t be helped?” she said to herself.
Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving in the wind, with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the cold sunshine, she knew that they would not forgive her, that everyone and everything would be merciless to her now as was that sky, that green.
And again she felt that everything was split in two in her soul.
Annushka and Seryozha, and only the most necessary things.
But first I must write to them both.” She went quickly indoors into her boudoir, sat down at the table, and wrote to her husband:—“After what has happened, I cannot remain any longer in your house.
Be generous, leave him to me.” Up to this point she wrote rapidly and naturally, but the appeal to his generosity, a quality she did not recognize in him, and the necessity of winding up the letter with something touching, pulled her up.
“Of my fault and my remorse I cannot speak, because....” She stopped again, finding no connection in her ideas.
“No,” she said to herself, “there’s no need of anything,” and tearing up the letter, she wrote it again, leaving out the allusion to generosity, and sealed it up.
It was so coarse, so unfeminine.
Again a flush of shame spread over her face; she recalled his composure, and a feeling of anger against him impelled her to tear the sheet with the phrase she had written into tiny bits.
“No need of anything,” she said to herself, and closing her blotting-case she went upstairs, told the governess and the servants that she was going that day to Moscow, and at once set to work to pack up her things.
Chapter 16 All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters, gardeners, and footmen going to and fro carrying out things.
Cupboards and chests were open; twice they had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper were tossing about on the floor.
Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up rugs, had been carried down into the hall.
The carriage and two hired cabs were waiting at the steps.
Anna, forgetting her inward agitation in the work of packing, was standing at a table in her boudoir, packing her traveling bag, when Annushka called her attention to the rattle of some carriage driving up.
Anna looked out of the window and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch’s courier on the steps, ringing at the front door bell.
“Run and find out what it is,” she said, and with a calm sense of being prepared for anything, she sat down in a low chair, folding her hands on her knees.
A footman brought in a thick packet directed in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hand.
“Very well,” she said, and as soon as he had left the room she tore open the letter with trembling fingers.
A roll of unfolded notes done up in a wrapper fell out of it.
She disengaged the letter and began reading it at the end.
“Preparations shall be made for your arrival here ...
I attach particular significance to compliance....” she read.
She ran on, then back, read it all through, and once more read the letter all through again from the beginning.
When she had finished, she felt that she was cold all over, and that a fearful calamity, such as she had not expected, had burst upon her.
In the morning she had regretted that she had spoken to her husband, and wished for nothing so much as that those words could be unspoken.
And here this letter regarded them as unspoken, and gave her what she had wanted.
But now this letter seemed to her more awful than anything she had been able to conceive.
“He’s right!” she said; “of course, he’s always right; he’s a Christian, he’s generous!
Yes, vile, base creature!
And no one understands it except me, and no one ever will; and I can’t explain it.
They say he’s so religious, so high-principled, so upright, so clever; but they don’t see what I’ve seen.
They don’t know how he has crushed my life for eight years, crushed everything that was living in me—he has not once even thought that I’m a live woman who must have love.
They don’t know how at every step he’s humiliated me, and been just as pleased with himself.
Haven’t I striven, striven with all my strength, to find something to give meaning to my life?
Haven’t I struggled to love him, to love my son when I could not love my husband?
If he’d killed me, if he’d killed him, I could have borne anything, I could have forgiven anything; but, no, he....
He’s doing just what’s characteristic of his mean character.
He’ll keep himself in the right, while me, in my ruin, he’ll drive still lower to worse ruin yet....” She recalled the words from the letter.
“You can conjecture what awaits you and your son....” “That’s a threat to take away my child, and most likely by their stupid law he can.
He doesn’t believe even in my love for my child, or he despises it (just as he always used to ridicule it).
He despises that feeling in me, but he knows that I won’t abandon my child, that I can’t abandon my child, that there could be no life for me without my child, even with him whom I love; but that if I abandoned my child and ran away from him, I should be acting like the most infamous, basest of women.
He knows that, and knows that I am incapable of doing that.” She recalled another sentence in the letter.
“Our life must go on as it has done in the past....” “That life was miserable enough in the old days; it has been awful of late.
And he knows all that; he knows that I can’t repent that I breathe, that I love; he knows that it can lead to nothing but lying and deceit; but he wants to go on torturing me.
I know him; I know that he’s at home and is happy in deceit, like a fish swimming in the water.
No, I won’t give him that happiness.
I’ll break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants to catch me, come what may.
Anything’s better than lying and deceit.” “But how?
Was ever a woman so miserable as I am?...” “No; I will break through it, I will break through it!” she cried, jumping up and keeping back her tears.
But at the bottom of her heart she felt that she was not strong enough to break through anything, that she was not strong enough to get out of her old position, however false and dishonorable it might be.
She was weeping that her dream of her position being made clear and definite had been annihilated forever.
She knew beforehand that everything would go on in the old way, and far worse, indeed, than in the old way.
She felt that the position in the world that she enjoyed, and that had seemed to her of so little consequence in the morning, that this position was precious to her, that she would not have the strength to exchange it for the shameful position of a woman who has abandoned husband and child to join her lover; that however much she might struggle, she could not be stronger than herself.
She would never know freedom in love, but would remain forever a guilty wife, with the menace of detection hanging over her at every instant; deceiving her husband for the sake of a shameful connection with a man living apart and away from her, whose life she could never share.
She knew that this was how it would be, and at the same time it was so awful that she could not even conceive what it would end in.
And she cried without restraint, as children cry when they are punished.
The sound of the footman’s steps forced her to rouse herself, and, hiding her face from him, she pretended to be writing.
“The courier asks if there’s an answer,” the footman announced.
What is there I care for?” Again she felt that her soul was beginning to be split in two.
She was terrified again at this feeling, and clutched at the first pretext for doing something which might divert her thoughts from herself.
“I ought to see Alexey” (so she called Vronsky in her thoughts); “no one but he can tell me what I ought to do.
I’ll go to Betsy’s, perhaps I shall see him there,” she said to herself, completely forgetting that when she had told him the day before that she was not going to Princess Tverskaya’s, he had said that in that case he should not go either.
She went up to the table, wrote to her husband, “I have received your letter.—A.”; and, ringing the bell, gave it to the footman.
“We are not going,” she said to Annushka, as she came in.
“Not going at all?” “No; don’t unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wait.
I’m going to the princess’s.” “Which dress am I to get ready?” Chapter 17 The croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had invited Anna was to consist of two ladies and their adorers.
These two ladies were the chief representatives of a select new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, in imitation of some imitation, _les sept merveilles du monde_.
These ladies belonged to a circle which, though of the highest society, was utterly hostile to that in which Anna moved.
Moreover, Stremov, one of the most influential people in Petersburg, and the elderly admirer of Liza Merkalova, was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the political world.
From all these considerations Anna had not meant to go, and the hints in Princess Tverskaya’s note referred to her refusal.
Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya’s earlier than the other guests.
At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky’s footman, with side-whiskers combed out like a _Kammerjunker_, went in too.
Anna recognized him, and only then recalled that Vronsky had told her the day before that he would not come.
As she took off her outer garment in the hall, she heard the footman, pronouncing his “_r’s_” even like a _Kammerjunker_, say, “From the count for the princess,” and hand the note.
She longed to question him as to where his master was.
But neither the first nor the second nor the third course was possible.
Already she heard bells ringing to announce her arrival ahead of her, and Princess Tverskaya’s footman was standing at the open door waiting for her to go forward into the inner rooms.
“The princess is in the garden; they will inform her immediately.
Would you be pleased to walk into the garden?” announced another footman in another room.
The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as at home—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step, impossible to see Vronsky, and she had to remain here among outsiders, in company so uncongenial to her present mood.
She was not alone; all around was that luxurious setting of idleness that she was used to, and she felt less wretched than at home.
Everything would be done of itself.
On meeting Betsy coming towards her in a white gown that struck her by its elegance, Anna smiled at her just as she always did.
Princess Tverskaya was walking with Tushkevitch and a young lady, a relation, who, to the great joy of her parents in the provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable princess.
There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed it at once.
“I slept badly,” answered Anna, looking intently at the footman who came to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky’s note.
You might go”—she turned to Tushkevitch—“with Masha, and try the croquet ground over there where they’ve been cutting it.
We shall have time to talk a little over tea; we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?” she said in English to Anna, with a smile, pressing the hand with which she held a parasol.
“Yes, especially as I can’t stay very long with you.
I’ve been promising to go for a century,” said Anna, to whom lying, alien as it was to her nature, had become not merely simple and natural in society, but a positive source of satisfaction.
Why she said this, which she had not thought of a second before, she could not have explained.
She had said it simply from the reflection that as Vronsky would not be here, she had better secure her own freedom, and try to see him somehow.
But why she had spoken of old Madame Vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she had to see many other people, she could not have explained; and yet, as it afterwards turned out, had she contrived the most cunning devices to meet Vronsky, she could have thought of nothing better.
I’m not going to let you go for anything,” answered Betsy, looking intently into Anna’s face.
“Really, if I were not fond of you, I should feel offended.
One would think you were afraid my society would compromise you.
Tea in the little dining-room, please,” she said, half closing her eyes, as she always did when addressing the footman.
“Alexey’s playing us false,” she said in French; “he writes that he can’t come,” she added in a tone as simple and natural as though it could never enter her head that Vronsky could mean anything more to Anna than a game of croquet.
Anna knew that Betsy knew everything, but, hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost felt persuaded for a minute that she knew nothing.
“Ah!” said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested in the matter, and she went on smiling: “How can you or your friends compromise anyone?” This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great fascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women.
And it was not the necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the concealment was contrived, but the process of concealment itself which attracted her.
“I can’t be more Catholic than the Pope,” she said.
“Stremov and Liza Merkalova, why, they’re the cream of the cream of society.
Besides, they’re received everywhere, and _I_”—she laid special stress on the I—“have never been strict and intolerant.
Let him and Alexey Alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee—that’s no affair of ours.
And, in spite of his absurd position as Liza’s lovesick swain at his age, you ought to see how he carries off the absurd position.
Oh, that’s a new type, quite new.” Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her good-humored, shrewd glance, Anna felt that she partly guessed her plight, and was hatching something for her benefit.
“I must write to Alexey though,” and Betsy sat down to the table, scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.
Look what I’ve said, will that persuade him?
Would you seal it up, please, and send it off?” she said from the door; “I have to give some directions.” Without a moment’s thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy’s letter, and, without reading it, wrote below: “It’s essential for me to see you.
I shall be there at six o’clock.” She sealed it up, and, Betsy coming back, in her presence handed the note to be taken.
At tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in the cool little drawing-room, the cozy chat promised by Princess Tverskaya before the arrival of her visitors really did come off between the two women.
They criticized the people they were expecting, and the conversation fell upon Liza Merkalova.
Yesterday she came up to me after the races and was in despair at not finding you.
Stremov says she does that as it is.” “But do tell me, please, I never could make it out,” said Anna, after being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she was not asking an idle question, but that what she was asking was of more importance to her than it should have been; “do tell me, please, what are her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as he’s called?
What does it mean?” Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.
They’ve flung their caps over the windmills.
But there are ways and ways of flinging them.” “Yes, but what are her relations precisely with Kaluzhsky?” Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, a thing which rarely happened with her.
“You’re encroaching on Princess Myakaya’s special domain now.
That’s the question of an _enfant terrible_,” and Betsy obviously tried to restrain herself, but could not, and went off into peals of that infectious laughter that people laugh who do not laugh often.
“You’d better ask them,” she brought out, between tears of laughter.
“No; you laugh,” said Anna, laughing too in spite of herself, “but I never could understand it.
I can’t understand the husband’s rôle in it.” “The husband?
Liza Merkalova’s husband carries her shawl, and is always ready to be of use.
But anything more than that in reality, no one cares to inquire.
That’s how it is with this.” “Will you be at Madame Rolandak’s fête?” asked Anna, to change the conversation.
“I don’t think so,” answered Betsy, and, without looking at her friend, she began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant tea.
Putting a cup before Anna, she took out a cigarette, and, fitting it into a silver holder, she lighted it.
“It’s like this, you see: I’m in a fortunate position,” she began, quite serious now, as she took up her cup.
“I understand you, and I understand Liza.
Liza now is one of those naïve natures that, like children, don’t know what’s good and what’s bad.
Anyway, she didn’t comprehend it when she was very young.
And now she’s aware that the lack of comprehension suits her.
The very same thing, don’t you see, may be looked at tragically, and turned into a misery, or it may be looked at simply and even humorously.
Possibly you are inclined to look at things too tragically.” “How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!” said Anna, seriously and dreamily.
I think I’m worse.” “_Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!_” repeated Betsy.
“But here they are.” Chapter 18 They heard the sound of steps and a man’s voice, then a woman’s voice and laughter, and immediately thereafter there walked in the expected guests: Sappho Shtoltz, and a young man beaming with excess of health, the so-called Vaska.
It was evident that ample supplies of beefsteak, truffles, and Burgundy never failed to reach him at the fitting hour.
He walked after Sappho into the drawing-room, and followed her about as though he were chained to her, keeping his sparkling eyes fixed on her as though he wanted to eat her.
She walked with smart little steps in high-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the ladies vigorously like a man.
Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by her beauty, the exaggerated extreme to which her dress was carried, and the boldness of her manners.
On her head there was such a superstructure of soft, golden hair—her own and false mixed—that her head was equal in size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in front.
Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.
“Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers,” she began telling them at once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her tail, which she flung back at one stroke all on one side.
Ah, to be sure, you don’t know each other.” And mentioning his surname she introduced the young man, and reddening a little, broke into a ringing laugh at her mistake—that is, at her having called him Vaska to a stranger.
He addressed Sappho: “You’ve lost your bet.
Sappho laughed still more festively.
Oh, yes.” She turned suddenly to Princess Betsy: “I am a nice person ...
I positively forgot it ...
And here he comes.” The unexpected young visitor, whom Sappho had invited, and whom she had forgotten, was, however, a personage of such consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the ladies rose on his entrance.
He now dogged her footsteps, like Vaska.
Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with Stremov.
Liza Merkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental, languid type of face, and—as everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes.
The tone of her dark dress (Anna immediately observed and appreciated the fact) was in perfect harmony with her style of beauty.
Liza was as soft and enervated as Sappho was smart and abrupt.
But to Anna’s taste Liza was far more attractive.
Betsy had said to Anna that she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when Anna saw her, she felt that this was not the truth.
She really was both innocent and corrupt, but a sweet and passive woman.
It is true that her tone was the same as Sappho’s; that like Sappho, she had two men, one young and one old, tacked onto her, and devouring her with their eyes.
But there was something in her higher than what surrounded her.
There was in her the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations.
This glow shone out in her exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes.
The weary, and at the same time passionate, glance of those eyes, encircled by dark rings, impressed one by its perfect sincerity.
Everyone looking into those eyes fancied he knew her wholly, and knowing her, could not but love her.
“Yesterday at the races all I wanted was to get to you, but you’d gone away.
I did so want to see you, yesterday especially.
“Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling,” said Anna, blushing.
“I’m not going,” said Liza, smiling and settling herself close to Anna.
It’s delightful to look at you.
Why, you live in the liveliest set in Petersburg,” said Anna.
“Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; but we—I certainly—are not happy, but awfully, awfully bored.” Sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden with the two young men.
Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea-table.
“Sappho says they did enjoy themselves tremendously at your house last night.” “Ah, how dreary it all was!” said Liza Merkalova.
No; do tell me how you manage never to be bored?” she said, addressing Anna again.
Tell me how you do it?” “I do nothing,” answered Anna, blushing at these searching questions.
Stremov was a man of fifty, partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but with a characteristic and intelligent face.
Liza Merkalova was his wife’s niece, and he spent all his leisure hours with her.
On meeting Anna Karenina, as he was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the government, he tried, like a shrewd man and a man of the world, to be particularly cordial with her, the wife of his enemy.
I told you long ago,” he said, turning to Liza Merkalova, “that if you don’t want to be bored, you mustn’t think you’re going to be bored.
It’s just as you mustn’t be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if you’re afraid of sleeplessness.
That’s just what Anna Arkadyevna has just said.” “I should be very glad if I had said it, for it’s not only clever but true,” said Anna, smiling.
And I can’t and won’t knowingly make a pretense about it.” “You’re incorrigible,” said Stremov, not looking at her, and he spoke again to Anna.
As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing but commonplaces to her, but he said those commonplaces as to when she was returning to Petersburg, and how fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was of her, with an expression which suggested that he longed with his whole soul to please her and show his regard for her and even more than that.
Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the other players to begin croquet.
“No, don’t go away, please don’t,” pleaded Liza Merkalova, hearing that Anna was going.
Stremov joined in her entreaties.
“It’s too violent a transition,” he said, “to go from such company to old Madame Vrede.
And besides, you will only give her a chance for talking scandal, while here you arouse none but such different feelings of the highest and most opposite kind,” he said to her.
Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty.
This shrewd man’s flattering words, the naïve, childlike affection shown her by Liza Merkalova, and all the social atmosphere she was used to,—it was all so easy, and what was in store for her was so difficult, that she was for a minute in uncertainty whether to remain, whether to put off a little longer the painful moment of explanation.
But remembering what was in store for her alone at home, if she did not come to some decision, remembering that gesture—terrible even in memory—when she had clutched her hair in both hands—she said good-bye and went away.
Chapter 19 In spite of Vronsky’s apparently frivolous life in society, he was a man who hated irregularity.
In early youth in the Corps of Pages, he had experienced the humiliation of a refusal, when he had tried, being in difficulties, to borrow money, and since then he had never once put himself in the same position again.
In order to keep his affairs in some sort of order, he used about five times a year (more or less frequently, according to circumstances) to shut himself up alone and put all his affairs into definite shape.
This he used to call his day of reckoning or _faire la lessive_.
On waking up the day after the races, Vronsky put on a white linen coat, and without shaving or taking his bath, he distributed about the table moneys, bills, and letters, and set to work.
Petritsky, who knew he was ill-tempered on such occasions, on waking up and seeing his comrade at the writing-table, quietly dressed and went out without getting in his way.
Every man who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of the conditions surrounding him, cannot help imagining that the complexity of these conditions, and the difficulty of making them clear, is something exceptional and personal, peculiar to himself, and never supposes that others are surrounded by just as complicated an array of personal affairs as he is.
And not without inward pride, and not without reason, he thought that any other man would long ago have been in difficulties, would have been forced to some dishonorable course, if he had found himself in such a difficult position.
But Vronsky felt that now especially it was essential for him to clear up and define his position if he were to avoid getting into difficulties.
What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was his pecuniary position.
Writing out on note paper in his minute hand all that he owed, he added up the amount and found that his debts amounted to seventeen thousand and some odd hundreds, which he left out for the sake of clearness.
Reckoning up his money and his bank book, he found that he had left one thousand eight hundred roubles, and nothing coming in before the New Year.
Reckoning over again his list of debts, Vronsky copied it, dividing it into three classes.
Such debts amounted to about four thousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand five hundred as surety for a young comrade, Venovsky, who had lost that sum to a cardsharper in Vronsky’s presence.
Vronsky had wanted to pay the money at the time (he had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvin had insisted that they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played.
That was so far well, but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business, though his only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be surety for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have the two thousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to fling it at the swindler, and have no more words with him.
And so for this first and most important division he must have four thousand roubles.
The second class—eight thousand roubles—consisted of less important debts.
These were principally accounts owing in connection with his race horses, to the purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and so on.
He would have to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to be quite free from anxiety.
The last class of debts—to shops, to hotels, to his tailor—were such as need not be considered.
So that he needed at least six thousand roubles for current expenses, and he only had one thousand eight hundred.
For a man with one hundred thousand roubles of revenue, which was what everyone fixed as Vronsky’s income, such debts, one would suppose, could hardly be embarrassing; but the fact was that he was far from having one hundred thousand.
His father’s immense property, which alone yielded a yearly income of two hundred thousand, was left undivided between the brothers.
At the time when the elder brother, with a mass of debts, married Princess Varya Tchirkova, the daughter of a Decembrist without any fortune whatever, Alexey had given up to his elder brother almost the whole income from his father’s estate, reserving for himself only twenty-five thousand a year from it.
Alexey had said at the time to his brother that that sum would be sufficient for him until he married, which he probably never would do.
And his brother, who was in command of one of the most expensive regiments, and was only just married, could not decline the gift.
His mother, who had her own separate property, had allowed Alexey every year twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand he had reserved, and Alexey had spent it all.
Of late his mother, incensed with him on account of his love affair and his leaving Moscow, had given up sending him the money.
And in consequence of this, Vronsky, who had been in the habit of living on the scale of forty-five thousand a year, having only received twenty thousand that year, found himself now in difficulties.
To get out of these difficulties, he could not apply to his mother for money.
Her last letter, which he had received the day before, had particularly exasperated him by the hints in it that she was quite ready to help him to succeed in the world and in the army, but not to lead a life which was a scandal to all good society.
But he could not draw back from the generous word when it was once uttered, even though he felt now, vaguely foreseeing certain eventualities in his intrigue with Madame Karenina, that this generous word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and that even though he were not married he might need all the hundred thousand of income.
But it was impossible to draw back.
He had only to recall his brother’s wife, to remember how that sweet, delightful Varya sought, at every convenient opportunity, to remind him that she remembered his generosity and appreciated it, to grasp the impossibility of taking back his gift.
It was as impossible as beating a woman, stealing, or lying.
One thing only could and ought to be done, and Vronsky determined upon it without an instant’s hesitation: to borrow money from a money-lender, ten thousand roubles, a proceeding which presented no difficulty, to cut down his expenses generally, and to sell his race horses.
Resolving on this, he promptly wrote a note to Rolandak, who had more than once sent to him with offers to buy horses from him.
Then he sent for the Englishman and the money-lender, and divided what money he had according to the accounts he intended to pay.
Having finished this business, he wrote a cold and cutting answer to his mother.
Chapter 20 Vronsky’s life was particularly happy in that he had a code of principles, which defined with unfailing certitude what he ought and what he ought not to do.
This code of principles covered only a very small circle of contingencies, but then the principles were never doubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went outside that circle, had never had a moment’s hesitation about doing what he ought to do.
These principles laid down as invariable rules: that one must pay a cardsharper, but need not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie to a man, but one may to a woman; that one must never cheat anyone, but one may a husband; that one must never pardon an insult, but one may give one and so on.
These principles were possibly not reasonable and not good, but they were of unfailing certainty, and so long as he adhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and he could hold his head up.
Only quite lately in regard to his relations with Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his code of principles did not fully cover all possible contingencies, and to foresee in the future difficulties and perplexities for which he could find no guiding clue.
His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind clear and simple.
It was clearly and precisely defined in the code of principles by which he was guided.
She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him, and he loved her, and therefore she was in his eyes a woman who had a right to the same, or even more, respect than a lawful wife.
He would have had his hand chopped off before he would have allowed himself by a word, by a hint, to humiliate her, or even to fall short of the fullest respect a woman could look for.
His attitude to society, too, was clear.
Everyone might know, might suspect it, but no one might dare to speak of it.
If any did so, he was ready to force all who might speak to be silent and to respect the non-existent honor of the woman he loved.
His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all.
From the moment that Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right over her as the one thing unassailable.
Her husband was simply a superfluous and tiresome person.
No doubt he was in a pitiable position, but how could that be helped?
The one thing the husband had a right to was to demand satisfaction with a weapon in his hand, and Vronsky was prepared for this at any minute.
But of late new inner relations had arisen between him and her, which frightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness.
And he felt that this fact and what she expected of him called for something not fully defined in that code of principles by which he had hitherto steered his course in life.
And he had been indeed caught unawares, and at the first moment when she spoke to him of her position, his heart had prompted him to beg her to leave her husband.
He had said that, but now thinking things over he saw clearly that it would be better to manage to avoid that; and at the same time, as he told himself so, he was afraid whether it was not wrong.
“If I told her to leave her husband, that must mean uniting her life with mine; am I prepared for that?
Supposing I could arrange....
If I say that—I ought to be prepared to do it, that is, I ought to have the money and to retire from the army.” And he grew thoughtful.
The question whether to retire from the service or not brought him to the other and perhaps the chief though hidden interest of his life, of which none knew but he.
Ambition was the old dream of his youth and childhood, a dream which he did not confess even to himself, though it was so strong that now this passion was even doing battle with his love.
His first steps in the world and in the service had been successful, but two years before he had made a great mistake.
Anxious to show his independence and to advance, he had refused a post that had been offered him, hoping that this refusal would heighten his value; but it turned out that he had been too bold, and he was passed over.
And having, whether he liked or not, taken up for himself the position of an independent man, he carried it off with great tact and good sense, behaving as though he bore no grudge against anyone, did not regard himself as injured in any way, and cared for nothing but to be left alone since he was enjoying himself.
He felt that this independent attitude of a man who might have done anything, but cared to do nothing, was already beginning to pall, that many people were beginning to fancy that he was not really capable of anything but being a straightforward, good-natured fellow.
His connection with Madame Karenina, by creating so much sensation and attracting general attention, had given him a fresh distinction which soothed his gnawing worm of ambition for a while, but a week before that worm had been roused up again with fresh force.
The friend of his childhood, a man of the same set, of the same coterie, his comrade in the Corps of Pages, Serpuhovskoy, who had left school with him and had been his rival in class, in gymnastics, in their scrapes and their dreams of glory, had come back a few days before from Central Asia, where he had gained two steps up in rank, and an order rarely bestowed upon generals so young.
As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about him as a newly risen star of the first magnitude.
A schoolfellow of Vronsky’s and of the same age, he was a general and was expecting a command, which might have influence on the course of political events; while Vronsky, independent and brilliant and beloved by a charming woman though he was, was simply a cavalry captain who was readily allowed to be as independent as ever he liked.
“Of course I don’t envy Serpuhovskoy and never could envy him; but his advancement shows me that one has only to watch one’s opportunity, and the career of a man like me may be very rapidly made.
Three years ago he was in just the same position as I am.
She said herself she did not wish to change her position.
And with her love I cannot feel envious of Serpuhovskoy.” And slowly twirling his mustaches, he got up from the table and walked about the room.
His eyes shone particularly brightly, and he felt in that confident, calm, and happy frame of mind which always came after he had thoroughly faced his position.
Everything was straight and clear, just as after former days of reckoning.
Your _lessive_ lasted a good time today,” said Petritsky.
“Well, is it over?” “It is over,” answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes only, and twirling the tips of his mustaches as circumspectly as though after the perfect order into which his affairs had been brought any over-bold or rapid movement might disturb it.
“You’re always just as if you’d come out of a bath after it,” said Petritsky.
“I’ve come from Gritsky’s” (that was what they called the colonel); “they’re expecting you.” Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade, thinking of something else.
“Yes; is that music at his place?” he said, listening to the familiar sounds of polkas and waltzes floating across to him.
“What’s the fête?” “Serpuhovskoy’s come.” “Aha!” said Vronsky, “why, I didn’t know.” The smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.
Having once made up his mind that he was happy in his love, that he sacrificed his ambition to it—having anyway taken up this position, Vronsky was incapable of feeling either envious of Serpuhovskoy or hurt with him for not coming first to him when he came to the regiment.
Serpuhovskoy was a good friend, and he was delighted he had come.
In the courtyard the first objects that met Vronsky’s eyes were a band of singers in white linen coats, standing near a barrel of vodka, and the robust, good-humored figure of the colonel surrounded by officers.
He had gone out as far as the first step of the balcony and was loudly shouting across the band that played Offenbach’s quadrille, waving his arms and giving some orders to a few soldiers standing on one side.
A group of soldiers, a quartermaster, and several subalterns came up to the balcony with Vronsky.
The colonel returned to the table, went out again onto the steps with a tumbler in his hand, and proposed the toast, “To the health of our former comrade, the gallant general, Prince Serpuhovskoy.
Hurrah!” The colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came out onto the steps smiling, with a glass in his hand.
“You always get younger, Bondarenko,” he said to the rosy-cheeked, smart-looking quartermaster standing just before him, still youngish looking though doing his second term of service.
It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpuhovskoy.
He looked more robust, had let his whiskers grow, but was still the same graceful creature, whose face and figure were even more striking from their softness and nobility than their beauty.
The only change Vronsky detected in him was that subdued, continual radiance of beaming content which settles on the faces of men who are successful and are sure of the recognition of their success by everyone.
Vronsky knew that radiant air, and immediately observed it in Serpuhovskoy.
As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw Vronsky.
A smile of pleasure lighted up his face.
He tossed his head upwards and waved the glass in his hand, greeting Vronsky, and showing him by the gesture that he could not come to him before the quartermaster, who stood craning forward his lips ready to be kissed.
“Yashvin told me you were in one of your gloomy tempers.” Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-looking quartermaster, and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, went up to Vronsky.
“How glad I am!” he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him on one side.
“You look after him,” the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing to Vronsky; and he went down below to the soldiers.
“Why weren’t you at the races yesterday?
I expected to see you there,” said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.
I beg your pardon,” he added, and he turned to the adjutant: “Please have this divided from me, each man as much as it runs to.” And he hurriedly took notes for three hundred roubles from his pocketbook, blushing a little.
Have anything to eat or drink?” asked Yashvin.
“Hi, something for the count to eat!
There was a great deal of drinking.
They tossed Serpuhovskoy in the air and caught him again several times.
Then, to the accompaniment of the band, the colonel himself danced with Petritsky.
Then the colonel, who began to show signs of feebleness, sat down on a bench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to Yashvin the superiority of Russia over Prussia, especially in cavalry attack, and there was a lull in the revelry for a moment.
Serpuhovskoy went into the house to the bathroom to wash his hands and found Vronsky there; Vronsky was drenching his head with water.
He had taken off his coat and put his sunburnt, hairy neck under the tap, and was rubbing it and his head with his hands.
When he had finished, Vronsky sat down by Serpuhovskoy.
They both sat down in the bathroom on a lounge, and a conversation began which was very interesting to both of them.
“I’ve always been hearing about you through my wife,” said Serpuhovskoy.
“I’m glad you’ve been seeing her pretty often.” “She’s friendly with Varya, and they’re the only women in Petersburg I care about seeing,” answered Vronsky, smiling.
He smiled because he foresaw the topic the conversation would turn on, and he was glad of it.
“The only ones?” Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.
“Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your wife,” said Vronsky, checking his hint by a stern expression of face.
“I was greatly delighted to hear of your success, but not a bit surprised.
I expected even more.” Serpuhovskoy smiled.
Such an opinion of him was obviously agreeable to him, and he did not think it necessary to conceal it.
“Well, I on the contrary expected less—I’ll own frankly.
I’m ambitious; that’s my weakness, and I confess to it.” “Perhaps you wouldn’t confess to it if you hadn’t been successful,” said Vronsky.
“I don’t suppose so,” said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again.
Of course I may be mistaken, but I fancy I have a certain capacity for the line I’ve chosen, and that power of any sort in my hands, if it is to be, will be better than in the hands of a good many people I know,” said Serpuhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of success; “and so the nearer I get to it, the better pleased I am.” “Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone.
I used to think so too, but here I live and think life worth living not only for that.” “There it’s out! here it comes!” said Serpuhovskoy, laughing.
Of course, I approved of what you did.
But there are ways of doing everything.
But you’re not satisfied with that.
There he goes!” he added, listening to the roar of “hurrah!”—“and he’s happy, but that does not satisfy you.” “I didn’t say it did satisfy me.” “Yes, but that’s not the only thing.
Russia needs men; she needs a party, or else everything goes and will go to the dogs.” “How do you mean?
Bertenev’s party against the Russian communists?” “No,” said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being suspected of such an absurdity.
There are no communists.
But intriguing people have to invent a noxious, dangerous party.
No, what’s wanted is a powerful party of independent men like you and me.” “But why so?” Vronsky mentioned a few men who were in power.
“Why aren’t they independent men?” “Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, an independent fortune; they’ve not had a name, they’ve not been close to the sun and center as we have.
And they have to find a support for themselves in inventing a policy.
And they bring forward some notion, some policy that they don’t believe in, that does harm; and the whole policy is really only a means to a government house and so much income. _Cela n’est pas plus fin que ça_, when you get a peep at their cards.
I may be inferior to them, stupider perhaps, though I don’t see why I should be inferior to them.
But you and I have one important advantage over them for certain, in being more difficult to buy.
And such men are more needed than ever.” Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much interested by the meaning of the words as by the attitude of Serpuhovskoy who was already contemplating a struggle with the existing powers, and already had his likes and dislikes in that higher world, while his own interest in the governing world did not go beyond the interests of his regiment.
Vronsky felt, too, how powerful Serpuhovskoy might become through his unmistakable faculty for thinking things out and for taking things in, through his intelligence and gift of words, so rarely met with in the world in which he moved.
“Still I haven’t the one thing of most importance for that,” he answered; “I haven’t the desire for power.
I had it once, but it’s gone.” “Excuse me, that’s not true,” said Serpuhovskoy, smiling.
“Yes, it is true, it is true ... now!” Vronsky added, to be truthful.
“Yes, it’s true now, that’s another thing; but that _now_ won’t last forever.” “Perhaps,” answered Vronsky.
“You say _perhaps_,” Serpuhovskoy went on, as though guessing his thoughts, “but I say _for certain_.
I’m not going to offer you my protection ... though, indeed, why shouldn’t I protect you?—you’ve protected me often enough!
I should hope our friendship rises above all that sort of thing.
Yes,” he said, smiling to him as tenderly as a woman, “give me _carte blanche_, retire from the regiment, and I’ll draw you upwards imperceptibly.” “But you must understand that I want nothing,” said Vronsky, “except that all should be as it is.” Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing him.
I understand what that means.
But listen: we’re the same age, you’ve known a greater number of women perhaps than I have.” Serpohovskoy’s smile and gestures told Vronsky that he mustn’t be afraid, that he would be tender and careful in touching the sore place.
“But I’m married, and believe me, in getting to know thoroughly one’s wife, if one loves her, as someone has said, one gets to know all women better than if one knew thousands of them.” “We’re coming directly!” Vronsky shouted to an officer, who looked into the room and called them to the colonel.
Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what Serpuhovskey would say to him.
Women are the chief stumbling block in a man’s career.
It’s hard to love a woman and do anything.
There’s only one way of having love conveniently without its being a hindrance—that’s marriage.
How, how am I to tell you what I mean?” said Serpuhovskoy, who liked similes.
Yes, just as you can only carry a _fardeau_ and do something with your hands, when the _fardeau_ is tied on your back, and that’s marriage.
My hands were suddenly set free.
But to drag that _fardeau_ about with you without marriage, your hands will always be so full that you can do nothing.
Look at Mazankov, at Krupov.
They’ve ruined their careers for the sake of women.” “What women!” said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and the actress with whom the two men he had mentioned were connected.
That’s much the same as—not merely carrying the _fardeau_ in your arms—but tearing it away from someone else.” “You have never loved,” Vronsky said softly, looking straight before him and thinking of Anna.
But you remember what I’ve said to you.
And another thing, women are all more materialistic than men.
We make something immense out of love, but they are always _terre-à-terre_.” “Directly, directly!” he cried to a footman who came in.
But the footman had not come to call them again, as he supposed.
“A man brought it from Princess Tverskaya.” Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.
“My head’s begun to ache; I’m going home,” he said to Serpuhovskoy.
You give me _carte blanche!_” “We’ll talk about it later on; I’ll look you up in Petersburg.” Chapter 22 It was six o’clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly, and at the same time not to drive with his own horses, known to everyone, Vronsky got into Yashvin’s hired fly, and told the driver to drive as quickly as possible.
It was a roomy, old-fashioned fly, with seats for four.
He sat in one corner, stretched his legs out on the front seat, and sank into meditation.
A vague sense of the order into which his affairs had been brought, a vague recollection of the friendliness and flattery of Serpuhovskoy, who had considered him a man that was needed, and most of all, the anticipation of the interview before him—all blended into a general, joyous sense of life.
He had often before had this sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never felt so fond of himself, of his own body, as at that moment.
He enjoyed the slight ache in his strong leg, he enjoyed the muscular sensation of movement in his chest as he breathed.
The bright, cold August day, which had made Anna feel so hopeless, seemed to him keenly stimulating, and refreshed his face and neck that still tingled from the cold water.
The scent of brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularly pleasant in the fresh air.
The driver’s hand fumbled with something at the lamp, the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along the smooth highroad.
“I want nothing, nothing but this happiness,” he thought, staring at the bone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and picturing to himself Anna just as he had seen her last time.
Whereabouts will she be?
Why did she fix on this place to meet me, and why does she write in Betsy’s letter?” he thought, wondering now for the first time at it.
He called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue, and opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and went into the avenue that led up to the house.
Her face was hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the special movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of the shoulders, and the setting of the head, and at once a sort of electric shock ran all over him.
With fresh force, he felt conscious of himself from the springy motions of his legs to the movements of his lungs as he breathed, and something set his lips twitching.
I absolutely had to see you,” she said; and the serious and set line of her lips, which he saw under the veil, transformed his mood at once.
But how have you come, where from?” “Never mind,” she said, laying her hand on his, “come along, I must talk to you.” He saw that something had happened, and that the interview would not be a joyous one.
In her presence he had no will of his own: without knowing the grounds of her distress, he already felt the same distress unconsciously passing over him.
“What is it? what?” he asked her, squeezing her hand with his elbow, and trying to read her thoughts in her face.
She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her courage; then suddenly she stopped.
“I did not tell you yesterday,” she began, breathing quickly and painfully, “that coming home with Alexey Alexandrovitch I told him everything ... told him I could not be his wife, that ... and told him everything.” He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole figure down to her as though hoping in this way to soften the hardness of her position for her.
But directly she had said this he suddenly drew himself up, and a proud and hard expression came over his face.
“Yes, yes, that’s better, a thousand times better!
But she was not listening to his words, she was reading his thoughts from the expression of his face.
She could not guess that that expression arose from the first idea that presented itself to Vronsky—that a duel was now inevitable.
The idea of a duel had never crossed her mind, and so she put a different interpretation on this passing expression of hardness.
When she got her husband’s letter, she knew then at the bottom of her heart that everything would go on in the old way, that she would not have the strength of will to forego her position, to abandon her son, and to join her lover.
The morning spent at Princess Tverskaya’s had confirmed her still more in this.
But this interview was still of the utmost gravity for her.
She hoped that this interview would transform her position, and save her.
If on hearing this news he were to say to her resolutely, passionately, without an instant’s wavering: “Throw up everything and come with me!” she would give up her son and go away with him.
But this news had not produced what she had expected in him; he simply seemed as though he were resenting some affront.
It happened of itself,” she said irritably; “and see....” she pulled her husband’s letter out of her glove.
“I understand, I understand,” he interrupted her, taking the letter, but not reading it, and trying to soothe her.
“The one thing I longed for, the one thing I prayed for, was to cut short this position, so as to devote my life to your happiness.” “Why do you tell me that?” she said.
If I doubted....” “Who’s that coming?” said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two ladies walking towards them.
“Perhaps they know us!” and he hurriedly turned off, drawing her after him into a side path.
Her lips were quivering.
Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of her rupture with her husband, Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously carried away by the natural sensation aroused in him by his own relation to the betrayed husband.
Now while he held his letter in his hands, he could not help picturing the challenge, which he would most likely find at home today or tomorrow, and the duel itself, in which, with the same cold and haughty expression that his face was assuming at this moment he would await the injured husband’s shot, after having himself fired into the air.
And at that instant there flashed across his mind the thought of what Serpuhovskoy had just said to him, and what he had himself been thinking in the morning—that it was better not to bind himself—and he knew that this thought he could not tell her.
Having read the letter, he raised his eyes to her, and there was no determination in them.
She saw at once that he had been thinking about it before by himself.
She knew that whatever he might say to her, he would not say all he thought.
This was not what she had been reckoning on.
“You see the sort of man he is,” she said, with a shaking voice; “he....” “Forgive me, but I rejoice at it,” Vronsky interrupted.
“For God’s sake, let me finish!” he added, his eyes imploring her to give him time to explain his words.
“I rejoice, because things cannot, cannot possibly remain as he supposes.” “Why can’t they?” Anna said, restraining her tears, and obviously attaching no sort of consequence to what he said.
Vronsky meant that after the duel—inevitable, he thought—things could not go on as before, but he said something different.
I hope”—he was confused, and reddened—“that you will let me arrange and plan our life.
Tomorrow....” he was beginning.
“But my child!” she shrieked.
I should have to leave him, and I can’t and won’t do that.” “But, for God’s sake, which is better?—leave your child, or keep up this degrading position?” “To whom is it degrading?” “To all, and most of all to you.” “You say degrading ... don’t say that.
“Don’t you understand that from the day I loved you everything has changed for me?
If that’s mine, I feel so exalted, so strong, that nothing can be humiliating to me.
I am proud of my position, because ... proud of being ... proud....” She could not say what she was proud of.
Tears of shame and despair choked her utterance.
He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in his nose, and for the first time in his life he felt on the point of weeping.
He felt sorry for her, and he felt he could not help her, and with that he knew that he was to blame for her wretchedness, and that he had done something wrong.
“Is not a divorce possible?” he said feebly.
She shook her head, not answering.
Her presentiment that all would again go on in the old way had not deceived her.
“On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything can be settled.” “Yes,” she said.
“But don’t let us talk any more of it.” Anna’s carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come back to the little gate of the Vrede garden, drove up.
Chapter 23 On Monday there was the usual sitting of the Commission of the 2nd of June.
Alexey Alexandrovitch walked into the hall where the sitting was held, greeted the members and the president, as usual, and sat down in his place, putting his hand on the papers laid ready before him.
Among these papers lay the necessary evidence and a rough outline of the speech he intended to make.
But he did not really need these documents.
He remembered every point, and did not think it necessary to go over in his memory what he would say.
He knew that when the time came, and when he saw his enemy facing him, and studiously endeavoring to assume an expression of indifference, his speech would flow of itself better than he could prepare it now.
He felt that the import of his speech was of such magnitude that every word of it would have weight.
Meantime, as he listened to the usual report, he had the most innocent and inoffensive air.
When the report was over, Alexey Alexandrovitch announced in his subdued, delicate voice that he had several points to bring before the meeting in regard to the Commission for the Reorganization of the Native Tribes.
All attention was turned upon him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch cleared his throat, and not looking at his opponent, but selecting, as he always did while he was delivering his speeches, the first person sitting opposite him, an inoffensive little old man, who never had an opinion of any sort in the Commission, began to expound his views.
When he reached the point about the fundamental and radical law, his opponent jumped up and began to protest.
Stremov, who was also a member of the Commission, and also stung to the quick, began defending himself, and altogether a stormy sitting followed; but Alexey Alexandrovitch triumphed, and his motion was carried, three new commissions were appointed, and the next day in a certain Petersburg circle nothing else was talked of but this sitting.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s success had been even greater than he had anticipated.
Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on waking up, recollected with pleasure his triumph of the previous day, and he could not help smiling, though he tried to appear indifferent, when the chief secretary of his department, anxious to flatter him, informed him of the rumors that had reached him concerning what had happened in the Commission.
Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey Alexandrovitch had completely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the day fixed by him for the return of Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a shock of annoyance when a servant came in to inform him of her arrival.
Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage had been sent to meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so Alexey Alexandrovitch might have known of her arrival.
She was told that he had not yet gone out, but was busy with his secretary.
She sent word to her husband that she had come, went to her own room, and occupied herself in sorting out her things, expecting he would come to her.
She went into the dining-room on the pretext of giving some directions, and spoke loudly on purpose, expecting him to come out there; but he did not come, though she heard him go to the door of his study as he parted from the chief secretary.
She knew that he usually went out quickly to his office, and she wanted to see him before that, so that their attitude to one another might be defined.
She walked across the drawing-room and went resolutely to him.
When she went into his study he was in official uniform, obviously ready to go out, sitting at a little table on which he rested his elbows, looking dejectedly before him.
She saw him before he saw her, and she saw that he was thinking of her.
On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then his face flushed hotly—a thing Anna had never seen before, and he got up quickly and went to meet her, looking not at her eyes, but above them at her forehead and hair.
“I am very glad you have come,” he said, sitting down beside her, and obviously wishing to say something, he stuttered.
In spite of the fact that, preparing herself for meeting him, she had schooled herself to despise and reproach him, she did not know what to say to him, and she felt sorry for him.
“Is Seryozha quite well?” he said, and not waiting for an answer, he added: “I shan’t be dining at home today, and I have got to go out directly.” “I had thought of going to Moscow,” she said.
Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she began herself.
Not all wives are so kind as you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such agreeable news to their husbands.” He laid special emphasis on the word “agreeable.” “I shall ignore it so long as the world knows nothing of it, so long as my name is not disgraced.
And so I simply inform you that our relations must be just as they have always been, and that only in the event of your compromising me I shall be obliged to take steps to secure my honor.” “But our relations cannot be the same as always,” Anna began in a timid voice, looking at him with dismay.
When she saw once more those composed gestures, heard that shrill, childish, and sarcastic voice, her aversion for him extinguished her pity for him, and she felt only afraid, but at all costs she wanted to make clear her position.
He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.
“The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I suppose, in your ideas.
I have too much respect or contempt, or both ...
I respect your past and despise your present ... that I was far from the interpretation you put on my words.” Anna sighed and bowed her head.
“Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence you show,” he went on, getting hot, “—announcing your infidelity to your husband and seeing nothing reprehensible in it, apparently—you can see anything reprehensible in performing a wife’s duties in relation to your husband.” “Alexey Alexandrovitch!
What is it you want of me?” “I want you not to meet that man here, and to conduct yourself so that neither the world nor the servants can reproach you ... not to see him.
And in return you will enjoy all the privileges of a faithful wife without fulfilling her duties.
The way in which he had been managing his land revolted him and had lost all attraction for him.
In spite of the magnificent harvest, never had there been, or, at least, never it seemed to him, had there been so many hindrances and so many quarrels between him and the peasants as that year, and the origin of these failures and this hostility was now perfectly comprehensible to him.
The herd of improved cows such as Pava, the whole land ploughed over and enriched, the nine level fields surrounded with hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily manured, the seed sown in drills, and all the rest of it—it was all splendid if only the work had been done for themselves, or for themselves and comrades—people in sympathy with them.
And in this struggle he saw that with immense expenditure of force on his side, and with no effort or even intention on the other side, all that was attained was that the work did not go to the liking of either side, and that splendid tools, splendid cattle and land were spoiled with no good to anyone.
Worst of all, the energy expended on this work was not simply wasted.
He could not help feeling now, since the meaning of this system had become clear to him, that the aim of his energy was a most unworthy one.
In reality, what was the struggle about?
He was struggling for every farthing of his share (and he could not help it, for he had only to relax his efforts, and he would not have had the money to pay his laborers’ wages), while they were only struggling to be able to do their work easily and agreeably, that is to say, as they were used to doing it.
It was for his interests that every laborer should work as hard as possible, and that while doing so he should keep his wits about him, so as to try not to break the winnowing machines, the horse rakes, the thrashing machines, that he should attend to what he was doing.
What the laborer wanted was to work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and above all, carelessly and heedlessly, without thinking.
He sent out a hay machine for pitching the hay—it was broken at the first row because it was dull work for a peasant to sit on the seat in front with the great wings waving above him.
And he was told, “Don’t trouble, your honor, sure, the womenfolks will pitch it quick enough.” The ploughs were practically useless, because it never occurred to the laborer to raise the share when he turned the plough, and forcing it round, he strained the horses and tore up the ground, and Levin was begged not to mind about it.
All this happened, not because anyone felt ill-will to Levin or his farm; on the contrary, he knew that they liked him, thought him a simple gentleman (their highest praise); but it happened simply because all they wanted was to work merrily and carelessly, and his interests were not only remote and incomprehensible to them, but fatally opposed to their most just claims.
Long before, Levin had felt dissatisfaction with his own position in regard to the land.
He saw where his boat leaked, but he did not look for the leak, perhaps purposely deceiving himself. (Nothing would be left him if he lost faith in it.) But now he could deceive himself no longer.
The farming of the land, as he was managing it, had become not merely unattractive but revolting to him, and he could take no further interest in it.
To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off, of Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not see.
Darya Alexandrovna Oblonskaya had invited him, when he was over there, to come; to come with the object of renewing his offer to her sister, who would, so she gave him to understand, accept him now.
Levin himself had felt on seeing Kitty Shtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to love her; but he could not go over to the Oblonskys’, knowing she was there.
The fact that he had made her an offer, and she had refused him, had placed an insuperable barrier between her and him.
“I should not be able to speak to her without a feeling of reproach; I could not look at her without resentment; and she will only hate me all the more, as she’s bound to.
And besides, how can I now, after what Darya Alexandrovna told me, go to see them?
And me to go magnanimously to forgive her, and have pity on her!
Me go through a performance before her of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!...
What induced Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that?
By chance I might have seen her, then everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it’s out of the question, out of the question!” Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a side-saddle for Kitty’s use.
“I’m told you have a side-saddle,” she wrote to him; “I hope you will bring it over yourself.” This was more than he could stand.
How could a woman of any intelligence, of any delicacy, put her sister in such a humiliating position!
To write that he would go was impossible, because he could not go; to write that he could not come because something prevented him, or that he would be away, that was still worse.
He sent the saddle without an answer, and with a sense of having done something shameful; he handed over all the now revolting business of the estate to the bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to see his friend Sviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse in his neighborhood, and had lately written to ask him to keep a long-standing promise to stay with him.
The grouse-marsh, in the Surovsky district, had long tempted Levin, but he had continually put off this visit on account of his work on the estate.
Now he was glad to get away from the neighborhood of the Shtcherbatskys, and still more from his farm work, especially on a shooting expedition, which always in trouble served as the best consolation.
Chapter 25 In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of post horses, and Levin drove there with his own horses in his big, old-fashioned carriage.
A bald, well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, gray on his cheeks, opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the three horses pass.
Directing the coachman to a place under the shed in the big, clean, tidy yard, with charred, old-fashioned ploughs in it, the old man asked Levin to come into the parlor.
A cleanly dressed young woman, with clogs on her bare feet, was scrubbing the floor in the new outer room.
She was frightened of the dog, that ran in after Levin, and uttered a shriek, but began laughing at her own fright at once when she was told the dog would not hurt her.
Pointing Levin with her bare arm to the door into the parlor, she bent down again, hiding her handsome face, and went on scrubbing.
“Yes, please.” The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen dividing it into two.
Under the holy pictures stood a table painted in patterns, a bench, and two chairs.
Near the entrance was a dresser full of crockery.
The shutters were closed, there were few flies, and it was so clean that Levin was anxious that Laska, who had been running along the road and bathing in puddles, should not muddy the floor, and ordered her to a place in the corner by the door.
The good-looking young woman in clogs, swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before him to the well for water.
“Look sharp, my girl!” the old man shouted after her, good-humoredly, and he went up to Levin.
“Well, sir, are you going to Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky?
His honor comes to us too,” he began, chatting, leaning his elbows on the railing of the steps.
In the middle of the old man’s account of his acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creaked again, and laborers came into the yard from the fields, with wooden ploughs and harrows.
The horses harnessed to the ploughs and harrows were sleek and fat.
The laborers were obviously of the household: two were young men in cotton shirts and caps, the two others were hired laborers in homespun shirts, one an old man, the other a young fellow.
Moving off from the steps, the old man went up to the horses and began unharnessing them.
“What have they been ploughing?” asked Levin.
“Ploughing up the potatoes.
Fedot, don’t let out the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we’ll put the other in harness.” “Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has he brought them along?” asked the big, healthy-looking fellow, obviously the old man’s son.
“There ... in the outer room,” answered the old man, bundling together the harness he had taken off, and flinging it on the ground.
“You can put them on, while they have dinner.” The good-looking young woman came into the outer room with the full pails dragging at her shoulders.
More women came on the scene from somewhere, young and handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with children and without children.
The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family, having disposed of the horses, came in to dinner.
Levin, getting his provisions out of his carriage, invited the old man to take tea with him.
“Well, I have had some today already,” said the old man, obviously accepting the invitation with pleasure.
Ten years before, the old man had rented three hundred acres from the lady who owned them, and a year ago he had bought them and rented another three hundred from a neighboring landowner.
A small part of the land—the worst part—he let out for rent, while a hundred acres of arable land he cultivated himself with his family and two hired laborers.
The old man complained that things were doing badly.
But Levin saw that he simply did so from a feeling of propriety, and that his farm was in a flourishing condition.
If it had been unsuccessful he would not have bought land at thirty-five roubles the acre, he would not have married his three sons and a nephew, he would not have rebuilt twice after fires, and each time on a larger scale.
In spite of the old man’s complaints, it was evident that he was proud, and justly proud, of his prosperity, proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons’ wives, his horses and his cows, and especially of the fact that he was keeping all this farming going.
From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought he was not averse to new methods either.
He had planted a great many potatoes, and his potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past, were already past flowering and beginning to die down, while Levin’s were only just coming into flower.
He earthed up his potatoes with a modern plough borrowed from a neighboring landowner.
The trifling fact that, thinning out his rye, the old man used the rye he thinned out for his horses, specially struck Levin.
How many times had Levin seen this splendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but always it had turned out to be impossible.
They carry it out in bundles to the roadside, and the cart brings it away.” “Well, we landowners can’t manage well with our laborers,” said Levin, handing him a glass of tea.
“Thank you,” said the old man, and he took the glass, but refused sugar, pointing to a lump he had left.
“They’re simple destruction,” said he.
“Look at Sviazhsky’s, for instance.
It’s not looked after enough—that’s all it is!” “But you work your land with hired laborers?” “We’re all peasants together.
We go into everything ourselves.
If a man’s no use, he can go, and we can manage by ourselves.” “Father, Finogen wants some tar,” said the young woman in the clogs, coming in.
“Yes, yes, that’s how it is, sir!” said the old man, getting up, and crossing himself deliberately, he thanked Levin and went out.
When Levin went into the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the whole family at dinner.
The women were standing up waiting on them.
The young, sturdy-looking son was telling something funny with his mouth full of pudding, and they were all laughing, the woman in the clogs, who was pouring cabbage soup into a bowl, laughing most merrily of all.
Very probably the good-looking face of the young woman in the clogs had a good deal to do with the impression of well-being this peasant household made upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levin could never get rid of it.
And all the way from the old peasant’s to Sviazhsky’s he kept recalling this peasant farm as though there were something in this impression that demanded his special attention.
Chapter 26 Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district.
His sister-in-law, a young girl Levin liked very much, lived in his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and his wife would have greatly liked to marry the girl to him.
And this knowledge poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit to Sviazhsky.
On getting Sviazhsky’s letter with the invitation for shooting, Levin had immediately thought of this; but in spite of it he had made up his mind that Sviazhsky’s having such views for him was simply his own groundless supposition, and so he would go, all the same.
The Sviazhskys’ home-life was exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky himself, the best type of man taking part in local affairs that Levin knew, was very interesting to him.
Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to Levin, whose convictions, very logical though never original, go one way by themselves, while their life, exceedingly definite and firm in its direction, goes its way quite apart and almost always in direct contradiction to their convictions.
Sviazhsky was an extremely advanced man.
He despised the nobility, and believed the mass of the nobility to be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their views from cowardice.
He regarded Russia as a ruined country, rather after the style of Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad that he never permitted himself to criticize its doings seriously, and yet he was a functionary of that government and a model marshal of nobility, and when he drove about he always wore the cockade of office and the cap with the red band.
He considered human life only tolerable abroad, and went abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same time he carried on a complex and improved system of agriculture in Russia, and with extreme interest followed everything and knew everything that was being done in Russia.
He considered the Russian peasant as occupying a stage of development intermediate between the ape and the man, and at the same time in the local assemblies no one was readier to shake hands with the peasants and listen to their opinion.
He believed neither in God nor the devil, but was much concerned about the question of the improvement of the clergy and the maintenance of their revenues, and took special trouble to keep up the church in his village.
On the woman question he was on the side of the extreme advocates of complete liberty for women, and especially their right to labor.
But he lived with his wife on such terms that their affectionate childless home life was the admiration of everyone, and arranged his wife’s life so that she did nothing and could do nothing but share her husband’s efforts that her time should pass as happily and as agreeably as possible.
If it had not been a characteristic of Levin’s to put the most favorable interpretation on people, Sviazhsky’s character would have presented no doubt or difficulty to him: he would have said to himself, “a fool or a knave,” and everything would have seemed clear.
But he could not say “a fool,” because Sviazhsky was unmistakably clever, and moreover, a highly cultivated man, who was exceptionally modest over his culture.
But he did not display his knowledge except when he was compelled to do so.
Still less could Levin say that he was a knave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an honest, good-hearted, sensible man, who worked good-humoredly, keenly, and perseveringly at his work; he was held in high honor by everyone about him, and certainly he had never consciously done, and was indeed incapable of doing, anything base.
Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and looked at him and his life as at a living enigma.
Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to sound Sviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view of life; but it was always in vain.
Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond the outer chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind, which were hospitably open to all, he noticed that Sviazhsky was slightly disconcerted; faint signs of alarm were visible in his eyes, as though he were afraid Levin would understand him, and he would give him a kindly, good-humored repulse.
Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was particularly glad to stay with Sviazhsky.
Apart from the fact that the sight of this happy and affectionate couple, so pleased with themselves and everyone else, and their well-ordered home had always a cheering effect on Levin, he felt a longing, now that he was so dissatisfied with his own life, to get at that secret in Sviazhsky that gave him such clearness, definiteness, and good courage in life.
Moreover, Levin knew that at Sviazhsky’s he should meet the landowners of the neighborhood, and it was particularly interesting for him just now to hear and take part in those rural conversations concerning crops, laborers’ wages, and so on, which, he was aware, are conventionally regarded as something very low, but which seemed to him just now to constitute the one subject of importance.
“It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom, and it may not be of importance in England.
In both cases the conditions of agriculture are firmly established; but among us now, when everything has been turned upside down and is only just taking shape, the question what form these conditions will take is the one question of importance in Russia,” thought Levin.
The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected.
He walked about the whole day and only brought back three birds, but to make up for that—he brought back, as he always did from shooting, an excellent appetite, excellent spirits, and that keen, intellectual mood which with him always accompanied violent physical exertion.
And while out shooting, when he seemed to be thinking of nothing at all, suddenly the old man and his family kept coming back to his mind, and the impression of them seemed to claim not merely his attention, but the solution of some question connected with them.
In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some business connected with a wardship were of the party, and the interesting conversation Levin had been looking forward to sprang up.
Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and was obliged to keep up a conversation with her and her sister, who was sitting opposite him.
Madame Sviazhskaya was a round-faced, fair-haired, rather short woman, all smiles and dimples.
Levin tried through her to get a solution of the weighty enigma her husband presented to his mind; but he had not complete freedom of ideas, because he was in an agony of embarrassment.
This agony of embarrassment was due to the fact that the sister-in-law was sitting opposite to him, in a dress, specially put on, as he fancied, for his benefit, cut particularly open, in the shape of a trapeze, on her white bosom.
This quadrangular opening, in spite of the bosom’s being very white, or just because it was very white, deprived Levin of the full use of his faculties.
He imagined, probably mistakenly, that this low-necked bodice had been made on his account, and felt that he had no right to look at it, and tried not to look at it; but he felt that he was to blame for the very fact of the low-necked bodice having been made.
It seemed to Levin that he had deceived someone, that he ought to explain something, but that to explain it was impossible, and for that reason he was continually blushing, was ill at ease and awkward.
His awkwardness infected the pretty sister-in-law too.
But their hostess appeared not to observe this, and kept purposely drawing her into the conversation.
“You say,” she said, pursuing the subject that had been started, “that my husband cannot be interested in what’s Russian.
It’s quite the contrary; he is always in cheerful spirits abroad, but not as he is here.
He has so much to do, and he has the faculty of interesting himself in everything.
The little house covered with ivy, isn’t it?” “Yes; that’s Nastia’s work,” she said, indicating her sister.
“You teach in it yourself?” asked Levin, trying to look above the open neck, but feeling that wherever he looked in that direction he should see it.
“Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we have a first-rate schoolmistress now.
And we’ve started gymnastic exercises.” “No, thank you, I won’t have any more tea,” said Levin, and conscious of doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the conversation, he got up, blushing.
“I hear a very interesting conversation,” he added, and walked to the other end of the table, where Sviazhsky was sitting with the two gentlemen of the neighborhood.
Sviazhsky was sitting sideways, with one elbow on the table, and a cup in one hand, while with the other hand he gathered up his beard, held it to his nose and let it drop again, as though he were smelling it.
His brilliant black eyes were looking straight at the excited country gentleman with gray whiskers, and apparently he derived amusement from his remarks.
The gentleman was complaining of the peasants.
It was evident to Levin that Sviazhsky knew an answer to this gentleman’s complaints, which would at once demolish his whole contention, but that in his position he could not give utterance to this answer, and listened, not without pleasure, to the landowner’s comic speeches.
The gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterate adherent of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all his life in the country.
Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in the old-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not his everyday attire, in his shrewd, deep-set eyes, in his idiomatic, fluent Russian, in the imperious tone that had become habitual from long use, and in the resolute gestures of his large, red, sunburnt hands, with an old betrothal ring on the little finger.
I’d turn my back on the whole business, sell up, go off like Nikolay Ivanovitch ... to hear _La Belle Hélène_,” said the landowner, a pleasant smile lighting up his shrewd old face.
“But you see you don’t throw it up,” said Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky; “so there must be something gained.” “The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought nor hired.
Though, instead of that, you’d never believe it—the drunkenness, the immorality!
They keep chopping and changing their bits of land.
The peasant’s dying of hunger, but just go and take him on as a laborer, he’ll do his best to do you a mischief, and then bring you up before the justice of the peace.” “But then you make complaints to the justice too,” said Sviazhsky.
“I lodge complaints?
Not for anything in the world!
At the works, for instance, they pocketed the advance-money and made off.
Why, acquitted them.
Nothing keeps them in order but their own communal court and their village elder.
But for that there’d be nothing for it but to give it all up and run away.” Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviazhsky, who, far from resenting it, was apparently amused by it.
“But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures,” said he, smiling: “Levin and I and this gentleman.” He indicated the other landowner.
“Yes, the thing’s done at Mihail Petrovitch’s, but ask him how it’s done.
Do you call that a rational system?” said the landowner, obviously rather proud of the word “rational.” “My system’s very simple,” said Mihail Petrovitch, “thank God.
All my management rests on getting the money ready for the autumn taxes, and the peasants come to me, ‘Father, master, help us!’ Well, the peasants are all one’s neighbors; one feels for them.
“Then what do you think?” he asked; “what system is one to adopt nowadays?” “Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land for half the crop or for rent to the peasants; that one can do—only that’s just how the general prosperity of the country is being ruined.
Where the land with serf-labor and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on the half-crop system it yields three to one.
Russia has been ruined by the emancipation!” Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a faint gesture of irony to him; but Levin did not think the landowner’s words absurd, he understood them better than he did Sviazhsky.
A great deal more of what the gentleman with the gray whiskers said to show in what way Russia was ruined by the emancipation struck him indeed as very true, new to him, and quite incontestable.
The landowner unmistakably spoke his own individual thought—a thing that very rarely happens—and a thought to which he had been brought not by a desire of finding some exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown up out of the conditions of his life, which he had brooded over in the solitude of his village, and had considered in every aspect.
“The point is, don’t you see, that progress of every sort is only made by the use of authority,” he said, evidently wishing to show he was not without culture.
“Take the reforms of Peter, of Catherine, of Alexander.
Take European history.
And progress in agriculture more than anything else—the potato, for instance, that was introduced among us by force.
It was introduced maybe in the days before the Empire, but it was probably brought in by force.
Now, in our own day, we landowners in the serf times used various improvements in our husbandry: drying machines and thrashing machines, and carting manure and all the modern implements—all that we brought into use by our authority, and the peasants opposed it at first, and ended by imitating us.
Now, by the abolition of serfdom we have been deprived of our authority; and so our husbandry, where it had been raised to a high level, is bound to sink to the most savage primitive condition.
If it’s rational, you’ll be able to keep up the same system with hired labor,” said Sviazhsky.
With whom am I going to work the system, allow me to ask?” “There it is—the labor force—the chief element in agriculture,” thought Levin.
“With laborers.” “The laborers won’t work well, and won’t work with good implements.
Our laborer can do nothing but get drunk like a pig, and when he’s drunk he ruins everything you give him.
He makes the horses ill with too much water, cuts good harness, barters the tires of the wheels for drink, drops bits of iron into the thrashing machine, so as to break it.
He loathes the sight of anything that’s not after his fashion.
And that’s how it is the whole level of husbandry has fallen.
Lands gone out of cultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants, and where millions of bushels were raised you get a hundred thousand; the wealth of the country has decreased.
If the same thing had been done, but with care that....” And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of emancipation by means of which these drawbacks might have been avoided.
This did not interest Levin, but when he had finished, Levin went back to his first position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying to draw him into expressing his serious opinion:— “That the standard of culture is falling, and that with our present relations to the peasants there is no possibility of farming on a rational system to yield a profit—that’s perfectly true,” said he.
“I don’t believe it,” Sviazhsky replied quite seriously; “all I see is that we don’t know how to cultivate the land, and that our system of agriculture in the serf days was by no means too high, but too low.
We have no machines, no good stock, no efficient supervision; we don’t even know how to keep accounts.
Ask any landowner; he won’t be able to tell you what crop’s profitable, and what’s not.” “Italian bookkeeping,” said the gentleman of the gray whiskers ironically.
“You may keep your books as you like, but if they spoil everything for you, there won’t be any profit.” “Why do they spoil things?
A poor thrashing machine, or your Russian presser, they will break, but my steam press they don’t break.
A wretched Russian nag they’ll ruin, but keep good dray-horses—they won’t ruin them.
We must raise our farming to a higher level.” “Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay Ivanovitch!
It’s all very well for you; but for me, with a son to keep at the university, lads to be educated at the high school—how am I going to buy these dray-horses?” “Well, that’s what the land banks are for.” “To get what’s left me sold by auction?
No, thank you.” “I don’t agree that it’s necessary or possible to raise the level of agriculture still higher,” said Levin.
For my part, anyway, whatever I’ve spent money on in the way of husbandry, it has been a loss: stock—a loss, machinery—a loss.” “That’s true enough,” the gentleman with the gray whiskers chimed in, positively laughing with satisfaction.
“I mix with all the neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rational system; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at a loss.
Come, tell us how does your land do—does it pay?” said Levin, and at once in Sviazhsky’s eyes he detected that fleeting expression of alarm which he had noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond the outer chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind.
Moreover, this question on Levin’s part was not quite in good faith.
Madame Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea that they had that summer invited a German expert in bookkeeping from Moscow, who for a consideration of five hundred roubles had investigated the management of their property, and found that it was costing them a loss of three thousand odd roubles.
She did not remember the precise sum, but it appeared that the German had worked it out to the fraction of a farthing.
The gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention of the profits of Sviazhsky’s farming, obviously aware how much gain his neighbor and marshal was likely to be making.
“Possibly it does not pay,” answered Sviazhsky.
“That merely proves either that I’m a bad manager, or that I’ve sunk my capital for the increase of my rents.” “Oh, rent!” Levin cried with horror.
“Rent there may be in Europe, where land has been improved by the labor put into it, but with us all the land is deteriorating from the labor put into it—in other words they’re working it out; so there’s no question of rent.” “How no rent?
It’s a law.” “Then we’re outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, but simply muddles us.
Masha, pass us some junket or raspberries.” He turned to his wife.
“Extraordinarily late the raspberries are lasting this year.” And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked off, apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the very point when to Levin it seemed that it was only just beginning.
Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with the gray-whiskered landowner, trying to prove to him that all the difficulty arises from the fact that we don’t find out the peculiarities and habits of our laborer; but the landowner, like all men who think independently and in isolation, was slow in taking in any other person’s idea, and particularly partial to his own.
“What makes you think,” said Levin, trying to get back to the question, “that it’s impossible to find some relation to the laborer in which the labor would become productive?” “That never could be so with the Russian peasantry; we’ve no power over them,” answered the landowner.
“How can new conditions be found?” said Sviazhsky.
Having eaten some junket and lighted a cigarette, he came back to the discussion.
“All possible relations to the labor force have been defined and studied,” he said.
“The relic of barbarism, the primitive commune with each guarantee for all, will disappear of itself; serfdom has been abolished—there remains nothing but free labor, and its forms are fixed and ready made, and must be adopted.
Permanent hands, day-laborers, rammers—you can’t get out of those forms.” “But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms.” “Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones.
And will find them, in all probability.” “That’s just what I was meaning,” answered Levin.
“Why shouldn’t we seek them for ourselves?” “Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means for constructing railways.
They are ready, invented.” “But if they don’t do for us, if they’re stupid?” said Levin.
And again he detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of Sviazhsky.
I’ve heard all that; but, excuse me, do you know all that’s been done in Europe on the question of the organization of labor?” “No, very little.” “That question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe.
The Schulze-Delitsch movement....
And then all this enormous literature of the labor question, the most liberal Lassalle movement ... the Mulhausen experiment?
That’s a fact by now, as you’re probably aware.” “I have some idea of it, but very vague.” “No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as I do.
I’m not a professor of sociology, of course, but it interested me, and really, if it interests you, you ought to study it.” “But what conclusion have they come to?” “Excuse me....” The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking Levin in his inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the outer chambers of his mind, went to see his guests out.
After saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to stay the whole of the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them to see an interesting ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going to bed, into his host’s study to get the books on the labor question that Sviazhsky had offered him.
Sviazhsky’s study was a huge room, surrounded by bookcases and with two tables in it—one a massive writing-table, standing in the middle of the room, and the other a round table, covered with recent numbers of reviews and journals in different languages, ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp.
On the writing-table was a stand of drawers marked with gold lettering, and full of papers of various sorts.
Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking-chair.
“What are you looking at there?” he said to Levin, who was standing at the round table looking through the reviews.
“Oh, yes, there’s a very interesting article here,” said Sviazhsky of the review Levin was holding in his hand.
“It appears,” he went on, with eager interest, “that Friedrich was not, after all, the person chiefly responsible for the partition of Poland.
It is proved....” And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new, very important, and interesting revelations.
Although Levin was engrossed at the moment by his ideas about the problem of the land, he wondered, as he heard Sviazhsky: “What is there inside of him?
And why, why is he interested in the partition of Poland?” When Sviazhsky had finished, Levin could not help asking: “Well, and what then?” But there was nothing to follow.
It was simply interesting that it had been proved to be so and so.
But Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to explain why it was interesting to him.
“Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor,” said Levin, sighing.
An inveterate supporter of serfdom at heart, like all of them!” said Sviazhsky.
“Whose marshal you are.” “Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction,” said Sviazhsky, laughing.
“I’ll tell you what interests me very much,” said Levin.
“He’s right that our system, that’s to say of rational farming, doesn’t answer, that the only thing that answers is the money-lender system, like that meek-looking gentleman’s, or else the very simplest....
It answers with Vassiltchikov.” “A factory....” “But I really don’t know what it is you are surprised at.
The people are at such a low stage of rational and moral development, that it’s obvious they’re bound to oppose everything that’s strange to them.
I say political economy; you say—worse.
I say socialism: worse.
Education: worse.” “But how do schools help matters?” “They give the peasant fresh wants.” “Well, that’s a thing I’ve never understood,” Levin replied with heat.
“In what way are schools going to help the people to improve their material position?
You say schools, education, will give them fresh wants.
So much the worse, since they won’t be capable of satisfying them.
And in what way a knowledge of addition and subtraction and the catechism is going to improve their material condition, I never could make out.
The day before yesterday, I met a peasant woman in the evening with a little baby, and asked her where she was going.
She said she was going to the wise woman; her boy had screaming fits, so she was taking him to be doctored.
I asked, ‘Why, how does the wise woman cure screaming fits?’ ‘She puts the child on the hen-roost and repeats some charm....’” “Well, you’re saying it yourself!
What’s wanted to prevent her taking her child to the hen-roost to cure it of screaming fits is just....” Sviazhsky said, smiling good-humoredly.
“Oh, no!” said Levin with annoyance; “that method of doctoring I merely meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools.
The people are poor and ignorant—that we see as surely as the peasant woman sees the baby is ill because it screams.
But in what way this trouble of poverty and ignorance is to be cured by schools is as incomprehensible as how the hen-roost affects the screaming.
What has to be cured is what makes him poor.” “Well, in that, at least, you’re in agreement with Spencer, whom you dislike so much.
He says, too, that education may be the consequence of greater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent washing, as he says, but not of being able to read and write....” “Well, then, I’m very glad—or the contrary, very sorry, that I’m in agreement with Spencer; only I’ve known it a long while.
Schools can do no good; what will do good is an economic organization in which the people will become richer, will have more leisure—and then there will be schools.” “Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory.” “And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?” asked Levin.
But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky’s eyes, and he said smiling: “No; that screaming story is positively capital!
Did you really hear it yourself?” Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this man’s life and his thoughts.
Obviously he did not care in the least what his reasoning led him to; all he wanted was the process of reasoning.
And he did not like it when the process of reasoning brought him into a blind alley.
That was the only thing he disliked, and avoided by changing the conversation to something agreeable and amusing.
All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made by the old peasant, which served, as it were, as the fundamental basis of all the conceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into violent excitement.
Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring mattress that yielded unexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his leg, Levin did not fall asleep for a long while.
Not one conversation with Sviazhsky, though he had said a great deal that was clever, had interested Levin; but the conclusions of the irascible landowner required consideration.
Levin could not help recalling every word he had said, and in imagination amending his own replies.
“Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our husbandry does not answer because the peasant hates improvements, and that they must be forced on him by authority.
If no system of husbandry answered at all without these improvements, you would be quite right.
But the only system that does answer is where laborer is working in accordance with his habits, just as on the old peasant’s land half-way here.
Your and our general dissatisfaction with the system shows that either we are to blame or the laborers.
We have gone our way—the European way—a long while, without asking ourselves about the qualities of our labor force.
Let us try to look upon the labor force not as an abstract force, but as the _Russian peasant_ with his instincts, and we shall arrange our system of culture in accordance with that.
Imagine, I ought to have said to him, that you have the same system as the old peasant has, that you have found means of making your laborers take an interest in the success of the work, and have found the happy mean in the way of improvements which they will admit, and you will, without exhausting the soil, get twice or three times the yield you got before.
And to do this one must lower the standard of husbandry and interest the laborers in its success.
How to do this?—that’s a matter of detail; but undoubtedly it can be done.” This idea threw Levin into a great excitement.
He did not sleep half the night, thinking over in detail the putting of his idea into practice.
He had not intended to go away next day, but he now determined to go home early in the morning.
Most important of all—he must get back without delay: he would have to make haste to put his new project to the peasants before the sowing of the winter wheat, so that the sowing might be undertaken on a new basis.
He had made up his mind to revolutionize his whole system.
Chapter 29 The carrying out of Levin’s plan presented many difficulties; but he struggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which, though not what he desired, was enough to enable him, without self-deception, to believe that the attempt was worth the trouble.
One of the chief difficulties was that the process of cultivating the land was in full swing, that it was impossible to stop everything and begin it all again from the beginning, and the machine had to be mended while in motion.
When on the evening that he arrived home he informed the bailiff of his plans, the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what he said so long as he was pointing out that all that had been done up to that time was stupid and useless.
On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a proposition to cede them the land on new terms, he came into collision with the same great difficulty that they were so much absorbed by the current work of the day, that they had not time to consider the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed scheme.
The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp Levin’s proposal—that he should with his family take a share of the profits of the cattle-yard—and he was in complete sympathy with the plan.
But when Levin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan’s face expressed alarm and regret that he could not hear all he had to say, and he made haste to find himself some task that would admit of no delay: he either snatched up the fork to pitch the hay out of the pens, or ran to get water or to clear out the dung.
Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant that a landowner’s object could be anything else than a desire to squeeze all he could out of them.
They were firmly convinced that his real aim (whatever he might say to them) would always be in what he did not say to them.
And they themselves, in giving their opinion, said a great deal but never said what was their real object.
Moreover (Levin felt that the irascible landowner had been right) the peasants made their first and unalterable condition of any agreement whatever that they should not be forced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor to use new implements.
They agreed that the modern plough ploughed better, that the scarifier did the work more quickly, but they found thousands of reasons that made it out of the question for them to use either of them; and though he had accepted the conviction that he would have to lower the standard of cultivation, he felt sorry to give up improved methods, the advantages of which were so obvious.
But in spite of all these difficulties he got his way, and by autumn the system was working, or at least so it seemed to him.
At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the land just as it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiff on new conditions of partnership; but he was very soon convinced that this was impossible, and determined to divide it up.
The cattle-yard, the garden, hay fields, and arable land, divided into several parts, had to be made into separate lots.
The simple-hearted cowherd, Ivan, who, Levin fancied, understood the matter better than any of them, collecting together a gang of workers to help him, principally of his own family, became a partner in the cattle-yard.
A distant part of the estate, a tract of waste land that had lain fallow for eight years, was with the help of the clever carpenter, Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by six families of peasants on new conditions of partnership, and the peasant Shuraev took the management of all the vegetable gardens on the same terms.
The remainder of the land was still worked on the old system, but these three associated partnerships were the first step to a new organization of the whole, and they completely took up Levin’s time.
It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov’s company did not plough over the ground twice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying themselves on the plea that the time was too short.
It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen gardens he had undertaken in small lots to the peasants.
He evidently quite misunderstood, and apparently intentionally misunderstood, the conditions upon which the land had been given to him.
Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all the advantages of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing but the sound of his voice, and were firmly resolved, whatever he might say, not to let themselves be taken in.
He felt this especially when he talked to the cleverest of the peasants, Ryezunov, and detected the gleam in Ryezunov’s eyes which showed so plainly both ironical amusement at Levin, and the firm conviction that, if anyone were to be taken in, it would not be he, Ryezunov.
But in spite of all this Levin thought the system worked, and that by keeping accounts strictly and insisting on his own way, he would prove to them in the future the advantages of the arrangement, and then the system would go of itself.
These matters, together with the management of the land still left on his hands, and the indoor work over his book, so engrossed Levin the whole summer that he scarcely ever went out shooting.
At the end of August he heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from their servant who brought back the side-saddle.
He felt that in not answering Darya Alexandrovna’s letter he had by his rudeness, of which he could not think without a flush of shame, burned his ships, and that he would never go and see them again.
He had been just as rude with the Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye.
The business of reorganizing the farming of his land absorbed him as completely as though there would never be anything else in his life.
He read the books lent him by Sviazhsky, and copying out what he had not got, he read both the economic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as he had anticipated, found nothing bearing on the scheme he had undertaken.
In the books on political economy—in Mill, for instance, whom he studied first with great ardor, hoping every minute to find an answer to the questions that were engrossing him—he found laws deduced from the condition of land culture in Europe; but he did not see why these laws, which did not apply in Russia, must be general.
He saw just the same thing in the socialistic books: either they were the beautiful but impracticable fantasies which had fascinated him when he was a student, or they were attempts at improving, rectifying the economic position in which Europe was placed, with which the system of land tenure in Russia had nothing in common.
Political economy told him that the laws by which the wealth of Europe had been developed, and was developing, were universal and unvarying.
Socialism told him that development along these lines leads to ruin.
And neither of them gave an answer, or even a hint, in reply to the question what he, Levin, and all the Russian peasants and landowners, were to do with their millions of hands and millions of acres, to make them as productive as possible for the common weal.
Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously everything bearing on it, and intended in the autumn to go abroad to study land systems on the spot, in order that he might not on this question be confronted with what so often met him on various subjects.
Often, just as he was beginning to understand the idea in the mind of anyone he was talking to, and was beginning to explain his own, he would suddenly be told: “But Kauffmann, but Jones, but Dubois, but Michelli?
You haven’t read them: they’ve thrashed that question out thoroughly.” He saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli had nothing to tell him.
He thought that the Russian people whose task it was to colonize and cultivate vast tracts of unoccupied land, consciously adhered, till all their land was occupied, to the methods suitable to their purpose, and that their methods were by no means so bad as was generally supposed.
And he wanted to prove this theoretically in his book and practically on his land.
Chapter 30 At the end of September the timber had been carted for building the cattleyard on the land that had been allotted to the association of peasants, and the butter from the cows was sold and the profits divided.
In practice the system worked capitally, or, at least, so it seemed to Levin.
Levin was only waiting for the delivery of his wheat to receive the money for it and go abroad.
But the rains began, preventing the harvesting of the corn and potatoes left in the fields, and putting a stop to all work, even to the delivery of the wheat.
The mud was impassable along the roads; two mills were carried away, and the weather got worse and worse.
On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and hoping for fine weather, Levin began making final preparations for his journey.
He gave orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff to the merchant to get the money owing him, and went out himself to give some final directions on the estate before setting off.
Having finished all his business, soaked through with the streams of water which kept running down the leather behind his neck and his gaiters, but in the keenest and most confident temper, Levin returned homewards in the evening.
In spite of the gloominess of nature around him, he felt peculiarly eager.
The talks he had been having with the peasants in the further village had shown that they were beginning to get used to their new position.
The old servant to whose hut he had gone to get dry evidently approved of Levin’s plan, and of his own accord proposed to enter the partnership by the purchase of cattle.
“I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall attain my end,” thought Levin; “and it’s something to work and take trouble for.
This is not a matter of myself individually; the question of the public welfare comes into it.
The whole system of culture, the chief element in the condition of the people, must be completely transformed.
Instead of poverty, general prosperity and content; instead of hostility, harmony and unity of interests.
In short, a bloodless revolution, but a revolution of the greatest magnitude, beginning in the little circle of our district, then the province, then Russia, the whole world.
Because a just idea cannot but be fruitful.
And its being me, Kostya Levin, who went to a ball in a black tie, and was refused by the Shtcherbatskaya girl, and who was intrinsically such a pitiful, worthless creature—that proves nothing; I feel sure Franklin felt just as worthless, and he too had no faith in himself, thinking of himself as a whole.
And he too, most likely, had an Agafea Mihalovna to whom he confided his secrets.” Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.
The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come back and brought part of the money for the wheat.
An agreement had been made with the old servant, and on the road the bailiff had learned that everywhere the corn was still standing in the fields, so that his one hundred and sixty shocks that had not been carried were nothing in comparison with the losses of others.
After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an easy chair with a book, and as he read he went on thinking of the journey before him in connection with his book.
Today all the significance of his book rose before him with special distinctness, and whole periods ranged themselves in his mind in illustration of his theories.
“That ought to form a brief introduction, which I thought unnecessary before.” He got up to go to his writing-table, and Laska, lying at his feet, got up too, stretching and looking at him as though to inquire where to go.
But he had not time to write it down, for the head peasants had come round, and Levin went out into the hall to them.
After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors of the next day, and seeing all the peasants who had business with him, Levin went back to his study and sat down to work.
Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna settled herself in her place with her stocking.
After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with exceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting.
“What’s the use of being dreary?” said Agafea Mihalovna.
You ought to go to some warm springs, especially now you’re ready for the journey.” “Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agafea Mihalovna; I must finish my work.” “There, there, your work, you say!
As if you hadn’t done enough for the peasants!
Why, as ’tis, they’re saying, ‘Your master will be getting some honor from the Tsar for it.’ Indeed and it is a strange thing; why need you worry about the peasants?” “I’m not worrying about them; I’m doing it for my own good.” Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin’s plans for his land.
Levin often put his views before her in all their complexity, and not uncommonly he argued with her and did not agree with her comments.
But on this occasion she entirely misinterpreted what he had said.
“Of one’s soul’s salvation we all know and must think before all else,” she said with a sigh.
“Parfen Denisitch now, for all he was no scholar, he died a death that God grant everyone of us the like,” she said, referring to a servant who had died recently.
“Took the sacrament and all.” “That’s not what I mean,” said he.
“I mean that I’m acting for my own advantage.
It’s all the better for me if the peasants do their work better.” “Well, whatever you do, if he’s a lazy good-for-nought, everything’ll be at sixes and sevens.
Levin scowled, and without answering her, he sat down again to his work, repeating to himself all that he had been thinking of the real significance of that work.
Only at intervals he listened in the stillness to the click of Agafea Mihalovna’s needles, and recollecting what he did not want to remember, he frowned again.
At nine o’clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of a carriage over the mud.
“Well, here’s visitors come to us, and you won’t be dull,” said Agafea Mihalovna, getting up and going to the door.
But Levin overtook her.
Chapter 31 Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew, a familiar cough in the hall.
But he heard it indistinctly through the sound of his own footsteps, and hoped he was mistaken.
Then he caught sight of a long, bony, familiar figure, and now it seemed there was no possibility of mistake; and yet he still went on hoping that this tall man taking off his fur cloak and coughing was not his brother Nikolay.
Just now, when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that had come to him, and Agafea Mihalovna’s hint, was in a troubled and uncertain humor, the meeting with his brother that he had to face seemed particularly difficult.
Instead of a lively, healthy visitor, some outsider who would, he hoped, cheer him up in his uncertain humor, he had to see his brother, who knew him through and through, who would call forth all the thoughts nearest his heart, would force him to show himself fully.
And that he was not disposed to do.
Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall; as soon as he had seen his brother close, this feeling of selfish disappointment vanished instantly and was replaced by pity.
Terrible as his brother Nikolay had been before in his emaciation and sickliness, now he looked still more emaciated, still more wasted.
He was a skeleton covered with skin.
When he saw that smile, submissive and humble, Levin felt something clutching at his throat.
“Yes, yes!” answered Levin.
And he felt still more frightened when, kissing him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his brother’s skin and saw close to him his big eyes, full of a strange light.
A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to his brother that through the sale of the small part of the property, that had remained undivided, there was a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to him as his share.
Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money and, what was more important, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch with the earth, so as to renew his strength like the heroes of old for the work that lay before him.
In spite of his exaggerated stoop, and the emaciation that was so striking from his height, his movements were as rapid and abrupt as ever.
His brother dressed with particular care—a thing he never used to do—combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.
He was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levin often remembered him in childhood.
He even referred to Sergey Ivanovitch without rancor.
When he saw Agafea Mihalovna, he made jokes with her and asked after the old servants.
The news of the death of Parfen Denisitch made a painful impression on him.
A look of fear crossed his face, but he regained his serenity immediately.
Do you know, Myakov has promised me a place there, and I’m going into the service.
Now I’m going to arrange my life quite differently,” he went on.
“You know I got rid of that woman.” “Marya Nikolaevna?
She caused me all sorts of worries.” But he did not say what the annoyances were.
He could not say that he had cast off Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was weak, and, above all, because she would look after him, as though he were an invalid.
“Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now.
I’ve done silly things, of course, like everyone else, but money’s the last consideration; I don’t regret it.
So long as there’s health, and my health, thank God, is quite restored.” Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing to say.
Nikolay probably felt the same; he began questioning his brother about his affairs; and Levin was glad to talk about himself, because then he could speak without hypocrisy.
His brother listened, but evidently he was not interested by it.
These two men were so akin, so near each other, that the slightest gesture, the tone of voice, told both more than could be said in words.
Both of them now had only one thought—the illness of Nikolay and the nearness of his death—which stifled all else.
But neither of them dared to speak of it, and so whatever they said—not uttering the one thought that filled their minds—was all falsehood.
Never with any outside person, never on any official visit had he been so unnatural and false as he was that evening.
And the consciousness of this unnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it, made him even more unnatural.
His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep, tossed about like a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get his throat clear, mumbled something.
Sometimes when his breathing was painful, he said, “Oh, my God!” Sometimes when he was choking he muttered angrily, “Ah, the devil!” Levin could not sleep for a long while, hearing him.
His thoughts were of the most various, but the end of all his thoughts was the same—death.
Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first time presented itself to him with irresistible force.
And death, which was here in this loved brother, groaning half asleep and from habit calling without distinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as it had hitherto seemed to him.
If not today, tomorrow, if not tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn’t it all the same!
And what was this inevitable death—he did not know, had never thought about it, and what was more, had not the power, had not the courage to think about it.
“I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it must all end; I had forgotten—death.” He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging his knees, and holding his breath from the strain of thought, he pondered.
But the more intensely he thought, the clearer it became to him that it was indubitably so, that in reality, looking upon life, he had forgotten one little fact—that death will come, and all ends; that nothing was even worth beginning, and that there was no helping it anyway.
He lighted a candle, got up cautiously and went to the looking-glass, and began looking at his face and hair.
His back teeth were beginning to decay.
He bared his muscular arms.
Yes, there was strength in them.
But Nikolay, who lay there breathing with what was left of lungs, had had a strong, healthy body too.
And suddenly he recalled how they used to go to bed together as children, and how they only waited till Fyodor Bogdanitch was out of the room to fling pillows at each other and laugh, laugh irrepressibly, so that even their awe of Fyodor Bogdanitch could not check the effervescing, overbrimming sense of life and happiness.
“And now that bent, hollow chest ... and I, not knowing what will become of me, or wherefore....” “K...ha!
Why do you keep fidgeting, why don’t you go to sleep?” his brother’s voice called to him.
Just see, feel my shirt; it’s not wet, is it?” Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle, but for a long while he could not sleep.
The question how to live had hardly begun to grow a little clearer to him, when a new, insoluble question presented itself—death.
I’d even forgotten that it was at all.” Chapter 32 Levin had long before made the observation that when one is uncomfortable with people from their being excessively amenable and meek, one is apt very soon after to find things intolerable from their touchiness and irritability.
And his brother Nikolay’s gentleness did in fact not last out for long.
The very next morning he began to be irritable, and seemed doing his best to find fault with his brother, attacking him on his tenderest points.
But life like that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he had been trying to do all his life, and never could learn to do, though, as far as he could observe, many people knew so well how to do it, and without it there was no living at all.
He tried to say what he was not thinking, but he felt continually that it had a ring of falsehood, that his brother detected him in it, and was exasperated at it.
The third day Nikolay induced his brother to explain his plan to him again, and began not merely attacking it, but intentionally confounding it with communism.
“You’ve simply borrowed an idea that’s not your own, but you’ve distorted it, and are trying to apply it where it’s not applicable.” “But I tell you it’s nothing to do with it.
“But my idea has nothing in common....” “That, anyway,” said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, his eyes flashing malignantly, “has the charm of—what’s one to call it?—geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness.
But if once one allows the possibility of making of all the past a _tabula rasa_—no property, no family—then labor would organize itself.
I’ve never been a communist.” “But I have, and I consider it’s premature, but rational, and it has a future, just like Christianity in its first ages.” “All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be investigated from the point of view of natural science; that is to say, it ought to be studied, its qualities ascertained....” “But that’s utter waste of time.
That force finds a certain form of activity of itself, according to the stage of its development.
There have been slaves first everywhere, then metayers; and we have the half-crop system, rent, and day laborers.
What are you trying to find?” Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the bottom of his heart he was afraid that it was true—true that he was trying to hold the balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and that this was hardly possible.
“I am trying to find means of working productively for myself and for the laborers.
I want to organize....” he answered hotly.
“You don’t want to organize anything; it’s simply just as you’ve been all your life, that you want to be original to pose as not exploiting the peasants simply, but with some idea in view.” “Oh, all right, that’s what you think—and let me alone!” answered Levin, feeling the muscles of his left cheek twitching uncontrollably.
Nikolay was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin went in to him again and begged him, rather unnaturally, to forgive him if he had hurt his feelings in any way.
“Ah, generosity!” said Nikolay, and he smiled.
“If you want to be right, I can give you that satisfaction.
You’re in the right; but I’m going all the same.” It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed him, and said, looking with sudden strangeness and seriousness at his brother: “Anyway, don’t remember evil against me, Kostya!” and his voice quivered.
These were the only words that had been spoken sincerely between them.
Three days after his brother’s departure, Levin too set off for his foreign tour.
Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in the railway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his depression.
“What’s the matter with you?” Shtcherbatsky asked him.
“Oh, nothing; there’s not much happiness in life.” “Not much?
You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhausen.
It’s time I was dead.” “Well, that’s a good one!” said Shtcherbatsky, laughing; “why, I’m only just getting ready to begin.” “Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall soon be dead.” Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late.
He saw nothing but death or the advance towards death in everything.
But his cherished scheme only engrossed him the more.
Darkness had fallen upon everything for him; but just because of this darkness he felt that the one guiding clue in the darkness was his work, and he clutched it and clung to it with all his strength.
PART FOUR Chapter 1 The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same house, met every day, but were complete strangers to one another.
Alexey Alexandrovitch made it a rule to see his wife every day, so that the servants might have no grounds for suppositions, but avoided dining at home.
Vronsky was never at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house, but Anna saw him away from home, and her husband was aware of it.
The position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them would have been equal to enduring this position for a single day, if it had not been for the expectation that it would change, that it was merely a temporary painful ordeal which would pass over.
Alexey Alexandrovitch hoped that this passion would pass, as everything does pass, that everyone would forget about it, and his name would remain unsullied.
Anna, on whom the position depended, and for whom it was more miserable than for anyone, endured it because she not merely hoped, but firmly believed, that it would all very soon be settled and come right.
She had not the least idea what would settle the position, but she firmly believed that something would very soon turn up now.
Vronsky, against his own will or wishes, followed her lead, hoped too that something, apart from his own action, would be sure to solve all difficulties.
In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week.
A foreign prince, who had come on a visit to Petersburg, was put under his charge, and he had to show him the sights worth seeing.
Vronsky was of distinguished appearance; he possessed, moreover, the art of behaving with respectful dignity, and was used to having to do with such grand personages—that was how he came to be put in charge of the prince.
And on his own account he was anxious to enjoy to the utmost all Russian forms of amusement.
Vronsky was obliged to be his guide in satisfying both these inclinations.
The mornings they spent driving to look at places of interest; the evenings they passed enjoying the national entertainments.
The prince rejoiced in health exceptional even among princes.
By gymnastics and careful attention to his health he had brought himself to such a point that in spite of his excess in pleasure he looked as fresh as a big glossy green Dutch cucumber.
The prince had traveled a great deal, and considered one of the chief advantages of modern facilities of communication was the accessibility of the pleasures of all nations.
He had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades and had made friends with a Spanish girl who played the mandolin.
In Switzerland he had killed chamois.
In England he had galloped in a red coat over hedges and killed two hundred pheasants for a bet.
In Turkey he had got into a harem; in India he had hunted on an elephant, and now in Russia he wished to taste all the specially Russian forms of pleasure.
Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to him, was at great pains to arrange all the Russian amusements suggested by various persons to the prince.
They had race horses, and Russian pancakes and bear hunts and three-horse sledges, and gypsies and drinking feasts, with the Russian accompaniment of broken crockery.
And the prince with surprising ease fell in with the Russian spirit, smashed trays full of crockery, sat with a gypsy girl on his knee, and seemed to be asking—what more, and does the whole Russian spirit consist in just this?
In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince liked best French actresses and ballet dancers and white-seal champagne.
Vronsky was used to princes, but, either because he had himself changed of late, or that he was in too close proximity to the prince, that week seemed fearfully wearisome to him.
The whole of that week he experienced a sensation such as a man might have set in charge of a dangerous madman, afraid of the madman, and at the same time, from being with him, fearing for his own reason.
Vronsky was continually conscious of the necessity of never for a second relaxing the tone of stern official respectfulness, that he might not himself be insulted.
The prince’s manner of treating the very people who, to Vronsky’s surprise, were ready to descend to any depths to provide him with Russian amusements, was contemptuous.
His criticisms of Russian women, whom he wished to study, more than once made Vronsky crimson with indignation.
The chief reason why the prince was so particularly disagreeable to Vronsky was that he could not help seeing himself in him.
He was a very stupid and very self-satisfied and very healthy and very well-washed man, and nothing else.
He was a gentleman—that was true, and Vronsky could not deny it.
He was equable and not cringing with his superiors, was free and ingratiating in his behavior with his equals, and was contemptuously indulgent with his inferiors.
Vronsky was himself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to be so.
But for this prince he was an inferior, and his contemptuous and indulgent attitude to him revolted him.
“Brainless beef! can I be like that?” he thought.
Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he parted from the prince, who was starting for Moscow, and received his thanks, he was happy to be rid of his uncomfortable position and the unpleasant reflection of himself.
Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to the council at seven and will be there till ten.” Thinking for an instant of the strangeness of her bidding him come straight to her, in spite of her husband’s insisting on her not receiving him, he decided to go.
Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had left the regimental quarters, and was living alone.
After having some lunch, he lay down on the sofa immediately, and in five minutes memories of the hideous scenes he had witnessed during the last few days were confused together and joined on to a mental image of Anna and of the peasant who had played an important part in the bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep.
He waked up in the dark, trembling with horror, and made haste to light a candle.
What was the dreadful thing I dreamed?
Yes, yes; I think a little dirty man with a disheveled beard was stooping down doing something, and all of a sudden he began saying some strange words in French.
“But why was it so awful?” He vividly recalled the peasant again and those incomprehensible French words the peasant had uttered, and a chill of horror ran down his spine.
“What nonsense!” thought Vronsky, and glanced at his watch.
He rang up his servant, dressed in haste, and went out onto the steps, completely forgetting the dream and only worried at being late.
As he drove up to the Karenins’ entrance he looked at his watch and saw it was ten minutes to nine.
A high, narrow carriage with a pair of grays was standing at the entrance.
He recognized Anna’s carriage.
But no matter; I can’t hide myself,” he thought, and with that manner peculiar to him from childhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of, Vronsky got out of his sledge and went to the door.
The door opened, and the hall-porter with a rug on his arm called the carriage.
Vronsky, though he did not usually notice details, noticed at this moment the amazed expression with which the porter glanced at him.
In the very doorway Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey Alexandrovitch.
The gas jet threw its full light on the bloodless, sunken face under the black hat and on the white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat.
Karenin’s fixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky’s face.
Vronsky bowed, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, chewing his lips, lifted his hand to his hat and went on.
Vronsky saw him without looking round get into the carriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the window and disappear.
His brows were scowling, and his eyes gleamed with a proud and angry light in them.
“What a position!” he thought.
“If he would fight, would stand up for his honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but this weakness or baseness....
He puts me in the position of playing false, which I never meant and never mean to do.” Vronsky’s ideas had changed since the day of his conversation with Anna in the Vrede garden.
Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna—who had surrendered herself up to him utterly, and simply looked to him to decide her fate, ready to submit to anything—he had long ceased to think that their tie might end as he had thought then.
His ambitious plans had retreated into the background again, and feeling that he had got out of that circle of activity in which everything was definite, he had given himself entirely to his passion, and that passion was binding him more and more closely to her.
He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of her retreating footsteps.
He knew she had been expecting him, had listened for him, and was now going back to the drawing-room.
No, I won’t.” She laid her two hands on his shoulders, and looked a long while at him with a profound, passionate, and at the same time searching look.
She was studying his face to make up for the time she had not seen him.
She was, every time she saw him, making the picture of him in her imagination (incomparably superior, impossible in reality) fit with him as he really was.
Chapter 3 “You met him?” she asked, when they had sat down at the table in the lamplight.
“You’re punished, you see, for being late.” “Yes; but how was it?
Wasn’t he to be at the council?” “He had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again.
With the prince still?” She knew every detail of his existence.
He was going to say that he had been up all night and had dropped asleep, but looking at her thrilled and rapturous face, he was ashamed.
And he said he had had to go to report on the prince’s departure.
You wouldn’t believe how insufferable it’s been for me.” “Why so?
Isn’t it the life all of you, all young men, always lead?” she said, knitting her brows; and taking up the crochet work that was lying on the table, she began drawing the hook out of it, without looking at Vronsky.
“I gave that life up long ago,” said he, wondering at the change in her face, and trying to divine its meaning.
“This morning Liza came to see me—they’re not afraid to call on me, in spite of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna,” she put in—“and she told me about your Athenian evening.
How loathsome!” “I was just going to say....” She interrupted him.
“It was that Thérèse you used to know?” “I was just saying....” “How disgusting you are, you men!
How is it you can’t understand that a woman can never forget that,” she said, getting more and more angry, and so letting him see the cause of her irritation, “especially a woman who cannot know your life?
Haven’t I told you that I haven’t a thought I wouldn’t lay bare to you?” “Yes, yes,” she said, evidently trying to suppress her jealous thoughts.
“But if only you knew how wretched I am!
These fits of jealousy, which of late had been more and more frequent with her, horrified him, and however much he tried to disguise the fact, made him feel cold to her, although he knew the cause of her jealousy was her love for him.
How often he had told himself that her love was happiness; and now she loved him as a woman can love when love has outweighed for her all the good things of life—and he was much further from happiness than when he had followed her from Moscow.
Then he had thought himself unhappy, but happiness was before him; now he felt that the best happiness was already left behind.
Both morally and physically she had changed for the worse.
She had broadened out all over, and in her face at the time when she was speaking of the actress there was an evil expression of hatred that distorted it.
He looked at her as a man looks at a faded flower he has gathered, with difficulty recognizing in it the beauty for which he picked and ruined it.
And in spite of this he felt that then, when his love was stronger, he could, if he had greatly wished it, have torn that love out of his heart; but now, when as at that moment it seemed to him he felt no love for her, he knew that what bound him to her could not be broken.
The fiend was the name they had given her jealousy.
Why did you find it so tiresome?” “Oh, it was intolerable!” he said, trying to pick up the thread of his interrupted thought.
“He does not improve on closer acquaintance.
If you want him defined, here he is: a prime, well-fed beast such as takes medals at the cattle shows, and nothing more,” he said, with a tone of vexation that interested her.
“He’s seen a great deal, anyway; he’s cultured?” “It’s an utterly different culture—their culture.
He’s cultivated, one sees, simply to be able to despise culture, as they despise everything but animal pleasures.” “But don’t you all care for these animal pleasures?” she said, and again he noticed a dark look in her eyes that avoided him.
“How is it you’re defending him?” he said, smiling.
“I’m not defending him, it’s nothing to me; but I imagine, if you had not cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got out of them.
But if it affords you satisfaction to gaze at Thérèse in the attire of Eve....” “Again, the devil again,” Vronsky said, taking the hand she had laid on the table and kissing it.
You don’t know what I have suffered waiting for you.
Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?” Her voice sounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.
“We ran up against each other in the doorway.” “And he bowed to you like this?” She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly transformed her expression, folded her hands, and Vronsky suddenly saw in her beautiful face the very expression with which Alexey Alexandrovitch had bowed to him.
He smiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep laugh, which was one of her greatest charms.
“I don’t understand him in the least,” said Vronsky.
“If after your avowal to him at your country house he had broken with you, if he had called me out—but this I can’t understand.
How can he put up with such a position?
He feels it, that’s evident.” “He?” she said sneeringly.
“He’s perfectly satisfied.” “What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so happy?” “Only not he.
He understands nothing, and feels nothing.
Could a man of any feeling live in the same house with his unfaithful wife?
Could he talk to her, call her ‘my dear’?” And again she could not help mimicking him: “‘Anna, _ma chère_; Anna, dear!’” “He’s not a man, not a human being—he’s a doll!
He’s not a man, he’s an official machine.
He doesn’t understand that I’m your wife, that he’s outside, that he’s superfluous....
What has been wrong with you, and what did the doctor say?” She looked at him with mocking amusement.
Evidently she had hit on other absurd and grotesque aspects in her husband and was awaiting the moment to give expression to them.
But he went on: “I imagine that it’s not illness, but your condition.
When will it be?” The ironical light died away in her eyes, but a different smile, a consciousness of something, he did not know what, and of quiet melancholy, came over her face.
You say that our position is miserable, that we must put an end to it.
If you knew how terrible it is to me, what I would give to be able to love you freely and boldly!
I should not torture myself and torture you with my jealousy....
And it will come soon, but not as we expect.” And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed so pitiable to herself that tears came into her eyes, and she could not go on.
She laid her hand on his sleeve, dazzling and white with its rings in the lamplight.
Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall all, all be at peace, and suffer no more.” “I don’t understand,” he said, understanding her.
Don’t interrupt me!” and she made haste to speak.
“Yes, it’s better so,” she said, tightly gripping his hand.
“That’s the only way, the only way left us.” He had recovered himself, and lifted his head.
What absurd nonsense you are talking!” “No, it’s the truth.” “What, what’s the truth?” “That I shall die.
I have had a dream.” “A dream?” repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled the peasant of his dream.
I dreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get something there, to find out something; you know how it is in dreams,” she said, her eyes wide with horror; “and in the bedroom, in the corner, stood something.” “Oh, what nonsense!
How can you believe....” But she would not let him interrupt her.
What she was saying was too important to her.
“And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with a disheveled beard, little, and dreadful looking.
I wanted to run away, but he bent down over a sack, and was fumbling there with his hands....” She showed how he had moved his hands.
And Vronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same terror filling his soul.
“He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, you know: _Il faut le battre, le fer, le broyer, le pétrir_....
And Korney said to me: ‘In childbirth you’ll die, ma’am, you’ll die....’ And I woke up.” “What nonsense, what nonsense!” said Vronsky; but he felt himself that there was no conviction in his voice.
The expression of her face instantaneously changed.
Horror and excitement were suddenly replaced by a look of soft, solemn, blissful attention.
He could not comprehend the meaning of the change.
She was listening to the stirring of the new life within her.
Chapter 4 Alexey Alexandrovitch, after meeting Vronsky on his own steps, drove, as he had intended, to the Italian opera.
He sat through two acts there, and saw everyone he had wanted to see.
On returning home, he carefully scrutinized the hat stand, and noticing that there was not a military overcoat there, he went, as usual, to his own room.
But, contrary to his usual habit, he did not go to bed, he walked up and down his study till three o’clock in the morning.
The feeling of furious anger with his wife, who would not observe the proprieties and keep to the one stipulation he had laid on her, not to receive her lover in her own home, gave him no peace.
She had not complied with his request, and he was bound to punish her and carry out his threat—obtain a divorce and take away his son.
He knew all the difficulties connected with this course, but he had said he would do it, and now he must carry out his threat.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna had hinted that this was the best way out of his position, and of late the obtaining of divorces had been brought to such perfection that Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a possibility of overcoming the formal difficulties.
Misfortunes never come singly, and the affairs of the reorganization of the native tribes, and of the irrigation of the lands of the Zaraisky province, had brought such official worries upon Alexey Alexandrovitch that he had been of late in a continual condition of extreme irritability.
He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury, growing in a sort of vast, arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in the morning.
He dressed in haste, and as though carrying his cup full of wrath, and fearing to spill any over, fearing to lose with his wrath the energy necessary for the interview with his wife, he went into her room directly he heard she was up.
Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at his appearance when he went in to her.
His brow was lowering, and his eyes stared darkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his mouth was tightly and contemptuously shut.
In his walk, in his gestures, in the sound of his voice there was a determination and firmness such as his wife had never seen in him.
He went into her room, and without greeting her, walked straight up to her writing-table, and taking her keys, opened a drawer.
“They’re not here,” she said, shutting the drawer; but from that action he saw he had guessed right, and roughly pushing away her hand, he quickly snatched a portfolio in which he knew she used to put her most important papers.
She tried to pull the portfolio away, but he pushed her back.
I have to speak to you,” he said, putting the portfolio under his arm, and squeezing it so tightly with his elbow that his shoulder stood up.
Amazed and intimidated, she gazed at him in silence.
“I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants to see her lover.” “I meant, I only....” she said, flushing hotly.
This coarseness of his angered her, and gave her courage.
“No!” he shrieked, in his shrill voice, which pitched a note higher than usual even, and his big hands clutching her by the arm so violently that red marks were left from the bracelet he was squeezing, he forcibly sat her down in her place.
She did not say what she had said the evening before to her lover, that _he_ was her husband, and her husband was superfluous; she did not even think that.
She felt all the justice of his words, and only said softly: “You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be myself; but what are you saying all this for?” “What am I saying it for? what for?” he went on, as angrily.
“That you may know that since you have not carried out my wishes in regard to observing outward decorum, I will take measures to put an end to this state of things.” “Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway,” she said; and again, at the thought of death near at hand and now desired, tears came into her eyes.
If you must have the satisfaction of animal passion....” “Alexey Alexandrovitch!
I won’t say it’s not generous, but it’s not like a gentleman to strike anyone who’s down.” “Yes, you only think of yourself!
But the sufferings of a man who was your husband have no interest for you.
You don’t care that his whole life is ruined, that he is thuff ... thuff....” Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that he stammered, and was utterly unable to articulate the word “suffering.” In the end he pronounced it “thuffering.” She wanted to laugh, and was immediately ashamed that anything could amuse her at such a moment.
He too was silent for some time, and then began speaking in a frigid, less shrill voice, emphasizing random words that had no special significance.
“No, it was my fancy,” she thought, recalling the expression of his face when he stumbled over the word “suffering.” “No; can a man with those dull eyes, with that self-satisfied complacency, feel anything?” “I cannot change anything,” she whispered.
“I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and shall not return again to this house, and you will receive notice of what I decide through the lawyer into whose hands I shall intrust the task of getting a divorce.
My son is going to my sister’s,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with an effort recalling what he had meant to say about his son.
“You take Seryozha to hurt me,” she said, looking at him from under her brows.
Leave me Seryozha!” “Yes, I have lost even my affection for my son, because he is associated with the repulsion I feel for you.
Good-bye!” And he was going away, but now she detained him.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!” she whispered once more.
Leave Seryozha till my ...
I shall soon be confined; leave him!” Alexey Alexandrovitch flew into a rage, and, snatching his hand from her, he went out of the room without a word.
Chapter 5 The waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer was full when Alexey Alexandrovitch entered it.
Three ladies—an old lady, a young lady, and a merchant’s wife—and three gentlemen—one a German banker with a ring on his finger, the second a merchant with a beard, and the third a wrathful-looking government clerk in official uniform, with a cross on his neck—had obviously been waiting a long while already.
Two clerks were writing at tables with scratching pens.
The appurtenances of the writing-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was himself very fastidious, were exceptionally good.
He could not help observing this.
One of the clerks, without getting up, turned wrathfully to Alexey Alexandrovitch, half closing his eyes.
“What are you wanting?” He replied that he had to see the lawyer on some business.
“He is engaged,” the clerk responded severely, and he pointed with his pen at the persons waiting, and went on writing.
“Can’t he spare time to see me?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Kindly wait your turn.” “Then I must trouble you to give him my card,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said with dignity, seeing the impossibility of preserving his incognito.
The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what he read on it, went to the door.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the publicity of legal proceedings, though for some higher official considerations he disliked the application of the principle in Russia, and disapproved of it, as far as he could disapprove of anything instituted by authority of the Emperor.
His whole life had been spent in administrative work, and consequently, when he did not approve of anything, his disapproval was softened by the recognition of the inevitability of mistakes and the possibility of reform in every department.
In the new public law courts he disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting cases.
But till then he had had nothing to do with the law courts, and so had disapproved of their publicity simply in theory; now his disapprobation was strengthened by the unpleasant impression made on him in the lawyer’s waiting room.
“Coming immediately,” said the clerk; and two minutes later there did actually appear in the doorway the large figure of an old solicitor who had been consulting with the lawyer himself.
The lawyer was a little, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish beard, light-colored long eyebrows, and an overhanging brow.
He was attired as though for a wedding, from his cravat to his double watch-chain and varnished boots.
His face was clever and manly, but his dress was dandified and in bad taste.
“Pray walk in,” said the lawyer, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch; and, gloomily ushering Karenin in before him, he closed the door.
“Won’t you sit down?” He indicated an armchair at a writing-table covered with papers.
But as soon as he was settled in this position a moth flew over the table.
The lawyer, with a swiftness that could never have been expected of him, opened his hands, caught the moth, and resumed his former attitude.
“Before beginning to speak of my business,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, following the lawyer’s movements with wondering eyes, “I ought to observe that the business about which I have to speak to you is to be strictly private.” The lawyer’s overhanging reddish mustaches were parted in a scarcely perceptible smile.
“I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets confided to me.
But if you would like proof....” Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at his face, and saw that the shrewd, gray eyes were laughing, and seemed to know all about it already.
“You know my name?” Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up his courage.
But having once made up his mind he went on in his shrill voice, without timidity—or hesitation, accentuating here and there a word.
“You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?” “Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may be wasting your time and attention.
I have come simply to consult you as a preliminary step.
I want a divorce, but the form in which it is possible is of great consequence to me.
It is very possible that if that form does not correspond with my requirements I may give up a legal divorce.” “Oh, that’s always the case,” said the lawyer, “and that’s always for you to decide.” He let his eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feet, feeling that he might offend his client by the sight of his irrepressible amusement.
He looked at a moth that flew before his nose, and moved his hands, but did not catch it from regard for Alexey Alexandrovitch’s position.
“Divorce by our laws,” he said, with a slight shade of disapprobation of our laws, “is possible, as you are aware, in the following cases....
And therefore, guided by precedents, I must inform you that in practice cases of divorce may all be reduced to the following—there’s no physical defect, I may assume, nor desertion?...” Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed his head in assent.
“—May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the married parties, and the detection in the fact of the guilty party by mutual agreement, and failing such agreement, accidental detection.
It must be admitted that the latter case is rarely met with in practice,” said the lawyer, and stealing a glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch he paused, as a man selling pistols, after enlarging on the advantages of each weapon, might await his customer’s choice.
But Alexey Alexandrovitch said nothing, and therefore the lawyer went on: “The most usual and simple, the sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual consent.
I should not permit myself to express it so, speaking with a man of no education,” he said, “but I imagine that to you this is comprehensible.” Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that he did not immediately comprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual consent, and his eyes expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer promptly came to his assistance.
“People cannot go on living together—here you have a fact.
And if both are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a matter of no importance.
And at the same time this is the simplest and most certain method.” Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now.
But he had religious scruples, which hindered the execution of such a plan.
“That is out of the question in the present case,” he said.
“Only one alternative is possible: undesigned detection, supported by letters which I have.” At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave utterance to a thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.
“Kindly consider,” he began, “cases of that kind are, as you are aware, under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are fond of going into the minutest details in cases of that kind,” he said with a smile, which betrayed his sympathy with the reverend fathers’ taste.
“Letters may, of course, be a partial confirmation; but detection in the fact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by eyewitnesses.
In fact, if you do me the honor to intrust your confidence to me, you will do well to leave me the choice of the measures to be employed.
If one wants the result, one must admit the means.” “If it is so....” Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turning white; but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speak to the intruding clerk.
“Tell her we don’t haggle over fees!” he said, and returned to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
On his way back he caught unobserved another moth.
“Nice state my rep curtains will be in by the summer!” he thought, frowning.
“I will communicate my decision to you by letter,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, getting up, and he clutched at the table.
After standing a moment in silence, he said: “From your words I may consequently conclude that a divorce may be obtained?
I would ask you to let me know what are your terms.” “It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action,” said the lawyer, not answering his question.
“When can I reckon on receiving information from you?” he asked, moving towards the door, his eyes and his varnished boots shining.
Your answer as to whether you will undertake to conduct the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as to communicate to me.” “Very good.” The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door, and, left alone, gave himself up to his sense of amusement.
He felt so mirthful that, contrary to his rules, he made a reduction in his terms to the haggling lady, and gave up catching moths, finally deciding that next winter he must have the furniture covered with velvet, like Sigonin’s.
Chapter 6 Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the sitting of the Commission of the 17th of August, but in the sequel this victory cut the ground from under his feet.
The new commission for the inquiry into the condition of the native tribes in all its branches had been formed and despatched to its destination with an unusual speed and energy inspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Within three months a report was presented.
The condition of the native tribes was investigated in its political, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, and religious aspects.
To all these questions there were answers admirably stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were not a product of human thought, always liable to error, but were all the product of official activity.
The answers were all based on official data furnished by governors and heads of churches, and founded on the reports of district magistrates and ecclesiastical superintendents, founded in their turn on the reports of parochial overseers and parish priests; and so all of these answers were unhesitating and certain.
All such questions as, for instance, of the cause of failure of crops, of the adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs, etc.—questions which, but for the convenient intervention of the official machine, are not, and cannot be solved for ages—received full, unhesitating solution.
And this solution was in favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s contention.
But Stremov, who had felt stung to the quick at the last sitting, had, on the reception of the commission’s report, resorted to tactics which Alexey Alexandrovitch had not anticipated.
Stremov, carrying with him several members, went over to Alexey Alexandrovitch’s side, and not contenting himself with warmly defending the measure proposed by Karenin, proposed other more extreme measures in the same direction.
These measures, still further exaggerated in opposition to what was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s fundamental idea, were passed by the commission, and then the aim of Stremov’s tactics became apparent.
Carried to an extreme, the measures seemed at once to be so absurd that the highest authorities, and public opinion, and intellectual ladies, and the newspapers, all at the same time fell foul of them, expressing their indignation both with the measures and their nominal father, Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Stremov drew back, affecting to have blindly followed Karenin, and to be astounded and distressed at what had been done.
This meant the defeat of Alexey Alexandrovitch.
But in spite of failing health, in spite of his domestic griefs, he did not give in.
There was a split in the commission.
Some members, with Stremov at their head, justified their mistake on the ground that they had put faith in the commission of revision, instituted by Alexey Alexandrovitch, and maintained that the report of the commission was rubbish, and simply so much waste paper.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a following of those who saw the danger of so revolutionary an attitude to official documents, persisted in upholding the statements obtained by the revising commission.
In consequence of this, in the higher spheres, and even in society, all was chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one could tell whether the native tribes really were becoming impoverished and ruined, or whether they were in a flourishing condition.
The position of Alexey Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly owing to the contempt lavished on him for his wife’s infidelity, became very precarious.
And in this position he took an important resolution.
To the astonishment of the commission, he announced that he should ask permission to go himself to investigate the question on the spot.
And having obtained permission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off to these remote provinces.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s departure made a great sensation, the more so as just before he started he officially returned the posting-fares allowed him for twelve horses, to drive to his destination.
“I think it very noble,” Betsy said about this to the Princess Myakaya.
“Why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows that there are railways everywhere now?” But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaya’s opinion annoyed her indeed.
“It’s all very well for you to talk,” said she, “when you have I don’t know how many millions; but I am very glad when my husband goes on a revising tour in the summer.
It’s very good for him and pleasant traveling about, and it’s a settled arrangement for me to keep a carriage and coachman on the money.” On his way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped for three days at Moscow.
The day after his arrival he was driving back from calling on the governor-general.
At the crossroads by Gazetoy Place, where there are always crowds of carriages and sledges, Alexey Alexandrovitch suddenly heard his name called out in such a loud and cheerful voice that he could not help looking round.
At the corner of the pavement, in a short, stylish overcoat and a low-crowned fashionable hat, jauntily askew, with a smile that showed a gleam of white teeth and red lips, stood Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant, young, and beaming.
He called him vigorously and urgently, and insisted on his stopping.
He had one arm on the window of a carriage that was stopping at the corner, and out of the window were thrust the heads of a lady in a velvet hat, and two children.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was smiling and beckoning to his brother-in-law.
The lady smiled a kindly smile too, and she too waved her hand to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
It was Dolly with her children.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and least of all his wife’s brother.
He raised his hat and would have driven on, but Stepan Arkadyevitch told his coachman to stop, and ran across the snow to him.
I was at Dussots’ yesterday and saw ‘Karenin’ on the visitors’ list, but it never entered my head that it was you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, sticking his head in at the window of the carriage, “or I should have looked you up.
I am glad to see you!” he said, knocking one foot against the other to shake the snow off.
“What a shame of you not to let us know!” he repeated.
“I had no time; I am very busy,” Alexey Alexandrovitch responded dryly.
“Come to my wife, she does so want to see you.” Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which his frozen feet were wrapped, and getting out of his carriage made his way over the snow to Darya Alexandrovna.
“Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cutting us like this for?” said Dolly, smiling.
Delighted to see you!” he said in a tone clearly indicating that he was annoyed by it.
“How are you?” “Tell me, how is my darling Anna?” Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would have gone on.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch stopped him.
“I tell you what we’ll do tomorrow.
We’ll ask Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain him with our Moscow celebrities.” “Yes, please, do come,” said Dolly; “we will expect you at five, or six o’clock, if you like.
How long....” “She is quite well,” Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled, frowning.
“Delighted!” and he moved away towards his carriage.
Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch in the noise of the moving carriages.
“I shall come round tomorrow!” Stepan Arkadyevitch shouted to him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch got into his carriage, and buried himself in it so as neither to see nor be seen.
“Queer fish!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch to his wife, and glancing at his watch, he made a motion of his hand before his face, indicating a caress to his wife and children, and walked jauntily along the pavement.
Stiva!” Dolly called, reddening.
Give me the money.” “Never mind; you tell them I’ll pay the bill!” and he vanished, nodding genially to an acquaintance who drove by.
Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand Theater to a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova, a pretty dancing-girl whom he had just taken under his protection, the coral necklace he had promised her the evening before, and behind the scenes in the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss her pretty little face, radiant over her present.
Besides the gift of the necklace he wanted to arrange with her about meeting after the ballet.
After explaining that he could not come at the beginning of the ballet, he promised he would come for the last act and take her to supper.
Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he liked to give a dinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and as regards the selection of guests.
He particularly liked the program of that day’s dinner.
There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and _la pièce de resistance_—first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines to suit: so much for the eating and drinking.
Kitty and Levin would be of the party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there would be a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pièce de resistance_ among the guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow man, and a philosopher; Alexey Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a practical politician.
He was asking, too, the well-known eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a great talker, a musician, an historian, and the most delightfully youthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish for Koznishev and Karenin.
The second installment for the forest had been received from the merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and good-humored of late, and the idea of the dinner pleased Stepan Arkadyevitch from every point of view.
There were two circumstances a little unpleasant, but these two circumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humored gaiety which flooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
That was one disagreeable thing.
The other slightly disagreeable fact was that the new head of his department, like all new heads, had the reputation already of a terrible person, who got up at six o’clock in the morning, worked like a horse, and insisted on his subordinates working in the same way.
Moreover, this new head had the further reputation of being a bear in his manners, and was, according to all reports, a man of a class in all respects the opposite of that to which his predecessor had belonged, and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch had hitherto belonged himself.
On the previous day Stepan Arkadyevitch had appeared at the office in a uniform, and the new chief had been very affable and had talked to him as to an acquaintance.
Consequently Stepan Arkadyevitch deemed it his duty to call upon him in his non-official dress.
The thought that the new chief might not tender him a warm reception was the other unpleasant thing.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch instinctively felt that everything would _come round_ all right.
“They’re all people, all men, like us poor sinners; why be nasty and quarrelsome?” he thought as he went into the hotel.
“Good-day, Vassily,” he said, walking into the corridor with his hat cocked on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; “why, you’ve let your whiskers grow!
And find out whether Count Anitchkin” (this was the new head) “is receiving.” “Yes, sir,” Vassily responded, smiling.
“You’ve not been to see us for a long while.” “I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance.
Is this number seven?” Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the room, measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.
“What! you killed him?” cried Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“No, I haven’t time; I’ve only looked in for a tiny second,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.
He threw open his coat, but afterwards did take it off, and sat on for a whole hour, talking to Levin about hunting and the most intimate subjects.
Where have you been?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, when the peasant had gone.
“Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England—not in the capitals, but in the manufacturing towns, and saw a great deal that was new to me.
And I’m glad I went.” “Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question.” “Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question.
In Russia the question is that of the relation of the working people to the land; though the question exists there too—but there it’s a matter of repairing what’s been ruined, while with us....” Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.
“Yes, yes!” he said, “it’s very possible you’re right.
But I’m glad you’re in good spirits, and are hunting bears, and working, and interested.
Shtcherbatsky told me another story—he met you—that you were in such a depressed state, talking of nothing but death....” “Well, what of it?
I’ve not given up thinking of death,” said Levin.
“It’s true that it’s high time I was dead; and that all this is nonsense.
I do value my idea and my work awfully; but in reality only consider this: all this world of ours is nothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet.
And for us to suppose we can have something great—ideas, work—it’s all dust and ashes.” “But all that’s as old as the hills, my boy!” “It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully, then somehow everything becomes of no consequence.
When you understand that you will die tomorrow, if not today, and nothing will be left, then everything is so unimportant!
And I consider my idea very important, but it turns out really to be as unimportant too, even if it were carried out, as doing for that bear.
So one goes on living, amusing oneself with hunting, with work—anything so as not to think of death!” Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile as he listened to Levin.
Do you remember you attacked me for seeking enjoyment in life?
Don’t be so severe, O moralist!” “No; all the same, what’s fine in life is....” Levin hesitated—“oh, I don’t know.
All I know is that we shall soon be dead.” “Why so soon?” “And do you know, there’s less charm in life, when one thinks of death, but there’s more peace.” “On the contrary, the finish is always the best.
But I must be going,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up for the tenth time.
I’m going tomorrow.” “I’m a nice person!
He had heard at the beginning of the winter that she was at Petersburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did not know whether she had come back or not; but he changed his mind and did not ask.
“So you’ll come?” “Of course.” “At five o’clock, then, and not evening dress.” And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down below to the new head of his department.
Instinct had not misled Stepan Arkadyevitch.
The terrible new head turned out to be an extremely amenable person, and Stepan Arkadyevitch lunched with him and stayed on, so that it was four o’clock before he got to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Chapter 8 Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had spent the whole morning indoors.
He had two pieces of business before him that morning; first, to receive and send on a deputation from the native tribes which was on its way to Petersburg, and now at Moscow; secondly, to write the promised letter to the lawyer.
The deputation, though it had been summoned at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s instigation, was not without its discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and he was glad he had found it in Moscow.
The members of this deputation had not the slightest conception of their duty and the part they were to play.
They naïvely believed that it was their business to lay before the commission their needs and the actual condition of things, and to ask assistance of the government, and utterly failed to grasp that some of their statements and requests supported the contention of the enemy’s side, and so spoiled the whole business.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was busily engaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them from which they were not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote a letter to Petersburg for the guidance of the deputation.
He had his chief support in this affair in the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
She was a specialist in the matter of deputations, and no one knew better than she how to manage them, and put them in the way they should go.
Having completed this task, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote the letter to the lawyer.
Without the slightest hesitation he gave him permission to act as he might judge best.
In the letter he enclosed three of Vronsky’s notes to Anna, which were in the portfolio he had taken away.
He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he heard the loud tones of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing with Alexey Alexandrovitch’s servant, and insisting on being announced.
“No matter,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, “so much the better.
I will inform him at once of my position in regard to his sister, and explain why it is I can’t dine with him.” “Come in!” he said aloud, collecting his papers, and putting them in the blotting-paper.
“There, you see, you’re talking nonsense, and he’s at home!” responded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice, addressing the servant, who had refused to let him in, and taking off his coat as he went, Oblonsky walked into the room.
So I hope....” Stepan Arkadyevitch began cheerfully.
“I cannot come,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, standing and not asking his visitor to sit down.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into those frigid relations in which he ought to stand with the brother of a wife against whom he was beginning a suit for divorce.
But he had not taken into account the ocean of kindliness brimming over in the heart of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide his clear, shining eyes.
What do you mean?” he asked in perplexity, speaking in French.
And we’re all counting on you.” “I want to tell you that I can’t dine at your house, because the terms of relationship which have existed between us must cease.” “How?
What for?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a smile.
“Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your sister, my wife.
I ought to have....” But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to finish his sentence, Stepan Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all as he had expected.
He groaned and sank into an armchair.
“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!
What are you saying?” cried Oblonsky, and his suffering was apparent in his face.
“It is so.” “Excuse me, I can’t, I can’t believe it!” Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words had not had the effect he anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable for him to explain his position, and that, whatever explanations he might make, his relations with his brother-in-law would remain unchanged.
“Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a divorce,” he said.
“I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch.
I know you for an excellent, upright man; I know Anna—excuse me, I can’t change my opinion of her—for a good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse me, I cannot believe it.
There is some misunderstanding,” said he.
“Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!...” “Pardon, I understand,” interposed Stepan Arkadyevitch.
You must not, you must not act in haste!” “I am not acting in haste,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, “but one cannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter.
I have quite made up my mind.” “This is awful!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“I would do one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“No action has yet been taken, if I understand rightly.
She loves Anna like a sister, she loves you, and she’s a wonderful woman.
Do me that favor, I beseech you!” Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at him sympathetically, without interrupting his silence.
I imagine our relations must change.” “Why so?
Allow me to believe that apart from our connection you have for me, at least in part, the same friendly feeling I have always had for you ... and sincere esteem,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing his hand.
“Even if your worst suppositions were correct, I don’t—and never would—take on myself to judge either side, and I see no reason why our relations should be affected.
But now, do this, come and see my wife.” “Well, we look at the matter differently,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly.
My wife’s expecting you.
She’s a wonderful woman.
For God’s sake, on my knees, I implore you!” “If you so much wish it, I will come,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sighing.
And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired about what interested them both—the new head of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s department, a man not yet old, who had suddenly been promoted to so high a position.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for Count Anitchkin, and had always differed from him in his opinions.
But now, from a feeling readily comprehensible to officials—that hatred felt by one who has suffered a defeat in the service for one who has received a promotion, he could not endure him.
“Well, have you seen him?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch with a malignant smile.
“Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday.
He seems to know his work capitally, and to be very energetic.” “Yes, but what is his energy directed to?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Is he aiming at doing anything, or simply undoing what’s been done?
It’s the great misfortune of our government—this paper administration, of which he’s a worthy representative.” “Really, I don’t know what fault one could find with him.
His policy I don’t know, but one thing—he’s a very nice fellow,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.
We lunched together, and I taught him how to make, you know that drink, wine and oranges.
No, really he’s a capital fellow.” Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at his watch.
“Why, good heavens, it’s four already, and I’ve still to go to Dolgovushin’s!
You can’t imagine how you will grieve my wife and me.” The way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw his brother-in-law out was very different from the manner in which he had met him.
“I’ve promised, and I’ll come,” he answered wearily.
“Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won’t regret it,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
And, putting on his coat as he went, he patted the footman on the head, chuckled, and went out.
He went in together with Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev and Pestsov, who had reached the street door at the same moment.
These were the two leading representatives of the Moscow intellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them.
Both were men respected for their character and their intelligence.
They respected each other, but were in complete and hopeless disagreement upon almost every subject, not because they belonged to opposite parties, but precisely because they were of the same party (their enemies refused to see any distinction between their views); but, in that party, each had his own special shade of opinion.
And since no difference is less easily overcome than the difference of opinion about semi-abstract questions, they never agreed in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been accustomed to jeer without anger, each at the other’s incorrigible aberrations.
They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when Stepan Arkadyevitch overtook them.
In the drawing-room there were already sitting Prince Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, young Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well in the drawing-room without him.
Darya Alexandrovna, in her best gray silk gown, obviously worried about the children, who were to have their dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s absence, was not equal to the task of making the party mix without him.
All were sitting like so many priests’ wives on a visit (so the old prince expressed it), obviously wondering why they were there, and pumping up remarks simply to avoid being silent.
Turovtsin—good, simple man—felt unmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile with which his thick lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words: “Well, old boy, you have popped me down in a learned set!
A drinking party now, or the _Château des Fleurs_, would be more in my line!” The old prince sat in silence, his bright little eyes watching Karenin from one side, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had already formed a phrase to sum up that politician of whom guests were invited to partake as though he were a sturgeon.
Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her energies to keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin.
Young Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying to look as though he were not in the least conscious of it.
Karenin himself had followed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with ladies and was wearing evening dress and a white tie.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by his face that he had come simply to keep his promise, and was performing a disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering.
He was indeed the person chiefly responsible for the chill benumbing all the guests before Stepan Arkadyevitch came in.
Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered something comic in his ear, and set him down by his wife and the old prince.
Then he told Kitty she was looking very pretty that evening, and presented Shtcherbatsky to Karenin.
In a moment he had so kneaded together the social dough that the drawing-room became very lively, and there was a merry buzz of voices.
Konstantin Levin was the only person who had not arrived.
But this was so much the better, as going into the dining-room, Stepan Arkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and sherry had been procured from Depré, and not from Levy, and, directing that the coachman should be sent off as speedily as possible to Levy’s, he was going back to the drawing-room.
In the dining-room he was met by Konstantin Levin.
“I’m not late?” “You can never help being late!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking his arm.
Who’s here?” asked Levin, unable to help blushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.
Come along, I’ll introduce you to Karenin.” Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware that to meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and so treated his best friends to this honor.
But at that instant Konstantin Levin was not in a condition to feel all the gratification of making such an acquaintance.
He had not seen Kitty since that memorable evening when he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment when he had had a glimpse of her on the highroad.
But to keep his thoughts free, he had tried to persuade himself that he did not know it.
Now when he heard that she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such delight, and at the same time of such dread, that his breath failed him and he could not utter what he wanted to say.
Like what she used to be, or like what she was in the carriage?
What if Darya Alexandrovna told the truth?
“Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin,” he brought out with an effort, and with a desperately determined step he walked into the drawing-room and beheld her.
She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as she had been in the carriage; she was quite different.
She was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more charming from it.
She had been expecting him.
She was delighted, and so confused at her own delight that there was a moment, the moment when he went up to her sister and glanced again at her, when she, and he, and Dolly, who saw it all, thought she would break down and would begin to cry.
She crimsoned, turned white, crimsoned again, and grew faint, waiting with quivering lips for him to come to her.
He went up to her, bowed, and held out his hand without speaking.
Except for the slight quiver of her lips and the moisture in her eyes that made them brighter, her smile was almost calm as she said: “How long it is since we’ve seen each other!” and with desperate determination she pressed his hand with her cold hand.
“You’ve not seen me, but I’ve seen you,” said Levin, with a radiant smile of happiness.
“I saw you when you were driving from the railway station to Ergushovo.” “When?” she asked, wondering.
“You were driving to Ergushovo,” said Levin, feeling as if he would sob with the rapture that was flooding his heart.
“And how dared I associate a thought of anything not innocent with this touching creature?
And, yes, I do believe it’s true what Darya Alexandrovna told me,” he thought.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took him by the arm and led him away to Karenin.
“Let me introduce you.” He mentioned their names.
“Very glad to meet you again,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly, shaking hands with Levin.
“You are acquainted?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in surprise.
“We spent three hours together in the train,” said Levin smiling, “but got out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified—at least I was.” “Nonsense!
Come along, please,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing in the direction of the dining-room.
The men went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid with six sorts of spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with little silver spades and some without, caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds, and plates with slices of French bread.
The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies, and the discussion of the Russification of Poland between Koznishev, Karenin, and Pestsov died down in anticipation of dinner.
Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the most heated and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of Attic salt that changed the disposition of his opponent.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russification of Poland could only be accomplished as a result of larger measures which ought to be introduced by the Russian government.
Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it is the more densely populated.
Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations.
As they were going out of the drawing-room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said, smiling: “So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there is but one method—to bring up as many children as one can.
My brother and I are terribly in fault, I see.
You married men, especially you, Stepan Arkadyevitch, are the real patriots: what number have you reached?” he said, smiling genially at their host and holding out a tiny wine-glass to him.
Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good humor.
“Oh, yes, that’s the best method!” he said, munching cheese and filling the wine-glass with a special sort of spirit.
The conversation dropped at the jest.
“Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?” he asked Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand.
Levin smiled, bent his arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch’s fingers the muscles swelled up like a sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine cloth of the coat.
A perfect Samson!” “I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears,” observed Alexey Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the chase.
Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear,” he said, with a slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who were approaching the table.
“You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!” said Kitty, trying assiduously to catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip away, and setting the lace quivering over her white arm.
“Are there bears on your place?” she added, turning her charming little head to him and smiling.
There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but what unutterable meaning there was for him in every sound, in every turn of her lips, her eyes, her hand as she said it!
There was entreaty for forgiveness, and trust in him, and tenderness—soft, timid tenderness—and promise and hope and love for him, which he could not but believe in and which choked him with happiness.
“No, we’ve been hunting in the Tver province.
“It was an amusing meeting.” And he began telling with droll good-humor how, after not sleeping all night, he had, wearing an old fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s compartment.
“I saw you were in uncertainty about me,” said Levin, smiling good-naturedly, “but I made haste to plunge into intellectual conversation to smooth over the defects of my attire.” Sergey Ivanovitch, while he kept up a conversation with their hostess, had one ear for his brother, and he glanced askance at him.
Why such a conquering hero?” he thought.
Levin knew she was listening to his words and that she was glad to listen to him.
And this was the only thing that interested him.
Not in that room only, but in the whole world, there existed for him only himself, with enormously increased importance and dignity in his own eyes, and she.
He felt himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy, and far away down below were all those nice excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, and all the world.
Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kitty side by side.
The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch was a connoisseur.
The _soupe Marie-Louise_ was a splendid success; the tiny pies eaten with it melted in the mouth and were irreproachable.
The two footmen and Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the dishes and wines unobtrusively, quietly, and swiftly.
On the material side the dinner was a success; it was no less so on the immaterial.
The conversation, at times general and at times between individuals, never paused, and towards the end the company was so lively that the men rose from the table, without stopping speaking, and even Alexey Alexandrovitch thawed.
Chapter 10 Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was not satisfied with Sergey Ivanovitch’s words, especially as he felt the injustice of his view.
“I did not mean,” he said over the soup, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, “mere density of population alone, but in conjunction with fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles.” “It seems to me,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with no haste, “that that’s the same thing.
In my opinion, influence over another people is only possible to the people which has the higher development, which....” “But that’s just the question,” Pestsov broke in in his bass.
“In what are we to make higher development consist?
The English, the French, the Germans, which is at the highest stage of development?
Which of them will nationalize the other?
We see the Rhine provinces have been turned French, but the Germans are not at a lower stage!” he shouted.
“There is another law at work there.” “I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of true civilization,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly lifting his eyebrows.
“But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of true civilization?” said Pestsov.
“I imagine such signs are generally very well known,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“But are they fully known?” Sergey Ivanovitch put in with a subtle smile.
“It is the accepted view now that real culture must be purely classical; but we see most intense disputes on each side of the question, and there is no denying that the opposite camp has strong points in its favor.” “You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch.
Will you take red wine?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture,” Sergey Ivanovitch said, holding out his glass with a smile of condescension, as to a child.
“I only say that both sides have strong arguments to support them,” he went on, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“My sympathies are classical from education, but in this discussion I am personally unable to arrive at a conclusion.
I see no distinct grounds for classical studies being given a preeminence over scientific studies.” “The natural sciences have just as great an educational value,” put in Pestsov.
“Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology with its system of general principles.” “I cannot quite agree with that,” responded Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“It seems to me that one must admit that the very process of studying the forms of language has a peculiarly favorable influence on intellectual development.
Moreover, it cannot be denied that the influence of the classical authors is in the highest degree moral, while, unfortunately, with the study of the natural sciences are associated the false and noxious doctrines which are the curse of our day.” Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but Pestsov interrupted him in his rich bass.
He began warmly contesting the justice of this view.
Sergey Ivanovitch waited serenely to speak, obviously with a convincing reply ready.
But now we know that these little pills of classical learning possess the medicinal property of anti-nihilism, and we boldly prescribe them to our patients....
But what if they had no such medicinal property?” he wound up humorously.
At Sergey Ivanovitch’s little pills, everyone laughed; Turovtsin in especial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have found something to laugh at, all he ever looked for in listening to conversation.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov.
With Pestsov intellectual conversation never flagged for an instant.
Directly Sergey Ivanovitch had concluded the conversation with his jest, Pestsov promptly started a new one.
“I can’t agree even,” said he, “that the government had that aim.
The government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and remains indifferent to the influence its measures may exercise.
The education of women, for instance, would naturally be regarded as likely to be harmful, but the government opens schools and universities for women.” And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the education of women.
Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the education of women is apt to be confounded with the emancipation of women, and that it is only so that it can be considered dangerous.
“I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are inseparably connected together,” said Pestsov; “it is a vicious circle.
Woman is deprived of rights from lack of education, and the lack of education results from the absence of rights.
We must not forget that the subjection of women is so complete, and dates from such ages back that we are often unwilling to recognize the gulf that separates them from us,” said he.
Every man will agree that in doing the duty of a juryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing duties.
And therefore it would be correct to say that women are seeking duties, and quite legitimately.
And one can but sympathize with this desire to assist in the general labor of man.” “Quite so,” Alexey Alexandrovitch assented.
“The question, I imagine, is simply whether they are fitted for such duties.” “They will most likely be perfectly fitted,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “when education has become general among them.
We see this....” “How about the proverb?” said the prince, who had a long while been intent on the conversation, his little comical eyes twinkling.
“I can say it before my daughter: her hair is long, because her wit is....” “Just what they thought of the negroes before their emancipation!” said Pestsov angrily.
“What seems strange to me is that women should seek fresh duties,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “while we see, unhappily, that men usually try to avoid them.” “Duties are bound up with rights—power, money, honor; those are what women are seeking,” said Pestsov.
Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and Sergey Ivanovitch regretted that he had not made this comparison.
Even Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled.
“Yes, but a man can’t nurse a baby,” said Pestsov, “while a woman....” “No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby on board ship,” said the old prince, feeling this freedom in conversation permissible before his own daughters.
“There are as many such Englishmen as there would be women officials,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?” put in Stepan Arkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova, whom he had had in his mind all along, in sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting him.
“If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sifted, you would find she had abandoned a family—her own or a sister’s, where she might have found a woman’s duties,” Darya Alexandrovna broke in unexpectedly in a tone of exasperation, probably suspecting what sort of girl Stepan Arkadyevitch was thinking of.
“But we take our stand on principle as the ideal,” replied Pestsov in his mellow bass.
“Woman desires to have rights, to be independent, educated.
She is oppressed, humiliated by the consciousness of her disabilities.” “And I’m oppressed and humiliated that they won’t engage me at the Foundling,” the old prince said again, to the huge delight of Turovtsin, who in his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick end in the sauce.
Chapter 11 Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin.
At first, when they were talking of the influence that one people has on another, there rose to Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject.
But these ideas, once of such importance in his eyes, seemed to come into his brain as in a dream, and had now not the slightest interest for him.
Kitty, too, should, one would have supposed, have been interested in what they were saying of the rights and education of women.
How often she had mused on the subject, thinking of her friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of dependence, how often she had wondered about herself what would become of her if she did not marry, and how often she had argued with her sister about it!
But it did not interest her at all.
She and Levin had a conversation of their own, yet not a conversation, but some sort of mysterious communication, which brought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of glad terror before the unknown into which they were entering.
At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he could have seen her last year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home from the mowing along the highroad and had met her.
You were probably only just awake.
It was an exquisite morning.
I was walking along wondering who it could be in a four-in-hand?
It was a splendid set of four horses with bells, and in a second you flashed by, and I saw you at the window—you were sitting like this, holding the strings of your cap in both hands, and thinking awfully deeply about something,” he said, smiling.
“How I should like to know what you were thinking about then!
Something important?” “Wasn’t I dreadfully untidy?” she wondered, but seeing the smile of ecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt that the impression she had made had been very good.
She blushed and laughed with delight; “Really I don’t remember.” “How nicely Turovtsin laughs!” said Levin, admiring his moist eyes and shaking chest.
“Oh, everyone knows him!” “And I see you think he’s a horrid man?” “Not horrid, but nothing in him.” “Oh, you’re wrong!
And you must give up thinking so directly!” said Kitty.
“I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but he, he’s an awfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted man.
Last winter, soon after ... you came to see us,” she said, with a guilty and at the same time confiding smile, “all Dolly’s children had scarlet fever, and he happened to come and see her.
And only fancy,” she said in a whisper, “he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and began to help her look after the children.
Yes, and for three weeks he stopped with them, and looked after the children like a nurse.” “I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the scarlet fever,” she said, bending over to her sister.
“Yes, it was wonderful, noble!” said Dolly, glancing towards Turovtsin, who had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently to him.
Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was he had not realized all this man’s goodness before.
“I’m sorry, I’m sorry, and I’ll never think ill of people again!” he said gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at the moment.
Chapter 12 Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights of women there were certain questions as to the inequality of rights in marriage improper to discuss before the ladies.
Pestsov had several times during dinner touched upon these questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch and Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drew him off them.
When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out, Pestsov did not follow them, but addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, began to expound the chief ground of inequality.
The inequality in marriage, in his opinion, lay in the fact that the infidelity of the wife and the infidelity of the husband are punished unequally, both by the law and by public opinion.
Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up to Alexey Alexandrovitch and offered him a cigar.
“No, I don’t smoke,” Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly, and as though purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the subject, he turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.
“I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature of things,” he said, and would have gone on to the drawing-room.
But at this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the conversation, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?” said Turovtsin, warmed up by the champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity to break the silence that had weighed on him.
He would again have got his brother-in-law away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself inquired, with curiosity: “What did Pryatchnikov fight about?” “His wife.
Called him out and shot him!” “Ah!” said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and lifting his eyebrows, he went into the drawing-room.
“How glad I am you have come,” Dolly said with a frightened smile, meeting him in the outer drawing-room.
Let’s sit here.” Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indifference, given him by his lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, and smiled affectedly.
“It’s fortunate,” said he, “especially as I was meaning to ask you to excuse me, and to be taking leave.
I have to start tomorrow.” Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna’s innocence, and she felt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at this frigid, unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her innocent friend.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, with desperate resolution looking him in the face, “I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer.
How is she?” “She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna,” replied Alexey Alexandrovitch, not looking at her.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right ... but I love Anna as a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what is wrong between you? what fault do you find with her?” Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his eyes, dropped his head.
“I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I consider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?” he said, not looking her in the face, but eyeing with displeasure Shtcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing-room.
“I don’t believe it, I don’t believe it, I can’t believe it!” Dolly said, clasping her bony hands before her with a vigorous gesture.
She rose quickly, and laid her hand on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sleeve.
“We shall be disturbed here.
Come this way, please.” Dolly’s agitation had an effect on Alexey Alexandrovitch.
He got up and submissively followed her to the schoolroom.
They sat down to a table covered with an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.
“One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna,” said he, with an emphasis on the word “facts.” “But what has she done?” said Darya Alexandrovna.
“What precisely has she done?” “She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband.
No, for God’s sake, you are mistaken,” said Dolly, putting her hands to her temples and closing her eyes.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning to signify to her and to himself the firmness of his conviction; but this warm defense, though it could not shake him, reopened his wound.
“It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife herself informs her husband of the fact—informs him that eight years of her life, and a son, all that’s a mistake, and that she wants to begin life again,” he said angrily, with a snort.
“Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!” “Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, now looking straight into Dolly’s kindly, troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was being loosened in spite of himself, “I would give a great deal for doubt to be still possible.
When I doubted, I was miserable, but it was better than now.
When I doubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope, and still I doubt of everything.
I am in such doubt of everything that I even hate my son, and sometimes do not believe he is my son.
Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon as he glanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and her faith in the innocence of her friend began to totter.
But can it be true that you are resolved on a divorce?” “I am resolved on extreme measures.
“What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot, as in any other—in loss, in death—bear one’s trouble in peace, but that one must act,” said he, as though guessing her thought.
“One must get out of the humiliating position in which one is placed; one can’t live _à trois_.” “I understand, I quite understand that,” said Dolly, and her head sank.
She was silent for a little, thinking of herself, of her own grief in her family, and all at once, with an impulsive movement, she raised her head and clasped her hands with an imploring gesture.
You are a Christian.
What will become of her, if you cast her off?” “I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great deal,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
His face turned red in patches, and his dim eyes looked straight before him.
Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied him with all her heart.
“That was what I did indeed when she herself made known to me my humiliation; I left everything as of old.
She would not regard the slightest request—that she should observe decorum,” he said, getting heated.
“One may save anyone who does not want to be ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so depraved, that ruin itself seems to be her salvation, what’s to be done?” “Anything, only not divorce!” answered Darya Alexandrovna “But what is anything?” “No, it is awful!
She will be no one’s wife, she will be lost!” “What can I do?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his shoulders and his eyebrows.
The recollection of his wife’s last act had so incensed him that he had become frigid, as at the beginning of the conversation.
“I am very grateful for your sympathy, but I must be going,” he said, getting up.
I was married, and my husband deceived me; in anger and jealousy, I would have thrown up everything, I would myself....
The children are growing up, my husband has come back to his family, and feels his fault, is growing purer, better, and I live on....
I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!” Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no effect on him now.
All the hatred of that day when he had resolved on a divorce had sprung up again in his soul.
I have done everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all in the mud to which she is akin.
I am not a spiteful man, I have never hated anyone, but I hate her with my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive her, because I hate her too much for all the wrong she has done me!” he said, with tones of hatred in his voice.
“Love those that hate you....” Darya Alexandrovna whispered timorously.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously.
“Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is impossible.
Forgive me for having troubled you.
Everyone has enough to bear in his own grief!” And regaining his self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch quietly took leave and went away.
Chapter 13 When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty into the drawing-room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as too obviously paying her attention.
He remained in the little ring of men, taking part in the general conversation, and without looking at Kitty, he was aware of her movements, her looks, and the place where she was in the drawing-room.
He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise he had made her—always to think well of all men, and to like everyone always.
The conversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov saw a sort of special principle, called by him the “choral” principle.
Levin did not agree with Pestsov, nor with his brother, who had a special attitude of his own, both admitting and not admitting the significance of the Russian commune.
But he talked to them, simply trying to reconcile and soften their differences.
He was not in the least interested in what he said himself, and even less so in what they said; all he wanted was that they and everyone should be happy and contented.
He knew now the one thing of importance; and that one thing was at first there, in the drawing-room, and then began moving across and came to a standstill at the door.
She was standing in the doorway with Shtcherbatsky, looking at him.
“That’s something I miss in the country—music.” “No; we only came to fetch you and thank you,” she said, rewarding him with a smile that was like a gift, “for coming.
He had often had the experience of suddenly in a discussion grasping what it was his opponent liked and at once liking it too, and immediately he found himself agreeing, and then all arguments fell away as useless.
Sometimes, too, he had experienced the opposite, expressing at last what he liked himself, which he was devising arguments to defend, and, chancing to express it well and genuinely, he had found his opponent at once agreeing and ceasing to dispute his position.
She knitted her brow, trying to understand.
But directly he began to illustrate his meaning, she understood at once.
“I know: one must find out what he is arguing for, what is precious to him, then one can....” She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed idea.
Levin smiled joyfully; he was struck by this transition from the confused, verbose discussion with Pestsov and his brother to this laconic, clear, almost wordless communication of the most complex ideas.
Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a card-table, sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging circles over the new green cloth.
They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner—the liberty and occupations of women.
Levin was of the opinion of Darya Alexandrovna that a girl who did not marry should find a woman’s duties in a family.
He supported this view by the fact that no family can get on without women to help; that in every family, poor or rich, there are and must be nurses, either relations or hired.
“No,” said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the more boldly with her truthful eyes; “a girl may be so circumstanced that she cannot live in the family without humiliation, while she herself....” At the hint he understood her.
“Yes, yes, yes—you’re right; you’re right!” And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of the liberty of woman, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of an old maid’s existence and its humiliation in Kitty’s heart; and loving her, he felt that terror and humiliation, and at once gave up his arguments.
Under the influence of her mood he felt in all his being a continually growing tension of happiness.
I’ve scribbled all over the table!” she said, and, laying down the chalk, she made a movement as though to get up.
“I’ve long wanted to ask you one thing.” He looked straight into her caressing, though frightened eyes.
These letters meant, “When you told me it could never be, did that mean never, or then?” There seemed no likelihood that she could make out this complicated sentence; but he looked at her as though his life depended on her understanding the words.
She glanced at him seriously, then leaned her puckered brow on her hands and began to read.
Once or twice she stole a look at him, as though asking him, “Is it what I think?” “I understand,” she said, flushing a little.
“What is this word?” he said, pointing to the _n_ that stood for _never_.
Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of the two figures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy smile looking upwards at Levin, and his handsome figure bending over the table with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the next on her.
He was suddenly radiant: he had understood.
It meant, “Then I could not answer differently.” He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.
“Only then?” “Yes,” her smile answered.
“I understand,” she said in a whisper.
She understood it all, and without asking him, “Is it this?” took the chalk and at once answered.
For a long while he could not understand what she had written, and often looked into her eyes.
He was stupefied with happiness.
He could not supply the word she had meant; but in her charming eyes, beaming with happiness, he saw all he needed to know.
But he had hardly finished writing when she read them over her arm, and herself finished and wrote the answer, “Yes.” “You’re playing _secrétaire_?” said the old prince.
“But we must really be getting along if you want to be in time at the theater.” Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.
In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said that she loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother that he would come tomorrow morning.
Chapter 14 When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such uneasiness without her, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as quickly as possible, to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and be plighted to her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, of those fourteen hours that he had to get through without her.
It was essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be left alone, to kill time.
Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the companion most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a _soirée_, in reality to the ballet.
The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed Levin that he comprehended that feeling fittingly.
“Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing Levin’s hand with emotion.
Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort of congratulation, saying, “How glad I am you have met Kitty again!
One must value old friends.” Levin did not like these words of Darya Alexandrovna’s.
She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it all was, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it.
Levin said good-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself to his brother.
Yes, come along,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling.
Happiness is the matter with me!” said Levin, letting down the window of the carriage they were driving in.
“You don’t mind?—it’s so stifling.
It’s happiness is the matter with me!
Why is it you have never married?” Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
“I am very glad, she seems a nice gi....” Sergey Ivanovitch was beginning.
“Don’t say it! don’t say it!” shouted Levin, clutching at the collar of his fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in it.
Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare with him.
“Well, anyway, I may say that I’m very glad of it.” “That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more!
Nothing, nothing, silence,” said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur coat, he added: “I do like you so!
Well, is it possible for me to be present at the meeting?” “Of course it is.” “What is your discussion about today?” asked Levin, never ceasing smiling.
Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly read the minutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but Levin saw from this secretary’s face what a good, nice, kind-hearted person he was.
This was evident from his confusion and embarrassment in reading the minutes.
Then the discussion began.
They were disputing about the misappropriation of certain sums and the laying of certain pipes, and Sergey Ivanovitch was very cutting to two members, and said something at great length with an air of triumph; and another member, scribbling something on a bit of paper, began timidly at first, but afterwards answered him very viciously and delightfully.
And then Sviazhsky (he was there too) said something too, very handsomely and nobly.
Levin listened to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums and these pipes were not anything real, and that they were not at all angry, but were all the nicest, kindest people, and everything was as happy and charming as possible among them.
They did no harm to anyone, and were all enjoying it.
What struck Levin was that he could see through them all today, and from little, almost imperceptible signs knew the soul of each, and saw distinctly that they were all good at heart.
And Levin himself in particular they were all extremely fond of that day.
That was evident from the way they spoke to him, from the friendly, affectionate way even those he did not know looked at him.
“Well, did you like it?” Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.
I never supposed it was so interesting!
Splendid!” Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea with him.
Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was he had disliked in Sviazhsky, what he had failed to find in him.
He was a clever and wonderfully good-hearted man.
“Most delighted,” he said, and asked after his wife and sister-in-law.
And from a queer association of ideas, because in his imagination the idea of Sviazhsky’s sister-in-law was connected with marriage, it occurred to him that there was no one to whom he could more suitably speak of his happiness, and he was very glad to go and see them.
Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate, presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of doing anything not done already in Europe, and now this did not in the least annoy Levin.
On the contrary, he felt that Sviazhsky was right, that the whole business was of little value, and he saw the wonderful softness and consideration with which Sviazhsky avoided fully expressing his correct view.
The ladies of the Sviazhsky household were particularly delightful.
It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it already and sympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy.
He stayed with them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of subjects but the one thing that filled his heart, and did not observe that he was boring them dreadfully, and that it was long past their bedtime.
Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the strange humor his friend was in.
Levin went back to his hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now with his impatience he had ten hours still left to get through.
This servant, Yegor, whom Levin had noticed before, struck him as a very intelligent, excellent, and, above all, good-hearted man.
“Well, Yegor, it’s hard work not sleeping, isn’t it?” “One’s got to put up with it!
In a gentleman’s house it’s easier; but then here one makes more.” It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a daughter, a sempstress, whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler’s shop.
Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in marriage the great thing was love, and that with love one would always be happy, for happiness rests only on oneself.
Yegor listened attentively, and obviously quite took in Levin’s idea, but by way of assent to it he enunciated, greatly to Levin’s surprise, the observation that when he had lived with good masters he had always been satisfied with his masters, and now was perfectly satisfied with his employer, though he was a Frenchman.
“Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!” thought Levin.
“Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married, did you love your wife?” “Ay! and why not?” responded Yegor.
And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and intending to express all his most heartfelt emotions.
“My life, too, has been a wonderful one.
From a child up....” he was beginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin’s enthusiasm, just as people catch yawning.
Yegor departed, and Levin was left alone.
He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused tea and supper at Sviazhsky’s, but he was incapable of thinking of supper.
He had not slept the previous night, but was incapable of thinking of sleep either.
His room was cold, but he was oppressed by heat.
He opened both the movable panes in his window and sat down to the table opposite the open panes.
Over the snow-covered roofs could be seen a decorated cross with chains, and above it the rising triangle of Charles’s Wain with the yellowish light of Capella.
He gazed at the cross, then at the stars, drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed evenly into the room, and followed as though in a dream the images and memories that rose in his imagination.
He walked gloomily, frowning and coughing.
He would have talked with him, and tried to comfort him, but remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on, he changed his mind and sat down again at the open pane to bathe in the cold air and gaze at the exquisite lines of the cross, silent, but full of meaning for him, and the mounting lurid yellow star.
At seven o’clock there was a noise of people polishing the floors, and bells ringing in some servants’ department, and Levin felt that he was beginning to get frozen.
Levin went to the house of the Shtcherbatskys.
The visitors’ doors were closed and everything was asleep.
Levin would have entered into conversation with him, but a bell rang for the servant, and he went out.
Levin, rejecting the roll, put on his coat and went out again for a walk.
It was nine o’clock when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ steps the second time.
In the house they were only just up, and the cook came out to go marketing.
All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously, and felt perfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life.
He had eaten nothing for a whole day, he had not slept for two nights, had spent several hours undressed in the frozen air, and felt not simply fresher and stronger than ever, but felt utterly independent of his body; he moved without muscular effort, and felt as if he could do anything.
He was convinced he could fly upwards or lift the corner of the house, if need be.
He spent the remainder of the time in the street, incessantly looking at his watch and gazing about him.
The children especially going to school, the bluish doves flying down from the roofs to the pavement, and the little loaves covered with flour, thrust out by an unseen hand, touched him.
Those loaves, those doves, and those two boys were not earthly creatures.
It all happened at the same time: a boy ran towards a dove and glanced smiling at Levin; the dove, with a whir of her wings, darted away, flashing in the sun, amid grains of snow that quivered in the air, while from a little window there came a smell of fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out.
All of this together was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight.
Going a long way round by Gazetny Place and Kislovka, he went back again to the hotel, and putting his watch before him, he sat down to wait for twelve o’clock.
In the next room they were talking about some sort of machines, and swindling, and coughing their morning coughs.
They crowded round Levin with happy faces, quarreling among themselves, and offering their services.
Trying not to offend the other sledge drivers, and promising to drive with them too, Levin took one and told him to drive to the Shtcherbatskys’.
The sledge-driver was splendid in a white shirt-collar sticking out over his overcoat and into his strong, full-blooded red neck.
The sledge was high and comfortable, and altogether such a one as Levin never drove in after, and the horse was a good one, and tried to gallop but didn’t seem to move.
The driver knew the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and drew up at the entrance with a curve of his arm and a “Wo!” especially indicative of respect for his fare.
The Shtcherbatskys’ hall-porter certainly knew all about it.
This was evident from the smile in his eyes and the way he said: “Well, it’s a long while since you’ve been to see us, Konstantin Dmitrievitch!” Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted and making efforts to conceal his joy.
Looking into his kindly old eyes, Levin realized even something new in his happiness.
That meant something.
“To whom shall I announce your honor?” asked the footman.
“The princess ... the prince ... the young princess....” said Levin.
The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon.
She walked across the room, and her ringlets and her face were beaming.
He had only just spoken to her, when suddenly he heard the rustle of a skirt at the door, and Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin’s eyes, and a joyful terror came over him at the nearness of his happiness.
Mademoiselle Linon was in great haste, and leaving him, went out at the other door.
Directly she had gone out, swift, swift light steps sounded on the parquet, and his bliss, his life, himself—what was best in himself, what he had so long sought and longed for—was quickly, so quickly approaching him.
He saw nothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by the same bliss of love that flooded his heart.
Those eyes were shining nearer and nearer, blinding him with their light of love.
She stopped still close to him, touching him.
Her hands rose and dropped onto his shoulders.
She had done all she could—she had run up to him and given herself up entirely, shy and happy.
She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting him all the morning.
Her mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy in her happiness.
She wanted to be the first to tell him her happiness and his.
She had got ready to see him alone, and had been delighted at the idea, and had been shy and ashamed, and did not know herself what she was doing.
She had heard his steps and voice, and had waited at the door for Mademoiselle Linon to go.
Mademoiselle Linon had gone away.
Without thinking, without asking herself how and what, she had gone up to him, and did as she was doing.
For a long while he could say nothing, not so much because he was afraid of desecrating the loftiness of his emotion by a word, as that every time he tried to say something, instead of words he felt that tears of happiness were welling up.
“I can’t believe you love me, dear!” She smiled at that “dear,” and at the timidity with which he glanced at her.
“Yes!” she said significantly, deliberately.
The princess, seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and then immediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had not expected, ran up to him, and hugging his head, kissed him, wetting his cheeks with her tears.
Kitty!” “You’ve not been long settling things,” said the old prince, trying to seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet when he turned to him.
“Even when this little feather-head fancied....” “Papa!” shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.
Oh, what a fool I am....” He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and made the sign of the cross over her.
And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till then so little known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty kissed his muscular hand.
Chapter 16 The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince sat down beside her.
The princess was the first to put everything into words, and to translate all thoughts and feelings into practical questions.
We must have the benediction and announcement.
What do you think, Alexander?” “Here he is,” said the old prince, pointing to Levin—“he’s the principal person in the matter.” “When?” said Levin blushing.
If you ask me, I should say, the benediction today and the wedding tomorrow.” “Come, _mon cher_, that’s nonsense!” “Well, in a week.” “He’s quite mad.” “No, why so?” “Well, upon my word!” said the mother, smiling, delighted at this haste.
“How about the trousseau?” “Will there really be a trousseau and all that?” Levin thought with horror.
“But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—can it spoil my happiness?
Nothing can spoil it!” He glanced at Kitty, and noticed that she was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbed by the idea of the trousseau.
“Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like,” he said apologetically.
The benediction and announcement can take place now.
That’s very well.” The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have gone away, but he kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young lover, kissed her several times, smiling.
The old people were obviously muddled for a moment, and did not quite know whether it was they who were in love again or their daughter.
When the prince and the princess had gone, Levin went up to his betrothed and took her hand.
He was self-possessed now and could speak, and he had a great deal he wanted to tell her.
“I believe that it was ordained.” “And I!” she said.
“Even when....” She stopped and went on again, looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes, “Even when I thrust from me my happiness.
He had resolved from the first to tell her two things—that he was not chaste as she was, and that he was not a believer.
It was agonizing, but he considered he ought to tell her both these facts.
“Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me.
I’m not afraid of anything.
I want to know everything.
Now it is settled.” He added: “Settled that you’ll take me whatever I may be—you won’t give me up?
Yes?” “Yes, yes.” Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with an affected but tender smile came to congratulate her favorite pupil.
Before she had gone, the servants came in with their congratulations.
Then relations arrived, and there began that state of blissful absurdity from which Levin did not emerge till the day after his wedding.
Levin was in a continual state of awkwardness and discomfort, but the intensity of his happiness went on all the while increasing.
He felt continually that a great deal was being expected of him—what, he did not know; and he did everything he was told, and it all gave him happiness.
He had thought his engagement would have nothing about it like others, that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would spoil his special happiness; but it ended in his doing exactly as other people did, and his happiness being only increased thereby and becoming more and more special, more and more unlike anything that had ever happened.
“Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat,” said Mademoiselle Linon—and Levin drove off to buy sweetmeats.
“Well, I’m very glad,” said Sviazhsky.
“I advise you to get the bouquets from Fomin’s.” “Oh, are they wanted?” And he drove to Fomin’s.
His brother offered to lend him money, as he would have so many expenses, presents to give....
“Oh, are presents wanted?” And he galloped to Foulde’s.
And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s he saw that he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and prided themselves on his happiness, just as everyone whom he had to do with during those days.
What was extraordinary was that everyone not only liked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous, were enthusiastic over him, gave way to him in everything, treated his feeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction that he was the happiest man in the world because his betrothed was beyond perfection.
When Countess Nordston ventured to hint that she had hoped for something better, Kitty was so angry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be better than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and in Kitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic admiration.
The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of this time.
He consulted the old prince, and with his sanction gave Kitty his diary, in which there was written the confession that tortured him.
His confession of unbelief passed unnoticed.
She was religious, had never doubted the truths of religion, but his external unbelief did not affect her in the least.
Through love she knew all his soul, and in his soul she saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul should be called unbelieving was to her a matter of no account.
The other confession set her weeping bitterly.
Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary.
But he had not realized what an effect it would have on her, he had not put himself in her place.
It was only when the same evening he came to their house before the theater, went into her room and saw her tear-stained, pitiful, sweet face, miserable with suffering he had caused and nothing could undo, he felt the abyss that separated his shameful past from her dovelike purity, and was appalled at what he had done.
No, it was better anyway,” she added, touched by his despairing face.
“You can’t forgive me,” he whispered.
“Yes, I forgive you; but it’s terrible!” But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not shatter it, it only added another shade to it.
She forgave him; but from that time more than ever he considered himself unworthy of her, morally bowed down lower than ever before her, and prized more highly than ever his undeserved happiness.
Chapter 17 Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had taken place during and after dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to his solitary room.
Darya Alexandrovna’s words about forgiveness had aroused in him nothing but annoyance.
The applicability or non-applicability of the Christian precept to his own case was too difficult a question to be discussed lightly, and this question had long ago been answered by Alexey Alexandrovitch in the negative.
Of all that had been said, what stuck most in his memory was the phrase of stupid, good-natured Turovtsin—“_Acted like a man, he did!
Called him out and shot him!_” Everyone had apparently shared this feeling, though from politeness they had not expressed it.
“But the matter is settled, it’s useless thinking about it,” Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself.
And thinking of nothing but the journey before him, and the revision work he had to do, he went into his room and asked the porter who escorted him where his man was.
“Two telegrams,” said his manservant, coming into the room.
“I beg your pardon, your excellency; I’d only just that minute gone out.” Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them.
The first telegram was the announcement of Stremov’s appointment to the very post Karenin had coveted.
Alexey Alexandrovitch flung the telegram down, and flushing a little, got up and began to pace up and down the room.
“_Quos vult perdere dementat_,” he said, meaning by _quos_ the persons responsible for this appointment.
He was not so much annoyed that he had not received the post, that he had been conspicuously passed over; but it was incomprehensible, amazing to him that they did not see that the wordy phrase-monger Stremov was the last man fit for it.
How could they fail to see how they were ruining themselves, lowering their _prestige_ by this appointment?
“Something else in the same line,” he said to himself bitterly, opening the second telegram.
The telegram was from his wife.
I shall die easier with your forgiveness,” he read.
He smiled contemptuously, and flung down the telegram.
She was near her confinement.
Perhaps it is the confinement.
To legitimize the child, to compromise me, and prevent a divorce,” he thought.
“But something was said in it: I am dying....” He read the telegram again, and suddenly the plain meaning of what was said in it struck him.
“If it is true that in the moment of agony and nearness to death she is genuinely penitent, and I, taking it for a trick, refuse to go?
That would not only be cruel, and everyone would blame me, but it would be stupid on my part.” “Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg,” he said to his servant.
Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to Petersburg and see his wife.
With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in the train, in the early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch drove through the deserted Nevsky and stared straight before him, not thinking of what was awaiting him.
He could not think about it, because in picturing what would happen, he could not drive away the reflection that her death would at once remove all the difficulty of his position.
Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen, porters sweeping the pavements flashed past his eyes, and he watched it all, trying to smother the thought of what was awaiting him, and what he dared not hope for, and yet was hoping for.
A sledge and a carriage with the coachman asleep stood at the entrance.
As he went into the entry, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out his resolution from the remotest corner of his brain, and mastered it thoroughly.
Its meaning ran: “If it’s a trick, then calm contempt and departure.
If truth, do what is proper.” The porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang.
The porter, Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in slippers.
“How is your mistress?” “A successful confinement yesterday.” Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white.
He felt distinctly now how intensely he had longed for her death.
“And how is she?” Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.
“Very ill,” he answered.
“There was a consultation yesterday, and the doctor’s here now.” “Take my things,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling some relief at the news that there was still hope of her death, he went into the hall.
On the hatstand there was a military overcoat.
Alexey Alexandrovitch noticed it and asked: “Who is here?” “The doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky.” Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.
She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity given by the approach of death took him by the arm and drew him towards the bedroom.
“Make haste with the ice!” the doctor’s peremptory voice said from the bedroom.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.
At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his face hidden in his hands, weeping.
He jumped up at the doctor’s voice, took his hands from his face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Seeing the husband, he was so overwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing his head down to his shoulders, as if he wanted to disappear; but he made an effort over himself, got up and said: “She is dying.
I am entirely in your power, only let me be here ... though I am at your disposal.
I....” Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a rush of that nervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other people’s suffering, and turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to the door, without hearing the rest of his words.
From the bedroom came the sound of Anna’s voice saying something.
Her voice was lively, eager, with exceedingly distinct intonations.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the bedroom, and went up to the bed.
Her cheeks were flushed crimson, her eyes glittered, her little white hands thrust out from the sleeves of her dressing gown were playing with the quilt, twisting it about.
It seemed as though she were not only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind.
She was talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correct articulation and expressive intonation.
“For Alexey—I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a strange and awful thing that both are Alexey, isn’t it?)—Alexey would not refuse me.
Give her to the nurse.” “Anna Arkadyevna, he has come.
Here he is!” said the midwife, trying to attract her attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Oh, what nonsense!” Anna went on, not seeing her husband.
His eyes I ought to know—Seryozha has just the same eyes—and I can’t bear to see them because of it.
Has Seryozha had his dinner?
I know everyone will forget him.
Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and Mariette must be asked to sleep with him.” All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as though expecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her hands to her face.
I am in a hurry, because I’ve no time, I’ve not long left to live; the fever will begin directly and I shall understand nothing more.
Now I understand, I understand it all, I see it all!” Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wrinkled face wore an expression of agony; he took her by the hand and tried to say something, but he could not utter it; his lower lip quivered, but he still went on struggling with his emotion, and only now and then glanced at her.
And each time he glanced at her, he saw her eyes gazing at him with such passionate and triumphant tenderness as he had never seen in them.
“Wait a minute, you don’t know ... stay a little, stay!...” She stopped, as though collecting her ideas.
Don’t be surprised at me.
I’m terrible, but my nurse used to tell me; the holy martyr—what was her name?
And I’ll go to Rome; there’s a wilderness, and there I shall be no trouble to anyone, only I’ll take Seryozha and the little one....
I know, it can’t be forgiven!
The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing, and had by now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it.
He suddenly felt that what he had regarded as nervous agitation was on the contrary a blissful spiritual condition that gave him all at once a new happiness he had never known.
He did not think that the Christian law that he had been all his life trying to follow, enjoined on him to forgive and love his enemies; but a glad feeling of love and forgiveness for his enemies filled his heart.
Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive me!...
Oh, take these cloaks off me!” The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the pillow, and covered her up to the shoulders.
She lay back submissively, and looked before her with beaming eyes.
“Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I want nothing more....
“Alexey Alexandrovitch, do uncover his face!
I want to see him.” Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky’s hands and drew them away from his face, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame upon it.
Forgive him.” Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not attempting to restrain the tears that streamed from his eyes.
“Thank God, thank God!” she said, “now everything is ready.
How badly these flowers are done—not a bit like a violet,” she said, pointing to the hangings.
Give me some morphine.
Doctor, give me some morphine!
The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it was ninety-nine chances in a hundred it would end in death.
The whole day long there was fever, delirium, and unconsciousness.
At midnight the patient lay without consciousness, and almost without pulse.
The end was expected every minute.
Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and Alexey Alexandrovitch meeting him in the hall, said: “Better stay, she might ask for you,” and himself led him to his wife’s boudoir.
Towards morning, there was a return again of excitement, rapid thought and talk, and again it ended in unconsciousness.
That day Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the boudoir where Vronsky was sitting, and closing the door sat down opposite him.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” said Vronsky, feeling that a statement of the position was coming, “I can’t speak, I can’t understand.
However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more terrible for me.” He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took him by the hand and said: “I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary.
I must explain my feelings, the feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so that you may not be in error regarding me.
You know I had resolved on a divorce, and had even begun to take proceedings.
I won’t conceal from you that in beginning this I was in uncertainty, I was in misery; I will confess that I was pursued by a desire to revenge myself on you and on her.
When I got the telegram, I came here with the same feelings; I will say more, I longed for her death.
But....” He paused, pondering whether to disclose or not to disclose his feeling to him.
And the happiness of forgiveness has revealed to me my duty.
I forgive completely.
I pray to God only not to take from me the bliss of forgiveness!” Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them impressed Vronsky.
“This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me the laughing-stock of the world, I will not abandon her, and I will never utter a word of reproach to you,” Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.
Vronsky too was getting up, and in a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him from under his brows.
He did not understand Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feeling, but he felt that it was something higher and even unattainable for him with his view of life.
Chapter 18 After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out onto the steps of the Karenins’ house and stood still, with difficulty remembering where he was, and where he ought to walk or drive.
He felt disgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of washing away his humiliation.
All the habits and rules of his life that had seemed so firm, had turned out suddenly false and inapplicable.
The betrayed husband, who had figured till that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat ludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly been summoned by her herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle that husband had shown himself, not malignant, not false, not ludicrous, but kind and straightforward and large.
Vronsky could not but feel this, and the parts were suddenly reversed.
Vronsky felt his elevation and his own abasement, his truth and his own falsehood.
He felt that the husband was magnanimous even in his sorrow, while he had been base and petty in his deceit.
But this sense of his own humiliation before the man he had unjustly despised made up only a small part of his misery.
He felt unutterably wretched now, for his passion for Anna, which had seemed to him of late to be growing cooler, now that he knew he had lost her forever, was stronger than ever it had been.
And now when he had learned to know her, to love her as she should be loved, he had been humiliated before her, and had lost her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but a shameful memory.
Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful position when Alexey Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away from his humiliated face.
He stood on the steps of the Karenins’ house like one distraught, and did not know what to do.
“Yes, a sledge.” On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without undressing, lay down flat on the sofa, clasping his hands and laying his head on them.
Images, memories, and ideas of the strangest description followed one another with extraordinary rapidity and vividness.
First it was the medicine he had poured out for the patient and spilt over the spoon, then the midwife’s white hands, then the queer posture of Alexey Alexandrovitch on the floor beside the bed.
To forget!” he said to himself with the serene confidence of a healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he will go to sleep at once.
And the same instant his head did begin to feel drowsy and he began to drop off into forgetfulness.
The waves of the sea of unconsciousness had begun to meet over his head, when all at once—it was as though a violent shock of electricity had passed over him.
The heaviness in his head and the weariness in his limbs that he had felt a minute before had suddenly gone.
“You may trample me in the mud,” he heard Alexey Alexandrovitch’s words and saw him standing before him, and saw Anna’s face with its burning flush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at him but at Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as he fancied, foolish and ludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch took his hands away from his face.
He stretched out his legs again and flung himself on the sofa in the same position and shut his eyes.
To forget!” he repeated to himself.
But with his eyes shut he saw more distinctly than ever Anna’s face as it had been on the memorable evening before the races.
How can we be reconciled? how can we be reconciled?” he said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat these words.
This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images and memories, which he felt were thronging in his brain.
But repeating words did not check his imagination for long.
Again in extraordinarily rapid succession his best moments rose before his mind, and then his recent humiliation.
He takes away his hands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of his face.
He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was not the smallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some chain of thought, trying by this to check the rising flood of fresh images.
He listened, and heard in a strange, mad whisper words repeated: “I did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it.
I did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it.” “What’s this?
What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men shoot themselves?” he answered himself, and opening his eyes, he saw with wonder an embroidered cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’s wife.
But to think of anything extraneous was an agonizing effort.
The court?” He could not come to a pause anywhere.
He got up from the sofa, took off his coat, undid his belt, and uncovering his hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked up and down the room.
“This is how people go mad,” he repeated, “and how they shoot themselves ... to escape humiliation,” he added slowly.
He went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes and clenched teeth he went up to the table, took a revolver, looked round him, turned it to a loaded barrel, and sank into thought.
For two minutes, his head bent forward with an expression of an intense effort of thought, he stood with the revolver in his hand, motionless, thinking.
“Of course,” he said to himself, as though a logical, continuous, and clear chain of reasoning had brought him to an indubitable conclusion.
In reality this “of course,” that seemed convincing to him, was simply the result of exactly the same circle of memories and images through which he had passed ten times already during the last hour—memories of happiness lost forever.
There was the same conception of the senselessness of everything to come in life, the same consciousness of humiliation.
Even the sequence of these images and emotions was the same.
“Of course,” he repeated, when for the third time his thought passed again round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, and pulling the revolver to the left side of his chest, and clutching it vigorously with his whole hand, as it were, squeezing it in his fist, he pulled the trigger.
He tried to clutch at the edge of the table, dropped the revolver, staggered, and sat down on the ground, looking about him in astonishment.
He did not recognize his room, looking up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at the wastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug.
The hurried, creaking steps of his servant coming through the drawing-room brought him to his senses.
Missed!” he said, fumbling after the revolver.
The revolver was close beside him—he sought further off.
Still feeling for it, he stretched out to the other side, and not being strong enough to keep his balance, fell over, streaming with blood.
The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually complaining to his acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves, was so panic-stricken on seeing his master lying on the floor, that he left him losing blood while he ran for assistance.
An hour later Varya, his brother’s wife, had arrived, and with the assistance of three doctors, whom she had sent for in all directions, and who all appeared at the same moment, she got the wounded man to bed, and remained to nurse him.
Chapter 19 The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing for seeing his wife, he had overlooked the possibility that her repentance might be sincere, and he might forgive her, and she might not die—this mistake was two months after his return from Moscow brought home to him in all its significance.
But the mistake made by him had arisen not simply from his having overlooked that contingency, but also from the fact that until that day of his interview with his dying wife, he had not known his own heart.
At his sick wife’s bedside he had for the first time in his life given way to that feeling of sympathetic suffering always roused in him by the sufferings of others, and hitherto looked on by him with shame as a harmful weakness.
And pity for her, and remorse for having desired her death, and most of all, the joy of forgiveness, made him at once conscious, not simply of the relief of his own sufferings, but of a spiritual peace he had never experienced before.
He suddenly felt that the very thing that was the source of his sufferings had become the source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemed insoluble while he was judging, blaming, and hating, had become clear and simple when he forgave and loved.
He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and her remorse.
He forgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially after reports reached him of his despairing action.
And he blamed himself now for having taken too little interest in him.
But for the little newborn baby he felt a quite peculiar sentiment, not of pity, only, but of tenderness.
At first, from a feeling of compassion alone, he had been interested in the delicate little creature, who was not his child, and who was cast on one side during her mother’s illness, and would certainly have died if he had not troubled about her, and he did not himself observe how fond he became of her.
He would go into the nursery several times a day, and sit there for a long while, so that the nurses, who were at first afraid of him, got quite used to his presence.
Sometimes for half an hour at a stretch he would sit silently gazing at the saffron-red, downy, wrinkled face of the sleeping baby, watching the movements of the frowning brows, and the fat little hands, with clenched fingers, that rubbed the little eyes and nose.
At such moments particularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had a sense of perfect peace and inward harmony, and saw nothing extraordinary in his position, nothing that ought to be changed.
But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that however natural the position now seemed to him, he would not long be allowed to remain in it.
He felt that besides the blessed spiritual force controlling his soul, there was another, a brutal force, as powerful, or more powerful, which controlled his life, and that this force would not allow him that humble peace he longed for.
He felt that everyone was looking at him with inquiring wonder, that he was not understood, and that something was expected of him.
Above all, he felt the instability and unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.
When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed away, Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of him, ill at ease with him, and could not look him straight in the face.
She seemed to be wanting, and not daring, to tell him something; and as though foreseeing their present relations could not continue, she seemed to be expecting something from him.
Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s baby daughter, who had been named Anna too, fell ill.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the nursery in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent for, he went to his office.
On finishing his work, he returned home at four.
Going into the hall he saw a handsome groom, in a braided livery and a bear fur cape, holding a white fur cloak.
“Who is here?” asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya,” the groom answered, and it seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he grinned.
During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed that his worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar interest in him and his wife.
All these acquaintances he observed with difficulty concealing their mirth at something; the same mirth that he had perceived in the lawyer’s eyes, and just now in the eyes of this groom.
Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though they had just been at a wedding.
When they met him, with ill-disguised enjoyment they inquired after his wife’s health.
The presence of Princess Tverskaya was unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories associated with her, and also because he disliked her, and he went straight to the nursery.
In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the table with his legs on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily.
The English governess, who had during Anna’s illness replaced the French one, was sitting near the boy knitting a shawl.
She hurriedly got up, curtseyed, and pulled Seryozha.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered the governess’s inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had said of the baby.
“The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath, sir.” “But she is still in pain,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listening to the baby’s screaming in the next room.
“I think it’s the wet-nurse, sir,” the Englishwoman said firmly.
“What makes you think so?” he asked, stopping short.
“It’s just as it was at Countess Paul’s, sir.
They gave the baby medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the nurse had no milk, sir.” Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing still a few seconds he went in at the other door.
The baby was lying with its head thrown back, stiffening itself in the nurse’s arms, and would not take the plump breast offered it; and it never ceased screaming in spite of the double hushing of the wet-nurse and the other nurse, who was bending over her.
“Still no better?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“She’s very restless,” answered the nurse in a whisper.
“I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch.” “Then why didn’t you say so?” “Who’s one to say it to?
Anna Arkadyevna still ill....” said the nurse discontentedly.
And in her simple words there seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to his position.
The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing.
“You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse, frightened at the idea of losing her place, muttered something to herself, and covering her bosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea of doubts being cast on her abundance of milk.
In that smile, too, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.
“Luckless child!” said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still walking up and down with it.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and suffering face watched the nurse walking to and fro.
When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed, and the nurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left her, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the baby.
For a minute he was still, and with the same despondent face gazed at the baby; but all at once a smile, that moved his hair and the skin of his forehead, came out on his face, and he went as softly out of the room.
He felt vexed with his wife for not being anxious about this exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had no wish to go to her; he had no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy.
But his wife might wonder why he did not go to her as usual; and so, overcoming his disinclination, he went towards the bedroom.
As he walked over the soft rug towards the door, he could not help overhearing a conversation he did not want to hear.
“If he hadn’t been going away, I could have understood your answer and his too.
Don’t say that!” answered Anna’s excited voice.
“Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who has shot himself on your account....” “That’s just why I don’t want to.” With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped and would have gone back unobserved.
But reflecting that this would be undignified, he turned back again, and clearing his throat, he went up to the bedroom.
Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black curls on her round head, was sitting on a settee.
The eagerness died out of her face, as it always did, at the sight of her husband; she dropped her head and looked round uneasily at Betsy.
Betsy, dressed in the height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered somewhere over her head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with violet crossway stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt, was sitting beside Anna, her tall flat figure held erect.
Bowing her head, she greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.
“Ah!” she said, as though surprised.
You never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven’t seen you ever since Anna has been ill.
Yes, you’re a wonderful husband!” she said, with a meaning and affable air, as though she were bestowing an order of magnanimity on him for his conduct to his wife.
Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife’s hand, asked how she was.
“Better, I think,” she said, avoiding his eyes.
“But you’ve rather a feverish-looking color,” he said, laying stress on the word “feverish.” “We’ve been talking too much,” said Betsy.
“I feel it’s selfishness on my part, and I am going away.” She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.
I must tell you ... no, you.” she turned to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were suffused with crimson.
“I won’t and can’t keep anything secret from you,” she said.
Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed his head.
“Betsy’s been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here to say good-bye before his departure for Tashkend.” She did not look at her husband, and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however hard it might be for her.
“I told her I could not receive him.” “You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey Alexandrovitch,” Betsy corrected her.
“Oh, no, I can’t receive him; and what object would there....” She stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband (he did not look at her).
“In short, I don’t wish it....” Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.
He stopped short, looking at Princess Tverskaya.
Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch!
I know you are a truly magnanimous man,” said Betsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special warmth shaking hands with him once more.
“I am an outsider, but I so love her and respect you that I venture to advise.
Alexey Vronsky is the soul of honor, and he is going away to Tashkend.” “Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice.
But the question of whether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself.” He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and reflected immediately that whatever his words might be, there could be no dignity in his position.
And he saw this by the suppressed, malicious, and ironical smile with which Betsy glanced at him after this phrase.
Chapter 20 Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing-room, and went to his wife.
She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up hastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared way at him.
“I am very grateful for your confidence in me.” He repeated gently in Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and sat down beside her.
When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian “thou” of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating to Anna.
“And I am very grateful for your decision.
I, too, imagine that since he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky to come here.
However, if....” “But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?” Anna suddenly interrupted him with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing.
“No sort of necessity,” she thought, “for a man to come and say good-bye to the woman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, and has ruined himself, and who cannot live without him.
No sort of necessity!” she compressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes to his hands with their swollen veins.
“I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad to see....” Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.
“That my wish coincides with your own,” she finished quickly, exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all he would say.
“Yes,” he assented; “and Princess Tverskaya’s interference in the most difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for.
She especially....” “I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her,” said Anna quickly.
“I know she really cares for me.” Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing.
She played nervously with the tassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that torturing sensation of physical repulsion for which she blamed herself, though she could not control it.
Her only desire now was to be rid of his oppressive presence.
“I have just sent for the doctor,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Anyway” (Alexey Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that “anyway”), “she’s a baby, and they’re killing her.” She rang the bell and ordered the baby to be brought her.
“Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m unjust,” she said, controlling herself, “but do go away....” “No, it can’t go on like this,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself decidedly as he left his wife’s room.
Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and his wife’s hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious brutal force that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations, and exacted conformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to his wife, been presented to him with such distinctness as that day.
He saw clearly that all the world and his wife expected of him something, but what exactly, he could not make out.
He felt that this was rousing in his soul a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of all the good of his achievement.
He believed that for Anna herself it would be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they all thought this out of the question, he was even ready to allow these relations to be renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced, and he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position.
Bad as this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put her in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything he cared for.
But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that everyone was against him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong, though it seemed the proper thing to them.
Chapter 21 Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met in the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s, where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.
“Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!” he began.
“Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand.
There’s nothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for as the kissing the hand.” He kissed Betsy’s hand.
“When shall we see each other?” “You don’t deserve it,” answered Betsy, smiling.
I don’t only manage my own affairs, but other people’s too,” he said, with a significant expression.
“Oh, I’m so glad!” answered Betsy, at once understanding that he was speaking of Anna.
“It’s impossible, impossible....” “I’m so glad you think so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his head with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, “that’s what I’ve come to Petersburg for.” “The whole town’s talking of it,” she said.
“It’s an impossible position.
He doesn’t understand that she’s one of those women who can’t trifle with their feelings.
This is stifling her.” “Yes, yes ... just so....” Oblonsky said, sighing.
I’ve been made a _Kammerherr_; of course, one has to say thank you.
After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her hand above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring to her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or be angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his sister.
Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic, poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood.
“Very, very miserably.
“I think you’re giving way to pessimism.
You must rouse yourself, you must look life in the face.
I know it’s hard, but....” “I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices,” Anna began suddenly, “but I hate him for his virtues.
Do you understand? the sight of him has a physical effect on me, it makes me beside myself.
I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t be more unhappy, but the awful state of things I am going through now, I could never have conceived.
Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good man, a splendid man, that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate him.
I hate him for his generosity.
And there’s nothing left for me but....” She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let her finish.
“You are ill and overwrought,” he said; “believe me, you’re exaggerating dreadfully.
There’s nothing so terrible in it.” And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled.
No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile (the smile would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so much of sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did not wound, but softened and soothed.
His gentle, soothing words and smiles were as soothing and softening as almond oil.
I can’t say yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it’s not over.
I’m an overstrained string that must snap.
But it’s not ended yet ... and it will have a fearful end.” “No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.
There’s no position from which there is no way of escape.” “I have thought, and thought.
Only one....” Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape in her thought was death, and he would not let her say it.
You can’t see your own position as I can.
Let me tell you candidly my opinion.” Again he smiled discreetly his almond-oil smile.
“I’ll begin from the beginning.
You married a man twenty years older than yourself.
“But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact.
Then you had, let us say, the misfortune to love a man not your husband.
That was a misfortune; but that, too, is an accomplished fact.
And your husband knew it and forgave it.” He stopped at each sentence, waiting for her to object, but she made no answer.
Now the question is: can you go on living with your husband?
Does he wish it?” “I know nothing, nothing.” “But you said yourself that you can’t endure him.” “No, I didn’t say so.
I can’t tell, I don’t know anything about it.” “Yes, but let....” “You can’t understand.
I feel I’m lying head downwards in a sort of pit, but I ought not to save myself.
And I can’t....” “Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you out.
I understand you: I understand that you can’t take it on yourself to express your wishes, your feelings.” “There’s nothing, nothing I wish ... except for it to be all over.” “But he sees this and knows it.
You’re wretched, he’s wretched, and what good can come of it? while divorce would solve the difficulty completely.” With some effort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea, and looked significantly at her.
But from the look in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, he saw that if she did not desire this, it was simply because it seemed to her unattainable happiness.
And how happy I should be if I could arrange things!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly.
Chapter 22 Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression with which he used to take his presidential chair at his board, walked into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s room.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about his room with his hands behind his back, thinking of just what Stepan Arkadyevitch had been discussing with his wife.
“I’m not interrupting you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the sight of his brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassment unusual with him.
To conceal this embarrassment he took out a cigarette case he had just bought that opened in a new way, and sniffing the leather, took a cigarette out of it.
Do you want anything?” Alexey Alexandrovitch asked without eagerness.
I wanted ... yes, I wanted to talk to you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.
This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not believe it was the voice of conscience telling him that what he was meaning to do was wrong.
Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the timidity that had come over him.
“I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere affection and respect for you,” he said, reddening.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face struck Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting sacrifice.
I wanted to have a little talk with you about my sister and your mutual position,” he said, still struggling with an unaccustomed constraint.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at his brother-in-law, and without answering went up to the table, took from it an unfinished letter, and handed it to his brother-in-law.
“I think unceasingly of the same thing.
And here is what I had begun writing, thinking I could say it better by letter, and that my presence irritates her,” he said, as he gave him the letter.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with incredulous surprise at the lusterless eyes fixed so immovably on him, and began to read.
“I see that my presence is irksome to you.
Painful as it is to me to believe it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise.
I don’t blame you, and God is my witness that on seeing you at the time of your illness I resolved with my whole heart to forget all that had passed between us and to begin a new life.
I do not regret, and shall never regret, what I have done; but I have desired one thing—your good, the good of your soul—and now I see I have not attained that.
Tell me yourself what will give you true happiness and peace to your soul.
I put myself entirely in your hands, and trust to your feeling of what’s right.” Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with the same surprise continued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing what to say.
This silence was so awkward for both of them that Stepan Arkadyevitch’s lips began twitching nervously, while he still gazed without speaking at Karenin’s face.
“That’s what I wanted to say to her,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning away.
“Yes, yes....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for the tears that were choking him.
“Yes, yes, I understand you,” he brought out at last.
“I want to know what she would like,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“I am afraid she does not understand her own position.
She is not a judge,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering himself.
“She is crushed, simply crushed by your generosity.
“I see no possible way out of it.” “There is some way of getting out of every position,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful.
“There was a time when you thought of breaking off....
If you are convinced now that you cannot make each other happy....” “Happiness may be variously understood.
But suppose that I agree to everything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting out of our position?” “If you care to know my opinion,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with the same smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he had been talking to Anna.
His kindly smile was so winning that Alexey Alexandrovitch, feeling his own weakness and unconsciously swayed by it, was ready to believe what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.
But one thing is possible, one thing she might desire,” he went on, “that is the cessation of your relations and all memories associated with them.
To my thinking, in your position what’s essential is the formation of a new attitude to one another.
And that can only rest on a basis of freedom on both sides.” “Divorce,” Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone of aversion.
“Yes, I imagine that divorce—yes, divorce,” Stepan Arkadyevitch repeated, reddening.
“That is from every point of view the most rational course for married people who find themselves in the position you are in.
What can be done if married people find that life is impossible for them together?
That may always happen.” Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.
“There’s only one point to be considered: is either of the parties desirous of forming new ties?
If not, it is very simple,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, feeling more and more free from constraint.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muttered something to himself, and made no answer.
All that seemed so simple to Stepan Arkadyevitch, Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought over thousands of times.
And, so far from being simple, it all seemed to him utterly impossible.
Divorce, the details of which he knew by this time, seemed to him now out of the question, because the sense of his own dignity and respect for religion forbade his taking upon himself a fictitious charge of adultery, and still more suffering his wife, pardoned and beloved by him, to be caught in the fact and put to public shame.
Divorce appeared to him impossible also on other still more weighty grounds.
To leave him with his mother was out of the question.
The divorced mother would have her own illegitimate family, in which his position as a stepson and his education would not be good.
He knew that would be an act of vengeance on his part, and that he did not want.
But apart from this, what more than all made divorce seem impossible to Alexey Alexandrovitch was, that by consenting to a divorce he would be completely ruining Anna.
The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow, that in deciding on a divorce he was thinking of himself, and not considering that by this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunk into his heart.
And connecting this saying with his forgiveness of her, with his devotion to the children, he understood it now in his own way.
To consent to a divorce, to give her her freedom, meant in his thoughts to take from himself the last tie that bound him to life—the children whom he loved; and to take from her the last prop that stayed her on the path of right, to thrust her down to her ruin.
If she were divorced, he knew she would join her life to Vronsky’s, and their tie would be an illegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by the interpretation of the ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband was living.
“She will join him, and in a year or two he will throw her over, or she will form a new tie,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“And I, by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for her ruin.” He had thought it all over hundreds of times, and was convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as Stepan Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly impossible.
He did not believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him; to every word he had a thousand objections to make, but he listened to him, feeling that his words were the expression of that mighty brutal force which controlled his life and to which he would have to submit.
“The only question is on what terms you agree to give her a divorce.
She does not want anything, does not dare ask you for anything, she leaves it all to your generosity.” “My God, my God! what for?” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, remembering the details of divorce proceedings in which the husband took the blame on himself, and with just the same gesture with which Vronsky had done the same, he hid his face for shame in his hands.
“You are distressed, I understand that.
But if you think it over....” “Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also; and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“I will take the disgrace on myself, I will give up even my son, but ... but wouldn’t it be better to let it alone?
There was bitterness, there was shame in his heart, but with bitterness and shame he felt joy and emotion at the height of his own meekness.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates your generosity,” he said.
“But it seems it was the will of God,” he added, and as he said it felt how foolish a remark it was, and with difficulty repressed a smile at his own foolishness.
Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears stopped him.
“This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such.
I accept the calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best to help both her and you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
When he went out of his brother-in-law’s room he was touched, but that did not prevent him from being glad he had successfully brought the matter to a conclusion, for he felt certain Alexey Alexandrovitch would not go back on his words.
To this satisfaction was added the fact that an idea had just struck him for a riddle turning on his successful achievement, that when the affair was over he would ask his wife and most intimate friends.
He put this riddle into two or three different ways.
Chapter 23 Vronsky’s wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not touch the heart, and for several days he had lain between life and death.
“Varya,” he said, looking sternly at her, “I shot myself by accident.
And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so.
Or else it’s too ridiculous.” Without answering his words, Varya bent over him, and with a delighted smile gazed into his face.
His eyes were clear, not feverish; but their expression was stern.
“Then let me change your bandages.” In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her while she bandaged him up.
When she had finished he said: “I’m not delirious.
Only I hope you won’t shoot yourself by accident any more,” she said, with a questioning smile.
“Of course I won’t, but it would have been better....” And he smiled gloomily.
In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened Varya, when the inflammation was over and he began to recover, he felt that he was completely free from one part of his misery.
By his action he had, as it were, washed away the shame and humiliation he had felt before.
He could now think calmly of Alexey Alexandrovitch.
He recognized all his magnanimity, but he did not now feel himself humiliated by it.
He saw the possibility of looking men in the face again without shame, and he could live in accordance with his own habits.
One thing he could not pluck out of his heart, though he never ceased struggling with it, was the regret, amounting to despair, that he had lost her forever.
Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky agreed to the proposition without the slightest hesitation.
But the nearer the time of departure came, the bitterer was the sacrifice he was making to what he thought his duty.
His wound had healed, and he was driving about making preparations for his departure for Tashkend.
“To see her once and then to bury myself, to die,” he thought, and as he was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to Betsy.
Charged with this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought him back a negative reply.
“So much the better,” thought Vronsky, when he received the news.
“It was a weakness, which would have shattered what strength I have left.” Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced that she had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that Alexey Alexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky could see Anna.
Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his flat, forgetting all his resolutions, without asking when he could see her, where her husband was, Vronsky drove straight to the Karenins’.
He ran up the stairs seeing no one and nothing, and with a rapid step, almost breaking into a run, he went into her room.
And without considering, without noticing whether there was anyone in the room or not, he flung his arms round her, and began to cover her face, her hands, her neck with kisses.
Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought what she would say to him, but she did not succeed in saying anything of it; his passion mastered her.
His feeling infected her.
Her lips trembled so that for a long while she could say nothing.
“Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours,” she said at last, pressing his hands to her bosom.
I know it now.” “That’s true,” she said, getting whiter and whiter, and embracing his head.
“Still there is something terrible in it after all that has happened.” “It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy.
Our love, if it could be stronger, will be strengthened by there being something terrible in it,” he said, lifting his head and parting his strong teeth in a smile.
And her lips began trembling again.
“Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone, your family with you?” she said, looking close into his eyes.
“It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise.” “Stiva says that _he_ has agreed to everything, but I can’t accept _his_ generosity,” she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky’s face.
Only I don’t know what he will decide about Seryozha.” He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she could remember and think of her son, of divorce.
“Don’t speak of that, don’t think of it,” he said, turning her hand in his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still she did not look at him.
To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend would have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and impossible.
But now, without an instant’s consideration, he declined it, and observing dissatisfaction in the most exalted quarters at this step, he immediately retired from the army.
A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son in his house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not having obtained a divorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.
PART FIVE Chapter 1 Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question for the wedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off, since not half the trousseau could possibly be ready by that time.
But she could not but agree with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be putting it off too late, as an old aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky’s was seriously ill and might die, and then the mourning would delay the wedding still longer.
And therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two parts—a larger and smaller trousseau—the princess consented to have the wedding before Lent.
She determined that she would get the smaller part of the trousseau all ready now, and the larger part should be made later, and she was much vexed with Levin because he was incapable of giving her a serious answer to the question whether he agreed to this arrangement or not.
The arrangement was the more suitable as, immediately after the wedding, the young people were to go to the country, where the more important part of the trousseau would not be wanted.
Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it seemed to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole aim of all existence, and that he need not now think or care about anything, that everything was being done and would be done for him by others.
He had not even plans and aims for the future, he left its arrangement to others, knowing that everything would be delightful.
His brother Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in doing what he had to do.
All he did was to agree entirely with everything suggested to him.
His brother raised money for him, the princess advised him to leave Moscow after the wedding.
Stepan Arkadyevitch advised him to go abroad.
He agreed to everything.
I’m happy, and my happiness can be no greater and no less for anything you do,” he thought.
When he told Kitty of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s advice that they should go abroad, he was much surprised that she did not agree to this, and had some definite requirements of her own in regard to their future.
She did not, as he saw, understand this work, she did not even care to understand it.
But that did not prevent her from regarding it as a matter of great importance.
This definitely expressed purpose astonished Levin.
But since he did not care either way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were his duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything there to the best of his ability with the taste of which he had so much.
“But I say,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day after he had come back from the country, where he had got everything ready for the young people’s arrival, “have you a certificate of having been at confession?” “No.
“Why, I believe it’s nine years since I’ve taken the sacrament!
I never thought of it.” “You’re a pretty fellow!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, “and you call me a Nihilist!
You must take the sacrament.” “When?
There are four days left now.” Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to confession.
To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs of others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take part in church ceremonies.
At this moment, in his present softened state of feeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy was not merely painful to Levin, it seemed to him utterly impossible.
He felt incapable of being either.
But though he repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually communicating, Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.
He’ll pull the tooth out for you so gently, you won’t notice it.” Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in himself his youthful recollections of the intense religious emotion he had passed through between the ages of sixteen and seventeen.
But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to him.
He attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of meaning, like the custom of paying calls.
Levin found himself, like the majority of his contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to religion.
Believe he could not, and at the same time he had no firm conviction that it was all wrong.
And consequently, not being able to believe in the significance of what he was doing nor to regard it with indifference as an empty formality, during the whole period of preparing for the sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doing what he did not himself understand, and what, as an inner voice told him, was therefore false and wrong.
During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying to attach some meaning to them not discordant with his own views; then feeling that he could not understand and must condemn them, he tried not to listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts, observations, and memories which floated through his brain with extreme vividness during this idle time of standing in church.
He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the midnight service, and the next day he got up earlier than usual, and without having tea went at eight o’clock in the morning to the church for the morning service and the confession.
There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old women, and the church officials.
A young deacon, whose long back showed in two distinct halves through his thin undercassock, met him, and at once going to a little table at the wall read the exhortation.
During the reading, especially at the frequent and rapid repetition of the same words, “Lord, have mercy on us!” which resounded with an echo, Levin felt that thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must not be touched or stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so standing behind the deacon he went on thinking of his own affairs, neither listening nor examining what was said.
“It’s wonderful what expression there is in her hand,” he thought, remembering how they had been sitting the day before at a corner table.
They had nothing to talk about, as was almost always the case at this time, and laying her hand on the table she kept opening and shutting it, and laughed herself as she watched her action.
He remembered how he had kissed it and then had examined the lines on the pink palm.
“Have mercy on us again!” thought Levin, crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the deacon’s back bowing before him.
“She took my hand then and examined the lines.
‘You’ve got a splendid hand,’ she said.” And he looked at his own hand and the short hand of the deacon.
“No, it seems to be beginning again,” he thought, listening to the prayers.
That’s always at the end.” The deacon’s hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble note unobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the register, and his new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones of the empty church, he went to the altar.
A moment later he peeped out thence and beckoned to Levin.
The priest, a little old man with a scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, was standing at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a missal.
With a slight bow to Levin he began immediately reading prayers in the official voice.
When he had finished them he bowed down to the ground and turned, facing Levin.
“Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession,” he said, pointing to the crucifix.
“Do you believe in all the doctrines of the Holy Apostolic Church?” the priest went on, turning his eyes away from Levin’s face and folding his hands under his stole.
“I have doubted, I doubt everything,” said Levin in a voice that jarred on himself, and he ceased speaking.
The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more, and closing his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent: “Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray that God in His mercy will strengthen us.
What are your special sins?” he added, without the slightest interval, as though anxious not to waste time.
I have doubts of everything, and for the most part I am in doubt.” “Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind,” the priest repeated the same words.
“What do you doubt about principally?” “I doubt of everything.
I sometimes even have doubts of the existence of God,” Levin could not help saying, and he was horrified at the impropriety of what he was saying.
But Levin’s words did not, it seemed, make much impression on the priest.
“What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?” he said hurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.
“What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His creation?” the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon.
“Who has decked the heavenly firmament with its lights?
How explain it without the Creator?” he said, looking inquiringly at Levin.
Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical discussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was a direct answer to the question.
Then how can you doubt that God created all?” the priest said, with good-humored perplexity.
“I don’t understand it at all,” said Levin, blushing, and feeling that his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything but stupid in such a position.
Even the holy fathers had doubts, and prayed to God to strengthen their faith.
Pray to God,” he repeated hurriedly.
The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.
“You’re about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner and son in the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?” he resumed, with a smile.
“An excellent young lady.” “Yes,” answered Levin, blushing for the priest.
“What does he want to ask me about this at confession for?” he thought.
And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him: “You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you with offspring.
Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if you do not overcome the temptation of the devil, enticing you to infidelity?” he said, with gentle reproachfulness.
“If you love your child as a good father, you will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor for your infant; you will be anxious for his salvation, his spiritual enlightenment with the light of truth.
What answer will you make him when the innocent babe asks you: ‘Papa! who made all that enchants me in this world—the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the grass?’ Can you say to him: ‘I don’t know’?
You cannot but know, since the Lord God in His infinite mercy has revealed it to us.
Will you leave him to the allurements of the world and the devil?
Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enter upon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had ever asked him such questions, and when his babes did ask him those questions, it would be time enough to think about answering them.
“You are entering upon a time of life,” pursued the priest, “when you must choose your path and keep to it.
Pray to God that He may in His mercy aid you and have mercy on you!” he concluded.
“Our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of His loving-kindness, forgives this child....” and, finishing the prayer of absolution, the priest blessed him and dismissed him.
On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at the awkward position being over and having been got through without his having to tell a lie.
Apart from this, there remained a vague memory that what the kind, nice old fellow had said had not been at all so stupid as he had fancied at first, and that there was something in it that must be cleared up.
“Of course, not now,” thought Levin, “but some day later on.” Levin felt more than ever now that there was something not clear and not clean in his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he was in the same position which he perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for which he blamed his friend Sviazhsky.
Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s, and was in very high spirits.
To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitement in which he found himself, he said that he was happy like a dog being trained to jump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea, and done what was required of him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up to the table and the windows in its delight.
Chapter 2 On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the princess and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the customs), Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with three bachelor friends, casually brought together at his rooms.
These were Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now professor of natural science, whom Levin had met in the street and insisted on taking home with him, and Tchirikov, his best man, a Moscow conciliation-board judge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts.
The dinner was a very merry one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, and was much amused by Katavasov’s originality.
Katavasov, feeling his originality was appreciated and understood, made the most of it.
Tchirikov always gave a lively and good-humored support to conversation of any sort.
“See, now,” said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habit acquired in the lecture-room, “what a capable fellow was our friend Konstantin Dmitrievitch.
I’m not speaking of present company, for he’s absent.
At the time he left the university he was fond of science, took an interest in humanity; now one-half of his abilities is devoted to deceiving himself, and the other to justifying the deceit.” “A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“Oh, no, I’m not an enemy of matrimony.
I’m in favor of division of labor.
People who can do nothing else ought to rear people while the rest work for their happiness and enlightenment.
“Please invite me to the wedding.” “I’m in love now.” “Yes, with a cuttlefish!
You know,” Levin turned to his brother, “Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of the....” “Now, make a muddle of it!
And the fact is, I certainly do love cuttlefish.” “But that’s no hindrance to your loving your wife.” “The cuttlefish is no hindrance.
The wife is the hindrance.” “Why so?” “Oh, you’ll see!
You care about farming, hunting,—well, you’d better look out!” “Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in Prudno, and two bears,” said Tchirikov.
“Well, you must go and get them without me.” “Ah, that’s the truth,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
The picture of his wife not letting him go was so pleasant that he was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon bears forever.
Do you remember last time at Hapilovo?
That was a delightful hunt!” said Tchirikov.
Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that there could be something delightful apart from her, and so said nothing.
“There’s some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor life,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“However happy you may be, you must regret your freedom.” “And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the window, like Gogol’s bridegroom?” “Of course there is, but it isn’t confessed,” said Katavasov, and he broke into loud laughter.
Seriously, let’s go by the five o’clock!
And here let them do what they like,” said Tchirikov, smiling.
“Well, now, on my honor,” said Levin, smiling, “I can’t find in my heart that feeling of regret for my freedom.” “Yes, there’s such a chaos in your heart just now that you can’t find anything there,” said Katavasov.
“Wait a bit, when you set it to rights a little, you’ll find it!” “No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling” (he could not say love before them) “and happiness, a certain regret at losing my freedom....
On the contrary, I am glad at the very loss of my freedom.” “Awful!
It’s a hopeless case!” said Katavasov.
“Well, let’s drink to his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his dreams may be realized—and that would be happiness such as never has been seen on earth!” Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be dressed for the wedding.
When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelor friends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that regret for his freedom of which they had spoken?
He smiled at the question.
Happiness is only in loving and wishing her wishes, thinking her thoughts, that is to say, not freedom at all—that’s happiness!” “But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?” some voice suddenly whispered to him.
The smile died away from his face, and he grew thoughtful.
And suddenly a strange feeling came upon him.
There came over him a dread and doubt—doubt of everything.
What if she’s marrying me simply to be married?
“She may come to her senses, and only when she is being married realize that she does not and cannot love me.” And strange, most evil thoughts of her began to come to him.
He was jealous of Vronsky, as he had been a year ago, as though the evening he had seen her with Vronsky had been yesterday.
He suspected she had not told him everything.
Anything’s better than endless misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!” With despair in his heart and bitter anger against all men, against himself, against her, he went out of the hotel and drove to her house.
She was sitting on a chest and making some arrangements with her maid, sorting over heaps of dresses of different colors, spread on the backs of chairs and on the floor.
Konstantin Dmitrievitch!” (These latter days she used these names almost alternately.) “I didn’t expect you!
I’m going through my wardrobe to see what’s for whom....” “Oh! that’s very nice!” he said gloomily, looking at the maid.
“You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently,” said Kitty.
“Kostya, what’s the matter?” she asked, definitely adopting this familiar name as soon as the maid had gone out.
She noticed his strange face, agitated and gloomy, and a panic came over her.
I can’t suffer alone,” he said with despair in his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly into her eyes.
He saw already from her loving, truthful face, that nothing could come of what he had meant to say, but yet he wanted her to reassure him herself.
What is the matter?” “What I have said a thousand times over, and can’t help thinking ... that I’m not worthy of you.
Think it over thoroughly.
“I shall be wretched.
Let people say what they like; anything’s better than misery....
Far better now while there’s still time....” “I don’t understand,” she answered, panic-stricken; “you mean you want to give it up ... don’t want it?” “Yes, if you don’t love me.” “You’re out of your mind!” she cried, turning crimson with vexation.
But his face was so piteous, that she restrained her vexation, and flinging some clothes off an armchair, she sat down beside him.
“What are you thinking? tell me all.” “I am thinking you can’t love me.
“Oh! what have I done?” he cried, and kneeling before her, he fell to kissing her hands.
When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she found them completely reconciled.
Kitty had not simply assured him that she loved him, but had gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved him for—as to explain what for.
She told him that she loved him because she understood him completely, because she knew what he would like, and because everything he liked was good.
And this seemed to him perfectly clear.
When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by side on the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty’s wanting to give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing when Levin proposed to her, while he insisted that that dress must never be given away, but Dunyasha must have the blue one.
She’s a brunette, and it won’t suit her....
I’ve worked it all out.” Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to hinder Kitty’s hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.
“As it is, she’s been eating nothing lately and is losing her looks, and then you must come and upset her with your nonsense,” she said to him.
“Get along with you, my dear!” Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his hotel.
His brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full dress, were waiting for him to bless him with the holy picture.
Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to fetch her curled and pomaded son, who was to carry the holy pictures after the bride.
Then a carriage had to be sent for the best man, and another that would take Sergey Ivanovitch away would have to be sent back....
Altogether there were a great many most complicated matters to be considered and arranged.
One thing was unmistakable, that there must be no delay, as it was already half-past six.
Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holy picture.
Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside his wife, took the holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the ground, he blessed him with his kindly, ironical smile, and kissed him three times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same, and immediately was in a hurry to get off, and again plunged into the intricate question of the destinations of the various carriages.
“Come, I’ll tell you how we’ll manage: you drive in our carriage to fetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he’ll be so good, will drive there and then send his carriage.” “Of course; I shall be delighted.” “We’ll come on directly with him.
Are your things sent off?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Yes,” answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes for him to dress.
Chapter 3 A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the church lighted up for the wedding.
Those who had not succeeded in getting into the main entrance were crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling, and peeping through the gratings.
More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks along the street by the police.
A police officer, regardless of the frost, stood at the entrance, gorgeous in his uniform.
More carriages were continually driving up, and ladies wearing flowers and carrying their trains, and men taking off their helmets or black hats kept walking into the church.
Inside the church both lusters were already lighted, and all the candles before the holy pictures.
The gilt on the red ground of the holy picture-stand, and the gilt relief on the pictures, and the silver of the lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the floor, and the rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps of the altar, and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and surplices—all were flooded with light.
On the right side of the warm church, in the crowd of frock coats and white ties, uniforms and broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair and flowers, bare shoulders and arms and long gloves, there was discreet but lively conversation that echoed strangely in the high cupola.
Every time there was heard the creak of the opened door the conversation in the crowd died away, and everybody looked round expecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in.
But the door had opened more than ten times, and each time it was either a belated guest or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on the right, or a spectator, who had eluded or softened the police officer, and went to join the crowd of outsiders on the left.
Both the guests and the outside public had by now passed through all the phases of anticipation.
At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive immediately, and attached no importance at all to their being late.
Then they began to look more and more often towards the door, and to talk of whether anything could have happened.
Then the long delay began to be positively discomforting, and relations and guests tried to look as if they were not thinking of the bridegroom but were engrossed in conversation.
The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his time, coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames.
In the choir the bored choristers could be heard trying their voices and blowing their noses.
The priest was continually sending first the beadle and then the deacon to find out whether the bridegroom had not come, more and more often he went himself, in a lilac vestment and an embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to see the bridegroom.
At last one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said, “It really is strange, though!” and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction.
One of the bridegroom’s best men went to find out what had happened.
Kitty meanwhile had long ago been quite ready, and in her white dress and long veil and wreath of orange blossoms she was standing in the drawing-room of the Shtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova, who was her bridal-mother.
She was looking out of the window, and had been for over half an hour anxiously expecting to hear from the best man that her bridegroom was at the church.
Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and waistcoat, was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel, continually putting his head out of the door and looking up and down the corridor.
But in the corridor there was no sign of the person he was looking for and he came back in despair, and frantically waving his hands addressed Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was smoking serenely.
“Was ever a man in such a fearful fool’s position?” he said.
“Yes, it is stupid,” Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling soothingly.
“But don’t worry, it’ll be brought directly.” “No, what is to be done!” said Levin, with smothered fury.
“And these fools of open waistcoats!
Out of the question!” he said, looking at the crumpled front of his shirt.
“And what if the things have been taken on to the railway station!” he roared in desperation.
“Then you must put on mine.” “I ought to have done so long ago, if at all.” “It’s not nice to look ridiculous....
Wait a bit! it will _come round_.” The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma, his old servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything that was wanted.
“You’ve got a shirt on,” Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.
Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receiving instructions to pack up everything and send it round to the Shtcherbatskys’ house, from which the young people were to set out the same evening, he had done so, packing everything but the dress suit.
The shirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the question with the fashionable open waistcoat.
It was a long way to send to the Shtcherbatskys’.
The servant came back; everything was shut up—it was Sunday.
They sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s and brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide and short.
They sent finally to the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things.
The bridegroom was expected at the church while he was pacing up and down his room like a wild beast in a cage, peeping out into the corridor, and with horror and despair recalling what absurd things he had said to Kitty and what she might be thinking now.
Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not looking at his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.
“You won’t help matters like this,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a smile, hurrying with more deliberation after him.
I tell you.” Chapter 4 “They’ve come!” “Here he is!” “Which one?” “Rather young, eh?” “Why, my dear soul, she looks more dead than alive!” were the comments in the crowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with her into the church.
Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the guests were whispering it with smiles to one another.
Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was not nearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not think so.
“I was beginning to think you meant to run away,” she said, and smiled to him.
“It’s so stupid, what happened to me, I’m ashamed to speak of it!” he said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey Ivanovitch, who came up to him.
“This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!” said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.
“Yes, yes!” answered Levin, without an idea of what they were talking about.
“Now, Kostya, you have to decide,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with an air of mock dismay, “a weighty question.
You are at this moment just in the humor to appreciate all its gravity.
It’s a matter of ten roubles,” he added, relaxing his lips into a smile.
“Well, how’s it to be then?—unlighted or lighted candles? that’s the question.” “Yes, yes, unlighted.” “Oh, I’m very glad.
The question’s decided!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
“How silly men are, though, in this position,” he said to Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking absently at him, had moved back to his bride.
“Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet,” said Countess Nordston, coming up.
“Aren’t you frightened, eh?” said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.
Stop a minute, stoop down,” said Kitty’s sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms she smilingly set straight the flowers on her head.
Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried, and then laughed unnaturally.
Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and the priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepart of the church.
The priest turned to Levin saying something.
It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of him.
For a long time they tried to set him right and made him begin again—because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong arm—till he understood at last that what he had to do was, without changing his position, to take her right hand in his right hand.
The crowd of friends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle of skirts.
The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his long silvery-gray locks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling with something at the lectern, putting out his little old hands from under the heavy silver vestment with the gold cross on the back of it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered something, and making a sign to Levin, walked back again.
The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding them sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing the bridal pair.
The priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin.
He looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom, sighed, and putting his right hand out from his vestment, blessed the bridegroom with it, and also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid the crossed fingers on the bowed head of Kitty.
Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from the scarcely perceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware of his eyes upon her.
She did not look round, but the high scalloped collar, that reached her little pink ear, trembled faintly.
All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends and relations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position—all suddenly passed away and he was filled with joy and dread.
The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his curly locks standing out at each side of his head, stepped smartly forward, and lifting his stole on two fingers, stood opposite the priest.
“Blessed be the name of the Lord,” the solemn syllables rang out slowly one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of sound.
“Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and ever shall be,” the little old priest answered in a submissive, piping voice, still fingering something at the lectern.
It grew stronger, rested for an instant, and slowly died away.
They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed, too, for the servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting their troth.
“Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we beseech Thee,” the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of the head deacon.
Levin heard the words, and they impressed him.
“How did they guess that it is help, just help that one wants?” he thought, recalling all his fears and doubts of late.
“What do I know? what can I do in this fearful business,” he thought, “without help?
For gracious and merciful art Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be.” “Amen!” the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.
“‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’ What deep meaning in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at this moment,” thought Levin.
“Is she feeling the same as I?” And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression he concluded that she was understanding it just as he was.
But this was a mistake; she almost completely missed the meaning of the words of the service; she had not heard them, in fact.
She could not listen to them and take them in, so strong was the one feeling that filled her breast and grew stronger and stronger.
That feeling was joy at the completion of the process that for the last month and a half had been going on in her soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy and a torture to her.
On the day when in the drawing-room of the house in Arbaty Street she had gone up to him in her brown dress, and given herself to him without a word—on that day, at that hour, there took place in her heart a complete severance from all her old life, and a quite different, new, utterly strange life had begun for her, while the old life was actually going on as before.
All her life, all her desires and hopes were concentrated on this one man, still uncomprehended by her, to whom she was bound by a feeling of alternate attraction and repulsion, even less comprehended than the man himself, and all the while she was going on living in the outward conditions of her old life.
Living the old life, she was horrified at herself, at her utter insurmountable callousness to all her own past, to things, to habits, to the people she had loved, who loved her—to her mother, who was wounded by her indifference, to her kind, tender father, till then dearer than all the world.
At one moment she was horrified at this indifference, at another she rejoiced at what had brought her to this indifference.
There was only anticipation, the dread and joy of the new and the unknown.
And now behold—anticipation and uncertainty and remorse at the abandonment of the old life—all was ending, and the new was beginning.
This new life could not but have terrors for her inexperience; but, terrible or not, the change had been wrought six weeks before in her soul, and this was merely the final sanction of what had long been completed in her heart.
Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty took Kitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the first joint of his finger.
“The servant of God, Konstantin, plights his troth to the servant of God, Ekaterina.” And putting his big ring on Kitty’s touchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.
And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in a whisper.
At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed the rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, and Levin the little one.
Again they were puzzled, and passed the rings from hand to hand, still without doing what was expected.
Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set them right.
There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and smiles; but the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair did not change: on the contrary, in their perplexity over their hands they looked more grave and deeply moved than before, and the smile with which Stepan Arkadyevitch whispered to them that now they would each put on their own ring died away on his lips.
“Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female,” the priest read after the exchange of rings, “from Thee woman was given to man to be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of children.
Chapter 5 In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations; and during the ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lighted church, there was an incessant flow of discreetly subdued talk in the circle of gaily dressed women and girls, and men in white ties, frockcoats, and uniforms.
The talk was principally kept up by the men, while the women were absorbed in watching every detail of the ceremony, which always means so much to them.
In the little group nearest to the bride were her two sisters: Dolly, and the other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who had just arrived from abroad.
“Why is it Marie’s in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?” said Madame Korsunskaya.
“With her complexion, it’s the one salvation,” responded Madame Trubetskaya.
It’s like shop-people....” “So much prettier.
I was married in the evening too....” answered Madame Korsunskaya, and she sighed, remembering how charming she had been that day, and how absurdly in love her husband was, and how different it all was now.
I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post was taken,” said Count Siniavin to the pretty Princess Tcharskaya, who had designs on him.
Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile.
She looked at Kitty, thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin in Kitty’s place, and how she would remind him then of his joke today.
Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that he meant to put the crown on Kitty’s chignon for luck.
“She ought not to have worn a chignon,” answered Madame Nikolaeva, who had long ago made up her mind that if the elderly widower she was angling for married her, the wedding should be of the simplest.
“I don’t like such grandeur.” Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly assuring her that the custom of going away after the wedding was becoming common because newly married people always felt a little ashamed of themselves.
She’s a marvel of sweetness.
I believe you’re envious.” “Oh, I’ve got over that, Darya Dmitrievna,” he answered, and a melancholy and serious expression suddenly came over his face.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his joke about divorce.
“The wreath wants setting straight,” she answered, not hearing him.
“What a pity she’s lost her looks so,” Countess Nordston said to Madame Lvova.
“Still he’s not worth her little finger, is he?” “Oh, I like him so—not because he’s my future _beau-frère_,” answered Madame Lvova.
“And how well he’s behaving!
It’s so difficult, too, to look well in such a position, not to be ridiculous.
And he’s not ridiculous, and not affected; one can see he’s moved.” “You expected it, I suppose?” “Almost.
I warned Kitty.” “It will make no difference,” said Madame Lvova; “we’re all obedient wives; it’s in our family.” “Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose.
She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going back in thought to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and remembered only her own innocent love.
She recalled not herself only, but all her women-friends and acquaintances.
She thought of them on the one day of their triumph, when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown, with love and hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and stepping forward into the mysterious future.
Among the brides that came back to her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposed divorce she had just been hearing.
And she had stood just as innocent in orange flowers and bridal veil.
“It’s terribly strange,” she said to herself.
It was not merely the sisters, the women-friends and female relations of the bride who were following every detail of the ceremony.
Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were watching it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movement or expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not answering, often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who kept making joking or irrelevant observations.
Just listen how the deacon booms out, ‘And fearing her husband.’” “Are the choristers from Tchudovo?” “No, from the Synod.” “I asked the footman.
That’s why she’s being married to him.” “No, they’re a well-matched pair.” “I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those fly-away crinolines were not being worn.
Just look at her in the puce dress—an ambassador’s wife they say she is—how her skirt bounces out from side to side!” “What a pretty dear the bride is—like a lamb decked with flowers!
Well, say what you will, we women feel for our sister.” Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had succeeded in slipping in at the church doors.
Chapter 6 When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread before the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuff, the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and tenor sang responses to one another, and the priest turning round pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug.
Though both had often heard a great deal about the saying that the one who steps first on the rug will be the head of the house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable of recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it.
They did not hear the loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining he had stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.
After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and their answers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new ceremony began.
Kitty listened to the words of the prayer, trying to make out their meaning, but she could not.
The feeling of triumph and radiant happiness flooded her soul more and more as the ceremony went on, and deprived her of all power of attention.
“That’s all splendid,” thought Kitty, catching the words, “all that’s just as it should be,” and a smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in everyone who looked at her, beamed on her radiant face.
“Put it on quite,” voices were heard urging when the priest had put on the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in its three-button glove, held the crown high above her head.
“Put it on!” she whispered, smiling.
Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance on her face, and unconsciously her feeling infected him.
They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head deacon’s voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by the outside public.
The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to have infected everyone in the church.
Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer and congratulated the young people.
She was charming with the new radiance of happiness in her face.
Levin longed to say something to her, but he did not know whether it was all over.
The priest got him out of his difficulty.
Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm, and with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the church.
It was only when their wondering and timid eyes met that he believed in it, because he felt that they were one.
Chapter 7 Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in Europe.
A handsome head waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an evening coat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hanging above his rounded stomach, stood with his hands in the full curve of his pockets, looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he gave some frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped him.
Catching the sound of footsteps coming from the other side of the entry towards the staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing the Russian count, who had taken their best rooms, he took his hands out of his pockets deferentially, and with a bow informed him that a courier had been, and that the business about the palazzo had been arranged.
The steward was prepared to sign the agreement.
“Is madame at home or not?” “Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now,” answered the waiter.
Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his handkerchief over his heated brow and hair, which had grown half over his ears, and was brushed back covering the bald patch on his head.
And glancing casually at the gentleman, who still stood there gazing intently at him, he would have gone on.
“This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you,” said the head waiter.
With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away from acquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort of diversion from the monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once more at the gentleman, who had retreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a light came into the eyes of both.
“Golenishtchev!” “Vronsky!” It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky’s in the Corps of Pages.
In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal party; he left the corps without entering the army, and had never taken office under the government.
Vronsky and he had gone completely different ways on leaving the corps, and had only met once since.
At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up a sort of lofty, intellectually liberal line, and was consequently disposed to look down upon Vronsky’s interests and calling in life.
Hence Vronsky had met him with the chilling and haughty manner he so well knew how to assume, the meaning of which was: “You may like or dislike my way of life, that’s a matter of the most perfect indifference to me; you will have to treat me with respect if you want to know me.” Golenishtchev had been contemptuously indifferent to the tone taken by Vronsky.
This second meeting might have been expected, one would have supposed, to estrange them still more.
But now they beamed and exclaimed with delight on recognizing one another.
Vronsky would never have expected to be so pleased to see Golenishtchev, but probably he was not himself aware how bored he was.
He forgot the disagreeable impression of their last meeting, and with a face of frank delight held out his hand to his old comrade.
The same expression of delight replaced the look of uneasiness on Golenishtchev’s face.
“How glad I am to meet you!” said Vronsky, showing his strong white teeth in a friendly smile.
I’m working.” “Ah!” said Vronsky, with sympathy; “let’s go in.” And with the habit common with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what he wanted to keep from the servants, he began to speak in French.
“Do you know Madame Karenina?
We are traveling together.
I am going to see her now,” he said in French, carefully scrutinizing Golenishtchev’s face.
I did not know” (though he did know), Golenishtchev answered carelessly.
“Four days,” Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his friend’s face intently.
“Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,” Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of Golenishtchev’s face and the change of subject.
“I can introduce him to Anna, he looks at it properly.” During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, he had always on meeting new people asked himself how the new person would look at his relations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he had met with the “proper” way of looking at it.
But if he had been asked, and those who looked at it “properly” had been asked, exactly how they did look at it, both he and they would have been greatly puzzled to answer.
In reality, those who in Vronsky’s opinion had the “proper” view had no sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons do behave in regard to all the complex and insoluble problems with which life is encompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety, avoiding allusions and unpleasant questions.
They assumed an air of fully comprehending the import and force of the situation, of accepting and even approving of it, but of considering it superfluous and uncalled for to put all this into words.
Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and therefore was doubly pleased to see him.
And in fact, Golenishtchev’s manner to Madame Karenina, when he was taken to call on her, was all that Vronsky could have desired.
Obviously without the slightest effort he steered clear of all subjects which might lead to embarrassment.
He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and still more by the frankness with which she accepted her position.
She blushed when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed by this childish blush overspreading her candid and handsome face.
But what he liked particularly was the way in which at once, as though on purpose that there might be no misunderstanding with an outsider, she called Vronsky simply Alexey, and said they were moving into a house they had just taken, what was here called a palazzo.
Golenishtchev liked this direct and simple attitude to her own position.
Looking at Anna’s manner of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he understood her perfectly.
He fancied that he understood what she was utterly unable to understand: how it was that, having made her husband wretched, having abandoned him and her son and lost her good name, she yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and happiness.
“It’s in the guide-book,” said Golenishtchev, referring to the palazzo Vronsky had taken.
“There’s a first-rate Tintoretto there.
One of his latest period.” “I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and have another look at it,” said Vronsky, addressing Anna.
Would you say it’s hot?” she said, stopping short in the doorway and looking inquiringly at Vronsky.
And again a vivid flush overspread her face.
Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he cared to be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as he would wish.
And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all, that he was pleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with her rapid step out at the door.
The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came into both faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring her, would have liked to say something about her, and could not find the right thing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded his doing so.
“Well then,” Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort; “so you’re settled here?
You’re still at the same work, then?” he went on, recalling that he had been told Golenishtchev was writing something.
“Yes, I’m writing the second part of the _Two Elements_,” said Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at the question—“that is, to be exact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting materials.
It will be of far wider scope, and will touch on almost all questions.
We in Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of Byzantium,” and he launched into a long and heated explanation of his views.
Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of the first part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke as something well known.
But as Golenishtchev began to lay down his opinions and Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing the _Two Elements_, he listened to him with some interest, for Golenishtchev spoke well.
But Vronsky was startled and annoyed by the nervous irascibility with which Golenishtchev talked of the subject that engrossed him.
As he went on talking, his eyes glittered more and more angrily; he was more and more hurried in his replies to imaginary opponents, and his face grew more and more excited and worried.
Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin, lively, good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head of the class, Vronsky could not make out the reason of his irritability, and he did not like it.
What he particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man belonging to a good set, should put himself on a level with some scribbling fellows, with whom he was irritated and angry.
Vronsky disliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was sorry for him.
Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible on his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even noticing Anna’s coming in, he went on hurriedly and hotly expressing his views.
When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand rapidly swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling of relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev which fastened persistently upon him, and with a fresh rush of love looked at his charming companion, full of life and happiness.
Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort, and at first was dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly with everyone as she was at that time, soon revived his spirits by her direct and lively manner.
After trying various subjects of conversation, she got him upon painting, of which he talked very well, and she listened to him attentively.
“I am very glad of one thing,” said Anna to Golenishtchev when they were on their way back, “Alexey will have a capital _atelier_.
You must certainly take that room,” she said to Vronsky in Russian, using the affectionately familiar form as though she saw that Golenishtchev would become intimate with them in their isolation, and that there was no need of reserve before him.
“Do you paint?” said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to Vronsky.
“Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a little,” said Vronsky, reddening.
“He has great talent,” said Anna with a delighted smile.
But good judges have said the same.” Chapter 8 Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return to health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life.
The thought of her husband’s unhappiness did not poison her happiness.
On the other side her husband’s unhappiness had given her too much happiness to be regretted.
The memory of all that had happened after her illness: her reconciliation with her husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky’s wound, his visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from her husband’s house, the parting from her son—all that seemed to her like a delirious dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky abroad.
The thought of the harm caused to her husband aroused in her a feeling like repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man might feel who has shaken off another man clinging to him.
One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her at the first moment of the final rupture, and when now she recalled all the past, she remembered that one reflection.
“I have inevitably made that man wretched,” she thought; “but I don’t want to profit by his misery.
I too am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I prized above everything—I am losing my good name and my son.
I have done wrong, and so I don’t want happiness, I don’t want a divorce, and shall suffer from my shame and the separation from my child.” But, however sincerely Anna had meant to suffer, she was not suffering.
With the tact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded in avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves in a false position, and everywhere they had met people who pretended that they perfectly understood their position, far better indeed than they did themselves.
Separation from the son she loved—even that did not cause her anguish in these early days.
The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Anna felt unpardonably happy.
Her complete ownership of him was a continual joy to her.
His presence was always sweet to her.
All the traits of his character, which she learned to know better and better, were unutterably dear to her.
His appearance, changed by his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as though she were some young girl in love.
In everything he said, thought, and did, she saw something particularly noble and elevated.
Her adoration of him alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not find in him anything not fine.
She dared not show him her sense of her own insignificance beside him.
But she could not help being grateful to him for his attitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it.
He, who had in her opinion such a marked aptitude for a political career, in which he would have been certain to play a leading part—he had sacrificed his ambition for her sake, and never betrayed the slightest regret.
He was more lovingly respectful to her than ever, and the constant care that she should not feel the awkwardness of her position never deserted him for a single instant.
He, so manly a man, never opposed her, had indeed, with her, no will of his own, and was anxious, it seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes.
And she could not but appreciate this, even though the very intensity of his solicitude for her, the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimes weighed upon her.
Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what he had so long desired, was not perfectly happy.
He soon felt that the realization of his desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out of the mountain of happiness he had expected.
It showed him the mistake men make in picturing to themselves happiness as the realization of their desires.
For a time after joining his life to hers, and putting on civilian dress, he had felt all the delight of freedom in general of which he had known nothing before, and of freedom in his love,—and he was content, but not for long.
He was soon aware that there was springing up in his heart a desire for desires—_ennui_.
Without conscious intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking it for a desire and an object.
Sixteen hours of the day must be occupied in some way, since they were living abroad in complete freedom, outside the conditions of social life which filled up time in Petersburg.
As for the amusements of bachelor existence, which had provided Vronsky with entertainment on previous tours abroad, they could not be thought of, since the sole attempt of the sort had led to a sudden attack of depression in Anna, quite out of proportion with the cause—a late supper with bachelor friends.
Relations with the society of the place—foreign and Russian—were equally out of the question owing to the irregularity of their position.
The inspection of objects of interest, apart from the fact that everything had been seen already, had not for Vronsky, a Russian and a sensible man, the immense significance Englishmen are able to attach to that pursuit.
And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it can get, hoping to find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously clutched first at politics, then at new books, and then at pictures.
As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing what to spend his money on, he had begun collecting engravings, he came to a stop at painting, began to take interest in it, and concentrated upon it the unoccupied mass of desires which demanded satisfaction.
He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste for imitating art, he supposed himself to have the real thing essential for an artist, and after hesitating for some time which style of painting to select—religious, historical, realistic, or genre painting—he set to work to paint.
He appreciated all kinds, and could have felt inspired by anyone of them; but he had no conception of the possibility of knowing nothing at all of any school of painting, and of being inspired directly by what is within the soul, without caring whether what is painted will belong to any recognized school.
Since he knew nothing of this, and drew his inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly from life embodied in art, his inspiration came very quickly and easily, and as quickly and easily came his success in painting something very similar to the sort of painting he was trying to imitate.
More than any other style he liked the French—graceful and effective—and in that style he began to paint Anna’s portrait in Italian costume, and the portrait seemed to him, and to everyone who saw it, extremely successful.
The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo was completely successful, and having, through Golenishtchev, made acquaintance with a few interesting people, for a time he was satisfied.
He painted studies from nature under the guidance of an Italian professor of painting, and studied mediæval Italian life.
Mediæval Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that he even wore a hat and flung a cloak over his shoulder in the mediæval style, which, indeed, was extremely becoming to him.
“Here we live, and know nothing of what’s going on,” Vronsky said to Golenishtchev as he came to see him one morning.
“Have you seen Mihailov’s picture?” he said, handing him a Russian gazette he had received that morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian artist, living in the very same town, and just finishing a picture which had long been talked about, and had been bought beforehand.
The article reproached the government and the academy for letting so remarkable an artist be left without encouragement and support.
“I’ve seen it,” answered Golenishtchev.
“Of course, he’s not without talent, but it’s all in a wrong direction.
It’s all the Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religious painting.” “What is the subject of the picture?” asked Anna.
Christ is represented as a Jew with all the realism of the new school.” And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him to one of his favorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth into a disquisition on it.
“I can’t understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake.
Christ always has His definite embodiment in the art of the great masters.
And therefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a revolutionist or a sage, let them take from history a Socrates, a Franklin, a Charlotte Corday, but not Christ.
They take the very figure which cannot be taken for their art, and then....” “And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?” asked Vronsky, thinking that, as a Russian Mæcenas, it was his duty to assist the artist regardless of whether the picture were good or bad.
He’s a remarkable portrait-painter.
Have you ever seen his portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova?
But I believe he doesn’t care about painting any more portraits, and so very likely he is in want.
I maintain that....” “Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?” said Vronsky.
“After yours I don’t want another portrait.
“Here she is,” she added, looking out of the window at the handsome Italian nurse, who was carrying the child out into the garden, and immediately glancing unnoticed at Vronsky.
The handsome nurse, from whom Vronsky was painting a head for his picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna’s life.
He painted with her as his model, admired her beauty and mediævalism, and Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of becoming jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly gracious and condescending both to her and her little son.
Vronsky, too, glanced out of the window and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at once to Golenishtchev, he said: “Do you know this Mihailov?” “I have met him.
But he’s a queer fish, and quite without breeding.
You know, one of those uncouth new people one’s so often coming across nowadays, one of those free-thinkers you know, who are reared _d’emblée_ in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism.
He’s the son, it appears, of some Moscow butler, and has never had any sort of bringing-up.
When he got into the academy and made his reputation he tried, as he’s no fool, to educate himself.
And he turned to what seemed to him the very source of culture—the magazines.
In old times, you see, a man who wanted to educate himself—a Frenchman, for instance—would have set to work to study all the classics and theologians and tragedians and historians and philosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual work that came in his way.
But in our day he goes straight for the literature of negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science of negation, and he’s ready.
But as the artist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to take the carriage.
An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on the front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house in the remote suburb.
On learning from the porter’s wife, who came out to them, that Mihailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that moment he was in his lodging only a couple of steps off, they sent her to him with their cards, asking permission to see his picture.
Chapter 10 The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of Count Vronsky and Golenishtchev were brought to him.
On getting home he flew into a rage with his wife for not having managed to put off the landlady, who had been asking for money.
You’re fool enough at all times, and when you start explaining things in Italian you’re a fool three times as foolish,” he said after a long dispute.
If I had the money....” “Leave me in peace, for God’s sake!” Mihailov shrieked, with tears in his voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off into his working room, the other side of a partition wall, and closed the door after him.
“Idiotic woman!” he said to himself, sat down to the table, and, opening a portfolio, he set to work at once with peculiar fervor at a sketch he had begun.
Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things went ill with him, and especially when he quarreled with his wife.
A sketch had been made before, but he was dissatisfied with it.
“No, that one was better ... where is it?” He went back to his wife, and scowling, and not looking at her, asked his eldest little girl, where was that piece of paper he had given them?
The paper with the discarded sketch on it was found, but it was dirty, and spotted with candle-grease.
Still, he took the sketch, laid it on his table, and, moving a little away, screwing up his eyes, he fell to gazing at it.
All at once he smiled and gesticulated gleefully.
He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the face of a shopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous face with a prominent chin, and he sketched this very face, this chin on to the figure of the man.
The figure from a lifeless imagined thing had become living, and such that it could never be changed.
That figure lived, and was clearly and unmistakably defined.
The sketch might be corrected in accordance with the requirements of the figure, the legs, indeed, could and must be put differently, and the position of the left hand must be quite altered; the hair too might be thrown back.
But in making these corrections he was not altering the figure but simply getting rid of what concealed the figure.
He was, as it were, stripping off the wrappings which hindered it from being distinctly seen.
Each new feature only brought out the whole figure in all its force and vigor, as it had suddenly come to him from the spot of tallow.
He was carefully finishing the figure when the cards were brought him.
“Come, Sasha, don’t be cross!” he said, smiling timidly and affectionately at her.
I’ll make it all right.” And having made peace with his wife he put on an olive-green overcoat with a velvet collar and a hat, and went towards his studio.
The successful figure he had already forgotten.
Now he was delighted and excited at the visit of these people of consequence, Russians, who had come in their carriage.
Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at the bottom of his heart one conviction—that no one had ever painted a picture like it.
He did not believe that his picture was better than all the pictures of Raphael, but he knew that what he tried to convey in that picture, no one ever had conveyed.
This he knew positively, and had known a long while, ever since he had begun to paint it.
But other people’s criticisms, whatever they might be, had yet immense consequence in his eyes, and they agitated him to the depths of his soul.
Any remark, the most insignificant, that showed that the critic saw even the tiniest part of what he saw in the picture, agitated him to the depths of his soul.
He always attributed to his critics a more profound comprehension than he had himself, and always expected from them something he did not himself see in the picture.
And often in their criticisms he fancied that he had found this.
He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his excitement he was struck by the soft light on Anna’s figure as she stood in the shade of the entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was eagerly telling her something, while she evidently wanted to look round at the artist.
He was himself unconscious how, as he approached them, he seized on this impression and absorbed it, as he had the chin of the shopkeeper who had sold him the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be brought out when he wanted it.
The visitors, not agreeably impressed beforehand by Golenishtchev’s account of the artist, were still less so by his personal appearance.
Thick-set and of middle height, with nimble movements, with his brown hat, olive-green coat and narrow trousers—though wide trousers had been a long while in fashion,—most of all, with the ordinariness of his broad face, and the combined expression of timidity and anxiety to keep up his dignity, Mihailov made an unpleasant impression.
“Please step in,” he said, trying to look indifferent, and going into the passage he took a key out of his pocket and opened the door.
Chapter 11 On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned his visitors and noted down in his imagination Vronsky’s expression too, and especially his jaws.
Although his artistic sense was unceasingly at work collecting materials, although he felt a continually increasing excitement as the moment of criticizing his work drew nearer, he rapidly and subtly formed, from imperceptible signs, a mental image of these three persons.
That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here.
Mihailov did not remember his surname nor where he had met him, nor what he had said to him.
He only remembered his face as he remembered all the faces he had ever seen; but he remembered, too, that it was one of the faces laid by in his memory in the immense class of the falsely consequential and poor in expression.
The abundant hair and very open forehead gave an appearance of consequence to the face, which had only one expression—a petty, childish, peevish expression, concentrated just above the bridge of the narrow nose.
Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be, Mihailov supposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing about art, like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as amateurs and connoisseurs.
“Most likely they’ve already looked at all the antiques, and now they’re making the round of the studios of the new people, the German humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow, and have only come to me to make the point of view complete,” he thought.
He was well acquainted with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were the worse he found them) of looking at the works of contemporary artists with the sole object of being in a position to say that art is a thing of the past, and that the more one sees of the new men the more one sees how inimitable the works of the great old masters have remained.
He expected all this; he saw it all in their faces, he saw it in the careless indifference with which they talked among themselves, stared at the lay figures and busts, and walked about in leisurely fashion, waiting for him to uncover his picture.
But in spite of this, while he was turning over his studies, pulling up the blinds and taking off the sheet, he was in intense excitement, especially as, in spite of his conviction that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain to be beasts and fools, he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.
“Here, if you please,” he said, moving on one side with his nimble gait and pointing to his picture, “it’s the exhortation to Pilate.
Matthew, chapter xxvii,” he said, feeling his lips were beginning to tremble with emotion.
For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the picture in silence Mihailov too gazed at it with the indifferent eye of an outsider.
For those few seconds he was sure in anticipation that a higher, juster criticism would be uttered by them, by those very visitors whom he had been so despising a moment before.
He forgot all he had thought about his picture before during the three years he had been painting it; he forgot all its qualities which had been absolutely certain to him—he saw the picture with their indifferent, new, outside eyes, and saw nothing good in it.
He saw in the foreground Pilate’s irritated face and the serene face of Christ, and in the background the figures of Pilate’s retinue and the face of John watching what was happening.
The face dearest to him, the face of Christ, the center of the picture, which had given him such ecstasy as it unfolded itself to him, was utterly lost to him when he glanced at the picture with their eyes.
He saw a well-painted (no, not even that—he distinctly saw now a mass of defects) repetition of those endless Christs of Titian, Raphael, Rubens, and the same soldiers and Pilate.
It was all common, poor, and stale, and positively badly painted—weak and unequal.
They would be justified in repeating hypocritically civil speeches in the presence of the painter, and pitying him and laughing at him when they were alone again.
The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became too intolerable to him.
To break it, and to show he was not agitated, he made an effort and addressed Golenishtchev.
“I think I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you,” he said, looking uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade of their expression.
We met at Rossi’s, do you remember, at that _soirée_ when that Italian lady recited—the new Rachel?” Golenishtchev answered easily, removing his eyes without the slightest regret from the picture and turning to the artist.
Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a criticism of the picture, he said: “Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time; and what strikes me particularly now, as it did then, is the figure of Pilate.
One so knows the man: a good-natured, capital fellow, but an official through and through, who does not know what it is he’s doing.
But I fancy....” All Mihailov’s mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled.
He tried to say something, but he could not speak for excitement, and pretended to be coughing.
Low as was his opinion of Golenishtchev’s capacity for understanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon the fidelity of the expression of Pilate as an official, and offensive as might have seemed the utterance of so unimportant an observation while nothing was said of more serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight at this observation.
He had himself thought about Pilate’s figure just what Golenishtchev said.
The fact that this reflection was but one of millions of reflections, which as Mihailov knew for certain would be true, did not diminish for him the significance of Golenishtchev’s remark.
His heart warmed to Golenishtchev for this remark, and from a state of depression he suddenly passed to ecstasy.
At once the whole of his picture lived before him in all the indescribable complexity of everything living.
Mihailov again tried to say that that was how he understood Pilate, but his lips quivered intractably, and he could not pronounce the words.
Vronsky and Anna too said something in that subdued voice in which, partly to avoid hurting the artist’s feelings and partly to avoid saying out loud something silly—so easily said when talking of art—people usually speak at exhibitions of pictures.
Mihailov fancied that the picture had made an impression on them too.
“How marvelous Christ’s expression is!” said Anna.
Of all she saw she liked that expression most of all, and she felt that it was the center of the picture, and so praise of it would be pleasant to the artist.
“One can see that He is pitying Pilate.” This again was one of the million true reflections that could be found in his picture and in the figure of Christ.
In Christ’s expression there ought to be indeed an expression of pity, since there is an expression of love, of heavenly peace, of readiness for death, and a sense of the vanity of words.
Of course there is the expression of an official in Pilate and of pity in Christ, seeing that one is the incarnation of the fleshly and the other of the spiritual life.
All this and much more flashed into Mihailov’s thoughts.
“Yes, and how that figure is done—what atmosphere!
One can walk round it,” said Golenishtchev, unmistakably betraying by this remark that he did not approve of the meaning and idea of the figure.
“Yes, there’s a wonderful mastery!” said Vronsky.
“How those figures in the background stand out!
There you have technique,” he said, addressing Golenishtchev, alluding to a conversation between them about Vronsky’s despair of attaining this technique.
“Yes, yes, marvelous!” Golenishtchev and Anna assented.
In spite of the excited condition in which he was, the sentence about technique had sent a pang to Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he suddenly scowled.
He had often heard this word technique, and was utterly unable to understand what was understood by it.
He knew that by this term was understood a mechanical facility for painting or drawing, entirely apart from its subject.
He had noticed often that even in actual praise technique was opposed to essential quality, as though one could paint well something that was bad.
He knew that a great deal of attention and care was necessary in taking off the coverings, to avoid injuring the creation itself, and to take off all the coverings; but there was no art of painting—no technique of any sort—about it.
If to a little child or to his cook were revealed what he saw, it or she would have been able to peel the wrappings off what was seen.
And the most experienced and adroit painter could not by mere mechanical facility paint anything if the lines of the subject were not revealed to him first.
Besides, he saw that if it came to talking about technique, it was impossible to praise him for it.
In all he had painted and repainted he saw faults that hurt his eyes, coming from want of care in taking off the wrappings—faults he could not correct now without spoiling the whole.
And in almost all the figures and faces he saw, too, remnants of the wrappings not perfectly removed that spoiled the picture.
“One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the remark....” observed Golenishtchev.
“Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you,” said Mihailov with a forced smile.
But I know that was what you meant to do.” “I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart,” said Mihailov gloomily.
Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot detract from it, and, besides, it is only my personal opinion.
With you it is different.
Your very motive is different.
I imagine that if Christ is brought down to the level of an historical character, it would have been better for Ivanov to select some other historical subject, fresh, untouched.” “But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?” “If one looked one would find others.
But the point is that art cannot suffer doubt and discussion.
And before the picture of Ivanov the question arises for the believer and the unbeliever alike, ‘Is it God, or is it not God?’ and the unity of the impression is destroyed.” “Why so?
I think that for educated people,” said Mihailov, “the question cannot exist.” Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by his support of his first idea of the unity of the impression being essential to art.
Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in defense of his own idea.
Chapter 12 Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting their friend’s flow of cleverness.
How exquisite!” they cried with one voice.
“What is it they’re so pleased with?” thought Mihailov.
He had positively forgotten that picture he had painted three years ago.
He had forgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies he had lived through with that picture when for several months it had been the one thought haunting him day and night.
He had forgotten, as he always forgot, the pictures he had finished.
He did not even like to look at it, and had only brought it out because he was expecting an Englishman who wanted to buy it.
“How fine!” said Golenishtchev, he too, with unmistakable sincerity, falling under the spell of the picture.
The elder had just dropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the float from behind a bush, entirely absorbed in what he was doing.
What was he thinking of?
The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for it in Mihailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of feeling for things past, and so, even though this praise was grateful to him, he tried to draw his visitors away to a third picture.
To Mihailov at that moment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to speak of money matters.
“It is put up there to be sold,” he answered, scowling gloomily.
When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the picture of Pilate and Christ, and in his mind went over what had been said, and what, though not said, had been implied by those visitors.
And, strange to say, what had had such weight with him, while they were there and while he mentally put himself at their point of view, suddenly lost all importance for him.
He began to look at his picture with all his own full artist vision, and was soon in that mood of conviction of the perfectibility, and so of the significance, of his picture—a conviction essential to the most intense fervor, excluding all other interests—in which alone he could work.
Christ’s foreshortened leg was not right, though.
As he corrected the leg he looked continually at the figure of John in the background, which his visitors had not even noticed, but which he knew was beyond perfection.
When he had finished the leg he wanted to touch that figure, but he felt too much excited for it.
He was equally unable to work when he was cold and when he was too much affected and saw everything too much.
There was only one stage in the transition from coldness to inspiration, at which work was possible.
Today he was too much agitated.
He would have covered the picture, but he stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and, smiling blissfully, gazed a long while at the figure of John.
At last, as it were regretfully tearing himself away, he dropped the cloth, and, exhausted but happy, went home.
Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularly lively and cheerful.
They talked of Mihailov and his pictures.
The word _talent_, by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude apart from brain and heart, and in which they tried to find an expression for all the artist had gained from life, recurred particularly often in their talk, as though it were necessary for them to sum up what they had no conception of, though they wanted to talk of it.
They said that there was no denying his talent, but that his talent could not develop for want of education—the common defect of our Russian artists.
But the picture of the boys had imprinted itself on their memories, and they were continually coming back to it.
“What an exquisite thing!
How he has succeeded in it, and how simply!
He doesn’t even comprehend how good it is.
Chapter 13 Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a portrait of Anna.
From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone, especially Vronsky, not only by its resemblance, but by its characteristic beauty.
It was strange how Mihailov could have discovered just her characteristic beauty.
“One needs to know and love her as I have loved her to discover the very sweetest expression of her soul,” Vronsky thought, though it was only from this portrait that he had himself learned this sweetest expression of her soul.
But the expression was so true that he, and others too, fancied they had long known it.
“I have been struggling on for ever so long without doing anything,” he said of his own portrait of her, “and he just looked and painted it.
That’s where technique comes in.” “That will come,” was the consoling reassurance given him by Golenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and what was most important, culture, giving him a wider outlook on art.
Golenishtchev’s faith in Vronsky’s talent was propped up by his own need of Vronsky’s sympathy and approval for his own articles and ideas, and he felt that the praise and support must be mutual.
In another man’s house, and especially in Vronsky’s palazzo, Mihailov was quite a different man from what he was in his studio.
He behaved with hostile courtesy, as though he were afraid of coming closer to people he did not respect.
He called Vronsky “your excellency,” and notwithstanding Anna’s and Vronsky’s invitations, he would never stay to dinner, nor come except for the sittings.
Anna was even more friendly to him than to other people, and was very grateful for her portrait.
Vronsky was more than cordial with him, and was obviously interested to know the artist’s opinion of his picture.
Golenishtchev never let slip an opportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into Mihailov.
But Mihailov remained equally chilly to all of them.
Anna was aware from his eyes that he liked looking at her, but he avoided conversation with her.
Vronsky’s talk about his painting he met with stubborn silence, and he was as stubbornly silent when he was shown Vronsky’s picture.
He was unmistakably bored by Golenishtchev’s conversation, and he did not attempt to oppose him.
Altogether Mihailov, with his reserved and disagreeable, as it were, hostile attitude, was quite disliked by them as they got to know him better; and they were glad when the sittings were over, and they were left with a magnificent portrait in their possession, and he gave up coming.
Golenishtchev was the first to give expression to an idea that had occurred to all of them, which was that Mihailov was simply jealous of Vronsky.
“Not envious, let us say, since he has _talent_; but it annoys him that a wealthy man of the highest society, and a count, too (you know they all detest a title), can, without any particular trouble, do as well, if not better, than he who has devoted all his life to it.
And more than all, it’s a question of culture, which he is without.” Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the bottom of his heart he believed it, because in his view a man of a different, lower world would be sure to be envious.
Anna’s portrait—the same subject painted from nature both by him and by Mihailov—ought to have shown Vronsky the difference between him and Mihailov; but he did not see it.
Only after Mihailov’s portrait was painted he left off painting his portrait of Anna, deciding that it was now not needed.
And he himself, and Golenishtchev, and still more Anna, thought it very good, because it was far more like the celebrated pictures they knew than Mihailov’s picture.
Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna’s portrait greatly fascinated him, was even more glad than they were when the sittings were over, and he had no longer to listen to Golenishtchev’s disquisitions upon art, and could forget about Vronsky’s painting.
He knew that Vronsky could not be prevented from amusing himself with painting; he knew that he and all dilettanti had a perfect right to paint what they liked, but it was distasteful to him.
A man could not be prevented from making himself a big wax doll, and kissing it.
But if the man were to come with the doll and sit before a man in love, and begin caressing his doll as the lover caressed the woman he loved, it would be distasteful to the lover.
Just such a distasteful sensation was what Mihailov felt at the sight of Vronsky’s painting: he felt it both ludicrous and irritating, both pitiable and offensive.
Vronsky’s interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last long.
He had enough taste for painting to be unable to finish his picture.
The picture came to a standstill.
He was vaguely aware that its defects, inconspicuous at first, would be glaring if he were to go on with it.
The same experience befell him as Golenishtchev, who felt that he had nothing to say, and continually deceived himself with the theory that his idea was not yet mature, that he was working it out and collecting materials.
This exasperated and tortured Golenishtchev, but Vronsky was incapable of deceiving and torturing himself, and even more incapable of exasperation.
With his characteristic decision, without explanation or apology, he simply ceased working at painting.
But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who wondered at his loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerably tedious in an Italian town.
The palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusively old and dirty, the spots on the curtains, the cracks in the floors, the broken plaster on the cornices became so disagreeably obvious, and the everlasting sameness of Golenishtchev, and the Italian professor and the German traveler became so wearisome, that they had to make some change.
They resolved to go to Russia, to the country.
In Petersburg Vronsky intended to arrange a partition of the land with his brother, while Anna meant to see her son.
The summer they intended to spend on Vronsky’s great family estate.
He was happy, but not at all in the way he had expected to be.
At every step he found his former dreams disappointed, and new, unexpected surprises of happiness.
He was happy; but on entering upon family life he saw at every step that it was utterly different from what he had imagined.
At every step he experienced what a man would experience who, after admiring the smooth, happy course of a little boat on a lake, should get himself into that little boat.
He saw that it was not all sitting still, floating smoothly; that one had to think too, not for an instant to forget where one was floating; and that there was water under one, and that one must row; and that his unaccustomed hands would be sore; and that it was only to look at it that was easy; but that doing it, though very delightful, was very difficult.
As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s married life, seen the petty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only smiled contemptuously in his heart.
In his future married life there could be, he was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external forms, indeed, he fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others in everything.
And all of a sudden, instead of his life with his wife being made on an individual pattern, it was, on the contrary, entirely made up of the pettiest details, which he had so despised before, but which now, by no will of his own, had gained an extraordinary importance that it was useless to contend against.
And Levin saw that the organization of all these details was by no means so easy as he had fancied before.
Although Levin believed himself to have the most exact conceptions of domestic life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured domestic life as the happiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder and no petty cares to distract.
He ought, as he conceived the position, to do his work, and to find repose from it in the happiness of love.
And he was surprised that she, his poetic, exquisite Kitty, could, not merely in the first weeks, but even in the first days of their married life, think, remember, and busy herself about tablecloths, and furniture, about mattresses for visitors, about a tray, about the cook, and the dinner, and so on.
While they were still engaged, he had been struck by the definiteness with which she had declined the tour abroad and decided to go into the country, as though she knew of something she wanted, and could still think of something outside her love.
This had jarred upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred upon him several times.
But he saw that this was essential for her.
And, loving her as he did, though he did not understand the reason of them, and jeered at these domestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them.
He jeered at the way in which she arranged the furniture they had brought from Moscow; rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared rooms for visitors; a room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her new maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with Agafea Mihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores.
He saw how the old cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced, impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook her head over the young mistress’s new arrangements.
He saw that Kitty was extraordinarily sweet when, laughing and crying, she came to tell him that her maid, Masha, was used to looking upon her as her young lady, and so no one obeyed her.
He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing; she, who at home had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or sweets, without the possibility of getting either, now could order what she liked, buy pounds of sweets, spend as much money as she liked, and order any puddings she pleased.
She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly’s coming to them with her children, especially because she would order for the children their favorite puddings and Dolly would appreciate all her new housekeeping.
She did not know herself why and wherefore, but the arranging of her house had an irresistible attraction for her.
Instinctively feeling the approach of spring, and knowing that there would be days of rough weather too, she built her nest as best she could, and was in haste at the same time to build it and to learn how to do it.
This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin’s ideal of exalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and this sweet care of her household, the aim of which he did not understand, but could not help loving, was one of the new happy surprises.
Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels.
Levin could never have conceived that between him and his wife any relations could arise other than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once in the very early days they quarreled, so that she said he did not care for her, that he cared for no one but himself, burst into tears, and wrung her arms.
This first quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to a new farmhouse and having been away half an hour too long, because he had tried to get home by a short cut and had lost his way.
He drove home thinking of nothing but her, of her love, of his own happiness, and the nearer he drew to home, the warmer was his tenderness for her.
He ran into the room with the same feeling, with an even stronger feeling than he had had when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ house to make his offer.
And suddenly he was met by a lowering expression he had never seen in her.
“What is it?” “You’ve been enjoying yourself,” she began, trying to be calm and spiteful.
But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of reproach, of senseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing her during that half hour which she had spent sitting motionless at the window, burst from her.
It was only then, for the first time, that he clearly understood what he had not understood when he led her out of the church after the wedding.
He felt this from the agonizing sensation of division that he experienced at that instant.
He was offended for the first instant, but the very same second he felt that he could not be offended by her, that she was himself.
He felt for the first moment as a man feels when, having suddenly received a violent blow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager to avenge himself, to look for his antagonist, and finds that it is he himself who has accidentally struck himself, that there is no one to be angry with, and that he must put up with and try to soothe the pain.
Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this first time he could not for a long while get over it.
His natural feeling urged him to defend himself, to prove to her she was wrong; but to prove her wrong would mean irritating her still more and making the rupture greater that was the cause of all his suffering.
One habitual feeling impelled him to get rid of the blame and to pass it on to her.
Another feeling, even stronger, impelled him as quickly as possible to smooth over the rupture without letting it grow greater.
To remain under such undeserved reproach was wretched, but to make her suffer by justifying himself was worse still.
She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she did not say so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new, redoubled happiness in their love.
But that did not prevent such quarrels from happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the most unexpected and trivial grounds.
These quarrels frequently arose from the fact that they did not yet know what was of importance to each other and that all this early period they were both often in a bad temper.
When one was in a good temper, and the other in a bad temper, the peace was not broken; but when both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from such incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could never remember afterwards what they had quarreled about.
It is true that when they were both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled.
But still this first period of their married life was a difficult time for them.
During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of tension, as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by which they were bound.
Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the month after their wedding—from which from tradition Levin expected so much, was not merely not a time of sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as the bitterest and most humiliating period in their lives.
They both alike tried in later life to blot out from their memories all the monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period, when both were rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite themselves.
It was only in the third month of their married life, after their return from Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that their life began to go more smoothly.
She, wearing the dark lilac dress she had worn during the first days of their married life, and put on again today, a dress particularly remembered and loved by him, was sitting on the sofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofa which had always stood in the study in Levin’s father’s and grandfather’s days.
She was sewing at _broderie anglaise_.
He thought and wrote, never losing the happy consciousness of her presence.
He went on with his work, but he felt now that the center of gravity of his attention had passed to something else, and that consequently he looked at his work quite differently and more clearly.
Formerly this work had been for him an escape from life.
Formerly he had felt that without this work his life would be too gloomy.
Now these pursuits were necessary for him that life might not be too uniformly bright.
Taking up his manuscript, reading through what he had written, he found with pleasure that the work was worth his working at.
Many of his old ideas seemed to him superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct to him when he reviewed the whole thing in his memory.
He was writing now a new chapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of agriculture in Russia.
While he was writing his ideas she was thinking how unnaturally cordial her husband had been to young Prince Tcharsky, who had, with great want of tact, flirted with her the day before they left Moscow.
“Goodness! how sweet and silly he is!
If he knew that I think no more of them than of Piotr the cook,” she thought, looking at his head and red neck with a feeling of possession strange to herself.
I’ll _will_ him to!” and she opened her eyes wide, as though to intensify the influence of her gaze.
“Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false appearance of prosperity,” he muttered, stopping to write, and, feeling that she was looking at him and smiling, he looked round.
“It’s nothing; I wanted you to look round,” she said, watching him, and trying to guess whether he was vexed at being interrupted or not.
“How happy we are alone together!—I am, that is,” he said, going up to her with a radiant smile of happiness.
I’ll never go anywhere, especially not to Moscow.” “And what were you thinking about?” “I?
No, no, go along, go on writing; don’t break off,” she said, pursing up her lips, “and I must cut out these little holes now, do you see?” She took up her scissors and began cutting them out.
“No; tell me, what was it?” he said, sitting down beside her and watching the tiny scissors moving round.
“Oh! what was I thinking about?
I was thinking about Moscow, about the back of your head.” “Why should I, of all people, have such happiness!
It’s unnatural, too good,” he said, kissing her hand.
“I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the more natural it seems to me.” “And you’ve got a little curl loose,” he said, carefully turning her head round.
No, no, we are busy at our work!” Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one another like culprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea was ready.
“They’ve just come; they’re unpacking the things.” “Come quickly,” she said to him as she went out of the study, “or else I shall read your letters without you.” Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the new portfolio bought by her, he washed his hands at the new washstand with the elegant fittings, that had all made their appearance with her.
Levin smiled at his own thoughts, and shook his head disapprovingly at those thoughts; a feeling akin to remorse fretted him.
There was something shameful, effeminate, Capuan, as he called it to himself, in his present mode of life.
Today, almost for the first time, I set to work seriously, and what happened?
Even my ordinary pursuits I have almost given up.
On the land I scarcely walk or drive about at all to look after things.
And I used to think that, before marriage, life was nothing much, somehow didn’t count, but that after marriage, life began in earnest.
And here almost three months have passed, and I have spent my time so idly and unprofitably.
I ought myself to be firmer, to maintain my masculine independence of action; or else I shall get into such ways, and she’ll get used to them too....
But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame someone else, and especially the person nearest of all to him, for the ground of his dissatisfaction.
And it vaguely came into Levin’s mind that she herself was not to blame (she could not be to blame for anything), but what was to blame was her education, too superficial and frivolous. (“That fool Tcharsky: she wanted, I know, to stop him, but didn’t know how to.”) “Yes, apart from her interest in the house (that she has), apart from dress and _broderie anglaise_, she has no serious interests.
No interest in her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music, though she’s rather good at it, nor in reading.
She does nothing, and is perfectly satisfied.” Levin, in his heart, censured this, and did not as yet understand that she was preparing for that period of activity which was to come for her when she would at once be the wife of her husband and mistress of the house, and would bear, and nurse, and bring up children.
He knew not that she was instinctively aware of this, and preparing herself for this time of terrible toil, did not reproach herself for the moments of carelessness and happiness in her love that she enjoyed now while gaily building her nest for the future.
Chapter 16 When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the new silver samovar behind the new tea service, and, having settled old Agafea Mihalovna at a little table with a full cup of tea, was reading a letter from Dolly, with whom they were in continual and frequent correspondence.
“You see, your good lady’s settled me here, told me to sit a bit with her,” said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling affectionately at Kitty.
In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of the drama which had been enacted of late between her and Kitty.
He saw that, in spite of Agafea Mihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new mistress taking the reins of government out of her hands, Kitty had yet conquered her and made her love her.
“Here, I opened your letter too,” said Kitty, handing him an illiterate letter.
Dolly took Tanya and Grisha to a children’s ball at the Sarmatskys’: Tanya was a French marquise.” But Levin did not hear her.
Flushing, he took the letter from Marya Nikolaevna, his brother’s former mistress, and began to read it.
This was the second letter he had received from Marya Nikolaevna.
In the first letter, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her away for no fault of hers, and, with touching simplicity, added that though she was in want again, she asked for nothing, and wished for nothing, but was only tormented by the thought that Nikolay Dmitrievitch would come to grief without her, owing to the weak state of his health, and begged his brother to look after him.
Now she wrote quite differently.
She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with him in Moscow, and had moved with him to a provincial town, where he had received a post in the government service.
But that he had quarreled with the head official, and was on his way back to Moscow, only he had been taken so ill on the road that it was doubtful if he would ever leave his bed again, she wrote.
“It’s always of you he has talked, and, besides, he has no more money left.” “Read this; Dolly writes about you,” Kitty was beginning, with a smile; but she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on her husband’s face.
Thoughts of Tanya as a marquise, of Dolly, all had vanished.
“Tomorrow.” “And I will go with you, can I?” she said.
What are you thinking of?” he said reproachfully.
“How do you mean?” offended that he should seem to take her suggestion unwillingly and with vexation.
And this lack of candor in a matter of such gravity infuriated him.
“It’s out of the question,” he said sternly.
Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently put down her cup and withdrew.
The tone in which her husband had said the last words wounded her, especially because he evidently did not believe what she had said.
“I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall certainly come,” she said hastily and wrathfully.
“Why out of the question?
Why do you say it’s out of the question?” “Because it’ll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads and to all sorts of hotels.
You would be a hindrance to me,” said Levin, trying to be cool.
I don’t want anything.
But just think a little: this is a matter of such importance that I can’t bear to think that you should bring in a feeling of weakness, of dislike to being left alone.
“I didn’t mean, it wasn’t weakness, it wasn’t ...
I feel that it’s my duty to be with my husband when he’s in trouble, but you try on purpose to hurt me, you try on purpose not to understand....” “No; this is awful!
To be such a slave!” cried Levin, getting up, and unable to restrain his anger any longer.
He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but simply to soothe her.
But she did not heed him, and would not agree to anything.
He bent down to her and took her hand, which resisted him.
But when he took her face in both his hands and said “Kitty!” she suddenly recovered herself, and began to cry, and they were reconciled.
It was decided that they should go together the next day.
Levin told his wife that he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of use, agreed that Marya Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make her going improper, but he set off at the bottom of his heart dissatisfied both with her and with himself.
He was dissatisfied with her for being unable to make up her mind to let him go when it was necessary (and how strange it was for him to think that he, so lately hardly daring to believe in such happiness as that she could love him—now was unhappy because she loved him too much!), and he was dissatisfied with himself for not showing more strength of will.
Even greater was the feeling of disagreement at the bottom of his heart as to her not needing to consider the woman who was with his brother, and he thought with horror of all the contingencies they might meet with.
The mere idea of his wife, his Kitty, being in the same room with a common wench, set him shuddering with horror and loathing.
As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what price they wanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room for them; one decent room had been taken by the inspector of railroads, another by a lawyer from Moscow, a third by Princess Astafieva from the country.
There remained only one filthy room, next to which they promised that another should be empty by the evening.
Feeling angry with his wife because what he had expected had come to pass, which was that at the moment of arrival, when his heart throbbed with emotion and anxiety to know how his brother was getting on, he should have to be seeing after her, instead of rushing straight to his brother, Levin conducted her to the room assigned them.
He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over Marya Nikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared to go in to see him.
She was just the same as when he saw her in Moscow; the same woolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the same good-naturedly stupid, pockmarked face, only a little plumper.
He has kept expecting you.
Are you ... with your wife?” Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was confused her, but she immediately enlightened him.
“Nikolay Dmitrievitch will be delighted.
He heard about it, and knows your lady, and remembers her abroad.” Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer to make.
Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who had put herself and him in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna crimsoned still more.
She positively shrank together and flushed to the point of tears, and clutching the ends of her apron in both hands, twisted them in her red fingers without knowing what to say and what to do.
For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible to her; but it lasted only a single instant.
“But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!” Levin said, looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that instant across the corridor, as though about his affairs.
“Well then, come in,” said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who had recovered herself, but noticing her husband’s face of dismay, “or go on; go, and then come for me,” she said, and went back into the room.
He had not in the least expected what he saw and felt in his brother’s room.
He had expected to find him in the same state of self-deception which he had heard was so frequent with the consumptive, and which had struck him so much during his brother’s visit in the autumn.
He had expected to find the physical signs of the approach of death more marked—greater weakness, greater emaciation, but still almost the same condition of things.
He had expected himself to feel the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved and the same horror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a greater degree.
And he had prepared himself for this; but he found something utterly different.
In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy with spittle, and conversation audible through the thin partition from the next room, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on a bedstead moved away from the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a body.
One arm of this body was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as a rake-handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, long bone of the arm smooth from the beginning to the middle.
The head lay sideways on the pillow.
Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweat on the temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.
But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible.
In spite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance at those eager eyes raised at his approach, only to catch the faint movement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to realize the terrible truth that this death-like body was his living brother.
The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his brother as he drew near.
And immediately this glance established a living relationship between living men.
Levin immediately felt the reproach in the eyes fixed on him, and felt remorse at his own happiness.
When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay smiled.
The smile was faint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the stern expression of the eyes was unchanged.
“You did not expect to find me like this,” he articulated with effort.
“Yes ... no,” said Levin, hesitating over his words.
I made inquiries in all directions.” He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to say, especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared without dropping his eyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of each word.
Nikolay expressed pleasure, but said he was afraid of frightening her by his condition.
Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and began to say something.
Levin expected something of peculiar gravity and importance from the expression of his face, but Nikolay began speaking of his health.
He found fault with the doctor, regretting he had not a celebrated Moscow doctor.
Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape, if only for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said that he would go and fetch his wife.
It’s dirty and stinking here, I expect.
“Oh, and when you’ve cleared up, go away yourself,” he added, looking inquiringly at his brother.
Going out into the corridor, he stopped short.
He had said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the emotion he was feeling, he decided that he would try on the contrary to persuade her not to go in to the sick man.
“Why should she suffer as I am suffering?” he thought.
“Well, how is he?” Kitty asked with a frightened face.
Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at her husband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both hands.
“Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it together.
“You must understand that for me to see you, and not to see him, is far more painful.
Please, let me!” she besought her husband, as though the happiness of her life depended on it.
Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completely forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his brother with Kitty.
Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing him a valorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sick-room, and, turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door.
With inaudible steps she went quickly to the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that he had not to turn his head, she immediately clasped in her fresh young hand the skeleton of his huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with that soft eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to women.
“We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden,” she said.
“You never thought I was to be your sister?” “You would not have recognized me?” he said, with a radiant smile at her entrance.
Not a day has passed that Kostya has not mentioned you, and been anxious.” But the sick man’s interest did not last long.
Before she had finished speaking, there had come back into his face the stern, reproachful expression of the dying man’s envy of the living.
“I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here,” she said, turning away from his fixed stare, and looking about the room.
“We must ask about another room,” she said to her husband, “so that we might be nearer.” Chapter 18 Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself be natural and calm in his presence.
When he went in to the sick man, his eyes and his attention were unconsciously dimmed, and he did not see and did not distinguish the details of his brother’s position.
He smelt the awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and miserable condition, and heard the groans, and felt that nothing could be done to help.
It never entered his head to analyze the details of the sick man’s situation, to consider how that body was lying under the quilt, how those emaciated legs and thighs and spine were lying huddled up, and whether they could not be made more comfortable, whether anything could not be done to make things, if not better, at least less bad.
He was absolutely convinced that nothing could be done to prolong his brother’s life or to relieve his suffering.
But a sense of his regarding all aid as out of the question was felt by the sick man, and exasperated him.
And he was continually, on various pretexts, going out of the room, and coming in again, because he was unable to remain alone.
But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently.
And pity in her womanly heart did not arouse at all that feeling of horror and loathing that it aroused in her husband, but a desire to act, to find out all the details of his state, and to remedy them.
And since she had not the slightest doubt that it was her duty to help him, she had no doubt either that it was possible, and immediately set to work.
The very details, the mere thought of which reduced her husband to terror, immediately engaged her attention.
She sent for the doctor, sent to the chemist’s, set the maid who had come with her and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and scrub; she herself washed up something, washed out something else, laid something under the quilt.
Something was by her directions brought into the sick-room, something else was carried out.
She herself went several times to her room, regardless of the men she met in the corridor, got out and brought in sheets, pillow cases, towels, and shirts.
The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dining hall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to her summons, and could not avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave them with such gracious insistence that there was no evading her.
But the sick man, though he seemed and was indifferent about it, was not angry, but only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in what she was doing with him.
Coming back from the doctor to whom Kitty had sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man at the instant when, by Kitty’s directions, they were changing his linen.
The long white ridge of his spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder blades and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the waiter were struggling with the sleeve of the night shirt, and could not get the long, limp arm into it.
Kitty, hurriedly closing the door after Levin, was not looking that way; but the sick man groaned, and she moved rapidly towards him.
“I’ll do it my myself....” “What say?” queried Marya Nikolaevna.
But Kitty heard and saw he was ashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before her.
“Marya Nikolaevna, you come this side, you do it,” she added.
“Please go for me, there’s a little bottle in my small bag,” she said, turning to her husband, “you know, in the side pocket; bring it, please, and meanwhile they’ll finish clearing up here.” Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled comfortably and everything about him completely changed.
The heavy smell was replaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting lips and puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through a little pipe.
There was no dust visible anywhere, a rug was laid by the bedside.
On the table stood medicine bottles and decanters tidily arranged, and the linen needed was folded up there, and Kitty’s _broderie anglaise_.
The sick man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets on high raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar about his astoundingly thin neck, and with a new expression of hope looked fixedly at Kitty.
The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was not the one who had been attending Nikolay Levin, as the patient was dissatisfied with him.
The new doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded the patient, shook his head, prescribed medicine, and with extreme minuteness explained first how to take the medicine and then what diet was to be kept to.
He advised eggs, raw or hardly cooked, and seltzer water, with warm milk at a certain temperature.
When the doctor had gone away the sick man said something to his brother, of which Levin could distinguish only the last words: “Your Katya.” By the expression with which he gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her.
No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she alone understood.
She understood because she was all the while mentally keeping watch on what he needed.
Turn him over, it’s so disagreeable calling the servants.
Can you?” she said to Marya Nikolaevna.
“I’m afraid not,” answered Marya Nikolaevna.
Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body, to take hold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred to know nothing, under his wife’s influence he made his resolute face that she knew so well, and putting his arms into the bed took hold of the body, but in spite of his own strength he was struck by the strange heaviness of those powerless limbs.
While he was turning him over, conscious of the huge emaciated arm about his neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselessly turned the pillow, beat it up and settled in it the sick man’s head, smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again to his moist brow.
Levin felt that he meant to do something with his hand and was pulling it somewhere.
Levin, shaking with sobs and unable to articulate a word, went out of the room.
Chapter 19 “Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.” So Levin thought about his wife as he talked to her that evening.
Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself “wise and prudent.” He did not so consider himself, but he could not help knowing that he had more intellect than his wife and Agafea Mihalovna, and he could not help knowing that when he thought of death, he thought with all the force of his intellect.
He knew too that the brains of many great men, whose thoughts he had read, had brooded over death and yet knew not a hundredth part of what his wife and Agafea Mihalovna knew about it.
Different as those two women were, Agafea Mihalovna and Katya, as his brother Nikolay had called her, and as Levin particularly liked to call her now, they were quite alike in this.
Both knew, without a shade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was death, and though neither of them could have answered, and would even not have understood the questions that presented themselves to Levin, both had no doubt of the significance of this event, and were precisely alike in their way of looking at it, which they shared with millions of people.
The proof that they knew for a certainty the nature of death lay in the fact that they knew without a second of hesitation how to deal with the dying, and were not frightened of them.
Levin and other men like him, though they could have said a great deal about death, obviously did not know this since they were afraid of death, and were absolutely at a loss what to do when people were dying.
To talk of outside things seemed to him shocking, impossible, to talk of death and depressing subjects—also impossible.
To be silent, also impossible.
“If I look at him he will think I am studying him, I am afraid; if I don’t look at him, he’ll think I’m thinking of other things.
If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread firmly, I’m ashamed.” Kitty evidently did not think of herself, and had no time to think about herself: she was thinking about him because she knew something, and all went well.
She told him about herself even and about her wedding, and smiled and sympathized with him and petted him, and talked of cases of recovery and all went well; so then she must know.
The proof that her behavior and Agafea Mihalovna’s was not instinctive, animal, irrational, was that apart from the physical treatment, the relief of suffering, both Agafea Mihalovna and Kitty required for the dying man something else more important than the physical treatment, and something which had nothing in common with physical conditions.
Agafea Mihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said: “Well, thank God, he took the sacrament and received absolution; God grant each one of us such a death.” Katya in just the same way, besides all her care about linen, bedsores, drink, found time the very first day to persuade the sick man of the necessity of taking the sacrament and receiving absolution.
Not to speak of supper, of preparing for bed, of considering what they were going to do, he could not even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to.
Kitty, on the contrary, was more active than usual.
She was even livelier than usual.
She ordered supper to be brought, herself unpacked their things, and herself helped to make the beds, and did not even forget to sprinkle them with Persian powder.
She showed that alertness, that swiftness of reflection which comes out in men before a battle, in conflict, in the dangerous and decisive moments of life—those moments when a man shows once and for all his value, and that all his past has not been wasted but has been a preparation for these moments.
Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was twelve o’clock all their things were arranged cleanly and tidily in her rooms, in such a way that the hotel rooms seemed like home: the beds were made, brushes, combs, looking-glasses were put out, table napkins were spread.
Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even now, and it seemed to him that every movement he made was unseemly.
She arranged the brushes, but she did it all so that there was nothing shocking in it.
“I am very glad I persuaded him to receive extreme unction tomorrow,” she said, sitting in her dressing jacket before her folding looking-glass, combing her soft, fragrant hair with a fine comb.
“I have never seen it, but I know, mamma has told me, there are prayers said for recovery.” “Do you suppose he can possibly recover?” said Levin, watching a slender tress at the back of her round little head that was continually hidden when she passed the comb through the front.
I’m very glad, anyway, that I persuaded him,” she said, looking askance at her husband through her hair.
“Anything is possible,” she added with that peculiar, rather sly expression that was always in her face when she spoke of religion.
Since their conversation about religion when they were engaged neither of them had ever started a discussion of the subject, but she performed all the ceremonies of going to church, saying her prayers, and so on, always with the unvarying conviction that this ought to be so.
In spite of his assertion to the contrary, she was firmly persuaded that he was as much a Christian as she, and indeed a far better one; and all that he said about it was simply one of his absurd masculine freaks, just as he would say about her _broderie anglaise_ that good people patch holes, but that she cut them on purpose, and so on.
“Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to manage all this,” said Levin.
You are such purity that....” He took her hand and did not kiss it (to kiss her hand in such closeness to death seemed to him improper); he merely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at her brightening eyes.
“It would have been miserable for you to be alone,” she said, and lifting her hands which hid her cheeks flushing with pleasure, twisted her coil of hair on the nape of her neck and pinned it there.
You would not believe how charming he was as a youth, but I did not understand him then.” “I can quite, quite believe it.
How I feel that we might have been friends!” she said; and, distressed at what she had said, she looked round at her husband, and tears came into her eyes.
“Yes, _might have been_,” he said mournfully.
“He’s just one of those people of whom they say they’re not for this world.” “But we have many days before us; we must go to bed,” said Kitty, glancing at her tiny watch.
Chapter 20 The next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme unction.
During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently.
His great eyes, fastened on the holy image that was set out on a card-table covered with a colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and hope that it was awful to Levin to see it.
Levin knew that this passionate prayer and hope would only make him feel more bitterly parting from the life he so loved.
Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened his hope by accounts of the marvelous recoveries she had heard of.
Levin knew all this; and it was agonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful eyes and the emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the sign of the cross on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping chest, which one could not feel consistent with the life the sick man was praying for.
During the sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever, had done a thousand times.
He said, addressing God, “If Thou dost exist, make this man to recover” (of course this same thing has been repeated many times), “and Thou wilt save him and me.” After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better.
He did not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand, thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain, and that he felt strong and had an appetite.
Hopelessly ill as he was, obvious as it was at the first glance that he could not recover, Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of excitement, happy, though fearful of being mistaken.
“Is he better?” “Yes, much.” “It’s wonderful.” “There’s nothing wonderful in it.” “Anyway, he’s better,” they said in a whisper, smiling to one another.
This self-deception was not of long duration.
And all at once every hope vanished in those about him and in himself.
The reality of his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in the sick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.
Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, as though ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in a bottle covered with perforated paper.
Levin gave him the bottle, and the same look of passionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament was now fastened on his brother, demanding from him the confirmation of the doctor’s words that inhaling iodine worked wonders.
“Is Katya not here?” he gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantly assented to the doctor’s words.
She’s so sweet; but you and I can’t deceive ourselves.
This is what I believe in,” he said, and, squeezing the bottle in his bony hand, he began breathing over it.
At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea in their room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly.
She was pale, and her lips were quivering.
“He is dying!” she whispered.
“I feel I’m setting off,” Nikolay said with difficulty, but with extreme distinctness, screwing the words out of himself.
He did not raise his head, but simply turned his eyes upwards, without their reaching his brother’s face.
Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.
“Why do you think so?” said Levin, so as to say something.
“Because I’m setting off,” he repeated, as though he had a liking for the phrase.
“It’s the end.” Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.
“I shall lie down soon enough,” he pronounced slowly, “when I’m dead,” he said sarcastically, wrathfully.
The dying man lay with closed eyes, but the muscles twitched from time to time on his forehead, as with one thinking deeply and intensely.
Levin involuntarily thought with him of what it was that was happening to him now, but in spite of all his mental efforts to go along with him he saw by the expression of that calm, stern face that for the dying man all was growing clearer and clearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.
“Yes, yes, so,” the dying man articulated slowly at intervals.
“Right!” he pronounced all at once reassuringly, as though all were solved for him.
“O Lord!” he murmured, and sighed deeply.
Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet.
“They’re getting cold,” she whispered.
For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick man lay motionless.
Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain.
He felt that, with no mental effort, could he understand what it was that was _right_.
He could not even think of the problem of death itself, but with no will of his own thoughts kept coming to him of what he had to do next; closing the dead man’s eyes, dressing him, ordering the coffin.
And, strange to say, he felt utterly cold, and was not conscious of sorrow nor of loss, less still of pity for his brother.
If he had any feeling for his brother at that moment, it was envy for the knowledge the dying man had now that he could not have.
A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end.
The door opened and Kitty appeared.
But at the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound of the dying man stirring.
He wondered what Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor lived in a house of his own.
He cautiously drew away his hand and felt the feet.
The feet were cold, but the sick man was still breathing.
Levin tried again to move away on tiptoe, but the sick man stirred again and said: “Don’t go.” The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged.
Levin stealthily withdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went off to his own room and went to sleep.
When he woke up, instead of news of his brother’s death which he expected, he learned that the sick man had returned to his earlier condition.
He had begun sitting up again, coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and again had ceased to talk of death, again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and had become more irritable and more gloomy than ever.
He was angry with everyone, and said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his sufferings, and insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor from Moscow.
Kitty tried in every possible way to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all in vain, and Levin saw that she herself was exhausted both physically and morally, though she would not admit it.
Everyone knew that he must inevitably die soon, that he was half dead already.
Everyone wished for nothing but that he should die as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing this, gave him medicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and deceived him and themselves and each other.
All this was falsehood, disgusting, irreverent deceit.
And owing to the bent of his character, and because he loved the dying man more than anyone else did, Levin was most painfully conscious of this deceit.
Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling his brothers, at least in face of death, had written to his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, and having received an answer from him, he read this letter to the sick man.
Sergey Ivanovitch wrote that he could not come himself, and in touching terms he begged his brother’s forgiveness.
“I hope you are not angry with him?” “No, not the least!” Nikolay answered, vexed at the question.
“Tell him to send me a doctor.” Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the same condition.
The sense of longing for his death was felt by everyone now at the mere sight of him, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all the people staying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna and Levin and Kitty.
The sick man alone did not express this feeling, but on the contrary was furious at their not getting him doctors, and went on taking medicine and talking of life.
Only at rare moments, when the opium gave him an instant’s relief from the never-ceasing pain, he would sometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more intense in his heart than in all the others: “Oh, if it were only the end!” or: “When will it be over?” His sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their work and prepared him for death.
There was no position in which he was not in pain, there was not a minute in which he was unconscious of it, not a limb, not a part of his body that did not ache and cause him agony.
Even the memories, the impressions, the thoughts of this body awakened in him now the same aversion as the body itself.
The sight of other people, their remarks, his own reminiscences, everything was for him a source of agony.
Those about him felt this, and instinctively did not allow themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes before him.
All his life was merged in the one feeling of suffering and desire to be rid of it.
There was evidently coming over him that revulsion that would make him look upon death as the goal of his desires, as happiness.
Hitherto each individual desire, aroused by suffering or privation, such as hunger, fatigue, thirst, had been satisfied by some bodily function giving pleasure.
But now no physical craving or suffering received relief, and the effort to relieve them only caused fresh suffering.
And so all desires were merged in one—the desire to be rid of all his sufferings and their source, the body.
But he had no words to express this desire of deliverance, and so he did not speak of it, and from habit asked for the satisfaction of desires which could not now be satisfied.
“Turn me over on the other side,” he would say, and immediately after he would ask to be turned back again as before.
Talk of something: why are you silent?” And directly they began to talk he would close his eyes, and would show weariness, indifference, and loathing.
She suffered from headache and sickness, and she could not get up all the morning.
The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue and excitement, and prescribed rest.
He looked at her sternly when she came in, and smiled contemptuously when she said she had been unwell.
That day he was continually blowing his nose, and groaning piteously.
“Worse,” he articulated with difficulty.
“In pain!” “In pain, where?” “Everywhere.” “It will be over today, you will see,” said Marya Nikolaevna.
Nikolay had heard; but these words produced no effect on him.
His eyes had still the same intense, reproachful look.
“Why do you think so?” Levin asked her, when she had followed him into the corridor.
“He has begun picking at himself,” said Marya Nikolaevna.
Levin noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at himself, as it were, trying to snatch something away.
Marya Nikolaevna’s prediction came true.
Towards night the sick man was not able to lift his hands, and could only gaze before him with the same intensely concentrated expression in his eyes.
Levin, Kitty, and Marya Nikolaevna stood at the bedside.
The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer when the dying man stretched, sighed, and opened his eyes.
The priest, on finishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead, then slowly returned it to the stand, and after standing for two minutes more in silence, he touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning cold.
The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in Levin that sense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma, together with the nearness and inevitability of death, that had come upon him that autumn evening when his brother had come to him.
This feeling was now even stronger than before; even less than before did he feel capable of apprehending the meaning of death, and its inevitability rose up before him more terrible than ever.
But now, thanks to his wife’s presence, that feeling did not reduce him to despair.
He felt that love saved him from despair, and that this love, under the menace of despair, had become still stronger and purer.
The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcely passed before his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as insoluble, urging him to love and to life.
The doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to Kitty.
Her indisposition was a symptom that she was with child.
It was only when Anna had left his house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she should dine with him or separately, that for the first time he clearly comprehended his position, and was appalled by it.
Most difficult of all in this position was the fact that he could not in any way connect and reconcile his past with what was now.
It was not the past when he had lived happily with his wife that troubled him.
The transition from that past to a knowledge of his wife’s unfaithfulness he had lived through miserably already; that state was painful, but he could understand it.
If his wife had then, on declaring to him her unfaithfulness, left him, he would have been wounded, unhappy, but he would not have been in the hopeless position—incomprehensible to himself—in which he felt himself now.
He could not now reconcile his immediate past, his tenderness, his love for his sick wife, and for the other man’s child with what was now the case, that is with the fact that, as it were, in return for all this he now found himself alone, put to shame, a laughing-stock, needed by no one, and despised by everyone.
For the first two days after his wife’s departure Alexey Alexandrovitch received applicants for assistance and his chief secretary, drove to the committee, and went down to dinner in the dining-room as usual.
Without giving himself a reason for what he was doing, he strained every nerve of his being for those two days, simply to preserve an appearance of composure, and even of indifference.
Answering inquiries about the disposition of Anna Arkadyevna’s rooms and belongings, he had exercised immense self-control to appear like a man in whose eyes what had occurred was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary course of events, and he attained his aim: no one could have detected in him signs of despair.
But on the second day after her departure, when Korney gave him a bill from a fashionable draper’s shop, which Anna had forgotten to pay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was waiting, Alexey Alexandrovitch told him to show the clerk up.
“Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble you.
But if you direct us to apply to her excellency, would you graciously oblige us with her address?” Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the clerk, and all at once, turning round, he sat down at the table.
Letting his head sink into his hands, he sat for a long while in that position, several times attempted to speak and stopped short.
Korney, perceiving his master’s emotion, asked the clerk to call another time.
Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch recognized that he had not the strength to keep up the line of firmness and composure any longer.
He gave orders for the carriage that was awaiting him to be taken back, and for no one to be admitted, and he did not go down to dinner.
He felt that he could not endure the weight of universal contempt and exasperation, which he had distinctly seen in the face of the clerk and of Korney, and of everyone, without exception, whom he had met during those two days.
He felt that he could not turn aside from himself the hatred of men, because that hatred did not come from his being bad (in that case he could have tried to be better), but from his being shamefully and repulsively unhappy.
He knew that for this, for the very fact that his heart was torn with grief, they would be merciless to him.
He felt that men would crush him as dogs strangle a torn dog yelping with pain.
He knew that his sole means of security against people was to hide his wounds from them, and instinctively he tried to do this for two days, but now he felt incapable of keeping up the unequal struggle.
His despair was even intensified by the consciousness that he was utterly alone in his sorrow.
In all Petersburg there was not a human being to whom he could express what he was feeling, who would feel for him, not as a high official, not as a member of society, but simply as a suffering man; indeed he had not such a one in the whole world.
Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan.
There were two brothers.
They did not remember their father, and their mother died when Alexey Alexandrovitch was ten years old.
The property was a small one.
Their uncle, Karenin, a government official of high standing, at one time a favorite of the late Tsar, had brought them up.
On completing his high school and university courses with medals, Alexey Alexandrovitch had, with his uncle’s aid, immediately started in a prominent position in the service, and from that time forward he had devoted himself exclusively to political ambition.
In the high school and the university, and afterwards in the service, Alexey Alexandrovitch had never formed a close friendship with anyone.
His brother had been the person nearest to his heart, but he had a post in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and was always abroad, where he had died shortly after Alexey Alexandrovitch’s marriage.
While he was governor of a province, Anna’s aunt, a wealthy provincial lady, had thrown him—middle-aged as he was, though young for a governor—with her niece, and had succeeded in putting him in such a position that he had either to declare himself or to leave the town.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long in hesitation.
There were at the time as many reasons for the step as against it, and there was no overbalancing consideration to outweigh his invariable rule of abstaining when in doubt.
But Anna’s aunt had through a common acquaintance insinuated that he had already compromised the girl, and that he was in honor bound to make her an offer.
He made the offer, and concentrated on his betrothed and his wife all the feeling of which he was capable.
The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need of intimate relations with others.
And now among all his acquaintances he had not one friend.
He had plenty of so-called connections, but no friendships.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had plenty of people whom he could invite to dinner, to whose sympathy he could appeal in any public affair he was concerned about, whose interest he could reckon upon for anyone he wished to help, with whom he could candidly discuss other people’s business and affairs of state.
But his relations with these people were confined to one clearly defined channel, and had a certain routine from which it was impossible to depart.
There was one man, a comrade of his at the university, with whom he had made friends later, and with whom he could have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this friend had a post in the Department of Education in a remote part of Russia.
Of the people in Petersburg the most intimate and most possible were his chief secretary and his doctor.
Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a straightforward, intelligent, good-hearted, and conscientious man, and Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of his personal goodwill.
But their five years of official work together seemed to have put a barrier between them that cut off warmer relations.
After signing the papers brought him, Alexey Alexandrovitch had sat for a long while in silence, glancing at Mihail Vassilievitch, and several times he attempted to speak, but could not.
He had already prepared the phrase: “You have heard of my trouble?” But he ended by saying, as usual: “So you’ll get this ready for me?” and with that dismissed him.
The other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling for him; but there had long existed a taciturn understanding between them that both were weighed down by work, and always in a hurry.
Of his women friends, foremost amongst them Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Alexey Alexandrovitch never thought.
All women, simply as women, were terrible and distasteful to him.
Chapter 22 Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgotten the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, but she had not forgotten him.
At the bitterest moment of his lonely despair she came to him, and without waiting to be announced, walked straight into his study.
“_J’ai forcé la consigne_,” she said, walking in with rapid steps and breathing hard with excitement and rapid exercise.
Alexey Alexandrovitch!
Dear friend!” she went on, warmly squeezing his hand in both of hers and gazing with her fine pensive eyes into his.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and disengaging his hand, moved her a chair.
“Won’t you sit down, countess?
I’m seeing no one because I’m unwell, countess,” he said, and his lips twitched.
“Dear friend!” repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never taking her eyes off his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at the inner corners, describing a triangle on her forehead, her ugly yellow face became still uglier, but Alexey Alexandrovitch felt that she was sorry for him and was preparing to cry.
And he too was softened; he snatched her plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.
“Dear friend!” she said in a voice breaking with emotion.
Your sorrow is a great one, but you ought to find consolation.” “I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, letting go her hand, but still gazing into her brimming eyes.
“My position is so awful because I can find nowhere, I cannot find within me strength to support me.” “You will find support; seek it—not in me, though I beseech you to believe in my friendship,” she said, with a sigh.
“Our support is love, that love that He has vouchsafed us.
His burden is light,” she said, with the look of ecstasy Alexey Alexandrovitch knew so well.
“He will be your support and your succor.” Although there was in these words a flavor of that sentimental emotion at her own lofty feelings, and that new mystical fervor which had lately gained ground in Petersburg, and which seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch disproportionate, still it was pleasant to him to hear this now.
I foresaw nothing, and now I understand nothing.” “Dear friend,” repeated Lidia Ivanovna.
“It’s not the loss of what I have not now, it’s not that!” pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch.
But I cannot help feeling humiliated before other people for the position I am placed in.
It is wrong, but I can’t help it, I can’t help it.” “Not you it was performed that noble act of forgiveness, at which I was moved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but He, working within your heart,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her eyes rapturously, “and so you cannot be ashamed of your act.” Alexey Alexandrovitch knitted his brows, and crooking his hands, he cracked his fingers.
“A man’s strength has its limits, countess, and I have reached my limits.
The whole day I have had to be making arrangements, arrangements about household matters arising” (he emphasized the word _arising_) “from my new, solitary position.
The servants, the governess, the accounts....
These pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart, and I have not the strength to bear it.
At dinner ... yesterday, I was almost getting up from the dinner-table.
He was afraid to look at me, but that is not all....” Alexey Alexandrovitch would have referred to the bill that had been brought him, but his voice shook, and he stopped.
“I understand, dear friend,” said Lidia Ivanovna.
“I understand it all.
If I could take from off you all these petty, humiliating cares ...
I understand that a woman’s word, a woman’s superintendence is needed.
You will intrust it to me?” Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed her hand.
“Together we will take care of Seryozha.
Practical affairs are not my strong point.
I will be your housekeeper.
I do it not from myself....” “I cannot help thanking you.” “But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which you spoke—being ashamed of what is the Christian’s highest glory: _he who humbles himself shall be exalted_.
In Him alone we find peace, consolation, salvation, and love,” she said, and turning her eyes heavenwards, she began praying, as Alexey Alexandrovitch gathered from her silence.
Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to her now, and those expressions which had seemed to him, if not distasteful, at least exaggerated, now seemed to him natural and consolatory.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had disliked this new enthusiastic fervor.
He was a believer, who was interested in religion primarily in its political aspect, and the new doctrine which ventured upon several new interpretations, just because it paved the way to discussion and analysis, was in principle disagreeable to him.
He had hitherto taken up a cold and even antagonistic attitude to this new doctrine, and with Countess Lidia Ivanovna, who had been carried away by it, he had never argued, but by silence had assiduously parried her attempts to provoke him into argument.
Now for the first time he heard her words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.
“I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for your words,” he said, when she had finished praying.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both her friend’s hands.
“I am going to Seryozha.
Only in the last extremity shall I apply to you.” And she got up and went out.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha’s part of the house, and dropping tears on the scared child’s cheeks, she told him that his father was a saint and his mother was dead.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise.
She did actually take upon herself the care of the organization and management of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s household.
But she had not overstated the case when saying that practical affairs were not her strong point.
All her arrangements had to be modified because they could not be carried out, and they were modified by Korney, Alexey Alexandrovitch’s valet, who, though no one was aware of the fact, now managed Karenin’s household, and quietly and discreetly reported to his master while he was dressing all it was necessary for him to know.
It was easy for Alexey Alexandrovitch to believe in this teaching.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and others who shared their views, was completely devoid of vividness of imagination, that spiritual faculty in virtue of which the conceptions evoked by the imagination become so vivid that they must needs be in harmony with other conceptions, and with actual fact.
He saw nothing impossible and inconceivable in the idea that death, though existing for unbelievers, did not exist for him, and that, as he was possessed of the most perfect faith, of the measure of which he was himself the judge, therefore there was no sin in his soul, and he was experiencing complete salvation here on earth.
But for Alexey Alexandrovitch it was a necessity to think in that way; it was such a necessity for him in his humiliation to have some elevated standpoint, however imaginary, from which, looked down upon by all, he could look down on others, that he clung, as to his one salvation, to his delusion of salvation.
Chapter 23 The Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and sentimental girl, been married to a wealthy man of high rank, an extremely good-natured, jovial, and extremely dissipated rake.
Two months after marriage her husband abandoned her, and her impassioned protestations of affection he met with a sarcasm and even hostility that people knowing the count’s good heart, and seeing no defects in the sentimental Lidia, were at a loss to explain.
Though they were divorced and lived apart, yet whenever the husband met the wife, he invariably behaved to her with the same malignant irony, the cause of which was incomprehensible.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with her husband, but from that time she had never given up being in love with someone.
She was in love with several people at once, both men and women; she had been in love with almost everyone who had been particularly distinguished in any way.
She was in love with all the new princes and princesses who married into the imperial family; she had been in love with a high dignitary of the Church, a vicar, and a parish priest; she had been in love with a journalist, three Slavophiles, with Komissarov, with a minister, a doctor, an English missionary and Karenin.
All these passions constantly waning or growing more ardent, did not prevent her from keeping up the most extended and complicated relations with the court and fashionable society.
But from the time that after Karenin’s trouble she took him under her special protection, from the time that she set to work in Karenin’s household looking after his welfare, she felt that all her other attachments were not the real thing, and that she was now genuinely in love, and with no one but Karenin.
The feeling she now experienced for him seemed to her stronger than any of her former feelings.
She was not simply overjoyed at meeting him, but she sought in his face signs of the impression she was making on him.
For his sake it was that she now lavished more care on her dress than before.
She caught herself in reveries on what might have been, if she had not been married and he had been free.
She blushed with emotion when he came into the room, she could not repress a smile of rapture when he said anything amiable to her.
For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state of intense excitement.
She had learned that Anna and Vronsky were in Petersburg.
Alexey Alexandrovitch must be saved from seeing her, he must be saved even from the torturing knowledge that that awful woman was in the same town with him, and that he might meet her any minute.
Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what those _infamous people_, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, and she endeavored so to guide every movement of her friend during those days that he could not come across them.
The young adjutant, an acquaintance of Vronsky, through whom she obtained her information, and who hoped through Countess Lidia Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told her that they had finished their business and were going away next day.
Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when the next morning a note was brought her, the handwriting of which she recognized with horror.
It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina.
The envelope was of paper as thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a huge monogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.
“Who brought it?” “A commissionaire from the hotel.” It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to read the letter.
Her excitement brought on an attack of asthma, to which she was subject.
When she had recovered her composure, she read the following letter in French: “Madame la Comtesse, “The Christian feelings with which your heart is filled give me the, I feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you.
I am miserable at being separated from my son.
I entreat permission to see him once before my departure.
Forgive me for recalling myself to your memory.
I apply to you and not to Alexey Alexandrovitch, simply because I do not wish to cause that generous man to suffer in remembering me.
Knowing your friendship for him, I know you will understand me.
Could you send Seryozha to me, or should I come to the house at some fixed hour, or will you let me know when and where I could see him away from home?
I do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the magnanimity of him with whom it rests.
You cannot conceive the craving I have to see him, and so cannot conceive the gratitude your help will arouse in me.
“Anna.” Everything in this letter exasperated Countess Lidia Ivanovna: its contents and the allusion to magnanimity, and especially its free and easy—as she considered—tone.
“Say that there is no answer,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, and immediately opening her blotting-book, she wrote to Alexey Alexandrovitch that she hoped to see him at one o’clock at the levee.
He lays the cross, but He gives the strength to bear it,” she added, so as to give him some slight preparation.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote some two or three letters a day to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
She enjoyed that form of communication, which gave opportunity for a refinement and air of mystery not afforded by their personal interviews.
People met as they were going away, and gossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed honors and the changes in the positions of the higher functionaries.
“If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and Princess Vatkovskaya were Commander-in-Chief,” said a gray-headed, little old man in a gold-embroidered uniform, addressing a tall, handsome maid of honor who had questioned him about the new appointments.
“And me among the adjutants,” said the maid of honor, smiling.
“You have an appointment already.
You’re over the ecclesiastical department.
And your assistant’s Karenin.” “Good-day, prince!” said the little old man to a man who came up to him.
“He and Putyatov have received the Alexander Nevsky.” “I thought he had it already.” “No.
Just look at him,” said the little old man, pointing with his embroidered hat to Karenin in a court uniform with the new red ribbon across his shoulders, standing in the doorway of the hall with an influential member of the Imperial Council.
“Pleased and happy as a brass farthing,” he added, stopping to shake hands with a handsome gentleman of the bedchamber of colossal proportions.
“No; he’s looking older,” said the gentleman of the bedchamber.
He’s always drawing up projects nowadays.
He won’t let a poor devil go nowadays till he’s explained it all to him under heads.” “Looking older, did you say? _Il fait des passions_.
I believe Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s jealous now of his wife.” “Oh, come now, please don’t say any harm of Countess Lidia Ivanovna.” “Why, is there any harm in her being in love with Karenin?” “But is it true Madame Karenina’s here?” “Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg.
I met her yesterday with Alexey Vronsky, _bras dessous, bras dessous_, in the Morsky.” “_C’est un homme qui n’a pas_,...” the gentleman of the bedchamber was beginning, but he stopped to make room, bowing, for a member of the Imperial family to pass.
Thus people talked incessantly of Alexey Alexandrovitch, finding fault with him and laughing at him, while he, blocking up the way of the member of the Imperial Council he had captured, was explaining to him point by point his new financial project, never interrupting his discourse for an instant for fear he should escape.
Almost at the same time that his wife left Alexey Alexandrovitch there had come to him that bitterest moment in the life of an official—the moment when his upward career comes to a full stop.
This full stop had arrived and everyone perceived it, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself was not yet aware that his career was over.
Whether it was due to his feud with Stremov, or his misfortune with his wife, or simply that Alexey Alexandrovitch had reached his destined limits, it had become evident to everyone in the course of that year that his career was at an end.
He still filled a position of consequence, he sat on many commissions and committees, but he was a man whose day was over, and from whom nothing was expected.
Whatever he said, whatever he proposed, was heard as though it were something long familiar, and the very thing that was not needed.
But Alexey Alexandrovitch was not aware of this, and, on the contrary, being cut off from direct participation in governmental activity, he saw more clearly than ever the errors and defects in the action of others, and thought it his duty to point out means for their correction.
Shortly after his separation from his wife, he began writing his first note on the new judicial procedure, the first of the endless series of notes he was destined to write in the future.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe his hopeless position in the official world, he was not merely free from anxiety on this head, he was positively more satisfied than ever with his own activity.
“He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife,” says the Apostle Paul, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, who was now guided in every action by Scripture, often recalled this text.
It seemed to him that ever since he had been left without a wife, he had in these very projects of reform been serving the Lord more zealously than before.
The unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying to get away from him did not trouble Alexey Alexandrovitch; he gave up his exposition only when the member of the Council, seizing his chance when one of the Imperial family was passing, slipped away from him.
Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down, collecting his thoughts, then looked casually about him and walked towards the door, where he hoped to meet Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
“And how strong they all are, how sound physically,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully built gentleman of the bedchamber with his well-combed, perfumed whiskers, and at the red neck of the prince, pinched by his tight uniform.
“Truly is it said that all the world is evil,” he thought, with another sidelong glance at the calves of the gentleman of the bedchamber.
Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed with his customary air of weariness and dignity to the gentleman who had been talking about him, and looking towards the door, his eyes sought Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
Alexey Alexandrovitch!” said the little old man, with a malicious light in his eyes, at the moment when Karenin was on a level with them, and was nodding with a frigid gesture, “I haven’t congratulated you yet,” said the old man, pointing to his newly received ribbon.
“Thank you,” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“What an _exquisite_ day today,” he added, laying emphasis in his peculiar way on the word _exquisite_.
That they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did not expect anything but hostility from them; he was used to that by now.
Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna jutting out above her corset, and her fine pensive eyes bidding him to her, Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and went towards her.
Lidia Ivanovna’s dress had cost her great pains, as indeed all her dresses had done of late.
Then her desire had been to adorn herself with something, and the more adorned the better.
Now, on the contrary, she was perforce decked out in a way so inconsistent with her age and her figure, that her one anxiety was to contrive that the contrast between these adornments and her own exterior should not be too appalling.
And as far as Alexey Alexandrovitch was concerned she succeeded, and was in his eyes attractive.
For him she was the one island not only of goodwill to him, but of love in the midst of the sea of hostility and jeering that surrounded him.
Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally to her loving glance as a plant to the sun.
“I congratulate you,” she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.
Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders, closing his eyes, as though to say that that could not be a source of joy to him.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna was very well aware that it was one of his chief sources of satisfaction, though he never admitted it.
“How is our angel?” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning Seryozha.
“I can’t say I was quite pleased with him,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes.
When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna’s help had been brought back anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to undertake the education of the son left on his hands.
Having never before taken any interest in educational questions, Alexey Alexandrovitch devoted some time to the theoretical study of the subject.
After reading several books on anthropology, education, and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch drew up a plan of education, and engaging the best tutor in Petersburg to superintend it, he set to work, and the subject continually absorbed him.
I see in him his father’s heart, and with such a heart a child cannot go far wrong,” said Lidia Ivanovna with enthusiasm.
It’s all I can do.” “You’re coming to me,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, after a pause; “we have to speak of a subject painful for you.
I would give anything to have spared you certain memories, but others are not of the same mind.
I have received a letter from _her_. _She_ is here in Petersburg.” Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his wife, but immediately his face assumed the deathlike rigidity which expressed utter helplessness in the matter.
“I was expecting it,” he said.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of rapture at the greatness of his soul came into her eyes.
Chapter 25 When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s snug little boudoir, decorated with old china and hung with portraits, the lady herself had not yet made her appearance.
She was changing her dress.
Alexey Alexandrovitch looked idly about at the endless familiar portraits which adorned the room, and sitting down to the table, he opened a New Testament lying upon it.
The rustle of the countess’s silk skirt drew his attention off.
“Well now, we can sit quietly,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, slipping hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and the sofa, “and talk over our tea.” After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna, breathing hard and flushing crimson, gave into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hands the letter she had received.
“Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!” “On the contrary, I see that all is evil.
But whether it is just....” His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support, and guidance in a matter he did not understand.
“No,” Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; “there are limits to everything.
I can understand immorality,” she said, not quite truthfully, since she never could understand that which leads women to immorality; “but I don’t understand cruelty: to whom? to you!
And I’m learning to understand your loftiness and her baseness.” “Who is to throw a stone?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, unmistakably pleased with the part he had to play.
“I have forgiven all, and so I cannot deprive her of what is exacted by love in her—by her love for her son....” “But is that love, my friend?
Admitting that you have forgiven—that you forgive—have we the right to work on the feelings of that angel?
He prays for her, and beseeches God to have mercy on her sins.
But now what will he think?” “I had not thought of that,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, evidently agreeing.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent.
“If you ask my advice,” she said, having finished her prayer and uncovered her face, “I do not advise you to do this.
Do you suppose I don’t see how you are suffering, how this has torn open your wounds?
But supposing that, as always, you don’t think of yourself, what can it lead to?—to fresh suffering for you, to torture for the child.
If there were a trace of humanity left in her, she ought not to wish for it herself.
I pray to Almighty God to have mercy on you.
“Countess Lidia.” This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia Ivanovna had concealed from herself.
For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from Lidia Ivanovna’s, could not all that day concentrate himself on his usual pursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and believing which he had felt of late.
The memory of how he had received her confession of infidelity on their way home from the races (especially that he had insisted only on the observance of external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured him like a remorse.
He was tortured too by the thought of the letter he had written her; and most of all, his forgiveness, which nobody wanted, and his care of the other man’s child made his heart burn with shame and remorse.
And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt now, as he reviewed all his past with her, recalling the awkward words in which, after long wavering, he had made her an offer.
And this question always excited another question in him—whether they felt differently, did their loving and marrying differently, these Vronskys and Oblonskys ... these gentlemen of the bedchamber, with their fine calves.
And there passed before his mind a whole series of these mettlesome, vigorous, self-confident men, who always and everywhere drew his inquisitive attention in spite of himself.
He tried to dispel these thoughts, he tried to persuade himself that he was not living for this transient life, but for the life of eternity, and that there was peace and love in his heart.
But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as it seemed to him, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though the eternal salvation in which he believed had no existence.
But this temptation did not last long, and soon there was reestablished once more in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s soul the peace and the elevation by virtue of which he could forget what he did not want to remember.
Chapter 26 “Well, Kapitonitch?” said Seryozha, coming back rosy and good-humored from his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his overcoat to the tall old hall-porter, who smiled down at the little person from the height of his long figure.
“Well, has the bandaged clerk been here today?
The minute the chief secretary came out, I announced him,” said the hall-porter with a good-humored wink.
“Here, I’ll take it off.” “Seryozha!” said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to the inner rooms.
“Take it off yourself.” But Seryozha, though he heard his tutor’s feeble voice, did not pay attention to it.
“Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?” The hall-porter nodded his head affirmatively.
The clerk with his face tied up, who had already been seven times to ask some favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch, interested both Seryozha and the hall-porter.
Seryozha had come upon him in the hall, and had heard him plaintively beg the hall-porter to announce him, saying that he and his children had death staring them in the face.
Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall, took great interest in him.
Almost dancing as he walked away.” “And has anything been left?” asked Seryozha, after a pause.
“Come, sir,” said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head he whispered, “Something from the countess.” Seryozha understood at once that what the hall-porter was speaking of was a present from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his birthday.
A fine plaything it must be too!” “How big?
Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is calling you,” said the porter, hearing the tutor’s steps approaching, and carefully taking away from his belt the little hand in the glove half pulled off, he signed with his head towards the tutor.
“Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!” answered Seryozha with that gay and loving smile which always won over the conscientious Vassily Lukitch.
Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to be able to help sharing with his friend the porter the family good fortune of which he had heard during his walk in the public gardens from Lidia Ivanovna’s niece.
This piece of good news seemed to him particularly important from its coming at the same time with the gladness of the bandaged clerk and his own gladness at toys having come for him.
It seemed to Seryozha that this was a day on which everyone ought to be glad and happy.
“You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky today?” “To be sure I do!
People have been already to congratulate him.” “And is he glad?” “Glad at the Tsar’s gracious favor!
It’s a proof he’s deserved it,” said the porter severely and seriously.
Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter, which he had thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the chin that hung down between the gray whiskers, never seen by anyone but Seryozha, who saw him only from below.
“Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?” The porter’s daughter was a ballet dancer.
And you’ve your lesson, sir; run along.” On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting down to his lessons, told his tutor of his supposition that what had been brought him must be a machine.
“What do you think?” he inquired.
But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity of learning the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at two.
“No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch,” he asked suddenly, when he was seated at their work table with the book in his hands, “what is greater than the Alexander Nevsky?
You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky?” Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the Alexander Nevsky.
“And higher still?” “Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny.” “And higher than the Andrey?” “I don’t know.” “What, you don’t know?” and Seryozha, leaning on his elbows, sank into deep meditation.
His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character.
He imagined his father’s having suddenly been presented with both the Vladimir and the Andrey today, and in consequence being much better tempered at his lesson, and dreamed how, when he was grown up, he would himself receive all the orders, and what they might invent higher than the Andrey.
Directly any higher order were invented, he would win it.
They would make a higher one still, and he would immediately win that too.
The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came, the lesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of action was not ready, and the teacher was not only displeased, but hurt.
This touched Seryozha.
As long as the teacher was explaining to him, he believed him and seemed to comprehend, but as soon as he was left alone, he was positively unable to recollect and to understand that the short and familiar word “suddenly” is an adverb of manner of action.
Still he was sorry that he had disappointed the teacher.
“Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?” he asked all, of a sudden.
“You’d much better be thinking about your work.
Birthdays are of no importance to a rational being.
It’s a day like any other on which one has to do one’s work.” Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at his spectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his nose, and fell into so deep a reverie that he heard nothing of what the teacher was explaining to him.
“But why have they all agreed to speak just in the same manner always the dreariest and most useless stuff?
Why does he keep me off; why doesn’t he love me?” he asked himself mournfully, and could not think of an answer.
While waiting for his father, Seryozha sat at the table playing with a penknife, and fell to dreaming.
Among Seryozha’s favorite occupations was searching for his mother during his walks.
He did not believe in death generally, and in her death in particular, in spite of what Lidia Ivanovna had told him and his father had confirmed, and it was just because of that, and after he had been told she was dead, that he had begun looking for her when out for a walk.
Every woman of full, graceful figure with dark hair was his mother.
At the sight of such a woman such a feeling of tenderness was stirred within him that his breath failed him, and tears came into his eyes.
And he was on the tiptoe of expectation that she would come up to him, would lift her veil.
All her face would be visible, she would smile, she would hug him, he would sniff her fragrance, feel the softness of her arms, and cry with happiness, just as he had one evening lain on her lap while she tickled him, and he laughed and bit her white, ring-covered fingers.
Later, when he accidentally learned from his old nurse that his mother was not dead, and his father and Lidia Ivanovna had explained to him that she was dead to him because she was wicked (which he could not possibly believe, because he loved her), he went on seeking her and expecting her in the same way.
That day in the public gardens there had been a lady in a lilac veil, whom he had watched with a throbbing heart, believing it to be she as she came towards them along the path.
The lady had not come up to them, but had disappeared somewhere.
That day, more intensely than ever, Seryozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his father, he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the table with his penknife, staring straight before him with sparkling eyes and dreaming of her.
Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his hand, looked at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy at receiving the Alexander Nevsky.
“Did you have a nice walk?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sitting down in his easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament to him and opening it.
Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more than once told Seryozha that every Christian ought to know Scripture history thoroughly, he often referred to the Bible himself during the lesson, and Seryozha observed this.
“Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa,” said Seryozha, sitting sideways on his chair and rocking it, which was forbidden.
“I saw Nadinka” (Nadinka was a niece of Lidia Ivanovna’s who was being brought up in her house).
Are you glad, papa?” “First of all, don’t rock your chair, please,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“And secondly, it’s not the reward that’s precious, but the work itself.
And I could have wished you understood that.
This was the same long-familiar tone his father always took with him, and Seryozha had learned by now to fall in with it.
His father always talked to him—so Seryozha felt—as though he were addressing some boy of his own imagination, one of those boys that exist in books, utterly unlike himself.
And Seryozha always tried with his father to act being the story-book boy.
“You understand that, I hope?” said his father.
“Yes, papa,” answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary boy.
The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of the Gospel and the repetition of the beginning of the Old Testament.
The verses from the Gospel Seryozha knew fairly well, but at the moment when he was saying them he became so absorbed in watching the sharply protruding, bony knobbiness of his father’s forehead, that he lost the thread, and he transposed the end of one verse and the beginning of another.
So it was evident to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he did not understand what he was saying, and that irritated him.
He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many times before and never could remember, because he understood it too well, just as that “suddenly” is an adverb of manner of action.
Seryozha looked with scared eyes at his father, and could think of nothing but whether his father would make him repeat what he had said, as he sometimes did.
And this thought so alarmed Seryozha that he now understood nothing.
But his father did not make him repeat it, and passed on to the lesson out of the Old Testament.
Seryozha recounted the events themselves well enough, but when he had to answer questions as to what certain events prefigured, he knew nothing, though he had already been punished over this lesson.
The passage at which he was utterly unable to say anything, and began fidgeting and cutting the table and swinging his chair, was where he had to repeat the patriarchs before the Flood.
In death, of which they talked to him so often, Seryozha disbelieved entirely.
That was to him something utterly inconceivable and impossible.
But he had been told that all men die; he had asked people, indeed, whom he trusted, and they too, had confirmed it; his old nurse, too, said the same, though reluctantly.
But Enoch had not died, and so it followed that everyone did not die.
“And why cannot anyone else so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?” thought Seryozha.
Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like, they might die, but the good might all be like Enoch.
“Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?” “Enoch, Enos—” “But you have said that already.
This is bad, Seryozha, very bad.
If you don’t try to learn what is more necessary than anything for a Christian,” said his father, getting up, “whatever can interest you?
I am displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatitch” (this was the most important of his teachers) “is displeased with you....
I shall have to punish you.” His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seryozha, and he certainly did learn his lessons very badly.
On the contrary, he was far cleverer than the boys his teacher held up as examples to Seryozha.
Those claims were in opposition, and he was in direct conflict with his education.
He was nine years old; he was a child; but he knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as the eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no one into his soul.
His teachers complained that he would not learn, while his soul was brimming over with thirst for knowledge.
And he learned from Kapitonitch, from his nurse, from Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch, but not from his teachers.
The spring his father and his teachers reckoned upon to turn their mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but its waters did their work in another channel.
His father punished Seryozha by not letting him go to see Nadinka, Lidia Ivanovna’s niece; but this punishment turned out happily for Seryozha.
Vassily Lukitch was in a good humor, and showed him how to make windmills.
The whole evening passed over this work and in dreaming how to make a windmill on which he could turn himself—clutching at the sails or tying himself on and whirling round.
Of his mother Seryozha did not think all the evening, but when he had gone to bed, he suddenly remembered her, and prayed in his own words that his mother tomorrow for his birthday might leave off hiding herself and come to him.
A splendid thing; but it’s a secret!
I was almost telling the secret!” said Seryozha, laughing gaily.
When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt his mother.
She stood over him, and with loving eyes caressed him.
But then came windmills, a knife, everything began to be mixed up, and he fell asleep.
Chapter 28 On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the best hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with her child, its nurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four rooms.
There he found his mother, who had come from Moscow on business.
His mother and sister-in-law greeted him as usual: they asked him about his stay abroad, and talked of their common acquaintances, but did not let drop a single word in allusion to his connection with Anna.
His brother came the next morning to see Vronsky, and of his own accord asked him about her, and Alexey Vronsky told him directly that he looked upon his connection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to arrange a divorce, and then to marry her, and until then he considered her as much a wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother and his wife so.
Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna with a certain formality, treating her as he might a very intimate friend, but it was understood that his brother knew their real relations, and they talked about Anna’s going to Vronsky’s estate.
In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of the new position in which he was placed, laboring under a strange misapprehension.
This was what Vronsky was experiencing in regard to the world.
But he very quickly perceived that though the world was open for him personally, it was closed for Anna.
One of the first ladies of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw was his cousin Betsy.
“At last!” she greeted him joyfully.
Where are you stopping?
I can fancy after your delightful travels you must find our poor Petersburg horrid.
I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome.
Is that all over?” Vronsky noticed that Betsy’s enthusiasm waned when she learned that no divorce had as yet taken place.
“People will throw stones at me, I know,” she said, “but I shall come and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come.
You won’t be here long, I suppose?” And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone was not at all the same as in former days.
She unmistakably prided herself on her courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity of her friendship.
Supposing I’m ready to fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will give you the cold shoulder until you’re married.
And that’s so simple nowadays. _Ça se fait_.
He knew that his mother, who had been so enthusiastic over Anna at their first acquaintance, would have no mercy on her now for having ruined her son’s career.
He fancied she would not throw stones, and would go simply and directly to see Anna, and would receive her in her own house.
The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and finding her alone, expressed his wishes directly.
“You know, Alexey,” she said after hearing him, “how fond I am of you, and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken, because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna,” she said, articulating the name “Anna Arkadyevna” with particular care.
I don’t and can’t enter into that,” she said, glancing timidly at his gloomy face.
You want me to go and see her, to ask her here, and to rehabilitate her in society; but do understand that _I cannot_ do so.
I have daughters growing up, and I must live in the world for my husband’s sake.
Well, I’m ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she will understand that I can’t ask her here, or I should have to do so in such a way that she would not meet people who look at things differently; that would offend her.
I can’t raise her....” “Oh, I don’t regard her as fallen more than hundreds of women you do receive!” Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he got up in silence, understanding that his sister-in-law’s decision was not to be shaken.
Please understand that I’m not to blame,” began Varya, looking at him with a timid smile.
“I’m not angry with you,” he said still as gloomily; “but I’m sorry in two ways.
I’m sorry, too, that this means breaking up our friendship—if not breaking up, at least weakening it.
You will understand that for me, too, it cannot be otherwise.” And with that he left her.
Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that he had to spend these few days in Petersburg as though in a strange town, avoiding every sort of relation with his own old circle in order not to be exposed to the annoyances and humiliations which were so intolerable to him.
One of the most unpleasant features of his position in Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and his name seemed to meet him everywhere.
He could not begin to talk of anything without the conversation turning on Alexey Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere without risk of meeting him.
So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as it seems to a man with a sore finger that he is continually, as though on purpose, grazing his sore finger on everything.
Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he perceived all the time a sort of new mood that he could not understand in Anna.
At one time she would seem in love with him, and then she would become cold, irritable, and impenetrable.
She was worrying over something, and keeping something back from him, and did not seem to notice the humiliations which poisoned his existence, and for her, with her delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.
And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and importance of this meeting grew ever greater in her imagination.
She did not even put to herself the question how to arrange it.
But on her arrival in Petersburg she was suddenly made distinctly aware of her present position in society, and she grasped the fact that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.
She had now been two days in Petersburg.
To go straight to the house, where she might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, that she felt she had no right to do.
She might be refused admittance and insulted.
To write and so enter into relations with her husband—that it made her miserable to think of doing; she could only be at peace when she did not think of her husband.
Seryozha’s old nurse might be a help to her and show her what to do.
But the nurse was not now living in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house.
In this uncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped by.
Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to her a letter, which cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally said that permission to see her son must depend on her husband’s generosity.
She knew that if the letter were shown to her husband, he would keep up his character of magnanimity, and would not refuse her request.
The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the most cruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer.
She had never felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for the commissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how he had waited, and how afterwards he had been told there was no answer.
Anna felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her point of view Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right.
Her suffering was the more poignant that she had to bear it in solitude.
She knew that to him, although he was the primary cause of her distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a matter of very little consequence.
She knew that he would never be capable of understanding all the depth of her suffering, that for his cool tone at any allusion to it she would begin to hate him.
And she dreaded that more than anything in the world, and so she hid from him everything that related to her son.
Spending the whole day at home she considered ways of seeing her son, and had reached a decision to write to her husband.
She was just composing this letter when she was handed the letter from Lidia Ivanovna.
The countess’s silence had subdued and depressed her, but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her passionate, legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned against other people and left off blaming herself.
“This coldness—this pretense of feeling!” she said to herself.
Not on any consideration!
I don’t lie, anyway.” And she decided on the spot that next day, Seryozha’s birthday, she would go straight to her husband’s house, bribe or deceive the servants, but at any cost see her son and overturn the hideous deception with which they were encompassing the unhappy child.
She would go early in the morning at eight o’clock, when Alexey Alexandrovitch would be certain not to be up.
She would have money in her hand to give the hall-porter and the footman, so that they should let her in, and not raising her veil, she would say that she had come from Seryozha’s godfather to congratulate him, and that she had been charged to leave the toys at his bedside.
She had prepared everything but the words she should say to her son.
Often as she had dreamed of it, she could never think of anything.
The next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hired sledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.
Some lady,” said Kapitonitch, who, not yet dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the window and seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door.
His assistant, a lad Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to her than she came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of her muff put it hurriedly into his hand.
“Seryozha—Sergey Alexeitch,” she said, and was going on.
Scrutinizing the note, the porter’s assistant stopped her at the second glass door.
Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went out to her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was pleased to want.
“From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch,” she said.
“His honor’s not up yet,” said the porter, looking at her attentively.
Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the house where she had lived for nine years would so greatly affect her.
Memories sweet and painful rose one after another in her heart, and for a moment she forgot what she was here for.
“Would you kindly wait?” said Kapitonitch, taking off her fur cloak.
As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face, recognized her, and made her a low bow in silence.
“Please walk in, your excellency,” he said to her.
She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any sound; with a guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went with light, swift steps up the stairs.
Bent double, and his galoshes catching in the steps, Kapitonitch ran after her, trying to overtake her.
I’ll let him know.” Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what the old man was saying.
“Excuse me, wait a little, your excellency; I’ll just see,” he said, and overtaking her, he opened the high door and disappeared behind it.
And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caught the sound of a childish yawn.
His little body bent forward with his nightshirt unbuttoned, he was stretching and still yawning.
The instant his lips came together they curved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he slowly and deliciously rolled back again.
“Seryozha!” she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.
When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she had been feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as he was at four years old, when she had loved him most of all.
But it was he with his head, his lips, his soft neck and broad little shoulders.
“Seryozha!” she repeated just in the child’s ear.
He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head from side to side as though looking for something, and opened his eyes.
Slowly and inquiringly he looked for several seconds at his mother standing motionless before him, then all at once he smiled a blissful smile, and shutting his eyes, rolled not backwards but towards her into her arms.
“Seryozha! my darling boy!” she said, breathing hard and putting her arms round his plump little body.
“Mother!” he said, wriggling about in her arms so as to touch her hands with different parts of him.
Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms round her shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious sleepy warmth and fragrance that is only found in children, and began rubbing his face against her neck and shoulders.
“I know,” he said, opening his eyes; “it’s my birthday today.
I’ll get up directly.” And saying that he dropped asleep.
Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in her absence.
“What are you crying for, mother?” he said, waking completely up.
How....” she tried to begin talking simply and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.
Why, you’re sitting on my clothes!” And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter.
“Mother, darling, sweet one!” he shouted, flinging himself on her again and hugging her.
It was as though only now, on seeing her smile, he fully grasped what had happened.
You didn’t think I was dead?” “I never believed it.” “You didn’t believe it, my sweet?” “I knew, I knew!” he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching the hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouth and kissed it.
Chapter 30 Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this lady was, and had learned from their conversation that it was no other person than the mother who had left her husband, and whom he had not seen, as he had entered the house after her departure.
He was in doubt whether to go in or not, or whether to communicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Reflecting finally that his duty was to get Seryozha up at the hour fixed, and that it was therefore not his business to consider who was there, the mother or anyone else, but simply to do his duty, he finished dressing, went to the door and opened it.
But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices, and what they were saying, made him change his mind.
“I’ll wait another ten minutes,” he said to himself, clearing his throat and wiping away tears.
Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement all this time.
All had heard that their mistress had come, and that Kapitonitch had let her in, and that she was even now in the nursery, and that their master always went in person to the nursery at nine o’clock, and everyone fully comprehended that it was impossible for the husband and wife to meet, and that they must prevent it.
Korney, the valet, going down to the hall-porter’s room, asked who had let her in, and how it was he had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had admitted her and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to.
The hall-porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told him he ought to be sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to him, and waving his hands in Korney’s face, began: “Oh yes, to be sure you’d not have let her in!
After ten years’ service, and never a word but of kindness, and there you’d up and say, ‘Be off, go along, get away with you!’ Oh yes, you’re a shrewd one at politics, I dare say!
You don’t need to be taught how to swindle the master, and to filch fur coats!” “Soldier!” said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse who was coming in.
“Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: he let her in without a word to anyone,” Korney said addressing her.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch will be down immediately—and go into the nursery!” “A pretty business, a pretty business!” said the nurse.
“You, Korney Vassilievitch, you’d best keep him some way or other, the master, while I’ll run and get her away somehow.
A pretty business!” When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his mother how he and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turned over three times.
She was listening to the sound of his voice, watching his face and the play of expression on it, touching his hand, but she did not follow what he was saying.
She must go, she must leave him,—this was the only thing she was thinking and feeling.
She heard the steps of Vassily Lukitch coming up to the door and coughing; she heard, too, the steps of the nurse as she came near; but she sat like one turned to stone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.
“Mistress, darling!” began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing her hands and shoulders.
“God has brought joy indeed to our boy on his birthday.
“I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter.
I came for the birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!” The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand again.
Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one hand and his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat little bare feet.
The tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his mother threw him into an ecstasy.
She often comes to see me, and when she comes....” he was beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying something in a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother’s face there was a look of dread and something like shame, which was so strangely unbecoming to her.
She could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on her face said it, and he understood.
How often afterwards she thought of words she might have said.
But Seryozha knew all she wanted to say to him.
He understood that she was unhappy and loved him.
He understood even what the nurse had whispered.
That he understood, but one thing he could not understand—why there should be a look of dread and shame in her face?...
She was not in fault, but she was afraid of him and ashamed of something.
He would have liked to put a question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he did not dare; he saw that she was miserable, and he felt for her.
Silently he pressed close to her and whispered, “Don’t go yet.
He won’t come just yet.” The mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking, what to say to him, and in his frightened face she read not only that he was speaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her what he ought to think about his father.
“Seryozha, my darling,” she said, “love him; he’s better and kinder than I am, and I have done him wrong.
When you grow up you will judge.” “There’s no one better than you!...” he cried in despair through his tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing her with all his force to him, his arms trembling with the strain.
“My sweet, my little one!” said Anna, and she cried as weakly and childishly as he.
Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands.
Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her.
Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in the rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in all its details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and jealousy over her son took possession of her.
With a swift gesture she put down her veil, and, quickening her pace, almost ran out of the room.
Chapter 31 As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had been thinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the least expected that seeing him would affect her so deeply.
On getting back to her lonely rooms in the hotel she could not for a long while understand why she was there.
Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table between the windows, she tried to think.
She gazed at her wonderingly and said, “Presently.” A footman offered her coffee.
The plump, well-fed little baby, on seeing her mother, as she always did, held out her fat little hands, and with a smile on her toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a float, bobbing her fingers up and down the starched folds of her embroidered skirt, making them rustle.
It was impossible not to smile, not to kiss the baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for her to clutch, crowing and prancing all over; impossible not to offer her a lip which she sucked into her little mouth by way of a kiss.
And all this Anna did, and took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh little cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this child it was plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her could not be called love in comparison with what she felt for Seryozha.
Everything in this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did not go deep to her heart.
On her first child, though the child of an unloved father, had been concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction.
Her baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had not had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had been concentrated on her first child.
Besides, in the little girl everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was by now almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved.
In him there was a conflict of thought and feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he judged her, she thought, recalling his words and his eyes.
And she was forever—not physically only but spiritually—divided from him, and it was impossible to set this right.
She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the locket in which there was Seryozha’s portrait when he was almost of the same age as the girl.
She got up, and, taking off her hat, took up from a little table an album in which there were photographs of her son at different ages.
She took them all out except one, the latest and best photograph.
In it he was in a white smock, sitting astride a chair, with frowning eyes and smiling lips.
It was his best, most characteristic expression.
With her little supple hands, her white, delicate fingers, that moved with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at a corner of the photograph, but the photograph had caught somewhere, and she could not get it out.
There was no paper-knife on the table, and so, pulling out the photograph that was next to her son’s (it was a photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with long hair), she used it to push out her son’s photograph.
“Oh, here is he!” she said, glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and she suddenly recalled that he was the cause of her present misery.
But now, coming all at once upon that manly, noble face, so familiar and so dear to her, she felt a sudden rush of love for him.
How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?” she thought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting she had herself kept from him everything concerning her son.
She sent to ask him to come to her immediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited him, rehearsing to herself the words in which she would tell him all, and the expressions of love with which he would console her.
The messenger returned with the answer that he had a visitor with him, but that he would come immediately, and that he asked whether she would let him bring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg.
“He’s not coming alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me,” she thought; “he’s not coming so that I could tell him everything, but coming with Yashvin.” And all at once a strange idea came to her: what if he had ceased to love her?
And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her that she saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea.
The fact that he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact that he had insisted on their taking separate sets of rooms in Petersburg, and that even now he was not coming to her alone, as though he were trying to avoid meeting her face to face.
If I knew it, then I know what I should do,” she said to herself, utterly unable to picture to herself the position she would be in if she were convinced of his not caring for her.
She thought he had ceased to love her, she felt close upon despair, and consequently she felt exceptionally alert.
She rang for her maid and went to her dressing-room.
As she dressed, she took more care over her appearance than she had done all those days, as though he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love with her again because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the way most becoming to her.
Vronsky was looking through the photographs of her son, which she had forgotten on the table, and he made no haste to look round at her.
“We have met already,” she said, putting her little hand into the huge hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping with his immense frame and coarse face.
Give them to me,” she said, with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky the photographs of her son, and glancing significantly at him with flashing eyes.
“I know you and all your tastes, though I have seen so little of you.” “I’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad,” said Yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.
Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at the clock, Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much longer in Petersburg, and unbending his huge figure reached after his cap.
“Not long, I think,” she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.
“So then we shan’t meet again?” “Come and dine with me,” said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed with herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did when she defined her position before a fresh person.
There is no one of his old friends in the regiment Alexey cares for as he does for you.” “Delighted,” said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could see that he liked Anna very much.
“I’m late already,” he answered.
She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him, gazed at him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would keep him.
“Wait a minute, there’s something I want to say to you,” and taking his broad hand she pressed it on her neck.
“Alexey, you have not changed to me?” she said, pressing his hand in both of hers.
“Alexey, I am miserable here.
You wouldn’t believe how disagreeable our way of living here is to me too,” he said, and he drew away his hand.
Chapter 32 When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home.
He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her.
But Anna did not return alone, but brought with her her old unmarried aunt, Princess Oblonskaya.
This was the lady who had come in the morning, and with whom Anna had gone out shopping.
Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky’s worried and inquiring expression, and began a lively account of her morning’s shopping.
He saw that there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes, when they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration, and in her words and movements there was that nervous rapidity and grace which, during the early period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him, but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.
All were gathered together and about to go into the little dining-room when Tushkevitch made his appearance with a message from Princess Betsy.
Princess Betsy begged her to excuse her not having come to say good-bye; she had been indisposed, but begged Anna to come to her between half-past six and nine o’clock.
Vronsky glanced at Anna at the precise limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been taken that she should meet no one; but Anna appeared not to notice it.
“The princess will be very sorry.” “And so am I.” “You’re going, no doubt, to hear Patti?” said Tushkevitch.
I would go if it were possible to get a box.” “I can get one,” Tushkevitch offered his services.
“I should be very, very grateful to you,” said Anna.
“But won’t you dine with us?” Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug.
He was at a complete loss to understand what Anna was about.
What had she brought the old Princess Oblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for, and, most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box?
Could she possibly think in her position of going to Patti’s benefit, where all the circle of her acquaintances would be?
He looked at her with serious eyes, but she responded with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate look, the meaning of which he could not comprehend.
At dinner Anna was in aggressively high spirits—she almost flirted both with Tushkevitch and with Yashvin.
When they got up from dinner and Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to smoke, and Vronsky went down with him to his own rooms.
After sitting there for some time he ran upstairs.
Anna was already dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk and velvet that she had had made in Paris, and with costly white lace on her head, framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up her dazzling beauty.
“Why shouldn’t I go?” She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.
“Oh, of course, there’s no reason whatever,” he said, frowning.
“That’s just what I say,” she said, willfully refusing to see the irony of his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed glove.
“Anna, for God’s sake! what is the matter with you?” he said, appealing to her exactly as once her husband had done.
“I don’t understand what you are asking.” “You know that it’s out of the question to go.” “Why so?
Princess Varvara has gone to dress, she is going with me.” He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.
“But I don’t care to know!” she almost shrieked.
If it were all to do again from the beginning, it would be the same.
Other people we need not consider.
I love you, and I don’t care for anything,” she said in Russian, glancing at him with a peculiar gleam in her eyes that he could not understand.
He saw all the beauty of her face and full dress, always so becoming to her.
But now her beauty and elegance were just what irritated him.
“My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat you,” he said again in French, with a note of tender supplication in his voice, but with coldness in his eyes.
She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes, and answered with irritation: “And I beg you to explain why I should not go.” “Because it might cause you....” he hesitated.
“I don’t understand.
Yashvin _n’est pas compromettant_, and Princess Varvara is no worse than others.
Oh, here she is!” Chapter 33 Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna, almost a hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her own position.
This feeling was aggravated by his being unable to tell her plainly the cause of his anger.
If he had told her directly what he was thinking, he would have said: “In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to show yourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging your position as a fallen woman, but is flinging down a challenge to society, that is to say, cutting yourself off from it forever.” He could not say that to her.
He felt at the same time that his respect for her was diminished while his sense of her beauty was intensified.
He went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down beside Yashvin, who, with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandy and seltzer water, he ordered a glass of the same for himself.
“You were talking of Lankovsky’s Powerful.
That’s a fine horse, and I would advise you to buy him,” said Yashvin, glancing at his comrade’s gloomy face.
“His hind-quarters aren’t quite first-rate, but the legs and head—one couldn’t wish for anything better.” “I think I will take him,” answered Vronsky.
Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for an instant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps in the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.
“Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the theater.” Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drank it and got up, buttoning his coat.
“Well, let’s go,” he said, faintly smiling under his mustache, and showing by this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky’s gloominess, and did not attach any significance to it.
“I’m not going,” Vronsky answered gloomily.
“Well, I must, I promised to.
Of course all Petersburg’s there.
Tushkevitch, Yashvin, Princess Varvara,” he pictured them to himself....
Either that I’m frightened or have given up to Tushkevitch the right to protect her?
And why is she putting me in such a position?” he said with a gesture of despair.
With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there was standing the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upset it.
“If you care to be in my service,” he said to the valet who came in, “you had better remember your duties.
You ought to have cleared away.” The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended himself, but glancing at his master, he saw from his face that the only thing to do was to be silent, and hurriedly threading his way in and out, dropped down on the carpet and began gathering up the whole and broken glasses and bottles.
The performance was in full swing.
The little old box-keeper, recognizing Vronsky as he helped him off with his fur coat, called him “Your Excellency,” and suggested he should not take a number but should simply call Fyodor.
In the brightly lighted corridor there was no one but the box-opener and two attendants with fur cloaks on their arms listening at the doors.
Through the closed doors came the sounds of the discreet _staccato_ accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice rendering distinctly a musical phrase.
But the doors were closed again at once, and Vronsky did not hear the end of the phrase and the cadence of the accompaniment, though he knew from the thunder of applause that it was over.
When he entered the hall, brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and gas jets, the noise was still going on.
On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling, with bare shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenor who had given her his arm, gathering up the bouquets that were flying awkwardly over the footlights.
Then she went up to a gentleman with glossy pomaded hair parted down the center, who was stretching across the footlights holding out something to her, and all the public in the stalls as well as in the boxes was in excitement, craning forward, shouting and clapping.
The conductor in his high chair assisted in passing the offering, and straightened his white tie.
Vronsky walked into the middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about him.
That day less than ever was his attention turned upon the familiar, habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the familiar, uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in the packed theater.
There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with officers of some sort in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed women—God knows who—and uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in the upper gallery; and among the crowd, in the boxes and in the front rows, were some forty of the _real_ people.
And to those oases Vronsky at once directed his attention, and with them he entered at once into relation.
The act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight to his brother’s box, but going up to the first row of stalls stopped at the footlights with Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with one knee raised and his heel on the footlights, caught sight of him in the distance and beckoned to him, smiling.
He purposely avoided looking in her direction.
But he knew by the direction of people’s eyes where she was.
He looked round discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting the worst, his eyes sought for Alexey Alexandrovitch.
To his relief Alexey Alexandrovitch was not in the theater that evening.
“How little of the military man there is left in you!” Serpuhovskoy was saying to him.
“A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, one would say.” “Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat,” answered Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera-glass.
When I come back from abroad and put on this,” he touched his epaulets, “I regret my freedom.” Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky’s career, but he liked him as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.
“What a pity you were not in time for the first act!” Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera-glass from the stalls and scanned the boxes.
Near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, who seemed to wave angrily in the moving opera-glass, Vronsky suddenly caught sight of Anna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in the frame of lace.
She was sitting in front, and slightly turning, was saying something to Yashvin.
The setting of her head on her handsome, broad shoulders, and the restrained excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole face reminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow.
But he felt utterly different towards her beauty now.
In his feeling for her now there was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though it attracted him even more intensely than before, gave him now a sense of injury.
She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky felt that she had seen him already.
When Vronsky turned the opera-glass again in that direction, he noticed that Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing unnaturally and looking round at the next box.
Anna, folding her fan and tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, and obviously did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.
Yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common when he was losing at cards.
Scowling, he sucked the left end of his mustache further and further into his mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.
In that box on the left were the Kartasovs.
Vronsky knew them, and knew that Anna was acquainted with them.
Madame Kartasova, a thin little woman, was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna, she was putting on a mantle that her husband was holding for her.
Her face was pale and angry, and she was talking excitedly.
Kartasov, a fat, bald man, was continually looking round at Anna, while he attempted to soothe his wife.
When the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a long while, and tried to catch Anna’s eye, obviously anxious to bow to her.
But Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing him, and talked to Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her.
Kartasov went out without making his salutation, and the box was left empty.
Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna had happened.
And in maintaining this attitude of external composure she was completely successful.
Anyone who did not know her and her circle, who had not heard all the utterances of the women expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that she should show herself in society, and show herself so conspicuously with her lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity and loveliness of this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing the sensations of a man in the stocks.
Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what, Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find out something, he went towards his brother’s box.
Purposely choosing the way round furthest from Anna’s box, he jostled as he came out against the colonel of his old regiment talking to two acquaintances.
Vronsky heard the name of Madame Karenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened to address Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at his companions.
When are you coming to the regiment?
You’re one of the old set,” said the colonel of his regiment.
“I can’t stop, awfully sorry, another time,” said Vronsky, and he ran upstairs towards his brother’s box.
The old countess, Vronsky’s mother, with her steel-gray curls, was in his brother’s box.
Varya with the young Princess Sorokina met him in the corridor.
Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya held out her hand to her brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what interested him.
“I think it’s mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no right to do it.
Madame Karenina....” she began.
I don’t know.” “What? you’ve not heard?” “You know I should be the last person to hear of it.” “There isn’t a more spiteful creature than that Madame Kartasova!” “But what did she do?” “My husband told me....
She has insulted Madame Karenina.
Her husband began talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene.
She said something aloud, he says, something insulting, and went away.” “Count, your maman is asking for you,” said the young Princess Sorokina, peeping out of the door of the box.
“I’ve been expecting you all the while,” said his mother, smiling sarcastically.
“You were nowhere to be seen.” Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.
“Why aren’t you going to _faire la cour à Madame Karenina?_” she went on, when Princess Sorokina had moved away.
“_Elle fait sensation.
On oublie la Patti pour elle_.” “Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that,” he answered, scowling.
“I’m only saying what everyone’s saying.” Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess Sorokina, he went away.
I wanted to go straight to her.
Let’s go together.” Vronsky did not hear him.
With rapid steps he went downstairs; he felt that he must do something, but he did not know what.
Anger with her for having put herself and him in such a false position, together with pity for her suffering, filled his heart.
He went down, and made straight for Anna’s box.
“You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song,” Anna said to Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.
“Like Prince Yashvin,” she said smiling, “who considers that Patti sings too loud.” “Thank you,” she said, her little hand in its long glove taking the playbill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her lovely face quivered.
She got up and went into the interior of the box.
Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousing indignant “hushes” in the silent audience, went out in the middle of a solo and drove home.
She was sitting in the first armchair against the wall, looking straight before her.
She looked at him, and at once resumed her former position.
“You, you are to blame for everything!” she cried, with tears of despair and hatred in her voice, getting up.
“I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would be unpleasant....” “Unpleasant!” she cried—“hideous!
She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me.” “A silly woman’s chatter,” he said: “but why risk it, why provoke?...” “I hate your calm.
How does the question of my love come in?” “Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am!...” she said, looking at him with an expression of terror.
He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding.
He assured her of his love because he saw that this was the only means of soothing her, and he did not reproach her in words, but in his heart he reproached her.
And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so vulgar that he was ashamed to utter them, she drank in eagerly, and gradually became calmer.
The next day, completely reconciled, they left for the country.
PART SIX Chapter 1 Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, at her sister Kitty Levin’s.
The house on her own estate was quite in ruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer with them.
Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement.
He said he was very sorry his official duties prevented him from spending the summer in the country with his family, which would have been the greatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came down to the country from time to time for a day or two.
Besides the Oblonskys, with all their children and their governess, the old princess too came to stay that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to watch over her inexperienced daughter in her _interesting condition_.
Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad, kept her promise to come to Kitty when she was married, and stayed with her friend.
All of these were friends or relations of Levin’s wife.
And though he liked them all, he rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was smothered by this influx of the “Shtcherbatsky element,” as he called it to himself.
Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, but he too was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the Levin spirit was utterly obliterated.
In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many people that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it happened that the old princess, sitting down to table, counted them all over, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate table.
And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no little trouble to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which so many were needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.
Dolly’s children, with their governess and Varenka, were making plans for going to look for mushrooms.
Sergey Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all the party for his intellect and learning, with a respect that almost amounted to awe, surprised everyone by joining in the conversation about mushrooms.
I am very fond of picking mushrooms,” he said, looking at Varenka; “I think it’s a very nice occupation.” “Oh, we shall be delighted,” answered Varenka, coloring a little.
Kitty exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly.
The proposal of the learned and intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenka confirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind had been very busy of late.
After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat with his cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and while he took part in a conversation he had begun with his brother, he watched the door through which the children would start on the mushroom-picking expedition.
Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a conversation that had no interest for her, in order to tell him something.
“You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for the better,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and obviously little interested in the conversation, “but you have remained true to your passion for defending the most paradoxical theories.” “Katya, it’s not good for you to stand,” her husband said to her, putting a chair for her and looking significantly at her.
“Oh, and there’s no time either,” added Sergey Ivanovitch, seeing the children running out.
At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her tightly-drawn stockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch’s hat, she ran straight up to him.
Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like her father’s fine eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though she would put it on for him, softening her freedom by a shy and friendly smile.
“Varenka’s waiting,” she said, carefully putting his hat on, seeing from Sergey Ivanovitch’s smile that she might do so.
Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown, with a white kerchief on her head.
“I’m coming, I’m coming, Varvara Andreevna,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, finishing his cup of coffee, and putting into their separate pockets his handkerchief and cigar-case.
“And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?” said Kitty to her husband, as soon as Sergey Ivanovitch rose.
She spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could hear, and it was clear that she meant him to do so.
We’ll come out to you.” “You certainly forget your condition, Kitty,” said the old princess, hurriedly coming out at the door.
“You mustn’t shout like that.” Varenka, hearing Kitty’s voice and her mother’s reprimand, went with light, rapid steps up to Kitty.
The rapidity of her movement, her flushed and eager face, everything betrayed that something out of the common was going on in her.
Kitty knew what this was, and had been watching her intently.
She called Varenka at that moment merely in order mentally to give her a blessing for the important event which, as Kitty fancied, was bound to come to pass that day after dinner in the wood.
“Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to happen,” she whispered as she kissed her.
“And are you coming with us?” Varenka said to Levin in confusion, pretending not to have heard what had been said.
“I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and there I shall stop.” “Why, what do you want there?” said Kitty.
“I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the invoice,” said Levin; “and where will you be?” “On the terrace.” Chapter 2 On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party.
Besides the sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which all of them were busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace by a method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition of water.
Kitty had introduced this new method, which had been in use in her home.
Agafea Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been intrusted, considering that what had been done in the Levin household could not be amiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries, maintaining that the jam could not be made without it.
She had been caught in the act, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was to be proved to her conclusively that jam could be very well made without water.
Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and her thin arms bare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan over the charcoal stove, looking darkly at the raspberries and devoutly hoping they would stick and not cook properly.
The princess, conscious that Agafea Mihalovna’s wrath must be chiefly directed against her, as the person responsible for the raspberry jam-making, tried to appear to be absorbed in other things and not interested in the jam, talked of other matters, but cast stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.
“I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheap material,” the princess said, continuing the previous conversation.
“Isn’t it time to skim it, my dear?” she added, addressing Agafea Mihalovna.
“There’s not the slightest need for you to do it, and it’s hot for you,” she said, stopping Kitty.
“I’ll do it,” said Dolly, and getting up, she carefully passed the spoon over the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook off the clinging jam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered with yellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup.
“How they’ll enjoy this at tea-time!” she thought of her children, remembering how she herself as a child had wondered how it was the grown-up people did not eat what was best of all—the scum of the jam.
“Stiva says it’s much better to give money.” Dolly took up meanwhile the weighty subject under discussion, what presents should be made to servants.
“But....” “Money’s out of the question!” the princess and Kitty exclaimed with one voice.
“They appreciate a present....” “Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna, not a poplin, but something of that sort,” said the princess.
“I remember she was wearing it on your nameday.” “A charming pattern—so simple and refined,—I should have liked it myself, if she hadn’t had it.
Something like Varenka’s.
So pretty and inexpensive.” “Well, now I think it’s done,” said Dolly, dropping the syrup from the spoon.
Cook it a little longer, Agafea Mihalovna.” “The flies!” said Agafea Mihalovna angrily.
“Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!” Kitty said suddenly, looking at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking at the center of a raspberry.
“_À propos de Varenka_,” said Kitty, speaking in French, as they had been doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not understand them, “you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be settled today.
How splendid it would be!” “But what a famous matchmaker she is!” said Dolly.
“How carefully and cleverly she throws them together!...” “No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?” “Why, what is one to think?
He” (_he_ meant Sergey Ivanovitch) “might at any time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now, of course, he’s not quite a young man, still I know ever so many girls would be glad to marry him even now....
She’s a very nice girl, but he might....” “Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too, nothing better could be imagined.
In the first place, she’s charming!” said Kitty, crooking one of her fingers.
“He thinks her very attractive, that’s certain,” assented Dolly.
“Then he occupies such a position in society that he has no need to look for either fortune or position in his wife.
All he needs is a good, sweet wife—a restful one.” “Well, with her he would certainly be restful,” Dolly assented.
And so it is ... that is, it would be so splendid!...
I look forward to seeing them coming out of the forest—and everything settled.
I should be so delighted!
What do you think, Dolly?” “But don’t excite yourself.
There is a sort of barrier, and all at once it’s broken down,” said Dolly, smiling pensively and recalling her past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?” Kitty asked suddenly.
“There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple,” answered the princess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.
You loved him, anyway, before you were allowed to speak?” Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her mother on equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest in a woman’s life.
“Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country.” “But how was it settled between you, mamma?” “You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new?
It’s just by the eyes, by smiles that it’s done,” Dolly assented.
It was wonderful....
She remembered all that last winter before her marriage, and her passion for Vronsky.
“There’s one thing ... that old love affair of Varenka’s,” she said, a natural chain of ideas bringing her to this point.
“I should have liked to say something to Sergey Ivanovitch, to prepare him.
It makes him miserable even now to remember Vronsky.
Eh? that’s true, isn’t it?” “Yes,” Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.
“But I really don’t know,” the mother put in in defense of her motherly care of her daughter, “what there was in your past that could worry him?
That Vronsky paid you attentions—that happens to every girl.” “Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that,” Kitty said, flushing a little.
“No, let me speak,” her mother went on, “why, you yourself would not let me have a talk to Vronsky.
Don’t you remember?” “Oh, mamma!” said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.
“There’s no keeping you young people in check nowadays....
Your friendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable.
But, my darling, it’s not right for you to be agitated.
Please remember that, and calm yourself.” “I’m perfectly calm, maman.” “How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then,” said Dolly, “and how unhappy for her.
It turned out quite the opposite,” she said, struck by her own ideas.
Now it is just the opposite.
Horrid, repulsive woman—no heart,” said her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not Vronsky, but Levin.
“What do you want to talk of it for?” Kitty said with annoyance.
And I don’t want to think of it,” she said, catching the sound of her husband’s well-known step on the steps of the terrace.
“What’s that you don’t want to think about?” inquired Levin, coming onto the terrace.
But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.
“I’m sorry I’ve broken in on your feminine parliament,” he said, looking round on everyone discontentedly, and perceiving that they had been talking of something which they would not talk about before him.
For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agafea Mihalovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether at the outside Shtcherbatsky element.
“Well, how are you?” he asked her, looking at her with the expression with which everyone looked at her now.
Well, are we going for the children?
I’ve ordered the horses to be put in.” “What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?” her mother said reproachfully.
“Yes, at a walking pace, princess.” Levin never called the princess “maman” as men often do call their mothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so.
But though he liked and respected the princess, Levin could not call her so without a sense of profaning his feeling for his dead mother.
“I don’t like to see such imprudence.” “Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well.” Kitty got up and went to her husband and took his hand.
“You may be well, but everything in moderation,” said the princess.
“Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?” said Levin, smiling to Agafea Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up.
Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.
“You needn’t try to console me, mistress.
I need only to look at you with him, and I feel happy,” she said, and something in the rough familiarity of that _with him_ touched Kitty.
When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had come out of sight of the house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with rusty wheels and sprinkled with grains of corn, she clung faster to his arm and pressed it closer to her.
He had quite forgotten the momentary unpleasant impression, and alone with her he felt, now that the thought of her approaching motherhood was never for a moment absent from his mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from all alloy of sense, in the being near to the woman he loved.
In her voice, as in her eyes, there was that softness and gravity which is found in people continually concentrated on some cherished pursuit.
“No, I’m so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must own, though I’m happy with them, I do regret our winter evenings alone.” “That was good, but this is even better.
Both are better,” he said, squeezing her hand.
“Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?” “About jam?” “Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how men make offers.” “Ah!” said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to the words she was saying, and all the while paying attention to the road, which passed now through the forest, and avoiding places where she might make a false step.
“And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka.
“I don’t know what to think,” Levin answered, smiling.
I told you, you know....” “Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died....” “That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and tradition.
I remember him then.
He was wonderfully sweet.
But I’ve watched him since with women; he is friendly, some of them he likes, but one feels that to him they’re simply people, not women.” “Yes, but now with Varenka ...
I fancy there’s something....” “Perhaps there is....
He’s a peculiar, wonderful person.
He lives a spiritual life only.
Would this lower him, then?” “No, but he’s so used to a spiritual life that he can’t reconcile himself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact.” Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly, without taking the trouble of clothing it in exact language.
He knew that his wife, in such moments of loving tenderness as now, would understand what he meant to say from a hint, and she did understand him.
She is altogether spiritual.” “Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my people like you....” “Yes, he’s very nice to me; but....” “It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay ... you really cared for each other,” Levin finished.
“I sometimes blame myself for not; it ends in one’s forgetting.
Ah, how terrible and dear he was!...
“You think he can’t fall in love,” said Kitty, translating into her own language.
“It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love,” Levin said, smiling, “but he has not the weakness necessary....
His whole life is subordinated to his duty.
And that’s why he can be calm and contented.” “And you?” Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.
She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her smile; but the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his brother and abasing himself, was not quite sincere.
Kitty knew that this insincerity came from his love for his brother, from his sense of shame at being too happy, and above all from his unflagging craving to be better—she loved it in him, and so she smiled.
What are you dissatisfied with?” she asked, with the same smile.
Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, and unconsciously he tried to draw her into giving utterance to the grounds of her disbelief.
“I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself....” he said.
“Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are happy?” “Well, how shall I say?...
In my heart I really care for nothing whatever but that you should not stumble—see?
Oh, but really you mustn’t skip about like that!” he cried, breaking off to scold her for too agile a movement in stepping over a branch that lay in the path.
“But when I think about myself, and compare myself with others, especially with my brother, I feel I’m a poor creature.” “But in what way?” Kitty pursued with the same smile.
What about your co-operative settlement, and your work on the estate, and your book?...” “Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now—it’s your fault,” he said, pressing her hand—“that all that doesn’t count.
I do it in a way halfheartedly.
“Is he a poor creature then, as he does nothing for the public good?” “He?—no!
But then one must have the simplicity, the straightforwardness, the goodness of your father: and I haven’t got that.
Before there was you—and _this_ too,” he added with a glance towards her waist that she understood—“I put all my energies into work; now I can’t, and I’m ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task set me, I’m pretending....” “Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey Ivanovitch?” said Kitty.
“But I’m so happy that I don’t understand anything.
Here, wait a minute.” She stooped down and picked a wild camomile at the edge of the path.
“No, no!” Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him.
She had been watching his fingers with interest.
“Here’s the wagonette overtaking us.” “Aren’t you tired, Kitty?” called the princess.
“Not in the least.” “If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking.” But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place, and all walked on together.
Chapter 4 Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded by the children, gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and at the same time visibly excited at the possibility of receiving a declaration from the man she cared for, was very attractive.
Sergey Ivanovitch walked beside her, and never left off admiring her.
Looking at her, he recalled all the delightful things he had heard from her lips, all the good he knew about her, and became more and more conscious that the feeling he had for her was something special that he had felt long, long ago, and only once, in his early youth.
The feeling of happiness in being near her continually grew, and at last reached such a point that, as he put a huge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in her basket, he looked straight into her face, and noticing the flush of glad and alarmed excitement that overspread her face, he was confused himself, and smiled to her in silence a smile that said too much.
Walking some forty paces away, Sergey Ivanovitch, knowing he was out of sight, stood still behind a bushy spindle-tree in full flower with its rosy red catkins.
It was perfectly still all round him.
Only overhead in the birches under which he stood, the flies, like a swarm of bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time the children’s voices were floated across to him.
All at once he heard, not far from the edge of the wood, the sound of Varenka’s contralto voice, calling Grisha, and a smile of delight passed over Sergey Ivanovitch’s face.
Conscious of this smile, he shook his head disapprovingly at his own condition, and taking out a cigar, he began lighting it.
The soft scales of the white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, and the light went out.
At last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant cigar smoke, hovering uncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched away forwards and upwards over a bush under the overhanging branches of a birch tree.
Watching the streak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked gently on, deliberating on his position.
“If it were only a passing fancy or a passion, if it were only this attraction—this mutual attraction (I can call it a _mutual_ attraction), but if I felt that it was in contradiction with the whole bent of my life—if I felt that in giving way to this attraction I should be false to my vocation and my duty ... but it’s not so.
The only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie, I said to myself that I would remain faithful to her memory.
That’s a great thing,” Sergey Ivanovitch said to himself, feeling at the same time that this consideration had not the slightest importance for him personally, but would only perhaps detract from his romantic character in the eyes of others.
“But apart from that, however much I searched, I should never find anything to say against my feeling.
If I were choosing by considerations of suitability alone, I could not have found anything better.” However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could not think of a girl who united to such a degree all, positively all, the qualities he would wish to see in his wife.
She had all the charm and freshness of youth, but she was not a child; and if she loved him, she loved him consciously as a woman ought to love; that was one thing.
Another point: she was not only far from being worldly, but had an unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at the same time she knew the world, and had all the ways of a woman of the best society, which were absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’s conception of the woman who was to share his life.
Thirdly: she was religious, and not like a child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for example, was, but her life was founded on religious principles.
Even in trifling matters, Sergey Ivanovitch found in her all that he wanted in his wife: she was poor and alone in the world, so she would not bring with her a mass of relations and their influence into her husband’s house, as he saw now in Kitty’s case.
She would owe everything to her husband, which was what he had always desired too for his future family life.
And this girl, who united all these qualities, loved him.
There was one consideration against it—his age.
But he came of a long-lived family, he had not a single gray hair, no one would have taken him for forty, and he remembered Varenka’s saying that it was only in Russia that men of fifty thought themselves old, and that in France a man of fifty considers himself _dans la force de l’âge_, while a man of forty is _un jeune homme_.
But what did the mere reckoning of years matter when he felt as young in heart as he had been twenty years ago?
His heart throbbed joyously.
A softened feeling came over him.
Varenka, who had just crouched down to pick a mushroom, rose with a supple movement and looked round.
Flinging away the cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolute steps towards her.
Chapter 5 “Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the ideal of the woman I loved and should be happy to call my wife.
I love you, and offer you my hand.” Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he was ten paces from Varvara.
Kneeling down, with her hands over the mushrooms to guard them from Grisha, she was calling little Masha.
Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get up and did not change her position, but everything told him that she felt his presence and was glad of it.
“Well, did you find some?” she asked from under the white kerchief, turning her handsome, gently smiling face to him.
“Not one,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“Did you?” She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about her.
Varenka got up while Masha picked the fungus, breaking it into two white halves.
“This brings back my childhood,” she added, moving apart from the children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.
After a silence it would have been easier for them to say what they wanted to say than after talking about mushrooms.
But against her own will, as it were accidentally, Varenka said: “So you found nothing?
In the middle of the wood there are always fewer, though.” Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no answer.
He was annoyed that she had spoken about the mushrooms.
He wanted to bring her back to the first words she had uttered about her childhood; but after a pause of some length, as though against his own will, he made an observation in response to her last words.
“I have heard that the white edible funguses are found principally at the edge of the wood, though I can’t tell them apart.” Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from the children, and were quite alone.
Varenka’s heart throbbed so that she heard it beating, and felt that she was turning red and pale and red again.
To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her position with Madame Stahl, was to her imagination the height of happiness.
She felt frightened.
She dreaded both his speaking and his not speaking.
Now or never it must be said—that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too.
Everything in the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast eyes of Varenka betrayed a painful suspense.
Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and felt sorry for her.
Rapidly in his own mind he ran over all the arguments in support of his decision.
“The birch mushroom’s stalk suggests a dark man’s chin after two days without shaving,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite calmly now.
“Yes, that’s true,” answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously the direction of their walk changed.
They began to turn towards the children.
When he had got home again and went over the whole subject, Sergey Ivanovitch thought his previous decision had been a mistaken one.
“Gently, children, gently!” Levin shouted quite angrily to the children, standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of children flew with shrieks of delight to meet them.
Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of the wood.
Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm and somewhat crestfallen faces of both that her plans had not come off.
“Well?” her husband questioned her as they were going home again.
“It doesn’t bite,” said Kitty, her smile and manner of speaking recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.
“How doesn’t bite?” “I’ll show you,” she said, taking her husband’s hand, lifting it to her mouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips.
“Like a kiss on a priest’s hand.” “Which didn’t it bite with?” he said, laughing.
But it should have been like this....” “There are some peasants coming....” “Oh, they didn’t see.” Chapter 6 During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in the balcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all, especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that there had happened an event which, though negative, was of very great importance.
They both had the same feeling, rather like that of a schoolboy after an examination, which has left him in the same class or shut him out of the school forever.
Everyone present, feeling too that something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects.
Levin and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love that evening.
And their happiness in their love seemed to imply a disagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same and could not—and they felt a prick of conscience.
“Mark my words, Alexander will not come,” said the old princess.
That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down by train, and the old prince had written that possibly he might come too.
“And I know why,” the princess went on; “he says that young people ought to be left alone for a while at first.” “But papa has left us alone.
“Besides, we’re not young people!—we’re old, married people by now.” “Only if he doesn’t come, I shall say good-bye to you children,” said the princess, sighing mournfully.
“What nonsense, mamma!” both the daughters fell upon her at once.
Why, now....” And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess’s voice.
Her daughters were silent, and looked at one another.
“Maman always finds something to be miserable about,” they said in that glance.
They did not know that happy as the princess was in her daughter’s house, and useful as she felt herself to be there, she had been extremely miserable, both on her own account and her husband’s, ever since they had married their last and favorite daughter, and the old home had been left empty.
“What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?” Kitty asked suddenly of Agafea Mihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full of meaning.
Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the lessons of the term in the summer holidays.
Darya Alexandrovna, who had been studying Latin with her son in Moscow before, had made it a rule on coming to the Levins’ to go over with him, at least once a day, the most difficult lessons of Latin and arithmetic.
Levin had offered to take her place, but the mother, having once overheard Levin’s lesson, and noticing that it was not given exactly as the teacher in Moscow had given it, said resolutely, though with much embarrassment and anxiety not to mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as the teacher had done, and that she had better undertake it again herself.
Levin was amazed both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting his duty, threw upon the mother the supervision of studies of which she had no comprehension, and at the teachers for teaching the children so badly.
But he promised his sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly as she wished.
And he went on teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but by the book, and so took little interest in it, and often forgot the hour of the lesson.
“We’ll do it all properly, like the book.
Only when Stiva comes, and we go out shooting, then we shall have to miss it.” And Levin went to Grisha.
Even in the happy, well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in making herself useful.
“I’ll see to the supper, you sit still,” she said, and got up to go to Agafea Mihalovna.
“Yes, yes, most likely they’ve not been able to get chickens.
If so, ours....” “Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it,” and Varenka vanished with her.
“What a nice girl!” said the princess.
“Not nice, maman; she’s an exquisite girl; there’s no one else like her.” “So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?” said Sergey Ivanovitch, evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation about Varenka.
“It would be difficult to find two sons-in-law more unlike than yours,” he said with a subtle smile.
“One all movement, only living in society, like a fish in water; the other our Kostya, lively, alert, quick in everything, but as soon as he is in society, he either sinks into apathy, or struggles helplessly like a fish on land.” “Yes, he’s very heedless,” said the princess, addressing Sergey Ivanovitch.
“I’ve been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tell him that it’s out of the question for her” (she indicated Kitty) “to stay here; that she positively must come to Moscow.
He talks of getting a doctor down....” “Maman, he’ll do everything; he has agreed to everything,” Kitty said, angry with her mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judge in such a matter.
In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of horses and the sound of wheels on the gravel.
“We’ve finished, Dolly, don’t be afraid!” he added, and started running like a boy to meet the carriage.
“_Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!_” shouted Grisha, skipping along the avenue.
Papa, of course!” cried Levin, stopping at the entrance of the avenue.
“Kitty, don’t come down the steep staircase, go round.” But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the carriage for the old prince.
As he got nearer to the carriage he saw beside Stepan Arkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome, stout young man in a Scotch cap, with long ends of ribbon behind.
This was Vassenka Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant young gentleman in Petersburg and Moscow society.
“A capital fellow, and a keen sportsman,” as Stepan Arkadyevitch said, introducing him.
Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having come in place of the old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claiming acquaintance with him in the past, and snatching up Grisha into the carriage, lifted him over the pointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch had brought with him.
Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind.
He was rather vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked more and more the more he saw of him, and also at the arrival of this Vassenka Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous person.
He seemed to him still more uncongenial and superfluous when, on approaching the steps where the whole party, children and grown-up, were gathered together in much excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm and gallant air, kissing Kitty’s hand.
“Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends,” said Vassenka Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin’s hand with great warmth.
“Well, are there plenty of birds?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Levin, hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings.
“We’ve come with the most savage intentions.
Look, Tanya, here’s something for you!
Get it, please, it’s in the carriage, behind!” he talked in all directions.
Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind, now looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased him.
“Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?” he thought, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch’s tender demonstrations to his wife.
Revolting!” thought Levin.
He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to him a minute before, and he did not like the manner in which she welcomed this Vassenka, with his ribbons, just as though she were in her own house.
Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps, seemed to him unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which he met Stepan Arkadyevitch, though Levin knew that his brother neither liked nor respected Oblonsky.
And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air _sainte nitouche_ making the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all the while she was thinking of nothing but getting married.
And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the tone of gaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in the country, as though it were a holiday for himself and everyone else.
And, above all, unpleasant was that particular smile with which she responded to his smile.
Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband.
She tried to seize a moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from her, saying he was wanted at the counting-house.
It was long since his own work on the estate had seemed to him so important as at that moment.
On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna, consulting about wines for supper.
Kostya, stop, what’s the matter?” Kitty began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to the dining-room without waiting for her, and at once joined in the lively general conversation which was being maintained there by Vassenka Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Please, do let’s go,” said Veslovsky, moving to another chair, where he sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.
“I shall be delighted, we will go.
And have you had any shooting yet this year?” said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, but speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in him, and that was so out of keeping with him.
Capital!” Veslovsky chimed in.
“But to my thinking, it’s time for bed now....
I’m going, I don’t want supper.” “No, do stay a little, Dolly,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going round to her side behind the table where they were having supper.
“I’ve so much still to tell you.” “Nothing really, I suppose.” “Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s going to them again?
You know they’re hardly fifty miles from you, and I too must certainly go over there.
Veslovsky, come here!” Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.
How was she?” Darya Alexandrovna appealed to him.
Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausing in his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there was an eager and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky.
He saw on his wife’s face an expression of real feeling as she gazed with fixed eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them something with great animation.
“It’s exceedingly nice at their place,” Veslovsky was telling them about Vronsky and Anna.
“I can’t, of course, take it upon myself to judge, but in their house you feel the real feeling of home.” “What do they intend doing?” “I believe they think of going to Moscow.” “How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together!
When are you going there?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.
“I’m spending July there.” “Will you go?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.
“I’ve been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go,” said Dolly.
She’s a splendid woman.
And it will be better indeed without you.” “To be sure,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Why should I go?” Kitty said, flushing all over, and she glanced round at her husband.
“Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?” Veslovsky asked her.
“She’s a very fascinating woman.” “Yes,” she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more.
“Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?” she said.
His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush that had overspread her cheeks while she was talking to Veslovsky, gone far indeed.
Now as he heard her words, he construed them in his own fashion.
Strange as it was to him afterwards to recall it, it seemed to him at the moment clear that in asking whether he was going shooting, all she cared to know was whether he would give that pleasure to Vassenka Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in love.
“Yes, I’m going,” he answered her in an unnatural voice, disagreeable to himself.
“No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won’t see anything of her husband, and set off the day after,” said Kitty.
The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin thus: “Don’t separate me from _him_.
I don’t care about _your_ going, but do let me enjoy the society of this delightful young man.” “Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow,” Levin answered, with peculiar amiability.
Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence had occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching her with smiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.
Do, please, let us go,” said Vassenka, sitting down on a chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.
Levin’s jealousy went further still.
Already he saw himself a deceived husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply necessary to provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of life....
But in spite of that he made polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about his shooting, his gun, and his boots, and agreed to go shooting next day.
Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by getting up herself and advising Kitty to go to bed.
As he said good-night to his hostess, Vassenka would again have kissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew back her hand and said with a naïve bluntness, for which the old princess scolded her afterwards: “We don’t like that fashion.” In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations to arise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she did not like them.
“Why, how can one want to go to bed!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in his most charming and sentimental humor.
“Look, Kitty,” he said, pointing to the moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees—“how exquisite!
Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade.
You know, he has a splendid voice; we practiced songs together along the road.
Varvara Andreevna and he must sing some duets.” When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long while about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing one of the new songs.
Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his wife’s bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him what was wrong.
But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded the question: “Was there perhaps something you disliked about Veslovsky?”—it all burst out, and he told her all.
He was humiliated himself at what he was saying, and that exasperated him all the more.
He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under his scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest, as though he were straining every nerve to hold himself in.
The expression of his face would have been grim, and even cruel, if it had not at the same time had a look of suffering which touched her.
His jaws were twitching, and his voice kept breaking.
“You must understand that I’m not jealous, that’s a nasty word.
I’m not jealous, but I’m wounded, humiliated that anybody dare think, that anybody dare look at you with eyes like that.” “Eyes like what?” said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as possible to recall every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied in them.
At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been something precisely at the moment when he had crossed over after her to the other end of the table; but she dared not own it even to herself, and would have been even more unable to bring herself to say so to him, and so increase his suffering.
“And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am now?...” “Ah!” he cried, clutching at his head, “you shouldn’t say that!...
If you had been attractive then....” “Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!” she said, looking at him with an expression of pained commiseration.
“Why, what can you be thinking about!
Would you like me never to see anyone?” For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she was angry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should be forbidden her; but now she would readily have sacrificed, not merely such trifles, but everything, for his peace of mind, to save him from the agony he was suffering.
“You must understand the horror and comedy of my position,” he went on in a desperate whisper; “that he’s in my house, that he’s done nothing improper positively except his free and easy airs and the way he sits on his legs.
He thinks it’s the best possible form, and so I’m obliged to be civil to him.” “But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating,” said Kitty, at the bottom of her heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in his jealousy.
“The most awful part of it all is that you’re just as you always are, and especially now when to me you’re something sacred, and we’re so happy, so particularly happy—and all of a sudden a little wretch....
But why should my, and your, happiness....” “Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come from,” Kitty was beginning.
And as she told him, she was breathless with emotion.
Levin was silent for a space, then he scanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly he clutched at his head.
“Katya, I’ve been worrying you!
Katya, I’m a criminal.
And how could you be so distressed at such idiocy?” “Oh, I was sorry for you.” “For me? for me?
But why make you miserable?
It’s awful to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness.” “It’s humiliating too, of course.” “Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm him with civility,” said Levin, kissing her hands.
The first to come out was Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high boots that reached half-way up his thick thighs, in a green blouse, with a new Russian leather cartridge-belt, and in his Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new English gun without a sling.
Laska flew up to him, welcomed him, and jumping up, asked him in her own way whether the others were coming soon, but getting no answer from him, she returned to her post of observation and sank into repose again, her head on one side, and one ear pricked up to listen.
At last the door opened with a creak, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s spot-and-tan pointer Krak flew out, running round and round and turning over in the air.
Stepan Arkadyevitch himself followed with a gun in his hand and a cigar in his mouth.
“Good dog, good dog, Krak!” he cried encouragingly to the dog, who put his paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was dressed in rough leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a short coat.
On his head there was a wreck of a hat of indefinite form, but his gun of a new patent was a perfect gem, and his game bag and cartridge belt, though worn, were of the very best quality.
Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly _chic_ for a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting outfit of the best quality.
He saw it now as he looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant in his rags, graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian nobleman.
And he made up his mind that next time he went shooting he would certainly adopt the same get-up.
“A young wife,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
“Yes, and such a charming one!” “He came down dressed.
No doubt he’s run up to her again.” Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right.
Levin had run up again to his wife to ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and, moreover, to beg her for Christ’s sake to be more careful.
The great thing was for her to keep away from the children—they might any minute push against her.
Then he had once more to hear her declare that she was not angry with him for going away for two days, and to beg her to be sure to send him a note next morning by a servant on horseback, to write him, if it were but two words only, to let him know that all was well with her.
Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple of days from her husband, but when she saw his eager figure, looking big and strong in his shooting-boots and his white blouse, and a sort of sportsman elation and excitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot her own chagrin for the sake of his pleasure, and said good-bye to him cheerfully.
“Pardon, gentlemen!” he said, running out onto the steps.
Why is the chestnut on the right?
Laska, down; go and lie down!” “Put it with the herd of oxen,” he said to the herdsman, who was waiting for him at the steps with some question.
“Excuse me, here comes another villain.” Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken his seat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule in his hand.
“You didn’t come to the counting house yesterday, and now you’re detaining me.
It will be much more convenient.” “You should have listened to me,” Levin answered with annoyance.
Do as I told you, and make a new staircase.” The point was that in the lodge that was being built the carpenter had spoiled the staircase, fitting it together without calculating the space it was to fill, so that the steps were all sloping when it was put in place.
Now the carpenter wanted, keeping the same staircase, to add three steps.
“It will be much better.” “But where’s your staircase coming out with its three steps?” “Why, upon my word, sir,” the carpenter said with a contemptuous smile.
It starts, so to speak,” he said, with a persuasive gesture; “it comes down, and comes down, and comes out.” “But three steps will add to the length too ... where is it to come out?” “Why, to be sure, it’ll start from the bottom and go up and go up, and come out so,” the carpenter said obstinately and convincingly.
Why, it’ll go up, and up, and come out like this.” Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in the dust.
“There, do you see?” “As your honor likes,” said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in his eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last.
“It seems it’ll be best to make a new one.” “Well, then, do it as you’re told,” Levin shouted, seating himself in the wagonette.
Hold the dogs, Philip!” Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household cares such an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was not disposed to talk.
Besides that, he had that feeling of concentrated excitement that every sportsman experiences as he approaches the scene of action.
If he had anything on his mind at that moment, it was only the doubt whether they would start anything in the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska would show to advantage in comparison with Krak, and whether he would shoot well that day himself.
Not to disgrace himself before a new spectator—not to be outdone by Oblonsky—that too was a thought that crossed his brain.
Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative.
Vassenka Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter.
As he listened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he had been to him the day before.
Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple, good-hearted, and very good-humored.
Levin rather disliked his holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption of elegance.
It was as though he assumed a high degree of importance in himself that could not be disputed, because he had long nails and a stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could be forgiven for the sake of his good nature and good breeding.
Levin liked him for his good education, for speaking French and English with such an excellent accent, and for being a man of his world.
Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of the Don Steppes.
He kept praising him enthusiastically.
“How fine it must be galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse!
He had imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and romantic, and it turned out nothing of the sort.
But his simplicity, particularly in conjunction with his good looks, his amiable smile, and the grace of his movements, was very attractive.
Either because his nature was sympathetic to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sins of the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was good in him, anyway he liked his society.
After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at once felt for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know whether he had lost them or left them on the table.
In the pocketbook there were thirty-seven pounds, and so the matter could not be left in uncertainty.
That will be splendid.
Eh?” he said, preparing to get out.
“No, why should you?” answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka could hardly weigh less than seventeen stone.
“I’ll send the coachman.” The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself drove the remaining pair.
Chapter 9 “Well, now what’s our plan of campaign?
Tell us all about it,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Now we’re driving to Gvozdyov.
In Gvozdyov there’s a grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come some magnificent snipe marshes where there are grouse too.
It’s hot now, and we’ll get there—it’s fifteen miles or so—towards evening and have some evening shooting; we’ll spend the night there and go on tomorrow to the bigger moors.” “And is there nothing on the way?” “Yes; but we’ll reserve ourselves; besides it’s hot.
There are two nice little places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot.” Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places, but they were near home; he could shoot them over any time, and they were only little places—there would hardly be room for three to shoot.
And so, with some insincerity, he said that he doubted there being anything to shoot.
When they reached a little marsh Levin would have driven by, but Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at once detected reeds visible from the road.
“Shan’t we try that?” he said, pointing to the little marsh.
“Levin, do, please! how delightful!” Vassenka Veslovsky began begging, and Levin could but consent.
I’ll stay here,” said Levin, hoping they would find nothing but peewits, who had been startled by the dogs, and turning over in their flight, were plaintively wailing over the marsh.
Come along, Levin, let’s go together!” Veslovsky called.
You won’t want another dog, will you?” Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at the sportsmen.
Except little birds and peewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.
Did you see us?” said Vassenka Veslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the wagonette with his gun and his peewit in his hands.
“How splendidly I shot this bird!
Well, shall we soon be getting to the real place?” The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against the stock of someone’s gun, and there was the report of a shot.
The gun did actually go off first, but that was how it seemed to Levin.
It appeared that Vassenka Veslovsky had pulled only one trigger, and had left the other hammer still cocked.
Stepan Arkadyevitch shook his head and laughed reprovingly at Veslovsky.
In the first place, any reproach would have seemed to be called forth by the danger he had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin’s forehead.
And besides, Veslovsky was at first so naïvely distressed, and then laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously at their general dismay, that one could not but laugh with him.
When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and would inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade them to pass it by.
But Veslovsky again overpersuaded him.
Again, as the marsh was narrow, Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.
Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge.
Vassenka Veslovsky was the first to run after the dog.
Before Stepan Arkadyevitch had time to come up, a grouse flew out.
Veslovsky missed it and it flew into an unmown meadow.
This grouse was left for Veslovsky to follow up.
Krak found it again and pointed, and Veslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage.
Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman’s envy.
He handed the reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.
Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the injustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful place that Levin knew well, and that Krak had not yet come upon.
“Why don’t you stop her?” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“She won’t scare them,” answered Levin, sympathizing with his bitch’s pleasure and hurrying after her.
As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places there was more and more earnestness in Laska’s exploration.
A little marsh bird did not divert her attention for more than an instant.
She made one circuit round the clump of reeds, was beginning a second, and suddenly quivered with excitement and became motionless.
“Come, come, Stiva!” shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning to beat more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of shutter had been drawn back from his straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud, began to beat on his hearing, losing all sense of distance.
He heard the steps of Stepan Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the horses in the distance; he heard the brittle sound of the twigs on which he had trodden, taking this sound for the flying of a grouse.
He heard too, not far behind him, a splashing in the water, which he could not explain to himself.
Levin had lifted his gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim, the sound of splashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined with the sound of Veslovsky’s voice, shouting something with strange loudness.
When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw the horses and the wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.
Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh, and got the horses stuck in the mud.
“Damn the fellow!” Levin said to himself, as he went back to the carriage that had sunk in the mire.
“What did you drive in for?” he said to him dryly, and calling the coachman, he began pulling the horses out.
Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his horses getting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that neither Stepan Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped him and the coachman to unharness the horses and get them out, since neither of them had the slightest notion of harnessing.
Without vouchsafing a syllable in reply to Vassenka’s protestations that it had been quite dry there, Levin worked in silence with the coachman at extricating the horses.
But then, as he got warm at the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was tugging at the wagonette by one of the mud-guards, so that he broke it indeed, Levin blamed himself for having under the influence of yesterday’s feelings been too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be particularly genial so as to smooth over his chilliness.
When everything had been put right, and the carriage had been brought back to the road, Levin had the lunch served.
“_Bon appétit—bonne conscience!
Ce poulet va tomber jusqu’au fond de mes bottes_,” Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits, quoted the French saying as he finished his second chicken.
“Well, now our troubles are over, now everything’s going to go well.
I’ll be your Automedon.
You shall see how I’ll get you along,” he answered, not letting go the rein, when Levin begged him to let the coachman drive.
“No, I must atone for my sins, and I’m very comfortable on the box.” And he drove.
Chapter 10 Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh too early, while it was still hot.
As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of their expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could get rid of Vassenka and be free in his movements.
Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently had the same desire, and on his face Levin saw the look of anxiety always present in a true sportsman when beginning shooting, together with a certain good-humored slyness peculiar to him.
It’s a splendid marsh, I see, and there are hawks,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds hovering over the reeds.
“Where there are hawks, there is sure to be game.” “Now, gentlemen,” said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining the lock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, “do you see those reeds?” He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river.
“The marsh begins here, straight in front of us, do you see—where it is greener?
From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there are breeding places there, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that alder, and right up to the mill.
There I once shot seventeen snipe.
We’ll separate with the dogs and go in different directions, and then meet over there at the mill.” “Well, which shall go to left and which to right?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“It’s wider to the right; you two go that way and I’ll take the left,” he said with apparent carelessness.
Yes, come along, come along!” Vassenka exclaimed.
As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting about together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool.
Levin knew Laska’s method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place too and expected a whole covey of snipe.
“Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!” he said in a faint voice to his companion splashing in the water behind him.
Levin could not help feeling an interest in the direction his gun was pointed, after that casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.
“Oh, I won’t get in your way, don’t trouble about me.” But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s words at parting: “Mind you don’t shoot one another.” The dogs came nearer and nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent.
The expectation of snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of his own heel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of a snipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his gun.
Vassenka had fired at a flock of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that moment towards the sportsmen, far out of range.
Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was beginning its zigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into the mud.
Oblonsky aimed deliberately at another, still flying low in the reeds, and together with the report of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it could be seen fluttering out where the sedge had been cut, its unhurt wing showing white beneath.
Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and missed; he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant another snipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him so that he missed again.
While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky, who had had time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into the water.
Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyes looked at Levin.
“Well, now let us separate,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limping on his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his dog, he walked off in one direction.
Levin and Veslovsky walked in the other.
It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a failure he got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day.
The snipe showed themselves in numbers.
They kept flying up from just under the dogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and Levin might have retrieved his ill luck.
But the more he shot, the more he felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrily and indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest abashed by his ill success.
Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrain himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting almost without a hope of hitting.
Laska, indeed, seemed to understand this.
She began looking more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as it were, with perplexity or reproach in her eyes.
Shots followed shots in rapid succession.
The smoke of the powder hung about the sportsmen, while in the great roomy net of the game bag there were only three light little snipe.
And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky alone, and one by both of them together.
Meanwhile from the other side of the marsh came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shots, not frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost after each they heard “Krak, Krak, _apporte_!” This excited Levin still more.
The snipe were floating continually in the air over the reeds.
Their whirring wings close to the earth, and their harsh cries high in the air, could be heard on all sides; the snipe that had risen first and flown up into the air, settled again before the sportsmen.
Instead of two hawks there were now dozens of them hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.
After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovsky reached the place where the peasants’ mowing-grass was divided into long strips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one place by the trampled grass, in another by a path mown through it.
Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part as the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet him, and so he walked on with his companion through the cut and uncut patches.
“Hi, sportsmen!” shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on an unharnessed cart; “come and have some lunch with us!
“Come along, it’s all right!” shouted a good-humored-looking bearded peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a grin, and holding up a greenish bottle that flashed in the sunlight.
“_Qu’est-ce qu’ils disent_?” asked Veslovsky.
Most likely they’ve been dividing the meadow into lots.
I should have some,” said Levin, not without some guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go away to them.
You would be interested.” “_Allons, c’est curieux_.” “You go, you go, you’ll find the way to the mill!” cried Levin, and looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bent and stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm’s length, was making his way out of the marsh towards the peasants.
“You come too!” the peasants shouted to Levin.
You taste our cake!” Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to eat some bread.
He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag his staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he hesitated.
And immediately all his weariness vanished, and he walked lightly through the swamp towards the dog.
He wandered all about the reeds, but Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent her to find it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really.
And in the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of his failure, things went no better.
At last, after a disgraceful miss, he flung his gun and his hat on the ground.
When he got on to dry ground he sat down, pulled off his boot and emptied it, then walked to the marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting water, moistened his burning hot gun, and washed his face and hands.
Feeling refreshed, he went back to the spot where a snipe had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.
He had only five birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the marsh towards the alders where he was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog.
Krak darted out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black all over with the stinking mire of the marsh, and with the air of a conqueror sniffed at Laska.
Behind Krak there came into view in the shade of the alder tree the shapely figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
He came to meet him, red and perspiring, with unbuttoned neckband, still limping in the same way.
You have been popping away!” he said, smiling good-humoredly.
“Oh, pretty fair.” He had fourteen birds.
I’ve no doubt Veslovsky got in your way.
It’s awkward too, shooting with one dog,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, to soften his triumph.
Chapter 11 When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant’s hut where Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there.
He was sitting in the middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from which he was being pulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s wife, who was helping him off with his miry boots.
Veslovsky was laughing his infectious, good-humored laugh.
“I’ve only just come. _Ils ont été charmants_.
Such bread, it was exquisite! _Délicieux!_ And the vodka, I never tasted any better.
And they would not take a penny for anything.
And they kept saying: ‘Excuse our homely ways.’” “What should they take anything for?
They were entertaining you, to be sure.
Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?” said the soldier, succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the blackened stocking.
In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by their boots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smell of marsh mud and powder that filled the room, and the absence of knives and forks, the party drank their tea and ate their supper with a relish only known to sportsmen.
Washed and clean, they went into a hay-barn swept ready for them, where the coachman had been making up beds for the gentlemen.
After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs, and of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic that interested all of them.
Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money by speculation in railway shares.
Stepan Arkadyevitch described what grouse moors this Malthus had bought in the Tver province, and how they were preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in which the shooting party had been driven, and the luncheon pavilion that had been rigged up at the marsh.
“I don’t understand you,” said Levin, sitting up in the hay; “how is it such people don’t disgust you?
I can understand a lunch with Lafitte is all very pleasant, but don’t you dislike just that very sumptuousness?
All these people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days, get their money in a way that gains them the contempt of everyone.
They don’t care for their contempt, and then they use their dishonest gains to buy off the contempt they have deserved.” “Perfectly true!” chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky.
Oblonsky, of course, goes out of _bonhomie_, but other people say: ‘Well, Oblonsky stays with them.’...” “Not a bit of it.” Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as he spoke.
“I simply don’t consider him more dishonest than any other wealthy merchant or nobleman.
They’ve all made their money alike—by their work and their intelligence.” “Oh, by what work?
Do you call it work to get hold of concessions and speculate with them?” “Of course it’s work.
Work in this sense, that if it were not for him and others like him, there would have been no railways.” “But that’s not work, like the work of a peasant or a learned profession.” “Granted, but it’s work in the sense that his activity produces a result—the railways.
But of course you think the railways useless.” “No, that’s another question; I am prepared to admit that they’re useful.
But all profit that is out of proportion to the labor expended is dishonest.” “But who is to define what is proportionate?” “Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery,” said Levin, conscious that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty and dishonesty.
“Such as banking, for instance,” he went on.
“It’s an evil—the amassing of huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the spirit monopolies, it’s only the form that’s changed. _Le roi est mort, vive le roi_.
No sooner were the spirit monopolies abolished than the railways came up, and banking companies; that, too, is profit without work.” “Yes, that may all be very true and clever....
Lie down, Krak!” Stepan Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and turning over all the hay.
He was obviously convinced of the correctness of his position, and so talked serenely and without haste.
“But you have not drawn the line between honest and dishonest work.
No, quite the contrary; I see that society takes up a sort of antagonistic attitude to these people, which is utterly baseless, and I fancy there’s envy at the bottom of it....” “No, that’s unfair,” said Veslovsky; “how could envy come in?
There is something not nice about that sort of business.” “You say,” Levin went on, “that it’s unjust for me to receive five thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that’s true.
Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking, shooting, doing nothing, while they are forever at work?” said Vassenka Veslovsky, obviously for the first time in his life reflecting on the question, and consequently considering it with perfect sincerity.
“Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your property,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.
There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism between the two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had married sisters, a kind of rivalry had sprung up between them as to which was ordering his life best, and now this hostility showed itself in the conversation, as it began to take a personal note.
“I don’t give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if I wanted to, I could not give it away,” answered Levin, “and have no one to give it to.” “Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it.” “Yes, but how am I to give it up?
Am I to go to him and make a deed of conveyance?” “I don’t know; but if you are convinced that you have no right....” “I’m not at all convinced.
“Ah! our host; so you’re not asleep yet?” he said to the peasant who came into the barn, opening the creaking door.
I thought our gentlemen would be asleep, but I heard them chattering.
She won’t bite?” he added, stepping cautiously with his bare feet.
“And where are you going to sleep?” “We are going out for the night with the beasts.” “Ah, what a night!” said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of the hut and the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the faint light of the evening glow in the great frame of the open doors.
Oblonsky, come along!” “If one could only do both, lie here and go,” answered Oblonsky, stretching.
“It’s capital lying here.” “Well, I shall go by myself,” said Veslovsky, getting up eagerly, and putting on his shoes and stockings.
“Good-bye, gentlemen.
You’ve treated me to some good sport, and I won’t forget you.” “He really is a capital fellow, isn’t he?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the door after him.
“Yes, capital,” answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of their conversation just before.
It seemed to him that he had clearly expressed his thoughts and feelings to the best of his capacity, and yet both of them, straightforward men and not fools, had said with one voice that he was comforting himself with sophistries.
This disconcerted him.
One must do one of two things: either admit that the existing order of society is just, and then stick up for one’s rights in it; or acknowledge that you are enjoying unjust privileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be satisfied.” “No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and be satisfied—at least I could not.
The great thing for me is to feel that I’m not to blame.” “What do you say, why not go after all?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, evidently weary of the strain of thought.
What they had said in the conversation, that he acted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his thoughts.
“Can it be that it’s only possible to be just negatively?” he was asking himself.
“How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up.
“There’s not a chance of sleeping.
Vassenka has been getting up some fun there.
Do you hear the laughing and his voice?
Come along!” “No, I’m not coming,” answered Levin.
“Surely that’s not a matter of principle too,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.
“It’s not a matter of principle, but why should I go?” “But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, finding his cap and getting up.
I heard how it’s a question of the greatest consequence, whether or not you’re to be away for a couple of days’ shooting.
A man must be independent; he has his masculine interests.
A man has to be manly,” said Oblonsky, opening the door.
The great thing is to respect the sanctity of the home.
“Tomorrow, early, I want to go shooting, and I won’t wake anyone, and shall set off at daybreak.” “_Messieurs, venez vite!_” they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming back.
“_Charmante!_ I’ve made such a discovery. _Charmante!_ a perfect Gretchen, and I’ve already made friends with her.
Really, exceedingly pretty,” he declared in a tone of approval, as though she had been made pretty entirely on his account, and he was expressing his satisfaction with the entertainment that had been provided for him.
Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his slippers, and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices were lost.
He heard the horses munching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy getting ready for the night, and going off for the night watch with the beasts, then he heard the soldier arranging his bed on the other side of the barn, with his nephew, the younger son of their peasant host.
He could only hear the snort of the horses, and the guttural cry of a snipe.
“Is it really only negative?” he repeated to himself.
It’s not my fault.” And he began thinking about the next day.
“Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of keeping cool.
Negative again....” Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch.
For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon was up, and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they were standing talking.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of the freshness of one girl, comparing her to a freshly peeled nut, and Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was repeating some words, probably said to him by a peasant: “Ah, you do your best to get round her!” Levin, half asleep, said: “Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!” and fell asleep.
Chapter 12 Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.
Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out, was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response.
Oblonsky, half asleep, declined to get up so early.
Even Laska, who was asleep, curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched out and straightened her hind legs one after the other.
Getting on his boots and stockings, taking his gun, and carefully opening the creaking door of the barn, Levin went out into the road.
The coachmen were sleeping in their carriages, the horses were dozing.
“Why are you up so early, my dear?” the old woman, their hostess, said, coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as an old friend.
“Going shooting, granny.
Do I go this way to the marsh?” “Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemp patches; there’s a little footpath.” Stepping carefully with her sunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and moved back the fence for him by the threshing floor.
“Straight on and you’ll come to the marsh.
Our lads drove the cattle there yesterday evening.” Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path.
Levin followed her with a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky.
The moon, which had been bright when he went out, by now shone only like a crescent of quicksilver.
The pink flush of dawn, which one could not help seeing before, now had to be sought to be discerned at all.
What were before undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside could now be distinctly seen.
The dew, not visible till the sun was up, wetted Levin’s legs and his blouse above his belt in the high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the pollen had already fallen out.
In the transparent stillness of morning the smallest sounds were audible.
A bee flew by Levin’s ear with the whizzing sound of a bullet.
He looked carefully, and saw a second and a third.
They were all flying from the beehives behind the hedge, and they disappeared over the hemp patch in the direction of the marsh.
The path led straight to the marsh.
The marsh could be recognized by the mist which rose from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the reeds and willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist.
Laska walked beside her master, pressing a little forward and looking round.
Passing the sleeping peasants and reaching the first reeds, Levin examined his pistols and let his dog off.
One of the horses, a sleek, dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched its tail and snorted.
The other horses too were frightened, and splashing through the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofs out of the thick mud with a squelching sound, they bounded out of the marsh.
Laska stopped, looking ironically at the horses and inquiringly at Levin.
Levin patted Laska, and whistled as a sign that she might begin.
Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed under her.
Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh plants, and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska detected at once a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of that strong-smelling bird that always excited her more than any other.
Here and there among the moss and marsh plants this scent was very strong, but it was impossible to determine in which direction it grew stronger or fainter.
To find the direction, she had to go farther away from the wind.
Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, she felt at once that not their tracks only but they themselves were here before her, and not one, but many.
Laska slackened her speed.
They were here, but where precisely she could not yet determine.
To find the very spot, she began to make a circle, when suddenly her master’s voice drew her off.
“Laska! here?” he asked, pointing her to a different direction.
But he repeated his command in an angry voice, pointing to a spot covered with water, where there could not be anything.
She obeyed him, pretending she was looking, so as to please him, went round it, and went back to her former position, and was at once aware of the scent again.
Now when he was not hindering her, she knew what to do, and without looking at what was under her feet, and to her vexation stumbling over a high stump into the water, but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she began making the circle which was to make all clear to her.
The scent of them reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more defined, and all at once it became perfectly clear to her that one of them was here, behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in front of her; she stopped, and her whole body was still and rigid.
She stood still, feeling more and more conscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation.
Her tail was stretched straight and tense, and only wagging at the extreme end.
Her mouth was slightly open, her ears raised.
One ear had been turned wrong side out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but warily, and still more warily looked round, but more with her eyes than her head, to her master.
He was coming along with the face she knew so well, though the eyes were always terrible to her.
He stumbled over the stump as he came, and moved, as she thought, extraordinarily slowly.
Noticing Laska’s special attitude as she crouched on the ground, as it were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her mouth slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse, and with an inward prayer for luck, especially with the first bird, he ran up to her.
In a space between two little thickets, at a couple of yards’ distance, he could see a grouse.
Turning its head, it was listening.
Then lightly preening and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner with a clumsy wag of its tail.
She scented nothing now; she could only see and hear, without understanding anything.
Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry and the peculiar round sound of its wings.
And immediately after the shot it splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet mire.
Flying twenty paces further, the second grouse rose upwards, and whirling round like a ball, dropped heavily on a dry place.
The stagnant pools were all like amber.
The marsh birds twittered and swarmed about the brook and upon the bushes that glittered with dew and cast long shadows.
A hawk woke up and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to side and looking discontentedly at the marsh.
“Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!” he shouted to him, and he walked a little way off behind him.
And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed his approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight off.
Chapter 13 The sportsman’s saying, that if the first beast or the first bird is not missed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.
At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of twenty miles, returned to his night’s lodging with nineteen head of fine game and one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would not go into the game bag.
His companions had long been awake, and had had time to get hungry and have breakfast.
“Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen,” said Levin, counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so much less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crooked aside, than they did when they were flying.
The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin.
He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by Kitty with a note was already there.
“I am perfectly well and happy.
I’ve a new bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna,”—this was the midwife, a new and important personage in Levin’s domestic life.
She found me perfectly well, and we have kept her till you are back.
All are happy and well, and please, don’t be in a hurry to come back, but, if the sport is good, stay another day.” These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his wife, were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightly over Levin.
One was that the chestnut trace horse, who had been unmistakably overworked on the previous day, was off his feed and out of sorts.
The coachman said he was “Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.
Yes, indeed! driven ten miles with no sense!” The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed his good humor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to find that of all the provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that one would have thought there was enough for a week, nothing was left.
On his way back, tired and hungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision of meat-pies that as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste them, as Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip to give him some.
It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even any chicken.
“Well, this fellow’s appetite!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing and pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky.
“I never suffer from loss of appetite, but he’s really marvelous!...” “Well, it can’t be helped,” said Levin, looking gloomily at Veslovsky.
“Well, Philip, give me some beef, then.” “The beef’s been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs,” answered Philip.
Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, “You might have left me something!” and he felt ready to cry.
“Then put away the game,” he said in a shaking voice to Philip, trying not to look at Vassenka, “and cover them with some nettles.
And you might at least ask for some milk for me.” But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at having shown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh at his hungry mortification.
In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had several successful shots, and in the night they drove home.
Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
“Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully.
And you, Levin?” “I have, very much,” Levin said quite sincerely.
It was particularly delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility he had been feeling towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the most friendly disposition to him.
Chapter 14 Next day at ten o’clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds, knocked at the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.
“_Entrez!_” Veslovsky called to him.
“Excuse me, I’ve only just finished my ablutions,” he said, smiling, standing before him in his underclothes only.
What sort of day is it for shooting?” “What will you take, tea or coffee?” “Neither.
You show me your horses.” After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even doing some gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars, Levin returned to the house with his guest, and went with him into the drawing-room.
“We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!” said Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the samovar.
“What a pity ladies are cut off from these delights!” “Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house,” Levin said to himself.
Again he fancied something in the smile, in the all-conquering air with which their guest addressed Kitty....
The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and began to talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement, and getting ready rooms for them.
Just as Levin had disliked all the trivial preparations for his wedding, as derogatory to the grandeur of the event, now he felt still more offensive the preparations for the approaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, it seemed, on their fingers.
He tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best patterns of long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and avoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles of linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance.
But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down his reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and indifference, and so she gave him no peace.
She had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitch to look at a flat, and now she called Levin up.
“I know nothing about it, princess.
I know millions of children are born away from Moscow, and doctors ... why....” “But if so....” “Oh, no, as Kitty wishes.” “We can’t talk to Kitty about it!
Do you want me to frighten her?
Why, this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an ignorant doctor.” “I will do just what you say,” he said gloomily.
The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her.
Though the conversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon him, he was gloomy, not on account of that conversation, but from what he saw at the samovar.
“No, it’s impossible,” he thought, glancing now and then at Vassenka bending over Kitty, telling her something with his charming smile, and at her, flushed and disturbed.
There was something not nice in Vassenka’s attitude, in his eyes, in his smile.
Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty’s attitude and look.
Again, as before, all of a sudden, without the slightest transition, he felt cast down from a pinnacle of happiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair, rage, and humiliation.
Again everything and everyone had become hateful to him.
“You do just as you think best, princess,” he said again, looking round.
“Heavy is the cap of Monomach,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said playfully, hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess’s conversation, but at the cause of Levin’s agitation, which he had noticed.
“How late you are today, Dolly!” Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna.
Vassenka only rose for an instant, and with the lack of courtesy to ladies characteristic of the modern young man, he scarcely bowed, and resumed his conversation again, laughing at something.
She did not sleep well, and is dreadfully tiresome today,” said Dolly.
The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the same lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether love is to be put higher than worldly considerations.
Kitty disliked the conversation, and she was disturbed both by the subject and the tone in which it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the effect it would have on her husband.
But she was too simple and innocent to know how to cut short this conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure afforded her by the young man’s very obvious admiration.
Whatever she did she knew would be observed by her husband, and the worst interpretation put on it.
And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrong with Masha, and Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting conversation was over, began to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the question struck Levin as an unnatural and disgusting piece of hypocrisy.
“What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?” said Dolly.
She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he would come, and she did not ask him.
“Where are you going, Kostya?” she asked her husband with a guilty face, as he passed by her with a resolute step.
This guilty air confirmed all his suspicions.
“The mechanician came when I was away; I haven’t seen him yet,” he said, not looking at her.
He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he heard his wife’s familiar footsteps running with reckless speed to him.
“We are busy.” “I beg your pardon,” she said to the German mechanician; “I want a few words with my husband.” The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him: “Don’t disturb yourself.” “The train is at three?” queried the German.
He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she in her condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous, crushed look.
“The servants are here at the sideboard,” he said angrily; “don’t make a scene.” “Well, let’s go in here!” They were standing in the passage.
Kitty would have gone into the next room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.
And no longer considering that the peasant could see her tear-stained and his agitated face, that they looked like people fleeing from some disaster, they went on with rapid steps, feeling that they must speak out and clear up misunderstandings, must be alone together, and so get rid of the misery they were both feeling.
I am wretched; you are wretched.
What for?” she said, when they had at last reached a solitary garden seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.
“But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly, not nice, humiliatingly horrible?” he said, standing before her again in the same position with his clenched fists on his chest, as he had stood before her that night.
How happy we were!” she said, breathless with the sobs that shook her.
Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to run away from, and they could not possibly have found anything very delightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment that they passed him on their way home with comforted and radiant faces.
Chapter 15 After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s part of the house.
Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great distress too that day.
“Oh, she is a disgusting child!” she turned to Levin.
“Where does she get such wicked propensities?” “Why, what has she done?” Levin said without much interest, for he had wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had come at an unlucky moment.
“Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there ...
It’s a thousand pities Miss Elliot’s not with us.
This one sees to nothing—she’s a machine.... _Figurez-vous que la petite_?...” And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha’s crime.
“That proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil propensities at all, it’s simply mischief,” Levin assured her.
“But you are upset about something?
“What’s going on there?” And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy for him to say what he had meant to say.
Stiva came.” Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.
“Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been ... not in Kitty, but in that gentleman’s behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant—not unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?” “You mean, how shall I say....
Stay, stay in the corner!” she said to Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother’s face, had been turning round.
“The opinion of the world would be that he is behaving as young men do behave. _Il fait la cour à une jeune et jolie femme_, and a husband who’s a man of the world should only be flattered by it.” “Yes, yes,” said Levin gloomily; “but you noticed it?” “Not only I, but Stiva noticed it.
Just after breakfast he said to me in so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour à Kitty_.” “Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisfied.
Are you crazy?” Dolly cried in horror; “nonsense, Kostya, only think!” she said, laughing.
He can say you’re expecting visitors.
Altogether he doesn’t fit into the house.” “No, no, I’ll do it myself.” “But you’ll quarrel with him?” “Not a bit.
I shall so enjoy it,” Levin said, his eyes flashing with real enjoyment.
“Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won’t do it again,” he said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny, but was standing irresolutely before her mother, waiting and looking up from under her brows to catch her mother’s eye.
“And what is there in common between us and him?” thought Levin, and he went off to look for Veslovsky.
As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage to be got ready to drive to the station.
“The spring was broken yesterday,” said the footman.
Where’s the visitor?” “The gentleman’s gone to his room.” Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having unpacked his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs, was putting on his gaiters to go out riding.
Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s face, or that Vassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he was making was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as much as a young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.
“You ride in gaiters?” “Yes, it’s much cleaner,” said Vassenka, putting his fat leg on a chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted good humor.
He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for him and ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy look on Vassenka’s face.
On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together that morning, trying their strength.
Levin took the fragment in his hands and began smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick, not knowing how to begin.
“I wanted....” He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and everything that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in the face: “I have ordered the horses to be put-to for you.” “How so?” Vassenka began in surprise.
“To drive where?” “For you to drive to the station,” Levin said gloomily.
“Are you going away, or has something happened?” “It happens that I expect visitors,” said Levin, his strong fingers more and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split stick.
“And I’m not expecting visitors, and nothing has happened, but I beg you to go away.
You can explain my rudeness as you like.” Vassenka drew himself up.
“I beg you to explain....” he said with dignity, understanding at last.
“I can’t explain,” Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to control the trembling of his jaw; “and you’d better not ask.” And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the thick ends in his finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully caught the end as it fell.
Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles he had proved that morning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes, the soft voice, and quivering jaws, convinced Vassenka better than any words.
He bowed, shrugging his shoulders, and smiling contemptuously.
“Can I not see Oblonsky?” The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.
“I’ll send him to you at once.” “What madness is this?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after hearing from his friend that he was being turned out of the house, he found Levin in the garden, where he was walking about waiting for his guest’s departure.
“_Mais c’est ridicule!_ What fly has stung you? _Mais c’est du dernier ridicule!_ What did you think, if a young man....” But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still sore, for he turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would have enlarged on the reason, and he himself cut him short.
I feel ashamed of how I’m treating you and him.
But it won’t be, I imagine, a great grief to him to go, and his presence was distasteful to me and to my wife.” “But it’s insulting to him! _Et puis c’est ridicule_.” “And to me it’s both insulting and distressing!
And I’m not at fault in any way, and there’s no need for me to suffer.” “Well, this I didn’t expect of you! _On peut être jaloux, mais à ce point, c’est du dernier ridicule!_” Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of the avenue, and he went on walking up and down alone.
Soon he heard the rumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, sitting in the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the trap) in his Scotch cap, was driven along the avenue, jolting up and down over the ruts.
It was the mechanician, whom Levin had totally forgotten.
The mechanician, bowing low, said something to Veslovsky, then clambered into the trap, and they drove off together.
Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin’s action.
And he himself felt not only in the highest degree _ridicule_, but also utterly guilty and disgraced.
But remembering what sufferings he and his wife had been through, when he asked himself how he should act another time, he answered that he should do just the same again.
In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone except the princess, who could not pardon Levin’s action, became extraordinarily lively and good-humored, like children after a punishment or grown-up people after a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by the evening Vassenka’s dismissal was spoken of, in the absence of the princess, as though it were some remote event.
And Dolly, who had inherited her father’s gift of humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with laughter as she related for the third and fourth time, always with fresh humorous additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes for the benefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing-room, heard suddenly the rumble of the trap.
And who should be in the trap but Vassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his gaiters, and all, sitting in the hay.
“If only you’d ordered out the carriage!
But no! and then I hear: ‘Stop!’ Oh, I thought they’ve relented.
And my new shoes all for nothing!...” Chapter 16 Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see Anna.
She was sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin disliked.
She quite understood how right the Levins were in not wishing to have anything to do with Vronsky.
But she felt she must go and see Anna, and show her that her feelings could not be changed, in spite of the change in her position.
That she might be independent of the Levins in this expedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for the drive; but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.
Hiring horses in the village is disagreeable to me, and, what’s of more importance, they’ll undertake the job and never get you there.
And if you don’t want to wound me, you’ll take mine.” Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had ready for his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays, getting them together from the farm and saddle-horses—not at all a smart-looking set, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance in a single day.
At that moment, when horses were wanted for the princess, who was going, and for the midwife, it was a difficult matter for Levin to make up the number, but the duties of hospitality would not let him allow Darya Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.
Moreover, he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked for the journey were a serious matter for her; Darya Alexandrovna’s pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state, were taken to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.
Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin’s advice, started before daybreak.
The road was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted along merrily, and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the counting-house clerk, whom Levin was sending instead of a groom for greater security.
Darya Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only on reaching the inn where the horses were to be changed.
After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with whom Levin had stayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and chatting with the women about their children, and with the old man about Count Vronsky, whom the latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock, went on again.
At home, looking after her children, she had no time to think.
So now, after this journey of four hours, all the thoughts she had suppressed before rushed swarming into her brain, and she thought over all her life as she never had before, and from the most different points of view.
Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself.
At first she thought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although the princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised to look after them.
But these questions of the present were succeeded by questions of the immediate future.
She began thinking how she had to get a new flat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew the drawing-room furniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak.
Then questions of the more remote future occurred to her: how she was to place her children in the world.
“The girls are all right,” she thought; “but the boys?” “It’s very well that I’m teaching Grisha, but of course that’s only because I am free myself now, I’m not with child.
Stiva, of course, there’s no counting on.
And with the help of good-natured friends I can bring them up; but if there’s another baby coming?...” And the thought struck her how untruly it was said that the curse laid on woman was that in sorrow she should bring forth children.
“The birth itself, that’s nothing; but the months of carrying the child—that’s what’s so intolerable,” she thought, picturing to herself her last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby.
And she recalled the conversation she had just had with the young woman at the inn.
On being asked whether she had any children, the handsome young woman had answered cheerfully: “I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent.” “Well, did you grieve very much for her?” asked Darya Alexandrovna.
The old man has grandchildren enough as it is.
Only a tie.” This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite of the good-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now she could not help recalling these words.
“Yes, altogether,” thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over her whole existence during those fifteen years of her married life, “pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to everything, and most of all—hideousness.
The birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that last moment ... then the nursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful pains....” Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain from sore breasts which she had suffered with almost every child.
“Then the children’s illnesses, that everlasting apprehension; then bringing them up; evil propensities” (she thought of little Masha’s crime among the raspberries), “education, Latin—it’s all so incomprehensible and difficult.
That I’m wasting my life, never having a moment’s peace, either with child, or nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched myself and worrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the children are growing up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless.
Even now, if it weren’t for spending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we should be managing to live.
They’ll have children, they won’t be able to keep us; it’s a drag on them as it is.
How is papa, who has hardly anything left for himself, to help us?
So that I can’t even bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with the help of other people, at the cost of humiliation.
Why, even if we suppose the greatest good luck, that the children don’t die, and I bring them up somehow.
One’s whole life ruined!” Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said, and again she was revolted at the thought; but she could not help admitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.
“Is it far now, Mihail?” Darya Alexandrovna asked the counting-house clerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that were frightening her.
“From this village, they say, it’s five miles.” The carriage drove along the village street and onto a bridge.
On the bridge was a crowd of peasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves on their shoulders, gaily and noisily chattering.
They stood still on the bridge, staring inquisitively at the carriage.
All the faces turned to Darya Alexandrovna looked to her healthy and happy, making her envious of their enjoyment of life.
“They’re all living, they’re all enjoying life,” Darya Alexandrovna still mused when she had passed the peasant women and was driving uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the soft springs of the old carriage, “while I, let out, as it were from prison, from the world of worries that fret me to death, am only looking about me now for an instant.
Even to this day I don’t feel sure I did right in listening to her at that terrible time when she came to me in Moscow.
He’s necessary to me,” she thought about her husband, “and I put up with him.
At that time I could still have been admired, I had beauty left me still,” Darya Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and she would have liked to look at herself in the looking-glass.
She had a traveling looking-glass in her handbag, and she wanted to take it out; but looking at the backs of the coachman and the swaying counting-house clerk, she felt that she would be ashamed if either of them were to look round, and she did not take out the glass.
But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it was not too late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was always particularly attentive to her, of Stiva’s good-hearted friend, Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children through the scarlatina, and was in love with her.
And there was someone else, a quite young man, who—her husband had told her it as a joke—thought her more beautiful than either of her sisters.
And the most passionate and impossible romances rose before Darya Alexandrovna’s imagination.
“Anna did quite right, and certainly I shall never reproach her for it.
She, like Anna, confessed the whole affair to her husband.
And the amazement and perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at this avowal made her smile.
In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that led to Vozdvizhenskoe.
Chapter 17 The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the right, to a field of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a cart.
The counting-house clerk was just going to jump down, but on second thoughts he shouted peremptorily to the peasants instead, and beckoned to them to come up.
The wind, that seemed to blow as they drove, dropped when the carriage stood still; gadflies settled on the steaming horses that angrily shook them off.
The metallic clank of a whetstone against a scythe, that came to them from the cart, ceased.
One of the peasants got up and came towards the carriage.
“Well, you are slow!” the counting-house clerk shouted angrily to the peasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the ruts of the rough dry road.
“Come along, do!” A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair, and his bent back dark with perspiration, came towards the carriage, quickening his steps, and took hold of the mud-guard with his sunburnt hand.
“Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count’s?” he repeated; “go on to the end of this track.
Straight along the avenue and you’ll come right upon it.
The count himself?” “Well, are they at home, my good man?” Darya Alexandrovna said vaguely, not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.
“At home for sure,” said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot to the other, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a heel in the dust.
“Sure to be at home,” he repeated, evidently eager to talk.
“Only yesterday visitors arrived.
There’s a sight of visitors come.
What do you want?” He turned round and called to a lad, who was shouting something to him from the cart.
And who will you be belonging to?...” “We’ve come a long way,” said the coachman, climbing onto the box.
As soon as you get out....” he said, keeping hold all the while of the carriage.
A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.
“What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?” he asked.
“I don’t know, my boy.” “So you keep to the left, and you’ll come right on it,” said the peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to converse.
The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning off when the peasant shouted: “Stop!
The coachman stopped.
“See what a turn-out!” he said, pointing to four persons on horseback, and two in a _char-à-banc_, coming along the road.
They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, and Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char-à-banc_.
When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at a walking pace.
Anna was in front beside Veslovsky.
Anna, quietly walking her horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane and short tail, her beautiful head with her black hair straying loose under her high hat, her full shoulders, her slender waist in her black riding habit, and all the ease and grace of her deportment, impressed Dolly.
For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be on horseback.
The conception of riding on horseback for a lady was, in Darya Alexandrovna’s mind, associated with ideas of youthful flirtation and frivolity, which, in her opinion, was unbecoming in Anna’s position.
But when she had scrutinized her, seeing her closer, she was at once reconciled to her riding.
In spite of her elegance, everything was so simple, quiet, and dignified in the attitude, the dress and the movements of Anna, that nothing could have been more natural.
Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka Veslovsky in his Scotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout legs stretched out in front, obviously pleased with his own appearance.
Darya Alexandrovna could not suppress a good-humored smile as she recognized him.
Behind rode Vronsky on a dark bay mare, obviously heated from galloping.
Sviazhsky and Princess Varvara in a new _char-à-banc_ with a big, raven-black trotting horse, overtook the party on horseback.
Anna’s face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant when, in the little figure huddled in a corner of the old carriage, she recognized Dolly.
On reaching the carriage she jumped off without assistance, and holding up her riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.
You can’t fancy how glad I am!” she said, at one moment pressing her face against Dolly and kissing her, and at the next holding her off and examining her with a smile.
“Here’s a delightful surprise, Alexey!” she said, looking round at Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.
“You wouldn’t believe how glad we are to see you,” he said, giving peculiar significance to the words, and showing his strong white teeth in a smile.
Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took off his cap and greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over his head.
“That’s Princess Varvara,” Anna said in reply to a glance of inquiry from Dolly as the _char-à-banc_ drove up.
“Ah!” said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face betrayed her dissatisfaction.
Princess Varvara was her husband’s aunt, and she had long known her, and did not respect her.
She knew that Princess Varvara had passed her whole life toadying on her rich relations, but that she should now be sponging on Vronsky, a man who was nothing to her, mortified Dolly on account of her kinship with her husband.
Anna noticed Dolly’s expression, and was disconcerted by it.
She blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled over it.
Darya Alexandrovna went up to the _char-à-banc_ and coldly greeted Princess Varvara.
Sviazhsky too she knew.
He inquired how his queer friend with the young wife was, and running his eyes over the ill-matched horses and the carriage with its patched mud-guards, proposed to the ladies that they should get into the _char-à-banc_.
“The horse is quiet, and the princess drives capitally.” “No, stay as you were,” said Anna, coming up, “and we’ll go in the carriage,” and taking Dolly’s arm, she drew her away.
Darya Alexandrovna’s eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant carriage of a pattern she had never seen before, the splendid horses, and the elegant and gorgeous people surrounding her.
Any other woman, a less close observer, not knowing Anna before, or not having thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been thinking on the road, would not have noticed anything special in Anna.
But now Dolly was struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found in women during the moments of love, and which she saw now in Anna’s face.
When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden embarrassment came over both of them.
Anna was disconcerted by the intent look of inquiry Dolly fixed upon her.
Dolly was embarrassed because after Sviazhsky’s phrase about “this vehicle,” she could not help feeling ashamed of the dirty old carriage in which Anna was sitting with her.
The coachman Philip and the counting-house clerk were experiencing the same sensation.
The counting-house clerk, to conceal his confusion, busied himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman became sullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in future by this external superiority.
He smiled ironically, looking at the raven horse, and was already deciding in his own mind that this smart trotter in the _char-à-banc_ was only good for _promenage_, and wouldn’t do thirty miles straight off in the heat.
The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively and mirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making their comments on it.
Is that a woman in breeches?” said one of them, pointing to Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.
See how smartly he’s going it!” “Eh, lads! seems we’re not going to sleep, then?” “What chance of sleep today!” said the old man, with a sidelong look at the sun.
Get your hooks, and come along!” Chapter 18 Anna looked at Dolly’s thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles filled with dust from the road, and she was on the point of saying what she was thinking, that is, that Dolly had got thinner.
But, conscious that she herself had grown handsomer, and that Dolly’s eyes were telling her so, she sighed and began to speak about herself.
“You are looking at me,” she said, “and wondering how I can be happy in my position?
Well! it’s shameful to confess, but I ...
I’m inexcusably happy.
Something magical has happened to me, like a dream, when you’re frightened, panic-stricken, and all of a sudden you wake up and all the horrors are no more.
I have lived through the misery, the dread, and now for a long while past, especially since we’ve been here, I’ve been so happy!...” she said, with a timid smile of inquiry looking at Dolly.
“How glad I am!” said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more coldly than she wanted to.
You forget my position....” “To me?
I look at....” Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning, but for some reason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.
What’s this, what are all these buildings?” she asked, wanting to change the conversation and pointing to the red and green roofs that came into view behind the green hedges of acacia and lilac.
How do you look at my position, what do you think of it?” she asked.
“I consider....” Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that instant Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with the right leg foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up and down in his short jacket on the chamois leather of the side saddle.
“He’s doing it, Anna Arkadyevna!” he shouted.
Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation in the carriage, and so she cut short her thought.
“I don’t think anything,” she said, “but I always loved you, and if one loves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they are and not as one would like them to be....” Anna, taking her eyes off her friend’s face and dropping her eyelids (this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before), pondered, trying to penetrate the full significance of the words.
And obviously interpreting them as she would have wished, she glanced at Dolly.
“If you had any sins,” she said, “they would all be forgiven you for your coming to see me and these words.” And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes.
“Well, what are these buildings?
How many there are of them!” After a moment’s silence she repeated her question.
“These are the servants’ houses, barns, and stables,” answered Anna.
It had all gone to ruin, but Alexey had everything renewed.
He is very fond of this place, and, what I never expected, he has become intensely interested in looking after it.
Whatever he takes up, he does splendidly.
So far from being bored by it, he works with passionate interest.
He—with his temperament as I know it—he has become careful and businesslike, a first-rate manager, he positively reckons every penny in his management of the land.
When it’s a question of tens of thousands, he doesn’t think of money.” She spoke with that gleefully sly smile with which women often talk of the secret characteristics only known to them—of those they love.
“Do you see that big building? that’s the new hospital.
I believe it will cost over a hundred thousand; that’s his hobby just now.
The peasants asked him for some meadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and he refused, and I accused him of being miserly.
Of course it was not really because of that, but everything together, he began this hospital to prove, do you see, that he was not miserly about money. _C’est une petitesse_, if you like, but I love him all the more for it.
It was his grandfather’s house, and he has had nothing changed outside.” “How beautiful!” said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration at the handsome house with columns, standing out among the different-colored greens of the old trees in the garden.
And from the house, from the top, the view is wonderful.” They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with flowers, in which two laborers were at work putting an edging of stones round the light mould of a flower bed, and drew up in a covered entry.
It’s my cob; my favorite.
Where is the count?” she inquired of two smart footmen who darted out.
“Ah, there he is!” she said, seeing Vronsky coming to meet her with Veslovsky.
“Where are you going to put the princess?” said Vronsky in French, addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once more greeted Darya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her hand.
Come, let’s go up,” said Anna, as she gave her favorite horse the sugar the footman had brought her.
“_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_,” she said to Veslovsky, who came out too on the steps.
“_Pardon, j’en ai tout plein les poches_,” he answered, smiling, putting his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.
“_Mais vous venez trop tard_,” she said, rubbing her handkerchief on her hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.
That’s impossible!” “I promised to be back, and the children....” said Dolly, feeling embarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the carriage, and because she knew her face must be covered with dust.
That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but the one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it.
And this room, for which excuse was needed, was more full of luxury than any in which Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that reminded her of the best hotels abroad.
Stiva I had only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one about the children.
How is my favorite, Tanya?
Quite a big girl, I expect?” “Yes, she’s very tall,” Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly, surprised herself that she should respond so coolly about her children.
“We are having a delightful stay at the Levins’,” she added.
Stiva’s an old friend and a great friend of Alexey’s, you know,” she added, and suddenly she blushed.
“Yes, but we are all....” Dolly answered in confusion.
“But in my delight I’m talking nonsense.
The chief thing I shouldn’t like would be for people to imagine I want to prove anything.
I don’t want to prove anything; I merely want to live, to do no one harm but myself.
But it is a big subject, and we’ll talk over everything properly later.
Now I’ll go and dress and send a maid to you.” Chapter 19 Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife’s eye, scanned her room.
All she had seen in entering the house and walking through it, and all she saw now in her room, gave her an impression of wealth and sumptuousness and of that modern European luxury of which she had only read in English novels, but had never seen in Russia and in the country.
Everything was new from the new French hangings on the walls to the carpet which covered the whole floor.
The bed had a spring mattress, and a special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the little pillows.
The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the window curtains, and the _portières_ were all new and expensive.
The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair done up high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly’s, was as new and expensive as the whole room.
Darya Alexandrovna liked her neatness, her deferential and obliging manners, but she felt ill at ease with her.
She felt ashamed of her seeing the patched dressing jacket that had unluckily been packed by mistake for her.
At home it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets there would be needed twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, which was a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and making, and these thirty shillings had been saved.
But before the maid she felt, if not exactly ashamed, at least uncomfortable.
Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka, whom she had known for years, walked in.
The smart maid was sent for to go to her mistress, and Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.
Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s arrival, and began to chatter away without a pause.
Dolly observed that she was longing to express her opinion in regard to her mistress’s position, especially as to the love and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly carefully interrupted her whenever she began to speak about this.
“I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to me than anything.
And, to be sure, there seems so much love....” “Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please,” Darya Alexandrovna cut her short.
We’ve two women kept specially for washing small things, but most of the linen’s done by machinery.
The count goes into everything himself.
Ah, what a husband!...” Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop to Annushka’s gossip.
Dolly scrutinized that simple gown attentively.
She knew what it meant, and the price at which such simplicity was obtained.
“An old friend,” said Anna of Annushka.
Anna was not embarrassed now.
She was perfectly composed and at ease.
Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the impression her arrival had made on her, and had assumed that superficial, careless tone which, as it were, closed the door on that compartment in which her deeper feelings and ideas were kept.
“Annie?” (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.) “Very well.
She has got on wonderfully.
We had a terrible bother,” she began telling her, “over nurses.
A good creature, but so stupid!
We wanted to get rid of her, but the baby is so used to her that we’ve gone on keeping her still.” “But how have you managed?...” Dolly was beginning a question as to what name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden frown on Anna’s face, she changed the drift of her question.
“How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?” But Anna had understood.
She has no name—that is, she’s a Karenina,” said Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashes meeting.
“But we’ll talk about all that later,” her face suddenly brightening.
“Come, I’ll show you her. _Elle est très gentille_.
She crawls now.” In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole house struck her still more.
There were little go-carts ordered from England, and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa after the fashion of a billiard table, purposely constructed for crawling, and swings and baths, all of special pattern, and modern.
They were all English, solid, and of good make, and obviously very expensive.
When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock, was sitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having her dinner of broth, which she was spilling all over her little chest.
The baby was being fed, and the Russian nursery maid was evidently sharing her meal.
Neither the wet-nurse nor the head-nurse were there; they were in the next room, from which came the sound of their conversation in the queer French which was their only means of communication.
Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeable face and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly shaking her fair curls, and immediately began to defend herself though Anna had not found fault with her.
At every word Anna said, the English nurse said hurriedly several times, “Yes, my lady.” The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red little body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya Alexandrovna in spite of the cross expression with which she stared at the stranger.
She positively envied the baby’s healthy appearance.
She was delighted, too, at the baby’s crawling.
Not one of her own children had crawled like that.
When the baby was put on the carpet and its little dress tucked up behind, it was wonderfully charming.
Looking round like some little wild animal at the grown-up big people with her bright black eyes, she smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding her legs sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and rapidly drew her whole back up after, and then made another step forward with her little arms.
But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the English nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all.
It was only on the supposition that no good nurse would have entered so irregular a household as Anna’s that Darya Alexandrovna could explain to herself how Anna with her insight into people could take such an unprepossessing, disreputable-looking woman as nurse to her child.
Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw at once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence, and that the mother’s visit was something exceptional.
Anna wanted to get the baby her plaything, and could not find it.
Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last teeth.
“I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superfluous here,” said Anna, going out of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the plaything standing in the doorway.
“It was very different with my first child.” “I expected it to be the other way,” said Darya Alexandrovna shyly.
By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?” said Anna, screwing up her eyes, as though looking at something far away.
I must have everything out with you.” “Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet with us,” she went on.
Princess Varvara—you know her, and I know your opinion and Stiva’s about her.
Stiva says the whole aim of her existence is to prove her superiority over Auntie Katerina Pavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s a good-natured woman, and I am so grateful to her.
In Petersburg there was a moment when a chaperon was absolutely essential for me.
She did a great deal to alleviate my position.
I see you don’t understand all the difficulty of my position ... there in Petersburg,” she added.
“Here I’m perfectly at ease and happy.
Then Sviazhsky—he’s the marshal of the district, and he’s a very good sort of a man, but he wants to get something out of Alexey.
You understand, with his property, now that we are settled in the country, Alexey can exercise great influence.
Then there’s Tushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—Betsy’s admirer.
As Alexey says, he’s one of those people who are very pleasant if one accepts them for what they try to appear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_, as Princess Varvara says.
Then Veslovsky ... you know him.
Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we don’t believe it. _Il est très gentil et naïf_,” she said again with the same smile.
“Men need occupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I value all these people.
Then you’ll see the steward—a German, a very good fellow, and he understands his work.
Then the doctor, a young man, not quite a Nihilist perhaps, but you know, eats with his knife ... but a very good doctor.
Then the architect.... _Une petite cour!_” Chapter 20 “Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see her,” said Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone terrace where Princess Varvara was sitting in the shade at an embroidery frame, working at a cover for Count Alexey Kirillovitch’s easy chair.
“Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to my solitude; but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty, however difficult it may be for me—not like some other people.
And didn’t Biryuzovsky and Madame Avenieva ... and Sam Nikandrov, and Vassiliev and Madame Mamonova, and Liza Neptunova....
Did no one say anything about them?
And it has ended by their being received by everyone.
Tout-à-fait à l’anglaise.
On se réunit le matin au breakfast, et puis on se sépare._ Everyone does as he pleases till dinner time.
You know that through his mother and brother he can do anything.
He didn’t tell you about his hospital? _Ce sera admirable_—everything from Paris.” Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men of the party in the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace.
There was still a long time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite weather, and so several different methods of spending the next two hours were proposed.
There were very many methods of passing the time at Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlike those in use at Pokrovskoe.
“_Une partie de lawn-tennis,_” Veslovsky proposed, with his handsome smile.
“We’ll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna.” “No, it’s too hot; better stroll about the garden and have a row in the boat, show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks.” Vronsky proposed.
“I agree to anything,” said Sviazhsky.
Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off to the bathing place, promising to get the boat ready and to wait there for them.
They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, and Dolly with Vronsky.
Dolly was a little embarrassed and anxious in the new surroundings in which she found herself.
Abstractly, theoretically, she did not merely justify, she positively approved of Anna’s conduct.
As is indeed not unfrequent with women of unimpeachable virtue, weary of the monotony of respectable existence, at a distance she not only excused illicit love, she positively envied it.
But seeing Anna in actual life among these strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new to Darya Alexandrovna, she felt ill at ease.
What she disliked particularly was seeing Princess Varvara ready to overlook everything for the sake of the comforts she enjoyed.
As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna’s action; but to see the man for whose sake her action had been taken was disagreeable to her.
Moreover, she had never liked Vronsky.
But against her own will, here in his own house, he overawed her more than ever, and she could not be at ease with him.
She felt with him the same feeling she had had with the maid about her dressing jacket.
Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly ashamed, but embarrassed at her darns, so she felt with him not exactly ashamed, but embarrassed at herself.
Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of conversation.
Even though she supposed that, through his pride, praise of his house and garden would be sure to be disagreeable to him, she did all the same tell him how much she liked his house.
“Yes, it’s a very fine building, and in the good old-fashioned style,” he said.
Was that always so?” “Oh, no!” he said, and his face beamed with pleasure.
“If you could only have seen that court last spring!” And he began, at first rather diffidently, but more and more carried away by the subject as he went on, to draw her attention to the various details of the decoration of his house and garden.
It was evident that, having devoted a great deal of trouble to improve and beautify his home, Vronsky felt a need to show off the improvements to a new person, and was genuinely delighted at Darya Alexandrovna’s praise.
“If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed, it’s not far.
Shall we go?” he said, glancing into her face to convince himself that she was not bored.
“We will come, won’t we?” she said, addressing Sviazhsky.
“_Mais il ne faut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevitch se morfondre là dans le bateau._ We must send and tell them.” “Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here,” said Anna, turning to Dolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which she had previously talked about the hospital.
“Oh, it’s a work of real importance!” said Sviazhsky.
But to show he was not trying to ingratiate himself with Vronsky, he promptly added some slightly critical remarks.
“I wonder, though, count,” he said, “that while you do so much for the health of the peasants, you take so little interest in the schools.” “_C’est devenu tellement commun les écoles,_” said Vronsky.
“You understand it’s not on that account, but it just happens so, my interest has been diverted elsewhere.
This way then to the hospital,” he said to Darya Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning out of the avenue.
The ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side path.
After going down several turnings, and going through a little gate, Darya Alexandrovna saw standing on rising ground before her a large pretentious-looking red building, almost finished.
The iron roof, which was not yet painted, shone with dazzling brightness in the sunshine.
Beside the finished building another had been begun, surrounded by scaffolding.
Workmen in aprons, standing on scaffolds, were laying bricks, pouring mortar out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.
“How quickly work gets done with you!” said Sviazhsky.
Inside almost everything is done,” said Anna.
“And what’s this new building?” “That’s the house for the doctor and the dispensary,” answered Vronsky, seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards him; and excusing himself to the ladies, he went to meet him.
Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood still with the architect and began talking rather warmly.
“I said the foundation ought to be raised,” said Anna.
“Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna,” said the architect, “but now it’s too late.” “Yes, I take a great interest in it,” Anna answered Sviazhsky, who was expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture.
“This new building ought to have been in harmony with the hospital.
It was an afterthought, and was begun without a plan.” Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect, joined the ladies, and led them inside the hospital.
Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were painting on the ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms were finished.
Going up the broad cast-iron staircase to the landing, they walked into the first large room.
The walls were stuccoed to look like marble, the huge plate-glass windows were already in, only the parquet floor was not yet finished, and the carpenters, who were planing a block of it, left their work, taking off the bands that fastened their hair, to greet the gentry.
“This is the reception room,” said Vronsky.
From the reception room they went into the corridor.
Here Vronsky showed them the mechanism for ventilation on a novel system.
Then he showed them marble baths, and beds with extraordinary springs.
Then he showed them the wards one after another, the storeroom, the linen room, then the heating stove of a new pattern, then the trolleys, which would make no noise as they carried everything needed along the corridors, and many other things.
Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest mechanical improvements, appreciated everything fully.
Dolly simply wondered at all she had not seen before, and, anxious to understand it all, made minute inquiries about everything, which gave Vronsky great satisfaction.
“Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a properly fitted hospital in Russia,” said Sviazhsky.
I have often....” In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.
“This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and is intended for all diseases, except infectious complaints,” he said.
“Ah! look at this,” and he rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna an invalid chair that had just been ordered for the convalescents.
“The patient can’t walk—still too weak, perhaps, or something wrong with his legs, but he must have air, and he moves, rolls himself along....” Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything.
She liked everything very much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself with his natural, simple-hearted eagerness.
“Yes, he’s a very nice, good man,” she thought several times, not hearing what he said, but looking at him and penetrating into his expression, while she mentally put herself in Anna’s place.
She liked him so much just now with his eager interest that she saw how Anna could be in love with him.
Chapter 21 “No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don’t interest her,” Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables, where Sviazhsky wished to see the new stallion.
“You go on, while I escort the princess home, and we’ll have a little talk,” he said, “if you would like that?” he added, turning to her.
“I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted,” answered Darya Alexandrovna, rather astonished.
She saw by Vronsky’s face that he wanted something from her.
She was not mistaken.
As soon as they had passed through the little gate back into the garden, he looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having made sure that she could neither hear nor see them, he began: “You guess that I have something I want to say to you,” he said, looking at her with laughing eyes.
“I am not wrong in believing you to be a friend of Anna’s.” He took off his hat, and taking out his handkerchief, wiped his head, which was growing bald.
Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at him with dismay.
When she was left alone with him, she suddenly felt afraid; his laughing eyes and stern expression scared her.
The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of to her flashed into her brain.
“He is going to beg me to come to stay with them with the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set that will receive Anna in Moscow....
Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and his relations with Anna?
Or perhaps about Kitty, that he feels he was to blame?” All her conjectures were unpleasant, but she did not guess what he really wanted to talk about to her.
“You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond of you,” he said; “do help me.” Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his energetic face, which under the lime-trees was continually being lighted up in patches by the sunshine, and then passing into complete shadow again.
She waited for him to say more, but he walked in silence beside her, scratching with his cane in the gravel.
“You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna’s former friends—I don’t count Princess Varvara—but I know that you have done this not because you regard our position as normal, but because, understanding all the difficulty of the position, you still love her and want to be a help to her.
Have I understood you rightly?” he asked, looking round at her.
“Oh, yes,” answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down her sunshade, “but....” “No,” he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward position into which he was putting his companion, he stopped abruptly, so that she had to stop short too.
“No one feels more deeply and intensely than I do all the difficulty of Anna’s position; and that you may well understand, if you do me the honor of supposing I have any heart.
I am to blame for that position, and that is why I feel it.” “I understand,” said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring the sincerity and firmness with which he said this.
“But just because you feel yourself responsible, you exaggerate it, I am afraid,” she said.
“Her position in the world is difficult, I can well understand.” “In the world it is hell!” he brought out quickly, frowning darkly.
“You can’t imagine moral sufferings greater than what she went through in Petersburg in that fortnight ... and I beg you to believe it.” “Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna ... nor you miss society....” “Society!” he said contemptuously, “how could I miss society?” “So far—and it may be so always—you are happy and at peace.
I see in Anna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time to tell me so much already,” said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, as she said this, at the same moment a doubt entered her mind whether Anna really were happy.
But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.
“Yes, yes,” he said, “I know that she has revived after all her sufferings; she is happy.
I beg your pardon, you would like to walk on?” “No, I don’t mind.” “Well, then, let us sit here.” Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the avenue.
“I see that she is happy,” he repeated, and the doubt whether she were happy sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna’s mind.
Whether we have acted rightly or wrongly is another question, but the die is cast,” he said, passing from Russian to French, “and we are bound together for life.
We have a child, we may have other children.
But the law and all the conditions of our position are such that thousands of complications arise which she does not see and does not want to see.
And that one can well understand.
My daughter is by law not my daughter, but Karenin’s.
I cannot bear this falsity!” he said, with a vigorous gesture of refusal, and he looked with gloomy inquiry towards Darya Alexandrovna.
He went on: “One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a Karenin; he will not be the heir of my name nor of my property, and however happy we may be in our home life and however many children we may have, there will be no real tie between us.
They will be Karenins.
You can understand the bitterness and horror of this position!
She does not understand, and to her I cannot speak plainly of all this.
I am happy, happy in her love, but I must have occupation.
I have found occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it nobler than the pursuits of my former companions at court and in the army.
And most certainly I would not change the work I am doing for theirs.
I am working here, settled in my own place, and I am happy and contented, and we need nothing more to make us happy.
“Well, I will go on,” he said, collecting himself.
“The great thing is that as I work I want to have a conviction that what I am doing will not die with me, that I shall have heirs to come after me,—and this I have not.
Conceive the position of a man who knows that his children, the children of the woman he loves, will not be his, but will belong to someone who hates them and cares nothing about them!
It is awful!” He paused, evidently much moved.
But what can Anna do?” queried Darya Alexandrovna.
“Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation,” he said, calming himself with an effort.
Even to petition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce is essential.
Her husband agreed to a divorce—at that time your husband had arranged it completely.
He said plainly at that time that if she expressed the desire, he would not refuse.
Of course,” he said gloomily, “it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only such heartless men are capable.
He knows what agony any recollection of him must give her, and knowing her, he must have a letter from her.
I can understand that it is agony to her.
But the matter is of such importance, that one must _passer par-dessus toutes ces finesses de sentiment.
Il y va du bonheur et de l’existence d’Anne et de ses enfants._ I won’t speak of myself, though it’s hard for me, very hard,” he said, with an expression as though he were threatening someone for its being hard for him.
“And so it is, princess, that I am shamelessly clutching at you as an anchor of salvation.
Help me to persuade her to write to him and ask for a divorce.” “Yes, of course,” Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she vividly recalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Yes, of course,” she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.
“Use your influence with her, make her write.
But how is it she does not think of it herself?” said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason she suddenly at that point recalled Anna’s strange new habit of half-closing her eyes.
And she remembered that Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeper questions of life were touched upon.
“Just as though she half-shut her eyes to her own life, so as not to see everything,” thought Dolly.
“Yes, indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her,” Dolly said in reply to his look of gratitude.
Chapter 22 When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in her eyes, as though questioning her about the talk she had had with Vronsky, but she made no inquiry in words.
I am reckoning on the evening.
I expect you do too; we all got splashed at the buildings.” Dolly went to her room and she felt amused.
To change her dress was impossible, for she had already put on her best dress.
But in order to signify in some way her preparation for dinner, she asked the maid to brush her dress, changed her cuffs and tie, and put some lace on her head.
“This is all I can do,” she said with a smile to Anna, who came in to her in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.
“Yes, we are too formal here,” she said, as it were apologizing for her magnificence.
“Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he rarely is at anything.
He has completely lost his heart to you,” she added.
“You’re not tired?” There was no time for talking about anything before dinner.
Going into the drawing-room they found Princess Varvara already there, and the gentlemen of the party in black frock-coats.
The architect wore a swallow-tail coat.
Vronsky presented the doctor and the steward to his guest.
The architect he had already introduced to her at the hospital.
A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and a starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the ladies got up.
Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himself offered his arm to Dolly.
Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in offering his arm to Princess Varvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward and the doctor walked in alone.
The dinner, the dining-room, the service, the waiting at table, the wine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone of modern luxury throughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuous and modern.
Darya Alexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel to her, and as a good housekeeper used to managing a household—although she never dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own household, as it was all in a style of luxury far above her own manner of living—she could not help scrutinizing every detail, and wondering how and by whom it was all done.
Vassenka Veslovsky, her husband, and even Sviazhsky, and many other people she knew, would never have considered this question, and would have readily believed what every well-bred host tries to make his guests feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered in his house has cost him, the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of itself.
Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for the children’s breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, where so complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained, someone must give earnest attention to its organization.
And from the glance with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way he nodded to the butler, and offered Darya Alexandrovna her choice between cold soup and hot soup, she saw that it was all organized and maintained by the care of the master of the house himself.
It was evident that it all rested no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky.
She, Sviazhsky, the princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light hearts enjoying what had been arranged for them.
Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation.
The conversation was a difficult one for the lady of the house at a small table with persons present, like the steward and the architect, belonging to a completely different world, struggling not to be overawed by an elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to sustain a large share in the general conversation.
But this difficult conversation Anna directed with her usual tact and naturalness, and indeed she did so with actual enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed.
The conversation began about the row Tushkevitch and Veslovsky had taken alone together in the boat, and Tushkevitch began describing the last boat races in Petersburg at the Yacht Club.
But Anna, seizing the first pause, at once turned to the architect to draw him out of his silence.
“Nikolay Ivanitch was struck,” she said, meaning Sviazhsky, “at the progress the new building had made since he was here last; but I am there every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at which it grows.” “It’s first-rate working with his excellency,” said the architect with a smile (he was respectful and composed, though with a sense of his own dignity).
“It’s a very different matter to have to do with the district authorities.
Where one would have to write out sheaves of papers, here I call upon the count, and in three words we settle the business.” “The American way of doing business,” said Sviazhsky, with a smile.
“Yes, there they build in a rational fashion....” The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the United States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as to draw the steward into talk.
“Have you ever seen a reaping machine?” she said, addressing Darya Alexandrovna.
“Exactly like little scissors.
A plank and a lot of little scissors.
Like this.” Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered with rings, and began showing how the machine worked.
It was clear that she saw nothing would be understood from her explanation; but aware that her talk was pleasant and her hands beautiful she went on explaining.
“More like little penknives,” Veslovsky said playfully, never taking his eyes off her.
Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer.
“Isn’t it true, Karl Fedoritch, that it’s just like little scissors?” she said to the steward.
“_Oh, ja,_” answered the German. _“Es ist ein ganz einfaches Ding,”_ and he began to explain the construction of the machine.
I saw one at the Vienna exhibition, which binds with a wire,” said Sviazhsky.
“They would be more profitable in use.” _“Es kommt drauf an....
“We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch,” she said to the doctor, a sickly-looking man; “have you been there?” “I went there, but I had taken flight,” the doctor answered with gloomy jocoseness.
“Then you’ve taken a good constitutional?” “Splendid!” “Well, and how was the old woman?
I hope it’s not typhus?” “Typhus it is not, but it’s taking a bad turn.” “What a pity!” said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civility to her domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.
“It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from your description, Anna Arkadyevna,” Sviazhsky said jestingly.
“Oh, no, why so?” said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she knew there was something charming in her disquisitions upon the machine that had been noticed by Sviazhsky.
This new trait of girlish coquettishness made an unpleasant impression on Dolly.
“But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture is marvelous,” said Tushkevitch.
“To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths and damp-courses,” said Veslovsky.
“Have I got it right?” “There’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so much of it,” said Anna.
“But, I dare say, you don’t even know what houses are made of?” Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery that existed between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against her will.
Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin.
He obviously attached no significance to Veslovsky’s chattering; on the contrary, he encouraged his jests.
“Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?” “By cement, of course.” “Bravo!
And what is cement?” “Oh, some sort of paste ... no, putty,” said Veslovsky, raising a general laugh.
The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect, and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a conversation that never paused, glancing off one subject, fastening on another, and at times stinging one or the other to the quick.
Once Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded to the quick, and got so hot that she positively flushed and wondered afterwards whether she had said anything extreme or unpleasant.
Sviazhsky began talking of Levin, describing his strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its effects on Russian agriculture.
“I have not the pleasure of knowing this M.
Levin,” Vronsky said, smiling, “but most likely he has never seen the machines he condemns; or if he has seen and tried any, it must have been after a queer fashion, some Russian imitation, not a machine from abroad.
What sort of views can anyone have on such a subject?” “Turkish views, in general,” Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with a smile.
“I can’t defend his opinions,” Darya Alexandrovna said, firing up; “but I can say that he’s a highly cultivated man, and if he were here he would know very well how to answer you, though I am not capable of doing so.” “I like him extremely, and we are great friends,” Sviazhsky said, smiling good-naturedly.
“For my part,” pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason or other keenly affected by this conversation, “such as I am, I am, on the contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have done me, thanks to Nikolay Ivanitch” (he indicated Sviazhsky), “in electing me a justice of the peace.
I consider that for me the duty of being present at the session, of judging some peasants’ quarrel about a horse, is as important as anything I can do.
And I shall regard it as an honor if they elect me for the district council.
It’s only in that way I can pay for the advantages I enjoy as a landowner.
Unluckily they don’t understand the weight that the big landowners ought to have in the state.” It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely confident he was of being right at his own table.
She thought how Levin, who believed the opposite, was just as positive in his opinions at his own table.
“So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?” said Sviazhsky.
“But you must come a little beforehand, so as to be on the spot by the eighth.
Just as in old days there were so many government functionaries that one had to call in a functionary for every single thing, so now everyone’s doing some sort of public duty.
Alexey has been here now six months, and he’s a member, I do believe, of five or six different public bodies. _Du train que cela va,_ the whole time will be wasted on it.
And I’m afraid that with such a multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll end in being a mere form.
How many are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?” she turned to Sviazhsky—“over twenty, I fancy.” Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her tone.
Darya Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively, detected it instantly.
She noticed, too, that as she spoke Vronsky’s face had immediately taken a serious and obstinate expression.
Noticing this, and that Princess Varvara at once made haste to change the conversation by talking of Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky had without apparent connection said in the garden of his work in the country, Dolly surmised that this question of public activity was connected with some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.
The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very good; but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at formal dinners and balls which of late years had become quite unfamiliar to her; it all had the same impersonal and constrained character, and so on an ordinary day and in a little circle of friends it made a disagreeable impression on her.
After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play lawn tennis.
The players, divided into two parties, stood on opposite sides of a tightly drawn net with gilt poles on the carefully leveled and rolled croquet-ground.
Darya Alexandrovna made an attempt to play, but it was a long time before she could understand the game, and by the time she did understand it, she was so tired that she sat down with Princess Varvara and simply looked on at the players.
Her partner, Tushkevitch, gave up playing too, but the others kept the game up for a long time.
Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously.
They kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without haste or getting in each other’s way, they ran adroitly up to them, waited for the rebound, and neatly and accurately returned them over the net.
Veslovsky played worse than the others.
His laughter and outcries never paused.
Like the other men of the party, with the ladies’ permission, he took off his coat, and his solid, comely figure in his white shirt-sleeves, with his red perspiring face and his impulsive movements, made a picture that imprinted itself vividly on the memory.
When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she closed her eyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the croquet ground.
During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself.
She did not like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time between Vassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether of grown-up people, all alone without children, playing at a child’s game.
But to avoid breaking up the party and to get through the time somehow, after a rest she joined the game again, and pretended to be enjoying it.
All that day it seemed to her as though she were acting in a theater with actors cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was spoiling the whole performance.
She had come with the intention of staying two days, if all went well.
The maternal cares and worries, which she had so hated on the way, now, after a day spent without them, struck her in quite another light, and tempted her back to them.
When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya Alexandrovna went alone to her room, took off her dress, and began arranging her thin hair for the night, she had a great sense of relief.
It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was coming to see her immediately.
She longed to be alone with her own thoughts.
In the course of the day Anna had several times begun to speak of matters near her heart, and every time after a few words she had stopped: “Afterwards, by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything.
Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about.
She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in her own mind all the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible beforehand, and she found nothing.
At that moment it seemed to her that everything had been said already.
“Well, what of Kitty?” she said with a heavy sigh, looking penitently at Dolly.
Oh, no!” said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.
“But she hates me, despises me?” “Oh, no!
But you know that sort of thing isn’t forgiven.” “Yes, yes,” said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open window.
Could it have been otherwise?
Could it possibly have happened that you didn’t become the wife of Stiva?” “Really, I don’t know.
But this is what I want you to tell me....” “Yes, yes, but we’ve not finished about Kitty.
Much more than very nice,” she repeated.
“But tell me about yourself.
She felt it awkward to call him either the count or Alexey Kirillovitch.
But I wanted to ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?” “How am I to say like that straight off?
I see by everything that it will often be repeated, that he will be half the time away from home,” she said, getting up and sitting down close by Dolly.
“Of course,” she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, “of course I won’t try to keep him by force.
But think of me, fancy my position....
“Well, what did he talk about with you?” “He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it’s easy for me to be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility ... whether you could not....” (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated) “correct, improve your position....
But all the same, if possible, you should get married....” “Divorce, you mean?” said Anna.
“Do you know, the only woman who came to see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya?
You know her, of course? _Au fond, c’est la femme la plus depravée qui existe._ She had an intrigue with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest way.
And she told me that she did not care to know me so long as my position was irregular.
But I could not help remembering....
Well, so what did he say to you?” she repeated.
Perhaps you will say that it’s egoism, but what a legitimate and noble egoism.
He wants first of all to legitimize his daughter, and to be your husband, to have a legal right to you.” “What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in my position?” she put in gloomily.
“The chief thing he desires ... he desires that you should not suffer.” “That’s impossible.
Well?” “Well, and the most legitimate desire—he wishes that your children should have a name.” “What children?” Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closing her eyes.
“Annie and those to come....” “He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more children.” “How can you tell that you won’t?” “I shall not, because I don’t wish it.” And, in spite of all her emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of curiosity, wonder, and horror on Dolly’s face.
“The doctor told me after my illness....” “Impossible!” said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.
For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences and deductions from which are so immense that all that one feels for the first instant is that it is impossible to take it all in, and that one will have to reflect a great, great deal upon it.
This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one or two children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to her, aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory emotions, that she had nothing to say, and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder at Anna.
This was the very thing she had been dreaming of, but now learning that it was possible, she was horrified.
She felt that it was too simple a solution of too complicated a problem. _“N’est-ce pas immoral?”_ was all she said, after a brief pause.
Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to be with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of my husband—practically my husband,” Anna said in a tone intentionally superficial and frivolous.
“Yes, yes,” said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments she had used to herself, and not finding the same force in them as before.
“For you, for other people,” said Anna, as though divining her thoughts, “there may be reason to hesitate; but for me....
You must consider, I am not his wife; he loves me as long as he loves me.
Not like this!” She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with extraordinary rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas and memories rushed into Darya Alexandrovna’s head.
“I,” she thought, “did not keep my attraction for Stiva; he left me for others, and the first woman for whom he betrayed me did not keep him by being always pretty and lively.
He deserted her and took another.
If that is what he looks for, he will find dresses and manners still more attractive and charming.
And however white and beautiful her bare arms are, however beautiful her full figure and her eager face under her black curls, he will find something better still, just as my disgusting, pitiful, and charming husband does.” Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed.
Anna noticed this sigh, indicating dissent, and she went on.
In her armory she had other arguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.
But you must consider,” she went on; “you forget my position.
How can I desire children?
I’m not speaking of the suffering, I’m not afraid of that.
Think only, what are my children to be?
Ill-fated children, who will have to bear a stranger’s name.
For the very fact of their birth they will be forced to be ashamed of their mother, their father, their birth.” “But that is just why a divorce is necessary.” But Anna did not hear her.
She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with which she had so many times convinced herself.
“What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid bringing unhappy beings into the world!” She looked at Dolly, but without waiting for a reply she went on: “I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children,” she said.
“If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while if they are unhappy, I alone should be to blame for it.” These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her own reflections; but she heard them without understanding them.
“How can one wrong creatures that don’t exist?” she thought.
And all at once the idea struck her: could it possibly, under any circumstances, have been better for her favorite Grisha if he had never existed?
And this seemed to her so wild, so strange, that she shook her head to drive away this tangle of whirling, mad ideas.
“No, I don’t know; it’s not right,” was all she said, with an expression of disgust on her face.
And besides that,” added Anna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and the poverty of Dolly’s objections, seeming still to admit that it was not right, “don’t forget the chief point, that I am not now in the same position as you.
For you the question is: do you desire not to have any more children; while for me it is: do I desire to have them?
And that’s a great difference.
You must see that I can’t desire it in my position.” Darya Alexandrovna made no reply.
She suddenly felt that she had got far away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions on which they could never agree, and about which it was better not to speak.
Chapter 24 “Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your position, if possible,” said Dolly.
“Yes, if possible,” said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterly different tone, subdued and mournful.
“Surely you don’t mean a divorce is impossible?
I was told your husband had consented to it.” “Dolly, I don’t want to talk about that.” “Oh, we won’t then,” Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing the expression of suffering on Anna’s face.
You see, _je fais des passions._ Veslovsky....” “Yes, to tell the truth, I don’t like Veslovsky’s tone,” said Darya Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.
“Oh, that’s nonsense!
Dolly!”—she suddenly changed the subject—“you say I take too gloomy a view of things.
You can’t understand.
I don’t think about it!” she repeated, and a flush rose into her face.
She got up, straightening her chest, and sighed heavily.
With her light step she began pacing up and down the room, stopping now and then.
Not a day, not an hour passes that I don’t think of it, and blame myself for thinking of it ... because thinking of that may drive me mad.
Drive me mad!” she repeated.
“When I think of it, I can’t sleep without morphine.
He’s under the influence of Countess Lidia Ivanovna now.” Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head, following Anna with a face of sympathetic suffering.
What does it mean?” she said, evidently giving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought over and learned by heart.
“It means that I, hating him, but still recognizing that I have wronged him—and I consider him magnanimous—that I humiliate myself to write to him....
Either I receive a humiliating refusal or consent....
Well, I have received his consent, say....” Anna was at that moment at the furthest end of the room, and she stopped there, doing something to the curtain at the window.
He will grow up despising me, with his father, whom I’ve abandoned.
Do you see, I love ... equally, I think, but both more than myself—two creatures, Seryozha and Alexey.” She came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly, with her arms pressed tightly across her chest.
In her white dressing gown her figure seemed more than usually grand and broad.
She bent her head, and with shining, wet eyes looked from under her brows at Dolly, a thin little pitiful figure in her patched dressing jacket and nightcap, shaking all over with emotion.
“It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the other.
I can’t have them together, and that’s the only thing I want.
I don’t care about anything, anything.
So don’t blame me, don’t judge me for anything.
You can’t with your pure heart understand all that I’m suffering.” She went up, sat down beside Dolly, and with a guilty look, peeped into her face and took her hand.
“What are you thinking?
What are you thinking about me?
I don’t deserve contempt.
If anyone is unhappy, I am,” she articulated, and turning away, she burst into tears.
Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed.
She had felt for Anna with all her heart while she was speaking to her, but now she could not force herself to think of her.
The memories of home and of her children rose up in her imagination with a peculiar charm quite new to her, with a sort of new brilliance.
That world of her own seemed to her now so sweet and precious that she would not on any account spend an extra day outside it, and she made up her mind that she would certainly go back next day.
Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine-glass and dropped into it several drops of a medicine, of which the principal ingredient was morphine.
After drinking it off and sitting still a little while, she went into her bedroom in a soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.
When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at her.
He was looking for traces of the conversation which he knew that, staying so long in Dolly’s room, she must have had with her.
But in her expression of restrained excitement, and of a sort of reserve, he could find nothing but the beauty that always bewitched him afresh though he was used to it, the consciousness of it, and the desire that it should affect him.
He did not want to ask her what they had been talking of, but he hoped that she would tell him something of her own accord.
She’s very good-hearted, I suppose, _mais excessivement terre-à-terre._ Still, I’m very glad to see her.” He took Anna’s hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.
Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him.
Next morning, in spite of the protests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared for her homeward journey.
Levin’s coachman, in his by no means new coat and shabby hat, with his ill-matched horses and his coach with the patched mud-guards, drove with gloomy determination into the covered gravel approach.
Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and the gentlemen of the party.
After a day spent together, both she and her hosts were distinctly aware that they did not get on together, and that it was better for them not to meet.
She knew that now, from Dolly’s departure, no one again would stir up within her soul the feelings that had been roused by their conversation.
It hurt her to stir up these feelings, but yet she knew that that was the best part of her soul, and that that part of her soul would quickly be smothered in the life she was leading.
As she drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had a delightful sense of relief, and she felt tempted to ask the two men how they had liked being at Vronsky’s, when suddenly the coachman, Philip, expressed himself unasked: “Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all they gave us.
Everything cleared up till there wasn’t a grain left by cockcrow.
At our place, no fear, all comers may have as much as they can eat.” “The master’s a screw,” put in the counting-house clerk.
“The horses!—there’s no two opinions about them.
But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya Alexandrovna.
I don’t know what you thought,” he said, turning his handsome, good-natured face to her.
Well, shall we get home by evening?” “Eh, we must!” On reaching home and finding everyone entirely satisfactory and particularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great liveliness telling them how she had arrived, how warmly they had received her, of the luxury and good taste in which the Vronskys lived, and of their recreations, and she would not allow a word to be said against them.
“One has to know Anna and Vronsky—I have got to know him better now—to see how nice they are, and how touching,” she said, speaking now with perfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague feeling of dissatisfaction and awkwardness she had experienced there.
Chapter 25 Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter in the country, living in just the same condition, and still taking no steps to obtain a divorce.
It was an understood thing between them that they should not go away anywhere; but both felt, the longer they lived alone, especially in the autumn, without guests in the house, that they could not stand this existence, and that they would have to alter it.
Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be desired.
They had the fullest abundance of everything; they had a child, and both had occupation.
Anna devoted just as much care to her appearance when they had no visitors, and she did a great deal of reading, both of novels and of what serious literature was in fashion.
She ordered all the books that were praised in the foreign papers and reviews she received, and read them with that concentrated attention which is only given to what is read in seclusion.
Moreover, every subject that was of interest to Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so that he often went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture or architecture, sometimes even with questions relating to horse-breeding or sport.
He was amazed at her knowledge, her memory, and at first was disposed to doubt it, to ask for confirmation of her facts; and she would find what he asked for in some book, and show it to him.
The building of the hospital, too, interested her.
She did not merely assist, but planned and suggested a great deal herself.
Vronsky appreciated this desire not only to please, but to serve him, which had become the sole aim of her existence, but at the same time he wearied of the loving snares in which she tried to hold him fast.
As time went on, and he saw himself more and more often held fast in these snares, he had an ever growing desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether they hindered his freedom.
Had it not been for this growing desire to be free, not to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the town to a meeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly satisfied with his life.
The rôle he had taken up, the rôle of a wealthy landowner, one of that class which ought to be the very heart of the Russian aristocracy, was entirely to his taste; and now, after spending six months in that character, he derived even greater satisfaction from it.
And his management of his estate, which occupied and absorbed him more and more, was most successful.
In spite of the immense sums cost him by the hospital, by machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and many other things, he was convinced that he was not wasting, but increasing his substance.
In all matters affecting income, the sales of timber, wheat, and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky was hard as a rock, and knew well how to keep up prices.
In all operations on a large scale on this and his other estates, he kept to the simplest methods involving no risk, and in trifling details he was careful and exacting to an extreme degree.
In spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German steward, who would try to tempt him into purchases by making his original estimate always far larger than really required, and then representing to Vronsky that he might get the thing cheaper, and so make a profit, Vronsky did not give in.
He listened to his steward, cross-examined him, and only agreed to his suggestions when the implement to be ordered or constructed was the very newest, not yet known in Russia, and likely to excite wonder.
Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon an increased outlay only where there was a surplus, and in making such an outlay he went into the minutest details, and insisted on getting the very best for his money; so that by the method on which he managed his affairs, it was clear that he was not wasting, but increasing his substance.
In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky province, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev, Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin’s land.
These elections were attracting public attention from several circumstances connected with them, and also from the people taking part in them.
There had been a great deal of talk about them, and great preparations were being made for them.
Persons who never attended the elections were coming from Moscow, from Petersburg, and from abroad to attend these.
Vronsky had long before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.
Before the elections Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove over to fetch Vronsky.
On the day before there had been almost a quarrel between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition.
It was the very dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the country, and so, preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and cold expression, informed Anna of his departure as he had never spoken to her before.
But, to his surprise, Anna accepted the information with great composure, and merely asked when he would be back.
He looked intently at her, at a loss to explain this composure.
He knew that way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that it only happened when she had determined upon something without letting him know her plans.
He was afraid of this; but he was so anxious to avoid a scene that he kept up appearances, and half sincerely believed in what he longed to believe in—her reasonableness.
“I got a box of books yesterday from Gautier’s.
No, I shan’t be dull.” “She’s trying to take that tone, and so much the better,” he thought, “or else it would be the same thing over and over again.” And he set off for the elections without appealing to her for a candid explanation.
It was the first time since the beginning of their intimacy that he had parted from her without a full explanation.
From one point of view this troubled him, but on the other side he felt that it was better so.
“At first there will be, as this time, something undefined kept back, and then she will get used to it.
In any case I can give up anything for her, but not my masculine independence,” he thought.
Chapter 26 In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement.
He had spent a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, who had property in the Kashinsky province, and took great interest in the question of the approaching elections, made ready to set off to the elections.
He invited his brother, who had a vote in the Seleznevsky district, to come with him.
Levin had, moreover, to transact in Kashin some extremely important business relating to the wardship of land and to the receiving of certain redemption money for his sister, who was abroad.
Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in Moscow, and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the proper nobleman’s uniform, costing seven pounds.
Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, and busily engaged about his sister’s business, which still dragged on.
The district marshals of nobility were all occupied with the elections, and it was impossible to get the simplest thing done that depended upon the court of wardship.
The other matter, the payment of the sums due, was met too by difficulties.
After long negotiations over the legal details, the money was at last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obliging person, could not hand over the order, because it must have the signature of the president, and the president, though he had not given over his duties to a deputy, was at the elections.
All these worrying negotiations, this endless going from place to place, and talking with pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the unpleasantness of the petitioner’s position, but were powerless to assist him—all these efforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling of misery in Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness one experiences in dreams when one tries to use physical force.
He felt this frequently as he talked to his most good-natured solicitor.
This solicitor did, it seemed, everything possible, and strained every nerve to get him out of his difficulties.
“I tell you what you might try,” he said more than once; “go to so-and-so and so-and-so,” and the solicitor drew up a regular plan for getting round the fatal point that hindered everything.
But he would add immediately, “It’ll mean some delay, anyway, but you might try it.” And Levin did try, and did go.
Everyone was kind and civil, but the point evaded seemed to crop up again in the end, and again to bar the way.
What was particularly trying, was that Levin could not make out with whom he was struggling, to whose interest it was that his business should not be done.
That no one seemed to know; the solicitor certainly did not know.
If Levin could have understood why, just as he saw why one can only approach the booking office of a railway station in single file, it would not have been so vexatious and tiresome to him.
But with the hindrances that confronted him in his business, no one could explain why they existed.
But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was patient, and if he could not see why it was all arranged like this, he told himself that he could not judge without knowing all about it, and that most likely it must be so, and he tried not to fret.
In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he tried now not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as he could the question which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing honest and excellent men whom he respected.
Since his marriage there had been revealed to Levin so many new and serious aspects of life that had previously, through his frivolous attitude to them, seemed of no importance, that in the question of the elections too he assumed and tried to find some serious significance.
Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the proposed revolution at the elections.
He always took, in every question, the side of the nobility; he was positively antagonistic to the spread of popular education, and he succeeded in giving a purely party character to the district council which ought by rights to be of such an immense importance.
What was needed was to put in his place a fresh, capable, perfectly modern man, of contemporary ideas, and to frame their policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, not as the nobility, but as an element of the district council, to extract all the powers of self-government that could possibly be derived from them.
In the wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead of other provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance of forces that this policy, once carried through properly there, might serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia.
And hence the whole question was of the greatest importance.
It was proposed to elect as marshal in place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still, Nevyedovsky, a former university professor, a man of remarkable intelligence and a great friend of Sergey Ivanovitch.
The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the nobles, urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from regard for persons, but for the service and welfare of their fatherland, and hoping that the honorable nobility of the Kashinsky province would, as at all former elections, hold their duty as sacred, and vindicate the exalted confidence of the monarch.
When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of the hall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly—some even enthusiastically—followed him and thronged round him while he put on his fur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of the province.
Levin, anxious to see into everything and not to miss anything, stood there too in the crowd, and heard the governor say: “Please tell Marya Ivanovna my wife is very sorry she couldn’t come to the Home.” And thereupon the nobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove off to the cathedral.
In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and repeating the words of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all the governor had hoped they would do.
Church services always affected Levin, and as he uttered the words “I kiss the cross,” and glanced round at the crowd of young and old men repeating the same, he felt touched.
On the second and third days there was business relating to the finances of the nobility and the female high school, of no importance whatever, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing after his own affairs, did not attend the meetings.
On the fourth day the auditing of the marshal’s accounts took place at the high table of the marshal of the province.
And then there occurred the first skirmish between the new party and the old.
The committee who had been deputed to verify the accounts reported to the meeting that all was in order.
The marshal of the province got up, thanked the nobility for their confidence, and shed tears.
But at that instant a nobleman of Sergey Ivanovitch’s party said that he had heard that the committee had not verified the accounts, considering such a verification an insult to the marshal of the province.
One of the members of the committee incautiously admitted this.
Then a small gentleman, very young-looking but very malignant, began to say that it would probably be agreeable to the marshal of the province to give an account of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the misplaced delicacy of the members of the committee was depriving him of this moral satisfaction.
Then the members of the committee tried to withdraw their admission, and Sergey Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically admit either that they had verified the accounts or that they had not, and he developed this dilemma in detail.
Sergey Ivanovitch was answered by the spokesman of the opposite party.
Then Sviazhsky spoke, and then the malignant gentleman again.
The discussion lasted a long time and ended in nothing.
Levin was surprised that they should dispute upon this subject so long, especially as, when he asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether he supposed that money had been misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch answered: “Oh, no!
But those old-fashioned methods of paternal family arrangements in the management of provincial affairs must be broken down.” On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals.
It was rather a stormy day in several districts.
In the Seleznevsky district Sviazhsky was elected unanimously without a ballot, and he gave a dinner that evening.
Chapter 27 The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the province.
The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of uniforms.
Men who had not seen each other for years, some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some from abroad, met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility.
There was much discussion around the governor’s table under the portrait of the Tsar.
The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped themselves in camps, and from their hostile and suspicious glances, from the silence that fell upon them when outsiders approached a group, and from the way that some, whispering together, retreated to the farther corridor, it was evident that each side had secrets from the other.
In appearance the noblemen were sharply divided into two classes: the old and the new.
The old were for the most part either in old uniforms of the nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats, or in their own special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms.
The uniforms of the older men were embroidered in the old-fashioned way with epaulets on their shoulders; they were unmistakably tight and short in the waist, as though their wearers had grown out of them.
The younger men wore the uniform of the nobility with long waists and broad shoulders, unbuttoned over white waistcoats, or uniforms with black collars and with the embroidered badges of justices of the peace.
To the younger men belonged the court uniforms that here and there brightened up the crowd.
But the division into young and old did not correspond with the division of parties.
Some of the young men, as Levin observed, belonged to the old party; and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the contrary, were whispering with Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent partisans of the new party.
Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and taking light refreshments, close to his own friends, and listening to what they were saying, he conscientiously exerted all his intelligence trying to understand what was said.
Sergey Ivanovitch was the center round which the others grouped themselves.
He was listening at that moment to Sviazhsky and Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who belonged to their party.
Hliustov would not agree to go with his district to ask Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to do so, and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan.
Levin could not make out why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom they wanted to supersede.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some lunch, came up to them in his uniform of a gentleman of the bedchamber, wiping his lips with a perfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.
“We are placing our forces,” he said, pulling out his whiskers, “Sergey Ivanovitch!” And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky’s contention.
“One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of the opposition,” he said, words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.
I suppose you’re converted, eh?” he added, turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his.
Levin would have been glad indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was, and retreating a few steps from the speakers, he explained to Stepan Arkadyevitch his inability to understand why the marshal of the province should be asked to stand. _“O sancta simplicitas!”_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly and clearly he explained it to Levin.
If, as at previous elections, all the districts asked the marshal of the province to stand, then he would be elected without a ballot.
Now eight districts had agreed to call upon him: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might decline to stand at all; and then the old party might choose another of their party, which would throw them completely out in their reckoning.
But if only one district, Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov would let himself be balloted for.
They were even, some of them, going to vote for him, and purposely to let him get a good many votes, so that the enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a candidate of the other side was put up, they too might give him some votes.
Levin understood to some extent, but not fully, and would have put a few more questions, when suddenly everyone began talking and making a noise and they moved towards the big room.
“What is it? eh? whom?” “No guarantee? whose? what?” “They won’t pass him?” “No guarantee?” “They won’t let Flerov in?” “Eh, because of the charge against him?” “Why, at this rate, they won’t admit anyone.
It’s a swindle!” “The law!” Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and he moved into the big room together with the others, all hurrying somewhere and afraid of missing something.
Squeezed by the crowding noblemen, he drew near the high table where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky, and the other leaders were hotly disputing about something.
Chapter 28 Levin was standing rather far off.
A nobleman breathing heavily and hoarsely at his side, and another whose thick boots were creaking, prevented him from hearing distinctly.
He could only hear the soft voice of the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice of the malignant gentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky.
They were disputing, as far as he could make out, as to the interpretation to be put on the act and the exact meaning of the words: “liable to be called up for trial.” The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching the table.
Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant gentleman had finished speaking, said that he thought the best solution would be to refer to the act itself, and asked the secretary to find the act.
The act said that in case of difference of opinion, there must be a ballot.
Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning, but at that point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with dyed whiskers, in a tight uniform that cut the back of his neck, interrupted him.
He went up to the table, and striking it with his finger ring, he shouted loudly: “A ballot!
No need for more talking!” Then several voices began to talk all at once, and the tall nobleman with the ring, getting more and more exasperated, shouted more and more loudly.
But it was impossible to make out what he said.
He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had proposed; but it was evident that he hated him and all his party, and this feeling of hatred spread through the whole party and roused in opposition to it the same vindictiveness, though in a more seemly form, on the other side.
Shouts were raised, and for a moment all was confusion, so that the marshal of the province had to call for order.
Every nobleman sees it!
The confidence of the monarch....
No checking the accounts of the marshal; he’s not a cashier....
They expressed the most implacable hatred.
Levin did not in the least understand what was the matter, and he marveled at the passion with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about Flerov should be put to the vote.
“And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious and consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life,” concluded Sergey Ivanovitch.
But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to him to see all these excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such an unpleasant and vicious state of excitement.
To escape from this painful feeling he went away into the other room where there was nobody except the waiters at the refreshment bar.
Seeing the waiters busy over washing up the crockery and setting in order their plates and wine-glasses, seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an unexpected sense of relief as though he had come out of a stuffy room into the fresh air.
He began walking up and down, looking with pleasure at the waiters.
He particularly liked the way one gray-whiskered waiter, who showed his scorn for the other younger ones and was jeered at by them, was teaching them how to fold up napkins properly.
Levin was just about to enter into conversation with the old waiter, when the secretary of the court of wardship, a little old man whose specialty it was to know all the noblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew him away.
“Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said, “your brother’s looking for you.
They are voting on the legal point.” Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standing with a significant and ironical face, holding his beard in his fist and sniffing at it.
Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand into the box, put the ball somewhere, and making room for Levin, stopped.
Levin advanced, but utterly forgetting what he was to do, and much embarrassed, he turned to Sergey Ivanovitch with the question, “Where am I to put it?” He asked this softly, at a moment when there was talking going on near, so that he had hoped his question would not be overheard.
But the persons speaking paused, and his improper question was overheard.
Sergey Ivanovitch frowned.
“That is a matter for each man’s own decision,” he said severely.
Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his hand under the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in his right hand.
Having put it in, he recollected that he ought to have thrust his left hand too, and so he thrust it in though too late, and, still more overcome with confusion, he beat a hasty retreat into the background.
“A hundred and twenty-six for admission!
Ninety-eight against!” sang out the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the letter _r_.
The nobleman was allowed the right to vote, and the new party had conquered.
But the old party did not consider themselves conquered.
Levin heard that they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a crowd of noblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying something.
In reply Snetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of the province had placed in him, the affection they had shown him, which he did not deserve, as his only merit had been his attachment to the nobility, to whom he had devoted twelve years of service.
Several times he repeated the words: “I have served to the best of my powers with truth and good faith, I value your goodness and thank you,” and suddenly he stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out of the room.
Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice being done him, from his love for the nobility, or from the strain of the position he was placed in, feeling himself surrounded by enemies, his emotion infected the assembly, the majority were touched, and Levin felt a tenderness for Snetkov.
In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.
“Beg pardon, excuse me, please,” he said as to a stranger, but recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly.
It seemed to Levin that he would have liked to say something, but could not speak for emotion.
His face and his whole figure in his uniform with the crosses, and white trousers striped with braid, as he moved hurriedly along, reminded Levin of some hunted beast who sees that he is in evil case.
This expression in the marshal’s face was particularly touching to Levin, because, only the day before, he had been at his house about his trustee business and had seen him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted, fatherly man.
This old man was a touching and pathetic figure to Levin now, and he longed to say something pleasant to him.
“It’s not likely,” said the marshal, looking round with a scared expression.
If there are men younger and more deserving than I, let them serve.” And the marshal disappeared through a side door.
They were to proceed immediately to the election.
The leaders of both parties were reckoning white and black on their fingers.
The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only Flerov’s vote, but had also gained time for them, so that they could send to fetch three noblemen who had been rendered unable to take part in the elections by the wiles of the other party.
Two noble gentlemen, who had a weakness for strong drink, had been made drunk by the partisans of Snetkov, and a third had been robbed of his uniform.
On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the dispute about Flerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to clothe the stripped gentleman, and to bring along one of the intoxicated to the meeting.
“I’ve brought one, drenched him with water,” said the landowner, who had gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky.
“He’s all right? he’ll do.” “Not too drunk, he won’t fall down?” said Sviazhsky, shaking his head.
I’ve told the waiter not to give him anything on any account.” Chapter 29 The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments, was full of noblemen.
The excitement grew more intense, and every face betrayed some uneasiness.
The excitement was specially keen for the leaders of each party, who knew every detail, and had reckoned up every vote.
They were the generals organizing the approaching battle.
The rest, like the rank and file before an engagement, though they were getting ready for the fight, sought for other distractions in the interval.
Some were lunching, standing at the bar, or sitting at the table; others were walking up and down the long room, smoking cigarettes, and talking with friends whom they had not seen for a long while.
Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not want to join his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform was standing with them in eager conversation.
Levin had seen him already at the meeting on the previous day, and he had studiously avoided him, not caring to greet him.
He went to the window and sat down, scanning the groups, and listening to what was being said around him.
He felt depressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw, eager, anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little man with mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him, had no interest in it and nothing to do.
“He’s such a blackguard!
I have told him so, but it makes no difference.
He couldn’t collect it in three years!” he heard vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short, country gentleman, who had pomaded hair hanging on his embroidered collar, and new boots obviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped energetically as he spoke.
Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this gentleman sharply turned his back.
“Yes, it’s a dirty business, there’s no denying,” a small gentleman assented in a high voice.
Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout general, hurriedly came near Levin.
These persons were unmistakably seeking a place where they could talk without being overheard.
“How dare he say I had his breeches stolen!
They take their stand on the act,” was being said in another group; “the wife must be registered as noble.” “Oh, damn your acts!
We’re all gentlemen, aren’t we?
Above suspicion.” “Shall we go on, your excellency, _fine champagne?_” Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting something in a loud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated gentlemen.
“I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for she can never save a profit,” he heard a pleasant voice say.
The speaker was a country gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of an old general staff-officer.
It was the very landowner Levin had met at Sviazhsky’s.
The landowner too stared at Levin, and they exchanged greetings.
I remember you very well.
Last year at our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch’s.” “Well, and how is your land doing?” asked Levin.
“Oh, still just the same, always at a loss,” the landowner answered with a resigned smile, but with an expression of serenity and conviction that so it must be.
“And how do you come to be in our province?” he asked.
“Come to take part in our _coup d’état?_” he said, confidently pronouncing the French words with a bad accent.
“All Russia’s here—gentlemen of the bedchamber, and everything short of the ministry.” He pointed to the imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in white trousers and his court uniform, walking by with a general.
“I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the drift of the provincial elections,” said Levin.
The landowner looked at him.
“Why, what is there to understand?
It’s a decaying institution that goes on running only by the force of inertia.
Just look, the very uniforms tell you that it’s an assembly of justices of the peace, permanent members of the court, and so on, but not of noblemen.” “Then why do you come?” asked Levin.
Then, too, one must keep up connections.
It’s a moral obligation of a sort.
And then, to tell the truth, there’s one’s own interests.
My son-in-law wants to stand as a permanent member; they’re not rich people, and he must be brought forward.
These gentlemen, now, what do they come for?” he said, pointing to the malignant gentleman, who was talking at the high table.
“That’s the new generation of nobility.” “New it may be, but nobility it isn’t.
They’re proprietors of a sort, but we’re the landowners.
As noblemen, they’re cutting their own throats.” “But you say it’s an institution that’s served its time.” “That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little more respectfully.
We may be of use, or we may not, but we’re the growth of a thousand years.
If we’re laying out a garden, planning one before the house, you know, and there you’ve a tree that’s stood for centuries in the very spot....
Old and gnarled it may be, and yet you don’t cut down the old fellow to make room for the flowerbeds, but lay out your beds so as to take advantage of the tree.
You won’t grow him again in a year,” he said cautiously, and he immediately changed the conversation.
Aren’t you worth something too?
And what’s more,” the landowner went on, leaning his elbows on the window and chatting on, “my son, I must tell you, has no taste for it.
There’s no doubt he’ll be a scientific man.
Here this year I’ve planted an orchard.” “Yes, yes,” said Levin, “that’s perfectly true.
It’s a sort of duty one feels to the land.” “But I tell you what,” the landowner pursued; “a neighbor of mine, a merchant, was at my place.
‘No,’ said he, ‘Stepan Vassilievitch, everything’s well looked after, but your garden’s neglected.’ But, as a fact, it’s well kept up.
‘To my thinking, I’d cut down that lime-tree.
Here you’ve thousands of limes, and each would make two good bundles of bark.
And nowadays that bark’s worth something.
I’d cut down the lot.’” “And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy some land for a trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants,” Levin added, smiling.
He had evidently more than once come across those commercial calculations.
But you and I must thank God if we keep what we’ve got and leave it to our children.” “You’re married, I’ve heard?” said the landowner.
“Yes,” Levin answered, with proud satisfaction.
“So we live without making anything, as though we were ancient vestals set to keep in a fire.” The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.
“There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay Ivanovitch, or Count Vronsky, that’s settled here lately, who try to carry on their husbandry as though it were a factory; but so far it leads to nothing but making away with capital on it.” “But why is it we don’t do like the merchants?
Why don’t we cut down our parks for timber?” said Levin, returning to a thought that had struck him.
Besides that’s not work for a nobleman.
And our work as noblemen isn’t done here at the elections, but yonder, each in our corner.
There’s a class instinct, too, of what one ought and oughtn’t to do.
There’s the peasants, too, I wonder at them sometimes; any good peasant tries to take all the land he can.
“Very, very glad to have met you,” he added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.
“And here we’ve met for the first time since we met at your place,” said the landowner to Sviazhsky, “and we’ve had a good talk too.” “Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?” said Sviazhsky with a smile.
“That we’re bound to do.” “You’ve relieved your feelings?” Chapter 30 Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his own friends.
This time there was no avoiding Vronsky.
He was standing with Stepan Arkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as he drew near.
I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you ... at Princess Shtcherbatskaya’s,” he said, giving Levin his hand.
“Yes, I quite remember our meeting,” said Levin, and blushing crimson, he turned away immediately, and began talking to his brother.
With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviously without the slightest inclination to enter into conversation with Levin.
But Levin, as he talked to his brother, was continually looking round at Vronsky, trying to think of something to say to him to gloss over his rudeness.
“What are we waiting for now?” asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky and Vronsky.
He has to refuse or to consent to stand,” answered Sviazhsky.
“Well, and what has he done, consented or not?” “That’s the point, that he’s done neither,” said Vronsky.
“Whoever chooses to,” said Sviazhsky.
“Certainly not I,” said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning an alarmed glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing beside Sergey Ivanovitch.
Nevyedovsky?” said Levin, feeling he was putting his foot into it.
Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two candidates.
“I certainly shall not, under any circumstances,” answered the malignant gentleman.
This was Nevyedovsky himself.
Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.
“Well, you find it exciting too?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, winking at Vronsky.
“It’s something like a race.
One might bet on it.” “Yes, it is keenly exciting,” said Vronsky.
It’s a fight!” he said, scowling and setting his powerful jaws.
“What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is!
Sees it all so clearly.” “Oh, yes!” Vronsky assented indifferently.
A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he had to look at something—looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at his face, and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said, in order to say something: “How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a justice of the peace?
You are not in the uniform of one.” “It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly institution,” Levin answered gloomily.
He had been all the time looking for an opportunity to enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as to smooth over his rudeness at their first meeting.
“I don’t think so, quite the contrary,” Vronsky said, with quiet surprise.
“It’s a plaything,” Levin cut him short.
“We don’t want justices of the peace.
For some matter of two roubles I should have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen.” And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the miller, and when the miller told him of it, had lodged a complaint for slander.
All this was utterly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself as he said it.
“Oh, this is such an original fellow!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with his most soothing, almond-oil smile.
“But come along; I think they’re voting....” And they separated.
“I can’t understand,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed his brother’s clumsiness, “I can’t understand how anyone can be so absolutely devoid of political tact.
That’s where we Russians are so deficient.
The marshal of the province is our opponent, and with him you’re _ami cochon_, and you beg him to stand.
Then you ask Nevyedovsky if he’s going to stand.
That’s not a thing to do.” “Oh, I don’t understand it at all!
And it’s all such nonsense,” Levin answered gloomily.
“You say it’s all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything to do with it, you make a muddle.” Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.
The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in the air of some trap being prepared for him, and though he had not been called upon by all to stand, had still made up his mind to stand.
The secretary announced in a loud voice that the captain of the guards, Mihail Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now be balloted for as marshal of the province.
The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were balls, from their tables to the high table, and the election began.
“Put it in the right side,” whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as with his brother Levin followed the marshal of his district to the table.
But Levin had forgotten by now the calculations that had been explained to him, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying “the right side.” Surely Snetkov was the enemy.
As he went up, he held the ball in his right hand, but thinking he was wrong, just at the box he changed to the left hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left.
An adept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere action of the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance.
Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard.
Then a single voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and against.
The marshal had been voted for by a considerable majority.
All was noise and eager movement towards the doors.
Snetkov came in, and the nobles thronged round him, congratulating him.
“Well, now is it over?” Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.
“It’s only just beginning,” Sviazhsky said, replying for Sergey Ivanovitch with a smile.
“Some other candidate may receive more votes than the marshal.” Levin had quite forgotten about that.
Now he could only remember that there was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored to think what it was exactly.
He felt depressed, and longed to get out of the crowd.
As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently needed him, he quietly slipped away into the little room where the refreshments were, and again had a great sense of comfort when he saw the waiters.
The little old waiter pressed him to have something, and Levin agreed.
After eating a cutlet with beans and talking to the waiters of their former masters, Levin, not wishing to go back to the hall, where it was all so distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through the galleries.
The galleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over the balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was being said below.
With the ladies were sitting and standing smart lawyers, high school teachers in spectacles, and officers.
Everywhere they were talking of the election, and of how worried the marshal was, and how splendid the discussions had been.
One lady was telling a lawyer: “How glad I am I heard Koznishev!
So clear and distinct all of it!
The only one is Meidel, and he’s not so eloquent by a long way.” Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began looking and listening.
All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers according to their districts.
In the middle of the room stood a man in a uniform, who shouted in a loud, high voice: “As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the province we call upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!” A dead silence followed, and then a weak old voice was heard: “Declined!” “We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol,” the voice began again.
“Declined!” a high boyish voice replied.
Again it began, and again “Declined.” And so it went on for about an hour.
Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened.
At first he wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure that he could not make it out he began to be bored.
Then recalling all the excitement and vindictiveness he had seen on all the faces, he felt sad; he made up his mind to go, and went downstairs.
As he passed through the entry to the galleries he met a dejected high school boy walking up and down with tired-looking eyes.
On the stairs he met a couple—a lady running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputy prosecutor.
“I told you you weren’t late,” the deputy prosecutor was saying at the moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.
Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in his waistcoat pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the secretary overtook him.
“This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting.” The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so stoutly denied all idea of standing.
The secretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin was met by two red-faced gentlemen, who darted out.
“I can’t stand any more of it,” said one red-faced gentleman.
After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out.
His face was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.
“I told you not to let anyone out!” he cried to the doorkeeper.
“I let someone in, your excellency!” “Mercy on us!” and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the province walked with downcast head to the high table in the middle of the room, his legs staggering in his white trousers.
Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned, and he was the new marshal of the province.
Many people were amused, many were pleased and happy, many were in ecstasies, many were disgusted and unhappy.
The former marshal of the province was in a state of despair, which he could not conceal.
When Nevyedovsky went out of the room, the crowd thronged round him and followed him enthusiastically, just as they had followed the governor who had opened the meetings, and just as they had followed Snetkov when he was elected.
Chapter 31 The newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined that day with Vronsky.
Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in the country and wanted to show Anna his right to independence, and also to repay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for all the trouble he had taken for Vronsky at the district council election, but chiefly in order strictly to perform all those duties of a nobleman and landowner which he had taken upon himself.
But he had not in the least expected that the election would so interest him, so keenly excite him, and that he would be so good at this kind of thing.
He was quite a new man in the circle of the nobility of the province, but his success was unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had already obtained a certain influence.
This influence was due to his wealth and reputation, the capital house in the town lent him by his old friend Shirkov, who had a post in the department of finances and was director of a flourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky had brought from the country, and his friendship with the governor, who was a schoolfellow of Vronsky’s—a schoolfellow he had patronized and protected indeed.
But what contributed more than all to his success was his direct, equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made the majority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of his supposed haughtiness.
He was himself conscious that, except that whimsical gentleman married to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had _à propos de bottes_ poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such spiteful fury, every nobleman with whom he had made acquaintance had become his adherent.
He saw clearly, and other people recognized it, too, that he had done a great deal to secure the success of Nevyedovsky.
And now at his own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’s election, he was experiencing an agreeable sense of triumph over the success of his candidate.
The election itself had so fascinated him that, if he could succeed in getting married during the next three years, he began to think of standing himself—much as after winning a race ridden by a jockey, he had longed to ride a race himself.
Today he was celebrating the success of his jockey.
Vronsky sat at the head of the table, on his right hand sat the young governor, a general of high rank.
To all the rest he was the chief man in the province, who had solemnly opened the elections with his speech, and aroused a feeling of respect and even of awe in many people, as Vronsky saw; to Vronsky he was little Katka Maslov—that had been his nickname in the Pages’ Corps—whom he felt to be shy and tried to _mettre à son aise_.
On the left hand sat Nevyedovsky with his youthful, stubborn, and malignant face.
With him Vronsky was simple and deferential.
Sviazhsky took his failure very light-heartedly.
It was indeed no failure in his eyes, as he said himself, turning, glass in hand, to Nevyedovsky; they could not have found a better representative of the new movement, which the nobility ought to follow.
And so every honest person, as he said, was on the side of today’s success and was rejoicing over it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that he was having a good time, and that everyone was pleased.
The episode of the elections served as a good occasion for a capital dinner.
Sviazhsky comically imitated the tearful discourse of the marshal, and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky, that his excellency would have to select another more complicated method of auditing the accounts than tears.
Another nobleman jocosely described how footmen in stockings had been ordered for the marshal’s ball, and how now they would have to be sent back unless the new marshal would give a ball with footmen in stockings.
Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky: “our marshal,” and “your excellency.” This was said with the same pleasure with which a bride is called “Madame” and her husband’s name.
Nevyedovsky affected to be not merely indifferent but scornful of this appellation, but it was obvious that he was highly delighted, and had to keep a curb on himself not to betray the triumph which was unsuitable to their new liberal tone.
After dinner several telegrams were sent to people interested in the result of the election.
And Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was in high good humor, sent Darya Alexandrovna a telegram: “Nevyedovsky elected by twenty votes.
Tell people.” He dictated it aloud, saying: “We must let them share our rejoicing.” Darya Alexandrovna, getting the message, simply sighed over the rouble wasted on it, and understood that it was an after-dinner affair.
She knew Stiva had a weakness after dining for _faire jouer le télégraphe._ Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the wine, not from Russian merchants, but imported direct from abroad, was extremely dignified, simple, and enjoyable.
The party—some twenty—had been selected by Sviazhsky from among the more active new liberals, all of the same way of thinking, who were at the same time clever and well bred.
They drank, also half in jest, to the health of the new marshal of the province, of the governor, of the bank director, and of “our amiable host.” Vronsky was satisfied.
He had never expected to find so pleasant a tone in the provinces.
The governor asked Vronsky to come to a concert for the benefit of the Servians which his wife, who was anxious to make his acquaintance, had been getting up.
“There’ll be a ball, and you’ll see the belle of the province.
Worth seeing, really.” “Not in my line,” Vronsky answered.
But he smiled, and promised to come.
“From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger,” he said with a significant expression.
“Astonishing! how like he is to the deputy prosecutor Sventitsky,” said one of the guests in French of the valet, while Vronsky, frowning, read the letter.
Before he read the letter, he knew its contents.
Expecting the elections to be over in five days, he had promised to be back on Friday.
Today was Saturday, and he knew that the letter contained reproaches for not being back at the time fixed.
The letter he had sent the previous evening had probably not reached her yet.
The letter was what he had expected, but the form of it was unexpected, and particularly disagreeable to him.
“Annie is very ill, the doctor says it may be inflammation.
Princess Varvara is no help, but a hindrance.
I expected you the day before yesterday, and yesterday, and now I am sending to find out where you are and what you are doing.
Their daughter ill, and this hostile tone.
The innocent festivities over the election, and this gloomy, burdensome love to which he had to return struck Vronsky by their contrast.
Chapter 32 Before Vronsky’s departure for the elections, Anna had reflected that the scenes constantly repeated between them each time he left home, might only make him cold to her instead of attaching him to her, and resolved to do all she could to control herself so as to bear the parting with composure.
But the cold, severe glance with which he had looked at her when he came to tell her he was going had wounded her, and before he had started her peace of mind was destroyed.
In solitude afterwards, thinking over that glance which had expressed his right to freedom, she came, as she always did, to the same point—the sense of her own humiliation.
He looked at me with a cold, severe expression.
Of course that is something indefinable, impalpable, but it has never been so before, and that glance means a great deal,” she thought.
“That glance shows the beginning of indifference.” And though she felt sure that a coldness was beginning, there was nothing she could do, she could not in any way alter her relations to him.
And so, just as before, only by occupation in the day, by morphine at night, could she stifle the fearful thought of what would be if he ceased to love her.
It is true there was still one means; not to keep him—for that she wanted nothing more than his love—but to be nearer to him, to be in such a position that he would not leave her.
That means was divorce and marriage.
And she began to long for that, and made up her mind to agree to it the first time he or Stiva approached her on the subject.
Absorbed in such thoughts, she passed five days without him, the five days that he was to be at the elections.
Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the hospital, and, most of all, reading—reading of one book after another—filled up her time.
But on the sixth day, when the coachman came back without him, she felt that now she was utterly incapable of stifling the thought of him and of what he was doing there, just at that time her little girl was taken ill.
Anna began to look after her, but even that did not distract her mind, especially as the illness was not serious.
Towards the evening of that day, still alone, Anna was in such a panic about him that she decided to start for the town, but on second thoughts wrote him the contradictory letter that Vronsky received, and without reading it through, sent it off by a special messenger.
The next morning she received his letter and regretted her own.
She dreaded a repetition of the severe look he had flung at her at parting, especially when he knew that the baby was not dangerously ill.
At this moment Anna was positively admitting to herself that she was a burden to him, that he would relinquish his freedom regretfully to return to her, and in spite of that she was glad he was coming.
She was sitting in the drawing-room near a lamp, with a new volume of Taine, and as she read, listening to the sound of the wind outside, and every minute expecting the carriage to arrive.
Several times she had fancied she heard the sound of wheels, but she had been mistaken.
At last she heard not the sound of wheels, but the coachman’s shout and the dull rumble in the covered entry.
Even Princess Varvara, playing patience, confirmed this, and Anna, flushing hotly, got up; but instead of going down, as she had done twice before, she stood still.
She suddenly felt ashamed of her duplicity, but even more she dreaded how he might meet her.
All feeling of wounded pride had passed now; she was only afraid of the expression of his displeasure.
She remembered that her child had been perfectly well again for the last two days.
She felt positively vexed with her for getting better from the very moment her letter was sent off.
And forgetting everything, she ran joyfully to meet him.
“Well, I’m glad,” he said, coldly scanning her, her hair, her dress, which he knew she had put on for him.
All was charming, but how many times it had charmed him!
And the stern, stony expression that she so dreaded settled upon his face.
And are you well?” he said, wiping his damp beard with his handkerchief and kissing her hand.
“Never mind,” she thought, “only let him be here, and so long as he’s here he cannot, he dare not, cease to love me.” The evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of Princess Varvara, who complained to him that Anna had been taking morphine in his absence.
My thoughts prevented me.
When he’s here I never take it—hardly ever.” He told her about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit questions to bring him to what gave him most pleasure—his own success.
She told him of everything that interested him at home; and all that she told him was of the most cheerful description.
But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that she had regained complete possession of him, wanted to erase the painful impression of the glance he had given her for her letter.
She said: “Tell me frankly, you were vexed at getting my letter, and you didn’t believe me?” As soon as she had said it, she felt that however warm his feelings were to her, he had not forgiven her for that.
First, Annie ill, and then you thought of coming yourself.” “It was all the truth.” “Oh, I don’t doubt it.” “Yes, you do doubt it.
I’m only vexed, that’s true, that you seem somehow unwilling to admit that there are duties....” “The duty of going to a concert....” “But we won’t talk about it,” he said.
“I only meant to say that matters of real importance may turn up.
Now, for instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about the house....
Oh, Anna, why are you so irritable?
Don’t you know that I can’t live without you?” “If so,” said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, “it means that you are sick of this life....
Either we must separate or else live together.” “Why, you know, that’s my one desire.
But I will come with you to Moscow.” “You talk as if you were threatening me.
But as he said these words there gleamed in his eyes not merely a cold look, but the vindictive look of a man persecuted and made cruel.
She saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.
“If so, it’s a calamity!” that glance told her.
It was a moment’s impression, but she never forgot it.
Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce, and towards the end of November, taking leave of Princess Varvara, who wanted to go to Petersburg, she went with Vronsky to Moscow.
Expecting every day an answer from Alexey Alexandrovitch, and after that the divorce, they now established themselves together like married people.
The date had long passed on which, according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learned in such matters, Kitty should have been confined.
The doctor, the monthly nurse, and Dolly and her mother, and most of all Levin, who could not think of the approaching event without terror, began to be impatient and uneasy.
Kitty was the only person who felt perfectly calm and happy.
She was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new feeling of love for the future child, for her to some extent actually existing already, and she brooded blissfully over this feeling.
He was not by now altogether a part of herself, but sometimes lived his own life independently of her.
Often this separate being gave her pain, but at the same time she wanted to laugh with a strange new joy.
All the people she loved were with her, and all were so good to her, so attentively caring for her, so entirely pleasant was everything presented to her, that if she had not known and felt that it must all soon be over, she could not have wished for a better and pleasanter life.
She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the country.
In the town he seemed continually uneasy and on his guard, as though he were afraid someone would be rude to him, and still more to her.
At home in the country, knowing himself distinctly to be in his right place, he was never in haste to be off elsewhere.
He was never unoccupied.
Here in town he was in a continual hurry, as though afraid of missing something, and yet he had nothing to do.
But she saw him not from without, but from within; she saw that here he was not himself; that was the only way she could define his condition to herself.
Sometimes she inwardly reproached him for his inability to live in the town; sometimes she recognized that it was really hard for him to order his life here so that he could be satisfied with it.
Spending the time with jovial gentlemen of Oblonsky’s type—she knew now what that meant ... it meant drinking and going somewhere after drinking.
She could not think without horror of where men went on such occasions.
But she knew he could only find satisfaction in that if he took pleasure in the society of young women, and that she could not wish for.
But much as she liked and enjoyed their conversations forever on the same subjects—“Aline-Nadine,” as the old prince called the sisters’ talks—she knew it must bore him.
To go on writing at his book he had indeed attempted, and at first he used to go to the library and make extracts and look up references for his book.
But, as he told her, the more he did nothing, the less time he had to do anything.
And besides, he complained that he had talked too much about his book here, and that consequently all his ideas about it were muddled and had lost their interest for him.
One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly ever happened between them here in town.
Whether it was that their conditions were different, or that they had both become more careful and sensible in that respect, they had no quarrels in Moscow from jealousy, which they had so dreaded when they moved from the country.
One event, an event of great importance to both from that point of view, did indeed happen—that was Kitty’s meeting with Vronsky.
The old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kitty’s godmother, who had always been very fond of her, had insisted on seeing her.
Kitty, though she did not go into society at all on account of her condition, went with her father to see the venerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.
The only thing Kitty could reproach herself for at this meeting was that at the instant when she recognized in his civilian dress the features once so familiar to her, her breath failed her, the blood rushed to her heart, and a vivid blush—she felt it—overspread her face.
She said a few words to him, even smiled serenely at his joke about the elections, which he called “our parliament.” (She had to smile to show she saw the joke.) But she turned away immediately to Princess Marya Borissovna, and did not once glance at him till he got up to go; then she looked at him, but evidently only because it would be uncivil not to look at a man when he is saying good-bye.
She was grateful to her father for saying nothing to her about their meeting Vronsky, but she saw by his special warmth to her after the visit during their usual walk that he was pleased with her.
She had not expected she would have had the power, while keeping somewhere in the bottom of her heart all the memories of her old feeling for Vronsky, not only to seem but to be perfectly indifferent and composed with him.
Levin flushed a great deal more than she when she told him she had met Vronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna’s.
It was very hard for her to tell him this, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of the meeting, as he did not question her, but simply gazed at her with a frown.
I couldn’t have been so natural in your presence ...
I am blushing now much more, much, much more,” she said, blushing till the tears came into her eyes.
“But that you couldn’t see through a crack.” The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself, and in spite of her blushing he was quickly reassured and began questioning her, which was all she wanted.
“It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an enemy whom it’s painful to meet,” said Levin.
But what are you going to do in the morning?” “I am only going to Katavasov,” answered Levin.
“Why so early?” “He promised to introduce me to Metrov.
He’s a distinguished scientific man from Petersburg,” said Levin.
“Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so?
“I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister’s business.” “And the concert?” she queried.
That interested you so.
I should certainly go.” “Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner,” he said, looking at his watch.
“Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on Countess Bola.” “But is it absolutely necessary?” “Oh, absolutely!
I’ve got so out of the way of all this that it makes me feel positively ashamed.
It’s such a horrible thing to do!
A complete outsider walks in, sits down, stays on with nothing to do, wastes their time and worries himself, and walks away!” Kitty laughed.
How much?” he said, with the expression of dissatisfaction she knew so well.
I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money seems to fly away simply.
It was a sign of intense dissatisfaction, not with her, but with himself.
He certainly was displeased not at so much money being spent, but at being reminded of what he, knowing something was unsatisfactory, wanted to forget.
We shall have money enough in any case.” “Yes, but I’m afraid that altogether....” “Oh, it’s all right, all right,” he repeated.
“Well, good-bye, darling.” “No, I’m really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma.
As it is, I’m worrying you all, and we’re wasting our money.” “Not at all, not at all.
He had said it without thinking, simply to console her.
But when he glanced at her and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened questioningly on him, he repeated it with his whole heart.
“I was positively forgetting her,” he thought.
And he remembered what was before them, so soon to come.
How do you feel?” he whispered, taking her two hands.
“I have so often thought so, that now I don’t think about it or know anything about it.” “And you’re not frightened?” She smiled contemptuously.
“Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov’s.” “No, nothing will happen, and don’t think about it.
I’m going for a walk on the boulevard with papa.
Do you know that Dolly’s position is becoming utterly impossible?
We were talking yesterday with mamma and Arseny” (this was her sister’s husband Lvov), “and we determined to send you with him to talk to Stiva.
It’s really unbearable.
“You’ll be at Arseny’s, anyway; talk to him, he will tell what we decided.” “Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand.
Well, good-bye.” On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had been with him before his marriage, and now looked after their household in town.
He had tried to arrange this part of their expenses in the best and cheapest way possible; but it appeared that their own horses came dearer than hired horses, and they still hired too.
“Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise.” “And for Katerina Alexandrovna?” asked Kouzma.
Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by the fact that to get from one end of Moscow to the other he had to have two powerful horses put into a heavy carriage, to take the carriage three miles through the snowy slush and to keep it standing there four hours, paying five roubles every time.
“Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster,” said he.
“Yes, sir.” And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levin settled a question which, in the country, would have called for so much personal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called a sledge, sat down, and drove to Nikitsky.
On the way he thought no more of money, but mused on the introduction that awaited him to the Petersburg savant, a writer on sociology, and what he would say to him about his book.
Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struck by the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive but inevitable, that was expected of him on every side.
That had happened to him in this matter which is said to happen to drunkards—the first glass sticks in the throat, the second flies down like a hawk, but after the third they’re like tiny little birds.
But the next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations, that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, which men would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed and winnowed and sifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more easily.
And now the notes he changed no longer aroused such reflections, and they flew off like little birds.
Whether the labor devoted to obtaining the money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was bought with it, was a consideration he had long ago dismissed.
His business calculation that there was a certain price below which he could not sell certain grain was forgotten too.
The rye, for the price of which he had so long held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measure cheaper than it had been fetching a month ago.
Even the consideration that with such an expenditure he could not go on living for a year without debt, that even had no force.
Only one thing was essential: to have money in the bank, without inquiring where it came from, so as to know that one had the wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow.
And this condition had hitherto been fulfilled; he had always had the money in the bank.
But now the money in the bank had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get the next installment.
And this it was which, at the moment when Kitty had mentioned money, had disturbed him; but he had no time to think about it.
He drove off, thinking of Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov that was before him.
Chapter 3 Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old friend at the university, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since his marriage.
He liked in Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of his conception of life.
Levin thought that the clearness of Katavasov’s conception of life was due to the poverty of his nature; Katavasov thought that the disconnectedness of Levin’s ideas was due to his lack of intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov’s clearness, and Katavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin’s untrained ideas, and they liked to meet and to discuss.
Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked them.
On the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and told him that the celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much liked, was in Moscow, that he had been much interested by what Katavasov had told him about Levin’s work, and that he was coming to see him tomorrow at eleven, and would be very glad to make Levin’s acquaintance.
“You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad to see,” said Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing-room.
“I heard the bell and thought: Impossible that it can be he at the exact time!...
Well, what do you say to the Montenegrins now?
They’re a race of warriors.” “Why, what’s happened?” asked Levin.
Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the war, and going into his study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set man of pleasant appearance.
The conversation touched for a brief space on politics and on how recent events were looked at in the higher spheres in Petersburg.
Metrov repeated a saying that had reached him through a most trustworthy source, reported as having been uttered on this subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers.
Katavasov had heard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said something quite different.
Levin tried to imagine circumstances in which both sayings might have been uttered, and the conversation on that topic dropped.
“What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but studying the chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer,” said Levin, reddening, “I could not help coming to quite unexpected results.” And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to expound his views.
He knew Metrov had written an article against the generally accepted theory of political economy, but to what extent he could reckon on his sympathy with his own new views he did not know and could not guess from the clever and serene face of the learned man.
“But in what do you see the special characteristics of the Russian laborer?” said Metrov; “in his biological characteristics, so to speak, or in the condition in which he is placed?” Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which he did not agree.
But he went on explaining his own idea that the Russian laborer has a quite special view of the land, different from that of other people; and to support this proposition he made haste to add that in his opinion this attitude of the Russian peasant was due to the consciousness of his vocation to people vast unoccupied expanses in the East.
“One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the general vocation of a people,” said Metrov, interrupting Levin.
“The condition of the laborer will always depend on his relation to the land and to capital.” And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov began expounding to him the special point of his own theory.
In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand, because he did not take the trouble to understand.
He saw that Metrov, like other people, in spite of his own article, in which he had attacked the current theory of political economy, looked at the position of the Russian peasant simply from the point of view of capital, wages, and rent.
He would indeed have been obliged to admit that in the eastern—much the larger—part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that for nine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages took the form simply of food provided for themselves, and that capital does not so far exist except in the form of the most primitive tools.
Yet it was only from that point of view that he considered every laborer, though in many points he differed from the economists and had his own theory of the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.
Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections.
He would have liked to interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought, which in his opinion would have rendered further exposition of Metrov’s theories superfluous.
But later on, feeling convinced that they looked at the matter so differently, that they could never understand one another, he did not even oppose his statements, but simply listened.
Although what Metrov was saying was by now utterly devoid of interest for him, he yet experienced a certain satisfaction in listening to him.
It flattered his vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to him so eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin’s understanding of the subject, sometimes with a mere hint referring him to a whole aspect of the subject.
He put this down to his own credit, unaware that Metrov, who had already discussed his theory over and over again with all his intimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to every new person, and in general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject that interested him, even if still obscure to himself.
“We are late though,” said Katavasov, looking at his watch directly Metrov had finished his discourse.
“Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today in commemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch,” said Katavasov in answer to Levin’s inquiry.
“Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going.
I’ve promised to deliver an address on his labors in zoology.
Come along with us, it’s very interesting.” “Yes, and indeed it’s time to start,” said Metrov.
It’s no good yet, it’s unfinished.
He has handed in the separate report,” Katavasov called from the other room, where he was putting on his frock coat.
And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which was a very important event that winter in Moscow.
Three old professors in the council had not accepted the opinion of the younger professors.
The young ones had registered a separate resolution.
This, in the judgment of some people, was monstrous, in the judgment of others it was the simplest and most just thing to do, and the professors were split up into two parties.
One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party a scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in them childishness and lack of respect for the authorities.
Levin, though he did not belong to the university, had several times already during his stay in Moscow heard and talked about this matter, and had his own opinion on the subject.
He took part in the conversation that was continued in the street, as they all three walked to the buildings of the old university.
Round the cloth-covered table, at which Katavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozen persons, and one of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading something aloud.
Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that were standing round the table, and in a whisper asked a student sitting near what was being read.
The student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said: “Biography.” Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not help listening, and learned some new and interesting facts about the life of the distinguished man of science.
When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked him and read some verses of the poet Ment sent him on the jubilee, and said a few words by way of thanks to the poet.
Then Katavasov in his loud, ringing voice read his address on the scientific labors of the man whose jubilee was being kept.
When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it was past one, and thought that there would not be time before the concert to read Metrov his book, and indeed, he did not now care to do so.
During the reading he had thought over their conversation.
He saw distinctly now that though Metrov’s ideas might perhaps have value, his own ideas had a value too, and their ideas could only be made clear and lead to something if each worked separately in his chosen path, and that nothing would be gained by putting their ideas together.
And having made up his mind to refuse Metrov’s invitation, Levin went up to him at the end of the meeting.
Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman, with whom he was talking of the political news.
Metrov told the chairman what he had already told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks on his news that he had already made that morning, but for the sake of variety he expressed also a new opinion which had only just struck him.
After that the conversation turned again on the university question.
As Levin had already heard it all, he made haste to tell Metrov that he was sorry he could not take advantage of his invitation, took leave, and drove to Lvov’s.
Chapter 4 Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty’s sister, had spent all his life in foreign capitals, where he had been educated, and had been in the diplomatic service.
During the previous year he had left the diplomatic service, not owing to any “unpleasantness” (he never had any “unpleasantness” with anyone), and was transferred to the department of the court of the palace in Moscow, in order to give his two boys the best education possible.
In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the fact that Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of one another that winter, and had taken a great liking to each other.
Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.
Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes, was sitting in an armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue glasses he was reading a book that stood on a reading desk, while in his beautiful hand he held a half-burned cigarette daintily away from him.
His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which his curly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air, lighted up with a smile when he saw Levin.
Sit here, it’s more comfortable.” He got up and pushed up a rocking chair.
“Have you read the last circular in the _Journal de St.
Pétersbourg?_ I think it’s excellent,” he said, with a slight French accent.
Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was being said in Petersburg, and after talking a little about politics, he told him of his interview with Metrov, and the learned society’s meeting.
To Lvov it was very interesting.
“That’s what I envy you, that you are able to mix in these interesting scientific circles,” he said.
My official work and the children leave me no time; and then I’m not ashamed to own that my education has been too defective.” “That I don’t believe,” said Levin with a smile, feeling, as he always did, touched at Lvov’s low opinion of himself, which was not in the least put on from a desire to seem or to be modest, but was absolutely sincere.
I feel now how badly educated I am.
To educate my children I positively have to look up a great deal, and in fact simply to study myself.
For it’s not enough to have teachers, there must be someone to look after them, just as on your land you want laborers and an overseer.
See what I’m reading”—he pointed to Buslaev’s _Grammar_ on the desk—“it’s expected of Misha, and it’s so difficult....
Here he says....” Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn’t be understood, but that it had to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with him.
“Oh, you’re laughing at it!” “On the contrary, you can’t imagine how, when I look at you, I’m always learning the task that lies before me, that is the education of one’s children.” “Well, there’s nothing for you to learn,” said Lvov.
“All I know,” said Levin, “is that I have never seen better brought-up children than yours, and I wouldn’t wish for children better than yours.” Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of his delight, but he was positively radiant with smiles.
They’re such clever children.
The great thing is the education of character.
That’s what I learn when I look at your children.” “You talk of the education of character.
You can’t imagine how difficult that is!
You have hardly succeeded in combating one tendency when others crop up, and the struggle begins again.
If one had not a support in religion—you remember we talked about that—no father could bring children up relying on his own strength alone without that help.” This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by the entrance of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.
“I didn’t know you were here,” she said, unmistakably feeling no regret, but a positive pleasure, in interrupting this conversation on a topic she had heard so much of that she was by now weary of it.
I tell you what, Arseny,” she turned to her husband, “you take the carriage.” And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for the day.
As the husband had to drive to meet someone on official business, while the wife had to go to the concert and some public meeting of a committee on the Eastern Question, there was a great deal to consider and settle.
Levin had to take part in their plans as one of themselves.
It was settled that Levin should go with Natalia to the concert and the meeting, and that from there they should send the carriage to the office for Arseny, and he should call for her and take her to Kitty’s; or that, if he had not finished his work, he should send the carriage back and Levin would go with her.
“He’s spoiling me,” Lvov said to his wife; “he assures me that our children are splendid, when I know how much that’s bad there is in them.” “Arseny goes to extremes, I always say,” said his wife.
“If you look for perfection, you will never be satisfied.
And it’s true, as papa says,—that when we were brought up there was one extreme—we were kept in the basement, while our parents lived in the best rooms; now it’s just the other way—the parents are in the wash house, while the children are in the best rooms.
Parents now are not expected to live at all, but to exist altogether for their children.” “Well, what if they like it better?” Lvov said, with his beautiful smile, touching her hand.
“Anyone who didn’t know you would think you were a stepmother, not a true mother.” “No, extremes are not good in anything,” Natalia said serenely, putting his paper-knife straight in its proper place on the table.
“Well, come here, you perfect children,” Lvov said to the two handsome boys who came in, and after bowing to Levin, went up to their father, obviously wishing to ask him about something.
Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would say to their father, but Natalia began talking to him, and then Lvov’s colleague in the service, Mahotin, walked in, wearing his court uniform, to go with him to meet someone, and a conversation was kept up without a break upon Herzegovina, Princess Korzinskaya, the town council, and the sudden death of Madame Apraksina.
Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him.
He recollected it as he was going into the hall.
“Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky,” he said, as Lvov was standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin off.
“Yes, yes, maman wants us, _les beaux-frères,_ to attack him,” he said, blushing.
“But why should I?” “Well, then, I will attack him,” said Madame Lvova, with a smile, standing in her white sheepskin cape, waiting till they had finished speaking.
“Come, let us go.” Chapter 5 At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting things were performed.
One was a fantasia, _King Lear;_ the other was a quartette dedicated to the memory of Bach.
After escorting his sister-in-law to her stall, he stood against a column and tried to listen as attentively and conscientiously as possible.
He tried not to let his attention be distracted, and not to spoil his impression by looking at the conductor in a white tie, waving his arms, which always disturbed his enjoyment of music so much, or the ladies in bonnets, with strings carefully tied over their ears, and all these people either thinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things except the music.
He tried to avoid meeting musical connoisseurs or talkative acquaintances, and stood looking at the floor straight before him, listening.
But the more he listened to the fantasia of _King Lear_ the further he felt from forming any definite opinion of it.
There was, as it were, a continual beginning, a preparation of the musical expression of some feeling, but it fell to pieces again directly, breaking into new musical motives, or simply nothing but the whims of the composer, exceedingly complex but disconnected sounds.
And these fragmentary musical expressions, though sometimes beautiful, were disagreeable, because they were utterly unexpected and not led up to by anything.
Gaiety and grief and despair and tenderness and triumph followed one another without any connection, like the emotions of a madman.
And those emotions, like a madman’s, sprang up quite unexpectedly.
During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf man watching people dancing, and was in a state of complete bewilderment when the fantasia was over, and felt a great weariness from the fruitless strain on his attention.
Loud applause resounded on all sides.
Everyone got up, moved about, and began talking.
Anxious to throw some light on his own perplexity from the impressions of others, Levin began to walk about, looking for connoisseurs, and was glad to see a well-known musical amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he knew.
“Marvelous!” Pestsov was saying in his mellow bass.
“How are you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch?
Particularly sculpturesque and plastic, so to say, and richly colored is that passage where you feel Cordelia’s approach, where woman, _das ewig Weibliche,_ enters into conflict with fate.
Isn’t it?” “You mean ... what has Cordelia to do with it?” Levin asked timidly, forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent King Lear.
“Cordelia comes in ... see here!” said Pestsov, tapping his finger on the satiny surface of the program he held in his hand and passing it to Levin.
Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made haste to read in the Russian translation the lines from Shakespeare that were printed on the back of the program.
“You can’t follow it without that,” said Pestsov, addressing Levin, as the person he had been speaking to had gone away, and he had no one to talk to.
In the _entr’acte_ Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon the merits and defects of music of the Wagner school.
Levin maintained that the mistake of Wagner and all his followers lay in their trying to take music into the sphere of another art, just as poetry goes wrong when it tries to paint a face as the art of painting ought to do, and as an instance of this mistake he cited the sculptor who carved in marble certain poetic phantasms flitting round the figure of the poet on the pedestal.
“These phantoms were so far from being phantoms that they were positively clinging on the ladder,” said Levin.
The comparison pleased him, but he could not remember whether he had not used the same phrase before, and to Pestsov, too, and as he said it he felt confused.
Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can attain its highest manifestations only by conjunction with all kinds of art.
The second piece that was performed Levin could not hear.
Pestsov, who was standing beside him, was talking to him almost all the time, condemning the music for its excessive affected assumption of simplicity, and comparing it with the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelites in painting.
As he went out Levin met many more acquaintances, with whom he talked of politics, of music, and of common acquaintances.
Among others he met Count Bol, whom he had utterly forgotten to call upon.
You’ll find me still there.” Chapter 6 “Perhaps they’re not at home?” said Levin, as he went into the hall of Countess Bola’s house.
“At home; please walk in,” said the porter, resolutely removing his overcoat.
“How annoying!” thought Levin with a sigh, taking off one glove and stroking his hat.
What have I to say to them?” As he passed through the first drawing-room Levin met in the doorway Countess Bola, giving some order to a servant with a care-worn and severe face.
In this room there were sitting in armchairs the two daughters of the countess, and a Moscow colonel, whom Levin knew.
The countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and she too asked after his wife and inquired about the concert.
Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina’s sudden death.
“But she was always in weak health.” “Were you at the opera yesterday?” “Yes, I was.” “Lucca was very good.” “Yes, very good,” he said, and as it was utterly of no consequence to him what they thought of him, he began repeating what they had heard a hundred times about the characteristics of the singer’s talent.
Countess Bola pretended to be listening.
At last, after speaking of the proposed _folle journée_ at Turin’s, the colonel laughed, got up noisily, and went away.
Levin too rose, but he saw by the face of the countess that it was not yet time for him to go.
But as he was thinking all the while how stupid it was, he could not find a subject for conversation, and sat silent.
They say it will be very interesting,” began the countess.
“No, I promised my _belle-sœur_ to fetch her from it,” said Levin.
The mother once more exchanged glances with a daughter.
The porter asked him, as he gave him his coat, “Where is your honor staying?” and immediately wrote down his address in a big handsomely bound book.
“Of course I don’t care, but still I feel ashamed and awfully stupid,” thought Levin, consoling himself with the reflection that everyone does it.
At the public meeting of the committee there were a great many people, and almost all the highest society.
Levin was in time for the report which, as everyone said, was very interesting.
But, probably from the mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he made a blunder in speaking of the trial, and this blunder he recalled several times with vexation.
Speaking of the sentence upon a foreigner who had been condemned in Russia, and of how unfair it would be to punish him by exile abroad, Levin repeated what he had heard the day before in conversation from an acquaintance.
“I think sending him abroad is much the same as punishing a carp by putting it into the water,” said Levin.
Then he recollected that this idea, which he had heard from an acquaintance and uttered as his own, came from a fable of Krilov’s, and that the acquaintance had picked it up from a newspaper article.
Members and visitors were driving up as he arrived.
Levin had not been at the club for a very long while—not since he lived in Moscow, when he was leaving the university and going into society.
He remembered the club, the external details of its arrangement, but he had completely forgotten the impression it had made on him in old days.
The prince put your name down yesterday.
Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch is not here yet.” The porter did not only know Levin, but also all his ties and relationships, and so immediately mentioned his intimate friends.
Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the room partitioned on the right, where a man sits at the fruit buffet, Levin overtook an old man walking slowly in, and entered the dining-room full of noise and people.
He walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked at the visitors.
He saw people of all sorts, old and young; some he knew a little, some intimate friends.
All seemed to have left their cares and anxieties in the porter’s room with their hats, and were all deliberately getting ready to enjoy the material blessings of life.
Sviazhsky was here and Shtcherbatsky, Nevyedovsky and the old prince, and Vronsky and Sergey Ivanovitch.
“Ah! why are you late?” the prince said smiling, and giving him his hand over his own shoulder.
“How’s Kitty?” he added, smoothing out the napkin he had tucked in at his waistcoat buttons.
Go to that table, and make haste and take a seat,” said the prince, and turning away he carefully took a plate of eel soup.
He had always liked the good-hearted rake, Turovtsin—he was associated in his mind with memories of his courtship—and at that moment, after the strain of intellectual conversation, the sight of Turovtsin’s good-natured face was particularly welcome.
“For you and Oblonsky.
He’ll be here directly.” The young man, holding himself very erect, with eyes forever twinkling with enjoyment, was an officer from Petersburg, Gagin.
Turovtsin introduced them.
“Oblonsky’s always late.” “Ah, here he is!” “Have you only just come?” said Oblonsky, coming quickly towards them.
Well, come along then.” Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread with spirits and appetizers of the most various kinds.
One would have thought that out of two dozen delicacies one might find something to one’s taste, but Stepan Arkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the liveried waiters standing by immediately brought what was required.
They drank a wine-glassful and returned to their table.
At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served with champagne, and told the waiter to fill four glasses.
He was very hungry, and ate and drank with great enjoyment, and with still greater enjoyment took part in the lively and simple conversation of his companions.
Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last good story from Petersburg, and the story, though improper and stupid, was so ludicrous that Levin broke into roars of laughter so loud that those near looked round.
“That’s in the same style as, ‘that’s a thing I can’t endure!’ You know the story?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Ah, that’s exquisite!
“Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him,” a little old waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate glasses of sparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the glass, and looking towards a bald man with red mustaches at the other end of the table, he nodded to him, smiling.
“You met him once at my place, don’t you remember?
A good-natured fellow.” Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s anecdote too was very amusing.
Levin told his story, and that too was successful.
“Ah! and here they are!” Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the end of dinner, leaning over the back of his chair and holding out his hand to Vronsky, who came up with a tall officer of the Guards.
Vronsky’s face too beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment that was general in the club.
He propped his elbow playfully on Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shoulder, whispering something to him, and he held out his hand to Levin with the same good-humored smile.
“I looked out for you at the election, but I was told you had gone away.” “Yes, I left the same day.
I congratulate you,” said Levin.
“It was very rapidly run.” “Yes; you’ve race horses too, haven’t you?” “No, my father had; but I remember and know something about it.” “Where have you dined?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“We were at the second table, behind the columns.” “We’ve been celebrating his success,” said the tall colonel.
“It’s his second Imperial prize.
Well, why waste the precious time?
I’m going to the ‘infernal regions,’” added the colonel, and he walked away.
“That’s Yashvin,” Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and he sat down in the vacated seat beside them.
Under the influence of the club atmosphere or the wine he had drunk, Levin chatted away to Vronsky of the best breeds of cattle, and was very glad not to feel the slightest hostility to this man.
He even told him, among other things, that he had heard from his wife that she had met him at Princess Marya Borissovna’s.
“Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she’s exquisite!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and he told an anecdote about her which set them all laughing.
Vronsky particularly laughed with such simplehearted amusement that Levin felt quite reconciled to him.
“Well, have we finished?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up with a smile.
“Let us go.” Chapter 8 Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the lofty room to the billiard room, feeling his arms swing as he walked with a peculiar lightness and ease.
“Well, how do you like our Temple of Indolence?” said the prince, taking his arm.
“Come along, come along!” “Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything.
It’s interesting.” “Yes, it’s interesting for you.
But its interest for me is quite different.
You look at those little old men now,” he said, pointing to a club member with bent back and projecting lip, shuffling towards them in his soft boots, “and imagine that they were _shlupiks_ like that from their birth up.” “How _shlupiks_?” “I see you don’t know that name.
That’s our club designation.
So it is with us; one goes on coming and coming to the club, and ends by becoming a _shlupik_.
Ah, you laugh! but we look out, for fear of dropping into it ourselves.
You know Prince Tchetchensky?” inquired the prince; and Levin saw by his face that he was just going to relate something funny.
Well, Prince Tchetchensky is a well-known figure.
He’s always playing billiards here.
Only three years ago he was not a _shlupik_ and kept up his spirits and even used to call other people _shlupiks_.
And so Prince Tchetchensky asks him, ‘Come, Vassily, who’s here?
They peeped into the “infernal regions,” where a good many men were crowding round one table, at which Yashvin was sitting.
Trying not to make a noise, they walked into the dark reading room, where under the shaded lamps there sat a young man with a wrathful countenance, turning over one journal after another, and a bald general buried in a book.
They went, too, into what the prince called the intellectual room, where three gentlemen were engaged in a heated discussion of the latest political news.
Levin sat down and listened, but recalling all the conversation of the morning he felt all of a sudden fearfully bored.
He got up hurriedly, and went to look for Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom it had been so pleasant.
Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard room, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky near the door at the farther corner of the room.
“It’s not that she’s dull; but this undefined, this unsettled position,” Levin caught, and he was hurrying away, but Stepan Arkadyevitch called to him.
“Levin,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that his eyes were not full of tears exactly, but moist, which always happened when he had been drinking, or when he was touched.
“Levin, don’t go,” he said, and he warmly squeezed his arm above the elbow, obviously not at all wishing to let him go.
“This is a true friend of mine—almost my greatest friend,” he said to Vronsky.
And I want you, and I know you ought, to be friends, and great friends, because you’re both splendid fellows.” “Well, there’s nothing for us now but to kiss and be friends,” Vronsky said, with good-natured playfulness, holding out his hand.
“Waiter, a bottle of champagne,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s desire, and their own desire, they had nothing to talk about, and both felt it.
“Do you know, he has never met Anna?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Vronsky.
“And I want above everything to take him to see her.
I should be going home at once,” he added, “but I’m worried about Yashvin, and I want to stay on till he finishes.” “Why, is he losing?” “He keeps losing, and I’m the only friend that can restrain him.” “Well, what do you say to pyramids?
Capital!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“It has been ready a long while,” answered the marker, who had already set the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one about for his own diversion.
“Well, let us begin.” After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin’s table, and at Stepan Arkadyevitch’s suggestion Levin took a hand in the game.
Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were incessantly coming up to him.
Every now and then he went to the “infernal” to keep an eye on Yashvin.
Levin was enjoying a delightful sense of repose after the mental fatigue of the morning.
He was glad that all hostility was at an end with Vronsky, and the sense of peace, decorum, and comfort never left him.
When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin’s arm.
I promised her long ago to bring you.
Where were you meaning to spend the evening?” “Oh, nowhere specially.
I promised Sviazhsky to go to the Society of Agriculture.
Find out if my carriage is here,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to the waiter.
Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost; paid his bill, the amount of which was in some mysterious way ascertained by the little old waiter who stood at the counter, and swinging his arms he walked through all the rooms to the way out.
Chapter 9 “Oblonsky’s carriage!” the porter shouted in an angry bass.
The carriage drove up and both got in.
It was only for the first few moments, while the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin was still under the influence of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, and unimpeachable good form.
But as soon as the carriage drove out into the street, and he felt it jolting over the uneven road, heard the angry shout of a sledge driver coming towards them, saw in the uncertain light the red blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression was dissipated, and he began to think over his actions, and to wonder whether he was doing right in going to see Anna.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch gave him no time for reflection, and, as though divining his doubts, he scattered them.
Though she is my sister,” Stepan Arkadyevitch pursued, “I don’t hesitate to say that she’s a remarkable woman.
Her position is very painful, especially now.” “Why especially now?” “We are carrying on negotiations with her husband about a divorce.
And he’s agreed; but there are difficulties in regard to the son, and the business, which ought to have been arranged long ago, has been dragging on for three months past.
How stupid these old ceremonies are, that no one believes in, and which only prevent people being comfortable!” Stepan Arkadyevitch put in.
“Well, then their position will be as regular as mine, as yours.” “What is the difficulty?” said Levin.
The whole business is in such an anomalous position with us.
But the point is she has been for three months in Moscow, where everyone knows her, waiting for the divorce; she goes out nowhere, sees no woman except Dolly, because, do you understand, she doesn’t care to have people come as a favor.
That fool Princess Varvara, even she has left her, considering this a breach of propriety.
Well, you see, in such a position any other woman would not have found resources in herself.
But you’ll see how she has arranged her life—how calm, how dignified she is.
To the left, in the crescent opposite the church!” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, leaning out of the window.
“Phew! how hot it is!” he said, in spite of twelve degrees of frost, flinging his open overcoat still wider open.
“But she has a daughter: no doubt she’s busy looking after her?” said Levin.
“I believe you picture every woman simply as a female, _une couveuse,_” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“If she’s occupied, it must be with her children.
No, she brings her up capitally, I believe, but one doesn’t hear about her.
I see you’re smiling ironically, but you’re wrong.
She’s writing a children’s book, and doesn’t talk about it to anyone, but she read it to me and I gave the manuscript to Vorkuev ... you know the publisher ... and he’s an author himself too, I fancy.
He understands those things, and he says it’s a remarkable piece of work.
But are you fancying she’s an authoress?—not a bit of it.
She’s a woman with a heart, before everything, but you’ll see.
Now she has a little English girl with her, and a whole family she’s looking after.” “Oh, something in a philanthropic way?” “Why, you will look at everything in the worst light.
It’s not from philanthropy, it’s from the heart.
They—that is, Vronsky—had a trainer, an Englishman, first-rate in his own line, but a drunkard.
He’s completely given up to drink—delirium tremens—and the family were cast on the world.
She saw them, helped them, got more and more interested in them, and now the whole family is on her hands.
But not by way of patronage, you know, helping with money; she’s herself preparing the boys in Russian for the high school, and she’s taken the little girl to live with her.
But you’ll see her for yourself.” The carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan Arkadyevitch rang loudly at the entrance where sledges were standing.
And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the lady were at home, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall.
Levin followed him, more and more doubtful whether he was doing right or wrong.
Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in the face, but he felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed Stepan Arkadyevitch up the carpeted stairs.
At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired of the footman, who bowed to him as to an intimate friend, who was with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the answer that it was M.
“Where are they?” “In the study.” Passing through the dining-room, a room not very large, with dark, paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the soft carpet to the half-dark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big dark shade.
Another lamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall, lighting up a big full-length portrait of a woman, which Levin could not help looking at.
It was the portrait of Anna, painted in Italy by Mihailov.
While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behind the _treillage_, and the man’s voice which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the portrait, which stood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown on it, and he could not tear himself away from it.
He positively forgot where he was, and not even hearing what was said, he could not take his eyes off the marvelous portrait.
It was not a picture, but a living, charming woman, with black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders, with a pensive smile on the lips, covered with soft down; triumphantly and softly she looked at him with eyes that baffled him.
She was not living only because she was more beautiful than a living woman can be.
“I am delighted!” He heard suddenly near him a voice, unmistakably addressing him, the voice of the very woman he had been admiring in the portrait.
Anna had come from behind the _treillage_ to meet him, and Levin saw in the dim light of the study the very woman of the portrait, in a dark blue shot gown, not in the same position nor with the same expression, but with the same perfection of beauty which the artist had caught in the portrait.
She was less dazzling in reality, but, on the other hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the living woman which was not in the portrait.
Chapter 10 She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure at seeing him; and in the quiet ease with which she held out her little vigorous hand, introduced him to Vorkuev and indicated a red-haired, pretty little girl who was sitting at work, calling her her pupil, Levin recognized and liked the manners of a woman of the great world, always self-possessed and natural.
“I am delighted, delighted,” she repeated, and on her lips these simple words took for Levin’s ears a special significance.
“I have known you and liked you for a long while, both from your friendship with Stiva and for your wife’s sake....
I knew her for a very short time, but she left on me the impression of an exquisite flower, simply a flower.
And to think she will soon be a mother!” She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from Levin to her brother, and Levin felt that the impression he was making was good, and he felt immediately at home, simple and happy with her, as though he had known her from childhood.
“Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey’s study,” she said in answer to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s question whether he might smoke, “just so as to be able to smoke”—and glancing at Levin, instead of asking whether he would smoke, she pulled closer a tortoise-shell cigar-case and took a cigarette.
Nerves, as usual.” “Yes, isn’t it extraordinarily fine?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, noticing that Levin was scrutinizing the picture.
“I have never seen a better portrait.” “And extraordinarily like, isn’t it?” said Vorkuev.
Levin looked from the portrait to the original.
A peculiar brilliance lighted up Anna’s face when she felt his eyes on her.
Levin flushed, and to cover his confusion would have asked whether she had seen Darya Alexandrovna lately; but at that moment Anna spoke.
“We were just talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of Vashtchenkov’s last pictures.
Have you seen them?” “Yes, I have seen them,” answered Levin.
“But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you ... you were saying?...” Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.
“She was here yesterday.
She was very indignant with the high school people on Grisha’s account.
The Latin teacher, it seems, had been unfair to him.” “Yes, I have seen his pictures.
Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike attitude to the subject with which he had been talking all the morning.
Every word in his conversation with her had a special significance.
And talking to her was pleasant; still pleasanter it was to listen to her.
Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and carelessly, attaching no value to her own ideas and giving great weight to the ideas of the person she was talking to.
The conversation turned on the new movement in art, on the new illustrations of the Bible by a French artist.
Vorkuev attacked the artist for a realism carried to the point of coarseness.
Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further than anyone, and that consequently they see a great merit in the return to realism.
Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much pleasure as this remark.
Anna’s face lighted up at once, as at once she appreciated the thought.
“I laugh,” she said, “as one laughs when one sees a very true portrait.
What you said so perfectly hits off French art now, painting and literature too, indeed—Zola, Daudet.
But perhaps it is always so, that men form their conceptions from fictitious, conventional types, and then—all the _combinaisons_ made—they are tired of the fictitious figures and begin to invent more natural, true figures.” “That’s perfectly true,” said Vorknev.
“Yes, yes, this is a woman!” Levin thought, forgetting himself and staring persistently at her lovely, mobile face, which at that moment was all at once completely transformed.
Levin did not hear what she was talking of as she leaned over to her brother, but he was struck by the change of her expression.
Her face—so handsome a moment before in its repose—suddenly wore a look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride.
She dropped her eyelids, as though recollecting something.
“Oh, well, but that’s of no interest to anyone,” she said, and she turned to the English girl.
“Well, how did she get through her examination?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
She’s a very gifted child and a sweet character.” “It will end in your loving her more than your own.” “There a man speaks.
I love my daughter with one love, and her with another.” “I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna,” said Vorkuev, “that if she were to put a hundredth part of the energy she devotes to this English girl to the public question of the education of Russian children, she would be doing a great and useful work.” “Yes, but I can’t help it; I couldn’t do it.
Count Alexey Kirillovitch urged me very much” (as she uttered the words _Count Alexey Kirillovitch_ she glanced with appealing timidity at Levin, and he unconsciously responded with a respectful and reassuring look); “he urged me to take up the school in the village.
The children were very nice, but I could not feel drawn to the work.
And her smile and her glance—all told him that it was to him only she was addressing her words, valuing his good opinion, and at the same time sure beforehand that they understood each other.
“I quite understand that,” Levin answered.
“It’s impossible to give one’s heart to a school or such institutions in general, and I believe that’s just why philanthropic institutions always give such poor results.” She was silent for a while, then she smiled.
“Yes, yes,” she agreed; “I never could. _Je n’ai pas le cœur assez_ large to love a whole asylum of horrid little girls. _Cela ne m’a jamais réussi._ There are so many women who have made themselves _une position sociale_ in that way.
And now more than ever,” she said with a mournful, confiding expression, ostensibly addressing her brother, but unmistakably intending her words only for Levin, “now when I have such need of some occupation, I cannot.” And suddenly frowning (Levin saw that she was frowning at herself for talking about herself) she changed the subject.
“I know about you,” she said to Levin; “that you’re not a public-spirited citizen, and I have defended you to the best of my ability.” “How have you defended me?” “Oh, according to the attacks made on you.
“Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna,” said Vorkuev, indicating the book.
“It’s well worth taking up.” “Oh, no, it’s all so sketchy.” “I told him about it,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister, nodding at Levin.
My writing is something after the fashion of those little baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me from the prisons.
She had the direction of the prison department in that society,” she turned to Levin; “and they were miracles of patience, the work of those poor wretches.” And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who attracted him so extraordinarily.
She had no wish to hide from him all the bitterness of her position.
As she said that she sighed, and her face suddenly taking a hard expression, looked as it were turned to stone.
With that expression on her face she was more beautiful than ever; but the expression was new; it was utterly unlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creating happiness, which had been caught by the painter in her portrait.
Levin looked more than once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking her brother’s arm she walked with him to the high doors and he felt for her a tenderness and pity at which he wondered himself.
“About her divorce, about Vronsky, and what he’s doing at the club, about me?” wondered Levin.
And he was so keenly interested by the question of what she was saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard what Vorkuev was telling him of the qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevna had written.
At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting matter, continued.
There was not a single instant when a subject for conversation was to seek; on the contrary, it was felt that one had hardly time to say what one had to say, and eagerly held back to hear what the others were saying.
And all that was said, not only by her, but by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so it seemed to Levin, gained peculiar significance from her appreciation and her criticism.
While he followed this interesting conversation, Levin was all the time admiring her—her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same time her directness and genuine depth of feeling.
He listened and talked, and all the while he was thinking of her inner life, trying to divine her feelings.
And though he had judged her so severely hitherto, now by some strange chain of reasoning he was justifying her and was also sorry for her, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand her.
At eleven o’clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev had left earlier), it seemed to Levin that he had only just come.
Regretfully Levin too rose.
“Good-bye,” she said, holding his hand and glancing into his face with a winning look.
“Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she cannot pardon me my position, then my wish for her is that she may never pardon it.
To pardon it, one must go through what I have gone through, and may God spare her that.” “Certainly, yes, I will tell her....” Levin said, blushing.
Chapter 11 “What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!” he was thinking, as he stepped out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Well, didn’t I tell you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that Levin had been completely won over.
“Yes,” said Levin dreamily, “an extraordinary woman!
It’s not her cleverness, but she has such wonderful depth of feeling.
I’m awfully sorry for her!” “Now, please God, everything will soon be settled.
Well, well, don’t be hard on people in future,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, opening the carriage door.
“Good-bye; we don’t go the same way.” Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in their conversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in her expression, entering more and more into her position, and feeling sympathy for her, Levin reached home.
At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well, and that her sisters had not long been gone, and he handed him two letters.
Levin read them at once in the hall, that he might not overlook them later.
Sokolov wrote that the corn could not be sold, that it was fetching only five and a half roubles, and that more than that could not be got for it.
She scolded him for her business being still unsettled.
“Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t get more,” Levin decided the first question, which had always before seemed such a weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot.
“It’s extraordinary how all one’s time is taken up here,” he thought, considering the second letter.
“Today, again, I’ve not been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time.” And resolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to his wife.
As he went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he had spent.
All the events of the day were conversations, conversations he had heard and taken part in.
All the conversations were upon subjects which, if he had been alone at home, he would never have taken up, but here they were very interesting.
And all these conversations were right enough, only in two places there was something not quite right.
One was what he had said about the carp, the other was something not “quite the thing” in the tender sympathy he was feeling for Anna.
Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull.
The dinner of the three sisters had gone off very well, but then they had waited and waited for him, all of them had felt dull, the sisters had departed, and she had been left alone.
“Well, and what have you been doing?” she asked him, looking straight into his eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious brightness.
But that she might not prevent his telling her everything, she concealed her close scrutiny of him, and with an approving smile listened to his account of how he had spent the evening.
You understand, I shall try not to see him, but I’m glad that this awkwardness is all over,” he said, and remembering that by way of trying not to see him, he had immediately gone to call on Anna, he blushed.
“We talk about the peasants drinking; I don’t know which drinks most, the peasantry or our own class; the peasants do on holidays, but....” But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinking habits of the peasants.
“Well, and then where did you go?” “Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna.” And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as to whether he had done right in going to see Anna were settled once for all.
Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name, but controlling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion and deceived him.
“Oh, no!” she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint that boded him no good.
“She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good woman,” he said, telling her about Anna, her occupations, and what she had told him to say to her.
“Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied,” said Kitty, when he had finished.
“Whom was your letter from?” He told her, and believing in her calm tone, he went to change his coat.
“What? what is it?” he asked, knowing beforehand what.
“You’re in love with that hateful woman; she has bewitched you!
You were drinking at the club, drinking and gambling, and then you went ... to her of all people!
I shall go away tomorrow.” It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife.
At last he succeeded in calming her, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, in conjunction with the wine he had drunk, had been too much for him, that he had succumbed to Anna’s artful influence, and that he would avoid her.
One thing he did with more sincerity confess to was that living so long in Moscow, a life of nothing but conversation, eating and drinking, he was degenerating.
Only at three o’clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be able to go to sleep.
She had unconsciously the whole evening done her utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had fallen into doing with all young men—and she knew she had attained her aim, as far as was possible in one evening, with a married and conscientious man.
She liked him indeed extremely, and, in spite of the striking difference, from the masculine point of view, between Vronsky and Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in common, which had made Kitty able to love both.
One thought, and one only, pursued her in different forms, and refused to be shaken off.
But something new is drawing us apart now.
But supposing it’s true.
But there’s something else in it if it’s true.
He is glad of an opportunity of showing me that he has other duties; I know that, I submit to that.
He wants to show me that his love for me is not to interfere with his freedom.
He ought to understand all the bitterness of this life for me here in Moscow.
I am not living, but waiting for an event, which is continually put off and put off.
And Stiva says he cannot go to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
I can do nothing, can begin nothing, can alter nothing; I hold myself in, I wait, inventing amusements for myself—the English family, writing, reading—but it’s all nothing but a sham, it’s all the same as morphine.
She heard Vronsky’s abrupt ring and hurriedly dried her tears—not only dried her tears, but sat down by a lamp and opened a book, affecting composure.
She wanted to show him that she was displeased that he had not come home as he had promised—displeased only, and not on any account to let him see her distress, and least of all, her self-pity.
She did not want strife, she blamed him for wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put herself into an attitude of antagonism.
“Well, you’ve not been dull?” he said, eagerly and good-humoredly, going up to her.
“What a terrible passion it is—gambling!” “No, I’ve not been dull; I’ve learned long ago not to be dull.
What was Yashvin doing?” “He was winning—seventeen thousand.
He had really started home, but he went back again, and now he’s losing.” “Then what did you stay for?” she asked, suddenly lifting her eyes to him.
The expression of her face was cold and ungracious.
And you have left him there.” The same expression of cold readiness for the conflict appeared on his face too.
“In the first place, I did not ask him to give you any message; and secondly, I never tell lies.
But what’s the chief point, I wanted to stay, and I stayed,” he said, frowning.
She was glad of this appeal for tenderness.
But some strange force of evil would not let her give herself up to her feelings, as though the rules of warfare would not permit her to surrender.
You do everything you want to.
But you want to be right, and you’re welcome to be right.” His hand closed, he turned away, and his face wore a still more obstinate expression.
“For you it’s a matter of obstinacy,” she said, watching him intently and suddenly finding the right word for that expression that irritated her, “simply obstinacy.
For you it’s a question of whether you keep the upper hand of me, while for me....” Again she felt sorry for herself, and she almost burst into tears.
If you knew how I feel on the brink of calamity at this instant, how afraid I am of myself!” And she turned away, hiding her sobs.
“But what are you talking about?” he said, horrified at her expression of despair, and again bending over her, he took her hand and kissed it.
Do I seek amusements outside our home?
I am ready to do anything to make you happy,” he said, touched by her expression of despair; “what wouldn’t I do to save you from distress of any sort, as now, Anna!” he said.
“I don’t know myself whether it’s the solitary life, my nerves....
You haven’t told me!” she inquired, trying to conceal her triumph at the victory, which had anyway been on her side.
He asked for supper, and began telling her about the races; but in his tone, in his eyes, which became more and more cold, she saw that he did not forgive her for her victory, that the feeling of obstinacy with which she had been struggling had asserted itself again in him.
He was colder to her than before, as though he were regretting his surrender.
And she, remembering the words that had given her the victory, “how I feel on the brink of calamity, how afraid I am of myself,” saw that this weapon was a dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second time.
And she felt that beside the love that bound them together there had grown up between them some evil spirit of strife, which she could not exorcise from his, and still less from her own heart.
Chapter 13 There are no conditions to which a man cannot become used, especially if he sees that all around him are living in the same way.
But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night, and the wine he had drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.
“I felt unwell,” she said, smiling a particularly sweet and meaning smile.
“We ought to send....” and hurriedly he reached after his clothes.
Though he thought her stillness suspicious, as though she were holding her breath, and still more suspicious the expression of peculiar tenderness and excitement with which, as she came from behind the screen, she said “nothing,” he was so sleepy that he fell asleep at once.
Only later he remembered the stillness of her breathing, and understood all that must have been passing in her sweet, precious heart while she lay beside him, not stirring, in anticipation of the greatest event in a woman’s life.
At seven o’clock he was waked by the touch of her hand on his shoulder, and a gentle whisper.
She seemed struggling between regret at waking him, and the desire to talk to him.
“Kostya, don’t be frightened.
We ought to send for Lizaveta Petrovna.” The candle was lighted again.
She was sitting up in bed, holding some knitting, which she had been busy upon during the last few days.
“Please, don’t be frightened, it’s all right.
He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes fixed on her, as he put on his dressing gown; then he stopped, still looking at her.
He thought he loved her face, knew her expression, her eyes, but never had he seen it like this.
How hateful and horrible he seemed to himself, thinking of the distress he had caused her yesterday.
Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty’s character in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of her soul shone in her eyes.
And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul, she, the very woman he loved in her, was more manifest than ever.
She looked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw up her head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressed close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him.
She was in pain and was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering.
But in her eyes there was a tenderness that told him that she was far from reproaching him, that she loved him for her sufferings.
“If not I, who is to blame for it?” he thought unconsciously, seeking someone responsible for this suffering for him to punish; but there was no one responsible.
She was suffering, complaining, and triumphing in her sufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them.
He saw that something sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what?
It was beyond his understanding.
You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna ...
I am all right.” And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the knitting she had brought in in the night and begun working at it again.
He stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact directions to the maid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.
Two maid-servants were carefully moving something in the bedroom.
Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.
They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna, but I’ll go on there too.
Isn’t there anything wanted?
Yes, shall I go to Dolly’s?” She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.
Do go,” she said quickly, frowning and waving her hand to him.
He had just gone into the drawing-room, when suddenly a plaintive moan sounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly.
He stood still, and for a long while he could not understand.
“Yes, that is she,” he said to himself, and clutching at his head he ran downstairs.
“Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!” he repeated the words that for some reason came suddenly to his lips.
And he, an unbeliever, repeated these words not with his lips only.
At that instant he knew that all his doubts, even the impossibility of believing with his reason, of which he was aware in himself, did not in the least hinder his turning to God.
The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration of his physical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he started off on foot without waiting for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake him.
At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly.
In the little sledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna with a kerchief round her head.
“Thank God! thank God!” he said, overjoyed to recognize her little fair face which wore a peculiarly serious, even stern expression.
Not more?” she inquired.
“You should let Pyotr Dmitrievitch know, but don’t hurry him.
Chapter 14 The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that “he had been up late, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon.” The footman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about them.
This concentration of the footman upon his lamps, and his indifference to what was passing in Levin, at first astounded him, but immediately on considering the question he realized that no one knew or was bound to know his feelings, and that it was all the more necessary to act calmly, sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall of indifference and attain his aim.
“Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip,” Levin said to himself, feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy and attention to all that lay before him to do.
Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin considered various plans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should go for another doctor, while he himself should go to the chemist’s for opium, and if when he came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up, he would either by tipping the footman, or by force, wake the doctor at all hazards.
At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for a coachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the same callousness with which the doctor’s footman had cleaned his lamp chimneys.
Trying not to get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned the names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the opium was needed for, tried to persuade him.
The assistant inquired in German whether he should give it, and receiving an affirmative reply from behind the partition, he took out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately poured the opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a label, sealed it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would not do so, and was about to wrap it up too.
The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waiting room.
Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about, washing, and saying something.
“Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!” he said in an imploring voice at the open door.
It’s been going on more than two hours already.” “In a minute; in a minute!” answered a voice, and to his amazement Levin heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.
“Pyotr Dmitrievitch!” Levin was beginning again in a plaintive voice, just as the doctor came in dressed and ready.
“These people have no conscience,” thought Levin.
“Combing his hair, while we’re dying!” “Good morning!” the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as it were, teasing him with his composure.
Well now?” Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him every unnecessary detail of his wife’s condition, interrupting his account repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come with him at once.
You don’t understand, you know.
I’m certain I’m not wanted, still I’ve promised, and if you like, I’ll come.
Please sit down; won’t you have some coffee?” Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing at him; but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.
“I know, I know,” the doctor said, smiling; “I’m a married man myself; and at these moments we husbands are very much to be pitied.
I’ve a patient whose husband always takes refuge in the stables on such occasions.” “But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch?
Do you suppose it may go all right?” “Everything points to a favorable issue.” “So you’ll come immediately?” said Levin, looking wrathfully at the servant who was bringing in the coffee.
Did you read yesterday’s telegrams?” said the doctor, munching some roll.
“So you’ll be with us in a quarter of an hour.” “In half an hour.” “On your honor?” When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the princess, and they went up to the bedroom door together.
The princess had tears in her eyes, and her hands were shaking.
Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and burst into tears.
“Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?” she queried, clasping the hand of the midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and anxious face.
“She’s going on well,” she said; “persuade her to lie down.
She will be easier so.” From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was going on, Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was before him, and without considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting his wife, and on the contrary to soothe her and keep up her courage.
Without allowing himself even to think of what was to come, of how it would end, judging from his inquiries as to the usual duration of these ordeals, Levin had in his imagination braced himself to bear up and to keep a tight rein on his feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to him he could do this.
But when he came back from the doctor’s and saw her sufferings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently: “Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!” He sighed, and flung his head up, and began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he would burst into tears or run away.
But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three, the full five hours he had fixed as the furthest limit of his sufferings, and the position was still unchanged; and he was still bearing it because there was nothing to be done but bear it; every instant feeling that he had reached the utmost limits of his endurance, and that his heart would break with sympathy and pain.
All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin.
Minutes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held her moist hand, that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence and then push it away—seemed to him hours, and hours seemed to him minutes.
He was surprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle behind a screen, and he found that it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in the morning, he would not have been more surprised.
Where he was all this time, he knew as little as the time of anything.
He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewildered and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to reassure him.
He saw the old princess too, flushed and overwrought, with her gray curls in disorder, forcing herself to gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and Lizaveta Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring face, and the old prince walking up and down the hall with a frowning face.
The princess was with the doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table set for dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not there, but Dolly was.
Then Levin remembered he had been sent somewhere.
He had done this eagerly, thinking it had to be done for her sake, and only later on he found it was his own bed he had been getting ready.
Then he had been sent to the study to ask the doctor something.
The doctor had answered and then had said something about the irregularities in the municipal council.
But where, when, and why all this had happened, he could not tell.
He did not understand why the old princess took his hand, and looking compassionately at him, begged him not to worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat something and led him out of the room, and even the doctor looked seriously and with commiseration at him and offered him a drop of something.
All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had happened nearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at the deathbed of his brother Nikolay.
Yet that grief and this joy were alike outside all the ordinary conditions of life; they were loop-holes, as it were, in that ordinary life through which there came glimpses of something sublime.
And in the contemplation of this sublime something the soul was exalted to inconceivable heights of which it had before had no conception, while reason lagged behind, unable to keep up with it.
“Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!” he repeated to himself incessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed, complete alienation from religion, that he turned to God just as trustfully and simply as he had in his childhood and first youth.
All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions.
And every time he was brought back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching him from the bedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had come upon him the first minute.
Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped up, ran to justify himself, remembered on the way that he was not to blame, and he longed to defend her, to help her.
But as he looked at her, he saw again that help was impossible, and he was filled with terror and prayed: “Lord, have mercy on us, and help us!” And as time went on, both these conditions became more intense; the calmer he became away from her, completely forgetting her, the more agonizing became both her sufferings and his feeling of helplessness before them.
Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed her; but seeing her patient, smiling face, and hearing the words, “I am worrying you,” he threw the blame on God; but thinking of God, at once he fell to beseeching God to forgive him and have mercy.
Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the doctor that he should lie down.
Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories of a quack mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his cigarette.
There had been a period of repose, and he had sunk into oblivion.
He had completely forgotten what was going on now.
He heard the doctor’s chat and understood it.
Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek.
The shriek was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding his breath, gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor.
The doctor put his head on one side, listened, and smiled approvingly.
Everything was so extraordinary that nothing could strike Levin as strange.
He jumped up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the princess, and took up his position at Kitty’s pillow.
The scream had subsided, but there was some change now.
What it was he did not see and did not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or comprehend.
But he saw it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna.
Lizaveta Petrovna’s face was stern and pale, and still as resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and her eyes were fixed intently on Kitty.
Kitty’s swollen and agonized face, a tress of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought his eyes.
Clutching his chill hands in her moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.
“Mamma, take my earrings.
Quick, quick, Lizaveta Petrovna....” She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile.
But suddenly her face was drawn, she pushed him away.
Go away!” she shrieked, and again he heard that unearthly scream.
Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.
He stood in the next room, his head leaning against the door post, and heard shrieks, howls such as he had never heard before, and he knew that what had been Kitty was uttering these shrieks.
By God!” he said, snatching at the doctor’s hand as he came up.
The first thing he saw was the face of Lizaveta Petrovna.
It was even more frowning and stern.
In the place where it had been was something that was fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that came from it.
He fell down with his head on the wooden framework of the bed, feeling that his heart was bursting.
The awful scream never paused, it became still more awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit of terror, suddenly it ceased.
Levin could not believe his ears, but there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping, alive, tender, and blissful, uttered softly, “It’s over!” He lifted his head.
With her hands hanging exhausted on the quilt, looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at him in silence and tried to smile, and could not.
And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which he had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself all in an instant borne back to the old every-day world, glorified though now, by such a radiance of happiness that he could not bear it.
The strained chords snapped, sobs and tears of joy which he had never foreseen rose up with such violence that his whole body shook, that for long they prevented him from speaking.
Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife’s hand before his lips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement of the fingers, responded to his kiss.
And meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, in the deft hands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like a flickering light in a lamp, lay the life of a human creature, which had never existed before, and which would now with the same right, with the same importance to itself, live and create in its own image.
Set your mind at rest!” Levin heard Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby’s back with a shaking hand.
The princess’s sobs were all the answers she could make.
And in the midst of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the mother’s question, a voice quite unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room.
It was the bold, clamorous, self-assertive squall of the new human being, who had so incomprehensibly appeared.
If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he had died with her, and that their children were angels, and that God was standing before him, he would have been surprised at nothing.
But now, coming back to the world of reality, he had to make great mental efforts to take in that she was alive and well, and that the creature squalling so desperately was his son.
And he was unutterably happy.
That he understood; he was completely happy in it.
It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous, to which he could not accustom himself.
Chapter 16 At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin’s.
Having inquired after Kitty, they had dropped into conversation upon other subjects.
Levin heard them, and unconsciously, as they talked, going over the past, over what had been up to that morning, he thought of himself as he had been yesterday till that point.
He felt himself exalted to unattainable heights, from which he studiously lowered himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to.
He talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her condition now, of his son, in whose existence he tried to school himself into believing.
The whole world of woman, which had taken for him since his marriage a new value he had never suspected before, was now so exalted that he could not take it in in his imagination.
He heard them talk of yesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought: “What is happening with her now?
What is she thinking of?
Is he crying, my son Dmitri?” And in the middle of the conversation, in the middle of a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.
“Very well, in a minute,” answered Levin, and without stopping, he went to her room.
She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother, making plans about the christening.
Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart little cap with some blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she was lying on her back.
Her face, bright before, brightened still more as he drew near her.
There was the same change in it from earthly to unearthly that is seen in the face of the dead.
But then it means farewell, here it meant welcome.
He could not answer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.
“I have had a nap, Kostya!” she said to him; “and I am so comfortable now.” She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.
“Give him to me, Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at him.” “To be sure, his papa shall look at him,” said Lizaveta Petrovna, getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling.
“Wait a minute, we’ll make him tidy first,” and Lizaveta Petrovna laid the red wobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing and trussing up the baby, lifting it up and turning it over with one finger and powdering it with something.
Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous efforts to discover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it.
Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.
“Don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened!” When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm doll, Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her handiwork, and stood a little away so that Levin might see his son in all his glory.
Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her eyes off the baby.
“What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn’t move like that!
Here we’re showing papa what a fine fellow we are!” And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling head, lifted up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature, whose head was lost in its swaddling clothes.
But it had a nose, too, and slanting eyes and smacking lips.
“A splendid baby!” said Lizaveta Petrovna.
Levin sighed with mortification.
This splendid baby excited in him no feeling but disgust and compassion.
He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the unaccustomed breast.
Suddenly laughter made him look round.
“Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!” said Lizaveta Petrovna, but Kitty would not let the baby go.
The aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more and the baby sneezed.
Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife and went out of the dark room.
What he felt towards this little creature was utterly unlike what he had expected.
There was nothing cheerful and joyous in the feeling; on the contrary, it was a new torture of apprehension.
It was the consciousness of a new sphere of liability to pain.
And this sense was so painful at first, the apprehension lest this helpless creature should suffer was so intense, that it prevented him from noticing the strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride that he had felt when the baby sneezed.
Chapter 17 Stepan Arkadyevitch’s affairs were in a very bad way.
The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent already, and he had borrowed from the merchant in advance at ten per cent discount, almost all the remaining third.
The merchant would not give more, especially as Darya Alexandrovna, for the first time that winter insisting on her right to her own property, had refused to sign the receipt for the payment of the last third of the forest.
All his salary went on household expenses and in payment of petty debts that could not be put off.
There was positively no money.
This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s opinion things could not go on like this.
The explanation of the position was, in his view, to be found in the fact that his salary was too small.
The post he filled had been unmistakably very good five years ago, but it was so no longer.
Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a company director, had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded a bank, received fifty thousand.
“Clearly I’ve been napping, and they’ve overlooked me,” Stepan Arkadyevitch thought about himself.
And he began keeping his eyes and ears open, and towards the end of the winter he had discovered a very good berth and had formed a plan of attack upon it, at first from Moscow through aunts, uncles, and friends, and then, when the matter was well advanced, in the spring, he went himself to Petersburg.
It was one of those snug, lucrative berths of which there are so many more nowadays than there used to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand to fifty thousand roubles.
It was the post of secretary of the committee of the amalgamated agency of the southern railways, and of certain banking companies.
This position, like all such appointments, called for such immense energy and such varied qualifications, that it was difficult for them to be found united in any one man.
And since a man combining all the qualifications was not to be found, it was at least better that the post be filled by an honest than by a dishonest man.
Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which that expression had come into use, was regarded there as an honest man, and so had more right to this appointment than others.
The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a year, and Oblonsky could fill it without giving up his government position.
It was in the hands of two ministers, one lady, and two Jews, and all these people, though the way had been paved already with them, Stepan Arkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg.
Besides this business, Stepan Arkadyevitch had promised his sister Anna to obtain from Karenin a definite answer on the question of divorce.
And begging fifty roubles from Dolly, he set off for Petersburg.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin’s study listening to his report on the causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian finance, and only waiting for the moment when he would finish to speak about his own business or about Anna.
And turning over the beautifully written, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey Alexandrovitch read aloud over again the conclusive passage.
“I don’t advocate protection for the sake of private interests, but for the public weal, and for the lower and upper classes equally,” he said, looking over his pince-nez at Oblonsky.
“But _they_ cannot grasp that, _they_ are taken up now with personal interests, and carried away by phrases.” Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what _they_ were doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept his report and were the cause of everything wrong in Russia, that it was coming near the end.
And so now he eagerly abandoned the principle of free-trade, and fully agreed.
Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, thoughtfully turning over the pages of his manuscript.
Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties of this new committee, and pondered.
He was considering whether the new committee would not be acting in some way contrary to the views he had been advocating.
The high figure of the salary made him reflect that on that side Stepan Arkadyevitch’s proposed position ran counter to the main tendency of his own projects of reform, which always leaned towards economy.
“I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the subject, that in our day these immense salaries are evidence of the unsound economic _assiette_ of our finances.” “But what’s to be done?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Suppose a bank director gets ten thousand—well, he’s worth it; or an engineer gets twenty thousand—after all, it’s a growing thing, you know!” “I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it ought to conform with the law of supply and demand.
And this is an abuse of great gravity in itself, and one that reacts injuriously on the government service.
I consider....” Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his brother-in-law.
“Yes; but you must agree that it’s a new institution of undoubted utility that’s being started.
What they lay particular stress on is the thing being carried on honestly,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with emphasis.
But the Moscow significance of the word “honest” was lost on Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Honesty is only a negative qualification,” he said.
“Well, you’ll do me a great service, anyway,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “by putting in a word to Pomorsky—just in the way of conversation....” “But I fancy it’s more in Volgarinov’s hands,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he’s concerned,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, turning red.
Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened at the mention of that name, because he had been that morning at the Jew Volgarinov’s, and the visit had left an unpleasant recollection.
Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee in which he was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine, and honest public body, but that morning when Volgarinov had—intentionally, beyond a doubt—kept him two hours waiting with other petitioners in his waiting room, he had suddenly felt uneasy.
Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik, Prince Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a Jew, or that for the first time in his life he was not following the example of his ancestors in serving the government, but was turning off into a new career, anyway he was very uncomfortable.
During those two hours in Volgarinov’s waiting room Stepan Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about the room, pulling his whiskers, entering into conversation with the other petitioners, and inventing an epigram on his position, assiduously concealed from others, and even from himself, the feeling he was experiencing.
But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not have said why—whether because he could not get his epigram just right, or from some other reason.
When at last Volgarinov had received him with exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph at his humiliation, and had all but refused the favor asked of him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had made haste to forget it all as soon as possible.
And now, at the mere recollection, he blushed.
Chapter 18 “Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is.
About Anna,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, and shaking off the unpleasant impression.
As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna’s name, the face of Alexey Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out of it, and it looked weary and dead.
“What is it exactly that you want from me?” he said, moving in his chair and snapping his pince-nez.
“A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of the position.
I’m appealing to you” (“not as an injured husband,” Stepan Arkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of wrecking his negotiation by this, he changed the words) “not as a statesman” (which did not sound _à propos_), “but simply as a man, and a good-hearted man and a Christian.
“That is, in what way precisely?” Karenin said softly.
If you had seen her as I have!—I have been spending all the winter with her—you would have pity on her.
Her position is awful, simply awful!” “I had imagined,” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher, almost shrill voice, “that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had desired for herself.” “Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven’s sake, don’t let us indulge in recriminations!
What is past is past, and you know what she wants and is waiting for—divorce.” “But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a condition to leave me my son.
I replied in that sense, and supposed that the matter was ended.
I consider it at an end,” shrieked Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“But, for heaven’s sake, don’t get hot!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, touching his brother-in-law’s knee.
If you will allow me to recapitulate, it was like this: when you parted, you were as magnanimous as could possibly be; you were ready to give her everything—freedom, divorce even.
She appreciated that.
She did appreciate it—to such a degree that at the first moment, feeling how she had wronged you, she did not consider and could not consider everything.
She gave up everything.
But experience, time, have shown that her position is unbearable, impossible.” “The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me,” Alexey Alexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.
“Allow me to disbelieve that,” Stepan Arkadyevitch replied gently.
“Her position is intolerable for her, and of no benefit to anyone whatever.
She has deserved it, you will say.
But I, all of us, her relatives, all who love her, beg you, entreat you.
Who is any the better for it?” “Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty party,” observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though feeling sure this physical contact would soften his brother-in-law.
“All I say is this: her position is intolerable, and it might be alleviated by you, and you will lose nothing by it.
And I had supposed that the question of my son had settled the matter.
Besides, I had hoped that Anna Arkadyevna had enough generosity....” Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated with difficulty, his lips twitching and his face white.
“She leaves it all to your generosity.
She begs, she implores one thing of you—to extricate her from the impossible position in which she is placed.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are a good man.
Put yourself in her position for a minute.
The question of divorce for her in her position is a question of life and death.
If you had not promised it once, she would have reconciled herself to her position, she would have gone on living in the country.
But you promised it, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow.
And here she’s been for six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting cuts her to the heart, every day expecting an answer.
Why, it’s like keeping a condemned criminal for six months with the rope round his neck, promising him perhaps death, perhaps mercy.
Have pity on her, and I will undertake to arrange everything. _Vos scrupules_....” “I am not talking about that, about that....” Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted with disgust.
“But, perhaps, I promised what I had no right to promise.” “So you go back from your promise?” “I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time to consider how much of what I promised is possible.” “No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!” cried Oblonsky, jumping up, “I won’t believe that!
She’s unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and you cannot refuse in such....” “As much of what I promised as is possible. _Vous professez d’être libre penseur._ But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of such gravity, act in opposition to the Christian law.” “But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I’m aware, divorce is allowed,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Divorce is sanctioned even by our church.
And we see....” “It is allowed, but not in the sense....” “Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself,” said Oblonsky, after a brief pause.
“Wasn’t it you (and didn’t we all appreciate it in you?) who forgave everything, and moved simply by Christian feeling was ready to make any sacrifice?
You said yourself: if a man take thy coat, give him thy cloak also, and now....” “I beg,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly onto his feet, his face white and his jaws twitching, “I beg you to drop this ... to drop ... this subject!” “Oh, no!
Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of embarrassment; “but like a messenger I have simply performed the commission given me.” Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and said: “I must think it over and seek for guidance.
The day after tomorrow I will give you a final answer,” he said, after considering a moment.
Chapter 19 Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to announce: “Sergey Alexyevitch!” “Who’s Sergey Alexyevitch?” Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning, but he remembered immediately.
“Ah, Seryozha!” he said aloud.
“Sergey Alexyevitch!
I thought it was the director of a department.
And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had said to him at parting: “Anyway, you will see him.
And Stiva ... if it were possible!
Could it be possible?” Stepan Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that “if it were possible,”—if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as to let her have her son....
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good to dream of that, but still he was glad to see his nephew.
Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never spoke to the boy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention a single word about her.
“He was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we had not foreseen,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
But with rational treatment, and sea-bathing in the summer, he regained his strength, and now, by the doctor’s advice, I have let him go to school.
And certainly the companionship of school has had a good effect on him, and he is perfectly well, and making good progress.” “What a fine fellow he’s grown!
He’s not Seryozha now, but quite full-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in blue coat and long trousers, who walked in alertly and confidently.
He bowed to his uncle as to a stranger, but recognizing him, he blushed and turned hurriedly away from him, as though offended and irritated at something.
“Well, that’s very fair,” said his father, “you can go.” “He’s thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into a boy; I like that,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Do you remember me?” The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.
“Yes, _mon oncle_,” he answered, glancing at his father, and again he looked downcast.
The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand away.
As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced doubtfully at his father, and like a bird set free, he darted out of the room.
A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his mother.
And in the course of that year he had gone to school, and made friends among his schoolfellows.
The dreams and memories of his mother, which had made him ill after seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts now.
When they came back to him, he studiously drove them away, regarding them as shameful and girlish, below the dignity of a boy and a schoolboy.
He knew that his father and mother were separated by some quarrel, he knew that he had to remain with his father, and he tried to get used to that idea.
He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called up those memories of which he was ashamed.
He disliked it all the more as from some words he had caught as he waited at the study door, and still more from the faces of his father and uncle, he guessed that they must have been talking of his mother.
And to avoid condemning the father with whom he lived and on whom he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving way to sentimentality, which he considered so degrading, Seryozha tried not to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his peace of mind, and not to think of what he recalled to him.
But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on the stairs, and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime at school, Seryozha talked more freely to him away from his father’s presence.
“We have a railway now,” he said in answer to his uncle’s question.
“It’s like this, do you see: two sit on a bench—they’re the passengers; and one stands up straight on the bench.
And all are harnessed to it by their arms or by their belts, and they run through all the rooms—the doors are left open beforehand.
Well, and it’s pretty hard work being the conductor!” “That’s the one that stands?” Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired, smiling.
“Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when they stop all of a sudden, or someone falls down.” “Yes, that must be a serious matter,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, watching with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his mother’s; not childish now—no longer fully innocent.
And though he had promised Alexey Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he could not restrain himself.
“Do you remember your mother?” he asked suddenly.
“No, I don’t,” Seryozha said quickly.
His tutor found his pupil on the staircase half an hour later, and for a long while he could not make out whether he was ill-tempered or crying.
I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?” said the tutor.
“I told you it was a dangerous game.
And we shall have to speak to the director.” “If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that’s certain.” “Well, what is it, then?” “Leave me alone!
If I remember, or if I don’t remember?... what business is it of his?
Why should I remember?
Leave me in peace!” he said, addressing not his tutor, but the whole world.
Chapter 20 Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in Petersburg.
In Petersburg, besides business, his sister’s divorce, and his coveted appointment, he wanted, as he always did, to freshen himself up, as he said, after the mustiness of Moscow.
In spite of its _cafés chantants_ and its omnibuses, Moscow was yet a stagnant bog.
Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it.
After living for some time in Moscow, especially in close relations with his family, he was conscious of a depression of spirits.
After being a long time in Moscow without a change, he reached a point when he positively began to be worrying himself over his wife’s ill-humor and reproaches, over his children’s health and education, and the petty details of his official work; even the fact of being in debt worried him.
But he had only to go and stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which he moved, where people lived—really lived—instead of vegetating as in Moscow, and all such ideas vanished and melted away at once, like wax before the fire.
Only that day he had been talking to Prince Tchetchensky.
Prince Tchetchensky had a wife and family, grown-up pages in the corps, ... and he had another illegitimate family of children also.
Though the first family was very nice too, Prince Tchetchensky felt happier in his second family; and he used to take his eldest son with him to his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch that he thought it good for his son, enlarging his ideas.
In Petersburg children did not prevent their parents from enjoying life.
The children were brought up in schools, and there was no trace of the wild idea that prevailed in Moscow, in Lvov’s household, for instance, that all the luxuries of life were for the children, while the parents have nothing but work and anxiety.
Here people understood that a man is in duty bound to live for himself, as every man of culture should live.
His official duties?
Official work here was not the stiff, hopeless drudgery that it was in Moscow.
Here there was some interest in official life.
A chance meeting, a service rendered, a happy phrase, a knack of facetious mimicry, and a man’s career might be made in a trice.
So it had been with Bryantsev, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had met the previous day, and who was one of the highest functionaries in government now.
There was some interest in official work like that.
The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially soothing effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Bartnyansky, who must spend at least fifty thousand to judge by the style he lived in, had made an interesting comment the day before on that subject.
As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Bartnyansky: “You’re friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a favor: say a word to him, please, for me.
There’s an appointment I should like to get—secretary of the agency....” “Oh, I shan’t remember all that, if you tell it to me....
But what possesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?...
Take it as you will, it’s a low business.” Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a “growing thing”—Bartnyansky would not have understood that.
Heavily?” said Bartnyansky sympathetically.
“Very heavily: twenty thousand.” Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.
“My debts mount up to a million and a half, and I’ve nothing, and still I can live, as you see!” And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in words only but in actual fact.
Zhivahov owed three hundred thousand, and hadn’t a farthing to bless himself with, and he lived, and in style too!
Count Krivtsov was considered a hopeless case by everyone, and yet he kept two mistresses.
Petrovsky had run through five millions, and still lived in just the same style, and was even a manager in the financial department with a salary of twenty thousand.
But besides this, Petersburg had physically an agreeable effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch.
In Moscow he sometimes found a gray hair in his head, dropped asleep after dinner, stretched, walked slowly upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the society of young women, and did not dance at balls.
In Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.
His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described to him on the previous day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of sixty, who had just come back from abroad: “We don’t know the way to live here,” said Pyotr Oblonsky.
At a glimpse of a pretty woman, my thoughts....
One dines and drinks a glass of wine, and feels strong and ready for anything.
I came home to Russia—had to see my wife, and, what’s more, go to my country place; and there, you’d hardly believe it, in a fortnight I’d got into a dressing gown and given up dressing for dinner.
Needn’t say I had no thoughts left for pretty women.
I became quite an old gentleman.
There was nothing left for me but to think of my eternal salvation.
I went off to Paris—I was as right as could be at once.” Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr Oblonsky described.
In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he had had to be there for long together, he might in good earnest have come to considering his salvation; in Petersburg he felt himself a man of the world again.
Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there had long existed rather curious relations.
Stepan Arkadyevitch always flirted with her in jest, and used to say to her, also in jest, the most unseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted her so much.
The day after his conversation with Karenin, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to see her, and felt so youthful that in this jesting flirtation and nonsense he recklessly went so far that he did not know how to extricate himself, as unluckily he was so far from being attracted by her that he thought her positively disagreeable.
What made it hard to change the conversation was the fact that he was very attractive to her.
So that he was considerably relieved at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which cut short their _tête-à-tête_.
“Ever since they’ve all turned against her, all those who’re a thousand times worse than she, I’ve thought she did a very fine thing.
I can’t forgive Vronsky for not letting me know when she was in Petersburg.
I’d have gone to see her and gone about with her everywhere.
Come, tell me about her.” “Yes, her position is very difficult; she....” began Stepan Arkadyevitch, in the simplicity of his heart accepting as sterling coin Princess Myakaya’s words “tell me about her.” Princess Myakaya interrupted him immediately, as she always did, and began talking herself.
But she wouldn’t be deceitful, and she did a fine thing.
And she did better still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours.
Everybody used to say he was so clever, so very clever; I was the only one that said he was a fool.
Now that he’s so thick with Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say he’s crazy, and I should prefer not to agree with everybody, but this time I can’t help it.” “Oh, do please explain,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch; “what does it mean?
Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister’s behalf, and I asked him to give me a final answer.
But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an invitation from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for this evening.” “Ah, so that’s it, that’s it!” said Princess Myakaya gleefully, “they’re going to ask Landau what he’s to say.” “Ask Landau?
Who or what’s Landau?” “What! you don’t know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau, le clairvoyant_?
See what comes of living in the provinces—you know nothing about anything.
Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in a shop in Paris, and he went to a doctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting room he fell asleep, and in his sleep he began giving advice to all the patients.
And wonderful advice it was!
Then the wife of Yury Meledinsky—you know, the invalid?—heard of this Landau, and had him to see her husband.
And he cured her husband, though I can’t say that I see he did him much good, for he’s just as feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed in him, and took him along with them and brought him to Russia.
Here there’s been a general rush to him, and he’s begun doctoring everyone.
He cured Countess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy to him that she adopted him.” “Adopted him?” “Yes, as her son.
He’s not Landau any more now, but Count Bezzubov.
“Who else is with the countess?—a Frenchman?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked the hall-porter, as he glanced at the familiar overcoat of Alexey Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather artless-looking overcoat with clasps.
“Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov,” the porter answered severely.
“Princess Myakaya guessed right,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he went upstairs.
It would be quite as well, though, to get on friendly terms with her.
She has immense influence.
If she would say a word to Pomorsky, the thing would be a certainty.” It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s little drawing-room the blinds were drawn and the lamps lighted.
At a round table under a lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch, talking softly.
A short, thinnish man, very pale and handsome, with feminine hips and knock-kneed legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long hair lying on the collar of his coat, was standing at the end of the room gazing at the portraits on the wall.
After greeting the lady of the house and Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not resist glancing once more at the unknown man.
“Monsieur Landau!” the countess addressed him with a softness and caution that impressed Oblonsky.
And she introduced them.
Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his moist, lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s outstretched hand and immediately walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits again.
The countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.
“I am very glad to see you, particularly today,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside Karenin.
“I introduced you to him as Landau,” she said in a soft voice, glancing at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey Alexandrovitch, “but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you’re probably aware.
Only he does not like the title.” “Yes, I heard so,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; “they say he completely cured Countess Bezzubova.” “She was here today, poor thing!” the countess said, turning to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“This separation is awful for her.
It’s such a blow to her!” “And he positively is going?” queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.
He heard a voice yesterday,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Ah, a voice!” repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as circumspect as he possibly could in this society, where something peculiar was going on, or was to go on, to which he had not the key.
You understand what I mean?” she said, lifting her fine pensive eyes.
“In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey Alexandrovitch....” said Oblonsky.
Having no clear idea what they were talking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.
“The change is not in his external position,” Countess Lidia Ivanovna said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of Alexey Alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau; “his heart is changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and I fear you don’t fully apprehend the change that has taken place in him.” “Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change.
We have always been friendly, and now....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding with a sympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and mentally balancing the question with which of the two ministers she was most intimate, so as to know about which to ask her to speak for him.
“The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love for his neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only intensify love in his heart.
But I am afraid you do not understand me.
Won’t you have some tea?” she said, with her eyes indicating the footman, who was handing round tea on a tray.
“Not quite, countess.
Of course, his misfortune....” “Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when his heart was made new, was filled full of it,” she said, gazing with eyes full of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Oh, of course, countess,” he said; “but I imagine such changes are a matter so private that no one, even the most intimate friend, would care to speak of them.” “On the contrary!
We ought to speak freely and help one another.” “Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of convictions, and besides....” said Oblonsky with a soft smile.
“There can be no difference where it is a question of holy truth.” “Oh, no, of course; but....” and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in confusion.
He understood at last that they were talking of religion.
“I fancy he will fall asleep immediately,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch in a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia Ivanovna.
Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round.
Landau was sitting at the window, leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head drooping.
Noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised his head and smiled a smile of childlike artlessness.
“Don’t take any notice,” said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly moved a chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch.
“I have observed....” she was beginning, when a footman came into the room with a letter.
Lidia Ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and excusing herself, wrote an answer with extraordinary rapidity, handed it to the man, and came back to the table.
“I have observed,” she went on, “that Moscow people, especially the men, are more indifferent to religion than anyone.” “Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of being the firmest in the faith,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the indifferent ones,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him with a weary smile.
“How anyone can be indifferent!” said Lidia Ivanovna.
“I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting in suspense,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating smile.
“I hardly think that the time for such questions has come yet for me.” Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.
“We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.
God’s grace is not guided by human considerations: sometimes it comes not to those that strive for it, and comes to those that are unprepared, like Saul.” “No, I believe it won’t be just yet,” said Lidia Ivanovna, who had been meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman.
“Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you,” said Lidia Ivanovna, gazing tenderly at him; “sit here with us.” “One has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the light,” Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.
“Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever in our hearts!” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous smile.
“But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that height,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in admitting this religious height, but at the same time unable to bring himself to acknowledge his free-thinking views before a person who, by a single word to Pomorsky, might procure him the coveted appointment.
“That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?” said Lidia Ivanovna.
There is no sin for believers, their sin has been atoned for. _Pardon,_” she added, looking at the footman, who came in again with another letter.
She read it and gave a verbal answer: “Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess’s, say.” “For the believer sin is not,” she went on.
“Yes, but faith without works is dead,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile clinging to his independence.
James,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain reproachfulness in his tone.
It was unmistakably a subject they had discussed more than once before.
“What harm has been done by the false interpretation of that passage!
Nothing holds men back from belief like that misinterpretation.
But the very opposite is said.” “Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, “those are the crude ideas of our monks....
It is far simpler and easier,” she added, looking at Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which at court she encouraged youthful maids of honor, disconcerted by the new surroundings of the court.
“We are saved by Christ who suffered for us.
We are saved by faith,” Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of approval at her words. _“Vous comprenez l’anglais?”_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving a reply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through a shelf of books.
“I want to read him ‘Safe and Happy,’ or ‘Under the Wing,’” she said, looking inquiringly at Karenin.
In it is described the way by which faith can be reached, and the happiness, above all earthly bliss, with which it fills the soul.
The believer cannot be unhappy because he is not alone.
But you will see.” She was just settling herself to read when the footman came in again.
Tell her, tomorrow at two o’clock.
She found this comforter, and she thanks God now for the death of her child.
Such is the happiness faith brings!” “Oh, yes, that is most....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they were going to read, and let him have a chance to collect his faculties.
“No, I see I’d better not ask her about anything today,” he thought.
“If only I can get out of this without putting my foot in it!” “It will be dull for you,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, addressing Landau; “you don’t know English, but it’s short.” “Oh, I shall understand,” said Landau, with the same smile, and he closed his eyes.
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna exchanged meaningful glances, and the reading began.
Chapter 22 Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk which he was hearing for the first time.
The complexity of Petersburg, as a rule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing him out of his Moscow stagnation.
But he liked these complications, and understood them only in the circles he knew and was at home in.
In these unfamiliar surroundings he was puzzled and disconcerted, and could not get his bearings.
As he listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of the beautiful, artless—or perhaps artful, he could not decide which—eyes of Landau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious of a peculiar heaviness in his head.
The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head.
To be saved, one need only believe, and the monks don’t know how the thing’s to be done, but Countess Lidia Ivanovna does know....
Anyway, I fancy I’ve done nothing unsuitable so far.
That’ll be too imbecile.
Landau—Bezzubov—what’s he Bezzubov for?” All at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw was uncontrollably forming a yawn.
He pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn, and shook himself together.
But soon after he became aware that he was dropping asleep and on the very point of snoring.
He recovered himself at the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna was saying “he’s asleep.” Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay, feeling guilty and caught.
But he was reassured at once by seeing that the words “he’s asleep” referred not to him, but to Landau.
The Frenchman was asleep as well as Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Not at home.” The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his head on the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on his knee, made faint movements, as though trying to catch something.
Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, tried to move carefully, but stumbled against the table, went up and laid his hand in the Frenchman’s hand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch got up too, and opening his eyes wide, trying to wake himself up if he were asleep, he looked first at one and then at the other.
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was getting worse and worse.
“_Que la personne qui est arrivée la dernière, celle qui demande, qu’elle sorte!
Qu’elle sorte!_” articulated the Frenchman, without opening his eyes.
“_Vous m’excuserez, mais vous voyez....
Revenez vers dix heures, encore mieux demain._” “_Qu’elle sorte!_” repeated the Frenchman impatiently.
“_C’est moi, n’est-ce pas?_” And receiving an answer in the affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he had meant to ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting his sister’s affairs, caring for nothing, but filled with the sole desire to get away as soon as possible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into the street as though from a plague-stricken house.
At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and afterwards at the Tatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan Arkadyevitch felt a little refreshed in the atmosphere he was used to.
On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky’s, where he was staying, Stepan Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy.
She wrote to him that she was very anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and begged him to come next day.
He had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its contents, when he heard below the ponderous tramp of the servants, carrying something heavy.
Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look.
It was the rejuvenated Pyotr Oblonsky.
He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs; but he told them to set him on his legs when he saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, and clinging to him, walked with him into his room and there began telling him how he had spent the evening, and fell asleep doing so.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened rarely with him, and for a long while he could not go to sleep.
Everything he could recall to his mind, everything was disgusting; but most disgusting of all, as if it were something shameful, was the memory of the evening he had spent at Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.
Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer, refusing to grant Anna’s divorce, and he understood that this decision was based on what the Frenchman had said in his real or pretended trance.
Chapter 23 In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there must necessarily be either complete division between the husband and wife, or loving agreement.
When the relations of a couple are vacillating and neither one thing nor the other, no sort of enterprise can be undertaken.
Many families remain for years in the same place, though both husband and wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither complete division nor agreement between them.
Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat and dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and all the trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and the leaves were covered with dust.
But they did not go back to Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to do long before; they went on staying in Moscow, though they both loathed it, because of late there had been no agreement between them.
The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and all efforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead of removing it.
It was an inner irritation, grounded in her mind on the conviction that his love had grown less; in his, on regret that he had put himself for her sake in a difficult position, which she, instead of lightening, made still more difficult.
Neither of them gave full utterance to their sense of grievance, but they considered each other in the wrong, and tried on every pretext to prove this to one another.
In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas, desires, with all his spiritual and physical temperament, was one thing—love for women, and that love, she felt, ought to be entirely concentrated on her alone.
That love was less; consequently, as she reasoned, he must have transferred part of his love to other women or to another woman—and she was jealous.
She was jealous not of any particular woman but of the decrease of his love.
Not having got an object for her jealousy, she was on the lookout for it.
At the slightest hint she transferred her jealousy from one object to another.
At one time she was jealous of those low women with whom he might so easily renew his old bachelor ties; then she was jealous of the society women he might meet; then she was jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might want to marry, for whose sake he would break with her.
And this last form of jealousy tortured her most of all, especially as he had unwarily told her, in a moment of frankness, that his mother knew him so little that she had had the audacity to try and persuade him to marry the young Princess Sorokina.
And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and found grounds for indignation in everything.
For everything that was difficult in her position she blamed him.
The agonizing condition of suspense she had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her solitude—she put it all down to him.
If he had loved her he would have seen all the bitterness of her position, and would have rescued her from it.
He must have society, and he had put her in this awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see.
And again, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her son.
Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time did not soothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of complacency, of self-confidence, which had not been of old, and which exasperated her.
Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back from a bachelor dinner.
She walked up and down in his study (the room where the noise from the street was least heard), and thought over every detail of their yesterday’s quarrel.
Going back from the well-remembered, offensive words of the quarrel to what had been the ground of it, she arrived at last at its origin.
For a long while she could hardly believe that their dissension had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of so little moment to either.
But so it actually had been.
It all arose from his laughing at the girls’ high schools, declaring they were useless, while she defended them.
He had spoken slightingly of women’s education in general, and had said that Hannah, Anna’s English protégée, had not the slightest need to know anything of physics.
This irritated Anna.
She saw in this a contemptuous reference to her occupations.
And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him back for the pain he had given her.
“I don’t expect you to understand me, my feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but simple delicacy I did expect,” she said.
And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something unpleasant.
“I am very sorry that nothing but what’s coarse and material is comprehensible and natural to you,” she said and walked out of the room.
When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not referred to the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been smoothed over, but was not at an end.
Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely and wretched in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to forget it all, to forgive him, and be reconciled with him; she wanted to throw the blame on herself and to justify him.
I’m irritable, I’m insanely jealous.
I will make it up with him, and we’ll go away to the country; there I shall be more at peace.” “Unnatural!” She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her most of all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound her with which it was said.
“I know what he meant; he meant—unnatural, not loving my own daughter, to love another person’s child.
What does he know of love for children, of my love for Seryozha, whom I’ve sacrificed for him?
No, he loves another woman, it must be so.” And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind, she had gone round the same circle that she had been round so often before, and had come back to her former state of exasperation, she was horrified at herself.
“Can it be impossible?
Can it be beyond me to control myself?” she said to herself, and began again from the beginning.
“He’s truthful, he’s honest, he loves me.
Yes, now when he comes in, I will tell him I was wrong, though I was not wrong, and we will go away tomorrow.” And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by irritability, she rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up for packing their things for the country.
Chapter 24 “Well, was it nice?” she asked, coming out to meet him with a penitent and meek expression.
“Just as usual,” he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in one of her good moods.
He was used by now to these transitions, and he was particularly glad to see it today, as he was in a specially good humor himself.
Come, that’s good!” he said, pointing to the boxes in the passage.
I’ll be back directly, and we’ll talk it over; I only want to change my coat.
There was something mortifying in the way he had said “Come, that’s good,” as one says to a child when it leaves off being naughty, and still more mortifying was the contrast between her penitent and his self-confident tone; and for one instant she felt the lust of strife rising up in her again, but making an effort she conquered it, and met Vronsky as good-humoredly as before.
When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had prepared beforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for going away.
“You know it came to me almost like an inspiration,” she said.
I don’t want to go on hoping, I don’t want to hear anything about the divorce.
I have made up my mind it shall not have any more influence on my life.
Do you agree?” “Oh, yes!” he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.
Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests.
“The dinner was first rate, and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough, but in Moscow they can never do anything without something _ridicule_.
A lady of a sort appeared on the scene, teacher of swimming to the Queen of Sweden, and gave us an exhibition of her skill.” “How? did she swim?” asked Anna, frowning.
“In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ she was old and hideous too.
Why, did she swim in some special way, then?” said Anna, not answering.
“There was absolutely nothing in it.
Well, then, when do you think of going?” Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant idea.
By tomorrow we shan’t be ready.
The day after tomorrow.” “Yes ... oh, no, wait a minute!
The day after tomorrow’s Sunday, I have to be at maman’s,” said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soon as he uttered his mother’s name he was aware of her intent, suspicious eyes.
His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion.
It was now not the Queen of Sweden’s swimming-mistress who filled Anna’s imagination, but the young Princess Sorokina.
She was staying in a village near Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.
“Can’t you go tomorrow?” she said.
The deeds and the money for the business I’m going there for I can’t get by tomorrow,” he answered.
Monday or never!” “What for?” said Vronsky, as though in amazement.
You don’t care to understand my life.
You say it’s affectation.
Why, you said yesterday that I don’t love my daughter, that I love this English girl, that it’s unnatural.
I should like to know what life there is for me that could be natural!” For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and was horrified at how she had fallen away from her resolution.
But even though she knew it was her own ruin, she could not restrain herself, could not keep herself from proving to him that he was wrong, could not give way to him.
“I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden passion.” “How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you don’t tell the truth?” “I never boast, and I never tell lies,” he said slowly, restraining his rising anger.
“It’s a great pity if you can’t respect....” “Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be.
And if you don’t love me any more, it would be better and more honest to say so.” “No, this is becoming unbearable!” cried Vronsky, getting up from his chair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking deliberately: “What do you try my patience for?” looking as though he might have said much more, but was restraining himself.
“It has limits.” “What do you mean by that?” she cried, looking with terror at the undisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his cruel, menacing eyes.
“I mean to say....” he was beginning, but he checked himself.
All I can want is that you should not desert me, as you think of doing,” she said, understanding all he had not uttered.
“But that I don’t want; that’s secondary.
“He hates me, that’s clear,” she thought, and in silence, without looking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room.
So, then, all is over.” She repeated the words she had said, “and it must be ended.” “But how?” she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair before the looking-glass.
At the bottom of her heart was some obscure idea that alone interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.
Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the time of her illness after her confinement, and the feeling which never left her at that time.
And the shame and disgrace of Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my awful shame, it will all be saved by death.
To die! and he will feel remorse; will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account.” With the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down in the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left hand, vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after her death.
Approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her attention.
As though absorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even turn to him.
He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly: “Anna, we’ll go the day after tomorrow, if you like.
I agree to everything.” She did not speak.
“You know,” she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain herself any longer, she burst into sobs.
“Cast me off!” she articulated between her sobs.
“I’ll go away tomorrow ...
I don’t want to make you wretched, I don’t want to!
You don’t love me; you love someone else!” Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no trace of foundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased, and never would cease, to love her; that he loved her more than ever.
“Anna, why distress yourself and me so?” he said to her, kissing her hands.
There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied she caught the sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet on her hand.
And instantly Anna’s despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of tenderness.
Chapter 25 Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to work in the morning preparing for their departure.
Though it was not settled whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling absolutely indifferent whether they went a day earlier or later.
She was standing in her room over an open box, taking things out of it, when he came in to see her earlier than usual, dressed to go out.
And I shall be ready to go tomorrow,” he said.
“No, I shan’t be ready by then myself,” she said; and at once reflected, “so then it was possible to arrange to do as I wished.” “No, do as you meant to do.
Go into the dining-room, I’m coming directly.
It’s only to turn out those things that aren’t wanted,” she said, putting something more on the heap of frippery that lay in Annushka’s arms.
Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-room.
“You wouldn’t believe how distasteful these rooms have become to me,” she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee.
“There’s nothing more awful than these _chambres garnies_.
There’s no individuality in them, no soul.
These clocks, and curtains, and, worst of all, the wallpapers—they’re a nightmare.
I think of Vozdvizhenskoe as the promised land.
So it’s really to be tomorrow?” she said in a cheerful voice; but suddenly her face changed.
Vronsky’s valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a telegram from Petersburg.
There was nothing out of the way in Vronsky’s getting a telegram, but he said, as though anxious to conceal something from her, that the receipt was in his study, and he turned hurriedly to her.
“By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all.” “From whom is the telegram?” she asked, not hearing him.
“From Stiva,” he answered reluctantly.
What secret can there be between Stiva and me?” Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the telegram.
“I didn’t want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a passion for telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?” “About the divorce?” “Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet.
He has promised a decisive answer in a day or two.
But here it is; read it.” With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what Vronsky had told her.
At the end was added: “Little hope; but I will do everything possible and impossible.” “I said yesterday that it’s absolutely nothing to me when I get, or whether I never get, a divorce,” she said, flushing crimson.
“There was not the slightest necessity to hide it from me.” “So he may hide and does hide his correspondence with women from me,” she thought.
“Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov,” said Vronsky; “I believe he’s won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay, about sixty thousand.” “No,” she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this change of subject that he was irritated, “why did you suppose that this news would affect me so, that you must even try to hide it?
I said I don’t want to consider it, and I should have liked you to care as little about it as I do.” “I care about it because I like definiteness,” he said.
“Definiteness is not in the form but the love,” she said, more and more irritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool composure in which he spoke.
“What do you want it for?” “My God! love again,” he thought, frowning.
“Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children’s in the future.” “There won’t be children in the future.” “That’s a great pity,” he said.
“You want it for the children’s sake, but you don’t think of me?” she said, quite forgetting or not having heard that he had said, “_For your sake_ and the children’s.” The question of the possibility of having children had long been a subject of dispute and irritation to her.
His desire to have children she interpreted as a proof he did not prize her beauty.
Above all for your sake,” he repeated, frowning as though in pain, “because I am certain that the greater part of your irritability comes from the indefiniteness of the position.” “Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred for me is apparent,” she thought, not hearing his words, but watching with terror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking her out of his eyes.
“The cause is not that,” she said, “and, indeed, I don’t see how the cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am completely in your power.
What indefiniteness is there in the position? on the contrary....” “I am very sorry that you don’t care to understand,” he interrupted, obstinately anxious to give utterance to his thought.
“The indefiniteness consists in your imagining that I am free.” “On that score you can set your mind quite at rest,” she said, and turning away from him, she began drinking her coffee.
After drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and by his expression, she saw clearly that he was repelled by her hand, and her gesture, and the sound made by her lips.
Looking intently at him, at his face, his hands, she recalled all the details of their reconciliation the previous day, and his passionate caresses.
“There, just such caresses he has lavished, and will lavish, and longs to lavish on other women!” she thought.
Anna greeted him and remained.
Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was standing at a turning point in her life, which might have fearful consequences—why, at that minute, she had to keep up appearances before an outsider, who sooner or later must know it all—she did not know.
But at once quelling the storm within her, she sat down and began talking to their guest.
And when are you off?” said Yashvin, looking at Vronsky, and unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.
“The day after tomorrow, I think,” said Vronsky.
“You’ve been meaning to go so long, though.” “But now it’s quite decided,” said Anna, looking Vronsky straight in the face with a look which told him not to dream of the possibility of reconciliation.
“Don’t you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?” she went on, talking to Yashvin.
“I’ve never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether I’m sorry for him or not.
And so we fight it out, and that’s the pleasure of it.” “Well, but suppose you were married,” said Anna, “how would it be for your wife?” Yashvin laughed.
“That’s why I’m not married, and never mean to be.” “And Helsingfors?” said Vronsky, entering into the conversation and glancing at Anna’s smiling face.
Meeting his eyes, Anna’s face instantly took a coldly severe expression as though she were saying to him: “It’s not forgotten.
But you see, some men can play but only so that they can always lay down their cards when the hour of a _rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only so as not to be late for my cards in the evening.
That’s how I manage things.” “No, I didn’t mean that, but the real thing.” She would have said _Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.
She would have pretended to be looking for something on the table, but ashamed of making a pretense, she looked straight in his face with cold eyes.
“To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I’ve sold him,” he said, in a tone which said more clearly than words, “I’ve no time for discussing things, and it would lead to nothing.” “I’m not to blame in any way,” he thought.
“If she will punish herself, _tant pis pour elle._ But as he was going he fancied that she said something, and his heart suddenly ached with pity for her.
“I said nothing,” she answered just as coldly and calmly.
As he was going out he caught a glimpse in the looking-glass of her face, white, with quivering lips.
He even wanted to stop and to say some comforting word to her, but his legs carried him out of the room before he could think what to say.
The whole of that day he spent away from home, and when he came in late in the evening the maid told him that Anna Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to go in to her.
It was the open acknowledgment of complete coldness.
Was it possible to glance at her as he had glanced when he came into the room for the guarantee?—to look at her, see her heart was breaking with despair, and go out without a word with that face of callous composure?
And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied, too, the words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to her, and she grew more and more exasperated.
You were unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so that you might go back to him.
How many roubles do you want?” All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to her in her imagination, and she could not forgive him for them, as though he had actually said them.
“But didn’t he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful and sincere man?
Haven’t I despaired for nothing many times already?” she said to herself afterwards.
All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which occupied two hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whether there were still hope of reconciliation, whether she should go away at once or see him once more.
She was expecting him the whole day, and in the evening, as she went to her own room, leaving a message for him that her head ached, she said to herself, “If he comes in spite of what the maid says, it means that he loves me still.
If not, it means that all is over, and then I will decide what I’m to do!...” In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the entrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation with the servant; he believed what was told him, did not care to find out more, and went to his own room.
So then everything was over.
And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole means of bringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing him and of gaining the victory in that strife which the evil spirit in possession of her heart was waging with him.
Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe, getting or not getting a divorce from her husband—all that did not matter.
The one thing that mattered was punishing him.
When she poured herself out her usual dose of opium, and thought that she had only to drink off the whole bottle to die, it seemed to her so simple and easy, that she began musing with enjoyment on how he would suffer, and repent and love her memory when it would be too late.
She lay in bed with open eyes, by the light of a single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice of the ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it, while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she would be no more, when she would be only a memory to him.
“How could I go out of the room without saying anything to her?
She is....” Suddenly the shadow of the screen wavered, pounced on the whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadows from the other side swooped to meet it, for an instant the shadows flitted back, but then with fresh swiftness they darted forward, wavered, commingled, and all was darkness.
And such horror came upon her that for a long while she could not realize where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands could not find the matches and light another candle, instead of the one that had burned down and gone out.
“No, anything—only to live!
This has been before and will pass,” she said, feeling that tears of joy at the return to life were trickling down her cheeks.
And to escape from her panic she went hurriedly to his room.
He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly.
Now when he was asleep, she loved him so that at the sight of him she could not keep back tears of tenderness.
But she knew that if he waked up he would look at her with cold eyes, convinced that he was right, and that before telling him of her love, she would have to prove to him that he had been wrong in his treatment of her.
Without waking him, she went back, and after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning into a heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lost consciousness.
In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had recurred several times in her dreams, even before her connection with Vronsky.
A little old man with unkempt beard was doing something bent down over some iron, muttering meaningless French words, and she, as she always did in this nightmare (it was what made the horror of it), felt that this peasant was taking no notice of her, but was doing something horrible with the iron—over her.
When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though veiled in mist.
Just what has happened several times.
I said I had a headache, and he did not come in to see me.
Tomorrow we’re going away; I must see him and get ready for the journey,” she said to herself.
And learning that he was in his study, she went down to him.
As she passed through the drawing-room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and looking out of the window she saw the carriage, from which a young girl in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction to the footman ringing the bell.
After a parley in the hall, someone came upstairs, and Vronsky’s steps could be heard passing the drawing-room.
He went rapidly downstairs.
She saw him come out onto the steps without his hat and go up to the carriage.
Vronsky, smiling, said something to her.
The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.
The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted suddenly.
The feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with a fresh pang.
She could not understand now how she could have lowered herself by spending a whole day with him in his house.
She went into his room to announce her determination.
“That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter.
I couldn’t get them yesterday.
How is your head, better?” he said quietly, not wishing to see and to understand the gloomy and solemn expression of her face.
She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of the room.
She turned, and went deliberately out of the room.
He still might have turned her back, but she had reached the door, he was still silent, and the only sound audible was the rustling of the note paper as he turned it.
“Oh, by the way,” he said at the very moment she was in the doorway, “we’re going tomorrow for certain, aren’t we?” “You, but not I,” she said, turning round to him.
“Anna, we can’t go on like this....” “You, but not I,” she repeated.
“This is getting unbearable!” “You ... you will be sorry for this,” she said, and went out.
Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words were uttered, he jumped up and would have run after her, but on second thoughts he sat down and scowled, setting his teeth.
This vulgar—as he thought it—threat of something vague exasperated him.
“I’ve tried everything,” he thought; “the only thing left is not to pay attention,” and he began to get ready to drive into town, and again to his mother’s to get her signature to the deeds.
Then she heard the carriage brought round, the door opened, and he came out again.
But he went back into the porch again, and someone was running upstairs.
It was the valet running up for his gloves that had been forgotten.
She went to the window and saw him take the gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the back he said something to him.
Then without looking up at the window he settled himself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his legs crossed, and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the corner.
It is over!” Anna said to herself, standing at the window; and in answer to this statement the impression of the darkness when the candle had flickered out, and of her fearful dream mingling into one, filled her heart with cold terror.
“No, that cannot be!” she cried, and crossing the room she rang the bell.
The servant answered that the count had gone to the stable.
“His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage would be back immediately.” “Very good.
She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant out of the room, and went to the nursery.
Where are his blue eyes, his sweet, shy smile?” was her first thought when she saw her chubby, rosy little girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangle of her ideas she had expected to see in the nursery.
The little girl sitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with a cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.
Answering the English nurse that she was quite well, and that she was going to the country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and began spinning the cork to show her.
But the child’s loud, ringing laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly that she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went away.
But how can he explain that smile, that excitement after he had been talking to her?
“By now he has received the note and is coming back.
And she could not remember.
“Yes, my hair has been done, but when I did it I can’t in the least remember.” She could not believe the evidence of her hand, and went up to the pier-glass to see whether she really had done her hair.
She certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it.
“Who’s that?” she thought, looking in the looking-glass at the swollen face with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a scared way at her.
“Why, it’s I!” she suddenly understood, and looking round, she seemed all at once to feel his kisses on her, and twitched her shoulders, shuddering.
Why, I’m going out of my mind!” and she went into her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.
“Annushka,” she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she stared at the maid, not knowing what to say to her.
“You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna,” said the girl, as though she understood.
“Darya Alexandrovna?
But her calculations might be wrong, and she began once more to recall when he had started and to count the minutes.
Glancing out of the window, she saw his carriage.
But no one came upstairs, and voices could be heard below.
It was the messenger who had come back in the carriage.
“Why, then, he has never received it!” she thought.
“Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya’s place, you know? and bring an answer back immediately,” she said to the messenger.
Yes, and I can telegraph, too.” And she wrote a telegram.
“I absolutely must talk to you; come at once.” After sending off the telegram, she went to dress.
When she was dressed and in her hat, she glanced again into the eyes of the plump, comfortable-looking Annushka.
There was unmistakable sympathy in those good-natured little gray eyes.
“Annushka, dear, what am I to do?” said Anna, sobbing and sinking helplessly into a chair.
“Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna?
“And if there’s a telegram while I’m away, send it on to Darya Alexandrovna’s ... but no, I shall be back myself.” “Yes, I mustn’t think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and most of all, get out of this house,” she said, feeling with terror the strange turmoil going on in her own heart, and she made haste to go out and get into the carriage.
“To Znamenka, the Oblonskys’.” Chapter 28 It was bright and sunny.
The iron roofs, the flags of the roads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and leather, the brass and the tinplate of the carriages—all glistened brightly in the May sunshine.
It was three o’clock, and the very liveliest time in the streets.
As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayed on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in the midst of the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing impressions in the pure air, Anna ran over the events of the last days, and she saw her position quite differently from how it had seemed at home.
Now the thought of death seemed no longer so terrible and so clear to her, and death itself no longer seemed so inevitable.
Now she blamed herself for the humiliation to which she had lowered herself.
Can’t I live without him?” And leaving unanswered the question how she was going to live without him, she fell to reading the signs on the shops.
“Office and warehouse.
They say they send their dough to Petersburg.
Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!” And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of seventeen, she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa.
How much that seemed to me then splendid and out of reach has become worthless, while what I had then has gone out of my reach forever!
Could I ever have believed then that I could come to such humiliation?
How conceited and self-satisfied he will be when he gets my note!
Why is it they’re always painting and building? _Modes et robes_, she read.
It was Annushka’s husband.
“Our parasites”; she remembered how Vronsky had said that.
And I’ll hide it.” And then she thought of her past with Alexey Alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted the memory of it out of her life.
“Dolly will think I’m leaving my second husband, and so I certainly must be in the wrong.
But at once she fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling about.
The boulevard and the children.
And I’m losing everything and not getting him back.
Yes, I’m losing everything, if he doesn’t return.
Longing for humiliation again!” she said to herself.
“No, I’ll go to Dolly, and say straight out to her, I’m unhappy, I deserve this, I’m to blame, but still I’m unhappy, help me.
These horses, this carriage—how loathsome I am to myself in this carriage—all his; but I won’t see them again.” Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and mentally working her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went upstairs.
“Katerina Alexandrovna Levin,” answered the footman.
But me he thinks of with hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do with me.” The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called.
Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted their conversation.
I meant to have come to you,” she said; “I had a letter from Stiva today.” “We had a telegram too,” answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.
“He writes that he can’t make out quite what Alexey Alexandrovitch wants, but he won’t go away without a decisive answer.” “I thought you had someone with you.
Can I see the letter?” “Yes; Kitty,” said Dolly, embarrassed.
May I see the letter?” “I’ll get it directly.
But he doesn’t refuse; on the contrary, Stiva has hopes,” said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.
Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?” thought Anna when she was alone.
I know that in my position I can’t be received by any decent woman.
I knew that from the first moment I sacrificed everything to him.
I’m worse here, more miserable.” She heard from the next room the sisters’ voices in consultation.
Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness, submit to her patronizing?
No; and besides, Dolly wouldn’t understand.
It would only be interesting to see Kitty, to show her how I despise everyone and everything, how nothing matters to me now.” Dolly came in with the letter.
“I knew all that,” she said, “and it doesn’t interest me in the least.” “Oh, why so?
On the contrary, I have hopes,” said Dolly, looking inquisitively at Anna.
She had never seen her in such a strangely irritable condition.
Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did not answer.
“Why does Kitty shrink from me?” she said, looking at the door and flushing red.
She’s nursing, and things aren’t going right with her, and I’ve been advising her....
She’ll be here in a minute,” said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at lying.
“Yes, here she is.” Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dolly persuaded her.
Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked up to her, blushing, and shook hands.
“I am so glad to see you,” she said with a trembling voice.
Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between her antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her.
But as soon as she saw Anna’s lovely and attractive face, all feeling of antagonism disappeared.
“I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me.
I’m used to everything.
She ascribed this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.
They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was obvious that nothing interested Anna.
“Oh, when are you going?” But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.
“I have heard so much of you from everyone, even from your husband.
He came to see me, and I liked him exceedingly,” she said, unmistakably with malicious intent.
“Where is he?” “He has gone back to the country,” said Kitty, blushing.
“Remember me to him, be sure you do.” “I’ll be sure to!” Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately into her eyes.
“So good-bye, Dolly.” And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kitty, Anna went out hurriedly.
“She’s just the same and just as charming!
“But there’s something piteous about her.
Awfully piteous!” “Yes, there’s something unusual about her today,” said Dolly.
“When I went with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost crying.” Chapter 29 Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than when she set out from home.
To her previous tortures was added now that sense of mortification and of being an outcast which she had felt so distinctly on meeting Kitty.
“Yes, home,” she said, not even thinking now where she was going.
“How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, and curious!
She would have concealed it, but her chief feeling would have been delight at my being punished for the happiness she envied me for.
And she despises me.
There’s someone who’s pleased with himself,” she thought, as she saw a fat, rubicund gentleman coming towards her.
He took her for an acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat above his bald, glossy head, and then perceived his mistake.
I know my appetites, as the French say.
They want that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain,” she thought, looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who took a barrel off his head and began wiping his perspiring face with a towel.
If not sweetmeats, then a dirty ice.
‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur._’ _Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._ I’ll tell him that when he comes,” she thought and smiled.
But the same instant she remembered that she had no one now to tell anything amusing to.
“And there’s nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really.
They’re singing for vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses himself! as if he were afraid of missing something.
Why these churches and this singing and this humbug?
Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I him of his.’ Yes, that’s the truth!” She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that she left off thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew up at the steps of her house.
It was only when she saw the porter running out to meet her that she remembered she had sent the note and the telegram.
“Is there an answer?” she inquired.
“I’ll see this minute,” answered the porter, and glancing into his room, he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a telegram.
“And hasn’t the messenger come back?” “No,” answered the porter.
“Then, since it’s so, I know what I must do,” she said, and feeling a vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within her, she ran upstairs.
Seeing his hat on the rack, she shuddered with aversion.
She did not consider that his telegram was an answer to her telegram and that he had not yet received her note.
She pictured him to herself as talking calmly to his mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings.
She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the feelings she had gone through in that awful house.
The servants, the walls, the things in that house—all aroused repulsion and hatred in her and lay like a weight upon her.
“Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not there, then go there and catch him.” Anna looked at the railway timetable in the newspapers.
“Yes, I shall be in time.” She gave orders for the other horses to be put in the carriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed for a few days.
Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined that after what would happen at the station or at the countess’s house, she would go as far as the first town on the Nizhni road and stop there.
Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread and cheese was enough to make her feel that all food was disgusting.
She ordered the carriage and went out.
The house threw a shadow now right across the street, but it was a bright evening and still warm in the sunshine.
Annushka, who came down with her things, and Pyotr, who put the things in the carriage, and the coachman, evidently out of humor, were all hateful to her, and irritated her by their words and actions.
Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the coachman to drive to the booking-office.
Again I understand it all!” Anna said to herself, as soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled over the tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one impression followed rapidly upon another.
“‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur?_’—no, not that.
Yes, of what Yashvin says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one thing that holds men together.
No, it’s a useless journey you’re making,” she said, mentally addressing a party in a coach and four, evidently going for an excursion into the country.
You can’t get away from yourselves.” Turning her eyes in the direction Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory-hand almost dead-drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman.
“Count Vronsky and I did not find that happiness either, though we expected so much from it.” And now for the first time Anna turned that glaring light in which she was seeing everything on to her relations with him, which she had hitherto avoided thinking about.
Not love so much as the satisfaction of vanity.” She remembered his words, the expression of his face, that recalled an abject setter-dog, in the early days of their connection.
And everything now confirmed this.
He is weary of me and is trying not to be dishonorable in his behavior to me.
He let that out yesterday—he wants divorce and marriage so as to burn his ships.
That fellow wants everyone to admire him and is very much pleased with himself,” she thought, looking at a red-faced clerk, riding on a riding-school horse.
If I go away from him, at the bottom of his heart he will be glad.” This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the piercing light, which revealed to her now the meaning of life and human relations.
“My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is waning and waning, and that’s why we’re drifting apart.” She went on musing.
He is everything for me, and I want him more and more to give himself up to me entirely.
We walked to meet each other up to the time of our love, and then we have been irresistibly drifting in different directions.
And there’s no altering that.
He tells me I’m insanely jealous, and I have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it’s not true.
I’m not jealous, but I’m unsatisfied.
But....” she opened her lips, and shifted her place in the carriage in the excitement, aroused by the thought that suddenly struck her.
“If I could be anything but a mistress, passionately caring for nothing but his caresses; but I can’t and I don’t care to be anything else.
And by that desire I rouse aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me, and it cannot be different.
Don’t I know that he wouldn’t deceive me, that he has no schemes about Princess Sorokina, that he’s not in love with Kitty, that he won’t desert me!
If without loving me, from _duty_ he’ll be good and kind to me, without what I want, that’s a thousand times worse than unkindness!
“Well, I’m divorced, and become Vronsky’s wife.
And will Seryozha leave off asking and wondering about my two husbands?
Is there possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery?
No, no!” she answered now without the slightest hesitation.
We are drawn apart by life, and I make his unhappiness, and he mine, and there’s no altering him or me.
Every attempt has been made, the screw has come unscrewed.
Aren’t we all flung into the world only to hate each other, and so to torture ourselves and each other?
Schoolboys coming—laughing Seryozha?” she thought.
“I thought, too, that I loved him, and used to be touched by my own tenderness.
But I have lived without him, I gave him up for another love, and did not regret the exchange till that love was satisfied.” And with loathing she thought of what she meant by that love.
And the clearness with which she saw life now, her own and all men’s, was a pleasure to her.
“It’s so with me and Pyotr, and the coachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along the Volga, where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere and always,” she thought when she had driven under the low-pitched roof of the Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.
“A ticket to Obiralovka?” said Pyotr.
She had utterly forgotten where and why she was going, and only by a great effort she understood the question.
“Yes,” she said, handing him her purse, and taking a little red bag in her hand, she got out of the carriage.
Making her way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room, she gradually recollected all the details of her position, and the plans between which she was hesitating.
And again at the old sore places, hope and then despair poisoned the wounds of her tortured, fearfully throbbing heart.
Then she thought that life might still be happy, and how miserably she loved and hated him, and how fearfully her heart was beating.
Chapter 31 A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same time careful of the impression they were making, hurried by.
Some noisy men were quiet as she passed them on the platform, and one whispered something about her to another—something vile, no doubt.
She stepped up on the high step, and sat down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat that had been white.
Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by the springiness of the seat.
With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his hat, with its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell; an impudent conductor slammed the door and the latch.
A grotesque-looking lady wearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed the woman, and was appalled at her hideousness), and a little girl laughing affectedly ran down the platform.
“Katerina Andreevna, she’s got them all, _ma tante!_” cried the girl.
“Even the child’s hideous and affected,” thought Anna.
To avoid seeing anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the opposite window of the empty carriage.
A misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, in a cap from which his tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by that window, stooping down to the carriage wheels.
“There’s something familiar about that hideous peasant,” thought Anna.
And remembering her dream, she moved away to the opposite door, shaking with terror.
The conductor opened the door and let in a man and his wife.
The conductor and her two fellow-passengers did not notice under her veil her panic-stricken face.
The couple seated themselves on the opposite side, and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized her clothes.
Both husband and wife seemed repulsive to Anna.
The husband asked, would she allow him to smoke, obviously not with a view to smoking but to getting into conversation with her.
Receiving her assent, he said to his wife in French something about caring less to smoke than to talk.
They made inane and affected remarks to one another, entirely for her benefit.
And no one could have helped hating such miserable monstrosities.
A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage, noise, shouting and laughter.
It was so clear to Anna that there was nothing for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter irritated her agonizingly, and she would have liked to stop up her ears not to hear it.
At last the third bell rang, there was a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank of chains, and the man in her carriage crossed himself.
“It would be interesting to ask him what meaning he attaches to that,” thought Anna, looking angrily at him.
She looked past the lady out of the window at the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or stood on the platform.
The train, jerking at regular intervals at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a stone wall, a signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving more smoothly and evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the rails.
The window was lighted up by the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze fluttered the curtain.
Anna forgot her fellow passengers, and to the light swaying of the train she fell to thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.
That I couldn’t conceive a position in which life would not be a misery, that we are all created to be miserable, and that we all know it, and all invent means of deceiving each other.
And when one sees the truth, what is one to do?” “That’s what reason is given man for, to escape from what worries him,” said the lady in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously pleased with her phrase.
The words seemed an answer to Anna’s thoughts.
“To escape from what worries him,” repeated Anna.
And glancing at the red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the sickly wife considered herself misunderstood, and the husband deceived her and encouraged her in that idea of herself.
Anna seemed to see all their history and all the crannies of their souls, as it were turning a light upon them.
But there was nothing interesting in them, and she pursued her thought.
“Yes, I’m very much worried, and that’s what reason was given me for, to escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the light when there’s nothing more to look at, when it’s sickening to look at it all?
Why did the conductor run along the footboard, why are they shrieking, those young men in that train? why are they talking, why are they laughing?
It’s all falsehood, all lying, all humbug, all cruelty!...” When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd of passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers, she stood on the platform, trying to think what she had come here for, and what she meant to do.
Everything that had seemed to her possible before was now so difficult to consider, especially in this noisy crowd of hideous people who would not leave her alone.
One moment porters ran up to her proffering their services, then young men, clacking their heels on the planks of the platform and talking loudly, stared at her; people meeting her dodged past on the wrong side.
Remembering that she had meant to go on further if there were no answer, she stopped a porter and asked if her coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.
They sent up here from the Vronskys just this minute, to meet Princess Sorokina and her daughter.
And what is the coachman like?” Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red and cheerful in his smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of having so successfully performed his commission, came up to her and gave her a letter.
I will be home at ten,” Vronsky had written carelessly....
“Yes, that’s what I expected!” she said to herself with an evil smile.
“Very good, you can go home then,” she said softly, addressing Mihail.
She spoke softly because the rapidity of her heart’s beating hindered her breathing.
“No, I won’t let you make me miserable,” she thought menacingly, addressing not him, not herself, but the power that made her suffer, and she walked along the platform.
Two maid-servants walking along the platform turned their heads, staring at her and making some remarks about her dress.
Again they passed by, peering into her face, and with a laugh shouting something in an unnatural voice.
“My God! where am I to go?” she thought, going farther and farther along the platform.
Some ladies and children, who had come to meet a gentleman in spectacles, paused in their loud laughter and talking, and stared at her as she reached them.
She quickened her pace and walked away from them to the edge of the platform.
The platform began to sway, and she fancied she was in the train again.
With a rapid, light step she went down the steps that led from the tank to the rails and stopped quite near the approaching train.
She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and chains and the tall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly moving up, and trying to measure the middle between the front and back wheels, and the very minute when that middle point would be opposite her.
She had to wait for the next carriage.
That familiar gesture brought back into her soul a whole series of girlish and childish memories, and suddenly the darkness that had covered everything for her was torn apart, and life rose up before her for an instant with all its bright past joys.
But she did not take her eyes from the wheels of the second carriage.
And exactly at the moment when the space between the wheels came opposite her, she dropped the red bag, and drawing her head back into her shoulders, fell on her hands under the carriage, and lightly, as though she would rise again at once, dropped on to her knees.
And at the same instant she was terror-stricken at what she was doing.
What for?” She tried to get up, to drop backwards; but something huge and merciless struck her on the head and rolled her on her back.
“Lord, forgive me all!” she said, feeling it impossible to struggle.
A peasant muttering something was working at the iron above her.
And the light by which she had read the book filled with troubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil, flared up more brightly than ever before, lighted up for her all that had been in darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was quenched forever.
The hot summer was half over, but Sergey Ivanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s life had not been uneventful during this time.
But still Sergey Ivanovitch had expected that on its appearance his book would be sure to make a serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a revolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a great stir in the scientific world.
After the most conscientious revision the book had last year been published, and had been distributed among the booksellers.
Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned indifference answered his friends’ inquiries as to how the book was going, and did not even inquire of the booksellers how the book was selling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all on the alert, with strained attention, watching for the first impression his book would make in the world and in literature.
But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no impression whatever could be detected.
His friends who were specialists and savants, occasionally—unmistakably from politeness—alluded to it.
The rest of his acquaintances, not interested in a book on a learned subject, did not talk of it at all.
And society generally—just now especially absorbed in other things—was absolutely indifferent.
Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary for writing a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still there was silence.
Only in the _Northern Beetle_, in a comic article on the singer Drabanti, who had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous allusion to Koznishev’s book, suggesting that the book had been long ago seen through by everyone, and was a subject of general ridicule.
At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a serious review.
Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the article.
He had met him once at Golubtsov’s.
The author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold as a writer, but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in personal relations.
In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with complete respect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the article.
The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book which could not possibly be put on it.
But he had selected quotations so adroitly that for people who had not read the book (and obviously scarcely anyone had read it) it seemed absolutely clear that the whole book was nothing but a medley of high-flown phrases, not even—as suggested by marks of interrogation—used appropriately, and that the author of the book was a person absolutely without knowledge of the subject.
And all this was so wittily done that Sergey Ivanovitch would not have disowned such wit himself.
In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey Ivanovitch verified the correctness of the critic’s arguments, he did not for a minute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes which were ridiculed; but unconsciously he began immediately trying to recall every detail of his meeting and conversation with the author of the article.
“Didn’t I offend him in some way?” Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.
And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man about something he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey Ivanovitch found the clue to explain the article.
This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both in the press and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that his six years’ task, toiled at with such love and labor, had gone, leaving no trace.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s position was still more difficult from the fact that, since he had finished his book, he had had no more literary work to do, such as had hitherto occupied the greater part of his time.
Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic, and he did not know what use to make of his energy.
Conversations in drawing-rooms, in meetings, assemblies, and committees—everywhere where talk was possible—took up part of his time.
But being used for years to town life, he did not waste all his energies in talk, as his less experienced younger brother did, when he was in Moscow.
He had a great deal of leisure and intellectual energy still to dispose of.
In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was talked of or written about just now but the Servian War.
Everything that the idle crowd usually does to kill time was done now for the benefit of the Slavonic States.
Balls, concerts, dinners, matchboxes, ladies’ dresses, beer, restaurants—everything testified to sympathy with the Slavonic peoples.
From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, Sergey Ivanovitch differed on various points.
He saw that the Slavonic question had become one of those fashionable distractions which succeed one another in providing society with an object and an occupation.
He saw, too, that a great many people were taking up the subject from motives of self-interest and self-advertisement.
He recognized that the newspapers published a great deal that was superfluous and exaggerated, with the sole aim of attracting attention and outbidding one another.
He saw that in this general movement those who thrust themselves most forward and shouted the loudest were men who had failed and were smarting under a sense of injury—generals without armies, ministers not in the ministry, journalists not on any paper, party leaders without followers.
He saw that there was a great deal in it that was frivolous and absurd.
But he saw and recognized an unmistakable growing enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with which it was impossible not to sympathize.
The massacre of men who were fellow Christians, and of the same Slavonic race, excited sympathy for the sufferers and indignation against the oppressors.
And the heroism of the Servians and Montenegrins struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a longing to help their brothers not in word but in deed.
But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey Ivanovitch.
That was the manifestation of public opinion.
The public had definitely expressed its desire.
The soul of the people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch said, found expression.
And the more he worked in this cause, the more incontestable it seemed to him that it was a cause destined to assume vast dimensions, to create an epoch.
His whole time now was engrossed by it, so that he could scarcely manage to answer all the letters and appeals addressed to him.
He worked the whole spring and part of the summer, and it was only in July that he prepared to go away to his brother’s in the country.
He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart of the people, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the sight of that uplifting of the spirit of the people, of which, like all residents in the capital and big towns, he was fully persuaded.
Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out his promise to stay with Levin, and so he was going with him.
Chapter 2 Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station of the Kursk line, which was particularly busy and full of people that day, when, looking round for the groom who was following with their things, they saw a party of volunteers driving up in four cabs.
Ladies met them with bouquets of flowers, and followed by the rushing crowd they went into the station.
One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the hall and addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.
“No, I’m going away myself, princess.
Do you always see them off?” said Sergey Ivanovitch with a hardly perceptible smile.
“Oh, that would be impossible!” answered the princess.
Malvinsky wouldn’t believe me.” “More than eight hundred.
If you reckon those who have been sent not directly from Moscow, over a thousand,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
That’s just what I said!” exclaimed the lady.
“And it’s true too, I suppose, that more than a million has been subscribed?” “Yes, princess.” “What do you say to today’s telegram?
Beaten the Turks again.” “Yes, so I saw,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
They were speaking of the last telegram stating that the Turks had been for three days in succession beaten at all points and put to flight, and that tomorrow a decisive engagement was expected.
“Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go, and they’ve made some difficulty, I don’t know why.
He’s being sent by Countess Lidia Ivanovna.” Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew about the young man, and going into the first-class waiting-room, wrote a note to the person on whom the granting of leave of absence depended, and handed it to the princess.
“You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one ... is going by this train?” said the princess with a smile full of triumph and meaning, when he found her again and gave her the letter.
It’s the best thing, anyway, that he could do.” “Oh, yes, of course.” While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the dining-room.
They went forward too, and heard a gentleman with a glass in his hand delivering a loud discourse to the volunteers.
“In the service of religion, humanity, and our brothers,” the gentleman said, his voice growing louder and louder; “to this great cause mother Moscow dedicates you with her blessing. _Jivio!_” he concluded, loudly and tearfully.
Everyone shouted _Jivio!_ and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall, almost carrying the princess off her legs.
“Ah, princess! that was something like!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and beaming upon them with a delighted smile.
“Capitally, warmly said, wasn’t it?
And Sergey Ivanovitch!
Why, you ought to have said something—just a few words, you know, to encourage them; you do that so well,” he added with a soft, respectful, and discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward a little by the arm.
“No, I’m just off.” “Where to?” “To the country, to my brother’s,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
Oh, and be so good as to tell her I’m appointed secretary of the committee....
But she’ll understand!
You know, _les petites misères de la vie humaine,_” he said, as it were apologizing to the princess.
“And Princess Myakaya—not Liza, but Bibish—is sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses.
Did I tell you?” “Yes, I heard so,” answered Koznishev indifferently.
“It’s a pity you’re going away,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“Tomorrow we’re giving a dinner to two who’re setting off—Dimer-Bartnyansky from Petersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha.
Veslovsky’s only lately married.
Eh, princess?” he turned to the lady.
The princess looked at Koznishev without replying.
But the fact that Sergey Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid of him did not in the least disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Smiling, he stared at the feather in the princess’s hat, and then about him as though he were going to pick something up.
Seeing a lady approaching with a collecting box, he beckoned her up and put in a five-rouble note.
“I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I’ve money in my pocket,” he said.
“And how about today’s telegram?
Fine chaps those Montenegrins!” “You don’t say so!” he cried, when the princess told him that Vronsky was going by this train.
For an instant Stepan Arkadyevitch’s face looked sad, but a minute later, when, stroking his mustaches and swinging as he walked, he went into the hall where Vronsky was, he had completely forgotten his own despairing sobs over his sister’s corpse, and he saw in Vronsky only a hero and an old friend.
“With all his faults one can’t refuse to do him justice,” said the princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch had left them.
“What a typically Russian, Slav nature!
Only, I’m afraid it won’t be pleasant for Vronsky to see him.
Do talk to him a little on the way,” said the princess.
He’s not merely going himself, he’s taking a squadron at his own expense.” “Yes, so I heard.” A bell sounded.
Everyone crowded to the doors.
“Here he is!” said the princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm walked by, wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat.
Oblonsky was walking beside him, talking eagerly of something.
Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though he did not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.
Probably on Oblonsky’s pointing them out, he looked round in the direction where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing, and without speaking lifted his hat.
His face, aged and worn by suffering, looked stony.
Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and disappeared into a compartment.
On the platform there rang out “God save the Tsar,” then shouts of “hurrah!” and _“jivio!”_ One of the volunteers, a tall, very young man with a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous, bowing and waving his felt hat and a nosegay over his head.
Then two officers emerged, bowing too, and a stout man with a big beard, wearing a greasy forage cap.
Chapter 3 Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overflowing, and the train started.
At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men singing “Hail to Thee!” Again the volunteers bowed and poked their heads out, but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them.
He had had so much to do with the volunteers that the type was familiar to him and did not interest him.
Katavasov, whose scientific work had prevented his having a chance of observing them hitherto, was very much interested in them and questioned Sergey Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and talk to them himself.
At the next station Katavasov acted on this suggestion.
At the first stop he moved into the second-class and made the acquaintance of the volunteers.
They were sitting in a corner of the carriage, talking loudly and obviously aware that the attention of the passengers and Katavasov as he got in was concentrated upon them.
He was unmistakably tipsy, and was relating some story that had occurred at his school.
Facing him sat a middle-aged officer in the Austrian military jacket of the Guards uniform.
He was listening with a smile to the hollow-chested youth, and occasionally pulling him up.
The third, in an artillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them.
Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that he was a wealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large fortune before he was two-and-twenty.
Katavasov did not like him, because he was unmanly and effeminate and sickly.
He was obviously convinced, especially now after drinking, that he was performing a heroic action, and he bragged of it in the most unpleasant way.
The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant impression too upon Katavasov.
He was, it seemed, a man who had tried everything.
He had been on a railway, had been a land-steward, and had started factories, and he talked, quite without necessity, of all he had done, and used learned expressions quite inappropriately.
The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov very favorably.
He was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably impressed by the knowledge of the officer and the heroic self-sacrifice of the merchant and saying nothing about himself.
When Katavasov asked him what had impelled him to go to Servia, he answered modestly: “Oh, well, everyone’s going.
The Servians want help, too.
I’m sorry for them.” “Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there,” said Katavasov.
“Oh, I wasn’t long in the artillery, maybe they’ll put me into the infantry or the cavalry.” “Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?” said Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman’s apparent age that he must have reached a fairly high grade.
“I wasn’t long in the artillery; I’m a cadet retired,” he said, and he began to explain how he had failed in his examination.
All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov, and when the volunteers got out at a station for a drink, Katavasov would have liked to compare his unfavorable impression in conversation with someone.
There was an old man in the carriage, wearing a military overcoat, who had been listening all the while to Katavasov’s conversation with the volunteers.
When they were left alone, Katavasov addressed him.
“What different positions they come from, all those fellows who are going off there,” Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to express his own opinion, and at the same time anxious to find out the old man’s views.
The old man was an officer who had served on two campaigns.
He knew what makes a soldier, and judging by the appearance and the talk of those persons, by the swagger with which they had recourse to the bottle on the journey, he considered them poor soldiers.
Moreover, he lived in a district town, and he was longing to tell how one soldier had volunteered from his town, a drunkard and a thief whom no one would employ as a laborer.
But knowing by experience that in the present condition of the public temper it was dangerous to express an opinion opposed to the general one, and especially to criticize the volunteers unfavorably, he too watched Katavasov without committing himself.
“Well, men are wanted there,” he said, laughing with his eyes.
And they fell to talking of the last war news, and each concealed from the other his perplexity as to the engagement expected next day, since the Turks had been beaten, according to the latest news, at all points.
And so they parted, neither giving expression to his opinion.
Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with reluctant hypocrisy reported to Sergey Ivanovitch his observations of the volunteers, from which it would appear that they were capital fellows.
At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with shouts and singing, again men and women with collecting boxes appeared, and provincial ladies brought bouquets to the volunteers and followed them into the refreshment room; but all this was on a much smaller and feebler scale than in Moscow.
Chapter 4 While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey Ivanovitch did not go to the refreshment room, but walked up and down the platform.
The first time he passed Vronsky’s compartment he noticed that the curtain was drawn over the window; but as he passed it the second time he saw the old countess at the window.
She beckoned to Koznishev.
“Yes, so I heard,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her window and peeping in.
“What a noble act on his part!” he added, noticing that Vronsky was not in the compartment.
“Yes, after his misfortune, what was there for him to do?” “What a terrible thing it was!” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
Ah, what I have been through!” she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got in and sat down beside her.
“You can’t conceive it!
For six weeks he did not speak to anyone, and would not touch food except when I implored him.
We took away everything he could have used against himself.
We lived on the ground floor, but there was no reckoning on anything.
You know, of course, that he had shot himself once already on her account,” she said, and the old lady’s eyelashes twitched at the recollection.
Even the death she chose was low and vulgar.” “It’s not for us to judge, countess,” said Sergey Ivanovitch; “but I can understand that it has been very hard for you.” “Ah, don’t speak of it!
Something seemed to strike me at once.
His coachman was there and saw it all.
He didn’t say a word, but galloped off there.
I don’t know to this day what happened there, but he was brought back at death’s door.
I shouldn’t have known him. _Prostration complète,_ the doctor said.
And that was followed almost by madness.
Oh, why talk of it!” said the countess with a wave of her hand.
Why, what is the meaning of such desperate passions?
It was all to show herself something out of the way.
She brought herself to ruin and two good men—her husband and my unhappy son.” “And what did her husband do?” asked Sergey Ivanovitch.
“He has taken her daughter.
Alexey was ready to agree to anything at first.
Now it worries him terribly that he should have given his own child away to another man.
He had thrown up everything, his career, me, and even then she had no mercy on him, but of set purpose she made his ruin complete.
No, say what you will, her very death was the death of a vile woman, of no religious feeling.
God forgive me, but I can’t help hating the memory of her, when I look at my son’s misery!” “But how is he now?” “It was a blessing from Providence for us—this Servian war.
I’m old, and I don’t understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it’s come as a providential blessing to him.
Of course for me, as his mother, it’s terrible; and what’s worse, they say, _ce n’est pas très bien vu à Pétersbourg_.
He came to see him and persuaded him to go.
Now it’s an interest for him.
I want to distract his mind.
He’s so low-spirited.
And as bad luck would have it, he has toothache too.
But he’ll be delighted to see you.
Please do talk to him; he’s walking up and down on that side.” Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over to the other side of the station.
Chapter 5 In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on the platform, Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with his hands in his pockets, strode up and down, like a wild beast in a cage, turning sharply after twenty paces.
Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as he approached him, that Vronsky saw him but was pretending not to see.
This did not affect Sergey Ivanovitch in the slightest.
He was above all personal considerations with Vronsky.
At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man taking an important part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought it his duty to encourage him and express his approval.
Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and going a few steps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very warmly.
“Possibly you didn’t wish to see me,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “but couldn’t I be of use to you?” “There’s no one I should less dislike seeing than you,” said Vronsky.
“Excuse me; and there’s nothing in life for me to like.” “I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my services,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky’s face, full of unmistakable suffering.
“Wouldn’t it be of use to you to have a letter to Ristitch—to Milan?” “Oh, no!” Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with difficulty.
It’s so stuffy among the carriages.
No, thank you; to meet death one needs no letters of introduction.
His eyes still kept their look of angry suffering.
“Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which are after all essential, with anyone prepared to see you.
I was very glad to hear of your intention.
There have been so many attacks made on the volunteers, and a man like you raises them in public estimation.” “My use as a man,” said Vronsky, “is that life’s worth nothing to me.
I’m glad there’s something to give my life for, for it’s not simply useless but loathsome to me.
Anyone’s welcome to it.” And his jaw twitched impatiently from the incessant gnawing toothache, that prevented him from even speaking with a natural expression.
“You will become another man, I predict,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, feeling touched.
God grant you success outwardly—and inwardly peace,” he added, and he held out his hand.
Vronsky warmly pressed his outstretched hand.
He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth, that were like rows of ivory in his mouth.
He was silent, and his eyes rested on the wheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly rolling along the rails.
And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner trouble, that set his whole being in anguish, made him for an instant forget his toothache.
And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the first time, at a railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving, seeking and giving happiness, and not cruelly revengeful as he remembered her on that last moment.
He tried to recall his best moments with her, but those moments were poisoned forever.
He could only think of her as triumphant, successful in her menace of a wholly useless remorse never to be effaced.
He lost all consciousness of toothache, and his face worked with sobs.
Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and regaining his self-possession, he addressed Sergey Ivanovitch calmly: “You have had no telegrams since yesterday’s?
Yes, driven back for a third time, but a decisive engagement expected for tomorrow.” And after talking a little more of King Milan’s proclamation, and the immense effect it might have, they parted, going to their carriages on hearing the second bell.
Chapter 6 Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to meet him, as he did not know when he should be able to leave Moscow.
Levin was not at home when Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired at the station drove up to the steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black as Moors from the dust of the road.
Kitty, sitting on the balcony with her father and sister, recognized her brother-in-law, and ran down to meet him.
“What a shame not to have let us know,” she said, giving her hand to Sergey Ivanovitch, and putting her forehead up for him to kiss.
“We drove here capitally, and have not put you out,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
And so you’re still as ever enjoying your peaceful, quiet happiness,” he said, smiling, “out of the reach of the current in your peaceful backwater.
Here’s our friend Fyodor Vassilievitch who has succeeded in getting here at last.” “But I’m not a negro, I shall look like a human being when I wash,” said Katavasov in his jesting fashion, and he shook hands and smiled, his teeth flashing white in his black face.
“Kostya will be delighted.
He has gone to his settlement.
It really is a peaceful backwater,” said Katavasov; “while we in town think of nothing but the Servian war.
He’s sure not to think like other people.” “Oh, I don’t know, like everybody else,” Kitty answered, a little embarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch.
He’s only just come home from abroad.” And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash, one in his room and the other in what had been Dolly’s, and giving orders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the freedom, and rapidity of movement, of which she had been deprived during the months of her pregnancy.
“It’s Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor,” she said.
“No, papa, he’s very nice, and Kostya’s very fond of him,” Kitty said, with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on her father’s face.
“Oh, I didn’t say anything.” “You go to them, darling,” said Kitty to her sister, “and entertain them.
He’s awake now, and sure to be screaming.” And feeling a rush of milk, she hurried to the nursery.
This was not a mere guess; her connection with the child was still so close, that she could gauge by the flow of her milk his need of food, and knew for certain he was hungry.
She heard him and hastened.
But the faster she went, the louder he screamed.
It was a fine healthy scream, hungry and impatient.
“Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?” said Kitty hurriedly, seating herself on a chair, and preparing to give the baby the breast.
Oh, nurse, how tiresome you are!
There, tie the cap afterwards, do!” The baby’s greedy scream was passing into sobs.
“But you can’t manage so, ma’am,” said Agafea Mihalovna, who was almost always to be found in the nursery.
“He must be put straight.
A-oo! a-oo!” she chanted over him, paying no attention to the mother.
Agafea Mihalovna followed him with a face dissolving with tenderness.
In God’s faith, Katerina Alexandrovna, ma’am, he knew me!” Agafea Mihalovna cried above the baby’s screams.
Her impatience kept growing, like the baby’s.
Their impatience hindered things for a while.
At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain sucking, things went right, and mother and child felt simultaneously soothed, and both subsided into calm.
“But poor darling, he’s all in perspiration!” said Kitty in a whisper, touching the baby.
“What makes you think he knows you?” she added, with a sidelong glance at the baby’s eyes, that peered roguishly, as she fancied, from under his cap, at his rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the little red-palmed hand he was waving.
If he knew anyone, he would have known me,” said Kitty, in response to Agafea Mihalovna’s statement, and she smiled.
She smiled because, though she said he could not know her, in her heart she was sure that he knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but that he knew and understood everything, and knew and understood a great deal too that no one else knew, and that she, his mother, had learned and come to understand only through him.
To Agafea Mihalovna, to the nurse, to his grandfather, to his father even, Mitya was a living being, requiring only material care, but for his mother he had long been a moral being, with whom there had been a whole series of spiritual relations already.
“When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself.
Simply beams like a sunny day!” said Agafea Mihalovna.
“Well, well; then we shall see,” whispered Kitty.
“But now go away, he’s going to sleep.” Chapter 7 Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the blind, chased a fly out from under the muslin canopy of the crib, and a bumblebee struggling on the window-frame, and sat down waving a faded branch of birch over the mother and the baby.
“Yes, yes, sh—sh—sh——” was all Kitty answered, rocking a little, and tenderly squeezing the plump little arm, with rolls of fat at the wrist, which Mitya still waved feebly as he opened and shut his eyes.
Only from time to time, as he went on sucking, the baby raised his long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes, that looked black in the twilight.
From above came the peals of the old prince’s voice, and the chuckle of Katavasov.
It distracts his mind.
He’s become altogether happier and better now than in the spring.
He used to be so gloomy and worried that I felt frightened for him.
And how absurd he is!” she whispered, smiling.
It was his unbelief.
Although, if she had been asked whether she supposed that in the future life, if he did not believe, he would be damned, she would have had to admit that he would be damned, his unbelief did not cause her unhappiness.
And she, confessing that for an unbeliever there can be no salvation, and loving her husband’s soul more than anything in the world, thought with a smile of his unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.
“What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this year?” she wondered.
“If it’s all written in those books, he can understand them.
Surely from his thinking so much?
And he thinks so much from being solitary.
I fancy he’ll be glad of these visitors, especially Katavasov.
He likes discussions with them,” she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of where it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to share Sergey Ivanovitch’s room.
And then an idea suddenly struck her, which made her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at her.
“I do believe the laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet, and all the best sheets are in use.
If I don’t see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets,” and at the very idea of this the blood rushed to Kitty’s face.
“Yes, I will arrange it,” she decided, and going back to her former thoughts, she remembered that some spiritual question of importance had been interrupted, and she began to recall what.
“Yes, Kostya, an unbeliever,” she thought again with a smile.
“Well, an unbeliever then!
No, he won’t ever sham anything.” And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind.
A fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch to Dolly.
He besought her to save his honor, to sell her estate to pay his debts.
Dolly was in despair, she detested her husband, despised him, pitied him, resolved on a separation, resolved to refuse, but ended by agreeing to sell part of her property.
After that, with an irrepressible smile of tenderness, Kitty recalled her husband’s shamefaced embarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts to approach the subject, and how at last, having thought of the one means of helping Dolly without wounding her pride, he had suggested to Kitty—what had not occurred to her before—that she should give up her share of the property.
“He an unbeliever indeed!
With his heart, his dread of offending anyone, even a child!
Everything for others, nothing for himself.
Sergey Ivanovitch simply considers it as Kostya’s duty to be his steward.
Now Dolly and her children are under his guardianship; all these peasants who come to him every day, as though he were bound to be at their service.” “Yes, only be like your father, only like him,” she said, handing Mitya over to the nurse, and putting her lips to his cheek.
The physical organization, its decay, the indestructibility of matter, the law of the conservation of energy, evolution, were the words which usurped the place of his old belief.
These words and the ideas associated with them were very well for intellectual purposes.
But for life they yielded nothing, and Levin felt suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak for a muslin garment, and going for the first time into the frost is immediately convinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature that he is as good as naked, and that he must infallibly perish miserably.
From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still went on living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at his lack of knowledge.
He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions were not merely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a whole order of ideas, in which no knowledge of what he needed was possible.
At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, had completely crowded out these thoughts.
But of late, while he was staying in Moscow after his wife’s confinement, with nothing to do, the question that clamored for solution had more and more often, more and more insistently, haunted Levin’s mind.
The question was summed up for him thus: “If I do not accept the answers Christianity gives to the problems of my life, what answers do I accept?” And in the whole arsenal of his convictions, so far from finding any satisfactory answers, he was utterly unable to find anything at all like an answer.
He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and tool shops.
Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every conversation, with every man he met, he was on the lookout for light on these questions and their solution.
What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the majority of men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged their old beliefs for the same new convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this, and were perfectly satisfied and serene.
So that, apart from the principal question, Levin was tortured by other questions too.
Were these people sincere? he asked himself, or were they playing a part? or was it that they understood the answers science gave to these problems in some different, clearer sense than he did?
And he assiduously studied both these men’s opinions and the books which treated of these scientific explanations.
One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his mind, was that he had been quite wrong in supposing from the recollections of the circle of his young days at college, that religion had outlived its day, and that it was now practically non-existent.
All the people nearest to him who were good in their lives were believers.
The old prince, and Lvov, whom he liked so much, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and all the women believed, and his wife believed as simply as he had believed in his earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russian people, all the working people for whose life he felt the deepest respect, believed.
Moreover, during his wife’s confinement, something had happened that seemed extraordinary to him.
He, an unbeliever, had fallen into praying, and at the moment he prayed, he believed.
He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and that now he was wrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly about it, it all fell to pieces.
He could not admit that he was mistaken then, for his spiritual condition then was precious to him, and to admit that it was a proof of weakness would have been to desecrate those moments.
He was miserably divided against himself, and strained all his spiritual forces to the utmost to escape from this condition.
Chapter 9 These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger from time to time, but never leaving him.
He read and thought, and the more he read and the more he thought, the further he felt from the aim he was pursuing.
Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become convinced that he would find no solution in the materialists, he had read and re-read thoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the philosophers who gave a non-materialistic explanation of life.
Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was himself seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially those of the materialists; but as soon as he began to read or sought for himself a solution of problems, the same thing always happened.
As long as he followed the fixed definition of obscure words such as _spirit, will, freedom, essence,_ purposely letting himself go into the snare of words the philosophers set for him, he seemed to comprehend something.
But he had only to forget the artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from life itself to what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance with the fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces at once like a house of cards, and it became clear that the edifice had been built up out of those transposed words, apart from anything in life more important than reason.
At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his _will_ the word _love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed him, till he removed a little away from it.
His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological works of Homiakov.
Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and in spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first repelled him, he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found in them.
He was struck at first by the idea that the apprehension of divine truths had not been vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of men bound together by love—to the church.
What delighted him was the thought how much easier it was to believe in a still existing living church, embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head, and therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in God, in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God, a mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc.
But afterwards, on reading a Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greek orthodox writer’s history of the church, and seeing that the two churches, in their very conception infallible, each deny the authority of the other, Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, and this edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers’ edifices.
“Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible; and that I can’t know, and so I can’t live,” Levin said to himself.
“In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is formed a bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and that bubble is Me.” It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages of human thought in that direction.
This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by human thought in almost all their ramifications rested.
It was the prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin had unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway the clearest, and made it his own.
But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wicked power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.
He had but to cut short this dependence on evil.
And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was several times so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be tempted to hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of shooting himself.
Chapter 10 When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could find no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he left off questioning himself about it.
It seemed as though he knew both what he was and for what he was living, for he acted and lived resolutely and without hesitation.
Indeed, in these latter days he was far more decided and unhesitating in life than he had ever been.
When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he went back also to his usual pursuits.
The management of the estate, his relations with the peasants and the neighbors, the care of his household, the management of his sister’s and brother’s property, of which he had the direction, his relations with his wife and kindred, the care of his child, and the new bee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring, filled all his time.
But now, since his marriage, when he had begun to confine himself more and more to living for himself, though he experienced no delight at all at the thought of the work he was doing, he felt a complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded far better than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and more.
Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into the soil like a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without turning aside the furrow.
To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, in the same condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same, was incontestably necessary.
It was as necessary as dining when one was hungry.
And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was necessary to keep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as to yield an income.
Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay a debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition that his son, when he received it as a heritage, would say “thank you” to his father as Levin had said “thank you” to his grandfather for all he built and planted.
And to do this it was necessary to look after the land himself, not to let it, and to breed cattle, manure the fields, and plant timber.
It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey Ivanovitch, of his sister, of the peasants who came to him for advice and were accustomed to do so—as impossible as to fling down a child one is carrying in one’s arms.
It was necessary to look after the comfort of his sister-in-law and her children, and of his wife and baby, and it was impossible not to spend with them at least a short time each day.
And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping, filled up the whole of Levin’s life, which had no meaning at all for him, when he began to think.
But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in just the same way _how_ he had to do it all, and what was more important than the rest.
He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire men under bond, paying them in advance at less than the current rate of wages, was what he must not do, even though it was very profitable.
Selling straw to the peasants in times of scarcity of provender was what he might do, even though he felt sorry for them; but the tavern and the pothouse must be put down, though they were a source of income.
Felling timber must be punished as severely as possible, but he could not exact forfeits for cattle being driven onto his fields; and though it annoyed the keeper and made the peasants not afraid to graze their cattle on his land, he could not keep their cattle as a punishment.
But he could not let off peasants who did not pay their rent, nor let them fall into arrears.
It was impossible to overlook the bailiff’s not having mown the meadows and letting the hay spoil; and it was equally impossible to mow those acres where a young copse had been planted.
It was impossible to excuse a laborer who had gone home in the busy season because his father was dying, however sorry he might feel for him, and he must subtract from his pay those costly months of idleness.
But it was impossible not to allow monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use for anything.
Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his wife, who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three hours to see him could wait a little longer.
He knew too that, regardless of all the pleasure he felt in taking a swarm, he must forego that pleasure, and leave the old man to see to the bees alone, while he talked to the peasants who had come after him to the bee-house.
Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and far from trying to prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all thought or talk about it.
Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing what he ought to do and what he ought not.
When he did not think, but simply lived, he was continually aware of the presence of an infallible judge in his soul, determining which of two possible courses of action was the better and which was the worse, and as soon as he did not act rightly, he was at once aware of it.
So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing what he was and what he was living for, and harassed at this lack of knowledge to such a point that he was afraid of suicide, and yet firmly laying down his own individual definite path in life.
Chapter 11 The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of Levin’s most painful days.
It was the very busiest working time, when all the peasantry show an extraordinary intensity of self-sacrifice in labor, such as is never shown in any other conditions of life, and would be highly esteemed if the men who showed these qualities themselves thought highly of them, and if it were not repeated every year, and if the results of this intense labor were not so simple.
Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in the closest relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in this busy time that he was infected by this general quickening of energy in the people.
In the early morning he rode over to the first sowing of the rye, and to the oats, which were being carried to the stacks, and returning home at the time his wife and sister-in-law were getting up, he drank coffee with them and walked to the farm, where a new thrashing machine was to be set working to get ready the seed-corn.
He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the leaves of the hazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled aspen beams of the new thatch roof.
“Why am I standing here, making them work?
What is that old Matrona, my old friend, toiling for? (I doctored her, when the beam fell on her in the fire)” he thought, looking at a thin old woman who was raking up the grain, moving painfully with her bare, sun-blackened feet over the uneven, rough floor.
“Then she recovered, but today or tomorrow or in ten years she won’t; they’ll bury her, and nothing will be left either of her or of that smart girl in the red jacket, who with that skillful, soft action shakes the ears out of their husks.
“And they will bury her and Fyodor the thrasher with his curly beard full of chaff and his shirt torn on his white shoulders—they will bury him.
He’s untying the sheaves, and giving orders, and shouting to the women, and quickly setting straight the strap on the moving wheel.
What for?” He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to reckon how much they thrashed in an hour.
“It’ll soon be one, and they’re only beginning the third sheaf,” thought Levin.
He went up to the man that was feeding the machine, and shouting over the roar of the machine he told him to put it in more slowly.
Do it evenly.” Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shouted something in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did not want him to.
Working on till the peasants’ dinner hour, which was not long in coming, he went out of the barn with Fyodor and fell into talk with him, stopping beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on the thrashing floor for seed.
Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which Levin had once allotted land to his cooperative association.
Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon, a well-to-do peasant of good character belonging to the same village, would not take the land for the coming year.
“It’s a high rent; it wouldn’t pay Platon, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” answered the peasant, picking the ears off his sweat-drenched shirt.
“But how does Kirillov make it pay?” “Mituh!” (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone of contempt), “you may be sure he’ll make it pay, Konstantin Dmitrievitch!
He’s no mercy on a Christian.
But Uncle Fokanitch” (so he called the old peasant Platon), “do you suppose he’d flay the skin off a man?
He’s a man too.” “But why will he let anyone off?” “Oh, well, of course, folks are different.
One man lives for his own wants and nothing else, like Mituh, he only thinks of filling his belly, but Fokanitch is a righteous man.
Folks are different.
Take you now, you wouldn’t wrong a man....” “Yes, yes, good-bye!” said Levin, breathless with excitement, and turning round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards home.
At the peasant’s words that Fokanitch lived for his soul, in truth, in God’s way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to burst out as though they had been locked up, and all striving towards one goal, they thronged whirling through his head, blinding him with their light.
Chapter 12 Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his thoughts (he could not yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual condition, unlike anything he had experienced before.
The words uttered by the peasant had acted on his soul like an electric shock, suddenly transforming and combining into a single whole the whole swarm of disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts that incessantly occupied his mind.
These thoughts had unconsciously been in his mind even when he was talking about the land.
He was aware of something new in his soul, and joyfully tested this new thing, not yet knowing what it was.
And could one say anything more senseless than what he said?
He said that one must not live for one’s own wants, that is, that one must not live for what we understand, what we are attracted by, what we desire, but must live for something incomprehensible, for God, whom no one can understand nor even define.
Didn’t I understand those senseless words of Fyodor’s?
And understanding them, did I doubt of their truth?
No, I understood him, and exactly as he understands the words.
I understood them more fully and clearly than I understand anything in life, and never in my life have I doubted nor can I doubt about it.
And not only I, but everyone, the whole world understands nothing fully but this, and about this only they have no doubt and are always agreed.
“And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a miracle which would convince me.
A material miracle would have persuaded me.
And here is a miracle, the sole miracle possible, continually existing, surrounding me on all sides, and I never noticed it!
“Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly.
That’s comprehensible and rational.
All of us as rational beings can’t do anything else but live for our belly.
And all of a sudden the same Fyodor says that one mustn’t live for one’s belly, but must live for truth, for God, and at a hint I understand him!
And I and millions of men, men who lived ages ago and men living now—peasants, the poor in spirit and the learned, who have thought and written about it, in their obscure words saying the same thing—we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must live for and what is good.
I and all men have only one firm, incontestable, clear knowledge, and that knowledge cannot be explained by the reason—it is outside it, and has no causes and can have no effects.
“If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has effects, a reward, it is not goodness either.
So goodness is outside the chain of cause and effect.
“Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings be over?” thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing the heat nor his weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief from prolonged suffering.
This feeling was so delicious that it seemed to him incredible.
He was breathless with emotion and incapable of going farther; he turned off the road into the forest and lay down in the shade of an aspen on the uncut grass.
He took his hat off his hot head and lay propped on his elbow in the lush, feathery, woodland grass.
“Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand,” he thought, looking intently at the untrampled grass before him, and following the movements of a green beetle, advancing along a blade of couch-grass and lifting up in its progress a leaf of goat-weed.
“What have I discovered?” he asked himself, bending aside the leaf of goat-weed out of the beetle’s way and twisting another blade of grass above for the beetle to cross over onto it.
What have I discovered?
“I have discovered nothing.
I understand the force that in the past gave me life, and now too gives me life.
“Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this grass and of this beetle (there, she didn’t care for the grass, she’s opened her wings and flown away), there was going on a transformation of matter in accordance with physical, chemical, and physiological laws.
And in all of us, as well as in the aspens and the clouds and the misty patches, there was a process of evolution.
Evolution from what? into what?—Eternal evolution and struggle....
As though there could be any sort of tendency and struggle in the eternal!
And I was astonished that in spite of the utmost effort of thought along that road I could not discover the meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses and yearnings.
Now I say that I know the meaning of my life: ‘To live for God, for my soul.’ And this meaning, in spite of its clearness, is mysterious and marvelous.
Such, indeed, is the meaning of everything existing.
Yes, pride,” he said to himself, turning over on his stomach and beginning to tie a noose of blades of grass, trying not to break them.
“And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect.
And most of all, the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of intellect.
The cheating knavishness of intellect, that’s it,” he said to himself.
And he briefly went through, mentally, the whole course of his ideas during the last two years, the beginning of which was the clear confronting of death at the sight of his dear brother hopelessly ill.
Then, for the first time, grasping that for every man, and himself too, there was nothing in store but suffering, death, and forgetfulness, he had made up his mind that life was impossible like that, and that he must either interpret life so that it would not present itself to him as the evil jest of some devil, or shoot himself.
But he had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, and feeling, and had even at that very time married, and had had many joys and had been happy, when he was not thinking of the meaning of his life.
It meant that he had been living rightly, but thinking wrongly.
He had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual truths that he had sucked in with his mother’s milk, but he had thought, not merely without recognition of these truths, but studiously ignoring them.
Nothing of what makes the chief happiness of my life would have existed for me.” And with the utmost stretch of imagination he could not conceive the brutal creature he would have been himself, if he had not known what he was living for.
“I looked for an answer to my question.
And thought could not give an answer to my question—it is incommensurable with my question.
The answer has been given me by life itself, in my knowledge of what is right and what is wrong.
And that knowledge I did not arrive at in any way, it was given to me as to all men, _given_, because I could not have got it from anywhere.
By reason could I have arrived at knowing that I must love my neighbor and not oppress him?
I was told that in my childhood, and I believed it gladly, for they told me what was already in my soul.
But who discovered it?
Reason discovered the struggle for existence, and the law that requires us to oppress all who hinder the satisfaction of our desires.
That is the deduction of reason.
But loving one’s neighbor reason could never discover, because it’s irrational.” Chapter 13 And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between Dolly and her children.
The children, left to themselves, had begun cooking raspberries over the candles and squirting milk into each other’s mouths with a syringe.
Their mother, catching them at these pranks, began reminding them in Levin’s presence of the trouble their mischief gave to the grown-up people, and that this trouble was all for their sake, and that if they smashed the cups they would have nothing to drink their tea out of, and that if they wasted the milk, they would have nothing to eat, and die of hunger.
And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with which the children heard what their mother said to them.
They were simply annoyed that their amusing play had been interrupted, and did not believe a word of what their mother was saying.
They could not believe it indeed, for they could not take in the immensity of all they habitually enjoyed, and so could not conceive that what they were destroying was the very thing they lived by.
“That all comes of itself,” they thought, “and there’s nothing interesting or important about it because it has always been so, and always will be so.
But we want to invent something of our own, and new.
So we thought of putting raspberries in a cup, and cooking them over a candle, and squirting milk straight into each other’s mouths.
That’s fun, and something new, and not a bit worse than drinking out of cups.” “Isn’t it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by the aid of reason for the significance of the forces of nature and the meaning of the life of man?” he thought.
“And don’t all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying by the path of thought, which is strange and not natural to man, to bring him to a knowledge of what he has known long ago, and knows so certainly that he could not live at all without it?
Isn’t it distinctly to be seen in the development of each philosopher’s theory, that he knows what is the chief significance of life beforehand, just as positively as the peasant Fyodor, and not a bit more clearly than he, and is simply trying by a dubious intellectual path to come back to what everyone knows?
“Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone and make their crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on.
Well, then, leave us with our passions and thoughts, without any idea of the one God, of the Creator, or without any idea of what is right, without any idea of moral evil.
“Just try and build up anything without those ideas!
“We only try to destroy them, because we’re spiritually provided for.
Exactly like the children!
“Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant, that alone gives peace to my soul?
“Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life filled with the spiritual blessings Christianity has given me, full of them, and living on those blessings, like the children I did not understand them, and destroy, that is try to destroy, what I live by.
And as soon as an important moment of life comes, like the children when they are cold and hungry, I turn to Him, and even less than the children when their mother scolds them for their childish mischief, do I feel that my childish efforts at wanton madness are reckoned against me.
“Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to me, revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the chief thing taught by the church.
“The church! the church!” Levin repeated to himself.
He turned over on the other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing into the distance at a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.
“But can I believe in all the church teaches?” he thought, trying himself, and thinking of everything that could destroy his present peace of mind.
Intentionally he recalled all those doctrines of the church which had always seemed most strange and had always been a stumbling block to him.
But how did I explain existence?
“But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has been told to me and all men.” And it seemed to him that there was not a single article of faith of the church which could destroy the chief thing—faith in God, in goodness, as the one goal of man’s destiny.
Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky.
“Do I not know that that is infinite space, and that it is not a round arch?
But, however I screw up my eyes and strain my sight, I cannot see it not round and not bounded, and in spite of my knowing about infinite space, I am incontestably right when I see a solid blue dome, and more right than when I strain my eyes to see beyond it.” Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to mysterious voices that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly within him.
“Can this be faith?” he thought, afraid to believe in his happiness.
“My God, I thank Thee!” he said, gulping down his sobs, and with both hands brushing away the tears that filled his eyes.
Chapter 14 Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then he caught sight of his trap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman, who, driving up to the herd, said something to the herdsman.
But he was so buried in his thoughts that he did not even wonder why the coachman had come for him.
He only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to him and shouted to him.
“The mistress sent me.
Your brother has come, and some gentleman with him.” Levin got into the trap and took the reins.
As though just roused out of sleep, for a long while Levin could not collect his faculties.
He stared at the sleek horse flecked with lather between his haunches and on his neck, where the harness rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman sitting beside him, and remembered that he was expecting his brother, thought that his wife was most likely uneasy at his long absence, and tried to guess who was the visitor who had come with his brother.
And his brother and his wife and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite different from before.
He fancied that now his relations with all men would be different.
He would have said that Ivan had pulled the saddle-girth up too high, but that was like blame, and he longed for friendly, warm talk.
Nothing else occurred to him.
“Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump,” said the coachman, pulling the rein Levin held.
“Please don’t touch and don’t teach me!” said Levin, angered by this interference.
Now, as always, interference made him angry, and he felt sorrowfully at once how mistaken had been his supposition that his spiritual condition could immediately change him in contact with reality.
“Uncle Kostya! mamma’s coming, and grandfather, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and someone else,” they said, clambering up into the trap.
“Who is he?” “An awfully terrible person!
And he does like this with his arms,” said Tanya, getting up in the trap and mimicking Katavasov.
“Old or young?” asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, he did not know whom, by Tanya’s performance.
“Oh, I hope it’s not a tiresome person!” thought Levin.
As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party coming, Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along swinging his arms just as Tanya had shown him.
Katavasov was very fond of discussing metaphysics, having derived his notions from natural science writers who had never studied metaphysics, and in Moscow Levin had had many arguments with him of late.
And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously considered that he came off victorious, was the first thing Levin thought of as he recognized him.
“No, whatever I do, I won’t argue and give utterance to my ideas lightly,” he thought.
Getting out of the trap and greeting his brother and Katavasov, Levin asked about his wife.
Levin had always advised his wife not to take the baby to the wood, thinking it unsafe, and he was not pleased to hear this.
“Well, and what are you doing?” said Sergey Ivanovitch, falling back from the rest and walking beside him.
Busy as usual with the land,” answered Levin.
We have been expecting you for such a long time.” “Only for a fortnight.
I’ve a great deal to do in Moscow.” At these words the brothers’ eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the desire he always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on affectionate and still more open terms with his brother, felt an awkwardness in looking at him.
Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant to Sergey Ivanovitch, and would keep him off the subject of the Servian war and the Slavonic question, at which he had hinted by the allusion to what he had to do in Moscow, Levin began to talk of Sergey Ivanovitch’s book.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of the question.
“No one is interested in that now, and I less than anyone,” he said.
“Just look, Darya Alexandrovna, we shall have a shower,” he added, pointing with a sunshade at the white rain clouds that showed above the aspen tree-tops.
And these words were enough to re-establish again between the brothers that tone—hardly hostile, but chilly—which Levin had been so longing to avoid.
Levin went up to Katavasov.
Now we shall have some discussion, we’ll see to that.
Have you been reading Spencer?” “No, I’ve not finished reading him,” said Levin.
“But I don’t need him now.” “How’s that? that’s interesting.
Why so?” “I mean that I’m fully convinced that the solution of the problems that interest me I shall never find in him and his like.
Now....” But Katavasov’s serene and good-humored expression suddenly struck him, and he felt such tenderness for his own happy mood, which he was unmistakably disturbing by this conversation, that he remembered his resolution and stopped short.
“If we’re going to the bee-house, it’s this way, along this little path,” he said, addressing them all.
Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible, and listening to the bees that buzzed more and more frequently past him, he walked along the little path to the hut.
In the very entry one bee hummed angrily, caught in his beard, but he carefully extricated it.
In front of the openings of the hives, it made his eyes giddy to watch the bees and drones whirling round and round about the same spot, while among them the working bees flew in and out with spoils or in search of them, always in the same direction into the wood to the flowering lime trees and back to the hives.
His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now the busy hum of the working bee flying quickly off, then the blaring of the lazy drone, and the excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their property from the enemy and preparing to sting.
Levin stood still in the midst of the beehives and did not call him.
He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the influence of ordinary actual life, which had already depressed his happy mood.
He thought that he had already had time to lose his temper with Ivan, to show coolness to his brother, and to talk flippantly with Katavasov.
“Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and leave no trace?” he thought.
But the same instant, going back to his mood, he felt with delight that something new and important had happened to him.
Real life had only for a time overcast the spiritual peace he had found, but it was still untouched within him.
Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing him and distracting his attention, prevented him from enjoying complete physical peace, forced him to restrain his movements to avoid them, so had the petty cares that had swarmed about him from the moment he got into the trap restricted his spiritual freedom; but that lasted only so long as he was among them.
Just as his bodily strength was still unaffected, in spite of the bees, so too was the spiritual strength that he had just become aware of.
Chapter 15 “Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on his way here?” said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the children; “with Vronsky!
He’s going to Servia.” “And not alone; he’s taking a squadron out with him at his own expense,” said Katavasov.
“Are volunteers still going out then?” he added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer.
He was carefully with a blunt knife getting a live bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup full of white honeycomb.
You should have seen what was going on at the station yesterday!” said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound into a cucumber.
For mercy’s sake, do explain to me, Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are they fighting with?” asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up a conversation that had sprung up in Levin’s absence.
“With the Turks,” Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, as he extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put it with the knife on a stout aspen leaf.
“But who has declared war on the Turks?—Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov and Countess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?” “No one has declared war, but people sympathize with their neighbors’ sufferings and are eager to help them,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“But the prince is not speaking of help,” said Levin, coming to the assistance of his father-in-law, “but of war.
The prince says that private persons cannot take part in war without the permission of the government.” “Kostya, mind, that’s a bee!
“Well now, well, what’s your own theory?” Katavasov said to Levin with a smile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion.
“Why have not private persons the right to do so?” “Oh, my theory’s this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel, and awful thing, that no one man, not to speak of a Christian, can individually take upon himself the responsibility of beginning wars; that can only be done by a government, which is called upon to do this, and is driven inevitably into war.
On the other hand, both political science and common sense teach us that in matters of state, and especially in the matter of war, private citizens must forego their personal individual will.” Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both began speaking at the same time.
“But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when the government does not carry out the will of the citizens and then the public asserts its will,” said Katavasov.
But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer.
His brows contracted at Katavasov’s words and he said something else.
There is no question here of a declaration of war, but simply the expression of a human Christian feeling.
Our brothers, one with us in religion and in race, are being massacred.
Even supposing they were not our brothers nor fellow-Christians, but simply children, women, old people, feeling is aroused and Russians go eagerly to help in stopping these atrocities.
Fancy, if you were going along the street and saw drunken men beating a woman or a child—I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether war had been declared on the men, but would throw yourself on them, and protect the victim.” “But I should not kill them,” said Levin.
If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of the moment, but I can’t say beforehand.
And such a momentary impulse there is not, and there cannot be, in the case of the oppression of the Slavonic peoples.” “Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning with displeasure.
“There are traditions still extant among the people of Slavs of the true faith suffering under the yoke of the ‘unclean sons of Hagar.’ The people have heard of the sufferings of their brethren and have spoken.” “Perhaps so,” said Levin evasively; “but I don’t see it.
“I’ve been staying abroad and reading the papers, and I must own, up to the time of the Bulgarian atrocities, I couldn’t make out why it was all the Russians were all of a sudden so fond of their Slavonic brethren, while I didn’t feel the slightest affection for them.
I was very much upset, thought I was a monster, or that it was the influence of Carlsbad on me.
I see that there are people besides me who’re only interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonic brethren.
Here’s Konstantin too.” “Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case,” said Sergey Ivanovitch; “it’s not a matter of personal opinions when all Russia—the whole people—has expressed its will.” “But excuse me, I don’t see that.
The people don’t know anything about it, if you come to that,” said the old prince.
And last Sunday in church?” said Dolly, listening to the conversation.
“Please give me a cloth,” she said to the old man, who was looking at the children with a smile.
“Why, it’s not possible that all....” “But what was it in church on Sunday?
They didn’t understand a word of it.
Then they were told that there was to be a collection for a pious object in church; well, they pulled out their halfpence and gave them, but what for they couldn’t say.” “The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies is always in the people, and at such moments as the present that sense finds utterance,” said Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing at the old bee-keeper.
The handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery hair, stood motionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from the height of his tall figure with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviously understanding nothing of their conversation and not caring to understand it.
“That’s so, no doubt,” he said, with a significant shake of his head at Sergey Ivanovitch’s words.
“Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?” he said, turning to him.
Ought we to fight for the Christians?” “What should we think?
Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has thought for us; he thinks for us indeed in all things.
Give the little lad some more?” he said addressing Darya Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who had finished his crust.
“I don’t need to ask,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “we have seen and are seeing hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything to serve a just cause, come from every part of Russia, and directly and clearly express their thought and aim.
They bring their halfpence or go themselves and say directly what for.
“And what of the subscriptions?
In this case it is a whole people directly expressing their will.” “That word ‘people’ is so vague,” said Levin.
“Parish clerks, teachers, and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what it’s all about.
The rest of the eighty millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressing their will, haven’t the faintest idea what there is for them to express their will about.
What right have we to say that this is the people’s will?” Chapter 16 Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply, but at once turned the conversation to another aspect of the subject.
“Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by arithmetical computation, of course it’s very difficult to arrive at it.
And voting has not been introduced among us and cannot be introduced, for it does not express the will of the people; but there are other ways of reaching that.
I won’t speak of those deep currents which are astir in the still ocean of the people, and which are evident to every unprejudiced man; let us look at society in the narrow sense.
All the most diverse sections of the educated public, hostile before, are merged in one.
Every division is at an end, all the public organs say the same thing over and over again, all feel the mighty torrent that has overtaken them and is carrying them in one direction.” “Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing,” said the prince.
One can hear nothing for them.” “Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I don’t want to defend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectual world,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing his brother.
Levin would have answered, but the old prince interrupted him.
“Well, about that unanimity, that’s another thing, one may say,” said the prince.
“There’s my son-in-law, Stepan Arkadyevitch, you know him.
He’s got a place now on the committee of a commission and something or other, I don’t remember.
Only there’s nothing to do in it—why, Dolly, it’s no secret!—and a salary of eight thousand.
You try asking him whether his post is of use, he’ll prove to you that it’s most necessary.
And he’s a truthful man too, but there’s no refusing to believe in the utility of eight thousand roubles.” “Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about the post,” said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the prince’s remark to be ill-timed.
“So it is with the unanimity of the press.
That’s been explained to me: as soon as there’s war their incomes are doubled.
How can they help believing in the destinies of the people and the Slavonic races ... and all that?” “I don’t care for many of the papers, but that’s unjust,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“I would only make one condition,” pursued the old prince.
“Alphonse Karr said a capital thing before the war with Prussia: ‘You consider war to be inevitable?
Let everyone who advocates war be enrolled in a special regiment of advance-guards, for the front of every storm, of every attack, to lead them all!’” “A nice lot the editors would make!” said Katavasov, with a loud roar, as he pictured the editors he knew in this picked legion.
“But they’d run,” said Dolly, “they’d only be in the way.” “Oh, if they ran away, then we’d have grape-shot or Cossacks with whips behind them,” said the prince.
“But that’s a joke, and a poor one too, if you’ll excuse my saying so, prince,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.
“I don’t see that it was a joke, that....” Levin was beginning, but Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.
And the single-hearted and full expression of public opinion is the service of the press and a phenomenon to rejoice us at the same time.
Twenty years ago we should have been silent, but now we have heard the voice of the Russian people, which is ready to rise as one man and ready to sacrifice itself for its oppressed brethren; that is a great step and a proof of strength.” “But it’s not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks,” said Levin timidly.
“The people make sacrifices and are ready to make sacrifices for their soul, but not for murder,” he added, instinctively connecting the conversation with the ideas that had been absorbing his mind.
That’s a most puzzling expression for a natural science man, do you understand?
What sort of thing is the soul?” said Katavasov, smiling.
“Oh, you know!” “No, by God, I haven’t the faintest idea!” said Katavasov with a loud roar of laughter.
“‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ,” Sergey Ivanovitch rejoined for his part, quoting as simply as though it were the easiest thing to understand the very passage that had always puzzled Levin most.
“That’s so, no doubt,” the old man repeated again.
He was standing near them and responded to a chance glance turned in his direction.
“Ah, my dear fellow, you’re defeated, utterly defeated!” cried Katavasov good-humoredly.
Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at having failed to control himself and being drawn into argument.
“No, I can’t argue with them,” he thought; “they wear impenetrable armor, while I’m naked.” He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother and Katavasov, and he saw even less possibility of himself agreeing with them.
What they advocated was the very pride of intellect that had almost been his ruin.
He could not admit that some dozens of men, among them his brother, had the right, on the ground of what they were told by some hundreds of glib volunteers swarming to the capital, to say that they and the newspapers were expressing the will and feeling of the people, and a feeling which was expressed in vengeance and murder.
He said as Mihalitch did and the people, who had expressed their feeling in the traditional invitations of the Varyagi: “Be princes and rule over us.
Gladly we promise complete submission.
All the labor, all humiliations, all sacrifices we take upon ourselves; but we will not judge and decide.” And now, according to Sergey Ivanovitch’s account, the people had foregone this privilege they had bought at such a costly price.
He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide, then why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movement in favor of the Slavonic peoples?
But these were merely thoughts that could settle nothing.
One thing could be seen beyond doubt—that was that at the actual moment the discussion was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch, and so it was wrong to continue it.
And Levin ceased speaking and then called the attention of his guests to the fact that the storm clouds were gathering, and that they had better be going home before it rained.
Chapter 17 The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove off; the rest of the party hastened homewards on foot.
The foremost clouds, lowering and black as soot-laden smoke, rushed with extraordinary swiftness over the sky.
They were still two hundred paces from home and a gust of wind had already blown up, and every second the downpour might be looked for.
The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks.
Darya Alexandrovna, struggling painfully with her skirts that clung round her legs, was not walking, but running, her eyes fixed on the children.
They were just at the steps when a big drop fell splashing on the edge of the iron guttering.
The children and their elders after them ran into the shelter of the house, talking merrily.
“Katerina Alexandrovna?” Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met them with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.
“And Mitya?” “In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him.” Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.
In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, covering the sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse.
Stubbornly, as though insisting on its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the leaves and flowers off the lime trees and stripping the white birch branches into strange unseemly nakedness, it twisted everything on one side—acacias, flowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall tree-tops.
The peasant girls working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in the servants’ quarters.
The streaming rain had already flung its white veil over all the distant forest and half the fields close by, and was rapidly swooping down upon the copse.
The wet of the rain spurting up in tiny drops could be smelt in the air.
Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the wind that strove to tear the wraps away from him, Levin was moving up to the copse and had just caught sight of something white behind the oak tree, when there was a sudden flash, the whole earth seemed on fire, and the vault of heaven seemed crashing overhead.
Opening his blinded eyes, Levin gazed through the thick veil of rain that separated him now from the copse, and to his horror the first thing he saw was the green crest of the familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily changing its position.
“Can it have been struck?” Levin hardly had time to think when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind the other trees, and he heard the crash of the great tree falling upon the others.
The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneous chill that ran through him were all merged for Levin in one sense of terror.
And though he thought at once how senseless was his prayer that they should not have been killed by the oak which had fallen now, he repeated it, knowing that he could do nothing better than utter this senseless prayer.
Two figures in dark dresses (they had been light summer dresses when they started out) were standing bending over something.
The rain was already ceasing, and it was beginning to get light when Levin reached them.
The nurse was not wet on the lower part of her dress, but Kitty was drenched through, and her soaked clothes clung to her.
Though the rain was over, they still stood in the same position in which they had been standing when the storm broke.
Both stood bending over a perambulator with a green umbrella.
Thank God!” he said, splashing with his soaked boots through the standing water and running up to them.
Kitty’s rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she smiled timidly under her shapeless sopped hat.
“Aren’t you ashamed of yourself?
I can’t think how you can be so reckless!” he said angrily to his wife.
We were just....” Kitty began defending herself.
Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.
I don’t know what I’m saying!” They gathered up the baby’s wet belongings; the nurse picked up the baby and carried it.
Levin walked beside his wife, and, penitent for having been angry, he squeezed her hand when the nurse was not looking.
Chapter 18 During the whole of that day, in the extremely different conversations in which he took part, only as it were with the top layer of his mind, in spite of the disappointment of not finding the change he expected in himself, Levin had been all the while joyfully conscious of the fulness of his heart.
After the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides, the storm clouds still hung about the horizon, and gathered here and there, black and thundery, on the rim of the sky.
No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, after dinner everyone was in the most amiable frame of mind.
At first Katavasov amused the ladies by his original jokes, which always pleased people on their first acquaintance with him.
Then Sergey Ivanovitch induced him to tell them about the very interesting observations he had made on the habits and characteristics of common houseflies, and their life.
Sergey Ivanovitch, too, was in good spirits, and at tea his brother drew him on to explain his views of the future of the Eastern question, and he spoke so simply and so well, that everyone listened eagerly.
Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all—she was summoned to give Mitya his bath.
Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the interesting conversation, and at the same time uneasily wondering why he had been sent for, as this only happened on important occasions, Levin went to the nursery.
And all the theories of the significance of the Slav element in the history of the world seemed to him so trivial compared with what was passing in his own soul, that he instantly forgot it all and dropped back into the same frame of mind that he had been in that morning.
He fell back at once into the feeling which had guided him, which was connected with those thoughts, and he found that feeling in his soul even stronger and more definite than before.
He did not, as he had had to do with previous attempts to find comforting arguments, need to revive a whole chain of thought to find the feeling.
Now, on the contrary, the feeling of joy and peace was keener than ever, and thought could not keep pace with feeling.
He walked across the terrace and looked at two stars that had come out in the darkening sky, and suddenly he remembered.
“Yes, looking at the sky, I thought that the dome that I see is not a deception, and then I thought something, I shirked facing something,” he mused.
“But whatever it was, there can be no disproving it!
I have but to think, and all will come clear!” Just as he was going into the nursery he remembered what it was he had shirked facing.
It was that if the chief proof of the Divinity was His revelation of what is right, how is it this revelation is confined to the Christian church alone?
What relation to this revelation have the beliefs of the Buddhists, Mohammedans, who preached and did good too?
It seemed to him that he had an answer to this question; but he had not time to formulate it to himself before he went into the nursery.
Kitty was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the baby in the bath.
Hearing her husband’s footstep, she turned towards him, summoning him to her with her smile.
With one hand she was supporting the fat baby that lay floating and sprawling on its back, while with the other she squeezed the sponge over him.
“Agafea Mihalovna’s right.
He knows us!” Mitya had on that day given unmistakable, incontestable signs of recognizing all his friends.
As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and it was completely successful.
He frowned and shook his head disapprovingly.
Kitty bent down to him, he gave her a beaming smile, propped his little hands on the sponge and chirruped, making such a queer little contented sound with his lips, that Kitty and the nurse were not alone in their admiration.
Levin, too, was surprised and delighted.
The baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with water, wrapped in towels, dried, and after a piercing scream, handed to his mother.
“Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him,” said Kitty to her husband, when she had settled herself comfortably in her usual place, with the baby at her breast.
It had begun to distress me.
I only said I was disappointed.” “What! disappointed in him?” “Not disappointed in him, but in my own feeling; I had expected more.
I had expected a rush of new delightful emotion to come as a surprise.
And then instead of that—disgust, pity....” She listened attentively, looking at him over the baby, while she put back on her slender fingers the rings she had taken off while giving Mitya his bath.
“And most of all, at there being far more apprehension and pity than pleasure.
Today, after that fright during the storm, I understand how I love him.” Kitty’s smile was radiant.
“Were you very much frightened?” she said.
How nice Katavasov is!
And what a happy day we’ve had altogether.
And you’re so nice with Sergey Ivanovitch, when you care to be....
It’s always so hot and steamy here after the bath.” Chapter 19 Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back at once to the thought, in which there was something not clear.
The storm had drifted on to the opposite side of the sky, and there were flashes of lightning and distant thunder from that quarter.
Levin listened to the monotonous drip from the lime trees in the garden, and looked at the triangle of stars he knew so well, and the Milky Way with its branches that ran through its midst.
At each flash of lightning the Milky Way, and even the bright stars, vanished, but as soon as the lightning died away, they reappeared in their places as though some hand had flung them back with careful aim.
“Well, what is it perplexes me?” Levin said to himself, feeling beforehand that the solution of his difficulties was ready in his soul, though he did not know it yet.
“Yes, the one unmistakable, incontestable manifestation of the Divinity is the law of right and wrong, which has come into the world by revelation, and which I feel in myself, and in the recognition of which—I don’t make myself, but whether I will or not—I am made one with other men in one body of believers, which is called the church.
Well, but the Jews, the Mohammedans, the Confucians, the Buddhists—what of them?” he put to himself the question he had feared to face.
“Can these hundreds of millions of men be deprived of that highest blessing without which life has no meaning?” He pondered a moment, but immediately corrected himself.
“But what am I questioning?” he said to himself.
“I am questioning the relation to Divinity of all the different religions of all mankind.
I am questioning the universal manifestation of God to all the world with all those misty blurs.
To me individually, to my heart has been revealed a knowledge beyond all doubt, and unattainable by reason, and here I am obstinately trying to express that knowledge in reason and words.
“Don’t I know that the stars don’t move?” he asked himself, gazing at the bright planet which had shifted its position up to the topmost twig of the birch-tree.
“But looking at the movements of the stars, I can’t picture to myself the rotation of the earth, and I’m right in saying that the stars move.
“And could the astronomers have understood and calculated anything, if they had taken into account all the complicated and varied motions of the earth?
All the marvelous conclusions they have reached about the distances, weights, movements, and deflections of the heavenly bodies are only founded on the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies about a stationary earth, on that very motion I see before me now, which has been so for millions of men during long ages, and was and will be always alike, and can always be trusted.
The question of other religions and their relations to Divinity I have no right to decide, and no possibility of deciding.” “Oh, you haven’t gone in then?” he heard Kitty’s voice all at once, as she came by the same way to the drawing-room.
“What is it? you’re not worried about anything?” she said, looking intently at his face in the starlight.
But she could not have seen his face if a flash of lightning had not hidden the stars and revealed it.
In that flash she saw his face distinctly, and seeing him calm and happy, she smiled at him.
“She understands,” he thought; “she knows what I’m thinking about.
Yes, I’ll tell her.” But at the moment he was about to speak, she began speaking.
“Kostya! do something for me,” she said; “go into the corner room and see if they’ve made it all right for Sergey Ivanovitch.
See if they’ve put the new wash stand in it.” “Very well, I’ll go directly,” said Levin, standing up and kissing her.
“It is a secret for me alone, of vital importance for me, and not to be put into words.
“This new feeling has not changed me, has not made me happy and enlightened all of a sudden, as I had dreamed, just like the feeling for my child.
There was no surprise in this either.
Faith—or not faith—I don’t know what it is—but this feeling has come just as imperceptibly through suffering, and has taken firm root in my soul.
VOLUME I CHAPTER I Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home and happy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her.
She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate, indulgent father; and had, in consequence of her sister’s marriage, been mistress of his house from a very early period.
Her mother had died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman as governess, who had fallen little short of a mother in affection.
Woodhouse’s family, less as a governess than a friend, very fond of both daughters, but particularly of Emma.
Between _them_ it was more the intimacy of sisters.
Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess, the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away, they had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached, and Emma doing just what she liked; highly esteeming Miss Taylor’s judgment, but directed chiefly by her own.
The real evils, indeed, of Emma’s situation were the power of having rather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little too well of herself; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments.
The danger, however, was at present so unperceived, that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her.
Sorrow came—a gentle sorrow—but not at all in the shape of any disagreeable consciousness.—Miss Taylor married.
It was on the wedding-day of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance.
The wedding over, and the bride-people gone, her father and herself were left to dine together, with no prospect of a third to cheer a long evening.
Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner, as usual, and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost.
The event had every promise of happiness for her friend.
Weston was a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, and pleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in considering with what self-denying, generous friendship she had always wished and promoted the match; but it was a black morning’s work for her.
She recalled her past kindness—the kindness, the affection of sixteen years—how she had taught and how she had played with her from five years old—how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health—and how nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood.
A large debt of gratitude was owing here; but the intercourse of the last seven years, the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella’s marriage, on their being left to each other, was yet a dearer, tenderer recollection.
She had been a friend and companion such as few possessed: intelligent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing all the ways of the family, interested in all its concerns, and peculiarly interested in herself, in every pleasure, every scheme of hers—one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose, and who had such an affection for her as could never find fault.
How was she to bear the change?—It was true that her friend was going only half a mile from them; but Emma was aware that great must be the difference between a Mrs.
Weston, only half a mile from them, and a Miss Taylor in the house; and with all her advantages, natural and domestic, she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual solitude.
She dearly loved her father, but he was no companion for her.
He could not meet her in conversation, rational or playful.
The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and Mr.
Woodhouse had not married early) was much increased by his constitution and habits; for having been a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mind or body, he was a much older man in ways than in years; and though everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiable temper, his talents could not have recommended him at any time.
Her sister, though comparatively but little removed by matrimony, being settled in London, only sixteen miles off, was much beyond her daily reach; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield, before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband, and their little children, to fill the house, and give her pleasant society again.
Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town, to which Hartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubberies, and name, did really belong, afforded her no equals.
The Woodhouses were first in consequence there.
She had many acquaintance in the place, for her father was universally civil, but not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for even half a day.
It was a melancholy change; and Emma could not but sigh over it, and wish for impossible things, till her father awoke, and made it necessary to be cheerful.
His spirits required support.
He was a nervous man, easily depressed; fond of every body that he was used to, and hating to part with them; hating change of every kind.
Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him from such thoughts; but when tea came, it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner, “Poor Miss Taylor!—I wish she were here again.
Weston is such a good-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves a good wife;—and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for ever, and bear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of her own?” “A house of her own!—But where is the advantage of a house of her own?
Randalls is such a distance.
We must go in the carriage, to be sure.” “The carriage!
And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like going to Randalls, because of his daughter’s being housemaid there.
I only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else.
Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentioned her—James is so obliged to you!” “I am very glad I did think of her.
It was very lucky, for I would not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account; and I am sure she will make a very good servant: she is a civil, pretty-spoken girl; I have a great opinion of her.
Whenever I see her, she always curtseys and asks me how I do, in a very pretty manner; and when you have had her here to do needlework, I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it.
I am sure she will be an excellent servant; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see.
Whenever James goes over to see his daughter, you know, she will be hearing of us.
He will be able to tell her how we all are.” Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas, and hoped, by the help of backgammon, to get her father tolerably through the evening, and be attacked by no regrets but her own.
The backgammon-table was placed; but a visitor immediately afterwards walked in and made it unnecessary.
Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty, was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family, but particularly connected with it, as the elder brother of Isabella’s husband.
He lived about a mile from Highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome, and at this time more welcome than usual, as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London.
He had returned to a late dinner, after some days’ absence, and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square.
It was a happy circumstance, and animated Mr.
Woodhouse for some time.
Knightley had a cheerful manner, which always did him good; and his many inquiries after “poor Isabella” and her children were answered most satisfactorily.
Woodhouse gratefully observed, “It is very kind of you, Mr.
Knightley, to come out at this late hour to call upon us.
I am afraid you must have had a shocking walk.” “Not at all, sir.
It is a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild that I must draw back from your great fire.” “But you must have found it very damp and dirty.
Not a speck on them.” “Well! that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast deal of rain here.
It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were at breakfast.
Being pretty well aware of what sort of joy you must both be feeling, I have been in no hurry with my congratulations; but I hope it all went off tolerably well.
“That is what you have in your head, I know—and what you would certainly say if my father were not by.” “I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed,” said Mr.
Woodhouse, with a sigh.
“I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome.” “My dearest papa!
Knightley to mean _you_.
What a horrible idea!
Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know—in a joke—it is all a joke.
Knightley, in fact, was one of the few people who could see faults in Emma Woodhouse, and the only one who ever told her of them: and though this was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself, she knew it would be so much less so to her father, that she would not have him really suspect such a circumstance as her not being thought perfect by every body.
Knightley, “but I meant no reflection on any body.
The chances are that she must be a gainer.” “Well,” said Emma, willing to let it pass—“you want to hear about the wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all behaved charmingly.
Every body was punctual, every body in their best looks: not a tear, and hardly a long face to be seen.
Knightley, she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor, and I am sure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for.” Emma turned away her head, divided between tears and smiles.
“It is impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion,” said Mr.
“We should not like her so well as we do, sir, if we could suppose it; but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Taylor’s advantage; she knows how very acceptable it must be, at Miss Taylor’s time of life, to be settled in a home of her own, and how important to her to be secure of a comfortable provision, and therefore cannot allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure.
Every friend of Miss Taylor must be glad to have her so happily married.” “And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me,” said Emma, “and a very considerable one—that I made the match myself.
Knightley shook his head at her.
Her father fondly replied, “Ah! my dear, I wish you would not make matches and foretell things, for whatever you say always comes to pass.
It is the greatest amusement in the world!
Weston, who had been a widower so long, and who seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupied either in his business in town or among his friends here, always acceptable wherever he went, always cheerful—Mr.
Weston certainly would never marry again.
Some people even talked of a promise to his wife on her deathbed, and others of the son and the uncle not letting him.
All manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject, but I believed none of it.
“Ever since the day—about four years ago—that Miss Taylor and I met with him in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to drizzle, he darted away with so much gallantry, and borrowed two umbrellas for us from Farmer Mitchell’s, I made up my mind on the subject.
I planned the match from that hour; and when such success has blessed me in this instance, dear papa, you cannot think that I shall leave off match-making.” “I do not understand what you mean by ‘success,’” said Mr.
“Success supposes endeavour.
Your time has been properly and delicately spent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring about this marriage.
A worthy employment for a young lady’s mind!
But if, which I rather imagine, your making the match, as you call it, means only your planning it, your saying to yourself one idle day, ‘I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr.
Weston were to marry her,’ and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards, why do you talk of success?
You made a lucky guess; and _that_ is all that can be said.” “And have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess?—I pity you.—I thought you cleverer—for, depend upon it a lucky guess is never merely luck.
And as to my poor word ‘success,’ which you quarrel with, I do not know that I am so entirely without any claim to it.
You have drawn two pretty pictures; but I think there may be a third—a something between the do-nothing and the do-all.
If I had not promoted Mr.
Weston’s visits here, and given many little encouragements, and smoothed many little matters, it might not have come to any thing after all.
I think you must know Hartfield enough to comprehend that.” “A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational, unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely left to manage their own concerns.
You are more likely to have done harm to yourself, than good to them, by interference.” “Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others,” rejoined Mr.
Woodhouse, understanding but in part.
“But, my dear, pray do not make any more matches; they are silly things, and break up one’s family circle grievously.” “Only one more, papa; only for Mr.
There is nobody in Highbury who deserves him—and he has been here a whole year, and has fitted up his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame to have him single any longer—and I thought when he was joining their hands to-day, he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office done for him!
But if you want to shew him any attention, my dear, ask him to come and dine with us some day.
Knightley will be so kind as to meet him.” “With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time,” said Mr.
Knightley, laughing, “and I agree with you entirely, that it will be a much better thing.
Weston was a native of Highbury, and born of a respectable family, which for the last two or three generations had been rising into gentility and property.
He had received a good education, but, on succeeding early in life to a small independence, had become indisposed for any of the more homely pursuits in which his brothers were engaged, and had satisfied an active, cheerful mind and social temper by entering into the militia of his county, then embodied.
Captain Weston was a general favourite; and when the chances of his military life had introduced him to Miss Churchill, of a great Yorkshire family, and Miss Churchill fell in love with him, nobody was surprized, except her brother and his wife, who had never seen him, and who were full of pride and importance, which the connexion would offend.
Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the full command of her fortune—though her fortune bore no proportion to the family-estate—was not to be dissuaded from the marriage, and it took place, to the infinite mortification of Mr. and Mrs.
Churchill, who threw her off with due decorum.
It was an unsuitable connexion, and did not produce much happiness.
Weston ought to have found more in it, for she had a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing due to her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him; but though she had one sort of spirit, she had not the best.
She had resolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of her brother, but not enough to refrain from unreasonable regrets at that brother’s unreasonable anger, nor from missing the luxuries of her former home.
They lived beyond their income, but still it was nothing in comparison of Enscombe: she did not cease to love her husband, but she wanted at once to be the wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill of Enscombe.
Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially by the Churchills, as making such an amazing match, was proved to have much the worst of the bargain; for when his wife died, after a three years’ marriage, he was rather a poorer man than at first, and with a child to maintain.
From the expense of the child, however, he was soon relieved.
The boy had, with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his mother’s, been the means of a sort of reconciliation; and Mr. and Mrs.
Churchill, having no children of their own, nor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for, offered to take the whole charge of the little Frank soon after her decease.
Some scruples and some reluctance the widower-father may be supposed to have felt; but as they were overcome by other considerations, the child was given up to the care and the wealth of the Churchills, and he had only his own comfort to seek, and his own situation to improve as he could.
A complete change of life became desirable.
He quitted the militia and engaged in trade, having brothers already established in a good way in London, which afforded him a favourable opening.
It was a concern which brought just employment enough.
He had still a small house in Highbury, where most of his leisure days were spent; and between useful occupation and the pleasures of society, the next eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheerfully away.
He had, by that time, realised an easy competence—enough to secure the purchase of a little estate adjoining Highbury, which he had always longed for—enough to marry a woman as portionless even as Miss Taylor, and to live according to the wishes of his own friendly and social disposition.
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his schemes; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could purchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to; but he had gone steadily on, with these objects in view, till they were accomplished.
He had made his fortune, bought his house, and obtained his wife; and was beginning a new period of existence, with every probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through.
He had never been an unhappy man; his own temper had secured him from that, even in his first marriage; but his second must shew him how delightful a well-judging and truly amiable woman could be, and must give him the pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen, to excite gratitude than to feel it.
He had only himself to please in his choice: his fortune was his own; for as to Frank, it was more than being tacitly brought up as his uncle’s heir, it had become so avowed an adoption as to have him assume the name of Churchill on coming of age.
It was most unlikely, therefore, that he should ever want his father’s assistance.
His father had no apprehension of it.
The aunt was a capricious woman, and governed her husband entirely; but it was not in Mr.
Weston’s nature to imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear, and, as he believed, so deservedly dear.
He saw his son every year in London, and was proud of him; and his fond report of him as a very fine young man had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too.
He was looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and prospects a kind of common concern.
Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury, and a lively curiosity to see him prevailed, though the compliment was so little returned that he had never been there in his life.
His coming to visit his father had been often talked of but never achieved.
Now, upon his father’s marriage, it was very generally proposed, as a most proper attention, that the visit should take place.
There was not a dissentient voice on the subject, either when Mrs.
Perry drank tea with Mrs. and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. and Miss Bates returned the visit.
Frank Churchill to come among them; and the hope strengthened when it was understood that he had written to his new mother on the occasion.
For a few days, every morning visit in Highbury included some mention of the handsome letter Mrs.
Weston had received.
“I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr.
Frank Churchill has written to Mrs.
I understand it was a very handsome letter, indeed.
Woodhouse told me of it.
Woodhouse saw the letter, and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his life.” It was, indeed, a highly prized letter.
Weston had, of course, formed a very favourable idea of the young man; and such a pleasing attention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense, and a most welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation which her marriage had already secured.
She felt herself a most fortunate woman; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate she might well be thought, where the only regret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled, and who could ill bear to part with her.
And then there was such comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from Hartfield, so convenient for even solitary female walking, and in Mr.
Weston’s disposition and circumstances, which would make the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half the evenings in the week together.
Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs.
Woodhouse’s giving a gentle sigh, and saying, “Ah, poor Miss Taylor!
She would be very glad to stay.” There was no recovering Miss Taylor—nor much likelihood of ceasing to pity her; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr.
The compliments of his neighbours were over; he was no longer teased by being wished joy of so sorrowful an event; and the wedding-cake, which had been a great distress to him, was all eat up.
His own stomach could bear nothing rich, and he could never believe other people to be different from himself.
What was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfit for any body; and he had, therefore, earnestly tried to dissuade them from having any wedding-cake at all, and when that proved vain, as earnestly tried to prevent any body’s eating it.
He had been at the pains of consulting Mr.
Perry, the apothecary, on the subject.
Perry was an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of Mr.
Woodhouse’s life; and upon being applied to, he could not but acknowledge (though it seemed rather against the bias of inclination) that wedding-cake might certainly disagree with many—perhaps with most people, unless taken moderately.
With such an opinion, in confirmation of his own, Mr.
Woodhouse hoped to influence every visitor of the newly married pair; but still the cake was eaten; and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves till it was all gone.
There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys being seen with a slice of Mrs.
Woodhouse would never believe it.
Woodhouse was fond of society in his own way.
He liked very much to have his friends come and see him; and from various united causes, from his long residence at Hartfield, and his good nature, from his fortune, his house, and his daughter, he could command the visits of his own little circle, in a great measure, as he liked.
He had not much intercourse with any families beyond that circle; his horror of late hours, and large dinner-parties, made him unfit for any acquaintance but such as would visit him on his own terms.
Fortunately for him, Highbury, including Randalls in the same parish, and Donwell Abbey in the parish adjoining, the seat of Mr.
Knightley, comprehended many such.
Not unfrequently, through Emma’s persuasion, he had some of the chosen and the best to dine with him: but evening parties were what he preferred; and, unless he fancied himself at any time unequal to company, there was scarcely an evening in the week in which Emma could not make up a card-table for him.
Real, long-standing regard brought the Westons and Mr.
Knightley; and by Mr.
Elton, a young man living alone without liking it, the privilege of exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitude for the elegancies and society of Mr.
Woodhouse’s drawing-room, and the smiles of his lovely daughter, was in no danger of being thrown away.
Goddard, three ladies almost always at the service of an invitation from Hartfield, and who were fetched and carried home so often, that Mr.
Woodhouse thought it no hardship for either James or the horses.
Had it taken place only once a year, it would have been a grievance.
Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, was a very old lady, almost past every thing but tea and quadrille.
She lived with her single daughter in a very small way, and was considered with all the regard and respect which a harmless old lady, under such untoward circumstances, can excite.
Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young, handsome, rich, nor married.
Miss Bates stood in the very worst predicament in the world for having much of the public favour; and she had no intellectual superiority to make atonement to herself, or frighten those who might hate her into outward respect.
She had never boasted either beauty or cleverness.
Her youth had passed without distinction, and her middle of life was devoted to the care of a failing mother, and the endeavour to make a small income go as far as possible.
It was her own universal good-will and contented temper which worked such wonders.
She loved every body, was interested in every body’s happiness, quicksighted to every body’s merits; thought herself a most fortunate creature, and surrounded with blessings in such an excellent mother, and so many good neighbours and friends, and a home that wanted for nothing.
The simplicity and cheerfulness of her nature, her contented and grateful spirit, were a recommendation to every body, and a mine of felicity to herself.
Woodhouse, full of trivial communications and harmless gossip.
Goddard’s school was in high repute—and very deservedly; for Highbury was reckoned a particularly healthy spot: she had an ample house and garden, gave the children plenty of wholesome food, let them run about a great deal in the summer, and in winter dressed their chilblains with her own hands.
She was a plain, motherly kind of woman, who had worked hard in her youth, and now thought herself entitled to the occasional holiday of a tea-visit; and having formerly owed much to Mr.
Woodhouse’s kindness, felt his particular claim on her to leave her neat parlour, hung round with fancy-work, whenever she could, and win or lose a few sixpences by his fireside.
These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very frequently able to collect; and happy was she, for her father’s sake, in the power; though, as far as she was herself concerned, it was no remedy for the absence of Mrs.
She was delighted to see her father look comfortable, and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated.
Goddard, requesting, in most respectful terms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her; a most welcome request: for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knew very well by sight, and had long felt an interest in, on account of her beauty.
A very gracious invitation was returned, and the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion.
Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody.
Somebody had placed her, several years back, at Mrs.
Goddard’s school, and somebody had lately raised her from the condition of scholar to that of parlour-boarder.
This was all that was generally known of her history.
She had no visible friends but what had been acquired at Highbury, and was now just returned from a long visit in the country to some young ladies who had been at school there with her.
She was a very pretty girl, and her beauty happened to be of a sort which Emma particularly admired.
She was short, plump, and fair, with a fine bloom, blue eyes, light hair, regular features, and a look of great sweetness, and, before the end of the evening, Emma was as much pleased with her manners as her person, and quite determined to continue the acquaintance.
Encouragement should be given.
Those soft blue eyes, and all those natural graces, should not be wasted on the inferior society of Highbury and its connexions.
The acquaintance she had already formed were unworthy of her.
They were a family of the name of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a large farm of Mr.
Knightley, and residing in the parish of Donwell—very creditably, she believed—she knew Mr.
Knightley thought highly of them—but they must be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit to be the intimates of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and elegance to be quite perfect. _She_ would notice her; she would improve her; she would detach her from her bad acquaintance, and introduce her into good society; she would form her opinions and her manners.
It would be an interesting, and certainly a very kind undertaking; highly becoming her own situation in life, her leisure, and powers.
She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes, in talking and listening, and forming all these schemes in the in-betweens, that the evening flew away at a very unusual rate; and the supper-table, which always closed such parties, and for which she had been used to sit and watch the due time, was all set out and ready, and moved forwards to the fire, before she was aware.
Upon such occasions poor Mr.
Woodhouse’s feelings were in sad warfare.
He loved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion of his youth, but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to see any thing put on it; and while his hospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thing, his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat.
Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that he could, with thorough self-approbation, recommend; though he might constrain himself, while the ladies were comfortably clearing the nicer things, to say: “Mrs.
Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs.
An egg boiled very soft is not unwholesome.
Serle understands boiling an egg better than any body.
I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else; but you need not be afraid, they are very small, you see—one of our small eggs will not hurt you.
You need not be afraid of unwholesome preserves here.
I do not think it could disagree with you.” Emma allowed her father to talk—but supplied her visitors in a much more satisfactory style, and on the present evening had particular pleasure in sending them away happy.
The happiness of Miss Smith was quite equal to her intentions.
Miss Woodhouse was so great a personage in Highbury, that the prospect of the introduction had given as much panic as pleasure; but the humble, grateful little girl went off with highly gratified feelings, delighted with the affability with which Miss Woodhouse had treated her all the evening, and actually shaken hands with her at last!
CHAPTER IV Harriet Smith’s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing.
Quick and decided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging, and telling her to come very often; and as their acquaintance increased, so did their satisfaction in each other.
As a walking companion, Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her.
Weston’s loss had been important.
Her father never went beyond the shrubbery, where two divisions of the ground sufficed him for his long walk, or his short, as the year varied; and since Mrs.
Weston’s marriage her exercise had been too much confined.
She had ventured once alone to Randalls, but it was not pleasant; and a Harriet Smith, therefore, one whom she could summon at any time to a walk, would be a valuable addition to her privileges.
But in every respect, as she saw more of her, she approved her, and was confirmed in all her kind designs.
Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet, docile, grateful disposition, was totally free from conceit, and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked up to.
Her early attachment to herself was very amiable; and her inclination for good company, and power of appreciating what was elegant and clever, shewed that there was no want of taste, though strength of understanding must not be expected.
Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet Smith’s being exactly the young friend she wanted—exactly the something which her home required.
Weston was out of the question.
It was quite a different sort of thing, a sentiment distinct and independent.
Weston was the object of a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem.
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who were the parents, but Harriet could not tell.
She was ready to tell every thing in her power, but on this subject questions were vain.
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked—but she could never believe that in the same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth.
Harriet had no penetration.
She had been satisfied to hear and believe just what Mrs.
Goddard, and the teachers, and the girls and the affairs of the school in general, formed naturally a great part of the conversation—and but for her acquaintance with the Martins of Abbey-Mill Farm, it must have been the whole.
But the Martins occupied her thoughts a good deal; she had spent two very happy months with them, and now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit, and describe the many comforts and wonders of the place.
Emma encouraged her talkativeness—amused by such a picture of another set of beings, and enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much exultation of Mrs.
Martin’s having “_two_ parlours, two very good parlours, indeed; one of them quite as large as Mrs.
Goddard’s drawing-room; and of her having an upper maid who had lived five-and-twenty years with her; and of their having eight cows, two of them Alderneys, and one a little Welch cow, a very pretty little Welch cow indeed; and of Mrs.
She had taken up a wrong idea, fancying it was a mother and daughter, a son and son’s wife, who all lived together; but when it appeared that the Mr.
Martin, who bore a part in the narrative, and was always mentioned with approbation for his great good-nature in doing something or other, was a single man; that there was no young Mrs.
Martin, no wife in the case; she did suspect danger to her poor little friend from all this hospitality and kindness, and that, if she were not taken care of, she might be required to sink herself forever.
With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in number and meaning; and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr.
Martin, and there was evidently no dislike to it.
Harriet was very ready to speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry evening games; and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very good-humoured and obliging.
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts, because she had said how fond she was of them, and in every thing else he was so very obliging.
He had his shepherd’s son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her.
She believed he was very clever, and understood every thing.
She believed every body spoke well of him.
Martin had told her one day (and there was a blush as she said it,) that it was impossible for any body to be a better son, and therefore she was sure, whenever he married, he would make a good husband.
Goddard a beautiful goose—the finest goose Mrs.
Goddard had dressed it on a Sunday, and asked all the three teachers, Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson, to sup with her.” “Mr.
Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information beyond the line of his own business?
He reads the Agricultural Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the window seats—but he reads all _them_ to himself.
But sometimes of an evening, before we went to cards, he would read something aloud out of the Elegant Extracts, very entertaining.
And I know he has read the Vicar of Wakefield.
He never read the Romance of the Forest, nor The Children of the Abbey.
He had never heard of such books before I mentioned them, but he is determined to get them now as soon as ever he can.” The next question was— “What sort of looking man is Mr.
Martin?” “Oh! not handsome—not at all handsome.
He is in Highbury every now and then, and he is sure to ride through every week in his way to Kingston.
A young farmer, whether on horseback or on foot, is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity.
The yeomanry are precisely the order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing to do.
A degree or two lower, and a creditable appearance might interest me; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other.
But a farmer can need none of my help, and is, therefore, in one sense, as much above my notice as in every other he is below it.” “To be sure.
It is not likely you should ever have observed him; but he knows you very well indeed—I mean by sight.” “I have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man.
What do you imagine his age to be?” “He was four-and-twenty the 8th of last June, and my birthday is the 23rd just a fortnight and a day’s difference—which is very odd.” “Only four-and-twenty.
His mother is perfectly right not to be in a hurry.
They seem very comfortable as they are, and if she were to take any pains to marry him, she would probably repent it.
Six years hence, if he could meet with a good sort of young woman in the same rank as his own, with a little money, it might be very desirable.” “Six years hence!
Dear Miss Woodhouse, he would be thirty years old!” “Well, and that is as early as most men can afford to marry, who are not born to an independence.
Martin, I imagine, has his fortune entirely to make—cannot be at all beforehand with the world.
Whatever money he might come into when his father died, whatever his share of the family property, it is, I dare say, all afloat, all employed in his stock, and so forth; and though, with diligence and good luck, he may be rich in time, it is next to impossible that he should have realised any thing yet.” “To be sure, so it is.
But they live very comfortably.
Martin talks of taking a boy another year.” “I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet, whenever he does marry;—I mean, as to being acquainted with his wife—for though his sisters, from a superior education, are not to be altogether objected to, it does not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for you to notice.
The misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly careful as to your associates.
There can be no doubt of your being a gentleman’s daughter, and you must support your claim to that station by every thing within your own power, or there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrading you.” “Yes, to be sure, I suppose there are.
But while I visit at Hartfield, and you are so kind to me, Miss Woodhouse, I am not afraid of what any body can do.” “You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I would have you so firmly established in good society, as to be independent even of Hartfield and Miss Woodhouse.
I want to see you permanently well connected, and to that end it will be advisable to have as few odd acquaintance as may be; and, therefore, I say that if you should still be in this country when Mr.
Martin marries, I wish you may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters, to be acquainted with the wife, who will probably be some mere farmer’s daughter, without education.” “To be sure.
Martin would ever marry any body but what had had some education—and been very well brought up.
However, I do not mean to set up my opinion against yours—and I am sure I shall not wish for the acquaintance of his wife.
I shall always have a great regard for the Miss Martins, especially Elizabeth, and should be very sorry to give them up, for they are quite as well educated as me.
But if he marries a very ignorant, vulgar woman, certainly I had better not visit her, if I can help it.” Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech, and saw no alarming symptoms of love.
The young man had been the first admirer, but she trusted there was no other hold, and that there would be no serious difficulty, on Harriet’s side, to oppose any friendly arrangement of her own.
He was on foot, and after looking very respectfully at her, looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion.
Emma was not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey; and walking a few yards forward, while they talked together, soon made her quick eye sufficiently acquainted with Mr.
His appearance was very neat, and he looked like a sensible young man, but his person had no other advantage; and when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen, she thought he must lose all the ground he had gained in Harriet’s inclination.
Harriet was not insensible of manner; she had voluntarily noticed her father’s gentleness with admiration as well as wonder.
They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss Woodhouse must not be kept waiting; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face, and in a flutter of spirits, which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to compose.
“Only think of our happening to meet him!—How very odd!
It was quite a chance, he said, that he had not gone round by Randalls.
He thought we walked towards Randalls most days.
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it, but he goes again to-morrow.
Well, Miss Woodhouse, is he like what you expected?
Do you think him so very plain?” “He is very plain, undoubtedly—remarkably plain:—but that is nothing compared with his entire want of gentility.
I had no right to expect much, and I did not expect much; but I had no idea that he could be so very clownish, so totally without air.
I had imagined him, I confess, a degree or two nearer gentility.” “To be sure,” said Harriet, in a mortified voice, “he is not so genteel as real gentlemen.” “I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you have been repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen, that you must yourself be struck with the difference in Mr.
At Hartfield, you have had very good specimens of well educated, well bred men.
I should be surprized if, after seeing them, you could be in company with Mr.
Martin again without perceiving him to be a very inferior creature—and rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before.
I am sure you must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt manner, and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to be wholly unmodulated as I stood here.” “Certainly, he is not like Mr.
I see the difference plain enough.
Knightley is so very fine a man!” “Mr.
Knightley’s air is so remarkably good that it is not fair to compare Mr.
You might not see one in a hundred with _gentleman_ so plainly written as in Mr.
But he is not the only gentleman you have been lately used to.
Compare their manner of carrying themselves; of walking; of speaking; of being silent.
You must see the difference.” “Oh yes!—there is a great difference.
Weston must be between forty and fifty.” “Which makes his good manners the more valuable.
The older a person grows, Harriet, the more important it is that their manners should not be bad; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness, or coarseness, or awkwardness becomes.
What is passable in youth is detestable in later age.
Weston’s time of life?” “There is no saying, indeed,” replied Harriet rather solemnly.
“But there may be pretty good guessing.
He will be a completely gross, vulgar farmer, totally inattentive to appearances, and thinking of nothing but profit and loss.” “Will he, indeed?
That will be very bad.” “How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended.
He was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing else—which is just as it should be, for a thriving man.
And I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive, and be a very rich man in time—and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb _us_.” “I wonder he did not remember the book”—was all Harriet’s answer, and spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might be safely left to itself.
She, therefore, said no more for some time.
Her next beginning was, “In one respect, perhaps, Mr.
Elton’s manners are superior to Mr.
They have more gentleness.
There is an openness, a quickness, almost a bluntness in Mr.
Knightley’s downright, decided, commanding sort of manner, though it suits _him_ very well; his figure, and look, and situation in life seem to allow it; but if any young man were to set about copying him, he would not be sufferable.
On the contrary, I think a young man might be very safely recommended to take Mr.
Elton is good-humoured, cheerful, obliging, and gentle.
He seems to me to be grown particularly gentle of late.
I do not know whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either of us, Harriet, by additional softness, but it strikes me that his manners are softer than they used to be.
Did not I tell you what he said of you the other day?” She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from Mr.
Elton very agreeable.
She thought it would be an excellent match; and only too palpably desirable, natural, and probable, for her to have much merit in planning it.
It was not likely, however, that any body should have equalled her in the date of the plan, as it had entered her brain during the very first evening of Harriet’s coming to Hartfield.
The longer she considered it, the greater was her sense of its expediency.
Elton’s situation was most suitable, quite the gentleman himself, and without low connexions; at the same time, not of any family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet.
He had a comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very sufficient income; for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large, he was known to have some independent property; and she thought very highly of him as a good-humoured, well-meaning, respectable young man, without any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world.
She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful girl, which she trusted, with such frequent meetings at Hartfield, was foundation enough on his side; and on Harriet’s there could be little doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usual weight and efficacy.
And he was really a very pleasing young man, a young man whom any woman not fastidious might like.
He was reckoned very handsome; his person much admired in general, though not by her, there being a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispense with:—but the girl who could be gratified by a Robert Martin’s riding about the country to get walnuts for her might very well be conquered by Mr.
Knightley, “of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith, but I think it a bad thing.” “A bad thing!
Do you really think it a bad thing?—why so?” “I think they will neither of them do the other any good.” “You surprize me!
Emma must do Harriet good: and by supplying her with a new object of interest, Harriet may be said to do Emma good.
I have been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure.
How very differently we feel!—Not think they will do each other any good!
This will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma, Mr.
Knightley.” “Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you, knowing Weston to be out, and that you must still fight your own battle.” “Mr.
Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he were here, for he thinks exactly as I do on the subject.
We were speaking of it only yesterday, and agreeing how fortunate it was for Emma, that there should be such a girl in Highbury for her to associate with.
Knightley, I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case.
You are so much used to live alone, that you do not know the value of a companion; and, perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex, after being used to it all her life.
I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith.
She is not the superior young woman which Emma’s friend ought to be.
But on the other hand, as Emma wants to see her better informed, it will be an inducement to her to read more herself.
They will read together.
I have seen a great many lists of her drawing-up at various times of books that she meant to read regularly through—and very good lists they were—very well chosen, and very neatly arranged—sometimes alphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule.
The list she drew up when only fourteen—I remember thinking it did her judgment so much credit, that I preserved it some time; and I dare say she may have made out a very good list now.
But I have done with expecting any course of steady reading from Emma.
She will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patience, and a subjection of the fancy to the understanding.
Where Miss Taylor failed to stimulate, I may safely affirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing.—You never could persuade her to read half so much as you wished.—You know you could not.” “I dare say,” replied Mrs.
Weston, smiling, “that I thought so _then_;—but since we have parted, I can never remember Emma’s omitting to do any thing I wished.” “There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as _that_,”—said Mr.
Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment or two he had done.
“But I,” he soon added, “who have had no such charm thrown over my senses, must still see, hear, and remember.
Emma is spoiled by being the cleverest of her family.
At ten years old, she had the misfortune of being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen.
She was always quick and assured: Isabella slow and diffident.
And ever since she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all.
She inherits her mother’s talents, and must have been under subjection to her.” “I should have been sorry, Mr.
Knightley, to be dependent on _your_ recommendation, had I quitted Mr.
Woodhouse’s family and wanted another situation; I do not think you would have spoken a good word for me to any body.
“You are better placed _here_; very fit for a wife, but not at all for a governess.
But you were preparing yourself to be an excellent wife all the time you were at Hartfield.
You might not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to promise; but you were receiving a very good education from _her_, on the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will, and doing as you were bid; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a wife, I should certainly have named Miss Taylor.” “Thank you.
Weston.” “Why, to own the truth, I am afraid you are rather thrown away, and that with every disposition to bear, there will be nothing to be borne.
Weston may grow cross from the wantonness of comfort, or his son may plague him.” “I hope not _that_.—It is not likely.
Knightley, do not foretell vexation from that quarter.” “Not I, indeed.
I only name possibilities.
I do not pretend to Emma’s genius for foretelling and guessing.
I hope, with all my heart, the young man may be a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune.—But Harriet Smith—I have not half done about Harriet Smith.
I think her the very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have.
She is a flatterer in all her ways; and so much the worse, because undesigned.
Her ignorance is hourly flattery.
How can Emma imagine she has any thing to learn herself, while Harriet is presenting such a delightful inferiority?
And as for Harriet, I will venture to say that _she_ cannot gain by the acquaintance.
Hartfield will only put her out of conceit with all the other places she belongs to.
She will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her home.
I am much mistaken if Emma’s doctrines give any strength of mind, or tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the varieties of her situation in life.—They only give a little polish.” “I either depend more upon Emma’s good sense than you do, or am more anxious for her present comfort; for I cannot lament the acquaintance.
Very well; I shall not attempt to deny Emma’s being pretty.” “Pretty! say beautiful rather.
Can you imagine any thing nearer perfect beauty than Emma altogether—face and figure?” “I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that I have seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers.
But I am a partial old friend.” “Such an eye!—the true hazle eye—and so brilliant! regular features, open countenance, with a complexion! oh! what a bloom of full health, and such a pretty height and size; such a firm and upright figure!
One hears sometimes of a child being ‘the picture of health;’ now, Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete picture of grown-up health.
She is loveliness itself.
Knightley, is not she?” “I have not a fault to find with her person,” he replied.
“I think her all you describe.
I love to look at her; and I will add this praise, that I do not think her personally vain.
Considering how very handsome she is, she appears to be little occupied with it; her vanity lies another way.
Knightley, am equally stout in my confidence of its not doing them any harm.
With all dear Emma’s little faults, she is an excellent creature.
Where shall we see a better daughter, or a kinder sister, or a truer friend?
No, no; she has qualities which may be trusted; she will never lead any one really wrong; she will make no lasting blunder; where Emma errs once, she is in the right a hundred times.” “Very well; I will not plague you any more.
Emma shall be an angel, and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella.
John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection, and Isabella always thinks as he does; except when he is not quite frightened enough about the children.
I am sure of having their opinions with me.” “I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind; but excuse me, Mr.
Knightley, if I take the liberty (I consider myself, you know, as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma’s mother might have had) the liberty of hinting that I do not think any possible good can arise from Harriet Smith’s intimacy being made a matter of much discussion among you.
Pray excuse me; but supposing any little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy, it cannot be expected that Emma, accountable to nobody but her father, who perfectly approves the acquaintance, should put an end to it, so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself.
It has been so many years my province to give advice, that you cannot be surprized, Mr.
Knightley, at this little remains of office.” “Not at all,” cried he; “I am much obliged to you for it.
It is very good advice, and it shall have a better fate than your advice has often found; for it shall be attended to.” “Mrs.
John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might be made unhappy about her sister.” “Be satisfied,” said he, “I will not raise any outcry.
I have a very sincere interest in Emma.
Isabella does not seem more my sister; has never excited a greater interest; perhaps hardly so great.
There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what one feels for Emma.
Weston gently, “very much.” “She always declares she will never marry, which, of course, means just nothing at all.
But there is nobody hereabouts to attach her; and she goes so seldom from home.” “There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break her resolution at present,” said Mrs.
Weston, “as can well be; and while she is so happy at Hartfield, I cannot wish her to be forming any attachment which would be creating such difficulties on poor Mr.
Woodhouse’s account.
I do not recommend matrimony at present to Emma, though I mean no slight to the state, I assure you.” Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and Mr.
Weston’s on the subject, as much as possible.
There were wishes at Randalls respecting Emma’s destiny, but it was not desirable to have them suspected; and the quiet transition which Mr.
Knightley soon afterwards made to “What does Weston think of the weather; shall we have rain?” convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield.
CHAPTER VI Emma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet’s fancy a proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good purpose, for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr.
Elton’s being a remarkably handsome man, with most agreeable manners; and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints, she was soon pretty confident of creating as much liking on Harriet’s side, as there could be any occasion for.
She was quite convinced of Mr.
His perception of the striking improvement of Harriet’s manner, since her introduction at Hartfield, was not one of the least agreeable proofs of his growing attachment.
“You have given Miss Smith all that she required,” said he; “you have made her graceful and easy.
She was a beautiful creature when she came to you, but, in my opinion, the attractions you have added are infinitely superior to what she received from nature.” “I am glad you think I have been useful to her; but Harriet only wanted drawing out, and receiving a few, very few hints.
She had all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself.
I have done very little.” “If it were admissible to contradict a lady,” said the gallant Mr.
Elton— “I have perhaps given her a little more decision of character, have taught her to think on points which had not fallen in her way before.” “Exactly so; that is what principally strikes me.
So much superadded decision of character!
Skilful has been the hand!” “Great has been the pleasure, I am sure.
I never met with a disposition more truly amiable.” “I have no doubt of it.” And it was spoken with a sort of sighing animation, which had a vast deal of the lover.
She was not less pleased another day with the manner in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers, to have Harriet’s picture.
“Did you ever have your likeness taken, Harriet?” said she: “did you ever sit for your picture?” Harriet was on the point of leaving the room, and only stopt to say, with a very interesting naïveté, “Oh! dear, no, never.” No sooner was she out of sight, than Emma exclaimed, “What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be!
I almost long to attempt her likeness myself.
You do not know it I dare say, but two or three years ago I had a great passion for taking likenesses, and attempted several of my friends, and was thought to have a tolerable eye in general.
Let me entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, to exercise so charming a talent in favour of your friend.
I know what your drawings are.
How could you suppose me ignorant?
Is not this room rich in specimens of your landscapes and flowers; and has not Mrs.
Weston some inimitable figure-pieces in her drawing-room, at Randalls?” Yes, good man!—thought Emma—but what has all that to do with taking likenesses?
Don’t pretend to be in raptures about mine.
Keep your raptures for Harriet’s face.
“Well, if you give me such kind encouragement, Mr.
Harriet’s features are very delicate, which makes a likeness difficult; and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth which one ought to catch.” “Exactly so—The shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth—I have not a doubt of your success.
As you will do it, it will indeed, to use your own words, be an exquisite possession.” “But I am afraid, Mr.
Did not you observe her manner of answering me?
How completely it meant, ‘why should my picture be drawn?’” “Oh! yes, I observed it, I assure you.
But still I cannot imagine she would not be persuaded.” Harriet was soon back again, and the proposal almost immediately made; and she had no scruples which could stand many minutes against the earnest pressing of both the others.
Emma wished to go to work directly, and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts at portraits, for not one of them had ever been finished, that they might decide together on the best size for Harriet.
Her many beginnings were displayed.
Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths, pencil, crayon, and water-colours had been all tried in turn.
She had always wanted to do every thing, and had made more progress both in drawing and music than many might have done with so little labour as she would ever submit to.
She played and sang;—and drew in almost every style; but steadiness had always been wanting; and in nothing had she approached the degree of excellence which she would have been glad to command, and ought not to have failed of.
She was not much deceived as to her own skill either as an artist or a musician, but she was not unwilling to have others deceived, or sorry to know her reputation for accomplishment often higher than it deserved.
There was merit in every drawing—in the least finished, perhaps the most; her style was spirited; but had there been much less, or had there been ten times more, the delight and admiration of her two companions would have been the same.
They were both in ecstasies.
A likeness pleases every body; and Miss Woodhouse’s performances must be capital.
There is my father—another of my father—but the idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous, that I could only take him by stealth; neither of them very like therefore.
Weston! always my kindest friend on every occasion.
She would sit whenever I asked her.
I should have made a good likeness of her, if she would have sat longer, but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her four children that she would not be quiet.
Then, here come all my attempts at three of those four children;—there they are, Henry and John and Bella, from one end of the sheet to the other, and any one of them might do for any one of the rest.
She was so eager to have them drawn that I could not refuse; but there is no making children of three or four years old stand still you know; nor can it be very easy to take any likeness of them, beyond the air and complexion, unless they are coarser featured than any of mama’s children ever were.
I took him as he was sleeping on the sofa, and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would wish to see.
He had nestled down his head most conveniently.
Then here is my last,”—unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentleman in small size, whole-length—“my last and my best—my brother, Mr.
John Knightley.—This did not want much of being finished, when I put it away in a pet, and vowed I would never take another likeness.
I could not help being provoked; for after all my pains, and when I had really made a very good likeness of it—(Mrs.
Weston and I were quite agreed in thinking it _very_ like)—only too handsome—too flattering—but that was a fault on the right side”—after all this, came poor dear Isabella’s cold approbation of—“Yes, it was a little like—but to be sure it did not do him justice.
We had had a great deal of trouble in persuading him to sit at all.
It was made a great favour of; and altogether it was more than I could bear; and so I never would finish it, to have it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness, to every morning visitor in Brunswick Square;—and, as I said, I did then forswear ever drawing any body again.
But for Harriet’s sake, or rather for my own, and as there are no husbands and wives in the case _at_ _present_, I will break my resolution now.” Mr.
Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea, and was repeating, “No husbands and wives in the case at present indeed, as you observe.
No husbands and wives,” with so interesting a consciousness, that Emma began to consider whether she had not better leave them together at once.
But as she wanted to be drawing, the declaration must wait a little longer.
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait.
John Knightley’s, and was destined, if she could please herself, to hold a very honourable station over the mantelpiece.
The sitting began; and Harriet, smiling and blushing, and afraid of not keeping her attitude and countenance, presented a very sweet mixture of youthful expression to the steady eyes of the artist.
Elton fidgeting behind her and watching every touch.
She gave him credit for stationing himself where he might gaze and gaze again without offence; but was really obliged to put an end to it, and request him to place himself elsewhere.
It then occurred to her to employ him in reading.
“If he would be so good as to read to them, it would be a kindness indeed!
It would amuse away the difficulties of her part, and lessen the irksomeness of Miss Smith’s.” Mr.
Harriet listened, and Emma drew in peace.
She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look; any thing less would certainly have been too little in a lover; and he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil, to jump up and see the progress, and be charmed.—There was no being displeased with such an encourager, for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible.
She could not respect his eye, but his love and his complaisance were unexceptionable.
The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she was quite enough pleased with the first day’s sketch to wish to go on.
Elton’s very promising attachment was likely to add.
Elton, just as he ought, entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again.
We shall be most happy to consider you as one of the party.” The same civilities and courtesies, the same success and satisfaction, took place on the morrow, and accompanied the whole progress of the picture, which was rapid and happy.
Elton was in continual raptures, and defended it through every criticism.
“Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty she wanted,”—observed Mrs.
Weston to him—not in the least suspecting that she was addressing a lover.—“The expression of the eye is most correct, but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes.
It appears to me a most perfect resemblance in every feature.
I never saw such a likeness in my life.
Elton warmly added, “Oh no! certainly not too tall; not in the least too tall.
Consider, she is sitting down—which naturally presents a different—which in short gives exactly the idea—and the proportions must be preserved, you know.
Proportions, fore-shortening.—Oh no! it gives one exactly the idea of such a height as Miss Smith’s.
Just as your drawings always are, my dear.
The only thing I do not thoroughly like is, that she seems to be sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl over her shoulders—and it makes one think she must catch cold.” “But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer; a warm day in summer.
Elton, “but I must confess that I regard it as a most happy thought, the placing of Miss Smith out of doors; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit!
Any other situation would have been much less in character.
The naïveté of Miss Smith’s manners—and altogether—Oh, it is most admirable!
I never saw such a likeness.” The next thing wanted was to get the picture framed; and here were a few difficulties.
It must be done directly; it must be done in London; the order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose taste could be depended on; and Isabella, the usual doer of all commissions, must not be applied to, because it was December, and Mr.
Woodhouse could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogs of December.
But no sooner was the distress known to Mr.
His gallantry was always on the alert.
“Might he be trusted with the commission, what infinite pleasure should he have in executing it! he could ride to London at any time.
It was impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being employed on such an errand.” “He was too good!—she could not endure the thought!—she would not give him such a troublesome office for the world,”—brought on the desired repetition of entreaties and assurances,—and a very few minutes settled the business.
Elton was to take the drawing to London, chuse the frame, and give the directions; and Emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure its safety without much incommoding him, while he seemed mostly fearful of not being incommoded enough.
“What a precious deposit!” said he with a tender sigh, as he received it.
“I should say so, but that I suppose there may be a hundred different ways of being in love.
He is an excellent young man, and will suit Harriet exactly; it will be an ‘Exactly so,’ as he says himself; but he does sigh and languish, and study for compliments rather more than I could endure as a principal.
But it is his gratitude on Harriet’s account.” CHAPTER VII The very day of Mr.
Elton’s going to London produced a fresh occasion for Emma’s services towards her friend.
Harriet had been at Hartfield, as usual, soon after breakfast; and, after a time, had gone home to return again to dinner: she returned, and sooner than had been talked of, and with an agitated, hurried look, announcing something extraordinary to have happened which she was longing to tell.
Martin had been there an hour before, and finding she was not at home, nor particularly expected, had left a little parcel for her from one of his sisters, and gone away; and on opening this parcel, she had actually found, besides the two songs which she had lent Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself; and this letter was from him, from Mr.
Martin, and contained a direct proposal of marriage.
She was so surprized she did not know what to do.
Yes, quite a proposal of marriage; and a very good letter, at least she thought so.
And he wrote as if he really loved her very much—but she did not know—and so, she was come as fast as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do.—” Emma was half-ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful.
“Upon my word,” she cried, “the young man is determined not to lose any thing for want of asking.
She read, and was surprized.
The style of the letter was much above her expectation.
There were not merely no grammatical errors, but as a composition it would not have disgraced a gentleman; the language, though plain, was strong and unaffected, and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of the writer.
It was short, but expressed good sense, warm attachment, liberality, propriety, even delicacy of feeling.
She paused over it, while Harriet stood anxiously watching for her opinion, with a “Well, well,” and was at last forced to add, “Is it a good letter? or is it too short?” “Yes, indeed, a very good letter,” replied Emma rather slowly—“so good a letter, Harriet, that every thing considered, I think one of his sisters must have helped him.
I can hardly imagine the young man whom I saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well, if left quite to his own powers, and yet it is not the style of a woman; no, certainly, it is too strong and concise; not diffuse enough for a woman.
No doubt he is a sensible man, and I suppose may have a natural talent for—thinks strongly and clearly—and when he takes a pen in hand, his thoughts naturally find proper words.
Yes, I understand the sort of mind.
Vigorous, decided, with sentiments to a certain point, not coarse.
A better written letter, Harriet (returning it,) than I had expected.” “Well,” said the still waiting Harriet;—“well—and—and what shall I do?” “What shall you do!
You must answer it of course—and speedily.” “Yes.
Dear Miss Woodhouse, do advise me.” “Oh no, no! the letter had much better be all your own.
You will express yourself very properly, I am sure.
There is no danger of your not being intelligible, which is the first thing.
Your meaning must be unequivocal; no doubts or demurs: and such expressions of gratitude and concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires, will present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind, I am persuaded.
You need not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow for his disappointment.” “You think I ought to refuse him then,” said Harriet, looking down.
I certainly have been misunderstanding you, if you feel in doubt as to the _purport_ of your answer.
I had imagined you were consulting me only as to the wording of it.” Harriet was silent.
With a little reserve of manner, Emma continued: “You mean to return a favourable answer, I collect.” “No, I do not; that is, I do not mean—What shall I do?
Pray, dear Miss Woodhouse, tell me what I ought to do.” “I shall not give you any advice, Harriet.
This is a point which you must settle with your feelings.” “I had no notion that he liked me so very much,” said Harriet, contemplating the letter.
For a little while Emma persevered in her silence; but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flattery of that letter might be too powerful, she thought it best to say, “I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman _doubts_ as to whether she should accept a man or not, she certainly ought to refuse him.
If she can hesitate as to ‘Yes,’ she ought to say ‘No’ directly.
It is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful feelings, with half a heart.
I thought it my duty as a friend, and older than yourself, to say thus much to you.
You must be the best judge of your own happiness.
Martin to every other person; if you think him the most agreeable man you have ever been in company with, why should you hesitate?
You blush, Harriet.—Does any body else occur to you at this moment under such a definition?
Harriet, Harriet, do not deceive yourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion.
At this moment whom are you thinking of?” The symptoms were favourable.—Instead of answering, Harriet turned away confused, and stood thoughtfully by the fire; and though the letter was still in her hand, it was now mechanically twisted about without regard.
Emma waited the result with impatience, but not without strong hopes.
At last, with some hesitation, Harriet said— “Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your opinion, I must do as well as I can by myself; and I have now quite determined, and really almost made up my mind—to refuse Mr.
Do you think I am right?” “Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet; you are doing just what you ought.
While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings to myself, but now that you are so completely decided I have no hesitation in approving.
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance, which must have been the consequence of your marrying Mr.
While you were in the smallest degree wavering, I said nothing about it, because I would not influence; but it would have been the loss of a friend to me.
Now I am secure of you for ever.” Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the idea of it struck her forcibly.
That would have been too dreadful!—What an escape!—Dear Miss Woodhouse, I would not give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you for any thing in the world.” “Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to lose you; but it must have been.
You would have thrown yourself out of all good society.
It would have killed me never to come to Hartfield any more!” “Dear affectionate creature!—_You_ banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!—_You_ confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life!
I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it.
Martin a very amiable young man, and have a great opinion of him; and his being so much attached to me—and his writing such a letter—but as to leaving you, it is what I would not do upon any consideration.” “Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend.
Nobody cares for a letter; the thing is, to be always happy with pleasant companions.
I am quite determined to refuse him.
What shall I say?” Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer, and advised its being written directly, which was agreed to, in the hope of her assistance; and though Emma continued to protest against any assistance being wanted, it was in fact given in the formation of every sentence.
The business was finished, and Harriet safe.
She was rather low all the evening, but Emma could allow for her amiable regrets, and sometimes relieved them by speaking of her own affection, sometimes by bringing forward the idea of Mr.
“I shall never be invited to Abbey-Mill again,” was said in rather a sorrowful tone.
You are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to Abbey-Mill.” “And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy but at Hartfield.” Some time afterwards it was, “I think Mrs.
Goddard would be very much surprized if she knew what had happened.
I am sure Miss Nash would—for Miss Nash thinks her own sister very well married, and it is only a linen-draper.” “One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher of a school, Harriet.
I dare say Miss Nash would envy you such an opportunity as this of being married.
Even this conquest would appear valuable in her eyes.
As to any thing superior for you, I suppose she is quite in the dark.
The attentions of a certain person can hardly be among the tittle-tattle of Highbury yet.
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained themselves.” Harriet blushed and smiled, and said something about wondering that people should like her so much.
Elton was certainly cheering; but still, after a time, she was tender-hearted again towards the rejected Mr.
I hope he will not mind it so very much.” “Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfully employed,” cried Emma.
Elton is shewing your picture to his mother and sisters, telling how much more beautiful is the original, and after being asked for it five or six times, allowing them to hear your name, your own dear name.” “My picture!—But he has left my picture in Bond-street.” “Has he so!—Then I know nothing of Mr.
It is his companion all this evening, his solace, his delight.
It opens his designs to his family, it introduces you among them, it diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of our nature, eager curiosity and warm prepossession.
How cheerful, how animated, how suspicious, how busy their imaginations all are!” Harriet smiled again, and her smiles grew stronger.
CHAPTER VIII Harriet slept at Hartfield that night.
For some weeks past she had been spending more than half her time there, and gradually getting to have a bed-room appropriated to herself; and Emma judged it best in every respect, safest and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possible just at present.
Goddard’s, but it was then to be settled that she should return to Hartfield, to make a regular visit of some days.
Knightley called, and sat some time with Mr.
Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr.
Woodhouse, who had previously made up his mind to walk out, was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it, and was induced by the entreaties of both, though against the scruples of his own civility, to leave Mr.
Knightley for that purpose.
Knightley, who had nothing of ceremony about him, was offering by his short, decided answers, an amusing contrast to the protracted apologies and civil hesitations of the other.
Knightley, if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing, I shall take Emma’s advice and go out for a quarter of an hour.
I treat you without ceremony, Mr.
We invalids think we are privileged people.” “My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me.” “I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter.
Emma will be happy to entertain you.
And therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take my three turns—my winter walk.” “You cannot do better, sir.” “I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr.
Knightley, but I am a very slow walker, and my pace would be tedious to you; and, besides, you have another long walk before you, to Donwell Abbey.” “Thank you, sir, thank you; I am going this moment myself; and I think the sooner _you_ go the better.
I will fetch your greatcoat and open the garden door for you.” Mr.
Woodhouse at last was off; but Mr.
Knightley, instead of being immediately off likewise, sat down again, seemingly inclined for more chat.
He began speaking of Harriet, and speaking of her with more voluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before.
“I cannot rate her beauty as you do,” said he; “but she is a pretty little creature, and I am inclined to think very well of her disposition.
Her character depends upon those she is with; but in good hands she will turn out a valuable woman.” “I am glad you think so; and the good hands, I hope, may not be wanting.” “Come,” said he, “you are anxious for a compliment, so I will tell you that you have improved her.
I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I had been of some use; but it is not every body who will bestow praise where they may. _You_ do not often overpower me with it.” “You are expecting her again, you say, this morning?” “Almost every moment.
She has been gone longer already than she intended.” “Something has happened to delay her; some visitors perhaps.” “Highbury gossips!—Tiresome wretches!” “Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would.” Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and therefore said nothing.
He presently added, with a smile, “I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you that I have good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear of something to her advantage.” “Indeed! how so? of what sort?” “A very serious sort, I assure you;” still smiling.
Who makes you their confidant?” Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr.
Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser, and she knew Mr.
“I have reason to think,” he replied, “that Harriet Smith will soon have an offer of marriage, and from a most unexceptionable quarter:—Robert Martin is the man.
Her visit to Abbey-Mill, this summer, seems to have done his business.
He is desperately in love and means to marry her.” “He is very obliging,” said Emma; “but is he sure that Harriet means to marry him?” “Well, well, means to make her an offer then.
He came to the Abbey two evenings ago, on purpose to consult me about it.
He knows I have a thorough regard for him and all his family, and, I believe, considers me as one of his best friends.
He came to ask me whether I thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early; whether I thought her too young: in short, whether I approved his choice altogether; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered (especially since _your_ making so much of her) as in a line of society above him.
He always speaks to the purpose; open, straightforward, and very well judging.
He told me every thing; his circumstances and plans, and what they all proposed doing in the event of his marriage.
He is an excellent young man, both as son and brother.
I had no hesitation in advising him to marry.
He proved to me that he could afford it; and that being the case, I was convinced he could not do better.
I praised the fair lady too, and altogether sent him away very happy.
If he had never esteemed my opinion before, he would have thought highly of me then; and, I dare say, left the house thinking me the best friend and counsellor man ever had.
This happened the night before last.
Now, as we may fairly suppose, he would not allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady, and as he does not appear to have spoken yesterday, it is not unlikely that he should be at Mrs.
Goddard’s to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor, without thinking him at all a tiresome wretch.” “Pray, Mr.
Knightley,” said Emma, who had been smiling to herself through a great part of this speech, “how do you know that Mr.
Martin did not speak yesterday?” “Certainly,” replied he, surprized, “I do not absolutely know it; but it may be inferred.
Was not she the whole day with you?” “Come,” said she, “I will tell you something, in return for what you have told me.
He did speak yesterday—that is, he wrote, and was refused.” This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed; and Mr.
Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure, as he stood up, in tall indignation, and said, “Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her.
What is the foolish girl about?” “Oh! to be sure,” cried Emma, “it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage.
A man always imagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her.” “Nonsense! a man does not imagine any such thing.
Harriet Smith refuse Robert Martin? madness, if it is so; but I hope you are mistaken.” “I saw her answer!—nothing could be clearer.” “You saw her answer!—you wrote her answer too.
You persuaded her to refuse him.” “And if I did, (which, however, I am far from allowing) I should not feel that I had done wrong.
Martin is a very respectable young man, but I cannot admit him to be Harriet’s equal; and am rather surprized indeed that he should have ventured to address her.
By your account, he does seem to have had some scruples.
It is a pity that they were ever got over.” “Not Harriet’s equal!” exclaimed Mr.
Knightley loudly and warmly; and with calmer asperity, added, a few moments afterwards, “No, he is not her equal indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense as in situation.
Emma, your infatuation about that girl blinds you.
What are Harriet Smith’s claims, either of birth, nature or education, to any connexion higher than Robert Martin?
She is the natural daughter of nobody knows whom, with probably no settled provision at all, and certainly no respectable relations.
She is not a sensible girl, nor a girl of any information.
She has been taught nothing useful, and is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself.
At her age she can have no experience, and with her little wit, is not very likely ever to have any that can avail her.
She is pretty, and she is good tempered, and that is all.
My only scruple in advising the match was on his account, as being beneath his deserts, and a bad connexion for him.
I felt that, as to fortune, in all probability he might do much better; and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate, he could not do worse.
But I could not reason so to a man in love, and was willing to trust to there being no harm in her, to her having that sort of disposition, which, in good hands, like his, might be easily led aright and turn out very well.
The advantage of the match I felt to be all on her side; and had not the smallest doubt (nor have I now) that there would be a general cry-out upon her extreme good luck.
Even _your_ satisfaction I made sure of.
It crossed my mind immediately that you would not regret your friend’s leaving Highbury, for the sake of her being settled so well.
I remember saying to myself, ‘Even Emma, with all her partiality for Harriet, will think this a good match.’” “I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say any such thing.
Martin is nothing more,) a good match for my intimate friend!
Not regret her leaving Highbury for the sake of marrying a man whom I could never admit as an acquaintance of my own!
I wonder you should think it possible for me to have such feelings.
I assure you mine are very different.
I must think your statement by no means fair.
They would be estimated very differently by others as well as myself; Mr.
Knightley, “whoever may have had the charge of her, it does not appear to have been any part of their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society.
After receiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs.
Goddard’s acquaintance.
Her friends evidently thought this good enough for her; and it _was_ good enough.
Till you chose to turn her into a friend, her mind had no distaste for her own set, nor any ambition beyond it.
She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer.
She had no sense of superiority then.
Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far, if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him.
He has too much real feeling to address any woman on the haphazard of selfish passion.
And as to conceit, he is the farthest from it of any man I know.
Depend upon it he had encouragement.” It was most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to this assertion; she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject again.
Harriet’s claims to marry well are not so contemptible as you represent them.
She is not a clever girl, but she has better sense than you are aware of, and does not deserve to have her understanding spoken of so slightingly.
Her good-nature, too, is not so very slight a claim, comprehending, as it does, real, thorough sweetness of temper and manner, a very humble opinion of herself, and a great readiness to be pleased with other people.
I am very much mistaken if your sex in general would not think such beauty, and such temper, the highest claims a woman could possess.” “Upon my word, Emma, to hear you abusing the reason you have, is almost enough to make me think so too.
Better be without sense, than misapply it as you do.” “To be sure!” cried she playfully.
I know that such a girl as Harriet is exactly what every man delights in—what at once bewitches his senses and satisfies his judgment.
Were you, yourself, ever to marry, she is the very woman for you.
And is she, at seventeen, just entering into life, just beginning to be known, to be wondered at because she does not accept the first offer she receives?
No—pray let her have time to look about her.” “I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy,” said Mr.
Knightley presently, “though I have kept my thoughts to myself; but I now perceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet.
Vanity working on a weak head, produces every sort of mischief.
Nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations too high.
Miss Harriet Smith may not find offers of marriage flow in so fast, though she is a very pretty girl.
Men of sense, whatever you may chuse to say, do not want silly wives.
Men of family would not be very fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity—and most prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved in, when the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed.
Let her marry Robert Martin, and she is safe, respectable, and happy for ever; but if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly, and teach her to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and large fortune, she may be a parlour-boarder at Mrs.
Goddard’s all the rest of her life—or, at least, (for Harriet Smith is a girl who will marry somebody or other,) till she grow desperate, and is glad to catch at the old writing-master’s son.” “We think so very differently on this point, Mr.
Knightley, that there can be no use in canvassing it.
But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin, it is impossible; she has refused him, and so decidedly, I think, as must prevent any second application.
She must abide by the evil of having refused him, whatever it may be; and as to the refusal itself, I will not pretend to say that I might not influence her a little; but I assure you there was very little for me or for any body to do.
His appearance is so much against him, and his manner so bad, that if she ever were disposed to favour him, she is not now.
I can imagine, that before she had seen any body superior, she might tolerate him.
He was the brother of her friends, and he took pains to please her; and altogether, having seen nobody better (that must have been his great assistant) she might not, while she was at Abbey-Mill, find him disagreeable.
She knows now what gentlemen are; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner has any chance with Harriet.” “Nonsense, errant nonsense, as ever was talked!” cried Mr.
Knightley.—“Robert Martin’s manners have sense, sincerity, and good-humour to recommend them; and his mind has more true gentility than Harriet Smith could understand.” Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned, but was really feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone.
She did not repent what she had done; she still thought herself a better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be; but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment in general, which made her dislike having it so loudly against her; and to have him sitting just opposite to her in angry state, was very disagreeable.
Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence, with only one attempt on Emma’s side to talk of the weather, but he made no answer.
The result of his thoughts appeared at last in these words.
Your views for Harriet are best known to yourself; but as you make no secret of your love of match-making, it is fair to suppose that views, and plans, and projects you have;—and as a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man, I think it will be all labour in vain.” Emma laughed and disclaimed.
He continued, “Depend upon it, Elton will not do.
Elton is a very good sort of man, and a very respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely to make an imprudent match.
Elton may talk sentimentally, but he will act rationally.
He is as well acquainted with his own claims, as you can be with Harriet’s.
He knows that he is a very handsome young man, and a great favourite wherever he goes; and from his general way of talking in unreserved moments, when there are only men present, I am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away.
I have heard him speak with great animation of a large family of young ladies that his sisters are intimate with, who have all twenty thousand pounds apiece.” “I am very much obliged to you,” said Emma, laughing again.
Elton’s marrying Harriet, it would have been very kind to open my eyes; but at present I only want to keep Harriet to myself.
I could never hope to equal my own doings at Randalls.
I shall leave off while I am well.” “Good morning to you,”—said he, rising and walking off abruptly.
He felt the disappointment of the young man, and was mortified to have been the means of promoting it, by the sanction he had given; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the affair, was provoking him exceedingly.
Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was more indistinctness in the causes of her’s, than in his.
She did not always feel so absolutely satisfied with herself, so entirely convinced that her opinions were right and her adversary’s wrong, as Mr.
He walked off in more complete self-approbation than he left for her.
She was not so materially cast down, however, but that a little time and the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives.
Harriet’s staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy.
The possibility of the young man’s coming to Mrs.
Goddard’s that morning, and meeting with Harriet and pleading his own cause, gave alarming ideas.
The dread of such a failure after all became the prominent uneasiness; and when Harriet appeared, and in very good spirits, and without having any such reason to give for her long absence, she felt a satisfaction which settled her with her own mind, and convinced her, that let Mr.
Knightley think or say what he would, she had done nothing which woman’s friendship and woman’s feelings would not justify.
He had frightened her a little about Mr.
Elton; but when she considered that Mr.
Knightley could not have observed him as she had done, neither with the interest, nor (she must be allowed to tell herself, in spite of Mr.
Knightley’s pretensions) with the skill of such an observer on such a question as herself, that he had spoken it hastily and in anger, she was able to believe, that he had rather said what he wished resentfully to be true, than what he knew any thing about.
He certainly might have heard Mr.
Elton speak with more unreserve than she had ever done, and Mr.
Elton might not be of an imprudent, inconsiderate disposition as to money matters; he might naturally be rather attentive than otherwise to them; but then, Mr.
Knightley did not make due allowance for the influence of a strong passion at war with all interested motives.
Knightley saw no such passion, and of course thought nothing of its effects; but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming any hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest; and more than a reasonable, becoming degree of prudence, she was very sure did not belong to Mr.
Harriet’s cheerful look and manner established hers: she came back, not to think of Mr.
Miss Nash had been telling her something, which she repeated immediately with great delight.
Goddard’s to attend a sick child, and Miss Nash had seen him, and he had told Miss Nash, that as he was coming back yesterday from Clayton Park, he had met Mr.
Elton, and found to his great surprize, that Mr.
Elton was actually on his road to London, and not meaning to return till the morrow, though it was the whist-club night, which he had been never known to miss before; and Mr.
Perry had remonstrated with him about it, and told him how shabby it was in him, their best player, to absent himself, and tried very much to persuade him to put off his journey only one day; but it would not do; Mr.
Elton had been determined to go on, and had said in a _very_ _particular_ way indeed, that he was going on business which he would not put off for any inducement in the world; and something about a very enviable commission, and being the bearer of something exceedingly precious.
Perry could not quite understand him, but he was very sure there must be a _lady_ in the case, and he told him so; and Mr.
Elton only looked very conscious and smiling, and rode off in great spirits.
Elton; and said, looking so very significantly at her, “that she did not pretend to understand what his business might be, but she only knew that any woman whom Mr.
Elton could prefer, she should think the luckiest woman in the world; for, beyond a doubt, Mr.
Elton had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness.” CHAPTER IX Mr.
Knightley might quarrel with her, but Emma could not quarrel with herself.
He was so much displeased, that it was longer than usual before he came to Hartfield again; and when they did meet, his grave looks shewed that she was not forgiven.
On the contrary, her plans and proceedings were more and more justified and endeared to her by the general appearances of the next few days.
The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon after Mr.
Elton’s return, and being hung over the mantelpiece of the common sitting-room, he got up to look at it, and sighed out his half sentences of admiration just as he ought; and as for Harriet’s feelings, they were visibly forming themselves into as strong and steady an attachment as her youth and sort of mind admitted.
Emma was soon perfectly satisfied of Mr.
Martin’s being no otherwise remembered, than as he furnished a contrast with Mr.
Elton, of the utmost advantage to the latter.
Her views of improving her little friend’s mind, by a great deal of useful reading and conversation, had never yet led to more than a few first chapters, and the intention of going on to-morrow.
In this age of literature, such collections on a very grand scale are not uncommon.
Goddard’s, had written out at least three hundred; and Harriet, who had taken the first hint of it from her, hoped, with Miss Woodhouse’s help, to get a great many more.
Emma assisted with her invention, memory and taste; and as Harriet wrote a very pretty hand, it was likely to be an arrangement of the first order, in form as well as quantity.
Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the girls, and tried very often to recollect something worth their putting in.
It was by no means his daughter’s wish that the intellects of Highbury in general should be put under requisition.
Elton was the only one whose assistance she asked.
He was invited to contribute any really good enigmas, charades, or conundrums that he might recollect; and she had the pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his recollections; and at the same time, as she could perceive, most earnestly careful that nothing ungallant, nothing that did not breathe a compliment to the sex should pass his lips.
They owed to him their two or three politest puzzles; and the joy and exultation with which at last he recalled, and rather sentimentally recited, that well-known charade, My first doth affliction denote, Which my second is destin’d to feel And my whole is the best antidote That affliction to soften and heal.— made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it some pages ago already.
“Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr.
Elton?” said she; “that is the only security for its freshness; and nothing could be easier to you.” “Oh no! he had never written, hardly ever, any thing of the kind in his life.
The stupidest fellow!
He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse”—he stopt a moment—“or Miss Smith could inspire him.” The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration.
He called for a few moments, just to leave a piece of paper on the table containing, as he said, a charade, which a friend of his had addressed to a young lady, the object of his admiration, but which, from his manner, Emma was immediately convinced must be his own.
“I do not offer it for Miss Smith’s collection,” said he.
“Being my friend’s, I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye, but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it.” The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma could understand.
There was deep consciousness about him, and he found it easier to meet her eye than her friend’s.
My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings, Lords of the earth! their luxury and ease.
Thy ready wit the word will soon supply, May its approval beam in that soft eye!
She cast her eye over it, pondered, caught the meaning, read it through again to be quite certain, and quite mistress of the lines, and then passing it to Harriet, sat happily smiling, and saying to herself, while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope and dulness, “Very well, Mr.
I have read worse charades. _Courtship_—a very good hint.
This is saying very plainly—‘Pray, Miss Smith, give me leave to pay my addresses to you.
Approve my charade and my intentions in the same glance.’ May its approval beam in that soft eye!
Soft is the very word for her eye—of all epithets, the justest that could be given.
A man must be very much in love, indeed, to describe her so.
Knightley, I wish you had the benefit of this; I think this would convince you.
For once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken.
An excellent charade indeed! and very much to the purpose.
Things must come to a crisis soon now.” She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observations, which were otherwise of a sort to run into great length, by the eagerness of Harriet’s wondering questions.
“What can it be, Miss Woodhouse?—what can it be?
What can it possibly be?
Do try to find it out, Miss Woodhouse.
Oh, no! shark is only one syllable.
Miss Woodhouse, do you think we shall ever find it out?” “Mermaids and sharks!
My dear Harriet, what are you thinking of?
Where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made by a friend upon a mermaid or a shark?
But ah! united, (_courtship_, you know,) what reverse we have!
A very proper compliment!—and then follows the application, which I think, my dear Harriet, you cannot find much difficulty in comprehending.
Read it in comfort to yourself.
There can be no doubt of its being written for you and to you.” Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion.
She read the concluding lines, and was all flutter and happiness.
“There is so pointed, and so particular a meaning in this compliment,” said she, “that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr.
You are his object—and you will soon receive the completest proof of it.
I thought I could not be so deceived; but now, it is clear; the state of his mind is as clear and decided, as my wishes on the subject have been ever since I knew you.
Yes, Harriet, just so long have I been wanting the very circumstance to happen that has happened.
I could never tell whether an attachment between you and Mr.
Elton were most desirable or most natural.
Its probability and its eligibility have really so equalled each other!
I congratulate you, my dear Harriet, with all my heart.
This is an attachment which a woman may well feel pride in creating.
This is a connexion which offers nothing but good.
It will give you every thing that you want—consideration, independence, a proper home—it will fix you in the centre of all your real friends, close to Hartfield and to me, and confirm our intimacy for ever.
This, Harriet, is an alliance which can never raise a blush in either of us.” “Dear Miss Woodhouse!”—and “Dear Miss Woodhouse,” was all that Harriet, with many tender embraces could articulate at first; but when they did arrive at something more like conversation, it was sufficiently clear to her friend that she saw, felt, anticipated, and remembered just as she ought.
Elton’s superiority had very ample acknowledgment.
“Whatever you say is always right,” cried Harriet, “and therefore I suppose, and believe, and hope it must be so; but otherwise I could not have imagined it.
There cannot be two opinions about _him_.
He is so very superior.
Only think of those sweet verses—‘To Miss ———.’ Dear me, how clever!—Could it really be meant for me?” “I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about that.
Receive it on my judgment.
It is a sort of prologue to the play, a motto to the chapter; and will be soon followed by matter-of-fact prose.” “It is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected.
I am sure, a month ago, I had no more idea myself!—The strangest things do take place!” “When Miss Smiths and Mr.
Eltons get acquainted—they do indeed—and really it is strange; it is out of the common course that what is so evidently, so palpably desirable—what courts the pre-arrangement of other people, should so immediately shape itself into the proper form.
Elton are by situation called together; you belong to one another by every circumstance of your respective homes.
Your marrying will be equal to the match at Randalls.
There does seem to be a something in the air of Hartfield which gives love exactly the right direction, and sends it into the very channel where it ought to flow.
The course of true love never did run smooth— A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on that passage.” “That Mr.
Elton should really be in love with me,—me, of all people, who did not know him, to speak to him, at Michaelmas!
And he, the very handsomest man that ever was, and a man that every body looks up to, quite like Mr.
His company so sought after, that every body says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it; that he has more invitations than there are days in the week.
And so excellent in the Church!
Miss Nash has put down all the texts he has ever preached from since he came to Highbury.
How little did I think!—The two Abbots and I ran into the front room and peeped through the blind when we heard he was going by, and Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look through herself; however, she called me back presently, and let me look too, which was very good-natured.
And how beautiful we thought he looked!
Cole.” “This is an alliance which, whoever—whatever your friends may be, must be agreeable to them, provided at least they have common sense; and we are not to be addressing our conduct to fools.
You understand every thing.
The most satisfactory comparisons were rising in her mind.
“It is one thing,” said she, presently—her cheeks in a glow—“to have very good sense in a common way, like every body else, and if there is any thing to say, to sit down and write a letter, and say just what you must, in a short way; and another, to write verses and charades like this.” Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr.
“Such sweet lines!” continued Harriet—“these two last!—But how shall I ever be able to return the paper, or say I have found it out?—Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, what can we do about that?” “Leave it to me.
He will be here this evening, I dare say, and then I will give it him back, and some nonsense or other will pass between us, and you shall not be committed.—Your soft eyes shall chuse their own time for beaming.
Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write this beautiful charade into my book!
Granted;—for private enjoyment; and for private enjoyment keep them.
But take it away, and all _appropriation_ ceases, and a very pretty gallant charade remains, fit for any collection.
Depend upon it, he would not like to have his charade slighted, much better than his passion.
A poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities, or neither.
Give me the book, I will write it down, and then there can be no possible reflection on you.” Harriet submitted, though her mind could hardly separate the parts, so as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a declaration of love.
It seemed too precious an offering for any degree of publicity.
It will be giving him so much pleasure!
He loves any thing of the sort, and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment.
He has the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards us all!—You must let me read it to him.” Harriet looked grave.
“My dear Harriet, you must not refine too much upon this charade.—You will betray your feelings improperly, if you are too conscious and too quick, and appear to affix more meaning, or even quite all the meaning which may be affixed to it.
Do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration.
Do not let us be too solemn on the business.
He has encouragement enough to proceed, without our sighing out our souls over this charade.” “Oh! no—I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it.
Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the subject again, by the recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of “Well, my dears, how does your book go on?—Have you got any thing fresh?” “Yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh.
“Aye, that’s very just, indeed, that’s very properly said.
‘Woman, lovely woman.’ It is such a pretty charade, my dear, that I can easily guess what fairy brought it.—Nobody could have written so prettily, but you, Emma.” Emma only nodded, and smiled.—After a little thinking, and a very tender sigh, he added, “Ah! it is no difficulty to see who you take after!
But I can remember nothing;—not even that particular riddle which you have heard me mention; I can only recollect the first stanza; and there are several.
Kitty, a fair but frozen maid, Kindled a flame I yet deplore, The hood-wink’d boy I called to aid, Though of his near approach afraid, So fatal to my suit before.
And that is all that I can recollect of it—but it is very clever all the way through.
We copied it from the Elegant Extracts.
It was Garrick’s, you know.” “Aye, very true.—I wish I could recollect more of it.
The name makes me think of poor Isabella; for she was very near being christened Catherine after her grandmama.
Have you thought, my dear, where you shall put her—and what room there will be for the children?” “Oh! yes—she will have her own room, of course; the room she always has;—and there is the nursery for the children,—just as usual, you know.
John Knightley’s being a lawyer is very inconvenient.—Poor Isabella!—she is sadly taken away from us all!—and how sorry she will be when she comes, not to see Miss Taylor here!” “She will not be surprized, papa, at least.” “I do not know, my dear.
I am sure I was very much surprized when I first heard she was going to be married.” “We must ask Mr. and Mrs.
Weston to dine with us, while Isabella is here.” “Yes, my dear, if there is time.—But—(in a very depressed tone)—she is coming for only one week.
There will not be time for any thing.” “It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer—but it seems a case of necessity.
John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th, and we ought to be thankful, papa, that we are to have the whole of the time they can give to the country, that two or three days are not to be taken out for the Abbey.
Knightley promises to give up his claim this Christmas—though you know it is longer since they were with him, than with us.” “It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella were to be anywhere but at Hartfield.” Mr.
Woodhouse could never allow for Mr.
Knightley’s claims on his brother, or any body’s claims on Isabella, except his own.
He sat musing a little while, and then said, “But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to go back so soon, though he does.
I think, Emma, I shall try and persuade her to stay longer with us.
She and the children might stay very well.” “Ah! papa—that is what you never have been able to accomplish, and I do not think you ever will.
Isabella cannot bear to stay behind her husband.” This was too true for contradiction.
Unwelcome as it was, Mr.
Woodhouse could only give a submissive sigh; and as Emma saw his spirits affected by the idea of his daughter’s attachment to her husband, she immediately led to such a branch of the subject as must raise them.
I am sure she will be pleased with the children.
We are very proud of the children, are not we, papa?
I wonder which she will think the handsomest, Henry or John?” “Aye, I wonder which she will.
They are very fond of being at Hartfield, Harriet.” “I dare say they are, sir.
Some people are surprized, I believe, that the eldest was not, but Isabella would have him called Henry, which I thought very pretty of her.
They are all remarkably clever; and they have so many pretty ways.
They will come and stand by my chair, and say, ‘Grandpapa, can you give me a bit of string?’ and once Henry asked me for a knife, but I told him knives were only made for grandpapas.
I think their father is too rough with them very often.” “He appears rough to you,” said Emma, “because you are so very gentle yourself; but if you could compare him with other papas, you would not think him rough.
He wishes his boys to be active and hardy; and if they misbehave, can give them a sharp word now and then; but he is an affectionate father—certainly Mr.
John Knightley is an affectionate father.
The children are all fond of him.” “And then their uncle comes in, and tosses them up to the ceiling in a very frightful way!” “But they like it, papa; there is nothing they like so much.
It is such enjoyment to them, that if their uncle did not lay down the rule of their taking turns, whichever began would never give way to the other.” “Well, I cannot understand it.” “That is the case with us all, papa.
One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other.” Later in the morning, and just as the girls were going to separate in preparation for the regular four o’clock dinner, the hero of this inimitable charade walked in again.
Harriet turned away; but Emma could receive him with the usual smile, and her quick eye soon discerned in his the consciousness of having made a push—of having thrown a die; and she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up.
His ostensible reason, however, was to ask whether Mr.
Woodhouse’s party could be made up in the evening without him, or whether he should be in the smallest degree necessary at Hartfield.
If he were, every thing else must give way; but otherwise his friend Cole had been saying so much about his dining with him—had made such a point of it, that he had promised him conditionally to come.
Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his disappointing his friend on their account; her father was sure of his rubber.
He re-urged—she re-declined; and he seemed then about to make his bow, when taking the paper from the table, she returned it— “Oh! here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us; thank you for the sight of it.
We admired it so much, that I have ventured to write it into Miss Smith’s collection.
Of course I have not transcribed beyond the first eight lines.” Mr.
Elton certainly did not very well know what to say.
He looked rather doubtingly—rather confused; said something about “honour,”—glanced at Emma and at Harriet, and then seeing the book open on the table, took it up, and examined it very attentively.
With the view of passing off an awkward moment, Emma smilingly said, “You must make my apologies to your friend; but so good a charade must not be confined to one or two.
He may be sure of every woman’s approbation while he writes with such gallantry.” “I have no hesitation in saying,” replied Mr.
Elton, though hesitating a good deal while he spoke; “I have no hesitation in saying—at least if my friend feels at all as _I_ do—I have not the smallest doubt that, could he see his little effusion honoured as _I_ see it, (looking at the book again, and replacing it on the table), he would consider it as the proudest moment of his life.” After this speech he was gone as soon as possible.
Emma could not think it too soon; for with all his good and agreeable qualities, there was a sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt to incline her to laugh.
She ran away to indulge the inclination, leaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure to Harriet’s share.
CHAPTER X Though now the middle of December, there had yet been no weather to prevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exercise; and on the morrow, Emma had a charitable visit to pay to a poor sick family, who lived a little way out of Highbury.
Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane, a lane leading at right angles from the broad, though irregular, main street of the place; and, as may be inferred, containing the blessed abode of Mr.
A few inferior dwellings were first to be passed, and then, about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the Vicarage, an old and not very good house, almost as close to the road as it could be.
It had no advantage of situation; but had been very much smartened up by the present proprietor; and, such as it was, there could be no possibility of the two friends passing it without a slackened pace and observing eyes.—Emma’s remark was— “There it is.
“I wish we could contrive it,” said she; “but I cannot think of any tolerable pretence for going in;—no servant that I want to inquire about of his housekeeper—no message from my father.” She pondered, but could think of nothing.
After a mutual silence of some minutes, Harriet thus began again— “I do so wonder, Miss Woodhouse, that you should not be married, or going to be married! so charming as you are!”— Emma laughed, and replied, “My being charming, Harriet, is not quite enough to induce me to marry; I must find other people charming—one other person at least.
And I am not only, not going to be married, at present, but have very little intention of ever marrying at all.” “Ah!—so you say; but I cannot believe it.” “I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet, to be tempted; Mr.
Elton, you know, (recollecting herself,) is out of the question: and I do _not_ wish to see any such person.
If I were to marry, I must expect to repent it.” “Dear me!—it is so odd to hear a woman talk so!”— “I have none of the usual inducements of women to marry.
Were I to fall in love, indeed, it would be a different thing! but I never have been in love; it is not my way, or my nature; and I do not think I ever shall.
And, without love, I am sure I should be a fool to change such a situation as mine.
But between _us_, I am convinced there never can be any likeness, except in being unmarried.” “But still, you will be an old maid! and that’s so dreadful!” “Never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old maid; and it is poverty only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public!
A single woman, with a very narrow income, must be a ridiculous, disagreeable old maid! the proper sport of boys and girls, but a single woman, of good fortune, is always respectable, and may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else.
And the distinction is not quite so much against the candour and common sense of the world as appears at first; for a very narrow income has a tendency to contract the mind, and sour the temper.
Those who can barely live, and who live perforce in a very small, and generally very inferior, society, may well be illiberal and cross.
Woman’s usual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then as they are now; or with no important variation.
And as for objects of interest, objects for the affections, which is in truth the great point of inferiority, the want of which is really the great evil to be avoided in _not_ marrying, I shall be very well off, with all the children of a sister I love so much, to care about.
There will be enough of them, in all probability, to supply every sort of sensation that declining life can need.
There will be enough for every hope and every fear; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent, it suits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder.
That is, I know you must have seen her a hundred times—but are you acquainted?” “Oh! yes; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes to Highbury.
Heaven forbid! at least, that I should ever bore people half so much about all the Knightleys together, as she does about Jane Fairfax.
Every letter from her is read forty times over; her compliments to all friends go round and round again; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher, or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother, one hears of nothing else for a month.
I wish Jane Fairfax very well; but she tires me to death.” They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle topics were superseded.
Emma was very compassionate; and the distresses of the poor were as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness, her counsel and her patience, as from her purse.
She understood their ways, could allow for their ignorance and their temptations, had no romantic expectations of extraordinary virtue from those for whom education had done so little; entered into their troubles with ready sympathy, and always gave her assistance with as much intelligence as good-will.
In the present instance, it was sickness and poverty together which she came to visit; and after remaining there as long as she could give comfort or advice, she quitted the cottage with such an impression of the scene as made her say to Harriet, as they walked away, “These are the sights, Harriet, to do one good.
How trifling they make every thing else appear!—I feel now as if I could think of nothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind?” “Very true,” said Harriet.
“Poor creatures! one can think of nothing else.” “And really, I do not think the impression will soon be over,” said Emma, as she crossed the low hedge, and tottering footstep which ended the narrow, slippery path through the cottage garden, and brought them into the lane again.
“I do not think it will,” stopping to look once more at all the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the still greater within.
“Oh! dear, no,” said her companion.
Elton was immediately in sight; and so near as to give Emma time only to say farther, “Ah!
Harriet, here comes a very sudden trial of our stability in good thoughts.
Well, (smiling,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers, it has done all that is truly important.
If we feel for the wretched, enough to do all we can for them, the rest is empty sympathy, only distressing to ourselves.” Harriet could just answer, “Oh! dear, yes,” before the gentleman joined them.
The wants and sufferings of the poor family, however, were the first subject on meeting.
His visit he would now defer; but they had a very interesting parley about what could be done and should be done.
Elton then turned back to accompany them.
“To fall in with each other on such an errand as this,” thought Emma; “to meet in a charitable scheme; this will bring a great increase of love on each side.
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration.
I wish I were anywhere else.” Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could, she soon afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath, a little raised on one side of the lane, leaving them together in the main road.
But she had not been there two minutes when she found that Harriet’s habits of dependence and imitation were bringing her up too, and that, in short, they would both be soon after her.
This would not do; she immediately stopped, under pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacing of her half-boot, and stooping down in complete occupation of the footpath, begged them to have the goodness to walk on, and she would follow in half a minute.
They did as they were desired; and by the time she judged it reasonable to have done with her boot, she had the comfort of farther delay in her power, being overtaken by a child from the cottage, setting out, according to orders, with her pitcher, to fetch broth from Hartfield.
To walk by the side of this child, and talk to and question her, was the most natural thing in the world, or would have been the most natural, had she been acting just then without design; and by this means the others were still able to keep ahead, without any obligation of waiting for her.
She gained on them, however, involuntarily: the child’s pace was quick, and theirs rather slow; and she was the more concerned at it, from their being evidently in a conversation which interested them.
Elton was speaking with animation, Harriet listening with a very pleased attention; and Emma, having sent the child on, was beginning to think how she might draw back a little more, when they both looked around, and she was obliged to join them.
Elton was still talking, still engaged in some interesting detail; and Emma experienced some disappointment when she found that he was only giving his fair companion an account of the yesterday’s party at his friend Cole’s, and that she was come in herself for the Stilton cheese, the north Wiltshire, the butter, the celery, the beet-root, and all the dessert.
“This would soon have led to something better, of course,” was her consoling reflection; “any thing interests between those who love; and any thing will serve as introduction to what is near the heart.
If I could but have kept longer away!” They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage pales, when a sudden resolution, of at least getting Harriet into the house, made her again find something very much amiss about her boot, and fall behind to arrange it once more.
She then broke the lace off short, and dexterously throwing it into a ditch, was presently obliged to entreat them to stop, and acknowledged her inability to put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort.
“Part of my lace is gone,” said she, “and I do not know how I am to contrive.
I really am a most troublesome companion to you both, but I hope I am not often so ill-equipped.
Elton, I must beg leave to stop at your house, and ask your housekeeper for a bit of ribband or string, or any thing just to keep my boot on.” Mr.
Elton looked all happiness at this proposition; and nothing could exceed his alertness and attention in conducting them into his house and endeavouring to make every thing appear to advantage.
The room they were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied, and looking forwards; behind it was another with which it immediately communicated; the door between them was open, and Emma passed into it with the housekeeper to receive her assistance in the most comfortable manner.
She was obliged to leave the door ajar as she found it; but she fully intended that Mr.
It was not closed, however, it still remained ajar; but by engaging the housekeeper in incessant conversation, she hoped to make it practicable for him to chuse his own subject in the adjoining room.
It could be protracted no longer.
She was then obliged to be finished, and make her appearance.
The lovers were standing together at one of the windows.
It had a most favourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory of having schemed successfully.
He had been most agreeable, most delightful; he had told Harriet that he had seen them go by, and had purposely followed them; other little gallantries and allusions had been dropt, but nothing serious.
“Cautious, very cautious,” thought Emma; “he advances inch by inch, and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure.” Still, however, though every thing had not been accomplished by her ingenious device, she could not but flatter herself that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to both, and must be leading them forward to the great event.
It was no longer in Emma’s power to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures.
The coming of her sister’s family was so very near at hand, that first in anticipation, and then in reality, it became henceforth her prime object of interest; and during the ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to be expected—she did not herself expect—that any thing beyond occasional, fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to the lovers.
There are people, who the more you do for them, the less they will do for themselves.
John Knightley, from having been longer than usual absent from Surry, were exciting of course rather more than the usual interest.
Till this year, every long vacation since their marriage had been divided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey; but all the holidays of this autumn had been given to sea-bathing for the children, and it was therefore many months since they had been seen in a regular way by their Surry connexions, or seen at all by Mr.
Woodhouse, who could not be induced to get so far as London, even for poor Isabella’s sake; and who consequently was now most nervously and apprehensively happy in forestalling this too short visit.
He thought much of the evils of the journey for her, and not a little of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring some of the party the last half of the way; but his alarms were needless; the sixteen miles being happily accomplished, and Mr. and Mrs.
John Knightley, their five children, and a competent number of nursery-maids, all reaching Hartfield in safety.
The bustle and joy of such an arrival, the many to be talked to, welcomed, encouraged, and variously dispersed and disposed of, produced a noise and confusion which his nerves could not have borne under any other cause, nor have endured much longer even for this; but the ways of Hartfield and the feelings of her father were so respected by Mrs.
John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle, quiet manners, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate; wrapt up in her family; a devoted wife, a doating mother, and so tenderly attached to her father and sister that, but for these higher ties, a warmer love might have seemed impossible.
She was not a woman of strong understanding or any quickness; and with this resemblance of her father, she inherited also much of his constitution; was delicate in her own health, over-careful of that of her children, had many fears and many nerves, and was as fond of her own Mr.
Wingfield in town as her father could be of Mr.
They were alike too, in a general benevolence of temper, and a strong habit of regard for every old acquaintance.
John Knightley was a tall, gentleman-like, and very clever man; rising in his profession, domestic, and respectable in his private character; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing; and capable of being sometimes out of humour.
He was not an ill-tempered man, not so often unreasonably cross as to deserve such a reproach; but his temper was not his great perfection; and, indeed, with such a worshipping wife, it was hardly possible that any natural defects in it should not be increased.
The extreme sweetness of her temper must hurt his.
He had all the clearness and quickness of mind which she wanted, and he could sometimes act an ungracious, or say a severe thing.
He was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law.
She was quick in feeling the little injuries to Isabella, which Isabella never felt herself.
Perhaps she might have passed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella’s sister, but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend, without praise and without blindness; but hardly any degree of personal compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes fell into, the want of respectful forbearance towards her father.
There he had not always the patience that could have been wished.
Woodhouse’s peculiarities and fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill-bestowed.
John Knightley had really a great regard for his father-in-law, and generally a strong sense of what was due to him; but it was too often for Emma’s charity, especially as there was all the pain of apprehension frequently to be endured, though the offence came not.
The beginning, however, of every visit displayed none but the properest feelings, and this being of necessity so short might be hoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality.
They had not been long seated and composed when Mr.
Woodhouse, with a melancholy shake of the head and a sigh, called his daughter’s attention to the sad change at Hartfield since she had been there last.
“Ah, my dear,” said he, “poor Miss Taylor—It is a grievous business.” “Oh yes, sir,” cried she with ready sympathy, “how you must miss her!
And dear Emma, too!—What a dreadful loss to you both!—I have been so grieved for you.—I could not imagine how you could possibly do without her.—It is a sad change indeed.—But I hope she is pretty well, sir.” “Pretty well, my dear—I hope—pretty well.—I do not know but that the place agrees with her tolerably.” Mr.
John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any doubts of the air of Randalls.
Papa is only speaking his own regret.” “Very much to the honour of both,” was the handsome reply.
“And do you see her, sir, tolerably often?” asked Isabella in the plaintive tone which just suited her father.
Woodhouse hesitated.—“Not near so often, my dear, as I could wish.” “Oh! papa, we have missed seeing them but one entire day since they married.
Either in the morning or evening of every day, excepting one, have we seen either Mr.
Weston, and generally both, either at Randalls or here—and as you may suppose, Isabella, most frequently here.
Papa, if you speak in that melancholy way, you will be giving Isabella a false idea of us all.
Weston do really prevent our missing her by any means to the extent we ourselves anticipated—which is the exact truth.” “Just as it should be,” said Mr.
John Knightley, “and just as I hoped it was from your letters.
Her wish of shewing you attention could not be doubted, and his being a disengaged and social man makes it all easy.
I have been always telling you, my love, that I had no idea of the change being so very material to Hartfield as you apprehended; and now you have Emma’s account, I hope you will be satisfied.” “Why, to be sure,” said Mr.
Woodhouse—“yes, certainly—I cannot deny that Mrs.
Weston.” “I think, indeed,” said John Knightley pleasantly, “that Mr.
As for Isabella, she has been married long enough to see the convenience of putting all the Mr.
Westons aside as much as she can.” “Me, my love,” cried his wife, hearing and understanding only in part.— “Are you talking about me?—I am sure nobody ought to be, or can be, a greater advocate for matrimony than I am; and if it had not been for the misery of her leaving Hartfield, I should never have thought of Miss Taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world; and as to slighting Mr.
Weston, that excellent Mr.
I believe he is one of the very best-tempered men that ever existed.
Excepting yourself and your brother, I do not know his equal for temper.
“Has he been here on this occasion—or has he not?” “He has not been here yet,” replied Emma.
“There was a strong expectation of his coming soon after the marriage, but it ended in nothing; and I have not heard him mentioned lately.” “But you should tell them of the letter, my dear,” said her father.
Weston, to congratulate her, and a very proper, handsome letter it was.
However, it was an exceeding good, pretty letter, and gave Mr. and Mrs.
Weston a great deal of pleasure.
I remember it was written from Weymouth, and dated Sept. 28th—and began, ‘My dear Madam,’ but I forget how it went on; and it was signed ‘F.
Weston Churchill.’—I remember that perfectly.” “How very pleasing and proper of him!” cried the good-hearted Mrs.
There is something so shocking in a child’s being taken away from his parents and natural home!
I never could comprehend how Mr.
I really never could think well of any body who proposed such a thing to any body else.” “Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills, I fancy,” observed Mr.
John Knightley coolly.
Weston, and had half a mind to take it up; but she struggled, and let it pass.
She would keep the peace if possible; and there was something honourable and valuable in the strong domestic habits, the all-sufficiency of home to himself, whence resulted her brother’s disposition to look down on the common rate of social intercourse, and those to whom it was important.—It had a high claim to forbearance.
Knightley was to dine with them—rather against the inclination of Mr.
Woodhouse, who did not like that any one should share with him in Isabella’s first day.
Emma’s sense of right however had decided it; and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother, she had particular pleasure, from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr.
Knightley and herself, in procuring him the proper invitation.
Making-up indeed would not do. _She_ certainly had not been in the wrong, and _he_ would never own that he had.
It did assist; for though he began with grave looks and short questions, he was soon led on to talk of them all in the usual way, and to take the child out of her arms with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity.
Emma felt they were friends again; and the conviction giving her at first great satisfaction, and then a little sauciness, she could not help saying, as he was admiring the baby, “What a comfort it is, that we think alike about our nephews and nieces.
Tell your aunt, little Emma, that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing old grievances, and that if she were not wrong before, she is now.” “That’s true,” she cried—“very true.
Be infinitely cleverer and not half so conceited.
Knightley, a word or two more, and I have done.
As far as good intentions went, we were _both_ right, and I must say that no effects on my side of the argument have yet proved wrong.
Martin is not very, very bitterly disappointed.” “A man cannot be more so,” was his short, full answer.
The evening was quiet and conversable, as Mr.
Woodhouse declined cards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella, and the little party made two natural divisions; on one side he and his daughter; on the other the two Mr.
Knightleys; their subjects totally distinct, or very rarely mixing—and Emma only occasionally joining in one or the other.
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits, but principally of those of the elder, whose temper was by much the most communicative, and who was always the greater talker.
The plan of a drain, the change of a fence, the felling of a tree, and the destination of every acre for wheat, turnips, or spring corn, was entered into with as much equality of interest by John, as his cooler manners rendered possible; and if his willing brother ever left him any thing to inquire about, his inquiries even approached a tone of eagerness.
While they were thus comfortably occupied, Mr.
Woodhouse was enjoying a full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter.
“My poor dear Isabella,” said he, fondly taking her hand, and interrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one of her five children—“How long it is, how terribly long since you were here!
You must go to bed early, my dear—and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go.—You and I will have a nice basin of gruel together.
Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself;—and two basins only were ordered.
After a little more discourse in praise of gruel, with some wondering at its not being taken every evening by every body, he proceeded to say, with an air of grave reflection, “It was an awkward business, my dear, your spending the autumn at South End instead of coming here.
Wingfield most strenuously recommended it, sir—or we should not have gone.
He recommended it for all the children, but particularly for the weakness in little Bella’s throat,—both sea air and bathing.” “Ah! my dear, but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her any good; and as to myself, I have been long perfectly convinced, though perhaps I never told you so before, that the sea is very rarely of use to any body.
It makes me envious and miserable;—I who have never seen it!
South End is prohibited, if you please.
My dear Isabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr.
I suppose there is not a man in such practice anywhere.
Perry and the children, how are they? do the children grow?
He will be so pleased to see my little ones.” “I hope he will be here to-morrow, for I have a question or two to ask him about myself of some consequence.
And, my dear, whenever he comes, you had better let him look at little Bella’s throat.” “Oh! my dear sir, her throat is so much better that I have hardly any uneasiness about it.
Either bathing has been of the greatest service to her, or else it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr.
Bates—I will call upon her to-morrow, and take my children.—They are always so pleased to see my children.—And that excellent Miss Bates!—such thorough worthy people!—How are they, sir?” “Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole.
But colds were never so prevalent as they have been this autumn.
Wingfield told me that he has never known them more general or heavy—except when it has been quite an influenza.” “That has been a good deal the case, my dear; but not to the degree you mention.
Perry says that colds have been very general, but not so heavy as he has very often known them in November.
Perry does not call it altogether a sickly season.” “No, I do not know that Mr.
Wingfield considers it _very_ sickly except— “Ah! my poor dear child, the truth is, that in London it is always a sickly season.
It is a dreadful thing to have you forced to live there! so far off!—and the air so bad!” “No, indeed—_we_ are not at all in a bad air.
Our part of London is very superior to most others!—You must not confound us with London in general, my dear sir.
The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very different from almost all the rest.
I should be unwilling, I own, to live in any other part of the town;—there is hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my children in: but _we_ are so remarkably airy!—Mr.
Wingfield thinks the vicinity of Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air.” “Ah! my dear, it is not like Hartfield.
You make the best of it—but after you have been a week at Hartfield, you are all of you different creatures; you do not look like the same.
Wingfield told me, that he did not believe he had ever sent us off altogether, in such good case.
Knightley looking ill,” turning her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband.
“Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you.
John Knightley very far from looking well.” “What is the matter, sir?—Did you speak to me?” cried Mr.
John Knightley, hearing his own name.
“I am sorry to find, my love, that my father does not think you looking well—but I hope it is only from being a little fatigued.
Wingfield before you left home.” “My dear Isabella,”—exclaimed he hastily—“pray do not concern yourself about my looks.
Be satisfied with doctoring and coddling yourself and the children, and let me look as I chuse.” “I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother,” cried Emma, “about your friend Mr.
Graham’s intending to have a bailiff from Scotland, to look after his new estate.
Will not the old prejudice be too strong?” And she talked in this way so long and successfully that, when forced to give her attention again to her father and sister, she had nothing worse to hear than Isabella’s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax; and Jane Fairfax, though no great favourite with her in general, she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising.
John Knightley.—“It is so long since I have seen her, except now and then for a moment accidentally in town!
What happiness it must be to her good old grandmother and excellent aunt, when she comes to visit them!
I always regret excessively on dear Emma’s account that she cannot be more at Highbury; but now their daughter is married, I suppose Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell will not be able to part with her at all.
She would be such a delightful companion for Emma.” Mr.
Woodhouse agreed to it all, but added, “Our little friend Harriet Smith, however, is just such another pretty kind of young person.
Emma could not have a better companion than Harriet.” “I am most happy to hear it—but only Jane Fairfax one knows to be so very accomplished and superior!—and exactly Emma’s age.” This topic was discussed very happily, and others succeeded of similar moment, and passed away with similar harmony; but the evening did not close without a little return of agitation.
Often as she had wished for and ordered it, she had never been able to get any thing tolerable.
Here was a dangerous opening.
Woodhouse, shaking his head and fixing his eyes on her with tender concern.—The ejaculation in Emma’s ear expressed, “Ah! there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End.
It does not bear talking of.” And for a little while she hoped he would not talk of it, and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore him to the relish of his own smooth gruel.
After an interval of some minutes, however, he began with, “I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn, instead of coming here.” “But why should you be sorry, sir?—I assure you, it did the children a great deal of good.” “And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had better not have been to South End.
South End is an unhealthy place.
Perry was surprized to hear you had fixed upon South End.” “I know there is such an idea with many people, but indeed it is quite a mistake, sir.—We all had our health perfectly well there, never found the least inconvenience from the mud; and Mr.
Wingfield says it is entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy; and I am sure he may be depended on, for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air, and his own brother and family have been there repeatedly.” “You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you went anywhere.—Perry was a week at Cromer once, and he holds it to be the best of all the sea-bathing places.
And, by what I understand, you might have had lodgings there quite away from the sea—a quarter of a mile off—very comfortable.
It seemed to him a very ill-judged measure.” Emma’s attempts to stop her father had been vain; and when he had reached such a point as this, she could not wonder at her brother-in-law’s breaking out.
Perry,” said he, in a voice of very strong displeasure, “would do as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for.
Why does he make it any business of his, to wonder at what I do?—at my taking my family to one part of the coast or another?—I may be allowed, I hope, the use of my judgment as well as Mr.
Perry.—I want his directions no more than his drugs.” He paused—and growing cooler in a moment, added, with only sarcastic dryness, “If Mr.
Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and five children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be as willing to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself.” “True, true,” cried Mr.
Knightley, with most ready interposition—“very true.
That’s a consideration indeed.—But John, as to what I was telling you of my idea of moving the path to Langham, of turning it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadows, I cannot conceive any difficulty.
I should not attempt it, if it were to be the means of inconvenience to the Highbury people, but if you call to mind exactly the present line of the path....
Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on his friend Perry, to whom he had, in fact, though unconsciously, been attributing many of his own feelings and expressions;—but the soothing attentions of his daughters gradually removed the present evil, and the immediate alertness of one brother, and better recollections of the other, prevented any renewal of it.
CHAPTER XIII There could hardly be a happier creature in the world than Mrs.
John Knightley, in this short visit to Hartfield, going about every morning among her old acquaintance with her five children, and talking over what she had done every evening with her father and sister.
She had nothing to wish otherwise, but that the days did not pass so swiftly.
It was a delightful visit;—perfect, in being much too short.
In general their evenings were less engaged with friends than their mornings; but one complete dinner engagement, and out of the house too, there was no avoiding, though at Christmas.
Weston would take no denial; they must all dine at Randalls one day;—even Mr.
Woodhouse was persuaded to think it a possible thing in preference to a division of the party.
How they were all to be conveyed, he would have made a difficulty if he could, but as his son and daughter’s carriage and horses were actually at Hartfield, he was not able to make more than a simple question on that head; it hardly amounted to a doubt; nor did it occupy Emma long to convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room for Harriet also.
Knightley, their own especial set, were the only persons invited to meet them;—the hours were to be early, as well as the numbers few; Mr.
Woodhouse’s habits and inclination being consulted in every thing.
Woodhouse should dine out, on the 24th of December) had been spent by Harriet at Hartfield, and she had gone home so much indisposed with a cold, that, but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs.
Emma called on her the next day, and found her doom already signed with regard to Randalls.
She was very feverish and had a bad sore throat: Mrs.
Goddard was full of care and affection, Mr.
Perry was talked of, and Harriet herself was too ill and low to resist the authority which excluded her from this delightful engagement, though she could not speak of her loss without many tears.
Goddard’s unavoidable absences, and raise her spirits by representing how much Mr.
Elton’s would be depressed when he knew her state; and left her at last tolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of his having a most comfortless visit, and of their all missing her very much.
She had not advanced many yards from Mrs.
Elton himself, evidently coming towards it, and as they walked on slowly together in conversation about the invalid—of whom he, on the rumour of considerable illness, had been going to inquire, that he might carry some report of her to Hartfield—they were overtaken by Mr.
John Knightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell, with his two eldest boys, whose healthy, glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a country run, and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudding they were hastening home for.
They joined company and proceeded together.
Emma was just describing the nature of her friend’s complaint;—“a throat very much inflamed, with a great deal of heat about her, a quick, low pulse, &c. and she was sorry to find from Mrs.
Elton looked all alarm on the occasion, as he exclaimed, “A sore-throat!—I hope not infectious.
I hope not of a putrid infectious sort.
Indeed you should take care of yourself as well as of your friend.
Why does not Perry see her?” Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself, tranquillised this excess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs.
Elton, in your case, I should certainly excuse myself.
You appear to me a little hoarse already, and when you consider what demand of voice and what fatigues to-morrow will bring, I think it would be no more than common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to-night.” Mr.
“You do quite right,” said she;—“we will make your apologies to Mr. and Mrs.
Weston.” But hardly had she so spoken, when she found her brother was civilly offering a seat in his carriage, if the weather were Mr.
Elton’s only objection, and Mr.
Elton actually accepting the offer with much prompt satisfaction.
Elton was to go, and never had his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than at this moment; never had his smile been stronger, nor his eyes more exulting than when he next looked at her.
Elton; a most valuable, amiable, pleasing young man undoubtedly, and very much in love with Harriet; but still, he cannot refuse an invitation, he must dine out wherever he is asked.
What a strange thing love is! he can see ready wit in Harriet, but will not dine alone for her.” Soon afterwards Mr.
Elton quitted them, and she could not but do him the justice of feeling that there was a great deal of sentiment in his manner of naming Harriet at parting; in the tone of his voice while assuring her that he should call at Mrs.
Goddard’s for news of her fair friend, the last thing before he prepared for the happiness of meeting her again, when he hoped to be able to give a better report; and he sighed and smiled himself off in a way that left the balance of approbation much in his favour.
After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John Knightley began with— “I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr.
It is downright labour to him where ladies are concerned.
With men he can be rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies to please, every feature works.” “Mr.
Elton’s manners are not perfect,” replied Emma; “but where there is a wish to please, one ought to overlook, and one does overlook a great deal.
Where a man does his best with only moderate powers, he will have the advantage over negligent superiority.
John Knightley presently, with some slyness, “he seems to have a great deal of good-will towards you.” “Me!” she replied with a smile of astonishment, “are you imagining me to be Mr.
Elton’s object?” “Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma; and if it never occurred to you before, you may as well take it into consideration now.” “Mr.
Elton in love with me!—What an idea!” “I do not say it is so; but you will do well to consider whether it is so or not, and to regulate your behaviour accordingly.
I think your manners to him encouraging.
You had better look about you, and ascertain what you do, and what you mean to do.” “I thank you; but I assure you you are quite mistaken.
Elton and I are very good friends, and nothing more;” and she walked on, amusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a partial knowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes which people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into; and not very well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant, and in want of counsel.
The cold, however, was severe; and by the time the second carriage was in motion, a few flakes of snow were finding their way down, and the sky had the appearance of being so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very white world in a very short time.
Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour.
The preparing and the going abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice of his children after dinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least, which Mr.
John Knightley did not by any means like; he anticipated nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase; and the whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in expressing his discontent.
“A man,” said he, “must have a very good opinion of himself when he asks people to leave their own fireside, and encounter such a day as this, for the sake of coming to see him.
He must think himself a most agreeable fellow; I could not do such a thing.
It is the greatest absurdity—Actually snowing at this moment!—The folly of not allowing people to be comfortable at home—and the folly of people’s not staying comfortably at home when they can!
She could not be complying, she dreaded being quarrelsome; her heroism reached only to silence.
She allowed him to talk, and arranged the glasses, and wrapped herself up, without opening her lips.
They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let down, and Mr.
Elton, spruce, black, and smiling, was with them instantly.
Emma thought with pleasure of some change of subject.
Elton was all obligation and cheerfulness; he was so very cheerful in his civilities indeed, that she began to think he must have received a different account of Harriet from what had reached her.
She had sent while dressing, and the answer had been, “Much the same—not better.” “_My_ report from Mrs.
Goddard’s,” said she presently, “was not so pleasant as I had hoped—‘Not better’ was _my_ answer.” His face lengthened immediately; and his voice was the voice of sentiment as he answered.
Goddard’s door, which I did the very last thing before I returned to dress, I was told that Miss Smith was not better, by no means better, rather worse.
Very much grieved and concerned—I had flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial as I knew had been given her in the morning.” Emma smiled and answered—“My visit was of use to the nervous part of her complaint, I hope; but not even I can charm away a sore throat; it is a most severe cold indeed.
Perry has been with her, as you probably heard.” “Yes—I imagined—that is—I did not—” “He has been used to her in these complaints, and I hope to-morrow morning will bring us both a more comfortable report.
But it is impossible not to feel uneasiness.
Such a sad loss to our party to-day!” “Dreadful!—Exactly so, indeed.—She will be missed every moment.” This was very proper; the sigh which accompanied it was really estimable; but it should have lasted longer.
Emma was rather in dismay when only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things, and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment.
“What an excellent device,” said he, “the use of a sheepskin for carriages.
How very comfortable they make it;—impossible to feel cold with such precautions.
The contrivances of modern days indeed have rendered a gentleman’s carriage perfectly complete.
One is so fenced and guarded from the weather, that not a breath of air can find its way unpermitted.
Weather becomes absolutely of no consequence.
It is a very cold afternoon—but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter.—Ha! snows a little I see.” “Yes,” said John Knightley, “and I think we shall have a good deal of it.” “Christmas weather,” observed Mr.
“Quite seasonable; and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not begin yesterday, and prevent this day’s party, which it might very possibly have done, for Mr.
Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been much snow on the ground; but now it is of no consequence.
This is quite the season indeed for friendly meetings.
At Christmas every body invites their friends about them, and people think little of even the worst weather.
Nothing could be pleasanter.
John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure, but said only, coolly, “I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls.” At another time Emma might have been amused, but she was too much astonished now at Mr.
Elton’s spirits for other feelings.
Harriet seemed quite forgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party.
“We are sure of excellent fires,” continued he, “and every thing in the greatest comfort.
Charming people, Mr. and Mrs.
Weston indeed is much beyond praise, and he is exactly what one values, so hospitable, and so fond of society;—it will be a small party, but where small parties are select, they are perhaps the most agreeable of any.
Weston’s dining-room does not accommodate more than ten comfortably; and for my part, I would rather, under such circumstances, fall short by two than exceed by two.
I think you will agree with me, (turning with a soft air to Emma,) I think I shall certainly have your approbation, though Mr.
Knightley perhaps, from being used to the large parties of London, may not quite enter into our feelings.” “I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir—I never dine with any body.” “Indeed! (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I had no idea that the law had been so great a slavery.
Well, sir, the time must come when you will be paid for all this, when you will have little labour and great enjoyment.” “My first enjoyment,” replied John Knightley, as they passed through the sweep-gate, “will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again.” CHAPTER XIV Some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they walked into Mrs.
John Knightley disperse his ill-humour.
John Knightley more, to fit them for the place.—Emma only might be as nature prompted, and shew herself just as happy as she was.
To her it was real enjoyment to be with the Westons.
Weston was a great favourite, and there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with such unreserve, as to his wife; not any one, to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to and understood, of being always interesting and always intelligible, the little affairs, arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her father and herself.
She could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which Mrs.
Weston had not a lively concern; and half an hour’s uninterrupted communication of all those little matters on which the daily happiness of private life depends, was one of the first gratifications of each.
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day’s visit might not afford, which certainly did not belong to the present half-hour; but the very sight of Mrs.
Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice was grateful to Emma, and she determined to think as little as possible of Mr.
Elton’s oddities, or of any thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all that was enjoyable to the utmost.
The misfortune of Harriet’s cold had been pretty well gone through before her arrival.
Woodhouse had been safely seated long enough to give the history of it, besides all the history of his own and Isabella’s coming, and of Emma’s being to follow, and had indeed just got to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see his daughter, when the others appeared, and Mrs.
Weston, who had been almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to him, was able to turn away and welcome her dear Emma.
Emma’s project of forgetting Mr.
The difficulty was great of driving his strange insensibility towards Harriet, from her mind, while he not only sat at her elbow, but was continually obtruding his happy countenance on her notice, and solicitously addressing her upon every occasion.
Instead of forgetting him, his behaviour was such that she could not avoid the internal suggestion of “Can it really be as my brother imagined? can it be possible for this man to be beginning to transfer his affections from Harriet to me?—Absurd and insufferable!”—Yet he would be so anxious for her being perfectly warm, would be so interested about her father, and so delighted with Mrs.
Weston; and at last would begin admiring her drawings with so much zeal and so little knowledge as seemed terribly like a would-be lover, and made it some effort with her to preserve her good manners.
For her own sake she could not be rude; and for Harriet’s, in the hope that all would yet turn out right, she was even positively civil; but it was an effort; especially as something was going on amongst the others, in the most overpowering period of Mr.
Elton’s nonsense, which she particularly wished to listen to.
Weston was giving some information about his son; she heard the words “my son,” and “Frank,” and “my son,” repeated several times over; and, from a few other half-syllables very much suspected that he was announcing an early visit from his son; but before she could quiet Mr.
Elton, the subject was so completely past that any reviving question from her would have been awkward.
Now, it so happened that in spite of Emma’s resolution of never marrying, there was something in the name, in the idea of Mr.
Frank Churchill, which always interested her.
She had frequently thought—especially since his father’s marriage with Miss Taylor—that if she _were_ to marry, he was the very person to suit her in age, character and condition.
He seemed by this connexion between the families, quite to belong to her.
With such sensations, Mr.
Elton’s civilities were dreadfully ill-timed; but she had the comfort of appearing very polite, while feeling very cross—and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly pass without bringing forward the same information again, or the substance of it, from the open-hearted Mr.
Weston.—So it proved;—for when happily released from Mr.
Weston, at dinner, he made use of the very first interval in the cares of hospitality, the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton, to say to her, “We want only two more to be just the right number.
I should like to see two more here,—your pretty little friend, Miss Smith, and my son—and then I should say we were quite complete.
I believe you did not hear me telling the others in the drawing-room that we are expecting Frank.
I had a letter from him this morning, and he will be with us within a fortnight.” Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure; and fully assented to his proposition of Mr.
Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their party quite complete.
“He has been wanting to come to us,” continued Mr.
Weston, “ever since September: every letter has been full of it; but he cannot command his own time.
He has those to please who must be pleased, and who (between ourselves) are sometimes to be pleased only by a good many sacrifices.
But now I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week in January.” “What a very great pleasure it will be to you! and Mrs.
Weston is so anxious to be acquainted with him, that she must be almost as happy as yourself.” “Yes, she would be, but that she thinks there will be another put-off.
The case, you see, is—(but this is quite between ourselves: I did not mention a syllable of it in the other room.
There are secrets in all families, you know)—The case is, that a party of friends are invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in January; and that Frank’s coming depends upon their being put off.
But I know they will, because it is a family that a certain lady, of some consequence, at Enscombe, has a particular dislike to: and though it is thought necessary to invite them once in two or three years, they always are put off when it comes to the point.
I have not the smallest doubt of the issue.
If you think he will come, I shall think so too; for you know Enscombe.” “Yes—I have some right to that knowledge; though I have never been at the place in my life.—She is an odd woman!—But I never allow myself to speak ill of her, on Frank’s account; for I do believe her to be very fond of him.
I used to think she was not capable of being fond of any body, except herself: but she has always been kind to him (in her way—allowing for little whims and caprices, and expecting every thing to be as she likes).
And it is no small credit, in my opinion, to him, that he should excite such an affection; for, though I would not say it to any body else, she has no more heart than a stone to people in general; and the devil of a temper.” Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon it, to Mrs.
Weston, very soon after their moving into the drawing-room: wishing her joy—yet observing, that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming.— Mrs.
Weston agreed to it; but added, that she should be very glad to be secure of undergoing the anxiety of a first meeting at the time talked of: “for I cannot depend upon his coming.
I cannot be so sanguine as Mr.
Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world.” “My Emma!” replied Mrs.
Weston, smiling, “what is the certainty of caprice?” Then turning to Isabella, who had not been attending before—“You must know, my dear Mrs.
Knightley, that we are by no means so sure of seeing Mr.
Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as his father thinks.
It depends entirely upon his aunt’s spirits and pleasure; in short, upon her temper.
To you—to my two daughters—I may venture on the truth.
Churchill rules at Enscombe, and is a very odd-tempered woman; and his coming now, depends upon her being willing to spare him.” “Oh, Mrs.
Churchill; every body knows Mrs.
Churchill,” replied Isabella: “and I am sure I never think of that poor young man without the greatest compassion.
To be constantly living with an ill-tempered person, must be dreadful.
What a blessing, that she never had any children!
Poor little creatures, how unhappy she would have made them!” Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs.
Weston would speak to her, with a degree of unreserve which she would not hazard with Isabella; and, she really believed, would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from her, excepting those views on the young man, of which her own imagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge.
Woodhouse very soon followed them into the drawing-room.
To be sitting long after dinner, was a confinement that he could not endure.
Neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him; and gladly did he move to those with whom he was always comfortable.
While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity of saying, “And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means certain.
The introduction must be unpleasant, whenever it takes place; and the sooner it could be over, the better.” “Yes; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays.
Even if this family, the Braithwaites, are put off, I am still afraid that some excuse may be found for disappointing us.
I cannot bear to imagine any reluctance on his side; but I am sure there is a great wish on the Churchills’ to keep him to themselves.
In short, I can feel no dependence on his coming, and I wish Mr.
Weston were less sanguine.” “He ought to come,” said Emma.
“If he could stay only a couple of days, he ought to come; and one can hardly conceive a young man’s not having it in his power to do as much as that.
A young _woman_, if she fall into bad hands, may be teased, and kept at a distance from those she wants to be with; but one cannot comprehend a young _man_’s being under such restraint, as not to be able to spend a week with his father, if he likes it.” “One ought to be at Enscombe, and know the ways of the family, before one decides upon what he can do,” replied Mrs.
“One ought to use the same caution, perhaps, in judging of the conduct of any one individual of any one family; but Enscombe, I believe, certainly must not be judged by general rules: _she_ is so very unreasonable; and every thing gives way to her.” “But she is so fond of the nephew: he is so very great a favourite.
Now, according to my idea of Mrs.
I have no doubt of his having, at times, considerable influence; but it may be perfectly impossible for him to know beforehand _when_ it will be.” Emma listened, and then coolly said, “I shall not be satisfied, unless he comes.” “He may have a great deal of influence on some points,” continued Mrs.
Weston, “and on others, very little: and among those, on which she is beyond his reach, it is but too likely, may be this very circumstance of his coming away from them to visit us.” CHAPTER XV Mr.
Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea; and when he had drank his tea he was quite ready to go home; and it was as much as his three companions could do, to entertain away his notice of the lateness of the hour, before the other gentlemen appeared.
Weston was chatty and convivial, and no friend to early separations of any sort; but at last the drawing-room party did receive an augmentation.
Weston and Emma were sitting together on a sofa.
He joined them immediately, and, with scarcely an invitation, seated himself between them.
Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement afforded her mind by the expectation of Mr.
Frank Churchill, was willing to forget his late improprieties, and be as well satisfied with him as before, and on his making Harriet his very first subject, was ready to listen with most friendly smiles.
He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend—her fair, lovely, amiable friend.
“Did she know?—had she heard any thing about her, since their being at Randalls?—he felt much anxiety—he must confess that the nature of her complaint alarmed him considerably.” And in this style he talked on for some time very properly, not much attending to any answer, but altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad sore throat; and Emma was quite in charity with him.
But at last there seemed a perverse turn; it seemed all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account, than on Harriet’s—more anxious that she should escape the infection, than that there should be no infection in the complaint.
He began with great earnestness to entreat her to refrain from visiting the sick-chamber again, for the present—to entreat her to _promise_ _him_ not to venture into such hazard till he had seen Mr.
Perry and learnt his opinion; and though she tried to laugh it off and bring the subject back into its proper course, there was no putting an end to his extreme solicitude about her.
It did appear—there was no concealing it—exactly like the pretence of being in love with her, instead of Harriet; an inconstancy, if real, the most contemptible and abominable! and she had difficulty in behaving with temper.
Weston to implore her assistance, “Would not she give him her support?—would not she add her persuasions to his, to induce Miss Woodhouse not to go to Mrs.
Goddard’s till it were certain that Miss Smith’s disorder had no infection?
He could not be satisfied without a promise—would not she give him her influence in procuring it?” “So scrupulous for others,” he continued, “and yet so careless for herself!
She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to-day, and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sore throat herself.
Have not I some right to complain?
Weston’s surprize, and felt that it must be great, at an address which, in words and manner, was assuming to himself the right of first interest in her; and as for herself, she was too much provoked and offended to have the power of directly saying any thing to the purpose.
She could only give him a look; but it was such a look as she thought must restore him to his senses, and then left the sofa, removing to a seat by her sister, and giving her all her attention.
John Knightley now came into the room from examining the weather, and opened on them all with the information of the ground being covered with snow, and of its still snowing fast, with a strong drifting wind; concluding with these words to Mr.
Woodhouse: “This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements, sir.
Something new for your coachman and horses to be making their way through a storm of snow.” Poor Mr.
Woodhouse was silent from consternation; but every body else had something to say; every body was either surprized or not surprized, and had some question to ask, or some comfort to offer.
Weston and Emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his attention from his son-in-law, who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly.
“I admired your resolution very much, sir,” said he, “in venturing out in such weather, for of course you saw there would be snow very soon.
Another hour or two’s snow can hardly make the road impassable; and we are two carriages; if one is blown over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the other at hand.
I dare say we shall be all safe at Hartfield before midnight.” Mr.
Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was confessing that he had known it to be snowing some time, but had not said a word, lest it should make Mr.
Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for his hurrying away.
As to there being any quantity of snow fallen or likely to fall to impede their return, that was a mere joke; he was afraid they would find no difficulty.
He wished the road might be impassable, that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls; and with the utmost good-will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body, calling on his wife to agree with him, that with a little contrivance, every body might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to do, from the consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house.
Woodhouse’s first exclamation, and all that he could say for some time.
To her he looked for comfort; and her assurances of safety, her representation of the excellence of the horses, and of James, and of their having so many friends about them, revived him a little.
His eldest daughter’s alarm was equal to his own.
“You had better order the carriage directly, my love,” said she; “I dare say we shall be able to get along, if we set off directly; and if we do come to any thing very bad, I can get out and walk.
“Then, my dear Isabella, it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world, for in general every thing does give you cold.
Walk home!—you are prettily shod for walking home, I dare say.
It will be bad enough for the horses.” Isabella turned to Mrs.
Weston for her approbation of the plan.
Isabella then went to Emma; but Emma could not so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away; and they were still discussing the point, when Mr.
Knightley, who had left the room immediately after his brother’s first report of the snow, came back again, and told them that he had been out of doors to examine, and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty in their getting home, whenever they liked it, either now or an hour hence.
He had gone beyond the sweep—some way along the Highbury road—the snow was nowhere above half an inch deep—in many places hardly enough to whiten the ground; a very few flakes were falling at present, but the clouds were parting, and there was every appearance of its being soon over.
He had seen the coachmen, and they both agreed with him in there being nothing to apprehend.
To Isabella, the relief of such tidings was very great, and they were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father’s account, who was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed; but the alarm that had been raised could not be appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued at Randalls.
He was satisfied of there being no present danger in returning home, but no assurances could convince him that it was safe to stay; and while the others were variously urging and recommending, Mr.
Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief sentences: thus— “Your father will not be easy; why do not you go?” “I am ready, if the others are.” “Shall I ring the bell?” “Yes, do.” And the bell was rung, and the carriages spoken for.
A few minutes more, and Emma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his own house, to get sober and cool, and the other recover his temper and happiness when this visit of hardship were over.
The carriage came: and Mr.
Woodhouse, always the first object on such occasions, was carefully attended to his own by Mr.
Weston; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen, and the discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for.
He was afraid poor Isabella would not like it.
And there would be poor Emma in the carriage behind.
They must keep as much together as they could;” and James was talked to, and given a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage.
Isabella stept in after her father; John Knightley, forgetting that he did not belong to their party, stept in after his wife very naturally; so that Emma found, on being escorted and followed into the second carriage by Mr.
Elton, that the door was to be lawfully shut on them, and that they were to have a tête-à-tête drive.
It would not have been the awkwardness of a moment, it would have been rather a pleasure, previous to the suspicions of this very day; she could have talked to him of Harriet, and the three-quarters of a mile would have seemed but one.
But now, she would rather it had not happened.
She believed he had been drinking too much of Mr.
Weston’s good wine, and felt sure that he would want to be talking nonsense.
To restrain him as much as might be, by her own manners, she was immediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of the weather and the night; but scarcely had she begun, scarcely had they passed the sweep-gate and joined the other carriage, than she found her subject cut up—her hand seized—her attention demanded, and Mr.
Without scruple—without apology—without much apparent diffidence, Mr.
Elton, the lover of Harriet, was professing himself _her_ lover.
Angry as she was, the thought of the moment made her resolve to restrain herself when she did speak.
She felt that half this folly must be drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might belong only to the passing hour.
Accordingly, with a mixture of the serious and the playful, which she hoped would best suit his half and half state, she replied, “I am very much astonished, Mr.
This to _me_! you forget yourself—you take me for my friend—any message to Miss Smith I shall be happy to deliver; but no more of this to _me_, if you please.” “Miss Smith!—message to Miss Smith!—What could she possibly mean!”—And he repeated her words with such assurance of accent, such boastful pretence of amazement, that she could not help replying with quickness, “Mr.
Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct! and I can account for it only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speak either to me, or of Harriet, in such a manner.
Command yourself enough to say no more, and I will endeavour to forget it.” But Mr.
Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits, not at all to confuse his intellects.
He perfectly knew his own meaning; and having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious, and slightly touched upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend,—but acknowledging his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all,—he resumed the subject of his own passion, and was very urgent for a favourable answer.
As she thought less of his inebriety, she thought more of his inconstancy and presumption; and with fewer struggles for politeness, replied, “It is impossible for me to doubt any longer.
You have made yourself too clear.
Elton, my astonishment is much beyond any thing I can express.
After such behaviour, as I have witnessed during the last month, to Miss Smith—such attentions as I have been in the daily habit of observing—to be addressing me in this manner—this is an unsteadiness of character, indeed, which I had not supposed possible!
Believe me, sir, I am far, very far, from gratified in being the object of such professions.” “Good Heaven!” cried Mr.
Elton, “what can be the meaning of this?—Miss Smith!—I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole course of my existence—never paid her any attentions, but as your friend: never cared whether she were dead or alive, but as your friend.
If she has fancied otherwise, her own wishes have misled her, and I am very sorry—extremely sorry—But, Miss Smith, indeed!—Oh!
Miss Woodhouse! who can think of Miss Smith, when Miss Woodhouse is near!
No, upon my honour, there is no unsteadiness of character.
I protest against having paid the smallest attention to any one else.
Every thing that I have said or done, for many weeks past, has been with the sole view of marking my adoration of yourself.
You cannot really, seriously, doubt it.
No!—(in an accent meant to be insinuating)—I am sure you have seen and understood me.” It would be impossible to say what Emma felt, on hearing this—which of all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost.
She was too completely overpowered to be immediately able to reply: and two moments of silence being ample encouragement for Mr.
Elton’s sanguine state of mind, he tried to take her hand again, as he joyously exclaimed— “Charming Miss Woodhouse! allow me to interpret this interesting silence.
It confesses that you have long understood me.” “No, sir,” cried Emma, “it confesses no such thing.
So far from having long understood you, I have been in a most complete error with respect to your views, till this moment.
Am I to believe that you have never sought to recommend yourself particularly to Miss Smith?—that you have never thought seriously of her?” “Never, madam,” cried he, affronted in his turn: “never, I assure you. _I_ think seriously of Miss Smith!—Miss Smith is a very good sort of girl; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled.
I wish her extremely well: and, no doubt, there are men who might not object to—Every body has their level: but as for myself, I am not, I think, quite so much at a loss.
I need not so totally despair of an equal alliance, as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith!—No, madam, my visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only; and the encouragement I received—” “Encouragement!—I give you encouragement!—Sir, you have been entirely mistaken in supposing it.
In no other light could you have been more to me than a common acquaintance.
I am exceedingly sorry: but it is well that the mistake ends where it does.
Had the same behaviour continued, Miss Smith might have been led into a misconception of your views; not being aware, probably, any more than myself, of the very great inequality which you are so sensible of.
But, as it is, the disappointment is single, and, I trust, will not be lasting.
I have no thoughts of matrimony at present.” He was too angry to say another word; her manner too decided to invite supplication; and in this state of swelling resentment, and mutually deep mortification, they had to continue together a few minutes longer, for the fears of Mr.
Woodhouse had confined them to a foot-pace.
If there had not been so much anger, there would have been desperate awkwardness; but their straightforward emotions left no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment.
Without knowing when the carriage turned into Vicarage Lane, or when it stopped, they found themselves, all at once, at the door of his house; and he was out before another syllable passed.—Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good night.
The compliment was just returned, coldly and proudly; and, under indescribable irritation of spirits, she was then conveyed to Hartfield.
There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight, by her father, who had been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from Vicarage Lane—turning a corner which he could never bear to think of—and in strange hands—a mere common coachman—no James; and there it seemed as if her return only were wanted to make every thing go well: for Mr.
CHAPTER XVI The hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and Emma sat down to think and be miserable.—It was a wretched business indeed!—Such an overthrow of every thing she had been wishing for!—Such a development of every thing most unwelcome!—Such a blow for Harriet!—that was the worst of all.
Every part of it brought pain and humiliation, of some sort or other; but, compared with the evil to Harriet, all was light; and she would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistaken—more in error—more disgraced by mis-judgment, than she actually was, could the effects of her blunders have been confined to herself.
“If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man, I could have borne any thing.
He might have doubled his presumption to me—but poor Harriet!” How she could have been so deceived!—He protested that he had never thought seriously of Harriet—never!
She looked back as well as she could; but it was all confusion.
She had taken up the idea, she supposed, and made every thing bend to it.
His manners, however, must have been unmarked, wavering, dubious, or she could not have been so misled.
The picture!—How eager he had been about the picture!—and the charade!—and an hundred other circumstances;—how clearly they had seemed to point at Harriet.
Who could have seen through such thick-headed nonsense?
John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the subject, for the first start of its possibility.
There was no denying that those brothers had penetration.
She remembered what Mr.
Knightley had once said to her about Mr.
Elton, the caution he had given, the conviction he had professed that Mr.
Elton would never marry indiscreetly; and blushed to think how much truer a knowledge of his character had been there shewn than any she had reached herself.
It was dreadfully mortifying; but Mr.
Elton was proving himself, in many respects, the very reverse of what she had meant and believed him; proud, assuming, conceited; very full of his own claims, and little concerned about the feelings of others.
Contrary to the usual course of things, Mr.
Elton’s wanting to pay his addresses to her had sunk him in her opinion.
His professions and his proposals did him no service.
She thought nothing of his attachment, and was insulted by his hopes.
He wanted to marry well, and having the arrogance to raise his eyes to her, pretended to be in love; but she was perfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment that need be cared for.
There had been no real affection either in his language or manners.
Sighs and fine words had been given in abundance; but she could hardly devise any set of expressions, or fancy any tone of voice, less allied with real love.
He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself; and if Miss Woodhouse of Hartfield, the heiress of thirty thousand pounds, were not quite so easily obtained as he had fancied, he would soon try for Miss Somebody else with twenty, or with ten.
Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was her inferior in talent, and all the elegancies of mind.
The very want of such equality might prevent his perception of it; but he must know that in fortune and consequence she was greatly his superior.
He must know that the Woodhouses had been settled for several generations at Hartfield, the younger branch of a very ancient family—and that the Eltons were nobody.
Elton, in fancying himself a very decided favourite.
If _she_ had so misinterpreted his feelings, she had little right to wonder that _he_, with self-interest to blind him, should have mistaken hers.
It was foolish, it was wrong, to take so active a part in bringing any two people together.
It was adventuring too far, assuming too much, making light of what ought to be serious, a trick of what ought to be simple.
She was quite concerned and ashamed, and resolved to do such things no more.
“Here have I,” said she, “actually talked poor Harriet into being very much attached to this man.
She might never have thought of him but for me; and certainly never would have thought of him with hope, if I had not assured her of his attachment, for she is as modest and humble as I used to think him.
Oh! that I had been satisfied with persuading her not to accept young Martin.
I was introducing her into good company, and giving her the opportunity of pleasing some one worth having; I ought not to have attempted more.
To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma’s, though under temporary gloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of spirits.
The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy, and of powerful operation; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed, they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope.
Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had gone to bed, more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her, and to depend on getting tolerably out of it.
It was a great consolation that Mr.
These were very cheering thoughts; and the sight of a great deal of snow on the ground did her further service, for any thing was welcome that might justify their all three being quite asunder at present.
The weather was most favourable for her; though Christmas Day, she could not go to church.
Woodhouse would have been miserable had his daughter attempted it, and she was therefore safe from either exciting or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas.
The ground covered with snow, and the atmosphere in that unsettled state between frost and thaw, which is of all others the most unfriendly for exercise, every morning beginning in rain or snow, and every evening setting in to freeze, she was for many days a most honourable prisoner.
No intercourse with Harriet possible but by note; no church for her on Sunday any more than on Christmas Day; and no need to find excuses for Mr.
Elton’s absenting himself.
It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home; and though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some society or other, it was very pleasant to have her father so well satisfied with his being all alone in his own house, too wise to stir out; and to hear him say to Mr.
Knightley, whom no weather could keep entirely from them,— “Ah!
Knightley, why do not you stay at home like poor Mr.
Elton?” These days of confinement would have been, but for her private perplexities, remarkably comfortable, as such seclusion exactly suited her brother, whose feelings must always be of great importance to his companions; and he had, besides, so thoroughly cleared off his ill-humour at Randalls, that his amiableness never failed him during the rest of his stay at Hartfield.
He was always agreeable and obliging, and speaking pleasantly of every body.
But with all the hopes of cheerfulness, and all the present comfort of delay, there was still such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet, as made it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease.
John Knightley were not detained long at Hartfield.
The weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move; and Mr.
Woodhouse having, as usual, tried to persuade his daughter to stay behind with all her children, was obliged to see the whole party set off, and return to his lamentations over the destiny of poor Isabella;—which poor Isabella, passing her life with those she doated on, full of their merits, blind to their faults, and always innocently busy, might have been a model of right feminine happiness.
Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with Mr.
Elton’s best compliments, “that he was proposing to leave Highbury the following morning in his way to Bath; where, in compliance with the pressing entreaties of some friends, he had engaged to spend a few weeks, and very much regretted the impossibility he was under, from various circumstances of weather and business, of taking a personal leave of Mr.
Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilities he should ever retain a grateful sense—and had Mr.
Woodhouse any commands, should be happy to attend to them.” Emma was most agreeably surprized.—Mr.
She admired him for contriving it, though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which it was announced.
Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than in a civility to her father, from which she was so pointedly excluded.
She had not even a share in his opening compliments.—Her name was not mentioned;—and there was so striking a change in all this, and such an ill-judged solemnity of leave-taking in his graceful acknowledgments, as she thought, at first, could not escape her father’s suspicion.
It did, however.—Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of so sudden a journey, and his fears that Mr.
Elton might never get safely to the end of it, and saw nothing extraordinary in his language.
It was a very useful note, for it supplied them with fresh matter for thought and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening.
Woodhouse talked over his alarms, and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away with all her usual promptitude.
She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark.
She had reason to believe her nearly recovered from her cold, and it was desirable that she should have as much time as possible for getting the better of her other complaint before the gentleman’s return.
The confession completely renewed her first shame—and the sight of Harriet’s tears made her think that she should never be in charity with herself again.
Harriet bore the intelligence very well—blaming nobody—and in every thing testifying such an ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinion of herself, as must appear with particular advantage at that moment to her friend.
Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost; and all that was amiable, all that ought to be attaching, seemed on Harriet’s side, not her own.
Harriet did not consider herself as having any thing to complain of.
The affection of such a man as Mr.
Elton would have been too great a distinction.—She never could have deserved him—and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would have thought it possible.
It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded and ignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of being humble and discreet, and repressing imagination all the rest of her life.
Her second duty now, inferior only to her father’s claims, was to promote Harriet’s comfort, and endeavour to prove her own affection in some better method than by match-making.
She got her to Hartfield, and shewed her the most unvarying kindness, striving to occupy and amuse her, and by books and conversation, to drive Mr.
Elton from her thoughts.
Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thoroughly done; and she could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in general, and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr.
Elton in particular; but it seemed to her reasonable that at Harriet’s age, and with the entire extinction of all hope, such a progress might be made towards a state of composure by the time of Mr.
Elton’s return, as to allow them all to meet again in the common routine of acquaintance, without any danger of betraying sentiments or increasing them.
Harriet did think him all perfection, and maintained the non-existence of any body equal to him in person or goodness—and did, in truth, prove herself more resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen; but yet it appeared to her so natural, so inevitable to strive against an inclination of that sort _unrequited_, that she could not comprehend its continuing very long in equal force.
Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident and indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could not imagine Harriet’s persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the recollection of him.
Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place, was bad for each, for all three.
Not one of them had the power of removal, or of effecting any material change of society.
They must encounter each other, and make the best of it.
Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at Mrs.
Elton being the adoration of all the teachers and great girls in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could have any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling moderation or repellent truth.
Where the wound had been given, there must the cure be found if anywhere; and Emma felt that, till she saw her in the way of cure, there could be no true peace for herself.
Frank Churchill did not come.
When the time proposed drew near, Mrs.
Weston’s fears were justified in the arrival of a letter of excuse.
For the present, he could not be spared, to his “very great mortification and regret; but still he looked forward with the hope of coming to Randalls at no distant period.” Mrs.
Weston was exceedingly disappointed—much more disappointed, in fact, than her husband, though her dependence on seeing the young man had been so much more sober: but a sanguine temper, though for ever expecting more good than occurs, does not always pay for its hopes by any proportionate depression.
Weston was surprized and sorry; but then he began to perceive that Frank’s coming two or three months later would be a much better plan; better time of year; better weather; and that he would be able, without any doubt, to stay considerably longer with them than if he had come sooner.
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while Mrs.
Weston, of a more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition of excuses and delays; and after all her concern for what her husband was to suffer, suffered a great deal more herself.
Frank Churchill’s not coming, except as a disappointment at Randalls.
The acquaintance at present had no charm for her.
She wanted, rather, to be quiet, and out of temptation; but still, as it was desirable that she should appear, in general, like her usual self, she took care to express as much interest in the circumstance, and enter as warmly into Mr. and Mrs.
Weston’s disappointment, as might naturally belong to their friendship.
She was the first to announce it to Mr.
Knightley; and exclaimed quite as much as was necessary, (or, being acting a part, perhaps rather more,) at the conduct of the Churchills, in keeping him away.
She then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt, of the advantage of such an addition to their confined society in Surry; the pleasure of looking at somebody new; the gala-day to Highbury entire, which the sight of him would have made; and ending with reflections on the Churchills again, found herself directly involved in a disagreement with Mr.
Knightley; and, to her great amusement, perceived that she was taking the other side of the question from her real opinion, and making use of Mrs.
Weston’s arguments against herself.
“The Churchills are very likely in fault,” said Mr.
Knightley, coolly; “but I dare say he might come if he would.” “I do not know why you should say so.
He wishes exceedingly to come; but his uncle and aunt will not spare him.” “I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if he made a point of it.
It is too unlikely, for me to believe it without proof.” “How odd you are!
Frank Churchill done, to make you suppose him such an unnatural creature?” “I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting that he may have learnt to be above his connexions, and to care very little for any thing but his own pleasure, from living with those who have always set him the example of it.
It is a great deal more natural than one could wish, that a young man, brought up by those who are proud, luxurious, and selfish, should be proud, luxurious, and selfish too.
If Frank Churchill had wanted to see his father, he would have contrived it between September and January.
It is impossible.” “That’s easily said, and easily felt by you, who have always been your own master.
Knightley, of the difficulties of dependence.
You do not know what it is to have tempers to manage.” “It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four-and-twenty should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount.
We know, on the contrary, that he has so much of both, that he is glad to get rid of them at the idlest haunts in the kingdom.
We hear of him for ever at some watering-place or other.
A little while ago, he was at Weymouth.
This proves that he can leave the Churchills.” “Yes, sometimes he can.” “And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while; whenever there is any temptation of pleasure.” “It is very unfair to judge of any body’s conduct, without an intimate knowledge of their situation.
Nobody, who has not been in the interior of a family, can say what the difficulties of any individual of that family may be.
We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mrs.
Churchill’s temper, before we pretend to decide upon what her nephew can do.
He may, at times, be able to do a great deal more than he can at others.” “There is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuses, and that is, his duty; not by manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour and resolution.
It is Frank Churchill’s duty to pay this attention to his father.
He knows it to be so, by his promises and messages; but if he wished to do it, it might be done.
A man who felt rightly would say at once, simply and resolutely, to Mrs.
Churchill—‘Every sacrifice of mere pleasure you will always find me ready to make to your convenience; but I must go and see my father immediately.
I know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion.
I shall, therefore, set off to-morrow.’—If he would say so to her at once, in the tone of decision becoming a man, there would be no opposition made to his going.” “No,” said Emma, laughing; “but perhaps there might be some made to his coming back again.
Such language for a young man entirely dependent, to use!—Nobody but you, Mr.
Knightley, would imagine it possible.
But you have not an idea of what is requisite in situations directly opposite to your own.
Frank Churchill to be making such a speech as that to the uncle and aunt, who have brought him up, and are to provide for him!—Standing up in the middle of the room, I suppose, and speaking as loud as he could!—How can you imagine such conduct practicable?” “Depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would find no difficulty in it.
He would feel himself in the right; and the declaration—made, of course, as a man of sense would make it, in a proper manner—would do him more good, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the people he depended on, than all that a line of shifts and expedients can ever do.
Respect would be added to affection.
They would feel that they could trust him; that the nephew who had done rightly by his father, would do rightly by them; for they know, as well as he does, as well as all the world must know, that he ought to pay this visit to his father; and while meanly exerting their power to delay it, are in their hearts not thinking the better of him for submitting to their whims.
If he would act in this sort of manner, on principle, consistently, regularly, their little minds would bend to his.” “I rather doubt that.
You are very fond of bending little minds; but where little minds belong to rich people in authority, I think they have a knack of swelling out, till they are quite as unmanageable as great ones.
Knightley, were to be transported and placed all at once in Mr.
Frank Churchill’s situation, you would be able to say and do just what you have been recommending for him; and it might have a very good effect.
The Churchills might not have a word to say in return; but then, you would have no habits of early obedience and long observance to break through.
To him who has, it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence, and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought.
He may have as strong a sense of what would be right, as you can have, without being so equal, under particular circumstances, to act up to it.” “Then it would not be so strong a sense.
If it failed to produce equal exertion, it could not be an equal conviction.” “Oh, the difference of situation and habit!
I wish you would try to understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly opposing those, whom as child and boy he has been looking up to all his life.” “Our amiable young man is a very weak young man, if this be the first occasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against the will of others.
It ought to have been a habit with him by this time, of following his duty, instead of consulting expediency.
As he became rational, he ought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy in their authority.
Had he begun as he ought, there would have been no difficulty now.” “We shall never agree about him,” cried Emma; “but that is nothing extraordinary.
Weston would not be blind to folly, though in his own son; but he is very likely to have a more yielding, complying, mild disposition than would suit your notions of man’s perfection.
I dare say he has; and though it may cut him off from some advantages, it will secure him many others.” “Yes; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move, and of leading a life of mere idle pleasure, and fancying himself extremely expert in finding excuses for it.
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter, full of professions and falsehoods, and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father’s having any right to complain.
His letters disgust me.” “Your feelings are singular.
They hardly can satisfy a woman of her good sense and quick feelings: standing in a mother’s place, but without a mother’s affection to blind her.
It is on her account that attention to Randalls is doubly due, and she must doubly feel the omission.
Had she been a person of consequence herself, he would have come I dare say; and it would not have signified whether he did or no.
Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of considerations?
He may be very ‘amiable,’ have very good manners, and be very agreeable; but he can have no English delicacy towards the feelings of other people: nothing really amiable about him.” “You seem determined to think ill of him.” “Me!—not at all,” replied Mr.
Knightley, rather displeased; “I do not want to think ill of him.
I should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man; but I hear of none, except what are merely personal; that he is well-grown and good-looking, with smooth, plausible manners.” “Well, if he have nothing else to recommend him, he will be a treasure at Highbury.
We do not often look upon fine young men, well-bred and agreeable.
Knightley, what a _sensation_ his coming will produce?
There will be but one subject throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest—one object of curiosity; it will be all Mr.
Frank Churchill; we shall think and speak of nobody else.” “You will excuse my being so much over-powered.
If I find him conversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance; but if he is only a chattering coxcomb, he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts.” “My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation to the taste of every body, and has the power as well as the wish of being universally agreeable.
To you, he will talk of farming; to me, of drawing or music; and so on to every body, having that general information on all subjects which will enable him to follow the lead, or take the lead, just as propriety may require, and to speak extremely well on each; that is my idea of him.” “And mine,” said Mr.
Knightley warmly, “is, that if he turn out any thing like it, he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing!
What! at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company—the great man—the practised politician, who is to read every body’s character, and make every body’s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority; to be dispensing his flatteries around, that he may make all appear like fools compared with himself!
We are both prejudiced; you against, I for him; and we have no chance of agreeing till he is really here.” “Prejudiced!
I am not prejudiced.” “But I am very much, and without being at all ashamed of it.
Weston gives me a decided prejudice in his favour.” “He is a person I never think of from one month’s end to another,” said Mr.
Knightley, with a degree of vexation, which made Emma immediately talk of something else, though she could not comprehend why he should be angry.
To take a dislike to a young man, only because he appeared to be of a different disposition from himself, was unworthy the real liberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him; for with all the high opinion of himself, which she had often laid to his charge, she had never before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the merit of another.
VOLUME II CHAPTER I Emma and Harriet had been walking together one morning, and, in Emma’s opinion, had been talking enough of Mr.
She could not think that Harriet’s solace or her own sins required more; and she was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they returned;—but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded, and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter, and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive—“Mr.
Elton is so good to the poor!” she found something else must be done.
They were just approaching the house where lived Mrs. and Miss Bates.
She determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers.
There was always sufficient reason for such an attention; Mrs. and Miss Bates loved to be called on, and she knew she was considered by the very few who presumed ever to see imperfection in her, as rather negligent in that respect, and as not contributing what she ought to the stock of their scanty comforts.
Knightley and some from her own heart, as to her deficiency—but none were equal to counteract the persuasion of its being very disagreeable,—a waste of time—tiresome women—and all the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second-rate and third-rate of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever, and therefore she seldom went near them.
But now she made the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going in—observing, as she proposed it to Harriet, that, as well as she could calculate, they were just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax.
The house belonged to people in business.
Woodhouse’s health, cheerful communications about her mother’s, and sweet-cake from the beaufet—“Mrs.
Cole had just been there, just called in for ten minutes, and had been so good as to sit an hour with them, and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she liked it very much; and, therefore, she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too.” The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that of Mr.
There was intimacy between them, and Mr.
This she had been prepared for when she entered the house; but meant, having once talked him handsomely over, to be no farther incommoded by any troublesome topic, and to wander at large amongst all the Mistresses and Misses of Highbury, and their card-parties.
She had not been prepared to have Jane Fairfax succeed Mr.
Elton; but he was actually hurried off by Miss Bates, she jumped away from him at last abruptly to the Coles, to usher in a letter from her niece.
Elton, I understand—certainly as to dancing—Mrs.
Cole was so kind as to sit some time with us, talking of Jane; for as soon as she came in, she began inquiring after her, Jane is so very great a favourite there.
Whenever she is with us, Mrs.
Cole does not know how to shew her kindness enough; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any body can.
And so she began inquiring after her directly, saying, ‘I know you cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not her time for writing;’ and when I immediately said, ‘But indeed we have, we had a letter this very morning,’ I do not know that I ever saw any body more surprized.
‘Have you, upon your honour?’ said she; ‘well, that is quite unexpected.
Do let me hear what she says.’” Emma’s politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest— “Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately?
I am extremely happy.
You are so kind!” replied the happily deceived aunt, while eagerly hunting for the letter.—“Oh! here it is.
She often says, when the letter is first opened, ‘Well, Hetty, now I think you will be put to it to make out all that checker-work’—don’t you, ma’am?—And then I tell her, I am sure she would contrive to make it out herself, if she had nobody to do it for her—every word of it—I am sure she would pore over it till she had made out every word.
And, indeed, though my mother’s eyes are not so good as they were, she can see amazingly well still, thank God! with the help of spectacles.
It is such a blessing!
Jane often says, when she is here, ‘I am sure, grandmama, you must have had very strong eyes to see as you do—and so much fine work as you have done too!—I only wish my eyes may last me as well.’” All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath; and Emma said something very civil about the excellence of Miss Fairfax’s handwriting.
“You are extremely kind,” replied Miss Bates, highly gratified; “you who are such a judge, and write so beautifully yourself.
I am sure there is nobody’s praise that could give us so much pleasure as Miss Woodhouse’s.
Ma’am,” addressing her, “do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging to say about Jane’s handwriting?” And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeated twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it.
She was pondering, in the meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming very rude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax’s letter, and had almost resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse, when Miss Bates turned to her again and seized her attention.
“My mother’s deafness is very trifling you see—just nothing at all.
But it is very remarkable that she should always hear Jane better than she does me.
Jane speaks so distinct!
However, she will not find her grandmama at all deafer than she was two years ago; which is saying a great deal at my mother’s time of life—and it really is full two years, you know, since she was here.
Cole, we shall hardly know how to make enough of her now.” “Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon?” “Oh yes; next week.” “Indeed!—that must be a very great pleasure.” “Thank you.
Every body is so surprized; and every body says the same obliging things.
I am sure she will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury, as they can be to see her.
Yes, Friday or Saturday; she cannot say which, because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days.
Oh yes, Friday or Saturday next.
That is the reason of her writing out of rule, as we call it; for, in the common course, we should not have heard from her before next Tuesday or Wednesday.” “Yes, so I imagined.
I was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to-day.” “So obliging of you!
No, we should not have heard, if it had not been for this particular circumstance, of her being to come here so soon.
My mother is so delighted!—for she is to be three months with us at least.
Three months, she says so, positively, as I am going to have the pleasure of reading to you.
The case is, you see, that the Campbells are going to Ireland.
Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to come over and see her directly.
Dixon’s name as well as her own, to press their coming over directly, and they would give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back to their country seat, Baly-craig, a beautiful place, I fancy.
Dixon, I mean—I do not know that she ever heard about it from any body else; but it was very natural, you know, that he should like to speak of his own place while he was paying his addresses—and as Jane used to be very often walking out with them—for Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell were very particular about their daughter’s not walking out often with only Mr.
Dixon, for which I do not at all blame them; of course she heard every thing he might be telling Miss Campbell about his own home in Ireland; and I think she wrote us word that he had shewn them some drawings of the place, views that he had taken himself.
He is a most amiable, charming young man, I believe.
Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland, from his account of things.” At this moment, an ingenious and animating suspicion entering Emma’s brain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr.
Dixon, and the not going to Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of farther discovery, “You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed to come to you at such a time.
Considering the very particular friendship between her and Mrs.
Dixon, you could hardly have expected her to be excused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell.” “Very true, very true, indeed.
The very thing that we have always been rather afraid of; for we should not have liked to have her at such a distance from us, for months together—not able to come if any thing was to happen.
Dixon) excessively to come over with Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell; quite depend upon it; nothing can be more kind or pressing than their _joint_ invitation, Jane says, as you will hear presently; Mr.
Dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention.
He is a most charming young man.
Dixon!” “But, in spite of all her friends’ urgency, and her own wish of seeing Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefers devoting the time to you and Mrs.
Bates?” “Yes—entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice; and Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell think she does quite right, just what they should recommend; and indeed they particularly _wish_ her to try her native air, as she has not been quite so well as usual lately.” “I am concerned to hear of it.
Dixon must be very much disappointed.
Dixon, I understand, has no remarkable degree of personal beauty; is not, by any means, to be compared with Miss Fairfax.” “Oh! no.
You are very obliging to say such things—but certainly not.
There is no comparison between them.
Miss Campbell always was absolutely plain—but extremely elegant and amiable.” “Yes, that of course.” “Jane caught a bad cold, poor thing! so long ago as the 7th of November, (as I am going to read to you,) and has never been well since.
She never mentioned it before, because she would not alarm us.
Just like her! so considerate!—But however, she is so far from well, that her kind friends the Campbells think she had better come home, and try an air that always agrees with her; and they have no doubt that three or four months at Highbury will entirely cure her—and it is certainly a great deal better that she should come here, than go to Ireland, if she is unwell.
Nobody could nurse her, as we should do.” “It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world.” “And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday, and the Campbells leave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following—as you will find from Jane’s letter.
So sudden!—You may guess, dear Miss Woodhouse, what a flurry it has thrown me in!
If it was not for the drawback of her illness—but I am afraid we must expect to see her grown thin, and looking very poorly.
I must tell you what an unlucky thing happened to me, as to that.
I always make a point of reading Jane’s letters through to myself first, before I read them aloud to my mother, you know, for fear of there being any thing in them to distress her.
Jane desired me to do it, so I always do: and so I began to-day with my usual caution; but no sooner did I come to the mention of her being unwell, than I burst out, quite frightened, with ‘Bless me! poor Jane is ill!’—which my mother, being on the watch, heard distinctly, and was sadly alarmed at.
The expense shall not be thought of; and though he is so liberal, and so fond of Jane that I dare say he would not mean to charge any thing for attendance, we could not suffer it to be so, you know.
He has a wife and family to maintain, and is not to be giving away his time.
Well, now I have just given you a hint of what Jane writes about, we will turn to her letter, and I am sure she tells her own story a great deal better than I can tell it for her.” “I am afraid we must be running away,” said Emma, glancing at Harriet, and beginning to rise—“My father will be expecting us.
I had no intention, I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes, when I first entered the house.
I merely called, because I would not pass the door without inquiring after Mrs.
Bates; but I have been so pleasantly detained!
Bates good morning.” And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded.
She regained the street—happy in this, that though much had been forced on her against her will, though she had in fact heard the whole substance of Jane Fairfax’s letter, she had been able to escape the letter itself.
Bates’s youngest daughter.
The marriage of Lieut.
Fairfax of the ——regiment of infantry, and Miss Jane Bates, had had its day of fame and pleasure, hope and interest; but nothing now remained of it, save the melancholy remembrance of him dying in action abroad—of his widow sinking under consumption and grief soon afterwards—and this girl.
But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave a change to her destiny.
This was Colonel Campbell, who had very highly regarded Fairfax, as an excellent officer and most deserving young man; and farther, had been indebted to him for such attentions, during a severe camp-fever, as he believed had saved his life.
These were claims which he did not learn to overlook, though some years passed away from the death of poor Fairfax, before his own return to England put any thing in his power.
He was a married man, with only one living child, a girl, about Jane’s age: and Jane became their guest, paying them long visits and growing a favourite with all; and before she was nine years old, his daughter’s great fondness for her, and his own wish of being a real friend, united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertaking the whole charge of her education.
It was accepted; and from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel Campbell’s family, and had lived with them entirely, only visiting her grandmother from time to time.
The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others; the very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father making independence impossible.
To provide for her otherwise was out of Colonel Campbell’s power; for though his income, by pay and appointments, was handsome, his fortune was moderate and must be all his daughter’s; but, by giving her an education, he hoped to be supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter.
She had fallen into good hands, known nothing but kindness from the Campbells, and been given an excellent education.
Living constantly with right-minded and well-informed people, her heart and understanding had received every advantage of discipline and culture; and Colonel Campbell’s residence being in London, every lighter talent had been done full justice to, by the attendance of first-rate masters.
Her disposition and abilities were equally worthy of all that friendship could do; and at eighteen or nineteen she was, as far as such an early age can be qualified for the care of children, fully competent to the office of instruction herself; but she was too much beloved to be parted with.
Neither father nor mother could promote, and the daughter could not endure it.
It was easy to decide that she was still too young; and Jane remained with them, sharing, as another daughter, in all the rational pleasures of an elegant society, and a judicious mixture of home and amusement, with only the drawback of the future, the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to remind her that all this might soon be over.
The affection of the whole family, the warm attachment of Miss Campbell in particular, was the more honourable to each party from the circumstance of Jane’s decided superiority both in beauty and acquirements.
They continued together with unabated regard however, till the marriage of Miss Campbell, who by that chance, that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs, giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superior, engaged the affections of Mr.
Dixon, a young man, rich and agreeable, almost as soon as they were acquainted; and was eligibly and happily settled, while Jane Fairfax had yet her bread to earn.
This event had very lately taken place; too lately for any thing to be yet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her path of duty; though she had now reached the age which her own judgment had fixed on for beginning.
She had long resolved that one-and-twenty should be the period.
With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate, she had resolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and retire from all the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse, equal society, peace and hope, to penance and mortification for ever.
Campbell could not oppose such a resolution, though their feelings did.
As long as they lived, no exertions would be necessary, their home might be hers for ever; and for their own comfort they would have retained her wholly; but this would be selfishness:—what must be at last, had better be soon.
Perhaps they began to feel it might have been kinder and wiser to have resisted the temptation of any delay, and spared her from a taste of such enjoyments of ease and leisure as must now be relinquished.
Still, however, affection was glad to catch at any reasonable excuse for not hurrying on the wretched moment.
With regard to her not accompanying them to Ireland, her account to her aunt contained nothing but truth, though there might be some truths not told.
Certain it was that she was to come; and that Highbury, instead of welcoming that perfect novelty which had been so long promised it—Mr.
Frank Churchill—must put up for the present with Jane Fairfax, who could bring only the freshness of a two years’ absence.
Emma was sorry;—to have to pay civilities to a person she did not like through three long months!—to be always doing more than she wished, and less than she ought!
Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a difficult question to answer; Mr.
Knightley had once told her it was because she saw in her the really accomplished young woman, which she wanted to be thought herself; and though the accusation had been eagerly refuted at the time, there were moments of self-examination in which her conscience could not quite acquit her.
Jane Fairfax was very elegant, remarkably elegant; and she had herself the highest value for elegance.
Her height was pretty, just such as almost every body would think tall, and nobody could think very tall; her figure particularly graceful; her size a most becoming medium, between fat and thin, though a slight appearance of ill-health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two.
Emma could not but feel all this; and then, her face—her features—there was more beauty in them altogether than she had remembered; it was not regular, but it was very pleasing beauty.
Her eyes, a deep grey, with dark eye-lashes and eyebrows, had never been denied their praise; but the skin, which she had been used to cavil at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy which really needed no fuller bloom.
It was a style of beauty, of which elegance was the reigning character, and as such, she must, in honour, by all her principles, admire it:—elegance, which, whether of person or of mind, she saw so little in Highbury.
There, not to be vulgar, was distinction, and merit.
In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane Fairfax with twofold complacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice, and was determining that she would dislike her no longer.
Dixon, which she had so naturally started to herself.
In that case, nothing could be more pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on.
Dixon’s affections from his wife, or of any thing mischievous which her imagination had suggested at first.
If it were love, it might be simple, single, successless love on her side alone.
She might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poison, while a sharer of his conversation with her friend; and from the best, the purest of motives, might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland, and resolving to divide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty.
Upon the whole, Emma left her with such softened, charitable feelings, as made her look around in walking home, and lament that Highbury afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence; nobody that she could wish to scheme about for her.
These were charming feelings—but not lasting.
Before she had committed herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for Jane Fairfax, or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices and errors, than saying to Mr.
Knightley, “She certainly is handsome; she is better than handsome!” Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield with her grandmother and aunt, and every thing was relapsing much into its usual state.
Former provocations reappeared.
The aunt was as tiresome as ever; more tiresome, because anxiety for her health was now added to admiration of her powers; and they had to listen to the description of exactly how little bread and butter she ate for breakfast, and how small a slice of mutton for dinner, as well as to see exhibitions of new caps and new workbags for her mother and herself; and Jane’s offences rose again.
They had music; Emma was obliged to play; and the thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an affectation of candour, an air of greatness, meaning only to shew off in higher style her own very superior performance.
She was, besides, which was the worst of all, so cold, so cautious!
Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness, she seemed determined to hazard nothing.
She was disgustingly, was suspiciously reserved.
If any thing could be more, where all was most, she was more reserved on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing.
Dixon’s character, or her own value for his company, or opinion of the suitableness of the match.
It was all general approbation and smoothness; nothing delineated or distinguished.
Emma saw its artifice, and returned to her first surmises.
There probably _was_ something more to conceal than her own preference; Mr.
Dixon, perhaps, had been very near changing one friend for the other, or been fixed only to Miss Campbell, for the sake of the future twelve thousand pounds.
The like reserve prevailed on other topics.
Frank Churchill had been at Weymouth at the same time.
It was known that they were a little acquainted; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what he truly was.
“Was he handsome?”—“She believed he was reckoned a very fine young man.” “Was he agreeable?”—“He was generally thought so.” “Did he appear a sensible young man; a young man of information?”—“At a watering-place, or in a common London acquaintance, it was difficult to decide on such points.
Manners were all that could be safely judged of, under a much longer knowledge than they had yet had of Mr.
She believed every body found his manners pleasing.” Emma could not forgive her.
CHAPTER III Emma could not forgive her;—but as neither provocation nor resentment were discerned by Mr.
Knightley, who had been of the party, and had seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side, he was expressing the next morning, being at Hartfield again on business with Mr.
Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so openly as he might have done had her father been out of the room, but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma.
He had been used to think her unjust to Jane, and had now great pleasure in marking an improvement.
“A very pleasant evening,” he began, as soon as Mr.
Woodhouse had been talked into what was necessary, told that he understood, and the papers swept away;—“particularly pleasant.
I do not know a more luxurious state, sir, than sitting at one’s ease to be entertained a whole evening by two such young women; sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation.
I am sure Miss Fairfax must have found the evening pleasant, Emma.
I was glad you made her play so much, for having no instrument at her grandmother’s, it must have been a real indulgence.” “I am happy you approved,” said Emma, smiling; “but I hope I am not often deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield.” “No, my dear,” said her father instantly; “_that_ I am sure you are not.
There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are.
If any thing, you are too attentive.
Knightley, nearly at the same time; “you are not often deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension.
I think you understand me, therefore.” An arch look expressed—“I understand you well enough;” but she said only, “Miss Fairfax is reserved.” “I always told you she was—a little; but you will soon overcome all that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that has its foundation in diffidence.
What arises from discretion must be honoured.” “You think her diffident.
I do not see it.” “My dear Emma,” said he, moving from his chair into one close by her, “you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you had not a pleasant evening.” “Oh! no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions; and amused to think how little information I obtained.” “I am disappointed,” was his only answer.
“I hope every body had a pleasant evening,” said Mr.
Woodhouse, in his quiet way.
Miss Bates was very chatty and good-humoured, as she always is, though she speaks rather too quick.
However, she is very agreeable, and Mrs.
Bates too, in a different way.
She must have found the evening agreeable, Mr.
Knightley, because she had Emma.” “True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax.” Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for the present, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question— “She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one’s eyes from.
I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from my heart.” Mr.
Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared to express; and before he could make any reply, Mr.
There will be the leg to be salted, you know, which is so very nice, and the loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like.” “That’s right, my dear, very right.
They must not over-salt the leg; and then, if it is not over-salted, and if it is very thoroughly boiled, just as Serle boils ours, and eaten very moderately of, with a boiled turnip, and a little carrot or parsnip, I do not consider it unwholesome.” “Emma,” said Mr.
Knightley presently, “I have a piece of news for you.
You like news—and I heard an article in my way hither that I think will interest you.” “News!
What is it?—why do you smile so?—where did you hear it?—at Randalls?” He had time only to say, “No, not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls,” when the door was thrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room.
Full of thanks, and full of news, Miss Bates knew not which to give quickest.
Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment, and that not another syllable of communication could rest with him.
My dear Miss Woodhouse—I come quite over-powered.
Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork!
You are too bountiful!
Elton, and she was so completely surprized that she could not avoid a little start, and a little blush, at the sound.
“There is my news:—I thought it would interest you,” said Mr.
Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction of some part of what had passed between them.
“Where could you possibly hear it, Mr.
For it is not five minutes since I received Mrs.
Cole’s note—no, it cannot be more than five—or at least ten—for I had got my bonnet and spencer on, just ready to come out—I was only gone down to speak to Patty again about the pork—Jane was standing in the passage—were not you, Jane?—for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting-pan large enough.
Knightley, how could you possibly have heard it? for the very moment Mr.
Cole on business an hour and a half ago.
He had just read Elton’s letter as I was shewn in, and handed it to me directly.” “Well! that is quite—I suppose there never was a piece of news more generally interesting.
My dear sir, you really are too bountiful.
My mother desires her very best compliments and regards, and a thousand thanks, and says you really quite oppress her.” “We consider our Hartfield pork,” replied Mr.
Woodhouse—“indeed it certainly is, so very superior to all other pork, that Emma and I cannot have a greater pleasure than—” “Oh! my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends are only too good to us.
If ever there were people who, without having great wealth themselves, had every thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us.
We may well say that ‘our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.’ Well, Mr.
Knightley, and so you actually saw the letter; well—” “It was short—merely to announce—but cheerful, exulting, of course.”— Here was a sly glance at Emma.
“He had been so fortunate as to—I forget the precise words—one has no business to remember them.
The information was, as you state, that he was going to be married to a Miss Hawkins.
“He will have every body’s wishes for his happiness.” “He is very young to settle,” was Mr.
Woodhouse’s observation.
We were always glad to see him at Hartfield.” “A new neighbour for us all, Miss Woodhouse!” said Miss Bates, joyfully; “my mother is so pleased!—she says she cannot bear to have the poor old Vicarage without a mistress.
Elton!—no wonder that you have such a curiosity to see him.” Jane’s curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly to occupy her.
Elton,” she replied, starting on this appeal; “is he—is he a tall man?” “Who shall answer that question?” cried Emma.
Knightley ‘no;’ and Miss Bates and I that he is just the happy medium.
When you have been here a little longer, Miss Fairfax, you will understand that Mr.
Elton is the standard of perfection in Highbury, both in person and mind.” “Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will.
He is the very best young man—But, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told you yesterday he was precisely the height of Mr.
Miss Hawkins,—I dare say, an excellent young woman.
His extreme attention to my mother—wanting her to sit in the vicarage pew, that she might hear the better, for my mother is a little deaf, you know—it is not much, but she does not hear quite quick.
Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a little deaf.
Colonel Campbell, you know, is quite our angel.
Dixon seems a very charming young man, quite worthy of him.
It is such a happiness when good people get together—and they always do.
Woodhouse, “I think there are few places with such society as Highbury.
I always say, we are quite blessed in our neighbours.—My dear sir, if there is one thing my mother loves better than another, it is pork—a roast loin of pork—” “As to who, or what Miss Hawkins is, or how long he has been acquainted with her,” said Emma, “nothing I suppose can be known.
One feels that it cannot be a very long acquaintance.
He has been gone only four weeks.” Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings, Emma said, “You are silent, Miss Fairfax—but I hope you mean to take an interest in this news.
You, who have been hearing and seeing so much of late on these subjects, who must have been so deep in the business on Miss Campbell’s account—we shall not excuse your being indifferent about Mr.
Elton,” replied Jane, “I dare say I shall be interested—but I believe it requires _that_ with me.
And as it is some months since Miss Campbell married, the impression may be a little worn off.” “Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, Miss Woodhouse,” said Miss Bates, “four weeks yesterday.—A Miss Hawkins!—Well, I had always rather fancied it would be some young lady hereabouts; not that I ever—Mrs.
Cole once whispered to me—but I immediately said, ‘No, Mr.
Elton is a most worthy young man—but’—In short, I do not think I am particularly quick at those sort of discoveries.
Elton should have aspired—Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly.
She seems quite recovered now.
John Knightley lately?
Oh! those dear little children.
I mean in person—tall, and with that sort of look—and not very talkative.” “Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all.” “Very odd! but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand.
Dixon, you say, is not, strictly speaking, handsome?” “Handsome!
Oh! no—far from it—certainly plain.
I told you he was plain.” “My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain, and that you yourself—” “Oh! as for me, my judgment is worth nothing.
But I gave what I believed the general opinion, when I called him plain.” “Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away.
The weather does not look well, and grandmama will be uneasy.
You are too obliging, my dear Miss Woodhouse; but we really must take leave.
This has been a most agreeable piece of news indeed.
Cole’s; but I shall not stop three minutes: and, Jane, you had better go home directly—I would not have you out in a shower!—We think she is the better for Highbury already.
Knightley is coming too.
Elton, and Miss Hawkins!—Good morning to you.” Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him while he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry—and to marry strangers too—and the other half she could give to her own view of the subject.
Elton could not have suffered long; but she was sorry for Harriet: Harriet must feel it—and all that she could hope was, by giving the first information herself, to save her from hearing it abruptly from others.
If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way!—and upon its beginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be detaining her at Mrs.
Goddard’s, and that the intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon her without preparation.
The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes, when in came Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give; and the “Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, what do you think has happened!” which instantly burst forth, had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation.
As the blow was given, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly through what she had to tell.
I was sitting near the door—Elizabeth saw me directly; but he did not; he was busy with the umbrella.
I am sure she saw me, but she looked away directly, and took no notice; and they both went to quite the farther end of the shop; and I kept sitting near the door!—Oh! dear; I was so miserable!
I could not go away you know, because of the rain; but I did so wish myself anywhere in the world but there.—Oh! dear, Miss Woodhouse—well, at last, I fancy, he looked round and saw me; for instead of going on with her buyings, they began whispering to one another.
I am sure they were talking of me; and I could not help thinking that he was persuading her to speak to me—(do you think he was, Miss Woodhouse?)—for presently she came forward—came quite up to me, and asked me how I did, and seemed ready to shake hands, if I would.
She did not do any of it in the same way that she used; I could see she was altered; but, however, she seemed to _try_ to be very friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time; but I know no more what I said—I was in such a tremble!—I remember she said she was sorry we never met now; which I thought almost too kind!
Dear, Miss Woodhouse, I was absolutely miserable!
So I said, I was very much obliged to him: you know I could not do less; and then he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round by the stables—I believe I did—but I hardly knew where I was, or any thing about it.
Miss Woodhouse, I would rather done any thing than have it happen: and yet, you know, there was a sort of satisfaction in seeing him behave so pleasantly and so kindly.
Miss Woodhouse, do talk to me and make me comfortable again.” Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in her power.
She was not thoroughly comfortable herself.
As Harriet described it, there had been an interesting mixture of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour.
But she had believed them to be well-meaning, worthy people before; and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion?
It was folly to be disturbed by it.
Ambition, as well as love, had probably been mortified.
They might all have hoped to rise by Harriet’s acquaintance: and besides, what was the value of Harriet’s description?—So easily pleased—so little discerning;—what signified her praise?
Elton’s importance with her!
Elton’s rights, however, gradually revived.
Though she did not feel the first intelligence as she might have done the day before, or an hour before, its interest soon increased; and before their first conversation was over, she had talked herself into all the sensations of curiosity, wonder and regret, pain and pleasure, as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins, which could conduce to place the Martins under proper subordination in her fancy.
It had been serviceable in deadening the first shock, without retaining any influence to alarm.
As Harriet now lived, the Martins could not get at her, without seeking her, where hitherto they had wanted either the courage or the condescension to seek her; for since her refusal of the brother, the sisters never had been at Mrs.
Goddard’s; and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again, with any necessity, or even any power of speech.
CHAPTER IV Human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interesting situations, that a young person, who either marries or dies, is sure of being kindly spoken of.
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins’s name was first mentioned in Highbury, before she was, by some means or other, discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind; to be handsome, elegant, highly accomplished, and perfectly amiable: and when Mr.
Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects, and circulate the fame of her merits, there was very little more for him to do, than to tell her Christian name, and say whose music she principally played.
Elton returned, a very happy man.
He had gone away rejected and mortified—disappointed in a very sanguine hope, after a series of what appeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing the right lady, but finding himself debased to the level of a very wrong one.
He had gone away deeply offended—he came back engaged to another—and to another as superior, of course, to the first, as under such circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost.
He came back gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring nothing for Miss Woodhouse, and defying Miss Smith.
Cole of the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious—the steps so quick, from the accidental rencontre, to the dinner at Mr.
Brown’s—smiles and blushes rising in importance—with consciousness and agitation richly scattered—the lady had been so easily impressed—so sweetly disposed—had in short, to use a most intelligible phrase, been so very ready to have him, that vanity and prudence were equally contented.
He had caught both substance and shadow—both fortune and affection, and was just the happy man he ought to be; talking only of himself and his own concerns—expecting to be congratulated—ready to be laughed at—and, with cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing all the young ladies of the place, to whom, a few weeks ago, he would have been more cautiously gallant.
The wedding was no distant event, as the parties had only themselves to please, and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for; and when he set out for Bath again, there was a general expectation, which a certain glance of Mrs.
Cole’s did not seem to contradict, that when he next entered Highbury he would bring his bride.
During his present short stay, Emma had barely seen him; but just enough to feel that the first meeting was over, and to give her the impression of his not being improved by the mixture of pique and pretension, now spread over his air.
She was, in fact, beginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasing at all; and his sight was so inseparably connected with some very disagreeable feelings, that, except in a moral light, as a penance, a lesson, a source of profitable humiliation to her own mind, she would have been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again.
She wished him very well; but he gave her pain, and his welfare twenty miles off would administer most satisfaction.
The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, must certainly be lessened by his marriage.
Many vain solicitudes would be prevented—many awkwardnesses smoothed by it.
A _Mrs._ _Elton_ would be an excuse for any change of intercourse; former intimacy might sink without remark.
It would be almost beginning their life of civility again.
Of the lady, individually, Emma thought very little.
Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for Highbury—handsome enough—to look plain, probably, by Harriet’s side.
As to connexion, there Emma was perfectly easy; persuaded, that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet, he had done nothing.
On that article, truth seemed attainable. _What_ she was, must be uncertain; but _who_ she was, might be found out; and setting aside the 10,000 l., it did not appear that she was at all Harriet’s superior.
She brought no name, no blood, no alliance.
Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol—merchant, of course, he must be called; but, as the whole of the profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate, it was not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been very moderate also.
Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath; but Bristol was her home, the very heart of Bristol; for though the father and mother had died some years ago, an uncle remained—in the law line—nothing more distinctly honourable was hazarded of him, than that he was in the law line; and with him the daughter had lived.
Emma guessed him to be the drudge of some attorney, and too stupid to rise.
And all the grandeur of the connexion seemed dependent on the elder sister, who was _very_ _well_ _married_, to a gentleman in a _great_ _way_, near Bristol, who kept two carriages!
Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all!
The charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies of Harriet’s mind was not to be talked away.
He might be superseded by another; he certainly would indeed; nothing could be clearer; even a Robert Martin would have been sufficient; but nothing else, she feared, would cure her.
And now, poor girl! she was considerably worse from this reappearance of Mr.
She was always having a glimpse of him somewhere or other.
Emma saw him only once; but two or three times every day Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him, or _just_ to miss him, _just_ to hear his voice, or see his shoulder, _just_ to have something occur to preserve him in her fancy, in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture.
She was, moreover, perpetually hearing about him; for, excepting when at Hartfield, she was always among those who saw no fault in Mr.
Elton, and found nothing so interesting as the discussion of his concerns; and every report, therefore, every guess—all that had already occurred, all that might occur in the arrangement of his affairs, comprehending income, servants, and furniture, was continually in agitation around her.
Her regard was receiving strength by invariable praise of him, and her regrets kept alive, and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions of Miss Hawkins’s happiness, and continual observation of, how much he seemed attached!—his air as he walked by the house—the very sitting of his hat, being all in proof of how much he was in love!
Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no pain to her friend, or reproach to herself, in the waverings of Harriet’s mind, Emma would have been amused by its variations.
Elton predominated, sometimes the Martins; and each was occasionally useful as a check to the other.
Elton’s engagement had been the cure of the agitation of meeting Mr.
Goddard’s a few days afterwards.
Harriet had not been at home; but a note had been prepared and left for her, written in the very style to touch; a small mixture of reproach, with a great deal of kindness; and till Mr.
Elton himself appeared, she had been much occupied by it, continually pondering over what could be done in return, and wishing to do more than she dared to confess.
While he staid, the Martins were forgotten; and on the very morning of his setting off for Bath again, Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned, judged it best for her to return Elizabeth Martin’s visit.
How that visit was to be acknowledged—what would be necessary—and what might be safest, had been a point of some doubtful consideration.
Absolute neglect of the mother and sisters, when invited to come, would be ingratitude.
It must not be: and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance—!
After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, than Harriet’s returning the visit; but in a way that, if they had understanding, should convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance.
She meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at the Abbey Mill, while she drove a little farther, and call for her again so soon, as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrences to the past, and give the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy was chosen for the future.
She could think of nothing better: and though there was something in it which her own heart could not approve—something of ingratitude, merely glossed over—it must be done, or what would become of Harriet?
CHAPTER V Small heart had Harriet for visiting.
Goddard’s, her evil stars had led her to the very spot where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to _The Rev.
Philip Elton, White-Hart, Bath_, was to be seen under the operation of being lifted into the butcher’s cart, which was to convey it to where the coaches past; and every thing in this world, excepting that trunk and the direction, was consequently a blank.
The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again; and Miss Smith receiving her summons, was with her without delay, and unattended by any alarming young man.
She came solitarily down the gravel walk—a Miss Martin just appearing at the door, and parting with her seemingly with ceremonious civility.
Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account.
She was feeling too much; but at last Emma collected from her enough to understand the sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it was creating.
They had received her doubtingly, if not coolly; and nothing beyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time—till just at last, when Mrs.
Martin’s saying, all of a sudden, that she thought Miss Smith was grown, had brought on a more interesting subject, and a warmer manner.
In that very room she had been measured last September, with her two friends.
There were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot by the window. _He_ had done it.
They all seemed to remember the day, the hour, the party, the occasion—to feel the same consciousness, the same regrets—to be ready to return to the same good understanding; and they were just growing again like themselves, (Harriet, as Emma must suspect, as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy,) when the carriage reappeared, and all was over.
The style of the visit, and the shortness of it, were then felt to be decisive.
Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six months ago!—Emma could not but picture it all, and feel how justly they might resent, how naturally Harriet must suffer.
It was a bad business.
They were so deserving, that a _little_ higher should have been enough: but as it was, how could she have done otherwise?—Impossible!—She could not repent.
They must be separated; but there was a great deal of pain in the process—so much to herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity of a little consolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls to procure it.
The refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary.
It was a good scheme; but on driving to the door they heard that neither “master nor mistress was at home;” they had both been out some time; the man believed they were gone to Hartfield.
“And now we shall just miss them; too provoking!—I do not know when I have been so disappointed.” And she leaned back in the corner, to indulge her murmurs, or to reason them away; probably a little of both—such being the commonest process of a not ill-disposed mind.
Presently the carriage stopt; she looked up; it was stopt by Mr. and Mrs.
Weston, who were standing to speak to her.
There was instant pleasure in the sight of them, and still greater pleasure was conveyed in sound—for Mr.
Weston immediately accosted her with, “How d’ye do?—how d’ye do?—We have been sitting with your father—glad to see him so well.
Frank comes to-morrow—I had a letter this morning—we see him to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty—he is at Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; I knew it would be so.
If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days; I was always glad he did not come at Christmas; now we are going to have just the right weather for him, fine, dry, settled weather.
We shall enjoy him completely; every thing has turned out exactly as we could wish.” There was no resisting such news, no possibility of avoiding the influence of such a happy face as Mr.
Weston’s, confirmed as it all was by the words and the countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter, but not less to the purpose.
To know that _she_ thought his coming certain was enough to make Emma consider it so, and sincerely did she rejoice in their joy.
It was a most delightful reanimation of exhausted spirits.
The worn-out past was sunk in the freshness of what was coming; and in the rapidity of half a moment’s thought, she hoped Mr.
Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe, which allowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight at his command, as well as the route and the method of his journey; and she listened, and smiled, and congratulated.
“I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield,” said he, at the conclusion.
Weston,” said she, “we are detaining the girls.” “Well, well, I am ready;”—and turning again to Emma, “but you must not be expecting such a _very_ fine young man; you have only had _my_ account you know; I dare say he is really nothing extraordinary:”—though his own sparkling eyes at the moment were speaking a very different conviction.
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer in a manner that appropriated nothing.
Weston’s parting injunction; spoken with some anxiety, and meant only for her.
Weston’s quick amendment; and so ended a most satisfactory meeting.
Emma’s spirits were mounted quite up to happiness; every thing wore a different air; James and his horses seemed not half so sluggish as before.
When she looked at the hedges, she thought the elder at least must soon be coming out; and when she turned round to Harriet, she saw something like a look of spring, a tender smile even there.
Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford?”—was a question, however, which did not augur much.
But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once, and Emma was now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time.
The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs.
Weston’s faithful pupil did not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve o’clock, that she was to think of her at four.
“My dear, dear anxious friend,”—said she, in mental soliloquy, while walking downstairs from her own room, “always overcareful for every body’s comfort but your own; I see you now in all your little fidgets, going again and again into his room, to be sure that all is right.” The clock struck twelve as she passed through the hall.
“’Tis twelve; I shall not forget to think of you four hours hence; and by this time to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later, I may be thinking of the possibility of their all calling here.
I am sure they will bring him soon.” She opened the parlour door, and saw two gentlemen sitting with her father—Mr.
Weston had scarcely finished his explanation of Frank’s being a day before his time, and her father was yet in the midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations, when she appeared, to have her share of surprize, introduction, and pleasure.
The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in interest, was actually before her—he was presented to her, and she did not think too much had been said in his praise; he was a _very_ good looking young man; height, air, address, all were unexceptionable, and his countenance had a great deal of the spirit and liveliness of his father’s; he looked quick and sensible.
She felt immediately that she should like him; and there was a well-bred ease of manner, and a readiness to talk, which convinced her that he came intending to be acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be.
He had reached Randalls the evening before.
She was pleased with the eagerness to arrive which had made him alter his plan, and travel earlier, later, and quicker, that he might gain half a day.
“I told you yesterday,” cried Mr.
Weston with exultation, “I told you all that he would be here before the time named.
I remembered what I used to do myself.
Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable; the conviction was strengthened by what followed.
He was very much pleased with Randalls, thought it a most admirably arranged house, would hardly allow it even to be very small, admired the situation, the walk to Highbury, Highbury itself, Hartfield still more, and professed himself to have always felt the sort of interest in the country which none but one’s _own_ country gives, and the greatest curiosity to visit it.
That he should never have been able to indulge so amiable a feeling before, passed suspiciously through Emma’s brain; but still, if it were a falsehood, it was a pleasant one, and pleasantly handled.
His manner had no air of study or exaggeration.
He did really look and speak as if in a state of no common enjoyment.
Their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening acquaintance.
He did not advance a word of praise beyond what she knew to be thoroughly deserved by Mrs.
Weston; but, undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter.
He understood what would be welcome; he could be sure of little else.
And at last, as if resolved to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object, he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person.
“Elegant, agreeable manners, I was prepared for,” said he; “but I confess that, considering every thing, I had not expected more than a very tolerably well-looking woman of a certain age; I did not know that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs.
Weston.” “You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs.
Weston for my feelings,” said Emma; “were you to guess her to be _eighteen_, I should listen with pleasure; but _she_ would be ready to quarrel with you for using such words.
Don’t let her imagine that you have spoken of her as a pretty young woman.” “I hope I should know better,” he replied; “no, depend upon it, (with a gallant bow,) that in addressing Mrs.
Weston I should understand whom I might praise without any danger of being thought extravagant in my terms.” Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from their knowing each other, which had taken strong possession of her mind, had ever crossed his; and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks of acquiescence, or proofs of defiance.
She must see more of him to understand his ways; at present she only felt they were agreeable.
Weston was often thinking about.
His quick eye she detected again and again glancing towards them with a happy expression; and even, when he might have determined not to look, she was confident that he was often listening.
Her own father’s perfect exemption from any thought of the kind, the entire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetration or suspicion, was a most comfortable circumstance.
Happily he was not farther from approving matrimony than from foreseeing it.—Though always objecting to every marriage that was arranged, he never suffered beforehand from the apprehension of any; it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two persons’ understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it were proved against them.
She blessed the favouring blindness.
He could now, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise, without a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest, give way to all his natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after Mr.
Frank Churchill’s accommodation on his journey, through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road, and express very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold—which, however, he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till after another night.
A reasonable visit paid, Mr.
He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands for Mrs.
Weston at Ford’s, but he need not hurry any body else.” His son, too well bred to hear the hint, rose immediately also, saying, “As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the opportunity of paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other, and therefore may as well be paid now.
I have the honour of being acquainted with a neighbour of yours, (turning to Emma,) a lady residing in or near Highbury; a family of the name of Fairfax.
I shall have no difficulty, I suppose, in finding the house; though Fairfax, I believe, is not the proper name—I should rather say Barnes, or Bates.
True, true, you are acquainted with Miss Fairfax; I remember you knew her at Weymouth, and a fine girl she is.
Call upon her, by all means.” “There is no necessity for my calling this morning,” said the young man; “another day would do as well; but there was that degree of acquaintance at Weymouth which—” “Oh! go to-day, go to-day.
And, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank; any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided.
You saw her with the Campbells, when she was the equal of every body she mixed with, but here she is with a poor old grandmother, who has barely enough to live on.
If you do not call early it will be a slight.” The son looked convinced.
“I have heard her speak of the acquaintance,” said Emma; “she is a very elegant young woman.” He agreed to it, but with so quiet a “Yes,” as inclined her almost to doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be thought only ordinarily gifted with it.
“If you were never particularly struck by her manners before,” said she, “I think you will to-day.
You will see her to advantage; see her and hear her—no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all, for she has an aunt who never holds her tongue.” “You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?” said Mr.
Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in conversation; “then give me leave to assure you that you will find her a very agreeable young lady.
She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt, very worthy people; I have known them all my life.
Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as he could, and his father gave his hearty support by calling out, “My good friend, this is quite unnecessary; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees it, and as to Mrs.
Bates’s, he may get there from the Crown in a hop, step, and jump.” They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one, and a graceful bow from the other, the two gentlemen took leave.
Emma remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance, and could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of the day, with full confidence in their comfort.
Frank Churchill again.
Weston, to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially.
He had been sitting with her, it appeared, most companionably at home, till her usual hour of exercise; and on being desired to chuse their walk, immediately fixed on Highbury.—“He did not doubt there being very pleasant walks in every direction, but if left to him, he should always chuse the same.
Highbury, that airy, cheerful, happy-looking Highbury, would be his constant attraction.”—Highbury, with Mrs.
Weston, stood for Hartfield; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction with him.
They walked thither directly.
Emma had hardly expected them: for Mr.
Weston, who had called in for half a minute, in order to hear that his son was very handsome, knew nothing of their plans; and it was an agreeable surprize to her, therefore, to perceive them walking up to the house together, arm in arm.
She was wanting to see him again, and especially to see him in company with Mrs.
Weston, upon his behaviour to whom her opinion of him was to depend.
If he were deficient there, nothing should make amends for it.
But on seeing them together, she became perfectly satisfied.
It was not merely in fine words or hyperbolical compliment that he paid his duty; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole manner to her—nothing could more agreeably denote his wish of considering her as a friend and securing her affection.
And there was time enough for Emma to form a reasonable judgment, as their visit included all the rest of the morning.
They were all three walking about together for an hour or two—first round the shrubberies of Hartfield, and afterwards in Highbury.
He was delighted with every thing; admired Hartfield sufficiently for Mr.
Woodhouse’s ear; and when their going farther was resolved on, confessed his wish to be made acquainted with the whole village, and found matter of commendation and interest much oftener than Emma could have supposed.
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings.
Emma watched and decided, that with such feelings as were now shewn, it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself; that he had not been acting a part, or making a parade of insincere professions; and that Mr.
Knightley certainly had not done him justice.
He was immediately interested.
Its character as a ball-room caught him; and instead of passing on, he stopt for several minutes at the two superior sashed windows which were open, to look in and contemplate its capabilities, and lament that its original purpose should have ceased.
He saw no fault in the room, he would acknowledge none which they suggested.
No, it was long enough, broad enough, handsome enough.
They ought to have balls there at least every fortnight through the winter.
Why had not Miss Woodhouse revived the former good old days of the room?—She who could do any thing in Highbury!
The want of proper families in the place, and the conviction that none beyond the place and its immediate environs could be tempted to attend, were mentioned; but he was not satisfied.
He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing; and Emma was rather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills.
He seemed to have all the life and spirit, cheerful feelings, and social inclinations of his father, and nothing of the pride or reserve of Enscombe.
Of pride, indeed, there was, perhaps, scarcely enough; his indifference to a confusion of rank, bordered too much on inelegance of mind.
It was but an effusion of lively spirits.
At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown; and being now almost facing the house where the Bateses lodged, Emma recollected his intended visit the day before, and asked him if he had paid it.
A very successful visit:—I saw all the three ladies; and felt very much obliged to you for your preparatory hint.
If the talking aunt had taken me quite by surprize, it must have been the death of me.
As it was, I was only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit.
Ten minutes would have been all that was necessary, perhaps all that was proper; and I had told my father I should certainly be at home before him—but there was no getting away, no pause; and, to my utter astonishment, I found, when he (finding me nowhere else) joined me there at last, that I had been actually sitting with them very nearly three-quarters of an hour.
The good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before.” “And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking?” “Ill, very ill—that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill.
But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs.
And, seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally so pale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.—A most deplorable want of complexion.” Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence of Miss Fairfax’s complexion.
“It was certainly never brilliant, but she would not allow it to have a sickly hue in general; and there was a softness and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance to the character of her face.” He listened with all due deference; acknowledged that he had heard many people say the same—but yet he must confess, that to him nothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health.
Where features were indifferent, a fine complexion gave beauty to them all; and where they were good, the effect was—fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the effect was.
“Well,” said Emma, “there is no disputing about taste.—At least you admire her except her complexion.” He shook his head and laughed.—“I cannot separate Miss Fairfax and her complexion.” “Did you see her often at Weymouth?
Were you often in the same society?” At this moment they were approaching Ford’s, and he hastily exclaimed, “Ha! this must be the very shop that every body attends every day of their lives, as my father informs me.
He comes to Highbury himself, he says, six days out of the seven, and has always business at Ford’s.
If it be not inconvenient to you, pray let us go in, that I may prove myself to belong to the place, to be a true citizen of Highbury.
I must buy something at Ford’s.
I do admire your patriotism.
You will be adored in Highbury.
Weston’s son—but lay out half a guinea at Ford’s, and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues.” They went in; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels of “Men’s Beavers” and “York Tan” were bringing down and displaying on the counter, he said—“But I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, you were speaking to me, you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_ _patriae_.
I assure you the utmost stretch of public fame would not make me amends for the loss of any happiness in private life.” “I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax and her party at Weymouth.” “And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be a very unfair one.
It is always the lady’s right to decide on the degree of acquaintance.
Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.—I shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow.” “Upon my word! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself.
But her account of every thing leaves so much to be guessed, she is so very reserved, so very unwilling to give the least information about any body, that I really think you may say what you like of your acquaintance with her.” “May I, indeed?—Then I will speak the truth, and nothing suits me so well.
I met her frequently at Weymouth.
I had known the Campbells a little in town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set.
Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs.
Campbell a friendly, warm-hearted woman.
I like them all.” “You know Miss Fairfax’s situation in life, I conclude; what she is destined to be?” “Yes—(rather hesitatingly)—I believe I do.” “You get upon delicate subjects, Emma,” said Mrs.
Weston smiling; “remember that I am here.—Mr.
Frank Churchill hardly knows what to say when you speak of Miss Fairfax’s situation in life.
I will move a little farther off.” “I certainly do forget to think of _her_,” said Emma, “as having ever been any thing but my friend and my dearest friend.” He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment.
When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the shop again, “Did you ever hear the young lady we were speaking of, play?” said Frank Churchill.
“Ever hear her!” repeated Emma.
“You forget how much she belongs to Highbury.
She plays charmingly.” “You think so, do you?—I wanted the opinion of some one who could really judge.
We shall know more about them all, in half an hour, from you, than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year.” “Yes, Mr.
Dixon and Miss Campbell were the persons; and I thought it a very strong proof.” “Certainly—very strong it was; to own the truth, a great deal stronger than, if _I_ had been Miss Campbell, would have been at all agreeable to me.
I could not excuse a man’s having more music than love—more ear than eye—a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings.
How did Miss Campbell appear to like it?” “It was her very particular friend, you know.” “Poor comfort!” said Emma, laughing.
“One would rather have a stranger preferred than one’s very particular friend—with a stranger it might not recur again—but the misery of having a very particular friend always at hand, to do every thing better than one does oneself!—Poor Mrs.
It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell; but she really did not seem to feel it.” “So much the better—or so much the worse:—I do not know which.
But be it sweetness or be it stupidity in her—quickness of friendship, or dulness of feeling—there was one person, I think, who must have felt it: Miss Fairfax herself.
She must have felt the improper and dangerous distinction.” “As to that—I do not—” “Oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax’s sensations from you, or from any body else.
But if she continued to play whenever she was asked by Mr.
Dixon, one may guess what one chuses.” “There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all—” he began rather quickly, but checking himself, added, “however, it is impossible for me to say on what terms they really were—how it might all be behind the scenes.
I can only say that there was smoothness outwardly.
But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from a child, must be a better judge of her character, and of how she is likely to conduct herself in critical situations, than I can be.” “I have known her from a child, undoubtedly; we have been children and women together; and it is natural to suppose that we should be intimate,—that we should have taken to each other whenever she visited her friends.
I hardly know how it has happened; a little, perhaps, from that wickedness on my side which was prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always was, by her aunt and grandmother, and all their set.
And then, her reserve—I never could attach myself to any one so completely reserved.” “It is a most repulsive quality, indeed,” said he.
“Oftentimes very convenient, no doubt, but never pleasing.
There is safety in reserve, but no attraction.
One cannot love a reserved person.” “Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself; and then the attraction may be the greater.
But I must be more in want of a friend, or an agreeable companion, than I have yet been, to take the trouble of conquering any body’s reserve to procure one.
Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me is quite out of the question.
He was not exactly what she had expected; less of the man of the world in some of his notions, less of the spoiled child of fortune, therefore better than she had expected.
His ideas seemed more moderate—his feelings warmer.
She was particularly struck by his manner of considering Mr.
The man must be a blockhead who wanted more.
Used only to a large house himself, and without ever thinking how many advantages and accommodations were attached to its size, he could be no judge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small one.
But Emma, in her own mind, determined that he _did_ know what he was talking about, and that he shewed a very amiable inclination to settle early in life, and to marry, from worthy motives.
He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper’s room, or a bad butler’s pantry, but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make him happy, and that whenever he were attached, he would willingly give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment.
CHAPTER VII Emma’s very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken the following day, by hearing that he was gone off to London, merely to have his hair cut.
A sudden freak seemed to have seized him at breakfast, and he had sent for a chaise and set off, intending to return to dinner, but with no more important view that appeared than having his hair cut.
There was certainly no harm in his travelling sixteen miles twice over on such an errand; but there was an air of foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve.
It did not accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense, or even the unselfish warmth of heart, which she had believed herself to discern in him yesterday.
Vanity, extravagance, love of change, restlessness of temper, which must be doing something, good or bad; heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs.
Weston, indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general; he became liable to all these charges.
Weston did not like it, was clear enough, by her passing it over as quickly as possible, and making no other comment than that “all young people would have their little whims.” With the exception of this little blot, Emma found that his visit hitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him.
Weston was very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he made himself—how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether.
He gave her to understand that Frank admired her extremely—thought her very beautiful and very charming; and with so much to be said for him altogether, she found she must not judge him harshly.
Weston observed, “all young people would have their little whims.” There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so leniently disposed.
In general he was judged, throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowances were made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man—one who smiled so often and bowed so well; but there was one spirit among them not to be softened, from its power of censure, by bows or smiles—Mr.
Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings, Mr. and Mrs.
Weston’s visit this morning was in another respect particularly opportune.
Something occurred while they were at Hartfield, to make Emma want their advice; and, which was still more lucky, she wanted exactly the advice they gave.
This was the occurrence:—The Coles had been settled some years in Highbury, and were very good sort of people—friendly, liberal, and unpretending; but, on the other hand, they were of low origin, in trade, and only moderately genteel.
On their first coming into the country, they had lived in proportion to their income, quietly, keeping little company, and that little unexpensively; but the last year or two had brought them a considerable increase of means—the house in town had yielded greater profits, and fortune in general had smiled on them.
With their wealth, their views increased; their want of a larger house, their inclination for more company.
They added to their house, to their number of servants, to their expenses of every sort; and by this time were, in fortune and style of living, second only to the family at Hartfield.
Their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared every body for their keeping dinner-company; and a few parties, chiefly among the single men, had already taken place.
The regular and best families Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite—neither Donwell, nor Hartfield, nor Randalls.
Nothing should tempt _her_ to go, if they did; and she regretted that her father’s known habits would be giving her refusal less meaning than she could wish.
The Coles were very respectable in their way, but they ought to be taught that it was not for them to arrange the terms on which the superior families would visit them.
Knightley, none of Mr.
But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many weeks before it appeared, that when the insult came at last, it found her very differently affected.
Donwell and Randalls had received their invitation, and none had come for her father and herself; and Mrs.
Weston’s accounting for it with “I suppose they will not take the liberty with you; they know you do not dine out,” was not quite sufficient.
She felt that she should like to have had the power of refusal; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to be assembled there, consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her, occurred again and again, she did not know that she might not have been tempted to accept.
They had been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the day before, and Frank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence.
Might not the evening end in a dance? had been a question of his.
The bare possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spirits; and her being left in solitary grandeur, even supposing the omission to be intended as a compliment, was but poor comfort.
It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were at Hartfield, which made their presence so acceptable; for though her first remark, on reading it, was that “of course it must be declined,” she so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do, that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful.
She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutely without inclination for the party.
The Coles expressed themselves so properly—there was so much real attention in the manner of it—so much consideration for her father.
“They would have solicited the honour earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen from London, which they hoped might keep Mr.
Woodhouse from any draught of air, and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of his company.” Upon the whole, she was very persuadable; and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without neglecting his comfort—how certainly Mrs.
Bates, might be depended on for bearing him company—Mr.
Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter’s going out to dinner on a day now near at hand, and spending the whole evening away from him.
As for _his_ going, Emma did not wish him to think it possible, the hours would be too late, and the party too numerous.
He was soon pretty well resigned.
“I am not fond of dinner-visiting,” said he—“I never was.
I think it would be much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer, and take their tea with us—take us in their afternoon walk; which they might do, as our hours are so reasonable, and yet get home without being out in the damp of the evening.
However, as they are so very desirous to have dear Emma dine with them, and as you will both be there, and Mr.
Knightley too, to take care of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be what it ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy.” Then turning to Mrs.
Weston, with a look of gentle reproach—“Ah!
Weston, “as I took Miss Taylor away, it is incumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will step to Mrs.
Goddard in a moment, if you wish it.” But the idea of any thing to be done in a _moment_, was increasing, not lessening, Mr.
Woodhouse’s agitation.
Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberately arranged.
With this treatment, Mr.
Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking as usual.
Cole.” “You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible.
You will say that I am quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must decline their obliging invitation; beginning with my _compliments_, of course.
We must remember to let James know that the carriage will be wanted on Tuesday.
We have never been there above once since the new approach was made; but still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely.
Weston, “if Emma comes away early, it will be breaking up the party.” “And no great harm if it does,” said Mr.
“The sooner every party breaks up, the better.” “But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles.
Emma’s going away directly after tea might be giving offence.
They are good-natured people, and think little of their own claims; but still they must feel that any body’s hurrying away is no great compliment; and Miss Woodhouse’s doing it would be more thought of than any other person’s in the room.
You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, I am sure, sir; friendly, good sort of people as ever lived, and who have been your neighbours these _ten_ years.” “No, upon no account in the world, Mr.
Weston; I am much obliged to you for reminding me.
I should be extremely sorry to be giving them any pain.
My dear Emma, we must consider this.
You will be perfectly safe, you know, among your friends.” “Oh yes, papa.
I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have no scruples of staying as late as Mrs.
I am not afraid of your not being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs.
She loves piquet, you know; but when she is gone home, I am afraid you will be sitting up by yourself, instead of going to bed at your usual time—and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort.
You must promise me not to sit up.” He did, on the condition of some promises on her side: such as that, if she came home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly; if hungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid should sit up for her; and that Serle and the butler should see that every thing were safe in the house, as usual.
CHAPTER VIII Frank Churchill came back again; and if he kept his father’s dinner waiting, it was not known at Hartfield; for Mrs.
Weston was too anxious for his being a favourite with Mr.
Woodhouse, to betray any imperfection which could be concealed.
He had no reason to wish his hair longer, to conceal any confusion of face; no reason to wish the money unspent, to improve his spirits.
He was quite as undaunted and as lively as ever; and, after seeing him, Emma thus moralised to herself:— “I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly things do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent way.
Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not always folly.—It depends upon the character of those who handle it.
Knightley, he is _not_ a trifling, silly young man.
If he were, he would have done this differently.
He would either have gloried in the achievement, or been ashamed of it.
Cole’s; and without being able to forget that among the failings of Mr.
Elton, even in the days of his favour, none had disturbed her more than his propensity to dine with Mr.
She followed another carriage to Mr.
Knightley’s; for Mr.
Knightley keeping no horses, having little spare money and a great deal of health, activity, and independence, was too apt, in Emma’s opinion, to get about as he could, and not use his carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey.
She had an opportunity now of speaking her approbation while warm from her heart, for he stopped to hand her out.
There is always a look of consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be beneath them.
You think you carry it off very well, I dare say, but with you it is a sort of bravado, an air of affected unconcern; I always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstances. _Now_ you have nothing to try for.
You are not afraid of being supposed ashamed.
You are not striving to look taller than any body else. _Now_ I shall really be very happy to walk into the same room with you.” “Nonsensical girl!” was his reply, but not at all in anger.
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with Mr.
She was received with a cordial respect which could not but please, and given all the consequence she could wish for.
When the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of love, the strongest of admiration were for her, from both husband and wife; the son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his peculiar object, and at dinner she found him seated by her—and, as she firmly believed, not without some dexterity on his side.
The party was rather large, as it included one other family, a proper unobjectionable country family, whom the Coles had the advantage of naming among their acquaintance, and the male part of Mr.
Cox’s family, the lawyer of Highbury.
The less worthy females were to come in the evening, with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith; but already, at dinner, they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to be general; and, while politics and Mr.
Elton were talked over, Emma could fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her neighbour.
Cole seemed to be relating something of her that was expected to be very interesting.
She listened, and found it well worth listening to.
That very dear part of Emma, her fancy, received an amusing supply.
Cole, “and I was only surprized that there could ever have been a doubt.
She knows their ways best; but I should not consider their silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present.
They might chuse to surprize her.” Mrs.
Cole had many to agree with her; every body who spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell, and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made; and there were enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way, and still listen to Mrs.
“I declare, I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given me more satisfaction!—It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax, who plays so delightfully, should not have an instrument.
It seemed quite a shame, especially considering how many houses there are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown away.
This is like giving ourselves a slap, to be sure! and it was but yesterday I was telling Mr.
Cole’s, turned to Frank Churchill.
Bates’s house.” “You may _say_ what you chuse—but your countenance testifies that your _thoughts_ on this subject are very much like mine.” “I do not know.
I rather believe you are giving me more credit for acuteness than I deserve.
I smile because you smile, and shall probably suspect whatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not see what there is to question.
If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can be?” “What do you say to Mrs.
She must know as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument would be; and perhaps the mode of it, the mystery, the surprize, is more like a young woman’s scheme than an elderly man’s.
I told you that your suspicions would guide mine.” “If so, you must extend your suspicions and comprehend _Mr_.
Yes, I immediately perceive that it must be the joint present of Mr. and Mrs.
We were speaking the other day, you know, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance.” “Yes, and what you told me on that head, confirmed an idea which I had entertained before.—I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions of either Mr.
Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help suspecting either that, after making his proposals to her friend, he had the misfortune to fall in love with _her_, or that he became conscious of a little attachment on her side.
One might guess twenty things without guessing exactly the right; but I am sure there must be a particular cause for her chusing to come to Highbury instead of going with the Campbells to Ireland.
Here, she must be leading a life of privation and penance; there it would have been all enjoyment.
As to the pretence of trying her native air, I look upon that as a mere excuse.—In the summer it might have passed; but what can any body’s native air do for them in the months of January, February, and March?
Good fires and carriages would be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health, and I dare say in her’s.
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions, though you make so noble a profession of doing it, but I honestly tell you what they are.” “And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability.
Dixon’s preference of her music to her friend’s, I can answer for being very decided.” “And then, he saved her life.
Did you ever hear of that?—A water party; and by some accident she was falling overboard.
I was there—one of the party.” “Were you really?—Well!—But you observed nothing of course, for it seems to be a new idea to you.—If I had been there, I think I should have made some discoveries.” “I dare say you would; but I, simple I, saw nothing but the fact, that Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr.
And though the consequent shock and alarm was very great and much more durable—indeed I believe it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again—yet that was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be observable.
I do not mean to say, however, that you might not have made discoveries.” The conversation was here interrupted.
They were called on to share in the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses, and obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others; but when the table was again safely covered, when every corner dish was placed exactly right, and occupation and ease were generally restored, Emma said, “The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me.
Dixon.” “And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the Campbells.” “No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells.
Miss Fairfax knows it is not from the Campbells, or they would have been guessed at first.
I may not have convinced you perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr.
Dixon is a principal in the business.” “Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced.
Your reasonings carry my judgment along with them entirely.
At first, while I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw it only as paternal kindness, and thought it the most natural thing in the world.
But when you mentioned Mrs.
Dixon, I felt how much more probable that it should be the tribute of warm female friendship.
And now I can see it in no other light than as an offering of love.” There was no occasion to press the matter farther.
The conviction seemed real; he looked as if he felt it.
She said no more, other subjects took their turn; and the rest of the dinner passed away; the dessert succeeded, the children came in, and were talked to and admired amid the usual rate of conversation; a few clever things said, a few downright silly, but by much the larger proportion neither the one nor the other—nothing worse than everyday remarks, dull repetitions, old news, and heavy jokes.
The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room, before the other ladies, in their different divisions, arrived.
Emma watched the entree of her own particular little friend; and if she could not exult in her dignity and grace, she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner, but could most heartily rejoice in that light, cheerful, unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure, in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection.
There she sat—and who would have guessed how many tears she had been lately shedding?
To be in company, nicely dressed herself and seeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile and look pretty, and say nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour.
Jane Fairfax did look and move superior; but Emma suspected she might have been glad to change feelings with Harriet, very glad to have purchased the mortification of having loved—yes, of having loved even Mr.
Elton in vain—by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of her friend.
In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her.
Weston, kind-hearted and musical, was particularly interested by the circumstance, and Emma could not help being amused at her perseverance in dwelling on the subject; and having so much to ask and to say as to tone, touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little about it as possible, which she plainly read in the fair heroine’s countenance.
They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen; and the very first of the early was Frank Churchill.
In he walked, the first and the handsomest; and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates and her niece, made his way directly to the opposite side of the circle, where sat Miss Woodhouse; and till he could find a seat by her, would not sit at all.
Emma divined what every body present must be thinking.
She was his object, and every body must perceive it.
She introduced him to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient moments afterwards, heard what each thought of the other.
“He had never seen so lovely a face, and was delighted with her naïveté.” And she, “Only to be sure it was paying him too great a compliment, but she did think there were some looks a little like Mr.
Elton.” Emma restrained her indignation, and only turned from her in silence.
Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on first glancing towards Miss Fairfax; but it was most prudent to avoid speech.
He told her that he had been impatient to leave the dining-room—hated sitting long—was always the first to move when he could—that his father, Mr.
Cole, were left very busy over parish business—that as long as he had staid, however, it had been pleasant enough, as he had found them in general a set of gentlemanlike, sensible men; and spoke so handsomely of Highbury altogether—thought it so abundant in agreeable families—that Emma began to feel she had been used to despise the place rather too much.
She questioned him as to the society in Yorkshire—the extent of the neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort; and could make out from his answers that, as far as Enscombe was concerned, there was very little going on, that their visitings were among a range of great families, none very near; and that even when days were fixed, and invitations accepted, it was an even chance that Mrs.
Churchill were not in health and spirits for going; that they made a point of visiting no fresh person; and that, though he had his separate engagements, it was not without difficulty, without considerable address _at_ _times_, that he could get away, or introduce an acquaintance for a night.
She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury, taken at its best, might reasonably please a young man who had more retirement at home than he liked.
His importance at Enscombe was very evident.
He did not boast, but it naturally betrayed itself, that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing, and on her laughing and noticing it, he owned that he believed (excepting one or two points) he could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing.
One of those points on which his influence failed, he then mentioned.
This had happened the year before. _Now_, he said, he was beginning to have no longer the same wish.
The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed to be good behaviour to his father.
“I have made a most wretched discovery,” said he, after a short pause.— “I have been here a week to-morrow—half my time.
But just got acquainted with Mrs.
Weston, and others!—I hate the recollection.” “Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day, out of so few, in having your hair cut.” “No,” said he, smiling, “that is no subject of regret at all.
I have no pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself fit to be seen.” The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr.
Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored as before, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite.
Shall I?—Yes, I will—I declare I will—and you shall see how she takes it;—whether she colours.” He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady, as he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly in front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.
I have been making discoveries and forming plans, just like yourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh.
Do you know how Miss Bates and her niece came here?” “How?—They were invited, were not they?” “Oh! yes—but how they were conveyed hither?—the manner of their coming?” “They walked, I conclude.
How else could they come?” “Very true.—Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad it would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night, and cold as the nights are now.
And as I looked at her, though I never saw her appear to more advantage, it struck me that she was heated, and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold.
Weston came into the room, and I could get at him, I spoke to him about the carriage.
You may guess how readily he came into my wishes; and having his approbation, I made my way directly to Miss Bates, to assure her that the carriage would be at her service before it took us home; for I thought it would be making her comfortable at once.
Good soul! she was as grateful as possible, you may be sure.
‘Nobody was ever so fortunate as herself!’—but with many, many thanks—‘there was no occasion to trouble us, for Mr.
Knightley’s carriage had brought, and was to take them home again.’ I was quite surprized;—very glad, I am sure; but really quite surprized.
Such a very kind attention—and so thoughtful an attention!—the sort of thing that so few men would think of.
And, in short, from knowing his usual ways, I am very much inclined to think that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all.
I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself, and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them.” “Very likely,” said Emma—“nothing more likely.
Knightley to do the sort of thing—to do any thing really good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent.
He is not a gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this, considering Jane Fairfax’s ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;—and for an act of unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix on more than on Mr.
I know he had horses to-day—for we arrived together; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word that could betray.” “Well,” said Mrs.
Weston, smiling, “you give him credit for more simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do; for while Miss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head, and I have never been able to get it out again.
The more I think of it, the more probable it appears.
Knightley and Jane Fairfax.
See the consequence of keeping you company!—What do you say to it?” “Mr.
Knightley and Jane Fairfax!” exclaimed Emma.
Knightley must not marry!—You would not have little Henry cut out from Donwell?—Oh! no, no, Henry must have Donwell.
Knightley’s marrying; and I am sure it is not at all likely.
I do not want the match—I do not want to injure dear little Henry—but the idea has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr.
Knightley really wished to marry, you would not have him refrain on Henry’s account, a boy of six years old, who knows nothing of the matter?” “Yes, I would.
I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.—Mr.
Knightley marry!—No, I have never had such an idea, and I cannot adopt it now.
And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!” “Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you very well know.” “But the imprudence of such a match!” “I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability.” “I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation than what you mention.
His good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you, would be quite enough to account for the horses.
He has a great regard for the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax—and is always glad to shew them attention.
Jane Fairfax mistress of the Abbey!—Oh! no, no;—every feeling revolts.
For his own sake, I would not have him do so mad a thing.” “Imprudent, if you please—but not mad.
Excepting inequality of fortune, and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothing unsuitable.” “But Mr.
Knightley does not want to marry.
Why should he marry?—He is as happy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep, and his library, and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely fond of his brother’s children.
He has no occasion to marry, either to fill up his time or his heart.” “My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really loves Jane Fairfax—” “Nonsense!
Weston, laughing, “perhaps the greatest good he could do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home.” “If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself; a very shameful and degrading connexion.
How would he bear to have Miss Bates belonging to him?—To have her haunting the Abbey, and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane?—‘So very kind and obliging!—But he always had been such a very kind neighbour!’ And then fly off, through half a sentence, to her mother’s old petticoat.
‘Not that it was such a very old petticoat either—for still it would last a great while—and, indeed, she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong.’” “For shame, Emma!
You divert me against my conscience.
Knightley would be much disturbed by Miss Bates.
Little things do not irritate him.
But the question is not, whether it would be a bad connexion for him, but whether he wishes it; and I think he does.
The interest he takes in her—his anxiety about her health—his concern that she should have no happier prospect!
I have heard him express himself so warmly on those points!—Such an admirer of her performance on the pianoforte, and of her voice!
Oh! and I had almost forgotten one idea that occurred to me—this pianoforte that has been sent here by somebody—though we have all been so well satisfied to consider it a present from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr.
I cannot help suspecting him.
I think he is just the person to do it, even without being in love.” “Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love.
Knightley does nothing mysteriously.” “I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly; oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common course of things, occur to him.” “Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have told her so.” “There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma.
I am sure he was particularly silent when Mrs.
Weston, and run away with it; as you have many a time reproached me with doing.
I see no sign of attachment—I believe nothing of the pianoforte—and proof only shall convince me that Mr.
Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax.” They combated the point some time longer in the same way; Emma rather gaining ground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs.
Weston was the most used of the two to yield; till a little bustle in the room shewed them that tea was over, and the instrument in preparation;—and at the same moment Mr.
Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do them the honour of trying it.
Frank Churchill, of whom, in the eagerness of her conversation with Mrs.
Weston, she had been seeing nothing, except that he had found a seat by Miss Fairfax, followed Mr.
Cole, to add his very pressing entreaties; and as, in every respect, it suited Emma best to lead, she gave a very proper compliance.
She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt more than she could perform with credit; she wanted neither taste nor spirit in the little things which are generally acceptable, and could accompany her own voice well.
One accompaniment to her song took her agreeably by surprize—a second, slightly but correctly taken by Frank Churchill.
Her pardon was duly begged at the close of the song, and every thing usual followed.
He was accused of having a delightful voice, and a perfect knowledge of music; which was properly denied; and that he knew nothing of the matter, and had no voice at all, roundly asserted.
They sang together once more; and Emma would then resign her place to Miss Fairfax, whose performance, both vocal and instrumental, she never could attempt to conceal from herself, was infinitely superior to her own.
With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance from the numbers round the instrument, to listen.
Frank Churchill sang again.
They had sung together once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth.
Knightley among the most attentive, soon drew away half Emma’s mind; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of Mrs.
Weston’s suspicions, to which the sweet sounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions.
Her objections to Mr.
Knightley’s marrying did not in the least subside.
It would be a great disappointment to Mr.
John Knightley; consequently to Isabella.
A real injury to the children—a most mortifying change, and material loss to them all;—a very great deduction from her father’s daily comfort—and, as to herself, she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey.
Knightley for them all to give way to!—No—Mr.
Knightley must never marry.
Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her.
They talked at first only of the performance.
His admiration was certainly very warm; yet she thought, but for Mrs.
As a sort of touchstone, however, she began to speak of his kindness in conveying the aunt and niece; and though his answer was in the spirit of cutting the matter short, she believed it to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own.
“I often feel concern,” said she, “that I dare not make our carriage more useful on such occasions.
It is not that I am without the wish; but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James should put-to for such a purpose.” “Quite out of the question, quite out of the question,” he replied;—“but you must often wish it, I am sure.” And he smiled with such seeming pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceed another step.
“This present from the Campbells,” said she—“this pianoforte is very kindly given.” “Yes,” he replied, and without the smallest apparent embarrassment.—“But they would have done better had they given her notice of it.
Surprizes are foolish things.
The pleasure is not enhanced, and the inconvenience is often considerable.
I should have expected better judgment in Colonel Campbell.” From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that Mr.
Knightley had had no concern in giving the instrument.
But whether he were entirely free from peculiar attachment—whether there were no actual preference—remained a little longer doubtful.
“That will do,” said he, when it was finished, thinking aloud—“you have sung quite enough for one evening—now be quiet.” Another song, however, was soon begged for.
“One more;—they would not fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account, and would only ask for one more.” And Frank Churchill was heard to say, “I think you could manage this without effort; the first part is so very trifling.
The strength of the song falls on the second.” Mr.
Knightley grew angry.
“That fellow,” said he, indignantly, “thinks of nothing but shewing off his own voice.
This must not be.” And touching Miss Bates, who at that moment passed near—“Miss Bates, are you mad, to let your niece sing herself hoarse in this manner?
They have no mercy on her.” Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even to be grateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all farther singing.
Here ceased the concert part of the evening, for Miss Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers; but soon (within five minutes) the proposal of dancing—originating nobody exactly knew where—was so effectually promoted by Mr. and Mrs.
Cole, that every thing was rapidly clearing away, to give proper space.
Weston, capital in her country-dances, was seated, and beginning an irresistible waltz; and Frank Churchill, coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma, had secured her hand, and led her up to the top.
While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off, Emma found time, in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her voice and her taste, to look about, and see what became of Mr.
If he were to be very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now, it might augur something.
There was no immediate appearance.
Cole—he was looking on unconcerned; Jane was asked by somebody else, and he was still talking to Mrs.
Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry; his interest was yet safe; and she led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment.
Not more than five couple could be mustered; but the rarity and the suddenness of it made it very delightful, and she found herself well matched in a partner.
Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be allowed.
After some attempts, therefore, to be permitted to begin again, they were obliged to thank Mrs.
Weston, look sorrowful, and have done.
“Perhaps it is as well,” said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma to her carriage.
“I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancing would not have agreed with me, after yours.” CHAPTER IX Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles.
The visit afforded her many pleasant recollections the next day; and all that she might be supposed to have lost on the side of dignified seclusion, must be amply repaid in the splendour of popularity.
She must have delighted the Coles—worthy people, who deserved to be made happy!—And left a name behind her that would not soon die away.
Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and there were two points on which she was not quite easy.
She doubted whether she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman, in betraying her suspicions of Jane Fairfax’s feelings to Frank Churchill.
It was hardly right; but it had been so strong an idea, that it would escape her, and his submission to all that she told, was a compliment to her penetration, which made it difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to have held her tongue.
The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax; and there she had no doubt.
She did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret the inferiority of her own playing and singing.
She did most heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhood—and sat down and practised vigorously an hour and a half.
She was then interrupted by Harriet’s coming in; and if Harriet’s praise could have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted.
“Oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!” “Don’t class us together, Harriet.
My playing is no more like her’s, than a lamp is like sunshine.” “Oh! dear—I think you play the best of the two.
Every body last night said how well you played.” “Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference.
The truth is, Harriet, that my playing is just good enough to be praised, but Jane Fairfax’s is much beyond it.” “Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does, or that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out.
Frank Churchill talked a great deal about your taste, and that he valued taste much more than execution.” “Ah! but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet.” “Are you sure?
I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had any taste.
And I hate Italian singing.—There is no understanding a word of it.
The Coxes were wondering last night whether she would get into any great family.
How did you think the Coxes looked?” “Just as they always do—very vulgar.” “They told me something,” said Harriet rather hesitatingly; “but it is nothing of any consequence.” Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her, though fearful of its producing Mr.
Martin dined with them last Saturday.” “Oh!” “He came to their father upon some business, and he asked him to stay to dinner.” “Oh!” “They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne Cox.
I do not know what she meant, but she asked me if I thought I should go and stay there again next summer.” “She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox should be.” “She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there.
Miss Nash thinks either of the Coxes would be very glad to marry him.” “Very likely.—I think they are, without exception, the most vulgar girls in Highbury.” Harriet had business at Ford’s.—Emma thought it most prudent to go with her.
Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible, and in her present state, would be dangerous.
Harriet, tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word, was always very long at a purchase; and while she was still hanging over muslins and changing her mind, Emma went to the door for amusement.—Much could not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury;—Mr.
She looked down the Randalls road.
The scene enlarged; two persons appeared; Mrs.
Weston and her son-in-law; they were walking into Highbury;—to Hartfield of course.
They were stopping, however, in the first place at Mrs.
Bates’s; whose house was a little nearer Randalls than Ford’s; and had all but knocked, when Emma caught their eye.—Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her; and the agreeableness of yesterday’s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting.
Weston informed her that she was going to call on the Bateses, in order to hear the new instrument.
“For my companion tells me,” said she, “that I absolutely promised Miss Bates last night, that I would come this morning.
Weston pays her visit, I may be allowed, I hope,” said Frank Churchill, “to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield—if you are going home.” Mrs.
Weston was disappointed.
Miss Woodhouse looks as if she did not want me.
My aunt always sends me off when she is shopping.
She says I fidget her to death; and Miss Woodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same.
What am I to do?” “I am here on no business of my own,” said Emma; “I am only waiting for my friend.
She will probably have soon done, and then we shall go home.
Weston and hear the instrument.” “Well—if you advise it.—But (with a smile) if Colonel Campbell should have employed a careless friend, and if it should prove to have an indifferent tone—what shall I say?
A disagreeable truth would be palatable through her lips, but I am the wretchedest being in the world at a civil falsehood.” “I do not believe any such thing,” replied Emma.—“I am persuaded that you can be as insincere as your neighbours, when it is necessary; but there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent.
Quite otherwise indeed, if I understood Miss Fairfax’s opinion last night.” “Do come with me,” said Mrs.
Weston, “if it be not very disagreeable to you.
We will go to Hartfield afterwards.
We will follow them to Hartfield.
It will be felt so great an attention! and I always thought you meant it.” He could say no more; and with the hope of Hartfield to reward him, returned with Mrs.
Emma watched them in, and then joined Harriet at the interesting counter,—trying, with all the force of her own mind, to convince her that if she wanted plain muslin it was of no use to look at figured; and that a blue ribbon, be it ever so beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern.
At last it was all settled, even to the destination of the parcel.
Only my pattern gown is at Hartfield.
No, you shall send it to Hartfield, if you please.
But I shall want the ribbon directly—so it had better go to Hartfield—at least the ribbon.
Ford the trouble of two parcels.” “No more it is.” “No trouble in the world, ma’am,” said the obliging Mrs.
Goddard’s—I do not know—No, I think, Miss Woodhouse, I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield, and take it home with me at night.
To Hartfield, if you please, Mrs.
Ford.” “Aye, that will be much best,” said Harriet, quite satisfied, “I should not at all like to have it sent to Mrs.
Goddard’s.” Voices approached the shop—or rather one voice and two ladies: Mrs.
“My dear Miss Woodhouse,” said the latter, “I am just run across to entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a little while, and give us your opinion of our new instrument; you and Miss Smith.
Weston to come with me, that I might be sure of succeeding.” “I hope Mrs.
My mother is delightfully well; and Jane caught no cold last night.
Woodhouse?—I am so glad to hear such a good account.
Weston told me you were here.—Oh! then, said I, I must run across, I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in; my mother will be so very happy to see her—and now we are such a nice party, she cannot refuse.—‘Aye, pray do,’ said Mr.
And, by the bye, every body ought to have two pair of spectacles; they should indeed.
I meant to take them over to John Saunders the first thing I did, but something or other hindered me all the morning; first one thing, then another, there is no saying what, you know.
At one time Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping.
Here is the rivet of your mistress’s spectacles out.
Wallis sent them by her boy; they are extremely civil and obliging to us, the Wallises, always—I have heard some people say that Mrs.
Wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answer, but we have never known any thing but the greatest attention from them.
And it cannot be for the value of our custom now, for what is our consumption of bread, you know?
Only three of us.—besides dear Jane at present—and she really eats nothing—makes such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite frightened if you saw it.
But about the middle of the day she gets hungry, and there is nothing she likes so well as these baked apples, and they are extremely wholesome, for I took the opportunity the other day of asking Mr.
Perry; I happened to meet him in the street.
Woodhouse recommend a baked apple.
Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome.
We have apple-dumplings, however, very often.
Patty makes an excellent apple-dumpling.
Weston, you have prevailed, I hope, and these ladies will oblige us.” Emma would be “very happy to wait on Mrs.
I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town.
Jane came back delighted yesterday.
Thank ye, the gloves do very well—only a little too large about the wrist; but Jane is taking them in.” “What was I talking of?” said she, beginning again when they were all in the street.
Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix.
“I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of.—Oh! my mother’s spectacles.
So very obliging of Mr.
‘Oh!’ said he, ‘I do think I can fasten the rivet; I like a job of this kind excessively.’—Which you know shewed him to be so very....
Indeed I must say that, much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected, he very far exceeds any thing....
I do congratulate you, Mrs.
I like a job of that sort excessively.’ I never shall forget his manner.
And when I brought out the baked apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so very obliging as to take some, ‘Oh!’ said he directly, ‘there is nothing in the way of fruit half so good, and these are the finest-looking home-baked apples I ever saw in my life.’ That, you know, was so very....
And I am sure, by his manner, it was no compliment.
Indeed they are very delightful apples, and Mrs.
Woodhouse made us promise to have them done three times—but Miss Woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it.
The apples themselves are the very finest sort for baking, beyond a doubt; all from Donwell—some of Mr.
Knightley’s most liberal supply.
He sends us a sack every year; and certainly there never was such a keeping apple anywhere as one of his trees—I believe there is two of them.
Knightley called one morning, and Jane was eating these apples, and we talked about them and said how much she enjoyed them, and he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock.
William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this year.
I will send you some more, before they get good for nothing.’ So I begged he would not—for really as to ours being gone, I could not absolutely say that we had a great many left—it was but half a dozen indeed; but they should be all kept for Jane; and I could not at all bear that he should be sending us more, so liberal as he had been already; and Jane said the same.
And when he was gone, she almost quarrelled with me—No, I should not say quarrelled, for we never had a quarrel in our lives; but she was quite distressed that I had owned the apples were so nearly gone; she wished I had made him believe we had a great many left.
William Larkins is such an old acquaintance!
But, however, I found afterwards from Patty, that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had; he had brought them all—and now his master had not one left to bake or boil.
Hodges, he said, was quite displeased at their being all sent away.
Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes, and as long as so many sacks were sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder.
And so Patty told me, and I was excessively shocked indeed!
Knightley know any thing about it for the world!
I wanted to keep it from Jane’s knowledge; but, unluckily, I had mentioned it before I was aware.” Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door; and her visitors walked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend to, pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good-will.
Pray take care, Miss Woodhouse, ours is rather a dark staircase—rather darker and narrower than one could wish.
Miss Woodhouse, I am quite concerned, I am sure you hit your foot.
Miss Smith, the step at the turning.” CHAPTER X The appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered, was tranquillity itself; Mrs.
Bates, deprived of her usual employment, slumbering on one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table near her, most deedily occupied about her spectacles, and Jane Fairfax, standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte.
Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to shew a most happy countenance on seeing Emma again.
“This is a pleasure,” said he, in rather a low voice, “coming at least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated.
Weston, “have not you finished it yet? you would not earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate.” “I have not been working uninterruptedly,” he replied, “I have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily, it was not quite firm; an unevenness in the floor, I believe.
This was very kind of you to be persuaded to come.
I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home.” He contrived that she should be seated by him; and was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple for her, and trying to make her help or advise him in his work, till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again.
That she was not immediately ready, Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves; she had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without emotion; she must reason herself into the power of performance; and Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their origin, and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again.
At last Jane began, and though the first bars were feebly given, the powers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to.
Weston had been delighted before, and was delighted again; Emma joined her in all her praise; and the pianoforte, with every proper discrimination, was pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise.
“Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ,” said Frank Churchill, with a smile at Emma, “the person has not chosen ill.
I heard a good deal of Colonel Campbell’s taste at Weymouth; and the softness of the upper notes I am sure is exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ would particularly prize.
I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either gave his friend very minute directions, or wrote to Broadwood himself.
Weston had been speaking to her at the same moment.
Do not distress her.” He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he had very little doubt and very little mercy.
Soon afterwards he began again, “How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on this occasion, Miss Fairfax.
I dare say they often think of you, and wonder which will be the day, the precise day of the instrument’s coming to hand.
Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to be going forward just at this time?—Do you imagine it to be the consequence of an immediate commission from him, or that he may have sent only a general direction, an order indefinite as to time, to depend upon contingencies and conveniences?” He paused.
She could not but hear; she could not avoid answering, “Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell,” said she, in a voice of forced calmness, “I can imagine nothing with any confidence.
It must be all conjecture.” “Conjecture—aye, sometimes one conjectures right, and sometimes one conjectures wrong.
I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite firm.
What nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse, when hard at work, if one talks at all;—your real workmen, I suppose, hold their tongues; but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word—Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing.
I have the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs.
Bates,) of restoring your spectacles, healed for the present.” He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape a little from the latter, he went to the pianoforte, and begged Miss Fairfax, who was still sitting at it, to play something more.
You did not enjoy them as I did; you appeared tired the whole time.
“What felicity it is to hear a tune again which _has_ made one happy!—If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth.” She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played something else.
He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte, and turning to Emma, said, “Here is something quite new to me.
Do you know it?—Cramer.—And here are a new set of Irish melodies.
This was all sent with the instrument.
Very thoughtful of Colonel Campbell, was not it?—He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music here.
I honour that part of the attention particularly; it shews it to have been so thoroughly from the heart.
Nothing hastily done; nothing incomplete.
He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.—Emma took the opportunity of whispering, “You speak too plain.
She must understand you.” “I hope she does.
I would have her understand me.
I am not in the least ashamed of my meaning.” “But really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never taken up the idea.” “I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me.
If she does wrong, she ought to feel it.” “She is not entirely without it, I think.” “I do not see much sign of it.
She is playing _Robin_ _Adair_ at this moment—_his_ favourite.” Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the window, descried Mr.
Knightley on horse-back not far off.
Knightley I declare!—I must speak to him if possible, just to thank him.
Quite delightful to have you all meet so!—Our little room so honoured!” She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke, and opening the casement there, immediately called Mr.
Knightley’s attention, and every syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the others, as if it had passed within the same apartment.
So obliged to you for the carriage last night.
Knightley seemed determined to be heard in his turn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say, “How is your niece, Miss Bates?—I want to inquire after you all, but particularly your niece.
The listeners were amused; and Mrs.
Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning.
But Emma still shook her head in steady scepticism.
“So obliged to you!—so very much obliged to you for the carriage,” resumed Miss Bates.
He cut her short with, “I am going to Kingston.
Can I do any thing for you?” “Oh! dear, Kingston—are you?—Mrs.
Cole was saying the other day she wanted something from Kingston.” “Mrs.
Cole has servants to send.
Who do you think is here?—Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte.
Do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in.” “Well,” said he, in a deliberating manner, “for five minutes, perhaps.” “And here is Mrs.
Frank Churchill too!—Quite delightful; so many friends!” “No, not now, I thank you.
I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can.” “Oh! do come in.
I will call another day, and hear the pianoforte.” “Well, I am so sorry!—Oh!
Knightley, what a delightful party last night; how extremely pleasant.—Did you ever see such dancing?—Was not it delightful?—Miss Woodhouse and Mr.
Frank Churchill; I never saw any thing equal to it.” “Oh! very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose Miss Woodhouse and Mr.
Frank Churchill are hearing every thing that passes.
And (raising his voice still more) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not be mentioned too.
Weston is the very best country-dance player, without exception, in England.
Now, if your friends have any gratitude, they will say something pretty loud about you and me in return; but I cannot stay to hear it.” “Oh!
Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence—so shocked!—Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!” “What is the matter now?” “To think of your sending us all your store apples.
William Larkins mentioned it here.
But I thought he would have staid now, and it would have been a pity not to have mentioned....
Well, (returning to the room,) I have not been able to succeed.
Knightley cannot stop.
He is going to Kingston.
Knightley spoke loud.
‘Can I do any thing for you at Kingston?’ said he; so I just mentioned....
Miss Woodhouse, must you be going?—You seem but just come—so very obliging of you.” Emma found it really time to be at home; the visit had already lasted long; and on examining watches, so much of the morning was perceived to be gone, that Mrs.
Weston and her companion taking leave also, could allow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to Hartfield gates, before they set off for Randalls.
CHAPTER XI It may be possible to do without dancing entirely.
Instances have been known of young people passing many, many months successively, without being at any ball of any description, and no material injury accrue either to body or mind;—but when a beginning is made—when the felicities of rapid motion have once been, though slightly, felt—it must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more.
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and longed to dance again; and the last half-hour of an evening which Mr.
Woodhouse was persuaded to spend with his daughter at Randalls, was passed by the two young people in schemes on the subject.
Frank’s was the first idea; and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it; for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties, and the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance.
But still she had inclination enough for shewing people again how delightfully Mr.
Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse danced—for doing that in which she need not blush to compare herself with Jane Fairfax—and even for simple dancing itself, without any of the wicked aids of vanity—to assist him first in pacing out the room they were in to see what it could be made to hold—and then in taking the dimensions of the other parlour, in the hope of discovering, in spite of all that Mr.
His first proposition and request, that the dance begun at Mr.
Cole’s should be finished there—that the same party should be collected, and the same musician engaged, met with the readiest acquiescence.
Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoyment, and Mrs.
Weston most willingly undertook to play as long as they could wish to dance; and the interesting employment had followed, of reckoning up exactly who there would be, and portioning out the indispensable division of space to every couple.
“You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss Coxes five,” had been repeated many times over.
“And there will be the two Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself, besides Mr.
Yes, that will be quite enough for pleasure.
Five couple are nothing, when one thinks seriously about it.
It can be allowable only as the thought of the moment.” Somebody said that _Miss_ Gilbert was expected at her brother’s, and must be invited with the rest.
Somebody else believed _Mrs_.
Weston naming one family of cousins who must be included, and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left out, it became a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they could be disposed of.
The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other.
Weston was in distress about the supper; and Mr.
Woodhouse opposed it earnestly, on the score of health.
It made him so very unhappy, indeed, that it could not be persevered in.
“Oh! no,” said he; “it would be the extreme of imprudence.
She would catch a dreadful cold.
That young man (speaking lower) is very thoughtless.
He has been opening the doors very often this evening, and keeping them open very inconsiderately.
She knew the importance of it, and said every thing in her power to do it away.
Every door was now closed, the passage plan given up, and the first scheme of dancing only in the room they were in resorted to again; and with such good-will on Frank Churchill’s part, that the space which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple, was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten.
“We were too magnificent,” said he.
“We allowed unnecessary room.
Ten couple may stand here very well.” Emma demurred.
“It would be a crowd—a sad crowd; and what could be worse than dancing without space to turn in?” “Very true,” he gravely replied; “it was very bad.” But still he went on measuring, and still he ended with, “I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple.” “No, no,” said she, “you are quite unreasonable.
It would be dreadful to be standing so close!
Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to be dancing in a crowd—and a crowd in a little room!” “There is no denying it,” he replied.
A crowd in a little room—Miss Woodhouse, you have the art of giving pictures in a few words.
Exquisite, quite exquisite!—Still, however, having proceeded so far, one is unwilling to give the matter up.
It would be a disappointment to my father—and altogether—I do not know that—I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well.” Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a little self-willed, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of dancing with her; but she took the compliment, and forgave the rest.
Had she intended ever to _marry_ him, it might have been worth while to pause and consider, and try to understand the value of his preference, and the character of his temper; but for all the purposes of their acquaintance, he was quite amiable enough.
Before the middle of the next day, he was at Hartfield; and he entered the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of the scheme.
It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement.
“Well, Miss Woodhouse,” he almost immediately began, “your inclination for dancing has not been quite frightened away, I hope, by the terrors of my father’s little rooms.
I bring a new proposal on the subject:—a thought of my father’s, which waits only your approbation to be acted upon.
May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances of this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at the Crown Inn?” “The Crown!” “Yes; if you and Mr.
Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you cannot, my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there.
Better accommodations, he can promise them, and not a less grateful welcome than at Randalls.
Weston sees no objection to it, provided you are satisfied.
Oh! you were perfectly right!
Ten couple, in either of the Randalls rooms, would have been insufferable!—Dreadful!—I felt how right you were the whole time, but was too anxious for securing _any_ _thing_ to like to yield.
Is not it a good exchange?—You consent—I hope you consent?” “It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to, if Mr. and Mrs.
I think it admirable; and, as far as I can answer for myself, shall be most happy—It seems the only improvement that could be.
Papa, do you not think it an excellent improvement?” She was obliged to repeat and explain it, before it was fully comprehended; and then, being quite new, farther representations were necessary to make it acceptable.
“No; he thought it very far from an improvement—a very bad plan—much worse than the other.
A room at an inn was always damp and dangerous; never properly aired, or fit to be inhabited.
If they must dance, they had better dance at Randalls.
They would catch worse colds at the Crown than anywhere.” “I was going to observe, sir,” said Frank Churchill, “that one of the great recommendations of this change would be the very little danger of any body’s catching cold—so much less danger at the Crown than at Randalls!
Perry might have reason to regret the alteration, but nobody else could.” “Sir,” said Mr.
Woodhouse, rather warmly, “you are very much mistaken if you suppose Mr.
Perry to be that sort of character.
Perry is extremely concerned when any of us are ill.
But I do not understand how the room at the Crown can be safer for you than your father’s house.” “From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir.
We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all—not once the whole evening; and it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows, letting in cold air upon heated bodies, which (as you well know, sir) does the mischief.” “Open the windows!—but surely, Mr.
Churchill, nobody would think of opening the windows at Randalls.
Nobody could be so imprudent!
Weston (poor Miss Taylor that was) would suffer it.” “Ah! sir—but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind a window-curtain, and throw up a sash, without its being suspected.
I never could have supposed it.
But I live out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear.
However, this does make a difference; and, perhaps, when we come to talk it over—but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration.
Weston will be so obliging as to call here one morning, we may talk it over, and see what can be done.” “But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited—” “Oh!” interrupted Emma, “there will be plenty of time for talking every thing over.
If it can be contrived to be at the Crown, papa, it will be very convenient for the horses.
Not that James ever complains; but it is right to spare our horses when we can.
If I could be sure of the rooms being thoroughly aired—but is Mrs.
Weston undertakes to direct the whole.” “There, papa!—Now you must be satisfied—Our own dear Mrs.
Weston, who is carefulness itself.
Do not you remember what Mr.
‘If _Miss_ _Taylor_ undertakes to wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fears, sir.’ How often have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her!” “Aye, very true.
You were very bad with the measles; that is, you would have been very bad, but for Perry’s great attention.
He said, from the first, it was a very good sort—which was our great comfort; but the measles are a dreadful complaint.
I hope whenever poor Isabella’s little ones have the measles, she will send for Perry.” “My father and Mrs.
Weston are at the Crown at this moment,” said Frank Churchill, “examining the capabilities of the house.
I left them there and came on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion, and hoping you might be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot.
It would be the greatest pleasure to them, if you could allow me to attend you there.
They can do nothing satisfactorily without you.” Emma was most happy to be called to such a council; and her father, engaging to think it all over while she was gone, the two young people set off together without delay for the Crown.
Weston; delighted to see her and receive her approbation, very busy and very happy in their different way; she, in some little distress; and he, finding every thing perfect.
“Emma,” said she, “this paper is worse than I expected.
Look! in places you see it is dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot is more yellow and forlorn than any thing I could have imagined.” “My dear, you are too particular,” said her husband.
You will see nothing of it by candlelight.
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight.
We never see any thing of it on our club-nights.” The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, “Men never know when things are dirty or not;” and the gentlemen perhaps thought each to himself, “Women will have their little nonsenses and needless cares.” One perplexity, however, arose, which the gentlemen did not disdain.
It regarded a supper-room.
At the time of the ballroom’s being built, suppers had not been in question; and a small card-room adjoining, was the only addition.
This card-room would be wanted as a card-room now; or, if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four selves, still was it not too small for any comfortable supper?
This made a difficulty.
Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people in that passage; and neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being miserably crowded at supper.
Weston proposed having no regular supper; merely sandwiches, &c., set out in the little room; but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion.
A private dance, without sitting down to supper, was pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women; and Mrs.
She then took another line of expediency, and looking into the doubtful room, observed, “I do not think it _is_ so very small.
Weston, “one could know which arrangement our guests in general would like best.
To do what would be most generally pleasing must be our object—if one could but tell what that would be.” “Yes, very true,” cried Frank, “very true.
You want your neighbours’ opinions.
If one could ascertain what the chief of them—the Coles, for instance.
She is still nearer.—And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations of the rest of the people as any body.
Weston rather hesitating, “if you think she will be of any use.” “You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates,” said Emma.
“She will be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing.
She will not even listen to your questions.
I see no advantage in consulting Miss Bates.” “But she is so amusing, so extremely amusing!
Weston joined them, and on hearing what was proposed, gave it his decided approbation.
She will enjoy the scheme, I am sure; and I do not know a properer person for shewing us how to do away difficulties.
She is a standing lesson of how to be happy.
I shall think you a great blockhead, Frank, if you bring the aunt without the niece.” “Oh!
I did not immediately recollect.
Undoubtedly if you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade them both.” And away he ran.
Long before he reappeared, attending the short, neat, brisk-moving aunt, and her elegant niece,—Mrs.
Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman and a good wife, had examined the passage again, and found the evils of it much less than she had supposed before—indeed very trifling; and here ended the difficulties of decision.
All the rest, in speculation at least, was perfectly smooth.
All the minor arrangements of table and chair, lights and music, tea and supper, made themselves; or were left as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs.
Stokes.—Every body invited, was certainly to come; Frank had already written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight, which could not possibly be refused.
And a delightful dance it was to be.
Most cordially, when Miss Bates arrived, did she agree that it must.
As a counsellor she was not wanted; but as an approver, (a much safer character,) she was truly welcome.
Her approbation, at once general and minute, warm and incessant, could not but please; and for another half-hour they were all walking to and fro, between the different rooms, some suggesting, some attending, and all in happy enjoyment of the future.
The party did not break up without Emma’s being positively secured for the two first dances by the hero of the evening, nor without her overhearing Mr.
I knew he would!” CHAPTER XII One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma—its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill’s stay in Surry; for, in spite of Mr.
Weston’s confidence, she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight.
But this was not judged feasible.
The preparations must take their time, nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on, and for a few days they must be planning, proceeding and hoping in uncertainty—at the risk—in her opinion, the great risk, of its being all in vain.
Enscombe however was gracious, gracious in fact, if not in word.
His wish of staying longer evidently did not please; but it was not opposed.
All was safe and prosperous; and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way for another, Emma, being now certain of her ball, began to adopt as the next vexation Mr.
Knightley’s provoking indifference about it.
Either because he did not dance himself, or because the plan had been formed without his being consulted, he seemed resolved that it should not interest him, determined against its exciting any present curiosity, or affording him any future amusement.
To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approving reply, than, “Very well.
Those who are standing by are usually thinking of something very different.” This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her quite angry.
It was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent, or so indignant; he was not guided by _her_ feelings in reprobating the ball, for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree.
It made her animated—open hearted—she voluntarily said;— “Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball.
What a disappointment it would be!
I do look forward to it, I own, with _very_ great pleasure.” It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have preferred the society of William Larkins.
No!—she was more and more convinced that Mrs.
Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise.
There was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his side—but no love.
Alas! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr.
Two days of joyful security were immediately followed by the over-throw of every thing.
Churchill to urge his nephew’s instant return.
Churchill was unwell—far too unwell to do without him; she had been in a very suffering state (so said her husband) when writing to her nephew two days before, though from her usual unwillingness to give pain, and constant habit of never thinking of herself, she had not mentioned it; but now she was too ill to trifle, and must entreat him to set off for Enscombe without delay.
The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma, in a note from Mrs.
As to his going, it was inevitable.
He must be gone within a few hours, though without feeling any real alarm for his aunt, to lessen his repugnance.
He knew her illnesses; they never occurred but for her own convenience.
Weston added, “that he could only allow himself time to hurry to Highbury, after breakfast, and take leave of the few friends there whom he could suppose to feel any interest in him; and that he might be expected at Hartfield very soon.” This wretched note was the finale of Emma’s breakfast.
The loss of the ball—the loss of the young man—and all that the young man might be feeling!—It was too wretched!—Such a delightful evening as it would have been!—Every body so happy! and she and her partner the happiest!—“I said it would be so,” was the only consolation.
Her father’s feelings were quite distinct.
He thought principally of Mrs.
Churchill’s illness, and wanted to know how she was treated; and as for the ball, it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed; but they would all be safer at home.
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared; but if this reflected at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him.
His dejection was most evident.
Miss Woodhouse, why are you always so right?” “Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance.
Do not forget your engagement.” Emma looked graciously.
“Such a fortnight as it has been!” he continued; “every day more precious and more delightful than the day before!—every day making me less fit to bear any other place.
Happy those, who can remain at Highbury!” “As you do us such ample justice now,” said Emma, laughing, “I will venture to ask, whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first?
Do not we rather surpass your expectations?
You would not have been so long in coming, if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury.” He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment, Emma was convinced that it had been so.
“And you must be off this very morning?” “Yes; my father is to join me here: we shall walk back together, and I must be off immediately.
Miss Bates’s powerful, argumentative mind might have strengthened yours.” “Yes—I _have_ called there; passing the door, I thought it better.
I went in for three minutes, and was detained by Miss Bates’s being absent.
She was out; and I felt it impossible not to wait till she came in.
It was better to pay my visit, then”— He hesitated, got up, walked to a window.
“In short,” said he, “perhaps, Miss Woodhouse—I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion”— He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts.
It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely serious, which she did not wish.
Forcing herself to speak, therefore, in the hope of putting it by, she calmly said, “You are quite in the right; it was most natural to pay your visit, then”— He was silent.
She believed he was looking at her; probably reflecting on what she had said, and trying to understand the manner.
He could not believe her to be encouraging him.
A few awkward moments passed, and he sat down again; and in a more determined manner said, “It was something to feel that all the rest of my time might be given to Hartfield.
My regard for Hartfield is most warm”— He stopt again, rose again, and seemed quite embarrassed.—He was more in love with her than Emma had supposed; and who can say how it might have ended, if his father had not made his appearance?
Woodhouse soon followed; and the necessity of exertion made him composed.
A very few minutes more, however, completed the present trial.
Weston, always alert when business was to be done, and as incapable of procrastinating any evil that was inevitable, as of foreseeing any that was doubtful, said, “It was time to go;” and the young man, though he might and did sigh, could not but agree, to take leave.
“I shall hear about you all,” said he; “that is my chief consolation.
Weston to correspond with me.
Oh! the blessing of a female correspondent, when one is really interested in the absent!—she will tell me every thing.
In her letters I shall be at dear Highbury again.” A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest “Good-bye,” closed the speech, and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill.
Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit to the last two weeks—indescribable spirit; the idea, the expectation of seeing him which every morning had brought, the assurance of his attentions, his liveliness, his manners!
It had been a very happy fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common course of Hartfield days.
To complete every other recommendation, he had _almost_ told her that he loved her.
What strength, or what constancy of affection he might be subject to, was another point; but at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration, a conscious preference of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all the rest, made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him, in spite of every previous determination against it.
“I certainly must,” said she.
“This sensation of listlessness, weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down and employ myself, this feeling of every thing’s being dull and insipid about the house!— I must be in love; I should be the oddest creature in the world if I were not—for a few weeks at least.
I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball, if not for Frank Churchill; but Mr.
Knightley will be happy.
Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness.
She had been particularly unwell, however, suffering from headache to a degree, which made her aunt declare, that had the ball taken place, she did not think Jane could have attended it; and it was charity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of ill-health.
CHAPTER XIII Emma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love.
At first, she thought it was a good deal; and afterwards, but little.
She had great pleasure in hearing Frank Churchill talked of; and, for his sake, greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr. and Mrs.
Weston; she was very often thinking of him, and quite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he was, how were his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance of his coming to Randalls again this spring.
Their affection was always to subside into friendship.
Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting; but still they were to part.
When she became sensible of this, it struck her that she could not be very much in love; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to quit her father, never to marry, a strong attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings.
“I do not find myself making any use of the word _sacrifice_,” said she.—“In not one of all my clever replies, my delicate negatives, is there any allusion to making a sacrifice.
I do suspect that he is not really necessary to my happiness.
I certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I do.
I should be sorry to be more.” Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her view of his feelings.
“_He_ is undoubtedly very much in love—every thing denotes it—very much in love indeed!—and when he comes again, if his affection continue, I must be on my guard not to encourage it.—It would be most inexcusable to do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up.
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto.
No, if he had believed me at all to share his feelings, he would not have been so wretched.
Could he have thought himself encouraged, his looks and language at parting would have been different.—Still, however, I must be on my guard.
Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it; and she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her at first shake her head over her own sensations, and think she had undervalued their strength.
It was a long, well-written letter, giving the particulars of his journey and of his feelings, expressing all the affection, gratitude, and respect which was natural and honourable, and describing every thing exterior and local that could be supposed attractive, with spirit and precision.
No suspicious flourishes now of apology or concern; it was the language of real feeling towards Mrs.
Compressed into the very lowest vacant corner were these words—“I had not a spare moment on Tuesday, as you know, for Miss Woodhouse’s beautiful little friend.
Harriet was remembered only from being _her_ friend.
His information and prospects as to Enscombe were neither worse nor better than had been anticipated; Mrs.
Churchill was recovering, and he dared not yet, even in his own imagination, fix a time for coming to Randalls again.
Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter in the material part, its sentiments, she yet found, when it was folded up and returned to Mrs.
Her intentions were unchanged.
Her resolution of refusal only grew more interesting by the addition of a scheme for his subsequent consolation and happiness.
His recollection of Harriet, and the words which clothed it, the “beautiful little friend,” suggested to her the idea of Harriet’s succeeding her in his affections.
Was it impossible?—No.—Harriet undoubtedly was greatly his inferior in understanding; but he had been very much struck with the loveliness of her face and the warm simplicity of her manner; and all the probabilities of circumstance and connexion were in her favour.—For Harriet, it would be advantageous and delightful indeed.
I know the danger of indulging such speculations.
But stranger things have happened; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now, it will be the means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterested friendship which I can already look forward to with pleasure.” It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet’s behalf, though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for evil in that quarter was at hand.
As Frank Churchill’s arrival had succeeded Mr.
Elton’s engagement in the conversation of Highbury, as the latest interest had entirely borne down the first, so now upon Frank Churchill’s disappearance, Mr.
Elton’s concerns were assuming the most irresistible form.—His wedding-day was named.
There was hardly time to talk over the first letter from Enscombe before “Mr.
Elton and his bride” was in every body’s mouth, and Frank Churchill was forgotten.
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr.
Elton; and Harriet’s mind, she had been willing to hope, had been lately gaining strength.
Weston’s ball in view at least, there had been a great deal of insensibility to other things; but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state of composure as could stand against the actual approach—new carriage, bell-ringing, and all.
Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the reasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma could give.
Emma felt that she could not do too much for her, that Harriet had a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience; but it was heavy work to be for ever convincing without producing any effect, for ever agreed to, without being able to make their opinions the same.
Harriet listened submissively, and said “it was very true—it was just as Miss Woodhouse described—it was not worth while to think about them—and she would not think about them any longer” but no change of subject could avail, and the next half-hour saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons as before.
At last Emma attacked her on another ground.
“Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr.
Elton’s marrying, Harriet, is the strongest reproach you can make _me_.
I have not forgotten it, I assure you.—Deceived myself, I did very miserably deceive you—and it will be a painful reflection to me for ever.
Do not imagine me in danger of forgetting it.” Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eager exclamation.
Emma continued, “I have not said, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less, talk less of Mr.
Elton for my sake; because for your own sake rather, I would wish it to be done, for the sake of what is more important than my comfort, a habit of self-command in you, a consideration of what is your duty, an attention to propriety, an endeavour to avoid the suspicions of others, to save your health and credit, and restore your tranquillity.
These are the motives which I have been pressing on you.
They are very important—and sorry I am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them.
My being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration.
I want you to save yourself from greater pain.
Perhaps I may sometimes have felt that Harriet would not forget what was due—or rather what would be kind by me.” This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest.
The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse, whom she really loved extremely, made her wretched for a while, and when the violence of grief was comforted away, still remained powerful enough to prompt to what was right and support her in it very tolerably.
“You, who have been the best friend I ever had in my life—Want gratitude to you!—Nobody is equal to you!—I care for nobody as I do for you!—Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have been!” Such expressions, assisted as they were by every thing that look and manner could do, made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet so well, nor valued her affection so highly before.
“There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart,” said she afterwards to herself.
“There is nothing to be compared to it.
Warmth and tenderness of heart, with an affectionate, open manner, will beat all the clearness of head in the world, for attraction, I am sure it will.
It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so generally beloved—which gives Isabella all her popularity.—I have it not—but I know how to prize and respect it.—Harriet is my superior in all the charm and all the felicity it gives.
Dear Harriet!—I would not change you for the clearest-headed, longest-sighted, best-judging female breathing.
Oh! the coldness of a Jane Fairfax!—Harriet is worth a hundred such—And for a wife—a sensible man’s wife—it is invaluable.
Elton was first seen at church: but though devotion might be interrupted, curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew, and it must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paid, to settle whether she were very pretty indeed, or only rather pretty, or not pretty at all.
Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety, to make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respects; and she made a point of Harriet’s going with her, that the worst of the business might be gone through as soon as possible.
She could not enter the house again, could not be in the same room to which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago, to lace up her boot, without _recollecting_.
A thousand vexatious thoughts would recur.
Compliments, charades, and horrible blunders; and it was not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too; but she behaved very well, and was only rather pale and silent.
The visit was of course short; and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one, beyond the nothing-meaning terms of being “elegantly dressed, and very pleasing.” She did not really like her.
She would not be in a hurry to find fault, but she suspected that there was no elegance;—ease, but not elegance.— She was almost sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride, there was too much ease.
Her person was rather good; her face not unpretty; but neither feature, nor air, nor voice, nor manner, were elegant.
It was an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits, and a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it.
The woman was better off; she might have the assistance of fine clothes, and the privilege of bashfulness, but the man had only his own good sense to depend on; and when she considered how peculiarly unlucky poor Mr.
Elton was in being in the same room at once with the woman he had just married, the woman he had wanted to marry, and the woman whom he had been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the right to look as little wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy as could be.
“Well, Miss Woodhouse,” said Harriet, when they had quitted the house, and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin; “Well, Miss Woodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?—Is not she very charming?” There was a little hesitation in Emma’s answer.
Miss Hawkins perhaps wanted a home, and thought this the best offer she was likely to have.” “Yes,” said Harriet earnestly, “and well she might, nobody could ever have a better.
And now, Miss Woodhouse, I do not think I shall mind seeing them again.
He is just as superior as ever;—but being married, you know, it is quite a different thing.
No, indeed, Miss Woodhouse, you need not be afraid; I can sit and admire him now without any great misery.
To know that he has not thrown himself away, is such a comfort!—She does seem a charming young woman, just what he deserves.
He called her ‘Augusta.’ How delightful!” When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind.
From Harriet’s happening not to be at Hartfield, and her father’s being present to engage Mr.
Elton, she had a quarter of an hour of the lady’s conversation to herself, and could composedly attend to her; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced her that Mrs.
Elton was a vain woman, extremely well satisfied with herself, and thinking much of her own importance; that she meant to shine and be very superior, but with manners which had been formed in a bad school, pert and familiar; that all her notions were drawn from one set of people, and one style of living; that if not foolish she was ignorant, and that her society would certainly do Mr.
If not wise or refined herself, she would have connected him with those who were; but Miss Hawkins, it might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit, had been the best of her own set.
The rich brother-in-law near Bristol was the pride of the alliance, and his place and his carriages were the pride of him.
Suckling’s seat;”—a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove.
The grounds of Hartfield were small, but neat and pretty; and the house was modern and well-built.
Elton seemed most favourably impressed by the size of the room, the entrance, and all that she could see or imagine.
“Very like Maple Grove indeed!—She was quite struck by the likeness!—That room was the very shape and size of the morning-room at Maple Grove; her sister’s favourite room.”—Mr.
Elton was appealed to.—“Was not it astonishingly like?—She could really almost fancy herself at Maple Grove.” “And the staircase—You know, as I came in, I observed how very like the staircase was; placed exactly in the same part of the house.
I really could not help exclaiming!
I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, it is very delightful to me, to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial to as Maple Grove.
I have spent so many happy months there! (with a little sigh of sentiment).
A charming place, undoubtedly.
Whenever you are transplanted, like me, Miss Woodhouse, you will understand how very delightful it is to meet with any thing at all like what one has left behind.
I always say this is quite one of the evils of matrimony.” Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was fully sufficient for Mrs.
“So extremely like Maple Grove!
And it is not merely the house—the grounds, I assure you, as far as I could observe, are strikingly like.
The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here, and stand very much in the same way—just across the lawn; and I had a glimpse of a fine large tree, with a bench round it, which put me so exactly in mind!
My brother and sister will be enchanted with this place.
People who have extensive grounds themselves are always pleased with any thing in the same style.” Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment.
She had a great idea that people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds of any body else; but it was not worth while to attack an error so double-dyed, and therefore only said in reply, “When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think you have overrated Hartfield.
Surry is full of beauties.” “Oh! yes, I am quite aware of that.
Surry is the garden of England.” “Yes; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction.
Many counties, I believe, are called the garden of England, as well as Surry.” “No, I fancy not,” replied Mrs.
Elton, with a most satisfied smile.
“I never heard any county but Surry called so.” Emma was silenced.
“My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring, or summer at farthest,” continued Mrs.
Elton; “and that will be our time for exploring.
They will have their barouche-landau, of course, which holds four perfectly; and therefore, without saying any thing of _our_ carriage, we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well.
Indeed, when the time draws on, I shall decidedly recommend their bringing the barouche-landau; it will be so very much preferable.
When people come into a beautiful country of this sort, you know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wishes them to see as much as possible; and Mr.
Suckling is extremely fond of exploring.
We explored to King’s-Weston twice last summer, in that way, most delightfully, just after their first having the barouche-landau.
You have many parties of that kind here, I suppose, Miss Woodhouse, every summer?” “No; not immediately here.
We are rather out of distance of the very striking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of; and we are a very quiet set of people, I believe; more disposed to stay at home than engage in schemes of pleasure.” “Ah! there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort.
I absolutely must go in by myself, though I hate being stuck up in the barouche-landau without a companion; but Augusta, I believe, with her own good-will, would never stir beyond the park paling.’ Many a time has she said so; and yet I am no advocate for entire seclusion.
I think, on the contrary, when people shut themselves up entirely from society, it is a very bad thing; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world in a proper degree, without living in it either too much or too little.
I perfectly understand your situation, however, Miss Woodhouse—(looking towards Mr.
Woodhouse), Your father’s state of health must be a great drawback.
Let me recommend Bath to you.
Woodhouse good.” “My father tried it more than once, formerly; but without receiving any benefit; and Mr.
Perry, whose name, I dare say, is not unknown to you, does not conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now.” “Ah! that’s a great pity; for I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, where the waters do agree, it is quite wonderful the relief they give.
In my Bath life, I have seen such instances of it!
And it is so cheerful a place, that it could not fail of being of use to Mr.
Woodhouse’s spirits, which, I understand, are sometimes much depressed.
And as to its recommendations to _you_, I fancy I need not take much pains to dwell on them.
The advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generally understood.
It would be a charming introduction for you, who have lived so secluded a life; and I could immediately secure you some of the best society in the place.
A line from me would bring you a little host of acquaintance; and my particular friend, Mrs.
Partridge, the lady I have always resided with when in Bath, would be most happy to shew you any attentions, and would be the very person for you to go into public with.” It was as much as Emma could bear, without being impolite.
The idea of her being indebted to Mrs.
Elton for what was called an _introduction_—of her going into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs.
Elton’s—probably some vulgar, dashing widow, who, with the help of a boarder, just made a shift to live!—The dignity of Miss Woodhouse, of Hartfield, was sunk indeed!
She restrained herself, however, from any of the reproofs she could have given, and only thanked Mrs.
Elton coolly; “but their going to Bath was quite out of the question; and she was not perfectly convinced that the place might suit her better than her father.” And then, to prevent farther outrage and indignation, changed the subject directly.
Upon these occasions, a lady’s character generally precedes her; and Highbury has long known that you are a superior performer.” “Oh! no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea.
A superior performer!—very far from it, I assure you.
Consider from how partial a quarter your information came.
I am doatingly fond of music—passionately fond;—and my friends say I am not entirely devoid of taste; but as to any thing else, upon my honour my performance is _mediocre_ to the last degree.
You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play delightfully.
I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction, comfort, and delight to me, to hear what a musical society I am got into.
I absolutely cannot do without music.
It is a necessary of life to me; and having always been used to a very musical society, both at Maple Grove and in Bath, it would have been a most serious sacrifice.
I honestly said as much to Mr.
E. when he was speaking of my future home, and expressing his fears lest the retirement of it should be disagreeable; and the inferiority of the house too—knowing what I had been accustomed to—of course he was not wholly without apprehension.
When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly said that _the_ _world_ I could give up—parties, balls, plays—for I had no fear of retirement.
Blessed with so many resources within myself, the world was not necessary to _me_.
To those who had no resources it was a different thing; but my resources made me quite independent.
I hoped I was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description.
Certainly I had been accustomed to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I did assure him that two carriages were not necessary to my happiness, nor were spacious apartments.
‘But,’ said I, ‘to be quite honest, I do not think I can live without something of a musical society.
I condition for nothing else; but without music, life would be a blank to me.’” “We cannot suppose,” said Emma, smiling, “that Mr.
Elton would hesitate to assure you of there being a _very_ musical society in Highbury; and I hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than may be pardoned, in consideration of the motive.” “No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head.
I am delighted to find myself in such a circle.
I hope we shall have many sweet little concerts together.
I think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish a musical club, and have regular weekly meetings at your house, or ours.
If _we_ exert ourselves, I think we shall not be long in want of allies.
Something of that nature would be particularly desirable for _me_, as an inducement to keep me in practice; for married women, you know—there is a sad story against them, in general.
They are but too apt to give up music.” “But you, who are so extremely fond of it—there can be no danger, surely?” “I should hope not; but really when I look around among my acquaintance, I tremble.
Selina has entirely given up music—never touches the instrument—though she played sweetly.
Jeffereys—Clara Partridge, that was—and of the two Milmans, now Mrs.
James Cooper; and of more than I can enumerate.
I used to be quite angry with Selina; but really I begin now to comprehend that a married woman has many things to call her attention.
I believe I was half an hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper.” “But every thing of that kind,” said Emma, “will soon be in so regular a train—” “Well,” said Mrs.
Elton, laughing, “we shall see.” Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her music, had nothing more to say; and, after a moment’s pause, Mrs.
“We have been calling at Randalls,” said she, “and found them both at home; and very pleasant people they seem to be.
I like them extremely.
Weston seems an excellent creature—quite a first-rate favourite with me already, I assure you.
And _she_ appears so truly good—there is something so motherly and kind-hearted about her, that it wins upon one directly.
She was your governess, I think?” Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs.
Elton hardly waited for the affirmative before she went on.
“Having understood as much, I was rather astonished to find her so very lady-like!
But she is really quite the gentlewoman.” “Mrs.
Weston’s manners,” said Emma, “were always particularly good.
Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make them the safest model for any young woman.” “And who do you think came in while we were there?” Emma was quite at a loss.
The tone implied some old acquaintance—and how could she possibly guess?
“Knightley!” continued Mrs.
Elton; “Knightley himself!—Was not it lucky?—for, not being within when he called the other day, I had never seen him before; and of course, as so particular a friend of Mr.
E.’s, I had a great curiosity.
‘My friend Knightley’ had been so often mentioned, that I was really impatient to see him; and I must do my cara sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his friend.
Knightley is quite the gentleman.
Decidedly, I think, a very gentleman-like man.” Happily, it was now time to be gone.
“Insufferable woman!” was her immediate exclamation.
“Worse than I had supposed.
Absolutely insufferable!
Knightley!—I could not have believed it.
Knightley!—never seen him in her life before, and call him Knightley!—and discover that he is a gentleman!
E., and her _caro_ _sposo_, and her resources, and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery.
Actually to discover that Mr.
Knightley is a gentleman!
I doubt whether he will return the compliment, and discover her to be a lady.
I could not have believed it!
Weston!—Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be a gentlewoman!
Harriet is disgraced by any comparison.
Oh! what would Frank Churchill say to her, if he were here?
How angry and how diverted he would be!
Ah! there I am—thinking of him directly.
Frank Churchill comes as regularly into my mind!”— All this ran so glibly through her thoughts, that by the time her father had arranged himself, after the bustle of the Eltons’ departure, and was ready to speak, she was very tolerably capable of attending.
“Well, my dear,” he deliberately began, “considering we never saw her before, she seems a very pretty sort of young lady; and I dare say she was very much pleased with you.
A little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear.
However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-behaved young lady, and no doubt will make him a very good wife.
Elton on this happy occasion; I said that I hoped I _should_ in the course of the summer.
But I do not like the corner into Vicarage Lane.” “I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir.
Elton knows you.” “Yes: but a young lady—a bride—I ought to have paid my respects to her if possible.
It was being very deficient.” “But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_?
It ought to be no recommendation to _you_.
It is encouraging people to marry if you make so much of them.” “No, my dear, I never encouraged any body to marry, but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady—and a bride, especially, is never to be neglected.
More is avowedly due to _her_.
A bride, you know, my dear, is always the first in company, let the others be who they may.” “Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry, I do not know what is.
And I should never have expected you to be lending your sanction to such vanity-baits for poor young ladies.” “My dear, you do not understand me.
This is a matter of mere common politeness and good-breeding, and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry.” Emma had done.
Her father was growing nervous, and could not understand _her_.
Her mind returned to Mrs.
Elton’s offences, and long, very long, did they occupy her.
CHAPTER XV Emma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill opinion of Mrs.
Her observation had been pretty correct.
Elton appeared to her on this second interview, such she appeared whenever they met again,—self-important, presuming, familiar, ignorant, and ill-bred.
She had a little beauty and a little accomplishment, but so little judgment that she thought herself coming with superior knowledge of the world, to enliven and improve a country neighbourhood; and conceived Miss Hawkins to have held such a place in society as Mrs.
Elton’s consequence only could surpass.
Elton thought at all differently from his wife.
Elton’s praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought to do, unimpeded by Miss Woodhouse, who readily continued her first contribution and talked with a good grace of her being “very pleasant and very elegantly dressed.” In one respect Mrs.
Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at first.
Her feelings altered towards Emma.—Offended, probably, by the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drew back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant; and though the effect was agreeable, the ill-will which produced it was necessarily increasing Emma’s dislike.
Elton’s, were unpleasant towards Harriet.
They were sneering and negligent.
Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet’s cure; but the sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very much.—It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet’s attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreserve, and her own share in the story, under a colouring the least favourable to her and the most soothing to him, had in all likelihood been given also.
She was, of course, the object of their joint dislike.—When they had nothing else to say, it must be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the enmity which they dared not shew in open disrespect to her, found a broader vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet.
Not merely when a state of warfare with one young lady might be supposed to recommend the other, but from the very first; and she was not satisfied with expressing a natural and reasonable admiration—but without solicitation, or plea, or privilege, she must be wanting to assist and befriend her.—Before Emma had forfeited her confidence, and about the third time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs.
Elton’s knight-errantry on the subject.— “Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming, Miss Woodhouse.—I quite rave about Jane Fairfax.—A sweet, interesting creature.
So mild and ladylike—and with such talents!—I assure you I think she has very extraordinary talents.
I do not scruple to say that she plays extremely well.
I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point.
Oh! she is absolutely charming!
You will laugh at my warmth—but, upon my word, I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax.—And her situation is so calculated to affect one!—Miss Woodhouse, we must exert ourselves and endeavour to do something for her.
Campbell, I have no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown.” “Oh! but dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in such retirement, such obscurity, so thrown away.—Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed with the Campbells are so palpably at an end!
One can see that she feels the want of encouragement.
I must confess it is a recommendation to me.
I am a great advocate for timidity—and I am sure one does not often meet with it.—But in those who are at all inferior, it is extremely prepossessing.
I assure you, Jane Fairfax is a very delightful character, and interests me more than I can express.” “You appear to feel a great deal—but I am not aware how you or any of Miss Fairfax’s acquaintance here, any of those who have known her longer than yourself, can shew her any other attention than”— “My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done by those who dare to act.
It is not likely that I _should_, considering what I have been used to.
My greatest danger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite the other way, in doing too much, and being too careless of expense.
Maple Grove will probably be my model more than it ought to be—for we do not at all affect to equal my brother, Mr.
Suckling, in income.—However, my resolution is taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax.—I shall certainly have her very often at my house, shall introduce her wherever I can, shall have musical parties to draw out her talents, and shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation.
My acquaintance is so very extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suit her shortly.—I shall introduce her, of course, very particularly to my brother and sister when they come to us.
Dixon, but this is a punishment beyond what you can have merited!—The kindness and protection of Mrs.
Let me not suppose that she dares go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!—But upon my honour, there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman’s tongue!” Emma had not to listen to such paradings again—to any so exclusively addressed to herself—so disgustingly decorated with a “dear Miss Woodhouse.” The change on Mrs.
Elton’s side soon afterwards appeared, and she was left in peace—neither forced to be the very particular friend of Mrs.
Elton’s guidance, the very active patroness of Jane Fairfax, and only sharing with others in a general way, in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.
She looked on with some amusement.—Miss Bates’s gratitude for Mrs.
Elton’s attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless simplicity and warmth.
She was quite one of her worthies—the most amiable, affable, delightful woman—just as accomplished and condescending as Mrs.
Elton meant to be considered.
Emma’s only surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and tolerate Mrs.
She heard of her walking with the Eltons, sitting with the Eltons, spending a day with the Eltons!
This was astonishing!—She could not have believed it possible that the taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax could endure such society and friendship as the Vicarage had to offer.
“She is a riddle, quite a riddle!” said she.—“To chuse to remain here month after month, under privations of every sort!
And now to chuse the mortification of Mrs.
According to Miss Bates—it all came from her—Mrs.
Dixon had written most pressingly.
Would Jane but go, means were to be found, servants sent, friends contrived—no travelling difficulty allowed to exist; but still she had declined it!
“She must have some motive, more powerful than appears, for refusing this invitation,” was Emma’s conclusion.
“She must be under some sort of penance, inflicted either by the Campbells or herself.
There is great fear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.—She is _not_ to be with the _Dixons_.
The decree is issued by somebody.
But why must she consent to be with the Eltons?—Here is quite a separate puzzle.” Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subject, before the few who knew her opinion of Mrs.
Weston ventured this apology for Jane.
“We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage, my dear Emma—but it is better than being always at home.
Her aunt is a good creature, but, as a constant companion, must be very tiresome.
We must consider what Miss Fairfax quits, before we condemn her taste for what she goes to.” “You are right, Mrs.
Knightley warmly, “Miss Fairfax is as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion of Mrs.
Could she have chosen with whom to associate, she would not have chosen her.
But (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receives attentions from Mrs.
Weston was giving her a momentary glance; and she was herself struck by his warmth.
With a faint blush, she presently replied, “Such attentions as Mrs.
Elton’s, I should have imagined, would rather disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax.
Elton’s invitations I should have imagined any thing but inviting.” “I should not wonder,” said Mrs.
Weston, “if Miss Fairfax were to have been drawn on beyond her own inclination, by her aunt’s eagerness in accepting Mrs.
Elton’s civilities for her.
Poor Miss Bates may very likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greater appearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictated, in spite of the very natural wish of a little change.” Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again; and after a few minutes silence, he said, “Another thing must be taken into consideration too—Mrs.
We all know the difference between the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest spoken amongst us; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with each other—a something more early implanted.
We cannot give any body the disagreeable hints that we may have been very full of the hour before.
We feel things differently.
And besides the operation of this, as a general principle, you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs.
Elton by her superiority both of mind and manner; and that, face to face, Mrs.
Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell in Mrs.
Elton’s way before—and no degree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action, if not in consciousness.” “I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax,” said Emma.
Little Henry was in her thoughts, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made her irresolute what else to say.
“Yes,” he replied, “any body may know how highly I think of her.” “And yet,” said Emma, beginning hastily and with an arch look, but soon stopping—it was better, however, to know the worst at once—she hurried on—“And yet, perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself how highly it is.
The extent of your admiration may take you by surprize some day or other.” Mr.
Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick leather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together, or some other cause, brought the colour into his face, as he answered, “Oh! are you there?—But you are miserably behindhand.
Miss Fairfax, I dare say, would not have me if I were to ask her—and I am very sure I shall never ask her.” Emma returned her friend’s pressure with interest; and was pleased enough to exclaim, “You are not vain, Mr.
I will say that for you.” He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful—and in a manner which shewed him not pleased, soon afterwards said, “So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax?” “No indeed I have not.
Oh! no, upon my word I have not the smallest wish for your marrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body.
You would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way, if you were married.” Mr.
Knightley was thoughtful again.
The result of his reverie was, “No, Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by surprize.—I never had a thought of her in that way, I assure you.” And soon afterwards, “Jane Fairfax is a very charming young woman—but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect.
“Well,” said she, “and you soon silenced Mr.
He gave me a quiet hint; I told him he was mistaken; he asked my pardon and said no more.
Cole does not want to be wiser or wittier than his neighbours.” “In that respect how unlike dear Mrs.
How can she find any appellation for them, deep enough in familiar vulgarity?
She calls you, Knightley—what can she do for Mr.
And so I am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax accepts her civilities and consents to be with her.
Weston, your argument weighs most with me.
I can much more readily enter into the temptation of getting away from Miss Bates, than I can believe in the triumph of Miss Fairfax’s mind over Mrs.
Elton’s acknowledging herself the inferior in thought, word, or deed; or in her being under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good-breeding.
I cannot imagine that she will not be continually insulting her visitor with praise, encouragement, and offers of service; that she will not be continually detailing her magnificent intentions, from the procuring her a permanent situation to the including her in those delightful exploring parties which are to take place in the barouche-landau.” “Jane Fairfax has feeling,” said Mr.
Knightley—“I do not accuse her of want of feeling.
Her sensibilities, I suspect, are strong—and her temper excellent in its power of forbearance, patience, self-control; but it wants openness.
She is reserved, more reserved, I think, than she used to be—And I love an open temper.
No—till Cole alluded to my supposed attachment, it had never entered my head.
I saw Jane Fairfax and conversed with her, with admiration and pleasure always—but with no thought beyond.” “Well, Mrs.
Weston,” said Emma triumphantly when he left them, “what do you say now to Mr.
Knightley’s marrying Jane Fairfax?” “Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied by the idea of _not_ being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it were to end in his being so at last.
Do not beat me.” CHAPTER XVI Every body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr.
Elton, was disposed to pay him attention on his marriage.
Dinner-parties and evening-parties were made for him and his lady; and invitations flowed in so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehending they were never to have a disengaged day.
Upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated.
If this is living in the country, it is nothing very formidable.
From Monday next to Saturday, I assure you we have not a disengaged day!—A woman with fewer resources than I have, need not have been at a loss.” No invitation came amiss to her.
Her Bath habits made evening-parties perfectly natural to her, and Maple Grove had given her a taste for dinners.
She was a little shocked at the want of two drawing rooms, at the poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being no ice in the Highbury card-parties.
Goddard and others, were a good deal behind-hand in knowledge of the world, but she would soon shew them how every thing ought to be arranged.
In the course of the spring she must return their civilities by one very superior party—in which her card-tables should be set out with their separate candles and unbroken packs in the true style—and more waiters engaged for the evening than their own establishment could furnish, to carry round the refreshments at exactly the proper hour, and in the proper order.
Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner at Hartfield for the Eltons.
They must not do less than others, or she should be exposed to odious suspicions, and imagined capable of pitiful resentment.
Woodhouse felt no unwillingness, and only made the usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself, with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for him.
The persons to be invited, required little thought.
Knightley; so far it was all of course—and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be asked to make the eighth:—but this invitation was not given with equal satisfaction, and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet’s begging to be allowed to decline it.
She was not yet quite able to see him and his charming happy wife together, without feeling uncomfortable.
If Miss Woodhouse would not be displeased, she would rather stay at home.” It was precisely what Emma would have wished, had she deemed it possible enough for wishing.
She was delighted with the fortitude of her little friend—for fortitude she knew it was in her to give up being in company and stay at home; and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax.— Since her last conversation with Mrs.
Knightley, she was more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often been.—Mr.
Knightley’s words dwelt with her.
He had said that Jane Fairfax received attentions from Mrs.
“This is very true,” said she, “at least as far as relates to me, which was all that was meant—and it is very shameful.—Of the same age—and always knowing her—I ought to have been more her friend.—She will never like me now.
I have neglected her too long.
But I will shew her greater attention than I have done.” Every invitation was successful.
They were all disengaged and all happy.—The preparatory interest of this dinner, however, was not yet over.
A circumstance rather unlucky occurred.
The two eldest little Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some weeks in the spring, and their papa now proposed bringing them, and staying one whole day at Hartfield—which one day would be the very day of this party.—His professional engagements did not allow of his being put off, but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening so.
Woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as the utmost that his nerves could bear—and here would be a ninth—and Emma apprehended that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at not being able to come even to Hartfield for forty-eight hours without falling in with a dinner-party.
She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself, by representing that though he certainly would make them nine, yet he always said so little, that the increase of noise would be very immaterial.
She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself, to have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed to her instead of his brother.
The event was more favourable to Mr.
Woodhouse than to Emma.
John Knightley came; but Mr.
Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent on the very day.
He might be able to join them in the evening, but certainly not to dinner.
Woodhouse was quite at ease; and the seeing him so, with the arrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate, removed the chief of even Emma’s vexation.
The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and Mr.
John Knightley seemed early to devote himself to the business of being agreeable.
Elton, as elegant as lace and pearls could make her, he looked at in silence—wanting only to observe enough for Isabella’s information—but Miss Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could talk to her.
He had met her before breakfast as he was returning from a walk with his little boys, when it had been just beginning to rain.
It was natural to have some civil hopes on the subject, and he said, “I hope you did not venture far, Miss Fairfax, this morning, or I am sure you must have been wet.—We scarcely got home in time.
I hope you turned directly.” “I went only to the post-office,” said she, “and reached home before the rain was much.
It saves trouble, and is a something to get me out.
A walk before breakfast does me good.” “Not a walk in the rain, I should imagine.” “No, but it did not absolutely rain when I set out.” Mr.
John Knightley smiled, and replied, “That is to say, you chose to have your walk, for you were not six yards from your own door when I had the pleasure of meeting you; and Henry and John had seen more drops than they could count long before.
When you have lived to my age, you will begin to think letters are never worth going through the rain for.” There was a little blush, and then this answer, “I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in the midst of every dearest connexion, and therefore I cannot expect that simply growing older should make me indifferent about letters.” “Indifferent!
Oh! no—I never conceived you could become indifferent.
Letters are no matter of indifference; they are generally a very positive curse.” “You are speaking of letters of business; mine are letters of friendship.” “I have often thought them the worst of the two,” replied he coolly.
“Business, you know, may bring money, but friendship hardly ever does.” “Ah! you are not serious now.
John Knightley too well—I am very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body.
I can easily believe that letters are very little to you, much less than to me, but it is not your being ten years older than myself which makes the difference, it is not age, but situation.
You have every body dearest to you always at hand, I, probably, never shall again; and therefore till I have outlived all my affections, a post-office, I think, must always have power to draw me out, in worse weather than to-day.” “When I talked of your being altered by time, by the progress of years,” said John Knightley, “I meant to imply the change of situation which time usually brings.
I consider one as including the other.
Time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the daily circle—but that is not the change I had in view for you.
As an old friend, you will allow me to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten years hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have.” It was kindly said, and very far from giving offence.
A pleasant “thank you” seemed meant to laugh it off, but a blush, a quivering lip, a tear in the eye, shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh.
Her attention was now claimed by Mr.
Woodhouse, who being, according to his custom on such occasions, making the circle of his guests, and paying his particular compliments to the ladies, was ending with her—and with all his mildest urbanity, said, “I am very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your being out this morning in the rain.
Young ladies should take care of themselves.—Young ladies are delicate plants.
They should take care of their health and their complexion.
My dear, did you change your stockings?” “Yes, sir, I did indeed; and I am very much obliged by your kind solicitude about me.” “My dear Miss Fairfax, young ladies are very sure to be cared for.—I hope your good grand-mama and aunt are well.
I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour.
My daughter and I are both highly sensible of your goodness, and have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield.” The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit down and feel that he had done his duty, and made every fair lady welcome and easy.
Elton, and her remonstrances now opened upon Jane.
“My dear Jane, what is this I hear?—Going to the post-office in the rain!—This must not be, I assure you.—You sad girl, how could you do such a thing?—It is a sign I was not there to take care of you.” Jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught any cold.
You really are a very sad girl, and do not know how to take care of yourself.—To the post-office indeed!
You and I must positively exert our authority.” “My advice,” said Mrs.
Weston kindly and persuasively, “I certainly do feel tempted to give.
Miss Fairfax, you must not run such risks.—Liable as you have been to severe colds, indeed you ought to be particularly careful, especially at this time of year.
The spring I always think requires more than common care.
Better wait an hour or two, or even half a day for your letters, than run the risk of bringing on your cough again.
Yes, I am sure you are much too reasonable.
You look as if you would not do such a thing again.” “Oh! she _shall_ _not_ do such a thing again,” eagerly rejoined Mrs.
“We will not allow her to do such a thing again:”—and nodding significantly—“there must be some arrangement made, there must indeed.
That will obviate all difficulties you know; and from _us_ I really think, my dear Jane, you can have no scruple to accept such an accommodation.” “You are extremely kind,” said Jane; “but I cannot give up my early walk.
I am advised to be out of doors as much as I can, I must walk somewhere, and the post-office is an object; and upon my word, I have scarcely ever had a bad morning before.” “My dear Jane, say no more about it.
The thing is determined, that is (laughing affectedly) as far as I can presume to determine any thing without the concurrence of my lord and master.
Weston, you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves.
But I do flatter myself, my dear Jane, that my influence is not entirely worn out.
If I meet with no insuperable difficulties therefore, consider that point as settled.” “Excuse me,” said Jane earnestly, “I cannot by any means consent to such an arrangement, so needlessly troublesome to your servant.
If the errand were not a pleasure to me, it could be done, as it always is when I am not here, by my grandmama’s.” “Oh! my dear; but so much as Patty has to do!—And it is a kindness to employ our men.” Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered; but instead of answering, she began speaking again to Mr.
“The post-office is a wonderful establishment!” said she.—“The regularity and despatch of it!
If one thinks of all that it has to do, and all that it does so well, it is really astonishing!” “It is certainly very well regulated.” “So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears!
So seldom that a letter, among the thousands that are constantly passing about the kingdom, is even carried wrong—and not one in a million, I suppose, actually lost!
And when one considers the variety of hands, and of bad hands too, that are to be deciphered, it increases the wonder.” “The clerks grow expert from habit.—They must begin with some quickness of sight and hand, and exercise improves them.
If you want any farther explanation,” continued he, smiling, “they are paid for it.
That is the key to a great deal of capacity.
The public pays and must be served well.” The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of, and the usual observations made.
“I have heard it asserted,” said John Knightley, “that the same sort of handwriting often prevails in a family; and where the same master teaches, it is natural enough.
But for that reason, I should imagine the likeness must be chiefly confined to the females, for boys have very little teaching after an early age, and scramble into any hand they can get.
Isabella and Emma, I think, do write very much alike.
I have not always known their writing apart.” “Yes,” said his brother hesitatingly, “there is a likeness.
I know what you mean—but Emma’s hand is the strongest.” “Isabella and Emma both write beautifully,” said Mr.
Woodhouse; “and always did.
“I never saw any gentleman’s handwriting”—Emma began, looking also at Mrs.
Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that Mrs.
Weston was attending to some one else—and the pause gave her time to reflect, “Now, how am I going to introduce him?—Am I unequal to speaking his name at once before all these people?
Is it necessary for me to use any roundabout phrase?—Your Yorkshire friend—your correspondent in Yorkshire;—that would be the way, I suppose, if I were very bad.—No, I can pronounce his name without the smallest distress.
I certainly get better and better.—Now for it.” Mrs.
Weston was disengaged and Emma began again—“Mr.
Frank Churchill writes one of the best gentleman’s hands I ever saw.” “I do not admire it,” said Mr.
“It is too small—wants strength.
It is like a woman’s writing.” This was not submitted to by either lady.
They vindicated him against the base aspersion.
“No, it by no means wanted strength—it was not a large hand, but very clear and certainly strong.
Weston any letter about her to produce?” No, she had heard from him very lately, but having answered the letter, had put it away.
“If we were in the other room,” said Emma, “if I had my writing-desk, I am sure I could produce a specimen.
I have a note of his.—Do not you remember, Mrs.
Weston, employing him to write for you one day?” “He chose to say he was employed”— “Well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner to convince Mr.
Knightley.” “Oh! when a gallant young man, like Mr.
Frank Churchill,” said Mr.
Knightley dryly, “writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse, he will, of course, put forth his best.” Dinner was on table.—Mrs.
Woodhouse had reached her with his request to be allowed to hand her into the dining-parlour, was saying— “Must I go first?
I really am ashamed of always leading the way.” Jane’s solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma.
She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morning had produced any.
She suspected that it _had_; that it would not have been so resolutely encountered but in full expectation of hearing from some one very dear, and that it had not been in vain.
She thought there was an air of greater happiness than usual—a glow both of complexion and spirits.
She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the expedition and the expense of the Irish mails;—it was at her tongue’s end—but she abstained.
She was quite determined not to utter a word that should hurt Jane Fairfax’s feelings; and they followed the other ladies out of the room, arm in arm, with an appearance of good-will highly becoming to the beauty and grace of each.
CHAPTER XVII When the ladies returned to the drawing-room after dinner, Emma found it hardly possible to prevent their making two distinct parties;—with so much perseverance in judging and behaving ill did Mrs.
Weston were obliged to be almost always either talking together or silent together.
If Jane repressed her for a little time, she soon began again; and though much that passed between them was in a half-whisper, especially on Mrs.
Elton’s side, there was no avoiding a knowledge of their principal subjects: The post-office—catching cold—fetching letters—and friendship, were long under discussion; and to them succeeded one, which must be at least equally unpleasant to Jane—inquiries whether she had yet heard of any situation likely to suit her, and professions of Mrs.
Elton’s meditated activity.
You do not know how many candidates there always are for the _first_ situations.
I saw a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove.
Bragge, had such an infinity of applications; every body was anxious to be in her family, for she moves in the first circle.
Wax-candles in the schoolroom!
You may imagine how desirable!
Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer,” said Jane.
“I must spend some time with them; I am sure they will want it;—afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself.
But I would not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present.” “Trouble! aye, I know your scruples.
You are afraid of giving me trouble; but I assure you, my dear Jane, the Campbells can hardly be more interested about you than I am.
Your inexperience really amuses me!
A situation such as you deserve, and your friends would require for you, is no everyday occurrence, is not obtained at a moment’s notice; indeed, indeed, we must begin inquiring directly.” “Excuse me, ma’am, but this is by no means my intention; I make no inquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any made by my friends.
When I am quite determined as to the time, I am not at all afraid of being long unemployed.
There are places in town, offices, where inquiry would soon produce something—Offices for the sale—not quite of human flesh—but of human intellect.” “Oh! my dear, human flesh!
Suckling was always rather a friend to the abolition.” “I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade,” replied Jane; “governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view; widely different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as to the greater misery of the victims, I do not know where it lies.
But I only mean to say that there are advertising offices, and that by applying to them I should have no doubt of very soon meeting with something that would do.” “Something that would do!” repeated Mrs.
A gentleman’s family is all that I should condition for.” “I know you, I know you; you would take up with any thing; but I shall be a little more nice, and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite on my side; with your superior talents, you have a right to move in the first circle.
I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mrs.
Elton gaily, “in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friends to watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us.” In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till Mr.
Woodhouse came into the room; her vanity had then a change of object, and Emma heard her saying in the same half-whisper to Jane, “Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest!—Only think of his gallantry in coming away before the other men!—what a dear creature he is;—I assure you I like him excessively.
I admire all that quaint, old-fashioned politeness; it is much more to my taste than modern ease; modern ease often disgusts me.
Woodhouse, I wish you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner.
I assure you I began to think my cara sposo would be absolutely jealous.
I fancy I am rather a favourite; he took notice of my gown.
How do you like it?—Selina’s choice—handsome, I think, but I do not know whether it is not over-trimmed; I have the greatest dislike to the idea of being over-trimmed—quite a horror of finery.
I must put on a few ornaments now, because it is expected of me.
A bride, you know, must appear like a bride, but my natural taste is all for simplicity; a simple style of dress is so infinitely preferable to finery.
But I am quite in the minority, I believe; few people seem to value simplicity of dress,—show and finery are every thing.
I have some notion of putting such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin.
Do you think it will look well?” The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when Mr.
Weston made his appearance among them.
He had returned to a late dinner, and walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over.
He had been too much expected by the best judges, for surprize—but there was great joy.
Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now, as he would have been sorry to see him before.
John Knightley only was in mute astonishment.—That a man who might have spent his evening quietly at home after a day of business in London, should set off again, and walk half a mile to another man’s house, for the sake of being in mixed company till bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civility and the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to strike him deeply.
John Knightley looked at him with amazement, then shrugged his shoulders, and said, “I could not have believed it even of _him_.” Mr.
Weston, he had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in the room.
“Read it, read it,” said he, “it will give you pleasure; only a few lines—will not take you long; read it to Emma.” The two ladies looked over it together; and he sat smiling and talking to them the whole time, in a voice a little subdued, but very audible to every body.
Well, what do you say to it?—I always told you he would be here again soon, did not I?—Anne, my dear, did not I always tell you so, and you would not believe me?—In town next week, you see—at the latest, I dare say; for _she_ is as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be done; most likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday.
But it is an excellent thing to have Frank among us again, so near as town.
This is precisely what I wanted.
Have you finished it?
I shall only just mention the circumstance to the others in a common way.” Mrs.
Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion.
Her looks and words had nothing to restrain them.
Her congratulations were warm and open; but Emma could not speak so fluently. _She_ was a little occupied in weighing her own feelings, and trying to understand the degree of her agitation, which she rather thought was considerable.
Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicative to want others to talk, was very well satisfied with what she did say, and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial communication of what the whole room must have overheard already.
Knightley particularly delighted.
They were the first entitled, after Mrs.
Weston and Emma, to be made happy;—from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax, but she was so deep in conversation with John Knightley, that it would have been too positive an interruption; and finding himself close to Mrs.
Elton, and her attention disengaged, he necessarily began on the subject with her.
CHAPTER XVIII “I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you,” said Mr.
Elton, very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended her by such a hope, smiled most graciously.
“You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I presume,” he continued—“and know him to be my son, though he does not bear my name.” “Oh! yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance.
Elton will lose no time in calling on him; and we shall both have great pleasure in seeing him at the Vicarage.” “You are very obliging.—Frank will be extremely happy, I am sure.— He is to be in town next week, if not sooner.
I met the letters in my way this morning, and seeing my son’s hand, presumed to open it—though it was not directed to me—it was to Mrs.
She is his principal correspondent, I assure you.
I hardly ever get a letter.” “And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her!
Weston—(laughing affectedly) I must protest against that.—A most dangerous precedent indeed!—I beg you will not let your neighbours follow your example.—Upon my word, if this is what I am to expect, we married women must begin to exert ourselves!—Oh!
Weston, I could not have believed it of you!” “Aye, we men are sad fellows.
You must take care of yourself, Mrs.
Elton.—This letter tells us—it is a short letter—written in a hurry, merely to give us notice—it tells us that they are all coming up to town directly, on Mrs.
Churchill’s account—she has not been well the whole winter, and thinks Enscombe too cold for her—so they are all to move southward without loss of time.” “Indeed!—from Yorkshire, I think.
Enscombe is in Yorkshire?” “Yes, they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London, a considerable journey.” “Yes, upon my word, very considerable.
But what is distance, Mr.
Suckling, sometimes flies about.
Bragge went to London and back again with four horses.” “The evil of the distance from Enscombe,” said Mr.
Churchill, _as_ _we_ _understand_, has not been able to leave the sofa for a week together.
In Frank’s last letter she complained, he said, of being too weak to get into her conservatory without having both his arm and his uncle’s!
This, you know, speaks a great degree of weakness—but now she is so impatient to be in town, that she means to sleep only two nights on the road.—So Frank writes word.
Certainly, delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions, Mrs.
I give you notice—You will find me a formidable antagonist on that point.
I always stand up for women—and I assure you, if you knew how Selina feels with respect to sleeping at an inn, you would not wonder at Mrs.
Churchill’s making incredible exertions to avoid it.
She always travels with her own sheets; an excellent precaution.
Churchill do the same?” “Depend upon it, Mrs.
Churchill does every thing that any other fine lady ever did.
Churchill will not be second to any lady in the land for”— Mrs.
Elton eagerly interposed with, “Oh!
Churchill, who is as thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld.” Mrs.
Elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly.
It was by no means her object to have it believed that her sister was _not_ a fine lady; perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it;—and she was considering in what way she had best retract, when Mr.
Churchill is not much in my good graces, as you may suspect—but this is quite between ourselves.
She is very fond of Frank, and therefore I would not speak ill of her.
Churchill’s illness.” “If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr.
Weston?—To Bath, or to Clifton?” “She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is too cold for her.
The fact is, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe.
She has now been a longer time stationary there, than she ever was before, and she begins to want change.
Such an immense plantation all round it!
You seem shut out from every thing—in the most complete retirement.—And Mrs.
Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to enjoy that sort of seclusion.
Or, perhaps she may not have resources enough in herself to be qualified for a country life.
I always say a woman cannot have too many resources—and I feel very thankful that I have so many myself as to be quite independent of society.” “Frank was here in February for a fortnight.” “So I remember to have heard.
He will find an _addition_ to the society of Highbury when he comes again; that is, if I may presume to call myself an addition.
But perhaps he may never have heard of there being such a creature in the world.” This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by, and Mr.
Weston, with a very good grace, immediately exclaimed, “My dear madam!
Nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing possible.
“When Frank left us,” continued he, “it was quite uncertain when we might see him again, which makes this day’s news doubly welcome.
It has been completely unexpected.
That is, _I_ always had a strong persuasion he would be here again soon, I was sure something favourable would turn up—but nobody believed me.
Weston were both dreadfully desponding.
‘How could he contrive to come?
And how could it be supposed that his uncle and aunt would spare him again?’ and so forth—I always felt that something would happen in our favour; and so it has, you see.
I have observed, Mrs.
Elton, in the course of my life, that if things are going untowardly one month, they are sure to mend the next.” “Very true, Mr.
Weston, perfectly true.
It is just what I used to say to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship, when, because things did not go quite right, did not proceed with all the rapidity which suited his feelings, he was apt to be in despair, and exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen’s saffron robe would be put on for us.
Oh! the pains I have been at to dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views!
The carriage—we had disappointments about the carriage;—one morning, I remember, he came to me quite in despair.” She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr.
Weston instantly seized the opportunity of going on.
“You were mentioning May.
Churchill is ordered, or has ordered herself, to spend in some warmer place than Enscombe—in short, to spend in London; so that we have the agreeable prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring—precisely the season of the year which one should have chosen for it: days almost at the longest; weather genial and pleasant, always inviting one out, and never too hot for exercise.
When he was here before, we made the best of it; but there was a good deal of wet, damp, cheerless weather; there always is in February, you know, and we could not do half that we intended.
This will be complete enjoyment; and I do not know, Mrs.
Elton, whether the uncertainty of our meetings, the sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to-day or to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more friendly to happiness than having him actually in the house.
He is generally thought a fine young man, but do not expect a prodigy.
Weston’s partiality for him is very great, and, as you may suppose, most gratifying to me.
Weston, I have very little doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in his favour.
Frank Churchill.—At the same time it is fair to observe, that I am one of those who always judge for themselves, and are by no means implicitly guided by others.
I give you notice that as I find your son, so I shall judge of him.—I am no flatterer.” Mr.
“I hope,” said he presently, “I have not been severe upon poor Mrs.
If she is ill I should be sorry to do her injustice; but there are some traits in her character which make it difficult for me to speak of her with the forbearance I could wish.
You cannot be ignorant, Mrs.
Elton, of my connexion with the family, nor of the treatment I have met with; and, between ourselves, the whole blame of it is to be laid to her.
She was the instigator.
Frank’s mother would never have been slighted as she was but for her.
Churchill has pride; but his pride is nothing to his wife’s: his is a quiet, indolent, gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody, and only make himself a little helpless and tiresome; but her pride is arrogance and insolence!
And what inclines one less to bear, she has no fair pretence of family or blood.
She was nobody when he married her, barely the daughter of a gentleman; but ever since her being turned into a Churchill she has out-Churchill’d them all in high and mighty claims: but in herself, I assure you, she is an upstart.” “Only think! well, that must be infinitely provoking!
I have quite a horror of upstarts.
Maple Grove has given me a thorough disgust to people of that sort; for there is a family in that neighbourhood who are such an annoyance to my brother and sister from the airs they give themselves!
Your description of Mrs.
Churchill made me think of them directly.
People of the name of Tupman, very lately settled there, and encumbered with many low connexions, but giving themselves immense airs, and expecting to be on a footing with the old established families.
They came from Birmingham, which is not a place to promise much, you know, Mr.
One has not great hopes from Birmingham.
I always say there is something direful in the sound: but nothing more is positively known of the Tupmans, though a good many things I assure you are suspected; and yet by their manners they evidently think themselves equal even to my brother, Mr.
Suckling, who happens to be one of their nearest neighbours.
It is infinitely too bad.
Suckling, who has been eleven years a resident at Maple Grove, and whose father had it before him—I believe, at least—I am almost sure that old Mr.
Suckling had completed the purchase before his death.” They were interrupted.
Tea was carrying round, and Mr.
Weston, having said all that he wanted, soon took the opportunity of walking away.
The remaining five were left to their own powers, and Emma doubted their getting on very well; for Mr.
Knightley seemed little disposed for conversation; Mrs.
Elton was wanting notice, which nobody had inclination to pay, and she was herself in a worry of spirits which would have made her prefer being silent.
John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother.
You think so, do not you?” “I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your father—or even may be some encumbrance to you, if your visiting engagements continue to increase as much as they have done lately.” “Increase!” “Certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year has made a great difference in your way of life.” “Difference!
Your neighbourhood is increasing, and you mix more with it.
A little while ago, every letter to Isabella brought an account of fresh gaieties; dinners at Mr.
The difference which Randalls, Randalls alone makes in your goings-on, is very great.” “Yes,” said his brother quickly, “it is Randalls that does it all.” “Very well—and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely to have less influence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible thing, Emma, that Henry and John may be sometimes in the way.
Knightley, “that need not be the consequence.
I shall certainly be at leisure.” “Upon my word,” exclaimed Emma, “you amuse me!
I should like to know how many of all my numerous engagements take place without your being of the party; and why I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure to attend to the little boys.
These amazing engagements of mine—what have they been?
I can understand you—(nodding at Mr.
John Knightley)—your good fortune in meeting with so many of your friends at once here, delights you too much to pass unnoticed.
Knightley,) who know how very, very seldom I am ever two hours from Hartfield, why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for me, I cannot imagine.
And as to my dear little boys, I must say, that if Aunt Emma has not time for them, I do not think they would fare much better with Uncle Knightley, who is absent from home about five hours where she is absent one—and who, when he is at home, is either reading to himself or settling his accounts.” Mr.
Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile; and succeeded without difficulty, upon Mrs.
Elton’s beginning to talk to him.
VOLUME III CHAPTER I A very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the nature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill.
She was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at all apprehensive or embarrassed; it was for him.
Her own attachment had really subsided into a mere nothing; it was not worth thinking of;—but if he, who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of the two, were to be returning with the same warmth of sentiment which he had taken away, it would be very distressing.
If a separation of two months should not have cooled him, there were dangers and evils before her:—caution for him and for herself would be necessary.
She did not mean to have her own affections entangled again, and it would be incumbent on her to avoid any encouragement of his.
She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration.
That would be so very painful a conclusion of their present acquaintance! and yet, she could not help rather anticipating something decisive.
She felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing a crisis, an event, a something to alter her present composed and tranquil state.
Weston had foreseen, before she had the power of forming some opinion of Frank Churchill’s feelings.
The Enscombe family were not in town quite so soon as had been imagined, but he was at Highbury very soon afterwards.
He rode down for a couple of hours; he could not yet do more; but as he came from Randalls immediately to Hartfield, she could then exercise all her quick observation, and speedily determine how he was influenced, and how she must act.
They met with the utmost friendliness.
There could be no doubt of his great pleasure in seeing her.
But she had an almost instant doubt of his caring for her as he had done, of his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree.
Absence, with the conviction probably of her indifference, had produced this very natural and very desirable effect.
He was in high spirits; as ready to talk and laugh as ever, and seemed delighted to speak of his former visit, and recur to old stories: and he was not without agitation.
It was not in his calmness that she read his comparative indifference.
He was not calm; his spirits were evidently fluttered; there was restlessness about him.
Lively as he was, it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himself; but what decided her belief on the subject, was his staying only a quarter of an hour, and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury.
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days.
He was often hoping, intending to come—but was always prevented.
If he were quite sincere, if he really tried to come, it was to be inferred that Mrs.
Churchill’s removal to London had been of no service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder.
That she was really ill was very certain; he had declared himself convinced of it, at Randalls.
He did not believe it to proceed from any thing that care and medicine might not remove, or at least that she might not have many years of existence before her; but he could not be prevailed on, by all his father’s doubts, to say that her complaints were merely imaginary, or that she was as strong as ever.
It soon appeared that London was not the place for her.
Her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering; and by the ten days’ end, her nephew’s letter to Randalls communicated a change of plan.
They were going to remove immediately to Richmond.
Churchill had been recommended to the medical skill of an eminent person there, and had otherwise a fancy for the place.
A ready-furnished house in a favourite spot was engaged, and much benefit expected from the change.
Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement, and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two months before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends—for the house was taken for May and June.
She was told that now he wrote with the greatest confidence of being often with them, almost as often as he could even wish.
Weston understood these joyous prospects.
He was considering her as the source of all the happiness they offered.
Weston’s own happiness was indisputable.
He was quite delighted.
It was the very circumstance he could have wished for.
Now, it would be really having Frank in their neighbourhood.
The difference in that respect of Richmond and London was enough to make the whole difference of seeing him always and seeing him never.
Sixteen miles—nay, eighteen—it must be full eighteen to Manchester-street—was a serious obstacle.
Were he ever able to get away, the day would be spent in coming and returning.
There was no comfort in having him in London; he might as well be at Enscombe; but Richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse.
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removal,—the ball at the Crown.
It had not been forgotten before, but it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day.
Now, however, it was absolutely to be; every preparation was resumed, and very soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond, a few lines from Frank, to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change, and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for twenty-four hours at any given time, induced them to name as early a day as possible.
A very few to-morrows stood between the young people of Highbury and happiness.
Woodhouse was resigned.
The time of year lightened the evil to him.
May was better for every thing than February.
Bates was engaged to spend the evening at Hartfield, James had due notice, and he sanguinely hoped that neither dear little Henry nor dear little John would have any thing the matter with them, while dear Emma were gone.
CHAPTER II No misfortune occurred, again to prevent the ball.
The day approached, the day arrived; and after a morning of some anxious watching, Frank Churchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reached Randalls before dinner, and every thing was safe.
Weston had been so very earnest in his entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible after themselves, for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort of the rooms before any other persons came, that she could not refuse him, and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man’s company.
She was to convey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good time, the Randalls party just sufficiently before them.
Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch; and though he did not say much, his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening.
They all walked about together, to see that every thing was as it should be; and within a few minutes were joined by the contents of another carriage, which Emma could not hear the sound of at first, without great surprize.
“So unreasonably early!” she was going to exclaim; but she presently found that it was a family of old friends, who were coming, like herself, by particular desire, to help Mr.
Weston’s judgment; and they were so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins, who had been entreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr.
Weston depended, and felt, that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes, was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity.
She liked his open manners, but a little less of open-heartedness would have made him a higher character.—General benevolence, but not general friendship, made a man what he ought to be.—She could fancy such a man.
The whole party walked about, and looked, and praised again; and then, having nothing else to do, formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe in their various modes, till other subjects were started, that, though _May_, a fire in the evening was still very pleasant.
Weston’s fault that the number of privy councillors was not yet larger.
Bates’s door to offer the use of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to be brought by the Eltons.
Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a restlessness, which shewed a mind not at ease.
He was looking about, he was going to the door, he was watching for the sound of other carriages,—impatient to begin, or afraid of being always near her.
“I have a great curiosity to see Mrs.
It cannot be long, I think, before she comes.” A carriage was heard.
He was on the move immediately; but coming back, said, “I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her.
I have no business to put myself forward.” Mr. and Mrs.
Elton appeared; and all the smiles and the proprieties passed.
The carriage was sent for them now.
Elton might be; how he was affected by the studied elegance of her dress, and her smiles of graciousness.
He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion, by giving her very proper attention, after the introduction had passed.
In a few minutes the carriage returned.—Somebody talked of rain.—“I will see that there are umbrellas, sir,” said Frank to his father: “Miss Bates must not be forgotten:” and away he went.
Weston was following; but Mrs.
Elton detained him, to gratify him by her opinion of his son; and so briskly did she begin, that the young man himself, though by no means moving slowly, could hardly be out of hearing.
You know I candidly told you I should form my own opinion; and I am happy to say that I am extremely pleased with him.—You may believe me.
I think him a very handsome young man, and his manners are precisely what I like and approve—so truly the gentleman, without the least conceit or puppyism.
They were never tolerated at Maple Grove.
Suckling nor me had ever any patience with them; and we used sometimes to say very cutting things!
Weston’s attention was chained; but when she got to Maple Grove, he could recollect that there were ladies just arriving to be attended to, and with happy smiles must hurry away.
“I have no doubt of its being our carriage with Miss Bates and Jane.
Our coachman and horses are so extremely expeditious!—I believe we drive faster than any body.—What a pleasure it is to send one’s carriage for a friend!—I understand you were so kind as to offer, but another time it will be quite unnecessary.
You may be very sure I shall always take care of _them_.” Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentlemen, walked into the room; and Mrs.
Her gestures and movements might be understood by any one who looked on like Emma; but her words, every body’s words, were soon lost under the incessant flow of Miss Bates, who came in talking, and had not finished her speech under many minutes after her being admitted into the circle at the fire.
As the door opened she was heard, “So very obliging of you!—No rain at all.
And Jane declares—Well!—(as soon as she was within the door) Well!
This is brilliant indeed!—This is admirable!—Excellently contrived, upon my word.
Could not have imagined it.—So well lighted up!—Jane, Jane, look!—did you ever see any thing?
I saw her as I came in; she was standing in the entrance.
So afraid you might have a headache!—seeing you pass by so often, and knowing how much trouble you must have.
Delighted to hear it indeed.
Elton, so obliged to you for the carriage!—excellent time.
Most comfortable carriage.—Oh! and I am sure our thanks are due to you, Mrs.
Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note, or we should have been.—But two such offers in one day!—Never were such neighbours.
I said to my mother, ‘Upon my word, ma’am—.’ Thank you, my mother is remarkably well.
I made her take her shawl—for the evenings are not warm—her large new shawl— Mrs.
Bought at Weymouth, you know—Mr.
There were three others, Jane says, which they hesitated about some time.
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive.
Frank Churchill was so extremely—and there was a mat to step upon—I shall never forget his extreme politeness.—Oh!
Frank Churchill, I must tell you my mother’s spectacles have never been in fault since; the rivet never came out again.
Frank Churchill?—Ah! here’s Miss Woodhouse.—Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do you do?—Very well I thank you, quite well.
This is meeting quite in fairy-land!—Such a transformation!—Must not compliment, I know (eyeing Emma most complacently)—that would be rude—but upon my word, Miss Woodhouse, you do look—how do you like Jane’s hair?—You are a judge.—She did it all herself.
Quite wonderful how she does her hair!—No hairdresser from London I think could.—Ah!
This is delightful, is not it?—Where’s dear Mr.
Much better employed talking to the young ladies.
Otway, and Miss Otway and Miss Caroline.—Such a host of friends!—and Mr.
Never better.—Don’t I hear another carriage?—Who can this be?—very likely the worthy Coles.—Upon my word, this is charming to be standing about among such friends!
Every thing so good!” Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma; and as soon as Miss Bates was quiet, she found herself necessarily overhearing the discourse of Mrs.
Elton and Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little way behind her.—He was thoughtful.
Whether he were overhearing too, she could not determine.
After a good many compliments to Jane on her dress and look, compliments very quietly and properly taken, Mrs.
Elton was evidently wanting to be complimented herself—and it was, “How do you like my gown?—How do you like my trimming?—How has Wright done my hair?”—with many other relative questions, all answered with patient politeness.
Elton then said, “Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do—but upon such an occasion as this, when every body’s eyes are so much upon me, and in compliment to the Westons—who I have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour—I would not wish to be inferior to others.
And I see very few pearls in the room except mine.—So Frank Churchill is a capital dancer, I understand.—We shall see if our styles suit.—A fine young man certainly is Frank Churchill.
I like him very well.” At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could not but imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hear more;—and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till another suspension brought Mrs.
Elton’s tones again distinctly forward.—Mr.
Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming, “Oh! you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?—I was this moment telling Jane, I thought you would begin to be impatient for tidings of us.” “Jane!”—repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize and displeasure.—“That is easy—but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it, I suppose.” “How do you like Mrs.
“Not at all.” “You are ungrateful.” “Ungrateful!—What do you mean?” Then changing from a frown to a smile—“No, do not tell me—I do not want to know what you mean.—Where is my father?—When are we to begin dancing?” Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour.
He had met with them in a little perplexity, which must be laid before Emma.
It had just occurred to Mrs.
Elton must be asked to begin the ball; that she would expect it; which interfered with all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction.—Emma heard the sad truth with fortitude.
“She will think Frank ought to ask her.” Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; and boasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most perfect approbation of—and it then appeared that Mrs.
Elton himself, and that their business was to help to persuade him into it, which was done pretty soon.—Mr.
Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed.
Elton, though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her.
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying.
Elton had undoubtedly the advantage, at this time, in vanity completely gratified; for though she had intended to begin with Frank Churchill, she could not lose by the change.
Weston might be his son’s superior.—In spite of this little rub, however, Emma was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see the respectable length of the set as it was forming, and to feel that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her.—She was more disturbed by Mr.
She wished he could love a ballroom better, and could like Frank Churchill better.—He seemed often observing her.
She must not flatter herself that he thought of her dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she did not feel afraid.
There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner.
They seemed more like cheerful, easy friends, than lovers.
That Frank Churchill thought less of her than he had done, was indubitable.
The ball proceeded pleasantly.
The anxious cares, the incessant attentions of Mrs.
Every body seemed happy; and the praise of being a delightful ball, which is seldom bestowed till after a ball has ceased to be, was repeatedly given in the very beginning of the existence of this.
Of very important, very recordable events, it was not more productive than such meetings usually are.
There was one, however, which Emma thought something of.—The two last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had no partner;—the only young lady sitting down;—and so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers, that how there could be any one disengaged was the wonder!—But Emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards, on seeing Mr.
Elton sauntering about.
He would not ask Harriet to dance if it were possible to be avoided: she was sure he would not—and she was expecting him every moment to escape into the card-room.
He came to the part of the room where the sitters-by were collected, spoke to some, and walked about in front of them, as if to shew his liberty, and his resolution of maintaining it.
He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss Smith, or speaking to those who were close to her.—Emma saw it.
She was not yet dancing; she was working her way up from the bottom, and had therefore leisure to look around, and by only turning her head a little she saw it all.
Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable of a dialogue which just then took place between him and Mrs.
Weston; and she perceived that his wife, who was standing immediately above her, was not only listening also, but even encouraging him by significant glances.—The kind-hearted, gentle Mrs.
Gilbert wishes to dance,” said he, “I shall have great pleasure, I am sure—for, though beginning to feel myself rather an old married man, and that my dancing days are over, it would give me very great pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs.
Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young lady disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing—Miss Smith.” “Miss Smith!—oh!—I had not observed.—You are extremely obliging—and if I were not an old married man.—But my dancing days are over, Mrs.
Weston said no more; and Emma could imagine with what surprize and mortification she must be returning to her seat.
Elton! the amiable, obliging, gentle Mr.
Knightley at a little distance, and was arranging himself for settled conversation, while smiles of high glee passed between him and his wife.
Knightley leading Harriet to the set!—Never had she been more surprized, seldom more delighted, than at that instant.
She was all pleasure and gratitude, both for Harriet and herself, and longed to be thanking him; and though too distant for speech, her countenance said much, as soon as she could catch his eye again.
His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it, extremely good; and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky, if it had not been for the cruel state of things before, and for the very complete enjoyment and very high sense of the distinction which her happy features announced.
It was not thrown away on her, she bounded higher than ever, flew farther down the middle, and was in a continual course of smiles.
Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking (Emma trusted) very foolish.
She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife, though growing very like her;—_she_ spoke some of her feelings, by observing audibly to her partner, “Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith!—Very good-natured, I declare.” Supper was announced.
The move began; and Miss Bates might be heard from that moment, without interruption, till her being seated at table and taking up her spoon.
She says she is afraid there will be draughts in the passage, though every thing has been done—One door nailed up—Quantities of matting—My dear Jane, indeed you must.
Churchill, oh! you are too obliging!
How well you put it on!—so gratified!
Excellent dancing indeed!—Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I said I should, to help grandmama to bed, and got back again, and nobody missed me.—I set off without saying a word, just as I told you.
Grandmama was quite well, had a charming evening with Mr.
Woodhouse, a vast deal of chat, and backgammon.—Tea was made downstairs, biscuits and baked apples and wine before she came away: amazing luck in some of her throws: and she inquired a great deal about you, how you were amused, and who were your partners.
‘Oh!’ said I, ‘I shall not forestall Jane; I left her dancing with Mr.
William Cox.’ My dear sir, you are too obliging.—Is there nobody you would not rather?—I am not helpless.
Elton, how elegant she looks!—Beautiful lace!—Now we all follow in her train.
Well, I was persuaded there were two.
I was convinced there were two, and there is but one.
I never saw any thing equal to the comfort and style—Candles everywhere.—I was telling you of your grandmama, Jane,—There was a little disappointment.—The baked apples and biscuits, excellent in their way, you know; but there was a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first, and good Mr.
Woodhouse, not thinking the asparagus quite boiled enough, sent it all out again.
Now there is nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread and asparagus—so she was rather disappointed, but we agreed we would not speak of it to any body, for fear of its getting round to dear Miss Woodhouse, who would be so very much concerned!—Well, this is brilliant!
I am all amazement! could not have supposed any thing!—Such elegance and profusion!—I have seen nothing like it since—Well, where shall we sit? where shall we sit?
Anywhere, so that Jane is not in a draught.
Where _I_ sit is of no consequence.
Oh! do you recommend this side?—Well, I am sure, Mr.
Churchill—only it seems too good—but just as you please.
Dear Jane, how shall we ever recollect half the dishes for grandmama?
I should not be helped so soon, but it smells most excellent, and I cannot help beginning.” Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr.
Knightley till after supper; but, when they were all in the ballroom again, her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked.
He was warm in his reprobation of Mr.
Elton’s conduct; it had been unpardonable rudeness; and Mrs.
Elton’s looks also received the due share of censure.
“They aimed at wounding more than Harriet,” said he.
I leave you to your own reflections.” “Can you trust me with such flatterers?—Does my vain spirit ever tell me I am wrong?” “Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit.—If one leads you wrong, I am sure the other tells you of it.” “I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr.
There is a littleness about him which you discovered, and which I did not: and I was fully convinced of his being in love with Harriet.
It was through a series of strange blunders!” “And, in return for your acknowledging so much, I will do you the justice to say, that you would have chosen for him better than he has chosen for himself.—Harriet Smith has some first-rate qualities, which Mrs.
An unpretending, single-minded, artless girl—infinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such a woman as Mrs.
I found Harriet more conversable than I expected.” Emma was extremely gratified.—They were interrupted by the bustle of Mr.
“Come Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what are you all doing?—Come Emma, set your companions the example.
Every body is asleep!” “I am ready,” said Emma, “whenever I am wanted.” “Whom are you going to dance with?” asked Mr.
She hesitated a moment, and then replied, “With you, if you will ask me.” “Will you?” said he, offering his hand.
You have shewn that you can dance, and you know we are not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper.” “Brother and sister! no, indeed.” CHAPTER III This little explanation with Mr.
Knightley gave Emma considerable pleasure.
It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball, which she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.—She was extremely glad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting the Eltons, and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so much alike; and his praise of Harriet, his concession in her favour, was peculiarly gratifying.
The impertinence of the Eltons, which for a few minutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her evening, had been the occasion of some of its highest satisfactions; and she looked forward to another happy result—the cure of Harriet’s infatuation.—From Harriet’s manner of speaking of the circumstance before they quitted the ballroom, she had strong hopes.
It seemed as if her eyes were suddenly opened, and she were enabled to see that Mr.
Elton was not the superior creature she had believed him.
The fever was over, and Emma could harbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by injurious courtesy.
She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther requisite.—Harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too much in love, and Mr.
Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her, how very happy a summer must be before her!
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning.
He had told her that he could not allow himself the pleasure of stopping at Hartfield, as he was to be at home by the middle of the day.
Harriet looked white and frightened, and he was trying to cheer her.—The iron gates and the front-door were not twenty yards asunder;—they were all three soon in the hall, and Harriet immediately sinking into a chair fainted away.
A young lady who faints, must be recovered; questions must be answered, and surprizes be explained.
Such events are very interesting, but the suspense of them cannot last long.
A few minutes made Emma acquainted with the whole.
Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour boarder at Mrs.
A child on the watch, came towards them to beg; and Miss Bickerton, excessively frightened, gave a great scream, and calling on Harriet to follow her, ran up a steep bank, cleared a slight hedge at the top, and made the best of her way by a short cut back to Highbury.
She had suffered very much from cramp after dancing, and her first attempt to mount the bank brought on such a return of it as made her absolutely powerless—and in this state, and exceedingly terrified, she had been obliged to remain.
In this state Frank Churchill had found her, she trembling and conditioning, they loud and insolent.
By a most fortunate chance his leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistance at this critical moment.
The terror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet was then their own portion.
He had left them completely frightened; and Harriet eagerly clinging to him, and hardly able to speak, had just strength enough to reach Hartfield, before her spirits were quite overcome.
It was his idea to bring her to Hartfield: he had thought of no other place.
This was the amount of the whole story,—of his communication and of Harriet’s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech.—He dared not stay longer than to see her well; these several delays left him not another minute to lose; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her safety to Mrs.
Goddard, and notice of there being such a set of people in the neighbourhood to Mr.
Knightley, he set off, with all the grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and herself.
Such an adventure as this,—a fine young man and a lovely young woman thrown together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggesting certain ideas to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain.
It was a very extraordinary thing!
He was wishing to get the better of his attachment to herself, she just recovering from her mania for Mr.
It seemed as if every thing united to promise the most interesting consequences.
It was not possible that the occurrence should not be strongly recommending each to the other.
In the few minutes’ conversation which she had yet had with him, while Harriet had been partially insensible, he had spoken of her terror, her naïveté, her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm, with a sensibility amused and delighted; and just at last, after Harriet’s own account had been given, he had expressed his indignation at the abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms.
Every thing was to take its natural course, however, neither impelled nor assisted.
No, she had had enough of interference.
Emma’s first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge of what had passed,—aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion: but she soon felt that concealment must be impossible.
Within half an hour it was known all over Highbury.
It was the very event to engage those who talk most, the young and the low; and all the youth and servants in the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news.
Woodhouse trembled as he sat, and, as Emma had foreseen, would scarcely be satisfied without their promising never to go beyond the shrubbery again.
She had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man, for she hardly knew what indisposition was; and if he did not invent illnesses for her, she could make no figure in a message.
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they took themselves off in a hurry.
CHAPTER IV A very few days had passed after this adventure, when Harriet came one morning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting down and hesitating, thus began: “Miss Woodhouse—if you are at leisure—I have something that I should like to tell you—a sort of confession to make—and then, you know, it will be over.” Emma was a good deal surprized; but begged her to speak.
There was a seriousness in Harriet’s manner which prepared her, quite as much as her words, for something more than ordinary.
“It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish,” she continued, “to have no reserves with you on this subject.
As I am happily quite an altered creature in _one_ _respect_, it is very fit that you should have the satisfaction of knowing it.
I do not want to say more than is necessary—I am too much ashamed of having given way as I have done, and I dare say you understand me.” “Yes,” said Emma, “I hope I do.” “How I could so long a time be fancying myself!...” cried Harriet, warmly.
Cannot you guess what this parcel holds?” said she, with a conscious look.
“Not the least in the world.—Did he ever give you any thing?” “No—I cannot call them gifts; but they are things that I have valued very much.” She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the words _Most_ _precious_ _treasures_ on the top.
Her curiosity was greatly excited.
Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience.
Within abundance of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box, which Harriet opened: it was well lined with the softest cotton; but, excepting the cotton, Emma saw only a small piece of court-plaister.
“Now,” said Harriet, “you _must_ recollect.” “No, indeed I do not.” “Dear me!
I should not have thought it possible you could forget what passed in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very last times we ever met in it!—It was but a very few days before I had my sore throat—just before Mr. and Mrs.
And so then, in my nonsense, I could not help making a treasure of it—so I put it by never to be used, and looked at it now and then as a great treat.” “My dearest Harriet!” cried Emma, putting her hand before her face, and jumping up, “you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear.
I am sure I never suspected it, you did it so naturally.” “And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for his sake!” said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and feeling divided between wonder and amusement.
And secretly she added to herself, “Lord bless me! when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a piece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about!
I never was equal to this.” “Here,” resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, “here is something still more valuable, I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable, because this is what did really once belong to him, which the court-plaister never did.” Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure.
“This was really his,” said Harriet.—“Do not you remember one morning?—no, I dare say you do not.
But one morning—I forget exactly the day—but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that_ _evening_, he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket-book; it was about spruce-beer.
Knightley had been telling him something about brewing spruce-beer, and he wanted to put it down; but when he took out his pencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away, and it would not do, so you lent him another, and this was left upon the table as good for nothing.
But I kept my eye on it; and, as soon as I dared, caught it up, and never parted with it again from that moment.” “I do remember it,” cried Emma; “I perfectly remember it.—Talking about spruce-beer.—Oh! yes—Mr.
Knightley and I both saying we liked it, and Mr.
Elton’s seeming resolved to learn to like it too.
I perfectly remember it.—Stop; Mr.
Knightley was standing just here, was not he?
I have an idea he was standing just here.” “Ah!
I cannot recollect.—It is very odd, but I cannot recollect.—Mr.
Elton was sitting here, I remember, much about where I am now.”— “Well, go on.” “Oh! that’s all.
I have nothing more to shew you, or to say—except that I am now going to throw them both behind the fire, and I wish you to see me do it.” “My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness in treasuring up these things?” “Yes, simpleton as I was!—but I am quite ashamed of it now, and wish I could forget as easily as I can burn them.
It was very wrong of me, you know, to keep any remembrances, after he was married.
I knew it was—but had not resolution enough to part with them.” “But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-plaister?—I have not a word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister might be useful.” “I shall be happier to burn it,” replied Harriet.
“It has a disagreeable look to me.
Elton.” “And when,” thought Emma, “will there be a beginning of Mr.
Churchill?” She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was already made, and could not but hope that the gipsy, though she had _told_ no fortune, might be proved to have made Harriet’s.—About a fortnight after the alarm, they came to a sufficient explanation, and quite undesignedly.
Emma was not thinking of it at the moment, which made the information she received more valuable.
Elton indeed!” cried Harriet indignantly.—“Oh! no”—and Emma could just catch the words, “so superior to Mr.
Elton!” She then took a longer time for consideration.
She had previously determined how far she would proceed, on any application of the sort; and it would be safer for both, to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed.—She was decided, and thus spoke— “Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning.
Your resolution, or rather your expectation of never marrying, results from an idea that the person whom you might prefer, would be too greatly your superior in situation to think of you.
Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to suppose— Indeed I am not so mad.—But it is a pleasure to me to admire him at a distance—and to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest of the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which are so proper, in me especially.” “I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet.
The service he rendered you was enough to warm your heart.” “Service! oh! it was such an inexpressible obligation!—The very recollection of it, and all that I felt at the time—when I saw him coming—his noble look—and my wretchedness before.
From perfect misery to perfect happiness!” “It is very natural.
It is natural, and it is honourable.—Yes, honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.—But that it will be a fortunate preference is more than I can promise.
I do not by any means engage for its being returned.
Consider what you are about.
Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your feelings while you can: at any rate do not let them carry you far, unless you are persuaded of his liking you.
Be observant of him.
Let his behaviour be the guide of your sensations.
I am determined against all interference.
Henceforward I know nothing of the matter.
We were very wrong before; we will be cautious now.—He is your superior, no doubt, and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious nature; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place, there have been matches of greater disparity.
But take care of yourself.
I would not have you too sanguine; though, however it may end, be assured your raising your thoughts to _him_, is a mark of good taste which I shall always know how to value.” Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude.
Emma was very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her friend.
Its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind—and it must be saving her from the danger of degradation.
CHAPTER V In this state of schemes, and hopes, and connivance, June opened upon Hartfield.
To Highbury in general it brought no material change.
The Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings, and of the use to be made of their barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax was still at her grandmother’s; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was again delayed, and August, instead of Midsummer, fixed for it, she was likely to remain there full two months longer, provided at least she were able to defeat Mrs.
Elton’s activity in her service, and save herself from being hurried into a delightful situation against her will.
Knightley, who, for some reason best known to himself, had certainly taken an early dislike to Frank Churchill, was only growing to dislike him more.
That Emma was his object appeared indisputable.
Every thing declared it; his own attentions, his father’s hints, his mother-in-law’s guarded silence; it was all in unison; words, conduct, discretion, and indiscretion, told the same story.
But while so many were devoting him to Emma, and Emma herself making him over to Harriet, Mr.
Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax.
He could not understand it; but there were symptoms of intelligence between them—he thought so at least—symptoms of admiration on his side, which, having once observed, he could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning, however he might wish to escape any of Emma’s errors of imagination. _She_ was not present when the suspicion first arose.
He was dining with the Randalls family, and Jane, at the Eltons’; and he had seen a look, more than a single look, at Miss Fairfax, which, from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse, seemed somewhat out of place.
When he was again in their company, he could not help remembering what he had seen; nor could he avoid observations which, unless it were like Cowper and his fire at twilight, “Myself creating what I saw,” brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a something of private liking, of private understanding even, between Frank Churchill and Jane.
He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very often did, to spend his evening at Hartfield.
Emma and Harriet were going to walk; he joined them; and, on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who, like themselves, judged it wisest to take their exercise early, as the weather threatened rain; Mr. and Mrs.
Weston and their son, Miss Bates and her niece, who had accidentally met.
They all united; and, on reaching Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it was exactly the sort of visiting that would be welcome to her father, pressed them all to go in and drink tea with him.
The Randalls party agreed to it immediately; and after a pretty long speech from Miss Bates, which few persons listened to, she also found it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse’s most obliging invitation.
Perry passed by on horseback.
The gentlemen spoke of his horse.
“By the bye,” said Frank Churchill to Mrs.
Weston presently, “what became of Mr.
Perry’s plan of setting up his carriage?” Mrs.
Weston looked surprized, and said, “I did not know that he ever had any such plan.” “Nay, I had it from you.
You wrote me word of it three months ago.” “Me! impossible!” “Indeed you did.
I remember it perfectly.
You mentioned it as what was certainly to be very soon.
Perry had told somebody, and was extremely happy about it.
It was owing to _her_ persuasion, as she thought his being out in bad weather did him a great deal of harm.
You must remember it now?” “Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment.” “Never! really, never!—Bless me! how could it be?—Then I must have dreamt it—but I was completely persuaded—Miss Smith, you walk as if you were tired.
You will not be sorry to find yourself at home.” “What is this?—What is this?” cried Mr.
Weston, “about Perry and a carriage?
Is Perry going to set up his carriage, Frank?
You had it from himself, had you?” “No, sir,” replied his son, laughing, “I seem to have had it from nobody.—Very odd!—I really was persuaded of Mrs.
Weston’s having mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe, many weeks ago, with all these particulars—but as she declares she never heard a syllable of it before, of course it must have been a dream.
I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away—and when I have gone through my particular friends, then I begin dreaming of Mr. and Mrs.
Perry.” “It is odd though,” observed his father, “that you should have had such a regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely you should be thinking of at Enscombe.
Perry’s setting up his carriage! and his wife’s persuading him to it, out of care for his health—just what will happen, I have no doubt, some time or other; only a little premature.
What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream!
And at others, what a heap of absurdities it is!
Well, Frank, your dream certainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are absent.
She had hurried on before her guests to prepare her father for their appearance, and was beyond the reach of Mr.
Frank Churchill might have—I do not mean to say that he did not dream it—I am sure I have sometimes the oddest dreams in the world—but if I am questioned about it, I must acknowledge that there was such an idea last spring; for Mrs.
Perry herself mentioned it to my mother, and the Coles knew of it as well as ourselves—but it was quite a secret, known to nobody else, and only thought of about three days.
Perry was very anxious that he should have a carriage, and came to my mother in great spirits one morning because she thought she had prevailed.
Jane, don’t you remember grandmama’s telling us of it when we got home?
I forget where we had been walking to—very likely to Randalls; yes, I think it was to Randalls.
Perry was always particularly fond of my mother—indeed I do not know who is not—and she had mentioned it to her in confidence; she had no objection to her telling us, of course, but it was not to go beyond: and, from that day to this, I never mentioned it to a soul that I know of.
At the same time, I will not positively answer for my having never dropt a hint, because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing before I am aware.
I will answer for it _she_ never betrayed the least thing in the world.
Perfectly remember Mrs.
Perry’s coming.—Extraordinary dream, indeed!” They were entering the hall.
Knightley’s eyes had preceded Miss Bates’s in a glance at Jane.
From Frank Churchill’s face, where he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away, he had involuntarily turned to hers; but she was indeed behind, and too busy with her shawl.
The two other gentlemen waited at the door to let her pass.
Knightley suspected in Frank Churchill the determination of catching her eye—he seemed watching her intently—in vain, however, if it were so—Jane passed between them into the hall, and looked at neither.
There was no time for farther remark or explanation.
Knightley must take his seat with the rest round the large modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield, and which none but Emma could have had power to place there and persuade her father to use, instead of the small-sized Pembroke, on which two of his daily meals had, for forty years been crowded.
Tea passed pleasantly, and nobody seemed in a hurry to move.
“Miss Woodhouse,” said Frank Churchill, after examining a table behind him, which he could reach as he sat, “have your nephews taken away their alphabets—their box of letters?
We had great amusement with those letters one morning.
I want to puzzle you again.” Emma was pleased with the thought; and producing the box, the table was quickly scattered over with alphabets, which no one seemed so much disposed to employ as their two selves.
The quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr.
Woodhouse, who had often been distressed by the more animated sort, which Mr.
Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now sat happily occupied in lamenting, with tender melancholy, over the departure of the “poor little boys,” or in fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray letter near him, how beautifully Emma had written it.
Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax.
Frank was next to Emma, Jane opposite to them—and Mr.
Knightley so placed as to see them all; and it was his object to see as much as he could, with as little apparent observation.
The word was discovered, and with a faint smile pushed away.
If meant to be immediately mixed with the others, and buried from sight, she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across, for it was not mixed; and Harriet, eager after every fresh word, and finding out none, directly took it up, and fell to work.
Knightley, and turned to him for help.
The word was _blunder_; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it, there was a blush on Jane’s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible.
Knightley connected it with the dream; but how it could all be, was beyond his comprehension.
How the delicacy, the discretion of his favourite could have been so lain asleep!
He feared there must be some decided involvement.
Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn.
These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick.
It was a child’s play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank Churchill’s part.
With great indignation did he continue to observe him; with great alarm and distrust, to observe also his two blinded companions.
He saw a short word prepared for Emma, and given to her with a look sly and demure.
He saw that Emma had soon made it out, and found it highly entertaining, though it was something which she judged it proper to appear to censure; for she said, “Nonsense! for shame!” He heard Frank Churchill next say, with a glance towards Jane, “I will give it to her—shall I?”—and as clearly heard Emma opposing it with eager laughing warmth.
This gallant young man, who seemed to love without feeling, and to recommend himself without complaisance, directly handed over the word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular degree of sedate civility entreated her to study it.
Knightley’s excessive curiosity to know what this word might be, made him seize every possible moment for darting his eye towards it, and it was not long before he saw it to be _Dixon_.
Jane Fairfax’s perception seemed to accompany his; her comprehension was certainly more equal to the covert meaning, the superior intelligence, of those five letters so arranged.
She was evidently displeased; looked up, and seeing herself watched, blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived her, and saying only, “I did not know that proper names were allowed,” pushed away the letters with even an angry spirit, and looked resolved to be engaged by no other word that could be offered.
The evening is closing in, and grandmama will be looking for us.
My dear sir, you are too obliging.
We really must wish you good night.” Jane’s alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her aunt had preconceived.
She was immediately up, and wanting to quit the table; but so many were also moving, that she could not get away; and Mr.
Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed towards her, and resolutely swept away by her unexamined.
She was afterwards looking for her shawl—Frank Churchill was looking also—it was growing dusk, and the room was in confusion; and how they parted, Mr.
Knightley could not tell.
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full of what he had seen; so full, that when the candles came to assist his observations, he must—yes, he certainly must, as a friend—an anxious friend—give Emma some hint, ask her some question.
He could not see her in a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her.
“Pray, Emma,” said he, “may I ask in what lay the great amusement, the poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax?
I saw the word, and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining to the one, and so very distressing to the other.” Emma was extremely confused.
She could not endure to give him the true explanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed, she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them.
“Oh!” she cried in evident embarrassment, “it all meant nothing; a mere joke among ourselves.” “The joke,” he replied gravely, “seemed confined to you and Mr.
Churchill.” He had hoped she would speak again, but she did not.
Interference—fruitless interference.
Emma’s confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed to declare her affection engaged.
He owed it to her, to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome interference, rather than her welfare; to encounter any thing, rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.
“My dear Emma,” said he at last, with earnest kindness, “do you think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the gentleman and lady we have been speaking of?” “Between Mr.
Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax?
Oh! yes, perfectly.—Why do you make a doubt of it?” “Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her, or that she admired him?” “Never, never!” she cried with a most open eagerness—“Never, for the twentieth part of a moment, did such an idea occur to me.
And how could it possibly come into your head?” “I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment between them—certain expressive looks, which I did not believe meant to be public.” “Oh! you amuse me excessively.
I am delighted to find that you can vouchsafe to let your imagination wander—but it will not do—very sorry to check you in your first essay—but indeed it will not do.
I will answer for the gentleman’s indifference.” She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a satisfaction which silenced, Mr.
She was in gay spirits, and would have prolonged the conversation, wanting to hear the particulars of his suspicions, every look described, and all the wheres and hows of a circumstance which highly entertained her: but his gaiety did not meet hers.
He found he could not be useful, and his feelings were too much irritated for talking.
That he might not be irritated into an absolute fever, by the fire which Mr.
Woodhouse’s tender habits required almost every evening throughout the year, he soon afterwards took a hasty leave, and walked home to the coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.
Suckling, the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification of hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn.
No such importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at present.
In the daily interchange of news, they must be again restricted to the other topics with which for a while the Sucklings’ coming had been united, such as the last accounts of Mrs.
Churchill, whose health seemed every day to supply a different report, and the situation of Mrs.
Weston, whose happiness it was to be hoped might eventually be as much increased by the arrival of a child, as that of all her neighbours was by the approach of it.
Elton was very much disappointed.
It was the delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade.
Her introductions and recommendations must all wait, and every projected party be still only talked of.
So she thought at first;—but a little consideration convinced her that every thing need not be put off.
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come?
That there was to be such a party had been long generally known: it had even given the idea of another.
Two or three more of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them, and it was to be done in a quiet, unpretending, elegant way, infinitely superior to the bustle and preparation, the regular eating and drinking, and picnic parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings.
This was so very well understood between them, that Emma could not but feel some surprise, and a little displeasure, on hearing from Mr.
Weston that he had been proposing to Mrs.
Elton, as her brother and sister had failed her, that the two parties should unite, and go together; and that as Mrs.
Elton had very readily acceded to it, so it was to be, if she had no objection.
Now, as her objection was nothing but her very great dislike of Mrs.
Weston must already be perfectly aware, it was not worth bringing forward again:—it could not be done without a reproof to him, which would be giving pain to his wife; and she found herself therefore obliged to consent to an arrangement which she would have done a great deal to avoid; an arrangement which would probably expose her even to the degradation of being said to be of Mrs.
Every feeling was offended; and the forbearance of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due of secret severity in her reflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr.
“I am glad you approve of what I have done,” said he very comfortably.
A large party secures its own amusement.
Elton was growing impatient to name the day, and settle with Mr.
Weston as to pigeon-pies and cold lamb, when a lame carriage-horse threw every thing into sad uncertainty.
It might be weeks, it might be only a few days, before the horse were useable; but no preparations could be ventured on, and it was all melancholy stagnation.
Elton’s resources were inadequate to such an attack.
“Is not this most vexatious, Knightley?” she cried.—“And such weather for exploring!—These delays and disappointments are quite odious.
Before this time last year I assure you we had had a delightful exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston.” “You had better explore to Donwell,” replied Mr.
Come, and eat my strawberries.
They are ripening fast.” If Mr.
Knightley did not begin seriously, he was obliged to proceed so, for his proposal was caught at with delight; and the “Oh!
Donwell was famous for its strawberry-beds, which seemed a plea for the invitation: but no plea was necessary; cabbage-beds would have been enough to tempt the lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere.
She promised him again and again to come—much oftener than he doubted—and was extremely gratified by such a proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing compliment as she chose to consider it.
“I certainly will come.
Only give me a carte-blanche.—I am Lady Patroness, you know.
I will bring friends with me.” “I hope you will bring Elton,” said he: “but I will not trouble you to give any other invitations.” “Oh! now you are looking very sly.
But consider—you need not be afraid of delegating power to _me_.
I am no young lady on her preferment.
Married women, you know, may be safely authorised.
Weston, I suppose,” interrupted Mrs.
Elton, rather mortified.
Knightley;—and till she is in being, I will manage such matters myself.” “Ah! you are an odd creature!” she cried, satisfied to have no one preferred to herself.—“You are a humourist, and may say what you like.
I have no objections at all to meeting the Hartfield family.
I know you are attached to them.” “You certainly will meet them if I can prevail; and I shall call on Miss Bates in my way home.” “That’s quite unnecessary; I see Jane every day:—but as you like.
It is to be a morning scheme, you know, Knightley; quite a simple thing.
Here,—probably this basket with pink ribbon.
We are to walk about your gardens, and gather the strawberries ourselves, and sit under trees;—and whatever else you may like to provide, it is to be all out of doors—a table spread in the shade, you know.
Every thing as natural and simple as possible.
The nature and the simplicity of gentlemen and ladies, with their servants and furniture, I think is best observed by meals within doors.
When you are tired of eating strawberries in the garden, there shall be cold meat in the house.” “Well—as you please; only don’t have a great set out.
And, by the bye, can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion?—Pray be sincere, Knightley.
Hodges, or to inspect anything—” “I have not the least wish for it, I thank you.” “Well—but if any difficulties should arise, my housekeeper is extremely clever.” “I will answer for it, that mine thinks herself full as clever, and would spurn any body’s assistance.” “I wish we had a donkey.
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey.
In a country life I conceive it to be a sort of necessary; for, let a woman have ever so many resources, it is not possible for her to be always shut up at home;—and very long walks, you know—in summer there is dust, and in winter there is dirt.” “You will not find either, between Donwell and Highbury.
Donwell Lane is never dusty, and now it is perfectly dry.
I would wish every thing to be as much to your taste as possible.” “That I am sure you would.
Under that peculiar sort of dry, blunt manner, I know you have the warmest heart.
E., you are a thorough humourist.—Yes, believe me, Knightley, I am fully sensible of your attention to me in the whole of this scheme.
Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade.
He wished to persuade Mr.
Woodhouse, as well as Emma, to join the party; and he knew that to have any of them sitting down out of doors to eat would inevitably make him ill.
Woodhouse must not, under the specious pretence of a morning drive, and an hour or two spent at Donwell, be tempted away to his misery.
No lurking horrors were to upbraid him for his easy credulity.
He should like to see the old house again exceedingly, and should be very happy to meet Mr. and Mrs.
Elton, and any other of his neighbours.—He could not see any objection at all to his, and Emma’s, and Harriet’s going there some very fine morning.
Knightley to invite them—very kind and sensible—much cleverer than dining out.—He was not fond of dining out.” Mr.
Knightley was fortunate in every body’s most ready concurrence.
The invitation was everywhere so well received, that it seemed as if, like Mrs.
Elton, they were all taking the scheme as a particular compliment to themselves.—Emma and Harriet professed very high expectations of pleasure from it; and Mr.
Weston, unasked, promised to get Frank over to join them, if possible; a proof of approbation and gratitude which could have been dispensed with.—Mr.
Knightley was then obliged to say that he should be glad to see him; and Mr.
Weston engaged to lose no time in writing, and spare no arguments to induce him to come.
In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast, that the party to Box Hill was again under happy consideration; and at last Donwell was settled for one day, and Box Hill for the next,—the weather appearing exactly right.
Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mr.
Woodhouse was safely conveyed in his carriage, with one window down, to partake of this al-fresco party; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the Abbey, especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning, he was happily placed, quite at his ease, ready to talk with pleasure of what had been achieved, and advise every body to come and sit down, and not to heat themselves.—Mrs.
Weston, who seemed to have walked there on purpose to be tired, and sit all the time with him, remained, when all the others were invited or persuaded out, his patient listener and sympathiser.
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she was satisfied of her father’s comfort, she was glad to leave him, and look around her; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more particular observation, more exact understanding of a house and grounds which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family.
These were pleasant feelings, and she walked about and indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others did, and collect round the strawberry-beds.—The whole party were assembled, excepting Frank Churchill, who was expected every moment from Richmond; and Mrs.
Weston, who came out, in her solicitude after her son-in-law, to inquire if he were come—and she was a little uneasy.—She had some fears of his horse.
Seats tolerably in the shade were found; and now Emma was obliged to overhear what Mrs.
Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of.—A situation, a most desirable situation, was in question.
Elton had received notice of it that morning, and was in raptures.
Suckling, it was not with Mrs.
Bragge, but in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them: it was with a cousin of Mrs.
Bragge, an acquaintance of Mrs.
Suckling, a lady known at Maple Grove.
Delightful, charming, superior, first circles, spheres, lines, ranks, every thing—and Mrs.
Elton was wild to have the offer closed with immediately.—On her side, all was warmth, energy, and triumph—and she positively refused to take her friend’s negative, though Miss Fairfax continued to assure her that she would not at present engage in any thing, repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge before.—Still Mrs.
Elton insisted on being authorised to write an acquiescence by the morrow’s post.—How Jane could bear it at all, was astonishing to Emma.—She did look vexed, she did speak pointedly—and at last, with a decision of action unusual to her, proposed a removal.—“Should not they walk?
Knightley shew them the gardens—all the gardens?—She wished to see the whole extent.”—The pertinacity of her friend seemed more than she could bear.
English verdure, English culture, English comfort, seen under a sun bright, without being oppressive.
Weston found all the others assembled; and towards this view she immediately perceived Mr.
Knightley and Harriet distinct from the rest, quietly leading the way.
Knightley and Harriet!—It was an odd tête-à-tête; but she was glad to see it.—There had been a time when he would have scorned her as a companion, and turned from her with little ceremony.
Now they seemed in pleasant conversation.
There had been a time also when Emma would have been sorry to see Harriet in a spot so favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm; but now she feared it not.
It might be safely viewed with all its appendages of prosperity and beauty, its rich pastures, spreading flocks, orchard in blossom, and light column of smoke ascending.—She joined them at the wall, and found them more engaged in talking than in looking around.
He was giving Harriet information as to modes of agriculture, etc. and Emma received a smile which seemed to say, “These are my own concerns.
I have a right to talk on such subjects, without being suspected of introducing Robert Martin.”—She did not suspect him.
It was too old a story.—Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet.—They took a few turns together along the walk.—The shade was most refreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day.
The next remove was to the house; they must all go in and eat;—and they were all seated and busy, and still Frank Churchill did not come.
He had expressed himself as to coming, with more than common certainty.
Churchill’s state, however, as many were ready to remind her, was liable to such sudden variation as might disappoint her nephew in the most reasonable dependence—and Mrs.
Weston was at last persuaded to believe, or to say, that it must be by some attack of Mrs.
Churchill that he was prevented coming.—Emma looked at Harriet while the point was under consideration; she behaved very well, and betrayed no emotion.
The cold repast was over, and the party were to go out once more to see what had not yet been seen, the old Abbey fish-ponds; perhaps get as far as the clover, which was to be begun cutting on the morrow, or, at any rate, have the pleasure of being hot, and growing cool again.—Mr.
Woodhouse, who had already taken his little round in the highest part of the gardens, where no damps from the river were imagined even by him, stirred no more; and his daughter resolved to remain with him, that Mrs.
Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise and variety which her spirits seemed to need.
Knightley had done all in his power for Mr.
Woodhouse’s entertainment.
Books of engravings, drawers of medals, cameos, corals, shells, and every other family collection within his cabinets, had been prepared for his old friend, to while away the morning; and the kindness had perfectly answered.
Woodhouse had been exceedingly well amused.
“Will you be so kind,” said she, “when I am missed, as to say that I am gone home?—I am going this moment.—My aunt is not aware how late it is, nor how long we have been absent—but I am sure we shall be wanted, and I am determined to go directly.—I have said nothing about it to any body.
It would only be giving trouble and distress.
Till they all come in I shall not be missed; and when they do, will you have the goodness to say that I am gone?” “Certainly, if you wish it;—but you are not going to walk to Highbury alone?” “Yes—what should hurt me?—I walk fast.
Let my father’s servant go with you.—Let me order the carriage.
It can be round in five minutes.” “Thank you, thank you—but on no account.—I would rather walk.—And for _me_ to be afraid of walking alone!—I, who may so soon have to guard others!” She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly replied, “That can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now.
I must order the carriage.
The heat even would be danger.—You are fatigued already.” “I am,”—she answered—“I am fatigued; but it is not the sort of fatigue—quick walking will refresh me.—Miss Woodhouse, we all know at times what it is to be wearied in spirits.
Mine, I confess, are exhausted.
The greatest kindness you can shew me, will be to let me have my own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary.” Emma had not another word to oppose.
She saw it all; and entering into her feelings, promoted her quitting the house immediately, and watched her safely off with the zeal of a friend.
Her parting look was grateful—and her parting words, “Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, the comfort of being sometimes alone!”—seemed to burst from an overcharged heart, and to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practised by her, even towards some of those who loved her best.
And the more sensibility you betray of their just horrors, the more I shall like you.” Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and they had only accomplished some views of St.
Mark’s Place, Venice, when Frank Churchill entered the room.
Emma had not been thinking of him, she had forgotten to think of him—but she was very glad to see him.
The black mare was blameless; _they_ were right who had named Mrs.
Churchill as the cause.
He had been detained by a temporary increase of illness in her; a nervous seizure, which had lasted some hours—and he had quite given up every thought of coming, till very late;—and had he known how hot a ride he should have, and how late, with all his hurry, he must be, he believed he should not have come at all.
The heat was excessive; he had never suffered any thing like it—almost wished he had staid at home—nothing killed him like heat—he could bear any degree of cold, etc., but heat was intolerable—and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from the slight remains of Mr.
Woodhouse’s fire, looking very deplorable.
You will all be going soon I suppose; the whole party breaking up.
I met _one_ as I came—Madness in such weather!—absolute madness!” Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that Frank Churchill’s state might be best defined by the expressive phrase of being out of humour.
Such might be his constitution; and as she knew that eating and drinking were often the cure of such incidental complaints, she recommended his taking some refreshment; he would find abundance of every thing in the dining-room—and she humanely pointed out the door.
He was not hungry; it would only make him hotter.” In two minutes, however, he relented in his own favour; and muttering something about spruce-beer, walked off.
Emma returned all her attention to her father, saying in secret— “I am glad I have done being in love with him.
I should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning.
Harriet’s sweet easy temper will not mind it.” He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal, and came back all the better—grown quite cool—and, with good manners, like himself—able to draw a chair close to them, take an interest in their employment; and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should be so late.
He was not in his best spirits, but seemed trying to improve them; and, at last, made himself talk nonsense very agreeably.
They were looking over views in Swisserland.
You will have my sketches, some time or other, to look at—or my tour to read—or my poem.
I shall do something to expose myself.” “That may be—but not by sketches in Swisserland.
You will never go to Swisserland.
A warm climate may be prescribed for her.
I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad.
I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I shall soon be abroad.
I am serious, Miss Woodhouse, whatever your penetrating eyes may fancy—I am sick of England—and would leave it to-morrow, if I could.” “You are sick of prosperity and indulgence.
Cannot you invent a few hardships for yourself, and be contented to stay?” “_I_ sick of prosperity and indulgence!
You are quite mistaken.
I do not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged.
I am thwarted in every thing material.
I do not consider myself at all a fortunate person.” “You are not quite so miserable, though, as when you first came.
It is not Swisserland, but it will be something for a young man so much in want of a change.
You will stay, and go with us?” “No, certainly not; I shall go home in the cool of the evening.” “But you may come again in the cool of to-morrow morning.” “No—It will not be worth while.
If I come, I shall be cross.” “Then pray stay at Richmond.” “But if I do, I shall be crosser still.
I can never bear to think of you all there without me.” “These are difficulties which you must settle for yourself.
Chuse your own degree of crossness.
I shall press you no more.” The rest of the party were now returning, and all were soon collected.
With some there was great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill; others took it very composedly; but there was a very general distress and disturbance on Miss Fairfax’s disappearance being explained.
That it was time for every body to go, concluded the subject; and with a short final arrangement for the next day’s scheme, they parted.
Frank Churchill’s little inclination to exclude himself increased so much, that his last words to Emma were, “Well;—if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party, I will.” She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a summons from Richmond was to take him back before the following evening.
CHAPTER VII They had a very fine day for Box Hill; and all the other outward circumstances of arrangement, accommodation, and punctuality, were in favour of a pleasant party.
Weston directed the whole, officiating safely between Hartfield and the Vicarage, and every body was in good time.
Emma and Harriet went together; Miss Bates and her niece, with the Eltons; the gentlemen on horseback.
Weston remained with Mr.
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment, and every body had a burst of admiration on first arriving; but in the general amount of the day there was deficiency.
They separated too much into parties.
The Eltons walked together; Mr.
Knightley took charge of Miss Bates and Jane; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank Churchill.
Weston tried, in vain, to make them harmonise better.
It seemed at first an accidental division, but it never materially varied.
Elton, indeed, shewed no unwillingness to mix, and be as agreeable as they could; but during the two whole hours that were spent on the hill, there seemed a principle of separation, between the other parties, too strong for any fine prospects, or any cold collation, or any cheerful Mr.
At first it was downright dulness to Emma.
She had never seen Frank Churchill so silent and stupid.
He said nothing worth hearing—looked without seeing—admired without intelligence—listened without knowing what she said.
While he was so dull, it was no wonder that Harriet should be dull likewise; and they were both insufferable.
When they all sat down it was better; to her taste a great deal better, for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay, making her his first object.
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid, was paid to her.
Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse flirted together excessively.” They were laying themselves open to that very phrase—and to having it sent off in a letter to Maple Grove by one lady, to Ireland by another.
Not that Emma was gay and thoughtless from any real felicity; it was rather because she felt less happy than she had expected.
She laughed because she was disappointed; and though she liked him for his attentions, and thought them all, whether in friendship, admiration, or playfulness, extremely judicious, they were not winning back her heart.
She still intended him for her friend.
“How much I am obliged to you,” said he, “for telling me to come to-day!—If it had not been for you, I should certainly have lost all the happiness of this party.
I had quite determined to go away again.” “Yes, you were very cross; and I do not know what about, except that you were too late for the best strawberries.
I was a kinder friend than you deserved.
You begged hard to be commanded to come.” “Don’t say I was cross.
The heat overcame me.” “It is hotter to-day.” “Not to my feelings.
I am perfectly comfortable to-day.” “You are comfortable because you are under command.” “Your command?—Yes.” “Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-command.
You had, somehow or other, broken bounds yesterday, and run away from your own management; but to-day you are got back again—and as I cannot be always with you, it is best to believe your temper under your own command rather than mine.” “It comes to the same thing.
You are always with me.” “Dating from three o’clock yesterday.
My perpetual influence could not begin earlier, or you would not have been so much out of humour before.” “Three o’clock yesterday!
I thought I had seen you first in February.” “Your gallantry is really unanswerable.
But (lowering her voice)—nobody speaks except ourselves, and it is rather too much to be talking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people.” “I say nothing of which I am ashamed,” replied he, with lively impudence.
“I saw you first in February.
Let my accents swell to Mickleham on one side, and Dorking on the other.
I saw you first in February.” And then whispering—“Our companions are excessively stupid.
Any nonsense will serve.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever she is, presides) to say, that she desires to know what you are all thinking of?” Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly.
Elton swelled at the idea of Miss Woodhouse’s presiding; Mr.
Knightley’s answer was the most distinct.
“Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are all thinking of?” “Oh! no, no”—cried Emma, laughing as carelessly as she could—“Upon no account in the world.
Let me hear any thing rather than what you are all thinking of.
There are one or two, perhaps, (glancing at Mr.
Weston and Harriet,) whose thoughts I might not be afraid of knowing.” “It is a sort of thing,” cried Mrs.
Elton emphatically, “which _I_ should not have thought myself privileged to inquire into.
Though, perhaps, as the _Chaperon_ of the party—_I_ never was in any circle—exploring parties—young ladies—married women—” Her mutterings were chiefly to her husband; and he murmured, in reply, “Very true, my love, very true.
Every body knows what is due to _you_.” “It will not do,” whispered Frank to Emma; “they are most of them affronted.
Ladies and gentlemen—I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say, that she waives her right of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of, and only requires something very entertaining from each of you, in a general way.
Here are seven of you, besides myself, (who, she is pleased to say, am very entertaining already,) and she only demands from each of you either one thing very clever, be it prose or verse, original or repeated—or two things moderately clever—or three things very dull indeed, and she engages to laugh heartily at them all.” “Oh! very well,” exclaimed Miss Bates, “then I need not be uneasy.
I shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth, shan’t I? (looking round with the most good-humoured dependence on every body’s assent)—Do not you all think I shall?” Emma could not resist.
“Ah! ma’am, but there may be a difficulty.
Pardon me—but you will be limited as to number—only three at once.” Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner, did not immediately catch her meaning; but, when it burst on her, it could not anger, though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her.
Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue.
I must make myself very disagreeable, or she would not have said such a thing to an old friend.” “I like your plan,” cried Mr.
I am making a conundrum.
How will a conundrum reckon?” “Low, I am afraid, sir, very low,” answered his son;—“but we shall be indulgent—especially to any one who leads the way.” “No, no,” said Emma, “it will not reckon low.
Weston’s shall clear him and his next neighbour.
“It is too much a matter of fact, but here it is.—What two letters of the alphabet are there, that express perfection?” “What two letters!—express perfection!
You, (to Emma), I am certain, will never guess.—I will tell you.—M. and A.—Em-ma.—Do you understand?” Understanding and gratification came together.
It might be a very indifferent piece of wit, but Emma found a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it—and so did Frank and Harriet.—It did not seem to touch the rest of the party equally; some looked very stupid about it, and Mr.
Knightley gravely said, “This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and Mr.
Weston has done very well for himself; but he must have knocked up every body else. _Perfection_ should not have come quite so soon.” “Oh! for myself, I protest I must be excused,” said Mrs.
I had an acrostic once sent to me upon my own name, which I was not at all pleased with.
An abominable puppy!—You know who I mean (nodding to her husband).
These kind of things are very well at Christmas, when one is sitting round the fire; but quite out of place, in my opinion, when one is exploring about the country in summer.
Miss Woodhouse must excuse me.
I have a great deal of vivacity in my own way, but I really must be allowed to judge when to speak and when to hold my tongue.
E., Knightley, Jane, and myself.
“Yes, yes, pray pass _me_,” added her husband, with a sort of sneering consciousness; “_I_ have nothing to say that can entertain Miss Woodhouse, or any other young lady.
I am really tired of exploring so long on one spot.
Come, Jane, take my other arm.” Jane declined it, however, and the husband and wife walked off.
“Happy couple!” said Frank Churchill, as soon as they were out of hearing:—“How well they suit one another!—Very lucky—marrying as they did, upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place!—They only knew each other, I think, a few weeks in Bath!
Peculiarly lucky!—for as to any real knowledge of a person’s disposition that Bath, or any public place, can give—it is all nothing; there can be no knowledge.
It is only by seeing women in their own homes, among their own set, just as they always are, that you can form any just judgment.
Short of that, it is all guess and luck—and will generally be ill-luck.
How many a man has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and rued it all the rest of his life!” Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except among her own confederates, spoke now.
“Such things do occur, undoubtedly.”—She was stopped by a cough.
Frank Churchill turned towards her to listen.
“You were speaking,” said he, gravely.
She recovered her voice.
“I was only going to observe, that though such unfortunate circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and women, I cannot imagine them to be very frequent.
A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise—but there is generally time to recover from it afterwards.
I undertake the commission.
You shall have a charming wife.” “She must be very lively, and have hazle eyes.
Remember.” Emma was in no danger of forgetting.
It was a commission to touch every favourite feeling.
Would not Harriet be the very creature described?
Hazle eyes excepted, two years more might make her all that he wished.
He might even have Harriet in his thoughts at the moment; who could say?
Referring the education to her seemed to imply it.
We shall soon overtake her.
There she is—no, that’s somebody else.
That’s one of the ladies in the Irish car party, not at all like her.—Well, I declare—” They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr.
Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet, only remained; and the young man’s spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant.
Even Emma grew tired at last of flattery and merriment, and wished herself rather walking quietly about with any of the others, or sitting almost alone, and quite unattended to, in tranquil observation of the beautiful views beneath her.
The appearance of the servants looking out for them to give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight; and even the bustle of collecting and preparing to depart, and the solicitude of Mrs.
Elton to have _her_ carriage first, were gladly endured, in the prospect of the quiet drive home which was to close the very questionable enjoyments of this day of pleasure.
Such another scheme, composed of so many ill-assorted people, she hoped never to be betrayed into again.
While waiting for the carriage, she found Mr.
Knightley by her side.
He looked around, as if to see that no one were near, and then said, “Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do: a privilege rather endured than allowed, perhaps, but I must still use it.
I cannot see you acting wrong, without a remonstrance.
How could you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates?
How could you be so insolent in your wit to a woman of her character, age, and situation?—Emma, I had not thought it possible.” Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to laugh it off.
I dare say she did not understand me.” “I assure you she did.
I wish you could have heard how she talked of it—with what candour and generosity.
Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every harmless absurdity to take its chance, I would not quarrel with you for any liberties of manner.
Were she your equal in situation—but, Emma, consider how far this is from being the case.
She is poor; she has sunk from the comforts she was born to; and, if she live to old age, must probably sink more.
Her situation should secure your compassion.
He had misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted, and her tongue motionless.
They were combined only of anger against herself, mortification, and deep concern.
She had not been able to speak; and, on entering the carriage, sunk back for a moment overcome—then reproaching herself for having taken no leave, making no acknowledgment, parting in apparent sullenness, she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference; but it was just too late.
She continued to look back, but in vain; and soon, with what appeared unusual speed, they were half way down the hill, and every thing left far behind.
She was vexed beyond what could have been expressed—almost beyond what she could conceal.
Never had she felt so agitated, mortified, grieved, at any circumstance in her life.
She was most forcibly struck.
The truth of this representation there was no denying.
And how suffer him to leave her without saying one word of gratitude, of concurrence, of common kindness!
As she reflected more, she seemed but to feel it more.
She never had been so depressed.
Happily it was not necessary to speak.
There was only Harriet, who seemed not in spirits herself, fagged, and very willing to be silent; and Emma felt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the way home, without being at any trouble to check them, extraordinary as they were.
CHAPTER VIII The wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma’s thoughts all the evening.
How it might be considered by the rest of the party, she could not tell.
They, in their different homes, and their different ways, might be looking back on it with pleasure; but in her view it was a morning more completely misspent, more totally bare of rational satisfaction at the time, and more to be abhorred in recollection, than any she had ever passed.
A whole evening of back-gammon with her father, was felicity to it. _There_, indeed, lay real pleasure, for there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty-four to his comfort; and feeling that, unmerited as might be the degree of his fond affection and confiding esteem, she could not, in her general conduct, be open to any severe reproach.
As a daughter, she hoped she was not without a heart.
She hoped no one could have said to her, “How could you be so unfeeling to your father?—I must, I will tell you truths while I can.” Miss Bates should never again—no, never!
If attention, in future, could do away the past, she might hope to be forgiven.
She had been often remiss, her conscience told her so; remiss, perhaps, more in thought than fact; scornful, ungracious.
In the warmth of true contrition, she would call upon her the very next morning, and it should be the beginning, on her side, of a regular, equal, kindly intercourse.
She was just as determined when the morrow came, and went early, that nothing might prevent her.
It was not unlikely, she thought, that she might see Mr.
Knightley in her way; or, perhaps, he might come in while she were paying her visit.
She had no objection.
She would not be ashamed of the appearance of the penitence, so justly and truly hers.
“The ladies were all at home.” She had never rejoiced at the sound before, nor ever before entered the passage, nor walked up the stairs, with any wish of giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation, or of deriving it, except in subsequent ridicule.
There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of moving and talking.
She heard Miss Bates’s voice, something was to be done in a hurry; the maid looked frightened and awkward; hoped she would be pleased to wait a moment, and then ushered her in too soon.
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room.
Jane she had a distinct glimpse of, looking extremely ill; and, before the door had shut them out, she heard Miss Bates saying, “Well, my dear, I shall _say_ you are laid down upon the bed, and I am sure you are ill enough.” Poor old Mrs.
Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked as if she did not quite understand what was going on.
I dare say my daughter will be here presently, Miss Woodhouse.
I am sure she will be here presently.” Emma seriously hoped she would.
But Miss Bates soon came—“Very happy and obliged”—but Emma’s conscience told her that there was not the same cheerful volubility as before—less ease of look and manner.
A very friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hoped, might lead the way to a return of old feelings.
The touch seemed immediate.
Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are!—I suppose you have heard—and are come to give us joy.
This does not seem much like joy, indeed, in me—(twinkling away a tear or two)—but it will be very trying for us to part with her, after having had her so long, and she has a dreadful headache just now, writing all the morning:—such long letters, you know, to be written to Colonel Campbell, and Mrs.
‘My dear,’ said I, ‘you will blind yourself’—for tears were in her eyes perpetually.
It is a great change; and though she is amazingly fortunate—such a situation, I suppose, as no young woman before ever met with on first going out—do not think us ungrateful, Miss Woodhouse, for such surprising good fortune—(again dispersing her tears)—but, poor dear soul! if you were to see what a headache she has.
When one is in great pain, you know one cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve.
She is as low as possible.
To look at her, nobody would think how delighted and happy she is to have secured such a situation.
She will be extremely sorry to miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse, but your kindness will excuse her.
You were kept waiting at the door—I was quite ashamed—but somehow there was a little bustle—for it so happened that we had not heard the knock, and till you were on the stairs, we did not know any body was coming.
‘Oh!’ said I, ‘it is Miss Woodhouse: I am sure you will like to see her.’—‘I can see nobody,’ said she; and up she got, and would go away; and that was what made us keep you waiting—and extremely sorry and ashamed we were.
‘If you must go, my dear,’ said I, ‘you must, and I will say you are laid down upon the bed.’” Emma was most sincerely interested.
Her heart had been long growing kinder towards Jane; and this picture of her present sufferings acted as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing but pity; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle sensations of the past, obliged her to admit that Jane might very naturally resolve on seeing Mrs.
She spoke as she felt, with earnest regret and solicitude—sincerely wishing that the circumstances which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually determined on, might be as much for Miss Fairfax’s advantage and comfort as possible.
She had understood it was to be delayed till Colonel Campbell’s return.” “So very kind!” replied Miss Bates.
“But you are always kind.” There was no bearing such an “always;” and to break through her dreadful gratitude, Emma made the direct inquiry of— “Where—may I ask?—is Miss Fairfax going?” “To a Mrs.
Smallridge—charming woman—most superior—to have the charge of her three little girls—delightful children.
Impossible that any situation could be more replete with comfort; if we except, perhaps, Mrs.
Suckling’s own family, and Mrs.
Smallridge is intimate with both, and in the very same neighbourhood:—lives only four miles from Maple Grove.
The most indefatigable, true friend.
Elton, whose judgment never fails her, saw farther than I did.
It is not every body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did, and refuse to take Jane’s answer; but she positively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday, as Jane wished her; she would wait—and, sure enough, yesterday evening it was all settled that Jane should go.
Quite a surprize to me!
Elton aside, and told her at once, that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs.
Smallridge’s situation, she had come to the resolution of accepting it.—I did not know a word of it till it was all settled.” “You spent the evening with Mrs.
‘You _must_ _all_ spend your evening with us,’ said she—‘I positively must have you _all_ come.’” “Mr.
Knightley was there too, was he?” “No, not Mr.
Knightley; he declined it from the first; and though I thought he would come, because Mrs.
Elton declared she would not let him off, he did not;—but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there, and a very agreeable evening we had.
Such kind friends, you know, Miss Woodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every body seemed rather fagged after the morning’s party.
Even pleasure, you know, is fatiguing—and I cannot say that any of them seemed very much to have enjoyed it.
Except the Sucklings and Bragges, there is not such another nursery establishment, so liberal and elegant, in all Mrs.
Elton’s acquaintance.
Smallridge, a most delightful woman!—A style of living almost equal to Maple Grove—and as to the children, except the little Sucklings and little Bragges, there are not such elegant sweet children anywhere.
Jane will be treated with such regard and kindness!—It will be nothing but pleasure, a life of pleasure.—And her salary!—I really cannot venture to name her salary to you, Miss Woodhouse.
Smallridge is in a great hurry.
So then, I try to put it out of her thoughts, and say, Come ma’am, do not let us think about it any more.” “Her friends must all be sorry to lose her; and will not Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before their return?” “Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such a situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining.
I was so astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs.
Elton at the same moment came congratulating me upon it!
It was before tea—stay—no, it could not be before tea, because we were just going to cards—and yet it was before tea, because I remember thinking—Oh! no, now I recollect, now I have it; something happened before tea, but not that.
Poor old John, I have a great regard for him; he was clerk to my poor father twenty-seven years; and now, poor old man, he is bed-ridden, and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints—I must go and see him to-day; and so will Jane, I am sure, if she gets out at all.
Elton came back, he told us what John ostler had been telling him, and then it came out about the chaise having been sent to Randalls to take Mr.
Frank Churchill to Richmond.
That was what happened before tea.
Elton.” Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly new this circumstance was to her; but as without supposing it possible that she could be ignorant of any of the particulars of Mr.
Frank Churchill’s going, she proceeded to give them all, it was of no consequence.
Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject, being the accumulation of the ostler’s own knowledge, and the knowledge of the servants at Randalls, was, that a messenger had come over from Richmond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill—which messenger, however, had been no more than was expected; and that Mr.
Churchill had sent his nephew a few lines, containing, upon the whole, a tolerable account of Mrs.
Churchill, and only wishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning early; but that Mr.
Frank Churchill having resolved to go home directly, without waiting at all, and his horse seeming to have got a cold, Tom had been sent off immediately for the Crown chaise, and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by, the boy going a good pace, and driving very steady.
There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest, and it caught Emma’s attention only as it united with the subject which already engaged her mind.
The contrast between Mrs.
Churchill’s importance in the world, and Jane Fairfax’s, struck her; one was every thing, the other nothing—and she sat musing on the difference of woman’s destiny, and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed, till roused by Miss Bates’s saying, “Aye, I see what you are thinking of, the pianoforte.
You will have no business here.—Let it stay, however,’ said she; ‘give it houseroom till Colonel Campbell comes back.
CHAPTER IX Emma’s pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not interrupted; but on entering the parlour, she found those who must rouse her.
Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence, and were sitting with her father.—Mr.
Knightley immediately got up, and in a manner decidedly graver than usual, said, “I would not go away without seeing you, but I have no time to spare, and therefore must now be gone directly.
I am going to London, to spend a few days with John and Isabella.
But is not this a sudden scheme?” “Yes—rather—I have been thinking of it some little time.” Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked unlike himself.
While he stood, as if meaning to go, but not going—her father began his inquiries.
“Well, my dear, and did you get there safely?—And how did you find my worthy old friend and her daughter?—I dare say they must have been very much obliged to you for coming.
Knightley, as I told you before.
She is always so attentive to them!” Emma’s colour was heightened by this unjust praise; and with a smile, and shake of the head, which spoke much, she looked at Mr.
Knightley.—It seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in her favour, as if his eyes received the truth from hers, and all that had passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured.— He looked at her with a glow of regard.
It spoke such perfect amity.—He left them immediately afterwards—gone in a moment.
He always moved with the alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory, but now he seemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance.
Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates, but she wished she had left her ten minutes earlier;—it would have been a great pleasure to talk over Jane Fairfax’s situation with Mr.
In the hope of diverting her father’s thoughts from the disagreeableness of Mr.
Knightley’s going to London; and going so suddenly; and going on horseback, which she knew would be all very bad; Emma communicated her news of Jane Fairfax, and her dependence on the effect was justified; it supplied a very useful check,—interested, without disturbing him.
He had long made up his mind to Jane Fairfax’s going out as governess, and could talk of it cheerfully, but Mr.
Knightley’s going to London had been an unexpected blow.
“I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to be so comfortably settled.
Elton is very good-natured and agreeable, and I dare say her acquaintance are just what they ought to be.
I hope it is a dry situation, and that her health will be taken good care of.
And I hope she will be better off in one respect, and not be induced to go away after it has been her home so long.” The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every thing else into the background.
An express arrived at Randalls to announce the death of Mrs.
Though her nephew had had no particular reason to hasten back on her account, she had not lived above six-and-thirty hours after his return.
A sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing foreboded by her general state, had carried her off after a short struggle.
Churchill was no more.
Every body had a degree of gravity and sorrow; tenderness towards the departed, solicitude for the surviving friends; and, in a reasonable time, curiosity to know where she would be buried.
Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoops to folly, she has nothing to do but to die; and when she stoops to be disagreeable, it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill-fame.
Churchill, after being disliked at least twenty-five years, was now spoken of with compassionate allowances.
In one point she was fully justified.
She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill.
The event acquitted her of all the fancifulness, and all the selfishness of imaginary complaints.
Churchill! no doubt she had been suffering a great deal: more than any body had ever supposed—and continual pain would try the temper.
Churchill do without her?
Churchill’s loss would be dreadful indeed.
Churchill would never get over it.”—Even Mr.
Weston shook his head, and looked solemn, and said, “Ah! poor woman, who would have thought it!” and resolved, that his mourning should be as handsome as possible; and his wife sat sighing and moralising over her broad hems with a commiseration and good sense, true and steady.
How it would affect Frank was among the earliest thoughts of both.
It was also a very early speculation with Emma.
The character of Mrs.
Churchill, the grief of her husband—her mind glanced over them both with awe and compassion—and then rested with lightened feelings on how Frank might be affected by the event, how benefited, how freed.
She saw in a moment all the possible good.
Now, an attachment to Harriet Smith would have nothing to encounter.
Churchill, independent of his wife, was feared by nobody; an easy, guidable man, to be persuaded into any thing by his nephew.
All that remained to be wished was, that the nephew should form the attachment, as, with all her goodwill in the cause, Emma could feel no certainty of its being already formed.
Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion, with great self-command.
What ever she might feel of brighter hope, she betrayed nothing.
Emma was gratified, to observe such a proof in her of strengthened character, and refrained from any allusion that might endanger its maintenance.
They spoke, therefore, of Mrs.
Churchill’s death with mutual forbearance.
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls, communicating all that was immediately important of their state and plans.
Churchill was better than could be expected; and their first removal, on the departure of the funeral for Yorkshire, was to be to the house of a very old friend in Windsor, to whom Mr.
Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years.
At present, there was nothing to be done for Harriet; good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possible on Emma’s side.
It was a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax, whose prospects were closing, while Harriet’s opened, and whose engagements now allowed of no delay in any one at Highbury, who wished to shew her kindness—and with Emma it was grown into a first wish.
She had scarcely a stronger regret than for her past coldness; and the person, whom she had been so many months neglecting, was now the very one on whom she would have lavished every distinction of regard or sympathy.
She wanted to be of use to her; wanted to shew a value for her society, and testify respect and consideration.
She resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at Hartfield.
The invitation was refused, and by a verbal message.
Perry called at Hartfield, the same morning, it appeared that she was so much indisposed as to have been visited, though against her own consent, by himself, and that she was suffering under severe headaches, and a nervous fever to a degree, which made him doubt the possibility of her going to Mrs.
Smallridge’s at the time proposed.
Her health seemed for the moment completely deranged—appetite quite gone—and though there were no absolutely alarming symptoms, nothing touching the pulmonary complaint, which was the standing apprehension of the family, Mr.
He thought she had undertaken more than she was equal to, and that she felt it so herself, though she would not own it.
Her spirits seemed overcome.
Her present home, he could not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervous disorder:—confined always to one room;—he could have wished it otherwise—and her good aunt, though his very old friend, he must acknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of that description.
Her care and attention could not be questioned; they were, in fact, only too great.
Emma listened with the warmest concern; grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to discover some way of being useful.
To take her—be it only an hour or two—from her aunt, to give her change of air and scene, and quiet rational conversation, even for an hour or two, might do her good; and the following morning she wrote again to say, in the most feeling language she could command, that she would call for her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name—mentioning that she had Mr.
Perry’s decided opinion, in favour of such exercise for his patient.
The answer was only in this short note: “Miss Fairfax’s compliments and thanks, but is quite unequal to any exercise.” Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better; but it was impossible to quarrel with words, whose tremulous inequality shewed indisposition so plainly, and she thought only of how she might best counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted.
In spite of the answer, therefore, she ordered the carriage, and drove to Mrs.
Bates’s, in the hope that Jane would be induced to join her—but it would not do;—Miss Bates came to the carriage door, all gratitude, and agreeing with her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of the greatest service—and every thing that message could do was tried—but all in vain.
Miss Bates was obliged to return without success; Jane was quite unpersuadable; the mere proposal of going out seemed to make her worse.—Emma wished she could have seen her, and tried her own powers; but, almost before she could hint the wish, Miss Bates made it appear that she had promised her niece on no account to let Miss Woodhouse in.
Coles, who would force themselves anywhere; neither could she feel any right of preference herself—she submitted, therefore, and only questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece’s appetite and diet, which she longed to be able to assist.
On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy, and very communicative; Jane would hardly eat any thing:—Mr.
Perry recommended nourishing food; but every thing they could command (and never had any body such good neighbours) was distasteful.
Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper directly, to an examination of her stores; and some arrowroot of very superior quality was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note.
Knightley have been privy to all her attempts of assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have seen into her heart, he would not, on this occasion, have found any thing to reprove.
Churchill’s decease, Emma was called downstairs to Mr.
Weston, who “could not stay five minutes, and wanted particularly to speak with her.”—He met her at the parlour-door, and hardly asking her how she did, in the natural key of his voice, sunk it immediately, to say, unheard by her father, “Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning?—Do, if it be possible.
She must see you.” “Is she unwell?” “No, no, not at all—only a little agitated.
She would have ordered the carriage, and come to you, but she must see you _alone_, and that you know—(nodding towards her father)—Humph!—Can you come?” “Certainly.
It is impossible to refuse what you ask in such a way.
But what can be the matter?—Is she really not ill?” “Depend upon me—but ask no more questions.
The most unaccountable business!
But hush, hush!” To guess what all this meant, was impossible even for Emma.
Something really important seemed announced by his looks; but, as her friend was well, she endeavoured not to be uneasy, and settling it with her father, that she would take her walk now, she and Mr.
Weston were soon out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for Randalls.
Weston, do let me know what has happened.” “No, no,”—he gravely replied.—“Don’t ask me.
I promised my wife to leave it all to her.
Do not be impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon.” “Break it to me,” cried Emma, standing still with terror.—“Good God!—Mr.
Weston, tell me at once.—Something has happened in Brunswick Square.
Tell me, I charge you tell me this moment what it is.” “No, indeed you are mistaken.”— “Mr.
Weston do not trifle with me.—Consider how many of my dearest friends are now in Brunswick Square.
Which of them is it?—I charge you by all that is sacred, not to attempt concealment.” “Upon my word, Emma.”— “Your word!—why not your honour!—why not say upon your honour, that it has nothing to do with any of them?
Good Heavens!—What can be to be _broke_ to me, that does not relate to one of that family?” “Upon my honour,” said he very seriously, “it does not.
It is not in the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name of Knightley.” Emma’s courage returned, and she walked on.
“I was wrong,” he continued, “in talking of its being _broke_ to you.
I should not have used the expression.
In fact, it does not concern you—it concerns only myself,—that is, we hope.—Humph!—In short, my dear Emma, there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it.
I don’t say that it is not a disagreeable business—but things might be much worse.—If we walk fast, we shall soon be at Randalls.” Emma found that she must wait; and now it required little effort.
She asked no more questions therefore, merely employed her own fancy, and that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some money concern—something just come to light, of a disagreeable nature in the circumstances of the family,—something which the late event at Richmond had brought forward.
Half a dozen natural children, perhaps—and poor Frank cut off!—This, though very undesirable, would be no matter of agony to her.
It inspired little more than an animating curiosity.
“Who is that gentleman on horseback?” said she, as they proceeded—speaking more to assist Mr.
I shall leave you together.
I shall not be far off, if you want me.”—And Emma distinctly heard him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted the room,—“I have been as good as my word.
Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of so much perturbation, that Emma’s uneasiness increased; and the moment they were alone, she eagerly said, “What is it my dear friend?
Something of a very unpleasant nature, I find, has occurred;—do let me know directly what it is.
I have been walking all this way in complete suspense.
We both abhor suspense.
Do not let mine continue longer.
It will do you good to speak of your distress, whatever it may be.” “Have you indeed no idea?” said Mrs.
Weston in a trembling voice.
Frank Churchill, I do guess.” “You are right.
It does relate to him, and I will tell you directly;” (resuming her work, and seeming resolved against looking up.) “He has been here this very morning, on a most extraordinary errand.
It is impossible to express our surprize.
He came to speak to his father on a subject,—to announce an attachment—” She stopped to breathe.
“More than an attachment, indeed,” resumed Mrs.
Weston; “an engagement—a positive engagement.—What will you say, Emma—what will any body say, when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are engaged;—nay, that they have been long engaged!” Emma even jumped with surprize;—and, horror-struck, exclaimed, “Jane Fairfax!—Good God!
You do not mean it?” “You may well be amazed,” returned Mrs.
Weston, still averting her eyes, and talking on with eagerness, that Emma might have time to recover— “You may well be amazed.
There has been a solemn engagement between them ever since October—formed at Weymouth, and kept a secret from every body.
Not a creature knowing it but themselves—neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.—It is so wonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact, it is yet almost incredible to myself.
I can hardly believe it.—I thought I knew him.” Emma scarcely heard what was said.—Her mind was divided between two ideas—her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax; and poor Harriet;—and for some time she could only exclaim, and require confirmation, repeated confirmation.
“Well,” said she at last, trying to recover herself; “this is a circumstance which I must think of at least half a day, before I can at all comprehend it.
What!—engaged to her all the winter—before either of them came to Highbury?” “Engaged since October,—secretly engaged.—It has hurt me, Emma, very much.
It has hurt his father equally. _Some_ _part_ of his conduct we cannot excuse.” Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, “I will not pretend _not_ to understand you; and to give you all the relief in my power, be assured that no such effect has followed his attentions to me, as you are apprehensive of.” Mrs.
Weston looked up, afraid to believe; but Emma’s countenance was as steady as her words.
“That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast, of my present perfect indifference,” she continued, “I will farther tell you, that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance, when I did like him, when I was very much disposed to be attached to him—nay, was attached—and how it came to cease, is perhaps the wonder.
Fortunately, however, it did cease.
Weston kissed her with tears of joy; and when she could find utterance, assured her, that this protestation had done her more good than any thing else in the world could do.
Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself,” said she.
“On this point we have been wretched.
It was our darling wish that you might be attached to each other—and we were persuaded that it was so.— Imagine what we have been feeling on your account.” “I have escaped; and that I should escape, may be a matter of grateful wonder to you and myself.
What right had he to come among us with affection and faith engaged, and with manners so _very_ disengaged?
Composure with a witness! to look on, while repeated attentions were offering to another woman, before her face, and not resent it.—That is a degree of placidity, which I can neither comprehend nor respect.” “There were misunderstandings between them, Emma; he said so expressly.
He had not time to enter into much explanation.
He was here only a quarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation which did not allow the full use even of the time he could stay—but that there had been misunderstandings he decidedly said.
The present crisis, indeed, seemed to be brought on by them; and those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct.” “Impropriety!
Much, much beyond impropriety!—It has sunk him, I cannot say how it has sunk him in my opinion.
Jane actually on the point of going as governess!
What could he mean by such horrible indelicacy?
It was a private resolution of hers, not communicated to him—or at least not communicated in a way to carry conviction.—Till yesterday, I know he said he was in the dark as to her plans.
They burst on him, I do not know how, but by some letter or message—and it was the discovery of what she was doing, of this very project of hers, which determined him to come forward at once, own it all to his uncle, throw himself on his kindness, and, in short, put an end to the miserable state of concealment that had been carrying on so long.” Emma began to listen better.
“I am to hear from him soon,” continued Mrs.
“He told me at parting, that he should soon write; and he spoke in a manner which seemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now.
Let us wait, therefore, for this letter.
It may bring many extenuations.
It may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not to be understood.
Let us have patience.
I must love him; and now that I am satisfied on one point, the one material point, I am sincerely anxious for its all turning out well, and ready to hope that it may.
They must both have suffered a great deal under such a system of secresy and concealment.” “_His_ sufferings,” replied Emma dryly, “do not appear to have done him much harm.
Churchill take it?” “Most favourably for his nephew—gave his consent with scarcely a difficulty.
Conceive what the events of a week have done in that family!
Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have been a hope, a chance, a possibility;—but scarcely are her remains at rest in the family vault, than her husband is persuaded to act exactly opposite to what she would have required.
What a blessing it is, when undue influence does not survive the grave!—He gave his consent with very little persuasion.” “Ah!” thought Emma, “he would have done as much for Harriet.” “This was settled last night, and Frank was off with the light this morning.
He positively said that it had been known to no being in the world but their two selves.” “Well,” said Emma, “I suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled to the idea, and I wish them very happy.
But I shall always think it a very abominable sort of proceeding.
“I am very sure that I never said any thing of either to the other, which both might not have heard.” “You are in luck.—Your only blunder was confined to my ear, when you imagined a certain friend of ours in love with the lady.” “True.
But as I have always had a thoroughly good opinion of Miss Fairfax, I never could, under any blunder, have spoken ill of her; and as to speaking ill of him, there I must have been safe.” At this moment Mr.
Weston appeared at a little distance from the window, evidently on the watch.
His wife gave him a look which invited him in; and, while he was coming round, added, “Now, dearest Emma, let me intreat you to say and look every thing that may set his heart at ease, and incline him to be satisfied with the match.
It is not a connexion to gratify; but if Mr.
Churchill does not feel that, why should we? and it may be a very fortunate circumstance for him, for Frank, I mean, that he should have attached himself to a girl of such steadiness of character and good judgment as I have always given her credit for—and still am disposed to give her credit for, in spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule of right.
And how much may be said in her situation for even that error!” “Much, indeed!” cried Emma feelingly.
“If a woman can ever be excused for thinking only of herself, it is in a situation like Jane Fairfax’s.—Of such, one may almost say, that ‘the world is not their’s, nor the world’s law.’” She met Mr.
Weston on his entrance, with a smiling countenance, exclaiming, “A very pretty trick you have been playing me, upon my word!
This was a device, I suppose, to sport with my curiosity, and exercise my talent of guessing.
But you really frightened me.
I thought you had lost half your property, at least.
And here, instead of its being a matter of condolence, it turns out to be one of congratulation.—I congratulate you, Mr.
Weston, with all my heart, on the prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplished young women in England for your daughter.” A glance or two between him and his wife, convinced him that all was as right as this speech proclaimed; and its happy effect on his spirits was immediate.
His air and voice recovered their usual briskness: he shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand, and entered on the subject in a manner to prove, that he now only wanted time and persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing.
His companions suggested only what could palliate imprudence, or smooth objections; and by the time they had talked it all over together, and he had talked it all over again with Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he was become perfectly reconciled, and not far from thinking it the very best thing that Frank could possibly have done.
CHAPTER XI “Harriet, poor Harriet!”—Those were the words; in them lay the tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of, and which constituted the real misery of the business to her.
Frank Churchill had behaved very ill by herself—very ill in many ways,—but it was not so much _his_ behaviour as her _own_, which made her so angry with him.
It was the scrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet’s account, that gave the deepest hue to his offence.—Poor Harriet! to be a second time the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery.
She might have prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments.
Her influence would have been enough.
And now she was very conscious that she ought to have prevented them.—She felt that she had been risking her friend’s happiness on most insufficient grounds.
Common sense would have directed her to tell Harriet, that she must not allow herself to think of him, and that there were five hundred chances to one against his ever caring for her.—“But, with common sense,” she added, “I am afraid I have had little to do.” She was extremely angry with herself.
If she could not have been angry with Frank Churchill too, it would have been dreadful.—As for Jane Fairfax, she might at least relieve her feelings from any present solicitude on her account.
Harriet would be anxiety enough; she need no longer be unhappy about Jane, whose troubles and whose ill-health having, of course, the same origin, must be equally under cure.—Her days of insignificance and evil were over.—She would soon be well, and happy, and prosperous.—Emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been slighted.
This discovery laid many smaller matters open.
No doubt it had been from jealousy.—In Jane’s eyes she had been a rival; and well might any thing she could offer of assistance or regard be repulsed.
An airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack, and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have been poison.
She understood it all; and as far as her mind could disengage itself from the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings, she acknowledged that Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her desert.
But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge!
There was little sympathy to be spared for any body else.
Emma was sadly fearful that this second disappointment would be more severe than the first.
Considering the very superior claims of the object, it ought; and judging by its apparently stronger effect on Harriet’s mind, producing reserve and self-command, it would.—She must communicate the painful truth, however, and as soon as possible.
An injunction of secresy had been among Mr.
“For the present, the whole affair was to be completely a secret.
Churchill had made a point of it, as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost; and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum.”—Emma had promised; but still Harriet must be excepted.
It was her superior duty.
In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling it almost ridiculous, that she should have the very same distressing and delicate office to perform by Harriet, which Mrs.
The intelligence, which had been so anxiously announced to her, she was now to be anxiously announcing to another.
Her heart beat quick on hearing Harriet’s footstep and voice; so, she supposed, had poor Mrs.
Weston felt when _she_ was approaching Randalls.
Could the event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance!—But of that, unfortunately, there could be no chance.
“Well, Miss Woodhouse!” cried Harriet, coming eagerly into the room—“is not this the oddest news that ever was?” “What news do you mean?” replied Emma, unable to guess, by look or voice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint.
He told me it was to be a great secret; and, therefore, I should not think of mentioning it to any body but you, but he said you knew it.” “What did Mr.
Weston tell you?”—said Emma, still perplexed.
Frank Churchill are to be married, and that they have been privately engaged to one another this long while.
How very odd!” It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet’s behaviour was so extremely odd, that Emma did not know how to understand it.
Her character appeared absolutely changed.
She seemed to propose shewing no agitation, or disappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery.
“Had you any idea,” cried Harriet, “of his being in love with her?—You, perhaps, might.—You (blushing as she spoke) who can see into every body’s heart; but nobody else—” “Upon my word,” said Emma, “I begin to doubt my having any such talent.
Can you seriously ask me, Harriet, whether I imagined him attached to another woman at the very time that I was—tacitly, if not openly—encouraging you to give way to your own feelings?—I never had the slightest suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr.
Frank Churchill’s having the least regard for Jane Fairfax.
You may be very sure that if I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly.” “Me!” cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished.
Frank Churchill.” “I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject,” replied Emma, smiling; “but you do not mean to deny that there was a time—and not very distant either—when you gave me reason to understand that you did care about him?” “Him!—never, never.
Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistake me?” turning away distressed.
Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned from her, did not immediately say any thing; and when she did speak, it was in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma’s.
“I should not have thought it possible,” she began, “that you could have misunderstood me!
I know we agreed never to name him—but considering how infinitely superior he is to every body else, I should not have thought it possible that I could be supposed to mean any other person.
Frank Churchill, indeed!
Frank Churchill, who is like nobody by his side.
And that you should have been so mistaken, is amazing!—I am sure, but for believing that you entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my attachment, I should have considered it at first too great a presumption almost, to dare to think of him.
Are you speaking of—Mr.
Knightley?” “To be sure I am.
When we talked about him, it was as clear as possible.” “Not quite,” returned Emma, with forced calmness, “for all that you then said, appeared to me to relate to a different person.
Frank Churchill had rendered you, in protecting you from the gipsies, was spoken of.” “Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget!” “My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I said on the occasion.
Frank Churchill that I meant.
No! (with some elevation) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance—of Mr.
Knightley’s coming and asking me to dance, when Mr.
That was the kind action; that was the noble benevolence and generosity; that was the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to every other being upon earth.” “Good God!” cried Emma, “this has been a most unfortunate—most deplorable mistake!—What is to be done?” “You would not have encouraged me, then, if you had understood me?
At least, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been, if the other had been the person; and now—it _is_ possible—” She paused a few moments.
“I do not wonder, Miss Woodhouse,” she resumed, “that you should feel a great difference between the two, as to me or as to any body.
But I hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing—that if—strange as it may appear—.
But you know they were your own words, that _more_ wonderful things had happened, matches of _greater_ disparity had taken place than between Mr.
Frank Churchill and me; and, therefore, it seems as if such a thing even as this, may have occurred before—and if I should be so fortunate, beyond expression, as to—if Mr.
Knightley should really—if _he_ does not mind the disparity, I hope, dear Miss Woodhouse, you will not set yourself against it, and try to put difficulties in the way.
But you are too good for that, I am sure.” Harriet was standing at one of the windows.
Emma turned round to look at her in consternation, and hastily said, “Have you any idea of Mr.
Knightley’s returning your affection?” “Yes,” replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully—“I must say that I have.” Emma’s eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating, in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.
A few minutes were sufficient for making her acquainted with her own heart.
A mind like hers, once opening to suspicion, made rapid progress.
She touched—she admitted—she acknowledged the whole truth.
Knightley, than with Frank Churchill?
Why was the evil so dreadfully increased by Harriet’s having some hope of a return?
Knightley must marry no one but herself!
She saw it all with a clearness which had never blessed her before.
How improperly had she been acting by Harriet!
How inconsiderate, how indelicate, how irrational, how unfeeling had been her conduct!
What blindness, what madness, had led her on!
It struck her with dreadful force, and she was ready to give it every bad name in the world.
Some portion of respect for herself, however, in spite of all these demerits—some concern for her own appearance, and a strong sense of justice by Harriet—(there would be no need of _compassion_ to the girl who believed herself loved by Mr.
Knightley and themselves.
Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was yet very glad to be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge, and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to give the history of her hopes with great, though trembling delight.—Emma’s tremblings as she asked, and as she listened, were better concealed than Harriet’s, but they were not less.
Knightley’s most improved opinion of Harriet.
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since those two decisive dances.—Emma knew that he had, on that occasion, found her much superior to his expectation.
From that evening, or at least from the time of Miss Woodhouse’s encouraging her to think of him, Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more than he had been used to do, and of his having indeed quite a different manner towards her; a manner of kindness and sweetness!—Latterly she had been more and more aware of it.
When they had been all walking together, he had so often come and walked by her, and talked so very delightfully!—He seemed to want to be acquainted with her.
She had often observed the change, to almost the same extent.—Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from him—and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with what she had known of his opinion of Harriet.
The superior degree of confidence towards Harriet, which this one article marked, gave her severe pain.
On the subject of the first of the two circumstances, she did, after a little reflection, venture the following question.
“Might he not?—Is not it possible, that when enquiring, as you thought, into the state of your affections, he might be alluding to Mr.
Martin’s interest in view?
But Harriet rejected the suspicion with spirit.
Martin, or to be suspected of it.” When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed to her dear Miss Woodhouse, to say whether she had not good ground for hope.
“I never should have presumed to think of it at first,” said she, “but for you.
You told me to observe him carefully, and let his behaviour be the rule of mine—and so I have.
But now I seem to feel that I may deserve him; and that if he does chuse me, it will not be any thing so very wonderful.” The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the many bitter feelings, made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma’s side, to enable her to say on reply, “Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr.
Knightley is the last man in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling for her more than he really does.” Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which at that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her father’s footsteps.
Harriet was too much agitated to encounter him.
Every moment had brought a fresh surprize; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to her.—How to understand it all!
To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the first endeavour.
To that point went every leisure moment which her father’s claims on her allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind.
Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling declared him now to be?
Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had not been infinitely the most dear.
She saw, that in persuading herself, in fancying, in acting to the contrary, she had been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her own heart—and, in short, that she had never really cared for Frank Churchill at all!
This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection.
This was the knowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry, which she reached; and without being long in reaching it.—She was most sorrowfully indignant; ashamed of every sensation but the one revealed to her—her affection for Mr.
Knightley.—Every other part of her mind was disgusting.
With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of every body’s feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange every body’s destiny.
She was proved to have been universally mistaken; and she had not quite done nothing—for she had done mischief.
Knightley.—Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place, on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning; for his attachment, she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of Harriet’s;—and even were this not the case, he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly.
Knightley and Harriet Smith!—It was a union to distance every wonder of the kind.—The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax became commonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting no surprize, presenting no disparity, affording nothing to be said or thought.—Mr.
Knightley and Harriet Smith!—Such an elevation on her side!
Such a debasement on his!
It was horrible to Emma to think how it must sink him in the general opinion, to foresee the smiles, the sneers, the merriment it would prompt at his expense; the mortification and disdain of his brother, the thousand inconveniences to himself.—Could it be?—No; it was impossible.
And yet it was far, very far, from impossible.—Was it a new circumstance for a man of first-rate abilities to be captivated by very inferior powers?
Was it new for one, perhaps too busy to seek, to be the prize of a girl who would seek him?—Was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal, inconsistent, incongruous—or for chance and circumstance (as second causes) to direct the human fate?
Had she left her where she ought, and where he had told her she ought!—Had she not, with a folly which no tongue could express, prevented her marrying the unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy and respectable in the line of life to which she ought to belong—all would have been safe; none of this dreadful sequel would have been.
How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise her thoughts to Mr.
Knightley!—How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of such a man till actually assured of it!—But Harriet was less humble, had fewer scruples than formerly.—Her inferiority, whether of mind or situation, seemed little felt.—She had seemed more sensible of Mr.
Elton’s being to stoop in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr.
Knightley’s.—Alas! was not that her own doing too?
Who had been at pains to give Harriet notions of self-consequence but herself?—Who but herself had taught her, that she was to elevate herself if possible, and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment?—If Harriet, from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing too.
CHAPTER XII Till now that she was threatened with its loss, Emma had never known how much of her happiness depended on being _first_ with Mr.
In spite of all her faults, she knew she was dear to him; might she not say, very dear?—When the suggestions of hope, however, which must follow here, presented themselves, she could not presume to indulge them.
Harriet Smith might think herself not unworthy of being peculiarly, exclusively, passionately loved by Mr.
Knightley. _She_ could not.
She could not flatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachment to _her_.
She had received a very recent proof of its impartiality.—How shocked had he been by her behaviour to Miss Bates!
Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marrying at all, she believed she should be perfectly satisfied.—Let him but continue the same Mr.
Knightley to her and her father, the same Mr.
Knightley to all the world; let Donwell and Hartfield lose none of their precious intercourse of friendship and confidence, and her peace would be fully secured.—Marriage, in fact, would not do for her.
It would be incompatible with what she owed to her father, and with what she felt for him.
Nothing should separate her from her father.
The power of observation would be soon given—frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in one course.
In the meanwhile, she resolved against seeing Harriet.—It would do neither of them good, it would do the subject no good, to be talking of it farther.—She was resolved not to be convinced, as long as she could doubt, and yet had no authority for opposing Harriet’s confidence.
This point was just arranged, when a visitor arrived to tear Emma’s thoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them, sleeping or waking, the last twenty-four hours—Mrs.
Weston, who had been calling on her daughter-in-law elect, and took Hartfield in her way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself, to relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview.
Weston had accompanied her to Mrs.
Bates’s, and gone through his share of this essential attention most handsomely; but she having then induced Miss Fairfax to join her in an airing, was now returned with much more to say, and much more to say with satisfaction, than a quarter of an hour spent in Mrs.
Bates’s parlour, with all the encumbrance of awkward feelings, could have afforded.
A little curiosity Emma had; and she made the most of it while her friend related.
Weston had set off to pay the visit in a good deal of agitation herself; and in the first place had wished not to go at all at present, to be allowed merely to write to Miss Fairfax instead, and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time had passed, and Mr.
Churchill could be reconciled to the engagement’s becoming known; as, considering every thing, she thought such a visit could not be paid without leading to reports:—but Mr.
Weston had thought differently; he was extremely anxious to shew his approbation to Miss Fairfax and her family, and did not conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it; or if it were, that it would be of any consequence; for “such things,” he observed, “always got about.” Emma smiled, and felt that Mr.
They had gone, in short—and very great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady.
She had hardly been able to speak a word, and every look and action had shewn how deeply she was suffering from consciousness.
The quiet, heart-felt satisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous delight of her daughter—who proved even too joyous to talk as usual, had been a gratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene.
They were both so truly respectable in their happiness, so disinterested in every sensation; thought so much of Jane; so much of every body, and so little of themselves, that every kindly feeling was at work for them.
Weston to invite her to an airing; she had drawn back and declined at first, but, on being pressed had yielded; and, in the course of their drive, Mrs.
Weston had, by gentle encouragement, overcome so much of her embarrassment, as to bring her to converse on the important subject.
Apologies for her seemingly ungracious silence in their first reception, and the warmest expressions of the gratitude she was always feeling towards herself and Mr.
Weston, must necessarily open the cause; but when these effusions were put by, they had talked a good deal of the present and of the future state of the engagement.
Weston was convinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief to her companion, pent up within her own mind as every thing had so long been, and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the subject.
“On the misery of what she had suffered, during the concealment of so many months,” continued Mrs.
Weston, “she was energetic.
This was one of her expressions.
‘I will not say, that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments; but I can say, that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour:’—and the quivering lip, Emma, which uttered it, was an attestation that I felt at my heart.” “Poor girl!” said Emma.
“She thinks herself wrong, then, for having consented to a private engagement?” “Wrong!
No one, I believe, can blame her more than she is disposed to blame herself.
‘The consequence,’ said she, ‘has been a state of perpetual suffering to me; and so it ought.
But after all the punishment that misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct.
Pain is no expiation.
I never can be blameless.
I have been acting contrary to all my sense of right; and the fortunate turn that every thing has taken, and the kindness I am now receiving, is what my conscience tells me ought not to be.’ ‘Do not imagine, madam,’ she continued, ‘that I was taught wrong.
Do not let any reflection fall on the principles or the care of the friends who brought me up.
The error has been all my own; and I do assure you that, with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to give, I shall yet dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell.’” “Poor girl!” said Emma again.
“She loves him then excessively, I suppose.
It must have been from attachment only, that she could be led to form the engagement.
Her affection must have overpowered her judgment.” “Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him.” “I am afraid,” returned Emma, sighing, “that I must often have contributed to make her unhappy.” “On your side, my love, it was very innocently done.
But she probably had something of that in her thoughts, when alluding to the misunderstandings which he had given us hints of before.
One natural consequence of the evil she had involved herself in,” she said, “was that of making her _unreasonable_.
The consciousness of having done amiss, had exposed her to a thousand inquietudes, and made her captious and irritable to a degree that must have been—that had been—hard for him to bear.
She was sensible that you had never received any proper acknowledgment from herself.” “If I did not know her to be happy now,” said Emma, seriously, “which, in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience, she must be, I could not bear these thanks;—for, oh!
Weston, if there were an account drawn up of the evil and the good I have done Miss Fairfax!—Well (checking herself, and trying to be more lively), this is all to be forgotten.
You are very kind to bring me these interesting particulars.
They shew her to the greatest advantage.
It is fit that the fortune should be on his side, for I think the merit will be all on hers.” Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs.
She thought well of Frank in almost every respect; and, what was more, she loved him very much, and her defence was, therefore, earnest.
She talked with a great deal of reason, and at least equal affection—but she had too much to urge for Emma’s attention; it was soon gone to Brunswick Square or to Donwell; she forgot to attempt to listen; and when Mrs.
Weston ended with, “We have not yet had the letter we are so anxious for, you know, but I hope it will soon come,” she was obliged to pause before she answered, and at last obliged to answer at random, before she could at all recollect what letter it was which they were so anxious for.
Weston’s parting question.
Be sure to give me intelligence of the letter as soon as possible.” Mrs.
Weston’s communications furnished Emma with more food for unpleasant reflection, by increasing her esteem and compassion, and her sense of past injustice towards Miss Fairfax.
She bitterly regretted not having sought a closer acquaintance with her, and blushed for the envious feelings which had certainly been, in some measure, the cause.
Had she followed Mr.
Dixon, which she had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself, but had so unpardonably imparted; an idea which she greatly feared had been made a subject of material distress to the delicacy of Jane’s feelings, by the levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill’s.
Of all the sources of evil surrounding the former, since her coming to Highbury, she was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst.
She must have been a perpetual enemy.
They never could have been all three together, without her having stabbed Jane Fairfax’s peace in a thousand instances; and on Box Hill, perhaps, it had been the agony of a mind that would bear no more.
The evening of this day was very long, and melancholy, at Hartfield.
A cold stormy rain set in, and nothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the wind was despoiling, and the length of the day, which only made such cruel sights the longer visible.
The weather affected Mr.
Woodhouse, and he could only be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter’s side, and by exertions which had never cost her half so much before.
It reminded her of their first forlorn tête-à-tête, on the evening of Mrs.
Knightley had walked in then, soon after tea, and dissipated every melancholy fancy.
Alas! such delightful proofs of Hartfield’s attraction, as those sort of visits conveyed, might shortly be over.
The picture which she had then drawn of the privations of the approaching winter, had proved erroneous; no friends had deserted them, no pleasures had been lost.—But her present forebodings she feared would experience no similar contradiction.
The prospect before her now, was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled—that might not be even partially brightened.
If all took place that might take place among the circle of her friends, Hartfield must be comparatively deserted; and she left to cheer her father with the spirits only of ruined happiness.
The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer than herself; and Mrs.
Weston’s heart and time would be occupied by it.
They should lose her; and, probably, in great measure, her husband also.—Frank Churchill would return among them no more; and Miss Fairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease to belong to Highbury.
They would be married, and settled either at or near Enscombe.
All that were good would be withdrawn; and if to these losses, the loss of Donwell were to be added, what would remain of cheerful or of rational society within their reach?
Knightley to be no longer coming there for his evening comfort!—No longer walking in at all hours, as if ever willing to change his own home for their’s!—How was it to be endured?
CHAPTER XIII The weather continued much the same all the following morning; and the same loneliness, and the same melancholy, seemed to reign at Hartfield—but in the afternoon it cleared; the wind changed into a softer quarter; the clouds were carried off; the sun appeared; it was summer again.
With all the eagerness which such a transition gives, Emma resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible.
Never had the exquisite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil, warm, and brilliant after a storm, been more attractive to her.
She longed for the serenity they might gradually introduce; and on Mr.
Perry’s coming in soon after dinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, she lost no time in hurrying into the shrubbery.—There, with spirits freshened, and thoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns, when she saw Mr.
Knightley passing through the garden door, and coming towards her.—It was the first intimation of his being returned from London.
She had been thinking of him the moment before, as unquestionably sixteen miles distant.—There was time only for the quickest arrangement of mind.
She must be collected and calm.
In half a minute they were together.
The “How d’ye do’s” were quiet and constrained on each side.
“He had just looked into the dining-room, and as he was not wanted there, preferred being out of doors.”—She thought he neither looked nor spoke cheerfully; and the first possible cause for it, suggested by her fears, was, that he had perhaps been communicating his plans to his brother, and was pained by the manner in which they had been received.
They walked together.
And this belief produced another dread.
Perhaps he wanted to speak to her, of his attachment to Harriet; he might be watching for encouragement to begin.—She did not, could not, feel equal to lead the way to any such subject.
With him it was most unnatural.
“I had a few lines on parish business from Mr.
They will soon be in Yorkshire.
She deserves a better fate.” Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter of pleasure, excited by such tender consideration, replied, “You are very kind—but you are mistaken—and I must set you right.— I am not in want of that sort of compassion.
Knightley,” said Emma, trying to be lively, but really confused—“I am in a very extraordinary situation.
I cannot let you continue in your error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression, I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.—But I never have.” He listened in perfect silence.
She supposed she must say more before she were entitled to his clemency; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself in his opinion.
“I have very little to say for my own conduct.—I was tempted by his attentions, and allowed myself to appear pleased.—An old story, probably—a common case—and no more than has happened to hundreds of my sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets up as I do for Understanding.
Many circumstances assisted the temptation.
Weston—he was continually here—I always found him very pleasant—and, in short, for (with a sigh) let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniously, they all centre in this at last—my vanity was flattered, and I allowed his attentions.
Latterly, however—for some time, indeed—I have had no idea of their meaning any thing.—I thought them a habit, a trick, nothing that called for seriousness on my side.
I have never been attached to him.
And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour.
At last, and tolerably in his usual tone, he said, “I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill.—I can suppose, however, that I may have underrated him.
Knightley, with energy.
“So early in life—at three-and-twenty—a period when, if a man chuses a wife, he generally chuses ill.
They seemed to be within half a sentence of Harriet, and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject, if possible.
She made her plan; she would speak of something totally different—the children in Brunswick Square; and she only waited for breath to begin, when Mr.
Knightley startled her, by saying, “You will not ask me what is the point of envy.—You are determined, I see, to have no curiosity.—You are wise—but _I_ cannot be wise.
“Take a little time, consider, do not commit yourself.” “Thank you,” said he, in an accent of deep mortification, and not another syllable followed.
She might assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it; she might give just praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him his own independence, relieve him from that state of indecision, which must be more intolerable than any alternative to such a mind as his.—They had reached the house.
“No,”—replied Emma—quite confirmed by the depressed manner in which he still spoke—“I should like to take another turn.
Perry is not gone.” And, after proceeding a few steps, she added—“I stopped you ungraciously, just now, Mr.
Knightley, and, I am afraid, gave you pain.—But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend, or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation—as a friend, indeed, you may command me.—I will hear whatever you like.
I will tell you exactly what I think.” “As a friend!”—repeated Mr.
Knightley.—“Emma, that I fear is a word—No, I have no wish—Stay, yes, why should I hesitate?—I have gone too far already for concealment.—Emma, I accept your offer—Extraordinary as it may seem, I accept it, and refer myself to you as a friend.—Tell me, then, have I no chance of ever succeeding?” He stopped in his earnestness to look the question, and the expression of his eyes overpowered her.
“My dearest Emma,” said he, “for dearest you will always be, whatever the event of this hour’s conversation, my dearest, most beloved Emma—tell me at once.
Say ‘No,’ if it is to be said.”—She could really say nothing.—“You are silent,” he cried, with great animation; “absolutely silent! at present I ask no more.” Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment.
The dread of being awakened from the happiest dream, was perhaps the most prominent feeling.
“I cannot make speeches, Emma:” he soon resumed; and in a tone of such sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as was tolerably convincing.—“If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about it more.
But you know what I am.—You hear nothing but truth from me.—I have blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne it as no other woman in England would have borne it.—Bear with the truths I would tell you now, dearest Emma, as well as you have borne with them.
The manner, perhaps, may have as little to recommend them.
God knows, I have been a very indifferent lover.—But you understand me.—Yes, you see, you understand my feelings—and will return them if you can.
She felt for Harriet, with pain and with contrition; but no flight of generosity run mad, opposing all that could be probable or reasonable, entered her brain.
She had led her friend astray, and it would be a reproach to her for ever; but her judgment was as strong as her feelings, and as strong as it had ever been before, in reprobating any such alliance for him, as most unequal and degrading.
Her way was clear, though not quite smooth.—She spoke then, on being so entreated.—What did she say?—Just what she ought, of course.
He _had_ despaired at one period; he had received such an injunction to caution and silence, as for the time crushed every hope;—she had begun by refusing to hear him.—The change had perhaps been somewhat sudden;—her proposal of taking another turn, her renewing the conversation which she had just put an end to, might be a little extraordinary!—She felt its inconsistency; but Mr.
Knightley was so obliging as to put up with it, and seek no farther explanation.
Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any human disclosure; seldom can it happen that something is not a little disguised, or a little mistaken; but where, as in this case, though the conduct is mistaken, the feelings are not, it may not be very material.—Mr.
Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relenting heart than she possessed, or a heart more disposed to accept of his.
He had, in fact, been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence.
He had followed her into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it.
He had come, in his anxiety to see how she bore Frank Churchill’s engagement, with no selfish view, no view at all, but of endeavouring, if she allowed him an opening, to soothe or to counsel her.—The rest had been the work of the moment, the immediate effect of what he heard, on his feelings.
It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill that had taken him from the country.—The Box Hill party had decided him on going away.
He would save himself from witnessing again such permitted, encouraged attentions.—He had gone to learn to be indifferent.—But he had gone to a wrong place.
He had ridden home through the rain; and had walked up directly after dinner, to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures, faultless in spite of all her faults, bore the discovery.
He had found her agitated and low.—Frank Churchill was a villain.— He heard her declare that she had never loved him.
Frank Churchill’s character was not desperate.—She was his own Emma, by hand and word, when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought of Frank Churchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow.
CHAPTER XIV What totally different feelings did Emma take back into the house from what she had brought out!—she had then been only daring to hope for a little respite of suffering;—she was now in an exquisite flutter of happiness, and such happiness moreover as she believed must still be greater when the flutter should have passed away.
Perry, and talked on with much self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of what they could have told him in return.
Knightley remained with them, Emma’s fever continued; but when he was gone, she began to be a little tranquillised and subdued—and in the course of the sleepless night, which was the tax for such an evening, she found one or two such very serious points to consider, as made her feel, that even her happiness must have some alloy.
She could not be alone without feeling the full weight of their separate claims; and how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost, was the question.
With respect to her father, it was a question soon answered.
Knightley would ask; but a very short parley with her own heart produced the most solemn resolution of never quitting her father.—She even wept over the idea of it, as a sin of thought.
She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet; an employment which left her so very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr.
Knightley, in walking up to Hartfield to breakfast, did not arrive at all too soon; and half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him, literally and figuratively, was quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before.
“I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in forwarding to you the enclosed.
MY DEAR MADAM, “If I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be expected; but expected or not, I know it will be read with candour and indulgence.—You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need of even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.—But I have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent.
It is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble.
I have already met with such success in two applications for pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of yours, and of those among your friends who have had any ground of offence.—You must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when I first arrived at Randalls; you must consider me as having a secret which was to be kept at all hazards.
My right to place myself in a situation requiring such concealment, is another question.
For my temptation to _think_ it a right, I refer every caviller to a brick house, sashed windows below, and casements above, in Highbury.
Every possibility of good was before me, and the first of blessings secured, in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence.
If you need farther explanation, I have the honour, my dear madam, of being your husband’s son, and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for good, which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever equal the value of.—See me, then, under these circumstances, arriving on my first visit to Randalls;—and here I am conscious of wrong, for that visit might have been sooner paid.
You will look back and see that I did not come till Miss Fairfax was in Highbury; and as _you_ were the person slighted, you will forgive me instantly; but I must work on my father’s compassion, by reminding him, that so long as I absented myself from his house, so long I lost the blessing of knowing you.
My behaviour, during the very happy fortnight which I spent with you, did not, I hope, lay me open to reprehension, excepting on one point.
And now I come to the principal, the only important part of my conduct while belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety, or requires very solicitous explanation.
We seemed to understand each other.
You will find, whenever the subject becomes freed from its present restraints, that it did not take her wholly by surprize.
She frequently gave me hints of it.
I remember her telling me at the ball, that I owed Mrs.
Elton gratitude for her attentions to Miss Fairfax.—I hope this history of my conduct towards her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuation of what you saw amiss.
While you considered me as having sinned against Emma Woodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either.
Acquit me here, and procure for me, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishes of that said Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so much brotherly affection, as to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love as myself.—Whatever strange things I said or did during that fortnight, you have now a key to.
My heart was in Highbury, and my business was to get my body thither as often as might be, and with the least suspicion.
If you remember any queernesses, set them all to the right account.—Of the pianoforte so much talked of, I feel it only necessary to say, that its being ordered was absolutely unknown to Miss F—, who would never have allowed me to send it, had any choice been given her.—The delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement, my dear madam, is much beyond my power of doing justice to.
You will soon, I earnestly hope, know her thoroughly yourself.—No description can describe her.
She must tell you herself what she is—yet not by word, for never was there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit.—Since I began this letter, which will be longer than I foresaw, I have heard from her.—She gives a good account of her own health; but as she never complains, I dare not depend.
Let me hear from you without delay; I am impatient for a thousand particulars.
Remember how few minutes I was at Randalls, and in how bewildered, how mad a state: and I am not much better yet; still insane either from happiness or misery.
When I think of the kindness and favour I have met with, of her excellence and patience, and my uncle’s generosity, I am mad with joy: but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her, and how little I deserve to be forgiven, I am mad with anger.
My uncle has been too good for me to encroach.—I must still add to this long letter.
I could not give any connected detail yesterday; but the suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonableness with which the affair burst out, needs explanation; for though the event of the 26th ult., as you will conclude, immediately opened to me the happiest prospects, I should not have presumed on such early measures, but from the very particular circumstances, which left me not an hour to lose.
I should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty, and she would have felt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement.—But I had no choice.
The hasty engagement she had entered into with that woman—Here, my dear madam, I was obliged to leave off abruptly, to recollect and compose myself.—I have been walking over the country, and am now, I hope, rational enough to make the rest of my letter what it ought to be.—It is, in fact, a most mortifying retrospect for me.
I behaved shamefully.
And here I can admit, that my manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were highly blameable. _She_ disapproved them, which ought to have been enough.—My plea of concealing the truth she did not think sufficient.—She was displeased; I thought unreasonably so: I thought her, on a thousand occasions, unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious: I thought her even cold.
If I had followed her judgment, and subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed proper, I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever known.—We quarrelled.— Do you remember the morning spent at Donwell?—_There_ every little dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis.
She absolutely refused to allow me, which I then thought most unreasonable.
Now, however, I see nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion.
While I, to blind the world to our engagement, was behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman, was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made every previous caution useless?—Had we been met walking together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must have been suspected.—I was mad enough, however, to resent.—I doubted her affection.
Even then, I was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time; but I was the injured person, injured by her coldness, and I went away determined that she should make the first advances.—I shall always congratulate myself that you were not of the Box Hill party.
Had you witnessed my behaviour there, I can hardly suppose you would ever have thought well of me again.
Its effect upon her appears in the immediate resolution it produced: as soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls, she closed with the offer of that officious Mrs.
Elton; the whole system of whose treatment of her, by the bye, has ever filled me with indignation and hatred.
I must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has been so richly extended towards myself; but, otherwise, I should loudly protest against the share of it which that woman has known.—‘Jane,’ indeed!—You will observe that I have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that name, even to you.
Think, then, what I must have endured in hearing it bandied between the Eltons with all the vulgarity of needless repetition, and all the insolence of imaginary superiority.
Have patience with me, I shall soon have done.—She closed with this offer, resolving to break with me entirely, and wrote the next day to tell me that we never were to meet again.—_She_ _felt_ _the_ _engagement_ _to_ _be_ _a_ _source_ _of_ _repentance_ _and_ _misery_ _to_ _each_: _she_ _dissolved_ _it_.—This letter reached me on the very morning of my poor aunt’s death.
Smallridge’s, near Bristol, stared me in the face.
I knew the name, the place, I knew all about it, and instantly saw what she had been doing.
It was perfectly accordant with that resolution of character which I knew her to possess; and the secrecy she had maintained, as to any such design in her former letter, was equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy.
For the world would not she have seemed to threaten me.—Imagine the shock; imagine how, till I had actually detected my own blunder, I raved at the blunders of the post.—What was to be done?—One thing only.—I must speak to my uncle.
Do not pity me till I saw her wan, sick looks.—I reached Highbury at the time of day when, from my knowledge of their late breakfast hour, I was certain of a good chance of finding her alone.—I was not disappointed; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object of my journey.
A great deal of very reasonable, very just displeasure I had to persuade away.
But it is done; we are reconciled, dearer, much dearer, than ever, and no moment’s uneasiness can ever occur between us again.
Now, my dear madam, I will release you; but I could not conclude before.
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have ever shewn me, and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will dictate towards her.—If you think me in a way to be happier than I deserve, I am quite of your opinion.—Miss W. calls me the child of good fortune.
I hope she is right.—In one respect, my good fortune is undoubted, that of being able to subscribe myself, Your obliged and affectionate Son, F.
CHAPTER XV This letter must make its way to Emma’s feelings.
She was obliged, in spite of her previous determination to the contrary, to do it all the justice that Mrs.
As soon as she came to her own name, it was irresistible; every line relating to herself was interesting, and almost every line agreeable; and when this charm ceased, the subject could still maintain itself, by the natural return of her former regard for the writer, and the very strong attraction which any picture of love must have for her at that moment.
She never stopt till she had gone through the whole; and though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrong, yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed—and he had suffered, and was very sorry—and he was so grateful to Mrs.
Weston, and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she was so happy herself, that there was no being severe; and could he have entered the room, she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever.
Knightley came again, she desired him to read it.
Weston’s wishing it to be communicated; especially to one, who, like Mr.
Knightley, had seen so much to blame in his conduct.
We will not be severe.” “It will be natural for me,” he added shortly afterwards, “to speak my opinion aloud as I read.
Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity.
“He trifles here,” said he, “as to the temptation.
He knows he is wrong, and has nothing rational to urge.—Bad.—He ought not to have formed the engagement.—‘His father’s disposition:’—he is unjust, however, to his father.
Weston’s sanguine temper was a blessing on all his upright and honourable exertions; but Mr.
Weston earned every present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it.—Very true; he did not come till Miss Fairfax was here.” “And I have not forgotten,” said Emma, “how sure you were that he might have come sooner if he would.
Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.—No judge of his own manners by you.—Always deceived in fact by his own wishes, and regardless of little besides his own convenience.—Fancying you to have fathomed his secret.
Natural enough!—his own mind full of intrigue, that he should suspect it in others.—Mystery; Finesse—how they pervert the understanding!
My Emma, does not every thing serve to prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each other?” Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet’s account, which she could not give any sincere explanation of.
He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, “the pianoforte!
That was the act of a very, very young man, one too young to consider whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the pleasure.
A boyish scheme, indeed!—I cannot comprehend a man’s wishing to give a woman any proof of affection which he knows she would rather dispense with; and he did know that she would have prevented the instrument’s coming if she could.” After this, he made some progress without any pause.
Frank Churchill’s confession of having behaved shamefully was the first thing to call for more than a word in passing.
“I perfectly agree with you, sir,”—was then his remark.
“You did behave very shamefully.
He should have respected even unreasonable scruples, had there been such; but hers were all reasonable.
We must look to her one fault, and remember that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagement, to bear that she should have been in such a state of punishment.” Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party, and grew uncomfortable.
Her own behaviour had been so very improper!
It was all read, however, steadily, attentively, and without the smallest remark; and, excepting one momentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear of giving pain—no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist.
Knightley coolly, and resuming the letter.
“‘Smallridge!’—What does this mean?
What is all this?” “She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs.
Smallridge’s children—a dear friend of Mrs.
Elton’s—a neighbour of Maple Grove; and, by the bye, I wonder how Mrs.
Elton bears the disappointment?” “Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read—not even of Mrs.
What a letter the man writes!” “I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him.” “Well, there _is_ feeling here.—He does seem to have suffered in finding her ill.—Certainly, I can have no doubt of his being fond of her.
‘Dearer, much dearer than ever.’ I hope he may long continue to feel all the value of such a reconciliation.—He is a very liberal thanker, with his thousands and tens of thousands.—‘Happier than I deserve.’ Come, he knows himself there.
‘Miss Woodhouse calls me the child of good fortune.’—Those were Miss Woodhouse’s words, were they?— And a fine ending—and there is the letter.
That was your name for him, was it?” “You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am; but still you must, at least I hope you must, think the better of him for it.
I hope it does him some service with you.” “Yes, certainly it does.
And now, let me talk to you of something else.
I have another person’s interest at present so much at heart, that I cannot think any longer about Frank Churchill.
Ever since I left you this morning, Emma, my mind has been hard at work on one subject.” The subject followed; it was in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlike English, such as Mr.
Knightley used even to the woman he was in love with, how to be able to ask her to marry him, without attacking the happiness of her father.
“While her dear father lived, any change of condition must be impossible for her.
She could never quit him.” Part only of this answer, however, was admitted.
The impossibility of her quitting her father, Mr.
Knightley felt as strongly as herself; but the inadmissibility of any other change, he could not agree to.
He had been thinking it over most deeply, most intently; he had at first hoped to induce Mr.
Woodhouse to remove with her to Donwell; he had wanted to believe it feasible, but his knowledge of Mr.
Woodhouse would not suffer him to deceive himself long; and now he confessed his persuasion, that such a transplantation would be a risk of her father’s comfort, perhaps even of his life, which must not be hazarded.
Woodhouse taken from Hartfield!—No, he felt that it ought not to be attempted.
But the plan which had arisen on the sacrifice of this, he trusted his dearest Emma would not find in any respect objectionable; it was, that he should be received at Hartfield; that so long as her father’s happiness—in other words, his life—required Hartfield to continue her home, it should be his likewise.
Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already had her own passing thoughts.
Like him, she had tried the scheme and rejected it; but such an alternative as this had not occurred to her.
She was sensible of all the affection it evinced.
She felt that, in quitting Donwell, he must be sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits; that in living constantly with her father, and in no house of his own, there would be much, very much, to be borne with.
She promised to think of it, and advised him to think of it more; but he was fully convinced, that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject.
He had given it, he could assure her, very long and calm consideration; he had been walking away from William Larkins the whole morning, to have his thoughts to himself.
“Ah! there is one difficulty unprovided for,” cried Emma.
You must get his consent before you ask mine.” She promised, however, to think of it; and pretty nearly promised, moreover, to think of it, with the intention of finding it a very good scheme.
It is remarkable, that Emma, in the many, very many, points of view in which she was now beginning to consider Donwell Abbey, was never struck with any sense of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights as heir-expectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded.
Think she must of the possible difference to the poor little boy; and yet she only gave herself a saucy conscious smile about it, and found amusement in detecting the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr.
Knightley’s marrying Jane Fairfax, or any body else, which at the time she had wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt.
This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and continuing at Hartfield—the more she contemplated it, the more pleasing it became.
His evils seemed to lessen, her own advantages to increase, their mutual good to outweigh every drawback.
Such a companion for herself in the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!—Such a partner in all those duties and cares to which time must be giving increase of melancholy!
She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet; but every blessing of her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferings of her friend, who must now be even excluded from Hartfield.
The delightful family party which Emma was securing for herself, poor Harriet must, in mere charitable caution, be kept at a distance from.
Emma could not deplore her future absence as any deduction from her own enjoyment.
In such a party, Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise; but for the poor girl herself, it seemed a peculiarly cruel necessity that was to be placing her in such a state of unmerited punishment.
Knightley would be forgotten, that is, supplanted; but this could not be expected to happen very early.
Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure;—not like Mr.
Knightley, always so kind, so feeling, so truly considerate for every body, would never deserve to be less worshipped than now; and it really was too much to hope even of Harriet, that she could be in love with more than _three_ men in one year.
CHAPTER XVI It was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting.
Their intercourse was painful enough by letter.
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella’s invitation; and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it, without resorting to invention.—There was a tooth amiss.
John Knightley was delighted to be of use; any thing of ill health was a recommendation to her—and though not so fond of a dentist as of a Mr.
Wingfield, she was quite eager to have Harriet under her care.—When it was thus settled on her sister’s side, Emma proposed it to her friend, and found her very persuadable.—Harriet was to go; she was invited for at least a fortnight; she was to be conveyed in Mr.
Woodhouse’s carriage.—It was all arranged, it was all completed, and Harriet was safe in Brunswick Square.
Knightley’s visits; now she could talk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by that sense of injustice, of guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her, how much might at that moment, and at a little distance, be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself.
The difference of Harriet at Mrs.
Goddard’s, or in London, made perhaps an unreasonable difference in Emma’s sensations; but she could not think of her in London without objects of curiosity and employment, which must be averting the past, and carrying her out of herself.
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had occupied.
There was a communication before her, one which _she_ only could be competent to make—the confession of her engagement to her father; but she would have nothing to do with it at present.—She had resolved to defer the disclosure till Mrs.
No additional agitation should be thrown at this period among those she loved—and the evil should not act on herself by anticipation before the appointed time.—A fortnight, at least, of leisure and peace of mind, to crown every warmer, but more agitating, delight, should be hers.
She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half an hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax.—She ought to go—and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of their present situations increasing every other motive of goodwill.
It would be a _secret_ satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should attend to any thing Jane might communicate.
Elton’s voice from the sitting-room had not checked her, and made it expedient to compress all her friendly and all her congratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest shake of the hand.
Elton were together.
Miss Bates was out, which accounted for the previous tranquillity.
Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience with every body; and as Mrs.
Elton met her with unusual graciousness, she hoped the rencontre would do them no harm.
She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs.
Elton’s thoughts, and understand why she was, like herself, in happy spirits; it was being in Miss Fairfax’s confidence, and fancying herself acquainted with what was still a secret to other people.
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her face; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs.
Bates, and appearing to attend to the good old lady’s replies, she saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side, saying, with significant nods, “We can finish this some other time, you know.
You and I shall not want opportunities.
And, in fact, you have heard all the essential already.
S. admits our apology, and is not offended.
You see how delightfully she writes.
Oh! she is a sweet creature!
Let us be discreet—quite on our good behaviour.—Hush!—You remember those lines—I forget the poem at this moment: “For when a lady’s in the case, “You know all other things give place.” Now I say, my dear, in _our_ case, for _lady_, read——mum! a word to the wise.—I am in a fine flow of spirits, an’t I?
S.—_My_ representation, you see, has quite appeased her.” And again, on Emma’s merely turning her head to look at Mrs.
Bates’s knitting, she added, in a half whisper, “I mentioned no _names_, you will observe.—Oh! no; cautious as a minister of state.
I managed it extremely well.” Emma could not doubt.
It was a palpable display, repeated on every possible occasion.
Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed with, “Do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy little friend here is charmingly recovered?—Do not you think her cure does Perry the highest credit?—(here was a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.) Upon my word, Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time!—Oh! if you had seen her, as I did, when she was at the worst!”—And when Mrs.
Bates was saying something to Emma, whispered farther, “We do not say a word of any _assistance_ that Perry might have; not a word of a certain young physician from Windsor.—Oh! no; Perry shall have all the credit.” “I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss Woodhouse,” she shortly afterwards began, “since the party to Box Hill.
Very pleasant party.
But yet I think there was something wanting.
Things did not seem—that is, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of some.—So it appeared to me at least, but I might be mistaken.
However, I think it answered so far as to tempt one to go again.
“Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.—It is impossible to say—Yes, indeed, I quite understand—dearest Jane’s prospects—that is, I do not mean.—But she is charmingly recovered.—How is Mr.
Woodhouse?—I am so glad.—Quite out of my power.—Such a happy little circle as you find us here.—Yes, indeed.—Charming young man!—that is—so very friendly; I mean good Mr.
Perry!—such attention to Jane!”—And from her great, her more than commonly thankful delight towards Mrs.
Elton for being there, Emma guessed that there had been a little show of resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter, which was now graciously overcome.—After a few whispers, indeed, which placed it beyond a guess, Mrs.
Elton, speaking louder, said, “Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have been so long, that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise; but, the truth is, that I am waiting for my lord and master.
He promised to join me here, and pay his respects to you.” “What! are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr.
Elton?—That will be a favour indeed! for I know gentlemen do not like morning visits, and Mr.
Elton’s time is so engaged.” “Upon my word it is, Miss Bates.—He really is engaged from morning to night.—There is no end of people’s coming to him, on some pretence or other.—The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens, are always wanting his opinion.
“He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himself from Knightley; but he and Knightley are shut up together in deep consultation.—Mr.
E. is Knightley’s right hand.” Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only said, “Is Mr.
E. and Knightley have every thing their own way.” “Have not you mistaken the day?” said Emma.
Knightley was at Hartfield yesterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday.” “Oh! no, the meeting is certainly to-day,” was the abrupt answer, which denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs.
Elton’s side.—“I do believe,” she continued, “this is the most troublesome parish that ever was.
“Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never heard the subject talked of.” “But it is proved by the smallness of the school, which I have heard you speak of, as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs.
Bragge; the only school, and not more than five-and-twenty children.” “Ah! you clever creature, that’s very true.
What a thinking brain you have!
I say, Jane, what a perfect character you and I should make, if we could be shaken together.
My liveliness and your solidity would produce perfection.—Not that I presume to insinuate, however, that _some_ people may not think _you_ perfection already.—But hush!—not a word, if you please.” It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was wanting to give her words, not to Mrs.
Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw.
The wish of distinguishing her, as far as civility permitted, was very evident, though it could not often proceed beyond a look.
Elton made his appearance.
His lady greeted him with some of her sparkling vivacity.
“Very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on here, to be an encumbrance to my friends, so long before you vouchsafe to come!—But you knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with.
You knew I should not stir till my lord and master appeared.—Here have I been sitting this hour, giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal obedience—for who can say, you know, how soon it may be wanted?” Mr.
His civilities to the other ladies must be paid; but his subsequent object was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering, and the walk he had had for nothing.
“When I got to Donwell,” said he, “Knightley could not be found.
Very odd! very unaccountable! after the note I sent him this morning, and the message he returned, that he should certainly be at home till one.” “Donwell!” cried his wife.—“My dear Mr.
E., you have not been to Donwell!—You mean the Crown; you come from the meeting at the Crown.” “No, no, that’s to-morrow; and I particularly wanted to see Knightley to-day on that very account.—Such a dreadful broiling morning!—I went over the fields too—(speaking in a tone of great ill-usage,) which made it so much the worse.
The housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected.—Very extraordinary!—And nobody knew at all which way he was gone.
Perhaps to Hartfield, perhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps into his woods.—Miss Woodhouse, this is not like our friend Knightley!—Can you explain it?” Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary, indeed, and that she had not a syllable to say for him.
Elton, (feeling the indignity as a wife ought to do,) “I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you, of all people in the world!
The very last person whom one should expect to be forgotten!—My dear Mr.
E., he must have left a message for you, I am sure he must.—Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;—and his servants forgot it.
Depend upon it, that was the case: and very likely to happen with the Donwell servants, who are all, I have often observed, extremely awkward and remiss.—I am sure I would not have such a creature as his Harry stand at our sideboard for any consideration.
Hodges, Wright holds her very cheap indeed.—She promised Wright a receipt, and never sent it.” “I met William Larkins,” continued Mr.
I have nothing to do with William’s wants, but it really is of very great importance that _I_ should see Knightley to-day; and it becomes a matter, therefore, of very serious inconvenience that I should have had this hot walk to no purpose.” Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly.
In all probability she was at this very time waited for there; and Mr.
Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards Mr.
She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fairfax determined to attend her out of the room, to go with her even downstairs; it gave her an opportunity which she immediately made use of, to say, “It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the possibility.
The danger would have been of my wearying you.
You could not have gratified me more than by expressing an interest—.
Indeed, Miss Woodhouse, (speaking more collectedly,) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct, very great misconduct, it is particularly consoling to me to know that those of my friends, whose good opinion is most worth preserving, are not disgusted to such a degree as to—I have not time for half that I could wish to say.
I long to make apologies, excuses, to urge something for myself.
But, unfortunately—in short, if your compassion does not stand my friend—” “Oh! you are too scrupulous, indeed you are,” cried Emma warmly, and taking her hand.
“You owe me no apologies; and every body to whom you might be supposed to owe them, is so perfectly satisfied, so delighted even—” “You are very kind, but I know what my manners were to you.—So cold and artificial!—I had always a part to act.—It was a life of deceit!—I know that I must have disgusted you.” “Pray say no more.
I feel that all the apologies should be on my side.
We must do whatever is to be done quickest, and I think our feelings will lose no time there.
I hope you have pleasant accounts from Windsor?” “Very.” “And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are to lose you—just as I begin to know you.” “Oh! as to all that, of course nothing can be thought of yet.
Campbell.” “Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps,” replied Emma, smiling—“but, excuse me, it must be thought of.” The smile was returned as Jane answered, “You are very right; it has been thought of.
Churchill at Enscombe, it is settled.
There must be three months, at least, of deep mourning; but when they are over, I imagine there will be nothing more to wait for.” “Thank you, thank you.—This is just what I wanted to be assured of.—Oh! if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided and open!—Good-bye, good-bye.” CHAPTER XVII Mrs.
Weston’s friends were all made happy by her safety; and if the satisfaction of her well-doing could be increased to Emma, it was by knowing her to be the mother of a little girl.
She would not acknowledge that it was with any view of making a match for her, hereafter, with either of Isabella’s sons; but she was convinced that a daughter would suit both father and mother best.
Weston might be growing older ten years hence—to have his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense, the freaks and the fancies of a child never banished from home; and Mrs.
Weston—no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her; and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teach, should not have their powers in exercise again.
“She has had the advantage, you know, of practising on me,” she continued—“like La Baronne d’Almane on La Comtesse d’Ostalis, in Madame de Genlis’ Adelaide and Theodore, and we shall now see her own little Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan.” “That is,” replied Mr.
Knightley, “she will indulge her even more than she did you, and believe that she does not indulge her at all.
It will be the only difference.” “Poor child!” cried Emma; “at that rate, what will become of her?” “Nothing very bad.—The fate of thousands.
She will be disagreeable in infancy, and correct herself as she grows older.
I am losing all my bitterness against spoilt children, my dearest Emma.
I, who am owing all my happiness to _you_, would not it be horrible ingratitude in me to be severe on them?” Emma laughed, and replied: “But I had the assistance of all your endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people.
I doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it.” “Do you?—I have no doubt.
Nature gave you understanding:—Miss Taylor gave you principles.
My interference was quite as likely to do harm as good.
It was very natural for you to say, what right has he to lecture me?—and I am afraid very natural for you to feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner.
The good was all to myself, by making you an object of the tenderest affection to me.
I could not think about you so much without doating on you, faults and all; and by dint of fancying so many errors, have been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at least.” “I am sure you were of use to me,” cried Emma.
“I was very often influenced rightly by you—oftener than I would own at the time.
And if poor little Anna Weston is to be spoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her as you have done for me, except falling in love with her when she is thirteen.” “How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me, with one of your saucy looks—‘Mr.
Knightley, I am going to do so-and-so; papa says I may, or I have Miss Taylor’s leave’—something which, you knew, I did not approve.
In such cases my interference was giving you two bad feelings instead of one.” “What an amiable creature I was!—No wonder you should hold my speeches in such affectionate remembrance.” “‘Mr.
Knightley.’—You always called me, ‘Mr.
Knightley;’ and, from habit, it has not so very formal a sound.—And yet it is formal.
I want you to call me something else, but I do not know what.” “I remember once calling you ‘George,’ in one of my amiable fits, about ten years ago.
I did it because I thought it would offend you; but, as you made no objection, I never did it again.” “And cannot you call me ‘George’ now?” “Impossible!—I never can call you any thing but ‘Mr.
Knightley.’ I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs.
K.—But I will promise,” she added presently, laughing and blushing—“I will promise to call you once by your Christian name.
This, on his side, might merely proceed from her not being thought of; but Emma was rather inclined to attribute it to delicacy, and a suspicion, from some appearances, that their friendship were declining.
She was aware herself, that, parting under any other circumstances, they certainly should have corresponded more, and that her intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost wholly did, on Isabella’s letters.
The pain of being obliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little inferior to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy.
Emma’s comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on, by Harriet’s being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to be a month at least.
John Knightley were to come down in August, and she was invited to remain till they could bring her back.
“Here is his answer, if you like to see it.” It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage.
Emma accepted it with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive to know what he would say about it, and not at all checked by hearing that her friend was unmentioned.
“John enters like a brother into my happiness,” continued Mr.
Knightley, “but he is no complimenter; and though I well know him to have, likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he is so far from making flourishes, that any other young woman might think him rather cool in her praise.
But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes.” “He writes like a sensible man,” replied Emma, when she had read the letter.
“I honour his sincerity.
It is very plain that he considers the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side, but that he is not without hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your affection, as you think me already.
Had he said any thing to bear a different construction, I should not have believed him.” “My Emma, he means no such thing.
He will think all the happiness, all the advantage, on your side of the question; all the merit on mine.
I wish I may not sink into ‘poor Emma’ with him at once.—His tender compassion towards oppressed worth can go no farther.” “Ah!” he cried, “I wish your father might be half as easily convinced as John will be, of our having every right that equal worth can give, to be happy together.
I am amused by one part of John’s letter—did you notice it?—where he says, that my information did not take him wholly by surprize, that he was rather in expectation of hearing something of the kind.” “If I understand your brother, he only means so far as your having some thoughts of marrying.
He seems perfectly unprepared for that.” “Yes, yes—but I am amused that he should have seen so far into my feelings.
What has he been judging by?—I am not conscious of any difference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him at this time for my marrying any more than at another.—But it was so, I suppose.
I dare say there was a difference when I was staying with them the other day.
I believe I did not play with the children quite so much as usual.
I remember one evening the poor boys saying, ‘Uncle seems always tired now.’” The time was coming when the news must spread farther, and other persons’ reception of it tried.
Weston was sufficiently recovered to admit Mr.
Woodhouse’s visits, Emma having it in view that her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause, resolved first to announce it at home, and then at Randalls.—But how to break it to her father at last!—She had bound herself to do it, in such an hour of Mr.
Knightley’s absence, or when it came to the point her heart would have failed her, and she must have put it off; but Mr.
Knightley was to come at such a time, and follow up the beginning she was to make.—She was forced to speak, and to speak cheerfully too.
She must not make it a more decided subject of misery to him, by a melancholy tone herself.
She must not appear to think it a misfortune.—With all the spirits she could command, she prepared him first for something strange, and then, in a few words, said, that if his consent and approbation could be obtained—which, she trusted, would be attended with no difficulty, since it was a plan to promote the happiness of all—she and Mr.
Knightley meant to marry; by which means Hartfield would receive the constant addition of that person’s company whom she knew he loved, next to his daughters and Mrs.
Poor man!—it was at first a considerable shock to him, and he tried earnestly to dissuade her from it.
She was reminded, more than once, of having always said she would never marry, and assured that it would be a great deal better for her to remain single; and told of poor Isabella, and poor Miss Taylor.—But it would not do.
Emma hung about him affectionately, and smiled, and said it must be so; and that he must not class her with Isabella and Mrs.
Weston, whose marriages taking them from Hartfield, had, indeed, made a melancholy change: but she was not going from Hartfield; she should be always there; she was introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but for the better; and she was very sure that he would be a great deal the happier for having Mr.
Knightley always at hand, when he were once got used to the idea.—Did he not love Mr.
Knightley very much?—He would not deny that he did, she was sure.—Whom did he ever want to consult on business but Mr.
Knightley?—Who was so useful to him, who so ready to write his letters, who so glad to assist him?—Who so cheerful, so attentive, so attached to him?—Would not he like to have him always on the spot?—Yes.
Knightley could not be there too often; he should be glad to see him every day;—but they did see him every day as it was.—Why could not they go on as they had done?
Woodhouse could not be soon reconciled; but the worst was overcome, the idea was given; time and continual repetition must do the rest.—To Emma’s entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr.
Knightley’s, whose fond praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome; and he was soon used to be talked to by each, on every fair occasion.—They had all the assistance which Isabella could give, by letters of the strongest approbation; and Mrs.
Weston was ready, on the first meeting, to consider the subject in the most serviceable light—first, as a settled, and, secondly, as a good one—well aware of the nearly equal importance of the two recommendations to Mr.
Woodhouse’s mind.—It was agreed upon, as what was to be; and every body by whom he was used to be guided assuring him that it would be for his happiness; and having some feelings himself which almost admitted it, he began to think that some time or other—in another year or two, perhaps—it might not be so very bad if the marriage did take place.
Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings in all that she said to him in favour of the event.—She had been extremely surprized, never more so, than when Emma first opened the affair to her; but she saw in it only increase of happiness to all, and had no scruple in urging him to the utmost.—She had such a regard for Mr.
Knightley could know and bear with Mr.
Woodhouse, so as to make such an arrangement desirable!—The difficulty of disposing of poor Mr.
Woodhouse had been always felt in her husband’s plans and her own, for a marriage between Frank and Emma.
How to settle the claims of Enscombe and Hartfield had been a continual impediment—less acknowledged by Mr.
Weston than by herself—but even he had never been able to finish the subject better than by saying—“Those matters will take care of themselves; the young people will find a way.” But here there was nothing to be shifted off in a wild speculation on the future.
No sacrifice on any side worth the name.
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself, and without one real, rational difficulty to oppose or delay it.
Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in such reflections as these, was one of the happiest women in the world.
If any thing could increase her delight, it was perceiving that the baby would soon have outgrown its first set of caps.
The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread; and Mr.
Weston had his five minutes share of it; but five minutes were enough to familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind.—He saw the advantages of the match, and rejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife; but the wonder of it was very soon nothing; and by the end of an hour he was not far from believing that he had always foreseen it.
“It is to be a secret, I conclude,” said he.
Only let me be told when I may speak out.—I wonder whether Jane has any suspicion.” He went to Highbury the next morning, and satisfied himself on that point.
Was not she like a daughter, his eldest daughter?—he must tell her; and Miss Bates being present, it passed, of course, to Mrs.
Elton, immediately afterwards.
It was no more than the principals were prepared for; they had calculated from the time of its being known at Randalls, how soon it would be over Highbury; and were thinking of themselves, as the evening wonder in many a family circle, with great sagacity.
In general, it was a very well approved match.
One set might recommend their all removing to Donwell, and leaving Hartfield for the John Knightleys; and another might predict disagreements among their servants; but yet, upon the whole, there was no serious objection raised, except in one habitation, the Vicarage.—There, the surprize was not softened by any satisfaction.
Elton cared little about it, compared with his wife; he only hoped “the young lady’s pride would now be contented;” and supposed “she had always meant to catch Knightley if she could;” and, on the point of living at Hartfield, could daringly exclaim, “Rather he than I!”—But Mrs.
But that would be all over now.—Poor fellow!—No more exploring parties to Donwell made for _her_.
Knightley to throw cold water on every thing.—Extremely disagreeable!
But she was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper the other day.—Shocking plan, living together.
She knew a family near Maple Grove who had tried it, and been obliged to separate before the end of the first quarter.
A few more to-morrows, and the party from London would be arriving.
It was an alarming change; and Emma was thinking of it one morning, as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her, when Mr.
Knightley came in, and distressing thoughts were put by.
After the first chat of pleasure he was silent; and then, in a graver tone, began with, “I have something to tell you, Emma; some news.” “Good or bad?” said she, quickly, looking up in his face.
“I do not know which it ought to be called.” “Oh! good I am sure.—I see it in your countenance.
“Does nothing occur to you?—Do not you recollect?—Harriet Smith.” Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid of something, though she knew not what.
“Have you heard from her yourself this morning?” cried he.
“You have, I believe, and know the whole.” “No, I have not; I know nothing; pray tell me.” “You are prepared for the worst, I see—and very bad it is.
Harriet Smith marries Robert Martin.” Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being prepared—and her eyes, in eager gaze, said, “No, this is impossible!” but her lips were closed.
“It is so, indeed,” continued Mr.
Knightley; “I have it from Robert Martin himself.
He left me not half an hour ago.” She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement.
“You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.—I wish our opinions were the same.
Time, you may be sure, will make one or the other of us think differently; and, in the meanwhile, we need not talk much on the subject.” “You mistake me, you quite mistake me,” she replied, exerting herself.
“It is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy, but I cannot believe it.
It seems an impossibility!—You cannot mean to say, that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin.
You cannot mean that he has even proposed to her again—yet.
You only mean, that he intends it.” “I mean that he has done it,” answered Mr.
Knightley, with smiling but determined decision, “and been accepted.” “Good God!” she cried.—“Well!”—Then having recourse to her workbasket, in excuse for leaning down her face, and concealing all the exquisite feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she must be expressing, she added, “Well, now tell me every thing; make this intelligible to me.
I never was more surprized—but it does not make me unhappy, I assure you.—How—how has it been possible?” “It is a very simple story.
He went to town on business three days ago, and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send to John.—He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers, and was asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley’s.
They called for him in their way; were all extremely amused; and my brother asked him to dine with them the next day—which he did—and in the course of that visit (as I understand) he found an opportunity of speaking to Harriet; and certainly did not speak in vain.—She made him, by her acceptance, as happy even as he is deserving.
He came down by yesterday’s coach, and was with me this morning immediately after breakfast, to report his proceedings, first on my affairs, and then on his own.
John Knightley and little John, and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry; and that at one time they were in such a crowd, as to make Miss Smith rather uneasy.” He stopped.—Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply.
To speak, she was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness.
Her silence disturbed him; and after observing her a little while, he added, “Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance would not now make you unhappy; but I am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected.
His situation is an evil—but you must consider it as what satisfies your friend; and I will answer for your thinking better and better of him as you know him more.
His good sense and good principles would delight you.—As far as the man is concerned, you could not wish your friend in better hands.
His rank in society I would alter if I could, which is saying a great deal I assure you, Emma.—You laugh at me about William Larkins; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin.” He wanted her to look up and smile; and having now brought herself not to smile too broadly—she did—cheerfully answering, “You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match.
I think Harriet is doing extremely well. _Her_ connexions may be worse than _his_.
In respectability of character, there can be no doubt that they are.
I have been silent from surprize merely, excessive surprize.
You cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me! how peculiarly unprepared I was!—for I had reason to believe her very lately more determined against him, much more, than she was before.” “You ought to know your friend best,” replied Mr.
Knightley; “but I should say she was a good-tempered, soft-hearted girl, not likely to be very, very determined against any young man who told her he loved her.” Emma could not help laughing as she answered, “Upon my word, I believe you know her quite as well as I do.—But, Mr.
Knightley, are you perfectly sure that she has absolutely and downright _accepted_ him.
I could suppose she might in time—but can she already?—Did not you misunderstand him?—You were both talking of other things; of business, shows of cattle, or new drills—and might not you, in the confusion of so many subjects, mistake him?—It was not Harriet’s hand that he was certain of—it was the dimensions of some famous ox.” The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr.
Knightley and Robert Martin was, at this moment, so strong to Emma’s feelings, and so strong was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on Harriet’s side, so fresh the sound of those words, spoken with such emphasis, “No, I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin,” that she was really expecting the intelligence to prove, in some measure, premature.
It could not be otherwise.
“Do you dare to suppose me so great a blockhead, as not to know what a man is talking of?—What do you deserve?” “Oh!
I always deserve the best treatment, because I never put up with any other; and, therefore, you must give me a plain, direct answer.
Are you quite sure that you understand the terms on which Mr.
Martin and Harriet now are?” “I am quite sure,” he replied, speaking very distinctly, “that he told me she had accepted him; and that there was no obscurity, nothing doubtful, in the words he used; and I think I can give you a proof that it must be so.
Goddard to whom he could apply for information of her relations or friends.
Then, he said, he would endeavour to see her in the course of this day.” “I am perfectly satisfied,” replied Emma, with the brightest smiles, “and most sincerely wish them happy.” “You are materially changed since we talked on this subject before.” “I hope so—for at that time I was a fool.” “And I am changed also; for I am now very willing to grant you all Harriet’s good qualities.
I have taken some pains for your sake, and for Robert Martin’s sake, (whom I have always had reason to believe as much in love with her as ever,) to get acquainted with her.
Their conversation was soon afterwards closed by the entrance of her father.
Her mind was in a state of flutter and wonder, which made it impossible for her to be collected.
She was in dancing, singing, exclaiming spirits; and till she had moved about, and talked to herself, and laughed and reflected, she could be fit for nothing rational.
Her father’s business was to announce James’s being gone out to put the horses to, preparatory to their now daily drive to Randalls; and she had, therefore, an immediate excuse for disappearing.
The joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensations may be imagined.
The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect of Harriet’s welfare, she was really in danger of becoming too happy for security.—What had she to wish for?
Nothing, but to grow more worthy of him, whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own.
Nothing, but that the lessons of her past folly might teach her humility and circumspection in future.
Serious she was, very serious in her thankfulness, and in her resolutions; and yet there was no preventing a laugh, sometimes in the very midst of them.
Such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back!
Now there would be pleasure in her returning—Every thing would be a pleasure.
It would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin.
High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities, was the reflection that all necessity of concealment from Mr.
Knightley would soon be over.
The disguise, equivocation, mystery, so hateful to her to practise, might soon be over.
She could now look forward to giving him that full and perfect confidence which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a duty.
In the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her father; not always listening, but always agreeing to what he said; and, whether in speech or silence, conniving at the comfortable persuasion of his being obliged to go to Randalls every day, or poor Mrs.
Weston would be disappointed.
Woodhouse received the thanks for coming, which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through the blind, of two figures passing near the window.
“I was just going to tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning.
He stays till to-morrow, and Miss Fairfax has been persuaded to spend the day with us.—They are coming in, I hope.” In half a minute they were in the room.
Emma was extremely glad to see him—but there was a degree of confusion—a number of embarrassing recollections on each side.
They met readily and smiling, but with a consciousness which at first allowed little to be said; and having all sat down again, there was for some time such a blank in the circle, that Emma began to doubt whether the wish now indulged, which she had long felt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more, and of seeing him with Jane, would yield its proportion of pleasure.
Weston joined the party, however, and when the baby was fetched, there was no longer a want of subject or animation—or of courage and opportunity for Frank Churchill to draw near her and say, “I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouse, for a very kind forgiving message in one of Mrs.
I am particularly glad to see and shake hands with you—and to give you joy in person.” He thanked her with all his heart, and continued some time to speak with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness.
Weston doat upon her.” But his spirits were soon rising again, and with laughing eyes, after mentioning the expected return of the Campbells, he named the name of Dixon.—Emma blushed, and forbade its being pronounced in her hearing.
“I can never think of it,” she cried, “without extreme shame.” “The shame,” he answered, “is all mine, or ought to be.
But is it possible that you had no suspicion?—I mean of late.
Early, I know, you had none.” “I never had the smallest, I assure you.” “That appears quite wonderful.
But though I was always doing wrong things, they were very bad wrong things, and such as did me no service.—It would have been a much better transgression had I broken the bond of secrecy and told you every thing.” “It is not now worth a regret,” said Emma.
“I have some hope,” resumed he, “of my uncle’s being persuaded to pay a visit at Randalls; he wants to be introduced to her.
When the Campbells are returned, we shall meet them in London, and continue there, I trust, till we may carry her northward.—But now, I am at such a distance from her—is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse?—Till this morning, we have not once met since the day of reconciliation.
Do not you pity me?” Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession of gay thought, he cried, “Ah! by the bye,” then sinking his voice, and looking demure for the moment—“I hope Mr.
Knightley is well?” He paused.—She coloured and laughed.—“I know you saw my letter, and think you may remember my wish in your favour.
It is a most uncommon complexion, with her dark eye-lashes and hair—a most distinguishing complexion!
I was the most miserable wretch!” “Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth.
I am sure it was a source of high entertainment to you, to feel that you were taking us all in.—Perhaps I am the readier to suspect, because, to tell you the truth, I think it might have been some amusement to myself in the same situation.
I think there is a little likeness between us.” He bowed.
“If not in our dispositions,” she presently added, with a look of true sensibility, “there is a likeness in our destiny; the destiny which bids fair to connect us with two characters so much superior to our own.” “True, true,” he answered, warmly.
You can have no superior, but most true on mine.—She is a complete angel.
Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my father.—You will be glad to hear (inclining his head, and whispering seriously) that my uncle means to give her all my aunt’s jewels.
I am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head.
Will not it be beautiful in her dark hair?” “Very beautiful, indeed,” replied Emma; and she spoke so kindly, that he gratefully burst out, “How delighted I am to see you again! and to see you in such excellent looks!—I would not have missed this meeting for the world.
I should certainly have called at Hartfield, had you failed to come.” The others had been talking of the child, Mrs.
Weston giving an account of a little alarm she had been under, the evening before, from the infant’s appearing not quite well.
She believed she had been foolish, but it had alarmed her, and she had been within half a minute of sending for Mr.
Weston had been almost as uneasy as herself.—In ten minutes, however, the child had been perfectly well again.
This was her history; and particularly interesting it was to Mr.
Woodhouse, who commended her very much for thinking of sending for Perry, and only regretted that she had not done it.
“She should always send for Perry, if the child appeared in the slightest degree disordered, were it only for a moment.
It was a pity, perhaps, that he had not come last night; for, though the child seemed well now, very well considering, it would probably have been better if Perry had seen it.” Frank Churchill caught the name.
Perry?—Has he been here this morning?—And how does he travel now?—Has he set up his carriage?” Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined in the laugh, it was evident from Jane’s countenance that she too was really hearing him, though trying to seem deaf.
“Such an extraordinary dream of mine!” he cried.
“I can never think of it without laughing.—She hears us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse.
Knightley’s high superiority of character.
The happiness of this most happy day, received its completion, in the animated contemplation of his worth which this comparison produced.
CHAPTER XIX If Emma had still, at intervals, an anxious feeling for Harriet, a momentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really cured of her attachment to Mr.
Knightley, and really able to accept another man from unbiased inclination, it was not long that she had to suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty.
A very few days brought the party from London, and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with Harriet, than she became perfectly satisfied—unaccountable as it was!—that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr.
Knightley, and was now forming all her views of happiness.
But what did such particulars explain?—The fact was, as Emma could now acknowledge, that Harriet had always liked Robert Martin; and that his continuing to love her had been irresistible.—Beyond this, it must ever be unintelligible to Emma.
The event, however, was most joyful; and every day was giving her fresh reason for thinking so.—Harriet’s parentage became known.
She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers, and decent enough to have always wished for concealment.—Such was the blood of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for!—It was likely to be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman: but what a connexion had she been preparing for Mr.
Knightley—or for the Churchills—or even for Mr.
Elton!—The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached by nobility or wealth, would have been a stain indeed.
No objection was raised on the father’s side; the young man was treated liberally; it was all as it should be: and as Emma became acquainted with Robert Martin, who was now introduced at Hartfield, she fully acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worth which could bid fairest for her little friend.
She had no doubt of Harriet’s happiness with any good-tempered man; but with him, and in the home he offered, there would be the hope of more, of security, stability, and improvement.
She would be placed in the midst of those who loved her, and who had better sense than herself; retired enough for safety, and occupied enough for cheerfulness.
She would be never led into temptation, nor left for it to find her out.
She would be respectable and happy; and Emma admitted her to be the luckiest creature in the world, to have created so steady and persevering an affection in such a man;—or, if not quite the luckiest, to yield only to herself.
Harriet, necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the Martins, was less and less at Hartfield; which was not to be regretted.—The intimacy between her and Emma must sink; their friendship must change into a calmer sort of goodwill; and, fortunately, what ought to be, and must be, seemed already beginning, and in the most gradual, natural manner.
Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet to church, and saw her hand bestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction, as no remembrances, even connected with Mr.
Elton as he stood before them, could impair.—Perhaps, indeed, at that time she scarcely saw Mr.
Elton, but as the clergyman whose blessing at the altar might next fall on herself.—Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the latest couple engaged of the three, were the first to be married.
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury, and was restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells.—The Mr.
Churchills were also in town; and they were only waiting for November.
The intermediate month was the one fixed on, as far as they dared, by Emma and Mr.
Knightley.—They had determined that their marriage ought to be concluded while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield, to allow them the fortnight’s absence in a tour to the seaside, which was the plan.—John and Isabella, and every other friend, were agreed in approving it.
Woodhouse—how was Mr.
Woodhouse to be induced to consent?—he, who had never yet alluded to their marriage but as a distant event.
When first sounded on the subject, he was so miserable, that they were almost hopeless.—A second allusion, indeed, gave less pain.—He began to think it was to be, and that he could not prevent it—a very promising step of the mind on its way to resignation.
Nay, he appeared so much otherwise, that his daughter’s courage failed.
She could not bear to see him suffering, to know him fancying himself neglected; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr.
Knightleys, that when once the event were over, his distress would be soon over too, she hesitated—she could not proceed.
In this state of suspense they were befriended, not by any sudden illumination of Mr.
Woodhouse’s mind, or any wonderful change of his nervous system, but by the operation of the same system in another way.—Mrs.
Weston’s poultry-house was robbed one night of all her turkeys—evidently by the ingenuity of man.
Other poultry-yards in the neighbourhood also suffered.—Pilfering was _housebreaking_ to Mr.
Woodhouse’s fears.—He was very uneasy; and but for the sense of his son-in-law’s protection, would have been under wretched alarm every night of his life.
The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of the Mr.
Knightleys, commanded his fullest dependence.
While either of them protected him and his, Hartfield was safe.—But Mr.
John Knightley must be in London again by the end of the first week in November.
The result of this distress was, that, with a much more voluntary, cheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at the moment, she was able to fix her wedding-day—and Mr.
Elton was called on, within a month from the marriage of Mr. and Mrs.
Knightley and Miss Woodhouse.
The wedding was very much like other weddings, where the parties have no taste for finery or parade; and Mrs.
D. (J.H.U.) Professor of English and History in The College of William and Mary D.C.
HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERS BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1892, by JNO: LESSLIE HALL, in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.
TO My Wife [v] CONTENTS.
The present work is a modest effort to reproduce approximately, in modern measures, the venerable epic, Beowulf. _Approximately_, I repeat; for a very close reproduction of Anglo-Saxon verse would, to a large extent, be prose to a modern ear.
The Heyne-Socin text and glossary have been closely followed.
Occasionally a deviation has been made, but always for what seemed good and sufficient reason.
The translator does not aim to be an editor.
Once in a while, however, he has added a conjecture of his own to the emendations quoted from the criticisms of other students of the poem.
This work is addressed to two classes of readers.
From both of these alike the translator begs sympathy and co-operation.
The Anglo-Saxon scholar he hopes to please by adhering faithfully to the original.
The student of English literature he aims to interest by giving him, in modern garb, the most ancient epic of our race.
This is a bold and venturesome undertaking; and yet there must be some students of the Teutonic past willing to follow even a daring guide, if they may read in modern phrases of the sorrows of Hrothgar, of the prowess of Beowulf, and of the feelings that stirred the hearts of our forefathers in their primeval homes.
In order to please the larger class of readers, a regular cadence has been used, a measure which, while retaining the essential characteristics of the original, permits the reader to see ahead of him in reading.
Perhaps every Anglo-Saxon scholar has his own theory as to how Beowulf should be translated.
Some have given us prose versions of what we believe to be a great poem.
Is it any reflection on our honored Kemble and Arnold to say that their translations fail to show a layman that Beowulf is justly called our first _epic_?
Of those translators who have used verse, several have written from what would seem a mistaken point of view.
Is it proper, for instance, that the grave and solemn speeches of Beowulf and Hrothgar be put in ballad measures, tripping lightly and airily along?
Or, again, is it fitting that the rough martial music of Anglo-Saxon verse be interpreted to us in the smooth measures of modern blank verse?
Do we hear what has been beautifully called "the clanging tread of a warrior in mail"? [viii] Of all English translations of Beowulf, that of Professor Garnett alone gives any adequate idea of the chief characteristics of this great Teutonic epic.
The measure used in the present translation is believed to be as near a reproduction of the original as modern English affords.
The cadences closely resemble those used by Browning in some of his most striking poems.
The four stresses of the Anglo-Saxon verse are retained, and as much thesis and anacrusis is allowed as is consistent with a regular cadence.
Alliteration has been used to a large extent; but it was thought that modern ears would hardly tolerate it on every line.
End-rhyme has been used occasionally; internal rhyme, sporadically.
Both have some warrant in Anglo-Saxon poetry. (For end-rhyme, see 1_53, 1_54; for internal rhyme, 2_21, 6_40.) What Gummere[1] calls the "rime-giver" has been studiously kept; _viz._, the first accented syllable in the second half-verse always carries the alliteration; and the last accented syllable alliterates only sporadically.
Alternate alliteration is occasionally used as in the original. (See 7_61, 8_5.) No two accented syllables have been brought together, except occasionally after a cæsural pause. (See 2_19 and 12_1.) Or, scientifically speaking, Sievers's C type has been avoided as not consonant with the plan of translation.
Several of his types, however, constantly occur; _e.g._ A and a variant (/ x | / x) (/ x x | / x); B and a variant (x / | x / ) (x x / | x / ); a variant of D (/ x | / x x); E (/ x x | / ).
Anacrusis gives further variety to the types used in the translation.
The parallelisms of the original have been faithfully preserved. (_E.g._, 1_16 and 1_17: "Lord" and "Wielder of Glory"; 1_30, 1_31, 1_32; 2_12 and 2_13; 2_27 and 2_28; 3_5 and 3_6.) Occasionally, some loss has been sustained; but, on the other hand, a gain has here and there been made.
The effort has been made to give a decided flavor of archaism to the translation.
Again, though many archaic words have been used, there are none, it is believed, which are not found in standard modern poetry. [ix] With these preliminary remarks, it will not be amiss to give an outline of the story of the poem. _THE STORY._ _Hrothgar, king of the Danes, or Scyldings, builds a great mead-hall, or palace, in which he hopes to feast his liegemen and to give them presents.
The joy of king and retainers is, however, of short duration.
Grendel, the monster, is seized with hateful jealousy.
He cannot brook the sounds of joyance that reach him down in his fen-dwelling near the hall.
Oft and anon he goes to the joyous building, bent on direful mischief.
Thane after thane is ruthlessly carried off and devoured, while no one is found strong enough and bold enough to cope with the monster.
For twelve years he persecutes Hrothgar and his vassals._ _Over sea, a day's voyage off, Beowulf, of the Geats, nephew of Higelac, king of the Geats, hears of Grendel's doings and of Hrothgar's misery.
He resolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king.
With fourteen chosen companions, he sets sail for Dane-land.
Reaching that country, he soon persuades Hrothgar of his ability to help him.
The hours that elapse before night are spent in beer-drinking and conversation.
When Hrothgar's bedtime comes he leaves the hall in charge of Beowulf, telling him that never before has he given to another the absolute wardship of his palace.
All retire to rest, Beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms._ _Grendel comes, the great march-stepper, bearing God's anger.
He seizes and kills one of the sleeping warriors.
Then he advances towards Beowulf.
A fierce and desperate hand-to-hand struggle ensues.
No arms are used, both combatants trusting to strength and hand-grip.
Beowulf tears Grendel's shoulder from its socket, and the monster retreats to his den, howling and yelling with agony and fury.
The wound is fatal._ _The next morning, at early dawn, warriors in numbers flock to the hall Heorot, to hear the news.
Hrothgar and his retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts._ _Grendel's mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death.
While Beowulf is sleeping in a room somewhat apart [x] from the quarters of the other warriors, she seizes one of Hrothgar's favorite counsellors, and carries him off and devours him.
Determined to leave Heorot entirely purified, he arms himself, and goes down to look for the female monster.
After traveling through the waters many hours, he meets her near the sea-bottom.
After a desperate and almost fatal struggle with the woman, he slays her, and swims upward in triumph, taking with him Grendel's head._ _Joy is renewed at Heorot.
Congratulations crowd upon the victor.
Hrothgar literally pours treasures into the lap of Beowulf; and it is agreed among the vassals of the king that Beowulf will be their next liegelord._ _Beowulf leaves Dane-land.
Hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure._ _When the hero arrives in his own land, Higelac treats him as a distinguished guest.
He is the hero of the hour._ _Beowulf subsequently becomes king of his own people, the Geats.
After he has been ruling for fifty years, his own neighborhood is wofully harried by a fire-spewing dragon.
Beowulf determines to kill him.
In the ensuing struggle both Beowulf and the dragon are slain.
The grief of the Geats is inexpressible.
They determine, however, to leave nothing undone to honor the memory of their lord.
It is an epitomized history of the life of the Teutonic races.
It brings vividly before us our forefathers of pre-Alfredian eras, in their love of war, of sea, and of adventure.
My special thanks are due to Professors Francis A.
Harrison, for advice, sympathy, and assistance.
HALL. [xi] ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE NOTES.
Grdvtg. = Grundtvig.
H. and S. = Harrison and Sharp.
W. = Wülcker. * * * * * BIBLIOGRAPHY OF TRANSLATIONS. ~Arnold, Thomas.~--Beowulf.
With English translation.
First French translation.
Passages occasionally omitted. ~Conybeare, J.J.~--Illustrations of Anglo-Saxon Poetry.
Full Latin translation, and some passages translated into English blank-verse. ~Ettmuller, L.~--Beowulf, stabreimend übersetzt.
Zürich, 1840. ~Garnett, J.M.~--Beowulf: an Anglo-Saxon Poem, and the Fight at Finnsburg.
An accurate line-for-line translation, using alliteration occasionally, and sometimes assuming a metrical cadence. ~Grein, C.W.M.~--Dichtungen der Angelsachsen, stabreimend übersetzt. 2 Bde.
Göttingen, 1857-59. ~Grion, Giusto.~--Beovulf, poema epico anglo-sassone del VII. secolo, tradotto e illustrato.
First Italian translation. ~Grundtvig, N.F.S.~--Bjowulfs Drape.
Copenhagen, 1820. ~Heyne, M.~--A translation in iambic measures.
Paderborn, 1863. ~Kemble, J.M.~--The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Traveller's Song, and the Battle of Finnsburg.
The second edition contains a prose translation of Beowulf. ~Leo, H.~--Ueber Beowulf.
Translations of extracts. [xii] ~Lumsden, H.W.~--Beowulf, translated into modern rhymes.
Passages occasionally omitted. ~Sandras, G.S.~--De carminibus Cædmoni adjudicatis.
An extract from Beowulf, with Latin translation. ~Schaldmose, F.~--Beowulf og Scopes Widsith, to Angelsaxiske Digte.
Copenhagen, 1847. ~Simrock, K.~--Beowulf.
Uebersetzt und erläutert.
Stuttgart und Augsburg, 1859.
Alliterative measures. ~Thorkelin, G.J.~--De Danorum rebus gestis secul.
III. et IV. poema Danicum dialecto Anglosaxonica.
Latin translation. ~Thorpe, B.~--The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Scôp or Gleeman's Tale, and the Fight at Finnsburg.
English translation in short lines, generally containing two stresses. ~Wackerbarth, A.D.~--Beowulf, translated into English verse.
London, 1849. ~Wickberg, R.~--Beowulf, en fornengelsk hjeltedikt, öfersatt.
First Swedish translation. ~von Wolzogen, H.~--Beowulf, in alliterative measures.
Leipzig. ~Zinsser, G.~--Der Kampf Beowulfs mit Grendel.
Jahresbericht of the Realschule at Forbach, 1881. [xiii] GLOSSARY OF PROPER NAMES. * * * * * [The figures refer to the divisions of the poem in which the respective names occur.
The large figures refer to fitts, the small, to lines in the fitts.] * * * * * ~Ælfhere~.--A kinsman of Wiglaf.--36_3. ~Æschere~.--Confidential friend of King Hrothgar.
Elder brother of Yrmenlaf.
Killed by Grendel.--21_3; 30_89. ~Beanstan~.--Father of Breca.--9_26. ~Beowulf~.--Son of Scyld, the founder of the dynasty of Scyldings.
Father of Healfdene, and grandfather of Hrothgar.--1_18; 2_1. ~Beowulf~.--The hero of the poem.
Sprung from the stock of Geats, son of Ecgtheow.
Brought up by his maternal grandfather Hrethel, and figuring in manhood as a devoted liegeman of his uncle Higelac.
Has the strength of thirty men.
Engages in a swimming-match with Breca.
Goes to the help of Hrothgar against the monster Grendel.
Vanquishes Grendel and his mother.
Afterwards becomes king of the Geats.
Late in life attempts to kill a fire-spewing dragon, and is slain.
Other names for them are Victory-Scyldings, Honor-Scyldings, Armor-Danes, Bright-Danes, East-Danes, West-Danes, North-Danes, South-Danes, Ingwins, Hrethmen.--1_1; 2_1; 3_2; 5_14; 7_1, etc. ~Ecglaf~.--Father of Unferth, who taunts Beowulf.--9_1. ~Ecgtheow~.--Father of Beowulf, the hero of the poem.
A widely-known Wægmunding warrior.
Marries Hrethel's daughter.
The reference to these brothers is vague, and variously understood.
Heyne supposes as follows: Raising a revolt against their father, they are obliged to leave Sweden.
They go to the land of the Geats; with what intention, is not known, but probably to conquer and plunder.
At his court takes place the horrible slaughter in which the Danish general, Hnæf, fell.
Some of them were engaged in the struggle in which Higelac was slain.--17_20; 17_42; 17_52; 40_21. ~Freaware~.--Daughter of King Hrothgar.
Married to Ingeld, a Heathobard prince.--29_60; 30_32. ~Froda~.--King of the Heathobards, and father of Ingeld.--29_62. ~Garmund~.--Father of Offa.--28_71. ~Geats, Geatmen~.--The race to which the hero of the poem belongs.
They are ruled by Hrethel, Hæthcyn, Higelac, and Beowulf.--4_7; 7_4; 10_45; 11_8; 27_14; 28_8. ~Gepids~.--Named in connection with the Danes and Swedes.--35_34. ~Grendel~.--A monster of the race of Cain.
Is furiously envious when he hears sounds of joy in Hrothgar's palace.
Is finally conquered by Beowulf, and dies of his wound.
His hand and arm are hung up in Hrothgar's hall Heorot.
His head is cut off by Beowulf when he goes down to fight with Grendel's mother.--2_50; 3_1; 3_13; 8_19; 11_17; 12_2; 13_27; 15_3. ~Guthlaf~.--A Dane of Hnæf's party.--18_24. ~Half-Danes~.--Branch of the Danes to which Hnæf belonged.--17_19. [xv] ~Halga~.--Surnamed the Good.
Younger brother of Hrothgar.--2_9. ~Hama~.--Takes the Brosinga mene from Eormenric.--19_7. ~Hæreth~.--Father of Higelac's queen, Hygd.--28_39; 29_18. ~Hæthcyn~.--Son of Hrethel and brother of Higelac.
Kills his brother Herebeald accidentally.
Is slain at Ravenswood, fighting against Ongentheow.--34_43; 35_23; 40_32. ~Helmings~.--The race to which Queen Wealhtheow belonged.--10_63. ~Heming~.--A kinsman of Garmund, perhaps nephew.--28_54; 28_70. ~Hengest~.--A Danish leader.
Takes command on the fall of Hnæf.--17_33; 17_41. ~Herebeald~.--Eldest son of Hrethel, the Geatish king, and brother of Higelac.
Killed by his younger brother Hæthcyn.--34_43; 34_47. ~Heremod~.--A Danish king of a dynasty before the Scylding line.
Was a source of great sorrow to his people.--14_64; 25_59. ~Hereric~.--Referred to as uncle of Heardred, but otherwise unknown.--31_60. ~Hetwars~.--Another name for the Franks.--33_51. ~Healfdene~.--Grandson of Scyld and father of Hrothgar.
Ruled the Danes long and well.--2_5; 4_1; 8_14. ~Heardred~.--Son of Higelac and Hygd, king and queen of the Geats.
Succeeds his father, with Beowulf as regent.
Is slain by the sons of Ohthere.--31_56; 33_63; 33_75. ~Heathobards~.--Race of Lombards, of which Froda is king.
Finally cleansed by Beowulf, the Geat.
It is called Heort on account of the hart-antlers which decorate it.--2_25; 3_32; 3_52. ~Hildeburg~.--Wife of Finn, daughter of Hoce, and related to Hnæf,--probably his sister.--17_21; 18_34. ~Hnæf~.--Leader of a branch of the Danes called Half-Danes.
Killed in the struggle at Finn's castle.--17_19; 17_61. ~Hondscio~.--One of Beowulf's companions.
Marries Wealhtheow, a Helming lady.
Has two sons and a daughter.
Is a typical Teutonic king, lavish of gifts.
A devoted liegelord, as his lamentations over slain liegemen prove.
Also very appreciative of kindness, as is shown by his loving gratitude to Beowulf.--2_9; 2_12; 4_1; 8_10; 15_1; etc., etc. ~Hrothmund~.--Son of Hrothgar.--18_65. ~Hrothulf~.--Probably a son of Halga, younger brother of Hrothgar.
Certainly on terms of close intimacy in Hrothgar's palace.--16_26; 18_57. ~Hrunting~.--Unferth's sword, lent to Beowulf.--22_71; 25_9. ~Hugs~.--A race in alliance with the Franks and Frisians at the time of Higelac's fall.--35_41. ~Hun~.--A Frisian warrior, probably general of the Hetwars.
Gives Hengest a beautiful sword.--18_19. ~Hunferth~.--Sometimes used for Unferth. ~Hygelac~, ~Higelac~.--King of the Geats, uncle and liegelord of Beowulf, the hero of the poem.--His second wife is the lovely Hygd, daughter of Hæreth.
The son of their union is Heardred.
Is slain in a war with the Hugs, Franks, and Frisians combined.
Beowulf is regent, and afterwards king of the Geats.--4_6; 5_4; 28_34; 29_9; 29_21; 31_56. ~Hygd~.--Wife of Higelac, and daughter of Hæreth.
There are some indications that she married Beowulf after she became a widow.--28_37. ~Ingeld~.--Son of the Heathobard king, Froda.
Marries the terrible Thrytho who is so strongly contrasted with Hygd.--28_59; 28_66. ~Ohthere~.--Son of Ongentheow, king of the Swedes.
He is father of Eanmund and Eadgils.--40_35; 40_39. ~Onela~.--Brother of Ohthere.--36_15; 40_39. ~Ongentheow~.--King of Sweden, of the Scylfing dynasty.
Married, perhaps, Elan, daughter of Healfdene.--35_26; 41_16. ~Oslaf~.--A Dane of Hnæf's party.--18_24. ~Ravenswood~.--The forest near which Hæthcyn was slain.--40_31; 40_41. ~Scefing~.--Applied (1_4) to Scyld, and meaning 'son of Scef.' [xvii] ~Scyld~.--Founder of the dynasty to which Hrothgar, his father, and grandfather belonged.
He goes from Daneland just as he had come to it--in a bark.--1_4; 1_19; 1_27. ~Scyldings~.--The descendants of Scyld.
They are also called Honor-Scyldings, Victory-Scyldings, War-Scyldings, etc. (See 'Danes,' above.)--2_1; 7_1; 8_1. ~Scylfings~.--A Swedish royal line to which Wiglaf belonged.--36_2. ~Sigemund~.--Son of Wæls, and uncle and father of Fitela.
His struggle with a dragon is related in connection with Beowulf's deeds of prowess.--14_38; 14_47. ~Swerting~.--Grandfather of Higelac, and father of Hrethel.--19_11. ~Swedes~.--People of Sweden, ruled by the Scylfings.--35_13. ~Thrytho~.--Wife of Offa, king of the Angles.
Known for her fierce and unwomanly disposition.
She is introduced as a contrast to the gentle Hygd, queen of Higelac.--28_42; 28_56. ~Unferth~.--Son of Ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of Hrothgar.
Taunts Beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match.
Her queenly courtesy is well shown in the poem.--10_55. ~Weohstan~, or ~Wihstan~.--A Wægmunding, and father of Wiglaf.--36_1. ~Whale's Ness~.--A prominent promontory, on which Beowulf's mound was built.--38_52; 42_76. ~Wiglaf~.--Son of Wihstan, and related to Beowulf.
He remains faithful to Beowulf in the fatal struggle with the fire-drake.
Would rather die than leave his lord in his dire emergency.--36_1; 36_3; 36_28. ~Wonred~.--Father of Wulf and Eofor.--41_20; 41_26. ~Wulf~.--Son of Wonred.
Engaged in the battle between Higelac's and Ongentheow's forces, and had a hand-to-hand fight with Ongentheow himself.
Ongentheow disables him, and is thereupon slain by Eofor.--41_19; 41_29. ~Wulfgar~.--Lord of the Wendels, and retainer of Hrothgar.--6_18; 6_30. ~Wylfings~.--A people to whom belonged Heatholaf, who was slain by Ecgtheow.--8_6; 8_16. ~Yrmenlaf~.--Younger brother of Æschere, the hero whose death grieved Hrothgar so deeply.--21_4. [xviii] LIST OF WORDS AND PHRASES NOT IN GENERAL USE.
ATHELING.--Prince, nobleman.
BEAKER.--Cup, drinking-vessel.
BOSS.--Ornamental projection.
BRACTEATE.--A round ornament on a necklace.
EARL.--Nobleman, any brave man.
EMPRISE.--Enterprise, undertaking.
GREWSOME.--Cruel, fierce.
HEFT.--Handle, hilt; used by synecdoche for 'sword.' HELM.--Helmet, protector.
HENCHMAN.--Retainer, vassal.
HIMSEEMED.--(It) seemed to him.
MERE.--Sea; in compounds, 'mere-ways,' 'mere-currents,' etc.
NATHLESS.--Nevertheless.
THROUGHLY.--Thoroughly.
UNCANNY.--Ill-featured, grizzly.
UNNETHE.--Difficult.
WEB.--Tapestry (that which is 'woven').
WEIRD.--Fate, Providence.
WHILOM.--At times, formerly, often.
Often used of God; also in compounds, as 'Wielder of Glory,' 'Wielder of Worship.' WIGHT.--Creature.
WOLD.--Plane, extended surface.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF SCYLD. {The famous race of Spear-Danes.} Lo! the Spear-Danes' glory through splendid achievements The folk-kings' former fame we have heard of, How princes displayed then their prowess-in-battle. {Scyld, their mighty king, in honor of whom they are often called Scyldings.
He is the great-grandfather of Hrothgar, so prominent in the poem.} Oft Scyld the Scefing from scathers in numbers 5 From many a people their mead-benches tore.
Since first he found him friendless and wretched, The earl had had terror: comfort he got for it, Waxed 'neath the welkin, world-honor gained, Till all his neighbors o'er sea were compelled to 10 Bow to his bidding and bring him their tribute: An excellent atheling!
After was borne him {A son is born to him, who receives the name of Beowulf--a name afterwards made so famous by the hero of the poem.} A son and heir, young in his dwelling, Whom God-Father sent to solace the people.
He had marked the misery malice had caused them, 15 [1]That reaved of their rulers they wretched had erstwhile[2] Long been afflicted.
The Lord, in requital, Wielder of Glory, with world-honor blessed him.
Men are not able {No one knows whither the boat drifted.} Soothly to tell us, they in halls who reside,[4] Heroes under heaven, to what haven he hied. [1] For the 'Þæt' of verse 15, Sievers suggests 'Þá' (= which).
If this be accepted, the sentence 'He had ... afflicted' will read: _He_ (_i.e._ God) _had perceived the malice-caused sorrow which they, lordless, had formerly long endured_. [2] For 'aldor-léase' (15) Gr. suggested 'aldor-ceare': _He perceived their distress, that they formerly had suffered life-sorrow a long while_. [3] A very difficult passage. 'Áhte' (31) has no object.
H. supplies 'geweald' from the context; and our translation is based upon this assumption, though it is far from satisfactory.
Kl. suggests 'lændagas' for 'lange': _And the beloved land-prince enjoyed (had) his transitory days (i.e. lived)_.
Hrothgar becomes a mighty king.} The well-beloved bedmate of the War-Scylfing leader.
Then glory in battle to Hrothgar was given, Waxing of war-fame, that willingly kinsmen Obeyed his bidding, till the boys grew to manhood, 15 A numerous band.
It burned in his spirit To urge his folk to found a great building, A mead-hall grander than men of the era {He is eager to build a great hall in which he may feast his retainers} Ever had heard of, and in it to share With young and old all of the blessings 20 The Lord had allowed him, save life and retainers.
Then the work I find afar was assigned [4] To many races in middle-earth's regions, To adorn the great folk-hall.
In due time it happened Early 'mong men, that 'twas finished entirely, 25 The greatest of hall-buildings; Heorot he named it {The hall is completed, and is called Heort, or Heorot.} Who wide-reaching word-sway wielded 'mong earlmen.
His promise he brake not, rings he lavished, Treasure at banquet.
Towered the hall up High and horn-crested, huge between antlers: 30 It battle-waves bided, the blasting fire-demon; Ere long then from hottest hatred must sword-wrath Arise for a woman's husband and father.
Then the mighty war-spirit[1] endured for a season, {The Monster Grendel is madly envious of the Danemen's joy.} Bore it bitterly, he who bided in darkness, 35 That light-hearted laughter loud in the building Greeted him daily; there was dulcet harp-music, Clear song of the singer.
For that bitter murder, 55 The killing of Abel, all-ruling Father {Cain is referred to as a progenitor of Grendel, and of monsters in general.} The kindred of Cain crushed with His vengeance; In the feud He rejoiced not, but far away drove him From kindred and kind, that crime to atone for, Meter of Justice.
Thence ill-favored creatures, 60 Elves and giants, monsters of ocean, Came into being, and the giants that longtime Grappled with God; He gave them requital. [1] R. and t.
B. prefer 'ellor-gæst' to 'ellen-gæst' (86): _Then the stranger from afar endured, etc._ [2] Some authorities would translate '_demon_' instead of '_stranger_.' [3] Some authorities arrange differently, and render: _Who dwelt in the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness, the land of the giant-race._ III.
GRENDEL THE MURDERER. {Grendel attacks the sleeping heroes} When the sun was sunken, he set out to visit The lofty hall-building, how the Ring-Danes had used it For beds and benches when the banquet was over.
Then he found there reposing many a noble 5 Asleep after supper; sorrow the heroes,[1] Misery knew not.
The monster of evil Greedy and cruel tarried but little, {He drags off thirty of them, and devours them} Fell and frantic, and forced from their slumbers Thirty of thanemen; thence he departed 10 Leaping and laughing, his lair to return to, With surfeit of slaughter sallying homeward.
In the dusk of the dawning, as the day was just breaking, Was Grendel's prowess revealed to the warriors: {A cry of agony goes up, when Grendel's horrible deed is fully realized.} Then, his meal-taking finished, a moan was uplifted, 15 Morning-cry mighty.
The man-ruler famous, The long-worthy atheling, sat very woful, Suffered great sorrow, sighed for his liegemen, [6] When they had seen the track of the hateful pursuer, The spirit accursèd: too crushing that sorrow, {The monster returns the next night.} 20 Too loathsome and lasting.
Not longer he tarried, But one night after continued his slaughter Shameless and shocking, shrinking but little From malice and murder; they mastered him fully.
He was easy to find then who otherwhere looked for 25 A pleasanter place of repose in the lodges, A bed in the bowers.
Then was brought to his notice Told him truly by token apparent The hall-thane's hatred: he held himself after Further and faster who the foeman did baffle. 30 [2]So ruled he and strongly strove against justice Lone against all men, till empty uptowered {King Hrothgar's agony and suspense last twelve years.} The choicest of houses.
Not seldom in private Sat the king in his council; conference held they What the braves should determine 'gainst terrors unlooked for. {They invoke the aid of their gods.} 60 At the shrines of their idols often they promised Gifts and offerings, earnestly prayed they The devil from hell would help them to lighten Their people's oppression.
Such practice they used then, Hope of the heathen; hell they remembered 65 In innermost spirit, God they knew not, {The true God they do not know.} Judge of their actions, All-wielding Ruler, No praise could they give the Guardian of Heaven, The Wielder of Glory.
So Higelac's liegeman, Good amid Geatmen, of Grendel's achievements Heard in his home:[1] of heroes then living He was stoutest and strongest, sturdy and noble. 10 He bade them prepare him a bark that was trusty; He said he the war-king would seek o'er the ocean, The folk-leader noble, since he needed retainers.
Never a greater one Of earls o'er the earth have _I_ had a sight of 60 Than is one of your number, a hero in armor; No low-ranking fellow[4] adorned with his weapons, But launching them little, unless looks are deceiving, And striking appearance.
Ere ye pass on your journey As treacherous spies to the land of the Scyldings 65 And farther fare, I fully must know now What race ye belong to.
Ye far-away dwellers, Sea-faring sailors, my simple opinion Hear ye and hearken: haste is most fitting Plainly to tell me what place ye are come from." [1] 'From hám' (194) is much disputed.
One rendering is: _Beowulf, being away from home, heard of Hrothgar's troubles, etc_.
Another, that adopted by S. and endorsed in the H.-So. notes, is: _B. heard from his neighborhood (neighbors),_ i.e. _in his home, etc_.
A third is: _B., being at home, heard this as occurring away from home_.
The H.-So. glossary and notes conflict. [2] 'Eoletes' (224) is marked with a (?) by H.-So.; our rendering simply follows his conjecture.--Other conjectures as to 'eolet' are: (1) _voyage_, (2) _toil_, _labor_, (3) _hasty journey_. [3] The lacuna of the MS at this point has been supplied by various conjectures.
The reading adopted by H.-So. has been rendered in the above translation.
W., like H.-So., makes 'ic' the beginning of a new sentence, but, for 'helmas bæron,' he reads 'hringed stefnan.' This has the advantage of giving a parallel to 'brontne ceol' instead of a kenning for 'go.'--B puts the (?) after 'holmas', and begins a new sentence at the middle of the line.
Translate: _What warriors are ye, clad in armor, who have thus come bringing the foaming vessel over the water way, hither over the seas?
S. endorses most of what B. says, but leaves out 'on the wall' in the last sentence.
If W.'s 'hringed stefnan' be accepted, change line 51 above to, _A ring-stemmed vessel hither o'ersea_. [4] 'Seld-guma' (249) is variously rendered: (1) _housecarle_; (2) _home-stayer_; (3) _common man_.
Wood suggests _a man-at-arms in another's house_.
THE GEATS REACH HEOROT. {Beowulf courteously replies.} The chief of the strangers rendered him answer, War-troopers' leader, and word-treasure opened: {We are Geats.} "We are sprung from the lineage of the people of Geatland, And Higelac's hearth-friends.
To the noble one bear we a weighty commission, The helm of the Danemen; we shall hide, I ween, {Is it true that a monster is slaying Danish heroes?} 15 Naught of our message.
Thou know'st if it happen, As we soothly heard say, that some savage despoiler, Some hidden pursuer, on nights that are murky By deeds very direful 'mid the Danemen exhibits Hatred unheard of, horrid destruction 20 And the falling of dead.
This band, I hear, beareth no malice {I am satisfied of your good intentions, and shall lead you to the palace.} To the prince of the Scyldings.
The heroes hastened, hurried the liegemen, {The land is perhaps rolling.} Descended together, till they saw the great palace, 50 The well-fashioned wassail-hall wondrous and gleaming: {Heorot flashes on their view.} 'Mid world-folk and kindreds that was widest reputed Of halls under heaven which the hero abode in; Its lustre enlightened lands without number.
Then the battle-brave hero showed them the glittering 55 Court of the bold ones, that they easily thither Might fare on their journey; the aforementioned warrior Turning his courser, quoth as he left them: {The coast-guard, having discharged his duty, bids them God-speed.} "'Tis time I were faring; Father Almighty Grant you His grace, and give you to journey 60 Safe on your mission!
To the sea I will get me 'Gainst hostile warriors as warden to stand." [1] 'Edwendan' (280) B. takes to be the subs. 'edwenden' (cf. 1775); and 'bisigu' he takes as gen. sing., limiting 'edwenden': _If reparation for sorrows is ever to come_.
This is supported by t.B. [2] Combining the emendations of B. and t.B., we may read: _The boar-images glistened ... brilliant, protected the life of the war-mooded man_.
BEOWULF INTRODUCES HIMSELF AT THE PALACE.
I ween that from valor, nowise as outlaws, But from greatness of soul ye sought for King Hrothgar." {Beowulf replies.} Then the strength-famous earlman answer rendered, The proud-mooded Wederchief replied to his question, {We are Higelac's table-companions, and bear an important commission to your prince.} 25 Hardy 'neath helmet: "Higelac's mates are we; Beowulf hight I.
Wulfgar addressed then His friendly liegelord: "Folk of the Geatmen [14] {He thereupon urges his liegelord to receive the visitors courteously.} O'er the way of the waters are wafted hither, Faring from far-lands: the foremost in rank 45 The battle-champions Beowulf title.
HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF. {Hrothgar remembers Beowulf as a youth, and also remembers his father.} Hrothgar answered, helm of the Scyldings: "I remember this man as the merest of striplings.
His father long dead now was Ecgtheow titled, Him Hrethel the Geatman granted at home his 5 One only daughter; his battle-brave son Is come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.
Ye straightway may enter Clad in corslets, cased in your helmets, 25 To see King Hrothgar.
Here let your battle-boards, Wood-spears and war-shafts, await your conferring." The mighty one rose then, with many a liegeman, An excellent thane-group; some there did await them, And as bid of the brave one the battle-gear guarded. 30 Together they hied them, while the hero did guide them, 'Neath Heorot's roof; the high-minded went then Sturdy 'neath helmet till he stood in the building.
Beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten, His armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman): {Beowulf salutes Hrothgar, and then proceeds to boast of his youthful achievements.} 35 "Hail thou, Hrothgar!
I am Higelac's kinsman And vassal forsooth; many a wonder I dared as a stripling.
The doings of Grendel, In far-off fatherland I fully did know of: Sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth, 40 Excellent edifice, empty and useless To all the earlmen after evenlight's glimmer 'Neath heaven's bright hues hath hidden its glory.
This my earls then urged me, the most excellent of them, Carles very clever, to come and assist thee, 45 Folk-leader Hrothgar; fully they knew of {His fight with the nickers.} The strength of my body.
Thee I would therefore 55 Beg of thy bounty, Bright-Danish chieftain, Lord of the Scyldings, this single petition: Not to refuse me, defender of warriors, Friend-lord of folks, so far have I sought thee, That _I_ may unaided, my earlmen assisting me, 60 This brave-mooded war-band, purify Heorot.
Bande) ýðde, eotena cyn = _where I conquered the monster band, the race of the eotens_.
This makes no change except to read '_fífel_' for '_fífe_.' [4] 'Unforhte' (444) is much disputed.--H.-So. wavers between adj. and adv.
Gr. and B. take it as an adv. modifying _etan: Will eat the Geats fearlessly_.--Kl. considers this reading absurd, and proposes 'anforhte' = timid.--Understanding 'unforhte' as an adj. has this advantage, viz. that it gives a parallel to 'Geátena leóde': but to take it as an adv. is more natural.
Furthermore, to call the Geats 'brave' might, at this point, seem like an implied thrust at the Danes, so long helpless; while to call his own men 'timid' would be befouling his own nest. [5] For 'head-watch,' cf.
H.-So. notes and cf. v. 2910.--Th. translates: _Thou wilt not need my head to hide_ (i.e., thou wilt have no occasion to bury me, as Grendel will devour me whole).--Simrock imagines a kind of dead-watch.--Dr.
Wood suggests: _Thou wilt not have to bury so much as my head_ (for Grendel will be a thorough undertaker),--grim humor. [6] S. proposes a colon after 'nimeð' (l. 447).
This would make no essential change in the translation. [7] Owing to the vagueness of 'feorme' (451), this passage is variously translated.
In our translation, H.-So.'s glossary has been quite closely followed.
This agrees substantially with B.'s translation (P. and B.
R. translates: _Thou needst not take care longer as to the consumption of my dead body._ 'Líc' is also a crux here, as it may mean living body or dead body.
Thence flying he fled to the folk of the South-Danes, [18] The race of the Scyldings, o'er the roll of the waters; 10 I had lately begun then to govern the Danemen, The hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth, Rich in its jewels: dead was Heregar, My kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken, Healfdene his bairn.
He was better than I am! 15 That feud thereafter for a fee I compounded; O'er the weltering waters to the Wilfings I sent Ornaments old; oaths did he swear me. {Hrothgar recounts to Beowulf the horrors of Grendel's persecutions.} It pains me in spirit to any to tell it, What grief in Heorot Grendel hath caused me, 20 What horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.
Waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop; Weird hath offcast them to the clutches of Grendel.
Oft drunken with beer {My thanes have made many boasts, but have not executed them.} 25 O'er the ale-vessel promised warriors in armor They would willingly wait on the wassailing-benches A grapple with Grendel, with grimmest of edges.
A liegeman did service, [19] Who a beaker embellished bore with decorum, {The gleeman sings} 40 And gleaming-drink poured.
The gleeman sang whilom {The heroes all rejoice together.} Hearty in Heorot; there was heroes' rejoicing, A numerous war-band of Weders and Danemen. [1] B. and S. reject the reading given in H.-So., and suggested by Grtvg.
B. suggests for 457-458: wáere-ryhtum Þú, wine mín Béowulf, and for ár-stafum úsic sóhtest.
Of these the boldest is to regard 'meoto' as a verb (imperative), and read 'on sæl': _Think upon gayety, etc_.--All the renderings are unsatisfactory, the one given in our translation involving a zeugma.
And no one was able Nor lief nor loth one, in the least to dissuade you Your difficult voyage; then ye ventured a-swimming, 15 Where your arms outstretching the streams ye did cover, The mere-ways measured, mixing and stirring them, Glided the ocean; angry the waves were, With the weltering of winter.
In the water's possession, Ye toiled for a seven-night; he at swimming outdid thee, 20 In strength excelled thee.
Then early at morning On the Heathoremes' shore the holm-currents tossed him, Sought he thenceward the home of his fathers, Beloved of his liegemen, the land of the Brondings, The peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded, [20] 25 Had borough and jewels.
The pledge that he made thee {Breca outdid you entirely.} The son of Beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
A fact I allege it, 35 That greater strength in the waters I had then, Ills in the ocean, than any man else had.
We made agreement as the merest of striplings Promised each other (both of us then were {We simply kept an engagement made in early life.} Younkers in years) that we yet would adventure 40 Out on the ocean; it all we accomplished.
While swimming the sea-floods, sword-blade unscabbarded Boldly we brandished, our bodies expected To shield from the sharks.
Then we two companions stayed in the ocean {After five days the currents separated us.} Five nights together, till the currents did part us, The weltering waters, weathers the bleakest, And nethermost night, and the north-wind whistled 50 Fierce in our faces; fell were the billows.
The mere fishes' mood was mightily ruffled: And there against foemen my firm-knotted corslet, Hand-jointed, hardy, help did afford me; My battle-sark braided, brilliantly gilded, {A horrible sea-beast attacked me, but I slew him.} 55 Lay on my bosom.
BEOWULF SILENCES UNFERTH.--GLEE IS HIGH.
Came a light from the east, God's beautiful beacon; the billows subsided, That well I could see the nesses projecting, {Fortune helps the brave earl.} The blustering crags.
Weird often saveth 15 The undoomed hero if doughty his valor!
Of night-struggle harder 'Neath dome of the heaven heard I but rarely, Nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean; 20 Yet I 'scaped with my life the grip of the monsters, {After that escape I drifted to Finland.} Weary from travel.
Then the waters bare me To the land of the Finns, the flood with the current, {I have never heard of your doing any such bold deeds.} The weltering waves.
Not a word hath been told me Of deeds so daring done by thee, Unferth, 25 And of sword-terror none; never hath Breca At the play of the battle, nor either of you two, Feat so fearless performèd with weapons Glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . . [22] . . . . . . . . . . . .
I utter no boasting; {You are a slayer of brothers, and will suffer damnation, wise as you may be.} 30 Though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers, Thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get Direful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.
I tell thee in earnest, offspring of Ecglaf, Never had Grendel such numberless horrors, 35 The direful demon, done to thy liegelord, Harrying in Heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy, {Had your acts been as brave as your words, Grendel had not ravaged your land so long.} Thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.
The heroes are joyful.} Heard from Beowulf his bold resolution.
There was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter, 55 The words were winsome.
Thou shalt want no enjoyments, Survive thou safely adventure so glorious!" [1] The repetition of 'hwæðere' (574 and 578) is regarded by some scholars as a defect.
ALL SLEEP SAVE ONE. {Hrothgar retires.} Then Hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him, Folk-lord of Scyldings, forth from the building; The war-chieftain wished then Wealhtheow to look for, The queen for a bedmate.
But the Lord to them granted The weaving of war-speed, to Wederish heroes Aid and comfort, that every opponent By one man's war-might they worsted and vanquished, {God rules the world.} 40 By the might of himself; the truth is established That God Almighty hath governed for ages Kindreds and nations.
A night very lurid {Grendel comes to Heorot.} The trav'ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.
The latter takes the passage as meaning that Grendel, though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war. [2] B. in his masterly articles on Beowulf (P. and B.
XII.) rejects the division usually made at this point, 'Þá.' (711), usually rendered 'then,' he translates 'when,' and connects its clause with the foregoing sentence.
These changes he makes to reduce the number of 'cóm's' as principal verbs. (Cf. 703, 711, 721.) With all deference to this acute scholar, I must say that it seems to me that the poet is exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme event on which the whole subsequent action turns.
The monster intended some one of earthmen In the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with: {He goes towards the joyous building.} 5 He went under welkin where well he knew of The wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating, Gold-hall of earthmen.
Not the earliest occasion {This was not his first visit there.} He the home and manor of Hrothgar had sought: Ne'er found he in life-days later nor earlier 10 Hardier hero, hall-thanes[1] more sturdy!
Then came to the building the warrior marching, {His horrid fingers tear the door open.} Bereft of his joyance.
The door quickly opened On fire-hinges fastened, when his fingers had touched it; The fell one had flung then--his fury so bitter-- 15 Open the entrance.
Early thereafter The foeman trod the shining hall-pavement, {He strides furiously into the hall.} Strode he angrily; from the eyes of him glimmered A lustre unlovely likest to fire.
He beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers, 20 A circle of kinsmen sleeping together, {He exults over his supposed prey.} A throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant, He minded to sunder from each of the thanemen The life from his body, horrible demon, Ere morning came, since fate had allowed him {Fate has decreed that he shall devour no more heroes.
Beowulf suffers from suspense.} 25 The prospect of plenty.
Providence willed not To permit him any more of men under heaven To eat in the night-time.
Nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior {Beowulf and Grendel grapple.} Snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip, Forward the foeman foined with his hand; Caught he quickly the cunning deviser, 40 On his elbow he rested.
The liege-kinsman worthy {Beowulf recalls his boast of the evening, and determines to fulfil it.} Of Higelac minded his speech of the evening, 50 Stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.
His fingers crackled; the giant was outward, The earl stepped farther.
Angry they both were, Archwarders raging.[2] Rattled the building; [28] 'Twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood then The bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward, 65 Excellent earth-hall; but within and without it Was fastened so firmly in fetters of iron, By the art of the armorer.
Off from the sill there Bent mead-benches many, as men have informed me, Adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle. 70 The Scylding wise men weened ne'er before That by might and main-strength a man under heaven Might break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent, Crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fire In smoke should consume it.
The sound mounted upward {Grendel's cries terrify the Danes.} 75 Novel enough; on the North Danes fastened A terror of anguish, on all of the men there Who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining, The song of defeat from the foeman of heaven, Heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow 80 Hell-bound bewailing.
GRENDEL IS VANQUISHED. {Beowulf has no idea of letting Grendel live.} For no cause whatever would the earlmen's defender Leave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer, He deemed his existence utterly useless To men under heaven.
This plainly he saw then Who with mirth[1] of mood malice no little Had wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen 20 (To God he was hostile), that his body would fail him, But Higelac's hardy henchman and kinsman Held him by the hand; hateful to other {Grendel is sorely wounded.} Was each one if living.
A body-wound suffered The direful demon, damage incurable {His body bursts.} 25 Was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered, His body did burst.
To Beowulf was given Glory in battle; Grendel from thenceward Must flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes, Sick unto death, his dwelling must look for 30 Unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fully {The monster flees away to hide in the moors.} The end of his earthly existence was nearing, His life-days' limits.
At last for the Danemen, When the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.
The comer-from-far-land had cleansed then of evil, 35 Wise and valiant, the war-hall of Hrothgar, Saved it from violence.
To the present translator, the phrase 'módes myrðe' seems a mere padding for _gladly_; i.e., _he who gladly harassed mankind_. [30] XIV.
REJOICING OF THE DANES. {At early dawn, warriors from far and near come together to hear of the night's adventures.} In the mist of the morning many a warrior Stood round the gift-hall, as the story is told me: Folk-princes fared then from far and from near Through long-stretching journeys to look at the wonder, 5 The footprints of the foeman.
Thence the friends from of old backward turned them, And many a younker from merry adventure, Striding their stallions, stout from the seaward, 20 Heroes on horses.
There were heard very often {Beowulf is the hero of the hour.} Beowulf's praises; many often asserted That neither south nor north, in the circuit of waters, {He is regarded as a probable successor to Hrothgar.} O'er outstretching earth-plain, none other was better 'Mid bearers of war-shields, more worthy to govern, 25 'Neath the arch of the ether.
Not any, however, 'Gainst the friend-lord muttered, mocking-words uttered {But no word is uttered to derogate from the old king} Of Hrothgar the gracious (a good king he).
Then the light of the morning Was hurried and hastened.
HROTHGAR'S GRATITUDE.
Hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he, He stood by the pillar,[1] saw the steep-rising hall-roof Gleaming with gold-gems, and Grendel his hand there): {Hrothgar gives thanks for the overthrow of the monster.} "For the sight we behold now, thanks to the Wielder 5 Early be offered!
Through the might of the Wielder 15 A doughty retainer hath a deed now accomplished Which erstwhile we all with our excellent wisdom {If his mother yet liveth, well may she thank God for this son.} Failed to perform.
May affirm very truly What woman soever in all of the nations Gave birth to the child, if yet she surviveth, 20 That the long-ruling Lord was lavish to herward In the birth of the bairn.
Now, Beowulf dear, {Hereafter, Beowulf, thou shalt be my son.} Most excellent hero, I'll love thee in spirit As bairn of my body; bear well henceforward The relationship new.
Full often for lesser service I've given [34] Hero less hardy hoard-treasure precious, {Thou hast won immortal distinction.} To a weaker in war-strife.
By works of distinction Thou hast gained for thyself now that thy glory shall flourish 30 Forever and ever.
On murder-bed quickly I minded to bind him, With firm-holding fetters, that forced by my grapple 40 Low he should lie in life-and-death struggle 'Less his body escape; I was wholly unable, {I could not keep the monster from escaping, as God did not will that I should.} Since God did not will it, to keep him from going, Not held him that firmly, hated opposer; Too swift was the foeman.
This gives a parallel to 'láðes.' 'Grynna' may well be gen. pl. of 'gyrn,' by a scribal slip. [3] The H.-So punctuation has been followed; but B. has been followed in understanding 'gehwylcne' as object of 'wíd-scofen (hæfde).' Gr. construes 'wéa' as nom abs.
HROTHGAR LAVISHES GIFTS UPON HIS DELIVERER. {Heorot is adorned with hands.} Then straight was ordered that Heorot inside[1] With hands be embellished: a host of them gathered, Of men and women, who the wassailing-building The guest-hall begeared.
Full was the time then That the son of Healfdene went to the building; [36] The excellent atheling would eat of the banquet. 20 Ne'er heard I that people with hero-band larger Bare them better tow'rds their bracelet-bestower.
The laden-with-glory stooped to the bench then (Their kinsmen-companions in plenty were joyful, Many a cupful quaffing complaisantly), 25 Doughty of spirit in the high-tow'ring palace, {Hrothgar's nephew, Hrothulf, is present.} Hrothgar and Hrothulf.
Heorot then inside Was filled with friendly ones; falsehood and treachery The Folk-Scyldings now nowise did practise. {Hrothgar lavishes gifts upon Beowulf.} Then the offspring of Healfdene offered to Beowulf 30 A golden standard, as reward for the victory, A banner embossed, burnie and helmet; Many men saw then a song-famous weapon Borne 'fore the hero.
One difficult point is to find a subject for 'gesacan.' Some say 'he'; others supply 'each,' _i.e., every soul-bearer ... must gain the inevitable place_.
The genitives in this case are partitive.--If 'he' be subj., the genitives are dependent on 'gearwe' (= prepared).--The 'he' itself is disputed, some referring it to Grendel; but B. takes it as involved in the parenthesis.
Sure Hildeburg needed not mention approving The faith of the Jutemen: though blameless entirely, {Queen Hildeburg is not only wife of Finn, but a kinswoman of the murdered Hnæf.} When shields were shivered she was shorn of her darlings, Of bairns and brothers: they bent to their fate 25 With war-spear wounded; woe was that woman.
Accomplished the oath was, 55 And treasure of gold from the hoard was uplifted. {Danish warriors are burned on a funeral-pyre.} The best of the Scylding braves was then fully Prepared for the pile; at the pyre was seen clearly The blood-gory burnie, the boar with his gilding, The iron-hard swine, athelings many 60 Fatally wounded; no few had been slaughtered.
Hildeburg bade then, at the burning of Hnæf, [39] {Queen Hildeburg has her son burnt along with Hnæf.} The bairn of her bosom to bear to the fire, That his body be burned and borne to the pyre.
The woe-stricken woman wept on his shoulder,[2] 65 In measures lamented; upmounted the hero.[3] The greatest of dead-fires curled to the welkin, On the hill's-front crackled; heads were a-melting, Wound-doors bursting, while the blood was a-coursing From body-bite fierce.
THE FINN EPISODE (_continued_).--THE BANQUET CONTINUES. {The survivors go to Friesland, the home of Finn.} "Then the warriors departed to go to their dwellings, Reaved of their friends, Friesland to visit, Their homes and high-city.
Then winter was gone, Earth's bosom was lovely; the exile would get him, {He devises schemes of vengeance.} The guest from the palace; on grewsomest vengeance 15 He brooded more eager than on oversea journeys, Whe'r onset-of-anger he were able to 'complish, The bairns of the Jutemen therein to remember.
Nowise refused he the duties of liegeman When Hun of the Frisians the battle-sword Láfing, 20 Fairest of falchions, friendly did give him: Its edges were famous in folk-talk of Jutland.
And savage sword-fury seized in its clutches Bold-mooded Finn where he bode in his palace, {Guthlaf and Oslaf revenge Hnæf's slaughter.} When the grewsome grapple Guthlaf and Oslaf 25 Had mournfully mentioned, the mere-journey over, For sorrows half-blamed him; the flickering spirit Could not bide in his bosom.
They ferried to Daneland The excellent woman on oversea journey, {The lay is concluded, and the main story is resumed.} 35 Led her to their land-folk." The lay was concluded, The gleeman's recital.
Shouts again rose then, Bench-glee resounded, bearers then offered {Skinkers carry round the beaker.} Wine from wonder-vats.
Wealhtheo advanced then Going 'neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated [41] {Queen Wealhtheow greets Hrothgar, as he sits beside Hrothulf, his nephew.} 40 Uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual, True each to the other.
Be kind to the Geatmen, 50 In gifts not niggardly; anear and afar now Peace thou enjoyest.
Report hath informed me Thou'lt have for a bairn the battle-brave hero.
Now is Heorot cleansèd, ring-palace gleaming; {Have as much joy as possible in thy hall, once more purified.} Give while thou mayest many rewards, 55 And bequeath to thy kinsmen kingdom and people, On wending thy way to the Wielder's splendor.
The latter verse is undisputed; and, for the former, 'elne' would be as possible as 'ealles,' and 'unflitme' is well supported.
Accepting 'elne unflitme' for both, I would suggest '_very peaceably_' for both places: (1) _Finn to Hengest very peaceably vowed with oaths_, etc. (2) _Hengest then still the slaughter-stained winter remained there with Finn very peaceably_.
BEOWULF RECEIVES FURTHER HONOR. {More gifts are offered Beowulf.} A beaker was borne him, and bidding to quaff it Graciously given, and gold that was twisted Pleasantly proffered, a pair of arm-jewels, [42] Rings and corslet, of collars the greatest 5 I've heard of 'neath heaven.
Of heroes not any More splendid from jewels have I heard 'neath the welkin, {A famous necklace is referred to, in comparison with the gems presented to Beowulf.} Since Hama off bore the Brosingmen's necklace, The bracteates and jewels, from the bright-shining city,[1] Eormenric's cunning craftiness fled from, 10 Chose gain everlasting.
The choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.
Wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she: {Queen Wealhtheow magnifies Beowulf's achievements.} 25 "This collar enjoy thou, Beowulf worthy, Young man, in safety, and use thou this armor, Gems of the people, and prosper thou fully, Show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemen Mild with instruction!
I'll mind thy requital. 30 Thou hast brought it to pass that far and near Forever and ever earthmen shall honor thee, Even so widely as ocean surroundeth The blustering bluffs.
Be, while thou livest, [43] A wealth-blessèd atheling.
I wish thee most truly {May gifts never fail thee.} 35 Jewels and treasure.
The liegemen are peaceful, The war-troops ready: well-drunken heroes,[3] 40 Do as I bid ye." Then she went to the settle.
There was choicest of banquets, wine drank the heroes: {They little know of the sorrow in store for them.} Weird they knew not, destiny cruel, As to many an earlman early it happened, When evening had come and Hrothgar had parted 45 Off to his manor, the mighty to slumber.
Warriors unnumbered warded the building As erst they did often: the ale-settle bared they, 'Twas covered all over with beds and pillows. {A doomed thane is there with them.} Doomed unto death, down to his slumber 50 Bowed then a beer-thane.
Moreover, what has the idea of single combat to do with B. 1247 ff.?
The poet is giving an inventory of the arms and armor which they lay aside on retiring, and he closes his narration by saying that they were _always prepared for battle both at home and on the march_. [44] XX.
His mother moreover {Grendel's mother comes to avenge her son.} Eager and gloomy was anxious to go on Her mournful mission, mindful of vengeance For the death of her son.
She came then to Heorot [45] 30 Where the Armor-Dane earlmen all through the building Were lying in slumber.
Soon there became then Return[2] to the nobles, when the mother of Grendel Entered the folk-hall; the fear was less grievous By even so much as the vigor of maidens, 35 War-strength of women, by warrior is reckoned, When well-carved weapon, worked with the hammer, Blade very bloody, brave with its edges, Strikes down the boar-sign that stands on the helmet.
Then the hard-edgèd weapon was heaved in the building,[3] 40 The brand o'er the benches, broad-lindens many Hand-fast were lifted; for helmet he recked not, For armor-net broad, whom terror laid hold of.
Beowulf was absent, {Beowulf was asleep in another part of the palace.} But another apartment was erstwhile devoted To the glory-decked Geatman when gold was distributed.
The hand that was famous She grasped in its gore;[4] grief was renewed then [46] 55 In homes and houses: 'twas no happy arrangement In both of the quarters to barter and purchase With lives of their friends.
Then the well-agèd ruler, The gray-headed war-thane, was woful in spirit, When his long-trusted liegeman lifeless he knew of, {Beowulf is sent for.} 60 His dearest one gone.
Quick from a room was Beowulf brought, brave and triumphant.
As day was dawning in the dusk of the morning, {He comes at Hrothgar's summons.} Went then that earlman, champion noble, Came with comrades, where the clever one bided 65 Whether God all gracious would grant him a respite After the woe he had suffered.
So 20_15 below: _ravaged the desert_. [2] For 'sóna' (1281), t.B. suggests 'sára,' limiting 'edhwyrft.' Read then: _Return of sorrows to the nobles, etc_.
This emendation supplies the syntactical gap after 'edhwyrft.' [3] Some authorities follow Grein's lexicon in treating 'heard ecg' as an adj. limiting 'sweord': H.-So. renders it as a subst. (So v. 1491.) The sense of the translation would be the same. [4] B. suggests 'under hróf genam' (v. 1303).
This emendation, as well as an emendation with (?) to v. 739, he offers, because 'under' baffles him in both passages.
All we need is to take 'under' in its secondary meaning of 'in,' which, though not given by Grein, occurs in the literature.
Cf. modern Eng. 'in such circumstances,' which interchanges in good usage with 'under such circumstances.' [5] For 'néod-laðu' (1321) C. suggests 'néad-láðum,' and translates: _asked whether the night had been pleasant to him after crushing-hostility_.
HROTHGAR'S ACCOUNT OF THE MONSTERS. {Hrothgar laments the death of Æschere, his shoulder-companion.} Hrothgar rejoined, helm of the Scyldings: "Ask not of joyance!
They guard the wolf-coverts, Lands inaccessible, wind-beaten nesses, Fearfullest fen-deeps, where a flood from the mountains 'Neath mists of the nesses netherward rattles, 40 The stream under earth: not far is it henceward Measured by mile-lengths that the mere-water standeth, Which forests hang over, with frost-whiting covered,[4] [48] A firm-rooted forest, the floods overshadow.
Uncanny the place is: Thence upward ascendeth the surging of waters, Wan to the welkin, when the wind is stirring The weathers unpleasing, till the air groweth gloomy, {To thee only can I look for assistance.} 55 And the heavens lower.
The abode thou know'st not, The dangerous place where thou'rt able to meet with The sin-laden hero: seek if thou darest!
So v. 1888, where 'sé Þe' refers to 'yldo.' [4] For 'hrímge' in the H.-So. edition, Gr. and others read 'hrínde' (=hrínende), and translate: _which rustling forests overhang_.
Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow's son: {Beowulf exhorts the old king to arouse himself for action.} "Grieve not, O wise one! for each it is better, His friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him; Each of us must the end-day abide of 5 His earthly existence; who is able accomplish Glory ere death!
To battle-thane noble Lifeless lying, 'tis at last most fitting.
Arise, O king, quick let us hasten To look at the footprint of the kinsman of Grendel! 10 I promise thee this now: to his place he'll escape not, To embrace of the earth, nor to mountainous forest, Nor to depths of the ocean, wherever he wanders. [49] Practice thou now patient endurance Of each of thy sorrows, as I hope for thee soothly!" {Hrothgar rouses himself.
His horse is brought.} 15 Then up sprang the old one, the All-Wielder thanked he, Ruler Almighty, that the man had outspoken.
Then for Hrothgar a war-horse was decked with a bridle, Curly-maned courser.
The clever folk-leader {They start on the track of the female monster.} Stately proceeded: stepped then an earl-troop 20 Of linden-wood bearers.
The current was seething With blood and with gore (the troopers gazed on it). 40 The horn anon sang the battle-song ready.
One did the Geat-prince [50] Sunder from earth-joys, with arrow from bowstring, 50 From his sea-struggle tore him, that the trusty war-missile {The dead beast is a poor swimmer} Pierced to his vitals; he proved in the currents Less doughty at swimming whom death had offcarried.
Not so with the other When he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.
Early she found then who fifty of winters 25 The course of the currents kept in her fury, Grisly and greedy, that the grim one's dominion [52] {Grendel's mother knows that some one has reached her domains.} Some one of men from above was exploring.
Forth did she grab them, grappled the warrior With horrible clutches; yet no sooner she injured 30 His body unscathèd: the burnie out-guarded, That she proved but powerless to pierce through the armor, The limb-mail locked, with loath-grabbing fingers.
The sea-wolf bare then, when bottomward came she, {She grabs him, and bears him to her den.} The ring-prince homeward, that he after was powerless 35 (He had daring to do it) to deal with his weapons, But many a mere-beast tormented him swimming, {Sea-monsters bite and strike him.} Flood-beasts no few with fierce-biting tusks did Break through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.
The earl then discovered he was down in some cavern 40 Where no water whatever anywise harmed him, And the clutch of the current could come not anear him, Since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleaming Fire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.
The good one saw then the sea-bottom's monster, {Beowulf attacks the mother of Grendel.} 45 The mighty mere-woman; he made a great onset With weapon-of-battle, his hand not desisted From striking, that war-blade struck on her head then A battle-song greedy.
The stranger perceived then {The sword will not bite.} The sword would not bite, her life would not injure, 50 But the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened: Erst had it often onsets encountered, Oft cloven the helmet, the fated one's armor: 'Twas the first time that ever the excellent jewel Had failed of its fame.
The lord of the War-Geats [53] (He shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder[2] The mother of Grendel; then mighty in struggle 65 Swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled, That she fell to the floor.
With furious grapple {Beowulf falls.} She gave him requital[3] early thereafter, And stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriors Faint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces, {The monster sits on him with drawn sword.} 70 Foot-going champion.
Then she sat on the hall-guest And wielded her war-knife wide-bladed, flashing, For her son would take vengeance, her one only bairn. {His armor saves his life.} His breast-armor woven bode on his shoulder; It guarded his life, the entrance defended 75 'Gainst sword-point and edges.
BEOWULF IS DOUBLE-CONQUEROR. {Beowulf grasps a giant-sword,} Then he saw mid the war-gems a weapon of victory, An ancient giant-sword, of edges a-doughty, Glory of warriors: of weapons 'twas choicest, Only 'twas larger than any man else was [54] 5 Able to bear to the battle-encounter, The good and splendid work of the giants.
He grasped then the sword-hilt, knight of the Scyldings, Bold and battle-grim, brandished his ring-sword, Hopeless of living, hotly he smote her, 10 That the fiend-woman's neck firmly it grappled, {and fells the female monster.} Broke through her bone-joints, the bill fully pierced her Fate-cursèd body, she fell to the ground then: The hand-sword was bloody, the hero exulted.
The brand was brilliant, brightly it glimmered, 15 Just as from heaven gemlike shineth The torch of the firmament.
He glanced 'long the building, And turned by the wall then, Higelac's vassal Raging and wrathful raised his battle-sword Strong by the handle.
The edge was not useless 20 To the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished to Give Grendel requital for the many assaults he Had worked on the West-Danes not once, but often, When he slew in slumber the subjects of Hrothgar, Swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers 25 Of the folk of the Danemen, and fully as many Carried away, a horrible prey.
He gave him requital, grim-raging champion, {Beowulf sees the body of Grendel, and cuts off his head.} When he saw on his rest-place weary of conflict Grendel lying, of life-joys bereavèd, 30 As the battle at Heorot erstwhile had scathed him; His body far bounded, a blow when he suffered, Death having seized him, sword-smiting heavy, And he cut off his head then.
From the ness-edge departed The bold-mooded Scyldings; the gold-friend of heroes Homeward betook him.
The strangers sat down then 45 Soul-sick, sorrowful, the sea-waves regarding: They wished and yet weened not their well-loved friend-lord {The giant-sword melts.} To see any more.
The sword-blade began then, The blood having touched it, contracting and shriveling With battle-icicles; 'twas a wonderful marvel 50 That it melted entirely, likest to ice when The Father unbindeth the bond of the frost and Unwindeth the wave-bands, He who wieldeth dominion Of times and of tides: a truth-firm Creator.
Nor took he of jewels more in the dwelling, 55 Lord of the Weders, though they lay all around him, Than the head and the handle handsome with jewels; [56] The brand early melted, burnt was the weapon:[2] So hot was the blood, the strange-spirit poisonous {The hero swims back to the realms of day.} That in it did perish.
He early swam off then 60 Who had bided in combat the carnage of haters, Went up through the ocean; the eddies were cleansèd, The spacious expanses, when the spirit from farland His life put aside and this short-lived existence.
The seamen's defender came swimming to land then 65 Doughty of spirit, rejoiced in his sea-gift, The bulky burden which he bore in his keeping.
The excellent vassals advanced then to meet him, To God they were grateful, were glad in their chieftain, That to see him safe and sound was granted them. 70 From the high-minded hero, then, helmet and burnie Were speedily loosened: the ocean was putrid, The water 'neath welkin weltered with gore.
In the two Beowulf passages, the þæt-clause is anticipated by 'þæs,' which is clearly a gen. of the thing agreed on.
The first passage (v. 1599 (b)-1600) I translate literally: _Then many agreed upon this (namely), that the sea-wolf had killed him_.
The second passage (v. 2025 (b)-2027): _She is promised ...; to this the friend of the Scyldings has agreed, etc_.
By emending 'is' instead of 'wæs' (2025), the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.
In v. 1997 ff. this same idiom occurs, and was noticed in B.'s great article on Beowulf, which appeared about the time I published my reading of 1599 and 2027.
Translate 1997 then: _Wouldst let the South-Danes themselves decide about their struggle with Grendel_.
With such collateral support as that afforded by B. (P. and B.
XII. 97), I have no hesitation in departing from H.-So., my usual guide.
The idiom above treated runs through A.-S., Old Saxon, and other Teutonic languages, and should be noticed in the lexicons. [2] 'Bróden-mæl' is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeened sword.
Translate: _The damaskeened sword burned up_.
Cf. 25_16 and note. [3] 'Cyning-balde' (1635) is the much-disputed reading of K. and Th.
To render this, "_nobly bold_," "_excellently bold_," have been suggested.
B. would read 'cyning-holde' (cf. 290), and render: _Men well-disposed towards the king carried the head, etc._ 'Cynebealde,' says t.B., endorsing Gr.
I failed in the battle Aught to accomplish, aided by Hrunting, 10 Though that weapon was worthy, but the Wielder of earth-folk {God was fighting with me.} Gave me willingly to see on the wall a Heavy old hand-sword hanging in splendor (He guided most often the lorn and the friendless), That I swung as a weapon.
The wards of the house then 15 I killed in the conflict (when occasion was given me).
Then the battle-sword burned, the brand that was lifted,[1] As the blood-current sprang, hottest of war-sweats; Seizing the hilt, from my foes I offbore it; I avenged as I ought to their acts of malignity, 20 The murder of Danemen.
So in letters of rune on the clasp of the handle Gleaming and golden, 'twas graven exactly, 45 Set forth and said, whom that sword had been made for, Finest of irons, who first it was wrought for, Wreathed at its handle and gleaming with serpents.
The wise one then said (silent they all were) {Hrothgar praises Beowulf.} Son of old Healfdene: "He may say unrefuted 50 Who performs 'mid the folk-men fairness and truth (The hoary old ruler remembers the past), That better by birth is this bairn of the nobles!
Thy fame is extended through far-away countries, Good friend Beowulf, o'er all of the races, 55 Thou holdest all firmly, hero-like strength with Prudence of spirit.
I'll prove myself grateful As before we agreed on; thou granted for long shalt Become a great comfort to kinsmen and comrades, {Heremod's career is again contrasted with Beowulf's.} A help unto heroes.
Though laden with winters, I have sung thee these measures. 'Tis a marvel to tell it, {Hrothgar moralizes.} 75 How all-ruling God from greatness of spirit Giveth wisdom to children of men, Manor and earlship: all things He ruleth.
His end-day anear, 10 It afterward happens that the bodily-dwelling Fleetingly fadeth, falls into ruins; Another lays hold who doleth the ornaments, The nobleman's jewels, nothing lamenting, Heedeth no terror.
Oh, Beowulf dear, 15 Best of the heroes, from bale-strife defend thee, And choose thee the better, counsels eternal; {Be not over proud: life is fleeting, and its strength soon wasteth away.} Beware of arrogance, world-famous champion!
So the Danes a half-century I held under heaven, helped them in struggles 'Gainst many a race in middle-earth's regions, With ash-wood and edges, that enemies none On earth molested me.
Lo! offsetting change, now, [61] {Sorrow after joy.} 30 Came to my manor, grief after joyance, When Grendel became my constant visitor, Inveterate hater: I from that malice Continually travailed with trouble no little.
Thanks be to God that I gained in my lifetime, 35 To the Lord everlasting, to look on the gory Head with mine eyes, after long-lasting sorrow!
Go to the bench now, battle-adornèd Joy in the feasting: of jewels in common We'll meet with many when morning appeareth." 40 The Geatman was gladsome, ganged he immediately To go to the bench, as the clever one bade him.
Then again as before were the famous-for-prowess, Hall-inhabiters, handsomely banqueted, Feasted anew.
The night-veil fell then 45 Dark o'er the warriors.
The courtiers rose then; The gray-haired was anxious to go to his slumbers, The hoary old Scylding.
Hankered the Geatman, {Beowulf is fagged, and seeks rest.} The champion doughty, greatly, to rest him: An earlman early outward did lead him, 50 Fagged from his faring, from far-country springing, Who for etiquette's sake all of a liegeman's Needs regarded, such as seamen at that time Were bounden to feel.
The big-hearted rested; The building uptowered, spacious and gilded, 55 The guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad raven Blithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.
Then the bright-shining sun o'er the bottoms came going;[2] The warriors hastened, the heads of the peoples Were ready to go again to their peoples, {The Geats prepare to leave Dane-land.} 60 The high-mooded farer would faraway thenceward Look for his vessel.
Beowulf thanks him.} Offspring of Ecglaf, off to bear Hrunting, To take his weapon, his well-beloved iron; He him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted 65 The war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words then The blade of the brand: 'twas a brave-mooded hero.
If, however, the suggestions of Grdtvg. and M. be accepted, the passage will read: _Then the brave one (_i.e._ Beowulf) commanded that Hrunting be borne to the son of Ecglaf (Unferth), bade him take his sword, his dear weapon; he (B.) thanked him (U.) for the loan, etc_.
SORROW AT PARTING. {Beowulf's farewell.} Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow's offspring: "We men of the water wish to declare now Fared from far-lands, we're firmly determined To seek King Higelac.
Here have we fitly 5 Been welcomed and feasted, as heart would desire it; Good was the greeting.
If greater affection I am anywise able ever on earth to Gain at thy hands, ruler of heroes, Than yet I have done, I shall quickly be ready {I shall be ever ready to aid thee.} 10 For combat and conflict.
The man was so dear that he failed to suppress the 60 Emotions that moved him, but in mood-fetters fastened {The old king is deeply grieved to part with his benefactor.} The long-famous hero longeth in secret Deep in his spirit for the dear-beloved man Though not a blood-kinsman.
Beowulf thenceward, Gold-splendid warrior, walked o'er the meadows 65 Exulting in treasure: the sea-going vessel Riding at anchor awaited its owner.
But the weeping is mentioned before the 'expectations': the tears may have been due to many emotions, especially gratitude, struggling for expression.
THE HOMEWARD JOURNEY.--THE TWO QUEENS.
Then the band of very valiant retainers Came to the current; they were clad all in armor, {The coast-guard again.} In link-woven burnies.
The land-warder noticed The return of the earlmen, as he erstwhile had seen them; 5 Nowise with insult he greeted the strangers From the naze of the cliff, but rode on to meet them; Said the bright-armored visitors[1] vesselward traveled [65] Welcome to Weders.
Along by the mast then a sea-garment fluttered, A rope-fastened sail.
The sea-boat resounded, The wind o'er the waters the wave-floater nowise Kept from its journey; the sea-goer traveled, 20 The foamy-necked floated forth o'er the currents, The well-fashioned vessel o'er the ways of the ocean, {The Geats see their own land again.} Till they came within sight of the cliffs of the Geatmen, The well-known headlands.
Bade he up then take the treasure of princes, Plate-gold and fretwork; not far was it thence To go off in search of the giver of jewels: [66] Hrethel's son Higelac at home there remaineth,[4] 35 Himself with his comrades close to the sea-coast.
Such no womanly custom For a lady to practise, though lovely her person, That a weaver-of-peace, on pretence of anger A belovèd liegeman of life should deprive.
Accepting this, we may render: _He said the bright-armored warriors were going to their vessel, welcome, etc_. (Cf. 1804.) [2] R. suggests, 'Gewát him on naca,' and renders: _The vessel set out, to drive on the sea, the Dane-country left_. 'On' bears the alliteration; cf. 'on hafu' (2524).
This has some advantages over the H.-So. reading; viz. (1) It adds nothing to the text; (2) it makes 'naca' the subject, and thus brings the passage into keeping with the context, where the poet has exhausted his vocabulary in detailing the actions of the vessel.--B.'s emendation (cf.
XII. 97) is violent. [3] B. translates: _Who for a long time, ready at the coast, had looked out into the distance eagerly for the dear men_.
This changes the syntax of 'léofra manna.' [4] For 'wunað' (v. 1924) several eminent critics suggest 'wunade' (=remained).
This makes the passage much clearer. [5] Why should such a woman be described as an 'excellent' queen?
C. suggests 'frécnu' = dangerous, bold. [6] For 'an dæges' various readings have been offered.
If 'and-éges' be accepted, the sentence will read: _No hero ... dared look upon her, eye to eye_.
If 'án-dæges' be adopted, translate: _Dared look upon her the whole day_.
Then the brave one departed, his band along with him, {Beowulf and his party seek Higelac.} Seeking the sea-shore, the sea-marches treading, The wide-stretching shores.
The world-candle glimmered, The sun from the southward; they proceeded then onward, 5 Early arriving where they heard that the troop-lord, Ongentheow's slayer, excellent, youthful Folk-prince and warrior was distributing jewels, Close in his castle.
The coming of Beowulf Was announced in a message quickly to Higelac, 10 That the folk-troop's defender forth to the palace The linden-companion alive was advancing, Secure from the combat courtward a-going.
The building was early inward made ready For the foot-going guests as the good one had ordered. {Beowulf sits by his liegelord.} 15 He sat by the man then who had lived through the struggle, Kinsman by kinsman, when the king of the people Had in lordly language saluted the dear one, {Queen Hygd receives the heroes.} In words that were formal.
The daughter of Hæreth Coursed through the building, carrying mead-cups:[1] [68] 20 She loved the retainers, tendered the beakers To the high-minded Geatmen.
Higelac 'gan then {Higelac is greatly interested in Beowulf's adventures.} Pleasantly plying his companion with questions In the high-towering palace.
A curious interest Tormented his spirit, what meaning to see in 25 The Sea-Geats' adventures: "Beowulf worthy, {Give an account of thy adventures, Beowulf dear.} How throve your journeying, when thou thoughtest suddenly Far o'er the salt-streams to seek an encounter, A battle at Heorot?
Hast bettered for Hrothgar, The famous folk-leader, his far-published sorrows 30 Any at all?
In agony-billows {My suspense has been great.} I mused upon torture, distrusted the journey Of the belovèd liegeman; I long time did pray thee By no means to seek out the murderous spirit, To suffer the South-Danes themselves to decide on[2] 35 Grappling with Grendel.
XII. 97. [3] For 'fenne,' supplied by Grdtvg., B. suggests 'fácne' (cf.
BEOWULF NARRATES HIS ADVENTURES TO HIGELAC.
So the Heathobards' favor not faithful I reckon, 35 Their part in the treaty not true to the Danemen, Their friendship not fast.
I further shall tell thee [71] {Having made these preliminary statements, I will now tell thee of Grendel, the monster.} More about Grendel, that thou fully mayst hear, Ornament-giver, what afterward came from The hand-rush of heroes.
Not the earlier off empty of hand did The bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of evils, 50 Wish to escape from the gold-giver's palace, But sturdy of strength he strove to outdo me, Hand-ready grappled.
He left and retreated, He lived his life a little while longer: 65 Yet his right-hand guarded his footstep in Heorot, And sad-mooded thence to the sea-bottom fell he, Mournful in mind.
For the might-rush of battle {King Hrothgar lavished gifts upon me.} The friend of the Scyldings, with gold that was plated, With ornaments many, much requited me, 70 When daylight had dawned, and down to the banquet We had sat us together.
There was chanting and joyance: The age-stricken Scylding asked many questions [72] And of old-times related; oft light-ringing harp-strings, Joy-telling wood, were touched by the brave one; 75 Now he uttered measures, mourning and truthful, Then the large-hearted land-king a legend of wonder Truthfully told us.
Now troubled with years {The old king is sad over the loss of his youthful vigor.} The age-hoary warrior afterward began to Mourn for the might that marked him in youth-days; 80 His breast within boiled, when burdened with winters Much he remembered.
From morning till night then We joyed us therein as etiquette suffered, Till the second night season came unto earth-folk.
Then early thereafter, the mother of Grendel {Grendel's mother.} 85 Was ready for vengeance, wretched she journeyed; Her son had death ravished, the wrath of the Geatmen.
To Hrothgar 'twas saddest Of pains that ever had preyed on the chieftain; By the life of thee the land-prince then me[3] Besought very sadly, in sea-currents' eddies To display my prowess, to peril my safety, 100 Might-deeds accomplish; much did he promise. {I sought the creature in her den,} I found then the famous flood-current's cruel, Horrible depth-warder.
"So the belovèd land-prince lived in decorum; I had missed no rewards, no meeds of my prowess, But he gave me jewels, regarding my wishes, Healfdene his bairn; I'll bring them to thee, then, {All my gifts I lay at thy feet.} 5 Atheling of earlmen, offer them gladly.
Hold all in joyance!" I heard that there followed hard on the jewels Two braces of stallions of striking resemblance, 20 Dappled and yellow; he granted him usance Of horses and treasures.
So a kinsman should bear him, No web of treachery weave for another, Nor by cunning craftiness cause the destruction {Higelac loves his nephew Beowulf.} Of trusty companion.
So Ecgtheow's bairn brave did prove him, {Beowulf is famous.} War-famous man, by deeds that were valiant, He lived in honor, belovèd companions 35 Slew not carousing; his mood was not cruel, But by hand-strength hugest of heroes then living The brave one retained the bountiful gift that The Lord had allowed him.
Common to both was land 'mong the people, [75] Estate and inherited rights and possessions, To the second one specially spacious dominions, To the one who was better.
It afterward happened 55 In days that followed, befell the battle-thanes, {After Heardred's death, Beowulf becomes king.} After Higelac's death, and when Heardred was murdered With weapons of warfare 'neath well-covered targets, When valiant battlemen in victor-band sought him, War-Scylfing heroes harassed the nephew 60 Of Hereric in battle.
To Beowulf's keeping Turned there in time extensive dominions: {He rules the Geats fifty years.} He fittingly ruled them a fifty of winters (He a man-ruler wise was, manor-ward old) till A certain one 'gan, on gloom-darkening nights, a {The fire-drake.} 65 Dragon, to govern, who guarded a treasure, A high-rising stone-cliff, on heath that was grayish: A path 'neath it lay, unknown unto mortals.
Some one of earthmen entered the mountain, The heathenish hoard laid hold of with ardor; 70 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * [1] This verse B. renders, '_Now serve I again thee alone as my gracious king_.' [2] For 'eafor' (2153), Kl. suggests 'ealdor.' Translate then: _Bade the prince then to bear in the banner, battle-high helmet, etc_.
THE HOARD AND THE DRAGON. * * * * * * * He sought of himself who sorely did harm him, But, for need very pressing, the servant of one of The sons of the heroes hate-blows evaded, 5 Seeking for shelter and the sin-driven warrior Took refuge within there.
He early looked in it, * * * * * * * * * * * * * * [76] * * * * * * when the onset surprised him, {The hoard.} 10 He a gem-vessel saw there: many of suchlike Ancient ornaments in the earth-cave were lying, As in days of yore some one of men of Illustrious lineage, as a legacy monstrous, There had secreted them, careful and thoughtful, 15 Dear-valued jewels.
Lo! erst in thy bosom Worthy men won them; war-death hath ravished, Perilous life-bale, all my warriors, 30 Liegemen belovèd, who this life have forsaken, Who hall-pleasures saw.
No sword-bearer have I, And no one to burnish the gold-plated vessel, The high-valued beaker: my heroes are vanished.
The hardy helmet behung with gilding 35 Shall be reaved of its riches: the ring-cleansers slumber Who were charged to have ready visors-for-battle, And the burnie that bided in battle-encounter [77] O'er breaking of war-shields the bite of the edges Moulds with the hero.
The ring-twisted armor, 40 Its lord being lifeless, no longer may journey Hanging by heroes; harp-joy is vanished, The rapture of glee-wood, no excellent falcon Swoops through the building, no swift-footed charger Grindeth the gravel.
A grievous destruction 45 No few of the world-folk widely hath scattered!" So, woful of spirit one after all Lamented mournfully, moaning in sadness By day and by night, till death with its billows {The fire-dragon} Dashed on his spirit.
Then the hoard[5] was discovered, The treasure was taken, his petition was granted {The hero plunders the dragon's den} The lorn-mooded liegeman.
His lord regarded 65 The old-work of earth-folk--'twas the earliest occasion.
When the dragon awoke, the strife was renewed there; He snuffed 'long the stone then, stout-hearted found he [78] The footprint of foeman; too far had he gone With cunning craftiness close to the head of 70 The fire-spewing dragon.
So undoomed he may 'scape from Anguish and exile with ease who possesseth The favor of Heaven.
Not fain did the hoard-ward Wait until evening; then the ward of the barrow Was angry in spirit, the loathèd one wished to Pay for the dear-valued drink-cup with fire. 85 Then the day was done as the dragon would have it, He no longer would wait on the wall, but departed {The dragon is infuriated.} Fire-impelled, flaming.
Fearful the start was To earls in the land, as it early thereafter To their giver-of-gold was grievously ended. [1] For 'long-gestréona,' B. suggests 'láengestréona,' and renders, _Of fleeting treasures_.
S. accepts H.'s 'long-gestréona,' but renders, _The treasure long in accumulating_. [2] For 'hard-fyrdne' (2246), B. first suggested 'hard-fyndne,' rendering: _A heap of treasures ... so great that its equal would be hard to find_.
B. emends and renders: _Nor was there any man in that desert who rejoiced in conflict, in battle-work._ That is, the hoard-ward could not find any one who had disturbed his slumbers, for no warrior was there, t.B.'s emendation would give substantially the same translation. [7] 'Sinc-fæt' (2301): this word both here and in v. 2232, t.B. renders 'treasure.' XXXIII.
The fire-spewing dragon fully had wasted The fastness of warriors, the water-land outward, The manor with fire.
The folk-ruling hero, 25 Prince of the Weders, was planning to wreak him.
The warmen's defender bade them to make him, Earlmen's atheling, an excellent war-shield {He orders an iron shield to be made from him, wood is useless.} Wholly of iron: fully he knew then That wood from the forest was helpless to aid him, 30 Shield against fire.
BEOWULF SEEKS THE DRAGON.--BEOWULF'S REMINISCENCES.
He planned requital for the folk-leader's ruin In days thereafter, to Eadgils the wretched Becoming an enemy.
Then the battle-brave atheling sat on the naze-edge, While the gold-friend of Geatmen gracious saluted His fireside-companions: woe was his spirit, 30 Death-boding, wav'ring; Weird very near him, Who must seize the old hero, his soul-treasure look for, Dragging aloof his life from his body: Not flesh-hidden long was the folk-leader's spirit.
Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow's son: {Beowulf's retrospect.} 35 "I survived in my youth-days many a conflict, Hours of onset: that all I remember.
I was seven-winters old when the jewel-prince took me, High-lord of heroes, at the hands of my father, Hrethel the hero-king had me in keeping, {Hrethel took me when I was seven.} 40 Gave me treasure and feasting, our kinship remembered; Not ever was I _any_ less dear to him {He treated me as a son.} Knight in the boroughs, than the bairns of his household, Herebald and Hæthcyn and Higelac mine.
Every morning his offspring's departure Is constant recalled: he cares not to wait for 60 The birth of an heir in his borough-enclosures, Since that one through death-pain the deeds hath experienced.
Hrethrel had certainly never seen a son of his ride on the gallows to feed the crows.
The passage beginning 'swá bið géomorlic' seems to be an effort to reach a full simile, 'as ... so.' 'As it is mournful for an old man, etc. ... so the defence of the Weders (2463) bore heart-sorrow, etc.' The verses 2451 to 2463-1/2 would be parenthetical, the poet's feelings being so strong as to interrupt the simile.
The punctuation of the fourth edition would be better--a comma after 'galgan' (2447).
The translation may be indicated as follows: _(Just) as it is sad for an old man to see his son ride young on the gallows when he himself is uttering mournful measures, a sorrowful song, while his son hangs for a comfort to the raven, and he, old and infirm, cannot render him any kelp--(he is constantly reminded, etc., 2451-2463)--so the defence of the Weders, etc._ XXXV.
REMINISCENCES (_continued_).--BEOWULF'S LAST BATTLE.
"He seeks then his chamber, singeth a woe-song One for the other; all too extensive Seemed homesteads and plains.
This my kinsman avengèd, 20 The feud and fury, as 'tis found on inquiry, Though one of them paid it with forfeit of life-joys, {Hæthcyn's fall at Ravenswood.} With price that was hard: the struggle became then Fatal to Hæthcyn, lord of the Geatmen.
At the wall 'twill befall us as Fate decreeth, {Let Fate decide between us.} 65 Each one's Creator.
I am eager in spirit, With the wingèd war-hero to away with all boasting.
Bide on the barrow with burnies protected, {Wait ye here till the battle is over.} Earls in armor, which of _us_ two may better Bear his disaster, when the battle is over. 70 'Tis no matter of yours, and man cannot do it, But me and me only, to measure his strength with The monster of malice, might-deeds to 'complish.
I with prowess shall gain the gold, or the battle, [86] Direful death-woe will drag off your ruler!" 75 The mighty champion rose by his shield then, Brave under helmet, in battle-mail went he 'Neath steep-rising stone-cliffs, the strength he relied on Of one man alone: no work for a coward.
The prince of the Weders Caused then that words came from his bosom, So fierce was his fury; the firm-hearted shouted: His battle-clear voice came in resounding 90 'Neath the gray-colored stone.
Stirred was his hatred, {Beowulf calls out under the stone arches.} The hoard-ward distinguished the speech of a man; Time was no longer to look out for friendship.
The breath of the monster issued forth first, Vapory war-sweat, out of the stone-cave: {The terrible encounter.} 95 The earth re-echoed.
His life and body The targe well protected, for time-period shorter Than wish demanded for the well-renowned leader, Where he then for the first day was forced to be victor, 110 Famous in battle, as Fate had not willed it.
The lord of the Geatmen uplifted his hand then, Smiting the fire-drake with sword that was precious, That bright on the bone the blade-edge did weaken, Bit more feebly than his folk-leader needed, 115 Burdened with bale-griefs.
Anew and afresh The hoard-ward took heart (gasps heaved then his bosom): {The great hero is reduced to extremities.} Sorrow he suffered encircled with fire 130 Who the people erst governed.
His companions by no means Were banded about him, bairns of the princes, {His comrades flee!} With valorous spirit, but they sped to the forest, Seeking for safety.
Nor did kinsman's bequest quail at the battle: This the dragon discovered on their coming together.
Meseemeth not proper To bear our battle-shields back to our country, 50 'Less first we are able to fell and destroy the Long-hating foeman, to defend the life of {Surely he does not deserve to die alone.} The prince of the Weders.
In the first place, some eminent critics assume a gap of at least two half-verses.--'Úrum' (2660), being a peculiar form, has been much discussed. 'Byrdu-scrúd' is also a crux.
B. suggests 'býwdu-scrúd' = _splendid vestments_.
Nor is 'bám' accepted by all, 'béon' being suggested.
Whatever the individual words, the passage must mean, "_I intend to share with him my equipments of defence_." [2] B. would render: _Which, as I heard, excelled in stroke every sword that he carried to the strife, even the strongest (sword)._ For 'Þonne' he reads 'Þone,' rel. pr. [91] XXXVII.
The liegelord himself then 10 Retained his consciousness, brandished his war-knife, Battle-sharp, bitter, that he bare on his armor: {and cuts the dragon.} The Weder-lord cut the worm in the middle.
They had felled the enemy (life drove out then[3] Puissant prowess), the pair had destroyed him, 15 Land-chiefs related: so a liegeman should prove him, A thaneman when needed.
To the prince 'twas the last of His era of conquest by his own great achievements, [92] {Beowulf's wound swells and burns.} The latest of world-deeds.
The wound then began Which the earth-dwelling dragon erstwhile had wrought him 20 To burn and to swell.
He soon then discovered That bitterest bale-woe in his bosom was raging, Poison within.
The atheling advanced then, {He sits down exhausted.} That along by the wall, he prudent of spirit Might sit on a settle; he saw the giant-work, 25 How arches of stone strengthened with pillars The earth-hall eternal inward supported.
Then the long-worthy liegeman laved with his hand the {Wiglaf bathes his lord's head.} Far-famous chieftain, gory from sword-edge, Refreshing the face of his friend-lord and ruler, 30 Sated with battle, unbinding his helmet.
Beowulf answered, of his injury spake he, His wound that was fatal (he was fully aware He had lived his allotted life-days enjoying The pleasures of earth; then past was entirely 35 His measure of days, death very near): {Beowulf regrets that he has no son.} "My son I would give now my battle-equipments, Had any of heirs been after me granted, Along of my body.
This people I governed Fifty of winters: no king 'mong my neighbors 40 Dared to encounter me with comrades-in-battle, Try me with terror.
The time to me ordered I bided at home, mine own kept fitly, Sought me no snares, swore me not many {I can rejoice in a well-spent life.} Oaths in injustice.
Joy over all this 45 I'm able to have, though ill with my death-wounds; Hence the Ruler of Earthmen need not charge me With the killing of kinsmen, when cometh my life out Forth from my body.
Fare thou with haste now {Bring me the hoard, Wiglaf, that my dying eyes may be refreshed by a sight of it.} To behold the hoard 'neath the hoar-grayish stone, 50 Well-lovèd Wiglaf, now the worm is a-lying, Sore-wounded sleepeth, disseized of his treasure.
This emendation relieves the passage of a plethora of conjunctive _þæt_'s. [3] For 'gefyldan' (2707), S. proposes 'gefylde.' The passage would read: _He felled the foe (life drove out strength), and they then both had destroyed him, chieftains related_.
This gives Beowulf the credit of having felled the dragon; then they combine to annihilate him.--For 'ellen' (2707), Kl. suggests 'e(a)llne.'--The reading '_life drove out strength_' is very unsatisfactory and very peculiar.
I would suggest as follows: Adopt S.'s emendation, remove H.'s parenthesis, read 'ferh-ellen wræc,' and translate: _He felled the foe, drove out his life-strength_ (that is, made him _hors de combat_), _and then they both, etc_.
Wealth can easily, Gold on the sea-bottom, turn into vanity[1] 15 Each one of earthmen, arm him who pleaseth!
And he saw there lying an all-golden banner High o'er the hoard, of hand-wonders greatest, Linkèd with lacets: a light from it sparkled, That the floor of the cavern he was able to look on, {The dragon is not there.} 20 To examine the jewels.
Since I've bartered the agèd life to me granted For treasure of jewels, attend ye henceforward {He desires to be held in memory by his people.} The wants of the war-thanes; I can wait here no longer.
THE DEAD FOES.--WIGLAF'S BITTER TAUNTS. {Wiglaf is sorely grieved to see his lord look so un-warlike.} It had wofully chanced then the youthful retainer To behold on earth the most ardent-belovèd At his life-days' limit, lying there helpless.
I heard sure it throve then [96] {Few warriors dared to face the monster.} 15 But few in the land of liegemen of valor, Though of every achievement bold he had proved him, To run 'gainst the breath of the venomous scather, Or the hall of the treasure to trouble with hand-blows, If he watching had found the ward of the hoard-hall 20 On the barrow abiding.
Beowulf's part of The treasure of jewels was paid for with death; Each of the twain had attained to the end of Life so unlasting.
From the young one forthwith then Could grim-worded greeting be got for him quickly 40 Whose courage had failed him.
I life-protection but little was able To give him in battle, and I 'gan, notwithstanding, {With some aid, I could have saved our liegelord} 55 Helping my kinsman (my strength overtaxing): He waxed the weaker when with weapon I smote on My mortal opponent, the fire less strongly Flamed from his bosom.
THE MESSENGER OF DEATH. {Wiglaf sends the news of Beowulf's death to liegemen near by.} Then he charged that the battle be announced at the hedge Up o'er the cliff-edge, where the earl-troopers bided The whole of the morning, mood-wretched sat them, Bearers of battle-shields, both things expecting, 5 The end of his lifetime and the coming again of The liegelord belovèd.
Wiglaf is sitting, Offspring of Wihstan, up over Beowulf, Earl o'er another whose end-day hath reached him, Head-watch holdeth o'er heroes unliving,[1] {Our lord's death will lead to attacks from our old foes.} For friend and for foeman.
The folk now expecteth 20 A season of strife when the death of the folk-king To Frankmen and Frisians in far-lands is published.
The war-hatred waxed warm 'gainst the Hugmen, {Higelac's death recalled.} When Higelac came with an army of vessels Faring to Friesland, where the Frankmen in battle 25 Humbled him and bravely with overmight 'complished That the mail-clad warrior must sink in the battle, Fell 'mid his folk-troop: no fret-gems presented The atheling to earlmen; aye was denied us Merewing's mercy.
Then with vast-numbered forces he assaulted the remnant, Weary with wounds, woe often promised The livelong night to the sad-hearted war-troop: 45 Said he at morning would kill them with edges of weapons, Some on the gallows for glee to the fowls.
Aid came after to the anxious-in-spirit At dawn of the day, after Higelac's bugle And trumpet-sound heard they, when the good one proceeded 50 And faring followed the flower of the troopers. [1] 'Hige-méðum' (2910) is glossed by H. as dat. plu. (= for the dead).
S. proposes 'hige-méðe,' nom. sing. limiting Wigláf; i.e. _W., mood-weary, holds head-watch o'er friend and foe_.--B. suggests taking the word as dat. inst. plu. of an abstract noun in -'u.' The translation would be substantially the same as S.'s.
THE MESSENGER'S RETROSPECT. {The messenger continues, and refers to the feuds of Swedes and Geats.} "The blood-stainèd trace of Swedes and Geatmen, The death-rush of warmen, widely was noticed, How the folks with each other feud did awaken.
Then was offered pursuance To the braves of the Swedemen, the banner[2] to Higelac. [100] They fared then forth o'er the field-of-protection, 15 When the Hrethling heroes hedgeward had thronged them.
Then with edges of irons was Ongentheow driven, The gray-haired to tarry, that the troop-ruler had to Suffer the power solely of Eofor: {Wulf wounds Ongentheow.} Wulf then wildly with weapon assaulted him, 20 Wonred his son, that for swinge of the edges The blood from his body burst out in currents, Forth 'neath his hair.
There were many attendants who bound up his kinsman, Carried him quickly when occasion was granted That the place of the slain they were suffered to manage. 40 This pending, one hero plundered the other, His armor of iron from Ongentheow ravished, His hard-sword hilted and helmet together; {Eofor takes the old king's war-gear to Higelac.} The old one's equipments he carried to Higelac.
Now is haste most fitting, That the lord of liegemen we look upon yonder, 65 And _that_ one carry on journey to death-pyre Who ring-presents gave us.
They saw on the sand then soulless a-lying, 90 His slaughter-bed holding, him who rings had given them In days that were done; then the death-bringing moment Was come to the good one, that the king very warlike, Wielder of Weders, with wonder-death perished.
H.-So.) [5] B. takes 'nihtes' and 'hwílum' (3045) as separate adverbial cases, and renders: _Joy in the air had he of yore by night, etc_.
He thinks that the idea of vanished time ought to be expressed. [6] The parenthesis is by some emended so as to read: (1) (_He_ (i.e. _God_) _is the hope of men_); (2) (_he is the hope of heroes_).
Gr.'s reading has no parenthesis, but says: ... _could touch, unless God himself, true king of victories, gave to whom he would to open the treasure, the secret place of enchanters, etc_.
The last is rejected on many grounds.
Then 'twas seen that the journey prospered him little Who wrongly within had the ornaments hidden[1] Down 'neath the wall.
The warden erst slaughtered Some few of the folk-troop: the feud then thereafter 5 Was hotly avengèd. 'Tis a wonder where,[2] When the strength-famous trooper has attained to the end of Life-days allotted, then no longer the man may Remain with his kinsmen where mead-cups are flowing.
So to Beowulf happened when the ward of the barrow, 10 Assaults, he sought for: himself had no knowledge How his leaving this life was likely to happen.
The liegelord belovèd we could little prevail on, Kingdom's keeper, counsel to follow, Not to go to the guardian of the gold-hoard, but let him 25 Lie where he long was, live in his dwelling Till the end of the world.
Met we a destiny Hard to endure: the hoard has been looked at, Been gained very grimly; too grievous the fate that[5] The prince of the people pricked to come thither. 30 _I_ was therein and all of it looked at, The building's equipments, since access was given me, Not kindly at all entrance permitted {He tells them of Beowulf's last moments.} Within under earth-wall.
Let us rouse us and hasten [105] Again to see and seek for the treasure, 45 The wonder 'neath wall.
The way I will show you, That close ye may look at ring-gems sufficient And gold in abundance.
This gives a parallel to 'fretan' above.
The parenthesis would be discarded and the passage read: _Now shall the fire consume, the wan-flame devour, the prince of warriors, etc_.
So lamented mourning the men of the Geats, Fond-loving vassals, the fall of their lord, {An ideal king.} Said he was kindest of kings under heaven, Gentlest of men, most winning of manner, 45 Friendliest to folk-troops and fondest of honor. [109] ADDENDA.
Several discrepancies and other oversights have been noticed in the H.-So. glossary.
Of these a good part were avoided by Harrison and Sharp, the American editors of Beowulf, in their last edition, 1888.
H. and S. (3d edition) make the change. ~Brád~ and ~brún-ecg~ (1547).--Under 'brád' H. says 'das breite Hüftmesser mit bronzener Klinge'; under 'brún-ecg' he says 'ihr breites Hüftmesser mit blitzender Klinge.' [110] ~Yðelíce~ (1557).--Under this word H. makes it modify 'ástód.' If this be right, the punctuation of the fifth edition is wrong.
See H. and S., appendix. ~Sélran gesóhte~ (1840).--Under 'sél' and 'gesécan' H. calls these two words accus. plu.; but this is clearly an error, as both are nom. plu., pred. nom.
The fourth edition had 'bronda betost.' In the fifth edition the editor neglects to change the glossary to suit the new emendation.
CASSY MINISTERING TO UNCLE TOM AFTER HIS WHIPPING.
THE FUGITIVES ARE SAVE IN A FREE LAND.
VOLUME I CHAPTER I In Which the Reader Is Introduced to a Man of Humanity Late in the afternoon of a chilly day in February, two gentlemen were sitting alone over their wine, in a well-furnished dining parlor, in the town of P——, in Kentucky.
There were no servants present, and the gentlemen, with chairs closely approaching, seemed to be discussing some subject with great earnestness.
For convenience sake, we have said, hitherto, two _gentlemen_.
One of the parties, however, when critically examined, did not seem, strictly speaking, to come under the species.
He was a short, thick-set man, with coarse, commonplace features, and that swaggering air of pretension which marks a low man who is trying to elbow his way upward in the world.
He was much over-dressed, in a gaudy vest of many colors, a blue neckerchief, bedropped gayly with yellow spots, and arranged with a flaunting tie, quite in keeping with the general air of the man.
His hands, large and coarse, were plentifully bedecked with rings; and he wore a heavy gold watch-chain, with a bundle of seals of portentous size, and a great variety of colors, attached to it,—which, in the ardor of conversation, he was in the habit of flourishing and jingling with evident satisfaction.
His conversation was in free and easy defiance of Murray’s Grammar,[1] and was garnished at convenient intervals with various profane expressions, which not even the desire to be graphic in our account shall induce us to transcribe. [1] English Grammar (1795), by Lindley Murray (1745-1826), the most authoritative American grammarian of his day.
Shelby, had the appearance of a gentleman; and the arrangements of the house, and the general air of the housekeeping, indicated easy, and even opulent circumstances.
As we before stated, the two were in the midst of an earnest conversation.
“I can’t make trade that way—I positively can’t, Mr.
“Why, the fact is, Haley, Tom is an uncommon fellow; he is certainly worth that sum anywhere,—steady, honest, capable, manages my whole farm like a clock.” “You mean honest, as niggers go,” said Haley, helping himself to a glass of brandy.
“No; I mean, really, Tom is a good, steady, sensible, pious fellow.
He got religion at a camp-meeting, four years ago; and I believe he really _did_ get it.
I’ve trusted him, since then, with everything I have,—money, house, horses,—and let him come and go round the country; and I always found him true and square in everything.” “Some folks don’t believe there is pious niggers Shelby,” said Haley, with a candid flourish of his hand, “but _I do_.
He fetched me a good sum, too, for I bought him cheap of a man that was ’bliged to sell out; so I realized six hundred on him.
Yes, I consider religion a valeyable thing in a nigger, when it’s the genuine article, and no mistake.” “Well, Tom’s got the real article, if ever a fellow had,” rejoined the other.
“Why, last fall, I let him go to Cincinnati alone, to do business for me, and bring home five hundred dollars.
‘Tom,’ says I to him, ‘I trust you, because I think you’re a Christian—I know you wouldn’t cheat.’ Tom comes back, sure enough; I knew he would.
Shelby, after an uneasy interval of silence.
“Well, haven’t you a boy or gal that you could throw in with Tom?” “Hum!—none that I could well spare; to tell the truth, it’s only hard necessity makes me willing to sell at all.
I don’t like parting with any of my hands, that’s a fact.” Here the door opened, and a small quadroon boy, between four and five years of age, entered the room.
There was something in his appearance remarkably beautiful and engaging.
His black hair, fine as floss silk, hung in glossy curls about his round, dimpled face, while a pair of large dark eyes, full of fire and softness, looked out from beneath the rich, long lashes, as he peered curiously into the apartment.
A gay robe of scarlet and yellow plaid, carefully made and neatly fitted, set off to advantage the dark and rich style of his beauty; and a certain comic air of assurance, blended with bashfulness, showed that he had been not unused to being petted and noticed by his master.
Shelby, whistling, and snapping a bunch of raisins towards him, “pick that up, now!” The child scampered, with all his little strength, after the prize, while his master laughed.
“Now, Jim, show this gentleman how you can dance and sing.” The boy commenced one of those wild, grotesque songs common among the negroes, in a rich, clear voice, accompanying his singing with many comic evolutions of the hands, feet, and whole body, all in perfect time to the music.
“Bravo!” said Haley, throwing him a quarter of an orange.
“Now, Jim, walk like old Uncle Cudjoe, when he has the rheumatism,” said his master.
Instantly the flexible limbs of the child assumed the appearance of deformity and distortion, as, with his back humped up, and his master’s stick in his hand, he hobbled about the room, his childish face drawn into a doleful pucker, and spitting from right to left, in imitation of an old man.
Both gentlemen laughed uproariously.
“Now, Jim,” said his master, “show us how old Elder Robbins leads the psalm.” The boy drew his chubby face down to a formidable length, and commenced toning a psalm tune through his nose, with imperturbable gravity.
Tell you what,” said he, suddenly clapping his hand on Mr.
Shelby’s shoulder, “fling in that chap, and I’ll settle the business—I will.
Come, now, if that ain’t doing the thing up about the rightest!” At this moment, the door was pushed gently open, and a young quadroon woman, apparently about twenty-five, entered the room.
There needed only a glance from the child to her, to identify her as its mother.
The brown of her complexion gave way on the cheek to a perceptible flush, which deepened as she saw the gaze of the strange man fixed upon her in bold and undisguised admiration.
Her dress was of the neatest possible fit, and set off to advantage her finely moulded shape;—a delicately formed hand and a trim foot and ankle were items of appearance that did not escape the quick eye of the trader, well used to run up at a glance the points of a fine female article.
“Well, Eliza?” said her master, as she stopped and looked hesitatingly at him.
“I was looking for Harry, please, sir;” and the boy bounded toward her, showing his spoils, which he had gathered in the skirt of his robe.
Shelby; and hastily she withdrew, carrying the child on her arm.
“By Jupiter,” said the trader, turning to him in admiration, “there’s an article, now!
I’ve seen over a thousand, in my day, paid down for gals not a bit handsomer.” “I don’t want to make my fortune on her,” said Mr.
Shelby, dryly; and, seeking to turn the conversation, he uncorked a bottle of fresh wine, and asked his companion’s opinion of it.
“Capital, sir,—first chop!” said the trader; then turning, and slapping his hand familiarly on Shelby’s shoulder, he added— “Come, how will you trade about the gal?—what shall I say for her—what’ll you take?” “Mr.
“My wife would not part with her for her weight in gold.” “Ay, ay! women always say such things, cause they ha’nt no sort of calculation.
Just show ’em how many watches, feathers, and trinkets, one’s weight in gold would buy, and that alters the case, _I_ reckon.” “I tell you, Haley, this must not be spoken of; I say no, and I mean no,” said Shelby, decidedly.
“Well, you’ll let me have the boy, though,” said the trader; “you must own I’ve come down pretty handsomely for him.” “What on earth can you want with the child?” said Shelby.
“Why, I’ve got a friend that’s going into this yer branch of the business—wants to buy up handsome boys to raise for the market.
Fancy articles entirely—sell for waiters, and so on, to rich ’uns, that can pay for handsome ’uns.
It sets off one of yer great places—a real handsome boy to open door, wait, and tend.
Shelby, thoughtfully; “the fact is, sir, I’m a humane man, and I hate to take the boy from his mother, sir.” “O, you do?—La! yes—something of that ar natur.
I understand, perfectly.
It is mighty onpleasant getting on with women, sometimes.
I al’ays hates these yer screechin’, screamin’ times.
They are _mighty_ onpleasant; but, as I manages business, I generally avoids ’em, sir.
These critters an’t like white folks, you know; they gets over things, only manage right.
Now, they say,” said Haley, assuming a candid and confidential air, “that this kind o’ trade is hardening to the feelings; but I never found it so.
Fact is, I never could do things up the way some fellers manage the business.
I’ve seen ’em as would pull a woman’s child out of her arms, and set him up to sell, and she screechin’ like mad all the time;—very bad policy—damages the article—makes ’em quite unfit for service sometimes.
I knew a real handsome gal once, in Orleans, as was entirely ruined by this sort o’ handling.
I tell you, she squeezed up her child in her arms, and talked, and went on real awful.
Clear waste, sir, of a thousand dollars, just for want of management,—there’s where ’t is.
It’s always best to do the humane thing, sir; that’s been _my_ experience.” And the trader leaned back in his chair, and folded his arms, with an air of virtuous decision, apparently considering himself a second Wilberforce.
The subject appeared to interest the gentleman deeply; for while Mr.
Shelby was thoughtfully peeling an orange, Haley broke out afresh, with becoming diffidence, but as if actually driven by the force of truth to say a few words more.
I believe I’m reckoned to bring in about the finest droves of niggers that is brought in,—at least, I’ve been told so; if I have once, I reckon I have a hundred times,—all in good case,—fat and likely, and I lose as few as any man in the business.
And I lays it all to my management, sir; and humanity, sir, I may say, is the great pillar of _my_ management.” Mr.
They an’t pop’lar, and they an’t common; but I stuck to ’em, sir; I’ve stuck to ’em, and realized well on ’em; yes, sir, they have paid their passage, I may say,” and the trader laughed at his joke.
There was something so piquant and original in these elucidations of humanity, that Mr.
Shelby could not help laughing in company.
Perhaps you laugh too, dear reader; but you know humanity comes out in a variety of strange forms now-a-days, and there is no end to the odd things that humane people will say and do.
Shelby’s laugh encouraged the trader to proceed.
Now, there was Tom Loker, my old partner, down in Natchez; he was a clever fellow, Tom was, only the very devil with niggers,—on principle ’t was, you see, for a better hearted feller never broke bread; ’t was his _system_, sir.
It’s ridiculous,’ says I, ‘and don’t do no sort o’ good.
Besides, Tom,’ says I, ‘it jest spiles your gals; they get sickly, and down in the mouth; and sometimes they gets ugly,—particular yallow gals do,—and it’s the devil and all gettin’ on ’em broke in.
You see, when I any ways can, I takes a leetle care about the onpleasant parts, like selling young uns and that,—get the gals out of the way—out of sight, out of mind, you know,—and when it’s clean done, and can’t be helped, they naturally gets used to it. ’Tan’t, you know, as if it was white folks, that’s brought up in the way of ’spectin’ to keep their children and wives, and all that.
Niggers, you know, that’s fetched up properly, ha’n’t no kind of ’spectations of no kind; so all these things comes easier.” “I’m afraid mine are not properly brought up, then,” said Mr.
“S’pose not; you Kentucky folks spile your niggers.
You mean well by ’em, but ’tan’t no real kindness, arter all.
Now, a nigger, you see, what’s got to be hacked and tumbled round the world, and sold to Tom, and Dick, and the Lord knows who, ’tan’t no kindness to be givin’ on him notions and expectations, and bringin’ on him up too well, for the rough and tumble comes all the harder on him arter.
Now, I venture to say, your niggers would be quite chop-fallen in a place where some of your plantation niggers would be singing and whooping like all possessed.
Shelby, naturally thinks well of his own ways; and I think I treat niggers just about as well as it’s ever worth while to treat ’em.” “It’s a happy thing to be satisfied,” said Mr.
Shelby, with a slight shrug, and some perceptible feelings of a disagreeable nature.
“Well,” said Haley, after they had both silently picked their nuts for a season, “what do you say?” “I’ll think the matter over, and talk with my wife,” said Mr.
“Meantime, Haley, if you want the matter carried on in the quiet way you speak of, you’d best not let your business in this neighborhood be known.
It will get out among my boys, and it will not be a particularly quiet business getting away any of my fellows, if they know it, I’ll promise you.” “O! certainly, by all means, mum! of course.
But I’ll tell you, I’m in a devil of a hurry, and shall want to know, as soon as possible, what I may depend on,” said he, rising and putting on his overcoat.
Shelby, and the trader bowed himself out of the apartment.
“I’d like to have been able to kick the fellow down the steps,” said he to himself, as he saw the door fairly closed, “with his impudent assurance; but he knows how much he has me at advantage.
If anybody had ever said to me that I should sell Tom down south to one of those rascally traders, I should have said, ‘Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this thing?’ And now it must come, for aught I see.
The fellow sees his advantage, and means to push it.” Perhaps the mildest form of the system of slavery is to be seen in the State of Kentucky.
Whoever visits some estates there, and witnesses the good-humored indulgence of some masters and mistresses, and the affectionate loyalty of some slaves, might be tempted to dream the oft-fabled poetic legend of a patriarchal institution, and all that; but over and above the scene there broods a portentous shadow—the shadow of _law_.
Shelby was a fair average kind of man, good-natured and kindly, and disposed to easy indulgence of those around him, and there had never been a lack of anything which might contribute to the physical comfort of the negroes on his estate.
He had, however, speculated largely and quite loosely; had involved himself deeply, and his notes to a large amount had come into the hands of Haley; and this small piece of information is the key to the preceding conversation.
Now, it had so happened that, in approaching the door, Eliza had caught enough of the conversation to know that a trader was making offers to her master for somebody.
She would gladly have stopped at the door to listen, as she came out; but her mistress just then calling, she was obliged to hasten away.
Still she thought she heard the trader make an offer for her boy;—could she be mistaken?
Her heart swelled and throbbed, and she involuntarily strained him so tight that the little fellow looked up into her face in astonishment.
“Eliza, girl, what ails you today?” said her mistress, when Eliza had upset the wash-pitcher, knocked down the workstand, and finally was abstractedly offering her mistress a long nightgown in place of the silk dress she had ordered her to bring from the wardrobe.
“O, missis!” she said, raising her eyes; then, bursting into tears, she sat down in a chair, and began sobbing.
“Why, Eliza, child, what ails you?” said her mistress.
I heard him.” “Well, silly child, suppose there has.” “O, missis, _do_ you suppose mas’r would sell my Harry?” And the poor creature threw herself into a chair, and sobbed convulsively.
You know your master never deals with those southern traders, and never means to sell any of his servants, as long as they behave well.
There now, put my back hair up in that pretty braid you learnt the other day, and don’t go listening at doors any more.” “Well, but, missis, _you_ never would give your consent—to—to—” “Nonsense, child! to be sure, I shouldn’t.
I would as soon have one of my own children sold.
But really, Eliza, you are getting altogether too proud of that little fellow.
A man can’t put his nose into the door, but you think he must be coming to buy him.” Reassured by her mistress’ confident tone, Eliza proceeded nimbly and adroitly with her toilet, laughing at her own fears, as she proceeded.
Shelby was a woman of a high class, both intellectually and morally.
To that natural magnanimity and generosity of mind which one often marks as characteristic of the women of Kentucky, she added high moral and religious sensibility and principle, carried out with great energy and ability into practical results.
Her husband, who made no professions to any particular religious character, nevertheless reverenced and respected the consistency of hers, and stood, perhaps, a little in awe of her opinion.
Certain it was that he gave her unlimited scope in all her benevolent efforts for the comfort, instruction, and improvement of her servants, though he never took any decided part in them himself.
In fact, if not exactly a believer in the doctrine of the efficiency of the extra good works of saints, he really seemed somehow or other to fancy that his wife had piety and benevolence enough for two—to indulge a shadowy expectation of getting into heaven through her superabundance of qualities to which he made no particular pretension.
The heaviest load on his mind, after his conversation with the trader, lay in the foreseen necessity of breaking to his wife the arrangement contemplated,—meeting the importunities and opposition which he knew he should have reason to encounter.
Shelby, being entirely ignorant of her husband’s embarrassments, and knowing only the general kindliness of his temper, had been quite sincere in the entire incredulity with which she had met Eliza’s suspicions.
In fact, she dismissed the matter from her mind, without a second thought; and being occupied in preparations for an evening visit, it passed out of her thoughts entirely.
CHAPTER II The Mother Eliza had been brought up by her mistress, from girlhood, as a petted and indulged favorite.
The traveller in the south must often have remarked that peculiar air of refinement, that softness of voice and manner, which seems in many cases to be a particular gift to the quadroon and mulatto women.
These natural graces in the quadroon are often united with beauty of the most dazzling kind, and in almost every case with a personal appearance prepossessing and agreeable.
Eliza, such as we have described her, is not a fancy sketch, but taken from remembrance, as we saw her, years ago, in Kentucky.
Safe under the protecting care of her mistress, Eliza had reached maturity without those temptations which make beauty so fatal an inheritance to a slave.
She had been married to a bright and talented young mulatto man, who was a slave on a neighboring estate, and bore the name of George Harris.
This young man had been hired out by his master to work in a bagging factory, where his adroitness and ingenuity caused him to be considered the first hand in the place.
He had invented a machine for the cleaning of the hemp, which, considering the education and circumstances of the inventor, displayed quite as much mechanical genius as Whitney’s cotton-gin.[1] [2] A machine of this description was really the invention of a young colored man in Kentucky. [Mrs.
Stowe’s note.] He was possessed of a handsome person and pleasing manners, and was a general favorite in the factory.
Nevertheless, as this young man was in the eye of the law not a man, but a thing, all these superior qualifications were subject to the control of a vulgar, narrow-minded, tyrannical master.
This same gentleman, having heard of the fame of George’s invention, took a ride over to the factory, to see what this intelligent chattel had been about.
He was received with great enthusiasm by the employer, who congratulated him on possessing so valuable a slave.
He was waited upon over the factory, shown the machinery by George, who, in high spirits, talked so fluently, held himself so erect, looked so handsome and manly, that his master began to feel an uneasy consciousness of inferiority.
What business had his slave to be marching round the country, inventing machines, and holding up his head among gentlemen?
He’d take him back, and put him to hoeing and digging, and “see if he’d step about so smart.” Accordingly, the manufacturer and all hands concerned were astounded when he suddenly demanded George’s wages, and announced his intention of taking him home.
Harris,” remonstrated the manufacturer, “isn’t this rather sudden?” “What if it is?—isn’t the man _mine_?” “We would be willing, sir, to increase the rate of compensation.” “No object at all, sir.
I don’t need to hire any of my hands out, unless I’ve a mind to.” “But, sir, he seems peculiarly adapted to this business.” “Dare say he may be; never was much adapted to anything that I set him about, I’ll be bound.” “But only think of his inventing this machine,” interposed one of the workmen, rather unluckily.
They are all labor-saving machines themselves, every one of ’em.
No, he shall tramp!” George had stood like one transfixed, at hearing his doom thus suddenly pronounced by a power that he knew was irresistible.
He folded his arms, tightly pressed in his lips, but a whole volcano of bitter feelings burned in his bosom, and sent streams of fire through his veins.
He breathed short, and his large dark eyes flashed like live coals; and he might have broken out into some dangerous ebullition, had not the kindly manufacturer touched him on the arm, and said, in a low tone, “Give way, George; go with him for the present.
We’ll try to help you, yet.” The tyrant observed the whisper, and conjectured its import, though he could not hear what was said; and he inwardly strengthened himself in his determination to keep the power he possessed over his victim.
George was taken home, and put to the meanest drudgery of the farm.
He had been able to repress every disrespectful word; but the flashing eye, the gloomy and troubled brow, were part of a natural language that could not be repressed,—indubitable signs, which showed too plainly that the man could not become a thing.
It was during the happy period of his employment in the factory that George had seen and married his wife.
During that period,—being much trusted and favored by his employer,—he had free liberty to come and go at discretion.
The marriage was highly approved of by Mrs.
After the birth of little Harry, however, she had gradually become tranquillized and settled; and every bleeding tie and throbbing nerve, once more entwined with that little life, seemed to become sound and healthful, and Eliza was a happy woman up to the time that her husband was rudely torn from his kind employer, and brought under the iron sway of his legal owner.
The manufacturer, true to his word, visited Mr.
Harris a week or two after George had been taken away, when, as he hoped, the heat of the occasion had passed away, and tried every possible inducement to lead him to restore him to his former employment.
“You needn’t trouble yourself to talk any longer,” said he, doggedly; “I know my own business, sir.” “I did not presume to interfere with it, sir.
I only thought that you might think it for your interest to let your man to us on the terms proposed.” “O, I understand the matter well enough.
I saw your winking and whispering, the day I took him out of the factory; but you don’t come it over me that way.
It’s a free country, sir; the man’s _mine_, and I do what I please with him,—that’s it!” And so fell George’s last hope;—nothing before him but a life of toil and drudgery, rendered more bitter by every little smarting vexation and indignity which tyrannical ingenuity could devise.
Shelby had gone on her visit, and Eliza stood in the verandah, rather dejectedly looking after the retreating carriage, when a hand was laid on her shoulder.
How you frightened me!
Missis is gone to spend the afternoon; so come into my little room, and we’ll have the time all to ourselves.” Saying this, she drew him into a neat little apartment opening on the verandah, where she generally sat at her sewing, within call of her mistress.
“How glad I am!—why don’t you smile?—and look at Harry—how he grows.” The boy stood shyly regarding his father through his curls, holding close to the skirts of his mother’s dress.
“Isn’t he beautiful?” said Eliza, lifting his long curls and kissing him.
“I wish he’d never been born!” said George, bitterly.
“I wish I’d never been born myself!” Surprised and frightened, Eliza sat down, leaned her head on her husband’s shoulder, and burst into tears.
What dreadful thing has happened, or is going to happen?
Then drawing his child on his knee, he gazed intently on his glorious dark eyes, and passed his hands through his long curls.
“Just like you, Eliza; and you are the handsomest woman I ever saw, and the best one I ever wish to see; but, oh, I wish I’d never seen you, nor you me!” “O, George, how can you!” “Yes, Eliza, it’s all misery, misery, misery!
My life is bitter as wormwood; the very life is burning out of me.
I’m a poor, miserable, forlorn drudge; I shall only drag you down with me, that’s all.
What’s the use of our trying to do anything, trying to know anything, trying to be anything?
I know how you feel about losing your place in the factory, and you have a hard master; but pray be patient, and perhaps something—” “Patient!” said he, interrupting her; “haven’t I been patient?
Did I say a word when he came and took me away, for no earthly reason, from the place where everybody was kind to me?
I’d paid him truly every cent of my earnings,—and they all say I worked well.” “Well, it _is_ dreadful,” said Eliza; “but, after all, he is your master, you know.” “My master! and who made him my master?
I know more about business than he does; I am a better manager than he is; I can read better than he can; I can write a better hand,—and I’ve learned it all myself, and no thanks to him,—I’ve learned it in spite of him; and now what right has he to make a dray-horse of me?—to take me from things I can do, and do better than he can, and put me to work that any horse can do?
He tries to do it; he says he’ll bring me down and humble me, and he puts me to just the hardest, meanest and dirtiest work, on purpose!” “O, George!
George! you frighten me!
Why, I never heard you talk so; I’m afraid you’ll do something dreadful.
I don’t wonder at your feelings, at all; but oh, do be careful—do, do—for my sake—for Harry’s!” “I have been careful, and I have been patient, but it’s growing worse and worse; flesh and blood can’t bear it any longer;—every chance he can get to insult and torment me, he takes.
He says that though I don’t say anything, he sees I’ve got the devil in me, and he means to bring it out; and one of these days it will come out in a way that he won’t like, or I’m mistaken!” “O dear! what shall we do?” said Eliza, mournfully.
“It was only yesterday,” said George, “as I was busy loading stones into a cart, that young Mas’r Tom stood there, slashing his whip so near the horse that the creature was frightened.
I asked him to stop, as pleasant as I could,—he just kept right on.
I begged him again, and then he turned on me, and began striking me.
I held his hand, and then he screamed and kicked and ran to his father, and told him that I was fighting him.
He came in a rage, and said he’d teach me who was my master; and he tied me to a tree, and cut switches for young master, and told him that he might whip me till he was tired;—and he did do it!
If I don’t make him remember it, some time!” and the brow of the young man grew dark, and his eyes burned with an expression that made his young wife tremble.
“Well,” said Eliza, mournfully, “I always thought that I must obey my master and mistress, or I couldn’t be a Christian.” “There is some sense in it, in your case; they have brought you up like a child, fed you, clothed you, indulged you, and taught you, so that you have a good education; that is some reason why they should claim you.
No, I _won’t_!” he said, clenching his hand with a fierce frown.
Eliza trembled, and was silent.
She had never seen her husband in this mood before; and her gentle system of ethics seemed to bend like a reed in the surges of such passions.
“You know poor little Carlo, that you gave me,” added George; “the creature has been about all the comfort that I’ve had.
He has slept with me nights, and followed me around days, and kind o’ looked at me as if he understood how I felt.
Mas’r and Tom pelted the poor drowning creature with stones.
Poor thing! he looked at me so mournful, as if he wondered why I didn’t save him.
I had to take a flogging because I wouldn’t do it myself.
Mas’r will find out that I’m one that whipping won’t tame.
O, George, don’t do anything wicked; if you only trust in God, and try to do right, he’ll deliver you.” “I an’t a Christian like you, Eliza; my heart’s full of bitterness; I can’t trust in God.
Mistress says that when all things go wrong to us, we must believe that God is doing the very best.” “That’s easy to say for people that are sitting on their sofas and riding in their carriages; but let ’em be where I am, I guess it would come some harder.
I wish I could be good; but my heart burns, and can’t be reconciled, anyhow.
At first he only scolded and grumbled these things; but yesterday he told me that I should take Mina for a wife, and settle down in a cabin with her, or he would sell me down river.” “Why—but you were married to _me_, by the minister, as much as if you’d been a white man!” said Eliza, simply.
What pleasure is it that he is handsome, and smart, and bright?
I tell you, Eliza, that a sword will pierce through your soul for every good and pleasant thing your child is or has; it will make him worth too much for you to keep.” The words smote heavily on Eliza’s heart; the vision of the trader came before her eyes, and, as if some one had struck her a deadly blow, she turned pale and gasped for breath.
She looked nervously out on the verandah, where the boy, tired of the grave conversation, had retired, and where he was riding triumphantly up and down on Mr.
“No, I won’t tell him; besides, it an’t true; Missis never deceives us.” “So, Eliza, my girl,” said the husband, mournfully, “bear up, now; and good-by, for I’m going.” “Going, George!
Going where?” “To Canada,” said he, straightening himself up; “and when I’m there, I’ll buy you; that’s all the hope that’s left us.
I’ll buy you and the boy;—God helping me, I will!” “O, dreadful! if you should be taken?” “I won’t be taken, Eliza; I’ll _die_ first!
I’ll be free, or I’ll die!” “You won’t kill yourself!” “No need of that.
Don’t do anything wicked; don’t lay hands on yourself, or anybody else!
You are tempted too much—too much; but don’t—go you must—but go carefully, prudently; pray God to help you.” “Well, then, Eliza, hear my plan.
I believe he expected I should come here to tell you what I have.
It would please him, if he thought it would aggravate ‘Shelby’s folks,’ as he calls ’em.
I’m going home quite resigned, you understand, as if all was over.
I’ve got some preparations made,—and there are those that will help me; and, in the course of a week or so, I shall be among the missing, some day.
Pray for me, Eliza; perhaps the good Lord will hear _you_.” “O, pray yourself, George, and go trusting in him; then you won’t do anything wicked.” “Well, now, _good-by_,” said George, holding Eliza’s hands, and gazing into her eyes, without moving.
CHAPTER IV An Evening in Uncle Tom’s Cabin The cabin of Uncle Tom was a small log building, close adjoining to “the house,” as the negro _par excellence_ designates his master’s dwelling.
In front it had a neat garden-patch, where, every summer, strawberries, raspberries, and a variety of fruits and vegetables, flourished under careful tending.
The whole front of it was covered by a large scarlet bignonia and a native multiflora rose, which, entwisting and interlacing, left scarce a vestige of the rough logs to be seen.
Here, also, in summer, various brilliant annuals, such as marigolds, petunias, four-o’clocks, found an indulgent corner in which to unfold their splendors, and were the delight and pride of Aunt Chloe’s heart.
Let us enter the dwelling.
Her whole plump countenance beams with satisfaction and contentment from under her well-starched checked turban, bearing on it, however, if we must confess it, a little of that tinge of self-consciousness which becomes the first cook of the neighborhood, as Aunt Chloe was universally held and acknowledged to be.
A cook she certainly was, in the very bone and centre of her soul.
Not a chicken or turkey or duck in the barn-yard but looked grave when they saw her approaching, and seemed evidently to be reflecting on their latter end; and certain it was that she was always meditating on trussing, stuffing and roasting, to a degree that was calculated to inspire terror in any reflecting fowl living.
Her corn-cake, in all its varieties of hoe-cake, dodgers, muffins, and other species too numerous to mention, was a sublime mystery to all less practised compounders; and she would shake her fat sides with honest pride and merriment, as she would narrate the fruitless efforts that one and another of her compeers had made to attain to her elevation.
The arrival of company at the house, the arranging of dinners and suppers “in style,” awoke all the energies of her soul; and no sight was more welcome to her than a pile of travelling trunks launched on the verandah, for then she foresaw fresh efforts and fresh triumphs.
Just at present, however, Aunt Chloe is looking into the bake-pan; in which congenial operation we shall leave her till we finish our picture of the cottage.
In one corner of it stood a bed, covered neatly with a snowy spread; and by the side of it was a piece of carpeting, of some considerable size.
On this piece of carpeting Aunt Chloe took her stand, as being decidedly in the upper walks of life; and it and the bed by which it lay, and the whole corner, in fact, were treated with distinguished consideration, and made, so far as possible, sacred from the marauding inroads and desecrations of little folks.
In fact, that corner was the _drawing-room_ of the establishment.
In the other corner was a bed of much humbler pretensions, and evidently designed for _use_.
The wall over the fireplace was adorned with some very brilliant scriptural prints, and a portrait of General Washington, drawn and colored in a manner which would certainly have astonished that hero, if ever he had happened to meet with its like.
On a rough bench in the corner, a couple of woolly-headed boys, with glistening black eyes and fat shining cheeks, were busy in superintending the first walking operations of the baby, which, as is usually the case, consisted in getting up on its feet, balancing a moment, and then tumbling down,—each successive failure being violently cheered, as something decidedly clever.
A table, somewhat rheumatic in its limbs, was drawn out in front of the fire, and covered with a cloth, displaying cups and saucers of a decidedly brilliant pattern, with other symptoms of an approaching meal.
Shelby’s best hand, who, as he is to be the hero of our story, we must daguerreotype for our readers.
He was a large, broad-chested, powerfully-made man, of a full glossy black, and a face whose truly African features were characterized by an expression of grave and steady good sense, united with much kindliness and benevolence.
There was something about his whole air self-respecting and dignified, yet united with a confiding and humble simplicity.
He was very busily intent at this moment on a slate lying before him, on which he was carefully and slowly endeavoring to accomplish a copy of some letters, in which operation he was overlooked by young Mas’r George, a smart, bright boy of thirteen, who appeared fully to realize the dignity of his position as instructor.
“How easy white folks al’us does things!” said Aunt Chloe, pausing while she was greasing a griddle with a scrap of bacon on her fork, and regarding young Master George with pride.
“The way he can write, now! and read, too! and then to come out here evenings and read his lessons to us,—it’s mighty interestin’!” “But, Aunt Chloe, I’m getting mighty hungry,” said George.
“Isn’t that cake in the skillet almost done?” “Mose done, Mas’r George,” said Aunt Chloe, lifting the lid and peeping in,—“browning beautiful—a real lovely brown.
Cake ris all to one side—no shape at all; no more than my shoe; go way!’” And with this final expression of contempt for Sally’s greenness, Aunt Chloe whipped the cover off the bake-kettle, and disclosed to view a neatly-baked pound-cake, of which no city confectioner need to have been ashamed.
This being evidently the central point of the entertainment, Aunt Chloe began now to bustle about earnestly in the supper department.
Go way!” And, with that, aunty gave George a nudge with her finger, designed to be immensely facetious, and turned again to her griddle with great briskness.
“Now for the cake,” said Mas’r George, when the activity of the griddle department had somewhat subsided; and, with that, the youngster flourished a large knife over the article in question.
“La bless you, Mas’r George!” said Aunt Chloe, with earnestness, catching his arm, “you wouldn’t be for cuttin’ it wid dat ar great heavy knife!
Now eat away—you won’t get anything to beat dat ar.” “Tom Lincon says,” said George, speaking with his mouth full, “that their Jinny is a better cook than you.” “Dem Lincons an’t much count, no way!” said Aunt Chloe, contemptuously; “I mean, set along side _our_ folks.
They ’s ’spectable folks enough in a kinder plain way; but, as to gettin’ up anything in style, they don’t begin to have a notion on ’t.
Set Mas’r Lincon, now, alongside Mas’r Shelby!
Good Lor! and Missis Lincon,—can she kinder sweep it into a room like my missis,—so kinder splendid, yer know!
O, go way! don’t tell me nothin’ of dem Lincons!”—and Aunt Chloe tossed her head as one who hoped she did know something of the world.
Good, plain, common cookin’, Jinny’ll do;—make a good pone o’ bread,—bile her taters _far_,—her corn cakes isn’t extra, not extra now, Jinny’s corn cakes isn’t, but then they’s far,—but, Lor, come to de higher branches, and what _can_ she do?
Thar she was, showing ’em, as innocent—ye see, it’s jest here, Jinny _don’t know_.
Ah, Mas’r George, you doesn’t know half your privileges in yer family and bringin’ up!” Here Aunt Chloe sighed, and rolled up her eyes with emotion.
“I’m sure, Aunt Chloe, I understand all my pie and pudding privileges,” said George.
Mas’r George, if ye wouldn’t make a hornbug laugh!” “Yes,” said George, “I says to him, ‘Tom, you ought to see some of Aunt Chloe’s pies; they’re the right sort,’ says I.” “Pity, now, Tom couldn’t,” said Aunt Chloe, on whose benevolent heart the idea of Tom’s benighted condition seemed to make a strong impression.
Ye know, Mas’r George, ye oughtenter feel ’bove nobody, on ’count yer privileges, ’cause all our privileges is gi’n to us; we ought al’ays to ’member that,” said Aunt Chloe, looking quite serious.
“Well, I mean to ask Tom here, some day next week,” said George; “and you do your prettiest, Aunt Chloe, and we’ll make him stare.
Won’t we make him eat so he won’t get over it for a fortnight?” “Yes, yes—sartin,” said Aunt Chloe, delighted; “you’ll see.
I and Missis, we come pretty near quarrelling about dat ar crust.
What does get into ladies sometimes, I don’t know; but, sometimes, when a body has de heaviest kind o’ ’sponsibility on ’em, as ye may say, and is all kinder _‘seris’_ and taken up, dey takes dat ar time to be hangin’ round and kinder interferin’!
Now, Missis, she wanted me to do dis way, and she wanted me to do dat way; and, finally, I got kinder sarcy, and, says I, ‘Now, Missis, do jist look at dem beautiful white hands o’ yourn with long fingers, and all a sparkling with rings, like my white lilies when de dew ’s on ’em; and look at my great black stumpin hands.
“Say?—why, she kinder larfed in her eyes—dem great handsome eyes o’ hern; and, says she, ‘Well, Aunt Chloe, I think you are about in the right on ’t,’ says she; and she went off in de parlor.
She oughter cracked me over de head for bein’ so sarcy; but dar’s whar ’t is—I can’t do nothin’ with ladies in de kitchen!” “Well, you made out well with that dinner,—I remember everybody said so,” said George.
And wan’t I behind de dinin’-room door dat bery day? and didn’t I see de General pass his plate three times for some more dat bery pie?—and, says he, ‘You must have an uncommon cook, Mrs.
He comes of one of de bery _fustest_ families in Old Virginny!
Ye see, there’s _pints_ in all pies, Mas’r George; but tan’t everybody knows what they is, or orter be.
Yes, he knows what de pints is!” By this time, Master George had arrived at that pass to which even a boy can come (under uncommon circumstances), when he really could not eat another morsel, and, therefore, he was at leisure to notice the pile of woolly heads and glistening eyes which were regarding their operations hungrily from the opposite corner.
“Here, you Mose, Pete,” he said, breaking off liberal bits, and throwing it at them; “you want some, don’t you?
“O! go long, will ye?” said the mother, giving now and then a kick, in a kind of general way, under the table, when the movement became too obstreperous.
Better mind yerselves, or I’ll take ye down a button-hole lower, when Mas’r George is gone!” What meaning was couched under this terrible threat, it is difficult to say; but certain it is that its awful indistinctness seemed to produce very little impression on the young sinners addressed.
“La, now!” said Uncle Tom, “they are so full of tickle all the while, they can’t behave theirselves.” Here the boys emerged from under the table, and, with hands and faces well plastered with molasses, began a vigorous kissing of the baby.
“Ye’ll all stick together, and never get clar, if ye do dat fashion.
Go long to de spring and wash yerselves!” she said, seconding her exhortations by a slap, which resounded very formidably, but which seemed only to knock out so much more laugh from the young ones, as they tumbled precipitately over each other out of doors, where they fairly screamed with merriment.
“Did ye ever see such aggravating young uns?” said Aunt Chloe, rather complacently, as, producing an old towel, kept for such emergencies, she poured a little water out of the cracked tea-pot on it, and began rubbing off the molasses from the baby’s face and hands; and, having polished her till she shone, she set her down in Tom’s lap, while she busied herself in clearing away supper.
The baby employed the intervals in pulling Tom’s nose, scratching his face, and burying her fat hands in his woolly hair, which last operation seemed to afford her special content.
“Aint she a peart young un?” said Tom, holding her from him to take a full-length view; then, getting up, he set her on his broad shoulder, and began capering and dancing with her, while Mas’r George snapped at her with his pocket-handkerchief, and Mose and Pete, now returned again, roared after her like bears, till Aunt Chloe declared that they “fairly took her head off” with their noise.
As, according to her own statement, this surgical operation was a matter of daily occurrence in the cabin, the declaration no whit abated the merriment, till every one had roared and tumbled and danced themselves down to a state of composure.
We likes ’em.” “La, Aunt Chloe, shove it under, and let ’em sit up,” said Mas’r George, decisively, giving a push to the rude machine.
Aunt Chloe, having thus saved appearances, seemed highly delighted to push the thing under, saying, as she did so, “Well, mebbe ’t will do ’em some good.” The house now resolved itself into a committee of the whole, to consider the accommodations and arrangements for the meeting.
As the meeting had been held at Uncle Tom’s weekly, for an indefinite length of time, without any more “cheers,” there seemed some encouragement to hope that a way would be discovered at present.
“Old Uncle Peter sung both de legs out of dat oldest cheer, last week,” suggested Mose.
“Good Lor! get him in it, then,” said Mose, “and den he’d begin, ‘Come saints and sinners, hear me tell,’ and den down he’d go,”—and Mose imitated precisely the nasal tones of the old man, tumbling on the floor, to illustrate the supposed catastrophe.
“Come now, be decent, can’t ye?” said Aunt Chloe; “an’t yer shamed?” Mas’r George, however, joined the offender in the laugh, and declared decidedly that Mose was a “buster.” So the maternal admonition seemed rather to fail of effect.
“Mas’r George is such a beautiful reader, now, I know he’ll stay to read for us,” said Aunt Chloe; “’pears like ’t will be so much more interestin’.” George very readily consented, for your boy is always ready for anything that makes him of importance.
The room was soon filled with a motley assemblage, from the old gray-headed patriarch of eighty, to the young girl and lad of fifteen.
A little harmless gossip ensued on various themes, such as where old Aunt Sally got her new red headkerchief, and how “Missis was a going to give Lizzy that spotted muslin gown, when she’d got her new berage made up;” and how Mas’r Shelby was thinking of buying a new sorrel colt, that was going to prove an addition to the glories of the place.
A few of the worshippers belonged to families hard by, who had got permission to attend, and who brought in various choice scraps of information, about the sayings and doings at the house and on the place, which circulated as freely as the same sort of small change does in higher circles.
After a while the singing commenced, to the evident delight of all present.
Not even all the disadvantage of nasal intonation could prevent the effect of the naturally fine voices, in airs at once wild and spirited.
The words were sometimes the well-known and common hymns sung in the churches about, and sometimes of a wilder, more indefinite character, picked up at camp-meetings.
The chorus of one of them, which ran as follows, was sung with great energy and unction: “Die on the field of battle, Die on the field of battle, Glory in my soul.” Another special favorite had oft repeated the words— “O, I’m going to glory,—won’t you come along with me?
Various exhortations, or relations of experience, followed, and intermingled with the singing.
One old gray-headed woman, long past work, but much revered as a sort of chronicle of the past, rose, and leaning on her staff, said— “Well, chil’en!
Having, naturally, an organization in which the _morale_ was strongly predominant, together with a greater breadth and cultivation of mind than obtained among his companions, he was looked up to with great respect, as a sort of minister among them; and the simple, hearty, sincere style of his exhortations might have edified even better educated persons.
But it was in prayer that he especially excelled.
While this scene was passing in the cabin of the man, one quite otherwise passed in the halls of the master.
Shelby were seated together in the dining room afore-named, at a table covered with papers and writing utensils.
Shelby was busy in counting some bundles of bills, which, as they were counted, he pushed over to the trader, who counted them likewise.
Shelby hastily drew the bills of sale towards him, and signed them, like a man that hurries over some disagreeable business, and then pushed them over with the money.
Haley produced, from a well-worn valise, a parchment, which, after looking over it a moment, he handed to Mr.
Shelby, who took it with a gesture of suppressed eagerness.
Shelby, in a musing tone; and, fetching a long breath, he repeated, _“It’s done!”_ “Yer don’t seem to feel much pleased with it, ’pears to me,” said the trader.
Shelby, “I hope you’ll remember that you promised, on your honor, you wouldn’t sell Tom, without knowing what sort of hands he’s going into.” “Why, you’ve just done it, sir,” said the trader.
“Circumstances, you well know, _obliged_ me,” said Shelby, haughtily.
“Howsomever, I’ll do the very best I can in gettin’ Tom a good berth; as to my treatin’ on him bad, you needn’t be a grain afeard.
If there’s anything that I thank the Lord for, it is that I’m never noways cruel.” After the expositions which the trader had previously given of his humane principles, Mr.
Shelby did not feel particularly reassured by these declarations; but, as they were the best comfort the case admitted of, he allowed the trader to depart in silence, and betook himself to a solitary cigar.
CHAPTER V Showing the Feelings of Living Property on Changing Owners Mr. and Mrs.
Shelby had retired to their apartment for the night.
He was lounging in a large easy-chair, looking over some letters that had come in the afternoon mail, and she was standing before her mirror, brushing out the complicated braids and curls in which Eliza had arranged her hair; for, noticing her pale cheeks and haggard eyes, she had excused her attendance that night, and ordered her to bed.
The employment, naturally enough, suggested her conversation with the girl in the morning; and turning to her husband, she said, carelessly, “By the by, Arthur, who was that low-bred fellow that you lugged in to our dinner-table today?” “Haley is his name,” said Shelby, turning himself rather uneasily in his chair, and continuing with his eyes fixed on a letter.
Who is he, and what may be his business here, pray?” “Well, he’s a man that I transacted some business with, last time I was at Natchez,” said Mr.
“And he presumed on it to make himself quite at home, and call and dine here, ay?” “Why, I invited him; I had some accounts with him,” said Shelby.
Shelby, noticing a certain embarrassment in her husband’s manner.
“Nothing,—only Eliza came in here, after dinner, in a great worry, crying and taking on, and said you were talking with a trader, and that she heard him make an offer for her boy—the ridiculous little goose!” “She did, hey?” said Mr.
Shelby, returning to his paper, which he seemed for a few moments quite intent upon, not perceiving that he was holding it bottom upwards.
“It will have to come out,” said he, mentally; “as well now as ever.” “I told Eliza,” said Mrs.
Shelby, as she continued brushing her hair, “that she was a little fool for her pains, and that you never had anything to do with that sort of persons.
Of course, I knew you never meant to sell any of our people,—least of all, to such a fellow.” “Well, Emily,” said her husband, “so I have always felt and said; but the fact is that my business lies so that I cannot get on without.
I shall have to sell some of my hands.” “To that creature?
“I’ve agreed to sell Tom.” “What! our Tom?—that good, faithful creature!—been your faithful servant from a boy!
Shelby!—and you have promised him his freedom, too,—you and I have spoken to him a hundred times of it.
Well, I can believe anything now,—I can believe _now_ that you could sell little Harry, poor Eliza’s only child!” said Mrs.
Shelby, in a tone between grief and indignation.
“Well, I didn’t listen to it, a moment,—out of regard to your feelings, I wouldn’t;—so give me some credit.” “My dear,” said Mrs.
Shelby, recollecting herself, “forgive me.
I was surprised, and entirely unprepared for this;—but surely you will allow me to intercede for these poor creatures.
Tom is a noble-hearted, faithful fellow, if he is black.
Shelby, that if he were put to it, he would lay down his life for you.” “I know it,—I dare say;—but what’s the use of all this?—I can’t help myself.” “Why not make a pecuniary sacrifice?
I’m willing to bear my part of the inconvenience.
Shelby, I have tried—tried most faithfully, as a Christian woman should—to do my duty to these poor, simple, dependent creatures.
I have cared for them, instructed them, watched over them, and known all their little cares and joys, for years; and how can I ever hold up my head again among them, if, for the sake of a little paltry gain, we sell such a faithful, excellent, confiding creature as poor Tom, and tear from him in a moment all we have taught him to love and value?
I have taught them the duties of the family, of parent and child, and husband and wife; and how can I bear to have this open acknowledgment that we care for no tie, no duty, no relation, however sacred, compared with money?
I have talked with Eliza about her boy—her duty to him as a Christian mother, to watch over him, pray for him, and bring him up in a Christian way; and now what can I say, if you tear him away, and sell him, soul and body, to a profane, unprincipled man, just to save a little money?
Shelby; “and I respect your feelings, too, though I don’t pretend to share them to their full extent; but I tell you now, solemnly, it’s of no use—I can’t help myself.
I didn’t mean to tell you this Emily; but, in plain words, there is no choice between selling these two and selling everything.
Haley has come into possession of a mortgage, which, if I don’t clear off with him directly, will take everything before it.
I’ve raked, and scraped, and borrowed, and all but begged,—and the price of these two was needed to make up the balance, and I had to give them up.
Shelby stood like one stricken.
“This is God’s curse on slavery!—a bitter, bitter, most accursed thing!—a curse to the master and a curse to the slave!
I was a fool to think I could make anything good out of such a deadly evil.
Ministers can’t help the evil, perhaps,—can’t cure it, any more than we can,—but defend it!—it always went against my common sense.
And I think you didn’t think much of that sermon, either.” “Well,” said Shelby, “I must say these ministers sometimes carry matters further than we poor sinners would exactly dare to do.
But we don’t quite fancy, when women and ministers come out broad and square, and go beyond us in matters of either modesty or morals, that’s a fact.
But now, my dear, I trust you see the necessity of the thing, and you see that I have done the very best that circumstances would allow.” “O yes, yes!” said Mrs.
Shelby, hurriedly and abstractedly fingering her gold watch,—“I haven’t any jewelry of any amount,” she added, thoughtfully; “but would not this watch do something?—it was an expensive one, when it was bought.
If I could only at least save Eliza’s child, I would sacrifice anything I have.” “I’m sorry, very sorry, Emily,” said Mr.
The fact is, Emily, the thing’s done; the bills of sale are already signed, and in Haley’s hands; and you must be thankful it is no worse.
If you knew the man as I do, you’d think that we had had a narrow escape.” “Is he so hard, then?” “Why, not a cruel man, exactly, but a man of leather,—a man alive to nothing but trade and profit,—cool, and unhesitating, and unrelenting, as death and the grave.
He’d sell his own mother at a good percentage—not wishing the old woman any harm, either.” “And this wretch owns that good, faithful Tom, and Eliza’s child!” “Well, my dear, the fact is that this goes rather hard with me; it’s a thing I hate to think of.
Haley wants to drive matters, and take possession tomorrow.
I can’t see Tom, that’s a fact; and you had better arrange a drive somewhere, and carry Eliza off.
Shelby; “I’ll be in no sense accomplice or help in this cruel business.
I’ll go and see poor old Tom, God help him, in his distress!
They shall see, at any rate, that their mistress can feel for and with them.
What have we done, that this cruel necessity should come on us?” There was one listener to this conversation whom Mr. and Mrs.
Shelby little suspected.
Communicating with their apartment was a large closet, opening by a door into the outer passage.
Shelby had dismissed Eliza for the night, her feverish and excited mind had suggested the idea of this closet; and she had hidden herself there, and, with her ear pressed close against the crack of the door, had lost not a word of the conversation.
When the voices died into silence, she rose and crept stealthily away.
Pale, shivering, with rigid features and compressed lips, she looked an entirely altered being from the soft and timid creature she had been hitherto.
She moved cautiously along the entry, paused one moment at her mistress’ door, and raised her hands in mute appeal to Heaven, and then turned and glided into her own room.
It was a quiet, neat apartment, on the same floor with her mistress.
There was the pleasant sunny window, where she had often sat singing at her sewing; there a little case of books, and various little fancy articles, ranged by them, the gifts of Christmas holidays; there was her simple wardrobe in the closet and in the drawers:—here was, in short, her home; and, on the whole, a happy one it had been to her.
But there, on the bed, lay her slumbering boy, his long curls falling negligently around his unconscious face, his rosy mouth half open, his little fat hands thrown out over the bedclothes, and a smile spread like a sunbeam over his whole face.
“Poor boy! poor fellow!” said Eliza; “they have sold you! but your mother will save you yet!” No tear dropped over that pillow; in such straits as these, the heart has no tears to give,—it drops only blood, bleeding itself away in silence.
She took a piece of paper and a pencil, and wrote, hastily, “O, Missis! dear Missis! don’t think me ungrateful,—don’t think hard of me, any way,—I heard all you and master said tonight.
His mother drew near, and looked so earnestly into his eyes, that he at once divined that something unusual was the matter.
It was a sparkling, frosty, starlight night, and the mother wrapped the shawl close round her child, as, perfectly quiet with vague terror, he clung round her neck.
Old Bruno, a great Newfoundland, who slept at the end of the porch, rose, with a low growl, as she came near.
She gently spoke his name, and the animal, an old pet and playmate of hers, instantly, wagging his tail, prepared to follow her, though apparently revolving much, in his simple dog’s head, what such an indiscreet midnight promenade might mean.
Some dim ideas of imprudence or impropriety in the measure seemed to embarrass him considerably; for he often stopped, as Eliza glided forward, and looked wistfully, first at her and then at the house, and then, as if reassured by reflection, he pattered along after her again.
A few minutes brought them to the window of Uncle Tom’s cottage, and Eliza, stopping, tapped lightly on the window-pane.
The prayer-meeting at Uncle Tom’s had, in the order of hymn-singing, been protracted to a very late hour; and, as Uncle Tom had indulged himself in a few lengthy solos afterwards, the consequence was, that, although it was now between twelve and one o’clock, he and his worthy helpmeet were not yet asleep.
“Good Lord! what’s that?” said Aunt Chloe, starting up and hastily drawing the curtain.
I’m gwine to open the door.” And suiting the action to the word, the door flew open, and the light of the tallow candle, which Tom had hastily lighted, fell on the haggard face and dark, wild eyes of the fugitive.
“Yes, sold him!” said Eliza, firmly; “I crept into the closet by Mistress’ door tonight, and I heard Master tell Missis that he had sold my Harry, and you, Uncle Tom, both, to a trader; and that he was going off this morning on his horse, and that the man was to take possession today.” Tom had stood, during this speech, with his hands raised, and his eyes dilated, like a man in a dream.
Slowly and gradually, as its meaning came over him, he collapsed, rather than seated himself, on his old chair, and sunk his head down upon his knees.
What has he done, that Mas’r should sell _him_?” “He hasn’t done anything,—it isn’t for that.
If she an’t a Christian and an angel, there never was one.
Will you wait to be toted down river, where they kill niggers with hard work and starving?
Come, bustle up, and I’ll get your things together.” Tom slowly raised his head, and looked sorrowfully but quietly around, and said, “No, no—I an’t going.
If I must be sold, or all the people on the place, and everything go to rack, why, let me be sold.
I s’pose I can b’ar it as well as any on ’em,” he added, while something like a sob and a sigh shook his broad, rough chest convulsively.
I never have broke trust, nor used my pass no ways contrary to my word, and I never will.
“And now,” said Eliza, as she stood in the door, “I saw my husband only this afternoon, and I little knew then what was to come.
They have pushed him to the very last standing place, and he told me, today, that he was going to run away.
He mustn’t go with me!” A few last words and tears, a few simple adieus and blessings, and clasping her wondering and affrighted child in her arms, she glided noiselessly away.
CHAPTER VI Discovery Mr. and Mrs.
Shelby, after their protracted discussion of the night before, did not readily sink to repose, and, in consequence, slept somewhat later than usual, the ensuing morning.
Shelby, after giving her bell repeated pulls, to no purpose.
Shelby was standing before his dressing-glass, sharpening his razor; and just then the door opened, and a colored boy entered, with his shaving-water.
“Andy,” said his mistress, “step to Eliza’s door, and tell her I have rung for her three times.
Andy soon returned, with eyes very wide in astonishment.
He exclaimed, “Then she suspected it, and she’s off!” “The Lord be thanked!” said Mrs.
Really, it will be something pretty awkward for me, if she is.
Haley saw that I hesitated about selling this child, and he’ll think I connived at it, to get him out of the way.
There was great running and ejaculating, and opening and shutting of doors, and appearance of faces in all shades of color in different places, for about a quarter of an hour.
One person only, who might have shed some light on the matter, was entirely silent, and that was the head cook, Aunt Chloe.
Silently, and with a heavy cloud settled down over her once joyous face, she proceeded making out her breakfast biscuits, as if she heard and saw nothing of the excitement around her.
Very soon, about a dozen young imps were roosting, like so many crows, on the verandah railings, each one determined to be the first one to apprize the strange Mas’r of his ill luck.
“I hearn him yesterday, at dinner.
When, at last, Haley appeared, booted and spurred, he was saluted with the bad tidings on every hand.
“If I had the little devils!” muttered Haley, between his teeth.
“But you ha’nt got ’em, though!” said Andy, with a triumphant flourish, and making a string of indescribable mouths at the unfortunate trader’s back, when he was fairly beyond hearing.
“I say now, Shelby, this yer ’s a most extro’rnary business!” said Haley, as he abruptly entered the parlor.
“I beg pardon, ma’am,” said Haley, bowing slightly, with a still lowering brow; “but still I say, as I said before, this yer’s a sing’lar report.
Shelby, “if you wish to communicate with me, you must observe something of the decorum of a gentleman.
Yes, sir; I regret to say that the young woman, excited by overhearing, or having reported to her, something of this business, has taken her child in the night, and made off.” “I did expect fair dealing in this matter, I confess,” said Haley.
Shelby, turning sharply round upon him, “what am I to understand by that remark?
If any man calls my honor in question, I have but one answer for him.” The trader cowered at this, and in a somewhat lower tone said that “it was plaguy hard on a fellow, that had made a fair bargain, to be gulled that way.” “Mr.
Shelby, “if I did not think you had some cause for disappointment, I should not have borne from you the rude and unceremonious style of your entrance into my parlor this morning.
I say thus much, however, since appearances call for it, that I shall allow of no insinuations cast upon me, as if I were at all partner to any unfairness in this matter.
Moreover, I shall feel bound to give you every assistance, in the use of horses, servants, &c., in the recovery of your property.
So, in short, Haley,” said he, suddenly dropping from the tone of dignified coolness to his ordinary one of easy frankness, “the best way for you is to keep good-natured and eat some breakfast, and we will then see what is to be done.” Mrs.
Shelby now rose, and said her engagements would prevent her being at the breakfast-table that morning; and, deputing a very respectable mulatto woman to attend to the gentlemen’s coffee at the side-board, she left the room.
“Old lady don’t like your humble servant, over and above,” said Haley, with an uneasy effort to be very familiar.
“I am not accustomed to hear my wife spoken of with such freedom,” said Mr.
“Some jokes are less agreeable than others,” rejoined Shelby.
“Devilish free, now I’ve signed those papers, cuss him!” muttered Haley to himself; “quite grand, since yesterday!” Never did fall of any prime minister at court occasion wider surges of sensation than the report of Tom’s fate among his compeers on the place.
It was the topic in every mouth, everywhere; and nothing was done in the house or in the field, but to discuss its probable results.
Eliza’s flight—an unprecedented event on the place—was also a great accessory in stimulating the general excitement.
Black Sam, as he was commonly called, from his being about three shades blacker than any other son of ebony on the place, was revolving the matter profoundly in all its phases and bearings, with a comprehensiveness of vision and a strict lookout to his own personal well-being, that would have done credit to any white patriot in Washington.
“It’s an ill wind dat blow nowhar,—dat ar a fact,” said Sam, sententiously, giving an additional hoist to his pantaloons, and adroitly substituting a long nail in place of a missing suspender-button, with which effort of mechanical genius he seemed highly delighted.
“Yes, it’s an ill wind blows nowhar,” he repeated.
Mas’r wants you to cotch Bill and Jerry,” said Andy, cutting short Sam’s soliloquy.
Sam spoke like a philosopher, emphasizing _this_—as if he had had a large experience in different sorts of worlds, and therefore had come to his conclusions advisedly.
“Now, sartin I’d a said that Missis would a scoured the varsal world after Lizy,” added Sam, thoughtfully.
Missis don’t want dis yer Mas’r Haley to get Lizy’s boy; dat’s de go!” “High!” said Sam, with an indescribable intonation, known only to those who have heard it among the negroes.
Haley’s horse, which was a skittish young colt, winced, and bounced, and pulled hard at his halter.
“Ho, ho!” said Sam, “skeery, ar ye?” and his black visage lighted up with a curious, mischievous gleam.
There was a large beech-tree overshadowing the place, and the small, sharp, triangular beech-nuts lay scattered thickly on the ground.
With one of these in his fingers, Sam approached the colt, stroked and patted, and seemed apparently busy in soothing his agitation.
On pretence of adjusting the saddle, he adroitly slipped under it the sharp little nut, in such a manner that the least weight brought upon the saddle would annoy the nervous sensibilities of the animal, without leaving any perceptible graze or wound.
“Dar!” he said, rolling his eyes with an approving grin; “me fix ’em!” At this moment Mrs.
Shelby appeared on the balcony, beckoning to him.
Sam approached with as good a determination to pay court as did ever suitor after a vacant place at St.
James’ or Washington.
“Why have you been loitering so, Sam?
Shelby spoke the last words with a low voice, and strong emphasis.
Didn’t say dat!” said he, suddenly catching his breath, with a ludicrous flourish of apprehension, which made his mistress laugh, spite of herself.
“Yes, Missis, I’ll look out for de hosses!” “Now, Andy,” said Sam, returning to his stand under the beech-trees, “you see I wouldn’t be ’t all surprised if dat ar gen’lman’s crittur should gib a fling, by and by, when he comes to be a gettin’ up.
You know, Andy, critturs _will_ do such things;” and therewith Sam poked Andy in the side, in a highly suggestive manner.
“High!” said Andy, with an air of instant appreciation.
Now, you see, get all dese yer hosses loose, caperin’ permiscus round dis yer lot and down to de wood dar, and I spec Mas’r won’t be off in a hurry.” Andy grinned.
“Yer see,” said Sam, “yer see, Andy, if any such thing should happen as that Mas’r Haley’s horse _should_ begin to act contrary, and cut up, you and I jist lets go of our’n to help him, and _we’ll help him_—oh yes!” And Sam and Andy laid their heads back on their shoulders, and broke into a low, immoderate laugh, snapping their fingers and flourishing their heels with exquisite delight.
At this instant, Haley appeared on the verandah.
Somewhat mollified by certain cups of very good coffee, he came out smiling and talking, in tolerably restored humor.
The instant Haley touched the saddle, the mettlesome creature bounded from the earth with a sudden spring, that threw his master sprawling, some feet off, on the soft, dry turf.
Sam, with frantic ejaculations, made a dive at the reins, but only succeeded in brushing the blazing palm-leaf afore-named into the horse’s eyes, which by no means tended to allay the confusion of his nerves.
So, with great vehemence, he overturned Sam, and, giving two or three contemptuous snorts, flourished his heels vigorously in the air, and was soon prancing away towards the lower end of the lawn, followed by Bill and Jerry, whom Andy had not failed to let loose, according to contract, speeding them off with various direful ejaculations.
And now ensued a miscellaneous scene of confusion.
Sam and Andy ran and shouted,—dogs barked here and there,—and Mike, Mose, Mandy, Fanny, and all the smaller specimens on the place, both male and female, raced, clapped hands, whooped, and shouted, with outrageous officiousness and untiring zeal.
Nothing was further from Sam’s mind than to have any one of the troop taken until such season as should seem to him most befitting,—and the exertions that he made were certainly most heroic.
Like the sword of Coeur De Lion, which always blazed in the front and thickest of the battle, Sam’s palm-leaf was to be seen everywhere when there was the least danger that a horse could be caught; there he would bear down full tilt, shouting, “Now for it! cotch him! cotch him!” in a way that would set everything to indiscriminate rout in a moment.
Haley ran up and down, and cursed and swore and stamped miscellaneously.
Shelby in vain tried to shout directions from the balcony, and Mrs.
Shelby from her chamber window alternately laughed and wondered,—not without some inkling of what lay at the bottom of all this confusion.
At last, about twelve o’clock, Sam appeared triumphant, mounted on Jerry, with Haley’s horse by his side, reeking with sweat, but with flashing eyes and dilated nostrils, showing that the spirit of freedom had not yet entirely subsided.
“He’s cotched!” he exclaimed, triumphantly.
“If ’t hadn’t been for me, they might a bust themselves, all on ’em; but I cotched him!” “You!” growled Haley, in no amiable mood.
“If it hadn’t been for you, this never would have happened.” “Lord bless us, Mas’r,” said Sam, in a tone of the deepest concern, “and me that has been racin’ and chasin’ till the sweat jest pours off me!” “Well, well!” said Haley, “you’ve lost me near three hours, with your cursed nonsense.
Now let’s be off, and have no more fooling.” “Why, Mas’r,” said Sam, in a deprecating tone, “I believe you mean to kill us all clar, horses and all.
Here we are all just ready to drop down, and the critters all in a reek of sweat.
Mas’r’s hoss wants rubben down; see how he splashed hisself; and Jerry limps too; don’t think Missis would be willin’ to have us start dis yer way, no how.
Shelby, who, greatly to her amusement, had overheard this conversation from the verandah, now resolved to do her part.
She came forward, and, courteously expressing her concern for Haley’s accident, pressed him to stay to dinner, saying that the cook should bring it on the table immediately.
Thus, all things considered, Haley, with rather an equivocal grace, proceeded to the parlor, while Sam, rolling his eyes after him with unutterable meaning, proceeded gravely with the horses to the stable-yard.
“Did yer see him, Andy? _did_ yer see him?” said Sam, when he had got fairly beyond the shelter of the barn, and fastened the horse to a post.
Lord, he’d a killed me, if he durs’ to; and there I was a standin’ as innercent and as humble.” “Lor, I seed you,” said Andy; “an’t you an old hoss, Sam?” “Rather specks I am,” said Sam; “did yer see Missis up stars at the winder?
“Well, yer see,” said Sam, proceeding gravely to wash down Haley’s pony, “I ’se ’quired what yer may call a habit _o’ bobservation_, Andy.
It’s a very ’portant habit, Andy; and I ’commend yer to be cultivatin’ it, now yer young.
Yer see, Andy, it’s _bobservation_ makes all de difference in niggers.
Dat ar’s bobservation, Andy.
Faculties is different in different peoples, but cultivation of ’em goes a great way.” “I guess if I hadn’t helped your bobservation dis mornin’, yer wouldn’t have seen your way so smart,” said Andy.
“Andy,” said Sam, “you’s a promisin’ child, der an’t no manner o’ doubt.
We oughtenter overlook nobody, Andy, cause the smartest on us gets tripped up sometimes.
I’ll be boun’ Missis’ll give us an uncommon good bite, dis yer time.” CHAPTER VII The Mother’s Struggle It is impossible to conceive of a human creature more wholly desolate and forlorn than Eliza, when she turned her footsteps from Uncle Tom’s cabin.
Her husband’s suffering and dangers, and the danger of her child, all blended in her mind, with a confused and stunning sense of the risk she was running, in leaving the only home she had ever known, and cutting loose from the protection of a friend whom she loved and revered.
Then there was the parting from every familiar object,—the place where she had grown up, the trees under which she had played, the groves where she had walked many an evening in happier days, by the side of her young husband,—everything, as it lay in the clear, frosty starlight, seemed to speak reproachfully to her, and ask her whither could she go from a home like that?
But stronger than all was maternal love, wrought into a paroxysm of frenzy by the near approach of a fearful danger.
Her boy was old enough to have walked by her side, and, in an indifferent case, she would only have led him by the hand; but now the bare thought of putting him out of her arms made her shudder, and she strained him to her bosom with a convulsive grasp, as she went rapidly forward.
The frosty ground creaked beneath her feet, and she trembled at the sound; every quaking leaf and fluttering shadow sent the blood backward to her heart, and quickened her footsteps.
She wondered within herself at the strength that seemed to be come upon her; for she felt the weight of her boy as if it had been a feather, and every flutter of fear seemed to increase the supernatural power that bore her on, while from her pale lips burst forth, in frequent ejaculations, the prayer to a Friend above—“Lord, help!
Lord, save me!” If it were _your_ Harry, mother, or your Willie, that were going to be torn from you by a brutal trader, tomorrow morning,—if you had seen the man, and heard that the papers were signed and delivered, and you had only from twelve o’clock till morning to make good your escape,—how fast could _you_ walk?
How many miles could you make in those few brief hours, with the darling at your bosom,—the little sleepy head on your shoulder,—the small, soft arms trustingly holding on to your neck?
“You’re _sure_, an’t you, mother?” “Yes, _sure_!” said the mother, in a voice that startled herself; for it seemed to her to come from a spirit within, that was no part of her; and the boy dropped his little weary head on her shoulder, and was soon asleep.
How the touch of those warm arms, the gentle breathings that came in her neck, seemed to add fire and spirit to her movements!
It seemed to her as if strength poured into her in electric streams, from every gentle touch and movement of the sleeping, confiding child.
Sublime is the dominion of the mind over the body, that, for a time, can make flesh and nerve impregnable, and string the sinews like steel, so that the weak become so mighty.
The boundaries of the farm, the grove, the wood-lot, passed by her dizzily, as she walked on; and still she went, leaving one familiar object after another, slacking not, pausing not, till reddening daylight found her many a long mile from all traces of any familiar objects upon the open highway.
She had often been, with her mistress, to visit some connections, in the little village of T——, not far from the Ohio river, and knew the road well.
To go thither, to escape across the Ohio river, were the first hurried outlines of her plan of escape; beyond that, she could only hope in God.
When horses and vehicles began to move along the highway, with that alert perception peculiar to a state of excitement, and which seems to be a sort of inspiration, she became aware that her headlong pace and distracted air might bring on her remark and suspicion.
She therefore put the boy on the ground, and, adjusting her dress and bonnet, she walked on at as rapid a pace as she thought consistent with the preservation of appearances.
In her little bundle she had provided a store of cakes and apples, which she used as expedients for quickening the speed of the child, rolling the apple some yards before them, when the boy would run with all his might after it; and this ruse, often repeated, carried them over many a half-mile.
After a while, they came to a thick patch of woodland, through which murmured a clear brook.
As the child complained of hunger and thirst, she climbed over the fence with him; and, sitting down behind a large rock which concealed them from the road, she gave him a breakfast out of her little package.
The boy wondered and grieved that she could not eat; and when, putting his arms round her neck, he tried to wedge some of his cake into her mouth, it seemed to her that the rising in her throat would choke her.
We must go on—on—till we come to the river!” And she hurried again into the road, and again constrained herself to walk regularly and composedly forward.
She was many miles past any neighborhood where she was personally known.
If she should chance to meet any who knew her, she reflected that the well-known kindness of the family would be of itself a blind to suspicion, as making it an unlikely supposition that she could be a fugitive.
As she was also so white as not to be known as of colored lineage, without a critical survey, and her child was white also, it was much easier for her to pass on unsuspected.
On this presumption, she stopped at noon at a neat farmhouse, to rest herself, and buy some dinner for her child and self; for, as the danger decreased with the distance, the supernatural tension of the nervous system lessened, and she found herself both weary and hungry.
The good woman, kindly and gossipping, seemed rather pleased than otherwise with having somebody come in to talk with; and accepted, without examination, Eliza’s statement, that she “was going on a little piece, to spend a week with her friends,”—all which she hoped in her heart might prove strictly true.
It was now early spring, and the river was swollen and turbulent; great cakes of floating ice were swinging heavily to and fro in the turbid waters.
Eliza stood, for a moment, contemplating this unfavorable aspect of things, which she saw at once must prevent the usual ferry-boat from running, and then turned into a small public house on the bank, to make a few inquiries.
The hostess, who was busy in various fizzing and stewing operations over the fire, preparatory to the evening meal, stopped, with a fork in her hand, as Eliza’s sweet and plaintive voice arrested her.
“No, indeed!” said the woman; “the boats has stopped running.” Eliza’s look of dismay and disappointment struck the woman, and she said, inquiringly, “May be you’re wanting to get over?—anybody sick?
Ye seem mighty anxious?” “I’ve got a child that’s very dangerous,” said Eliza.
“I never heard of it till last night, and I’ve walked quite a piece today, in hopes to get to the ferry.” “Well, now, that’s onlucky,” said the woman, whose motherly sympathies were much aroused; “I’m re’lly consarned for ye.
Solomon!” she called, from the window, towards a small back building.
A man, in leather apron and very dirty hands, appeared at the door.
That’s a sweet little fellow,” added the woman, offering him a cake.
But the child, wholly exhausted, cried with weariness.
“Well, take him into this room,” said the woman, opening into a small bed-room, where stood a comfortable bed.
Here we must take our leave of her for the present, to follow the course of her pursuers.
Shelby had promised that the dinner should be hurried on table, yet it was soon seen, as the thing has often been seen before, that it required more than one to make a bargain.
So, although the order was fairly given out in Haley’s hearing, and carried to Aunt Chloe by at least half a dozen juvenile messengers, that dignitary only gave certain very gruff snorts, and tosses of her head, and went on with every operation in an unusually leisurely and circumstantial manner.
For some singular reason, an impression seemed to reign among the servants generally that Missis would not be particularly disobliged by delay; and it was wonderful what a number of counter accidents occurred constantly, to retard the course of things.
It was Uncle Tom, who had come in, and stood listening to the conversation at the door.
You oughtenter wish that ar to any human crittur.” “We wouldn’t to anybody but the soul-drivers,” said Andy; “nobody can help wishing it to them, they ’s so awful wicked.” “Don’t natur herself kinder cry out on ’em?” said Aunt Chloe.
“Don’t dey tear der suckin’ baby right off his mother’s breast, and sell him, and der little children as is crying and holding on by her clothes,—don’t dey pull ’em off and sells ’em?
Don’t dey tear wife and husband apart?” said Aunt Chloe, beginning to cry, “when it’s jest takin’ the very life on ’em?—and all the while does they feel one bit, don’t dey drink and smoke, and take it oncommon easy?
“Pray for them that ’spitefully use you, the good book says,” says Tom.
I can’t pray for ’em.” “It’s natur, Chloe, and natur ’s strong,” said Tom, “but the Lord’s grace is stronger; besides, you oughter think what an awful state a poor crittur’s soul ’s in that’ll do them ar things,—you oughter thank God that you an’t _like_ him, Chloe.
I’m sure I’d rather be sold, ten thousand times over, than to have all that ar poor crittur’s got to answer for.” “So ’d I, a heap,” said Jake.
“Lor, _shouldn’t_ we cotch it, Andy?” Andy shrugged his shoulders, and gave an acquiescent whistle.
Mebbe it might have been natural for him, but ’t would have come desp’t hard on me, as has known him from a baby; but I’ve seen Mas’r, and I begin ter feel sort o’ reconciled to the Lord’s will now.
Mas’r couldn’t help hisself; he did right, but I’m feared things will be kinder goin’ to rack, when I’m gone Mas’r can’t be spected to be a pryin’ round everywhar, as I’ve done, a keepin’ up all the ends.
The boys all means well, but they ’s powerful car’less.
That ar troubles me.” The bell here rang, and Tom was summoned to the parlor.
“Tom,” said his master, kindly, “I want you to notice that I give this gentleman bonds to forfeit a thousand dollars if you are not on the spot when he wants you; he’s going today to look after his other business, and you can have the day to yourself.
Go anywhere you like, boy.” “Thank you, Mas’r,” said Tom.
“And mind yourself,” said the trader, “and don’t come it over your master with any o’ yer nigger tricks; for I’ll take every cent out of him, if you an’t thar.
If he’d hear to me, he wouldn’t trust any on ye—slippery as eels!” “Mas’r,” said Tom,—and he stood very straight,—“I was jist eight years old when ole Missis put you into my arms, and you wasn’t a year old.
And now I jist ask you, Mas’r, have I ever broke word to you, or gone contrary to you, ’specially since I was a Christian?” Mr.
Shelby was fairly overcome, and the tears rose to his eyes.
“My good boy,” said he, “the Lord knows you say but the truth; and if I was able to help it, all the world shouldn’t buy you.” “And sure as I am a Christian woman,” said Mrs.
Shelby, “you shall be redeemed as soon as I can any way bring together means.
Sir,” she said to Haley, “take good account of who you sell him to, and let me know.” “Lor, yes, for that matter,” said the trader, “I may bring him up in a year, not much the wuss for wear, and trade him back.” “I’ll trade with you then, and make it for your advantage,” said Mrs.
“Of course,” said the trader, “all ’s equal with me; li’ves trade ’em up as down, so I does a good business.
Shelby both felt annoyed and degraded by the familiar impudence of the trader, and yet both saw the absolute necessity of putting a constraint on their feelings.
The more hopelessly sordid and insensible he appeared, the greater became Mrs.
Shelby’s dread of his succeeding in recapturing Eliza and her child, and of course the greater her motive for detaining him by every female artifice.
She therefore graciously smiled, assented, chatted familiarly, and did all she could to make time pass imperceptibly.
At two o’clock Sam and Andy brought the horses up to the posts, apparently greatly refreshed and invigorated by the scamper of the morning.
Sam was there new oiled from dinner, with an abundance of zealous and ready officiousness.
As Haley approached, he was boasting, in flourishing style, to Andy, of the evident and eminent success of the operation, now that he had “farly come to it.” “Your master, I s’pose, don’t keep no dogs,” said Haley, thoughtfully, as he prepared to mount.
“Our dogs all smells round considable sharp.
I spect they’s the kind, though they han’t never had no practice.
They ’s _far_ dogs, though, at most anything, if you’d get ’em started.
Here, Bruno,” he called, whistling to the lumbering Newfoundland, who came pitching tumultuously toward them.
“Come, tumble up now.” Sam tumbled up accordingly, dexterously contriving to tickle Andy as he did so, which occasioned Andy to split out into a laugh, greatly to Haley’s indignation, who made a cut at him with his riding-whip.
“I ’s ’stonished at yer, Andy,” said Sam, with awful gravity.
This yer an’t no way to help Mas’r.” “I shall take the straight road to the river,” said Haley, decidedly, after they had come to the boundaries of the estate.
“I know the way of all of ’em,—they makes tracks for the underground.” “Sartin,” said Sam, “dat’s de idee.
Now, der’s two roads to de river,—de dirt road and der pike,—which Mas’r mean to take?” Andy looked up innocently at Sam, surprised at hearing this new geographical fact, but instantly confirmed what he said, by a vehement reiteration.
“’Cause,” said Sam, “I’d rather be ’clined to ’magine that Lizy ’d take de dirt road, bein’ it’s the least travelled.” Haley, notwithstanding that he was a very old bird, and naturally inclined to be suspicious of chaff, was rather brought up by this view of the case.
“If yer warn’t both on yer such cussed liars, now!” he said, contemplatively as he pondered a moment.
The pensive, reflective tone in which this was spoken appeared to amuse Andy prodigiously, and he drew a little behind, and shook so as apparently to run a great risk of failing off his horse, while Sam’s face was immovably composed into the most doleful gravity.
“Course,” said Sam, “Mas’r can do as he’d ruther, go de straight road, if Mas’r thinks best,—it’s all one to us.
Now, when I study ’pon it, I think de straight road de best, _deridedly_.” “She would naturally go a lonesome way,” said Haley, thinking aloud, and not minding Sam’s remark.
“Dar an’t no sayin’,” said Sam; “gals is pecular; they never does nothin’ ye thinks they will; mose gen’lly the contrary.
Gals is nat’lly made contrary; and so, if you thinks they’ve gone one road, it is sartin you’d better go t’ other, and then you’ll be sure to find ’em.
Now, my private ’pinion is, Lizy took der road; so I think we’d better take de straight one.” This profound generic view of the female sex did not seem to dispose Haley particularly to the straight road, and he announced decidedly that he should go the other, and asked Sam when they should come to it.
It’s despit lonesome, and we might lose our way,—whar we’d come to, de Lord only knows.” “Nevertheless,” said Haley, “I shall go that way.” “Now I think on ’t, I think I hearn ’em tell that dat ar road was all fenced up and down by der creek, and thar, an’t it, Andy?” Andy wasn’t certain; he’d only “hearn tell” about that road, but never been over it.
In short, he was strictly noncommittal.
Haley, accustomed to strike the balance of probabilities between lies of greater or lesser magnitude, thought that it lay in favor of the dirt road aforesaid.
The mention of the thing he thought he perceived was involuntary on Sam’s part at first, and his confused attempts to dissuade him he set down to a desperate lying on second thoughts, as being unwilling to implicate Liza.
When, therefore, Sam indicated the road, Haley plunged briskly into it, followed by Sam and Andy.
Now, the road, in fact, was an old one, that had formerly been a thoroughfare to the river, but abandoned for many years after the laying of the new pike.
Sam knew this fact perfectly well,—indeed, the road had been so long closed up, that Andy had never heard of it.
After riding about an hour in this way, the whole party made a precipitate and tumultuous descent into a barn-yard belonging to a large farming establishment.
Not a soul was in sight, all the hands being employed in the fields; but, as the barn stood conspicuously and plainly square across the road, it was evident that their journey in that direction had reached a decided finale.
“Wan’t dat ar what I telled Mas’r?” said Sam, with an air of injured innocence.
“How does strange gentleman spect to know more about a country dan de natives born and raised?” “You rascal!” said Haley, “you knew all about this.” “Didn’t I tell yer I _knowd_, and yer wouldn’t believe me?
I telled Mas’r ’t was all shet up, and fenced up, and I didn’t spect we could get through,—Andy heard me.” It was all too true to be disputed, and the unlucky man had to pocket his wrath with the best grace he was able, and all three faced to the right about, and took up their line of march for the highway.
In consequence of all the various delays, it was about three-quarters of an hour after Eliza had laid her child to sleep in the village tavern that the party came riding into the same place.
Eliza was standing by the window, looking out in another direction, when Sam’s quick eye caught a glimpse of her.
At this crisis, Sam contrived to have his hat blown off, and uttered a loud and characteristic ejaculation, which startled her at once; she drew suddenly back; the whole train swept by the window, round to the front door.
A thousand lives seemed to be concentrated in that one moment to Eliza.
The trader caught a full glimpse of her just as she was disappearing down the bank; and throwing himself from his horse, and calling loudly on Sam and Andy, he was after her like a hound after a deer.
Right on behind they came; and, nerved with strength such as God gives only to the desperate, with one wild cry and flying leap, she vaulted sheer over the turbid current by the shore, on to the raft of ice beyond.
It was a desperate leap—impossible to anything but madness and despair; and Haley, Sam, and Andy, instinctively cried out, and lifted up their hands, as she did it.
The huge green fragment of ice on which she alighted pitched and creaked as her weight came on it, but she staid there not a moment.
With wild cries and desperate energy she leaped to another and still another cake; stumbling—leaping—slipping—springing upwards again!
Her shoes are gone—her stockings cut from her feet—while blood marked every step; but she saw nothing, felt nothing, till dimly, as in a dream, she saw the Ohio side, and a man helping her up the bank.
Eliza recognized the voice and face for a man who owned a farm not far from her old home.
There is his Mas’r,” said she, pointing to the Kentucky shore.
I like grit, wherever I see it.” When they had gained the top of the bank, the man paused.
“I’d be glad to do something for ye,” said he; “but then there’s nowhar I could take ye.
The best I can do is to tell ye to go _thar_,” said he, pointing to a large white house which stood by itself, off the main street of the village.
Thar’s no kind o’ danger but they’ll help you,—they’re up to all that sort o’ thing.” “The Lord bless you!” said Eliza, earnestly.
“Come, now, go along like a likely, sensible gal, as you are.
“Shelby, now, mebbe won’t think this yer the most neighborly thing in the world; but what’s a feller to do?
Somehow I never could see no kind o’ critter a strivin’ and pantin’, and trying to clar theirselves, with the dogs arter ’em and go agin ’em.
Besides, I don’t see no kind of ’casion for me to be hunter and catcher for other folks, neither.” So spoke this poor, heathenish Kentuckian, who had not been instructed in his constitutional relations, and consequently was betrayed into acting in a sort of Christianized manner, which, if he had been better situated and more enlightened, he would not have been left to do.
Haley had stood a perfectly amazed spectator of the scene, till Eliza had disappeared up the bank, when he turned a blank, inquiring look on Sam and Andy.
“That ar was a tolable fair stroke of business,” said Sam.
“How like a wildcat she jumped!” “Wal, now,” said Sam, scratching his head, “I hope Mas’r’ll ’scuse us trying dat ar road.
“She looked so curi’s, a leapin’ and springin’—ice a crackin’—and only to hear her,—plump! ker chunk! ker splash!
Both ducked, and ran shouting up the bank, and were on their horses before he was up.
Missis wouldn’t hear of our ridin’ the critters over Lizy’s bridge tonight;” and, with a facetious poke into Andy’s ribs, he started off, followed by the latter, at full speed,—their shouts of laughter coming faintly on the wind.
CHAPTER VIII Eliza’s Escape Eliza made her desperate retreat across the river just in the dusk of twilight.
The gray mist of evening, rising slowly from the river, enveloped her as she disappeared up the bank, and the swollen current and floundering masses of ice presented a hopeless barrier between her and her pursuer.
Haley therefore slowly and discontentedly returned to the little tavern, to ponder further what was to be done.
“What did I want with the little cuss, now,” he said to himself, “that I should have got myself treed like a coon, as I am, this yer way?” and Haley relieved himself by repeating over a not very select litany of imprecations on himself, which, though there was the best possible reason to consider them as true, we shall, as a matter of taste, omit.
He was startled by the loud and dissonant voice of a man who was apparently dismounting at the door.
“By the land! if this yer an’t the nearest, now, to what I’ve heard folks call Providence,” said Haley.
“I do b’lieve that ar’s Tom Loker.” Haley hastened out.
Standing by the bar, in the corner of the room, was a brawny, muscular man, full six feet in height, and broad in proportion.
He was dressed in a coat of buffalo-skin, made with the hair outward, which gave him a shaggy and fierce appearance, perfectly in keeping with the whole air of his physiognomy.
In the head and face every organ and lineament expressive of brutal and unhesitating violence was in a state of the highest possible development.
Indeed, could our readers fancy a bull-dog come unto man’s estate, and walking about in a hat and coat, they would have no unapt idea of the general style and effect of his physique.
He was accompanied by a travelling companion, in many respects an exact contrast to himself.
The little man stood tiptoe, and putting his head first to one side and then the other, and snuffing considerately in the directions of the various bottles, ordered at last a mint julep, in a thin and quivering voice, and with an air of great circumspection.
When poured out, he took it and looked at it with a sharp, complacent air, like a man who thinks he has done about the right thing, and hit the nail on the head, and proceeded to dispose of it in short and well-advised sips.
Why, Loker, how are ye?” said Haley, coming forward, and extending his hand to the big man.
“What brought you here, Haley?” The mousing man, who bore the name of Marks, instantly stopped his sipping, and, poking his head forward, looked shrewdly on the new acquaintance, as a cat sometimes looks at a moving dry leaf, or some other possible object of pursuit.
“I say, Tom, this yer’s the luckiest thing in the world.
I’m in a devil of a hobble, and you must help me out.” “Ugh? aw! like enough!” grunted his complacent acquaintance.
“A body may be pretty sure of that, when _you’re_ glad to see ’em; something to be made off of ’em.
What’s the blow now?” “You’ve got a friend here?” said Haley, looking doubtfully at Marks; “partner, perhaps?” “Yes, I have.
Here, Marks! here’s that ar feller that I was in with in Natchez.” “Shall be pleased with his acquaintance,” said Marks, thrusting out a long, thin hand, like a raven’s claw.
“And now, gentlemen, seein’ as we’ve met so happily, I think I’ll stand up to a small matter of a treat in this here parlor.
So, now, old coon,” said he to the man at the bar, “get us hot water, and sugar, and cigars, and plenty of the _real stuff_ and we’ll have a blow-out.” Behold, then, the candles lighted, the fire stimulated to the burning point in the grate, and our three worthies seated round a table, well spread with all the accessories to good fellowship enumerated before.
Haley began a pathetic recital of his peculiar troubles.
Loker shut up his mouth, and listened to him with gruff and surly attention.
Marks, who was anxiously and with much fidgeting compounding a tumbler of punch to his own peculiar taste, occasionally looked up from his employment, and, poking his sharp nose and chin almost into Haley’s face, gave the most earnest heed to the whole narrative.
The conclusion of it appeared to amuse him extremely, for he shook his shoulders and sides in silence, and perked up his thin lips with an air of great internal enjoyment.
It’s neatly done, too.” “This yer young-un business makes lots of trouble in the trade,” said Haley, dolefully.
“If we could get a breed of gals that didn’t care, now, for their young uns,” said Marks; “tell ye, I think ’t would be ’bout the greatest mod’rn improvement I knows on,”—and Marks patronized his joke by a quiet introductory sniggle.
I won’t hear one word—not the beginning of a word.’ I says to ’em, ‘This yer young un’s mine, and not yourn, and you’ve no kind o’ business with it.
Loker brought down his fist with a thump that fully explained the hiatus.
“That ar’s what ye may call _emphasis_,” said Marks, poking Haley in the side, and going into another small giggle.
“An’t Tom peculiar? he! he!
I say, Tom, I s’pect you make ’em _understand_, for all niggers’ heads is woolly.
“I say,” said Haley, and leaning back in his chair and gesturing impressively, “I’ll say this now, I al’ays meant to drive my trade so as to make money on ’t _fust and foremost_, as much as any man; but, then, trade an’t everything, and money an’t everything, ’cause we ’s all got souls.
I b’lieve in religion, and one of these days, when I’ve got matters tight and snug, I calculates to tend to my soul and them ar matters; and so what’s the use of doin’ any more wickedness than ’s re’lly necessary?—it don’t seem to me it’s ’t all prudent.” “Tend to yer soul!” repeated Tom, contemptuously; “take a bright lookout to find a soul in you,—save yourself any care on that score.
If the devil sifts you through a hair sieve, he won’t find one.” “Why, Tom, you’re cross,” said Haley; “why can’t ye take it pleasant, now, when a feller’s talking for your good?” “Stop that ar jaw o’ yourn, there,” said Tom, gruffly.
After all, what’s the odds between me and you? ’Tan’t that you care one bit more, or have a bit more feelin’—it’s clean, sheer, dog meanness, wanting to cheat the devil and save your own skin; don’t I see through it?
And your ‘gettin’ religion,’ as you call it, arter all, is too p’isin mean for any crittur;—run up a bill with the devil all your life, and then sneak out when pay time comes!
Bob!” “Come, come, gentlemen, I say; this isn’t business,” said Marks.
“There’s different ways, you know, of looking at all subjects.
Haley is a very nice man, no doubt, and has his own conscience; and, Tom, you have your ways, and very good ones, too, Tom; but quarrelling, you know, won’t answer no kind of purpose.
Let’s go to business.
Haley, what is it?—you want us to undertake to catch this yer gal?” “The gal’s no matter of mine,—she’s Shelby’s; it’s only the boy.
I was a fool for buying the monkey!” “You’re generally a fool!” said Tom, gruffly.
Haley ’s a puttin’ us in a way of a good job, I reckon; just hold still—these yer arrangements is my forte.
Haley, how is she? what is she?” “Wal! white and handsome—well brought up.
I’d a gin Shelby eight hundred or a thousand, and then made well on her.” “White and handsome—well brought up!” said Marks, his sharp eyes, nose and mouth, all alive with enterprise.
“Look here, now, Loker, a beautiful opening.
We’ll do a business here on our own account;—we does the catchin’; the boy, of course, goes to Mr.
Haley,—we takes the gal to Orleans to speculate on.
An’t it beautiful?” Tom, whose great heavy mouth had stood ajar during this communication, now suddenly snapped it together, as a big dog closes on a piece of meat, and seemed to be digesting the idea at his leisure.
“Ye see,” said Marks to Haley, stirring his punch as he did so, “ye see, we has justices convenient at all p’ints along shore, that does up any little jobs in our line quite reasonable.
Tom, he does the knockin’ down and that ar; and I come in all dressed up—shining boots—everything first chop, when the swearin’ ’s to be done.
You oughter see, now,” said Marks, in a glow of professional pride, “how I can tone it off.
Twickem, from New Orleans; ’nother day, I’m just come from my plantation on Pearl River, where I works seven hundred niggers; then, again, I come out a distant relation of Henry Clay, or some old cock in Kentuck.
Talents is different, you know.
Now, Tom’s roarer when there’s any thumping or fighting to be done; but at lying he an’t good, Tom an’t,—ye see it don’t come natural to him; but, Lord, if thar’s a feller in the country that can swear to anything and everything, and put in all the circumstances and flourishes with a long face, and carry ’t through better ’n I can, why, I’d like to see him, that’s all!
I b’lieve my heart, I could get along and snake through, even if justices were more particular than they is.
Sometimes I rather wish they was more particular; ’t would be a heap more relishin’ if they was,—more fun, yer know.” Tom Loker, who, as we have made it appear, was a man of slow thoughts and movements, here interrupted Marks by bringing his heavy fist down on the table, so as to make all ring again, _“It’ll do!”_ he said.
“Lord bless ye, Tom, ye needn’t break all the glasses!” said Marks; “save your fist for time o’ need.” “But, gentlemen, an’t I to come in for a share of the profits?” said Haley.
“What do ye want?” “Wal,” said Haley, “if I gives you the job, it’s worth something,—say ten per cent. on the profits, expenses paid.” “Now,” said Loker, with a tremendous oath, and striking the table with his heavy fist, “don’t I know _you_, Dan Haley?
Suppose Marks and I have taken up the catchin’ trade, jest to ’commodate gentlemen like you, and get nothin’ for ourselves?—Not by a long chalk! we’ll have the gal out and out, and you keep quiet, or, ye see, we’ll have both,—what’s to hinder?
“Ye don’t think I did business with you, down in Natchez, for nothing, Haley; I’ve learned to hold an eel, when I catch him.
I know yer.” “Why, when you have a job in hand that may bring a clean profit of somewhere about a thousand or sixteen hundred, why, Tom, you’re onreasonable,” said Haley.
“Yes, and hasn’t we business booked for five weeks to come,—all we can do?
And suppose we leaves all, and goes to bush-whacking round arter yer young uns, and finally doesn’t catch the gal,—and gals allers is the devil _to_ catch,—what’s then? would you pay us a cent—would you?
If we get the job, and it pays, I’ll hand it back; if we don’t, it’s for our trouble,—that’s _far_, an’t it, Marks?” “Certainly, certainly,” said Marks, with a conciliatory tone; “it’s only a retaining fee, you see,—he! he! he!—we lawyers, you know.
Tom’ll have the boy for yer, anywhere ye’ll name; won’t ye, Tom?” “If I find the young un, I’ll bring him on to Cincinnati, and leave him at Granny Belcher’s, on the landing,” said Loker.
Marks had got from his pocket a greasy pocket-book, and taking a long paper from thence, he sat down, and fixing his keen black eyes on it, began mumbling over its contents: “Barnes—Shelby County—boy Jim, three hundred dollars for him, dead or alive.
“Edwards—Dick and Lucy—man and wife, six hundred dollars; wench Polly and two children—six hundred for her or her head.
“I’m jest a runnin’ over our business, to see if we can take up this yer handily.
Loker,” he said, after a pause, “we must set Adams and Springer on the track of these yer; they’ve been booked some time.” “They’ll charge too much,” said Tom.
“I’ll manage that ar; they ’s young in the business, and must spect to work cheap,” said Marks, as he continued to read.
So now let’s come to the particulars.
“To be sure, I did.” “Most likely,” said Marks, “she’s took in somewhere; but where, ’s a question.
“The ice is running awfully, Tom; an’t it dangerous?” “Don’no nothing ’bout that,—only it’s got to be done,” said Tom, decidedly.
“Dear me,” said Marks, fidgeting, “it’ll be—I say,” he said, walking to the window, “it’s dark as a wolf’s mouth, and, Tom—” “The long and short is, you’re scared, Marks; but I can’t help that,—you’ve got to go.
Suppose you want to lie by a day or two, till the gal ’s been carried on the underground line up to Sandusky or so, before you start.” “O, no; I an’t a grain afraid,” said Marks, “only—” “Only what?” said Tom.
“But what’s the use? you han’t got nothin’ o’ hers to smell on.” “Yes, I have,” said Haley, triumphantly.
“That ar’s a consideration,” said Marks.
Dogs is no ’count in these yer up states where these critters gets carried; of course, ye can’t get on their track.
They only does down in plantations, where niggers, when they runs, has to do their own running, and don’t get no help.” “Well,” said Loker, who had just stepped out to the bar to make some inquiries, “they say the man’s come with the boat; so, Marks—” That worthy cast a rueful look at the comfortable quarters he was leaving, but slowly rose to obey.
After exchanging a few words of further arrangement, Haley, with visible reluctance, handed over the fifty dollars to Tom, and the worthy trio separated for the night.
If any of our refined and Christian readers object to the society into which this scene introduces them, let us beg them to begin and conquer their prejudices in time.
The catching business, we beg to remind them, is rising to the dignity of a lawful and patriotic profession.
If all the broad land between the Mississippi and the Pacific becomes one great market for bodies and souls, and human property retains the locomotive tendencies of this nineteenth century, the trader and catcher may yet be among our aristocracy.
While this scene was going on at the tavern, Sam and Andy, in a state of high felicitation, pursued their way home.
Sam was in the highest possible feather, and expressed his exultation by all sorts of supernatural howls and ejaculations, by divers odd motions and contortions of his whole system.
Sometimes he would sit backward, with his face to the horse’s tail and sides, and then, with a whoop and a somerset, come right side up in his place again, and, drawing on a grave face, begin to lecture Andy in high-sounding tones for laughing and playing the fool.
Anon, slapping his sides with his arms, he would burst forth in peals of laughter, that made the old woods ring as they passed.
With all these evolutions, he contrived to keep the horses up to the top of their speed, until, between ten and eleven, their heels resounded on the gravel at the end of the balcony.
Shelby flew to the railings.
Where are they?” “Mas’r Haley ’s a-restin’ at the tavern; he’s drefful fatigued, Missis.” “And Eliza, Sam?” “Wal, she’s clar ’cross Jordan.
Shelby, breathless, and almost faint, as the possible meaning of these words came over her.
“Wal, Missis, de Lord he persarves his own.
Lizy’s done gone over the river into ’Hio, as ’markably as if de Lord took her over in a charrit of fire and two hosses.” Sam’s vein of piety was always uncommonly fervent in his mistress’ presence; and he made great capital of scriptural figures and images.
Shelby, who had followed on to the verandah, “and tell your mistress what she wants.
Come, come, Emily,” said he, passing his arm round her, “you are cold and all in a shiver; you allow yourself to feel too much.” “Feel too much!
Are we not both responsible to God for this poor girl?
You see yourself that we have only done what we were obliged to.” “There’s an awful feeling of guilt about it, though,” said Mrs.
“I can’t reason it away.” “Here, Andy, you nigger, be alive!” called Sam, under the verandah; “take these yer hosses to der barn; don’t ye hear Mas’r a callin’?” and Sam soon appeared, palm-leaf in hand, at the parlor door.
“Now, Sam, tell us distinctly how the matter was,” said Mr.
She crossed most ’markably; it wasn’t no less nor a miracle; and I saw a man help her up the ’Hio side, and then she was lost in the dusk.” “Sam, I think this rather apocryphal,—this miracle.
Crossing on floating ice isn’t so easily done,” said Mr.
Down she come to the river, and thar was the current running ten feet wide by the shore, and over t’ other side ice a sawin’ and a jiggling up and down, kinder as ’t were a great island.
We come right behind her, and I thought my soul he’d got her sure enough,—when she gin sich a screech as I never hearn, and thar she was, clar over t’ other side of the current, on the ice, and then on she went, a screeching and a jumpin’,—the ice went crack! c’wallop! cracking! chunk! and she a boundin’ like a buck!
Shelby sat perfectly silent, pale with excitement, while Sam told his story.
“As I’ve been a sayin’, dis yer ’s a providence and no mistake, as Missis has allers been a instructin’ on us.
Thar’s allers instruments ris up to do de Lord’s will.
These yer ’s all providences.” “They are a kind of providences that you’ll have to be pretty sparing of, Master Sam.
I allow no such practices with gentlemen on my place,” said Mr.
Shelby, with as much sternness as he could command, under the circumstances.
Now, there is no more use in making believe be angry with a negro than with a child; both instinctively see the true state of the case, through all attempts to affect the contrary; and Sam was in no wise disheartened by this rebuke, though he assumed an air of doleful gravity, and stood with the corners of his mouth lowered in most penitential style.
“Mas’r quite right,—quite; it was ugly on me,—there’s no disputin’ that ar; and of course Mas’r and Missis wouldn’t encourage no such works.
I’m sensible of dat ar; but a poor nigger like me ’s ’mazin’ tempted to act ugly sometimes, when fellers will cut up such shines as dat ar Mas’r Haley; he an’t no gen’l’man no way; anybody’s been raised as I’ve been can’t help a seein’ dat ar.” “Well, Sam,” said Mrs.
You and Andy must be hungry.” “Missis is a heap too good for us,” said Sam, making his bow with alacrity, and departing.
“I’ll speechify these yer niggers,” said Sam to himself, “now I’ve got a chance.
In fact, Sam considered oratory as his vocation, and never let slip an opportunity of magnifying his office.
The thing took accordingly.
Savory morsels of ham, golden blocks of corn-cake, fragments of pie of every conceivable mathematical figure, chicken wings, gizzards, and drumsticks, all appeared in picturesque confusion; and Sam, as monarch of all he surveyed, sat with his palm-leaf cocked rejoicingly to one side, and patronizing Andy at his right hand.
The kitchen was full of all his compeers, who had hurried and crowded in, from the various cabins, to hear the termination of the day’s exploits.
The story of the day was rehearsed, with all kinds of ornament and varnishing which might be necessary to heighten its effect; for Sam, like some of our fashionable dilettanti, never allowed a story to lose any of its gilding by passing through his hands.
Roars of laughter attended the narration, and were taken up and prolonged by all the smaller fry, who were lying, in any quantity, about on the floor, or perched in every corner.
In the height of the uproar and laughter, Sam, however, preserved an immovable gravity, only from time to time rolling his eyes up, and giving his auditors divers inexpressibly droll glances, without departing from the sententious elevation of his oratory.
“Yer see, fellow-countrymen,” said Sam, elevating a turkey’s leg, with energy, “yer see, now what dis yer chile ’s up ter, for fendin’ yer all,—yes, all on yer.
For him as tries to get one o’ our people is as good as tryin’ to get all; yer see the principle ’s de same,—dat ar’s clar.
“Dat ar was _conscience_, Andy; when I thought of gwine arter Lizy, I railly spected Mas’r was sot dat way.
When I found Missis was sot the contrar, dat ar was conscience _more yet_,—cause fellers allers gets more by stickin’ to Missis’ side,—so yer see I ’s persistent either way, and sticks up to conscience, and holds on to principles.
Yes, _principles_,” said Sam, giving an enthusiastic toss to a chicken’s neck,—“what’s principles good for, if we isn’t persistent, I wanter know?
Thar, Andy, you may have dat ar bone,—tan’t picked quite clean.” Sam’s audience hanging on his words with open mouth, he could not but proceed.
“Dis yer matter ’bout persistence, feller-niggers,” said Sam, with the air of one entering into an abstruse subject, “dis yer ’sistency ’s a thing what an’t seed into very clar, by most anybody.
Now, yer see, when a feller stands up for a thing one day and night, de contrar de next, folks ses (and nat’rally enough dey ses), why he an’t persistent,—hand me dat ar bit o’ corn-cake, Andy.
Wal, I puts up my larder dis yer side; ’tan’t no go;—den, cause I don’t try dere no more, but puts my larder right de contrar side, an’t I persistent?
I’m persistent in wantin’ to get up which ary side my larder is; don’t you see, all on yer?” “It’s the only thing ye ever was persistent in, Lord knows!” muttered Aunt Chloe, who was getting rather restive; the merriment of the evening being to her somewhat after the Scripture comparison,—like “vinegar upon nitre.” “Yes, indeed!” said Sam, rising, full of supper and glory, for a closing effort.
“Yes, my feller-citizens and ladies of de other sex in general, I has principles,—I’m proud to ’oon ’em,—they ’s perquisite to dese yer times, and ter _all_ times.
CHAPTER IX In Which It Appears That a Senator Is But a Man The light of the cheerful fire shone on the rug and carpet of a cosey parlor, and glittered on the sides of the tea-cups and well-brightened tea-pot, as Senator Bird was drawing off his boots, preparatory to inserting his feet in a pair of new handsome slippers, which his wife had been working for him while away on his senatorial tour.
Bird, looking the very picture of delight, was superintending the arrangements of the table, ever and anon mingling admonitory remarks to a number of frolicsome juveniles, who were effervescing in all those modes of untold gambol and mischief that have astonished mothers ever since the flood.
Jim, you mustn’t climb on that table,—no, no!—You don’t know, my dear, what a surprise it is to us all, to see you here tonight!” said she, at last, when she found a space to say something to her husband.
Bird cast a glance at a camphor-bottle, which stood in the half-open closet, and appeared to meditate an approach to it, but her husband interposed.
“No, no, Mary, no doctoring! a cup of your good hot tea, and some of our good home living, is what I want.
It’s a tiresome business, this legislating!” And the senator smiled, as if he rather liked the idea of considering himself a sacrifice to his country.
“Well,” said his wife, after the business of the tea-table was getting rather slack, “and what have they been doing in the Senate?” Now, it was a very unusual thing for gentle little Mrs.
Bird ever to trouble her head with what was going on in the house of the state, very wisely considering that she had enough to do to mind her own.
Bird, therefore, opened his eyes in surprise, and said, “Not very much of importance.” “Well; but is it true that they have been passing a law forbidding people to give meat and drink to those poor colored folks that come along?
I heard they were talking of some such law, but I didn’t think any Christian legislature would pass it!” “Why, Mary, you are getting to be a politician, all at once.” “No, nonsense!
I wouldn’t give a fig for all your politics, generally, but I think this is something downright cruel and unchristian.
It don’t forbid us to shelter those poor creatures a night, does it, and to give ’em something comfortable to eat, and a few old clothes, and send them quietly about their business?” “Why, yes, my dear; that would be aiding and abetting, you know.” Mrs.
Bird was a timid, blushing little woman, of about four feet in height, and with mild blue eyes, and a peach-blow complexion, and the gentlest, sweetest voice in the world;—as for courage, a moderate-sized cock-turkey had been known to put her to rout at the very first gobble, and a stout house-dog, of moderate capacity, would bring her into subjection merely by a show of his teeth.
Her husband and children were her entire world, and in these she ruled more by entreaty and persuasion than by command or argument.
There was only one thing that was capable of arousing her, and that provocation came in on the side of her unusually gentle and sympathetic nature;—anything in the shape of cruelty would throw her into a passion, which was the more alarming and inexplicable in proportion to the general softness of her nature.
Generally the most indulgent and easy to be entreated of all mothers, still her boys had a very reverent remembrance of a most vehement chastisement she once bestowed on them, because she found them leagued with several graceless boys of the neighborhood, stoning a defenceless kitten.
Mother came at me so that I thought she was crazy, and I was whipped and tumbled off to bed, without any supper, before I could get over wondering what had come about; and, after that, I heard mother crying outside the door, which made me feel worse than all the rest.
I’ll tell you what,” he’d say, “we boys never stoned another kitten!” On the present occasion, Mrs.
Poor, homeless, houseless creatures!
It’s a shameful, wicked, abominable law, and I’ll break it, for one, the first time I get a chance; and I hope I _shall_ have a chance, I do!
Things have got to a pretty pass, if a woman can’t give a warm supper and a bed to poor, starving creatures, just because they are slaves, and have been abused and oppressed all their lives, poor things!” “But, Mary, just listen to me.
“Now, listen to me, Mary, and I can state to you a very clear argument, to show—” “O, nonsense, John! you can talk all night, but you wouldn’t do it.
So he had recourse to the usual means of gaining time for such cases made and provided; he said “ahem,” and coughed several times, took out his pocket-handkerchief, and began to wipe his glasses.
Bird, seeing the defenceless condition of the enemy’s territory, had no more conscience than to push her advantage.
Turning a woman out of doors in a snowstorm, for instance; or may be you’d take her up and put her in jail, wouldn’t you?
Bird, in a moderate tone.
If folks want to keep their slaves from running away, let ’em treat ’em well,—that’s my doctrine.
I tell you folks don’t run away when they are happy; and when they do run, poor creatures! they suffer enough with cold and hunger and fear, without everybody’s turning against them; and, law or no law, I never will, so help me God!” “Mary!
My dear, let me reason with you.” “I hate reasoning, John,—especially reasoning on such subjects.
There’s a way you political folks have of coming round and round a plain right thing; and you don’t believe in it yourselves, when it comes to practice.
I do wish you’d come here, a moment.” He laid down his paper, and went into the kitchen, and started, quite amazed at the sight that presented itself:—A young and slender woman, with garments torn and frozen, with one shoe gone, and the stocking torn away from the cut and bleeding foot, was laid back in a deadly swoon upon two chairs.
There was the impress of the despised race on her face, yet none could help feeling its mournful and pathetic beauty, while its stony sharpness, its cold, fixed, deathly aspect, struck a solemn chill over him.
His wife, and their only colored domestic, old Aunt Dinah, were busily engaged in restorative measures; while old Cudjoe had got the boy on his knee, and was busy pulling off his shoes and stockings, and chafing his little cold feet.
“Sure, now, if she an’t a sight to behold!” said old Dinah, compassionately; “‘pears like ’t was the heat that made her faint.
Never done much hard work, guess, by the looks of her hands.” “Poor creature!” said Mrs.
Bird, compassionately, as the woman slowly unclosed her large, dark eyes, and looked vacantly at her.
Suddenly an expression of agony crossed her face, and she sprang up, saying, “O, my Harry!
“O, he’s here! he’s here!” she exclaimed.
Bird, encouragingly.
“You are safe; don’t be afraid.” “God bless you!” said the woman, covering her face and sobbing; while the little boy, seeing her crying, tried to get into her lap.
Bird, the poor woman was, in time, rendered more calm.
Bird had gone back to the parlor, where, strange as it may appear, no reference was made, on either side, to the preceding conversation; but Mrs.
Bird busied herself with her knitting-work, and Mr.
Bird pretended to be reading the paper.
Bird after musing in silence over his newspaper.
She seems to be rather larger than you are.” A quite perceptible smile glimmered on Mrs.
Bird’s face, as she answered, “We’ll see.” Another pause, and Mr.
What now?” “Why, there’s that old bombazin cloak, that you keep on purpose to put over me when I take my afternoon’s nap; you might as well give her that,—she needs clothes.” At this instant, Dinah looked in to say that the woman was awake, and wanted to see Missis.
Bird went into the kitchen, followed by the two eldest boys, the smaller fry having, by this time, been safely disposed of in bed.
She was looking steadily into the blaze, with a calm, heart-broken expression, very different from her former agitated wildness.
“I hope you feel better now, poor woman!” A long-drawn, shivering sigh was the only answer; but she lifted her dark eyes, and fixed them on her with such a forlorn and imploring expression, that the tears came into the little woman’s eyes.
“You needn’t be afraid of anything; we are friends here, poor woman!
“I came from Kentucky,” said the woman.
Bird, taking up the interogatory.
God helping me, I crossed on the ice; for they were behind me—right behind—and there was no other way!” “Law, Missis,” said Cudjoe, “the ice is all in broken-up blocks, a swinging and a tetering up and down in the water!” “I know it was—I know it!” said she, wildly; “but I did it!
The Lord helped me; nobody knows how much the Lord can help ’em, till they try,” said the woman, with a flashing eye.
“Yes, sir; I belonged to a man in Kentucky.” “Was he unkind to you?” “No, sir; he was a good master.” “And was your mistress unkind to you?” “No, sir—no! my mistress was always good to me.” “What could induce you to leave a good home, then, and run away, and go through such dangers?” The woman looked up at Mrs.
Bird, with a keen, scrutinizing glance, and it did not escape her that she was dressed in deep mourning.
“Ma’am,” she said, suddenly, “have you ever lost a child?” The question was unexpected, and it was thrust on a new wound; for it was only a month since a darling child of the family had been laid in the grave.
Bird burst into tears; but, recovering her voice, she said, “Why do you ask that?
I knew I never should be good for anything, if they did; and when I knew the papers were signed, and he was sold, I took him and came off in the night; and they chased me,—the man that bought him, and some of Mas’r’s folks,—and they were coming down right behind me, and I heard ’em.
She had gone to a place where tears are dry; but every one around her was, in some way characteristic of themselves, showing signs of hearty sympathy.
The two little boys, after a desperate rummaging in their pockets, in search of those pocket-handkerchiefs which mothers know are never to be found there, had thrown themselves disconsolately into the skirts of their mother’s gown, where they were sobbing, and wiping their eyes and noses, to their hearts’ content;—Mrs.
Bird had her face fairly hidden in her pocket-handkerchief; and old Dinah, with tears streaming down her black, honest face, was ejaculating, “Lord have mercy on us!” with all the fervor of a camp-meeting;—while old Cudjoe, rubbing his eyes very hard with his cuffs, and making a most uncommon variety of wry faces, occasionally responded in the same key, with great fervor.
Our senator was a statesman, and of course could not be expected to cry, like other mortals; and so he turned his back to the company, and looked out of the window, and seemed particularly busy in clearing his throat and wiping his spectacle-glasses, occasionally blowing his nose in a manner that was calculated to excite suspicion, had any one been in a state to observe critically.
“How came you to tell me you had a kind master?” he suddenly exclaimed, gulping down very resolutely some kind of rising in his throat, and turning suddenly round upon the woman.
“Because he _was_ a kind master; I’ll say that of him, any way;—and my mistress was kind; but they couldn’t help themselves.
I listened, and heard him telling mistress that, and she begging and pleading for me,—and he told her he couldn’t help himself, and that the papers were all drawn;—and then it was I took him and left my home, and came away.
Is it very far off, is Canada?” said she, looking up, with a simple, confiding air, to Mrs.
Bird, involuntarily.
“Is ’t a very great way off, think?” said the woman, earnestly.
Meanwhile, never fear, poor woman; put your trust in God; he will protect you.” Mrs.
Bird and her husband reentered the parlor.
She sat down in her little rocking-chair before the fire, swaying thoughtfully to and fro.
Bird strode up and down the room, grumbling to himself, “Pish! pshaw! confounded awkward business!” At length, striding up to his wife, he said, “I say, wife, she’ll have to get away from here, this very night.
That fellow will be down on the scent bright and early tomorrow morning: if ’t was only the woman, she could lie quiet till it was over; but that little chap can’t be kept still by a troop of horse and foot, I’ll warrant me; he’ll bring it all out, popping his head out of some window or door.
How is it possible?—where to?” “Well, I know pretty well where to,” said the senator, beginning to put on his boots, with a reflective air; and, stopping when his leg was half in, he embraced his knee with both hands, and seemed to go off in deep meditation.
“It’s a confounded awkward, ugly business,” said he, at last, beginning to tug at his boot-straps again, “and that’s a fact!” After one boot was fairly on, the senator sat with the other in his hand, profoundly studying the figure of the carpet.
“It will have to be done, though, for aught I see,—hang it all!” and he drew the other boot anxiously on, and looked out of the window.
Bird was a discreet woman,—a woman who never in her life said, “I told you so!” and, on the present occasion, though pretty well aware of the shape her husband’s meditations were taking, she very prudently forbore to meddle with them, only sat very quietly in her chair, and looked quite ready to hear her liege lord’s intentions, when he should think proper to utter them.
“You see,” he said, “there’s my old client, Van Trompe, has come over from Kentucky, and set all his slaves free; and he has bought a place seven miles up the creek, here, back in the woods, where nobody goes, unless they go on purpose; and it’s a place that isn’t found in a hurry.
There she’d be safe enough; but the plague of the thing is, nobody could drive a carriage there tonight, but _me_.” “Why not?
Cudjoe is an excellent driver.” “Ay, ay, but here it is.
The creek has to be crossed twice; and the second crossing is quite dangerous, unless one knows it as I do.
I have crossed it a hundred times on horseback, and know exactly the turns to take.
Cudjoe must put in the horses, as quietly as may be, about twelve o’clock, and I’ll take her over; and then, to give color to the matter, he must carry me on to the next tavern to take the stage for Columbus, that comes by about three or four, and so it will look as if I had had the carriage only for that.
I shall get into business bright and early in the morning.
But I’m thinking I shall feel rather cheap there, after all that’s been said and done; but, hang it, I can’t help it!” “Your heart is better than your head, in this case, John,” said the wife, laying her little white hand on his.
“Could I ever have loved you, had I not known you better than you know yourself?” And the little woman looked so handsome, with the tears sparkling in her eyes, that the senator thought he must be a decidedly clever fellow, to get such a pretty creature into such a passionate admiration of him; and so, what could he do but walk off soberly, to see about the carriage.
At the door, however, he stopped a moment, and then coming back, he said, with some hesitation.
His wife opened the little bed-room door adjoining her room and, taking the candle, set it down on the top of a bureau there; then from a small recess she took a key, and put it thoughtfully in the lock of a drawer, and made a sudden pause, while two boys, who, boy like, had followed close on her heels, stood looking, with silent, significant glances, at their mother.
There were little coats of many a form and pattern, piles of aprons, and rows of small stockings; and even a pair of little shoes, worn and rubbed at the toes, were peeping from the folds of a paper.
There was a toy horse and wagon, a top, a ball,—memorials gathered with many a tear and many a heart-break!
She sat down by the drawer, and, leaning her head on her hands over it, wept till the tears fell through her fingers into the drawer; then suddenly raising her head, she began, with nervous haste, selecting the plainest and most substantial articles, and gathering them into a bundle.
“Mamma,” said one of the boys, gently touching her arm, “you going to give away _those_ things?” “My dear boys,” she said, softly and earnestly, “if our dear, loving little Henry looks down from heaven, he would be glad to have us do this.
Among such was the delicate woman who sits there by the lamp, dropping slow tears, while she prepares the memorials of her own lost one for the outcast wanderer.
Bird opened a wardrobe, and, taking from thence a plain, serviceable dress or two, she sat down busily to her work-table, and, with needle, scissors, and thimble, at hand, quietly commenced the “letting down” process which her husband had recommended, and continued busily at it till the old clock in the corner struck twelve, and she heard the low rattling of wheels at the door.
“Mary,” said her husband, coming in, with his overcoat in his hand, “you must wake her up now; we must be off.” Mrs.
Bird hastily deposited the various articles she had collected in a small plain trunk, and locking it, desired her husband to see it in the carriage, and then proceeded to call the woman.
Soon, arrayed in a cloak, bonnet, and shawl, that had belonged to her benefactress, she appeared at the door with her child in her arms.
Bird hurried her into the carriage, and Mrs.
Bird pressed on after her to the carriage steps.
Eliza leaned out of the carriage, and put out her hand,—a hand as soft and beautiful as was given in return.
Her lips moved,—she tried once or twice, but there was no sound,—and pointing upward, with a look never to be forgotten, she fell back in the seat, and covered her face.
The door was shut, and the carriage drove on.
What a situation, now, for a patriotic senator, that had been all the week before spurring up the legislature of his native state to pass more stringent resolutions against escaping fugitives, their harborers and abettors!
Our good senator in his native state had not been exceeded by any of his brethren at Washington, in the sort of eloquence which has won for them immortal renown!
How sublimely he had sat with his hands in his pockets, and scouted all sentimental weakness of those who would put the welfare of a few miserable fugitives before great state interests!
He was as bold as a lion about it, and “mightily convinced” not only himself, but everybody that heard him;—but then his idea of a fugitive was only an idea of the letters that spell the word,—or at the most, the image of a little newspaper picture of a man with a stick and bundle with “Ran away from the subscriber” under it.
The magic of the real presence of distress,—the imploring human eye, the frail, trembling human hand, the despairing appeal of helpless agony,—these he had never tried.
He had never thought that a fugitive might be a hapless mother, a defenceless child,—like that one which was now wearing his lost boy’s little well-known cap; and so, as our poor senator was not stone or steel,—as he was a man, and a downright noble-hearted one, too,—he was, as everybody must see, in a sad case for his patriotism.
And you need not exult over him, good brother of the Southern States; for we have some inklings that many of you, under similar circumstances, would not do much better.
We have reason to know, in Kentucky, as in Mississippi, are noble and generous hearts, to whom never was tale of suffering told in vain.
Ah, good brother! is it fair for you to expect of us services which your own brave, honorable heart would not allow you to render, were you in our place?
Be that as it may, if our good senator was a political sinner, he was in a fair way to expiate it by his night’s penance.
There had been a long continuous period of rainy weather, and the soft, rich earth of Ohio, as every one knows, is admirably suited to the manufacture of mud—and the road was an Ohio railroad of the good old times.
“And pray, what sort of a road may that be?” says some eastern traveller, who has been accustomed to connect no ideas with a railroad, but those of smoothness or speed.
Know, then, innocent eastern friend, that in benighted regions of the west, where the mud is of unfathomable and sublime depth, roads are made of round rough logs, arranged transversely side by side, and coated over in their pristine freshness with earth, turf, and whatsoever may come to hand, and then the rejoicing native calleth it a road, and straightway essayeth to ride thereupon.
In process of time, the rains wash off all the turf and grass aforesaid, move the logs hither and thither, in picturesque positions, up, down and crosswise, with divers chasms and ruts of black mud intervening.
Over such a road as this our senator went stumbling along, making moral reflections as continuously as under the circumstances could be expected,—the carriage proceeding along much as follows,—bump! bump! bump! slush! down in the mud!—the senator, woman and child, reversing their positions so suddenly as to come, without any very accurate adjustment, against the windows of the down-hill side.
Carriage sticks fast, while Cudjoe on the outside is heard making a great muster among the horses.
Carriage springs up, with another bounce,—down go the hind wheels,—senator, woman, and child, fly over on to the back seat, his elbows encountering her bonnet, and both her feet being jammed into his hat, which flies off in the concussion.
After a few moments the “slough” is passed, and the horses stop, panting;—the senator finds his hat, the woman straightens her bonnet and hushes her child, and they brace themselves for what is yet to come.
For a while only the continuous bump! bump! intermingled, just by way of variety, with divers side plunges and compound shakes; and they begin to flatter themselves that they are not so badly off, after all.
At last, with a square plunge, which puts all on to their feet and then down into their seats with incredible quickness, the carriage stops,—and, after much outside commotion, Cudjoe appears at the door.
“Please, sir, it’s powerful bad spot, this’ yer.
I’m a thinkin’ we’ll have to be a gettin’ rails.” The senator despairingly steps out, picking gingerly for some firm foothold; down goes one foot an immeasurable depth,—he tries to pull it up, loses his balance, and tumbles over into the mud, and is fished out, in a very despairing condition, by Cudjoe.
But we forbear, out of sympathy to our readers’ bones.
Western travellers, who have beguiled the midnight hour in the interesting process of pulling down rail fences, to pry their carriages out of mud holes, will have a respectful and mournful sympathy with our unfortunate hero.
It was full late in the night when the carriage emerged, dripping and bespattered, out of the creek, and stood at the door of a large farmhouse.
It took no inconsiderable perseverance to arouse the inmates; but at last the respectable proprietor appeared, and undid the door.
He was a great, tall, bristling Orson of a fellow, full six feet and some inches in his stockings, and arrayed in a red flannel hunting-shirt.
A very heavy mat of sandy hair, in a decidedly tousled condition, and a beard of some days’ growth, gave the worthy man an appearance, to say the least, not particularly prepossessing.
He stood for a few minutes holding the candle aloft, and blinking on our travellers with a dismal and mystified expression that was truly ludicrous.
It cost some effort of our senator to induce him to comprehend the case fully; and while he is doing his best at that, we shall give him a little introduction to our readers.
Honest old John Van Trompe was once quite a considerable land-owner and slave-owner in the State of Kentucky.
Having “nothing of the bear about him but the skin,” and being gifted by nature with a great, honest, just heart, quite equal to his gigantic frame, he had been for some years witnessing with repressed uneasiness the workings of a system equally bad for oppressor and oppressed.
“Are you the man that will shelter a poor woman and child from slave-catchers?” said the senator, explicitly.
“I rather think I am,” said honest John, with some considerable emphasis.
“If there’s anybody comes,” said the good man, stretching his tall, muscular form upward, “why here I’m ready for him: and I’ve got seven sons, each six foot high, and they’ll be ready for ’em.
Give our respects to ’em,” said John; “tell ’em it’s no matter how soon they call,—make no kinder difference to us,” said John, running his fingers through the shock of hair that thatched his head, and bursting out into a great laugh.
Weary, jaded, and spiritless, Eliza dragged herself up to the door, with her child lying in a heavy sleep on her arm.
The rough man held the candle to her face, and uttering a kind of compassionate grunt, opened the door of a small bed-room adjoining to the large kitchen where they were standing, and motioned her to go in.
He took down a candle, and lighting it, set it upon the table, and then addressed himself to Eliza.
I’m up to all that sort o’ thing,” said he, pointing to two or three goodly rifles over the mantel-piece; “and most people that know me know that ’t wouldn’t be healthy to try to get anybody out o’ my house when I’m agin it.
“Why, this is an uncommon handsome un,” he said to the senator.
“Ah, well; handsome uns has the greatest cause to run, sometimes, if they has any kind o’ feelin, such as decent women should.
I know all about that.” The senator, in a few words, briefly explained Eliza’s history.
“O! ou! aw! now, I want to know?” said the good man, pitifully; “sho! now sho!
I tell ye what, these yer things make me come the nighest to swearin’, now, o’ most anything,” said honest John, as he wiped his eyes with the back of a great, freckled, yellow hand.
“I tell yer what, stranger, it was years and years before I’d jine the church, ’cause the ministers round in our parts used to preach that the Bible went in for these ere cuttings up,—and I couldn’t be up to ’em with their Greek and Hebrew, and so I took up agin ’em, Bible and all.
I never jined the church till I found a minister that was up to ’em all in Greek and all that, and he said right the contrary; and then I took right hold, and jined the church,—I did now, fact,” said John, who had been all this time uncorking some very frisky bottled cider, which at this juncture he presented.
“Ye’d better jest put up here, now, till daylight,” said he, heartily, “and I’ll call up the old woman, and have a bed got ready for you in no time.” “Thank you, my good friend,” said the senator, “I must be along, to take the night stage for Columbus.” “Ah! well, then, if you must, I’ll go a piece with you, and show you a cross road that will take you there better than the road you came on.
That road’s mighty bad.” John equipped himself, and, with a lantern in hand, was soon seen guiding the senator’s carriage towards a road that ran down in a hollow, back of his dwelling.
“Ay, ay,” said John, with equal conciseness.
CHAPTER X The Property Is Carried Off The February morning looked gray and drizzling through the window of Uncle Tom’s cabin.
It looked on downcast faces, the images of mournful hearts.
Carefully she rubbed and ironed every fold and every hem, with the most scrupulous exactness, every now and then raising her hand to her face to wipe off the tears that were coursing down her cheeks.
Tom sat by, with his Testament open on his knee, and his head leaning upon his hand;—but neither spoke.
It was yet early, and the children lay all asleep together in their little rude trundle-bed.
Tom, who had, to the full, the gentle, domestic heart, which woe for them! has been a peculiar characteristic of his unhappy race, got up and walked silently to look at his children.
Aunt Chloe did not answer, only rubbed away over and over on the coarse shirt, already as smooth as hands could make it; and finally setting her iron suddenly down with a despairing plunge, she sat down to the table, and “lifted up her voice and wept.” “S’pose we must be resigned; but oh Lord! how ken I?
If I know’d anything whar you ’s goin’, or how they’d sarve you!
I’ve hearn ’em tell how dey works ’em up on dem ar plantations.” “There’ll be the same God there, Chloe, that there is here.” “Well,” said Aunt Chloe, “s’pose dere will; but de Lord lets drefful things happen, sometimes.
Here you’re safe;—what comes will come only on me; and the Lord, he’ll help me,—I know he will.” Ah, brave, manly heart,—smothering thine own sorrow, to comfort thy beloved ones!
Tom spoke with a thick utterance, and with a bitter choking in his throat,—but he spoke brave and strong.
“Let’s think on our marcies!” he added, tremulously, as if he was quite sure he needed to think on them very hard indeed.
Sich a faithful crittur as ye’ve been,—and allers sot his business ’fore yer own every way,—and reckoned on him more than yer own wife and chil’en!
Them as sells heart’s love and heart’s blood, to get out thar scrapes, de Lord’ll be up to ’em!” “Chloe! now, if ye love me, ye won’t talk so, when perhaps jest the last time we’ll ever have together!
Set him ’longside of other Mas’rs—who’s had the treatment and livin’ I’ve had?
And he never would have let this yer come on me, if he could have seed it aforehand.
I know he wouldn’t.” “Wal, any way, thar’s wrong about it _somewhar_,” said Aunt Chloe, in whom a stubborn sense of justice was a predominant trait; “I can’t jest make out whar ’t is, but thar’s wrong somewhar, I’m _clar_ o’ that.” “Yer ought ter look up to the Lord above—he’s above all—thar don’t a sparrow fall without him.” “It don’t seem to comfort me, but I spect it orter,” said Aunt Chloe.
“But dar’s no use talkin’; I’ll jes wet up de corn-cake, and get ye one good breakfast, ’cause nobody knows when you’ll get another.” In order to appreciate the sufferings of the negroes sold south, it must be remembered that all the instinctive affections of that race are peculiarly strong.
Their local attachments are very abiding.
They are not naturally daring and enterprising, but home-loving and affectionate.
Add to this all the terrors with which ignorance invests the unknown, and add to this, again, that selling to the south is set before the negro from childhood as the last severity of punishment.
The threat that terrifies more than whipping or torture of any kind is the threat of being sent down river.
We have ourselves heard this feeling expressed by them, and seen the unaffected horror with which they will sit in their gossipping hours, and tell frightful stories of that “down river,” which to them is “That undiscovered country, from whose bourn No traveller returns.”[1] [1] A slightly inaccurate quotation from _Hamlet_, Act III, scene I, lines 369-370.
A missionary figure among the fugitives in Canada told us that many of the fugitives confessed themselves to have escaped from comparatively kind masters, and that they were induced to brave the perils of escape, in almost every case, by the desperate horror with which they regarded being sold south,—a doom which was hanging either over themselves or their husbands, their wives or children.
This nerves the African, naturally patient, timid and unenterprising, with heroic courage, and leads him to suffer hunger, cold, pain, the perils of the wilderness, and the more dread penalties of recapture.
Shelby had excused Aunt Chloe’s attendance at the great house that morning.
The poor soul had expended all her little energies on this farewell feast,—had killed and dressed her choicest chicken, and prepared her corn-cake with scrupulous exactness, just to her husband’s taste, and brought out certain mysterious jars on the mantel-piece, some preserves that were never produced except on extreme occasions.
“Lor, Pete,” said Mose, triumphantly, “han’t we got a buster of a breakfast!” at the same time catching at a fragment of the chicken.
“Thar now! crowing over the last breakfast yer poor daddy’s gwine to have to home!” “O, Chloe!” said Tom, gently.
“Wal, I can’t help it,” said Aunt Chloe, hiding her face in her apron; “I ’s so tossed about, it makes me act ugly.” The boys stood quite still, looking first at their father and then at their mother, while the baby, climbing up her clothes, began an imperious, commanding cry.
“Thar!” said Aunt Chloe, wiping her eyes and taking up the baby; “now I’s done, I hope,—now do eat something.
Thar, boys, ye shall have some, poor critturs!
Yer mammy’s been cross to yer.” The boys needed no second invitation, and went in with great zeal for the eatables; and it was well they did so, as otherwise there would have been very little performed to any purpose by the party.
“Now,” said Aunt Chloe, bustling about after breakfast, “I must put up yer clothes.
Wal, now, yer flannels for rhumatis is in this corner; so be careful, ’cause there won’t nobody make ye no more.
I toed off these yer stockings last night, and put de ball in ’em to mend with.
But Lor! who’ll ever mend for ye?” and Aunt Chloe, again overcome, laid her head on the box side, and sobbed.
I don’t railly think I ought ter be good now!” The boys, having eaten everything there was on the breakfast-table, began now to take some thought of the case; and, seeing their mother crying, and their father looking very sad, began to whimper and put their hands to their eyes.
Uncle Tom had the baby on his knee, and was letting her enjoy herself to the utmost extent, scratching his face and pulling his hair, and occasionally breaking out into clamorous explosions of delight, evidently arising out of her own internal reflections.
Aunt Chloe set a chair for her in a manner decidedly gruff and crusty.
“Tom,” she said, “I come to—” and stopping suddenly, and regarding the silent group, she sat down in the chair, and, covering her face with her handkerchief, began to sob.
“Lor, now, Missis, don’t—don’t!” said Aunt Chloe, bursting out in her turn; and for a few moments they all wept in company.
And in those tears they all shed together, the high and the lowly, melted away all the heart-burnings and anger of the oppressed.
O, ye who visit the distressed, do ye know that everything your money can buy, given with a cold, averted face, is not worth one honest tear shed in real sympathy?
Shelby, “I can’t give you anything to do you any good.
But I tell you solemnly, and before God, that I will keep trace of you, and bring you back as soon as I can command the money;—and, till then, trust in God!” Here the boys called out that Mas’r Haley was coming, and then an unceremonious kick pushed open the door.
Haley stood there in very ill humor, having ridden hard the night before, and being not at all pacified by his ill success in recapturing his prey.
Aunt Chloe shut and corded the box, and, getting up, looked gruffly on the trader, her tears seeming suddenly turned to sparks of fire.
Tom rose up meekly, to follow his new master, and raised up his heavy box on his shoulder.
His wife took the baby in her arms to go with him to the wagon, and the children, still crying, trailed on behind.
Shelby, walking up to the trader, detained him for a few moments, talking with him in an earnest manner; and while she was thus talking, the whole family party proceeded to a wagon, that stood ready harnessed at the door.
A crowd of all the old and young hands on the place stood gathered around it, to bid farewell to their old associate.
Tom had been looked up to, both as a head servant and a Christian teacher, by all the place, and there was much honest sympathy and grief about him, particularly among the women.
“Why, Chloe, you bar it better ’n we do!” said one of the women, who had been weeping freely, noticing the gloomy calmness with which Aunt Chloe stood by the wagon.
“I does not feel to cry ’fore dat ar old limb, no how!” “Get in!” said Haley to Tom, as he strode through the crowd of servants, who looked at him with lowering brows.
Tom got in, and Haley, drawing out from under the wagon seat a heavy pair of shackles, made them fast around each ankle.
A smothered groan of indignation ran through the whole circle, and Mrs.
Shelby spoke from the verandah,—“Mr.
Haley, I assure you that precaution is entirely unnecessary.” “Don’ know, ma’am; I’ve lost one five hundred dollars from this yer place, and I can’t afford to run no more risks.” “What else could she spect on him?” said Aunt Chloe, indignantly, while the two boys, who now seemed to comprehend at once their father’s destiny, clung to her gown, sobbing and groaning vehemently.
“I’m sorry,” said Tom, “that Mas’r George happened to be away.” George had gone to spend two or three days with a companion on a neighboring estate, and having departed early in the morning, before Tom’s misfortune had been made public, had left without hearing of it.
“Give my love to Mas’r George,” he said, earnestly.
Haley whipped up the horse, and, with a steady, mournful look, fixed to the last on the old place, Tom was whirled away.
He had sold Tom under the spur of a driving necessity, to get out of the power of a man whom he dreaded,—and his first feeling, after the consummation of the bargain, had been that of relief.
But his wife’s expostulations awoke his half-slumbering regrets; and Tom’s manly disinterestedness increased the unpleasantness of his feelings.
It was in vain that he said to himself that he had a _right_ to do it,—that everybody did it,—and that some did it without even the excuse of necessity;—he could not satisfy his own feelings; and that he might not witness the unpleasant scenes of the consummation, he had gone on a short business tour up the country, hoping that all would be over before he returned.
Tom and Haley rattled on along the dusty road, whirling past every old familiar spot, until the bounds of the estate were fairly passed, and they found themselves out on the open pike.
After they had ridden about a mile, Haley suddenly drew up at the door of a blacksmith’s shop, when, taking out with him a pair of handcuffs, he stepped into the shop, to have a little alteration in them.
“These yer ’s a little too small for his build,” said Haley, showing the fetters, and pointing out to Tom.
Why, ye needn’t go to fetterin’ him up this yer way.
He’s the faithfullest, best crittur—” “Yes, yes,” said Haley; “but your good fellers are just the critturs to want ter run off.
Them stupid ones, as doesn’t care whar they go, and shifless, drunken ones, as don’t care for nothin’, they’ll stick by, and like as not be rather pleased to be toted round; but these yer prime fellers, they hates it like sin.
“Wal, now, a feller can’t help thinkin’ it’s a mighty pity to have a nice, quiet, likely feller, as good un as Tom is, go down to be fairly ground up on one of them ar sugar plantations.” “Wal, he’s got a fa’r chance.
I promised to do well by him.
I’ll get him in house-servant in some good old family, and then, if he stands the fever and ’climating, he’ll have a berth good as any nigger ought ter ask for.” “He leaves his wife and chil’en up here, s’pose?” “Yes; but he’ll get another thar.
Lord, thar’s women enough everywhar,” said Haley.
Tom was sitting very mournfully on the outside of the shop while this conversation was going on.
Suddenly he heard the quick, short click of a horse’s hoof behind him; and, before he could fairly awake from his surprise, young Master George sprang into the wagon, threw his arms tumultuously round his neck, and was sobbing and scolding with energy.
It does me real good, ye can’t tell!” Here Tom made some movement of his feet, and George’s eye fell on the fetters.
“What a shame!” he exclaimed, lifting his hands.
Look here, Uncle Tom,” said he, turning his back to the shop, and speaking in a mysterious tone, _“I’ve brought you my dollar!”_ “O!
I tell ye, Tom, I want to blow him up! it would do me good!” “No, don’t Mas’r George, for it won’t do _me_ any good.” “Well, I won’t, for your sake,” said George, busily tying his dollar round Tom’s neck; “but there, now, button your coat tight over it, and keep it, and remember, every time you see it, that I’ll come down after you, and bring you back.
Mas’r George, ye mustn’t talk so ’bout yer father!” “Lor, Uncle Tom, I don’t mean anything bad.” “And now, Mas’r George,” said Tom, “ye must be a good boy; ’member how many hearts is sot on ye.
So, now, you hold on to her, and grow up, and be a comfort to her, thar’s my own good boy,—you will now, won’t ye?” “Yes, I will, Uncle Tom,” said George seriously.
“And be careful of yer speaking, Mas’r George.
Young boys, when they comes to your age, is wilful, sometimes—it is natur they should be.
But real gentlemen, such as I hopes you’ll be, never lets fall on words that isn’t ’spectful to thar parents.
Ye an’t ’fended, Mas’r George?” “No, indeed, Uncle Tom; you always did give me good advice.” “I’s older, ye know,” said Tom, stroking the boy’s fine, curly head with his large, strong hand, but speaking in a voice as tender as a woman’s, “and I sees all that’s bound up in you.
O, Mas’r George, you has everything,—l’arnin’, privileges, readin’, writin’,—and you’ll grow up to be a great, learned, good man and all the people on the place and your mother and father’ll be so proud on ye!
Be a good Mas’r, like yer father; and be a Christian, like yer mother. ’Member yer Creator in the days o’ yer youth, Mas’r George.” “I’ll be _real_ good, Uncle Tom, I tell you,” said George.
“I’m going to be a _first-rater_; and don’t you be discouraged.
O, you’ll have good times yet!” Haley now came to the door, with the handcuffs in his hands.
“Look here, now, Mister,” said George, with an air of great superiority, as he got out, “I shall let father and mother know how you treat Uncle Tom!” “You’re welcome,” said the trader.
“I should think you’d be ashamed to spend all your life buying men and women, and chaining them, like cattle!
“So long as your grand folks wants to buy men and women, I’m as good as they is,” said Haley; “‘tan’t any meaner sellin’ on ’em, that ’t is buyin’!” “I’ll never do either, when I’m a man,” said George; “I’m ashamed, this day, that I’m a Kentuckian.
I always was proud of it before;” and George sat very straight on his horse, and looked round with an air, as if he expected the state would be impressed with his opinion.
“Good-by, Mas’r George,” said Tom, looking fondly and admiringly at him.
“God Almighty bless you!
Kentucky han’t got many like you!” he said, in the fulness of his heart, as the frank, boyish face was lost to his view.
But over his heart there seemed to be a warm spot, where those young hands had placed that precious dollar.
“Now, I tell ye what, Tom,” said Haley, as he came up to the wagon, and threw in the handcuffs, “I mean to start fa’r with ye, as I gen’ally do with my niggers; and I’ll tell ye now, to begin with, you treat me fa’r, and I’ll treat you fa’r; I an’t never hard on my niggers.
Calculates to do the best for ’em I can.
Now, ye see, you’d better jest settle down comfortable, and not be tryin’ no tricks; because nigger’s tricks of all sorts I’m up to, and it’s no use.
If niggers is quiet, and don’t try to get off, they has good times with me; and if they don’t, why, it’s thar fault, and not mine.” Tom assured Haley that he had no present intentions of running off.
In fact, the exhortation seemed rather a superfluous one to a man with a great pair of iron fetters on his feet.
Haley had got in the habit of commencing his relations with his stock with little exhortations of this nature, calculated, as he deemed, to inspire cheerfulness and confidence, and prevent the necessity of any unpleasant scenes.
And here, for the present, we take our leave of Tom, to pursue the fortunes of other characters in our story.
CHAPTER XI In Which Property Gets into an Improper State of Mind It was late in a drizzly afternoon that a traveler alighted at the door of a small country hotel, in the village of N——, in Kentucky.
In the barroom he found assembled quite a miscellaneous company, whom stress of weather had driven to harbor, and the place presented the usual scenery of such reunions.
Great, tall, raw-boned Kentuckians, attired in hunting-shirts, and trailing their loose joints over a vast extent of territory, with the easy lounge peculiar to the race,—rifles stacked away in the corner, shot-pouches, game-bags, hunting-dogs, and little negroes, all rolled together in the corners,—were the characteristic features in the picture.
At each end of the fireplace sat a long-legged gentleman, with his chair tipped back, his hat on his head, and the heels of his muddy boots reposing sublimely on the mantel-piece,—a position, we will inform our readers, decidedly favorable to the turn of reflection incident to western taverns, where travellers exhibit a decided preference for this particular mode of elevating their understandings.
Mine host, who stood behind the bar, like most of his country men, was great of stature, good-natured and loose-jointed, with an enormous shock of hair on his head, and a great tall hat on the top of that.
In fact, everybody in the room bore on his head this characteristic emblem of man’s sovereignty; whether it were felt hat, palm-leaf, greasy beaver, or fine new chapeau, there it reposed with true republican independence.
In truth, it appeared to be the characteristic mark of every individual.
The various hats, in fact, were quite a Shakespearean study.
Divers negroes, in very free-and-easy pantaloons, and with no redundancy in the shirt line, were scuttling about, hither and thither, without bringing to pass any very particular results, except expressing a generic willingness to turn over everything in creation generally for the benefit of Mas’r and his guests.
Add to this picture a jolly, crackling, rollicking fire, going rejoicingly up a great wide chimney,—the outer door and every window being set wide open, and the calico window-curtain flopping and snapping in a good stiff breeze of damp raw air,—and you have an idea of the jollities of a Kentucky tavern.
Your Kentuckian of the present day is a good illustration of the doctrine of transmitted instincts and peculiarities.
Into such an assembly of the free and easy our traveller entered.
He was a short, thick-set man, carefully dressed, with a round, good-natured countenance, and something rather fussy and particular in his appearance.
He was very careful of his valise and umbrella, bringing them in with his own hands, and resisting, pertinaciously, all offers from the various servants to relieve him of them.
He looked round the barroom with rather an anxious air, and, retreating with his valuables to the warmest corner, disposed them under his chair, sat down, and looked rather apprehensively up at the worthy whose heels illustrated the end of the mantel-piece, who was spitting from right to left, with a courage and energy rather alarming to gentlemen of weak nerves and particular habits.
“I say, stranger, how are ye?” said the aforesaid gentleman, firing an honorary salute of tobacco-juice in the direction of the new arrival.
“Well, I reckon,” was the reply of the other, as he dodged, with some alarm, the threatening honor.
“Any news?” said the respondent, taking out a strip of tobacco and a large hunting-knife from his pocket.
“Chaw?” said the first speaker, handing the old gentleman a bit of his tobacco, with a decidedly brotherly air.
The old gentleman uniformly gave a little start whenever his long-sided brother fired in his direction; and this being observed by his companion, he very good-naturedly turned his artillery to another quarter, and proceeded to storm one of the fire-irons with a degree of military talent fully sufficient to take a city.
“What’s that?” said the old gentleman, observing some of the company formed in a group around a large handbill.
“Nigger advertised!” said one of the company, briefly.
Wilson, for that was the old gentleman’s name, rose up, and, after carefully adjusting his valise and umbrella, proceeded deliberately to take out his spectacles and fix them on his nose; and, this operation being performed, read as follows: “Ran away from the subscriber, my mulatto boy, George.
Said George six feet in height, a very light mulatto, brown curly hair; is very intelligent, speaks handsomely, can read and write, will probably try to pass for a white man, is deeply scarred on his back and shoulders, has been branded in his right hand with the letter H.
“I will give four hundred dollars for him alive, and the same sum for satisfactory proof that he has been _killed.”_ The old gentleman read this advertisement from end to end in a low voice, as if he were studying it.
The long-legged veteran, who had been besieging the fire-iron, as before related, now took down his cumbrous length, and rearing aloft his tall form, walked up to the advertisement and very deliberately spit a full discharge of tobacco-juice on it.
“Why, now, stranger, what’s that for?” said mine host.
“I’d do it all the same to the writer of that ar paper, if he was here,” said the long man, coolly resuming his old employment of cutting tobacco.
“Any man that owns a boy like that, and can’t find any better way o’ treating on him, _deserves_ to lose him.
Such papers as these is a shame to Kentucky; that’s my mind right out, if anybody wants to know!” “Well, now, that’s a fact,” said mine host, as he made an entry in his book.
“I’ve got a gang of boys, sir,” said the long man, resuming his attack on the fire-irons, “and I jest tells ’em—‘Boys,’ says I,—‘_run_ now! dig! put! jest when ye want to!
More ’n all, I’ve got free papers for ’em all recorded, in case I gets keeled up any o’ these times, and they know it; and I tell ye, stranger, there an’t a fellow in our parts gets more out of his niggers than I do.
Why, my boys have been to Cincinnati, with five hundred dollars’ worth of colts, and brought me back the money, all straight, time and agin.
Treat ’em like men, and you’ll have men’s works.” And the honest drover, in his warmth, endorsed this moral sentiment by firing a perfect _feu de joi_ at the fireplace.
“I think you’re altogether right, friend,” said Mr.
Wilson; “and this boy described here _is_ a fine fellow—no mistake about that.
He is an ingenious fellow, too: he invented a machine for the cleaning of hemp—a really valuable affair; it’s gone into use in several factories.
If I had a fair chance, I’d mark him, I reckon so that he’d carry it _one_ while.” “These yer knowin’ boys is allers aggravatin’ and sarcy,” said a coarse-looking fellow, from the other side of the room; “that’s why they gets cut up and marked so.
If they behaved themselves, they wouldn’t.” “That is to say, the Lord made ’em men, and it’s a hard squeeze gettin ’em down into beasts,” said the drover, dryly.
“Bright niggers isn’t no kind of ’vantage to their masters,” continued the other, well entrenched, in a coarse, unconscious obtuseness, from the contempt of his opponent; “what’s the use o’ talents and them things, if you can’t get the use on ’em yourself?
I knew I’d got to lose ’em, first or last, if I didn’t.” “Better send orders up to the Lord, to make you a set, and leave out their souls entirely,” said the drover.
Here the conversation was interrupted by the approach of a small one-horse buggy to the inn.
It had a genteel appearance, and a well-dressed, gentlemanly man sat on the seat, with a colored servant driving.
The whole party examined the new comer with the interest with which a set of loafers in a rainy day usually examine every newcomer.
He was very tall, with a dark, Spanish complexion, fine, expressive black eyes, and close-curling hair, also of a glossy blackness.
His well-formed aquiline nose, straight thin lips, and the admirable contour of his finely-formed limbs, impressed the whole company instantly with the idea of something uncommon.
He walked easily in among the company, and with a nod indicated to his waiter where to place his trunk, bowed to the company, and, with his hat in his hand, walked up leisurely to the bar, and gave in his name as Henry Butter, Oaklands, Shelby County.
Turning, with an indifferent air, he sauntered up to the advertisement, and read it over.
“Jim,” he said to his man, “seems to me we met a boy something like this, up at Beman’s, didn’t we?” “Yes, Mas’r,” said Jim, “only I an’t sure about the hand.” “Well, I didn’t look, of course,” said the stranger with a careless yawn.
Then walking up to the landlord, he desired him to furnish him with a private apartment, as he had some writing to do immediately.
The manufacturer, Mr.
Wilson, from the time of the entrance of the stranger, had regarded him with an air of disturbed and uneasy curiosity.
He seemed to himself to have met and been acquainted with him somewhere, but he could not recollect.
Every few moments, when the man spoke, or moved, or smiled, he would start and fix his eyes on him, and then suddenly withdraw them, as the bright, dark eyes met his with such unconcerned coolness.
At last, a sudden recollection seemed to flash upon him, for he stared at the stranger with such an air of blank amazement and alarm, that he walked up to him.
Wilson, I think,” said he, in a tone of recognition, and extending his hand.
“I beg your pardon, I didn’t recollect you before.
I see you remember me,—Mr.
Butler, of Oaklands, Shelby County.” “Ye—yes—yes, sir,” said Mr.
Wilson, like one speaking in a dream.
Just then a negro boy entered, and announced that Mas’r’s room was ready.
“Jim, see to the trunks,” said the gentleman, negligently; then addressing himself to Mr.
Wilson, he added—“I should like to have a few moments’ conversation with you on business, in my room, if you please.” Mr.
Wilson followed him, as one who walks in his sleep; and they proceeded to a large upper chamber, where a new-made fire was crackling, and various servants flying about, putting finishing touches to the arrangements.
When all was done, and the servants departed, the young man deliberately locked the door, and putting the key in his pocket, faced about, and folding his arms on his bosom, looked Mr.
“I couldn’t have thought it!” “I am pretty well disguised, I fancy,” said the young man, with a smile.
“A little walnut bark has made my yellow skin a genteel brown, and I’ve dyed my hair black; so you see I don’t answer to the advertisement at all.” “O, George! but this is a dangerous game you are playing.
I could not have advised you to it.” “I can do it on my own responsibility,” said George, with the same proud smile.
His mother was one of those unfortunates of her race, marked out by personal beauty to be the slave of the passions of her possessor, and the mother of children who may never know a father.
From one of the proudest families in Kentucky he had inherited a set of fine European features, and a high, indomitable spirit.
From his mother he had received only a slight mulatto tinge, amply compensated by its accompanying rich, dark eye.
A slight change in the tint of the skin and the color of his hair had metamorphosed him into the Spanish-looking fellow he then appeared; and as gracefulness of movement and gentlemanly manners had always been perfectly natural to him, he found no difficulty in playing the bold part he had adopted—that of a gentleman travelling with his domestic.
“Why, to see you, as it were, setting yourself in opposition to the laws of your country.” “_My_ country!” said George, with a strong and bitter emphasis; “what country have I, but the grave,—and I wish to God that I was laid there!” “Why, George, no—no—it won’t do; this way of talking is wicked—unscriptural.
George, you’ve got a hard master—in fact, he is—well he conducts himself reprehensibly—I can’t pretend to defend him.
But you know how the angel commanded Hagar to return to her mistress, and submit herself under the hand;[1] and the apostle sent back Onesimus to his master.”[2] [1] Gen. 16.
The angel bade the pregnant Hagar return to her mistress Sarai, even though Sarai had dealt harshly with her. [2] Phil. 1:10.
Onesimus went back to his master to become no longer a servant but a “brother beloved.” “Don’t quote Bible at me that way, Mr.
Wilson,” said George, with a flashing eye, “don’t! for my wife is a Christian, and I mean to be, if ever I get to where I can; but to quote Bible to a fellow in my circumstances, is enough to make him give it up altogether.
I appeal to God Almighty;—I’m willing to go with the case to Him, and ask Him if I do wrong to seek my freedom.” “These feelings are quite natural, George,” said the good-natured man, blowing his nose.
“Yes, they’re natural, but it is my duty not to encourage ’em in you.
Yes, my boy, I’m sorry for you, now; it’s a bad case—very bad; but the apostle says, ‘Let everyone abide in the condition in which he is called.’ We must all submit to the indications of Providence, George,—don’t you see?” George stood with his head drawn back, his arms folded tightly over his broad breast, and a bitter smile curling his lips.
Wilson, if the Indians should come and take you a prisoner away from your wife and children, and want to keep you all your life hoeing corn for them, if you’d think it your duty to abide in the condition in which you were called.
I rather think that you’d think the first stray horse you could find an indication of Providence—shouldn’t you?” The little old gentleman stared with both eyes at this illustration of the case; but, though not much of a reasoner, he had the sense in which some logicians on this particular subject do not excel,—that of saying nothing, where nothing could be said.
So, as he stood carefully stroking his umbrella, and folding and patting down all the creases in it, he proceeded on with his exhortations in a general way.
“You see, George, you know, now, I always have stood your friend; and whatever I’ve said, I’ve said for your good.
“I _do_ run a risk, but—” he threw open his overcoat, and showed two pistols and a bowie-knife.
No! if it comes to that, I can earn myself at least six feet of free soil,—the first and last I shall ever own in Kentucky!” “Why, George, this state of mind is awful; it’s getting really desperate George.
Haven’t I heard your Fourth-of-July speeches?
Don’t you tell us all, once a year, that governments derive their just power from the consent of the governed?
Can’t he put this and that together, and see what it comes to?” Mr.
Wilson’s mind was one of those that may not unaptly be represented by a bale of cotton,—downy, soft, benevolently fuzzy and confused.
He really pitied George with all his heart, and had a sort of dim and cloudy perception of the style of feeling that agitated him; but he deemed it his duty to go on talking _good_ to him, with infinite pertinacity.
I must tell you, you know, as a friend, you’d better not be meddling with such notions; they are bad, George, very bad, for boys in your condition,—very;” and Mr.
Wilson sat down to a table, and began nervously chewing the handle of his umbrella.
Wilson,” said George, coming up and sitting himself determinately down in front of him; “look at me, now.
I had a father—one of your Kentucky gentlemen—who didn’t think enough of me to keep me from being sold with his dogs and horses, to satisfy the estate, when he died.
I saw my mother put up at sheriff’s sale, with her seven children.
They were sold before her eyes, one by one, all to different masters; and I was the youngest.
She was a pious, good girl,—a member of the Baptist church,—and as handsome as my poor mother had been.
Well, I grew up,—long years and years,—no father, no mother, no sister, not a living soul that cared for me more than a dog; nothing but whipping, scolding, starving.
Why, sir, I’ve been so hungry that I have been glad to take the bones they threw to their dogs; and yet, when I was a little fellow, and laid awake whole nights and cried, it wasn’t the hunger, it wasn’t the whipping, I cried for.
Wilson, you treated me well; you encouraged me to do well, and to learn to read and write, and to try to make something of myself; and God knows how grateful I am for it.
Then, sir, I found my wife; you’ve seen her,—you know how beautiful she is.
When I found she loved me, when I married her, I scarcely could believe I was alive, I was so happy; and, sir, she is as good as she is beautiful.
There isn’t _one_ of all these things, that have broken the hearts of my mother and my sister, and my wife and myself, but your laws allow, and give every man power to do, in Kentucky, and none can say to him nay!
I don’t want anything of _your_ country, except to be let alone,—to go peaceably out of it; and when I get to Canada, where the laws will own me and protect me, _that_ shall be my country, and its laws I will obey.
But if any man tries to stop me, let him take care, for I am desperate.
“Blast ’em all!” he suddenly broke out.
“Haven’t I always said so—the infernal old cusses!
I hope I an’t swearing, now.
Where is your wife, George?” he added, as he nervously rose, and began walking the room.
“Well, well,” said the honest old man, fumbling in his pocket: “I s’pose, perhaps, I an’t following my judgment,—hang it, I _won’t_ follow my judgment!” he added, suddenly; “so here, George,” and, taking out a roll of bills from his pocket-book, he offered them to George.
Money is a great help everywhere;—can’t have too much, if you get it honestly.
Take it,—_do_ take it, _now_,—do, my boy!” “On condition, sir, that I may repay it at some future time, I will,” said George, taking up the money.
Meanwhile, he is going with me as far as Ohio, to put me among friends that helped him, and then he will come back after her.
“Dangerous, very dangerous!” said the old man.
George drew himself up, and smiled disdainfully.
The old gentleman eyed him from head to foot, with a sort of innocent wonder.
“George, something has brought you out wonderfully.
“I’m perfectly dumb-founded with your boldness!” said Mr.
Wilson, it is _so_ bold, and this tavern is so near, that they will never think of it; they will look for me on ahead, and you yourself wouldn’t know me.
Besides, he is given up; nobody is looking after him, and nobody will take me up from the advertisement, I think.” “But the mark in your hand?” George drew off his glove, and showed a newly-healed scar in his hand.
Harris’ regard,” he said, scornfully.
“A fortnight ago, he took it into his head to give it to me, because he said he believed I should try to get away one of these days.
Looks interesting, doesn’t it?” he said, drawing his glove on again.
“I declare, my very blood runs cold when I think of it,—your condition and your risks!” said Mr.
“Well, my good sir,” continued George, after a few moments’ silence, “I saw you knew me; I thought I’d just have this talk with you, lest your surprised looks should bring me out.
I leave early tomorrow morning, before daylight; by tomorrow night I hope to sleep safe in Ohio.
I shall travel by daylight, stop at the best hotels, go to the dinner-tables with the lords of the land.
The friendly little old man shook it heartily, and after a little shower of caution, he took his umbrella, and fumbled his way out of the room.
George stood thoughtfully looking at the door, as the old man closed it.
Wilson, one word more.” The old gentleman entered again, and George, as before, locked the door, and then stood for a few moments looking on the floor, irresolutely.
Wilson, you have shown yourself a Christian in your treatment of me,—I want to ask one last deed of Christian kindness of you.” “Well, George.” “Well, sir,—what you said was true.
I _am_ running a dreadful risk.
There isn’t, on earth, a living soul to care if I die,” he added, drawing his breath hard, and speaking with a great effort,—“I shall be kicked out and buried like a dog, and nobody’ll think of it a day after,—_only my poor wife!_ Poor soul! she’ll mourn and grieve; and if you’d only contrive, Mr.
She gave it to me for a Christmas present, poor child!
Will you? _Will_ you?” he added, earnestly.
“Yes, certainly—poor fellow!” said the old gentleman, taking the pin, with watery eyes, and a melancholy quiver in his voice.
No matter how kind her mistress is,—no matter how much she loves her home; beg her not to go back,—for slavery always ends in misery.
I wish in my heart you were safe through, though,—that’s what I do.” “_Is_ there a God to trust in?” said George, in such a tone of bitter despair as arrested the old gentleman’s words.
You Christians don’t know how these things look to us.
There is—there is; clouds and darkness are around about him, but righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne.
Everything will be set right,—if not in this life, in another.” The real piety and benevolence of the simple old man invested him with a temporary dignity and authority, as he spoke.
George stopped his distracted walk up and down the room, stood thoughtfully a moment, and then said, quietly, “Thank you for saying that, my good friend; I’ll _think of that_.” CHAPTER XII Select Incident of Lawful Trade “In Ramah there was a voice heard,—weeping, and lamentation, and great mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted.” Jer. 31:15.
Haley and Tom jogged onward in their wagon, each, for a time, absorbed in his own reflections.
Now, the reflections of two men sitting side by side are a curious thing,—seated on the same seat, having the same eyes, ears, hands and organs of all sorts, and having pass before their eyes the same objects,—it is wonderful what a variety we shall find in these same reflections!
He had been taken in so by “niggers” whom he had favored; but still he was astonished to consider how good-natured he yet remained!
They stir up the soul from its depths, and rouse, as with trumpet call, courage, energy, and enthusiasm, where before was only the blackness of despair.
Haley pulled out of his pocket sundry newspapers, and began looking over their advertisements, with absorbed interest.
He was not a remarkably fluent reader, and was in the habit of reading in a sort of recitative half-aloud, by way of calling in his ears to verify the deductions of his eyes.
In this tone he slowly recited the following paragraph: “EXECUTOR’S SALE,—NEGROES!—Agreeably to order of court, will be sold, on Tuesday, February 20, before the Court-house door, in the town of Washington, Kentucky, the following negroes: Hagar, aged 60; John, aged 30; Ben, aged 21; Saul, aged 25; Albert, aged 14.
Sold for the benefit of the creditors and heirs of the estate of Jesse Blutchford, Esq.
“SAMUEL MORRIS, THOMAS FLINT, _Executors_.” “This yer I must look at,” said he to Tom, for want of somebody else to talk to.
“Ye see, I’m going to get up a prime gang to take down with ye, Tom; it’ll make it sociable and pleasant like,—good company will, ye know.
We must drive right to Washington first and foremost, and then I’ll clap you into jail, while I does the business.” Tom received this agreeable intelligence quite meekly; simply wondering, in his own heart, how many of these doomed men had wives and children, and whether they would feel as he did about leaving them.
It is to be confessed, too, that the naive, off-hand information that he was to be thrown into jail by no means produced an agreeable impression on a poor fellow who had always prided himself on a strictly honest and upright course of life.
Yes, Tom, we must confess it, was rather proud of his honesty, poor fellow,—not having very much else to be proud of;—if he had belonged to some of the higher walks of society, he, perhaps, would never have been reduced to such straits.
However, the day wore on, and the evening saw Haley and Tom comfortably accommodated in Washington,—the one in a tavern, and the other in a jail.
About eleven o’clock the next day, a mixed throng was gathered around the court-house steps,—smoking, chewing, spitting, swearing, and conversing, according to their respective tastes and turns,—waiting for the auction to commence.
The woman who had been advertised by the name of Hagar was a regular African in feature and figure.
She might have been sixty, but was older than that by hard work and disease, was partially blind, and somewhat crippled with rheumatism.
By her side stood her only remaining son, Albert, a bright-looking little fellow of fourteen years.
The boy was the only survivor of a large family, who had been successively sold away from her to a southern market.
“I can cook yet, and scrub, and scour,—I’m wuth a buying, if I do come cheap;—tell ’em dat ar,—you _tell_ ’em,” she added, earnestly.
Haley here forced his way into the group, walked up to the old man, pulled his mouth open and looked in, felt of his teeth, made him stand and straighten himself, bend his back, and perform various evolutions to show his muscles; and then passed on to the next, and put him through the same trial.
Walking up last to the boy, he felt of his arms, straightened his hands, and looked at his fingers, and made him jump, to show his agility.
“He an’t gwine to be sold widout me!” said the old woman, with passionate eagerness; “he and I goes in a lot together; I ’s rail strong yet, Mas’r and can do heaps o’ work,—heaps on it, Mas’r.” “On plantation?” said Haley, with a contemptuous glance.
“Likely story!” and, as if satisfied with his examination, he walked out and looked, and stood with his hands in his pocket, his cigar in his mouth, and his hat cocked on one side, ready for action.
“What think of ’em?” said a man who had been following Haley’s examination, as if to make up his own mind from it.
“Wal,” said Haley, spitting, “I shall put in, I think, for the youngerly ones and the boy.” “They want to sell the boy and the old woman together,” said the man.
She’s half blind, crooked with rheumatis, and foolish to boot.” “Some buys up these yer old critturs, and ses there’s a sight more wear in ’em than a body ’d think,” said the man, reflectively.
I shall bid off on that ar boy for a plantation-hand;—wouldn’t be bothered with her, no way, not if they’d give her to me,” said Haley.
The conversation was here interrupted by a busy hum in the audience; and the auctioneer, a short, bustling, important fellow, elbowed his way into the crowd.
The old woman drew in her breath, and caught instinctively at her son.
“Keep close to yer mammy, Albert,—close,—dey’ll put us up togedder,” she said.
“Dey must, child; I can’t live, no ways, if they don’t” said the old creature, vehemently.
The stentorian tones of the auctioneer, calling out to clear the way, now announced that the sale was about to commence.
The different men on the list were soon knocked off at prices which showed a pretty brisk demand in the market; two of them fell to Haley.
“Come, now, young un,” said the auctioneer, giving the boy a touch with his hammer, “be up and show your springs, now.” “Put us two up togedder, togedder,—do please, Mas’r,” said the old woman, holding fast to her boy.
His fine figure, alert limbs, and bright face, raised an instant competition, and half a dozen bids simultaneously met the ear of the auctioneer.
Anxious, half-frightened, he looked from side to side, as he heard the clatter of contending bids,—now here, now there,—till the hammer fell.
He was pushed from the block toward his new master, but stopped one moment, and looked back, when his poor old mother, trembling in every limb, held out her shaking hands toward him.
The bidding for the poor old creature was summary.
The man who had addressed Haley, and who seemed not destitute of compassion, bought her for a trifle, and the spectators began to disperse.
The poor victims of the sale, who had been brought up in one place together for years, gathered round the despairing old mother, whose agony was pitiful to see.
Mas’r allers said I should have one,—he did,” she repeated over and over, in heart-broken tones.
“Trust in the Lord, Aunt Hagar,” said the oldest of the men, sorrowfully.
“What good will it do?” said she, sobbing passionately.
Lord, how ken I?” “Come, take her off, can’t some of ye?” said Haley, dryly; “don’t do no good for her to go on that ar way.” The old men of the company, partly by persuasion and partly by force, loosed the poor creature’s last despairing hold, and, as they led her off to her new master’s wagon, strove to comfort her.
“Now!” said Haley, pushing his three purchases together, and producing a bundle of handcuffs, which he proceeded to put on their wrists; and fastening each handcuff to a long chain, he drove them before him to the jail.
A few days saw Haley, with his possessions, safely deposited on one of the Ohio boats.
It was the commencement of his gang, to be augmented, as the boat moved on, by various other merchandise of the same kind, which he, or his agent, had stored for him in various points along shore.
The La Belle Riviere, as brave and beautiful a boat as ever walked the waters of her namesake river, was floating gayly down the stream, under a brilliant sky, the stripes and stars of free America waving and fluttering over head; the guards crowded with well-dressed ladies and gentlemen walking and enjoying the delightful day.
All was full of life, buoyant and rejoicing;—all but Haley’s gang, who were stored, with other freight, on the lower deck, and who, somehow, did not seem to appreciate their various privileges, as they sat in a knot, talking to each other in low tones.
“Boys,” said Haley, coming up, briskly, “I hope you keep up good heart, and are cheerful.
“I’ve got a wife,” spoke out the article enumerated as “John, aged thirty,” and he laid his chained hand on Tom’s knee,—“and she don’t know a word about this, poor girl!” “Where does she live?” said Tom.
It _was_ rather natural; and the tears that fell, as he spoke, came as naturally as if he had been a white man.
And over head, in the cabin, sat fathers and mothers, husbands and wives; and merry, dancing children moved round among them, like so many little butterflies, and everything was going on quite easy and comfortable.
“O, mamma,” said a boy, who had just come up from below, “there’s a negro trader on board, and he’s brought four or five slaves down there.” “Poor creatures!” said the mother, in a tone between grief and indignation.
“I’ve been south, and I must say I think the negroes are better off than they would be to be free.” “In some respects, some of them are well off, I grant,” said the lady to whose remark she had answered.
Suppose, ma’am, your two children, there, should be taken from you, and sold?” “We can’t reason from our feelings to those of this class of persons,” said the other lady, sorting out some worsteds on her lap.
“Indeed, ma’am, you can know nothing of them, if you say so,” answered the first lady, warmly.
“‘Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be,’ the scripture says.”[1] [1] Gen. 9:25. his is what Noah says when he wakes out of drunkenness and realizes that his youngest son, Ham, father of Canaan, has seen him naked.
“I say, stranger, is that ar what that text means?” said a tall man, standing by.
It pleased Providence, for some inscrutable reason, to doom the race to bondage, ages ago; and we must not set up our opinion against that.” “Well, then, we’ll all go ahead and buy up niggers,” said the man, “if that’s the way of Providence,—won’t we, Squire?” said he, turning to Haley, who had been standing, with his hands in his pockets, by the stove and intently listening to the conversation.
“Yes,” continued the tall man, “we must all be resigned to the decrees of Providence.
Niggers must be sold, and trucked round, and kept under; it’s what they’s made for. ’Pears like this yer view ’s quite refreshing, an’t it, stranger?” said he to Haley.
I took up the trade just to make a living; if ’tan’t right, I calculated to ’pent on ’t in time, ye know.” “And now you’ll save yerself the trouble, won’t ye?” said the tall man.
“See what ’t is, now, to know scripture.
Ye could jist have said, ‘Cussed be’—what’s his name?—‘and ’t would all have come right.’” And the stranger, who was no other than the honest drover whom we introduced to our readers in the Kentucky tavern, sat down, and began smoking, with a curious smile on his long, dry face.
The young man paused, looked as if he was going to say more, when suddenly the boat stopped, and the company made the usual steamboat rush, to see where they were landing.
As the boat stopped, a black woman came running wildly up the plank, darted into the crowd, flew up to where the slave gang sat, and threw her arms round that unfortunate piece of merchandise before enumerate—“John, aged thirty,” and with sobs and tears bemoaned him as her husband.
But what needs tell the story, told too oft,—every day told,—of heart-strings rent and broken,—the weak broken and torn for the profit and convenience of the strong!
The young man who had spoken for the cause of humanity and God before stood with folded arms, looking on this scene.
He turned, and Haley was standing at his side.
“My friend,” he said, speaking with thick utterance, “how can you, how dare you, carry on a trade like this?
Look at those poor creatures!
Here I am, rejoicing in my heart that I am going home to my wife and child; and the same bell which is a signal to carry me onward towards them will part this poor man and his wife forever.
Depend upon it, God will bring you into judgment for this.” The trader turned away in silence.
“I say, now,” said the drover, touching his elbow, “there’s differences in parsons, an’t there?
“And that ar an’t the worst on ’t,” said John; “mabbee it won’t go down with the Lord, neither, when ye come to settle with Him, one o’ these days, as all on us must, I reckon.” Haley walked reflectively to the other end of the boat.
“If I make pretty handsomely on one or two next gangs,” he thought, “I reckon I’ll stop off this yer; it’s really getting dangerous.” And he took out his pocket-book, and began adding over his accounts,—a process which many gentlemen besides Mr.
Haley have found a specific for an uneasy conscience.
Women sewed, and children played, and the boat passed on her way.
One day, when she lay to for a while at a small town in Kentucky, Haley went up into the place on a little matter of business.
Tom, whose fetters did not prevent his taking a moderate circuit, had drawn near the side of the boat, and stood listlessly gazing over the railing.
After a time, he saw the trader returning, with an alert step, in company with a colored woman, bearing in her arms a young child.
She was dressed quite respectably, and a colored man followed her, bringing along a small trunk.
The woman came cheerfully onward, talking, as she came, with the man who bore her trunk, and so passed up the plank into the boat.
The woman walked forward among the boxes and bales of the lower deck, and, sitting down, busied herself with chirruping to her baby.
Haley made a turn or two about the boat, and then, coming up, seated himself near her, and began saying something to her in an indifferent undertone.
Tom soon noticed a heavy cloud passing over the woman’s brow; and that she answered rapidly, and with great vehemence.
“You’re jist a foolin’ with me.” “If you won’t believe it, look here!” said the man, drawing out a paper; “this yer’s the bill of sale, and there’s your master’s name to it; and I paid down good solid cash for it, too, I can tell you,—so, now!” “I don’t believe Mas’r would cheat me so; it can’t be true!” said the woman, with increasing agitation.
It’s all straight enough, for aught I see.” The woman’s passionate exclamations collected a crowd around her, and the trader briefly explained to them the cause of the agitation.
“He told me that I was going down to Louisville, to hire out as cook to the same tavern where my husband works,—that’s what Mas’r told me, his own self; and I can’t believe he’d lie to me,” said the woman.
“But he has sold you, my poor woman, there’s no doubt about it,” said a good-natured looking man, who had been examining the papers; “he has done it, and no mistake.” “Then it’s no account talking,” said the woman, suddenly growing quite calm; and, clasping her child tighter in her arms, she sat down on her box, turned her back round, and gazed listlessly into the river.
“Gal’s got grit, I see.” The woman looked calm, as the boat went on; and a beautiful soft summer breeze passed like a compassionate spirit over her head,—the gentle breeze, that never inquires whether the brow is dusky or fair that it fans.
And she saw sunshine sparkling on the water, in golden ripples, and heard gay voices, full of ease and pleasure, talking around her everywhere; but her heart lay as if a great stone had fallen on it.
Her baby raised himself up against her, and stroked her cheeks with his little hands; and, springing up and down, crowing and chatting, seemed determined to arouse her.
She strained him suddenly and tightly in her arms, and slowly one tear after another fell on his wondering, unconscious face; and gradually she seemed, and little by little, to grow calmer, and busied herself with tending and nursing him.
The child, a boy of ten months, was uncommonly large and strong of his age, and very vigorous in his limbs.
Never, for a moment, still, he kept his mother constantly busy in holding him, and guarding his springing activity.
“That’s a fine chap!” said a man, suddenly stopping opposite to him, with his hands in his pockets.
The man whistled to the boy, and offered him part of a stick of candy, which he eagerly grabbed at, and very soon had it in a baby’s general depository, to wit, his mouth.
“Rum fellow!” said the man “Knows what’s what!” and he whistled, and walked on.
The stranger produced a match, and lighted a cigar, saying, as he did so, “Decentish kind o’ wench you’ve got round there, stranger.” “Why, I reckon she _is_ tol’able fair,” said Haley, blowing the smoke out of his mouth.
“Plantation hand?” said the man.
“Wal,” said Haley, “I’m fillin’ out an order for a plantation, and I think I shall put her in.
“They won’t want the young ’un on the plantation,” said the man.
“I shall sell him, first chance I find,” said Haley, lighting another cigar.
“S’pose you’d be selling him tol’able cheap,” said the stranger, mounting the pile of boxes, and sitting down comfortably.
“Don’t know ’bout that,” said Haley; “he’s a pretty smart young ’un, straight, fat, strong; flesh as hard as a brick!” “Very true, but then there’s the bother and expense of raisin’.” “Nonsense!” said Haley; “they is raised as easy as any kind of critter there is going; they an’t a bit more trouble than pups.
“One cook lost a young ’un last week,—got drownded in a washtub, while she was a hangin’ out the clothes,—and I reckon it would be well enough to set her to raisin’ this yer.” Haley and the stranger smoked a while in silence, neither seeming willing to broach the test question of the interview.
At last the man resumed: “You wouldn’t think of wantin’ more than ten dollars for that ar chap, seeing you _must_ get him off yer hand, any how?” Haley shook his head, and spit impressively.
“Well, stranger, what will you take?” “Well, now,” said Haley, “I _could_ raise that ar chap myself, or get him raised; he’s oncommon likely and healthy, and he’d fetch a hundred dollars, six months hence; and, in a year or two, he’d bring two hundred, if I had him in the right spot; I shan’t take a cent less nor fifty for him now.” “O, stranger! that’s ridiculous, altogether,” said the man.
“Fact!” said Haley, with a decisive nod of his head.
“I’ll give thirty for him,” said the stranger, “but not a cent more.” “Now, I’ll tell ye what I will do,” said Haley, spitting again, with renewed decision.
“I’ll split the difference, and say forty-five; and that’s the most I will do.” “Well, agreed!” said the man, after an interval.
“Where do you land?” “At Louisville,” said the man.
“Louisville,” said Haley.
Chap will be asleep,—all fair,—get him off quietly, and no screaming,—happens beautiful,—I like to do everything quietly,—I hates all kind of agitation and fluster.” And so, after a transfer of certain bills had passed from the man’s pocket-book to the trader’s, he resumed his cigar.
It was a bright, tranquil evening when the boat stopped at the wharf at Louisville.
When she heard the name of the place called out, she hastily laid the child down in a little cradle formed by the hollow among the boxes, first carefully spreading under it her cloak; and then she sprung to the side of the boat, in hopes that, among the various hotel-waiters who thronged the wharf, she might see her husband.
In this hope, she pressed forward to the front rails, and, stretching far over them, strained her eyes intently on the moving heads on the shore, and the crowd pressed in between her and the child.
“Now’s your time,” said Haley, taking the sleeping child up, and handing him to the stranger.
“Don’t wake him up, and set him to crying, now; it would make a devil of a fuss with the gal.” The man took the bundle carefully, and was soon lost in the crowd that went up the wharf.
When the boat, creaking, and groaning, and puffing, had loosed from the wharf, and was beginning slowly to strain herself along, the woman returned to her old seat.
“Why, why,—where?” she began, in bewildered surprise.
You see, I know’d you couldn’t take him down south; and I got a chance to sell him to a first-rate family, that’ll raise him better than you can.” The trader had arrived at that stage of Christian and political perfection which has been recommended by some preachers and politicians of the north, lately, in which he had completely overcome every humane weakness and prejudice.
His heart was exactly where yours, sir, and mine could be brought, with proper effort and cultivation.
The wild look of anguish and utter despair that the woman cast on him might have disturbed one less practised; but he was used to it.
He had seen that same look hundreds of times.
You can get used to such things, too, my friend; and it is the great object of recent efforts to make our whole northern community used to them, for the glory of the Union.
So the trader only regarded the mortal anguish which he saw working in those dark features, those clenched hands, and suffocating breathings, as necessary incidents of the trade, and merely calculated whether she was going to scream, and get up a commotion on the boat; for, like other supporters of our peculiar institution, he decidedly disliked agitation.
The shot had passed too straight and direct through the heart, for cry or tear.
Her slack hands fell lifeless by her side.
Her eyes looked straight forward, but she saw nothing.
All the noise and hum of the boat, the groaning of the machinery, mingled dreamily to her bewildered ear; and the poor, dumb-stricken heart had neither cry not tear to show for its utter misery.
The trader, who, considering his advantages, was almost as humane as some of our politicians, seemed to feel called on to administer such consolation as the case admitted of.
“I know this yer comes kinder hard, at first, Lucy,” said he; “but such a smart, sensible gal as you are, won’t give way to it.
You see it’s _necessary_, and can’t be helped!” “O! don’t, Mas’r, don’t!” said the woman, with a voice like one that is smothering.
“You’re a smart wench, Lucy,” he persisted; “I mean to do well by ye, and get ye a nice place down river; and you’ll soon get another husband,—such a likely gal as you—” “O!
Mas’r, if you _only_ won’t talk to me now,” said the woman, in a voice of such quick and living anguish that the trader felt that there was something at present in the case beyond his style of operation.
The trader walked up and down for a time, and occasionally stopped and looked at her.
“Takes it hard, rather,” he soliloquized, “but quiet, tho’;—let her sweat a while; she’ll come right, by and by!” Tom had watched the whole transaction from first to last, and had a perfect understanding of its results.
To him, it looked like something unutterably horrible and cruel, because, poor, ignorant black soul! he had not learned to generalize, and to take enlarged views.
His very soul bled within him for what seemed to him the _wrongs_ of the poor suffering thing that lay like a crushed reed on the boxes; the feeling, living, bleeding, yet immortal _thing_, which American state law coolly classes with the bundles, and bales, and boxes, among which she is lying. [2] Dr.
Joel Parker of Philadelphia. [Mrs.
Stowe’s note.] Presbyterian clergyman (1798-1873), a friend of the Beecher family.
Stowe attempted unsuccessfully to have this identifying note removed from the stereotype-plate of the first edition.
Tom drew near, and tried to say something; but she only groaned.
Honestly, and with tears running down his own cheeks, he spoke of a heart of love in the skies, of a pitying Jesus, and an eternal home; but the ear was deaf with anguish, and the palsied heart could not feel.
Night came on,—night calm, unmoved, and glorious, shining down with her innumerable and solemn angel eyes, twinkling, beautiful, but silent.
There was no speech nor language, no pitying voice or helping hand, from that distant sky.
One after another, the voices of business or pleasure died away; all on the boat were sleeping, and the ripples at the prow were plainly heard.
Tom stretched himself out on a box, and there, as he lay, he heard, ever and anon, a smothered sob or cry from the prostrate creature,—“O! what shall I do?
At midnight, Tom waked, with a sudden start.
Something black passed quickly by him to the side of the boat, and he heard a splash in the water.
No one else saw or heard anything.
The poor bleeding heart was still, at last, and the river rippled and dimpled just as brightly as if it had not closed above it.
Patience! patience! ye whose hearts swell indignant at wrongs like these.
Not one throb of anguish, not one tear of the oppressed, is forgotten by the Man of Sorrows, the Lord of Glory.
In his patient, generous bosom he bears the anguish of a world.
Bear thou, like him, in patience, and labor in love; for sure as he is God, “the year of his redeemed _shall_ come.” The trader waked up bright and early, and came out to see to his live stock.
It was now his turn to look about in perplexity.
Tom, who had learned the wisdom of keeping counsel, did not feel called upon to state his observations and suspicions, but said he did not know.
“She surely couldn’t have got off in the night at any of the landings, for I was awake, and on the lookout, whenever the boat stopped.
I never trust these yer things to other folks.” This speech was addressed to Tom quite confidentially, as if it was something that would be specially interesting to him.
The trader searched the boat from stem to stern, among boxes, bales and barrels, around the machinery, by the chimneys, in vain.
“Now, I say, Tom, be fair about this yer,” he said, when, after a fruitless search, he came where Tom was standing.
“You know something about it, now.
I saw the gal stretched out here about ten o’clock, and ag’in at twelve, and ag’in between one and two; and then at four she was gone, and you was a sleeping right there all the time.
Now, you know something,—you can’t help it.” “Well, Mas’r,” said Tom, “towards morning something brushed by me, and I kinder half woke; and then I hearn a great splash, and then I clare woke up, and the gal was gone.
Even the awful presence of Death struck no solemn chill upon him.
He had seen Death many times,—met him in the way of trade, and got acquainted with him,—and he only thought of him as a hard customer, that embarrassed his property operations very unfairly; and so he only swore that the gal was a baggage, and that he was devilish unlucky, and that, if things went on in this way, he should not make a cent on the trip.
In short, he seemed to consider himself an ill-used man, decidedly; but there was no help for it, as the woman had escaped into a state which _never will_ give up a fugitive,—not even at the demand of the whole glorious Union.
The trader, therefore, sat discontentedly down, with his little account-book, and put down the missing body and soul under the head of _losses!_ “He’s a shocking creature, isn’t he,—this trader? so unfeeling!
It’s dreadful, really!” “O, but nobody thinks anything of these traders!
They are universally despised,—never received into any decent society.” But who, sir, makes the trader?
The enlightened, cultivated, intelligent man, who supports the system of which the trader is the inevitable result, or the poor trader himself?
You make the public statement that calls for his trade, that debauches and depraves him, till he feels no shame in it; and in what are you better than he?
Are you educated and he ignorant, you high and he low, you refined and he coarse, you talented and he simple?
In the day of a future judgment, these very considerations may make it more tolerable for him than for you.
In concluding these little incidents of lawful trade, we must beg the world not to think that American legislators are entirely destitute of humanity, as might, perhaps, be unfairly inferred from the great efforts made in our national body to protect and perpetuate this species of traffic.
Who does not know how our great men are outdoing themselves, in declaiming against the _foreign_ slave-trade.
There are a perfect host of Clarksons and Wilberforces[3] risen up among us on that subject, most edifying to hear and behold.
But trading them from Kentucky,—that’s quite another thing! [3] Thomas Clarkson (1760-1846) and William Wilberforce (1759- 1833), English philanthropists and anti-slavery agitators who helped to secure passage of the Emancipation Bill by Parliament in 1833.
CHAPTER XIII The Quaker Settlement A quiet scene now rises before us.
Yes, there she is, paler and thinner than in her Kentucky home, with a world of quiet sorrow lying under the shadow of her long eyelashes, and marking the outline of her gentle mouth!
It was plain to see how old and firm the girlish heart was grown under the discipline of heavy sorrow; and when, anon, her large dark eye was raised to follow the gambols of her little Harry, who was sporting, like some tropical butterfly, hither and thither over the floor, she showed a depth of firmness and steady resolve that was never there in her earlier and happier days.
By her side sat a woman with a bright tin pan in her lap, into which she was carefully sorting some dried peaches.
She might be fifty-five or sixty; but hers was one of those faces that time seems to touch only to brighten and adorn.
The snowy lisse crape cap, made after the strait Quaker pattern,—the plain white muslin handkerchief, lying in placid folds across her bosom,—the drab shawl and dress,—showed at once the community to which she belonged.
Her face was round and rosy, with a healthful downy softness, suggestive of a ripe peach.
Her hair, partially silvered by age, was parted smoothly back from a high placid forehead, on which time had written no inscription, except peace on earth, good will to men, and beneath shone a large pair of clear, honest, loving brown eyes; you only needed to look straight into them, to feel that you saw to the bottom of a heart as good and true as ever throbbed in woman’s bosom.
So much has been said and sung of beautiful young girls, why don’t somebody wake up to the beauty of old women?
If any want to get up an inspiration under this head, we refer them to our good friend Rachel Halliday, just as she sits there in her little rocking-chair.
It had a turn for quacking and squeaking,—that chair had,—either from having taken cold in early life, or from some asthmatic affection, or perhaps from nervous derangement; but, as she gently swung backward and forward, the chair kept up a kind of subdued “creechy crawchy,” that would have been intolerable in any other chair.
But old Simeon Halliday often declared it was as good as any music to him, and the children all avowed that they wouldn’t miss of hearing mother’s chair for anything in the world.
For why? for twenty years or more, nothing but loving words, and gentle moralities, and motherly loving kindness, had come from that chair;—head-aches and heart-aches innumerable had been cured there,—difficulties spiritual and temporal solved there,—all by one good, loving woman, God bless her!
Thee must think about that, my daughter.” “My daughter” came naturally from the lips of Rachel Halliday; for hers was just the face and form that made “mother” seem the most natural word in the world.
Eliza’s hands trembled, and some tears fell on her fine work; but she answered, firmly, “I shall do—anything I can find.
I hope I can find something.” “Thee knows thee can stay here, as long as thee pleases,” said Rachel.
Last night I dreamed I saw that man coming into the yard,” she said, shuddering.
The Lord hath ordered it so that never hath a fugitive been stolen from our village.
I trust thine will not be the first.” The door here opened, and a little short, round, pin-cushiony woman stood at the door, with a cheery, blooming face, like a ripe apple.
“Ruth Stedman,” said Rachel, coming joyfully forward; “how is thee, Ruth? she said, heartily taking both her hands.
“Nicely,” said Ruth, taking off her little drab bonnet, and dusting it with her handkerchief, displaying, as she did so, a round little head, on which the Quaker cap sat with a sort of jaunty air, despite all the stroking and patting of the small fat hands, which were busily applied to arranging it.
“Ruth, this friend is Eliza Harris; and this is the little boy I told thee of.” “I am glad to see thee, Eliza,—very,” said Ruth, shaking hands, as if Eliza were an old friend she had long been expecting; “and this is thy dear boy,—I brought a cake for him,” she said, holding out a little heart to the boy, who came up, gazing through his curls, and accepted it shyly.
“O, he’s coming; but thy Mary caught him as I came in, and ran off with him to the barn, to show him to the children.” At this moment, the door opened, and Mary, an honest, rosy-looking girl, with large brown eyes, like her mother’s, came in with the baby.
Baby seemed quite used to this mode of proceeding, for he put his thumb in his mouth (as if it were quite a thing of course), and seemed soon absorbed in his own reflections, while the mother seated herself, and taking out a long stocking of mixed blue and white yarn, began to knit with briskness.
“Mary, thee’d better fill the kettle, hadn’t thee?” gently suggested the mother.
Mary took the kettle to the well, and soon reappearing, placed it over the stove, where it was soon purring and steaming, a sort of censer of hospitality and good cheer.
The peaches, moreover, in obedience to a few gentle whispers from Rachel, were soon deposited, by the same hand, in a stew-pan over the fire.
Rachel now took down a snowy moulding-board, and, tying on an apron, proceeded quietly to making up some biscuits, first saying to Mary,—“Mary, hadn’t thee better tell John to get a chicken ready?” and Mary disappeared accordingly.
“And how is Abigail Peters?” said Rachel, as she went on with her biscuits.
Leah Hills went in, this afternoon, and baked bread and pies enough to last some days; and I engaged to go back to get her up, this evening.” “I will go in tomorrow, and do any cleaning there may be, and look over the mending,” said Rachel.
“I’ve heard,” she added, “that Hannah Stanwood is sick.
John was up there, last night,—I must go there tomorrow.” “John can come in here to his meals, if thee needs to stay all day,” suggested Rachel.
“Thank thee, Rachel; will see, tomorrow; but, here comes Simeon.” Simeon Halliday, a tall, straight, muscular man, in drab coat and pantaloons, and broad-brimmed hat, now entered.
John is well, and all the rest of our folks,” said Ruth, cheerily.
“Any news, father?” said Rachel, as she was putting her biscuits into the oven.
“Peter Stebbins told me that they should be along tonight, with _friends_,” said Simeon, significantly, as he was washing his hands at a neat sink, in a little back porch.
“Indeed!” said Rachel, looking thoughtfully, and glancing at Eliza.
“Did thee say thy name was Harris?” said Simeon to Eliza, as he reentered.
Rachel glanced quickly at her husband, as Eliza tremulously answered “yes;” her fears, ever uppermost, suggesting that possibly there might be advertisements out for her.
“Mother!” said Simeon, standing in the porch, and calling Rachel out.
“This child’s husband is in the settlement, and will be here tonight,” said Simeon.
Peter was down yesterday, with the wagon, to the other stand, and there he found an old woman and two men; and one said his name was George Harris; and from what he told of his history, I am certain who he is.
“Here, Ruth,—come here.” Ruth laid down her knitting-work, and was in the back porch in a moment.
“Father says Eliza’s husband is in the last company, and will be here tonight.” A burst of joy from the little Quakeress interrupted the speech.
She gave such a bound from the floor, as she clapped her little hands, that two stray curls fell from under her Quaker cap, and lay brightly on her white neckerchief.
Do tell her, right off.” “Thee uses thyself only to learn how to love thy neighbor, Ruth,” said Simeon, looking, with a beaming face, on Ruth.
Come, now do tell her,—do!” and she laid her hands persuasively on Rachel’s arm.
“Take her into thy bed-room, there, and let me fry the chicken while thee does it.” Rachel came out into the kitchen, where Eliza was sewing, and opening the door of a small bed-room, said, gently, “Come in here with me, my daughter; I have news to tell thee.” The blood flushed in Eliza’s pale face; she rose, trembling with nervous anxiety, and looked towards her boy.
Thy father is coming,” she said, over and over again, as the boy looked wonderingly at her.
Meanwhile, within the door, another scene was going on.
Rachel Halliday drew Eliza toward her, and said, “The Lord hath had mercy on thee, daughter; thy husband hath escaped from the house of bondage.” The blood flushed to Eliza’s cheek in a sudden glow, and went back to her heart with as sudden a rush.
“He is among friends, who will bring him here tonight.” “Tonight!” Eliza repeated, “tonight!” The words lost all meaning to her; her head was dreamy and confused; all was mist for a moment.
She opened her eyes in a state of dreamy, delicious languor, such as one who has long been bearing a heavy load, and now feels it gone, and would rest.
The tension of the nerves, which had never ceased a moment since the first hour of her flight, had given way, and a strange feeling of security and rest came over her; and as she lay, with her large, dark eyes open, she followed, as in a quiet dream, the motions of those about her.
She saw the door open into the other room; saw the supper-table, with its snowy cloth; heard the dreamy murmur of the singing tea-kettle; saw Ruth tripping backward and forward, with plates of cake and saucers of preserves, and ever and anon stopping to put a cake into Harry’s hand, or pat his head, or twine his long curls round her snowy fingers.
She saw the ample, motherly form of Rachel, as she ever and anon came to the bedside, and smoothed and arranged something about the bedclothes, and gave a tuck here and there, by way of expressing her good-will; and was conscious of a kind of sunshine beaming down upon her from her large, clear, brown eyes.
She saw Ruth’s husband come in,—saw her fly up to him, and commence whispering very earnestly, ever and anon, with impressive gesture, pointing her little finger toward the room.
She dreamed of a beautiful country,—a land, it seemed to her, of rest,—green shores, pleasant islands, and beautifully glittering water; and there, in a house which kind voices told her was a home, she saw her boy playing, free and happy child.
She heard her husband’s footsteps; she felt him coming nearer; his arms were around her, his tears falling on her face, and she awoke!
The daylight had long faded; her child lay calmly sleeping by her side; a candle was burning dimly on the stand, and her husband was sobbing by her pillow.
The next morning was a cheerful one at the Quaker house.
While, therefore, John ran to the spring for fresh water, and Simeon the second sifted meal for corn-cakes, and Mary ground coffee, Rachel moved gently, and quietly about, making biscuits, cutting up chicken, and diffusing a sort of sunny radiance over the whole proceeding generally.
If there was any danger of friction or collision from the ill-regulated zeal of so many young operators, her gentle “Come! come!” or “I wouldn’t, now,” was quite sufficient to allay the difficulty.
Bards have written of the cestus of Venus, that turned the heads of all the world in successive generations.
We had rather, for our part, have the cestus of Rachel Halliday, that kept heads from being turned, and made everything go on harmoniously.
We think it is more suited to our modern days, decidedly.
While all other preparations were going on, Simeon the elder stood in his shirt-sleeves before a little looking-glass in the corner, engaged in the anti-patriarchal operation of shaving.
At last, they were all seated at breakfast, while Mary stood at the stove, baking griddle-cakes, which, as they gained the true exact golden-brown tint of perfection, were transferred quite handily to the table.
Rachel never looked so truly and benignly happy as at the head of her table.
There was so much motherliness and full-heartedness even in the way she passed a plate of cakes or poured a cup of coffee, that it seemed to put a spirit into the food and drink she offered.
It was the first time that ever George had sat down on equal terms at any white man’s table; and he sat down, at first, with some constraint and awkwardness; but they all exhaled and went off like fog, in the genial morning rays of this simple, overflowing kindness.
“Father, what if thee should get found out again?” said Simeon second, as he buttered his cake.
“Mother can do almost everything,” said the boy.
“Well, I hate those old slaveholders!” said the boy, who felt as unchristian as became any modern reformer.
“I am surprised at thee, son,” said Simeon; “thy mother never taught thee so.
I would do even the same for the slaveholder as for the slave, if the Lord brought him to my door in affliction.” Simeon second blushed scarlet; but his mother only smiled, and said, “Simeon is my good boy; he will grow older, by and by, and then he will be like his father.” “I hope, my good sir, that you are not exposed to any difficulty on our account,” said George, anxiously.
“Fear nothing, George, for therefore are we sent into the world.
“And now thou must lie by quietly this day, and tonight, at ten o’clock, Phineas Fletcher will carry thee onward to the next stand,—thee and the rest of thy company.
The pursuers are hard after thee; we must not delay.” “If that is the case, why wait till evening?” said George.
“Thou art safe here by daylight, for every one in the settlement is a Friend, and all are watching.
It has been found safer to travel by night.” CHAPTER XIV Evangeline “A young star! which shone O’er life—too sweet an image, for such glass!
A lovely being, scarcely formed or moulded; A rose with all its sweetest leaves yet folded.” The Mississippi!
How, as by an enchanted wand, have its scenes been changed, since Chateaubriand wrote his prose-poetic description of it,[1] as a river of mighty, unbroken solitudes, rolling amid undreamed wonders of vegetable and animal existence. [1] _In Atala; or the Love and Constantcy of Two Savages in the Desert_ (1801) by Francois Auguste Rene, Vicomte de Chateaubriand (1768-1848).
But as in an hour, this river of dreams and wild romance has emerged to a reality scarcely less visionary and splendid.
What other river of the world bears on its bosom to the ocean the wealth and enterprise of such another country?—a country whose products embrace all between the tropics and the poles!
Those turbid waters, hurrying, foaming, tearing along, an apt resemblance of that headlong tide of business which is poured along its wave by a race more vehement and energetic than any the old world ever saw.
Piled with cotton-bales, from many a plantation, up over deck and sides, till she seems in the distance a square, massive block of gray, she moves heavily onward to the nearing mart.
High on the upper deck, in a little nook among the everywhere predominant cotton-bales, at last we may find him.
Partly from confidence inspired by Mr.
Shelby’s representations, and partly from the remarkably inoffensive and quiet character of the man, Tom had insensibly won his way far into the confidence even of such a man as Haley.
At first he had watched him narrowly through the day, and never allowed him to sleep at night unfettered; but the uncomplaining patience and apparent contentment of Tom’s manner led him gradually to discontinue these restraints, and for some time Tom had enjoyed a sort of parole of honor, being permitted to come and go freely where he pleased on the boat.
Ever quiet and obliging, and more than ready to lend a hand in every emergency which occurred among the workmen below, he had won the good opinion of all the hands, and spent many hours in helping them with as hearty a good will as ever he worked on a Kentucky farm.
When there seemed to be nothing for him to do, he would climb to a nook among the cotton-bales of the upper deck, and busy himself in studying over his Bible,—and it is there we see him now.
For a hundred or more miles above New Orleans, the river is higher than the surrounding country, and rolls its tremendous volume between massive levees twenty feet in height.
The traveller from the deck of the steamer, as from some floating castle top, overlooks the whole country for miles and miles around.
Tom, therefore, had spread out full before him, in plantation after plantation, a map of the life to which he was approaching.
In such a case, you write to your wife, and send messages to your children; but Tom could not write,—the mail for him had no existence, and the gulf of separation was unbridged by even a friendly word or signal.
Is it strange, then, that some tears fall on the pages of his Bible, as he lays it on the cotton-bale, and, with patient finger, threading his slow way from word to word, traces out its promises?
Having learned late in life, Tom was but a slow reader, and passed on laboriously from verse to verse.
Fortunate for him was it that the book he was intent on was one which slow reading cannot injure,—nay, one whose words, like ingots of gold, seem often to need to be weighed separately, that the mind may take in their priceless value.
Let us follow him a moment, as, pointing to each word, and pronouncing each half aloud, he reads, “Let—not—your—heart—be—troubled.
In—my—Father’s—house—are—many—mansions.
But, to poor Tom, there it lay, just what he needed, so evidently true and divine that the possibility of a question never entered his simple head.
As for Tom’s Bible, though it had no annotations and helps in margin from learned commentators, still it had been embellished with certain way-marks and guide-boards of Tom’s own invention, and which helped him more than the most learned expositions could have done.
It had been his custom to get the Bible read to him by his master’s children, in particular by young Master George; and, as they read, he would designate, by bold, strong marks and dashes, with pen and ink, the passages which more particularly gratified his ear or affected his heart.
Among the passengers on the boat was a young gentleman of fortune and family, resident in New Orleans, who bore the name of St.
He had with him a daughter between five and six years of age, together with a lady who seemed to claim relationship to both, and to have the little one especially under her charge.
Tom had often caught glimpses of this little girl,—for she was one of those busy, tripping creatures, that can be no more contained in one place than a sunbeam or a summer breeze,—nor was she one that, once seen, could be easily forgotten.
Her form was the perfection of childish beauty, without its usual chubbiness and squareness of outline.
There was about it an undulating and aerial grace, such as one might dream of for some mythic and allegorical being.
Her face was remarkable less for its perfect beauty of feature than for a singular and dreamy earnestness of expression, which made the ideal start when they looked at her, and by which the dullest and most literal were impressed, without exactly knowing why.
The shape of her head and the turn of her neck and bust was peculiarly noble, and the long golden-brown hair that floated like a cloud around it, the deep spiritual gravity of her violet blue eyes, shaded by heavy fringes of golden brown,—all marked her out from other children, and made every one turn and look after her, as she glided hither and thither on the boat.
Nevertheless, the little one was not what you would have called either a grave child or a sad one.
On the contrary, an airy and innocent playfulness seemed to flicker like the shadow of summer leaves over her childish face, and around her buoyant figure.
She was always in motion, always with a half smile on her rosy mouth, flying hither and thither, with an undulating and cloud-like tread, singing to herself as she moved as in a happy dream.
Her father and female guardian were incessantly busy in pursuit of her,—but, when caught, she melted from them again like a summer cloud; and as no word of chiding or reproof ever fell on her ear for whatever she chose to do, she pursued her own way all over the boat.
Always dressed in white, she seemed to move like a shadow through all sorts of places, without contracting spot or stain; and there was not a corner or nook, above or below, where those fairy footsteps had not glided, and that visionary golden head, with its deep blue eyes, fleeted along.
The fireman, as he looked up from his sweaty toil, sometimes found those eyes looking wonderingly into the raging depths of the furnace, and fearfully and pityingly at him, as if she thought him in some dreadful danger.
Anon the steersman at the wheel paused and smiled, as the picture-like head gleamed through the window of the round house, and in a moment was gone again.
A thousand times a day rough voices blessed her, and smiles of unwonted softness stole over hard faces, as she passed; and when she tripped fearlessly over dangerous places, rough, sooty hands were stretched involuntarily out to save her, and smooth her path.
Tom, who had the soft, impressible nature of his kindly race, ever yearning toward the simple and childlike, watched the little creature with daily increasing interest.
To him she seemed something almost divine; and whenever her golden head and deep blue eyes peered out upon him from behind some dusky cotton-bale, or looked down upon him over some ridge of packages, he half believed that he saw one of the angels stepped out of his New Testament.
Often and often she walked mournfully round the place where Haley’s gang of men and women sat in their chains.
She would glide in among them, and look at them with an air of perplexed and sorrowful earnestness; and sometimes she would lift their chains with her slender hands, and then sigh wofully, as she glided away.
Several times she appeared suddenly among them, with her hands full of candy, nuts, and oranges, which she would distribute joyfully to them, and then be gone again.
Tom watched the little lady a great deal, before he ventured on any overtures towards acquaintanceship.
He knew an abundance of simple acts to propitiate and invite the approaches of the little people, and he resolved to play his part right skilfully.
He could cut cunning little baskets out of cherry-stones, could make grotesque faces on hickory-nuts, or odd-jumping figures out of elder-pith, and he was a very Pan in the manufacture of whistles of all sizes and sorts.
His pockets were full of miscellaneous articles of attraction, which he had hoarded in days of old for his master’s children, and which he now produced, with commendable prudence and economy, one by one, as overtures for acquaintance and friendship.
The little one was shy, for all her busy interest in everything going on, and it was not easy to tame her.
For a while, she would perch like a canary-bird on some box or package near Tom, while busy in the little arts afore-named, and take from him, with a kind of grave bashfulness, the little articles he offered.
But at last they got on quite confidential terms.
Clare,” said the little one, “though papa and everybody else call me Eva.
“No, I am going to be sold to somebody.
Eva and her father were standing together by the railings to see the boat start from the landing-place, the wheel had made two or three revolutions in the water, when, by some sudden movement, the little one suddenly lost her balance and fell sheer over the side of the boat into the water.
Her father, scarce knowing what he did, was plunging in after her, but was held back by some behind him, who saw that more efficient aid had followed his child.
Tom was standing just under her on the lower deck, as she fell.
A broad-chested, strong-armed fellow, it was nothing for him to keep afloat in the water, till, in a moment or two the child rose to the surface, and he caught her in his arms, and, swimming with her to the boat-side, handed her up, all dripping, to the grasp of hundreds of hands, which, as if they had all belonged to one man, were stretched eagerly out to receive her.
A few moments more, and her father bore her, dripping and senseless, to the ladies’ cabin, where, as is usual in cases of the kind, there ensued a very well-meaning and kind-hearted strife among the female occupants generally, as to who should do the most things to make a disturbance, and to hinder her recovery in every way possible.
A general bustle of expectation and preparation was spread through the boat; in the cabin, one and another were gathering their things together, and arranging them, preparatory to going ashore.
The steward and chambermaid, and all, were busily engaged in cleaning, furbishing, and arranging the splendid boat, preparatory to a grand entree.
On the lower deck sat our friend Tom, with his arms folded, and anxiously, from time to time, turning his eyes towards a group on the other side of the boat.
There stood the fair Evangeline, a little paler than the day before, but otherwise exhibiting no traces of the accident which had befallen her.
A graceful, elegantly-formed young man stood by her, carelessly leaning one elbow on a bale of cotton while a large pocket-book lay open before him.
It was quite evident, at a glance, that the gentleman was Eva’s father.
There was the same noble cast of head, the same large blue eyes, the same golden-brown hair; yet the expression was wholly different.
In the large, clear blue eyes, though in form and color exactly similar, there was wanting that misty, dreamy depth of expression; all was clear, bold, and bright, but with a light wholly of this world: the beautifully cut mouth had a proud and somewhat sarcastic expression, while an air of free-and-easy superiority sat not ungracefully in every turn and movement of his fine form.
He was listening, with a good-humored, negligent air, half comic, half contemptuous, to Haley, who was very volubly expatiating on the quality of the article for which they were bargaining.
“All the moral and Christian virtues bound in black Morocco, complete!” he said, when Haley had finished.
“Well, now, my good fellow, what’s the damage, as they say in Kentucky; in short, what’s to be paid out for this business?
Now, as a matter of Christian charity, how cheap could you afford to let him go, to oblige a young lady that’s particular sot on him?” “Wal, now, just think on ’t,” said the trader; “just look at them limbs,—broad-chested, strong as a horse.
Look at his head; them high forrads allays shows calculatin niggers, that’ll do any kind o’ thing.
Now, a nigger of that ar heft and build is worth considerable, just as you may say, for his body, supposin he’s stupid; but come to put in his calculatin faculties, and them which I can show he has oncommon, why, of course, it makes him come higher.
He has a strornary talent for business.” “Bad, bad, very bad; knows altogether too much!” said the young man, with the same mocking smile playing about his mouth.
Your smart fellows are always running off, stealing horses, and raising the devil generally.
I think you’ll have to take off a couple of hundred for his smartness.” “Wal, there might be something in that ar, if it warnt for his character; but I can show recommends from his master and others, to prove he is one of your real pious,—the most humble, prayin, pious crittur ye ever did see.
Why, he’s been called a preacher in them parts he came from.” “And I might use him for a family chaplain, possibly,” added the young man, dryly.
Religion is a remarkably scarce article at our house.” “You’re joking, now.” “How do you know I am?
Didn’t you just warrant him for a preacher?
Has he been examined by any synod or council?
“Papa, do buy him! it’s no matter what you pay,” whispered Eva, softly, getting up on a package, and putting her arm around her father’s neck.
“I want to make him happy.” “An original reason, certainly.” Here the trader handed up a certificate, signed by Mr.
Shelby, which the young man took with the tips of his long fingers, and glanced over carelessly.
“A gentlemanly hand,” he said, “and well spelt, too.
Well, now, but I’m not sure, after all, about this religion,” said he, the old wicked expression returning to his eye; “the country is almost ruined with pious white people; such pious politicians as we have just before elections,—such pious goings on in all departments of church and state, that a fellow does not know who’ll cheat him next.
I don’t know, either, about religion’s being up in the market, just now.
How many hundred dollars, now, do you put on for this religion?” “You like to be jokin, now,” said the trader; “but, then, there’s _sense_ under all that ar.
I know there’s differences in religion.
“I’m a thinkin that every man’ll have to hang on his own hook, in them ar quarters.” “Rather hard on a fellow that pays extra on religion, and can’t trade with it in the state where he wants it most, an’t it, now?” said the young man, who had been making out a roll of bills while he was speaking.
“All right,” said Haley, his face beaming with delight; and pulling out an old inkhorn, he proceeded to fill out a bill of sale, which, in a few moments, he handed to the young man.
“I wonder, now, if I was divided up and inventoried,” said the latter as he ran over the paper, “how much I might bring.
Say so much for the shape of my head, so much for a high forehead, so much for arms, and hands, and legs, and then so much for education, learning, talent, honesty, religion!
Bless me! there would be small charge on that last, I’m thinking.
But come, Eva,” he said; and taking the hand of his daughter, he stepped across the boat, and carelessly putting the tip of his finger under Tom’s chin, said, good-humoredly, “Look-up, Tom, and see how you like your new master.” Tom looked up.
It was not in nature to look into that gay, young, handsome face, without a feeling of pleasure; and Tom felt the tears start in his eyes as he said, heartily, “God bless you, Mas’r!” “Well, I hope he will.
Quite as likely to do it for your asking as mine, from all accounts.
“Mas’r Shelby raised heaps of ’em.” “Well, I think I shall put you in coachy, on condition that you won’t be drunk more than once a week, unless in cases of emergency, Tom.” Tom looked surprised, and rather hurt, and said, “I never drink, Mas’r.” “I’ve heard that story before, Tom; but then we’ll see.
It will be a special accommodation to all concerned, if you don’t.
Never mind, my boy,” he added, good-humoredly, seeing Tom still looked grave; “I don’t doubt you mean to do well.” “I sartin do, Mas’r,” said Tom.
“Papa is very good to everybody, only he always will laugh at them.” “Papa is much obliged to you for his recommendation,” said St.
Clare, laughing, as he turned on his heel and walked away.
CHAPTER XV Of Tom’s New Master, and Various Other Matters Since the thread of our humble hero’s life has now become interwoven with that of higher ones, it is necessary to give some brief introduction to them.
Clare was the son of a wealthy planter of Louisiana.
Of two brothers, very similar in temperament and character, one had settled on a flourishing farm in Vermont, and the other became an opulent planter in Louisiana.
The mother of Augustine was a Huguenot French lady, whose family had emigrated to Louisiana during the days of its early settlement.
Augustine and another brother were the only children of their parents.
Having inherited from his mother an exceeding delicacy of constitution, he was, at the instance of physicians, during many years of his boyhood, sent to the care of his uncle in Vermont, in order that his constitution might be strengthened by the cold of a more bracing climate.
In childhood, he was remarkable for an extreme and marked sensitiveness of character, more akin to the softness of woman than the ordinary hardness of his own sex.
Time, however, overgrew this softness with the rough bark of manhood, and but few knew how living and fresh it still lay at the core.
His talents were of the very first order, although his mind showed a preference always for the ideal and the æsthetic, and there was about him that repugnance to the actual business of life which is the common result of this balance of the faculties.
Soon after the completion of his college course, his whole nature was kindled into one intense and passionate effervescence of romantic passion.
His hour came,—the hour that comes only once; his star rose in the horizon,—that star that rises so often in vain, to be remembered only as a thing of dreams; and it rose for him in vain.
To drop the figure,—he saw and won the love of a high-minded and beautiful woman, in one of the northern states, and they were affianced.
He returned south to make arrangements for their marriage, when, most unexpectedly, his letters were returned to him by mail, with a short note from her guardian, stating to him that ere this reached him the lady would be the wife of another.
Stung to madness, he vainly hoped, as many another has done, to fling the whole thing from his heart by one desperate effort.
The married couple were enjoying their honeymoon, and entertaining a brilliant circle of friends in their splendid villa, near Lake Pontchartrain, when, one day, a letter was brought to him in _that_ well-remembered writing.
It was handed to him while he was in full tide of gay and successful conversation, in a whole room-full of company.
He turned deadly pale when he saw the writing, but still preserved his composure, and finished the playful warfare of badinage which he was at the moment carrying on with a lady opposite; and, a short time after, was missed from the circle.
The letter ended with expressions of hope and thankfulness, and professions of undying affection, which were more bitter than death to the unhappy young man.
He wrote to her immediately: “I have received yours,—but too late.
I believed all I heard.
I was desperate. _I am married_, and all is over.
Only forget,—it is all that remains for either of us.” And thus ended the whole romance and ideal of life for Augustine St.
But the _real_ remained,—the _real_, like the flat, bare, oozy tide-mud, when the blue sparkling wave, with all its company of gliding boats and white-winged ships, its music of oars and chiming waters, has gone down, and there it lies, flat, slimy, bare,—exceedingly real.
Of course, in a novel, people’s hearts break, and they die, and that is the end of it; and in a story this is very convenient.
There is a most busy and important round of eating, drinking, dressing, walking, visiting, buying, selling, talking, reading, and all that makes up what is commonly called _living_, yet to be gone through; and this yet remained to Augustine.
Had his wife been a whole woman, she might yet have done something—as woman can—to mend the broken threads of life, and weave again into a tissue of brightness.
As before stated, she consisted of a fine figure, a pair of splendid eyes, and a hundred thousand dollars; and none of these items were precisely the ones to minister to a mind diseased.
When Augustine, pale as death, was found lying on the sofa, and pleaded sudden sick-headache as the cause of his distress, she recommended to him to smell of hartshorn; and when the paleness and headache came on week after week, she only said that she never thought Mr.
Clare was sickly; but it seems he was very liable to sick-headaches, and that it was a very unfortunate thing for her, because he didn’t enjoy going into company with her, and it seemed odd to go so much alone, when they were just married.
Augustine was glad in his heart that he had married so undiscerning a woman; but as the glosses and civilities of the honeymoon wore away, he discovered that a beautiful young woman, who has lived all her life to be caressed and waited on, might prove quite a hard mistress in domestic life.
Marie never had possessed much capability of affection, or much sensibility, and the little that she had, had been merged into a most intense and unconscious selfishness; a selfishness the more hopeless, from its quiet obtuseness, its utter ignorance of any claims but her own.
From her infancy, she had been surrounded with servants, who lived only to study her caprices; the idea that they had either feelings or rights had never dawned upon her, even in distant perspective.
Her father, whose only child she had been, had never denied her anything that lay within the compass of human possibility; and when she entered life, beautiful, accomplished, and an heiress, she had, of course, all the eligibles and non-eligibles of the other sex sighing at her feet, and she had no doubt that Augustine was a most fortunate man in having obtained her.
It is a great mistake to suppose that a woman with no heart will be an easy creditor in the exchange of affection.
There is not on earth a more merciless exactor of love from others than a thoroughly selfish woman; and the more unlovely she grows, the more jealously and scrupulously she exacts love, to the uttermost farthing.
When, therefore, St.
Clare began to drop off those gallantries and small attentions which flowed at first through the habitude of courtship, he found his sultana no way ready to resign her slave; there were abundance of tears, poutings, and small tempests, there were discontents, pinings, upbraidings.
Clare was good-natured and self-indulgent, and sought to buy off with presents and flatteries; and when Marie became mother to a beautiful daughter, he really felt awakened, for a time, to something like tenderness.
Clare’s mother had been a woman of uncommon elevation and purity of character, and he gave to his child his mother’s name, fondly fancying that she would prove a reproduction of her image.
The thing had been remarked with petulant jealousy by his wife, and she regarded her husband’s absorbing devotion to the child with suspicion and dislike; all that was given to her seemed so much taken from herself.
From the time of the birth of this child, her health gradually sunk.
There was no end of her various complaints; but her principal forte appeared to lie in sick-headache, which sometimes would confine her to her room three days out of six.
As, of course, all family arrangements fell into the hands of servants, St.
Clare found his menage anything but comfortable.
His only daughter was exceedingly delicate, and he feared that, with no one to look after her and attend to her, her health and life might yet fall a sacrifice to her mother’s inefficiency.
He had taken her with him on a tour to Vermont, and had persuaded his cousin, Miss Ophelia St.
Clare, to return with him to his southern residence; and they are now returning on this boat, where we have introduced them to our readers.
And now, while the distant domes and spires of New Orleans rise to our view, there is yet time for an introduction to Miss Ophelia.
Whoever has travelled in the New England States will remember, in some cool village, the large farmhouse, with its clean-swept grassy yard, shaded by the dense and massive foliage of the sugar maple; and remember the air of order and stillness, of perpetuity and unchanging repose, that seemed to breathe over the whole place.
Nothing lost, or out of order; not a picket loose in the fence, not a particle of litter in the turfy yard, with its clumps of lilac bushes growing up under the windows.
Within, he will remember wide, clean rooms, where nothing ever seems to be doing or going to be done, where everything is once and forever rigidly in place, and where all household arrangements move with the punctual exactness of the old clock in the corner.
In the family “keeping-room,” as it is termed, he will remember the staid, respectable old book-case, with its glass doors, where Rollin’s History,[1] Milton’s Paradise Lost, Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress, and Scott’s Family Bible,[2] stand side by side in decorous order, with multitudes of other books, equally solemn and respectable.
On such a farm, in such a house and family, Miss Ophelia had spent a quiet existence of some forty-five years, when her cousin invited her to visit his southern mansion.
The eldest of a large family, she was still considered by her father and mother as one of “the children,” and the proposal that she should go to _Orleans_ was a most momentous one to the family circle.
Morse. [4] _Recollections of the Last Ten Years_ (1826) by Timothy Flint (1780-1840), missionary of Presbyterianism to the trans-Allegheny West.
The good mother inquired, anxiously, “if Orleans wasn’t an awful wicked place,” saying, “that it seemed to her most equal to going to the Sandwich Islands, or anywhere among the heathen.” It was known at the minister’s and at the doctor’s, and at Miss Peabody’s milliner shop, that Ophelia St.
Clare was “talking about” going away down to Orleans with her cousin; and of course the whole village could do no less than help this very important process of _talking about_ the matter.
The minister, who inclined strongly to abolitionist views, was quite doubtful whether such a step might not tend somewhat to encourage the southerners in holding on to their slaves; while the doctor, who was a stanch colonizationist, inclined to the opinion that Miss Ophelia ought to go, to show the Orleans people that we don’t think hardly of them, after all.
He was of opinion, in fact, that southern people needed encouraging.
When however, the fact that she had resolved to go was fully before the public mind, she was solemnly invited out to tea by all her friends and neighbors for the space of a fortnight, and her prospects and plans duly canvassed and inquired into.
Miss Moseley, who came into the house to help to do the dress-making, acquired daily accessions of importance from the developments with regard to Miss Ophelia’s wardrobe which she had been enabled to make.
It was credibly ascertained that Squire Sinclare, as his name was commonly contracted in the neighborhood, had counted out fifty dollars, and given them to Miss Ophelia, and told her to buy any clothes she thought best; and that two new silk dresses, and a bonnet, had been sent for from Boston.
There were credible rumors, also, of a hemstitched pocket-handkerchief; and report even went so far as to state that Miss Ophelia had one pocket-handkerchief with lace all around it,—it was even added that it was worked in the corners; but this latter point was never satisfactorily ascertained, and remains, in fact, unsettled to this day.
Miss Ophelia, as you now behold her, stands before you, in a very shining brown linen travelling-dress, tall, square-formed, and angular.
Her face was thin, and rather sharp in its outlines; the lips compressed, like those of a person who is in the habit of making up her mind definitely on all subjects; while the keen, dark eyes had a peculiarly searching, advised movement, and travelled over everything, as if they were looking for something to take care of.
All her movements were sharp, decided, and energetic; and, though she was never much of a talker, her words were remarkably direct, and to the purpose, when she did speak.
In her habits, she was a living impersonation of order, method, and exactness.
In punctuality, she was as inevitable as a clock, and as inexorable as a railroad engine; and she held in most decided contempt and abomination anything of a contrary character.
People who did nothing, or who did not know exactly what they were going to do, or who did not take the most direct way to accomplish what they set their hands to, were objects of her entire contempt,—a contempt shown less frequently by anything she said, than by a kind of stony grimness, as if she scorned to say anything about the matter.
As to mental cultivation,—she had a clear, strong, active mind, was well and thoroughly read in history and the older English classics, and thought with great strength within certain narrow limits.
Her theological tenets were all made up, labelled in most positive and distinct forms, and put by, like the bundles in her patch trunk; there were just so many of them, and there were never to be any more.
So, also, were her ideas with regard to most matters of practical life,—such as housekeeping in all its branches, and the various political relations of her native village.
And, underlying all, deeper than anything else, higher and broader, lay the strongest principle of her being—conscientiousness.
Nowhere is conscience so dominant and all-absorbing as with New England women.
It is the granite formation, which lies deepest, and rises out, even to the tops of the highest mountains.
Miss Ophelia was the absolute bond-slave of the “_ought_.” Once make her certain that the “path of duty,” as she commonly phrased it, lay in any given direction, and fire and water could not keep her from it.
She would walk straight down into a well, or up to a loaded cannon’s mouth, if she were only quite sure that there the path lay.
Her standard of right was so high, so all-embracing, so minute, and making so few concessions to human frailty, that, though she strove with heroic ardor to reach it, she never actually did so, and of course was burdened with a constant and often harassing sense of deficiency;—this gave a severe and somewhat gloomy cast to her religious character.
But, how in the world can Miss Ophelia get along with Augustine St.
Clare,—gay, easy, unpunctual, unpractical, sceptical,—in short,—walking with impudent and nonchalant freedom over every one of her most cherished habits and opinions?
The idea of a house without anybody to take care of it went to her heart; then she loved the lovely little girl, as few could help doing; and though she regarded Augustine as very much of a heathen, yet she loved him, laughed at his jokes, and forbore with his failings, to an extent which those who knew him thought perfectly incredible.
But what more or other is to be known of Miss Ophelia our reader must discover by a personal acquaintance.
There she is, sitting now in her state-room, surrounded by a mixed multitude of little and big carpet-bags, boxes, baskets, each containing some separate responsibility which she is tying, binding up, packing, or fastening, with a face of great earnestness.
Of course you haven’t,—children never do: there’s the spotted carpet-bag and the little blue band-box with your best bonnet,—that’s two; then the India rubber satchel is three; and my tape and needle box is four; and my band-box, five; and my collar-box; and that little hair trunk, seven.
What have you done with your sunshade?
I should have thought you’d a lost everything you had.” “Well, aunty, I did lose a great many; and then, when we stopped anywhere, papa would buy some more of whatever it was.” “Mercy on us, child,—what a way!” “It was a very easy way, aunty,” said Eva.
“It’s a dreadful shiftless one,” said aunty.
“Why, aunty, what’ll you do now?” said Eva; “that trunk is too full to be shut down.” “It _must_ shut down,” said aunty, with the air of a general, as she squeezed the things in, and sprung upon the lid;—still a little gap remained about the mouth of the trunk.
“Get up here, Eva!” said Miss Ophelia, courageously; “what has been done can be done again.
This trunk has _got to be_ shut and locked—there are no two ways about it.” And the trunk, intimidated, doubtless, by this resolute statement, gave in.
The hasp snapped sharply in its hole, and Miss Ophelia turned the key, and pocketed it in triumph.
Do look out, Eva, and see if you see your papa.” “O, yes, he’s down the other end of the gentlemen’s cabin, eating an orange.” “He can’t know how near we are coming,” said aunty; “hadn’t you better run and speak to him?” “Papa never is in a hurry about anything,” said Eva, “and we haven’t come to the landing.
Look! there’s our house, up that street!” The boat now began, with heavy groans, like some vast, tired monster, to prepare to push up among the multiplied steamers at the levee.
Eva joyously pointed out the various spires, domes, and way-marks, by which she recognized her native city.
“But mercy on us! the boat has stopped! where is your father?” And now ensued the usual turmoil of landing—waiters running twenty ways at once—men tugging trunks, carpet-bags, boxes—women anxiously calling to their children, and everybody crowding in a dense mass to the plank towards the landing.
Miss Ophelia seated herself resolutely on the lately vanquished trunk, and marshalling all her goods and chattels in fine military order, seemed resolved to defend them to the last.
“Shall I take your trunk, ma’am?” “Shall I take your baggage?” “Let me ’tend to your baggage, Missis?” “Shan’t I carry out these yer, Missis?” rained down upon her unheeded.
“Well, the carriage is waiting, and the crowd are now off, so that one can walk out in a decent and Christian manner, and not be pushed and shoved.
“Well, at any rate, I’ll carry this, and this, and this,” said Miss Ophelia, singling out three boxes and a small carpet-bag.
“My dear Miss Vermont, positively you mustn’t come the Green Mountains over us that way.
You must adopt at least a piece of a southern principle, and not walk out under all that load.
They’ll take you for a waiting-maid; give them to this fellow; he’ll put them down as if they were eggs, now.” Miss Ophelia looked despairingly as her cousin took all her treasures from her, and rejoiced to find herself once more in the carriage with them, in a state of preservation.
I’m going to take Tom up to mother for a peace-offering, to make up for that drunken fellow that upset the carriage.” “O, Tom will make a splendid driver, I know,” said Eva; “he’ll never get drunk.” The carriage stopped in front of an ancient mansion, built in that odd mixture of Spanish and French style, of which there are specimens in some parts of New Orleans.
It was built in the Moorish fashion,—a square building enclosing a court-yard, into which the carriage drove through an arched gateway.
The court, in the inside, had evidently been arranged to gratify a picturesque and voluptuous ideality.
Wide galleries ran all around the four sides, whose Moorish arches, slender pillars, and arabesque ornaments, carried the mind back, as in a dream, to the reign of oriental romance in Spain.
In the middle of the court, a fountain threw high its silvery water, falling in a never-ceasing spray into a marble basin, fringed with a deep border of fragrant violets.
The water in the fountain, pellucid as crystal, was alive with myriads of gold and silver fishes, twinkling and darting through it like so many living jewels.
Around the fountain ran a walk, paved with a mosaic of pebbles, laid in various fanciful patterns; and this, again, was surrounded by turf, smooth as green velvet, while a carriage-drive enclosed the whole.
Two large orange-trees, now fragrant with blossoms, threw a delicious shade; and, ranged in a circle round upon the turf, were marble vases of arabesque sculpture, containing the choicest flowering plants of the tropics.
The galleries that surrounded the court were festooned with a curtain of some kind of Moorish stuff, and could be drawn down at pleasure, to exclude the beams of the sun.
On the whole, the appearance of the place was luxurious and romantic.
As the carriage drove in, Eva seemed like a bird ready to burst from a cage, with the wild eagerness of her delight.
“O, isn’t it beautiful, lovely! my own dear, darling home!” she said to Miss Ophelia.
“Isn’t it beautiful?” “’T is a pretty place,” said Miss Ophelia, as she alighted; “though it looks rather old and heathenish to me.” Tom got down from the carriage, and looked about with an air of calm, still enjoyment.
The negro, it must be remembered, is an exotic of the most gorgeous and superb countries of the world, and he has, deep in his heart, a passion for all that is splendid, rich, and fanciful; a passion which, rudely indulged by an untrained taste, draws on them the ridicule of the colder and more correct white race.
Clare, who was in heart a poetical voluptuary, smiled as Miss Ophelia made her remark on his premises, and, turning to Tom, who was standing looking round, his beaming black face perfectly radiant with admiration, he said, “Tom, my boy, this seems to suit you.” “Yes, Mas’r, it looks about the right thing,” said Tom.
All this passed in a moment, while trunks were being hustled off, hackman paid, and while a crowd, of all ages and sizes,—men, women, and children,—came running through the galleries, both above and below to see Mas’r come in.
Foremost among them was a highly-dressed young mulatto man, evidently a very _distingue_ personage, attired in the ultra extreme of the mode, and gracefully waving a scented cambric handkerchief in his hand.
This personage had been exerting himself, with great alacrity, in driving all the flock of domestics to the other end of the verandah.
I am ashamed of you,” he said, in a tone of authority.
“Would you intrude on Master’s domestic relations, in the first hour of his return?” All looked abashed at this elegant speech, delivered with quite an air, and stood huddled together at a respectful distance, except two stout porters, who came up and began conveying away the baggage.
Adolph’s systematic arrangements, when St.
Adolph himself, conspicuous in satin vest, gold guard-chain, and white pants, and bowing with inexpressible grace and suavity.
“Ah, Adolph, is it you?” said his master, offering his hand to him; “how are you, boy?” while Adolph poured forth, with great fluency, an extemporary speech, which he had been preparing, with great care, for a fortnight before.
Clare, passing on, with his usual air of negligent drollery, “that’s very well got up, Adolph.
See that the baggage is well bestowed.
I’ll come to the people in a minute;” and, so saying, he led Miss Ophelia to a large parlor that opened on the verandah.
While this had been passing, Eva had flown like a bird, through the porch and parlor, to a little boudoir opening likewise on the verandah.
A tall, dark-eyed, sallow woman, half rose from a couch on which she was reclining.
“Mamma!” said Eva, in a sort of a rapture, throwing herself on her neck, and embracing her over and over again.
“That’ll do,—take care, child,—don’t, you make my head ache,” said the mother, after she had languidly kissed her.
Clare came in, embraced his wife in true, orthodox, husbandly fashion, and then presented to her his cousin.
Marie lifted her large eyes on her cousin with an air of some curiosity, and received her with languid politeness.
A crowd of servants now pressed to the entry door, and among them a middle-aged mulatto woman, of very respectable appearance, stood foremost, in a tremor of expectation and joy, at the door.
“O, there’s Mammy!” said Eva, as she flew across the room; and, throwing herself into her arms, she kissed her repeatedly.
This woman did not tell her that she made her head ache, but, on the contrary, she hugged her, and laughed, and cried, till her sanity was a thing to be doubted of; and when released from her, Eva flew from one to another, shaking hands and kissing, in a way that Miss Ophelia afterwards declared fairly turned her stomach.
“Well!” said Miss Ophelia, “you southern children can do something that _I_ couldn’t.” “What, now, pray?” said St.
“Well, I want to be kind to everybody, and I wouldn’t have anything hurt; but as to kissing—” “Niggers,” said St.
“Look out for the babies!” he added, as he stumbled over a sooty little urchin, who was crawling upon all fours.
“If I step upon anybody, let ’em mention it.” There was an abundance of laughing and blessing Mas’r, as St.
Clare distributed small pieces of change among them.
“Come, now, take yourselves off, like good boys and girls,” he said; and the whole assemblage, dark and light, disappeared through a door into a large verandah, followed by Eva, who carried a large satchel, which she had been filling with apples, nuts, candy, ribbons, laces, and toys of every description, during her whole homeward journey.
Clare turned to go back his eye fell upon Tom, who was standing uneasily, shifting from one foot to the other, while Adolph stood negligently leaning against the banisters, examining Tom through an opera-glass, with an air that would have done credit to any dandy living.
“Puh! you puppy,” said his master, striking down the opera glass; “is that the way you treat your company?
Seems to me, Dolph,” he added, laying his finger on the elegant figured satin vest that Adolph was sporting, “seems to me that’s _my_ vest.” “O!
Master, this vest all stained with wine; of course, a gentleman in Master’s standing never wears a vest like this.
I understood I was to take it.
“Well, here, I’m going to show this Tom to his mistress, and then you take him to the kitchen; and mind you don’t put on any of your airs to him.
He’s worth two such puppies as you.” “Master always will have his joke,” said Adolph, laughing.
“I’m delighted to see Master in such spirits.” “Here, Tom,” said St.
He looked wistfully on the velvet carpets, and the before unimagined splendors of mirrors, pictures, statues, and curtains, and, like the Queen of Sheba before Solomon, there was no more spirit in him.
Clare to his wife, “I’ve bought you a coachman, at last, to order.
I tell you, he’s a regular hearse for blackness and sobriety, and will drive you like a funeral, if you want.
“No, he’s warranted a pious and sober article.” “Well, I hope he may turn out well,” said the lady; “it’s more than I expect, though.” “Dolph,” said St.
Clare, “show Tom down stairs; and, mind yourself,” he added; “remember what I told you.” Adolph tripped gracefully forward, and Tom, with lumbering tread, went after.
“He’s a perfect behemoth!” said Marie.
Clare, seating himself on a stool beside her sofa, “be gracious, and say something pretty to a fellow.” “You’ve been gone a fortnight beyond the time,” said the lady, pouting.
Marie looked at it with a dissatisfied air.
“What made you sit in such an awkward position?” she said.
“Well, the position may be a matter of opinion; but what do you think of the likeness?” “If you don’t think anything of my opinion in one case, I suppose you wouldn’t in another,” said the lady, shutting the daguerreotype.
Clare, mentally; but aloud he added, “Come, now, Marie, what do you think of the likeness?
Don’t be nonsensical, now.” “It’s very inconsiderate of you, St.
You know I’ve been lying all day with the sick-headache; and there’s been such a tumult made ever since you came, I’m half dead.” “You’re subject to the sick-headache, ma’am!” said Miss Ophelia, suddenly rising from the depths of the large arm-chair, where she had sat quietly, taking an inventory of the furniture, and calculating its expense.
“Juniper-berry tea is good for sick-headache,” said Miss Ophelia; “at least, Auguste, Deacon Abraham Perry’s wife, used to say so; and she was a great nurse.” “I’ll have the first juniper-berries that get ripe in our garden by the lake brought in for that special purpose,” said St.
Clare, gravely pulling the bell as he did so; “meanwhile, cousin, you must be wanting to retire to your apartment, and refresh yourself a little, after your journey.
Dolph,” he added, “tell Mammy to come here.” The decent mulatto woman whom Eva had caressed so rapturously soon entered; she was dressed neatly, with a high red and yellow turban on her head, the recent gift of Eva, and which the child had been arranging on her head.
Clare, “I put this lady under your care; she is tired, and wants rest; take her to her chamber, and be sure she is made comfortable,” and Miss Ophelia disappeared in the rear of Mammy.
CHAPTER XVI Tom’s Mistress and Her Opinions “And now, Marie,” said St.
Here is our practical, business-like New England cousin, who will take the whole budget of cares off your shoulders, and give you time to refresh yourself, and grow young and handsome.
The ceremony of delivering the keys had better come off forthwith.” This remark was made at the breakfast-table, a few mornings after Miss Ophelia had arrived.
“I’m sure she’s welcome,” said Marie, leaning her head languidly on her hand.
“I think she’ll find one thing, if she does, and that is, that it’s we mistresses that are the slaves, down here.” “O, certainly, she will discover that, and a world of wholesome truths besides, no doubt,” said St.
“Talk about our keeping slaves, as if we did it for our _convenience_,” said Marie.
“I’m sure, if we consulted _that_, we might let them all go at once.” Evangeline fixed her large, serious eyes on her mother’s face, with an earnest and perplexed expression, and said, simply, “What do you keep them for, mamma?” “I don’t know, I’m sure, except for a plague; they are the plague of my life.
There’s Mammy, the best creature living,—what could you do without her?” “Mammy is the best I ever knew,” said Marie; “and yet Mammy, now, is selfish—dreadfully selfish; it’s the fault of the whole race.” “Selfishness _is_ a dreadful fault,” said St.
“Well, now, there’s Mammy,” said Marie, “I think it’s selfish of her to sleep so sound nights; she knows I need little attentions almost every hour, when my worst turns are on, and yet she’s so hard to wake.
I absolutely am worse, this very morning, for the efforts I had to make to wake her last night.” “Hasn’t she sat up with you a good many nights, lately, mamma?” said Eva.
“How should you know that?” said Marie, sharply; “she’s been complaining, I suppose.” “She didn’t complain; she only told me what bad nights you’d had,—so many in succession.” “Why don’t you let Jane or Rosa take her place, a night or two,” said St.
Clare, you really are inconsiderate.
So nervous as I am, the least breath disturbs me; and a strange hand about me would drive me absolutely frantic.
If Mammy felt the interest in me she ought to, she’d wake easier,—of course, she would.
I’ve heard of people who had such devoted servants, but it never was _my_ luck;” and Marie sighed.
Miss Ophelia had listened to this conversation with an air of shrewd, observant gravity; and she still kept her lips tightly compressed, as if determined fully to ascertain her longitude and position, before she committed herself.
“Now, Mammy has a _sort_ of goodness,” said Marie; “she’s smooth and respectful, but she’s selfish at heart.
Now, she never will be done fidgeting and worrying about that husband of hers.
He was a blacksmith, and, of course, very necessary; and I thought and said, at the time, that Mammy and he had better give each other up, as it wasn’t likely to be convenient for them ever to live together again.
I wish, now, I’d insisted on it, and married Mammy to somebody else; but I was foolish and indulgent, and didn’t want to insist.
I told Mammy, at the time, that she mustn’t ever expect to see him more than once or twice in her life again, for the air of father’s place doesn’t agree with my health, and I can’t go there; and I advised her to take up with somebody else; but no—she wouldn’t.
Mammy has a kind of obstinacy about her, in spots, that everybody don’t see as I do.” “Has she children?” said Miss Ophelia.
“Yes; she has two.” “I suppose she feels the separation from them?” “Well, of course, I couldn’t bring them.
They were little dirty things—I couldn’t have them about; and, besides, they took up too much of her time; but I believe that Mammy has always kept up a sort of sulkiness about this.
She won’t marry anybody else; and I do believe, now, though she knows how necessary she is to me, and how feeble my health is, she would go back to her husband tomorrow, if she only could.
I _do_, indeed,” said Marie; “they are just so selfish, now, the best of them.” “It’s distressing to reflect upon,” said St.
Miss Ophelia looked keenly at him, and saw the flush of mortification and repressed vexation, and the sarcastic curl of the lip, as he spoke.
“I wish some of your northern servants could look at her closets of dresses,—silks and muslins, and one real linen cambric, she has hanging there.
I’ve worked sometimes whole afternoons, trimming her caps, and getting her ready to go to a party.
It’s abominable, to be sure; but St.
The fact is, our servants are over-indulged.
I suppose it is partly our fault that they are selfish, and act like spoiled children; but I’ve talked to St.
Eva, the beautiful Eva, had stood listening to her mother, with that expression of deep and mystic earnestness which was peculiar to her.
I often lie awake nights, thinking—” “O, nonsense, child—nonsense!” said Marie; “you are such a strange child!” “But may I, mamma?
Mammy is just like all the rest of them—makes such a fuss about every little headache or finger-ache; it’ll never do to encourage it—never!
I’m principled about this matter,” said she, turning to Miss Ophelia; “you’ll find the necessity of it.
If you encourage servants in giving way to every little disagreeable feeling, and complaining of every little ailment, you’ll have your hands full.
I never complain myself—nobody knows what I endure.
I feel it a duty to bear it quietly, and I do.” Miss Ophelia’s round eyes expressed an undisguised amazement at this peroration, which struck St.
Clare as so supremely ludicrous, that he burst into a loud laugh.
Clare always laughs when I make the least allusion to my ill health,” said Marie, with the voice of a suffering martyr.
“I only hope the day won’t come when he’ll remember it!” and Marie put her handkerchief to her eyes.
Clare got up, looked at his watch, and said he had an engagement down street.
Eva tripped away after him, and Miss Ophelia and Marie remained at the table alone.
Clare!” said the latter, withdrawing her handkerchief with somewhat of a spirited flourish when the criminal to be affected by it was no longer in sight.
“He never realizes, never can, never will, what I suffer, and have, for years.
If I was one of the complaining sort, or ever made any fuss about my ailments, there would be some reason for it.
Men do get tired, naturally, of a complaining wife.
Clare has got in the way of thinking I can bear anything.” Miss Ophelia did not exactly know what she was expected to answer to this.
“And now,” said Marie, “I believe I’ve told you everything; so that, when my next sick turn comes on, you’ll be able to go forward entirely, without consulting me;—only about Eva,—she requires watching.” “She seems to be a good child, very,” said Miss Ophelia; “I never saw a better child.” “Eva’s peculiar,” said her mother, “very.
There are things about her so singular; she isn’t like me, now, a particle;” and Marie sighed, as if this was a truly melancholy consideration.
Miss Ophelia in her own heart said, “I hope she isn’t,” but had prudence enough to keep it down.
“Eva always was disposed to be with servants; and I think that well enough with some children.
But Eva somehow always seems to put herself on an equality with every creature that comes near her.
Clare, I believe, encourages her in it.
Clare indulges every creature under this roof but his own wife.” Again Miss Ophelia sat in blank silence.
“Now, there’s no way with servants,” said Marie, “but to _put them down_, and keep them down.
I hold to being _kind_ to servants—I always am; but you must make ’em _know their place_.
Eva never does; there’s no getting into the child’s head the first beginning of an idea what a servant’s place is!
You heard her offering to take care of me nights, to let Mammy sleep!
That’s just a specimen of the way the child would be doing all the time, if she was left to herself.” “Why,” said Miss Ophelia, bluntly, “I suppose you think your servants are human creatures, and ought to have some rest when they are tired.” “Certainly, of course.
I’m very particular in letting them have everything that comes convenient,—anything that doesn’t put one at all out of the way, you know.
Mammy can make up her sleep, some time or other; there’s no difficulty about that.
She’s the sleepiest concern that ever I saw; sewing, standing, or sitting, that creature will go to sleep, and sleep anywhere and everywhere.
But this treating servants as if they were exotic flowers, or china vases, is really ridiculous,” said Marie, as she plunged languidly into the depths of a voluminous and pillowy lounge, and drew towards her an elegant cut-glass vinaigrette.
“You see,” she continued, in a faint and lady-like voice, like the last dying breath of an Arabian jessamine, or something equally ethereal, “you see, Cousin Ophelia, I don’t often speak of myself.
It isn’t my _habit_; ’t isn’t agreeable to me.
In fact, I haven’t strength to do it.
Clare never understood me, never appreciated me.
Clare means well, I am bound to believe; but men are constitutionally selfish and inconsiderate to woman.
That, at least, is my impression.” Miss Ophelia, who had not a small share of the genuine New England caution, and a very particular horror of being drawn into family difficulties, now began to foresee something of this kind impending; so, composing her face into a grim neutrality, and drawing out of her pocket about a yard and a quarter of stocking, which she kept as a specific against what Dr.
Watts asserts to be a personal habit of Satan when people have idle hands, she proceeded to knit most energetically, shutting her lips together in a way that said, as plain as words could, “You needn’t try to make me speak.
I don’t want anything to do with your affairs,”—in fact, she looked about as sympathizing as a stone lion.
She had got somebody to talk to, and she felt it her duty to talk, and that was enough; and reinforcing herself by smelling again at her vinaigrette, she went on.
“You see, I brought my own property and servants into the connection, when I married St.
Clare, and I am legally entitled to manage them my own way.
Clare had his fortune and his servants, and I’m well enough content he should manage them his way; but St.
Clare will be interfering.
He has wild, extravagant notions about things, particularly about the treatment of servants.
He really does act as if he set his servants before me, and before himself, too; for he lets them make him all sorts of trouble, and never lifts a finger.
Clare is really frightful—he frightens me—good-natured as he looks, in general.
Clare wouldn’t raise his hand, if every one of them walked over him, and I—you see how cruel it would be to require me to make the exertion.
Now, you know these servants are nothing but grown-up children.” “I don’t know anything about it, and I thank the Lord that I don’t!” said Miss Ophelia, shortly.
“Well, but you will have to know something, and know it to your cost, if you stay here.
You don’t know what a provoking, stupid, careless, unreasonable, childish, ungrateful set of wretches they are.” Marie seemed wonderfully supported, always, when she got upon this topic; and she now opened her eyes, and seemed quite to forget her languor.
“You don’t know, and you can’t, the daily, hourly trials that beset a housekeeper from them, everywhere and every way.
But it’s no use to complain to St.
He talks the strangest stuff.
They are a degraded race.” “Don’t you think they’ve got immortal souls?” said Miss Ophelia, with increasing indignation.
But as to putting them on any sort of equality with us, you know, as if we could be compared, why, it’s impossible!
There’s no comparing in this way.
Mammy couldn’t have the feelings that I should.
It’s a different thing altogether,—of course, it is,—and yet St.
Clare pretends not to see it.
Clare once really and soberly tried to persuade me that it was my duty, with my weak health, and all I suffer, to let Mammy go back, and take somebody else in her place.
I don’t often show my feelings, I make it a principle to endure everything in silence; it’s a wife’s hard lot, and I bear it.
But I know by his looks, and little things that he says, that he thinks so as much as ever; and it’s so trying, so provoking!” Miss Ophelia looked very much as if she was afraid she should say something; but she rattled away with her needles in a way that had volumes of meaning in it, if Marie could only have understood it.
“So, you just see,” she continued, “what you’ve got to manage.
A household without any rule; where servants have it all their own way, do what they please, and have what they please, except so far as I, with my feeble health, have kept up government.
I keep my cowhide about, and sometimes I do lay it on; but the exertion is always too much for me.
Clare would only have this thing done as others do—” “And how’s that?” “Why, send them to the calaboose, or some of the other places to be flogged.
Clare contrive to manage?” said Miss Ophelia.
“You say he never strikes a blow.” “Well, men have a more commanding way, you know; it is easier for them; besides, if you ever looked full in his eye, it’s peculiar,—that eye,—and if he speaks decidedly, there’s a kind of flash.
I’m afraid of it, myself; and the servants know they must mind.
I couldn’t do as much by a regular storm and scolding as St.
But you’ll find, when you come to manage, that there’s no getting along without severity,—they are so bad, so deceitful, so lazy.” “The old tune,” said St.
Clare, sauntering in.
“What an awful account these wicked creatures will have to settle, at last, especially for being lazy!
You see, cousin,” said he, as he stretched himself at full length on a lounge opposite to Marie, “it’s wholly inexcusable in them, in the light of the example that Marie and I set them,—this laziness.” “Come, now, St.
Why, I thought I was talking good, quite remarkably for me.
“O, I must have been mistaken, then.
Thank you, my dear, for setting me right.” “You do really try to be provoking,” said Marie.
“O, come, Marie, the day is growing warm, and I have just had a long quarrel with Dolph, which has fatigued me excessively; so, pray be agreeable, now, and let a fellow repose in the light of your smile.” “What’s the matter about Dolph?” said Marie.
“That fellow’s impudence has been growing to a point that is perfectly intolerable to me.
I only wish I had the undisputed management of him a while.
I’d bring him down!” “What you say, my dear, is marked with your usual acuteness and good sense,” said St.
“As to Dolph, the case is this: that he has so long been engaged in imitating my graces and perfections, that he has, at last, really mistaken himself for his master; and I have been obliged to give him a little insight into his mistake.” “How?” said Marie.
“Why, I was obliged to let him understand explicitly that I preferred to keep _some_ of my clothes for my own personal wearing; also, I put his magnificence upon an allowance of cologne-water, and actually was so cruel as to restrict him to one dozen of my cambric handkerchiefs.
Dolph was particularly huffy about it, and I had to talk to him like a father, to bring him round.” “O!
Clare, when will you learn how to treat your servants?
It’s abominable, the way you indulge them!” said Marie.
“Why, after all, what’s the harm of the poor dog’s wanting to be like his master; and if I haven’t brought him up any better than to find his chief good in cologne and cambric handkerchiefs, why shouldn’t I give them to him?” “And why haven’t you brought him up better?” said Miss Ophelia, with blunt determination.
“Too much trouble,—laziness, cousin, laziness,—which ruins more souls than you can shake a stick at.
If it weren’t for laziness, I should have been a perfect angel, myself.
I’m inclined to think that laziness is what your old Dr.
Botherem, up in Vermont, used to call the ‘essence of moral evil.’ It’s an awful consideration, certainly.” “I think you slaveholders have an awful responsibility upon you,” said Miss Ophelia.
“I wouldn’t have it, for a thousand worlds.
You ought to educate your slaves, and treat them like reasonable creatures,—like immortal creatures, that you’ve got to stand before the bar of God with.
That’s my mind,” said the good lady, breaking suddenly out with a tide of zeal that had been gaining strength in her mind all the morning.
His touch was brilliant and firm, and his fingers flew over the keys with a rapid and bird-like motion, airy, and yet decided.
I make no manner of doubt that you threw a very diamond of truth at me, though you see it hit me so directly in the face that it wasn’t exactly appreciated, at first.” “For my part, I don’t see any use in such sort of talk,” said Marie.
“I’m sure, if anybody does more for servants than we do, I’d like to know who; and it don’t do ’em a bit good,—not a particle,—they get worse and worse.
You see, Cousin Ophelia, I’ve tried, and you haven’t; I was born and bred among them, and I know.” Miss Ophelia thought she had said enough, and therefore sat silent.
Clare whistled a tune.
“Is there anything else you wouldn’t wish me to do?” “I wish you _would_ have some kind of sympathy for my trials; you never have any feeling for me.” “My dear accusing angel!” said St.
“It’s provoking to be talked to in that way.” “Then, how will you be talked to?
I’ll talk to order,—any way you’ll mention,—only to give satisfaction.” A gay laugh from the court rang through the silken curtains of the verandah.
There sat Tom, on a little mossy seat in the court, every one of his button-holes stuck full of cape jessamines, and Eva, gayly laughing, was hanging a wreath of roses round his neck; and then she sat down on his knee, like a chip-sparrow, still laughing.
“O, Tom, you look so funny!” Tom had a sober, benevolent smile, and seemed, in his quiet way, to be enjoying the fun quite as much as his little mistress.
He lifted his eyes, when he saw his master, with a half-deprecating, apologetic air.
“Why, I don’t know, it seems so dreadful!” “You would think no harm in a child’s caressing a large dog, even if he was black; but a creature that can think, and reason, and feel, and is immortal, you shudder at; confess it, cousin.
I know the feeling among some of you northerners well enough.
Not that there is a particle of virtue in our not having it; but custom with us does what Christianity ought to do,—obliterates the feeling of personal prejudice.
I have often noticed, in my travels north, how much stronger this was with you than with us.
You loathe them as you would a snake or a toad, yet you are indignant at their wrongs.
You would not have them abused; but you don’t want to have anything to do with them yourselves.
You would send them to Africa, out of your sight and smell, and then send a missionary or two to do up all the self-denial of elevating them compendiously.
Isn’t that it?” “Well, cousin,” said Miss Ophelia, thoughtfully, “there may be some truth in this.” “What would the poor and lowly do, without children?” said St.
Clare, leaning on the railing, and watching Eva, as she tripped off, leading Tom with her.
“Your little child is your only true democrat.
Tom, now is a hero to Eva; his stories are wonders in her eyes, his songs and Methodist hymns are better than an opera, and the traps and little bits of trash in his pocket a mine of jewels, and he the most wonderful Tom that ever wore a black skin.
This is one of the roses of Eden that the Lord has dropped down expressly for the poor and lowly, who get few enough of any other kind.” “It’s strange, cousin,” said Miss Ophelia, “one might almost think you were a _professor_, to hear you talk.” “A professor?” said St.
“Yes; a professor of religion.” “Not at all; not a professor, as your town-folks have it; and, what is worse, I’m afraid, not a _practiser_, either.” “What makes you talk so, then?” “Nothing is easier than talking,” said St.
“I believe Shakespeare makes somebody say, ‘I could sooner show twenty what were good to be done, than be one of the twenty to follow my own showing.’[1] Nothing like division of labor.
My forte lies in talking, and yours, cousin, lies in doing.” [1] _The Merchant of Venice_, Act 1, scene 2, lines 17-18.
Clare was fastidiously particular on this point.
His stable services were merely a sinecure, and consisted simply in a daily care and inspection, and directing an under-servant in his duties; for Marie St.
Tom, therefore, in his well-brushed broadcloth suit, smooth beaver, glossy boots, faultless wristbands and collar, with his grave, good-natured black face, looked respectable enough to be a Bishop of Carthage, as men of his color were, in other ages.
Then, too, he was in a beautiful place, a consideration to which his sensitive race was never indifferent; and he did enjoy with a quiet joy the birds, the flowers, the fountains, the perfume, and light and beauty of the court, the silken hangings, and pictures, and lustres, and statuettes, and gilding, that made the parlors within a kind of Aladdin’s palace to him.
If ever Africa shall show an elevated and cultivated race,—and come it must, some time, her turn to figure in the great drama of human improvement.—life will awake there with a gorgeousness and splendor of which our cold western tribes faintly have conceived.
In that far-off mystic land of gold, and gems, and spices, and waving palms, and wondrous flowers, and miraculous fertility, will awake new forms of art, new styles of splendor; and the negro race, no longer despised and trodden down, will, perhaps, show forth some of the latest and most magnificent revelations of human life.
Certainly they will, in their gentleness, their lowly docility of heart, their aptitude to repose on a superior mind and rest on a higher power, their childlike simplicity of affection, and facility of forgiveness.
In all these they will exhibit the highest form of the peculiarly _Christian life_, and, perhaps, as God chasteneth whom he loveth, he hath chosen poor Africa in the furnace of affliction, to make her the highest and noblest in that kingdom which he will set up, when every other kingdom has been tried, and failed; for the first shall be last, and the last first.
Clare was thinking of, as she stood, gorgeously dressed, on the verandah, on Sunday morning, clasping a diamond bracelet on her slender wrist?
Or, if it wasn’t that, it was something else; for Marie patronized good things, and she was going now, in full force,—diamonds, silk, and lace, and jewels, and all,—to a fashionable church, to be very religious.
There she stood, so slender, so elegant, so airy and undulating in all her motions, her lace scarf enveloping her like a mist.
She looked a graceful creature, and she felt very good and very elegant indeed.
Miss Ophelia stood at her side, a perfect contrast.
It was not that she had not as handsome a silk dress and shawl, and as fine a pocket-handkerchief; but stiffness and squareness, and bolt-uprightness, enveloped her with as indefinite yet appreciable a presence as did grace her elegant neighbor; not the grace of God, however,—that is quite another thing!
“The child stopped on the stairs, to say something to Mammy.” And what was Eva saying to Mammy on the stairs?
“Dear Mammy, I know your head is aching dreadfully.” “Lord bless you, Miss Eva! my head allers aches lately.
You don’t need to worry.” “Well, I’m glad you’re going out; and here,”—and the little girl threw her arms around her,—“Mammy, you shall take my vinaigrette.” “What! your beautiful gold thing, thar, with them diamonds!
Mamma always uses it for headache, and it’ll make you feel better.
“What were you stopping for?” “I was just stopping to give Mammy my vinaigrette, to take to church with her.” “Eva” said Marie, stamping impatiently,—“your gold vinaigrette to _Mammy!_ When will you learn what’s _proper_?
Go right and take it back this moment!” Eva looked downcast and aggrieved, and turned slowly.
Clare, “but she’ll get along in heaven better than you or I.” “O, papa, don’t,” said Eva, softly touching his elbow; “it troubles mother.” “Well, cousin, are you ready to go to meeting?” said Miss Ophelia, turning square about on St.
Clare ever would go to church,” said Marie; “but he hasn’t a particle of religion about him.
It really isn’t respectable.” “I know it,” said St.
“You ladies go to church to learn how to get along in the world, I suppose, and your piety sheds respectability on us.
If I did go at all, I would go where Mammy goes; there’s something to keep a fellow awake there, at least.” “What! those shouting Methodists?
Horrible!” said Marie.
“Anything but the dead sea of your respectable churches, Marie.
Positively, it’s too much to ask of a man.
Come, stay at home and play with me.” “Thank you, papa; but I’d rather go to church.” “Isn’t it dreadful tiresome?” said St.
“I think it is tiresome, some,” said Eva, “and I am sleepy, too, but I try to keep awake.” “What do you go for, then?” “Why, you know, papa,” she said, in a whisper, “cousin told me that God wants to have us; and he gives us everything, you know; and it isn’t much to do it, if he wants us to.
It isn’t so very tiresome after all.” “You sweet, little obliging soul!” said St.
Clare, kissing her; “go along, that’s a good girl, and pray for me.” “Certainly, I always do,” said the child, as she sprang after her mother into the carriage.
Clare stood on the steps and kissed his hand to her, as the carriage drove away; large tears were in his eyes.
“O, Evangeline! rightly named,” he said; “hath not God made thee an evangel to me?” So he felt a moment; and then he smoked a cigar, and read the Picayune, and forgot his little gospel.
“You see, Evangeline,” said her mother, “it’s always right and proper to be kind to servants, but it isn’t proper to treat them _just_ as we would our relations, or people in our own class of life.
Now, if Mammy was sick, you wouldn’t want to put her in your own bed.” “I should feel just like it, mamma,” said Eva, “because then it would be handier to take care of her, and because, you know, my bed is better than hers.” Marie was in utter despair at the entire want of moral perception evinced in this reply.
“What can I do to make this child understand me?” she said.
“Nothing,” said Miss Ophelia, significantly.
Eva looked sorry and disconcerted for a moment; but children, luckily, do not keep to one impression long, and in a few moments she was merrily laughing at various things which she saw from the coach-windows, as it rattled along.
Clare, as they were comfortably seated at the dinner-table, “and what was the bill of fare at church today?” “O, Dr.
G—— preached a splendid sermon,” said Marie.
“It was just such a sermon as you ought to hear; it expressed all my views exactly.” “It must have been very improving,” said St.
“The subject must have been an extensive one.” “Well, I mean all my views about society, and such things,” said Marie.
“I can learn what does me as much good as that from the Picayune, any time, and smoke a cigar besides; which I can’t do, you know, in a church.” “Why,” said Miss Ophelia, “don’t you believe in these views?” “Who,—I?
You know I’m such a graceless dog that these religious aspects of such subjects don’t edify me much.
“I think it’s shocking to hear you talk.” “Shocking! it’s the truth.
“If I answer that question, I know you’ll be at me with half a dozen others, each one harder than the last; and I’m not a going to define my position.
I am one of the sort that lives by throwing stones at other people’s glass houses, but I never mean to put up one for them to stone.” “That’s just the way he’s always talking,” said Marie; “you can’t get any satisfaction out of him.
I believe it’s just because he don’t like religion, that he’s always running out in this way he’s been doing.” “Religion!” said St.
Is what you hear at church, religion?
Is that which can bend and turn, and descend and ascend, to fit every crooked phase of selfish, worldly society, religion?
Is that religion which is less scrupulous, less generous, less just, less considerate for man, than even my own ungodly, worldly, blinded nature?
When I look for a religion, I must look for something above me, and not something beneath.” “Then you don’t believe that the Bible justifies slavery,” said Miss Ophelia.
I’d as soon desire to have it proved that my mother could drink brandy, chew tobacco, and swear, by way of satisfying me that I did right in doing the same.
It wouldn’t make me at all more satisfied with these things in myself, and it would take from me the comfort of respecting her; and it really is a comfort, in this world, to have anything one can respect.
In short, you see,” said he, suddenly resuming his gay tone, “all I want is that different things be kept in different boxes.
The whole frame-work of society, both in Europe and America, is made up of various things which will not stand the scrutiny of any very ideal standard of morality.
It’s pretty generally understood that men don’t aspire after the absolute right, but only to do about as well as the rest of the world.
Now, when any one speaks up, like a man, and says slavery is necessary to us, we can’t get along without it, we should be beggared if we give it up, and, of course, we mean to hold on to it,—this is strong, clear, well-defined language; it has the respectability of truth to it; and, if we may judge by their practice, the majority of the world will bear us out in it.
But when he begins to put on a long face, and snuffle, and quote Scripture, I incline to think he isn’t much better than he should be.” “You are very uncharitable,” said Marie.
Clare, “suppose that something should bring down the price of cotton once and forever, and make the whole slave property a drug in the market, don’t you think we should soon have another version of the Scripture doctrine?
“What about, papa?” “Why, which do you like the best,—to live as they do at your uncle’s, up in Vermont, or to have a house-full of servants, as we do?” “O, of course, our way is the pleasantest,” said Eva.
Clare, stroking her head.
“Why, it makes so many more round you to love, you know,” said Eva, looking up earnestly.
“Now, that’s just like Eva,” said Marie; “just one of her odd speeches.” “Is it an odd speech, papa?” said Eva, whisperingly, as she got upon his knee.
“Tom has a natural genius for religion.
I wanted the horses out early, this morning, and I stole up to Tom’s cubiculum there, over the stables, and there I heard him holding a meeting by himself; and, in fact, I haven’t heard anything quite so savory as Tom’s prayer, this some time.
He put in for me, with a zeal that was quite apostolic.” “Perhaps he guessed you were listening.
Tom seemed to think there was decidedly room for improvement in me, and seemed very earnest that I should be converted.” “I hope you’ll lay it to heart,” said Miss Ophelia.
“Well, we shall see,—shan’t we, Eva?” CHAPTER XVII The Freeman’s Defence There was a gentle bustle at the Quaker house, as the afternoon drew to a close.
Rachel Halliday moved quietly to and fro, collecting from her household stores such needments as could be arranged in the smallest compass, for the wanderers who were to go forth that night.
The afternoon shadows stretched eastward, and the round red sun stood thoughtfully on the horizon, and his beams shone yellow and calm into the little bed-room where George and his wife were sitting.
Both looked thoughtful and serious and traces of tears were on their cheeks.
I’ll try to feel like a Christian.
God Almighty knows that I’ve meant to do well,—tried hard to do well,—when everything has been against me; and now I’ll forget all the past, and put away every hard and bitter feeling, and read my Bible, and learn to be a good man.” “And when we get to Canada,” said Eliza, “I can help you.
I can do dress-making very well; and I understand fine washing and ironing; and between us we can find something to live on.” “Yes, Eliza, so long as we have each other and our boy.
Eliza, if these people only knew what a blessing it is for a man to feel that his wife and child belong to _him_!
I’ve often wondered to see men that could call their wives and children _their own_ fretting and worrying about anything else.
I feel as if I could scarcely ask God for any more.
Yes, though I’ve worked hard every day, till I am twenty-five years old, and have not a cent of money, nor a roof to cover me, nor a spot of land to call my own, yet, if they will only let me alone now, I will be satisfied,—thankful; I will work, and send back the money for you and my boy.
I don’t owe him anything.” “But yet we are not quite out of danger,” said Eliza; “we are not yet in Canada.” “True,” said George, “but it seems as if I smelt the free air, and it makes me strong.” At this moment, voices were heard in the outer apartment, in earnest conversation, and very soon a rap was heard on the door.
Simeon Halliday was there, and with him a Quaker brother, whom he introduced as Phineas Fletcher.
Phineas was tall and lathy, red-haired, with an expression of great acuteness and shrewdness in his face.
He had not the placid, quiet, unworldly air of Simeon Halliday; on the contrary, a particularly wide-awake and _au fait_ appearance, like a man who rather prides himself on knowing what he is about, and keeping a bright lookout ahead; peculiarities which sorted rather oddly with his broad brim and formal phraseology.
“Our friend Phineas hath discovered something of importance to the interests of thee and thy party, George,” said Simeon; “it were well for thee to hear it.” “That I have,” said Phineas, “and it shows the use of a man’s always sleeping with one ear open, in certain places, as I’ve always said.
Thee remembers the place, Simeon, where we sold some apples, last year, to that fat woman, with the great ear-rings.
Well, I was tired with hard driving; and, after my supper I stretched myself down on a pile of bags in the corner, and pulled a buffalo over me, to wait till my bed was ready; and what does I do, but get fast asleep.” “With one ear open, Phineas?” said Simeon, quietly.
“No; I slept, ears and all, for an hour or two, for I was pretty well tired; but when I came to myself a little, I found that there were some men in the room, sitting round a table, drinking and talking; and I thought, before I made much muster, I’d just see what they were up to, especially as I heard them say something about the Quakers.
‘So,’ says one, ‘they are up in the Quaker settlement, no doubt,’ says he.
Then I listened with both ears, and I found that they were talking about this very party.
They said that there were two constables, in a town a little piece ahead, who would go in with ’em to get ’em taken up, and the young woman was to be taken before a judge; and one of the fellows, who is small and smooth-spoken, was to swear to her for his property, and get her delivered over to him to take south.
So now, what’s to be done?” The group that stood in various attitudes, after this communication, were worthy of a painter.
Rachel Halliday, who had taken her hands out of a batch of biscuit, to hear the news, stood with them upraised and floury, and with a face of the deepest concern.
Simeon looked profoundly thoughtful; Eliza had thrown her arms around her husband, and was looking up to him.
George stood with clenched hands and glowing eyes, and looking as any other man might look, whose wife was to be sold at auction, and son sent to a trader, all under the shelter of a Christian nation’s laws.
“I know what _I_ shall do,” said George, as he stepped into the little room, and began examining pistols.
Jim is a giant in strength, and brave as death and despair, and so am I.” “Ah, well, friend,” said Phineas, “but thee’ll need a driver, for all that.
Thee’s quite welcome to do all the fighting, thee knows; but I know a thing or two about the road, that thee doesn’t.” “But I don’t want to involve you,” said George.
“Involve,” said Phineas, with a curious and keen expression of face, “When thee does involve me, please to let me know.” “Phineas is a wise and skilful man,” said Simeon.
“Thee does well, George, to abide by his judgment; and,” he added, laying his hand kindly on George’s shoulder, and pointing to the pistols, “be not over hasty with these,—young blood is hot.” “I will attack no man,” said George.
“All I ask of this country is to be let alone, and I will go out peaceably; but,”—he paused, and his brow darkened and his face worked,—“I’ve had a sister sold in that New Orleans market.
Flesh and blood could not do otherwise,” said Simeon.
“Woe unto the world because of offences, but woe unto them through whom the offence cometh.” “Would not even you, sir, do the same, in my place?” “I pray that I be not tried,” said Simeon; “the flesh is weak.” “I think my flesh would be pretty tolerable strong, in such a case,” said Phineas, stretching out a pair of arms like the sails of a windmill.
“Friend Phineas will ever have ways of his own,” said Rachel Halliday, smiling; “but we all think that his heart is in the right place, after all.” “Well,” said George, “isn’t it best that we hasten our flight?” “I got up at four o’clock, and came on with all speed, full two or three hours ahead of them, if they start at the time they planned.
It isn’t safe to start till dark, at any rate; for there are some evil persons in the villages ahead, that might be disposed to meddle with us, if they saw our wagon, and that would delay us more than the waiting; but in two hours I think we may venture.
I am going out now to warn Jim and the old woman to be in readiness, and to see about the horse.
What we do we are conscience bound to do; we can do no other way.
Till I knew you, Eliza, no creature had loved me, but my poor, heart-broken mother and sister.
What will become of you, poor boy?’ And I got up and threw my arms round her, and cried and sobbed, and she cried too; and those were the last kind words I got for ten long years; and my heart all withered up, and felt as dry as ashes, till I met you.
“If he will only let us get out of this country together, that is all we ask.” “Is God on their side?” said George, speaking less to his wife than pouring out his own bitter thoughts.
And they tell us that the Bible is on their side; certainly all the power is.
They are rich, and healthy, and happy; they are members of churches, expecting to go to heaven; and they get along so easy in the world, and have it all their own way; and poor, honest, faithful Christians,—Christians as good or better than they,—are lying in the very dust under their feet.
For I was envious of the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
Therefore, pride compasseth them as a chain; violence covereth them as a garment.
They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression; they speak loftily.
Therefore his people return, and the waters of a full cup are wrung out to them, and they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the Most High?” “Is not that the way thee feels, George?” “It is so indeed,” said George,—“as well as I could have written it myself.” “Then, hear,” said Simeon: “When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me until I went unto the sanctuary of God.
Then understood I their end.
Surely thou didst set them in slippery places, thou castedst them down to destruction.
Nevertheless I am continually with thee; thou hast holden me by my right hand.
Thou shalt guide me by thy counsel, and afterwards receive me to glory.
I have put my trust in the Lord God.”[1] [1] Ps. 73, “The End of the Wicked contrasted with that of the Righteous.” The words of holy trust, breathed by the friendly old man, stole like sacred music over the harassed and chafed spirit of George; and after he ceased, he sat with a gentle and subdued expression on his fine features.
But it is often those who have least of all in this life whom he chooseth for the kingdom.
“I just ran in,” she said, “with these little stockings for the boy,—three pair, nice, warm woollen ones.
Does thee keep up good courage, Eliza?” she added, tripping round to Eliza’s side of the table, and shaking her warmly by the hand, and slipping a seed-cake into Harry’s hand.
“Children, thee knows, will always be eating.” “O, thank you; you are too kind,” said Eliza.
I left John with the baby, and some biscuits in the oven; and I can’t stay a moment, else John will burn up all the biscuits, and give the baby all the sugar in the bowl.
That’s the way he does,” said the little Quakeress, laughing.
“So, good-by, Eliza; good-by, George; the Lord grant thee a safe journey;” and, with a few tripping steps, Ruth was out of the apartment.
A little while after supper, a large covered-wagon drew up before the door; the night was clear starlight; and Phineas jumped briskly down from his seat to arrange his passengers.
His step was firm, his face settled and resolute.
“You get out, a moment,” said Phineas to those inside, “and let me fix the back of the wagon, there, for the women-folks and the boy.” “Here are the two buffaloes,” said Rachel.
“Make the seats as comfortable as may be; it’s hard riding all night.” Jim came out first, and carefully assisted out his old mother, who clung to his arm, and looked anxiously about, as if she expected the pursuer every moment.
“And you’ve no doubt what you shall do, if they come?” “I rather think I haven’t,” said Jim, throwing open his broad chest, and taking a deep breath.
“Do you think I’ll let them get mother again?” During this brief colloquy, Eliza had been taking her leave of her kind friend, Rachel, and was handed into the carriage by Simeon, and, creeping into the back part with her boy, sat down among the buffalo-skins.
“Farewell, my friends,” said Simeon, from without.
“God bless you!” answered all from within.
And the wagon drove off, rattling and jolting over the frozen road.
There was no opportunity for conversation, on account of the roughness of the way and the noise of the wheels.
The vehicle, therefore, rumbled on, through long, dark stretches of woodland,—over wide dreary plains,—up hills, and down valleys,—and on, on, on they jogged, hour after hour.
The poor, frightened old woman at last forgot her fears; and, even Eliza, as the night waned, found all her anxieties insufficient to keep her eyes from closing.
Phineas seemed, on the whole, the briskest of the company, and beguiled his long drive with whistling certain very unquaker-like songs, as he went on.
But about three o’clock George’s ear caught the hasty and decided click of a horse’s hoof coming behind them at some distance and jogged Phineas by the elbow.
Phineas pulled up his horses, and listened.
“That must be Michael,” he said; “I think I know the sound of his gallop;” and he rose up and stretched his head anxiously back over the road.
A man riding in hot haste was now dimly descried at the top of a distant hill.
All stood intensely silent, with their faces turned towards the expected messenger.
Now he went down into a valley, where they could not see him; but they heard the sharp, hasty tramp, rising nearer and nearer; at last they saw him emerge on the top of an eminence, within hail.
“Yes, that’s Michael!” said Phineas; and, raising his voice, “Halloa, there, Michael!” “Phineas! is that thee?” “Yes; what news—they coming?” “Right on behind, eight or ten of them, hot with brandy, swearing and foaming like so many wolves.” And, just as he spoke, a breeze brought the faint sound of galloping horsemen towards them.
“If you must fight, wait till I get you a piece ahead.” And, with the word, both jumped in, and Phineas lashed the horses to a run, the horseman keeping close beside them.
The wagon rattled, jumped, almost flew, over the frozen ground; but plainer, and still plainer, came the noise of pursuing horsemen behind.
The women heard it, and, looking anxiously out, saw, far in the rear, on the brow of a distant hill, a party of men looming up against the red-streaked sky of early dawn.
Another hill, and their pursuers had evidently caught sight of their wagon, whose white cloth-covered top made it conspicuous at some distance, and a loud yell of brutal triumph came forward on the wind.
Eliza sickened, and strained her child closer to her bosom; the old woman prayed and groaned, and George and Jim clenched their pistols with the grasp of despair.
The pursuers gained on them fast; the carriage made a sudden turn, and brought them near a ledge of a steep overhanging rock, that rose in an isolated ridge or clump in a large lot, which was, all around it, quite clear and smooth.
This isolated pile, or range of rocks, rose up black and heavy against the brightening sky, and seemed to promise shelter and concealment.
It was a place well known to Phineas, who had been familiar with the spot in his hunting days; and it was to gain this point he had been racing his horses.
“Now for it!” said he, suddenly checking his horses, and springing from his seat to the ground.
“Out with you, in a twinkling, every one, and up into these rocks with me.
Michael, thee tie thy horse to the wagon, and drive ahead to Amariah’s and get him and his boys to come back and talk to these fellows.” In a twinkling they were all out of the carriage.
“There,” said Phineas, catching up Harry, “you, each of you, see to the women; and run, _now_ if you ever _did_ run!” They needed no exhortation.
Quicker than we can say it, the whole party were over the fence, making with all speed for the rocks, while Michael, throwing himself from his horse, and fastening the bridle to the wagon, began driving it rapidly away.
“Come ahead,” said Phineas, as they reached the rocks, and saw in the mingled starlight and dawn, the traces of a rude but plainly marked foot-path leading up among them; “this is one of our old hunting-dens.
Come up!” Phineas went before, springing up the rocks like a goat, with the boy in his arms.
Jim came second, bearing his trembling old mother over his shoulder, and George and Eliza brought up the rear.
The party of horsemen came up to the fence, and, with mingled shouts and oaths, were dismounting, to prepare to follow them.
A few moments’ scrambling brought them to the top of the ledge; the path then passed between a narrow defile, where only one could walk at a time, till suddenly they came to a rift or chasm more than a yard in breadth, and beyond which lay a pile of rocks, separate from the rest of the ledge, standing full thirty feet high, with its sides steep and perpendicular as those of a castle.
Phineas easily leaped the chasm, and sat down the boy on a smooth, flat platform of crisp white moss, that covered the top of the rock.
Several fragments of loose stone formed a kind of breast-work, which sheltered their position from the observation of those below.
“Well, here we all are,” said Phineas, peeping over the stone breast-work to watch the assailants, who were coming tumultuously up under the rocks.
“and now, as this matter is ours, let us take all the risk, and do all the fighting.” “Thee’s quite welcome to do the fighting, George,” said Phineas, chewing some checkerberry-leaves as he spoke; “but I may have the fun of looking on, I suppose.
But see, these fellows are kinder debating down there, and looking up, like hens when they are going to fly up on to the roost.
“It’s the best I’ve got; and niggers _do_ fight like the devil, sometimes.” At this moment, George appeared on the top of a rock above them, and, speaking in a calm, clear voice, said, “Gentlemen, who are you, down there, and what do you want?” “We want a party of runaway niggers,” said Tom Loker.
We’ve got the officers, here, and a warrant to take ’em; and we’re going to have ’em, too.
Harris, of Shelby county, Kentucky?” “I am George Harris.
Harris, of Kentucky, did call me his property.
But now I’m a free man, standing on God’s free soil; and my wife and my child I claim as mine.
We have arms to defend ourselves, and we mean to do it.
You can come up, if you like; but the first one of you that comes within the range of our bullets is a dead man, and the next, and the next; and so on till the last.” “O, come! come!” said a short, puffy man, stepping forward, and blowing his nose as he did so.
You see, we’re officers of justice.
We’ve got the law on our side, and the power, and so forth; so you’d better give up peaceably, you see; for you’ll certainly have to give up, at last.” “I know very well that you’ve got the law on your side, and the power,” said George, bitterly.
You want to send Jim and me back to be whipped and tortured, and ground down under the heels of them that you call masters; and your laws _will_ bear you out in it,—more shame for you and them!
When despairing Hungarian fugitives make their way, against all the search-warrants and authorities of their lawful government, to America, press and political cabinet ring with applause and welcome.
When despairing African fugitives do the same thing,—it is—what _is_ it?
Be it as it may, it is certain that the attitude, eye, voice, manner, of the speaker for a moment struck the party below to silence.
There is something in boldness and determination that for a time hushes even the rudest nature.
Marks was the only one who remained wholly untouched.
George sprang backward,—Eliza uttered a shriek,—the ball had passed close to his hair, had nearly grazed the cheek of his wife, and struck in the tree above.
“Thee’d better keep out of sight, with thy speechifying,” said Phineas; “they’re mean scamps.” “Now, Jim,” said George, “look that your pistols are all right, and watch that pass with me.
“Good! now, there’s stuff in that fellow,” muttered Phineas, between his teeth.
The party below, after Marks had fired, stood, for a moment, rather undecided.
Who goes after?” he said, springing up the rocks.
George heard the words distinctly.
He drew up his pistol, examined it, pointed it towards that point in the defile where the first man would appear.
One of the most courageous of the party followed Tom, and, the way being thus made, the whole party began pushing up the rock,—the hindermost pushing the front ones faster than they would have gone of themselves.
On they came, and in a moment the burly form of Tom appeared in sight, almost at the verge of the chasm.
“Friend,” said Phineas, suddenly stepping to the front, and meeting him with a push from his long arms, “thee isn’t wanted here.” Down he fell into the chasm, crackling down among trees, bushes, logs, loose stones, till he lay bruised and groaning thirty feet below.
The fall might have killed him, had it not been broken and moderated by his clothes catching in the branches of a large tree; but he came down with some force, however,—more than was at all agreeable or convenient.
“Lord help us, they are perfect devils!” said Marks, heading the retreat down the rocks with much more of a will than he had joined the ascent, while all the party came tumbling precipitately after him,—the fat constable, in particular, blowing and puffing in a very energetic manner.
“I say, fellers,” said Marks, “you jist go round and pick up Tom, there, while I run and get on to my horse to go back for help,—that’s you;” and, without minding the hootings and jeers of his company, Marks was as good as his word, and was soon seen galloping away.
“Was ever such a sneaking varmint?” said one of the men; “to come on his business, and he clear out and leave us this yer way!” “Well, we must pick up that feller,” said another.
“Cuss me if I much care whether he is dead or alive.” The men, led by the groans of Tom, scrambled and crackled through stumps, logs and bushes, to where that hero lay groaning and swearing with alternate vehemence.
Blast that infernal Quaker!
If it hadn’t been for him, I’d a pitched some on ’em down here, to see how they liked it.” With much labor and groaning, the fallen hero was assisted to rise; and, with one holding him up under each shoulder, they got him as far as the horses.
Give me a handkerchief or something, to stuff into this place, and stop this infernal bleeding.” George looked over the rocks, and saw them trying to lift the burly form of Tom into the saddle.
After two or three ineffectual attempts, he reeled, and fell heavily to the ground.
“O, I hope he isn’t killed!” said Eliza, who, with all the party, stood watching the proceeding.
“Why not?” said Phineas; “serves him right.” “Because after death comes the judgment,” said Eliza.
“Yes,” said the old woman, who had been groaning and praying, in her Methodist fashion, during all the encounter, “it’s an awful case for the poor crittur’s soul.” “On my word, they’re leaving him, I do believe,” said Phineas.
It was true; for after some appearance of irresolution and consultation, the whole party got on their horses and rode away.
It’s early in the day; there won’t be much travel afoot yet a while; we an’t much more than two miles from our stopping-place.
If the road hadn’t been so rough last night, we could have outrun ’em entirely.” As the party neared the fence, they discovered in the distance, along the road, their own wagon coming back, accompanied by some men on horseback.
“Well, now, there’s Michael, and Stephen and Amariah,” exclaimed Phineas, joyfully.
“Now we _are_ made—as safe as if we’d got there.” “Well, do stop, then,” said Eliza, “and do something for that poor man; he’s groaning dreadfully.” “It would be no more than Christian,” said George; “let’s take him up and carry him on.” “And doctor him up among the Quakers!” said Phineas; “pretty well, that!
Here, let’s have a look at him;” and Phineas, who in the course of his hunting and backwoods life had acquired some rude experience of surgery, kneeled down by the wounded man, and began a careful examination of his condition.
“The cussed sneaking dog, to leave me to die alone!
“Thee has no chance, unless I stop the bleeding.” And Phineas busied himself with making some off-hand surgical arrangements with his own pocket-handkerchief, and such as could be mustered in the company.
In men of his class, vigor and resolution are entirely a physical matter, and ooze out with the flowing of the blood; and the gigantic fellow really looked piteous in his helplessness.
The buffalo-skins, doubled in fours, were spread all along one side, and four men, with great difficulty, lifted the heavy form of Tom into it.
Before he was gotten in, he fainted entirely.
The old negress, in the abundance of her compassion, sat down on the bottom, and took his head in her lap.
Eliza, George and Jim, bestowed themselves, as well as they could, in the remaining space and the whole party set forward.
“Well it’s only a pretty deep flesh-wound; but, then, tumbling and scratching down that place didn’t help him much.
“It would always be a heavy thought to me, if I’d caused his death, even in a just cause.” “Yes,” said Phineas, “killing is an ugly operation, any way they’ll fix it,—man or beast.
I’ve seen a buck that was shot down and a dying, look that way on a feller with his eye, that it reely most made a feller feel wicked for killing on him; and human creatures is a more serious consideration yet, bein’, as thy wife says, that the judgment comes to ’em after death.
So I don’t know as our people’s notions on these matters is too strict; and, considerin’ how I was raised, I fell in with them pretty considerably.” “What shall you do with this poor fellow?” said George.
There’s old Grandmam Stephens there,—Dorcas, they call her,—she’s most an amazin’ nurse.
We may reckon on turning him over to her for a fortnight or so.” A ride of about an hour more brought the party to a neat farmhouse, where the weary travellers were received to an abundant breakfast.
Tom Loker was soon carefully deposited in a much cleaner and softer bed than he had ever been in the habit of occupying.
His wound was carefully dressed and bandaged, and he lay languidly opening and shutting his eyes on the white window-curtains and gently-gliding figures of his sick room, like a weary child.
CHAPTER XVIII Miss Ophelia’s Experiences and Opinions Our friend Tom, in his own simple musings, often compared his more fortunate lot, in the bondage into which he was cast, with that of Joseph in Egypt; and, in fact, as time went on, and he developed more and more under the eye of his master, the strength of the parallel increased.
Clare was indolent and careless of money.
Hitherto the providing and marketing had been principally done by Adolph, who was, to the full, as careless and extravagant as his master; and, between them both, they had carried on the dispersing process with great alacrity.
Accustomed, for many years, to regard his master’s property as his own care, Tom saw, with an uneasiness he could scarcely repress, the wasteful expenditure of the establishment; and, in the quiet, indirect way which his class often acquire, would sometimes make his own suggestions.
Clare at first employed him occasionally; but, struck with his soundness of mind and good business capacity, he confided in him more and more, till gradually all the marketing and providing for the family were intrusted to him.
“No, no, Adolph,” he said, one day, as Adolph was deprecating the passing of power out of his hands; “let Tom alone.
But, to that nature, the very unbounded trust reposed in him was bond and seal for the most scrupulous accuracy.
With Adolph the case had been different.
Thoughtless and self-indulgent, and unrestrained by a master who found it easier to indulge than to regulate, he had fallen into an absolute confusion as to _meum tuum_ with regard to himself and his master, which sometimes troubled even St.
His own good sense taught him that such a training of his servants was unjust and dangerous.
A sort of chronic remorse went with him everywhere, although not strong enough to make any decided change in his course; and this very remorse reacted again into indulgence.
He passed lightly over the most serious faults, because he told himself that, if he had done his part, his dependents had not fallen into them.
Tom regarded his gay, airy, handsome young master with an odd mixture of fealty, reverence, and fatherly solicitude.
Not that Tom had not his own way of speaking his mind occasionally, with something of the tact often observable in his class; as, for example, the very day after the Sabbath we have described, St.
Clare was invited out to a convivial party of choice spirits, and was helped home, between one and two o’clock at night, in a condition when the physical had decidedly attained the upper hand of the intellectual.
Tom and Adolph assisted to get him composed for the night, the latter in high spirits, evidently regarding the matter as a good joke, and laughing heartily at the rusticity of Tom’s horror, who really was simple enough to lie awake most of the rest of the night, praying for his young master.
Clare, the next day, as he sat in his library, in dressing-gown and slippers.
Clare had just been entrusting Tom with some money, and various commissions.
I allays have thought that Mas’r would be good to everybody.” “Well, Tom, haven’t I been?
There’s something you haven’t got, I suppose, and this is the preface.” “Mas’r allays been good to me.
I haven’t nothing to complain of on that head.
“All!” said Tom, turning suddenly round and falling on his knees.
The good Book says, ‘it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder!’ my dear Mas’r!” Tom’s voice choked, and the tears ran down his cheeks.
I’m not worth crying over.” But Tom wouldn’t rise, and looked imploring.
“Well, I won’t go to any more of their cursed nonsense, Tom,” said St.
I’ve always despised _it_, and myself for it,—so now, Tom, wipe up your eyes, and go about your errands.
Come, come,” he added, “no blessings.
I’m not so wonderfully good, now,” he said, as he gently pushed Tom to the door.
“There, I’ll pledge my honor to you, Tom, you don’t see me so again,” he said; and Tom went off, wiping his eyes, with great satisfaction.
Clare did so,—for gross sensualism, in any form, was not the peculiar temptation of his nature.
But, all this time, who shall detail the tribulations manifold of our friend Miss Ophelia, who had begun the labors of a Southern housekeeper?
There is all the difference in the world in the servants of Southern establishments, according to the character and capacity of the mistresses who have brought them up.
South as well as north, there are women who have an extraordinary talent for command, and tact in educating.
Such are enabled, with apparent ease, and without severity, to subject to their will, and bring into harmonious and systematic order, the various members of their small estate,—to regulate their peculiarities, and so balance and compensate the deficiencies of one by the excess of another, as to produce a harmonious and orderly system.
Such a housekeeper was Mrs.
Shelby, whom we have already described; and such our readers may remember to have met with.
They are to be found there as often as anywhere; and, when existing, find in that peculiar state of society a brilliant opportunity to exhibit their domestic talent.
Such a housekeeper Marie St.
Indolent and childish, unsystematic and improvident, it was not to be expected that servants trained under her care should not be so likewise; and she had very justly described to Miss Ophelia the state of confusion she would find in the family, though she had not ascribed it to the proper cause.
The first morning of her regency, Miss Ophelia was up at four o’clock; and having attended to all the adjustments of her own chamber, as she had done ever since she came there, to the great amazement of the chambermaid, she prepared for a vigorous onslaught on the cupboards and closets of the establishment of which she had the keys.
Hidden things of darkness were brought to light to an extent that alarmed all the principalities and powers of kitchen and chamber, and caused many wonderings and murmurings about “dese yer northern ladies” from the domestic cabinet.
Old Dinah, the head cook, and principal of all rule and authority in the kitchen department, was filled with wrath at what she considered an invasion of privilege.
No feudal baron in _Magna Charta_ times could have more thoroughly resented some incursion of the crown.
Dinah was a character in her own way, and it would be injustice to her memory not to give the reader a little idea of her.
She was a native and essential cook, as much as Aunt Chloe,—cooking being an indigenous talent of the African race; but Chloe was a trained and methodical one, who moved in an orderly domestic harness, while Dinah was a self-taught genius, and, like geniuses in general, was positive, opinionated and erratic, to the last degree.
Like a certain class of modern philosophers, Dinah perfectly scorned logic and reason in every shape, and always took refuge in intuitive certainty; and here she was perfectly impregnable.
No possible amount of talent, or authority, or explanation, could ever make her believe that any other way was better than her own, or that the course she had pursued in the smallest matter could be in the least modified.
This had been a conceded point with her old mistress, Marie’s mother; and “Miss Marie,” as Dinah always called her young mistress, even after her marriage, found it easier to submit than contend; and so Dinah had ruled supreme.
This was the easier, in that she was perfect mistress of that diplomatic art which unites the utmost subservience of manner with the utmost inflexibility as to measure.
Dinah was mistress of the whole art and mystery of excuse-making, in all its branches.
Indeed, it was an axiom with her that the cook can do no wrong; and a cook in a Southern kitchen finds abundance of heads and shoulders on which to lay off every sin and frailty, so as to maintain her own immaculateness entire.
If any part of the dinner was a failure, there were fifty indisputably good reasons for it; and it was the fault undeniably of fifty other people, whom Dinah berated with unsparing zeal.
It was now the season of incipient preparation for dinner.
Dinah, who required large intervals of reflection and repose, and was studious of ease in all her arrangements, was seated on the kitchen floor, smoking a short, stumpy pipe, to which she was much addicted, and which she always kindled up, as a sort of censer, whenever she felt the need of an inspiration in her arrangements.
It was Dinah’s mode of invoking the domestic Muses.
Seated around her were various members of that rising race with which a Southern household abounds, engaged in shelling peas, peeling potatoes, picking pin-feathers out of fowls, and other preparatory arrangements,—Dinah every once in a while interrupting her meditations to give a poke, or a rap on the head, to some of the young operators, with the pudding-stick that lay by her side.
In fact, Dinah ruled over the woolly heads of the younger members with a rod of iron, and seemed to consider them born for no earthly purpose but to “save her steps,” as she phrased it.
Miss Ophelia, after passing on her reformatory tour through all the other parts of the establishment, now entered the kitchen.
Dinah had heard, from various sources, what was going on, and resolved to stand on defensive and conservative ground,—mentally determined to oppose and ignore every new measure, without any actual observable contest.
The kitchen was a large brick-floored apartment, with a great old-fashioned fireplace stretching along one side of it,—an arrangement which St.
Clare had vainly tried to persuade Dinah to exchange for the convenience of a modern cook-stove.
No Puseyite,[1] or conservative of any school, was ever more inflexibly attached to time-honored inconveniences than Dinah. [1] Edward Bouverie Pusey (1800-1882), champion of the orthodoxy of revealed religion, defender of the Oxford movement, and Regius professor of Hebrew and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.
Clare had first returned from the north, impressed with the system and order of his uncle’s kitchen arrangements, he had largely provided his own with an array of cupboards, drawers, and various apparatus, to induce systematic regulation, under the sanguine illusion that it would be of any possible assistance to Dinah in her arrangements.
He might as well have provided them for a squirrel or a magpie.
The more drawers and closets there were, the more hiding-holes could Dinah make for the accommodation of old rags, hair-combs, old shoes, ribbons, cast-off artificial flowers, and other articles of _vertu_, wherein her soul delighted.
When Miss Ophelia entered the kitchen Dinah did not rise, but smoked on in sublime tranquillity, regarding her movements obliquely out of the corner of her eye, but apparently intent only on the operations around her.
Miss Ophelia commenced opening a set of drawers.
“It’s handy for most anything, Missis,” said Dinah.
So it appeared to be.
From the variety it contained, Miss Ophelia pulled out first a fine damask table-cloth stained with blood, having evidently been used to envelop some raw meat.
You don’t wrap up meat in your mistress’ best table-cloths?” “O Lor, Missis, no; the towels was all a missin’—so I jest did it.
“Where do you keep your nutmegs, Dinah?” said Miss Ophelia, with the air of one who prayed for patience.
“Most anywhar, Missis; there’s some in that cracked tea-cup, up there, and there’s some over in that ar cupboard.” “Here are some in the grater,” said Miss Ophelia, holding them up.
“You, Jake! what are you stopping for!
Be still, thar!” she added, with a dive of her stick at the criminal.
“Laws, it’s my har _grease_;—I put it thar to have it handy.” “Do you use your mistress’ best saucers for that?” “Law! it was cause I was driv, and in sich a hurry;—I was gwine to change it this very day.” “Here are two damask table-napkins.” “Them table-napkins I put thar, to get ’em washed out, some day.” “Don’t you have some place here on purpose for things to be washed?” “Well, Mas’r St.
Them ’s particular onions I was a savin’ for dis yer very stew.
I likes to keep my things where I knows whar to go to ’em,” said Dinah, rather decidedly.
Missis has spilt lots dat ar way,” said Dinah, coming uneasily to the drawers.
“If Missis only will go up stars till my clarin’ up time comes, I’ll have everything right; but I can’t do nothin’ when ladies is round, a henderin’.
I’ll crack ye over, if ye don’t mind!” “I’m going through the kitchen, and going to put everything in order, _once_, Dinah; and then I’ll expect you to _keep_ it so.” “Lor, now!
“Lor now! if dat ar de way dem northern ladies do, dey an’t ladies, nohow,” she said to some of her satellites, when at a safe hearing distance.
When all the tins were scoured, and the tables scrubbed snowy white, and everything that could offend tucked out of sight in holes and corners, Dinah would dress herself up in a smart dress, clean apron, and high, brilliant Madras turban, and tell all marauding “young uns” to keep out of the kitchen, for she was gwine to have things kept nice.
Indeed, these periodic seasons were often an inconvenience to the whole household; for Dinah would contract such an immoderate attachment to her scoured tin, as to insist upon it that it shouldn’t be used again for any possible purpose,—at least, till the ardor of the “clarin’ up” period abated.
Miss Ophelia, in a few days, thoroughly reformed every department of the house to a systematic pattern; but her labors in all departments that depended on the cooperation of servants were like those of Sisyphus or the Danaides.
In despair, she one day appealed to St.
“There is no such thing as getting anything like a system in this family!” “To be sure, there isn’t,” said St.
“Such shiftless management, such waste, such confusion, I never saw!” “I dare say you didn’t.” “You would not take it so coolly, if you were housekeeper.” “My dear cousin, you may as well understand, once for all, that we masters are divided into two classes, oppressors and oppressed.
We who are good-natured and hate severity make up our minds to a good deal of inconvenience.
If we _will keep_ a shambling, loose, untaught set in the community, for our convenience, why, we must take the consequence.
Some rare cases I have seen, of persons, who, by a peculiar tact, can produce order and system without severity; but I’m not one of them,—and so I made up my mind, long ago, to let things go just as they do.
I will not have the poor devils thrashed and cut to pieces, and they know it,—and, of course, they know the staff is in their own hands.” “But to have no time, no place, no order,—all going on in this shiftless way!” “My dear Vermont, you natives up by the North Pole set an extravagant value on time!
As to order and system, where there is nothing to be done but to lounge on the sofa and read, an hour sooner or later in breakfast or dinner isn’t of much account.
But, Heaven bless us! if we are to go down there, and view all the smoking and squatting about, and hurryscurryation of the preparatory process, we should never eat more!
My good cousin, absolve yourself from that!
It’s more than a Catholic penance, and does no more good.
You’ll only lose your own temper, and utterly confound Dinah.
Let her go her own way.” “But, Augustine, you don’t know how I found things.” “Don’t I?
Don’t I know that the rolling-pin is under her bed, and the nutmeg-grater in her pocket with her tobacco,—that there are sixty-five different sugar-bowls, one in every hole in the house,—that she washes dishes with a dinner-napkin one day, and with a fragment of an old petticoat the next?
But the upshot is, she gets up glorious dinners, makes superb coffee; and you must judge her as warriors and statesmen are judged, _by her success_.” “But the waste,—the expense!” “O, well!
Lock everything you can, and keep the key.
Give out by driblets, and never inquire for odds and ends,—it isn’t best.” “That troubles me, Augustine.
I can’t help feeling as if these servants were not _strictly honest_.
Are you sure they can be relied on?” Augustine laughed immoderately at the grave and anxious face with which Miss Ophelia propounded the question.
“O, cousin, that’s too good,—_honest!_—as if that’s a thing to be expected!
What upon earth is to make them so?” “Why don’t you instruct?” “Instruct!
What instructing do you think I should do?
As to Marie, she has spirit enough, to be sure, to kill off a whole plantation, if I’d let her manage; but she wouldn’t get the cheatery out of them.” “Are there no honest ones?” “Well, now and then one, whom Nature makes so impracticably simple, truthful and faithful, that the worst possible influence can’t destroy it.
But, you see, from the mother’s breast the colored child feels and sees that there are none but underhand ways open to it.
It can get along no other way with its parents, its mistress, its young master and missie play-fellows.
Cunning and deception become necessary, inevitable habits.
It isn’t fair to expect anything else of him.
He ought not to be punished for it.
As to honesty, the slave is kept in that dependent, semi-childish state, that there is no making him realize the rights of property, or feel that his master’s goods are not his own, if he can get them.
The fact is, that the whole race are pretty generally understood to be turned over to the devil, for our benefit, in this world, however it may turn out in another!” “This is perfectly horrible!” said Miss Ophelia; “you ought to be ashamed of yourselves!” “I don’t know as I am.
Clare, “as people in the broad road generally are.
It is so in England; it is so everywhere; and yet all Christendom stands aghast, with virtuous indignation, because we do the thing in a little different shape from what they do it.” “It isn’t so in Vermont.” “Ah, well, in New England, and in the free States, you have the better of us, I grant.
Prue had a peculiar scowling expression of countenance, and a sullen, grumbling voice.
She set down her basket, squatted herself down, and resting her elbows on her knees said, “O Lord!
“What need you getting drunk, then, and cutting up, Prue?” said a spruce quadroon chambermaid, dangling, as she spoke, a pair of coral ear-drops.
“We buy tickets of her Mas’r, and she gives us bread for ’em.” “And they counts my money and tickets, when I gets home, to see if I ’s got the change; and if I han’t, they half kills me.” “And serves you right,” said Jane, the pert chambermaid, “if you will take their money to get drunk on.
That’s what she does, Missis.” “And that’s what I _will_ do,—I can’t live no other ways,—drink and forget my misery.” “You are very wicked and very foolish,” said Miss Ophelia, “to steal your master’s money to make yourself a brute with.” “It’s mighty likely, Missis; but I will do it,—yes, I will.
I wish I ’s dead, I do,—I wish I ’s dead, and out of my misery!” and slowly and stiffly the old creature rose, and got her basket on her head again; but before she went out, she looked at the quadroon girl, who still stood playing with her ear-drops.
“Ye think ye’re mighty fine with them ar, a frolickin’ and a tossin’ your head, and a lookin’ down on everybody.
Hope to the Lord ye will, I do; then see if ye won’t drink,—drink,—drink,—yerself into torment; and sarve ye right, too—ugh!” and, with a malignant howl, the woman left the room.
“Disgusting old beast!” said Adolph, who was getting his master’s shaving-water.
“Her back’s a far sight now,—she can’t never get a dress together over it.” “I think such low creatures ought not to be allowed to go round to genteel families,” said Miss Jane.
Clare?” she said, coquettishly tossing her head at Adolph.
It must be observed that, among other appropriations from his master’s stock, Adolph was in the habit of adopting his name and address; and that the style under which he moved, among the colored circles of New Orleans, was that of _Mr.
“I’m certainly of your opinion, Miss Benoir,” said Adolph.
Clare’s family, and Jane was one of her servants.
“Pray, Miss Benoir, may I be allowed to ask if those drops are for the ball, tomorrow night?
They are certainly bewitching!” “I wonder, now, Mr.
Clare, what the impudence of you men will come to!” said Jane, tossing her pretty head ’til the ear-drops twinkled again.
“I shan’t dance with you for a whole evening, if you go to asking me any more questions.” “O, you couldn’t be so cruel, now!
I was just dying to know whether you would appear in your pink tarletane,” said Adolph.
“What is it?” said Rosa, a bright, piquant little quadroon who came skipping down stairs at this moment.
Clare’s so impudent!” “On my honor,” said Adolph, “I’ll leave it to Miss Rosa now.” “I know he’s always a saucy creature,” said Rosa, poising herself on one of her little feet, and looking maliciously at Adolph.
“He’s always getting me so angry with him.” “O! ladies, ladies, you will certainly break my heart, between you,” said Adolph.
“I shall be found dead in my bed, some morning, and you’ll have it to answer for.” “Do hear the horrid creature talk!” said both ladies, laughing immoderately.
I can’t have you cluttering up the kitchen,” said Dinah; “in my way, foolin’ round here.” “Aunt Dinah’s glum, because she can’t go to the ball,” said Rosa.
Arter all, you’s niggers, much as I am.” “Aunt Dinah greases her wool stiff, every day, to make it lie straight,” said Jane.
“And it will be wool, after all,” said Rosa, maliciously shaking down her long, silky curls.
Get out wid ye, ye trumpery,—I won’t have ye round!” Here the conversation was interrupted in a two-fold manner.
Go in and attend to your muslins.” Our friend Tom, who had been in the kitchen during the conversation with the old rusk-woman, had followed her out into the street.
He saw her go on, giving every once in a while a suppressed groan.
At last she set her basket down on a doorstep, and began arranging the old, faded shawl which covered her shoulders.
“I’ll carry your basket a piece,” said Tom, compassionately.
“I don’t want no help.” “You seem to be sick, or in trouble, or somethin’,” said Tom.
“I wish,” said Tom, looking at her earnestly,—“I wish I could persuade you to leave off drinking.
Don’t you know it will be the ruin of ye, body and soul?” “I knows I’m gwine to torment,” said the woman, sullenly.
I ’s ugly, I ’s wicked,—I ’s gwine straight to torment.
I wish I ’s thar!” Tom shuddered at these frightful words, spoken with a sullen, impassioned earnestness.
“I think I’ve hearn tell o’ the Lord, and the judgment and torment.
A man kept me to breed chil’en for market, and sold ’em as fast as they got big enough; last of all, he sold me to a speculator, and my Mas’r got me o’ him.” “What set you into this bad way of drinkin’?” “To get shet o’ my misery.
I had one child after I come here; and I thought then I’d have one to raise, cause Mas’r wasn’t a speculator.
It was de peartest little thing! and Missis she seemed to think a heap on ’t, at first; it never cried,—it was likely and fat.
She said she knowed I could feed it on what other folks eat; and the child kinder pined, and cried, and cried, and cried, day and night, and got all gone to skin and bones, and Missis got sot agin it and she said ’t wan’t nothin’ but crossness.
I had _so_,” she said, as with her usual groan, she got her basket on her head, and walked sullenly away.
Tom turned, and walked sorrowfully back to the house.
In the court he met little Eva,—a crown of tuberoses on her head, and her eyes radiant with delight.
Papa says you may get out the ponies, and take me in my little new carriage,” she said, catching his hand.
“But what’s the matter Tom?—you look sober.” “I feel bad, Miss Eva,” said Tom, sorrowfully.
She did not exclaim or wonder, or weep, as other children do.
VOLUME II CHAPTER XIX Miss Ophelia’s Experiences and Opinions Continued “Tom, you needn’t get me the horses.
“Why not, Miss Eva?” “These things sink into my heart, Tom,” said Eva,—“they sink into my heart,” she repeated, earnestly.
“Lor!” said Dinah, “what’s got Prue?” “Prue isn’t coming any more,” said the woman, mysteriously.
She’s down cellar,” said the woman, glancing at Miss Ophelia.
After Miss Ophelia had taken the rusks, Dinah followed the woman to the door.
The woman seemed desirous, yet reluctant, to speak, and answered, in low, mysterious tone.
“Well, you mustn’t tell nobody, Prue, she got drunk agin,—and they had her down cellar,—and thar they left her all day,—and I hearn ’em saying that the _flies had got to her_,—and _she’s dead_!” Dinah held up her hands, and, turning, saw close by her side the spirit-like form of Evangeline, her large, mystic eyes dilated with horror, and every drop of blood driven from her lips and cheeks.
It an’t so much for me to hear it, as for poor Prue to suffer it.” “_Lor sakes_! it isn’t for sweet, delicate young ladies, like you,—these yer stories isn’t; it’s enough to kill ’em!” Eva sighed again, and walked up stairs with a slow and melancholy step.
Miss Ophelia anxiously inquired the woman’s story.
Dinah gave a very garrulous version of it, to which Tom added the particulars which he had drawn from her that morning.
“An abominable business,—perfectly horrible!” she exclaimed, as she entered the room where St.
“Pray, what iniquity has turned up now?” said he.
“What now? why, those folks have whipped Prue to death!” said Miss Ophelia, going on, with great strength of detail, into the story, and enlarging on its most shocking particulars.
“Thought so!—an’t you going to _do_ anything about it?” said Miss Ophelia.
“Haven’t you got any _selectmen_, or anybody, to interfere and look after such matters?” “It’s commonly supposed that the _property_ interest is a sufficient guard in these cases.
If people choose to ruin their own possessions, I don’t know what’s to be done.
It seems the poor creature was a thief and a drunkard; and so there won’t be much hope to get up sympathy for her.” “It is perfectly outrageous,—it is horrid, Augustine!
It will certainly bring down vengeance upon you.” “My dear cousin, I didn’t do it, and I can’t help it; I would, if I could.
If low-minded, brutal people will act like themselves, what am I to do? they have absolute control; they are irresponsible despots.
There would be no use in interfering; there is no law that amounts to anything practically, for such a case.
It’s the only resource left us.” “How can you shut your eyes and ears?
Here is a whole class,—debased, uneducated, indolent, provoking,—put, without any sort of terms or conditions, entirely into the hands of such people as the majority in our world are; people who have neither consideration nor self-control, who haven’t even an enlightened regard to their own interest,—for that’s the case with the largest half of mankind.
Of course, in a community so organized, what can a man of honorable and humane feelings do, but shut his eyes all he can, and harden his heart?
I can’t turn knight-errant, and undertake to redress every individual case of wrong in such a city as this.
Clare’s fine countenance was for a moment overcast; he said, “Come, cousin, don’t stand there looking like one of the Fates; you’ve only seen a peep through the curtain,—a specimen of what is going on, the world over, in some shape or other.
If we are to be prying and spying into all the dismals of life, we should have no heart to anything. ’T is like looking too close into the details of Dinah’s kitchen;” and St.
Miss Ophelia sat down, and pulled out her knitting-work, and sat there grim with indignation.
She knit and knit, but while she mused the fire burned; at last she broke out—“I tell you, Augustine, I can’t get over things so, if you can.
It’s a perfect abomination for you to defend such a system,—that’s _my_ mind!” “What now?” said St.
“At it again, hey?” “I say it’s perfectly abominable for you to defend such a system!” said Miss Ophelia, with increasing warmth.
“Of course, you defend it,—you all do,—all you Southerners.
What do you have slaves for, if you don’t?” “Are you such a sweet innocent as to suppose nobody in this world ever does what they don’t think is right?
Don’t you, or didn’t you ever, do anything that you did not think quite right?” “If I do, I repent of it, I hope,” said Miss Ophelia, rattling her needles with energy.
Clare, peeling his orange; “I’m repenting of it all the time.” “What do you keep on doing it for?” “Didn’t you ever keep on doing wrong, after you’d repented, my good cousin?” “Well, only when I’ve been very much tempted,” said Miss Ophelia.
Clare; “that’s just my difficulty.” “But I always resolve I won’t and I try to break off.” “Well, I have been resolving I won’t, off and on, these ten years,” said St.
Have you got clear of all your sins, cousin?” “Cousin Augustine,” said Miss Ophelia, seriously, and laying down her knitting-work, “I suppose I deserve that you should reprove my short-comings.
I know all you say is true enough; nobody else feels them more than I do; but it does seem to me, after all, there is some difference between me and you.
But, then, my conduct is so inconsistent with my profession, I don’t wonder you reprove me.” “O, now, cousin,” said Augustine, sitting down on the floor, and laying his head back in her lap, “don’t take on so awfully serious!
I do think you are desperately, distressingly good; it tires me to death to think of it.” “But this is a serious subject, my boy, Auguste,” said Miss Ophelia, laying her hand on his forehead.
“Dismally so,” said he; “and I—well, I never want to talk seriously in hot weather.
What with mosquitos and all, a fellow can’t get himself up to any very sublime moral flights; and I believe,” said St.
Clare, suddenly rousing himself up, “there’s a theory, now!
I understand now why northern nations are always more virtuous than southern ones,—I see into that whole subject.” “O, Augustine, you are a sad rattle-brain!” “Am I?
Now,” said Augustine, drawing the basket up, “I’ll begin: When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for a fellow to hold two or three dozen of his fellow-worms in captivity, a decent regard to the opinions of society requires—” “I don’t see that you are growing more serious,” said Miss Ophelia.
The short of the matter is, cousin,” said he, his handsome face suddenly settling into an earnest and serious expression, “on this abstract question of slavery there can, as I think, be but one opinion.
Planters, who have money to make by it,—clergymen, who have planters to please,—politicians, who want to rule by it,—may warp and bend language and ethics to a degree that shall astonish the world at their ingenuity; they can press nature and the Bible, and nobody knows what else, into the service; but, after all, neither they nor the world believe in it one particle the more.
It comes from the devil, that’s the short of it;—and, to my mind, it’s a pretty respectable specimen of what he can do in his own line.” Miss Ophelia stopped her knitting, and looked surprised, and St.
Clare, apparently enjoying her astonishment, went on.
This cursed business, accursed of God and man, what is it?
Strip it of all its ornament, run it down to the root and nucleus of the whole, and what is it?
Why, because my brother Quashy is ignorant and weak, and I am intelligent and strong,—because I know how, and _can_ do it,—therefore, I may steal all he has, keep it, and give him only such and so much as suits my fancy.
Whatever is too hard, too dirty, too disagreeable, for me, I may set Quashy to doing.
Quashy shall do my will, and not his, all the days of his mortal life, and have such chance of getting to heaven, at last, as I find convenient.
I defy anybody on earth to read our slave-code, as it stands in our law-books, and make anything else of it.
And the only reason why the land don’t sink under it, like Sodom and Gomorrah, is because it is _used_ in a way infinitely better than it is.
And he who goes the furthest, and does the worst, only uses within limits the power that the law gives him.” St.
His fine face, classic as that of a Greek statue, seemed actually to burn with the fervor of his feelings.
His large blue eyes flashed, and he gestured with an unconscious eagerness.
Miss Ophelia had never seen him in this mood before, and she sat perfectly silent.
“I declare to you,” said he, suddenly stopping before his cousin “(It’s no sort of use to talk or to feel on this subject), but I declare to you, there have been times when I have thought, if the whole country would sink, and hide all this injustice and misery from the light, I would willingly sink with it.
Augustine!” said Miss Ophelia, “I’m sure you’ve said enough.
I never, in my life, heard anything like this, even at the North.” “At the North!” said St.
Clare, with a sudden change of expression, and resuming something of his habitual careless tone.
“Pooh! your northern folks are cold-blooded; you are cool in everything!
You can’t begin to curse up hill and down as we can, when we get fairly at it.” “Well, but the question is,” said Miss Ophelia.
“O, yes, to be sure, the _question is_,—and a deuce of a question it is!
I came so by ordinary generation.
My servants were my father’s, and, what is more, my mother’s; and now they are mine, they and their increase, which bids fair to be a pretty considerable item.
My father, you know, came first from New England; and he was just such another man as your father,—a regular old Roman,—upright, energetic, noble-minded, with an iron will.
Your father settled down in New England, to rule over rocks and stones, and to force an existence out of Nature; and mine settled in Louisiana, to rule over men and women, and force existence out of them.
Clare, getting up and walking to a picture at the end of the room, and gazing upward with a face fervent with veneration, “_she was divine!_ Don’t look at me so!—you know what I mean!
She probably was of mortal birth; but, as far as ever I could observe, there was no trace of any human weakness or error about her; and everybody that lives to remember her, whether bond or free, servant, acquaintance, relation, all say the same.
Why, cousin, that mother has been all that has stood between me and utter unbelief for years.
She was a direct embodiment and personification of the New Testament,—a living fact, to be accounted for, and to be accounted for in no other way than by its truth.
Clare, clasping his hands, in a sort of transport; and then suddenly checking himself, he came back, and seating himself on an ottoman, he went on: “My brother and I were twins; and they say, you know, that twins ought to resemble each other; but we were in all points a contrast.
He had black, fiery eyes, coal-black hair, a strong, fine Roman profile, and a rich brown complexion.
I had blue eyes, golden hair, a Greek outline, and fair complexion.
He was active and observing, I dreamy and inactive.
He was generous to his friends and equals, but proud, dominant, overbearing, to inferiors, and utterly unmerciful to whatever set itself up against him.
Truthful we both were; he from pride and courage, I from a sort of abstract ideality.
We loved each other about as boys generally do,—off and on, and in general;—he was my father’s pet, and I my mother’s.
“There was a morbid sensitiveness and acuteness of feeling in me on all possible subjects, of which he and my father had no kind of understanding, and with which they could have no possible sympathy.
But mother did; and so, when I had quarreled with Alfred, and father looked sternly on me, I used to go off to mother’s room, and sit by her.
I remember just how she used to look, with her pale cheeks, her deep, soft, serious eyes, her white dress,—she always wore white; and I used to think of her whenever I read in Revelations about the saints that were arrayed in fine linen, clean and white.
She had a great deal of genius of one sort and another, particularly in music; and she used to sit at her organ, playing fine old majestic music of the Catholic church, and singing with a voice more like an angel than a mortal woman; and I would lay my head down on her lap, and cry, and dream, and feel,—oh, immeasurably!—things that I had no language to say!
“In those days, this matter of slavery had never been canvassed as it has now; nobody dreamed of any harm in it.
“My father was a born aristocrat.
I think, in some preexistent state, he must have been in the higher circles of spirits, and brought all his old court pride along with him; for it was ingrain, bred in the bone, though he was originally of poor and not in any way of noble family.
My brother was begotten in his image.
“Now, an aristocrat, you know, the world over, has no human sympathies, beyond a certain line in society.
In England the line is in one place, in Burmah in another, and in America in another; but the aristocrat of all these countries never goes over it.
What would be hardship and distress and injustice in his own class, is a cool matter of course in another one.
My father’s dividing line was that of color. _Among his equals_, never was a man more just and generous; but he considered the negro, through all possible gradations of color, as an intermediate link between man and animals, and graded all his ideas of justice or generosity on this hypothesis.
I suppose, to be sure, if anybody had asked him, plump and fair, whether they had human immortal souls, he might have hemmed and hawed, and said yes.
But my father was not a man much troubled with spiritualism; religious sentiment he had none, beyond a veneration for God, as decidedly the head of the upper classes.
“Well, my father worked some five hundred negroes; he was an inflexible, driving, punctilious business man; everything was to move by system,—to be sustained with unfailing accuracy and precision.
“Besides all, he had an overseer,—great, tall, slab-sided, two-fisted renegade son of Vermont—(begging your pardon),—who had gone through a regular apprenticeship in hardness and brutality and taken his degree to be admitted to practice.
My mother never could endure him, nor I; but he obtained an entire ascendency over my father; and this man was the absolute despot of the estate.
“I was a little fellow then, but I had the same love that I have now for all kinds of human things,—a kind of passion for the study of humanity, come in what shape it would.
I was found in the cabins and among the field-hands a great deal, and, of course, was a great favorite; and all sorts of complaints and grievances were breathed in my ear; and I told them to mother, and we, between us, formed a sort of committee for a redress of grievances.
We hindered and repressed a great deal of cruelty, and congratulated ourselves on doing a vast deal of good, till, as often happens, my zeal overacted.
Stubbs complained to my father that he couldn’t manage the hands, and must resign his position.
Father was a fond, indulgent husband, but a man that never flinched from anything that he thought necessary; and so he put down his foot, like a rock, between us and the field-hands.
He told my mother, in language perfectly respectful and deferential, but quite explicit, that over the house-servants she should be entire mistress, but that with the field-hands he could allow no interference.
He revered and respected her above all living beings; but he would have said it all the same to the virgin Mary herself, if she had come in the way of his system.
“I used sometimes to hear my mother reasoning cases with him,—endeavoring to excite his sympathies.
He would listen to the most pathetic appeals with the most discouraging politeness and equanimity.
‘It all resolves itself into this,’ he would say; ‘must I part with Stubbs, or keep him?
Stubbs is the soul of punctuality, honesty, and efficiency,—a thorough business hand, and as humane as the general run.
We can’t have perfection; and if I keep him, I must sustain his administration as a _whole_, even if there are, now and then, things that are exceptionable.
All government includes some necessary hardness.
General rules will bear hard on particular cases.’ This last maxim my father seemed to consider a settler in most alleged cases of cruelty.
After he had said _that_, he commonly drew up his feet on the sofa, like a man that has disposed of a business, and betook himself to a nap, or the newspaper, as the case might be.
“The fact is my father showed the exact sort of talent for a statesman.
He could have divided Poland as easily as an orange, or trod on Ireland as quietly and systematically as any man living.
It never will be known, till the last account, what noble and sensitive natures like hers have felt, cast, utterly helpless, into what seems to them an abyss of injustice and cruelty, and which seems so to nobody about them.
It has been an age of long sorrow of such natures, in such a hell-begotten sort of world as ours.
What remained for her, but to train her children in her own views and sentiments?
Well, after all you say about training, children will grow up substantially what they _are_ by nature, and only that.
From the cradle, Alfred was an aristocrat; and as he grew up, instinctively, all his sympathies and all his reasonings were in that line, and all mother’s exhortations went to the winds.
She never contradicted, in form, anything my father said, or seemed directly to differ from him; but she impressed, burnt into my very soul, with all the force of her deep, earnest nature, an idea of the dignity and worth of the meanest human soul.
I have looked in her face with solemn awe, when she would point up to the stars in the evening, and say to me, ‘See there, Auguste! the poorest, meanest soul on our place will be living, when all these stars are gone forever,—will live as long as God lives!’ “She had some fine old paintings; one, in particular, of Jesus healing a blind man.
They were very fine, and used to impress me strongly.
‘See there, Auguste,’ she would say; ‘the blind man was a beggar, poor and loathsome; therefore, he would not heal him _afar off!_ He called him to him, and put _his hands on him!_ Remember this, my boy.’ If I had lived to grow up under her care, she might have stimulated me to I know not what of enthusiasm.
I might have been a saint, reformer, martyr,—but, alas! alas!
I went from her when I was only thirteen, and I never saw her again!” St.
After a while, he looked up, and went on: “What poor, mean trash this whole business of human virtue is!
A mere matter, for the most part, of latitude and longitude, and geographical position, acting with natural temperament.
The greater part is nothing but an accident!
Your father, for example, settles in Vermont, in a town where all are, in fact, free and equal; becomes a regular church member and deacon, and in due time joins an Abolition society, and thinks us all little better than heathens.
Yet he is, for all the world, in constitution and habit, a duplicate of my father.
I can see it leaking out in fifty different ways,—just the same strong, overbearing, dominant spirit.
You know very well how impossible it is to persuade some of the folks in your village that Squire Sinclair does not feel above them.
The fact is, though he has fallen on democratic times, and embraced a democratic theory, he is to the heart an aristocrat, as much as my father, who ruled over five or six hundred slaves.” Miss Ophelia felt rather disposed to cavil at this picture, and was laying down her knitting to begin, but St.
One fell into a condition where everything acted against the natural tendency, and the other where everything acted for it; and so one turned out a pretty wilful, stout, overbearing old democrat, and the other a wilful, stout old despot.
If both had owned plantations in Louisiana, they would have been as like as two old bullets cast in the same mould.” “What an undutiful boy you are!” said Miss Ophelia.
“I don’t mean them any disrespect,” said St.
“You know reverence is not my forte.
But, to go back to my history: “When father died, he left the whole property to us twin boys, to be divided as we should agree.
There does not breathe on God’s earth a nobler-souled, more generous fellow, than Alfred, in all that concerns his equals; and we got on admirably with this property question, without a single unbrotherly word or feeling.
We undertook to work the plantation together; and Alfred, whose outward life and capabilities had double the strength of mine, became an enthusiastic planter, and a wonderfully successful one.
“But two years’ trial satisfied me that I could not be a partner in that matter.
“It’s all nonsense to talk to me about slaves _enjoying_ all this!
To this day, I have no patience with the unutterable trash that some of your patronizing Northerners have made up, as in their zeal to apologize for our sins.
Tell me that any man living wants to work all his days, from day-dawn till dark, under the constant eye of a master, without the power of putting forth one irresponsible volition, on the same dreary, monotonous, unchanging toil, and all for two pairs of pantaloons and a pair of shoes a year, with enough food and shelter to keep him in working order!
Any man who thinks that human beings can, as a general thing, be made about as comfortable that way as any other, I wish he might try it.
I’d buy the dog, and work him, with a clear conscience!” “I always have supposed,” said Miss Ophelia, “that you, all of you, approved of these things, and thought them _right_—according to Scripture.” “Humbug!
He defends both,—and I think, at least, _consistently_.
He says that there can be no high civilization without enslavement of the masses, either nominal or real.
There must, he says, be a lower class, given up to physical toil and confined to an animal nature; and a higher one thereby acquires leisure and wealth for a more expanded intelligence and improvement, and becomes the directing soul of the lower.
So he reasons, because, as I said, he is born an aristocrat;—so I don’t believe, because I was born a democrat.” “How in the world can the two things be compared?” said Miss Ophelia.
“The English laborer is not sold, traded, parted from his family, whipped.” “He is as much at the will of his employer as if he were sold to him.
The slave-owner can whip his refractory slave to death,—the capitalist can starve him to death.
“Well, I’ve travelled in England some, and I’ve looked over a good many documents as to the state of their lower classes; and I really think there is no denying Alfred, when he says that his slaves are better off than a large class of the population of England.
He is despotic, and unmerciful to insubordination; he would shoot a fellow down with as little remorse as he would shoot a buck, if he opposed him.
But, in general, he takes a sort of pride in having his slaves comfortably fed and accommodated.
“When I was with him, I insisted that he should do something for their instruction; and, to please me, he did get a chaplain, and used to have them catechized Sunday, though, I believe, in his heart, that he thought it would do about as much good to set a chaplain over his dogs and horses.
And the fact is, that a mind stupefied and animalized by every bad influence from the hour of birth, spending the whole of every week-day in unreflecting toil, cannot be done much with by a few hours on Sunday.
The teachers of Sunday-schools among the manufacturing population of England, and among plantation-hands in our country, could perhaps testify to the same result, _there and here_.
Yet some striking exceptions there are among us, from the fact that the negro is naturally more impressible to religious sentiment than the white.” “Well,” said Miss Ophelia, “how came you to give up your plantation life?” “Well, we jogged on together some time, till Alfred saw plainly that I was no planter.
He thought it absurd, after he had reformed, and altered, and improved everywhere, to suit my notions, that I still remained unsatisfied.
The fact was, it was, after all, the THING that I hated—the using these men and women, the perpetuation of all this ignorance, brutality and vice,—just to make money for me!
“Besides, I was always interfering in the details.
Being myself one of the laziest of mortals, I had altogether too much fellow-feeling for the lazy; and when poor, shiftless dogs put stones at the bottom of their cotton-baskets to make them weigh heavier, or filled their sacks with dirt, with cotton at the top, it seemed so exactly like what I should do if I were they, I couldn’t and wouldn’t have them flogged for it.
Well, of course, there was an end of plantation discipline; and Alf and I came to about the same point that I and my respected father did, years before.
So he told me that I was a womanish sentimentalist, and would never do for business life; and advised me to take the bank-stock and the New Orleans family mansion, and go to writing poetry, and let him manage the plantation.
Some of them were old house-servants, to whom I was much attached; and the younger ones were children to the old.
All were well satisfied to be as they were.” He paused, and walked reflectively up and down the room.
Clare, “a time in my life when I had plans and hopes of doing something in this world, more than to float and drift.
I had vague, indistinct yearnings to be a sort of emancipator,—to free my native land from this spot and stain.
All young men have had such fever-fits, I suppose, some time,—but then—” “Why didn’t you?” said Miss Ophelia;—“you ought not to put your hand to the plough, and look back.” “O, well, things didn’t go with me as I expected, and I got the despair of living that Solomon did.
I suppose it was a necessary incident to wisdom in us both; but, some how or other, instead of being actor and regenerator in society, I became a piece of driftwood, and have been floating and eddying about, ever since.
Alfred scolds me, every time we meet; and he has the better of me, I grant,—for he really does something; his life is a logical result of his opinions and mine is a contemptible _non sequitur_.” “My dear cousin, can you be satisfied with such a way of spending your probation?” “Satisfied!
Was I not just telling you I despised it?
But, then, to come back to this point,—we were on this liberation business.
I don’t think my feelings about slavery are peculiar.
The land groans under it; and, bad as it is for the slave, it is worse, if anything, for the master.
It takes no spectacles to see that a great class of vicious, improvident, degraded people, among us, are an evil to us, as well as to themselves.
The capitalist and aristocrat of England cannot feel that as we do, because they do not mingle with the class they degrade as we do.
They are in our homes; they are the associates of our children, and they form their minds faster than we can; for they are a race that children always will cling to and assimilate with.
If Eva, now, was not more angel than ordinary, she would be ruined.
We might as well allow the small-pox to run among them, and think our children would not take it, as to let them be uninstructed and vicious, and think our children will not be affected by that.
Yet our laws positively and utterly forbid any efficient general educational system, and they do it wisely, too; for, just begin and thoroughly educate one generation, and the whole thing would be blown sky high.
One thing is certain,—that there is a mustering among the masses, the world over; and there is a _dies iræ_ coming on, sooner or later.
My mother used to tell me of a millennium that was coming, when Christ should reign, and all men should be free and happy.
And she taught me, when I was a boy, to pray, ‘thy kingdom come.’ Sometimes I think all this sighing, and groaning, and stirring among the dry bones foretells what she used to tell me was coming.
But who may abide the day of His appearing?” “Augustine, sometimes I think you are not far from the kingdom,” said Miss Ophelia, laying down her knitting, and looking anxiously at her cousin.
“Thank you for your good opinion, but it’s up and down with me,—up to heaven’s gate in theory, down in earth’s dust in practice.
But there’s the teabell,—do let’s go,—and don’t say, now, I haven’t had one downright serious talk, for once in my life.” At table, Marie alluded to the incident of Prue.
“I suppose you’ll think, cousin,” she said, “that we are all barbarians.” “I think that’s a barbarous thing,” said Miss Ophelia, “but I don’t think you are all barbarians.” “Well, now,” said Marie, “I know it’s impossible to get along with some of these creatures.
I don’t feel a particle of sympathy for such cases.
If they’d only behave themselves, it would not happen.” “But, mamma,” said Eva, “the poor creature was unhappy; that’s what made her drink.” “O, fiddlestick! as if that were any excuse!
I presume,” she said, pensively, “that I’ve had greater trials than ever she had.
There’s some of them that you cannot break in by any kind of severity.
I remember father had a man that was so lazy he would run away just to get rid of work, and lie round in the swamps, stealing and doing all sorts of horrid things.
Clare, “that all the overseers and masters had tried their hands on in vain.” “You!” said Marie; “well, I’d be glad to know when _you_ ever did anything of the sort.” “Well, he was a powerful, gigantic fellow,—a native-born African; and he appeared to have the rude instinct of freedom in him to an uncommon degree.
Nobody could do anything with him; and he was sold round from overseer to overseer, till at last Alfred bought him, because he thought he could manage him.
Well, one day he knocked down the overseer, and was fairly off into the swamps.
I was on a visit to Alf’s plantation, for it was after we had dissolved partnership.
Alfred was greatly exasperated; but I told him that it was his own fault, and laid him any wager that I could break the man; and finally it was agreed that, if I caught him, I should have him to experiment on.
So they mustered out a party of some six or seven, with guns and dogs, for the hunt.
People, you know, can get up as much enthusiasm in hunting a man as a deer, if it is only customary; in fact, I got a little excited myself, though I had only put in as a sort of mediator, in case he was caught.
“Well, the dogs bayed and howled, and we rode and scampered, and finally we started him.
He ran and bounded like a buck, and kept us well in the rear for some time; but at last he got caught in an impenetrable thicket of cane; then he turned to bay, and I tell you he fought the dogs right gallantly.
He dashed them to right and left, and actually killed three of them with only his naked fists, when a shot from a gun brought him down, and he fell, wounded and bleeding, almost at my feet.
I kept back the dogs and the party, as they came pressing up, and claimed him as my prisoner.
It was all I could do to keep them from shooting him, in the flush of success; but I persisted in my bargain, and Alfred sold him to me.
Well, I took him in hand, and in one fortnight I had him tamed down as submissive and tractable as heart could desire.” “What in the world did you do to him?” said Marie.
The foolish fellow tore the paper in two, and absolutely refused to leave me.
He embraced Christianity afterwards, and became as gentle as a child.
He used to oversee my place on the lake, and did it capitally, too.
For I was sick, almost to death; and when, through the panic, everybody else fled, Scipio worked for me like a giant, and actually brought me back into life again.
I never felt anybody’s loss more.” Eva had come gradually nearer and nearer to her father, as he told the story,—her small lips apart, her eyes wide and earnest with absorbing interest.
As he finished, she suddenly threw her arms around his neck, burst into tears, and sobbed convulsively.
Clare, as the child’s small frame trembled and shook with the violence of her feelings.
“This child,” he added, “ought not to hear any of this kind of thing,—she’s nervous.” “No, papa, I’m not nervous,” said Eva, controlling herself, suddenly, with a strength of resolution singular in such a child.
“I’m not nervous, but these things _sink into my heart_.” “What do you mean, Eva?” “I can’t tell you, papa, I think a great many thoughts.
Clare, “Look here,—see what a beautiful peach I have got for you.” Eva took it and smiled, though there was still a nervous twiching about the corners of her mouth.
Clare, taking her hand and stepping on to the verandah.
A few moments, and merry laughs were heard through the silken curtains, as Eva and St.
There is danger that our humble friend Tom be neglected amid the adventures of the higher born; but, if our readers will accompany us up to a little loft over the stable, they may, perhaps, learn a little of his affairs.
It was a decent room, containing a bed, a chair, and a small, rough stand, where lay Tom’s Bible and hymn-book; and where he sits, at present, with his slate before him, intent on something that seems to cost him a great deal of anxious thought.
The fact was, that Tom’s home-yearnings had become so strong that he had begged a sheet of writing-paper of Eva, and, mustering up all his small stock of literary attainment acquired by Mas’r George’s instructions, he conceived the bold idea of writing a letter; and he was busy now, on his slate, getting out his first draft.
Tom was in a good deal of trouble, for the forms of some of the letters he had forgotten entirely; and of what he did remember, he did not know exactly which to use.
And while he was working, and breathing very hard, in his earnestness, Eva alighted, like a bird, on the round of his chair behind him, and peeped over his shoulder.
Last year I could make all the letters, but I’m afraid I’ve forgotten.” So Eva put her golden head close to his, and the two commenced a grave and anxious discussion, each one equally earnest, and about equally ignorant; and, with a deal of consulting and advising over every word, the composition began, as they both felt very sanguine, to look quite like writing.
“Yes, Uncle Tom, it really begins to look beautiful,” said Eva, gazing delightedly on it.
“How pleased your wife’ll be, and the poor little children!
I mean to ask papa to let you go back, some time.” “Missis said that she would send down money for me, as soon as they could get it together,” said Tom.
Young Mas’r George, he said he’d come for me; and he gave me this yer dollar as a sign;” and Tom drew from under his clothes the precious dollar.
“O, he’ll certainly come, then!” said Eva.
I’m helping him to write it,” said Eva; “isn’t it nice?” “I wouldn’t discourage either of you,” said St.
I’ll do it, when I come home from my ride.” “It’s very important he should write,” said Eva, “because his mistress is going to send down money to redeem him, you know, papa; he told me they told him so.” St.
Clare thought, in his heart, that this was probably only one of those things which good-natured owners say to their servants, to alleviate their horror of being sold, without any intention of fulfilling the expectation thus excited.
Miss Ophelia still persevered in her labors in the housekeeping line.
It was universally agreed, among all the household, from Dinah down to the youngest urchin, that Miss Ophelia was decidedly “curis,”—a term by which a southern servant implies that his or her betters don’t exactly suit them.
The higher circle in the family—to wit, Adolph, Jane and Rosa—agreed that she was no lady; ladies never keep working about as she did,—that she had no _air_ at all; and they were surprised that she should be any relation of the St.
Even Marie declared that it was absolutely fatiguing to see Cousin Ophelia always so busy.
And, in fact, Miss Ophelia’s industry was so incessant as to lay some foundation for the complaint.
She sewed and stitched away, from daylight till dark, with the energy of one who is pressed on by some immediate urgency; and then, when the light faded, and the work was folded away, with one turn out came the ever-ready knitting-work, and there she was again, going on as briskly as ever.
CHAPTER XX Topsy One morning, while Miss Ophelia was busy in some of her domestic cares, St.
“Come down here, Cousin, I’ve something to show you.” “What is it?” said Miss Ophelia, coming down, with her sewing in her hand.
“I’ve made a purchase for your department,—see here,” said St.
She was one of the blackest of her race; and her round shining eyes, glittering as glass beads, moved with quick and restless glances over everything in the room.
Her mouth, half open with astonishment at the wonders of the new Mas’r’s parlor, displayed a white and brilliant set of teeth.
Her woolly hair was braided in sundry little tails, which stuck out in every direction.
The expression of her face was an odd mixture of shrewdness and cunning, over which was oddly drawn, like a kind of veil, an expression of the most doleful gravity and solemnity.
She was dressed in a single filthy, ragged garment, made of bagging; and stood with her hands demurely folded before her.
Altogether, there was something odd and goblin-like about her appearance,—something, as Miss Ophelia afterwards said, “so heathenish,” as to inspire that good lady with utter dismay; and turning to St.
Clare, she said, “Augustine, what in the world have you brought that thing here for?” “For you to educate, to be sure, and train in the way she should go.
I thought she was rather a funny specimen in the Jim Crow line.
Miss Ophelia stood silent, perfectly paralyzed with amazement.
Clare, like a mischievous fellow as he was, appeared to enjoy her astonishment; and, addressing the child again, said, “Topsy, this is your new mistress.
I’m going to give you up to her; see now that you behave yourself.” “Yes, Mas’r,” said Topsy, with sanctimonious gravity, her wicked eyes twinkling as she spoke.
“You’re going to be good, Topsy, you understand,” said St.
“O yes, Mas’r,” said Topsy, with another twinkle, her hands still devoutly folded.
“Now, Augustine, what upon earth is this for?” said Miss Ophelia.
“Your house is so full of these little plagues, now, that a body can’t set down their foot without treading on ’em.
I get up in the morning, and find one asleep behind the door, and see one black head poking out from under the table, one lying on the door-mat,—and they are mopping and mowing and grinning between all the railings, and tumbling over the kitchen floor!
You’re always preaching about educating.
I thought I would make you a present of a fresh-caught specimen, and let you try your hand on her, and bring her up in the way she should go.” “_I_ don’t want her, I am sure;—I have more to do with ’em now than I want to.” “That’s you Christians, all over!—you’ll get up a society, and get some poor missionary to spend all his days among just such heathen.
But let me see one of you that would take one into your house with you, and take the labor of their conversion on yourselves!
No; when it comes to that, they are dirty and disagreeable, and it’s too much care, and so on.” “Augustine, you know I didn’t think of it in that light,” said Miss Ophelia, evidently softening.
“Well, it might be a real missionary work,” said she, looking rather more favorably on the child.
Miss Ophelia’s conscientiousness was ever on the alert.
Clare, drawing her aside, “I ought to beg your pardon for my good-for-nothing speeches.
Why, the fact is, this concern belonged to a couple of drunken creatures that keep a low restaurant that I have to pass by every day, and I was tired of hearing her screaming, and them beating and swearing at her.
She looked bright and funny, too, as if something might be made of her;—so I bought her, and I’ll give her to you.
Try, now, and give her a good orthodox New England bringing up, and see what it’ll make of her.
You know I haven’t any gift that way; but I’d like you to try.” “Well, I’ll do what I can,” said Miss Ophelia; and she approached her new subject very much as a person might be supposed to approach a black spider, supposing them to have benevolent designs toward it.
“She’s dreadfully dirty, and half naked,” she said.
Clare wants of ’nother nigger!” said Dinah, surveying the new arrival with no friendly air.
No more nigger dan you be, Miss Rosa,” said Dinah, who felt this last remark a reflection on herself.
“You seem to tink yourself white folks.
You an’t nerry one, black _nor_ white, I’d like to be one or turrer.” Miss Ophelia saw that there was nobody in the camp that would undertake to oversee the cleansing and dressing of the new arrival; and so she was forced to do it herself, with some very ungracious and reluctant assistance from Jane.
It is not for ears polite to hear the particulars of the first toilet of a neglected, abused child.
In fact, in this world, multitudes must live and die in a state that it would be too great a shock to the nerves of their fellow-mortals even to hear described.
Miss Ophelia had a good, strong, practical deal of resolution; and she went through all the disgusting details with heroic thoroughness, though, it must be confessed, with no very gracious air,—for endurance was the utmost to which her principles could bring her.
When she saw, on the back and shoulders of the child, great welts and calloused spots, ineffaceable marks of the system under which she had grown up thus far, her heart became pitiful within her.
“See there!” said Jane, pointing to the marks, “don’t that show she’s a limb?
I hate these nigger young uns! so disgusting!
I wonder that Mas’r would buy her!” The “young un” alluded to heard all these comments with the subdued and doleful air which seemed habitual to her, only scanning, with a keen and furtive glance of her flickering eyes, the ornaments which Jane wore in her ears.
When arrayed at last in a suit of decent and whole clothing, her hair cropped short to her head, Miss Ophelia, with some satisfaction, said she looked more Christian-like than she did, and in her own mind began to mature some plans for her instruction.
Sitting down before her, she began to question her.
Tell me where you were born, and who your father and mother were.” “Never was born,” reiterated the creature, more emphatically; “never had no father nor mother, nor nothin’.
I was raised by a speculator, with lots of others.
Old Aunt Sue used to take car on us.” The child was evidently sincere, and Jane, breaking into a short laugh, said, “Laws, Missis, there’s heaps of ’em.
Speculators buys ’em up cheap, when they’s little, and gets ’em raised for market.” “How long have you lived with your master and mistress?” “Dun no, Missis.” “Is it a year, or more, or less?” “Dun no, Missis.” “Laws, Missis, those low negroes,—they can’t tell; they don’t know anything about time,” said Jane; “they don’t know what a year is; they don’t know their own ages.
“Have you ever heard anything about God, Topsy?” The child looked bewildered, but grinned as usual.
The idea appeared to amuse her considerably; for her eyes twinkled, and she added, “I spect I grow’d.
Don’t think nobody never made me.” “Do you know how to sew?” said Miss Ophelia, who thought she would turn her inquiries to something more tangible.
“No, Missis.” “What can you do?—what did you do for your master and mistress?” “Fetch water, and wash dishes, and rub knives, and wait on folks.” “Were they good to you?” “Spect they was,” said the child, scanning Miss Ophelia cunningly.
Miss Ophelia rose from this encouraging colloquy; St.
“You find virgin soil there, Cousin; put in your own ideas,—you won’t find many to pull up.” Miss Ophelia’s ideas of education, like all her other ideas, were very set and definite; and of the kind that prevailed in New England a century ago, and which are still preserved in some very retired and unsophisticated parts, where there are no railroads.
As nearly as could be expressed, they could be comprised in very few words: to teach them to mind when they were spoken to; to teach them the catechism, sewing, and reading; and to whip them if they told lies.
And though, of course, in the flood of light that is now poured on education, these are left far away in the rear, yet it is an undisputed fact that our grandmothers raised some tolerably fair men and women under this regime, as many of us can remember and testify.
At all events, Miss Ophelia knew of nothing else to do; and, therefore, applied her mind to her heathen with the best diligence she could command.
The child was announced and considered in the family as Miss Ophelia’s girl; and, as she was looked upon with no gracious eye in the kitchen, Miss Ophelia resolved to confine her sphere of operation and instruction chiefly to her own chamber.
With a self-sacrifice which some of our readers will appreciate, she resolved, instead of comfortably making her own bed, sweeping and dusting her own chamber,—which she had hitherto done, in utter scorn of all offers of help from the chambermaid of the establishment,—to condemn herself to the martyrdom of instructing Topsy to perform these operations,—ah, woe the day!
Did any of our readers ever do the same, they will appreciate the amount of her self-sacrifice.
Miss Ophelia began with Topsy by taking her into her chamber, the first morning, and solemnly commencing a course of instruction in the art and mystery of bed-making.
Behold, then, Topsy, washed and shorn of all the little braided tails wherein her heart had delighted, arrayed in a clean gown, with well-starched apron, standing reverently before Miss Ophelia, with an expression of solemnity well befitting a funeral.
I am very particular about my bed.
You must learn exactly how to do it.” “Yes, ma’am,” says Topsy, with a deep sigh, and a face of woful earnestness.
“Now, Topsy, look here;—this is the hem of the sheet,—this is the right side of the sheet, and this is the wrong;—will you remember?” “Yes, ma’am,” says Topsy, with another sigh.
“Well, now, the under sheet you must bring over the bolster,—so—and tuck it clear down under the mattress nice and smooth,—so,—do you see?” “Yes, ma’am,” said Topsy, with profound attention.
Topsy, with great gravity and adroitness, went through the exercise completely to Miss Ophelia’s satisfaction; smoothing the sheets, patting out every wrinkle, and exhibiting, through the whole process, a gravity and seriousness with which her instructress was greatly edified.
By an unlucky slip, however, a fluttering fragment of the ribbon hung out of one of her sleeves, just as she was finishing, and caught Miss Ophelia’s attention.
Instantly, she pounced upon it.
You naughty, wicked child,—you’ve been stealing this!” The ribbon was pulled out of Topsy’s own sleeve, yet was she not in the least disconcerted; she only looked at it with an air of the most surprised and unconscious innocence.
Miss Feeley must have left it on the bed, and it got caught in the clothes, and so got in my sleeve.” Miss Ophelia was so indignant at the barefaced lie, that she caught the child and shook her.
“There, you!” said Miss Ophelia, “will you tell me now, you didn’t steal the ribbon?” Topsy now confessed to the gloves, but still persisted in denying the ribbon.
“Now, Topsy,” said Miss Ophelia, “if you’ll confess all about it, I won’t whip you this time.” Thus adjured, Topsy confessed to the ribbon and gloves, with woful protestations of penitence.
I know you must have taken other things since you have been in the house, for I let you run about all day yesterday.
Now, tell me if you took anything, and I shan’t whip you.” “Laws, Missis!
Go get ’em, or I’ll whip you.” Topsy, with loud protestations, and tears, and groans, declared that she _could_ not.
I can’t help it.” Just at this moment, Eva came innocently into the room, with the identical coral necklace on her neck.
“Why, Eva, where did you get your necklace?” said Miss Ophelia.
“Did you have it on yesterday?” “Yes; and what is funny, Aunty, I had it on all night.
I forgot to take it off when I went to bed.” Miss Ophelia looked perfectly bewildered; the more so, as Rosa, at that instant, came into the room, with a basket of newly-ironed linen poised on her head, and the coral ear-drops shaking in her ears!
“I’m sure I can’t tell anything what to do with such a child!” she said, in despair.
“But, of course, I didn’t want you to confess things you didn’t do,” said Miss Ophelia; “that’s telling a lie, just as much as the other.” “Laws, now, is it?” said Topsy, with an air of innocent wonder.
“La, there an’t any such thing as truth in that limb,” said Rosa, looking indignantly at Topsy.
Don’t you say another word of that sort!” and the eye of the child flashed, and her cheek deepened its color.
There stood the two children representatives of the two extremes of society.
The fair, high-bred child, with her golden head, her deep eyes, her spiritual, noble brow, and prince-like movements; and her black, keen, subtle, cringing, yet acute neighbor.
They stood the representatives of their races.
The Saxon, born of ages of cultivation, command, education, physical and moral eminence; the Afric, born of ages of oppression, submission, ignorance, toil and vice!
Something, perhaps, of such thoughts struggled through Eva’s mind.
But a child’s thoughts are rather dim, undefined instincts; and in Eva’s noble nature many such were yearning and working, for which she had no power of utterance.
When Miss Ophelia expatiated on Topsy’s naughty, wicked conduct, the child looked perplexed and sorrowful, but said, sweetly.
I’m sure I’d rather give you anything of mine, than have you steal it.” It was the first word of kindness the child had ever heard in her life; and the sweet tone and manner struck strangely on the wild, rude heart, and a sparkle of something like a tear shone in the keen, round, glittering eye; but it was followed by the short laugh and habitual grin.
No! the ear that has never heard anything but abuse is strangely incredulous of anything so heavenly as kindness; and Topsy only thought Eva’s speech something funny and inexplicable,—she did not believe it.
Miss Ophelia found the case a puzzler; her rules for bringing up didn’t seem to apply.
She thought she would take time to think of it; and, by the way of gaining time, and in hopes of some indefinite moral virtues supposed to be inherent in dark closets, Miss Ophelia shut Topsy up in one till she had arranged her ideas further on the subject.
Clare, “how I’m going to manage that child, without whipping her.” “Well, whip her, then, to your heart’s content; I’ll give you full power to do what you like.” “Children always have to be whipped,” said Miss Ophelia; “I never heard of bringing them up without.” “O, well, certainly,” said St.
Only I’ll make one suggestion: I’ve seen this child whipped with a poker, knocked down with the shovel or tongs, whichever came handiest, &c.; and, seeing that she is used to that style of operation, I think your whippings will have to be pretty energetic, to make much impression.” “What is to be done with her, then?” said Miss Ophelia.
“You have started a serious question,” said St.
What is to be done with a human being that can be governed only by the lash,—_that_ fails,—it’s a very common state of things down here!” “I’m sure I don’t know; I never saw such a child as this.” “Such children are very common among us, and such men and women, too.
How are they to be governed?” said St.
“The horrid cruelties and outrages that once and a while find their way into the papers,—such cases as Prue’s, for example,—what do they come from?
In many cases, it is a gradual hardening process on both sides,—the owner growing more and more cruel, as the servant more and more callous.
Whipping and abuse are like laudanum; you have to double the dose as the sensibilities decline.
I saw this very early when I became an owner; and I resolved never to begin, because I did not know when I should stop,—and I resolved, at least, to protect my own moral nature.
The consequence is, that my servants act like spoiled children; but I think that better than for us both to be brutalized together.
You have talked a great deal about our responsibilities in educating, Cousin.
I really wanted you to _try_ with one child, who is a specimen of thousands among us.” “It is your system makes such children,” said Miss Ophelia.
“I know it; but they are _made_,—they exist,—and what _is_ to be done with them?” “Well, I can’t say I thank you for the experiment.
But, then, as it appears to be a duty, I shall persevere and try, and do the best I can,” said Miss Ophelia; and Miss Ophelia, after this, did labor, with a commendable degree of zeal and energy, on her new subject.
She instituted regular hours and employments for her, and undertook to teach her to read and sew.
She learned her letters as if by magic, and was very soon able to read plain reading; but the sewing was a more difficult matter.
The creature was as lithe as a cat, and as active as a monkey, and the confinement of sewing was her abomination; so she broke her needles, threw them slyly out of the window, or down in chinks of the walls; she tangled, broke, and dirtied her thread, or, with a sly movement, would throw a spool away altogether.
Her motions were almost as quick as those of a practised conjurer, and her command of her face quite as great; and though Miss Ophelia could not help feeling that so many accidents could not possibly happen in succession, yet she could not, without a watchfulness which would leave her no time for anything else, detect her.
Topsy was soon a noted character in the establishment.
Her talent for every species of drollery, grimace, and mimicry,—for dancing, tumbling, climbing, singing, whistling, imitating every sound that hit her fancy,—seemed inexhaustible.
In her play-hours, she invariably had every child in the establishment at her heels, open-mouthed with admiration and wonder,—not excepting Miss Eva, who appeared to be fascinated by her wild diablerie, as a dove is sometimes charmed by a glittering serpent.
Miss Ophelia was uneasy that Eva should fancy Topsy’s society so much, and implored St.
“Topsy will do her good.” “But so depraved a child,—are you not afraid she will teach her some mischief?” “She can’t teach her mischief; she might teach it to some children, but evil rolls off Eva’s mind like dew off a cabbage-leaf,—not a drop sinks in.” “Don’t be too sure,” said Miss Ophelia.
“I know I’d never let a child of mine play with Topsy.” “Well, your children needn’t,” said St.
Clare, “but mine may; if Eva could have been spoiled, it would have been done years ago.” Topsy was at first despised and contemned by the upper servants.
Topsy was cited, and had up before all the domestic judicatories, time and again; but always sustained her examinations with most edifying innocence and gravity of appearance.
Nobody in the world ever doubted who did the things; but not a scrap of any direct evidence could be found to establish the suppositions, and Miss Ophelia was too just to feel at liberty to proceed to any length without it.
The mischiefs done were always so nicely timed, also, as further to shelter the aggressor.
Thus, the times for revenge on Rosa and Jane, the two chamber maids, were always chosen in those seasons when (as not unfrequently happened) they were in disgrace with their mistress, when any complaint from them would of course meet with no sympathy.
In short, Topsy soon made the household understand the propriety of letting her alone; and she was let alone, accordingly.
Topsy was smart and energetic in all manual operations, learning everything that was taught her with surprising quickness.
With a few lessons, she had learned to do the proprieties of Miss Ophelia’s chamber in a way with which even that particular lady could find no fault.
Mortal hands could not lay spread smoother, adjust pillows more accurately, sweep and dust and arrange more perfectly, than Topsy, when she chose,—but she didn’t very often choose.
If Miss Ophelia, after three or four days of careful patient supervision, was so sanguine as to suppose that Topsy had at last fallen into her way, could do without over-looking, and so go off and busy herself about something else, Topsy would hold a perfect carnival of confusion, for some one or two hours.
On one occasion, Miss Ophelia found Topsy with her very best scarlet India Canton crape shawl wound round her head for a turban, going on with her rehearsals before the glass in great style,—Miss Ophelia having, with carelessness most unheard-of in her, left the key for once in her drawer.
“Topsy!” she would say, when at the end of all patience, “what does make you act so?” “Dunno, Missis,—I spects cause I ’s so wicked!” “I don’t know anything what I shall do with you, Topsy.” “Law, Missis, you must whip me; my old Missis allers whipped me.
“Law, Miss Feely whip!—wouldn’t kill a skeeter, her whippins.
Oughter see how old Mas’r made the flesh fly; old Mas’r know’d how!” Topsy always made great capital of her own sins and enormities, evidently considering them as something peculiarly distinguishing.
“Law, you niggers,” she would say to some of her auditors, “does you know you ’s all sinners?
Well, you is—everybody is.
I spects I ’s the wickedest critter in the world;” and Topsy would cut a summerset, and come up brisk and shining on to a higher perch, and evidently plume herself on the distinction.
Miss Ophelia busied herself very earnestly on Sundays, teaching Topsy the catechism.
Topsy had an uncommon verbal memory, and committed with a fluency that greatly encouraged her instructress.
“Why, it always has done children good.
It’s what children always have to learn, you know,” said Miss Ophelia.
“Understand it or not,” said St.
“O, children never understand it at the time; but, after they are grown up, it’ll come to them.” “Mine hasn’t come to me yet,” said St.
Clare, “though I’ll bear testimony that you put it into me pretty thoroughly when I was a boy.”’ “Ah, you were always good at learning, Augustine.
“I wish you were as good as you were when you were a boy, Augustine.” “So do I, that’s a fact, Cousin,” said St.
“Well, go ahead and catechize Topsy; may be you’ll make out something yet.” Topsy, who had stood like a black statue during this discussion, with hands decently folded, now, at a signal from Miss Ophelia, went on: “Our first parents, being left to the freedom of their own will, fell from the state wherein they were created.” Topsy’s eyes twinkled, and she looked inquiringly.
“There seems to be a theory of emigration suggested there.” “O!
Augustine, be still,” said Miss Ophelia; “how can I do anything, if you will be laughing?” “Well, I won’t disturb the exercises again, on my honor;” and St.
Clare took his paper into the parlor, and sat down, till Topsy had finished her recitations.
They were all very well, only that now and then she would oddly transpose some important words, and persist in the mistake, in spite of every effort to the contrary; and St.
Clare, after all his promises of goodness, took a wicked pleasure in these mistakes, calling Topsy to him whenever he had a mind to amuse himself, and getting her to repeat the offending passages, in spite of Miss Ophelia’s remonstrances.
“How do you think I can do anything with the child, if you will go on so, Augustine?” she would say.
Clare took the same kind of amusement in the child that a man might in the tricks of a parrot or a pointer.
Topsy, whenever her sins brought her into disgrace in other quarters, always took refuge behind his chair; and St.
From him she got many a stray picayune, which she laid out in nuts and candies, and distributed, with careless generosity, to all the children in the family; for Topsy, to do her justice, was good-natured and liberal, and only spiteful in self-defence.
She is fairly introduced into our _corps de ballet_, and will figure, from time to time, in her turn, with other performers.
CHAPTER XXI Kentuck Our readers may not be unwilling to glance back, for a brief interval, at Uncle Tom’s Cabin, on the Kentucky farm, and see what has been transpiring among those whom he had left behind.
It was late in the summer afternoon, and the doors and windows of the large parlor all stood open, to invite any stray breeze, that might feel in a good humor, to enter.
Leisurely tipped back on one chair, with his heels in another, he was enjoying his after-dinner cigar.
Shelby sat in the door, busy about some fine sewing; she seemed like one who had something on her mind, which she was seeking an opportunity to introduce.
“Tom, I suppose, will get reconciled to a Southern residence;—hardly want to come up here again.” “On the contrary he inquires very anxiously,” said Mrs.
Shelby, “when the money for his redemption is to be raised.” “I’m sure _I_ don’t know,” said Mr.
“Once get business running wrong, there does seem to be no end to it.
It’s like jumping from one bog to another, all through a swamp; borrow of one to pay another, and then borrow of another to pay one,—and these confounded notes falling due before a man has time to smoke a cigar and turn round,—dunning letters and dunning messages,—all scamper and hurry-scurry.” “It does seem to me, my dear, that something might be done to straighten matters.
Suppose we sell off all the horses, and sell one of your farms, and pay up square?” “O, ridiculous, Emily!
You are the finest woman in Kentucky; but still you haven’t sense to know that you don’t understand business;—women never do, and never can.
Shelby, “could not you give me some little insight into yours; a list of all your debts, at least, and of all that is owed to you, and let me try and see if I can’t help you to economize.” “O, bother! don’t plague me, Emily!—I can’t tell exactly.
I know somewhere about what things are likely to be; but there’s no trimming and squaring my affairs, as Chloe trims crust off her pies.
You don’t know anything about business, I tell you.” And Mr.
Shelby, not knowing any other way of enforcing his ideas, raised his voice,—a mode of arguing very convenient and convincing, when a gentleman is discussing matters of business with his wife.
Shelby ceased talking, with something of a sigh.
The fact was, that though her husband had stated she was a woman, she had a clear, energetic, practical mind, and a force of character every way superior to that of her husband; so that it would not have been so very absurd a supposition, to have allowed her capable of managing, as Mr.
Her heart was set on performing her promise to Tom and Aunt Chloe, and she sighed as discouragements thickened around her.
“Don’t you think we might in some way contrive to raise that money?
I think I was premature in promising.
Tom’ll have another wife, in a year or two; and she had better take up with somebody else.” “Mr.
Shelby, I have taught my people that their marriages are as sacred as ours.
I never could think of giving Chloe such advice.” “It’s a pity, wife, that you have burdened them with a morality above their condition and prospects.
I always thought so.” “It’s only the morality of the Bible, Mr.
Shelby.” “Well, well, Emily, I don’t pretend to interfere with your religious notions; only they seem extremely unfitted for people in that condition.” “They are, indeed,” said Mrs.
I tell you, my dear, _I_ cannot absolve myself from the promises I make to these helpless creatures.
If I can get the money no other way I will take music-scholars;—I could get enough, I know, and earn the money myself.” “You wouldn’t degrade yourself that way, Emily?
I never could consent to it.” “Degrade! would it degrade me as much as to break my faith with the helpless?
No, indeed!” “Well, you are always heroic and transcendental,” said Mr.
Shelby, “but I think you had better think before you undertake such a piece of Quixotism.” Here the conversation was interrupted by the appearance of Aunt Chloe, at the end of the verandah.
“Well, Chloe, what is it?” said her mistress, rising, and going to the end of the balcony.
“If Missis would come and look at dis yer lot o’ poetry.” Chloe had a particular fancy for calling poultry poetry,—an application of language in which she always persisted, notwithstanding frequent corrections and advisings from the young members of the family.
“La sakes!” she would say, “I can’t see; one jis good as turry,—poetry suthin good, any how;” and so poetry Chloe continued to call it.
Shelby smiled as she saw a prostrate lot of chickens and ducks, over which Chloe stood, with a very grave face of consideration.
“I’m a thinkin whether Missis would be a havin a chicken pie o’ dese yer.” “Really, Aunt Chloe, I don’t much care;—serve them any way you like.” Chloe stood handling them over abstractedly; it was quite evident that the chickens were not what she was thinking of.
At last, with the short laugh with which her tribe often introduce a doubtful proposal, she said, “Laws me, Missis! what should Mas’r and Missis be a troublin theirselves ’bout de money, and not a usin what’s right in der hands?” and Chloe laughed again.
“I don’t understand you, Chloe,” said Mrs.
Shelby, nothing doubting, from her knowledge of Chloe’s manner, that she had heard every word of the conversation that had passed between her and her husband.
“Why, laws me, Missis!” said Chloe, laughing again, “other folks hires out der niggers and makes money on ’em!
I an’t a proposin nothin; only Sam he said der was one of dese yer _perfectioners_, dey calls ’em, in Louisville, said he wanted a good hand at cake and pastry; and said he’d give four dollars a week to one, he did.” “Well, Chloe.” “Well, laws, I ’s a thinkin, Missis, it’s time Sally was put along to be doin’ something.
Sally ’s been under my care, now, dis some time, and she does most as well as me, considerin; and if Missis would only let me go, I would help fetch up de money.
I an’t afraid to put my cake, nor pies nother, ’long side no _perfectioner’s_.
Chloe’s countenance fell.
Yes, you may go; and your wages shall every cent of them be laid aside for your husband’s redemption.” As when a bright sunbeam turns a dark cloud to silver, so Chloe’s dark face brightened immediately,—it really shone.
I was thinking of dat ar very thing; cause I shouldn’t need no clothes, nor shoes, nor nothin,—I could save every cent.
“Why-e!” said Chloe, with an accent of surprise and delight; “and how long would it take me to work it out, Missis?” “Some four or five years, Chloe; but, then, you needn’t do it all,—I shall add something to it.” “I wouldn’t hear to Missis’ givin lessons nor nothin.
“But when do you expect to go?” “Well, I want spectin nothin; only Sam, he’s a gwine to de river with some colts, and he said I could go ’long with him; so I jes put my things together.
If Missis was willin, I’d go with Sam tomorrow morning, if Missis would write my pass, and write me a commendation.” “Well, Chloe, I’ll attend to it, if Mr.
Shelby has no objections.
Shelby went up stairs, and Aunt Chloe, delighted, went out to her cabin, to make her preparation.
“Law sakes, Mas’r George! ye didn’t know I ’s a gwine to Louisville tomorrow!” she said to George, as entering her cabin, he found her busy in sorting over her baby’s clothes.
“I thought I’d jis look over sis’s things, and get ’em straightened up.
But I’m gwine, Mas’r George,—gwine to have four dollars a week; and Missis is gwine to lay it all up, to buy back my old man agin!” “Whew!” said George, “here’s a stroke of business, to be sure!
How are you going?” “Tomorrow, wid Sam.
Tom read, in his only literary cabinet, of one who had “learned in whatsoever state he was, therewith to be content.” It seemed to him good and reasonable doctrine, and accorded well with the settled and thoughtful habit which he had acquired from the reading of that same book.
Tom’s cabin was shut up for the present; but George expatiated brilliantly on ornaments and additions to be made to it when Tom came back.
The rest of this letter gave a list of George’s school studies, each one headed by a flourishing capital; and also told the names of four new colts that appeared on the premises since Tom left; and stated, in the same connection, that father and mother were well.
The style of the letter was decidedly concise and terse; but Tom thought it the most wonderful specimen of composition that had appeared in modern times.
He was never tired of looking at it, and even held a council with Eva on the expediency of getting it framed, to hang up in his room.
Nothing but the difficulty of arranging it so that both sides of the page would show at once stood in the way of this undertaking.
The friendship between Tom and Eva had grown with the child’s growth.
It would be hard to say what place she held in the soft, impressible heart of her faithful attendant.
He loved her as something frail and earthly, yet almost worshipped her as something heavenly and divine.
He gazed on her as the Italian sailor gazes on his image of the child Jesus,—with a mixture of reverence and tenderness; and to humor her graceful fancies, and meet those thousand simple wants which invest childhood like a many-colored rainbow, was Tom’s chief delight.
Though a child, she was a beautiful reader;—a fine musical ear, a quick poetic fancy, and an instinctive sympathy with what’s grand and noble, made her such a reader of the Bible as Tom had never before heard.
At first, she read to please her humble friend; but soon her own earnest nature threw out its tendrils, and wound itself around the majestic book; and Eva loved it, because it woke in her strange yearnings, and strong, dim emotions, such as impassioned, imaginative children love to feel.
The parts that pleased her most were the Revelations and the Prophecies,—parts whose dim and wondrous imagery, and fervent language, impressed her the more, that she questioned vainly of their meaning;—and she and her simple friend, the old child and the young one, felt just alike about it.
All that they knew was, that they spoke of a glory to be revealed,—a wondrous something yet to come, wherein their soul rejoiced, yet knew not why; and though it be not so in the physical, yet in moral science that which cannot be understood is not always profitless.
For the soul awakes, a trembling stranger, between two dim eternities,—the eternal past, the eternal future.
The light shines only on a small space around her; therefore, she needs must yearn towards the unknown; and the voices and shadowy movings which come to her from out the cloudy pillar of inspiration have each one echoes and answers in her own expecting nature.
Clare establishment is, for the time being, removed to their villa on Lake Pontchartrain.
The heats of summer had driven all who were able to leave the sultry and unhealthy city, to seek the shores of the lake, and its cool sea-breezes.
Clare’s villa was an East Indian cottage, surrounded by light verandahs of bamboo-work, and opening on all sides into gardens and pleasure-grounds.
The common sitting-room opened on to a large garden, fragrant with every picturesque plant and flower of the tropics, where winding paths ran down to the very shores of the lake, whose silvery sheet of water lay there, rising and falling in the sunbeams,—a picture never for an hour the same, yet every hour more beautiful.
It is now one of those intensely golden sunsets which kindles the whole horizon into one blaze of glory, and makes the water another sky.
The lake lay in rosy or golden streaks, save where white-winged vessels glided hither and thither, like so many spirits, and little golden stars twinkled through the glow, and looked down at themselves as they trembled in the water.
She read,—“And I saw a sea of glass, mingled with fire.” “Tom,” said Eva, suddenly stopping, and pointing to the lake, “there ’t is.” “What, Miss Eva?” “Don’t you see,—there?” said the child, pointing to the glassy water, which, as it rose and fell, reflected the golden glow of the sky.
“There’s a ‘sea of glass, mingled with fire.’” “True enough, Miss Eva,” said Tom; and Tom sang— “O, had I the wings of the morning, I’d fly away to Canaan’s shore; Bright angels should convey me home, To the new Jerusalem.” “Where do you suppose new Jerusalem is, Uncle Tom?” said Eva.
Tom, sing about ‘spirits bright.’” Tom sung the words of a well-known Methodist hymn, “I see a band of spirits bright, That taste the glories there; They all are robed in spotless white, And conquering palms they bear.” “Uncle Tom, I’ve seen _them_,” said Eva.
Tom had no doubt of it at all; it did not surprise him in the least.
If Eva had told him she had been to heaven, he would have thought it entirely probable.
He had heard Miss Ophelia speak often of a cough, that all her medicaments could not cure; and even now that fervent cheek and little hand were burning with hectic fever; and yet the thought that Eva’s words suggested had never come to him till now.
Yes, there have been; but their names are always on grave-stones, and their sweet smiles, their heavenly eyes, their singular words and ways, are among the buried treasures of yearning hearts.
In how many families do you hear the legend that all the goodness and graces of the living are nothing to the peculiar charms of one who _is not_.
It is as if heaven had an especial band of angels, whose office it was to sojourn for a season here, and endear to them the wayward human heart, that they might bear it upward with them in their homeward flight.
When you see that deep, spiritual light in the eye,—when the little soul reveals itself in words sweeter and wiser than the ordinary words of children,—hope not to retain that child; for the seal of heaven is on it, and the light of immortality looks out from its eyes.
Even so, beloved Eva! fair star of thy dwelling!
The colloquy between Tom and Eva was interrupted by a hasty call from Miss Ophelia.
“Eva—Eva!—why, child, the dew is falling; you mustn’t be out there!” Eva and Tom hastened in.
She was from New England, and knew well the first guileful footsteps of that soft, insidious disease, which sweeps away so many of the fairest and loveliest, and, before one fibre of life seems broken, seals them irrevocably for death.
She had noted the slight, dry cough, the daily brightening cheek; nor could the lustre of the eye, and the airy buoyancy born of fever, deceive her.
She tried to communicate her fears to St.
Clare; but he threw back her suggestions with a restless petulance, unlike his usual careless good-humor.
“Don’t be croaking, Cousin,—I hate it!” he would say; “don’t you see that the child is only growing.
Children always lose strength when they grow fast.” “But she has that cough!” “O! nonsense of that cough!—it is not anything.
She has taken a little cold, perhaps.” “Well, that was just the way Eliza Jane was taken, and Ellen and Maria Sanders.” “O! stop these hobgoblin’ nurse legends.
You old hands got so wise, that a child cannot cough, or sneeze, but you see desperation and ruin at hand.
Clare said; but he grew nervous and restless.
He watched Eva feverishly day by day, as might be told by the frequency with which he repeated over that “the child was quite well”—that there wasn’t anything in that cough,—it was only some little stomach affection, such as children often had.
But he kept by her more than before, took her oftener to ride with him, brought home every few days some receipt or strengthening mixture,—“not,” he said, “that the child _needed_ it, but then it would not do her any harm.” If it must be told, the thing that struck a deeper pang to his heart than anything else was the daily increasing maturity of the child’s mind and feelings.
While still retaining all a child’s fanciful graces, yet she often dropped, unconsciously, words of such a reach of thought, and strange unworldly wisdom, that they seemed to be an inspiration.
Clare would feel a sudden thrill, and clasp her in his arms, as if that fond clasp could save her; and his heart rose up with wild determination to keep her, never to let her go.
The child’s whole heart and soul seemed absorbed in works of love and kindness.
Impulsively generous she had always been; but there was a touching and womanly thoughtfulness about her now, that every one noticed.
She still loved to play with Topsy, and the various colored children; but she now seemed rather a spectator than an actor of their plays, and she would sit for half an hour at a time, laughing at the odd tricks of Topsy,—and then a shadow would seem to pass across her face, her eyes grew misty, and her thoughts were afar.
“Mamma,” she said, suddenly, to her mother, one day, “why don’t we teach our servants to read?” “What a question child!
It don’t help them to work any better, and they are not made for anything else.” “But they ought to read the Bible, mamma, to learn God’s will.” “O! they can get that read to them all _they_ need.” “It seems to me, mamma, the Bible is for every one to read themselves.
“Miss Ophelia has taught Topsy to read,” continued Eva.
Topsy is the worst creature I ever saw!” “Here’s poor Mammy!” said Eva.
And what will she do when I can’t read to her?” Marie was busy, turning over the contents of a drawer, as she answered, “Well, of course, by and by, Eva, you will have other things to think of besides reading the Bible round to servants.
But when you come to be dressing and going into company, you won’t have time.
I can tell you, Eva, I made a sensation.” Eva took the jewel-case, and lifted from it a diamond necklace.
Her large, thoughtful eyes rested on them, but it was plain her thoughts were elsewhere.
They are worth a small fortune.” “I wish I had them,” said Eva, “to do what I pleased with!” “What would you do with them?” “I’d sell them, and buy a place in the free states, and take all our people there, and hire teachers, to teach them to read and write.” Eva was cut short by her mother’s laughing.
“Set up a boarding-school!
Wouldn’t you teach them to play on the piano, and paint on velvet?” “I’d teach them to read their own Bible, and write their own letters, and read letters that are written to them,” said Eva, steadily.
You don’t know anything about these things,” said Marie; “besides, your talking makes my head ache.” Marie always had a headache on hand for any conversation that did not exactly suit her.
Eva stole away; but after that, she assiduously gave Mammy reading lessons.
CHAPTER XXIII Henrique About this time, St.
No sight could be more singular and beautiful than that of these twin brothers.
Nature, instead of instituting resemblances between them, had made them opposites on every point; yet a mysterious tie seemed to unite them in a closer friendship than ordinary.
Augustine, with his blue eyes and golden hair, his ethereally flexible form and vivacious features; and Alfred, dark-eyed, with haughty Roman profile, firmly-knit limbs, and decided bearing.
They were always abusing each other’s opinions and practices, and yet never a whit the less absorbed in each other’s society; in fact, the very contrariety seemed to unite them, like the attraction between opposite poles of the magnet.
Henrique, the eldest son of Alfred, was a noble, dark-eyed, princely boy, full of vivacity and spirit; and, from the first moment of introduction, seemed to be perfectly fascinated by the spirituelle graces of his cousin Evangeline.
Eva had a little pet pony, of a snowy whiteness.
It was easy as a cradle, and as gentle as its little mistress; and this pony was now brought up to the back verandah by Tom, while a little mulatto boy of about thirteen led along a small black Arabian, which had just been imported, at a great expense, for Henrique.
Henrique had a boy’s pride in his new possession; and, as he advanced and took the reins out of the hands of his little groom, he looked carefully over him, and his brow darkened.
“What’s this, Dodo, you little lazy dog! you haven’t rubbed my horse down, this morning.” “Yes, Mas’r,” said Dodo, submissively; “he got that dust on his own self.” “You rascal, shut your mouth!” said Henrique, violently raising his riding-whip.
“How dare you speak?” The boy was a handsome, bright-eyed mulatto, of just Henrique’s size, and his curling hair hung round a high, bold forehead.
“Mas’r Henrique!—” he began.
Henrique struck him across the face with his riding-whip, and, seizing one of his arms, forced him on to his knees, and beat him till he was out of breath.
“There, you impudent dog!
Take the horse back, and clean him properly.
“Cruel,—wicked!” said the boy, with unaffected surprise.
The only way is to put him down at once,—not let him open his mouth; that’s the way papa manages.” “But Uncle Tom said it was an accident, and he never tells what isn’t true.” “He’s an uncommon old nigger, then!” said Henrique.
“Dodo will lie as fast as he can speak.” “You frighten him into deceiving, if you treat him so.” “Why, Eva, you’ve really taken such a fancy to Dodo, that I shall be jealous.” “But you beat him,—and he didn’t deserve it.” “O, well, it may go for some time when he does, and don’t get it.
A few cuts never come amiss with Dodo,—he’s a regular spirit, I can tell you; but I won’t beat him again before you, if it troubles you.” Eva was not satisfied, but found it in vain to try to make her handsome cousin understand her feelings.
Dodo soon appeared, with the horses.
“Well, Dodo, you’ve done pretty well, this time,” said his young master, with a more gracious air.
His face was troubled; his eyes looked as if he had been crying.
Henrique, who valued himself on his gentlemanly adroitness in all matters of gallantry, soon had his fair cousin in the saddle, and, gathering the reins, placed them in her hands.
But Eva bent to the other side of the horse, where Dodo was standing, and said, as he relinquished the reins,—“That’s a good boy, Dodo;—thank you!” Dodo looked up in amazement into the sweet young face; the blood rushed to his cheeks, and the tears to his eyes.
“Here, Dodo,” said his master, imperiously.
“There’s a picayune for you to buy candy with, Dodo,” said Henrique; “go get some.” And Henrique cantered down the walk after Eva.
Dodo stood looking after the two children.
His master had bought him at a slave warehouse, for his handsome face, to be a match to the handsome pony; and he was now getting his breaking in, at the hands of his young master.
The scene of the beating had been witnessed by the two brothers St.
Augustine’s cheek flushed; but he only observed, with his usual sarcastic carelessness.
“I suppose that’s what we may call republican education, Alfred?” “Henrique is a devil of a fellow, when his blood’s up,” said Alfred, carelessly.
“I suppose you consider this an instructive practice for him,” said Augustine, drily.
Henrique is a regular little tempest;—his mother and I have given him up, long ago.
But, then, that Dodo is a perfect sprite,—no amount of whipping can hurt him.” “And this by way of teaching Henrique the first verse of a republican’s catechism, ‘All men are born free and equal!’” “Poh!” said Alfred; “one of Tom Jefferson’s pieces of French sentiment and humbug.
It’s perfectly ridiculous to have that going the rounds among us, to this day.” “I think it is,” said St.
Clare, significantly.
“Because,” said Alfred, “we can see plainly enough that all men are _not_ born free, nor born equal; they are born anything else.
For my part, I think half this republican talk sheer humbug.
It is the educated, the intelligent, the wealthy, the refined, who ought to have equal rights and not the canaille.” “If you can keep the canaille of that opinion,” said Augustine.
“They took _their_ turn once, in France.” “Of course, they must be _kept down_, consistently, steadily, as I _should_,” said Alfred, setting his foot hard down as if he were standing on somebody.
“It makes a terrible slip when they get up,” said Augustine,—“in St.
Domingo, for instance.” “Poh!” said Alfred, “we’ll take care of that, in this country.
We must set our face against all this educating, elevating talk, that is getting about now; the lower class must not be educated.” “That is past praying for,” said Augustine; “educated they will be, and we have only to say how.
Our system is educating them in barbarism and brutality.
We are breaking all humanizing ties, and making them brute beasts; and, if they get the upper hand, such we shall find them.” “They shall never get the upper hand!” said Alfred.
I’m not afraid to sit on the escape-valve, as long as the boilers are strong, and the machinery works well.” “The nobles in Louis XVI.‘s time thought just so; and Austria and Pius IX. think so now; and, some pleasant morning, you may all be caught up to meet each other in the air, _when the boilers burst_.” “_Dies declarabit_,” said Alfred, laughing.
“I tell you,” said Augustine, “if there is anything that is revealed with the strength of a divine law in our times, it is that the masses are to rise, and the under class become the upper one.” “That’s one of your red republican humbugs, Augustine!
Well, I hope I shall be dead before this millennium of your greasy masses comes on.” “Greasy or not greasy, they will govern _you_, when their time comes,” said Augustine; “and they will be just such rulers as you make them.
The French noblesse chose to have the people ’_sans culottes_,’ and they had ’_sans culotte_’ governors to their hearts’ content.
The people of Hayti—” “O, come, Augustine! as if we hadn’t had enough of that abominable, contemptible Hayti![1] The Haytiens were not Anglo Saxons; if they had been there would have been another story.
The Anglo Saxon is the dominant race of the world, and _is to be so_.” [1] In August 1791, as a consequence of the French Revolution, the black slaves and mulattoes on Haiti rose in revolt against the whites, and in the period of turmoil that followed enormous cruelties were practised by both sides.
The “Emperor” Dessalines, come to power in 1804, massacred all the whites on the island.
Haitian bloodshed became an argument to show the barbarous nature of the Negro, a doctrine Wendell Phillips sought to combat in his celebrated lecture on Toussaint L’Ouverture.
“Well, there is a pretty fair infusion of Anglo Saxon blood among our slaves, now,” said Augustine.
“There are plenty among them who have only enough of the African to give a sort of tropical warmth and fervor to our calculating firmness and foresight.
Sons of white fathers, with all our haughty feelings burning in their veins, will not always be bought and sold and traded.
They will rise, and raise with them their mother’s race.” “Stuff!—nonsense!” “Well,” said Augustine, “there goes an old saying to this effect, ‘As it was in the days of Noah so shall it be;—they ate, they drank, they planted, they builded, and knew not till the flood came and took them.’” “On the whole, Augustine, I think your talents might do for a circuit rider,” said Alfred, laughing.
“Never you fear for us; possession is our nine points.
This subject race,” said he, stamping firmly, “is down and shall _stay_ down!
We have energy enough to manage our own powder.” “Sons trained like your Henrique will be grand guardians of your powder-magazines,” said Augustine,—“so cool and self-possessed!
The proverb says, ‘They that cannot govern themselves cannot govern others.’” “There is a trouble there” said Alfred, thoughtfully; “there’s no doubt that our system is a difficult one to train children under.
It gives too free scope to the passions, altogether, which, in our climate, are hot enough.
I find trouble with Henrique.
The boy is generous and warm-hearted, but a perfect fire-cracker when excited.
It makes boys manly and courageous; and the very vices of an abject race tend to strengthen in them the opposite virtues.
I think Henrique, now, has a keener sense of the beauty of truth, from seeing lying and deception the universal badge of slavery.” “A Christian-like view of the subject, certainly!” said Augustine.
“It’s true, Christian-like or not; and is about as Christian-like as most other things in the world,” said Alfred.
“Well, there’s no use in talking, Augustine.
What do you say to a game of backgammon?” The two brothers ran up the verandah steps, and were soon seated at a light bamboo stand, with the backgammon-board between them.
As they were setting their men, Alfred said, “I tell you, Augustine, if I thought as you do, I should do something.” “I dare say you would,—you are one of the doing sort,—but what?” “Why, elevate your own servants, for a specimen,” said Alfred, with a half-scornful smile.
“You might as well set Mount Ætna on them flat, and tell them to stand up under it, as tell me to elevate my servants under all the superincumbent mass of society upon them.
One man can do nothing, against the whole action of a community.
Education, to do anything, must be a state education; or there must be enough agreed in it to make a current.” “You take the first throw,” said Alfred; and the brothers were soon lost in the game, and heard no more till the scraping of horses’ feet was heard under the verandah.
“There come the children,” said Augustine, rising.
Did you ever see anything so beautiful?” And, in truth, it _was_ a beautiful sight.
Henrique, with his bold brow, and dark, glossy curls, and glowing cheek, was laughing gayly as he bent towards his fair cousin, as they came on.
Exercise had given a brilliant hue to her cheeks, and heightened the effect of her singularly transparent skin, and golden hair.
“Good heavens! what perfectly dazzling beauty!” said Alfred.
Clare, in a tone of sudden bitterness, as he hurried down to take her off her horse.
“No, papa,” said the child; but her short, hard breathing alarmed her father.
“Henrique, you must be careful of Eva,” said he; “you mustn’t ride fast with her.” “I’ll take her under my care,” said Henrique, seating himself by the sofa, and taking Eva’s hand.
Her father and uncle resumed their game, and the children were left together.
I give him a picayune, now and then; and you see he dresses well.
I think, on the whole, Dodo ’s pretty well off.” “Would you think you were well off, if there were not one creature in the world near you to love you?” “I?—Well, of course not.” “And you have taken Dodo away from all the friends he ever had, and now he has not a creature to love him;—nobody can be good that way.” “Well, I can’t help it, as I know of.
I may _like_ him well enough; but you don’t _love_ your servants.” “I do, indeed.” “How odd!” “Don’t the Bible say we must love everybody?” “O, the Bible!
To be sure, it says a great many such things; but, then, nobody ever thinks of doing them,—you know, Eva, nobody does.” Eva did not speak; her eyes were fixed and thoughtful for a few moments.
“At any rate,” she said, “dear Cousin, do love poor Dodo, and be kind to him, for my sake!” “I could love anything, for your sake, dear Cousin; for I really think you are the loveliest creature that I ever saw!” And Henrique spoke with an earnestness that flushed his handsome face.
Eva received it with perfect simplicity, without even a change of feature; merely saying, “I’m glad you feel so, dear Henrique!
I hope you will remember.” The dinner-bell put an end to the interview.
CHAPTER XXIV Foreshadowings Two days after this, Alfred St.
Clare and Augustine parted; and Eva, who had been stimulated, by the society of her young cousin, to exertions beyond her strength, began to fail rapidly.
Clare was at last willing to call in medical advice,—a thing from which he had always shrunk, because it was the admission of an unwelcome truth.
But, for a day or two, Eva was so unwell as to be confined to the house; and the doctor was called.
Clare had taken no notice of the child’s gradually decaying health and strength, because she was completely absorbed in studying out two or three new forms of disease to which she believed she herself was a victim.
It was the first principle of Marie’s belief that nobody ever was or could be so great a sufferer as _herself_; and, therefore, she always repelled quite indignantly any suggestion that any one around her could be sick.
She was always sure, in such a case, that it was nothing but laziness, or want of energy; and that, if they had had the suffering _she_ had, they would soon know the difference.
Miss Ophelia had several times tried to awaken her maternal fears about Eva; but to no avail.
“I don’t see as anything ails the child,” she would say; “she runs about, and plays.” “But she has a cough.” “Cough! you don’t need to tell _me_ about a cough.
When I was of Eva’s age, they thought I was in a consumption.
Eva’s cough is not anything.” “But she gets weak, and is short-breathed.” “Law!
I’ve had that, years and years; it’s only a nervous affection.” “But she sweats so, nights!” “Well, I have, these ten years.
Very often, night after night, my clothes will be wringing wet.
Eva doesn’t sweat anything like that!” Miss Ophelia shut her mouth for a season.
But, now that Eva was fairly and visibly prostrated, and a doctor called, Marie, all on a sudden, took a new turn.
“She knew it,” she said; “she always felt it, that she was destined to be the most miserable of mothers.
Here she was, with her wretched health, and her only darling child going down to the grave before her eyes;”—and Marie routed up Mammy nights, and rumpussed and scolded, with more energy than ever, all day, on the strength of this new misery.
“You ought not to give up the case so, at once.” “You have not a mother’s feelings, St.
You never could understand me!—you don’t now.” “But don’t talk so, as if it were a gone case!” “I can’t take it as indifferently as you can, St.
If _you_ don’t feel when your only child is in this alarming state, I do.
Clare, “that Eva is very delicate, _that_ I always knew; and that she has grown so rapidly as to exhaust her strength; and that her situation is critical.
But just now she is only prostrated by the heat of the weather, and by the excitement of her cousin’s visit, and the exertions she made.
The physician says there is room for hope.” “Well, of course, if you can look on the bright side, pray do; it’s a mercy if people haven’t sensitive feelings, in this world.
I am sure I wish I didn’t feel as I do; it only makes me completely wretched!
I wish I _could_ be as easy as the rest of you!” And the “rest of them” had good reason to breathe the same prayer, for Marie paraded her new misery as the reason and apology for all sorts of inflictions on every one about her.
Every word that was spoken by anybody, everything that was done or was not done everywhere, was only a new proof that she was surrounded by hard-hearted, insensible beings, who were unmindful of her peculiar sorrows.
Poor Eva heard some of these speeches; and nearly cried her little eyes out, in pity for her mamma, and in sorrow that she should make her so much distress.
In a week or two, there was a great improvement of symptoms,—one of those deceitful lulls, by which her inexorable disease so often beguiles the anxious heart, even on the verge of the grave.
Eva’s step was again in the garden,—in the balconies; she played and laughed again,—and her father, in a transport, declared that they should soon have her as hearty as anybody.
Miss Ophelia and the physician alone felt no encouragement from this illusive truce.
There was one other heart, too, that felt the same certainty, and that was the little heart of Eva.
What is it that sometimes speaks in the soul so calmly, so clearly, that its earthly time is short?
Is it the secret instinct of decaying nature, or the soul’s impulsive throb, as immortality draws on?
Be it what it may, it rested in the heart of Eva, a calm, sweet, prophetic certainty that Heaven was near; calm as the light of sunset, sweet as the bright stillness of autumn, there her little heart reposed, only troubled by sorrow for those who loved her so dearly.
For the child, though nursed so tenderly, and though life was unfolding before her with every brightness that love and wealth could give, had no regret for herself in dying.
In that book which she and her simple old friend had read so much together, she had seen and taken to her young heart the image of one who loved the little child; and, as she gazed and mused, He had ceased to be an image and a picture of the distant past, and come to be a living, all-surrounding reality.
His love enfolded her childish heart with more than mortal tenderness; and it was to Him, she said, she was going, and to his home.
But her heart yearned with sad tenderness for all that she was to leave behind.
Her father most,—for Eva, though she never distinctly thought so, had an instinctive perception that she was more in his heart than any other.
She loved her mother because she was so loving a creature, and all the selfishness that she had seen in her only saddened and perplexed her; for she had a child’s implicit trust that her mother could not do wrong.
There was something about her that Eva never could make out; and she always smoothed it over with thinking that, after all, it was mamma, and she loved her very dearly indeed.
She felt, too, for those fond, faithful servants, to whom she was as daylight and sunshine.
Children do not usually generalize; but Eva was an uncommonly mature child, and the things that she had witnessed of the evils of the system under which they were living had fallen, one by one, into the depths of her thoughtful, pondering heart.
She had vague longings to do something for them,—to bless and save not only them, but all in their condition,—longings that contrasted sadly with the feebleness of her little frame.
“She’s got the Lord’s mark in her forehead.” “Ah, yes, yes,” said Mammy, raising her hands; “I’ve allers said so.
She wasn’t never like a child that’s to live—there was allers something deep in her eyes.
I’ve told Missis so, many the time; it’s a comin’ true,—we all sees it,—dear, little, blessed lamb!” Eva came tripping up the verandah steps to her father.
It was late in the afternoon, and the rays of the sun formed a kind of glory behind her, as she came forward in her white dress, with her golden hair and glowing cheeks, her eyes unnaturally bright with the slow fever that burned in her veins.
Clare had called her to show a statuette that he had been buying for her; but her appearance, as she came on, impressed him suddenly and painfully.
Her father folded her suddenly in his arms, and almost forgot what he was going to tell her.
“Eva, dear, you are better now-a-days,—are you not?” “Papa,” said Eva, with sudden firmness “I’ve had things I wanted to say to you, a great while.
Clare trembled as Eva seated herself in his lap.
Clare, trembling as he spoke, but speaking cheerfully, “you’ve got nervous and low-spirited; you mustn’t indulge such gloomy thoughts.
See here, I’ve bought a statuette for you!” “No, papa,” said Eva, putting it gently away, “don’t deceive yourself!—I am _not_ any better, I know it perfectly well,—and I am going, before long.
I am not nervous,—I am not low-spirited.
If it were not for you, papa, and my friends, I should be perfectly happy.
You have had everything, to make you happy, that could be given you.” “I had rather be in heaven; though, only for my friends’ sake, I would be willing to live.
There are a great many things here that make me sad, that seem dreadful to me; I had rather be there; but I don’t want to leave you,—it almost breaks my heart!” “What makes you sad, and seems dreadful, Eva?” “O, things that are done, and done all the time.
I wish, papa, they were all _free_.” “Why, Eva, child, don’t you think they are well enough off now?” “O, but, papa, if anything should happen to you, what would become of them?
What horrid things people do, and can do!” and Eva shuddered.
“My dear child, you are too sensitive.
I’m sorry I ever let you hear such stories.” “O, that’s what troubles me, papa.
You want me to live so happy, and never to have any pain,—never suffer anything,—not even hear a sad story, when other poor creatures have nothing but pain and sorrow, all their lives;—it seems selfish.
Papa, isn’t there any way to have all slaves made free?” “That’s a difficult question, dearest.
There’s no doubt that this way is a very bad one; a great many people think so; I do myself; I heartily wish that there were not a slave in the land; but, then, I don’t know what is to be done about it!” “Papa, you are such a good man, and so noble, and kind, and you always have a way of saying things that is so pleasant, couldn’t you go all round and try to persuade people to do right about this?
Clare, passionately.
Papa, these poor creatures love their children as much as you do me.
O! do something for them!
There’s poor Mammy loves her children; I’ve seen her cry when she talked about them.
And Tom loves his children; and it’s dreadful, papa, that such things are happening, all the time!” “There, there, darling,” said St.
“To our Saviour’s home; it’s so sweet and peaceful there—it is all so loving there!” The child spoke unconsciously, as of a place where she had often been.
“You will come to me,” said the child, speaking in a voice of calm certainty which she often used unconsciously.
Clare sat silently holding the little frail form to his bosom.
He saw no more the deep eyes, but the voice came over him as a spirit voice, and, as in a sort of judgment vision, his whole past life rose in a moment before his eyes: his mother’s prayers and hymns; his own early yearnings and aspirings for good; and, between them and this hour, years of worldliness and scepticism, and what man calls respectable living.
Clare saw and felt many things, but spoke nothing; and, as it grew darker, he took his child to her bed-room; and, when she was prepared for rest; he sent away the attendants, and rocked her in his arms, and sung to her till she was asleep.
CHAPTER XXV The Little Evangelist It was Sunday afternoon.
Clare was stretched on a bamboo lounge in the verandah, solacing himself with a cigar.
Marie lay reclined on a sofa, opposite the window opening on the verandah, closely secluded, under an awning of transparent gauze, from the outrages of the mosquitos, and languidly holding in her hand an elegantly bound prayer-book.
She was holding it because it was Sunday, and she imagined she had been reading it,—though, in fact, she had been only taking a succession of short naps, with it open in her hand.
Miss Ophelia, who, after some rummaging, had hunted up a small Methodist meeting within riding distance, had gone out, with Tom as driver, to attend it; and Eva had accompanied them.
“I say, Augustine,” said Marie after dozing a while, “I must send to the city after my old Doctor Posey; I’m sure I’ve got the complaint of the heart.” “Well; why need you send for him?
This doctor that attends Eva seems skilful.” “I would not trust him in a critical case,” said Marie; “and I think I may say mine is becoming so!
I’ve been thinking of it, these two or three nights past; I have such distressing pains, and such strange feelings.” “O, Marie, you are blue; I don’t believe it’s heart complaint.” “I dare say _you_ don’t,” said Marie; “I was prepared to expect _that_.
You can be alarmed enough, if Eva coughs, or has the least thing the matter with her; but you never think of me.” “If it’s particularly agreeable to you to have heart disease, why, I’ll try and maintain you have it,” said St.
Clare; “I didn’t know it was.” “Well, I only hope you won’t be sorry for this, when it’s too late!” said Marie; “but, believe it or not, my distress about Eva, and the exertions I have made with that dear child, have developed what I have long suspected.” What the _exertions_ were which Marie referred to, it would have been difficult to state.
Clare quietly made this commentary to himself, and went on smoking, like a hard-hearted wretch of a man as he was, till a carriage drove up before the verandah, and Eva and Miss Ophelia alighted.
Miss Ophelia marched straight to her own chamber, to put away her bonnet and shawl, as was always her manner, before she spoke a word on any subject; while Eva came, at St.
Clare’s call, and was sitting on his knee, giving him an account of the services they had heard.
They soon heard loud exclamations from Miss Ophelia’s room, which, like the one in which they were sitting, opened on to the verandah and violent reproof addressed to somebody.
“What new witchcraft has Tops been brewing?” asked St.
“That commotion is of her raising, I’ll be bound!” And, in a moment after, Miss Ophelia, in high indignation, came dragging the culprit along.
“I _will_ tell your master!” “What’s the case now?” asked Augustine.
Here, I locked her up, and gave her a hymn to study; and what does she do, but spy out where I put my key, and has gone to my bureau, and got a bonnet-trimming, and cut it all to pieces to make dolls’ jackets!
I never saw anything like it, in my life!” “I told you, Cousin,” said Marie, “that you’d find out that these creatures can’t be brought up without severity.
If I had _my_ way, now,” she said, looking reproachfully at St.
Clare, “I’d send that child out, and have her thoroughly whipped; I’d have her whipped till she couldn’t stand!” “I don’t doubt it,” said St.
“I wouldn’t have the child treated so, for the world,” she said; “but, I am sure, Augustine, I don’t know what to do.
I’ve taught and taught; I’ve talked till I’m tired; I’ve whipped her; I’ve punished her in every way I can think of, and she’s just what she was at first.” “Come here, Tops, you monkey!” said St.
Topsy came up; her round, hard eyes glittering and blinking with a mixture of apprehensiveness and their usual odd drollery.
Clare, who could not help being amused with the child’s expression.
“Spects it’s my wicked heart,” said Topsy, demurely; “Miss Feely says so.” “Don’t you see how much Miss Ophelia has done for you?
She says she has done everything she can think of.” “Lor, yes, Mas’r! old Missis used to say so, too.
I ’s nothin but a nigger, no ways!” “Well, I shall have to give her up,” said Miss Ophelia; “I can’t have that trouble any longer.” “Well, I’d just like to ask one question,” said St.
“What is it?” “Why, if your Gospel is not strong enough to save one heathen child, that you can have at home here, all to yourself, what’s the use of sending one or two poor missionaries off with it among thousands of just such?
I suppose this child is about a fair sample of what thousands of your heathen are.” Miss Ophelia did not make an immediate answer; and Eva, who had stood a silent spectator of the scene thus far, made a silent sign to Topsy to follow her.
There was a little glass-room at the corner of the verandah, which St.
Clare used as a sort of reading-room; and Eva and Topsy disappeared into this place.
Clare; “I mean to see.” And, advancing on tiptoe, he lifted up a curtain that covered the glass-door, and looked in.
There sat the two children on the floor, with their side faces towards them.
Topsy, with her usual air of careless drollery and unconcern; but, opposite to her, Eva, her whole face fervent with feeling, and tears in her large eyes.
Miss Ophelia would love you, if you were good.” Topsy gave the short, blunt laugh that was her common mode of expressing incredulity.
There can’t nobody love niggers, and niggers can’t do nothin’! _I_ don’t care,” said Topsy, beginning to whistle.
“O, Topsy, poor child, _I_ love you!” said Eva, with a sudden burst of feeling, and laying her little thin, white hand on Topsy’s shoulder; “I love you, because you haven’t had any father, or mother, or friends;—because you’ve been a poor, abused child!
I wish you would try to be good, for my sake;—it’s only a little while I shall be with you.” The round, keen eyes of the black child were overcast with tears;—large, bright drops rolled heavily down, one by one, and fell on the little white hand.
Yes, in that moment, a ray of real belief, a ray of heavenly love, had penetrated the darkness of her heathen soul!
She laid her head down between her knees, and wept and sobbed,—while the beautiful child, bending over her, looked like the picture of some bright angel stooping to reclaim a sinner.
“It is true what she told me; if we want to give sight to the blind, we must be willing to do as Christ did,—call them to us, and _put our hands on them_.” “I’ve always had a prejudice against negroes,” said Miss Ophelia, “and it’s a fact, I never could bear to have that child touch me; but, I don’t think she knew it.” “Trust any child to find that out,” said St.
She might teach me a lesson.” “It wouldn’t be the first time a little child had been used to instruct an old disciple, if it _were_ so,” said St.
Eva’s bed-room was a spacious apartment, which, like all the other rooms in the house, opened on to the broad verandah.
The room communicated, on one side, with her father and mother’s apartment; on the other, with that appropriated to Miss Ophelia.
Clare had gratified his own eye and taste, in furnishing this room in a style that had a peculiar keeping with the character of her for whom it was intended.
The windows were hung with curtains of rose-colored and white muslin, the floor was spread with a matting which had been ordered in Paris, to a pattern of his own device, having round it a border of rose-buds and leaves, and a centre-piece with full-flown roses.
The bedstead, chairs, and lounges, were of bamboo, wrought in peculiarly graceful and fanciful patterns.
Over the head of the bed was an alabaster bracket, on which a beautiful sculptured angel stood, with drooping wings, holding out a crown of myrtle-leaves.
From this depended, over the bed, light curtains of rose-colored gauze, striped with silver, supplying that protection from mosquitos which is an indispensable addition to all sleeping accommodation in that climate.
The graceful bamboo lounges were amply supplied with cushions of rose-colored damask, while over them, depending from the hands of sculptured figures, were gauze curtains similar to those of the bed.
A light, fanciful bamboo table stood in the middle of the room, where a Parian vase, wrought in the shape of a white lily, with its buds, stood, ever filled with flowers.
On this table lay Eva’s books and little trinkets, with an elegantly wrought alabaster writing-stand, which her father had supplied to her when he saw her trying to improve herself in writing.
There was a fireplace in the room, and on the marble mantle above stood a beautifully wrought statuette of Jesus receiving little children, and on either side marble vases, for which it was Tom’s pride and delight to offer bouquets every morning.
Two or three exquisite paintings of children, in various attitudes, embellished the wall.
In short, the eye could turn nowhere without meeting images of childhood, of beauty, and of peace.
Those little eyes never opened, in the morning light, without falling on something which suggested to the heart soothing and beautiful thoughts.
The deceitful strength which had buoyed Eva up for a little while was fast passing away; seldom and more seldom her light footstep was heard in the verandah, and oftener and oftener she was found reclined on a little lounge by the open window, her large, deep eyes fixed on the rising and falling waters of the lake.
It was towards the middle of the afternoon, as she was so reclining,—her Bible half open, her little transparent fingers lying listlessly between the leaves,—suddenly she heard her mother’s voice, in sharp tones, in the verandah.
“What now, you baggage!—what new piece of mischief!
“Law, Missis! they ’s for Miss Eva,” she heard a voice say, which she knew belonged to Topsy.
Get along off with you!” In a moment, Eva was off from her lounge, and in the verandah.
“Topsy, do bring them here.” Topsy, who had stood sullenly, holding down her head, now came up and offered her flowers.
She did it with a look of hesitation and bashfulness, quite unlike the eldrich boldness and brightness which was usual with her.
“It’s a beautiful bouquet!” said Eva, looking at it.
It was rather a singular one,—a brilliant scarlet geranium, and one single white japonica, with its glossy leaves.
It was tied up with an evident eye to the contrast of color, and the arrangement of every leaf had carefully been studied.
Topsy looked pleased, as Eva said,—“Topsy, you arrange flowers very prettily.
I wish you’d arrange something every day for it.” “Well, that’s odd!” said Marie.
“What in the world do you want that for?” “Never mind, mamma; you’d as lief as not Topsy should do it,—had you not?” “Of course, anything you please, dear!
Topsy, you hear your young mistress;—see that you mind.” Topsy made a short courtesy, and looked down; and, as she turned away, Eva saw a tear roll down her dark cheek.
“You see, mamma, I knew poor Topsy wanted to do something for me,” said Eva to her mother.
“O, nonsense! it’s only because she likes to do mischief.
But, if you fancy to have her pluck them, so be it.” “Mamma, I think Topsy is different from what she used to be; she’s trying to be a good girl.” “She’ll have to try a good while before _she_ gets to be good,” said Marie, with a careless laugh.
“Well, you know, mamma, poor Topsy! everything has always been against her.” “Not since she’s been here, I’m sure.
I suppose God made everybody,” said Marie.
“Where is my smelling-bottle?” “It’s such a pity,—oh! _such_ a pity!” said Eva, looking out on the distant lake, and speaking half to herself.
“Why, that any one, who could be a bright angel, and live with angels, should go all down, down down, and nobody help them!—oh dear!” “Well, we can’t help it; it’s no use worrying, Eva!
I don’t know what’s to be done; we ought to be thankful for our own advantages.” “I hardly can be,” said Eva, “I’m so sorry to think of poor folks that haven’t any.” “That’s odd enough,” said Marie;—“I’m sure my religion makes me thankful for my advantages.” “Mamma,” said Eva, “I want to have some of my hair cut off,—a good deal of it.” “What for?” said Marie.
The child half rose from her pillow as she came in, and, shaking down her long golden-brown curls, said, rather playfully, “Come aunty, shear the sheep!” “What’s that?” said St.
Besides, I want to give some of it away.” Miss Ophelia came, with her scissors.
“Take care,—don’t spoil the looks of it!” said her father; “cut underneath, where it won’t show.
“Yes, and I want them kept handsome against the time I take you up to your uncle’s plantation, to see Cousin Henrique,” said St.
Clare closed his lips, and stood gloomily eying the long, beautiful curls, which, as they were separated from the child’s head, were laid, one by one, in her lap.
She raised them up, looked earnestly at them, twined them around her thin fingers, and looked from time to time, anxiously at her father.
“It’s just what I’ve been foreboding!” said Marie; “it’s just what has been preying on my health, from day to day, bringing me downward to the grave, though nobody regards it.
Clare, you will see, after a while, that I was right.” “Which will afford you great consolation, no doubt!” said St.
Marie lay back on a lounge, and covered her face with her cambric handkerchief.
Eva’s clear blue eye looked earnestly from one to the other.
It was the calm, comprehending gaze of a soul half loosed from its earthly bonds; it was evident she saw, felt, and appreciated, the difference between the two.
She beckoned with her hand to her father.
“Papa, my strength fades away every day, and I know I must go.
There are some things I want to say and do,—that I ought to do; and you are so unwilling to have me speak a word on this subject.
Clare, covering his eyes with one hand, and holding up Eva’s hand with the other.
“Then, I want to see all our people together.
Clare, in a tone of dry endurance.
Miss Ophelia despatched a messenger, and soon the whole of the servants were convened in the room.
Eva lay back on her pillows; her hair hanging loosely about her face, her crimson cheeks contrasting painfully with the intense whiteness of her complexion and the thin contour of her limbs and features, and her large, soul-like eyes fixed earnestly on every one.
The servants were struck with a sudden emotion.
The spiritual face, the long locks of hair cut off and lying by her, her father’s averted face, and Marie’s sobs, struck at once upon the feelings of a sensitive and impressible race; and, as they came in, they looked one on another, sighed, and shook their heads.
Eva raised herself, and looked long and earnestly round at every one.
All looked sad and apprehensive.
I love you all; and I have something to say to you, which I want you always to remember. . . .
In a few more weeks you will see me no more—” Here the child was interrupted by bursts of groans, sobs, and lamentations, which broke from all present, and in which her slender voice was lost entirely.
She waited a moment, and then, speaking in a tone that checked the sobs of all, she said, “If you love me, you must not interrupt me so.
Many of you, I am afraid, are very careless.
You are thinking only about this world.
I want you to remember that there is a beautiful world, where Jesus is.
But, if you want to go there, you must not live idle, careless, thoughtless lives.
You must be Christians.
You must remember that each one of you can become angels, and be angels forever. . . .
If you want to be Christians, Jesus will help you.
You must pray to him; you must read—” The child checked herself, looked piteously at them, and said, sorrowfully, “O dear! you _can’t_ read—poor souls!” and she hid her face in the pillow and sobbed, while many a smothered sob from those she was addressing, who were kneeling on the floor, aroused her.
“Never mind,” she said, raising her face and smiling brightly through her tears, “I have prayed for you; and I know Jesus will help you, even if you can’t read.
Try all to do the best you can; pray every day; ask Him to help you, and get the Bible read to you whenever you can; and I think I shall see you all in heaven.” “Amen,” was the murmured response from the lips of Tom and Mammy, and some of the elder ones, who belonged to the Methodist church.
The younger and more thoughtless ones, for the time completely overcome, were sobbing, with their heads bowed upon their knees.
Lord bless her!” was the involuntary answer of all.
They fell on their knees; they sobbed, and prayed, and kissed the hem of her garment; and the elder ones poured forth words of endearment, mingled in prayers and blessings, after the manner of their susceptible race.
As each one took their gift, Miss Ophelia, who was apprehensive for the effect of all this excitement on her little patient, signed to each one to pass out of the apartment.
“Here, Uncle Tom,” said Eva, “is a beautiful one for you.
O, I am so happy, Uncle Tom, to think I shall see you in heaven,—for I’m sure I shall; and Mammy,—dear, good, kind Mammy!” she said, fondly throwing her arms round her old nurse,—“I know you’ll be there, too.” “O, Miss Eva, don’t see how I can live without ye, no how!” said the faithful creature.
“‘Pears like it’s just taking everything off the place to oncet!” and Mammy gave way to a passion of grief.
Miss Ophelia pushed her and Tom gently from the apartment, and thought they were all gone; but, as she turned, Topsy was standing there.
“Where did you start up from?” she said, suddenly.
That worthy lady had wiped away many tears of her own, during the scene; but concern for the consequence of such an excitement to her young charge was uppermost in her mind.
Clare had been sitting, during the whole time, with his hand shading his eyes, in the same attitude.
The Almighty hath dealt _very bitterly_ with me!” and St.
Clare pronounced these words with a bitter emphasis, indeed.
“Augustine! has not God a right to do what he will with his own?” said Miss Ophelia.
“Perhaps so; but that doesn’t make it any easier to bear,” said he, with a dry, hard, tearless manner, as he turned away.
“Papa, you break my heart!” said Eva, rising and throwing herself into his arms; “you must not feel so!” and the child sobbed and wept with a violence which alarmed them all, and turned her father’s thoughts at once to another channel.
I will feel any way, do any way,—only don’t distress yourself; don’t sob so.
I will be resigned; I was wicked to speak as I did.” Eva soon lay like a wearied dove in her father’s arms; and he, bending over her, soothed her by every tender word he could think of.
Marie rose and threw herself out of the apartment into her own, when she fell into violent hysterics.
I only gave them to our poor people myself, because you know, papa, they might be forgotten when I am gone, and because I hoped it might help them remember. . . .
You are a Christian, are you not, papa?” said Eva, doubtfully.
You are so good, I don’t see how you can help it.” “What is being a Christian, Eva?” “Loving Christ most of all,” said Eva.
“Do you, Eva?” “Certainly I do.” “You never saw him,” said St.
“That makes no difference,” said Eva.
It was a feeling which he had seen before in his mother; but no chord within vibrated to it.
Eva, after this, declined rapidly; there was no more any doubt of the event; the fondest hope could not be blinded.
Her beautiful room was avowedly a sick room; and Miss Ophelia day and night performed the duties of a nurse,—and never did her friends appreciate her value more than in that capacity.
With so well-trained a hand and eye, such perfect adroitness and practice in every art which could promote neatness and comfort, and keep out of sight every disagreeable incident of sickness,—with such a perfect sense of time, such a clear, untroubled head, such exact accuracy in remembering every prescription and direction of the doctors,—she was everything to him.
They who had shrugged their shoulders at her little peculiarities and setnesses, so unlike the careless freedom of southern manners, acknowledged that now she was the exact person that was wanted.
Her father often did the same thing; but his frame was slighter, and when he was weary, Eva would say to him, “O, papa, let Tom take me.
Poor fellow! it pleases him; and you know it’s all he can do now, and he wants to do something!” “So do I, Eva!” said her father.
“Well, papa, you can do everything, and are everything to me.
He carries me so strong!” The desire to do something was not confined to Tom.
Every servant in the establishment showed the same feeling, and in their way did what they could.
Poor Mammy’s heart yearned towards her darling; but she found no opportunity, night or day, as Marie declared that the state of her mind was such, it was impossible for her to rest; and, of course, it was against her principles to let any one else rest.
“I feel it my duty to be particularly careful of myself, now,” she would say, “feeble as I am, and with the whole care and nursing of that dear child upon me.” “Indeed, my dear,” said St.
Clare, “I thought our cousin relieved you of that.” “You talk like a man, St.
Clare,—just as if a mother _could_ be relieved of the care of a child in that state; but, then, it’s all alike,—no one ever knows what I feel!
For so bright and placid was the farewell voyage of the little spirit,—by such sweet and fragrant breezes was the small bark borne towards the heavenly shores,—that it was impossible to realize that it was death that was approaching.
The child felt no pain,—only a tranquil, soft weakness, daily and almost insensibly increasing; and she was so beautiful, so loving, so trustful, so happy, that one could not resist the soothing influence of that air of innocence and peace which seemed to breathe around her.
It was not hope,—that was impossible; it was not resignation; it was only a calm resting in the present, which seemed so beautiful that he wished to think of no future.
It was like that hush of spirit which we feel amid the bright, mild woods of autumn, when the bright hectic flush is on the trees, and the last lingering flowers by the brook; and we joy in it all the more, because we know that soon it will all pass away.
The friend who knew most of Eva’s own imaginings and foreshadowings was her faithful bearer, Tom.
To him she imparted those mysterious intimations which the soul feels, as the cords begin to unbind, ere it leaves its clay forever.
Tom, at last, would not sleep in his room, but lay all night in the outer verandah, ready to rouse at every call.
“Uncle Tom, what alive have you taken to sleeping anywhere and everywhere, like a dog, for?” said Miss Ophelia.
“I thought you was one of the orderly sort, that liked to lie in bed in a Christian way.” “I do, Miss Feely,” said Tom, mysteriously.
Clare won’t hear on ’t; but Miss Feely, you know there must be somebody watchin’ for the bridegroom.” “What do you mean, Tom?” “You know it says in Scripture, ‘At midnight there was a great cry made.
Behold, the bridegroom cometh.’ That’s what I’m spectin now, every night, Miss Feely,—and I couldn’t sleep out o’ hearin, no ways.” “Why, Uncle Tom, what makes you think so?” “Miss Eva, she talks to me.
The Lord, he sends his messenger in the soul.
It’s the angels,—‘it’s the trumpet sound afore the break o’ day,’” said Tom, quoting from a favorite hymn.
This dialogue passed between Miss Ophelia and Tom, between ten and eleven, one evening, after her arrangements had all been made for the night, when, on going to bolt her outer door, she found Tom stretched along by it, in the outer verandah.
She was not nervous or impressible; but the solemn, heart-felt manner struck her.
Eva had been unusually bright and cheerful, that afternoon, and had sat raised in her bed, and looked over all her little trinkets and precious things, and designated the friends to whom she would have them given; and her manner was more animated, and her voice more natural, than they had known it for weeks.
Her father had been in, in the evening, and had said that Eva appeared more like her former self than ever she had done since her sickness; and when he kissed her for the night, he said to Miss Ophelia,—“Cousin, we may keep her with us, after all; she is certainly better;” and he had retired with a lighter heart in his bosom than he had had there for weeks.
But at midnight,—strange, mystic hour!—when the veil between the frail present and the eternal future grows thin,—then came the messenger!
It was Miss Ophelia, who had resolved to sit up all night with her little charge, and who, at the turn of the night, had discerned what experienced nurses significantly call “a change.” The outer door was quickly opened, and Tom, who was watching outside, was on the alert, in a moment.
“Go for the doctor, Tom! lose not a moment,” said Miss Ophelia; and, stepping across the room, she rapped at St.
Thou canst say, who hast seen that same expression on the face dearest to thee;—that look indescribable, hopeless, unmistakable, that says to thee that thy beloved is no longer thine.
On the face of the child, however, there was no ghastly imprint,—only a high and almost sublime expression,—the overshadowing presence of spiritual natures, the dawning of immortal life in that childish soul.
In a few moments, Tom returned, with the doctor.
Marie, roused by the entrance of the doctor, appeared, hurriedly, from the next room.
Cousin!—O!—what!” she hurriedly began.
Clare, hoarsely; _“she is dying!”_ Mammy heard the words, and flew to awaken the servants.
The house was soon roused,—lights were seen, footsteps heard, anxious faces thronged the verandah, and looked tearfully through the glass doors; but St.
“O, if she would only wake, and speak once more!” he said; and, stooping over her, he spoke in her ear,—“Eva, darling!” The large blue eyes unclosed—a smile passed over her face;—she tried to raise her head, and to speak.
“Do you know me, Eva?” “Dear papa,” said the child, with a last effort, throwing her arms about his neck.
Clare raised his head, he saw a spasm of mortal agony pass over the face,—she struggled for breath, and threw up her little hands.
“O, God, this is dreadful!” he said, turning away in agony, and wringing Tom’s hand, scarce conscious what he was doing.
“O, Tom, my boy, it is killing me!” Tom had his master’s hands between his own; and, with tears streaming down his dark cheeks, looked up for help where he had always been used to look.
Clare,—“this wrings my heart.” “O, bless the Lord! it’s over,—it’s over, dear Master!” said Tom; “look at her.” The child lay panting on her pillows, as one exhausted,—the large clear eyes rolled up and fixed.
Earth was past,—and earthly pain; but so solemn, so mysterious, was the triumphant brightness of that face, that it checked even the sobs of sorrow.
They pressed around her, in breathless stillness.
A bright, a glorious smile passed over her face, and she said, brokenly,—“O! love,—joy,—peace!” gave one sigh and passed from death unto life!
“Farewell, beloved child! the bright, eternal doors have closed after thee; we shall see thy sweet face no more.
O, woe for them who watched thy entrance into heaven, when they shall wake and find only the cold gray sky of daily life, and thou gone forever!” CHAPTER XXVII “This Is the Last of Earth”[1] [1] “This is the last of Earth!
I am content,” last words of John Quincy Adams, uttered February 21, 1848.
The statuettes and pictures in Eva’s room were shrouded in white napkins, and only hushed breathings and muffled footfalls were heard there, and the light stole in solemnly through windows partially darkened by closed blinds.
The bed was draped in white; and there, beneath the drooping angel-figure, lay a little sleeping form,—sleeping never to waken!
There she lay, robed in one of the simple white dresses she had been wont to wear when living; the rose-colored light through the curtains cast over the icy coldness of death a warm glow.
Thine is the victory without the battle,—the crown without the conflict.
Ah! who shall say what he did think? for, from the hour that voices had said, in the dying chamber, “she is gone,” it had been all a dreary mist, a heavy “dimness of anguish.” He had heard voices around him; he had had questions asked, and answered them; they had asked him when he would have the funeral, and where they should lay her; and he had answered, impatiently, that he cared not.
Adolph and Rosa had arranged the chamber; volatile, fickle and childish, as they generally were, they were soft-hearted and full of feeling; and, while Miss Ophelia presided over the general details of order and neatness, it was their hands that added those soft, poetic touches to the arrangements, that took from the death-room the grim and ghastly air which too often marks a New England funeral.
There were still flowers on the shelves,—all white, delicate and fragrant, with graceful, drooping leaves.
Eva’s little table, covered with white, bore on it her favorite vase, with a single white moss rose-bud in it.
The folds of the drapery, the fall of the curtains, had been arranged and rearranged, by Adolph and Rosa, with that nicety of eye which characterizes their race.
Clare stood there thinking, little Rosa tripped softly into the chamber with a basket of white flowers.
Clare, and stopped respectfully; but, seeing that he did not observe her, she came forward to place them around the dead.
Clare saw her as in a dream, while she placed in the small hands a fair cape jessamine, and, with admirable taste, disposed other flowers around the couch.
The door opened again, and Topsy, her eyes swelled with crying, appeared, holding something under her apron.
Rosa made a quick forbidding gesture; but she took a step into the room.
“You must go out,” said Rosa, in a sharp, positive whisper; “_you_ haven’t any business here!” “O, do let me!
“Do let me put just one there.” “Get along!” said Rosa, more decidedly.
Clare, suddenly stamping his foot.
“She shall come.” Rosa suddenly retreated, and Topsy came forward and laid her offering at the feet of the corpse; then suddenly, with a wild and bitter cry, she threw herself on the floor alongside the bed, and wept, and moaned aloud.
Miss Ophelia hastened into the room, and tried to raise and silence her; but in vain.
I wish I ’s dead, too,—I do!” There was a piercing wildness in the cry; the blood flushed into St.
“Get up, child,” said Miss Ophelia, in a softened voice; “don’t cry so.
Clare; “but do,” he said to Miss Ophelia, “see if you can’t comfort the poor creature.” “I jist wish I hadn’t never been born,” said Topsy.
I hope I’ve learnt something of the love of Christ from her.
I can love you; I do, and I’ll try to help you to grow up a good Christian girl.” Miss Ophelia’s voice was more than her words, and more than that were the honest tears that fell down her face.
From that hour, she acquired an influence over the mind of the destitute child that she never lost.
Clare stood beside it,—looked vacantly down; he saw them lower the little coffin; he heard, dimly, the solemn words, “I am the resurrection and the Life; he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live;” and, as the earth was cast in and filled up the little grave, he could not realize that it was his Eva that they were hiding from his sight.
Nor was it!—not Eva, but only the frail seed of that bright, immortal form with which she shall yet come forth, in the day of the Lord Jesus!
And then all were gone, and the mourners went back to the place which should know her no more; and Marie’s room was darkened, and she lay on the bed, sobbing and moaning in uncontrollable grief, and calling every moment for the attentions of all her servants.
Of course, they had no time to cry,—why should they? the grief was _her_ grief, and she was fully convinced that nobody on earth did, could, or would feel it as she did.
He followed him wherever he walked, wistfully and sadly; and when he saw him sitting, so pale and quiet, in Eva’s room, holding before his eyes her little open Bible, though seeing no letter or word of what was in it, there was more sorrow to Tom in that still, fixed, tearless eye, than in all Marie’s moans and lamentations.
Clare family were back again in the city; Augustine, with the restlessness of grief, longing for another scene, to change the current of his thoughts.
Clare is a singular man,” said Marie to Miss Ophelia, in a complaining tone.
“I used to think, if there was anything in the world he did love, it was our dear little Eva; but he seems to be forgetting her very easily.
I really did think he would show more feeling!” “Still waters run deepest, they used to tell me,” said Miss Ophelia, oracularly.
If people have feeling, they will show it,—they can’t help it; but, then, it’s a great misfortune to have feeling.
My feelings prey upon me so!” “Sure, Missis, Mas’r St.
“Well, at all events, he has no consideration for me,” said Marie; “he hasn’t spoken one word of sympathy, and he must know how much more a mother feels than any man can.” “The heart knoweth its own bitterness,” said Miss Ophelia, gravely.
Eva used to, but she is gone!” and Marie lay back on her lounge, and began to sob disconsolately.
Marie was one of those unfortunately constituted mortals, in whose eyes whatever is lost and gone assumes a value which it never had in possession.
Whatever she had, she seemed to survey only to pick flaws in it; but, once fairly away, there was no end to her valuation of it.
While this conversation was taking place in the parlor another was going on in St.
Tom, who was always uneasily following his master about, had seen him go to his library, some hours before; and, after vainly waiting for him to come out, determined, at last, to make an errand in.
He was lying on his face, with Eva’s Bible open before him, at a little distance.
He hesitated; and, while he was hesitating, St.
Clare suddenly raised himself up.
The honest face, so full of grief, and with such an imploring expression of affection and sympathy, struck his master.
He laid his hand on Tom’s, and bowed down his forehead on it.
I do look up; but the trouble is, I don’t see anything, when I do, I wish I could.” Tom sighed heavily.
“It seems to be given to children, and poor, honest fellows, like you, to see what we can’t,” said St.
“How comes it?” “Thou has ‘hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes,’” murmured Tom; “‘even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.’” “Tom, I don’t believe,—I can’t believe,—I’ve got the habit of doubting,” said St.
“I want to believe this Bible,—and I can’t.” “Dear Mas’r, pray to the good Lord,—‘Lord, I believe; help thou my unbelief.’” “Who knows anything about anything?” said St.
Clare, his eyes wandering dreamily, and speaking to himself.
“Was all that beautiful love and faith only one of the ever-shifting phases of human feeling, having nothing real to rest on, passing away with the little breath?
O, Mas’r, when I was sold away from my old woman and the children, I was jest a’most broke up.
I felt as if there warn’t nothin’ left; and then the good Lord, he stood by me, and he says, ‘Fear not, Tom;’ and he brings light and joy in a poor feller’s soul,—makes all peace; and I ’s so happy, and loves everybody, and feels willin’ jest to be the Lord’s, and have the Lord’s will done, and be put jest where the Lord wants to put me.
I know it couldn’t come from me, cause I ’s a poor, complainin’ cretur; it comes from the Lord; and I know He’s willin’ to do for Mas’r.” Tom spoke with fast-running tears and choking voice.
Clare leaned his head on his shoulder, and wrung the hard, faithful, black hand.
“I ’s willin’ to lay down my life, this blessed day, to see Mas’r a Christian.” “Poor, foolish boy!” said St.
‘the love of Christ, that passeth knowledge.’” “Singular!” said St.
Clare, turning away, “that the story of a man that lived and died eighteen hundred years ago can affect people so yet.
But he was no man,” he added, suddenly.
O, that I could believe what my mother taught me, and pray as I did when I was a boy!” “If Mas’r pleases,” said Tom, “Miss Eva used to read this so beautifully.
Don’t get no readin’, hardly, now Miss Eva’s gone.” The chapter was the eleventh of John,—the touching account of the raising of Lazarus, St.
Clare read it aloud, often pausing to wrestle down feelings which were roused by the pathos of the story.
Tom knelt before him, with clasped hands, and with an absorbed expression of love, trust, adoration, on his quiet face.
“I wish I had your eyes, Tom.” “I wish, to the dear Lord, Mas’r had!” “But, Tom, you know that I have a great deal more knowledge than you; what if I should tell you that I don’t believe this Bible?” “O, Mas’r!” said Tom, holding up his hands, with a deprecating gesture.
But Mas’r wasn’t in earnest, for sartin, now?” said Tom, anxiously.
I don’t disbelieve, and I think there is reason to believe; and still I don’t.
It’s a troublesome bad habit I’ve got, Tom.” “If Mas’r would only pray!” “How do you know I don’t, Tom?” “Does Mas’r?” “I would, Tom, if there was anybody there when I pray; but it’s all speaking unto nothing, when I do.
But come, Tom, you pray now, and show me how.” Tom’s heart was full; he poured it out in prayer, like waters that have been long suppressed.
One thing was plain enough; Tom thought there was somebody to hear, whether there were or not.
Clare felt himself borne, on the tide of his faith and feeling, almost to the gates of that heaven he seemed so vividly to conceive.
“I like to hear you, Tom; but go, now, and leave me alone; some other time, I’ll talk more.” Tom silently left the room.
For how imperiously, how coolly, in disregard of all one’s feeling, does the hard, cold, uninteresting course of daily realities move on!
Still must we eat, and drink, and sleep, and wake again,—still bargain, buy, sell, ask and answer questions,—pursue, in short, a thousand shadows, though all interest in them be over; the cold mechanical habit of living remaining, after all vital interest in it has fled.
All the interests and hopes of St.
Clare’s life had unconsciously wound themselves around this child.
It was for Eva that he had managed his property; it was for Eva that he had planned the disposal of his time; and, to do this and that for Eva,—to buy, improve, alter, and arrange, or dispose something for her,—had been so long his habit, that now she was gone, there seemed nothing to be thought of, and nothing to be done.
True, there was another life,—a life which, once believed in, stands as a solemn, significant figure before the otherwise unmeaning ciphers of time, changing them to orders of mysterious, untold value.
Clare knew this well; and often, in many a weary hour, he heard that slender, childish voice calling him to the skies, and saw that little hand pointing to him the way of life; but a heavy lethargy of sorrow lay on him,—he could not arise.
He had one of those natures which could better and more clearly conceive of religious things from its own perceptions and instincts, than many a matter-of-fact and practical Christian.
The gift to appreciate and the sense to feel the finer shades and relations of moral things, often seems an attribute of those whose whole life shows a careless disregard of them.
Hence Moore, Byron, Goethe, often speak words more wisely descriptive of the true religious sentiment, than another man, whose whole life is governed by it.
In such minds, disregard of religion is a more fearful treason,—a more deadly sin.
Clare had never pretended to govern himself by any religious obligation; and a certain fineness of nature gave him such an instinctive view of the extent of the requirements of Christianity, that he shrank, by anticipation, from what he felt would be the exactions of his own conscience, if he once did resolve to assume them.
For, so inconsistent is human nature, especially in the ideal, that not to undertake a thing at all seems better than to undertake and come short.
Clare was, in many respects, another man.
Meantime, he attached himself to Tom more and more, every day.
In all the wide world, there was nothing that seemed to remind him so much of Eva; and he would insist on keeping him constantly about him, and, fastidious and unapproachable as he was with regard to his deeper feelings, he almost thought aloud to Tom.
Nor would any one have wondered at it, who had seen the expression of affection and devotion with which Tom continually followed his young master.
Clare, the day after he had commenced the legal formalities for his enfranchisement, “I’m going to make a free man of you;—so have your trunk packed, and get ready to set out for Kentuck.” The sudden light of joy that shone in Tom’s face as he raised his hands to heaven, his emphatic “Bless the Lord!” rather discomposed St.
“No, indeed!” “Why, Tom, you couldn’t possibly have earned, by your work, such clothes and such living as I have given you.” “Knows all that, Mas’r St.
Clare; Mas’r’s been too good; but, Mas’r, I’d rather have poor clothes, poor house, poor everything, and have ’em _mine_, than have the best, and have ’em any man’s else,—I had _so_, Mas’r; I think it’s natur, Mas’r.” “I suppose so, Tom, and you’ll be going off and leaving me, in a month or so,” he added, rather discontentedly.
Clare’s a Christian,” said Tom.
Clare, half smiling, as he turned from the window, and laid his hand on Tom’s shoulder.
Go home to your wife and children, and give my love to all.” “I ’s faith to believe that day will come,” said Tom, earnestly, and with tears in his eyes; “the Lord has a work for Mas’r.” “A work, hey?” said St.
“We does for the Lord when we does for his critturs,” said Tom.
“Good theology, Tom; better than Dr.
B. preaches, I dare swear,” said St.
The conversation was here interrupted by the announcement of some visitors.
Clare felt the loss of Eva as deeply as she could feel anything; and, as she was a woman that had a great faculty of making everybody unhappy when she was, her immediate attendants had still stronger reason to regret the loss of their young mistress, whose winning ways and gentle intercessions had so often been a shield to them from the tyrannical and selfish exactions of her mother.
Poor old Mammy, in particular, whose heart, severed from all natural domestic ties, had consoled itself with this one beautiful being, was almost heart-broken.
She cried day and night, and was, from excess of sorrow, less skilful and alert in her ministrations of her mistress than usual, which drew down a constant storm of invectives on her defenceless head.
Miss Ophelia felt the loss; but, in her good and honest heart, it bore fruit unto everlasting life.
She was more softened, more gentle; and, though equally assiduous in every duty, it was with a chastened and quiet air, as one who communed with her own heart not in vain.
She was more diligent in teaching Topsy,—taught her mainly from the Bible,—did not any longer shrink from her touch, or manifest an ill-repressed disgust, because she felt none.
She viewed her now through the softened medium that Eva’s hand had first held before her eyes, and saw in her only an immortal creature, whom God had sent to be led by her to glory and virtue.
The callous indifference was gone; there was now sensibility, hope, desire, and the striving for good,—a strife irregular, interrupted, suspended oft, but yet renewed again.
One day, when Topsy had been sent for by Miss Ophelia, she came, hastily thrusting something into her bosom.
You’ve been stealing something, I’ll be bound,” said the imperious little Rosa, who had been sent to call her, seizing her, at the same time, roughly by the arm.
“You go ’long, Miss Rosa!” said Topsy, pulling from her; “‘tan’t none o’ your business!” “None o’ your sa’ce!” said Rosa, “I saw you hiding something,—I know yer tricks,” and Rosa seized her arm, and tried to force her hand into her bosom, while Topsy, enraged, kicked and fought valiantly for what she considered her rights.
The clamor and confusion of the battle drew Miss Ophelia and St.
“She’s been stealing!” said Rosa.
“I han’t, neither!” vociferated Topsy, sobbing with passion.
“Give me that, whatever it is!” said Miss Ophelia, firmly.
Topsy hesitated; but, on a second order, pulled out of her bosom a little parcel done up in the foot of one of her own old stockings.
There was a small book, which had been given to Topsy by Eva, containing a single verse of Scripture, arranged for every day in the year, and in a paper the curl of hair that she had given her on that memorable day when she had taken her last farewell.
Clare was a good deal affected at the sight of it; the little book had been rolled in a long strip of black crape, torn from the funeral weeds.
O, don’t take ’em away, please!” she said; and, sitting flat down on the floor, and putting her apron over her head, she began to sob vehemently.
It was a curious mixture of the pathetic and the ludicrous,—the little old stockings,—black crape,—text-book,—fair, soft curl,—and Topsy’s utter distress.
Clare smiled; but there were tears in his eyes, as he said, “Come, come,—don’t cry; you shall have them!” and, putting them together, he threw them into her lap, and drew Miss Ophelia with him into the parlor.
“I really think you can make something of that concern,” he said, pointing with his thumb backward over his shoulder.
You must try and do something with her.” “The child has improved greatly,” said Miss Ophelia.
“I have great hopes of her; but, Augustine,” she said, laying her hand on his arm, “one thing I want to ask; whose is this child to be?—yours or mine?” “Why, I gave her to you,” said Augustine.
“Whew! cousin,” said Augustine.
“What will the Abolition Society think?
They’ll have a day of fasting appointed for this backsliding, if you become a slaveholder!” “O, nonsense!
I can’t encourage it.” “I don’t want you to joke, but to reason,” said Miss Ophelia.
“There is no use in my trying to make this child a Christian child, unless I save her from all the chances and reverses of slavery; and, if you really are willing I should have her, I want you to give me a deed of gift, or some legal paper.” “Well, well,” said St.
Clare, “I will;” and he sat down, and unfolded a newspaper to read.
Clare, like most men of his class of mind, cordially hated the present tense of action, generally; and, therefore, he was considerably annoyed by Miss Ophelia’s downrightness.
“You may die, or fail, and then Topsy be hustled off to auction, spite of all I can do.” “Really, you are quite provident.
Clare rapidly wrote off a deed of gift, which, as he was well versed in the forms of law, he could easily do, and signed his name to it in sprawling capitals, concluding by a tremendous flourish.
“But must it not be witnessed?” “O, bother!—yes.
Here,” he said, opening the door into Marie’s apartment, “Marie, Cousin wants your autograph; just put your name down here.” “What’s this?” said Marie, as she ran over the paper.
I thought Cousin was too pious for such horrid things,” she added, as she carelessly wrote her name; “but, if she has a fancy for that article, I am sure she’s welcome.” “There, now, she’s yours, body and soul,” said St.
Miss Ophelia, who seldom sat much in Marie’s company, followed him into the parlor, having first carefully laid away the paper.
“Augustine,” she said, suddenly, as she sat knitting, “have you ever made any provision for your servants, in case of your death?” “No,” said St.
“Then all your indulgence to them may prove a great cruelty, by and by.” St.
Clare had often thought the same thing himself; but he answered, negligently.
“Well, I mean to make a provision, by and by.” “When?” said Miss Ophelia.
“Do you think I show symptoms of yellow fever or cholera, that you are making post mortem arrangements with such zeal?” “‘In the midst of life we are in death,’” said Miss Ophelia.
Clare rose up, and laying the paper down, carelessly, walked to the door that stood open on the verandah, to put an end to a conversation that was not agreeable to him.
Clare, seating himself carelessly by him.
“If Mas’r pleases,” said Tom, gratefully, “Mas’r makes it so much plainer.” St.
Clare took the book and glanced at the place, and began reading one of the passages which Tom had designated by the heavy marks around it.
It ran as follows: “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all his holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.” St.
Clare read on in an animated voice, till he came to the last of the verses.
“Then shall the king say unto him on his left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: I was sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
Then shall they answer unto Him, Lord when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
Then shall he say unto them, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not to me.” St.
Clare seemed struck with this last passage, for he read it twice,—the second time slowly, and as if he were revolving the words in his mind.
“Tom,” he said, “these folks that get such hard measure seem to have been doing just what I have,—living good, easy, respectable lives; and not troubling themselves to inquire how many of their brethren were hungry or athirst, or sick, or in prison.” Tom did not answer.
Clare rose up and walked thoughtfully up and down the verandah, seeming to forget everything in his own thoughts; so absorbed was he, that Tom had to remind him twice that the teabell had rung, before he could get his attention.
Clare was absent and thoughtful, all tea-time.
After tea, he and Marie and Miss Ophelia took possession of the parlor almost in silence.
Marie disposed herself on a lounge, under a silken mosquito curtain, and was soon sound asleep.
Miss Ophelia silently busied herself with her knitting.
Clare sat down to the piano, and began playing a soft and melancholy movement with the Æolian accompaniment.
He seemed in a deep reverie, and to be soliloquizing to himself by music.
“There,” he said to Miss Ophelia, “this was one of my mother’s books,—and here is her handwriting,—come and look at it.
She copied and arranged this from Mozart’s Requiem.” Miss Ophelia came accordingly.
“It was something she used to sing often,” said St.
“I think I can hear her now.” He struck a few majestic chords, and began singing that grand old Latin piece, the “Dies Iræ.” Tom, who was listening in the outer verandah, was drawn by the sound to the very door, where he stood earnestly.
He did not understand the words, of course; but the music and manner of singing appeared to affect him strongly, especially when St.
Clare sang the more pathetic parts.
Clare threw a deep and pathetic expression into the words; for the shadowy veil of years seemed drawn away, and he seemed to hear his mother’s voice leading his.
Voice and instrument seemed both living, and threw out with vivid sympathy those strains which the ethereal Mozart first conceived as his own dying requiem.
“What a sublime conception is that of a last judgment!” said he,—“a righting of all the wrongs of ages!—a solving of all moral problems, by an unanswerable wisdom!
It is, indeed, a wonderful image.” “It is a fearful one to us,” said Miss Ophelia.
Clare stopping, thoughtfully.
“I was reading to Tom, this afternoon, that chapter in Matthew that gives an account of it, and I have been quite struck with it.
One should have expected some terrible enormities charged to those who are excluded from Heaven, as the reason; but no,—they are condemned for _not_ doing positive good, as if that included every possible harm.” “Perhaps,” said Miss Ophelia, “it is impossible for a person who does no good not to do harm.” “And what,” said St.
Clare, his face breaking out into a smile.
“You never leave me any time for general reflections, Cousin; you always bring me short up against the actual present; you have a kind of eternal _now_, always in your mind.” “_Now_ is all the time I have anything to do with,” said Miss Ophelia.
Clare, “she had set her little simple soul on a good work for me.” It was the first time since Eva’s death that he had ever said as many words as these to her, and he spoke now evidently repressing very strong feeling.
“My view of Christianity is such,” he added, “that I think no man can consistently profess it without throwing the whole weight of his being against this monstrous system of injustice that lies at the foundation of all our society; and, if need be, sacrificing himself in the battle.
One can see, you know, very easily, how others ought to be martyrs.” “Well, are you going to do differently now?” said Miss Ophelia.
Clare, “beginning with my own servants, for whom I have yet done nothing; and, perhaps, at some future day, it may appear that I can do something for a whole class; something to save my country from the disgrace of that false position in which she now stands before all civilized nations.” “Do you suppose it possible that a nation ever will voluntarily emancipate?” said Miss Ophelia.
Heroism and disinterestedness are rising up, here and there, in the earth.
The Hungarian nobles set free millions of serfs, at an immense pecuniary loss; and, perhaps, among us may be found generous spirits, who do not estimate honor and justice by dollars and cents.” “I hardly think so,” said Miss Ophelia.
“But, suppose we should rise up tomorrow and emancipate, who would educate these millions, and teach them how to use their freedom?
The fact is, we are too lazy and unpractical, ourselves, ever to give them much of an idea of that industry and energy which is necessary to form them into men.
They will have to go north, where labor is the fashion,—the universal custom; and tell me, now, is there enough Christian philanthropy, among your northern states, to bear with the process of their education and elevation?
You send thousands of dollars to foreign missions; but could you endure to have the heathen sent into your towns and villages, and give your time, and thoughts, and money, to raise them to the Christian standard?
If we emancipate, are you willing to educate?
How many families, in your town, would take a negro man and woman, teach them, bear with them, and seek to make them Christians?
How many merchants would take Adolph, if I wanted to make him a clerk; or mechanics, if I wanted him taught a trade?
If I wanted to put Jane and Rosa to a school, how many schools are there in the northern states that would take them in? how many families that would board them? and yet they are as white as many a woman, north or south.
We are in a bad position.
It would certainly be a greater self-denial to receive heathen among us, than to send missionaries to them; but I think we would do it.” “_You_ would, I know,” said St.
“I’d like to see anything you wouldn’t do, if you thought it your duty!” “Well, I’m not uncommonly good,” said Miss Ophelia.
Besides, I know there are many people at the north who do exactly what you said.” “Yes, but they are a minority; and, if we should begin to emancipate to any extent, we should soon hear from you.” Miss Ophelia did not reply.
Clare’s countenance was overcast by a sad, dreamy expression.
I keep thinking of things she used to say.
Strange, what brings these past things so vividly back to us, sometimes!” St.
Tom followed him to the passage, out of the court, and asked if he should attend him.
“I shall be back in an hour.” Tom sat down in the verandah.
It was a beautiful moonlight evening, and he sat watching the rising and falling spray of the fountain, and listening to its murmur.
Then he thought of his noble young master, and, ever second to that, came the habitual prayer that he had always offered for him; and then his thoughts passed on to the beautiful Eva, whom he now thought of among the angels; and he thought till he almost fancied that that bright face and golden hair were looking upon him, out of the spray of the fountain.
He hastened to undo it; and, with smothered voices and heavy tread, came several men, bringing a body, wrapped in a cloak, and lying on a shutter.
The light of the lamp fell full on the face; and Tom gave a wild cry of amazement and despair, that rung through all the galleries, as the men advanced, with their burden, to the open parlor door, where Miss Ophelia still sat knitting.
As he was reading, an affray arose between two gentlemen in the room, who were both partially intoxicated.
Clare and one or two others made an effort to separate them, and St.
Clare received a fatal stab in the side with a bowie-knife, which he was attempting to wrest from one of them.
The house was full of cries and lamentations, shrieks and screams, servants frantically tearing their hair, throwing themselves on the ground, or running distractedly about, lamenting.
Tom and Miss Ophelia alone seemed to have any presence of mind; for Marie was in strong hysteric convulsions.
At Miss Ophelia’s direction, one of the lounges in the parlor was hastily prepared, and the bleeding form laid upon it.
Clare had fainted, through pain and loss of blood; but, as Miss Ophelia applied restoratives, he revived, opened his eyes, looked fixedly on them, looked earnestly around the room, his eyes travelling wistfully over every object, and finally they rested on his mother’s picture.
The physician now arrived, and made his examination.
It was evident, from the expression of his face, that there was no hope; but he applied himself to dressing the wound, and he and Miss Ophelia and Tom proceeded composedly with this work, amid the lamentations and sobs and cries of the affrighted servants, who had clustered about the doors and windows of the verandah.
“Now,” said the physician, “we must turn all these creatures out; all depends on his being kept quiet.” St.
Clare opened his eyes, and looked fixedly on the distressed beings, whom Miss Ophelia and the doctor were trying to urge from the apartment.
“Poor creatures!” he said, and an expression of bitter self-reproach passed over his face.
Adolph absolutely refused to go.
Terror had deprived him of all presence of mind; he threw himself along the floor, and nothing could persuade him to rise.
The rest yielded to Miss Ophelia’s urgent representations, that their master’s safety depended on their stillness and obedience.
Clare could say but little; he lay with his eyes shut, but it was evident that he wrestled with bitter thoughts.
After a while, he laid his hand on Tom’s, who was kneeling beside him, and said, “Tom! poor fellow!” “What, Mas’r?” said Tom, earnestly.
Clare, pressing his hand; “pray!” “If you would like a clergyman—” said the physician.
Clare hastily shook his head, and said again to Tom, more earnestly, “Pray!” And Tom did pray, with all his mind and strength, for the soul that was passing,—the soul that seemed looking so steadily and mournfully from those large, melancholy blue eyes.
It was literally prayer offered with strong crying and tears.
Clare reached out and took his hand, looking earnestly at him, but saying nothing.
He closed his eyes, but still retained his hold; for, in the gates of eternity, the black hand and the white hold each other with an equal clasp.
He murmured softly to himself, at broken intervals, “Recordare Jesu pie— * * * * Ne me perdas—illa die Quærens me—sedisti lassus.” It was evident that the words he had been singing that evening were passing through his mind,—words of entreaty addressed to Infinite Pity.
His lips moved at intervals, as parts of the hymn fell brokenly from them.
“His mind is wandering,” said the doctor.
Clare, energetically; “at last! at last!” The effort of speaking exhausted him.
The sinking paleness of death fell on him; but with it there fell, as if shed from the wings of some pitying spirit, a beautiful expression of peace, like that of a wearied child who sleeps.
Just before the spirit parted, he opened his eyes, with a sudden light, as of joy and recognition, and said _“Mother!”_ and then he was gone!
CHAPTER XXIX The Unprotected We hear often of the distress of the negro servants, on the loss of a kind master; and with good reason, for no creature on God’s earth is left more utterly unprotected and desolate than the slave in these circumstances.
The child who has lost a father has still the protection of friends, and of the law; he is something, and can do something,—has acknowledged rights and position; the slave has none.
The law regards him, in every respect, as devoid of rights as a bale of merchandise.
The only possible acknowledgment of any of the longings and wants of a human and immortal creature, which are given to him, comes to him through the sovereign and irresponsible will of his master; and when that master is stricken down, nothing remains.
The number of those men who know how to use wholly irresponsible power humanely and generously is small.
Everybody knows this, and the slave knows it best of all; so that he feels that there are ten chances of his finding an abusive and tyrannical master, to one of his finding a considerate and kind one.
Therefore is it that the wail over a kind master is loud and long, as well it may be.
Clare breathed his last, terror and consternation took hold of all his household.
He had been stricken down so in a moment, in the flower and strength of his youth!
Every room and gallery of the house resounded with sobs and shrieks of despair.
Marie, whose nervous system had been enervated by a constant course of self-indulgence, had nothing to support the terror of the shock, and, at the time her husband breathed his last, was passing from one fainting fit to another; and he to whom she had been joined in the mysterious tie of marriage passed from her forever, without the possibility of even a parting word.
Miss Ophelia, with characteristic strength and self-control, had remained with her kinsman to the last,—all eye, all ear, all attention; doing everything of the little that could be done, and joining with her whole soul in the tender and impassioned prayers which the poor slave had poured forth for the soul of his dying master.
When they were arranging him for his last rest, they found upon his bosom a small, plain miniature case, opening with a spring.
It was the miniature of a noble and beautiful female face; and on the reverse, under a crystal, a lock of dark hair.
They laid them back on the lifeless breast,—dust to dust,—poor mournful relics of early dreams, which once made that cold heart beat so warmly!
Tom’s whole soul was filled with thoughts of eternity; and while he ministered around the lifeless clay, he did not once think that the sudden stroke had left him in hopeless slavery.
He felt at peace about his master; for in that hour, when he had poured forth his prayer into the bosom of his Father, he had found an answer of quietness and assurance springing up within himself.
In the depths of his own affectionate nature, he felt able to perceive something of the fulness of Divine love; for an old oracle hath thus written,—“He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.” Tom hoped and trusted, and was at peace.
It rose to Miss Ophelia, who began to turn her thoughts towards her northern home.
It rose, in silent terrors, to the minds of the servants, who well knew the unfeeling, tyrannical character of the mistress in whose hands they were left.
All knew, very well, that the indulgences which had been accorded to them were not from their mistress, but from their master; and that, now he was gone, there would be no screen between them and every tyrannous infliction which a temper soured by affliction might devise.
It was about a fortnight after the funeral, that Miss Ophelia, busied one day in her apartment, heard a gentle tap at the door.
She opened it, and there stood Rosa, the pretty young quadroon, whom we have before often noticed, her hair in disorder, and her eyes swelled with crying.
“O, Miss Feeley,” she said, falling on her knees, and catching the skirt of her dress, “_do, do go_ to Miss Marie for me! do plead for me!
It was an order, written in Marie’s delicate Italian hand, to the master of a whipping-establishment to give the bearer fifteen lashes.
I’d rather she’d kill me, right out.” Miss Ophelia stood considering, with the paper in her hand.
She had _known_ it before; but hitherto she had never realized it, till she saw the slender form of Rosa almost convulsed with distress.
She found Marie sitting up in her easy-chair, with Mammy standing by her, combing her hair; Jane sat on the ground before her, busy in chafing her feet.
“How do you find yourself, today?” said Miss Ophelia.
A deep sigh, and a closing of the eyes, was the only reply, for a moment; and then Marie answered, “O, I don’t know, Cousin; I suppose I’m as well as I ever shall be!” and Marie wiped her eyes with a cambric handkerchief, bordered with an inch deep of black.
“I came,” said Miss Ophelia, with a short, dry cough, such as commonly introduces a difficult subject,—“I came to speak with you about poor Rosa.” Marie’s eyes were open wide enough now, and a flush rose to her sallow cheeks, as she answered, sharply, “Well, what about her?” “She is very sorry for her fault.” “She is, is she?
I’ve endured that child’s impudence long enough; and now I’ll bring her down,—I’ll make her lie in the dust!” “But could not you punish her some other way,—some way that would be less shameful?” “I mean to shame her; that’s just what I want.
She has all her life presumed on her delicacy, and her good looks, and her lady-like airs, till she forgets who she is;—and I’ll give her one lesson that will bring her down, I fancy!” “But, Cousin, consider that, if you destroy delicacy and a sense of shame in a young girl, you deprave her very fast.” “Delicacy!” said Marie, with a scornful laugh,—“a fine word for such as she!
I’ll teach her, with all her airs, that she’s no better than the raggedest black wench that walks the streets!
“I’m sure any girl might rather be killed outright!” “It might seem so to anybody with your feeling; but all these creatures get used to it; it’s the only way they can be kept in order.
Once let them feel that they are to take any airs about delicacy, and all that, and they’ll run all over you, just as my servants always have.
I’ve begun now to bring them under; and I’ll have them all to know that I’ll send one out to be whipped, as soon as another, if they don’t mind themselves!” said Marie, looking around her decidedly.
Jane hung her head and cowered at this, for she felt as if it was particularly directed to her.
Miss Ophelia sat for a moment, as if she had swallowed some explosive mixture, and were ready to burst.
Then, recollecting the utter uselessness of contention with such a nature, she shut her lips resolutely, gathered herself up, and walked out of the room.
It was hard to go back and tell Rosa that she could do nothing for her; and, shortly after, one of the man-servants came to say that her mistress had ordered him to take Rosa with him to the whipping-house, whither she was hurried, in spite of her tears and entreaties.
A few days after, Tom was standing musing by the balconies, when he was joined by Adolph, who, since the death of his master, had been entirely crest-fallen and disconsolate.
Adolph knew that he had always been an object of dislike to Marie; but while his master lived he had paid but little attention to it.
Now that he was gone, he had moved about in daily dread and trembling, not knowing what might befall him next.
Marie had held several consultations with her lawyer; after communicating with St.
Clare’s brother, it was determined to sell the place, and all the servants, except her own personal property, and these she intended to take with her, and go back to her father’s plantation.
“I hid myself behind the curtains when Missis was talking with the lawyer.
“We’ll never get another such a master,” said Adolph, apprehensively; “but I’d rather be sold than take my chance under Missis.” Tom turned away; his heart was full.
The hope of liberty, the thought of distant wife and children, rose up before his patient soul, as to the mariner shipwrecked almost in port rises the vision of the church-spire and loving roofs of his native village, seen over the top of some black wave only for one last farewell.
The poor old soul had such a singular, unaccountable prejudice in favor of liberty, that it was a hard wrench for him; and the more he said, “Thy will be done,” the worse he felt.
He sought Miss Ophelia, who, ever since Eva’s death, had treated him with marked and respectful kindness.
Clare promised me my freedom.
Clare, I can’t hope much for you;—nevertheless, I will try.” This incident occurred a few days after that of Rosa, while Miss Ophelia was busied in preparations to return north.
Seriously reflecting within herself, she considered that perhaps she had shown too hasty a warmth of language in her former interview with Marie; and she resolved that she would now endeavor to moderate her zeal, and to be as conciliatory as possible.
So the good soul gathered herself up, and, taking her knitting, resolved to go into Marie’s room, be as agreeable as possible, and negotiate Tom’s case with all the diplomatic skill of which she was mistress.
She found Marie reclining at length upon a lounge, supporting herself on one elbow by pillows, while Jane, who had been out shopping, was displaying before her certain samples of thin black stuffs.
“That will do,” said Marie, selecting one; “only I’m not sure about its being properly mourning.” “Laws, Missis,” said Jane, volubly, “Mrs.
General Derbennon wore just this very thing, after the General died, last summer; it makes up lovely!” “What do you think?” said Marie to Miss Ophelia.
“You can judge about it better than I.” “The fact is,” said Marie, “that I haven’t a dress in the world that I can wear; and, as I am going to break up the establishment, and go off, next week, I must decide upon something.” “Are you going so soon?” “Yes.
Clare’s brother has written, and he and the lawyer think that the servants and furniture had better be put up at auction, and the place left with our lawyer.” “There’s one thing I wanted to speak with you about,” said Miss Ophelia.
“Augustine promised Tom his liberty, and began the legal forms necessary to it.
I hope you will use your influence to have it perfected.” “Indeed, I shall do no such thing!” said Marie, sharply.
“Tom is one of the most valuable servants on the place,—it couldn’t be afforded, any way.
He’s a great deal better off as he is.” “But he does desire it, very earnestly, and his master promised it,” said Miss Ophelia.
“I dare say he does want it,” said Marie; “they all want it, just because they are a discontented set,—always wanting what they haven’t got.
Now, I’m principled against emancipating, in any case.
Keep a negro under the care of a master, and he does well enough, and is respectable; but set them free, and they get lazy, and won’t work, and take to drinking, and go all down to be mean, worthless fellows, I’ve seen it tried, hundreds of times.
It’s no favor to set them free.” “But Tom is so steady, industrious, and pious.” “O, you needn’t tell me!
He’ll do very well, as long as he’s taken care of,—that’s all.” “But, then, consider,” said Miss Ophelia, “when you set him up for sale, the chances of his getting a bad master.” “O, that’s all humbug!” said Marie; “it isn’t one time in a hundred that a good fellow gets a bad master; most masters are good, for all the talk that is made.
I’ve lived and grown up here, in the South, and I never yet was acquainted with a master that didn’t treat his servants well,—quite as well as is worth while.
“Everybody goes against me!” she said.
“Everybody is so inconsiderate!
I shouldn’t have expected that _you_ would bring up all these remembrances of my troubles to me,—it’s so inconsiderate!
But nobody ever does consider,—my trials are so peculiar!
It’s so hard, that when I had only one daughter, she should have been taken!—and when I had a husband that just exactly suited me,—and I’m so hard to be suited!—he should be taken!
And you seem to have so little feeling for me, and keep bringing it up to me so carelessly,—when you know how it overcomes me!
I suppose you mean well; but it is very inconsiderate,—very!” And Marie sobbed, and gasped for breath, and called Mammy to open the window, and to bring her the camphor-bottle, and to bathe her head, and unhook her dress.
And, in the general confusion that ensued, Miss Ophelia made her escape to her apartment.
She saw, at once, that it would do no good to say anything more; for Marie had an indefinite capacity for hysteric fits; and, after this, whenever her husband’s or Eva’s wishes with regard to the servants were alluded to, she always found it convenient to set one in operation.
Miss Ophelia, therefore, did the next best thing she could for Tom,—she wrote a letter to Mrs.
Shelby for him, stating his troubles, and urging them to send to his relief.
The next day, Tom and Adolph, and some half a dozen other servants, were marched down to a slave-warehouse, to await the convenience of the trader, who was going to make up a lot for auction.
CHAPTER XXX The Slave Warehouse A slave warehouse!
Perhaps some of my readers conjure up horrible visions of such a place.
They fancy some foul, obscure den, some horrible _Tartarus “informis, ingens, cui lumen ademptum.”_ But no, innocent friend; in these days men have learned the art of sinning expertly and genteelly, so as not to shock the eyes and senses of respectable society.
Human property is high in the market; and is, therefore, well fed, well cleaned, tended, and looked after, that it may come to sale sleek, and strong, and shining.
A slave-warehouse in New Orleans is a house externally not much unlike many others, kept with neatness; and where every day you may see arranged, under a sort of shed along the outside, rows of men and women, who stand there as a sign of the property sold within.
It was a day or two after the conversation between Marie and Miss Ophelia, that Tom, Adolph, and about half a dozen others of the St.
Clare estate, were turned over to the loving kindness of Mr.
Tom had with him quite a sizable trunk full of clothing, as had most others of them.
They were ushered, for the night, into a long room, where many other men, of all ages, sizes, and shades of complexion, were assembled, and from which roars of laughter and unthinking merriment were proceeding.
Sambo, I see!” he said, speaking approvingly to a burly negro who was performing tricks of low buffoonery, which occasioned the shouts which Tom had heard.
As might be imagined, Tom was in no humor to join these proceedings; and, therefore, setting his trunk as far as possible from the noisy group, he sat down on it, and leaned his face against the wall.
The dealers in the human article make scrupulous and systematic efforts to promote noisy mirth among them, as a means of drowning reflection, and rendering them insensible to their condition.
The whole object of the training to which the negro is put, from the time he is sold in the northern market till he arrives south, is systematically directed towards making him callous, unthinking, and brutal.
The slave-dealer collects his gang in Virginia or Kentucky, and drives them to some convenient, healthy place,—often a watering place,—to be fattened.
Briskness, alertness, and cheerfulness of appearance, especially before observers, are constantly enforced upon them, both by the hope of thereby getting a good master, and the fear of all that the driver may bring upon them if they prove unsalable.
“What you doin here?” said Sambo, coming up to Tom, and poking him facetiously in the side.
“Meditatin’, eh?” “I am to be sold at the auction tomorrow!” said Tom, quietly.
But how is it,—dis yer whole lot gwine tomorrow?” said Sambo, laying his hand freely on Adolph’s shoulder.
“Please to let me alone!” said Adolph, fiercely, straightening himself up, with extreme disgust.
“Law, now, boys! dis yer’s one o’ yer white niggers,—kind o’ cream color, ye know, scented!” said he, coming up to Adolph and snuffing.
“O Lor! he’d do for a tobaccer-shop; they could keep him to scent snuff!
Look at us now!” and Sambo gave a ludicrous imitation of Adolph’s manner; “here’s de airs and graces.
We’s been in a good family, I specs.” “Yes,” said Adolph; “I had a master that could have bought you all for old truck!” “Laws, now, only think,” said Sambo, “the gentlemens that we is!” “I belonged to the St.
Spects they’s gwine to trade ye off with a lot o’ cracked tea-pots and sich like!” said Sambo, with a provoking grin.
Adolph, enraged at this taunt, flew furiously at his adversary, swearing and striking on every side of him.
Order,—order!” he said, coming in and flourishing a large whip.
All fled in different directions, except Sambo, who, presuming on the favor which the keeper had to him as a licensed wag, stood his ground, ducking his head with a facetious grin, whenever the master made a dive at him.
“Lor, Mas’r, ’tan’t us,—we ’s reglar stiddy,—it’s these yer new hands; they ’s real aggravatin’,—kinder pickin’ at us, all time!” The keeper, at this, turned upon Tom and Adolph, and distributing a few kicks and cuffs without much inquiry, and leaving general orders for all to be good boys and go to sleep, left the apartment.
While this scene was going on in the men’s sleeping-room, the reader may be curious to take a peep at the corresponding apartment allotted to the women.
Stretched out in various attitudes over the floor, he may see numberless sleeping forms of every shade of complexion, from the purest ebony to white, and of all years, from childhood to old age, lying now asleep.
Here is a fine bright girl, of ten years, whose mother was sold out yesterday, and who tonight cried herself to sleep when nobody was looking at her.
Here, a worn old negress, whose thin arms and callous fingers tell of hard toil, waiting to be sold tomorrow, as a cast-off article, for what can be got for her; and some forty or fifty others, with heads variously enveloped in blankets or articles of clothing, lie stretched around them.
But, in a corner, sitting apart from the rest, are two females of a more interesting appearance than common.
One of these is a respectably-dressed mulatto woman between forty and fifty, with soft eyes and a gentle and pleasing physiognomy.
She has on her head a high-raised turban, made of a gay red Madras handkerchief, of the first quality, her dress is neatly fitted, and of good material, showing that she has been provided for with a careful hand.
By her side, and nestling closely to her, is a young girl of fifteen,—her daughter.
She is a quadroon, as may be seen from her fairer complexion, though her likeness to her mother is quite discernible.
She has the same soft, dark eye, with longer lashes, and her curling hair is of a luxuriant brown.
She also is dressed with great neatness, and her white, delicate hands betray very little acquaintance with servile toil.
These two are to be sold tomorrow, in the same lot with the St.
Clare servants; and the gentleman to whom they belong, and to whom the money for their sale is to be transmitted, is a member of a Christian church in New York, who will receive the money, and go thereafter to the sacrament of his Lord and theirs, and think no more of it.
These two, whom we shall call Susan and Emmeline, had been the personal attendants of an amiable and pious lady of New Orleans, by whom they had been carefully and piously instructed and trained.
They had been taught to read and write, diligently instructed in the truths of religion, and their lot had been as happy an one as in their condition it was possible to be.
But the only son of their protectress had the management of her property; and, by carelessness and extravagance involved it to a large amount, and at last failed.
One of the largest creditors was the respectable firm of B. & Co., in New York.
B. & Co. wrote to their lawyer in New Orleans, who attached the real estate (these two articles and a lot of plantation hands formed the most valuable part of it), and wrote word to that effect to New York.
Brother B., being, as we have said, a Christian man, and a resident in a free State, felt some uneasiness on the subject.
The day after the letter arrived in New Orleans, Susan and Emmeline were attached, and sent to the depot to await a general auction on the following morning; and as they glimmer faintly upon us in the moonlight which steals through the grated window, we may listen to their conversation.
With a deadly sickness at her heart, she remembered how he had looked at Emmeline’s hands, and lifted up her curly hair, and pronounced her a first-rate article.
Susan had been trained as a Christian, brought up in the daily reading of the Bible, and had the same horror of her child’s being sold to a life of shame that any other Christian mother might have; but she had no hope,—no protection.
“Mother, I think we might do first rate, if you could get a place as cook, and I as chambermaid or seamstress, in some family.
Let’s both look as bright and lively as we can, and tell all we can do, and perhaps we shall,” said Emmeline.
“I want you to brush your hair all back straight, tomorrow,” said Susan.
“Respectable families would be more apt to buy you, if they saw you looked plain and decent, as if you wasn’t trying to look handsome.
She thinks of all this, as she holds her daughter in her arms, and wishes that she were not handsome and attractive.
It seems almost an aggravation to her to remember how purely and piously, how much above the ordinary lot, she has been brought up.
The mother and daughter are singing together a wild and melancholy dirge, common as a funeral hymn among the slaves: “O, where is weeping Mary?
She is dead and gone to Heaven; She is dead and gone to Heaven; ’Rived in the goodly land.” These words, sung by voices of a peculiar and melancholy sweetness, in an air which seemed like the sighing of earthy despair after heavenly hope, floated through the dark prison rooms with a pathetic cadence, as verse after verse was breathed out: “O, where are Paul and Silas?
But now it is morning, and everybody is astir; and the worthy Mr.
There is a brisk lookout on the toilet; injunctions passed around to every one to put on their best face and be spry; and now all are arranged in a circle for a last review, before they are marched up to the Bourse.
Skeggs, with his palmetto on and his cigar in his mouth, walks around to put farewell touches on his wares.
“How’s this?” he said, stepping in front of Susan and Emmeline.
“Them curls may make a hundred dollars difference in the sale of her.” Beneath a splendid dome were men of all nations, moving to and fro, over the marble pave.
On every side of the circular area were little tribunes, or stations, for the use of speakers and auctioneers.
Two of these, on opposite sides of the area, were now occupied by brilliant and talented gentlemen, enthusiastically forcing up, in English and French commingled, the bids of connoisseurs in their various wares.
A third one, on the other side, still unoccupied, was surrounded by a group, waiting the moment of sale to begin.
And here we may recognize the St.
Clare servants,—Tom, Adolph, and others; and there, too, Susan and Emmeline, awaiting their turn with anxious and dejected faces.
Various spectators, intending to purchase, or not intending, examining, and commenting on their various points and faces with the same freedom that a set of jockeys discuss the merits of a horse.
“Hulloa, Alf! what brings you here?” said a young exquisite, slapping the shoulder of a sprucely-dressed young man, who was examining Adolph through an eye-glass.
Impudent as the devil!” said the other.
“If I get ’em, I’ll soon have their airs out of them; they’ll soon find that they’ve another kind of master to deal with than Monsieur St.
He’s deucedly extravagant!” “Yes, but my lord will find that he _can’t_ be extravagant with _me_.
Just let him be sent to the calaboose a few times, and thoroughly dressed down!
I buy him, that’s flat!” Tom had been standing wistfully examining the multitude of faces thronging around him, for one whom he would wish to call master.
And if you should ever be under the necessity, sir, of selecting, out of two hundred men, one who was to become your absolute owner and disposer, you would, perhaps, realize, just as Tom did, how few there were that you would feel at all comfortable in being made over to.
Tom saw abundance of men,—great, burly, gruff men; little, chirping, dried men; long-favored, lank, hard men; and every variety of stubbed-looking, commonplace men, who pick up their fellow-men as one picks up chips, putting them into the fire or a basket with equal unconcern, according to their convenience; but he saw no St.
A little before the sale commenced, a short, broad, muscular man, in a checked shirt considerably open at the bosom, and pantaloons much the worse for dirt and wear, elbowed his way through the crowd, like one who is going actively into a business; and, coming up to the group, began to examine them systematically.
From the moment that Tom saw him approaching, he felt an immediate and revolting horror at him, that increased as he came near.
He was evidently, though short, of gigantic strength.
This man proceeded to a very free personal examination of the lot.
“Where was you raised?” he added, briefly, to these investigations.
“In Kintuck, Mas’r,” said Tom, looking about, as if for deliverance.
He paused a moment before Dolph; then spitting a discharge of tobacco-juice on his well-blacked boots, and giving a contemptuous umph, he walked on.
Again he stopped before Susan and Emmeline.
He put out his heavy, dirty hand, and drew the girl towards him; passed it over her neck and bust, felt her arms, looked at her teeth, and then pushed her back against her mother, whose patient face showed the suffering she had been going through at every motion of the hideous stranger.
The girl was frightened, and began to cry.
“Stop that, you minx!” said the salesman; “no whimpering here,—the sale is going to begin.” And accordingly the sale begun.
Adolph was knocked off, at a good sum, to the young gentlemen who had previously stated his intention of buying him; and the other servants of the St.
“Now, up with you, boy! d’ye hear?” said the auctioneer to Tom.
He was pushed from the block;—the short, bullet-headed man seizing him roughly by the shoulder, pushed him to one side, saying, in a harsh voice, “Stand there, _you!_” Tom hardly realized anything; but still the bidding went on,—ratting, clattering, now French, now English.
She goes down from the block, stops, looks wistfully back,—her daughter stretches her hands towards her.
She looks with agony in the face of the man who has bought her,—a respectable middle-aged man, of benevolent countenance.
“O, Mas’r, please do buy my daughter!” “I’d like to, but I’m afraid I can’t afford it!” said the gentleman, looking, with painful interest, as the young girl mounted the block, and looked around her with a frightened and timid glance.
The blood flushes painfully in her otherwise colorless cheek, her eye has a feverish fire, and her mother groans to see that she looks more beautiful than she ever saw her before.
The auctioneer sees his advantage, and expatiates volubly in mingled French and English, and bids rise in rapid succession.
“I’ll do anything in reason,” said the benevolent-looking gentleman, pressing in and joining with the bids.
He is silent; the auctioneer grows warmer; but bids gradually drop off.
It lies now between an aristocratic old citizen and our bullet-headed acquaintance.
The citizen bids for a few turns, contemptuously measuring his opponent; but the bullet-head has the advantage over him, both in obstinacy and concealed length of purse, and the controversy lasts but a moment; the hammer falls,—he has got the girl, body and soul, unless God help her!
Legree, who owns a cotton plantation on the Red River.
The benevolent gentleman is sorry; but, then, the thing happens every day!
One sees girls and mothers crying, at these sales, _always!_ it can’t be helped, &c.; and he walks off, with his acquisition, in another direction.
Two days after, the lawyer of the Christian firm of B. & Co., New York, send on their money to them.
Kentucky home, with wife and children, and indulgent owners; St.
Clare home, with all its refinements and splendors; the golden head of Eva, with its saint-like eyes; the proud, gay, handsome, seemingly careless, yet ever-kind St.
Clare; hours of ease and indulgent leisure,—all gone! and in place thereof, _what_ remains?
The great difference is, that the table and chair cannot feel, and the _man_ can; for even a legal enactment that he shall be “taken, reputed, adjudged in law, to be a chattel personal,” cannot blot out his soul, with its own private little world of memories, hopes, loves, fears, and desires.
Simon Legree, Tom’s master, had purchased slaves at one place and another, in New Orleans, to the number of eight, and driven them, handcuffed, in couples of two and two, down to the good steamer Pirate, which lay at the levee, ready for a trip up the Red River.
Having got them fairly on board, and the boat being off, he came round, with that air of efficiency which ever characterized him, to take a review of them.
Stopping opposite to Tom, who had been attired for sale in his best broadcloth suit, with well-starched linen and shining boots, he briefly expressed himself as follows: “Stand up.” Tom stood up.
“Take off that stock!” and, as Tom, encumbered by his fetters, proceeded to do it, he assisted him, by pulling it, with no gentle hand, from his neck, and putting it in his pocket.
Legree now turned to Tom’s trunk, which, previous to this, he had been ransacking, and, taking from it a pair of old pantaloons and dilapidated coat, which Tom had been wont to put on about his stable-work, he said, liberating Tom’s hands from the handcuffs, and pointing to a recess in among the boxes, “You go there, and put these on.” Tom obeyed, and in a few moments returned.
“There,” said the former, throwing him a pair of coarse, stout shoes, such as were common among the slaves, “put these on.” In Tom’s hurried exchange, he had not forgotten to transfer his cherished Bible to his pocket.
Legree, having refitted Tom’s handcuffs, proceeded deliberately to investigate the contents of his pockets.
He drew out a silk handkerchief, and put it into his own pocket.
Several little trifles, which Tom had treasured, chiefly because they had amused Eva, he looked upon with a contemptuous grunt, and tossed them over his shoulder into the river.
Tom’s Methodist hymn-book, which, in his hurry, he had forgotten, he now held up and turned over.
I have none o’ yer bawling, praying, singing niggers on my place; so remember.
Now, mind yourself,” he said, with a stamp and a fierce glance of his gray eye, directed at Tom, “_I’m_ your church now!
You understand,—you’ve got to be as _I_ say.” Something within the silent black man answered _No!_ and, as if repeated by an invisible voice, came the words of an old prophetic scroll, as Eva had often read them to him,—“Fear not! for I have redeemed thee.
He only glared for a moment on the downcast face of Tom, and walked off.
He took Tom’s trunk, which contained a very neat and abundant wardrobe, to the forecastle, where it was soon surrounded by various hands of the boat.
With much laughing, at the expense of niggers who tried to be gentlemen, the articles very readily were sold to one and another, and the empty trunk finally put up at auction.
It was a good joke, they all thought, especially to see how Tom looked after his things, as they were going this way and that; and then the auction of the trunk, that was funnier than all, and occasioned abundant witticisms.
This little affair being over, Simon sauntered up again to his property.
“Now, Tom, I’ve relieved you of any extra baggage, you see.
I go in for making niggers careful; one suit has to do for one year, on my place.” Simon next walked up to the place where Emmeline was sitting, chained to another woman.
“Well, my dear,” he said, chucking her under the chin, “keep up your spirits.” The involuntary look of horror, fright and aversion, with which the girl regarded him, did not escape his eye.
He frowned fiercely.
“None o’ your shines, gal! you’s got to keep a pleasant face, when I speak to ye,—d’ye hear?
And you, you old yellow poco moonshine!” he said, giving a shove to the mulatto woman to whom Emmeline was chained, “don’t you carry that sort of face!
You’s got to look chipper, I tell ye!” “I say, all on ye,” he said retreating a pace or two back, “look at me,—look at me,—look me right in the eye,—_straight_, now!” said he, stamping his foot at every pause.
As by a fascination, every eye was now directed to the glaring greenish-gray eye of Simon.
“Now,” said he, doubling his great, heavy fist into something resembling a blacksmith’s hammer, “d’ye see this fist?
Heft it!” he said, bringing it down on Tom’s hand.
Well, I tell ye this yer fist has got as hard as iron _knocking down niggers_.
I never see the nigger, yet, I couldn’t bring down with one crack,” said he, bringing his fist down so near to the face of Tom that he winked and drew back.
“I don’t keep none o’ yer cussed overseers; I does my own overseeing; and I tell you things _is_ seen to.
You’s every one on ye got to toe the mark, I tell ye; quick,—straight,—the moment I speak.
So, now, mind yerselves; for I don’t show no mercy!” The women involuntarily drew in their breath, and the whole gang sat with downcast, dejected faces.
Meanwhile, Simon turned on his heel, and marched up to the bar of the boat for a dram.
“That’s the way I begin with my niggers,” he said, to a gentlemanly man, who had stood by him during his speech.
“It’s my system to begin strong,—just let ’em know what to expect.” “Indeed!” said the stranger, looking upon him with the curiosity of a naturalist studying some out-of-the-way specimen.
I’m none o’ yer gentlemen planters, with lily fingers, to slop round and be cheated by some old cuss of an overseer!
Just feel of my knuckles, now; look at my fist.
Tell ye, sir, the flesh on ’t has come jest like a stone, practising on nigger—feel on it.” The stranger applied his fingers to the implement in question, and simply said, “’T is hard enough; and, I suppose,” he added, “practice has made your heart just like it.” “Why, yes, I may say so,” said Simon, with a hearty laugh.
Niggers never gets round me, neither with squalling nor soft soap,—that’s a fact.” “You have a fine lot there.” “Real,” said Simon.
“There’s that Tom, they telled me he was suthin’ uncommon.
I paid a little high for him, tendin’ him for a driver and a managing chap; only get the notions out that he’s larnt by bein’ treated as niggers never ought to be, he’ll do prime!
“And how long do they generally last?” said the stranger.
“Well, donno; ’cordin’ as their constitution is.
I used to, when I fust begun, have considerable trouble fussin’ with ’em and trying to make ’em hold out,—doctorin’ on ’em up when they’s sick, and givin’ on ’em clothes and blankets, and what not, tryin’ to keep ’em all sort o’ decent and comfortable.
Now, you see, I just put ’em straight through, sick or well.
When one nigger’s dead, I buy another; and I find it comes cheaper and easier, every way.” The stranger turned away, and seated himself beside a gentleman, who had been listening to the conversation with repressed uneasiness.
“You must not take that fellow to be any specimen of Southern planters,” said he.
“I should hope not,” said the young gentleman, with emphasis.
If there were no planters except such as that one,” said he, pointing with his finger to Legree, who stood with his back to them, “the whole thing would go down like a millstone.
It is your respectability and humanity that licenses and protects his brutality.” “You certainly have a high opinion of my good nature,” said the planter, smiling, “but I advise you not to talk quite so loud, as there are people on board the boat who might not be quite so tolerant to opinion as I am.
You had better wait till I get up to my plantation, and there you may abuse us all, quite at your leisure.” The young gentleman colored and smiled, and the two were soon busy in a game of backgammon.
Meanwhile, another conversation was going on in the lower part of the boat, between Emmeline and the mulatto woman with whom she was confined.
As was natural, they were exchanging with each other some particulars of their history.
“Who did you belong to?” said Emmeline.
P’raps you’ve seen the house.” “Was he good to you?” said Emmeline.
“Yes, my husband,—he’s a blacksmith.
They took me off so quick, I didn’t even have time to see him; and I’s got four children.
O, dear me!” said the woman, covering her face with her hands.
It is a natural impulse, in every one, when they hear a tale of distress, to think of something to say by way of consolation.
Emmeline wanted to say something, but she could not think of anything to say.
As by a common consent, they both avoided, with fear and dread, all mention of the horrible man who was now their master.
True, there is religious trust for even the darkest hour.
The mulatto woman was a member of the Methodist church, and had an unenlightened but very sincere spirit of piety.
Emmeline had been educated much more intelligently,—taught to read and write, and diligently instructed in the Bible, by the care of a faithful and pious mistress; yet, would it not try the faith of the firmest Christian, to find themselves abandoned, apparently, of God, in the grasp of ruthless violence?
How much more must it shake the faith of Christ’s poor little ones, weak in knowledge and tender in years!
The boat moved on,—freighted with its weight of sorrow,—up the red, muddy, turbid current, through the abrupt tortuous windings of the Red river; and sad eyes gazed wearily on the steep red-clay banks, as they glided by in dreary sameness.
At last the boat stopped at a small town, and Legree, with his party, disembarked.
CHAPTER XXXII Dark Places “The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.”[1] [1] Ps. 74:20.
Trailing wearily behind a rude wagon, and over a ruder road, Tom and his associates faced onward.
In the wagon was seated Simon Legree and the two women, still fettered together, were stowed away with some baggage in the back part of it, and the whole company were seeking Legree’s plantation, which lay a good distance off.
It is disconsolate enough, this riding, to the stranger, who, with well-filled pocket and well-appointed horse, threads the lonely way on some errand of business; but wilder, drearier, to the man enthralled, whom every weary step bears further from all that man loves and prays for.
So one should have thought, that witnessed the sunken and dejected expression on those dark faces; the wistful, patient weariness with which those sad eyes rested on object after object that passed them in their sad journey.
Simon rode on, however, apparently well pleased, occasionally pulling away at a flask of spirit, which he kept in his pocket.
“I say, _you!_” he said, as he turned back and caught a glance at the dispirited faces behind him.
“Strike up a song, boys,—come!” The men looked at each other, and the “_come_” was repeated, with a smart crack of the whip which the driver carried in his hands.
Tom began a Methodist hymn.
“Jerusalem, my happy home, Name ever dear to me!
When shall my sorrows have an end, Thy joys when shall—“[2] [2] _Jerusalem, my happy home_,” anonymous hymn dating from the latter part of the sixteenth century, sung to the tune of “St.
Augustine’s _Meditations_.
“Shut up, you black cuss!” roared Legree; “did ye think I wanted any o’ yer infernal old Methodism?
I say, tune up, now, something real rowdy,—quick!” One of the other men struck up one of those unmeaning songs, common among the slaves.
Ho! yo! hi—e! _oh!”_ The singer appeared to make up the song to his own pleasure, generally hitting on rhyme, without much attempt at reason; and the party took up the chorus, at intervals, “Ho! ho! ho! boys, ho!
High—e—oh! high—e—oh!” It was sung very boisterouly, and with a forced attempt at merriment; but no wail of despair, no words of impassioned prayer, could have had such a depth of woe in them as the wild notes of the chorus.
As if the poor, dumb heart, threatened,—prisoned,—took refuge in that inarticulate sanctuary of music, and found there a language in which to breathe its prayer to God!
He only heard the boys singing noisily, and was well pleased; he was making them “keep up their spirits.” “Well, my little dear,” said he, turning to Emmeline, and laying his hand on her shoulder, “we’re almost home!” When Legree scolded and stormed, Emmeline was terrified; but when he laid his hand on her, and spoke as he now did, she felt as if she had rather he would strike her.
The expression of his eyes made her soul sick, and her flesh creep.
Involuntarily she clung closer to the mulatto woman by her side, as if she were her mother.
“No, Mas’r!” said Emmeline, trembling and looking down.
You needn’t be so frightened; I don’t mean to make you work very hard.
You’ll have fine times with me, and live like a lady,—only be a good girl.” Legree had been drinking to that degree that he was inclining to be very gracious; and it was about this time that the enclosures of the plantation rose to view.
The estate had formerly belonged to a gentleman of opulence and taste, who had bestowed some considerable attention to the adornment of his grounds.
Having died insolvent, it had been purchased, at a bargain, by Legree, who used it, as he did everything else, merely as an implement for money-making.
What was once a smooth-shaven lawn before the house, dotted here and there with ornamental shrubs, was now covered with frowsy tangled grass, with horseposts set up, here and there, in it, where the turf was stamped away, and the ground littered with broken pails, cobs of corn, and other slovenly remains.
Here and there, a mildewed jessamine or honeysuckle hung raggedly from some ornamental support, which had been pushed to one side by being used as a horse-post.
What once was a large garden was now all grown over with weeds, through which, here and there, some solitary exotic reared its forsaken head.
What had been a conservatory had now no window-shades, and on the mouldering shelves stood some dry, forsaken flower-pots, with sticks in them, whose dried leaves showed they had once been plants.
The wagon rolled up a weedy gravel walk, under a noble avenue of China trees, whose graceful forms and ever-springing foliage seemed to be the only things there that neglect could not daunt or alter,—like noble spirits, so deeply rooted in goodness, as to flourish and grow stronger amid discouragement and decay.
The house had been large and handsome.
It was built in a manner common at the South; a wide verandah of two stories running round every part of the house, into which every outer door opened, the lower tier being supported by brick pillars.
But the place looked desolate and uncomfortable; some windows stopped up with boards, some with shattered panes, and shutters hanging by a single hinge,—all telling of coarse neglect and discomfort.
Bits of board, straw, old decayed barrels and boxes, garnished the ground in all directions; and three or four ferocious-looking dogs, roused by the sound of the wagon-wheels, came tearing out, and were with difficulty restrained from laying hold of Tom and his companions, by the effort of the ragged servants who came after them.
“Ye see what ye’d get!” said Legree, caressing the dogs with grim satisfaction, and turning to Tom and his companions.
How now, Sambo!” he said, to a ragged fellow, without any brim to his hat, who was officious in his attentions.
“How have things been going?” “Fust rate, Mas’r.” “Quimbo,” said Legree to another, who was making zealous demonstrations to attract his attention, “ye minded what I telled ye?” “Guess I did, didn’t I?” These two colored men were the two principal hands on the plantation.
Legree had trained them in savageness and brutality as systematically as he had his bull-dogs; and, by long practice in hardness and cruelty, brought their whole nature to about the same range of capacities.
It is a common remark, and one that is thought to militate strongly against the character of the race, that the negro overseer is always more tyrannical and cruel than the white one.
It is no more true of this race than of every oppressed race, the world over.
Legree, like some potentates we read of in history, governed his plantation by a sort of resolution of forces.
Sambo and Quimbo cordially hated each other; the plantation hands, one and all, cordially hated them; and, by playing off one against another, he was pretty sure, through one or the other of the three parties, to get informed of whatever was on foot in the place.
Nobody can live entirely without social intercourse; and Legree encouraged his two black satellites to a kind of coarse familiarity with him,—a familiarity, however, at any moment liable to get one or the other of them into trouble; for, on the slightest provocation, one of them always stood ready, at a nod, to be a minister of his vengeance on the other.
As they stood there now by Legree, they seemed an apt illustration of the fact that brutal men are lower even than animals.
Their coarse, dark, heavy features; their great eyes, rolling enviously on each other; their barbarous, guttural, half-brute intonation; their dilapidated garments fluttering in the wind,—were all in admirable keeping with the vile and unwholesome character of everything about the place.
“Here, you Sambo,” said Legree, “take these yer boys down to the quarters; and here’s a gal I’ve got for _you_,” said he, as he separated the mulatto woman from Emmeline, and pushed her towards him;—“I promised to bring you one, you know.” The woman gave a start, and drawing back, said, suddenly, “O, Mas’r!
“Come, mistress,” he said to Emmeline, “you go in here with me.” A dark, wild face was seen, for a moment, to glance at the window of the house; and, as Legree opened the door, a female voice said something, in a quick, imperative tone.
Tom, who was looking, with anxious interest, after Emmeline, as she went in, noticed this, and heard Legree answer, angrily, “You may hold your tongue!
I’ll do as I please, for all you!” Tom heard no more; for he was soon following Sambo to the quarters.
The quarters was a little sort of street of rude shanties, in a row, in a part of the plantation, far off from the house.
They had a forlorn, brutal, forsaken air.
He had been comforting himself with the thought of a cottage, rude, indeed, but one which he might make neat and quiet, and where he might have a shelf for his Bible, and a place to be alone out of his laboring hours.
He looked into several; they were mere rude shells, destitute of any species of furniture, except a heap of straw, foul with dirt, spread confusedly over the floor, which was merely the bare ground, trodden hard by the tramping of innumerable feet.
“Which of these will be mine?” said he, to Sambo, submissively.
“Dunno; ken turn in here, I spose,” said Sambo; “spects thar’s room for another thar; thar’s a pretty smart heap o’ niggers to each on ’em, now; sure, I dunno what I ’s to do with more.” It was late in the evening when the weary occupants of the shanties came flocking home,—men and women, in soiled and tattered garments, surly and uncomfortable, and in no mood to look pleasantly on new-comers.
The small village was alive with no inviting sounds; hoarse, guttural voices contending at the hand-mills where their morsel of hard corn was yet to be ground into meal, to fit it for the cake that was to constitute their only supper.
From the earliest dawn of the day, they had been in the fields, pressed to work under the driving lash of the overseers; for it was now in the very heat and hurry of the season, and no means was left untried to press every one up to the top of their capabilities.
“True,” says the negligent lounger; “picking cotton isn’t hard work.” Isn’t it?
Tom looked in vain among the gang, as they poured along, for companionable faces.
He saw only sullen, scowling, imbruted men, and feeble, discouraged women, or women that were not women,—the strong pushing away the weak,—the gross, unrestricted animal selfishness of human beings, of whom nothing good was expected and desired; and who, treated in every way like brutes, had sunk as nearly to their level as it was possible for human beings to do.
To a late hour in the night the sound of the grinding was protracted; for the mills were few in number compared with the grinders, and the weary and feeble ones were driven back by the strong, and came on last in their turn.
“Ho yo!” said Sambo, coming to the mulatto woman, and throwing down a bag of corn before her; “what a cuss yo name?” “Lucy,” said the woman.
Yo grind dis yer corn, and get _my_ supper baked, ye har?” “I an’t your woman, and I won’t be!” said the woman, with the sharp, sudden courage of despair; “you go long!” “I’ll kick yo, then!” said Sambo, raising his foot threateningly.
“I say, Sambo, you go to spilin’ the hands, I’ll tell Mas’r o’ you,” said Quimbo, who was busy at the mill, from which he had viciously driven two or three tired women, who were waiting to grind their corn.
It was a new kind of work there,—a deed of charity, small as it was; but it woke an answering touch in their hearts,—an expression of womanly kindness came over their hard faces; they mixed his cake for him, and tended its baking; and Tom sat down by the light of the fire, and drew out his Bible,—for he had need for comfort.
“Good Lord! han’t seen un since I was in Kentuck.” “Was you raised in Kentuck?” said Tom, with interest.
“I used to har Missis a readin’ on ’t, sometimes, in Kentuck; but, laws o’ me! we don’t har nothin’ here but crackin’ and swarin’.” “Read a piece, anyways!” said the first woman, curiously, seeing Tom attentively poring over it.
My flesh is fairly sore, and I tremble all over, every day, and Sambo’s allers a jawin’ at me, ’cause I doesn’t pick faster; and nights it’s most midnight ’fore I can get my supper; and den ’pears like I don’t turn over and shut my eyes, ’fore I hear de horn blow to get up, and at it agin in de mornin’.
If I knew whar de Lor was, I’d tell him.” “He’s here, he’s everywhere,” said Tom.
I’s jest gwine to camp down, and sleep while I ken.” The women went off to their cabins, and Tom sat alone, by the smouldering fire, that flickered up redly in his face.
The silver, fair-browed moon rose in the purple sky, and looked down, calm and silent, as God looks on the scene of misery and oppression,—looked calmly on the lone black man, as he sat, with his arms folded, and his Bible on his knee.
“Is God HERE?” Ah, how is it possible for the untaught heart to keep its faith, unswerving, in the face of dire misrule, and palpable, unrebuked injustice?
In that simple heart waged a fierce conflict; the crushing sense of wrong, the foreshadowing, of a whole life of future misery, the wreck of all past hopes, mournfully tossing in the soul’s sight, like dead corpses of wife, and child, and friend, rising from the dark wave, and surging in the face of the half-drowned mariner!
Ah, was it easy _here_ to believe and hold fast the great password of Christian faith, that “God IS, and is the REWARDER of them that diligently seek Him”?
Tom rose, disconsolate, and stumbled into the cabin that had been allotted to him.
The floor was already strewn with weary sleepers, and the foul air of the place almost repelled him; but the heavy night-dews were chill, and his limbs weary, and, wrapping about him a tattered blanket, which formed his only bed-clothing, he stretched himself in the straw and fell asleep.
In dreams, a gentle voice came over his ear; he was sitting on the mossy seat in the garden by Lake Pontchartrain, and Eva, with her serious eyes bent downward, was reading to him from the Bible; and he heard her read.
But who shall say that that sweet young spirit, which in life so yearned to comfort and console the distressed, was forbidden of God to assume this ministry after death?
It is a beautiful belief, That ever round our head Are hovering, on angel wings, The spirits of the dead.
CHAPTER XXXIII Cassy “And behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had no comforter.”—ECCL. 4:1 It took but a short time to familiarize Tom with all that was to be hoped or feared in his new way of life.
He was an expert and efficient workman in whatever he undertook; and was, both from habit and principle, prompt and faithful.
Quiet and peaceable in his disposition, he hoped, by unremitting diligence, to avert from himself at least a portion of the evils of his condition.
He saw enough of abuse and misery to make him sick and weary; but he determined to toil on, with religious patience, committing himself to Him that judgeth righteously, not without hope that some way of escape might yet be opened to him.
Legree took a silent note of Tom’s availability.
He rated him as a first-class hand; and yet he felt a secret dislike to him,—the native antipathy of bad to good.
He saw, plainly, that when, as was often the case, his violence and brutality fell on the helpless, Tom took notice of it; for, so subtle is the atmosphere of opinion, that it will make itself felt, without words; and the opinion even of a slave may annoy a master.
Tom in various ways manifested a tenderness of feeling, a commiseration for his fellow-sufferers, strange and new to them, which was watched with a jealous eye by Legree.
He had purchased Tom with a view of eventually making him a sort of overseer, with whom he might, at times, intrust his affairs, in short absences; and, in his view, the first, second, and third requisite for that place, was _hardness_.
Legree made up his mind, that, as Tom was not hard to his hand, he would harden him forthwith; and some few weeks after Tom had been on the place, he determined to commence the process.
One morning, when the hands were mustered for the field, Tom noticed, with surprise, a new comer among them, whose appearance excited his attention.
It was a woman, tall and slenderly formed, with remarkably delicate hands and feet, and dressed in neat and respectable garments.
By the appearance of her face, she might have been between thirty-five and forty; and it was a face that, once seen, could never be forgotten,—one of those that, at a glance, seem to convey to us an idea of a wild, painful, and romantic history.
Her forehead was high, and her eyebrows marked with beautiful clearness.
Her straight, well-formed nose, her finely-cut mouth, and the graceful contour of her head and neck, showed that she must once have been beautiful; but her face was deeply wrinkled with lines of pain, and of proud and bitter endurance.
Her complexion was sallow and unhealthy, her cheeks thin, her features sharp, and her whole form emaciated.
But her eye was the most remarkable feature,—so large, so heavily black, overshadowed by long lashes of equal darkness, and so wildly, mournfully despairing.
There was a fierce pride and defiance in every line of her face, in every curve of the flexible lip, in every motion of her body; but in her eye was a deep, settled night of anguish,—an expression so hopeless and unchanging as to contrast fearfully with the scorn and pride expressed by her whole demeanor.
To the gang, however, she was known; for there was much looking and turning of heads, and a smothered yet apparent exultation among the miserable, ragged, half-starved creatures by whom she was surrounded.
“He! he! he!” said another; “you’ll know how good it is, Misse!” “We’ll see her work!” “Wonder if she’ll get a cutting up, at night, like the rest of us!” “I’d be glad to see her down for a flogging, I’ll bound!” said another.
The woman took no notice of these taunts, but walked on, with the same expression of angry scorn, as if she heard nothing.
Tom had always lived among refined, and cultivated people, and he felt intuitively, from her air and bearing, that she belonged to that class; but how or why she could be fallen to those degrading circumstances, he could not tell.
Tom was soon busy at his work; but, as the woman was at no great distance from him, he often glanced an eye to her, at her work.
He saw, at a glance, that a native adroitness and handiness made the task to her an easier one than it proved to many.
She picked very fast and very clean, and with an air of scorn, as if she despised both the work and the disgrace and humiliation of the circumstances in which she was placed.
She was evidently in a condition of great suffering, and Tom often heard her praying, as she wavered and trembled, and seemed about to fall down.
Tom silently as he came near to her, transferred several handfuls of cotton from his own sack to hers.
“O, don’t, don’t!” said the woman, looking surprised; “it’ll get you into trouble.” Just then Sambo came up.
He seemed to have a special spite against this woman; and, flourishing his whip, said, in brutal, guttural tones, “What dis yer, Luce,—foolin’ a’” and, with the word, kicking the woman with his heavy cowhide shoe, he struck Tom across the face with his whip.
Tom silently resumed his task; but the woman, before at the last point of exhaustion, fainted.
“I’ll give her something better than camphire!” and, taking a pin from his coat-sleeve, he buried it to the head in her flesh.
“Get up, you beast, and work, will yer, or I’ll show yer a trick more!” The woman seemed stimulated, for a few moments, to an unnatural strength, and worked with desperate eagerness.
Suddenly, the stranger woman whom we have described, and who had, in the course of her work, come near enough to hear Tom’s last words, raised her heavy black eyes, and fixed them, for a second, on him; then, taking a quantity of cotton from her basket, she placed it in his.
When you’ve been here a month, you’ll be done helping anybody; you’ll find it hard enough to take care of your own skin!” “The Lord forbid, Missis!” said Tom, using instinctively to his field companion the respectful form proper to the high bred with whom he had lived.
“The Lord never visits these parts,” said the woman, bitterly, as she went nimbly forward with her work; and again the scornful smile curled her lips.
But the action of the woman had been seen by the driver, across the field; and, flourishing his whip, he came up to her.
Go along! yer under me now,—mind yourself, or yer’ll cotch it!” A glance like sheet-lightning suddenly flashed from those black eyes; and, facing about, with quivering lip and dilated nostrils, she drew herself up, and fixed a glance, blazing with rage and scorn, on the driver.
I’ve only to say the word!” “What de devil you here for, den?” said the man, evidently cowed, and sullenly retreating a step or two.
“Didn’t mean no harm, Misse Cassy!” “Keep your distance, then!” said the woman.
And, in truth, the man seemed greatly inclined to attend to something at the other end of the field, and started off in quick time.
The woman suddenly turned to her work, and labored with a despatch that was perfectly astonishing to Tom.
Long after dusk, the whole weary train, with their baskets on their heads, defiled up to the building appropriated to the storing and weighing the cotton.
Legree was there, busily conversing with the two drivers.
“Dat ar Tom’s gwine to make a powerful deal o’ trouble; kept a puttin’ into Lucy’s basket.—One o’ these yer dat will get all der niggers to feelin’ ’bused, if Masir don’t watch him!” said Sambo.
“He’ll have to get a breakin’ in, won’t he, boys?” Both negroes grinned a horrid grin, at this intimation.
“Wal, boys, the best way is to give him the flogging to do, till he gets over his notions.
“Now, dar’s Lucy,—de aggravatinest, ugliest wench on de place!” pursued Sambo.
“Take care, Sam; I shall begin to think what’s the reason for your spite agin Lucy.” “Well, Mas’r knows she sot herself up agin Mas’r, and wouldn’t have me, when he telled her to.” “I’d a flogged her into ’t,” said Legree, spitting, “only there’s such a press o’ work, it don’t seem wuth a while to upset her jist now.
She’s slender; but these yer slender gals will bear half killin’ to get their own way!” “Wal, Lucy was real aggravatin’ and lazy, sulkin’ round; wouldn’t do nothin,—and Tom he stuck up for her.” “He did, eh!
Wal, then, Tom shall have the pleasure of flogging her.
It’ll be a good practice for him, and he won’t put it on to the gal like you devils, neither.” “Ho, ho! haw! haw! haw!” laughed both the sooty wretches; and the diabolical sounds seemed, in truth, a not unapt expression of the fiendish character which Legree gave them.
I ruther guess der weight ’s in it, Mas’r!” “_I do the weighing!_” said Legree, emphatically.
Both the drivers again laughed their diabolical laugh.
“So!” he added, “Misse Cassy did her day’s work.” “She picks like de debil and all his angels!” “She’s got ’em all in her, I believe!” said Legree; and, growling a brutal oath, he proceeded to the weighing-room.
Slowly the weary, dispirited creatures, wound their way into the room, and, with crouching reluctance, presented their baskets to be weighed.
Tom’s basket was weighed and approved; and he looked, with an anxious glance, for the success of the woman he had befriended.
Tottering with weakness, she came forward, and delivered her basket.
It was of full weight, as Legree well perceived; but, affecting anger, he said, “What, you lazy beast! short again! stand aside, you’ll catch it, pretty soon!” The woman gave a groan of utter despair, and sat down on a board.
The person who had been called Misse Cassy now came forward, and, with a haughty, negligent air, delivered her basket.
As she delivered it, Legree looked in her eyes with a sneering yet inquiring glance.
She fixed her black eyes steadily on him, her lips moved slightly, and she said something in French.
What it was, no one knew; but Legree’s face became perfectly demoniacal in its expression, as she spoke; he half raised his hand, as if to strike,—a gesture which she regarded with fierce disdain, as she turned and walked away.
It’s what I an’t used to,—never did,—and can’t do, no way possible.” “Ye’ll larn a pretty smart chance of things ye never did know, before I’ve done with ye!” said Legree, taking up a cowhide, and striking Tom a heavy blow cross the cheek, and following up the infliction by a shower of blows.
“There!” he said, as he stopped to rest; “now, will ye tell me ye can’t do it?” “Yes, Mas’r,” said Tom, putting up his hand, to wipe the blood, that trickled down his face.
“I’m willin’ to work, night and day, and work while there’s life and breath in me; but this yer thing I can’t feel it right to do;—and, Mas’r, I _never_ shall do it,—_never_!” Tom had a remarkably smooth, soft voice, and a habitually respectful manner, that had given Legree an idea that he would be cowardly, and easily subdued.
When he spoke these last words, a thrill of amazement went through every one; the poor woman clasped her hands, and said, “O Lord!” and every one involuntarily looked at each other and drew in their breath, as if to prepare for the storm that was about to burst.
Legree looked stupefied and confounded; but at last burst forth,—“What! ye blasted black beast! tell _me_ ye don’t think it _right_ to do what I tell ye!
What have any of you cussed cattle to do with thinking what’s right?
May be ye think ye’r a gentleman master, Tom, to be a telling your master what’s right, and what ain’t!
So you pretend it’s wrong to flog the gal!” “I think so, Mas’r,” said Tom; “the poor crittur’s sick and feeble; ’t would be downright cruel, and it’s what I never will do, nor begin to.
Mas’r, if you mean to kill me, kill me; but, as to my raising my hand agin any one here, I never shall,—I’ll die first!” Tom spoke in a mild voice, but with a decision that could not be mistaken.
Legree shook with anger; his greenish eyes glared fiercely, and his very whiskers seemed to curl with passion; but, like some ferocious beast, that plays with its victim before he devours it, he kept back his strong impulse to proceed to immediate violence, and broke out into bitter raillery.
“Well, here’s a pious dog, at last, let down among us sinners!—a saint, a gentleman, and no less, to talk to us sinners about our sins!
Powerful holy critter, he must be!
Here, you rascal, you make believe to be so pious,—didn’t you never hear, out of yer Bible, ‘Servants, obey yer masters’?
An’t yer mine, now, body and soul?” he said, giving Tom a violent kick with his heavy boot; “tell me!” In the very depth of physical suffering, bowed by brutal oppression, this question shot a gleam of joy and triumph through Tom’s soul.
He suddenly stretched himself up, and, looking earnestly to heaven, while the tears and blood that flowed down his face mingled, he exclaimed, “No! no! no! my soul an’t yours, Mas’r!
Here, Sambo, Quimbo, give this dog such a breakin’ in as he won’t get over, this month!” The two gigantic negroes that now laid hold of Tom, with fiendish exultation in their faces, might have formed no unapt personification of powers of darkness.
The poor woman screamed with apprehension, and all rose, as by a general impulse, while they dragged him unresisting from the place.
CHAPTER XXXIV The Quadroon’s Story And behold the tears of such as are oppressed; and on the side of their oppressors there was power.
Wherefore I praised the dead that are already dead more than the living that are yet alive.—ECCL. 4:1.
It was late at night, and Tom lay groaning and bleeding alone, in an old forsaken room of the gin-house, among pieces of broken machinery, piles of damaged cotton, and other rubbish which had there accumulated.
The night was damp and close, and the thick air swarmed with myriads of mosquitos, which increased the restless torture of his wounds; whilst a burning thirst—a torture beyond all others—filled up the uttermost measure of physical anguish.
A footstep entered the room, behind him, and the light of a lantern flashed on his eyes.
It isn’t the first time I’ve been out in the night, carrying water to such as you.” “Thank you, Missis,” said Tom, when he had done drinking.
The woman, whom long practice with the victims of brutality had made familiar with many healing arts, went on to make many applications to Tom’s wounds, by means of which he was soon somewhat relieved.
“Now,” said the woman, when she had raised his head on a roll of damaged cotton, which served for a pillow, “there’s the best I can do for you.” Tom thanked her; and the woman, sitting down on the floor, drew up her knees, and embracing them with her arms, looked fixedly before her, with a bitter and painful expression of countenance.
Her bonnet fell back, and long wavy streams of black hair fell around her singular and melancholy-face.
You were a brave fellow,—you had the right on your side; but it’s all in vain, and out of the question, for you to struggle.
You are in the devil’s hands;—he is the strongest, and you must give up!” Give up! and, had not human weakness and physical agony whispered that, before?
Tom started; for the bitter woman, with her wild eyes and melancholy voice, seemed to him an embodiment of the temptation with which he had been wrestling.
O Lord!” he groaned, “how can I give up?” “There’s no use calling on the Lord,—he never hears,” said the woman, steadily; “there isn’t any God, I believe; or, if there is, he’s taken sides against us.
Everything is pushing us into hell.
Why shouldn’t we go?” Tom closed his eyes, and shuddered at the dark, atheistic words.
“You see,” said the woman, “_you_ don’t know anything about it—I do.
Here you are, on a lone plantation, ten miles from any other, in the swamps; not a white person here, who could testify, if you were burned alive,—if you were scalded, cut into inch-pieces, set up for the dogs to tear, or hung up and whipped to death.
I could make any one’s hair rise, and their teeth chatter, if I should only tell what I’ve seen and been knowing to, here,—and it’s no use resisting!
Wasn’t I a woman delicately bred; and he,—God in heaven! what was he, and is he?
Her good mistress taught her to read the Bible; and she’s brought her Bible here—to hell with her!”—and the woman laughed a wild and doleful laugh, that rung, with a strange, supernatural sound, through the old ruined shed.
Tom folded his hands; all was darkness and horror.
Lord Jesus! have you quite forgot us poor critturs?” burst forth, at last;—“help, Lord, I perish!” The woman sternly continued: “And what are these miserable low dogs you work with, that you should suffer on their account?
They are all of ’em as low and cruel to each other as they can be; there’s no use in your suffering to keep from hurting them.” “Poor critturs!” said Tom,—“what made ’em cruel?—and, if I give out, I shall get used to ’t, and grow, little by little, just like ’em!
If I get to be as hard-hearted as that ar’ Sambo, and as wicked, it won’t make much odds to me how I come so; it’s the bein’ so,—that ar’s what I’m a dreadin’.” The woman fixed a wild and startled look on Tom, as if a new thought had struck her; and then, heavily groaning, said, “O God a’ mercy! you speak the truth!
O—O—O!”—and, with groans, she fell on the floor, like one crushed and writhing under the extremity of mental anguish.
There was a silence, a while, in which the breathing of both parties could be heard, when Tom faintly said, “O, please, Missis!” The woman suddenly rose up, with her face composed to its usual stern, melancholy expression.
She then read aloud, in a soft voice, and with a beauty of intonation that was peculiar, that touching account of anguish and of glory.
Often, as she read, her voice faltered, and sometimes failed her altogether, when she would stop, with an air of frigid composure, till she had mastered herself.
When she came to the touching words, “Father forgive them, for they know not what they do,” she threw down the book, and, burying her face in the heavy masses of her hair, she sobbed aloud, with a convulsive violence.
Tom was weeping, also, and occasionally uttering a smothered ejaculation.
O blessed Lord Jesus, do help us!” “Missis,” said Tom, after a while, “I can see that, some how, you’re quite ’bove me in everything; but there’s one thing Missis might learn even from poor Tom.
If we suffer with him, we shall also reign, Scripture says; but, if we deny Him, he also will deny us.
It tells how they was stoned and sawn asunder, and wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, and was destitute, afflicted, tormented.
Sufferin’ an’t no reason to make us think the Lord’s turned agin us; but jest the contrary, if only we hold on to him, and doesn’t give up to sin.” “But why does he put us where we can’t help but sin?” said the woman.
Tomorrow they’ll be at you again.
There’s Emmeline, she’s trying to hold on, and you’re trying,—but what use?
I _know_ the Lord’ll help me, and bring me through.” The woman did not answer; she sat with her black eyes intently fixed on the floor.
“May be it’s the way,” she murmured to herself; “but those that _have_ given up, there’s no hope for them!—none!
We live in filth, and grow loathsome, till we loathe ourselves!
And we long to die, and we don’t dare to kill ourselves!—No hope! no hope! no hope?—this girl now,—just as old as I was!
“You see me now,” she said, speaking to Tom very rapidly; “see what I am!
Well, I was brought up in luxury; the first I remember is, playing about, when I was a child, in splendid parlors,—when I was kept dressed up like a doll, and company and visitors used to praise me.
There was a garden opening from the saloon windows; and there I used to play hide-and-go-seek, under the orange-trees, with my brothers and sisters.
I went to a convent, and there I learned music, French and embroidery, and what not; and when I was fourteen, I came out to my father’s funeral.
He died very suddenly, and when the property came to be settled, they found that there was scarcely enough to cover the debts; and when the creditors took an inventory of the property, I was set down in it.
The day after the funeral, my father’s wife took her children, and went up to her father’s plantation.
I thought they treated me strangely, but didn’t know.
There was a young lawyer who they left to settle the business; and he came every day, and was about the house, and spoke very politely to me.
He brought with him, one day, a young man, whom I thought the handsomest I had ever seen.
I was lonesome and full of sorrow, and he was so kind and gentle to me; and he told me that he had seen me before I went to the convent, and that he had loved me a great while, and that he would be my friend and protector;—in short, though he didn’t tell me, he had paid two thousand dollars for me, and I was his property,—I became his willingly, for I loved him.
Loved!” said the woman, stopping.
He was so beautiful, so high, so noble!
He put me into a beautiful house, with servants, horses, and carriages, and furniture, and dresses.
Everything that money could buy, he gave me; but I didn’t set any value on all that,—I only cared for him.
But he convinced me that it would be impossible; and he told me that, if we were only faithful to each other, it was marriage before God.
I alone,—and gave him all his medicine, and did everything for him; and then he called me his good angel, and said I’d saved his life.
We had two beautiful children.
He was the image of his father,—he had such beautiful eyes, such a forehead, and his hair hung all in curls around it; and he had all his father’s spirit, and his talent, too.
He used to tell me that I was the most beautiful woman in Louisiana, he was so proud of me and the children.
He used to love to have me dress them up, and take them and me about in an open carriage, and hear the remarks that people would make on us; and he used to fill my ears constantly with the fine things that were said in praise of me and the children.
He had a cousin come to New Orleans, who was his particular friend,—he thought all the world of him;—but, from the first time I saw him, I couldn’t tell why, I dreaded him; for I felt sure he was going to bring misery on us.
I did not dare say a word; for Henry was so high spirited, I was afraid to.
And then he introduced him to another lady, and I saw soon that his heart was gone from me.
He never told me, but I saw it,—I knew it, day after day,—I felt my heart breaking, but I could not say a word!
At this, the wretch offered to buy me and the children of Henry, to clear off his gambling debts, which stood in the way of his marrying as he wished;—and _he sold us_.
He told me, one day, that he had business in the country, and should be gone two or three weeks.
He kissed me and kissed the children, a good many times, and went out.
“Then _he_ came, the cursed wretch! he came to take possession.
He told me that he had bought me and my children; and showed me the papers.
I cursed him before God, and told him I’d die sooner than live with him.” “‘Just as you please,’ said he; ‘but, if you don’t behave reasonably, I’ll sell both the children, where you shall never see them again.’ He told me that he always had meant to have me, from the first time he saw me; and that he had drawn Henry on, and got him in debt, on purpose to make him willing to sell me.
He had my children;—whenever I resisted his will anywhere, he would talk about selling them, and he made me as submissive as he desired.
O, what a life it was! to live with my heart breaking, every day,—to keep on, on, on, loving, when it was only misery; and to be bound, body and soul, to one I hated.
I used to love to read to Henry, to play to him, to waltz with him, and sing to him; but everything I did for this one was a perfect drag,—yet I was afraid to refuse anything.
He was very imperious, and harsh to the children.
Elise was a timid little thing; but Henry was bold and high-spirited, like his father, and he had never been brought under, in the least, by any one.
He was always finding fault, and quarrelling with him; and I used to live in daily fear and dread.
I tried to make the child respectful;—I tried to keep them apart, for I held on to those children like death; but it did no good. _He sold both those children_.
He told me that my children were sold, but whether I ever saw their faces again, depended on him; and that, if I wasn’t quiet, they should smart for it.
Well, you can do anything with a woman, when you’ve got her children.
He made me submit; he made me be peaceable; he flattered me with hopes that, perhaps, he would buy them back; and so things went on, a week or two.
One day, I was out walking, and passed by the calaboose; I saw a crowd about the gate, and heard a child’s voice,—and suddenly my Henry broke away from two or three men who were holding him, and ran, screaming, and caught my dress.
They came up to him, swearing dreadfully; and one man, whose face I shall never forget, told him that he wouldn’t get away so; that he was going with him into the calaboose, and he’d get a lesson there he’d never forget.
I tried to beg and plead,—they only laughed; the poor boy screamed and looked into my face, and held on to me, until, in tearing him off, they tore the skirt of my dress half away; and they carried him in, screaming ‘Mother! mother! mother!’ There was one man stood there seemed to pity me.
I offered him all the money I had, if he’d only interfere.
He shook his head, and said that the boy had been impudent and disobedient, ever since he bought him; that he was going to break him in, once for all.
I told him, and begged him to go and interfere.
“It seemed to me something in my head snapped, at that moment.
I remember seeing a great sharp bowie-knife on the table; I remember something about catching it, and flying upon him; and then all grew dark, and I didn’t know any more,—not for days and days.
Then, they made me dress up, every day; and gentlemen used to come in and stand and smoke their cigars, and look at me, and ask questions, and debate my price.
They threatened to whip me, if I wasn’t gayer, and didn’t take some pains to make myself agreeable.
At length, one day, came a gentleman named Stuart.
He seemed to have some feeling for me; he saw that something dreadful was on my heart, and he came to see me alone, a great many times, and finally persuaded me to tell him.
He bought me, at last, and promised to do all he could to find and buy back my children.
Then he found where my daughter was; an old woman was keeping her.
Captain Stuart was very kind to me; he had a splendid plantation, and took me to it.
I took the little fellow in my arms, when he was two weeks old, and kissed him, and cried over him; and then I gave him laudanum, and held him close to my bosom, while he slept to death.
How I mourned and cried over it! and who ever dreamed that it was anything but a mistake, that had made me give it the laudanum? but it’s one of the few things that I’m glad of, now.
After a while, the cholera came, and Captain Stuart died; everybody died that wanted to live,—and I,—I, though I went down to death’s door,—_I lived!_ Then I was sold, and passed from hand to hand, till I grew faded and wrinkled, and I had a fever; and then this wretch bought me, and brought me here,—and here I am!” The woman stopped.
She had hurried on through her story, with a wild, passionate utterance; sometimes seeming to address it to Tom, and sometimes speaking as in a soliloquy.
So vehement and overpowering was the force with which she spoke, that, for a season, Tom was beguiled even from the pain of his wounds, and, raising himself on one elbow, watched her as she paced restlessly up and down, her long black hair swaying heavily about her, as she moved.
The sisters in the convent used to tell me of a day of judgment, when everything is coming to light;—won’t there be vengeance, then!
“They think it’s nothing, what we suffer,—nothing, what our children suffer!
Yes! and, in the judgment day, I will stand up before God, a witness against those that have ruined me and my children, body and soul!
“When I was a girl, I thought I was religious; I used to love God and prayer.
Now, I’m a lost soul, pursued by devils that torment me day and night; they keep pushing me on and on—and I’ll do it, too, some of these days!” she said, clenching her hand, while an insane light glanced in her heavy black eyes.
“I’ll send him where he belongs,—a short way, too,—one of these nights, if they burn me alive for it!” A wild, long laugh rang through the deserted room, and ended in a hysteric sob; she threw herself on the floor, in convulsive sobbing and struggles.
“Can I do anything more for you, my poor fellow?” she said, approaching where Tom lay; “shall I give you some more water?” There was a graceful and compassionate sweetness in her voice and manner, as she said this, that formed a strange contrast with the former wildness.
Tom drank the water, and looked earnestly and pitifully into her face.
“Him that you read of to me,—the Lord.” “I used to see the picture of him, over the altar, when I was a girl,” said Cassy, her dark eyes fixing themselves in an expression of mournful reverie; “but, _he isn’t here!_ there’s nothing here, but sin and long, long, long despair!
Try to sleep, if you can.” And, placing water in his reach, and making whatever little arrangements for his comforts she could, Cassy left the shed.
CHAPTER XXXV The Tokens “And slight, withal, may be the things that bring Back on the heart the weight which it would fling Aside forever; it may be a sound, A flower, the wind, the ocean, which shall wound,— Striking the electric chain wherewith we’re darkly bound.” _Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, Can_. 4.
The sitting-room of Legree’s establishment was a large, long room, with a wide, ample fireplace.
It had once been hung with a showy and expensive paper, which now hung mouldering, torn and discolored, from the damp walls.
The place had that peculiar sickening, unwholesome smell, compounded of mingled damp, dirt and decay, which one often notices in close old houses.
The wall-paper was defaced, in spots, by slops of beer and wine; or garnished with chalk memorandums, and long sums footed up, as if somebody had been practising arithmetic there.
In the fireplace stood a brazier full of burning charcoal; for, though the weather was not cold, the evenings always seemed damp and chilly in that great room; and Legree, moreover, wanted a place to light his cigars, and heat his water for punch.
The ruddy glare of the charcoal displayed the confused and unpromising aspect of the room,—saddles, bridles, several sorts of harness, riding-whips, overcoats, and various articles of clothing, scattered up and down the room in confused variety; and the dogs, of whom we have before spoken, had encamped themselves among them, to suit their own taste and convenience.
Legree was just mixing himself a tumbler of punch, pouring his hot water from a cracked and broken-nosed pitcher, grumbling, as he did so, “Plague on that Sambo, to kick up this yer row between me and the new hands!
It was the woman Cassy, who had stolen upon his soliloquy.
Either behave yourself, or stay down to the quarters, and fare and work with the rest.” “I’d rather, ten thousand times,” said the woman, “live in the dirtiest hole at the quarters, than be under your hoof!” “But you _are_ under my hoof, for all that,” said he, turning upon her, with a savage grin; “that’s one comfort.
“Simon Legree, take care!” said the woman, with a sharp flash of her eye, a glance so wild and insane in its light as to be almost appalling.
“You’re afraid of me, Simon,” she said, deliberately; “and you’ve reason to be!
But be careful, for I’ve got the devil in me!” The last words she whispered in a hissing tone, close to his ear.
I believe, to my soul, you have!” said Legree, pushing her from him, and looking uncomfortably at her.
“After all, Cassy,” he said, “why can’t you be friends with me, as you used to?” “Used to!” said she, bitterly.
She stopped short,—a word of choking feelings, rising in her heart, kept her silent.
When Legree brought Emmeline to the house, all the smouldering embers of womanly feeling flashed up in the worn heart of Cassy, and she took part with the girl; and a fierce quarrel ensued between her and Legree.
Legree, in a fury, swore she should be put to field service, if she would not be peaceable.
Cassy, with proud scorn, declared she _would_ go to the field.
And she worked there one day, as we have described, to show how perfectly she scorned the threat.
Legree was secretly uneasy, all day; for Cassy had an influence over him from which he could not free himself.
When she presented her basket at the scales, he had hoped for some concession, and addressed her in a sort of half conciliatory, half scornful tone; and she had answered with the bitterest contempt.
The outrageous treatment of poor Tom had roused her still more; and she had followed Legree to the house, with no particular intention, but to upbraid him for his brutality.
“I wish, Cassy,” said Legree, “you’d behave yourself decently.” “_You_ talk about behaving decently!
And what have you been doing?—you, who haven’t even sense enough to keep from spoiling one of your best hands, right in the most pressing season, just for your devilish temper!” “I was a fool, it’s a fact, to let any such brangle come up,” said Legree; “but, when the boy set up his will, he had to be broke in.” “I reckon you won’t break _him_ in!” “Won’t I?” said Legree, rising, passionately.
He came forward, bowing, and holding out something in a paper.
“It’s a witch thing, Mas’r!” “A what?” “Something that niggers gets from witches.
He had it tied round his neck, with a black string.” Legree, like most godless and cruel men, was superstitious.
He took the paper, and opened it uneasily.
“Damnation!” he screamed, in sudden passion, stamping on the floor, and pulling furiously at the hair, as if it burned him.
Take it off!—burn it up!—burn it up!” he screamed, tearing it off, and throwing it into the charcoal.
“What did you bring it to me for?” Sambo stood, with his heavy mouth wide open, and aghast with wonder; and Cassy, who was preparing to leave the apartment, stopped, and looked at him in perfect amazement.
“Don’t you bring me any more of your devilish things!” said he, shaking his fist at Sambo, who retreated hastily towards the door; and, picking up the silver dollar, he sent it smashing through the window-pane, out into the darkness.
He sat doggedly down in his chair, and began sullenly sipping his tumbler of punch.
Cassy prepared herself for going out, unobserved by him; and slipped away to minister to poor Tom, as we have already related.
And what was the matter with Legree? and what was there in a simple curl of fair hair to appall that brutal man, familiar with every form of cruelty?
To answer this, we must carry the reader backward in his history.
Hard and reprobate as the godless man seemed now, there had been a time when he had been rocked on the bosom of a mother,—cradled with prayers and pious hymns,—his now seared brow bedewed with the waters of holy baptism.
In early childhood, a fair-haired woman had led him, at the sound of Sabbath bell, to worship and to pray.
Far in New England that mother had trained her only son, with long, unwearied love, and patient prayers.
Born of a hard-tempered sire, on whom that gentle woman had wasted a world of unvalued love, Legree had followed in the steps of his father.
Boisterous, unruly, and tyrannical, he despised all her counsel, and would none of her reproof; and, at an early age, broke from her, to seek his fortunes at sea.
He never came home but once, after; and then, his mother, with the yearning of a heart that must love something, and has nothing else to love, clung to him, and sought, with passionate prayers and entreaties, to win him from a life of sin, to his soul’s eternal good.
That was Legree’s day of grace; then good angels called him; then he was almost persuaded, and mercy held him by the hand.
His heart inly relented,—there was a conflict,—but sin got the victory, and he set all the force of his rough nature against the conviction of his conscience.
And, one night, when his mother, in the last agony of her despair, knelt at his feet, he spurned her from him,—threw her senseless on the floor, and, with brutal curses, fled to his ship.
The next Legree heard of his mother was, when, one night, as he was carousing among drunken companions, a letter was put into his hand.
There is a dread, unhallowed necromancy of evil, that turns things sweetest and holiest to phantoms of horror and affright.
That pale, loving mother,—her dying prayers, her forgiving love,—wrought in that demoniac heart of sin only as a damning sentence, bringing with it a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation.
Legree burned the hair, and burned the letter; and when he saw them hissing and crackling in the flame, inly shuddered as he thought of everlasting fires.
He tried to drink, and revel, and swear away the memory; but often, in the deep night, whose solemn stillness arraigns the bad soul in forced communion with herself, he had seen that pale mother rising by his bedside, and felt the soft twining of that hair around his fingers, till the cold sweat would roll down his face, and he would spring from his bed in horror.
Ye who have wondered to hear, in the same evangel, that God is love, and that God is a consuming fire, see ye not how, to the soul resolved in evil, perfect love is the most fearful torture, the seal and sentence of the direst despair?
Curse me, if I think there’s any such thing as forgetting anything, any how,—hang it!
I don’t care,—I’ll _make_ her come!” Legree stepped out into a large entry, which went up stairs, by what had formerly been a superb winding staircase; but the passage-way was dirty and dreary, encumbered with boxes and unsightly litter.
The stairs, uncarpeted, seemed winding up, in the gloom, to nobody knew where!
The pale moonlight streamed through a shattered fanlight over the door; the air was unwholesome and chilly, like that of a vault.
It seemed strange and ghostlike in that dreary old house, perhaps because of the already tremulous state of his nerves.
A wild, pathetic voice, chants a hymn common among the slaves: “O there’ll be mourning, mourning, mourning, O there’ll be mourning, at the judgment-seat of Christ!” “Blast the girl!” said Legree.
Em!” he called, harshly; but only a mocking echo from the walls answered him.
The sweet voice still sung on: “Parents and children there shall part!
Parents and children there shall part!
Shall part to meet no more!” And clear and loud swelled through the empty halls the refrain, “O there’ll be mourning, mourning, mourning, O there’ll be mourning, at the judgment-seat of Christ!” Legree stopped.
He would have been ashamed to tell of it, but large drops of sweat stood on his forehead, his heart beat heavy and thick with fear; he even thought he saw something white rising and glimmering in the gloom before him, and shuddered to think what if the form of his dead mother should suddenly appear to him.
“I know one thing,” he said to himself, as he stumbled back in the sitting-room, and sat down; “I’ll let that fellow alone, after this!
I b’lieve I am bewitched, sure enough!
I’ve been shivering and sweating, ever since!
It would be a joke, if hair could rise from the dead!” Ah, Legree! that golden tress _was_ charmed; each hair had in it a spell of terror and remorse for thee, and was used by a mightier power to bind thy cruel hands from inflicting uttermost evil on the helpless!
“I say,” said Legree, stamping and whistling to the dogs, “wake up, some of you, and keep me company!” but the dogs only opened one eye at him, sleepily, and closed it again.
“I’ll have Sambo and Quimbo up here, to sing and dance one of their hell dances, and keep off these horrid notions,” said Legree; and, putting on his hat, he went on to the verandah, and blew a horn, with which he commonly summoned his two sable drivers.
Legree was often wont, when in a gracious humor, to get these two worthies into his sitting-room, and, after warming them up with whiskey, amuse himself by setting them to singing, dancing or fighting, as the humor took him.
It was between one and two o’clock at night, as Cassy was returning from her ministrations to poor Tom, that she heard the sound of wild shrieking, whooping, halloing, and singing, from the sitting-room, mingled with the barking of dogs, and other symptoms of general uproar.
She came up on the verandah steps, and looked in.
Legree and both the drivers, in a state of furious intoxication, were singing, whooping, upsetting chairs, and making all manner of ludicrous and horrid grimaces at each other.
She rested her small, slender hand on the window-blind, and looked fixedly at them;—there was a world of anguish, scorn, and fierce bitterness, in her black eyes, as she did so.
She turned hurriedly away, and, passing round to a back door, glided up stairs, and tapped at Emmeline’s door.
CHAPTER XXXVI Emmeline and Cassy Cassy entered the room, and found Emmeline sitting, pale with fear, in the furthest corner of it.
As she came in, the girl started up nervously; but, on seeing who it was, rushed forward, and catching her arm, said, “O Cassy, is it you?
I don’t care where,—into the swamp among the snakes,—anywhere! _Couldn’t_ we get _somewhere_ away from here?” “Nowhere, but into our graves,” said Cassy.
I’d rather have one near me than him,” said Emmeline, eagerly.
“There have been a good many here of your opinion,” said Cassy; “but you couldn’t stay in the swamps,—you’d be tracked by the dogs, and brought back, and then—then—” “What would he do?” said the girl, looking, with breathless interest, into her face.
You wouldn’t sleep much, if I should tell you things I’ve seen,—things that he tells of, sometimes, for good jokes.
There’s a place way out down by the quarters, where you can see a black, blasted tree, and the ground all covered with black ashes.
And I tell you, the Lord only knows what we may see tomorrow, if that poor fellow holds out as he’s begun.” “Horrid!” said Emmeline, every drop of blood receding from her cheeks.
Do the best you can,—do what you must,—and make it up in hating and cursing.” “He wanted to make me drink some of his hateful brandy,” said Emmeline; “and I hate it so—” “You’d better drink,” said Cassy.
One must have something;—things don’t look so dreadful, when you take that.” “Mother used to tell me never to touch any such thing,” said Emmeline.
“_Mother_ told you!” said Cassy, with a thrilling and bitter emphasis on the word mother.
“What use is it for mothers to say anything?
Haven’t I a daughter,—Lord knows where she is, and whose she is, now,—going the way her mother went, before her, I suppose, and that her children must go, after her!
There’s no end to the curse—forever!” “I wish I’d never been born!” said Emmeline, wringing her hands.
I’d die, if I dared to,” she said, looking out into the darkness, with that still, fixed despair which was the habitual expression of her face when at rest.
“It would be wicked to kill one’s self,” said Emmeline.
“I don’t know why,—no wickeder than things we live and do, day after day.
If it would only be the end of us, why, then—” Emmeline turned away, and hid her face in her hands.
While this conversation was passing in the chamber, Legree, overcome with his carouse, had sunk to sleep in the room below.
Legree was not an habitual drunkard.
His coarse, strong nature craved, and could endure, a continual stimulation, that would have utterly wrecked and crazed a finer one.
But a deep, underlying spirit of cautiousness prevented his often yielding to appetite in such measure as to lose control of himself.
This night, however, in his feverish efforts to banish from his mind those fearful elements of woe and remorse which woke within him, he had indulged more than common; so that, when he had discharged his sable attendants, he fell heavily on a settle in the room, and was sound asleep.
O! how dares the bad soul to enter the shadowy world of sleep?—that land whose dim outlines lie so fearfully near to the mystic scene of retribution!
In his heavy and feverish sleep, a veiled form stood beside him, and laid a cold, soft hand upon him.
He thought he knew who it was; and shuddered, with creeping horror, though the face was veiled.
Then he thought he felt _that hair_ twining round his fingers; and then, that it slid smoothly round his neck, and tightened and tightened, and he could not draw his breath; and then he thought voices _whispered_ to him,—whispers that chilled him with horror.
Then it seemed to him he was on the edge of a frightful abyss, holding on and struggling in mortal fear, while dark hands stretched up, and were pulling him over; and Cassy came behind him laughing, and pushed him.
It was his mother; and she turned away from him, and he fell down, down, down, amid a confused noise of shrieks, and groans, and shouts of demon laughter,—and Legree awoke.
Calmly the rosy hue of dawn was stealing into the room.
The morning star stood, with its solemn, holy eye of light, looking down on the man of sin, from out the brightening sky.
O, with what freshness, what solemnity and beauty, is each new day born; as if to say to insensate man, “Behold! thou hast one more chance! _Strive_ for immortal glory!” There is no speech nor language where this voice is not heard; but the bold, bad man heard it not.
What to him the sanctity of the star which the Son of God has hallowed as his own emblem?
Brute-like, he saw without perceiving; and, stumbling forward, poured out a tumbler of brandy, and drank half of it.
“I’ve had a h—l of a night!” he said to Cassy, who just then entered from an opposite door.
“What do you mean, you minx?” “You’ll find out, one of these days,” returned Cassy, in the same tone.
“Now Simon, I’ve one piece of advice to give you.” “The devil, you have!” “My advice is,” said Cassy, steadily, as she began adjusting some things about the room, “that you let Tom alone.” “What business is ’t of yours?” “What?
If you want to pay twelve hundred for a fellow, and use him right up in the press of the season, just to serve your own spite, it’s no business of mine, I’ve done what I could for him.” “You have?
What business have you meddling in my matters?” “None, to be sure.
I’ve saved you some thousands of dollars, at different times, by taking care of your hands,—that’s all the thanks I get.
Tompkins won’t lord it over you, I suppose,—and you’ll pay down your money like a lady, won’t you?
I think I see you doing it!” Legree, like many other planters, had but one form of ambition,—to have in the heaviest crop of the season,—and he had several bets on this very present season pending in the next town.
Cassy, therefore, with woman’s tact, touched the only string that could be made to vibrate.
“Well, I’ll let him off at what he’s got,” said Legree; “but he shall beg my pardon, and promise better fashions.” “That he won’t do,” said Cassy.
“I’d like to know _why_, Mistress,” said Legree, in the extreme of scorn.
You may kill him by inches,—you won’t get the first word of confession out of him.” “We’ll see,—where is he?” said Legree, going out.
Legree, though he talked so stoutly to Cassy, still sallied forth from the house with a degree of misgiving which was not common with him.
His dreams of the past night, mingled with Cassy’s prudential suggestions, considerably affected his mind.
He resolved that nobody should be witness of his encounter with Tom; and determined, if he could not subdue him by bullying, to defer his vengeance, to be wreaked in a more convenient season.
And, therefore, without shuddering or trembling, he heard the voice of his persecutor, as he drew near.
“Well, my boy,” said Legree, with a contemptuous kick, “how do you find yourself?
Ye couldn’t treat a poor sinner, now, to a bit of sermon, could ye,—eh?” Tom answered nothing.
This was a difficult matter for one so bruised and faint; and, as Tom made efforts to do so, Legree laughed brutally.
Cotched cold, may be, last night.” Tom by this time had gained his feet, and was confronting his master with a steady, unmoved front.
“Down, you dog!” said Legree, striking him with his riding-whip.
Ye think what you’ve got is something.
I tell you ’t an’t anything,—nothing ’t all.
How would ye like to be tied to a tree, and have a slow fire lit up around ye;—wouldn’t that be pleasant,—eh, Tom?” “Mas’r,” said Tom, “I know ye can do dreadful things; but,”—he stretched himself upward and clasped his hands,—“but, after ye’ve killed the body, there an’t no more ye can do.
And O, there’s all ETERNITY to come, after that!” ETERNITY,—the word thrilled through the black man’s soul with light and power, as he spoke; it thrilled through the sinner’s soul, too, like the bite of a scorpion.
Legree gnashed on him with his teeth, but rage kept him silent; and Tom, like a man disenthralled, spoke, in a clear and cheerful voice, “Mas’r Legree, as ye bought me, I’ll be a true and faithful servant to ye.
I’ll give ye all the work of my hands, all my time, all my strength; but my soul I won’t give up to mortal man.
I will hold on to the Lord, and put his commands before all,—die or live; you may be sure on ’t.
“I shall have _help_,” said Tom; “you’ll never do it.” “Who the devil’s going to help you?” said Legree, scornfully.
“The Lord Almighty,” said Tom.
He turned,—it was Cassy’s; but the cold soft touch recalled his dream of the night before, and, flashing through the chambers of his brain, came all the fearful images of the night-watches, with a portion of the horror that accompanied them.
Isn’t it just as I told you?” They say the alligator, the rhinoceros, though enclosed in bullet-proof mail, have each a spot where they are vulnerable; and fierce, reckless, unbelieving reprobates, have commonly this point in superstitious dread.
Legree turned away, determined to let the point go for the time.
“Well, have it your own way,” he said, doggedly, to Cassy.
“Hark, ye!” he said to Tom; “I won’t deal with ye now, because the business is pressing, and I want all my hands; but I _never_ forget.
I’ll score it against ye, and sometime I’ll have my pay out o’ yer old black hide,—mind ye!” Legree turned, and went out.
“There you go,” said Cassy, looking darkly after him; “your reckoning’s to come, yet!—My poor fellow, how are you?” “The Lord God hath sent his angel, and shut the lion’s mouth, for this time,” said Tom.
“For this time, to be sure,” said Cassy; “but now you’ve got his ill will upon you, to follow you day in, day out, hanging like a dog on your throat,—sucking your blood, bleeding away your life, drop by drop.
A while we must leave Tom in the hands of his persecutors, while we turn to pursue the fortunes of George and his wife, whom we left in friendly hands, in a farmhouse on the road-side.
Tom Loker we left groaning and touzling in a most immaculately clean Quaker bed, under the motherly supervision of Aunt Dorcas, who found him to the full as tractable a patient as a sick bison.
Imagine a tall, dignified, spiritual woman, whose clear muslin cap shades waves of silvery hair, parted on a broad, clear forehead, which overarches thoughtful gray eyes.
A snowy handkerchief of lisse crape is folded neatly across her bosom; her glossy brown silk dress rustles peacefully, as she glides up and down the chamber.
“The devil!” says Tom Loker, giving a great throw to the bedclothes.
“I must request thee, Thomas, not to use such language,” says Aunt Dorcas, as she quietly rearranged the bed.
Last thing ever _I_ want to think of—hang it all!” And Tom flounced over, untucking and disarranging everything, in a manner frightful to behold.
“That fellow and gal are here, I s’pose,” said he, sullenly, after a pause.
“They’d better be off up to the lake,” said Tom; “the quicker the better.” “Probably they will do so,” said Aunt Dorcas, knitting peacefully.
“And hark ye,” said Tom; “we’ve got correspondents in Sandusky, that watch the boats for us.
Her description’s out in Sandusky.” “We will attend to that matter,” said Dorcas, with characteristic composure.
Tom always spoke reverently of the Quakers.
But, tell ye what, stranger, they do fix up a sick fellow first rate,—no mistake.
Make jist the tallest kind o’ broth and knicknacks.” As Tom had informed them that their party would be looked for in Sandusky, it was thought prudent to divide them.
Jim, with his old mother, was forwarded separately; and a night or two after, George and Eliza, with their child, were driven privately into Sandusky, and lodged beneath a hospital roof, preparatory to taking their last passage on the lake.
Their night was now far spent, and the morning star of liberty rose fair before them!—electric word!
Is there anything more in it than a name—a rhetorical flourish?
Is there anything in it glorious and dear for a nation, that is not also glorious and dear for a man?
What is freedom to a nation, but freedom to the individuals in it?
To him, it is the right of a man to be a man, and not a brute; the right to call the wife of his bosom his wife, and to protect her from lawless violence; the right to protect and educate his child; the right to have a home of his own, a religion of his own, a character of his own, unsubject to the will of another.
All these thoughts were rolling and seething in George’s breast, as he was pensively leaning his head on his hand, watching his wife, as she was adapting to her slender and pretty form the articles of man’s attire, in which it was deemed safest she should make her escape.
“Now for it,” said she, as she stood before the glass, and shook down her silky abundance of black curly hair.
“I say, George, it’s almost a pity, isn’t it,” she said, as she held up some of it, playfully,—“pity it’s all got to come off?” George smiled sadly, and made no answer.
Eliza turned to the glass, and the scissors glittered as one long lock after another was detached from her head.
“There, now, that’ll do,” she said, taking up a hair-brush; “now for a few fancy touches.” “There, an’t I a pretty young fellow?” she said, turning around to her husband, laughing and blushing at the same time.
“What does make you so sober?” said Eliza, kneeling on one knee, and laying her hand on his.
Now my fate is all narrowing down to a point.
I should never live under it, Eliza.” “Don’t fear,” said his wife, hopefully.
I seem to feel him with us, George.” “You are a blessed woman, Eliza!” said George, clasping her with a convulsive grasp.
“I am sure of it, George,” said Eliza, looking upward, while tears of hope and enthusiasm shone on her long, dark lashes.
“I feel it in me, that God is going to bring us out of bondage, this very day.” “I will believe you, Eliza,” said George, rising suddenly up, “I will believe,—come let’s be off.
Well, indeed,” said he, holding her off at arm’s length, and looking admiringly at her, “you _are_ a pretty little fellow.
That crop of little, short curls, is quite becoming.
But, it’s almost time for the carriage;—I wonder if Mrs.
Smyth has got Harry rigged?” The door opened, and a respectable, middle-aged woman entered, leading little Harry, dressed in girl’s clothes.
“We call him Harriet, you see;—don’t the name come nicely?” The child stood gravely regarding his mother in her new and strange attire, observing a profound silence, and occasionally drawing deep sighs, and peeping at her from under his dark curls.
“Does Harry know mamma?” said Eliza, stretching her hands toward him.
Here,—how is it men put on cloaks, George?” “You must wear it so,” said her husband, throwing it over his shoulders.
“So, then,” said Eliza, imitating the motion,—“and I must stamp, and take long steps, and try to look saucy.” “Don’t exert yourself,” said George.
“There is, now and then, a modest young man; and I think it would be easier for you to act that character.” “And these gloves! mercy upon us!” said Eliza; “why, my hands are lost in them.” “I advise you to keep them on pretty strictly,” said George.
Smyth, “that there have been men down, warning all the packet captains against a man and woman, with a little boy.” “They have!” said George.
“Well, if we see any such people, we can tell them.” A hack now drove to the door, and the friendly family who had received the fugitives crowded around them with farewell greetings.
The disguises the party had assumed were in accordance with the hints of Tom Loker.
The two young men, as they appeared, walked up the plank into the boat, Eliza gallantly giving her arm to Mrs.
Smyth, and George attending to their baggage.
George was standing at the captain’s office, settling for his party, when he overheard two men talking by his side.
The speaker whom he addressed was our sometime friend Marks, who, with that valuable perseverance which characterized him, had come on to Sandusky, seeking whom he might devour.
“You would scarcely know the woman from a white one,” said Marks.
“The man is a very light mulatto; he has a brand in one of his hands.” The hand with which George was taking the tickets and change trembled a little; but he turned coolly around, fixed an unconcerned glance on the face of the speaker, and walked leisurely toward another part of the boat, where Eliza stood waiting for him.
Smyth, with little Harry, sought the seclusion of the ladies’ cabin, where the dark beauty of the supposed little girl drew many flattering comments from the passengers.
George had the satisfaction, as the bell rang out its farewell peal, to see Marks walk down the plank to the shore; and drew a long sigh of relief, when the boat had put a returnless distance between them.
The blue waves of Lake Erie danced, rippling and sparkling, in the sun-light.
A fresh breeze blew from the shore, and the lordly boat ploughed her way right gallantly onward.
Who thought, as George walked calmly up and down the deck of the steamer, with his shy companion at his side, of all that was burning in his bosom?
The mighty good that seemed approaching seemed too good, too fair, even to be a reality; and he felt a jealous dread, every moment of the day, that something would rise to snatch it from him.
His breath grew thick and short; a mist gathered before his eyes; he silently pressed the little hand that lay trembling on his arm.
Scarcely seeing what he did, he looked out his baggage, and gathered his little party.
They stood still till the boat had cleared; and then, with tears and embracings, the husband and wife, with their wondering child in their arms, knelt down and lifted up their hearts to God!
Smyth, to the hospitable abode of a good missionary, whom Christian charity has placed here as a shepherd to the outcast and wandering, who are constantly finding an asylum on this shore.
Who can speak the blessedness of that first day of freedom?
To move, speak and breathe,—go out and come in unwatched, and free from danger!
Who can speak the blessings of that rest which comes down on the free man’s pillow, under laws which insure to him the rights that God has given to man?
How fair and precious to that mother was that sleeping child’s face, endeared by the memory of a thousand dangers!
How impossible was it to sleep, in the exuberant possession of such blessedness!
The martyr, when faced even by a death of bodily anguish and horror, finds in the very terror of his doom a strong stimulant and tonic.
There is a vivid excitement, a thrill and fervor, which may carry through any crisis of suffering that is the birth-hour of eternal glory and rest.
But to live,—to wear on, day after day, of mean, bitter, low, harassing servitude, every nerve dampened and depressed, every power of feeling gradually smothered,—this long and wasting heart-martyrdom, this slow, daily bleeding away of the inward life, drop by drop, hour after hour,—this is the true searching test of what there may be in man or woman.
Long before his wounds were healed, Legree insisted that he should be put to the regular field-work; and then came day after day of pain and weariness, aggravated by every kind of injustice and indignity that the ill-will of a mean and malicious mind could devise.
Whoever, in _our_ circumstances, has made trial of pain, even with all the alleviations which, for us, usually attend it, must know the irritation that comes with it.
Tom no longer wondered at the habitual surliness of his associates; nay, he found the placid, sunny temper, which had been the habitude of his life, broken in on, and sorely strained, by the inroads of the same thing.
He had flattered himself on leisure to read his Bible; but there was no such thing as leisure there.
In the height of the season, Legree did not hesitate to press all his hands through, Sundays and week-days alike.
At first, Tom used to read a verse or two of his Bible, by the flicker of the fire, after he had returned from his daily toil; but, after the cruel treatment he received, he used to come home so exhausted, that his head swam and his eyes failed when he tried to read; and he was fain to stretch himself down, with the others, in utter exhaustion.
Is it strange that the religious peace and trust, which had upborne him hitherto, should give way to tossings of soul and despondent darkness?
The gloomiest problem of this mysterious life was constantly before his eyes,—souls crushed and ruined, evil triumphant, and God silent.
It was weeks and months that Tom wrestled, in his own soul, in darkness and sorrow.
He thought of Miss Ophelia’s letter to his Kentucky friends, and would pray earnestly that God would send him deliverance.
And then he would watch, day after day, in the vague hope of seeing somebody sent to redeem him; and, when nobody came, he would crush back to his soul bitter thoughts,—that it was vain to serve God, that God had forgotten him.
He sometimes saw Cassy; and sometimes, when summoned to the house, caught a glimpse of the dejected form of Emmeline, but held very little communion with either; in fact, there was no time for him to commune with anybody.
One evening, he was sitting, in utter dejection and prostration, by a few decaying brands, where his coarse supper was baking.
He put a few bits of brushwood on the fire, and strove to raise the light, and then drew his worn Bible from his pocket.
There were all the marked passages, which had thrilled his soul so often,—words of patriarchs and seers, poets and sages, who from early time had spoken courage to man,—voices from the great cloud of witnesses who ever surround us in the race of life.
Had the word lost its power, or could the failing eye and weary sense no longer answer to the touch of that mighty inspiration?
A coarse laugh roused him; he looked up,—Legree was standing opposite to him.
“Well, old boy,” he said, “you find your religion don’t work, it seems!
I thought I should get that through your wool, at last!” The cruel taunt was more than hunger and cold and nakedness.
You might have been better off than Sambo, or Quimbo either, and had easy times; and, instead of getting cut up and thrashed, every day or two, ye might have had liberty to lord it round, and cut up the other niggers; and ye might have had, now and then, a good warming of whiskey punch.
Come, Tom, don’t you think you’d better be reasonable?—heave that ar old pack of trash in the fire, and join my church!” “The Lord forbid!” said Tom, fervently.
This yer religion is all a mess of lying trumpery, Tom.
Ye’d better hold to me; I’m somebody, and can do something!” “No, Mas’r,” said Tom; “I’ll hold on.
The Lord may help me, or not help; but I’ll hold to him, and believe him to the last!” “The more fool you!” said Legree, spitting scornfully at him, and spurning him with his foot.
When a heavy weight presses the soul to the lowest level at which endurance is possible, there is an instant and desperate effort of every physical and moral nerve to throw off the weight; and hence the heaviest anguish often precedes a return tide of joy and courage.
The atheistic taunts of his cruel master sunk his before dejected soul to the lowest ebb; and, though the hand of faith still held to the eternal rock, it was a numb, despairing grasp.
Suddenly everything around him seemed to fade, and a vision rose before him of one crowned with thorns, buffeted and bleeding.
When he came to himself, the fire was gone out, his clothes were wet with the chill and drenching dews; but the dread soul-crisis was past, and, in the joy that filled him, he no longer felt hunger, cold, degradation, disappointment, wretchedness.
From his deepest soul, he that hour loosed and parted from every hope in life that now is, and offered his own will an unquestioning sacrifice to the Infinite.
Tom looked up to the silent, ever-living stars,—types of the angelic hosts who ever look down on man; and the solitude of the night rung with the triumphant words of a hymn, which he had sung often in happier days, but never with such feeling as now: “The earth shall be dissolved like snow, The sun shall cease to shine; But God, who called me here below, Shall be forever mine.
“When we’ve been there ten thousand years, Bright shining like the sun, We’ve no less days to sing God’s praise Than when we first begun.” Those who have been familiar with the religious histories of the slave population know that relations like what we have narrated are very common among them.
We have heard some from their own lips, of a very touching and affecting character.
The psychologist tells us of a state, in which the affections and images of the mind become so dominant and overpowering, that they press into their service the outward imagining.
Who shall measure what an all-pervading Spirit may do with these capabilities of our mortality, or the ways in which He may encourage the desponding souls of the desolate?
If the poor forgotten slave believes that Jesus hath appeared and spoken to him, who shall contradict him?
When the dim gray of dawn woke the slumberers to go forth to the field, there was among those tattered and shivering wretches one who walked with an exultant tread; for firmer than the ground he trod on was his strong faith in Almighty, eternal love.
Utmost agony, woe, degradation, want, and loss of all things, shall only hasten on the process by which he shall be made a king and a priest unto God!
From this time, an inviolable sphere of peace encompassed the lowly heart of the oppressed one,—an ever-present Saviour hallowed it as a temple.
Past now the bleeding of earthly regrets; past its fluctuations of hope, and fear, and desire; the human will, bent, and bleeding, and struggling long, was now entirely merged in the Divine.
So short now seemed the remaining voyage of life,—so near, so vivid, seemed eternal blessedness,—that life’s uttermost woes fell from him unharming.
All noticed the change in his appearance.
Cheerfulness and alertness seemed to return to him, and a quietness which no insult or injury could ruffle seemed to possess him.
Haw! haw! ho!” said the sooty gnome, laughing obsequiously.
I thought they’d a had her all stripped up afore I could get ’em off.
If the nigger’s got anything of this sort going, trip him up.” “Mas’r, let me lone for dat,” said Sambo, “I’ll tree de coon.
Ho, ho, ho!” This was spoken as Legree was getting on his horse, to go to the neighboring town.
That night, as he was returning, he thought he would turn his horse and ride round the quarters, and see if all was safe.
It was a superb moonlight night, and the shadows of the graceful China trees lay minutely pencilled on the turf below, and there was that transparent stillness in the air which it seems almost unholy to disturb.
Legree was a little distance from the quarters, when he heard the voice of some one singing.
A musical tenor voice sang, “When I can read my title clear To mansions in the skies, I’ll bid farewell to every fear, And wipe my weeping eyes “Should earth against my soul engage, And hellish darts be hurled, Then I can smile at Satan’s rage, And face a frowning world.
“Let cares like a wild deluge come, And storms of sorrow fall, May I but safely reach my home, My God, my Heaven, my All.”[2] [2] “On My Journey Home,” hymn by Isaac Watts, found in many of the southern country songbooks of the ante bellum period.
How I hate these cursed Methodist hymns!
Here, you nigger,” said he, coming suddenly out upon Tom, and raising his riding-whip, “how dare you be gettin’ up this yer row, when you ought to be in bed?
Shut yer old black gash, and get along in with you!” “Yes, Mas’r,” said Tom, with ready cheerfulness, as he rose to go in.
Legree was provoked beyond measure by Tom’s evident happiness; and riding up to him, belabored him over his head and shoulders.
“There, you dog,” he said, “see if you’ll feel so comfortable, after that!” But the blows fell now only on the outer man, and not, as before, on the heart.
Tom stood perfectly submissive; and yet Legree could not hide from himself that his power over his bond thrall was somehow gone.
And, as Tom disappeared in his cabin, and he wheeled his horse suddenly round, there passed through his mind one of those vivid flashes that often send the lightning of conscience across the dark and wicked soul.
He understood full well that it was GOD who was standing between him and his victim, and he blasphemed him.
That submissive and silent man, whom taunts, nor threats, nor stripes, nor cruelties, could disturb, roused a voice within him, such as of old his Master roused in the demoniac soul, saying, “What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth?—art thou come to torment us before the time?” Tom’s whole soul overflowed with compassion and sympathy for the poor wretches by whom he was surrounded.
To him it seemed as if his life-sorrows were now over, and as if, out of that strange treasury of peace and joy, with which he had been endowed from above, he longed to pour out something for the relief of their woes.
It is true, opportunities were scanty; but, on the way to the fields, and back again, and during the hours of labor, chances fell in his way of extending a helping-hand to the weary, the disheartened and discouraged.
The poor, worn-down, brutalized creatures, at first, could scarce comprehend this; but, when it was continued week after week, and month after month, it began to awaken long-silent chords in their benumbed hearts.
They would gladly have met to hear, and pray, and sing, in some place, together; but Legree would not permit it, and more than once broke up such attempts, with oaths and brutal execrations,—so that the blessed news had to circulate from individual to individual.
Yet who can speak the simple joy with which some of those poor outcasts, to whom life was a joyless journey to a dark unknown, heard of a compassionate Redeemer and a heavenly home?
It is the statement of missionaries, that, of all races of the earth, none have received the Gospel with such eager docility as the African.
The principle of reliance and unquestioning faith, which is its foundation, is more a native element in this race than any other; and it has often been found among them, that a stray seed of truth, borne on some breeze of accident into hearts the most ignorant, has sprung up into fruit, whose abundance has shamed that of higher and more skilful culture.
Stung to madness and despair by the crushing agonies of a life, Cassy had often resolved in her soul an hour of retribution, when her hand should avenge on her oppressor all the injustice and cruelty to which she had been witness, or which _she_ had in her own person suffered.
One night, after all in Tom’s cabin were sunk in sleep, he was suddenly aroused by seeing her face at the hole between the logs, that served for a window.
It was between one and two o’clock at night,—broad, calm, still moonlight.
Tom remarked, as the light of the moon fell upon Cassy’s large, black eyes, that there was a wild and peculiar glare in them, unlike their wonted fixed despair.
“Come here, Father Tom,” she said, laying her small hand on his wrist, and drawing him forward with a force as if the hand were of steel; “come here,—I’ve news for you.” “What, Misse Cassy?” said Tom, anxiously.
“Come on.” Tom hesitated.
But come, the back door is unlocked; there’s an axe there, I put it there,—his room door is open; I’ll show you the way.
Come along!” “Not for ten thousand worlds, Misse!” said Tom, firmly, stopping and holding her back, as she was pressing forward.
“But think of all these poor creatures,” said Cassy.
“We might set them all free, and go somewhere in the swamps, and find an island, and live by ourselves; I’ve heard of its being done.
“No! good never comes of wickedness.
“O, Misse Cassy!” said Tom, throwing himself before her, “for the dear Lord’s sake that died for ye, don’t sell your precious soul to the devil, that way!
What has he made hundreds of poor creatures suffer?
Isn’t he wringing the life-blood out of you?
His time’s come, and I’ll have his heart’s blood!” “No, no, no!” said Tom, holding her small hands, which were clenched with spasmodic violence.
When we can love and pray over all and through all, the battle’s past, and the victory’s come,—glory be to God!” And, with streaming eyes and choking voice, the black man looked up to heaven.
The deep fervor of Tom’s feelings, the softness of his voice, his tears, fell like dew on the wild, unsettled spirit of the poor woman.
A softness gathered over the lurid fires of her eye; she looked down, and Tom could feel the relaxing muscles of her hands, as she said, “Didn’t I tell you that evil spirits followed me?
I never have prayed since my children were sold!
I can’t pray!” “Poor soul!” said Tom, compassionately.
He came to bind up the broken-hearted, and comfort all that mourn.” Cassy stood silent, while large, heavy tears dropped from her downcast eyes.
It’s different with you; it’s a snare to you,—it’s more’n you can stand,—and you’d better go, if you can.” “I know no way but through the grave,” said Cassy.
“There’s no beast or bird but can find a home some where; even the snakes and the alligators have their places to lie down and be quiet; but there’s no place for us.
Everybody and everything is against us; even the very beasts side against us,—and where shall we go?” Tom stood silent; at length he said, “Him that saved Daniel in the den of lions,—that saved the children in the fiery furnace,—Him that walked on the sea, and bade the winds be still,—He’s alive yet; and I’ve faith to believe he can deliver you.
Try it, and I’ll pray, with all my might, for you.” By what strange law of mind is it that an idea long overlooked, and trodden under foot as a useless stone, suddenly sparkles out in new light, as a discovered diamond?
Cassy had often revolved, for hours, all possible or probable schemes of escape, and dismissed them all, as hopeless and impracticable; but at this moment there flashed through her mind a plan, so simple and feasible in all its details, as to awaken an instant hope.
“Father Tom, I’ll try it!” she said, suddenly.
“Amen!” said Tom; “the Lord help ye!” CHAPTER XXXIX The Stratagem “The way of the wicked is as darkness; he knoweth not at what he stumbleth.”[1] [1] Prov. 4:19.
The garret of the house that Legree occupied, like most other garrets, was a great, desolate space, dusty, hung with cobwebs, and littered with cast-off lumber.
The opulent family that had inhabited the house in the days of its splendor had imported a great deal of splendid furniture, some of which they had taken away with them, while some remained standing desolate in mouldering, unoccupied rooms, or stored away in this place.
One or two immense packing-boxes, in which this furniture was brought, stood against the sides of the garret.
There was a small window there, which let in, through its dingy, dusty panes, a scanty, uncertain light on the tall, high-backed chairs and dusty tables, that had once seen better days.
Altogether, it was a weird and ghostly place; but, ghostly as it was, it wanted not in legends among the superstitious negroes, to increase its terrors.
Some few years before, a negro woman, who had incurred Legree’s displeasure, was confined there for several weeks.
What passed there, we do not say; the negroes used to whisper darkly to each other; but it was known that the body of the unfortunate creature was one day taken down from there, and buried; and, after that, it was said that oaths and cursings, and the sound of violent blows, used to ring through that old garret, and mingled with wailings and groans of despair.
Once, when Legree chanced to overhear something of this kind, he flew into a violent passion, and swore that the next one that told stories about that garret should have an opportunity of knowing what was there, for he would chain them up there for a week.
Gradually, the staircase that led to the garret, and even the passage-way to the staircase, were avoided by every one in the house, from every one fearing to speak of it, and the legend was gradually falling into desuetude.
It had suddenly occurred to Cassy to make use of the superstitious excitability, which was so great in Legree, for the purpose of her liberation, and that of her fellow-sufferer.
The sleeping-room of Cassy was directly under the garret.
One day, without consulting Legree, she suddenly took it upon her, with some considerable ostentation, to change all the furniture and appurtenances of the room to one at some considerable distance.
The under-servants, who were called on to effect this movement, were running and bustling about with great zeal and confusion, when Legree returned from a ride.
“Hallo! you Cass!” said Legree, “what’s in the wind now?” “Nothing; only I choose to have another room,” said Cassy, doggedly.
“The devil you do! and what for?” “I’d like to get some sleep, now and then.” “Sleep! well, what hinders your sleeping?” “I could tell, I suppose, if you want to hear,” said Cassy, dryly.
Perhaps you’d better try it!” and then immediately she shut and locked the door.
Legree blustered and swore, and threatened to break down the door; but apparently thought better of it, and walked uneasily into the sitting-room.
Cassy perceived that her shaft had struck home; and, from that hour, with the most exquisite address, she never ceased to continue the train of influences she had begun.
In a knot-hole of the garret, that had opened, she had inserted the neck of an old bottle, in such a manner that when there was the least wind, most doleful and lugubrious wailing sounds proceeded from it, which, in a high wind, increased to a perfect shriek, such as to credulous and superstitious ears might easily seem to be that of horror and despair.
These sounds were, from time to time, heard by the servants, and revived in full force the memory of the old ghost legend.
A superstitious creeping horror seemed to fill the house; and though no one dared to breathe it to Legree, he found himself encompassed by it, as by an atmosphere.
No one is so thoroughly superstitious as the godless man.
The Christian is composed by the belief of a wise, all-ruling Father, whose presence fills the void unknown with light and order; but to the man who has dethroned God, the spirit-land is, indeed, in the words of the Hebrew poet, “a land of darkness and the shadow of death,” without any order, where the light is as darkness.
The influence of Cassy over him was of a strange and singular kind.
He was her owner, her tyrant and tormentor.
She was, as he knew, wholly, and without any possibility of help or redress, in his hands; and yet so it is, that the most brutal man cannot live in constant association with a strong female influence, and not be greatly controlled by it.
When he first bought her, she was, as she said, a woman delicately bred; and then he crushed her, without scruple, beneath the foot of his brutality.
But, as time, and debasing influences, and despair, hardened womanhood within her, and waked the fires of fiercer passions, she had become in a measure his mistress, and he alternately tyrannized over and dreaded her.
This influence had become more harassing and decided, since partial insanity had given a strange, weird, unsettled cast to all her words and language.
A night or two after this, Legree was sitting in the old sitting-room, by the side of a flickering wood fire, that threw uncertain glances round the room.
It was a stormy, windy night, such as raises whole squadrons of nondescript noises in rickety old houses.
Windows were rattling, shutters flapping, and wind carousing, rumbling, and tumbling down the chimney, and, every once in a while, puffing out smoke and ashes, as if a legion of spirits were coming after them.
Legree had been casting up accounts and reading newspapers for some hours, while Cassy sat in the corner; sullenly looking into the fire.
It was one of those collections of stories of bloody murders, ghostly legends, and supernatural visitations, which, coarsely got up and illustrated, have a strange fascination for one who once begins to read them.
“You don’t believe in ghosts, do you, Cass?” said he, taking the tongs and settling the fire.
“I thought you’d more sense than to let noises scare _you_.” “No matter what I believe,” said Cassy, sullenly.
“Fellows used to try to frighten me with their yarns at sea,” said Legree.
I’m too tough for any such trash, tell ye.” Cassy sat looking intensely at him in the shadow of the corner.
There was that strange light in her eyes that always impressed Legree with uneasiness.
I used to hear ’em sometimes down in the hold of the ship; and wind,—Lord’s sake! ye can make anything out o’ wind.” Cassy knew Legree was uneasy under her eyes, and, therefore, she made no answer, but sat fixing them on him, with that strange, unearthly expression, as before.
Nobody did?” “O, no,—of course not,—did I say they did?” said Cassy, with a smile of chilling derision.
“But—did—have you really seen?—Come, Cass, what is it, now,—speak out!” “You may sleep there, yourself,” said Cassy, “if you want to know.” “Did it come from the garret, Cassy?” “_It_,—what?” said Cassy.
“Why, what you told of—” “I didn’t tell you anything,” said Cassy, with dogged sullenness.
Legree walked up and down the room, uneasily.
“I’ll have this yer thing examined.
Fire your pistols,—do!” Legree stamped his foot, and swore violently.
What was that?” “What?” said Legree, starting.
For some reason or other, Legree neither spoke nor moved; a vague horror fell on him; while Cassy, with a keen, sneering glitter in her eyes, stood looking at him, counting the strokes.
“Twelve o’clock; well _now_ we’ll see,” said she, turning, and opening the door into the passage-way, and standing as if listening.
“Don’t you hear how cursedly it blows?” “Simon, come here,” said Cassy, in a whisper, laying her hand on his, and leading him to the foot of the stairs: “do you know what _that_ is?
Hark!” A wild shriek came pealing down the stairway.
Legree’s knees knocked together; his face grew white with fear.
Come!” and Cassy flitted up the winding stairway, laughing, and looking back after him.
A wild gust of wind swept down, extinguishing the candle he held in his hand, and with it the fearful, unearthly screams; they seemed to be shrieked in his very ear.
Legree fled frantically into the parlor, whither, in a few moments, he was followed by Cassy, pale, calm, cold as an avenging spirit, and with that same fearful light in her eye.
“I hope you are satisfied,” said she.
“None of your business!” said Legree.
Well,” said Cassy, “at any rate, I’m glad _I_ don’t sleep under it.” Anticipating the rising of the wind, that very evening, Cassy had been up and opened the garret window.
Of course, the moment the doors were opened, the wind had drafted down, and extinguished the light.
This may serve as a specimen of the game that Cassy played with Legree, until he would sooner have put his head into a lion’s mouth than to have explored that garret.
Meanwhile, in the night, when everybody else was asleep, Cassy slowly and carefully accumulated there a stock of provisions sufficient to afford subsistence for some time; she transferred, article by article, a greater part of her own and Emmeline’s wardrobe.
All things being arranged, they only waited a fitting opportunity to put their plan in execution.
By cajoling Legree, and taking advantage of a good-natured interval, Cassy had got him to take her with him to the neighboring town, which was situated directly on the Red River.
With a memory sharpened to almost preternatural clearness, she remarked every turn in the road, and formed a mental estimate of the time to be occupied in traversing it.
It was now near evening, Legree had been absent, on a ride to a neighboring farm.
For many days Cassy had been unusually gracious and accommodating in her humors; and Legree and she had been, apparently, on the best of terms.
At present, we may behold her and Emmeline in the room of the latter, busy in sorting and arranging two small bundles.
“Now put on your bonnet, and let’s start; it’s just about the right time.” “Why, they can see us yet,” said Emmeline.
The way of the thing is to be just this:—We will steal out of the back door, and run down by the quarters.
They will give chase, and we will get into the swamp; then, they can’t follow us any further till they go up and give the alarm, and turn out the dogs, and so on; and, while they are blundering round, and tumbling over each other, as they always do, you and I will slip along to the creek, that runs back of the house, and wade along in it, till we get opposite the back door.
He’ll muster some of those old overseers on the other plantations, and have a great hunt; and they’ll go over every inch of ground in that swamp.
So let him hunt at his leisure.” “Cassy, how well you have planned it!” said Emmeline.
“Who ever would have thought of it, but you?” There was neither pleasure nor exultation in Cassy’s eyes,—only a despairing firmness.
“Come,” she said, reaching her hand to Emmeline.
The two fugitives glided noiselessly from the house, and flitted, through the gathering shadows of evening, along by the quarters.
The crescent moon, set like a silver signet in the western sky, delayed a little the approach of night.
As Cassy expected, when quite near the verge of the swamps that encircled the plantation, they heard a voice calling to them to stop.
It was not Sambo, however, but Legree, who was pursuing them with violent execrations.
At the sound, the feebler spirit of Emmeline gave way; and, laying hold of Cassy’s arm, she said, “O, Cassy, I’m going to faint!” “If you do, I’ll kill you!” said Cassy, drawing a small, glittering stiletto, and flashing it before the eyes of the girl.
The diversion accomplished the purpose.
Emmeline did not faint, and succeeded in plunging, with Cassy, into a part of the labyrinth of swamp, so deep and dark that it was perfectly hopeless for Legree to think of following them, without assistance.
“Well,” said he, chuckling brutally; “at any rate, they’ve got themselves into a trap now—the baggage!
All hands!” called Legree, coming to the quarters, when the men and women were just returning from work.
“There’s two runaways in the swamps.
Many of the men sprang forward, officiously, to offer their services, either from the hope of the reward, or from that cringing subserviency which is one of the most baleful effects of slavery.
Some were for getting flambeaux of pine-knots.
Some were uncoupling the dogs, whose hoarse, savage bay added not a little to the animation of the scene.
Five dollars for him that gets ’em; and a glass of spirits to every one of you, anyhow.” The whole band, with the glare of blazing torches, and whoop, and shout, and savage yell, of man and beast, proceeded down to the swamp, followed, at some distance, by every servant in the house.
The establishment was, of a consequence, wholly deserted, when Cassy and Emmeline glided into it the back way.
The whooping and shouts of their pursuers were still filling the air; and, looking from the sitting-room windows, Cassy and Emmeline could see the troop, with their flambeaux, just dispersing themselves along the edge of the swamp.
“See there!” said Emmeline, pointing to Cassy; “the hunt is begun!
If we were only _there_, our chances wouldn’t be worth a picayune.
O, for pity’s sake, do let’s hide ourselves.
Quick!” “There’s no occasion for hurry,” said Cassy, coolly; “they are all out after the hunt,—that’s the amusement of the evening!
Meanwhile,” said she, deliberately taking a key from the pocket of a coat that Legree had thrown down in his hurry, “meanwhile I shall take something to pay our passage.” She unlocked the desk, took from it a roll of bills, which she counted over rapidly.
“O, don’t let’s do that!” said Emmeline.
Money will do anything, girl.” And, as she spoke, she put the money in her bosom.
“It would be stealing,” said Emmeline, in a distressed whisper.
“Stealing!” said Cassy, with a scornful laugh.
Every one of these bills is stolen,—stolen from poor, starving, sweating creatures, who must go to the devil at last, for his profit.
Let _him_ talk about stealing!
If they do, I’ll play ghost for them.” When Emmeline reached the garret, she found an immense box, in which some heavy pieces of furniture had once been brought, turned on its side, so that the opening faced the wall, or rather the eaves.
Cassy lit a small lamp, and creeping round under the eaves, they established themselves in it.
It was spread with a couple of small mattresses and some pillows; a box near by was plentifully stored with candles, provisions, and all the clothing necessary to their journey, which Cassy had arranged into bundles of an astonishingly small compass.
As to the servants, they would any of them stand and be shot, sooner than show their faces here.” Somewhat reassured, Emmeline settled herself back on her pillow.
“I meant to stop your fainting,” said Cassy, “and I did do it.
And now I tell you, Emmeline, you must make up your mind _not_ to faint, let what will come; there’s no sort of need of it.
If I had not stopped you, that wretch might have had his hands on you now.” Emmeline shuddered.
The two remained some time in silence.
Cassy busied herself with a French book; Emmeline, overcome with the exhaustion, fell into a doze, and slept some time.
She was awakened by loud shouts and outcries, the tramp of horses’ feet, and the baying of dogs.
Look, how muddy his horse is, flouncing about in the swamp; the dogs, too, look rather crestfallen.
Ah, my good sir, you’ll have to try the race again and again,—the game isn’t there.” “O, don’t speak a word!” said Emmeline; “what if they should hear you?” “If they do hear anything, it will make them very particular to keep away,” said Cassy.
“No danger; we may make any noise we please, and it will only add to the effect.” At length the stillness of midnight settled down over the house.
Legree, cursing his ill luck, and vowing dire vengeance on the morrow, went to bed.
Though life its common gifts deny,— Though, with a crushed and bleeding heart, And spurned of man, he goes to die!
For God hath marked each sorrowing day, And numbered every bitter tear, And heaven’s long years of bliss shall pay For all his children suffer here.” BRYANT.[1] [1] This poem does not appear in the collected works of William Cullen Bryant, nor in the collected poems of his brother, John Howard Bryant.
It was probably copied from a newspaper or magazine.
The longest way must have its close,—the gloomiest night will wear on to a morning.
An eternal, inexorable lapse of moments is ever hurrying the day of the evil to an eternal night, and the night of the just to an eternal day.
We have walked with our humble friend thus far in the valley of slavery; first through flowery fields of ease and indulgence, then through heart-breaking separations from all that man holds dear.
Again, we have waited with him in a sunny island, where generous hands concealed his chains with flowers; and, lastly, we have followed him when the last ray of earthly hope went out in night, and seen how, in the blackness of earthly darkness, the firmament of the unseen has blazed with stars of new and significant lustre.
The morning-star now stands over the tops of the mountains, and gales and breezes, not of earth, show that the gates of day are unclosing.
The escape of Cassy and Emmeline irritated the before surly temper of Legree to the last degree; and his fury, as was to be expected, fell upon the defenceless head of Tom.
When he hurriedly announced the tidings among his hands, there was a sudden light in Tom’s eye, a sudden upraising of his hands, that did not escape him.
He saw that he did not join the muster of the pursuers.
He thought of forcing him to do it; but, having had, of old, experience of his inflexibility when commanded to take part in any deed of inhumanity, he would not, in his hurry, stop to enter into any conflict with him.
Tom, therefore, remained behind, with a few who had learned of him to pray, and offered up prayers for the escape of the fugitives.
When Legree returned, baffled and disappointed, all the long-working hatred of his soul towards his slave began to gather in a deadly and desperate form.
Had not this man braved him,—steadily, powerfully, resistlessly,—ever since he bought him?
Was there not a spirit in him which, silent as it was, burned on him like the fires of perdition?
Who’s to hinder, I wonder?” And Legree clenched his fist, and shook it, as if he had something in his hands that he could rend in pieces.
But, then, Tom was a faithful, valuable servant; and, although Legree hated him the more for that, yet the consideration was still somewhat of a restraint to him.
The next morning, he determined to say nothing, as yet; to assemble a party, from some neighboring plantations, with dogs and guns; to surround the swamp, and go about the hunt systematically.
If it succeeded, well and good; if not, he would summon Tom before him, and—his teeth clenched and his blood boiled—_then_ he would break the fellow down, or—there was a dire inward whisper, to which his soul assented.
Ye say that the _interest_ of the master is a sufficient safeguard for the slave.
In the fury of man’s mad will, he will wittingly, and with open eye, sell his own soul to the devil to gain his ends; and will he be more careful of his neighbor’s body?
“Well,” said Cassy, the next day, from the garret, as she reconnoitred through the knot-hole, “the hunt’s going to begin again, today!” Three or four mounted horsemen were curvetting about, on the space in front of the house; and one or two leashes of strange dogs were struggling with the negroes who held them, baying and barking at each other.
The men are, two of them, overseers of plantations in the vicinity; and others were some of Legree’s associates at the tavern-bar of a neighboring city, who had come for the interest of the sport.
A more hard-favored set, perhaps, could not be imagined.
Legree was serving brandy, profusely, round among them, as also among the negroes, who had been detailed from the various plantations for this service; for it was an object to make every service of this kind, among the negroes, as much of a holiday as possible.
Cassy placed her ear at the knot-hole; and, as the morning air blew directly towards the house, she could overhear a good deal of the conversation.
A grave sneer overcast the dark, severe gravity of her face, as she listened, and heard them divide out the ground, discuss the rival merits of the dogs, give orders about firing, and the treatment of each, in case of capture.
Cassy drew back; and, clasping her hands, looked upward, and said, “O, great Almighty God! we are _all_ sinners; but what have _we_ done, more than all the rest of the world, that we should be treated so?” There was a terrible earnestness in her face and voice, as she spoke.
“If it wasn’t for _you_, child,” she said, looking at Emmeline, “I’d _go_ out to them; and I’d thank any one of them that _would_ shoot me down; for what use will freedom be to me?
Can it give me back my children, or make me what I used to be?” Emmeline, in her child-like simplicity, was half afraid of the dark moods of Cassy.
She looked perplexed, but made no answer.
She only took her hand, with a gentle, caressing movement.
“Don’t!” said Cassy, trying to draw it away; “you’ll get me to loving you; and I never mean to love anything, again!” “Poor Cassy!” said Emmeline, “don’t feel so!
If the Lord gives us liberty, perhaps he’ll give you back your daughter; at any rate, I’ll be like a daughter to you.
I shall love you, Cassy, whether you love me or not!” The gentle, child-like spirit conquered.
Cassy sat down by her, put her arm round her neck, stroked her soft, brown hair; and Emmeline then wondered at the beauty of her magnificent eyes, now soft with tears.
“O, Em!” said Cassy, “I’ve hungered for my children, and thirsted for them, and my eyes fail with longing for them!
Here! here!” she said, striking her breast, “it’s all desolate, all empty!
If God would give me back my children, then I could pray.” “You must trust him, Cassy,” said Emmeline; “he is our Father!” “His wrath is upon us,” said Cassy; “he has turned away in anger.” “No, Cassy!
Let us hope in Him,” said Emmeline,—“I always have had hope.” The hunt was long, animated, and thorough, but unsuccessful; and, with grave, ironic exultation, Cassy looked down on Legree, as, weary and dispirited, he alighted from his horse.
“Now, Quimbo,” said Legree, as he stretched himself down in the sitting-room, “you jest go and walk that Tom up here, right away!
Legree had told them, at first, that he had bought him for a general overseer, in his absence; and this had begun an ill will, on their part, which had increased, in their debased and servile natures, as they saw him becoming obnoxious to their master’s displeasure.
Quimbo, therefore, departed, with a will, to execute his orders.
Tom heard the message with a forewarning heart; for he knew all the plan of the fugitives’ escape, and the place of their present concealment;—he knew the deadly character of the man he had to deal with, and his despotic power.
But he felt strong in God to meet death, rather than betray the helpless.
Thou hast redeemed me, oh Lord God of truth!” and then quietly yielded himself to the rough, brutal grasp with which Quimbo seized him.
I’ll boun’ Mas’r’s back ’s up _high!_ No sneaking out, now!
See what ye’ll get!” The savage words none of them reached that ear!—a higher voice there was saying, “Fear not them that kill the body, and, after that, have no more that they can do.” Nerve and bone of that poor man’s body vibrated to those words, as if touched by the finger of God; and he felt the strength of a thousand souls in one.
As he passed along, the trees and bushes, the huts of his servitude, the whole scene of his degradation, seemed to whirl by him as the landscape by the rushing ear.
His soul throbbed,—his home was in sight,—and the hour of release seemed at hand.
“Well, Tom!” said Legree, walking up, and seizing him grimly by the collar of his coat, and speaking through his teeth, in a paroxysm of determined rage, “do you know I’ve made up my mind to KILL YOU?” “It’s very likely, Mas’r,” said Tom, calmly.
“I _have_,” said Legree, with a grim, terrible calmness, “_done—just—that—thing_, Tom, unless you’ll tell me what you know about these yer gals!” Tom stood silent.
“D’ye hear?” said Legree, stamping, with a roar like that of an incensed lion.
“Speak!” “_I han’t got nothing to tell, Mas’r_,” said Tom, with a slow, firm, deliberate utterance.
“Do you dare to tell me, ye old black Christian, ye don’t _know_?” said Legree.
“Speak!” thundered Legree, striking him furiously.
“Do you know anything?” “I know, Mas’r; but I can’t tell anything. _I can die!_” Legree drew in a long breath; and, suppressing his rage, took Tom by the arm, and, approaching his face almost to his, said, in a terrible voice, “Hark ’e, Tom!—ye think, ’cause I’ve let you off before, I don’t mean what I say; but, this time, _I’ve made up my mind_, and counted the cost.
I’ll count every drop of blood there is in you, and take ’em, one by one, till ye give up!” Tom looked up to his master, and answered, “Mas’r, if you was sick, or in trouble, or dying, and I could save ye, I’d _give_ ye my heart’s blood; and, if taking every drop of blood in this poor old body would save your precious soul, I’d give ’em freely, as the Lord gave his for me.
Do the worst you can, my troubles’ll be over soon; but, if ye don’t repent, yours won’t _never_ end!” Like a strange snatch of heavenly music, heard in the lull of a tempest, this burst of feeling made a moment’s blank pause.
Legree stood aghast, and looked at Tom; and there was such a silence, that the tick of the old clock could be heard, measuring, with silent touch, the last moments of mercy and probation to that hardened heart.
There was one hesitating pause,—one irresolute, relenting thrill,—and the spirit of evil came back, with seven-fold vehemence; and Legree, foaming with rage, smote his victim to the ground.
Scenes of blood and cruelty are shocking to our ear and heart.
What brother-man and brother-Christian must suffer, cannot be told us, even in our secret chamber, it so harrows the soul!
But, of old, there was One whose suffering changed an instrument of torture, degradation and shame, into a symbol of glory, honor, and immortal life; and, where His spirit is, neither degrading stripes, nor blood, nor insults, can make the Christian’s last struggle less than glorious.
Was he alone, that long night, whose brave, loving spirit was bearing up, in that old shed, against buffeting and brutal stripes?
There stood by him ONE,—seen by him alone,—“like unto the Son of God.” The tempter stood by him, too,—blinded by furious, despotic will,—every moment pressing him to shun that agony by the betrayal of the innocent.
Like his Master, he knew that, if he saved others, himself he could not save; nor could utmost extremity wring from him words, save of prayers and holy trust.
“He’s most gone, Mas’r,” said Sambo, touched, in spite of himself, by the patience of his victim.
“I’ll take every drop of blood he has, unless he confesses!” Tom opened his eyes, and looked upon his master.
“Ye poor miserable critter!” he said, “there ain’t no more ye can do!
I forgive ye, with all my soul!” and he fainted entirely away.
“I b’lieve, my soul, he’s done for, finally,” said Legree, stepping forward, to look at him.
Well, his mouth’s shut up, at last,—that’s one comfort!” Yes, Legree; but who shall shut up that voice in thy soul? that soul, past repentance, past prayer, past hope, in whom the fire that never shall be quenched is already burning!
His wondrous words and pious prayers had struck upon the hearts of the imbruted blacks, who had been the instruments of cruelty upon him; and, the instant Legree withdrew, they took him down, and, in their ignorance, sought to call him back to life,—as if _that_ were any favor to him.
“Sartin, we ’s been doin’ a drefful wicked thing!” said Sambo; “hopes Mas’r’ll have to ’count for it, and not we.” They washed his wounds,—they provided a rude bed, of some refuse cotton, for him to lie down on; and one of them, stealing up to the house, begged a drink of brandy of Legree, pretending that he was tired, and wanted it for himself.
“O, Tom! do tell us who is _Jesus_, anyhow?” said Sambo;—“Jesus, that’s been a standin’ by you so, all this night!—Who is he?” The word roused the failing, fainting spirit.
He poured forth a few energetic sentences of that wondrous One,—his life, his death, his everlasting presence, and power to save.
Lord Jesus, have mercy on us!” “Poor critters!” said Tom, “I’d be willing to bar all I have, if it’ll only bring ye to Christ!
O, Lord! give me these two more souls, I pray!” That prayer was answered!
CHAPTER XLI The Young Master Two days after, a young man drove a light wagon up through the avenue of China trees, and, throwing the reins hastily on the horse’s neck, sprang out and inquired for the owner of the place.
Shelby had, by some unfortunate accident, been detained, for a month or two, at some remote post-office, before it reached its destination; and, of course, before it was received, Tom was already lost to view among the distant swamps of the Red River.
Shelby read the intelligence with the deepest concern; but any immediate action upon it was an impossibility.
She was then in attendance on the sick-bed of her husband, who lay delirious in the crisis of a fever.
Master George Shelby, who, in the interval, had changed from a boy to a tall young man, was her constant and faithful assistant, and her only reliance in superintending his father’s affairs.
Miss Ophelia had taken the precaution to send them the name of the lawyer who did business for the St.
Clares; and the most that, in the emergency, could be done, was to address a letter of inquiry to him.
Shelby, a few days after, brought, of course, an absorbing pressure of other interests, for a season.
Shelby showed his confidence in his wife’s ability, by appointing her sole executrix upon his estates; and thus immediately a large and complicated amount of business was brought upon her hands.
Shelby, with characteristic energy, applied herself to the work of straightening the entangled web of affairs; and she and George were for some time occupied with collecting and examining accounts, selling property and settling debts; for Mrs.
Shelby was determined that everything should be brought into tangible and recognizable shape, let the consequences to her prove what they might.
In the mean time, they received a letter from the lawyer to whom Miss Ophelia had referred them, saying that he knew nothing of the matter; that the man was sold at a public auction, and that, beyond receiving the money, he knew nothing of the affair.
Shelby could be easy at this result; and, accordingly, some six months after, the latter, having business for his mother, down the river, resolved to visit New Orleans, in person, and push his inquiries, in hopes of discovering Tom’s whereabouts, and restoring him.
After some months of unsuccessful search, by the merest accident, George fell in with a man, in New Orleans, who happened to be possessed of the desired information; and with his money in his pocket, our hero took steamboat for Red River, resolving to find out and re-purchase his old friend.
He was soon introduced into the house, where he found Legree in the sitting-room.
Legree received the stranger with a kind of surly hospitality, “I understand,” said the young man, “that you bought, in New Orleans, a boy, named Tom.
He used to be on my father’s place, and I came to see if I couldn’t buy him back.” Legree’s brow grew dark, and he broke out, passionately: “Yes, I did buy such a fellow,—and a h—l of a bargain I had of it, too!
The most rebellious, saucy, impudent dog!
Set up my niggers to run away; got off two gals, worth eight hundred or a thousand apiece.
He owned to that, and, when I bid him tell me where they was, he up and said he knew, but he wouldn’t tell; and stood to it, though I gave him the cussedest flogging I ever gave nigger yet.
I b’lieve he’s trying to die; but I don’t know as he’ll make it out.” “Where is he?” said George, impetuously.
“Let me see him.” The cheeks of the young man were crimson, and his eyes flashed fire; but he prudently said nothing, as yet.
Tom had been lying two days since the fatal night, not suffering, for every nerve of suffering was blunted and destroyed.
He lay, for the most part, in a quiet stupor; for the laws of a powerful and well-knit frame would not at once release the imprisoned spirit.
By stealth, there had been there, in the darkness of the night, poor desolated creatures, who stole from their scanty hours’ rest, that they might repay to him some of those ministrations of love in which he had always been so abundant.
Truly, those poor disciples had little to give,—only the cup of cold water; but it was given with full hearts.
Tears had fallen on that honest, insensible face,—tears of late repentance in the poor, ignorant heathen, whom his dying love and patience had awakened to repentance, and bitter prayers, breathed over him to a late-found Saviour, of whom they scarce knew more than the name, but whom the yearning ignorant heart of man never implores in vain.
“Is it possible,—is it possible?” said he, kneeling down by him.
“Uncle Tom, my poor, poor old friend!” Something in the voice penetrated to the ear of the dying.
Don’t you know me?” “Mas’r George!” said Tom, opening his eyes, and speaking in a feeble voice; “Mas’r George!” He looked bewildered.
Slowly the idea seemed to fill his soul; and the vacant eye became fixed and brightened, the whole face lighted up, the hard hands clasped, and tears ran down the cheeks.
I’ve come to buy you, and take you home,” said George, with impetuous vehemence.
It’ll kill me!—it’ll break my heart to think what you’ve suffered,—and lying in this old shed, here!
Poor, poor fellow!” “Don’t call me poor fellow!” said Tom, solemnly, “I _have_ been poor fellow; but that’s all past and gone, now.
Glory be to His name!” George was awe-struck at the force, the vehemence, the power, with which these broken sentences were uttered.
Tom grasped his hand, and continued,—“Ye mustn’t, now, tell Chloe, poor soul! how ye found me;—‘t would be so drefful to her.
And tell her the Lord’s stood by me everywhere and al’ays, and made everything light and easy.
Give my love to Mas’r, and dear good Missis, and everybody in the place!
I loves every creature everywhar!—it’s nothing _but_ love!
O, Mas’r George! what a thing ’t is to be a Christian!” At this moment, Legree sauntered up to the door of the shed, looked in, with a dogged air of affected carelessness, and turned away.
“The old Satan!” said George, in his indignation.
“It’s a comfort to think the devil will pay _him_ for this, some of these days!” “O, don’t!—oh, ye mustn’t!” said Tom, grasping his hand; “he’s a poor mis’able critter! it’s awful to think on ’t!
He an’t done me no real harm,—only opened the gate of the kingdom for me; that’s all!” At this moment, the sudden flush of strength which the joy of meeting his young master had infused into the dying man gave way.
A sudden sinking fell upon him; he closed his eyes; and that mysterious and sublime change passed over his face, that told the approach of other worlds.
He began to draw his breath with long, deep inspirations; and his broad chest rose and fell, heavily.
The expression of his face was that of a conqueror.
“Who,—who,—who shall separate us from the love of Christ?” he said, in a voice that contended with mortal weakness; and, with a smile, he fell asleep.
It seemed to him that the place was holy; and, as he closed the lifeless eyes, and rose up from the dead, only one thought possessed him,—that expressed by his simple old friend,—“What a thing it is to be a Christian!” He turned: Legree was standing, sullenly, behind him.
Something in that dying scene had checked the natural fierceness of youthful passion.
The presence of the man was simply loathsome to George; and he felt only an impulse to get away from him, with as few words as possible.
Fixing his keen dark eyes on Legree, he simply said, pointing to the dead, “You have got all you ever can of him.
I will take it away, and bury it decently.” “I don’t sell dead niggers,” said Legree, doggedly.
“You are welcome to bury him where and when you like.” “Boys,” said George, in an authoritative tone, to two or three negroes, who were looking at the body, “help me lift him up, and carry him to my wagon; and get me a spade.” One of them ran for a spade; the other two assisted George to carry the body to the wagon.
George neither spoke to nor looked at Legree, who did not countermand his orders, but stood, whistling, with an air of forced unconcern.
He sulkily followed them to where the wagon stood at the door.
George spread his cloak in the wagon, and had the body carefully disposed of in it,—moving the seat, so as to give it room.
Then he turned, fixed his eyes on Legree, and said, with forced composure, “I have not, as yet, said to you what I think of this most atrocious affair;—this is not the time and place.
But, sir, this innocent blood shall have justice.
I will proclaim this murder.
I will go to the very first magistrate, and expose you.” “Do!” said Legree, snapping his fingers, scornfully.
Where you going to get witnesses?—how you going to prove it?—Come, now!” George saw, at once, the force of this defiance.
There was not a white person on the place; and, in all southern courts, the testimony of colored blood is nothing.
He felt, at that moment, as if he could have rent the heavens with his heart’s indignant cry for justice; but in vain.
The word was as a spark to a powder magazine.
Prudence was never a cardinal virtue of the Kentucky boy.
George turned, and, with one indignant blow, knocked Legree flat upon his face; and, as he stood over him, blazing with wrath and defiance, he would have formed no bad personification of his great namesake triumphing over the dragon.
Some men, however, are decidedly bettered by being knocked down.
If a man lays them fairly flat in the dust, they seem immediately to conceive a respect for him; and Legree was one of this sort.
As he rose, therefore, and brushed the dust from his clothes, he eyed the slowly-retreating wagon with some evident consideration; nor did he open his mouth till it was out of sight.
Beyond the boundaries of the plantation, George had noticed a dry, sandy knoll, shaded by a few trees; there they made the grave.
It’s all I can give you, now, poor Tom, and you shall have it.” They laid him in; and the men shovelled away, silently.
“You may go, boys,” said George, slipping a quarter into the hand of each.
They lingered about, however.
“We’d serve him so faithful!” said the other.
“Do, Mas’r, buy us, please!” “I can’t!—I can’t!” said George, with difficulty, motioning them off; “it’s impossible!” The poor fellows looked dejected, and walked off in silence.
“Witness, eternal God!” said George, kneeling on the grave of his poor friend; “oh, witness, that, from this hour, I will do _what one man can_ to drive out this curse of slavery from my land!” There is no monument to mark the last resting-place of our friend.
His Lord knows where he lies, and will raise him up, immortal, to appear with him when he shall appear in his glory.
Not in the riches of omnipotence is the chief glory of God; but in self-denying, suffering love!
And blessed are the men whom he calls to fellowship with him, bearing their cross after him with patience.
Of such it is written, “Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.” CHAPTER XLII An Authentic Ghost Story For some remarkable reason, ghostly legends were uncommonly rife, about this time, among the servants on Legree’s place.
It was whisperingly asserted that footsteps, in the dead of night, had been heard descending the garret stairs, and patrolling the house.
In vain the doors of the upper entry had been locked; the ghost either carried a duplicate key in its pocket, or availed itself of a ghost’s immemorial privilege of coming through the keyhole, and promenaded as before, with a freedom that was alarming.
Authorities were somewhat divided, as to the outward form of the spirit, owing to a custom quite prevalent among negroes,—and, for aught we know, among whites, too,—of invariably shutting the eyes, and covering up heads under blankets, petticoats, or whatever else might come in use for a shelter, on these occasions.
The poor souls were not versed in ancient history, and did not know that Shakspeare had authenticated this costume, by telling how “The _sheeted_ dead Did squeak and gibber in the streets of Rome.”[1] [1] _Hamlet_, Act I, scene 1, lines 115-116 And, therefore, their all hitting upon this is a striking fact in pneumatology, which we recommend to the attention of spiritual media generally.
Be it as it may, we have private reasons for knowing that a tall figure in a white sheet did walk, at the most approved ghostly hours, around the Legree premises,—pass out the doors, glide about the house,—disappear at intervals, and, reappearing, pass up the silent stairway, into that fatal garret; and that, in the morning, the entry doors were all found shut and locked as firm as ever.
Legree could not help overhearing this whispering; and it was all the more exciting to him, from the pains that were taken to conceal it from him.
He drank more brandy than usual; held up his head briskly, and swore louder than ever in the daytime; but he had bad dreams, and the visions of his head on his bed were anything but agreeable.
After all, let a man take what pains he may to hush it down, a human soul is an awful ghostly, unquiet possession, for a bad man to have.
Who knows all its awful perhapses,—those shudderings and tremblings, which it can no more live down than it can outlive its own eternity!
What a fool is he who locks his door to keep out spirits, who has in his own bosom a spirit he dares not meet alone,—whose voice, smothered far down, and piled over with mountains of earthliness, is yet like the forewarning trumpet of doom!
He examined the catches and fastenings of the windows, and then swore he “didn’t care for the devil and all his angels,” and went to sleep.
But, finally, there came over his sleep a shadow, a horror, an apprehension of something dreadful hanging over him.
He heard a confused noise of screams and groanings; and, with it all, he knew he was asleep, and he struggled to wake himself.
He was sure something was coming into his room.
It was a cloudy, misty moonlight, and there he saw it!—something white, gliding in!
He heard the still rustle of its ghostly garments.
It stood still by his bed;—a cold hand touched his; a voice said, three times, in a low, fearful whisper, “Come! come! come!” And, while he lay sweating with terror, he knew not when or how, the thing was gone.
He no longer drank cautiously, prudently, but imprudently and recklessly.
Excess had brought on that frightful disease that seems to throw the lurid shadows of a coming retribution back into the present life.
It was near sunrise when Cassy and Emmeline paused, for a moment, in a little knot of trees near the town.
A small black bonnet on her head, covered by a veil thick with embroidery, concealed her face.
It had been agreed that, in their escape, she was to personate the character of a Creole lady, and Emmeline that of her servant.
Brought up, from early life, in connection with the highest society, the language, movements and air of Cassy, were all in agreement with this idea; and she had still enough remaining with her, of a once splendid wardrobe, and sets of jewels, to enable her to personate the thing to advantage.
She stopped in the outskirts of the town, where she had noticed trunks for sale, and purchased a handsome one.
This she requested the man to send along with her.
And, accordingly, thus escorted by a boy wheeling her trunk, and Emmeline behind her, carrying her carpet-bag and sundry bundles, she made her appearance at the small tavern, like a lady of consideration.
The first person that struck her, after her arrival, was George Shelby, who was staying there, awaiting the next boat.
Cassy had remarked the young man from her loophole in the garret, and seen him bear away the body of Tom, and observed with secret exultation, his rencontre with Legree.
Subsequently she had gathered, from the conversations she had overheard among the negroes, as she glided about in her ghostly disguise, after nightfall, who he was, and in what relation he stood to Tom.
She, therefore, felt an immediate accession of confidence, when she found that he was, like herself, awaiting the next boat.
Cassy’s air and manner, address, and evident command of money, prevented any rising disposition to suspicion in the hotel.
People never inquire too closely into those who are fair on the main point, of paying well,—a thing which Cassy had foreseen when she provided herself with money.
In the edge of the evening, a boat was heard coming along, and George Shelby handed Cassy aboard, with the politeness which comes naturally to every Kentuckian, and exerted himself to provide her with a good state-room.
Cassy kept her room and bed, on pretext of illness, during the whole time they were on Red River; and was waited on, with obsequious devotion, by her attendant.
When they arrived at the Mississippi river, George, having learned that the course of the strange lady was upward, like his own, proposed to take a state-room for her on the same boat with himself,—good-naturedly compassionating her feeble health, and desirous to do what he could to assist her.
Behold, therefore, the whole party safely transferred to the good steamer Cincinnati, and sweeping up the river under a powerful head of steam.
She sat upon the guards, came to the table, and was remarked upon in the boat as a lady that must have been very handsome.
From the moment that George got the first glimpse of her face, he was troubled with one of those fleeting and indefinite likenesses, which almost every body can remember, and has been, at times, perplexed with.
He could not keep himself from looking at her, and watching her perpetually.
At table, or sitting at her state-room door, still she would encounter the young man’s eyes fixed on her, and politely withdrawn, when she showed, by her countenance, that she was sensible to the observation.
She began to think that he suspected something; and finally resolved to throw herself entirely on his generosity, and intrusted him with her whole history.
George was heartily disposed to sympathize with any one who had escaped from Legree’s plantation,—a place that he could not remember or speak of with patience,—and, with the courageous disregard of consequences which is characteristic of his age and state, he assured her that he would do all in his power to protect and bring them through.
The next state-room to Cassy’s was occupied by a French lady, named De Thoux, who was accompanied by a fine little daughter, a child of some twelve summers.
This lady, having gathered, from George’s conversation, that he was from Kentucky, seemed evidently disposed to cultivate his acquaintance; in which design she was seconded by the graces of her little girl, who was about as pretty a plaything as ever diverted the weariness of a fortnight’s trip on a steamboat.
George’s chair was often placed at her state-room door; and Cassy, as she sat upon the guards, could hear their conversation.
Madame de Thoux was very minute in her inquiries as to Kentucky, where she said she had resided in a former period of her life.
George discovered, to his surprise, that her former residence must have been in his own vicinity; and her inquiries showed a knowledge of people and things in his vicinity, that was perfectly surprising to him.
“Do you know,” said Madame de Thoux to him, one day, “of any man, in your neighborhood, of the name of Harris?” “There is an old fellow, of that name, lives not far from my father’s place,” said George.
“We never have had much intercourse with him, though.” “He is a large slave-owner, I believe,” said Madame de Thoux, with a manner which seemed to betray more interest than she was exactly willing to show.
“He is,” said George, looking rather surprised at her manner.
“Did you ever know of his having—perhaps, you may have heard of his having a mulatto boy, named George?” “O, certainly,—George Harris,—I know him well; he married a servant of my mother’s, but has escaped, now, to Canada.” “He has?” said Madame de Thoux, quickly.
“Thank God!” George looked a surprised inquiry, but said nothing.
“Madame!” said George, with a strong accent of surprise.
Shelby, George Harris is my brother!” “I am perfectly astonished,” said George, pushing back his chair a pace or two, and looking at Madame de Thoux.
“I was bought by a good and generous man.
It is but lately that he died; and I was going up to Kentucky, to see if I could find and redeem my brother.” “I heard him speak of a sister Emily, that was sold South,” said George.
I am the one,” said Madame de Thoux;—“tell me what sort of a—” “A very fine young man,” said George, “notwithstanding the curse of slavery that lay on him.
He sustained a first rate character, both for intelligence and principle.
“A treasure,” said George; “a beautiful, intelligent, amiable girl.
My mother had brought her up, and trained her as carefully, almost, as a daughter.
She could read and write, embroider and sew, beautifully; and was a beautiful singer.” “Was she born in your house?” said Madame de Thoux.
He paid an extravagant sum for her, to be sure.
I suppose, on account of her extraordinary beauty.” George sat with his back to Cassy, and did not see the absorbed expression of her countenance, as he was giving these details.
At this point in the story, she touched his arm, and, with a face perfectly white with interest, said, “Do you know the names of the people he bought her of?” “A man of the name of Simmons, I think, was the principal in the transaction.
At least, I think that was the name on the bill of sale.” “O, my God!” said Cassy, and fell insensible on the floor of the cabin.
Poor Cassy! when she recovered, turned her face to the wall, and wept and sobbed like a child,—perhaps, mother, you can tell what she was thinking of!
Perhaps you cannot,—but she felt as sure, in that hour, that God had had mercy on her, and that she should see her daughter,—as she did, months afterwards,—when—but we anticipate.
George Shelby, interested, as any other young man might be, by the romance of the incident, no less than by feelings of humanity, was at the pains to send to Cassy the bill of sale of Eliza; whose date and name all corresponded with her own knowledge of facts, and felt no doubt upon her mind as to the identity of her child.
It remained now only for her to trace out the path of the fugitives.
Madame de Thoux and she, thus drawn together by the singular coincidence of their fortunes, proceeded immediately to Canada, and began a tour of inquiry among the stations, where the numerous fugitives from slavery are located.
At Amherstberg they found the missionary with whom George and Eliza had taken shelter, on their first arrival in Canada; and through him were enabled to trace the family to Montreal.
George had found constant occupation in the shop of a worthy machinist, where he had been earning a competent support for his family, which, in the mean time, had been increased by the addition of another daughter.
Little Harry—a fine bright boy—had been put to a good school, and was making rapid proficiency in knowledge.
The worthy pastor of the station, in Amherstberg, where George had first landed, was so much interested in the statements of Madame de Thoux and Cassy, that he yielded to the solicitations of the former, to accompany them to Montreal, in their search,—she bearing all the expense of the expedition.
The scene now changes to a small, neat tenement, in the outskirts of Montreal; the time, evening.
A cheerful fire blazes on the hearth; a tea-table, covered with a snowy cloth, stands prepared for the evening meal.
In one corner of the room was a table covered with a green cloth, where was an open writing-desk, pens, paper, and over it a shelf of well-selected books.
The same zeal for self-improvement, which led him to steal the much coveted arts of reading and writing, amid all the toil and discouragements of his early life, still led him to devote all his leisure time to self-cultivation.
Do put down that book, and let’s talk, while I’m getting tea,—do.” And little Eliza seconds the effort, by toddling up to her father, and trying to pull the book out of his hand, and install herself on his knee as a substitute.
“O, you little witch!” says George, yielding, as, in such circumstances, man always must.
A little older she looks; her form a little fuller; her air more matronly than of yore; but evidently contented and happy as woman need be.
Harry has lost his long curls; but he can never lose those eyes and eyelashes, and that fine, bold brow, that flushes with triumph, as he answers, “I did it, every bit of it, _myself_, father; and _nobody_ helped me!” “That’s right,” says his father; “depend on yourself, my son.
The delighted—“Why! this you?”—calls up her husband; and the good pastor of Amherstberg is welcomed.
Now, if the truth must be told, the honest pastor had arranged a little programme, according to which this affair was to develop itself; and, on the way up, all had very cautiously and prudently exhorted each other not to let things out, except according to previous arrangement.
What was the good man’s consternation, therefore, just as he had motioned to the ladies to be seated, and was taking out his pocket-handkerchief to wipe his mouth, so as to proceed to his introductory speech in good order, when Madame de Thoux upset the whole plan, by throwing her arms around George’s neck, and letting all out at once, by saying, “O, George! don’t you know me?
I’m your sister Emily.” Cassy had seated herself more composedly, and would have carried on her part very well, had not little Eliza suddenly appeared before her in exact shape and form, every outline and curl, just as her daughter was when she saw her last.
They knelt together, and the good man prayed,—for there are some feelings so agitated and tumultuous, that they can find rest only by being poured into the bosom of Almighty love,—and then, rising up, the new-found family embraced each other, with a holy trust in Him, who from such peril and dangers, and by such unknown ways, had brought them together.
The note-book of a missionary, among the Canadian fugitives, contains truth stranger than fiction.
How can it be otherwise, when a system prevails which whirls families and scatters their members, as the wind whirls and scatters the leaves of autumn?
These shores of refuge, like the eternal shore, often unite again, in glad communion, hearts that for long years have mourned each other as lost.
And affecting beyond expression is the earnestness with which every new arrival among them is met, if, perchance, it may bring tidings of mother, sister, child or wife, still lost to view in the shadows of slavery.
Deeds of heroism are wrought here more than those of romance, when defying torture, and braving death itself, the fugitive voluntarily threads his way back to the terrors and perils of that dark land, that he may bring out his sister, or mother, or wife.
One young man, of whom a missionary has told us, twice re-captured, and suffering shameful stripes for his heroism, had escaped again; and, in a letter which we heard read, tells his friends that he is going back a third time, that he may, at last, bring away his sister.
My good sir, is this man a hero, or a criminal?
But, to return to our friends, whom we left wiping their eyes, and recovering themselves from too great and sudden a joy.
And, indeed, in two or three days, such a change has passed over Cassy, that our readers would scarcely know her.
The despairing, haggard expression of her face had given way to one of gentle trust.
She seemed to sink, at once, into the bosom of the family, and take the little ones into her heart, as something for which it long had waited.
Indeed, her love seemed to flow more naturally to the little Eliza than to her own daughter; for she was the exact image and body of the child whom she had lost.
The little one was a flowery bond between mother and daughter, through whom grew up acquaintanceship and affection.
Eliza’s steady, consistent piety, regulated by the constant reading of the sacred word, made her a proper guide for the shattered and wearied mind of her mother.
Cassy yielded at once, and with her whole soul, to every good influence, and became a devout and tender Christian.
After a day or two, Madame de Thoux told her brother more particularly of her affairs.
The death of her husband had left her an ample fortune, which she generously offered to share with the family.
When she asked George what way she could best apply it for him, he answered, “Give me an education, Emily; that has always been my heart’s desire.
Then, I can do all the rest.” On mature deliberation, it was decided that the whole family should go, for some years, to France; whither they sailed, carrying Emmeline with them.
The good looks of the latter won the affection of the first mate of the vessel; and, shortly after entering the port, she became his wife.
George remained four years at a French university, and, applying himself with an unintermitted zeal, obtained a very thorough education.
Political troubles in France, at last, led the family again to seek an asylum in this country.
George’s feelings and views, as an educated man, may be best expressed in a letter to one of his friends.
“I feel somewhat at a loss, as to my future course.
True, as you have said to me, I might mingle in the circles of the whites, in this country, my shade of color is so slight, and that of my wife and family scarce perceptible.
Well, perhaps, on sufferance, I might.
“My sympathies are not for my father’s race, but for my mother’s.
To him I was no more than a fine dog or horse: to my poor heart-broken mother I was a _child_; and, though I never saw her, after the cruel sale that separated us, till she died, yet I _know_ she always loved me dearly.
When I think of all she suffered, of my own early sufferings, of the distresses and struggles of my heroic wife, of my sister, sold in the New Orleans slave-market,—though I hope to have no unchristian sentiments, yet I may be excused for saying, I have no wish to pass for an American, or to identify myself with them.
“It is with the oppressed, enslaved African race that I cast in my lot; and, if I wished anything, I would wish myself two shades darker, rather than one lighter.
“The desire and yearning of my soul is for an African _nationality_.
I want a people that shall have a tangible, separate existence of its own; and where am I to look for it?
A stream cannot rise above its fountain.
The race that formed the character of the Haytiens was a worn-out, effeminate one; and, of course, the subject race will be centuries in rising to anything.
On the shores of Africa I see a republic,—a republic formed of picked men, who, by energy and self-educating force, have, in many cases, individually, raised themselves above a condition of slavery.
Having gone through a preparatory stage of feebleness, this republic has, at last, become an acknowledged nation on the face of the earth,—acknowledged by both France and England.
During my stay in France, I have followed up, with intense interest, the history of my people in America.
I have noted the struggle between abolitionist and colonizationist, and have received some impressions, as a distant spectator, which could never have occurred to me as a participator.
“I grant that this Liberia may have subserved all sorts of purposes, by being played off, in the hands of our oppressors, against us.
Doubtless the scheme may have been used, in unjustifiable ways, as a means of retarding our emancipation.
But the question to me is, Is there not a God above all man’s schemes?
A nation starts, now, with all the great problems of republican life and civilization wrought out to its hand;—it has not to discover, but only to apply.
Let us, then, all take hold together, with all our might, and see what we can do with this new enterprise, and the whole splendid continent of Africa opens before us and our children. _Our nation_ shall roll the tide of civilization and Christianity along its shores, and plant there mighty republics, that, growing with the rapidity of tropical vegetation, shall be for all coming ages.
“Do you say that I am deserting my enslaved brethren?
No, not as an individual; but, let me go and form part of a nation, which shall have a voice in the councils of nations, and then we can speak.
A nation has a right to argue, remonstrate, implore, and present the cause of its race,—which an individual has not.
“But, you will tell me, our race have equal rights to mingle in the American republic as the Irishman, the German, the Swede.
We _ought_ to be free to meet and mingle,—to rise by our individual worth, without any consideration of caste or color; and they who deny us this right are false to their own professed principles of human equality.
We ought, in particular, to be allowed _here_.
We have _more_ than the rights of common men;—we have the claim of an injured race for reparation.
I think that the African race has peculiarities, yet to be unfolded in the light of civilization and Christianity, which, if not the same with those of the Anglo-Saxon, may prove to be, morally, of even a higher type.
“To the Anglo-Saxon race has been intrusted the destinies of the world, during its pioneer period of struggle and conflict.
To that mission its stern, inflexible, energetic elements, were well adapted; but, as a Christian, I look for another era to arise.
On its borders I trust we stand; and the throes that now convulse the nations are, to my hope, but the birth-pangs of an hour of universal peace and brotherhood.
“I trust that the development of Africa is to be essentially a Christian one.
If not a dominant and commanding race, they are, at least, an affectionate, magnanimous, and forgiving one.
Having been called in the furnace of injustice and oppression, they have need to bind closer to their hearts that sublime doctrine of love and forgiveness, through which alone they are to conquer, which it is to be their mission to spread over the continent of Africa.
“In myself, I confess, I am feeble for this,—full half the blood in my veins is the hot and hasty Saxon; but I have an eloquent preacher of the Gospel ever by my side, in the person of my beautiful wife.
When I wander, her gentler spirit ever restores me, and keeps before my eyes the Christian calling and mission of our race.
But I have considered, and counted the cost.
I expect to work with both hands,—to work _hard_; to work against all sorts of difficulties and discouragements; and to work till I die.
This is what I go for; and in this I am quite sure I shall not be disappointed.
“Whatever you may think of my determination, do not divorce me from your confidence; and think that, in whatever I do, I act with a heart wholly given to my people.
“GEORGE HARRIS.” George, with his wife, children, sister and mother, embarked for Africa, some few weeks after.
If we are not mistaken, the world will yet hear from him there.
Of our other characters we have nothing very particular to write, except a word relating to Miss Ophelia and Topsy, and a farewell chapter, which we shall dedicate to George Shelby.
P.S.—It will be a satisfaction to some mother, also, to state, that some inquiries, which were set on foot by Madame de Thoux, have resulted recently in the discovery of Cassy’s son.
Being a young man of energy, he had escaped, some years before his mother, and been received and educated by friends of the oppressed in the north.
CHAPTER XLIV The Liberator George Shelby had written to his mother merely a line, stating the day that she might expect him home.
He had tried several times, and only succeeded in half choking himself; and invariably finished by tearing up the paper, wiping his eyes, and rushing somewhere to get quiet.
There was a pleased bustle all through the Shelby mansion, that day, in expectation of the arrival of young Mas’r George.
Shelby was seated in her comfortable parlor, where a cheerful hickory fire was dispelling the chill of the late autumn evening.
A supper-table, glittering with plate and cut glass, was set out, on whose arrangements our former friend, old Chloe, was presiding.
Arrayed in a new calico dress, with clean, white apron, and high, well-starched turban, her black polished face glowing with satisfaction, she lingered, with needless punctiliousness, around the arrangements of the table, merely as an excuse for talking a little to her mistress.
O, go way!—why didn’t Sally get out de _best_ tea-pot,—de little new one, Mas’r George got for Missis, Christmas?
And Missis has heard from Mas’r George?” she said, inquiringly.
“Yes, Chloe; but only a line, just to say he would be home tonight, if he could,—that’s all.” “Didn’t say nothin’ ’bout my old man, s’pose?” said Chloe, still fidgeting with the tea-cups.
He did not speak of anything, Chloe.
He said he would tell all, when he got home.” “Jes like Mas’r George,—he’s allers so ferce for tellin’ everything hisself.
Shelby sighed, and felt a heavy weight on her heart, at this allusion.
She had felt uneasy, ever since she received her son’s letter, lest something should prove to be hidden behind the veil of silence which he had drawn.
“Missis has got dem bills?” said Chloe, anxiously.
“Yes, Chloe.” “‘Cause I wants to show my old man dem very bills de _perfectioner_ gave me.
Berry nice man, dat Mas’r Jones was.” Chloe had pertinaciously insisted that the very bills in which her wages had been paid should be preserved, to show her husband, in memorial of her capability.
Shelby had readily consented to humor her in the request.
Remember how tickled he used to be, cause she would keep a fallin’ over, when she sot out to walk.
Laws a me!” The rattling of wheels now was heard.
“Mas’r George!” said Aunt Chloe, starting to the window.
Aunt Chloe stood anxiously straining her eyes out into the darkness.
“O, _poor_ Aunt Chloe!” said George, stopping compassionately, and taking her hard, black hand between both his; “I’d have given all my fortune to have brought him with me, but he’s gone to a better country.” There was a passionate exclamation from Mrs.
“Thar,” said she, gathering it up, and holding it, with a trembling hand, to her mistress, “don’t never want to see nor hear on ’t again.
Jist as I knew ’t would be,—sold, and murdered on dem ar’ old plantations!” Chloe turned, and was walking proudly out of the room.
Shelby followed her softly, and took one of her hands, drew her down into a chair, and sat down by her.
Chloe leaned her head on her mistress’ shoulder, and sobbed out, “O Missis! ’scuse me, my heart’s broke,—dat’s all!” “I know it is,” said Mrs.
He healeth the broken hearted, and bindeth up their wounds.” There was a silence for some time, and all wept together.
At last, George, sitting down beside the mourner, took her hand, and, with simple pathos, repeated the triumphant scene of her husband’s death, and his last messages of love.
About a month after this, one morning, all the servants of the Shelby estate were convened together in the great hall that ran through the house, to hear a few words from their young master.
To the surprise of all, he appeared among them with a bundle of papers in his hand, containing a certificate of freedom to every one on the place, which he read successively, and presented, amid the sobs and tears and shouts of all present.
Many, however, pressed around him, earnestly begging him not to send them away; and, with anxious faces, tendering back their free papers.
The advantage is, that in case of my getting in debt, or dying,—things that might happen,—you cannot now be taken up and sold.
I expect you to be good, and willing to learn; and I trust in God that I shall be faithful, and willing to teach.
So, when you rejoice in your freedom, think that you owe it to that good old soul, and pay it back in kindness to his wife and children.
The separate incidents that compose the narrative are, to a very great extent, authentic, occurring, many of them, either under her own observation, or that of her personal friends.
She or her friends have observed characters the counterpart of almost all that are here introduced; and many of the sayings are word for word as heard herself, or reported to her.
The personal appearance of Eliza, the character ascribed to her, are sketches drawn from life.
The incorruptible fidelity, piety and honesty, of Uncle Tom, had more than one development, to her personal knowledge.
Some of the most deeply tragic and romantic, some of the most terrible incidents, have also their parallels in reality.
The incident of the mother’s crossing the Ohio river on the ice is a well-known fact.
The story of “old Prue,” in the second volume, was an incident that fell under the personal observation of a brother of the writer, then collecting-clerk to a large mercantile house, in New Orleans.
From the same source was derived the character of the planter Legree.
Let it be remembered that in all southern states it is a principle of jurisprudence that no person of colored lineage can testify in a suit against a white, and it will be easy to see that such a case may occur, wherever there is a man whose passions outweigh his interests, and a slave who has manhood or principle enough to resist his will.
There is, actually, nothing to protect the slave’s life, but the _character_ of the master.
Facts too shocking to be contemplated occasionally force their way to the public ear, and the comment that one often hears made on them is more shocking than the thing itself.
It is said, “Very likely such cases may now and then occur, but they are no sample of general practice.” If the laws of New England were so arranged that a master could _now and then_ torture an apprentice to death, would it be received with equal composure?
Would it be said, “These cases are rare, and no samples of general practice”?
This injustice is an _inherent_ one in the slave system,—it cannot exist without it.
The public and shameless sale of beautiful mulatto and quadroon girls has acquired a notoriety, from the incidents following the capture of the Pearl.
We extract the following from the speech of Hon.
Horace Mann, one of the legal counsel for the defendants in that case.
He says: “In that company of seventy-six persons, who attempted, in 1848, to escape from the District of Columbia in the schooner Pearl, and whose officers I assisted in defending, there were several young and healthy girls, who had those peculiar attractions of form and feature which connoisseurs prize so highly.
Elizabeth Russel was one of them.
She immediately fell into the slave-trader’s fangs, and was doomed for the New Orleans market.
They offered eighteen hundred dollars to redeem her; and some there were who offered to give, that would not have much left after the gift; but the fiend of a slave-trader was inexorable.
She was despatched to New Orleans; but, when about half way there, God had mercy on her, and smote her with death.
There were two girls named Edmundson in the same company.
When about to be sent to the same market, an older sister went to the shambles, to plead with the wretch who owned them, for the love of God, to spare his victims.
He bantered her, telling what fine dresses and fine furniture they would have.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘that may do very well in this life, but what will become of them in the next?’ They too were sent to New Orleans; but were afterwards redeemed, at an enormous ransom, and brought back.” Is it not plain, from this, that the histories of Emmeline and Cassy may have many counterparts?
Justice, too, obliges the author to state that the fairness of mind and generosity attributed to St.
Clare are not without a parallel, as the following anecdote will show.
A few years since, a young southern gentleman was in Cincinnati, with a favorite servant, who had been his personal attendant from a boy.
The young man took advantage of this opportunity to secure his own freedom, and fled to the protection of a Quaker, who was quite noted in affairs of this kind.
The owner was exceedingly indignant.
He had always treated the slave with such indulgence, and his confidence in his affection was such, that he believed he must have been practised upon to induce him to revolt from him.
He visited the Quaker, in high anger; but, being possessed of uncommon candor and fairness, was soon quieted by his arguments and representations.
It was a side of the subject which he never had heard,—never had thought on; and he immediately told the Quaker that, if his slave would, to his own face, say that it was his desire to be free, he would liberate him.
An interview was forthwith procured, and Nathan was asked by his young master whether he had ever had any reason to complain of his treatment, in any respect.
“No, Mas’r,” said Nathan; “you’ve always been good to me.” “Well, then, why do you want to leave me?” “Mas’r may die, and then who get me?—I’d rather be a free man.” After some deliberation, the young master replied, “Nathan, in your place, I think I should feel very much so, myself.
You are free.” He immediately made him out free papers; deposited a sum of money in the hands of the Quaker, to be judiciously used in assisting him to start in life, and left a very sensible and kind letter of advice to the young man.
The author hopes she has done justice to that nobility, generosity, and humanity, which in many cases characterize individuals at the South.
Such instances save us from utter despair of our kind.
But, she asks any person, who knows the world, are such characters _common_, anywhere?
For many years of her life, the author avoided all reading upon or allusion to the subject of slavery, considering it as too painful to be inquired into, and one which advancing light and civilization would certainly live down.
And from this arose a desire to exhibit it in a _living dramatic reality_.
She has endeavored to show it fairly, in its best and its worst phases.
In its _best_ aspect, she has, perhaps, been successful; but, oh! who shall say what yet remains untold in that valley and shadow of death, that lies the other side?
To you, generous, noble-minded men and women, of the South,—you, whose virtue, and magnanimity and purity of character, are the greater for the severer trial it has encountered,—to you is her appeal.
Have you not, in your own secret souls, in your own private conversings, felt that there are woes and evils, in this accursed system, far beyond what are here shadowed, or can be shadowed?
Is _man_ ever a creature to be trusted with wholly irresponsible power?
And does not the slave system, by denying the slave all legal right of testimony, make every individual owner an irresponsible despot?
Can anybody fail to make the inference what the practical result will be?
If there is, as we admit, a public sentiment among you, men of honor, justice and humanity, is there not also another kind of public sentiment among the ruffian, the brutal and debased?
Are the honorable, the just, the high-minded and compassionate, the majority anywhere in this world?
The slave-trade is now, by American law, considered as piracy.
But a slave-trade, as systematic as ever was carried on on the coast of Africa, is an inevitable attendant and result of American slavery.
The writer has given only a faint shadow, a dim picture, of the anguish and despair that are, at this very moment, riving thousands of hearts, shattering thousands of families, and driving a helpless and sensitive race to frenzy and despair.
There are those living who know the mothers whom this accursed traffic has driven to the murder of their children; and themselves seeking in death a shelter from woes more dreaded than death.
Nothing of tragedy can be written, can be spoken, can be conceived, that equals the frightful reality of scenes daily and hourly acting on our shores, beneath the shadow of American law, and the shadow of the cross of Christ.
And now, men and women of America, is this a thing to be trifled with, apologized for, and passed over in silence?
Farmers of Massachusetts, of New Hampshire, of Vermont, of Connecticut, who read this book by the blaze of your winter-evening fire,—strong-hearted, generous sailors and ship-owners of Maine,—is this a thing for you to countenance and encourage?
Brave and generous men of New York, farmers of rich and joyous Ohio, and ye of the wide prairie states,—answer, is this a thing for you to protect and countenance?
By the sick hour of your child; by those dying eyes, which you can never forget; by those last cries, that wrung your heart when you could neither help nor save; by the desolation of that empty cradle, that silent nursery,—I beseech you, pity those mothers that are constantly made childless by the American slave-trade!
And say, mothers of America, is this a thing to be defended, sympathized with, passed over in silence?
The people of the free states have defended, encouraged, and participated; and are more guilty for it, before God, than the South, in that they have not the apology of education or custom.
There are multitudes of slaves temporarily owned, and sold again, by merchants in northern cities; and shall the whole guilt or obloquy of slavery fall only on the South?
Northern men, northern mothers, northern Christians, have something more to do than denounce their brethren at the South; they have to look to the evil among themselves.
But, what can any individual do?
Of that, every individual can judge.
There is one thing that every individual can do,—they can see to it that _they feel right_.
An atmosphere of sympathetic influence encircles every human being; and the man or woman who _feels_ strongly, healthily and justly, on the great interests of humanity, is a constant benefactor to the human race.
See, then, to your sympathies in this matter!
Are they in harmony with the sympathies of Christ? or are they swayed and perverted by the sophistries of worldly policy?
Christian men and women of the North! still further,—you have another power; you can _pray!_ Do you believe in prayer? or has it become an indistinct apostolic tradition?
And pray for those distressed Christians whose whole chance of religious improvement is an accident of trade and sale; from whom any adherence to the morals of Christianity is, in many cases, an impossibility, unless they have given them, from above, the courage and grace of martyrdom.
On the shores of our free states are emerging the poor, shattered, broken remnants of families,—men and women, escaped, by miraculous providences from the surges of slavery,—feeble in knowledge, and, in many cases, infirm in moral constitution, from a system which confounds and confuses every principle of Christianity and morality.
They come to seek a refuge among you; they come to seek education, knowledge, Christianity.
What do you owe to these poor unfortunates, oh Christians?
Does not every American Christian owe to the African race some effort at reparation for the wrongs that the American nation has brought upon them?
Shall the doors of churches and school-houses be shut upon them?
Shall the church of Christ hear in silence the taunt that is thrown at them, and shrink away from the helpless hand that they stretch out; and, by her silence, encourage the cruelty that would chase them from our borders?
If it must be so, it will be a mournful spectacle.
If it must be so, the country will have reason to tremble, when it remembers that the fate of nations is in the hands of One who is very pitiful, and of tender compassion.
That the providence of God has provided a refuge in Africa, is, indeed, a great and noticeable fact; but that is no reason why the church of Christ should throw off that responsibility to this outcast race which her profession demands of her.
To fill up Liberia with an ignorant, inexperienced, half-barbarized race, just escaped from the chains of slavery, would be only to prolong, for ages, the period of struggle and conflict which attends the inception of new enterprises.
Let the church of the north receive these poor sufferers in the spirit of Christ; receive them to the educating advantages of Christian republican society and schools, until they have attained to somewhat of a moral and intellectual maturity, and then assist them in their passage to those shores, where they may put in practice the lessons they have learned in America.
There is a body of men at the north, comparatively small, who have been doing this; and, as the result, this country has already seen examples of men, formerly slaves, who have rapidly acquired property, reputation, and education.
Talent has been developed, which, considering the circumstances, is certainly remarkable; and, for moral traits of honesty, kindness, tenderness of feeling,—for heroic efforts and self-denials, endured for the ransom of brethren and friends yet in slavery,—they have been remarkable to a degree that, considering the influence under which they were born, is surprising.
The writer has lived, for many years, on the frontier-line of slave states, and has had great opportunities of observation among those who formerly were slaves.
They have been in her family as servants; and, in default of any other school to receive them, she has, in many cases, had them instructed in a family school, with her own children.
She has also the testimony of missionaries, among the fugitives in Canada, in coincidence with her own experience; and her deductions, with regard to the capabilities of the race, are encouraging in the highest degree.
The first desire of the emancipated slave, generally, is for _education_.
There is nothing that they are not willing to give or do to have their children instructed, and, so far as the writer has observed herself, or taken the testimony of teachers among them, they are remarkably intelligent and quick to learn.
The results of schools, founded for them by benevolent individuals in Cincinnati, fully establish this.
The author gives the following statement of facts, on the authority of Professor C.
Stowe, then of Lane Seminary, Ohio, with regard to emancipated slaves, now resident in Cincinnati; given to show the capability of the race, even without any very particular assistance or encouragement.
They are all residents of Cincinnati.
Furniture maker; twenty years in the city; worth ten thousand dollars, all his own earnings; a Baptist.
Full black; stolen from Africa; sold in New Orleans; been free fifteen years; paid for himself six hundred dollars; a farmer; owns several farms in Indiana; Presbyterian; probably worth fifteen or twenty thousand dollars, all earned by himself.
Full black; dealer in real estate; worth thirty thousand dollars; about forty years old; free six years; paid eighteen hundred dollars for his family; member of the Baptist church; received a legacy from his master, which he has taken good care of, and increased.
Full black; coal dealer; about thirty years old; worth eighteen thousand dollars; paid for himself twice, being once defrauded to the amount of sixteen hundred dollars; made all his money by his own efforts—much of it while a slave, hiring his time of his master, and doing business for himself; a fine, gentlemanly fellow.
Three-fourths black; barber and waiter; from Kentucky; nineteen years free; paid for self and family over three thousand dollars; deacon in the Baptist church.
The daughter of this woman married a slave.
She was a remarkably active and capable young woman, and, by her industry and thrift, and the most persevering self-denial, raised nine hundred dollars for her husband’s freedom, which she paid, as she raised it, into the hands of his master.
She never recovered any of the money.
These are but few facts, among multitudes which might be adduced, to show the self-denial, energy, patience, and honesty, which the slave has exhibited in a state of freedom.
And let it be remembered that these individuals have thus bravely succeeded in conquering for themselves comparative wealth and social position, in the face of every disadvantage and discouragement.
The colored man, by the law of Ohio, cannot be a voter, and, till within a few years, was even denied the right of testimony in legal suits with the white.
Nor are these instances confined to the State of Ohio.
In all states of the Union we see men, but yesterday burst from the shackles of slavery, who, by a self-educating force, which cannot be too much admired, have risen to highly respectable stations in society.
Pennington, among clergymen, Douglas and Ward, among editors, are well known instances.
If this persecuted race, with every discouragement and disadvantage, have done thus much, how much more they might do if the Christian church would act towards them in the spirit of her Lord!
This is an age of the world when nations are trembling and convulsed.
A mighty influence is abroad, surging and heaving the world, as with an earthquake.
Every nation that carries in its bosom great and unredressed injustice has in it the elements of this last convulsion.
For what is this mighty influence thus rousing in all nations and languages those groanings that cannot be uttered, for man’s freedom and equality?
But who may abide the day of his appearing?
“for that day shall burn as an oven: and he shall appear as a swift witness against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless, and that _turn aside the stranger in his right_: and he shall break in pieces the oppressor.” Are not these dread words for a nation bearing in her bosom so mighty an injustice?
Christians! every time that you pray that the kingdom of Christ may come, can you forget that prophecy associates, in dread fellowship, the _day of vengeance_ with the year of his redeemed?
Both North and South have been guilty before God; and the _Christian church_ has a heavy account to answer.
Not by combining together, to protect injustice and cruelty, and making a common capital of sin, is this Union to be saved,—but by repentance, justice and mercy; for, not surer is the eternal law by which the millstone sinks in the ocean, than that stronger law, by which injustice and cruelty shall bring on nations the wrath of Almighty God!
Into the Primitive Chapter II.
The Dominant Primordial Beast Chapter IV.
Who Has Won to Mastership Chapter V.
The Sounding of the Call Chapter I.
Into the Primitive “Old longings nomadic leap, Chafing at custom’s chain; Again from its brumal sleep Wakens the ferine strain.” Buck did not read the newspapers, or he would have known that trouble was brewing, not alone for himself, but for every tide-water dog, strong of muscle and with warm, long hair, from Puget Sound to San Diego.
Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow metal, and because steamship and transportation companies were booming the find, thousands of men were rushing into the Northland.
It stood back from the road, half hidden among the trees, through which glimpses could be caught of the wide cool veranda that ran around its four sides.
The house was approached by gravelled driveways which wound about through wide-spreading lawns and under the interlacing boughs of tall poplars.
At the rear things were on even a more spacious scale than at the front.
There were great stables, where a dozen grooms and boys held forth, rows of vine-clad servants’ cottages, an endless and orderly array of outhouses, long grape arbors, green pastures, orchards, and berry patches.
Then there was the pumping plant for the artesian well, and the big cement tank where Judge Miller’s boys took their morning plunge and kept cool in the hot afternoon.
They came and went, resided in the populous kennels, or lived obscurely in the recesses of the house after the fashion of Toots, the Japanese pug, or Ysabel, the Mexican hairless,—strange creatures that rarely put nose out of doors or set foot to ground.
On the other hand, there were the fox terriers, a score of them at least, who yelped fearful promises at Toots and Ysabel looking out of the windows at them and protected by a legion of housemaids armed with brooms and mops.
Among the terriers he stalked imperiously, and Toots and Ysabel he utterly ignored, for he was king,—king over all creeping, crawling, flying things of Judge Miller’s place, humans included.
Bernard, had been the Judge’s inseparable companion, and Buck bid fair to follow in the way of his father.
He was not so large,—he weighed only one hundred and forty pounds,—for his mother, Shep, had been a Scotch shepherd dog.
Nevertheless, one hundred and forty pounds, to which was added the dignity that comes of good living and universal respect, enabled him to carry himself in right royal fashion.
During the four years since his puppyhood he had lived the life of a sated aristocrat; he had a fine pride in himself, was even a trifle egotistical, as country gentlemen sometimes become because of their insular situation.
But he had saved himself by not becoming a mere pampered house-dog.
Hunting and kindred outdoor delights had kept down the fat and hardened his muscles; and to him, as to the cold-tubbing races, the love of water had been a tonic and a health preserver.
And this was the manner of dog Buck was in the fall of 1897, when the Klondike strike dragged men from all the world into the frozen North.
But Buck did not read the newspapers, and he did not know that Manuel, one of the gardener’s helpers, was an undesirable acquaintance.
Manuel had one besetting sin.
Also, in his gambling, he had one besetting weakness—faith in a system; and this made his damnation certain.
For to play a system requires money, while the wages of a gardener’s helper do not lap over the needs of a wife and numerous progeny.
The Judge was at a meeting of the Raisin Growers’ Association, and the boys were busy organizing an athletic club, on the memorable night of Manuel’s treachery.
No one saw him and Buck go off through the orchard on what Buck imagined was merely a stroll.
And with the exception of a solitary man, no one saw them arrive at the little flag station known as College Park.
“You might wrap up the goods before you deliver ’m,” the stranger said gruffly, and Manuel doubled a piece of stout rope around Buck’s neck under the collar.
“Twist it, an’ you’ll choke ’m plentee,” said Manuel, and the stranger grunted a ready affirmative.
Buck had accepted the rope with quiet dignity.
To be sure, it was an unwonted performance: but he had learned to trust in men he knew, and to give them credit for a wisdom that outreached his own.
But when the ends of the rope were placed in the stranger’s hands, he growled menacingly.
He had merely intimated his displeasure, in his pride believing that to intimate was to command.
But to his surprise the rope tightened around his neck, shutting off his breath.
In quick rage he sprang at the man, who met him halfway, grappled him close by the throat, and with a deft twist threw him over on his back.
Then the rope tightened mercilessly, while Buck struggled in a fury, his tongue lolling out of his mouth and his great chest panting futilely.
But his strength ebbed, his eyes glazed, and he knew nothing when the train was flagged and the two men threw him into the baggage car.
The next he knew, he was dimly aware that his tongue was hurting and that he was being jolted along in some kind of a conveyance.
The hoarse shriek of a locomotive whistling a crossing told him where he was.
He had travelled too often with the Judge not to know the sensation of riding in a baggage car.
He opened his eyes, and into them came the unbridled anger of a kidnapped king.
“Yep, has fits,” the man said, hiding his mangled hand from the baggageman, who had been attracted by the sounds of struggle.
A crack dog-doctor there thinks that he can cure ’m.” Concerning that night’s ride, the man spoke most eloquently for himself, in a little shed back of a saloon on the San Francisco water front.
“All I get is fifty for it,” he grumbled; “an’ I wouldn’t do it over for a thousand, cold cash.” His hand was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief, and the right trouser leg was ripped from knee to ankle.
“How much did the other mug get?” the saloon-keeper demanded.
“Wouldn’t take a sou less, so help me.” “That makes a hundred and fifty,” the saloon-keeper calculated; “and he’s worth it, or I’m a squarehead.” The kidnapper undid the bloody wrappings and looked at his lacerated hand.
“If I don’t get the hydrophoby—” “It’ll be because you was born to hang,” laughed the saloon-keeper.
Dazed, suffering intolerable pain from throat and tongue, with the life half throttled out of him, Buck attempted to face his tormentors.
But he was thrown down and choked repeatedly, till they succeeded in filing the heavy brass collar from off his neck.
Then the rope was removed, and he was flung into a cagelike crate.
There he lay for the remainder of the weary night, nursing his wrath and wounded pride.
He could not understand what it all meant.
He did not know why, but he felt oppressed by the vague sense of impending calamity.
Several times during the night he sprang to his feet when the shed door rattled open, expecting to see the Judge, or the boys at least.
And each time the joyful bark that trembled in Buck’s throat was twisted into a savage growl.
More tormentors, Buck decided, for they were evil-looking creatures, ragged and unkempt; and he stormed and raged at them through the bars.
They only laughed and poked sticks at him, which he promptly assailed with his teeth till he realized that that was what they wanted.
Whereupon he lay down sullenly and allowed the crate to be lifted into a wagon.
Then he, and the crate in which he was imprisoned, began a passage through many hands.
Clerks in the express office took charge of him; he was carted about in another wagon; a truck carried him, with an assortment of boxes and parcels, upon a ferry steamer; he was trucked off the steamer into a great railway depot, and finally he was deposited in an express car.
For two days and nights this express car was dragged along at the tail of shrieking locomotives; and for two days and nights Buck neither ate nor drank.
In his anger he had met the first advances of the express messengers with growls, and they had retaliated by teasing him.
When he flung himself against the bars, quivering and frothing, they laughed at him and taunted him.
They growled and barked like detestable dogs, mewed, and flapped their arms and crowed.
It was all very silly, he knew; but therefore the more outrage to his dignity, and his anger waxed and waxed.
He did not mind the hunger so much, but the lack of water caused him severe suffering and fanned his wrath to fever-pitch.
For that matter, high-strung and finely sensitive, the ill treatment had flung him into a fever, which was fed by the inflammation of his parched and swollen throat and tongue.
That had given them an unfair advantage; but now that it was off, he would show them.
Upon that he was resolved.
For two days and nights he neither ate nor drank, and during those two days and nights of torment, he accumulated a fund of wrath that boded ill for whoever first fell foul of him.
His eyes turned blood-shot, and he was metamorphosed into a raging fiend.
So changed was he that the Judge himself would not have recognized him; and the express messengers breathed with relief when they bundled him off the train at Seattle.
Four men gingerly carried the crate from the wagon into a small, high-walled back yard.
A stout man, with a red sweater that sagged generously at the neck, came out and signed the book for the driver.
That was the man, Buck divined, the next tormentor, and he hurled himself savagely against the bars.
There was an instantaneous scattering of the four men who had carried it in, and from safe perches on top the wall they prepared to watch the performance.
Buck rushed at the splintering wood, sinking his teeth into it, surging and wrestling with it.
Wherever the hatchet fell on the outside, he was there on the inside, snarling and growling, as furiously anxious to get out as the man in the red sweater was calmly intent on getting him out.
“Now, you red-eyed devil,” he said, when he had made an opening sufficient for the passage of Buck’s body.
And Buck was truly a red-eyed devil, as he drew himself together for the spring, hair bristling, mouth foaming, a mad glitter in his blood-shot eyes.
Straight at the man he launched his one hundred and forty pounds of fury, surcharged with the pent passion of two days and nights.
In mid air, just as his jaws were about to close on the man, he received a shock that checked his body and brought his teeth together with an agonizing clip.
He whirled over, fetching the ground on his back and side.
He had never been struck by a club in his life, and did not understand.
With a snarl that was part bark and more scream he was again on his feet and launched into the air.
And again the shock came and he was brought crushingly to the ground.
After a particularly fierce blow, he crawled to his feet, too dazed to rush.
He staggered limply about, the blood flowing from nose and mouth and ears, his beautiful coat sprayed and flecked with bloody slaver.
Then the man advanced and deliberately dealt him a frightful blow on the nose.
All the pain he had endured was as nothing compared with the exquisite agony of this.
With a roar that was almost lionlike in its ferocity, he again hurled himself at the man.
But the man, shifting the club from right to left, coolly caught him by the under jaw, at the same time wrenching downward and backward.
Buck described a complete circle in the air, and half of another, then crashed to the ground on his head and chest.
The man struck the shrewd blow he had purposely withheld for so long, and Buck crumpled up and went down, knocked utterly senseless.
“He’s no slouch at dog-breakin’, that’s wot I say,” one of the men on the wall cried enthusiastically.
Buck’s senses came back to him, but not his strength.
“‘Answers to the name of Buck,’” the man soliloquized, quoting from the saloon-keeper’s letter which had announced the consignment of the crate and contents.
Understand?” As he spoke he fearlessly patted the head he had so mercilessly pounded, and though Buck’s hair involuntarily bristled at touch of the hand, he endured it without protest.
When the man brought him water he drank eagerly, and later bolted a generous meal of raw meat, chunk by chunk, from the man’s hand.
That club was a revelation.
It was his introduction to the reign of primitive law, and he met the introduction halfway.
As the days went by, other dogs came, in crates and at the ends of ropes, some docilely, and some raging and roaring as he had come; and, one and all, he watched them pass under the dominion of the man in the red sweater.
Again and again, as he looked at each brutal performance, the lesson was driven home to Buck: a man with a club was a lawgiver, a master to be obeyed, though not necessarily conciliated.
Also he saw one dog, that would neither conciliate nor obey, finally killed in the struggle for mastery.
Now and again men came, strangers, who talked excitedly, wheedlingly, and in all kinds of fashions to the man in the red sweater.
And at such times that money passed between them the strangers took one or more of the dogs away with them.
Buck wondered where they went, for they never came back; but the fear of the future was strong upon him, and he was glad each time when he was not selected.
Yet his time came, in the end, in the form of a little weazened man who spat broken English and many strange and uncouth exclamations which Buck could not understand.
“Sacredam!” he cried, when his eyes lit upon Buck.
“And seem’ it’s government money, you ain’t got no kick coming, eh, Perrault?” Perrault grinned.
Considering that the price of dogs had been boomed skyward by the unwonted demand, it was not an unfair sum for so fine an animal.
The Canadian Government would be no loser, nor would its despatches travel the slower.
Perrault knew dogs, and when he looked at Buck he knew that he was one in a thousand—“One in ten t’ousand,” he commented mentally.
Buck saw money pass between them, and was not surprised when Curly, a good-natured Newfoundland, and he were led away by the little weazened man.
That was the last he saw of the man in the red sweater, and as Curly and he looked at receding Seattle from the deck of the _Narwhal_, it was the last he saw of the warm Southland.
Curly and he were taken below by Perrault and turned over to a black-faced giant called François.
Perrault was a French-Canadian, and swarthy; but François was a French-Canadian half-breed, and twice as swarthy.
They were a new kind of men to Buck (of which he was destined to see many more), and while he developed no affection for them, he none the less grew honestly to respect them.
He speedily learned that Perrault and François were fair men, calm and impartial in administering justice, and too wise in the way of dogs to be fooled by dogs.
One of them was a big, snow-white fellow from Spitzbergen who had been brought away by a whaling captain, and who had later accompanied a Geological Survey into the Barrens.
He was friendly, in a treacherous sort of way, smiling into one’s face the while he meditated some underhand trick, as, for instance, when he stole from Buck’s food at the first meal.
As Buck sprang to punish him, the lash of François’s whip sang through the air, reaching the culprit first; and nothing remained to Buck but to recover the bone.
That was fair of François, he decided, and the half-breed began his rise in Buck’s estimation.
The other dog made no advances, nor received any; also, he did not attempt to steal from the newcomers.
“Dave” he was called, and he ate and slept, or yawned between times, and took interest in nothing, not even when the _Narwhal_ crossed Queen Charlotte Sound and rolled and pitched and bucked like a thing possessed.
When Buck and Curly grew excited, half wild with fear, he raised his head as though annoyed, favored them with an incurious glance, yawned, and went to sleep again.
Day and night the ship throbbed to the tireless pulse of the propeller, and though one day was very like another, it was apparent to Buck that the weather was steadily growing colder.
At last, one morning, the propeller was quiet, and the _Narwhal_ was pervaded with an atmosphere of excitement.
At the first step upon the cold surface, Buck’s feet sank into a white mushy something very like mud.
He sniffed it curiously, then licked some up on his tongue.
The onlookers laughed uproariously, and he felt ashamed, he knew not why, for it was his first snow.
The Law of Club and Fang Buck’s first day on the Dyea beach was like a nightmare.
Every hour was filled with shock and surprise.
He had been suddenly jerked from the heart of civilization and flung into the heart of things primordial.
All was confusion and action, and every moment life and limb were in peril.
There was imperative need to be constantly alert; for these dogs and men were not town dogs and men.
He had never seen dogs fight as these wolfish creatures fought, and his first experience taught him an unforgetable lesson.
It is true, it was a vicarious experience, else he would not have lived to profit by it.
They were camped near the log store, where she, in her friendly way, made advances to a husky dog the size of a full-grown wolf, though not half so large as she.
There was no warning, only a leap in like a flash, a metallic clip of teeth, a leap out equally swift, and Curly’s face was ripped open from eye to jaw.
It was the wolf manner of fighting, to strike and leap away; but there was more to it than this.
Thirty or forty huskies ran to the spot and surrounded the combatants in an intent and silent circle.
Buck did not comprehend that silent intentness, nor the eager way with which they were licking their chops.
Curly rushed her antagonist, who struck again and leaped aside.
He met her next rush with his chest, in a peculiar fashion that tumbled her off her feet.
She never regained them.
This was what the onlooking huskies had waited for.
They closed in upon her, snarling and yelping, and she was buried, screaming with agony, beneath the bristling mass of bodies.
So sudden was it, and so unexpected, that Buck was taken aback.
He saw Spitz run out his scarlet tongue in a way he had of laughing; and he saw François, swinging an axe, spring into the mess of dogs.
Two minutes from the time Curly went down, the last of her assailants were clubbed off.
But she lay there limp and lifeless in the bloody, trampled snow, almost literally torn to pieces, the swart half-breed standing over her and cursing horribly.
Spitz ran out his tongue and laughed again, and from that moment Buck hated him with a bitter and deathless hatred.
Before he had recovered from the shock caused by the tragic passing of Curly, he received another shock.
François fastened upon him an arrangement of straps and buckles.
And as he had seen horses work, so he was set to work, hauling François on a sled to the forest that fringed the valley, and returning with a load of firewood.
François was stern, demanding instant obedience, and by virtue of his whip receiving instant obedience; while Dave, who was an experienced wheeler, nipped Buck’s hind quarters whenever he was in error.
Spitz was the leader, likewise experienced, and while he could not always get at Buck, he growled sharp reproof now and again, or cunningly threw his weight in the traces to jerk Buck into the way he should go.
Buck learned easily, and under the combined tuition of his two mates and François made remarkable progress.
Ere they returned to camp he knew enough to stop at “ho,” to go ahead at “mush,” to swing wide on the bends, and to keep clear of the wheeler when the loaded sled shot downhill at their heels.
“T’ree vair’ good dogs,” François told Perrault.
I tich heem queek as anyt’ing.” By afternoon, Perrault, who was in a hurry to be on the trail with his despatches, returned with two more dogs.
“Billee” and “Joe” he called them, two brothers, and true huskies both.
Sons of the one mother though they were, they were as different as day and night.
Billee’s one fault was his excessive good nature, while Joe was the very opposite, sour and introspective, with a perpetual snarl and a malignant eye.
Buck received them in comradely fashion, Dave ignored them, while Spitz proceeded to thrash first one and then the other.
Billee wagged his tail appeasingly, turned to run when he saw that appeasement was of no avail, and cried (still appeasingly) when Spitz’s sharp teeth scored his flank.
But no matter how Spitz circled, Joe whirled around on his heels to face him, mane bristling, ears laid back, lips writhing and snarling, jaws clipping together as fast as he could snap, and eyes diabolically gleaming—the incarnation of belligerent fear.
So terrible was his appearance that Spitz was forced to forego disciplining him; but to cover his own discomfiture he turned upon the inoffensive and wailing Billee and drove him to the confines of the camp.
By evening Perrault secured another dog, an old husky, long and lean and gaunt, with a battle-scarred face and a single eye which flashed a warning of prowess that commanded respect.
Like Dave, he asked nothing, gave nothing, expected nothing; and when he marched slowly and deliberately into their midst, even Spitz left him alone.
He had one peculiarity which Buck was unlucky enough to discover.
He did not like to be approached on his blind side.
Of this offence Buck was unwittingly guilty, and the first knowledge he had of his indiscretion was when Sol-leks whirled upon him and slashed his shoulder to the bone for three inches up and down.
Forever after Buck avoided his blind side, and to the last of their comradeship had no more trouble.
His only apparent ambition, like Dave’s, was to be left alone; though, as Buck was afterward to learn, each of them possessed one other and even more vital ambition.
That night Buck faced the great problem of sleeping.
The tent, illumined by a candle, glowed warmly in the midst of the white plain; and when he, as a matter of course, entered it, both Perrault and François bombarded him with curses and cooking utensils, till he recovered from his consternation and fled ignominiously into the outer cold.
A chill wind was blowing that nipped him sharply and bit with especial venom into his wounded shoulder.
He lay down on the snow and attempted to sleep, but the frost soon drove him shivering to his feet.
Miserable and disconsolate, he wandered about among the many tents, only to find that one place was as cold as another.
Here and there savage dogs rushed upon him, but he bristled his neck-hair and snarled (for he was learning fast), and they let him go his way unmolested.
To his astonishment, they had disappeared.
Again he wandered about through the great camp, looking for them, and again he returned.
Then where could they possibly be?
With drooping tail and shivering body, very forlorn indeed, he aimlessly circled the tent.
Suddenly the snow gave way beneath his fore legs and he sank down.
Something wriggled under his feet.
He sprang back, bristling and snarling, fearful of the unseen and unknown.
But a friendly little yelp reassured him, and he went back to investigate.
A whiff of warm air ascended to his nostrils, and there, curled up under the snow in a snug ball, lay Billee.
He whined placatingly, squirmed and wriggled to show his good will and intentions, and even ventured, as a bribe for peace, to lick Buck’s face with his warm wet tongue.
Buck confidently selected a spot, and with much fuss and waste effort proceeded to dig a hole for himself.
In a trice the heat from his body filled the confined space and he was asleep.
The day had been long and arduous, and he slept soundly and comfortably, though he growled and barked and wrestled with bad dreams.
It had snowed during the night and he was completely buried.
It was a token that he was harking back through his own life to the lives of his forebears; for he was a civilized dog, an unduly civilized dog, and of his own experience knew no trap and so could not of himself fear it.
The muscles of his whole body contracted spasmodically and instinctively, the hair on his neck and shoulders stood on end, and with a ferocious snarl he bounded straight up into the blinding day, the snow flying about him in a flashing cloud.
Ere he landed on his feet, he saw the white camp spread out before him and knew where he was and remembered all that had passed from the time he went for a stroll with Manuel to the hole he had dug for himself the night before.
A shout from François hailed his appearance.
“Wot I say?” the dog-driver cried to Perrault.
“Dat Buck for sure learn queek as anyt’ing.” Perrault nodded gravely.
As courier for the Canadian Government, bearing important despatches, he was anxious to secure the best dogs, and he was particularly gladdened by the possession of Buck.
Three more huskies were added to the team inside an hour, making a total of nine, and before another quarter of an hour had passed they were in harness and swinging up the trail toward the Dyea Cañon.
Buck was glad to be gone, and though the work was hard he found he did not particularly despise it.
He was surprised at the eagerness which animated the whole team and which was communicated to him; but still more surprising was the change wrought in Dave and Sol-leks.
They were new dogs, utterly transformed by the harness.
All passiveness and unconcern had dropped from them.
They were alert and active, anxious that the work should go well, and fiercely irritable with whatever, by delay or confusion, retarded that work.
The toil of the traces seemed the supreme expression of their being, and all that they lived for and the only thing in which they took delight.
Dave was wheeler or sled dog, pulling in front of him was Buck, then came Sol-leks; the rest of the team was strung out ahead, single file, to the leader, which position was filled by Spitz.
Buck had been purposely placed between Dave and Sol-leks so that he might receive instruction.
Apt scholar that he was, they were equally apt teachers, never allowing him to linger long in error, and enforcing their teaching with their sharp teeth.
As François’s whip backed him up, Buck found it to be cheaper to mend his ways than to retaliate.
Once, during a brief halt, when he got tangled in the traces and delayed the start, both Dave and Sol-leks flew at him and administered a sound trouncing.
The resulting tangle was even worse, but Buck took good care to keep the traces clear thereafter; and ere the day was done, so well had he mastered his work, his mates about ceased nagging him.
François’s whip snapped less frequently, and Perrault even honored Buck by lifting up his feet and carefully examining them.
It was a hard day’s run, up the Cañon, through Sheep Camp, past the Scales and the timber line, across glaciers and snowdrifts hundreds of feet deep, and over the great Chilcoot Divide, which stands between the salt water and the fresh and guards forbiddingly the sad and lonely North.
They made good time down the chain of lakes which fills the craters of extinct volcanoes, and late that night pulled into the huge camp at the head of Lake Bennett, where thousands of goldseekers were building boats against the break-up of the ice in the spring.
Buck made his hole in the snow and slept the sleep of the exhausted just, but all too early was routed out in the cold darkness and harnessed with his mates to the sled.
As a rule, Perrault travelled ahead of the team, packing the snow with webbed shoes to make it easier for them.
François, guiding the sled at the gee-pole, sometimes exchanged places with him, but not often.
Perrault was in a hurry, and he prided himself on his knowledge of ice, which knowledge was indispensable, for the fall ice was very thin, and where there was swift water, there was no ice at all.
Day after day, for days unending, Buck toiled in the traces.
And always they pitched camp after dark, eating their bit of fish, and crawling to sleep into the snow.
He never had enough, and suffered from perpetual hunger pangs.
Yet the other dogs, because they weighed less and were born to the life, received a pound only of the fish and managed to keep in good condition.
He swiftly lost the fastidiousness which had characterized his old life.
A dainty eater, he found that his mates, finishing first, robbed him of his unfinished ration.
There was no defending it.
While he was fighting off two or three, it was disappearing down the throats of the others.
When he saw Pike, one of the new dogs, a clever malingerer and thief, slyly steal a slice of bacon when Perrault’s back was turned, he duplicated the performance the following day, getting away with the whole chunk.
A great uproar was raised, but he was unsuspected; while Dub, an awkward blunderer who was always getting caught, was punished for Buck’s misdeed.
This first theft marked Buck as fit to survive in the hostile Northland environment.
It marked his adaptability, his capacity to adjust himself to changing conditions, the lack of which would have meant swift and terrible death.
It marked, further, the decay or going to pieces of his moral nature, a vain thing and a handicap in the ruthless struggle for existence.
It was all well enough in the Southland, under the law of love and fellowship, to respect private property and personal feelings; but in the Northland, under the law of club and fang, whoso took such things into account was a fool, and in so far as he observed them he would fail to prosper.
Not that Buck reasoned it out.
He was fit, that was all, and unconsciously he accommodated himself to the new mode of life.
But the club of the man in the red sweater had beaten into him a more fundamental and primitive code.
Civilized, he could have died for a moral consideration, say the defence of Judge Miller’s riding-whip; but the completeness of his decivilization was now evidenced by his ability to flee from the defence of a moral consideration and so save his hide.
He did not rob openly, but stole secretly and cunningly, out of respect for club and fang.
His development (or retrogression) was rapid.
His muscles became hard as iron, and he grew callous to all ordinary pain.
He achieved an internal as well as external economy.
He could eat anything, no matter how loathsome or indigestible; and, once eaten, the juices of his stomach extracted the last least particle of nutriment; and his blood carried it to the farthest reaches of his body, building it into the toughest and stoutest of tissues.
Sight and scent became remarkably keen, while his hearing developed such acuteness that in his sleep he heard the faintest sound and knew whether it heralded peace or peril.
He learned to bite the ice out with his teeth when it collected between his toes; and when he was thirsty and there was a thick scum of ice over the water hole, he would break it by rearing and striking it with stiff fore legs.
His most conspicuous trait was an ability to scent the wind and forecast it a night in advance.
No matter how breathless the air when he dug his nest by tree or bank, the wind that later blew inevitably found him to leeward, sheltered and snug.
And not only did he learn by experience, but instincts long dead became alive again.
The domesticated generations fell from him.
In vague ways he remembered back to the youth of the breed, to the time the wild dogs ranged in packs through the primeval forest and killed their meat as they ran it down.
In this manner had fought forgotten ancestors.
They quickened the old life within him, and the old tricks which they had stamped into the heredity of the breed were his tricks.
They came to him without effort or discovery, as though they had been his always.
And when, on the still cold nights, he pointed his nose at a star and howled long and wolflike, it was his ancestors, dead and dust, pointing nose at star and howling down through the centuries and through him.
And his cadences were their cadences, the cadences which voiced their woe and what to them was the meaning of the stiffness, and the cold, and dark.
Thus, as token of what a puppet thing life is, the ancient song surged through him and he came into his own again; and he came because men had found a yellow metal in the North, and because Manuel was a gardener’s helper whose wages did not lap over the needs of his wife and divers small copies of himself.
The Dominant Primordial Beast The dominant primordial beast was strong in Buck, and under the fierce conditions of trail life it grew and grew.
He was too busy adjusting himself to the new life to feel at ease, and not only did he not pick fights, but he avoided them whenever possible.
A certain deliberateness characterized his attitude.
He was not prone to rashness and precipitate action; and in the bitter hatred between him and Spitz he betrayed no impatience, shunned all offensive acts.
On the other hand, possibly because he divined in Buck a dangerous rival, Spitz never lost an opportunity of showing his teeth.
He even went out of his way to bully Buck, striving constantly to start the fight which could end only in the death of one or the other.
Early in the trip this might have taken place had it not been for an unwonted accident.
At the end of this day they made a bleak and miserable camp on the shore of Lake Le Barge.
Driving snow, a wind that cut like a white-hot knife, and darkness had forced them to grope for a camping place.
At their backs rose a perpendicular wall of rock, and Perrault and François were compelled to make their fire and spread their sleeping robes on the ice of the lake itself.
The tent they had discarded at Dyea in order to travel light.
A few sticks of driftwood furnished them with a fire that thawed down through the ice and left them to eat supper in the dark.
Close in under the sheltering rock Buck made his nest.
So snug and warm was it, that he was loath to leave it when François distributed the fish which he had first thawed over the fire.
But when Buck finished his ration and returned, he found his nest occupied.
A warning snarl told him that the trespasser was Spitz.
He sprang upon Spitz with a fury which surprised them both, and Spitz particularly, for his whole experience with Buck had gone to teach him that his rival was an unusually timid dog, who managed to hold his own only because of his great weight and size.
François was surprised, too, when they shot out in a tangle from the disrupted nest and he divined the cause of the trouble.
He was crying with sheer rage and eagerness as he circled back and forth for a chance to spring in.
Buck was no less eager, and no less cautious, as he likewise circled back and forth for the advantage.
But it was then that the unexpected happened, the thing which projected their struggle for supremacy far into the future, past many a weary mile of trail and toil.
An oath from Perrault, the resounding impact of a club upon a bony frame, and a shrill yelp of pain, heralded the breaking forth of pandemonium.
The camp was suddenly discovered to be alive with skulking furry forms,—starving huskies, four or five score of them, who had scented the camp from some Indian village.
They had crept in while Buck and Spitz were fighting, and when the two men sprang among them with stout clubs they showed their teeth and fought back.
Perrault found one with head buried in the grub-box.
His club landed heavily on the gaunt ribs, and the grub-box was capsized on the ground.
On the instant a score of the famished brutes were scrambling for the bread and bacon.
The clubs fell upon them unheeded.
They yelped and howled under the rain of blows, but struggled none the less madly till the last crumb had been devoured.
In the meantime the astonished team-dogs had burst out of their nests only to be set upon by the fierce invaders.
They were mere skeletons, draped loosely in draggled hides, with blazing eyes and slavered fangs.
But the hunger-madness made them terrifying, irresistible.
There was no opposing them.
Buck was beset by three huskies, and in a trice his head and shoulders were ripped and slashed.
The din was frightful.
Dave and Sol-leks, dripping blood from a score of wounds, were fighting bravely side by side.
Joe was snapping like a demon.
Once, his teeth closed on the fore leg of a husky, and he crunched down through the bone.
Pike, the malingerer, leaped upon the crippled animal, breaking its neck with a quick flash of teeth and a jerk, Buck got a frothing adversary by the throat, and was sprayed with blood when his teeth sank through the jugular.
The warm taste of it in his mouth goaded him to greater fierceness.
It was Spitz, treacherously attacking from the side.
Perrault and François, having cleaned out their part of the camp, hurried to save their sled-dogs.
The wild wave of famished beasts rolled back before them, and Buck shook himself free.
The two men were compelled to run back to save the grub, upon which the huskies returned to the attack on the team.
Billee, terrified into bravery, sprang through the savage circle and fled away over the ice.
Pike and Dub followed on his heels, with the rest of the team behind.
As Buck drew himself together to spring after them, out of the tail of his eye he saw Spitz rush upon him with the evident intention of overthrowing him.
Later, the nine team-dogs gathered together and sought shelter in the forest.
Though unpursued, they were in a sorry plight.
There was not one who was not wounded in four or five places, while some were wounded grievously.
Dub was badly injured in a hind leg; Dolly, the last husky added to the team at Dyea, had a badly torn throat; Joe had lost an eye; while Billee, the good-natured, with an ear chewed and rent to ribbons, cried and whimpered throughout the night.
At daybreak they limped warily back to camp, to find the marauders gone and the two men in bad tempers.
The huskies had chewed through the sled lashings and canvas coverings.
In fact, nothing, no matter how remotely eatable, had escaped them.
They had eaten a pair of Perrault’s moose-hide moccasins, chunks out of the leather traces, and even two feet of lash from the end of François’s whip.
He broke from a mournful contemplation of it to look over his wounded dogs.
Mebbe all mad dog, sacredam!
Wot you t’ink, eh, Perrault?” The courier shook his head dubiously.
Two hours of cursing and exertion got the harnesses into shape, and the wound-stiffened team was under way, struggling painfully over the hardest part of the trail they had yet encountered, and for that matter, the hardest between them and Dawson.
Six days of exhausting toil were required to cover those thirty terrible miles.
And terrible they were, for every foot of them was accomplished at the risk of life to dog and man.
A dozen times, Perrault, nosing the way broke through the ice bridges, being saved by the long pole he carried, which he so held that it fell each time across the hole made by his body.
But a cold snap was on, the thermometer registering fifty below zero, and each time he broke through he was compelled for very life to build a fire and dry his garments.
It was because nothing daunted him that he had been chosen for government courier.
He took all manner of risks, resolutely thrusting his little weazened face into the frost and struggling on from dim dawn to dark.
He skirted the frowning shores on rim ice that bent and crackled under foot and upon which they dared not halt.
The usual fire was necessary to save them.
They were coated solidly with ice, and the two men kept them on the run around the fire, sweating and thawing, so close that they were singed by the flames.
At another time Spitz went through, dragging the whole team after him up to Buck, who strained backward with all his strength, his fore paws on the slippery edge and the ice quivering and snapping all around.
But behind him was Dave, likewise straining backward, and behind the sled was François, pulling till his tendons cracked.
Perrault scaled it by a miracle, while François prayed for just that miracle; and with every thong and sled lashing and the last bit of harness rove into a long rope, the dogs were hoisted, one by one, to the cliff crest.
Then came the search for a place to descend, which descent was ultimately made by the aid of the rope, and night found them back on the river with a quarter of a mile to the day’s credit.
By the time they made the Hootalinqua and good ice, Buck was played out.
The rest of the dogs were in like condition; but Perrault, to make up lost time, pushed them late and early.
His had softened during the many generations since the day his last wild ancestor was tamed by a cave-dweller or river man.
Also, the dog-driver rubbed Buck’s feet for half an hour each night after supper, and sacrificed the tops of his own moccasins to make four moccasins for Buck.
This was a great relief, and Buck caused even the weazened face of Perrault to twist itself into a grin one morning, when François forgot the moccasins and Buck lay on his back, his four feet waving appealingly in the air, and refused to budge without them.
At the Pelly one morning, as they were harnessing up, Dolly, who had never been conspicuous for anything, went suddenly mad.
She announced her condition by a long, heartbreaking wolf howl that sent every dog bristling with fear, then sprang straight for Buck.
Straight away he raced, with Dolly, panting and frothing, one leap behind; nor could she gain on him, so great was his terror, nor could he leave her, so great was her madness.
He plunged through the wooded breast of the island, flew down to the lower end, crossed a back channel filled with rough ice to another island, gained a third island, curved back to the main river, and in desperation started to cross it.
And all the time, though he did not look, he could hear her snarling just one leap behind.
François called to him a quarter of a mile away and he doubled back, still one leap ahead, gasping painfully for air and putting all his faith in that François would save him.
Buck staggered over against the sled, exhausted, sobbing for breath, helpless.
This was Spitz’s opportunity.
He sprang upon Buck, and twice his teeth sank into his unresisting foe and ripped and tore the flesh to the bone.
Then François’s lash descended, and Buck had the satisfaction of watching Spitz receive the worst whipping as yet administered to any of the teams.
“One devil, dat Spitz,” remarked Perrault.
“Some dam day heem keel dat Buck.” “Dat Buck two devils,” was François’s rejoinder.
Spitz, as lead-dog and acknowledged master of the team, felt his supremacy threatened by this strange Southland dog.
And strange Buck was to him, for of the many Southland dogs he had known, not one had shown up worthily in camp and on trail.
They were all too soft, dying under the toil, the frost, and starvation.
Buck was the exception.
He alone endured and prospered, matching the husky in strength, savagery, and cunning.
Then he was a masterful dog, and what made him dangerous was the fact that the club of the man in the red sweater had knocked all blind pluck and rashness out of his desire for mastery.
He was preeminently cunning, and could bide his time with a patience that was nothing less than primitive.
It was inevitable that the clash for leadership should come.
He wanted it because it was his nature, because he had been gripped tight by that nameless, incomprehensible pride of the trail and trace—that pride which holds dogs in the toil to the last gasp, which lures them to die joyfully in the harness, and breaks their hearts if they are cut out of the harness.
This was the pride of Dave as wheel-dog, of Sol-leks as he pulled with all his strength; the pride that laid hold of them at break of camp, transforming them from sour and sullen brutes into straining, eager, ambitious creatures; the pride that spurred them on all day and dropped them at pitch of camp at night, letting them fall back into gloomy unrest and uncontent.
This was the pride that bore up Spitz and made him thrash the sled-dogs who blundered and shirked in the traces or hid away at harness-up time in the morning.
Likewise it was this pride that made him fear Buck as a possible lead-dog.
He openly threatened the other’s leadership.
He came between him and the shirks he should have punished.
And he did it deliberately.
One night there was a heavy snowfall, and in the morning Pike, the malingerer, did not appear.
He was securely hidden in his nest under a foot of snow.
He raged through the camp, smelling and digging in every likely place, snarling so frightfully that Pike heard and shivered in his hiding-place.
But when he was at last unearthed, and Spitz flew at him to punish him, Buck flew, with equal rage, in between.
So unexpected was it, and so shrewdly managed, that Spitz was hurled backward and off his feet.
Pike, who had been trembling abjectly, took heart at this open mutiny, and sprang upon his overthrown leader.
Buck, to whom fair play was a forgotten code, likewise sprang upon Spitz.
But François, chuckling at the incident while unswerving in the administration of justice, brought his lash down upon Buck with all his might.
This failed to drive Buck from his prostrate rival, and the butt of the whip was brought into play.
Half-stunned by the blow, Buck was knocked backward and the lash laid upon him again and again, while Spitz soundly punished the many times offending Pike.
In the days that followed, as Dawson grew closer and closer, Buck still continued to interfere between Spitz and the culprits; but he did it craftily, when François was not around, With the covert mutiny of Buck, a general insubordination sprang up and increased.
Dave and Sol-leks were unaffected, but the rest of the team went from bad to worse.
There was continual bickering and jangling.
He kept François busy, for the dog-driver was in constant apprehension of the life-and-death struggle between the two which he knew must take place sooner or later; and on more than one night the sounds of quarrelling and strife among the other dogs turned him out of his sleeping robe, fearful that Buck and Spitz were at it.
But the opportunity did not present itself, and they pulled into Dawson one dreary afternoon with the great fight still to come.
Here were many men, and countless dogs, and Buck found them all at work.
It seemed the ordained order of things that dogs should work.
All day they swung up and down the main street in long teams, and in the night their jingling bells still went by.
They hauled cabin logs and firewood, freighted up to the mines, and did all manner of work that horses did in the Santa Clara Valley.
Here and there Buck met Southland dogs, but in the main they were the wild wolf husky breed.
Every night, regularly, at nine, at twelve, at three, they lifted a nocturnal song, a weird and eerie chant, in which it was Buck’s delight to join.
With the aurora borealis flaming coldly overhead, or the stars leaping in the frost dance, and the land numb and frozen under its pall of snow, this song of the huskies might have been the defiance of life, only it was pitched in minor key, with long-drawn wailings and half-sobs, and was more the pleading of life, the articulate travail of existence.
It was invested with the woe of unnumbered generations, this plaint by which Buck was so strangely stirred.
And that he should be stirred by it marked the completeness with which he harked back through the ages of fire and roof to the raw beginnings of life in the howling ages.
Seven days from the time they pulled into Dawson, they dropped down the steep bank by the Barracks to the Yukon Trail, and pulled for Dyea and Salt Water.
Perrault was carrying despatches if anything more urgent than those he had brought in; also, the travel pride had gripped him, and he purposed to make the record trip of the year.
The week’s rest had recuperated the dogs and put them in thorough trim.
The trail they had broken into the country was packed hard by later journeyers.
And further, the police had arranged in two or three places deposits of grub for dog and man, and he was travelling light.
But such splendid running was achieved not without great trouble and vexation on the part of François.
The insidious revolt led by Buck had destroyed the solidarity of the team.
The encouragement Buck gave the rebels led them into all kinds of petty misdemeanors.
The old awe departed, and they grew equal to challenging his authority.
Pike robbed him of half a fish one night, and gulped it down under the protection of Buck.
Another night Dub and Joe fought Spitz and made him forego the punishment they deserved.
And even Billee, the good-natured, was less good-natured, and whined not half so placatingly as in former days.
Buck never came near Spitz without snarling and bristling menacingly.
In fact, his conduct approached that of a bully, and he was given to swaggering up and down before Spitz’s very nose.
The breaking down of discipline likewise affected the dogs in their relations with one another.
They quarrelled and bickered more than ever among themselves, till at times the camp was a howling bedlam.
Dave and Sol-leks alone were unaltered, though they were made irritable by the unending squabbling.
François swore strange barbarous oaths, and stamped the snow in futile rage, and tore his hair.
Directly his back was turned they were at it again.
He backed up Spitz with his whip, while Buck backed up the remainder of the team.
He worked faithfully in the harness, for the toil had become a delight to him; yet it was a greater delight slyly to precipitate a fight amongst his mates and tangle the traces.
At the mouth of the Tahkeena, one night after supper, Dub turned up a snowshoe rabbit, blundered it, and missed.
A hundred yards away was a camp of the Northwest Police, with fifty dogs, huskies all, who joined the chase.
The rabbit sped down the river, turned off into a small creek, up the frozen bed of which it held steadily.
It ran lightly on the surface of the snow, while the dogs ploughed through by main strength.
He lay down low to the race, whining eagerly, his splendid body flashing forward, leap by leap, in the wan white moonlight.
And leap by leap, like some pale frost wraith, the snowshoe rabbit flashed on ahead.
All that stirring of old instincts which at stated periods drives men out from the sounding cities to forest and plain to kill things by chemically propelled leaden pellets, the blood lust, the joy to kill—all this was Buck’s, only it was infinitely more intimate.
And such is the paradox of living, this ecstasy comes when one is most alive, and it comes as a complete forgetfulness that one is alive.
This ecstasy, this forgetfulness of living, comes to the artist, caught up and out of himself in a sheet of flame; it comes to the soldier, war-mad on a stricken field and refusing quarter; and it came to Buck, leading the pack, sounding the old wolf-cry, straining after the food that was alive and that fled swiftly before him through the moonlight.
He was sounding the deeps of his nature, and of the parts of his nature that were deeper than he, going back into the womb of Time.
He was mastered by the sheer surging of life, the tidal wave of being, the perfect joy of each separate muscle, joint, and sinew in that it was everything that was not death, that it was aglow and rampant, expressing itself in movement, flying exultantly under the stars and over the face of dead matter that did not move.
But Spitz, cold and calculating even in his supreme moods, left the pack and cut across a narrow neck of land where the creek made a long bend around.
Buck did not know of this, and as he rounded the bend, the frost wraith of a rabbit still flitting before him, he saw another and larger frost wraith leap from the overhanging bank into the immediate path of the rabbit.
The rabbit could not turn, and as the white teeth broke its back in mid air it shrieked as loudly as a stricken man may shriek.
At sound of this, the cry of Life plunging down from Life’s apex in the grip of Death, the full pack at Buck’s heels raised a hell’s chorus of delight.
He did not check himself, but drove in upon Spitz, shoulder to shoulder, so hard that he missed the throat.
Spitz gained his feet almost as though he had not been overthrown, slashing Buck down the shoulder and leaping clear.
Twice his teeth clipped together, like the steel jaws of a trap, as he backed away for better footing, with lean and lifting lips that writhed and snarled.
As they circled about, snarling, ears laid back, keenly watchful for the advantage, the scene came to Buck with a sense of familiarity.
He seemed to remember it all,—the white woods, and earth, and moonlight, and the thrill of battle.
Over the whiteness and silence brooded a ghostly calm.
There was not the faintest whisper of air—nothing moved, not a leaf quivered, the visible breaths of the dogs rising slowly and lingering in the frosty air.
They had made short work of the snowshoe rabbit, these dogs that were ill-tamed wolves; and they were now drawn up in an expectant circle.
They, too, were silent, their eyes only gleaming and their breaths drifting slowly upward.
Spitz was a practised fighter.
From Spitzbergen through the Arctic, and across Canada and the Barrens, he had held his own with all manner of dogs and achieved to mastery over them.
He never rushed till he was prepared to receive a rush; never attacked till he had first defended that attack.
Wherever his fangs struck for the softer flesh, they were countered by the fangs of Spitz.
Fang clashed fang, and lips were cut and bleeding, but Buck could not penetrate his enemy’s guard.
Then he warmed up and enveloped Spitz in a whirlwind of rushes.
Then Buck took to rushing, as though for the throat, when, suddenly drawing back his head and curving in from the side, he would drive his shoulder at the shoulder of Spitz, as a ram by which to overthrow him.
But instead, Buck’s shoulder was slashed down each time as Spitz leaped lightly away.
Spitz was untouched, while Buck was streaming with blood and panting hard.
The fight was growing desperate.
And all the while the silent and wolfish circle waited to finish off whichever dog went down.
As Buck grew winded, Spitz took to rushing, and he kept him staggering for footing.
Once Buck went over, and the whole circle of sixty dogs started up; but he recovered himself, almost in mid air, and the circle sank down again and waited.
But Buck possessed a quality that made for greatness—imagination.
He fought by instinct, but he could fight by head as well.
He rushed, as though attempting the old shoulder trick, but at the last instant swept low to the snow and in.
There was a crunch of breaking bone, and the white dog faced him on three legs.
Thrice he tried to knock him over, then repeated the trick and broke the right fore leg.
Despite the pain and helplessness, Spitz struggled madly to keep up.
He saw the silent circle, with gleaming eyes, lolling tongues, and silvery breaths drifting upward, closing in upon him as he had seen similar circles close in upon beaten antagonists in the past.
Buck was inexorable.
Mercy was a thing reserved for gentler climes.
The circle had tightened till he could feel the breaths of the huskies on his flanks.
He could see them, beyond Spitz and to either side, half crouching for the spring, their eyes fixed upon him.
Every animal was motionless as though turned to stone.
Only Spitz quivered and bristled as he staggered back and forth, snarling with horrible menace, as though to frighten off impending death.
Then Buck sprang in and out; but while he was in, shoulder had at last squarely met shoulder.
The dark circle became a dot on the moon-flooded snow as Spitz disappeared from view.
Buck stood and looked on, the successful champion, the dominant primordial beast who had made his kill and found it good.
Who Has Won to Mastership “Eh?
I spik true w’en I say dat Buck two devils.” This was François’s speech next morning when he discovered Spitz missing and Buck covered with wounds.
“Dat Spitz fight lak hell,” said Perrault, as he surveyed the gaping rips and cuts.
No more Spitz, no more trouble, sure.” While Perrault packed the camp outfit and loaded the sled, the dog-driver proceeded to harness the dogs.
Buck trotted up to the place Spitz would have occupied as leader; but François, not noticing him, brought Sol-leks to the coveted position.
In his judgment, Sol-leks was the best lead-dog left.
Buck sprang upon Sol-leks in a fury, driving him back and standing in his place.
“Eh? eh?” François cried, slapping his thighs gleefully.
He took Buck by the scruff of the neck, and though the dog growled threateningly, dragged him to one side and replaced Sol-leks.
François was obdurate, but when he turned his back Buck again displaced Sol-leks, who was not at all unwilling to go.
Buck remembered the man in the red sweater, and retreated slowly; nor did he attempt to charge in when Sol-leks was once more brought forward.
But he circled just beyond the range of the club, snarling with bitterness and rage; and while he circled he watched the club so as to dodge it if thrown by François, for he was become wise in the way of clubs.
Buck retreated two or three steps.
François followed him up, whereupon he again retreated.
After some time of this, François threw down the club, thinking that Buck feared a thrashing.
He wanted, not to escape a clubbing, but to have the leadership.
Perrault took a hand.
They cursed him, and his fathers and mothers before him, and all his seed to come after him down to the remotest generation, and every hair on his body and drop of blood in his veins; and he answered curse with snarl and kept out of their reach.
He did not try to run away, but retreated around and around the camp, advertising plainly that when his desire was met, he would come in and be good.
François sat down and scratched his head.
Perrault looked at his watch and swore.
François scratched his head again.
He shook it and grinned sheepishly at the courier, who shrugged his shoulders in sign that they were beaten.
Buck laughed, as dogs laugh, yet kept his distance.
François unfastened Sol-leks’s traces and put him back in his old place.
The team stood harnessed to the sled in an unbroken line, ready for the trail.
“T’row down de club,” Perrault commanded.
François complied, whereupon Buck trotted in, laughing triumphantly, and swung around into position at the head of the team.
His traces were fastened, the sled broken out, and with both men running they dashed out on to the river trail.
Highly as the dog-driver had forevalued Buck, with his two devils, he found, while the day was yet young, that he had undervalued.
At a bound Buck took up the duties of leadership; and where judgment was required, and quick thinking and quick acting, he showed himself the superior even of Spitz, of whom François had never seen an equal.
But it was in giving the law and making his mates live up to it, that Buck excelled.
Dave and Sol-leks did not mind the change in leadership.
It was none of their business.
Their business was to toil, and toil mightily, in the traces.
So long as that were not interfered with, they did not care what happened.
The rest of the team, however, had grown unruly during the last days of Spitz, and their surprise was great now that Buck proceeded to lick them into shape.
Pike, who pulled at Buck’s heels, and who never put an ounce more of his weight against the breast-band than he was compelled to do, was swiftly and repeatedly shaken for loafing; and ere the first day was done he was pulling more than ever before in his life.
The first night in camp, Joe, the sour one, was punished roundly—a thing that Spitz had never succeeded in doing.
Buck simply smothered him by virtue of superior weight, and cut him up till he ceased snapping and began to whine for mercy.
The general tone of the team picked up immediately.
It recovered its old-time solidarity, and once more the dogs leaped as one dog in the traces.
At the Rink Rapids two native huskies, Teek and Koona, were added; and the celerity with which Buck broke them in took away François’s breath.
Wot you say, Perrault?” And Perrault nodded.
The trail was in excellent condition, well packed and hard, and there was no new-fallen snow with which to contend.
The temperature dropped to fifty below zero and remained there the whole trip.
The men rode and ran by turn, and the dogs were kept on the jump, with but infrequent stoppages.
The Thirty Mile River was comparatively coated with ice, and they covered in one day going out what had taken them ten days coming in.
And on the last night of the second week they topped White Pass and dropped down the sea slope with the lights of Skaguay and of the shipping at their feet.
Each day for fourteen days they had averaged forty miles.
For three days Perrault and François threw chests up and down the main street of Skaguay and were deluged with invitations to drink, while the team was the constant centre of a worshipful crowd of dog-busters and mushers.
Then three or four western bad men aspired to clean out the town, were riddled like pepper-boxes for their pains, and public interest turned to other idols.
Next came official orders.
And that was the last of François and Perrault.
It was no light running now, nor record time, but heavy toil each day, with a heavy load behind; for this was the mail train, carrying word from the world to the men who sought gold under the shadow of the Pole.
It was a monotonous life, operating with machine-like regularity.
At a certain time each morning the cooks turned out, fires were built, and breakfast was eaten.
Then, while some broke camp, others harnessed the dogs, and they were under way an hour or so before the darkness fell which gave warning of dawn.
Some pitched the flies, others cut firewood and pine boughs for the beds, and still others carried water or ice for the cooks.
To them, this was the one feature of the day, though it was good to loaf around, after the fish was eaten, for an hour or so with the other dogs, of which there were fivescore and odd.
There were fierce fighters among them, but three battles with the fiercest brought Buck to mastery, so that when he bristled and showed his teeth they got out of his way.
Best of all, perhaps, he loved to lie near the fire, hind legs crouched under him, fore legs stretched out in front, head raised, and eyes blinking dreamily at the flames.
Sometimes he thought of Judge Miller’s big house in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley, and of the cement swimming-tank, and Ysabel, the Mexican hairless, and Toots, the Japanese pug; but oftener he remembered the man in the red sweater, the death of Curly, the great fight with Spitz, and the good things he had eaten or would like to eat.
He was not homesick.
The Sunland was very dim and distant, and such memories had no power over him.
Far more potent were the memories of his heredity that gave things he had never seen before a seeming familiarity; the instincts (which were but the memories of his ancestors become habits) which had lapsed in later days, and still later, in him, quickened and become alive again.
Sometimes as he crouched there, blinking dreamily at the flames, it seemed that the flames were of another fire, and that as he crouched by this other fire he saw another and different man from the half-breed cook before him.
This other man was shorter of leg and longer of arm, with muscles that were stringy and knotty rather than rounded and swelling.
He uttered strange sounds, and seemed very much afraid of the darkness, into which he peered continually, clutching in his hand, which hung midway between knee and foot, a stick with a heavy stone made fast to the end.
He was all but naked, a ragged and fire-scorched skin hanging part way down his back, but on his body there was much hair.
In some places, across the chest and shoulders and down the outside of the arms and thighs, it was matted into almost a thick fur.
He did not stand erect, but with trunk inclined forward from the hips, on legs that bent at the knees.
About his body there was a peculiar springiness, or resiliency, almost catlike, and a quick alertness as of one who lived in perpetual fear of things seen and unseen.
At other times this hairy man squatted by the fire with head between his legs and slept.
On such occasions his elbows were on his knees, his hands clasped above his head as though to shed rain by the hairy arms.
And beyond that fire, in the circling darkness, Buck could see many gleaming coals, two by two, always two by two, which he knew to be the eyes of great beasts of prey.
And he could hear the crashing of their bodies through the undergrowth, and the noises they made in the night.
They were short of weight and in poor condition when they made Dawson, and should have had a ten days’ or a week’s rest at least.
But in two days’ time they dropped down the Yukon bank from the Barracks, loaded with letters for the outside.
The dogs were tired, the drivers grumbling, and to make matters worse, it snowed every day.
This meant a soft trail, greater friction on the runners, and heavier pulling for the dogs; yet the drivers were fair through it all, and did their best for the animals.
Each night the dogs were attended to first.
They ate before the drivers ate, and no man sought his sleeping-robe till he had seen to the feet of the dogs he drove.
Still, their strength went down.
Since the beginning of the winter they had travelled eighteen hundred miles, dragging sleds the whole weary distance; and eighteen hundred miles will tell upon life of the toughest.
Buck stood it, keeping his mates up to their work and maintaining discipline, though he, too, was very tired.
Billee cried and whimpered regularly in his sleep each night.
Joe was sourer than ever, and Sol-leks was unapproachable, blind side or other side.
But it was Dave who suffered most of all.
Something had gone wrong with him.
He became more morose and irritable, and when camp was pitched at once made his nest, where his driver fed him.
Sometimes, in the traces, when jerked by a sudden stoppage of the sled, or by straining to start it, he would cry out with pain.
The driver examined him, but could find nothing.
All the drivers became interested in his case.
They talked it over at meal-time, and over their last pipes before going to bed, and one night they held a consultation.
Something was wrong inside, but they could locate no broken bones, could not make it out.
By the time Cassiar Bar was reached, he was so weak that he was falling repeatedly in the traces.
His intention was to rest Dave, letting him run free behind the sled.
Sick as he was, Dave resented being taken out, grunting and growling while the traces were unfastened, and whimpering broken-heartedly when he saw Sol-leks in the position he had held and served so long.
When the sled started, he floundered in the soft snow alongside the beaten trail, attacking Sol-leks with his teeth, rushing against him and trying to thrust him off into the soft snow on the other side, striving to leap inside his traces and get between him and the sled, and all the while whining and yelping and crying with grief and pain.
The half-breed tried to drive him away with the whip; but he paid no heed to the stinging lash, and the man had not the heart to strike harder.
Dave refused to run quietly on the trail behind the sled, where the going was easy, but continued to flounder alongside in the soft snow, where the going was most difficult, till exhausted.
Then he fell, and lay where he fell, howling lugubriously as the long train of sleds churned by.
With the last remnant of his strength he managed to stagger along behind till the train made another stop, when he floundered past the sleds to his own, where he stood alongside Sol-leks.
His driver lingered a moment to get a light for his pipe from the man behind.
Then he returned and started his dogs.
They swung out on the trail with remarkable lack of exertion, turned their heads uneasily, and stopped in surprise.
The driver was surprised, too; the sled had not moved.
He called his comrades to witness the sight.
Dave had bitten through both of Sol-leks’s traces, and was standing directly in front of the sled in his proper place.
The driver was perplexed.
His comrades talked of how a dog could break its heart through being denied the work that killed it, and recalled instances they had known, where dogs, too old for the toil, or injured, had died because they were cut out of the traces.
So he was harnessed in again, and proudly he pulled as of old, though more than once he cried out involuntarily from the bite of his inward hurt.
Several times he fell down and was dragged in the traces, and once the sled ran upon him so that he limped thereafter in one of his hind legs.
By convulsive efforts he got on his feet, staggered, and fell.
Then he wormed his way forward slowly toward where the harnesses were being put on his mates.
He would advance his fore legs and drag up his body with a sort of hitching movement, when he would advance his fore legs and hitch ahead again for a few more inches.
His strength left him, and the last his mates saw of him he lay gasping in the snow and yearning toward them.
But they could hear him mournfully howling till they passed out of sight behind a belt of river timber.
The Scotch half-breed slowly retraced his steps to the camp they had left.
A revolver-shot rang out.
The man came back hurriedly.
They were in a wretched state, worn out and worn down.
Buck’s one hundred and forty pounds had dwindled to one hundred and fifteen.
The rest of his mates, though lighter dogs, had relatively lost more weight than he.
Pike, the malingerer, who, in his lifetime of deceit, had often successfully feigned a hurt leg, was now limping in earnest.
Sol-leks was limping, and Dub was suffering from a wrenched shoulder-blade.
They were all terribly footsore.
Their feet fell heavily on the trail, jarring their bodies and doubling the fatigue of a day’s travel.
It was not the dead-tiredness that comes through brief and excessive effort, from which recovery is a matter of hours; but it was the dead-tiredness that comes through the slow and prolonged strength drainage of months of toil.
There was no power of recuperation left, no reserve strength to call upon.
In less than five months they had travelled twenty-five hundred miles, during the last eighteen hundred of which they had had but five days’ rest.
When they arrived at Skaguay they were apparently on their last legs.
“Mush on, poor sore feets,” the driver encouraged them as they tottered down the main street of Skaguay.
One bully long res’.” The drivers confidently expected a long stopover.
Themselves, they had covered twelve hundred miles with two days’ rest, and in the nature of reason and common justice they deserved an interval of loafing.
But so many were the men who had rushed into the Klondike, and so many were the sweethearts, wives, and kin that had not rushed in, that the congested mail was taking on Alpine proportions; also, there were official orders.
Fresh batches of Hudson Bay dogs were to take the places of those worthless for the trail.
The worthless ones were to be got rid of, and, since dogs count for little against dollars, they were to be sold.
The men addressed each other as “Hal” and “Charles.” Charles was a middle-aged, lightish-colored man, with weak and watery eyes and a mustache that twisted fiercely and vigorously up, giving the lie to the limply drooping lip it concealed.
Hal was a youngster of nineteen or twenty, with a big Colt’s revolver and a hunting-knife strapped about him on a belt that fairly bristled with cartridges.
It advertised his callowness—a callowness sheer and unutterable.
Both men were manifestly out of place, and why such as they should adventure the North is part of the mystery of things that passes understanding.
Buck heard the chaffering, saw the money pass between the man and the Government agent, and knew that the Scotch half-breed and the mail-train drivers were passing out of his life on the heels of Perrault and François and the others who had gone before.
When driven with his mates to the new owners’ camp, Buck saw a slipshod and slovenly affair, tent half stretched, dishes unwashed, everything in disorder; also, he saw a woman.
“Mercedes” the men called her.
Buck watched them apprehensively as they proceeded to take down the tent and load the sled.
There was a great deal of effort about their manner, but no businesslike method.
The tin dishes were packed away unwashed.
Mercedes continually fluttered in the way of her men and kept up an unbroken chattering of remonstrance and advice.
When they put a clothes-sack on the front of the sled, she suggested it should go on the back; and when they had put it on the back, and covered it over with a couple of other bundles, she discovered overlooked articles which could abide nowhere else but in that very sack, and they unloaded again.
Three men from a neighboring tent came out and looked on, grinning and winking at one another.
“You’ve got a right smart load as it is,” said one of them; “and it’s not me should tell you your business, but I wouldn’t tote that tent along if I was you.” “Undreamed of!” cried Mercedes, throwing up her hands in dainty dismay.
“However in the world could I manage without a tent?” “It’s springtime, and you won’t get any more cold weather,” the man replied.
She shook her head decidedly, and Charles and Hal put the last odds and ends on top the mountainous load.
“Why shouldn’t it?” Charles demanded rather shortly.
“Oh, that’s all right, that’s all right,” the man hastened meekly to say.
“I was just a-wonderin’, that is all.
It seemed a mite top-heavy.” Charles turned his back and drew the lashings down as well as he could, which was not in the least well.
“An’ of course the dogs can hike along all day with that contraption behind them,” affirmed a second of the men.
“Certainly,” said Hal, with freezing politeness, taking hold of the gee-pole with one hand and swinging his whip from the other.
“Mush on there!” The dogs sprang against the breast-bands, strained hard for a few moments, then relaxed.
“The lazy brutes, I’ll show them,” he cried, preparing to lash out at them with the whip.
But Mercedes interfered, crying, “Oh, Hal, you mustn’t,” as she caught hold of the whip and wrenched it from him.
Now you must promise you won’t be harsh with them for the rest of the trip, or I won’t go a step.” “Precious lot you know about dogs,” her brother sneered; “and I wish you’d leave me alone.
They’re lazy, I tell you, and you’ve got to whip them to get anything out of them.
Ask one of those men.” Mercedes looked at them imploringly, untold repugnance at sight of pain written in her pretty face.
“Plum tuckered out, that’s what’s the matter.
They need a rest.” “Rest be blanked,” said Hal, with his beardless lips; and Mercedes said, “Oh!” in pain and sorrow at the oath.
But she was a clannish creature, and rushed at once to the defence of her brother.
“Never mind that man,” she said pointedly.
They threw themselves against the breast-bands, dug their feet into the packed snow, got down low to it, and put forth all their strength.
The whip was whistling savagely, when once more Mercedes interfered.
“You poor, poor dears,” she cried sympathetically, “why don’t you pull hard?—then you wouldn’t be whipped.” Buck did not like her, but he was feeling too miserable to resist her, taking it as part of the day’s miserable work.
One of the onlookers, who had been clenching his teeth to suppress hot speech, now spoke up:— “It’s not that I care a whoop what becomes of you, but for the dogs’ sakes I just want to tell you, you can help them a mighty lot by breaking out that sled.
Throw your weight against the gee-pole, right and left, and break it out.” A third time the attempt was made, but this time, following the advice, Hal broke out the runners which had been frozen to the snow.
The overloaded and unwieldy sled forged ahead, Buck and his mates struggling frantically under the rain of blows.
It would have required an experienced man to keep the top-heavy sled upright, and Hal was not such a man.
As they swung on the turn the sled went over, spilling half its load through the loose lashings.
The lightened sled bounded on its side behind them.
They were angry because of the ill treatment they had received and the unjust load.
He broke into a run, the team following his lead.
The capsized sled ground over him, and the dogs dashed on up the street, adding to the gayety of Skaguay as they scattered the remainder of the outfit along its chief thoroughfare.
Kind-hearted citizens caught the dogs and gathered up the scattered belongings.
Half the load and twice the dogs, if they ever expected to reach Dawson, was what was said.
Hal and his sister and brother-in-law listened unwillingly, pitched tent, and overhauled the outfit.
“Blankets for a hotel” quoth one of the men who laughed and helped.
Good Lord, do you think you’re travelling on a Pullman?” And so it went, the inexorable elimination of the superfluous.
Mercedes cried when her clothes-bags were dumped on the ground and article after article was thrown out.
She cried in general, and she cried in particular over each discarded thing.
She clasped hands about knees, rocking back and forth broken-heartedly.
She averred she would not go an inch, not for a dozen Charleses.
She appealed to everybody and to everything, finally wiping her eyes and proceeding to cast out even articles of apparel that were imperative necessaries.
And in her zeal, when she had finished with her own, she attacked the belongings of her men and went through them like a tornado.
This accomplished, the outfit, though cut in half, was still a formidable bulk.
These, added to the six of the original team, and Teek and Koona, the huskies obtained at the Rink Rapids on the record trip, brought the team up to fourteen.
But the Outside dogs, though practically broken in since their landing, did not amount to much.
Three were short-haired pointers, one was a Newfoundland, and the other two were mongrels of indeterminate breed.
They did not seem to know anything, these newcomers.
Buck and his comrades looked upon them with disgust, and though he speedily taught them their places and what not to do, he could not teach them what to do.
With the exception of the two mongrels, they were bewildered and spirit-broken by the strange savage environment in which they found themselves and by the ill treatment they had received.
The two mongrels were without spirit at all; bones were the only things breakable about them.
With the newcomers hopeless and forlorn, and the old team worn out by twenty-five hundred miles of continuous trail, the outlook was anything but bright.
The two men, however, were quite cheerful.
They were doing the thing in style, with fourteen dogs.
They had seen other sleds depart over the Pass for Dawson, or come in from Dawson, but never had they seen a sled with so many as fourteen dogs.
In the nature of Arctic travel there was a reason why fourteen dogs should not drag one sled, and that was that one sled could not carry the food for fourteen dogs.
Mercedes looked over their shoulders and nodded comprehensively, it was all so very simple.
They were starting dead weary.
Four times he had covered the distance between Salt Water and Dawson, and the knowledge that, jaded and tired, he was facing the same trail once more, made him bitter.
The Outsides were timid and frightened, the Insides without confidence in their masters.
Buck felt vaguely that there was no depending upon these two men and the woman.
They did not know how to do anything, and as the days went by it became apparent that they could not learn.
They were slack in all things, without order or discipline.
It took them half the night to pitch a slovenly camp, and half the morning to break that camp and get the sled loaded in fashion so slovenly that for the rest of the day they were occupied in stopping and rearranging the load.
And on no day did they succeed in making more than half the distance used by the men as a basis in their dog-food computation.
It was inevitable that they should go short on dog-food.
But they hastened it by overfeeding, bringing the day nearer when underfeeding would commence.
The Outside dogs, whose digestions had not been trained by chronic famine to make the most of little, had voracious appetites.
And when, in addition to this, the worn-out huskies pulled weakly, Hal decided that the orthodox ration was too small.
And to cap it all, when Mercedes, with tears in her pretty eyes and a quaver in her throat, could not cajole him into giving the dogs still more, she stole from the fish-sacks and fed them slyly.
And though they were making poor time, the heavy load they dragged sapped their strength severely.
Then came the underfeeding.
Hal awoke one day to the fact that his dog-food was half gone and the distance only quarter covered; further, that for love or money no additional dog-food was to be obtained.
So he cut down even the orthodox ration and tried to increase the day’s travel.
His sister and brother-in-law seconded him; but they were frustrated by their heavy outfit and their own incompetence.
It was a simple matter to give the dogs less food; but it was impossible to make the dogs travel faster, while their own inability to get under way earlier in the morning prevented them from travelling longer hours.
Not only did they not know how to work dogs, but they did not know how to work themselves.
Poor blundering thief that he was, always getting caught and punished, he had none the less been a faithful worker.
His wrenched shoulder-blade, untreated and unrested, went from bad to worse, till finally Hal shot him with the big Colt’s revolver.
The Newfoundland went first, followed by the three short-haired pointers, the two mongrels hanging more grittily on to life, but going in the end.
By this time all the amenities and gentlenesses of the Southland had fallen away from the three people.
Shorn of its glamour and romance, Arctic travel became to them a reality too harsh for their manhood and womanhood.
Mercedes ceased weeping over the dogs, being too occupied with weeping over herself and with quarrelling with her husband and brother.
Their irritability arose out of their misery, increased with it, doubled upon it, outdistanced it.
The wonderful patience of the trail which comes to men who toil hard and suffer sore, and remain sweet of speech and kindly, did not come to these two men and the woman.
They had no inkling of such a patience.
Charles and Hal wrangled whenever Mercedes gave them a chance.
It was the cherished belief of each that he did more than his share of the work, and neither forbore to speak this belief at every opportunity.
Sometimes Mercedes sided with her husband, sometimes with her brother.
The result was a beautiful and unending family quarrel.
Starting from a dispute as to which should chop a few sticks for the fire (a dispute which concerned only Charles and Hal), presently would be lugged in the rest of the family, fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins, people thousands of miles away, and some of them dead.
That Hal’s views on art, or the sort of society plays his mother’s brother wrote, should have anything to do with the chopping of a few sticks of firewood, passes comprehension; nevertheless the quarrel was as likely to tend in that direction as in the direction of Charles’s political prejudices.
And that Charles’s sister’s tale-bearing tongue should be relevant to the building of a Yukon fire, was apparent only to Mercedes, who disburdened herself of copious opinions upon that topic, and incidentally upon a few other traits unpleasantly peculiar to her husband’s family.
In the meantime the fire remained unbuilt, the camp half pitched, and the dogs unfed.
Mercedes nursed a special grievance—the grievance of sex.
She was pretty and soft, and had been chivalrously treated all her days.
But the present treatment by her husband and brother was everything save chivalrous.
It was her custom to be helpless.
Upon which impeachment of what to her was her most essential sex-prerogative, she made their lives unendurable.
She no longer considered the dogs, and because she was sore and tired, she persisted in riding on the sled.
She was pretty and soft, but she weighed one hundred and twenty pounds—a lusty last straw to the load dragged by the weak and starving animals.
Charles and Hal begged her to get off and walk, pleaded with her, entreated, the while she wept and importuned Heaven with a recital of their brutality.
On one occasion they took her off the sled by main strength.
After they had travelled three miles they unloaded the sled, came back for her, and by main strength put her on the sled again.
In the excess of their own misery they were callous to the suffering of their animals.
Hal’s theory, which he practised on others, was that one must get hardened.
He had started out preaching it to his sister and brother-in-law.
Failing there, he hammered it into the dogs with a club.
At the Five Fingers the dog-food gave out, and a toothless old squaw offered to trade them a few pounds of frozen horse-hide for the Colt’s revolver that kept the big hunting-knife company at Hal’s hip.
A poor substitute for food was this hide, just as it had been stripped from the starved horses of the cattlemen six months back.
In its frozen state it was more like strips of galvanized iron, and when a dog wrestled it into his stomach it thawed into thin and innutritious leathery strings and into a mass of short hair, irritating and indigestible.
And through it all Buck staggered along at the head of the team as in a nightmare.
He pulled when he could; when he could no longer pull, he fell down and remained down till blows from whip or club drove him to his feet again.
All the stiffness and gloss had gone out of his beautiful furry coat.
The hair hung down, limp and draggled, or matted with dried blood where Hal’s club had bruised him.
His muscles had wasted away to knotty strings, and the flesh pads had disappeared, so that each rib and every bone in his frame were outlined cleanly through the loose hide that was wrinkled in folds of emptiness.
It was heartbreaking, only Buck’s heart was unbreakable.
They were perambulating skeletons.
There were seven all together, including him.
In their very great misery they had become insensible to the bite of the lash or the bruise of the club.
They were simply so many bags of bones in which sparks of life fluttered faintly.
And when the club or whip fell upon them, the spark fluttered feebly up, and they tottered to their feet and staggered on.
Hal had traded off his revolver, so he took the axe and knocked Billee on the head as he lay in the traces, then cut the carcass out of the harness and dragged it to one side.
It was beautiful spring weather, but neither dogs nor humans were aware of it.
It was dawn by three in the morning, and twilight lingered till nine at night.
The whole long day was a blaze of sunshine.
The ghostly winter silence had given way to the great spring murmur of awakening life.
The willows and aspens were bursting out in young buds.
Crickets sang in the nights, and in the days all manner of creeping, crawling things rustled forth into the sun.
Partridges and woodpeckers were booming and knocking in the forest.
Squirrels were chattering, birds singing, and overhead honked the wild-fowl driving up from the south in cunning wedges that split the air.
From every hill slope came the trickle of running water, the music of unseen fountains.
All things were thawing, bending, snapping.
The Yukon was straining to break loose the ice that bound it down.
Air-holes formed, fissures sprang and spread apart, while thin sections of ice fell through bodily into the river.
And amid all this bursting, rending, throbbing of awakening life, under the blazing sun and through the soft-sighing breezes, like wayfarers to death, staggered the two men, the woman, and the huskies.
With the dogs falling, Mercedes weeping and riding, Hal swearing innocuously, and Charles’s eyes wistfully watering, they staggered into John Thornton’s camp at the mouth of White River.
Mercedes dried her eyes and looked at John Thornton.
He sat down very slowly and painstakingly what of his great stiffness.
John Thornton was whittling the last touches on an axe-handle he had made from a stick of birch.
He whittled and listened, gave monosyllabic replies, and, when it was asked, terse advice.
He knew the breed, and he gave his advice in the certainty that it would not be followed.
“They told us up above that the bottom was dropping out of the trail and that the best thing for us to do was to lay over,” Hal said in response to Thornton’s warning to take no more chances on the rotten ice.
“They told us we couldn’t make White River, and here we are.” This last with a sneering ring of triumph in it.
“And they told you true,” John Thornton answered.
I tell you straight, I wouldn’t risk my carcass on that ice for all the gold in Alaska.” “That’s because you’re not a fool, I suppose,” said Hal.
“All the same, we’ll go on to Dawson.” He uncoiled his whip.
Mush on!” Thornton went on whittling.
It had long since passed into the stage where blows were required to rouse it.
The whip flashed out, here and there, on its merciless errands.
John Thornton compressed his lips.
The lash bit into him again and again, but he neither whined nor struggled.
Several times Thornton started, as though to speak, but changed his mind.
A moisture came into his eyes, and, as the whipping continued, he arose and walked irresolutely up and down.
This was the first time Buck had failed, in itself a sufficient reason to drive Hal into a rage.
He exchanged the whip for the customary club.
He had a vague feeling of impending doom.
This had been strong upon him when he pulled in to the bank, and it had not departed from him.
What of the thin and rotten ice he had felt under his feet all day, it seemed that he sensed disaster close at hand, out there ahead on the ice where his master was trying to drive him.
So greatly had he suffered, and so far gone was he, that the blows did not hurt much.
And as they continued to fall upon him, the spark of life within flickered and went down.
He felt strangely numb.
As though from a great distance, he was aware that he was being beaten.
The last sensations of pain left him.
He no longer felt anything, though very faintly he could hear the impact of the club upon his body.
And then, suddenly, without warning, uttering a cry that was inarticulate and more like the cry of an animal, John Thornton sprang upon the man who wielded the club.
Hal was hurled backward, as though struck by a falling tree.
Charles looked on wistfully, wiped his watery eyes, but did not get up because of his stiffness.
John Thornton stood over Buck, struggling to control himself, too convulsed with rage to speak.
I’m going to Dawson.” Thornton stood between him and Buck, and evinced no intention of getting out of the way.
Mercedes screamed, cried, laughed, and manifested the chaotic abandonment of hysteria.
Thornton rapped Hal’s knuckles with the axe-handle, knocking the knife to the ground.
He rapped his knuckles again as he tried to pick it up.
They were limping and staggering.
Mercedes was riding the loaded sled.
Hal guided at the gee-pole, and Charles stumbled along in the rear.
As Buck watched them, Thornton knelt beside him and with rough, kindly hands searched for broken bones.
By the time his search had disclosed nothing more than many bruises and a state of terrible starvation, the sled was a quarter of a mile away.
Dog and man watched it crawling along over the ice.
Suddenly, they saw its back end drop down, as into a rut, and the gee-pole, with Hal clinging to it, jerk into the air.
Mercedes’s scream came to their ears.
They saw Charles turn and make one step to run back, and then a whole section of ice give way and dogs and humans disappear.
John Thornton and Buck looked at each other.
“You poor devil,” said John Thornton, and Buck licked his hand.
For the Love of a Man When John Thornton froze his feet in the previous December his partners had made him comfortable and left him to get well, going on themselves up the river to get out a raft of saw-logs for Dawson.
He was still limping slightly at the time he rescued Buck, but with the continued warm weather even the slight limp left him.
And here, lying by the river bank through the long spring days, watching the running water, listening lazily to the songs of birds and the hum of nature, Buck slowly won back his strength.
A rest comes very good after one has travelled three thousand miles, and it must be confessed that Buck waxed lazy as his wounds healed, his muscles swelled out, and the flesh came back to cover his bones.
For that matter, they were all loafing,—Buck, John Thornton, and Skeet and Nig,—waiting for the raft to come that was to carry them down to Dawson.
Skeet was a little Irish setter who early made friends with Buck, who, in a dying condition, was unable to resent her first advances.
She had the doctor trait which some dogs possess; and as a mother cat washes her kittens, so she washed and cleansed Buck’s wounds.
Regularly, each morning after he had finished his breakfast, she performed her self-appointed task, till he came to look for her ministrations as much as he did for Thornton’s.
Nig, equally friendly, though less demonstrative, was a huge black dog, half bloodhound and half deerhound, with eyes that laughed and a boundless good nature.
To Buck’s surprise these dogs manifested no jealousy toward him.
They seemed to share the kindliness and largeness of John Thornton.
As Buck grew stronger they enticed him into all sorts of ridiculous games, in which Thornton himself could not forbear to join; and in this fashion Buck romped through his convalescence and into a new existence.
Love, genuine passionate love, was his for the first time.
This he had never experienced at Judge Miller’s down in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley.
With the Judge’s sons, hunting and tramping, it had been a working partnership; with the Judge’s grandsons, a sort of pompous guardianship; and with the Judge himself, a stately and dignified friendship.
But love that was feverish and burning, that was adoration, that was madness, it had taken John Thornton to arouse.
This man had saved his life, which was something; but, further, he was the ideal master.
Other men saw to the welfare of their dogs from a sense of duty and business expediency; he saw to the welfare of his as if they were his own children, because he could not help it.
He never forgot a kindly greeting or a cheering word, and to sit down for a long talk with them (“gas” he called it) was as much his delight as theirs.
Buck knew no greater joy than that rough embrace and the sound of murmured oaths, and at each jerk back and forth it seemed that his heart would be shaken out of his body so great was its ecstasy.
And when, released, he sprang to his feet, his mouth laughing, his eyes eloquent, his throat vibrant with unuttered sound, and in that fashion remained without movement, John Thornton would reverently exclaim, “God! you can all but speak!” Buck had a trick of love expression that was akin to hurt.
He would often seize Thornton’s hand in his mouth and close so fiercely that the flesh bore the impress of his teeth for some time afterward.
And as Buck understood the oaths to be love words, so the man understood this feigned bite for a caress.
For the most part, however, Buck’s love was expressed in adoration.
While he went wild with happiness when Thornton touched him or spoke to him, he did not seek these tokens.
Unlike Skeet, who was wont to shove her nose under Thornton’s hand and nudge and nudge till petted, or Nig, who would stalk up and rest his great head on Thornton’s knee, Buck was content to adore at a distance.
He would lie by the hour, eager, alert, at Thornton’s feet, looking up into his face, dwelling upon it, studying it, following with keenest interest each fleeting expression, every movement or change of feature.
Or, as chance might have it, he would lie farther away, to the side or rear, watching the outlines of the man and the occasional movements of his body.
And often, such was the communion in which they lived, the strength of Buck’s gaze would draw John Thornton’s head around, and he would return the gaze, without speech, his heart shining out of his eyes as Buck’s heart shone out.
For a long time after his rescue, Buck did not like Thornton to get out of his sight.
His transient masters since he had come into the Northland had bred in him a fear that no master could be permanent.
He was afraid that Thornton would pass out of his life as Perrault and François and the Scotch half-breed had passed out.
At such times he would shake off sleep and creep through the chill to the flap of the tent, where he would stand and listen to the sound of his master’s breathing.
But in spite of this great love he bore John Thornton, which seemed to bespeak the soft civilizing influence, the strain of the primitive, which the Northland had aroused in him, remained alive and active.
Faithfulness and devotion, things born of fire and roof, were his; yet he retained his wildness and wiliness.
He was a thing of the wild, come in from the wild to sit by John Thornton’s fire, rather than a dog of the soft Southland stamped with the marks of generations of civilization.
Because of his very great love, he could not steal from this man, but from any other man, in any other camp, he did not hesitate an instant; while the cunning with which he stole enabled him to escape detection.
His face and body were scored by the teeth of many dogs, and he fought as fiercely as ever and more shrewdly.
Skeet and Nig were too good-natured for quarrelling,—besides, they belonged to John Thornton; but the strange dog, no matter what the breed or valor, swiftly acknowledged Buck’s supremacy or found himself struggling for life with a terrible antagonist.
And Buck was merciless.
He had learned well the law of club and fang, and he never forewent an advantage or drew back from a foe he had started on the way to Death.
He had lessoned from Spitz, and from the chief fighting dogs of the police and mail, and knew there was no middle course.
He must master or be mastered; while to show mercy was a weakness.
Mercy did not exist in the primordial life.
It was misunderstood for fear, and such misunderstandings made for death.
He linked the past with the present, and the eternity behind him throbbed through him in a mighty rhythm to which he swayed as the tides and seasons swayed.
So peremptorily did these shades beckon him, that each day mankind and the claims of mankind slipped farther from him.
Deep in the forest a call was sounding, and as often as he heard this call, mysteriously thrilling and luring, he felt compelled to turn his back upon the fire and the beaten earth around it, and to plunge into the forest, and on and on, he knew not where or why; nor did he wonder where or why, the call sounding imperiously, deep in the forest.
But as often as he gained the soft unbroken earth and the green shade, the love for John Thornton drew him back to the fire again.
Thornton alone held him.
Chance travellers might praise or pet him; but he was cold under it all, and from a too demonstrative man he would get up and walk away.
When Thornton’s partners, Hans and Pete, arrived on the long-expected raft, Buck refused to notice them till he learned they were close to Thornton; after that he tolerated them in a passive sort of way, accepting favors from them as though he favored them by accepting.
They were of the same large type as Thornton, living close to the earth, thinking simply and seeing clearly; and ere they swung the raft into the big eddy by the saw-mill at Dawson, they understood Buck and his ways, and did not insist upon an intimacy such as obtained with Skeet and Nig.
For Thornton, however, his love seemed to grow and grow.
He, alone among men, could put a pack upon Buck’s back in the summer travelling.
Nothing was too great for Buck to do, when Thornton commanded.
One day (they had grub-staked themselves from the proceeds of the raft and left Dawson for the head-waters of the Tanana) the men and dogs were sitting on the crest of a cliff which fell away, straight down, to naked bed-rock three hundred feet below.
John Thornton was sitting near the edge, Buck at his shoulder.
A thoughtless whim seized Thornton, and he drew the attention of Hans and Pete to the experiment he had in mind.
“Jump, Buck!” he commanded, sweeping his arm out and over the chasm.
The next instant he was grappling with Buck on the extreme edge, while Hans and Pete were dragging them back into safety.
Thornton shook his head.
“No, it is splendid, and it is terrible, too.
Do you know, it sometimes makes me afraid.” “I’m not hankering to be the man that lays hands on you while he’s around,” Pete announced conclusively, nodding his head toward Buck.
“Py Jingo!” was Hans’s contribution.
“Not mineself either.” It was at Circle City, ere the year was out, that Pete’s apprehensions were realized.
“Black” Burton, a man evil-tempered and malicious, had been picking a quarrel with a tenderfoot at the bar, when Thornton stepped good-naturedly between.
Buck, as was his custom, was lying in a corner, head on paws, watching his master’s every action.
Burton struck out, without warning, straight from the shoulder.
Thornton was sent spinning, and saved himself from falling only by clutching the rail of the bar.
Those who were looking on heard what was neither bark nor yelp, but a something which is best described as a roar, and they saw Buck’s body rise up in the air as he left the floor for Burton’s throat.
The man saved his life by instinctively throwing out his arm, but was hurled backward to the floor with Buck on top of him.
This time the man succeeded only in partly blocking, and his throat was torn open.
Then the crowd was upon Buck, and he was driven off; but while a surgeon checked the bleeding, he prowled up and down, growling furiously, attempting to rush in, and being forced back by an array of hostile clubs.
A “miners’ meeting,” called on the spot, decided that the dog had sufficient provocation, and Buck was discharged.
But his reputation was made, and from that day his name spread through every camp in Alaska.
Later on, in the fall of the year, he saved John Thornton’s life in quite another fashion.
The three partners were lining a long and narrow poling-boat down a bad stretch of rapids on the Forty-Mile Creek.
Hans and Pete moved along the bank, snubbing with a thin Manila rope from tree to tree, while Thornton remained in the boat, helping its descent by means of a pole, and shouting directions to the shore.
At a particularly bad spot, where a ledge of barely submerged rocks jutted out into the river, Hans cast off the rope, and, while Thornton poled the boat out into the stream, ran down the bank with the end in his hand to snub the boat when it had cleared the ledge.
This it did, and was flying down-stream in a current as swift as a mill-race, when Hans checked it with the rope and checked too suddenly.
The boat flirted over and snubbed in to the bank bottom up, while Thornton, flung sheer out of it, was carried down-stream toward the worst part of the rapids, a stretch of wild water in which no swimmer could live.
Buck had sprung in on the instant; and at the end of three hundred yards, amid a mad swirl of water, he overhauled Thornton.
When he felt him grasp his tail, Buck headed for the bank, swimming with all his splendid strength.
But the progress shoreward was slow; the progress down-stream amazingly rapid.
From below came the fatal roaring where the wild current went wilder and was rent in shreds and spray by the rocks which thrust through like the teeth of an enormous comb.
The suck of the water as it took the beginning of the last steep pitch was frightful, and Thornton knew that the shore was impossible.
He scraped furiously over a rock, bruised across a second, and struck a third with crushing force.
He clutched its slippery top with both hands, releasing Buck, and above the roar of the churning water shouted: “Go, Buck!
Go!” Buck could not hold his own, and swept on down-stream, struggling desperately, but unable to win back.
When he heard Thornton’s command repeated, he partly reared out of the water, throwing his head high, as though for a last look, then turned obediently toward the bank.
He swam powerfully and was dragged ashore by Pete and Hans at the very point where swimming ceased to be possible and destruction began.
They knew that the time a man could cling to a slippery rock in the face of that driving current was a matter of minutes, and they ran as fast as they could up the bank to a point far above where Thornton was hanging on.
They attached the line with which they had been snubbing the boat to Buck’s neck and shoulders, being careful that it should neither strangle him nor impede his swimming, and launched him into the stream.
He struck out boldly, but not straight enough into the stream.
He discovered the mistake too late, when Thornton was abreast of him and a bare half-dozen strokes away while he was being carried helplessly past.
Hans promptly snubbed with the rope, as though Buck were a boat.
The rope thus tightening on him in the sweep of the current, he was jerked under the surface, and under the surface he remained till his body struck against the bank and he was hauled out.
He was half drowned, and Hans and Pete threw themselves upon him, pounding the breath into him and the water out of him.
He staggered to his feet and fell down.
The faint sound of Thornton’s voice came to them, and though they could not make out the words of it, they knew that he was in his extremity.
His master’s voice acted on Buck like an electric shock.
He sprang to his feet and ran up the bank ahead of the men to the point of his previous departure.
Again the rope was attached and he was launched, and again he struck out, but this time straight into the stream.
He had miscalculated once, but he would not be guilty of it a second time.
Hans paid out the rope, permitting no slack, while Pete kept it clear of coils.
Buck held on till he was on a line straight above Thornton; then he turned, and with the speed of an express train headed down upon him.
Thornton saw him coming, and, as Buck struck him like a battering ram, with the whole force of the current behind him, he reached up and closed with both arms around the shaggy neck.
Hans snubbed the rope around the tree, and Buck and Thornton were jerked under the water.
Strangling, suffocating, sometimes one uppermost and sometimes the other, dragging over the jagged bottom, smashing against rocks and snags, they veered in to the bank.
Thornton came to, belly downward and being violently propelled back and forth across a drift log by Hans and Pete.
His first glance was for Buck, over whose limp and apparently lifeless body Nig was setting up a howl, while Skeet was licking the wet face and closed eyes.
Thornton was himself bruised and battered, and he went carefully over Buck’s body, when he had been brought around, finding three broken ribs.
“That settles it,” he announced.
That winter, at Dawson, Buck performed another exploit, not so heroic, perhaps, but one that put his name many notches higher on the totem-pole of Alaskan fame.
This exploit was particularly gratifying to the three men; for they stood in need of the outfit which it furnished, and were enabled to make a long-desired trip into the virgin East, where miners had not yet appeared.
It was brought about by a conversation in the Eldorado Saloon, in which men waxed boastful of their favorite dogs.
Buck, because of his record, was the target for these men, and Thornton was driven stoutly to defend him.
“Pooh! pooh!” said John Thornton; “Buck can start a thousand pounds.” “And break it out? and walk off with it for a hundred yards?” demanded Matthewson, a Bonanza King, he of the seven hundred vaunt.
“And break it out, and walk off with it for a hundred yards,” John Thornton said coolly.
“Well,” Matthewson said, slowly and deliberately, so that all could hear, “I’ve got a thousand dollars that says he can’t.
Thornton’s bluff, if bluff it was, had been called.
He could feel a flush of warm blood creeping up his face.
He did not know whether Buck could start a thousand pounds.
The enormousness of it appalled him.
He had great faith in Buck’s strength and had often thought him capable of starting such a load; but never, as now, had he faced the possibility of it, the eyes of a dozen men fixed upon him, silent and waiting.
Further, he had no thousand dollars; nor had Hans or Pete.
“I’ve got a sled standing outside now, with twenty fiftypound sacks of flour on it,” Matthewson went on with brutal directness; “so don’t let that hinder you.” Thornton did not reply.
He glanced from face to face in the absent way of a man who has lost the power of thought and is seeking somewhere to find the thing that will start it going again.
The face of Jim O’Brien, a Mastodon King and old-time comrade, caught his eyes.
“Can you lend me a thousand?” he asked, almost in a whisper.
“Sure,” answered O’Brien, thumping down a plethoric sack by the side of Matthewson’s.
“Though it’s little faith I’m having, John, that the beast can do the trick.” The Eldorado emptied its occupants into the street to see the test.
The tables were deserted, and the dealers and gamekeepers came forth to see the outcome of the wager and to lay odds.
Several hundred men, furred and mittened, banked around the sled within easy distance.
Matthewson’s sled, loaded with a thousand pounds of flour, had been standing for a couple of hours, and in the intense cold (it was sixty below zero) the runners had frozen fast to the hard-packed snow.
A quibble arose concerning the phrase “break out.” O’Brien contended it was Thornton’s privilege to knock the runners loose, leaving Buck to “break it out” from a dead standstill.
Matthewson insisted that the phrase included breaking the runners from the frozen grip of the snow.
A majority of the men who had witnessed the making of the bet decided in his favor, whereat the odds went up to three to one against Buck.
Not a man believed him capable of the feat.
Thornton had been hurried into the wager, heavy with doubt; and now that he looked at the sled itself, the concrete fact, with the regular team of ten dogs curled up in the snow before it, the more impossible the task appeared.
Matthewson waxed jubilant.
“Three to one!” he proclaimed.
“I’ll lay you another thousand at that figure, Thornton.
What d’ye say?” Thornton’s doubt was strong in his face, but his fighting spirit was aroused—the fighting spirit that soars above odds, fails to recognize the impossible, and is deaf to all save the clamor for battle.
Their sacks were slim, and with his own the three partners could rake together only two hundred dollars.
In the ebb of their fortunes, this sum was their total capital; yet they laid it unhesitatingly against Matthewson’s six hundred.
The team of ten dogs was unhitched, and Buck, with his own harness, was put into the sled.
He had caught the contagion of the excitement, and he felt that in some way he must do a great thing for John Thornton.
Murmurs of admiration at his splendid appearance went up.
He was in perfect condition, without an ounce of superfluous flesh, and the one hundred and fifty pounds that he weighed were so many pounds of grit and virility.
Down the neck and across the shoulders, his mane, in repose as it was, half bristled and seemed to lift with every movement, as though excess of vigor made each particular hair alive and active.
The great breast and heavy fore legs were no more than in proportion with the rest of the body, where the muscles showed in tight rolls underneath the skin.
Men felt these muscles and proclaimed them hard as iron, and the odds went down to two to one.
Gad, sir!” stuttered a member of the latest dynasty, a king of the Skookum Benches.
“I offer you eight hundred for him, sir, before the test, sir; eight hundred just as he stands.” Thornton shook his head and stepped to Buck’s side.
“You must stand off from him,” Matthewson protested.
“Free play and plenty of room.” The crowd fell silent; only could be heard the voices of the gamblers vainly offering two to one.
Everybody acknowledged Buck a magnificent animal, but twenty fifty-pound sacks of flour bulked too large in their eyes for them to loosen their pouch-strings.
Thornton knelt down by Buck’s side.
He did not playfully shake him, as was his wont, or murmur soft love curses; but he whispered in his ear.
As you love me,” was what he whispered.
Buck whined with suppressed eagerness.
The crowd was watching curiously.
The affair was growing mysterious.
It seemed like a conjuration.
As Thornton got to his feet, Buck seized his mittened hand between his jaws, pressing in with his teeth and releasing slowly, half-reluctantly.
Thornton stepped well back.
Buck tightened the traces, then slacked them for a matter of several inches.
“Gee!” Thornton’s voice rang out, sharp in the tense silence.
Buck swung to the right, ending the movement in a plunge that took up the slack and with a sudden jerk arrested his one hundred and fifty pounds.
The load quivered, and from under the runners arose a crisp crackling.
“Haw!” Thornton commanded.
Buck duplicated the manœuvre, this time to the left.
The crackling turned into a snapping, the sled pivoting and the runners slipping and grating several inches to the side.
Men were holding their breaths, intensely unconscious of the fact.
“Now, MUSH!” Thornton’s command cracked out like a pistol-shot.
Buck threw himself forward, tightening the traces with a jarring lunge.
His whole body was gathered compactly together in the tremendous effort, the muscles writhing and knotting like live things under the silky fur.
His great chest was low to the ground, his head forward and down, while his feet were flying like mad, the claws scarring the hard-packed snow in parallel grooves.
The sled swayed and trembled, half-started forward.
Then the sled lurched ahead in what appeared a rapid succession of jerks, though it never really came to a dead stop again...half an inch...an inch... two inches...
The jerks perceptibly diminished; as the sled gained momentum, he caught them up, till it was moving steadily along.
Thornton was running behind, encouraging Buck with short, cheery words.
The distance had been measured off, and as he neared the pile of firewood which marked the end of the hundred yards, a cheer began to grow and grow, which burst into a roar as he passed the firewood and halted at command.
Every man was tearing himself loose, even Matthewson.
Men were shaking hands, it did not matter with whom, and bubbling over in a general incoherent babel.
But Thornton fell on his knees beside Buck.
Those who hurried up heard him cursing Buck, and he cursed him long and fervently, and softly and lovingly.
Gad, sir!” spluttered the Skookum Bench king.
“I’ll give you a thousand for him, sir, a thousand, sir—twelve hundred, sir.” Thornton rose to his feet.
The tears were streaming frankly down his cheeks.
It’s the best I can do for you, sir.” Buck seized Thornton’s hand in his teeth.
Thornton shook him back and forth.
As though animated by a common impulse, the onlookers drew back to a respectful distance; nor were they again indiscreet enough to interrupt.
The Sounding of the Call When Buck earned sixteen hundred dollars in five minutes for John Thornton, he made it possible for his master to pay off certain debts and to journey with his partners into the East after a fabled lost mine, the history of which was as old as the history of the country.
Many men had sought it; few had found it; and more than a few there were who had never returned from the quest.
This lost mine was steeped in tragedy and shrouded in mystery.
The oldest tradition stopped before it got back to him.
From the beginning there had been an ancient and ramshackle cabin.
Dying men had sworn to it, and to the mine the site of which it marked, clinching their testimony with nuggets that were unlike any known grade of gold in the Northland.
But no living man had looted this treasure house, and the dead were dead; wherefore John Thornton and Pete and Hans, with Buck and half a dozen other dogs, faced into the East on an unknown trail to achieve where men and dogs as good as themselves had failed.
They sledded seventy miles up the Yukon, swung to the left into the Stewart River, passed the Mayo and the McQuestion, and held on until the Stewart itself became a streamlet, threading the upstanding peaks which marked the backbone of the continent.
John Thornton asked little of man or nature.
He was unafraid of the wild.
With a handful of salt and a rifle he could plunge into the wilderness and fare wherever he pleased and as long as he pleased.
Being in no haste, Indian fashion, he hunted his dinner in the course of the day’s travel; and if he failed to find it, like the Indian, he kept on travelling, secure in the knowledge that sooner or later he would come to it.
So, on this great journey into the East, straight meat was the bill of fare, ammunition and tools principally made up the load on the sled, and the time-card was drawn upon the limitless future.
To Buck it was boundless delight, this hunting, fishing, and indefinite wandering through strange places.
For weeks at a time they would hold on steadily, day after day; and for weeks upon end they would camp, here and there, the dogs loafing and the men burning holes through frozen muck and gravel and washing countless pans of dirt by the heat of the fire.
Sometimes they went hungry, sometimes they feasted riotously, all according to the abundance of game and the fortune of hunting.
Summer arrived, and dogs and men packed on their backs, rafted across blue mountain lakes, and descended or ascended unknown rivers in slender boats whipsawed from the standing forest.
The months came and went, and back and forth they twisted through the uncharted vastness, where no men were and yet where men had been if the Lost Cabin were true.
They went across divides in summer blizzards, shivered under the midnight sun on naked mountains between the timber line and the eternal snows, dropped into summer valleys amid swarming gnats and flies, and in the shadows of glaciers picked strawberries and flowers as ripe and fair as any the Southland could boast.
In the fall of the year they penetrated a weird lake country, sad and silent, where wildfowl had been, but where then there was no life nor sign of life—only the blowing of chill winds, the forming of ice in sheltered places, and the melancholy rippling of waves on lonely beaches.
And through another winter they wandered on the obliterated trails of men who had gone before.
But the path began nowhere and ended nowhere, and it remained mystery, as the man who made it and the reason he made it remained mystery.
Another time they chanced upon the time-graven wreckage of a hunting lodge, and amid the shreds of rotted blankets John Thornton found a long-barrelled flint-lock.
He knew it for a Hudson Bay Company gun of the young days in the Northwest, when such a gun was worth its height in beaver skins packed flat, And that was all—no hint as to the man who in an early day had reared the lodge and left the gun among the blankets.
Spring came on once more, and at the end of all their wandering they found, not the Lost Cabin, but a shallow placer in a broad valley where the gold showed like yellow butter across the bottom of the washing-pan.
Each day they worked earned them thousands of dollars in clean dust and nuggets, and they worked every day.
The gold was sacked in moose-hide bags, fifty pounds to the bag, and piled like so much firewood outside the spruce-bough lodge.
Like giants they toiled, days flashing on the heels of days like dreams as they heaped the treasure up.
There was nothing for the dogs to do, save the hauling in of meat now and again that Thornton killed, and Buck spent long hours musing by the fire.
The vision of the short-legged hairy man came to him more frequently, now that there was little work to be done; and often, blinking by the fire, Buck wandered with him in that other world which he remembered.
When he watched the hairy man sleeping by the fire, head between his knees and hands clasped above, Buck saw that he slept restlessly, with many starts and awakenings, at which times he would peer fearfully into the darkness and fling more wood upon the fire.
Did they walk by the beach of a sea, where the hairy man gathered shellfish and ate them as he gathered, it was with eyes that roved everywhere for hidden danger and with legs prepared to run like the wind at its first appearance.
Through the forest they crept noiselessly, Buck at the hairy man’s heels; and they were alert and vigilant, the pair of them, ears twitching and moving and nostrils quivering, for the man heard and smelled as keenly as Buck.
The hairy man could spring up into the trees and travel ahead as fast as on the ground, swinging by the arms from limb to limb, sometimes a dozen feet apart, letting go and catching, never falling, never missing his grip.
In fact, he seemed as much at home among the trees as on the ground; and Buck had memories of nights of vigil spent beneath trees wherein the hairy man roosted, holding on tightly as he slept.
And closely akin to the visions of the hairy man was the call still sounding in the depths of the forest.
It caused him to feel a vague, sweet gladness, and he was aware of wild yearnings and stirrings for he knew not what.
Sometimes he pursued the call into the forest, looking for it as though it were a tangible thing, barking softly or defiantly, as the mood might dictate.
He would thrust his nose into the cool wood moss, or into the black soil where long grasses grew, and snort with joy at the fat earth smells; or he would crouch for hours, as if in concealment, behind fungus-covered trunks of fallen trees, wide-eyed and wide-eared to all that moved and sounded about him.
It might be, lying thus, that he hoped to surprise this call he could not understand.
He was impelled to do them, and did not reason about them at all.
Irresistible impulses seized him.
He would be lying in camp, dozing lazily in the heat of the day, when suddenly his head would lift and his ears cock up, intent and listening, and he would spring to his feet and dash away, and on and on, for hours, through the forest aisles and across the open spaces where the niggerheads bunched.
He loved to run down dry watercourses, and to creep and spy upon the bird life in the woods.
For a day at a time he would lie in the underbrush where he could watch the partridges drumming and strutting up and down.
But especially he loved to run in the dim twilight of the summer midnights, listening to the subdued and sleepy murmurs of the forest, reading signs and sounds as man may read a book, and seeking for the mysterious something that called—called, waking or sleeping, at all times, for him to come.
One night he sprang from sleep with a start, eager-eyed, nostrils quivering and scenting, his mane bristling in recurrent waves.
From the forest came the call (or one note of it, for the call was many noted), distinct and definite as never before,—a long-drawn howl, like, yet unlike, any noise made by husky dog.
And he knew it, in the old familiar way, as a sound heard before.
He sprang through the sleeping camp and in swift silence dashed through the woods.
As he drew closer to the cry he went more slowly, with caution in every movement, till he came to an open place among the trees, and looking out saw, erect on haunches, with nose pointed to the sky, a long, lean, timber wolf.
He had made no noise, yet it ceased from its howling and tried to sense his presence.
Buck stalked into the open, half crouching, body gathered compactly together, tail straight and stiff, feet falling with unwonted care.
Every movement advertised commingled threatening and overture of friendliness.
It was the menacing truce that marks the meeting of wild beasts that prey.
He followed, with wild leapings, in a frenzy to overtake.
The wolf whirled about, pivoting on his hind legs after the fashion of Joe and of all cornered husky dogs, snarling and bristling, clipping his teeth together in a continuous and rapid succession of snaps.
Buck did not attack, but circled him about and hedged him in with friendly advances.
The wolf was suspicious and afraid; for Buck made three of him in weight, while his head barely reached Buck’s shoulder.
Watching his chance, he darted away, and the chase was resumed.
Time and again he was cornered, and the thing repeated, though he was in poor condition, or Buck could not so easily have overtaken him.
He would run till Buck’s head was even with his flank, when he would whirl around at bay, only to dash away again at the first opportunity.
But in the end Buck’s pertinacity was rewarded; for the wolf, finding that no harm was intended, finally sniffed noses with him.
Then they became friendly, and played about in the nervous, half-coy way with which fierce beasts belie their fierceness.
After some time of this the wolf started off at an easy lope in a manner that plainly showed he was going somewhere.
He made it clear to Buck that he was to come, and they ran side by side through the sombre twilight, straight up the creek bed, into the gorge from which it issued, and across the bleak divide where it took its rise.
On the opposite slope of the watershed they came down into a level country where were great stretches of forest and many streams, and through these great stretches they ran steadily, hour after hour, the sun rising higher and the day growing warmer.
He knew he was at last answering the call, running by the side of his wood brother toward the place from where the call surely came.
Old memories were coming upon him fast, and he was stirring to them as of old he stirred to the realities of which they were the shadows.
He had done this thing before, somewhere in that other and dimly remembered world, and he was doing it again, now, running free in the open, the unpacked earth underfoot, the wide sky overhead.
They stopped by a running stream to drink, and, stopping, Buck remembered John Thornton.
The wolf started on toward the place from where the call surely came, then returned to him, sniffing noses and making actions as though to encourage him.
It was a mournful howl, and as Buck held steadily on his way he heard it grow faint and fainter until it was lost in the distance.
John Thornton was eating dinner when Buck dashed into camp and sprang upon him in a frenzy of affection, overturning him, scrambling upon him, licking his face, biting his hand—“playing the general tom-fool,” as John Thornton characterized it, the while he shook Buck back and forth and cursed him lovingly.
For two days and nights Buck never left camp, never let Thornton out of his sight.
He followed him about at his work, watched him while he ate, saw him into his blankets at night and out of them in the morning.
But after two days the call in the forest began to sound more imperiously than ever.
Buck’s restlessness came back on him, and he was haunted by recollections of the wild brother, and of the smiling land beyond the divide and the run side by side through the wide forest stretches.
Once again he took to wandering in the woods, but the wild brother came no more; and though he listened through long vigils, the mournful howl was never raised.
There he wandered for a week, seeking vainly for fresh sign of the wild brother, killing his meat as he travelled and travelling with the long, easy lope that seems never to tire.
He fished for salmon in a broad stream that emptied somewhere into the sea, and by this stream he killed a large black bear, blinded by the mosquitoes while likewise fishing, and raging through the forest helpless and terrible.
Even so, it was a hard fight, and it aroused the last latent remnants of Buck’s ferocity.
And two days later, when he returned to his kill and found a dozen wolverenes quarrelling over the spoil, he scattered them like chaff; and those that fled left two behind who would quarrel no more.
The blood-longing became stronger than ever before.
He was a killer, a thing that preyed, living on the things that lived, unaided, alone, by virtue of his own strength and prowess, surviving triumphantly in a hostile environment where only the strong survived.
Because of all this he became possessed of a great pride in himself, which communicated itself like a contagion to his physical being.
It advertised itself in all his movements, was apparent in the play of every muscle, spoke plainly as speech in the way he carried himself, and made his glorious furry coat if anything more glorious.
But for the stray brown on his muzzle and above his eyes, and for the splash of white hair that ran midmost down his chest, he might well have been mistaken for a gigantic wolf, larger than the largest of the breed.
Bernard father he had inherited size and weight, but it was his shepherd mother who had given shape to that size and weight.
His muzzle was the long wolf muzzle, save that it was larger than the muzzle of any wolf; and his head, somewhat broader, was the wolf head on a massive scale.
His cunning was wolf cunning, and wild cunning; his intelligence, shepherd intelligence and St.
Bernard intelligence; and all this, plus an experience gained in the fiercest of schools, made him as formidable a creature as any that roamed the wild.
A carnivorous animal living on a straight meat diet, he was in full flower, at the high tide of his life, overspilling with vigor and virility.
When Thornton passed a caressing hand along his back, a snapping and crackling followed the hand, each hair discharging its pent magnetism at the contact.
Every part, brain and body, nerve tissue and fibre, was keyed to the most exquisite pitch; and between all the parts there was a perfect equilibrium or adjustment.
To sights and sounds and events which required action, he responded with lightning-like rapidity.
He saw the movement, or heard sound, and responded in less time than another dog required to compass the mere seeing or hearing.
He perceived and determined and responded in the same instant.
In point of fact the three actions of perceiving, determining, and responding were sequential; but so infinitesimal were the intervals of time between them that they appeared simultaneous.
His muscles were surcharged with vitality, and snapped into play sharply, like steel springs.
Life streamed through him in splendid flood, glad and rampant, until it seemed that it would burst him asunder in sheer ecstasy and pour forth generously over the world.
“Never was there such a dog,” said John Thornton one day, as the partners watched Buck marching out of camp.
I t’ink so mineself,” Hans affirmed.
They saw him marching out of camp, but they did not see the instant and terrible transformation which took place as soon as he was within the secrecy of the forest.
At once he became a thing of the wild, stealing along softly, cat-footed, a passing shadow that appeared and disappeared among the shadows.
He knew how to take advantage of every cover, to crawl on his belly like a snake, and like a snake to leap and strike.
He could take a ptarmigan from its nest, kill a rabbit as it slept, and snap in mid air the little chipmunks fleeing a second too late for the trees.
He killed to eat, not from wantonness; but he preferred to eat what he killed himself.
So a lurking humor ran through his deeds, and it was his delight to steal upon the squirrels, and, when he all but had them, to let them go, chattering in mortal fear to the treetops.
As the fall of the year came on, the moose appeared in greater abundance, moving slowly down to meet the winter in the lower and less rigorous valleys.
Buck had already dragged down a stray part-grown calf; but he wished strongly for larger and more formidable quarry, and he came upon it one day on the divide at the head of the creek.
He was in a savage temper, and, standing over six feet from the ground, was as formidable an antagonist as even Buck could desire.
Back and forth the bull tossed his great palmated antlers, branching to fourteen points and embracing seven feet within the tips.
From the bull’s side, just forward of the flank, protruded a feathered arrow-end, which accounted for his savageness.
Guided by that instinct which came from the old hunting days of the primordial world, Buck proceeded to cut the bull out from the herd.
He would bark and dance about in front of the bull, just out of reach of the great antlers and of the terrible splay hoofs which could have stamped his life out with a single blow.
Unable to turn his back on the fanged danger and go on, the bull would be driven into paroxysms of rage.
At such moments he charged Buck, who retreated craftily, luring him on by a simulated inability to escape.
But when he was thus separated from his fellows, two or three of the younger bulls would charge back upon Buck and enable the wounded bull to rejoin the herd.
For half a day this continued.
Buck multiplied himself, attacking from all sides, enveloping the herd in a whirlwind of menace, cutting out his victim as fast as it could rejoin its mates, wearing out the patience of creatures preyed upon, which is a lesser patience than that of creatures preying.
As the day wore along and the sun dropped to its bed in the northwest (the darkness had come back and the fall nights were six hours long), the young bulls retraced their steps more and more reluctantly to the aid of their beset leader.
The down-coming winter was harrying them on to the lower levels, and it seemed they could never shake off this tireless creature that held them back.
Besides, it was not the life of the herd, or of the young bulls, that was threatened.
The life of only one member was demanded, which was a remoter interest than their lives, and in the end they were content to pay the toll.
As twilight fell the old bull stood with lowered head, watching his mates—the cows he had known, the calves he had fathered, the bulls he had mastered—as they shambled on at a rapid pace through the fading light.
He could not follow, for before his nose leaped the merciless fanged terror that would not let him go.
Three hundredweight more than half a ton he weighed; he had lived a long, strong life, full of fight and struggle, and at the end he faced death at the teeth of a creature whose head did not reach beyond his great knuckled knees.
From then on, night and day, Buck never left his prey, never gave it a moment’s rest, never permitted it to browse the leaves of trees or the shoots of young birch and willow.
Nor did he give the wounded bull opportunity to slake his burning thirst in the slender trickling streams they crossed.
Often, in desperation, he burst into long stretches of flight.
At such times Buck did not attempt to stay him, but loped easily at his heels, satisfied with the way the game was played, lying down when the moose stood still, attacking him fiercely when he strove to eat or drink.
The great head drooped more and more under its tree of horns, and the shambling trot grew weak and weaker.
He took to standing for long periods, with nose to the ground and dejected ears dropped limply; and Buck found more time in which to get water for himself and in which to rest.
At such moments, panting with red lolling tongue and with eyes fixed upon the big bull, it appeared to Buck that a change was coming over the face of things.
Forest and stream and air seemed palpitant with their presence.
He heard nothing, saw nothing, yet knew that the land was somehow different; that through it strange things were afoot and ranging; and he resolved to investigate after he had finished the business in hand.
For a day and a night he remained by the kill, eating and sleeping, turn and turn about.
Then, rested, refreshed and strong, he turned his face toward camp and John Thornton.
He broke into the long easy lope, and went on, hour after hour, never at loss for the tangled way, heading straight home through strange country with a certitude of direction that put man and his magnetic needle to shame.
As he held on he became more and more conscious of the new stir in the land.
There was life abroad in it different from the life which had been there throughout the summer.
No longer was this fact borne in upon him in some subtle, mysterious way.
The birds talked of it, the squirrels chattered about it, the very breeze whispered of it.
He was oppressed with a sense of calamity happening, if it were not calamity already happened; and as he crossed the last watershed and dropped down into the valley toward camp, he proceeded with greater caution.
Three miles away he came upon a fresh trail that sent his neck hair rippling and bristling, It led straight toward camp and John Thornton.
Buck hurried on, swiftly and stealthily, every nerve straining and tense, alert to the multitudinous details which told a story—all but the end.
His nose gave him a varying description of the passage of the life on the heels of which he was travelling.
He remarked the pregnant silence of the forest.
The squirrels were in hiding.
One only he saw,—a sleek gray fellow, flattened against a gray dead limb so that he seemed a part of it, a woody excrescence upon the wood itself.
As Buck slid along with the obscureness of a gliding shadow, his nose was jerked suddenly to the side as though a positive force had gripped and pulled it.
He followed the new scent into a thicket and found Nig.
He was lying on his side, dead where he had dragged himself, an arrow protruding, head and feathers, from either side of his body.
A hundred yards farther on, Buck came upon one of the sled-dogs Thornton had bought in Dawson.
This dog was thrashing about in a death-struggle, directly on the trail, and Buck passed around him without stopping.
Bellying forward to the edge of the clearing, he found Hans, lying on his face, feathered with arrows like a porcupine.
At the same instant Buck peered out where the spruce-bough lodge had been and saw what made his hair leap straight up on his neck and shoulders.
A gust of overpowering rage swept over him.
He did not know that he growled, but he growled aloud with a terrible ferocity.
For the last time in his life he allowed passion to usurp cunning and reason, and it was because of his great love for John Thornton that he lost his head.
The Yeehats were dancing about the wreckage of the spruce-bough lodge when they heard a fearful roaring and saw rushing upon them an animal the like of which they had never seen before.
It was Buck, a live hurricane of fury, hurling himself upon them in a frenzy to destroy.
He sprang at the foremost man (it was the chief of the Yeehats), ripping the throat wide open till the rent jugular spouted a fountain of blood.
There was no withstanding him.
He plunged about in their very midst, tearing, rending, destroying, in constant and terrific motion which defied the arrows they discharged at him.
In fact, so inconceivably rapid were his movements, and so closely were the Indians tangled together, that they shot one another with the arrows; and one young hunter, hurling a spear at Buck in mid air, drove it through the chest of another hunter with such force that the point broke through the skin of the back and stood out beyond.
Then a panic seized the Yeehats, and they fled in terror to the woods, proclaiming as they fled the advent of the Evil Spirit.
And truly Buck was the Fiend incarnate, raging at their heels and dragging them down like deer as they raced through the trees.
They scattered far and wide over the country, and it was not till a week later that the last of the survivors gathered together in a lower valley and counted their losses.
As for Buck, wearying of the pursuit, he returned to the desolated camp.
He found Pete where he had been killed in his blankets in the first moment of surprise.
Thornton’s desperate struggle was fresh-written on the earth, and Buck scented every detail of it down to the edge of a deep pool.
By the edge, head and fore feet in the water, lay Skeet, faithful to the last.
The pool itself, muddy and discolored from the sluice boxes, effectually hid what it contained, and it contained John Thornton; for Buck followed his trace into the water, from which no trace led away.
All day Buck brooded by the pool or roamed restlessly about the camp.
Death, as a cessation of movement, as a passing out and away from the lives of the living, he knew, and he knew John Thornton was dead.
It left a great void in him, somewhat akin to hunger, but a void which ached and ached, and which food could not fill.
At times, when he paused to contemplate the carcasses of the Yeehats, he forgot the pain of it; and at such times he was aware of a great pride in himself,—a pride greater than any he had yet experienced.
He sniffed the bodies curiously.
Thenceforward he would be unafraid of them except when they bore in their hands their arrows, spears, and clubs.
Night came on, and a full moon rose high over the trees into the sky, lighting the land till it lay bathed in ghostly day.
And with the coming of the night, brooding and mourning by the pool, Buck became alive to a stirring of the new life in the forest other than that which the Yeehats had made, He stood up, listening and scenting.
From far away drifted a faint, sharp yelp, followed by a chorus of similar sharp yelps.
Again Buck knew them as things heard in that other world which persisted in his memory.
He walked to the centre of the open space and listened.
It was the call, the many-noted call, sounding more luringly and compellingly than ever before.
John Thornton was dead.
Hunting their living meat, as the Yeehats were hunting it, on the flanks of the migrating moose, the wolf pack had at last crossed over from the land of streams and timber and invaded Buck’s valley.
Into the clearing where the moonlight streamed, they poured in a silvery flood; and in the centre of the clearing stood Buck, motionless as a statue, waiting their coming.
They were awed, so still and large he stood, and a moment’s pause fell, till the boldest one leaped straight for him.
Like a flash Buck struck, breaking the neck.
Then he stood, without movement, as before, the stricken wolf rolling in agony behind him.
Three others tried it in sharp succession; and one after the other they drew back, streaming blood from slashed throats or shoulders.
This was sufficient to fling the whole pack forward, pell-mell, crowded together, blocked and confused by its eagerness to pull down the prey.
Buck’s marvellous quickness and agility stood him in good stead.
Pivoting on his hind legs, and snapping and gashing, he was everywhere at once, presenting a front which was apparently unbroken so swiftly did he whirl and guard from side to side.
He worked along to a right angle in the bank which the men had made in the course of mining, and in this angle he came to bay, protected on three sides and with nothing to do but face the front.
And so well did he face it, that at the end of half an hour the wolves drew back discomfited.
The tongues of all were out and lolling, the white fangs showing cruelly white in the moonlight.
Some were lying down with heads raised and ears pricked forward; others stood on their feet, watching him; and still others were lapping water from the pool.
One wolf, long and lean and gray, advanced cautiously, in a friendly manner, and Buck recognized the wild brother with whom he had run for a night and a day.
Buck writhed his lips into the preliminary of a snarl, but sniffed noses with him, Whereupon the old wolf sat down, pointed nose at the moon, and broke out the long wolf howl.
And now the call came to Buck in unmistakable accents.
This over, he came out of his angle and the pack crowded around him, sniffing in half-friendly, half-savage manner.
The years were not many when the Yeehats noted a change in the breed of timber wolves; for some were seen with splashes of brown on head and muzzle, and with a rift of white centring down the chest.
But more remarkable than this, the Yeehats tell of a Ghost Dog that runs at the head of the pack.
They are afraid of this Ghost Dog, for it has cunning greater than they, stealing from their camps in fierce winters, robbing their traps, slaying their dogs, and defying their bravest hunters.
Hunters there are who fail to return to the camp, and hunters there have been whom their tribesmen found with throats slashed cruelly open and with wolf prints about them in the snow greater than the prints of any wolf.
Each fall, when the Yeehats follow the movement of the moose, there is a certain valley which they never enter.
It is a great, gloriously coated wolf, like, and yet unlike, all other wolves.
Here a yellow stream flows from rotted moose-hide sacks and sinks into the ground, with long grasses growing through it and vegetable mould overrunning it and hiding its yellow from the sun; and here he muses for a time, howling once, long and mournfully, ere he departs.
When the long winter nights come on and the wolves follow their meat into the lower valleys, he may be seen running at the head of the pack through the pale moonlight or glimmering borealis, leaping gigantic above his fellows, his great throat a-bellow as he sings a song of the younger world, which is the song of the pack.
CONTENTS: THE GOLDEN BIRD HANS IN LUCK JORINDA AND JORINDEL THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS OLD SULTAN THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN BRIAR ROSE THE DOG AND THE SPARROW THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR THE FROG-PRINCE CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP THE GOOSE-GIRL THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET 1.
HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS 2.
The king became very angry at this, and ordered the gardener to keep watch all night under the tree.
The gardener set his eldest son to watch; but about twelve o’clock he fell asleep, and in the morning another of the apples was missing.
Then the second son was ordered to watch; and at midnight he too fell asleep, and in the morning another apple was gone.
Then the third son offered to keep watch; but the gardener at first would not let him, for fear some harm should come to him: however, at last he consented, and the young man laid himself under the tree to watch.
As the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling noise in the air, and a bird came flying that was of pure gold; and as it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak, the gardener’s son jumped up and shot an arrow at it.
The golden feather was brought to the king in the morning, and all the council was called together.
Then the fox said, ‘Do not shoot me, for I will give you good counsel; I know what your business is, and that you want to find the golden bird.
Then he went his way, and in the evening came to the village where the two inns were; and in one of these were people singing, and dancing, and feasting; but the other looked very dirty, and poor.
‘I should be very silly,’ said he, ‘if I went to that shabby house, and left this charming place’; so he went into the smart house, and ate and drank at his ease, and forgot the bird, and his country too.
Time passed on; and as the eldest son did not come back, and no tidings were heard of him, the second son set out, and the same thing happened to him.
He met the fox, who gave him the good advice: but when he came to the two inns, his eldest brother was standing at the window where the merrymaking was, and called to him to come in; and he could not withstand the temptation, but went in, and forgot the golden bird and his country in the same manner.
Time passed on again, and the youngest son too wished to set out into the wide world to seek for the golden bird; but his father would not listen to it for a long while, for he was very fond of his son, and was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also, and prevent his coming back.
But he was thankful to the fox, and did not attempt his life as his brothers had done; so the fox said, ‘Sit upon my tail, and you will travel faster.’ So he sat down, and the fox began to run, and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair whistled in the wind.
When they came to the village, the son followed the fox’s counsel, and without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all night at his ease.
But the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke, and they took him prisoner and carried him before the king.
The next morning the court sat to judge him; and when all was heard, it sentenced him to die, unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as swiftly as the wind; and if he did this, he was to have the golden bird given him for his own.
So he set out once more on his journey, sighing, and in great despair, when on a sudden his friend the fox met him, and said, ‘You see now what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel.
You must go straight on till you come to the castle where the horse stands in his stall: by his side will lie the groom fast asleep and snoring: take away the horse quietly, but be sure to put the old leathern saddle upon him, and not the golden one that is close by it.’ Then the son sat down on the fox’s tail, and away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled in the wind.
But when the son looked at the horse, he thought it a great pity to put the leathern saddle upon it.
‘I will give him the good one,’ said he; ‘I am sure he deserves it.’ As he took up the golden saddle the groom awoke and cried out so loud, that all the guards ran in and took him prisoner, and in the morning he was again brought before the court to be judged, and was sentenced to die.
But it was agreed, that, if he could bring thither the beautiful princess, he should live, and have the bird and the horse given him for his own.
Then he went his way very sorrowful; but the old fox came and said, ‘Why did not you listen to me?
Go straight on, and in the evening you will arrive at a castle.
At twelve o’clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house: go up to her and give her a kiss, and she will let you lead her away; but take care you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother.’ Then the fox stretched out his tail, and so away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled again.
As they came to the castle, all was as the fox had said, and at twelve o’clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the kiss, and she agreed to run away with him, but begged with many tears that he would let her take leave of her father.
At first he refused, but she wept still more and more, and fell at his feet, till at last he consented; but the moment she came to her father’s house the guards awoke and he was taken prisoner again.
Then he was brought before the king, and the king said, ‘You shall never have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops the view from my window.’ Now this hill was so big that the whole world could not take it away: and when he had worked for seven days, and had done very little, the fox came and said.
‘Lie down and go to sleep; I will work for you.’ And in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone; so he went merrily to the king, and told him that now that it was removed he must give him the princess.
Then the king was obliged to keep his word, and away went the young man and the princess; and the fox came and said to him, ‘We will have all three, the princess, the horse, and the bird.’ ‘Ah!’ said the young man, ‘that would be a great thing, but how can you contrive it?’ ‘If you will only listen,’ said the fox, ‘it can be done.
When you come to the king, and he asks for the beautiful princess, you must say, “Here she is!” Then he will be very joyful; and you will mount the golden horse that they are to give you, and put out your hand to take leave of them; but shake hands with the princess last.
‘Well,’ thought the young man, ‘it is no hard matter to keep that advice.’ He rode on with the princess, till at last he came to the village where he had left his two brothers.
And there he heard a great noise and uproar; and when he asked what was the matter, the people said, ‘Two men are going to be hanged.’ As he came nearer, he saw that the two men were his brothers, who had turned robbers; so he said, ‘Cannot they in any way be saved?’ But the people said ‘No,’ unless he would bestow all his money upon the rascals and buy their liberty.
Then he did not stay to think about the matter, but paid what was asked, and his brothers were given up, and went on with him towards their home.
‘All this have we won by our labour.’ Then there was great rejoicing made; but the horse would not eat, the bird would not sing, and the princess wept.
The youngest son fell to the bottom of the river’s bed: luckily it was nearly dry, but his bones were almost broken, and the bank was so steep that he could find no way to get out.
Then he went to the king, and told him all his brothers’ roguery; and they were seized and punished, and he had the princess given to him again; and after the king’s death he was heir to his kingdom.
A long while after, he went to walk one day in the wood, and the old fox met him, and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him, and cut off his head and feet.
And at last he did so, and in a moment the fox was changed into a man, and turned out to be the brother of the princess, who had been lost a great many many years.
The world may very likely not always think of them as they think of themselves, but what care they for the world? what can it know about the matter?
One of these lucky beings was neighbour Hans.
At last he said, ‘Master, my time is up; I must go home and see my poor mother once more: so pray pay me my wages and let me go.’ And the master said, ‘You have been a faithful and good servant, Hans, so your pay shall be handsome.’ Then he gave him a lump of silver as big as his head.
Hans took out his pocket-handkerchief, put the piece of silver into it, threw it over his shoulder, and jogged off on his road homewards.
As he went lazily on, dragging one foot after another, a man came in sight, trotting gaily along on a capital horse.
‘Ah!’ said Hans aloud, ‘what a fine thing it is to ride on horseback!
His horse would have ran off, if a shepherd who was coming by, driving a cow, had not stopped it.
Hans soon came to himself, and got upon his legs again, sadly vexed, and said to the shepherd, ‘This riding is no joke, when a man has the luck to get upon a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break his neck.
What would I give to have such a prize!’ ‘Well,’ said the shepherd, ‘if you are so fond of her, I will change my cow for your horse; I like to do good to my neighbours, even though I lose by it myself.’ ‘Done!’ said Hans, merrily.
Then the shepherd jumped upon the horse, wished Hans and the cow good morning, and away he rode.
‘If I have only a piece of bread (and I certainly shall always be able to get that), I can, whenever I like, eat my butter and cheese with it; and when I am thirsty I can milk my cow and drink the milk: and what can I wish for more?’ When he came to an inn, he halted, ate up all his bread, and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer.
‘I can find a cure for this,’ thought he; ‘now I will milk my cow and quench my thirst’: so he tied her to the stump of a tree, and held his leathern cap to milk into; but not a drop was to be had.
While he was trying his luck in milking, and managing the matter very clumsily, the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome; and at last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down; and there he lay a long while senseless.
Luckily a butcher soon came by, driving a pig in a wheelbarrow.
Hans told him what had happened, how he was dry, and wanted to milk his cow, but found the cow was dry too.
Then the butcher gave him a flask of ale, saying, ‘There, drink and refresh yourself; your cow will give you no milk: don’t you see she is an old beast, good for nothing but the slaughter-house?’ ‘Alas, alas!’ said Hans, ‘who would have thought it?
If it were a pig now--like that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do something with it; it would at any rate make sausages.’ ‘Well,’ said the butcher, ‘I don’t like to say no, when one is asked to do a kind, neighbourly thing.
To please you I will change, and give you my fine fat pig for the cow.’ ‘Heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial!’ said Hans, as he gave the butcher the cow; and taking the pig off the wheel-barrow, drove it away, holding it by the string that was tied to its leg.
So on he jogged, and all seemed now to go right with him: he had met with some misfortunes, to be sure; but he was now well repaid for all.
How could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at last got?
The next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose.
The countryman stopped to ask what was o’clock; this led to further chat; and Hans told him all his luck, how he had so many good bargains, and how all the world went gay and smiling with him.
The countryman then began to tell his tale, and said he was going to take the goose to a christening.
Whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it, it has lived so well!’ ‘You’re right,’ said Hans, as he weighed it in his hand; ‘but if you talk of fat, my pig is no trifle.’ Meantime the countryman began to look grave, and shook his head.
I was dreadfully afraid when I saw you that you had got the squire’s pig.
Can you swim?’ Poor Hans was sadly frightened.
I know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born; but he may have been the squire’s for aught I can tell: you know this country better than I do, take my pig and give me the goose.’ ‘I ought to have something into the bargain,’ said the countryman; ‘give a fat goose for a pig, indeed!
‘Tis not everyone would do so much for you as that.
However, I will not be hard upon you, as you are in trouble.’ Then he took the string in his hand, and drove off the pig by a side path; while Hans went on the way homewards free from care.
I don’t care whose pig it is, but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me.
First there will be a capital roast; then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months; and then there are all the beautiful white feathers.
I worked hard for that seven long years.’ ‘You have thriven well in the world hitherto,’ said the grinder, ‘now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand in it, your fortune would be made.’ ‘Very true: but how is that to be managed?’ ‘How?
Why, you must turn grinder like myself,’ said the other; ‘you only want a grindstone; the rest will come of itself.
People are so kind; they seem really to think I do them a favour in letting them make me rich, and giving me good bargains.’ Meantime he began to be tired, and hungry too, for he had given away his last penny in his joy at getting the cow.
So he laid the stone carefully by his side on the bank: but, as he stooped down to drink, he forgot it, pushed it a little, and down it rolled, plump into the stream.
For a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water; then sprang up and danced for joy, and again fell upon his knees and thanked Heaven, with tears in his eyes, for its kindness in taking away his only plague, the ugly heavy stone.
‘How happy am I!’ cried he; ‘nobody was ever so lucky as I.’ Then up he got with a light heart, free from all his troubles, and walked on till he reached his mother’s house, and told her how very easy the road to good luck was.
JORINDA AND JORINDEL There was once an old castle, that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy wood, and in the castle lived an old fairy.
There were seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle, and all with beautiful birds in them.
She was prettier than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before, and a shepherd lad, whose name was Jorindel, was very fond of her, and they were soon to be married.
One day they went to walk in the wood, that they might be alone; and Jorindel said, ‘We must take care that we don’t go too near to the fairy’s castle.’ It was a beautiful evening; the last rays of the setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon the green underwood beneath, and the turtle-doves sang from the tall birches.
Jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun; Jorindel sat by her side; and both felt sad, they knew not why; but it seemed as if they were to be parted from one another for ever.
They had wandered a long way; and when they looked to see which way they should go home, they found themselves at a loss to know what path to take.
The sun was setting fast, and already half of its circle had sunk behind the hill: Jorindel on a sudden looked behind him, and saw through the bushes that they had, without knowing it, sat down close under the old walls of the castle.
Then he shrank for fear, turned pale, and trembled.
He mourn’d for the fate of his darling mate, Well-a-day!’ when her song stopped suddenly.
Jorindel turned to see the reason, and beheld his Jorinda changed into a nightingale, so that her song ended with a mournful _jug, jug_.
An owl with fiery eyes flew three times round them, and three times screamed: ‘Tu whu!
Tu whu!’ Jorindel could not move; he stood fixed as a stone, and could neither weep, nor speak, nor stir hand or foot.
She mumbled something to herself, seized the nightingale, and went away with it in her hand.
Poor Jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but what could he do?
At last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse voice: ‘Till the prisoner is fast, And her doom is cast, There stay!
When the charm is around her, And the spell has bound her, Hie away! away!’ On a sudden Jorindel found himself free.
He prayed, he wept, he sorrowed, but all in vain.
‘Alas!’ he said, ‘what will become of me?’ He could not go back to his own home, so he went to a strange village, and employed himself in keeping sheep.
At last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower, and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl; and he dreamt that he plucked the flower, and went with it in his hand into the castle, and that everything he touched with it was disenchanted, and that there he found his Jorinda again.
In the morning when he awoke, he began to search over hill and dale for this pretty flower; and eight long days he sought for it in vain: but on the ninth day, early in the morning, he found the beautiful purple flower; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop, as big as a costly pearl.
Then he plucked the flower, and set out and travelled day and night, till he came again to the castle.
Jorindel was very glad indeed to see this.
Then he touched the door with the flower, and it sprang open; so that he went in through the court, and listened when he heard so many birds singing.
When she saw Jorindel she was very angry, and screamed with rage; but she could not come within two yards of him, for the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard.
He looked around at the birds, but alas! there were many, many nightingales, and how then should he find out which was his Jorinda?
While he was thinking what to do, he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages, and was making the best of her way off through the door.
He ran or flew after her, touched the cage with the flower, and Jorinda stood before him, and threw her arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever, as beautiful as when they walked together in the wood.
Then he touched all the other birds with the flower, so that they all took their old forms again; and he took Jorinda home, where they were married, and lived happily together many years: and so did a good many other lads, whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy’s cages by themselves, much longer than they liked.
THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him a great many years, but was now growing old and every day more and more unfit for work.
His master therefore was tired of keeping him and began to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly off, and began his journey towards the great city, ‘For there,’ thought he, ‘I may turn musician.’ After he had travelled a little way, he spied a dog lying by the roadside and panting as if he were tired.
Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard, they saw a cock perched upon a gate, and screaming out with all his might and main.
If we care to sing in tune, we may get up some kind of a concert; so come along with us.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said the cock: so they all four went on jollily together.
The ass and the dog laid themselves down under a great tree, and the cat climbed up into the branches; while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer he should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and then, according to his custom, before he went to sleep, looked out on all sides of him to see that everything was well.
‘Well, Donkey,’ said Chanticleer, ‘what do you see?’ ‘What do I see?’ replied the ass.
‘Yes,’ said the ass, ‘if we could only get in’; so they consulted together how they should contrive to get the robbers out; and at last they hit upon a plan.
The ass placed himself upright on his hind legs, with his forefeet resting against the window; the dog got upon his back; the cat scrambled up to the dog’s shoulders, and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat’s head.
The ass brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock screamed; and then they all broke through the window at once, and came tumbling into the room, amongst the broken glass, with a most hideous clatter!
The robbers, who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert, had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them, and scampered away as fast as they could.
The coast once clear, our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what the robbers had left, with as much eagerness as if they had not expected to eat again for a month.
As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they put out the lights, and each once more sought out a resting-place to his own liking.
The donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in the yard, the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door, the cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes, and the cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they were all rather tired with their journey, they soon fell asleep.
But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were out and that all seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in too great a hurry to run away; and one of them, who was bolder than the rest, went to see what was going on.
Finding everything still, he marched into the kitchen, and groped about till he found a match in order to light a candle; and then, espying the glittering fiery eyes of the cat, he mistook them for live coals, and held the match to them to light it.
But the cat, not understanding this joke, sprang at his face, and spat, and scratched at him.
This frightened him dreadfully, and away he ran to the back door; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the leg; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the cock, who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his might.
OLD SULTAN A shepherd had a faithful dog, called Sultan, who was grown very old, and had lost all his teeth.
‘Make yourself easy,’ said the wolf, ‘I will give you some good advice.
The wolf ran with the child a little way; the shepherd and his wife screamed out; but Sultan soon overtook him, and carried the poor little thing back to his master and mistress.
Then the shepherd patted him on the head, and said, ‘Old Sultan has saved our child from the wolf, and therefore he shall live and be well taken care of, and have plenty to eat.
Soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy, and said, ‘Now, my good fellow, you must tell no tales, but turn your head the other way when I want to taste one of the old shepherd’s fine fat sheep.’ ‘No,’ said the Sultan; ‘I will be true to my master.’ However, the wolf thought he was in joke, and came one night to get a dainty morsel.
So the next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge Sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter.
Now Sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd’s old three-legged cat; so he took her with him, and as the poor thing limped along with some trouble, she stuck up her tail straight in the air.
Sultan and the cat soon came up, and looked about and wondered that no one was there.
THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together a dish of beans and wanted to cook them.
When she was emptying the beans into the pan, one dropped without her observing it, and lay on the ground beside a straw, and soon afterwards a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two.
‘The old woman has destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke; she seized sixty of them at once, and took their lives.
‘I think,’ answered the bean, ‘that as we have so fortunately escaped death, we should keep together like good companions, and lest a new mischance should overtake us here, we should go away together, and repair to a foreign country.’ The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on their way together.
The straw hit on a good idea, and said: ‘I will lay myself straight across, and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge.’ The straw therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other, and the coal, who was of an impetuous disposition, tripped quite boldly on to the newly-built bridge.
But when she had reached the middle, and heard the water rushing beneath her, she was after all, afraid, and stood still, and ventured no farther.
The coal slipped after her, hissed when she got into the water, and breathed her last.
The bean, who had prudently stayed behind on the shore, could not but laugh at the event, was unable to stop, and laughed so heartily that she burst.
It would have been all over with her, likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who was travelling in search of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.
As he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread, and sewed her together.
The bean thanked him most prettily, but as the tailor used black thread, all beans since then have a black seam.
Now this king and queen had plenty of money, and plenty of fine clothes to wear, and plenty of good things to eat and drink, and a coach to ride out in every day: but though they had been married many years they had no children, and this grieved them very much indeed.
So he asked his kinsmen, and nobles, and friends, and neighbours.
But the queen said, ‘I will have the fairies also, that they might be kind and good to our little daughter.’ Now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom; but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat out of, they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her.
So twelve fairies came, each with a high red cap on her head, and red shoes with high heels on her feet, and a long white wand in her hand: and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all their best gifts to the little princess.
One gave her goodness, another beauty, another riches, and so on till she had all that was good in the world.
Just as eleven of them had done blessing her, a great noise was heard in the courtyard, and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was come, with a black cap on her head, and black shoes on her feet, and a broomstick in her hand: and presently up she came into the dining-hall.
However, the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from the threatened evil; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom should be bought up and burnt.
But all the gifts of the first eleven fairies were in the meantime fulfilled; for the princess was so beautiful, and well behaved, and good, and wise, that everyone who knew her loved her.
It happened that, on the very day she was fifteen years old, the king and queen were not at home, and she was left alone in the palace.
So she roved about by herself, and looked at all the rooms and chambers, till at last she came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase ending with a little door.
In the door there was a golden key, and when she turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning away very busily.
‘Why, how now, good mother,’ said the princess; ‘what are you doing there?’ ‘Spinning,’ said the old lady, and nodded her head, humming a tune, while buzz! went the wheel.
‘How prettily that little thing turns round!’ said the princess, and took the spindle and began to try and spin.
But scarcely had she touched it, before the fairy’s prophecy was fulfilled; the spindle wounded her, and she fell down lifeless on the ground.
A large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace, and every year it became higher and thicker; till at last the old palace was surrounded and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen.
But there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping Briar Rose (for so the king’s daughter was called): so that, from time to time, several kings’ sons came, and tried to break through the thicket into the palace.
This, however, none of them could ever do; for the thorns and bushes laid hold of them, as it were with hands; and there they stuck fast, and died wretchedly.
After many, many years there came a king’s son into that land: and an old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns; and how a beautiful palace stood behind it, and how a wonderful princess, called Briar Rose, lay in it asleep, with all her court.
He told, too, how he had heard from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had tried to break through the thicket, but that they had all stuck fast in it, and died.
Then the young prince said, ‘All this shall not frighten me; I will go and see this Briar Rose.’ The old man tried to hinder him, but he was bent upon going.
Now that very day the hundred years were ended; and as the prince came to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs, through which he went with ease, and they shut in after him as thick as ever.
Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court lay the dogs asleep; and the horses were standing in the stables; and on the roof sat the pigeons fast asleep, with their heads under their wings.
And when he came into the palace, the flies were sleeping on the walls; the spit was standing still; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips, going to drink a draught; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be plucked; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand, as if she was going to beat the boy.
She looked so beautiful that he could not take his eyes off her, so he stooped down and gave her a kiss.
But the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled upon him; and they went out together; and soon the king and queen also awoke, and all the court, and gazed on each other with great wonder.
And then the prince and Briar Rose were married, and the wedding feast was given; and they lived happily together all their lives long.
THE DOG AND THE SPARROW A shepherd’s dog had a master who took no care of him, but often let him suffer the greatest hunger.
At last he could bear it no longer; so he took to his heels, and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood.
Then the dog snapped it up, and scrambled away with it into a corner, where he soon ate it all up.
Mr Carter, or it shall be the worse for you.’ But the carter, grumbling to himself, ‘You make it the worse for me, indeed! what can you do?’ cracked his whip, and drove his cart over the poor dog, so that the wheels crushed him to death.
But the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart, and pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it; and then all the wine ran out, without the carter seeing it.
At last he looked round, and saw that the cart was dripping, and the cask quite empty.
‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow, as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses, and pecked at him till he reared up and kicked.
When the carter saw this, he again cried out, ‘Miserable wretch that I am!’ But the sparrow answered, ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ and perched on the head of the second horse, and pecked at him too.
‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow; and perching upon the third horse, she began to peck him too.
‘Alas! miserable wretch that I am!’ cried he.
‘Not wretch enough yet!’ answered the sparrow as she flew away; ‘now will I plague and punish thee at thy own house.’ The carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him, and to go home overflowing with rage and vexation.
THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES There was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters.
They slept in twelve beds all in one room; and when they went to bed, the doors were shut and locked up; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite worn through as if they had been danced in all night; and yet nobody could find out how it happened, or where they had been.
Then the king made it known to all the land, that if any person could discover the secret, and find out where it was that the princesses danced in the night, he should have the one he liked best for his wife, and should be king after his death; but whoever tried and did not succeed, after three days and nights, should be put to death.
He was well entertained, and in the evening was taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their twelve beds.
But the king’s son soon fell asleep; and when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been dancing, for the soles of their shoes were full of holes.
The same thing happened the second and third night: so the king ordered his head to be cut off.
Now it chanced that an old soldier, who had been wounded in battle and could fight no longer, passed through the country where this king reigned: and as he was travelling through a wood, he met an old woman, who asked him where he was going.
He was as well received as the others had been, and the king ordered fine royal robes to be given him; and when the evening came he was led to the outer chamber.
Just as he was going to lie down, the eldest of the princesses brought him a cup of wine; but the soldier threw it all away secretly, taking care not to drink a drop.
When the twelve princesses heard this they laughed heartily; and the eldest said, ‘This fellow too might have done a wiser thing than lose his life in this way!’ Then they rose up and opened their drawers and boxes, and took out all their fine clothes, and dressed themselves at the glass, and skipped about as if they were eager to begin dancing.
But the youngest said, ‘I don’t know how it is, while you are so happy I feel very uneasy; I am sure some mischance will befall us.’ ‘You simpleton,’ said the eldest, ‘you are always afraid; have you forgotten how many kings’ sons have already watched in vain?
And as for this soldier, even if I had not given him his sleeping draught, he would have slept soundly enough.’ When they were all ready, they went and looked at the soldier; but he snored on, and did not stir hand or foot: so they thought they were quite safe; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands, and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open.
Then the youngest daughter said again, ‘I am sure all is not right--did not you hear that noise?
That never happened before.’ But the eldest said, ‘It is only our princes, who are shouting for joy at our approach.’ Then they came to another grove of trees, where all the leaves were of gold; and afterwards to a third, where the leaves were all glittering diamonds.
And the soldier broke a branch from each; and every time there was a loud noise, which made the youngest sister tremble with fear; but the eldest still said, it was only the princes, who were crying for joy.
So they went on till they came to a great lake; and at the side of the lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them, who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses.
One of the princesses went into each boat, and the soldier stepped into the same boat with the youngest.
There they all landed, and went into the castle, and each prince danced with his princess; and the soldier, who was all the time invisible, danced with them too; and when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her, he drank it all up, so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty.
At this, too, the youngest sister was terribly frightened, but the eldest always silenced her.
The princes rowed them back again over the lake (but this time the soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess); and on the opposite shore they took leave of each other, the princesses promising to come again the next night.
When they came to the stairs, the soldier ran on before the princesses, and laid himself down; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very much tired, they heard him snoring in his bed; so they said, ‘Now all is quite safe’; then they undressed themselves, put away their fine clothes, pulled off their shoes, and went to bed.
In the morning the soldier said nothing about what had happened, but determined to see more of this strange adventure, and went again the second and third night; and every thing happened just as before; the princesses danced each time till their shoes were worn to pieces, and then returned home.
As soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret, he was taken before the king with the three branches and the golden cup; and the twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would say.
‘Where do my twelve daughters dance at night?’ he answered, ‘With twelve princes in a castle under ground.’ And then he told the king all that had happened, and showed him the three branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him.
Then the king called for the princesses, and asked them whether what the soldier said was true: and when they saw that they were discovered, and that it was of no use to deny what had happened, they confessed it all.
And the king asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife; and he answered, ‘I am not very young, so I will have the eldest.’--And they were married that very day, and the soldier was chosen to be the king’s heir.
THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty, close by the seaside.
The fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing; and one day, as he sat on the shore with his rod, looking at the sparkling waves and watching his line, all on a sudden his float was dragged away deep into the water: and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish.
When the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty, he told her how he had caught a great fish, and how it had told him it was an enchanted prince, and how, on hearing it speak, he had let it go again.
‘Did not you ask it for anything?’ said the wife, ‘we live very wretchedly here, in this nasty dirty pigsty; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug little cottage.’ The fisherman did not much like the business: however, he went to the seashore; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and green.
My wife Ilsabill Will have her own will, And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’ Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, ‘Well, what is her will?
What does your wife want?’ ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘she says that when I had caught you, I ought to have asked you for something before I let you go; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty, and wants a snug little cottage.’ ‘Go home, then,’ said the fish; ‘she is in the cottage already!’ So the man went home, and saw his wife standing at the door of a nice trim little cottage.
‘Come in, come in!’ said she; ‘is not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had?’ And there was a parlour, and a bedchamber, and a kitchen; and behind the cottage there was a little garden, planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits; and there was a courtyard behind, full of ducks and chickens.
‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘how happily we shall live now!’ ‘We will try to do so, at least,’ said his wife.
My wife Ilsabill Will have her own will, And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’ ‘Well, what does she want now?’ said the fish.
‘Ah!’ said the man, dolefully, ‘my wife wants to live in a stone castle.’ ‘Go home, then,’ said the fish; ‘she is standing at the gate of it already.’ So away went the fisherman, and found his wife standing before the gate of a great castle.
‘See,’ said she, ‘is not this grand?’ With that they went into the castle together, and found a great many servants there, and the rooms all richly furnished, and full of golden chairs and tables; and behind the castle was a garden, and around it was a park half a mile long, full of sheep, and goats, and hares, and deer; and in the courtyard were stables and cow-houses.
‘Well,’ said the man, ‘now we will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of our lives.’ ‘Perhaps we may,’ said the wife; ‘but let us sleep upon it, before we make up our minds to that.’ So they went to bed.
The next morning when Dame Ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight, and she jogged the fisherman with her elbow, and said, ‘Get up, husband, and bestir yourself, for we must be king of all the land.’ ‘Wife, wife,’ said the man, ‘why should we wish to be the king?
‘But, wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘how can you be king--the fish cannot make you a king?’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘say no more about it, but go and try!
I will be king.’ So the man went away quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king.
This time the sea looked a dark grey colour, and was overspread with curling waves and the ridges of foam as he cried out: ‘O man of the sea!
My wife Ilsabill Will have her own will, And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’ ‘Well, what would she have now?’ said the fish.
‘Alas!’ said the poor man, ‘my wife wants to be king.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is king already.’ Then the fisherman went home; and as he came close to the palace he saw a troop of soldiers, and heard the sound of drums and trumpets.
And when he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds, with a golden crown upon her head; and on each side of her stood six fair maidens, each a head taller than the other.
‘Well, wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘are you king?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am king.’ And when he had looked at her for a long time, he said, ‘Ah, wife! what a fine thing it is to be king!
Now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long as we live.’ ‘I don’t know how that may be,’ said she; ‘never is a long time.
I am king, it is true; but I begin to be tired of that, and I think I should like to be emperor.’ ‘Alas, wife! why should you wish to be emperor?’ said the fisherman.
My wife Ilsabill Will have her own will, And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’ ‘What would she have now?’ said the fish.
And before her stood princes, and dukes, and earls: and the fisherman went up to her and said, ‘Wife, are you emperor?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am emperor.’ ‘Ah!’ said the man, as he gazed upon her, ‘what a fine thing it is to be emperor!’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘why should we stop at being emperor?
I will be pope next.’ ‘O wife, wife!’ said he, ‘how can you be pope? there is but one pope at a time in Christendom.’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘I will be pope this very day.’ ‘But,’ replied the husband, ‘the fish cannot make you pope.’ ‘What nonsense!’ said she; ‘if he can make an emperor, he can make a pope: go and try him.’ So the fisherman went.
But when he came to the shore the wind was raging and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves, and the ships were in trouble, and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows.
In the middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky, but towards the south all was red, as if a dreadful storm was rising.
At this sight the fisherman was dreadfully frightened, and he trembled so that his knees knocked together: but still he went down near to the shore, and said: ‘O man of the sea!
My wife Ilsabill Will have her own will, And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’ ‘What does she want now?’ said the fish.
‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘my wife wants to be pope.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is pope already.’ Then the fisherman went home, and found Ilsabill sitting on a throne that was two miles high.
And on each side of her were two rows of burning lights, of all sizes, the greatest as large as the highest and biggest tower in the world, and the least no larger than a small rushlight.
‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, as he looked at all this greatness, ‘are you pope?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am pope.’ ‘Well, wife,’ replied he, ‘it is a grand thing to be pope; and now you must be easy, for you can be nothing greater.’ ‘I will think about that,’ said the wife.
Then they went to bed: but Dame Ilsabill could not sleep all night for thinking what she should be next.
At last, as she was dropping asleep, morning broke, and the sun rose.
‘Ha!’ thought she, as she woke up and looked at it through the window, ‘after all I cannot prevent the sun rising.’ At this thought she was very angry, and wakened her husband, and said, ‘Husband, go to the fish and tell him I must be lord of the sun and moon.’ The fisherman was half asleep, but the thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed.
Go to the fish at once!’ Then the man went shivering with fear; and as he was going down to the shore a dreadful storm arose, so that the trees and the very rocks shook.
And all the heavens became black with stormy clouds, and the lightnings played, and the thunders rolled; and you might have seen in the sea great black waves, swelling up like mountains with crowns of white foam upon their heads.
And the fisherman crept towards the sea, and cried out, as well as he could: ‘O man of the sea!
THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest, and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said: ‘Brother wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?’ ‘That is the King of birds,’ said the wolf, ‘before whom we must bow down.’ In reality the bird was the willow-wren.
‘IF that’s the case,’ said the bear, ‘I should very much like to see his royal palace; come, take me thither.’ ‘That is not done quite as you seem to think,’ said the wolf; ‘you must wait until the Queen comes,’ Soon afterwards, the Queen arrived with some food in her beak, and the lord King came too, and they began to feed their young ones.
‘Is that the royal palace?’ cried the bear; ‘it is a wretched palace, and you are not King’s children, you are disreputable children!’ When the young wrens heard that, they were frightfully angry, and screamed: ‘No, that we are not!
You shall suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war.’ Thus war was announced to the Bear, and all four-footed animals were summoned to take part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other animal the earth contained.
And the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the air, not only birds, large and small, but midges, and hornets, bees and flies had to come.
When the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies to discover who was the enemy’s commander-in-chief.
The gnat, who was the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled, and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be announced.
There stood the bear, and he called the fox before him and said: ‘Fox, you are the most cunning of all animals, you shall be general and lead us.’ ‘Good,’ said the fox, ‘but what signal shall we agree upon?’ No one knew that, so the fox said: ‘I have a fine long bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers.
When I lift my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you must charge; but if I let it hang down, run away as fast as you can.’ When the gnat had heard that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, down to the minutest detail, to the willow-wren.
When day broke, and the battle was to begin, all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the earth trembled.
The willow-wren with his army also came flying through the air with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one was uneasy and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each other.
When the fox felt the first string, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air; at the second sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment; at the third, he could hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between his legs.
And now at last the young wrens were satisfied, and sat down together and ate and drank, and made merry till quite late into the night.
THE FROG-PRINCE One fine evening a young princess put on her bonnet and clogs, and went out to take a walk by herself in a wood; and when she came to a cool spring of water, that rose in the midst of it, she sat herself down to rest a while.
Now she had a golden ball in her hand, which was her favourite plaything; and she was always tossing it up into the air, and catching it again as it fell.
After a time she threw it up so high that she missed catching it as it fell; and the ball bounded away, and rolled along upon the ground, till at last it fell down into the spring.
The princess looked into the spring after her ball, but it was very deep, so deep that she could not see the bottom of it.
Then she began to bewail her loss, and said, ‘Alas! if I could only get my ball again, I would give all my fine clothes and jewels, and everything that I have in the world.’ Whilst she was speaking, a frog put its head out of the water, and said, ‘Princess, why do you weep so bitterly?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘what can you do for me, you nasty frog?
My golden ball has fallen into the spring.’ The frog said, ‘I want not your pearls, and jewels, and fine clothes; but if you will love me, and let me live with you and eat from off your golden plate, and sleep upon your bed, I will bring you your ball again.’ ‘What nonsense,’ thought the princess, ‘this silly frog is talking!
As soon as the young princess saw her ball, she ran to pick it up; and she was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again, that she never thought of the frog, but ran home with it as fast as she could.
The frog called after her, ‘Stay, princess, and take me with you as you said,’ But she did not stop to hear a word.
The next day, just as the princess had sat down to dinner, she heard a strange noise--tap, tap--plash, plash--as if something was coming up the marble staircase: and soon afterwards there was a gentle knock at the door, and a little voice cried out and said: ‘Open the door, my princess dear, Open the door to thy true love here!
And mind the words that thou and I said By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’ Then the princess ran to the door and opened it, and there she saw the frog, whom she had quite forgotten.
At this sight she was sadly frightened, and shutting the door as fast as she could came back to her seat.
The king, her father, seeing that something had frightened her, asked her what was the matter.
‘There is a nasty frog,’ said she, ‘at the door, that lifted my ball for me out of the spring this morning: I told him that he should live with me here, thinking that he could never get out of the spring; but there he is at the door, and he wants to come in.’ While she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door, and said: ‘Open the door, my princess dear, Open the door to thy true love here!
And mind the words that thou and I said By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’ Then the king said to the young princess, ‘As you have given your word you must keep it; so go and let him in.’ She did so, and the frog hopped into the room, and then straight on--tap, tap--plash, plash--from the bottom of the room to the top, till he came up close to the table where the princess sat.
As soon as it was light he jumped up, hopped downstairs, and went out of the house.
‘Now, then,’ thought the princess, ‘at last he is gone, and I shall be troubled with him no more.’ But she was mistaken; for when night came again she heard the same tapping at the door; and the frog came once more, and said: ‘Open the door, my princess dear, Open the door to thy true love here!
And mind the words that thou and I said By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’ And when the princess opened the door the frog came in, and slept upon her pillow as before, till the morning broke.
But when the princess awoke on the following morning she was astonished to see, instead of the frog, a handsome prince, gazing on her with the most beautiful eyes she had ever seen, and standing at the head of her bed.
He told her that he had been enchanted by a spiteful fairy, who had changed him into a frog; and that he had been fated so to abide till some princess should take him out of the spring, and let him eat from her plate, and sleep upon her bed for three nights.
They then took leave of the king, and got into the coach with eight horses, and all set out, full of joy and merriment, for the prince’s kingdom, which they reached safely; and there they lived happily a great many years.
CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together.
‘But we must make a provision for winter, or else we shall suffer from hunger,’ said the cat; ‘and you, little mouse, cannot venture everywhere, or you will be caught in a trap some day.’ The good advice was followed, and a pot of fat was bought, but they did not know where to put it.
At length, after much consideration, the cat said: ‘I know no place where it will be better stored up than in the church, for no one dares take anything away from there.
Let me go out today, and you look after the house by yourself.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ answered the mouse, ‘by all means go, and if you get anything very good to eat, think of me.
I should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.’ All this, however, was untrue; the cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to be godmother.
She went straight to the church, stole to the pot of fat, began to lick at it, and licked the top of the fat off.
Then she took a walk upon the roofs of the town, looked out for opportunities, and then stretched herself in the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought of the pot of fat, and not until it was evening did she return home.
‘Well, here you are again,’ said the mouse, ‘no doubt you have had a merry day.’ ‘All went off well,’ answered the cat.
‘Top off!’ cried the mouse, ‘that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in your family?’ ‘What does that matter,’ said the cat, ‘it is no worse than Crumb-stealer, as your godchildren are called.’ Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning.
I am again asked to be godmother, and, as the child has a white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.’ The good mouse consented, but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church, and devoured half the pot of fat.
‘Nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to oneself,’ said she, and was quite satisfied with her day’s work.
When she went home the mouse inquired: ‘And what was the child christened?’ ‘Half-done,’ answered the cat.
I never heard the name in my life, I’ll wager anything it is not in the calendar!’ The cat’s mouth soon began to water for some more licking.
‘All good things go in threes,’ said she, ‘I am asked to stand godmother again.
The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but with that exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body; this only happens once every few years, you will let me go, won’t you?’ ‘Top-off!
Half-done!’ answered the mouse, ‘they are such odd names, they make me very thoughtful.’ ‘You sit at home,’ said the cat, ‘in your dark-grey fur coat and long tail, and are filled with fancies, that’s because you do not go out in the daytime.’ During the cat’s absence the mouse cleaned the house, and put it in order, but the greedy cat entirely emptied the pot of fat.
‘When everything is eaten up one has some peace,’ said she to herself, and well filled and fat she did not return home till night.
‘He is called All-gone.’ ‘All-gone,’ cried the mouse ‘that is the most suspicious name of all!
‘Alas!’ said the mouse, ‘now I see what has happened, now it comes to light!
You have devoured all when you were standing godmother.
First top off, then half-done, then--’ ‘Will you hold your tongue,’ cried the cat, ‘one word more, and I will eat you too.’ ‘All-gone’ was already on the poor mouse’s lips; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang on her, seized her, and swallowed her down.
This child was a daughter, who was very beautiful; and her mother loved her dearly, and was very kind to her.
And there was a good fairy too, who was fond of the princess, and helped her mother to watch over her.
When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived a great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she got ready to set off on her journey to his country.
Then the queen her mother, packed up a great many costly things; jewels, and gold, and silver; trinkets, fine dresses, and in short everything that became a royal bride.
And she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her, and give her into the bridegroom’s hands; and each had a horse for the journey.
Now the princess’s horse was the fairy’s gift, and it was called Falada, and could speak.
Now she was so frightened that she did not see it; but her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the charm; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power, now that she had lost the hair.
So when the bride had done drinking, and would have got upon Falada again, the maid said, ‘I shall ride upon Falada, and you may have my horse instead’; so she was forced to give up her horse, and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her maid’s shabby ones.
At last, as they drew near the end of their journey, this treacherous servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had happened.
There was great joy at their coming, and the prince flew to meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she was the one who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber; but the true princess was told to stay in the court below.
Now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do; so he amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window, looking at what was going on; and he saw her in the courtyard.
As she looked very pretty, and too delicate for a waiting-maid, he went up into the royal chamber to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her, that was thus left standing in the court below.
‘I brought her with me for the sake of her company on the road,’ said she; ‘pray give the girl some work to do, that she may not be idle.’ The old king could not for some time think of any work for her to do; but at last he said, ‘I have a lad who takes care of my geese; she may go and help him.’ Now the name of this lad, that the real bride was to help in watching the king’s geese, was Curdken.
But the false bride said to the prince, ‘Dear husband, pray do me one piece of kindness.’ ‘That I will,’ said the prince.
‘Then tell one of your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon, for it was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road’; but the truth was, she was very much afraid lest Falada should some day or other speak, and tell all she had done to the princess.
She carried her point, and the faithful Falada was killed; but when the true princess heard of it, she wept, and begged the man to nail up Falada’s head against a large dark gate of the city, through which she had to pass every morning and evening, that there she might still see him sometimes.
Then the slaughterer said he would do as she wished; and cut off the head, and nailed it up under the dark gate.
Early the next morning, as she and Curdken went out through the gate, she said sorrowfully: ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’ and the head answered: ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
Then he was very angry and sulky, and would not speak to her at all; but they watched the geese until it grew dark in the evening, and then drove them homewards.
The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor girl looked up at Falada’s head, and cried: ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’ and the head answered: ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
‘Because, instead of doing any good, she does nothing but tease me all day long.’ Then the king made him tell him what had happened.
Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it, Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’ And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow where the geese fed; how his hat was blown away; and how he was forced to run after it, and to leave his flock of geese to themselves.
But the old king told the boy to go out again the next day: and when morning came, he placed himself behind the dark gate, and heard how she spoke to Falada, and how Falada answered.
Then he went into the field, and hid himself in a bush by the meadow’s side; and he soon saw with his own eyes how they drove the flock of geese; and how, after a little time, she let down her hair that glittered in the sun.
All this the old king saw: so he went home without being seen; and when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside, and asked her why she did so: but she burst into tears, and said, ‘That I must not tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life.’ But the old king begged so hard, that she had no peace till she had told him all the tale, from beginning to end, word for word.
And it was very lucky for her that she did so, for when she had done the king ordered royal clothes to be put upon her, and gazed on her with wonder, she was so beautiful.
And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and heard how meek and patient she had been; and without saying anything to the false bride, the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all his court.
The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one side, and the true one on the other; but nobody knew her again, for her beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes; and she did not seem at all like the little goose-girl, now that she had her brilliant dress on.
So he began, and told all the story of the princess, as if it was one that he had once heard; and he asked the true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would behave thus.
THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET 1.
HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS ‘The nuts are quite ripe now,’ said Chanticleer to his wife Partlet, ‘suppose we go together to the mountains, and eat as many as we can, before the squirrel takes them all away.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said Partlet, ‘let us go and make a holiday of it together.’ So they went to the mountains; and as it was a lovely day, they stayed there till the evening.
So Chanticleer began to build a little carriage of nutshells: and when it was finished, Partlet jumped into it and sat down, and bid Chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her home.
‘That’s a good joke!’ said Chanticleer; ‘no, that will never do; I had rather by half walk home; I’ll sit on the box and be coachman, if you like, but I’ll not draw.’ While this was passing, a duck came quacking up and cried out, ‘You thieving vagabonds, what business have you in my grounds?
I’ll give it you well for your insolence!’ and upon that she fell upon Chanticleer most lustily.
But Chanticleer was no coward, and returned the duck’s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely that she soon began to cry out for mercy; which was only granted her upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them.
This she agreed to do; and Chanticleer got upon the box, and drove, crying, ‘Now, duck, get on as fast as you can.’ And away they went at a pretty good pace.
Chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows, and not likely to take up much room, told them they might ride, but made them promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in, nor to tread on Partlet’s toes.
An hour or two afterwards the landlord got up, and took his handkerchief to wipe his face, but the pin ran into him and pricked him: then he walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire, but when he stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes, and almost blinded him.
He now flew into a very great passion, and, suspecting the company who had come in the night before, he went to look after them, but they were all off; so he swore that he never again would take in such a troop of vagabonds, who ate a great deal, paid no reckoning, and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks. 2.
HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES Another day, Chanticleer and Partlet wished to ride out together; so Chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels, and harnessed six mice to it; and then he and Partlet got into the carriage, and away they drove.
Soon afterwards a cat met them, and said, ‘Where are you going?’ And Chanticleer replied, ‘All on our way A visit to pay To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’ Then the cat said, ‘Take me with you,’ Chanticleer said, ‘With all my heart: get up behind, and be sure you do not fall off.’ ‘Take care of this handsome coach of mine, Nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine!
For we are going a visit to pay To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’ Soon after came up a millstone, an egg, a duck, and a pin; and Chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with them.
When they arrived at Mr Korbes’s house, he was not at home; so the mice drew the carriage into the coach-house, Chanticleer and Partlet flew upon a beam, the cat sat down in the fireplace, the duck got into the washing cistern, the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow, the millstone laid himself over the house door, and the egg rolled himself up in the towel.
When Mr Korbes came home, he went to the fireplace to make a fire; but the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes: so he ran to the kitchen to wash himself; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face; and when he tried to wipe himself, the egg broke to pieces in the towel all over his face and eyes.
Then he was very angry, and went without his supper to bed; but when he laid his head on the pillow, the pin ran into his cheek: at this he became quite furious, and, jumping up, would have run out of the house; but when he came to the door, the millstone fell down on his head, and killed him on the spot. 3.
HOW PARTLET DIED AND WAS BURIED, AND HOW CHANTICLEER DIED OF GRIEF Another day Chanticleer and Partlet agreed to go again to the mountains to eat nuts; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found should be shared equally between them.
Now Partlet found a very large nut; but she said nothing about it to Chanticleer, and kept it all to herself: however, it was so big that she could not swallow it, and it stuck in her throat.
Then Chanticleer was very sorry, and cried bitterly; and all the beasts came and wept with him over poor Partlet.
And six mice built a little hearse to carry her to her grave; and when it was ready they harnessed themselves before it, and Chanticleer drove them.
‘Where are you going, Chanticleer?’ said he.
‘Yes; but you must get up behind, or my horses will not be able to draw you.’ Then the fox got up behind; and presently the wolf, the bear, the goat, and all the beasts of the wood, came and climbed upon the hearse.
‘How shall we get over?’ said Chanticleer.
Then a large log of wood came and said, ‘I am big enough; I will lay myself across the stream, and you shall pass over upon me.’ So he laid himself down; but they managed so clumsily, that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the stream.
Then a stone, who saw what had happened, came up and kindly offered to help poor Chanticleer by laying himself across the stream; and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse, and managed to get Partlet out of it; but the fox and the other mourners, who were sitting behind, were too heavy, and fell back into the water and were all carried away by the stream and drowned.
Thus Chanticleer was left alone with his dead Partlet; and having dug a grave for her, he laid her in it, and made a little hillock over her.
RAPUNZEL There were once a man and a woman who had long in vain wished for a child.
These people had a little window at the back of their house from which a splendid garden could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful flowers and herbs.
It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had great power and was dreaded by all the world.
One day the woman was standing by this window and looking down into the garden, when she saw a bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it looked so fresh and green that she longed for it, she quite pined away, and began to look pale and miserable.
She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily.
In the gloom of evening therefore, he let himself down again; but when he had clambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the enchantress standing before him.
You shall suffer for it!’ ‘Ah,’ answered he, ‘let mercy take the place of justice, I only made up my mind to do it out of necessity.
Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun.
When she was twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a tower, which lay in a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but quite at the top was a little window.
When the enchantress wanted to go in, she placed herself beneath it and cried: ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair to me.’ Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses, wound them round one of the hooks of the window above, and then the hair fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbed up by it.
Then he heard a song, which was so charming that he stood still and listened.
This was Rapunzel, who in her solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound.
He rode home, but the singing had so deeply touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and listened to it.
Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw that an enchantress came there, and he heard how she cried: ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair to me.’ Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the enchantress climbed up to her.
‘If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I too will try my fortune,’ said he, and the next day when it began to grow dark, he went to the tower and cried: ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair to me.’ Immediately the hair fell down and the king’s son climbed up.
At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes had never yet beheld, came to her; but the king’s son began to talk to her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so stirred that it had let him have no rest, and he had been forced to see her.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she thought: ‘He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does’; and she said yes, and laid her hand in his.
She said: ‘I will willingly go away with you, but I do not know how to get down.
The enchantress remarked nothing of this, until once Rapunzel said to her: ‘Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens that you are so much heavier for me to draw up than the young king’s son--he is with me in a moment.’ ‘Ah! you wicked child,’ cried the enchantress.
I thought I had separated you from all the world, and yet you have deceived me!’ In her anger she clutched Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand, seized a pair of scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut off, and the lovely braids lay on the ground.
And she was so pitiless that she took poor Rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great grief and misery.
On the same day that she cast out Rapunzel, however, the enchantress fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, to the hook of the window, and when the king’s son came and cried: ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair to me.’ she let the hair down.
The king’s son ascended, but instead of finding his dearest Rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazed at him with wicked and venomous looks.
‘Aha!’ she cried mockingly, ‘you would fetch your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest; the cat has got it, and will scratch out your eyes as well.
Rapunzel is lost to you; you will never see her again.’ The king’s son was beside himself with pain, and in his despair he leapt down from the tower.
Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but roots and berries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of his dearest wife.
Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at length came to the desert where Rapunzel, with the twins to which she had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness.
He heard a voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it, and when he approached, Rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept.
He led her to his kingdom where he was joyfully received, and they lived for a long time afterwards, happy and contented.
FUNDEVOGEL There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt, and as he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were there.
He followed the sound, and at last came to a high tree, and at the top of this a little child was sitting, for the mother had fallen asleep under the tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen it in her arms, had flown down, snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.
The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought to himself: ‘You will take him home with you, and bring him up with your Lina.’ He took it home, therefore, and the two children grew up together.
And the one, which he had found on a tree was called Fundevogel, because a bird had carried it away.
Fundevogel and Lina loved each other so dearly that when they did not see each other they were sad.
Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails and began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times, out to the spring.
Then Lina said to Fundevogel: ‘If you will never leave me, I too will never leave you.’ Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now, nor ever will I leave you.’ Then said Lina: ‘Then will I tell you.
When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook went into the bedroom to fetch Fundevogel and throw him into it.
But when she came in, and went to the beds, both the children were gone.
Then she was terribly alarmed, and she said to herself: ‘What shall I say now when the forester comes home and sees that the children are gone?
They must be followed instantly to get them back again.’ Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and overtake the children.
Then the old cook scolded and said: ‘You simpletons, you should have cut the rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought it home with you; go, and do it at once.’ They had therefore to go out and look for the second time.
The children, however, saw them coming from a distance.
Then Lina said: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave you.’ Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now; nor ever.’ Said Lina: ‘Then do you become a church, and I’ll be the chandelier in it.’ So when the three servants came, nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in it.
They said therefore to each other: ‘What can we do here, let us go home.’ When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them; so they said no, they had found nothing but a church, and there was a chandelier in it.
And the cook scolded them and said: ‘You fools! why did you not pull the church to pieces, and bring the chandelier home with you?’ And now the old cook herself got on her legs, and went with the three servants in pursuit of the children.
The children, however, saw from afar that the three servants were coming, and the cook waddling after them.
Then said Lina: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave you.’ Then said Fundevogel: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’ Said Lina: ‘Be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.’ The cook, however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay down by it, and was about to drink it up.
Then the children went home together, and were heartily delighted, and if they have not died, they are living still.
Good jams, cheap!’ This rang pleasantly in the tailor’s ears; he stretched his delicate head out of the window, and called: ‘Come up here, dear woman; here you will get rid of your goods.’ The woman came up the three steps to the tailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the pots for him.
He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it, and at length said: ‘The jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me out four ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no consequence.’ The woman who had hoped to find a good sale, gave him what he desired, but went away quite angry and grumbling.
‘Now, this jam shall be blessed by God,’ cried the little tailor, ‘and give me health and strength’; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it.
‘This won’t taste bitter,’ said he, ‘but I will just finish the jacket before I take a bite.’ He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made bigger and bigger stitches.
In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and they were attracted and descended on it in hosts.
‘Hi! who invited you?’ said the little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away.
The flies, however, who understood no German, would not be turned away, but came back again in ever-increasing companies.
The little tailor at last lost all patience, and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table, and saying: ‘Wait, and I will give it to you,’ struck it mercilessly on them.
When he drew it away and counted, there lay before him no fewer than seven, dead and with legs stretched out.
‘Are you a fellow of that sort?’ said he, and could not help admiring his own bravery.
‘The whole town shall know of this!’ And the little tailor hastened to cut himself a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered on it in large letters: ‘Seven at one stroke!’ ‘What, the town!’ he continued, ‘the whole world shall hear of it!’ and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb’s tail.
The tailor put on the girdle, and resolved to go forth into the world, because he thought his workshop was too small for his valour.
Before he went away, he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could take with him; however, he found nothing but an old cheese, and that he put in his pocket.
In front of the door he observed a bird which had caught itself in the thicket.
The road led him up a mountain, and when he had reached the highest point of it, there sat a powerful giant looking peacefully about him.
The little tailor went bravely up, spoke to him, and said: ‘Good day, comrade, so you are sitting there overlooking the wide-spread world!
Have you any inclination to go with me?’ The giant looked contemptuously at the tailor, and said: ‘You ragamuffin!
You miserable creature!’ ‘Oh, indeed?’ answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat, and showed the giant the girdle, ‘there may you read what kind of a man I am!’ The giant read: ‘Seven at one stroke,’ and thought that they had been men whom the tailor had killed, and began to feel a little respect for the tiny fellow.
Nevertheless, he wished to try him first, and took a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out of it.
‘Do that likewise,’ said the giant, ‘if you have strength.’ ‘Is that all?’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play with us!’ and put his hand into his pocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until the liquid ran out of it.
Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high that the eye could scarcely follow it.
‘Now, little mite of a man, do that likewise,’ ‘Well thrown,’ said the tailor, ‘but after all the stone came down to earth again; I will throw you one which shall never come back at all,’ and he put his hand into his pocket, took out the bird, and threw it into the air.
The bird, delighted with its liberty, rose, flew away and did not come back.
Have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig?’ ‘There is no lack of strength,’ answered the little tailor.
‘Do you think that could be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow?
I leapt over the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.
Jump as I did, if you can do it.’ The giant made the attempt but he could not get over the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand.
The giant said: ‘If you are such a valiant fellow, come with me into our cavern and spend the night with us.’ The little tailor was willing, and followed him.
The little tailor looked round and thought: ‘It is much more spacious here than in my workshop.’ The giant showed him a bed, and said he was to lie down in it and sleep.
When it was midnight, and the giant thought that the little tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a great iron bar, cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he had finished off the grasshopper for good.
With the earliest dawn the giants went into the forest, and had quite forgotten the little tailor, when all at once he walked up to them quite merrily and boldly.
The giants were terrified, they were afraid that he would strike them all dead, and ran away in a great hurry.
The little tailor went onwards, always following his own pointed nose.
After he had walked for a long time, he came to the courtyard of a royal palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
Whilst he lay there, the people came and inspected him on all sides, and read on his girdle: ‘Seven at one stroke.’ ‘Ah!’ said they, ‘what does the great warrior want here in the midst of peace?
He must be a mighty lord.’ They went and announced him to the king, and gave it as their opinion that if war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart.
The counsel pleased the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer him military service when he awoke.
The ambassador remained standing by the sleeper, waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes, and then conveyed to him this proposal.
‘For this very reason have I come here,’ the tailor replied, ‘I am ready to enter the king’s service.’ He was therefore honourably received, and a special dwelling was assigned him.
The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and wished him a thousand miles away.
‘What is to be the end of this?’ they said among themselves.
‘If we quarrel with him, and he strikes about him, seven of us will fall at every blow; not one of us can stand against him.’ They came therefore to a decision, betook themselves in a body to the king, and begged for their dismissal.
‘We are not prepared,’ said they, ‘to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke.’ The king was sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants, wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly have been rid of him again.
But he did not venture to give him his dismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people dead, and place himself on the royal throne.
He sent to the little tailor and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior, he had one request to make to him.
In a forest of his country lived two giants, who caused great mischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging, and burning, and no one could approach them without putting himself in danger of death.
If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants, he would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of his kingdom as a dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him.
‘One is not offered a beautiful princess and half a kingdom every day of one’s life!’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will soon subdue the giants, and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen to do it; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of two.’ The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed him.
When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said to his followers: ‘Just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finish off the giants.’ Then he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left.
After a while he perceived both giants.
They lay sleeping under a tree, and snored so that the branches waved up and down.
The little tailor, not idle, gathered two pocketsful of stones, and with these climbed up the tree.
When he was halfway up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat just above the sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on the breast of one of the giants.
For a long time the giant felt nothing, but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said: ‘Why are you knocking me?’ ‘You must be dreaming,’ said the other, ‘I am not knocking you.’ They laid themselves down to sleep again, and then the tailor threw a stone down on the second.
‘What is the meaning of this?’ cried the other ‘Why are you pelting me?’ ‘I am not pelting you,’ answered the first, growling.
They disputed about it for a time, but as they were weary they let the matter rest, and their eyes closed once more.
‘That is too bad!’ cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed his companion against the tree until it shook.
The other paid him back in the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and belaboured each other so long, that at last they both fell down dead on the ground at the same time.
‘It is a lucky thing,’ said he, ‘that they did not tear up the tree on which I was sitting, or I should have had to sprint on to another like a squirrel; but we tailors are nimble.’ He drew out his sword and gave each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the horsemen and said: ‘The work is done; I have finished both of them off, but it was hard work!
They tore up trees in their sore need, and defended themselves with them, but all that is to no purpose when a man like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.’ ‘But are you not wounded?’ asked the horsemen.
‘You need not concern yourself about that,’ answered the tailor, ‘they have not bent one hair of mine.’ The horsemen would not believe him, and rode into the forest; there they found the giants swimming in their blood, and all round about lay the torn-up trees.
The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward; he, however, repented of his promise, and again bethought himself how he could get rid of the hero.
‘Before you receive my daughter, and the half of my kingdom,’ said he to him, ‘you must perform one more heroic deed.
The unicorn soon came towards him, and rushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with its horn without more ado.
The unicorn ran against the tree with all its strength, and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again, and thus it was caught.
The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made a third demand.
Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmen should give him their help.
‘Willingly,’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play!’ He did not take the huntsmen with him into the forest, and they were well pleased that he did not, for the wild boar had several times received them in such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him.
When the boar perceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth and whetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but the hero fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at once, and in one bound out again.
The little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes.
The hero, however, went to the king, who was now, whether he liked it or not, obliged to keep his promise, and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom.
Had he known that it was no warlike hero, but a little tailor who was standing before him, it would have gone to his heart still more than it did.
The wedding was held with great magnificence and small joy, and out of a tailor a king was made.
The king comforted her and said: ‘Leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants shall stand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bind him, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide world.’ The woman was satisfied with this; but the king’s armour-bearer, who had heard all, was friendly with the young lord, and informed him of the whole plot.
‘I’ll put a screw into that business,’ said the little tailor.
The little tailor, who was only pretending to be asleep, began to cry out in a clear voice: ‘Boy, make me the doublet and patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure over your ears.
I killed two giants, I brought away one unicorn, and caught a wild boar, and am I to fear those who are standing outside the room.’ When these men heard the tailor speaking thus, they were overcome by a great dread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were behind them, and none of them would venture anything further against him.
So the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his life.
HANSEL AND GRETEL Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his two children.
How are we to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything even for ourselves?’ ‘I’ll tell you what, husband,’ answered the woman, ‘early tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where it is the thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each of them one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work and leave them alone.
They will not find the way home again, and we shall be rid of them.’ ‘No, wife,’ said the man, ‘I will not do that; how can I bear to leave my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would soon come and tear them to pieces.’ ‘O, you fool!’ said she, ‘then we must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane the planks for our coffins,’ and she left him no peace until he consented.
‘But I feel very sorry for the poor children, all the same,’ said the man.
The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had heard what their stepmother had said to their father.
Gretel wept bitter tears, and said to Hansel: ‘Now all is over with us.’ ‘Be quiet, Gretel,’ said Hansel, ‘do not distress yourself, I will soon find a way to help us.’ And when the old folks had fallen asleep, he got up, put on his little coat, opened the door below, and crept outside.
The moon shone brightly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house glittered like real silver pennies.
Then he went back and said to Gretel: ‘Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in peace, God will not forsake us,’ and he lay down again in his bed.
When day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the two children, saying: ‘Get up, you sluggards! we are going into the forest to fetch wood.’ She gave each a little piece of bread, and said: ‘There is something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then, for you will get nothing else.’ Gretel took the bread under her apron, as Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket.
Then they all set out together on the way to the forest.
When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said: ‘Now, children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you may not be cold.’ Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together, as high as a little hill.
The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning very high, the woman said: ‘Now, children, lay yourselves down by the fire and rest, we will go into the forest and cut some wood.
When we have done, we will come back and fetch you away.’ Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a little piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they believed that their father was near.
It was not the axe, however, but a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was blowing backwards and forwards.
Gretel began to cry and said: ‘How are we to get out of the forest now?’ But Hansel comforted her and said: ‘Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, and then we will soon find the way.’ And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took his little sister by the hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like newly-coined silver pieces, and showed them the way.
They knocked at the door, and when the woman opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said: ‘You naughty children, why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought you were never coming back at all!’ The father, however, rejoiced, for it had cut him to the heart to leave them behind alone.
Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughout the land, and the children heard their mother saying at night to their father: ‘Everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left, and that is the end.
The children must go, we will take them farther into the wood, so that they will not find their way out again; there is no other means of saving ourselves!’ The man’s heart was heavy, and he thought: ‘It would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your children.’ The woman, however, would listen to nothing that he had to say, but scolded and reproached him.
He who says A must say B, likewise, and as he had yielded the first time, he had to do so a second time also.
The children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation.
Nevertheless he comforted his little sister, and said: ‘Do not cry, Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the good God will help us.’ Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of their beds.
On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground.
‘Hansel, why do you stop and look round?’ said the father, ‘go on.’ ‘I am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof, and wants to say goodbye to me,’ answered Hansel.
The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had never in their lives been before.
Then a great fire was again made, and the mother said: ‘Just sit there, you children, and when you are tired you may sleep a little; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in the evening when we are done, we will come and fetch you away.’ When it was noon, Gretel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had scattered his by the way.
Then they fell asleep and evening passed, but no one came to the poor children.
They did not awake until it was dark night, and Hansel comforted his little sister and said: ‘Just wait, Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I have strewn about, they will show us our way home again.’ When the moon came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked them all up.
It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house.
They began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the forest, and if help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness.
When it was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough, which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it.
And when its song was over, it spread its wings and flew away before them, and they followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof of which it alighted; and when they approached the little house they saw that it was built of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows were of clear sugar.
Then a soft voice cried from the parlour: ‘Nibble, nibble, gnaw, Who is nibbling at my little house?’ The children answered: ‘The wind, the wind, The heaven-born wind,’ and went on eating without disturbing themselves.
Suddenly the door opened, and a woman as old as the hills, who supported herself on crutches, came creeping out.
Hansel and Gretel were so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their hands.
The old woman, however, nodded her head, and said: ‘Oh, you dear children, who has brought you here? do come in, and stay with me.
Then good food was set before them, milk and pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts.
Afterwards two pretty little beds were covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down in them, and thought they were in heaven.
The old woman had only pretended to be so kind; she was in reality a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built the little house of bread in order to entice them there.
Then she went to Gretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried: ‘Get up, lazy thing, fetch some water, and cook something good for your brother, he is in the stable outside, and is to be made fat.
When he is fat, I will eat him.’ Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in vain, for she was forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.
Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and cried: ‘Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may feel if you will soon be fat.’ Hansel, however, stretched out a little bone to her, and the old woman, who had dim eyes, could not see it, and thought it was Hansel’s finger, and was astonished that there was no way of fattening him.
When four weeks had gone by, and Hansel still remained thin, she was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer.
‘Now, then, Gretel,’ she cried to the girl, ‘stir yourself, and bring some water.
Let Hansel be fat or lean, tomorrow I will kill him, and cook him.’ Ah, how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water, and how her tears did flow down her cheeks!
‘If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, we should at any rate have died together.’ ‘Just keep your noise to yourself,’ said the old woman, ‘it won’t help you at all.’ Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with the water, and light the fire.
‘Creep in,’ said the witch, ‘and see if it is properly heated, so that we can put the bread in.’ And once Gretel was inside, she intended to shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.
Then Gretel gave her a push that drove her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened the bolt.
Oh! then she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ran away and the godless witch was miserably burnt to death.
Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable, and cried: ‘Hansel, we are saved!
‘These are far better than pebbles!’ said Hansel, and thrust into his pockets whatever could be got in, and Gretel said: ‘I, too, will take something home with me,’ and filled her pinafore full.
‘We cannot cross,’ said Hansel, ‘I see no foot-plank, and no bridge.’ ‘And there is also no ferry,’ answered Gretel, ‘but a white duck is swimming there: if I ask her, she will help us over.’ Then she cried: ‘Little duck, little duck, dost thou see, Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee?
‘No,’ replied Gretel, ‘that will be too heavy for the little duck; she shall take us across, one after the other.’ The good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and had walked for a short time, the forest seemed to be more and more familiar to them, and at length they saw from afar their father’s house.
Then they began to run, rushed into the parlour, and threw themselves round their father’s neck.
The man had not known one happy hour since he had left the children in the forest; the woman, however, was dead.
Gretel emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to add to them.
Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together in perfect happiness.
My tale is done, there runs a mouse; whosoever catches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.
THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE Once upon a time, a mouse, a bird, and a sausage, entered into partnership and set up house together.
For a long time all went well; they lived in great comfort, and prospered so far as to be able to add considerably to their stores.
When people are too well off they always begin to long for something new.
And so it came to pass, that the bird, while out one day, met a fellow bird, to whom he boastfully expatiated on the excellence of his household arrangements.
But the other bird sneered at him for being a poor simpleton, who did all the hard work, while the other two stayed at home and had a good time of it.
The sausage had only to watch the pot to see that the food was properly cooked, and when it was near dinner-time, he just threw himself into the broth, or rolled in and out among the vegetables three or four times, and there they were, buttered, and salted, and ready to be served.
Then, when the bird came home and had laid aside his burden, they sat down to table, and when they had finished their meal, they could sleep their fill till the following morning: and that was really a very delightful life.
Influenced by those remarks, the bird next morning refused to bring in the wood, telling the others that he had been their servant long enough, and had been a fool into the bargain, and that it was now time to make a change, and to try some other way of arranging the work.
Beg and pray as the mouse and the sausage might, it was of no use; the bird remained master of the situation, and the venture had to be made.
They therefore drew lots, and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood, to the mouse to cook, and to the bird to fetch the water.
And now what happened?
The sausage started in search of wood, the bird made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two waited till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day.
But the sausage remained so long away, that they became uneasy, and the bird flew out to meet him.
He had not flown far, however, when he came across a dog who, having met the sausage, had regarded him as his legitimate booty, and so seized and swallowed him.
The bird complained to the dog of this bare-faced robbery, but nothing he said was of any avail, for the dog answered that he found false credentials on the sausage, and that was the reason his life had been forfeited.
So now the bird set the table, and the mouse looked after the food and, wishing to prepare it in the same way as the sausage, by rolling in and out among the vegetables to salt and butter them, she jumped into the pot; but she stopped short long before she reached the bottom, having already parted not only with her skin and hair, but also with life.
Presently the bird came in and wanted to serve up the dinner, but he could nowhere see the cook.
In his alarm and flurry, he threw the wood here and there about the floor, called and searched, but no cook was to be found.
Then some of the wood that had been carelessly thrown down, caught fire and began to blaze.
The bird hastened to fetch some water, but his pail fell into the well, and he after it, and as he was unable to recover himself, he was drowned.
MOTHER HOLLE Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters; one of them was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy.
The mother, however, loved the ugly and lazy one best, because she was her own daughter, and so the other, who was only her stepdaughter, was made to do all the work of the house, and was quite the Cinderella of the family.
Her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in the high road, there to spin until she made her fingers bleed.
Now it chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle, and as the girl stopped over the well to wash it off, the spindle suddenly sprang out of her hand and fell into the well.
She ran home crying to tell of her misfortune, but her stepmother spoke harshly to her, and after giving her a violent scolding, said unkindly, ‘As you have let the spindle fall into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out.’ The girl went back to the well not knowing what to do, and at last in her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle.
She remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a beautiful meadow, full of sunshine, and with countless flowers blooming in every direction.
She walked over the meadow, and presently she came upon a baker’s oven full of bread, and the loaves cried out to her, ‘Take us out, take us out, or alas! we shall be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long ago.’ So she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out.
‘Shake me, shake me, I pray,’ cried the tree; ‘my apples, one and all, are ripe.’ So she shook the tree, and the apples came falling down upon her like rain; but she continued shaking until there was not a single apple left upon it.
Then she carefully gathered the apples together in a heap and walked on again.
The next thing she came to was a little house, and there she saw an old woman looking out, with such large teeth, that she was terrified, and turned to run away.
Stay with me; if you will do the work of my house properly for me, I will make you very happy.
You must be very careful, however, to make my bed in the right way, for I wish you always to shake it thoroughly, so that the feathers fly about; then they say, down there in the world, that it is snowing; for I am Mother Holle.’ The old woman spoke so kindly, that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter into her service.
She took care to do everything according to the old woman’s bidding and every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might, so that the feathers flew about like so many snowflakes.
She could not at first tell why she felt sad, but she became conscious at last of great longing to go home; then she knew she was homesick, although she was a thousand times better off with Mother Holle than with her mother and sister.
‘That is a reward for your industry,’ said Mother Holle, and as she spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well.
As she entered the courtyard, the cock who was perched on the well, called out: ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
Your golden daughter’s come back to you.’ Then she went in to her mother and sister, and as she was so richly covered with gold, they gave her a warm welcome.
She related to them all that had happened, and when the mother heard how she had come by her great riches, she thought she should like her ugly, lazy daughter to go and try her fortune.
Like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow, and walked over it till she came to the oven.
But the lazy girl answered, ‘Do you think I am going to dirty my hands for you?’ and walked on.
Presently she came to the apple-tree.
But she only answered, ‘A nice thing to ask me to do, one of the apples might fall on my head,’ and passed on.
The first day she was very obedient and industrious, and exerted herself to please Mother Holle, for she thought of the gold she should get in return.
The next day, however, she began to dawdle over her work, and the third day she was more idle still; then she began to lie in bed in the mornings and refused to get up.
Worse still, she neglected to make the old woman’s bed properly, and forgot to shake it so that the feathers might fly about.
The lazy girl was delighted at this, and thought to herself, ‘The gold will soon be mine.’ Mother Holle led her, as she had led her sister, to the broad gateway; but as she was passing through, instead of the shower of gold, a great bucketful of pitch came pouring over her.
‘That is in return for your services,’ said the old woman, and she shut the gate.
Your dirty daughter’s come back to you.’ But, try what she would, she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to her as long as she lived.
LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD] Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone who looked at her, but most of all by her grandmother, and there was nothing that she would not have given to the child.
Once she gave her a little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would never wear anything else; so she was always called ‘Little Red-Cap.’ One day her mother said to her: ‘Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine; take them to your grandmother, she is ill and weak, and they will do her good.
Set out before it gets hot, and when you are going, walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path, or you may fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will get nothing; and when you go into her room, don’t forget to say, “Good morning”, and don’t peep into every corner before you do it.’ ‘I will take great care,’ said Little Red-Cap to her mother, and gave her hand on it.
The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the village, and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a wolf met her.
Red-Cap did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all afraid of him.
The wolf thought to himself: ‘What a tender young creature! what a nice plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman.
I must act craftily, so as to catch both.’ So he walked for a short time by the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he said: ‘See, Little Red-Cap, how pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round?
And whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a still prettier one farther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and deeper into the wood.
Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother’s house and knocked at the door.
‘She is bringing cake and wine; open the door.’ ‘Lift the latch,’ called out the grandmother, ‘I am too weak, and cannot get up.’ The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and without saying a word he went straight to the grandmother’s bed, and devoured her.
Then he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed and drew the curtains.
Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers, and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she remembered her grandmother, and set out on the way to her.
She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, and when she went into the room, she had such a strange feeling that she said to herself: ‘Oh dear! how uneasy I feel today, and at other times I like being with grandmother so much.’ She called out: ‘Good morning,’ but received no answer; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains.
There lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face, and looking very strange.
‘Oh! grandmother,’ she said, ‘what big ears you have!’ ‘The better to hear you with, my child,’ was the reply.
‘But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!’ she said.
‘The better to see you with, my dear.’ ‘But, grandmother, what large hands you have!’ ‘The better to hug you with.’ ‘Oh! but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!’ ‘The better to eat you with!’ And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he was out of bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.
When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again in the bed, fell asleep and began to snore very loud.
The huntsman was just passing the house, and thought to himself: ‘How the old woman is snoring!
I must just see if she wants anything.’ So he went into the room, and when he came to the bed, he saw that the wolf was lying in it.
‘I have long sought you!’ Then just as he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, so he did not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cut open the stomach of the sleeping wolf.
When he had made two snips, he saw the little Red-Cap shining, and then he made two snips more, and the little girl sprang out, crying: ‘Ah, how frightened I have been!
How dark it was inside the wolf’; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive also, but scarcely able to breathe.
Red-Cap, however, quickly fetched great stones with which they filled the wolf’s belly, and when he awoke, he wanted to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at once, and fell dead.
Then all three were delighted.
Red-Cap, however, was on her guard, and went straight forward on her way, and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf, and that he had said ‘good morning’ to her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes, that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would have eaten her up.
But the grandmother saw what was in his thoughts.
In front of the house was a great stone trough, so she said to the child: ‘Take the pail, Red-Cap; I made some sausages yesterday, so carry the water in which I boiled them to the trough.’ Red-Cap carried until the great trough was quite full.
Then the smell of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peeped down, and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep his footing and began to slip, and slipped down from the roof straight into the great trough, and was drowned.
But Red-Cap went joyously home, and no one ever did anything to harm her again.
THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM There was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter, and as she was grown up, he was anxious that she should be well married and provided for.
He said to himself, ‘I will give her to the first suitable man who comes and asks for her hand.’ Not long after a suitor appeared, and as he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with which to find fault, he betrothed his daughter to him.
But the girl did not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband.
One day he said to her, ‘You have not yet paid me a visit, although we have been betrothed for some time.’ ‘I do not know where your house is,’ she answered.
On reaching the entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes, and these she followed, throwing down some peas on either side of her at every step she took.
There she saw a lonely house, looking so grim and mysterious, that it did not please her at all.
She stepped inside, but not a soul was to be seen, and a great silence reigned throughout.
Suddenly a voice cried: ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair, Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’ The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a cage on the wall.
Again it cried: ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair, Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’ The girl passed on, going from room to room of the house, but they were all empty, and still she saw no one.
‘Can you tell me,’ asked the girl, ‘if my betrothed husband lives here?’ ‘Ah, you poor child,’ answered the old woman, ‘what a place for you to come to!
This is a murderers’ den.
You think yourself a promised bride, and that your marriage will soon take place, but it is with death that you will keep your marriage feast.
Look, do you see that large cauldron of water which I am obliged to keep on the fire!
If I did not take pity on you and save you, you would be lost.’ Thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask, which quite hid her from view.
Tonight, when the robbers are all asleep, we will flee together.
I have long been waiting for an opportunity to escape.’ The words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned, dragging another young girl along with them.
They were all drunk, and paid no heed to her cries and lamentations.
Then they tore off her dainty clothing, laid her on a table, and cut her beautiful body into pieces, and sprinkled salt upon it.
The poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the cask, for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by the robbers.
One of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on the little finger of the murdered girl, and as he could not draw it off easily, he took a hatchet and cut off the finger; but the finger sprang into the air, and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was hiding there.
But the old woman called out, ‘Come and eat your suppers, and let the thing be till tomorrow; the finger won’t run away.’ ‘The old woman is right,’ said the robbers, and they ceased looking for the finger and sat down.
The old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine, and before long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar, fast asleep and snoring.
She was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers, who were lying close together, and every moment she was filled with renewed dread lest she should awaken them.
But God helped her, so that she passed safely over them, and then she and the old woman went upstairs, opened the door, and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers’ den.
They found the ashes scattered by the wind, but the peas and lentils had sprouted, and grown sufficiently above the ground, to guide them in the moonlight along the path.
Then the girl told her father all that had happened.
The day came that had been fixed for the marriage.
The bridegroom arrived and also a large company of guests, for the miller had taken care to invite all his friends and relations.
‘And you, my love,’ said the bridegroom, turning to her, ‘is there no tale you know?
Tell us something.’ ‘I will tell you a dream, then,’ said the bride.
And here is the finger with the ring.’ And with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the assembled guests.
The bridegroom, who during this recital had grown deadly pale, up and tried to escape, but the guests seized him and held him fast.
They delivered him up to justice, and he and all his murderous band were condemned to death for their wicked deeds.
TOM THUMB A poor woodman sat in his cottage one night, smoking his pipe by the fireside, while his wife sat by his side spinning.
‘How lonely it is, wife,’ said he, as he puffed out a long curl of smoke, ‘for you and me to sit here by ourselves, without any children to play about and amuse us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children!’ ‘What you say is very true,’ said the wife, sighing, and turning round her wheel; ‘how happy should I be if I had but one child!
If it were ever so small--nay, if it were no bigger than my thumb--I should be very happy, and love it dearly.’ Now--odd as you may think it--it came to pass that this good woman’s wish was fulfilled, just in the very way she had wished it; for, not long afterwards, she had a little boy, who was quite healthy and strong, but was not much bigger than my thumb.
Still, his eyes were sharp and sparkling, and he soon showed himself to be a clever little fellow, who always knew well what he was about.
It happened that as the horse was going a little too fast, and Tom was calling out, ‘Gently! gently!’ two strangers came up.
The two strangers were all this time looking on, and did not know what to say for wonder.
They journeyed on till it began to be dusky, and then the little man said, ‘Let me get down, I’m tired.’ So the man took off his hat, and put him down on a clod of earth, in a ploughed field by the side of the road.
‘What dangerous walking it is,’ said he, ‘in this ploughed field!
If I were to fall from one of these great clods, I should undoubtedly break my neck.’ At last, by good luck, he found a large empty snail-shell.
Just as he was falling asleep, he heard two men passing by, chatting together; and one said to the other, ‘How can we rob that rich parson’s house of his silver and gold?’ ‘I’ll tell you!’ cried Tom.
‘What noise was that?’ said the thief, frightened; ‘I’m sure I heard someone speak.’ They stood still listening, and Tom said, ‘Take me with you, and I’ll soon show you how to get the parson’s money.’ ‘But where are you?’ said they.
‘Look about on the ground,’ answered he, ‘and listen where the sound comes from.’ At last the thieves found him out, and lifted him up in their hands.
Speak low, that you may not awaken anybody.’ But Tom seemed as if he did not understand them, and bawled out again, ‘How much will you have?
Shall I throw it all out?’ Now the cook lay in the next room; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and listened.
By the time she came back, Tom had slipped off into the barn; and when she had looked about and searched every hole and corner, and found nobody, she went to bed, thinking she must have been dreaming with her eyes open.
The little man crawled about in the hay-loft, and at last found a snug place to finish his night’s rest in; so he laid himself down, meaning to sleep till daylight, and then find his way home to his father and mother.
But alas! how woefully he was undone! what crosses and sorrows happen to us all in this world!
The cook got up early, before daybreak, to feed the cows; and going straight to the hay-loft, carried away a large bundle of hay, with the little man in the middle of it, fast asleep.
He still, however, slept on, and did not awake till he found himself in the mouth of the cow; for the cook had put the hay into the cow’s rick, and the cow had taken Tom up in a mouthful of it.
‘It is rather dark,’ said he; ‘they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in; a candle would be no bad thing.’ Though he made the best of his bad luck, he did not like his quarters at all; and the worst of it was, that more and more hay was always coming down, and the space left for him became smaller and smaller.
Don’t bring me any more hay!’ The maid happened to be just then milking the cow; and hearing someone speak, but seeing nobody, and yet being quite sure it was the same voice that she had heard in the night, she was so frightened that she fell off her stool, and overset the milk-pail.
Scarcely had they set foot on the threshold, when Tom called out, ‘Don’t bring me any more hay!’ Then the parson himself was frightened; and thinking the cow was surely bewitched, told his man to kill her on the spot.
So the cow was killed, and cut up; and the stomach, in which Tom lay, was thrown out upon a dunghill.
A hungry wolf sprang out, and swallowed up the whole stomach, with Tom in it, at one gulp, and ran away.
Tom, however, was still not disheartened; and thinking the wolf would not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along, he called out, ‘My good friend, I can show you a famous treat.’ ‘Where’s that?’ said the wolf.
‘In such and such a house,’ said Tom, describing his own father’s house.
This was just what Tom had reckoned upon; and now he began to set up a great shout, making all the noise he could.
‘Will you be easy?’ said the wolf; ‘you’ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter.’ ‘What’s that to me?’ said the little man; ‘you have had your frolic, now I’ve a mind to be merry myself’; and he began, singing and shouting as loud as he could.
The woodman and his wife, being awakened by the noise, peeped through a crack in the door; but when they saw a wolf was there, you may well suppose that they were sadly frightened; and the woodman ran for his axe, and gave his wife a scythe.
I am here, the wolf has swallowed me.’ And his father said, ‘Heaven be praised! we have found our dear child again’; and he told his wife not to use the scythe for fear she should hurt him.
‘Ah!’ said the father, ‘what fears we have had for you!’ ‘Yes, father,’ answered he; ‘I have travelled all over the world, I think, in one way or other, since we parted; and now I am very glad to come home and get fresh air again.’ ‘Why, where have you been?’ said his father.
So Master Thumb stayed at home with his father and mother, in peace; for though he had been so great a traveller, and had done and seen so many fine things, and was fond enough of telling the whole story, he always agreed that, after all, there’s no place like HOME!
RUMPELSTILTSKIN By the side of a wood, in a country a long way off, ran a fine stream of water; and upon the stream there stood a mill.
The miller’s house was close by, and the miller, you must know, had a very beautiful daughter.
She was, moreover, very shrewd and clever; and the miller was so proud of her, that he one day told the king of the land, who used to come and hunt in the wood, that his daughter could spin gold out of straw.
Now this king was very fond of money; and when he heard the miller’s boast his greediness was raised, and he sent for the girl to be brought before him.
Then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great heap of straw, and gave her a spinning-wheel, and said, ‘All this must be spun into gold before morning, as you love your life.’ It was in vain that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father, for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold: the chamber door was locked, and she was left alone.
She sat down in one corner of the room, and began to bewail her hard fate; when on a sudden the door opened, and a droll-looking little man hobbled in, and said, ‘Good morrow to you, my good lass; what are you weeping for?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘I must spin this straw into gold, and I know not how.’ ‘What will you give me,’ said the hobgoblin, ‘to do it for you?’ ‘My necklace,’ replied the maiden.
He took her at her word, and sat himself down to the wheel, and whistled and sang: ‘Round about, round about, Lo and behold!
When the king came and saw this, he was greatly astonished and pleased; but his heart grew still more greedy of gain, and he shut up the poor miller’s daughter again with a fresh task.
So her little friend took the ring, and began to work at the wheel again, and whistled and sang: ‘Round about, round about, Lo and behold!
The king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure; but still he had not enough: so he took the miller’s daughter to a yet larger heap, and said, ‘All this must be spun tonight; and if it is, you shall be my queen.’ As soon as she was alone that dwarf came in, and said, ‘What will you give me to spin gold for you this third time?’ ‘I have nothing left,’ said she.
‘Then say you will give me,’ said the little man, ‘the first little child that you may have when you are queen.’ ‘That may never be,’ thought the miller’s daughter: and as she knew no other way to get her task done, she said she would do what he asked.
The king came in the morning, and, finding all he wanted, was forced to keep his word; so he married the miller’s daughter, and she really became queen.
Today I’ll brew, tomorrow bake; Merrily I’ll dance and sing, For next day will a stranger bring.
Little does my lady dream Rumpelstiltskin is my name!” When the queen heard this she jumped for joy, and as soon as her little friend came she sat down upon her throne, and called all her court round to enjoy the fun; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her arms, as if it was quite ready to be given up.
‘No, madam!’ ‘Is it TOM?’ ‘No, madam!’ ‘Is it JEMMY?’ ‘It is not.’ ‘Can your name be RUMPELSTILTSKIN?’ said the lady slyly.
Meanwhile, I will run into the cellar, and take a drink.’ She ran down, set a jug, said: ‘God bless it for you, Gretel,’ and took a good drink, and thought that wine should flow on, and should not be interrupted, and took yet another hearty draught.
But as the roast meat smelt so good, Gretel thought: ‘Something might be wrong, it ought to be tasted!’ She touched it with her finger, and said: ‘Ah! how good fowls are!
It certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten at the right time!’ She ran to the window, to see if the master was not coming with his guest, but she saw no one, and went back to the fowls and thought: ‘One of the wings is burning!
I had better take it off and eat it.’ So she cut it off, ate it, and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she thought: ‘The other must go down too, or else master will observe that something is missing.’ When the two wings were eaten, she went and looked for her master, and did not see him.
It suddenly occurred to her: ‘Who knows?
They are perhaps not coming at all, and have turned in somewhere.’ Then she said: ‘Well, Gretel, enjoy yourself, one fowl has been cut into, take another drink, and eat it up entirely; when it is eaten you will have some peace, why should God’s good gifts be spoilt?’ So she ran into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the one chicken in great glee.
When one of the chickens was swallowed down, and still her master did not come, Gretel looked at the other and said: ‘What one is, the other should be likewise, the two go together; what’s right for the one is right for the other; I think if I were to take another draught it would do me no harm.’ So she took another hearty drink, and let the second chicken follow the first.
While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried: ‘Hurry up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me!’ ‘Yes, sir, I will soon serve up,’ answered Gretel.
Meantime the master looked to see that the table was properly laid, and took the great knife, wherewith he was going to carve the chickens, and sharpened it on the steps.
Presently the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the house-door.
Gretel ran, and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest, she put her finger to her lips and said: ‘Hush! hush! go away as quickly as you can, if my master catches you it will be the worse for you; he certainly did ask you to supper, but his intention is to cut off your two ears.
Just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it!’ The guest heard the sharpening, and hurried down the steps again as fast as he could.
Gretel was not idle; she ran screaming to her master, and cried: ‘You have invited a fine guest!’ ‘Why, Gretel?
What do you mean by that?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘he has taken the chickens which I was just going to serve up, off the dish, and has run away with them!’ ‘That’s a nice trick!’ said her master, and lamented the fine chickens.
‘If he had but left me one, so that something remained for me to eat.’ He called to him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear.
The guest, however, thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of his ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order to take them both with him.
THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his ears dull of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table he could hardly hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth or let it run out of his mouth.
His son and his son’s wife were disgusted at this, so the old grandfather at last had to sit in the corner behind the stove, and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not even enough of it.
Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it fell to the ground and broke.
They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years old began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground.
‘I am making a little trough,’ answered the child, ‘for father and mother to eat out of when I am big.’ The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presently began to cry.
Then they took the old grandfather to the table, and henceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing if he did spill a little of anything.
THE LITTLE PEASANT There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little peasant.
The cow-herd answered: ‘It is still standing out there eating.
It would not stop and come with us.’ But the little peasant said: ‘Oh, but I must have my beast back again.’ Then they went back to the meadow together, but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone.
The cow-herd said: ‘It must have run away.’ The peasant, however, said: ‘Don’t tell me that,’ and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for his carelessness condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away.
And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but they had no food for it, and could give it nothing to eat, so it soon had to be killed.
They salted the flesh, and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell the skin there, so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds.
The miller’s wife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant: ‘Lay yourself on the straw there,’ and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.
The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman thought: ‘He is tired and has gone to sleep.’ In the meantime came the parson; the miller’s wife received him well, and said: ‘My husband is out, so we will have a feast.’ The peasant listened, and when he heard them talk about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make shift with a slice of bread and cheese.
Then the woman served up four different things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.
Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking outside.
After this the miller saw the skin in which the raven was, lying on the ground, and asked: ‘What have you there?’ The peasant answered: ‘I have a soothsayer inside it.’ ‘Can he foretell anything to me?’ said the miller.
‘Why not?’ answered the peasant: ‘but he only says four things, and the fifth he keeps to himself.’ The miller was curious, and said: ‘Let him foretell something for once.’ Then the peasant pinched the raven’s head, so that he croaked and made a noise like krr, krr.
The miller said: ‘What did he say?’ The peasant answered: ‘In the first place, he says that there is some wine hidden under the pillow.’ ‘Bless me!’ cried the miller, and went there and found the wine.
The peasant made the raven prophesy still more, and said: ‘Thirdly, he says that there is some salad on the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the miller, and went there and found the salad.
At last the peasant pinched the raven once more till he croaked, and said: ‘Fourthly, he says that there are some cakes under the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the miller, and looked there, and found the cakes.
And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller’s wife was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all the keys with her.
The miller would have liked much to know the fifth, but the little peasant said: ‘First, we will quickly eat the four things, for the fifth is something bad.’ So they ate, and after that they bargained how much the miller was to give for the fifth prophecy, until they agreed on three hundred talers.
The miller asked: ‘What did he say?’ The peasant replied: ‘He says that the Devil is hiding outside there in the closet on the porch.’ The miller said: ‘The Devil must go out,’ and opened the house-door; then the woman was forced to give up the keys, and the peasant unlocked the closet.
The parson ran out as fast as he could, and the miller said: ‘It was true; I saw the black rascal with my own eyes.’ The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreak with the three hundred talers.
At home the small peasant gradually launched out; he built a beautiful house, and the peasants said: ‘The small peasant has certainly been to the place where golden snow falls, and people carry the gold home in shovels.’ Then the small peasant was brought before the mayor, and bidden to say from whence his wealth came.
He answered: ‘I sold my cow’s skin in the town, for three hundred talers.’ When the peasants heard that, they too wished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed all their cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in the town to the greatest advantage.
The innocent little peasant was unanimously sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the water, in a barrel pierced full of holes.
The others were all obliged to retire to a distance, and when the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the man who had been with the miller’s wife.
He said to him: ‘I set you free from the closet, set me free from the barrel.’ At this same moment up came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whom the peasant knew had long been wishing to be mayor, so he cried with all his might: ‘No, I will not do it; if the whole world insists on it, I will not do it!’ The shepherd hearing that, came up to him, and asked: ‘What are you about?
The parson went to the crowd, and declared that the mass had been said.
When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd cried: ‘I am quite willing to be mayor.’ They believed no otherwise than that it was the peasant who was saying this, and answered: ‘That is what we intend, but first you shall look about you a little down below there,’ and they rolled the barrel down into the water.
After that the peasants went home, and as they were entering the village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving a flock of sheep and looking quite contented.
Then the peasants were astonished, and said: ‘Peasant, from whence do you come?
FREDERICK AND CATHERINE There was once a man called Frederick: he had a wife whose name was Catherine, and they had not long been married.
One day Frederick said.
I am going to work in the fields; when I come back I shall be hungry so let me have something nice cooked, and a good draught of ale.’ ‘Very well,’ said she, ‘it shall all be ready.’ When dinner-time drew nigh, Catherine took a nice steak, which was all the meat she had, and put it on the fire to fry.
The steak soon began to look brown, and to crackle in the pan; and Catherine stood by with a fork and turned it: then she said to herself, ‘The steak is almost ready, I may as well go to the cellar for the ale.’ So she left the pan on the fire and took a large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask.
The beer ran into the jug and Catherine stood looking on.
At last it popped into her head, ‘The dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak; that’s well thought of.’ So up she ran from the cellar; and sure enough the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth, and was making off with it.
Away ran Catherine, and away ran the dog across the field: but he ran faster than she, and stuck close to the steak.
‘It’s all gone, and “what can’t be cured must be endured”,’ said Catherine.
So she turned round; and as she had run a good way and was tired, she walked home leisurely to cool herself.
Now all this time the ale was running too, for Catherine had not turned the cock; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till the cask was empty.
When she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had happened.
‘My stars!’ said she, ‘what shall I do to keep Frederick from seeing all this slopping about?’ So she thought a while; and at last remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair, and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale nicely.
‘What a lucky thing,’ said she, ‘that we kept that meal! we have now a good use for it.’ So away she went for it: but she managed to set it down just upon the great jug full of beer, and upset it; and thus all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also.
‘Ah! well,’ said she, ‘when one goes another may as well follow.’ Then she strewed the meal all about the cellar, and was quite pleased with her cleverness, and said, ‘How very neat and clean it looks!’ At noon Frederick came home.
I shall put them into a box and bury them in the garden; but take care that you never go near or meddle with them.’ ‘No, Frederick,’ said she, ‘that I never will.’ As soon as he was gone, there came by some pedlars with earthenware plates and dishes, and they asked her whether she would buy.
‘It does not matter,’ thought she: ‘when we turn back, I shall be so much nearer home than he.’ Presently she came to the top of a hill, down the side of which there was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees on each side as they passed.
Catherine looked, but could not see where it had gone; so she said, ‘Well, I suppose the other will go the same way and find you; he has younger legs than I have.’ Then she rolled the other cheese after it; and away it went, nobody knows where, down the hill.
But she said she supposed that they knew the road, and would follow her, and she could not stay there all day waiting for them.
At last she overtook Frederick, who desired her to give him something to eat.
‘Oh!’ answered she, ‘I used the butter to grease those poor trees that the wheels chafed so: and one of the cheeses ran away so I sent the other after it to find it, and I suppose they are both on the road together somewhere.’ ‘What a goose you are to do such silly things!’ said the husband.
Scarcely were they up, than who should come by but the very rogues they were looking for.
They were in truth great rascals, and belonged to that class of people who find things before they are lost; they were tired; so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where Frederick and Catherine were.
Frederick slipped down on the other side, and picked up some stones.
So when Frederick and Catherine came down, there they found all their money safe and sound.
SWEETHEART ROLAND There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two daughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she was her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one she hated, because she was her stepdaughter.
The stepdaughter once had a pretty apron, which the other fancied so much that she became envious, and told her mother that she must and would have that apron.
Your stepsister has long deserved death; tonight when she is asleep I will come and cut her head off.
Only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed, and push her well to the front.’ It would have been all over with the poor girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner, and heard everything.
All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bedtime had come, the witch’s daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at the far side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the front, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall.
In the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in her right hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside, and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut her own child’s head off.
When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who was called Roland, and knocked at his door.
When he came out, she said to him: ‘Listen, dearest Roland, we must fly in all haste; my stepmother wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child.
When daylight comes, and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.’ ‘But,’ said Roland, ‘I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, or we cannot escape if she pursues us.’ The maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took the dead girl’s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground, one in front of the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the stairs.
When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, and wanted to give her the apron, but she did not come.
Then the witch cried: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping,’ answered the first drop of blood.
Then she cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Ah, here in the bed, I am sleeping,’ cried the third drop of blood.
The witch fell into a passion, sprang to the window, and as she could look forth quite far into the world, she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her sweetheart Roland.
‘That shall not help you,’ cried she, ‘even if you have got a long way off, you shall still not escape me.’ She put on her many-league boots, in which she covered an hour’s walk at every step, and it was not long before she overtook them.
The girl, however, when she saw the old woman striding towards her, changed, with her magic wand, her sweetheart Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck swimming in the middle of it.
The witch placed herself on the shore, threw breadcrumbs in, and went to endless trouble to entice the duck; but the duck did not let herself be enticed, and the old woman had to go home at night as she had come.
At this the girl and her sweetheart Roland resumed their natural shapes again, and they walked on the whole night until daybreak.
Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart Roland into a fiddler.
As they were now set free, Roland said: ‘Now I will go to my father and arrange for the wedding.’ ‘Then in the meantime I will stay here and wait for you,’ said the girl, ‘and that no one may recognize me, I will change myself into a red stone landmark.’ Then Roland went away, and the girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved.
But when Roland got home, he fell into the snares of another, who so fascinated him that he forgot the maiden.
The poor girl remained there a long time, but at length, as he did not return at all, she was sad, and changed herself into a flower, and thought: ‘Someone will surely come this way, and trample me down.’ It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it with him, and laid it away in his chest.
From that time forth, strange things happened in the shepherd’s house.
He could not conceive how this came to pass, for he never saw a human being in his house, and no one could have concealed himself in it.
He was certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at last he was so afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice.
The wise woman said: ‘There is some enchantment behind it, listen very early some morning if anything is moving in the room, and if you see anything, no matter what it is, throw a white cloth over it, and then the magic will be stopped.’ The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as day dawned, he saw the chest open, and the flower come out.
Instantly the transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him, who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to this time she had attended to his house-keeping.
She told him her story, and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but she answered: ‘No,’ for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart Roland, although he had deserted her.
Nevertheless, she promised not to go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.
And now the time drew near when Roland’s wedding was to be celebrated, and then, according to an old custom in the country, it was announced that all the girls were to be present at it, and sing in honour of the bridal pair.
When the faithful maiden heard of this, she grew so sad that she thought her heart would break, and she would not go thither, but the other girls came and took her.
But when she began her song, and it reached Roland’s ears, he sprang up and cried: ‘I know the voice, that is the true bride, I will have no other!’ Everything he had forgotten, and which had vanished from his mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart.
Then the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart Roland, and grief came to an end and joy began.
SNOWDROP It was the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were falling around, that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working at her window.
Then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red drops that sprinkled the white snow, and said, ‘Would that my little daughter may be as white as that snow, as red as that blood, and as black as this ebony windowframe!’ And so the little girl really did grow up; her skin was as white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as the blood, and her hair as black as ebony; and she was called Snowdrop.
But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who became queen, and was very beautiful, but so vain that she could not bear to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was.
Of all the ladies in the land, Who is fairest, tell me, who?’ And the glass had always answered: ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all the land.’ But Snowdrop grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven years old she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen herself.
Then poor Snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear; and the wild beasts roared about her, but none did her any harm.
Everything was spruce and neat in the cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth, and there were seven little plates, seven little loaves, and seven little glasses with wine in them; and seven knives and forks laid in order; and by the wall stood seven little beds.
Now they were seven little dwarfs, that lived among the mountains, and dug and searched for gold.
But the seventh saw Snowdrop, and called all his brethren to come and see her; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought their lamps to look at her, and said, ‘Good heavens! what a lovely child she is!’ And they were very glad to see her, and took care not to wake her; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs in turn, till the night was gone.
In the morning Snowdrop told them all her story; and they pitied her, and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and wash and knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and they would take good care of her.
And she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful than she was; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar, and went her way over the hills, to the place where the dwarfs dwelt.
Then she knocked at the door, and cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ Snowdrop looked out at the window, and said, ‘Good day, good woman! what have you to sell?’ ‘Good wares, fine wares,’ said she; ‘laces and bobbins of all colours.’ ‘I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a very good sort of body,’ thought Snowdrop, as she ran down and unbolted the door.
Let me lace them up with one of my nice new laces.’ Snowdrop did not dream of any mischief; so she stood before the old woman; but she set to work so nimbly, and pulled the lace so tight, that Snowdrop’s breath was stopped, and she fell down as if she were dead.
‘There’s an end to all thy beauty,’ said the spiteful queen, and went away home.
In the evening the seven dwarfs came home; and I need not say how grieved they were to see their faithful Snowdrop stretched out upon the ground, as if she was quite dead.
When she reached the dwarfs’ cottage, she knocked at the door, and cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ But Snowdrop said, ‘I dare not let anyone in.’ Then the queen said, ‘Only look at my beautiful combs!’ and gave her the poisoned one.
And it looked so pretty, that she took it up and put it into her hair to try it; but the moment it touched her head, the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless.
But by good luck the dwarfs came in very early that evening; and when they saw Snowdrop lying on the ground, they thought what had happened, and soon found the poisoned comb.
Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and shook with rage when she read the very same answer as before; and she said, ‘Snowdrop shall die, if it cost me my life.’ So she went by herself into her chamber, and got ready a poisoned apple: the outside looked very rosy and tempting, but whoever tasted it was sure to die.
Do you think it is poisoned?
Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the other.’ Now the apple was so made up that one side was good, though the other side was poisoned.
Then Snowdrop was much tempted to taste, for the apple looked so very nice; and when she saw the old woman eat, she could wait no longer.
But she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth, when she fell down dead upon the ground.
When evening came, and the dwarfs had gone home, they found Snowdrop lying on the ground: no breath came from her lips, and they were afraid that she was quite dead.
And the birds of the air came too, and bemoaned Snowdrop; and first of all came an owl, and then a raven, and at last a dove, and sat by her side.
And thus Snowdrop lay for a long, long time, and still only looked as though she was asleep; for she was even now as white as snow, and as red as blood, and as black as ebony.
At last a prince came and called at the dwarfs’ house; and he saw Snowdrop, and read what was written in golden letters.
To the feast was asked, among the rest, Snowdrop’s old enemy the queen; and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes, she looked in the glass and said: ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
Of all the ladies in the land, Who is fairest, tell me, who?’ And the glass answered: ‘Thou, lady, art loveliest here, I ween; But lovelier far is the new-made queen.’ When she heard this she started with rage; but her envy and curiosity were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the bride.
And when she got there, and saw that it was no other than Snowdrop, who, as she thought, had been dead a long while, she choked with rage, and fell down and died: but Snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily over that land many, many years; and sometimes they went up into the mountains, and paid a visit to the little dwarfs, who had been so kind to Snowdrop in her time of need.
THE PINK There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.
Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to bestow on her a son or a daughter.
Then an angel from heaven came to her and said: ‘Be at rest, you shall have a son with the power of wishing, so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall he have.’ Then she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings, and when the time was come she gave birth to a son, and the king was filled with gladness.
It happened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying in her arms and she fell asleep.
When the king saw the blood on her apron, he believed this, fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built, in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into it, and walled up.
After a while the cook said to him: ‘It is not well for you to be so alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.’ Then the king’s son wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and was more beautiful than any painter could have painted her.
The two played together, and loved each other with all their hearts, and the old cook went out hunting like a nobleman.
The thought occurred to him, however, that the king’s son might some day wish to be with his father, and thus bring him into great peril.
Now will I pronounce thy sentence.
The king’s son remained there a short while longer, and he thought of his mother, and wondered if she were still alive.
At length he said to the maiden: ‘I will go home to my own country; if you will go with me, I will provide for you.’ ‘Ah,’ she replied, ‘the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strange land where I am unknown?’ As she did not seem quite willing, and as they could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might be changed into a beautiful pink, and took her with him.
He went to the tower in which his mother was confined, and as it was so high, he wished for a ladder which would reach up to the very top.
Then he mounted up and looked inside, and cried: ‘Beloved mother, Lady Queen, are you still alive, or are you dead?’ She answered: ‘I have just eaten, and am still satisfied,’ for she thought the angels were there.
Said he: ‘I am your dear son, whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from your arms; but I am alive still, and will soon set you free.’ Then he descended again, and went to his father, and caused himself to be announced as a strange huntsman, and asked if he could offer him service.
The king said yes, if he was skilful and could get game for him, he should come to him, but that deer had never taken up their quarters in any part of the district or country.
Then the huntsman promised to procure as much game for him as he could possibly use at the royal table.
So he summoned all the huntsmen together, and bade them go out into the forest with him.
And he went with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end where he stationed himself, and began to wish.
Two hundred deer and more came running inside the circle at once, and the huntsmen shot them.
Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entire household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast.
When they were all assembled together, he said to the huntsman: ‘As you are so clever, you shall sit by me.’ He replied: ‘Lord King, your majesty must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.’ But the king insisted on it, and said: ‘You shall sit by me,’ until he did it.
Whilst he was sitting there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the king’s principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask how it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alive still, or had perished.
Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began, and said: ‘Your majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen living in the tower?
On this the huntsman asked the king if he would like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into the form of the cook, in which he stood immediately, with his white apron, and his knife by his side.
Then the son said: ‘Now will I show her to you in her own form,’ and wished that she might become a maiden, and she stood there looking so beautiful that no painter could have made her look more so.
And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the tower, to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table.
But when she was led in she ate nothing, and said: ‘The gracious and merciful God who has supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.’ She lived three days more, and then died happily, and when she was buried, the two white doves which had brought her food to the tower, and were angels of heaven, followed her body and seated themselves on her grave.
The aged king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces, but grief consumed the king’s own heart, and he soon died.
His son married the beautiful maiden whom he had brought with him as a flower in his pocket, and whether they are still alive or not, is known to God.
CLEVER ELSIE There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie.
And when she had grown up her father said: ‘We will get her married.’ ‘Yes,’ said the mother, ‘if only someone would come who would have her.’ At length a man came from a distance and wooed her, who was called Hans; but he stipulated that Clever Elsie should be really smart.
When she was below she fetched herself a chair, and set it before the barrel so that she had no need to stoop, and did not hurt her back or do herself any unexpected injury.
Then she placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and while the beer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but looked up at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw a pick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentally left there.
Then Clever Elsie began to weep and said: ‘If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar here to draw beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then she sat and wept and screamed with all the strength of her body, over the misfortune which lay before her.
Those upstairs waited for the drink, but Clever Elsie still did not come.
Then the woman said to the servant: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie is.’ The maid went and found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly.
‘Ah,’ she answered, ‘have I not reason to weep?
If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on his head, and kill him.’ Then said the maid: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down beside her and began loudly to weep over the misfortune.
After a while, as the maid did not come back, and those upstairs were thirsty for the beer, the man said to the boy: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie and the girl are.’ The boy went down, and there sat Clever Elsie and the girl both weeping together.
If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then said the boy: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down by her, and likewise began to howl loudly.
Then said the mother likewise: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down and wept with them.
The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone for a long time; then as no one would come back he thought: ‘They must be waiting for me below: I too must go there and see what they are about.’ When he got down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting quite piteously, each out-doing the other.
‘What misfortune has happened then?’ asked he.
Oh, I will eat first.’ Then she drank her cup of broth and when she was fully satisfied, she once more said: ‘What shall I do?
Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come; then said he: ‘What a clever Elsie I have; she is so industrious that she does not even come home to eat.’ But when evening came and she still stayed away, Hans went out to see what she had cut, but nothing was cut, and she was lying among the corn asleep.
Then Hans hastened home and brought a fowler’s net with little bells and hung it round about her, and she still went on sleeping.
At length, when it was quite dark, Clever Elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling all round about her, and the bells rang at each step which she took.
Then it is not I,’ and went to another door; but when the people heard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and she could get in nowhere.
THE MISER IN THE BUSH A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for him three years, without having been paid any wages.
At last it came into the man’s head that he would not go on thus without pay any longer; so he went to his master, and said, ‘I have worked hard for you a long time, I will trust to you to give me what I deserve to have for my trouble.’ The farmer was a sad miser, and knew that his man was very simple-hearted; so he took out threepence, and gave him for every year’s service a penny.
I have saved up my three years’ earnings and have it all safe in my pocket.’ ‘How much may it come to?’ said the little man.
‘Full threepence,’ replied the countryman.
Our honest friend journeyed on his way too; and if he was merry before, he was now ten times more so.
He had not gone far before he met an old miser: close by them stood a tree, and on the topmost twig sat a thrush singing away most joyfully.
‘Oh, what a pretty bird!’ said the miser; ‘I would give a great deal of money to have such a one.’ ‘If that’s all,’ said the countryman, ‘I will soon bring it down.’ Then he took up his bow, and down fell the thrush into the bushes at the foot of the tree.
The miser crept into the bush to find it; but directly he had got into the middle, his companion took up his fiddle and played away, and the miser began to dance and spring about, capering higher and higher in the air.
The thorns soon began to tear his clothes till they all hung in rags about him, and he himself was all scratched and wounded, so that the blood ran down.
Then the miser began to beg and promise, and offered money for his liberty; but he did not come up to the musician’s price for some time, and he danced him along brisker and brisker, and the miser bid higher and higher, till at last he offered a round hundred of florins that he had in his purse, and had just gained by cheating some poor fellow.
When the countryman saw so much money, he said, ‘I will agree to your proposal.’ So he took the purse, put up his fiddle, and travelled on very pleased with his bargain.
Meanwhile the miser crept out of the bush half-naked and in a piteous plight, and began to ponder how he should take his revenge, and serve his late companion some trick.
At last he went to the judge, and complained that a rascal had robbed him of his money, and beaten him into the bargain; and that the fellow who did it carried a bow at his back and a fiddle hung round his neck.
Then the judge sent out his officers to bring up the accused wherever they should find him; and he was soon caught and brought up to be tried.
‘No, you gave it me for playing a tune to you.’ said the countryman; but the judge told him that was not likely, and cut the matter short by ordering him off to the gallows.
So away he was taken; but as he stood on the steps he said, ‘My Lord Judge, grant me one last request.’ ‘Anything but thy life,’ replied the other.
Then the miser said, ‘Bind me fast, bind me fast, for pity’s sake.’ But the countryman seized his fiddle, and struck up a tune, and at the first note judge, clerks, and jailer were in motion; all began capering, and no one could hold the miser.
At the second note the hangman let his prisoner go, and danced also, and by the time he had played the first bar of the tune, all were dancing together--judge, court, and miser, and all the people who had followed to look on.
At first the thing was merry and pleasant enough; but when it had gone on a while, and there seemed to be no end of playing or dancing, they began to cry out, and beg him to leave off; but he stopped not a whit the more for their entreaties, till the judge not only gave him his life, but promised to return him the hundred florins.
Then he called to the miser, and said, ‘Tell us now, you vagabond, where you got that gold, or I shall play on for your amusement only,’ ‘I stole it,’ said the miser in the presence of all the people; ‘I acknowledge that I stole it, and that you earned it fairly.’ Then the countryman stopped his fiddle, and left the miser to take his place at the gallows.
ASHPUTTEL The wife of a rich man fell sick; and when she felt that her end drew nigh, she called her only daughter to her bed-side, and said, ‘Always be a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you.’ Soon afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the garden; and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept, and was always good and kind to all about her.
And the snow fell and spread a beautiful white covering over the grave; but by the time the spring came, and the sun had melted it away again, her father had married another wife.
This new wife had two daughters of her own, that she brought home with her; they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it was now a sorry time for the poor little girl.
There she was forced to do hard work; to rise early before daylight, to bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash.
In the evening when she was tired, she had no bed to lie down on, but was made to lie by the hearth among the ashes; and as this, of course, made her always dusty and dirty, they called her Ashputtel.
It happened once that the father was going to the fair, and asked his wife’s daughters what he should bring them.
‘Fine clothes,’ said the first; ‘Pearls and diamonds,’ cried the second.
‘Now, child,’ said he to his own daughter, ‘what will you have?’ ‘The first twig, dear father, that brushes against your hat when you turn your face to come homewards,’ said she.
Then he bought for the first two the fine clothes and pearls and diamonds they had asked for: and on his way home, as he rode through a green copse, a hazel twig brushed against him, and almost pushed off his hat: so he broke it off and brought it away; and when he got home he gave it to his daughter.
Three times every day she went to it and cried; and soon a little bird came and built its nest upon the tree, and talked with her, and watched over her, and brought her whatever she wished for.
Now it happened that the king of that land held a feast, which was to last three days; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose a bride for himself.
‘You, Ashputtel!’ said she; ‘you who have nothing to wear, no clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to the ball?
Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay, Hither, hither, haste away!
Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’ Then first came two white doves, flying in at the kitchen window; next came two turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under heaven, chirping and fluttering in: and they flew down into the ashes.
Then Ashputtel brought the dish to her mother, overjoyed at the thought that now she should go to the ball.
But the mother said, ‘No, no! you slut, you have no clothes, and cannot dance; you shall not go.’ And when Ashputtel begged very hard to go, she said, ‘If you can in one hour’s time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes, you shall go too.’ And thus she thought she should at least get rid of her.
Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’ Then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window; next came two turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under heaven, chirping and hopping about.
And then Ashputtel took the dishes to her mother, rejoicing to think that she should now go to the ball.
But her mother said, ‘It is all of no use, you cannot go; you have no clothes, and cannot dance, and you would only put us to shame’: and off she went with her two daughters to the ball.
Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Ashputtel went sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out: ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree, Gold and silver over me!’ Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree, and brought a gold and silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them on, and followed her sisters to the feast.
But they did not know her, and thought it must be some strange princess, she looked so fine and beautiful in her rich clothes; and they never once thought of Ashputtel, taking it for granted that she was safe at home in the dirt.
But she slipped away from him, unawares, and ran off towards home; and as the prince followed her, she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut the door.
But when they had broken open the door they found no one within; and as they came back into the house, Ashputtel was lying, as she always did, in her dirty frock by the ashes, and her dim little lamp was burning in the chimney.
For she had run as quickly as she could through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree, and had there taken off her beautiful clothes, and put them beneath the tree, that the bird might carry them away, and had lain down again amid the ashes in her little grey frock.
The next day when the feast was again held, and her father, mother, and sisters were gone, Ashputtel went to the hazel-tree, and said: ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree, Gold and silver over me!’ And the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she had worn the day before.
In this garden stood a fine large pear-tree full of ripe fruit; and Ashputtel, not knowing where to hide herself, jumped up into it without being seen.
Then the king’s son lost sight of her, and could not find out where she was gone, but waited till her father came home, and said to him, ‘The unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away, and I think she must have sprung into the pear-tree.’ The father thought to himself, ‘Can it be Ashputtel?’ So he had an axe brought; and they cut down the tree, but found no one upon it.
And when they came back into the kitchen, there lay Ashputtel among the ashes; for she had slipped down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful clothes back to the bird at the hazel-tree, and then put on her little grey frock.
The prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king his father, and said, ‘I will take for my wife the lady that this golden slipper fits.’ Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear it; for they had beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the golden slipper.
But her great toe could not go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small for her.
Then the mother gave her a knife, and said, ‘Never mind, cut it off; when you are queen you will not care about toes; you will not want to walk.’ So the silly girl cut off her great toe, and thus squeezed on the shoe, and went to the king’s son.
Then he took her for his bride, and set her beside him on his horse, and rode away with her homewards.
But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that Ashputtel had planted; and on the branch sat a little dove singing: ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
Prince! prince! look again for thy bride, For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’ Then the prince got down and looked at her foot; and he saw, by the blood that streamed from it, what a trick she had played him.
But her mother squeezed it in till the blood came, and took her to the king’s son: and he set her as his bride by his side on his horse, and rode away with her.
Prince! prince! look again for thy bride, For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’ Then he looked down, and saw that the blood streamed so much from the shoe, that her white stockings were quite red.
‘This is not the true bride,’ said he to the father; ‘have you no other daughters?’ ‘No,’ said he; ‘there is only a little dirty Ashputtel here, the child of my first wife; I am sure she cannot be the bride.’ The prince told him to send her.
But the mother said, ‘No, no, she is much too dirty; she will not dare to show herself.’ However, the prince would have her come; and she first washed her face and hands, and then went in and curtsied to him, and he reached her the golden slipper.
And when he drew near and looked at her face he knew her, and said, ‘This is the right bride.’ But the mother and both the sisters were frightened, and turned pale with anger as he took Ashputtel on his horse, and rode away with her.
Princess! the shoe was made for you!
Prince! prince! take home thy bride, For she is the true one that sits by thy side!’ And when the dove had done its song, it came flying, and perched upon her right shoulder, and so went home with her.
This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who took away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help carrying the dish into his room.
When he had carefully locked the door, he lifted up the cover, and saw a white snake lying on the dish.
But when he saw it he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it, so he cut of a little bit and put it into his mouth.
No sooner had it touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices outside his window.
He went and listened, and then noticed that it was the sparrows who were chattering together, and telling one another of all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields and woods.
Eating the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals.
Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty servant, who was allowed to go everywhere.
The king ordered the man to be brought before him, and threatened with angry words that unless he could before the morrow point out the thief, he himself should be looked upon as guilty and executed.
In vain he declared his innocence; he was dismissed with no better answer.
In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought how to help himself out of his trouble.
Now some ducks were sitting together quietly by a brook and taking their rest; and, whilst they were making their feathers smooth with their bills, they were having a confidential conversation together.
The servant stood by and listened.
The servant could now easily prove his innocence; and the king, to make amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favour, and promised him the best place in the court that he could wish for.
The servant refused everything, and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling, as he had a mind to see the world and go about a little.
Now, though it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart, he got off his horse and put the three prisoners back into the water.
They leapt with delight, put out their heads, and cried to him: ‘We will remember you and repay you for saving us!’ He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in the sand at his feet.
He listened, and heard an ant-king complain: ‘Why cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep off our bodies?
That stupid horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been treading down my people without mercy!’ So he turned on to a side path and the ant-king cried out to him: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves another!’ The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing by their nest, and throwing out their young ones.
‘Out with you, you idle, good-for-nothing creatures!’ cried they; ‘we cannot find food for you any longer; you are big enough, and can provide for yourselves.’ But the poor young ravens lay upon the ground, flapping their wings, and crying: ‘Oh, what helpless chicks we are!
We must shift for ourselves, and yet we cannot fly!
What can we do, but lie here and starve?’ So the good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword, and gave it to them for food.
Then they came hopping up to it, satisfied their hunger, and cried: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves another!’ And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a long way, he came to a large city.
So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into it, before his eyes; then the king ordered him to fetch this ring up from the bottom of the sea, and added: ‘If you come up again without it you will be thrown in again and again until you perish amid the waves.’ All the people grieved for the handsome youth; then they went away, leaving him alone by the sea.
He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when suddenly he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and they were the very fishes whose lives he had saved.
Full of joy he took it to the king and expected that he would grant him the promised reward.
But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal in birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform another task.
But as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden he saw all the ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single grain was missing.
The ant-king had come in the night with thousands and thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry picked up all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.
Presently the king’s daughter herself came down into the garden, and was amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given him.
But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said: ‘Although he has performed both the tasks, he shall not be my husband until he had brought me an apple from the Tree of Life.’ The youth did not know where the Tree of Life stood, but he set out, and would have gone on for ever, as long as his legs would carry him, though he had no hope of finding it.
After he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to a wood, and lay down under a tree to sleep.
But he heard a rustling in the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand.
They cut the Apple of Life in two and ate it together; and then her heart became full of love for him, and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.
THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and loved them with all the love of a mother for her children.
So she called all seven to her and said: ‘Dear children, I have to go into the forest, be on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he will devour you all--skin, hair, and everything.
The wretch often disguises himself, but you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black feet.’ The kids said: ‘Dear mother, we will take good care of ourselves; you may go away without any anxiety.’ Then the old one bleated, and went on her way with an easy mind.
It was not long before someone knocked at the house-door and called: ‘Open the door, dear children; your mother is here, and has brought something back with her for each of you.’ But the little kids knew that it was the wolf, by the rough voice.
She has a soft, pleasant voice, but your voice is rough; you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf went away to a shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this and made his voice soft with it.
They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves.
One sprang under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case.
But the wolf found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after the other he swallowed them down his throat.
The youngest, who was in the clock-case, was the only one he did not find.
When the wolf had satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and began to sleep.
Soon afterwards the old goat came home again from the forest.
She sought her children, but they were nowhere to be found.
She called them one after another by name, but no one answered.
At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice cried: ‘Dear mother, I am in the clock-case.’ She took the kid out, and it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others.
Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.
At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with her.
When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree and snored so loud that the branches shook.
She looked at him on every side and saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged belly.
What rejoicing there was!
They embraced their dear mother, and jumped like a tailor at his wedding.
The mother, however, said: ‘Now go and look for some big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast’s stomach with them while he is still asleep.’ Then the seven kids dragged the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them into this stomach as they could get in; and the mother sewed him up again in the greatest haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once stirred.
I thought ‘twas six kids, But it feels like big stones.’ And when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the heavy stones made him fall in, and he drowned miserably.
THE QUEEN BEE Two kings’ sons once upon a time went into the world to seek their fortunes; but they soon fell into a wasteful foolish way of living, so that they could not return home again.
Then their brother, who was a little insignificant dwarf, went out to seek for his brothers: but when he had found them they only laughed at him, to think that he, who was so young and simple, should try to travel through the world, when they, who were so much wiser, had been unable to get on.
However, they all set out on their journey together, and came at last to an ant-hill.
The two elder brothers would have pulled it down, in order to see how the poor ants in their fright would run about and carry off their eggs.
But the little dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, I will not suffer you to trouble them.’ So on they went, and came to a lake where many many ducks were swimming about.
The two brothers wanted to catch two, and roast them.
But the dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, you shall not kill them.’ Next they came to a bees’-nest in a hollow tree, and there was so much honey that it ran down the trunk; and the two brothers wanted to light a fire under the tree and kill the bees, so as to get their honey.
But the dwarf held them back, and said, ‘Let the pretty insects enjoy themselves, I cannot let you burn them.’ At length the three brothers came to a castle: and as they passed by the stables they saw fine horses standing there, but all were of marble, and no man was to be seen.
He said nothing, but took hold of them and led them to a beautiful table covered with all sorts of good things: and when they had eaten and drunk, he showed each of them to a bed-chamber.
The next morning he came to the eldest and took him to a marble table, where there were three tablets, containing an account of the means by which the castle might be disenchanted.
The next day the second brother undertook the task; but he succeeded no better than the first; for he could only find the second hundred of the pearls; and therefore he too was turned into stone.
At last came the little dwarf’s turn; and he looked in the moss; but it was so hard to find the pearls, and the job was so tiresome!--so he sat down upon a stone and cried.
And as he sat there, the king of the ants (whose life he had saved) came to help him, with five thousand ants; and it was not long before they had found all the pearls and laid them in a heap.
The second tablet said: ‘The key of the princess’s bed-chamber must be fished up out of the lake.’ And as the dwarf came to the brink of it, he saw the two ducks whose lives he had saved swimming about; and they dived down and soon brought in the key from the bottom.
It was to choose out the youngest and the best of the king’s three daughters.
Now they were all beautiful, and all exactly alike: but he was told that the eldest had eaten a piece of sugar, the next some sweet syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey; so he was to guess which it was that had eaten the honey.
Then came the queen of the bees, who had been saved by the little dwarf from the fire, and she tried the lips of all three; but at last she sat upon the lips of the one that had eaten the honey: and so the dwarf knew which was the youngest.
And the dwarf married the youngest and the best of the princesses, and was king after her father’s death; but his two brothers married the other two sisters.
THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER There was once a shoemaker, who worked very hard and was very honest: but still he could not earn enough to live upon; and at last all he had in the world was gone, save just leather enough to make one pair of shoes.
His conscience was clear and his heart light amidst all his troubles; so he went peaceably to bed, left all his cares to Heaven, and soon fell asleep.
The good man knew not what to say or think at such an odd thing happening.
He looked at the workmanship; there was not one false stitch in the whole job; all was so neat and true, that it was quite a masterpiece.
The same day a customer came in, and the shoes suited him so well that he willingly paid a price higher than usual for them; and the poor shoemaker, with the money, bought leather enough to make two pairs more.
Soon in came buyers, who paid him handsomely for his goods, so that he bought leather enough for four pair more.
He cut out the work again overnight and found it done in the morning, as before; and so it went on for some time: what was got ready in the evening was always done by daybreak, and the good man soon became thriving and well off again.
One evening, about Christmas-time, as he and his wife were sitting over the fire chatting together, he said to her, ‘I should like to sit up and watch tonight, that we may see who it is that comes and does my work for me.’ The wife liked the thought; so they left a light burning, and hid themselves in a corner of the room, behind a curtain that was hung up there, and watched what would happen.
As soon as it was midnight, there came in two little naked dwarfs; and they sat themselves upon the shoemaker’s bench, took up all the work that was cut out, and began to ply with their little fingers, stitching and rapping and tapping away at such a rate, that the shoemaker was all wonder, and could not take his eyes off them.
This was long before daybreak; and then they bustled away as quick as lightning.
The next day the wife said to the shoemaker.
‘These little wights have made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them, and do them a good turn if we can.
About midnight in they came, dancing and skipping, hopped round the room, and then went to sit down to their work as usual; but when they saw the clothes lying for them, they laughed and chuckled, and seemed mightily delighted.
Then they dressed themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and danced and capered and sprang about, as merry as could be; till at last they danced out at the door, and away over the green.
The good couple saw them no more; but everything went well with them from that time forward, as long as they lived.
THE JUNIPER-TREE Long, long ago, some two thousand years or so, there lived a rich man with a good and beautiful wife.
They loved each other dearly, but sorrowed much that they had no children.
So greatly did they desire to have one, that the wife prayed for it day and night, but still they remained childless.
‘Ah,’ sighed the woman heavily, ‘if I had but a child, as red as blood and as white as snow,’ and as she spoke the words, her heart grew light within her, and it seemed to her that her wish was granted, and she returned to the house feeling glad and comforted.
A month passed, and the snow had all disappeared; then another month went by, and all the earth was green.
So the months followed one another, and first the trees budded in the woods, and soon the green branches grew thickly intertwined, and then the blossoms began to fall.
Once again the wife stood under the juniper-tree, and it was so full of sweet scent that her heart leaped for joy, and she was so overcome with her happiness, that she fell on her knees.
Presently the fruit became round and firm, and she was glad and at peace; but when they were fully ripe she picked the berries and ate eagerly of them, and then she grew sad and ill.
‘If I die, bury me under the juniper-tree.’ Then she felt comforted and happy again, and before another month had passed she had a little child, and when she saw that it was as white as snow and as red as blood, her joy was so great that she died.
Her husband buried her under the juniper-tree, and wept bitterly for her.
By degrees, however, his sorrow grew less, and although at times he still grieved over his loss, he was able to go about as usual, and later on he married again.
He now had a little daughter born to him; the child of his first wife was a boy, who was as red as blood and as white as snow.
The mother loved her daughter very much, and when she looked at her and then looked at the boy, it pierced her heart to think that he would always stand in the way of her own child, and she was continually thinking how she could get the whole of the property for her.
This evil thought took possession of her more and more, and made her behave very unkindly to the boy.
She drove him from place to place with cuffings and buffetings, so that the poor child went about in fear, and had no peace from the time he left school to the time he went back.
One day the little daughter came running to her mother in the store-room, and said, ‘Mother, give me an apple.’ ‘Yes, my child,’ said the wife, and she gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest; the chest had a very heavy lid and a large iron lock.
‘Mother,’ said the boy, ‘how dreadful you look!
‘Come with me,’ she said, and she lifted up the lid of the chest; ‘take one out for yourself.’ And as he bent over to do so, the evil spirit urged her, and crash! down went the lid, and off went the little boy’s head.
Then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done.
So she went upstairs to her room, and took a white handkerchief out of her top drawer; then she set the boy’s head again on his shoulders, and bound it with the handkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and placed him on a chair by the door with an apple in his hand.
She was so terrified at this, that she ran crying and screaming to her mother.
‘What have you done!’ said her mother, ‘but no one must know about it, so you must keep silence; what is done can’t be undone; we will make him into puddings.’ And she took the little boy and cut him up, made him into puddings, and put him in the pot.
Presently the father came home and sat down to his dinner; he asked, ‘Where is my son?’ The mother said nothing, but gave him a large dish of black pudding, and Marleen still wept without ceasing.
Little Marleen went upstairs and took her best silk handkerchief out of her bottom drawer, and in it she wrapped all the bones from under the table and carried them outside, and all the time she did nothing but weep.
And now the juniper-tree began to move, and the branches waved backwards and forwards, first away from one another, and then together again, as it might be someone clapping their hands for joy.
After this a mist came round the tree, and in the midst of it there was a burning as of fire, and out of the fire there flew a beautiful bird, that rose high into the air, singing magnificently, and when it could no more be seen, the juniper-tree stood there as before, and the silk handkerchief and the bones were gone.
Little Marleen now felt as lighthearted and happy as if her brother were still alive, and she went back to the house and sat down cheerfully to the table and ate.
He thought it so beautiful that he got up and ran out, and as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his slippers.
But he ran on into the middle of the street, with a slipper on one foot and a sock on the other; he still had on his apron, and still held the gold chain and the pincers in his hands, and so he stood gazing up at the bird, while the sun came shining brightly down on the street.
‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing!
Give that gold chain, and I will sing it you again.’ ‘Here is the chain, take it,’ said the goldsmith.
‘Bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘sing me that song again.’ ‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; you must give me something.’ ‘Wife,’ said the man, ‘go into the garret; on the upper shelf you will see a pair of red shoes; bring them to me.’ The wife went in and fetched the shoes.
And now only one, Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’ then he looked up and the last one had left off work.
‘Bird,’ he said, ‘what a beautiful song that is you sing!
‘How lighthearted I feel,’ said the father, ‘so pleased and cheerful.’ ‘And I,’ said the mother, ‘I feel so uneasy, as if a heavy thunderstorm were coming.’ But little Marleen sat and wept and wept.
She laid her kerchief over me, And took my bones that they might lie Underneath the juniper-tree Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’ With that the bird let fall the gold chain, and it fell just round the man’s neck, so that it fitted him exactly.
He went inside, and said, ‘See, what a splendid bird that is; he has given me this beautiful gold chain, and looks so beautiful himself.’ But the wife was in such fear and trouble, that she fell on the floor, and her cap fell from her head.
Then the bird began again: ‘My mother killed her little son; ‘Ah me!’ cried the wife, ‘if I were but a thousand feet beneath the earth, that I might not hear that song.’ My father grieved when I was gone; then the woman fell down again as if dead.
My sister loved me best of all; ‘Well,’ said little Marleen, ‘I will go out too and see if the bird will give me anything.’ So she went out.
She laid her kerchief over me, And took my bones that they might lie and he threw down the shoes to her, Underneath the juniper-tree Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’ And she now felt quite happy and lighthearted; she put on the shoes and danced and jumped about in them.
‘I was so miserable,’ she said, ‘when I came out, but that has all passed away; that is indeed a splendid bird, and he has given me a pair of red shoes.’ The wife sprang up, with her hair standing out from her head like flames of fire.
‘Then I will go out too,’ she said, ‘and see if it will lighten my misery, for I feel as if the world were coming to an end.’ But as she crossed the threshold, crash! the bird threw the millstone down on her head, and she was crushed to death.
The father and little Marleen heard the sound and ran out, but they only saw mist and flame and fire rising from the spot, and when these had passed, there stood the little brother, and he took the father and little Marleen by the hand; then they all three rejoiced, and went inside together and sat down to their dinners and ate.
THE TURNIP There were two brothers who were both soldiers; the one was rich and the other poor.
The poor man thought he would try to better himself; so, pulling off his red coat, he became a gardener, and dug his ground well, and sowed turnips.
At last it was so big that it filled a cart, and two oxen could hardly draw it; and the gardener knew not what in the world to do with it, nor whether it would be a blessing or a curse to him.
‘What a wonderful thing!’ said the king; ‘I have seen many strange things, but such a monster as this I never saw.
If so, you are a true child of fortune.’ ‘Ah, no!’ answered the gardener, ‘I am no child of fortune; I am a poor soldier, who never could get enough to live upon; so I laid aside my red coat, and set to work, tilling the ground.
I have a brother, who is rich, and your majesty knows him well, and all the world knows him; but because I am poor, everybody forgets me.’ The king then took pity on him, and said, ‘You shall be poor no longer.
I will give you so much that you shall be even richer than your brother.’ Then he gave him gold and lands and flocks, and made him so rich that his brother’s fortune could not at all be compared with his.
When the brother heard of all this, and how a turnip had made the gardener so rich, he envied him sorely, and bethought himself how he could contrive to get the same good fortune for himself.
However, he determined to manage more cleverly than his brother, and got together a rich present of gold and fine horses for the king; and thought he must have a much larger gift in return; for if his brother had received so much for only a turnip, what must his present be worth?
The king took the gift very graciously, and said he knew not what to give in return more valuable and wonderful than the great turnip; so the soldier was forced to put it into a cart, and drag it home with him.
When he reached home, he knew not upon whom to vent his rage and spite; and at length wicked thoughts came into his head, and he resolved to kill his brother.
But whilst they were getting all ready, they heard the trampling of a horse at a distance, which so frightened them that they pushed their prisoner neck and shoulders together into a sack, and swung him up by a cord to the tree, where they left him dangling, and ran away.
Meantime he worked and worked away, till he made a hole large enough to put out his head.
When the horseman came up, he proved to be a student, a merry fellow, who was journeying along on his nag, and singing as he went.
Compared to this seat, all the learning of the schools is as empty air.
Here I discern the signs and motions of the heavens and the stars; the laws that control the winds; the number of the sands on the seashore; the healing of the sick; the virtues of all simples, of birds, and of precious stones.
Wert thou but once here, my friend, though wouldst feel and own the power of knowledge.
Then the other pretended to give way, and said, ‘Thou must let the sack of wisdom descend, by untying yonder cord, and then thou shalt enter.’ So the student let him down, opened the sack, and set him free.
‘Now then,’ cried he, ‘let me ascend quickly.’ As he began to put himself into the sack heels first, ‘Wait a while,’ said the gardener, ‘that is not the way.’ Then he pushed him in head first, tied up the sack, and soon swung up the searcher after wisdom dangling in the air.
Rest there in peace, till thou art a wiser man than thou wert.’ So saying, he trotted off on the student’s nag, and left the poor fellow to gather wisdom till somebody should come and let him down.
CLEVER HANS The mother of Hans said: ‘Whither away, Hans?’ Hans answered: ‘To Gretel.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh, I’ll behave well.
What do you bring that is good?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want to have something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a needle, Hans says: ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the cart home.
Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing; had something given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a needle.’ ‘Where is the needle, Hans?’ ‘Stuck in the hay-cart.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans.
I want to have something given to me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a knife.
Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ What did you take her?’ ‘Took her nothing, she gave me something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a knife.’ ‘Where is the knife, Hans?’ ‘Stuck in my sleeve.’ ‘That’s ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in your pocket.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’ ‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh, I’ll behave well.
What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a young goat.
When he gets home it is suffocated.
What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a piece of bacon.
When he gets home, he has the rope in his hand, and there is no longer anything hanging on to it.
‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans, What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, but would have something given.’ Gretel presents Hans with a calf.
What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, but would have something given.’ Gretel says to Hans: ‘I will go with you.’ Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack, and binds her fast.
THE THREE LANGUAGES An aged count once lived in Switzerland, who had an only son, but he was stupid, and could learn nothing.
You must go from hence, I will give you into the care of a celebrated master, who shall see what he can do with you.’ The youth was sent into a strange town, and remained a whole year with the master.
I will send you into another town, to another master.’ The youth was taken thither, and stayed a year with this master likewise.
When he came back the father again asked: ‘My son, what have you learnt?’ He answered: ‘Father, I have learnt what the birds say.’ Then the father fell into a rage and said: ‘Oh, you lost man, you have spent the precious time and learnt nothing; are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes?
The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress where he begged for a night’s lodging.
The youth, however, was without fear, and said: ‘Just let me go down to the barking dogs, and give me something that I can throw to them; they will do nothing to harm me.’ As he himself would have it so, they gave him some food for the wild animals, and led him down to the tower.
When he went inside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged their tails quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and did not hurt one hair of his head.
Next morning, to the astonishment of everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and said to the lord of the castle: ‘The dogs have revealed to me, in their own language, why they dwell there, and bring evil on the land.
They are bewitched, and are obliged to watch over a great treasure which is below in the tower, and they can have no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise learnt, from their discourse, how that is to be done.’ Then all who heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him as a son if he accomplished it successfully.
He went down again, and as he knew what he had to do, he did it thoroughly, and brought a chest full of gold out with him.
The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth heard no more; they had disappeared, and the country was freed from the trouble.
On the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number of frogs were sitting croaking.
He listened to them, and when he became aware of what they were saying, he grew very thoughtful and sad.
At last he arrived in Rome, where the Pope had just died, and there was great doubt among the cardinals as to whom they should appoint as his successor.
They at length agreed that the person should be chosen as pope who should be distinguished by some divine and miraculous token.
And just as that was decided on, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there.
The ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above, and asked him on the spot if he would be pope.
He was undecided, and knew not if he were worthy of this, but the doves counselled him to do it, and at length he said yes.
Then was he anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled what he had heard from the frogs on his way, which had so affected him, that he was to be his Holiness the Pope.
Then he had to sing a mass, and did not know one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on his shoulders, and said it all in his ear.
THE FOX AND THE CAT It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought to herself: ‘He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed in the world,’ she spoke to him in a friendly way.
How are you getting on in these hard times?’ The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would give any answer or not.
At last he said: ‘Oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you piebald fool, you hungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of?
How many arts do you understand?’ ‘I understand but one,’ replied the cat, modestly.
‘When the hounds are following me, I can spring into a tree and save myself.’ ‘Is that all?’ said the fox.
The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down at the top of it, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her.
Had you been able to climb like me, you would not have lost your life.’ THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS ‘Dear children,’ said a poor man to his four sons, ‘I have nothing to give you; you must go out into the wide world and try your luck.
Begin by learning some craft or another, and see how you can get on.’ So the four brothers took their walking-sticks in their hands, and their little bundles on their shoulders, and after bidding their father goodbye, went all out at the gate together.
When they had got on some way they came to four crossways, each leading to a different country.
Then the eldest said, ‘Here we must part; but this day four years we will come back to this spot, and in the meantime each must try what he can do for himself.’ So each brother went his way; and as the eldest was hastening on a man met him, and asked him where he was going, and what he wanted.
‘I am going to try my luck in the world, and should like to begin by learning some art or trade,’ answered he.
Then the father took the eggs, and put one on each corner of the table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, ‘Cut all the eggs in two pieces at one shot.’ The huntsman took up his bow, and at one shot struck all the five eggs as his father wished.
‘Now comes your turn,’ said he to the young tailor; ‘sew the eggs and the young birds in them together again, so neatly that the shot shall have done them no harm.’ Then the tailor took his needle, and sewed the eggs as he was told; and when he had done, the thief was sent to take them back to the nest, and put them under the bird without its knowing it.
Then she went on sitting, and hatched them: and in a few days they crawled out, and had only a little red streak across their necks, where the tailor had sewn them together.
‘Well done, sons!’ said the old man; ‘you have made good use of your time, and learnt something worth the knowing; but I am sure I do not know which ought to have the prize.
Oh, that a time might soon come for you to turn your skill to some account!’ Not long after this there was a great bustle in the country; for the king’s daughter had been carried off by a mighty dragon, and the king mourned over his loss day and night, and made it known that whoever brought her back to him should have her for a wife.
Then the four brothers said to each other, ‘Here is a chance for us; let us try what we can do.’ And they agreed to see whether they could not set the princess free.
‘I will soon find out where she is, however,’ said the star-gazer, as he looked through his glass; and he soon cried out, ‘I see her afar off, sitting upon a rock in the sea, and I can spy the dragon close by, guarding her.’ Then he went to the king, and asked for a ship for himself and his brothers; and they sailed together over the sea, till they came to the right place.
There they found the princess sitting, as the star-gazer had said, on the rock; and the dragon was lying asleep, with his head upon her lap.
‘I dare not shoot at him,’ said the huntsman, ‘for I should kill the beautiful young lady also.’ ‘Then I will try my skill,’ said the thief, and went and stole her away from under the dragon, so quietly and gently that the beast did not know it, but went on snoring.
Then away they hastened with her full of joy in their boat towards the ship; but soon came the dragon roaring behind them through the air; for he awoke and missed the princess.
But when he got over the boat, and wanted to pounce upon them and carry off the princess, the huntsman took up his bow and shot him straight through the heart so that he fell down dead.
So the tailor took his needle, and with a few large stitches put some of the planks together; and he sat down upon these, and sailed about and gathered up all pieces of the boat; and then tacked them together so quickly that the boat was soon ready, and they then reached the ship and got home safe.
But to make up for your loss, I will give each of you, as a reward for his skill, half a kingdom.’ So the brothers agreed that this plan would be much better than either quarrelling or marrying a lady who had no mind to have them.
And the king then gave to each half a kingdom, as he had said; and they lived very happily the rest of their days, and took good care of their father; and somebody took better care of the young lady, than to let either the dragon or one of the craftsmen have her again.
LILY AND THE LION A merchant, who had three daughters, was once setting out upon a journey; but before he went he asked each daughter what gift he should bring back for her.
The eldest wished for pearls; the second for jewels; but the third, who was called Lily, said, ‘Dear father, bring me a rose.’ Now it was no easy task to find a rose, for it was the middle of winter; yet as she was his prettiest daughter, and was very fond of flowers, her father said he would try what he could do.
And when the time came for him to go home, he had bought pearls and jewels for the two eldest, but he had sought everywhere in vain for the rose; and when he went into any garden and asked for such a thing, the people laughed at him, and asked him whether he thought roses grew in snow.
This grieved him very much, for Lily was his dearest child; and as he was journeying home, thinking what he should bring her, he came to a fine castle; and around the castle was a garden, in one half of which it seemed to be summer-time and in the other half winter.
On one side the finest flowers were in full bloom, and on the other everything looked dreary and buried in the snow.
‘A lucky hit!’ said he, as he called to his servant, and told him to go to a beautiful bed of roses that was there, and bring him away one of the finest flowers.
And as he came near home, it was Lily, his youngest and dearest daughter, that met him; she came running, and kissed him, and welcomed him home; and when she saw that he had brought her the rose, she was still more glad.
But her father began to be very sorrowful, and to weep, saying, ‘Alas, my dearest child!
I have bought this flower at a high price, for I have said I would give you to a wild lion; and when he has you, he will tear you in pieces, and eat you.’ Then he told her all that had happened, and said she should not go, let what would happen.
But she comforted him, and said, ‘Dear father, the word you have given must be kept; I will go to the lion, and soothe him: perhaps he will let me come safe home again.’ The next morning she asked the way she was to go, and took leave of her father, and went forth with a bold heart into the wood.
But the lion was an enchanted prince.
And when Lily came to the castle, he welcomed her so courteously that she agreed to marry him.
The wedding-feast was held, and they lived happily together a long time.
After some time he said to her, ‘Tomorrow there will be a great feast in your father’s house, for your eldest sister is to be married; and if you wish to go and visit her my lions shall lead you thither.’ Then she rejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing her father once more, and set out with the lions; and everyone was overjoyed to see her, for they had thought her dead long since.
So at last they set out together, and took with them their little child; and she chose a large hall with thick walls for him to sit in while the wedding-torches were lighted; but, unluckily, no one saw that there was a crack in the door.
Then she began to be glad, and thought to herself that the time was fast coming when all her troubles should end; yet repose was still far off, for one day as she was travelling on she missed the white feather, and when she lifted up her eyes she could nowhere see the dove.
Go to the Red Sea; on the right shore stand many rods--count them, and when thou comest to the eleventh, break it off, and smite the dragon with it; and so the lion will have the victory, and both of them will appear to you in their own forms.
Then look round and thou wilt see a griffin, winged like bird, sitting by the Red Sea; jump on to his back with thy beloved one as quickly as possible, and he will carry you over the waters to your home.
I will also give thee this nut,’ continued the night-wind.
But no sooner was the princess released from the spell, than she seized the prince by the arm and sprang on to the griffin’s back, and went off carrying the prince away with her.
Thus the unhappy traveller was again forsaken and forlorn; but she took heart and said, ‘As far as the wind blows, and so long as the cock crows, I will journey on, till I find him once again.’ She went on for a long, long way, till at length she came to the castle whither the princess had carried the prince; and there was a feast got ready, and she heard that the wedding was about to be held.
‘Heaven aid me now!’ said she; and she took the casket that the sun had given her, and found that within it lay a dress as dazzling as the sun itself.
‘Not for gold and silver.’ said she, ‘but for flesh and blood.’ The princess asked what she meant, and she said, ‘Let me speak with the bridegroom this night in his chamber, and I will give thee the dress.’ At last the princess agreed, but she told her chamberlain to give the prince a sleeping draught, that he might not hear or see her.
When evening came, and the prince had fallen asleep, she was led into his chamber, and she sat herself down at his feet, and said: ‘I have followed thee seven years.
I have been to the sun, the moon, and the night-wind, to seek thee, and at last I have helped thee to overcome the dragon.
Wilt thou then forget me quite?’ But the prince all the time slept so soundly, that her voice only passed over him, and seemed like the whistling of the wind among the fir-trees.
But as she sat she bethought herself of the egg that the moon had given her; and when she broke it, there ran out a hen and twelve chickens of pure gold, that played about, and then nestled under the old one’s wings, so as to form the most beautiful sight in the world.
‘Not for gold or silver, but for flesh and blood: let me again this evening speak with the bridegroom in his chamber, and I will give thee the whole brood.’ Then the princess thought to betray her as before, and agreed to what she asked: but when the prince went to his chamber he asked the chamberlain why the wind had whistled so in the night.
And the chamberlain told him all--how he had given him a sleeping draught, and how a poor maiden had come and spoken to him in his chamber, and was to come again that night.
When they were half-way across Lily let the nut fall into the water, and immediately a large nut-tree arose from the sea, whereon the griffin rested for a while, and then carried them safely home.
There they found their child, now grown up to be comely and fair; and after all their troubles they lived happily together to the end of their days.
THE FOX AND THE HORSE A farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to him: but he was now grown too old to work; so the farmer would give him nothing more to eat, and said, ‘I want you no longer, so take yourself off out of my stable; I shall not take you back again until you are stronger than a lion.’ Then he opened the door and turned him adrift.
The poor horse was very melancholy, and wandered up and down in the wood, seeking some little shelter from the cold wind and rain.
But the fox managed to tie his legs together and bound all so hard and fast that with all his strength he could not set himself free.
When the work was done, the fox clapped the horse on the shoulder, and said, ‘Jip!
Jip!’ Then up he sprang, and moved off, dragging the lion behind him.
‘Here he is, master,’ said he, ‘I have got the better of him’: and when the farmer saw his old servant, his heart relented, and he said.
THE BLUE LIGHT There was once upon a time a soldier who for many years had served the king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no longer because of the many wounds which he had received.
The king said to him: ‘You may return to your home, I need you no longer, and you will not receive any more money, for he only receives wages who renders me service for them.’ Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living, went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the evening he entered a forest.
When darkness came on, he saw a light, which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a witch.
‘Do give me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,’ said he to her, ‘or I shall starve.’ ‘Oho!’ she answered, ‘who gives anything to a run-away soldier?
Yet will I be compassionate, and take you in, if you will do what I wish.’ ‘What do you wish?’ said the soldier.
‘That you should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow.’ The soldier consented, and next day laboured with all his strength, but could not finish it by the evening.
‘I see well enough,’ said the witch, ‘that you can do no more today, but I will keep you yet another night, in payment for which you must tomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small.’ The soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch proposed that he should stay one night more.
‘Tomorrow, you shall only do me a very trifling piece of work.
She did draw him up, but when he came near the edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the blue light away from him.
‘No,’ said he, perceiving her evil intention, ‘I will not give you the light until I am standing with both feet upon the ground.’ The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the well, and went away.
He sat for a while very sorrowfully, then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which was still half full.
‘This shall be my last pleasure,’ thought he, pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke.
When the smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little black dwarf stood before him, and said: ‘Lord, what are your commands?’ ‘What my commands are?’ replied the soldier, quite astonished.
‘I must do everything you bid me,’ said the little man.
‘Good,’ said the soldier; ‘then in the first place help me out of this well.’ The little man took him by the hand, and led him through an underground passage, but he did not forget to take the blue light with him.
On the way the dwarf showed him the treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry.
When he was above, he said to the little man: ‘Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before the judge.’ In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild tom-cat and screaming frightfully.
Nor was it long before the little man reappeared.
What further commands has my lord?’ inquired the dwarf.
‘At this moment, none,’ answered the soldier; ‘you can return home, only be at hand immediately, if I summon you.’ ‘Nothing more is needed than that you should light your pipe at the blue light, and I will appear before you at once.’ Thereupon he vanished from his sight.
The soldier returned to the town from which he came.
He went to the best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord furnish him a room as handsome as possible.
When it was ready and the soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black manikin and said: ‘I have served the king faithfully, but he has dismissed me, and left me to hunger, and now I want to take my revenge.’ ‘What am I to do?’ asked the little man.
‘Late at night, when the king’s daughter is in bed, bring her here in her sleep, she shall do servant’s work for me.’ The manikin said: ‘That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.’ When twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the manikin carried in the princess.
Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.’ When she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he stretched out his feet and said: ‘Pull off my boots,’ and then he threw them in her face, and made her pick them up again, and clean and brighten them.
She, however, did everything he bade her, without opposition, silently and with half-shut eyes.
Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and told him that she had had a very strange dream.
‘I was carried through the streets with the rapidity of lightning,’ said she, ‘and taken into a soldier’s room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work.
It was only a dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done everything.’ ‘The dream may have been true,’ said the king.
Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in the pocket, and then if you are carried away again, they will fall out and leave a track in the streets.’ But unseen by the king, the manikin was standing beside him when he said that, and heard all.
At night when the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets, some peas certainly did fall out of her pocket, but they made no track, for the crafty manikin had just before scattered peas in every street there was.
And again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until cock-crow.
‘Do what I bid you,’ replied the soldier, and again this third night the princess was obliged to work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under the bed.
Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s shoe.
It was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at the entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought back, and thrown into prison.
In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in his pocket.
And now loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by.
As soon as the soldier was alone again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black manikin.
‘Go wheresoever they take you, and let them do what they will, only take the blue light with you.’ Next day the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked, the judge condemned him to death.
The king was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier’s mercy, and merely to be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and his daughter to wife.
THE RAVEN There was once a queen who had a little daughter, still too young to run alone.
One day the child was very troublesome, and the mother could not quiet it, do what she would.
She grew impatient, and seeing the ravens flying round the castle, she opened the window, and said: ‘I wish you were a raven and would fly away, then I should have a little peace.’ Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when the child in her arms was turned into a raven, and flew away from her through the open window.
The bird took its flight to a dark wood and remained there for a long time, and meanwhile the parents could hear nothing of their child.
Long after this, a man was making his way through the wood when he heard a raven calling, and he followed the sound of the voice.
As he drew near, the raven said, ‘I am by birth a king’s daughter, but am now under the spell of some enchantment; you can, however, set me free.’ ‘What am I to do?’ he asked.
I shall drive there in my carriage at two o’clock in the afternoon for three successive days; the first day it will be drawn by four white, the second by four chestnut, and the last by four black horses; but if you fail to keep awake and I find you sleeping, I shall not be set free.’ The man promised to do all that she wished, but the raven said, ‘Alas!
I know even now that you will take something from the woman and be unable to save me.’ The man assured her again that he would on no account touch a thing to eat or drink.
Come in and rest and let me give you something to eat and drink.’ ‘No,’ answered the man, ‘I will neither eat not drink.’ But she would not leave him alone, and urged him saying, ‘If you will not eat anything, at least you might take a draught of wine; one drink counts for nothing,’ and at last he allowed himself to be persuaded, and drank.
As it drew towards the appointed hour, he went outside into the garden and mounted the tan-heap to await the raven.
Suddenly a feeling of fatigue came over him, and unable to resist it, he lay down for a little while, fully determined, however, to keep awake; but in another minute his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell into such a deep sleep, that all the noises in the world would not have awakened him.
She got out of her carriage and went to him; she called him and shook him, but it was all in vain, he still continued sleeping.
At last, overcome by her persistent entreaties that he would take something, he lifted the glass and drank again.
As the raven drove along her four chestnut horses, she said sorrowfully to herself, ‘I know he has fallen asleep.’ She went as before to look for him, but he slept, and it was impossible to awaken him.
The following day the old woman said to him, ‘What is this?
You are not eating or drinking anything, do you want to kill yourself?’ He answered, ‘I may not and will not either eat or drink.’ But she put down the dish of food and the glass of wine in front of him, and when he smelt the wine, he was unable to resist the temptation, and took a deep draught.
When the hour came round again he went as usual on to the tan-heap in the garden to await the king’s daughter, but he felt even more overcome with weariness than on the two previous days, and throwing himself down, he slept like a log.
At two o’clock the raven could be seen approaching, and this time her coachman and everything about her, as well as her horses, were black.
She was sadder than ever as she drove along, and said mournfully, ‘I know he has fallen asleep, and will not be able to set me free.’ She found him sleeping heavily, and all her efforts to awaken him were of no avail.
After that she drew a gold ring, on which her name was engraved, off her finger, and put it upon one of his.
When the man awoke and found that he had been sleeping, he was grieved at heart, and said, ‘She has no doubt been here and driven away again, and it is now too late for me to save her.’ Then his eyes fell on the things which were lying beside him; he read the letter, and knew from it all that had happened.
He rose up without delay, eager to start on his way and to reach the castle of Stromberg, but he had no idea in which direction he ought to go.
He travelled about a long time in search of it and came at last to a dark forest, through which he went on walking for fourteen days and still could not find a way out.
Again the next day he pursued his way through the forest, and that evening, thinking to rest again, he lay down as before, but he heard such a howling and wailing that he found it impossible to sleep.
He found that the light came from a house which looked smaller than it really was, from the contrast of its height with that of an immense giant who stood in front of it.
He thought to himself, ‘If the giant sees me going in, my life will not be worth much.’ However, after a while he summoned up courage and went forward.
When the giant saw him, he called out, ‘It is lucky for that you have come, for I have not had anything to eat for a long time.
When he had finished his supper the man asked him if he could direct him to the castle of Stromberg.
The giant said, ‘I will look on my map; on it are marked all the towns, villages, and houses.’ So he fetched his map, and looked for the castle, but could not find it.
‘Never mind,’ he said, ‘I have larger maps upstairs in the cupboard, we will look on those,’ but they searched in vain, for the castle was not marked even on these.
The man now thought he should like to continue his journey, but the giant begged him to remain for a day or two longer until the return of his brother, who was away in search of provisions.
When the brother came home, they asked him about the castle of Stromberg, and he told them he would look on his own maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hunger.
Accordingly, when he had finished his supper, they all went up together to his room and looked through his maps, but the castle was not to be found.
Then he fetched other older maps, and they went on looking for the castle until at last they found it, but it was many thousand miles away.
He found it situated, however, on a glass mountain, and looking up from the foot he saw the enchanted maiden drive round her castle and then go inside.
He was overjoyed to see her, and longed to get to the top of the mountain, but the sides were so slippery that every time he attempted to climb he fell back again.
When he saw that it was impossible to reach her, he was greatly grieved, and said to himself, ‘I will remain here and wait for her,’ so he built himself a little hut, and there he sat and watched for a whole year, and every day he saw the king’s daughter driving round her castle, but still was unable to get nearer to her.
Looking out from his hut one day he saw three robbers fighting and he called out to them, ‘God be with you.’ They stopped when they heard the call, but looking round and seeing nobody, they went on again with their fighting, which now became more furious.
‘God be with you,’ he cried again, and again they paused and looked about, but seeing no one went back to their fighting.
A third time he called out, ‘God be with you,’ and then thinking he should like to know the cause of dispute between the three men, he went out and asked them why they were fighting so angrily with one another.
One of them said that he had found a stick, and that he had but to strike it against any door through which he wished to pass, and it immediately flew open.
Another told him that he had found a cloak which rendered its wearer invisible; and the third had caught a horse which would carry its rider over any obstacle, and even up the glass mountain.
They had been unable to decide whether they would keep together and have the things in common, or whether they would separate.
On hearing this, the man said, ‘I will give you something in exchange for those three things; not money, for that I have not got, but something that is of far more value.
I must first, however, prove whether all you have told me about your three things is true.’ The robbers, therefore, made him get on the horse, and handed him the stick and the cloak, and when he had put this round him he was no longer visible.
Then he fell upon them with the stick and beat them one after another, crying, ‘There, you idle vagabonds, you have got what you deserve; are you satisfied now!’ After this he rode up the glass mountain.
‘That is my own ring,’ she exclaimed, ‘and if that is so the man must also be here who is coming to set me free.’ She sought for him about the castle, but could find him nowhere.
Meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off the cloak.
When therefore she came to the castle gate she saw him, and cried aloud for joy.
When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who bade him good day, and said: ‘Do give me a piece of cake out of your pocket, and let me have a draught of your wine; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ But the clever son answered: ‘If I give you my cake and wine, I shall have none for myself; be off with you,’ and he left the little man standing and went on.
The little old grey man met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of wine.
But the second son, too, said sensibly enough: ‘What I give you will be taken away from myself; be off!’ and he left the little man standing and went on.
His punishment, however, was not delayed; when he had made a few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg, so that he had to be carried home.
Then Dummling said: ‘Father, do let me go and cut wood.’ The father answered: ‘Your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone, you do not understand anything about it.’ But Dummling begged so long that at last he said: ‘Just go then, you will get wiser by hurting yourself.’ His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.
There stands an old tree, cut it down, and you will find something at the roots.’ Then the little man took leave of him.
Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was a goose sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold.
Now the host had three daughters, who saw the goose and were curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, and would have liked to have one of its golden feathers.
The eldest thought: ‘I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a feather,’ and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose by the wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.
The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get a feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she was held fast.
At last the third also came with the like intent, and the others screamed out: ‘Keep away; for goodness’ sake keep away!’ But she did not understand why she was to keep away.
‘The others are there,’ she thought, ‘I may as well be there too,’ and ran to them; but as soon as she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her.
The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out, without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to it.
They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, now right, wherever his legs took him.
In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw the procession he said: ‘For shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why are you running across the fields after this young man?
Is that seemly?’ At the same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away, but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, and was himself obliged to run behind.
He was astonished at this and called out: ‘Hi! your reverence, whither away so quickly?
Do not forget that we have a christening today!’ and running after him he took him by the sleeve, but was also held fast to it.
Whilst the five were trotting thus one behind the other, two labourers came with their hoes from the fields; the parson called out to them and begged that they would set him and the sexton free.
But they had scarcely touched the sexton when they were held fast, and now there were seven of them running behind Dummling and the goose.
Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had a daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh.
So he had put forth a decree that whosoever should be able to make her laugh should marry her.
When Dummling heard this, he went with his goose and all her train before the king’s daughter, and as soon as she saw the seven people running on and on, one behind the other, she began to laugh quite loudly, and as if she would never stop.
Thereupon Dummling asked to have her for his wife; but the king did not like the son-in-law, and made all manner of excuses and said he must first produce a man who could drink a cellarful of wine.
Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could certainly help him; so he went into the forest, and in the same place where he had felled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very sorrowful face.
Then Dummling asked once more for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow, whom everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and he made a new condition; he must first find a man who could eat a whole mountain of bread.
Dummling did not think long, but went straight into the forest, where in the same place there sat a man who was tying up his body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying: ‘I have eaten a whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when one has such a hunger as I?
My stomach remains empty, and I must tie myself up if I am not to die of hunger.’ At this Dummling was glad, and said: ‘Get up and come with me; you shall eat yourself full.’ He led him to the king’s palace where all the flour in the whole Kingdom was collected, and from it he caused a huge mountain of bread to be baked.
The man from the forest stood before it, began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountain had vanished.
Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride; but the king again sought a way out, and ordered a ship which could sail on land and on water.
‘As soon as you come sailing back in it,’ said he, ‘you shall have my daughter for wife.’ Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little grey man to whom he had given his cake.
When he heard what Dummling wanted, he said: ‘Since you have given me to eat and to drink, I will give you the ship; and I do all this because you once were kind to me.’ Then he gave him the ship which could sail on land and water, and when the king saw that, he could no longer prevent him from having his daughter.
The wedding was celebrated, and after the king’s death, Dummling inherited his kingdom and lived for a long time contentedly with his wife.
His sons were very much grieved at their father’s sickness; and as they were walking together very mournfully in the garden of the palace, a little old man met them and asked what was the matter.
He next tried to get off his horse and make his way on foot, but again the laugh rang in his ears, and he found himself unable to move a step, and thus he was forced to abide spellbound.
Meantime the old king was lingering on in daily hope of his son’s return, till at last the second son said, ‘Father, I will go in search of the Water of Life.’ For he thought to himself, ‘My brother is surely dead, and the kingdom will fall to me if I find the water.’ The king was at first very unwilling to let him go, but at last yielded to his wish.
So he set out and followed the same road which his brother had done, and met with the same elf, who stopped him at the same spot in the mountains, saying, as before, ‘Prince, prince, whither so fast?’ ‘Mind your own affairs, busybody!’ said the prince scornfully, and rode on.
But the dwarf put the same spell upon him as he put on his elder brother, and he, too, was at last obliged to take up his abode in the heart of the mountains.
Thus it is with proud silly people, who think themselves above everyone else, and are too proud to ask or take advice.
When the second prince had thus been gone a long time, the youngest son said he would go and search for the Water of Life, and trusted he should soon be able to make his father well again.
So he set out, and the dwarf met him too at the same spot in the valley, among the mountains, and said, ‘Prince, whither so fast?’ And the prince said, ‘I am going in search of the Water of Life, because my father is ill, and like to die: can you help me?
The door flew open at the third stroke of the wand, and when the lions were quieted he went on through the castle and came at length to a beautiful hall.
Further on he came to a room where a beautiful young lady sat upon a couch; and she welcomed him joyfully, and said, if he would set her free from the spell that bound her, the kingdom should be his, if he would come back in a year and marry her.
He walked on; and as he walked through beautiful gardens he came to a delightful shady spot in which stood a couch; and he thought to himself, as he felt tired, that he would rest himself for a while, and gaze on the lovely scenes around him.
So he laid himself down, and sleep fell upon him unawares, so that he did not wake up till the clock was striking a quarter to twelve.
Then he sprang from the couch dreadfully frightened, ran to the well, filled a cup that was standing by him full of water, and hastened to get away in time.
Then they all three rode on together, and on their way home came to a country that was laid waste by war and a dreadful famine, so that it was feared all must die for want.
And he lent the king the wonderful sword, and he slew the enemy’s army with it; and thus the kingdom was once more in peace and plenty.
In the same manner he befriended two other countries through which they passed on their way.
When they came to the sea, they got into a ship and during their voyage the two eldest said to themselves, ‘Our brother has got the water which we could not find, therefore our father will forsake us and give him the kingdom, which is our right’; so they were full of envy and revenge, and agreed together how they could ruin him.
Then they waited till he was fast asleep, and poured the Water of Life out of the cup, and took it for themselves, giving him bitter sea-water instead.
When they came to their journey’s end, the youngest son brought his cup to the sick king, that he might drink and be healed.
Scarcely, however, had he tasted the bitter sea-water when he became worse even than he was before; and then both the elder sons came in, and blamed the youngest for what they had done; and said that he wanted to poison their father, but that they had found the Water of Life, and had brought it with them.
He no sooner began to drink of what they brought him, than he felt his sickness leave him, and was as strong and well as in his younger days.
Pray, with all your cleverness, why did not you manage to keep your eyes open?
Next year one of us will take away your beautiful princess, if you do not take care.
The prince knew nothing of what was going on, till one day, when the king’s chief huntsmen went a-hunting with him, and they were alone in the wood together, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that the prince said, ‘My friend, what is the matter with you?’ ‘I cannot and dare not tell you,’ said he.
Some time after, three grand embassies came to the old king’s court, with rich gifts of gold and precious stones for his youngest son; now all these were sent from the three kings to whom he had lent his sword and loaf of bread, in order to rid them of their enemy and feed their people.
The time soon came, when the eldest brother thought that he would make haste to go to the princess, and say that he was the one who had set her free, and that he should have her for his wife, and the kingdom with her.
As he came before the palace and saw the golden road, he stopped to look at it, and he thought to himself, ‘It is a pity to ride upon this beautiful road’; so he turned aside and rode on the right-hand side of it.
But when he came to the gate, the guards, who had seen the road he took, said to him, he could not be what he said he was, and must go about his business.
The second prince set out soon afterwards on the same errand; and when he came to the golden road, and his horse had set one foot upon it, he stopped to look at it, and thought it very beautiful, and said to himself, ‘What a pity it is that anything should tread here!’ Then he too turned aside and rode on the left side of it.
But when he came to the gate the guards said he was not the true prince, and that he too must go away about his business; and away he went.
Now when the full year was come round, the third brother left the forest in which he had lain hid for fear of his father’s anger, and set out in search of his betrothed bride.
So he journeyed on, thinking of her all the way, and rode so quickly that he did not even see what the road was made of, but went with his horse straight over it; and as he came to the gate it flew open, and the princess welcomed him with joy, and said he was her deliverer, and should now be her husband and lord of the kingdom.
When the first joy at their meeting was over, the princess told him she had heard of his father having forgiven him, and of his wish to have him home again: so, before his wedding with the princess, he went to visit his father, taking her with him.
Then he told him everything; how his brothers had cheated and robbed him, and yet that he had borne all those wrongs for the love of his father.
And now the old king gathered together his court, and asked all his kingdom to come and celebrate the wedding of his son and the princess.
And young and old, noble and squire, gentle and simple, came at once on the summons; and among the rest came the friendly dwarf, with the sugarloaf hat, and a new scarlet cloak.
THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN There was once a king’s son who had a bride whom he loved very much.
Then he said to his beloved: ‘I must now go and leave you, I give you a ring as a remembrance of me.
When I am king, I will return and fetch you.’ So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was dangerously ill, and near his death.
He said to him: ‘Dear son, I wished to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as I wish,’ and he named a certain king’s daughter who was to be his wife.
The son was in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing, and said: ‘Yes, dear father, your will shall be done,’ and thereupon the king shut his eyes, and died.
When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time of mourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he had given his father, and caused the king’s daughter to be asked in marriage, and she was promised to him.
His first betrothed heard of this, and fretted so much about his faithfulness that she nearly died.
You shall have whatsoever you will.’ She thought for a moment and said: ‘Dear father, I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in face, figure, and size.’ The father said: ‘If it be possible, your desire shall be fulfilled,’ and he caused a search to be made in his whole kingdom, until eleven young maidens were found who exactly resembled his daughter in face, figure, and size.
When they came to the king’s daughter, she had twelve suits of huntsmen’s clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to put on the huntsmen’s clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.
Thereupon she took her leave of her father, and rode away with them, and rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.
Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take all of them into his service.
The king looked at her and did not know her, but as they were such handsome fellows, he said: ‘Yes,’ and that he would willingly take them, and now they were the king’s twelve huntsmen.
The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew all concealed and secret things.
It came to pass that one evening he said to the king: ‘You think you have twelve huntsmen?’ ‘Yes,’ said the king, ‘they are twelve huntsmen.’ The lion continued: ‘You are mistaken, they are twelve girls.’ The king said: ‘That cannot be true!
How will you prove that to me?’ ‘Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the ante-chamber,’ answered the lion, ‘and then you will soon see.
Then they went away again, and the king said to the lion: ‘You have lied to me, they walk just like men.’ The lion said: ‘They have been informed that they were going to be put to the test, and have assumed some strength.
Just let twelve spinning-wheels be brought into the ante-chamber, and they will go to them and be pleased with them, and that is what no man would do.’ The king liked the advice, and had the spinning-wheels placed in the ante-chamber.
But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them, and disclosed the project.
So when they were alone the king’s daughter said to her eleven girls: ‘Show some constraint, and do not look round at the spinning-wheels.’ And next morning when the king had his twelve huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber, and never once looked at the spinning-wheels.
Then the king again said to the lion: ‘You have deceived me, they are men, for they have not looked at the spinning-wheels.’ The lion replied: ‘They have restrained themselves.’ The king, however, would no longer believe the lion.
The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and his liking for them continually increased.
Now it came to pass that once when they were out hunting, news came that the king’s bride was approaching.
When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so much that her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to the ground.
The king thought something had happened to his dear huntsman, ran up to him, wanted to help him, and drew his glove off.
Then he saw the ring which he had given to his first bride, and when he looked in her face he recognized her.
Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and when she opened her eyes he said: ‘You are mine, and I am yours, and no one in the world can alter that.’ He sent a messenger to the other bride, and entreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wife already, and someone who had just found an old key did not require a new one.
Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again taken into favour, because, after all, he had told the truth.
THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN There was once a merchant who had only one child, a son, that was very young, and barely able to run alone.
He had two richly laden ships then making a voyage upon the seas, in which he had embarked all his wealth, in the hope of making great gains, when the news came that both were lost.
One day, as he was roaming along in a brown study, thinking with no great comfort on what he had been and what he now was, and was like to be, all on a sudden there stood before him a little, rough-looking, black dwarf.
‘Prithee, friend, why so sorrowful?’ said he to the merchant; ‘what is it you take so deeply to heart?’ ‘If you would do me any good I would willingly tell you,’ said the merchant.
‘Who knows but I may?’ said the little man: ‘tell me what ails you, and perhaps you will find I may be of some use.’ Then the merchant told him how all his wealth was gone to the bottom of the sea, and how he had nothing left but that little plot of land.
Then the father started, trembling with fear and horror, and saw what it was that he had bound himself to do; but as no gold was come, he made himself easy by thinking that it was only a joke that the dwarf was playing him, and that, at any rate, when the money came, he should see the bearer, and would not take it in.
About a month afterwards he went upstairs into a lumber-room to look for some old iron, that he might sell it and raise a little money; and there, instead of his iron, he saw a large pile of gold lying on the floor.
At the sight of this he was overjoyed, and forgetting all about his son, went into trade again, and became a richer merchant than before.
Meantime little Heinel grew up, and as the end of the twelve years drew near the merchant began to call to mind his bond, and became very sad and thoughtful; so that care and sorrow were written upon his face.
Then Heinel said, ‘Father, give yourself very little trouble about that; I shall be too much for the little man.’ When the time came, the father and son went out together to the place agreed upon: and the son drew a circle on the ground, and set himself and his father in the middle of it.
‘Have you anything to say to us, my friend, or what do you want?’ Now Heinel had found a friend in a good fairy, that was fond of him, and had told him what to do; for this fairy knew what good luck was in store for him.
‘Have you brought me what you said you would?’ said the dwarf to the merchant.
Heinel agreed that his father must give him up, and that so far the dwarf should have his way: but, on the other hand, the fairy had told Heinel what fortune was in store for him, if he followed his own course; and he did not choose to be given up to his hump-backed friend, who seemed so anxious for his company.
Then he took leave of his father, and set himself in the boat, but before it got far off a wave struck it, and it fell with one side low in the water, so the merchant thought that poor Heinel was lost, and went home very sorrowful, while the dwarf went his way, thinking that at any rate he had had his revenge.
As he jumped upon the shore he saw before him a beautiful castle but empty and dreary within, for it was enchanted.
‘Here,’ said he to himself, ‘must I find the prize the good fairy told me of.’ So he once more searched the whole palace through, till at last he found a white snake, lying coiled up on a cushion in one of the chambers.
Now the white snake was an enchanted princess; and she was very glad to see him, and said, ‘Are you at last come to set me free?
Twelve long years have I waited here for the fairy to bring you hither as she promised, for you alone can save me.
Joy and gladness burst forth throughout the castle, the wedding was celebrated, and he was crowned king of the Golden Mountain.
They lived together very happily, and the queen had a son.
But the queen was against his going, and said, ‘I know well that misfortunes will come upon us if you go.’ However, he gave her no rest till she agreed.
At his going away she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, ‘Take this ring, and put it on your finger; whatever you wish it will bring you; only promise never to make use of it to bring me hence to your father’s house.’ Then he said he would do what she asked, and put the ring on his finger, and wished himself near the town where his father lived.
Heinel found himself at the gates in a moment; but the guards would not let him go in, because he was so strangely clad.
So he went up to a neighbouring hill, where a shepherd dwelt, and borrowed his old frock, and thus passed unknown into the town.
When he came to his father’s house, he said he was his son; but the merchant would not believe him, and said he had had but one son, his poor Heinel, who he knew was long since dead: and as he was only dressed like a poor shepherd, he would not even give him anything to eat.
The king, however, still vowed that he was his son, and said, ‘Is there no mark by which you would know me if I am really your son?’ ‘Yes,’ said his mother, ‘our Heinel had a mark like a raspberry on his right arm.’ Then he showed them the mark, and they knew that what he had said was true.
He next told them how he was king of the Golden Mountain, and was married to a princess, and had a son seven years old.
But the merchant said, ‘that can never be true; he must be a fine king truly who travels about in a shepherd’s frock!’ At this the son was vexed; and forgetting his word, turned his ring, and wished for his queen and son.
He did all he could to soothe her, and she at last seemed to be appeased; but she was not so in truth, and was only thinking how she should punish him.
Heinel said they must first let him try these wonderful things, then he might know how to set a value upon them.
‘The cloak is very well,’ said he: ‘now give me the sword.’ ‘No,’ said they; ‘not unless you undertake not to say, “Heads off!” for if you do we are all dead men.’ So they gave it him, charging him to try it on a tree.
He next asked for the boots also; and the moment he had all three in his power, he wished himself at the Golden Mountain; and there he was at once.
But when anything to eat was put upon her plate, he took it away and ate it himself; and when a glass of wine was handed to her, he took it and drank it; and thus, though they kept on giving her meat and drink, her plate and cup were always empty.
Upon this, fear and remorse came over her, and she went into her chamber alone, and sat there weeping; and he followed her there.
Why then does this enchantment still seem to bind me?’ ‘False and fickle one!’ said he.
Ought he to have had such treatment from thee?’ Then he went out and sent away the company, and said the wedding was at an end, for that he was come back to the kingdom.
‘Heads Off!’ cried he; and with the word the traitors’ heads fell before him, and Heinel was once more king of the Golden Mountain.
When the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that the doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how well he ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and would willingly have been a doctor too.
So he remained standing a while, and at length inquired if he too could not be a doctor.
When he had doctored people awhile, but not long, a rich and great lord had some money stolen.
So the lord had the horses harnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and asked Crabb if he were Doctor Knowall.
‘Oh, yes, but Grete, my wife, must go too.’ The lord was willing, and let both of them have a seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together.
When they came to the nobleman’s castle, the table was spread, and Crabb was told to sit down and eat.
And when the first servant came with a dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said: ‘Grete, that was the first,’ meaning that was the servant who brought the first dish.
The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say: ‘That is the first thief,’ and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said to his comrade outside: ‘The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he said I was the first.’ The second did not want to go in at all, but was forced.
Actually, there were crabs.
The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and cried: ‘Ah, poor Crabb.’ When the lord heard that, he cried: ‘There! he knows it; he must also know who has the money!’ On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment.
When therefore he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen the money, and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a heavy sum into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he did they would be hanged.
They led him to the spot where the money was concealed.
With this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall, sat down to the table, and said: ‘My lord, now will I search in my book where the gold is hidden.’ The fifth servant, however, crept into the stove to hear if the doctor knew still more.
But the doctor sat still and opened his A B C book, turned the pages backwards and forwards, and looked for the cock.
As he could not find it immediately he said: ‘I know you are there, so you had better come out!’ Then the fellow in the stove thought that the doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out, crying: ‘That man knows everything!’ Then Doctor Knowall showed the lord where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.
THE SEVEN RAVENS There was once a man who had seven sons, and last of all one daughter.
Although the little girl was very pretty, she was so weak and small that they thought she could not live; but they said she should at once be christened.
Each wanted to be first at drawing the water, and so they were in such a hurry that all let their pitchers fall into the well, and they stood very foolishly looking at one another, and did not know what to do, for none dared go home.
In the meantime the father was uneasy, and could not tell what made the young men stay so long.
‘Surely,’ said he, ‘the whole seven must have forgotten themselves over some game of play’; and when he had waited still longer and they yet did not come, he flew into a rage and wished them all turned into ravens.
Scarcely had he spoken these words when he heard a croaking over his head, and looked up and saw seven ravens as black as coal flying round and round.
Sorry as he was to see his wish so fulfilled, he did not know how what was done could be undone, and comforted himself as well as he could for the loss of his seven sons with his dear little daughter, who soon became stronger and every day more beautiful.
For a long time she did not know that she had ever had any brothers; for her father and mother took care not to speak of them before her: but one day by chance she heard the people about her speak of them.
‘Yes,’ said they, ‘she is beautiful indeed, but still ‘tis a pity that her brothers should have been lost for her sake.’ Then she was much grieved, and went to her father and mother, and asked if she had any brothers, and what had become of them.
Then she felt for the little piece of wood; but when she unwrapped the cloth it was not there, and she saw she had lost the gift of the good stars.
She wanted to save her brothers, and had no key of the castle of the glass-mountain; so this faithful little sister took a knife out of her pocket and cut off her little finger, that was just the size of the piece of wood she had lost, and put it in the door and opened it.
As she went in, a little dwarf came up to her, and said, ‘What are you seeking for?’ ‘I seek for my brothers, the seven ravens,’ answered she.
On a sudden she heard a fluttering and croaking in the air, and the dwarf said, ‘Here come my masters.’ When they came in, they wanted to eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses.
And who has been drinking out of my little glass?’ ‘Caw!
THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX FIRST STORY There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, who believed that his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to put her to the test.
He stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved as if he were stone dead.
When it became known that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.
The maid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking.
Do you sleep or do you wake?’ She answered: ‘I am not sleeping, I am waking, Would you know what I am making?
‘A wooer he stands at the door out there.’ ‘What does he look like, my dear?’ ‘Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late Mr Fox?’ ‘Oh, no,’ answered the cat, ‘he has only one.’ ‘Then I will not have him.’ Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away.
Soon afterwards there was another knock, and another fox was at the door who wished to woo Mrs Fox.
When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat: ‘Now open the gates and doors all wide, And carry old Mr Fox outside.’ But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old Mr Fox stirred under the bench, and cudgelled all the rabble, and drove them and Mrs Fox out of the house.
The wolf greeted her, and said: ‘Good day, Mrs Cat of Kehrewit, How comes it that alone you sit?
What are you making good?’ The cat replied: ‘In milk I’m breaking bread so sweet, Will you be my guest, and eat?’ ‘No, thank you, Mrs Cat,’ answered the wolf.
‘Is Mrs Fox not at home?’ The cat said: ‘She sits upstairs in her room, Bewailing her sorrowful doom, Bewailing her trouble so sore, For old Mr Fox is no more.’ The wolf answered: ‘If she’s in want of a husband now, Then will it please her to step below?’ The cat runs quickly up the stair, And lets her tail fly here and there, Until she comes to the parlour door.
With her five gold rings at the door she knocks: ‘Are you within, good Mistress Fox?
Mrs Fox asked: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a pointed mouth?’ ‘No,’ answered the cat.
But one of the good qualities which old Mr Fox had possessed, was always lacking, and the cat had continually to send the suitors away.
Then Mrs Fox said: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has a little pointed mouth?’ ‘Yes,’ said the cat, ‘he has.’ ‘Then let him come upstairs,’ said Mrs Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding feast.
For many a fine fat mouse he brought, Yet of his wife he never thought, But ate up every one he caught.’ Then the wedding was solemnized with young Mr Fox, and there was much rejoicing and dancing; and if they have not left off, they are dancing still.
THE SALAD As a merry young huntsman was once going briskly along through a wood, there came up a little old woman, and said to him, ‘Good day, good day; you seem merry enough, but I am hungry and thirsty; do pray give me something to eat.’ The huntsman took pity on her, and put his hand in his pocket and gave her what he had.
Then he wanted to go his way; but she took hold of him, and said, ‘Listen, my friend, to what I am going to tell you; I will reward you for your kindness; go your way, and after a little time you will come to a tree where you will see nine birds sitting on a cloak.
Shoot into the midst of them, and one will fall down dead: the cloak will fall too; take it, it is a wishing-cloak, and when you wear it you will find yourself at any place where you may wish to be.
‘Well,’ said the huntsman, ‘this is wonderful; this happens just as the old woman said’; then he shot into the midst of them so that their feathers flew all about.
Off went the flock chattering away; but one fell down dead, and the cloak with it.
Then the huntsman did as the old woman told him, cut open the bird, took out the heart, and carried the cloak home with him.
The next morning when he awoke he lifted up his pillow, and there lay the piece of gold glittering underneath; the same happened next day, and indeed every day when he arose.
It so happened that his road one day led through a thick wood, at the end of which was a large castle in a green meadow, and at one of the windows stood an old woman with a very beautiful young lady by her side looking about them.
Now the old woman was a witch, and said to the young lady, ‘There is a young man coming out of the wood who carries a wonderful prize; we must get it away from him, my dear child, for it is more fit for us than for him.
He has a bird’s heart that brings a piece of gold under his pillow every morning.’ Meantime the huntsman came nearer and looked at the lady, and said to himself, ‘I have been travelling so long that I should like to go into this castle and rest myself, for I have money enough to pay for anything I want’; but the real reason was, that he wanted to see more of the beautiful lady.
Then he went into the house, and was welcomed kindly; and it was not long before he was so much in love that he thought of nothing else but looking at the lady’s eyes, and doing everything that she wished.
The diamonds glittered so on all sides that they were delighted with the sight and picked up the finest.
But the old witch made a deep sleep come upon him, and he said to the young lady, ‘Let us sit down and rest ourselves a little, I am so tired that I cannot stand any longer.’ So they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap and fell asleep; and whilst he was sleeping on she took the cloak from his shoulders, hung it on her own, picked up the diamonds, and wished herself home again.
Now this rock belonged to fierce giants who lived upon it; and as he saw three of them striding about, he thought to himself, ‘I can only save myself by feigning to be asleep’; so he laid himself down as if he were in a sound sleep.
‘It’s not worth the trouble,’ said the third; ‘let him live, he’ll go climbing higher up the mountain, and some cloud will come rolling and carry him away.’ And they passed on.
But the huntsman had heard all they said; and as soon as they were gone, he climbed to the top of the mountain, and when he had sat there a short time a cloud came rolling around him, and caught him in a whirlwind and bore him along for some time, till it settled in a garden, and he fell quite gently to the ground amongst the greens and cabbages.
However, he still felt very hungry, and the salad tasted very nice; so he ate on till he came to another kind of salad, and scarcely had he tasted it when he felt another change come over him, and soon saw that he was lucky enough to have found his old shape again.
Then he laid himself down and slept off a little of his weariness; and when he awoke the next morning he broke off a head both of the good and the bad salad, and thought to himself, ‘This will help me to my fortune again, and enable me to pay off some folks for their treachery.’ So he went away to try and find the castle of his friends; and after wandering about a few days he luckily found it.
Then he stained his face all over brown, so that even his mother would not have known him, and went into the castle and asked for a lodging; ‘I am so tired,’ said he, ‘that I can go no farther.’ ‘Countryman,’ said the witch, ‘who are you? and what is your business?’ ‘I am,’ said he, ‘a messenger sent by the king to find the finest salad that grows under the sun.
Then the witch herself took it into the kitchen to be dressed; and when it was ready she could not wait till it was carried up, but took a few leaves immediately and put them in her mouth, and scarcely were they swallowed when she lost her own form and ran braying down into the court in the form of an ass.
The messenger sat all this time with the beautiful young lady, and as nobody came with the salad and she longed to taste it, she said, ‘I don’t know where the salad can be.’ Then he thought something must have happened, and said, ‘I will go into the kitchen and see.’ And as he went he saw two asses in the court running about, and the salad lying on the ground.
Then the huntsman washed his face and went into the court that they might know him.
After this he went back to the castle, where he found everything he wanted.
Some days after, the miller came to him and told him that the old ass was dead; ‘The other two,’ said he, ‘are alive and eat, but are so sorrowful that they cannot last long.’ Then the huntsman pitied them, and told the miller to drive them back to him, and when they came, he gave them some of the good salad to eat.
And the beautiful young lady fell upon her knees before him, and said, ‘O dearest huntsman! forgive me all the ill I have done you; my mother forced me to it, it was against my will, for I always loved you very much.
Your wishing-cloak hangs up in the closet, and as for the bird’s heart, I will give it you too.’ But he said, ‘Keep it, it will be just the same thing, for I mean to make you my wife.’ So they were married, and lived together very happily till they died.
Or when stories were told by the fire at night which made the flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said: ‘Oh, it makes us shudder!’ The younger sat in a corner and listened with the rest of them, and could not imagine what they could mean.
‘That, too, must be an art of which I understand nothing!’ Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day: ‘Hearken to me, you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong, and you too must learn something by which you can earn your bread.
Look how your brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.’ ‘Well, father,’ he replied, ‘I am quite willing to learn something--indeed, if it could but be managed, I should like to learn how to shudder.
I don’t understand that at all yet.’ The elder brother smiled when he heard that, and thought to himself: ‘Goodness, what a blockhead that brother of mine is!
He will never be good for anything as long as he lives!
He who wants to be a sickle must bend himself betimes.’ The father sighed, and answered him: ‘You shall soon learn what it is to shudder, but you will not earn your bread by that.’ Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing.
‘Just think,’ said he, ‘when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread, he actually wanted to learn to shudder.’ ‘If that be all,’ replied the sexton, ‘he can learn that with me.
Send him to me, and I will soon polish him.’ The father was glad to do it, for he thought: ‘It will train the boy a little.’ The sexton therefore took him into his house, and he had to ring the church bell.
After a day or two, the sexton awoke him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into the church tower and ring the bell.
‘You shall soon learn what shuddering is,’ thought he, and secretly went there before him; and when the boy was at the top of the tower and turned round, and was just going to take hold of the bell rope, he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite the sounding hole.
‘Give an answer,’ cried the boy, ‘or take yourself off, you have no business here at night.’ The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might think he was a ghost.
Then the boy called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no purpose, he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so that it fell down the ten steps and remained lying there in a corner.
Thereupon he rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went to bed, and fell asleep.
He climbed up the tower before you did.’ ‘No, I don’t know,’ replied the boy, ‘but someone was standing by the sounding hole on the other side of the steps, and as he would neither give an answer nor go away, I took him for a scoundrel, and threw him downstairs.
She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the boy’s father, ‘Your boy,’ cried she, ‘has been the cause of a great misfortune!
Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.’ The father was terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy.
I am quite innocent.
He was standing there by night like one intent on doing evil.
I did not know who it was, and I entreated him three times either to speak or to go away.’ ‘Ah,’ said the father, ‘I have nothing but unhappiness with you.
I will see you no more.’ ‘Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day.
Then will I go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate, understand one art which will support me.’ ‘Learn what you will,’ spoke the father, ‘it is all the same to me.
If you desire nothing more than that, I can easily keep it in mind.’ When the day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to himself: ‘If I could but shudder!
If I could but shudder!’ Then a man approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they could see the gallows, the man said to him: ‘Look, there is the tree where seven men have married the ropemaker’s daughter, and are now learning how to fly.
Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes, and you will soon learn how to shudder.’ ‘If that is all that is wanted,’ answered the youth, ‘it is easily done; but if I learn how to shudder as fast as that, you shall have my fifty talers.
And as he was cold, he lighted himself a fire, but at midnight the wind blew so sharply that in spite of his fire, he could not get warm.
And as the wind knocked the hanged men against each other, and they moved backwards and forwards, he thought to himself: ‘If you shiver below by the fire, how those up above must freeze and suffer!’ And as he felt pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed up, unbound one of them after the other, and brought down all seven.
Then he stoked the fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm themselves.
Then he sat down by his fire and fell asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have the fifty talers, and said: ‘Well do you know how to shudder?’ ‘No,’ answered he, ‘how should I know?
Those fellows up there did not open their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which they had on their bodies get burnt.’ Then the man saw that he would not get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying: ‘Such a youth has never come my way before.’ The youth likewise went his way, and once more began to mutter to himself: ‘Ah, if I could but shudder!
Ah, if I could but shudder!’ A waggoner who was striding behind him heard this and asked: ‘Who are you?’ ‘I don’t know,’ answered the youth.
Then the waggoner asked: ‘From whence do you come?’ ‘I know not.’ ‘Who is your father?’ ‘That I may not tell you.’ ‘What is it that you are always muttering between your teeth?’ ‘Ah,’ replied the youth, ‘I do so wish I could shudder, but no one can teach me how.’ ‘Enough of your foolish chatter,’ said the waggoner.
‘Come, go with me, I will see about a place for you.’ The youth went with the waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn where they wished to pass the night.
Then at the entrance of the parlour the youth again said quite loudly: ‘If I could but shudder!
For this purpose indeed have I journeyed forth.’ He let the host have no rest, until the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a haunted castle where anyone could very easily learn what shuddering was, if he would but watch in it for three nights.
The king had promised that he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was the most beautiful maiden the sun shone on.
Likewise in the castle lay great treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these treasures would then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough.
‘Ah, if I could but shudder!’ said he, ‘but I shall not learn it here either.’ Towards midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing it, something cried suddenly from one corner: ‘Au, miau! how cold we are!’ ‘You fools!’ cried he, ‘what are you crying about?
If you are cold, come and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.’ And when he had said that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap and sat down on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with their fiery eyes.
After a short time, when they had warmed themselves, they said: ‘Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?’ ‘Why not?’ he replied, ‘but just show me your paws.’ Then they stretched out their claws.
Wait, I must first cut them for you.’ Thereupon he seized them by the throats, put them on the cutting-board and screwed their feet fast.
But when he had made away with these two, and was about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and corner came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more and more of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled horribly, and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put it out.
‘That’s right,’ said he, ‘but go faster.’ Then the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it, up and down, over thresholds and stairs, but suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside down, and lay on him like a mountain.
Then said he: ‘After all it is a pity,--for so handsome a man.’ The youth heard it, got up, and said: ‘It has not come to that yet.’ Then the king was astonished, but very glad, and asked how he had fared.
‘Very well indeed,’ answered he; ‘one night is past, the two others will pass likewise.’ Then he went to the innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said: ‘I never expected to see you alive again!
If someone would but tell me!’ The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the fire, and once more began his old song: ‘If I could but shudder!’ When midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard; at first it was low, but it grew louder and louder.
This is not enough!’ Then the uproar began again, there was a roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise.
‘Wait,’ said he, ‘I will just stoke up the fire a little for you.’ When he had done that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together, and a hideous man was sitting in his place.
‘That is no part of our bargain,’ said the youth, ‘the bench is mine.’ The man wanted to push him away; the youth, however, would not allow that, but thrust him off with all his strength, and seated himself again in his own place.
‘Hurrah! now we’ll have fun!’ He played with them and lost some of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished from his sight.
‘I have been playing at nine-pins,’ he answered, ‘and have lost a couple of farthings.’ ‘Have you not shuddered then?’ ‘What?’ said he, ‘I have had a wonderful time!
Then he said: ‘Ha, ha, that is certainly my little cousin, who died only a few days ago,’ and he beckoned with his finger, and cried: ‘Come, little cousin, come.’ They placed the coffin on the ground, but he went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay therein.
‘Wait,’ said he, ‘I will warm you a little,’ and went to the fire and warmed his hand and laid it on the dead man’s face, but he remained cold.
Then he took him out, and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his arms that the blood might circulate again.
As this also did no good, he thought to himself: ‘When two people lie in bed together, they warm each other,’ and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down by him.
Then said the youth, ‘See, little cousin, have I not warmed you?’ The dead man, however, got up and cried: ‘Now will I strangle you.’ ‘What!’ said he, ‘is that the way you thank me?
‘I shall never learn it here as long as I live.’ Then a man entered who was taller than all others, and looked terrible.
I am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.’ ‘We shall see,’ said the old man.
‘If you are stronger, I will let you go--come, we will try.’ Then he led him by dark passages to a smith’s forge, took an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.
‘Now it is your turn to die.’ Then he seized an iron bar and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop, when he would give him great riches.
‘Of these,’ said he, ‘one part is for the poor, the other for the king, the third yours.’ In the meantime it struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the youth stood in darkness.
Next morning the king came and said: ‘Now you must have learnt what shuddering is?’ ‘No,’ he answered; ‘what can it be?
Her waiting-maid said: ‘I will find a cure for him; he shall soon learn what it is to shudder.’ She went out to the stream which flowed through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons brought to her.
At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucket full of cold water with the gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would sprawl about him.
Ah! now I know what it is to shudder!’ KING GRISLY-BEARD A great king of a land far away in the East had a daughter who was very beautiful, but so proud, and haughty, and conceited, that none of the princes who came to ask her in marriage was good enough for her, and she only made sport of them.
Once upon a time the king held a great feast, and asked thither all her suitors; and they all sat in a row, ranged according to their rank--kings, and princes, and dukes, and earls, and counts, and barons, and knights.
Then the princess came in, and as she passed by them she had something spiteful to say to every one.
The next was too short: ‘What a dumpling!’ said she.
The fourth was too pale, and she called him ‘Wallface.’ The fifth was too red, so she called him ‘Coxcomb.’ The sixth was not straight enough; so she said he was like a green stick, that had been laid to dry over a baker’s oven.
‘Look at him,’ said she; ‘his beard is like an old mop; he shall be called Grisly-beard.’ So the king got the nickname of Grisly-beard.
But the old king was very angry when he saw how his daughter behaved, and how she ill-treated all his guests; and he vowed that, willing or unwilling, she should marry the first man, be he prince or beggar, that came to the door.
Two days after there came by a travelling fiddler, who began to play under the window and beg alms; and when the king heard him, he said, ‘Let him come in.’ So they brought in a dirty-looking fellow; and when he had sung before the king and the princess, he begged a boon.
Then the king said, ‘You have sung so well, that I will give you my daughter for your wife.’ The princess begged and prayed; but the king said, ‘I have sworn to give you to the first comer, and I will keep my word.’ So words and tears were of no avail; the parson was sent for, and she was married to the fiddler.
‘Pray,’ said she, ‘whose is this wood?’ ‘It belongs to King Grisly-beard,’ answered he; ‘hadst thou taken him, all had been thine.’ ‘Ah! unlucky wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘would that I had married King Grisly-beard!’ Next they came to some fine meadows.
‘Whose are these beautiful green meadows?’ said she.
‘It belongs to King Grisly-beard; hadst thou taken him, it had all been thine.’ ‘Ah! wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘why did I not marry King Grisly-beard?’ ‘That is no business of mine,’ said the fiddler: ‘why should you wish for another husband?
‘What a paltry place!’ said she; ‘to whom does that little dirty hole belong?’ Then the fiddler said, ‘That is your and my house, where we are to live.’ ‘Where are your servants?’ cried she.
‘What do we want with servants?’ said he; ‘you must do for yourself whatever is to be done.
Now make the fire, and put on water and cook my supper, for I am very tired.’ But the princess knew nothing of making fires and cooking, and the fiddler was forced to help her.
Thus they lived for two days: and when they had eaten up all there was in the cottage, the man said, ‘Wife, we can’t go on thus, spending money and earning nothing.
However, I’ll try and set up a trade in pots and pans, and you shall stand in the market and sell them.’ ‘Alas!’ sighed she, ‘if any of my father’s court should pass by and see me standing in the market, how they will laugh at me!’ But her husband did not care for that, and said she must work, if she did not wish to die of hunger.
At first the trade went well; for many people, seeing such a beautiful woman, went to buy her wares, and paid their money without thinking of taking away the goods.
They lived on this as long as it lasted; and then her husband bought a fresh lot of ware, and she sat herself down with it in the corner of the market; but a drunken soldier soon came by, and rode his horse against her stall, and broke all her goods into a thousand pieces.
Everything was ready, and all the pomp and brightness of the court was there.
Then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly which had brought her so low.
And the servants gave her some of the rich meats, which she put into her basket to take home.
All on a sudden, as she was going out, in came the king’s son in golden clothes; and when he saw a beautiful woman at the door, he took her by the hand, and said she should be his partner in the dance; but she trembled for fear, for she saw that it was King Grisly-beard, who was making sport of her.
Then everybody laughed and jeered at her; and she was so abashed, that she wished herself a thousand feet deep in the earth.
She sprang to the door to run away; but on the steps King Grisly-beard overtook her, and brought her back and said, ‘Fear me not!
I have done all this only to cure you of your silly pride, and to show you the folly of your ill-treatment of me.
Now all is over: you have learnt wisdom, and it is time to hold our marriage feast.’ Then the chamberlains came and brought her the most beautiful robes; and her father and his whole court were there already, and welcomed her home on her marriage.
One day he sent out a huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back.
‘Perhaps some accident has befallen him,’ said the king, and the next day he sent out two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they too stayed away.
Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said: ‘Scour the whole forest through, and do not give up until you have found all three.’ But of these also, none came home again, none were seen again.
From that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest, and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen of it, but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it.
This lasted for many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himself to the king as seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest.
The king, however, would not give his consent, and said: ‘It is not safe in there; I fear it would fare with you no better than with the others, and you would never come out again.’ The huntsman replied: ‘Lord, I will venture it at my own risk, of fear I know nothing.’ The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest.
It was not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way, and wanted to pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched itself out of the water, seized it, and drew it under.
When the huntsman saw that, he went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the water.
There was great astonishment over the wild man; the king, however, had him put in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade the door to be opened on pain of death, and the queen herself was to take the key into her keeping.
And from this time forth everyone could again go into the forest with safety.
The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the courtyard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage.
The boy ran thither and said: ‘Give me my ball out.’ ‘Not till you have opened the door for me,’ answered the man.
‘No,’ said the boy, ‘I will not do that; the king has forbidden it,’ and ran away.
The door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers.
The boy had become afraid; he called and cried after him: ‘Oh, wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beaten!’ The wild man turned back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and went with hasty steps into the forest.
When the king came home, he observed the empty cage, and asked the queen how that had happened.
She called the boy, but no one answered.
Then he could easily guess what had happened, and much grief reigned in the royal court.
When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he took the boy down from his shoulder, and said to him: ‘You will never see your father and mother again, but I will keep you with me, for you have set me free, and I have compassion on you.
Of treasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in the world.’ He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the next morning the man took him to a well, and said: ‘Behold, the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal, you shall sit beside it, and take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted.
As he was thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he involuntarily put it in the water.
He drew it quickly out again, but saw that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold off again, all was to no purpose.
In the evening Iron Hans came back, looked at the boy, and said: ‘What has happened to the well?’ ‘Nothing nothing,’ he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that the man might not see it.
But he said: ‘You have dipped your finger into the water, this time it may pass, but take care you do not again let anything go in.’ By daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and watching it.
His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head, and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well.
Iron Hans came, and already knew what had happened.
‘I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the third time then the well is polluted and you can no longer remain with me.’ On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger, however much it hurt him.
But the time was long to him, and he looked at the reflection of his face on the surface of the water.
And as he still bent down more and more while he was doing so, and trying to look straight into the eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into the water.
You can imagine how terrified the poor boy was!
He took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it round his head, in order that the man might not see it.
When he came he already knew everything, and said: ‘Take the handkerchief off.’ Then the golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he might, it was of no use.
But as you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there is one thing I will grant you; if you fall into any difficulty, come to the forest and cry: “Iron Hans,” and then I will come and help you.
My power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in abundance.’ Then the king’s son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city.
At length the cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood and water, and rake the cinders together.
Once when it so happened that no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the royal table, but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen, he kept his little cap on.
Such a thing as that had never yet come under the king’s notice, and he said: ‘When you come to the royal table you must take your hat off.’ He answered: ‘Ah, Lord, I cannot; I have a bad sore place on my head.’ Then the king had the cook called before him and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his service; and that he was to send him away at once.
The cook, however, had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.
As the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into the bedroom of the king’s daughter, and up she sprang to see what that could be.
Then she saw the boy, and cried to him: ‘Boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.’ He put his cap on with all haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together.
When he was ascending the stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said: ‘How can you take the king’s daughter a garland of such common flowers?
With these he departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces.
He took them to the gardener, and said: ‘I present them to your children, they can play with them.’ The following day the king’s daughter again called to him that he was to bring her a wreath of field-flowers, and then he went in with it, she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him, but he held it fast with both hands.
She again gave him a handful of ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener for playthings for his children.
Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war.
The king gathered together his people, and did not know whether or not he could offer any opposition to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty army.
When he came to the outskirts, he called ‘Iron Hans’ three times so loudly that it echoed through the trees.
The youth made over his three-legged horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and rode at the head of the soldiers.
When he got near the battlefield a great part of the king’s men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give way.
Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him.
Instead of returning to the king, however, he conducted his troop by byways back to the forest, and called forth Iron Hans.
When the king returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him, and wished him joy of his victory.
Perhaps the unknown man will show himself.’ When the feast was announced, the youth went out to the forest, and called Iron Hans.
‘That I may catch the king’s daughter’s golden apple.’ ‘It is as safe as if you had it already,’ said Iron Hans.
‘You shall likewise have a suit of red armour for the occasion, and ride on a spirited chestnut-horse.’ When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one.
The king’s daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none of them caught it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.
On the second day Iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and gave him a white horse.
Again he was the only one who caught the apple, and he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it.
The king grew angry, and said: ‘That is not allowed; he must appear before me and tell his name.’ He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple, should go away again they should pursue him, and if he would not come back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.
On the third day, he received from Iron Hans a suit of black armour and a black horse, and again he caught the apple.
But when he was riding off with it, the king’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near him that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword.
The youth nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fell from the youth’s head, and they could see that he had golden hair.
They rode back and announced this to the king.
The following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his boy.
‘He is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has likewise shown my children three golden apples which he has won.’ The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again had his little cap on his head.
But the king’s daughter went up to him and took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and he was so handsome that all were amazed.
‘Are you the knight who came every day to the festival, always in different colours, and who caught the three golden apples?’ asked the king.
‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘and here the apples are,’ and he took them out of his pocket, and returned them to the king.
‘If you desire further proof, you may see the wound which your people gave me when they followed me.
But I am likewise the knight who helped you to your victory over your enemies.’ ‘If you can perform such deeds as that, you are no gardener’s boy; tell me, who is your father?’ ‘My father is a mighty king, and gold have I in plenty as great as I require.’ ‘I well see,’ said the king, ‘that I owe my thanks to you; can I do anything to please you?’ ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘that indeed you can.
Give me your daughter to wife.’ The maiden laughed, and said: ‘He does not stand much on ceremony, but I have already seen by his golden hair that he was no gardener’s boy,’ and then she went and kissed him.
And as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately king came in with a great retinue.
He went up to the youth, embraced him and said: ‘I am Iron Hans, and was by enchantment a wild man, but you have set me free; all the treasures which I possess, shall be your property.’ CAT-SKIN There was once a king, whose queen had hair of the purest gold, and was so beautiful that her match was not to be met with on the whole face of the earth.
But this beautiful queen fell ill, and when she felt that her end drew near she called the king to her and said, ‘Promise me that you will never marry again, unless you meet with a wife who is as beautiful as I am, and who has golden hair like mine.’ Then when the king in his grief promised all she asked, she shut her eyes and died.
But the king was not to be comforted, and for a long time never thought of taking another wife.
At last, however, his wise men said, ‘this will not do; the king must marry again, that we may have a queen.’ So messengers were sent far and wide, to seek for a bride as beautiful as the late queen.
But there was no princess in the world so beautiful; and if there had been, still there was not one to be found who had golden hair.
So the messengers came home, and had had all their trouble for nothing.
Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her mother, and had the same golden hair.
And when she was grown up, the king looked at her and saw that she was just like this late queen: then he said to his courtiers, ‘May I not marry my daughter?
She is the very image of my dead wife: unless I have her, I shall not find any bride upon the whole earth, and you say there must be a queen.’ When the courtiers heard this they were shocked, and said, ‘Heaven forbid that a father should marry his daughter!
But the king made the most skilful workmen in his kingdom weave the three dresses: one golden, like the sun; another silvery, like the moon; and a third sparkling, like the stars: and his hunters were told to hunt out all the beasts in his kingdom, and to take the finest fur out of their skins: and thus a mantle of a thousand furs was made.
When all were ready, the king sent them to her; but she got up in the night when all were asleep, and took three of her trinkets, a golden ring, a golden necklace, and a golden brooch, and packed the three dresses--of the sun, the moon, and the stars--up in a nutshell, and wrapped herself up in the mantle made of all sorts of fur, and besmeared her face and hands with soot.
Then she threw herself upon Heaven for help in her need, and went away, and journeyed on the whole night, till at last she came to a large wood.
Now as the king to whom the wood belonged was hunting in it, his dogs came to the tree, and began to snuff about, and run round and round, and bark.
Then they showed her a little corner under the staircase, where no light of day ever peeped in, and said, ‘Cat-skin, you may lie and sleep there.’ And she was sent into the kitchen, and made to fetch wood and water, to blow the fire, pluck the poultry, pick the herbs, sift the ashes, and do all the dirty work.
Thus Cat-skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully.
‘Ah! pretty princess!’ thought she, ‘what will now become of thee?’ But it happened one day that a feast was to be held in the king’s castle, so she said to the cook, ‘May I go up a little while and see what is going on?
She next opened her nutshell, and brought out of it the dress that shone like the sun, and so went to the feast.
Everyone made way for her, for nobody knew her, and they thought she could be no less than a king’s daughter.
But the king came up to her, and held out his hand and danced with her; and he thought in his heart, ‘I never saw any one half so beautiful.’ When the dance was at an end she curtsied; and when the king looked round for her, she was gone, no one knew wither.
The truth was, that she had run into her little cabin, pulled off her dress, blackened her face and hands, put on the fur-skin cloak, and was Cat-skin again.
The cook was frightened when he heard the order, and said to Cat-skin, ‘You must have let a hair fall into the soup; if it be so, you will have a good beating.’ Then he went before the king, and he asked him who had cooked the soup.
‘I did,’ answered the cook.
But the king said, ‘That is not true; it was better done than you could do it.’ Then he answered, ‘To tell the truth I did not cook it, but Cat-skin did.’ ‘Then let Cat-skin come up,’ said the king: and when she came he said to her, ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am a poor child,’ said she, ‘that has lost both father and mother.’ ‘How came you in my palace?’ asked he.
‘I am good for nothing,’ said she, ‘but to be scullion-girl, and to have boots and shoes thrown at my head.’ ‘But how did you get the ring that was in the soup?’ asked the king.
Then she would not own that she knew anything about the ring; so the king sent her away again about her business.
‘Yes,’ said he, ‘but come again in half an hour, and cook the king the soup that he likes so much.’ Then she ran to her little cabin, washed herself quickly, and took her dress out which was silvery as the moon, and put it on; and when she went in, looking like a king’s daughter, the king went up to her, and rejoiced at seeing her again, and when the dance began he danced with her.
Whilst the cook was above stairs, she got the golden necklace and dropped it into the soup; then it was brought to the king, who ate it, and it pleased him as well as before; so he sent for the cook, who was again forced to tell him that Cat-skin had cooked it.
But when the king had ordered a feast to be got ready for the third time, it happened just the same as before.
‘You must be a witch, Cat-skin,’ said the cook; ‘for you always put something into your soup, so that it pleases the king better than mine.’ However, he let her go up as before.
Then she put on her dress which sparkled like the stars, and went into the ball-room in it; and the king danced with her again, and thought she had never looked so beautiful as she did then.
When the king got to the bottom, he ordered Cat-skin to be called once more, and soon saw the white finger, and the ring that he had put on it whilst they were dancing: so he seized her hand, and kept fast hold of it, and when she wanted to loose herself and spring away, the fur cloak fell off a little on one side, and the starry dress sparkled underneath it.
Then he got hold of the fur and tore it off, and her golden hair and beautiful form were seen, and she could no longer hide herself: so she washed the soot and ashes from her face, and showed herself to be the most beautiful princess upon the face of the earth.
She had two children who were like the two rose-trees, and one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red.
They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children in the world were, only Snow-white was more quiet and gentle than Rose-red.
Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home with her mother, and helped her with her housework, or read to her when there was nothing to do.
The little hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.
No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss, and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and did not worry on their account.
Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near their bed.
And when they looked round they found that they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces further.
And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who watches over good children.
Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat that it was a pleasure to look inside it.
The kettle was of brass and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished.
In the evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said: ‘Go, Snow-white, and bolt the door,’ and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls listened as they sat and spun.
One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, someone knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in.
The mother said: ‘Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveller who is seeking shelter.’ Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black head within the door.
Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered, and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother’s bed.
The bear said: ‘Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a little’; so they brought the broom and swept the bear’s hide clean; and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and comfortably.
Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were never fastened until their black friend had arrived.
‘I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs.
A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest to get firewood.
There they found a big tree which lay felled on the ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was.
When they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a snow-white beard a yard long.
‘You stupid, prying goose!’ answered the dwarf: ‘I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking.
The little bit of food that we people get is immediately burnt up with heavy logs; we do not swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk.
I had just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished; but the cursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the tree closed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white beard; so now it is tight and I cannot get away, and the silly, sleek, milk-faced things laugh!
Ugh! how odious you are!’ The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it was caught too fast.
‘You senseless goose!’ snarled the dwarf; ‘why should you fetch someone?
You are already two too many for me; can you not think of something better?’ ‘Don’t be impatient,’ said Snow-white, ‘I will help you,’ and she pulled her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.
As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it up, grumbling to himself: ‘Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine beard.
Bad luck to you!’ and then he swung the bag upon his back, and went off without even once looking at the children.
Some time afterwards Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a dish of fish.
As they came near the brook they saw something like a large grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of little good, for he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.
The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast together.
There was nothing to do but to bring out the scissors and cut the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost.
When the dwarf saw that he screamed out: ‘Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man’s face?
I wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!’ Then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without another word he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.
It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons.
There they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a rock not far away.
Immediately they heard a loud, piteous cry.
They ran up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.
The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man, and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried with his shrill voice: ‘Could you not have done it more carefully!
You dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you clumsy creatures!’ Then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and slipped away again under the rock into his hole.
The girls, who by this time were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their business in town.
As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot, and had not thought that anyone would come there so late.
The evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with all colours so beautifully that the children stood still and stared at them.
He was still cursing when a loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out of the forest.
Then in the dread of his heart he cried: ‘Dear Mr Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treasures; look, the beautiful jewels lying there!
Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy’s sake eat them!’ The bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single blow with his paw, and he did not move again.
The girls had run away, but the bear called to them: ‘Snow-white and Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I will come with you.’ Then they recognized his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly his bearskin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in gold.
‘I am a king’s son,’ he said, ‘and I was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; I have had to run about the forest as a savage bear until I was freed by his death.
Now he has got his well-deserved punishment.
Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and they divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered together in his cave.
The old mother lived peacefully and happily with her children for many years.
Throughout their lives they remained close friends, and both studied law at Marburg University.
Jacob was a pioneer in the study of German philology, and although Wilhelm’s work was hampered by poor health the brothers collaborated in the creation of a German dictionary, not completed until a century after their deaths.
But they were best (and universally) known for the collection of over two hundred folk tales they made from oral sources and published in two volumes of ‘Nursery and Household Tales’ in 1812 and 1814.
Although their intention was to preserve such material as part of German cultural and literary history, and their collection was first published with scholarly notes and no illustration, the tales soon came into the possession of young readers.
This was in part due to Edgar Taylor, who made the first English translation in 1823, selecting about fifty stories ‘with the amusement of some young friends principally in view.’ They have been an essential ingredient of children’s reading ever since.
Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov Chapter II.
The Second Marriage And The Second Family Chapter IV.
An Unfortunate Gathering Chapter I.
They Arrive At The Monastery Chapter II.
The Scandalous Scene Book III.
The Sensualists Chapter I.
In The Servants’ Quarters Chapter II.
Lizaveta Chapter III.
The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—In Verse Chapter IV.
The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—In Anecdote Chapter V.
The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—“Heels Up” Chapter VI.
Smerdyakov Chapter VII.
The Controversy Chapter VIII.
The Sensualists Chapter X.
Both Together Chapter XI.
Another Reputation Ruined Part II Book IV.
Lacerations Chapter I.
Father Ferapont Chapter II.
A Meeting With The Schoolboys Chapter IV.
At The Hohlakovs’ Chapter V.
A Laceration In The Drawing-Room Chapter VI.
A Laceration In The Cottage Chapter VII.
The Engagement Chapter II.
Smerdyakov With A Guitar Chapter III.
The Brothers Make Friends Chapter IV.
Rebellion Chapter V.
The Grand Inquisitor Chapter VI.
“It’s Always Worth While Speaking To A Clever Man” Book VI.
Father Zossima And His Visitors Chapter II.
Conversations And Exhortations Of Father Zossima Part III Book VII.
The Breath Of Corruption Chapter II.
A Critical Moment Chapter III.
Kuzma Samsonov Chapter II.
A Sudden Resolution Chapter VI.
The First And Rightful Lover Chapter VIII.
The Preliminary Investigation Chapter I.
The Beginning Of Perhotin’s Official Career Chapter II.
The Sufferings Of A Soul, The First Ordeal Chapter IV.
The Prosecutor Catches Mitya Chapter VII.
Received With Hisses Chapter VIII.
The Evidence Of The Witnesses.
Kolya Krassotkin Chapter II.
Children Chapter III.
The Schoolboy Chapter IV.
Precocity Chapter VII.
At Grushenka’s Chapter II.
The First Interview With Smerdyakov Chapter VII.
The Second Visit To Smerdyakov Chapter VIII.
The Third And Last Interview With Smerdyakov Chapter IX.
Ivan’s Nightmare Chapter X.
A Judicial Error Chapter I.
Dangerous Witnesses Chapter III.
A Sudden Catastrophe Chapter VI.
The Prosecutor’s Speech.
Sketches Of Character Chapter VII.
An Historical Survey Chapter VIII.
A Treatise On Smerdyakov Chapter IX.
The Galloping Troika.
The End Of The Prosecutor’s Speech.
An Argument That Cuts Both Ways Chapter XI.
A Corrupter Of Thought Chapter XIV.
The Peasants Stand Firm Epilogue Chapter I.
The Speech At The Stone Footnotes PART I Book I.
Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, a land owner well known in our district in his own day, and still remembered among us owing to his gloomy and tragic death, which happened thirteen years ago, and which I shall describe in its proper place.
For the present I will only say that this “landowner”—for so we used to call him, although he hardly spent a day of his life on his own estate—was a strange type, yet one pretty frequently to be met with, a type abject and vicious and at the same time senseless.
But he was one of those senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after their worldly affairs, and, apparently, after nothing else.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, for instance, began with next to nothing; his estate was of the smallest; he ran to dine at other men’s tables, and fastened on them as a toady, yet at his death it appeared that he had a hundred thousand roubles in hard cash.
At the same time, he was all his life one of the most senseless, fantastical fellows in the whole district.
I repeat, it was not stupidity—the majority of these fantastical fellows are shrewd and intelligent enough—but just senselessness, and a peculiar national form of it.
Fyodor Pavlovitch’s first wife, Adelaïda Ivanovna, belonged to a fairly rich and distinguished noble family, also landowners in our district, the Miüsovs.
How it came to pass that an heiress, who was also a beauty, and moreover one of those vigorous, intelligent girls, so common in this generation, but sometimes also to be found in the last, could have married such a worthless, puny weakling, as we all called him, I won’t attempt to explain.
Indeed, if this precipice, a chosen and favorite spot of hers, had been less picturesque, if there had been a prosaic flat bank in its place, most likely the suicide would never have taken place.
This is a fact, and probably there have been not a few similar instances in the last two or three generations.
Adelaïda Ivanovna Miüsov’s action was similarly, no doubt, an echo of other people’s ideas, and was due to the irritation caused by lack of mental freedom.
She wanted, perhaps, to show her feminine independence, to override class distinctions and the despotism of her family.
And a pliable imagination persuaded her, we must suppose, for a brief moment, that Fyodor Pavlovitch, in spite of his parasitic position, was one of the bold and ironical spirits of that progressive epoch, though he was, in fact, an ill-natured buffoon and nothing more.
What gave the marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by an elopement, and this greatly captivated Adelaïda Ivanovna’s fancy.
Fyodor Pavlovitch’s position at the time made him specially eager for any such enterprise, for he was passionately anxious to make a career in one way or another.
To attach himself to a good family and obtain a dowry was an alluring prospect.
As for mutual love it did not exist apparently, either in the bride or in him, in spite of Adelaïda Ivanovna’s beauty.
This was, perhaps, a unique case of the kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was always of a voluptuous temper, and ready to run after any petticoat on the slightest encouragement.
She seems to have been the only woman who made no particular appeal to his senses.
Immediately after the elopement Adelaïda Ivanovna discerned in a flash that she had no feeling for her husband but contempt.
The marriage accordingly showed itself in its true colors with extraordinary rapidity.
Although the family accepted the event pretty quickly and apportioned the runaway bride her dowry, the husband and wife began to lead a most disorderly life, and there were everlasting scenes between them.
It was said that the young wife showed incomparably more generosity and dignity than Fyodor Pavlovitch, who, as is now known, got hold of all her money up to twenty-five thousand roubles as soon as she received it, so that those thousands were lost to her for ever.
The little village and the rather fine town house which formed part of her dowry he did his utmost for a long time to transfer to his name, by means of some deed of conveyance.
He would probably have succeeded, merely from her moral fatigue and desire to get rid of him, and from the contempt and loathing he aroused by his persistent and shameless importunity.
But, fortunately, Adelaïda Ivanovna’s family intervened and circumvented his greediness.
It is known for a fact that frequent fights took place between the husband and wife, but rumor had it that Fyodor Pavlovitch did not beat his wife but was beaten by her, for she was a hot-tempered, bold, dark-browed, impatient woman, possessed of remarkable physical strength.
Finally, she left the house and ran away from Fyodor Pavlovitch with a destitute divinity student, leaving Mitya, a child of three years old, in her husband’s hands.
Immediately Fyodor Pavlovitch introduced a regular harem into the house, and abandoned himself to orgies of drunkenness.
In the intervals he used to drive all over the province, complaining tearfully to each and all of Adelaïda Ivanovna’s having left him, going into details too disgraceful for a husband to mention in regard to his own married life.
What seemed to gratify him and flatter his self-love most was to play the ridiculous part of the injured husband, and to parade his woes with embellishments.
“One would think that you’d got a promotion, Fyodor Pavlovitch, you seem so pleased in spite of your sorrow,” scoffers said to him.
Many even added that he was glad of a new comic part in which to play the buffoon, and that it was simply to make it funnier that he pretended to be unaware of his ludicrous position.
But, who knows, it may have been simplicity.
At last he succeeded in getting on the track of his runaway wife.
The poor woman turned out to be in Petersburg, where she had gone with her divinity student, and where she had thrown herself into a life of complete emancipation.
Fyodor Pavlovitch at once began bustling about, making preparations to go to Petersburg, with what object he could not himself have said.
He would perhaps have really gone; but having determined to do so he felt at once entitled to fortify himself for the journey by another bout of reckless drinking.
And just at that time his wife’s family received the news of her death in Petersburg.
She had died quite suddenly in a garret, according to one story, of typhus, or as another version had it, of starvation.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk when he heard of his wife’s death, and the story is that he ran out into the street and began shouting with joy, raising his hands to Heaven: “Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace,” but others say he wept without restraint like a little child, so much so that people were sorry for him, in spite of the repulsion he inspired.
It is quite possible that both versions were true, that he rejoiced at his release, and at the same time wept for her who released him.
And we ourselves are, too.
He Gets Rid Of His Eldest Son You can easily imagine what a father such a man could be and how he would bring up his children.
His behavior as a father was exactly what might be expected.
He completely abandoned the child of his marriage with Adelaïda Ivanovna, not from malice, nor because of his matrimonial grievances, but simply because he forgot him.
While he was wearying every one with his tears and complaints, and turning his house into a sink of debauchery, a faithful servant of the family, Grigory, took the three-year-old Mitya into his care.
It happened moreover that the child’s relations on his mother’s side forgot him too at first.
His grandfather was no longer living, his widow, Mitya’s grandmother, had moved to Moscow, and was seriously ill, while his daughters were married, so that Mitya remained for almost a whole year in old Grigory’s charge and lived with him in the servant’s cottage.
But if his father had remembered him (he could not, indeed, have been altogether unaware of his existence) he would have sent him back to the cottage, as the child would only have been in the way of his debaucheries.
But a cousin of Mitya’s mother, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, happened to return from Paris.
He lived for many years afterwards abroad, but was at that time quite a young man, and distinguished among the Miüsovs as a man of enlightened ideas and of European culture, who had been in the capitals and abroad.
He had known Proudhon and Bakunin personally, and in his declining years was very fond of describing the three days of the Paris Revolution of February 1848, hinting that he himself had almost taken part in the fighting on the barricades.
This was one of the most grateful recollections of his youth.
He had an independent property of about a thousand souls, to reckon in the old style.
His splendid estate lay on the outskirts of our little town and bordered on the lands of our famous monastery, with which Pyotr Alexandrovitch began an endless lawsuit, almost as soon as he came into the estate, concerning the rights of fishing in the river or wood-cutting in the forest, I don’t know exactly which.
He regarded it as his duty as a citizen and a man of culture to open an attack upon the “clericals.” Hearing all about Adelaïda Ivanovna, whom he, of course, remembered, and in whom he had at one time been interested, and learning of the existence of Mitya, he intervened, in spite of all his youthful indignation and contempt for Fyodor Pavlovitch.
He made the latter’s acquaintance for the first time, and told him directly that he wished to undertake the child’s education.
He used long afterwards to tell as a characteristic touch, that when he began to speak of Mitya, Fyodor Pavlovitch looked for some time as though he did not understand what child he was talking about, and even as though he was surprised to hear that he had a little son in the house.
The story may have been exaggerated, yet it must have been something like the truth.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was all his life fond of acting, of suddenly playing an unexpected part, sometimes without any motive for doing so, and even to his own direct disadvantage, as, for instance, in the present case.
This habit, however, is characteristic of a very great number of people, some of them very clever ones, not like Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Pyotr Alexandrovitch carried the business through vigorously, and was appointed, with Fyodor Pavlovitch, joint guardian of the child, who had a small property, a house and land, left him by his mother.
Mitya did, in fact, pass into this cousin’s keeping, but as the latter had no family of his own, and after securing the revenues of his estates was in haste to return at once to Paris, he left the boy in charge of one of his cousins, a lady living in Moscow.
It came to pass that, settling permanently in Paris he, too, forgot the child, especially when the Revolution of February broke out, making an impression on his mind that he remembered all the rest of his life.
The Moscow lady died, and Mitya passed into the care of one of her married daughters.
I won’t enlarge upon that now, as I shall have much to tell later of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s firstborn, and must confine myself now to the most essential facts about him, without which I could not begin my story.
In the first place, this Mitya, or rather Dmitri Fyodorovitch, was the only one of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s three sons who grew up in the belief that he had property, and that he would be independent on coming of age.
He spent an irregular boyhood and youth.
He did not finish his studies at the gymnasium, he got into a military school, then went to the Caucasus, was promoted, fought a duel, and was degraded to the ranks, earned promotion again, led a wild life, and spent a good deal of money.
He did not begin to receive any income from Fyodor Pavlovitch until he came of age, and until then got into debt.
He saw and knew his father, Fyodor Pavlovitch, for the first time on coming of age, when he visited our neighborhood on purpose to settle with him about his property.
He did not stay long with him, and made haste to get away, having only succeeded in obtaining a sum of money, and entering into an agreement for future payments from the estate, of the revenues and value of which he was unable (a fact worthy of note), upon this occasion, to get a statement from his father.
Fyodor Pavlovitch remarked for the first time then (this, too, should be noted) that Mitya had a vague and exaggerated idea of his property.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was very well satisfied with this, as it fell in with his own designs.
He gathered only that the young man was frivolous, unruly, of violent passions, impatient, and dissipated, and that if he could only obtain ready money he would be satisfied, although only, of course, for a short time.
So Fyodor Pavlovitch began to take advantage of this fact, sending him from time to time small doles, installments.
The young man was overwhelmed, suspected deceit and cheating, and was almost beside himself.
And, indeed, this circumstance led to the catastrophe, the account of which forms the subject of my first introductory story, or rather the external side of it.
But before I pass to that story I must say a little of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s other two sons, and of their origin.
The Second Marriage And The Second Family Very shortly after getting his four-year-old Mitya off his hands Fyodor Pavlovitch married a second time.
His second marriage lasted eight years.
He took this second wife, Sofya Ivanovna, also a very young girl, from another province, where he had gone upon some small piece of business in company with a Jew.
Though Fyodor Pavlovitch was a drunkard and a vicious debauchee he never neglected investing his capital, and managed his business affairs very successfully, though, no doubt, not over-scrupulously.
Sofya Ivanovna was the daughter of an obscure deacon, and was left from childhood an orphan without relations.
She grew up in the house of a general’s widow, a wealthy old lady of good position, who was at once her benefactress and tormentor.
I do not know the details, but I have only heard that the orphan girl, a meek and gentle creature, was once cut down from a halter in which she was hanging from a nail in the loft, so terrible were her sufferings from the caprice and everlasting nagging of this old woman, who was apparently not bad-hearted but had become an insufferable tyrant through idleness.
Fyodor Pavlovitch made her an offer; inquiries were made about him and he was refused.
But again, as in his first marriage, he proposed an elopement to the orphan girl.
But she lived in another province; besides, what could a little girl of sixteen know about it, except that she would be better at the bottom of the river than remaining with her benefactress.
So the poor child exchanged a benefactress for a benefactor.
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not get a penny this time, for the general’s widow was furious.
But he had not reckoned on a dowry; what allured him was the remarkable beauty of the innocent girl, above all her innocent appearance, which had a peculiar attraction for a vicious profligate, who had hitherto admired only the coarser types of feminine beauty.
“Those innocent eyes slit my soul up like a razor,” he used to say afterwards, with his loathsome snigger.
In a man so depraved this might, of course, mean no more than sensual attraction.
As he had received no dowry with his wife, and had, so to speak, taken her “from the halter,” he did not stand on ceremony with her.
Making her feel that she had “wronged” him, he took advantage of her phenomenal meekness and submissiveness to trample on the elementary decencies of marriage.
He gathered loose women into his house, and carried on orgies of debauchery in his wife’s presence.
To show what a pass things had come to, I may mention that Grigory, the gloomy, stupid, obstinate, argumentative servant, who had always hated his first mistress, Adelaïda Ivanovna, took the side of his new mistress.
He championed her cause, abusing Fyodor Pavlovitch in a manner little befitting a servant, and on one occasion broke up the revels and drove all the disorderly women out of the house.
In the end this unhappy young woman, kept in terror from her childhood, fell into that kind of nervous disease which is most frequently found in peasant women who are said to be “possessed by devils.” At times after terrible fits of hysterics she even lost her reason.
Yet she bore Fyodor Pavlovitch two sons, Ivan and Alexey, the eldest in the first year of marriage and the second three years later.
When she died, little Alexey was in his fourth year, and, strange as it seems, I know that he remembered his mother all his life, like a dream, of course.
At her death almost exactly the same thing happened to the two little boys as to their elder brother, Mitya.
They were completely forgotten and abandoned by their father.
They were looked after by the same Grigory and lived in his cottage, where they were found by the tyrannical old lady who had brought up their mother.
She was still alive, and had not, all those eight years, forgotten the insult done her.
All that time she was obtaining exact information as to her Sofya’s manner of life, and hearing of her illness and hideous surroundings she declared aloud two or three times to her retainers: “It serves her right.
God has punished her for her ingratitude.” Exactly three months after Sofya Ivanovna’s death the general’s widow suddenly appeared in our town, and went straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s house.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom she had not seen for those eight years, came in to her drunk.
The story is that instantly upon seeing him, without any sort of explanation, she gave him two good, resounding slaps on the face, seized him by a tuft of hair, and shook him three times up and down.
Then, without a word, she went straight to the cottage to the two boys.
Seeing, at the first glance, that they were unwashed and in dirty linen, she promptly gave Grigory, too, a box on the ear, and announcing that she would carry off both the children she wrapped them just as they were in a rug, put them in the carriage, and drove off to her own town.
Grigory accepted the blow like a devoted slave, without a word, and when he escorted the old lady to her carriage he made her a low bow and pronounced impressively that, “God would repay her for the orphans.” “You are a blockhead all the same,” the old lady shouted to him as she drove away.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, thinking it over, decided that it was a good thing, and did not refuse the general’s widow his formal consent to any proposition in regard to his children’s education.
It happened that the old lady died soon after this, but she left the boys in her will a thousand roubles each “for their instruction, and so that all be spent on them exclusively, with the condition that it be so portioned out as to last till they are twenty-one, for it is more than adequate provision for such children.
If other people think fit to throw away their money, let them.” I have not read the will myself, but I heard there was something queer of the sort, very whimsically expressed.
The principal heir, Yefim Petrovitch Polenov, the Marshal of Nobility of the province, turned out, however, to be an honest man.
Writing to Fyodor Pavlovitch, and discerning at once that he could extract nothing from him for his children’s education (though the latter never directly refused but only procrastinated as he always did in such cases, and was, indeed, at times effusively sentimental), Yefim Petrovitch took a personal interest in the orphans.
He became especially fond of the younger, Alexey, who lived for a long while as one of his family.
I beg the reader to note this from the beginning.
And to Yefim Petrovitch, a man of a generosity and humanity rarely to be met with, the young people were more indebted for their education and bringing up than to any one.
He kept the two thousand roubles left to them by the general’s widow intact, so that by the time they came of age their portions had been doubled by the accumulation of interest.
He educated them both at his own expense, and certainly spent far more than a thousand roubles upon each of them.
I won’t enter into a detailed account of their boyhood and youth, but will only mention a few of the most important events.
Of the elder, Ivan, I will only say that he grew into a somewhat morose and reserved, though far from timid boy.
At ten years old he had realized that they were living not in their own home but on other people’s charity, and that their father was a man of whom it was disgraceful to speak.
This boy began very early, almost in his infancy (so they say at least), to show a brilliant and unusual aptitude for learning.
I don’t know precisely why, but he left the family of Yefim Petrovitch when he was hardly thirteen, entering a Moscow gymnasium, and boarding with an experienced and celebrated teacher, an old friend of Yefim Petrovitch.
Ivan used to declare afterwards that this was all due to the “ardor for good works” of Yefim Petrovitch, who was captivated by the idea that the boy’s genius should be trained by a teacher of genius.
But neither Yefim Petrovitch nor this teacher was living when the young man finished at the gymnasium and entered the university.
As Yefim Petrovitch had made no provision for the payment of the tyrannical old lady’s legacy, which had grown from one thousand to two, it was delayed, owing to formalities inevitable in Russia, and the young man was in great straits for the first two years at the university, as he was forced to keep himself all the time he was studying.
It must be noted that he did not even attempt to communicate with his father, perhaps from pride, from contempt for him, or perhaps from his cool common sense, which told him that from such a father he would get no real assistance.
However that may have been, the young man was by no means despondent and succeeded in getting work, at first giving sixpenny lessons and afterwards getting paragraphs on street incidents into the newspapers under the signature of “Eye-Witness.” These paragraphs, it was said, were so interesting and piquant that they were soon taken.
This alone showed the young man’s practical and intellectual superiority over the masses of needy and unfortunate students of both sexes who hang about the offices of the newspapers and journals, unable to think of anything better than everlasting entreaties for copying and translations from the French.
Having once got into touch with the editors Ivan Fyodorovitch always kept up his connection with them, and in his latter years at the university he published brilliant reviews of books upon various special subjects, so that he became well known in literary circles.
But only in his last year he suddenly succeeded in attracting the attention of a far wider circle of readers, so that a great many people noticed and remembered him.
It was rather a curious incident.
When he had just left the university and was preparing to go abroad upon his two thousand roubles, Ivan Fyodorovitch published in one of the more important journals a strange article, which attracted general notice, on a subject of which he might have been supposed to know nothing, as he was a student of natural science.
The article dealt with a subject which was being debated everywhere at the time—the position of the ecclesiastical courts.
After discussing several opinions on the subject he went on to explain his own view.
What was most striking about the article was its tone, and its unexpected conclusion.
Many of the Church party regarded him unquestioningly as on their side.
And yet not only the secularists but even atheists joined them in their applause.
Finally some sagacious persons opined that the article was nothing but an impudent satirical burlesque.
I mention this incident particularly because this article penetrated into the famous monastery in our neighborhood, where the inmates, being particularly interested in the question of the ecclesiastical courts, were completely bewildered by it.
Learning the author’s name, they were interested in his being a native of the town and the son of “that Fyodor Pavlovitch.” And just then it was that the author himself made his appearance among us.
Why Ivan Fyodorovitch had come amongst us I remember asking myself at the time with a certain uneasiness.
This fateful visit, which was the first step leading to so many consequences, I never fully explained to myself.
It seemed strange on the face of it that a young man so learned, so proud, and apparently so cautious, should suddenly visit such an infamous house and a father who had ignored him all his life, hardly knew him, never thought of him, and would not under any circumstances have given him money, though he was always afraid that his sons Ivan and Alexey would also come to ask him for it.
And here the young man was staying in the house of such a father, had been living with him for two months, and they were on the best possible terms.
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, of whom we have spoken already, the cousin of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s first wife, happened to be in the neighborhood again on a visit to his estate.
He had come from Paris, which was his permanent home.
I remember that he was more surprised than any one when he made the acquaintance of the young man, who interested him extremely, and with whom he sometimes argued and not without an inner pang compared himself in acquirements.
He has no taste for drink and dissipation, and yet his father can’t do without him.
They get on so well together!” That was the truth; the young man had an unmistakable influence over his father, who positively appeared to be behaving more decently and even seemed at times ready to obey his son, though often extremely and even spitefully perverse.
It was only later that we learned that Ivan had come partly at the request of, and in the interests of, his elder brother, Dmitri, whom he saw for the first time on this very visit, though he had before leaving Moscow been in correspondence with him about an important matter of more concern to Dmitri than himself.
What that business was the reader will learn fully in due time.
Yet even when I did know of this special circumstance I still felt Ivan Fyodorovitch to be an enigmatic figure, and thought his visit rather mysterious.
I may add that Ivan appeared at the time in the light of a mediator between his father and his elder brother Dmitri, who was in open quarrel with his father and even planning to bring an action against him.
It is of that brother Alexey I find it most difficult to speak in this introduction.
Yet I must give some preliminary account of him, if only to explain one queer fact, which is that I have to introduce my hero to the reader wearing the cassock of a novice.
Yes, he had been for the last year in our monastery, and seemed willing to be cloistered there for the rest of his life.
I may as well give my full opinion from the beginning.
He was simply an early lover of humanity, and that he adopted the monastic life was simply because at that time it struck him, so to say, as the ideal escape for his soul struggling from the darkness of worldly wickedness to the light of love.
And the reason this life struck him in this way was that he found in it at that time, as he thought, an extraordinary being, our celebrated elder, Zossima, to whom he became attached with all the warm first love of his ardent heart.
And Alyosha remembered his mother’s face at that minute.
He used to say that it was frenzied but beautiful as he remembered.
In his childhood and youth he was by no means expansive, and talked little indeed, but not from shyness or a sullen unsociability; quite the contrary, from something different, from a sort of inner preoccupation entirely personal and unconcerned with other people, but so important to him that he seemed, as it were, to forget others on account of it.
But he was fond of people: he seemed throughout his life to put implicit trust in people: yet no one ever looked on him as a simpleton or naïve person.
There was something about him which made one feel at once (and it was so all his life afterwards) that he did not care to be a judge of others—that he would never take it upon himself to criticize and would never condemn any one for anything.
He seemed, indeed, to accept everything without the least condemnation though often grieving bitterly: and this was so much so that no one could surprise or frighten him even in his earliest youth.
Coming at twenty to his father’s house, which was a very sink of filthy debauchery, he, chaste and pure as he was, simply withdrew in silence when to look on was unbearable, but without the slightest sign of contempt or condemnation.
His father, who had once been in a dependent position, and so was sensitive and ready to take offense, met him at first with distrust and sullenness.
“He does not say much,” he used to say, “and thinks the more.” But soon, within a fortnight indeed, he took to embracing him and kissing him terribly often, with drunken tears, with sottish sentimentality, yet he evidently felt a real and deep affection for him, such as he had never been capable of feeling for any one before.
Every one, indeed, loved this young man wherever he went, and it was so from his earliest childhood.
When he entered the household of his patron and benefactor, Yefim Petrovitch Polenov, he gained the hearts of all the family, so that they looked on him quite as their own child.
Yet he entered the house at such a tender age that he could not have acted from design nor artfulness in winning affection.
So that the gift of making himself loved directly and unconsciously was inherent in him, in his very nature, so to speak.
It was the same at school, though he seemed to be just one of those children who are distrusted, sometimes ridiculed, and even disliked by their schoolfellows.
He was dreamy, for instance, and rather solitary.
From his earliest childhood he was fond of creeping into a corner to read, and yet he was a general favorite all the while he was at school.
He was rarely playful or merry, but any one could see at the first glance that this was not from any sullenness.
On the contrary he was bright and good-tempered.
He never tried to show off among his schoolfellows.
Perhaps because of this, he was never afraid of any one, yet the boys immediately understood that he was not proud of his fearlessness and seemed to be unaware that he was bold and courageous.
He never resented an insult.
It would happen that an hour after the offense he would address the offender or answer some question with as trustful and candid an expression as though nothing had happened between them.
And it was not that he seemed to have forgotten or intentionally forgiven the affront, but simply that he did not regard it as an affront, and this completely conquered and captivated the boys.
He had one characteristic which made all his schoolfellows from the bottom class to the top want to mock at him, not from malice but because it amused them.
This characteristic was a wild fanatical modesty and chastity.
He could not bear to hear certain words and certain conversations about women.
There are “certain” words and conversations unhappily impossible to eradicate in schools.
Boys pure in mind and heart, almost children, are fond of talking in school among themselves, and even aloud, of things, pictures, and images of which even soldiers would sometimes hesitate to speak.
More than that, much that soldiers have no knowledge or conception of is familiar to quite young children of our intellectual and higher classes.
There is no moral depravity, no real corrupt inner cynicism in it, but there is the appearance of it, and it is often looked upon among them as something refined, subtle, daring, and worthy of imitation.
Seeing that Alyosha Karamazov put his fingers in his ears when they talked of “that,” they used sometimes to crowd round him, pull his hands away, and shout nastiness into both ears, while he struggled, slipped to the floor, tried to hide himself without uttering one word of abuse, enduring their insults in silence.
But at last they left him alone and gave up taunting him with being a “regular girl,” and what’s more they looked upon it with compassion as a weakness.
At the time of Yefim Petrovitch’s death Alyosha had two more years to complete at the provincial gymnasium.
The inconsolable widow went almost immediately after his death for a long visit to Italy with her whole family, which consisted only of women and girls.
Alyosha went to live in the house of two distant relations of Yefim Petrovitch, ladies whom he had never seen before.
It was very characteristic of him, indeed, that he never cared at whose expense he was living.
In that respect he was a striking contrast to his elder brother Ivan, who struggled with poverty for his first two years in the university, maintained himself by his own efforts, and had from childhood been bitterly conscious of living at the expense of his benefactor.
In general he seemed scarcely to know the value of money, not, of course, in a literal sense.
When he was given pocket-money, which he never asked for, he was either terribly careless of it so that it was gone in a moment, or he kept it for weeks together, not knowing what to do with it.
And to shelter him would be no burden, but, on the contrary, would probably be looked on as a pleasure.” He did not finish his studies at the gymnasium.
A year before the end of the course he suddenly announced to the ladies that he was going to see his father about a plan which had occurred to him.
They were sorry and unwilling to let him go.
The journey was not an expensive one, and the ladies would not let him pawn his watch, a parting present from his benefactor’s family.
They provided him liberally with money and even fitted him out with new clothes and linen.
But he returned half the money they gave him, saying that he intended to go third class.
On his arrival in the town he made no answer to his father’s first inquiry why he had come before completing his studies, and seemed, so they say, unusually thoughtful.
It soon became apparent that he was looking for his mother’s tomb.
He practically acknowledged at the time that that was the only object of his visit.
It is more probable that he himself did not understand and could not explain what had suddenly arisen in his soul, and drawn him irresistibly into a new, unknown, but inevitable path.
Fyodor Pavlovitch could not show him where his second wife was buried, for he had never visited her grave since he had thrown earth upon her coffin, and in the course of years had entirely forgotten where she was buried.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, by the way, had for some time previously not been living in our town.
He made the acquaintance at first, in his own words, “of a lot of low Jews, Jewesses, and Jewkins,” and ended by being received by “Jews high and low alike.” It may be presumed that at this period he developed a peculiar faculty for making and hoarding money.
He finally returned to our town only three years before Alyosha’s arrival.
His former acquaintances found him looking terribly aged, although he was by no means an old man.
He behaved not exactly with more dignity but with more effrontery.
The former buffoon showed an insolent propensity for making buffoons of others.
His depravity with women was not simply what it used to be, but even more revolting.
In a short time he opened a great number of new taverns in the district.
It was evident that he had perhaps a hundred thousand roubles or not much less.
Many of the inhabitants of the town and district were soon in his debt, and, of course, had given good security.
Of late, too, he looked somehow bloated and seemed more irresponsible, more uneven, had sunk into a sort of incoherence, used to begin one thing and go on with another, as though he were letting himself go altogether.
He was more and more frequently drunk.
And, if it had not been for the same servant Grigory, who by that time had aged considerably too, and used to look after him sometimes almost like a tutor, Fyodor Pavlovitch might have got into terrible scrapes.
Alyosha’s arrival seemed to affect even his moral side, as though something had awakened in this prematurely old man which had long been dead in his soul.
He took him to our town cemetery and showed him in a remote corner a cast-iron tombstone, cheap but decently kept, on which were inscribed the name and age of the deceased and the date of her death, and below a four-lined verse, such as are commonly used on old-fashioned middle-class tombs.
To Alyosha’s amazement this tomb turned out to be Grigory’s doing.
He had put it up on the poor “crazy woman’s” grave at his own expense, after Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom he had often pestered about the grave, had gone to Odessa, abandoning the grave and all his memories.
Alyosha showed no particular emotion at the sight of his mother’s grave.
He only listened to Grigory’s minute and solemn account of the erection of the tomb; he stood with bowed head and walked away without uttering a word.
It was perhaps a year before he visited the cemetery again.
But this little episode was not without an influence upon Fyodor Pavlovitch—and a very original one.
He suddenly took a thousand roubles to our monastery to pay for requiems for the soul of his wife; but not for the second, Alyosha’s mother, the “crazy woman,” but for the first, Adelaïda Ivanovna, who used to thrash him.
He himself was far from being religious; he had probably never put a penny candle before the image of a saint.
Strange impulses of sudden feeling and sudden thought are common in such types.
I have mentioned already that he looked bloated.
His countenance at this time bore traces of something that testified unmistakably to the life he had led.
He slobbered every time he began to speak.
He was fond indeed of making fun of his own face, though, I believe, he was well satisfied with it.
He used particularly to point to his nose, which was not very large, but very delicate and conspicuously aquiline.
“A regular Roman nose,” he used to say, “with my goiter I’ve quite the countenance of an ancient Roman patrician of the decadent period.” He seemed proud of it.
Not long after visiting his mother’s grave Alyosha suddenly announced that he wanted to enter the monastery, and that the monks were willing to receive him as a novice.
He explained that this was his strong desire, and that he was solemnly asking his consent as his father.
The old man knew that the elder Zossima, who was living in the monastery hermitage, had made a special impression upon his “gentle boy.” “That is the most honest monk among them, of course,” he observed, after listening in thoughtful silence to Alyosha, and seeming scarcely surprised at his request.
So that’s where you want to be, my gentle boy?” He was half drunk, and suddenly he grinned his slow half-drunken grin, which was not without a certain cunning and tipsy slyness.
I had a presentiment that you would end in something like this.
You were making straight for it.
Well, to be sure you have your own two thousand.
Do you know that near one monastery there’s a place outside the town where every baby knows there are none but ‘the monks’ wives’ living, as they are called.
You know, it’s interesting in its own way, of course, as a variety.
Well, it’s a good opportunity.
I’ve always been thinking who would pray for me, and whether there’s any one in the world to do it.
You see, however stupid I am about it, I keep thinking, I keep thinking—from time to time, of course, not all the while.
It’s impossible, I think, for the devils to forget to drag me down to hell with their hooks when I die.
The monks in the monastery probably believe that there’s a ceiling in hell, for instance.
It makes it more refined, more enlightened, more Lutheran that is.
But, do you know, there’s a damnable question involved in it?
That’s how a Frenchman described hell: ‘_J’ai vu l’ombre d’un cocher qui avec l’ombre d’une brosse frottait l’ombre d’une carrosse._’ How do you know there are no hooks, darling?
When you’ve lived with the monks you’ll sing a different tune.
I feel that you’re the only creature in the world who has not condemned me.
I can’t help feeling it.” And he even began blubbering.
He was wicked and sentimental.
Elders Some of my readers may imagine that my young man was a sickly, ecstatic, poorly developed creature, a pale, consumptive dreamer.
On the contrary, Alyosha was at this time a well-grown, red-cheeked, clear-eyed lad of nineteen, radiant with health.
He was very handsome, too, graceful, moderately tall, with hair of a dark brown, with a regular, rather long, oval-shaped face, and wide-set dark gray, shining eyes; he was very thoughtful, and apparently very serene.
I shall be told, perhaps, that red cheeks are not incompatible with fanaticism and mysticism; but I fancy that Alyosha was more of a realist than any one.
Oh! no doubt, in the monastery he fully believed in miracles, but, to my thinking, miracles are never a stumbling-block to the realist.
It is not miracles that dispose realists to belief.
The genuine realist, if he is an unbeliever, will always find strength and ability to disbelieve in the miraculous, and if he is confronted with a miracle as an irrefutable fact he would rather disbelieve his own senses than admit the fact.
Even if he admits it, he admits it as a fact of nature till then unrecognized by him.
If the realist once believes, then he is bound by his very realism to admit the miraculous also.
Most likely not, but he believed solely because he desired to believe and possibly he fully believed in his secret heart even when he said, “I do not believe till I see.” I shall be told, perhaps, that Alyosha was stupid, undeveloped, had not finished his studies, and so on.
That he did not finish his studies is true, but to say that he was stupid or dull would be a great injustice.
He entered upon this path only because, at that time, it alone struck his imagination and presented itself to him as offering an ideal means of escape for his soul from darkness to light.
Add to that that he was to some extent a youth of our last epoch—that is, honest in nature, desiring the truth, seeking for it and believing in it, and seeking to serve it at once with all the strength of his soul, seeking for immediate action, and ready to sacrifice everything, life itself, for it.
The path Alyosha chose was a path going in the opposite direction, but he chose it with the same thirst for swift achievement.
As soon as he reflected seriously he was convinced of the existence of God and immortality, and at once he instinctively said to himself: “I want to live for immortality, and I will accept no compromise.” In the same way, if he had decided that God and immortality did not exist, he would at once have become an atheist and a socialist.
For socialism is not merely the labor question, it is before all things the atheistic question, the question of the form taken by atheism to-day, the question of the tower of Babel built without God, not to mount to heaven from earth but to set up heaven on earth.
Alyosha would have found it strange and impossible to go on living as before.
It is written: “Give all that thou hast to the poor and follow Me, if thou wouldst be perfect.” Alyosha said to himself: “I can’t give two roubles instead of ‘all,’ and only go to mass instead of ‘following Him.’” Perhaps his memories of childhood brought back our monastery, to which his mother may have taken him to mass.
Perhaps the slanting sunlight and the holy image to which his poor “crazy” mother had held him up still acted upon his imagination.
Brooding on these things he may have come to us perhaps only to see whether here he could sacrifice all or only “two roubles,” and in the monastery he met this elder.
I must digress to explain what an “elder” is in Russian monasteries, and I am sorry that I do not feel very competent to do so.
I will try, however, to give a superficial account of it in a few words.
Authorities on the subject assert that the institution of “elders” is of recent date, not more than a hundred years old in our monasteries, though in the orthodox East, especially in Sinai and Athos, it has existed over a thousand years.
It is maintained that it existed in ancient times in Russia also, but through the calamities which overtook Russia—the Tartars, civil war, the interruption of relations with the East after the destruction of Constantinople—this institution fell into oblivion.
It was revived among us towards the end of last century by one of the great “ascetics,” as they called him, Païssy Velitchkovsky, and his disciples.
But to this day it exists in few monasteries only, and has sometimes been almost persecuted as an innovation in Russia.
It flourished especially in the celebrated Kozelski Optin Monastery.
When and how it was introduced into our monastery I cannot say.
But he was almost dying of weakness and disease, and they had no one to take his place.
The question for our monastery was an important one, for it had not been distinguished by anything in particular till then: they had neither relics of saints, nor wonder-working ikons, nor glorious traditions, nor historical exploits.
It had flourished and been glorious all over Russia through its elders, to see and hear whom pilgrims had flocked for thousands of miles from all parts.
When you choose an elder, you renounce your own will and yield it to him in complete submission, complete self-abnegation.
This novitiate, this terrible school of abnegation, is undertaken voluntarily, in the hope of self-conquest, of self-mastery, in order, after a life of obedience, to attain perfect freedom, that is, from self; to escape the lot of those who have lived their whole life without finding their true selves in themselves.
This institution of elders is not founded on theory, but was established in the East from the practice of a thousand years.
The obligations due to an elder are not the ordinary “obedience” which has always existed in our Russian monasteries.
The obligation involves confession to the elder by all who have submitted themselves to him, and to the indissoluble bond between him and them.
The story is told, for instance, that in the early days of Christianity one such novice, failing to fulfill some command laid upon him by his elder, left his monastery in Syria and went to Egypt.
There, after great exploits, he was found worthy at last to suffer torture and a martyr’s death for the faith.
When the Church, regarding him as a saint, was burying him, suddenly, at the deacon’s exhortation, “Depart all ye unbaptized,” the coffin containing the martyr’s body left its place and was cast forth from the church, and this took place three times.
And only at last they learnt that this holy man had broken his vow of obedience and left his elder, and, therefore, could not be forgiven without the elder’s absolution in spite of his great deeds.
But here is a recent instance.
A monk was suddenly commanded by his elder to quit Athos, which he loved as a sacred place and a haven of refuge, and to go first to Jerusalem to do homage to the Holy Places and then to go to the north to Siberia: “There is the place for thee and not here.” The monk, overwhelmed with sorrow, went to the Œcumenical Patriarch at Constantinople and besought him to release him from his obedience.
But the Patriarch replied that not only was he unable to release him, but there was not and could not be on earth a power which could release him except the elder who had himself laid that duty upon him.
In this way the elders are endowed in certain cases with unbounded and inexplicable authority.
That is why in many of our monasteries the institution was at first resisted almost to persecution.
Meantime the elders immediately began to be highly esteemed among the people.
Masses of the ignorant people as well as men of distinction flocked, for instance, to the elders of our monastery to confess their doubts, their sins, and their sufferings, and ask for counsel and admonition.
Seeing this, the opponents of the elders declared that the sacrament of confession was being arbitrarily and frivolously degraded, though the continual opening of the heart to the elder by the monk or the layman had nothing of the character of the sacrament.
In the end, however, the institution of elders has been retained and is becoming established in Russian monasteries.
It is true, perhaps, that this instrument which had stood the test of a thousand years for the moral regeneration of a man from slavery to freedom and to moral perfectibility may be a two-edged weapon and it may lead some not to humility and complete self-control but to the most Satanic pride, that is, to bondage and not to freedom.
He came of a family of landowners, had been in the army in early youth, and served in the Caucasus as an officer.
He had, no doubt, impressed Alyosha by some peculiar quality of his soul.
It must be noted that Alyosha was bound by no obligation and could go where he pleased and be absent for whole days.
Though he wore the monastic dress it was voluntarily, not to be different from others.
Possibly his youthful imagination was deeply stirred by the power and fame of his elder.
It was said that so many people had for years past come to confess their sins to Father Zossima and to entreat him for words of advice and healing, that he had acquired the keenest intuition and could tell from an unknown face what a new-comer wanted, and what was the suffering on his conscience.
He sometimes astounded and almost alarmed his visitors by his knowledge of their secrets before they had spoken a word.
Alyosha noticed that many, almost all, went in to the elder for the first time with apprehension and uneasiness, but came out with bright and happy faces.
Alyosha was particularly struck by the fact that Father Zossima was not at all stern.
On the contrary, he was always almost gay.
There were, no doubt, up to the end of his life, among the monks some who hated and envied him, but they were few in number and they were silent, though among them were some of great dignity in the monastery, one, for instance, of the older monks distinguished for his strict keeping of fasts and vows of silence.
But the majority were on Father Zossima’s side and very many of them loved him with all their hearts, warmly and sincerely.
Some were almost fanatically devoted to him, and declared, though not quite aloud, that he was a saint, that there could be no doubt of it, and, seeing that his end was near, they anticipated miracles and great glory to the monastery in the immediate future from his relics.
Alyosha had unquestioning faith in the miraculous power of the elder, just as he had unquestioning faith in the story of the coffin that flew out of the church.
He saw many who came with sick children or relatives and besought the elder to lay hands on them and to pray over them, return shortly after—some the next day—and, falling in tears at the elder’s feet, thank him for healing their sick.
Whether they had really been healed or were simply better in the natural course of the disease was a question which did not exist for Alyosha, for he fully believed in the spiritual power of his teacher and rejoiced in his fame, in his glory, as though it were his own triumph.
His heart throbbed, and he beamed, as it were, all over when the elder came out to the gates of the hermitage into the waiting crowd of pilgrims of the humbler class who had flocked from all parts of Russia on purpose to see the elder and obtain his blessing.
They fell down before him, wept, kissed his feet, kissed the earth on which he stood, and wailed, while the women held up their children to him and brought him the sick “possessed with devils.” The elder spoke to them, read a brief prayer over them, blessed them, and dismissed them.
Of late he had become so weak through attacks of illness that he was sometimes unable to leave his cell, and the pilgrims waited for him to come out for several days.
Oh! he understood that for the humble soul of the Russian peasant, worn out by grief and toil, and still more by the everlasting injustice and everlasting sin, his own and the world’s, it was the greatest need and comfort to find some one or something holy to fall down before and worship.
“Among us there is sin, injustice, and temptation, but yet, somewhere on earth there is some one holy and exalted.
He has the truth; he knows the truth; so it is not dead upon the earth; so it will come one day to us, too, and rule over all the earth according to the promise.” Alyosha knew that this was just how the people felt and even reasoned.
He understood it, but that the elder Zossima was this saint and custodian of God’s truth—of that he had no more doubt than the weeping peasants and the sick women who held out their children to the elder.
The conviction that after his death the elder would bring extraordinary glory to the monastery was even stronger in Alyosha than in any one there, and, of late, a kind of deep flame of inner ecstasy burnt more and more strongly in his heart.
He was not at all troubled at this elder’s standing as a solitary example before him.
He carries in his heart the secret of renewal for all: that power which will, at last, establish truth on the earth, and all men will be holy and love one another, and there will be no more rich nor poor, no exalted nor humbled, but all will be as the children of God, and the true Kingdom of Christ will come.” That was the dream in Alyosha’s heart.
The arrival of his two brothers, whom he had not known till then, seemed to make a great impression on Alyosha.
He was extremely interested in his brother Ivan, but when the latter had been two months in the town, though they had met fairly often, they were still not intimate.
Alyosha was naturally silent, and he seemed to be expecting something, ashamed about something, while his brother Ivan, though Alyosha noticed at first that he looked long and curiously at him, seemed soon to have left off thinking of him.
Alyosha noticed it with some embarrassment.
He ascribed his brother’s indifference at first to the disparity of their age and education.
But he also wondered whether the absence of curiosity and sympathy in Ivan might be due to some other cause entirely unknown to him.
He kept fancying that Ivan was absorbed in something—something inward and important—that he was striving towards some goal, perhaps very hard to attain, and that that was why he had no thought for him.
Alyosha wondered, too, whether there was not some contempt on the part of the learned atheist for him—a foolish novice.
He could not take offense at this contempt, if it existed; yet, with an uneasy embarrassment which he did not himself understand, he waited for his brother to come nearer to him.
Dmitri used to speak of Ivan with the deepest respect and with a peculiar earnestness.
From him Alyosha learnt all the details of the important affair which had of late formed such a close and remarkable bond between the two elder brothers.
Dmitri’s enthusiastic references to Ivan were the more striking in Alyosha’s eyes since Dmitri was, compared with Ivan, almost uneducated, and the two brothers were such a contrast in personality and character that it would be difficult to find two men more unlike.
It was at this time that the meeting, or, rather gathering of the members of this inharmonious family took place in the cell of the elder who had such an extraordinary influence on Alyosha.
The pretext for this gathering was a false one.
It was at this time that the discord between Dmitri and his father seemed at its acutest stage and their relations had become insufferably strained.
Fyodor Pavlovitch seems to have been the first to suggest, apparently in joke, that they should all meet in Father Zossima’s cell, and that, without appealing to his direct intervention, they might more decently come to an understanding under the conciliating influence of the elder’s presence.
Dmitri, who had never seen the elder, naturally supposed that his father was trying to intimidate him, but, as he secretly blamed himself for his outbursts of temper with his father on several recent occasions, he accepted the challenge.
It happened that Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, who was staying in the district at the time, caught eagerly at the idea.
A Liberal of the forties and fifties, a freethinker and atheist, he may have been led on by boredom or the hope of frivolous diversion.
He was suddenly seized with the desire to see the monastery and the holy man.
As his lawsuit with the monastery still dragged on, he made it the pretext for seeing the Superior, in order to attempt to settle it amicably.
A visitor coming with such laudable intentions might be received with more attention and consideration than if he came from simple curiosity.
Influences from within the monastery were brought to bear on the elder, who of late had scarcely left his cell, and had been forced by illness to deny even his ordinary visitors.
In the end he consented to see them, and the day was fixed.
“Who has made me a judge over them?” was all he said, smilingly, to Alyosha.
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit.
Of all the wrangling, quarrelsome party, Dmitri was the only one who could regard the interview seriously.
All the others would come from frivolous motives, perhaps insulting to the elder.
Ivan and Miüsov would come from curiosity, perhaps of the coarsest kind, while his father might be contemplating some piece of buffoonery.
Though he said nothing, Alyosha thoroughly understood his father.
No doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the family discord could be ended.
But his chief anxiety concerned the elder.
He trembled for him, for his glory, and dreaded any affront to him, especially the refined, courteous irony of Miüsov and the supercilious half-utterances of the highly educated Ivan.
He even wanted to venture on warning the elder, telling him something about them, but, on second thoughts, said nothing.
He only sent word the day before, through a friend, to his brother Dmitri, that he loved him and expected him to keep his promise.
Dmitri wondered, for he could not remember what he had promised, but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let himself be provoked “by vileness,” but that, although he had a deep respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan, he was convinced that the meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce.
“Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in respect to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly,” he wrote in conclusion.
They Arrive At The Monastery It was a warm, bright day at the end of August.
The interview with the elder had been fixed for half-past eleven, immediately after late mass.
Our visitors did not take part in the service, but arrived just as it was over.
First an elegant open carriage, drawn by two valuable horses, drove up with Miüsov and a distant relative of his, a young man of twenty, called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov.
This young man was preparing to enter the university.
Miüsov, with whom he was staying for the time, was trying to persuade him to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena.
The young man was still undecided.
He was thoughtful and absent-minded.
He was nice-looking, strongly built, and rather tall.
Like all very absent-minded people he would sometimes stare at a person without seeing him.
He was silent and rather awkward, but sometimes, when he was alone with any one, he became talkative and effusive, and would laugh at anything or nothing.
But his animation vanished as quickly as it appeared.
He was always well and even elaborately dressed; he had already some independent fortune and expectations of much more.
In an ancient, jolting, but roomy, hired carriage, with a pair of old pinkish-gray horses, a long way behind Miüsov’s carriage, came Fyodor Pavlovitch, with his son Ivan.
Dmitri was late, though he had been informed of the time the evening before.
The visitors left their carriage at the hotel, outside the precincts, and went to the gates of the monastery on foot.
Except Fyodor Pavlovitch, none of the party had ever seen the monastery, and Miüsov had probably not even been to church for thirty years.
He looked about him with curiosity, together with assumed ease.
But, except the church and the domestic buildings, though these too were ordinary enough, he found nothing of interest in the interior of the monastery.
The last of the worshippers were coming out of the church, bareheaded and crossing themselves.
It was strange that their arrival did not seem expected, and that they were not received with special honor, though one of them had recently made a donation of a thousand roubles, while another was a very wealthy and highly cultured landowner, upon whom all in the monastery were in a sense dependent, as a decision of the lawsuit might at any moment put their fishing rights in his hands.
Yet no official personage met them.
Miüsov looked absent-mindedly at the tombstones round the church, and was on the point of saying that the dead buried here must have paid a pretty penny for the right of lying in this “holy place,” but refrained.
His liberal irony was rapidly changing almost into anger.
“Who the devil is there to ask in this imbecile place?
We must find out, for time is passing,” he observed suddenly, as though speaking to himself.
All at once there came up a bald-headed, elderly man with ingratiating little eyes, wearing a full, summer overcoat.
Lifting his hat, he introduced himself with a honeyed lisp as Maximov, a landowner of Tula.
He at once entered into our visitors’ difficulty.
“Father Zossima lives in the hermitage, apart, four hundred paces from the monastery, the other side of the copse.” “I know it’s the other side of the copse,” observed Fyodor Pavlovitch, “but we don’t remember the way.
It is a long time since we’ve been here.” “This way, by this gate, and straight across the copse ... the copse.
Maximov, a man of sixty, ran rather than walked, turning sideways to stare at them all, with an incredible degree of nervous curiosity.
His eyes looked starting out of his head.
“You see, we have come to the elder upon business of our own,” observed Miüsov severely.
“That personage has granted us an audience, so to speak, and so, though we thank you for showing us the way, we cannot ask you to accompany us.” “I’ve been there.
I’ve been already; _un chevalier parfait_,” and Maximov snapped his fingers in the air.
“Who is a _chevalier_?” asked Miüsov.
“The elder, the splendid elder, the elder!
The honor and glory of the monastery, Zossima.
Such an elder!” But his incoherent talk was cut short by a very pale, wan-looking monk of medium height, wearing a monk’s cap, who overtook them.
Fyodor Pavlovitch and Miüsov stopped.
The monk, with an extremely courteous, profound bow, announced: “The Father Superior invites all of you gentlemen to dine with him after your visit to the hermitage.
And you also,” he added, addressing Maximov.
“That I certainly will, without fail,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, hugely delighted at the invitation.
“And, believe me, we’ve all given our word to behave properly here....
And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, will you go, too?” “Yes, of course.
The only obstacle to me is your company....” “Yes, Dmitri Fyodorovitch is non-existent as yet.” “It would be a capital thing if he didn’t turn up.
Do you suppose I like all this business, and in your company, too?
Thank the Father Superior,” he said to the monk.
“No, it is my duty now to conduct you to the elder,” answered the monk.
“If so I’ll go straight to the Father Superior—to the Father Superior,” babbled Maximov.
“The Father Superior is engaged just now.
But as you please—” the monk hesitated.
“Impertinent old man!” Miüsov observed aloud, while Maximov ran back to the monastery.
“He’s like von Sohn,” Fyodor Pavlovitch said suddenly.
Have you ever seen von Sohn?” “I’ve seen his portrait.
It’s not the features, but something indefinable.
I can always tell from the physiognomy.” “Ah, I dare say you are a connoisseur in that.
But, look here, Fyodor Pavlovitch, you said just now that we had given our word to behave properly.
I advise you to control yourself.
But, if you begin to play the fool I don’t intend to be associated with you here....
You see what a man he is”—he turned to the monk—“I’m afraid to go among decent people with him.” A fine smile, not without a certain slyness, came on to the pale, bloodless lips of the monk, but he made no reply, and was evidently silent from a sense of his own dignity.
An outer show elaborated through centuries, and nothing but charlatanism and nonsense underneath,” flashed through Miüsov’s mind.
“Here’s the hermitage.
We’ve arrived,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch.
“The gates are shut.” And he repeatedly made the sign of the cross to the saints painted above and on the sides of the gates.
Here in this hermitage there are twenty-five saints being saved.
They look at one another, and eat cabbages.
That’s what is remarkable.
But I did hear that the elder receives ladies,” he remarked suddenly to the monk.
But for ladies of higher rank two rooms have been built adjoining the portico, but outside the precincts—you can see the windows—and the elder goes out to them by an inner passage when he is well enough.
They are always outside the precincts.
There is a Harkov lady, Madame Hohlakov, waiting there now with her sick daughter.
Probably he has promised to come out to her, though of late he has been so weak that he has hardly shown himself even to the people.” “So then there are loopholes, after all, to creep out of the hermitage to the ladies.
But do you know that at Athos not only the visits of women are not allowed, but no creature of the female sex—no hens, nor turkey-hens, nor cows.” “Fyodor Pavlovitch, I warn you I shall go back and leave you here.
They’ll turn you out when I’m gone.” “But I’m not interfering with you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
“And was it like this in the time of the last elder, Varsonofy?
He didn’t care for such elegance.
They say he used to jump up and thrash even ladies with a stick,” observed Fyodor Pavlovitch, as he went up the steps.
“The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange, but a great deal that’s told is foolishness.
He never thrashed any one,” answered the monk.
“Now, gentlemen, if you will wait a minute I will announce you.” “Fyodor Pavlovitch, for the last time, your compact, do you hear?
Behave properly or I will pay you out!” Miüsov had time to mutter again.
“I can’t think why you are so agitated,” Fyodor Pavlovitch observed sarcastically.
And what a lot you think of their opinion! you, a Parisian, and so advanced.
I’m surprised at you.” But Miüsov had no time to reply to this sarcasm.
He walked in, somewhat irritated.
“Now, I know myself, I am annoyed, I shall lose my temper and begin to quarrel—and lower myself and my ideas,” he reflected.
There were already in the cell, awaiting the elder, two monks of the hermitage, one the Father Librarian, and the other Father Païssy, a very learned man, so they said, in delicate health, though not old.
There was also a tall young man, who looked about two and twenty, standing in the corner throughout the interview.
He had a broad, fresh face, and clever, observant, narrow brown eyes, and was wearing ordinary dress.
He was a divinity student, living under the protection of the monastery.
His expression was one of unquestioning, but self-respecting, reverence.
Being in a subordinate and dependent position, and so not on an equality with the guests, he did not greet them with a bow.
Father Zossima was accompanied by a novice, and by Alyosha.
The two monks rose and greeted him with a very deep bow, touching the ground with their fingers; then kissed his hand.
Blessing them, the elder replied with as deep a reverence to them, and asked their blessing.
The whole ceremony was performed very seriously and with an appearance of feeling, not like an everyday rite.
But Miüsov fancied that it was all done with intentional impressiveness.
He stood in front of the other visitors.
He ought—he had reflected upon it the evening before—from simple politeness, since it was the custom here, to have gone up to receive the elder’s blessing, even if he did not kiss his hand.
But when he saw all this bowing and kissing on the part of the monks he instantly changed his mind.
With dignified gravity he made a rather deep, conventional bow, and moved away to a chair.
Fyodor Pavlovitch did the same, mimicking Miüsov like an ape.
Ivan bowed with great dignity and courtesy, but he too kept his hands at his sides, while Kalganov was so confused that he did not bow at all.
His forebodings were coming true.
Father Zossima sat down on a very old-fashioned mahogany sofa, covered with leather, and made his visitors sit down in a row along the opposite wall on four mahogany chairs, covered with shabby black leather.
The divinity student, the novice, and Alyosha remained standing.
It contained nothing but the most necessary furniture, of coarse and poor quality.
There were two pots of flowers in the window, and a number of holy pictures in the corner.
Near it were two other holy pictures in shining settings, and, next them, carved cherubims, china eggs, a Catholic cross of ivory, with a Mater Dolorosa embracing it, and several foreign engravings from the great Italian artists of past centuries.
Next to these costly and artistic engravings were several of the roughest Russian prints of saints and martyrs, such as are sold for a few farthings at all the fairs.
On the other walls were portraits of Russian bishops, past and present.
Miüsov took a cursory glance at all these “conventional” surroundings and bent an intent look upon the elder.
He had a high opinion of his own insight, a weakness excusable in him as he was fifty, an age at which a clever man of the world of established position can hardly help taking himself rather seriously.
There was, indeed, something in the elder’s face which many people besides Miüsov might not have liked.
His face was very thin and covered with a network of fine wrinkles, particularly numerous about his eyes, which were small, light-colored, quick, and shining like two bright points.
He had a sprinkling of gray hair about his temples.
His pointed beard was small and scanty, and his lips, which smiled frequently, were as thin as two threads.
“To all appearances a malicious soul, full of petty pride,” thought Miüsov.
He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position.
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly, and served to begin the conversation.
“Precisely to our time,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, “but no sign of my son, Dmitri.
I apologize for him, sacred elder!” (Alyosha shuddered all over at “sacred elder.”) “I am always punctual myself, minute for minute, remembering that punctuality is the courtesy of kings....” “But you are not a king, anyway,” Miüsov muttered, losing his self-restraint at once.
I’m not a king, and, would you believe it, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, I was aware of that myself.
Your reverence,” he cried, with sudden pathos, “you behold before you a buffoon in earnest!
I introduce myself as such.
And if I sometimes talk nonsense out of place it’s with an object, with the object of amusing people and making myself agreeable.
One must be agreeable, mustn’t one?
I was seven years ago in a little town where I had business, and I made friends with some merchants there.
We went to the captain of police because we had to see him about something, and to ask him to dine with us.
He was a tall, fat, fair, sulky man, the most dangerous type in such cases.
I went straight up to him, and with the ease of a man of the world, you know, ‘Mr.
Ispravnik,’ said I, ‘be our Napravnik.’ ‘What do you mean by Napravnik?’ said he.
‘I wanted to make a joke,’ said I, ‘for the general diversion, as Mr.
Napravnik is our well-known Russian orchestra conductor and what we need for the harmony of our undertaking is some one of that sort.’ And I explained my comparison very reasonably, didn’t I?
‘Excuse me,’ said he, ‘I am an Ispravnik, and I do not allow puns to be made on my calling.’ He turned and walked away.
I followed him, shouting, ‘Yes, yes, you are an Ispravnik, not a Napravnik.’ ‘No,’ he said, ‘since you called me a Napravnik I am one.’ And would you believe it, it ruined our business!
Always injuring myself with my politeness.
Once, many years ago, I said to an influential person: ‘Your wife is a ticklish lady,’ in an honorable sense, of the moral qualities, so to speak.
But he asked me, ‘Why, have you tickled her?’ I thought I’d be polite, so I couldn’t help saying, ‘Yes,’ and he gave me a fine tickling on the spot.
Only that happened long ago, so I’m not ashamed to tell the story.
I’m always injuring myself like that.” “You’re doing it now,” muttered Miüsov, with disgust.
Father Zossima scrutinized them both in silence.
Would you believe it, I was aware of that, too, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, and let me tell you, indeed, I foresaw I should as soon as I began to speak.
The minute I see my joke isn’t coming off, your reverence, both my cheeks feel as though they were drawn down to the lower jaw and there is almost a spasm in them.
That’s been so since I was young, when I had to make jokes for my living in noblemen’s families.
I am an inveterate buffoon, and have been from birth up, your reverence, it’s as though it were a craze in me.
But not your soul, Pyotr Alexandrovitch; you’re not a lodging worth having either.
I’m like the philosopher, Diderot, your reverence.
Did you ever hear, most Holy Father, how Diderot went to see the Metropolitan Platon, in the time of the Empress Catherine?
He went in and said straight out, ‘There is no God.’ To which the great bishop lifted up his finger and answered, ‘The fool hath said in his heart there is no God.’ And he fell down at his feet on the spot.
‘I believe,’ he cried, ‘and will be christened.’ And so he was.
Princess Dashkov was his godmother, and Potyomkin his godfather.” “Fyodor Pavlovitch, this is unbearable!
You know you’re telling lies and that that stupid anecdote isn’t true.
“I suspected all my life that it wasn’t true,” Fyodor Pavlovitch cried with conviction.
“But I’ll tell you the whole truth, gentlemen.
Forgive me, the last thing about Diderot’s christening I made up just now.
I made it up to add piquancy.
I play the fool, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to make myself agreeable.
Though I really don’t know myself, sometimes, what I do it for.
I heard your aunt, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, tell the story.
They all believe to this day that the infidel Diderot came to dispute about God with the Metropolitan Platon....” Miüsov got up, forgetting himself in his impatience.
He was furious, and conscious of being ridiculous.
What was taking place in the cell was really incredible.
For forty or fifty years past, from the times of former elders, no visitors had entered that cell without feelings of the profoundest veneration.
Almost every one admitted to the cell felt that a great favor was being shown him.
Many remained kneeling during the whole visit.
Of those visitors, many had been men of high rank and learning, some even freethinkers, attracted by curiosity, but all without exception had shown the profoundest reverence and delicacy, for here there was no question of money, but only, on the one side love and kindness, and on the other penitence and eager desire to decide some spiritual problem or crisis.
So that such buffoonery amazed and bewildered the spectators, or at least some of them.
The monks, with unchanged countenances, waited, with earnest attention, to hear what the elder would say, but seemed on the point of standing up, like Miüsov.
What seemed to him strangest of all was that his brother Ivan, on whom alone he had rested his hopes, and who alone had such influence on his father that he could have stopped him, sat now quite unmoved, with downcast eyes, apparently waiting with interest to see how it would end, as though he had nothing to do with it.
Alyosha did not dare to look at Rakitin, the divinity student, whom he knew almost intimately.
He alone in the monastery knew Rakitin’s thoughts.
“Forgive me,” began Miüsov, addressing Father Zossima, “for perhaps I seem to be taking part in this shameful foolery.
I made a mistake in believing that even a man like Fyodor Pavlovitch would understand what was due on a visit to so honored a personage.
I did not suppose I should have to apologize simply for having come with him....” Pyotr Alexandrovitch could say no more, and was about to leave the room, overwhelmed with confusion.
“Don’t distress yourself, I beg.” The elder got on to his feeble legs, and taking Pyotr Alexandrovitch by both hands, made him sit down again.
“I beg you not to disturb yourself.
I particularly beg you to be my guest.” And with a bow he went back and sat down again on his little sofa.
Do I annoy you by my vivacity?” Fyodor Pavlovitch cried suddenly, clutching the arms of his chair in both hands, as though ready to leap up from it if the answer were unfavorable.
“I earnestly beg you, too, not to disturb yourself, and not to be uneasy,” the elder said impressively.
Make yourself quite at home.
And, above all, do not be so ashamed of yourself, for that is at the root of it all.” “Quite at home?
Oh, that is much too much, but I accept it with grateful joy.
Well, the rest is still plunged in the mists of uncertainty, though there are people who’d be pleased to describe me for you.
I mean that for you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
But as for you, holy being, let me tell you, I am brimming over with ecstasy.” He got up, and throwing up his hands, declaimed, “Blessed be the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck—the paps especially.
When you said just now, ‘Don’t be so ashamed of yourself, for that is at the root of it all,’ you pierced right through me by that remark, and read me to the core.
It is from shame, great elder, from shame; it’s simply over-sensitiveness that makes me rowdy.
Teacher!” he fell suddenly on his knees, “what must I do to gain eternal life?” It was difficult even now to decide whether he was joking or really moved.
You have sense enough: don’t give way to drunkenness and incontinence of speech; don’t give way to sensual lust; and, above all, to the love of money.
Above all, don’t lie to yourself.
The man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a pass that he cannot distinguish the truth within him, or around him, and so loses all respect for himself and for others.
And having no respect he ceases to love, and in order to occupy and distract himself without love he gives way to passions and coarse pleasures, and sinks to bestiality in his vices, all from continual lying to other men and to himself.
The man who lies to himself can be more easily offended than any one.
You know it is sometimes very pleasant to take offense, isn’t it?
A man may know that nobody has insulted him, but that he has invented the insult for himself, has lied and exaggerated to make it picturesque, has caught at a word and made a mountain out of a molehill—he knows that himself, yet he will be the first to take offense, and will revel in his resentment till he feels great pleasure in it, and so pass to genuine vindictiveness.
All this, too, is deceitful posturing....” “Blessed man!
Give me your hand to kiss.” Fyodor Pavlovitch skipped up, and imprinted a rapid kiss on the elder’s thin hand.
“It is, it is pleasant to take offense.
Yes, I have been all my life taking offense, to please myself, taking offense on esthetic grounds, for it is not so much pleasant as distinguished sometimes to be insulted—that you had forgotten, great elder, it is distinguished!
But I have been lying, lying positively my whole life long, every day and hour of it.
I may sometimes talk about Diderot!
Diderot will do no harm, though sometimes a word will do harm.
Great elder, by the way, I was forgetting, though I had been meaning for the last two years to come here on purpose to ask and to find out something.
Only do tell Pyotr Alexandrovitch not to interrupt me.
Here is my question: Is it true, great Father, that the story is told somewhere in the _Lives of the Saints_ of a holy saint martyred for his faith who, when his head was cut off at last, stood up, picked up his head, and, ‘courteously kissing it,’ walked a long way, carrying it in his hands.
What saint do you say the story is told of?” asked the Father Librarian.
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov here, who was so angry just now about Diderot.
I mentioned it because by that ridiculous story you shook my faith, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
Yes, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, you were the cause of a great fall.
That was not a Diderot!” Fyodor Pavlovitch got excited and pathetic, though it was perfectly clear to every one by now that he was playing a part again.
“What nonsense, and it is all nonsense,” he muttered.
I heard it in Paris from a Frenchman.
He told me it was read at our mass from the _Lives of the Saints_ ... he was a very learned man who had made a special study of Russian statistics and had lived a long time in Russia....
I have not read the _Lives of the Saints_ myself, and I am not going to read them ... all sorts of things are said at dinner—we were dining then.” “Yes, you were dining then, and so I lost my faith!” said Fyodor Pavlovitch, mimicking him.
“What do I care for your faith?” Miüsov was on the point of shouting, but he suddenly checked himself, and said with contempt, “You defile everything you touch.” The elder suddenly rose from his seat.
“Excuse me, gentlemen, for leaving you a few minutes,” he said, addressing all his guests.
“I have visitors awaiting me who arrived before you.
But don’t you tell lies all the same,” he added, turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch with a good-humored face.
Alyosha was breathless: he was glad to get away, but he was glad, too, that the elder was good-humored and not offended.
But Fyodor Pavlovitch persisted in stopping him at the door of the cell.
Is there room for my humility beside your pride?
I am ready to give you a testimonial that one can get on with you!
Now it is for you to speak, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
You are the principal person left now—for ten minutes.” Chapter III.
Peasant Women Who Have Faith Near the wooden portico below, built on to the outer wall of the precinct, there was a crowd of about twenty peasant women.
They had been told that the elder was at last coming out, and they had gathered together in anticipation.
Two ladies, Madame Hohlakov and her daughter, had also come out into the portico to wait for the elder, but in a separate part of it set aside for women of rank.
Madame Hohlakov was a wealthy lady, still young and attractive, and always dressed with taste.
Her daughter, a girl of fourteen, was partially paralyzed.
The poor child had not been able to walk for the last six months, and was wheeled about in a long reclining chair.
She had a charming little face, rather thin from illness, but full of gayety.
There was a gleam of mischief in her big dark eyes with their long lashes.
Her mother had been intending to take her abroad ever since the spring, but they had been detained all the summer by business connected with their estate.
They had been staying a week in our town, where they had come more for purposes of business than devotion, but had visited Father Zossima once already, three days before.
Though they knew that the elder scarcely saw any one, they had now suddenly turned up again, and urgently entreated “the happiness of looking once again on the great healer.” The mother was sitting on a chair by the side of her daughter’s invalid carriage, and two paces from her stood an old monk, not one of our monastery, but a visitor from an obscure religious house in the far north.
He too sought the elder’s blessing.
But Father Zossima, on entering the portico, went first straight to the peasants who were crowded at the foot of the three steps that led up into the portico.
Father Zossima stood on the top step, put on his stole, and began blessing the women who thronged about him.
As soon as she caught sight of the elder she began shrieking and writhing as though in the pains of childbirth.
Laying the stole on her forehead, he read a short prayer over her, and she was at once soothed and quieted.
I do not know how it may be now, but in my childhood I often happened to see and hear these “possessed” women in the villages and monasteries.
But when the sacrament was carried in and they were led up to it, at once the “possession” ceased, and the sick women were always soothed for a time.
I was greatly impressed and amazed at this as a child; but then I heard from country neighbors and from my town teachers that the whole illness was simulated to avoid work, and that it could always be cured by suitable severity; various anecdotes were told to confirm this.
But later on I learnt with astonishment from medical specialists that there is no pretense about it, that it is a terrible illness to which women are subject, specially prevalent among us in Russia, and that it is due to the hard lot of the peasant women.
It is a disease, I was told, arising from exhausting toil too soon after hard, abnormal and unassisted labor in childbirth, and from the hopeless misery, from beatings, and so on, which some women were not able to endure like others.
The strange and instant healing of the frantic and struggling woman as soon as she was led up to the holy sacrament, which had been explained to me as due to malingering and the trickery of the “clericals,” arose probably in the most natural manner.
Both the women who supported her and the invalid herself fully believed as a truth beyond question that the evil spirit in possession of her could not hold out if the sick woman were brought to the sacrament and made to bow down before it.
And so, with a nervous and psychically deranged woman, a sort of convulsion of the whole organism always took place, and was bound to take place, at the moment of bowing down to the sacrament, aroused by the expectation of the miracle of healing and the implicit belief that it would come to pass; and it did come to pass, though only for a moment.
The “possessed” woman he knew already.
She came from a village only six versts from the monastery, and had been brought to him before.
“But here is one from afar.” He pointed to a woman by no means old but very thin and wasted, with a face not merely sunburnt but almost blackened by exposure.
She was kneeling and gazing with a fixed stare at the elder; there was something almost frenzied in her eyes.
From afar off, Father, from afar off!” the woman began in a sing-song voice as though she were chanting a dirge, swaying her head from side to side with her cheek resting in her hand.
There is silent and long-suffering sorrow to be met with among the peasantry.
It withdraws into itself and is still.
This is particularly common with women.
Lamentations comfort only by lacerating the heart still more.
Such grief does not desire consolation.
It feeds on the sense of its hopelessness.
Lamentations spring only from the constant craving to reopen the wound.
“You are of the tradesman class?” said Father Zossima, looking curiously at her.
“Townfolk we are, Father, townfolk.
Yet we are peasants though we live in the town.
I have buried my little son, and I have come on a pilgrimage.
I have been in three monasteries, but they told me, ‘Go, Nastasya, go to them’—that is to you.
I have come; I was yesterday at the service, and to-day I have come to you.” “What are you weeping for?” “It’s my little son I’m grieving for, Father.
We had four, my Nikita and I, and now we’ve no children, our dear ones have all gone.
I buried the first three without grieving overmuch, and now I have buried the last I can’t forget him.
He seems always standing before me.
He has withered my heart.
I say to Nikita, my husband, ‘Let me go on a pilgrimage, master.’ He is a driver.
It’s all our own, the horse and the carriage.
My Nikita has begun drinking while I am away.
I’ve forgotten everything.
I don’t want to remember.
And what would our life be now together?
I don’t care to see anything at all!” “Listen, mother,” said the elder.
“Thou didst give us life, O Lord,” they say, “and scarcely had we looked upon it when Thou didst take it back again.” And so boldly they ask and ask again that God gives them at once the rank of angels.
Therefore,’ said the saint, ‘thou, too, O mother, rejoice and weep not, for thy little son is with the Lord in the fellowship of the angels.’ That’s what the saint said to the weeping mother of old.
Therefore you too, mother, know that your little one is surely before the throne of God, is rejoicing and happy, and praying to God for you, and therefore weep not, but rejoice.” The woman listened to him, looking down with her cheek in her hand.
Here’s his little sash, but him I shall never see or hear now.” She drew out of her bosom her boy’s little embroidered sash, and as soon as she looked at it she began shaking with sobs, hiding her eyes with her fingers through which the tears flowed in a sudden stream.
“It is Rachel of old,” said the elder, “weeping for her children, and will not be comforted because they are not.
Consolation is not what you need.
Weep and be not consoled, but weep.
Only every time that you weep be sure to remember that your little son is one of the angels of God, that he looks down from there at you and sees you, and rejoices at your tears, and points at them to the Lord God; and a long while yet will you keep that great mother’s grief.
But it will turn in the end into quiet joy, and your bitter tears will be only tears of tender sorrow that purifies the heart and delivers it from sin.
I will remember him, mother, and your grief in my prayers, and I will pray for your husband’s health.
Your little one will see from heaven that you have forsaken his father, and will weep over you.
Why do you trouble his happiness?
To whom is he to go if he find you not together, his father and mother?
You’ve gone straight to my heart.
Her eyes showed that she had come with an object, and in order to say something.
She said she was the widow of a non-commissioned officer, and lived close by in the town.
Her son Vasenka was in the commissariat service, and had gone to Irkutsk in Siberia.
“Only the other day Stepanida Ilyinishna—she’s a rich merchant’s wife—said to me, ‘You go, Prohorovna, and put your son’s name down for prayer in the church, and pray for the peace of his soul as though he were dead.
His soul will be troubled,’ she said, ‘and he will write you a letter.’ And Stepanida Ilyinishna told me it was a certain thing which had been many times tried.
It’s shameful to ask the question.
How is it possible to pray for the peace of a living soul?
Only for your ignorance it is forgiven you.
And another thing I will tell you, Prohorovna.
Go, and henceforward be in peace.
Your son is alive, I tell you.” “Dear Father, God reward you, our benefactor, who prays for all of us and for our sins!” But the elder had already noticed in the crowd two glowing eyes fixed upon him.
An exhausted, consumptive-looking, though young peasant woman was gazing at him in silence.
Her eyes besought him, but she seemed afraid to approach.
“What is it, my child?” “Absolve my soul, Father,” she articulated softly, and slowly sank on her knees and bowed down at his feet.
The woman went on in a low whisper, so that it was almost impossible to catch anything.
At first I didn’t think about it, but now I’ve begun to be ill, and the thought never leaves me.” “Have you come from far?” “Over three hundred miles away.” “Have you told it in confession?” “I have confessed it.
Twice I have confessed it.” “Have you been admitted to Communion?” “Yes.
If only your penitence fail not, God will forgive all.
There is no sin, and there can be no sin on all the earth, which the Lord will not forgive to the truly repentant!
Man cannot commit a sin so great as to exhaust the infinite love of God.
Think only of repentance, continual repentance, but dismiss fear altogether.
Believe that God loves you as you cannot conceive; that He loves you with your sin, in your sin.
It has been said of old that over one repentant sinner there is more joy in heaven than over ten righteous men.
Be reconciled with him in truth.
If you are penitent, you love.
Love is such a priceless treasure that you can redeem the whole world by it, and expiate not only your own sins but the sins of others.” He signed her three times with the cross, took from his own neck a little ikon and put it upon her.
She bowed down to the earth without speaking.
He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with a tiny baby in her arms.
“From Vyshegorye, dear Father.” “Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby.
I have been to you before—or have you forgotten?
You’ve no great memory if you’ve forgotten me.
There are plenty to pray for you; how should you be ill?” “I thank you for all, daughter.” “By the way, I have a thing to ask, not a great one.
I will do so certainly.
Is that your little girl?” “My little girl, Father, Lizaveta.” “May the Lord bless you both, you and your babe Lizaveta!
You have gladdened my heart, mother.
Farewell, dear children, farewell, dear ones.” He blessed them all and bowed low to them.
A Lady Of Little Faith A visitor looking on the scene of his conversation with the peasants and his blessing them shed silent tears and wiped them away with her handkerchief.
She was a sentimental society lady of genuinely good disposition in many respects.
When the elder went up to her at last she met him enthusiastically.
“Ah, what I have been feeling, looking on at this touching scene!...” She could not go on for emotion.
“Oh, I understand the people’s love for you.
And who could help loving them, our splendid Russian people, so simple in their greatness!” “How is your daughter’s health?
You wanted to talk to me again?” “Oh, I have been urgently begging for it, I have prayed for it!
We have come, great healer, to express our ardent gratitude.
You have healed my Lise, healed her completely, merely by praying over her last Thursday and laying your hands upon her.
We have hastened here to kiss those hands, to pour out our feelings and our homage.” “What do you mean by healed?
But she is still lying down in her chair.” “But her night fevers have entirely ceased ever since Thursday,” said the lady with nervous haste.
Her legs are stronger.
This morning she insisted on my letting her stand up, and she stood up for a whole minute without any support.
She wagers that in a fortnight she’ll be dancing a quadrille.
I’ve called in Doctor Herzenstube.
He shrugged his shoulders and said, ‘I am amazed; I can make nothing of it.’ And would you have us not come here to disturb you, not fly here to thank you?
Lise, thank him—thank him!” Lise’s pretty little laughing face became suddenly serious.
She rose in her chair as far as she could and, looking at the elder, clasped her hands before him, but could not restrain herself and broke into laughter.
“It’s at him,” she said, pointing to Alyosha, with childish vexation at herself for not being able to repress her mirth.
If any one had looked at Alyosha standing a step behind the elder, he would have caught a quick flush crimsoning his cheeks in an instant.
“She has a message for you, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
How are you?” the mother went on, holding out her exquisitely gloved hand to Alyosha.
The elder turned round and all at once looked attentively at Alyosha.
The latter went nearer to Lise and, smiling in a strangely awkward way, held out his hand to her too.
Lise assumed an important air.
“Katerina Ivanovna has sent you this through me.” She handed him a little note.
“She particularly begs you to go and see her as soon as possible; that you will not fail her, but will be sure to come.” “She asks me to go and see her?
What for?” Alyosha muttered in great astonishment.
“Oh, it’s all to do with Dmitri Fyodorovitch and—what has happened lately,” the mother explained hurriedly.
“Katerina Ivanovna has made up her mind, but she must see you about it....
It is a Christian duty.” “I have only seen her once,” Alyosha protested with the same perplexity.
“Oh, she is such a lofty, incomparable creature!
If only for her suffering....
Think what she has gone through, what she is enduring now!
It’s all terrible, terrible!” “Very well, I will come,” Alyosha decided, after rapidly scanning the brief, enigmatic note, which consisted of an urgent entreaty that he would come, without any sort of explanation.
“Oh, how sweet and generous that would be of you!” cried Lise with sudden animation.
How splendid you are!
I’ve always thought you were splendid.
How glad I am to tell you so!” “Lise!” said her mother impressively, though she smiled after she had said it.
“You have quite forgotten us, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she said; “you never come to see us.
Yet Lise has told me twice that she is never happy except with you.” Alyosha raised his downcast eyes and again flushed, and again smiled without knowing why.
But the elder was no longer watching him.
He had begun talking to a monk who, as mentioned before, had been awaiting his entrance by Lise’s chair.
He was evidently a monk of the humblest, that is of the peasant, class, of a narrow outlook, but a true believer, and, in his own way, a stubborn one.
He announced that he had come from the far north, from Obdorsk, from Saint Sylvester, and was a member of a poor monastery, consisting of only ten monks.
The elder gave him his blessing and invited him to come to his cell whenever he liked.
“How can you presume to do such deeds?” the monk asked suddenly, pointing solemnly and significantly at Lise.
He was referring to her “healing.” “It’s too early, of course, to speak of that.
Relief is not complete cure, and may proceed from different causes.
“It’s not often I can see visitors.
I am ill, and I know that my days are numbered.” “Oh, no, no!
You look so well, so gay and happy.” “I am extraordinarily better to-day.
I understand my disease now thoroughly.
If I seem so happy to you, you could never say anything that would please me so much.
For men are made for happiness, and any one who is completely happy has a right to say to himself, ‘I am doing God’s will on earth.’ All the righteous, all the saints, all the holy martyrs were happy.” “Oh, how you speak!
And yet—happiness, happiness—where is it?
Oh, since you have been so good as to let us see you once more to-day, let me tell you what I could not utter last time, what I dared not say, all I am suffering and have been for so long!
I am suffering!” And in a rush of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him.
“From what specially?” “I suffer ... from lack of faith.” “Lack of faith in God?” “Oh, no, no!
You are a healer, you are deeply versed in the human soul, and of course I dare not expect you to believe me entirely, but I assure you on my word of honor that I am not speaking lightly now.
The thought of the life beyond the grave distracts me to anguish, to terror.
“Don’t distress yourself about my opinion of you,” said the elder.
“I quite believe in the sincerity of your suffering.” “Oh, how thankful I am to you!
And then they do say that it all comes from terror at the menacing phenomena of nature, and that none of it’s real.
And I say to myself, ‘What if I’ve been believing all my life, and when I come to die there’s nothing but the burdocks growing on my grave?’ as I read in some author.
But I only believed when I was a little child, mechanically, without thinking of anything.
How can I convince myself?
I stand and look about me and see that scarcely any one else cares; no one troubles his head about it, and I’m the only one who can’t stand it.
But there’s no proving it, though you can be convinced of it.” “How?” “By the experience of active love.
Strive to love your neighbor actively and indefatigably.
In as far as you advance in love you will grow surer of the reality of God and of the immortality of your soul.
If you attain to perfect self-forgetfulness in the love of your neighbor, then you will believe without doubt, and no doubt can possibly enter your soul.
There’s another question—and such a question!
You see, I so love humanity that—would you believe it?—I often dream of forsaking all that I have, leaving Lise, and becoming a sister of mercy.
I close my eyes and think and dream, and at that moment I feel full of strength to overcome all obstacles.
No wounds, no festering sores could at that moment frighten me.
I would nurse the afflicted.
Sometime, unawares, you may do a good deed in reality.” “Yes.
But could I endure such a life for long?” the lady went on fervently, almost frantically.
“That’s the chief question—that’s my most agonizing question.
I shut my eyes and ask myself, ‘Would you persevere long on that path?
And if the patient whose wounds you are washing did not meet you with gratitude, but worried you with his whims, without valuing or remarking your charitable services, began abusing you and rudely commanding you, and complaining to the superior authorities of you (which often happens when people are in great suffering)—what then?
Would you persevere in your love, or not?’ And do you know, I came with horror to the conclusion that, if anything could dissipate my love to humanity, it would be ingratitude.
In short, I am a hired servant, I expect my payment at once—that is, praise, and the repayment of love with love.
Otherwise I am incapable of loving any one.” She was in a very paroxysm of self-castigation, and, concluding, she looked with defiant resolution at the elder.
“It’s just the same story as a doctor once told me,” observed the elder.
“He was a man getting on in years, and undoubtedly clever.
‘I love humanity,’ he said, ‘but I wonder at myself.
The more I love humanity in general, the less I love man in particular.
In my dreams,’ he said, ‘I have often come to making enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity, and perhaps I might actually have faced crucifixion if it had been suddenly necessary; and yet I am incapable of living in the same room with any one for two days together, as I know by experience.
As soon as any one is near me, his personality disturbs my self-complacency and restricts my freedom.
But it has always happened that the more I detest men individually the more ardent becomes my love for humanity.’” “But what’s to be done?
It is enough that you are distressed at it.
Do what you can, and it will be reckoned unto you.
Much is done already in you since you can so deeply and sincerely know yourself.
If you have been talking to me so sincerely, simply to gain approbation for your frankness, as you did from me just now, then of course you will not attain to anything in the achievement of real love; it will all get no further than dreams, and your whole life will slip away like a phantom.
In that case you will naturally cease to think of the future life too, and will of yourself grow calmer after a fashion in the end.” “You have crushed me!
Only now, as you speak, I understand that I was really only seeking your approbation for my sincerity when I told you I could not endure ingratitude.
You have revealed me to myself.
You have seen through me and explained me to myself!” “Are you speaking the truth?
Well, now, after such a confession, I believe that you are sincere and good at heart.
If you do not attain happiness, always remember that you are on the right road, and try not to leave it.
Above all, avoid falsehood, every kind of falsehood, especially falseness to yourself.
Watch over your own deceitfulness and look into it every hour, every minute.
Avoid being scornful, both to others and to yourself.
What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of your observing it in yourself.
Avoid fear, too, though fear is only the consequence of every sort of falsehood.
Never be frightened at your own faint-heartedness in attaining love.
Don’t be frightened overmuch even at your evil actions.
I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you, for love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams.
Love in dreams is greedy for immediate action, rapidly performed and in the sight of all.
Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long but is soon over, with all looking on and applauding as though on the stage.
But active love is labor and fortitude, and for some people too, perhaps, a complete science.
But I predict that just when you see with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther from your goal instead of nearer to it—at that very moment I predict that you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord who has been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you.
Bless her—bless her!” she cried, starting up suddenly.
I have seen her naughtiness all along,” the elder said jestingly.
“Why have you been laughing at Alexey?” Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time.
She had noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her, and she found this extremely amusing.
She waited intently to catch his eye.
Alyosha, unable to endure her persistent stare, was irresistibly and suddenly drawn to glance at her, and at once she smiled triumphantly in his face.
Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed.
At last he turned away from her altogether and hid behind the elder’s back.
After a few minutes, drawn by the same irresistible force, he turned again to see whether he was being looked at or not, and found Lise almost hanging out of her chair to peep sideways at him, eagerly waiting for him to look.
Catching his eye, she laughed so that the elder could not help saying, “Why do you make fun of him like that, naughty girl?” Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed.
She began speaking quickly and nervously in a warm and resentful voice: “Why has he forgotten everything, then?
We used to play together.
We know that he goes everywhere.
He ought to have thought of it first, if he hasn’t forgotten me.
If he runs he’ll fall.” And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible, prolonged, nervous, inaudible laughter.
The elder listened to her with a smile, and blessed her tenderly.
As she kissed his hand she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying.
I’m silly and good for nothing ... and perhaps Alyosha’s right, quite right, in not wanting to come and see such a ridiculous girl.” “I will certainly send him,” said the elder.
It was more than half-past twelve, but Dmitri, on whose account they had all met there, had still not appeared.
But he seemed almost to be forgotten, and when the elder entered the cell again, he found his guests engaged in eager conversation.
Miüsov, too, was trying to take a part, and apparently very eagerly, in the conversation.
But he was unsuccessful in this also.
He was evidently in the background, and his remarks were treated with neglect, which increased his irritability.
He had had intellectual encounters with Ivan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan showed him.
“Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is progressive in Europe, and here the new generation positively ignores us,” he thought.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had given his word to sit still and be quiet, had actually been quiet for some time, but he watched his neighbor Miüsov with an ironical little smile, obviously enjoying his discomfiture.
He had been waiting for some time to pay off old scores, and now he could not let the opportunity slip.
Bending over his shoulder he began teasing him again in a whisper.
“Why didn’t you go away just now, after the ‘courteously kissing’?
Why did you consent to remain in such unseemly company?
It was because you felt insulted and aggrieved, and you remained to vindicate yourself by showing off your intelligence.
Now you won’t go till you’ve displayed your intellect to them.” “You again?...
On the contrary, I’m just going.” “You’ll be the last, the last of all to go!” Fyodor Pavlovitch delivered him another thrust, almost at the moment of Father Zossima’s return.
The discussion died down for a moment, but the elder, seating himself in his former place, looked at them all as though cordially inviting them to go on.
Alyosha, who knew every expression of his face, saw that he was fearfully exhausted and making a great effort.
Of late he had been liable to fainting fits from exhaustion.
But he evidently did not want to break up the party.
Alyosha watched him intently.
“We are discussing this gentleman’s most interesting article,” said Father Iosif, the librarian, addressing the elder, and indicating Ivan.
“He brings forward much that is new, but I think the argument cuts both ways.
It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiastical authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court, and the scope of its jurisdiction.” “I’m sorry I have not read your article, but I’ve heard of it,” said the elder, looking keenly and intently at Ivan.
“He takes up a most interesting position,” continued the Father Librarian.
“As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently quite opposed to the separation of Church from State.” “That’s interesting.
The latter, at last, answered him, not condescendingly, as Alyosha had feared, but with modesty and reserve, with evident goodwill and apparently without the slightest _arrière-pensée_.
“I start from the position that this confusion of elements, that is, of the essential principles of Church and State, will, of course, go on for ever, in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle, and that the confusion of these elements cannot lead to any consistent or even normal results, for there is falsity at the very foundation of it.
Compromise between the Church and State in such questions as, for instance, jurisdiction, is, to my thinking, impossible in any real sense.
My clerical opponent maintains that the Church holds a precise and defined position in the State.
I maintain, on the contrary, that the Church ought to include the whole State, and not simply to occupy a corner in it, and, if this is, for some reason, impossible at present, then it ought, in reality, to be set up as the direct and chief aim of the future development of Christian society!” “Perfectly true,” Father Païssy, the silent and learned monk, assented with fervor and decision.
“The purest Ultramontanism!” cried Miüsov impatiently, crossing and recrossing his legs.
“Oh, well, we have no mountains,” cried Father Iosif, and turning to the elder he continued: “Observe the answer he makes to the following ‘fundamental and essential’ propositions of his opponent, who is, you must note, an ecclesiastic.
“I have read the book which you have answered,” he added, addressing Ivan, “and was astounded at the words ‘the Church is a kingdom not of this world.’ If it is not of this world, then it cannot exist on earth at all.
To play with such words is indefensible.
The Kingdom of Heaven, of course, is not of this world, but in Heaven; but it is only entered through the Church which has been founded and established upon earth.
And so a frivolous play upon words in such a connection is unpardonable and improper.
The Church is, in truth, a kingdom and ordained to rule, and in the end must undoubtedly become the kingdom ruling over all the earth.
For that we have the divine promise.” He ceased speaking suddenly, as though checking himself.
After listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on, addressing the elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality: “The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and was nothing but the Church.
When the pagan Roman Empire desired to become Christian, it inevitably happened that, by becoming Christian, it included the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments.
But Rome as a State retained too much of the pagan civilization and culture, as, for example, in the very objects and fundamental principles of the State.
The Christian Church entering into the State could, of course, surrender no part of its fundamental principles—the rock on which it stands—and could pursue no other aims than those which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself, and among them that of drawing the whole world, and therefore the ancient pagan State itself, into the Church.
All this will not degrade it in any way or take from its honor and glory as a great State, nor from the glory of its rulers, but only turns it from a false, still pagan, and mistaken path to the true and rightful path, which alone leads to the eternal goal.
This is why the author of the book _On the Foundations of Church Jurisdiction_ would have judged correctly if, in seeking and laying down those foundations, he had looked upon them as a temporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and imperfect days.
But as soon as the author ventures to declare that the foundations which he predicates now, part of which Father Iosif just enumerated, are the permanent, essential, and eternal foundations, he is going directly against the Church and its sacred and eternal vocation.
And if the Church resists and is unwilling, some corner will be set apart for her in the State, and even that under control—and this will be so everywhere in all modern European countries.
But Russian hopes and conceptions demand not that the Church should pass as from a lower into a higher type into the State, but, on the contrary, that the State should end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else.
So be it!” “Well, I confess you’ve reassured me somewhat,” Miüsov said smiling, again crossing his legs.
“So far as I understand, then, the realization of such an ideal is infinitely remote, at the second coming of Christ.
It’s a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition of war, diplomacy, banks, and so on—something after the fashion of socialism, indeed.
But I imagined that it was all meant seriously, and that the Church might be _now_ going to try criminals, and sentence them to beating, prison, and even death.” “But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court, the Church would not even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death.
Crime and the way of regarding it would inevitably change, not all at once of course, but fairly soon,” Ivan replied calmly, without flinching.
“If everything became the Church, the Church would exclude all the criminal and disobedient, and would not cut off their heads,” Ivan went on.
“I ask you, what would become of the excluded?
By his crime he would have transgressed not only against men but against the Church of Christ.
This is so even now, of course, strictly speaking, but it is not clearly enunciated, and very, very often the criminal of to-day compromises with his conscience: ‘I steal,’ he says, ‘but I don’t go against the Church.
I’m not an enemy of Christ.’ That’s what the criminal of to-day is continually saying to himself, but when the Church takes the place of the State it will be difficult for him, in opposition to the Church all over the world, to say: ‘All men are mistaken, all in error, all mankind are the false Church.
I, a thief and murderer, am the only true Christian Church.’ It will be very difficult to say this to himself; it requires a rare combination of unusual circumstances.
Now, on the other side, take the Church’s own view of crime: is it not bound to renounce the present almost pagan attitude, and to change from a mechanical cutting off of its tainted member for the preservation of society, as at present, into completely and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man, of his reformation and salvation?” “What do you mean?
I fail to understand again,” Miüsov interrupted.
Something shapeless and even incomprehensible.
What is excommunication?
What sort of exclusion?
I suspect you are simply amusing yourself, Ivan Fyodorovitch.” “Yes, but you know, in reality it is so now,” said the elder suddenly, and all turned to him at once.
“Why,” began the elder, “all these sentences to exile with hard labor, and formerly with flogging also, reform no one, and what’s more, deter hardly a single criminal, and the number of crimes does not diminish but is continually on the increase.
Consequently the security of society is not preserved, for, although the obnoxious member is mechanically cut off and sent far away out of sight, another criminal always comes to take his place at once, and often two of them.
If anything does preserve society, even in our time, and does regenerate and transform the criminal, it is only the law of Christ speaking in his conscience.
It is only by recognizing his wrong-doing as a son of a Christian society—that is, of the Church—that he recognizes his sin against society—that is, against the Church.
So that it is only against the Church, and not against the State, that the criminal of to-day can recognize that he has sinned.
If society, as a Church, had jurisdiction, then it would know when to bring back from exclusion and to reunite to itself.
Now the Church having no real jurisdiction, but only the power of moral condemnation, withdraws of her own accord from punishing the criminal actively.
She does not excommunicate him but simply persists in motherly exhortation of him.
What is more, the Church even tries to preserve all Christian communion with the criminal.
She admits him to church services, to the holy sacrament, gives him alms, and treats him more as a captive than as a convict.
And what would become of the criminal, O Lord, if even the Christian society—that is, the Church—were to reject him even as the civil law rejects him and cuts him off?
What would become of him if the Church punished him with her excommunication as the direct consequence of the secular law?
There could be no more terrible despair, at least for a Russian criminal, for Russian criminals still have faith.
Though, who knows, perhaps then a fearful thing would happen, perhaps the despairing heart of the criminal would lose its faith and then what would become of him?
But the Church, like a tender, loving mother, holds aloof from active punishment herself, as the sinner is too severely punished already by the civil law, and there must be at least some one to have pity on him.
The Church holds aloof, above all, because its judgment is the only one that contains the truth, and therefore cannot practically and morally be united to any other judgment even as a temporary compromise.
The foreign criminal, they say, rarely repents, for the very doctrines of to-day confirm him in the idea that his crime is not a crime, but only a reaction against an unjustly oppressive force.
Society cuts him off completely by a force that triumphs over him mechanically and (so at least they say of themselves in Europe) accompanies this exclusion with hatred, forgetfulness, and the most profound indifference as to the ultimate fate of the erring brother.
In this way, it all takes place without the compassionate intervention of the Church, for in many cases there are no churches there at all, for though ecclesiastics and splendid church buildings remain, the churches themselves have long ago striven to pass from Church into State and to disappear in it completely.
So it seems at least in Lutheran countries.
As for Rome, it was proclaimed a State instead of a Church a thousand years ago.
And so the criminal is no longer conscious of being a member of the Church and sinks into despair.
If he returns to society, often it is with such hatred that society itself instinctively cuts him off.
You can judge for yourself how it must end.
In many cases it would seem to be the same with us, but the difference is that besides the established law courts we have the Church too, which always keeps up relations with the criminal as a dear and still precious son.
And besides that, there is still preserved, though only in thought, the judgment of the Church, which though no longer existing in practice is still living as a dream for the future, and is, no doubt, instinctively recognized by the criminal in his soul.
What was said here just now is true too, that is, that if the jurisdiction of the Church were introduced in practice in its full force, that is, if the whole of the society were changed into the Church, not only the judgment of the Church would have influence on the reformation of the criminal such as it never has now, but possibly also the crimes themselves would be incredibly diminished.
And there can be no doubt that the Church would look upon the criminal and the crime of the future in many cases quite differently and would succeed in restoring the excluded, in restraining those who plan evil, and in regenerating the fallen.
It is true,” said Father Zossima, with a smile, “the Christian society now is not ready and is only resting on some seven righteous men, but as they are never lacking, it will continue still unshaken in expectation of its complete transformation from a society almost heathen in character into a single universal and all-powerful Church.
Even though at the end of the ages, for it is ordained to come to pass!
And there is no need to be troubled about times and seasons, for the secret of the times and seasons is in the wisdom of God, in His foresight, and His love.
And what in human reckoning seems still afar off, may by the Divine ordinance be close at hand, on the eve of its appearance.
And so be it, so be it!” “So be it, so be it!” Father Païssy repeated austerely and reverently.
“Strange, extremely strange!” Miüsov pronounced, not so much with heat as with latent indignation.
“What strikes you as so strange?” Father Iosif inquired cautiously.
“Why, it’s beyond anything!” cried Miüsov, suddenly breaking out; “the State is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position of the State.
It’s not simply Ultramontanism, it’s arch-Ultramontanism!
It’s beyond the dreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh!” “You are completely misunderstanding it,” said Father Païssy sternly.
“Understand, the Church is not to be transformed into the State.
That is the third temptation of the devil.
On the contrary, the State is transformed into the Church, will ascend and become a Church over the whole world—which is the complete opposite of Ultramontanism and Rome, and your interpretation, and is only the glorious destiny ordained for the Orthodox Church.
This star will arise in the east!” Miüsov was significantly silent.
His whole figure expressed extraordinary personal dignity.
A supercilious and condescending smile played on his lips.
Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing heart.
The whole conversation stirred him profoundly.
He glanced casually at Rakitin, who was standing immovable in his place by the door listening and watching intently though with downcast eyes.
But from the color in his cheeks Alyosha guessed that Rakitin was probably no less excited, and he knew what caused his excitement.
“Allow me to tell you one little anecdote, gentlemen,” Miüsov said impressively, with a peculiarly majestic air.
“Some years ago, soon after the _coup d’état_ of December, I happened to be calling in Paris on an extremely influential personage in the Government, and I met a very interesting man in his house.
This individual was not precisely a detective but was a sort of superintendent of a whole regiment of political detectives—a rather powerful position in its own way.
I was prompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity of conversation with him.
And as he had not come as a visitor but as a subordinate official bringing a special report, and as he saw the reception given me by his chief, he deigned to speak with some openness, to a certain extent only, of course.
He was rather courteous than open, as Frenchmen know how to be courteous, especially to a foreigner.
But I thoroughly understood him.
The subject was the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted.
‘We are not particularly afraid,’ said he, ‘of all these socialists, anarchists, infidels, and revolutionists; we keep watch on them and know all their goings on.
But there are a few peculiar men among them who believe in God and are Christians, but at the same time are socialists.
They are dreadful people!
The socialist who is a Christian is more to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist.’ The words struck me at the time, and now they have suddenly come back to me here, gentlemen.” “You apply them to us, and look upon us as socialists?” Father Païssy asked directly, without beating about the bush.
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer, the door opened, and the guest so long expected, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, came in.
They had, in fact, given up expecting him, and his sudden appearance caused some surprise for a moment.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, a young man of eight and twenty, of medium height and agreeable countenance, looked older than his years.
He was muscular, and showed signs of considerable physical strength.
Yet there was something not healthy in his face.
It was rather thin, his cheeks were hollow, and there was an unhealthy sallowness in their color.
His rather large, prominent, dark eyes had an expression of firm determination, and yet there was a vague look in them, too.
Even when he was excited and talking irritably, his eyes somehow did not follow his mood, but betrayed something else, sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing.
“It’s hard to tell what he’s thinking,” those who talked to him sometimes declared.
People who saw something pensive and sullen in his eyes were startled by his sudden laugh, which bore witness to mirthful and light-hearted thoughts at the very time when his eyes were so gloomy.
A certain strained look in his face was easy to understand at this moment.
Every one knew, or had heard of, the extremely restless and dissipated life which he had been leading of late, as well as of the violent anger to which he had been roused in his quarrels with his father.
It is true that he was irascible by nature, “of an unstable and unbalanced mind,” as our justice of the peace, Katchalnikov, happily described him.
He was stylishly and irreproachably dressed in a carefully buttoned frock-coat.
Having only lately left the army, he still had mustaches and no beard.
He had the long, determined stride of a military man.
He stood still for a moment on the threshold, and glancing at the whole party went straight up to the elder, guessing him to be their host.
He made him a low bow, and asked his blessing.
Dmitri kissed his hand respectfully, and with intense feeling, almost anger, he said: “Be so generous as to forgive me for having kept you waiting so long, but Smerdyakov, the valet sent me by my father, in reply to my inquiries, told me twice over that the appointment was for one.
Now I suddenly learn—” “Don’t disturb yourself,” interposed the elder.
It’s of no consequence....” “I’m extremely obliged to you, and expected no less from your goodness.” Saying this, Dmitri bowed once more.
Then, turning suddenly towards his father, made him, too, a similarly low and respectful bow.
He had evidently considered it beforehand, and made this bow in all seriousness, thinking it his duty to show his respect and good intentions.
Although Fyodor Pavlovitch was taken unawares, he was equal to the occasion.
In response to Dmitri’s bow he jumped up from his chair and made his son a bow as low in return.
His face was suddenly solemn and impressive, which gave him a positively malignant look.
Dmitri bowed generally to all present, and without a word walked to the window with his long, resolute stride, sat down on the only empty chair, near Father Païssy, and, bending forward, prepared to listen to the conversation he had interrupted.
Dmitri’s entrance had taken no more than two minutes, and the conversation was resumed.
But this time Miüsov thought it unnecessary to reply to Father Païssy’s persistent and almost irritable question.
“Allow me to withdraw from this discussion,” he observed with a certain well-bred nonchalance.
“It’s a subtle question, too.
Here Ivan Fyodorovitch is smiling at us.
He must have something interesting to say about that also.
“European Liberals in general, and even our liberal dilettanti, often mix up the final results of socialism with those of Christianity.
This wild notion is, of course, a characteristic feature.
But it’s not only Liberals and dilettanti who mix up socialism and Christianity, but, in many cases, it appears, the police—the foreign police, of course—do the same.
Your Paris anecdote is rather to the point, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.” “I ask your permission to drop this subject altogether,” Miüsov repeated.
“I will tell you instead, gentlemen, another interesting and rather characteristic anecdote of Ivan Fyodorovitch himself.
Only five days ago, in a gathering here, principally of ladies, he solemnly declared in argument that there was nothing in the whole world to make men love their neighbors.
That there was no law of nature that man should love mankind, and that, if there had been any love on earth hitherto, it was not owing to a natural law, but simply because men have believed in immortality.
Ivan Fyodorovitch added in parenthesis that the whole natural law lies in that faith, and that if you were to destroy in mankind the belief in immortality, not only love but every living force maintaining the life of the world would at once be dried up.
Moreover, nothing then would be immoral, everything would be lawful, even cannibalism.
He ended by asserting that for every individual, like ourselves, who does not believe in God or immortality, the moral law of nature must immediately be changed into the exact contrary of the former religious law, and that egoism, even to crime, must become not only lawful but even recognized as the inevitable, the most rational, even honorable outcome of his position.
From this paradox, gentlemen, you can judge of the rest of our eccentric and paradoxical friend Ivan Fyodorovitch’s theories.” “Excuse me,” Dmitri cried suddenly; “if I’ve heard aright, crime must not only be permitted but even recognized as the inevitable and the most rational outcome of his position for every infidel!
“I’ll remember it.” Having uttered these words Dmitri ceased speaking as suddenly as he had begun.
Every one looked at him with curiosity.
“Is that really your conviction as to the consequences of the disappearance of the faith in immortality?” the elder asked Ivan suddenly.
That was my contention.
There is no virtue if there is no immortality.” “You are blessed in believing that, or else most unhappy.” “Why unhappy?” Ivan asked smiling.
“Because, in all probability you don’t believe yourself in the immortality of your soul, nor in what you have written yourself in your article on Church jurisdiction.” “Perhaps you are right! ...
But I wasn’t altogether joking,” Ivan suddenly and strangely confessed, flushing quickly.
“You were not altogether joking.
The question is still fretting your heart, and not answered.
But the martyr likes sometimes to divert himself with his despair, as it were driven to it by despair itself.
Meanwhile, in your despair, you, too, divert yourself with magazine articles, and discussions in society, though you don’t believe your own arguments, and with an aching heart mock at them inwardly....
That question you have not answered, and it is your great grief, for it clamors for an answer.” “But can it be answered by me?
Answered in the affirmative?” Ivan went on asking strangely, still looking at the elder with the same inexplicable smile.
“If it can’t be decided in the affirmative, it will never be decided in the negative.
You know that that is the peculiarity of your heart, and all its suffering is due to it.
But thank the Creator who has given you a lofty heart capable of such suffering; of thinking and seeking higher things, for our dwelling is in the heavens.
But the latter rose from his seat, went up to him, received his blessing, and kissing his hand went back to his place in silence.
This action and all the preceding conversation, which was so surprising from Ivan, impressed every one by its strangeness and a certain solemnity, so that all were silent for a moment, and there was a look almost of apprehension in Alyosha’s face.
But Miüsov suddenly shrugged his shoulders.
And at the same moment Fyodor Pavlovitch jumped up from his seat.
“Most pious and holy elder,” he cried, pointing to Ivan, “that is my son, flesh of my flesh, the dearest of my flesh!
He is my most dutiful Karl Moor, so to speak, while this son who has just come in, Dmitri, against whom I am seeking justice from you, is the undutiful Franz Moor—they are both out of Schiller’s _Robbers_, and so I am the reigning Count von Moor!
We need not only your prayers but your prophecies!” “Speak without buffoonery, and don’t begin by insulting the members of your family,” answered the elder, in a faint, exhausted voice.
He was obviously getting more and more fatigued, and his strength was failing.
“An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here!” cried Dmitri indignantly.
“Forgive it, reverend Father,” he added, addressing the elder.
“I am not a cultivated man, and I don’t even know how to address you properly, but you have been deceived and you have been too good-natured in letting us meet here.
But I believe I know why—” “They all blame me, all of them!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his turn.
“Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too.
You have been blaming me, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, you have!” he turned suddenly to Miüsov, although the latter was not dreaming of interrupting him.
“They all accuse me of having hidden the children’s money in my boots, and cheated them, but isn’t there a court of law?
There they will reckon out for you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, from your notes, your letters, and your agreements, how much money you had, how much you have spent, and how much you have left.
Why does Pyotr Alexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment?
Dmitri is not a stranger to him.
Because they are all against me, while Dmitri Fyodorovitch is in debt to me, and not a little, but some thousands of which I have documentary proof.
The whole town is echoing with his debaucheries.
And where he was stationed before, he several times spent a thousand or two for the seduction of some respectable girl; we know all about that, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, in its most secret details.
Would you believe it, holy Father, he has captivated the heart of the most honorable of young ladies of good family and fortune, daughter of a gallant colonel, formerly his superior officer, who had received many honors and had the Anna Order on his breast.
He compromised the girl by his promise of marriage, now she is an orphan and here; she is betrothed to him, yet before her very eyes he is dancing attendance on a certain enchantress.
And although this enchantress has lived in, so to speak, civil marriage with a respectable man, yet she is of an independent character, an unapproachable fortress for everybody, just like a legal wife—for she is virtuous, yes, holy Fathers, she is virtuous.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch wants to open this fortress with a golden key, and that’s why he is insolent to me now, trying to get money from me, though he has wasted thousands on this enchantress already.
He’s continually borrowing money for the purpose.
Don’t dare in my presence to asperse the good name of an honorable girl!
That you should utter a word about her is an outrage, and I won’t permit it!” He was breathless.
Mitya!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch hysterically, squeezing out a tear.
“And is your father’s blessing nothing to you?
If I curse you, what then?” “Shameless hypocrite!” exclaimed Dmitri furiously.
Gentlemen, only fancy; there’s a poor but honorable man living here, burdened with a numerous family, a captain who got into trouble and was discharged from the army, but not publicly, not by court-martial, with no slur on his honor.
And three weeks ago, Dmitri seized him by the beard in a tavern, dragged him out into the street and beat him publicly, and all because he is an agent in a little business of mine.” “It’s all a lie!
Outwardly it’s the truth, but inwardly a lie!” Dmitri was trembling with rage.
Yes, I confess it publicly, I behaved like a brute to that captain, and I regret it now, and I’m disgusted with myself for my brutal rage.
But this captain, this agent of yours, went to that lady whom you call an enchantress, and suggested to her from you, that she should take I.O.U.’s of mine which were in your possession, and should sue me for the money so as to get me into prison by means of them, if I persisted in claiming an account from you of my property.
Now you reproach me for having a weakness for that lady when you yourself incited her to captivate me!
You wanted to put me in prison because you are jealous of me with her, because you’d begun to force your attentions upon her; and I know all about that, too; she laughed at you for that as well—you hear—she laughed at you as she described it.
So here you have this man, this father who reproaches his profligate son!
Gentlemen, forgive my anger, but I foresaw that this crafty old man would only bring you together to create a scandal.
I had come to forgive him if he held out his hand; to forgive him, and ask forgiveness!
But as he has just this minute insulted not only me, but an honorable young lady, for whom I feel such reverence that I dare not take her name in vain, I have made up my mind to show up his game, though he is my father....” He could not go on.
His eyes were glittering and he breathed with difficulty.
All except Father Zossima got up from their seats uneasily.
The monks looked austere but waited for guidance from the elder.
He sat still, pale, not from excitement but from the weakness of disease.
An imploring smile lighted up his face; from time to time he raised his hand, as though to check the storm, and, of course, a gesture from him would have been enough to end the scene; but he seemed to be waiting for something and watched them intently as though trying to make out something which was not perfectly clear to him.
At last Miüsov felt completely humiliated and disgraced.
“We are all to blame for this scandalous scene,” he said hotly.
Believe me, your reverence, I had no precise knowledge of the details that have just come to light, I was unwilling to believe them, and I learn for the first time....
A father is jealous of his son’s relations with a woman of loose behavior and intrigues with the creature to get his son into prison!
I declare to you all that I was as much deceived as any one.” “Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, in an unnatural voice, “if you were not my son I would challenge you this instant to a duel ... with pistols, at three paces ... across a handkerchief,” he ended, stamping with both feet.
With old liars who have been acting all their lives there are moments when they enter so completely into their part that they tremble or shed tears of emotion in earnest, although at that very moment, or a second later, they are able to whisper to themselves, “You know you are lying, you shameless old sinner!
You’re acting now, in spite of your ‘holy’ wrath.” Dmitri frowned painfully, and looked with unutterable contempt at his father.
I thought,” he said, in a soft and, as it were, controlled voice, “that I was coming to my native place with the angel of my heart, my betrothed, to cherish his old age, and I find nothing but a depraved profligate, a despicable clown!” “A duel!” yelled the old wretch again, breathless and spluttering at each syllable.
“And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, let me tell you that there has never been in all your family a loftier, and more honest—you hear—more honest woman than this ‘creature,’ as you have dared to call her!
And you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, have abandoned your betrothed for that ‘creature,’ so you must yourself have thought that your betrothed couldn’t hold a candle to her.
That’s the woman called a ‘creature’!” “Shameful!” broke from Father Iosif.
“Shameful and disgraceful!” Kalganov, flushing crimson, cried in a boyish voice, trembling with emotion.
“Why is such a man alive?” Dmitri, beside himself with rage, growled in a hollow voice, hunching up his shoulders till he looked almost deformed.
“Tell me, can he be allowed to go on defiling the earth?” He looked round at every one and pointed at the old man.
He spoke evenly and deliberately.
“Listen, listen, monks, to the parricide!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, rushing up to Father Iosif.
“That’s the answer to your ‘shameful!’ What is shameful?
That ‘creature,’ that ‘woman of loose behavior’ is perhaps holier than you are yourselves, you monks who are seeking salvation!
She fell perhaps in her youth, ruined by her environment.
But she loved much, and Christ himself forgave the woman ‘who loved much.’” “It was not for such love Christ forgave her,” broke impatiently from the gentle Father Iosif.
You save your souls here, eating cabbage, and think you are the righteous.
You eat a gudgeon a day, and you think you bribe God with gudgeon.” “This is unendurable!” was heard on all sides in the cell.
But this unseemly scene was cut short in a most unexpected way.
Father Zossima rose suddenly from his seat.
Almost distracted with anxiety for the elder and every one else, Alyosha succeeded, however, in supporting him by the arm.
Father Zossima moved towards Dmitri and reaching him sank on his knees before him.
Alyosha thought that he had fallen from weakness, but this was not so.
The elder distinctly and deliberately bowed down at Dmitri’s feet till his forehead touched the floor.
Alyosha was so astounded that he failed to assist him when he got up again.
Dmitri stood for a few moments in amazement.
Suddenly he cried aloud, “Oh, God!” hid his face in his hands, and rushed out of the room.
All the guests flocked out after him, in their confusion not saying good-by, or bowing to their host.
Only the monks went up to him again for a blessing.
Was it symbolic or what?” said Fyodor Pavlovitch, suddenly quieted and trying to reopen conversation without venturing to address anybody in particular.
They were all passing out of the precincts of the hermitage at the moment.
“I can’t answer for a madhouse and for madmen,” Miüsov answered at once ill-humoredly, “but I will spare myself your company, Fyodor Pavlovitch, and, trust me, for ever.
Where’s that monk?” “That monk,” that is, the monk who had invited them to dine with the Superior, did not keep them waiting.
“Reverend Father, kindly do me a favor.
Convey my deepest respect to the Father Superior, apologize for me, personally, Miüsov, to his reverence, telling him that I deeply regret that owing to unforeseen circumstances I am unable to have the honor of being present at his table, greatly as I should desire to do so,” Miüsov said irritably to the monk.
“And that unforeseen circumstance, of course, is myself,” Fyodor Pavlovitch cut in immediately.
“Do you hear, Father; this gentleman doesn’t want to remain in my company or else he’d come at once.
And you shall go, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, pray go to the Father Superior and good appetite to you.
Home, home, I’ll eat at home, I don’t feel equal to it here, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, my amiable relative.” “I am not your relative and never have been, you contemptible man!” “I said it on purpose to madden you, because you always disclaim the relationship, though you really are a relation in spite of your shuffling.
I’ll prove it by the church calendar.
Propriety requires you to go to the Father Superior, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to apologize for the disturbance we’ve been making....” “Is it true that you are going home?
Aren’t you lying?” “Pyotr Alexandrovitch!
How could I dare after what’s happened!
Forgive me, gentlemen, I was carried away!
Gentlemen, one man has the heart of Alexander of Macedon and another the heart of the little dog Fido.
After such an escapade how can I go to dinner, to gobble up the monastery’s sauces?
You must excuse me!” “The devil only knows, what if he deceives us?” thought Miüsov, still hesitating, and watching the retreating buffoon with distrustful eyes.
The latter turned round, and noticing that Miüsov was watching him, waved him a kiss.
“Well, are you coming to the Superior?” Miüsov asked Ivan abruptly.
I was especially invited yesterday.” “Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded dinner,” said Miüsov with the same irritability, regardless of the fact that the monk was listening.
“We ought, at least, to apologize for the disturbance, and explain that it was not our doing.
Besides, father won’t be there,” observed Ivan.
Confound this dinner!” They all walked on, however.
The monk listened in silence.
On the road through the copse he made one observation however—that the Father Superior had been waiting a long time, and that they were more than half an hour late.
He received no answer.
“Here he is, going to the dinner as though nothing had happened,” he thought.
“A brazen face, and the conscience of a Karamazov!” Chapter VII.
It was a little room furnished with the bare necessities.
There was a narrow iron bedstead, with a strip of felt for a mattress.
The elder sank exhausted on the bed.
His eyes glittered and he breathed hard.
He looked intently at Alyosha, as though considering something.
Make haste, you are needed there, go and wait at the Father Superior’s table.” “Let me stay here,” Alyosha entreated.
And remember, my son”—the elder liked to call him that—“this is not the place for you in the future.
When it is God’s will to call me, leave the monastery.
Yours will be a long pilgrimage.
This is my last message to you: in sorrow seek happiness.
Work, work unceasingly.
Remember my words, for although I shall talk with you again, not only my days but my hours are numbered.” Alyosha’s face again betrayed strong emotion.
The corners of his mouth quivered.
“The worldly may follow the dead with tears, but here we rejoice over the father who is departing.
Be near your brothers.
He longed, moreover, to ask the significance of his bowing to Dmitri, the question was on the tip of his tongue, but he dared not ask it.
He knew that the elder would have explained it unasked if he had thought fit.
But evidently it was not his will.
That action had made a terrible impression on Alyosha; he believed blindly in its mysterious significance.
Mysterious, and perhaps awful.
As he hastened out of the hermitage precincts to reach the monastery in time to serve at the Father Superior’s dinner, he felt a sudden pang at his heart, and stopped short.
He seemed to hear again Father Zossima’s words, foretelling his approaching end.
What he had foretold so exactly must infallibly come to pass.
Alyosha believed that implicitly.
He had told him not to weep, and to leave the monastery.
He hurried through the copse that divided the monastery from the hermitage, and unable to bear the burden of his thoughts, he gazed at the ancient pines beside the path.
He expected to meet no one at that hour, but at the first turn of the path he noticed Rakitin.
“Are you waiting for me?” asked Alyosha, overtaking him.
“You are hurrying to the Father Superior, I know; he has a banquet.
There’s not been such a banquet since the Superior entertained the Bishop and General Pahatov, do you remember?
And didn’t he tap the ground with his forehead, too!” “You speak of Father Zossima?” “Yes, of Father Zossima.” “Tapped the ground?” “Ah, an irreverent expression!
There’s nothing wonderful about it, of course, only the usual holy mummery.
But there was an object in the performance.
All the pious people in the town will talk about it and spread the story through the province, wondering what it meant.
To my thinking the old man really has a keen nose; he sniffed a crime.
Your house stinks of it.” “What crime?” Rakitin evidently had something he was eager to speak of.
Between your brothers and your rich old father.
If something happens later on, it’ll be: ‘Ah, the holy man foresaw it, prophesied it!’ though it’s a poor sort of prophecy, flopping like that.
‘Ah, but it was symbolic,’ they’ll say, ‘an allegory,’ and the devil knows what all!
It’ll be remembered to his glory: ‘He predicted the crime and marked the criminal!’ That’s always the way with these crazy fanatics; they cross themselves at the tavern and throw stones at the temple.
Like your elder, he takes a stick to a just man and falls at the feet of a murderer.” “What crime?
That’s interesting, too, by the way.
Answer.” “I have,” answered Alyosha in a low voice.
I’ve not exactly thought it,” muttered Alyosha, “but directly you began speaking so strangely, I fancied I had thought of it myself.” “You see? (And how well you expressed it!) Looking at your father and your brother Mitya to-day you thought of a crime.
Then I’m not mistaken?” “But wait, wait a minute,” Alyosha broke in uneasily.
Why does it interest you?
That’s the first question.” “Two questions, disconnected, but natural.
I’ll deal with them separately.
I shouldn’t have seen it, if I hadn’t suddenly understood your brother Dmitri, seen right into the very heart of him all at once.
These very honest but passionate people have a line which mustn’t be crossed.
But your father’s a drunken and abandoned old sinner, who can never draw the line—if they both let themselves go, they’ll both come to grief.” “No, Misha, no.
If that’s all, you’ve reassured me.
It won’t come to that.” “But why are you trembling?
Let me tell you; he may be honest, our Mitya (he is stupid, but honest), but he’s—a sensualist.
That’s the very definition and inner essence of him.
It’s your father has handed him on his low sensuality.
You’re a Karamazov too, you know!
In your family sensuality is carried to a disease.
But now, these three sensualists are watching one another, with their knives in their belts.
The three of them are knocking their heads together, and you may be the fourth.” “You are mistaken about that woman.
Dmitri—despises her,” said Alyosha, with a sort of shudder.
Since he has openly abandoned his betrothed for her, he doesn’t despise her.
There’s something here, my dear boy, that you don’t understand yet.
A man will fall in love with some beauty, with a woman’s body, or even with a part of a woman’s body (a sensualist can understand that), and he’ll abandon his own children for her, sell his father and mother, and his country, Russia, too.
If he’s honest, he’ll steal; if he’s humane, he’ll murder; if he’s faithful, he’ll deceive.
Contempt’s no help here, brother, even if he did despise Grushenka.
He does, but he can’t tear himself away.” “I understand that,” Alyosha jerked out suddenly.
Well, I dare say you do understand, since you blurt it out at the first word,” said Rakitin, malignantly.
“That escaped you unawares, and the confession’s the more precious.
So it’s a familiar subject; you’ve thought about it already, about sensuality, I mean!
I’ve been watching you a long time.
You’re a Karamazov yourself; you’re a thorough Karamazov—no doubt birth and selection have something to answer for.
You’re a sensualist from your father, a crazy saint from your mother.
Do you know, Grushenka has been begging me to bring you along.
I wondered why she took such an interest in you.
Do you know, she’s an extraordinary woman, too!” “Thank her and say I’m not coming,” said Alyosha, with a strained smile.
If even you are a sensualist at heart, what of your brother, Ivan?
He’s a Karamazov, too.
What is at the root of all you Karamazovs is that you’re all sensual, grasping and crazy!
Your brother Ivan writes theological articles in joke, for some idiotic, unknown motive of his own, though he’s an atheist, and he admits it’s a fraud himself—that’s your brother Ivan.
He’s trying to get Mitya’s betrothed for himself, and I fancy he’ll succeed, too.
For Mitya will surrender his betrothed to him to be rid of her, and escape to Grushenka.
And he’s ready to do that in spite of all his nobility and disinterestedness.
He recognizes his vileness and goes on with it!
Let me tell you, too, the old man, your father, is standing in Mitya’s way now.
He has suddenly gone crazy over Grushenka.
It’s simply on her account he made that scene in the cell just now, simply because Miüsov called her an ‘abandoned creature.’ He’s worse than a tom-cat in love.
At first she was only employed by him in connection with his taverns and in some other shady business, but now he has suddenly realized all she is and has gone wild about her.
He keeps pestering her with his offers, not honorable ones, of course.
And they’ll come into collision, the precious father and son, on that path!
But Grushenka favors neither of them, she’s still playing with them, and teasing them both, considering which she can get most out of.
Yes, ready to marry her! to abandon his betrothed, a rare beauty, Katerina Ivanovna, who’s rich, and the daughter of a colonel, and to marry Grushenka, who has been the mistress of a dissolute old merchant, Samsonov, a coarse, uneducated, provincial mayor.
Some murderous conflict may well come to pass from all this, and that’s what your brother Ivan is waiting for.
He’ll carry off Katerina Ivanovna, for whom he is languishing, and pocket her dowry of sixty thousand.
That’s very alluring to start with, for a man of no consequence and a beggar.
And, take note, he won’t be wronging Mitya, but doing him the greatest service.
For I know as a fact that Mitya only last week, when he was with some gypsy girls drunk in a tavern, cried out aloud that he was unworthy of his betrothed, Katya, but that his brother Ivan, he was the man who deserved her.
And Katerina Ivanovna will not in the end refuse such a fascinating man as Ivan.
She’s hesitating between the two of them already.
He is laughing at you, and enjoying himself at your expense.” “How do you know?
How can you speak so confidently?” Alyosha asked sharply, frowning.
“Why do you ask, and are frightened at my answer?
It shows that you know I’m speaking the truth.” “You don’t like Ivan.
And the beauty of Katerina Ivanovna?
It’s not only the money, though a fortune of sixty thousand is an attraction.” “Ivan is above that.
He wouldn’t make up to any one for thousands.
Perhaps it’s suffering he is seeking.” “What wild dream now?
Oh, you—aristocrats!” “Ah, Misha, he has a stormy spirit.
He is haunted by a great, unsolved doubt.
He is one of those who don’t want millions, but an answer to their questions.” “That’s plagiarism, Alyosha.
Ah, Ivan has set you a problem!” cried Rakitin, with undisguised malice.
His face changed, and his lips twitched.
It is no good guessing it.
Rack your brains—you’ll understand it.
His article is absurd and ridiculous.
Humanity will find in itself the power to live for virtue even without believing in immortality.
It will find it in love for freedom, for equality, for fraternity.” Rakitin could hardly restrain himself in his heat, but, suddenly, as though remembering something, he stopped short.
“Why are you laughing?
Do you think I’m a vulgar fool?” “No, I never dreamed of thinking you a vulgar fool.
I understand your getting hot about it, Misha.
I guess from your warmth that you are not indifferent to Katerina Ivanovna yourself; I’ve suspected that for a long time, brother, that’s why you don’t like my brother Ivan.
I am not going to insult you.” “I believe it, since you say so, but confound you, and your brother Ivan with you.
Don’t you understand that one might very well dislike him, apart from Katerina Ivanovna.
He condescends to abuse me, you know.
Why haven’t I a right to abuse him?” “I never heard of his saying anything about you, good or bad.
He doesn’t speak of you at all.” “But I heard that the day before yesterday at Katerina Ivanovna’s he was abusing me for all he was worth—you see what an interest he takes in your humble servant.
According to your brother’s account, the tinge of socialism won’t hinder me from laying by the proceeds and investing them under the guidance of some Jew, till at the end of my career I build a great house in Petersburg and move my publishing offices to it, and let out the upper stories to lodgers.
He has even chosen the place for it, near the new stone bridge across the Neva, which they say is to be built in Petersburg.” “Ah, Misha, that’s just what will really happen, every word of it,” cried Alyosha, unable to restrain a good-humored smile.
“You are pleased to be sarcastic, too, Alexey Fyodorovitch.” “No, no, I’m joking, forgive me.
I’ve something quite different in my mind.
That Grushenka a relation of mine!” cried Rakitin, turning crimson.
You’re out of your mind!” “Why, isn’t she a relation of yours?
You Karamazovs brag of being an ancient, noble family, though your father used to run about playing the buffoon at other men’s tables, and was only admitted to the kitchen as a favor.
I may be only a priest’s son, and dirt in the eyes of noblemen like you, but don’t insult me so lightly and wantonly.
I have a sense of honor, too, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I couldn’t be a relation of Grushenka, a common harlot.
I beg you to understand that!” Rakitin was intensely irritated.
“Forgive me, for goodness’ sake, I had no idea ... besides ... how can you call her a harlot?
Is she ... that sort of woman?” Alyosha flushed suddenly.
“I tell you again, I heard that she was a relation of yours.
You often go to see her, and you told me yourself you’re not her lover.
I never dreamed that you of all people had such contempt for her!
Does she really deserve it?” “I may have reasons of my own for visiting her.
That’s not your business.
But as for relationship, your brother, or even your father, is more likely to make her yours than mine.
They can’t have finished dinner so soon!
Have the Karamazovs been making trouble again?
They’ve broken out from the Father Superior’s.
And look, Father Isidor’s shouting out something after them from the steps.
And your father’s shouting and waving his arms.
I expect he’s swearing.
Bah, and there goes Miüsov driving away in his carriage.
Surely they’ve not been beating the Father Superior!
It would serve them right!” There was reason for Rakitin’s exclamations.
There had been a scandalous, an unprecedented scene.
The Scandalous Scene Miüsov, as a man of breeding and delicacy, could not but feel some inward qualms, when he reached the Father Superior’s with Ivan: he felt ashamed of having lost his temper.
He felt that he ought to have disdained that despicable wretch, Fyodor Pavlovitch, too much to have been upset by him in Father Zossima’s cell, and so to have forgotten himself.
“The monks were not to blame, in any case,” he reflected, on the steps.
“And if they’re decent people here (and the Father Superior, I understand, is a nobleman) why not be friendly and courteous with them?
I won’t argue, I’ll fall in with everything, I’ll win them by politeness, and ... and ... show them that I’ve nothing to do with that Æsop, that buffoon, that Pierrot, and have merely been taken in over this affair, just as they have.” He determined to drop his litigation with the monastery, and relinquish his claims to the wood-cutting and fishery rights at once.
He was the more ready to do this because the rights had become much less valuable, and he had indeed the vaguest idea where the wood and river in question were.
These excellent intentions were strengthened when he entered the Father Superior’s dining-room, though, strictly speaking, it was not a dining-room, for the Father Superior had only two rooms altogether; they were, however, much larger and more comfortable than Father Zossima’s.
But there was no great luxury about the furnishing of these rooms either.
The furniture was of mahogany, covered with leather, in the old-fashioned style of 1820; the floor was not even stained, but everything was shining with cleanliness, and there were many choice flowers in the windows; the most sumptuous thing in the room at the moment was, of course, the beautifully decorated table.
The cloth was clean, the service shone; there were three kinds of well-baked bread, two bottles of wine, two of excellent mead, and a large glass jug of kvas—both the latter made in the monastery, and famous in the neighborhood.
Rakitin related afterwards that there were five dishes: fish-soup made of sterlets, served with little fish patties; then boiled fish served in a special way; then salmon cutlets, ice pudding and compote, and finally, blanc-mange.
He had a footing everywhere, and got information about everything.
He was well aware of his own considerable abilities, and nervously exaggerated them in his self-conceit.
He knew he would play a prominent part of some sort, but Alyosha, who was attached to him, was distressed to see that his friend Rakitin was dishonorable, and quite unconscious of being so himself, considering, on the contrary, that because he would not steal money left on the table he was a man of the highest integrity.
Neither Alyosha nor any one else could have influenced him in that.
Rakitin, of course, was a person of too little consequence to be invited to the dinner, to which Father Iosif, Father Païssy, and one other monk were the only inmates of the monastery invited.
They were already waiting when Miüsov, Kalganov, and Ivan arrived.
The Father Superior stepped into the middle of the room to receive his guests.
He was a tall, thin, but still vigorous old man, with black hair streaked with gray, and a long, grave, ascetic face.
But this time they approached to receive his blessing.
Miüsov even tried to kiss his hand, but the Father Superior drew it back in time to avoid the salute.
But Ivan and Kalganov went through the ceremony in the most simple-hearted and complete manner, kissing his hand as peasants do.
“We must apologize most humbly, your reverence,” began Miüsov, simpering affably, and speaking in a dignified and respectful tone.
“Pardon us for having come alone without the gentleman you invited, Fyodor Pavlovitch.
He felt obliged to decline the honor of your hospitality, and not without reason.
In the reverend Father Zossima’s cell he was carried away by the unhappy dissension with his son, and let fall words which were quite out of keeping ... in fact, quite unseemly ... as”—he glanced at the monks—“your reverence is, no doubt, already aware.
And therefore, recognizing that he had been to blame, he felt sincere regret and shame, and begged me, and his son Ivan Fyodorovitch, to convey to you his apologies and regrets.
He asks your blessing, and begs you to forget what has taken place.” As he uttered the last word of his tirade, Miüsov completely recovered his self-complacency, and all traces of his former irritation disappeared.
He fully and sincerely loved humanity again.
The Father Superior listened to him with dignity, and, with a slight bend of the head, replied: “I sincerely deplore his absence.
Pray be seated, gentlemen.” He stood before the holy image, and began to say grace, aloud.
All bent their heads reverently, and Maximov clasped his hands before him, with peculiar fervor.
It was at this moment that Fyodor Pavlovitch played his last prank.
It must be noted that he really had meant to go home, and really had felt the impossibility of going to dine with the Father Superior as though nothing had happened, after his disgraceful behavior in the elder’s cell.
Not that he was so very much ashamed of himself—quite the contrary perhaps.
But still he felt it would be unseemly to go to dinner.
Yet his creaking carriage had hardly been brought to the steps of the hotel, and he had hardly got into it, when he suddenly stopped short.
He remembered his own words at the elder’s: “I always feel when I meet people that I am lower than all, and that they all take me for a buffoon; so I say let me play the buffoon, for you are, every one of you, stupider and lower than I.” He longed to revenge himself on every one for his own unseemliness.
He suddenly recalled how he had once in the past been asked, “Why do you hate so and so, so much?” And he had answered them, with his shameless impudence, “I’ll tell you.
But I played him a dirty trick, and ever since I have hated him.” Remembering that now, he smiled quietly and malignantly, hesitating for a moment.
His eyes gleamed, and his lips positively quivered.
His predominant sensation at that moment might be expressed in the following words, “Well, there is no rehabilitating myself now.
I will show them I don’t care what they think—that’s all!” He told the coachman to wait, while with rapid steps he returned to the monastery and straight to the Father Superior’s.
He had no clear idea what he would do, but he knew that he could not control himself, and that a touch might drive him to the utmost limits of obscenity, but only to obscenity, to nothing criminal, nothing for which he could be legally punished.
In the last resort, he could always restrain himself, and had marveled indeed at himself, on that score, sometimes.
He appeared in the Father Superior’s dining-room, at the moment when the prayer was over, and all were moving to the table.
Standing in the doorway, he scanned the company, and laughing his prolonged, impudent, malicious chuckle, looked them all boldly in the face.
For one moment every one stared at him without a word; and at once every one felt that something revolting, grotesque, positively scandalous, was about to happen.
Miüsov passed immediately from the most benevolent frame of mind to the most savage.
All the feelings that had subsided and died down in his heart revived instantly.
“I absolutely cannot! and ...
I certainly cannot!” The blood rushed to his head.
He positively stammered; but he was beyond thinking of style, and he seized his hat.
“What is it he cannot?” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, “that he absolutely cannot and certainly cannot?
Your reverence, am I to come in or not?
Will you receive me as your guest?” “You are welcome with all my heart,” answered the Superior.
“Gentlemen!” he added, “I venture to beg you most earnestly to lay aside your dissensions, and to be united in love and family harmony—with prayer to the Lord at our humble table.” “No, no, it is impossible!” cried Miüsov, beside himself.
“Well, if it is impossible for Pyotr Alexandrovitch, it is impossible for me, and I won’t stop.
I will keep with Pyotr Alexandrovitch everywhere now.
If you will go away, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, I will go away too, if you remain, I will remain.
You stung him by what you said about family harmony, Father Superior, he does not admit he is my relation.
How are you, von Sohn?” “Do you mean me?” muttered Maximov, puzzled.
“Of course I mean you,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch.
The Father Superior could not be von Sohn.” “But I am not von Sohn either.
Your reverence, do you know who von Sohn was?
He was killed in a house of harlotry—I believe that is what such places are called among you—he was killed and robbed, and in spite of his venerable age, he was nailed up in a box and sent from Petersburg to Moscow in the luggage van, and while they were nailing him up, the harlots sang songs and played the harp, that is to say, the piano.
He has risen from the dead, hasn’t he, von Sohn?” “What is happening?
“Let us go,” cried Miüsov, addressing Kalganov.
“No, excuse me,” Fyodor Pavlovitch broke in shrilly, taking another step into the room.
There in the cell you blamed me for behaving disrespectfully just because I spoke of eating gudgeon, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
Miüsov, my relation, prefers to have _plus de noblesse que de sincérité_ in his words, but I prefer in mine _plus de sincérité que de noblesse_, and—damn the _noblesse_!
Allow me, Father Superior, though I am a buffoon and play the buffoon, yet I am the soul of honor, and I want to speak my mind.
Yes, I am the soul of honor, while in Pyotr Alexandrovitch there is wounded vanity and nothing else.
While I’ve been playing the fool, I have been listening and having a look on the sly; and now I want to give you the last act of the performance.
Holy Father, I am indignant with you.
Confession is a great sacrament, before which I am ready to bow down reverently; but there in the cell, they all kneel down and confess aloud.
It was ordained by the holy Fathers to confess in secret: then only your confession will be a mystery, and so it was of old.
But how can I explain to him before every one that I did this and that ... well, you understand what—sometimes it would not be proper to talk about it—so it is really a scandal!
No, Fathers, one might be carried along with you to the Flagellants, I dare say ... at the first opportunity I shall write to the Synod, and I shall take my son, Alexey, home.” We must note here that Fyodor Pavlovitch knew where to look for the weak spot.
But the spirit of folly, which had caught up Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was bearing him on the current of his own nerves into lower and lower depths of ignominy, prompted him with this old slander.
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not understand a word of it, and he could not even put it sensibly, for on this occasion no one had been kneeling and confessing aloud in the elder’s cell, so that he could not have seen anything of the kind.
He was only speaking from confused memory of old slanders.
But as soon as he had uttered his foolish tirade, he felt he had been talking absurd nonsense, and at once longed to prove to his audience, and above all to himself, that he had not been talking nonsense.
And, though he knew perfectly well that with each word he would be adding more and more absurdity, he could not restrain himself, and plunged forward blindly.
“How disgraceful!” cried Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
“Pardon me!” said the Father Superior.
And hearing it I have said to myself: it is the correction of the Lord and He has sent it to heal my vain soul.’ And so we humbly thank you, honored guest!” and he made Fyodor Pavlovitch a low bow.
“Tut—tut—tut—sanctimoniousness and stock phrases!
Old phrases and old gestures.
The old lies and formal prostrations.
A kiss on the lips and a dagger in the heart, as in Schiller’s _Robbers_.
I don’t like falsehood, Fathers, I want the truth.
But the truth is not to be found in eating gudgeon and that I proclaim aloud!
No, saintly monk, you try being virtuous in the world, do good to society, without shutting yourself up in a monastery at other people’s expense, and without expecting a reward up aloft for it—you’ll find that a bit harder.
I can talk sense, too, Father Superior.
“Old port wine, mead brewed by the Eliseyev Brothers.
That is something beyond gudgeon.
And who has provided it all?
The Russian peasant, the laborer, brings here the farthing earned by his horny hand, wringing it from his family and the tax-gatherer!
You bleed the people, you know, holy fathers.” “This is too disgraceful!” said Father Iosif.
Father Païssy kept obstinately silent.
Miüsov rushed from the room, and Kalganov after him.
“Well, Father, I will follow Pyotr Alexandrovitch!
I sent you a thousand roubles, so you have begun to keep your eye on me.
I am taking my revenge for my youth, for all the humiliation I endured.” He thumped the table with his fist in a paroxysm of simulated feeling.
“This monastery has played a great part in my life!
This is the age of Liberalism, the age of steamers and railways.
Neither a thousand, nor a hundred roubles, no, nor a hundred farthings will you get out of me!” It must be noted again that our monastery never had played any great part in his life, and he never had shed a bitter tear owing to it.
But he was so carried away by his simulated emotion, that he was for one moment almost believing it himself.
The Father Superior bowed his head at his malicious lie, and again spoke impressively: “It is written again, ‘Bear circumspectly and gladly dishonor that cometh upon thee by no act of thine own, be not confounded and hate not him who hath dishonored thee.’ And so will we.” “Tut, tut, tut!
Bethinking thyself and the rest of the rigmarole.
Bethink yourselves, Fathers, I will go.
But I will take my son, Alexey, away from here for ever, on my parental authority.
Ivan Fyodorovitch, my most dutiful son, permit me to order you to follow me.
I’ve cloudberry wine.
Hey, von Sohn, don’t lose your chance.” He went out, shouting and gesticulating.
“Alexey!” his father shouted, from far off, catching sight of him.
“You come home to me to-day, for good, and bring your pillow and mattress, and leave no trace behind.” Alyosha stood rooted to the spot, watching the scene in silence.
Meanwhile, Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage, and Ivan was about to follow him in grim silence without even turning to say good-by to Alyosha.
But at this point another almost incredible scene of grotesque buffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode.
Maximov suddenly appeared by the side of the carriage.
He was in such a hurry that in his impatience he put his foot on the step on which Ivan’s left foot was still resting, and clutching the carriage he kept trying to jump in.
“I am going with you!” he kept shouting, laughing a thin mirthful laugh with a look of reckless glee in his face.
“Take me, too.” “There!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, delighted.
Why, how did you tear yourself away?
I am that myself, but I am surprised at you, brother!
He can lie somewhere at our feet.
Or perch on the box with the coachman.
“Drive on!” Ivan shouted angrily to the coachman.
Why did you do that?” Fyodor Pavlovitch protested.
But the carriage had already driven away.
“Well, you are a fellow,” Fyodor Pavlovitch said again.
After a pause of two minutes, looking askance at his son, “Why, it was you got up all this monastery business.
You urged it, you approved of it.
You might rest a bit now,” Ivan snapped sullenly.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes.
“A drop of brandy would be nice now,” he observed sententiously, but Ivan made no response.
Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes.
“But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery, though you will dislike it so much, most honored Karl von Moor.” Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, and turning away stared at the road.
In The Servants’ Quarters The Karamazovs’ house was far from being in the center of the town, but it was not quite outside it.
It was a pleasant-looking old house of two stories, painted gray, with a red iron roof.
There were all sorts of unexpected little cupboards and closets and staircases.
There were rats in it, but Fyodor Pavlovitch did not altogether dislike them.
“One doesn’t feel so solitary when one’s left alone in the evening,” he used to say.
It was his habit to send the servants away to the lodge for the night and to lock himself up alone.
The lodge was a roomy and solid building in the yard.
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to have the cooking done there, although there was a kitchen in the house; he did not like the smell of cooking, and, winter and summer alike, the dishes were carried in across the courtyard.
The house was built for a large family; there was room for five times as many, with their servants.
But at the time of our story there was no one living in the house but Fyodor Pavlovitch and his son Ivan.
And in the lodge there were only three servants: old Grigory, and his old wife Marfa, and a young man called Smerdyakov.
Of old Grigory we have said something already.
He was firm and determined and went blindly and obstinately for his object, if once he had been brought by any reasons (and they were often very illogical ones) to believe that it was immutably right.
He was honest and incorruptible.
His wife, Marfa Ignatyevna, had obeyed her husband’s will implicitly all her life, yet she had pestered him terribly after the emancipation of the serfs.
She was set on leaving Fyodor Pavlovitch and opening a little shop in Moscow with their small savings.
But Grigory decided then, once for all, that “the woman’s talking nonsense, for every woman is dishonest,” and that they ought not to leave their old master, whatever he might be, for “that was now their duty.” “Do you understand what duty is?” he asked Marfa Ignatyevna.
“I understand what duty means, Grigory Vassilyevitch, but why it’s our duty to stay here I never shall understand,” Marfa answered firmly.
“Well, don’t understand then.
They did not go away, and Fyodor Pavlovitch promised them a small sum for wages, and paid it regularly.
Grigory knew, too, that he had an indisputable influence over his master.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was an obstinate and cunning buffoon, yet, though his will was strong enough “in some of the affairs of life,” as he expressed it, he found himself, to his surprise, extremely feeble in facing certain other emergencies.
He knew his weaknesses and was afraid of them.
There are positions in which one has to keep a sharp look out.
And that’s not easy without a trustworthy man, and Grigory was a most trustworthy man.
Many times in the course of his life Fyodor Pavlovitch had only just escaped a sound thrashing through Grigory’s intervention, and on each occasion the old servant gave him a good lecture.
But it wasn’t only thrashings that Fyodor Pavlovitch was afraid of.
There were graver occasions, and very subtle and complicated ones, when Fyodor Pavlovitch could not have explained the extraordinary craving for some one faithful and devoted, which sometimes unaccountably came upon him all in a moment.
It was almost a morbid condition.
Corrupt and often cruel in his lust, like some noxious insect, Fyodor Pavlovitch was sometimes, in moments of drunkenness, overcome by superstitious terror and a moral convulsion which took an almost physical form.
From somebody unknown, but terrible and dangerous.
What he needed was to feel that there was _another_ man, an old and tried friend, that he might call him in his sick moments merely to look at his face, or, perhaps, exchange some quite irrelevant words with him.
And if the old servant were not angry, he felt comforted, and if he were angry, he was more dejected.
It happened even (very rarely however) that Fyodor Pavlovitch went at night to the lodge to wake Grigory and fetch him for a moment.
When the old man came, Fyodor Pavlovitch would begin talking about the most trivial matters, and would soon let him go again, sometimes even with a jest.
And after he had gone, Fyodor Pavlovitch would get into bed with a curse and sleep the sleep of the just.
Something of the same sort had happened to Fyodor Pavlovitch on Alyosha’s arrival.
Alyosha “pierced his heart” by “living with him, seeing everything and blaming nothing.” Moreover, Alyosha brought with him something his father had never known before: a complete absence of contempt for him and an invariable kindness, a perfectly natural unaffected devotion to the old man who deserved it so little.
All this was a complete surprise to the old profligate, who had dropped all family ties.
It was a new and surprising experience for him, who had till then loved nothing but “evil.” When Alyosha had left him, he confessed to himself that he had learnt something he had not till then been willing to learn.
I have mentioned already that Grigory had detested Adelaïda Ivanovna, the first wife of Fyodor Pavlovitch and the mother of Dmitri, and that he had, on the contrary, protected Sofya Ivanovna, the poor “crazy woman,” against his master and any one who chanced to speak ill or lightly of her.
His sympathy for the unhappy wife had become something sacred to him, so that even now, twenty years after, he could not bear a slighting allusion to her from any one, and would at once check the offender.
Externally, Grigory was cold, dignified and taciturn, and spoke, weighing his words, without frivolity.
It was impossible to tell at first sight whether he loved his meek, obedient wife; but he really did love her, and she knew it.
Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish; she was probably, indeed, cleverer than her husband, or, at least, more prudent than he in worldly affairs, and yet she had given in to him in everything without question or complaint ever since her marriage, and respected him for his spiritual superiority.
It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in the course of their lives, and only of the most necessary daily affairs.
The grave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone, so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did not need her advice.
She felt that her husband respected her silence, and took it as a sign of her good sense.
He had never beaten her but once, and then only slightly.
Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch’s marriage with Adelaïda Ivanovna, the village girls and women—at that time serfs—were called together before the house to sing and dance.
They were beginning “In the Green Meadows,” when Marfa, at that time a young woman, skipped forward and danced “the Russian Dance,” not in the village fashion, but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service of the rich Miüsov family, in their private theater, where the actors were taught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow.
But there it ended: the beating was never repeated, and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing.
God had not blessed them with children.
Grigory was fond of children, and was not ashamed of showing it.
When Adelaïda Ivanovna had run away, Grigory took Dmitri, then a child of three years old, combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands, and looked after him for almost a year.
Afterwards he had looked after Ivan and Alyosha, for which the general’s widow had rewarded him with a slap in the face; but I have already related all that.
The only happiness his own child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth.
When it was born, he was overwhelmed with grief and horror.
Grigory was so crushed by this, that he was not only silent till the day of the christening, but kept away in the garden.
The third day was fixed for christening the baby: mean-time Grigory had reached a conclusion.
Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and the visitors had arrived, including Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was to stand god-father, he suddenly announced that the baby “ought not to be christened at all.” He announced this quietly, briefly, forcing out his words, and gazing with dull intentness at the priest.
“Why not?” asked the priest with good-humored surprise.
“Because it’s a dragon,” muttered Grigory.
“It’s a confusion of nature,” he muttered vaguely, but firmly, and obviously unwilling to say more.
They laughed, and of course christened the poor baby.
Grigory prayed earnestly at the font, but his opinion of the new-born child remained unchanged.
Yet he did not interfere in any way.
As long as the sickly infant lived he scarcely looked at it, tried indeed not to notice it, and for the most part kept out of the cottage.
But when, at the end of a fortnight, the baby died of thrush, he himself laid the child in its little coffin, looked at it in profound grief, and when they were filling up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to the earth.
He did not for years afterwards mention his child, nor did Marfa speak of the baby before him, and, even if Grigory were not present, she never spoke of it above a whisper.
Marfa observed that, from the day of the burial, he devoted himself to “religion,” and took to reading the _Lives of the Saints_, for the most part sitting alone and in silence, and always putting on his big, round, silver-rimmed spectacles.
He was fond of the Book of Job, and had somehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of “the God-fearing Father Isaac the Syrian,” which he read persistently for years together, understanding very little of it, but perhaps prizing and loving it the more for that.
Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sect of Flagellants settled in the neighborhood.
He was evidently shaken by them, but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith.
His habit of theological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity.
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism.
And the birth of his deformed child, and its death, had, as though by special design, been accompanied by another strange and marvelous event, which, as he said later, had left a “stamp” upon his soul.
It happened that, on the very night after the burial of his child, Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new-born baby.
She was frightened and waked her husband.
He listened and said he thought it was more like some one groaning, “it might be a woman.” He got up and dressed.
As he went down the steps, he distinctly heard groans coming from the garden.
But the gate from the yard into the garden was locked at night, and there was no other way of entering it, for it was enclosed all round by a strong, high fence.
Going back into the house, Grigory lighted a lantern, took the garden key, and taking no notice of the hysterical fears of his wife, who was still persuaded that she heard a child crying, and that it was her own baby crying and calling for her, went into the garden in silence.
Opening the door of the bath-house, he saw a sight which petrified him.
An idiot girl, who wandered about the streets and was known to the whole town by the nickname of Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya (Stinking Lizaveta), had got into the bath-house and had just given birth to a child.
Lizaveta There was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly, and confirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion.
This Lizaveta was a dwarfish creature, “not five foot within a wee bit,” as many of the pious old women said pathetically about her, after her death.
Her broad, healthy, red face had a look of blank idiocy and the fixed stare in her eyes was unpleasant, in spite of their meek expression.
She wandered about, summer and winter alike, barefooted, wearing nothing but a hempen smock.
It was always crusted with mud, and had leaves, bits of stick, and shavings clinging to it, as she always slept on the ground and in the dirt.
Her father, a homeless, sickly drunkard, called Ilya, had lost everything and lived many years as a workman with some well-to-do tradespeople.
Spiteful and diseased, Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever she returned to him.
But she rarely did so, for every one in the town was ready to look after her as being an idiot, and so specially dear to God.
Ilya’s employers, and many others in the town, especially of the tradespeople, tried to clothe her better, and always rigged her out with high boots and sheepskin coat for the winter.
But, although she allowed them to dress her up without resisting, she usually went away, preferably to the cathedral porch, and taking off all that had been given her—kerchief, sheepskin, skirt or boots—she left them there and walked away barefoot in her smock as before.
It happened on one occasion that a new governor of the province, making a tour of inspection in our town, saw Lizaveta, and was wounded in his tenderest susceptibilities.
And though he was told she was an idiot, he pronounced that for a young woman of twenty to wander about in nothing but a smock was a breach of the proprieties, and must not occur again.
But the governor went his way, and Lizaveta was left as she was.
At last her father died, which made her even more acceptable in the eyes of the religious persons of the town, as an orphan.
In fact, every one seemed to like her; even the boys did not tease her, and the boys of our town, especially the schoolboys, are a mischievous set.
Every one was kind to her and gave her something.
Sometimes she would stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give it to her, and the lady would be pleased to take it.
She herself never tasted anything but black bread and water.
If she went into an expensive shop, where there were costly goods or money lying about, no one kept watch on her, for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles overlooked by them, she would not have touched a farthing.
She scarcely ever went to church.
She used at least once a week to turn up “at home,” that is at the house of her father’s former employers, and in the winter went there every night, and slept either in the passage or the cowhouse.
People were amazed that she could stand such a life, but she was accustomed to it, and, although she was so tiny, she was of a robust constitution.
Some of the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride, but that is hardly credible.
She could hardly speak, and only from time to time uttered an inarticulate grunt.
It happened one clear, warm, moonlight night in September (many years ago) five or six drunken revelers were returning from the club at a very late hour, according to our provincial notions.
This way leads out on to the bridge over the long, stinking pool which we were accustomed to call a river.
Among the nettles and burdocks under the hurdle our revelers saw Lizaveta asleep.
They stopped to look at her, laughing, and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness.
It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry whether any one could possibly look upon such an animal as a woman, and so forth....
They all pronounced with lofty repugnance that it was impossible.
But Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was among them, sprang forward and declared that it was by no means impossible, and that, indeed, there was a certain piquancy about it, and so on....
It is true that at that time he was overdoing his part as a buffoon.
He liked to put himself forward and entertain the company, ostensibly on equal terms, of course, though in reality he was on a servile footing with them.
It was just at the time when he had received the news of his first wife’s death in Petersburg, and, with crape upon his hat, was drinking and behaving so shamelessly that even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of him.
The revelers, of course, laughed at this unexpected opinion; and one of them even began challenging him to act upon it.
The others repelled the idea even more emphatically, although still with the utmost hilarity, and at last they went on their way.
Later on, Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he had gone with them, and perhaps it was so, no one knows for certain, and no one ever knew.
But five or six months later, all the town was talking, with intense and sincere indignation, of Lizaveta’s condition, and trying to find out who was the miscreant who had wronged her.
Then suddenly a terrible rumor was all over the town that this miscreant was no other than Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Of that drunken band five had left the town and the only one still among us was an elderly and much respected civil councilor, the father of grown-up daughters, who could hardly have spread the tale, even if there had been any foundation for it.
But rumor pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch, and persisted in pointing at him.
Of course this was no great grievance to him: he would not have troubled to contradict a set of tradespeople.
In those days he was proud, and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle of the officials and nobles, whom he entertained so well.
At the time, Grigory stood up for his master vigorously.
He provoked quarrels and altercations in defense of him and succeeded in bringing some people round to his side.
“It’s the wench’s own fault,” he asserted, and the culprit was Karp, a dangerous convict, who had escaped from prison and whose name was well known to us, as he had hidden in our town.
This conjecture sounded plausible, for it was remembered that Karp had been in the neighborhood just at that time in the autumn, and had robbed three people.
But this affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popular sympathy from the poor idiot.
A well-to-do merchant’s widow named Kondratyev arranged to take her into her house at the end of April, meaning not to let her go out until after the confinement.
They kept a constant watch over her, but in spite of their vigilance she escaped on the very last day, and made her way into Fyodor Pavlovitch’s garden.
How, in her condition, she managed to climb over the high, strong fence remained a mystery.
Some maintained that she must have been lifted over by somebody; others hinted at something more uncanny.
The most likely explanation is that it happened naturally—that Lizaveta, accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens, had somehow managed to climb this fence, in spite of her condition, and had leapt down, injuring herself.
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta, while he ran to fetch an old midwife who lived close by.
They saved the baby, but Lizaveta died at dawn.
Our little lost one has sent us this, who has come from the devil’s son and a holy innocent.
He was christened Pavel, to which people were not slow in adding Fyodorovitch (son of Fyodor).
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not object to any of this, and thought it amusing, though he persisted vigorously in denying his responsibility.
The townspeople were pleased at his adopting the foundling.
Later on, Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname for the child, calling him Smerdyakov, after his mother’s nickname.
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch’s second servant, and was living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins.
He was employed as cook.
I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov, but I am ashamed of keeping my readers’ attention so long occupied with these common menials, and I will go back to my story, hoping to say more of Smerdyakov in the course of it.
The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—In Verse Alyosha remained for some time irresolute after hearing the command his father shouted to him from the carriage.
But in spite of his uneasiness he did not stand still.
Then he set off, trusting that on the way he would find some answer to the doubt tormenting him.
I hasten to add that his father’s shouts, commanding him to return home “with his mattress and pillow” did not frighten him in the least.
He understood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely “a flourish” to produce an effect.
In the same way a tradesman in our town who was celebrating his name-day with a party of friends, getting angry at being refused more vodka, smashed up his own crockery and furniture and tore his own and his wife’s clothes, and finally broke his windows, all for the sake of effect.
Next day, of course, when he was sober, he regretted the broken cups and saucers.
Alyosha knew that his father would let him go back to the monastery next day, possibly even that evening.
Moreover, he was fully persuaded that his father might hurt any one else, but would not hurt him.
This was for him an axiom, assumed once for all without question, and he went his way without hesitation, relying on it.
But at that moment an anxiety of a different sort disturbed him, and worried him the more because he could not formulate it.
It was the fear of a woman, of Katerina Ivanovna, who had so urgently entreated him in the note handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to come and see her about something.
This request and the necessity of going had at once aroused an uneasy feeling in his heart, and this feeling had grown more and more painful all the morning in spite of the scenes at the hermitage and at the Father Superior’s.
Though he knew little of women, he had spent his life, from early childhood till he entered the monastery, entirely with women.
He was afraid of that woman, Katerina Ivanovna.
He thought of her as a beautiful, proud, imperious girl.
It was not her beauty which troubled him, but something else.
And the vagueness of his apprehension increased the apprehension itself.
She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity, though he had already behaved badly to her.
Yet, although Alyosha recognized and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments, a shiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house.
He reflected that he would not find Ivan, who was so intimate a friend, with her, for Ivan was certainly now with his father.
Dmitri he was even more certain not to find there, and he had a foreboding of the reason.
And so his conversation would be with her alone.
He had a great longing to run and see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview.
Standing still for a minute, he reached a final decision.
Crossing himself with a rapid and accustomed gesture, and at once smiling, he turned resolutely in the direction of his terrible lady.
Though our town is small, it is scattered, and the houses are far apart.
And meanwhile his father was expecting him, and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command.
He might be unreasonable, and so he had to make haste to get there and back.
This meant skirting fences, climbing over hurdles, and crossing other people’s back-yards, where every one he met knew him and greeted him.
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father’s, and belonging to a little tumbledown house with four windows.
The owner of this house, as Alyosha knew, was a bedridden old woman, living with her daughter, who had been a genteel maid-servant in generals’ families in Petersburg.
She always dressed up in fine clothes, though her old mother and she had sunk into such poverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s kitchen for soup and bread, which Marfa gave readily.
Yet, though the young woman came up for soup, she had never sold any of her dresses, and one of these even had a long train—a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin, who always knew everything that was going on in the town.
He had forgotten it as soon as he heard it, but now, on reaching the garden, he remembered the dress with the train, raised his head, which had been bowed in thought, and came upon something quite unexpected.
Over the hurdle in the garden, Dmitri, mounted on something, was leaning forward, gesticulating violently, beckoning to him, obviously afraid to utter a word for fear of being overheard.
I was nearly shouting to you,” Mitya said in a joyful, hurried whisper.
How splendid that you’ve come!
I was just thinking of you!” Alyosha was delighted too, but he did not know how to get over the hurdle.
Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump.
Now come along,” said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper.
“Where?” whispered Alyosha, looking about him and finding himself in a deserted garden with no one near but themselves.
I’ll explain later on, but, knowing it’s a secret, I began whispering like a fool, when there’s no need.
I was just repeating that, sitting here, before you came.” The garden was about three acres in extent, and planted with trees only along the fence at the four sides.
The middle of the garden was an empty grass space, from which several hundredweight of hay was carried in the summer.
There were also plantations of raspberries and currants and gooseberries laid out along the sides; a kitchen garden had been planted lately near the house.
Dmitri led his brother to the most secluded corner of the garden.
There, in a thicket of lime-trees and old bushes of black currant, elder, snowball-tree, and lilac, there stood a tumble-down green summer-house, blackened with age.
There was a tradition that it had been put up some fifty years before by a retired colonel called von Schmidt, who owned the house at that time.
It was all in decay, the floor was rotting, the planks were loose, the woodwork smelled musty.
In the summer-house there was a green wooden table fixed in the ground, and round it were some green benches upon which it was still possible to sit.
Alyosha had at once observed his brother’s exhilarated condition, and on entering the arbor he saw half a bottle of brandy and a wineglass on the table.
“I see your look: ‘He’s drinking again!’ Distrust the apparition.
Distrust the worthless, lying crowd, And lay aside thy doubts.
I’m not drinking, I’m only ‘indulging,’ as that pig, your Rakitin, says.
He’ll be a civil councilor one day, but he’ll always talk about ‘indulging.’ Sit down.
I could take you in my arms, Alyosha, and press you to my bosom till I crush you, for in the whole world—in reality—in re-al-i-ty—(can you take it in?) I love no one but you!” He uttered the last words in a sort of exaltation.
But on reflection, you know, I’d better speak quietly, for here—here—you can never tell what ears are listening.
I will explain everything; as they say, ‘the story will be continued.’ Why have I been longing for you?
Why have I been thirsting for you all these days, and just now? (It’s five days since I’ve cast anchor here.) Because it’s only to you I can tell everything; because I must, because I need you, because to-morrow I shall fly from the clouds, because to-morrow life is ending and beginning.
Have you ever felt, have you ever dreamt of falling down a precipice into a pit?
It’s not enjoyment though, but ecstasy.
Damn it all, whatever it is!
A strong spirit, a weak spirit, a womanish spirit—whatever it is!
Let us praise nature: you see what sunshine, how clear the sky is, the leaves are all green, it’s still summer; four o’clock in the afternoon and the stillness!
Where were you going?” “I was going to father’s, but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna’s first.” “To her, and to father!
Oo! what a coincidence!
Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in my ribs?
Why, to send you to father and to her, Katerina Ivanovna, so as to have done with her and with father.
And here you are on your way to see father and her.” “Did you really mean to send me?” cried Alyosha with a distressed expression.
And I see you understand it all at once.
Don’t be sorry, and don’t cry.” Dmitri stood up, thought a moment, and put his finger to his forehead.
“She’s asked you, written to you a letter or something, that’s why you’re going to her?
Oh, gods, I thank you for sending him by the back-way, and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly old fishermen in the fable!
Now I mean to tell you everything, for I must tell some one.
If two people break away from everything on earth and fly off into the unknown, or at least one of them, and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to some one else and says, ‘Do this for me’—some favor never asked before that could only be asked on one’s deathbed—would that other refuse, if he were a friend or a brother?” “I will do it, but tell me what it is, and make haste,” said Alyosha.
Don’t be in a hurry, Alyosha, you hurry and worry yourself.
Ah, Alyosha, what a pity you can’t understand ecstasy.
As though you didn’t understand it.
I should like to begin—my confession—with Schiller’s _Hymn to Joy_, _An die Freude_!
Don’t think I’m talking nonsense because I’m drunk.
Brandy’s all very well, but I need two bottles to make me drunk: Silenus with his rosy phiz Upon his stumbling ass.
I’m not Silenus, though I am strong,[1] for I’ve made a decision once for all.
I’m not spinning it out.
I won’t keep you in suspense.
Stay, how does it go?” He raised his head, thought a minute, and began with enthusiasm: “Wild and fearful in his cavern Hid the naked troglodyte, And the homeless nomad wandered Laying waste the fertile plain.
Menacing with spear and arrow In the woods the hunter strayed....
Woe to all poor wretches stranded On those cruel and hostile shores!
“From the peak of high Olympus Came the mother Ceres down, Seeking in those savage regions Her lost daughter Proserpine.
“From the fields and from the vineyards Came no fruits to deck the feasts, Only flesh of bloodstained victims Smoldered on the altar-fires, And where’er the grieving goddess Turns her melancholy gaze, Sunk in vilest degradation Man his loathsomeness displays.” Mitya broke into sobs and seized Alyosha’s hand.
“My dear, my dear, in degradation, in degradation now, too.
There’s a terrible amount of suffering for man on earth, a terrible lot of trouble.
Don’t think I’m only a brute in an officer’s uniform, wallowing in dirt and drink.
I hardly think of anything but of that degraded man—if only I’m not lying.
Would he purge his soul from vileness And attain to light and worth, He must turn and cling for ever To his ancient Mother Earth.
But the difficulty is how am I to cling for ever to Mother Earth.
Am I to become a peasant or a shepherd?
That’s the trouble, for everything in the world is a riddle!
And whenever I’ve happened to sink into the vilest degradation (and it’s always been happening) I always read that poem about Ceres and man.
For I’m a Karamazov.
For when I do leap into the pit, I go headlong with my heels up, and am pleased to be falling in that degrading attitude, and pride myself upon it.
And in the very depths of that degradation I begin a hymn of praise.
Let me be vile and base, only let me kiss the hem of the veil in which my God is shrouded.
Though I may be following the devil, I am Thy son, O Lord, and I love Thee, and I feel the joy without which the world cannot stand.
Joy everlasting fostereth The soul of all creation, It is her secret ferment fires The cup of life with flame. ’Tis at her beck the grass hath turned Each blade towards the light And solar systems have evolved From chaos and dark night, Filling the realms of boundless space Beyond the sage’s sight.
At bounteous Nature’s kindly breast, All things that breathe drink Joy, And birds and beasts and creeping things All follow where She leads.
It may be foolishness that every one would laugh at.
I am that insect, brother, and it is said of me specially.
All we Karamazovs are such insects, and, angel as you are, that insect lives in you, too, and will stir up a tempest in your blood.
Tempests, because sensual lust is a tempest—worse than a tempest!
Beauty is a terrible and awful thing!
It is terrible because it has not been fathomed and never can be fathomed, for God sets us nothing but riddles.
Here the boundaries meet and all contradictions exist side by side.
I am not a cultivated man, brother, but I’ve thought a lot about this.
It’s terrible what mysteries there are!
What’s still more awful is that a man with the ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the ideal of the Madonna, and his heart may be on fire with that ideal, genuinely on fire, just as in his days of youth and innocence.
I’d have him narrower.
What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart.
The awful thing is that beauty is mysterious as well as terrible.
God and the devil are fighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man.
The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—In Anecdote “I was leading a wild life then.
Father said just now that I spent several thousand roubles in seducing young girls.
That’s a swinish invention, and there was nothing of the sort.
With me money is an accessory, the overflow of my heart, the framework.
I entertained them both.
Sometimes I gave it to the ladies, too, for they’ll take it greedily, that must be admitted, and be pleased and thankful for it.
Ladies used to be fond of me: not all of them, but it happened, it happened.
But I always liked side-paths, little dark back-alleys behind the main road—there one finds adventures and surprises, and precious metal in the dirt.
I am speaking figuratively, brother.
I loved vice, I loved the ignominy of vice.
In fact a Karamazov!
It was dark, it was winter, and I began squeezing a girl’s hand, and forced her to kiss me.
She was the daughter of an official, a sweet, gentle, submissive creature.
I used to see her in a corner at dances (we were always having dances), her eyes watching me.
I saw how they glowed with fire—a fire of gentle indignation.
This game only tickled that insect lust I cherished in my soul.
Five months later she married an official and left the town, still angry, and still, perhaps, in love with me.
Though I’m full of low desires, and love what’s low, I’m not dishonorable.
You’re blushing; your eyes flashed.
And all this was nothing much—wayside blossoms _à la_ Paul de Kock—though the cruel insect had already grown strong in my soul.
I’ve a perfect album of reminiscences, brother.
God bless them, the darlings.
I tried to break it off without quarreling.
You can’t suppose I brought you here simply to talk of such nonsense.
No, I’m going to tell you something more curious; and don’t be surprised that I’m glad to tell you, instead of being ashamed.” “You say that because I blushed,” Alyosha said suddenly.
“I wasn’t blushing at what you were saying or at what you’ve done.
Come, that’s going a little too far!” “No, it’s not too far,” said Alyosha warmly (obviously the idea was not a new one).
I’m at the bottom step, and you’re above, somewhere about the thirteenth.
Absolutely the same in kind.
That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men.
From this field of corruption fouled by flies, let’s pass to my tragedy, also befouled by flies, that is by every sort of vileness.
Although the old man told lies about my seducing innocence, there really was something of the sort in my tragedy, though it was only once, and then it did not come off.
The old man who has reproached me with what never happened does not even know of this fact; I never told any one about it.
You’re the first, except Ivan, of course—Ivan knows everything.
But Ivan’s a tomb.” “Ivan’s a tomb?” “Yes.” Alyosha listened with great attention.
“I was lieutenant in a line regiment, but still I was under supervision, like a kind of convict.
Yet I was awfully well received in the little town.
Although they shook their heads over me, they liked me.
He was always down upon me, but I had powerful friends, and, moreover, all the town was on my side, so he couldn’t do me much harm.
I was in fault myself for refusing to treat him with proper respect.
This obstinate old fellow, who was really a very good sort, kind-hearted and hospitable, had had two wives, both dead.
His first wife, who was of a humble family, left a daughter as unpretentious as herself.
The aunt was simple and illiterate; the niece was simple but lively.
I never knew a woman of more charming character than Agafya—fancy, her name was Agafya Ivanovna!
And she wasn’t bad-looking either, in the Russian style: tall, stout, with a full figure, and beautiful eyes, though a rather coarse face.
She had not married, although she had had two suitors.
She refused them, but was as cheerful as ever.
I was intimate with her, not in ‘that’ way, it was pure friendship.
I have often been friendly with women quite innocently.
I used to talk to her with shocking frankness, and she only laughed.
She and her aunt lived in her father’s house with a sort of voluntary humility, not putting themselves on an equality with other people.
She was a general favorite, and of use to every one, for she was a clever dressmaker.
She gave her services freely without asking for payment, but if any one offered her payment, she didn’t refuse.
The colonel, of course, was a very different matter.
He was one of the chief personages in the district.
He kept open house, entertained the whole town, gave suppers and dances.
At the time I arrived and joined the battalion, all the town was talking of the expected return of the colonel’s second daughter, a great beauty, who had just left a fashionable school in the capital.
This second daughter is Katerina Ivanovna, and she was the child of the second wife, who belonged to a distinguished general’s family; although, as I learnt on good authority, she too brought the colonel no money.
She had connections, and that was all.
There may have been expectations, but they had come to nothing.
“Yet, when the young lady came from boarding-school on a visit, the whole town revived.
Our most distinguished ladies—two ‘Excellencies’ and a colonel’s wife—and all the rest following their lead, at once took her up and gave entertainments in her honor.
She was the belle of the balls and picnics, and they got up _tableaux vivants_ in aid of distressed governesses.
I took no notice, I went on as wildly as before, and one of my exploits at the time set all the town talking.
I saw her eyes taking my measure one evening at the battery commander’s, but I didn’t go up to her, as though I disdained her acquaintance.
She scarcely looked at me, and compressed her lips scornfully.
I behaved like an awful fool on many occasions at that time, and I was conscious of it myself.
What made it worse was that I felt that ‘Katenka’ was not an innocent boarding-school miss, but a person of character, proud and really high-principled; above all, she had education and intellect, and I had neither.
“Meanwhile, I spent my time in drink and riot, till the lieutenant-colonel put me under arrest for three days.
Just at that time father sent me six thousand roubles in return for my sending him a deed giving up all claims upon him—settling our accounts, so to speak, and saying that I wouldn’t expect anything more.
I didn’t understand a word of it at the time.
“Just as I received the money, I got a letter from a friend telling me something that interested me immensely.
The authorities, I learnt, were dissatisfied with our lieutenant-colonel.
He was suspected of irregularities; in fact, his enemies were preparing a surprise for him.
And then the commander of the division arrived, and kicked up the devil of a shindy.
Shortly afterwards he was ordered to retire.
I won’t tell you how it all happened.
He had enemies certainly.
Suddenly there was a marked coolness in the town towards him and all his family.
I met Agafya Ivanovna, with whom I’d always kept up a friendship, and said, ‘Do you know there’s a deficit of 4,500 roubles of government money in your father’s accounts?’ “‘What do you mean?
The general was here not long ago, and everything was all right.’ “‘Then it was, but now it isn’t.’ “She was terribly scared.
“‘Don’t frighten me!’ she said.
I only wanted, in view of “possibilities,” to add, that when they demand that 4,500 roubles from your father, and he can’t produce it, he’ll be tried, and made to serve as a common soldier in his old age, unless you like to send me your young lady secretly.
I’ll give her four thousand, if you like, and keep the secret religiously.’ “‘Ah, you scoundrel!’—that’s what she said.
‘You wicked scoundrel!
How dare you!’ “She went away furiously indignant, while I shouted after her once more that the secret should be kept sacred.
Those two simple creatures, Agafya and her aunt, I may as well say at once, behaved like perfect angels all through this business.
They genuinely adored their ‘Katya,’ thought her far above them, and waited on her, hand and foot.
But Agafya told her of our conversation.
I found that out afterwards.
“Suddenly the new major arrived to take command of the battalion.
The old lieutenant-colonel was taken ill at once, couldn’t leave his room for two days, and didn’t hand over the government money.
Kravchenko declared that he really was ill.
But I knew for a fact, and had known for a long time, that for the last four years the money had never been in his hands except when the Commander made his visits of inspection.
He used to lend it to a trustworthy person, a merchant of our town called Trifonov, an old widower, with a big beard and gold-rimmed spectacles.
He used to go to the fair, do a profitable business with the money, and return the whole sum to the colonel, bringing with it a present from the fair, as well as interest on the loan.
But this time (I heard all about it quite by chance from Trifonov’s son and heir, a driveling youth and one of the most vicious in the world)—this time, I say, Trifonov brought nothing back from the fair.
The lieutenant-colonel flew to him.
‘I’ve never received any money from you, and couldn’t possibly have received any.’ That was all the answer he got.
So now our lieutenant-colonel is confined to the house, with a towel round his head, while they’re all three busy putting ice on it.
But Agafya, remembering what I had told her, had her suspicions.
I heard all about this afterwards.
I was at home, it was getting dusk, and I was just preparing to go out.
I had dressed, brushed my hair, scented my handkerchief, and taken up my cap, when suddenly the door opened, and facing me in the room stood Katerina Ivanovna.
“It’s strange how things happen sometimes.
I lodged with two decrepit old ladies, who looked after me.
They were most obliging old things, ready to do anything for me, and at my request were as silent afterwards as two cast-iron posts.
Of course I grasped the position at once.
She walked in and looked straight at me, her dark eyes determined, even defiant, but on her lips and round her mouth I saw uncertainty.
She was breathless, frightened, her voice failed her, and the corners of her mouth and the lines round it quivered.
Alyosha, are you listening, or are you asleep?” “Mitya, I know you will tell the whole truth,” said Alyosha in agitation.
If I tell the whole truth just as it happened I shan’t spare myself.
My first idea was a—Karamazov one.
Once I was bitten by a centipede, brother, and laid up a fortnight with fever from it.
Well, I felt a centipede biting at my heart then—a noxious insect, you understand?
But she was beautiful in another way then.
At that moment she was beautiful because she was noble, and I was a scoundrel; she in all the grandeur of her generosity and sacrifice for her father, and I—a bug!
And, scoundrel as I was, she was altogether at my mercy, body and soul.
I tell you frankly, that thought, that venomous thought, so possessed my heart that it almost swooned with suspense.
It seemed as if there could be no resisting it; as though I should act like a bug, like a venomous spider, without a spark of pity.
I could scarcely breathe.
Understand, I should have gone next day to ask for her hand, so that it might end honorably, so to speak, and that nobody would or could know.
And at that very second some voice seemed to whisper in my ear, ‘But when you come to-morrow to make your proposal, that girl won’t even see you; she’ll order her coachman to kick you out of the yard.
“Publish it through all the town,” she would say, “I’m not afraid of you.”’ I looked at the young lady, my voice had not deceived me.
I longed to play her the nastiest swinish cad’s trick: to look at her with a sneer, and on the spot where she stood before me to stun her with a tone of voice that only a shopman could use.
You’ve been counting your chickens too easily, madam.
But four thousand is not a sum to throw away on such frivolity.
You’ve put yourself out to no purpose.’ “I should have lost the game, of course.
But it would have been an infernal revenge.
Would you believe it, it has never happened to me with any other woman, not one, to look at her at such a moment with hatred.
“I went to the window, put my forehead against the frozen pane, and I remember the ice burnt my forehead like fire.
I turned round, went up to the table, opened the drawer and took out a banknote for five thousand roubles (it was lying in a French dictionary).
Then I showed it her in silence, folded it, handed it to her, opened the door into the passage, and, stepping back, made her a deep bow, a most respectful, a most impressive bow, believe me!
She shuddered all over, gazed at me for a second, turned horribly pale—white as a sheet, in fact—and all at once, not impetuously but softly, gently, bowed down to my feet—not a boarding-school curtsey, but a Russian bow, with her forehead to the floor.
It would have been frightfully stupid, of course.
Can you understand that one might kill oneself from delight?
I only kissed my sword and put it back in the scabbard—which there was no need to have told you, by the way.
And I fancy that in telling you about my inner conflict I have laid it on rather thick to glorify myself.
Well, so much for that ‘adventure’ with Katerina Ivanovna.
So now Ivan knows of it, and you—no one else.” Dmitri got up, took a step or two in his excitement, pulled out his handkerchief and mopped his forehead, then sat down again, not in the same place as before, but on the opposite side, so that Alyosha had to turn quite round to face him.
The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—“Heels Up” “Now,” said Alyosha, “I understand the first half.” “You understand the first half.
The second half is a tragedy, and it is being acted here.” “And I understand nothing of that second half so far,” said Alyosha.
Do you suppose I understand it?” “Stop, Dmitri.
There’s one important question.
Tell me, you were betrothed, you are betrothed still?” “We weren’t betrothed at once, not for three months after that adventure.
The next day I told myself that the incident was closed, concluded, that there would be no sequel.
On her side she gave no sign of life for the six weeks that she remained in the town; except, indeed, for one action.
The day after her visit the maid-servant slipped round with an envelope addressed to me.
I tore it open: it contained the change out of the banknote.
Only four thousand five hundred roubles was needed, but there was a discount of about two hundred on changing it.
I don’t remember exactly, but not a note, not a word of explanation.
I searched the packet for a pencil mark—n-nothing!
Well, I spent the rest of the money on such an orgy that the new major was obliged to reprimand me.
“Well, the lieutenant-colonel produced the battalion money, to the astonishment of every one, for nobody believed that he had the money untouched.
He’d no sooner paid it than he fell ill, took to his bed, and, three weeks later, softening of the brain set in, and he died five days afterwards.
He was buried with military honors, for he had not had time to receive his discharge.
Ten days after his funeral, Katerina Ivanovna, with her aunt and sister, went to Moscow.
And, behold, on the very day they went away (I hadn’t seen them, didn’t see them off or take leave) I received a tiny note, a sheet of thin blue paper, and on it only one line in pencil: ‘I will write to you.
In Moscow their fortunes changed with the swiftness of lightning and the unexpectedness of an Arabian fairy-tale.
That general’s widow, their nearest relation, suddenly lost the two nieces who were her heiresses and next-of-kin—both died in the same week of small-pox.
The old lady, prostrated with grief, welcomed Katya as a daughter, as her one hope, clutched at her, altered her will in Katya’s favor.
But that concerned the future.
Meanwhile she gave her, for present use, eighty thousand roubles, as a marriage portion, to do what she liked with.
She was an hysterical woman.
I saw something of her in Moscow, later.
“Well, suddenly I received by post four thousand five hundred roubles.
I was speechless with surprise, as you may suppose.
Three days later came the promised letter.
I want to save you from yourself.’ Alyosha, I am not worthy to repeat those lines in my vulgar words and in my vulgar tone, my everlastingly vulgar tone, that I can never cure myself of.
I wrote her an answer at once, as it was impossible for me to go to Moscow.
I referred to her being rich and having a dowry while I was only a stuck-up beggar!
Don’t you see what a lot she thinks of Ivan, how she respects him?
When she compares us, do you suppose she can love a man like me, especially after all that has happened here?” “But I am convinced that she does love a man like you, and not a man like him.” “She loves her own _virtue_, not me.” The words broke involuntarily, and almost malignantly, from Dmitri.
He laughed, but a minute later his eyes gleamed, he flushed crimson and struck the table violently with his fist.
“I swear, Alyosha,” he cried, with intense and genuine anger at himself; “you may not believe me, but as God is holy, and as Christ is God, I swear that though I smiled at her lofty sentiments just now, I know that I am a million times baser in soul than she, and that these lofty sentiments of hers are as sincere as a heavenly angel’s.
As for Ivan, I can understand how he must be cursing nature now—with his intellect, too!
To see the preference given—to whom, to what?
To a monster who, though he is betrothed and all eyes are fixed on him, can’t restrain his debaucheries—and before the very eyes of his betrothed!
And a man like me is preferred, while he is rejected.
Because a girl wants to sacrifice her life and destiny out of gratitude.
But destiny will be accomplished, and the best man will hold his ground while the undeserving one will vanish into his back-alley for ever—his filthy back-alley, his beloved back-alley, where he is at home and where he will sink in filth and stench at his own free will and with enjoyment.
I’ve been talking foolishly.
I shall drown in the back-alley, and she will marry Ivan.” “Stop, Dmitri,” Alyosha interrupted again with great anxiety.
“There’s one thing you haven’t made clear yet: you are still betrothed all the same, aren’t you?
How can you break off the engagement if she, your betrothed, doesn’t want to?” “Yes, formally and solemnly betrothed.
It was all done on my arrival in Moscow, with great ceremony, with ikons, all in fine style.
The general’s wife blessed us, and—would you believe it?—congratulated Katya.
I told her about myself—sincerely, honorably.
She listened to everything.
There was sweet confusion, There were tender words.
I gave my promise, and here—” “What?” “Why, I called to you and brought you out here to-day, this very day—remember it—to send you—this very day again—to Katerina Ivanovna, and—” “What?” “To tell her that I shall never come to see her again.
Say, ‘He sends you his compliments.’” “But is that possible?” “That’s just the reason I’m sending you, in my place, because it’s impossible.
And, how could I tell her myself?” “And where are you going?” “To the back-alley.” “To Grushenka, then!” Alyosha exclaimed mournfully, clasping his hands.
I thought that you had just visited her, and that was all.” “Can a betrothed man pay such visits?
Is such a thing possible and with such a betrothed, and before the eyes of all the world?
Confound it, I have some honor!
As soon as I began visiting Grushenka, I ceased to be betrothed, and to be an honest man.
I had heard, and I know for a fact now, that that captain, father’s agent, had given Grushenka an I.O.U. of mine for her to sue me for payment, so as to put an end to me.
I knew about her old merchant, who’s lying ill now, paralyzed; but he’s leaving her a decent little sum.
I knew, too, that she was fond of money, that she hoarded it, and lent it at a wicked rate of interest, that she’s a merciless cheat and swindler.
I’m plague-stricken still, and I know that everything is over, that there will never be anything more for me.
The cycle of the ages is accomplished.
And though I’m a beggar, as fate would have it, I had three thousand just then in my pocket.
I drove with Grushenka to Mokroe, a place twenty-five versts from here.
I got gypsies there and champagne and made all the peasants there drunk on it, and all the women and girls.
I sent the thousands flying.
In three days’ time I was stripped bare, but a hero.
I tell you that rogue, Grushenka, has a supple curve all over her body.
Say that you won’t beat me, and will let me do anything I choose, and perhaps I will marry you.’ She laughed, and she’s laughing still!” Dmitri leapt up with a sort of fury.
His eyes became suddenly bloodshot.
He stopped short before him, and taking him by the shoulders began shaking him violently.
“Do you know, you innocent boy, that this is all delirium, senseless delirium, for there’s a tragedy here.
Let me tell you, Alexey, that I may be a low man, with low and degraded passions, but a thief and a pickpocket Dmitri Karamazov never can be.
Well, then; let me tell you that I am a thief and a pickpocket.
That very morning, just before I went to beat Grushenka, Katerina Ivanovna sent for me, and in strict secrecy (why I don’t know, I suppose she had some reason) asked me to go to the chief town of the province and to post three thousand roubles to Agafya Ivanovna in Moscow, so that nothing should be known of it in the town here.
So I had that three thousand roubles in my pocket when I went to see Grushenka, and it was that money we spent at Mokroe.
Afterwards I pretended I had been to the town, but did not show her the post office receipt.
‘He sends his compliments,’ and she’ll ask you, ‘What about the money?’ You might still have said to her, ‘He’s a degraded sensualist, and a low creature, with uncontrolled passions.
Here is your three thousand; he sends it back.
Send it yourself to Agafya Ivanovna.
But he told me to say “he sends his compliments.”’ But, as it is, she will ask, ‘But where is the money?’” “Mitya, you are unhappy, yes!
Don’t worry yourself to death with despair.” “What, do you suppose I’d shoot myself because I can’t get three thousand to pay back?
I haven’t the strength now.
Afterwards, perhaps.
But now I’m going to Grushenka.
I’ll clean her friends’ goloshes, blow up their samovar, run their errands.” “Katerina Ivanovna will understand it all,” Alyosha said solemnly.
“She’ll understand how great this trouble is and will forgive.
She’ll see that for herself.” “She won’t forgive everything,” said Dmitri, with a grin.
“There’s something in it, brother, that no woman could forgive.
Do you know what would be the best thing to do?” “What?” “Pay back the three thousand.” “Where can we get it from?
I say, I have two thousand.
Ivan will give you another thousand—that makes three.
Take it and pay it back.” “And when would you get it, your three thousand?
You’re not of age, besides, and you must—you absolutely must—take my farewell to her to-day, with the money or without it, for I can’t drag on any longer, things have come to such a pass.
Ask him for three thousand.” “But, Mitya, he won’t give it.” “As though he would!
But morally he owes me something, doesn’t he?
You know he started with twenty-eight thousand of my mother’s money and made a hundred thousand with it.
Let him give me back only three out of the twenty-eight thousand, and he’ll draw my soul out of hell, and it will atone for many of his sins.
For that three thousand—I give you my solemn word—I’ll make an end of everything, and he shall hear nothing more of me.
Tell him God Himself sends him this chance.” “Mitya, he won’t give it for anything.” “I know he won’t.
I know it perfectly well.
I know something more.
Now, only a few days ago, perhaps only yesterday he found out for the first time _in earnest_ (underline _in earnest_) that Grushenka is really perhaps not joking, and really means to marry me.
I know that for the last five days he has had three thousand drawn out of the bank, changed into notes of a hundred roubles, packed into a large envelope, sealed with five seals, and tied across with red tape.
On the envelope is written: ‘To my angel, Grushenka, when she will come to me.’ He scrawled it himself in silence and in secret, and no one knows that the money’s there except the valet, Smerdyakov, whom he trusts like himself.
So now he has been expecting Grushenka for the last three or four days; he hopes she’ll come for the money.
You understand now why I’m here in secret and what I’m on the watch for.” “For her?” “Yes, for her.
Foma comes from our parts; he was a soldier in our regiment.
He’s watchman at night and goes grouse-shooting in the day-time; and that’s how he lives.
I’ve established myself in his room.
Neither he nor the women of the house know the secret—that is, that I am on the watch here.” “No one but Smerdyakov knows, then?” “No one else.
Even Ivan doesn’t know about the money, or anything.
The old man is sending Ivan to Tchermashnya on a two or three days’ journey.
A purchaser has turned up for the copse: he’ll give eight thousand for the timber.
That’s what the old man wants, so that Grushenka can come while he’s away.” “Then he’s expecting Grushenka to-day?” “No, she won’t come to-day; there are signs.
She’s certain not to come,” cried Mitya suddenly.
“Smerdyakov thinks so, too.
Father’s drinking now.
Go to him, Alyosha, and ask for the three thousand.” “Mitya, dear, what’s the matter with you?” cried Alyosha, jumping up from his place, and looking keenly at his brother’s frenzied face.
I’m not insane,” said Dmitri, looking intently and earnestly at him.
I believe in miracles.” “In miracles?” “In a miracle of Divine Providence.
Surely He won’t let something awful happen.
Alyosha, I believe in miracles.
Only remember you must go to Katerina Ivanovna to-day, if it has to be at midnight, _with the money or without the money_, and say, ‘He sends his compliments to you.’ I want you to say that verse to her: ‘He sends his compliments to you.’” “Mitya!
And what if Grushenka comes to-day—if not to-day, to-morrow, or the next day?” “Grushenka?
I couldn’t endure it.” “Who will be murdered?” “The old man.
I’m afraid that he will suddenly become so loathsome to me with his face at that moment.
I hate his ugly throat, his nose, his eyes, his shameless snigger.
I feel a physical repulsion.
And if it doesn’t come to pass—” Alyosha went thoughtfully towards his father’s house.
Smerdyakov He did in fact find his father still at table.
Though there was a dining-room in the house, the table was laid as usual in the drawing-room, which was the largest room, and furnished with old-fashioned ostentation.
The furniture was white and very old, upholstered in old, red, silky material.
In the spaces between the windows there were mirrors in elaborate white and gilt frames, of old-fashioned carving.
On the walls, covered with white paper, which was torn in many places, there hung two large portraits—one of some prince who had been governor of the district thirty years before, and the other of some bishop, also long since dead.
In the corner opposite the door there were several ikons, before which a lamp was lighted at nightfall ... not so much for devotional purposes as to light the room.
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to go to bed very late, at three or four o’clock in the morning, and would wander about the room at night or sit in an arm-chair, thinking.
He often slept quite alone in the house, sending his servants to the lodge; but usually Smerdyakov remained, sleeping on a bench in the hall.
When Alyosha came in, dinner was over, but coffee and preserves had been served.
Fyodor Pavlovitch liked sweet things with brandy after dinner.
The servants, Grigory and Smerdyakov, were standing by.
Both the gentlemen and the servants seemed in singularly good spirits.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was roaring with laughter.
Before he entered the room, Alyosha heard the shrill laugh he knew so well, and could tell from the sound of it that his father had only reached the good-humored stage, and was far from being completely drunk.
Here he is!” yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch, highly delighted at seeing Alyosha.
Smerdyakov, go to the cupboard, the second shelf on the right.
Look sharp!” Alyosha began refusing the liqueur.
If you won’t have it, we will,” said Fyodor Pavlovitch, beaming.
“But stay—have you dined?” “Yes,” answered Alyosha, who had in truth only eaten a piece of bread and drunk a glass of kvas in the Father Superior’s kitchen.
It’s capital coffee: Smerdyakov’s making.
My Smerdyakov’s an artist at coffee and at fish patties, and at fish soup, too.
Let me know beforehand....
But, stay; didn’t I tell you this morning to come home with your mattress and pillow and all?
Have you brought your mattress?
“Ah, but you were frightened, you were frightened this morning, weren’t you?
There, my darling, I couldn’t do anything to vex you.
Do you know, Ivan, I can’t resist the way he looks one straight in the face and laughs?
Alyosha, let me give you my blessing—a father’s blessing.” Alyosha rose, but Fyodor Pavlovitch had already changed his mind.
How he talks!” Balaam’s ass, it appeared, was the valet, Smerdyakov.
He was a young man of about four and twenty, remarkably unsociable and taciturn.
On the contrary, he was conceited and seemed to despise everybody.
He was brought up by Grigory and Marfa, but the boy grew up “with no sense of gratitude,” as Grigory expressed it; he was an unfriendly boy, and seemed to look at the world mistrustfully.
In his childhood he was very fond of hanging cats, and burying them with great ceremony.
He used to dress up in a sheet as though it were a surplice, and sang, and waved some object over the dead cat as though it were a censer.
All this he did on the sly, with the greatest secrecy.
Grigory caught him once at this diversion and gave him a sound beating.
Are you a human being?” he said, addressing the boy directly.
You grew from the mildew in the bath-house.[2] That’s what you are.” Smerdyakov, it appeared afterwards, could never forgive him those words.
Grigory taught him to read and write, and when he was twelve years old, began teaching him the Scriptures.
But this teaching came to nothing.
At the second or third lesson the boy suddenly grinned.
“What’s that for?” asked Grigory, looking at him threateningly from under his spectacles.
Where did the light come from on the first day?” Grigory was thunderstruck.
The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher.
There was something positively condescending in his expression.
Grigory could not restrain himself.
The boy took the slap without a word, but withdrew into his corner again for some days.
A week later he had his first attack of the disease to which he was subject all the rest of his life—epilepsy.
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it, his attitude to the boy seemed changed at once.
Sometimes, when he was in good humor, he would send the boy something sweet from his table.
But as soon as he heard of his illness, he showed an active interest in him, sent for a doctor, and tried remedies, but the disease turned out to be incurable.
The fits occurred, on an average, once a month, but at various intervals.
The fits varied too, in violence: some were light and some were very severe.
Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly forbade Grigory to use corporal punishment to the boy, and began allowing him to come upstairs to him.
He forbade him to be taught anything whatever for a time, too.
One day when the boy was about fifteen, Fyodor Pavlovitch noticed him lingering by the bookcase, and reading the titles through the glass.
Fyodor Pavlovitch had a fair number of books—over a hundred—but no one ever saw him reading.
He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the bookcase.
You shall be my librarian.
You’ll be better sitting reading than hanging about the courtyard.
Come, read this,” and Fyodor Pavlovitch gave him _Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka_.
He did not once smile, and ended by frowning.
Isn’t it funny?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Smerdyakov did not speak.
Stay, here’s Smaragdov’s _Universal History_.
Read that.” But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov.
So the bookcase was closed again.
Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary fastidiousness.
He would sit before his soup, take up his spoon and look into the soup, bend over it, examine it, take a spoonful and hold it to the light.
“A fly, perhaps,” observed Marfa.
The squeamish youth never answered, but he did the same with his bread, his meat, and everything he ate.
He would hold a piece on his fork to the light, scrutinize it microscopically, and only after long deliberation decide to put it in his mouth.
What fine gentlemen’s airs!” Grigory muttered, looking at him.
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he determined to make him his cook, and sent him to Moscow to be trained.
He spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in appearance.
He looked extraordinarily old for his age.
His face had grown wrinkled, yellow, and strangely emasculate.
In character he seemed almost exactly the same as before he went away.
He was just as unsociable, and showed not the slightest inclination for any companionship.
In Moscow, too, as we heard afterwards, he had always been silent.
Moscow itself had little interest for him; he saw very little there, and took scarcely any notice of anything.
He went once to the theater, but returned silent and displeased with it.
He brushed his clothes most scrupulously twice a day invariably, and was very fond of cleaning his smart calf boots with a special English polish, so that they shone like mirrors.
Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a salary, almost the whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes, pomade, perfumes, and such things.
But he seemed to have as much contempt for the female sex as for men; he was discreet, almost unapproachable, with them.
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently.
His fits were becoming more frequent, and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked, which did not suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all.
“Why are your fits getting worse?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, looking askance at his new cook.
Shall I find you a wife?” But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger, and made no reply.
Fyodor Pavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture.
The great thing was that he had absolute confidence in his honesty.
It happened once, when Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk, that he dropped in the muddy courtyard three hundred-rouble notes which he had only just received.
He only missed them next day, and was just hastening to search his pockets when he saw the notes lying on the table.
Smerdyakov had picked them up and brought them in the day before.
“Well, my lad, I’ve never met any one like you,” Fyodor Pavlovitch said shortly, and gave him ten roubles.
We may add that he not only believed in his honesty, but had, for some reason, a liking for him, although the young man looked as morosely at him as at every one and was always silent.
If it had occurred to any one to wonder at the time what the young man was interested in, and what was in his mind, it would have been impossible to tell by looking at him.
Yet he used sometimes to stop suddenly in the house, or even in the yard or street, and would stand still for ten minutes, lost in thought.
A physiognomist studying his face would have said that there was no thought in it, no reflection, but only a sort of contemplation.
There is a remarkable picture by the painter Kramskoy, called “Contemplation.” There is a forest in winter, and on a roadway through the forest, in absolute solitude, stands a peasant in a torn kaftan and bark shoes.
Yet he is not thinking; he is “contemplating.” If any one touched him he would start and look at one as though awakening and bewildered.
It’s true he would come to himself immediately; but if he were asked what he had been thinking about, he would remember nothing.
Yet probably he has, hidden within himself, the impression which had dominated him during the period of contemplation.
Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoards them imperceptibly, and even unconsciously.
He may suddenly, after hoarding impressions for many years, abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for his soul’s salvation, or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his native village, and perhaps do both.
There are a good many “contemplatives” among the peasantry.
Well, Smerdyakov was probably one of them, and he probably was greedily hoarding up his impressions, hardly knowing why.
The Controversy But Balaam’s ass had suddenly spoken.
Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases, and had heard from the shopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had appeared in the newspaper of that day.
This soldier had been taken prisoner in some remote part of Asia, and was threatened with an immediate agonizing death if he did not renounce Christianity and follow Islam.
He refused to deny his faith, and was tortured, flayed alive, and died, praising and glorifying Christ.
Fyodor Pavlovitch always liked, over the dessert after dinner, to laugh and talk, if only with Grigory.
This afternoon he was in a particularly good-humored and expansive mood.
Sipping his brandy and listening to the story, he observed that they ought to make a saint of a soldier like that, and to take his skin to some monastery.
“That would make the people flock, and bring the money in.” Grigory frowned, seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched, but, as usual, was beginning to scoff.
At that moment Smerdyakov, who was standing by the door, smiled.
Smerdyakov often waited at table towards the end of dinner, and since Ivan’s arrival in our town he had done so every day.
“What are you grinning at?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, catching the smile instantly, and knowing that it referred to Grigory.
You’re talking nonsense.
For that you’ll go straight to hell and be roasted there like mutton,” put in Fyodor Pavlovitch.
It was at this point that Alyosha came in, and Fyodor Pavlovitch, as we have seen, was highly delighted at his appearance.
“We’re on your subject, your subject,” he chuckled gleefully, making Alyosha sit down to listen.
“As for mutton, that’s not so, and there’ll be nothing there for this, and there shouldn’t be either, if it’s according to justice,” Smerdyakov maintained stoutly.
“How do you mean ‘according to justice’?” Fyodor Pavlovitch cried still more gayly, nudging Alyosha with his knee.
He looked Smerdyakov wrathfully in the face.
“As for being a rascal, wait a little, Grigory Vassilyevitch,” answered Smerdyakov with perfect composure.
“You’d better consider yourself that, once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race, and they demand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my holy christening, I am fully entitled to act by my own reason, since there would be no sin in it.” “But you’ve said that before.
Prove it,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch.
“Soup-maker!” muttered Grigory contemptuously.
“As for being a soup-maker, wait a bit, too, and consider for yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch, without abusing me.
Is that so or not, Grigory Vassilyevitch?” He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction, though he was really answering Fyodor Pavlovitch’s questions, and was well aware of it, and intentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions.
“Ivan,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, “stoop down for me to whisper.
Praise him.” Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father’s excited whisper.
“Stay, Smerdyakov, be quiet a minute,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once more.
“Ivan, your ear again.” Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face.
Some brandy?” “Yes.—But you’re rather drunk yourself,” thought Ivan, looking steadily at his father.
He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity.
“You’re anathema accursed, as it is,” Grigory suddenly burst out, “and how dare you argue, you rascal, after that, if—” “Don’t scold him, Grigory, don’t scold him,” Fyodor Pavlovitch cut him short.
“You should wait, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if only a short time, and listen, for I haven’t finished all I had to say.
For at the very moment I become accursed, at that same highest moment, I become exactly like a heathen, and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail.
Isn’t that so?” “Make haste and finish, my boy,” Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him, sipping from his wine-glass with relish.
“And if I’ve ceased to be a Christian, then I told no lie to the enemy when they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian, seeing I had already been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason of the thought alone, before I had time to utter a word to the enemy.
And if I have already been discharged, in what manner and with what sort of justice can I be held responsible as a Christian in the other world for having denied Christ, when, through the very thought alone, before denying Him I had been relieved from my christening?
If I’m no longer a Christian, then I can’t renounce Christ, for I’ve nothing then to renounce.
Who will hold an unclean Tatar responsible, Grigory Vassilyevitch, even in heaven, for not having been born a Christian?
And who would punish him for that, considering that you can’t take two skins off one ox?
For God Almighty Himself, even if He did make the Tatar responsible, when he dies would give him the smallest possible punishment, I imagine (since he must be punished), judging that he is not to blame if he has come into the world an unclean heathen, from heathen parents.
The Lord God can’t surely take a Tatar and say he was a Christian?
That would mean that the Almighty would tell a real untruth.
And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie, even in one word?” Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator, his eyes nearly starting out of his head.
Though he did not clearly understand what was said, he had caught something in this rigmarole, and stood, looking like a man who has just hit his head against a wall.
Fyodor Pavlovitch emptied his glass and went off into his shrill laugh.
He must have been with the Jesuits, somewhere, Ivan.
Oh, you stinking Jesuit, who taught you?
But you’re talking nonsense, you casuist, nonsense, nonsense, nonsense.
Tell me this, O ass; you may be right before your enemies, but you have renounced your faith all the same in your own heart, and you say yourself that in that very hour you became anathema accursed.
And if once you’re anathema they won’t pat you on the head for it in hell.
What do you say to that, my fine Jesuit?” “There is no doubt that I have renounced it in my own heart, but there was no special sin in that.
Or if there was sin, it was the most ordinary.” “How’s that the most ordinary?” “You lie, accursed one!” hissed Grigory.
“Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch,” Smerdyakov went on, staid and unruffled, conscious of his triumph, but, as it were, generous to the vanquished foe.
“Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch; it is said in the Scripture that if you have faith, even as a mustard seed, and bid a mountain move into the sea, it will move without the least delay at your bidding.
Well, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if I’m without faith and you have so great a faith that you are continually swearing at me, you try yourself telling this mountain, not to move into the sea for that’s a long way off, but even to our stinking little river which runs at the bottom of the garden.
You’ll see for yourself that it won’t budge, but will remain just where it is however much you shout at it, and that shows, Grigory Vassilyevitch, that you haven’t faith in the proper manner, and only abuse others about it.
And so I’m persuaded that though I may once have doubted I shall be forgiven if I shed tears of repentance.” “Stay!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, in a transport of delight.
“So you do suppose there are two who can move mountains?
There you have the Russian all over!” “You’re quite right in saying it’s characteristic of the people’s faith,” Ivan assented, with an approving smile.
That’s the Russian faith all over, isn’t it?” “No, Smerdyakov has not the Russian faith at all,” said Alyosha firmly and gravely.
But as to the rest you talk nonsense, nonsense, nonsense.
Let me tell you, stupid, that we here are all of little faith, only from carelessness, because we haven’t time; things are too much for us, and, in the second place, the Lord God has given us so little time, only twenty-four hours in the day, so that one hasn’t even time to get sleep enough, much less to repent of one’s sins.
So I consider, brother, that it constitutes a sin.” “Constitute a sin it may, but consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch, that it only extenuates it, if it does constitute.
If I had believed then in very truth, as I ought to have believed, then it really would have been sinful if I had not faced tortures for my faith, and had gone over to the pagan Mohammedan faith.
But, of course, it wouldn’t have come to torture then, because I should only have had to say at that instant to the mountain, ‘Move and crush the tormentor,’ and it would have moved and at the very instant have crushed him like a black-beetle, and I should have walked away as though nothing had happened, praising and glorifying God.
But, suppose at that very moment I had tried all that, and cried to that mountain, ‘Crush these tormentors,’ and it hadn’t crushed them, how could I have helped doubting, pray, at such a time, and at such a dread hour of mortal terror?
And apart from that, I should know already that I could not attain to the fullness of the Kingdom of Heaven (for since the mountain had not moved at my word, they could not think very much of my faith up aloft, and there could be no very great reward awaiting me in the world to come).
For, even though they had flayed my skin half off my back, even then the mountain would not have moved at my word or at my cry.
And, therefore, how should I be particularly to blame if not seeing my advantage or reward there or here, I should, at least, save my skin.
And so trusting fully in the grace of the Lord I should cherish the hope that I might be altogether forgiven.” Chapter VIII.
Over The Brandy The controversy was over.
But, strange to say, Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had been so gay, suddenly began frowning.
“Get along with you, Jesuits!” he cried to the servants.
“Go away, Smerdyakov.
I’ll send you the gold piece I promised you to-day, but be off!
The rascals won’t let us sit in peace after dinner,” he snapped peevishly, as the servants promptly withdrew at his word.
“Smerdyakov always pokes himself in now, after dinner.
It’s you he’s so interested in.
What have you done to fascinate him?” he added to Ivan.
“Nothing whatever,” answered Ivan.
Raw material for revolution, however, when the time comes.” “For revolution?” “There will be others and better ones.
The peasants are not very fond of listening to these soup-makers, so far.” “Ah, brother, but a Balaam’s ass like that thinks and thinks, and the devil knows where he gets to.” “He’s storing up ideas,” said Ivan, smiling.
Worse still with Alyosha, he despises Alyosha.
But, damn him, is he worth talking about so much?” “Of course he isn’t.” “And as for the ideas he may be hatching, the Russian peasant, generally speaking, needs thrashing.
That I’ve always maintained.
Our peasants are swindlers, and don’t deserve to be pitied, and it’s a good thing they’re still flogged sometimes.
If they destroyed the forests, it would be the ruin of Russia.
We’ve left off thrashing the peasants, we’ve grown so clever, but they go on thrashing themselves.
‘For with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again,’ or how does it go?
Anyhow, it will be measured.
But Russia’s all swinishness.
But maybe I mean Russia. _Tout cela c’est de la cochonnerie_....
No, stay, you interrupted me.
At Mokroe I was talking to an old man, and he told me: ‘There’s nothing we like so much as sentencing girls to be thrashed, and we always give the lads the job of thrashing them.
And the girl he has thrashed to-day, the young man will ask in marriage to-morrow.
Alyosha, are you blushing?
I’m sorry I didn’t stay to dinner at the Superior’s and tell the monks about the girls at Mokroe.
Alyosha, don’t be angry that I offended your Superior this morning.
It’s not enough to cut their heads off, for they keep back progress.
Would you believe it, Ivan, that that lacerates my sentiments?
You look sincere and you speak sincerely.
Ivan’s supercilious....
I’d take all that mystic stuff and suppress it, once for all, all over Russia, so as to bring all the fools to reason.
And the gold and the silver that would flow into the mint!” “But why suppress it?” asked Ivan.
That’s why.” “Well, if Truth were to prevail, you know, you’d be the first to be robbed and suppressed.” “Ah!
Ah, I’m an ass!” burst out Fyodor Pavlovitch, striking himself lightly on the forehead.
“Well, your monastery may stand then, Alyosha, if that’s how it is.
You know, Ivan, it must have been so ordained by the Almighty Himself.
Stay, speak the truth, speak seriously.
Why are you laughing again?” “I’m laughing that you should have made a clever remark just now about Smerdyakov’s belief in the existence of two saints who could move mountains.” “Why, am I like him now, then?” “Very much.” “Well, that shows I’m a Russian, too, and I have a Russian characteristic.
And you may be caught in the same way, though you are a philosopher.
I want you to be serious now.” “No, there is no God.” “Alyosha, is there a God?” “There is.” “Ivan, and is there immortality of some sort, just a little, just a tiny bit?” “There is no immortality either.” “None at all?” “None at all.” “There’s absolute nothingness then.
Perhaps there is just something?
Anything is better than nothing!” “Absolute nothingness.” “Alyosha, is there immortality?” “There is.” “God and immortality?” “God and immortality.
In God is immortality.” “H’m!
Good Lord! to think what faith, what force of all kinds, man has lavished for nothing, on that dream, and for how many thousand years.
Who is it laughing at man?
I ask for the last time!” “And for the last time there is not.” “Who is laughing at mankind, Ivan?” “It must be the devil,” said Ivan, smiling.
Damn it all, what wouldn’t I do to the man who first invented God!
Hanging on a bitter aspen tree would be too good for him.” “There would have been no civilization if they hadn’t invented God.” “Wouldn’t there have been?
I’ve hurt Alyosha’s feelings.
I know your thoughts.
Ivan, do you love Alyosha?” “Yes.” “You must love him” (Fyodor Pavlovitch was by this time very drunk).
As he’s an honorable person there’s a hidden indignation boiling within him at having to pretend and affect holiness.” “But, of course, he believes in God.” “Not a bit of it.
He said straight out to Governor Schultz not long ago: ‘_Credo_, but I don’t know in what.’” “Really?” “He really did.
There’s something of Mephistopheles about him, or rather of ‘The hero of our time’ ...
You see, he’s a sensualist.
He’s such a sensualist that I should be afraid for my daughter or my wife if she went to confess to him.
Especially how he once cured a paralyzed woman.
He did Dernidov, the merchant, out of sixty thousand.” “What, he stole it?” “He brought him the money as a man he could trust, saying, ‘Take care of it for me, friend, there’ll be a police search at my place to-morrow.’ And he kept it.
‘You have given it to the Church,’ he declared.
I said to him: ‘You’re a scoundrel,’ I said.
‘No,’ said he, ‘I’m not a scoundrel, but I’m broad-minded.’ But that wasn’t he, that was some one else.
I’ve muddled him with some one else ... without noticing it.
Why didn’t you stop me, Ivan, and tell me I was lying?” “I knew you’d stop of yourself.” “That’s a lie.
You have come to me and despised me in my own house.” “Well, I’m going away.
You’ve had too much brandy.” “I’ve begged you for Christ’s sake to go to Tchermashnya for a day or two, and you don’t go.” “I’ll go to-morrow if you’re so set upon it.” “You won’t go.
That’s what you want, spiteful fellow.
That’s why you won’t go.” The old man persisted.
He had reached that state of drunkenness when the drunkard who has till then been inoffensive tries to pick a quarrel and to assert himself.
Your eyes look at me and say, ‘You ugly drunkard!’ Your eyes are mistrustful.
They’re contemptuous....
Alexey, you mustn’t love Ivan.” “Don’t be ill-tempered with my brother.
Leave off attacking him,” Alyosha said emphatically.
It’s the third time I’ve told you.” He mused, and suddenly a slow, cunning grin spread over his face.
You go to Tchermashnya.
“To my thinking,” he revived at once, seeming to grow sober the instant he touched on his favorite topic.
You children, little sucking-pigs, to my thinking ...
Can you understand that?
How could you understand it?
My rule has been that you can always find something devilishly interesting in every woman that you wouldn’t find in any other.
The very fact that she is a woman is half the battle ... but how could you understand that?
Even in _vieilles filles_, even in them you may discover something that makes you simply wonder that men have been such fools as to let them grow old without noticing them.
Bare-footed girls or unattractive ones, you must take by surprise.
You must astound them till they’re fascinated, upset, ashamed that such a gentleman should fall in love with such a little slut.
It’s a jolly good thing that there always are and will be masters and slaves in the world, so there always will be a little maid-of-all-work and her master, and you know, that’s all that’s needed for happiness.
Stay ... listen, Alyosha, I always used to surprise your mother, but in a different way.
I paid no attention to her at all, but all at once, when the minute came, I’d be all devotion to her, crawl on my knees, kiss her feet, and I always, always—I remember it as though it were to-day—reduced her to that tinkling, quiet, nervous, queer little laugh.
It was peculiar to her.
The next day she would begin shrieking hysterically, and this little laugh was not a sign of delight, though it made a very good counterfeit.
Once Belyavsky—he was a handsome fellow, and rich—used to like to come here and hang about her—suddenly gave me a slap in the face in her presence.
‘And how dared he strike you in my presence!
Run at once, challenge him to a duel!’...
I took her to the monastery then to bring her to her senses.
But I swear, by God, Alyosha, I never insulted the poor crazy girl!
She used to keep the feasts of Our Lady particularly and used to turn me out of her room then.
I’ll knock that mysticism out of her, thought I!
You believe it’s miraculous, but here, I’ll spit on it directly and nothing will happen to me for it!’...
But she only jumped up, wrung her hands, then suddenly hid her face in them, began trembling all over and fell on the floor ... fell all of a heap.
From the time he had begun speaking about his mother, a change had gradually come over Alyosha’s face.
He flushed crimson, his eyes glowed, his lips quivered.
The old sot had gone spluttering on, noticing nothing, till the moment when something very strange happened to Alyosha.
Precisely what he was describing in the crazy woman was suddenly repeated with Alyosha.
He jumped up from his seat exactly as his mother was said to have done, wrung his hands, hid his face in them, and fell back in his chair, shaking all over in an hysterical paroxysm of sudden violent, silent weeping.
His extraordinary resemblance to his mother particularly impressed the old man.
He’s upset about his mother, his mother,” he muttered to Ivan.
Was she not?” said Ivan, with uncontrolled anger and contempt.
The old man shrank before his flashing eyes.
But something very strange had happened, though only for a second; it seemed really to have escaped the old man’s mind that Alyosha’s mother actually was the mother of Ivan too.
“Your mother?” he muttered, not understanding.
My mind has never been so darkened before.
Excuse me, why, I was thinking, Ivan....
A broad, drunken, half-senseless grin overspread his face.
Don’t let him get at me!” he screamed, clinging to the skirt of Ivan’s coat.
The Sensualists Grigory and Smerdyakov ran into the room after Dmitri.
They had been struggling with him in the passage, refusing to admit him, acting on instructions given them by Fyodor Pavlovitch some days before.
Taking advantage of the fact that Dmitri stopped a moment on entering the room to look about him, Grigory ran round the table, closed the double doors on the opposite side of the room leading to the inner apartments, and stood before the closed doors, stretching wide his arms, prepared to defend the entrance, so to speak, with the last drop of his blood.
Out of the way, scoundrel!” He tried to pull Grigory away, but the old servant pushed him back.
Smerdyakov remained pale and trembling at the other end of the room, huddling close to Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Where is she?” That shout, “She’s here!” produced an indescribable effect on Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Meanwhile Grigory had got up from the floor, but still seemed stunned.
In the third room something was heard to fall on the floor with a ringing crash: it was a large glass vase—not an expensive one—on a marble pedestal which Dmitri had upset as he ran past it.
“Help!” Ivan and Alyosha caught the old man and were forcibly bringing him back.
He’ll murder you outright,” Ivan cried wrathfully at his father.
He was not expecting Grushenka at the time, and the sudden news that she was here made him beside himself.
He was trembling all over.
“But you’ve seen for yourself that she hasn’t come,” cried Ivan.
“But she may have come by that other entrance.” “You know that entrance is locked, and you have the key.” Dmitri suddenly reappeared in the drawing-room.
He had, of course, found the other entrance locked, and the key actually was in Fyodor Pavlovitch’s pocket.
The windows of all the rooms were also closed, so Grushenka could not have come in anywhere nor have run out anywhere.
“Hold him!” shrieked Fyodor Pavlovitch, as soon as he saw him again.
“He’s been stealing money in my bedroom.” And tearing himself from Ivan he rushed again at Dmitri.
But Dmitri threw up both hands and suddenly clutched the old man by the two tufts of hair that remained on his temples, tugged at them, and flung him with a crash on the floor.
Alyosha helped him with his slender strength, holding Dmitri in front.
“Serve him right!” shouted Dmitri breathlessly.
Go away at once!” cried Alyosha commandingly.
I saw her myself creeping this way by the fence from the lane.
I shouted, she ran away.” “I swear she’s not been here, and no one expected her.” “But I saw her....
But go to Katerina Ivanovna at once and be sure to say, ‘He sends his compliments to you!’ Compliments, his compliments!
Just compliments and farewell!
Describe the scene to her.” Meanwhile Ivan and Grigory had raised the old man and seated him in an arm-chair.
His face was covered with blood, but he was conscious and listened greedily to Dmitri’s cries.
He was still fancying that Grushenka really was somewhere in the house.
“I don’t repent shedding your blood!” he cried.
I curse you, and disown you altogether.” He ran out of the room.
Smerdyakov!” the old man wheezed, scarcely audibly, beckoning to him with his finger.
“Here, he’s fainting!
Make haste, Smerdyakov!” Smerdyakov ran for water.
At last they got the old man undressed, and put him to bed.
Exhausted by the brandy, by his violent emotion, and the blows he had received, he shut his eyes and fell asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow.
Smerdyakov removed the fragments of the broken vase, while Grigory stood by the table looking gloomily at the floor.
My brother gave you a terrible blow—on the head.” “He’s insulted me!” Grigory articulated gloomily and distinctly.
“He’s ‘insulted’ his father, not only you,” observed Ivan with a forced smile.
He’s insulted me,” repeated Grigory.
“Damn it all, if I hadn’t pulled him away perhaps he’d have murdered him.
It wouldn’t take much to do for Æsop, would it?” whispered Ivan to Alyosha.
“Why should He forbid?” Ivan went on in the same whisper, with a malignant grimace.
And serve them both right, too.” Alyosha shuddered.
“Of course I won’t let him be murdered as I didn’t just now.
The old man suddenly opened his eyes and gazed for a long while at Alyosha, evidently remembering and meditating.
All at once his face betrayed extraordinary excitement.
“Alyosha,” he whispered apprehensively, “where’s Ivan?” “In the yard.
He’s got a headache.
The old man looked at himself in it; his nose was considerably swollen, and on the left side of his forehead there was a rather large crimson bruise.
He’s run to Grushenka.
She won’t on any account!” The old man fairly fluttered with joy, as though nothing more comforting could have been said to him.
Tears positively glittered in his eyes.
“Take it home and keep it for yourself.
And I’ll let you go back to the monastery....
Be an angel and tell me the truth!” “You’re still asking whether she has been here or not?” Alyosha said sorrowfully.
I’ll tell you what it is: you go to Grushenka yourself, or see her somehow; make haste and ask her; see for yourself, which she means to choose, him or me.
Can you?” “If I see her I’ll ask her,” Alyosha muttered, embarrassed.
“No, she won’t tell you,” the old man interrupted, “she’s a rogue.
She’s a deceitful, shameless hussy.
You mustn’t go to her, you mustn’t!” “No, father, and it wouldn’t be suitable, it wouldn’t be right at all.” “Where was he sending you just now?
He shouted ‘Go’ as he ran away.” “To Katerina Ivanovna.” “For money?
Not for money.” “He’s no money; not a farthing.
I’ve a word to say to you to-morrow—but I must think about it.” “And how do you feel now?” “I shall get up to-morrow and go out, perfectly well, perfectly well!” Crossing the yard Alyosha found Ivan sitting on the bench at the gateway.
He was sitting writing something in pencil in his note-book.
Alyosha told Ivan that their father had waked up, was conscious, and had let him go back to sleep at the monastery.
“Alyosha, I should be very glad to meet you to-morrow morning,” said Ivan cordially, standing up.
His cordiality was a complete surprise to Alyosha.
“I shall be at the Hohlakovs’ to-morrow,” answered Alyosha, “I may be at Katerina Ivanovna’s, too, if I don’t find her now.” “But you’re going to her now, anyway?
For that ‘compliments and farewell,’” said Ivan smiling.
Alyosha was disconcerted.
“I think I quite understand his exclamations just now, and part of what went before.
Dmitri has asked you to go to her and say that he—well, in fact—takes his leave of her?” “Brother, how will all this horror end between father and Dmitri?” exclaimed Alyosha.
In any case we must keep the old man indoors and not let Dmitri in the house.” “Brother, let me ask one thing more: has any man a right to look at other men and decide which is worthy to live?” “Why bring in the question of worth?
Are you referring to what I said just now—that one reptile will devour the other?
In that case let me ask you, do you think me like Dmitri capable of shedding Æsop’s blood, murdering him, eh?” “What are you saying, Ivan?
But in my wishes I reserve myself full latitude in this case.
Alyosha felt that his brother had taken the first step towards him, and that he had certainly done this with some definite motive.
Both Together Alyosha left his father’s house feeling even more exhausted and dejected in spirit than when he had entered it.
His mind too seemed shattered and unhinged, while he felt that he was afraid to put together the disjointed fragments and form a general idea from all the agonizing and conflicting experiences of the day.
He felt something bordering upon despair, which he had never known till then.
Towering like a mountain above all the rest stood the fatal, insoluble question: How would things end between his father and his brother Dmitri with this terrible woman?
Yet only his brother Dmitri could be made unhappy, terribly, completely unhappy: there was trouble awaiting him.
It appeared too that there were other people concerned, far more so than Alyosha could have supposed before.
There was something positively mysterious in it, too.
Ivan had made a step towards him, which was what Alyosha had been long desiring.
Yet now he felt for some reason that he was frightened at it.
Strange to say, that morning he had set out for Katerina Ivanovna’s in the greatest embarrassment; now he felt nothing of the kind.
On the contrary, he was hastening there as though expecting to find guidance from her.
Yet to give her this message was obviously more difficult than before.
The matter of the three thousand was decided irrevocably, and Dmitri, feeling himself dishonored and losing his last hope, might sink to any depth.
He had, moreover, told him to describe to Katerina Ivanovna the scene which had just taken place with his father.
It was by now seven o’clock, and it was getting dark as Alyosha entered the very spacious and convenient house in the High Street occupied by Katerina Ivanovna.
One of them, a woman of little education, was that aunt of her half-sister Agafya Ivanovna who had looked after her in her father’s house when she came from boarding-school.
The other aunt was a Moscow lady of style and consequence, though in straitened circumstances.
It was said that they both gave way in everything to Katerina Ivanovna, and that she only kept them with her as chaperons.
Katerina Ivanovna herself gave way to no one but her benefactress, the general’s widow, who had been kept by illness in Moscow, and to whom she was obliged to write twice a week a full account of all her doings.
Possibly he had been noticed from the window.
At least, Alyosha heard a noise, caught the sound of flying footsteps and rustling skirts.
Alyosha thought it strange that his arrival should cause such excitement.
He was conducted however to the drawing-room at once.
It was a large room, elegantly and amply furnished, not at all in provincial style.
There were pictures on the walls, vases and lamps on the tables, masses of flowers, and even an aquarium in the window.
It was twilight and rather dark.
Alyosha made out a silk mantle thrown down on the sofa, where people had evidently just been sitting; and on a table in front of the sofa were two unfinished cups of chocolate, cakes, a glass saucer with blue raisins, and another with sweetmeats.
Alyosha saw that he had interrupted visitors, and frowned.
But at that instant the portière was raised, and with rapid, hurrying footsteps Katerina Ivanovna came in, holding out both hands to Alyosha with a radiant smile of delight.
Sit down.” Alyosha had been struck by Katerina Ivanovna’s beauty when, three weeks before, Dmitri had first brought him, at Katerina Ivanovna’s special request, to be introduced to her.
There had been no conversation between them at that interview, however.
Supposing Alyosha to be very shy, Katerina Ivanovna had talked all the time to Dmitri to spare him.
He was struck by the imperiousness, proud ease, and self-confidence of the haughty girl.
And all that was certain, Alyosha felt that he was not exaggerating it.
He thought her great glowing black eyes were very fine, especially with her pale, even rather sallow, longish face.
But in those eyes and in the lines of her exquisite lips there was something with which his brother might well be passionately in love, but which perhaps could not be loved for long.
He expressed this thought almost plainly to Dmitri when, after the visit, his brother besought and insisted that he should not conceal his impressions on seeing his betrothed.
“You’ll be happy with her, but perhaps—not tranquilly happy.” “Quite so, brother.
But perhaps you won’t always be happy with her.” Alyosha had given his opinion at the time, blushing, and angry with himself for having yielded to his brother’s entreaties and put such “foolish” ideas into words.
For his opinion had struck him as awfully foolish immediately after he had uttered it.
He felt ashamed too of having given so confident an opinion about a woman.
It was with the more amazement that he felt now, at the first glance at Katerina Ivanovna as she ran in to him, that he had perhaps been utterly mistaken.
This time her face was beaming with spontaneous good-natured kindliness, and direct warm-hearted sincerity.
The “pride and haughtiness,” which had struck Alyosha so much before, was only betrayed now in a frank, generous energy and a sort of bright, strong faith in herself.
Alyosha realized at the first glance, at the first word, that all the tragedy of her position in relation to the man she loved so dearly was no secret to her; that she perhaps already knew everything, positively everything.
And yet, in spite of that, there was such brightness in her face, such faith in the future.
Alyosha felt at once that he had gravely wronged her in his thoughts.
He was conquered and captivated immediately.
Besides all this, he noticed at her first words that she was in great excitement, an excitement perhaps quite exceptional and almost approaching ecstasy.
“I was so eager to see you, because I can learn from you the whole truth—from you and no one else.” “I have come,” muttered Alyosha confusedly, “I—he sent me.” “Ah, he sent you!
Now I know everything—everything!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, her eyes flashing.
“Wait a moment, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I’ll tell you why I’ve been so longing to see you.
You see, I know perhaps far more than you do yourself, and there’s no need for you to tell me anything.
I want to know your own last impression of him.
I want you to tell me most directly, plainly, coarsely even (oh, as coarsely as you like!), what you thought of him just now and of his position after your meeting with him to-day.
That will perhaps be better than if I had a personal explanation with him, as he does not want to come to me.
Do you understand what I want from you?
Now, tell me simply, tell me every word of the message he sent you with (I knew he would send you).” “He told me to give you his compliments—and to say that he would never come again—but to give you his compliments.” “His compliments?
Was that what he said—his own expression?” “Yes.” “Accidentally perhaps he made a mistake in the word, perhaps he did not use the right word?” “No; he told me precisely to repeat that word.
He begged me two or three times not to forget to say so.” Katerina Ivanovna flushed hotly.
“Help me now, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
If he had sent me his compliments in passing, without insisting on your repeating the words, without emphasizing them, that would be the end of everything!
But if he particularly insisted on those words, if he particularly told you not to forget to repeat them to me, then perhaps he was in excitement, beside himself.
He had made his decision and was frightened at it.
He wasn’t walking away from me with a resolute step, but leaping headlong.
The emphasis on that phrase may have been simply bravado.” “Yes, yes!” cried Alyosha warmly.
“I believe that is it.” “And, if so, he’s not altogether lost.
Did he not tell you anything about money—about three thousand roubles?” “He did speak about it, and it’s that more than anything that’s crushing him.
He said he had lost his honor and that nothing matters now,” Alyosha answered warmly, feeling a rush of hope in his heart and believing that there really might be a way of escape and salvation for his brother.
“But do you know about the money?” he added, and suddenly broke off.
“I’ve known of it a long time; I telegraphed to Moscow to inquire, and heard long ago that the money had not arrived.
No, he won’t recognize that I am his truest friend; he won’t know me, and looks on me merely as a woman.
I’ve been tormented all the week, trying to think how to prevent him from being ashamed to face me because he spent that three thousand.
He can tell God everything without shame.
Why is it he still does not understand how much I am ready to bear for his sake?
How dare he not know me after all that has happened?
Let him forget me as his betrothed.
And here he fears that he is dishonored in my eyes.
Why, he wasn’t afraid to be open with you, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
“I must tell you,” Alyosha began, his voice trembling too, “what happened just now between him and my father.” And he described the whole scene, how Dmitri had sent him to get the money, how he had broken in, knocked his father down, and after that had again specially and emphatically begged him to take his compliments and farewell.
But he won’t marry her,” she suddenly laughed nervously.
“Could such a passion last for ever in a Karamazov?
He won’t marry her because she won’t marry him.” Again Katerina Ivanovna laughed strangely.
“He may marry her,” said Alyosha mournfully, looking down.
Do you know that?” Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly with extraordinary warmth.
“She is one of the most fantastic of fantastic creatures.
I know how bewitching she is, but I know too that she is kind, firm and noble.
Why do you look at me like that, Alexey Fyodorovitch?
Perhaps you are wondering at my words, perhaps you don’t believe me?
Agrafena Alexandrovna, my angel!” she cried suddenly to some one, peeping into the next room, “come in to us.
Show yourself to him.” “I’ve only been waiting behind the curtain for you to call me,” said a soft, one might even say sugary, feminine voice.
The portière was raised and Grushenka herself, smiling and beaming, came up to the table.
A violent revulsion passed over Alyosha.
And yet one would have thought the creature standing before him most simple and ordinary, a good-natured, kind woman, handsome certainly, but so like other handsome ordinary women!
It is true she was very, very good-looking with that Russian beauty so passionately loved by many men.
She was a rather tall woman, though a little shorter than Katerina Ivanovna, who was exceptionally tall.
She had a full figure, with soft, as it were, noiseless, movements, softened to a peculiar over-sweetness, like her voice.
She moved, not like Katerina Ivanovna, with a vigorous, bold step, but noiselessly.
Her feet made absolutely no sound on the floor.
She sank softly into a low chair, softly rustling her sumptuous black silk dress, and delicately nestling her milk-white neck and broad shoulders in a costly cashmere shawl.
The modeling of her face might be said to be too broad, and the lower jaw was set a trifle forward.
Her upper lip was thin, but the slightly prominent lower lip was at least twice as full, and looked pouting.
But her magnificent, abundant dark brown hair, her sable-colored eyebrows and charming gray-blue eyes with their long lashes would have made the most indifferent person, meeting her casually in a crowd in the street, stop at the sight of her face and remember it long after.
What struck Alyosha most in that face was its expression of childlike good nature.
There was a childlike look in her eyes, a look of childish delight.
She came up to the table, beaming with delight and seeming to expect something with childish, impatient, and confiding curiosity.
The light in her eyes gladdened the soul—Alyosha felt that.
There was something else in her which he could not understand, or would not have been able to define, and which yet perhaps unconsciously affected him.
It was that softness, that voluptuousness of her bodily movements, that catlike noiselessness.
Yet it was a vigorous, ample body.
Under the shawl could be seen full broad shoulders, a high, still quite girlish bosom.
Her figure suggested the lines of the Venus of Milo, though already in somewhat exaggerated proportions.
Alyosha, of course, did not think of this; but though he was fascinated, yet he wondered with an unpleasant sensation, and as it were regretfully, why she drawled in that way and could not speak naturally.
She did so evidently feeling there was a charm in the exaggerated, honeyed modulation of the syllables.
It was, of course, only a bad, underbred habit that showed bad education and a false idea of good manners.
And yet this intonation and manner of speaking impressed Alyosha as almost incredibly incongruous with the childishly simple and happy expression of her face, the soft, babyish joy in her eyes.
Katerina Ivanovna at once made her sit down in an arm-chair facing Alyosha, and ecstatically kissed her several times on her smiling lips.
“This is the first time we’ve met, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she said rapturously.
I wanted to go to her, but I’d no sooner expressed the wish than she came to me.
I knew we should settle everything together—everything.
My heart told me so—I was begged not to take the step, but I foresaw it would be a way out of the difficulty, and I was not mistaken.
Grushenka has explained everything to me, told me all she means to do.
She flew here like an angel of goodness and brought us peace and joy.” “You did not disdain me, sweet, excellent young lady,” drawled Grushenka in her sing-song voice, still with the same charming smile of delight.
“Don’t dare to speak to me like that, you sorceress, you witch!
Look how she laughs, Alexey Fyodorovitch!
It does one’s heart good to see the angel.” Alyosha flushed, and faint, imperceptible shivers kept running down him.
“You make so much of me, dear young lady, and perhaps I am not at all worthy of your kindness.” “Not worthy!
She’s not worthy of it!” Katerina Ivanovna cried again with the same warmth.
“You know, Alexey Fyodorovitch, we’re fanciful, we’re self-willed, but proudest of the proud in our little heart.
We’re noble, we’re generous, Alexey Fyodorovitch, let me tell you.
We have only been unfortunate.
We were too ready to make every sacrifice for an unworthy, perhaps, or fickle man.
There was one man—one, an officer too, we loved him, we sacrificed everything to him.
That was long ago, five years ago, and he has forgotten us, he has married.
He will come, and Grushenka will be happy again.
For the last five years she’s been wretched.
But who can reproach her, who can boast of her favor?
Only that bedridden old merchant, but he is more like her father, her friend, her protector.
He found her then in despair, in agony, deserted by the man she loved.
She was ready to drown herself then, but the old merchant saved her—saved her!” “You defend me very kindly, dear young lady.
You are in a great hurry about everything,” Grushenka drawled again.
Grushenka, angel, give me your hand.
Look at that charming soft little hand, Alexey Fyodorovitch!
It has brought me happiness and has lifted me up, and I’m going to kiss it, outside and inside, here, here, here!” And three times she kissed the certainly charming, though rather fat, hand of Grushenka in a sort of rapture.
She held out her hand with a charming musical, nervous little laugh, watched the “sweet young lady,” and obviously liked having her hand kissed.
He felt a peculiar uneasiness at heart the whole time.
“You won’t make me blush, dear young lady, kissing my hand like this before Alexey Fyodorovitch.” “Do you think I meant to make you blush?” said Katerina Ivanovna, somewhat surprised.
“Ah, my dear, how little you understand me!” “Yes, and you too perhaps quite misunderstand me, dear young lady.
I fascinated poor Dmitri Fyodorovitch that day simply for fun.” “But now you’ll save him.
You’ll break to him that you have long loved another man, who is now offering you his hand.” “Oh, no!
I didn’t give you my word.” “Then I didn’t quite understand you,” said Katerina Ivanovna slowly, turning a little pale.
“You promised—” “Oh, no, angel lady, I’ve promised nothing,” Grushenka interrupted softly and evenly, still with the same gay and simple expression.
“You see at once, dear young lady, what a willful wretch I am compared with you.
But now again I’m thinking: I may take to Mitya again.
You see, I’m so changeable.” “Just now you said—something quite different,” Katerina Ivanovna whispered faintly.
I’m such a soft-hearted, silly creature.
What then?” “I never expected—” “Ah, young lady, how good and generous you are compared with me!
Now perhaps you won’t care for a silly creature like me, now you know my character.
Give me your sweet little hand, angelic lady,” she said tenderly, and with a sort of reverence took Katerina Ivanovna’s hand.
Perhaps I shall be your slave entirely and want to do your bidding like a slave.
Let it be as God wills, without any agreements and promises.
You sweet young lady, you incredible beauty!” She slowly raised the hands to her lips, with the strange object indeed of “being even” with her in kisses.
Katerina Ivanovna did not take her hand away.
She listened with timid hope to the last words, though Grushenka’s promise to do her bidding like a slave was very strangely expressed.
She looked intently into her eyes; she still saw in those eyes the same simple-hearted, confiding expression, the same bright gayety.
“She’s perhaps too naïve,” thought Katerina Ivanovna, with a gleam of hope.
Grushenka meanwhile seemed enthusiastic over the “sweet hand.” She raised it deliberately to her lips.
But she held it for two or three minutes near her lips, as though reconsidering something.
“Do you know, angel lady,” she suddenly drawled in an even more soft and sugary voice, “do you know, after all, I think I won’t kiss your hand?” And she laughed a little merry laugh.
What’s the matter with you?” said Katerina Ivanovna, starting suddenly.
“So that you may be left to remember that you kissed my hand, but I didn’t kiss yours.” There was a sudden gleam in her eyes.
She looked with awful intentness at Katerina Ivanovna.
“Insolent creature!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, as though suddenly grasping something.
Grushenka too got up, but without haste.
That’s unbecoming for you, dear young lady, a word like that.” “Go away!
You’re a creature for sale!” screamed Katerina Ivanovna.
Every feature was working in her utterly distorted face.
You used to visit gentlemen in the dusk for money once; you brought your beauty for sale.
You see, I know.” Katerina Ivanovna shrieked, and would have rushed at her, but Alyosha held her with all his strength.
She’ll go away—she’ll go at once.” At that instant Katerina Ivanovna’s two aunts ran in at her cry, and with them a maid-servant.
“I will go away,” said Grushenka, taking up her mantle from the sofa.
“Alyosha, darling, see me home!” “Go away—go away, make haste!” cried Alyosha, clasping his hands imploringly.
See me home, dear, you’ll be glad of it afterwards.” Alyosha turned away, wringing his hands.
Grushenka ran out of the house, laughing musically.
Katerina Ivanovna went into a fit of hysterics.
She sobbed, and was shaken with convulsions.
You’re too impulsive.
You don’t know these creatures, and they say she’s worse than any of them.
You are too self-willed.” “She’s a tigress!” yelled Katerina Ivanovna.
“Why did you hold me, Alexey Fyodorovitch?
“She ought to be flogged in public on a scaffold!” Alyosha withdrew towards the door.
“But, my God!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, clasping her hands.
He could be so dishonorable, so inhuman!
Why, he told that creature what happened on that fatal, accursed day!
Your brother’s a scoundrel, Alexey Fyodorovitch.” Alyosha wanted to say something, but he couldn’t find a word.
“Go away, Alexey Fyodorovitch!
It’s shameful, it’s awful for me!
Suddenly he was overtaken by the maid.
“The young lady forgot to give you this letter from Madame Hohlakov; it’s been left with us since dinner-time.” Alyosha took the little pink envelope mechanically and put it, almost unconsciously, into his pocket.
Another Reputation Ruined It was not much more than three-quarters of a mile from the town to the monastery.
Alyosha walked quickly along the road, at that hour deserted.
It was almost night, and too dark to see anything clearly at thirty paces ahead.
A figure came into sight under a solitary willow at the cross-roads.
As soon as Alyosha reached the cross-roads the figure moved out and rushed at him, shouting savagely: “Your money or your life!” “So it’s you, Mitya,” cried Alyosha, in surprise, violently startled however.
I wondered where to wait for you.
At last I thought of waiting here, for you had to pass here, there’s no other way to the monastery.
Father’s blood just now.” (Alyosha began to cry, he had been on the verge of tears for a long time, and now something seemed to snap in his soul.) “You almost killed him—cursed him—and now—here—you’re making jokes—‘Your money or your life!’” “Well, what of that?
Not suitable in my position?” “No—I only—” “Stay.
And as God’s above, I suddenly thought, why go on in misery any longer, what is there to wait for?
Here I have a willow, a handkerchief, a shirt, I can twist them into a rope in a minute, and braces besides, and why go on burdening the earth, dishonoring it with my vile presence?
And then I heard you coming—Heavens, it was as though something flew down to me suddenly.
I shouted, like a fool, ‘Your money!’ Forgive my foolery—it was only nonsense, and there’s nothing unseemly in my soul....
Damn it all, tell me what’s happened.
Whom?” “Grushenka at Katerina Ivanovna’s.” Dmitri was struck dumb.
“Impossible!” he cried.
Grushenka with her?” Alyosha described all that had happened from the moment he went in to Katerina Ivanovna’s.
He can’t be said to have told it fluently and consecutively, but he seemed to make it clear, not omitting any word or action of significance, and vividly describing, often in one word, his own sensations.
Dmitri listened in silence, gazing at him with a terrible fixed stare, but it was clear to Alyosha that he understood it all, and had grasped every point.
But as the story went on, his face became not merely gloomy, but menacing.
He scowled, he clenched his teeth, and his fixed stare became still more rigid, more concentrated, more terrible, when suddenly, with incredible rapidity, his wrathful, savage face changed, his tightly compressed lips parted, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch broke into uncontrolled, spontaneous laughter.
He literally shook with laughter.
So she didn’t kiss it; so she ran away!” he kept exclaiming with hysterical delight; insolent delight it might have been called, if it had not been so spontaneous.
So she ought to be flogged on a scaffold?
It’s like this, brother, let her be punished, but I must get better first.
I understand the queen of impudence.
She’s magnificent in her own line!
Alyosha, don’t blame me, I agree that hanging is too good for her.” “But Katerina Ivanovna!” exclaimed Alyosha sorrowfully.
It’s a regular discovery of the four continents of the world, that is, of the five!
That’s just like Katya, who was not afraid to face a coarse, unmannerly officer and risk a deadly insult on a generous impulse to save her father!
But the pride, the recklessness, the defiance of fate, the unbounded defiance!
That aunt, you know, is overbearing, herself.
But her husband was caught stealing government money.
He lost everything, his estate and all, and the proud wife had to lower her colors, and hasn’t raised them since.
She thinks she can overcome everything, that everything will give way to her.
She thought she could bewitch Grushenka if she liked, and she believed it herself: she plays a part to herself, and whose fault is it?
Do you think she kissed Grushenka’s hand first, on purpose, with a motive?
No, she really was fascinated by Grushenka, that’s to say, not by Grushenka, but by her own dream, her own delusion—because it was _her_ dream, _her_ delusion!
Ha ha ha!” “Brother, you don’t seem to have noticed how you’ve insulted Katerina Ivanovna by telling Grushenka about that day.
And she flung it in her face just now that she had gone to gentlemen in secret to sell her beauty!
Brother, what could be worse than that insult?” What worried Alyosha more than anything was that, incredible as it seemed, his brother appeared pleased at Katerina Ivanovna’s humiliation.
“Bah!” Dmitri frowned fiercely, and struck his forehead with his hand.
He only now realized it, though Alyosha had just told him of the insult, and Katerina Ivanovna’s cry: “Your brother is a scoundrel!” “Yes, perhaps, I really did tell Grushenka about that ‘fatal day,’ as Katya calls it.
Yes, I did tell her, I remember!
I was sobbing then, kneeling and praying to Katya’s image, and Grushenka understood it.
She understood it all then.
I remember, she cried herself....
“Yes, I am a scoundrel, a thorough scoundrel!” he said suddenly, in a gloomy voice.
“It doesn’t matter whether I cried or not, I’m a scoundrel!
And I don’t want to see you again except as a last resource.
Alyosha looked after him, unable to believe he would go away so abruptly.
“Stay, Alexey, one more confession to you alone!” cried Dmitri, suddenly turning back.
I told you everything just now, but I didn’t tell you this, because even I had not brass enough for it.
I shall carry out my base plan, and you can bear witness that I told you so beforehand.
Darkness and destruction!
Away!” And he suddenly retreated, this time finally.
Alyosha went towards the monastery.
What is he saying?” he wondered wildly.
“Why, I shall certainly see him to-morrow.
What does he mean?” He went round the monastery, and crossed the pine-wood to the hermitage.
The door was opened to him, though no one was admitted at that hour.
But there was confusion, there was darkness in which one lost one’s way and went astray at once....” In the cell he found the novice Porfiry and Father Païssy, who came every hour to inquire after Father Zossima.
Even his usual discourse with the brothers could not take place that day.
As a rule every evening after service the monks flocked into Father Zossima’s cell, and all confessed aloud their sins of the day, their sinful thoughts and temptations; even their disputes, if there had been any.
Some confessed kneeling.
The elder absolved, reconciled, exhorted, imposed penance, blessed, and dismissed them.
It was against this general “confession” that the opponents of “elders” protested, maintaining that it was a profanation of the sacrament of confession, almost a sacrilege, though this was quite a different thing.
They even represented to the diocesan authorities that such confessions attained no good object, but actually to a large extent led to sin and temptation.
Many of the brothers disliked going to the elder, and went against their own will because every one went, and for fear they should be accused of pride and rebellious ideas.
People said that some of the monks agreed beforehand, saying, “I’ll confess I lost my temper with you this morning, and you confirm it,” simply in order to have something to say.
Alyosha knew that this actually happened sometimes.
He knew, too, that there were among the monks some who deeply resented the fact that letters from relations were habitually taken to the elder, to be opened and read by him before those to whom they were addressed.
It was assumed, of course, that all this was done freely, and in good faith, by way of voluntary submission and salutary guidance.
But, in fact, there was sometimes no little insincerity, and much that was false and strained in this practice.
So it was no good taking it too much into account.” “He is weaker, a drowsiness has come over him,” Father Païssy whispered to Alyosha, as he blessed him.
“It’s difficult to rouse him.
He waked up for five minutes, sent his blessing to the brothers, and begged their prayers for him at night.
He intends to take the sacrament again in the morning.
He remembered you, Alexey.
He remembered you lovingly, with anxiety; do you understand how he honored you?
He must have foreseen something in your destiny!
Understand, Alexey, that if you return to the world, it must be to do the duty laid upon you by your elder, and not for frivolous vanity and worldly pleasures.” Father Païssy went out.
Alyosha firmly and ardently resolved that in spite of his promises to his father, the Hohlakovs, and Katerina Ivanovna, he would not leave the monastery next day, but would remain with his elder to the end.
His heart glowed with love, and he reproached himself bitterly for having been able for one instant to forget him whom he had left in the monastery on his deathbed, and whom he honored above every one in the world.
He went into Father Zossima’s bedroom, knelt down, and bowed to the ground before the elder, who slept quietly without stirring, with regular, hardly audible breathing and a peaceful face.
Alyosha returned to the other room, where Father Zossima had received his guests in the morning.
Taking off his boots, he lay down on the hard, narrow, leathern sofa, which he had long used as a bed, bringing nothing but a pillow.
The mattress, about which his father had shouted to him that morning, he had long forgotten to lie on.
He took off his cassock, which he used as a covering.
In his fervent prayer he did not beseech God to lighten his darkness but only thirsted for the joyous emotion, which always visited his soul after the praise and adoration, of which his evening prayer usually consisted.
That joy always brought him light untroubled sleep.
As he was praying, he suddenly felt in his pocket the little pink note the servant had handed him as he left Katerina Ivanovna’s.
He was disturbed, but finished his prayer.
Then, after some hesitation, he opened the envelope.
In it was a letter to him, signed by Lise, the young daughter of Madame Hohlakov, who had laughed at him before the elder in the morning.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she wrote, “I am writing to you without any one’s knowledge, even mamma’s, and I know how wrong it is.
Paper, they say, does not blush, but I assure you it’s not true and that it’s blushing just as I am now, all over.
Dear Alyosha, I love you, I’ve loved you from my childhood, since our Moscow days, when you were very different from what you are now, and I shall love you all my life.
My heart has chosen you, to unite our lives, and pass them together till our old age.
Of course, on condition that you will leave the monastery.
By that time I shall certainly be quite strong, I shall be walking and dancing.
“You see how I’ve thought of everything.
I’m always laughing and being naughty.
Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, what if I can’t restrain myself like a silly and laugh when I look at you as I did to-day.
And so I beg you, dear one, if you’ve any pity for me, when you come to-morrow, don’t look me straight in the face, for if I meet your eyes, it will be sure to make me laugh, especially as you’ll be in that long gown.
Alyosha, don’t despise me, and if I’ve done something very horrid and wounded you, forgive me.
Now the secret of my reputation, ruined perhaps for ever, is in your hands.
“I shall certainly cry to-day.
You must, must, must come!—LISE.” Alyosha read the note in amazement, read it through twice, thought a little, and suddenly laughed a soft, sweet laugh.
He slowly replaced the note in the envelope, crossed himself and lay down.
The agitation in his heart passed at once.
“God, have mercy upon all of them, have all these unhappy and turbulent souls in Thy keeping, and set them in the right path.
Save them according to Thy wisdom.
Thou wilt send joy to all!” Alyosha murmured, crossing himself, and falling into peaceful sleep.
Father Ferapont Alyosha was roused early, before daybreak.
It wore an expression of gayety, kindness and cordiality.
Then he desired to confess and take the sacrament at once.
He always confessed to Father Païssy.
After taking the communion, the service of extreme unction followed.
The monks assembled and the cell was gradually filled up by the inmates of the hermitage.
Meantime it was daylight.
People began coming from the monastery.
As the cell was so small the earlier visitors withdrew to make room for others.
“I’ve been teaching you so many years, and therefore I’ve been talking aloud so many years, that I’ve got into the habit of talking, and so much so that it’s almost more difficult for me to hold my tongue than to talk, even now, in spite of my weakness, dear Fathers and brothers,” he jested, looking with emotion at the group round him.
Alyosha remembered afterwards something of what he said to them.
But though he spoke out distinctly and his voice was fairly steady, his speech was somewhat disconnected.
He spoke of many things, he seemed anxious before the moment of death to say everything he had not said in his life, and not simply for the sake of instructing them, but as though thirsting to share with all men and all creation his joy and ecstasy, and once more in his life to open his whole heart.
“Love one another, Fathers,” said Father Zossima, as far as Alyosha could remember afterwards.
Because we have come here and shut ourselves within these walls, we are no holier than those that are outside, but on the contrary, from the very fact of coming here, each of us has confessed to himself that he is worse than others, than all men on earth....
And the longer the monk lives in his seclusion, the more keenly he must recognize that.
When he realizes that he is not only worse than others, but that he is responsible to all men for all and everything, for all human sins, national and individual, only then the aim of our seclusion is attained.
For know, dear ones, that every one of us is undoubtedly responsible for all men and everything on earth, not merely through the general sinfulness of creation, but each one personally for all mankind and every individual man.
This knowledge is the crown of life for the monk and for every man.
Only through that knowledge, our heart grows soft with infinite, universal, inexhaustible love.
Each of you keep watch over your heart and confess your sins to yourself unceasingly.
Be not afraid of your sins, even when perceiving them, if only there be penitence, but make no conditions with God.
Hate not the atheists, the teachers of evil, the materialists—and I mean not only the good ones—for there are many good ones among them, especially in our day—hate not even the wicked ones.
Remember them in your prayers thus: Save, O Lord, all those who have none to pray for them, save too all those who will not pray.
Love God’s people, let not strangers draw away the flock, for if you slumber in your slothfulness and disdainful pride, or worse still, in covetousness, they will come from all sides and draw away your flock.
Expound the Gospel to the people unceasingly ... be not extortionate....
Cling to the banner and raise it on high.” But the elder spoke more disconnectedly than Alyosha reported his words afterwards.
Sometimes he broke off altogether, as though to take breath, and recover his strength, but he was in a sort of ecstasy.
They heard him with emotion, though many wondered at his words and found them obscure....
Afterwards all remembered those words.
When Alyosha happened for a moment to leave the cell, he was struck by the general excitement and suspense in the monks who were crowding about it.
This anticipation showed itself in some by anxiety, in others by devout solemnity.
All were expecting that some marvel would happen immediately after the elder’s death.
Their suspense was, from one point of view, almost frivolous, but even the most austere of the monks were affected by it.
Alyosha was mysteriously summoned by a monk to see Rakitin, who had arrived from town with a singular letter for him from Madame Hohlakov.
In it she informed Alyosha of a strange and very opportune incident.
It appeared that among the women who had come on the previous day to receive Father Zossima’s blessing, there had been an old woman from the town, a sergeant’s widow, called Prohorovna.
She had inquired whether she might pray for the rest of the soul of her son, Vassenka, who had gone to Irkutsk, and had sent her no news for over a year.
To which Father Zossima had answered sternly, forbidding her to do so, and saying that to pray for the living as though they were dead was a kind of sorcery.
But that was not all; in the letter written on the road from Ekaterinenburg, Vassya informed his mother that he was returning to Russia with an official, and that three weeks after her receiving the letter he hoped “to embrace his mother.” Madame Hohlakov warmly entreated Alyosha to report this new “miracle of prediction” to the Superior and all the brotherhood.
“All, all, ought to know of it!” she concluded.
The letter had been written in haste, the excitement of the writer was apparent in every line of it.
And even that austere and cautious man, though he frowned as he read the news of the “miracle,” could not completely restrain some inner emotion.
“We shall see greater things, greater things yet!” the monks around repeated.
But Father Païssy, frowning again, begged all of them, at least for a time, not to speak of the matter “till it be more fully confirmed, seeing there is so much credulity among those of this world, and indeed this might well have chanced naturally,” he added, prudently, as it were to satisfy his conscience, though scarcely believing his own disavowal, a fact his listeners very clearly perceived.
Within the hour the “miracle” was of course known to the whole monastery, and many visitors who had come for the mass.
No one seemed more impressed by it than the monk who had come the day before from St.
Sylvester, from the little monastery of Obdorsk in the far North.
It was he who had been standing near Madame Hohlakov the previous day and had asked Father Zossima earnestly, referring to the “healing” of the lady’s daughter, “How can you presume to do such things?” He was now somewhat puzzled and did not know whom to believe.
The evening before he had visited Father Ferapont in his cell apart, behind the apiary, and had been greatly impressed and overawed by the visit.
This Father Ferapont was that aged monk so devout in fasting and observing silence who has been mentioned already, as antagonistic to Father Zossima and the whole institution of “elders,” which he regarded as a pernicious and frivolous innovation.
He was a very formidable opponent, although from his practice of silence he scarcely spoke a word to any one.
What made him formidable was that a number of monks fully shared his feeling, and many of the visitors looked upon him as a great saint and ascetic, although they had no doubt that he was crazy.
But it was just his craziness attracted them.
Father Ferapont never went to see the elder.
Though he lived in the hermitage they did not worry him to keep its regulations, and this too because he behaved as though he were crazy.
He was seventy-five or more, and he lived in a corner beyond the apiary in an old decaying wooden cell which had been built long ago for another great ascetic, Father Iona, who had lived to be a hundred and five, and of whose saintly doings many curious stories were still extant in the monastery and the neighborhood.
Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this same solitary cell seven years previously.
It was simply a peasant’s hut, though it looked like a chapel, for it contained an extraordinary number of ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them—which men brought to the monastery as offerings to God.
Father Ferapont had been appointed to look after them and keep the lamps burning.
The beekeeper, who lived close by the apiary, used to bring him the bread every three days, and even to this man who waited upon him, Father Ferapont rarely uttered a word.
The four pounds of bread, together with the sacrament bread, regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the Father Superior, made up his weekly rations.
He rarely appeared at mass.
Visitors who came to do him homage saw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round.
If he addressed them, he was brief, abrupt, strange, and almost always rude.
On very rare occasions, however, he would talk to visitors, but for the most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a complete riddle, and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word in explanation.
There was a strange belief, chiefly however among the most ignorant, that Father Ferapont had communication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them, and so was silent with men.
The monk from Obdorsk, having been directed to the apiary by the beekeeper, who was also a very silent and surly monk, went to the corner where Father Ferapont’s cell stood.
“Maybe he will speak as you are a stranger and maybe you’ll get nothing out of him,” the beekeeper had warned him.
The monk, as he related afterwards, approached in the utmost apprehension.
Father Ferapont was sitting at the door of his cell on a low bench.
A huge old elm was lightly rustling overhead.
There was an evening freshness in the air.
The monk from Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing.
“Do you want me to bow down to you, monk?” said Father Ferapont.
“Blessing, be blessed!
Where have you come from?” What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strict fasting and great age, Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man.
There was no doubt he still had considerable strength.
He was of athletic build.
His eyes were gray, large and luminous, but strikingly prominent.
Beneath his coat, his shirt of the coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt, not having been changed for months.
They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under his coat.
His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping to pieces.
“From the little Obdorsk monastery, from St.
Sylvester,” the monk answered humbly, whilst his keen and inquisitive, but rather frightened little eyes kept watch on the hermit.
“I have been at your Sylvester’s.
Is Sylvester well?” The monk hesitated.
“You are a senseless lot!
How do you keep the fasts?” “Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules.
During Lent there are no meals provided for Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.
For Tuesday and Thursday we have white bread, stewed fruit with honey, wild berries, or salt cabbage and wholemeal stirabout.
On Saturday white cabbage soup, noodles with peas, kasha, all with hemp oil.
On weekdays we have dried fish and kasha with the cabbage soup.
From Monday till Saturday evening, six whole days in Holy Week, nothing is cooked, and we have only bread and water, and that sparingly; if possible not taking food every day, just the same as is ordered for first week in Lent.
In the same way on the Saturday we have to fast till three o’clock, and then take a little bread and water and drink a single cup of wine.
On Holy Thursday we drink wine and have something cooked without oil or not cooked at all, inasmuch as the Laodicean council lays down for Holy Thursday: ‘It is unseemly by remitting the fast on the Holy Thursday to dishonor the whole of Lent!’ This is how we keep the fast.
But what is that compared with you, holy Father,” added the monk, growing more confident, “for all the year round, even at Easter, you take nothing but bread and water, and what we should eat in two days lasts you full seven.
It’s truly marvelous—your great abstinence.” “And mushrooms?” asked Father Ferapont, suddenly.
“Mushrooms?” repeated the surprised monk.
I can give up their bread, not needing it at all, and go away into the forest and live there on the mushrooms or the berries, but they can’t give up their bread here, wherefore they are in bondage to the devil.
Nowadays the unclean deny that there is need of such fasting.
Haughty and unclean is their judgment.” “Och, true,” sighed the monk.
“And have you seen devils among them?” asked Ferapont.
“I went to the Father Superior on Trinity Sunday last year, I haven’t been since.
I saw a devil sitting on one man’s chest hiding under his cassock, only his horns poked out; another had one peeping out of his pocket with such sharp eyes, he was afraid of me; another settled in the unclean belly of one, another was hanging round a man’s neck, and so he was carrying him about without seeing him.” “You—can see spirits?” the monk inquired.
When I was coming out from the Superior’s I saw one hiding from me behind the door, and a big one, a yard and a half or more high, with a thick long gray tail, and the tip of his tail was in the crack of the door and I was quick and slammed the door, pinching his tail in it.
He squealed and began to struggle, and I made the sign of the cross over him three times.
He must have rotted there in the corner and be stinking, but they don’t see, they don’t smell it.
I reveal it to you, as you are a stranger.” “Your words are terrible!
But, holy and blessed Father,” said the monk, growing bolder and bolder, “is it true, as they noise abroad even to distant lands about you, that you are in continual communication with the Holy Ghost?” “He does fly down at times.” “How does he fly down?
The Holy Spirit can appear as other birds—sometimes as a swallow, sometimes a goldfinch and sometimes as a blue-tit.” “How do you know him from an ordinary tit?” “He speaks.” “How does he speak, in what language?” “Human language.” “And what does he tell you?” “Why, to-day he told me that a fool would visit me and would ask me unseemly questions.
You want to know too much, monk.” “Terrible are your words, most holy and blessed Father,” the monk shook his head.
But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes.
“Do you see this tree?” asked Father Ferapont, after a pause.
“I do, blessed Father.” “You think it’s an elm, but for me it has another shape.” “What sort of shape?” inquired the monk, after a pause of vain expectation.
You see those two branches?
It’s terrible, terrible!” “What is there terrible if it’s Christ Himself?” “Why, He’ll snatch me up and carry me away.” “Alive?” “In the spirit and glory of Elijah, haven’t you heard?
He will take me in His arms and bear me away.” Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of the brothers, in considerable perplexity of mind, he still cherished at heart a greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima.
He was strongly in favor of fasting, and it was not strange that one who kept so rigid a fast as Father Ferapont should “see marvels.” His words seemed certainly queer, but God only could tell what was hidden in those words, and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who have sacrificed their intellects for the glory of God?
The pinching of the devil’s tail he was ready and eager to believe, and not only in the figurative sense.
Besides he had, before visiting the monastery, a strong prejudice against the institution of “elders,” which he only knew of by hearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation.
Before he had been long at the monastery, he had detected the secret murmurings of some shallow brothers who disliked the institution.
He was, besides, a meddlesome, inquisitive man, who poked his nose into everything.
This was why the news of the fresh “miracle” performed by Father Zossima reduced him to extreme perplexity.
Alyosha remembered afterwards how their inquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and fro from one group to another, listening and asking questions among the monks that were crowding within and without the elder’s cell.
But he did not pay much attention to him at the time, and only recollected it afterwards.
The elder, opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha, asked him suddenly: “Are your people expecting you, my son?” Alyosha hesitated.
Didn’t you promise some one yesterday to see them to-day?” “I did promise—to my father—my brothers—others too.” “You see, you must go.
But now go to keep your promise.” Alyosha immediately obeyed, though it was hard to go.
Father Païssy, too, uttered some words of exhortation which moved and surprised him greatly.
He spoke as they left the cell together.
“Remember, young man, unceasingly,” Father Païssy began, without preface, “that the science of this world, which has become a great power, has, especially in the last century, analyzed everything divine handed down to us in the holy books.
After this cruel analysis the learned of this world have nothing left of all that was sacred of old.
But they have only analyzed the parts and overlooked the whole, and indeed their blindness is marvelous.
Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Has it not lasted nineteen centuries, is it not still a living, a moving power in the individual soul and in the masses of people?
It is still as strong and living even in the souls of atheists, who have destroyed everything!
For even those who have renounced Christianity and attack it, in their inmost being still follow the Christian ideal, for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardor of their hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtue than the ideal given by Christ of old.
When it has been attempted, the result has been only grotesque.
Remember this especially, young man, since you are being sent into the world by your departing elder.
Maybe, remembering this great day, you will not forget my words, uttered from the heart for your guidance, seeing you are young, and the temptations of the world are great and beyond your strength to endure.
As Alyosha left the monastery and thought them over, he suddenly realized that he had met a new and unexpected friend, a warmly loving teacher, in this austere monk who had hitherto treated him sternly.
It was as though Father Zossima had bequeathed him to him at his death, and “perhaps that’s just what had passed between them,” Alyosha thought suddenly.
The philosophic reflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of Father Païssy’s heart.
He was in haste to arm the boy’s mind for conflict with temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with the strongest defense he could imagine.
On the way he remembered that his father had insisted the day before that he should come without his brother Ivan seeing him.
“Why so?” Alyosha wondered suddenly.
“Even if my father has something to say to me alone, why should I go in unseen?
Most likely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different,” he decided.
Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna, who opened the garden gate to him (Grigory, it appeared, was ill in bed in the lodge), told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out two hours ago.
“And my father?” “He is up, taking his coffee,” Marfa answered somewhat dryly.
The old man was sitting alone at the table wearing slippers and a little old overcoat.
He was amusing himself by looking through some accounts, rather inattentively however.
He was quite alone in the house, for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing.
His forehead, upon which huge purple bruises had come out during the night, was bandaged with a red handkerchief; his nose too had swollen terribly in the night, and some smaller bruises covered it in patches, giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look.
Besides, I told you to come yesterday.
It’s all of no consequence.
You need not have troubled.
But I knew you’d come poking in directly.” He said this with almost hostile feeling.
At the same time he got up and looked anxiously in the looking-glass (perhaps for the fortieth time that morning) at his nose.
He began, too, binding his red handkerchief more becomingly on his forehead.
It’s just like the hospital in a white one,” he observed sententiously.
How is your elder?” “He is very bad; he may die to-day,” answered Alyosha.
But his father had not listened, and had forgotten his own question at once.
“Ivan’s gone out,” he said suddenly.
“He is doing his utmost to carry off Mitya’s betrothed.
That’s what he is staying here for,” he added maliciously, and, twisting his mouth, looked at Alyosha.
Why do you say such things?” said Alyosha, troubled.
“He doesn’t ask for money, it’s true, but yet he won’t get a farthing from me.
I intend living as long as possible, you may as well know, my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, and so I need every farthing, and the longer I live, the more I shall need it,” he continued, pacing from one corner of the room to the other, keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasy overcoat made of yellow cotton material.
So I am saving up more and more, simply for myself, my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch.
And your paradise, Alexey Fyodorovitch, is not to my taste, let me tell you that; and it’s not the proper place for a gentleman, your paradise, even if it exists.
That’s my philosophy.
Ivan talked well here yesterday, though we were all drunk.
Ivan is a conceited coxcomb, but he has no particular learning ... nor education either.
He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking—that’s what pulls him through.” Alyosha listened to him in silence.
Your Ivan is a scoundrel!
And I’ll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to.
For if you’ve money, Alexey Fyodorovitch, you have only to want a thing and you can have it.
That’s what Ivan is afraid of, he is on the watch to prevent me getting married and that’s why he is egging on Mitya to marry Grushenka himself.
He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that (as though I should leave him my money if I don’t marry her!).
Besides if Mitya marries Grushenka, Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed, that’s what he’s reckoning on!
He is a scoundrel, your Ivan!” “How cross you are!
It’s because of yesterday; you had better lie down,” said Alyosha.
“There! you say that,” the old man observed suddenly, as though it had struck him for the first time, “and I am not angry with you.
It is only with you I have good moments, else you know I am an ill-natured man.” “You are not ill-natured, but distorted,” said Alyosha with a smile.
Of course in these fashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice, but even now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by the hair, to kick him in the face in his own house, and brag of murdering him outright—all in the presence of witnesses.
If I liked, I could crush him and could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday.” “Then you don’t mean to take proceedings?” “Ivan has dissuaded me.
I shouldn’t care about Ivan, but there’s another thing.” And bending down to Alyosha, he went on in a confidential half-whisper.
For that’s her way, everything by contraries.
Take some cold coffee and I’ll pour a quarter of a glass of brandy into it, it’s delicious, my boy.” “No, thank you.
I’ll take that roll with me if I may,” said Alyosha, and taking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock.
“And you’d better not have brandy, either,” he suggested apprehensively, looking into the old man’s face.
“You are quite right, it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them.
I’ll get it out of the cupboard.” He unlocked the cupboard, poured out a glass, drank it, then locked the cupboard and put the key back in his pocket.
I love you even without the brandy, but with scoundrels I am a scoundrel.
Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya—why is that?
He wants to spy how much I give Grushenka if she comes.
They are all scoundrels!
But I don’t recognize Ivan, I don’t know him at all.
As though I’d leave him anything!
If I were to hand him over a thousand or maybe two now, would the beggarly wretch agree to take himself off altogether for five years or, better still, thirty-five, and without Grushenka, and give her up once for all, eh?” “I—I’ll ask him,” muttered Alyosha.
“If you would give him three thousand, perhaps he—” “That’s nonsense!
It was a nonsensical idea of mine.
I won’t give him anything, not a penny, I want my money myself,” cried the old man, waving his hand.
Don’t say anything to him or else he will begin hoping.
Is that betrothed of his, Katerina Ivanovna, whom he has kept so carefully hidden from me all this time, going to marry him or not?
You went to see her yesterday, I believe?” “Nothing will induce her to abandon him.” “There you see how dearly these fine young ladies love a rake and a scoundrel.
They are poor creatures I tell you, those pale young ladies, very different from—Ah, if I had his youth and the looks I had then (for I was better-looking than he at eight and twenty) I’d have been a conquering hero just as he is.
But he shan’t have Grushenka, anyway, he shan’t!
I’ll crush him!” His anger had returned with the last words.
Alyosha went up to say good-by to him, and kissed him on the shoulder.
“What’s that for?” The old man was a little surprised.
“We shall see each other again, or do you think we shan’t?” “Not at all, I didn’t mean anything.” “Nor did I, I did not mean anything,” said the old man, looking at him.
Come to-morrow, do you hear, to-morrow!” And as soon as Alyosha had gone out of the door, he went to the cupboard again and poured out another half-glass.
“I won’t have more!” he muttered, clearing his throat, and again he locked the cupboard and put the key in his pocket.
Then he went into his bedroom, lay down on the bed, exhausted, and in one minute he was asleep.
A Meeting With The Schoolboys “Thank goodness he did not ask me about Grushenka,” thought Alyosha, as he left his father’s house and turned towards Madame Hohlakov’s, “or I might have to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka yesterday.” Alyosha felt painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewed their energies, and that their hearts had grown hard again.
“Father is spiteful and angry, he’s made some plan and will stick to it.
He too will be harder than yesterday, he too must be spiteful and angry, and he too, no doubt, has made some plan.
Oh, I must succeed in finding him to-day, whatever happens.” But Alyosha had not long to meditate.
An incident occurred on the road, which, though apparently of little consequence, made a great impression on him.
Just after he had crossed the square and turned the corner coming out into Mihailovsky Street, which is divided by a small ditch from the High Street (our whole town is intersected by ditches), he saw a group of schoolboys between the ages of nine and twelve, at the bridge.
They were going home from school, some with their bags on their shoulders, others with leather satchels slung across them, some in short jackets, others in little overcoats.
The whole group was talking eagerly about something, apparently holding a council.
Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been able to pass children without taking notice of them, and although he was particularly fond of children of three or thereabout, he liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too.
Behind the ditch some thirty paces away, there was another schoolboy standing by a fence.
He was about ten years old, pale, delicate-looking and with sparkling black eyes.
He kept an attentive and anxious watch on the other six, obviously his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school, but with whom he had evidently had a feud.
Alyosha went up and, addressing a fair, curly-headed, rosy boy in a black jacket, observed: “When I used to wear a satchel like yours, I always used to carry it on my left side, so as to have my right hand free, but you’ve got yours on your right side.
So it will be awkward for you to get at it.” Alyosha had no art or premeditation in beginning with this practical remark.
But it is the only way for a grown-up person to get at once into confidential relations with a child, or still more with a group of children.
One must begin in a serious, businesslike way so as to be on a perfectly equal footing.
Alyosha understood it by instinct.
“But he is left-handed,” another, a fine healthy-looking boy of eleven, answered promptly.
“He even throws stones with his left hand,” observed a third.
At that instant a stone flew into the group, but only just grazed the left-handed boy, though it was well and vigorously thrown by the boy standing the other side of the ditch.
But Smurov, the left-handed boy, needed no telling, and at once revenged himself; he threw a stone, but it missed the boy and hit the ground.
The boy the other side of the ditch, the pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones, flung another stone at the group; this time it flew straight at Alyosha and hit him painfully on the shoulder.
You are Karamazov, Karamazov!” the boys shouted, laughing.
One struck the boy on the head and he fell down, but at once leapt up and began ferociously returning their fire.
Both sides threw stones incessantly.
He ran forward and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy.
Three or four ceased throwing for a minute.
“He began first!” cried a boy in a red shirt in an angry childish voice.
“He is a beast, he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with a penknife.
Krassotkin wouldn’t tell tales, but he must be thrashed.” “But what for?
I suppose you tease him.” “There, he sent a stone in your back again, he knows you,” cried the children.
“It’s you he is throwing at now, not us.
The boy the other side of the ditch was hit in the chest; he screamed, began to cry and ran away uphill towards Mihailovsky Street.
Wisp of tow!” “You don’t know what a beast he is, Karamazov, killing is too good for him,” said the boy in the jacket, with flashing eyes.
“What’s wrong with him?” asked Alyosha, “is he a tell-tale or what?” The boys looked at one another as though derisively.
“Are you going that way, to Mihailovsky?” the same boy went on.
“You ask him, does he like a disheveled wisp of tow.
Do you hear, ask him that!” There was a general burst of laughter.
“I shan’t ask him about the wisp of tow, for I expect you tease him with that question somehow.
But I’ll find out from him why you hate him so.” “Find out then, find out,” cried the boys, laughing.
Alyosha crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence, straight towards the boy.
He will stab you in a minute, on the sly, as he did Krassotkin.” The boy waited for him without budging.
He was an undersized weakly boy with a thin pale face, with large dark eyes that gazed at him vindictively.
He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat, which he had monstrously outgrown.
There was a large patch on the right knee of his trousers, and in his right boot just at the toe there was a big hole in the leather, carefully blackened with ink.
Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him, looking inquiringly at him.
The boy, seeing at once from Alyosha’s eyes that he wouldn’t beat him, became less defiant, and addressed him first.
I’ll beat them all, alone!” he said suddenly, with flashing eyes.
“I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly,” observed Alyosha.
Do you know me?” Alyosha continued.
“Let me alone!” the boy cried irritably; but he did not move, as though he were expecting something, and again there was a vindictive light in his eyes.
Good-by!” “Monk in silk trousers!” cried the boy, following Alyosha with the same vindictive and defiant expression, and he threw himself into an attitude of defense, feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him; but Alyosha turned, looked at him, and walked away.
This time the boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha’s face; but Alyosha just had time to guard himself, and the stone struck him on the elbow.
The boy waited in silent defiance, certain that now Alyosha would attack him.
Seeing that even now he would not, his rage was like a little wild beast’s; he flew at Alyosha himself, and before Alyosha had time to move, the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit his middle finger.
The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance.
Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly round his injured hand.
He was a full minute bandaging it.
Now tell me, what have I done to you?” The boy stared in amazement.
“Though I don’t know you and it’s the first time I’ve seen you,” Alyosha went on with the same serenity, “yet I must have done something to you—you wouldn’t have hurt me like this for nothing.
How have I wronged you, tell me?” Instead of answering, the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away.
Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street, and for a long time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever, not turning his head, and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail.
At The Hohlakovs’ Alyosha soon reached Madame Hohlakov’s house, a handsome stone house of two stories, one of the finest in our town.
Though Madame Hohlakov spent most of her time in another province where she had an estate, or in Moscow, where she had a house of her own, yet she had a house in our town too, inherited from her forefathers.
The estate in our district was the largest of her three estates, yet she had been very little in our province before this time.
“Did you get my letter about the new miracle?” She spoke rapidly and nervously.
He restored the son to his mother!” “He is dying to-day,” said Alyosha.
The whole town is in excitement, they are all suspense.
But now—do you know Katerina Ivanovna is here now?” “Ah, that’s lucky,” cried Alyosha.
She told me yesterday to be sure to come and see her to-day.” “I know, I know all.
I’ve heard exactly what happened yesterday—and the atrocious behavior of that—creature. _C’est tragique_, and if I’d been in her place I don’t know what I should have done.
And your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch, what do you think of him?—my goodness!
Alexey Fyodorovitch, I am forgetting, only fancy; your brother is in there with her, not that dreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday, but the other, Ivan Fyodorovitch, he is sitting with her talking; they are having a serious conversation.
If you could only imagine what’s passing between them now—it’s awful, I tell you it’s lacerating, it’s like some incredible tale of horror.
They both recognize it and revel in it.
I’ve been watching for you!
I’ve been thirsting for you!
I’ll tell you all about it presently, but now I must speak of something else, the most important thing—I had quite forgotten what’s most important.
Tell me, why has Lise been in hysterics?
As soon as she heard you were here, she began to be hysterical!” “_Maman_, it’s you who are hysterical now, not I,” Lise’s voice caroled through a tiny crack of the door at the side.
“And no wonder, Lise, no wonder ... your caprices will make me hysterical too.
But she is so ill, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she has been so ill all night, feverish and moaning!
I could hardly wait for the morning and for Herzenstube to come.
Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it.
As soon as you approached the house, she screamed, fell into hysterics, and insisted on being wheeled back into this room here.” “Mamma, I didn’t know he had come.
It wasn’t on his account I wanted to be wheeled into this room.” “That’s not true, Lise, Yulia ran to tell you that Alexey Fyodorovitch was coming.
But if you want to make up for it and say something very clever, dear mamma, you’d better tell our honored visitor, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that he has shown his want of wit by venturing to us after what happened yesterday and although every one is laughing at him.” “Lise, you go too far.
Oh, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I am exceedingly unhappy!” “But what’s the matter with you, mamma, darling?” “Ah, your caprices, Lise, your fidgetiness, your illness, that awful night of fever, that awful everlasting Herzenstube, everlasting, everlasting, that’s the worst of it!
Everything, in fact, everything....
Oh, how it has upset me, how it has shattered me, that miracle, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch!
What is happening to me?
Every minute I close my eyes and see that it’s all nonsense, all nonsense.” “I should be very grateful,” Alyosha interrupted suddenly, “if you could give me a clean rag to bind up my finger with.
The handkerchief was soaked with blood.
Madame Hohlakov screamed and shut her eyes.
“Come, come here,” she cried, imperiously.
But do make haste,” she finished nervously.
She was quite frightened at the sight of Alyosha’s wound.
“Shouldn’t we send for Herzenstube?” cried Madame Hohlakov.
Your Herzenstube will come and say that he can make nothing of it!
Mamma, for goodness’ sake go yourself and hurry Yulia, she is such a slowcoach and never can come quickly!
Make haste, mamma, or I shall die.” “Why, it’s nothing much,” cried Alyosha, frightened at this alarm.
You know where the bottle is, mamma; it’s in your bedroom in the right-hand cupboard, there’s a big bottle of it there with the lint.” “I’ll bring everything in a minute, Lise, only don’t scream and don’t fuss.
You see how bravely Alexey Fyodorovitch bears it.
Where did you get such a dreadful wound, Alexey Fyodorovitch?” Madame Hohlakov hastened away.
“First of all, answer the question, where did you get hurt like this?” she asked Alyosha, quickly.
“And then I’ll talk to you about something quite different.
Well?” Instinctively feeling that the time of her mother’s absence was precious for her, Alyosha hastened to tell her of his enigmatic meeting with the schoolboys in the fewest words possible.
“How can you, and in that dress too, associate with schoolboys?” she cried angrily, as though she had a right to control him.
“You are nothing but a boy yourself if you can do that, a perfect boy!
Now for the second thing, but first a question: does the pain prevent you talking about utterly unimportant things, but talking sensibly?” “Of course not, and I don’t feel much pain now.” “That’s because your finger is in the water.
It must be changed directly, for it will get warm in a minute.
Now she is gone, I can speak; will you give me the letter I sent you yesterday, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch—be quick, for mamma will be back in a minute and I don’t want—” “I haven’t got the letter.” “That’s not true, you have.
I’ve been regretting that joke all night.
Give me back the letter at once, give it me.” “I’ve left it at home.” “But you can’t consider me as a child, a little girl, after that silly joke!
I beg your pardon for that silliness, but you must bring me the letter, if you really haven’t got it—bring it to-day, you must, you must.” “To-day I can’t possibly, for I am going back to the monastery and I shan’t come and see you for the next two days—three or four perhaps—for Father Zossima—” “Four days, what nonsense!
Did you laugh at me very much?” “I didn’t laugh at all.” “Why not?” “Because I believed all you said.” “You are insulting me!” “Not at all.
As soon as I read it, I thought that all that would come to pass, for as soon as Father Zossima dies, I am to leave the monastery.
Though I haven’t had time to think about it, I believe I couldn’t find a better wife than you, and Father Zossima tells me I must marry.” “But I am a cripple, wheeled about in a chair,” laughed Lise, flushing crimson.
“I’ll wheel you about myself, but I’m sure you’ll get well by then.” “But you are mad,” said Lise, nervously, “to make all this nonsense out of a joke!
My darling mamma, you begin to say really witty things.” “Never mind my being witty, but I must say you show nice feeling for Alexey Fyodorovitch’s sufferings!
Oh, my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, what’s killing me is no one thing in particular, not Herzenstube, but everything together, that’s what is too much for me.” “That’s enough, mamma, enough about Herzenstube,” Lise laughed gayly.
That’s simply Goulard’s water, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I remember the name now, but it’s a splendid lotion.
Just think of him married, wouldn’t it be funny, wouldn’t it be awful?” And Lise kept laughing her thin hysterical giggle, looking slyly at Alyosha.
As though there were rabid boys!” “Why not, Lise, as though I had said something stupid!
How well she has bandaged it, Alexey Fyodorovitch!
“Come, that’s enough, Lise, perhaps I really was rather too quick talking of the boy being rabid, and you pounced upon it at once Katerina Ivanovna has only just heard that you are here, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she simply rushed at me, she’s dying to see you, dying!” “Ach, mamma, go to them yourself.
But I should like to see Katerina Ivanovna at once, for I am very anxious to be back at the monastery as soon as I can.” “Mamma, take him away quickly.
Alexey Fyodorovitch, don’t trouble to come and see me afterwards, but go straight back to your monastery and a good riddance.
I want to sleep, I didn’t sleep all night.” “Ah, Lise, you are only making fun, but how I wish you would sleep!” cried Madame Hohlakov.
I’ll stay another three minutes, five if you like,” muttered Alyosha.
Let us go, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she is too capricious to-day.
How quickly you have made her sleepy, and how fortunate it is!” “Ah, mamma, how sweetly you talk!
Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” Madame Hohlakov began mysteriously and importantly, speaking in a rapid whisper.
“I don’t want to suggest anything, I don’t want to lift the veil, you will see for yourself what’s going on.
It’s the most fantastic farce.
She loves your brother, Ivan, and she is doing her utmost to persuade herself she loves your brother, Dmitri.
A Laceration In The Drawing-Room But in the drawing-room the conversation was already over.
Katerina Ivanovna was greatly excited, though she looked resolute.
At the moment Alyosha and Madame Hohlakov entered, Ivan Fyodorovitch stood up to take leave.
His face was rather pale, and Alyosha looked at him anxiously.
For this moment was to solve a doubt, a harassing enigma which had for some time haunted Alyosha.
During the preceding month it had been several times suggested to him that his brother Ivan was in love with Katerina Ivanovna, and, what was more, that he meant “to carry her off” from Dmitri.
Until quite lately the idea seemed to Alyosha monstrous, though it worried him extremely.
He loved both his brothers, and dreaded such rivalry between them.
Meantime, Dmitri had said outright on the previous day that he was glad that Ivan was his rival, and that it was a great assistance to him, Dmitri.
But that Alyosha considered the worst thing possible.
Besides all this, Alyosha had till the evening before implicitly believed that Katerina Ivanovna had a steadfast and passionate love for Dmitri; but he had only believed it till the evening before.
He had fancied, too, that she was incapable of loving a man like Ivan, and that she did love Dmitri, and loved him just as he was, in spite of all the strangeness of such a passion.
But during yesterday’s scene with Grushenka another idea had struck him.
The word “lacerating,” which Madame Hohlakov had just uttered, almost made him start, because half waking up towards daybreak that night he had cried out “Laceration, laceration,” probably applying it to his dream.
He had been dreaming all night of the previous day’s scene at Katerina Ivanovna’s.
Now Alyosha was impressed by Madame Hohlakov’s blunt and persistent assertion that Katerina Ivanovna was in love with Ivan, and only deceived herself through some sort of pose, from “self-laceration,” and tortured herself by her pretended love for Dmitri from some fancied duty of gratitude.
“Yes,” he thought, “perhaps the whole truth lies in those words.” But in that case what was Ivan’s position?
Alyosha felt instinctively that a character like Katerina Ivanovna’s must dominate, and she could only dominate some one like Dmitri, and never a man like Ivan.
For Dmitri might at last submit to her domination “to his own happiness” (which was what Alyosha would have desired), but Ivan—no, Ivan could not submit to her, and such submission would not give him happiness.
Alyosha could not help believing that of Ivan.
And now all these doubts and reflections flitted through his mind as he entered the drawing-room.
Another idea, too, forced itself upon him: “What if she loved neither of them—neither Ivan nor Dmitri?” It must be noted that Alyosha felt as it were ashamed of his own thoughts and blamed himself when they kept recurring to him during the last month.
“What do I know about love and women and how can I decide such questions?” he thought reproachfully, after such doubts and surmises.
And yet it was impossible not to think about it.
He felt instinctively that this rivalry was of immense importance in his brothers’ lives and that a great deal depended upon it.
“One reptile will devour the other,” Ivan had pronounced the day before, speaking in anger of his father and Dmitri.
Was it perhaps since he had known Katerina Ivanovna?
That phrase had, of course, escaped Ivan unawares yesterday, but that only made it more important.
Were there not, on the contrary, new grounds for hatred and hostility in their family?
And with which of them was Alyosha to sympathize?
He loved them both, but what could he desire for each in the midst of these conflicting interests?
He might go quite astray in this maze, and Alyosha’s heart could not endure uncertainty, because his love was always of an active character.
He was incapable of passive love.
And to do so he must know what he was aiming at; he must know for certain what was best for each, and having ascertained this it was natural for him to help them both.
But instead of a definite aim, he found nothing but uncertainty and perplexity on all sides.
“It was lacerating,” as was said just now.
But what could he understand even in this “laceration”?
He did not understand the first word in this perplexing maze.
Seeing Alyosha, Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan, who had already got up to go, “A minute!
I want to hear the opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely.
Don’t go away,” she added, addressing Madame Hohlakov.
She made Alyosha sit down beside her, and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite, by Ivan.
“You are all my friends here, all I have in the world, my dear friends,” she began warmly, in a voice which quivered with genuine tears of suffering, and Alyosha’s heart warmed to her at once.
“You, Alexey Fyodorovitch, were witness yesterday of that abominable scene, and saw what I did.
You did not see it, Ivan Fyodorovitch, he did.
What he thought of me yesterday I don’t know.
I only know one thing, that if it were repeated to-day, this minute, I should express the same feelings again as yesterday—the same feelings, the same words, the same actions.
You remember my actions, Alexey Fyodorovitch; you checked me in one of them” ... (as she said that, she flushed and her eyes shone).
Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
If I loved him, if I still loved him, perhaps I shouldn’t be sorry for him now, but should hate him.” Her voice quivered, and tears glittered on her eyelashes.
Alyosha shuddered inwardly.
“That girl is truthful and sincere,” he thought, “and she does not love Dmitri any more.” “That’s true, that’s true,” cried Madame Hohlakov.
I haven’t told you the chief, the final decision I came to during the night.
I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one—for me, but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it—nothing.
My dear, kind, ever-faithful and generous adviser, the one friend I have in the world, Ivan Fyodorovitch, with his deep insight into the heart, approves and commends my decision.
He knows it.” “Yes, I approve of it,” Ivan assented, in a subdued but firm voice.
Alexey Fyodorovitch, forgive my calling you simply Alyosha), I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch, too, to tell me before my two friends whether I am right.
I feel instinctively that you, Alyosha, my dear brother (for you are a dear brother to me),” she said again ecstatically, taking his cold hand in her hot one, “I foresee that your decision, your approval, will bring me peace, in spite of all my sufferings, for, after your words, I shall be calm and submit—I feel that.” “I don’t know what you are asking me,” said Alyosha, flushing.
“I only know that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more than my own!...
But I know nothing about such affairs,” something impelled him to add hurriedly.
“In such affairs, Alexey Fyodorovitch, in such affairs, the chief thing is honor and duty and something higher—I don’t know what—but higher perhaps even than duty.
I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in my heart, and it compels me irresistibly.
I’ve already decided, even if he marries that—creature,” she began solemnly, “whom I never, never can forgive, _even then I will not abandon him_.
Henceforward I will never, never abandon him!” she cried, breaking into a sort of pale, hysterical ecstasy.
“Not that I would run after him continually, get in his way and worry him.
I will go away to another town—where you like—but I will watch over him all my life—I will watch over him all my life unceasingly.
Only a sister, of course, and so for ever; but he will learn at least that that sister is really his sister, who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to him.
I will insist on his knowing me and confiding entirely in me, without reserve,” she cried, in a sort of frenzy.
“I will be a god to whom he can pray—and that, at least, he owes me for his treachery and for what I suffered yesterday through him.
And let him see that all my life I will be true to him and the promise I gave him, in spite of his being untrue and betraying me.
I will—I will become nothing but a means for his happiness, or—how shall I say?—an instrument, a machine for his happiness, and that for my whole life, my whole life, and that he may see that all his life!
Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me.” She was breathless.
She had perhaps intended to express her idea with more dignity, art and naturalness, but her speech was too hurried and crude.
It was full of youthful impulsiveness, it betrayed that she was still smarting from yesterday’s insult, and that her pride craved satisfaction.
Her face suddenly darkened, an unpleasant look came into her eyes.
Alyosha at once saw it and felt a pang of sympathy.
His brother Ivan made it worse by adding: “I’ve only expressed my own view,” he said.
“From any one else, this would have been affected and overstrained, but from you—no.
I don’t know how to explain it, but I see that you are absolutely genuine and, therefore, you are right.” “But that’s only for the moment.
Nothing but yesterday’s insult.” Madame Hohlakov obviously had not intended to interfere, but she could not refrain from this very just comment.
“Quite so, quite so,” cried Ivan, with peculiar eagerness, obviously annoyed at being interrupted, “in any one else this moment would be only due to yesterday’s impression and would be only a moment.
But with Katerina Ivanovna’s character, that moment will last all her life.
What for any one else would be only a promise is for her an everlasting burdensome, grim perhaps, but unflagging duty.
And she will be sustained by the feeling of this duty being fulfilled.
Your life, Katerina Ivanovna, will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over your own feelings, your own heroism, and your own suffering; but in the end that suffering will be softened and will pass into sweet contemplation of the fulfillment of a bold and proud design.
Yes, proud it certainly is, and desperate in any case, but a triumph for you.
And the consciousness of it will at last be a source of complete satisfaction and will make you resigned to everything else.” This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with intention; even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke ironically and with intention.
“Oh, dear, how mistaken it all is!” Madame Hohlakov cried again.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch, you speak.
I want dreadfully to know what you will say!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and burst into tears.
But by the side of two such friends as you and your brother I still feel strong—for I know—you two will never desert me.” “Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow—perhaps to-morrow—and to leave you for a long time—And, unluckily, it’s unavoidable,” Ivan said suddenly.
“To-morrow—to Moscow!” her face was suddenly contorted; “but—but, dear me, how fortunate!” she cried in a voice suddenly changed.
She underwent an instantaneous transformation, which amazed Alyosha.
Instead of a poor, insulted girl, weeping in a sort of “laceration,” he saw a woman completely self-possessed and even exceedingly pleased, as though something agreeable had just happened.
“Oh, not fortunate that I am losing you, of course not,” she corrected herself suddenly, with a charming society smile.
I am only too unhappy at losing you.” She rushed impulsively at Ivan, and seizing both his hands, pressed them warmly.
“But what is fortunate is that you will be able in Moscow to see auntie and Agafya and to tell them all the horror of my present position.
You can speak with complete openness to Agafya, but spare dear auntie.
You can’t think how wretched I was yesterday and this morning, wondering how I could write them that dreadful letter—for one can never tell such things in a letter....
Now it will be easy for me to write, for you will see them and explain everything.
I will run at once to write the letter,” she finished suddenly, and took a step as though to go out of the room.
“And what about Alyosha and his opinion, which you were so desperately anxious to hear?” cried Madame Hohlakov.
There was a sarcastic, angry note in her voice.
“I had not forgotten that,” cried Katerina Ivanovna, coming to a sudden standstill, “and why are you so antagonistic at such a moment?” she added, with warm and bitter reproachfulness.
More than that, I must have his decision!
You see how anxious I am for your words, Alexey Fyodorovitch....
But what’s the matter?” “I couldn’t have believed it.
I can’t understand it!” Alyosha cried suddenly in distress.
And you begin explaining that you are not glad of that but sorry to be—losing a friend.
What do you mean?” exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna, profoundly astonished, flushing crimson, and frowning.
“Though you assure him you are sorry to lose a friend in him, you persist in telling him to his face that it’s fortunate he is going,” said Alyosha breathlessly.
He was standing at the table and did not sit down.
I don’t understand.” “I don’t understand myself....
I know I am not saying it properly, but I’ll say it all the same,” Alyosha went on in the same shaking and broken voice.
“What I see is that perhaps you don’t love Dmitri at all ... and never have, from the beginning....
I really don’t know how I dare to say all this, but somebody must tell the truth ... for nobody here will tell the truth.” “What truth?” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and there was an hysterical ring in her voice.
“I’ll tell you,” Alyosha went on with desperate haste, as though he were jumping from the top of a house.
For you’re torturing Ivan, simply because you love him—and torturing him, because you love Dmitri through ‘self-laceration’—with an unreal love—because you’ve persuaded yourself.” Alyosha broke off and was silent.
“You ... you ... you are a little religious idiot—that’s what you are!” Katerina Ivanovna snapped.
Ivan suddenly laughed and got up.
“You are mistaken, my good Alyosha,” he said, with an expression Alyosha had never seen in his face before—an expression of youthful sincerity and strong, irresistibly frank feeling.
“Katerina Ivanovna has never cared for me!
I have never been her friend either, not for one moment; she is too proud to need my friendship.
She revenged with me and on me all the insults which she has been continually receiving from Dmitri ever since their first meeting.
I am going now; but, believe me, Katerina Ivanovna, you really love him.
And the more he insults you, the more you love him—that’s your ‘laceration.’ You love him just as he is; you love him for insulting you.
If he reformed, you’d give him up at once and cease to love him.
But you need him so as to contemplate continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him for infidelity.
Oh, there’s a great deal of humiliation and self-abasement about it, but it all comes from pride....
I know that I ought not to say this, that it would be more dignified on my part simply to leave you, and it would be less offensive for you.
I don’t want to sit beside a ‘laceration.’...
I’ve said everything....
Good-by, Katerina Ivanovna; you can’t be angry with me, for I am a hundred times more severely punished than you, if only by the fact that I shall never see you again.
You have tortured me too deliberately for me to be able to forgive you at this moment.
‘Den Dank, Dame, begehr ich nicht,’” he added, with a forced smile, showing, however, that he could read Schiller, and read him till he knew him by heart—which Alyosha would never have believed.
He went out of the room without saying good-by even to his hostess, Madame Hohlakov.
“Ivan!” he cried desperately after him.
No, nothing will induce him to come back now!” he cried again, regretfully realizing it; “but it’s my fault, my fault.
Unjustly and angrily.
He must come back here, come back,” Alyosha kept exclaiming frantically.
Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room.
You behaved beautifully, like an angel,” Madame Hohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha.
“I will do my utmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going.” Her face beamed with delight, to the great distress of Alyosha, but Katerina Ivanovna suddenly returned.
“I have a great favor to ask of you, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she began, addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice, as though nothing had happened.
“A week—yes, I think it was a week ago—Dmitri Fyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action—a very ugly action.
There is a low tavern here, and in it he met that discharged officer, that captain, whom your father used to employ in some business.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this captain, seized him by the beard and dragged him out into the street and for some distance along it, in that insulting fashion.
And I am told that his son, a boy, quite a child, who is at the school here, saw it and ran beside them crying and begging for his father, appealing to every one to defend him, while every one laughed.
You must forgive me, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I cannot think without indignation of that disgraceful action of _his_ ... one of those actions of which only Dmitri Fyodorovitch would be capable in his anger ... and in his passions!
I can’t describe it even....
I’ve made inquiries about his victim, and find he is quite a poor man.
His name is Snegiryov.
He did something wrong in the army and was discharged.
And now he has sunk into terrible destitution, with his family—an unhappy family of sick children, and, I believe, an insane wife.
You see, I wanted to ask you, my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, to go to him, to find some excuse to go to them—I mean to that captain—oh, goodness, how badly I explain it!—and delicately, carefully, as only you know how to” (Alyosha blushed), “manage to give him this assistance, these two hundred roubles.
I mean, persuade him to take it....
You see it’s not by way of compensation to prevent him from taking proceedings (for I believe he meant to), but simply a token of sympathy, of a desire to assist him from me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch’s betrothed, not from himself....
He lives in Lake Street, in the house of a woman called Kalmikov....
For God’s sake, Alexey Fyodorovitch, do it for me, and now ... now I am rather ... tired.
Good-by!” She turned and disappeared behind the portière so quickly that Alyosha had not time to utter a word, though he wanted to speak.
He longed to beg her pardon, to blame himself, to say something, for his heart was full and he could not bear to go out of the room without it.
But Madame Hohlakov took him by the hand and drew him along with her.
“She is proud, she is struggling with herself; but kind, charming, generous,” she exclaimed, in a half-whisper.
“Oh, how I love her, especially sometimes, and how glad I am again of everything!
“Never trust a woman’s tears, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
I am always on the side of the men.” “Mamma, you are spoiling him,” Lise’s little voice cried from behind the door.
I am horribly to blame,” Alyosha repeated unconsoled, hiding his face in his hands in an agony of remorse for his indiscretion.
“Quite the contrary; you behaved like an angel, like an angel.
I am ready to say so a thousand times over.” “Mamma, how has he behaved like an angel?” Lise’s voice was heard again.
“Katerina Ivanovna is ill....
She is crying, struggling ... hysterics.” “What is the matter?” cried Lise, in a tone of real anxiety.
“Mamma, I shall be having hysterics, and not she!” “Lise, for mercy’s sake, don’t scream, don’t persecute me.
At your age one can’t know everything that grown-up people know.
I’ll come and tell you everything you ought to know.
Hysterics is a good sign, Alexey Fyodorovitch; it’s an excellent thing that she is hysterical.
In such cases I am always against the woman, against all these feminine tears and hysterics.
As for Ivan Fyodorovitch’s going away like that, it’s her own fault.
Oh, yes; you are not screaming.
It’s I am screaming.
Forgive your mamma; but I am delighted, delighted, delighted!
Did you notice, Alexey Fyodorovitch, how young, how young Ivan Fyodorovitch was just now when he went out, when he said all that and went out?
I thought he was so learned, such a _savant_, and all of a sudden he behaved so warmly, openly, and youthfully, with such youthful inexperience, and it was all so fine, like you....
And the way he repeated that German verse, it was just like you!
Alexey Fyodorovitch, make haste to carry out her commission, and then make haste back.
Lise, do you want anything now?
For mercy’s sake, don’t keep Alexey Fyodorovitch a minute.
He will come back to you at once.” Madame Hohlakov at last ran off.
That’s the only thing I want to know.” “For an awful piece of stupidity, Lise!
Good-by!” “Don’t dare to go away like that!” Lise was beginning.
I’ll be back directly, but I have a great, great sorrow!” And he ran out of the room.
A Laceration In The Cottage He certainly was really grieved in a way he had seldom been before.
What can I tell about such things?” he repeated to himself for the hundredth time, flushing crimson.
“Oh, being ashamed would be nothing; shame is only the punishment I deserve.
The trouble is I shall certainly have caused more unhappiness....
And Father Zossima sent me to reconcile and bring them together.
Is this the way to bring them together?” Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join their hands, and he felt fearfully ashamed again.
“Though I acted quite sincerely, I must be more sensible in the future,” he concluded suddenly, and did not even smile at his conclusion.
Katerina Ivanovna’s commission took him to Lake Street, and his brother Dmitri lived close by, in a turning out of Lake Street.
Alyosha decided to go to him in any case before going to the captain, though he had a presentiment that he would not find his brother.
He suspected that he would intentionally keep out of his way now, but he must find him anyhow.
Time was passing: the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha for one minute from the time he set off from the monastery.
There was one point which interested him particularly about Katerina Ivanovna’s commission; when she had mentioned the captain’s son, the little schoolboy who had run beside his father crying, the idea had at once struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten his finger when he, Alyosha, asked him what he had done to hurt him.
Now Alyosha felt practically certain of this, though he could not have said why.
Thinking of another subject was a relief, and he resolved to think no more about the “mischief” he had done, and not to torture himself with remorse, but to do what he had to do, let come what would.
At that thought he was completely comforted.
It made him feel stronger.
The people of the house, an old cabinet-maker, his son, and his old wife, looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha.
Maybe he has gone away,” the old man said in answer to Alyosha’s persistent inquiries.
Alyosha saw that he was answering in accordance with instructions.
When he asked whether he were not at Grushenka’s or in hiding at Foma’s (Alyosha spoke so freely on purpose), all three looked at him in alarm.
It was a decrepit little house, sunk on one side, with three windows looking into the street, and with a muddy yard, in the middle of which stood a solitary cow.
On the left of the passage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter.
In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain, one of them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers, and pointed to a door across the passage.
Yet he knew from Katerina Ivanovna’s words that the man had a family.
An answer came, but not at once, after an interval of perhaps ten seconds.
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold.
Though it was large, it was cumbered up with domestic belongings of all sorts, and there were several people in it.
There was a bedstead against the wall on each side, right and left, covered with knitted quilts.
The opposite corner was screened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string.
The three windows, which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes, gave little light, and were close shut, so that the room was not very light and rather stuffy.
A woman of genteel appearance, wearing a cotton gown, was sitting on a chair by the bed on the left.
Her face was thin and yellow, and her sunken cheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill.
But what struck Alyosha most was the expression in the poor woman’s eyes—a look of surprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride.
And while he was talking to her husband, her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other with the same haughty and questioning expression.
She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in.
She was a very sad sight, a young girl of about twenty, but hunchback and crippled “with withered legs,” as Alyosha was told afterwards.
Her crutches stood in the corner close by.
The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poor girl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha.
A man of forty-five was sitting at the table, finishing the fried eggs.
He had reddish hair and a scanty light-colored beard, very much like a wisp of tow (this comparison and the phrase “a wisp of tow” flashed at once into Alyosha’s mind for some reason, he remembered it afterwards).
It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him, as there was no other man in the room.
“It’s a monk come to beg for the monastery.
A nice place to come to!” the girl standing in the left corner said aloud.
The man spun round instantly towards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice: “No, Varvara, you are wrong.
Allow me to ask,” he turned again to Alyosha, “what has brought you to—our retreat?” Alyosha looked attentively at him.
There was something angular, flurried and irritable about him.
Though he had obviously just been drinking, he was not drunk.
There was extraordinary impudence in his expression, and yet, strange to say, at the same time there was fear.
He looked like a man who had long been kept in subjection and had submitted to it, and now had suddenly turned and was trying to assert himself.
Or, better still, like a man who wants dreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him.
In his words and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazy humor, at times spiteful and at times cringing, and continually shifting from one tone to another.
The question about “our retreat” he had asked as it were quivering all over, rolling his eyes, and skipping up so close to Alyosha that he instinctively drew back a step.
He wore checked trousers of an extremely light color, long out of fashion, and of very thin material.
They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grown out of them like a boy.
“I am Alexey Karamazov,” Alyosha began in reply.
“I quite understand that, sir,” the gentleman snapped out at once to assure him that he knew who he was already.
“I am Captain Snegiryov, sir, but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you—” “Oh, I’ve come for nothing special.
That’s what they used to say in the old comedies, ‘kindly be seated,’” and with a rapid gesture he seized an empty chair (it was a rough wooden chair, not upholstered) and set it for him almost in the middle of the room; then, taking another similar chair for himself, he sat down facing Alyosha, so close to him that their knees almost touched.
“Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov, sir, formerly a captain in the Russian infantry, put to shame for his vices, but still a captain.
“But is it used involuntarily or on purpose?” “As God’s above, it’s involuntary, and I usen’t to use it!
I see you are interested in contemporary questions, but how can I have excited your curiosity, living as I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality?” “I’ve come—about that business.” “About what business?” the captain interrupted impatiently.
“About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Alyosha blurted out awkwardly.
About my ‘wisp of tow,’ then?” He moved closer so that his knees positively knocked against Alyosha.
His lips were strangely compressed like a thread.
“What wisp of tow?” muttered Alyosha.
“He is come to complain of me, father!” cried a voice familiar to Alyosha—the voice of the schoolboy—from behind the curtain.
“I bit his finger just now.” The curtain was pulled, and Alyosha saw his assailant lying on a little bed made up on the bench and the chair in the corner under the ikons.
He was evidently unwell, and, judging by his glittering eyes, he was in a fever.
He was throwing stones with other schoolboys.
“But I am not complaining at all, I am simply telling you ...
I don’t want him to be thrashed.
That I’d take my Ilusha and thrash him before you for your satisfaction?
Would you like it done at once, sir?” said the captain, suddenly turning to Alyosha, as though he were going to attack him.
“I am sorry about your finger, sir; but instead of thrashing Ilusha, would you like me to chop off my four fingers with this knife here before your eyes to satisfy your just wrath?
I should think four fingers would be enough to satisfy your thirst for vengeance.
Every feature in his face was twitching and working; he looked extremely defiant.
“I think I understand it all now,” said Alyosha gently and sorrowfully, still keeping his seat.
“So your boy is a good boy, he loves his father, and he attacked me as the brother of your assailant....
Now I understand it,” he repeated thoughtfully.
“But my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch regrets his action, I know that, and if only it is possible for him to come to you, or better still, to meet you in that same place, he will ask your forgiveness before every one—if you wish it.” “After pulling out my beard, you mean, he will ask my forgiveness?
And he thinks that will be a satisfactory finish, doesn’t he?” “Oh, no!
On the contrary, he will do anything you like and in any way you like.” “So if I were to ask his highness to go down on his knees before me in that very tavern—‘The Metropolis’ it’s called—or in the market-place, he would do it?” “Yes, he would even go down on his knees.” “You’ve pierced me to the heart, sir.
I am only too sensible of your brother’s generosity.
Allow me to introduce my family, my two daughters and my son—my litter.
That’s a great thing the Lord has ordained for every man of my sort, sir.
For there must be some one able to love even a man like me.” “Ah, that’s perfectly true!” exclaimed Alyosha.
Some idiot comes in, and you put us to shame!” cried the girl by the window, suddenly turning to her father with a disdainful and contemptuous air.
“Wait a little, Varvara!” cried her father, speaking peremptorily but looking at her quite approvingly.
“That’s her character,” he said, addressing Alyosha again.
“And in all nature there was naught That could find favor in his eyes— or rather in the feminine: that could find favor in her eyes.
But now let me present you to my wife, Arina Petrovna.
She is crippled, she is forty-three; she can move, but very little.
Arina Petrovna, compose your countenance.
This is Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov.
Get up, Alexey Fyodorovitch.” He took him by the hand and with unexpected force pulled him up.
“You must stand up to be introduced to a lady.
It’s not the Karamazov, mamma, who ... h’m ... etcetera, but his brother, radiant with modest virtues.
Come, Arina Petrovna, come, mamma, first your hand to be kissed.” And he kissed his wife’s hand respectfully and even tenderly.
The girl at the window turned her back indignantly on the scene; an expression of extraordinary cordiality came over the haughtily inquiring face of the woman.
Tchernomazov,” she said.
“Karamazov, mamma, Karamazov.
We are of humble origin,” he whispered again.
“Well, Karamazov, or whatever it is, but I always think of Tchernomazov....
He calls me crippled, but I am not, only my legs are swollen like barrels, and I am shriveled up myself.
Once I used to be so fat, but now it’s as though I had swallowed a needle.” “We are of humble origin,” the captain muttered again.
“Oh, father, father!” the hunchback girl, who had till then been silent on her chair, said suddenly, and she hid her eyes in her handkerchief.
“Have you heard our news?” said the mother, pointing at her daughters.
I don’t mean to make any comparisons; every one to their taste.
The deacon’s wife used to come then and say, ‘Alexandr Alexandrovitch is a man of the noblest heart, but Nastasya Petrovna,’ she would say, ‘is of the brood of hell.’ ‘Well,’ I said, ‘that’s a matter of taste; but you are a little spitfire.’ ‘And you want keeping in your place,’ says she.
‘You black sword,’ said I, ‘who asked you to teach me?’ ‘But my breath,’ says she, ‘is clean, and yours is unclean.’ ‘You ask all the officers whether my breath is unclean.’ And ever since then I had it in my mind.
Not long ago I was sitting here as I am now, when I saw that very general come in who came here for Easter, and I asked him: ‘Your Excellency,’ said I, ‘can a lady’s breath be unpleasant?’ ‘Yes,’ he answered; ‘you ought to open a window-pane or open the door, for the air is not fresh here.’ And they all go on like that!
‘I won’t spoil the air,’ said I, ‘I’ll order some slippers and go away.’ My darlings, don’t blame your own mother!
Yesterday he brought me an apple.
Forgive your own mother—forgive a poor lonely creature!
Why has my breath become unpleasant to you?” And the poor mad woman broke into sobs, and tears streamed down her cheeks.
Every one loves you, every one adores you.” He began kissing both her hands again and tenderly stroking her face; taking the dinner-napkin, he began wiping away her tears.
“There, you see, you hear?” he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha, pointing to the poor imbecile.
“I see and hear,” muttered Alyosha.
“Do give over fooling, showing off your silly antics which never lead to anything!” shouted Varvara, stamping her foot with passion.
Come, put on your cap, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and I’ll put on mine.
This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina; I forgot to introduce her to you.
She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has flown down to us mortals,... if you can understand.” “There he is shaking all over, as though he is in convulsions!” Varvara went on indignantly.
“And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now, she is a heavenly angel incarnate too, and she has good reason to call me so.
Come along, Alexey Fyodorovitch, we must make an end.” And, snatching Alyosha’s hand, he drew him out of the room into the street.
And In The Open Air “The air is fresh, but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of the word.
I should be glad of your kind interest.” “I too have something important to say to you,” observed Alyosha, “only I don’t know how to begin.” “To be sure you must have business with me.
Unless you come simply to complain of the boy, and that’s hardly likely.
And, by the way, about the boy: I could not explain to you in there, but here I will describe that scene to you.
That’s the nickname they give to my beard, the schoolboys most of all.
Well, your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard, I’d done nothing, he was in a towering rage and happened to come upon me.
‘Father,’ he cried, ‘father!’ He caught hold of me, hugged me, tried to pull me away, crying to my assailant, ‘Let go, let go, it’s my father, forgive him!’—yes, he actually cried ‘forgive him.’ He clutched at that hand, that very hand, in his little hands and kissed it....
I remember his little face at that moment, I haven’t forgotten it and I never shall!” “I swear,” cried Alyosha, “that my brother will express his most deep and sincere regret, even if he has to go down on his knees in that same market-place....
I’ll make him or he is no brother of mine!” “Aha, then it’s only a suggestion!
And it does not come from him but simply from the generosity of your own warm heart.
No, in that case allow me to tell you of your brother’s highly chivalrous soldierly generosity, for he did give expression to it at the time.
He left off dragging me by my beard and released me: ‘You are an officer,’ he said, ‘and I am an officer, if you can find a decent man to be your second send me your challenge.
I will give satisfaction, though you are a scoundrel.’ That’s what he said.
A chivalrous spirit indeed!
I retired with Ilusha, and that scene is a family record imprinted for ever on Ilusha’s soul.
No, it’s not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen.
Three ladies, one a cripple and weak-minded, another a cripple and hunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever.
She is a student, dying to get back to Petersburg, to work for the emancipation of the Russian woman on the banks of the Neva.
And if I challenge him and he kills me on the spot, what then?
And worse still, if he doesn’t kill me but only cripples me: I couldn’t work, but I should still be a mouth to feed.
That’s what it means for me to challenge him to a duel.
It’s silly talk and nothing else.” “He will beg your forgiveness, he will bow down at your feet in the middle of the market-place,” cried Alyosha again, with glowing eyes.
“I did think of prosecuting him,” the captain went on, “but look in our code, could I get much compensation for a personal injury?
And then Agrafena Alexandrovna[3] sent for me and shouted at me: ‘Don’t dare to dream of it!
If you proceed against him, I’ll publish it to all the world that he beat you for your dishonesty, and then you will be prosecuted.’ I call God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands I acted, wasn’t it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch’s?
I’ll speak to my merchant too’ (that’s what she calls her old man) ‘and he will dismiss you!’ And if he dismisses me, what can I earn then from any one?
Those two are all I have to look to, for your Fyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me, for another reason, but he means to make use of papers I’ve signed to go to law against me.
He was avenging you on me as a Karamazov, I see that now.
But if only you had seen how he was throwing stones at his school-fellows!
It’s very dangerous.
They are children and stupid.
A stone may be thrown and break somebody’s head.” “That’s just what has happened.
He came home crying and groaning and now he is ill.” “And you know he attacks them first.
They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a pen-knife not long ago.” “I’ve heard about that too, it’s dangerous.
Krassotkin is an official here, we may hear more about it.” “I would advise you,” Alyosha went on warmly, “not to send him to school at all for a time till he is calmer ... and his anger is passed.” “Anger!” the captain repeated, “that’s just what it is.
He is a little creature, but it’s a mighty anger.
Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the ‘wisp of tow.’ Schoolboys are a merciless race, individually they are angels, but together, especially in schools, they are often merciless.
An ordinary boy, a weak son, would have submitted, have felt ashamed of his father, sir, but he stood up for his father against them all.
For what he suffered when he kissed your brother’s hand and cried to him ‘Forgive father, forgive him,’—that only God knows—and I, his father.
For our children—not your children, but ours—the children of the poor gentlemen looked down upon by every one—know what justice means, sir, even at nine years old.
“That very day, sir, he fell ill with fever and was delirious all night.
All that day he hardly said a word to me, but I noticed he kept watching me from the corner, though he turned to the window and pretended to be learning his lessons.
Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles, sinful man as I am, and I don’t remember much.
Mamma began crying, too—I am very fond of mamma—well, I spent my last penny drowning my troubles.
The best men amongst us are the greatest drunkards.
I lay down and I don’t remember about Ilusha, though all that day the boys had been jeering at him at school.
‘Wisp of tow,’ they shouted, ‘your father was pulled out of the tavern by his wisp of tow, you ran by and begged forgiveness.’” “On the third day when he came back from school, I saw he looked pale and wretched.
Varvara had begun snarling.
‘You fools and buffoons, can you ever do anything rational?’ ‘Quite so,’ I said, ‘can we ever do anything rational?’ For the time I turned it off like that.
So in the evening I took the boy out for a walk, for you must know we go for a walk every evening, always the same way, along which we are going now—from our gate to that great stone which lies alone in the road under the hurdle, which marks the beginning of the town pasture.
A beautiful and lonely spot, sir.
I saw his eyes flashing.
At school they say that he has paid you ten roubles for it.’ ‘No, Ilusha,’ said I, ‘I would not take money from him for anything.’ Then he began trembling all over, took my hand in both his and kissed it again.
‘Father,’ he said, ‘father, challenge him to a duel, at school they say you are a coward and won’t challenge him, and that you’ll accept ten roubles from him.’ ‘I can’t challenge him to a duel, Ilusha,’ I answered.
“But he began to come home from school badly beaten, I found out about it the day before yesterday, and you are right, I won’t send him to that school any more.
I heard that he was standing up against all the class alone and defying them all, that his heart was full of resentment, of bitterness—I was alarmed about him.
‘Father,’ he asked, ‘are the rich people stronger than any one else on earth?’ ‘Yes, Ilusha,’ I said, ‘there are no people on earth stronger than the rich.’ ‘Father,’ he said, ‘I will get rich, I will become an officer and conquer everybody.
The Tsar will reward me, I will come back here and then no one will dare—’ Then he was silent and his lips still kept trembling.
That’s how we’ll go.’ He was enchanted at that, most of all at the thought of having a horse and driving him.
We chattered a long while.
Thank God, I thought, I have diverted his mind and comforted him.
“That was the day before yesterday, in the evening, but last night everything was changed.
He had gone to school in the morning, he came back depressed, terribly depressed.
There was a wind blowing and no sun, and a feeling of autumn; twilight was coming on.
We walked along, both of us depressed.
He didn’t answer, but I felt his fingers trembling in my hand.
Ah, I thought, it’s a bad job; there’s something fresh.
And in the air there were lots of kites flapping and whirling.
He looked away and turned sideways to me.
He suddenly fell on me, threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight.
You know, when children are silent and proud, and try to keep back their tears when they are in great trouble and suddenly break down, their tears fall in streams.
With those warm streams of tears, he suddenly wetted my face.
He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions, and squeezed up against me as I sat on the stone.
‘Father,’ he kept crying, ‘dear father, how he insulted you!’ And I sobbed too.
You must thank your brother, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
No, sir, I won’t thrash my boy for your satisfaction.” He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery.
This encouraged Alyosha, whose heart was trembling on the verge of tears.
“If you could arrange it—” “Certainly, sir,” muttered the captain.
“But now listen to something quite different!” Alyosha went on.
That same brother of mine, Dmitri, has insulted his betrothed, too, a noble-hearted girl of whom you have probably heard.
I have a right to tell you of her wrong; I ought to do so, in fact, for hearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunate position, she commissioned me at once—just now—to bring you this help from her—but only from her alone, not from Dmitri, who has abandoned her.
She entreats you to accept her help....
You have both been insulted by the same man.
She thought of you only when she had just received a similar insult from him—similar in its cruelty, I mean.
She comes like a sister to help a brother in misfortune....
She told me to persuade you to take these two hundred roubles from her, as from a sister, knowing that you are in such need.
But there are brothers even on earth....
You have a generous heart ... you must see that, you must,” and Alyosha held out two new rainbow-colored hundred-rouble notes.
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence, and there was no one near.
The notes seemed to produce a tremendous impression on the captain.
He started, but at first only from astonishment.
Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing he expected.
He took the notes, and for a minute he was almost unable to answer, quite a new expression came into his face.
If I take it, I shan’t be behaving like a scoundrel?
In your eyes, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I shan’t be a scoundrel?
No, Alexey Fyodorovitch, listen, listen,” he hurried, touching Alyosha with both his hands.
“You are persuading me to take it, saying that it’s a sister sends it, but inwardly, in your heart won’t you feel contempt for me if I take it, eh?” “No, no, on my salvation I swear I shan’t!
Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch, at a moment like this you must listen, for you can’t understand what these two hundred roubles mean to me now.” The poor fellow went on rising gradually into a sort of incoherent, almost wild enthusiasm.
He was thrown off his balance and talked extremely fast, as though afraid he would not be allowed to say all he had to say.
“Besides its being honestly acquired from a ‘sister,’ so highly respected and revered, do you know that now I can look after mamma and Nina, my hunchback angel daughter?
Doctor Herzenstube came to me in the kindness of his heart and was examining them both for a whole hour.
‘I can make nothing of it,’ said he, but he prescribed a mineral water which is kept at a chemist’s here.
He said it would be sure to do her good, and he ordered baths, too, with some medicine in them.
The mineral water costs thirty copecks, and she’d need to drink forty bottles perhaps; so I took the prescription and laid it on the shelf under the ikons, and there it lies.
And he ordered hot baths for Nina with something dissolved in them, morning and evening.
But how can we carry out such a cure in our mansion, without servants, without help, without a bath, and without water?
Nina is rheumatic all over, I don’t think I told you that.
All her right side aches at night, she is in agony, and, would you believe it, the angel bears it without groaning for fear of waking us.
We eat what we can get, and she’ll only take the leavings, what you’d scarcely give to a dog.
‘I am a useless cripple, no good to any one.’ As though she were not worth it, when she is the saving of all of us with her angelic sweetness.
And don’t judge Varvara harshly either, she is an angel too, she, too, has suffered wrong.
She came to us for the summer, and she brought sixteen roubles she had earned by lessons and saved up, to go back with to Petersburg in September, that is now.
She is like an overdriven horse with all of us on her back.
And mamma is capricious and tearful and insane!
And now I can get a servant with this money, you understand, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I can get medicines for the dear creatures, I can send my student to Petersburg, I can buy beef, I can feed them properly.
Good Lord, but it’s a dream!” Alyosha was delighted that he had brought him such happiness and that the poor fellow had consented to be made happy.
“Stay, Alexey Fyodorovitch, stay,” the captain began to talk with frenzied rapidity, carried away by a new day-dream.
We will buy a horse and cart, a black horse, he insists on its being black, and we will set off as we pretended the other day.
I have an old friend, a lawyer in K. province, and I heard through a trustworthy man that if I were to go he’d give me a place as clerk in his office, so, who knows, maybe he would.
“Katerina Ivanovna will send you as much more as you need, and you know, I have money too, take what you want, as you would from a brother, from a friend, you can give it back later.... (You’ll get rich, you’ll get rich!) And you know you couldn’t have a better idea than to move to another province!
It would be the saving of you, especially of your boy—and you ought to go quickly, before the winter, before the cold.
You must write to us when you are there, and we will always be brothers....
But glancing at him he stopped short.
The man was standing with his neck outstretched and his lips protruding, with a pale and frenzied face.
His lips were moving as though trying to articulate something; no sound came, but still his lips moved.
“What is it?” asked Alyosha, startled.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch ...
I ... you,” muttered the captain, faltering, looking at him with a strange, wild, fixed stare, and an air of desperate resolution.
“I ... you, sir ... wouldn’t you like me to show you a little trick I know?” he murmured, suddenly, in a firm rapid whisper, his voice no longer faltering.
“What trick?” “A pretty trick,” whispered the captain.
What trick?” Alyosha cried, now thoroughly alarmed.
“Why, look,” squealed the captain suddenly, and showing him the two notes which he had been holding by one corner between his thumb and forefinger during the conversation, he crumpled them up savagely and squeezed them tight in his right hand.
“Do you see, do you see?” he shrieked, pale and infuriated.
And suddenly flinging up his hand, he threw the crumpled notes on the sand.
“Do you see?” he shrieked again, pointing to them.
“Look there!” And with wild fury he began trampling them under his heel, gasping and exclaiming as he did so: “So much for your money!
So much for your money!” Suddenly he darted back and drew himself up before Alyosha, and his whole figure expressed unutterable pride.
Then he turned quickly and began to run; but he had not run five steps before he turned completely round and kissed his hand to Alyosha.
This time his face was not contorted with laughter, but quivering all over with tears.
In a tearful, faltering, sobbing voice he cried: “What should I say to my boy if I took money from you for our shame?” And then he ran on without turning.
Alyosha looked after him, inexpressibly grieved.
They were very much crushed and crumpled, and had been pressed into the sand, but were uninjured and even rustled like new ones when Alyosha unfolded them and smoothed them out.
After smoothing them out, he folded them up, put them in his pocket and went to Katerina Ivanovna to report on the success of her commission.
The Engagement Madame Hohlakov was again the first to meet Alyosha.
She was flustered; something important had happened.
Katerina Ivanovna’s hysterics had ended in a fainting fit, and then “a terrible, awful weakness had followed, she lay with her eyes turned up and was delirious.
They had sent for Herzenstube; they had sent for the aunts.
The aunts were already here, but Herzenstube had not yet come.
She was unconscious now, and what if it turned to brain fever!” Madame Hohlakov looked gravely alarmed.
“This is serious, serious,” she added at every word, as though nothing that had happened to her before had been serious.
Alyosha listened with distress, and was beginning to describe his adventures, but she interrupted him at the first words.
“Lise,” she whispered almost in his ear, “Lise has greatly surprised me just now, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch.
She touched me, too, and so my heart forgives her everything.
Only fancy, as soon as you had gone, she began to be truly remorseful for having laughed at you to-day and yesterday, though she was not laughing at you, but only joking.
But she was seriously sorry for it, almost ready to cry, so that I was quite surprised.
She has never been really sorry for laughing at me, but has only made a joke of it.
And you know she is laughing at me every minute.
She thinks a great deal of your opinion, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and don’t take offense or be wounded by her if you can help it.
She said just now that you were a friend of her childhood, ‘the greatest friend of her childhood’—just think of that—‘greatest friend’—and what about me?
She has very strong feelings and memories, and, what’s more, she uses these phrases, most unexpected words, which come out all of a sudden when you least expect them.
She spoke lately about a pine-tree, for instance: there used to be a pine-tree standing in our garden in her early childhood.
Very likely it’s standing there still; so there’s no need to speak in the past tense.
Pine-trees are not like people, Alexey Fyodorovitch, they don’t change quickly.
‘Mamma,’ she said, ‘I remember this pine-tree as in a dream,’ only she said something so original about it that I can’t repeat it.
Besides, I’ve forgotten it.
Alexey Fyodorovitch, I’ve been out of my mind twice in my life.
Go to Lise, cheer her up, as you always can so charmingly.
Lise,” she cried, going to her door, “here I’ve brought you Alexey Fyodorovitch, whom you insulted so.
He is not at all angry, I assure you; on the contrary, he is surprised that you could suppose so.” “_Merci, maman._ Come in, Alexey Fyodorovitch.” Alyosha went in.
Lise looked rather embarrassed, and at once flushed crimson.
She was evidently ashamed of something, and, as people always do in such cases, she began immediately talking of other things, as though they were of absorbing interest to her at the moment.
“Mamma has just told me all about the two hundred roubles, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and your taking them to that poor officer ... and she told me all the awful story of how he had been insulted ... and you know, although mamma muddles things ... she always rushes from one thing to another ...
Well, did you give him the money and how is that poor man getting on?” “The fact is I didn’t give it to him, and it’s a long story,” answered Alyosha, as though he, too, could think of nothing but his regret at having failed, yet Lise saw perfectly well that he, too, looked away, and that he, too, was trying to talk of other things.
Alyosha sat down to the table and began to tell his story, but at the first words he lost his embarrassment and gained the whole of Lise’s attention as well.
He spoke with deep feeling, under the influence of the strong impression he had just received, and he succeeded in telling his story well and circumstantially.
In old days in Moscow he had been fond of coming to Lise and describing to her what had just happened to him, what he had read, or what he remembered of his childhood.
Sometimes they had made day-dreams and woven whole romances together—generally cheerful and amusing ones.
Now they both felt suddenly transported to the old days in Moscow, two years before.
Lise was extremely touched by his story.
Alyosha described Ilusha with warm feeling.
When he finished describing how the luckless man trampled on the money, Lise could not help clasping her hands and crying out: “So you didn’t give him the money!
Oh, dear, you ought to have run after him!” “No, Lise; it’s better I didn’t run after him,” said Alyosha, getting up from his chair and walking thoughtfully across the room.
Now they are without food and their case is hopeless?” “Not hopeless, for the two hundred roubles will still come to them.
To-morrow he will be sure to take it,” said Alyosha, pacing up and down, pondering.
“You see, Lise,” he went on, stopping suddenly before her, “I made one blunder, but that, even that, is all for the best.” “What blunder, and why is it for the best?” “I’ll tell you.
He is a man of weak and timorous character; he has suffered so much and is very good-natured.
I keep wondering why he took offense so suddenly, for I assure you, up to the last minute, he did not know that he was going to trample on the notes.
And I think now that there was a great deal to offend him ... and it could not have been otherwise in his position....
To begin with, he was sore at having been so glad of the money in my presence and not having concealed it from me.
If he had been pleased, but not so much; if he had not shown it; if he had begun affecting scruples and difficulties, as other people do when they take money, he might still endure to take it.
But he was too genuinely delighted, and that was mortifying.
Ah, Lise, he is a good and truthful man—that’s the worst of the whole business.
All the while he talked, his voice was so weak, so broken, he talked so fast, so fast, he kept laughing such a laugh, or perhaps he was crying—yes, I am sure he was crying, he was so delighted—and he talked about his daughters—and about the situation he could get in another town....
He is one of those awfully sensitive poor people.
What had made him feel most ashamed was that he had given in too soon and accepted me as a friend, you see.
At first he almost flew at me and tried to intimidate me, but as soon as he saw the money he had begun embracing me; he kept touching me with his hands.
This must have been how he came to feel it all so humiliating, and then I made that blunder, a very important one.
I suddenly said to him that if he had not money enough to move to another town, we would give it to him, and, indeed, I myself would give him as much as he wanted out of my own money.
You know, Lise, it’s awfully hard for a man who has been injured, when other people look at him as though they were his benefactors....
And the worst of it was that though he did not know, up to the very last minute, that he would trample on the notes, he had a kind of presentiment of it, I am sure of that.
That’s just what made him so ecstatic, that he had that presentiment....
And though it’s so dreadful, it’s all for the best.
In fact, I believe nothing better could have happened.” “Why, why could nothing better have happened?” cried Lise, looking with great surprise at Alyosha.
“Because if he had taken the money, in an hour after getting home, he would be crying with mortification, that’s just what would have happened.
And most likely he would have come to me early to-morrow, and perhaps have flung the notes at me and trampled upon them as he did just now.
But now he has gone home awfully proud and triumphant, though he knows he has ‘ruined himself.’ So now nothing could be easier than to make him accept the two hundred roubles by to-morrow, for he has already vindicated his honor, tossed away the money, and trampled it under foot....
He couldn’t know when he did it that I should bring it to him again to-morrow, and yet he is in terrible need of that money.
Though he is proud of himself now, yet even to-day he’ll be thinking what a help he has lost.
He will think of it more than ever at night, will dream of it, and by to-morrow morning he may be ready to run to me to ask forgiveness.
I understand that perfectly now.
You know, I scarcely respected you till now—that is I respected you but on an equal footing; but now I shall begin to respect you on a higher footing.
Isn’t there in all our analysis—I mean your analysis ... no, better call it ours—aren’t we showing contempt for him, for that poor man—in analyzing his soul like this, as it were, from above, eh?
In deciding so certainly that he will take the money?” “No, Lise, it’s not contempt,” Alyosha answered, as though he had prepared himself for the question.
“I was thinking of that on the way here.
How can it be contempt when we are all like him, when we are all just the same as he is?
I don’t know about you, Lise, but I consider that I have a sordid soul in many ways, and his soul is not sordid; on the contrary, full of fine feeling....
No, Lise, I have no contempt for him.
Do you know, Lise, my elder told me once to care for most people exactly as one would for children, and for some of them as one would for the sick in hospitals.” “Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, dear, let us care for people as we would for the sick!” “Let us, Lise; I am ready.
Though I am not altogether ready in myself.
I am sometimes very impatient and at other times I don’t see things.
It’s different with you.” “Ah, I don’t believe it!
Alexey Fyodorovitch, how happy I am!” “I am so glad you say so, Lise.” “Alexey Fyodorovitch, you are wonderfully good, but you are sometimes sort of formal....
Go to the door, open it gently, and see whether mamma is listening,” said Lise, in a nervous, hurried whisper.
Alyosha went, opened the door, and reported that no one was listening.
“Come here, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” Lise went on, flushing redder and redder.
I have to make a great confession, I didn’t write to you yesterday in joke, but in earnest,” and she hid her eyes with her hand.
It was evident that she was greatly ashamed of the confession.
Suddenly she snatched his hand and impulsively kissed it three times.
“Ah, Lise, what a good thing!” cried Alyosha joyfully.
“You know, I was perfectly sure you were in earnest.” “Sure?
Upon my word!” She put aside his hand, but did not leave go of it, blushing hotly, and laughing a little happy laugh.
“I kiss his hand and he says, ‘What a good thing!’” But her reproach was undeserved.
Alyosha, too, was greatly overcome.
“I should like to please you always, Lise, but I don’t know how to do it,” he muttered, blushing too.
Why, that’s impertinence—that’s what it is.” “Why, was it wrong of me to feel sure?” Alyosha asked, laughing suddenly.
“Ah, Alyosha, on the contrary, it was delightfully right,” cried Lise, looking tenderly and happily at him.
Suddenly he stooped down and kissed her on her lips.
Alyosha was terribly abashed.
“And in that dress!” she ejaculated in the midst of her mirth.
But she suddenly ceased laughing and became serious, almost stern.
We are not ready for that yet, and we shall have a long time to wait,” she ended suddenly.
“Tell me rather why you who are so clever, so intellectual, so observant, choose a little idiot, an invalid like me?
I shall be leaving the monastery altogether in a few days.
I have been thinking it over.
In the first place, you’ve known me from a child and you’ve a great many qualities I haven’t.
You are more light-hearted than I am; above all, you are more innocent than I am.
Ah, you don’t know, but I, too, am a Karamazov.
How?” “Yes, Lise, your question just now: whether we weren’t showing contempt for that poor man by dissecting his soul—that was the question of a sufferer....
You see, I don’t know how to express it, but any one who thinks of such questions is capable of suffering.
Why are you taking it away?” murmured Lise in a failing voice, weak with happiness.
What will you wear when you come out of the monastery?
Don’t laugh, don’t be angry, it’s very, very important to me.” “I haven’t thought about the suit, Lise; but I’ll wear whatever you like.” “I should like you to have a dark blue velvet coat, a white piqué waistcoat, and a soft gray felt hat....
Tell me, did you believe that I didn’t care for you when I said I didn’t mean what I wrote?” “No, I didn’t believe it.” “Oh, you insupportable person, you are incorrigible.” “You see, I knew that you—seemed to care for me, but I pretended to believe that you didn’t care for me to make it—easier for you.” “That makes it worse!
I decided I would ask you for my letter, and if you brought it out calmly and gave it to me (as might have been expected from you) it would mean that you did not love me at all, that you felt nothing, and were simply a stupid boy, good for nothing, and that I am ruined.
Here it is.” Alyosha pulled the letter out laughing, and showed it her at a distance.
It’s very precious to me,” he added suddenly, with strong feeling, and again he flushed.
“It always will be, and I won’t give it up to any one!” Lise looked at him joyfully.
“Alyosha,” she murmured again, “look at the door.
Isn’t mamma listening?” “Very well, Lise, I’ll look; but wouldn’t it be better not to look?
Why suspect your mother of such meanness?” “What meanness?
As for her spying on her daughter, it’s her right, it’s not meanness!” cried Lise, firing up.
“You may be sure, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that when I am a mother, if I have a daughter like myself I shall certainly spy on her!” “Really, Lise?
That’s not right.” “Oh, my goodness!
What has meanness to do with it?
If she were listening to some ordinary worldly conversation, it would be meanness, but when her own daughter is shut up with a young man....
Listen, Alyosha, do you know I shall spy upon you as soon as we are married, and let me tell you I shall open all your letters and read them, so you may as well be prepared.” “Yes, of course, if so—” muttered Alyosha, “only it’s not right.” “Ah, how contemptuous!
Of course, it’s very wrong to spy on people, and, of course, I am not right and you are, only I shall spy on you all the same.” “Do, then; you won’t find out anything,” laughed Alyosha.
We must decide that too.” “I shall be delighted to, Lise, and certain to, only not in the most important things.
Even if you don’t agree with me, I shall do my duty in the most important things.” “That’s right; but let me tell you I am ready to give in to you not only in the most important matters, but in everything.
And I am ready to vow to do so now—in everything, and for all my life!” cried Lise fervently, “and I’ll do it gladly, gladly!
And though I shall be awfully tempted to spy, I know that I won’t do it since you consider it dishonorable.
You are my conscience now....
Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch, why have you been so sad lately—both yesterday and to-day?
I know you have a lot of anxiety and trouble, but I see you have some special grief besides, some secret one, perhaps?” “Yes, Lise, I have a secret one, too,” answered Alyosha mournfully.
Can you tell me?” asked Lise with timid entreaty.
“I’ll tell you later, Lise—afterwards,” said Alyosha, confused.
“Now you wouldn’t understand it perhaps—and perhaps I couldn’t explain it.” “I know your brothers and your father are worrying you, too.” “Yes, my brothers too,” murmured Alyosha, pondering.
“I don’t like your brother Ivan, Alyosha,” said Lise suddenly.
He noticed this remark with some surprise, but did not answer it.
“My brothers are destroying themselves,” he went on, “my father, too.
And they are destroying others with them.
It’s ‘the primitive force of the Karamazovs,’ as Father Païssy said the other day, a crude, unbridled, earthly force.
I only know that I, too, am a Karamazov....
There was something too mysterious, too subjective in these last words of his, perhaps obscure to himself, but yet torturing him.
For the future we will be together.” “Yes, together, together!
Henceforward we shall be always together, all our lives!
Shall we be happy, shall we?” “I believe we shall, Lise.” Alyosha thought it better not to go in to Madame Hohlakov and was going out of the house without saying good-by to her.
But no sooner had he opened the door than he found Madame Hohlakov standing before him.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch, this is awful.
This is all childish nonsense and ridiculous.
I trust you won’t dream—It’s foolishness, nothing but foolishness!” she said, attacking him at once.
“Only don’t tell her that,” said Alyosha, “or she will be upset, and that’s bad for her now.” “Sensible advice from a sensible young man.
Am I to understand that you only agreed with her from compassion for her invalid state, because you didn’t want to irritate her by contradiction?” “Oh, no, not at all.
I was quite serious in what I said,” Alyosha declared stoutly.
“To be serious about it is impossible, unthinkable, and in the first place I shall never be at home to you again, and I shall take her away, you may be sure of that.” “But why?” asked Alyosha.
We may have to wait another year and a half.” “Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that’s true, of course, and you’ll have time to quarrel and separate a thousand times in a year and a half.
Though it’s such nonsense, it’s a great blow to me.
You are Tchatsky and she is Sofya, and, only fancy, I’ve run down to meet you on the stairs, and in the play the fatal scene takes place on the staircase.
So this is the explanation of her dreadful night and her hysterics of late!
It means love to the daughter but death to the mother.
Tell me, how is Katerina Ivanovna now?
I must know.” “She still lies in delirium; she has not regained consciousness.
Her aunts are here; but they do nothing but sigh and give themselves airs.
Herzenstube came, and he was so alarmed that I didn’t know what to do for him.
He was driven home in my carriage.
In the name of all that’s holy, in the name of your dying elder, show me that letter, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
Even if she sanctioned it, I wouldn’t.
I am coming to-morrow, and if you like, we can talk over many things, but now good-by!” And Alyosha ran downstairs and into the street.
Smerdyakov With A Guitar He had no time to lose indeed.
Even while he was saying good-by to Lise, the thought had struck him that he must attempt some stratagem to find his brother Dmitri, who was evidently keeping out of his way.
Alyosha’s whole soul turned to the monastery, to his dying saint, but the necessity of seeing Dmitri outweighed everything.
The conviction that a great inevitable catastrophe was about to happen grew stronger in Alyosha’s mind with every hour.
What that catastrophe was, and what he would say at that moment to his brother, he could perhaps not have said definitely.
“Even if my benefactor must die without me, anyway I won’t have to reproach myself all my life with the thought that I might have saved something and did not, but passed by and hastened home.
If I do as I intend, I shall be following his great precept.” His plan was to catch his brother Dmitri unawares, to climb over the fence, as he had the day before, get into the garden and sit in the summer-house.
If Dmitri were not there, thought Alyosha, he would not announce himself to Foma or the women of the house, but would remain hidden in the summer-house, even if he had to wait there till evening.
If, as before, Dmitri were lying in wait for Grushenka to come, he would be very likely to come to the summer-house.
Alyosha did not, however, give much thought to the details of his plan, but resolved to act upon it, even if it meant not getting back to the monastery that day.
Everything happened without hindrance, he climbed over the hurdle almost in the same spot as the day before, and stole into the summer-house unseen.
The woman of the house and Foma too, if he were here, might be loyal to his brother and obey his instructions, and so refuse to let Alyosha come into the garden, or might warn Dmitri that he was being sought and inquired for.
Though the day was just as fine as yesterday, it seemed a wretched little place this time.
Foolish and irrelevant ideas strayed about his mind, as they always do in a time of tedious waiting.
He wondered, for instance, why he had sat down precisely in the same place as before, why not in the other seat.
At last he felt very depressed—depressed by suspense and uncertainty.
But he had not sat there more than a quarter of an hour, when he suddenly heard the thrum of a guitar somewhere quite close.
People were sitting, or had only just sat down, somewhere in the bushes not more than twenty paces away.
Alyosha suddenly recollected that on coming out of the summer-house the day before, he had caught a glimpse of an old green low garden-seat among the bushes on the left, by the fence.
A man’s voice suddenly began singing in a sugary falsetto, accompanying himself on the guitar: With invincible force I am bound to my dear.
Another voice, a woman’s, suddenly asked insinuatingly and bashfully, though with mincing affectation: “Why haven’t you been to see us for so long, Pavel Fyodorovitch?
Why do you always look down upon us?” “Not at all,” answered a man’s voice politely, but with emphatic dignity.
It was clear that the man had the best of the position, and that the woman was making advances.
“I believe the man must be Smerdyakov,” thought Alyosha, “from his voice.
And the lady must be the daughter of the house here, who has come from Moscow, the one who wears the dress with a tail and goes to Marfa for soup.” “I am awfully fond of verses of all kinds, if they rhyme,” the woman’s voice continued.
“It was even better last time,” observed the woman’s voice.
I suppose you’ve forgotten to-day.” “Poetry is rubbish!” said Smerdyakov curtly.
I am very fond of poetry.” “So far as it’s poetry, it’s essential rubbish.
Consider yourself, who ever talks in rhyme?
And if we were all to talk in rhyme, even though it were decreed by government, we shouldn’t say much, should we?
Poetry is no good, Marya Kondratyevna.” “How clever you are!
How is it you’ve gone so deep into everything?” The woman’s voice was more and more insinuating.
I could have known more than that, if it had not been for my destiny from my childhood up.
I would have shot a man in a duel if he called me names because I am descended from a filthy beggar and have no father.
It had reached them from here, thanks to Grigory Vassilyevitch.
Grigory Vassilyevitch blames me for rebelling against my birth, but I would have sanctioned their killing me before I was born that I might not have come into the world at all.
They used to say in the market, and your mamma too, with great lack of delicacy, set off telling me that her hair was like a mat on her head, and that she was short of five foot by a wee bit.
She wanted to make it touching, a regular peasant’s feeling.
Can a Russian peasant be said to feel, in comparison with an educated man?
He can’t be said to have feeling at all, in his ignorance.
From my childhood up when I hear ‘a wee bit,’ I am ready to burst with rage.
I hate all Russia, Marya Kondratyevna.” “If you’d been a cadet in the army, or a young hussar, you wouldn’t have talked like that, but would have drawn your saber to defend all Russia.” “I don’t want to be a hussar, Marya Kondratyevna, and, what’s more, I should like to abolish all soldiers.” “And when an enemy comes, who is going to defend us?” “There’s no need of defense.
In 1812 there was a great invasion of Russia by Napoleon, first Emperor of the French, father of the present one, and it would have been a good thing if they had conquered us.
A clever nation would have conquered a very stupid one and annexed it.
We should have had quite different institutions.” “Are they so much better in their own country than we are?
I wouldn’t change a dandy I know of for three young Englishmen,” observed Marya Kondratyevna tenderly, doubtless accompanying her words with a most languishing glance.
“That’s as one prefers.” “But you are just like a foreigner—just like a most gentlemanly foreigner.
They are swindlers, only there the scoundrel wears polished boots and here he grovels in filth and sees no harm in it.
The Russian people want thrashing, as Fyodor Pavlovitch said very truly yesterday, though he is mad, and all his children.” “You said yourself you had such a respect for Ivan Fyodorovitch.” “But he said I was a stinking lackey.
He is mistaken there.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in his behavior, in his mind, and in his poverty.
He doesn’t know how to do anything, and yet he is respected by every one.
I may be only a soup-maker, but with luck I could open a café restaurant in Petrovka, in Moscow, for my cookery is something special, and there’s no one in Moscow, except the foreigners, whose cookery is anything special.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is a beggar, but if he were to challenge the son of the first count in the country, he’d fight him.
For he is ever so much stupider than I am.
Look at the money he has wasted without any need!” “It must be lovely, a duel,” Marya Kondratyevna observed suddenly.
“How so?” “It must be so dreadful and so brave, especially when young officers with pistols in their hands pop at one another for the sake of some lady.
Ah, if only girls were allowed to look on, I’d give anything to see one!” “It’s all very well when you are firing at some one, but when he is firing straight in your mug, you must feel pretty silly.
You’d be glad to run away, Marya Kondratyevna.” “You don’t mean you would run away?” But Smerdyakov did not deign to reply.
After a moment’s silence the guitar tinkled again, and he sang again in the same falsetto: Whatever you may say, I shall go far away.
Then something unexpected happened.
Alyosha suddenly sneezed.
He found Smerdyakov dressed up and wearing polished boots, his hair pomaded, and perhaps curled.
His companion was the daughter of the house, wearing a light-blue dress with a train two yards long.
She was young and would not have been bad-looking, but that her face was so round and terribly freckled.
“Will my brother Dmitri soon be back?” asked Alyosha with as much composure as he could.
Smerdyakov got up slowly; Marya Kondratyevna rose too.
“How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch?
It’s not as if I were his keeper,” answered Smerdyakov quietly, distinctly, and superciliously.
“But I simply asked whether you do know?” Alyosha explained.
“I know nothing of his whereabouts and don’t want to.” “But my brother told me that you let him know all that goes on in the house, and promised to let him know when Agrafena Alexandrovna comes.” Smerdyakov turned a deliberate, unmoved glance upon him.
“I came in from the back-alley, over the fence, and went straight to the summer-house.
I hope you’ll forgive me,” he added, addressing Marya Kondratyevna.
“I was in a hurry to find my brother.” “Ach, as though we could take it amiss in you!” drawled Marya Kondratyevna, flattered by Alyosha’s apology.
“For Dmitri Fyodorovitch often goes to the summer-house in that way.
Believe me, it’s on business of great importance to him.” “He never tells us,” lisped Marya Kondratyevna.
“Though I used to come here as a friend,” Smerdyakov began again, “Dmitri Fyodorovitch has pestered me in a merciless way even here by his incessant questions about the master.
Who’s coming and going?’ and can’t I tell him something more.
Twice already he’s threatened me with death.” “With death?” Alyosha exclaimed in surprise.
“Do you suppose he’d think much of that, with his temper, which you had a chance of observing yourself yesterday?
He says if I let Agrafena Alexandrovna in and she passes the night there, I’ll be the first to suffer for it.
I am terribly afraid of him, and if I were not even more afraid of doing so, I ought to let the police know.
God only knows what he might not do!” “His honor said to him the other day, ‘I’ll pound you in a mortar!’” added Marya Kondratyevna.
“Oh, if it’s pounding in a mortar, it may be only talk,” observed Alyosha.
“If I could meet him, I might speak to him about that too.” “Well, the only thing I can tell you is this,” said Smerdyakov, as though thinking better of it; “I am here as an old friend and neighbor, and it would be odd if I didn’t come.
On the other hand, Ivan Fyodorovitch sent me first thing this morning to your brother’s lodging in Lake Street, without a letter, but with a message to Dmitri Fyodorovitch to go to dine with him at the restaurant here, in the market-place.
I went, but didn’t find Dmitri Fyodorovitch at home, though it was eight o’clock.
‘He’s been here, but he is quite gone,’ those were the very words of his landlady.
It’s as though there was an understanding between them.
Perhaps at this moment he is in the restaurant with Ivan Fyodorovitch, for Ivan Fyodorovitch has not been home to dinner and Fyodor Pavlovitch dined alone an hour ago, and is gone to lie down.
But I beg you most particularly not to speak of me and of what I have told you, for he’d kill me for nothing at all.” “Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant to-day?” repeated Alyosha quickly.
“That’s so.” “The Metropolis tavern in the market-place?” “The very same.” “That’s quite likely,” cried Alyosha, much excited.
“Thank you, Smerdyakov; that’s important.
I’ll go there at once.” “Don’t betray me,” Smerdyakov called after him.
Don’t be anxious.” “But wait a minute, I’ll open the gate to you,” cried Marya Kondratyevna.
“No; it’s a short cut, I’ll get over the fence again.” What he had heard threw Alyosha into great agitation.
It was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monastic dress, but he could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and call them down.
I shall be awfully grateful.” “To be sure I can, only I don’t quite know whether in this dress—” “But I am in a room apart.
The Brothers Make Friends Ivan was not, however, in a separate room, but only in a place shut off by a screen, so that it was unseen by other people in the room.
It was the first room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall.
Waiters were continually darting to and fro in it.
The only customer in the room was an old retired military man drinking tea in a corner.
But there was the usual bustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern; there were shouts for the waiters, the sound of popping corks, the click of billiard balls, the drone of the organ.
Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit this tavern and disliked taverns in general.
So he must have come here, he reflected, simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement.
“Shall I order you fish, soup or anything.
You don’t live on tea alone, I suppose,” cried Ivan, apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha.
He had finished dinner and was drinking tea.
“Let me have soup, and tea afterwards, I am hungry,” said Alyosha gayly.
You remember how you used to love cherry jam when you were little?” “You remember that?
“I remember everything, Alyosha, I remember you till you were eleven, I was nearly fifteen.
There’s such a difference between fifteen and eleven that brothers are never companions at those ages.
Then, when you came to Moscow yourself, we only met once somewhere, I believe.
And now I’ve been here more than three months, and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other.
To-morrow I am going away, and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see you to say good-by and just then you passed.” “Were you very anxious to see me, then?” “Very.
There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes, and I can’t endure that.
Though I am laughing, I am serious.
I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by, even if they are such little fellows as you.
Your expectant eyes ceased to annoy me, I grew fond of them in the end, those expectant eyes.
But I understand something in you, and I did not understand it till this morning.” “What’s that?” laughed Ivan.
Now, have I insulted you dreadfully?” “On the contrary, I am struck by a coincidence,” cried Ivan, warmly and good-humoredly.
“Would you believe it that ever since that scene with her, I have thought of nothing else but my youthful greenness, and just as though you guessed that, you begin about it.
But till I am thirty, I know that my youth will triumph over everything—every disillusionment, every disgust with life.
I’ve asked myself many times whether there is in the world any despair that would overcome this frantic and perhaps unseemly thirst for life in me, and I’ve come to the conclusion that there isn’t, that is till I am thirty, and then I shall lose it of myself, I fancy.
Some driveling consumptive moralists—and poets especially—often call that thirst for life base.
It’s a feature of the Karamazovs, it’s true, that thirst for life regardless of everything; you have it no doubt too, but why is it base?
The centripetal force on our planet is still fearfully strong, Alyosha.
Though I may not believe in the order of the universe, yet I love the sticky little leaves as they open in spring.
I love the blue sky, I love some people, whom one loves you know sometimes without knowing why.
And yet I know that I am only going to a graveyard, but it’s a most precious graveyard, that’s what it is!
Precious are the dead that lie there, every stone over them speaks of such burning life in the past, of such passionate faith in their work, their truth, their struggle and their science, that I know I shall fall on the ground and kiss those stones and weep over them; though I’m convinced in my heart that it’s long been nothing but a graveyard.
It’s not a matter of intellect or logic, it’s loving with one’s inside, with one’s stomach.
One loves the first strength of one’s youth.
Do you understand anything of my tirade, Alyosha?” Ivan laughed suddenly.
“I understand too well, Ivan.
“I think every one should love life above everything in the world.” “Love life more than the meaning of it?” “Certainly, love it, regardless of logic as you say, it must be regardless of logic, and it’s only then one will understand the meaning of it.
I am so glad of our talk, Ivan.” “I see you are feeling inspired.
I am awfully fond of such _professions de foi_ from such—novices.
You are a steadfast person, Alexey.
Is it true that you mean to leave the monastery?” “Yes, my elder sends me out into the world.” “We shall see each other then in the world.
He means it only too seriously, though he is a buffoon.
He stands on a firm rock, too, he stands on his sensuality—though after we are thirty, indeed, there may be nothing else to stand on....
But to hang on to seventy is nasty, better only to thirty; one might retain ‘a shadow of nobility’ by deceiving oneself.
Have you seen Dmitri to-day?” “No, but I saw Smerdyakov,” and Alyosha rapidly, though minutely, described his meeting with Smerdyakov.
Ivan began listening anxiously and questioned him.
Ivan frowned and pondered.
“Are you frowning on Smerdyakov’s account?” asked Alyosha.
Damn him, I certainly did want to see Dmitri, but now there’s no need,” said Ivan reluctantly.
“But are you really going so soon, brother?” “Yes.” “What of Dmitri and father? how will it end?” asked Alyosha anxiously.
Am I my brother Dmitri’s keeper?” Ivan snapped irritably, but then he suddenly smiled bitterly.
“Cain’s answer about his murdered brother, wasn’t it?
Perhaps that’s what you’re thinking at this moment?
I’ve finished what I had to do, and I am going.
Do you imagine I am jealous of Dmitri, that I’ve been trying to steal his beautiful Katerina Ivanovna for the last three months?
Nonsense, I had business of my own.
I finished it just now, you were witness.” “At Katerina Ivanovna’s?” “Yes, and I’ve released myself once for all.
I had my own business to settle with Katerina Ivanovna.
You know, on the contrary, that Dmitri behaved as though there was an understanding between us.
I didn’t ask him to do it, but he solemnly handed her over to me and gave us his blessing.
Would you believe, it, I sat here eating my dinner and was nearly ordering champagne to celebrate my first hour of freedom.
I could never have guessed even yesterday, how easy it would be to put an end to it if I wanted.” “You are speaking of your love, Ivan?” “Of my love, if you like.
I sat watching over her ... and all at once it’s collapsed!
I spoke this morning with inspiration, but I went away and roared with laughter.
Yes, it’s the literal truth.” “You seem very merry about it now,” observed Alyosha, looking into his face, which had suddenly grown brighter.
And yet how she attracted me!
How attractive she was just now when I made my speech!
And do you know she attracts me awfully even now, yet how easy it is to leave her.
Do you think I am boasting?” “No, only perhaps it wasn’t love.” “Alyosha,” laughed Ivan, “don’t make reflections about love, it’s unseemly for you.
How you rushed into the discussion this morning!
I’ve forgotten to kiss you for it....
But how she tormented me!
It certainly was sitting by a ‘laceration.’ Ah, she knew how I loved her!
She loved me and not Dmitri,” Ivan insisted gayly.
“Her feeling for Dmitri was simply a self-laceration.
All I told her just now was perfectly true, but the worst of it is, it may take her fifteen or twenty years to find out that she doesn’t care for Dmitri, and loves me whom she torments, and perhaps she may never find it out at all, in spite of her lesson to-day.
What happened after I departed?” Alyosha told him she had been hysterical, and that she was now, he heard, unconscious and delirious.
“Isn’t Madame Hohlakov laying it on?” “I think not.” “I must find out.
Nobody dies of hysterics, though.
God gave woman hysterics as a relief.
Alyosha, shall I call for some champagne?
Ah, if only you knew how glad I am!” “No, brother, we had better not drink,” said Alyosha suddenly.
“Besides I feel somehow depressed.” “Yes, you’ve been depressed a long time, I’ve noticed it.” “Have you settled to go to-morrow morning, then?” “Morning?
I should have left long ago, so far as he is concerned.
We’ve plenty of time before I go, an eternity!” “If you are going away to-morrow, what do you mean by an eternity?” “But what does it matter to us?” laughed Ivan.
Why do you look so surprised?
To talk of my love for Katerina Ivanovna, of the old man and Dmitri? of foreign travel? of the fatal position of Russia?
Of the Emperor Napoleon?
It’s different for other people; but we in our green youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all.
Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternal questions now.
Just when the old folks are all taken up with practical questions.
Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the last three months?
“You are not laughing at me, now, Ivan?” “Me laughing!
I don’t want to wound my little brother who has been watching me with such expectation for three months.
Alyosha, look straight at me!
In this stinking tavern, for instance, here, they meet and sit down in a corner.
And what do they talk about in that momentary halt in the tavern?
Of the eternal questions, of the existence of God and immortality.
And those who do not believe in God talk of socialism or anarchism, of the transformation of all humanity on a new pattern, so that it all comes to the same, they’re the same questions turned inside out.
And masses, masses of the most original Russian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions!
Isn’t it so?” “Yes, for real Russians the questions of God’s existence and of immortality, or, as you say, the same questions turned inside out, come first and foremost, of course, and so they should,” said Alyosha, still watching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile.
“Well, Alyosha, it’s sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all, but anything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one can hardly imagine.
But there’s one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfully fond of.” “How nicely you put that in!” Alyosha laughed suddenly.
The existence of God, eh?” “Begin where you like.
You declared yesterday at father’s that there was no God.” Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother.
“I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw your eyes glow.
But now I’ve no objection to discussing with you, and I say so very seriously.
Well, only fancy, perhaps I too accept God,” laughed Ivan; “that’s a surprise for you, isn’t it?” “Yes, of course, if you are not joking now.” “Joking?
I was told at the elder’s yesterday that I was joking.
You know, dear boy, there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declared that, if there were no God, he would have to be invented. _S’il n’existait pas Dieu, il faudrait l’inventer._ And man has actually invented God.
And what’s strange, what would be marvelous, is not that God should really exist; the marvel is that such an idea, the idea of the necessity of God, could enter the head of such a savage, vicious beast as man.
So holy it is, so touching, so wise and so great a credit it does to man.
As for me, I’ve long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man.
And I won’t go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject, all derived from European hypotheses; for what’s a hypothesis there, is an axiom with the Russian boy, and not only with the boys but with their teachers too, for our Russian professors are often just the same boys themselves.
And so I omit all the hypotheses.
I am trying to explain as quickly as possible my essential nature, that is what manner of man I am, what I believe in, and for what I hope, that’s it, isn’t it?
And therefore I tell you that I accept God simply.
But you must note this: if God exists and if He really did create the world, then, as we all know, He created it according to the geometry of Euclid and the human mind with the conception of only three dimensions in space.
Yet there have been and still are geometricians and philosophers, and even some of the most distinguished, who doubt whether the whole universe, or to speak more widely the whole of being, was only created in Euclid’s geometry; they even dare to dream that two parallel lines, which according to Euclid can never meet on earth, may meet somewhere in infinity.
I have come to the conclusion that, since I can’t understand even that, I can’t expect to understand about God.
I acknowledge humbly that I have no faculty for settling such questions, I have a Euclidian earthly mind, and how could I solve problems that are not of this world?
And I advise you never to think about it either, my dear Alyosha, especially about God, whether He exists or not.
All such questions are utterly inappropriate for a mind created with an idea of only three dimensions.
And so I accept God and am glad to, and what’s more, I accept His wisdom, His purpose—which are utterly beyond our ken; I believe in the underlying order and the meaning of life; I believe in the eternal harmony in which they say we shall one day be blended.
I believe in the Word to Which the universe is striving, and Which Itself was ‘with God,’ and Which Itself is God and so on, and so on, to infinity.
Yet would you believe it, in the final result I don’t accept this world of God’s, and, although I know it exists, I don’t accept it at all.
It’s not that I don’t accept God, you must understand, it’s the world created by Him I don’t and cannot accept.
Even if parallel lines do meet and I see it myself, I shall see it and say that they’ve met, but still I won’t accept it.
I began our talk as stupidly as I could on purpose, but I’ve led up to my confession, for that’s all you want.
And so I’ve told you.” Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling.
“And why did you begin ‘as stupidly as you could’?” asked Alyosha, looking dreamily at him.
Russian conversations on such subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly.
And secondly, the stupider one is, the closer one is to reality.
The stupider one is, the clearer one is.
Stupidity is brief and artless, while intelligence wriggles and hides itself.
Intelligence is a knave, but stupidity is honest and straightforward.
I’ve led the conversation to my despair, and the more stupidly I have presented it, the better for me.” “You will explain why you don’t accept the world?” said Alyosha.
Dear little brother, I don’t want to corrupt you or to turn you from your stronghold, perhaps I want to be healed by you.” Ivan smiled suddenly quite like a little gentle child.
Rebellion “I must make you one confession,” Ivan began.
“I could never understand how one can love one’s neighbors.
It’s just one’s neighbors, to my mind, that one can’t love, though one might love those at a distance.
I once read somewhere of John the Merciful, a saint, that when a hungry, frozen beggar came to him, he took him into his bed, held him in his arms, and began breathing into his mouth, which was putrid and loathsome from some awful disease.
I am convinced that he did that from ‘self-laceration,’ from the self-laceration of falsity, for the sake of the charity imposed by duty, as a penance laid on him.
For any one to love a man, he must be hidden, for as soon as he shows his face, love is gone.” “Father Zossima has talked of that more than once,” observed Alyosha; “he, too, said that the face of a man often hinders many people not practiced in love, from loving him.
I know that myself, Ivan.” “Well, I know nothing of it so far, and can’t understand it, and the innumerable mass of mankind are with me there.
The question is, whether that’s due to men’s bad qualities or whether it’s inherent in their nature.
To my thinking, Christ-like love for men is a miracle impossible on earth.
Suppose I, for instance, suffer intensely.
And what’s more, a man is rarely ready to admit another’s suffering (as though it were a distinction).
Because I smell unpleasant, because I have a stupid face, because I once trod on his foot.
Besides, there is suffering and suffering; degrading, humiliating suffering such as humbles me—hunger, for instance—my benefactor will perhaps allow me; but when you come to higher suffering—for an idea, for instance—he will very rarely admit that, perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a man should have who suffers for an idea.
And so he deprives me instantly of his favor, and not at all from badness of heart.
Beggars, especially genteel beggars, ought never to show themselves, but to ask for charity through the newspapers.
One can love one’s neighbors in the abstract, or even at a distance, but at close quarters it’s almost impossible.
If it were as on the stage, in the ballet, where if beggars come in, they wear silken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully, then one might like looking at them.
I meant to speak of the suffering of mankind generally, but we had better confine ourselves to the sufferings of the children.
That reduces the scope of my argument to a tenth of what it would be.
Still we’d better keep to the children, though it does weaken my case.
But, in the first place, children can be loved even at close quarters, even when they are dirty, even when they are ugly (I fancy, though, children never are ugly).
The second reason why I won’t speak of grown-up people is that, besides being disgusting and unworthy of love, they have a compensation—they’ve eaten the apple and know good and evil, and they have become ‘like gods.’ They go on eating it still.
But the children haven’t eaten anything, and are so far innocent.
Are you fond of children, Alyosha?
I know you are, and you will understand why I prefer to speak of them.
If they, too, suffer horribly on earth, they must suffer for their fathers’ sins, they must be punished for their fathers, who have eaten the apple; but that reasoning is of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here on earth.
The innocent must not suffer for another’s sins, and especially such innocents!
You may be surprised at me, Alyosha, but I am awfully fond of children, too.
And observe, cruel people, the violent, the rapacious, the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children.
Children while they are quite little—up to seven, for instance—are so remote from grown-up people; they are different creatures, as it were, of a different species.
I knew a criminal in prison who had, in the course of his career as a burglar, murdered whole families, including several children.
But when he was in prison, he had a strange affection for them.
He spent all his time at his window, watching the children playing in the prison yard.
My head aches and I am sad.” “You speak with a strange air,” observed Alyosha uneasily, “as though you were not quite yourself.” “By the way, a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow,” Ivan went on, seeming not to hear his brother’s words, “told me about the crimes committed by Turks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a general rising of the Slavs.
They burn villages, murder, outrage women and children, they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences, leave them so till morning, and in the morning they hang them—all sorts of things you can’t imagine.
People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty, but that’s a great injustice and insult to the beasts; a beast can never be so cruel as a man, so artistically cruel.
These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children, too; cutting the unborn child from the mother’s womb, and tossing babies up in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets before their mothers’ eyes.
Doing it before the mothers’ eyes was what gave zest to the amusement.
Here is another scene that I thought very interesting.
Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms, a circle of invading Turks around her.
They’ve planned a diversion: they pet the baby, laugh to make it laugh.
Artistic, wasn’t it?
By the way, Turks are particularly fond of sweet things, they say.” “Brother, what are you driving at?” asked Alyosha.
“I think if the devil doesn’t exist, but man has created him, he has created him in his own image and likeness.” “Just as he did God, then?” observed Alyosha.
“‘It’s wonderful how you can turn words,’ as Polonius says in _Hamlet_,” laughed Ivan.
Yours must be a fine God, if man created Him in his image and likeness.
You see, I am fond of collecting certain facts, and, would you believe, I even copy anecdotes of a certain sort from newspapers and books, and I’ve already got a fine collection.
The Turks, of course, have gone into it, but they are foreigners.
I have specimens from home that are even better than the Turks.
You know we prefer beating—rods and scourges—that’s our national institution.
Nailing ears is unthinkable for us, for we are, after all, Europeans.
Abroad now they scarcely do any beating.
But they make up for it in another way just as national as ours.
And so national that it would be practically impossible among us, though I believe we are being inoculated with it, since the religious movement began in our aristocracy.
I have a charming pamphlet, translated from the French, describing how, quite recently, five years ago, a murderer, Richard, was executed—a young man, I believe, of three and twenty, who repented and was converted to the Christian faith at the very scaffold.
This Richard was an illegitimate child who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds on the Swiss mountains.
The shepherds taught him nothing, and scarcely fed or clothed him, but sent him out at seven to herd the flock in cold and wet, and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so.
Quite the contrary, they thought they had every right, for Richard had been given to them as a chattel, and they did not even see the necessity of feeding him.
Richard himself describes how in those years, like the Prodigal Son in the Gospel, he longed to eat of the mash given to the pigs, which were fattened for sale.
And that was how he spent all his childhood and his youth, till he grew up and was strong enough to go away and be a thief.
He drank what he earned, he lived like a brute, and finished by killing and robbing an old man.
He was caught, tried, and condemned to death.
They are not sentimentalists there.
And in prison he was immediately surrounded by pastors, members of Christian brotherhoods, philanthropic ladies, and the like.
They taught him to read and write in prison, and expounded the Gospel to him.
They exhorted him, worked upon him, drummed at him incessantly, till at last he solemnly confessed his crime.
He wrote to the court himself that he was a monster, but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace.
All Geneva was in excitement about him—all philanthropic and religious Geneva.
All the aristocratic and well-bred society of the town rushed to the prison, kissed Richard and embraced him; ‘You are our brother, you have found grace.’ And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion, ‘Yes, I’ve found grace!
All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs’ food, but now even I have found grace.
Though it’s not your fault that you knew not the Lord, when you coveted the pigs’ food and were beaten for stealing it (which was very wrong of you, for stealing is forbidden); but you’ve shed blood and you must die.’ And on the last day, Richard, perfectly limp, did nothing but cry and repeat every minute: ‘This is my happiest day.
I am going to the Lord.’ ‘Yes,’ cry the pastors and the judges and philanthropic ladies.
‘This is the happiest day of your life, for you are going to the Lord!’ They all walk or drive to the scaffold in procession behind the prison van.
At the scaffold they call to Richard: ‘Die, brother, die in the Lord, for even thou hast found grace!’ And so, covered with his brothers’ kisses, Richard is dragged on to the scaffold, and led to the guillotine.
And they chopped off his head in brotherly fashion, because he had found grace.
Yes, that’s characteristic.
That pamphlet is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropists of aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations, and has been distributed gratis for the enlightenment of the people.
The case of Richard is interesting because it’s national.
Though to us it’s absurd to cut off a man’s head, because he has become our brother and has found grace, yet we have our own speciality, which is all but worse.
Our historical pastime is the direct satisfaction of inflicting pain.
There are lines in Nekrassov describing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes, ‘on its meek eyes,’ every one must have seen it.
It’s peculiarly Russian.
He describes how a feeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a load and cannot move.
The peasant beats it, beats it savagely, beats it at last not knowing what he is doing in the intoxication of cruelty, thrashes it mercilessly over and over again.
‘However weak you are, you must pull, if you die for it.’ The nag strains, and then he begins lashing the poor defenseless creature on its weeping, on its ‘meek eyes.’ The frantic beast tugs and draws the load, trembling all over, gasping for breath, moving sideways, with a sort of unnatural spasmodic action—it’s awful in Nekrassov.
So the Tatars have taught us, and they left us the knout as a remembrance of it.
A well-educated, cultured gentleman and his wife beat their own child with a birch-rod, a girl of seven.
‘It stings more,’ said he, and so he began stinging his daughter.
I know for a fact there are people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality, to literal sensuality, which increases progressively at every blow they inflict.
They beat for a minute, for five minutes, for ten minutes, more often and more savagely.
At last the child cannot scream, it gasps, ‘Daddy! daddy!’ By some diabolical unseemly chance the case was brought into court.
The Russian people have long called a barrister ‘a conscience for hire.’ The counsel protests in his client’s defense.
‘It’s such a simple thing,’ he says, ‘an everyday domestic event.
A father corrects his child.
To our shame be it said, it is brought into court.’ The jury, convinced by him, give a favorable verdict.
The public roars with delight that the torturer is acquitted.
I would have proposed to raise a subscription in his honor!
“But I’ve still better things about children.
I’ve collected a great, great deal about Russian children, Alyosha.
There was a little girl of five who was hated by her father and mother, ‘most worthy and respectable people, of good education and breeding.’ You see, I must repeat again, it is a peculiar characteristic of many people, this love of torturing children, and children only.
To all other types of humanity these torturers behave mildly and benevolently, like cultivated and humane Europeans; but they are very fond of tormenting children, even fond of children themselves in that sense.
It’s just their defenselessness that tempts the tormentor, just the angelic confidence of the child who has no refuge and no appeal, that sets his vile blood on fire.
In every man, of course, a demon lies hidden—the demon of rage, the demon of lustful heat at the screams of the tortured victim, the demon of lawlessness let off the chain, the demon of diseases that follow on vice, gout, kidney disease, and so on.
“This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by those cultivated parents.
They beat her, thrashed her, kicked her for no reason till her body was one bruise.
Then, they went to greater refinements of cruelty—shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a privy, and because she didn’t ask to be taken up at night (as though a child of five sleeping its angelic, sound sleep could be trained to wake and ask), they smeared her face and filled her mouth with excrement, and it was her mother, her mother did this.
Can you understand why a little creature, who can’t even understand what’s done to her, should beat her little aching heart with her tiny fist in the dark and the cold, and weep her meek unresentful tears to dear, kind God to protect her?
Do you understand that, friend and brother, you pious and humble novice?
Do you understand why this infamy must be and is permitted?
Why should he know that diabolical good and evil when it costs so much?
Why, the whole world of knowledge is not worth that child’s prayer to ‘dear, kind God’!
I say nothing of the sufferings of grown-up people, they have eaten the apple, damn them, and the devil take them all!
I am making you suffer, Alyosha, you are not yourself.
I want to suffer too,” muttered Alyosha.
“One picture, only one more, because it’s so curious, so characteristic, and I have only just read it in some collection of Russian antiquities.
I’ve forgotten the name.
It was in the darkest days of serfdom at the beginning of the century, and long live the Liberator of the People!
There was in those days a general of aristocratic connections, the owner of great estates, one of those men—somewhat exceptional, I believe, even then—who, retiring from the service into a life of leisure, are convinced that they’ve earned absolute power over the lives of their subjects.
So our general, settled on his property of two thousand souls, lives in pomp, and domineers over his poor neighbors as though they were dependents and buffoons.
He has kennels of hundreds of hounds and nearly a hundred dog-boys—all mounted, and in uniform.
One day a serf-boy, a little child of eight, threw a stone in play and hurt the paw of the general’s favorite hound.
‘Why is my favorite dog lame?’ He is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog’s paw.
Early that morning the general comes out on horseback, with the hounds, his dependents, dog-boys, and huntsmen, all mounted around him in full hunting parade.
The servants are summoned for their edification, and in front of them all stands the mother of the child.
The general orders the child to be undressed; the child is stripped naked.
‘Make him run,’ commands the general.
I believe the general was afterwards declared incapable of administering his estates.
To be shot for the satisfaction of our moral feelings?
Speak, Alyosha!” “To be shot,” murmured Alyosha, lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale, twisted smile.
“Bravo!” cried Ivan, delighted.
So there is a little devil sitting in your heart, Alyosha Karamazov!” “What I said was absurd, but—” “That’s just the point, that ‘but’!” cried Ivan.
“Let me tell you, novice, that the absurd is only too necessary on earth.
The world stands on absurdities, and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it without them.
We know what we know!” “What do you know?” “I understand nothing,” Ivan went on, as though in delirium.
“I don’t want to understand anything now.
I made up my mind long ago not to understand.
If I try to understand anything, I shall be false to the fact, and I have determined to stick to the fact.” “Why are you trying me?” Alyosha cried, with sudden distress.
I took the case of children only to make my case clearer.
Of the other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust to its center, I will say nothing.
I have narrowed my subject on purpose.
I am a bug, and I recognize in all humility that I cannot understand why the world is arranged as it is.
Men are themselves to blame, I suppose; they were given paradise, they wanted freedom, and stole fire from heaven, though they knew they would become unhappy, so there is no need to pity them.
With my pitiful, earthly, Euclidian understanding, all I know is that there is suffering and that there are none guilty; that cause follows effect, simply and directly; that everything flows and finds its level—but that’s only Euclidian nonsense, I know that, and I can’t consent to live by it!
What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause follows effect simply and directly, and that I know it?—I must have justice, or I will destroy myself.
And not justice in some remote infinite time and space, but here on earth, and that I could see myself.
I have believed in it.
Surely I haven’t suffered, simply that I, my crimes and my sufferings, may manure the soil of the future harmony for somebody else.
I want to see with my own eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace his murderer.
I want to be there when every one suddenly understands what it has all been for.
All the religions of the world are built on this longing, and I am a believer.
But then there are the children, and what am I to do about them?
That’s a question I can’t answer.
For the hundredth time I repeat, there are numbers of questions, but I’ve only taken the children, because in their case what I mean is so unanswerably clear.
If all must suffer to pay for the eternal harmony, what have children to do with it, tell me, please?
It’s beyond all comprehension why they should suffer, and why they should pay for the harmony.
Why should they, too, furnish material to enrich the soil for the harmony of the future?
I understand solidarity in sin among men.
I understand solidarity in retribution, too; but there can be no such solidarity with children.
And if it is really true that they must share responsibility for all their fathers’ crimes, such a truth is not of this world and is beyond my comprehension.
Oh, Alyosha, I am not blaspheming!
And while I am on earth, I make haste to take my own measures.
You see, Alyosha, perhaps it really may happen that if I live to that moment, or rise again to see it, I, too, perhaps, may cry aloud with the rest, looking at the mother embracing the child’s torturer, ‘Thou art just, O Lord!’ but I don’t want to cry aloud then.
While there is still time, I hasten to protect myself, and so I renounce the higher harmony altogether.
It’s not worth the tears of that one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stinking outhouse, with its unexpiated tears to ‘dear, kind God’!
It’s not worth it, because those tears are unatoned for.
But what do I care for avenging them?
What do I care for a hell for oppressors?
What good can hell do, since those children have already been tortured?
I don’t want more suffering.
And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth, then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price.
I don’t want the mother to embrace the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs!
Let her forgive him for herself, if she will, let her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother’s heart.
But the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to forgive; she dare not forgive the torturer, even if the child were to forgive him!
From love for humanity I don’t want it.
I would rather be left with the unavenged suffering.
I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation, _even if I were wrong_.
And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket, and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as possible.
It’s not God that I don’t accept, Alyosha, only I most respectfully return Him the ticket.” “That’s rebellion,” murmured Alyosha, looking down.
I am sorry you call it that,” said Ivan earnestly.
“One can hardly live in rebellion, and I want to live.
Tell me yourself, I challenge you—answer.
Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human destiny with the object of making men happy in the end, giving them peace and rest at last, but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to death only one tiny creature—that baby beating its breast with its fist, for instance—and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears, would you consent to be the architect on those conditions?
“And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it would agree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated blood of a little victim?
And accepting it would remain happy for ever?” “No, I can’t admit it.
Brother,” said Alyosha suddenly, with flashing eyes, “you said just now, is there a being in the whole world who would have the right to forgive and could forgive?
But there is a Being and He can forgive everything, all and for all, because He gave His innocent blood for all and everything.
You have forgotten Him, and on Him is built the edifice, and it is to Him they cry aloud, ‘Thou art just, O Lord, for Thy ways are revealed!’” “Ah! the One without sin and His blood!
No, I have not forgotten Him; on the contrary I’ve been wondering all the time how it was you did not bring Him in before, for usually all arguments on your side put Him in the foreground.
But I made up this poem in prose and I remembered it.
You will be my first reader—that is listener.
Why should an author forego even one listener?” smiled Ivan.
“Shall I tell it to you?” “I am all attention,” said Alyosha.
“My poem is called ‘The Grand Inquisitor’; it’s a ridiculous thing, but I want to tell it to you.” Chapter V.
The Grand Inquisitor “Even this must have a preface—that is, a literary preface,” laughed Ivan, “and I am a poor hand at making one.
You see, my action takes place in the sixteenth century, and at that time, as you probably learnt at school, it was customary in poetry to bring down heavenly powers on earth.
Not to speak of Dante, in France, clerks, as well as the monks in the monasteries, used to give regular performances in which the Madonna, the saints, the angels, Christ, and God himself were brought on the stage.
In those days it was done in all simplicity.
In Victor Hugo’s _Notre Dame de Paris_ an edifying and gratuitous spectacle was provided for the people in the Hôtel de Ville of Paris in the reign of Louis XI. in honor of the birth of the dauphin.
It was called _Le bon jugement de la très sainte et gracieuse Vierge Marie_, and she appears herself on the stage and pronounces her _bon jugement_.
Similar plays, chiefly from the Old Testament, were occasionally performed in Moscow too, up to the times of Peter the Great.
But besides plays there were all sorts of legends and ballads scattered about the world, in which the saints and angels and all the powers of Heaven took part when required.
In our monasteries the monks busied themselves in translating, copying, and even composing such poems—and even under the Tatars.
There is, for instance, one such poem (of course, from the Greek), _The Wanderings of Our Lady through Hell_, with descriptions as bold as Dante’s.
Our Lady visits hell, and the Archangel Michael leads her through the torments.
She sees the sinners and their punishment.
There she sees among others one noteworthy set of sinners in a burning lake; some of them sink to the bottom of the lake so that they can’t swim out, and ‘these God forgets’—an expression of extraordinary depth and force.
And so Our Lady, shocked and weeping, falls before the throne of God and begs for mercy for all in hell—for all she has seen there, indiscriminately.
Her conversation with God is immensely interesting.
She beseeches Him, she will not desist, and when God points to the hands and feet of her Son, nailed to the Cross, and asks, ‘How can I forgive His tormentors?’ she bids all the saints, all the martyrs, all the angels and archangels to fall down with her and pray for mercy on all without distinction.
It ends by her winning from God a respite of suffering every year from Good Friday till Trinity Day, and the sinners at once raise a cry of thankfulness from hell, chanting, ‘Thou art just, O Lord, in this judgment.’ Well, my poem would have been of that kind if it had appeared at that time.
Fifteen centuries have passed since He promised to come in His glory, fifteen centuries since His prophet wrote, ‘Behold, I come quickly’; ‘Of that day and that hour knoweth no man, neither the Son, but the Father,’ as He Himself predicted on earth.
But humanity awaits him with the same faith and with the same love.
Oh, with greater faith, for it is fifteen centuries since man has ceased to see signs from heaven.
It is true there were many miracles in those days.
There were saints who performed miraculous cures; some holy people, according to their biographies, were visited by the Queen of Heaven herself.
But the devil did not slumber, and doubts were already arising among men of the truth of these miracles.
And just then there appeared in the north of Germany a terrible new heresy.
“A huge star like to a torch” (that is, to a church) “fell on the sources of the waters and they became bitter.” These heretics began blasphemously denying miracles.
But those who remained faithful were all the more ardent in their faith.
The tears of humanity rose up to Him as before, awaited His coming, loved Him, hoped for Him, yearned to suffer and die for Him as before.
And so many ages mankind had prayed with faith and fervor, “O Lord our God, hasten Thy coming,” so many ages called upon Him, that in His infinite mercy He deigned to come down to His servants.
Among us, Tyutchev, with absolute faith in the truth of his words, bore witness that Bearing the Cross, in slavish dress, Weary and worn, the Heavenly King Our mother, Russia, came to bless, And through our land went wandering.
And that certainly was so, I assure you.
“And behold, He deigned to appear for a moment to the people, to the tortured, suffering people, sunk in iniquity, but loving Him like children.
In His infinite mercy He came once more among men in that human shape in which He walked among men for three years fifteen centuries ago.
He came down to the ‘hot pavements’ of the southern town in which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had, _ad majorem gloriam Dei_, been burnt by the cardinal, the Grand Inquisitor, in a magnificent _auto da fé_, in the presence of the king, the court, the knights, the cardinals, the most charming ladies of the court, and the whole population of Seville.
“He came softly, unobserved, and yet, strange to say, every one recognized Him.
That might be one of the best passages in the poem.
I mean, why they recognized Him.
The people are irresistibly drawn to Him, they surround Him, they flock about Him, follow Him.
He moves silently in their midst with a gentle smile of infinite compassion.
The sun of love burns in His heart, light and power shine from His eyes, and their radiance, shed on the people, stirs their hearts with responsive love.
He holds out His hands to them, blesses them, and a healing virtue comes from contact with Him, even with His garments.
An old man in the crowd, blind from childhood, cries out, ‘O Lord, heal me and I shall see Thee!’ and, as it were, scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him.
Children throw flowers before Him, sing, and cry hosannah.
‘It must be He, it can be no one but Him!’ He stops at the steps of the Seville cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little open white coffin.
In it lies a child of seven, the only daughter of a prominent citizen.
The priest, coming to meet the coffin, looks perplexed, and frowns, but the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet with a wail.
The procession halts, the coffin is laid on the steps at His feet.
He looks with compassion, and His lips once more softly pronounce, ‘Maiden, arise!’ and the maiden arises.
The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round, smiling with wide-open wondering eyes, holding a bunch of white roses they had put in her hand.
“There are cries, sobs, confusion among the people, and at that moment the cardinal himself, the Grand Inquisitor, passes by the cathedral.
He is an old man, almost ninety, tall and erect, with a withered face and sunken eyes, in which there is still a gleam of light.
He is not dressed in his gorgeous cardinal’s robes, as he was the day before, when he was burning the enemies of the Roman Church—at this moment he is wearing his coarse, old, monk’s cassock.
At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants and slaves and the ‘holy guard.’ He stops at the sight of the crowd and watches it from a distance.
He sees everything; he sees them set the coffin down at His feet, sees the child rise up, and his face darkens.
He knits his thick gray brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire.
And such is his power, so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him, that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards, and in the midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead Him away.
The crowd instantly bows down to the earth, like one man, before the old Inquisitor.
The guards lead their prisoner to the close, gloomy vaulted prison in the ancient palace of the Holy Inquisition and shut Him in it.
The day passes and is followed by the dark, burning, ‘breathless’ night of Seville.
The air is ‘fragrant with laurel and lemon.’ In the pitch darkness the iron door of the prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes in with a light in his hand.
Thou?’ but receiving no answer, he adds at once, ‘Don’t answer, be silent.
And Thou hast no right to add anything to what Thou hadst said of old.
I know not who Thou art and care not to know whether it is Thou or only a semblance of Him, but to-morrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Thee at the stake as the worst of heretics.
And the very people who have to-day kissed Thy feet, to-morrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heap up the embers of Thy fire.
Yes, maybe Thou knowest it,’ he added with thoughtful penetration, never for a moment taking his eyes off the Prisoner.” “I don’t quite understand, Ivan.
What does it mean?” Alyosha, who had been listening in silence, said with a smile.
“Is it simply a wild fantasy, or a mistake on the part of the old man—some impossible _quiproquo_?” “Take it as the last,” said Ivan, laughing, “if you are so corrupted by modern realism and can’t stand anything fantastic.
If you like it to be a case of mistaken identity, let it be so.
It is true,” he went on, laughing, “the old man was ninety, and he might well be crazy over his set idea.
He might have been struck by the appearance of the Prisoner.
It might, in fact, be simply his ravings, the delusion of an old man of ninety, over-excited by the _auto da fé_ of a hundred heretics the day before.
But does it matter to us after all whether it was a mistake of identity or a wild fantasy?
All that matters is that the old man should speak out, should speak openly of what he has thought in silence for ninety years.” “And the Prisoner too is silent?
Does He look at him and not say a word?” “That’s inevitable in any case,” Ivan laughed again.
“The old man has told Him He hasn’t the right to add anything to what He has said of old.
One may say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism, in my opinion at least.
‘All has been given by Thee to the Pope,’ they say, ‘and all, therefore, is still in the Pope’s hands, and there is no need for Thee to come now at all.
I have read it myself in the works of their theologians.
‘Hast Thou the right to reveal to us one of the mysteries of that world from which Thou hast come?’ my old man asks Him, and answers the question for Him.
Whatsoever Thou revealest anew will encroach on men’s freedom of faith; for it will be manifest as a miracle, and the freedom of their faith was dearer to Thee than anything in those days fifteen hundred years ago.
But now Thou hast seen these “free” men,’ the old man adds suddenly, with a pensive smile.
‘Yes, we’ve paid dearly for it,’ he goes on, looking sternly at Him, ‘but at last we have completed that work in Thy name.
For fifteen centuries we have been wrestling with Thy freedom, but now it is ended and over for good.
Thou lookest meekly at me and deignest not even to be wroth with me.
But let me tell Thee that now, to-day, people are more persuaded than ever that they have perfect freedom, yet they have brought their freedom to us and laid it humbly at our feet.
Was this Thy freedom?’” “I don’t understand again,” Alyosha broke in.
“Is he ironical, is he jesting?” “Not a bit of it!
He claims it as a merit for himself and his Church that at last they have vanquished freedom and have done so to make men happy.
‘For now’ (he is speaking of the Inquisition, of course) ‘for the first time it has become possible to think of the happiness of men.
‘Thou hast had no lack of admonitions and warnings, but Thou didst not listen to those warnings; Thou didst reject the only way by which men might be made happy.
But, fortunately, departing Thou didst hand on the work to us.
Thou hast promised, Thou hast established by Thy word, Thou hast given to us the right to bind and to unbind, and now, of course, Thou canst not think of taking it away.
Why, then, hast Thou come to hinder us?’” “And what’s the meaning of ‘no lack of admonitions and warnings’?” asked Alyosha.
“‘The wise and dread spirit, the spirit of self-destruction and non- existence,’ the old man goes on, ‘the great spirit talked with Thee in the wilderness, and we are told in the books that he “tempted” Thee.
And could anything truer be said than what he revealed to Thee in three questions and what Thou didst reject, and what in the books is called “the temptation”?
And yet if there has ever been on earth a real stupendous miracle, it took place on that day, on the day of the three temptations.
The statement of those three questions was itself the miracle.
From those questions alone, from the miracle of their statement, we can see that we have here to do not with the fleeting human intelligence, but with the absolute and eternal.
For in those three questions the whole subsequent history of mankind is, as it were, brought together into one whole, and foretold, and in them are united all the unsolved historical contradictions of human nature.
At the time it could not be so clear, since the future was unknown; but now that fifteen hundred years have passed, we see that everything in those three questions was so justly divined and foretold, and has been so truly fulfilled, that nothing can be added to them or taken from them.
“‘Judge Thyself who was right—Thou or he who questioned Thee then?
Remember the first question; its meaning, in other words, was this: “Thou wouldst go into the world, and art going with empty hands, with some promise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their natural unruliness cannot even understand, which they fear and dread—for nothing has ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society than freedom.
But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barren wilderness?
Turn them into bread, and mankind will run after Thee like a flock of sheep, grateful and obedient, though for ever trembling, lest Thou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread.” But Thou wouldst not deprive man of freedom and didst reject the offer, thinking, what is that freedom worth, if obedience is bought with bread?
But dost Thou know that for the sake of that earthly bread the spirit of the earth will rise up against Thee and will strive with Thee and overcome Thee, and all will follow him, crying, “Who can compare with this beast?
He has given us fire from heaven!” Dost Thou know that the ages will pass, and humanity will proclaim by the lips of their sages that there is no crime, and therefore no sin; there is only hunger?
Where Thy temple stood will rise a new building; the terrible tower of Babel will be built again, and though, like the one of old, it will not be finished, yet Thou mightest have prevented that new tower and have cut short the sufferings of men for a thousand years; for they will come back to us after a thousand years of agony with their tower.
They will seek us again, hidden underground in the catacombs, for we shall be again persecuted and tortured.
They will find us and cry to us, “Feed us, for those who have promised us fire from heaven haven’t given it!” And then we shall finish building their tower, for he finishes the building who feeds them.
And we alone shall feed them in Thy name, declaring falsely that it is in Thy name.
Oh, never, never can they feed themselves without us!
In the end they will lay their freedom at our feet, and say to us, “Make us your slaves, but feed us.” They will understand themselves, at last, that freedom and bread enough for all are inconceivable together, for never, never will they be able to share between them!
They will be convinced, too, that they can never be free, for they are weak, vicious, worthless and rebellious.
And if for the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands shall follow Thee, what is to become of the millions and tens of thousands of millions of creatures who will not have the strength to forego the earthly bread for the sake of the heavenly?
Or dost Thou care only for the tens of thousands of the great and strong, while the millions, numerous as the sands of the sea, who are weak but love Thee, must exist only for the sake of the great and strong?
They are sinful and rebellious, but in the end they too will become obedient.
They will marvel at us and look on us as gods, because we are ready to endure the freedom which they have found so dreadful and to rule over them—so awful it will seem to them to be free.
But we shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them in Thy name.
That deception will be our suffering, for we shall be forced to lie.
“‘This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness, and this is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which Thou hast exalted above everything.
Yet in this question lies hid the great secret of this world.
Choosing “bread,” Thou wouldst have satisfied the universal and everlasting craving of humanity—to find some one to worship.
So long as man remains free he strives for nothing so incessantly and so painfully as to find some one to worship.
But man seeks to worship what is established beyond dispute, so that all men would agree at once to worship it.
For these pitiful creatures are concerned not only to find what one or the other can worship, but to find something that all would believe in and worship; what is essential is that all may be _together_ in it.
This craving for _community_ of worship is the chief misery of every man individually and of all humanity from the beginning of time.
They have set up gods and challenged one another, “Put away your gods and come and worship ours, or we will kill you and your gods!” And so it will be to the end of the world, even when gods disappear from the earth; they will fall down before idols just the same.
Thou didst know, Thou couldst not but have known, this fundamental secret of human nature, but Thou didst reject the one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow down to Thee alone—the banner of earthly bread; and Thou hast rejected it for the sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven.
I tell Thee that man is tormented by no greater anxiety than to find some one quickly to whom he can hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill-fated creature is born.
But only one who can appease their conscience can take over their freedom.
In bread there was offered Thee an invincible banner; give bread, and man will worship thee, for nothing is more certain than bread.
But if some one else gains possession of his conscience—oh! then he will cast away Thy bread and follow after him who has ensnared his conscience.
For the secret of man’s being is not only to live but to have something to live for.
Without a stable conception of the object of life, man would not consent to go on living, and would rather destroy himself than remain on earth, though he had bread in abundance.
Didst Thou forget that man prefers peace, and even death, to freedom of choice in the knowledge of good and evil?
Nothing is more seductive for man than his freedom of conscience, but nothing is a greater cause of suffering.
And behold, instead of giving a firm foundation for setting the conscience of man at rest for ever, Thou didst choose all that is exceptional, vague and enigmatic; Thou didst choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men, acting as though Thou didst not love them at all—Thou who didst come to give Thy life for them!
Instead of taking possession of men’s freedom, Thou didst increase it, and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind with its sufferings for ever.
In place of the rigid ancient law, man must hereafter with free heart decide for himself what is good and what is evil, having only Thy image before him as his guide.
They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in Thee, for they could not have been left in greater confusion and suffering than Thou hast caused, laying upon them so many cares and unanswerable problems.
“‘So that, in truth, Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for the destruction of Thy kingdom, and no one is more to blame for it.
There are three powers, three powers alone, able to conquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these impotent rebels for their happiness—those forces are miracle, mystery and authority.
Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doing so.
Oh, Thou didst know then that in taking one step, in making one movement to cast Thyself down, Thou wouldst be tempting God and have lost all Thy faith in Him, and wouldst have been dashed to pieces against that earth which Thou didst come to save.
And the wise spirit that tempted Thee would have rejoiced.
And couldst Thou believe for one moment that men, too, could face such a temptation?
Is the nature of men such, that they can reject miracle, and at the great moments of their life, the moments of their deepest, most agonizing spiritual difficulties, cling only to the free verdict of the heart?
Oh, Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books, would be handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth, and Thou didst hope that man, following Thee, would cling to God and not ask for a miracle.
But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he rejects God too; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous.
And as man cannot bear to be without the miraculous, he will create new miracles of his own for himself, and will worship deeds of sorcery and witchcraft, though he might be a hundred times over a rebel, heretic and infidel.
Thou didst not come down from the Cross when they shouted to Thee, mocking and reviling Thee, “Come down from the cross and we will believe that Thou art He.” Thou didst not come down, for again Thou wouldst not enslave man by a miracle, and didst crave faith given freely, not based on miracle.
Thou didst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave before the might that has overawed him for ever.
But Thou didst think too highly of men therein, for they are slaves, of course, though rebellious by nature.
Look round and judge; fifteen centuries have passed, look upon them.
I swear, man is weaker and baser by nature than Thou hast believed him!
Respecting him less, Thou wouldst have asked less of him.
What though he is everywhere now rebelling against our power, and proud of his rebellion?
It is the pride of a child and a schoolboy.
They are little children rioting and barring out the teacher at school.
But their childish delight will end; it will cost them dear.
But they will see at last, the foolish children, that, though they are rebels, they are impotent rebels, unable to keep up their own rebellion.
Bathed in their foolish tears, they will recognize at last that He who created them rebels must have meant to mock at them.
They will say this in despair, and their utterance will be a blasphemy which will make them more unhappy still, for man’s nature cannot bear blasphemy, and in the end always avenges it on itself.
And so unrest, confusion and unhappiness—that is the present lot of man after Thou didst bear so much for their freedom!
The great prophet tells in vision and in image, that he saw all those who took part in the first resurrection and that there were of each tribe twelve thousand.
They had borne Thy cross, they had endured scores of years in the barren, hungry wilderness, living upon locusts and roots—and Thou mayest indeed point with pride at those children of freedom, of free love, of free and splendid sacrifice for Thy name.
But remember that they were only some thousands; and what of the rest?
How is the weak soul to blame that it is unable to receive such terrible gifts?
But if so, it is a mystery and we cannot understand it.
And if it is a mystery, we too have a right to preach a mystery, and to teach them that it’s not the free judgment of their hearts, not love that matters, but a mystery which they must follow blindly, even against their conscience.
We have corrected Thy work and have founded it upon _miracle_, _mystery_ and _authority_.
And men rejoiced that they were again led like sheep, and that the terrible gift that had brought them such suffering was, at last, lifted from their hearts.
Were we right teaching them this?
Did we not love mankind, so meekly acknowledging their feebleness, lovingly lightening their burden, and permitting their weak nature even sin with our sanction?
And why dost Thou look silently and searchingly at me with Thy mild eyes?
And what use is it for me to hide anything from Thee?
Don’t I know to Whom I am speaking?
It’s long—eight centuries—since we have been on _his_ side and not on Thine.
Just eight centuries ago, we took from him what Thou didst reject with scorn, that last gift he offered Thee, showing Thee all the kingdoms of the earth.
We took from him Rome and the sword of Cæsar, and proclaimed ourselves sole rulers of the earth, though hitherto we have not been able to complete our work.
Oh, the work is only beginning, but it has begun.
It has long to await completion and the earth has yet much to suffer, but we shall triumph and shall be Cæsars, and then we shall plan the universal happiness of man.
But Thou mightest have taken even then the sword of Cæsar.
Hadst Thou accepted that last counsel of the mighty spirit, Thou wouldst have accomplished all that man seeks on earth—that is, some one to worship, some one to keep his conscience, and some means of uniting all in one unanimous and harmonious ant-heap, for the craving for universal unity is the third and last anguish of men.
Mankind as a whole has always striven to organize a universal state.
There have been many great nations with great histories, but the more highly they were developed the more unhappy they were, for they felt more acutely than other people the craving for world-wide union.
The great conquerors, Timours and Ghenghis-Khans, whirled like hurricanes over the face of the earth striving to subdue its people, and they too were but the unconscious expression of the same craving for universal unity.
Hadst Thou taken the world and Cæsar’s purple, Thou wouldst have founded the universal state and have given universal peace.
For who can rule men if not he who holds their conscience and their bread in his hands?
We have taken the sword of Cæsar, and in taking it, of course, have rejected Thee and followed _him_.
Oh, ages are yet to come of the confusion of free thought, of their science and cannibalism.
For having begun to build their tower of Babel without us, they will end, of course, with cannibalism.
And we shall sit upon the beast and raise the cup, and on it will be written, “Mystery.” But then, and only then, the reign of peace and happiness will come for men.
And besides, how many of those elect, those mighty ones who could become elect, have grown weary waiting for Thee, and have transferred and will transfer the powers of their spirit and the warmth of their heart to the other camp, and end by raising their _free_ banner against Thee.
Oh, we shall persuade them that they will only become free when they renounce their freedom to us and submit to us.
They will be convinced that we are right, for they will remember the horrors of slavery and confusion to which Thy freedom brought them.
They will see that we do not change the stones to bread, but in truth they will be more thankful for taking it from our hands than for the bread itself!
For they will remember only too well that in old days, without our help, even the bread they made turned to stones in their hands, while since they have come back to us, the very stones have turned to bread in their hands.
Too, too well will they know the value of complete submission!
Who scattered the flock and sent it astray on unknown paths?
But the flock will come together again and will submit once more, and then it will be once for all.
Then we shall give them the quiet humble happiness of weak creatures such as they are by nature.
Oh, we shall persuade them at last not to be proud, for Thou didst lift them up and thereby taught them to be proud.
We shall show them that they are weak, that they are only pitiful children, but that childlike happiness is the sweetest of all.
They will marvel at us and will be awe-stricken before us, and will be proud at our being so powerful and clever, that we have been able to subdue such a turbulent flock of thousands of millions.
They will tremble impotently before our wrath, their minds will grow fearful, they will be quick to shed tears like women and children, but they will be just as ready at a sign from us to pass to laughter and rejoicing, to happy mirth and childish song.
Yes, we shall set them to work, but in their leisure hours we shall make their life like a child’s game, with children’s songs and innocent dance.
Oh, we shall allow them even sin, they are weak and helpless, and they will love us like children because we allow them to sin.
We shall tell them that every sin will be expiated, if it is done with our permission, that we allow them to sin because we love them, and the punishment for these sins we take upon ourselves.
And we shall take it upon ourselves, and they will adore us as their saviors who have taken on themselves their sins before God.
We shall allow or forbid them to live with their wives and mistresses, to have or not to have children—according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient—and they will submit to us gladly and cheerfully.
The most painful secrets of their conscience, all, all they will bring to us, and we shall have an answer for all.
And they will be glad to believe our answer, for it will save them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at present in making a free decision for themselves.
And all will be happy, all the millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them.
There will be thousands of millions of happy babes, and a hundred thousand sufferers who have taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil.
Peacefully they will die, peacefully they will expire in Thy name, and beyond the grave they will find nothing but death.
But we shall keep the secret, and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of heaven and eternity.
Though if there were anything in the other world, it certainly would not be for such as they.
It is prophesied that Thou wilt come again in victory, Thou wilt come with Thy chosen, the proud and strong, but we will say that they have only saved themselves, but we have saved all.
We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast, and holds in her hands the _mystery_, shall be put to shame, that the weak will rise up again, and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked her loathsome body.
But then I will stand up and point out to Thee the thousand millions of happy children who have known no sin.
And we who have taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and say: “Judge us if Thou canst and darest.” Know that I fear Thee not.
Know that I too have been in the wilderness, I too have lived on roots and locusts, I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men, and I too was striving to stand among Thy elect, among the strong and powerful, thirsting “to make up the number.” But I awakened and would not serve madness.
I turned back and joined the ranks of those _who have corrected Thy work_.
I left the proud and went back to the humble, for the happiness of the humble.
What I say to Thee will come to pass, and our dominion will be built up.
I repeat, to-morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us.
For if any one has ever deserved our fires, it is Thou.
He was carried away as he talked, and spoke with excitement; when he had finished, he suddenly smiled.
Alyosha had listened in silence; towards the end he was greatly moved and seemed several times on the point of interrupting, but restrained himself.
“But ... that’s absurd!” he cried, flushing.
Is that the way to understand it?
That’s not the idea of it in the Orthodox Church....
That’s Rome, and not even the whole of Rome, it’s false—those are the worst of the Catholics, the Inquisitors, the Jesuits!...
And there could not be such a fantastic creature as your Inquisitor.
What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves?
Who are these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselves for the happiness of mankind?
We know the Jesuits, they are spoken ill of, but surely they are not what you describe?
They are simply the Romish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future, with the Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that’s their ideal, but there’s no sort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it....
It’s simple lust of power, of filthy earthly gain, of domination—something like a universal serfdom with them as masters—that’s all they stand for.
Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy.” “Stay, stay,” laughed Ivan, “how hot you are!
But allow me to say: do you really think that the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothing but the lust of power, of filthy earthly gain?
Is that Father Païssy’s teaching?” “No, no, on the contrary, Father Païssy did once say something rather the same as you ... but of course it’s not the same, not a bit the same,” Alyosha hastily corrected himself.
“A precious admission, in spite of your ‘not a bit the same.’ I ask you why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile material gain?
Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrow and loving humanity?
You see, only suppose that there was one such man among all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain—if there’s only one like my old Inquisitor, who had himself eaten roots in the desert and made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free and perfect.
Surely that could have happened?” “Joined whom, what clever people?” cried Alyosha, completely carried away.
“They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets....
Your Inquisitor does not believe in God, that’s his secret!” “What if it is so!
It’s perfectly true, it’s true that that’s the whole secret, but isn’t that suffering, at least for a man like that, who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet could not shake off his incurable love of humanity?
And note, the deception is in the name of Him in Whose ideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long.
More than that, one such standing at the head is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church with all its armies and Jesuits, its highest idea.
I tell you frankly that I firmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stood at the head of the movement.
Who knows, perhaps the spirit of that accursed old man who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way, is to be found even now in a whole multitude of such old men, existing not by chance but by agreement, as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of the mystery, to guard it from the weak and the unhappy, so as to make them happy.
I fancy that even among the Masons there’s something of the same mystery at the bottom, and that that’s why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivals breaking up the unity of the idea, while it is so essential that there should be one flock and one shepherd....
But from the way I defend my idea I might be an author impatient of your criticism.
Enough of it.” “You are perhaps a Mason yourself!” broke suddenly from Alyosha.
“You don’t believe in God,” he added, speaking this time very sorrowfully.
He fancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically.
“How does your poem end?” he asked, suddenly looking down.
When the Inquisitor ceased speaking he waited some time for his Prisoner to answer him.
He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time, looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply.
The old man longed for Him to say something, however bitter and terrible.
But He suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his bloodless aged lips.
The old man shuddered.
The Prisoner went away.” “And the old man?” “The kiss glows in his heart, but the old man adheres to his idea.” “And you with him, you too?” cried Alyosha, mournfully.
“Why, it’s all nonsense, Alyosha.
It’s only a senseless poem of a senseless student, who could never write two lines of verse.
Why do you take it so seriously?
Surely you don’t suppose I am going straight off to the Jesuits, to join the men who are correcting His work?
Good Lord, it’s no business of mine.
I told you, all I want is to live on to thirty, and then ... dash the cup to the ground!” “But the little sticky leaves, and the precious tombs, and the blue sky, and the woman you love!
How will you live, how will you love them?” Alyosha cried sorrowfully.
No, that’s just what you are going away for, to join them ... if not, you will kill yourself, you can’t endure it!” “There is a strength to endure everything,” Ivan said with a cold smile.
“What strength?” “The strength of the Karamazovs—the strength of the Karamazov baseness.” “To sink into debauchery, to stifle your soul with corruption, yes?” “Possibly even that ... only perhaps till I am thirty I shall escape it, and then—” “How will you escape it?
That’s impossible with your ideas.” “In the Karamazov way, again.” “‘Everything is lawful,’ you mean?
Everything is lawful, is that it?” Ivan scowled, and all at once turned strangely pale.
“Ah, you’ve caught up yesterday’s phrase, which so offended Miüsov—and which Dmitri pounced upon so naïvely, and paraphrased!” he smiled queerly.
“Yes, if you like, ‘everything is lawful’ since the word has been said.
“I thought that going away from here I have you at least,” Ivan said suddenly, with unexpected feeling; “but now I see that there is no place for me even in your heart, my dear hermit.
The formula, ‘all is lawful,’ I won’t renounce—will you renounce me for that, yes?” Alyosha got up, went to him and softly kissed him on the lips.
“That’s plagiarism,” cried Ivan, highly delighted.
Get up, Alyosha, it’s time we were going, both of us.” They went out, but stopped when they reached the entrance of the restaurant.
“Listen, Alyosha,” Ivan began in a resolute voice, “if I am really able to care for the sticky little leaves I shall only love them, remembering you.
It’s enough for me that you are somewhere here, and I shan’t lose my desire for life yet.
Take it as a declaration of love if you like.
I mean even if I don’t go away to-morrow (I think I certainly shall go) and we meet again, don’t say a word more on these subjects.
I beg that particularly.
And about Dmitri too, I ask you specially, never speak to me again,” he added, with sudden irritation; “it’s all exhausted, it has all been said over and over again, hasn’t it?
When at thirty, I want to ‘dash the cup to the ground,’ wherever I may be I’ll come to have one more talk with you, even though it were from America, you may be sure of that.
It will be very interesting to have a look at you, to see what you’ll be by that time.
Come, go now to your Pater Seraphicus, he is dying.
Good-by, kiss me once more; that’s right, now go.” Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back.
It was just as Dmitri had left Alyosha the day before, though the parting had been very different.
The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through Alyosha’s mind in the distress and dejection of that moment.
He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as he walked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left.
But all at once he turned too, and almost ran to the monastery.
It was nearly dark, and he felt almost frightened; something new was growing up in him for which he could not account.
The wind had risen again as on the previous evening, and the ancient pines murmured gloomily about him when he entered the hermitage copse.
“Pater Seraphicus—he got that name from somewhere—where from?” Alyosha wondered.
Here is the hermitage.
Yes, yes, that he is, Pater Seraphicus, he will save me—from him and for ever!” Several times afterwards he wondered how he could on leaving Ivan so completely forget his brother Dmitri, though he had that morning, only a few hours before, so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doing so, even should he be unable to return to the monastery that night.
For Awhile A Very Obscure One And Ivan, on parting from Alyosha, went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s house.
But, strange to say, he was overcome by insufferable depression, which grew greater at every step he took towards the house.
There was nothing strange in his being depressed; what was strange was that Ivan could not have said what was the cause of it.
He had often been depressed before, and there was nothing surprising at his feeling so at such a moment, when he had broken off with everything that had brought him here, and was preparing that day to make a new start and enter upon a new, unknown future.
He would again be as solitary as ever, and though he had great hopes, and great—too great—expectations from life, he could not have given any definite account of his hopes, his expectations, or even his desires.
Yet at that moment, though the apprehension of the new and unknown certainly found place in his heart, what was worrying him was something quite different.
“Is it loathing for my father’s house?” he wondered.
“Quite likely; I am so sick of it; and though it’s the last time I shall cross its hateful threshold, still I loathe it....
Is it the parting with Alyosha and the conversation I had with him?
For so many years I’ve been silent with the whole world and not deigned to speak, and all of a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that.” It certainly might have been the youthful vexation of youthful inexperience and vanity—vexation at having failed to express himself, especially with such a being as Alyosha, on whom his heart had certainly been reckoning.
No doubt that came in, that vexation, it must have done indeed; but yet that was not it, that was not it either.
“I feel sick with depression and yet I can’t tell what I want.
What made his depression so vexatious and irritating was that it had a kind of casual, external character—he felt that.
At last, feeling very cross and ill-humored, Ivan arrived home, and suddenly, about fifteen paces from the garden gate, he guessed what was fretting and worrying him.
On a bench in the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying the coolness of the evening, and at the first glance at him Ivan knew that the valet Smerdyakov was on his mind, and that it was this man that his soul loathed.
It all dawned upon him suddenly and became clear.
Just before, when Alyosha had been telling him of his meeting with Smerdyakov, he had felt a sudden twinge of gloom and loathing, which had immediately stirred responsive anger in his heart.
Afterwards, as he talked, Smerdyakov had been forgotten for the time; but still he had been in his mind, and as soon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home, the forgotten sensation began to obtrude itself again.
“Is it possible that a miserable, contemptible creature like that can worry me so much?” he wondered, with insufferable irritation.
It was true that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for the man, especially during the last few days.
He had even begun to notice in himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature.
Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first came to the neighborhood he had felt quite differently.
Then he had taken a marked interest in Smerdyakov, and had even thought him very original.
But Ivan soon saw that, though the sun, moon, and stars might be an interesting subject, yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov, and that he was looking for something altogether different.
In one way and another, he began to betray a boundless vanity, and a wounded vanity, too, and that Ivan disliked.
It had first given rise to his aversion.
Grushenka had come on the scene, and there had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri—they discussed that, too.
But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement, it was impossible to discover what he desired to come of it.
There was, in fact, something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some of his desires, accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed.
Smerdyakov was always inquiring, putting certain indirect but obviously premeditated questions, but what his object was he did not explain, and usually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse into silence or pass to another subject.
But what finally irritated Ivan most and confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar, revolting familiarity which Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly.
Not that he forgot himself and was rude; on the contrary, he always spoke very respectfully, yet he had obviously begun to consider—goodness knows why!—that there was some sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch.
He always spoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact, some secret between them, that had at some time been expressed on both sides, only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those around them.
But for a long while Ivan did not recognize the real cause of his growing dislike and he had only lately realized what was at the root of it.
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate without speaking or looking at Smerdyakov.
But Smerdyakov rose from the bench, and from that action alone, Ivan knew instantly that he wanted particularly to talk to him.
With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov’s emasculate, sickly face, with the little curls combed forward on his forehead.
You won’t pass by; you see that we two clever people have something to say to each other.” Ivan shook.
“Get away, miserable idiot.
What have I to do with you?” was on the tip of his tongue, but to his profound astonishment he heard himself say, “Is my father still asleep, or has he waked?” He asked the question softly and meekly, to his own surprise, and at once, again to his own surprise, sat down on the bench.
For an instant he felt almost frightened; he remembered it afterwards.
Smerdyakov stood facing him, his hands behind his back, looking at him with assurance and almost severity.
“His honor is still asleep,” he articulated deliberately (“You were the first to speak, not I,” he seemed to say).
“I am surprised at you, sir,” he added, after a pause, dropping his eyes affectedly, setting his right foot forward, and playing with the tip of his polished boot.
“Why are you surprised at me?” Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly, doing his utmost to restrain himself, and suddenly realizing, with disgust, that he was feeling intense curiosity and would not, on any account, have gone away without satisfying it.
“Why don’t you go to Tchermashnya, sir?” Smerdyakov suddenly raised his eyes and smiled familiarly.
“Why I smile you must understand of yourself, if you are a clever man,” his screwed-up left eye seemed to say.
“Why should I go to Tchermashnya?” Ivan asked in surprise.
Smerdyakov was silent again.
“Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to,” he said at last, slowly and apparently attaching no significance to his answer.
“I put you off with a secondary reason,” he seemed to suggest, “simply to say something.” “Damn you!
Speak out what you want!” Ivan cried angrily at last, passing from meekness to violence.
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left, pulled himself up, but still looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile.
“Substantially nothing—but just by way of conversation.” Another silence followed.
Ivan knew that he ought to get up and show anger, and Smerdyakov stood before him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry or not.
Smerdyakov seemed to seize the moment.
“I’m in an awful position, Ivan Fyodorovitch.
I don’t know how to help myself,” he said resolutely and distinctly, and at his last word he sighed.
Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again.
“They are both utterly crazy, they are no better than little children,” Smerdyakov went on.
“I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and begin worrying me every minute, ‘Has she come?
Why hasn’t she come?’ and so on up till midnight and even after midnight.
And if Agrafena Alexandrovna doesn’t come (for very likely she does not mean to come at all) then he will be at me again to-morrow morning, ‘Why hasn’t she come?
If you miss her and don’t let me know she’s been—I’ll kill you before any one.’ When the night’s over, in the morning, he, too, like Fyodor Pavlovitch, begins worrying me to death.
And every day and every hour they get angrier and angrier, so that I sometimes think I shall kill myself in a fright.
Why did you begin to spy for Dmitri Fyodorovitch?” said Ivan irritably.
“How could I help meddling?
I kept quiet from the very beginning, not daring to answer; but he pitched on me to be his servant.
He has had only one thing to say since: ‘I’ll kill you, you scoundrel, if you miss her,’ I feel certain, sir, that I shall have a long fit to-morrow.” “What do you mean by ‘a long fit’?” “A long fit, lasting a long time—several hours, or perhaps a day or two.
The struggling ceased and then began again, and for three days I couldn’t come back to my senses.
Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube, the doctor here, and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy, too....
I might have died.” “But they say one can’t tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming.
What makes you say you will have one to-morrow?” Ivan inquired, with a peculiar, irritable curiosity.
You can’t tell beforehand.” “Besides, you fell from the garret then.” “I climb up to the garret every day.
“You are talking nonsense, I see, and I don’t quite understand you,” he said softly, but with a sort of menace.
For even if Agrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill, his honor can’t blame a sick man for not telling him.
But even more than that, I am afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does something crazy to his father.” “Why should you be taken for an accomplice?” “They’ll think I am an accomplice, because I let him know the signals as a great secret.” “What signals?
Confound you, speak more plainly.” “I’m bound to admit the fact,” Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure, “that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business.
As you know yourself (if only you do know it) he has for several days past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on.
Of late you’ve been going upstairs to your room early every evening, and yesterday you did not come down at all, and so perhaps you don’t know how carefully he has begun to lock himself in at night, and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door he won’t open to him till he hears his voice.
But Grigory Vassilyevitch does not come, because I wait upon him alone in his room now.
That’s the arrangement he made himself ever since this to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began.
But at night, by his orders, I go away to the lodge so that I don’t get to sleep till midnight, but am on the watch, getting up and walking about the yard, waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come.
For the last few days he’s been perfectly frantic expecting her.
What he argues is, she is afraid of him, Dmitri Fyodorovitch (Mitya, as he calls him), ‘and so,’ says he, ‘she’ll come the back-way, late at night, to me.
You look out for her,’ says he, ‘till midnight and later; and if she does come, you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the garden.
Knock at first twice, rather gently, and then three times more quickly, then,’ says he, ‘I shall understand at once that she has come, and will open the door to you quietly.’ Another signal he gave me in case anything unexpected happens.
At first, two knocks, and then, after an interval, another much louder.
Then he will understand that something has happened suddenly and that I must see him, and he will open to me so that I can go and speak to him.
That’s all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna can’t come herself, but sends a message.
Besides, Dmitri Fyodorovitch might come, too, so I must let him know he is near.
His honor is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with him, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the time, I should be bound to let him know at once, knocking three times.
So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena Alexandrovna has come, while the second signal of three knocks means ‘something important to tell you.’ His honor has shown me them several times and explained them.
And as in the whole universe no one knows of these signals but myself and his honor, so he’d open the door without the slightest hesitation and without calling out (he is awfully afraid of calling out aloud).
Well, those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too, now.” “How are they known?
Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day, ‘You are deceiving me, you are hiding something from me!
How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit, confound you?
Are you laughing at me?” “How could I dare laugh at you?
I am in no laughing humor with this fear on me.
I have a presentiment.
Fright alone will bring it on.” “Confound it!
Let Grigory know beforehand; he will be sure not to let him in.” “I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals without orders from my master.
And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing him and not admitting him, he has been ill ever since yesterday, and Marfa Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to-morrow.
They’ve just arranged it.
Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a preparation and always keeps it.
She has the secret of it, and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago’s so bad he is almost paralyzed by it.
Then she takes a towel, wets it with the stuff, and rubs his whole back for half an hour till it’s quite red and swollen, and what’s left in the bottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer; but not quite all, for on such occasions she leaves some for herself, and drinks it herself.
And when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well after it, but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it.
So, if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow, they won’t hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
They’ll be asleep.” “What a rigmarole!
You’ll have a fit and they’ll both be unconscious,” cried Ivan.
“But aren’t you trying to arrange it so?” broke from him suddenly, and he frowned threateningly.
And why should I, when it all depends on Dmitri Fyodorovitch and his plans?...
If he means to do anything, he’ll do it; but if not, I shan’t be thrusting him upon his father.” “And why should he go to father, especially on the sly, if, as you say yourself, Agrafena Alexandrovna won’t come at all?” Ivan went on, turning white with anger.
“You say that yourself, and all the while I’ve been here, I’ve felt sure it was all the old man’s fancy, and the creature won’t come to him.
Speak, I want to know what you are thinking!” “You know yourself why he’ll come.
His honor will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account of my illness perhaps, and he’ll dash in, as he did yesterday through impatience to search the rooms, to see whether she hasn’t escaped him on the sly.
He is perfectly well aware, too, that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big envelope with three thousand roubles in it, tied up with ribbon and sealed with three seals.
On it is written in his own hand, ‘To my angel Grushenka, if she will come,’ to which he added three days later, ‘for my little chicken.’ There’s no knowing what that might do.” “Nonsense!” cried Ivan, almost beside himself.
He might have killed him yesterday on account of Grushenka, like the frantic, savage fool he is, but he won’t steal.” “He is in very great need of money now—the greatest need, Ivan Fyodorovitch.
You don’t know in what need he is,” Smerdyakov explained, with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness.
“He looks on that three thousand as his own, too.
‘My father still owes me just three thousand,’ he said.
And besides that, consider, Ivan Fyodorovitch, there is something else perfectly true.
It’s as good as certain, so to say, that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him, if only she cares to, to marry her—the master himself, I mean, Fyodor Pavlovitch—if only she cares to, and of course she may care to.
All I’ve said is that she won’t come, but maybe she’s looking for more than that—I mean to be mistress here.
I know myself that Samsonov, her merchant, was laughing with her about it, telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a stupid thing to do.
She wouldn’t marry a beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
So, taking that into consideration, Ivan Fyodorovitch, reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your brother, Alexey Fyodorovitch, would have anything after the master’s death, not a rouble, for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply to get hold of the whole, all the money there is.
But if your father were to die now, there’d be some forty thousand for sure, even for Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so, for he’s made no will....
Dmitri Fyodorovitch knows all that very well.” A sort of shudder passed over Ivan’s face.
He suddenly flushed.
“Then why on earth,” he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov, “do you advise me to go to Tchermashnya?
If I go away, you see what will happen here.” Ivan drew his breath with difficulty.
“Precisely so,” said Smerdyakov, softly and reasonably, watching Ivan intently, however.
“What do you mean by ‘precisely so’?” Ivan questioned him, with a menacing light in his eyes, restraining himself with difficulty.
If I were in your place I should simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position,” answered Smerdyakov, with the most candid air looking at Ivan’s flashing eyes.
“You seem to be a perfect idiot, and what’s more ... an awful scoundrel, too.” Ivan rose suddenly from the bench.
He was about to pass straight through the gate, but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov.
Something strange followed.
Ivan, in a sudden paroxysm, bit his lip, clenched his fists, and, in another minute, would have flung himself on Smerdyakov.
But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov, and Ivan turned in silence, as it seemed in perplexity, to the gate.
That’s all!” he suddenly said aloud angrily, and wondered himself afterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov.
“That’s the best thing you can do,” he responded, as though he had expected to hear it; “except that you can always be telegraphed for from Moscow, if anything should happen here.” Ivan stopped again, and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov.
All his familiarity and carelessness had completely disappeared.
His face expressed attention and expectation, intent but timid and cringing.
“Haven’t you something more to say—something to add?” could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan.
“And couldn’t I be sent for from Tchermashnya, too—in case anything happened?” Ivan shouted suddenly, for some unknown reason raising his voice.
“From Tchermashnya, too ... you could be sent for,” Smerdyakov muttered, almost in a whisper, looking disconcerted, but gazing intently into Ivan’s eyes.
“Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer.
Is it to save my spending money on the fare, or to save my going so far out of my way, that you insist on Tchermashnya?” “Precisely so ...” muttered Smerdyakov, with a breaking voice.
He looked at Ivan with a revolting smile, and again made ready to draw back.
But to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh, and went through the gate still laughing.
Any one who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he was not laughing from lightness of heart, and he could not have explained himself what he was feeling at that instant.
“It’s Always Worth While Speaking To A Clever Man” And in the same nervous frenzy, too, he spoke.
Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitch in the drawing-room directly he went in, he shouted to him, waving his hands, “I am going upstairs to my room, not in to you.
Very possibly the old man was too hateful to him at that moment; but such an unceremonious display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch.
And the old man evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meet him in the drawing-room on purpose.
Receiving this amiable greeting, he stood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son going upstairs, till he passed out of sight.
“What’s the matter with him?” he promptly asked Smerdyakov, who had followed Ivan.
“Angry about something.
Who can tell?” the valet muttered evasively.
No news?” Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complained of to Ivan, all relating to his expected visitor, and these questions we will omit.
Half an hour later the house was locked, and the crazy old man was wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearing every minute the five knocks agreed upon.
Now and then he peered out into the darkness, seeing nothing.
It was very late, but Ivan was still awake and reflecting.
But we will not give an account of his thoughts, and this is not the place to look into that soul—its turn will come.
And even if one tried, it would be very hard to give an account of them, for there were no thoughts in his brain, but something very vague, and, above all, intense excitement.
He felt himself that he had lost his bearings.
He was fretted, too, by all sorts of strange and almost surprising desires; for instance, after midnight he suddenly had an intense irresistible inclination to go down, open the door, go to the lodge and beat Smerdyakov.
But if he had been asked why, he could not have given any exact reason, except perhaps that he loathed the valet as one who had insulted him more gravely than any one in the world.
On the other hand, he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicable humiliating terror, which he felt positively paralyzed his physical powers.
A feeling of hatred was rankling in his heart, as though he meant to avenge himself on some one.
He even hated Alyosha, recalling the conversation he had just had with him.
At moments he hated himself intensely.
And why he had done all this, why he was listening, he could not have said.
That “action” all his life afterwards he called “infamous,” and at the bottom of his heart, he thought of it as the basest action of his life.
For Fyodor Pavlovitch himself he felt no hatred at that moment, but was simply intensely curious to know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now.
He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windows and stopping in the middle of the room, listening, listening—for some one to knock.
About two o’clock when everything was quiet, and even Fyodor Pavlovitch had gone to bed, Ivan had got into bed, firmly resolved to fall asleep at once, as he felt fearfully exhausted.
And he did fall asleep at once, and slept soundly without dreams, but waked early, at seven o’clock, when it was broad daylight.
Opening his eyes, he was surprised to feel himself extraordinarily vigorous.
He jumped up at once and dressed quickly; then dragged out his trunk and began packing immediately.
His linen had come back from the laundress the previous morning.
Ivan positively smiled at the thought that everything was helping his sudden departure.
And his departure certainly was sudden.
Though Ivan had said the day before (to Katerina Ivanovna, Alyosha, and Smerdyakov) that he was leaving next day, yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed, or, at least, had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would be to pack his trunk.
It was about nine o’clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry, “Where will your honor take your tea, in your own room or downstairs?” He looked almost cheerful, but there was about him, about his words and gestures, something hurried and scattered.
Greeting his father affably, and even inquiring specially after his health, though he did not wait to hear his answer to the end, he announced that he was starting off in an hour to return to Moscow for good, and begged him to send for the horses.
His father heard this announcement with no sign of surprise, and forgot in an unmannerly way to show regret at losing him.
Instead of doing so, he flew into a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of his own.
Not to tell me yesterday!
Go to Tchermashnya on the way.
It’s only to turn to the left from the station at Volovya, only another twelve versts and you come to Tchermashnya.” “I’m sorry, I can’t.
I can only just catch it.” “You’ll catch it to-morrow or the day after, but to-day turn off to Tchermashnya.
If I hadn’t had something to keep me here, I would have run over myself long ago, for I’ve some business there in a hurry.
The Maslovs, an old merchant and his son, will give eight thousand for the timber.
But last year I just missed a purchaser who would have given twelve.
The priest at Ilyinskoe wrote to me last Thursday that a merchant called Gorstkin, a man I know, had turned up.
What makes him valuable is that he is not from these parts, so he is not afraid of the Maslovs.
He says he will give me eleven thousand for the copse.
But he’ll only be here, the priest writes, for a week altogether, so you must go at once and make a bargain with him.” “Well, you write to the priest; he’ll make the bargain.” “He can’t do it.
He has no eye for business.
He is a perfect treasure, I’d give him twenty thousand to take care of for me without a receipt; but he has no eye for business, he is a perfect child, a crow could deceive him.
This Gorstkin looks like a peasant, he wears a blue kaftan, but he is a regular rogue.
That’s the common complaint.
Sometimes he tells such lies that you wonder why he is doing it.
So what you have to find out is whether he is lying or speaking the truth, when he says he wants to buy it and would give eleven thousand.” “I shall be no use in such a business.
You will be of use, for I will tell you the signs by which you can judge about Gorstkin.
I’ve done business with him a long time.
If his beard shakes when he talks and he gets cross, it’s all right, he is saying what he means, he wants to do business.
Don’t watch his eyes, you won’t find out anything from his eyes, he is a deep one, a rogue—but watch his beard!
He’s called Gorstkin, though his real name is Lyagavy;[4] but don’t call him so, he will be offended.
If you come to an understanding with him, and see it’s all right, write here at once.
You need only write: ‘He’s not lying.’ Stand out for eleven thousand; one thousand you can knock off, but not more.
Just think! there’s a difference between eight thousand and eleven thousand.
It’s as good as picking up three thousand; it’s not so easy to find a purchaser, and I’m in desperate need of money.
But what’s the good of my galloping over, if it’s all a notion of the priest’s?
I tell you, watch his beard—if his beard shakes you know he is in earnest.” “You force me to go to that damned Tchermashnya yourself, then?” cried Ivan, with a malignant smile.
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not catch, or would not catch, the malignancy, but he caught the smile.
I’ll scribble the note for you at once.” “I don’t know whether I shall go.
I’ll decide on the way.” “Nonsense!
The priest will give you horses back to Volovya station.” The old man was quite delighted.
When Fyodor Pavlovitch was pleased, he usually became expansive, but to-day he seemed to restrain himself.
Of Dmitri, for instance, he did not say a word.
He was quite unmoved by the parting, and seemed, in fact, at a loss for something to say.
Ivan noticed this particularly.
Only when accompanying his son out on to the steps, the old man began to fuss about.
He would have kissed him, but Ivan made haste to hold out his hand, obviously avoiding the kiss.
His father saw it at once, and instantly pulled himself up.
“Well, good luck to you, good luck to you!” he repeated from the steps.
Well, Christ be with you!” Ivan got into the carriage.
The whole household came out to take leave—Smerdyakov, Marfa and Grigory.
When he had seated himself in the carriage, Smerdyakov jumped up to arrange the rug.
I am going to Tchermashnya,” broke suddenly from Ivan.
Again, as the day before, the words seemed to drop of themselves, and he laughed, too, a peculiar, nervous laugh.
He remembered it long after.
“It’s a true saying then, that ‘it’s always worth while speaking to a clever man,’” answered Smerdyakov firmly, looking significantly at Ivan.
The carriage rolled away.
Nothing was clear in Ivan’s soul, but he looked eagerly around him at the fields, at the hills, at the trees, at a flock of geese flying high overhead in the bright sky.
He tried to talk to the driver, and he felt intensely interested in an answer the peasant made him; but a minute later he realized that he was not catching anything, and that he had not really even taken in the peasant’s answer.
He was silent, and it was pleasant even so.
The images of Alyosha and Katerina Ivanovna floated into his mind.
But he softly smiled, blew softly on the friendly phantoms, and they flew away.
They reached the station quickly, changed horses, and galloped to Volovya.
“Why is it worth while speaking to a clever man?
What did he mean by that?” The thought seemed suddenly to clutch at his breathing.
“And why did I tell him I was going to Tchermashnya?” They reached Volovya station.
Ivan got out of the carriage, and the drivers stood round him bargaining over the journey of twelve versts to Tchermashnya.
He went into the station house, looked round, glanced at the overseer’s wife, and suddenly went back to the entrance.
“I won’t go to Tchermashnya.
Am I too late to reach the railway by seven, brothers?” “We shall just do it.
Shall we get the carriage out?” “At once.
Go to my father’s, to Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, and tell him I haven’t gone to Tchermashnya.
I’ve known Fyodor Pavlovitch a long time.” “And here’s something for you, for I dare say he won’t give you anything,” said Ivan, laughing gayly.
He was thinking all the night.
The train flew on, and only at daybreak, when he was approaching Moscow, he suddenly roused himself from his meditation.
“I am a scoundrel,” he whispered to himself.
Fyodor Pavlovitch remained well satisfied at having seen his son off.
For two hours afterwards he felt almost happy, and sat drinking brandy.
But suddenly something happened which was very annoying and unpleasant for every one in the house, and completely upset Fyodor Pavlovitch’s equanimity at once.
Smerdyakov went to the cellar for something and fell down from the top of the steps.
Fortunately, Marfa Ignatyevna was in the yard and heard him in time.
She did not see the fall, but heard his scream—the strange, peculiar scream, long familiar to her—the scream of the epileptic falling in a fit.
They could not tell whether the fit had come on him at the moment he was descending the steps, so that he must have fallen unconscious, or whether it was the fall and the shock that had caused the fit in Smerdyakov, who was known to be liable to them.
They found him at the bottom of the cellar steps, writhing in convulsions and foaming at the mouth.
It was thought at first that he must have broken something—an arm or a leg—and hurt himself, but “God had preserved him,” as Marfa Ignatyevna expressed it—nothing of the kind had happened.
But it was difficult to get him out of the cellar.
They asked the neighbors to help and managed it somehow.
Fyodor Pavlovitch himself was present at the whole ceremony.
He helped, evidently alarmed and upset.
The sick man did not regain consciousness; the convulsions ceased for a time, but then began again, and every one concluded that the same thing would happen, as had happened a year before, when he accidentally fell from the garret.
They remembered that ice had been put on his head then.
There was still ice in the cellar, and Marfa Ignatyevna had some brought up.
In the evening, Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Doctor Herzenstube, who arrived at once.
He was a most estimable old man, and the most careful and conscientious doctor in the province.
After careful examination, he concluded that the fit was a very violent one and might have serious consequences; that meanwhile he, Herzenstube, did not fully understand it, but that by to-morrow morning, if the present remedies were unavailing, he would venture to try something else.
The invalid was taken to the lodge, to a room next to Grigory’s and Marfa Ignatyevna’s.
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up with that day.
Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner, and the soup, compared with Smerdyakov’s, was “no better than dish-water,” and the fowl was so dried up that it was impossible to masticate it.
To her master’s bitter, though deserved, reproaches, Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was a very old one to begin with, and that she had never been trained as a cook.
In the evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch; he was informed that Grigory, who had not been well for the last three days, was completely laid up by his lumbago.
Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his tea as early as possible and locked himself up alone in the house.
He was in terrible excitement and suspense.
That evening he reckoned on Grushenka’s coming almost as a certainty.
He had received from Smerdyakov that morning an assurance “that she had promised to come without fail.” The incorrigible old man’s heart throbbed with excitement; he paced up and down his empty rooms listening.
Dmitri might be on the watch for her somewhere, and when she knocked on the window (Smerdyakov had informed him two days before that he had told her where and how to knock) the door must be opened at once.
She must not be a second in the passage, for fear—which God forbid!—that she should be frightened and run away.
Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of, but never had his heart been steeped in such voluptuous hopes.
This time he could say almost certainly that she would come!
Father Zossima And His Visitors When with an anxious and aching heart Alyosha went into his elder’s cell, he stood still almost astonished.
Instead of a sick man at his last gasp, perhaps unconscious, as he had feared to find him, he saw him sitting up in his chair and, though weak and exhausted, his face was bright and cheerful, he was surrounded by visitors and engaged in a quiet and joyful conversation.
If he had seen him unconscious, if he had seen him breathe his last, and yet had his promise that he would rise up and say good-by to him, he would not have believed perhaps even in death, but would still have expected the dead man to recover and fulfill his promise.
In the morning as he lay down to sleep, Father Zossima had told him positively: “I shall not die without the delight of another conversation with you, beloved of my heart.
I shall look once more on your dear face and pour out my heart to you once again.” The monks, who had gathered for this probably last conversation with Father Zossima, had all been his devoted friends for many years.
There were four of them: Father Iosif and Father Païssy, Father Mihaïl, the warden of the hermitage, a man not very old and far from being learned.
He was of humble origin, of strong will and steadfast faith, of austere appearance, but of deep tenderness, though he obviously concealed it as though he were almost ashamed of it.
He was almost illiterate, and very quiet, scarcely speaking to any one.
He was the humblest of the humble, and looked as though he had been frightened by something great and awful beyond the scope of his intelligence.
Father Zossima had a great affection for this timorous man, and always treated him with marked respect, though perhaps there was no one he had known to whom he had said less, in spite of the fact that he had spent years wandering about holy Russia with him.
That was very long ago, forty years before, when Father Zossima first began his life as a monk in a poor and little monastery at Kostroma, and when, shortly after, he had accompanied Father Anfim on his pilgrimage to collect alms for their poor monastery.
The whole party were in the bedroom which, as we mentioned before, was very small, so that there was scarcely room for the four of them (in addition to Porfiry, the novice, who stood) to sit round Father Zossima on chairs brought from the sitting-room.
It was already beginning to get dark, the room was lighted up by the lamps and the candles before the ikons.
Seeing Alyosha standing embarrassed in the doorway, Father Zossima smiled at him joyfully and held out his hand.
Something surged up from his heart, his soul was quivering, he wanted to sob.
“You see I am sitting up talking; maybe I shall live another twenty years yet, as that dear good woman from Vishegorye, with her little Lizaveta in her arms, wished me yesterday.
God bless the mother and the little girl Lizaveta,” he crossed himself.
“Porfiry, did you take her offering where I told you?” He meant the sixty copecks brought him the day before by the good-humored woman to be given “to some one poorer than me.” Such offerings, always of money gained by personal toil, are made by way of penance voluntarily undertaken.
The elder had sent Porfiry the evening before to a widow, whose house had been burnt down lately, and who after the fire had gone with her children begging alms.
Porfiry hastened to reply that he had given the money, as he had been instructed, “from an unknown benefactress.” “Get up, my dear boy,” the elder went on to Alyosha.
Have you been home and seen your brother?” It seemed strange to Alyosha that he asked so confidently and precisely, about one of his brothers only—but which one?
Then perhaps he had sent him out both yesterday and to-day for the sake of that brother.
“I have seen one of my brothers,” answered Alyosha.
“I mean the elder one, to whom I bowed down.” “I only saw him yesterday and could not find him to-day,” said Alyosha.
“Make haste to find him, go again to-morrow and make haste, leave everything and make haste.
Perhaps you may still have time to prevent something terrible.
I bowed down yesterday to the great suffering in store for him.” He was suddenly silent and seemed to be pondering.
Father Iosif, who had witnessed the scene yesterday, exchanged glances with Father Païssy.
What is this suffering in store for him?” “Don’t inquire.
I seemed to see something terrible yesterday ... as though his whole future were expressed in his eyes.
A look came into his eyes—so that I was instantly horror-stricken at what that man is preparing for himself.
Once or twice in my life I’ve seen such a look in a man’s face ... reflecting as it were his future fate, and that fate, alas, came to pass.
I sent you to him, Alexey, for I thought your brotherly face would help him.
But everything and all our fates are from the Lord.
‘Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.’ Remember that.
You, Alexey, I’ve many times silently blessed for your face, know that,” added the elder with a gentle smile.
Life will bring you many misfortunes, but you will find your happiness in them, and will bless life and will make others bless it—which is what matters most.
Well, that is your character.
Fathers and teachers,” he addressed his friends with a tender smile, “I have never till to-day told even him why the face of this youth is so dear to me.
His face has been as it were a remembrance and a prophecy for me.
At the dawn of my life when I was a child I had an elder brother who died before my eyes at seventeen.
And later on in the course of my life I gradually became convinced that that brother had been for a guidance and a sign from on high for me.
For had he not come into my life, I should never perhaps, so I fancy at least, have become a monk and entered on this precious path.
He appeared first to me in my childhood, and here, at the end of my pilgrimage, he seems to have come to me over again.
It is marvelous, fathers and teachers, that Alexey, who has some, though not a great, resemblance in face, seems to me so like him spiritually, that many times I have taken him for that young man, my brother, mysteriously come back to me at the end of my pilgrimage, as a reminder and an inspiration.
So that I positively wondered at so strange a dream in myself.
“Many times I’ve seen in your face as it were a look of mortification that I love Alexey more than you.
Now you know why that was so, but I love you too, know that, and many times I grieved at your mortification.
I should like to tell you, dear friends, of that youth, my brother, for there has been no presence in my life more precious, more significant and touching.
My heart is full of tenderness, and I look at my whole life at this moment as though living through it again.” Here I must observe that this last conversation of Father Zossima with the friends who visited him on the last day of his life has been partly preserved in writing.
Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov wrote it down from memory, some time after his elder’s death.
But whether this was only the conversation that took place then, or whether he added to it his notes of parts of former conversations with his teacher, I cannot determine.
In his account, Father Zossima’s talk goes on without interruption, as though he told his life to his friends in the form of a story, though there is no doubt, from other accounts of it, that the conversation that evening was general.
Though the guests did not interrupt Father Zossima much, yet they too talked, perhaps even told something themselves.
Besides, Father Zossima could not have carried on an uninterrupted narrative, for he was sometimes gasping for breath, his voice failed him, and he even lay down to rest on his bed, though he did not fall asleep and his visitors did not leave their seats.
Once or twice the conversation was interrupted by Father Païssy’s reading the Gospel.
It is worthy of note, too, that no one of them supposed that he would die that night, for on that evening of his life after his deep sleep in the day he seemed suddenly to have found new strength, which kept him up through this long conversation.
It was like a last effort of love which gave him marvelous energy; only for a little time, however, for his life was cut short immediately....
I will only add now that I have preferred to confine myself to the account given by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov.
It will be shorter and not so fatiguing, though of course, as I must repeat, Alyosha took a great deal from previous conversations and added them to it.
Notes of the Life of the deceased Priest and Monk, the Elder Zossima, taken from his own words by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES _(a)_ _Father Zossima’s Brother_ Beloved fathers and teachers, I was born in a distant province in the north, in the town of V.
My father was a gentleman by birth, but of no great consequence or position.
He died when I was only two years old, and I don’t remember him at all.
He left my mother a small house built of wood, and a fortune, not large, but sufficient to keep her and her children in comfort.
He was eight years older than I was, of hasty irritable temperament, but kind-hearted and never ironical.
He was remarkably silent, especially at home with me, his mother, and the servants.
He did well at school, but did not get on with his schoolfellows, though he never quarreled, at least so my mother has told me.
Six months before his death, when he was seventeen, he made friends with a political exile who had been banished from Moscow to our town for freethinking, and led a solitary existence there.
He was a good scholar who had gained distinction in philosophy in the university.
Something made him take a fancy to Markel, and he used to ask him to see him.
The young man would spend whole evenings with him during that winter, till the exile was summoned to Petersburg to take up his post again at his own request, as he had powerful friends.
It was the beginning of Lent, and Markel would not fast, he was rude and laughed at it.
“That’s all silly twaddle, and there is no God,” he said, horrifying my mother, the servants, and me too.
We had four servants, all serfs.
I remember my mother selling one of the four, the cook Afimya, who was lame and elderly, for sixty paper roubles, and hiring a free servant to take her place.
In the sixth week in Lent, my brother, who was never strong and had a tendency to consumption, was taken ill.
He was tall but thin and delicate-looking, and of very pleasing countenance.
I suppose he caught cold, anyway the doctor, who came, soon whispered to my mother that it was galloping consumption, that he would not live through the spring.
My mother began weeping, and, careful not to alarm my brother, she entreated him to go to church, to confess and take the sacrament, as he was still able to move about.
This made him angry, and he said something profane about the church.
He grew thoughtful, however; he guessed at once that he was seriously ill, and that that was why his mother was begging him to confess and take the sacrament.
He had been aware, indeed, for a long time past, that he was far from well, and had a year before coolly observed at dinner to our mother and me, “My life won’t be long among you, I may not live another year,” which seemed now like a prophecy.
“His end must be near,” she thought, “if there’s such a change in him.” But he was not able to go to church long, he took to his bed, so he had to confess and take the sacrament at home.
It was a late Easter, and the days were bright, fine, and full of fragrance.
I remember he used to cough all night and sleep badly, but in the morning he dressed and tried to sit up in an arm-chair.
That’s how I remember him sitting, sweet and gentle, smiling, his face bright and joyous, in spite of his illness.
A marvelous change passed over him, his spirit seemed transformed.
“Light it, light it, dear, I was a wretch to have prevented you doing it.
So we are praying to the same God.” Those words seemed strange to us, and mother would go to her room and weep, but when she went in to him she wiped her eyes and looked cheerful.
“Dear ones,” he would say to them, “what have I done that you should love me so, how can you love any one like me, and how was it I did not know, I did not appreciate it before?” When the servants came in to him he would say continually, “Dear, kind people, why are you doing so much for me, do I deserve to be waited on?
If it were God’s will for me to live, I would wait on you, for all men should wait on one another.” Mother shook her head as she listened.
“My darling, it’s your illness makes you talk like that.” “Mother, darling,” he would say, “there must be servants and masters, but if so I will be the servant of my servants, the same as they are to me.
And another thing, mother, every one of us has sinned against all men, and I more than any.” Mother positively smiled at that, smiled through her tears.
Robbers and murderers have done that, but what sin have you committed yet, that you hold yourself more guilty than all?” “Mother, little heart of mine,” he said (he had begun using such strange caressing words at that time), “little heart of mine, my joy, believe me, every one is really responsible to all men for all men and for everything.
I don’t know how to explain it to you, but I feel it is so, painfully even.
When the doctor, an old German called Eisenschmidt, came: “Well, doctor, have I another day in this world?” he would ask, joking.
One day is enough for a man to know all happiness.
My dear ones, why do we quarrel, try to outshine each other and keep grudges against each other?
Let’s go straight into the garden, walk and play there, love, appreciate, and kiss each other, and glorify life.” “Your son cannot last long,” the doctor told my mother, as she accompanied him to the door.
“The disease is affecting his brain.” The windows of his room looked out into the garden, and our garden was a shady one, with old trees in it which were coming into bud.
The first birds of spring were flitting in the branches, chirruping and singing at the windows.
And looking at them and admiring them, he began suddenly begging their forgiveness too: “Birds of heaven, happy birds, forgive me, for I have sinned against you too.” None of us could understand that at the time, but he shed tears of joy.
“Yes,” he said, “there was such a glory of God all about me: birds, trees, meadows, sky; only I lived in shame and dishonored it all and did not notice the beauty and glory.” “You take too many sins on yourself,” mother used to say, weeping.
Am I not in heaven now?” And there was a great deal more I don’t remember.
I remember I went once into his room when there was no one else there.
He beckoned me, and I went up to him.
He put his hands on my shoulders and looked into my face tenderly, lovingly; he said nothing for a minute, only looked at me like that.
And many times in my life afterwards I remembered even with tears how he told me to enjoy life for him too.
There were many other marvelous and beautiful sayings of his, though we did not understand them at the time.
He was fully conscious though he could not talk; up to his last hour he did not change.
He looked happy, his eyes beamed and sought us, he smiled at us, beckoned us.
I was impressed by all this at the time, but not too much so, though I cried a good deal at his funeral.
I was young then, a child, but a lasting impression, a hidden feeling of it all, remained in my heart, ready to rise up and respond when the time came.
So indeed it happened. _(b) Of the Holy Scriptures in the Life of Father Zossima_ I was left alone with my mother.
Her friends began advising her to send me to Petersburg as other parents did.
“You have only one son now,” they said, “and have a fair income, and you will be depriving him perhaps of a brilliant career if you keep him here.” They suggested I should be sent to Petersburg to the Cadet Corps, that I might afterwards enter the Imperial Guard.
My mother hesitated for a long time, it was awful to part with her only child, but she made up her mind to it at last, though not without many tears, believing she was acting for my happiness.
She brought me to Petersburg and put me into the Cadet Corps, and I never saw her again.
For she too died three years afterwards.
She spent those three years mourning and grieving for both of us.
From the house of my childhood I have brought nothing but precious memories, for there are no memories more precious than those of early childhood in one’s first home.
Indeed, precious memories may remain even of a bad home, if only the heart knows how to find what is precious.
With my memories of home I count, too, my memories of the Bible, which, child as I was, I was very eager to read at home.
I had a book of Scripture history then with excellent pictures, called _A Hundred and Four Stories from the Old and New Testament_, and I learned to read from it.
I have it lying on my shelf now, I keep it as a precious relic of the past.
But even before I learned to read, I remember first being moved to devotional feeling at eight years old.
My mother took me alone to mass (I don’t remember where my brother was at the time) on the Monday before Easter.
It was a fine day, and I remember to-day, as though I saw it now, how the incense rose from the censer and softly floated upwards and, overhead in the cupola, mingled in rising waves with the sunlight that streamed in at the little window.
I was stirred by the sight, and for the first time in my life I consciously received the seed of God’s word in my heart.
A youth came out into the middle of the church carrying a big book, so large that at the time I fancied he could scarcely carry it.
He laid it on the reading desk, opened it, and began reading, and suddenly for the first time I understood something read in the church of God.
In the land of Uz, there lived a man, righteous and God-fearing, and he had great wealth, so many camels, so many sheep and asses, and his children feasted, and he loved them very much and prayed for them.
“It may be that my sons have sinned in their feasting.” Now the devil came before the Lord together with the sons of God, and said to the Lord that he had gone up and down the earth and under the earth.
“And hast thou considered my servant Job?” God asked of him.
And God boasted to the devil, pointing to his great and holy servant.
And the devil smote his children and his cattle and scattered his wealth, all of a sudden like a thunderbolt from heaven.
Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever.” Fathers and teachers, forgive my tears now, for all my childhood rises up again before me, and I breathe now as I breathed then, with the breast of a little child of eight, and I feel as I did then, awe and wonder and gladness.
The camels at that time caught my imagination, and Satan, who talked like that with God, and God who gave His servant up to destruction, and His servant crying out: “Blessed be Thy name although Thou dost punish me,” and then the soft and sweet singing in the church: “Let my prayer rise up before Thee,” and again incense from the priest’s censer and the kneeling and the prayer.
Ever since then—only yesterday I took it up—I’ve never been able to read that sacred tale without tears.
And how much that is great, mysterious and unfathomable there is in it!
Afterwards I heard the words of mockery and blame, proud words, “How could God give up the most loved of His saints for the diversion of the devil, take from him his children, smite him with sore boils so that he cleansed the corruption from his sores with a pot-sherd—and for no object except to boast to the devil!
‘See what My saint can suffer for My sake.’” But the greatness of it lies just in the fact that it is a mystery—that the passing earthly show and the eternal verity are brought together in it.
In the face of the earthly truth, the eternal truth is accomplished.
The Creator, just as on the first days of creation He ended each day with praise: “That is good that I have created,” looks upon Job and again praises His creation.
And Job, praising the Lord, serves not only Him but all His creation for generations and generations, and for ever and ever, since for that he was ordained.
What a book the Bible is, what a miracle, what strength is given with it to man!
It is like a mold cast of the world and man and human nature, everything is there, and a law for everything for all the ages.
And what mysteries are solved and revealed!
Many years pass by, and he has other children and loves them.
But how could he love those new ones when those first children are no more, when he has lost them?
Remembering them, how could he be fully happy with those new ones, however dear the new ones might be?
It’s the great mystery of human life that old grief passes gradually into quiet, tender joy.
The mild serenity of age takes the place of the riotous blood of youth.
I bless the rising sun each day, and, as before, my hearts sings to meet it, but now I love even more its setting, its long slanting rays and the soft, tender, gentle memories that come with them, the dear images from the whole of my long, happy life—and over all the Divine Truth, softening, reconciling, forgiving!
My life is ending, I know that well, but every day that is left me I feel how my earthly life is in touch with a new infinite, unknown, that approaching life, the nearness of which sets my soul quivering with rapture, my mind glowing and my heart weeping with joy.
Friends and teachers, I have heard more than once, and of late one may hear it more often, that the priests, and above all the village priests, are complaining on all sides of their miserable income and their humiliating lot.
They plainly state, even in print—I’ve read it myself—that they are unable to teach the Scriptures to the people because of the smallness of their means, and if Lutherans and heretics come and lead the flock astray, they let them lead them astray because they have so little to live upon.
May the Lord increase the sustenance that is so precious to them, for their complaint is just, too.
For he may be short of time, he may say truly that he is overwhelmed all the while with work and services, but still it’s not all the time, even he has an hour a week to remember God.
Let him gather round him once a week, some hour in the evening, if only the children at first—the fathers will hear of it and they too will begin to come.
Let him open that book and begin reading it without grand words or superciliousness, without condescension to them, but gently and kindly, being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening with attention, loving the words himself, only stopping from time to time to explain words that are not understood by the peasants.
Don’t be anxious, they will understand everything, the orthodox heart will understand all!
Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah, about Isaac and Rebecca, of how Jacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in his dream and said, “This place is holy”—and he will impress the devout mind of the peasant.
Let him read, especially to the children, how the brothers sold Joseph, the tender boy, the dreamer and prophet, into bondage, and told their father that a wild beast had devoured him, and showed him his blood-stained clothes.
And how, seeing them again after many years, he loved them beyond measure, but he harassed and tormented them in love.
He left them at last not able to bear the suffering of his heart, flung himself on his bed and wept.
Fathers and teachers, forgive me and don’t be angry, that like a little child I’ve been babbling of what you know long ago, and can teach me a hundred times more skillfully.
Let him too weep, the priest of God, and be sure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response.
Only a little tiny seed is needed—drop it into the heart of the peasant and it won’t die, it will live in his soul all his life, it will be hidden in the midst of his darkness and sin, like a bright spot, like a great reminder.
And there’s no need of much teaching or explanation, he will understand it all simply.
Do you suppose that the peasants don’t understand?
Try reading them the touching story of the fair Esther and the haughty Vashti; or the miraculous story of Jonah in the whale.
Don’t forget either the parables of Our Lord, choose especially from the Gospel of St.
Luke (that is what I did), and then from the Acts of the Apostles the conversion of St.
Paul (that you mustn’t leave out on any account), and from the _Lives of the Saints_, for instance, the life of Alexey, the man of God and, greatest of all, the happy martyr and the seer of God, Mary of Egypt—and you will penetrate their hearts with these simple tales.
And you will see for yourselves that our people is gracious and grateful, and will repay you a hundred-fold.
Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving words they have heard from him, they will of their own accord help him in his fields and in his house, and will treat him with more respect than before—so that it will even increase his worldly well-being too.
The thing is so simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words, for fear of being laughed at, and yet how true it is!
He who believes in God’s people will see His Holiness too, even though he had not believed in it till then.
Only the people and their future spiritual power will convert our atheists, who have torn themselves away from their native soil.
In my youth, long ago, nearly forty years ago, I traveled all over Russia with Father Anfim, collecting funds for our monastery, and we stayed one night on the bank of a great navigable river with some fishermen.
A good-looking peasant lad, about eighteen, joined us; he had to hurry back next morning to pull a merchant’s barge along the bank.
I noticed him looking straight before him with clear and tender eyes.
It was a bright, warm, still, July night, a cool mist rose from the broad river, we could hear the plash of a fish, the birds were still, all was hushed and beautiful, everything praying to God.
Only we two were not sleeping, the lad and I, and we talked of the beauty of this world of God’s and of the great mystery of it.
Every blade of grass, every insect, ant, and golden bee, all so marvelously know their path, though they have not intelligence, they bear witness to the mystery of God and continually accomplish it themselves.
“I know nothing better than to be in the forest,” said he, “though all things are good.” “Truly,” I answered him, “all things are good and fair, because all is truth.
Look,” said I, “at the horse, that great beast that is so near to man; or the lowly, pensive ox, which feeds him and works for him; look at their faces, what meekness, what devotion to man, who often beats them mercilessly.
What gentleness, what confidence and what beauty!
It’s touching to know that there’s no sin in them, for all, all except man, is sinless, and Christ has been with them before us.” “Why,” asked the boy, “is Christ with them too?” “It cannot but be so,” said I, “since the Word is for all.
All creation and all creatures, every leaf is striving to the Word, singing glory to God, weeping to Christ, unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery of their sinless life.
Yonder,” said I, “in the forest wanders the dreadful bear, fierce and menacing, and yet innocent in it.” And I told him how once a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a tiny cell in the wood.
“Go along,” said he, “Christ be with you,” and the savage beast walked away meekly and obediently, doing no harm.
And the lad was delighted that the bear had walked away without hurting the saint, and that Christ was with him too.
“Ah,” said he, “how good that is, how good and beautiful is all God’s work!” He sat musing softly and sweetly.
I saw he understood.
The Duel _(c) Recollections of Father Zossima’s Youth before he became a Monk.
The Duel_ I spent a long time, almost eight years, in the military cadet school at Petersburg, and in the novelty of my surroundings there, many of my childish impressions grew dimmer, though I forgot nothing.
I picked up so many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel, absurd, almost savage creature.
A surface polish of courtesy and society manners I did acquire together with the French language.
But we all, myself included, looked upon the soldiers in our service as cattle.
I was perhaps worse than the rest in that respect, for I was so much more impressionable than my companions.
By the time we left the school as officers, we were ready to lay down our lives for the honor of the regiment, but no one of us had any knowledge of the real meaning of honor, and if any one had known it, he would have been the first to ridicule it.
Drunkenness, debauchery and devilry were what we almost prided ourselves on.
What made it worse for me was that I had come into my own money, and so I flung myself into a life of pleasure, and plunged headlong into all the recklessness of youth.
I was fond of reading, yet strange to say, the Bible was the one book I never opened at that time, though I always carried it about with me, and I was never separated from it; in very truth I was keeping that book “for the day and the hour, for the month and the year,” though I knew it not.
After four years of this life, I chanced to be in the town of K. where our regiment was stationed at the time.
We found the people of the town hospitable, rich and fond of entertainments.
I met with a cordial reception everywhere, as I was of a lively temperament and was known to be well off, which always goes a long way in the world.
And then a circumstance happened which was the beginning of it all.
I formed an attachment to a beautiful and intelligent young girl of noble and lofty character, the daughter of people much respected.
They were well-to-do people of influence and position.
They always gave me a cordial and friendly reception.
Later on I saw and fully realized that I perhaps was not so passionately in love with her at all, but only recognized the elevation of her mind and character, which I could not indeed have helped doing.
I was prevented, however, from making her an offer at the time by my selfishness, I was loath to part with the allurements of my free and licentious bachelor life in the heyday of my youth, and with my pockets full of money.
I did drop some hint as to my feelings however, though I put off taking any decisive step for a time.
Then, all of a sudden, we were ordered off for two months to another district.
On my return two months later, I found the young lady already married to a rich neighboring landowner, a very amiable man, still young though older than I was, connected with the best Petersburg society, which I was not, and of excellent education, which I also was not.
I was so overwhelmed at this unexpected circumstance that my mind was positively clouded.
The worst of it all was that, as I learned then, the young landowner had been a long while betrothed to her, and I had met him indeed many times in her house, but blinded by my conceit I had noticed nothing.
And this particularly mortified me; almost everybody had known all about it, while I knew nothing.
I was filled with sudden irrepressible fury.
With flushed face I began recalling how often I had been on the point of declaring my love to her, and as she had not attempted to stop me or to warn me, she must, I concluded, have been laughing at me all the time.
Later on, of course, I reflected and remembered that she had been very far from laughing at me; on the contrary, she used to turn off any love-making on my part with a jest and begin talking of other subjects; but at that moment I was incapable of reflecting and was all eagerness for revenge.
I am surprised to remember that my wrath and revengeful feelings were extremely repugnant to my own nature, for being of an easy temper, I found it difficult to be angry with any one for long, and so I had to work myself up artificially and became at last revolting and absurd.
I waited for an opportunity and succeeded in insulting my “rival” in the presence of a large company.
I insulted him on a perfectly extraneous pretext, jeering at his opinion upon an important public event—it was in the year 1826[5]—and my jeer was, so people said, clever and effective.
Then I forced him to ask for an explanation, and behaved so rudely that he accepted my challenge in spite of the vast inequality between us, as I was younger, a person of no consequence, and of inferior rank.
I learned afterwards for a fact that it was from a jealous feeling on his side also that my challenge was accepted; he had been rather jealous of me on his wife’s account before their marriage; he fancied now that if he submitted to be insulted by me and refused to accept my challenge, and if she heard of it, she might begin to despise him and waver in her love for him.
I soon found a second in a comrade, an ensign of our regiment.
In those days though duels were severely punished, yet dueling was a kind of fashion among the officers—so strong and deeply rooted will a brutal prejudice sometimes be.
It was the end of June, and our meeting was to take place at seven o’clock the next day on the outskirts of the town—and then something happened that in very truth was the turning-point of my life.
In the evening, returning home in a savage and brutal humor, I flew into a rage with my orderly Afanasy, and gave him two blows in the face with all my might, so that it was covered with blood.
He had not long been in my service and I had struck him before, but never with such ferocious cruelty.
I went to bed and slept for about three hours; when I waked up the day was breaking.
I got up—I did not want to sleep any more—I went to the window—opened it, it looked out upon the garden; I saw the sun rising; it was warm and beautiful, the birds were singing.
“I feel in my heart as it were something vile and shameful.
It all rose before my mind, it all was as it were repeated over again; he stood before me and I was beating him straight on the face and he was holding his arms stiffly down, his head erect, his eyes fixed upon me as though on parade.
He staggered at every blow and did not even dare to raise his hands to protect himself.
That is what a man has been brought to, and that was a man beating a fellow creature!
I stood as if I were struck dumb, while the sun was shining, the leaves were rejoicing and the birds were trilling the praise of God....
And then I remembered my brother Markel and what he said on his death-bed to his servants: “My dear ones, why do you wait on me, why do you love me, am I worth your waiting on me?” “Yes, am I worth it?” flashed through my mind.
“After all what am I worth, that another man, a fellow creature, made in the likeness and image of God, should serve me?” For the first time in my life this question forced itself upon me.
He had said, “Mother, my little heart, in truth we are each responsible to all for all, it’s only that men don’t know this.
If they knew it, the world would be a paradise at once.” “God, can that too be false?” I thought as I wept.
“In truth, perhaps, I am more than all others responsible for all, a greater sinner than all men in the world.” And all at once the whole truth in its full light appeared to me; what was I going to do?
I was going to kill a good, clever, noble man, who had done me no wrong, and by depriving his wife of happiness for the rest of her life, I should be torturing and killing her too.
I lay thus in my bed with my face in the pillow, heedless how the time was passing.
Suddenly my second, the ensign, came in with the pistols to fetch me.
“Ah,” said he, “it’s a good thing you are up already, it’s time we were off, come along!” I did not know what to do and hurried to and fro undecided; we went out to the carriage, however.
“I’ll be back directly, I have forgotten my purse.” And I ran back alone, to Afanasy’s little room.
“Afanasy,” I said, “I gave you two blows on the face yesterday, forgive me,” I said.
He started as though he were frightened, and looked at me; and I saw that it was not enough, and on the spot, in my full officer’s uniform, I dropped at his feet and bowed my head to the ground.
Then he was completely aghast.
I flew out to my comrade and jumped into the carriage.
“Have you ever seen a conqueror?” I asked him.
“Here is one before you.” I was in ecstasy, laughing and talking all the way, I don’t remember what about.
I stood gayly, looking him full in the face; I did not twitch an eyelash, I looked lovingly at him, for I knew what I would do.
I turned to my adversary.
“Forgive me, young fool that I am, sir,” I said, “for my unprovoked insult to you and for forcing you to fire at me.
“Upon my word,” cried my adversary, annoyed, “if you did not want to fight, why did not you let me alone?” “Yesterday I was a fool, to-day I know better,” I answered him gayly.
“As to yesterday, I believe you, but as for to-day, it is difficult to agree with your opinion,” said he.
“Bravo,” I cried, clapping my hands.
I have deserved it!” “Will you shoot, sir, or not?” “No, I won’t,” I said; “if you like, fire at me again, but it would be better for you not to fire.” The seconds, especially mine, were shouting too: “Can you disgrace the regiment like this, facing your antagonist and begging his forgiveness!
If I’d only known this!” I stood facing them all, not laughing now.
“Gentlemen,” I said, “is it really so wonderful in these days to find a man who can repent of his stupidity and publicly confess his wrongdoing?” “But not in a duel,” cried my second again.
All my comrades heard of the affair at once and gathered together to pass judgment on me the same day.
“He has disgraced the uniform,” they said; “let him resign his commission.” Some stood up for me: “He faced the shot,” they said.
“Yes, but he was afraid of his other shot and begged for forgiveness.” “If he had been afraid of being shot, he would have shot his own pistol first before asking forgiveness, while he flung it loaded into the forest.
No, there’s something else in this, something original.” I enjoyed listening and looking at them.
“My dear friends and comrades,” said I, “don’t worry about my resigning my commission, for I have done so already.
I have sent in my papers this morning and as soon as I get my discharge I shall go into a monastery—it’s with that object I am leaving the regiment.” When I had said this every one of them burst out laughing.
“You should have told us of that first, that explains everything, we can’t judge a monk.” They laughed and could not stop themselves, and not scornfully, but kindly and merrily.
They all felt friendly to me at once, even those who had been sternest in their censure, and all the following month, before my discharge came, they could not make enough of me.
And every one said something kind to me, they began trying to dissuade me, even to pity me: “What are you doing to yourself?” “No,” they would say, “he is a brave fellow, he faced fire and could have fired his own pistol too, but he had a dream the night before that he should become a monk, that’s why he did it.” It was the same thing with the society of the town.
Till then I had been kindly received, but had not been the object of special attention, and now all came to know me at once and invited me; they laughed at me, but they loved me.
I may mention that although everybody talked openly of our duel, the authorities took no notice of it, because my antagonist was a near relation of our general, and as there had been no bloodshed and no serious consequences, and as I resigned my commission, they took it as a joke.
And I began then to speak aloud and fearlessly, regardless of their laughter, for it was always kindly and not spiteful laughter.
These conversations mostly took place in the evenings, in the company of ladies; women particularly liked listening to me then and they made the men listen.
“But how can I possibly be responsible for all?” every one would laugh in my face.
“Can I, for instance, be responsible for you?” “You may well not know it,” I would answer, “since the whole world has long been going on a different line, since we consider the veriest lies as truth and demand the same lies from others.
Here I have for once in my life acted sincerely and, well, you all look upon me as a madman.
Though you are friendly to me, yet, you see, you all laugh at me.” “But how can we help being friendly to you?” said my hostess, laughing.
All of a sudden the young lady rose, on whose account the duel had been fought and whom only lately I had intended to be my future wife.
“Let me tell you,” she said, “that I am the first not to laugh at you, but on the contrary I thank you with tears and express my respect for you for your action then.” Her husband, too, came up and then they all approached me and almost kissed me.
My heart was filled with joy, but my attention was especially caught by a middle-aged man who came up to me with the others.
I knew him by name already, but had never made his acquaintance nor exchanged a word with him till that evening. _(d) The Mysterious Visitor_ He had long been an official in the town; he was in a prominent position, respected by all, rich and had a reputation for benevolence.
He subscribed considerable sums to the almshouse and the orphan asylum; he was very charitable, too, in secret, a fact which only became known after his death.
He was a man of about fifty, almost stern in appearance and not much given to conversation.
He had been married about ten years and his wife, who was still young, had borne him three children.
Well, I was sitting alone in my room the following evening, when my door suddenly opened and this gentleman walked in.
I must mention, by the way, that I was no longer living in my former quarters.
As soon as I resigned my commission, I took rooms with an old lady, the widow of a government clerk.
My landlady’s servant waited upon me, for I had moved into her rooms simply because on my return from the duel I had sent Afanasy back to the regiment, as I felt ashamed to look him in the face after my last interview with him.
So prone is the man of the world to be ashamed of any righteous action.
“I have,” said my visitor, “with great interest listened to you speaking in different houses the last few days and I wanted at last to make your personal acquaintance, so as to talk to you more intimately.
Can you, dear sir, grant me this favor?” “I can, with the greatest pleasure, and I shall look upon it as an honor.” I said this, though I felt almost dismayed, so greatly was I impressed from the first moment by the appearance of this man.
For though other people had listened to me with interest and attention, no one had come to me before with such a serious, stern and concentrated expression.
“You are, I see, a man of great strength of character,” he said; “as you have dared to serve the truth, even when by doing so you risked incurring the contempt of all.” “Your praise is, perhaps, excessive,” I replied.
“No, it’s not excessive,” he answered; “believe me, such a course of action is far more difficult than you think.
It is that which has impressed me, and it is only on that account that I have come to you,” he continued.
“Tell me, please, that is if you are not annoyed by my perhaps unseemly curiosity, what were your exact sensations, if you can recall them, at the moment when you made up your mind to ask forgiveness at the duel.
“You ask what were my exact sensations at the moment when I asked my opponent’s forgiveness,” I answered; “but I had better tell you from the beginning what I have not yet told any one else.” And I described all that had passed between Afanasy and me, and how I had bowed down to the ground at his feet.
“From that you can see for yourself,” I concluded, “that at the time of the duel it was easier for me, for I had made a beginning already at home, and when once I had started on that road, to go farther along it was far from being difficult, but became a source of joy and happiness.” I liked the way he looked at me as he listened.
“All that,” he said, “is exceedingly interesting.
But about himself he scarcely ever said a word, yet continually asked me about myself.
In spite of that I became very fond of him and spoke with perfect frankness to him about all my feelings; “for,” thought I, “what need have I to know his secrets, since I can see without that that he is a good man?
Moreover, though he is such a serious man and my senior, he comes to see a youngster like me and treats me as his equal.” And I learned a great deal that was profitable from him, for he was a man of lofty mind.
“That life is heaven,” he said to me suddenly, “that I have long been thinking about”; and all at once he added, “I think of nothing else indeed.” He looked at me and smiled.
“I am more convinced of it than you are, I will tell you later why.” I listened to him and thought that he evidently wanted to tell me something.
“Heaven,” he went on, “lies hidden within all of us—here it lies hidden in me now, and if I will it, it will be revealed to me to-morrow and for all time.” I looked at him; he was speaking with great emotion and gazing mysteriously at me, as if he were questioning me.
“And that we are all responsible to all for all, apart from our own sins, you were quite right in thinking that, and it is wonderful how you could comprehend it in all its significance at once.
And in very truth, so soon as men understand that, the Kingdom of Heaven will be for them not a dream, but a living reality.” “And when,” I cried out to him bitterly, “when will that come to pass? and will it ever come to pass?
“You preach it and don’t believe it yourself.
It’s a spiritual, psychological process.
To transform the world, to recreate it afresh, men must turn into another path psychologically.
Until you have become really, in actual fact, a brother to every one, brotherhood will not come to pass.
No sort of scientific teaching, no kind of common interest, will ever teach men to share property and privileges with equal consideration for all.
Every one will think his share too small and they will be always envying, complaining and attacking one another.
You ask when it will come to pass; it will come to pass, but first we have to go through the period of isolation.” “What do you mean by isolation?” I asked him.
“Why, the isolation that prevails everywhere, above all in our age—it has not fully developed, it has not reached its limit yet.
For every one strives to keep his individuality as apart as possible, wishes to secure the greatest possible fullness of life for himself; but meantime all his efforts result not in attaining fullness of life but self-destruction, for instead of self-realization he ends by arriving at complete solitude.
All mankind in our age have split up into units, they all keep apart, each in his own groove; each one holds aloof, hides himself and hides what he has, from the rest, and he ends by being repelled by others and repelling them.
He heaps up riches by himself and thinks, ‘How strong I am now and how secure,’ and in his madness he does not understand that the more he heaps up, the more he sinks into self-destructive impotence.
For he is accustomed to rely upon himself alone and to cut himself off from the whole; he has trained himself not to believe in the help of others, in men and in humanity, and only trembles for fear he should lose his money and the privileges that he has won for himself.
Everywhere in these days men have, in their mockery, ceased to understand that the true security is to be found in social solidarity rather than in isolated individual effort.
But this terrible individualism must inevitably have an end, and all will suddenly understand how unnaturally they are separated from one another.
It will be the spirit of the time, and people will marvel that they have sat so long in darkness without seeing the light.
Sometimes even if he has to do it alone, and his conduct seems to be crazy, a man must set an example, and so draw men’s souls out of their solitude, and spur them to some act of brotherly love, that the great idea may not die.” Our evenings, one after another, were spent in such stirring and fervent talk.
I gave up society and visited my neighbors much less frequently.
Besides, my vogue was somewhat over.
I say this, not as blame, for they still loved me and treated me good-humoredly, but there’s no denying that fashion is a great power in society.
I began to regard my mysterious visitor with admiration, for besides enjoying his intelligence, I began to perceive that he was brooding over some plan in his heart, and was preparing himself perhaps for a great deed.
Perhaps he liked my not showing curiosity about his secret, not seeking to discover it by direct question nor by insinuation.
But I noticed at last, that he seemed to show signs of wanting to tell me something.
“Do you know,” he said to me once, “that people are very inquisitive about us in the town and wonder why I come to see you so often.
But let them wonder, for _soon all will be explained_.” Sometimes an extraordinary agitation would come over him, and almost always on such occasions he would get up and go away.
Sometimes he would fix a long piercing look upon me, and I thought, “He will say something directly now.” But he would suddenly begin talking of something ordinary and familiar.
He often complained of headache too.
One day, quite unexpectedly indeed, after he had been talking with great fervor a long time, I saw him suddenly turn pale, and his face worked convulsively, while he stared persistently at me.
“What’s the matter?” I said; “do you feel ill?”—he had just been complaining of headache.
I murdered some one.” He said this and smiled with a face as white as chalk.
“Why is it he is smiling?” The thought flashed through my mind before I realized anything else.
I thought he was mad, but ended by being convinced, to my great grief and amazement.
His crime was a great and terrible one.
Fourteen years before, he had murdered the widow of a landowner, a wealthy and handsome young woman who had a house in our town.
He fell passionately in love with her, declared his feeling and tried to persuade her to marry him.
But she had already given her heart to another man, an officer of noble birth and high rank in the service, who was at that time away at the front, though she was expecting him soon to return.
After he had ceased to visit her, he took advantage of his knowledge of the house to enter at night through the garden by the roof, at great risk of discovery.
But, as often happens, a crime committed with extraordinary audacity is more successful than others.
Entering the garret through the skylight, he went down the ladder, knowing that the door at the bottom of it was sometimes, through the negligence of the servants, left unlocked.
As though on purpose, both her maids had gone off to a birthday-party in the same street, without asking leave.
The other servants slept in the servants’ quarters or in the kitchen on the ground-floor.
His passion flamed up at the sight of her asleep, and then vindictive, jealous anger took possession of his heart, and like a drunken man, beside himself, he thrust a knife into her heart, so that she did not even cry out.
Then with devilish and criminal cunning he contrived that suspicion should fall on the servants.
He was so base as to take her purse, to open her chest with keys from under her pillow, and to take some things from it, doing it all as it might have been done by an ignorant servant, leaving valuable papers and taking only money.
He took some of the larger gold things, but left smaller articles that were ten times as valuable.
He took with him, too, some things for himself as remembrances, but of that later.
Having done this awful deed, he returned by the way he had come.
Neither the next day, when the alarm was raised, nor at any time after in his life, did any one dream of suspecting that he was the criminal.
No one indeed knew of his love for her, for he was always reserved and silent and had no friend to whom he would have opened his heart.
He was looked upon simply as an acquaintance, and not a very intimate one, of the murdered woman, as for the previous fortnight he had not even visited her.
A serf of hers called Pyotr was at once suspected, and every circumstance confirmed the suspicion.
The man knew—indeed his mistress did not conceal the fact—that having to send one of her serfs as a recruit she had decided to send him, as he had no relations and his conduct was unsatisfactory.
People had heard him angrily threatening to murder her when he was drunk in a tavern.
The day after the murder, he was found on the road leading out of the town, dead drunk, with a knife in his pocket, and his right hand happened to be stained with blood.
He declared that his nose had been bleeding, but no one believed him.
The maids confessed that they had gone to a party and that the street-door had been left open till they returned.
And a number of similar details came to light, throwing suspicion on the innocent servant.
They arrested him, and he was tried for the murder; but a week after the arrest, the prisoner fell sick of a fever and died unconscious in the hospital.
There the matter ended and the judges and the authorities and every one in the town remained convinced that the crime had been committed by no one but the servant who had died in the hospital.
And after that the punishment began.
My mysterious visitor, now my friend, told me that at first he was not in the least troubled by pangs of conscience.
He was miserable a long time, but not for that reason; only from regret that he had killed the woman he loved, that she was no more, that in killing her he had killed his love, while the fire of passion was still in his veins.
But of the innocent blood he had shed, of the murder of a fellow creature, he scarcely thought.
The thought that his victim might have become the wife of another man was insupportable to him, and so, for a long time, he was convinced in his conscience that he could not have acted otherwise.
At first he was worried at the arrest of the servant, but his illness and death soon set his mind at rest, for the man’s death was apparently (so he reflected at the time) not owing to his arrest or his fright, but a chill he had taken on the day he ran away, when he had lain all night dead drunk on the damp ground.
The theft of the money and other things troubled him little, for he argued that the theft had not been committed for gain but to avert suspicion.
The sum stolen was small, and he shortly afterwards subscribed the whole of it, and much more, towards the funds for maintaining an almshouse in the town.
He did this on purpose to set his conscience at rest about the theft, and it’s a remarkable fact that for a long time he really was at peace—he told me this himself.
He entered then upon a career of great activity in the service, volunteered for a difficult and laborious duty, which occupied him two years, and being a man of strong will almost forgot the past.
Whenever he recalled it, he tried not to think of it at all.
He became active in philanthropy too, founded and helped to maintain many institutions in the town, did a good deal in the two capitals, and in both Moscow and Petersburg was elected a member of philanthropic societies.
At last, however, he began brooding over the past, and the strain of it was too much for him.
Then he was attracted by a fine and intelligent girl and soon after married her, hoping that marriage would dispel his lonely depression, and that by entering on a new life and scrupulously doing his duty to his wife and children, he would escape from old memories altogether.
But the very opposite of what he expected happened.
He began, even in the first month of his marriage, to be continually fretted by the thought, “My wife loves me—but what if she knew?” When she first told him that she would soon bear him a child, he was troubled.
“I am giving life, but I have taken life.” Children came.
I have shed blood.” They were splendid children, he longed to caress them; “and I can’t look at their innocent candid faces, I am unworthy.” At last he began to be bitterly and ominously haunted by the blood of his murdered victim, by the young life he had destroyed, by the blood that cried out for vengeance.
But, being a man of fortitude, he bore his suffering a long time, thinking: “I shall expiate everything by this secret agony.” But that hope, too, was vain; the longer it went on, the more intense was his suffering.
He was respected in society for his active benevolence, though every one was overawed by his stern and gloomy character.
But the more he was respected, the more intolerable it was for him.
He confessed to me that he had thoughts of killing himself.
But he began to be haunted by another idea—an idea which he had at first regarded as impossible and unthinkable, though at last it got such a hold on his heart that he could not shake it off.
He dreamed of rising up, going out and confessing in the face of all men that he had committed murder.
For three years this dream had pursued him, haunting him in different forms.
At last he believed with his whole heart that if he confessed his crime, he would heal his soul and would be at peace for ever.
And then came what happened at my duel.
“Is it possible,” I cried, clasping my hands, “that such a trivial incident could give rise to such a resolution in you?” “My resolution has been growing for the last three years,” he answered, “and your story only gave the last touch to it.
Looking at you, I reproached myself and envied you.” He said this to me almost sullenly.
“But you won’t be believed,” I observed; “it’s fourteen years ago.” “I have proofs, great proofs.
“Tell me one thing, one thing,” he said (as though it all depended upon me), “my wife, my children!
My wife may die of grief, and though my children won’t lose their rank and property, they’ll be a convict’s children and for ever!
It’s for ever, you know, for ever!” I sat still and repeated a silent prayer.
Everything passes, only the truth remains.
Your children will understand, when they grow up, the nobility of your resolution.” He left me that time as though he had made up his mind.
Yet for more than a fortnight afterwards, he came to me every evening, still preparing himself, still unable to bring himself to the point.
One day he would come determined and say fervently: “I know it will be heaven for me, heaven, the moment I confess.
Fourteen years I’ve been in hell.
I will take my punishment and begin to live.
Now I dare not love my neighbor nor even my own children.
Good God, my children will understand, perhaps, what my punishment has cost me and will not condemn me!
God is not in strength but in truth.” “All will understand your sacrifice,” I said to him, “if not at once, they will understand later; for you have served truth, the higher truth, not of the earth.” And he would go away seeming comforted, but next day he would come again, bitter, pale, sarcastic.
“Every time I come to you, you look at me so inquisitively as though to say, ‘He has still not confessed!’ Wait a bit, don’t despise me too much.
You won’t go and inform against me then, will you?” And far from looking at him with indiscreet curiosity, I was afraid to look at him at all.
“Do you understand what the word ‘wife’ means?
When I went out, the children called to me, ‘Good-by, father, make haste back to read _The Children’s Magazine_ with us.’ No, you don’t understand that!
No one is wise from another man’s woe.” His eyes were glittering, his lips were twitching.
Suddenly he struck the table with his fist so that everything on it danced—it was the first time he had done such a thing, he was such a mild man.
“But need I?” he exclaimed, “must I?
No one has been condemned, no one has been sent to Siberia in my place, the man died of fever.
And I’ve been punished by my sufferings for the blood I shed.
And I shan’t be believed, they won’t believe my proofs.
I am ready to go on suffering all my life for the blood I have shed, if only my wife and children may be spared.
And will people recognize it, will they appreciate it, will they respect it?” “Good Lord!” I thought to myself, “he is thinking of other people’s respect at such a moment!” And I felt so sorry for him then, that I believe I would have shared his fate if it could have comforted him.
I was aghast, realizing with my heart as well as my mind what such a resolution meant.
“Decide my fate!” he exclaimed again.
“Go and confess,” I whispered to him.
My voice failed me, but I whispered it firmly.
I took up the New Testament from the table, the Russian translation, and showed him the Gospel of St.
John, chapter xii. verse 24: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.” I had just been reading that verse when he came in.
“That’s true,” he said, but he smiled bitterly.
“It’s terrible the things you find in those books,” he said, after a pause.
So I have been for fourteen years ‘in the hands of the living God,’ that’s how one must think of those fourteen years.
To-morrow I will beseech those hands to let me go.” I wanted to take him in my arms and kiss him, but I did not dare—his face was contorted and somber.
“Good God,” I thought, “what has he gone to face!” I fell on my knees before the ikon and wept for him before the Holy Mother of God, our swift defender and helper.
I was half an hour praying in tears, and it was late, about midnight.
Suddenly I saw the door open and he came in again.
“I think,” he said, “I’ve forgotten something ... my handkerchief, I think....
Well, even if I’ve not forgotten anything, let me stay a little.” He sat down.
We sat still for two minutes; he looked intently at me and suddenly smiled—I remembered that—then he got up, embraced me warmly and kissed me.
“Remember,” he said, “how I came to you a second time.
Do you hear, remember it!” And he went out.
I did not know that evening that the next day was his birthday.
On that day he always had a great gathering, every one in the town went to it.
After dinner he walked into the middle of the room, with a paper in his hand—a formal declaration to the chief of his department who was present.
This declaration he read aloud to the whole assembly.
It contained a full account of the crime, in every detail.
God has visited me,” he said in conclusion.
Why had he kept them for fourteen years afterwards instead of destroying them as evidence against him?
And this is what happened: every one was amazed and horrified, every one refused to believe it and thought that he was deranged, though all listened with intense curiosity.
The legal authorities could not refuse to take the case up, but they too dropped it.
Though the trinkets and letters made them ponder, they decided that even if they did turn out to be authentic, no charge could be based on those alone.
I heard afterwards, however, that the genuineness of the things was proved by the friends and relations of the murdered woman, and that there was no doubt about them.
Yet nothing was destined to come of it, after all.
The nature of his illness I can’t explain, they said it was an affection of the heart.
But it became known that the doctors had been induced by his wife to investigate his mental condition also, and had come to the conclusion that it was a case of insanity.
I betrayed nothing, though people ran to question me.
But when I wanted to visit him, I was for a long while forbidden to do so, above all by his wife.
“It’s you who have caused his illness,” she said to me; “he was always gloomy, but for the last year people noticed that he was peculiarly excited and did strange things, and now you have been the ruin of him.
Your preaching has brought him to this; for the last month he was always with you.” Indeed, not only his wife but the whole town were down upon me and blamed me.
I was silent and indeed rejoiced at heart, for I saw plainly God’s mercy to the man who had turned against himself and punished himself.
I could not believe in his insanity.
They let me see him at last, he insisted upon saying good-by to me.
I went in to him and saw at once, that not only his days, but his hours were numbered.
He was weak, yellow, his hands trembled, he gasped for breath, but his face was full of tender and happy feeling.
“I’ve long been yearning to see you, why didn’t you come?” I did not tell him that they would not let me see him.
Now I dare to love my children and to kiss them.
Neither my wife nor the judges, nor any one has believed it.
My children will never believe it either.
And now I feel God near, my heart rejoices as in Heaven ...
I have done my duty.” He could not speak, he gasped for breath, he pressed my hand warmly, looking fervently at me.
But he had time to whisper to me: “Do you remember how I came back to you that second time, at midnight?
I told you to remember it.
“I went out from you then into the darkness, I wandered about the streets, struggling with myself.
And suddenly I hated you so that I could hardly bear it.
I can’t refuse to face my punishment to-morrow, for he knows all.
It was not that I was afraid you would betray me (I never even thought of that), but I thought, ‘How can I look him in the face if I don’t confess?’ And if you had been at the other end of the earth, but alive, it would have been all the same, the thought was unendurable that you were alive knowing everything and condemning me.
I hated you as though you were the cause, as though you were to blame for everything.
I came back to you then, remembering that you had a dagger lying on your table.
I sat down and asked you to sit down, and for a whole minute I pondered.
If I had killed you, I should have been ruined by that murder even if I had not confessed the other.
I only hated you and longed to revenge myself on you for everything.
The Lord vanquished the devil in my heart.
The whole town followed him to the grave.
All lamented the terrible illness that had cut short his days.
Some, at first a few and afterwards more, began indeed to believe in the truth of his story, and they visited me and questioned me with great interest and eagerness, for man loves to see the downfall and disgrace of the righteous.
But I held my tongue, and very shortly after, I left the town, and five months later by God’s grace I entered upon the safe and blessed path, praising the unseen finger which had guided me so clearly to it.
But I remember in my prayer to this day, the servant of God, Mihail, who suffered so greatly.
Conversations And Exhortations Of Father Zossima _(e) The Russian Monk and his possible Significance_ Fathers and teachers, what is the monk?
In the cultivated world the word is nowadays pronounced by some people with a jeer, and by others it is used as a term of abuse, and this contempt for the monk is growing.
It is true, alas, it is true, that there are many sluggards, gluttons, profligates and insolent beggars among monks.
Educated people point to these: “You are idlers, useless members of society, you live on the labor of others, you are shameless beggars.” And yet how many meek and humble monks there are, yearning for solitude and fervent prayer in peace!
And how surprised men would be if I were to say that from these meek monks, who yearn for solitary prayer, the salvation of Russia will come perhaps once more!
For they are in truth made ready in peace and quiet “for the day and the hour, the month and the year.” Meanwhile, in their solitude, they keep the image of Christ fair and undefiled, in the purity of God’s truth, from the times of the Fathers of old, the Apostles and the martyrs.
And when the time comes they will show it to the tottering creeds of the world.
Look at the worldly and all who set themselves up above the people of God, has not God’s image and His truth been distorted in them?
The spiritual world, the higher part of man’s being is rejected altogether, dismissed with a sort of triumph, even with hatred.
The world has proclaimed the reign of freedom, especially of late, but what do we see in this freedom of theirs?
Nothing but slavery and self-destruction!
For the world says: “You have desires and so satisfy them, for you have the same rights as the most rich and powerful.
Don’t be afraid of satisfying them and even multiply your desires.” That is the modern doctrine of the world.
And what follows from this right of multiplication of desires?
In the rich, isolation and spiritual suicide; in the poor, envy and murder; for they have been given rights, but have not been shown the means of satisfying their wants.
They maintain that the world is getting more and more united, more and more bound together in brotherly community, as it overcomes distance and sets thoughts flying through the air.
Interpreting freedom as the multiplication and rapid satisfaction of desires, men distort their own nature, for many senseless and foolish desires and habits and ridiculous fancies are fostered in them.
They live only for mutual envy, for luxury and ostentation.
To have dinners, visits, carriages, rank and slaves to wait on one is looked upon as a necessity, for which life, honor and human feeling are sacrificed, and men even commit suicide if they are unable to satisfy it.
We see the same thing among those who are not rich, while the poor drown their unsatisfied need and their envy in drunkenness.
I knew one “champion of freedom” who told me himself that, when he was deprived of tobacco in prison, he was so wretched at the privation that he almost went and betrayed his cause for the sake of getting tobacco again!
And such a man says, “I am fighting for the cause of humanity.” How can such a one fight? what is he fit for?
And it’s no wonder that instead of gaining freedom they have sunk into slavery, and instead of serving the cause of brotherly love and the union of humanity have fallen, on the contrary, into dissension and isolation, as my mysterious visitor and teacher said to me in my youth.
And therefore the idea of the service of humanity, of brotherly love and the solidarity of mankind, is more and more dying out in the world, and indeed this idea is sometimes treated with derision.
What can become of him if he is in such bondage to the habit of satisfying the innumerable desires he has created for himself?
He is isolated, and what concern has he with the rest of humanity?
They have succeeded in accumulating a greater mass of objects, but the joy in the world has grown less.
The monastic way is very different.
Obedience, fasting and prayer are laughed at, yet only through them lies the way to real, true freedom.
I cut off my superfluous and unnecessary desires, I subdue my proud and wanton will and chastise it with obedience, and with God’s help I attain freedom of spirit and with it spiritual joy.
Which is most capable of conceiving a great idea and serving it—the rich man in his isolation or the man who has freed himself from the tyranny of material things and habits?
The monk is reproached for his solitude, “You have secluded yourself within the walls of the monastery for your own salvation, and have forgotten the brotherly service of humanity!” But we shall see which will be most zealous in the cause of brotherly love.
For it is not we, but they, who are in isolation, though they don’t see that.
The same meek and humble ascetics will rise up and go out to work for the great cause.
The salvation of Russia comes from the people.
We are isolated only if the people are isolated.
The people believe as we do, and an unbelieving reformer will never do anything in Russia, even if he is sincere in heart and a genius.
The people will meet the atheist and overcome him, and Russia will be one and orthodox.
Go on educating him quietly.
That’s your duty as monks, for the peasant has God in his heart. (_f_) _Of Masters and Servants, and of whether it is possible for them to be Brothers in the Spirit_ Of course, I don’t deny that there is sin in the peasants too.
And the fire of corruption is spreading visibly, hourly, working from above downwards.
The spirit of isolation is coming upon the people too.
Money-lenders and devourers of the commune are rising up.
Already the merchant grows more and more eager for rank, and strives to show himself cultured though he has not a trace of culture, and to this end meanly despises his old traditions, and is even ashamed of the faith of his fathers.
He visits princes, though he is only a peasant corrupted.
The peasants are rotting in drunkenness and cannot shake off the habit.
And what cruelty to their wives, to their children even!
All from drunkenness!
I’ve seen in the factories children of nine years old, frail, rickety, bent and already depraved.
The stuffy workshop, the din of machinery, work all day long, the vile language and the drink, the drink—is that what a little child’s heart needs?
He needs sunshine, childish play, good examples all about him, and at least a little love.
There must be no more of this, monks, no more torturing of children, rise up and preach that, make haste, make haste!
But God will save Russia, for though the peasants are corrupted and cannot renounce their filthy sin, yet they know it is cursed by God and that they do wrong in sinning.
So that our people still believe in righteousness, have faith in God and weep tears of devotion.
It is different with the upper classes.
They, following science, want to base justice on reason alone, but not with Christ, as before, and they have already proclaimed that there is no crime, that there is no sin.
And that’s consistent, for if you have no God what is the meaning of crime?
In Europe the people are already rising up against the rich with violence, and the leaders of the people are everywhere leading them to bloodshed, and teaching them that their wrath is righteous.
But their “wrath is accursed, for it is cruel.” But God will save Russia as He has saved her many times.
Salvation will come from the people, from their faith and their meekness.
Fathers and teachers, watch over the people’s faith and this will not be a dream.
I’ve seen it myself, I can testify to it, I’ve seen it and marveled at it, I’ve seen it in spite of the degraded sins and poverty-stricken appearance of our peasantry.
They are not servile, and even after two centuries of serfdom they are free in manner and bearing, yet without insolence, and not revengeful and not envious.
“You are rich and noble, you are clever and talented, well, be so, God bless you.
I have seen it myself, I have known it myself, and, would you believe it, the poorer our Russian peasant is, the more noticeable is that serene goodness, for the rich among them are for the most part corrupted already, and much of that is due to our carelessness and indifference.
But God will save His people, for Russia is great in her humility.
It will come to pass, that even the most corrupt of our rich will end by being ashamed of his riches before the poor, and the poor, seeing his humility, will understand and give way before him, will respond joyfully and kindly to his honorable shame.
Equality is to be found only in the spiritual dignity of man, and that will only be understood among us.
If we were brothers, there would be fraternity, but before that, they will never agree about the division of wealth.
We preserve the image of Christ, and it will shine forth like a precious diamond to the whole world.
Fathers and teachers, a touching incident befell me once.
In my wanderings I met in the town of K. my old orderly, Afanasy.
He chanced to see me in the market-place, recognized me, ran up to me, and how delighted he was!
He was no longer in the army, he was married and already had two little children.
He and his wife earned their living as costermongers in the market-place.
He made me sit down, set the samovar, sent for his wife, as though my appearance were a festival for them.
He brought me his children: “Bless them, Father.” “Is it for me to bless them?
And for you, Afanasy Pavlovitch, I have prayed every day since that day, for it all came from you,” said I.
And I explained that to him as well as I could.
The man kept gazing at me and could not believe that I, his former master, an officer, was now before him in such a guise and position; it made him shed tears.
“Why are you weeping?” said I, “better rejoice over me, dear friend, whom I can never forget, for my path is a glad and joyful one.” He did not say much, but kept sighing and shaking his head over me tenderly.
“I gave it to the monastery,” I answered; “we live in common.” After tea I began saying good-by, and suddenly he brought out half a rouble as an offering to the monastery, and another half-rouble I saw him thrusting hurriedly into my hand: “That’s for you in your wanderings, it may be of use to you, Father.” I took his half-rouble, bowed to him and his wife, and went out rejoicing.
And on my way I thought: “Here we are both now, he at home and I on the road, sighing and shaking our heads, no doubt, and yet smiling joyfully in the gladness of our hearts, remembering how God brought about our meeting.” I have never seen him again since then.
I had been his master and he my servant, but now when we exchanged a loving kiss with softened hearts, there was a great human bond between us.
I have thought a great deal about that, and now what I think is this: Is it so inconceivable that that grand and simple-hearted unity might in due time become universal among the Russian people?
It is impossible that there should be no servants in the world, but act so that your servant may be freer in spirit than if he were not a servant.
And why cannot I be a servant to my servant and even let him see it, and that without any pride on my part or any mistrust on his?
Even now this can be done, but it will lead to the grand unity of men in the future, when a man will not seek servants for himself, or desire to turn his fellow creatures into servants as he does now, but on the contrary, will long with his whole heart to be the servant of all, as the Gospel teaches.
And can it be a dream, that in the end man will find his joy only in deeds of light and mercy, and not in cruel pleasures as now, in gluttony, fornication, ostentation, boasting and envious rivalry of one with the other?
People laugh and ask: “When will that time come and does it look like coming?” I believe that with Christ’s help we shall accomplish this great thing.
And how many ideas there have been on earth in the history of man which were unthinkable ten years before they appeared!
Yet when their destined hour had come, they came forth and spread over the whole earth.
So it will be with us, and our people will shine forth in the world, and all men will say: “The stone which the builders rejected has become the corner-stone of the building.” And we may ask the scornful themselves: If our hope is a dream, when will you build up your edifice and order things justly by your intellect alone, without Christ?
If they declare that it is they who are advancing towards unity, only the most simple-hearted among them believe it, so that one may positively marvel at such simplicity.
Of a truth, they have more fantastic dreams than we.
They aim at justice, but, denying Christ, they will end by flooding the earth with blood, for blood cries out for blood, and he that taketh up the sword shall perish by the sword.
And if it were not for Christ’s covenant, they would slaughter one another down to the last two men on earth.
And those two last men would not be able to restrain each other in their pride, and the one would slay the other and then himself.
And that would come to pass, were it not for the promise of Christ that for the sake of the humble and meek the days shall be shortened.
While I was still wearing an officer’s uniform after my duel, I talked about servants in general society, and I remember every one was amazed at me.
“What!” they asked, “are we to make our servants sit down on the sofa and offer them tea?” And I answered them: “Why not, sometimes at least?” Every one laughed.
Their question was frivolous and my answer was not clear; but the thought in it was to some extent right. (_g_) _Of Prayer, of Love, and of Contact with other Worlds_ Young man, be not forgetful of prayer.
Every time you pray, if your prayer is sincere, there will be new feeling and new meaning in it, which will give you fresh courage, and you will understand that prayer is an education.
Remember, too, every day, and whenever you can, repeat to yourself, “Lord, have mercy on all who appear before Thee to-day.” For every hour and every moment thousands of men leave life on this earth, and their souls appear before God.
And how many of them depart in solitude, unknown, sad, dejected that no one mourns for them or even knows whether they have lived or not!
How touching it must be to a soul standing in dread before the Lord to feel at that instant that, for him too, there is one to pray, that there is a fellow creature left on earth to love him too!
And God will look on you both more graciously, for if you have had so much pity on him, how much will He have pity Who is infinitely more loving and merciful than you!
Brothers, have no fear of men’s sin.
Love a man even in his sin, for that is the semblance of Divine Love and is the highest love on earth.
Love all God’s creation, the whole and every grain of sand in it.
Love the animals, love the plants, love everything.
If you love everything, you will perceive the divine mystery in things.
Once you perceive it, you will begin to comprehend it better every day.
And you will come at last to love the whole world with an all-embracing love.
Love the animals: God has given them the rudiments of thought and joy untroubled.
Do not trouble it, don’t harass them, don’t deprive them of their happiness, don’t work against God’s intent.
Man, do not pride yourself on superiority to the animals; they are without sin, and you, with your greatness, defile the earth by your appearance on it, and leave the traces of your foulness after you—alas, it is true of almost every one of us!
Love children especially, for they too are sinless like the angels; they live to soften and purify our hearts and as it were to guide us.
Father Anfim taught me to love children.
The kind, silent man used often on our wanderings to spend the farthings given us on sweets and cakes for the children.
At some thoughts one stands perplexed, especially at the sight of men’s sin, and wonders whether one should use force or humble love.
Loving humility is marvelously strong, the strongest of all things, and there is nothing else like it.
Every day and every hour, every minute, walk round yourself and watch yourself, and see that your image is a seemly one.
You pass by a little child, you pass by, spiteful, with ugly words, with wrathful heart; you may not have noticed the child, but he has seen you, and your image, unseemly and ignoble, may remain in his defenseless heart.
You don’t know it, but you may have sown an evil seed in him and it may grow, and all because you were not careful before the child, because you did not foster in yourself a careful, actively benevolent love.
Brothers, love is a teacher; but one must know how to acquire it, for it is hard to acquire, it is dearly bought, it is won slowly by long labor.
For we must love not only occasionally, for a moment, but for ever.
Every one can love occasionally, even the wicked can.
My brother asked the birds to forgive him; that sounds senseless, but it is right; for all is like an ocean, all is flowing and blending; a touch in one place sets up movement at the other end of the earth.
It may be senseless to beg forgiveness of the birds, but birds would be happier at your side—a little happier, anyway—and children and all animals, if you were nobler than you are now.
Then you would pray to the birds too, consumed by an all-embracing love, in a sort of transport, and pray that they too will forgive you your sin.
Treasure this ecstasy, however senseless it may seem to men.
My friends, pray to God for gladness.
Be glad as children, as the birds of heaven.
And let not the sin of men confound you in your doings.
Fear not that it will wear away your work and hinder its being accomplished.
Do not say, “Sin is mighty, wickedness is mighty, evil environment is mighty, and we are lonely and helpless, and evil environment is wearing us away and hindering our good work from being done.” Fly from that dejection, children!
There is only one means of salvation, then take yourself and make yourself responsible for all men’s sins, that is the truth, you know, friends, for as soon as you sincerely make yourself responsible for everything and for all men, you will see at once that it is really so, and that you are to blame for every one and for all things.
But throwing your own indolence and impotence on others you will end by sharing the pride of Satan and murmuring against God.
Of the pride of Satan what I think is this: it is hard for us on earth to comprehend it, and therefore it is so easy to fall into error and to share it, even imagining that we are doing something grand and fine.
Indeed, many of the strongest feelings and movements of our nature we cannot comprehend on earth.
Let not that be a stumbling-block, and think not that it may serve as a justification to you for anything.
For the Eternal Judge asks of you what you can comprehend and not what you cannot.
You will know that yourself hereafter, for you will behold all things truly then and will not dispute them.
On earth, indeed, we are as it were astray, and if it were not for the precious image of Christ before us, we should be undone and altogether lost, as was the human race before the flood.
Much on earth is hidden from us, but to make up for that we have been given a precious mystic sense of our living bond with the other world, with the higher heavenly world, and the roots of our thoughts and feelings are not here but in other worlds.
That is why the philosophers say that we cannot apprehend the reality of things on earth.
God took seeds from different worlds and sowed them on this earth, and His garden grew up and everything came up that could come up, but what grows lives and is alive only through the feeling of its contact with other mysterious worlds.
If that feeling grows weak or is destroyed in you, the heavenly growth will die away in you.
Then you will be indifferent to life and even grow to hate it.
That’s what I think. _(h) Can a Man judge his Fellow Creatures?
Faith to the End_ Remember particularly that you cannot be a judge of any one.
For no one can judge a criminal, until he recognizes that he is just such a criminal as the man standing before him, and that he perhaps is more than all men to blame for that crime.
When he understands that, he will be able to be a judge.
If I had been righteous myself, perhaps there would have been no criminal standing before me.
If you can take upon yourself the crime of the criminal your heart is judging, take it at once, suffer for him yourself, and let him go without reproach.
And even if the law itself makes you his judge, act in the same spirit so far as possible, for he will go away and condemn himself more bitterly than you have done.
If, after your kiss, he goes away untouched, mocking at you, do not let that be a stumbling-block to you.
And if it come not, no matter; if not he, then another in his place will understand and suffer, and judge and condemn himself, and the truth will be fulfilled.
If you remember in the night as you go to sleep, “I have not done what I ought to have done,” rise up at once and do it.
If the people around you are spiteful and callous and will not hear you, fall down before them and beg their forgiveness; for in truth you are to blame for their not wanting to hear you.
And if you cannot speak to them in their bitterness, serve them in silence and in humility, never losing hope.
If all men abandon you and even drive you away by force, then when you are left alone fall on the earth and kiss it, water it with your tears and it will bring forth fruit even though no one has seen or heard you in your solitude.
Believe to the end, even if all men went astray and you were left the only one faithful; bring your offering even then and praise God in your loneliness.
And if two of you are gathered together—then there is a whole world, a world of living love.
Embrace each other tenderly and praise God, for if only in you two His truth has been fulfilled.
If you sin yourself and grieve even unto death for your sins or for your sudden sin, then rejoice for others, rejoice for the righteous man, rejoice that if you have sinned, he is righteous and has not sinned.
If the evil-doing of men moves you to indignation and overwhelming distress, even to a desire for vengeance on the evil-doers, shun above all things that feeling.
Go at once and seek suffering for yourself, as though you were yourself guilty of that wrong.
Accept that suffering and bear it and your heart will find comfort, and you will understand that you too are guilty, for you might have been a light to the evil-doers, even as the one man sinless, and you were not a light to them.
If you had been a light, you would have lightened the path for others too, and the evil-doer might perhaps have been saved by your light from his sin.
And even though your light was shining, yet you see men were not saved by it, hold firm and doubt not the power of the heavenly light.
Believe that if they were not saved, they will be saved hereafter.
And if they are not saved hereafter, then their sons will be saved, for your light will not die even when you are dead.
The righteous man departs, but his light remains.
Men are always saved after the death of the deliverer.
Men reject their prophets and slay them, but they love their martyrs and honor those whom they have slain.
Seek no reward, for great is your reward on this earth: the spiritual joy which is only vouchsafed to the righteous man.
Love to throw yourself on the earth and kiss it.
Kiss the earth and love it with an unceasing, consuming love.
Love all men, love everything.
Don’t be ashamed of that ecstasy, prize it, for it is a gift of God and a great one; it is not given to many but only to the elect. _(i) Of Hell and Hell Fire, a Mystic Reflection_ Fathers and teachers, I ponder, “What is hell?” I maintain that it is the suffering of being unable to love.
Once in infinite existence, immeasurable in time and space, a spiritual creature was given on his coming to earth, the power of saying, “I am and I love.” Once, only once, there was given him a moment of active _living_ love, and for that was earthly life given him, and with it times and seasons.
And that happy creature rejected the priceless gift, prized it and loved it not, scorned it and remained callous.
But that is just his torment, to rise up to the Lord without ever having loved, to be brought close to those who have loved when he has despised their love.
Even though I would gladly give my life for others, it can never be, for that life is passed which can be sacrificed for love, and now there is a gulf fixed between that life and this existence.” They talk of hell fire in the material sense.
But I think if there were fire in material sense, they would be glad of it, for I imagine that in material agony, their still greater spiritual agony would be forgotten for a moment.
Moreover, that spiritual agony cannot be taken from them, for that suffering is not external but within them.
And if it could be taken from them, I think it would be bitterer still for the unhappy creatures.
For even if the righteous in Paradise forgave them, beholding their torments, and called them up to heaven in their infinite love, they would only multiply their torments, for they would arouse in them still more keenly a flaming thirst for responsive, active and grateful love which is now impossible.
In the timidity of my heart I imagine, however, that the very recognition of this impossibility would serve at last to console them.
For accepting the love of the righteous together with the impossibility of repaying it, by this submissiveness and the effect of this humility, they will attain at last, as it were, to a certain semblance of that active love which they scorned in life, to something like its outward expression....
I am sorry, friends and brothers, that I cannot express this clearly.
But woe to those who have slain themselves on earth, woe to the suicides!
I believe that there can be none more miserable than they.
They tell us that it is a sin to pray for them and outwardly the Church, as it were, renounces them, but in my secret heart I believe that we may pray even for them.
For such as those I have prayed inwardly all my life, I confess it, fathers and teachers, and even now I pray for them every day.
Oh, there are some who remain proud and fierce even in hell, in spite of their certain knowledge and contemplation of the absolute truth; there are some fearful ones who have given themselves over to Satan and his proud spirit entirely.
For such, hell is voluntary and ever consuming; they are tortured by their own choice.
For they have cursed themselves, cursing God and life.
They live upon their vindictive pride like a starving man in the desert sucking blood out of his own body.
But they are never satisfied, and they refuse forgiveness, they curse God Who calls them.
They cannot behold the living God without hatred, and they cry out that the God of life should be annihilated, that God should destroy Himself and His own creation.
And they will burn in the fire of their own wrath for ever and yearn for death and annihilation.
Here Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov’s manuscript ends.
I repeat, it is incomplete and fragmentary.
Biographical details, for instance, cover only Father Zossima’s earliest youth.
Of his teaching and opinions we find brought together sayings evidently uttered on very different occasions.
His utterances during the last few hours have not been kept separate from the rest, but their general character can be gathered from what we have in Alexey Fyodorovitch’s manuscript.
The elder’s death came in the end quite unexpectedly.
For although those who were gathered about him that last evening realized that his death was approaching, yet it was difficult to imagine that it would come so suddenly.
On the contrary, his friends, as I observed already, seeing him that night apparently so cheerful and talkative, were convinced that there was at least a temporary change for the better in his condition.
Even five minutes before his death, they said afterwards wonderingly, it was impossible to foresee it.
He seemed suddenly to feel an acute pain in his chest, he turned pale and pressed his hands to his heart.
All rose from their seats and hastened to him.
But though suffering, he still looked at them with a smile, sank slowly from his chair on to his knees, then bowed his face to the ground, stretched out his arms and as though in joyful ecstasy, praying and kissing the ground, quietly and joyfully gave up his soul to God.
The news of his death spread at once through the hermitage and reached the monastery.
The nearest friends of the deceased and those whose duty it was from their position began to lay out the corpse according to the ancient ritual, and all the monks gathered together in the church.
By the morning all the town was talking of the event, and crowds were flocking from the town to the monastery.
But this subject will be treated in the next book; I will only add here that before a day had passed something happened so unexpected, so strange, upsetting, and bewildering in its effect on the monks and the townspeople, that after all these years, that day of general suspense is still vividly remembered in the town.
The Breath Of Corruption The body of Father Zossima was prepared for burial according to the established ritual.
On his head he put a hood with an eight-cornered cross.
It was decided to leave the coffin all day in the cell, in the larger room in which the elder used to receive his visitors and fellow monks.
As the deceased was a priest and monk of the strictest rule, the Gospel, not the Psalter, had to be read over his body by monks in holy orders.
The reading was begun by Father Iosif immediately after the requiem service.
Both the Superintendent and Father Païssy did their utmost to calm the general bustle and agitation.
When it was fully daylight, some people began bringing their sick, in most cases children, with them from the town—as though they had been waiting expressly for this moment to do so, evidently persuaded that the dead elder’s remains had a power of healing, which would be immediately made manifest in accordance with their faith.
It was only then apparent how unquestionably every one in our town had accepted Father Zossima during his lifetime as a great saint.
This intense expectation on the part of believers displayed with such haste, such openness, even with impatience and almost insistence, impressed Father Païssy as unseemly.
Though he had long foreseen something of the sort, the actual manifestation of the feeling was beyond anything he had looked for.
When he came across any of the monks who displayed this excitement, Father Païssy began to reprove them.
“Such immediate expectation of something extraordinary,” he said, “shows a levity, possible to worldly people but unseemly in us.” But little attention was paid him and Father Païssy noticed it uneasily.
Yet he himself (if the whole truth must be told), secretly at the bottom of his heart, cherished almost the same hopes and could not but be aware of it, though he was indignant at the too impatient expectation around him, and saw in it light-mindedness and vanity.
Nevertheless, it was particularly unpleasant to him to meet certain persons, whose presence aroused in him great misgivings.
In the crowd in the dead man’s cell he noticed with inward aversion (for which he immediately reproached himself) the presence of Rakitin and of the monk from Obdorsk, who was still staying in the monastery.
Of both of them Father Païssy felt for some reason suddenly suspicious—though, indeed, he might well have felt the same about others.
The monk from Obdorsk was conspicuous as the most fussy in the excited crowd.
He was to be seen everywhere; everywhere he was asking questions, everywhere he was listening, on all sides he was whispering with a peculiar, mysterious air.
His expression showed the greatest impatience and even a sort of irritation.
As for Rakitin, he, as appeared later, had come so early to the hermitage at the special request of Madame Hohlakov.
He was particularly clever in getting round people and assuming whatever part he thought most to their taste, if he detected the slightest advantage to himself from doing so.
It was a bright, clear day, and many of the visitors were thronging about the tombs, which were particularly numerous round the church and scattered here and there about the hermitage.
As he walked round the hermitage, Father Païssy remembered Alyosha and that he had not seen him for some time, not since the night.
And he had no sooner thought of him than he at once noticed him in the farthest corner of the hermitage garden, sitting on the tombstone of a monk who had been famous long ago for his saintliness.
He sat with his back to the hermitage and his face to the wall, and seemed to be hiding behind the tombstone.
Going up to him, Father Païssy saw that he was weeping quietly but bitterly, with his face hidden in his hands, and that his whole frame was shaking with sobs.
“Enough, dear son, enough, dear,” he pronounced with feeling at last.
Don’t you know that this is the greatest of his days?
Think only where he is now, at this moment!” Alyosha glanced at him, uncovering his face, which was swollen with crying like a child’s, but turned away at once without uttering a word and hid his face in his hands again.
“Maybe it is well,” said Father Païssy thoughtfully; “weep if you must, Christ has sent you those tears.” “Your touching tears are but a relief to your spirit and will serve to gladden your dear heart,” he added to himself, walking away from Alyosha, and thinking lovingly of him.
Meanwhile the time was passing; the monastery services and the requiems for the dead followed in their due course.
But before three o’clock in the afternoon that something took place to which I alluded at the end of the last book, something so unexpected by all of us and so contrary to the general hope, that, I repeat, this trivial incident has been minutely remembered to this day in our town and all the surrounding neighborhood.
I may add here, for myself personally, that I feel it almost repulsive to recall that event which caused such frivolous agitation and was such a stumbling-block to many, though in reality it was the most natural and trivial matter.
I should, of course, have omitted all mention of it in my story, if it had not exerted a very strong influence on the heart and soul of the chief, though future, hero of my story, Alyosha, forming a crisis and turning-point in his spiritual development, giving a shock to his intellect, which finally strengthened it for the rest of his life and gave it a definite aim.
When before dawn they laid Father Zossima’s body in the coffin and brought it into the front room, the question of opening the windows was raised among those who were around the coffin.
But this suggestion made casually by some one was unanswered and almost unnoticed.
Some of those present may perhaps have inwardly noticed it, only to reflect that the anticipation of decay and corruption from the body of such a saint was an actual absurdity, calling for compassion (if not a smile) for the lack of faith and the frivolity it implied.
For they expected something quite different.
And, behold, soon after midday there were signs of something, at first only observed in silence by those who came in and out and were evidently each afraid to communicate the thought in his mind.
But by three o’clock those signs had become so clear and unmistakable, that the news swiftly reached all the monks and visitors in the hermitage, promptly penetrated to the monastery, throwing all the monks into amazement, and finally, in the shortest possible time, spread to the town, exciting every one in it, believers and unbelievers alike.
The unbelievers rejoiced, and as for the believers some of them rejoiced even more than the unbelievers, for “men love the downfall and disgrace of the righteous,” as the deceased elder had said in one of his exhortations.
The fact is that a smell of decomposition began to come from the coffin, growing gradually more marked, and by three o’clock it was quite unmistakable.
In all the past history of our monastery, no such scandal could be recalled, and in no other circumstances could such a scandal have been possible, as showed itself in unseemly disorder immediately after this discovery among the very monks themselves.
Afterwards, even many years afterwards, some sensible monks were amazed and horrified, when they recalled that day, that the scandal could have reached such proportions.
For in the past, monks of very holy life had died, God-fearing old men, whose saintliness was acknowledged by all, yet from their humble coffins, too, the breath of corruption had come, naturally, as from all dead bodies, but that had caused no scandal nor even the slightest excitement.
Of course there had been, in former times, saints in the monastery whose memory was carefully preserved and whose relics, according to tradition, showed no signs of corruption.
This fact was regarded by the monks as touching and mysterious, and the tradition of it was cherished as something blessed and miraculous, and as a promise, by God’s grace, of still greater glory from their tombs in the future.
One such, whose memory was particularly cherished, was an old monk, Job, who had died seventy years before at the age of a hundred and five.
He was reverenced during his lifetime as a crazy saint by all the pilgrims to the monastery.
There was a tradition that both of these had lain in their coffins as though alive, that they had shown no signs of decomposition when they were buried and that there had been a holy light in their faces.
And some people even insisted that a sweet fragrance came from their bodies.
Yet, in spite of these edifying memories, it would be difficult to explain the frivolity, absurdity and malice that were manifested beside the coffin of Father Zossima.
It is my private opinion that several different causes were simultaneously at work, one of which was the deeply-rooted hostility to the institution of elders as a pernicious innovation, an antipathy hidden deep in the hearts of many of the monks.
Even more powerful was jealousy of the dead man’s saintliness, so firmly established during his lifetime that it was almost a forbidden thing to question it.
For though the late elder had won over many hearts, more by love than by miracles, and had gathered round him a mass of loving adherents, none the less, in fact, rather the more on that account he had awakened jealousy and so had come to have bitter enemies, secret and open, not only in the monastery but in the world outside it.
He did no one any harm, but “Why do they think him so saintly?” And that question alone, gradually repeated, gave rise at last to an intense, insatiable hatred of him.
That, I believe, was why many people were extremely delighted at the smell of decomposition which came so quickly, for not a day had passed since his death.
At the same time there were some among those who had been hitherto reverently devoted to the elder, who were almost mortified and personally affronted by this incident.
This was how the thing happened.
As soon as signs of decomposition had begun to appear, the whole aspect of the monks betrayed their secret motives in entering the cell.
They went in, stayed a little while and hastened out to confirm the news to the crowd of other monks waiting outside.
Some of the latter shook their heads mournfully, but others did not even care to conceal the delight which gleamed unmistakably in their malignant eyes.
And now no one reproached them for it, no one raised his voice in protest, which was strange, for the majority of the monks had been devoted to the dead elder.
But it seemed as though God had in this case let the minority get the upper hand for a time.
Visitors from outside, particularly of the educated class, soon went into the cell, too, with the same spying intent.
Of the peasantry few went into the cell, though there were crowds of them at the gates of the hermitage.
After three o’clock the rush of worldly visitors was greatly increased and this was no doubt owing to the shocking news.
People were attracted who would not otherwise have come on that day and had not intended to come, and among them were some personages of high standing.
But external decorum was still preserved and Father Païssy, with a stern face, continued firmly and distinctly reading aloud the Gospel, apparently not noticing what was taking place around him, though he had, in fact, observed something unusual long before.
But at last the murmurs, first subdued but gradually louder and more confident, reached even him.
“It shows God’s judgment is not as man’s,” Father Païssy heard suddenly.
The first to give utterance to this sentiment was a layman, an elderly official from the town, known to be a man of great piety.
But he only repeated aloud what the monks had long been whispering.
They had long before formulated this damning conclusion, and the worst of it was that a sort of triumphant satisfaction at that conclusion became more and more apparent every moment.
Soon they began to lay aside even external decorum and almost seemed to feel they had a sort of right to discard it.
“And for what reason can _this_ have happened,” some of the monks said, at first with a show of regret; “he had a small frame and his flesh was dried up on his bones, what was there to decay?” “It must be a sign from heaven,” others hastened to add, and their opinion was adopted at once without protest.
For it was pointed out, too, that if the decomposition had been natural, as in the case of every dead sinner, it would have been apparent later, after a lapse of at least twenty-four hours, but this premature corruption “was in excess of nature,” and so the finger of God was evident.
This conclusion seemed irresistible.
“And if the bones are yellow as wax, that is the great sign that the Lord has glorified the dead saint, if they are not yellow but black, it shows that God has not deemed him worthy of such glory—that is the belief in Athos, a great place, where the Orthodox doctrine has been preserved from of old, unbroken and in its greatest purity,” said Father Iosif in conclusion.
But the meek Father’s words had little effect and even provoked a mocking retort.
“That’s all pedantry and innovation, no use listening to it,” the monks decided.
“We stick to the old doctrine, there are all sorts of innovations nowadays, are we to follow them all?” added others.
There they are among the Turks, they have forgotten everything.
Their doctrine has long been impure and they have no bells even,” the most sneering added.
Father Iosif walked away, grieving the more since he had put forward his own opinion with little confidence as though scarcely believing in it himself.
He foresaw with distress that something very unseemly was beginning and that there were positive signs of disobedience.
Little by little, all the sensible monks were reduced to silence like Father Iosif.
And so it came to pass that all who loved the elder and had accepted with devout obedience the institution of the eldership were all at once terribly cast down and glanced timidly in one another’s faces, when they met.
Those who were hostile to the institution of elders, as a novelty, held up their heads proudly.
“There was no smell of corruption from the late elder Varsonofy, but a sweet fragrance,” they recalled malignantly.
“But he gained that glory not because he was an elder, but because he was a holy man.” And this was followed by a shower of criticism and even blame of Father Zossima.
“His teaching was false; he taught that life is a great joy and not a vale of tears,” said some of the more unreasonable.
“He followed the fashionable belief, he did not recognize material fire in hell,” others, still more unreasonable, added.
“He sat in pride,” the most malignant declared vindictively; “he considered himself a saint and he took it as his due when people knelt before him.” “He abused the sacrament of confession,” the fiercest opponents of the institution of elders added in a malicious whisper.
And among these were some of the oldest monks, strictest in their devotion, genuine ascetics, who had kept silent during the life of the deceased elder, but now suddenly unsealed their lips.
And this was terrible, for their words had great influence on young monks who were not yet firm in their convictions.
The monk from Obdorsk heard all this attentively, heaving deep sighs and nodding his head.
“Yes, clearly Father Ferapont was right in his judgment yesterday,” and at that moment Father Ferapont himself made his appearance, as though on purpose to increase the confusion.
I have mentioned already that he rarely left his wooden cell by the apiary.
He was seldom even seen at church and they overlooked this neglect on the ground of his craziness, and did not keep him to the rules binding on all the rest.
For it would have been discreditable to insist on burdening with the common regulations so great an ascetic, who prayed day and night (he even dropped asleep on his knees).
If they had insisted, the monks would have said, “He is holier than all of us and he follows a rule harder than ours.
And if he does not go to church, it’s because he knows when he ought to; he has his own rule.” It was to avoid the chance of these sinful murmurs that Father Ferapont was left in peace.
As every one was aware, Father Ferapont particularly disliked Father Zossima.
And now the news had reached him in his hut that “God’s judgment is not the same as man’s,” and that something had happened which was “in excess of nature.” It may well be supposed that among the first to run to him with the news was the monk from Obdorsk, who had visited him the evening before and left his cell terror-stricken.
I have mentioned above, that though Father Païssy, standing firm and immovable reading the Gospel over the coffin, could not hear nor see what was passing outside the cell, he gauged most of it correctly in his heart, for he knew the men surrounding him, well.
He was not shaken by it, but awaited what would come next without fear, watching with penetration and insight for the outcome of the general excitement.
Suddenly an extraordinary uproar in the passage in open defiance of decorum burst on his ears.
The door was flung open and Father Ferapont appeared in the doorway.
Behind him there could be seen accompanying him a crowd of monks, together with many people from the town.
They did not, however, enter the cell, but stood at the bottom of the steps, waiting to see what Father Ferapont would say or do.
For they felt with a certain awe, in spite of their audacity, that he had not come for nothing.
Standing in the doorway, Father Ferapont raised his arms, and under his right arm the keen inquisitive little eyes of the monk from Obdorsk peeped in.
He alone, in his intense curiosity, could not resist running up the steps after Father Ferapont.
The others, on the contrary, pressed farther back in sudden alarm when the door was noisily flung open.
Holding his hands aloft, Father Ferapont suddenly roared: “Casting out I cast out!” and, turning in all directions, he began at once making the sign of the cross at each of the four walls and four corners of the cell in succession.
All who accompanied Father Ferapont immediately understood his action.
For they knew he always did this wherever he went, and that he would not sit down or say a word, till he had driven out the evil spirits.
Satan, go hence!” he repeated at each sign of the cross.
As soon as he began waving his arms, the cruel irons he wore under his gown could be heard clanking.
What is your faith?” shouted Father Ferapont crazily.
“I’ve come here to drive out your visitors, the unclean devils.
I’ve come to see how many have gathered here while I have been away.
I want to sweep them out with a birch broom.” “You cast out the evil spirit, but perhaps you are serving him yourself,” Father Païssy went on fearlessly.
I would not sit in an arm-chair and would not have them bow down to me as an idol,” thundered Father Ferapont.
“Nowadays folk destroy the true faith.
The dead man, your saint,” he turned to the crowd, pointing with his finger to the coffin, “did not believe in devils.
He gave medicine to keep off the devils.
In that we see a great sign from God.” The incident he referred to was this.
When in the utmost terror he confided this to Father Zossima, the elder had advised continual prayer and rigid fasting.
But when that was of no use, he advised him, while persisting in prayer and fasting, to take a special medicine.
Many persons were shocked at the time and wagged their heads as they talked over it—and most of all Father Ferapont, to whom some of the censorious had hastened to report this “extraordinary” counsel on the part of the elder.
“Go away, Father!” said Father Païssy, in a commanding voice, “it’s not for man to judge but for God.
Perhaps we see here a ‘sign’ which neither you, nor I, nor any one of us is able to comprehend.
Go, Father, and do not trouble the flock!” he repeated impressively.
“He did not keep the fasts according to the rule and therefore the sign has come.
That is clear and it’s a sin to hide it,” the fanatic, carried away by a zeal that outstripped his reason, would not be quieted.
“He was seduced by sweetmeats, ladies brought them to him in their pockets, he sipped tea, he worshiped his belly, filling it with sweet things and his mind with haughty thoughts....
“I admire your fasting and severities, but you speak lightly like some frivolous youth, fickle and childish.
Go away, Father, I command you!” Father Païssy thundered in conclusion.
“I will go,” said Ferapont, seeming somewhat taken aback, but still as bitter.
You are so clever you look down upon my humbleness.
I came hither with little learning and here I have forgotten what I did know, God Himself has preserved me in my weakness from your subtlety.” Father Païssy stood over him, waiting resolutely.
Father Ferapont paused and, suddenly leaning his cheek on his hand despondently, pronounced in a sing-song voice, looking at the coffin of the dead elder: “To-morrow they will sing over him ‘Our Helper and Defender’—a splendid anthem—and over me when I die all they’ll sing will be ‘What earthly joy’—a little canticle,”[6] he added with tearful regret.
“You are proud and puffed up, this is a vain place!” he shouted suddenly like a madman, and with a wave of his hand he turned quickly and quickly descended the steps.
The crowd awaiting him below wavered; some followed him at once and some lingered, for the cell was still open, and Father Païssy, following Father Ferapont on to the steps, stood watching him.
But the excited old fanatic was not completely silenced.
Walking twenty steps away, he suddenly turned towards the setting sun, raised both his arms and, as though some one had cut him down, fell to the ground with a loud scream.
“My God has conquered!
Christ has conquered the setting sun!” he shouted frantically, stretching up his hands to the sun, and falling face downwards on the ground, he sobbed like a little child, shaken by his tears and spreading out his arms on the ground.
Then all rushed up to him; there were exclamations and sympathetic sobs ... a kind of frenzy seemed to take possession of them all.
“This is he who should be an elder,” others added malignantly.
“He wouldn’t be an elder ... he would refuse ... he wouldn’t serve a cursed innovation ... he wouldn’t imitate their foolery,” other voices chimed in at once.
And it is hard to say how far they might have gone, but at that moment the bell rang summoning them to service.
All began crossing themselves at once.
Father Ferapont, too, got up and crossing himself went back to his cell without looking round, still uttering exclamations which were utterly incoherent.
A few followed him, but the greater number dispersed, hastening to service.
The frantic outcries of bigots could not shake him, but his heart was suddenly filled with melancholy for some special reason and he felt that.
He stood still and suddenly wondered, “Why am I sad even to dejection?” and immediately grasped with surprise that his sudden sadness was due to a very small and special cause.
In the crowd thronging at the entrance to the cell, he had noticed Alyosha and he remembered that he had felt at once a pang at heart on seeing him.
“Can that boy mean so much to my heart now?” he asked himself, wondering.
At that moment Alyosha passed him, hurrying away, but not in the direction of the church.
“Have you, too, fallen into temptation?” cried Father Païssy.
“Can you be with those of little faith?” he added mournfully.
He stood sideways and did not turn his face to Father Païssy, who watched him attentively.
“Where are you hastening?
“Are you leaving the hermitage?
What, without asking leave, without asking a blessing?” Alyosha suddenly gave a wry smile, cast a strange, very strange, look at the Father to whom his former guide, the former sovereign of his heart and mind, his beloved elder, had confided him as he lay dying.
And suddenly, still without speaking, waved his hand, as though not caring even to be respectful, and with rapid steps walked towards the gates away from the hermitage.
“You will come back again!” murmured Father Païssy, looking after him with sorrowful surprise.
A Critical Moment Father Païssy, of course, was not wrong when he decided that his “dear boy” would come back again.
Perhaps indeed, to some extent, he penetrated with insight into the true meaning of Alyosha’s spiritual condition.
Yet I must frankly own that it would be very difficult for me to give a clear account of that strange, vague moment in the life of the young hero I love so much.
To Father Païssy’s sorrowful question, “Are you too with those of little faith?” I could of course confidently answer for Alyosha, “No, he is not with those of little faith.
Quite the contrary.” Indeed, all his trouble came from the fact that he was of great faith.
But still the trouble was there and was so agonizing that even long afterwards Alyosha thought of that sorrowful day as one of the bitterest and most fatal days of his life.
If the question is asked: “Could all his grief and disturbance have been only due to the fact that his elder’s body had shown signs of premature decomposition instead of at once performing miracles?” I must answer without beating about the bush, “Yes, it certainly was.” I would only beg the reader not to be in too great a hurry to laugh at my young hero’s pure heart.
I am far from intending to apologize for him or to justify his innocent faith on the ground of his youth, or the little progress he had made in his studies, or any such reason.
I must declare, on the contrary, that I have genuine respect for the qualities of his heart.
No doubt a youth who received impressions cautiously, whose love was lukewarm, and whose mind was too prudent for his age and so of little value, such a young man might, I admit, have avoided what happened to my hero.
But in some cases it is really more creditable to be carried away by an emotion, however unreasonable, which springs from a great love, than to be unmoved.
And this is even truer in youth, for a young man who is always sensible is to be suspected and is of little worth—that’s my opinion!
Let me say then, it was not a question of miracles.
There was no frivolous and impatient expectation of miracles in his mind.
And Alyosha needed no miracles at the time, for the triumph of some preconceived idea—oh, no, not at all—what he saw before all was one figure—the figure of his beloved elder, the figure of that holy man whom he revered with such adoration.
The fact is that all the love that lay concealed in his pure young heart for every one and everything had, for the past year, been concentrated—and perhaps wrongly so—on one being, his beloved elder.
But again it was not miracles he needed but only “the higher justice” which had been in his belief outraged by the blow that had so suddenly and cruelly wounded his heart.
And what does it signify that this “justice” looked for by Alyosha inevitably took the shape of miracles to be wrought immediately by the ashes of his adored teacher?
Why, every one in the monastery cherished the same thought and the same hope, even those whose intellects Alyosha revered, Father Païssy himself, for instance.
And so Alyosha, untroubled by doubts, clothed his dreams too in the same form as all the rest.
And a whole year of life in the monastery had formed the habit of this expectation in his heart.
But it was justice, justice, he thirsted for, not simply miracles.
And now the man who should, he believed, have been exalted above every one in the whole world, that man, instead of receiving the glory that was his due, was suddenly degraded and dishonored!
Those were the questions that wrung his inexperienced and virginal heart.
He could not endure without mortification, without resentment even, that the holiest of holy men should have been exposed to the jeering and spiteful mockery of the frivolous crowd so inferior to him.
Even had there been no miracles, had there been nothing marvelous to justify his hopes, why this indignity, why this humiliation, why this premature decay, “in excess of nature,” as the spiteful monks said?
Why this “sign from heaven,” which they so triumphantly acclaimed in company with Father Ferapont, and why did they believe they had gained the right to acclaim it?
Where is the finger of Providence?
Why did Providence hide its face “at the most critical moment” (so Alyosha thought it), as though voluntarily submitting to the blind, dumb, pitiless laws of nature?
That was why Alyosha’s heart was bleeding, and, of course, as I have said already, the sting of it all was that the man he loved above everything on earth should be put to shame and humiliated!
I will not, however, omit to mention something strange, which came for a time to the surface of Alyosha’s mind at this fatal and obscure moment.
This new something was the harassing impression left by the conversation with Ivan, which now persistently haunted Alyosha’s mind.
Oh, it was not that something of the fundamental, elemental, so to speak, faith of his soul had been shaken.
He loved his God and believed in Him steadfastly, though he was suddenly murmuring against Him.
Yet a vague but tormenting and evil impression left by his conversation with Ivan the day before, suddenly revived again now in his soul and seemed forcing its way to the surface of his consciousness.
It had begun to get dusk when Rakitin, crossing the pine copse from the hermitage to the monastery, suddenly noticed Alyosha, lying face downwards on the ground under a tree, not moving and apparently asleep.
Can you have—” he began wondering but broke off.
He had meant to say, “Can you have come to this?” Alyosha did not look at him, but from a slight movement Rakitin at once saw that he heard and understood him.
“What’s the matter?” he went on; but the surprise in his face gradually passed into a smile that became more and more ironical.
You suddenly disappeared.
He was not crying, but there was a look of suffering and irritability in his face.
There’s none of your famous mildness to be seen in it.
Have they been ill-treating you?” “Let me alone,” said Alyosha suddenly, with a weary gesture of his hand, still looking away from him.
I say, Alyosha, you have surprised me, do you hear?
It’s long since I’ve been surprised at anything here.
I always took you for an educated man....” Alyosha at last looked at him, but vaguely, as though scarcely understanding what he said.
You don’t mean to say you seriously believed that he was going to work miracles?” exclaimed Rakitin, genuinely surprised again.
“I believed, I believe, I want to believe, and I will believe, what more do you want?” cried Alyosha irritably.
Damn it all! why, no schoolboy of thirteen believes in that now.
So now you are in a temper with your God, you are rebelling against Him; He hasn’t given promotion, He hasn’t bestowed the order of merit!
“I am not rebelling against my God; I simply ‘don’t accept His world.’” Alyosha suddenly smiled a forced smile.
“Come, enough nonsense, now to business.
Have you had anything to eat to-day?” “I don’t remember....
And then all this bobbery afterwards.
Most likely you’ve had nothing to eat but a mouthful of holy bread.
Why, it’s a regular mutiny, with barricades!
You surprise me, brother!” Rakitin looked at him in amazement.
Come along.” Alyosha got up in silence and followed Rakitin.
“If your little brother Ivan could see this—wouldn’t he be surprised!
By the way, your brother Ivan set off to Moscow this morning, did you know?” “Yes,” answered Alyosha listlessly, and suddenly the image of his brother Dmitri rose before his mind.
But only for a minute, and though it reminded him of something that must not be put off for a moment, some duty, some terrible obligation, even that reminder made no impression on him, did not reach his heart and instantly faded out of his mind and was forgotten.
But, a long while afterwards, Alyosha remembered this.
“Your brother Ivan declared once that I was a ‘liberal booby with no talents whatsoever.’ Once you, too, could not resist letting me know I was ‘dishonorable.’ Well!
I should like to see what your talents and sense of honor will do for you now.” This phrase Rakitin finished to himself in a whisper.
“Listen!” he said aloud, “let’s go by the path beyond the monastery straight to the town.
I ought to go to Madame Hohlakov’s by the way.
Only fancy, I’ve written to tell her everything that happened, and would you believe it, she answered me instantly in pencil (the lady has a passion for writing notes) that ‘she would never have expected _such conduct_ from a man of such a reverend character as Father Zossima.’ That was her very word: ‘conduct.’ She is angry too.
Stay!” he cried suddenly again.
He suddenly stopped and taking Alyosha by the shoulder made him stop too.
“Do you know, Alyosha,” he peeped inquisitively into his eyes, absorbed in a sudden new thought which had dawned on him, and though he was laughing outwardly he was evidently afraid to utter that new idea aloud, so difficult he still found it to believe in the strange and unexpected mood in which he now saw Alyosha.
“Alyosha, do you know where we had better go?” he brought out at last timidly, and insinuatingly.
“I don’t care ... where you like.” “Let’s go to Grushenka, eh?
Will you come?” pronounced Rakitin at last, trembling with timid suspense.
“Let’s go to Grushenka,” Alyosha answered calmly, at once, and this prompt and calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he almost started back.
I say!” he cried in amazement, but seizing Alyosha firmly by the arm he led him along the path, still dreading that he would change his mind.
They walked along in silence, Rakitin was positively afraid to talk.
“And how glad she will be, how delighted!” he muttered, but lapsed into silence again.
And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was taking Alyosha to her.
He was a practical person and never undertook anything without a prospect of gain for himself.
His object in this case was twofold, first a revengeful desire to see “the downfall of the righteous,” and Alyosha’s fall “from the saints to the sinners,” over which he was already gloating in his imagination, and in the second place he had in view a certain material gain for himself, of which more will be said later.
“So the critical moment has come,” he thought to himself with spiteful glee, “and we shall catch it on the hop, for it’s just what we want.” Chapter III.
An Onion Grushenka lived in the busiest part of the town, near the cathedral square, in a small wooden lodge in the courtyard belonging to the house of the widow Morozov.
The house was a large stone building of two stories, old and very ugly.
The widow led a secluded life with her two unmarried nieces, who were also elderly women.
She had no need to let her lodge, but every one knew that she had taken in Grushenka as a lodger, four years before, solely to please her kinsman, the merchant Samsonov, who was known to be the girl’s protector.
It was said that the jealous old man’s object in placing his “favorite” with the widow Morozov was that the old woman should keep a sharp eye on her new lodger’s conduct.
But this sharp eye soon proved to be unnecessary, and in the end the widow Morozov seldom met Grushenka and did not worry her by looking after her in any way.
It is true that four years had passed since the old man had brought the slim, delicate, shy, timid, dreamy, and sad girl of eighteen from the chief town of the province, and much had happened since then.
Nothing more had been learnt during the last four years, even after many persons had become interested in the beautiful young woman into whom Agrafena Alexandrovna had meanwhile developed.
There were rumors that she had been at seventeen betrayed by some one, some sort of officer, and immediately afterwards abandoned by him.
The officer had gone away and afterwards married, while Grushenka had been left in poverty and disgrace.
It was said, however, that though Grushenka had been raised from destitution by the old man, Samsonov, she came of a respectable family belonging to the clerical class, that she was the daughter of a deacon or something of the sort.
And now after four years the sensitive, injured and pathetic little orphan had become a plump, rosy beauty of the Russian type, a woman of bold and determined character, proud and insolent.
She had a good head for business, was acquisitive, saving and careful, and by fair means or foul had succeeded, it was said, in amassing a little fortune.
Grushenka was not easily to be approached and except her aged protector there had not been one man who could boast of her favors during those four years.
It was a positive fact, for there had been a good many, especially during the last two years, who had attempted to obtain those favors.
But all their efforts had been in vain and some of these suitors had been forced to beat an undignified and even comic retreat, owing to the firm and ironical resistance they met from the strong-willed young person.
It was known, too, that the young person had, especially of late, been given to what is called “speculation,” and that she had shown marked abilities in that direction, so that many people began to say that she was no better than a Jew.
It was not that she lent money on interest, but it was known, for instance, that she had for some time past, in partnership with old Karamazov, actually invested in the purchase of bad debts for a trifle, a tenth of their nominal value, and afterwards had made out of them ten times their value.
The old widower Samsonov, a man of large fortune, was stingy and merciless.
He tyrannized over his grown-up sons, but, for the last year during which he had been ill and lost the use of his swollen legs, he had fallen greatly under the influence of his protégée, whom he had at first kept strictly and in humble surroundings, “on Lenten fare,” as the wits said at the time.
But Grushenka had succeeded in emancipating herself, while she established in him a boundless belief in her fidelity.
The old man, now long since dead, had had a large business in his day and was also a noteworthy character, miserly and hard as flint.
Though Grushenka’s hold upon him was so strong that he could not live without her (it had been so especially for the last two years), he did not settle any considerable fortune on her and would not have been moved to do so, if she had threatened to leave him.
But he had presented her with a small sum, and even that was a surprise to every one when it became known.
Grushenka was not even mentioned in his will.
All this became known afterwards.
He helped Grushenka with his advice to increase her capital and put business in her way.
When Fyodor Pavlovitch, who first came into contact with Grushenka over a piece of speculation, ended to his own surprise by falling madly in love with her, old Samsonov, gravely ill as he was, was immensely amused.
It is remarkable that throughout their whole acquaintance Grushenka was absolutely and spontaneously open with the old man, and he seems to have been the only person in the world with whom she was so.
Of late, when Dmitri too had come on the scene with his love, the old man left off laughing.
On the contrary, he once gave Grushenka a stern and earnest piece of advice.
“If you have to choose between the two, father or son, you’d better choose the old man, if only you make sure the old scoundrel will marry you and settle some fortune on you beforehand.
But don’t keep on with the captain, you’ll get no good out of that.” These were the very words of the old profligate, who felt already that his death was not far off and who actually died five months later.
I will note, too, in passing, that although many in our town knew of the grotesque and monstrous rivalry of the Karamazovs, father and son, the object of which was Grushenka, scarcely any one understood what really underlay her attitude to both of them.
Even Grushenka’s two servants (after the catastrophe of which we will speak later) testified in court that she received Dmitri Fyodorovitch simply from fear because “he threatened to murder her.” These servants were an old cook, invalidish and almost deaf, who came from Grushenka’s old home, and her granddaughter, a smart young girl of twenty, who performed the duties of a maid.
Grushenka lived very economically and her surroundings were anything but luxurious.
Her lodge consisted of three rooms furnished with mahogany furniture in the fashion of 1820, belonging to her landlady.
Grushenka was lying down in her drawing-room on the big, hard, clumsy sofa, with a mahogany back.
She was lying stretched out motionless on her back with her hands behind her head.
She was dressed as though expecting some one, in a black silk dress, with a dainty lace fichu on her head, which was very becoming.
Over her shoulders was thrown a lace shawl pinned with a massive gold brooch.
She certainly was expecting some one.
She lay as though impatient and weary, her face rather pale and her lips and eyes hot, restlessly tapping the arm of the sofa with the tip of her right foot.
The appearance of Rakitin and Alyosha caused a slight excitement.
From the hall they could hear Grushenka leap up from the sofa and cry out in a frightened voice, “Who’s there?” But the maid met the visitors and at once called back to her mistress.
“It’s not he, it’s nothing, only other visitors.” “What can be the matter?” muttered Rakitin, leading Alyosha into the drawing-room.
Grushenka was standing by the sofa as though still alarmed.
A thick coil of her dark brown hair escaped from its lace covering and fell on her right shoulder, but she did not notice it and did not put it back till she had gazed at her visitors and recognized them.
You quite frightened me.
Good heavens, you have brought him!” she exclaimed, recognizing Alyosha.
“Do send for candles!” said Rakitin, with the free-and-easy air of a most intimate friend, who is privileged to give orders in the house.
Well, you have chosen a moment to bring him!” she exclaimed again, nodding towards Alyosha, and turning to the looking-glass she began quickly fastening up her hair with both hands.
She seemed displeased.
“Haven’t I managed to please you?” asked Rakitin, instantly almost offended.
“You frightened me, Rakitin, that’s what it is.” Grushenka turned with a smile to Alyosha.
“Don’t be afraid of me, my dear Alyosha, you cannot think how glad I am to see you, my unexpected visitor.
But you frightened me, Rakitin, I thought it was Mitya breaking in.
You see, I deceived him just now, I made him promise to believe me and I told him a lie.
I told him that I was going to spend the evening with my old man, Kuzma Kuzmitch, and should be there till late counting up his money.
I always spend one whole evening a week with him making up his accounts.
We lock ourselves in and he counts on the reckoning beads while I sit and put things down in the book.
Mitya believes that I am there, but I came back and have been sitting locked in here, expecting some news.
Perhaps he is hiding and spying, I am dreadfully frightened.” “There’s no one there, Agrafena Alexandrovna, I’ve just looked out, I keep running to peep through the crack, I am in fear and trembling myself.” “Are the shutters fastened, Fenya?
And we must draw the curtains—that’s better!” She drew the heavy curtains herself.
I am afraid of your brother Mitya to-day, Alyosha.” Grushenka spoke aloud, and, though she was alarmed, she seemed very happy about something.
“Why are you so afraid of Mitya to-day?” inquired Rakitin.
“I should have thought you were not timid with him, you’d twist him round your little finger.” “I tell you, I am expecting news, priceless news, so I don’t want Mitya at all.
And he didn’t believe, I feel he didn’t, that I should stay at Kuzma Kuzmitch’s.
He must be in his ambush now, behind Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, in the garden, watching for me.
But I really have been to Kuzma Kuzmitch’s, Mitya escorted me there.
I told him I should stay there till midnight, and I asked him to be sure to come at midnight to fetch me home.
He went away and I sat ten minutes with Kuzma Kuzmitch and came back here again.
What a curious cap you’ve got on!” “How curious you are yourself, Rakitin!
I tell you, I am expecting a message.
You are highly delighted ...
The year before last, Kuzma Kuzmitch’s son was married and I looked on from the gallery.
Do you suppose I want to be talking to you, Rakitin, while a prince like this is standing here.
Eh, Rakitin, if only you had brought him yesterday or the day before!
Perhaps it’s better he has come now, at such a moment, and not the day before yesterday.” She gayly sat down beside Alyosha on the sofa, looking at him with positive delight.
Alyosha had not expected to see such a kind expression in her face....
He had hardly met her till the day before, he had formed an alarming idea of her, and had been horribly distressed the day before by the spiteful and treacherous trick she had played on Katerina Ivanovna.
He was greatly surprised to find her now altogether different from what he had expected.
And, crushed as he was by his own sorrow, his eyes involuntarily rested on her with attention.
Her whole manner seemed changed for the better since yesterday, there was scarcely any trace of that mawkish sweetness in her speech, of that voluptuous softness in her movements.
Everything was simple and good-natured, her gestures were rapid, direct, confiding, but she was greatly excited.
“Dear me, how everything comes together to-day!” she chattered on again.
If you ask me, I couldn’t tell you.” “Come, don’t you know why you’re glad?” said Rakitin, grinning.
“You used to be always pestering me to bring him, you’d some object, I suppose.” “I had a different object once, but now that’s over, this is not the moment.
I say, I want you to have something nice.
You sit down, too, Rakitin; why are you standing?
There’s no fear of Rakitin’s forgetting to look after himself.
Look, Alyosha, he’s sitting there opposite us, so offended that I didn’t ask him to sit down before you.
Ugh, Rakitin is such a one to take offense!” laughed Grushenka.
Why are you so depressed, Alyosha?
The promotion has not been given,” boomed Rakitin.
“What promotion?” “His elder stinks.” “What?
You are talking some nonsense, you want to say something nasty.
Let me sit on your knee, Alyosha, like this.” She suddenly skipped forward and jumped, laughing, on his knee, like a nestling kitten, with her right arm about his neck.
But there was nothing in his heart such as Rakitin, for instance, watching him malignantly from his corner, might have expected or fancied.
The great grief in his heart swallowed up every sensation that might have been aroused, and, if only he could have thought clearly at that moment, he would have realized that he had now the strongest armor to protect him from every lust and temptation.
Yet in spite of the vague irresponsiveness of his spiritual condition and the sorrow that overwhelmed him, he could not help wondering at a new and strange sensation in his heart.
This woman, this “dreadful” woman, had no terror for him now, none of that terror that had stirred in his soul at any passing thought of woman.
On the contrary, this woman, dreaded above all women, sitting now on his knee, holding him in her arms, aroused in him now a quite different, unexpected, peculiar feeling, a feeling of the intensest and purest interest without a trace of fear, of his former terror.
That was what instinctively surprised him.
“You’ve talked nonsense enough,” cried Rakitin, “you’d much better give us some champagne.
Do you know, Alyosha, I promised him champagne on the top of everything, if he’d bring you?
Though I am so stingy, I’ll stand a bottle, not for you, Rakitin, you’re a toadstool, but he is a falcon!
And though my heart is full of something very different, so be it, I’ll drink with you.
I long for some dissipation.” “But what is the matter with you?
And what is this message, may I ask, or is it a secret?” Rakitin put in inquisitively, doing his best to pretend not to notice the snubs that were being continually aimed at him.
“Ech, it’s not a secret, and you know it, too,” Grushenka said, in a voice suddenly anxious, turning her head towards Rakitin, and drawing a little away from Alyosha, though she still sat on his knee with her arm round his neck.
“My officer is coming, Rakitin, my officer is coming.” “I heard he was coming, but is he so near?” “He is at Mokroe now; he’ll send a messenger from there, so he wrote; I got a letter from him to-day.
I am expecting the messenger every minute.” “You don’t say so!
Why at Mokroe?” “That’s a long story, I’ve told you enough.” “Mitya’ll be up to something now—I say!
Be quiet, Rakitin, don’t remind me of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, he has bruised my heart.
I can think of Alyosha here, I can look at Alyosha ... smile at me, dear, cheer up, smile at my foolishness, at my pleasure....
And you know, Alyosha, I’ve been thinking all this time you were angry with me, because of the day before yesterday, because of that young lady.
But it’s a good thing it happened so.
It was a horrid thing, but a good thing too.” Grushenka smiled dreamily and a little cruel line showed in her smile.
“Mitya told me that she screamed out that I ‘ought to be flogged.’ I did insult her dreadfully.
She sent for me, she wanted to make a conquest of me, to win me over with her chocolate....
“But I am still afraid of your being angry.” “Yes, that’s really true,” Rakitin put in suddenly with genuine surprise.
“Alyosha, she is really afraid of a chicken like you.” “He is a chicken to you, Rakitin ... because you’ve no conscience, that’s what it is!
Alyosha, do you believe I love you with all my soul?” “Ah, you shameless woman!
She is making you a declaration, Alexey!” “Well, what of it, I love him!” “And what about your officer?
And the priceless message from Mokroe?” “That is quite different.” “That’s a woman’s way of looking at it!” “Don’t you make me angry, Rakitin.” Grushenka caught him up hotly.
“This is quite different.
I love Alyosha in a different way.
For I am a horrid, violent creature.
But at other times I’ve looked upon you, Alyosha, as my conscience.
I’ve kept thinking ‘how any one like that must despise a nasty thing like me.’ I thought that the day before yesterday, as I ran home from the young lady’s.
Would you believe it, I sometimes look at you and feel ashamed, utterly ashamed of myself....
And how, and since when, I began to think about you like that, I can’t say, I don’t remember....” Fenya came in and put a tray with an uncorked bottle and three glasses of champagne on the table.
“Here’s the champagne!” cried Rakitin.
“You’re excited, Agrafena Alexandrovna, and not yourself.
When you’ve had a glass of champagne, you’ll be ready to dance.
Eh, they can’t even do that properly,” he added, looking at the bottle.
“One doesn’t often stumble upon champagne,” he said, licking his lips.
The gates of paradise?
Take a glass, Grushenka, you drink to the gates of paradise, too.” “What gates of paradise?” She took a glass, Alyosha took his, tasted it and put it back.
“Well, if so, I won’t either,” chimed in Grushenka, “I really don’t want any.
If Alyosha has some, I will.” “What touching sentimentality!” said Rakitin tauntingly; “and she’s sitting on his knee, too!
He’s got something to grieve over, but what’s the matter with you?
He is rebelling against his God and ready to eat sausage....” “How so?” “His elder died to-day, Father Zossima, the saint.” “So Father Zossima is dead,” cried Grushenka.
“Good God, I did not know!” She crossed herself devoutly.
“Goodness, what have I been doing, sitting on his knee like this at such a moment!” She started up as though in dismay, instantly slipped off his knee and sat down on the sofa.
Alyosha bent a long wondering look upon her and a light seemed to dawn in his face.
“Rakitin,” he said suddenly, in a firm and loud voice; “don’t taunt me with having rebelled against God.
I don’t want to feel angry with you, so you must be kinder, too, I’ve lost a treasure such as you have never had, and you cannot judge me now.
I came here to find a wicked soul—I felt drawn to evil because I was base and evil myself, and I’ve found a true sister, I have found a treasure—a loving heart.
Agrafena Alexandrovna, I am speaking of you.
You’ve raised my soul from the depths.” Alyosha’s lips were quivering and he caught his breath.
“She has saved you, it seems,” laughed Rakitin spitefully.
“And she meant to get you in her clutches, do you realize that?” “Stay, Rakitin.” Grushenka jumped up.
I had the low idea of trying to get him in my clutches, but now you are lying, now it’s all different.
And don’t let me hear anything more from you, Rakitin.” All this Grushenka said with extreme emotion.
“They are both crazy,” said Rakitin, looking at them with amazement.
“I feel as though I were in a madhouse.
They’re both getting so feeble they’ll begin crying in a minute.” “I shall begin to cry, I shall,” repeated Grushenka.
Hang it all, you really are crazy.” Rakitin wondered at their enthusiasm.
He was aggrieved and annoyed, though he might have reflected that each of them was just passing through a spiritual crisis such as does not come often in a lifetime.
But though Rakitin was very sensitive about everything that concerned himself, he was very obtuse as regards the feelings and sensations of others—partly from his youth and inexperience, partly from his intense egoism.
“You see, Alyosha,” Grushenka turned to him with a nervous laugh.
“I was boasting when I told Rakitin I had given away an onion, but it’s not to boast I tell you about it.
I used to hear it when I was a child from Matryona, my cook, who is still with me.
So her guardian angel stood and wondered what good deed of hers he could remember to tell to God; ‘She once pulled up an onion in her garden,’ said he, ‘and gave it to a beggar woman.’ And God answered: ‘You take that onion then, hold it out to her in the lake, and let her take hold and be pulled out.
And if you can pull her out of the lake, let her come to Paradise, but if the onion breaks, then the woman must stay where she is.’ The angel ran to the woman and held out the onion to her.
‘Come,’ said he, ‘catch hold and I’ll pull you out.’ And he began cautiously pulling her out.
He had just pulled her right out, when the other sinners in the lake, seeing how she was being drawn out, began catching hold of her so as to be pulled out with her.
Eh, I must confess everything.
I was so anxious to get hold of you that I promised Rakitin twenty-five roubles if he would bring you to me.
What nonsense!” cried Rakitin, disconcerted.
Rakitin, I owe it you, there’s no fear of your refusing it, you asked for it yourself.” And she threw the note to him.
“Likely I should refuse it,” boomed Rakitin, obviously abashed, but carrying off his confusion with a swagger.
You don’t like us, so hold your tongue.” “What should I like you for?” Rakitin snarled, not concealing his ill-humor.
He had reckoned on receiving his payment later, without Alyosha’s knowing of it, and now, feeling ashamed, he lost his temper.
Till that moment he had thought it discreet not to contradict Grushenka too flatly in spite of her snubbing, since he had something to get out of her.
How has he shown it, that you make such a fuss about it?” Grushenka was standing in the middle of the room; she spoke with heat and there were hysterical notes in her voice.
How dare you be so familiar!
‘He despises me,’ I thought; ‘he won’t even look at me.’ And I felt it so much at last that I wondered at myself for being so frightened of a boy.
I’ll get him in my clutches and laugh at him.
Would you believe it, nobody here dares talk or think of coming to Agrafena Alexandrovna with any evil purpose.
Old Kuzma is the only man I have anything to do with here; I was bound and sold to him; Satan brought us together, but there has been no one else.
But looking at you, I thought, I’ll get him in my clutches and laugh at him.
You see what a spiteful cur I am, and you called me your sister!
I was a silly slip of a girl; I used to sit here sobbing; I used to lie awake all night, thinking: ‘Where is he now, the man who wronged me?
He is laughing at me with another woman, most likely.
And when I suddenly thought that I should really do nothing to him, and that he was laughing at me then, or perhaps had utterly forgotten me, I would fling myself on the floor, melt into helpless tears, and lie there shaking till dawn.
In the morning I would get up more spiteful than a dog, ready to tear the whole world to pieces.
No, no one in the whole world sees it, no one knows it, but when night comes on, I sometimes lie as I did five years ago, when I was a silly girl, clenching my teeth and crying all night, thinking, ‘I’ll pay him out, I’ll pay him out!’ Do you hear?
Well then, now you understand me.
It took my breath away; then I suddenly thought: ‘If he comes and whistles to call me, I shall creep back to him like a beaten dog.’ I couldn’t believe myself.
Do you see now, Alyosha, what a violent, vindictive creature I am?
Hush, Rakitin, it’s not for you to judge me, I am not speaking to you.
Before you came in, I was lying here waiting, brooding, deciding my whole future life, and you can never know what was in my heart.
Yes, Alyosha, tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happened the day before yesterday....
For perhaps I shall take a knife with me to-day, I can’t make up my mind ...” And at this “tragic” phrase Grushenka broke down, hid her face in her hands, flung herself on the sofa pillows, and sobbed like a little child.
You mustn’t ask too much of human endurance, one must be merciful.” Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart.
But Rakitin looked at him ironically and Alyosha stopped short.
“You were so primed up with your elder’s teaching last night that now you have to let it off on me, Alexey, man of God!” said Rakitin, with a smile of hatred.
I came here seeking my ruin, and said to myself, ‘What does it matter?’ in my cowardliness, but she, after five years in torment, as soon as any one says a word from the heart to her—it makes her forget everything, forgive everything, in her tears!
The man who has wronged her has come back, he sends for her and she forgives him everything, and hastens joyfully to meet him and she won’t take a knife with her.
No, you haven’t; if you had, you’d have understood her long ago ... and the person insulted the day before yesterday must forgive her, too!
This soul is not yet at peace with itself, one must be tender with it ... there may be a treasure in that soul....” Alyosha stopped, because he caught his breath.
In spite of his ill-humor Rakitin looked at him with astonishment.
He had never expected such a tirade from the gentle Alyosha.
Agrafena Alexandrovna, our monk’s really in love with you, you’ve made a conquest!” he cried, with a coarse laugh.
Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with a tender smile shining on her tear-stained face.
Mihail Osipovitch,” she turned to Rakitin, “I meant to beg your pardon for being rude to you, but now I don’t want to.
Alyosha, come to me, sit down here.” She beckoned to him with a happy smile.
Am I to forgive him or not?” “But you have forgiven him already,” said Alyosha, smiling.
“Yes, I really have forgiven him,” Grushenka murmured thoughtfully.
To my abject heart!” She snatched up a glass from the table, emptied it at a gulp, lifted it in the air and flung it on the floor.
“Perhaps I haven’t forgiven him, though,” she said, with a sort of menace in her voice, and she dropped her eyes to the ground as though she were talking to herself.
I shall struggle with my heart.
Perhaps I only love my resentment, not him ...” “Well, I shouldn’t care to be in his shoes,” hissed Rakitin.
Then why are you dressed up like that?” said Rakitin, with a venomous sneer.
“Don’t taunt me with dressing up, Rakitin, you don’t know all that is in my heart!
If I choose to tear off my finery, I’ll tear it off at once, this minute,” she cried in a resonant voice.
Perhaps I shall see him and say: ‘Have you ever seen me look like this before?’ He left me a thin, consumptive cry-baby of seventeen.
I’ll sit by him, fascinate him and work him up.
‘Do you see what I am like now?’ I’ll say to him; ‘well, and that’s enough for you, my dear sir, there’s many a slip twixt the cup and the lip!’ That may be what the finery is for, Rakitin.” Grushenka finished with a malicious laugh.
“I’m violent and resentful, Alyosha, I’ll tear off my finery, I’ll destroy my beauty, I’ll scorch my face, slash it with a knife, and turn beggar.
If I choose, I won’t go anywhere now to see any one.
I would, I would, I could do it directly, only don’t exasperate me ... and I’ll send him about his business, I’ll snap my fingers in his face, he shall never see me again!” She uttered the last words in an hysterical scream, but broke down again, hid her face in her hands, buried it in the pillow and shook with sobs.
“It’s time we were off,” he said, “it’s late, we shall be shut out of the monastery.” Grushenka leapt up from her place.
“Surely you don’t want to go, Alyosha!” she cried, in mournful surprise.
You’ve stirred up my feeling, tortured me, and now you’ll leave me to face this night alone!” “He can hardly spend the night with you!
I’ll go alone,” Rakitin scoffed jeeringly.
“Hush, evil tongue!” Grushenka cried angrily at him; “you never said such words to me as he has come to say.” “What has he said to you so special?” asked Rakitin irritably.
I don’t know what he said to me, it went straight to my heart; he has wrung my heart....
I believed that, nasty as I am, some one would really love me, not only with a shameful love!” “What have I done to you?” answered Alyosha, bending over her with a tender smile, and gently taking her by the hands; “I only gave you an onion, nothing but a tiny little onion, that was all!” He was moved to tears himself as he said it.
Grushenka jumped up, seeming greatly alarmed.
Fenya ran noisily into the room, crying out: “Mistress, mistress darling, a messenger has galloped up,” she cried, breathless and joyful.
“A carriage from Mokroe for you, Timofey the driver, with three horses, they are just putting in fresh horses....
A letter, here’s the letter, mistress.” A letter was in her hand and she waved it in the air all the while she talked.
Grushenka snatched the letter from her and carried it to the candle.
“He has sent for me,” she cried, her face white and distorted, with a wan smile; “he whistles!
Crawl back, little dog!” But only for one instant she stood as though hesitating; suddenly the blood rushed to her head and sent a glow to her cheeks.
Grushenka is flying to a new life....
Don’t you remember evil against me either, Rakitin.
I feel as though I were drunk!” She suddenly left them and ran into her bedroom.
“Well, she has no thoughts for us now!” grumbled Rakitin.
“Let’s go, or we may hear that feminine shriek again.
I am sick of all these tears and cries.” Alyosha mechanically let himself be led out.
But when Alyosha and Rakitin reached the bottom of the steps, Grushenka’s bedroom window was suddenly opened and she called in a ringing voice after Alyosha: “Alyosha, give my greetings to your brother Mitya and tell him not to remember evil against me, though I have brought him misery.
And tell him, too, in my words: ‘Grushenka has fallen to a scoundrel, and not to you, noble heart.’ And add, too, that Grushenka loved him only one hour, only one short hour she loved him—so let him remember that hour all his life—say, ‘Grushenka tells you to!’” She ended in a voice full of sobs.
“H’m, h’m!” growled Rakitin, laughing, “she murders your brother Mitya and then tells him to remember it all his life!
What ferocity!” Alyosha made no reply, he seemed not to have heard.
He walked fast beside Rakitin as though in a terrible hurry.
He was lost in thought and moved mechanically.
He had expected something quite different by bringing Grushenka and Alyosha together.
Something very different from what he had hoped for had happened.
“He is a Pole, that officer of hers,” he began again, restraining himself; “and indeed he is not an officer at all now.
He served in the customs in Siberia, somewhere on the Chinese frontier, some puny little beggar of a Pole, I expect.
He’s heard now that Grushenka’s saved a little money, so he’s turned up again—that’s the explanation of the mystery.” Again Alyosha seemed not to hear.
“Well, so you’ve saved the sinner?” he laughed spitefully.
“Have you turned the Magdalene into the true path?
So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come to pass!” “Hush, Rakitin,” Alyosha answered with an aching heart.
But you are not Christ, you know, and I am not Judas.” “Oh, Rakitin, I assure you I’d forgotten about it,” cried Alyosha, “you remind me of it yourself....” But this was the last straw for Rakitin.
“Damnation take you all and each of you!” he cried suddenly, “why the devil did I take you up?
Go alone, there’s your road!” And he turned abruptly into another street, leaving Alyosha alone in the dark.
Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to the monastery.
Cana Of Galilee It was very late, according to the monastery ideas, when Alyosha returned to the hermitage; the door-keeper let him in by a special entrance.
It had struck nine o’clock—the hour of rest and repose after a day of such agitation for all.
Alyosha timidly opened the door and went into the elder’s cell where his coffin was now standing.
There was no one in the cell but Father Païssy, reading the Gospel in solitude over the coffin, and the young novice Porfiry, who, exhausted by the previous night’s conversation and the disturbing incidents of the day, was sleeping the deep sound sleep of youth on the floor of the other room.
Though Father Païssy heard Alyosha come in, he did not even look in his direction.
His soul was overflowing but with mingled feelings; no single sensation stood out distinctly; on the contrary, one drove out another in a slow, continual rotation.
But there was a sweetness in his heart and, strange to say, Alyosha was not surprised at it.
Again he saw that coffin before him, the hidden dead figure so precious to him, but the weeping and poignant grief of the morning was no longer aching in his soul.
“So the smell must have become stronger, if they opened the window,” thought Alyosha.
But even this thought of the smell of corruption, which had seemed to him so awful and humiliating a few hours before, no longer made him feel miserable or indignant.
He began quietly praying, but he soon felt that he was praying almost mechanically.
Fragments of thought floated through his soul, flashed like stars and went out again at once, to be succeeded by others.
But yet there was reigning in his soul a sense of the wholeness of things—something steadfast and comforting—and he was aware of it himself.
Sometimes he began praying ardently, he longed to pour out his thankfulness and love....
But when he had begun to pray, he passed suddenly to something else, and sank into thought, forgetting both the prayer and what had interrupted it.
He began listening to what Father Païssy was reading, but worn out with exhaustion he gradually began to doze.
“_And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee;_” read Father Païssy.
“_And the mother of Jesus was there; And both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage._” “Marriage?
A marriage!” floated whirling through Alyosha’s mind.
“There is happiness for her, too....
Well ... tragic phrases should be forgiven, they must be.
The road is wide and straight and bright as crystal, and the sun is at the end of it....
It was not men’s grief, but their joy Christ visited, He worked His first miracle to help men’s gladness....
‘He who loves men loves their gladness, too’ ...
He was always repeating that, it was one of his leading ideas....
‘Everything that is true and good is always full of forgiveness,’ he used to say that, too” ...
Mine hour is not yet come._ “_His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it_” ...
Gladness, the gladness of some poor, very poor, people....
The historians write that, in those days, the people living about the Lake of Gennesaret were the poorest that can possibly be imagined ... and another great heart, that other great being, His Mother, knew that He had come not only to make His great terrible sacrifice.
She knew that His heart was open even to the simple, artless merrymaking of some obscure and unlearned people, who had warmly bidden Him to their poor wedding.
And, indeed, was it to make wine abundant at poor weddings He had come down to earth?
“_Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water.
And they filled them up to the brim._ “_And he saith unto them, Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the feast.
It’s the marriage, the wedding ... yes, of course.
Where is the wise governor of the feast?
Again the walls are receding....
Yes, he came up to him, to him, he, the little, thin old man, with tiny wrinkles on his face, joyful and laughing softly.
There was no coffin now, and he was in the same dress as he had worn yesterday sitting with them, when the visitors had gathered about him.
His face was uncovered, his eyes were shining.
He, too, at the marriage of Cana in Galilee....
“Why have you hidden yourself here, out of sight?
“We are rejoicing,” the little, thin old man went on.
“We are drinking the new wine, the wine of new, great gladness; do you see how many guests?
Here are the bride and bridegroom, here is the wise governor of the feast, he is tasting the new wine.
And you, my gentle one, you, my kind boy, you too have known how to give a famished woman an onion to-day.
I dare not look,” whispered Alyosha.
He is terrible in His greatness, awful in His sublimity, but infinitely merciful.
He has made Himself like unto us from love and rejoices with us.
He is changing the water into wine that the gladness of the guests may not be cut short.
He is expecting new guests, He is calling new ones unceasingly for ever and ever....
There they are bringing new wine.
Do you see they are bringing the vessels....” Something glowed in Alyosha’s heart, something filled it till it ached, tears of rapture rose from his soul....
He stretched out his hands, uttered a cry and waked up.
Again the coffin, the open window, and the soft, solemn, distinct reading of the Gospel.
It was strange, he had fallen asleep on his knees, but now he was on his feet, and suddenly, as though thrown forward, with three firm rapid steps he went right up to the coffin.
His shoulder brushed against Father Païssy without his noticing it.
Father Païssy raised his eyes for an instant from his book, but looked away again at once, seeing that something strange was happening to the boy.
Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin, at the covered, motionless dead man that lay in the coffin, with the ikon on his breast and the peaked cap with the octangular cross, on his head.
He was listening, still expecting other words, but suddenly he turned sharply and went out of the cell.
He did not stop on the steps either, but went quickly down; his soul, overflowing with rapture, yearned for freedom, space, openness.
The vault of heaven, full of soft, shining stars, stretched vast and fathomless above him.
The fresh, motionless, still night enfolded the earth.
The white towers and golden domes of the cathedral gleamed out against the sapphire sky.
The gorgeous autumn flowers, in the beds round the house, were slumbering till morning.
Alyosha stood, gazed, and suddenly threw himself down on the earth.
He did not know why he embraced it.
He could not have told why he longed so irresistibly to kiss it, to kiss it all.
But he kissed it weeping, sobbing and watering it with his tears, and vowed passionately to love it, to love it for ever and ever.
Oh! in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars, which were shining to him from the abyss of space, and “he was not ashamed of that ecstasy.” There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of God, linking his soul to them, and it was trembling all over “in contact with other worlds.” He longed to forgive every one and for everything, and to beg forgiveness.
Oh, not for himself, but for all men, for all and for everything.
But with every instant he felt clearly and, as it were, tangibly, that something firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into his soul.
It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of his mind—and it was for all his life and for ever and ever.
He had fallen on the earth a weak boy, but he rose up a resolute champion, and he knew and felt it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy.
“Some one visited my soul in that hour,” he used to say afterwards, with implicit faith in his words.
Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words of his elder, who had bidden him “sojourn in the world.” Book VIII.
Kuzma Samsonov But Dmitri, to whom Grushenka, flying away to a new life, had left her last greetings, bidding him remember the hour of her love for ever, knew nothing of what had happened to her, and was at that moment in a condition of feverish agitation and activity.
For the last two days he had been in such an inconceivable state of mind that he might easily have fallen ill with brain fever, as he said himself afterwards.
Alyosha had not been able to find him the morning before, and Ivan had not succeeded in meeting him at the tavern on the same day.
The people at his lodgings, by his orders, concealed his movements.
He had spent those two days literally rushing in all directions, “struggling with his destiny and trying to save himself,” as he expressed it himself afterwards, and for some hours he even made a dash out of the town on urgent business, terrible as it was to him to lose sight of Grushenka for a moment.
All this was explained afterwards in detail, and confirmed by documentary evidence; but for the present we will only note the most essential incidents of those two terrible days immediately preceding the awful catastrophe, that broke so suddenly upon him.
Though Grushenka had, it is true, loved him for an hour, genuinely and sincerely, yet she tortured him sometimes cruelly and mercilessly.
To prevail upon her by force or kindness was also impossible: she would yield to nothing.
She would only have become angry and turned away from him altogether, he knew that well already.
He suspected, quite correctly, that she, too, was passing through an inward struggle, and was in a state of extraordinary indecision, that she was making up her mind to something, and unable to determine upon it.
And so, perhaps, it was, but what was distressing Grushenka he did not understand.
For him the whole tormenting question lay between him and Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Here, we must note, by the way, one certain fact: he was firmly persuaded that Fyodor Pavlovitch would offer, or perhaps had offered, Grushenka lawful wedlock, and did not for a moment believe that the old voluptuary hoped to gain his object for three thousand roubles.
Mitya had reached this conclusion from his knowledge of Grushenka and her character.
That was how it was that he could believe at times that all Grushenka’s uneasiness rose from not knowing which of them to choose, which was most to her advantage.
Strange to say, during those days it never occurred to him to think of the approaching return of the “officer,” that is, of the man who had been such a fatal influence in Grushenka’s life, and whose arrival she was expecting with such emotion and dread.
It is true that of late Grushenka had been very silent about it.
Yet he was perfectly aware of a letter she had received a month ago from her seducer, and had heard of it from her own lips.
He partly knew, too, what the letter contained.
In a moment of spite Grushenka had shown him that letter, but to her astonishment he attached hardly any consequence to it.
Perhaps, weighed down by all the hideous horror of his struggle with his own father for this woman, he was incapable of imagining any danger more terrible, at any rate for the time.
He simply did not believe in a suitor who suddenly turned up again after five years’ disappearance, still less in his speedy arrival.
Moreover, in the “officer’s” first letter which had been shown to Mitya, the possibility of his new rival’s visit was very vaguely suggested.
The letter was very indefinite, high-flown, and full of sentimentality.
It must be noted that Grushenka had concealed from him the last lines of the letter, in which his return was alluded to more definitely.
He had, besides, noticed at that moment, he remembered afterwards, a certain involuntary proud contempt for this missive from Siberia on Grushenka’s face.
Grushenka told him nothing of what had passed later between her and this rival; so that by degrees he had completely forgotten the officer’s existence.
He felt that whatever might come later, whatever turn things might take, his final conflict with Fyodor Pavlovitch was close upon him, and must be decided before anything else.
With a sinking heart he was expecting every moment Grushenka’s decision, always believing that it would come suddenly, on the impulse of the moment.
Oh, then he would bear her away at once, as far, far away as possible; to the farthest end of Russia, if not of the earth, then he would marry her, and settle down with her incognito, so that no one would know anything about them, there, here, or anywhere.
Of this different, reformed and “virtuous” life (“it must, it must be virtuous”) he dreamed feverishly at every moment.
He thirsted for that reformation and renewal.
The filthy morass, in which he had sunk of his own free will, was too revolting to him, and, like very many men in such cases, he put faith above all in change of place.
If only it were not for these people, if only it were not for these circumstances, if only he could fly away from this accursed place—he would be altogether regenerated, would enter on a new path.
That was what he believed in, and what he was yearning for.
But all this could only be on condition of the first, the _happy_ solution of the question.
There was another possibility, a different and awful ending.
Suddenly she might say to him: “Go away.
I have just come to terms with Fyodor Pavlovitch.
He had no definite intentions, had planned no crime.
He was simply watching and spying in agony, while he prepared himself for the first, happy solution of his destiny.
But for that ending a quite different anxiety arose, a new, incidental, but yet fatal and insoluble difficulty presented itself.
It was just at this time that all sources of revenue from Fyodor Pavlovitch, doles which had gone on without interruption for so many years, ceased.
Grushenka had money, of course, but with regard to this Mitya suddenly evinced extraordinary pride; he wanted to carry her away and begin the new life with her himself, at his own expense, not at hers.
He could not conceive of taking her money, and the very idea caused him a pang of intense repulsion.
I won’t enlarge on this fact or analyze it here, but confine myself to remarking that this was his attitude at the moment.
All this may have arisen indirectly and unconsciously from the secret stings of his conscience for the money of Katerina Ivanovna that he had dishonestly appropriated.
“I’ve been a scoundrel to one of them, and I shall be a scoundrel again to the other directly,” was his feeling then, as he explained after: “and when Grushenka knows, she won’t care for such a scoundrel.” Where then was he to get the means, where was he to get the fateful money?
Oh, the shame of it!” To anticipate things: he did, perhaps, know where to get the money, knew, perhaps, where it lay at that moment.
But his chief trouble, I must explain however obscurely, lay in the fact that to have that sum he knew of, to _have the right_ to take it, he must first restore Katerina Ivanovna’s three thousand—if not, “I’m a common pickpocket, I’m a scoundrel, and I don’t want to begin a new life as a scoundrel,” Mitya decided.
And so he made up his mind to move heaven and earth to return Katerina Ivanovna that three thousand, and that _first of all_.
The final stage of this decision, so to say, had been reached only during the last hours, that is, after his last interview with Alyosha, two days before, on the high-road, on the evening when Grushenka had insulted Katerina Ivanovna, and Mitya, after hearing Alyosha’s account of it, had admitted that he was a scoundrel, and told him to tell Katerina Ivanovna so, if it could be any comfort to her.
I’d rather every one thought me a robber and a murderer, I’d rather go to Siberia than that Katya should have the right to say that I deceived her and stole her money, and used her money to run away with Grushenka and begin a new life!
That I can’t do!” So Mitya decided, grinding his teeth, and he might well fancy at times that his brain would give way.
But meanwhile he went on struggling....
Strange to say, though one would have supposed there was nothing left for him but despair—for what chance had he, with nothing in the world, to raise such a sum?—yet to the very end he persisted in hoping that he would get that three thousand, that the money would somehow come to him of itself, as though it might drop from heaven.
That is just how it is with people who, like Dmitri, have never had anything to do with money, except to squander what has come to them by inheritance without any effort of their own, and have no notion how money is obtained.
A whirl of the most fantastic notions took possession of his brain immediately after he had parted with Alyosha two days before, and threw his thoughts into a tangle of confusion.
This is how it was he pitched first on a perfectly wild enterprise.
And perhaps to men of that kind in such circumstances the most impossible, fantastic schemes occur first, and seem most practical.
He suddenly determined to go to Samsonov, the merchant who was Grushenka’s protector, and to propose a “scheme” to him, and by means of it to obtain from him at once the whole of the sum required.
Of the commercial value of his scheme he had no doubt, not the slightest, and was only uncertain how Samsonov would look upon his freak, supposing he were to consider it from any but the commercial point of view.
Though Mitya knew the merchant by sight, he was not acquainted with him and had never spoken a word to him.
But for some unknown reason he had long entertained the conviction that the old reprobate, who was lying at death’s door, would perhaps not at all object now to Grushenka’s securing a respectable position, and marrying a man “to be depended upon.” And he believed not only that he would not object, but that this was what he desired, and, if opportunity arose, that he would be ready to help.
From some rumor, or perhaps from some stray word of Grushenka’s, he had gathered further that the old man would perhaps prefer him to Fyodor Pavlovitch for Grushenka.
Possibly many of the readers of my novel will feel that in reckoning on such assistance, and being ready to take his bride, so to speak, from the hands of her protector, Dmitri showed great coarseness and want of delicacy.
I will only observe that Mitya looked upon Grushenka’s past as something completely over.
He looked on that past with infinite pity and resolved with all the fervor of his passion that when once Grushenka told him she loved him and would marry him, it would mean the beginning of a new Grushenka and a new Dmitri, free from every vice.
As for Kuzma Samsonov, Dmitri looked upon him as a man who had exercised a fateful influence in that remote past of Grushenka’s, though she had never loved him, and who was now himself a thing of the past, completely done with, and, so to say, non-existent.
Besides, Mitya hardly looked upon him as a man at all, for it was known to every one in the town that he was only a shattered wreck, whose relations with Grushenka had changed their character and were now simply paternal, and that this had been so for a long time.
In any case there was much simplicity on Mitya’s part in all this, for in spite of all his vices, he was a very simple-hearted man.
It was an instance of this simplicity that Mitya was seriously persuaded that, being on the eve of his departure for the next world, old Kuzma must sincerely repent of his past relations with Grushenka, and that she had no more devoted friend and protector in the world than this now harmless old man.
After his conversation with Alyosha, at the cross-roads, he hardly slept all night, and at ten o’clock next morning, he was at the house of Samsonov and telling the servant to announce him.
It was a very large and gloomy old house of two stories, with a lodge and outhouses.
In the lower story lived Samsonov’s two married sons with their families, his old sister, and his unmarried daughter.
Both the lodge and the lower story were overcrowded, but the old man kept the upper floor to himself, and would not even let the daughter live there with him, though she waited upon him, and in spite of her asthma was obliged at certain fixed hours, and at any time he might call her, to run upstairs to him from below.
This upper floor contained a number of large rooms kept purely for show, furnished in the old-fashioned merchant style, with long monotonous rows of clumsy mahogany chairs along the walls, with glass chandeliers under shades, and gloomy mirrors on the walls.
All these rooms were entirely empty and unused, for the old man kept to one room, a small, remote bedroom, where he was waited upon by an old servant with a kerchief on her head, and by a lad, who used to sit on the locker in the passage.
Owing to his swollen legs, the old man could hardly walk at all, and was only rarely lifted from his leather arm-chair, when the old woman supporting him led him up and down the room once or twice.
He was morose and taciturn even with this old woman.
When he was informed of the arrival of the “captain,” he at once refused to see him.
But Mitya persisted and sent his name up again.
Samsonov questioned the lad minutely: What he looked like?
The answer he received was: that he was sober, but wouldn’t go away.
Then Mitya, who had foreseen this, and purposely brought pencil and paper with him, wrote clearly on the piece of paper the words: “On most important business closely concerning Agrafena Alexandrovna,” and sent it up to the old man.
After thinking a little Samsonov told the lad to take the visitor to the drawing-room, and sent the old woman downstairs with a summons to his younger son to come upstairs to him at once.
This younger son, a man over six foot and of exceptional physical strength, who was closely-shaven and dressed in the European style, though his father still wore a kaftan and a beard, came at once without a comment.
All the family trembled before the father.
The old man had sent for this giant, not because he was afraid of the “captain” (he was by no means of a timorous temper), but in order to have a witness in case of any emergency.
Supported by his son and the servant-lad, he waddled at last into the drawing-room.
It may be assumed that he felt considerable curiosity.
The drawing-room in which Mitya was awaiting him was a vast, dreary room that laid a weight of depression on the heart.
It had a double row of windows, a gallery, marbled walls, and three immense chandeliers with glass lusters covered with shades.
Mitya was sitting on a little chair at the entrance, awaiting his fate with nervous impatience.
When the old man appeared at the opposite door, seventy feet away, Mitya jumped up at once, and with his long, military stride walked to meet him.
Mitya was well dressed, in a frock-coat, buttoned up, with a round hat and black gloves in his hands, just as he had been three days before at the elder’s, at the family meeting with his father and brothers.
The old man waited for him, standing dignified and unbending, and Mitya felt at once that he had looked him through and through as he advanced.
Mitya was greatly impressed, too, with Samsonov’s immensely swollen face.
He bowed to his guest in dignified silence, motioned him to a low chair by the sofa, and, leaning on his son’s arm he began lowering himself on to the sofa opposite, groaning painfully, so that Mitya, seeing his painful exertions, immediately felt remorseful and sensitively conscious of his insignificance in the presence of the dignified person he had ventured to disturb.
“What is it you want of me, sir?” said the old man, deliberately, distinctly, severely, but courteously, when he was at last seated.
Then he began at once speaking with loud, nervous haste, gesticulating, and in a positive frenzy.
He was unmistakably a man driven into a corner, on the brink of ruin, catching at the last straw, ready to sink if he failed.
Old Samsonov probably grasped all this in an instant, though his face remained cold and immovable as a statue’s.
“Most honored sir, Kuzma Kuzmitch, you have no doubt heard more than once of my disputes with my father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, who robbed me of my inheritance from my mother ... seeing the whole town is gossiping about it ... for here every one’s gossiping of what they shouldn’t ... and besides, it might have reached you through Grushenka ...
I beg your pardon, through Agrafena Alexandrovna ...
Agrafena Alexandrovna, the lady for whom I have the highest respect and esteem ...” So Mitya began, and broke down at the first sentence.
We will not reproduce his speech word for word, but will only summarize the gist of it.
Three months ago, he said, he had of express intention (Mitya purposely used these words instead of “intentionally”) consulted a lawyer in the chief town of the province, “a distinguished lawyer, Kuzma Kuzmitch, Pavel Pavlovitch Korneplodov.
A man of vast intellect, the mind of a statesman ... he knows you, too ... spoke of you in the highest terms ...” Mitya broke down again.
He leapt instantly over the gaps, and struggled on and on.
Quite the contrary, you may make six or seven thousand instead of three.” Above all, he wanted this concluded that very day.
“I’ll do the business with you at a notary’s, or whatever it is ... in fact, I’m ready to do anything....
I’ll hand over all the deeds ... whatever you want, sign anything ... and we could draw up the agreement at once ... and if it were possible, if it were only possible, that very morning....
You could pay me that three thousand, for there isn’t a capitalist in this town to compare with you, and so would save me from ... would save me, in fact ... for a good, I might say an honorable action....
For I cherish the most honorable feelings for a certain person, whom you know well, and care for as a father.
And, indeed, it’s a struggle of three in this business, for it’s fate—that’s a fearful thing, Kuzma Kuzmitch!
A tragedy, Kuzma Kuzmitch, a tragedy!
I’m expressing it awkwardly, perhaps, but I’m not a literary man.
It all lies in your hands—the fate of three lives, and the happiness of two....
Excuse me, I’m making a mess of it, but you understand ...
I see from your venerable eyes that you understand ... and if you don’t understand, I’m done for ... so you see!” Mitya broke off his clumsy speech with that, “so you see!” and jumping up from his seat, awaited the answer to his foolish proposal.
At the last phrase he had suddenly become hopelessly aware that it had all fallen flat, above all, that he had been talking utter nonsense.
On the way here it seemed all right, and now it’s nothing but nonsense.” The idea suddenly dawned on his despairing mind.
All the while he had been talking, the old man sat motionless, watching him with an icy expression in his eyes.
After keeping him for a moment in suspense, Kuzma Kuzmitch pronounced at last in the most positive and chilling tone: “Excuse me, we don’t undertake such business.” Mitya suddenly felt his legs growing weak under him.
“What am I to do now, Kuzma Kuzmitch?” he muttered, with a pale smile.
“I suppose it’s all up with me—what do you think?” “Excuse me....” Mitya remained standing, staring motionless.
He suddenly noticed a movement in the old man’s face.
“You see, sir, business of that sort’s not in our line,” said the old man slowly.
You’re my salvation, Kuzma Kuzmitch,” faltered Mitya.
He is a peasant, he does business in timber.
He’s been haggling with Fyodor Pavlovitch for the last year, over your copse at Tchermashnya.
Now he’s come back again and is staying with the priest at Ilyinskoe, about twelve versts from the Volovya station.
He wrote to me, too, about the business of the copse, asking my advice.
Fyodor Pavlovitch means to go and see him himself.
So if you were to be beforehand with Fyodor Pavlovitch and to make Lyagavy the offer you’ve made me, he might possibly—” “A brilliant idea!” Mitya interrupted ecstatically.
He’s haggling with him for it, being asked too much, and here he would have all the documents entitling him to the property itself.
Ha ha ha!” And Mitya suddenly went off into his short, wooden laugh, startling Samsonov.
“How can I thank you, Kuzma Kuzmitch?” cried Mitya effusively.
“Don’t mention it,” said Samsonov, inclining his head.
Oh, it was a true presentiment brought me to you....
I’m afraid I’ve overtaxed your strength.
It’s a Russian says that, Kuzma Kuzmitch, a R-r-russian!” “To be sure!” Mitya seized his hand to press it, but there was a malignant gleam in the old man’s eye.
Mitya drew back his hand, but at once blamed himself for his mistrustfulness.
For her sake, Kuzma Kuzmitch!
You understand that it’s for her,” he cried, his voice ringing through the room.
He was trembling with delight.
“Everything was on the verge of ruin and my guardian angel saved me,” was the thought in his mind.
And if such a business man as Samsonov (a most worthy old man, and what dignity!) had suggested this course, then ... then success was assured.
He would fly off immediately.
Could the old man have been laughing at me?” exclaimed Mitya, as he strode towards his lodging.
He could, of course, imagine nothing, but that the advice was practical “from such a business man” with an understanding of the business, with an understanding of this Lyagavy (curious surname!).
Or—the old man was laughing at him.
The second alternative was the correct one.
Long afterwards, when the catastrophe had happened, old Samsonov himself confessed, laughing, that he had made a fool of the “captain.” He was a cold, spiteful and sarcastic man, liable to violent antipathies.
Whether it was the “captain’s” excited face, or the foolish conviction of the “rake and spendthrift,” that he, Samsonov, could be taken in by such a cock-and-bull story as his scheme, or his jealousy of Grushenka, in whose name this “scapegrace” had rushed in on him with such a tale to get money which worked on the old man, I can’t tell.
But at the instant when Mitya stood before him, feeling his legs grow weak under him, and frantically exclaiming that he was ruined, at that moment the old man looked at him with intense spite, and resolved to make a laughing-stock of him.
When Mitya had gone, Kuzma Kuzmitch, white with rage, turned to his son and bade him see to it that that beggar be never seen again, and never admitted even into the yard, or else he’d— He did not utter his threat.
But even his son, who often saw him enraged, trembled with fear.
For a whole hour afterwards, the old man was shaking with anger, and by evening he was worse, and sent for the doctor.
He had forty kopecks, and that was all, all that was left after so many years of prosperity!
He snatched it up and carried it to a Jewish watchmaker who had a shop in the market-place.
“And I didn’t expect that,” cried Mitya, ecstatically. (He was still in a state of ecstasy.) He seized his six roubles and ran home.
At home he borrowed three roubles from the people of the house, who loved him so much that they were pleased to give it him, though it was all they had.
Mitya in his excitement told them on the spot that his fate would be decided that day, and he described, in desperate haste, the whole scheme he had put before Samsonov, the latter’s decision, his own hopes for the future, and so on.
These people had been told many of their lodger’s secrets before, and so looked upon him as a gentleman who was not at all proud, and almost one of themselves.
Having thus collected nine roubles Mitya sent for posting-horses to take him to the Volovya station.
This was how the fact came to be remembered and established that “at midday, on the day before the event, Mitya had not a farthing, and that he had sold his watch to get money and had borrowed three roubles from his landlord, all in the presence of witnesses.” I note this fact, later on it will be apparent why I do so.
Though he was radiant with the joyful anticipation that he would at last solve all his difficulties, yet, as he drew near Volovya station, he trembled at the thought of what Grushenka might be doing in his absence.
What if she made up her mind to-day to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch?
This was why he had gone off without telling her and why he left orders with his landlady not to let out where he had gone, if any one came to inquire for him.
“I must, I must get back to-night,” he repeated, as he was jolted along in the cart, “and I dare say I shall have to bring this Lyagavy back here ... to draw up the deed.” So mused Mitya, with a throbbing heart, but alas! his dreams were not fated to be carried out.
To begin with, he was late, taking a short cut from Volovya station which turned out to be eighteen versts instead of twelve.
Secondly, he did not find the priest at home at Ilyinskoe; he had gone off to a neighboring village.
While Mitya, setting off there with the same exhausted horses, was looking for him, it was almost dark.
The priest, a shy and amiable looking little man, informed him at once that though Lyagavy had been staying with him at first, he was now at Suhoy Possyolok, that he was staying the night in the forester’s cottage, as he was buying timber there too.
At Mitya’s urgent request that he would take him to Lyagavy at once, and by so doing “save him, so to speak,” the priest agreed, after some demur, to conduct him to Suhoy Possyolok; his curiosity was obviously aroused.
But, unluckily, he advised their going on foot, as it would not be “much over” a verst.
He was a very cautious man, though not old.
Mitya at once began talking to him, too, of his plans, nervously and excitedly asking advice in regard to Lyagavy, and talking all the way.
The priest listened attentively, but gave little advice.
He turned off Mitya’s questions with: “I don’t know.
When Mitya began to speak of his quarrel with his father over his inheritance, the priest was positively alarmed, as he was in some way dependent on Fyodor Pavlovitch.
He inquired, however, with surprise, why he called the peasant-trader Gorstkin, Lyagavy, and obligingly explained to Mitya that, though the man’s name really was Lyagavy, he was never called so, as he would be grievously offended at the name, and that he must be sure to call him Gorstkin, “or you’ll do nothing with him; he won’t even listen to you,” said the priest in conclusion.
Mitya was somewhat surprised for a moment, and explained that that was what Samsonov had called him.
On hearing this fact, the priest dropped the subject, though he would have done well to put into words his doubt whether, if Samsonov had sent him to that peasant, calling him Lyagavy, there was not something wrong about it and he was turning him into ridicule.
He hurried, striding along, and only when he reached Suhoy Possyolok did he realize that they had come not one verst, nor one and a half, but at least three.
This annoyed him, but he controlled himself.
The forester lived in one half of the hut, and Gorstkin was lodging in the other, the better room the other side of the passage.
The hut was extremely overheated.
The visitor himself lay stretched at full length on the bench, with his coat crushed up under his head for a pillow, snoring heavily.
Mitya stood in perplexity.
My business is too important.
I’m in a hurry to get back to-day,” he said in great agitation.
But the priest and the forester stood in silence, not giving their opinion.
Mitya went up and began trying to wake him himself; he tried vigorously, but the sleeper did not wake.
What am I to do?” And, terribly impatient, he began pulling him by the arms, by the legs, shaking his head, lifting him up and making him sit on the bench.
Yet, after prolonged exertions, he could only succeed in getting the drunken man to utter absurd grunts, and violent, but inarticulate oaths.
“No, you’d better wait a little,” the priest pronounced at last, “for he’s obviously not in a fit state.” “He’s been drinking the whole day,” the forester chimed in.
“If only you knew how important it is to me and how desperate I am!” “No, you’d better wait till morning,” the priest repeated.
Mercy! that’s impossible!” And in his despair he was on the point of attacking the sleeping man again, but stopped short at once, realizing the uselessness of his efforts.
The priest said nothing, the sleepy forester looked gloomy.
“What terrible tragedies real life contrives for people,” said Mitya, in complete despair.
The perspiration was streaming down his face.
The priest seized the moment to put before him, very reasonably, that, even if he succeeded in wakening the man, he would still be drunk and incapable of conversation.
“And your business is important,” he said, “so you’d certainly better put it off till morning.” With a gesture of despair Mitya agreed.
“Father, I will stay here with a light, and seize the favorable moment.
I’ll pay you for the light,” he said to the forester, “for the night’s lodging, too; you’ll remember Dmitri Karamazov.
I’ll take his horse and get home,” he said, indicating the forester.
Profound dejection clung about his soul like a heavy mist.
A profound, intense dejection!
He sat thinking, but could reach no conclusion.
The candle burnt dimly, a cricket chirped; it became insufferably close in the overheated room.
He suddenly pictured the garden, the path behind the garden, the door of his father’s house mysteriously opening and Grushenka running in.
“It’s a tragedy!” he said, grinding his teeth.
Mechanically he went up to the sleeping man and looked in his face.
He was a lean, middle-aged peasant, with a very long face, flaxen curls, and a long, thin, reddish beard, wearing a blue cotton shirt and a black waistcoat, from the pocket of which peeped the chain of a silver watch.
Mitya looked at his face with intense hatred, and for some unknown reason his curly hair particularly irritated him.
What was insufferably humiliating was, that after leaving things of such importance and making such sacrifices, he, Mitya, utterly worn out, should with business of such urgency be standing over this dolt on whom his whole fate depended, while he snored as though there were nothing the matter, as though he’d dropped from another planet.
He roused him with a sort of ferocity, pulled at him, pushed him, even beat him; but after five minutes of vain exertions, he returned to his bench in helpless despair, and sat down.
“And how dishonorable it all is!” something made him add.
His head began to ache horribly.
“Should he fling it up and go away altogether?” he wondered.
He sat without moving, and unconsciously dozed off and fell asleep as he sat.
He was waked up by his head aching so unbearably that he could have screamed.
There was a hammering in his temples, and the top of his head ached.
It was a long time before he could wake up fully and understand what had happened to him.
At last he realized that the room was full of charcoal fumes from the stove, and that he might die of suffocation.
The candle guttered and was about to go out.
Mitya cried out, and ran staggering across the passage into the forester’s room.
The forester waked up at once, but hearing that the other room was full of fumes, to Mitya’s surprise and annoyance, accepted the fact with strange unconcern, though he did go to see to it.
“But he’s dead, he’s dead! and ... what am I to do then?” cried Mitya frantically.
The forester still treated the matter contemptuously, and when he opened the window said grumpily: “It’ll be all right, now.” He went back to sleep, leaving Mitya a lighted lantern.
Mitya fussed about the drunken peasant for half an hour, wetting his head, and gravely resolved not to sleep all night.
But he was so worn out that when he sat down for a moment to take breath, he closed his eyes, unconsciously stretched himself full length on the bench and slept like the dead.
It was dreadfully late when he waked.
It was somewhere about nine o’clock.
The sun was shining brightly in the two little windows of the hut.
Yesterday’s bottle had already been finished, and the new one was more than half empty.
Mitya jumped up and saw at once that the cursed peasant was drunk again, hopelessly and incurably.
The peasant was silently and slyly watching him, with insulting composure, and even a sort of contemptuous condescension, so Mitya fancied.
I ... you’ve most likely heard from the forester here in the hut.
I’m Lieutenant Dmitri Karamazov, the son of the old Karamazov whose copse you are buying.” “That’s a lie!” said the peasant, calmly and confidently.
You know Fyodor Pavlovitch?” “I don’t know any of your Fyodor Pavlovitches,” said the peasant, speaking thickly.
“You’re bargaining with him for the copse, for the copse.
Do wake up, and collect yourself.
Father Pavel of Ilyinskoe brought me here.
You wrote to Samsonov, and he has sent me to you,” Mitya gasped breathlessly.
Yet you can speak and understand ... or else ...
I understand nothing!” “You’re a painter!” “For mercy’s sake!
I’m Karamazov, Dmitri Karamazov.
I have an offer to make you, an advantageous offer ... very advantageous offer, concerning the copse!” The peasant stroked his beard importantly.
“No, you’ve contracted for the job and turned out a scamp.
You’re a scoundrel!” “I assure you you’re mistaken,” cried Mitya, wringing his hands in despair.
The peasant still stroked his beard, and suddenly screwed up his eyes cunningly.
Do you understand that?” Mitya stepped back gloomily, and suddenly “something seemed to hit him on the head,” as he said afterwards.
In an instant a light seemed to dawn in his mind, “a light was kindled and I grasped it all.” He stood, stupefied, wondering how he, after all a man of intelligence, could have yielded to such folly, have been led into such an adventure, and have kept it up for almost twenty-four hours, fussing round this Lyagavy, wetting his head.
“Why, the man’s drunk, dead drunk, and he’ll go on drinking now for a week; what’s the use of waiting here?
And what if Samsonov sent me here on purpose?
Oh, God, what have I done?” The peasant sat watching him and grinning.
He went quietly to the bench, took up his overcoat, put it on without a word, and went out of the hut.
He did not find the forester in the next room; there was no one there.
Hurrying there the evening before with the priest, he had not noticed the road.
He had no revengeful feeling for anybody, even for Samsonov, in his heart.
He got out of the forest somehow, however, and a vista of fields, bare after the harvest, stretched as far as the eye could see.
What death all round!” he repeated, striding on and on.
He was saved by meeting an old merchant who was being driven across country in a hired trap.
When he overtook him, Mitya asked the way, and it turned out that the old merchant, too, was going to Volovya.
After some discussion Mitya got into the trap.
At Volovya, Mitya at once ordered posting-horses to drive to the town, and suddenly realized that he was appallingly hungry.
While the horses were being harnessed, an omelette was prepared for him.
He ate it all in an instant, ate a huge hunk of bread, ate a sausage, and swallowed three glasses of vodka.
He flew towards the town, urged on the driver, and suddenly made a new and “unalterable” plan to procure that “accursed money” before evening.
“And to think, only to think that a man’s life should be ruined for the sake of that paltry three thousand!” he cried, contemptuously.
“I’ll settle it to-day.” And if it had not been for the thought of Grushenka and of what might have happened to her, which never left him, he would perhaps have become quite cheerful again....
But the thought of her was stabbing him to the heart every moment, like a sharp knife.
At last they arrived, and Mitya at once ran to Grushenka.
Gold-Mines This was the visit of Mitya of which Grushenka had spoken to Rakitin with such horror.
She was just then expecting the “message,” and was much relieved that Mitya had not been to see her that day or the day before.
She hoped that “please God he won’t come till I’m gone away,” and he suddenly burst in on her.
To get him off her hands she suggested at once that he should walk with her to Samsonov’s, where she said she absolutely must go “to settle his accounts,” and when Mitya accompanied her at once, she said good-by to him at the gate, making him promise to come at twelve o’clock to take her home again.
Mitya, too, was delighted at this arrangement.
If she was sitting at Samsonov’s she could not be going to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, “if only she’s not lying,” he added at once.
After leaving Grushenka at the gate he rushed home.
“Now I must only make haste and find out from Smerdyakov whether anything happened there last night, whether, by any chance, she went to Fyodor Pavlovitch; ough!” floated through his mind.
Before he had time to reach his lodging, jealousy had surged up again in his restless heart.
“Othello was not jealous, he was trustful,” observed Pushkin.
Othello’s soul was shattered and his whole outlook clouded simply because _his ideal was destroyed_.
He was trustful, on the contrary.
He had to be led up, pushed on, excited with great difficulty before he could entertain the idea of deceit.
It is impossible to picture to oneself the shame and moral degradation to which the jealous man can descend without a qualm of conscience.
On the contrary, a man of lofty feelings, whose love is pure and full of self-sacrifice, may yet hide under tables, bribe the vilest people, and be familiar with the lowest ignominy of spying and eavesdropping.
Othello was incapable of making up his mind to faithlessness—not incapable of forgiving it, but of making up his mind to it—though his soul was as innocent and free from malice as a babe’s.
It is hard to imagine what some jealous men can make up their mind to and overlook, and what they can forgive!
The jealous are the readiest of all to forgive, and all women know it.
Of course the reconciliation is only for an hour.
For, even if the rival did disappear next day, he would invent another one and would be jealous of him.
And one might wonder what there was in a love that had to be so watched over, what a love could be worth that needed such strenuous guarding.
But that the jealous will never understand.
It is remarkable, too, that those very men of noble hearts, standing hidden in some cupboard, listening and spying, never feel the stings of conscience at that moment, anyway, though they understand clearly enough with their “noble hearts” the shameful depths to which they have voluntarily sunk.
At the sight of Grushenka, Mitya’s jealousy vanished, and, for an instant he became trustful and generous, and positively despised himself for his evil feelings.
But it only proved that, in his love for the woman, there was an element of something far higher than he himself imagined, that it was not only a sensual passion, not only the “curve of her body,” of which he had talked to Alyosha.
But, as soon as Grushenka had gone, Mitya began to suspect her of all the low cunning of faithlessness, and he felt no sting of conscience at it.
And so jealousy surged up in him again.
The first thing to be done was to get hold of at least a small, temporary loan of money.
The nine roubles had almost all gone on his expedition.
He had a brace of fine dueling pistols in a case, which he had not pawned till then because he prized them above all his possessions.
In the “Metropolis” tavern he had some time since made acquaintance with a young official and had learnt that this very opulent bachelor was passionately fond of weapons.
He used to buy pistols, revolvers, daggers, hang them on his wall and show them to acquaintances.
He prided himself on them, and was quite a specialist on the mechanism of the revolver.
Mitya, without stopping to think, went straight to him, and offered to pawn his pistols to him for ten roubles.
The official, delighted, began trying to persuade him to sell them outright.
But Mitya would not consent, so the young man gave him ten roubles, protesting that nothing would induce him to take interest.
Mitya was in haste; he rushed towards Fyodor Pavlovitch’s by the back way, to his arbor, to get hold of Smerdyakov as soon as possible.
In this way the fact was established that three or four hours before a certain event, of which I shall speak later on, Mitya had not a farthing, and pawned for ten roubles a possession he valued, though, three hours later, he was in possession of thousands....
But I am anticipating.
From Marya Kondratyevna (the woman living near Fyodor Pavlovitch’s) he learned the very disturbing fact of Smerdyakov’s illness.
He heard the story of his fall in the cellar, his fit, the doctor’s visit, Fyodor Pavlovitch’s anxiety; he heard with interest, too, that his brother Ivan had set off that morning for Moscow.
“Then he must have driven through Volovya before me,” thought Dmitri, but he was terribly distressed about Smerdyakov.
He began greedily questioning the women whether they had seen anything the evening before.
They quite understood what he was trying to find out, and completely reassured him.
Ivan Fyodorovitch had been there the night; everything had been perfectly as usual.
Mitya grew thoughtful.
He would certainly have to keep watch to-day, but where?
Here or at Samsonov’s gate?
He decided that he must be on the look out both here and there, and meanwhile ... meanwhile....
The difficulty was that he had to carry out the new plan that he had made on the journey back.
Mitya resolved to sacrifice an hour to it: “In an hour I shall know everything, I shall settle everything, and then, then, first of all to Samsonov’s.
I’ll inquire whether Grushenka’s there and instantly be back here again, stay till eleven, and then to Samsonov’s again to bring her home.” This was what he decided.
He flew home, washed, combed his hair, brushed his clothes, dressed, and went to Madame Hohlakov’s.
He had resolved to borrow three thousand from that lady.
And what was more, he felt suddenly convinced that she would not refuse to lend it to him.
It may be wondered why, if he felt so certain, he had not gone to her at first, one of his own sort, so to speak, instead of to Samsonov, a man he did not know, who was not of his own class, and to whom he hardly knew how to speak.
But the fact was that he had never known Madame Hohlakov well, and had seen nothing of her for the last month, and that he knew she could not endure him.
She had detested him from the first because he was engaged to Katerina Ivanovna, while she had, for some reason, suddenly conceived the desire that Katerina Ivanovna should throw him over, and marry the “charming, chivalrously refined Ivan, who had such excellent manners.” Mitya’s manners she detested.
Mitya positively laughed at her, and had once said about her that she was just as lively and at her ease as she was uncultivated.
But that morning in the cart a brilliant idea had struck him: “If she is so anxious I should not marry Katerina Ivanovna” (and he knew she was positively hysterical upon the subject) “why should she refuse me now that three thousand, just to enable me to leave Katya and get away from her for ever.
These spoilt fine ladies, if they set their hearts on anything, will spare no expense to satisfy their caprice.
As for his “plan” it was just the same as before; it consisted of the offer of his rights to Tchermashnya—but not with a commercial object, as it had been with Samsonov, not trying to allure the lady with the possibility of making a profit of six or seven thousand—but simply as a security for the debt.
As he worked out this new idea, Mitya was enchanted with it, but so it always was with him in all his undertakings, in all his sudden decisions.
He gave himself up to every new idea with passionate enthusiasm.
Yet, when he mounted the steps of Madame Hohlakov’s house he felt a shiver of fear run down his spine.
At that moment he saw fully, as a mathematical certainty, that this was his last hope, that if this broke down, nothing else was left him in the world, but to “rob and murder some one for the three thousand.” It was half-past seven when he rang at the bell.
As soon as he was announced he was received with extraordinary rapidity.
“As though she were waiting for me,” thought Mitya, and as soon as he had been led to the drawing-room, the lady of the house herself ran in, and declared at once that she was expecting him.
“I was expecting you!
I was expecting you!
Though I’d no reason to suppose you would come to see me, as you will admit yourself.
You may marvel at my instinct, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, but I was convinced all the morning that you would come.” “That is certainly wonderful, madam,” observed Mitya, sitting down limply, “but I have come to you on a matter of great importance....
On a matter of supreme importance for me, that is, madam ... for me alone ... and I hasten—” “I know you’ve come on most important business, Dmitri Fyodorovitch; it’s not a case of presentiment, no reactionary harking back to the miraculous (have you heard about Father Zossima?).
This is a case of mathematics: you couldn’t help coming, after all that has passed with Katerina Ivanovna; you couldn’t, you couldn’t, that’s a mathematical certainty.” “The realism of actual life, madam, that’s what it is.
But allow me to explain—” “Realism indeed, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
I’ve seen too much of miracles.
You’ve heard that Father Zossima is dead?” “No, madam, it’s the first time I’ve heard of it.” Mitya was a little surprised.
“Last night, and only imagine—” “Madam,” said Mitya, “I can imagine nothing except that I’m in a desperate position, and that if you don’t help me, everything will come to grief, and I first of all.
Excuse me for the triviality of the expression, but I’m in a fever—” “I know, I know that you’re in a fever.
You could hardly fail to be, and whatever you may say to me, I know beforehand.
I have long been thinking over your destiny, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, I am watching over it and studying it....
It’s of secondary importance.
But as for help, you’re not the first I have helped, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
You have most likely heard of my cousin, Madame Belmesov.
Her husband was ruined, ‘had come to grief,’ as you characteristically express it, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
I recommended him to take to horse-breeding, and now he’s doing well.
Have you any idea of horse-breeding, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?” “Not the faintest, madam; ah, madam, not the faintest!” cried Mitya, in nervous impatience, positively starting from his seat.
Only give me two minutes of free speech that I may just explain to you everything, the whole plan with which I have come.
I’m in a fearful hurry,” Mitya cried hysterically, feeling that she was just going to begin talking again, and hoping to cut her short.
“I have come in despair ... in the last gasp of despair, to beg you to lend me the sum of three thousand, a loan, but on safe, most safe security, madam, with the most trustworthy guarantees!
Only let me explain—” “You must tell me all that afterwards, afterwards!” Madame Hohlakov with a gesture demanded silence in her turn, “and whatever you may tell me, I know it all beforehand; I’ve told you so already.
You ask for a certain sum, for three thousand, but I can give you more, immeasurably more, I will save you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, but you must listen to me.” Mitya started from his seat again.
My eternal gratitude—” “I will give you more, infinitely more than three thousand!” cried Madame Hohlakov, looking with a radiant smile at Mitya’s ecstasy.
I only need that fatal three thousand, and on my part I can give security for that sum with infinite gratitude, and I propose a plan which—” “Enough, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, it’s said and done.” Madame Hohlakov cut him short, with the modest triumph of beneficence: “I have promised to save you, and I will save you.
I will save you as I did Belmesov.
What do you think of the gold-mines, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?” “Of the gold-mines, madam?
I have never thought anything about them.” “But I have thought of them for you.
I have been watching you for the last month.
I’ve studied your gait and come to the conclusion: that’s a man who would find gold.” “From my gait, madam?” said Mitya, smiling.
You surely don’t deny that character can be told from the gait, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?
Science supports the idea.
After all this business with Father Zossima, which has so upset me, from this very day I’m a realist and I want to devote myself to practical usefulness.
‘Enough!’ as Turgenev says.” “But, madam, the three thousand you so generously promised to lend me—” “It is yours, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Madame Hohlakov cut in at once.
“The money is as good as in your pocket, not three thousand, but three million, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, in less than no time.
I’ll make you a present of the idea: you shall find gold-mines, make millions, return and become a leading man, and wake us up and lead us to better things.
You will found institutions and enterprises of all sorts.
This is the age of railways, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
You’ll become famous and indispensable to the Department of Finance, which is so badly off at present.
The depreciation of the rouble keeps me awake at night, Dmitri Fyodorovitch; people don’t know that side of me—” “Madam, madam!” Dmitri interrupted with an uneasy presentiment.
I’ll come and see you again about it ... many times, indeed ... but now, that three thousand you so generously ... oh, that would set me free, and if you could to-day ... you see, I haven’t a minute, a minute to lose to-day—” “Enough, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, enough!” Madame Hohlakov interrupted emphatically.
“The question is, will you go to the gold-mines or not; have you quite made up your mind?
Answer yes or no.” “I will go, madam, afterwards....
I’ll go where you like ... but now—” “Wait!” cried Madame Hohlakov.
And jumping up and running to a handsome bureau with numerous little drawers, she began pulling out one drawer after another, looking for something with desperate haste.
“The three thousand,” thought Mitya, his heart almost stopping, “and at the instant ... without any papers or formalities ... that’s doing things in gentlemanly style!
She’s a splendid woman, if only she didn’t talk so much!” “Here!” cried Madame Hohlakov, running back joyfully to Mitya, “here is what I was looking for!” It was a tiny silver ikon on a cord, such as is sometimes worn next the skin with a cross.
“This is from Kiev, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” she went on reverently, “from the relics of the Holy Martyr, Varvara.
Let me put it on your neck myself, and with it dedicate you to a new life, to a new career.” And she actually put the cord round his neck, and began arranging it.
In extreme embarrassment, Mitya bent down and helped her, and at last he got it under his neck-tie and collar through his shirt to his chest.
“Now you can set off,” Madame Hohlakov pronounced, sitting down triumphantly in her place again.
I don’t know how to thank you, indeed ... for such kindness, but ...
If only you knew how precious time is to me....
That sum of money, for which I shall be indebted to your generosity....
Oh, madam, since you are so kind, so touchingly generous to me,” Mitya exclaimed impulsively, “then let me reveal to you ... though, of course, you’ve known it a long time ... that I love somebody here....
Katerina Ivanovna I should say....
Oh, I’ve behaved inhumanly, dishonorably to her, but I fell in love here with another woman ... a woman whom you, madam, perhaps, despise, for you know everything already, but whom I cannot leave on any account, and therefore that three thousand now—” “Leave everything, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Madame Hohlakov interrupted in the most decisive tone.
“Leave everything, especially women.
Afterwards, when you come back rich and famous, you will find the girl of your heart in the highest society.
That will be a modern girl, a girl of education and advanced ideas.
By that time the dawning woman question will have gained ground, and the new woman will have appeared.” “Madam, that’s not the point, not at all....” Mitya clasped his hands in entreaty.
“Yes, it is, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, just what you need; the very thing you’re yearning for, though you don’t realize it yourself.
I am not at all opposed to the present woman movement, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
The development of woman, and even the political emancipation of woman in the near future—that’s my ideal.
I’ve a daughter myself, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, people don’t know that side of me.
I wrote a letter to the author, Shtchedrin, on that subject.
He has taught me so much, so much about the vocation of woman.
So last year I sent him an anonymous letter of two lines: ‘I kiss and embrace you, my teacher, for the modern woman.
Persevere.’ And I signed myself, ‘A Mother.’ I thought of signing myself ‘A contemporary Mother,’ and hesitated, but I stuck to the simple ‘Mother’; there’s more moral beauty in that, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
And the word ‘contemporary’ might have reminded him of ‘_The Contemporary_’—a painful recollection owing to the censorship....
Good Heavens, what is the matter!” “Madam!” cried Mitya, jumping up at last, clasping his hands before her in helpless entreaty.
“You will make me weep if you delay what you have so generously—” “Oh, do weep, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, do weep!
Tears will ease your heart, and later on you will return rejoicing.
You will hasten to me from Siberia on purpose to share your joy with me—” “But allow me, too!” Mitya cried suddenly.
“For the last time I entreat you, tell me, can I have the sum you promised me to-day, if not, when may I come for it?” “What sum, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?” “The three thousand you promised me ... that you so generously—” “Three thousand?
Oh, no, I haven’t got three thousand,” Madame Hohlakov announced with serene amazement.
Mitya was stupefied.
“Why, you said just now ... you said ... you said it was as good as in my hands—” “Oh, no, you misunderstood me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
In that case you misunderstood me.
It’s true I promised you more, infinitely more than three thousand, I remember it all now, but I was referring to the gold-mines.” “But the money?
The three thousand?” Mitya exclaimed, awkwardly.
I haven’t a penny, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
I’m quarreling with my steward about it, and I’ve just borrowed five hundred roubles from Miüsov, myself.
And, do you know, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, if I had, I wouldn’t give it to you.
And I wouldn’t give it to you particularly.
Aie!” cried Madame Hohlakov, alarmed, and she flew to the other end of the drawing-room.
Mitya spat on the ground, and strode rapidly out of the room, out of the house, into the street, into the darkness!
He walked like one possessed, and beating himself on the breast, on the spot where he had struck himself two days previously, before Alyosha, the last time he saw him in the dark, on the road.
What those blows upon his breast signified, _on that spot_, and what he meant by it—that was, for the time, a secret which was known to no one in the world, and had not been told even to Alyosha.
But that secret meant for him more than disgrace; it meant ruin, suicide.
So he had determined, if he did not get hold of the three thousand that would pay his debt to Katerina Ivanovna, and so remove from his breast, from _that spot on his breast_, the shame he carried upon it, that weighed on his conscience.
All this will be fully explained to the reader later on, but now that his last hope had vanished, this man, so strong in appearance, burst out crying like a little child a few steps from the Hohlakovs’ house.
In this way he reached the square, and suddenly became aware that he had stumbled against something.
He heard a piercing wail from an old woman whom he had almost knocked down.
Why don’t you look where you’re going, scapegrace?” “Why, it’s you!” cried Mitya, recognizing the old woman in the dark.
It was the old servant who waited on Samsonov, whom Mitya had particularly noticed the day before.
“And who are you, my good sir?” said the old woman, in quite a different voice.
“I don’t know you in the dark.” “You live at Kuzma Kuzmitch’s.
You’re the servant there?” “Just so, sir, I was only running out to Prohoritch’s....
But I don’t know you now.” “Tell me, my good woman, is Agrafena Alexandrovna there now?” said Mitya, beside himself with suspense.
She only told Kuzma Kuzmitch a tale that made him laugh, and then she ran away.” “You’re lying, damn you!” roared Mitya.
Aie!” shrieked the old woman, but Mitya had vanished.
He ran with all his might to the house where Grushenka lived.
At the moment he reached it, Grushenka was on her way to Mokroe.
It was not more than a quarter of an hour after her departure.
Fenya was sitting with her grandmother, the old cook, Matryona, in the kitchen when “the captain” ran in.
Fenya uttered a piercing shriek on seeing him.
“You scream?” roared Mitya, “where is she?” But without giving the terror-stricken Fenya time to utter a word, he fell all of a heap at her feet.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, my dear, I don’t know.
You may kill me but I can’t tell you.” Fenya swore and protested.
“You went out with her yourself not long ago—” “She came back!” “Indeed she didn’t.
But as he ran, he surprised both Fenya and old Matryona by an unexpected action.
Mitya already had opened the door with one hand when, with the other, he snatched up the pestle, and thrust it in his side-pocket.
He’s going to murder some one!” cried Fenya, flinging up her hands.
“Where could she be except at Fyodor Pavlovitch’s?
She must have run straight to him from Samsonov’s, that was clear now.
The whole intrigue, the whole deceit was evident.” ...
It all rushed whirling through his mind.
He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna’s.
“There was no need to go there ... not the slightest need ... he must raise no alarm ... they would run and tell directly....
Here he chose a spot, apparently the very place, where according to the tradition, he knew Lizaveta had once climbed over it: “If she could climb over it,” the thought, God knows why, occurred to him, “surely I can.” He did in fact jump up, and instantly contrived to catch hold of the top of the fence.
Then he vigorously pulled himself up and sat astride on it.
Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likely Smerdyakov, too, and that there was no one to hear him, he instinctively hid himself, stood still, and began to listen.
But there was dead silence on all sides and, as though of design, complete stillness, not the slightest breath of wind.
“And naught but the whispering silence,” the line for some reason rose to his mind.
I think not.” Standing still for a minute, he walked softly over the grass in the garden, avoiding the trees and shrubs.
He walked slowly, creeping stealthily at every step, listening to his own footsteps.
He remembered that just under the window there were several thick and high bushes of elder and whitebeam.
The door from the house into the garden on the left-hand side, was shut; he had carefully looked on purpose to see, in passing.
“I must wait now,” he thought, “to reassure them, in case they heard my footsteps and are listening ... if only I don’t cough or sneeze.” He waited two minutes.
His heart was beating violently, and, at moments, he could scarcely breathe.
“No, this throbbing at my heart won’t stop,” he thought.
“I can’t wait any longer.” He was standing behind a bush in the shadow.
“How red the whitebeam berries are!” he murmured, not knowing why.
Softly and noiselessly, step by step, he approached the window, and raised himself on tiptoe.
All Fyodor Pavlovitch’s bedroom lay open before him.
It was not a large room, and was divided in two parts by a red screen, “Chinese,” as Fyodor Pavlovitch used to call it.
The word “Chinese” flashed into Mitya’s mind, “and behind the screen, is Grushenka,” thought Mitya.
He began watching Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was wearing his new striped-silk dressing-gown, which Mitya had never seen, and a silk cord with tassels round the waist.
A clean, dandified shirt of fine linen with gold studs peeped out under the collar of the dressing-gown.
On his head Fyodor Pavlovitch had the same red bandage which Alyosha had seen.
His father was standing near the window, apparently lost in thought.
Suddenly he jerked up his head, listened a moment, and hearing nothing went up to the table, poured out half a glass of brandy from a decanter and drank it off.
Then he uttered a deep sigh, again stood still a moment, walked carelessly up to the looking-glass on the wall, with his right hand raised the red bandage on his forehead a little, and began examining his bruises and scars, which had not yet disappeared.
“He’s alone,” thought Mitya, “in all probability he’s alone.” Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the looking-glass, turned suddenly to the window and looked out.
Mitya instantly slipped away into the shadow.
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the window.
He’s wild with impatience.” ...
The old man was sitting down at the table, apparently disappointed.
“He’s alone, he’s alone!” he repeated again.
“If she were here, his face would be different.” Strange to say, a queer, irrational vexation rose up in his heart that she was not here.
“It’s not that she’s not here,” he explained to himself, immediately, “but that I can’t tell for certain whether she is or not.” Mitya remembered afterwards that his mind was at that moment exceptionally clear, that he took in everything to the slightest detail, and missed no point.
But a feeling of misery, the misery of uncertainty and indecision, was growing in his heart with every instant.
“Is she here or not?” The angry doubt filled his heart, and suddenly, making up his mind, he put out his hand and softly knocked on the window frame.
He knocked the signal the old man had agreed upon with Smerdyakov, twice slowly and then three times more quickly, the signal that meant “Grushenka is here!” The old man started, jerked up his head, and, jumping up quickly, ran to the window.
Fyodor Pavlovitch opened the window and thrust his whole head out.
“Grushenka, is it you?
Is it you?” he said, in a sort of trembling half-whisper.
“Where are you, my angel, where are you?” He was fearfully agitated and breathless.
“Where are you?” cried the old man again; and he thrust his head out farther, thrust it out to the shoulders, gazing in all directions, right and left.
Come, I’ll show you....” “He means the three thousand,” thought Mitya.
I’ll open it directly.” And the old man almost climbed out of the window, peering out to the right, where there was a door into the garden, trying to see into the darkness.
In another second he would certainly have run out to open the door without waiting for Grushenka’s answer.
Mitya looked at him from the side without stirring.
The old man’s profile that he loathed so, his pendent Adam’s apple, his hooked nose, his lips that smiled in greedy expectation, were all brightly lighted up by the slanting lamplight falling on the left from the room.
I’m afraid he’ll suddenly be so loathsome to me at that moment.
I hate his double chin, his nose, his eyes, his shameless grin.
I feel a personal repulsion.
This personal repulsion was growing unendurable.
Mitya was beside himself, he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of his pocket.
“God was watching over me then,” Mitya himself said afterwards.
At that very moment Grigory waked up on his bed of sickness.
Earlier in the evening he had undergone the treatment which Smerdyakov had described to Ivan.
He had rubbed himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret, very strong decoction, had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wife repeated a “certain prayer” over him, after which he had gone to bed.
Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted the stuff, too, and, being unused to strong drink, slept like the dead beside her husband.
But Grigory waked up in the night, quite suddenly, and, after a moment’s reflection, though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back, he sat up in bed.
Then he deliberated again, got up and dressed hurriedly.
Perhaps his conscience was uneasy at the thought of sleeping while the house was unguarded “in such perilous times.” Smerdyakov, exhausted by his fit, lay motionless in the next room.
Marfa Ignatyevna did not stir.
“The stuff’s been too much for the woman,” Grigory thought, glancing at her, and groaning, he went out on the steps.
No doubt he only intended to look out from the steps, for he was hardly able to walk, the pain in his back and his right leg was intolerable.
But he suddenly remembered that he had not locked the little gate into the garden that evening.
He was the most punctual and precise of men, a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine, and habits that lasted for years.
Limping and writhing with pain he went down the steps and towards the garden.
Mechanically he stepped into the garden.
Perhaps he fancied something, perhaps caught some sound, and, glancing to the left he saw his master’s window open.
It’s not summer now,” thought Grigory, and suddenly, at that very instant he caught a glimpse of something extraordinary before him in the garden.
“Good Lord!” cried Grigory beside himself, and forgetting the pain in his back, he hurried to intercept the running figure.
He took a short cut, evidently he knew the garden better; the flying figure went towards the bath-house, ran behind it and rushed to the garden fence.
Grigory followed, not losing sight of him, and ran, forgetting everything.
He reached the fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it.
Grigory cried out, beside himself, pounced on him, and clutched his leg in his two hands.
Yes, his foreboding had not deceived him.
He recognized him, it was he, the “monster,” the “parricide.” “Parricide!” the old man shouted so that the whole neighborhood could hear, but he had not time to shout more, he fell at once, as though struck by lightning.
In Mitya’s hands was a brass pestle, and he flung it mechanically in the grass.
The pestle fell two paces from Grigory, not in the grass but on the path, in a most conspicuous place.
For some seconds he examined the prostrate figure before him.
He remembered afterwards clearly, that he had been awfully anxious to make sure whether he had broken the old man’s skull, or simply stunned him with the pestle.
But the blood was flowing horribly; and in a moment Mitya’s fingers were drenched with the hot stream.
He remembered taking out of his pocket the clean white handkerchief with which he had provided himself for his visit to Madame Hohlakov, and putting it to the old man’s head, senselessly trying to wipe the blood from his face and temples.
But the handkerchief was instantly soaked with blood.
“Good heavens! what am I doing it for?” thought Mitya, suddenly pulling himself together.
And what difference does it make now?” he added, hopelessly.
And suddenly turning to the fence, he vaulted over it into the lane and fell to running—the handkerchief soaked with blood he held, crushed up in his right fist, and as he ran he thrust it into the back pocket of his coat.
He ran headlong, and the few passers-by who met him in the dark, in the streets, remembered afterwards that they had met a man running that night.
The lad instantly recognized him, for Mitya had more than once tipped him.
Opening the gate at once, he let him in, and hastened to inform him with a good-humored smile that “Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now, you know.” “Where is she then, Prohor?” asked Mitya, stopping short.
A Sudden Resolution She was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother; they were both just going to bed.
Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch, they had not locked themselves in.
With whom is she now, at Mokroe?” he roared furiously.
Both the women squealed.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, darling, I’ll tell you everything directly, I won’t hide anything,” gabbled Fenya, frightened to death; “she’s gone to Mokroe, to her officer.” “What officer?” roared Mitya.
Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat.
He stood facing her, pale as death, unable to utter a word, but his eyes showed that he realized it all, all, from the first word, and guessed the whole position.
Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observe whether he understood or not.
She remained sitting on the trunk as she had been when he ran into the room, trembling all over, holding her hands out before her as though trying to defend herself.
She seemed to have grown rigid in that position.
Her wide-opened, scared eyes were fixed immovably upon him.
On the way, as he ran, he must have touched his forehead with them, wiping off the perspiration, so that on his forehead and his right cheek were blood-stained patches.
Fenya was on the verge of hysterics.
The old cook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman, almost unconscious with terror.
Mitya stood for a moment, then mechanically sank on to a chair next to Fenya.
He sat, not reflecting but, as it were, terror-stricken, benumbed.
Yet everything was clear as day: that officer, he knew about him, he knew everything perfectly, he had known it from Grushenka herself, had known that a letter had come from him a month before.
Why was it he had forgotten this officer, like that, forgotten him as soon as he heard of him?
That was the question that faced him like some monstrous thing.
And he looked at this monstrous thing with horror, growing cold with horror.
But suddenly, as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child, he began speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he had scared and hurt her just now.
He fell to questioning Fenya with an extreme preciseness, astonishing in his position, and though the girl looked wildly at his blood-stained hands, she, too, with wonderful readiness and rapidity, answered every question as though eager to put the whole truth and nothing but the truth before him.
Little by little, even with a sort of enjoyment, she began explaining every detail, not wanting to torment him, but, as it were, eager to be of the utmost service to him.
At the same moment Fenya said to him, not a bit afraid now to be inquisitive: “Look at your hands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
They’re all over blood!” “Yes,” answered Mitya mechanically.
He looked carelessly at his hands and at once forgot them and Fenya’s question.
His first horror was over, but evidently some new fixed determination had taken possession of him.
He suddenly stood up, smiling dreamily.
“What has happened to you, sir?” said Fenya, pointing to his hands again.
She spoke compassionately, as though she felt very near to him now in his grief.
“That’s blood, Fenya,” he said, looking at her with a strange expression.
Fenya ... there’s a fence here” (he looked at her as though setting her a riddle), “a high fence, and terrible to look at.
You don’t understand what fence, Fenya, and, never mind....
You’ll hear to-morrow and understand ... and now, good-by.
You loved me for an hour, remember Mityenka Karamazov so for ever....
She always used to call me Mityenka, do you remember?” And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen.
Fenya was almost more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran in and attacked her.
Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, the young official with whom he had pawned his pistols.
It was by now half-past eight, and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea, and had just put his coat on again to go to the “Metropolis” to play billiards.
Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood, the young man uttered a cry of surprise.
I’m in a hurry, Pyotr Ilyitch, please make haste.” Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised; he suddenly caught sight of a bundle of bank-notes in Mitya’s hand, and what was more, he had walked in holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money: he had them in his right hand, and held them outstretched as if to show them.
Perhotin’s servant-boy, who met Mitya in the passage, said afterwards that he walked into the passage in the same way, with the money outstretched in his hand, so he must have been carrying them like that even in the streets.
When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money, he said that it was difficult to judge at a glance, but that it might have been two thousand, or perhaps three, but it was a big, “fat” bundle.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” so he testified afterwards, “seemed unlike himself, too; not drunk, but, as it were, exalted, lost to everything, but at the same time, as it were, absorbed, as though pondering and searching for something and unable to come to a decision.
He was in great haste, answered abruptly and very strangely, and at moments seemed not at all dejected but quite cheerful.” “But what _is_ the matter with you?
Look at yourself!” He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass.
Seeing his blood-stained face, Mitya started and scowled wrathfully.
That’s the last straw,” he muttered angrily, hurriedly changing the notes from his right hand to the left, and impulsively jerked the handkerchief out of his pocket.
But the handkerchief turned out to be soaked with blood, too (it was the handkerchief he had used to wipe Grigory’s face).
There was scarcely a white spot on it, and it had not merely begun to dry, but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could not be pulled apart.
That’s all right ... but where am I to put this?” With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred-rouble notes, looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him to decide what he, Mitya, was to do with his own money.
But, I say, that’s all nonsense,” he cried, as though suddenly coming out of his absorption.
“Look here, let’s first settle that business of the pistols.
Haven’t you less?” “No,” said Mitya, looking again at the bundle, and as though not trusting his own words he turned over two or three of the topmost ones.
“No, they’re all alike,” he added, and again he looked inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch.
“Wait, I’ll send my boy to Plotnikov’s, they close late—to see if they won’t change it.
“To Plotnikov’s shop—first-rate!” cried Mitya, as though struck by an idea.
“Misha,” he turned to the boy as he came in, “look here, run to Plotnikov’s and tell them that Dmitri Fyodorovitch sends his greetings, and will be there directly....
But listen, listen, tell them to have champagne, three dozen bottles, ready before I come, and packed as it was to take to Mokroe.
I took four dozen with me then,” he added (suddenly addressing Pyotr Ilyitch); “they know all about it, don’t you trouble, Misha,” he turned again to the boy.
“Stay, listen; tell them to put in cheese, Strasburg pies, smoked fish, ham, caviare, and everything, everything they’ve got, up to a hundred roubles, or a hundred and twenty as before....
But wait: don’t let them forget dessert, sweets, pears, water-melons, two or three or four—no, one melon’s enough, and chocolate, candy, toffee, fondants; in fact, everything I took to Mokroe before, three hundred roubles’ worth with the champagne ... let it be just the same again.
And remember, Misha, if you are called Misha—His name is Misha, isn’t it?” He turned to Pyotr Ilyitch again.
“Wait a minute,” Protr Ilyitch intervened, listening and watching him uneasily, “you’d better go yourself and tell them.
Why, I was going to kiss you for the commission....
Champagne’s the chief thing, let them bring up champagne.
They know what I had then.” “But listen!” Pyotr Ilyitch interrupted with some impatience.
Put your best leg forward!” Pyotr Ilyitch seemed to hurry Misha off on purpose, because the boy remained standing with his mouth and eyes wide open, apparently understanding little of Mitya’s orders, gazing up with amazement and terror at his blood-stained face and the trembling bloodstained fingers that held the notes.
But take off your coat.” And beginning to help him off with his coat, he cried out again: “Look, your coat’s covered with blood, too!” “That ... it’s not the coat.
And that’s only here where the handkerchief lay.
I must have sat on the handkerchief at Fenya’s, and the blood’s come through,” Mitya explained at once with a childlike unconsciousness that was astounding.
Pyotr Ilyitch listened, frowning.
“Well, you must have been up to something; you must have been fighting with some one,” he muttered.
Mitya, in desperate haste, scarcely soaped his hands (they were trembling, and Pyotr Ilyitch remembered it afterwards).
But the young official insisted on his soaping them thoroughly and rubbing them more.
He seemed to exercise more and more sway over Mitya, as time went on.
It may be noted in passing that he was a young man of sturdy character.
Look, all the cuff of your right sleeve is covered with blood.” “Yes, it’s all bloody,” observed Mitya, looking at the cuff of his shirt.
You see I’ll ...” Mitya went on with the same confiding ingenuousness, drying his face and hands on the towel, and putting on his coat.
Have you been fighting with some one?
Have you been beating that captain again?” Pyotr Ilyitch asked him reproachfully.
“Whom have you been beating now ... or killing, perhaps?” “Nonsense!” said Mitya.
“Why ‘nonsense’?” “Don’t worry,” said Mitya, and he suddenly laughed.
An old woman?” “An old man!” cried Mitya, looking Pyotr Ilyitch straight in the face, laughing, and shouting at him as though he were deaf.
He’s forgiven me....
He’s sure to have forgiven me by now ... if he had got up, he wouldn’t have forgiven me”—Mitya suddenly winked—“only damn him, you know, I say, Pyotr Ilyitch, damn him!
I don’t want to just now!” Mitya snapped out, resolutely.
“Whatever do you want to go picking quarrels with every one for? ...
Just as you did with that captain over some nonsense....
You’ve been fighting and now you’re rushing off on the spree—that’s you all over!
Three dozen champagne—what do you want all that for?” “Bravo!
Where have I put it?” he cried, thrusting his hands into his pockets.
“You put it on the table ... yourself....
It’s an odd thing, at six o’clock you pledged them for ten roubles, and now you’ve got thousands.
Two or three I should say.” “Three, you bet,” laughed Mitya, stuffing the notes into the side-pocket of his trousers.
The gold-mines?” Mitya shouted at the top of his voice and went off into a roar of laughter.
“Would you like to go to the mines, Perhotin?
There’s a lady here who’ll stump up three thousand for you, if only you’ll go.
Do you know Madame Hohlakov?” “I don’t know her, but I’ve heard of her and seen her.
Did she really give you three thousand?
Did she really?” said Pyotr Ilyitch, eyeing him dubiously.
“As soon as the sun rises to-morrow, as soon as Phœbus, ever young, flies upwards, praising and glorifying God, you go to her, this Madame Hohlakov, and ask her whether she did stump up that three thousand or not.
Try and find out.” “I don’t know on what terms you are ... since you say it so positively, I suppose she did give it to you.
You’ve got the money in your hand, but instead of going to Siberia you’re spending it all....
But it’s night!” “Once the lad had all, now the lad has naught,” cried Mitya suddenly.
You say that with all those thousands!” “I’m not talking about thousands.
I’m talking of the female character.
Fickle is the heart of woman Treacherous and full of vice; I agree with Ulysses.
That’s what he says.” “I don’t understand you!” “Am I drunk?” “Not drunk, but worse.” “I’m drunk in spirit, Pyotr Ilyitch, drunk in spirit!
But that’s enough!” “What are you doing, loading the pistol?” “I’m loading the pistol.” Unfastening the pistol-case, Mitya actually opened the powder horn, and carefully sprinkled and rammed in the charge.
Then he took the bullet and, before inserting it, held it in two fingers in front of the candle.
“Why are you looking at the bullet?” asked Pyotr Ilyitch, watching him with uneasy curiosity.
Why, if you meant to put that bullet in your brain, would you look at it or not?” “Why look at it?” “It’s going into my brain, so it’s interesting to look and see what it’s like.
But that’s foolishness, a moment’s foolishness.
“Pyotr Ilyitch, my dear fellow, that’s nonsense, all nonsense, and if only you knew what nonsense!
That’s right.” And taking a pen from the table, Mitya rapidly wrote two lines, folded the paper in four, and thrust it in his waistcoat pocket.
Then he looked at Pyotr Ilyitch with a slow, thoughtful smile.
Are you thinking of putting that bullet in your brain, perhaps?” Pyotr Ilyitch asked uneasily.
Dear Pyotr Ilyitch, do you know how to step aside?” “What do you mean by ‘stepping aside’?” “Making way.
Making way for a dear creature, and for one I hate.
I was forgetting him.” Misha ran in, post-haste, with a handful of notes in change, and reported that every one was in a bustle at the Plotnikovs’; “They’re carrying down the bottles, and the fish, and the tea; it will all be ready directly.” Mitya seized ten roubles and handed it to Pyotr Ilyitch, then tossed another ten-rouble note to Misha.
“I won’t have it in my house, it’s a bad, demoralizing habit.
Ah, you’ll lose them!” “I say, my dear fellow, let’s go to Mokroe together.” “What should I go for?” “I say, let’s open a bottle at once, and drink to life!
I want to drink, and especially to drink with you.
I’ve never drunk with you, have I?” “Very well, we can go to the ‘Metropolis.’ I was just going there.” “I haven’t time for that.
Let’s drink at the Plotnikovs’, in the back room.
Shall I ask you a riddle?” “Ask away.” Mitya took the piece of paper out of his waistcoat pocket, unfolded it and showed it.
In a large, distinct hand was written: “I punish myself for my whole life, my whole life I punish!” “I will certainly speak to some one, I’ll go at once,” said Pyotr Ilyitch, after reading the paper.
March!” Plotnikov’s shop was at the corner of the street, next door but one to Pyotr Ilyitch’s.
It was the largest grocery shop in our town, and by no means a bad one, belonging to some rich merchants.
They kept everything that could be got in a Petersburg shop, grocery of all sort, wines “bottled by the brothers Eliseyev,” fruits, cigars, tea, coffee, sugar, and so on.
There were three shop-assistants and two errand boys always employed.
Though our part of the country had grown poorer, the landowners had gone away, and trade had got worse, yet the grocery stores flourished as before, every year with increasing prosperity; there were plenty of purchasers for their goods.
They were awaiting Mitya with impatience in the shop.
They had vivid recollections of how he had bought, three or four weeks ago, wine and goods of all sorts to the value of several hundred roubles, paid for in cash (they would never have let him have anything on credit, of course).
They remembered that then, as now, he had had a bundle of hundred-rouble notes in his hand, and had scattered them at random, without bargaining, without reflecting, or caring to reflect what use so much wine and provisions would be to him.
The story was told all over the town that, driving off then with Grushenka to Mokroe, he had “spent three thousand in one night and the following day, and had come back from the spree without a penny.” He had picked up a whole troop of gypsies (encamped in our neighborhood at the time), who for two days got money without stint out of him while he was drunk, and drank expensive wine without stint.
People used to tell, laughing at Mitya, how he had given champagne to grimy-handed peasants, and feasted the village women and girls on sweets and Strasburg pies.
In the shop they had almost entirely finished packing one box of provisions, and were only waiting for Mitya’s arrival to nail it down and put it in the cart.
Pyotr Ilyitch was astounded.
“I met Andrey as I ran to you, and told him to drive straight here to the shop.
Their pace won’t be ours, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
“Fifty roubles for vodka if we’re only an hour behind them.” “I warrant the time, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
Ech, they won’t be half an hour before us, let alone an hour.” Though Mitya bustled about seeing after things, he gave his orders strangely, as it were disconnectedly, and inconsecutively.
He began a sentence and forgot the end of it.
“Four hundred roubles’ worth, not less than four hundred roubles’ worth, just as it was then,” commanded Mitya.
“Four dozen champagne, not a bottle less.” “What do you want with so much?
Surely there isn’t four hundred roubles’ worth here?” The officious shopmen began explaining with oily politeness that the first box contained only half a dozen bottles of champagne, and only “the most indispensable articles,” such as savories, sweets, toffee, etc.
But the main part of the goods ordered would be packed and sent off, as on the previous occasion, in a special cart also with three horses traveling at full speed, so that it would arrive not more than an hour later than Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself.
And put in more toffee and fondants.
The girls there are so fond of it,” Mitya insisted hotly.
“The fondants are all right.
But what do you want with four dozen of champagne?
He began bargaining, asking for a bill of the goods, and refused to be satisfied.
But he only succeeded in saving a hundred roubles.
“Well, you may go to the devil!” cried Pyotr Ilyitch, on second thoughts.
Throw away your money, since it’s cost you nothing.” “This way, my economist, this way, don’t be angry.” Mitya drew him into a room at the back of the shop.
“They’ll give us a bottle here directly.
Pyotr Ilyitch sat down opposite, and the champagne soon appeared, and oysters were suggested to the gentlemen.
And we don’t need anything,” cried Pyotr Ilyitch, almost angrily.
Do you know, friend,” he said suddenly, with feeling, “I never have liked all this disorder.” “Who does like it?
Three dozen of champagne for peasants, upon my word, that’s enough to make any one angry!” “That’s not what I mean.
My whole life has been disorder, and one must set it in order.
That’s the long and short of it.” “You know, I keep thinking of your pistols.” “That’s all foolery, too!
Drink, and don’t be fanciful.
I’ve loved life too much, shamefully much.
I’m a scoundrel, but I’m satisfied with myself.
And yet I’m tortured by the thought that I’m a scoundrel, but satisfied with myself.
I bless the creation.
I’m ready to bless God and His creation directly, but ...
What can be more precious than life?
Although Mitya was excited and expansive, yet he was melancholy, too.
It was as though some heavy, overwhelming anxiety were weighing upon him.
Misha, come here, my boy, drink this glass to Phœbus, the golden-haired, of to-morrow morn....” “What are you giving it him for?” cried Pyotr Ilyitch, irritably.
“He’ll remember it afterwards,” Mitya remarked.
The queen of creation!
Do you remember Hamlet?
Yes, I’m Yorick now, and a skull afterwards.” Pyotr Ilyitch listened in silence.
“What dog’s that you’ve got here?” he asked the shopman, casually, noticing a pretty little lap-dog with dark eyes, sitting in the corner.
“It belongs to Varvara Alexyevna, the mistress,” answered the clerk.
It must be taken back to her.” “I saw one like it ... in the regiment ...” murmured Mitya dreamily, “only that one had its hind leg broken....
By the way, Pyotr Ilyitch, I wanted to ask you: have you ever stolen anything in your life?” “What a question!” “Oh, I didn’t mean anything.
From somebody’s pocket, you know.
I don’t mean government money, every one steals that, and no doubt you do, too....” “You go to the devil.” “I’m talking of other people’s money.
Stealing straight out of a pocket?
I took it off the table on the sly, and held it tight in my hand.” “Well, and what happened?” “Oh, nothing.
I kept it three days, then I felt ashamed, confessed, and gave it back.” “And what then?” “Naturally I was whipped.
Have you stolen something?” “I have,” said Mitya, winking slyly.
“What have you stolen?” inquired Pyotr Ilyitch curiously.
“I stole twenty copecks from my mother when I was nine years old, and gave it back three days after.” As he said this, Mitya suddenly got up.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, won’t you come now?” called Andrey from the door of the shop.
“A few more last words and—Andrey, a glass of vodka at starting.
Good-by, Pyotr Ilyitch, don’t remember evil against me.” “But you’re coming back to-morrow?” “Of course.” “Will you settle the little bill now?” cried the clerk, springing forward.
Of course.” He pulled the bundle of notes out of his pocket again, picked out three hundred roubles, threw them on the counter, and ran hurriedly out of the shop.
Every one followed him out, bowing and wishing him good luck.
Andrey, coughing from the brandy he had just swallowed, jumped up on the box.
But Mitya was only just taking his seat when suddenly to his surprise he saw Fenya before him.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear good Dmitri Fyodorovitch, don’t harm my mistress.
He’ll marry Agrafena Alexandrovna now.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear, don’t take a fellow creature’s life!” “Tut—tut—tut!
So you’re off there to make trouble!” muttered Pyotr Ilyitch.
“Now, it’s all clear, as clear as daylight.
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, give me your pistols at once if you mean to behave like a man,” he shouted aloud to Mitya.
Wait a bit, brother, I’ll throw them into the pool on the road,” answered Mitya.
“I hurt you just now, so forgive me and have pity on me, forgive a scoundrel....
My last tear is for you!...” “He’s not drunk, but he keeps babbling like a lunatic,” Pyotr Ilyitch thought as he watched him go.
He had half a mind to stay and see the cart packed with the remaining wines and provisions, knowing that they would deceive and defraud Mitya.
But, suddenly feeling vexed with himself, he turned away with a curse and went to the tavern to play billiards.
“He’s a fool, though he’s a good fellow,” he muttered as he went.
“I’ve heard of that officer, Grushenka’s former flame.
They’re a set of brawlers, that’s all.
They are not men who do anything real.
What does he mean by ‘I’m stepping aside, I’m punishing myself?’ It’ll come to nothing!
He’s shouted such phrases a thousand times, drunk, in the taverns.
‘Drunk in spirit’—they’re fond of fine phrases, the villains.
He must have been fighting, his face was all over blood.
I shall find out at the ‘Metropolis.’ And his handkerchief was soaked in blood....
He played a second game, and suddenly began telling one of his partners that Dmitri Karamazov had come in for some cash again—something like three thousand roubles, and had gone to Mokroe again to spend it with Grushenka....
This news roused singular interest in his listeners.
They all spoke of it, not laughing, but with a strange gravity.
But where can he have got three thousand?” Questions were asked.
The story of Madame Hohlakov’s present was received with skepticism.
“Hasn’t he robbed his old father?—that’s the question.” “Three thousand!
There’s something odd about it.” “He boasted aloud that he would kill his father; we all heard him, here.
And it was three thousand he talked about ...” Pyotr Ilyitch listened.
But by the end of the third game, Pyotr Ilyitch felt no more desire for billiards; he laid down the cue, and without having supper as he had intended, he walked out of the tavern.
When he reached the market-place he stood still in perplexity, wondering at himself.
He realized that what he wanted was to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s and find out if anything had happened there.
“On account of some stupid nonsense—as it’s sure to turn out—am I going to wake up the household and make a scandal?
Fooh! damn it, is it my business to look after them?” In a very bad humor he went straight home, and suddenly remembered Fenya.
I ought to have questioned her just now,” he thought with vexation, “I should have heard everything.” And the desire to speak to her, and so find out, became so pressing and importunate that when he was half-way home he turned abruptly and went towards the house where Grushenka lodged.
And no one answered him; every one in the house was asleep.
“And I shall be making a fuss!” he thought, with a feeling of positive discomfort.
But instead of going away altogether, he fell to knocking again with all his might, filling the street with clamor.
Well, I will knock them up, I will!” he muttered at each knock, fuming at himself, but at the same time he redoubled his knocks on the gate.
“I Am Coming, Too!” But Dmitri Fyodorovitch was speeding along the road.
It was a little more than twenty versts to Mokroe, but Andrey’s three horses galloped at such a pace that the distance might be covered in an hour and a quarter.
It was the very night, and perhaps the very hour, in which Alyosha fell on the earth, and rapturously swore to love it for ever and ever.
All was confusion, confusion, in Mitya’s soul, but although many things were goading his heart, at that moment his whole being was yearning for her, his queen, to whom he was flying to look on her for the last time.
I shall perhaps not be believed when I say that this jealous lover felt not the slightest jealousy of this new rival, who seemed to have sprung out of the earth.
If any other had appeared on the scene, he would have been jealous at once, and would perhaps have stained his fierce hands with blood again.
But as he flew through the night, he felt no envy, no hostility even, for the man who had been her first lover....
“Here there was no room for dispute: it was her right and his; this was her first love which, after five years, she had not forgotten; so she had loved him only for those five years, and I, how do I come in?
Now everything is over apart from the officer—even if he had not appeared, everything would be over ...” These words would roughly have expressed his feelings, if he had been capable of reasoning.
His present plan of action had arisen without reasoning.
At Fenya’s first words, it had sprung from feeling, and been adopted in a flash, with all its consequences.
And yet, in spite of his resolution, there was confusion in his soul, an agonizing confusion: his resolution did not give him peace.
There was so much behind that tortured him.
He felt that miserably, and the thought of it sank into his heart with despair.
There was one moment when he felt an impulse to stop Andrey, to jump out of the cart, to pull out his loaded pistol, and to make an end of everything without waiting for the dawn.
The horses galloped on, “devouring space,” and as he drew near his goal, again the thought of her, of her alone, took more and more complete possession of his soul, chasing away the fearful images that had been haunting it.
Oh, how he longed to look upon her, if only for a moment, if only from a distance!
“She’s now with _him_,” he thought, “now I shall see what she looks like with him, her first love, and that’s all I want.” Never had this woman, who was such a fateful influence in his life, aroused such love in his breast, such new and unknown feeling, surprising even to himself, a feeling tender to devoutness, to self-effacement before her!
“I will efface myself!” he said, in a rush of almost hysterical ecstasy.
They had been galloping nearly an hour.
Mitya was silent, and though Andrey was, as a rule, a talkative peasant, he did not utter a word, either.
He seemed afraid to talk, he only whipped up smartly his three lean, but mettlesome, bay horses.
Suddenly Mitya cried out in horrible anxiety: “Andrey!
It had not occurred to him before.
“It may well be that they’re gone to bed, by now, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.” Mitya frowned as though in pain.
Yes, indeed ... he was rushing there ... with such feelings ... while they were asleep ... she was asleep, perhaps, there too....
“Timofey said they were a lot of them there—” “At the station?” “Not at the posting-station, but at Plastunov’s, at the inn, where they let out horses, too.” “I know.
Who are they?” cried Mitya, greatly dismayed at this unexpected news.
“Well, Timofey was saying they’re all gentlefolk.
Two from our town—who they are I can’t say—and there are two others, strangers, maybe more besides.
I didn’t ask particularly.
Quicker!” Mitya cried again, nervously.
“May I ask you something, sir?” said Andrey, after a pause.
“Only I’m afraid of angering you, sir.” “What is it?” “Why, Fenya threw herself at your feet just now, and begged you not to harm her mistress, and some one else, too ... so you see, sir— It’s I am taking you there ... forgive me, sir, it’s my conscience ... maybe it’s stupid of me to speak of it—” Mitya suddenly seized him by the shoulders from behind.
“Are you a driver?” he asked frantically.
And if you have spoilt a life—punish yourself....
If only you’ve spoilt, if only you’ve ruined any one’s life—punish yourself and go away.” These phrases burst from Mitya almost hysterically.
Though Andrey was surprised at him, he kept up the conversation.
“That’s right, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, you’re quite right, one mustn’t crush or torment a man, or any kind of creature, for every creature is created by God.
Take a horse, for instance, for some folks, even among us drivers, drive anyhow.
Nothing will restrain them, they just force it along.” “To hell?” Mitya interrupted, and went off into his abrupt, short laugh.
“Andrey, simple soul,” he seized him by the shoulders again, “tell me, will Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov go to hell, or not, what do you think?” “I don’t know, darling, it depends on you, for you are ... you see, sir, when the Son of God was nailed on the Cross and died, He went straight down to hell from the Cross, and set free all sinners that were in agony.
Whip up the left, Andrey!” “So you see, sir, who it is hell’s for,” said Andrey, whipping up the left horse, “but you’re like a little child ... that’s how we look on you ... and though you’re hasty-tempered, sir, yet God will forgive you for your kind heart.” “And you, do you forgive me, Andrey?” “What should I forgive you for, sir?
He was frantically praying and muttering to himself.
“Lord, receive me, with all my lawlessness, and do not condemn me.
Let me pass by Thy judgment ... do not condemn me, for I have condemned myself, do not condemn me, for I love Thee, O Lord.
Farewell and forget your victim ... never fret yourself about me!’” “Mokroe!” cried Andrey, pointing ahead with his whip.
Through the pale darkness of the night loomed a solid black mass of buildings, flung down, as it were, in the vast plain.
The village of Mokroe numbered two thousand inhabitants, but at that hour all were asleep, and only here and there a few lights still twinkled.
“Drive on, Andrey, I come!” Mitya exclaimed, feverishly.
“They’re not asleep,” said Andrey again, pointing with his whip to the Plastunovs’ inn, which was at the entrance to the village.
The six windows, looking on the street, were all brightly lighted up.
“They’re not asleep,” Mitya repeated joyously.
I’m coming, too!” Andrey lashed his exhausted team into a gallop, drove with a dash and pulled up his steaming, panting horses at the high flight of steps.
Mitya jumped out of the cart just as the innkeeper, on his way to bed, peeped out from the steps curious to see who had arrived.
“Trifon Borissovitch, is that you?” The innkeeper bent down, looked intently, ran down the steps, and rushed up to the guest with obsequious delight.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, your honor!
Do I see you again?” Trifon Borissovitch was a thick-set, healthy peasant, of middle height, with a rather fat face.
His expression was severe and uncompromising, especially with the peasants of Mokroe, but he had the power of assuming the most obsequious countenance, when he had an inkling that it was to his interest.
He dressed in Russian style, with a shirt buttoning down on one side, and a full-skirted coat.
He had saved a good sum of money, but was for ever dreaming of improving his position.
More than half the peasants were in his clutches, every one in the neighborhood was in debt to him.
From the neighboring landowners he bought and rented lands which were worked by the peasants, in payment of debts which they could never shake off.
He was a widower, with four grown-up daughters.
One of them was already a widow and lived in the inn with her two children, his grandchildren, and worked for him like a charwoman.
Another of his daughters was married to a petty official, and in one of the rooms of the inn, on the wall could be seen, among the family photographs, a miniature photograph of this official in uniform and official epaulettes.
The two younger daughters used to wear fashionable blue or green dresses, fitting tight at the back, and with trains a yard long, on Church holidays or when they went to pay visits.
In spite of the thousands of roubles he had saved, Trifon Borissovitch was very fond of emptying the pockets of a drunken guest, and remembering that not a month ago he had, in twenty-four hours, made two if not three hundred roubles out of Dmitri, when he had come on his escapade with Grushenka, he met him now with eager welcome, scenting his prey the moment Mitya drove up to the steps.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear sir, we see you once more!” “Stay, Trifon Borissovitch,” began Mitya, “first and foremost, where is she?” “Agrafena Alexandrovna?” The inn-keeper understood at once, looking sharply into Mitya’s face.
With whom?” “Some strangers.
One is an official gentleman, a Pole, to judge from his speech.
He sent the horses for her from here; and there’s another with him, a friend of his, or a fellow traveler, there’s no telling.
They’re dressed like civilians.” “Well, are they feasting?
Nothing to boast of, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.” “Nothing to boast of?
And who are the others?” “They’re two gentlemen from the town....
One’s quite a young gentleman, a relative of Mr.
Miüsov, he must be, but I’ve forgotten his name ... and I expect you know the other, too, a gentleman called Maximov.
He’s been on a pilgrimage, so he says, to the monastery in the town.
He’s traveling with this young relation of Mr.
Miüsov.” “Is that all?” “Yes.” “Stay, listen, Trifon Borissovitch.
She’s sitting with them.” “Is she cheerful?
Is she laughing?” “No, I think she’s not laughing much.
She’s combing the young gentleman’s hair.” “The Pole—the officer?” “He’s not young, and he’s not an officer, either.
It’s the young gentleman that’s Mr.
Miüsov’s relation ...
I’ve forgotten his name.” “Kalganov.” “That’s it, Kalganov!” “All right.
They’ve been drinking tea, the official gentleman asked for liqueurs.” “Stay, Trifon Borissovitch, stay, my good soul, I’ll see for myself.
Now answer one more question: are the gypsies here?” “You can’t have the gypsies now, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
The authorities have sent them away.
Certainly send for them!” cried Mitya.
“And you can get the girls together as you did then, Marya especially, Stepanida, too, and Arina.
Two hundred roubles for a chorus!” “Oh, for a sum like that I can get all the village together, though by now they’re asleep.
Are the peasants here worth such kindness, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, or the girls either?
To spend a sum like that on such coarseness and rudeness!
What’s the good of giving a peasant a cigar to smoke, the stinking ruffian!
Besides, I’ll get my daughters up for nothing, let alone a sum like that.
You gave the peasants champagne to drink the other day, e—ech!” For all his pretended compassion for Mitya, Trifon Borissovitch had hidden half a dozen bottles of champagne on that last occasion, and had picked up a hundred-rouble note under the table, and it had remained in his clutches.
“Trifon Borissovitch, I sent more than one thousand flying last time I was here.
Do you remember?” “You did send it flying.
I may well remember.
You must have left three thousand behind you.” “Well, I’ve come to do the same again, do you see?” And he pulled out his roll of notes, and held them up before the innkeeper’s nose.
“Now, listen and remember.
In an hour’s time the wine will arrive, savories, pies, and sweets—bring them all up at once.
Open it, and hand champagne immediately.
And the girls, we must have the girls, Marya especially.” He turned to the cart and pulled out the box of pistols.
Here’s fifteen roubles for the drive, and fifty for vodka ... for your readiness, for your love....
Remember Karamazov!” “I’m afraid, sir,” faltered Andrey.
Trifon Borissovitch, bear witness.
Forgive my foolish words ...” “What are you afraid of?” asked Mitya, scanning him.
“Well, go to the devil, if that’s it!” he cried, flinging him five roubles.
“Now, Trifon Borissovitch, take me up quietly and let me first get a look at them, so that they don’t see me.
In the blue room?” Trifon Borissovitch looked apprehensively at Mitya, but at once obediently did his bidding.
Leading him into the passage, he went himself into the first large room, adjoining that in which the visitors were sitting, and took the light away.
Then he stealthily led Mitya in, and put him in a corner in the dark, whence he could freely watch the company without being seen.
But Mitya did not look long, and, indeed, he could not see them, he saw her, his heart throbbed violently, and all was dark before his eyes.
She was sitting sideways to the table in a low chair, and beside her, on the sofa, was the pretty youth, Kalganov.
She was holding his hand and seemed to be laughing, while he, seeming vexed and not looking at her, was saying something in a loud voice to Maximov, who sat the other side of the table, facing Grushenka.
Maximov was laughing violently at something.
On the sofa sat _he_, and on a chair by the sofa there was another stranger.
The one on the sofa was lolling backwards, smoking a pipe, and Mitya had an impression of a stoutish, broad-faced, short little man, who was apparently angry about something.
His friend, the other stranger, struck Mitya as extraordinarily tall, but he could make out nothing more.
He could not bear it for a minute, he put the pistol-case on a chest, and with a throbbing heart he walked, feeling cold all over, straight into the blue room to face the company.
“Aie!” shrieked Grushenka, the first to notice him.
The First And Rightful Lover With his long, rapid strides, Mitya walked straight up to the table.
“Gentlemen,” he said in a loud voice, almost shouting, yet stammering at every word, “I ...
Don’t be afraid!” he exclaimed, “I—there’s nothing the matter,” he turned suddenly to Grushenka, who had shrunk back in her chair towards Kalganov, and clasped his hand tightly.
Gentlemen, may I stay with you till morning?
Only till morning, for the last time, in this same room?” So he finished, turning to the fat little man, with the pipe, sitting on the sofa.
The latter removed his pipe from his lips with dignity and observed severely: “_Panie_, we’re here in private.
There are other rooms.” “Why, it’s you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch!
What do you mean?” answered Kalganov suddenly.
How are you?” “Delighted to see you, dear ... and precious fellow, I always thought a lot of you.” Mitya responded, joyfully and eagerly, at once holding out his hand across the table.
You’ve quite broken my fingers,” laughed Kalganov.
“He always squeezes like that, always,” Grushenka put in gayly, with a timid smile, seeming suddenly convinced from Mitya’s face that he was not going to make a scene.
She was watching him with intense curiosity and still some uneasiness.
She was impressed by something about him, and indeed the last thing she expected of him was that he would come in and speak like this at such a moment.
“Good evening,” Maximov ventured blandly on the left.
Gentlemen, gentlemen, I—” (He addressed the Polish gentleman with the pipe again, evidently taking him for the most important person present.) “I flew here....
Let’s drink to our good understanding.
I brought this with me.” (Something made him pull out his bundle of notes.) “Allow me, _panie_!
But the worm, the unnecessary worm, will crawl away, and there’ll be no more of him.
I will commemorate my day of joy on my last night.” He was almost choking.
There was so much, so much he wanted to say, but strange exclamations were all that came from his lips.
The Pole gazed fixedly at him, at the bundle of notes in his hand; looked at Grushenka, and was in evident perplexity.
“If my suverin lady is permitting—” he was beginning.
‘Sovereign,’ I suppose?” interrupted Grushenka.
“I can’t help laughing at you, the way you talk.
Don’t frighten us, please.
You won’t frighten us, will you?
If you won’t, I am glad to see you ...” “Me, me frighten you?” cried Mitya, flinging up his hands.
“Oh, pass me by, go your way, I won’t hinder you!...” And suddenly he surprised them all, and no doubt himself as well, by flinging himself on a chair, and bursting into tears, turning his head away to the opposite wall, while his arms clasped the back of the chair tight, as though embracing it.
“Come, come, what a fellow you are!” cried Grushenka reproachfully.
Why are you crying? _As though you had anything to cry for!_” she added enigmatically, emphasizing each word with some irritability.
Well, good evening!” He instantly turned round in his chair, and suddenly laughed, not his abrupt wooden laugh, but a long, quivering, inaudible nervous laugh.
Come, cheer up, cheer up!” Grushenka said to him persuasively.
I want him to stay here with us,” she said peremptorily, addressing the whole company, though her words were obviously meant for the man sitting on the sofa.
And if he goes away I shall go, too!” she added with flashing eyes.
“What my queen commands is law!” pronounced the Pole, gallantly kissing Grushenka’s hand.
“I beg you, _panie_, to join our company,” he added politely, addressing Mitya.
Mitya was jumping up with the obvious intention of delivering another tirade, but the words did not come.
I thought he was going to begin again!” Grushenka exclaimed nervously.
“Do you hear, Mitya,” she went on insistently, “don’t prance about, but it’s nice you’ve brought the champagne.
I want some myself, and I can’t bear liqueurs.
And best of all, you’ve come yourself.
We were fearfully dull here....
Where did you get such a lot?” Mitya had been, all this time, holding in his hand the crumpled bundle of notes on which the eyes of all, especially of the Poles, were fixed.
In confusion he thrust them hurriedly into his pocket.
At that moment the innkeeper brought in an uncorked bottle of champagne, and glasses on a tray.
Mitya snatched up the bottle, but he was so bewildered that he did not know what to do with it.
Kalganov took it from him and poured out the champagne.
Another bottle!” Mitya cried to the innkeeper, and, forgetting to clink glasses with the Pole whom he had so solemnly invited to drink to their good understanding, he drank off his glass without waiting for any one else.
His whole countenance suddenly changed.
The solemn and tragic expression with which he had entered vanished completely, and a look of something childlike came into his face.
He seemed to have become suddenly gentle and subdued.
He looked shyly and happily at every one, with a continual nervous little laugh, and the blissful expression of a dog who has done wrong, been punished, and forgiven.
He seemed to have forgotten everything, and was looking round at every one with a childlike smile of delight.
He looked at Grushenka, laughing continually, and bringing his chair close up to her.
By degrees he had gained some idea of the two Poles, though he had formed no definite conception of them yet.
The Pole on the sofa struck him by his dignified demeanor and his Polish accent; and, above all, by his pipe.
It’s a good thing he’s smoking a pipe,” he reflected.
The Pole’s puffy, middle-aged face, with its tiny nose and two very thin, pointed, dyed and impudent-looking mustaches, had not so far roused the faintest doubts in Mitya.
He was not even particularly struck by the Pole’s absurd wig made in Siberia, with love-locks foolishly combed forward over the temples.
“I suppose it’s all right since he wears a wig,” he went on, musing blissfully.
The other, younger Pole, who was staring insolently and defiantly at the company and listening to the conversation with silent contempt, still only impressed Mitya by his great height, which was in striking contrast to the Pole on the sofa.
It occurred to him, too, that this Pole must be the friend of the other, as it were, a “bodyguard,” and no doubt the big Pole was at the disposal of the little Pole with the pipe.
But this all seemed to Mitya perfectly right and not to be questioned.
In his mood of doglike submissiveness all feeling of rivalry had died away.
Grushenka’s mood and the enigmatic tone of some of her words he completely failed to grasp.
All he understood, with thrilling heart, was that she was kind to him, that she had forgiven him, and made him sit by her.
He was beside himself with delight, watching her sip her glass of champagne.
The silence of the company seemed somehow to strike him, however, and he looked round at every one with expectant eyes.
“Why are we sitting here though, gentlemen?
Why don’t you begin doing something?” his smiling eyes seemed to ask.
“He keeps talking nonsense, and we were all laughing,” Kalganov began suddenly, as though divining his thought, and pointing to Maximov.
Mitya immediately stared at Kalganov and then at Maximov.
“He’s talking nonsense?” he laughed, his short, wooden laugh, seeming suddenly delighted at something—“ha ha!” “Yes.
Would you believe it, he will have it that all our cavalry officers in the twenties married Polish women.
That’s awful rot, isn’t it?” “Polish women?” repeated Mitya, perfectly ecstatic.
Kalganov was well aware of Mitya’s attitude to Grushenka, and he guessed about the Pole, too, but that did not so much interest him, perhaps did not interest him at all; what he was interested in was Maximov.
Grushenka he knew before, and had once been with some one to see her; but she had not taken to him.
But here she looked at him very affectionately: before Mitya’s arrival, she had been making much of him, but he seemed somehow to be unmoved by it.
He was a boy, not over twenty, dressed like a dandy, with a very charming fair-skinned face, and splendid thick, fair hair.
From his fair face looked out beautiful pale blue eyes, with an intelligent and sometimes even deep expression, beyond his age indeed, although the young man sometimes looked and talked quite like a child, and was not at all ashamed of it, even when he was aware of it himself.
As a rule he was very willful, even capricious, though always friendly.
Sometimes there was something fixed and obstinate in his expression.
He would look at you and listen, seeming all the while to be persistently dreaming over something else.
Often he was listless and lazy, at other times he would grow excited, sometimes, apparently, over the most trivial matters.
“Only imagine, I’ve been taking him about with me for the last four days,” he went on, indolently drawling his words, quite naturally though, without the slightest affectation.
“Ever since your brother, do you remember, shoved him off the carriage and sent him flying.
That made me take an interest in him at the time, and I took him into the country, but he keeps talking such rot I’m ashamed to be with him.
I’m taking him back.” “The gentleman has not seen Polish ladies, and says what is impossible,” the Pole with the pipe observed to Maximov.
He spoke Russian fairly well, much better, anyway, than he pretended.
If he used Russian words, he always distorted them into a Polish form.
“But I was married to a Polish lady myself,” tittered Maximov.
Were you a cavalry officer?” put in Kalganov at once.
Ha ha!” cried Mitya, listening eagerly, and turning his inquiring eyes to each as he spoke, as though there were no knowing what he might hear from each.
That’s how it is ... offers her his hand, he he!” Maximov ended, tittering.
“The _pan_ is a _lajdak_!” the tall Pole on the chair growled suddenly and crossed one leg over the other.
What’s he scolding about?” said Grushenka, suddenly vexed.
“_Pani_ Agrippina, what the gentleman saw in Poland were servant girls, and not ladies of good birth,” the Pole with the pipe observed to Grushenka.
“You can reckon on that,” the tall Pole snapped contemptuously.
It makes it cheerful,” Grushenka said crossly.
“I’m not hindering them, _pani_,” said the Pole in the wig, with a long look at Grushenka, and relapsing into dignified silence he sucked his pipe again.
The Polish gentleman spoke the truth.” Kalganov got excited again, as though it were a question of vast import.
I suppose you weren’t married in Poland, were you?” “No, in the Province of Smolensk.
Only, a Uhlan had brought her to Russia before that, my future wife, with her mamma and her aunt, and another female relation with a grown-up son.
He brought her straight from Poland and gave her up to me.
He was a lieutenant in our regiment, a very nice young man.
But he didn’t marry her, because she turned out to be lame.” “So you married a lame woman?” cried Kalganov.
They both deceived me a little bit at the time, and concealed it.
I thought it was for fun.” “So pleased she was going to marry you!” yelled Kalganov, in a ringing, childish voice.
But it turned out to be quite a different cause.
Afterwards, when we were married, after the wedding, that very evening, she confessed, and very touchingly asked forgiveness.
‘I once jumped over a puddle when I was a child,’ she said, ‘and injured my leg.’ He he!” Kalganov went off into the most childish laughter, almost falling on the sofa.
Grushenka, too, laughed.
Mitya was at the pinnacle of happiness.
“Do you know, that’s the truth, he’s not lying now,” exclaimed Kalganov, turning to Mitya; “and do you know, he’s been married twice; it’s his first wife he’s talking about.
But his second wife, do you know, ran away, and is alive now.” “Is it possible?” said Mitya, turning quickly to Maximov with an expression of the utmost astonishment.
I’ve had that unpleasant experience,” Maximov modestly assented, “with a _monsieur_.
And what was worse, she’d had all my little property transferred to her beforehand.
‘You’re an educated man,’ she said to me.
‘You can always get your living.’ She settled my business with that.
A venerable bishop once said to me: ‘One of your wives was lame, but the other was too light-footed.’ He he!” “Listen, listen!” cried Kalganov, bubbling over, “if he’s telling lies—and he often is—he’s only doing it to amuse us all.
You know, I sometimes like him.
Some people are low from self-interest, but he’s simply so, from nature.
Only fancy, he claims (he was arguing about it all the way yesterday) that Gogol wrote _Dead Souls_ about him.
Do you remember, there’s a landowner called Maximov in it, whom Nozdryov thrashed.
He was charged, do you remember, ‘for inflicting bodily injury with rods on the landowner Maximov in a drunken condition.’ Would you believe it, he claims that he was that Maximov and that he was beaten!
Tchitchikov made his journey, at the very latest, at the beginning of the twenties, so that the dates don’t fit.
He couldn’t have been thrashed then, he couldn’t, could he?” It was difficult to imagine what Kalganov was excited about, but his excitement was genuine.
Mitya followed his lead without protest.
“Well, but if they did thrash him!” he cried, laughing.
“It’s not that they thrashed me exactly, but what I mean is—” put in Maximov.
Either they thrashed you or they didn’t.” “What o’clock is it, _panie_?” the Pole, with the pipe, asked his tall friend, with a bored expression.
The other shrugged his shoulders in reply.
Mustn’t other people talk because you’re bored?” Grushenka flew at him with evident intention of finding fault.
Something seemed for the first time to flash upon Mitya’s mind.
This time the Pole answered with unmistakable irritability.
I didn’t say anything.” “All right then.
Come, tell us your story,” Grushenka cried to Maximov.
“Why are you all silent?” “There’s nothing to tell, it’s all so foolish,” answered Maximov at once, with evident satisfaction, mincing a little.
“Besides, all that’s by way of allegory in Gogol, for he’s made all the names have a meaning.
Nozdryov was really called Nosov, and Kuvshinikov had quite a different name, he was called Shkvornev.
Fenardi really was called Fenardi, only he wasn’t an Italian but a Russian, and Mamsel Fenardi was a pretty girl with her pretty little legs in tights, and she had a little short skirt with spangles, and she kept turning round and round, only not for four hours but for four minutes only, and she bewitched every one...” “But what were you beaten for?” cried Kalganov.
“For Piron!” answered Maximov.
We were all drinking then, a big party of us, in a tavern at that very fair.
They’d invited me, and first of all I began quoting epigrams.
What a funny get-up!’ and Boileau answers that he’s going to a masquerade, that is to the baths, he he!
And they took it to themselves, so I made haste to repeat another, very sarcastic, well known to all educated people: Yes, Sappho and Phaon are we!
But one grief is weighing on me.
They were still more offended and began abusing me in the most unseemly way for it.
And as ill-luck would have it, to set things right, I began telling a very cultivated anecdote about Piron, how he was not accepted into the French Academy, and to revenge himself wrote his own epitaph: Ci-gît Piron qui ne fut rien, Pas même académicien.
They seized me and thrashed me.” “But what for?
What for?” “For my education.
People can thrash a man for anything,” Maximov concluded, briefly and sententiously.
I thought it would be amusing,” Grushenka cut them short, suddenly.
Mitya started, and at once left off laughing.
“Ah, he can’t sit still,” said Grushenka, looking at him contemptuously.
He noticed besides, that the Pole on the sofa was looking at him with an irritable expression.
Let us drink.” In a flash he had pulled three glasses towards him, and filled them with champagne.
“I shall be delighted, _panie_,” said the Pole on the sofa, with dignity and affable condescension, and he took his glass.
Drink, most illustrious, take your glass!” Mitya urged.
“Pan Vrublevsky,” put in the Pole on the sofa.
Pan Vrublevsky came up to the table, swaying as he walked.
“Now to Russia, _panovie_, and let us be brothers!” “Pour out some for us,” said Grushenka; “I’ll drink to Russia, too!” “So will I,” said Kalganov.
“And I would, too ... to Russia, the old grandmother!” tittered Maximov.
“Trifon Borissovitch, some more bottles!” The other three bottles Mitya had brought with him were put on the table.
All drank the toast except the Poles, and Grushenka tossed off her whole glass at once.
“How’s this, _panovie_?” cried Mitya, “won’t you drink it?” Pan Vrublevsky took the glass, raised it and said with a resonant voice: “To Russia as she was before 1772.” “Come, that’s better!” cried the other Pole, and they both emptied their glasses at once.
“You’re fools, you _panovie_,” broke suddenly from Mitya.
“_Panie!_” shouted both the Poles, menacingly, setting on Mitya like a couple of cocks.
Pan Vrublevsky was specially furious.
I won’t have any quarreling!” cried Grushenka imperiously, and she stamped her foot on the floor.
The effects of the glass she had just drunk were apparent.
Mitya was terribly alarmed.
Vrublevsky, _panie_ Vrublevsky, I’m sorry.” “Hold your tongue, you, anyway!
Sit down, you stupid!” Grushenka scolded with angry annoyance.
“Gentlemen, I was the cause of it all,” Mitya began again, unable to make anything of Grushenka’s words.
What shall we do ... to amuse ourselves again?” “Ach, it’s certainly anything but amusing!” Kalganov mumbled lazily.
“Let’s play faro again, as we did just now,” Maximov tittered suddenly.
Splendid!” cried Mitya.
“If only the _panovie_—” “It’s lite, _panovie_,” the Pole on the sofa responded, as it were unwillingly.
“That’s true,” assented Pan Vrublevsky.
What do you mean by ‘lite’?” asked Grushenka.
‘a late hour’ I mean,” the Pole on the sofa explained.
They can never do anything!” Grushenka almost shrieked in her anger.
“They’re dull themselves, so they want others to be dull.
Before you came, Mitya, they were just as silent and kept turning up their noses at me.” “My goddess!” cried the Pole on the sofa, “I see you’re not well-disposed to me, that’s why I’m gloomy.
I’m ready, _panie_,” added he, addressing Mitya.
“Begin, _panie_,” Mitya assented, pulling his notes out of his pocket, and laying two hundred-rouble notes on the table.
Make the bank.” “We’ll have cards from the landlord, _panie_,” said the little Pole, gravely and emphatically.
“That’s much the best way,” chimed in Pan Vrublevsky.
Very good, I understand, let’s get them from him.
Cards!” Mitya shouted to the landlord.
The landlord brought in a new, unopened pack, and informed Mitya that the girls were getting ready, and that the Jews with the cymbals would most likely be here soon; but the cart with the provisions had not yet arrived.
He only told them to take out of the box the presents for the girls, the sweets, the toffee and the fondants.
“I was rude to Andrey!” Suddenly Maximov, who had followed him out, touched him on the shoulder.
“Give me five roubles,” he whispered to Mitya.
“I’ll stake something at faro, too, he he!” “Capital!
“And if you lose that, come again, come again.” “Very good,” Maximov whispered joyfully, and he ran back again.
Mitya, too, returned, apologizing for having kept them waiting.
The Pole on the sofa had lighted another pipe and was preparing to throw.
He wore an air of solemnity.
“To your places, gentlemen,” cried Pan Vrublevsky.
“No, I’m not going to play any more,” observed Kalganov, “I’ve lost fifty roubles to them just now.” “The _pan_ had no luck, perhaps he’ll be lucky this time,” the Pole on the sofa observed in his direction.
To correspond?” asked Mitya.
“That’s according, _panie_, maybe a hundred, maybe two hundred, as much as you will stake.” “A million!” laughed Mitya.
“The Pan Captain has heard of Pan Podvysotsky, perhaps?” “What Podvysotsky?” “In Warsaw there was a bank and any one comes and stakes against it.
Podvysotsky comes, sees a thousand gold pieces, stakes against the bank.
The banker says, ‘_Panie_ Podvysotsky, are you laying down the gold, or must we trust to your honor?’ ‘To my honor, _panie_,’ says Podvysotsky.
‘I didn’t know that,’ says Podvysotsky.
‘_Panie_ Podvysotsky,’ said the banker, ‘you pledged your honor and we pledged ours.’ Podvysotsky took the million.” “That’s not true,” said Kalganov.
“_Panie_ Kalganov, in gentlemanly society one doesn’t say such things.” “As if a Polish gambler would give away a million!” cried Mitya, but checked himself at once.
Here, I stake ten roubles, the knave leads.” “And I put a rouble on the queen, the queen of hearts, the pretty little _panienotchka_, he he!” laughed Maximov, pulling out his queen, and, as though trying to conceal it from every one, he moved right up and crossed himself hurriedly under the table.
“I’ll bet another rouble, a ‘single’ stake,” Maximov muttered gleefully, hugely delighted at having won a rouble.
“Stop!” cried Kalganov suddenly.
“On the double!” shouted Mitya furiously.
Will you stake another hundred?” the Pole on the sofa inquired.
All doubles!” And pulling his money out of his pocket, Mitya was about to fling two hundred roubles on the queen, but Kalganov covered it with his hand.
I won’t let you go on playing.” Mitya gazed at him in astonishment.
You’ve lost a lot as it is,” said Grushenka, with a curious note in her voice.
Both the Poles rose from their seats with a deeply offended air.
“Are you joking, _panie_?” said the short man, looking severely at Kalganov.
“How dare you!” Pan Vrublevsky, too, growled at Kalganov.
“Don’t dare to shout like that,” cried Grushenka.
But something in Grushenka’s face suddenly struck him, and at the same instant something new flashed into his mind—a strange new thought!
“_Pani_ Agrippina,” the little Pole was beginning, crimson with anger, when Mitya suddenly went up to him and slapped him on the shoulder.
“Most illustrious, two words with you.” “What do you want?” “In the next room, I’ve two words to say to you, something pleasant, very pleasant.
You’ll be glad to hear it.” The little _pan_ was taken aback and looked apprehensively at Mitya.
He agreed at once, however, on condition that Pan Vrublevsky went with them.
“March, _panovie_!” “Where are you going?” asked Grushenka, anxiously.
“We’ll be back in one moment,” answered Mitya.
There was a sort of boldness, a sudden confidence shining in his eyes.
His face had looked very different when he entered the room an hour before.
He led the Poles, not into the large room where the chorus of girls was assembling and the table was being laid, but into the bedroom on the right, where the trunks and packages were kept, and there were two large beds, with pyramids of cotton pillows on each.
The small man and Mitya sat down to this table, facing each other, while the huge Vrublevsky stood beside them, his hands behind his back.
The Poles looked severe but were evidently inquisitive.
“Would you like three thousand?
Take it and go your way.” The Pole gazed open-eyed at Mitya, with a searching look.
“Three thousand, _panie_?” He exchanged glances with Vrublevsky.
Listen, _panie_, I see you’re a sensible man.
Take three thousand and go to the devil, and Vrublevsky with you—d’you hear?
You understand that, _panie_, for ever.
They’ll get the horses out directly, and then—good-by, _panie_!” Mitya awaited an answer with assurance.
An expression of extraordinary resolution passed over the Pole’s face.
Five hundred roubles I’ll give you this moment for the journey, and as a first installment, and two thousand five hundred to-morrow, in the town—I swear on my honor, I’ll get it, I’ll get it at any cost!” cried Mitya.
The Poles exchanged glances again.
The short man’s face looked more forbidding.
“Seven hundred, seven hundred, not five hundred, at once, this minute, cash down!” Mitya added, feeling something wrong.
I can’t give you the whole three thousand straight off.
Besides, I haven’t the three thousand with me.
I’ve got it at home in the town,” faltered Mitya, his spirit sinking at every word he uttered.
“Upon my word, the money’s there, hidden.” In an instant an extraordinary sense of personal dignity showed itself in the little man’s face.
“What next?” he asked ironically.
Pan Vrublevsky spat too.
“You do that, _panie_,” said Mitya, recognizing with despair that all was over, “because you hope to make more out of Grushenka?
You’re a couple of capons, that’s what you are!” “This is a mortal insult!” The little Pole turned as red as a crab, and he went out of the room, briskly, as though unwilling to hear another word.
Vrublevsky swung out after him, and Mitya followed, confused and crestfallen.
He was afraid of Grushenka, afraid that the _pan_ would at once raise an outcry.
The Pole walked into the room and threw himself in a theatrical attitude before Grushenka.
“_Pani_ Agrippina, I have received a mortal insult!” he exclaimed.
But Grushenka suddenly lost all patience, as though they had wounded her in the tenderest spot.
You can’t have forgotten it in five years.” She was red with passion.
“_Pani_ Agrippina—” “My name’s Agrafena, Grushenka, speak Russian or I won’t listen!” The Pole gasped with offended dignity, and quickly and pompously delivered himself in broken Russian: “_Pani_ Agrafena, I came here to forget the past and forgive it, to forget all that has happened till to-day—” “Forgive?
Came here to forgive me?” Grushenka cut him short, jumping up from her seat.
“Just so, _pani_, I’m not pusillanimous, I’m magnanimous.
But I was astounded when I saw your lovers.
Pan Mitya offered me three thousand, in the other room to depart.
He offered you money for me?” cried Grushenka, hysterically.
That’s a lie....” “How dare you defend me to him?” shrieked Grushenka.
“It wasn’t virtue kept me pure, and it wasn’t that I was afraid of Kuzma, but that I might hold up my head when I met him, and tell him he’s a scoundrel.
And he did actually refuse the money?” “He took it!
He took it!” cried Mitya; “only he wanted to get the whole three thousand at once, and I could only give him seven hundred straight off.” “I see: he heard I had money, and came here to marry me!” “_Pani_ Agrippina!” cried the little Pole.
“I’m—a knight, I’m—a nobleman, and not a _lajdak_.
I came here to make you my wife and I find you a different woman, perverse and shameless.” “Oh, go back where you came from!
I’ll tell them to turn you out and you’ll be turned out,” cried Grushenka, furious.
“I’ve been a fool, a fool, to have been miserable these five years!
And it wasn’t for his sake, it was my anger made me miserable.
And I’ve been crying for five years, damned fool, abject, shameless I was!” She sank back in her low chair and hid her face in her hands.
At that instant the chorus of Mokroe began singing in the room on the left—a rollicking dance song.
“A regular Sodom!” Vrublevsky roared suddenly.
“Landlord, send the shameless hussies away!” The landlord, who had been for some time past inquisitively peeping in at the door, hearing shouts and guessing that his guests were quarreling, at once entered the room.
“What are you shouting for?
D’you want to split your throat?” he said, addressing Vrublevsky, with surprising rudeness.
“Animal!” bellowed Pan Vrublevsky.
I could send you to Siberia for playing with false cards, d’you know that, for it’s just the same as false banknotes....” And going up to the sofa he thrust his fingers between the sofa back and the cushion, and pulled out an unopened pack of cards.
“Here’s my pack unopened!” He held it up and showed it to all in the room.
“From where I stood I saw him slip my pack away, and put his in place of it—you’re a cheat and not a gentleman!” “And I twice saw the _pan_ change a card!” cried Kalganov.
How shameful!” exclaimed Grushenka, clasping her hands, and blushing for genuine shame.
But before he had uttered the words, Vrublevsky, with a confused and infuriated face, shook his fist at Grushenka, shouting: “You low harlot!” Mitya flew at him at once, clutched him in both hands, lifted him in the air, and in one instant had carried him into the room on the right, from which they had just come.
“I’ve laid him on the floor, there,” he announced, returning at once, gasping with excitement.
“He’s struggling, the scoundrel!
But he won’t come back, no fear of that!...” He closed one half of the folding doors, and holding the other ajar called out to the little Pole: “Most illustrious, will you be pleased to retire as well?” “My dear Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” said Trifon Borissovitch, “make them give you back the money you lost.
It’s as good as stolen from you.” “I don’t want my fifty roubles back,” Kalganov declared suddenly.
“I don’t want my two hundred, either,” cried Mitya, “I wouldn’t take it for anything!
Let him keep it as a consolation.” “Bravo, Mitya!
You’re a trump, Mitya!” cried Grushenka, and there was a note of fierce anger in the exclamation.
The little _pan_, crimson with fury but still mindful of his dignity, was making for the door, but he stopped short and said suddenly, addressing Grushenka: “_Pani_, if you want to come with me, come.
If not, good-by.” And swelling with indignation and importance he went to the door.
This was a man of character: he had so good an opinion of himself that after all that had passed, he still expected that she would marry him.
“Lock it,” said Kalganov.
“That’s capital!” exclaimed Grushenka relentlessly.
Delirium What followed was almost an orgy, a feast to which all were welcome.
Grushenka was the first to call for wine.
Do you remember, Mitya, do you remember how we made friends here last time!” Mitya himself was almost delirious, feeling that his happiness was at hand.
But Grushenka was continually sending him away from her.
“Go and enjoy yourself.
Tell them to dance, to make merry, ‘let the stove and cottage dance’; as we had it last time,” she kept exclaiming.
She was tremendously excited.
And Mitya hastened to obey her.
The room in which they had been sitting till that moment was too small, and was divided in two by cotton curtains, behind which was a huge bed with a puffy feather mattress and a pyramid of cotton pillows.
In the four rooms for visitors there were beds.
Grushenka settled herself just at the door.
All the girls who had come had been there then; the Jewish band with fiddles and zithers had come, too, and at last the long expected cart had arrived with the wines and provisions.
All sorts of people began coming into the room to look on, peasants and their women, who had been roused from sleep and attracted by the hopes of another marvelous entertainment such as they had enjoyed a month before.
Mitya remembered their faces, greeting and embracing every one he knew.
He uncorked bottles and poured out wine for every one who presented himself.
Only the girls were very eager for the champagne.
The men preferred rum, brandy, and, above all, hot punch.
Mitya had chocolate made for all the girls, and ordered that three samovars should be kept boiling all night to provide tea and punch for everyone to help himself.
An absurd chaotic confusion followed, but Mitya was in his natural element, and the more foolish it became, the more his spirits rose.
If the peasants had asked him for money at that moment, he would have pulled out his notes and given them away right and left.
This was probably why the landlord, Trifon Borissovitch, kept hovering about Mitya to protect him.
He seemed to have given up all idea of going to bed that night; but he drank little, only one glass of punch, and kept a sharp look-out on Mitya’s interests after his own fashion.
He intervened in the nick of time, civilly and obsequiously persuading Mitya not to give away “cigars and Rhine wine,” and, above all, money to the peasants as he had done before.
He was very indignant, too, at the peasant girls drinking liqueur, and eating sweets.
“They’re a lousy lot, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” he said.
“I’d give them a kick, every one of them, and they’d take it as an honor—that’s all they’re worth!” Mitya remembered Andrey again, and ordered punch to be sent out to him.
“I was rude to him just now,” he repeated with a sinking, softened voice.
Kalganov did not want to drink, and at first did not care for the girls’ singing; but after he had drunk a couple of glasses of champagne he became extraordinarily lively, strolling about the room, laughing and praising the music and the songs, admiring every one and everything.
Maximov, blissfully drunk, never left his side.
Grushenka, too, was beginning to get drunk.
Pointing to Kalganov, she said to Mitya: “What a dear, charming boy he is!” And Mitya, delighted, ran to kiss Kalganov and Maximov.
She had said nothing yet, and seemed, indeed, purposely to refrain from speaking.
But she looked at him from time to time with caressing and passionate eyes.
At last she suddenly gripped his hand and drew him vigorously to her.
Did you really want to?” “I didn’t want to spoil your happiness!” Mitya faltered blissfully.
“Well, go and enjoy yourself ...” she sent him away once more.
“Don’t cry, I’ll call you back again.” He would run away, and she listened to the singing and looked at the dancing, though her eyes followed him wherever he went.
“Come, sit beside me, tell me, how did you hear about me, and my coming here yesterday?
From whom did you first hear it?” And Mitya began telling her all about it, disconnectedly, incoherently, feverishly.
He spoke strangely, often frowning, and stopping abruptly.
“What are you frowning at?” she asked.
So you meant to shoot yourself to-morrow!
I like such reckless fellows as you,” she lisped, with a rather halting tongue.
Did you really mean to shoot yourself to-morrow, you stupid?
To-morrow I may have something to say to you....
Come, go along now, go and amuse yourself.” Once, however, she called him, as it were, puzzled and uneasy.
Yes, I see it,” she added, looking intently into his eyes.
“Though you keep kissing the peasants and shouting, I see something.
I love somebody here.
Ah, look, my boy has fallen asleep, poor dear, he’s drunk.” She meant Kalganov.
But he was not merely drowsy from drink; he felt suddenly dejected, or, as he said, “bored.” He was intensely depressed by the girls’ songs, which, as the drinking went on, gradually became coarse and more reckless.
Two girls dressed up as bears, and a lively girl, called Stepanida, with a stick in her hand, acted the part of keeper, and began to “show them.” “Look alive, Marya, or you’ll get the stick!” The bears rolled on the ground at last in the most unseemly fashion, amid roars of laughter from the closely-packed crowd of men and women.
Let them!” said Grushenka sententiously, with an ecstatic expression on her face.
“When they do get a day to enjoy themselves, why shouldn’t folks be happy?” Kalganov looked as though he had been besmirched with dirt.
“It’s swinish, all this peasant foolery,” he murmured, moving away; “it’s the game they play when it’s light all night in summer.” He particularly disliked one “new” song to a jaunty dance-tune.
It described how a gentleman came and tried his luck with the girls, to see whether they would love him: The master came to try the girls: Would they love him, would they not?
But the soldier is rejected with contempt, in two indecent lines, sung with absolute frankness and producing a furore in the audience.
The song ends with a merchant: The merchant came to try the girls: Would they love him, would they not?
And it appears that he wins their love because: The merchant will make gold for me And his queen I’ll gladly be.
Kalganov was positively indignant.
“That’s just a song of yesterday,” he said aloud.
They might just as well have had a railwayman or a Jew come to try his luck with the girls; they’d have carried all before them.” And, almost as though it were a personal affront, he declared, on the spot, that he was bored, sat down on the sofa and immediately fell asleep.
“Look how pretty he is,” said Grushenka, taking Mitya up to him.
“I was combing his hair just now; his hair’s like flax, and so thick....” And, bending over him tenderly, she kissed his forehead.
Kalganov instantly opened his eyes, looked at her, stood up, and with the most anxious air inquired where was Maximov?
“So that’s who it is you want.” Grushenka laughed.
Mitya, run and find his Maximov.” Maximov, it appeared, could not tear himself away from the girls, only running away from time to time to pour himself out a glass of liqueur.
He had drunk two cups of chocolate.
His face was red, and his nose was crimson; his eyes were moist and mawkishly sweet.
He ran up and announced that he was going to dance the “sabotière.” “They taught me all those well-bred, aristocratic dances when I was little....” “Go, go with him, Mitya, and I’ll watch from here how he dances,” said Grushenka.
“No, no, I’m coming to look on, too,” exclaimed Kalganov, brushing aside in the most naïve way Grushenka’s offer to sit with him.
But it roused no great admiration in any one but Mitya.
It consisted of nothing but skipping and hopping, kicking up the feet, and at every skip Maximov slapped the upturned sole of his foot.
Kalganov did not like it at all, but Mitya kissed the dancer.
A cigar, perhaps?” “A cigarette.” “Don’t you want a drink?” “I’ll just have a liqueur....
Have you any chocolates?” “Yes, there’s a heap of them on the table there.
No, brother, that won’t do!” “I’d do no harm to any one,” Maximov muttered disconsolately.
Eat and drink and be merry, meanwhile.
He went outside to the wooden balcony which ran round the whole building on the inner side, overlooking the courtyard.
He stood alone in a dark corner, and suddenly clutched his head in both hands.
His scattered thoughts came together; his sensations blended into a whole and threw a sudden light into his mind.
A fearful and terrible light!
“Why not go for the pistols, bring them here, and here, in this dark dirty corner, make an end?” Almost a minute he stood, undecided.
A few hours earlier, when he had been dashing here, he was pursued by disgrace, by the theft he had committed, and that blood, that blood!...
Then everything was over: he had lost her, given her up.
She was gone, for him—oh, then his death sentence had been easier for him; at least it had seemed necessary, inevitable, for what had he to stay on earth for?
Now one phantom, one terror at least was at an end: that first, rightful lover, that fateful figure had vanished, leaving no trace.
The terrible phantom had turned into something so small, so comic; it had been carried into the bedroom and locked in.
Now he had everything to make life happy ... but he could not go on living, he could not; oh, damnation!
Lord, thou hast wrought miracles for such sinners as me!
Oh, then the shame of the other disgrace I would wipe away.
But no, no; oh, impossible cowardly dreams!
Oh, damnation!” Yet there was a ray of light and hope in his darkness.
Was not one moment of her love worth all the rest of life, even in the agonies of disgrace?
This wild question clutched at his heart.
“To her, to her alone, to see her, to hear her, to think of nothing, to forget everything, if only for that night, for an hour, for a moment!” Just as he turned from the balcony into the passage, he came upon the landlord, Trifon Borissovitch.
“What is it, Trifon Borissovitch? are you looking for me?” “No, sir.” The landlord seemed disconcerted.
Keep it up as long as you like....” “What’s the matter with him?” Mitya wondered for an instant, and he ran back to the room where the girls were dancing.
She was not in the blue room either; there was no one but Kalganov asleep on the sofa.
Bent forward, with her head and arms on the bed close by, she was crying bitterly, doing her utmost to stifle her sobs that she might not be heard.
Seeing Mitya, she beckoned him to her, and when he ran to her, she grasped his hand tightly.
Mitya, I was only seventeen then; he was so kind to me, so merry; he used to sing to me....
Even his face is not the same; he’s different altogether.
I drove here with Timofey, and all the way I was thinking how I should meet him, what I should say to him, how we should look at one another.
He talked to me like a schoolmaster, all so grave and learned; he met me so solemnly that I was struck dumb.
I sat staring at him and wondering why I couldn’t say a word to him now.
Mitya, how shameful it is!
I want to say one word to you,” she whispered, and suddenly raised her face to him.
That’s what you must tell me.” A smile lighted up her face that was swollen with weeping, and her eyes shone in the half darkness.
‘Fool! that’s the man you love!’ That was what my heart whispered to me at once.
For you were frightened; you couldn’t speak.
It’s not them he’s afraid of—could you be frightened of any one?
So Fenya told you, you little stupid, how I called to Alyosha out of the window that I’d loved Mityenka for one hour, and that I was going now to love ... another.
Do you love me?” She jumped up and held him with both hands on his shoulders.
Mitya, dumb with rapture, gazed into her eyes, at her face, at her smile, and suddenly clasped her tightly in his arms and kissed her passionately.
“You will forgive me for having tormented you?
It was through spite I tormented you all.
Do you remember how you drank at my house one day and broke the wine-glass?
I remembered that and I broke a glass to-day and drank ‘to my vile heart.’ Mitya, my falcon, why don’t you kiss me?
Stay, wait, afterwards, I won’t have that....” she suddenly thrust him away.
“Go along, Mitya, I’ll come and have some wine, I want to be drunk, I’m going to get drunk and dance; I must, I must!” She tore herself away from him and disappeared behind the curtain.
Mitya followed like a drunken man.
“Yes, come what may—whatever may happen now, for one minute I’d give the whole world,” he thought.
Grushenka did, in fact, toss off a whole glass of champagne at one gulp, and became at once very tipsy.
She sat down in the same chair as before, with a blissful smile on her face.
Her cheeks were glowing, her lips were burning, her flashing eyes were moist; there was passionate appeal in her eyes.
Even Kalganov felt a stir at the heart and went up to her.
And why isn’t Mitya drinking?
I’m drunk as it is ... drunk with you ... and now I’ll be drunk with wine, too.” He drank off another glass, and—he thought it strange himself—that glass made him completely drunk.
He was suddenly drunk, although till that moment he had been quite sober, he remembered that.
From that moment everything whirled about him, as though he were delirious.
He walked, laughed, talked to everybody, without knowing what he was doing.
Only one persistent burning sensation made itself felt continually, “like a red-hot coal in his heart,” he said afterwards.
He went up to her, sat beside her, gazed at her, listened to her....
She became very talkative, kept calling every one to her, and beckoned to different girls out of the chorus.
The hen goes strutting through the porch; Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo, she’ll say, Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo, she’ll say!
“Give him something, Mitya,” said Grushenka.
Ah, the poor, the insulted!...
No, I really shall one day, Alyosha said something to me to-day that I shall remember all my life....
If I were God, I’d forgive every one: ‘My dear sinners, from this day forth I forgive you.’ I’m going to beg forgiveness: ‘Forgive me, good people, a silly wench.’ I’m a beast, that’s what I am.
Come, tell me, I’ve something to ask you: come here every one, and I’ll ask you: Why am I so good?
Come, why am I so good?” So Grushenka babbled on, getting more and more drunk.
At last she announced that she was going to dance, too.
She got up from her chair, staggering.
Everything’s going round, the stove, and everything.
Let every one see how I dance ... let them see how beautifully I dance....” She really meant it.
She pulled a white cambric handkerchief out of her pocket, and took it by one corner in her right hand, to wave it in the dance.
Maximov, hearing that Grushenka wanted to dance, squealed with delight, and ran skipping about in front of her, humming: With legs so slim and sides so trim And its little tail curled tight.
But Grushenka waved her handkerchief at him and drove him away.
Let them look on, too....” Mitya walked with a drunken swagger to the locked door, and began knocking to the Poles with his fist.
“You’re a _lajdak_ yourself!
You’re a little scoundrel, that’s what you are.” “Leave off laughing at Poland,” said Kalganov sententiously.
If I call him a scoundrel, it doesn’t mean that I called all Poland so.
Be quiet, my pretty boy, eat a sweetmeat.” “Ach, what fellows!
Why won’t they make friends?” said Grushenka, and went forward to dance.
The chorus broke into “Ah, my porch, my new porch!” Grushenka flung back her head, half opened her lips, smiled, waved her handkerchief, and suddenly, with a violent lurch, stood still in the middle of the room, looking bewildered.
“I’m weak....” she said in an exhausted voice.
I’m sorry.” She bowed to the chorus, and then began bowing in all directions.
Forgive me....” “The lady’s been drinking.
The pretty lady has been drinking,” voices were heard saying.
“The lady’s drunk too much,” Maximov explained to the girls, giggling.
“Mitya, lead me away ... take me,” said Grushenka helplessly.
Mitya pounced on her, snatched her up in his arms, and carried the precious burden through the curtains.
“Well, now I’ll go,” thought Kalganov, and walking out of the blue room, he closed the two halves of the door after him.
Mitya laid Grushenka on the bed and kissed her on the lips.
“Don’t touch me....” she faltered, in an imploring voice.
I worship you!” muttered Mitya.
“Yes, it’s nasty here, it’s abominable.” And still holding her in his arms, he sank on his knees by the bedside.
“I know, though you’re a brute, you’re generous,” Grushenka articulated with difficulty.
“It must be honorable ... it shall be honorable for the future ... and let us be honest, let us be good, not brutes, but good ... take me away, take me far away, do you hear?
I don’t want it to be here, but far, far away....” “Oh, yes, yes, it must be!” said Mitya, pressing her in his arms.
Oh, I’d give my whole life for one year only to know about that blood!” “What blood?” asked Grushenka, bewildered.
“Nothing,” muttered Mitya, through his teeth.
Disgrace, a disgrace!” “From Katya, from that young lady?
Now everything of mine is yours.
I won’t be your mistress, I’ll be faithful to you, I’ll be your slave, I’ll work for you.
We’ll go to the young lady and bow down to her together, so that she may forgive us, and then we’ll go away.
If you love her, I shall strangle her....
Now it’s stopped.” She closed her eyes, exhausted, and suddenly fell asleep for an instant.
There had certainly been the sound of a bell in the distance, but the ringing had ceased.
He did not notice that the bell had ceased ringing, nor did he notice that the songs had ceased, and that instead of singing and drunken clamor there was absolute stillness in the house.
Grushenka opened her eyes.
I was holding you and kissing you, nestling close to you.
I was cold, and the snow glistened....
You know how the snow glistens at night when the moon shines.
How sweet that is!...” “Close to you,” murmured Mitya, kissing her dress, her bosom, her hands.
And suddenly he had a strange fancy: it seemed to him that she was looking straight before her, not at him, not into his face, but over his head, with an intent, almost uncanny fixity.
An expression of wonder, almost of alarm, came suddenly into her face.
“Mitya, who is that looking at us?” she whispered.
Mitya turned, and saw that some one had, in fact, parted the curtains and seemed to be watching them.
He jumped up and walked quickly to the intruder.
“Here, come to us, come here,” said a voice, speaking not loudly, but firmly and peremptorily.
An instantaneous shiver ran down his back, and he shuddered.
He recognized all those people instantly.
That tall, stout old man in the overcoat and forage-cap with a cockade—was the police captain, Mihail Makarovitch.
And that “consumptive-looking” trim dandy, “who always has such polished boots”—that was the deputy prosecutor.
“He has a chronometer worth four hundred roubles; he showed it to me.” And that small young man in spectacles....
Mitya forgot his surname though he knew him, had seen him: he was the “investigating lawyer,” from the “school of jurisprudence,” who had only lately come to the town.
And this man—the inspector of police, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, a man he knew well.
And those other two ... peasants....
And there at the door Kalganov with Trifon Borissovitch....
What’s this for, gentlemen?” began Mitya, but suddenly, as though beside himself, not knowing what he was doing, he cried aloud, at the top of his voice: “I un—der—stand!” The young man in spectacles moved forward suddenly, and stepping up to Mitya, began with dignity, though hurriedly: “We have to make ... in brief, I beg you to come this way, this way to the sofa....
It is absolutely imperative that you should give an explanation.” “The old man!” cried Mitya frantically.
I understand.” And he sank, almost fell, on a chair close by, as though he had been mown down by a scythe.
Monster and parricide!
Your father’s blood cries out against you!” the old captain of police roared suddenly, stepping up to Mitya.
He was beside himself, crimson in the face and quivering all over.
“This is impossible!” cried the small young man.
“Mihail Makarovitch, Mihail Makarovitch, this won’t do!...
I should never have expected such behavior from you....” “This is delirium, gentlemen, raving delirium,” cried the captain of police; “look at him: drunk, at this time of night, in the company of a disreputable woman, with the blood of his father on his hands....
It’s delirium!...” “I beg you most earnestly, dear Mihail Makarovitch, to restrain your feelings,” the prosecutor said in a rapid whisper to the old police captain, “or I shall be forced to resort to—” But the little lawyer did not allow him to finish.
He turned to Mitya, and delivered himself in a loud, firm, dignified voice: “Ex-Lieutenant Karamazov, it is my duty to inform you that you are charged with the murder of your father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, perpetrated this night....” He said something more, and the prosecutor, too, put in something, but though Mitya heard them he did not understand them.
The Beginning Of Perhotin’s Official Career Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, whom we left knocking at the strong locked gates of the widow Morozov’s house, ended, of course, by making himself heard.
Fenya, who was still excited by the fright she had had two hours before, and too much “upset” to go to bed, was almost frightened into hysterics on hearing the furious knocking at the gate.
Though she had herself seen him drive away, she fancied that it must be Dmitri Fyodorovitch knocking again, no one else could knock so savagely.
She ran to the house-porter, who had already waked up and gone out to the gate, and began imploring him not to open it.
But having questioned Pyotr Ilyitch, and learned that he wanted to see Fenya on very “important business,” the man made up his mind at last to open.
“And the blood was simply flowing, dripping from him, dripping!” Fenya kept exclaiming.
This horrible detail was simply the product of her disordered imagination.
But although not “dripping,” Pyotr Ilyitch had himself seen those hands stained with blood, and had helped to wash them.
Moreover, the question he had to decide was not how soon the blood had dried, but where Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run with the pestle, or rather, whether it really was to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, and how he could satisfactorily ascertain.
Pyotr Ilyitch persisted in returning to this point, and though he found out nothing conclusive, yet he carried away a conviction that Dmitri Fyodorovitch could have gone nowhere but to his father’s house, and that therefore something must have happened there.
“And when he came back,” Fenya added with excitement, “I told him the whole story, and then I began asking him, ‘Why have you got blood on your hands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?’ and he answered that that was human blood, and that he had just killed some one.
He confessed it all to me, and suddenly ran off like a madman.
I sat down and began thinking, where’s he run off to now like a madman?
He’ll go to Mokroe, I thought, and kill my mistress there.
I was running to his lodgings, but I looked at Plotnikov’s shop, and saw him just setting off, and there was no blood on his hands then.” (Fenya had noticed this and remembered it.) Fenya’s old grandmother confirmed her evidence as far as she was capable.
After asking some further questions, Pyotr Ilyitch left the house, even more upset and uneasy than he had been when he entered it.
The most direct and the easiest thing for him to do would have been to go straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, to find out whether anything had happened there, and if so, what; and only to go to the police captain, as Pyotr Ilyitch firmly intended doing, when he had satisfied himself of the fact.
But the night was dark, Fyodor Pavlovitch’s gates were strong, and he would have to knock again.
His acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch was of the slightest, and what if, after he had been knocking, they opened to him, and nothing had happened?
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch in his jeering way would go telling the story all over the town, how a stranger, called Perhotin, had broken in upon him at midnight to ask if any one had killed him.
And scandal was what Pyotr Ilyitch dreaded more than anything in the world.
Yet the feeling that possessed him was so strong, that though he stamped his foot angrily and swore at himself, he set off again, not to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s but to Madame Hohlakov’s.
He decided that if she denied having just given Dmitri Fyodorovitch three thousand roubles, he would go straight to the police captain, but if she admitted having given him the money, he would go home and let the matter rest till next morning.
It is, of course, perfectly evident that there was even more likelihood of causing scandal by going at eleven o’clock at night to a fashionable lady, a complete stranger, and perhaps rousing her from her bed to ask her an amazing question, than by going to Fyodor Pavlovitch.
But that is just how it is, sometimes, especially in cases like the present one, with the decisions of the most precise and phlegmatic people.
Pyotr Ilyitch was by no means phlegmatic at that moment.
He remembered all his life how a haunting uneasiness gradually gained possession of him, growing more and more painful and driving him on, against his will.
Yet he kept cursing himself, of course, all the way for going to this lady, but “I will get to the bottom of it, I will!” he repeated for the tenth time, grinding his teeth, and he carried out his intention.
It was exactly eleven o’clock when he entered Madame Hohlakov’s house.
He was admitted into the yard pretty quickly, but, in response to his inquiry whether the lady was still up, the porter could give no answer, except that she was usually in bed by that time.
The footman was unwilling to take in his name, but finally called a maid.
Pyotr Ilyitch politely but insistently begged her to inform her lady that an official, living in the town, called Perhotin, had called on particular business, and that if it were not of the greatest importance he would not have ventured to come.
He remained waiting in the entry.
Madame Hohlakov herself was already in her bedroom, though not yet asleep.
She had felt upset ever since Mitya’s visit, and had a presentiment that she would not get through the night without the sick headache which always, with her, followed such excitement.
She was surprised on hearing the announcement from the maid.
She irritably declined to see him, however, though the unexpected visit at such an hour, of an “official living in the town,” who was a total stranger, roused her feminine curiosity intensely.
But this time Pyotr Ilyitch was as obstinate as a mule.
He begged the maid most earnestly to take another message in these very words: “That he had come on business of the greatest importance, and that Madame Hohlakov might have cause to regret it later, if she refused to see him now.” “I plunged headlong,” he described it afterwards.
The maid, gazing at him in amazement, went to take his message again.
Madame Hohlakov was impressed.
She thought a little, asked what he looked like, and learned that he was “very well dressed, young and so polite.” We may note, parenthetically, that Pyotr Ilyitch was a rather good-looking young man, and well aware of the fact.
Madame Hohlakov made up her mind to see him.
She was in her dressing-gown and slippers, but she flung a black shawl over her shoulders.
“The official” was asked to walk into the drawing-room, the very room in which Mitya had been received shortly before.
The lady came to meet her visitor, with a sternly inquiring countenance, and, without asking him to sit down, began at once with the question: “What do you want?” “I have ventured to disturb you, madam, on a matter concerning our common acquaintance, Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov,” Perhotin began.
But he had hardly uttered the name, when the lady’s face showed signs of acute irritation.
She almost shrieked, and interrupted him in a fury: “How much longer am I to be worried by that awful man?” she cried hysterically.
“How dare you, sir, how could you venture to disturb a lady who is a stranger to you, in her own house at such an hour!...
And to force yourself upon her to talk of a man who came here, to this very drawing-room, only three hours ago, to murder me, and went stamping out of the room, as no one would go out of a decent house.
Let me tell you, sir, that I shall lodge a complaint against you, that I will not let it pass.
I—” “Murder! then he tried to murder you, too?” “Why, has he killed somebody else?” Madame Hohlakov asked impulsively.
“If you would kindly listen, madam, for half a moment, I’ll explain it all in a couple of words,” answered Perhotin, firmly.
“At five o’clock this afternoon Dmitri Fyodorovitch borrowed ten roubles from me, and I know for a fact he had no money.
Yet at nine o’clock, he came to see me with a bundle of hundred-rouble notes in his hand, about two or three thousand roubles.
When I asked him where he had got so much money, he answered that he had just received it from you, that you had given him a sum of three thousand to go to the gold-mines....” Madame Hohlakov’s face assumed an expression of intense and painful excitement.
He must have killed his old father!” she cried, clasping her hands.
You remember for a fact that you did not give him any money?” “No, I didn’t, I didn’t!
I refused to give it him, for he could not appreciate it.
He ran out in a fury, stamping.
And let me tell you, as I wish to hide nothing from you now, that he positively spat at me.
But why are we standing?
What do you think we must do now?” Meantime she had made Pyotr Ilyitch sit down and sat down herself, facing him.
Briefly, but fairly clearly, Pyotr Ilyitch told her the history of the affair, that part of it at least which he had himself witnessed.
He described, too, his visit to Fenya, and told her about the pestle.
All these details produced an overwhelming effect on the distracted lady, who kept uttering shrieks, and covering her face with her hands....
I have that special faculty, whatever I imagine comes to pass.
And how often I’ve looked at that awful man and always thought, that man will end by murdering me.
And now it’s happened ... that is, if he hasn’t murdered me, but only his own father, it’s only because the finger of God preserved me, and what’s more, he was ashamed to murder me because, in this very place, I put the holy ikon from the relics of the holy martyr, Saint Varvara, on his neck....
And to think how near I was to death at that minute, I went close up to him and he stretched out his neck to me!...
Do you know, Pyotr Ilyitch (I think you said your name was Pyotr Ilyitch), I don’t believe in miracles, but that ikon and this unmistakable miracle with me now—that shakes me, and I’m ready to believe in anything you like.
What do you think?” Pyotr Ilyitch got up, and announced that he was going straight to the police captain, to tell him all about it, and leave him to do what he thought fit.
“Oh, he’s an excellent man, excellent!
Mihail Makarovitch, I know him.
How practical you are, Pyotr Ilyitch!
How well you’ve thought of everything!
I should never have thought of it in your place!” “Especially as I know the police captain very well, too,” observed Pyotr Ilyitch, who still continued to stand, and was obviously anxious to escape as quickly as possible from the impulsive lady, who would not let him say good-by and go away.
“And be sure, be sure,” she prattled on, “to come back and tell me what you see there, and what you find out ... what comes to light ... how they’ll try him ... and what he’s condemned to....
Tell me, we have no capital punishment, have we?
But if you would write three lines with your own hand, stating that you did not give Dmitri Fyodorovitch money, it might, perhaps, be of use ... in case it’s needed....” “To be sure!” Madame Hohlakov skipped, delighted, to her bureau.
“And you know I’m simply struck, amazed at your resourcefulness, your good sense in such affairs.
I’m delighted to think that you’re in the service here!” And still speaking, she scribbled on half a sheet of notepaper the following lines: I’ve never in my life lent to that unhappy man, Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov (for, in spite of all, he is unhappy), three thousand roubles to-day.
She ran out to accompany him to the passage.
“How grateful I am to you!
You can’t think how grateful I am to you for having come to me, first.
I shall feel flattered at seeing you at my house in the future.
How delightful it is that you are living here!...
Such practical ability!...
They must appreciate you, they must understand you.
If there’s anything I can do, believe me ... oh, I love young people!
The younger generation are the one prop of our suffering country.
Yet Madame Hohlakov had made a rather agreeable impression on him, which had somewhat softened his anxiety at being drawn into such an unpleasant affair.
“She’s by no means so elderly,” he thought, feeling pleased, “on the contrary I should have taken her for her daughter.” As for Madame Hohlakov, she was simply enchanted by the young man.
“Such sense! such exactness! in so young a man! in our day! and all that with such manners and appearance!
People say the young people of to-day are no good for anything, but here’s an example!” etc.
So she simply forgot this “dreadful affair,” and it was only as she was getting into bed, that, suddenly recalling “how near death she had been,” she exclaimed: “Ah, it is awful, awful!” But she fell at once into a sound, sweet sleep.
I would not, however, have dwelt on such trivial and irrelevant details, if this eccentric meeting of the young official with the by no means elderly widow had not subsequently turned out to be the foundation of the whole career of that practical and precise young man.
His story is remembered to this day with amazement in our town, and I shall perhaps have something to say about it, when I have finished my long history of the Brothers Karamazov.
The Alarm Our police captain, Mihail Makarovitch Makarov, a retired lieutenant-colonel, was a widower and an excellent man.
He had only come to us three years previously, but had won general esteem, chiefly because he “knew how to keep society together.” He was never without visitors, and could not have got on without them.
He gave regular dinners, too, on all sorts of occasions, sometimes most surprising ones.
Though the fare was not _recherché_, it was abundant.
The fish-pies were excellent, and the wine made up in quantity for what it lacked in quality.
The first room his guests entered was a well-fitted billiard-room, with pictures of English race-horses, in black frames on the walls, an essential decoration, as we all know, for a bachelor’s billiard-room.
But at frequent intervals, all the society of our town, with the mammas and young ladies, assembled at his house to dance.
Though Mihail Makarovitch was a widower, he did not live alone.
His widowed daughter lived with him, with her two unmarried daughters, grown-up girls, who had finished their education.
They were of agreeable appearance and lively character, and though every one knew they would have no dowry, they attracted all the young men of fashion to their grandfather’s house.
Mihail Makarovitch was by no means very efficient in his work, though he performed his duties no worse than many others.
To speak plainly, he was a man of rather narrow education.
His understanding of the limits of his administrative power could not always be relied upon.
It was not so much that he failed to grasp certain reforms enacted during the present reign, as that he made conspicuous blunders in his interpretation of them.
This was not from any special lack of intelligence, but from carelessness, for he was always in too great a hurry to go into the subject.
“I have the heart of a soldier rather than of a civilian,” he used to say of himself.
He had not even formed a definite idea of the fundamental principles of the reforms connected with the emancipation of the serfs, and only picked it up, so to speak, from year to year, involuntarily increasing his knowledge by practice.
And yet he was himself a landowner.
Pyotr Ilyitch knew for certain that he would meet some of Mihail Makarovitch’s visitors there that evening, but he didn’t know which.
As it happened, at that moment the prosecutor, and Varvinsky, our district doctor, a young man, who had only just come to us from Petersburg after taking a brilliant degree at the Academy of Medicine, were playing whist at the police captain’s.
Ippolit Kirillovitch, the prosecutor (he was really the deputy prosecutor, but we always called him the prosecutor), was rather a peculiar man, of about five and thirty, inclined to be consumptive, and married to a fat and childless woman.
He was vain and irritable, though he had a good intellect, and even a kind heart.
It seemed that all that was wrong with him was that he had a better opinion of himself than his ability warranted.
And that made him seem constantly uneasy.
He had, moreover, certain higher, even artistic, leanings, towards psychology, for instance, a special study of the human heart, a special knowledge of the criminal and his crime.
He cherished a grievance on this ground, considering that he had been passed over in the service, and being firmly persuaded that in higher spheres he had not been properly appreciated, and had enemies.
In gloomy moments he even threatened to give up his post, and practice as a barrister in criminal cases.
The unexpected Karamazov case agitated him profoundly: “It was a case that might well be talked about all over Russia.” But I am anticipating.
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov, the young investigating lawyer, who had only come from Petersburg two months before, was sitting in the next room with the young ladies.
People talked about it afterwards and wondered that all the gentlemen should, as though intentionally, on the evening of “the crime” have been gathered together at the house of the executive authority.
Yet it was perfectly simple and happened quite naturally.
Ippolit Kirillovitch’s wife had had toothache for the last two days, and he was obliged to go out to escape from her groans.
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov had been intending for three days past to drop in that evening at Mihail Makarovitch’s, so to speak casually, so as slyly to startle the eldest granddaughter, Olga Mihailovna, by showing that he knew her secret, that he knew it was her birthday, and that she was trying to conceal it on purpose, so as not to be obliged to give a dance.
He anticipated a great deal of merriment, many playful jests about her age, and her being afraid to reveal it, about his knowing her secret and telling everybody, and so on.
The charming young man was a great adept at such teasing; the ladies had christened him “the naughty man,” and he seemed to be delighted at the name.
He was extremely well-bred, however, of good family, education and feelings, and, though leading a life of pleasure, his sallies were always innocent and in good taste.
He was short, and delicate-looking.
On his white, slender, little fingers he always wore a number of big, glittering rings.
When he was engaged in his official duties, he always became extraordinarily grave, as though realizing his position and the sanctity of the obligations laid upon him.
He had a special gift for mystifying murderers and other criminals of the peasant class during interrogation, and if he did not win their respect, he certainly succeeded in arousing their wonder.
Pyotr Ilyitch was simply dumbfounded when he went into the police captain’s.
He saw instantly that every one knew.
They had positively thrown down their cards, all were standing up and talking.
Even Nikolay Parfenovitch had left the young ladies and run in, looking strenuous and ready for action.
Pyotr Ilyitch was met with the astounding news that old Fyodor Pavlovitch really had been murdered that evening in his own house, murdered and robbed.
The news had only just reached them in the following manner.
Marfa Ignatyevna, the wife of old Grigory, who had been knocked senseless near the fence, was sleeping soundly in her bed and might well have slept till morning after the draught she had taken.
But, all of a sudden she waked up, no doubt roused by a fearful epileptic scream from Smerdyakov, who was lying in the next room unconscious.
That scream always preceded his fits, and always terrified and upset Marfa Ignatyevna.
She could never get accustomed to it.
She jumped up and ran half-awake to Smerdyakov’s room.
But it was dark there, and she could only hear the invalid beginning to gasp and struggle.
Then Marfa Ignatyevna herself screamed out and was going to call her husband, but suddenly realized that when she had got up, he was not beside her in bed.
She ran back to the bedstead and began groping with her hands, but the bed was really empty.
She got no answer, of course, but she caught the sound of groans far away in the garden in the darkness.
The groans were repeated, and it was evident they came from the garden.
Just as it was with Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya!” she thought distractedly.
She went up to the gate and all at once she distinctly heard Grigory calling her by name, “Marfa!
Marfa!” in a weak, moaning, dreadful voice.
“Lord, preserve us from harm!” Marfa Ignatyevna murmured, and ran towards the voice, and that was how she found Grigory.
It appeared later, that he had crawled away on coming to himself, and probably had been a long time getting so far, losing consciousness several times.
She noticed at once that he was covered with blood, and screamed at the top of her voice.
Grigory was muttering incoherently: “He has murdered ... his father murdered....
Why scream, silly ... run ... fetch some one....” But Marfa continued screaming, and seeing that her master’s window was open and that there was a candle alight in the window, she ran there and began calling Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Her master was lying on his back, motionless, on the floor.
His light-colored dressing-gown and white shirt were soaked with blood.
The candle on the table brightly lighted up the blood and the motionless dead face of Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Terror-stricken, Marfa rushed away from the window, ran out of the garden, drew the bolt of the big gate and ran headlong by the back way to the neighbor, Marya Kondratyevna.
Both mother and daughter were asleep, but they waked up at Marfa’s desperate and persistent screaming and knocking at the shutter.
Marfa, shrieking and screaming incoherently, managed to tell them the main fact, and to beg for assistance.
It happened that Foma had come back from his wanderings and was staying the night with them.
They got him up immediately and all three ran to the scene of the crime.
On the way, Marya Kondratyevna remembered that at about eight o’clock she heard a dreadful scream from their garden, and this was no doubt Grigory’s scream, “Parricide!” uttered when he caught hold of Mitya’s leg.
“Some one person screamed out and then was silent,” Marya Kondratyevna explained as she ran.
They lighted a candle and saw that Smerdyakov was no better, that he was writhing in convulsions, his eyes fixed in a squint, and that foam was flowing from his lips.
They moistened Grigory’s forehead with water mixed with vinegar, and the water revived him at once.
He asked immediately: “Is the master murdered?” Then Foma and both the women ran to the house and saw this time that not only the window, but also the door into the garden was wide open, though Fyodor Pavlovitch had for the last week locked himself in every night and did not allow even Grigory to come in on any pretext.
Seeing that door open, they were afraid to go in to Fyodor Pavlovitch “for fear anything should happen afterwards.” And when they returned to Grigory, the old man told them to go straight to the police captain.
Marya Kondratyevna ran there and gave the alarm to the whole party at the police captain’s.
She arrived only five minutes before Pyotr Ilyitch, so that his story came, not as his own surmise and theory, but as the direct confirmation, by a witness, of the theory held by all, as to the identity of the criminal (a theory he had in the bottom of his heart refused to believe till that moment).
It was resolved to act with energy.
The deputy police inspector of the town was commissioned to take four witnesses, to enter Fyodor Pavlovitch’s house and there to open an inquiry on the spot, according to the regular forms, which I will not go into here.
The district doctor, a zealous man, new to his work, almost insisted on accompanying the police captain, the prosecutor, and the investigating lawyer.
I will note briefly that Fyodor Pavlovitch was found to be quite dead, with his skull battered in.
Most likely with the same weapon with which Grigory had been attacked.
And immediately that weapon was found, Grigory, to whom all possible medical assistance was at once given, described in a weak and breaking voice how he had been knocked down.
They began looking with a lantern by the fence and found the brass pestle dropped in a most conspicuous place on the garden path.
There were no signs of disturbance in the room where Fyodor Pavlovitch was lying.
But by the bed, behind the screen, they picked up from the floor a big and thick envelope with the inscription: “A present of three thousand roubles for my angel Grushenka, if she is willing to come.” And below had been added by Fyodor Pavlovitch, “For my little chicken.” There were three seals of red sealing-wax on the envelope, but it had been torn open and was empty: the money had been removed.
They found also on the floor a piece of narrow pink ribbon, with which the envelope had been tied up.
One piece of Pyotr Ilyitch’s evidence made a great impression on the prosecutor and the investigating magistrate, namely, his idea that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would shoot himself before daybreak, that he had resolved to do so, had spoken of it to Ilyitch, had taken the pistols, loaded them before him, written a letter, put it in his pocket, etc.
When Pyotr Ilyitch, though still unwilling to believe in it, threatened to tell some one so as to prevent the suicide, Mitya had answered grinning: “You’ll be too late.” So they must make haste to Mokroe to find the criminal, before he really did shoot himself.
“That’s clear, that’s clear!” repeated the prosecutor in great excitement.
“That’s just the way with mad fellows like that: ‘I shall kill myself to-morrow, so I’ll make merry till I die!’” The story of how he had bought the wine and provisions excited the prosecutor more than ever.
“Do you remember the fellow that murdered a merchant called Olsufyev, gentlemen?
He stole fifteen hundred, went at once to have his hair curled, and then, without even hiding the money, carrying it almost in his hand in the same way, he went off to the girls.” All were delayed, however, by the inquiry, the search, and the formalities, etc., in the house of Fyodor Pavlovitch.
It all took time and so, two hours before starting, they sent on ahead to Mokroe the officer of the rural police, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch Schmertsov, who had arrived in the town the morning before to get his pay.
He was instructed to avoid raising the alarm when he reached Mokroe, but to keep constant watch over the “criminal” till the arrival of the proper authorities, to procure also witnesses for the arrest, police constables, and so on.
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch did as he was told, preserving his incognito, and giving no one but his old acquaintance, Trifon Borissovitch, the slightest hint of his secret business.
He had spoken to him just before Mitya met the landlord in the balcony, looking for him in the dark, and noticed at once a change in Trifon Borissovitch’s face and voice.
The box with the pistols had been carried off by Trifon Borissovitch and put in a suitable place.
Only after four o’clock, almost at sunrise, all the officials, the police captain, the prosecutor, the investigating lawyer, drove up in two carriages, each drawn by three horses.
The doctor remained at Fyodor Pavlovitch’s to make a post-mortem next day on the body.
But he was particularly interested in the condition of the servant, Smerdyakov.
“Such violent and protracted epileptic fits, recurring continually for twenty-four hours, are rarely to be met with, and are of interest to science,” he declared enthusiastically to his companions, and as they left they laughingly congratulated him on his find.
The prosecutor and the investigating lawyer distinctly remembered the doctor’s saying that Smerdyakov could not outlive the night.
After these long, but I think necessary explanations, we will return to that moment of our tale at which we broke off.
The Sufferings Of A Soul, The First Ordeal And so Mitya sat looking wildly at the people round him, not understanding what was said to him.
Suddenly he got up, flung up his hands, and shouted aloud: “I’m not guilty!
Not I.” But he had hardly said this, before Grushenka rushed from behind the curtain and flung herself at the police captain’s feet.
My wickedness!” she cried, in a heartrending voice, bathed in tears, stretching out her clasped hands towards them.
I tortured him and drove him to it.
I tortured that poor old man that’s dead, too, in my wickedness, and brought him to this!
You’re the chief criminal!
You’re the most to blame!” shouted the police captain, threatening her with his hand.
But he was quickly and resolutely suppressed.
The prosecutor positively seized hold of him.
“This is absolutely irregular, Mihail Makarovitch!” he cried.
“You are positively hindering the inquiry....
Follow the regular course!” cried Nikolay Parfenovitch, fearfully excited too, “otherwise it’s absolutely impossible!...” “Judge us together!” Grushenka cried frantically, still kneeling.
“Punish us together.
“Don’t believe her,” he cried, “she’s not guilty of anything, of any blood, of anything!” He remembered afterwards that he was forcibly dragged away from her by several men, and that she was led out, and that when he recovered himself he was sitting at the table.
Facing him on the other side of the table sat Nikolay Parfenovitch, the investigating lawyer.
He kept persuading him to drink a little water out of a glass that stood on the table.
Be calm, don’t be frightened,” he added, extremely politely.
Mitya (he remembered it afterwards) became suddenly intensely interested in his big rings, one with an amethyst, and another with a transparent bright yellow stone, of great brilliance.
And long afterwards he remembered with wonder how those rings had riveted his attention through all those terrible hours of interrogation, so that he was utterly unable to tear himself away from them and dismiss them, as things that had nothing to do with his position.
On Mitya’s left side, in the place where Maximov had been sitting at the beginning of the evening, the prosecutor was now seated, and on Mitya’s right hand, where Grushenka had been, was a rosy-cheeked young man in a sort of shabby hunting-jacket, with ink and paper before him.
This was the secretary of the investigating lawyer, who had brought him with him.
The police captain was now standing by the window at the other end of the room, beside Kalganov, who was sitting there.
“Drink some water,” said the investigating lawyer softly, for the tenth time.
“I have drunk it, gentlemen, I have ... but ... come, gentlemen, crush me, punish me, decide my fate!” cried Mitya, staring with terribly fixed wide-open eyes at the investigating lawyer.
“So you positively declare that you are not guilty of the death of your father, Fyodor Pavlovitch?” asked the investigating lawyer, softly but insistently.
But it’s hard to have to answer for that murder with another, a terrible murder of which I am not guilty....
It’s a terrible accusation, gentlemen, a knock-down blow.
It’s marvelous, extraordinary, impossible.” “Yes, who can have killed him?” the investigating lawyer was beginning, but Ippolit Kirillovitch, the prosecutor, glancing at him, addressed Mitya.
“You need not worry yourself about the old servant, Grigory Vassilyevitch.
He is alive, he has recovered, and in spite of the terrible blows inflicted, according to his own and your evidence, by you, there seems no doubt that he will live, so the doctor says, at least.” “Alive?
He’s alive?” cried Mitya, flinging up his hands.
“Lord, I thank Thee for the miracle Thou has wrought for me, a sinner and evildoer.
He was almost breathless.
“So from this Grigory we have received such important evidence concerning you, that—” The prosecutor would have continued, but Mitya suddenly jumped up from his chair.
“One minute, gentlemen, for God’s sake, one minute; I will run to her—” “Excuse me, at this moment it’s quite impossible,” Nikolay Parfenovitch almost shrieked.
“Gentlemen, what a pity!
I wanted to see her for one minute only; I wanted to tell her that it has been washed away, it has gone, that blood that was weighing on my heart all night, and that I am not a murderer now!
Gentlemen, she is my betrothed!” he said ecstatically and reverently, looking round at them all.
“Oh, thank you, gentlemen!
That old man used to carry me in his arms, gentlemen.
He used to wash me in the tub when I was a baby three years old, abandoned by every one, he was like a father to me!...” “And so you—” the investigating lawyer began.
“Allow me, gentlemen, allow me one minute more,” interposed Mitya, putting his elbows on the table and covering his face with his hands.
“Let me have a moment to think, let me breathe, gentlemen.
All this is horribly upsetting, horribly.
A man is not a drum, gentlemen!” “Drink a little more water,” murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch.
His eyes were confident.
He seemed completely transformed in a moment.
His whole bearing was changed; he was once more the equal of these men, with all of whom he was acquainted, as though they had all met the day before, when nothing had happened, at some social gathering.
We may note in passing that, on his first arrival, Mitya had been made very welcome at the police captain’s, but later, during the last month especially, Mitya had hardly called at all, and when the police captain met him, in the street, for instance, Mitya noticed that he frowned and only bowed out of politeness.
His acquaintance with the prosecutor was less intimate, though he sometimes paid his wife, a nervous and fanciful lady, visits of politeness, without quite knowing why, and she always received him graciously and had, for some reason, taken an interest in him up to the last.
He had not had time to get to know the investigating lawyer, though he had met him and talked to him twice, each time about the fair sex.
“You’re a most skillful lawyer, I see, Nikolay Parfenovitch,” cried Mitya, laughing gayly, “but I can help you now.
Oh, gentlemen, I feel like a new man, and don’t be offended at my addressing you so simply and directly.
I believe I’ve had the honor and pleasure of meeting you, Nikolay Parfenovitch, at my kinsman Miüsov’s.
Gentlemen, gentlemen, I don’t pretend to be on equal terms with you.
I understand, of course, in what character I am sitting before you.
Oh, of course, there’s a horrible suspicion ... hanging over me ... if Grigory has given evidence....
A horrible suspicion!
It’s awful, awful, I understand that!
But to business, gentlemen, I am ready, and we will make an end of it in one moment; for, listen, listen, gentlemen!
Since I know I’m innocent, we can put an end to it in a minute.
Can’t we?” Mitya spoke much and quickly, nervously and effusively, as though he positively took his listeners to be his best friends.
“So, for the present, we will write that you absolutely deny the charge brought against you,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, impressively, and bending down to the secretary he dictated to him in an undertone what to write.
Well, write it; I consent, I give my full consent, gentlemen, only ... do you see?...
Of disorderly conduct I am guilty, of violence on a poor old man I am guilty.
And there is something else at the bottom of my heart, of which I am guilty, too—but that you need not write down” (he turned suddenly to the secretary); “that’s my personal life, gentlemen, that doesn’t concern you, the bottom of my heart, that’s to say....
I will prove you that and you’ll be convinced directly....
You will laugh, gentlemen.
You’ll laugh yourselves at your suspicion!...” “Be calm, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” said the investigating lawyer evidently trying to allay Mitya’s excitement by his own composure.
“Before we go on with our inquiry, I should like, if you will consent to answer, to hear you confirm the statement that you disliked your father, Fyodor Pavlovitch, that you were involved in continual disputes with him.
Here at least, a quarter of an hour ago, you exclaimed that you wanted to kill him: ‘I didn’t kill him,’ you said, ‘but I wanted to kill him.’” “Did I exclaim that?
Ach, that may be so, gentlemen!
Yes, unhappily, I did want to kill him ... many times I wanted to ... unhappily, unhappily!” “You wanted to.
Would you consent to explain what motives precisely led you to such a sentiment of hatred for your parent?” “What is there to explain, gentlemen?” Mitya shrugged his shoulders sullenly, looking down.
“I have never concealed my feelings.
Only lately I declared them in Father Zossima’s cell....
I nearly killed him, and I swore I’d come again and kill him, before witnesses....
Oh, a thousand witnesses!
I’ve been shouting it aloud for the last month, any one can tell you that!...
The fact stares you in the face, it speaks for itself, it cries aloud, but feelings, gentlemen, feelings are another matter.
You see, gentlemen”—Mitya frowned—“it seems to me that about feelings you’ve no right to question me.
I know that you are bound by your office, I quite understand that, but that’s my affair, my private, intimate affair, yet ... since I haven’t concealed my feelings in the past ... in the tavern, for instance, I’ve talked to every one, so ... so I won’t make a secret of it now.
You see, I understand, gentlemen, that there are terrible facts against me in this business.
I can make allowances for you, gentlemen, I can quite make allowances.
I’m struck all of a heap myself, for who can have murdered him, if not I?
Gentlemen, I want to know, I insist on knowing!” he exclaimed suddenly.
“Where was he murdered?
How was he murdered?
“We found him in his study, lying on his back on the floor, with his head battered in,” said the prosecutor.
“That’s horrible!” Mitya shuddered and, putting his elbows on the table, hid his face in his right hand.
“We will continue,” interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“So what was it that impelled you to this sentiment of hatred?
You have asserted in public, I believe, that it was based upon jealousy?” “Well, yes, jealousy.
And not only jealousy.” “Disputes about money?” “Yes, about money, too.” “There was a dispute about three thousand roubles, I think, which you claimed as part of your inheritance?” “Three thousand!
More, more,” cried Mitya hotly; “more than six thousand, more than ten, perhaps.
But I made up my mind to let it go at three thousand.
I was desperately in need of that three thousand ... so the bundle of notes for three thousand that I knew he kept under his pillow, ready for Grushenka, I considered as simply stolen from me.
Yes, gentlemen, I looked upon it as mine, as my own property....” The prosecutor looked significantly at the investigating lawyer, and had time to wink at him on the sly.
“We will return to that subject later,” said the lawyer promptly.
“You will allow us to note that point and write it down; that you looked upon that money as your own property?” “Write it down, by all means.
Do you know, gentlemen, you take me for a different sort of man from what I am,” he added, suddenly gloomy and dejected.
“You have to deal with a man of honor, a man of the highest honor; above all—don’t lose sight of it—a man who’s done a lot of nasty things, but has always been, and still is, honorable at bottom, in his inner being.
That’s just what’s made me wretched all my life, that I yearned to be honorable, that I was, so to say, a martyr to a sense of honor, seeking for it with a lantern, with the lantern of Diogenes, and yet all my life I’ve been doing filthy things like all of us, gentlemen ... that is like me alone.
Gentlemen, my head aches ...” His brows contracted with pain.
“You see, gentlemen, I couldn’t bear the look of him, there was something in him ignoble, impudent, trampling on everything sacred, something sneering and irreverent, loathsome, loathsome.
But now that he’s dead, I feel differently.” “How do you mean?” “I don’t feel differently, but I wish I hadn’t hated him so.” “You feel penitent?” “No, not penitent, don’t write that.
I’m not much good myself, I’m not very beautiful, so I had no right to consider him repulsive.
Write that down, if you like.” Saying this Mitya became very mournful.
He had grown more and more gloomy as the inquiry continued.
At that moment another unexpected scene followed.
Though Grushenka had been removed, she had not been taken far away, only into the room next but one from the blue room, in which the examination was proceeding.
It was a little room with one window, next beyond the large room in which they had danced and feasted so lavishly.
She was sitting there with no one by her but Maximov, who was terribly depressed, terribly scared, and clung to her side, as though for security.
At their door stood one of the peasants with a metal plate on his breast.
Grushenka was crying, and suddenly her grief was too much for her, she jumped up, flung up her arms and, with a loud wail of sorrow, rushed out of the room to him, to her Mitya, and so unexpectedly that they had not time to stop her.
Mitya, hearing her cry, trembled, jumped up, and with a yell rushed impetuously to meet her, not knowing what he was doing.
But they were not allowed to come together, though they saw one another.
He struggled, and tried to tear himself away.
She was seized too, and he saw her stretching out her arms to him, crying aloud as they carried her away.
When the scene was over, he came to himself again, sitting in the same place as before, opposite the investigating lawyer, and crying out to them: “What do you want with her?
At last Mihail Makarovitch, who had been absent, came hurriedly into the room, and said in a loud and excited voice to the prosecutor: “She’s been removed, she’s downstairs.
Will you allow me to say one word to this unhappy man, gentlemen?
In your presence, gentlemen, in your presence.” “By all means, Mihail Makarovitch,” answered the investigating lawyer.
“In the present case we have nothing against it.” “Listen, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, my dear fellow,” began the police captain, and there was a look of warm, almost fatherly, feeling for the luckless prisoner on his excited face.
“I took your Agrafena Alexandrovna downstairs myself, and confided her to the care of the landlord’s daughters, and that old fellow Maximov is with her all the time.
I impressed on her that you have to clear yourself, so she mustn’t hinder you, must not depress you, or you may lose your head and say the wrong thing in your evidence.
In fact, I talked to her and she understood.
She’s a sensible girl, my boy, a good-hearted girl, she would have kissed my old hands, begging help for you.
And I must go, my dear fellow, I must go and tell her that you are calm and comforted about her.
And so you must be calm, do you understand?
I was unfair to her; she is a Christian soul, gentlemen, yes, I tell you, she’s a gentle soul, and not to blame for anything.
So what am I to tell her, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?
Will you sit quiet or not?” The good-natured police captain said a great deal that was irregular, but Grushenka’s suffering, a fellow creature’s suffering, touched his good-natured heart, and tears stood in his eyes.
“Forgive me, gentlemen, oh, allow me, allow me!” he cried.
“You’ve the heart of an angel, an angel, Mihail Makarovitch, I thank you for her.
I will, I will be calm, cheerful, in fact.
Tell her, in the kindness of your heart, that I am cheerful, quite cheerful, that I shall be laughing in a minute, knowing that she has a guardian angel like you.
I shall have done with all this directly, and as soon as I’m free, I’ll be with her, she’ll see, let her wait.
Gentlemen,” he said, turning to the two lawyers, “now I’ll open my whole soul to you; I’ll pour out everything.
We’ll finish this off directly, finish it off gayly.
But, gentlemen, that woman is the queen of my heart.
I see I’m with honorable men.
And what have I, a penniless beggar, done for her?
Gentlemen, forgive me!
But now, now I am comforted.” And he sank back in his chair and, covering his face with his hands, burst into tears.
He recovered himself instantly.
They felt that the examination was passing into a new phase.
When the police captain went out, Mitya was positively gay.
“Now, gentlemen, I am at your disposal, entirely at your disposal.
And if it were not for all these trivial details, we should understand one another in a minute.
I’m at your disposal, gentlemen, but I declare that we must have mutual confidence, you in me and I in you, or there’ll be no end to it.
I speak in your interests.
To business, gentlemen, to business, and don’t rummage in my soul; don’t tease me with trifles, but only ask me about facts and what matters, and I will satisfy you at once.
The interrogation began again.
The Second Ordeal “You don’t know how you encourage us, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, by your readiness to answer,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, with an animated air, and obvious satisfaction beaming in his very prominent, short-sighted, light gray eyes, from which he had removed his spectacles a moment before.
“And you have made a very just remark about the mutual confidence, without which it is sometimes positively impossible to get on in cases of such importance, if the suspected party really hopes and desires to defend himself and is in a position to do so.
We, on our side, will do everything in our power, and you can see for yourself how we are conducting the case.
You approve, Ippolit Kirillovitch?” He turned to the prosecutor.
“Oh, undoubtedly,” replied the prosecutor.
His tone was somewhat cold, compared with Nikolay Parfenovitch’s impulsiveness.
I will note once for all that Nikolay Parfenovitch, who had but lately arrived among us, had from the first felt marked respect for Ippolit Kirillovitch, our prosecutor, and had become almost his bosom friend.
He was almost the only person who put implicit faith in Ippolit Kirillovitch’s extraordinary talents as a psychologist and orator and in the justice of his grievance.
He had heard of him in Petersburg.
On the other hand, young Nikolay Parfenovitch was the only person in the whole world whom our “unappreciated” prosecutor genuinely liked.
On their way to Mokroe they had time to come to an understanding about the present case.
And now as they sat at the table, the sharp-witted junior caught and interpreted every indication on his senior colleague’s face—half a word, a glance, or a wink.
“Gentlemen, only let me tell my own story and don’t interrupt me with trivial questions and I’ll tell you everything in a moment,” said Mitya excitedly.
But before we proceed to listen to your communication, will you allow me to inquire as to another little fact of great interest to us?
I mean the ten roubles you borrowed yesterday at about five o’clock on the security of your pistols, from your friend, Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin.” “I pledged them, gentlemen.
Didn’t you know?” The prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch exchanged glances.
“Well, how would it be if you began your story with a systematic description of all you did yesterday, from the morning onwards?
Allow us, for instance, to inquire why you were absent from the town, and just when you left and when you came back—all those facts.” “You should have asked me like that from the beginning,” cried Mitya, laughing aloud, “and, if you like, we won’t begin from yesterday, but from the morning of the day before; then you’ll understand how, why, and where I went.
I went the day before yesterday, gentlemen, to a merchant of the town, called Samsonov, to borrow three thousand roubles from him on safe security.
It was a pressing matter, gentlemen, it was a sudden necessity.” “Allow me to interrupt you,” the prosecutor put in politely.
“Why were you in such pressing need for just that sum, three thousand?” “Oh, gentlemen, you needn’t go into details, how, when and why, and why just so much money, and not so much, and all that rigmarole.
Why, it’ll run to three volumes, and then you’ll want an epilogue!” Mitya said all this with the good-natured but impatient familiarity of a man who is anxious to tell the whole truth and is full of the best intentions.
“Gentlemen!”—he corrected himself hurriedly—“don’t be vexed with me for my restiveness, I beg you again.
Believe me once more, I feel the greatest respect for you and understand the true position of affairs.
And, besides, being drunk would be no hindrance.
But I see, gentlemen, it’s not the proper thing to make jokes to you, till we’ve had our explanation, I mean.
I quite understand the difference for the moment.
I am, after all, in the position of a criminal, and so, far from being on equal terms with you.
And it’s your business to watch me.
I can’t expect you to pat me on the head for what I did to Grigory, for one can’t break old men’s heads with impunity.
I suppose you’ll put me away for him for six months, or a year perhaps, in a house of correction.
I don’t know what the punishment is—but it will be without loss of the rights of my rank, without loss of my rank, won’t it?
So you see, gentlemen, I understand the distinction between us....
But you must see that you could puzzle God Himself with such questions.
And even if it’s nonsense I’m talking now, let me finish, and you, gentlemen, being men of honor and refinement, will forgive me!
I’ll finish by asking you, gentlemen, to drop that conventional method of questioning.
I mean, beginning from some miserable trifle, how I got up, what I had for breakfast, how I spat, and where I spat, and so distracting the attention of the criminal, suddenly stun him with an overwhelming question, ‘Whom did you murder?
That’s your regulation method, that’s where all your cunning comes in.
You can put peasants off their guard like that, but not me.
You’re not angry, gentlemen?
You forgive my impertinence?” he cried, looking at them with a good-nature that was almost surprising.
“It’s only Mitya Karamazov, you know, so you can overlook it.
It would be inexcusable in a sensible man; but you can forgive it in Mitya.
Ha ha!” Nikolay Parfenovitch listened, and laughed too.
Though the prosecutor did not laugh, he kept his eyes fixed keenly on Mitya, as though anxious not to miss the least syllable, the slightest movement, the smallest twitch of any feature of his face.
“That’s how we have treated you from the beginning,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, still laughing.
“We haven’t tried to put you out by asking how you got up in the morning and what you had for breakfast.
We began, indeed, with questions of the greatest importance.” “I understand.
I saw it and appreciated it, and I appreciate still more your present kindness to me, an unprecedented kindness, worthy of your noble hearts.
We three here are gentlemen, and let everything be on the footing of mutual confidence between educated, well-bred people, who have the common bond of noble birth and honor.
In any case, allow me to look upon you as my best friends at this moment of my life, at this moment when my honor is assailed.
That’s no offense to you, gentlemen, is it?” “On the contrary.
You’ve expressed all that so well, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Nikolay Parfenovitch answered with dignified approbation.
“And enough of those trivial questions, gentlemen, all those tricky questions!” cried Mitya enthusiastically.
Is there?” “I will follow your sensible advice entirely,” the prosecutor interposed, addressing Mitya.
“I don’t withdraw my question, however.
It is now vitally important for us to know exactly why you needed that sum, I mean precisely three thousand.” “Why I needed it?...
Well, it was to pay a debt.” “A debt to whom?” “That I absolutely refuse to answer, gentlemen.
Not because I couldn’t, or because I shouldn’t dare, or because it would be damaging, for it’s all a paltry matter and absolutely trifling, but—I won’t, because it’s a matter of principle: that’s my private life, and I won’t allow any intrusion into my private life.
That’s my principle.
Your question has no bearing on the case, and whatever has nothing to do with the case is my private affair.
I wanted to pay a debt of honor but to whom I won’t say.” “Allow me to make a note of that,” said the prosecutor.
Write that I should think it dishonorable to say.
That is entirely a matter for your personal decision.
But it is our duty, on the other hand, in such cases as the present, to explain and set before you the degree of injury you will be doing yourself by refusing to give this or that piece of evidence.
After which I will beg you to continue.” “Gentlemen, I’m not angry ...
I ...” Mitya muttered in a rather disconcerted tone.
“Well, gentlemen, you see, that Samsonov to whom I went then ...” We will, of course, not reproduce his account of what is known to the reader already.
Mitya was impatiently anxious not to omit the slightest detail.
But as he gave his evidence it was written down, and therefore they had continually to pull him up.
Mitya disliked this, but submitted; got angry, though still good-humoredly.
He did, it is true, exclaim, from time to time, “Gentlemen, that’s enough to make an angel out of patience!” Or, “Gentlemen, it’s no good your irritating me.” But even though he exclaimed he still preserved for a time his genially expansive mood.
So he told them how Samsonov had made a fool of him two days before. (He had completely realized by now that he had been fooled.) The sale of his watch for six roubles to obtain money for the journey was something new to the lawyers.
They were at once greatly interested, and even, to Mitya’s intense indignation, thought it necessary to write the fact down as a secondary confirmation of the circumstance that he had hardly a farthing in his pocket at the time.
Then, after describing his journey to see Lyagavy, the night spent in the stifling hut, and so on, he came to his return to the town.
Here he began, without being particularly urged, to give a minute account of the agonies of jealousy he endured on Grushenka’s account.
He was heard with silent attention.
They inquired particularly into the circumstance of his having a place of ambush in Marya Kondratyevna’s house at the back of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s garden to keep watch on Grushenka, and of Smerdyakov’s bringing him information.
They laid particular stress on this, and noted it down.
Of his jealousy he spoke warmly and at length, and though inwardly ashamed at exposing his most intimate feelings to “public ignominy,” so to speak, he evidently overcame his shame in order to tell the truth.
The frigid severity, with which the investigating lawyer, and still more the prosecutor, stared intently at him as he told his story, disconcerted him at last considerably.
“That boy, Nikolay Parfenovitch, to whom I was talking nonsense about women only a few days ago, and that sickly prosecutor are not worth my telling this to,” he reflected mournfully.
‘Be patient, humble, hold thy peace.’” He wound up his reflections with that line.
But he pulled himself together to go on again.
When he came to telling of his visit to Madame Hohlakov, he regained his spirits and even wished to tell a little anecdote of that lady which had nothing to do with the case.
At last he reached the point in his story when he learned that Grushenka had deceived him and had returned from Samsonov’s as soon as he left her there, though she had said that she would stay there till midnight.
“If I didn’t kill Fenya then, gentlemen, it was only because I hadn’t time,” broke from him suddenly at that point in his story.
That, too, was carefully written down.
Mitya waited gloomily, and was beginning to tell how he ran into his father’s garden when the investigating lawyer suddenly stopped him, and opening the big portfolio that lay on the sofa beside him he brought out the brass pestle.
“Do you recognize this object?” he asked, showing it to Mitya.
“Oh, yes,” he laughed gloomily.
“Of course I recognize it.
Damn it, never mind!” “You have forgotten to mention it,” observed the investigating lawyer.
“Hang it all, I shouldn’t have concealed it from you.
It simply escaped my memory.” “Be so good as to tell us precisely how you came to arm yourself with it.” “Certainly I will be so good, gentlemen.” And Mitya described how he took the pestle and ran.
“But what object had you in view in arming yourself with such a weapon?” “What object?
He looked intently at “the boy” and smiled gloomily and malignantly.
He was feeling more and more ashamed at having told “such people” the story of his jealousy so sincerely and spontaneously.
“Bother the pestle!” broke from him suddenly.
In case anything turned up.” “But have you ever on previous occasions taken a weapon with you when you went out, since you’re afraid of the dark?” “Ugh! damn it all, gentlemen!
There’s positively no talking to you!” cried Mitya, exasperated beyond endurance, and turning to the secretary, crimson with anger, he said quickly, with a note of fury in his voice: “Write down at once ... at once ...
‘that I snatched up the pestle to go and kill my father ...
Fyodor Pavlovitch ... by hitting him on the head with it!’ Well, now are you satisfied, gentlemen?
Are your minds relieved?” he said, glaring defiantly at the lawyers.
“We quite understand that you made that statement just now through exasperation with us and the questions we put to you, which you consider trivial, though they are, in fact, essential,” the prosecutor remarked dryly in reply.
“Well, upon my word, gentlemen!
I snatched it up and ran—that’s all.
For to me, gentlemen, _passons_, or I declare I won’t tell you any more.” He sat with his elbows on the table and his head in his hand.
He sat sideways to them and gazed at the wall, struggling against a feeling of nausea.
He had, in fact, an awful inclination to get up and declare that he wouldn’t say another word, “not if you hang me for it.” “You see, gentlemen,” he said at last, with difficulty controlling himself, “you see.
It’s a dream I have sometimes, you know....
I often dream it—it’s always the same ... that some one is hunting me, some one I’m awfully afraid of ... that he’s hunting me in the dark, in the night ... tracking me, and I hide somewhere from him, behind a door or cupboard, hide in a degrading way, and the worst of it is, he always knows where I am, but he pretends not to know where I am on purpose, to prolong my agony, to enjoy my terror....
It’s just like that!” “Is that the sort of thing you dream about?” inquired the prosecutor.
Don’t you want to write it down?” said Mitya, with a distorted smile.
But still you do have curious dreams.” “It’s not a question of dreams now, gentlemen—this is realism, this is real life!
Well, hunt him down!” “You are wrong to make such comparisons ...” began Nikolay Parfenovitch, with extraordinary softness.
“No, I’m not wrong, not at all!” Mitya flared up again, though his outburst of wrath had obviously relieved his heart.
“You may not trust a criminal or a man on trial tortured by your questions, but an honorable man, the honorable impulses of the heart (I say that boldly!)—no!
Well, shall I go on?” he broke off gloomily.
“If you’ll be so kind,” answered Nikolay Parfenovitch.
The Third Ordeal Though Mitya spoke sullenly, it was evident that he was trying more than ever not to forget or miss a single detail of his story.
Clearly, precisely, distinctly, he described the feelings that troubled him during those moments in the garden when he longed so terribly to know whether Grushenka was with his father or not.
But, strange to say, both the lawyers listened now with a sort of awful reserve, looked coldly at him, asked few questions.
“They’re angry and offended,” he thought.
“Well, bother them!” When he described how he made up his mind at last to make the “signal” to his father that Grushenka had come, so that he should open the window, the lawyers paid no attention to the word “signal,” as though they entirely failed to grasp the meaning of the word in this connection: so much so, that Mitya noticed it.
Coming at last to the moment when, seeing his father peering out of the window, his hatred flared up and he pulled the pestle out of his pocket, he suddenly, as though of design, stopped short.
“Well?” said the investigating lawyer.
“You pulled out the weapon and ... and what happened then?” “Then?
Why, then I murdered him ... hit him on the head and cracked his skull....
That’s it!” His eyes suddenly flashed.
All his smothered wrath suddenly flamed up with extraordinary violence in his soul.
“Our story?” repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“My story, gentlemen?
But the devil was conquered.
I remember that very well.
I ran across the garden to the fence ... and there Grigory caught me, when I was sitting on the fence.” At that point he raised his eyes at last and looked at his listeners.
They seemed to be staring at him with perfectly unruffled attention.
A sort of paroxysm of indignation seized on Mitya’s soul.
“Why, you’re laughing at me at this moment, gentlemen!” he broke off suddenly.
“What makes you think that?” observed Nikolay Parfenovitch.
I understand, of course, that I have come to the vital point.
The old man’s lying there now with his skull broken, while I—after dramatically describing how I wanted to kill him, and how I snatched up the pestle—I suddenly run away from the window.
You are scoffers, gentlemen!” And he swung round on his chair so that it creaked.
“And did you notice,” asked the prosecutor suddenly, as though not observing Mitya’s excitement, “did you notice when you ran away from the window, whether the door into the garden was open?” “No, it was not open.” “It was not?” “It was shut.
Wait a bit!” he seemed suddenly to bethink himself, and almost with a start: “Why, did you find the door open?” “Yes, it was open.” “Why, who could have opened it if you did not open it yourselves?” cried Mitya, greatly astonished.
“The door stood open, and your father’s murderer undoubtedly went in at that door, and, having accomplished the crime, went out again by the same door,” the prosecutor pronounced deliberately, as though chiseling out each word separately.
“That is perfectly clear.
The murder was committed in the room and _not through the window_; that is absolutely certain from the examination that has been made, from the position of the body and everything.
There can be no doubt of that circumstance.” Mitya was absolutely dumbfounded.
“But that’s utterly impossible!” he cried, completely at a loss.
I tell you positively, definitely, the door was shut the whole time I was in the garden, and when I ran out of the garden.
I remember to the last minute.
And if I didn’t remember, it would be just the same.
I know it, for no one knew the signals except Smerdyakov, and me, and the dead man.
What signals?” asked the prosecutor, with greedy, almost hysterical, curiosity.
He instantly lost all trace of his reserve and dignity.
He asked the question with a sort of cringing timidity.
He scented an important fact of which he had known nothing, and was already filled with dread that Mitya might be unwilling to disclose it.
“So you didn’t know!” Mitya winked at him with a malicious and mocking smile.
No one knew about the signals except my father, Smerdyakov, and me: that was all.
But it’s an interesting fact.
Take comfort, gentlemen, I’ll reveal it.
You have to do with a prisoner who gives evidence against himself, to his own damage!
Yes, for I’m a man of honor and you—are not.” The prosecutor swallowed this without a murmur.
He was trembling with impatience to hear the new fact.
Minutely and diffusely Mitya told them everything about the signals invented by Fyodor Pavlovitch for Smerdyakov.
“So no one knew of the signals but your dead father, you, and the valet Smerdyakov?
And no one else?” Nikolay Parfenovitch inquired once more.
The valet Smerdyakov, and Heaven.
Besides, you will need God yourselves.” And they had already, of course, begun writing it down.
His silent stare lasted so long that it made the prosecutor blink.
“You’ve caught the fox again,” commented Mitya at last; “you’ve got the beast by the tail.
You thought, of course, that I should jump at that, catch at your prompting, and shout with all my might, ‘Aie! it’s Smerdyakov; he’s the murderer.’ Confess that’s what you thought.
Confess, and I’ll go on.” But the prosecutor did not confess.
I’m not going to shout ‘It’s Smerdyakov,’” said Mitya.
“And you don’t even suspect him?” “Why, do you suspect him?” “He is suspected, too.” Mitya fixed his eyes on the floor.
“Joking apart,” he brought out gloomily.
From the very beginning, almost from the moment when I ran out to you from behind the curtain, I’ve had the thought of Smerdyakov in my mind.
I’ve been sitting here, shouting that I’m innocent and thinking all the time ‘Smerdyakov!’ I can’t get Smerdyakov out of my head.
In fact, I, too, thought of Smerdyakov just now; but only for a second.
Almost at once I thought, ‘No, it’s not Smerdyakov.’ It’s not his doing, gentlemen.” “In that case is there anybody else you suspect?” Nikolay Parfenovitch inquired cautiously.
“I don’t know any one it could be, whether it’s the hand of Heaven or Satan, but ... not Smerdyakov,” Mitya jerked out with decision.
“But what makes you affirm so confidently and emphatically that it’s not he?” “From my conviction—my impression.
Because Smerdyakov is a man of the most abject character and a coward.
He’s not a coward, he’s the epitome of all the cowardice in the world walking on two legs.
When he talked to me, he was always trembling for fear I should kill him, though I never raised my hand against him.
He fell at my feet and blubbered; he has kissed these very boots, literally, beseeching me ‘not to frighten him.’ Do you hear?
‘Not to frighten him.’ What a thing to say!
He’s a puling chicken—sickly, epileptic, weak-minded—a child of eight could thrash him.
He has no character worth talking about.
It’s not Smerdyakov, gentlemen.
He doesn’t care for money; he wouldn’t take my presents.
Besides, what motive had he for murdering the old man?
But you are your father’s son, too, you know; yet you yourself told every one you meant to murder him.” “That’s a thrust!
Oh, gentlemen, isn’t it too base of you to say that to my face?
And, what’s more, I went out of my way to tell you of my own accord that I nearly murdered him.
But, you see, I didn’t murder him; you see, my guardian angel saved me—that’s what you’ve not taken into account.
He had not been so moved before during the whole interrogation.
“And what has he told you, gentlemen—Smerdyakov, I mean?” he added suddenly, after a pause.
“May I ask that question?” “You may ask any question,” the prosecutor replied with frigid severity, “any question relating to the facts of the case, and we are, I repeat, bound to answer every inquiry you make.
We found the servant Smerdyakov, concerning whom you inquire, lying unconscious in his bed, in an epileptic fit of extreme severity, that had recurred, possibly, ten times.
The doctor who was with us told us, after seeing him, that he may possibly not outlive the night.” “Well, if that’s so, the devil must have killed him,” broke suddenly from Mitya, as though until that moment he had been asking himself: “Was it Smerdyakov or not?” “We will come back to this later,” Nikolay Parfenovitch decided.
“Now, wouldn’t you like to continue your statement?” Mitya asked for a rest.
His request was courteously granted.
But he was evidently depressed.
He was exhausted, mortified and morally shaken.
Mitya was surprised.
Do you remember that precisely?
But why do you ask?” “Would you mind sitting on the chair just as you sat on the wall then and showing us just how you moved your arm, and in what direction?” “You’re making fun of me, aren’t you?” asked Mitya, looking haughtily at the speaker; but the latter did not flinch.
Mitya turned abruptly, sat astride on his chair, and swung his arm.
I don’t remember.” “You don’t remember?
I remember everything—every detail.
I jumped down to look at him, and wiped his face with my handkerchief.” “We have seen your handkerchief.
Did you hope to restore him to consciousness?” “I don’t know whether I hoped it.
I ran away thinking I’d killed him.
And now he’s recovered.” “Excellent,” commented the prosecutor.
Kindly proceed.” Alas! it never entered Mitya’s head to tell them, though he remembered it, that he had jumped back from pity, and standing over the prostrate figure had even uttered some words of regret: “You’ve come to grief, old man—there’s no help for it.
Well, there you must lie.” The prosecutor could only draw one conclusion: that the man had jumped back “at such a moment and in such excitement simply with the object of ascertaining whether the _only_ witness of his crime were dead; that he must therefore have been a man of great strength, coolness, decision and foresight even at such a moment,” ... and so on.
The prosecutor was satisfied: “I’ve provoked the nervous fellow by ‘trifles’ and he has said more than he meant to.” With painful effort Mitya went on.
But this time he was pulled up immediately by Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“How came you to run to the servant, Fedosya Markovna, with your hands so covered with blood, and, as it appears, your face, too?” “Why, I didn’t notice the blood at all at the time,” answered Mitya.
It does happen sometimes.” The prosecutor exchanged glances with Nikolay Parfenovitch.
You’re quite right there, prosecutor,” Mitya assented suddenly.
Next came the account of Mitya’s sudden determination to “step aside” and make way for their happiness.
But he could not make up his mind to open his heart to them as before, and tell them about “the queen of his soul.” He disliked speaking of her before these chilly persons “who were fastening on him like bugs.” And so in response to their reiterated questions he answered briefly and abruptly: “Well, I made up my mind to kill myself.
That question stared me in the face.
Her first rightful lover had come back, the man who wronged her but who’d hurried back to offer his love, after five years, and atone for the wrong with marriage....
And behind me disgrace, and that blood—Grigory’s....
Damn it all, gentlemen!
I wrote it at Perhotin’s when I loaded my pistols.
It’s not for you I tell it,” he added contemptuously.
He took it from his waistcoat pocket and flung it on the table.
The lawyers read it with curiosity, and, as is usual, added it to the papers connected with the case.
“And you didn’t even think of washing your hands at Perhotin’s?
You were not afraid then of arousing suspicion?” “What suspicion?
Suspicion or not, I should have galloped here just the same, and shot myself at five o’clock, and you wouldn’t have been in time to do anything.
If it hadn’t been for what’s happened to my father, you would have known nothing about it, and wouldn’t have come here.
It was the devil murdered father, it was through the devil that you found it out so soon.
It’s marvelous, a dream!” “Mr.
Perhotin informed us that when you came to him, you held in your hands ... your blood-stained hands ... your money ... a lot of money ... a bundle of hundred-rouble notes, and that his servant-boy saw it too.” “That’s true, gentlemen.
I remember it was so.” “Now, there’s one little point presents itself.
Can you inform us,” Nikolay Parfenovitch began, with extreme gentleness, “where did you get so much money all of a sudden, when it appears from the facts, from the reckoning of time, that you had not been home?” The prosecutor’s brows contracted at the question being asked so plainly, but he did not interrupt Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“No, I didn’t go home,” answered Mitya, apparently perfectly composed, but looking at the floor.
“Allow me then to repeat my question,” Nikolay Parfenovitch went on as though creeping up to the subject.
“Where were you able to procure such a sum all at once, when by your own confession, at five o’clock the same day you—” “I was in want of ten roubles and pledged my pistols with Perhotin, and then went to Madame Hohlakov to borrow three thousand which she wouldn’t give me, and so on, and all the rest of it,” Mitya interrupted sharply.
“Yes, gentlemen, I was in want of it, and suddenly thousands turned up, eh?
Do you know, gentlemen, you’re both afraid now ‘what if he won’t tell us where he got it?’ That’s just how it is.
I’m not going to tell you, gentlemen.
You’ll never know,” said Mitya, chipping out each word with extraordinary determination.
“You must understand, Mr.
Karamazov, that it is of vital importance for us to know,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, softly and suavely.
“I understand; but still I won’t tell you.” The prosecutor, too, intervened, and again reminded the prisoner that he was at liberty to refuse to answer questions, if he thought it to his interest, and so on.
But in view of the damage he might do himself by his silence, especially in a case of such importance as— “And so on, gentlemen, and so on.
I’ve heard that rigmarole before,” Mitya interrupted again.
“I can see for myself how important it is, and that this is the vital point, and still I won’t say.” “What is it to us?
It’s not our business, but yours.
You are doing yourself harm,” observed Nikolay Parfenovitch nervously.
“You see, gentlemen, joking apart”—Mitya lifted his eyes and looked firmly at them both—“I had an inkling from the first that we should come to loggerheads at this point.
But at first when I began to give my evidence, it was all still far away and misty; it was all floating, and I was so simple that I began with the supposition of mutual confidence existing between us.
Now I can see for myself that such confidence is out of the question, for in any case we were bound to come to this cursed stumbling-block.
It’s impossible and there’s an end of it!
I understand that, of course.” He relapsed into gloomy silence.
“Couldn’t you, without abandoning your resolution to be silent about the chief point, could you not, at the same time, give us some slight hint as to the nature of the motives which are strong enough to induce you to refuse to answer, at a crisis so full of danger to you?” Mitya smiled mournfully, almost dreamily.
“I’m much more good-natured than you think, gentlemen.
I won’t speak of that, gentlemen, because it would be a stain on my honor.
The answer to the question where I got the money would expose me to far greater disgrace than the murder and robbing of my father, if I had murdered and robbed him.
I can’t for fear of disgrace.
What, gentlemen, are you going to write that down?” “Yes, we’ll write it down,” lisped Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“You ought not to write that down about ‘disgrace.’ I only told you that in the goodness of my heart.
Oh, well, write—write what you like,” he concluded, with scornful disgust.
“I’m not afraid of you and I can still hold up my head before you.” “And can’t you tell us the nature of that disgrace?” Nikolay Parfenovitch hazarded.
The prosecutor frowned darkly.
“No, no, _c’est fini_, don’t trouble yourselves.
I’m not going on.” This was said too peremptorily.
Nikolay Parfenovitch did not insist further, but from Ippolit Kirillovitch’s eyes he saw that he had not given up hope.
Perhotin’s—how many roubles exactly?” “I can’t tell you that.” “You spoke to Mr.
Perhotin, I believe, of having received three thousand from Madame Hohlakov.” “Perhaps I did.
But I’ll tell you if you like.” He proceeded to do so, but we won’t repeat his story.
Of the raptures of his love he said nothing, but told them that he abandoned his determination to shoot himself, owing to “new factors in the case.” He told the story without going into motives or details.
It was obvious that there was no essential point of interest to them here.
We will come back to it during the examination of the witnesses, which will, of course, take place in your presence,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch in conclusion.
“And now allow me to request you to lay on the table everything in your possession, especially all the money you still have about you.” “My money, gentlemen?
I understand that that is necessary.
I’m surprised, indeed, that you haven’t inquired about it before.
It’s true I couldn’t get away anywhere.
That’s all, I think.” He turned it all out of his pockets; even the small change—two pieces of twenty copecks—he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket.
They counted the money, which amounted to eight hundred and thirty-six roubles, and forty copecks.
“And is that all?” asked the investigating lawyer.
“Yes.” “You stated just now in your evidence that you spent three hundred roubles at Plotnikovs’.
You gave Perhotin ten, your driver twenty, here you lost two hundred, then....” Nikolay Parfenovitch reckoned it all up.
They recollected every farthing and included it in the reckoning.
Nikolay Parfenovitch hurriedly added up the total.
“How is it they all assert there was much more?” “Let them assert it.” “But you asserted it yourself.” “Yes, I did, too.” “We will compare all this with the evidence of other persons not yet examined.
It will be properly taken care of and be at your disposal at the conclusion of ... what is beginning ... if it appears, or, so to speak, is proved that you have undisputed right to it.
Well, and now....” Nikolay Parfenovitch suddenly got up, and informed Mitya firmly that it was his duty and obligation to conduct a minute and thorough search “of your clothes and everything else....” “By all means, gentlemen.
“It will be necessary to take off your clothes, too.” “What!
Can’t you?” “It’s utterly impossible, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
You must take off your clothes.” “As you like,” Mitya submitted gloomily; “only, please, not here, but behind the curtains.
Who will search them?” “Behind the curtains, of course.” Nikolay Parfenovitch bent his head in assent.
His small face wore an expression of peculiar solemnity.
The Prosecutor Catches Mitya Something utterly unexpected and amazing to Mitya followed.
He could never, even a minute before, have conceived that any one could behave like that to him, Mitya Karamazov.
What was worst of all, there was something humiliating in it, and on their side something “supercilious and scornful.” It was nothing to take off his coat, but he was asked to undress further, or rather not asked but “commanded,” he quite understood that.
From pride and contempt he submitted without a word.
Several peasants accompanied the lawyers and remained on the same side of the curtain.
“To be ready if force is required,” thought Mitya, “and perhaps for some other reason, too.” “Well, must I take off my shirt, too?” he asked sharply, but Nikolay Parfenovitch did not answer.
He was busily engaged with the prosecutor in examining the coat, the trousers, the waistcoat and the cap; and it was evident that they were both much interested in the scrutiny.
“They make no bones about it,” thought Mitya, “they don’t keep up the most elementary politeness.” “I ask you for the second time—need I take off my shirt or not?” he said, still more sharply and irritably.
“Don’t trouble yourself.
We will tell you what to do,” Nikolay Parfenovitch said, and his voice was positively peremptory, or so it seemed to Mitya.
Meantime a consultation was going on in undertones between the lawyers.
There turned out to be on the coat, especially on the left side at the back, a huge patch of blood, dry, and still stiff.
There were bloodstains on the trousers, too.
Nikolay Parfenovitch, moreover, in the presence of the peasant witnesses, passed his fingers along the collar, the cuffs, and all the seams of the coat and trousers, obviously looking for something—money, of course.
He didn’t even hide from Mitya his suspicion that he was capable of sewing money up in his clothes.
“He treats me not as an officer but as a thief,” Mitya muttered to himself.
They communicated their ideas to one another with amazing frankness.
The secretary, for instance, who was also behind the curtain, fussing about and listening, called Nikolay Parfenovitch’s attention to the cap, which they were also fingering.
“You remember Gridyenko, the copying-clerk,” observed the secretary.
“Last summer he received the wages of the whole office, and pretended to have lost the money when he was drunk.
The hundred-rouble notes were screwed up in little rolls and sewed in the piping.” Both the lawyers remembered Gridyenko’s case perfectly, and so laid aside Mitya’s cap, and decided that all his clothes must be more thoroughly examined later.
“Excuse me,” cried Nikolay Parfenovitch, suddenly, noticing that the right cuff of Mitya’s shirt was turned in, and covered with blood, “excuse me, what’s that, blood?” “Yes,” Mitya jerked out.
“That is, what blood? ... and why is the cuff turned in?” Mitya told him how he had got the sleeve stained with blood looking after Grigory, and had turned it inside when he was washing his hands at Perhotin’s.
That’s very important as material evidence.” Mitya flushed red and flew into a rage.
“Don’t disturb yourself.
We will arrange something.
And meanwhile take off your socks.” “You’re not joking?
Is that really necessary?” Mitya’s eyes flashed.
“We are in no mood for joking,” answered Nikolay Parfenovitch sternly.
“Well, if I must—” muttered Mitya, and sitting down on the bed, he took off his socks.
He felt unbearably awkward.
All were clothed, while he was naked, and strange to say, when he was undressed he felt somehow guilty in their presence, and was almost ready to believe himself that he was inferior to them, and that now they had a perfect right to despise him.
“When all are undressed, one is somehow not ashamed, but when one’s the only one undressed and everybody is looking, it’s degrading,” he kept repeating to himself, again and again.
“It’s like a dream, I’ve sometimes dreamed of being in such degrading positions.” It was a misery to him to take off his socks.
They were very dirty, and so were his underclothes, and now every one could see it.
And what was worse, he disliked his feet.
He particularly loathed the coarse, flat, crooked nail on the right one, and now they would all see it.
Feeling intolerably ashamed made him, at once and intentionally, rougher.
“Would you like to look anywhere else if you’re not ashamed to?” “No, there’s no need to, at present.” “Well, am I to stay naked like this?” he added savagely.
You can wrap yourself in a quilt from the bed, and I ...
I’ll see to all this.” All the things were shown to the witnesses.
The report of the search was drawn up, and at last Nikolay Parfenovitch went out, and the clothes were carried out after him.
Ippolit Kirillovitch went out, too.
Mitya was left alone with the peasants, who stood in silence, never taking their eyes off him.
Nikolay Parfenovitch seemed to be gone a long time, “an insufferable time.” “He thinks of me as a puppy,” thought Mitya, gnashing his teeth.
“That rotten prosecutor has gone, too, contemptuous no doubt, it disgusts him to see me naked!” Mitya imagined, however, that his clothes would be examined and returned to him.
But what was his indignation when Nikolay Parfenovitch came back with quite different clothes, brought in behind him by a peasant.
“Here are clothes for you,” he observed airily, seeming well satisfied with the success of his mission.
Kalganov has kindly provided these for this unusual emergency, as well as a clean shirt.
You can keep your own socks and underclothes.” Mitya flew into a passion.
“I won’t have other people’s clothes!” he shouted menacingly, “give me my own!” “It’s impossible!” “Give me my own.
Damn Kalganov and his clothes, too!” It was a long time before they could persuade him.
But they succeeded somehow in quieting him down.
They impressed upon him that his clothes, being stained with blood, must be “included with the other material evidence,” and that they “had not even the right to let him have them now ... taking into consideration the possible outcome of the case.” Mitya at last understood this.
He subsided into gloomy silence and hurriedly dressed himself.
He merely observed, as he put them on, that the clothes were much better than his old ones, and that he disliked “gaining by the change.” The coat was, besides, “ridiculously tight.
Am I to be dressed up like a fool ... for your amusement?” They urged upon him again that he was exaggerating, that Kalganov was only a little taller, so that only the trousers might be a little too long.
But the coat turned out to be really tight in the shoulders.
I can hardly button it,” Mitya grumbled.
Kalganov from me that I didn’t ask for his clothes, and it’s not my doing that they’ve dressed me up like a clown.” “He understands that, and is sorry ...
I mean, not sorry to lend you his clothes, but sorry about all this business,” mumbled Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“Confound his sorrow!
Am I to go on sitting here?” He was asked to go back to the “other room.” Mitya went in, scowling with anger, and trying to avoid looking at any one.
Dressed in another man’s clothes he felt himself disgraced, even in the eyes of the peasants, and of Trifon Borissovitch, whose face appeared, for some reason, in the doorway, and vanished immediately.
He had an absurd nightmarish feeling, as though he were out of his mind.
That’s all that’s left for you,” he said, clenching his teeth and addressing the prosecutor.
He would not turn to Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though he disdained to speak to him.
“He looked too closely at my socks, and turned them inside out on purpose to show every one how dirty they were—the scoundrel!” “Well, now we must proceed to the examination of witnesses,” observed Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though in reply to Mitya’s question.
“Yes,” said the prosecutor thoughtfully, as though reflecting on something.
“We’ve done what we could in your interest, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Nikolay Parfenovitch went on, “but having received from you such an uncompromising refusal to explain to us the source from which you obtained the money found upon you, we are, at the present moment—” “What is the stone in your ring?” Mitya interrupted suddenly, as though awakening from a reverie.
He pointed to one of the three large rings adorning Nikolay Parfenovitch’s right hand.
“Ring?” repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch with surprise.
“Yes, that one ... on your middle finger, with the little veins in it, what stone is that?” Mitya persisted, like a peevish child.
“That’s a smoky topaz,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, smiling.
I’ll take it off ...” “No, don’t take it off,” cried Mitya furiously, suddenly waking up, and angry with himself.
Gentlemen, you’ve sullied my heart!
No, that’s not like Dmitri Karamazov, that he couldn’t do, and if I were guilty, I swear I shouldn’t have waited for your coming, or for the sunrise as I meant at first, but should have killed myself before this, without waiting for the dawn!
I couldn’t have learnt so much in twenty years as I’ve found out in this accursed night!...
And should I have been like this on this night, and at this moment, sitting with you, could I have talked like this, could I have moved like this, could I have looked at you and at the world like this, if I had really been the murderer of my father, when the very thought of having accidentally killed Grigory gave me no peace all night—not from fear—oh, not simply from fear of your punishment!
And you expect me to be open with such scoffers as you, who see nothing and believe in nothing, blind moles and scoffers, and to tell you another nasty thing I’ve done, another disgrace, even if that would save me from your accusation!
But I can tell you it was not Dmitri Karamazov, and that’s all I can tell you, and that’s enough, enough, leave me alone....
Call your witnesses!” Mitya uttered his sudden monologue as though he were determined to be absolutely silent for the future.
I will not conceal from you that Grigory himself confidently affirms and bears witness that you must have run from that door, though, of course, he did not see you do so with his own eyes, since he only noticed you first some distance away in the garden, running towards the fence.” Mitya had leapt up from his chair half-way through this speech.
“Nonsense!” he yelled, in a sudden frenzy, “it’s a barefaced lie.
He’s lying!” “I consider it my duty to repeat that he is firm in his statement.
We’ve cross-examined him several times.” “Precisely.
I have cross-examined him several times,” Nikolay Parfenovitch confirmed warmly.
It’s either an attempt to slander me, or the hallucination of a madman,” Mitya still shouted.
He’s raving.” “Yes, but he noticed the open door, not when he came to after his injuries, but before that, as soon as he went into the garden from the lodge.” “But it’s false, it’s false!
He’s slandering me from spite....
The prosecutor turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and said to him impressively: “Confront him with it.” “Do you recognize this object?” Nikolay Parfenovitch laid upon the table a large and thick official envelope, on which three seals still remained intact.
The envelope was empty, and slit open at one end.
“It ... it must be that envelope of my father’s, the envelope that contained the three thousand roubles ... and if there’s inscribed on it, allow me, ‘For my little chicken’ ... yes—three thousand!” he shouted, “do you see, three thousand, do you see?” “Of course, we see.
It was empty, and lying on the floor by the bed, behind the screen.” For some seconds Mitya stood as though thunderstruck.
“Gentlemen, it’s Smerdyakov!” he shouted suddenly, at the top of his voice.
“It’s he who’s murdered him!
No one else knew where the old man hid the envelope.
It’s Smerdyakov, that’s clear, now!” “But you, too, knew of the envelope and that it was under the pillow.” “I never knew it.
I’d only heard of it from Smerdyakov....
He was the only one who knew where the old man kept it hidden, I didn’t know ...” Mitya was completely breathless.
“But you told us yourself that the envelope was under your deceased father’s pillow.
You especially stated that it was under the pillow, so you must have known it.” “We’ve got it written down,” confirmed Nikolay Parfenovitch.
What does Smerdyakov say?
What does Smerdyakov say? that’s the chief point....
I told you without thinking that it was under the pillow, and now you— Oh, you know how one says the wrong thing, without meaning it.
No one knew but Smerdyakov, only Smerdyakov, and no one else....
But it’s his doing, his doing; there’s no doubt about it, he murdered him, that’s as clear as daylight now,” Mitya exclaimed more and more frantically, repeating himself incoherently, and growing more and more exasperated and excited.
“You must understand that, and arrest him at once....
He must have killed him while I was running away and while Grigory was unconscious, that’s clear now....
He sank back helpless in his chair.
God is against me!” he exclaimed, staring before him in complete stupefaction.
“Come, you see,” the prosecutor went on with dignity, “and you can judge for yourself, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
On the one hand we have the evidence of the open door from which you ran out, a fact which overwhelms you and us.
On the other side your incomprehensible, persistent, and, so to speak, obdurate silence with regard to the source from which you obtained the money which was so suddenly seen in your hands, when only three hours earlier, on your own showing, you pledged your pistols for the sake of ten roubles!
In view of all these facts, judge for yourself.
And don’t accuse us of being ‘frigid, cynical, scoffing people,’ who are incapable of believing in the generous impulses of your heart....
Try to enter into our position ...” Mitya was indescribably agitated.
“Very well!” he exclaimed suddenly.
Received With Hisses “Gentlemen,” he began, still in the same agitation, “I want to make a full confession: that money was _my own_.” The lawyers’ faces lengthened.
That was not at all what they expected.
“How do you mean?” faltered Nikolay Parfenovitch, “when at five o’clock on the same day, from your own confession—” “Damn five o’clock on the same day and my own confession!
Yes, I consider that I practically stole it, but, if you prefer, I ‘appropriated it.’ I consider I stole it.
But you said that it’s a month since you ... obtained it?...” “Yes.
Let me tell you without interrupting.
You see, a month ago, I was sent for by Katerina Ivanovna, formerly my betrothed.
She’s a noble creature, noblest of the noble.
But she has hated me ever so long, oh, ever so long ... and hated me with good reason, good reason!” “Katerina Ivanovna!” Nikolay Parfenovitch exclaimed with wonder.
The prosecutor, too, stared.
I’m a scoundrel to bring her into it.
You’re unworthy even to know of that.
I need only tell you that she sent for me a month ago, gave me three thousand roubles to send off to her sister and another relation in Moscow (as though she couldn’t have sent it off herself!) and I ... it was just at that fatal moment in my life when I ... well, in fact, when I’d just come to love another, her, she’s sitting down below now, Grushenka.
I carried her off here to Mokroe then, and wasted here in two days half that damned three thousand, but the other half I kept on me.
Well, I’ve kept that other half, that fifteen hundred, like a locket round my neck, but yesterday I undid it, and spent it.
What’s left of it, eight hundred roubles, is in your hands now, Nikolay Parfenovitch.
That’s the change out of the fifteen hundred I had yesterday.” “Excuse me.
Why, when you were here a month ago you spent three thousand, not fifteen hundred, everybody knows that.” “Who knows it?
Did I let any one count it?” “Why, you told every one yourself that you’d spent exactly three thousand.” “It’s true, I did.
And here, at Mokroe, too, every one reckoned it was three thousand.
Yet I didn’t spend three thousand, but fifteen hundred.
That’s how it was, gentlemen.
That’s where I got that money yesterday....” “This is almost miraculous,” murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“Allow me to inquire,” observed the prosecutor at last, “have you informed any one whatever of this circumstance before, I mean that you had fifteen hundred left about you a month ago?” “I told no one.” “That’s strange.
Do you mean absolutely no one?” “Absolutely no one.
No one and nobody.” “What was your reason for this reticence?
Even admitting that it was an action in the highest degree discreditable, still, discreditable is not ‘disgraceful.’...
Many people have already guessed, during this last month, about the three thousand of Katerina Ivanovna’s, that you have spent, and I heard the legend myself, apart from your confession....
Mihail Makarovitch, for instance, had heard it, too, so that indeed, it was scarcely a legend, but the gossip of the whole town.
There are indications, too, if I am not mistaken, that you confessed this yourself to some one, I mean that the money was Katerina Ivanovna’s, and so, it’s extremely surprising to me that hitherto, that is, up to the present moment, you have made such an extraordinary secret of the fifteen hundred you say you put by, apparently connecting a feeling of positive horror with that secret....
It’s not easy to believe that it could cost you such distress to confess such a secret....
You cried out, just now, that Siberia would be better than confessing it ...” The prosecutor ceased speaking.
He did not conceal his vexation, which was almost anger, and gave vent to all his accumulated spleen, disconnectedly and incoherently, without choosing words.
“It’s not the fifteen hundred that’s the disgrace, but that I put it apart from the rest of the three thousand,” said Mitya firmly.
“Why?” smiled the prosecutor irritably.
“What is there disgraceful, to your thinking, in your having set aside half of the three thousand you had discreditably, if you prefer, ‘disgracefully,’ appropriated?
Your taking the three thousand is more important than what you did with it.
Can you explain that to us?” “Oh, gentlemen, the purpose is the whole point!” cried Mitya.
“I put it aside because I was vile, that is, because I was calculating, and to be calculating in such a case is vile ... and that vileness has been going on a whole month.” “It’s incomprehensible.” “I wonder at you.
Perhaps it really is incomprehensible.
I appropriate three thousand entrusted to my honor, I spend it on a spree, say I spend it all, and next morning I go to her and say, ‘Katya, I’ve done wrong, I’ve squandered your three thousand,’ well, is that right?
No, it’s not right—it’s dishonest and cowardly, I’m a beast, with no more self-control than a beast, that’s so, isn’t it?
Not a downright thief, you’ll admit!
I squandered it, but I didn’t steal it.
Now a second, rather more favorable alternative: follow me carefully, or I may get confused again—my head’s going round—and so, for the second alternative: I spend here only fifteen hundred out of the three thousand, that is, only half.
Next day I go and take that half to her: ‘Katya, take this fifteen hundred from me, I’m a low beast, and an untrustworthy scoundrel, for I’ve wasted half the money, and I shall waste this, too, so keep me from temptation!’ Well, what of that alternative?
I should be a beast and a scoundrel, and whatever you like; but not a thief, not altogether a thief, or I should not have brought back what was left, but have kept that, too.
So in that case I should be a scoundrel, but not a thief, you may say what you like, not a thief!” “I admit that there is a certain distinction,” said the prosecutor, with a cold smile.
“But it’s strange that you see such a vital difference.” “Yes, I see a vital difference!
Every man may be a scoundrel, and perhaps every man is a scoundrel, but not every one can be a thief, it takes an arch-scoundrel to be that.
Oh, of course, I don’t know how to make these fine distinctions ... but a thief is lower than a scoundrel, that’s my conviction.
Listen, I carry the money about me a whole month, I may make up my mind to give it back to-morrow, and I’m a scoundrel no longer, but I cannot make up my mind, you see, though I’m making up my mind every day, and every day spurring myself on to do it, and yet for a whole month I can’t bring myself to it, you see.
Is that right to your thinking, is that right?” “Certainly, that’s not right, that I can quite understand, and that I don’t dispute,” answered the prosecutor with reserve.
“And let us give up all discussion of these subtleties and distinctions, and, if you will be so kind, get back to the point.
And the point is, that you have still not told us, altogether we’ve asked you, why, in the first place, you halved the money, squandering one half and hiding the other?
I insist upon that question, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.” “Yes, of course!” cried Mitya, striking himself on the forehead; “forgive me, I’m worrying you, and am not explaining the chief point, or you’d understand in a minute, for it’s just the motive of it that’s the disgrace!
He was always pestering Agrafena Alexandrovna, and I was jealous; I thought then that she was hesitating between me and him.
So I kept thinking every day, suppose she were to make up her mind all of a sudden, suppose she were to leave off tormenting me, and were suddenly to say to me, ‘I love you, not him; take me to the other end of the world.’ And I’d only forty copecks; how could I take her away, what could I do?
You see, I didn’t know her then, I didn’t understand her, I thought she wanted money, and that she wouldn’t forgive my poverty.
And so I fiendishly counted out the half of that three thousand, sewed it up, calculating on it, sewed it up before I was drunk, and after I had sewn it up, I went off to get drunk on the rest.
Do you understand now?” Both the lawyers laughed aloud.
“I should have called it sensible and moral on your part not to have squandered it all,” chuckled Nikolay Parfenovitch, “for after all what does it amount to?” “Why, that I stole it, that’s what it amounts to!
Oh, God, you horrify me by not understanding!
Every day that I had that fifteen hundred sewn up round my neck, every day and every hour I said to myself, ‘You’re a thief! you’re a thief!’ Yes, that’s why I’ve been so savage all this month, that’s why I fought in the tavern, that’s why I attacked my father, it was because I felt I was a thief.
I couldn’t make up my mind, I didn’t dare even to tell Alyosha, my brother, about that fifteen hundred: I felt I was such a scoundrel and such a pickpocket.
But, do you know, while I carried it I said to myself at the same time every hour: ‘No, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, you may yet not be a thief.’ Why?
And only yesterday I made up my mind to tear my amulet off my neck, on my way from Fenya’s to Perhotin.
And it was only when I tore it off that I became a downright thief, a thief and a dishonest man for the rest of my life.
Because, with that I destroyed, too, my dream of going to Katya and saying, ‘I’m a scoundrel, but not a thief!’ Do you understand now?
Do you understand?” “What was it made you decide to do it yesterday?” Nikolay Parfenovitch interrupted.
Because I had condemned myself to die at five o’clock this morning, here, at dawn.
I thought it made no difference whether I died a thief or a man of honor.
But I see it’s not so, it turns out that it does make a difference.
Believe me, gentlemen, what has tortured me most during this night has not been the thought that I’d killed the old servant, and that I was in danger of Siberia just when my love was being rewarded, and Heaven was open to me again.
Oh, that did torture me, but not in the same way: not so much as the damned consciousness that I had torn that damned money off my breast at last and spent it, and had become a downright thief!
Oh, gentlemen, I tell you again, with a bleeding heart, I have learnt a great deal this night.
I have learnt that it’s not only impossible to live a scoundrel, but impossible to die a scoundrel....
No, gentlemen, one must die honest....” Mitya was pale.
His face had a haggard and exhausted look, in spite of his being intensely excited.
“I am beginning to understand you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” the prosecutor said slowly, in a soft and almost compassionate tone.
“But all this, if you’ll excuse my saying so, is a matter of nerves, in my opinion ... your overwrought nerves, that’s what it is.
And why, for instance, should you not have saved yourself such misery for almost a month, by going and returning that fifteen hundred to the lady who had entrusted it to you?
I suppose you still regard that security as of value?” Mitya suddenly crimsoned.
“Surely you don’t think me such an out and out scoundrel as that?
You can’t be speaking in earnest?” he said, with indignation, looking the prosecutor straight in the face, and seeming unable to believe his ears.
Why do you imagine I’m not serious?” It was the prosecutor’s turn to be surprised.
Gentlemen, do you know, you are torturing me!
Let me tell you everything, so be it.
I’ll confess all my infernal wickedness, but to put you to shame, and you’ll be surprised yourselves at the depth of ignominy to which a medley of human passions can sink.
You must know that I already had that plan myself, that plan you spoke of, just now, prosecutor!
Yes, gentlemen, I, too, have had that thought in my mind all this current month, so that I was on the point of deciding to go to Katya—I was mean enough for that.
But to go to her, to tell her of my treachery, and for that very treachery, to carry it out, for the expenses of that treachery, to beg for money from her, Katya (to beg, do you hear, to beg), and go straight from her to run away with the other, the rival, who hated and insulted her—to think of it!
You must be mad, prosecutor!” “Mad I am not, but I did speak in haste, without thinking ... of that feminine jealousy ... if there could be jealousy in this case, as you assert ... yes, perhaps there is something of the kind,” said the prosecutor, smiling.
“But that would have been so infamous!” Mitya brought his fist down on the table fiercely.
“That would have been filthy beyond everything!
Yes, do you know that she might have given me that money, yes, and she would have given it, too; she’d have been certain to give it, to be revenged on me, she’d have given it to satisfy her vengeance, to show her contempt for me, for hers is an infernal nature, too, and she’s a woman of great wrath.
Forgive me, gentlemen, I’m making such an outcry because I’ve had that thought in my mind so lately, only the day before yesterday, that night when I was having all that bother with Lyagavy, and afterwards yesterday, all day yesterday, I remember, till that happened ...” “Till what happened?” put in Nikolay Parfenovitch inquisitively, but Mitya did not hear it.
“I have made you an awful confession,” Mitya said gloomily in conclusion.
“You must appreciate it, and what’s more, you must respect it, for if not, if that leaves your souls untouched, then you’ve simply no respect for me, gentlemen, I tell you that, and I shall die of shame at having confessed it to men like you!
“Yes, what you said just now,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, looking at him in surprise, “that is, that up to the last hour you were still contemplating going to Katerina Ivanovna to beg that sum from her....
I assure you, that’s a very important piece of evidence for us, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, I mean for the whole case ... and particularly for you, particularly important for you.” “Have mercy, gentlemen!” Mitya flung up his hands.
Here I’ve torn my heart asunder before you, and you seize the opportunity and are fingering the wounds in both halves....
“Don’t worry yourself so, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” observed the prosecutor, “everything that is written down will be read over to you afterwards, and what you don’t agree to we’ll alter as you like.
But now I’ll ask you one little question for the second time.
Has no one, absolutely no one, heard from you of that money you sewed up?
That, I must tell you, is almost impossible to believe.” “No one, no one, I told you so before, or you’ve not understood anything!
Let me alone!” “Very well, this matter is bound to be explained, and there’s plenty of time for it, but meantime, consider; we have perhaps a dozen witnesses that you yourself spread it abroad, and even shouted almost everywhere about the three thousand you’d spent here; three thousand, not fifteen hundred.
And now, too, when you got hold of the money you had yesterday, you gave many people to understand that you had brought three thousand with you.” “You’ve got not dozens, but hundreds of witnesses, two hundred witnesses, two hundred have heard it, thousands have heard it!” cried Mitya.
And the word _all_ means something.” “It means nothing.
I talked rot, and every one began repeating it.” “But what need had you to ‘talk rot,’ as you call it?” “The devil knows.
To try and forget that money I had sewn up, perhaps ... yes, that was why ... damn it ... how often will you ask me that question?
What does a man tell lies for sometimes?” “That’s very difficult to decide, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, what makes a man tell lies,” observed the prosecutor impressively.
“Tell me, though, was that ‘amulet,’ as you call it, on your neck, a big thing?” “No, not big.” “How big, for instance?” “If you fold a hundred-rouble note in half, that would be the size.” “You’d better show us the remains of it.
You must have them somewhere.” “Damnation, what nonsense!
According to your own evidence you didn’t go home.” “When I was going from Fenya’s to Perhotin’s, on the way I tore it off my neck and took out the money.” “In the dark?” “What should I want a light for?
I did it with my fingers in one minute.” “Without scissors, in the street?” “In the market-place I think it was.
It was torn in a minute.” “Where did you put it afterwards?” “I dropped it there.” “Where was it, exactly?” “In the market-place, in the market-place!
The devil knows whereabouts.
What do you want to know for?” “That’s extremely important, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
It would be material evidence in your favor.
How is it you don’t understand that?
No knowledge was needed to do that.” “Where did you get the material, that is, the rag in which you sewed the money?” “Are you laughing at me?” “Not at all.
And we are in no mood for laughing, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.” “I don’t know where I got the rag from—somewhere, I suppose.” “I should have thought you couldn’t have forgotten it?” “Upon my word, I don’t remember.
I might have torn a bit off my linen.” “That’s very interesting.
We might find in your lodgings to-morrow the shirt or whatever it is from which you tore the rag.
What sort of rag was it, cloth or linen?” “Goodness only knows what it was.
I believe I didn’t tear it off anything.
I believe I sewed it up in a cap of my landlady’s.” “In your landlady’s cap?” “Yes.
I took it from her.” “How did you get it?” “You see, I remember once taking a cap for a rag, perhaps to wipe my pen on.
I took it without asking, because it was a worthless rag.
An old piece of calico, washed a thousand times.” “And you remember that for certain now?” “I don’t know whether for certain.
But, hang it, what does it matter?” “In that case your landlady will remember that the thing was lost?” “No, she won’t, she didn’t miss it.
It was an old rag, I tell you, an old rag not worth a farthing.” “And where did you get the needle and thread?” “I’ll stop now.
“It’s strange that you should have so completely forgotten where you threw the pieces in the market-place.” “Give orders for the market-place to be swept to-morrow, and perhaps you’ll find it,” said Mitya, sneering.
“Enough, gentlemen, enough!” he decided, in an exhausted voice.
Why, why did I degrade myself by confessing my secret to you?
You led me on to it, prosecutor?
Damn you, you torturers!” He bent his head, and hid his face in his hands.
A minute later he raised his head and looked at them almost vacantly.
His face now expressed complete, hopeless despair, and he sat mute and passive as though hardly conscious of what was happening.
In the meantime they had to finish what they were about.
They had immediately to begin examining the witnesses.
The lights had been extinguished long ago.
Mihail Makarovitch and Kalganov, who had been continually in and out of the room all the while the interrogation had been going on, had now both gone out again.
It was a wretched morning, the whole sky was overcast, and the rain streamed down in bucketfuls.
“May I look out of the window?” he asked Nikolay Parfenovitch, suddenly.
The rain lashed against its little greenish panes.
“Perhaps it would be even better on a morning like this,” he thought with a smile, and suddenly, flinging his hand downwards, he turned to his “torturers.” “Gentlemen,” he cried, “I see that I am lost!
She’s innocent, you know, she was out of her mind when she cried last night ‘It’s all my fault!’ She’s done nothing, nothing!
I’ve been grieving over her all night as I sat with you....
Can’t you, won’t you tell me what you are going to do with her now?” “You can set your mind quite at rest on that score, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” the prosecutor answered at once, with evident alacrity.
“We have, so far, no grounds for interfering with the lady in whom you are so interested.
I trust that it may be the same in the later development of the case....
On the contrary, we’ll do everything that lies in our power in that matter.
Set your mind completely at rest.” “Gentlemen, I thank you.
I knew that you were honest, straight-forward people in spite of everything.
We must pass to examining the witnesses without delay.
That must be done in your presence and therefore—” “Shouldn’t we have some tea first?” interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch, “I think we’ve deserved it!” They decided that if tea were ready downstairs (Mihail Makarovitch had, no doubt, gone down to get some) they would have a glass and then “go on and on,” putting off their proper breakfast until a more favorable opportunity.
Mitya at first refused the glass that Nikolay Parfenovitch politely offered him, but afterwards he asked for it himself and drank it greedily.
He looked surprisingly exhausted.
It might have been supposed from his Herculean strength that one night of carousing, even accompanied by the most violent emotions, could have had little effect on him.
The Babe The examination of the witnesses began.
But we will not continue our story in such detail as before.
And so we will not dwell on how Nikolay Parfenovitch impressed on every witness called that he must give his evidence in accordance with truth and conscience, and that he would afterwards have to repeat his evidence on oath, how every witness was called upon to sign the protocol of his evidence, and so on.
We will only note that the point principally insisted upon in the examination was the question of the three thousand roubles, that is, was the sum spent here, at Mokroe, by Mitya on the first occasion, a month before, three thousand or fifteen hundred?
And again had he spent three thousand or fifteen hundred yesterday?
Alas, all the evidence given by every one turned out to be against Mitya.
There was not one in his favor, and some witnesses introduced new, almost crushing facts, in contradiction of his, Mitya’s, story.
The first witness examined was Trifon Borissovitch.
He had, on the contrary, an air of stern and severe indignation with the accused, which gave him an appearance of truthfulness and personal dignity.
He spoke little, and with reserve, waited to be questioned, answered precisely and deliberately.
Firmly and unhesitatingly he bore witness that the sum spent a month before could not have been less than three thousand, that all the peasants about here would testify that they had heard the sum of three thousand mentioned by Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself.
He wasted a thousand, I daresay, on them alone.” “I don’t believe I gave them five hundred,” was Mitya’s gloomy comment on this.
“It’s a pity I didn’t count the money at the time, but I was drunk....” Mitya was sitting sideways with his back to the curtains.
He listened gloomily, with a melancholy and exhausted air, as though he would say: “Oh, say what you like.
It makes no difference now.” “More than a thousand went on them, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” retorted Trifon Borissovitch firmly.
They were a rascally, thievish lot, horse-stealers, they’ve been driven away from here, or maybe they’d bear witness themselves how much they got from you.
We can judge of amounts....” As for the sum spent yesterday he asserted that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had told him, as soon as he arrived, that he had brought three thousand with him.
“Come now, is that so, Trifon Borissovitch?” replied Mitya.
“Surely I didn’t declare so positively that I’d brought three thousand?” “You did say so, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
And in the hall, when you were treating the chorus, you shouted straight out that you would leave your sixth thousand here—that is with what you spent before, we must understand.
Stepan and Semyon heard it, and Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov, too, was standing beside you at the time.
Maybe he’d remember it....” The evidence as to the “sixth” thousand made an extraordinary impression on the two lawyers.
They were delighted with this new mode of reckoning; three and three made six, three thousand then and three now made six, that was clear.
They questioned all the peasants suggested by Trifon Borissovitch, Stepan and Semyon, the driver Andrey, and Kalganov.
The peasants and the driver unhesitatingly confirmed Trifon Borissovitch’s evidence.
He began by saying that “he knew nothing about it and didn’t want to.” But it appeared that he had heard of the “sixth” thousand, and he admitted that he had been standing close by at the moment.
He affirmed that the Poles had cheated at cards.
In reply to reiterated questions he stated that, after the Poles had been turned out, Mitya’s position with Agrafena Alexandrovna had certainly improved, and that she had said that she loved him.
He spoke of Agrafena Alexandrovna with reserve and respect, as though she had been a lady of the best society, and did not once allow himself to call her Grushenka.
In spite of the young man’s obvious repugnance at giving evidence, Ippolit Kirillovitch examined him at great length, and only from him learnt all the details of what made up Mitya’s “romance,” so to say, on that night.
Mitya did not once pull Kalganov up.
At last they let the young man go, and he left the room with unconcealed indignation.
The Poles, too, were examined.
Though they had gone to bed in their room, they had not slept all night, and on the arrival of the police officers they hastily dressed and got ready, realizing that they would certainly be sent for.
They gave their evidence with dignity, though not without some uneasiness.
The little Pole turned out to be a retired official of the twelfth class, who had served in Siberia as a veterinary surgeon.
His name was Mussyalovitch.
Pan Vrublevsky turned out to be an uncertificated dentist.
It turned out that they could speak Russian quite correctly except for their accent in some words.
Of his relations with Grushenka, past and present, Pan Mussyalovitch spoke proudly and warmly, so that Mitya was roused at once and declared that he would not allow the “scoundrel” to speak like that in his presence!
Pan Mussyalovitch at once called attention to the word “scoundrel” and begged that it should be put down in the protocol.
And put down, too, that, in spite of the protocol I still declare that he’s a scoundrel!” he cried.
Though Nikolay Parfenovitch did insert this in the protocol, he showed the most praiseworthy tact and management.
After sternly reprimanding Mitya, he cut short all further inquiry into the romantic aspect of the case, and hastened to pass to what was essential.
Mitya observed hotly that he had not said that he would be sure to pay him the remainder next day in the town.
But Pan Vrublevsky confirmed the statement, and Mitya, after thinking for a moment admitted, frowning, that it must have been as the Poles stated, that he had been excited at the time, and might indeed have said so.
The prosecutor positively pounced on this piece of evidence.
It seemed to establish for the prosecution (and they did, in fact, base this deduction on it) that half, or a part of, the three thousand that had come into Mitya’s hands might really have been left somewhere hidden in the town, or even, perhaps, somewhere here, in Mokroe.
This would explain the circumstance, so baffling for the prosecution, that only eight hundred roubles were to be found in Mitya’s hands.
This circumstance had been the one piece of evidence which, insignificant as it was, had hitherto told, to some extent, in Mitya’s favor.
Now this one piece of evidence in his favor had broken down.
The prosecutor positively smiled at the “innocence of this subterfuge.” “And you imagine he would have accepted such a deed as a substitute for two thousand three hundred roubles in cash?” “He certainly would have accepted it,” Mitya declared warmly.
“Why, look here, he might have grabbed not two thousand, but four or six, for it.
He would have put his lawyers, Poles and Jews, on to the job, and might have got, not three thousand, but the whole property out of the old man.” The evidence of Pan Mussyalovitch was, of course, entered in the protocol in the fullest detail.
The incident of the cheating at cards was hardly touched upon.
Nikolay Parfenovitch was too well pleased with them, as it was, and did not want to worry them with trifles, moreover, it was nothing but a foolish, drunken quarrel over cards.
There had been drinking and disorder enough, that night....
So the two hundred roubles remained in the pockets of the Poles.
Then old Maximov was summoned.
He came in timidly, approached with little steps, looking very disheveled and depressed.
He had, all this time, taken refuge below with Grushenka, sitting dumbly beside her, and “now and then he’d begin blubbering over her and wiping his eyes with a blue check handkerchief,” as Mihail Makarovitch described afterwards.
The old man at once confessed that he had done wrong, that he had borrowed “ten roubles in my poverty,” from Dmitri Fyodorovitch, and that he was ready to pay it back.
To Nikolay Parfenovitch’s direct question, had he noticed how much money Dmitri Fyodorovitch held in his hand, as he must have been able to see the sum better than any one when he took the note from him, Maximov, in the most positive manner, declared that there was twenty thousand.
“Have you ever seen so much as twenty thousand before, then?” inquired Nikolay Parfenovitch, with a smile.
“To be sure I have, not twenty, but seven, when my wife mortgaged my little property.
She’d only let me look at it from a distance, boasting of it to me.
And Dmitri Fyodorovitch’s were all rainbow-colored....” He was not kept long.
At last it was Grushenka’s turn.
Nikolay Parfenovitch was obviously apprehensive of the effect her appearance might have on Mitya, and he muttered a few words of admonition to him, but Mitya bowed his head in silence, giving him to understand “that he would not make a scene.” Mihail Makarovitch himself led Grushenka in.
She entered with a stern and gloomy face, that looked almost composed and sat down quietly on the chair offered her by Nikolay Parfenovitch.
She was very pale, she seemed to be cold, and wrapped herself closely in her magnificent black shawl.
She was suffering from a slight feverish chill—the first symptom of the long illness which followed that night.
Her grave air, her direct earnest look and quiet manner made a very favorable impression on every one.
Nikolay Parfenovitch was even a little bit “fascinated.” He admitted himself, when talking about it afterwards, that only then had he seen “how handsome the woman was,” for, though he had seen her several times before, he had always looked upon her as something of a “provincial hetaira.” “She has the manners of the best society,” he said enthusiastically, gossiping about her in a circle of ladies.
But this was received with positive indignation by the ladies, who immediately called him a “naughty man,” to his great satisfaction.
As she entered the room, Grushenka only glanced for an instant at Mitya, who looked at her uneasily.
But her face reassured him at once.
After the first inevitable inquiries and warnings, Nikolay Parfenovitch asked her, hesitating a little, but preserving the most courteous manner, on what terms she was with the retired lieutenant, Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov.
To this Grushenka firmly and quietly replied: “He was an acquaintance.
She had never meant to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch, she had simply been laughing at him.
“I had no thoughts for either of them all this last month.
I was expecting another man who had wronged me.
But I think,” she said in conclusion, “that there’s no need for you to inquire about that, nor for me to answer you, for that’s my own affair.” Nikolay Parfenovitch immediately acted upon this hint.
He again dismissed the “romantic” aspect of the case and passed to the serious one, that is, to the question of most importance, concerning the three thousand roubles.
Grushenka confirmed the statement that three thousand roubles had certainly been spent on the first carousal at Mokroe, and, though she had not counted the money herself, she had heard that it was three thousand from Dmitri Fyodorovitch’s own lips.
“Did he tell you that alone, or before some one else, or did you only hear him speak of it to others in your presence?” the prosecutor inquired immediately.
To which Grushenka replied that she had heard him say so before other people, and had heard him say so when they were alone.
“Did he say it to you alone once, or several times?” inquired the prosecutor, and learned that he had told Grushenka so several times.
Ippolit Kirillovitch was very well satisfied with this piece of evidence.
Further examination elicited that Grushenka knew, too, where that money had come from, and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had got it from Katerina Ivanovna.
“And did you never, once, hear that the money spent a month ago was not three thousand, but less, and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had saved half that sum for his own use?” “No, I never heard that,” answered Grushenka.
It was explained further that Mitya had, on the contrary, often told her that he hadn’t a farthing.
“He was always expecting to get some from his father,” said Grushenka in conclusion.
“Did he never say before you ... casually, or in a moment of irritation,” Nikolay Parfenovitch put in suddenly, “that he intended to make an attempt on his father’s life?” “Ach, he did say so,” sighed Grushenka.
“Once or several times?” “He mentioned it several times, always in anger.” “And did you believe he would do it?” “No, I never believed it,” she answered firmly.
“I had faith in his noble heart.” “Gentlemen, allow me,” cried Mitya suddenly, “allow me to say one word to Agrafena Alexandrovna, in your presence.” “You can speak,” Nikolay Parfenovitch assented.
“Agrafena Alexandrovna!” Mitya got up from his chair, “have faith in God and in me.
Grushenka stood up and crossed herself devoutly before the ikon.
“Thanks be to Thee, O Lord,” she said, in a voice thrilled with emotion, and still standing, she turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and added: “As he has spoken now, believe it!
He’ll say anything as a joke or from obstinacy, but he’ll never deceive you against his conscience.
He’s telling the whole truth, you may believe it.” “Thanks, Agrafena Alexandrovna, you’ve given me fresh courage,” Mitya responded in a quivering voice.
As to the money spent the previous day, she declared that she did not know what sum it was, but had heard him tell several people that he had three thousand with him.
And to the question where he got the money, she said that he had told her that he had “stolen” it from Katerina Ivanovna, and that she had replied to that that he hadn’t stolen it, and that he must pay the money back next day.
On the prosecutor’s asking her emphatically whether the money he said he had stolen from Katerina Ivanovna was what he had spent yesterday, or what he had squandered here a month ago, she declared that he meant the money spent a month ago, and that that was how she understood him.
Mitya was calm, and even looked more cheerful, but only for a moment.
He felt more and more oppressed by a strange physical weakness.
The examination of the witnesses was, at last, over.
They proceeded to a final revision of the protocol.
Mitya got up, moved from his chair to the corner by the curtain, lay down on a large chest covered with a rug, and instantly fell asleep.
He was driving somewhere in the steppes, where he had been stationed long ago, and a peasant was driving him in a cart with a pair of horses, through snow and sleet.
He was cold, it was early in November, and the snow was falling in big wet flakes, melting as soon as it touched the earth.
He was not an old man, somewhere about fifty, and he had on a gray peasant’s smock.
Not far off was a village, he could see the black huts, and half the huts were burnt down, there were only the charred beams sticking up.
And as they drove in, there were peasant women drawn up along the road, a lot of women, a whole row, all thin and wan, with their faces a sort of brownish color, especially one at the edge, a tall, bony woman, who looked forty, but might have been only twenty, with a long thin face.
“It’s the babe,” answered the driver, “the babe weeping.” And Mitya was struck by his saying, in his peasant way, “the babe,” and he liked the peasant’s calling it a “babe.” There seemed more pity in it.
“But why is it weeping?” Mitya persisted stupidly, “why are its little arms bare?
Why?” foolish Mitya still persisted.
They’re begging because they’ve been burnt out.” “No, no,” Mitya, as it were, still did not understand.
Why don’t they feed the babe?” And he felt that, though his questions were unreasonable and senseless, yet he wanted to ask just that, and he had to ask it just in that way.
I won’t leave you now for the rest of my life, I’m coming with you,” he heard close beside him Grushenka’s tender voice, thrilling with emotion.
And his heart glowed, and he struggled forward towards the light, and he longed to live, to live, to go on and on, towards the new, beckoning light, and to hasten, hasten, now, at once!
Where?” he exclaimed opening his eyes, and sitting up on the chest, as though he had revived from a swoon, smiling brightly.
Nikolay Parfenovitch was standing over him, suggesting that he should hear the protocol read aloud and sign it.
Mitya guessed that he had been asleep an hour or more, but he did not hear Nikolay Parfenovitch.
He was suddenly struck by the fact that there was a pillow under his head, which hadn’t been there when he had leant back, exhausted, on the chest.
Who was so kind?” he cried, with a sort of ecstatic gratitude, and tears in his voice, as though some great kindness had been shown him.
He never found out who this kind man was; perhaps one of the peasant witnesses, or Nikolay Parfenovitch’s little secretary, had compassionately thought to put a pillow under his head; but his whole soul was quivering with tears.
He went to the table and said that he would sign whatever they liked.
“I’ve had a good dream, gentlemen,” he said in a strange voice, with a new light, as of joy, in his face.
In brief, Mitya was informed that he was, from that moment, a prisoner, and that he would be driven at once to the town, and there shut up in a very unpleasant place.
Mitya listened attentively, and only shrugged his shoulders.
“Well, gentlemen, I don’t blame you.
I understand that there’s nothing else for you to do.” Nikolay Parfenovitch informed him gently that he would be escorted at once by the rural police officer, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, who happened to be on the spot....
“Stay,” Mitya interrupted, suddenly, and impelled by uncontrollable feeling he pronounced, addressing all in the room: “Gentlemen, we’re all cruel, we’re all monsters, we all make men weep, and mothers, and babes at the breast, but of all, let it be settled here, now, of all I am the lowest reptile!
I understand now that such men as I need a blow, a blow of destiny to catch them as with a noose, and bind them by a force from without.
But the thunderbolt has fallen.
I accept the torture of accusation, and my public shame, I want to suffer and by suffering I shall be purified.
Perhaps I shall be purified, gentlemen?
I accept my punishment, not because I killed him, but because I meant to kill him, and perhaps I really might have killed him.
Good-by, gentlemen, don’t be vexed with me for having shouted at you during the examination.
In another minute I shall be a prisoner, but now, for the last time, as a free man, Dmitri Karamazov offers you his hand.
Saying good-by to you, I say it to all men.” His voice quivered and he stretched out his hand, but Nikolay Parfenovitch, who happened to stand nearest to him, with a sudden, almost nervous movement, hid his hands behind his back.
Mitya instantly noticed this, and started.
He let his outstretched hand fall at once.
“The preliminary inquiry is not yet over,” Nikolay Parfenovitch faltered, somewhat embarrassed.
“We will continue it in the town, and I, for my part, of course, am ready to wish you all success ... in your defense....
As a matter of fact, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, I’ve always been disposed to regard you as, so to speak, more unfortunate than guilty.
All of us here, if I may make bold to speak for all, we are all ready to recognize that you are, at bottom, a young man of honor, but, alas, one who has been carried away by certain passions to a somewhat excessive degree....” Nikolay Parfenovitch’s little figure was positively majestic by the time he had finished speaking.
It struck Mitya that in another minute this “boy” would take his arm, lead him to another corner, and renew their conversation about “girls.” But many quite irrelevant and inappropriate thoughts sometimes occur even to a prisoner when he is being led out to execution.
“Gentlemen, you are good, you are humane, may I see _her_ to say ‘good-by’ for the last time?” asked Mitya.
“Certainly, but considering ... in fact, now it’s impossible except in the presence of—” “Oh, well, if it must be so, it must!” Grushenka was brought in, but the farewell was brief, and of few words, and did not at all satisfy Nikolay Parfenovitch.
Grushenka made a deep bow to Mitya.
I will follow you for ever, wherever they may send you.
Farewell; you are guiltless, though you’ve been your own undoing.” Her lips quivered, tears flowed from her eyes.
“Forgive me, Grusha, for my love, for ruining you, too, with my love.” Mitya would have said something more, but he broke off and went out.
He was at once surrounded by men who kept a constant watch on him.
At the bottom of the steps to which he had driven up with such a dash the day before with Andrey’s three horses, two carts stood in readiness.
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, a sturdy, thick-set man with a wrinkled face, was annoyed about something, some sudden irregularity.
He was shouting angrily.
He asked Mitya to get into the cart with somewhat excessive surliness.
“When I stood him drinks in the tavern, the man had quite a different face,” thought Mitya, as he got in.
At the gates there was a crowd of people, peasants, women and drivers.
Trifon Borissovitch came down the steps too.
“Forgive me at parting, good people!” Mitya shouted suddenly from the cart.
“Good-by to you, too, Trifon Borissovitch!” But Trifon Borissovitch did not even turn round.
He, too, was shouting and fussing about something.
It appeared that everything was not yet ready in the second cart, in which two constables were to accompany Mavriky Mavrikyevitch.
The peasant who had been ordered to drive the second cart was pulling on his smock, stoutly maintaining that it was not his turn to go, but Akim’s.
The peasant persisted and besought them to wait.
“You see what our peasants are, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch.
They’ve no shame!” exclaimed Trifon Borissovitch.
“Akim gave you twenty-five copecks the day before yesterday.
I’m simply surprised at your good-nature, with our low peasants, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, that’s all I can say.” “But what do we want a second cart for?” Mitya put in.
“Let’s start with the one, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch.
I’m not ‘old fellow’ to you, and you can keep your advice for another time!” Mavriky Mavrikyevitch snapped out savagely, as though glad to vent his wrath.
A moment later he felt suddenly very cold.
The rain had ceased, but the dull sky was still overcast with clouds, and a keen wind was blowing straight in his face.
“I’ve taken a chill,” thought Mitya, twitching his shoulders.
At last Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, too, got into the cart, sat down heavily, and, as though without noticing it, squeezed Mitya into the corner.
It is true that he was out of humor and greatly disliked the task that had been laid upon him.
“Good-by, Trifon Borissovitch!” Mitya shouted again, and felt himself, that he had not called out this time from good-nature, but involuntarily, from resentment.
But Trifon Borissovitch stood proudly, with both hands behind his back, and staring straight at Mitya with a stern and angry face, he made no reply.
“Good-by, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, good-by!” he heard all at once the voice of Kalganov, who had suddenly darted out.
I shan’t forget your generosity,” he cried warmly.
Kalganov ran back, sat down in a corner, bent his head, hid his face in his hands, and burst out crying.
Oh, he believed almost without doubt in Mitya’s guilt.
What can men be after this?” he exclaimed incoherently, in bitter despondency, almost despair.
Is it worth it?” exclaimed the boy in his grief.
Kolya Krassotkin It was the beginning of November.
There had been a hard frost, eleven degrees Réaumur, without snow, but a little dry snow had fallen on the frozen ground during the night, and a keen dry wind was lifting and blowing it along the dreary streets of our town, especially about the market-place.
Not far from the market-place, close to Plotnikov’s shop, there stood a small house, very clean both without and within.
It belonged to Madame Krassotkin, the widow of a former provincial secretary, who had been dead for fourteen years.
She lived in respectable seclusion; she was of a soft but fairly cheerful disposition.
She was about eighteen at the time of her husband’s death; she had been married only a year and had just borne him a son.
From the day of his death she had devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of her precious treasure, her boy Kolya.
Though she had loved him passionately those fourteen years, he had caused her far more suffering than happiness.
She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost every day, afraid he would fall ill, would catch cold, do something naughty, climb on a chair and fall off it, and so on and so on.
When Kolya began going to school, the mother devoted herself to studying all the sciences with him so as to help him, and go through his lessons with him.
She hastened to make the acquaintance of the teachers and their wives, even made up to Kolya’s schoolfellows, and fawned upon them in the hope of thus saving Kolya from being teased, laughed at, or beaten by them.
She went so far that the boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt him with being a “mother’s darling.” But the boy could take his own part.
He was a resolute boy, “tremendously strong,” as was rumored in his class, and soon proved to be the fact; he was agile, strong-willed, and of an audacious and enterprising temper.
He was good at lessons, and there was a rumor in the school that he could beat the teacher, Dardanelov, at arithmetic and universal history.
Though he looked down upon every one, he was a good comrade and not supercilious.
He accepted his schoolfellows’ respect as his due, but was friendly with them.
He could restrain himself on occasion, and in his relations with the teachers he never overstepped that last mystic limit beyond which a prank becomes an unpardonable breach of discipline.
But he was as fond of mischief on every possible occasion as the smallest boy in the school, and not so much for the sake of mischief as for creating a sensation, inventing something, something effective and conspicuous.
He was extremely vain.
He knew how to make even his mother give way to him; he was almost despotic in his control of her.
The one thought unendurable to her was that her boy had no great love for her.
She was always fancying that Kolya was “unfeeling” to her, and at times, dissolving into hysterical tears, she used to reproach him with his coldness.
The boy disliked this, and the more demonstrations of feeling were demanded of him the more he seemed intentionally to avoid them.
Yet it was not intentional on his part but instinctive—it was his character.
His mother was mistaken; he was very fond of her.
He only disliked “sheepish sentimentality,” as he expressed it in his schoolboy language.
There was a bookcase in the house containing a few books that had been his father’s.
His mother did not mind that and only wondered sometimes at seeing the boy stand for hours by the bookcase poring over a book instead of going to play.
And in that way Kolya read some things unsuitable for his age.
Though the boy, as a rule, knew where to draw the line in his mischief, he had of late begun to play pranks that caused his mother serious alarm.
It is true there was nothing vicious in what he did, but a wild mad recklessness.
It happened that July, during the summer holidays, that the mother and son went to another district, forty-five miles away, to spend a week with a distant relation, whose husband was an official at the railway station (the very station, the nearest one to our town, from which a month later Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov set off for Moscow).
There Kolya began by carefully investigating every detail connected with the railways, knowing that he could impress his schoolfellows when he got home with his newly acquired knowledge.
But there happened to be some other boys in the place with whom he soon made friends.
Some of them were living at the station, others in the neighborhood; there were six or seven of them, all between twelve and fifteen, and two of them came from our town.
The boys played together, and on the fourth or fifth day of Kolya’s stay at the station, a mad bet was made by the foolish boys.
Kolya, who was almost the youngest of the party and rather looked down upon by the others in consequence, was moved by vanity or by reckless bravado to bet them two roubles that he would lie down between the rails at night when the eleven o’clock train was due, and would lie there without moving while the train rolled over him at full speed.
It is true they made a preliminary investigation, from which it appeared that it was possible to lie so flat between the rails that the train could pass over without touching, but to lie there was no joke!
Kolya maintained stoutly that he would.
At first they laughed at him, called him a little liar, a braggart, but that only egged him on.
What piqued him most was that these boys of fifteen turned up their noses at him too superciliously, and were at first disposed to treat him as “a small boy,” not fit to associate with them, and that was an unendurable insult.
And so it was resolved to go in the evening, half a mile from the station, so that the train might have time to get up full speed after leaving the station.
The five others who had taken the bet waited among the bushes below the embankment, their hearts beating with suspense, which was followed by alarm and remorse.
At last they heard in the distance the rumble of the train leaving the station.
Two red lights gleamed out of the darkness; the monster roared as it approached.
“Run, run away from the rails,” the boys cried to Kolya from the bushes, breathless with terror.
He suddenly got up and walked away without a word.
Then he explained that he had lain there as though he were insensible to frighten them, but the fact was that he really had lost consciousness, as he confessed long after to his mother.
In this way his reputation as “a desperate character,” was established for ever.
He returned home to the station as white as a sheet.
The incident did not become known at once, but when they came back to the town it penetrated to the school and even reached the ears of the masters.
But then Kolya’s mother hastened to entreat the masters on her boy’s behalf, and in the end Dardanelov, a respected and influential teacher, exerted himself in his favor, and the affair was ignored.
Dardanelov was a middle-aged bachelor, who had been passionately in love with Madame Krassotkin for many years past, and had once already, about a year previously, ventured, trembling with fear and the delicacy of his sentiments, to offer her most respectfully his hand in marriage.
But she refused him resolutely, feeling that to accept him would be an act of treachery to her son, though Dardanelov had, to judge from certain mysterious symptoms, reason for believing that he was not an object of aversion to the charming but too chaste and tender-hearted widow.
Kolya’s mad prank seemed to have broken the ice, and Dardanelov was rewarded for his intercession by a suggestion of hope.
The suggestion, it is true, was a faint one, but then Dardanelov was such a paragon of purity and delicacy that it was enough for the time being to make him perfectly happy.
Kolya, too, kept him at a respectful distance.
He learned his lessons perfectly; he was second in his class, was reserved with Dardanelov, and the whole class firmly believed that Kolya was so good at universal history that he could “beat” even Dardanelov.
Kolya did indeed ask him the question, “Who founded Troy?” to which Dardanelov had made a very vague reply, referring to the movements and migrations of races, to the remoteness of the period, to the mythical legends.
But the question, “Who had founded Troy?” that is, what individuals, he could not answer, and even for some reason regarded the question as idle and frivolous.
But the boys remained convinced that Dardanelov did not know who founded Troy.
Kolya had read of the founders of Troy in Smaragdov, whose history was among the books in his father’s bookcase.
In the end all the boys became interested in the question, who it was that had founded Troy, but Krassotkin would not tell his secret, and his reputation for knowledge remained unshaken.
After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya’s attitude to his mother.
When Anna Fyodorovna (Madame Krassotkin) heard of her son’s exploit, she almost went out of her mind with horror.
She had such terrible attacks of hysterics, lasting with intervals for several days, that Kolya, seriously alarmed at last, promised on his honor that such pranks should never be repeated.
He swore on his knees before the holy image, and swore by the memory of his father, at Madame Krassotkin’s instance, and the “manly” Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six.
And all that day the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other’s arms sobbing.
Next day Kolya woke up as “unfeeling” as before, but he had become more silent, more modest, sterner, and more thoughtful.
Six weeks later, it is true, he got into another scrape, which even brought his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace, but it was a scrape of quite another kind, amusing, foolish, and he did not, as it turned out, take the leading part in it, but was only implicated in it.
His mother still fretted and trembled, but the more uneasy she became, the greater were the hopes of Dardanelov.
It must be noted that Kolya understood and divined what was in Dardanelov’s heart and, of course, despised him profoundly for his “feelings”; he had in the past been so tactless as to show this contempt before his mother, hinting vaguely that he knew what Dardanelov was after.
But from the time of the railway incident his behavior in this respect also was changed; he did not allow himself the remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak more respectfully of Dardanelov before his mother, which the sensitive woman at once appreciated with boundless gratitude.
But at the slightest mention of Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya’s presence, she would flush as pink as a rose.
At such moments Kolya would either stare out of the window scowling, or would investigate the state of his boots, or would shout angrily for “Perezvon,” the big, shaggy, mangy dog, which he had picked up a month before, brought home, and kept for some reason secretly indoors, not showing him to any of his schoolfellows.
I have forgotten, by the way, to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boy stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the son of Captain Snegiryov.
Ilusha had been defending his father when the schoolboys jeered at him, shouting the nickname “wisp of tow.” Chapter II.
Children And so on that frosty, snowy, and windy day in November, Kolya Krassotkin was sitting at home.
It had just struck eleven, and he particularly wanted to go out “on very urgent business,” but he was left alone in charge of the house, for it so happened that all its elder inmates were absent owing to a sudden and singular event.
Madame Krassotkin had let two little rooms, separated from the rest of the house by a passage, to a doctor’s wife with her two small children.
This lady was the same age as Anna Fyodorovna, and a great friend of hers.
Her husband, the doctor, had taken his departure twelve months before, going first to Orenburg and then to Tashkend, and for the last six months she had not heard a word from him.
Had it not been for her friendship with Madame Krassotkin, which was some consolation to the forsaken lady, she would certainly have completely dissolved away in tears.
And now, to add to her misfortunes, Katerina, her only servant, was suddenly moved the evening before to announce, to her mistress’s amazement, that she proposed to bring a child into the world before morning.
It seemed almost miraculous to every one that no one had noticed the probability of it before.
The astounded doctor’s wife decided to move Katerina while there was still time to an establishment in the town kept by a midwife for such emergencies.
As she set great store by her servant, she promptly carried out this plan and remained there looking after her.
By the morning all Madame Krassotkin’s friendly sympathy and energy were called upon to render assistance and appeal to some one for help in the case.
So both the ladies were absent from home, the Krassotkins’ servant, Agafya, had gone out to the market, and Kolya was thus left for a time to protect and look after “the kids,” that is, the son and daughter of the doctor’s wife, who were left alone.
Kolya was not afraid of taking care of the house, besides he had Perezvon, who had been told to lie flat, without moving, under the bench in the hall.
Every time Kolya, walking to and fro through the rooms, came into the hall, the dog shook his head and gave two loud and insinuating taps on the floor with his tail, but alas! the whistle did not sound to release him.
Kolya looked sternly at the luckless dog, who relapsed again into obedient rigidity.
The one thing that troubled Kolya was “the kids.” He looked, of course, with the utmost scorn on Katerina’s unexpected adventure, but he was very fond of the bereaved “kiddies,” and had already taken them a picture-book.
Krassotkin could, of course, have provided more diverting entertainment for them.
He could have made them stand side by side and played soldiers with them, or sent them hiding all over the house.
He had done so more than once before and was not above doing it, so much so that a report once spread at school that Krassotkin played horses with the little lodgers at home, prancing with his head on one side like a trace-horse.
But Krassotkin haughtily parried this thrust, pointing out that to play horses with boys of one’s own age, boys of thirteen, would certainly be disgraceful “at this date,” but that he did it for the sake of “the kids” because he liked them, and no one had a right to call him to account for his feelings.
But on this occasion he was in no mood for games.
He had very important business of his own before him, something almost mysterious.
Meanwhile time was passing and Agafya, with whom he could have left the children, would not come back from market.
He had several times already crossed the passage, opened the door of the lodgers’ room and looked anxiously at “the kids” who were sitting over the book, as he had bidden them.
Every time he opened the door they grinned at him, hoping he would come in and would do something delightful and amusing.
But Kolya was bothered and did not go in.
With this idea he put on his wadded winter overcoat with its catskin fur collar, slung his satchel round his shoulder, and, regardless of his mother’s constantly reiterated entreaties that he would always put on goloshes in such cold weather, he looked at them contemptuously as he crossed the hall and went out with only his boots on.
Perezvon, seeing him in his outdoor clothes, began tapping nervously, yet vigorously, on the floor with his tail.
Twitching all over, he even uttered a plaintive whine.
But Kolya, seeing his dog’s passionate excitement, decided that it was a breach of discipline, kept him for another minute under the bench, and only when he had opened the door into the passage, whistled for him.
The dog leapt up like a mad creature and rushed bounding before him rapturously.
Kolya opened the door to peep at “the kids.” They were both sitting as before at the table, not reading but warmly disputing about something.
The children often argued together about various exciting problems of life, and Nastya, being the elder, always got the best of it.
If Kostya did not agree with her, he almost always appealed to Kolya Krassotkin, and his verdict was regarded as infallible by both of them.
This time the “kids’” discussion rather interested Krassotkin, and he stood still in the passage to listen.
The children saw he was listening and that made them dispute with even greater energy.
“I shall never, never believe,” Nastya prattled, “that the old women find babies among the cabbages in the kitchen-garden.
It’s winter now and there are no cabbages, and so the old woman couldn’t have taken Katerina a daughter.” Kolya whistled to himself.
“Or perhaps they do bring babies from somewhere, but only to those who are married.” Kostya stared at Nastya and listened, pondering profoundly.
“How can Katerina have a baby when she isn’t married?” Nastya was exasperated.
“You know nothing about it,” she snapped irritably.
“Perhaps she has a husband, only he is in prison, so now she’s got a baby.” “But is her husband in prison?” the matter-of-fact Kostya inquired gravely.
“Or, I tell you what,” Nastya interrupted impulsively, completely rejecting and forgetting her first hypothesis.
“She hasn’t a husband, you are right there, but she wants to be married, and so she’s been thinking of getting married, and thinking and thinking of it till now she’s got it, that is, not a husband but a baby.” “Well, perhaps so,” Kostya agreed, entirely vanquished.
So how could I tell?” “Come, kiddies,” said Kolya, stepping into the room.
“You’re terrible people, I see.” “And Perezvon with you!” grinned Kostya, and began snapping his fingers and calling Perezvon.
“I am in a difficulty, kids,” Krassotkin began solemnly, “and you must help me.
Will you let me go?” The children looked anxiously at one another.
Their smiling faces showed signs of uneasiness, but they did not yet fully grasp what was expected of them.
You won’t climb on the cupboard and break your legs?
You won’t be frightened alone and cry?” A look of profound despondency came into the children’s faces.
“And I could show you something as a reward, a little copper cannon which can be fired with real gunpowder.” The children’s faces instantly brightened.
Krassotkin put his hand in his satchel, and pulling out a little bronze cannon stood it on the table.
It can be loaded with shot and fired off.” “And it could kill any one?” “It can kill any one; you’ve only got to aim at anybody,” and Krassotkin explained where the powder had to be put, where the shot should be rolled in, showing a tiny hole like a touch-hole, and told them that it kicked when it was fired.
The children listened with intense interest.
What particularly struck their imagination was that the cannon kicked.
“And have you got any powder?” Nastya inquired.
“Yes.” “Show us the powder, too,” she drawled with a smile of entreaty.
Krassotkin dived again into his satchel and pulled out a small flask containing a little real gunpowder.
He even uncorked the flask and shook a little powder into the palm of his hand.
“One has to be careful there’s no fire about, or it would blow up and kill us all,” Krassotkin warned them sensationally.
The children gazed at the powder with an awe-stricken alarm that only intensified their enjoyment.
“And does the shot burn?” he inquired.
“No, it doesn’t.” “Give me a little shot,” he asked in an imploring voice.
“I’ll give you a little shot; here, take it, but don’t show it to your mother till I come back, or she’ll be sure to think it’s gunpowder, and will die of fright and give you a thrashing.” “Mother never does whip us,” Nastya observed at once.
“I know, I only said it to finish the sentence.
You won’t be frightened and cry when I’m gone?” “We sha—all cry,” drawled Kostya, on the verge of tears already.
“Oh, children, children, how fraught with peril are your years!
There’s no help for it, chickens, I shall have to stay with you I don’t know how long.
And time is passing, time is passing, oogh!” “Tell Perezvon to pretend to be dead!” Kostya begged.
“There’s no help for it, we must have recourse to Perezvon. _Ici_, Perezvon.” And Kolya began giving orders to the dog, who performed all his tricks.
While this last performance was going on, the door opened and Agafya, Madame Krassotkin’s servant, a stout woman of forty, marked with small-pox, appeared in the doorway.
She had come back from market and had a bag full of provisions in her hand.
Holding up the bag of provisions in her left hand she stood still to watch the dog.
Though Kolya had been so anxious for her return, he did not cut short the performance, and after keeping Perezvon dead for the usual time, at last he whistled to him.
The dog jumped up and began bounding about in his joy at having done his duty.
“Only think, a dog!” Agafya observed sententiously.
“Why are you late, female?” asked Krassotkin sternly.
What is it to you if I’m late; if I’m late, you may be sure I have good reason,” muttered Agafya, busying herself about the stove, without a trace of anger or displeasure in her voice.
She seemed quite pleased, in fact, to enjoy a skirmish with her merry young master.
“Listen, you frivolous young woman,” Krassotkin began, getting up from the sofa, “can you swear by all you hold sacred in the world and something else besides, that you will watch vigilantly over the kids in my absence?
“I shall look after them without that.” “No, you must swear on your eternal salvation.
It’s cold out; stay at home.” “Kids,” Kolya turned to the children, “this woman will stay with you till I come back or till your mother comes, for she ought to have been back long ago.
You’ll give them something, Agafya, won’t you?” “That I can do.” “Good-by, chickens, I go with my heart at rest.
And you, granny,” he added gravely, in an undertone, as he passed Agafya, “I hope you’ll spare their tender years and not tell them any of your old woman’s nonsense about Katerina. _Ici_, Perezvon!” “Get along with you!” retorted Agafya, really angry this time.
You want a whipping for saying such things, that’s what you want!” Chapter III.
The Schoolboy But Kolya did not hear her.
As he went out at the gate he looked round him, shrugged up his shoulders, and saying “It is freezing,” went straight along the street and turned off to the right towards the market-place.
When he reached the last house but one before the market-place he stopped at the gate, pulled a whistle out of his pocket, and whistled with all his might as though giving a signal.
This was Smurov, a boy in the preparatory class (two classes below Kolya Krassotkin), son of a well-to-do official.
Apparently he was forbidden by his parents to associate with Krassotkin, who was well known to be a desperately naughty boy, so Smurov was obviously slipping out on the sly.
He was—if the reader has not forgotten—one of the group of boys who two months before had thrown stones at Ilusha.
He was the one who told Alyosha Karamazov about Ilusha.
“I’ve been waiting for you for the last hour, Krassotkin,” said Smurov stolidly, and the boys strode towards the market-place.
“I am late,” answered Krassotkin.
“I was detained by circumstances.
You won’t be thrashed for coming with me?” “Come, I say, I’m never thrashed!
And you’ve got Perezvon with you?” “Yes.” “You’re taking him, too?” “Yes.” “Ah! if it were only Zhutchka!” “That’s impossible.
Zhutchka’s non-existent.
Zhutchka is lost in the mists of obscurity.” “Ah! couldn’t we do this?” Smurov suddenly stood still.
“You see Ilusha says that Zhutchka was a shaggy, grayish, smoky-looking dog like Perezvon.
Couldn’t you tell him this is Zhutchka, and he might believe you?” “Boy, shun a lie, that’s one thing; even with a good object—that’s another.
Above all, I hope you’ve not told them anything about my coming.” “Heaven forbid!
But you won’t comfort him with Perezvon,” said Smurov, with a sigh.
I believe he’s in consumption: he is quite conscious, but his breathing!
His breathing’s gone wrong.
I could never walk properly in them.’ He fancied it was his boots that made him stagger, but it was simply weakness, really.
Herzenstube is looking after him.
Now they are rich again—they’ve got heaps of money.” “They are rogues.” “Who are rogues?” “Doctors and the whole crew of quacks collectively, and also, of course, individually.
I don’t believe in medicine.
It’s a useless institution.
But what’s that sentimentality you’ve got up there?
There’s nothing in that.” “What I don’t understand in all this is the part that Alexey Karamazov is taking in it.
His brother’s going to be tried to-morrow or next day for such a crime, and yet he has so much time to spend on sentimentality with boys.” “There’s no sentimentality about it.
You are going yourself now to make it up with Ilusha.” “Make it up with him?
What an absurd expression!
“My dear boy, that’s my business, not yours.
I am going of myself because I choose to, but you’ve all been hauled there by Alexey Karamazov—there’s a difference, you know.
It’s a stupid expression.” “It’s not Karamazov at all; it’s not his doing.
Our fellows began going there of themselves.
Of course, they went with Karamazov at first.
And there’s been nothing of that sort—no silliness.
It’s all the fault of that murderer who beat him then.” “Karamazov’s a riddle to me all the same.
I might have made his acquaintance long ago, but I like to have a proper pride in some cases.
Besides, I have a theory about him which I must work out and verify.” Kolya subsided into dignified silence.
Smurov, of course, worshiped Krassotkin and never dreamed of putting himself on a level with him.
Now he was tremendously interested at Kolya’s saying that he was “going of himself” to see Ilusha.
He felt that there must be some mystery in Kolya’s suddenly taking it into his head to go to him that day.
Perezvon ran about in the wildest spirits, sniffing about first one side, then the other.
When he met other dogs they zealously smelt each other over according to the rules of canine etiquette.
“I like to watch such realistic scenes, Smurov,” said Kolya suddenly.
There’s nothing funny in nature, however funny it may seem to man with his prejudices.
If dogs could reason and criticize us they’d be sure to find just as much that would be funny to them, if not far more, in the social relations of men, their masters—far more, indeed.
I repeat that, because I am convinced that there is far more foolishness among us.
That’s Rakitin’s idea—a remarkable idea.
I am a Socialist, Smurov.” “And what is a Socialist?” asked Smurov.
“That’s when all are equal and all have property in common, there are no marriages, and every one has any religion and laws he likes best, and all the rest of it.
You are not old enough to understand that yet.
Father looked at the thermometer just now.” “Have you noticed, Smurov, that in the middle of winter we don’t feel so cold even when there are fifteen or eighteen degrees of frost as we do now, in the beginning of winter, when there is a sudden frost of twelve degrees, especially when there is not much snow.
Everything is habit with men, everything even in their social and political relations.
What a funny-looking peasant!” Kolya pointed to a tall peasant, with a good-natured countenance in a long sheepskin coat, who was standing by his wagon, clapping together his hands, in their shapeless leather gloves, to warm them.
“That peasant’s beard’s frozen,” Kolya cried in a loud provocative voice as he passed him.
“Lots of people’s beards are frozen,” the peasant replied, calmly and sententiously.
“Don’t provoke him,” observed Smurov.
You are a schoolboy, I suppose?” “Yes.” “You get whipped, I expect?” “Nothing to speak of—sometimes.” “Does it hurt?” “Well, yes, it does.” “Ech, what a life!” The peasant heaved a sigh from the bottom of his heart.
“That was a nice peasant,” Kolya observed to Smurov.
“I like talking to the peasants, and am always glad to do them justice.” “Why did you tell a lie, pretending we are thrashed?” asked Smurov.
I like people to understand at the first word.
Some things can’t be explained.
According to a peasant’s notions, schoolboys are whipped, and must be whipped.
What would a schoolboy be if he were not whipped?
And if I were to tell him we are not, he’d be disappointed.
But you don’t understand that.
One has to know how to talk to the peasants.” “Only don’t tease them, please, or you’ll get into another scrape as you did about that goose.” “So you’re afraid?” “Don’t laugh, Kolya.
I am strictly forbidden to go out with you.” “Don’t be uneasy, nothing will happen this time.
You shall tell me next Sunday.” Kolya waved his hand at her, as though she had attacked him and not he her.
You set upon me, you impudent young monkey.
I didn’t say anything,” bawled Marya.
“You want a whipping, that’s what you want, you saucy jackanapes!” There was a roar of laughter among the other market women round her.
Suddenly a man in a violent rage darted out from the arcade of shops close by.
He was a young man, not a native of the town, with dark, curly hair and a long, pale face, marked with smallpox.
He wore a long blue coat and a peaked cap, and looked like a merchant’s clerk.
He was in a state of stupid excitement and brandished his fist at Kolya.
But he had been in so many rows in the street that he could hardly remember them all.
“Do you?” he asked sarcastically.
I know you!” the man repeated idiotically.
I know, you are at it again!” “It’s not your business, brother, if I am at my saucy pranks again,” said Kolya, standing still and scanning him.
“Not my business?” “No; it’s not your business.” “Whose then?
Whose then?” “It’s Trifon Nikititch’s business, not yours.” “What Trifon Nikititch?” asked the youth, staring with loutish amazement at Kolya, but still as angry as ever.
“Have you been to the Church of the Ascension?” he suddenly asked him, with stern emphasis.
“What Church of Ascension?
No, I haven’t,” said the young man, somewhat taken aback.
“Do you know Sabaneyev?” Kolya went on even more emphatically and even more severely.
No, I don’t know him.” “Well then you can go to the devil,” said Kolya, cutting short the conversation; and turning sharply to the right he strode quickly on his way as though he disdained further conversation with a dolt who did not even know Sabaneyev.
What Sabaneyev?” the young man recovered from his momentary stupefaction and was as excited as before.
“What Sabaneyev is it he’s talking about?” the young man repeated, still furious and brandishing his right arm.
“It must be a Sabaneyev who worked for the Kuzmitchovs, that’s who it must be,” one of the women suggested.
“For the Kuzmitchovs?” repeated another woman.
His name’s Kuzma, not Trifon; but the boy said Trifon Nikititch, so it can’t be the same.” “His name is not Trifon and not Sabaneyev, it’s Tchizhov,” put in suddenly a third woman, who had hitherto been silent, listening gravely.
“Alexey Ivanitch is his name.
Tchizhov, Alexey Ivanitch.” “Not a doubt about it, it’s Tchizhov,” a fourth woman emphatically confirmed the statement.
The bewildered youth gazed from one to another.
“But what did he ask for, what did he ask for, good people?” he cried almost in desperation.
“‘Do you know Sabaneyev?’ says he.
And who the devil’s to know who is Sabaneyev?” “You’re a senseless fellow.
I tell you it’s not Sabaneyev, but Tchizhov, Alexey Ivanitch Tchizhov, that’s who it is!” one of the women shouted at him impressively.
Tell me, if you know.” “That tall, sniveling fellow who used to sit in the market in the summer.” “And what’s your Tchizhov to do with me, good people, eh?” “How can I tell what he’s to do with you?” put in another.
“You ought to know yourself what you want with him, if you make such a clamor about him.
Don’t you really know him?” “Know whom?” “Tchizhov.” “The devil take Tchizhov and you with him.
He was laughing at me!” “Will give Tchizhov a hiding!
You are a fool, that’s what you are!” “Not Tchizhov, not Tchizhov, you spiteful, mischievous woman.
Catch him, catch him, he was laughing at me!” The woman guffawed.
But Kolya was by now a long way off, marching along with a triumphant air.
Smurov walked beside him, looking round at the shouting group far behind.
“What Sabaneyev did you mean?” he asked Kolya, foreseeing what his answer would be.
There’s another blockhead, that peasant there.
You know, they say ‘there’s no one stupider than a stupid Frenchman,’ but a stupid Russian shows it in his face just as much.
Hey, good morning, peasant!” A sturdy-looking peasant, with a round, simple face and grizzled beard, who was walking by, raised his head and looked at the boy.
“Good morning, if you are not laughing at me,” he said deliberately in reply.
Go along.” “I say, you seem a clever peasant.” “Cleverer than you,” the peasant answered unexpectedly, with the same gravity.
“I doubt it,” said Kolya, somewhat taken aback.
“It’s true, though.” “Perhaps it is.” “It is, brother.” “Good-by, peasant!” “Good-by!” “There are all sorts of peasants,” Kolya observed to Smurov after a brief silence.
I am always ready to recognize intelligence in the peasantry.” In the distance the cathedral clock struck half-past eleven.
The boys made haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov’s lodging, a considerable distance, quickly and almost in silence.
Twenty paces from the house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazov to come out to him.
“One must sniff round a bit first,” he observed to Smurov.
“Why ask him to come out?” Smurov protested.
What’s the sense of making friends in the frost out here?” “I know why I want to see him out here in the frost,” Kolya cut him short in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with “small boys,” and Smurov ran to do his bidding.
He had heard a great deal about him from the boys, but hitherto he had always maintained an appearance of disdainful indifference when he was mentioned, and he had even “criticized” what he heard about Alyosha.
But secretly he had a great longing to make his acquaintance; there was something sympathetic and attractive in all he was told about Alyosha.
So the present moment was important: to begin with, he had to show himself at his best, to show his independence, “Or he’ll think of me as thirteen and take me for a boy, like the rest of them.
I mustn’t talk too freely; if I fall into his arms all at once, he may think—Tfoo! how horrible if he should think—!” Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost to assume the most independent air.
What distressed him most was his being so short; he did not mind so much his “hideous” face, as being so short.
On the wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a pencil-mark to show his height, and every two months since he anxiously measured himself against it to see how much he had gained.
But alas! he grew very slowly, and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair.
His face was in reality by no means “hideous”; on the contrary, it was rather attractive, with a fair, pale skin, freckled.
His small, lively gray eyes had a fearless look, and often glowed with feeling.
He had rather high cheekbones; small, very red, but not very thick, lips; his nose was small and unmistakably turned up.
“I’ve a regular pug nose, a regular pug nose,” Kolya used to mutter to himself when he looked in the looking-glass, and he always left it with indignation.
“But perhaps I haven’t got a clever face?” he sometimes thought, doubtful even of that.
But it must not be supposed that his mind was preoccupied with his face and his height.
On the contrary, however bitter the moments before the looking-glass were to him, he quickly forgot them, and forgot them for a long time, “abandoning himself entirely to ideas and to real life,” as he formulated it to himself.
Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya.
Before he reached him, Kolya could see that he looked delighted.
“Can he be so glad to see me?” Kolya wondered, feeling pleased.
We may note here, in passing, that Alyosha’s appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw him last.
He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a well-cut coat, a soft, round hat, and his hair had been cropped short.
All this was very becoming to him, and he looked quite handsome.
His charming face always had a good-humored expression; but there was a gentleness and serenity in his good-humor.
To Kolya’s surprise, Alyosha came out to him just as he was, without an overcoat.
He had evidently come in haste.
How anxious we’ve been to see you!” “There were reasons which you shall know directly.
Anyway, I am glad to make your acquaintance.
I’ve long been hoping for an opportunity, and have heard a great deal about you,” Kolya muttered, a little breathless.
He is certainly dying.” “How awful!
You must admit that medicine is a fraud, Karamazov,” cried Kolya warmly.
“Ilusha has mentioned you often, very often, even in his sleep, in delirium, you know.
One can see that you used to be very, very dear to him ... before the incident ... with the knife....
Tell me, is that your dog?” “Yes, Perezvon.” “Not Zhutchka?” Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity.
“Is she lost for ever?” “I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka.
I’ve heard all about it.” Kolya smiled mysteriously.
“Listen, Karamazov, I’ll tell you all about it.
That’s what I came for; that’s what I asked you to come out here for, to explain the whole episode to you before we go in,” he began with animation.
“You see, Karamazov, Ilusha came into the preparatory class last spring.
Well, you know what our preparatory class is—a lot of small boys.
I am two classes higher up, and, of course, I only look on at them from a distance.
I like children like that.
The worst of it was he was horribly dressed at the time, his breeches were too small for him, and there were holes in his boots.
I beat them, but they adore me, do you know, Karamazov?” Kolya boasted impulsively; “but I am always fond of children.
I’ve two chickens in my hands at home now—that’s what detained me to-day.
So they left off beating Ilusha and I took him under my protection.
I tell you that, the boy was proud; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me: he did my slightest bidding, obeyed me as though I were God, tried to copy me.
In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once, and I’d go about with him.
They always laugh when an older boy makes friends with a younger one like that; but that’s a prejudice.
I am teaching him, developing him.
Here you, Karamazov, have taken up with all these nestlings.
I see you want to influence the younger generation—to develop them, to be of use to them, and I assure you this trait in your character, which I knew by hearsay, attracted me more than anything.
I noticed that there was a sort of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy, and you know I have a positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality, and I have had it from a baby.
There were contradictions in him, too: he was proud, but he was slavishly devoted to me, and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he’d refuse to agree with me; he’d argue, fly into a rage.
I used sometimes to propound certain ideas; I could see that it was not so much that he disagreed with the ideas, but that he was simply rebelling against me, because I was cool in responding to his endearments.
And so, in order to train him properly, the tenderer he was, the colder I became.
My object was to form his character, to lick him into shape, to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt, you understand me at a word.
Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession he was downcast and dejected, not because of my coldness, but for something else, something more important.
I wondered what the tragedy was.
I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to know Smerdyakov, who was footman to your late father—it was before his death, of course—and he taught the little fool a silly trick—that is, a brutal, nasty trick.
He told him to take a piece of bread, to stick a pin in it, and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without biting it, and then to watch and see what would happen.
So they prepared a piece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka, that shaggy dog there’s been such a fuss about.
The people of the house it belonged to never fed it at all, though it barked all day. (Do you like that stupid barking, Karamazov?
I can’t stand it.) So it rushed at the bread, swallowed it, and began to squeal; it turned round and round and ran away, squealing as it ran out of sight.
He confessed it to me, and cried bitterly.
He kept on repeating ‘He ran away squealing’: the sight of that haunted him.
He was tormented by remorse, I could see that.
I took it seriously.
I determined to give him a lesson for other things as well.
So I must confess I wasn’t quite straightforward, and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than I was.
‘You’ve done a nasty thing,’ I said, ‘you are a scoundrel.
I’ll think it over and let you know through Smurov’—that’s the boy who’s just come with me; he’s always ready to do anything for me—‘whether I will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you up for good as a scoundrel.’ He was tremendously upset.
That’s what we call it when two schoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another.
Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then, if I saw signs of repentance, to hold out my hand to him again.
That was my intention.
But what do you think happened?
‘Tell Krassotkin from me,’ he cried, ‘that I will throw bread with pins to all the dogs—all—all of them!’ ‘So he’s going in for a little temper.
We must smoke it out of him.’ And I began to treat him with contempt; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically.
And just then that affair with his father happened.
You must realize that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already.
The boys, seeing I’d given him up, set on him and taunted him, shouting, ‘Wisp of tow, wisp of tow!’ And he had soon regular skirmishes with them, which I am very sorry for.
And, I swear, I don’t remember that I laughed; it was quite the other way, I felt awfully sorry for him, in another minute I would have run up to take his part.
But he suddenly met my eyes.
I don’t know what he fancied; but he pulled out a penknife, rushed at me, and struck at my thigh, here in my right leg.
I don’t mind owning I am plucky sometimes, Karamazov.
I simply looked at him contemptuously, as though to say, ‘This is how you repay all my kindness!
Do it again, if you like, I’m at your service.’ But he didn’t stab me again; he broke down, he was frightened at what he had done, he threw away the knife, burst out crying, and ran away.
And then I heard that the same day he’d been throwing stones and had bitten your finger—but you understand now what a state he was in!
So now I’ve told you all about it ... but I’m afraid it was stupid of me.” “Oh, what a pity,” exclaimed Alyosha, with feeling, “that I didn’t know before what terms you were on with him, or I’d have come to you long ago to beg you to go to him with me.
Would you believe it, when he was feverish he talked about you in delirium.
And you’ve really not succeeded in finding that dog?
Would you believe it, since he’s been ill, I’ve three times heard him repeat with tears, ‘It’s because I killed Zhutchka, father, that I am ill now.
God is punishing me for it.’ He can’t get that idea out of his head.
We have all rested our hopes on you.” “Tell me, what made you hope that I should be the one to find him?” Kolya asked, with great curiosity.
Smurov said something of the sort.
We’ve all been trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive, that it’s been seen.
His father has just this moment come back, bringing him a mastiff pup, hoping to comfort him with that; but I think it only makes it worse.” “Tell me, Karamazov, what sort of man is the father?
I know him, but what do you make of him—a mountebank, a buffoon?” “Oh, no; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed.
Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom they daren’t speak the truth, from having been for years humiliated and intimidated by them.
Believe me, Krassotkin, that sort of buffoonery is sometimes tragic in the extreme.
His whole life now is centered in Ilusha, and if Ilusha dies, he will either go mad with grief or kill himself.
I feel almost certain of that when I look at him now.” “I understand you, Karamazov.
I see you understand human nature,” Kolya added, with feeling.
“And as soon as I saw you with a dog, I thought it was Zhutchka you were bringing.” “Wait a bit, Karamazov, perhaps we shall find it yet; but this is Perezvon.
Wait a bit, Karamazov, you will know something in a minute.
But, I say, I am keeping you here!” Kolya cried suddenly.
“You’ve no overcoat on in this bitter cold.
Oh, we are all egoists, Karamazov!” “Don’t trouble; it is cold, but I don’t often catch cold.
I know you are called Kolya, but what else?” “Nikolay—Nikolay Ivanovitch Krassotkin, or, as they say in official documents, ‘Krassotkin son.’” Kolya laughed for some reason, but added suddenly, “Of course I hate my name Nikolay.” “Why so?” “It’s so trivial, so ordinary.” “You are thirteen?” asked Alyosha.
“No, fourteen—that is, I shall be fourteen very soon, in a fortnight.
I’ll confess one weakness of mine, Karamazov, just to you, since it’s our first meeting, so that you may understand my character at once.
I hate being asked my age, more than that ... and in fact ... there’s a libelous story going about me, that last week I played robbers with the preparatory boys.
It’s a fact that I did play with them, but it’s a perfect libel to say I did it for my own amusement.
I have reasons for believing that you’ve heard the story; but I wasn’t playing for my own amusement, it was for the sake of the children, because they couldn’t think of anything to do by themselves.
This is an awful town for gossip, I can tell you.” “But what if you had been playing for your own amusement, what’s the harm?” “Come, I say, for my own amusement!
“Grown-up people go to the theater and there the adventures of all sorts of heroes are represented—sometimes there are robbers and battles, too—and isn’t that just the same thing, in a different form, of course?
And young people’s games of soldiers or robbers in their playtime are also art in its first stage.
You know, they spring from the growing artistic instincts of the young.
And sometimes these games are much better than performances in the theater, the only difference is that people go there to look at the actors, while in these games the young people are the actors themselves.
Is that your idea?” Kolya looked at him intently.
“Oh, you know, that’s rather an interesting view.
I’ll admit I thought I might learn something from you.
I’ve come to learn of you, Karamazov,” Kolya concluded, in a voice full of spontaneous feeling.
“And I of you,” said Alyosha, smiling and pressing his hand.
What struck him most was that he treated him exactly like an equal and that he talked to him just as if he were “quite grown up.” “I’ll show you something directly, Karamazov; it’s a theatrical performance, too,” he said, laughing nervously.
I’ll keep on my overcoat.
Perezvon will stay here in the passage and be dead. _Ici_, Perezvon, lie down and be dead!
I’ll arrange it all and you’ll see something.” Chapter V.
By Ilusha’s Bedside The room inhabited by the family of the retired captain Snegiryov is already familiar to the reader.
It was close and crowded at that moment with a number of visitors.
Several boys were sitting with Ilusha, and though all of them, like Smurov, were prepared to deny that it was Alyosha who had brought them and reconciled them with Ilusha, it was really the fact.
All the art he had used had been to take them, one by one, to Ilusha, without “sheepish sentimentality,” appearing to do so casually and without design.
It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering.
He was greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathy shown him by these boys, who had been his enemies.
Krassotkin was the only one missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha’s heart.
Perhaps the bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin, who had been his one friend and protector.
But when Smurov hinted to Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something, the latter cut him short, bidding Smurov tell “Karamazov” at once that he knew best what to do, that he wanted no one’s advice, and that, if he went to see Ilusha, he would choose his own time for he had “his own reasons.” That was a fortnight before this Sunday.
Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt, impatient refusal, sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more, that if he came himself, he, Krassotkin, would not go to Ilusha at all.
Up to the very last day, Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha that morning, and only the evening before, as he parted from Smurov, Kolya abruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning, for he would go with him to the Snegiryovs’, but warned him on no account to say he was coming, as he wanted to drop in casually.
Smurov’s fancy that Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya had dropped that “they must be asses not to find the dog, if it was alive.” When Smurov, waiting for an opportunity, timidly hinted at his guess about the dog, Krassotkin flew into a violent rage.
And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing a pin?
Sheepish sentimentality, that’s what it is!” For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikons in the corner.
He was taken ill the same day, though for a month afterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room and passage.
But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move without help from his father.
His father was terribly concerned about him.
He even gave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die.
And often, especially after leading him round the room on his arm and putting him back to bed, he would run to a dark corner in the passage and, leaning his head against the wall, he would break into paroxysms of violent weeping, stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha.
Returning to the room, he would usually begin doing something to amuse and comfort his precious boy; he would tell him stories, funny anecdotes, or would mimic comic people he had happened to meet, even imitate the howls and cries of animals.
Though the boy tried not to show how he disliked it, he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt, and he was continually haunted by the memory of the “wisp of tow” and that “terrible day.” Nina, Ilusha’s gentle, crippled sister, did not like her father’s buffoonery either (Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburg to study at the university).
But the half-imbecile mother was greatly diverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about or performing something.
It was the only way she could be amused; all the rest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now every one had forgotten her, that no one treated her with respect, that she was slighted, and so on.
But during the last few days she had completely changed.
She began looking constantly at Ilusha’s bed in the corner and seemed lost in thought.
The captain noticed the change in her with mournful perplexity.
When the children told some story or played a game, she laughed and clapped her hands.
She was particularly fond of Smurov.
As for the captain, the presence in his room of the children, who came to cheer up Ilusha, filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy.
He even hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression, and that that would hasten his recovery.
In spite of his alarm about Ilusha, he had not, till lately, felt one minute’s doubt of his boy’s ultimate recovery.
He met his little visitors with homage, waited upon them hand and foot; he was ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back, but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up.
He began buying little things for them, gingerbread and nuts, gave them tea and cut them sandwiches.
He had taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyosha had predicted he would.
And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna, learning more about their circumstances and Ilusha’s illness, visited them herself, made the acquaintance of the family, and succeeded in fascinating the half-imbecile mother.
Since then she had been lavish in helping them, and the captain, terror-stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying, forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance.
All this time Doctor Herzenstube, who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna, came punctually every other day, but little was gained by his visits and he dosed the invalid mercilessly.
But on that Sunday morning a new doctor was expected, who had come from Moscow, where he had a great reputation.
Katerina Ivanovna had sent for him from Moscow at great expense, not expressly for Ilusha, but for another object of which more will be said in its place hereafter.
He hadn’t the slightest idea that Kolya Krassotkin was coming, though he had long wished for a visit from the boy for whom Ilusha was fretting.
At the moment when Krassotkin opened the door and came into the room, the captain and all the boys were round Ilusha’s bed, looking at a tiny mastiff pup, which had only been born the day before, though the captain had bespoken it a week ago to comfort and amuse Ilusha, who was still fretting over the lost and probably dead Zhutchka.
Ilusha, who had heard three days before that he was to be presented with a puppy, not an ordinary puppy, but a pedigree mastiff (a very important point, of course), tried from delicacy of feeling to pretend that he was pleased.
Clearly he liked the puppy, but ... it wasn’t Zhutchka; if he could have had Zhutchka and the puppy, too, then he would have been completely happy.
“Krassotkin!” cried one of the boys suddenly.
Krassotkin’s entrance made a general sensation; the boys moved away and stood on each side of the bed, so that he could get a full view of Ilusha.
“Please come in ... you are welcome!” he said hurriedly.
Krassotkin has come to see you!” But Krassotkin, shaking hands with him hurriedly, instantly showed his complete knowledge of the manners of good society.
He turned first to the captain’s wife sitting in her arm-chair, who was very ill-humored at the moment, and was grumbling that the boys stood between her and Ilusha’s bed and did not let her see the new puppy.
With the greatest courtesy he made her a bow, scraping his foot, and turning to Nina, he made her, as the only other lady present, a similar bow.
This polite behavior made an extremely favorable impression on the deranged lady.
“There, you can see at once he is a young man that has been well brought up,” she commented aloud, throwing up her hands; “but as for our other visitors they come in one on the top of another.” “How do you mean, mamma, one on the top of another, how is that?” muttered the captain affectionately, though a little anxious on her account.
They get on each other’s shoulders in the passage and prance in like that on a respectable family.
Strange sort of visitors!” “But who’s come in like that, mamma?” “Why, that boy came in riding on that one’s back and this one on that one’s.” Kolya was already by Ilusha’s bedside.
He raised himself in the bed and looked intently at Kolya.
Kolya had not seen his little friend for two months, and he was overwhelmed at the sight of him.
He had never imagined that he would see such a wasted, yellow face, such enormous, feverishly glowing eyes and such thin little hands.
He saw, with grieved surprise, Ilusha’s rapid, hard breathing and dry lips.
He stepped close to him, held out his hand, and almost overwhelmed, he said: “Well, old man ... how are you?” But his voice failed him, he couldn’t achieve an appearance of ease; his face suddenly twitched and the corners of his mouth quivered.
Something moved Kolya to raise his hand and pass it over Ilusha’s hair.
“Never mind!” he murmured softly to him to cheer him up, or perhaps not knowing why he said it.
“Hallo, so you’ve got a new puppy?” Kolya said suddenly, in a most callous voice.
“Ye—es,” answered Ilusha in a long whisper, gasping for breath.
“A black nose, that means he’ll be fierce, a good house-dog,” Kolya observed gravely and stolidly, as if the only thing he cared about was the puppy and its black nose.
But in reality he still had to do his utmost to control his feelings not to burst out crying like a child, and do what he would he could not control it.
“I got one like that on purpose, one of the fiercest breed, and his parents are huge and very fierce, they stand as high as this from the floor....
You were so kind as to come with Alexey Fyodorovitch?” Krassotkin sat on the edge of the bed, at Ilusha’s feet.
Though he had perhaps prepared a free-and-easy opening for the conversation on his way, now he completely lost the thread of it.
I came with Perezvon.
I’ve got a dog now, called Perezvon.
I’ve brought a dog, too,” he said, addressing Ilusha all at once.
“Do you remember Zhutchka, old man?” he suddenly fired the question at him.
Ilusha’s little face quivered.
He looked with an agonized expression at Kolya.
Alyosha, standing at the door, frowned and signed to Kolya not to speak of Zhutchka, but he did not or would not notice.
“Where ... is Zhutchka?” Ilusha asked in a broken voice.
“Oh, well, my boy, your Zhutchka’s lost and done for!” Ilusha did not speak, but he fixed an intent gaze once more on Kolya.
Alyosha, catching Kolya’s eye, signed to him vigorously again, but he turned away his eyes pretending not to have noticed.
“It must have run away and died somewhere.
It must have died after a meal like that,” Kolya pronounced pitilessly, though he seemed a little breathless.
“But I’ve got a dog, Perezvon ...
I’ve brought him to show you.” “I don’t want him!” said Ilusha suddenly.
You allow me to call in my dog, madam?” He suddenly addressed Madame Snegiryov, with inexplicable excitement in his manner.
“I don’t want him, I don’t want him!” cried Ilusha, with a mournful break in his voice.
There was a reproachful light in his eyes.
“You’d better,” the captain started up from the chest by the wall on which he had just sat down, “you’d better ... another time,” he muttered, but Kolya could not be restrained.
He hurriedly shouted to Smurov, “Open the door,” and as soon as it was open, he blew his whistle.
Perezvon dashed headlong into the room.
“Jump, Perezvon, beg!
What followed was a surprise to every one: Ilusha started, lurched violently forward, bent over Perezvon and gazed at him, faint with suspense.
Zhutchka!” he cried suddenly, in a voice breaking with joy and suffering.
“And who did you think it was?” Krassotkin shouted with all his might, in a ringing, happy voice, and bending down he seized the dog and lifted him up to Ilusha.
“Look, old man, you see, blind of one eye and the left ear is torn, just the marks you described to me.
I found him directly.
He did not belong to any one!” he explained, turning quickly to the captain, to his wife, to Alyosha and then again to Ilusha.
“He used to live in the Fedotovs’ back-yard.
You see, old man, he couldn’t have swallowed what you gave him.
But the pin pricked his tongue, that is why he squealed.
He ran away squealing and you thought he’d swallowed it.
He might well squeal, because the skin of dogs’ mouths is so tender ... tenderer than in men, much tenderer!” Kolya cried impetuously, his face glowing and radiant with delight.
White as a sheet, he gazed open-mouthed at Kolya, with his great eyes almost starting out of his head.
And if Krassotkin, who had no suspicion of it, had known what a disastrous and fatal effect such a moment might have on the sick child’s health, nothing would have induced him to play such a trick on him.
But Alyosha was perhaps the only person in the room who realized it.
It’s Zhutchka!” he cried in a blissful voice, “Ilusha, this is Zhutchka, your Zhutchka!
Mamma, this is Zhutchka!” He was almost weeping.
“And I never guessed!” cried Smurov regretfully.
I said he’d find the dog and here he’s found him.” “Here he’s found him!” another boy repeated gleefully.
“Krassotkin’s a brick!” cried a third voice.
“He’s a brick, he’s a brick!” cried the other boys, and they began clapping.
“Wait, wait,” Krassotkin did his utmost to shout above them all.
“I’ll tell you how it happened, that’s the whole point.
Only Smurov has known for the last fortnight, but I assured him this dog was called Perezvon and he did not guess.
And meanwhile I taught the dog all sorts of tricks.
I trained him so as to bring you a well-trained dog, in good condition, old man, so as to be able to say to you, ‘See, old man, what a fine dog your Zhutchka is now!’ Haven’t you a bit of meat?
He’ll show you a trick that will make you die with laughing.
A piece of meat, haven’t you got any?” The captain ran across the passage to the landlady, where their cooking was done.
Not to lose precious time, Kolya, in desperate haste, shouted to Perezvon, “Dead!” And the dog immediately turned round and lay on his back with its four paws in the air.
Ilusha looked on with the same suffering smile, but the person most delighted with the dog’s performance was “mamma.” She laughed at the dog and began snapping her fingers and calling it, “Perezvon, Perezvon!” “Nothing will make him get up, nothing!” Kolya cried triumphantly, proud of his success.
“He won’t move for all the shouting in the world, but if I call to him, he’ll jump up in a minute.
Ici, Perezvon!” The dog leapt up and bounded about, whining with delight.
“Is it hot?” Kolya inquired hurriedly, with a business-like air, taking the meat.
Look, everybody, look, Ilusha, look, old man; why aren’t you looking?
He does not look at him, now I’ve brought him.” The new trick consisted in making the dog stand motionless with his nose out and putting a tempting morsel of meat just on his nose.
The luckless dog had to stand without moving, with the meat on his nose, as long as his master chose to keep him, without a movement, perhaps for half an hour.
But he kept Perezvon only for a brief moment.
The audience, of course, expressed enthusiasm and surprise.
“Can you really have put off coming all this time simply to train the dog?” exclaimed Alyosha, with an involuntary note of reproach in his voice.
“Simply for that!” answered Kolya, with perfect simplicity.
“I wanted to show him in all his glory.” “Perezvon!
Perezvon,” called Ilusha suddenly, snapping his thin fingers and beckoning to the dog.
Let him jump up on the bed! _Ici_, Perezvon!” Kolya slapped the bed and Perezvon darted up by Ilusha.
The boy threw both arms round his head and Perezvon instantly licked his cheek.
Ilusha crept close to him, stretched himself out in bed and hid his face in the dog’s shaggy coat.
“Dear, dear!” kept exclaiming the captain.
You remember, I told you about it before and you said how much you’d like to see it.
Well, here, I’ve brought it to you.” And Kolya hurriedly pulled out of his satchel the little bronze cannon.
Another time he would have waited till the sensation made by Perezvon had passed off, now he hurried on regardless of all consideration.
“You are all happy now,” he felt, “so here’s something to make you happier!” He was perfectly enchanted himself.
“I’ve been coveting this thing for a long while; it’s for you, old man, it’s for you.
It belonged to Morozov, it was no use to him, he had it from his brother.
I swopped a book from father’s book-case for it, _A Kinsman of Mahomet or Salutary Folly_, a scandalous book published in Moscow a hundred years ago, before they had any censorship.
He was grateful to me, too....” Kolya held the cannon in his hand so that all could see and admire it.
Ilusha raised himself, and, with his right arm still round the dog, he gazed enchanted at the toy.
The sensation was even greater when Kolya announced that he had gunpowder too, and that it could be fired off at once “if it won’t alarm the ladies.” “Mamma” immediately asked to look at the toy closer and her request was granted.
She readily gave permission for the cannon to be fired, without any idea of what she had been asked.
The captain, as a military man, undertook to load it, putting in a minute quantity of powder.
A magnificent explosion followed.
Mamma was startled, but at once laughed with delight.
The boys gazed in speechless triumph.
But the captain, looking at Ilusha, was more enchanted than any of them.
Kolya picked up the cannon and immediately presented it to Ilusha, together with the powder and the shot.
I’ve been keeping it for you a long time,” he repeated once more in his delight.
Kolya was disconcerted.
The captain fidgeted uneasily.
Ilusha will always let you play with it; it shall belong to both of you, both of you.” “No, I don’t want it to belong to both of us, I want it to be mine altogether, not Ilusha’s,” persisted mamma, on the point of tears.
“Krassotkin, may I give it to my mother?” he turned to Krassotkin with an imploring face, as though he were afraid he might be offended at his giving his present to some one else.
“Of course you may,” Krassotkin assented heartily, and, taking the cannon from Ilusha, he handed it himself to mamma with a polite bow.
“Ilusha, darling, he’s the one who loves his mamma!” she said tenderly, and at once began wheeling the cannon to and fro on her lap again.
“And I never saw such a charming fellow as this nice boy,” said the grateful lady, pointing to Krassotkin.
We make the powder ourselves now.
Borovikov found out how it’s made—twenty-four parts of saltpeter, ten of sulphur and six of birchwood charcoal.
It’s all pounded together, mixed into a paste with water and rubbed through a tammy sieve—that’s how it’s done.” “Smurov told me about your powder, only father says it’s not real gunpowder,” responded Ilusha.
We lighted some in a pomatum pot, it burned splendidly, it all burnt away leaving only a tiny ash.
And Bulkin’s father thrashed him on account of our powder, did you hear?” he turned to Ilusha.
“Yes,” answered Ilusha.
He listened to Kolya with immense interest and enjoyment.
“We had prepared a whole bottle of it and he used to keep it under his bed.
He said it might explode, and thrashed him on the spot.
He was going to make a complaint against me to the masters.
They say I’m a ‘desperate character,’” Kolya smiled scornfully.
“It all began from what happened on the railway.” “Ah, we’ve heard of that exploit of yours, too,” cried the captain.
Is it possible you weren’t the least afraid, lying there under the train?
Weren’t you frightened?” The captain was abject in his flattery of Kolya.
“N—not particularly,” answered Kolya carelessly.
“What’s blasted my reputation more than anything here was that cursed goose,” he said, turning again to Ilusha.
But though he assumed an unconcerned air as he talked, he still could not control himself and was continually missing the note he tried to keep up.
“They told me, but I didn’t understand.
Did they really take you to the court?” “The most stupid, trivial affair, they made a mountain of a molehill as they always do,” Kolya began carelessly.
All at once a fellow, who is an errand-boy at Plotnikov’s now, looked at me and said, ‘What are you looking at the geese for?’ I looked at him; he was a stupid, moon-faced fellow of twenty.
I am always on the side of the peasantry, you know.
I like talking to the peasants....
We’ve dropped behind the peasants—that’s an axiom.
I believe you are laughing, Karamazov?” “No, Heaven forbid, I am listening,” said Alyosha with a most good-natured air, and the sensitive Kolya was immediately reassured.
“My theory, Karamazov, is clear and simple,” he hurried on again, looking pleased.
“I believe in the people and am always glad to give them their due, but I am not for spoiling them, that is a _sine qua non_ ...
So I turned to the fool and answered, ‘I am wondering what the goose thinks about.’ He looked at me quite stupidly, ‘And what does the goose think about?’ he asked.
‘The oats are dropping out of the sack, and the goose has put its neck right under the wheel to gobble them up—do you see?’ ‘I see that quite well,’ he said.
‘Well,’ said I, ‘if that cart were to move on a little, would it break the goose’s neck or not?’ ‘It’d be sure to break it,’ and he grinned all over his face, highly delighted.
And, as luck would have it, all the peasants saw us at that moment and they kicked up a shindy at once.
‘You were there, too,’ they said, ‘you helped, you’re known all over the market!’ And, for some reason, I really am known all over the market,” Kolya added conceitedly.
The fellow was crying in a great funk, simply blubbering like a woman.
And the farmer kept shouting that you could kill any number of geese like that.
Well, of course, there were witnesses.
And the fellow kept blubbering like a woman.
I answered with the utmost composure that I hadn’t egged him on, that I simply stated the general proposition, had spoken hypothetically.
‘I’ll complain to your masters of you, so that for the future you mayn’t waste your time on such general propositions, instead of sitting at your books and learning your lessons.’ He didn’t complain to the masters, that was a joke, but the matter was noised abroad and came to the ears of the masters.
The classical master, Kolbasnikov, was particularly shocked about it, but Dardanelov got me off again.
But Kolbasnikov is savage with every one now like a green ass.
Did you know, Ilusha, he is just married, got a dowry of a thousand roubles, and his bride’s a regular fright of the first rank and the last degree.
The third-class fellows wrote an epigram on it: Astounding news has reached the class, Kolbasnikov has been an ass.
I say nothing against Dardanelov, he is a learned man, there’s no doubt about it.
I respect men like that and it’s not because he stood up for me.” “But you took him down about the founders of Troy!” Smurov put in suddenly, unmistakably proud of Krassotkin at such a moment.
He was particularly pleased with the story of the goose.
“Did you really take him down?” the captain inquired, in a flattering way.
“On the question who founded Troy?
We heard of it, Ilusha told me about it at the time.” “He knows everything, father, he knows more than any of us!” put in Ilusha; “he only pretends to be like that, but really he is top in every subject....” Ilusha looked at Kolya with infinite happiness.
“Oh, that’s all nonsense about Troy, a trivial matter.
I consider this an unimportant question,” said Kolya with haughty humility.
He had by now completely recovered his dignity, though he was still a little uneasy.
He felt that he was greatly excited and that he had talked about the goose, for instance, with too little reserve, while Alyosha had looked serious and had not said a word all the time.
And the vain boy began by degrees to have a rankling fear that Alyosha was silent because he despised him, and thought he was showing off before him.
If he dared to think anything like that Kolya would— “I regard the question as quite a trivial one,” he rapped out again, proudly.
“And I know who founded Troy,” a boy, who had not spoken before, said suddenly, to the surprise of every one.
He was a pretty boy of about eleven, called Kartashov.
Kolya looked at him with dignified amazement.
The fact was that the identity of the founders of Troy had become a secret for the whole school, a secret which could only be discovered by reading Smaragdov, and no one had Smaragdov but Kolya.
One day, when Kolya’s back was turned, Kartashov hastily opened Smaragdov, which lay among Kolya’s books, and immediately lighted on the passage relating to the foundation of Troy.
This was a good time ago, but he felt uneasy and could not bring himself to announce publicly that he too knew who had founded Troy, afraid of what might happen and of Krassotkin’s somehow putting him to shame over it.
“Well, who did found it?” asked Kolya, turning to him with haughty superciliousness.
There was, so to speak, a discordant note in the general harmony.
“Troy was founded by Teucer, Dardanus, Ilius and Tros,” the boy rapped out at once, and in the same instant he blushed, blushed so, that it was painful to look at him.
But the boys stared at him, stared at him for a whole minute, and then all the staring eyes turned at once and were fastened upon Kolya, who was still scanning the audacious boy with disdainful composure.
“And what is meant by founding a city or a state?
Did they go and each lay a brick, do you suppose?” There was laughter.
The offending boy turned from pink to crimson.
“Before you talk of a historical event like the foundation of a nationality, you must first understand what you mean by it,” he admonished him in stern, incisive tones.
“But I attach no consequence to these old wives’ tales and I don’t think much of universal history in general,” he added carelessly, addressing the company generally.
“Universal history?” the captain inquired, looking almost scared.
“Yes, universal history!
It’s the study of the successive follies of mankind and nothing more.
The only subjects I respect are mathematics and natural science,” said Kolya.
If Alyosha had said a word it would have stopped him, but Alyosha was silent and “it might be the silence of contempt,” and that finally irritated Kolya.
“The classical languages, too ... they are simply madness, nothing more.
You seem to disagree with me again, Karamazov?” “I don’t agree,” said Alyosha, with a faint smile.
“The study of the classics, if you ask my opinion, is simply a police measure, that’s simply why it has been introduced into our schools.” By degrees Kolya began to get breathless again.
“Latin and Greek were introduced because they are a bore and because they stupefy the intellect.
It was senseless enough before, so what could they do to make it more senseless?
That’s my opinion, I hope I shall never change it,” Kolya finished abruptly.
“That’s true,” assented Smurov suddenly, in a ringing tone of conviction.
He had listened attentively.
“And yet he is first in Latin himself,” cried one of the group of boys suddenly.
“I am fagging away at Latin because I have to, because I promised my mother to pass my examination, and I think that whatever you do, it’s worth doing it well.
But in my soul I have a profound contempt for the classics and all that fraud....
You don’t agree, Karamazov?” “Why ‘fraud’?” Alyosha smiled again.
“Well, all the classical authors have been translated into all languages, so it was not for the sake of studying the classics they introduced Latin, but solely as a police measure, to stupefy the intelligence.
So what can one call it but a fraud?” “Why, who taught you all this?” cried Alyosha, surprised at last.
“In the first place I am capable of thinking for myself without being taught.
Besides, what I said just now about the classics being translated our teacher Kolbasnikov has said to the whole of the third class.” “The doctor has come!” cried Nina, who had been silent till then.
A carriage belonging to Madame Hohlakov drove up to the gate.
The captain, who had been expecting the doctor all the morning, rushed headlong out to meet him.
“Mamma” pulled herself together and assumed a dignified air.
Alyosha went up to Ilusha and began setting his pillows straight.
Nina, from her invalid chair, anxiously watched him putting the bed tidy.
The boys hurriedly took leave.
Some of them promised to come again in the evening.
Kolya called Perezvon and the dog jumped off the bed.
“I’ll wait in the passage and come back when the doctor’s gone, I’ll come back with Perezvon.” But by now the doctor had entered, an important-looking person with long, dark whiskers and a shiny, shaven chin, wearing a bearskin coat.
As he crossed the threshold he stopped, taken aback; he probably fancied he had come to the wrong place.
Where am I?” he muttered, not removing his coat nor his peaked sealskin cap.
“It’s here, sir, here, sir,” he muttered cringingly; “it’s here, you’ve come right, you were coming to us...” “Sne-gi-ryov?” the doctor said loudly and pompously.
Snegiryov—is that you?” “That’s me, sir!” “Ah!” The doctor looked round the room with a squeamish air once more and threw off his coat, displaying to all eyes the grand decoration at his neck.
“Where is the patient?” he asked emphatically.
Precocity “What do you think the doctor will say to him?” Kolya asked quickly.
“What a repulsive mug, though, hasn’t he?
I can’t endure medicine!” “Ilusha is dying.
I think that’s certain,” answered Alyosha, mournfully.
I am glad to have made your acquaintance, though, Karamazov.
I am only sorry we meet in such sad circumstances.” Kolya had a great inclination to say something even warmer and more demonstrative, but he felt ill at ease.
“I’ve long learned to respect you as a rare person,” Kolya muttered again, faltering and uncertain.
“I have heard you are a mystic and have been in the monastery.
It’s always so with characters like yours.” “What do you mean by mystic?
Cure me of what?” Alyosha was rather astonished.
Of course, God is only a hypothesis, but ...
I admit that He is needed ... for the order of the universe and all that ... and that if there were no God He would have to be invented,” added Kolya, beginning to blush.
He suddenly fancied that Alyosha might think he was trying to show off his knowledge and to prove that he was “grown up.” “I haven’t the slightest desire to show off my knowledge to him,” Kolya thought indignantly.
And all of a sudden he felt horribly annoyed.
“I must confess I can’t endure entering on such discussions,” he said with a final air.
“It’s possible for one who doesn’t believe in God to love mankind, don’t you think so?
Voltaire didn’t believe in God and loved mankind?” (“I am at it again,” he thought to himself.) “Voltaire believed in God, though not very much, I think, and I don’t think he loved mankind very much either,” said Alyosha quietly, gently, and quite naturally, as though he were talking to some one of his own age, or even older.
Kolya was particularly struck by Alyosha’s apparent diffidence about his opinion of Voltaire.
He seemed to be leaving the question for him, little Kolya, to settle.
“Have you read Voltaire?” Alyosha finished.
But I’ve read _Candide_ in the Russian translation ... in an absurd, grotesque, old translation ... (At it again! again!)” “And did you understand it?” “Oh, yes, everything....
Why do you suppose I shouldn’t understand it?
There’s a lot of nastiness in it, of course....
Of course I can understand that it’s a philosophical novel and written to advocate an idea....” Kolya was getting mixed by now.
“I am a Socialist, Karamazov, I am an incurable Socialist,” he announced suddenly, apropos of nothing.
“A Socialist?” laughed Alyosha.
Why, I thought you were only thirteen?” Kolya winced.
“In the first place I am not thirteen, but fourteen, fourteen in a fortnight,” he flushed angrily, “and in the second place I am at a complete loss to understand what my age has to do with it?
The question is what are my convictions, not what is my age, isn’t it?” “When you are older, you’ll understand for yourself the influence of age on convictions.
I fancied, too, that you were not expressing your own ideas,” Alyosha answered serenely and modestly, but Kolya interrupted him hotly: “Come, you want obedience and mysticism.
You must admit that the Christian religion, for instance, has only been of use to the rich and the powerful to keep the lower classes in slavery.
And certainly no one told me so.
He was a most humane person, and if He were alive to-day, He would be found in the ranks of the revolutionists, and would perhaps play a conspicuous part....
What fool have you made friends with?” exclaimed Alyosha.
Rakitin, of course, but ... old Byelinsky said that, too, so they say.” “Byelinsky?
He hasn’t written that anywhere.” “If he didn’t write it, they say he said it.
I heard that from a ... but never mind.” “And have you read Byelinsky?” “Well, no ...
Surely you don’t ... understand that already?” “Why, you seem to take me for little Smurov,” said Kolya, with a grin of irritation.
“But please don’t suppose I am such a revolutionist.
I often disagree with Mr.
Though I mention Tatyana, I am not at all for the emancipation of women.
I acknowledge that women are a subject race and must obey. _Les femmes tricottent_, as Napoleon said.” Kolya, for some reason, smiled, “And on that question at least I am quite of one mind with that pseudo-great man.
Why go to America when one may be of great service to humanity here?
There’s a perfect mass of fruitful activity open to us.
That’s what I answered.” “What do you mean?
Has some one suggested your going to America already?” “I must own, they’ve been at me to go, but I declined.
That’s between ourselves, of course, Karamazov; do you hear, not a word to any one.
I am not at all anxious to fall into the clutches of the secret police and take lessons at the Chain bridge.
Long will you remember The house at the Chain bridge.
Why are you laughing?
You don’t suppose I am fibbing, do you?” (“What if he should find out that I’ve only that one number of _The Bell_ in father’s bookcase, and haven’t read any more of it?” Kolya thought with a shudder.) “Oh, no, I am not laughing and don’t suppose for a moment that you are lying.
No, indeed, I can’t suppose so, for all this, alas! is perfectly true.
But tell me, have you read Pushkin—_Onyegin_, for instance?...
I have no prejudices, Karamazov; I want to hear both sides.
What makes you ask?” “Oh, nothing.” “Tell me, Karamazov, have you an awful contempt for me?” Kolya rapped out suddenly and drew himself up before Alyosha, as though he were on drill.
“Be so kind as to tell me, without beating about the bush.” “I have a contempt for you?” Alyosha looked at him wondering.
I am only sad that a charming nature such as yours should be perverted by all this crude nonsense before you have begun life.” “Don’t be anxious about my nature,” Kolya interrupted, not without complacency.
“But it’s true that I am stupidly sensitive, crudely sensitive.
You smiled just now, and I fancied you seemed to—” “Oh, my smile meant something quite different.
Not long ago I read the criticism made by a German who had lived in Russia, on our students and schoolboys of to-day.
‘Show a Russian schoolboy,’ he writes, ‘a map of the stars, which he knows nothing about, and he will give you back the map next day with corrections on it.’ No knowledge and unbounded conceit—that’s what the German meant to say about the Russian schoolboy.” “Yes, that’s perfectly right,” Kolya laughed suddenly, “exactly so!
Conceit may be, that comes from youth, that will be corrected if need be, but, on the other hand, there is an independent spirit almost from childhood, boldness of thought and conviction, and not the spirit of these sausage makers, groveling before authority....
But Germans want strangling all the same.
Though they are so good at science and learning they must be strangled.” “Strangled, what for?” smiled Alyosha.
“Well, perhaps I am talking nonsense, I agree.
I am awfully childish sometimes, and when I am pleased about anything I can’t restrain myself and am ready to talk any stuff.
But, I say, we are chattering away here about nothing, and that doctor has been a long time in there.
But perhaps he’s examining the mamma and that poor crippled Nina.
She whispered to me suddenly as I was coming away, ‘Why didn’t you come before?’ And in such a voice, so reproachfully!
I think she is awfully nice and pathetic.” “Yes, yes!
It would do you a great deal of good to know people like that, to learn to value a great deal which you will find out from knowing these people,” Alyosha observed warmly.
“That would have more effect on you than anything.” “Oh, how I regret and blame myself for not having come sooner!” Kolya exclaimed, with bitter feeling.
You saw for yourself how delighted the poor child was to see you.
What kept me from coming was my conceit, my egoistic vanity, and the beastly wilfullness, which I never can get rid of, though I’ve been struggling with it all my life.
I am a beast in lots of ways, Karamazov!” “No, you have a charming nature, though it’s been distorted, and I quite understand why you have had such an influence on this generous, morbidly sensitive boy,” Alyosha answered warmly.
“And you say that to me!” cried Kolya; “and would you believe it, I thought—I’ve thought several times since I’ve been here—that you despised me!
If only you knew how I prize your opinion!” “But are you really so sensitive?
Would you believe it, just now, when you were telling your story, I thought, as I watched you, that you must be very sensitive!” “You thought so?
That was just when I was fancying you had a great contempt for me for being in such a hurry to show off, and for a moment I quite hated you for it, and began talking like a fool.
Then I fancied—just now, here—when I said that if there were no God He would have to be invented, that I was in too great a hurry to display my knowledge, especially as I got that phrase out of a book.
Yes, I believe it was because I was so pleased ... though it’s perfectly disgraceful for any one to be gushing directly they are pleased, I know that.
But I am convinced now that you don’t despise me; it was all my imagination.
Oh, Karamazov, I am profoundly unhappy.
I sometimes fancy all sorts of things, that every one is laughing at me, the whole world, and then I feel ready to overturn the whole order of things.” “And you worry every one about you,” smiled Alyosha.
“Yes, I worry every one about me, especially my mother.
Karamazov, tell me, am I very ridiculous now?” “Don’t think about that, don’t think of it at all!” cried Alyosha.
“And what does ridiculous mean?
Isn’t every one constantly being or seeming ridiculous?
Besides, nearly all clever people now are fearfully afraid of being ridiculous, and that makes them unhappy.
All I am surprised at is that you should be feeling that so early, though I’ve observed it for some time past, and not only in you.
Nowadays the very children have begun to suffer from it.
It’s almost a sort of insanity.
The devil has taken the form of that vanity and entered into the whole generation; it’s simply the devil,” added Alyosha, without a trace of the smile that Kolya, staring at him, expected to see.
“You are like every one else,” said Alyosha, in conclusion, “that is, like very many others.
Only you must not be like everybody else, that’s all.” “Even if every one is like that?” “Yes, even if every one is like that.
You really are not like every one else, here you are not ashamed to confess to something bad and even ridiculous.
And people have even ceased to feel the impulse to self-criticism.
Don’t be like every one else, even if you are the only one.” “Splendid!
I was not mistaken in you.
Oh, how I have longed to know you, Karamazov!
You said just now that you thought of me, too?” “Yes, I’d heard of you and had thought of you, too ... and if it’s partly vanity that makes you ask, it doesn’t matter.” “Do you know, Karamazov, our talk has been like a declaration of love,” said Kolya, in a bashful and melting voice.
“That’s not ridiculous, is it?” “Not at all ridiculous, and if it were, it wouldn’t matter, because it’s been a good thing.” Alyosha smiled brightly.
“But do you know, Karamazov, you must admit that you are a little ashamed yourself, now....
I see it by your eyes.” Kolya smiled with a sort of sly happiness.
“Why ashamed?” “Well, why are you blushing?” “It was you made me blush,” laughed Alyosha, and he really did blush.
“Oh, well, I am a little, goodness knows why, I don’t know...” he muttered, almost embarrassed.
Because you are just like me,” cried Kolya, in positive ecstasy.
“You know, Kolya, you will be very unhappy in your life,” something made Alyosha say suddenly.
How you know it all beforehand!” Kolya agreed at once.
Oh, we shall get on together, Karamazov!
Do you know, what delights me most, is that you treat me quite like an equal.
I’ve been loving and dreaming of you.
And how do you know it all beforehand?
His face looked almost angry and disgusted, as though he were afraid of getting dirty.
Alyosha waved from the door to the coachman, and the carriage that had brought the doctor drove up.
The captain darted out after the doctor, and, bowing apologetically, stopped him to get the last word.
“Your Excellency, your Excellency ... is it possible?” he began, but could not go on and clasped his hands in despair.
Yet he still gazed imploringly at the doctor, as though a word from him might still change the poor boy’s fate.
“I can’t help it, I am not God!” the doctor answered offhand, though with the customary impressiveness.
“Doctor ... your Excellency ... and will it be soon, soon?” “You must be prepared for anything,” said the doctor in emphatic and incisive tones, and dropping his eyes, he was about to step out to the coach.
“Your Excellency, for Christ’s sake!” the terror-stricken captain stopped him again.
“Your Excellency! but can nothing, absolutely nothing save him now?” “It’s not in my hands now,” said the doctor impatiently, “but h’m!...” he stopped suddenly.
“If you could, for instance ... send ... your patient ... at once, without delay” (the words “at once, without delay,” the doctor uttered with an almost wrathful sternness that made the captain start) “to Syracuse, the change to the new be-ne-ficial climatic conditions might possibly effect—” “To Syracuse!” cried the captain, unable to grasp what was said.
“Syracuse is in Sicily,” Kolya jerked out suddenly in explanation.
But you see!” The captain flung wide his hands again despairingly, indicating the bare wooden walls of the passage.
“Well, that’s not my business,” grinned the doctor.
“I have only told you the answer of medical science to your question as to possible treatment.
As for the rest, to my regret—” “Don’t be afraid, apothecary, my dog won’t bite you,” Kolya rapped out loudly, noticing the doctor’s rather uneasy glance at Perezvon, who was standing in the doorway.
There was a wrathful note in Kolya’s voice.
He used the word apothecary instead of doctor on purpose, and, as he explained afterwards, used it “to insult him.” “What’s that?” The doctor flung up his head, staring with surprise at Kolya.
“Who’s this?” he addressed Alyosha, as though asking him to explain.
“It’s Perezvon’s master, don’t worry about me,” Kolya said incisively again.
“Perezvon?”[7] repeated the doctor, perplexed.
Good-by, we shall meet in Syracuse.” “Who’s this?
Who’s this?” The doctor flew into a terrible rage.
“He is a schoolboy, doctor, he is a mischievous boy; take no notice of him,” said Alyosha, frowning and speaking quickly.
“Kolya, hold your tongue!” he cried to Krassotkin.
“Take no notice of him, doctor,” he repeated, rather impatiently.
“He wants a thrashing, a good thrashing!” The doctor stamped in a perfect fury.
“And you know, apothecary, my Perezvon might bite!” said Kolya, turning pale, with quivering voice and flashing eyes.
“_Ici_, Perezvon!” “Kolya, if you say another word, I’ll have nothing more to do with you,” Alyosha cried peremptorily.
“There is only one man in the world who can command Nikolay Krassotkin—this is the man”; Kolya pointed to Alyosha.
Perezvon flew after him.
The doctor stood still for five seconds in amazement, looking at Alyosha; then, with a curse, he went out quickly to the carriage, repeating aloud, “This is ... this is ...
I don’t know what it is!” The captain darted forward to help him into the carriage.
Alyosha followed Kolya into the room.
“Father, father, come ... we ...” Ilusha faltered in violent excitement, but apparently unable to go on, he flung his wasted arms round his father and Kolya, uniting them in one embrace, and hugging them as tightly as he could.
The captain suddenly began to shake with dumb sobs, and Kolya’s lips and chin twitched.
How sorry I am for you!” Ilusha moaned bitterly.
I saw!” cried Ilusha, and again he hugged them both with all his strength, hiding his face on his father’s shoulder.
“Father, don’t cry, and when I die get a good boy, another one ... choose one of them all, a good one, call him Ilusha and love him instead of me....” “Hush, old man, you’ll get well,” Krassotkin cried suddenly, in a voice that sounded angry.
“But don’t ever forget me, father,” Ilusha went on, “come to my grave ... and, father, bury me by our big stone, where we used to go for our walk, and come to me there with Krassotkin in the evening ... and Perezvon ...
They were all three silent, still embracing.
Ilusha!” she exclaimed.
Krassotkin suddenly released himself from Ilusha’s embrace.
She will be dreadfully anxious....
And I’ll bring Perezvon, but now I will take him with me, because he will begin to howl when I am away and bother you.
“Kolya, you must be sure to keep your word and come, or he will be terribly disappointed,” Alyosha said emphatically.
Oh, how I curse myself for not having come before!” muttered Kolya, crying, and no longer ashamed of it.
His face looked frenzied, his lips were trembling.
I don’t want another boy!” he muttered in a wild whisper, clenching his teeth.
“If I forget thee, Jerusalem, may my tongue—” He broke off with a sob and sank on his knees before the wooden bench.
Pressing his fists against his head, he began sobbing with absurd whimpering cries, doing his utmost that his cries should not be heard in the room.
“Good-by, Karamazov?
Will you come yourself?” he cried sharply and angrily to Alyosha.
“I will certainly come in the evening.” “What was that he said about Jerusalem?...
‘If I forget thee, Jerusalem,’ that is, if I forget all that is most precious to me, if I let anything take its place, then may—” “I understand, that’s enough!
Mind you come! _Ici_, Perezvon!” he cried with positive ferocity to the dog, and with rapid strides he went home.
At Grushenka’s Alyosha went towards the cathedral square to the widow Morozov’s house to see Grushenka, who had sent Fenya to him early in the morning with an urgent message begging him to come.
Questioning Fenya, Alyosha learned that her mistress had been particularly distressed since the previous day.
During the two months that had passed since Mitya’s arrest, Alyosha had called frequently at the widow Morozov’s house, both from his own inclination and to take messages for Mitya.
Three days after Mitya’s arrest, Grushenka was taken very ill and was ill for nearly five weeks.
For one whole week she was unconscious.
She was very much changed—thinner and a little sallow, though she had for the past fortnight been well enough to go out.
But to Alyosha her face was even more attractive than before, and he liked to meet her eyes when he went in to her.
A look of firmness and intelligent purpose had developed in her face.
There were signs of a spiritual transformation in her, and a steadfast, fine and humble determination that nothing could shake could be discerned in her.
There was a small vertical line between her brows which gave her charming face a look of concentrated thought, almost austere at the first glance.
There was scarcely a trace of her former frivolity.
It seemed strange to Alyosha, too, that in spite of the calamity that had overtaken the poor girl, betrothed to a man who had been arrested for a terrible crime, almost at the instant of their betrothal, in spite of her illness and the almost inevitable sentence hanging over Mitya, Grushenka had not yet lost her youthful cheerfulness.
There was a soft light in the once proud eyes, though at times they gleamed with the old vindictive fire when she was visited by one disturbing thought stronger than ever in her heart.
The object of that uneasiness was the same as ever—Katerina Ivanovna, of whom Grushenka had even raved when she lay in delirium.
Alyosha knew that she was fearfully jealous of her.
Yet Katerina Ivanovna had not once visited Mitya in his prison, though she might have done it whenever she liked.
All this made a difficult problem for Alyosha, for he was the only person to whom Grushenka opened her heart and from whom she was continually asking advice.
Sometimes he was unable to say anything.
She had returned from seeing Mitya half an hour before, and from the rapid movement with which she leapt up from her chair to meet him he saw that she had been expecting him with great impatience.
A bed had been made up on the leather sofa on the other side and Maximov lay, half-reclining, on it.
He wore a dressing-gown and a cotton nightcap, and was evidently ill and weak, though he was smiling blissfully.
When the homeless old man returned with Grushenka from Mokroe two months before, he had simply stayed on and was still staying with her.
He arrived with her in rain and sleet, sat down on the sofa, drenched and scared, and gazed mutely at her with a timid, appealing smile.
Grushenka, who was in terrible grief and in the first stage of fever, almost forgot his existence in all she had to do the first half-hour after her arrival.
Suddenly she chanced to look at him intently: he laughed a pitiful, helpless little laugh.
She called Fenya and told her to give him something to eat.
All that day he sat in the same place, almost without stirring.
When it got dark and the shutters were closed, Fenya asked her mistress: “Is the gentleman going to stay the night, mistress?” “Yes; make him a bed on the sofa,” answered Grushenka.
Questioning him more in detail, Grushenka learned from him that he had literally nowhere to go, and that “Mr.
Kalganov, my benefactor, told me straight that he wouldn’t receive me again and gave me five roubles.” “Well, God bless you, you’d better stay, then,” Grushenka decided in her grief, smiling compassionately at him.
Her smile wrung the old man’s heart and his lips twitched with grateful tears.
And so the destitute wanderer had stayed with her ever since.
Fenya and her grandmother, the cook, did not turn him out, but went on serving him meals and making up his bed on the sofa.
Grushenka had grown used to him, and coming back from seeing Mitya (whom she had begun to visit in prison before she was really well) she would sit down and begin talking to “Maximushka” about trifling matters, to keep her from thinking of her sorrow.
The old man turned out to be a good story-teller on occasions, so that at last he became necessary to her.
Grushenka saw scarcely any one else beside Alyosha, who did not come every day and never stayed long.
Her old merchant lay seriously ill at this time, “at his last gasp” as they said in the town, and he did, in fact, die a week after Mitya’s trial.
Three weeks before his death, feeling the end approaching, he made his sons, their wives and children, come upstairs to him at last and bade them not leave him again.
From that moment he gave strict orders to his servants not to admit Grushenka and to tell her if she came, “The master wishes you long life and happiness and tells you to forget him.” But Grushenka sent almost every day to inquire after him.
“You’ve come at last!” she cried, flinging down the cards and joyfully greeting Alyosha, “and Maximushka’s been scaring me that perhaps you wouldn’t come.
Fenya, Fenya, coffee,” cried Grushenka.
So I said to him: ‘I shall leave them with the warder; if you don’t eat them before evening, it will be that your venomous spite is enough for you!’ With that I went away.
We quarreled again, would you believe it?
Whenever I go we quarrel.” Grushenka said all this in one breath in her agitation.
‘So you’ve begun keeping him.’ He is jealous, jealous of me all the time, jealous eating and sleeping!
He has known about him from the very beginning, but to-day he suddenly got up and began scolding about him.
What do you think?” she added carelessly.
And now he is particularly worried.” “I should think he might be, with the trial to-morrow.
And I went to him to say something about to-morrow, for I dread to think what’s going to happen then.
He is not jealous of Maximushka yet, anyway.” “My wife was dreadfully jealous over me, too,” Maximov put in his word.
“Jealous of you?” Grushenka laughed in spite of herself.
“Of whom could she have been jealous?” “Of the servant girls.” “Hold your tongue, Maximushka, I am in no laughing mood now; I feel angry.
I have to look after him, too, just as though I kept an almshouse,” she laughed.
“I don’t deserve your kindness.
I am a worthless creature,” said Maximov, with tears in his voice.
“You would do better to spend your kindness on people of more use than me.” “Ech, every one is of use, Maximushka, and how can we tell who’s of most use?
Yes, it’s from the Poles—begging again!” Pan Mussyalovitch had indeed sent an extremely long and characteristically eloquent letter in which he begged her to lend him three roubles.
In the letter was enclosed a receipt for the sum, with a promise to repay it within three months, signed by Pan Vrublevsky as well.
Grushenka had received many such letters, accompanied by such receipts, from her former lover during the fortnight of her convalescence.
The first letter Grushenka got from them was a long one, written on large notepaper and with a big family crest on the seal.
It was so obscure and rhetorical that Grushenka put it down before she had read half, unable to make head or tail of it.
The first letter was followed next day by another in which Pan Mussyalovitch begged her for a loan of two thousand roubles for a very short period.
Grushenka left that letter, too, unanswered.
A whole series of letters had followed—one every day—all as pompous and rhetorical, but the loan asked for, gradually diminishing, dropped to a hundred roubles, then to twenty-five, to ten, and finally Grushenka received a letter in which both the Poles begged her for only one rouble and included a receipt signed by both.
Then Grushenka suddenly felt sorry for them, and at dusk she went round herself to their lodging.
She found the two Poles in great poverty, almost destitution, without food or fuel, without cigarettes, in debt to their landlady.
The two hundred roubles they had carried off from Mitya at Mokroe had soon disappeared.
But Grushenka was surprised at their meeting her with arrogant dignity and self-assertion, with the greatest punctilio and pompous speeches.
Grushenka simply laughed, and gave her former admirer ten roubles.
Then, laughing, she told Mitya of it and he was not in the least jealous.
But ever since, the Poles had attached themselves to Grushenka and bombarded her daily with requests for money and she had always sent them small sums.
And now that day Mitya had taken it into his head to be fearfully jealous.
“Like a fool, I went round to him just for a minute, on the way to see Mitya, for he is ill, too, my Pole,” Grushenka began again with nervous haste.
“I was laughing, telling Mitya about it.
He thought I would be touched and marry him!’ Mitya leapt up swearing....
And you, Alyosha, be sure to tell Mitya that I did send them the pies.” “I wouldn’t tell him for anything,” said Alyosha, smiling.
He doesn’t care,” said Grushenka bitterly.
You know nothing about it, with all your cleverness.
I am not offended that he is jealous of a girl like me.
I would be offended if he were not jealous.
I am not offended at jealousy.
He began talking to me just now of that woman, of Katerina, saying she was this and that, how she had ordered a doctor from Moscow for him, to try and save him; how she had ordered the best counsel, the most learned one, too.
He’s treated me badly himself, so he attacked me, to make out I am in fault first and to throw it all on me.
‘You were with your Pole before me, so I can’t be blamed for Katerina,’ that’s what it amounts to.
He attacked me on purpose, on purpose, I tell you, but I’ll—” Grushenka could not finish saying what she would do.
She hid her eyes in her handkerchief and sobbed violently.
“He doesn’t love Katerina Ivanovna,” said Alyosha firmly.
“Well, whether he loves her or not, I’ll soon find out for myself,” said Grushenka, with a menacing note in her voice, taking the handkerchief from her eyes.
Her face was distorted.
Alyosha saw sorrowfully that from being mild and serene, it had become sullen and spiteful.
“Enough of this foolishness,” she said suddenly; “it’s not for that I sent for you.
I look at every one and no one is thinking of it.
Are you thinking about it even?
They haven’t troubled the valet at all, have they?” “He’s been severely cross-examined,” observed Alyosha thoughtfully; “but every one came to the conclusion it was not he.
“Oh, dear! couldn’t you go to that counsel yourself and tell him the whole thing by yourself?
He’s been brought from Petersburg for three thousand roubles, they say.” “We gave these three thousand together—Ivan, Katerina Ivanovna and I—but she paid two thousand for the doctor from Moscow herself.
The counsel Fetyukovitch would have charged more, but the case has become known all over Russia; it’s talked of in all the papers and journals.
Fetyukovitch agreed to come more for the glory of the thing, because the case has become so notorious.
I saw him yesterday.” “Well?
Did you talk to him?” Grushenka put in eagerly.
“He listened and said nothing.
But he promised to give my words consideration.” “Consideration!
Ah, they are swindlers!
They want to prove that Mitya’s mad and committed the murder when he didn’t know what he was doing”; Alyosha smiled gently; “but Mitya won’t agree to that.” “Yes; but that would be the truth if he had killed him!” cried Grushenka.
“He was mad then, perfectly mad, and that was my fault, wretch that I am!
Even Fenya’s evidence went to prove he had done it.
And the people at the shop, and that official, and at the tavern, too, before, people had heard him say so!
They are all, all against him, all crying out against him.” “Yes, there’s a fearful accumulation of evidence,” Alyosha observed grimly.
“And Grigory—Grigory Vassilyevitch—sticks to his story that the door was open, persists that he saw it—there’s no shaking him.
He’s rude about it, too.” “Yes, that’s perhaps the strongest evidence against him,” said Alyosha.
“And as for Mitya’s being mad, he certainly seems like it now,” Grushenka began with a peculiarly anxious and mysterious air.
I fancied he was talking of something intellectual that I couldn’t understand in my foolishness.
Only he suddenly began talking to me about a babe—that is, about some child.
I am not a murderer, but I must go to Siberia!’ What that meant, what babe, I couldn’t tell for the life of me.
He suddenly kissed me and made the sign of the cross over me.
I didn’t see Mitya yesterday.
I’ll see him to-day.” “No, it’s not Rakitin; it’s his brother Ivan Fyodorovitch upsetting him.
It’s his going to see him, that’s what it is,” Grushenka began, and suddenly broke off.
Alyosha gazed at her in amazement.
Blurting things out!” exclaimed Grushenka, confused and suddenly blushing.
Since I’ve said so much I’ll tell the whole truth—he’s been to see him twice, the first directly he arrived.
He galloped here from Moscow at once, of course, before I was taken ill; and the second time was a week ago.
He told Mitya not to tell you about it, under any circumstances; and not to tell any one, in fact.
He came secretly.” Alyosha sat plunged in thought, considering something.
The news evidently impressed him.
And whenever I go to see him, he seems vexed at my coming, so I’ve not been to him for the last three weeks.
H’m!... if he was there a week ago ... there certainly has been a change in Mitya this week.” “There has been a change,” Grushenka assented quickly.
Before then, he was cheerful—and, indeed, he is cheerful now—but when he shakes his head like that, you know, and strides about the room and keeps pulling at the hair on his right temple with his right hand, I know there is something on his mind worrying him....
He was cheerful before, though, indeed, he is cheerful to-day.” “But you said he was worried.” “Yes, he is worried and yet cheerful.
He keeps on being irritable for a minute and then cheerful and then irritable again.
And you know, Alyosha, I am constantly wondering at him—with this awful thing hanging over him, he sometimes laughs at such trifles as though he were a baby himself.” “And did he really tell you not to tell me about Ivan?
Alyosha, darling, go to him and find out what their secret is and come and tell me,” Grushenka besought him with sudden eagerness.
That’s why I sent for you.” “You think it’s something to do with you?
There is a secret, he tells me, but he won’t tell me what it is.” “What do you think yourself?” “What do I think?
They all three have been plotting my end, for Katerina’s in it.
It’s all Katerina, it all comes from her.
He tells me that beforehand—warns me.
He is planning to throw me over, that’s the whole secret.
They’ve planned it together, the three of them—Mitya, Katerina, and Ivan Fyodorovitch.
A week ago he suddenly told me that Ivan was in love with Katerina, because he often goes to see her.
Tell me, on your conscience, tell me the worst.” “I won’t tell you a lie.
Ivan is not in love with Katerina Ivanovna, I think.” “Oh, that’s what I thought!
He is lying to me, shameless deceiver, that’s what it is!
And he was jealous of me just now, so as to put the blame on me afterwards.
He is stupid, he can’t disguise what he is doing; he is so open, you know....
He reproached me with that!
You wait, I’ll make it hot for Katerina at the trial!
I’ll tell everything then!” And again she cried bitterly.
“This I can tell you for certain, Grushenka,” Alyosha said, getting up.
The second thing is that I don’t want to worm his secret out of him, but if he’ll tell me of himself to-day, I shall tell him straight out that I have promised to tell you.
Katerina Ivanovna has nothing to do with it, and that the secret is about something else.
It isn’t likely it’s about Katerina Ivanovna, it seems to me.
Grushenka was still crying.
He saw that she put little faith in his consolation, but she was better for having had her sorrow out, for having spoken of it.
The Injured Foot The first of these things was at the house of Madame Hohlakov, and he hurried there to get it over as quickly as possible and not be too late for Mitya.
Madame Hohlakov had been slightly ailing for the last three weeks: her foot had for some reason swollen up, and though she was not in bed, she lay all day half-reclining on the couch in her boudoir, in a fascinating but decorous _déshabillé_.
Alyosha had once noted with innocent amusement that, in spite of her illness, Madame Hohlakov had begun to be rather dressy—top-knots, ribbons, loose wrappers, had made their appearance, and he had an inkling of the reason, though he dismissed such ideas from his mind as frivolous.
During the last two months the young official, Perhotin, had become a regular visitor at the house.
Alyosha had not called for four days and he was in haste to go straight to Lise, as it was with her he had to speak, for Lise had sent a maid to him the previous day, specially asking him to come to her “about something very important,” a request which, for certain reasons, had interest for Alyosha.
But while the maid went to take his name in to Lise, Madame Hohlakov heard of his arrival from some one, and immediately sent to beg him to come to her “just for one minute.” Alyosha reflected that it was better to accede to the mamma’s request, or else she would be sending down to Lise’s room every minute that he was there.
Madame Hohlakov was lying on a couch.
She was particularly smartly dressed and was evidently in a state of extreme nervous excitement.
Ah, but you were here only four days ago, on Wednesday.
My dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, if you only knew how worried I am about her!
But of that later, though that’s the most important thing, of that later.
Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, I trust you implicitly with my Lise.
Since the death of Father Zossima—God rest his soul!” (she crossed herself)—“I look upon you as a monk, though you look charming in your new suit.
Forgive me for sometimes calling you Alyosha; an old woman like me may take liberties,” she smiled coquettishly; “but that will do later, too.
The important thing is that I shouldn’t forget what is important.
Please remind me of it yourself.
As soon as my tongue runs away with me, you just say ‘the important thing?’ Ach! how do I know now what is of most importance?
Ever since Lise took back her promise—her childish promise, Alexey Fyodorovitch—to marry you, you’ve realized, of course, that it was only the playful fancy of a sick child who had been so long confined to her chair—thank God, she can walk now!... that new doctor Katya sent for from Moscow for your unhappy brother, who will to-morrow—But why speak of to-morrow?
Ready to die of curiosity....
That doctor was with us yesterday and saw Lise....
You see, I’m mixing everything up.
It’s awful how I seem growing unable to understand anything.
Everything seems mixed up in a sort of tangle.
“Where?” “At Agrafena Alexandrovna’s.” “At ... at that woman’s?
Hush, hush, Alexey Fyodorovitch, for I have so much to say to you that I am afraid I shall tell you nothing.
I shall certainly go, I am making arrangements.
Ah! this trial, this savage act, and then they are all going to Siberia, some are getting married, and all this so quickly, so quickly, everything’s changing, and at last—nothing.
This Katya, _cette charmante personne_, has disappointed all my hopes.
Now she is going to follow one of your brothers to Siberia, and your other brother is going to follow her, and will live in the nearest town, and they will all torment one another.
Worst of all—the publicity.
The story has been told a million times over in all the papers in Moscow and Petersburg.
Ah! yes, would you believe it, there’s a paragraph that I was ‘a dear friend’ of your brother’s ——, I can’t repeat the horrid word.
Just fancy, just fancy!” “Impossible!
Where was the paragraph?
What did it say?” “I’ll show you directly.
I got the paper and read it yesterday.
Here, in the Petersburg paper _Gossip_.
Read it.” And she handed Alyosha a sheet of newspaper which had been under her pillow.
It was not exactly that she was upset, she seemed overwhelmed and perhaps everything really was mixed up in a tangle in her head.
The paragraph was very typical, and must have been a great shock to her, but, fortunately perhaps, she was unable to keep her mind fixed on any one subject at that moment, and so might race off in a minute to something else and quite forget the newspaper.
Alyosha was well aware that the story of the terrible case had spread all over Russia.
And, good heavens! what wild rumors about his brother, about the Karamazovs, and about himself he had read in the course of those two months, among other equally credible items!
One paper had even stated that he had gone into a monastery and become a monk, in horror at his brother’s crime.
Another contradicted this, and stated that he and his elder, Father Zossima, had broken into the monastery chest and “made tracks from the monastery.” The present paragraph in the paper _Gossip_ was under the heading, “The Karamazov Case at Skotoprigonyevsk.” (That, alas! was the name of our little town.
I had hitherto kept it concealed.) It was brief, and Madame Hohlakov was not directly mentioned in it.
No names appeared, in fact.
But the criminal, counting on escaping punishment, had preferred to murder his father to get the three thousand rather than go off to Siberia with the middle-aged charms of his pining lady.
This playful paragraph finished, of course, with an outburst of generous indignation at the wickedness of parricide and at the lately abolished institution of serfdom.
Reading it with curiosity, Alyosha folded up the paper and handed it back to Madame Hohlakov.
Scarcely more than an hour before, I suggested gold mines to him, and here they talk of ‘middle-aged charms’ as though that were my motive!
God Almighty forgive him for the middle-aged charms, as I forgive him!
He abuses me, I suppose, abuses me dreadfully?” “Yes, he does; but then he abuses every one.
You see, my dear boy”—Madame Hohlakov suddenly looked arch and a charming, though enigmatic, smile played about her lips—“you see, I suspect ...
No, no; quite the contrary.
Well, it’s as though I were confessing to Father Zossima, that’s just it.
I feel cross, but not very), that frivolous young man, would you believe it, seems to have taken it into his head to fall in love with me.
At first—a month ago—he only began to come oftener to see me, almost every day; though, of course, we were acquainted before.
I knew nothing about it ... and suddenly it dawned upon me, and I began to notice things with surprise.
You know, two months ago, that modest, charming, excellent young man, Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, who’s in the service here, began to be a regular visitor at the house.
You met him here ever so many times yourself.
And he is an excellent, earnest young man, isn’t he?
Altogether, I love young people, Alyosha, talented, modest, like you, and he has almost the mind of a statesman, he talks so charmingly, and I shall certainly, certainly try and get promotion for him.
He is a future diplomat.
And your friend Rakitin comes in such boots, and always stretches them out on the carpet....
He began hinting at his feelings, in fact, and one day, as he was going, he squeezed my hand terribly hard.
My foot began to swell directly after he pressed my hand like that.
He had met Pyotr Ilyitch here before, and would you believe it, he is always gibing at him, growling at him, for some reason.
I simply looked at the way they went on together and laughed inwardly.
Well, I was lying here alone and suddenly Rakitin comes in, and only fancy! brought me some verses of his own composition—a short poem, on my bad foot: that is, he described my foot in a poem.
A captivating little foot.
I can never remember poetry.
But it’s a charming thing—charming; and, you know, it’s not only about the foot, it had a good moral, too, a charming idea, only I’ve forgotten it; in fact, it was just the thing for an album.
So, of course, I thanked him, and he was evidently flattered.
I’d hardly had time to thank him when in comes Pyotr Ilyitch, and Rakitin suddenly looked as black as night.
I could see that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way, for Rakitin certainly wanted to say something after giving me the verses.
I had a presentiment of it; but Pyotr Ilyitch came in.
But I am convinced that he guessed, though he won’t own it to this day, and declares he had no idea.
Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh at once, and fell to criticizing it.
‘Wretched doggerel,’ he said they were, ‘some divinity student must have written them,’ and with such vehemence, such vehemence!
Then, instead of laughing, your friend flew into a rage.
‘Good gracious!’ I thought, ‘they’ll fly at each other.’ ‘It was I who wrote them,’ said he.
‘I wrote them as a joke,’ he said, ‘for I think it degrading to write verses....
They want to put a monument to your Pushkin for writing about women’s feet, while I wrote with a moral purpose, and you,’ said he, ‘are an advocate of serfdom.
‘You have no modern enlightened feelings, you are uninfluenced by progress, you are a mere official,’ he said, ‘and you take bribes.’ Then I began screaming and imploring them.
And, you know, Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward.
He at once took up the most gentlemanly tone, looked at him sarcastically, listened, and apologized.
Poets are all so irritable,’ he said.
In short, he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone.
He explained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic.
Only as I lay there, just as before you now, I thought, ‘Would it, or would it not, be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin out for shouting so rudely at a visitor in my house?’ And, would you believe it, I lay here, shut my eyes, and wondered, would it be the proper thing or not.
I kept worrying and worrying, and my heart began to beat, and I couldn’t make up my mind whether to make an outcry or not.
I got up suddenly and said to Rakitin, ‘It’s painful for me to say it, but I don’t wish to see you in my house again.’ So I turned him out.
Alexey Fyodorovitch, I know myself I did wrong.
I wasn’t angry with him at all, really; but I suddenly fancied—that was what did it—that it would be such a fine scene....
And yet, believe me, it was quite natural, for I really shed tears and cried for several days afterwards, and then suddenly, one afternoon, I forgot all about it.
So it’s a fortnight since he’s been here, and I kept wondering whether he would come again.
I wondered even yesterday, then suddenly last night came this _Gossip_.
It was a fortnight ago, you see.
Ah! the words come of themselves!” “It’s very important for me to be in time to see my brother to-day,” Alyosha faltered.
Listen, what is an aberration?” “What aberration?” asked Alyosha, wondering.
An aberration in which everything is pardonable.
Whatever you do, you will be acquitted at once.” “What do you mean?” “I’ll tell you.
Ah! she is a charming, charming creature, only I never can make out who it is she is in love with.
She was with me some time ago and I couldn’t get anything out of her.
Especially as she won’t talk to me except on the surface now.
I was talking of aberration.
Of course, you know it—the one who discovers madmen.
Well, you see, a man may be sitting perfectly sane and suddenly have an aberration.
He may be conscious and know what he is doing and yet be in a state of aberration.
And there’s no doubt that Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering from aberration.
They found out about aberration as soon as the law courts were reformed.
It’s all the good effect of the reformed law courts.
The doctor has been here and questioned me about that evening, about the gold mines.
He must have been in a state of aberration.
He came in shouting, ‘Money, money, three thousand!
Give me three thousand!’ and then went away and immediately did the murder.
‘I don’t want to murder him,’ he said, and he suddenly went and murdered him.
That’s why they’ll acquit him, because he struggled against it and yet he murdered him.” “But he didn’t murder him,” Alyosha interrupted rather sharply.
He felt more and more sick with anxiety and impatience.
“Yes, I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him.” “Grigory?” cried Alyosha.
He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him down, and then got up, saw the door open, went in and killed Fyodor Pavlovitch.” “But why, why?” “Suffering from aberration.
When he recovered from the blow Dmitri Fyodorovitch gave him on the head, he was suffering from aberration; he went and committed the murder.
As for his saying he didn’t, he very likely doesn’t remember.
Only, you know, it’ll be better, ever so much better, if Dmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him.
It certainly was Dmitri Fyodorovitch, and that’s better, ever so much better!
Children ought to honor their parents, and yet it would be better if it were he, as you’d have nothing to cry over then, for he did it when he was unconscious or rather when he was conscious, but did not know what he was doing.
Let them acquit him—that’s so humane, and would show what a blessing reformed law courts are.
And when I heard it yesterday, I was so struck by it that I wanted to send for you at once.
And if he is acquitted, make him come straight from the law courts to dinner with me, and I’ll have a party of friends, and we’ll drink to the reformed law courts.
I don’t believe he’d be dangerous; besides, I’ll invite a great many friends, so that he could always be led out if he did anything.
And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something in another town, for those who have been in trouble themselves make the best judges.
And, besides, who isn’t suffering from aberration nowadays?—you, I, all of us are in a state of aberration, and there are ever so many examples of it: a man sits singing a song, suddenly something annoys him, he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he comes across, and no one blames him for it.
The doctors are always confirming; they confirm anything.
Why, my Lise is in a state of aberration.
She made me cry again yesterday, and the day before, too, and to-day I suddenly realized that it’s all due to aberration.
Did she send for you or did you come of yourself?” “Yes, she sent for me, and I am just going to her.” Alyosha got up resolutely.
“Oh, my dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, perhaps that’s what’s most important,” Madame Hohlakov cried, suddenly bursting into tears.
But forgive me, I can’t trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch, though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man.
When?” Alyosha was exceedingly surprised.
He had not sat down again and listened standing.
Well, Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to see me twice, since he came back from Moscow.
I didn’t, of course, expect him to come often, knowing what a lot he has to do as it is, _vous comprenez, cette affaire et la mort terrible de votre papa_.
But I suddenly heard he’d been here again, not to see me but to see Lise.
And I didn’t hear of it till three days afterwards, from Glafira, so it was a great shock to me.
I sent for Lise directly.
‘He thought you were asleep,’ she said, ‘and came in to me to ask after your health.’ Of course, that’s how it happened.
But Lise, Lise, mercy on us, how she distresses me!
Would you believe it, one night, four days ago, just after you saw her last time, and had gone away, she suddenly had a fit, screaming, shrieking, hysterics!
Why is it I never have hysterics?
Then, next day another fit, and the same thing on the third, and yesterday too, and then yesterday that aberration.
She suddenly screamed out, ‘I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch.
I insist on your never letting him come to the house again.’ I was struck dumb at these amazing words, and answered, ‘On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellent young man, a young man of such learning too, and so unfortunate?’—for all this business is a misfortune, isn’t it?
She suddenly burst out laughing at my words, and so rudely, you know.
Well, I was pleased; I thought I had amused her and the fits would pass off, especially as I wanted to refuse to see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his strange visits without my knowledge, and meant to ask him for an explanation.
That’s monstrous; I am always polite to my servants.
Now, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, I rest all my hopes on you, and, of course, my whole life is in your hands.
I simply beg you to go to Lise and find out everything from her, as you alone can, and come back and tell me—me, her mother, for you understand it will be the death of me, simply the death of me, if this goes on, or else I shall run away.
I have patience; but I may lose patience, and then ... then something awful will happen.
At last, Pyotr Ilyitch!” cried Madame Hohlakov, beaming all over as she saw Perhotin enter the room.
Well, sit down, speak, put us out of suspense.
Where are you off to, Alexey Fyodorovitch?” “To Lise.” “Oh, yes.
It’s a question of life and death!” “Of course, I won’t forget, if I can ... but I am so late,” muttered Alyosha, beating a hasty retreat.
“No, be sure, be sure to come in; don’t say ‘If you can.’ I shall die if you don’t,” Madame Hohlakov called after him, but Alyosha had already left the room.
A Little Demon Going in to Lise, he found her half reclining in the invalid-chair, in which she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk.
There was a feverish look in her eyes, her face was pale and yellow.
She was positively thinner.
He touched the thin, long fingers which lay motionless on her dress, then he sat down facing her, without a word.
“I’ve been listening.
I don’t apologize.” “You are upset about something?” “On the contrary, I am very happy.
I’ve only just been reflecting for the thirtieth time what a good thing it is I refused you and shall not be your wife.
If you were forty, you would still go on taking my love-letters for me.” She suddenly laughed.
“There is something spiteful and yet open-hearted about you,” Alyosha smiled to her.
“The open-heartedness consists in my not being ashamed of myself with you.
If I respected you, I shouldn’t talk to you without shame, should I?” “No.” “But do you believe that I am not ashamed with you?” “No, I don’t believe it.” Lise laughed nervously again; she spoke rapidly.
“I sent your brother, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, some sweets in prison.
I don’t want to be happy.” “You are in love with disorder?” “Yes, I want disorder.
I keep imagining how I’ll creep up and set fire to the house on the sly; it must be on the sly.
And how bored I am!” She waved her hand with a look of repulsion.
“It’s your luxurious life,” said Alyosha, softly.
Ach, don’t speak, don’t say anything,” she shook her hand at him, though Alyosha had not opened his mouth.
If I am ever poor, I shall murder somebody, and even if I am rich, I may murder some one, perhaps—why do nothing!
Do you know Kalganov?” “Yes.” “He is always wandering about, dreaming.
One can dream the most delightful things, but real life is a bore.’ But he’ll be married soon for all that; he’s been making love to me already.
Can you spin tops?” “Yes.” “Well, he’s just like a top: he wants to be wound up and set spinning and then to be lashed, lashed, lashed with a whip.
If I marry him, I’ll keep him spinning all his life.
What will they do to one in the next world for the greatest sin?
You must know all about that.” “God will censure you.” Alyosha was watching her steadily.
I would go up and they would censure me, and I would burst out laughing in their faces.
I should dreadfully like to set fire to the house, Alyosha, to our house; you still don’t believe me?” “Why?
There are children of twelve years old, who have a longing to set fire to something and they do set things on fire, too.
It’s a sort of disease.” “That’s not true, that’s not true; there may be children, but that’s not what I mean.” “You take evil for good; it’s a passing crisis, it’s the result of your illness, perhaps.” “You do despise me, though!
It’s simply that I don’t want to do good, I want to do evil, and it has nothing to do with illness.” “Why do evil?” “So that everything might be destroyed.
Ah, how nice it would be if everything were destroyed!
You know, Alyosha, I sometimes think of doing a fearful lot of harm and everything bad, and I should do it for a long while on the sly and suddenly every one would find it out.
It’s a craving to destroy something good or, as you say, to set fire to something.
It happens sometimes.” “I not only say it, I shall do it.” “I believe you.” “Ah, how I love you for saying you believe me.
I never can tell lies to you,” she declared, with a strange fire in her eyes.
What struck Alyosha above everything was her earnestness.
There was not a trace of humor or jesting in her face now, though, in old days, fun and gayety never deserted her even at her most “earnest” moments.
“There are moments when people love crime,” said Alyosha thoughtfully.
You have uttered my thought; they love crime, every one loves crime, they love it always, not at some ‘moments.’ You know, it’s as though people have made an agreement to lie about it and have lied about it ever since.
They all declare that they hate evil, but secretly they all love it.” “And are you still reading nasty books?” “Yes, I am.
Mamma reads them and hides them under her pillow and I steal them.” “Aren’t you ashamed to destroy yourself?” “I want to destroy myself.
Listen, your brother is being tried now for murdering his father and every one loves his having killed his father.” “Loves his having killed his father?” “Yes, loves it; every one loves it!
Everybody says it’s so awful, but secretly they simply love it.
“Oh, what ideas you have!” Lise shrieked in delight.
I sometimes dream of devils.
It’s night; I am in my room with a candle and suddenly there are devils all over the place, in all the corners, under the table, and they open the doors; there’s a crowd of them behind the doors and they want to come and seize me.
But I suddenly cross myself and they all draw back, though they don’t go away altogether, they stand at the doors and in the corners, waiting.
And suddenly I have a frightful longing to revile God aloud, and so I begin, and then they come crowding back to me, delighted, and seize me again and I cross myself again and they all draw back.
It’s awful fun. it takes one’s breath away.” “I’ve had the same dream, too,” said Alyosha suddenly.
“Really?” cried Lise, surprised.
“I say, Alyosha, don’t laugh, that’s awfully important.
Could two different people have the same dream?” “It seems they can.” “Alyosha, I tell you, it’s awfully important,” Lise went on, with really excessive amazement.
“It’s not the dream that’s important, but your having the same dream as me.
You are not laughing?” “It’s true.” Lise seemed extraordinarily impressed and for half a minute she was silent.
“Alyosha, come and see me, come and see me more often,” she said suddenly, in a supplicating voice.
“I’ll always come to see you, all my life,” answered Alyosha firmly.
Alyosha, is it true that at Easter the Jews steal a child and kill it?” “I don’t know.” “There’s a book here in which I read about the trial of a Jew, who took a child of four years old and cut off the fingers from both hands, and then crucified him on the wall, hammered nails into him and crucified him, and afterwards, when he was tried, he said that the child died soon, within four hours.
He said the child moaned, kept on moaning and he stood admiring it.
That’s nice!” “Nice?” “Nice; I sometimes imagine that it was I who crucified him.
He would hang there moaning and I would sit opposite him eating pineapple _compote_.
I am awfully fond of pineapple _compote_.
Her pale, sallow face was suddenly contorted, her eyes burned.
I kept fancying how the little thing cried and moaned (a child of four years old understands, you know), and all the while the thought of pineapple _compote_ haunted me.
In the morning I wrote a letter to a certain person, begging him _particularly_ to come and see me.
He came and I suddenly told him all about the child and the pineapple _compote_. _All_ about it, _all_, and said that it was nice.
Tell me, tell me, Alyosha, did he despise me or not?” She sat up on the couch, with flashing eyes.
“Tell me,” Alyosha asked anxiously, “did you send for that person?” “Yes, I did.” “Did you send him a letter?” “Yes.” “Simply to ask about that, about that child?” “No, not about that at all.
He answered, laughed, got up and went away.” “That person behaved honorably,” Alyosha murmured.
Did he laugh at me?” “No, for perhaps he believes in the pineapple _compote_ himself.
He is very ill now, too, Lise.” “Yes, he does believe in it,” said Lise, with flashing eyes.
If he doesn’t believe in people, of course, he does despise them.” “Then he despises me, me?” “You, too.” “Good,” Lise seemed to grind her teeth.
“When he went out laughing, I felt that it was nice to be despised.
The child with fingers cut off is nice, and to be despised is nice....” And she laughed in Alyosha’s face, a feverish malicious laugh.
“Do you know, Alyosha, do you know, I should like—Alyosha, save me!” She suddenly jumped from the couch, rushed to him and seized him with both hands.
I shall kill myself, because I loathe everything!
I don’t want to live, because I loathe everything!
I loathe everything, everything.
Alyosha, why don’t you love me in the least?” she finished in a frenzy.
“But I do love you!” answered Alyosha warmly.
Every one else may punish me and trample me under foot, every one, every one, not excepting _any one_.
On the contrary, I hate him!
Go, Alyosha; it’s time you went to your brother”; she tore herself away from him suddenly.
Give my love to Mitya, go, go!” And she almost forcibly pushed Alyosha out of the door.
He looked at her with pained surprise, when he was suddenly aware of a letter in his right hand, a tiny letter folded up tight and sealed.
He glanced at it and instantly read the address, “To Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov.” He looked quickly at Lise.
Her face had become almost menacing.
“Give it to him, you must give it to him!” she ordered him, trembling and beside herself.
Alyosha put the note in his pocket and went straight downstairs, without going back to Madame Hohlakov; forgetting her, in fact.
As soon as Alyosha had gone, Lise unbolted the door, opened it a little, put her finger in the crack and slammed the door with all her might, pinching her finger.
Ten seconds after, releasing her finger, she walked softly, slowly to her chair, sat up straight in it and looked intently at her blackened finger and at the blood that oozed from under the nail.
Her lips were quivering and she kept whispering rapidly to herself: “I am a wretch, wretch, wretch, wretch!” Chapter IV.
A Hymn And A Secret It was quite late (days are short in November) when Alyosha rang at the prison gate.
It was beginning to get dusk.
But Alyosha knew that he would be admitted without difficulty.
Things were managed in our little town, as everywhere else.
At first, of course, on the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry, relations and a few other persons could only obtain interviews with Mitya by going through certain inevitable formalities.
But later, though the formalities were not relaxed, exceptions were made for some, at least, of Mitya’s visitors.
So much so, that sometimes the interviews with the prisoner in the room set aside for the purpose were practically _tête-à-tête_.
These exceptions, however, were few in number; only Grushenka, Alyosha and Rakitin were treated like this.
But the captain of the police, Mihail Mihailovitch, was very favorably disposed to Grushenka.
His abuse of her at Mokroe weighed on the old man’s conscience, and when he learned the whole story, he completely changed his view of her.
And strange to say, though he was firmly persuaded of his guilt, yet after Mitya was once in prison, the old man came to take a more and more lenient view of him.
“He was a man of good heart, perhaps,” he thought, “who had come to grief from drinking and dissipation.” His first horror had been succeeded by pity.
Rakitin, who had of late taken to coming very often to see the prisoner, was one of the most intimate acquaintances of the “police captain’s young ladies,” as he called them, and was always hanging about their house.
He gave lessons in the house of the prison superintendent, too, who, though scrupulous in the performance of his duties, was a kind-hearted old man.
Alyosha, again, had an intimate acquaintance of long standing with the superintendent, who was fond of talking to him, generally on sacred subjects.
He respected Ivan Fyodorovitch, and stood in awe of his opinion, though he was a great philosopher himself; “self-taught,” of course.
But Alyosha had an irresistible attraction for him.
During the last year the old man had taken to studying the Apocryphal Gospels, and constantly talked over his impressions with his young friend.
He used to come and see him in the monastery and discussed for hours together with him and with the monks.
So even if Alyosha were late at the prison, he had only to go to the superintendent and everything was made easy.
Besides, every one in the prison, down to the humblest warder, had grown used to Alyosha.
The sentry, of course, did not trouble him so long as the authorities were satisfied.
When Mitya was summoned from his cell, he always went downstairs, to the place set aside for interviews.
Mitya was laughing heartily as he saw him out, while Rakitin seemed grumbling.
Rakitin did not like meeting Alyosha, especially of late.
He scarcely spoke to him, and bowed to him stiffly.
Seeing Alyosha enter now, he frowned and looked away, as though he were entirely absorbed in buttoning his big, warm, fur-trimmed overcoat.
Then he began looking at once for his umbrella.
“I must mind not to forget my belongings,” he muttered, simply to say something.
“Mind you don’t forget other people’s belongings,” said Mitya, as a joke, and laughed at once at his own wit.
Rakitin fired up instantly.
“You’d better give that advice to your own family, who’ve always been a slave-driving lot, and not to Rakitin,” he cried, suddenly trembling with anger.
They are all like that,” he turned to Alyosha, nodding towards Rakitin’s hurriedly retreating figure.
“He was sitting here, laughing and cheerful, and all at once he boils up like that.
Have you broken with him completely?
I’ve not been simply waiting, but thirsting for you the whole morning.
He, too, nodded at the door through which Rakitin had disappeared.
He considers I am ... a blackguard.
They can’t understand a joke either, that’s the worst of such people.
They never understand a joke, and their souls are dry, dry and flat; they remind me of prison walls when I was first brought here.
Are you so hopeless, brother?” Alyosha said, with an apprehensive feeling.
“What are you talking about?” said Mitya, looking at him rather uncertainly.
Why do you look at me so critically?” “What do you mean, Mitya?” “Ideas, ideas, that’s all!
What is ethics?” “Ethics?” asked Alyosha, wondering.
He means to go to Petersburg.
There he’ll go in for criticism of an elevating tendency.
Who was Karl Bernard?” “Karl Bernard?” Alyosha was surprised again.
Chemist or what?” “He must be a savant,” answered Alyosha; “but I confess I can’t tell you much about him, either.
“A scoundrel of some sort, most likely.
They are all scoundrels.
Rakitin will get on anywhere; he is another Bernard.
Ugh, these Bernards!
They are all over the place.” “But what is the matter?” Alyosha asked insistently.
“He wants to write an article about me, about my case, and so begin his literary career.
He wants to say ‘he couldn’t help murdering his father, he was corrupted by his environment,’ and so on.
He explained it all to me.
He is going to put in a tinge of Socialism, he says.
Awfully conceited, though.
I said to him just now, ‘The Karamazovs are not blackguards, but philosophers; for all true Russians are philosophers, and though you’ve studied, you are not a philosopher—you are a low fellow.’ He laughed, so maliciously.
And I said to him, ‘_De ideabus non est disputandum_.’ Isn’t that rather good?
I can set up for being a classic, you see!” Mitya laughed suddenly.
You said so just now,” Alyosha interposed.
That’s why I see and then think, because of those tails, not at all because I’ve got a soul, and that I am some sort of image and likeness.
All that is nonsense!
Rakitin explained it all to me yesterday, brother, and it simply bowled me over.
It’s magnificent, Alyosha, this science!
A new man’s arising—that I understand....
It’s chemistry, brother, chemistry!
There’s no help for it, your reverence, you must make way for chemistry.
‘But what will become of men then?’ I asked him, ‘without God and immortal life?
All things are lawful then, they can do what they like?’ ‘Didn’t you know?’ he said laughing, ‘a clever man can do what he likes,’ he said.
‘A clever man knows his way about, but you’ve put your foot in it, committing a murder, and now you are rotting in prison.’ He says that to my face!
Here it is.” Mitya hurriedly pulled out a piece of paper from his pocket and read: “‘In order to determine this question, it is above all essential to put one’s personality in contradiction to one’s reality.’ Do you understand that?” “No, I don’t,” said Alyosha.
He looked at Mitya and listened to him with curiosity.
“I don’t understand either.
It’s dark and obscure, but intellectual.
‘Every one writes like that now,’ he says, ‘it’s the effect of their environment.’ They are afraid of the environment.
He’s written in honor of Madame Hohlakov’s foot.
‘You’ve got yourself into a mess, like a fool, for the sake of three thousand, but I’m going to collar a hundred and fifty thousand.
I am going to marry a widow and buy a house in Petersburg.’ And he told me he was courting Madame Hohlakov.
‘But she’s awfully sentimental,’ he says; ‘that’s how I shall get hold of her.
When I marry her, I shall take her to Petersburg and there I shall start a newspaper.’ And his mouth was simply watering, the beast, not for the widow, but for the hundred and fifty thousand.
‘She is coming round,’ he declared.
Perhotin’s carrying everything before him, bravo!
And he had written this doggerel.
When I get hold of the silly woman’s fortune, I can be of great social utility.’ They have this social justification for every nasty thing they do!
‘Anyway it’s better than your Pushkin’s poetry,’ he said, ‘for I’ve managed to advocate enlightenment even in that.’ I understand what he means about Pushkin, I quite see that, if he really was a man of talent and only wrote about women’s feet.
But wasn’t Rakitin stuck up about his doggerel!
‘On the convalescence of the swollen foot of the object of my affections’—he thought of that for a title.
A captivating little foot, Though swollen and red and tender!
The doctors come and plasters put, But still they cannot mend her.
For as her foot swells, strange to say, Her intellect is on the wane— Oh, for some remedy I pray That may restore both foot and brain!
And he really has put in a progressive idea.
He was gnashing his teeth!” “He’s taken his revenge already,” said Alyosha.
“He’s written a paragraph about Madame Hohlakov.” And Alyosha told him briefly about the paragraph in _Gossip_.
“That’s his doing, that’s his doing!” Mitya assented, frowning.
These paragraphs ...
I know ... the insulting things that have been written about Grushenka, for instance....
H’m!” He walked across the room with a harassed air.
“To-morrow will be a great and awful day for you, the judgment of God will be accomplished ...
“Am I to talk of that stinking dog?
I don’t want to say more of the stinking son of Stinking Lizaveta!
Hush!” He went up to Alyosha excitedly and kissed him.
“Rakitin wouldn’t understand it,” he began in a sort of exaltation; “but you, you’ll understand it all.
That’s why I was thirsting for you.
And what do I care if I spend twenty years in the mines, breaking ore with a hammer?
I am not a bit afraid of that—it’s something else I am afraid of now: that that new man may leave me.
Even there, in the mines, under-ground, I may find a human heart in another convict and murderer by my side, and I may make friends with him, for even there one may live and love and suffer.
One may thaw and revive a frozen heart in that convict, one may wait upon him for years, and at last bring up from the dark depths a lofty soul, a feeling, suffering creature; one may bring forth an angel, create a hero!
There are so many of them, hundreds of them, and we are all to blame for them.
Because we are all responsible for all.
For all the ‘babes,’ for there are big children as well as little children.
There are numbers of them there, hundreds of them underground, with hammers in their hands.
Oh, yes, we shall be in chains and there will be no freedom, but then, in our great sorrow, we shall rise again to joy, without which man cannot live nor God exist, for God gives joy: it’s His privilege—a grand one.
Ah, man should be dissolved in prayer!
What should I be underground there without God?
If they drive God from the earth, we shall shelter Him underground.
One cannot exist in prison without God; it’s even more impossible than out of prison.
And then we men underground will sing from the bowels of the earth a glorious hymn to God, with Whom is joy.
He turned pale, his lips quivered, and tears rolled down his cheeks.
“Yes, life is full, there is life even underground,” he began again.
“You wouldn’t believe, Alexey, how I want to live now, what a thirst for existence and consciousness has sprung up in me within these peeling walls.
Rakitin doesn’t understand that; all he cares about is building a house and letting flats.
And what is suffering?
I am not afraid of it, even if it were beyond reckoning.
And I seem to have such strength in me now, that I think I could stand anything, any suffering, only to be able to say and to repeat to myself every moment, ‘I exist.’ In thousands of agonies—I exist.
I’m tormented on the rack—but I exist!
Alyosha, my angel, all these philosophies are the death of me.
Brother Ivan—” “What of brother Ivan?” interrupted Alyosha, but Mitya did not hear.
It was perhaps just because ideas I did not understand were surging up in me, that I used to drink and fight and rage.
It’s God that’s worrying me.
That’s the only thing that’s worrying me.
Then if He doesn’t exist, man is the chief of the earth, of the universe.
That’s the question.
To whom will he be thankful?
Rakitin says that one can love humanity without God.
Well, only a sniveling idiot can maintain that.
I can’t understand it.
‘You’d better think about the extension of civic rights, or even of keeping down the price of meat.
You will show your love for humanity more simply and directly by that, than by philosophy.’ I answered him, ‘Well, but you, without a God, are more likely to raise the price of meat, if it suits you, and make a rouble on every copeck.’ He lost his temper.
But after all, what is goodness?
Goodness is one thing with me and another with a Chinaman, so it’s a relative thing.
A treacherous question!
“I said to him, ‘Then everything is lawful, if it is so?’ He frowned.
‘Fyodor Pavlovitch, our papa,’ he said, ‘was a pig, but his ideas were right enough.’ That was what he dropped.
That was going one better than Rakitin.” “Yes,” Alyosha assented bitterly.
“When was he with you?” “Of that later; now I must speak of something else.
When my business here is over and the verdict has been given, then I’ll tell you something.
I’ll tell you everything.
We’ve something tremendous on hand....
Only imagine, he believes I did it.
Katerina Ivanovna wants to do her ‘duty’ to the end, whatever the strain!” Mitya smiled bitterly.
Hard-hearted creature!
She knows that I said of her at Mokroe that she was a woman of ‘great wrath.’ They repeated it.
Yes, the facts against me have grown numerous as the sands of the sea.
I mean Katerina Ivanovna.
I am afraid, oh, I am afraid she will tell how she bowed to the ground after that four thousand.
She’ll pay it back to the last farthing.
I don’t want her sacrifice; they’ll put me to shame at the trial.
She deserves what she gets.
I shall have my own story to tell, Alexey.” He smiled bitterly again.
Why should she have such suffering to bear?” he exclaimed suddenly, with tears.
I didn’t ask her forgiveness.” “Why didn’t you?” exclaimed Alyosha.
Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully.
“God preserve you, my dear boy, from ever asking forgiveness for a fault from a woman you love.
From one you love especially, however greatly you may have been in fault.
I know something about them, anyway.
But try acknowledging you are in fault to a woman.
Say, ‘I am sorry, forgive me,’ and a shower of reproaches will follow!
Nothing will make her forgive you simply and directly, she’ll humble you to the dust, bring forward things that have never happened, recall everything, forget nothing, add something of her own, and only then forgive you.
She’ll scrape up all the scrapings and load them on your head.
That’s my conviction—not conviction, but feeling.
A man ought to be magnanimous, and it’s no disgrace to a man!
No disgrace to a hero, not even a Cæsar!
But don’t ever beg her pardon all the same for anything.
Remember that rule given you by your brother Mitya, who’s come to ruin through women.
And she tortures me, tortures me with her love.
In the past it was only those infernal curves of hers that tortured me, but now I’ve taken all her soul into my soul and through her I’ve become a man myself.
If they don’t, I shall die of jealousy.
I imagine something every day....
What did she say to you about me?” Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day.
Mitya listened, made him repeat things, and seemed pleased.
“Then she is not angry at my being jealous?” he exclaimed.
But I shall love her, I shall love her infinitely.
Do they let convicts marry?
And without her I can’t exist....” Mitya walked frowning across the room.
He suddenly seemed terribly worried.
No, my good Grushenka, that’s not it.
You are very wide of the mark, in your foolish feminine way.
I’ll tell you our secret!” He looked round, went close up quickly to Alyosha, who was standing before him, and whispered to him with an air of mystery, though in reality no one could hear them: the old warder was dozing in the corner, and not a word could reach the ears of the soldiers on guard.
“I will tell you all our secret,” Mitya whispered hurriedly.
“I meant to tell you later, for how could I decide on anything without you?
You are everything to me.
Though I say that Ivan is superior to us, you are my angel.
It’s your decision will decide it.
Perhaps it’s you that is superior and not Ivan.
You see, it’s a question of conscience, question of the higher conscience—the secret is so important that I can’t settle it myself, and I’ve put it off till I could speak to you.
I won’t tell you everything.
Not a question, not a movement.
But, goodness, what shall I do with your eyes?
I’m afraid your eyes will tell me your decision, even if you don’t speak.
Ivan suggests my _escaping_.
I won’t tell you the details: it’s all been thought out: it can all be arranged.
Do they let convicts get married?
And without Grusha what should I do there underground with a hammer?
But, on the other hand, my conscience?
I should have run away from suffering.
I have a way of salvation and I turn my back on it.
Ivan says that in America, ‘with the good-will,’ I can be of more use than underground.
But what becomes of our hymn from underground?
And there’s a lot of swindling in America, too, I expect.
I should have run away from crucifixion!
I tell you, you know, Alexey, because you are the only person who can understand this.
Ivan understands about the hymn, too.
He understands, only he doesn’t answer—he doesn’t speak.
He held Alyosha with both hands on his shoulders, and his yearning, feverish eyes were fixed on his brother’s.
“They don’t let convicts marry, do they?” he repeated for the third time in a supplicating voice.
Alyosha listened with extreme surprise and was deeply moved.
He didn’t come to see me at first, then he suddenly came a week ago and he began about it straight away.
He told me he’d arrange it; he’s found out about everything.
It’s all a matter of money: he’ll pay ten thousand for escape and give me twenty thousand for America.
And he says we can arrange a magnificent escape for ten thousand.” “And he told you on no account to tell me?” Alyosha asked again.
“To tell no one, and especially not you; on no account to tell you.
He is afraid, no doubt, that you’ll stand before me as my conscience.
Don’t tell him, for anything.” “You are right,” Alyosha pronounced; “it’s impossible to decide anything before the trial is over.
After the trial you’ll decide of yourself.
Then you’ll find that new man in yourself and he will decide.” “A new man, or a Bernard who’ll decide _à la_ Bernard, for I believe I’m a contemptible Bernard myself,” said Mitya, with a bitter grin.
“But, brother, have you no hope then of being acquitted?” Mitya shrugged his shoulders nervously and shook his head.
“There’s the superintendent shouting in the yard.
He’ll be here directly.
We are late; it’s irregular.
Sign me with the cross, darling, for the cross I have to bear to-morrow.” They embraced and kissed.
“Ivan,” said Mitya suddenly, “suggests my escaping; but, of course, he believes I did it.” A mournful smile came on to his lips.
“Have you asked him whether he believes it?” asked Alyosha.
Well, good-by!” Once more they kissed hurriedly, and Alyosha was just going out, when Mitya suddenly called him back.
That’s right!” And again he seized Alyosha, putting both hands on his shoulders.
His face became suddenly quite pale, so that it was dreadfully apparent, even through the gathering darkness.
His lips twitched, his eyes fastened upon Alyosha.
Do you, do you in yourself, believe it?
The whole truth, don’t lie!” he cried desperately.
Everything seemed heaving before Alyosha, and he felt something like a stab at his heart.
What do you mean?” he faltered helplessly.
“The whole truth, the whole, don’t lie!” repeated Mitya.
“I’ve never for one instant believed that you were the murderer!” broke in a shaking voice from Alyosha’s breast, and he raised his right hand in the air, as though calling God to witness his words.
“Thank you!” he articulated slowly, as though letting a sigh escape him after fainting.
You’ve given me strength for to-morrow.
Such distrustfulness in Mitya, such lack of confidence even to him, to Alyosha—all this suddenly opened before Alyosha an unsuspected depth of hopeless grief and despair in the soul of his unhappy brother.
Intense, infinite compassion overwhelmed him instantly.
There was a poignant ache in his torn heart.
“Love Ivan!”—he suddenly recalled Mitya’s words.
On the way to Ivan he had to pass the house where Katerina Ivanovna was living.
He suddenly stopped and resolved to go in.
He had not seen Katerina Ivanovna for more than a week.
But now it struck him that Ivan might be with her, especially on the eve of the terrible day.
Ringing, and mounting the staircase, which was dimly lighted by a Chinese lantern, he saw a man coming down, and as they met, he recognized him as his brother.
So he was just coming from Katerina Ivanovna.
You are going to her?” “Yes.” “I don’t advise you to; she’s upset and you’ll upset her more.” A door was instantly flung open above, and a voice cried suddenly: “No, no!
Alexey Fyodorovitch, have you come from him?” “Yes, I have been with him.” “Has he sent me any message?
Come up, Alyosha, and you, Ivan Fyodorovitch, you must come back, you must.
Do you hear?” There was such a peremptory note in Katya’s voice that Ivan, after a moment’s hesitation, made up his mind to go back with Alyosha.
“She was listening,” he murmured angrily to himself, but Alyosha heard it.
“Excuse my keeping my greatcoat on,” said Ivan, going into the drawing-room.
I won’t stay more than a minute.” “Sit down, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” said Katerina Ivanovna, though she remained standing.
Alyosha remembered afterwards that she had struck him as particularly handsome at that moment.
“What did he ask you to tell me?” “Only one thing,” said Alyosha, looking her straight in the face, “that you would spare yourself and say nothing at the trial of what” (he was a little confused) “... passed between you ... at the time of your first acquaintance ... in that town.” “Ah! that I bowed down to the ground for that money!” She broke into a bitter laugh.
Tell me, Alexey Fyodorovitch!” Alyosha watched her intently, trying to understand her.
“Both yourself and him,” he answered softly.
“I am glad to hear it,” she snapped out maliciously, and she suddenly blushed.
“You don’t know me yet, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she said menacingly.
Perhaps you’ll want to trample me under foot after my examination to-morrow.” “You will give your evidence honorably,” said Alyosha; “that’s all that’s wanted.” “Women are often dishonorable,” she snarled.
“Only an hour ago I was thinking I felt afraid to touch that monster ... as though he were a reptile ... but no, he is still a human being to me!
Is he the murderer?” she cried, all of a sudden, hysterically, turning quickly to Ivan.
Alyosha saw at once that she had asked Ivan that question before, perhaps only a moment before he came in, and not for the first time, but for the hundredth, and that they had ended by quarreling.
“I’ve been to see Smerdyakov....
It was you, you who persuaded me that he murdered his father.
It’s only you I believed!” she continued, still addressing Ivan.
He gave her a sort of strained smile.
He had not suspected such familiar intimacy between them.
“Well, that’s enough, anyway,” Ivan cut short the conversation.
I’ll come to-morrow.” And turning at once, he walked out of the room and went straight downstairs.
With an imperious gesture, Katerina Ivanovna seized Alyosha by both hands.
I know it all by heart,” he added irritably.
“She is mistaken, of course; but she is right that you are ill,” said Alyosha.
You look very ill, Ivan.” Ivan walked on without stopping.
Alyosha followed him.
“And do you know, Alexey Fyodorovitch, how people do go out of their mind?” Ivan asked in a voice suddenly quiet, without a trace of irritation, with a note of the simplest curiosity.
I suppose there are all kinds of insanity.” “And can one observe that one’s going mad oneself?” “I imagine one can’t see oneself clearly in such circumstances,” Alyosha answered with surprise.
“If you want to talk to me, please change the subject,” he said suddenly.
Ivan recognized the handwriting at once.
“Ah, from that little demon!” he laughed maliciously, and, without opening the envelope, he tore it into bits and threw it in the air.
The bits were scattered by the wind.
“She’s not sixteen yet, I believe, and already offering herself,” he said contemptuously, striding along the street again.
“How do you mean, offering herself?” exclaimed Alyosha.
“As wanton women offer themselves, to be sure.” “How can you, Ivan, how can you?” Alyosha cried warmly, in a grieved voice.
“She is a child; you are insulting a child!
She is on the verge of insanity, too, perhaps....
I had hoped to hear something from you ... that would save her.” “You’ll hear nothing from me.
I am not even thinking about it.” They were silent again for a moment.
“You ... you mean Katerina Ivanovna?” “Yes.
She wants me to sing lullabies to her.” “Katerina Ivanovna loves you, brother,” said Alyosha sadly.
“Perhaps; but I am not very keen on her.” “She is suffering.
Why do you ... sometimes say things to her that give her hope?” Alyosha went on, with timid reproach.
Forgive me for speaking to you like this,” he added.
“I can’t behave to her as I ought—break off altogether and tell her so straight out,” said Ivan, irritably.
“I must wait till sentence is passed on the murderer.
If I break off with her now, she will avenge herself on me by ruining that scoundrel to-morrow at the trial, for she hates him and knows she hates him.
If only that damned verdict would come!” The words “murderer” and “monster” echoed painfully in Alyosha’s heart.
“But how can she ruin Mitya?” he asked, pondering on Ivan’s words.
“What evidence can she give that would ruin Mitya?” “You don’t know that yet.
She’s got a document in her hands, in Mitya’s own writing, that proves conclusively that he did murder Fyodor Pavlovitch.” “That’s impossible!” cried Alyosha.
“Why is it impossible?
I’ve read it myself.” “There can’t be such a document!” Alyosha repeated warmly.
“There can’t be, because he’s not the murderer.
It’s not he murdered father, not he!” Ivan suddenly stopped.
“Who is the murderer then, according to you?” he asked, with apparent coldness.
There was even a supercilious note in his voice.
“You know who,” Alyosha pronounced in a low, penetrating voice.
You mean the myth about that crazy idiot, the epileptic, Smerdyakov?” Alyosha suddenly felt himself trembling all over.
“You know who,” broke helplessly from him.
He could scarcely breathe.
Who?” Ivan cried almost fiercely.
All his restraint suddenly vanished.
What do you mean by ‘not you’?” Ivan was thunderstruck.
“It was not you killed father, not you!” Alyosha repeated firmly.
Are you raving?” said Ivan, with a pale, distorted smile.
They were standing again under a lamp-post.
You’ve told yourself several times that you are the murderer.” “When did I say so?
When have I said so?” Ivan faltered helplessly.
“You’ve said so to yourself many times, when you’ve been alone during these two dreadful months,” Alyosha went on softly and distinctly as before.
Yet he was speaking now, as it were, not of himself, not of his own will, but obeying some irresistible command.
“You have accused yourself and have confessed to yourself that you are the murderer and no one else.
But you didn’t do it: you are mistaken: you are not the murderer.
They were both standing still, gazing into each other’s eyes.
Suddenly Ivan began trembling all over, and clutched Alyosha’s shoulder.
“You’ve been in my room!” he whispered hoarsely.
Confess ... have you seen him, have you seen him?” “Whom do you mean—Mitya?” Alyosha asked, bewildered.
I don’t know whom you are talking about,” Alyosha faltered, beginning to be alarmed.
It’s impossible that you don’t know.” Suddenly he seemed to check himself.
A strange grin contorted his lips.
God has put it into my heart to say this to you, even though it may make you hate me from this hour.” But by now Ivan had apparently regained his self-control.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch,” he said, with a cold smile, “I can’t endure prophets and epileptics—messengers from God especially—and you know that only too well.
I break off all relations with you from this moment and probably for ever.
It’s the way to your lodgings, too.
You’d better be particularly careful not to come to me to-day!
“Brother,” Alyosha called after him, “if anything happens to you to-day, turn to me before any one!” But Ivan made no reply.
Alyosha stood under the lamp-post at the cross roads, till Ivan had vanished into the darkness.
Then he turned and walked slowly homewards.
Both Alyosha and Ivan were living in lodgings; neither of them was willing to live in Fyodor Pavlovitch’s empty house.
Alyosha had a furnished room in the house of some working people.
Ivan lived some distance from him.
He had taken a roomy and fairly comfortable lodge attached to a fine house that belonged to a well-to-do lady, the widow of an official.
But his only attendant was a deaf and rheumatic old crone who went to bed at six o’clock every evening and got up at six in the morning.
Ivan had become remarkably indifferent to his comforts of late, and very fond of being alone.
He did everything for himself in the one room he lived in, and rarely entered any of the other rooms in his abode.
He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell, when he suddenly stopped.
He felt that he was trembling all over with anger.
Suddenly he let go of the bell, turned back with a curse, and walked with rapid steps in the opposite direction.
He walked a mile and a half to a tiny, slanting, wooden house, almost a hut, where Marya Kondratyevna, the neighbor who used to come to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s kitchen for soup and to whom Smerdyakov had once sung his songs and played on the guitar, was now lodging.
Smerdyakov, who was ill—almost dying—had been with them ever since Fyodor Pavlovitch’s death.
It was to him Ivan was going now, drawn by a sudden and irresistible prompting.
The First Interview With Smerdyakov This was the third time that Ivan had been to see Smerdyakov since his return from Moscow.
The first time he had seen him and talked to him was on the first day of his arrival, then he had visited him once more, a fortnight later.
And he had scarcely heard anything of him.
Ivan had only returned five days after his father’s death, so that he was not present at the funeral, which took place the day before he came back.
The cause of his delay was that Alyosha, not knowing his Moscow address, had to apply to Katerina Ivanovna to telegraph to him, and she, not knowing his address either, telegraphed to her sister and aunt, reckoning on Ivan’s going to see them as soon as he arrived in Moscow.
When he got the telegram, he had, of course, set off post-haste to our town.
The first to meet him was Alyosha, and Ivan was greatly surprised to find that, in opposition to the general opinion of the town, he refused to entertain a suspicion against Mitya, and spoke openly of Smerdyakov as the murderer.
Later on, after seeing the police captain and the prosecutor, and hearing the details of the charge and the arrest, he was still more surprised at Alyosha, and ascribed his opinion only to his exaggerated brotherly feeling and sympathy with Mitya, of whom Alyosha, as Ivan knew, was very fond.
He positively disliked him; at most, felt sometimes a compassion for him, and even that was mixed with great contempt, almost repugnance.
Mitya’s whole personality, even his appearance, was extremely unattractive to him.
Ivan looked with indignation on Katerina Ivanovna’s love for his brother.
Yet he went to see Mitya on the first day of his arrival, and that interview, far from shaking Ivan’s belief in his guilt, positively strengthened it.
He found his brother agitated, nervously excited.
Mitya had been talkative, but very absent-minded and incoherent.
He used violent language, accused Smerdyakov, and was fearfully muddled.
He talked principally about the three thousand roubles, which he said had been “stolen” from him by his father.
“The money was mine, it was my money,” Mitya kept repeating.
“Even if I had stolen it, I should have had the right.” He hardly contested the evidence against him, and if he tried to turn a fact to his advantage, it was in an absurd and incoherent way.
Quite the contrary, he was angry and proudly scornful of the charges against him; he was continually firing up and abusing every one.
He only laughed contemptuously at Grigory’s evidence about the open door, and declared that it was “the devil that opened it.” But he could not bring forward any coherent explanation of the fact.
He even succeeded in insulting Ivan during their first interview, telling him sharply that it was not for people who declared that “everything was lawful,” to suspect and question him.
Altogether he was anything but friendly with Ivan on that occasion.
Immediately after that interview with Mitya, Ivan went for the first time to see Smerdyakov.
In the railway train on his way from Moscow, he kept thinking of Smerdyakov and of his last conversation with him on the evening before he went away.
Many things seemed to him puzzling and suspicious.
But when he gave his evidence to the investigating lawyer Ivan said nothing, for the time, of that conversation.
He put that off till he had seen Smerdyakov, who was at that time in the hospital.
Doctor Herzenstube and Varvinsky, the doctor he met in the hospital, confidently asserted in reply to Ivan’s persistent questions, that Smerdyakov’s epileptic attack was unmistakably genuine, and were surprised indeed at Ivan asking whether he might not have been shamming on the day of the catastrophe.
They gave him to understand that the attack was an exceptional one, the fits persisting and recurring several times, so that the patient’s life was positively in danger, and it was only now, after they had applied remedies, that they could assert with confidence that the patient would survive.
“Though it might well be,” added Doctor Herzenstube, “that his reason would be impaired for a considerable period, if not permanently.” On Ivan’s asking impatiently whether that meant that he was now mad, they told him that this was not yet the case, in the full sense of the word, but that certain abnormalities were perceptible.
Ivan decided to find out for himself what those abnormalities were.
At the hospital he was at once allowed to see the patient.
Smerdyakov was lying on a truckle-bed in a separate ward.
There was only one other bed in the room, and in it lay a tradesman of the town, swollen with dropsy, who was obviously almost dying; he could be no hindrance to their conversation.
Smerdyakov grinned uncertainly on seeing Ivan, and for the first instant seemed nervous.
But that was only momentary.
For the rest of the time he was struck, on the contrary, by Smerdyakov’s composure.
He was very weak; he spoke slowly, seeming to move his tongue with difficulty; he was much thinner and sallower.
Throughout the interview, which lasted twenty minutes, he kept complaining of headache and of pain in all his limbs.
His thin emasculate face seemed to have become so tiny; his hair was ruffled, and his crest of curls in front stood up in a thin tuft.
But in the left eye, which was screwed up and seemed to be insinuating something, Smerdyakov showed himself unchanged.
“It’s always worth while speaking to a clever man.” Ivan was reminded of that at once.
Smerdyakov, with painful effort, shifted his position in bed, but he was not the first to speak.
He remained dumb, and did not even look much interested.
“I won’t tire you much.” “Certainly I can,” mumbled Smerdyakov, in a faint voice.
“Has your honor been back long?” he added patronizingly, as though encouraging a nervous visitor.
To see the mess you are in here.” Smerdyakov sighed.
Smerdyakov was stolidly silent for a while.
It was clear beforehand.
You’ve foretold you’d have a fit; on the way down to the cellar, you know.
You mentioned the very spot.” “Have you said so at the examination yet?” Smerdyakov queried with composure.
Ivan felt suddenly angry.
“No, I haven’t yet, but I certainly shall.
You must explain a great deal to me, my man; and let me tell you, I am not going to let you play with me!” “Why should I play with you, when I put my whole trust in you, as in God Almighty?” said Smerdyakov, with the same composure, only for a moment closing his eyes.
“In the first place,” began Ivan, “I know that epileptic fits can’t be told beforehand.
I’ve inquired; don’t try and take me in.
You can’t foretell the day and the hour.
How was it you told me the day and the hour beforehand, and about the cellar, too?
How could you tell that you would fall down the cellar stairs in a fit, if you didn’t sham a fit on purpose?” “I had to go to the cellar anyway, several times a day, indeed,” Smerdyakov drawled deliberately.
It’s quite true you can’t tell the day and hour of a fit beforehand, but you can always have a presentiment of it.” “But you did foretell the day and the hour!” “In regard to my epilepsy, sir, you had much better inquire of the doctors here.
How could you know beforehand of the cellar?” “You don’t seem able to get over that cellar!
As I was going down to the cellar, I was in terrible dread and doubt.
What frightened me most was losing you and being left without defense in all the world.
So I went down into the cellar thinking, ‘Here, it’ll come on directly, it’ll strike me down directly, shall I fall?’ And it was through this fear that I suddenly felt the spasm that always comes ... and so I went flying.
All that and all my previous conversation with you at the gate the evening before, when I told you how frightened I was and spoke of the cellar, I told all that to Doctor Herzenstube and Nikolay Parfenovitch, the investigating lawyer, and it’s all been written down in the protocol.
Varvinsky, maintained to all of them that it was just the thought of it brought it on, the apprehension that I might fall.
And so they’ve written it down, that it’s just how it must have happened, simply from my fear.” As he finished, Smerdyakov drew a deep breath, as though exhausted.
“Then you have said all that in your evidence?” said Ivan, somewhat taken aback.
He had meant to frighten him with the threat of repeating their conversation, and it appeared that Smerdyakov had already reported it all himself.
Let them write down the whole truth,” Smerdyakov pronounced firmly.
That’s why I told you to get out of harm’s way, that you might understand that there would be trouble in the house, and would remain at home to protect your father.” “You might have said it more directly, you blockhead!” Ivan suddenly fired up.
“How could I have said it more directly then?
I might well have been apprehensive that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would make a scene and carry away that money, for he considered it as good as his own; but who could tell that it would end in a murder like this?
I thought that he would only carry off the three thousand that lay under the master’s mattress in the envelope, and you see, he’s murdered him.
How could you guess it either, sir?” “But if you say yourself that it couldn’t be guessed, how could I have guessed and stayed at home?
You contradict yourself!” said Ivan, pondering.
“You might have guessed from my sending you to Tchermashnya and not to Moscow.” “How could I guess it from that?” Smerdyakov seemed much exhausted, and again he was silent for a minute.
“You might have guessed from the fact of my asking you not to go to Moscow, but to Tchermashnya, that I wanted to have you nearer, for Moscow’s a long way off, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch, knowing you are not far off, would not be so bold.
And if anything had happened, you might have come to protect me, too, for I warned you of Grigory Vassilyevitch’s illness, and that I was afraid of having a fit.
“But I thought at the time that you quite guessed,” Smerdyakov parried with the simplest air.
“Do you remember how you went up to the carriage and said to me, ‘It’s always worth while speaking to a clever man’?
So you were glad I went away, since you praised me?” Smerdyakov sighed again and again.
“If I was pleased,” he articulated rather breathlessly, “it was simply because you agreed not to go to Moscow, but to Tchermashnya.
Only when I said these words to you, it was not by way of praise, but of reproach.
You didn’t understand it.” “What reproach?” “Why, that foreseeing such a calamity you deserted your own father, and would not protect us, for I might have been taken up any time for stealing that three thousand.” “Damn you!” Ivan swore again.
“Stay, did you tell the prosecutor and the investigating lawyer about those knocks?” “I told them everything just as it was.” Ivan wondered inwardly again.
“If I thought of anything then,” he began again, “it was solely of some wickedness on your part.
But I was prepared for any wickedness from you.
You told me yourself you could sham a fit.
What did you say that for?” “It was just through my simplicity, and I never have shammed a fit on purpose in my life.
It was just foolishness.
I liked you so much then, and was open-hearted with you.” “My brother directly accuses you of the murder and theft.” “What else is left for him to do?” said Smerdyakov, with a bitter grin.
Grigory Vassilyevitch saw the door open.
He is trembling to save himself.” He slowly ceased speaking; then suddenly, as though on reflection, added: “And look here again.
But as to my being clever at shamming a fit: should I have told you beforehand that I could sham one, if I really had had such a design against your father?
If I had been planning such a murder could I have been such a fool as to give such evidence against myself beforehand?
As if that could be, such a thing has never happened.
No one hears this talk of ours now, except Providence itself, and if you were to tell of it to the prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch you might defend me completely by doing so, for who would be likely to be such a criminal, if he is so open-hearted beforehand?
Any one can see that.” “Well,” and Ivan got up to cut short the conversation, struck by Smerdyakov’s last argument.
On the contrary, I am grateful to you for setting my mind at rest.
Is there anything you want?” “I am very thankful for everything.
Marfa Ignatyevna does not forget me, and provides me anything I want, according to her kindness.
But I shan’t say anything of your being able to sham a fit, and I don’t advise you to, either,” something made Ivan say suddenly.
“I quite understand.
And if you don’t speak of that, I shall say nothing of that conversation of ours at the gate.” Then it happened that Ivan went out, and only when he had gone a dozen steps along the corridor, he suddenly felt that there was an insulting significance in Smerdyakov’s last words.
He was almost on the point of turning back, but it was only a passing impulse, and muttering, “Nonsense!” he went out of the hospital.
His chief feeling was one of relief at the fact that it was not Smerdyakov, but Mitya, who had committed the murder, though he might have been expected to feel the opposite.
He did not want to analyze the reason for this feeling, and even felt a positive repugnance at prying into his sensations.
He felt as though he wanted to make haste to forget something.
In the following days he became convinced of Mitya’s guilt, as he got to know all the weight of evidence against him.
There was evidence of people of no importance, Fenya and her mother, for instance, but the effect of it was almost overpowering.
As to Perhotin, the people at the tavern, and at Plotnikov’s shop, as well as the witnesses at Mokroe, their evidence seemed conclusive.
The secret of the knocks impressed the lawyers almost as much as Grigory’s evidence as to the open door.
Grigory’s wife, Marfa, in answer to Ivan’s questions, declared that Smerdyakov had been lying all night the other side of the partition wall.
“He was not three paces from our bed,” and that although she was a sound sleeper she waked several times and heard him moaning, “He was moaning the whole time, moaning continually.” Talking to Herzenstube, and giving it as his opinion that Smerdyakov was not mad, but only rather weak, Ivan only evoked from the old man a subtle smile.
“Do you know how he spends his time now?” he asked; “learning lists of French words by heart.
He has an exercise-book under his pillow with the French words written out in Russian letters for him by some one, he he he!” Ivan ended by dismissing all doubts.
He could not think of Dmitri without repulsion.
Alyosha persisted that Dmitri was not the murderer, and that “in all probability” Smerdyakov was.
Ivan always felt that Alyosha’s opinion meant a great deal to him, and so he was astonished at it now.
Another thing that was strange was that Alyosha did not make any attempt to talk about Mitya with Ivan, that he never began on the subject and only answered his questions.
This, too, struck Ivan particularly.
But he was very much preoccupied at that time with something quite apart from that.
On his return from Moscow, he abandoned himself hopelessly to his mad and consuming passion for Katerina Ivanovna.
But I cannot omit to mention here that when Ivan, on leaving Katerina Ivanovna with Alyosha, as I’ve related already, told him, “I am not keen on her,” it was an absolute lie: he loved her madly, though at times he hated her so that he might have murdered her.
Shattered by what had happened with Mitya, she rushed on Ivan’s return to meet him as her one salvation.
She was hurt, insulted and humiliated in her feelings.
And here the man had come back to her, who had loved her so ardently before (oh! she knew that very well), and whose heart and intellect she considered so superior to her own.
But the sternly virtuous girl did not abandon herself altogether to the man she loved, in spite of the Karamazov violence of his passions and the great fascination he had for her.
She was continually tormented at the same time by remorse for having deserted Mitya, and in moments of discord and violent anger (and they were numerous) she told Ivan so plainly.
This was what he had called to Alyosha “lies upon lies.” There was, of course, much that was false in it, and that angered Ivan more than anything....
He did, in fact, for a time almost forget Smerdyakov’s existence, and yet, a fortnight after his first visit to him, he began to be haunted by the same strange thoughts as before.
It’s enough to say that he was continually asking himself, why was it that on that last night in Fyodor Pavlovitch’s house he had crept out on to the stairs like a thief and listened to hear what his father was doing below?
Why had he recalled that afterwards with repulsion?
Why next morning, had he been suddenly so depressed on the journey?
Why, as he reached Moscow, had he said to himself, “I am a scoundrel”?
And now he almost fancied that these tormenting thoughts would make him even forget Katerina Ivanovna, so completely did they take possession of him again.
It was just after fancying this, that he met Alyosha in the street.
He stopped him at once, and put a question to him: “Do you remember when Dmitri burst in after dinner and beat father, and afterwards I told you in the yard that I reserved ‘the right to desire’?...
Tell me, did you think then that I desired father’s death or not?” “I did think so,” answered Alyosha, softly.
“It was so, too; it was not a matter of guessing.
But didn’t you fancy then that what I wished was just that ‘one reptile should devour another’; that is, just that Dmitri should kill father, and as soon as possible ... and that I myself was even prepared to help to bring that about?” Alyosha turned rather pale, and looked silently into his brother’s face.
“Speak!” cried Ivan, “I want above everything to know what you thought then.
“Forgive me, I did think that, too, at the time,” whispered Alyosha, and he did not add one softening phrase.
From that time Alyosha noticed that Ivan began obviously to avoid him and seemed even to have taken a dislike to him, so much so that Alyosha gave up going to see him.
Immediately after that meeting with him, Ivan had not gone home, but went straight to Smerdyakov again.
The Second Visit To Smerdyakov By that time Smerdyakov had been discharged from the hospital.
Ivan knew his new lodging, the dilapidated little wooden house, divided in two by a passage on one side of which lived Marya Kondratyevna and her mother, and on the other, Smerdyakov.
It was supposed afterwards that he had come to stay with them as Marya Kondratyevna’s betrothed, and was living there for a time without paying for board or lodging.
Both mother and daughter had the greatest respect for him and looked upon him as greatly superior to themselves.
Ivan knocked, and, on the door being opened, went straight into the passage.
By Marya Kondratyevna’s directions he went straight to the better room on the left, occupied by Smerdyakov.
There was a tiled stove in the room and it was extremely hot.
The walls were gay with blue paper, which was a good deal used however, and in the cracks under it cockroaches swarmed in amazing numbers, so that there was a continual rustling from them.
The furniture was very scanty: two benches against each wall and two chairs by the table.
The table of plain wood was covered with a cloth with pink patterns on it.
There was a pot of geranium on each of the two little windows.
But Smerdyakov had finished tea and the samovar was out.
He was looking at an exercise-book and slowly writing with a pen.
There was a bottle of ink by him and a flat iron candlestick, but with a composite candle.
Ivan saw at once from Smerdyakov’s face that he had completely recovered from his illness.
His face was fresher, fuller, his hair stood up jauntily in front, and was plastered down at the sides.
He was sitting in a parti-colored, wadded dressing-gown, rather dirty and frayed, however.
He had spectacles on his nose, which Ivan had never seen him wearing before.
This trifling circumstance suddenly redoubled Ivan’s anger: “A creature like that and wearing spectacles!” Smerdyakov slowly raised his head and looked intently at his visitor through his spectacles; then he slowly took them off and rose from the bench, but by no means respectfully, almost lazily, doing the least possible required by common civility.
All this struck Ivan instantly; he took it all in and noted it at once—most of all the look in Smerdyakov’s eyes, positively malicious, churlish and haughty.
“What do you want to intrude for?” it seemed to say; “we settled everything then; why have you come again?” Ivan could scarcely control himself.
“It’s hot here,” he said, still standing, and unbuttoned his overcoat.
“Take off your coat,” Smerdyakov conceded.
Ivan took off his coat and threw it on a bench with trembling hands.
Smerdyakov managed to sit down on his bench before him.
“To begin with, are we alone?” Ivan asked sternly and impulsively.
“Can they overhear us in there?” “No one can hear anything.
You’ve seen for yourself: there’s a passage.” “Listen, my good fellow; what was that you babbled, as I was leaving the hospital, that if I said nothing about your faculty of shamming fits, you wouldn’t tell the investigating lawyer all our conversation at the gate?
Were you threatening me?
Do you suppose I am afraid of you?” Ivan said this in a perfect fury, giving him to understand with obvious intention that he scorned any subterfuge or indirectness and meant to show his cards.
Smerdyakov’s eyes gleamed resentfully, his left eye winked, and he at once gave his answer, with his habitual composure and deliberation.
“You want to have everything above-board; very well, you shall have it,” he seemed to say.
He stared impudently at Ivan.
Are you out of your mind?” “I’m perfectly in possession of all my faculties.” “Do you suppose I _knew_ of the murder?” Ivan cried at last, and he brought his fist violently on the table.
“What do you mean by ‘something else, too’?
Speak, scoundrel!” Smerdyakov was silent and still scanned Ivan with the same insolent stare.
“Speak, you stinking rogue, what is that ‘something else, too’?” “The ‘something else’ I meant was that you probably, too, were very desirous of your parent’s death.” Ivan jumped up and struck him with all his might on the shoulder, so that he fell back against the wall.
Saying, “It’s a shame, sir, to strike a sick man,” he dried his eyes with a very dirty blue check handkerchief and sank into quiet weeping.
Leave off,” Ivan said peremptorily, sitting down again.
“Don’t put me out of all patience.” Smerdyakov took the rag from his eyes.
Every line of his puckered face reflected the insult he had just received.
“It was you murdered him?” he cried suddenly.
Smerdyakov smiled contemptuously.
“You know of yourself, for a fact, that it wasn’t I murdered him.
And I should have thought that there was no need for a sensible man to speak of it again.” “But why, why had you such a suspicion about me at the time?” “As you know already, it was simply from fear.
For I was in such a position, shaking with fear, that I suspected every one.
Come answer, answer, I insist: what was it ... what could I have done to put such a degrading suspicion into your mean soul?” “As for the murder, you couldn’t have done that and didn’t want to, but as for wanting some one else to do it, that was just what you did want.” “And how coolly, how coolly he speaks!
What about the inheritance?” said Smerdyakov sarcastically, and, as it were, vindictively.
“Why, after your parent’s death there was at least forty thousand to come to each of you, and very likely more, but if Fyodor Pavlovitch got married then to that lady, Agrafena Alexandrovna, she would have had all his capital made over to her directly after the wedding, for she’s plenty of sense, so that your parent would not have left you two roubles between the three of you.
Not a hair’s-breadth: that lady had only to lift her little finger and he would have run after her to church, with his tongue out.” Ivan restrained himself with painful effort.
“Very good,” he commented at last.
So, according to you, I had fixed on Dmitri to do it; I was reckoning on him?” “How could you help reckoning on him?
If he killed him, then he would lose all the rights of a nobleman, his rank and property, and would go off to exile; so his share of the inheritance would come to you and your brother Alexey Fyodorovitch in equal parts; so you’d each have not forty, but sixty thousand each.
There’s not a doubt you did reckon on Dmitri Fyodorovitch.” “What I put up with from you!
Listen, scoundrel, if I had reckoned on any one then, it would have been on you, not on Dmitri, and I swear I did expect some wickedness from you ... at the time....
I remember my impression!” “I thought, too, for a minute, at the time, that you were reckoning on me as well,” said Smerdyakov, with a sarcastic grin.
“So that it was just by that more than anything you showed me what was in your mind.
For if you had a foreboding about me and yet went away, you as good as said to me, ‘You can murder my parent, I won’t hinder you!’” “You scoundrel!
So that’s how you understood it!” “It was all that going to Tchermashnya.
You were meaning to go to Moscow and refused all your father’s entreaties to go to Tchermashnya—and simply at a foolish word from me you consented at once!
What reason had you to consent to Tchermashnya?
Since you went to Tchermashnya with no reason, simply at my word, it shows that you must have expected something from me.” “No, I swear I didn’t!” shouted Ivan, grinding his teeth.
Then you ought, as your father’s son, to have had me taken to the lock-up and thrashed at once for my words then ... or at least, to have given me a punch in the face on the spot, but you were not a bit angry, if you please, and at once in a friendly way acted on my foolish word and went away, which was utterly absurd, for you ought to have stayed to save your parent’s life.
How could I help drawing my conclusions?” Ivan sat scowling, both his fists convulsively pressed on his knees.
Who would have believed me and what charge could I bring against you?
Though blows are forbidden, I should have pounded your ugly face to a jelly.” Smerdyakov looked at him almost with relish.
“Why shouldn’t I learn them so as to improve my education, supposing that I may myself chance to go some day to those happy parts of Europe?” “Listen, monster.” Ivan’s eyes flashed and he trembled all over.
“I am not afraid of your accusations; you can say what you like about me, and if I don’t beat you to death, it’s simply because I suspect you of that crime and I’ll drag you to justice.
I’ll unmask you.” “To my thinking, you’d better keep quiet, for what can you accuse me of, considering my absolute innocence? and who would believe you?
Only if you begin, I shall tell everything, too, for I must defend myself.” “Do you think I am afraid of you now?” “If the court doesn’t believe all I’ve said to you just now, the public will, and you will be ashamed.” “That’s as much as to say, ‘It’s always worth while speaking to a sensible man,’ eh?” snarled Ivan.
And you’d better be sensible.” Ivan got up, shaking all over with indignation, put on his coat, and without replying further to Smerdyakov, without even looking at him, walked quickly out of the cottage.
The cool evening air refreshed him.
A nightmare of ideas and sensations filled his soul.
“Shall I go at once and give information against Smerdyakov?
But what information can I give?
On the contrary, he’ll accuse me.
And in fact, why did I set off for Tchermashnya then?
“Yes, of course, I was expecting something and he is right....” And he remembered for the hundredth time how, on the last night in his father’s house, he had listened on the stairs.
But he remembered it now with such anguish that he stood still on the spot as though he had been stabbed.
“Yes, I expected it then, that’s true!
I must kill Smerdyakov!
If I don’t dare kill Smerdyakov now, life is not worth living!” Ivan did not go home, but went straight to Katerina Ivanovna and alarmed her by his appearance.
He repeated all his conversation with Smerdyakov, every syllable of it.
He couldn’t be calmed, however much she tried to soothe him: he kept walking about the room, speaking strangely, disconnectedly.
At last he sat down, put his elbows on the table, leaned his head on his hands and pronounced this strange sentence: “If it’s not Dmitri, but Smerdyakov who’s the murderer, I share his guilt, for I put him up to it.
But if he is the murderer, and not Dmitri, then, of course, I am the murderer, too.” When Katerina Ivanovna heard that, she got up from her seat without a word, went to her writing-table, opened a box standing on it, took out a sheet of paper and laid it before Ivan.
This was the document of which Ivan spoke to Alyosha later on as a “conclusive proof” that Dmitri had killed his father.
It was the letter written by Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna when he was drunk, on the very evening he met Alyosha at the crossroads on the way to the monastery, after the scene at Katerina Ivanovna’s, when Grushenka had insulted her.
Then, parting from Alyosha, Mitya had rushed to Grushenka.
I don’t know whether he saw her, but in the evening he was at the “Metropolis,” where he got thoroughly drunk.
Then he asked for pen and paper and wrote a document of weighty consequences to himself.
It was a wordy, disconnected, frantic letter, a drunken letter in fact.
It was like the talk of a drunken man, who, on his return home, begins with extraordinary heat telling his wife or one of his household how he has just been insulted, what a rascal had just insulted him, what a fine fellow he is on the other hand, and how he will pay that scoundrel out; and all that at great length, with great excitement and incoherence, with drunken tears and blows on the table.
The letter was written on a dirty piece of ordinary paper of the cheapest kind.
It had been provided by the tavern and there were figures scrawled on the back of it.
There was evidently not space enough for his drunken verbosity and Mitya not only filled the margins but had written the last line right across the rest.
The letter ran as follows: FATAL KATYA: To-morrow I will get the money and repay your three thousand and farewell, woman of great wrath, but farewell, too, my love!
If I have to go to Siberia for it, I’ll give you back your three thousand.
I bow down to the ground before you, for I’ve been a scoundrel to you.
Not _her_ either, for you are not my only tormentress; she is too.
One string is left, and it vibrates.
I shall tear three thousand from him and fling it to you.
Though I’ve been a scoundrel to you, I am not a thief!
You can expect three thousand.
The cur keeps it under his mattress, in pink ribbon.
Katya, don’t look disdainful.
Dmitri is not a thief! but a murderer!
He has murdered his father and ruined himself to hold his ground, rather than endure your pride.
P.P.S.—I kiss your feet, farewell!
When Ivan read this “document” he was convinced.
So then it was his brother, not Smerdyakov.
And if not Smerdyakov, then not he, Ivan.
There could be no longer the slightest doubt of Mitya’s guilt.
The suspicion never occurred to Ivan, by the way, that Mitya might have committed the murder in conjunction with Smerdyakov, and, indeed, such a theory did not fit in with the facts.
Ivan was completely reassured.
The next morning he only thought of Smerdyakov and his gibes with contempt.
A few days later he positively wondered how he could have been so horribly distressed at his suspicions.
He resolved to dismiss him with contempt and forget him.
He made no further inquiry about Smerdyakov, but twice he happened to hear that he was very ill and out of his mind.
“He’ll end in madness,” the young doctor Varvinsky observed about him, and Ivan remembered this.
He went to consult the Moscow doctor who had been sent for by Katerina Ivanovna just before the trial.
And just at that time his relations with Katerina Ivanovna became acutely strained.
Katerina Ivanovna’s “returns” to Mitya, that is, her brief but violent revulsions of feeling in his favor, drove Ivan to perfect frenzy.
Strange to say, until that last scene described above, when Alyosha came from Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna, Ivan had never once, during that month, heard her express a doubt of Mitya’s guilt, in spite of those “returns” that were so hateful to him.
It is remarkable, too, that while he felt that he hated Mitya more and more every day, he realized that it was not on account of Katya’s “returns” that he hated him, but just _because he was the murderer of his father_.
He was conscious of this and fully recognized it to himself.
Nevertheless, he went to see Mitya ten days before the trial and proposed to him a plan of escape—a plan he had obviously thought over a long time.
He was partly impelled to do this by a sore place still left in his heart from a phrase of Smerdyakov’s, that it was to his, Ivan’s, advantage that his brother should be convicted, as that would increase his inheritance and Alyosha’s from forty to sixty thousand roubles.
He determined to sacrifice thirty thousand on arranging Mitya’s escape.
On his return from seeing him, he was very mournful and dispirited; he suddenly began to feel that he was anxious for Mitya’s escape, not only to heal that sore place by sacrificing thirty thousand, but for another reason.
“Is it because I am as much a murderer at heart?” he asked himself.
Something very deep down seemed burning and rankling in his soul.
His pride above all suffered cruelly all that month.
When, after his conversation with Alyosha, Ivan suddenly decided with his hand on the bell of his lodging to go to Smerdyakov, he obeyed a sudden and peculiar impulse of indignation.
He suddenly remembered how Katerina Ivanovna had only just cried out to him in Alyosha’s presence: “It was you, you, persuaded me of his” (that is, Mitya’s) “guilt!” Ivan was thunderstruck when he recalled it.
He had never once tried to persuade her that Mitya was the murderer; on the contrary, he had suspected himself in her presence, that time when he came back from Smerdyakov.
It was _she_, she, who had produced that “document” and proved his brother’s guilt.
And now she suddenly exclaimed: “I’ve been at Smerdyakov’s myself!” When had she been there?
And what could Smerdyakov have told her?
He could not understand how he could, half an hour before, have let those words pass and not have cried out at the moment.
He let go of the bell and rushed off to Smerdyakov.
The Third And Last Interview With Smerdyakov When he was half-way there, the keen dry wind that had been blowing early that morning rose again, and a fine dry snow began falling thickly.
It did not lie on the ground, but was whirled about by the wind, and soon there was a regular snowstorm.
There were scarcely any lamp-posts in the part of the town where Smerdyakov lived.
Ivan strode alone in the darkness, unconscious of the storm, instinctively picking out his way.
His head ached and there was a painful throbbing in his temples.
He felt that his hands were twitching convulsively.
Not far from Marya Kondratyevna’s cottage, Ivan suddenly came upon a solitary drunken little peasant.
He was wearing a coarse and patched coat, and was walking in zigzags, grumbling and swearing to himself.
Then suddenly he would begin singing in a husky drunken voice: “Ach, Vanka’s gone to Petersburg; I won’t wait till he comes back.” But he broke off every time at the second line and began swearing again; then he would begin the same song again.
Suddenly he realized his presence and felt an irresistible impulse to knock him down.
At that moment they met, and the peasant with a violent lurch fell full tilt against Ivan, who pushed him back furiously.
The peasant went flying backwards and fell like a log on the frozen ground.
He uttered one plaintive “O—oh!” and then was silent.
He was lying on his back, without movement or consciousness.
“He will be frozen,” thought Ivan, and he went on his way to Smerdyakov’s.
In the passage, Marya Kondratyevna, who ran out to open the door with a candle in her hand, whispered that Smerdyakov was very ill, “It’s not that he’s laid up, but he seems not himself, and he even told us to take the tea away; he wouldn’t have any.” “Why, does he make a row?” asked Ivan coarsely.
“Oh, dear, no, quite the contrary, he’s very quiet.
Only please don’t talk to him too long,” Marya Kondratyevna begged him.
One of the benches at the side had been removed, and in its place had been put a large old mahogany leather sofa, on which a bed had been made up, with fairly clean white pillows.
Smerdyakov was sitting on the sofa, wearing the same dressing-gown.
On the table lay a thick book in yellow cover, but Smerdyakov was not reading it.
He met Ivan with a slow silent gaze, and was apparently not at all surprised at his coming.
There was a great change in his face; he was much thinner and sallower.
“Why do you look at me without speaking?
I’ve only come with one question, and I swear I won’t go without an answer.
Has the young lady, Katerina Ivanovna, been with you?” Smerdyakov still remained silent, looking quietly at Ivan as before.
Suddenly, with a motion of his hand, he turned his face away.
Tell me, when was she here?” “Why, I’d quite forgotten about her,” said Smerdyakov, with a scornful smile, and turning his face to Ivan again, he stared at him with a look of frenzied hatred, the same look that he had fixed on him at their last interview, a month before.
“You seem very ill yourself, your face is sunken; you don’t look like yourself,” he said to Ivan.
Are you so worried?” He smiled contemptuously and suddenly laughed outright.
“Listen; I’ve told you I won’t go away without an answer!” Ivan cried, intensely irritated.
“Why do you keep pestering me?
Why do you torment me?” said Smerdyakov, with a look of suffering.
Just answer my question and I’ll go away.” “I’ve no answer to give you,” said Smerdyakov, looking down again.
“You may be sure I’ll make you answer!” “Why are you so uneasy?” Smerdyakov stared at him, not simply with contempt, but almost with repulsion.
Go home, go to bed and sleep in peace, don’t be afraid of anything.” “I don’t understand you....
What have I to be afraid of to-morrow?” Ivan articulated in astonishment, and suddenly a chill breath of fear did in fact pass over his soul.
Smerdyakov measured him with his eyes.
“You don’t understand?” he drawled reproachfully.
“It’s a strange thing a sensible man should care to play such a farce!” Ivan looked at him speechless.
The startling, incredibly supercilious tone of this man who had once been his valet, was extraordinary in itself.
He had not taken such a tone even at their last interview.
I won’t say anything about you; there’s no proof against you.
I say, how your hands are trembling!
He remembered Alyosha.
“I know it was not I,” he faltered.
“Do you?” Smerdyakov caught him up again.
Ivan jumped up and seized him by the shoulder.
“Tell me everything, you viper!
Tell me everything!” Smerdyakov was not in the least scared.
“Well, it was you who murdered him, if that’s it,” he whispered furiously.
Ivan sank back on his chair, as though pondering something.
He laughed malignantly.
What you talked about last time?” “You stood before me last time and understood it all, and you understand it now.” “All I understand is that you are mad.” “Aren’t you tired of it?
Are you still trying to throw it all on me, to my face? _You_ murdered him; you are the real murderer, I was only your instrument, your faithful servant, and it was following your words I did it.” “_Did_ it?
Something seemed to give way in his brain, and he shuddered all over with a cold shiver.
Then Smerdyakov himself looked at him wonderingly; probably the genuineness of Ivan’s horror struck him.
“You don’t mean to say you really did not know?” he faltered mistrustfully, looking with a forced smile into his eyes.
Ach, Vanka’s gone to Petersburg; I won’t wait till he comes back, suddenly echoed in his head.
“Do you know, I am afraid that you are a dream, a phantom sitting before me,” he muttered.
What third person?” Ivan cried in alarm, looking about him, his eyes hastily searching in every corner.
“That third is God Himself—Providence.
“You are mad, or teasing me again!” Smerdyakov, as before, watched him curiously, with no sign of fear.
He could still scarcely get over his incredulity; he still fancied that Ivan knew everything and was trying to “throw it all on him to his face.” “Wait a minute,” he said at last in a weak voice, and suddenly bringing up his left leg from under the table, he began turning up his trouser leg.
He was wearing long white stockings and slippers.
Slowly he took off his garter and fumbled to the bottom of his stocking.
Ivan gazed at him, and suddenly shuddered in a paroxysm of terror.
“He’s mad!” he cried, and rapidly jumping up, he drew back, so that he knocked his back against the wall and stood up against it, stiff and straight.
He looked with insane terror at Smerdyakov, who, entirely unaffected by his terror, continued fumbling in his stocking, as though he were making an effort to get hold of something with his fingers and pull it out.
Smerdyakov pulled it out and laid it on the table.
“What is it?” asked Ivan, trembling.
“Kindly look at it,” Smerdyakov answered, still in the same low tone.
Ivan stepped up to the table, took up the roll of paper and began unfolding it, but suddenly he drew back his fingers, as though from contact with a loathsome reptile.
“Your hands keep twitching,” observed Smerdyakov, and he deliberately unfolded the bundle himself.
“They are all here, all the three thousand roubles; you need not count them.
Take them,” Smerdyakov suggested to Ivan, nodding at the notes.
He was as white as a handkerchief.
“You frightened me ... with your stocking,” he said, with a strange grin.
“Can you really not have known till now?” Smerdyakov asked once more.
I kept thinking of Dmitri.
Ach!” He suddenly clutched his head in both hands.
With my brother’s help or without?” “It was only with you, with your help, I killed him, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch is quite innocent.” “All right, all right.
Why do I keep on trembling?
I can’t speak properly.” “You were bold enough then.
You said ‘everything was lawful,’ and how frightened you are now,” Smerdyakov muttered in surprise.
“Won’t you have some lemonade?
It’s very refreshing.
Only I must hide this first.” And again he motioned at the notes.
He was just going to get up and call at the door to Marya Kondratyevna to make some lemonade and bring it them, but, looking for something to cover up the notes that she might not see them, he first took out his handkerchief, and as it turned out to be very dirty, took up the big yellow book that Ivan had noticed at first lying on the table, and put it over the notes.
Ivan read it mechanically.
“I won’t have any lemonade,” he said.
Tell me all about it.” “You’d better take off your greatcoat, or you’ll be too hot.” Ivan, as though he’d only just thought of it, took off his coat, and, without getting up from his chair, threw it on the bench.
He waited, feeling sure that Smerdyakov would tell him _all_ about it.
“How it was done?” sighed Smerdyakov.
“It was done in a most natural way, following your very words.” “Of my words later,” Ivan broke in again, apparently with complete self-possession, firmly uttering his words, and not shouting as before.
Everything, as it happened.
Don’t forget anything.
The details, above everything, the details, I beg you.” “You’d gone away, then I fell into the cellar.” “In a fit or in a sham one?” “A sham one, naturally.
I went quietly down the steps to the very bottom and lay down quietly, and as I lay down I gave a scream, and struggled, till they carried me out.” “Stay!
And were you shamming all along, afterwards, and in the hospital?” “No, not at all.
Next day, in the morning, before they took me to the hospital, I had a real attack and a more violent one than I’ve had for years.
For two days I was quite unconscious.” “All right, all right.
I knew I’d be the other side of the partition, for whenever I was ill, Marfa Ignatyevna used to put me there, near them.
I kept expecting Dmitri Fyodorovitch to come.” “Expecting him?
I expected him to come into the house, for I’d no doubt that he’d come that night, for being without me and getting no news, he’d be sure to come and climb over the fence, as he used to, and do something.” “And if he hadn’t come?” “Then nothing would have happened.
I should never have brought myself to it without him.” “All right, all right ... speak more intelligibly, don’t hurry; above all, don’t leave anything out!” “I expected him to kill Fyodor Pavlovitch.
I thought that was certain, for I had prepared him for it ... during the last few days....
With his suspiciousness and the fury which had been growing in him all those days, he was bound to get into the house by means of those taps.
That was inevitable, so I was expecting him.” “Stay,” Ivan interrupted; “if he had killed him, he would have taken the money and carried it away; you must have considered that.
What would you have got by it afterwards?
That was only what I told him, that the money was under the mattress.
And afterwards I suggested to Fyodor Pavlovitch, as I was the only person he trusted, to hide the envelope with the notes in the corner behind the ikons, for no one would have guessed that place, especially if they came in a hurry.
So that’s where the envelope lay, in the corner behind the ikons.
It would have been absurd to keep it under the mattress; the box, anyway, could be locked.
But all believe it was under the mattress.
So if Dmitri Fyodorovitch had committed the murder, finding nothing, he would either have run away in a hurry, afraid of every sound, as always happens with murderers, or he would have been arrested.
So I could always have clambered up to the ikons and have taken away the money next morning or even that night, and it would have all been put down to Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
I could reckon upon that.” “But what if he did not kill him, but only knocked him down?” “If he did not kill him, of course, I would not have ventured to take the money, and nothing would have happened.
But I calculated that he would beat him senseless, and I should have time to take it then, and then I’d make out to Fyodor Pavlovitch that it was no one but Dmitri Fyodorovitch who had taken the money after beating him.” “Stop ...
Well, I might as well have told you now that he was the murderer....
But I don’t want to lie to you now, because ... because if you really haven’t understood till now, as I see for myself, and are not pretending, so as to throw your guilt on me to my very face, you are still responsible for it all, since you knew of the murder and charged me to do it, and went away knowing all about it.
And so I want to prove to your face this evening that you are the only real murderer in the whole affair, and I am not the real murderer, though I did kill him.
You are the rightful murderer.” “Why, why, am I a murderer?
Oh, God!” Ivan cried, unable to restrain himself at last, and forgetting that he had put off discussing himself till the end of the conversation.
“You still mean that Tchermashnya?
Stay, tell me, why did you want my consent, if you really took Tchermashnya for consent?
How will you explain that now?” “Assured of your consent, I should have known that you wouldn’t have made an outcry over those three thousand being lost, even if I’d been suspected, instead of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, or as his accomplice; on the contrary, you would have protected me from others....
And when you got your inheritance you would have rewarded me when you were able, all the rest of your life.
For you’d have received your inheritance through me, seeing that if he had married Agrafena Alexandrovna, you wouldn’t have had a farthing.” “Ah!
Then you intended to worry me all my life afterwards,” snarled Ivan.
“And what if I hadn’t gone away then, but had informed against you?” “What could you have informed?
That I persuaded you to go to Tchermashnya?
That’s all nonsense.
Besides, after our conversation you would either have gone away or have stayed.
If you had stayed, nothing would have happened.
I should have known that you didn’t want it done, and should have attempted nothing.
As you went away, it meant you assured me that you wouldn’t dare to inform against me at the trial, and that you’d overlook my having the three thousand.
And, indeed, you couldn’t have prosecuted me afterwards, because then I should have told it all in the court; that is, not that I had stolen the money or killed him—I shouldn’t have said that—but that you’d put me up to the theft and the murder, though I didn’t consent to it.
That’s why I needed your consent, so that you couldn’t have cornered me afterwards, for what proof could you have had?
I could always have cornered you, revealing your eagerness for your father’s death, and I tell you the public would have believed it all, and you would have been ashamed for the rest of your life.” “Was I then so eager, was I?” Ivan snarled again.
“To be sure you were, and by your consent you silently sanctioned my doing it.” Smerdyakov looked resolutely at Ivan.
He evidently had some design.
“Tell me what happened that night.” “What more is there to tell!
And before that Grigory Vassilyevitch had suddenly got up and came out, and he suddenly gave a scream, and then all was silence and darkness.
I went to the window and shouted to the master, ‘It’s I.’ And he shouted to me, ‘He’s been, he’s been; he’s run away.’ He meant Dmitri Fyodorovitch had been.
‘He’s killed Grigory!’ ‘Where?’ I whispered.
He was whispering, too.
I went to the corner of the garden to look, and there I came upon Grigory Vassilyevitch lying by the wall, covered with blood, senseless.
So it’s true that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here, was the thought that came into my head, and I determined on the spot to make an end of it, as Grigory Vassilyevitch, even if he were alive, would see nothing of it, as he lay there senseless.
The only risk was that Marfa Ignatyevna might wake up.
I felt that at the moment, but the longing to get it done came over me, till I could scarcely breathe.
I went back to the window to the master and said, ‘She’s here, she’s come; Agrafena Alexandrovna has come, wants to be let in.’ And he started like a baby.
‘She’s standing there,’ said I.
‘Open.’ He looked out of the window at me, half believing and half distrustful, but afraid to open.
I bethought me to knock on the window-frame those taps we’d agreed upon as a signal that Grushenka had come, in his presence, before his eyes.
‘Well,’ thought I, ‘if he’s so frightened of me as all that, it’s a bad look out!’ And my legs went weak with fright that he wouldn’t let me in or would call out, or Marfa Ignatyevna would run up, or something else might happen.
I don’t remember now, but I must have stood pale, facing him.
I whispered to him, ‘Why, she’s there, there, under the window; how is it you don’t see her?’ I said.
‘Bring her then, bring her.’ ‘She’s afraid,’ said I; ‘she was frightened at the noise, she’s hidden in the bushes; go and call to her yourself from the study.’ He ran to the window, put the candle in the window.
‘Grushenka,’ he cried, ‘Grushenka, are you here?’ Though he cried that, he didn’t want to lean out of the window, he didn’t want to move away from me, for he was panic-stricken; he was so frightened he didn’t dare to turn his back on me.
‘Here she is; she’s in the bush, laughing at you, don’t you see her?’ He suddenly believed it; he was all of a shake—he was awfully crazy about her—and he leaned right out of the window.
I snatched up that iron paper-weight from his table; do you remember, weighing about three pounds?
He only sank down suddenly, and I hit him again and a third time.
He suddenly rolled on his back, face upwards, covered with blood.
I wiped the paper-weight, put it back, went up to the ikons, took the money out of the envelope, and flung the envelope on the floor and the pink ribbon beside it.
I went out into the garden all of a tremble, straight to the apple-tree with a hollow in it—you know that hollow.
And there it stayed for over a fortnight.
I took it out later, when I came out of the hospital.
At last she got up and she rushed to me, but when she saw Grigory Vassilyevitch was not there, she ran out, and I heard her scream in the garden.
Ivan had listened all the time in dead silence without stirring or taking his eyes off him.
As he told his story Smerdyakov glanced at him from time to time, but for the most part kept his eyes averted.
When he had finished he was evidently agitated and was breathing hard.
The perspiration stood out on his face.
But it was impossible to tell whether it was remorse he was feeling, or what.
“Stay,” cried Ivan, pondering.
For Grigory saw it before you went.” It was remarkable that Ivan spoke quite amicably, in a different tone, not angry as before, so if any one had opened the door at that moment and peeped in at them, he would certainly have concluded that they were talking peaceably about some ordinary, though interesting, subject.
“As for that door and Grigory Vassilyevitch’s having seen it open, that’s only his fancy,” said Smerdyakov, with a wry smile.
“He is not a man, I assure you, but an obstinate mule.
It’s just our luck he took that notion into his head, for they can’t fail to convict Dmitri Fyodorovitch after that.” “Listen ...” said Ivan, beginning to seem bewildered again and making an effort to grasp something.
There are a lot of questions I want to ask you, but I forget them ...
I keep forgetting and getting mixed up.
Tell me this at least, why did you open the envelope and leave it there on the floor?
Why didn’t you simply carry off the envelope?...
When you were telling me, I thought you spoke about it as though it were the right thing to do ... but why, I can’t understand....” “I did that for a good reason.
No, if the robber had been some one like me, he’d simply have put the envelope straight in his pocket and got away with it as fast as he could.
But it’d be quite different with Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
He only knew about the envelope by hearsay; he had never seen it, and if he’d found it, for instance, under the mattress, he’d have torn it open as quickly as possible to make sure the notes were in it.
And he’d have thrown the envelope down, without having time to think that it would be evidence against him.
Because he was not an habitual thief and had never directly stolen anything before, for he is a gentleman born, and if he did bring himself to steal, it would not be regular stealing, but simply taking what was his own, for he’d told the whole town he meant to before, and had even bragged aloud before every one that he’d go and take his property from Fyodor Pavlovitch.
I didn’t say that openly to the prosecutor when I was being examined, but quite the contrary, I brought him to it by a hint, as though I didn’t see it myself, and as though he’d thought of it himself and I hadn’t prompted him; so that Mr.
Prosecutor’s mouth positively watered at my suggestion.” “But can you possibly have thought of all that on the spot?” cried Ivan, overcome with astonishment.
He looked at Smerdyakov again with alarm.
Could any one think of it all in such a desperate hurry?
It was all thought out beforehand.” “Well ... well, it was the devil helped you!” Ivan cried again.
“No, you are not a fool, you are far cleverer than I thought....” He got up, obviously intending to walk across the room.
He was in terrible distress.
Perhaps the impossibility of moving irritated him, as he suddenly cried out almost as furiously as before.
“Listen, you miserable, contemptible creature!
Don’t you understand that if I haven’t killed you, it’s simply because I am keeping you to answer to-morrow at the trial.
But no matter, I will give evidence against myself to-morrow at the trial.
I shall tell everything, everything.
But we’ll make our appearance together.
And whatever you may say against me at the trial, whatever evidence you give, I’ll face it; I am not afraid of you.
You must, you must; we’ll go together.
That’s how it shall be!” Ivan said this solemnly and resolutely and from his flashing eyes alone it could be seen that it would be so.
Your eyes are yellow,” Smerdyakov commented, without the least irony, with apparent sympathy in fact.
“We’ll go together,” Ivan repeated.
“And if you won’t go, no matter, I’ll go alone.” Smerdyakov paused as though pondering.
“There’ll be nothing of the sort, and you won’t go,” he concluded at last positively.
“You don’t understand me,” Ivan exclaimed reproachfully.
And, what’s more, it will be no use at all, for I shall say straight out that I never said anything of the sort to you, and that you are either ill (and it looks like it, too), or that you’re so sorry for your brother that you are sacrificing yourself to save him and have invented it all against me, for you’ve always thought no more of me than if I’d been a fly.
And who will believe you, and what single proof have you got?” “Listen, you showed me those notes just now to convince me.” Smerdyakov lifted the book off the notes and laid it on one side.
“Take that money away with you,” Smerdyakov sighed.
But why do you give it to me, if you committed the murder for the sake of it?” Ivan looked at him with great surprise.
“I don’t want it,” Smerdyakov articulated in a shaking voice, with a gesture of refusal.
“I did have an idea of beginning a new life with that money in Moscow or, better still, abroad.
For if there’s no everlasting God, there’s no such thing as virtue, and there’s no need of it.
So that’s how I looked at it.” “Did you come to that of yourself?” asked Ivan, with a wry smile.
“With your guidance.” “And now, I suppose, you believe in God, since you are giving back the money?” “No, I don’t believe,” whispered Smerdyakov.
“Then why are you giving it back?” “Leave off ... that’s enough!” Smerdyakov waved his hand again.
“You used to say yourself that everything was lawful, so now why are you so upset, too?
You even want to go and give evidence against yourself....
You won’t go to give evidence,” Smerdyakov decided with conviction.
You like to be respected, too, for you’re very proud; you are far too fond of female charms, too, and you mind most of all about living in undisturbed comfort, without having to depend on any one—that’s what you care most about.
You won’t want to spoil your life for ever by taking such a disgrace on yourself.
You are like Fyodor Pavlovitch, you are more like him than any of his children; you’ve the same soul as he had.” “You are not a fool,” said Ivan, seeming struck.
“You are serious now!” he observed, looking suddenly at Smerdyakov with a different expression.
Take the money.” Ivan took the three rolls of notes and put them in his pocket without wrapping them in anything.
“I repeat,” he said, “the only reason I haven’t killed you is that I need you for to-morrow, remember that, don’t forget it!” “Well, kill me.
Kill me now,” Smerdyakov said, all at once looking strangely at Ivan.
“You won’t dare to do anything, you, who used to be so bold!” “Till to-morrow,” cried Ivan, and moved to go out.
Smerdyakov looked at them for ten seconds.
“Ivan Fyodorovitch!” he called after him again.
“What do you want?” Ivan turned without stopping.
The snowstorm was still raging.
He walked the first few steps boldly, but suddenly began staggering.
“It’s something physical,” he thought with a grin.
Something like joy was springing up in his heart.
He was conscious of unbounded resolution; he would make an end of the wavering that had so tortured him of late.
His determination was taken, “and now it will not be changed,” he thought with relief.
At that moment he stumbled against something and almost fell down.
Stopping short, he made out at his feet the peasant he had knocked down, still lying senseless and motionless.
Seeing a light in the little house to the right he went up, knocked at the shutters, and asked the man to whom the house belonged to help him carry the peasant to the police-station, promising him three roubles.
I won’t describe in detail how Ivan succeeded in his object, bringing the peasant to the police-station and arranging for a doctor to see him at once, providing with a liberal hand for the expenses.
I will only say that this business took a whole hour, but Ivan was well content with it.
His mind wandered and worked incessantly.
“If I had not taken my decision so firmly for to-morrow,” he reflected with satisfaction, “I should not have stayed a whole hour to look after the peasant, but should have passed by, without caring about his being frozen.
I am quite capable of watching myself, by the way,” he thought at the same instant, with still greater satisfaction, “although they have decided that I am going out of my mind!” Just as he reached his own house he stopped short, asking himself suddenly hadn’t he better go at once to the prosecutor and tell him everything.
He decided the question by turning back to the house.
“Everything together to-morrow!” he whispered to himself, and, strange to say, almost all his gladness and self-satisfaction passed in one instant.
As he entered his own room he felt something like a touch of ice on his heart, like a recollection or, more exactly, a reminder, of something agonizing and revolting that was in that room now, at that moment, and had been there before.
He felt that he was ill and helpless.
He was beginning to drop asleep, but got up uneasily and walked across the room to shake off his drowsiness.
At moments he fancied he was delirious, but it was not illness that he thought of most.
Sitting down again, he began looking round, as though searching for something.
This happened several times.
At last his eyes were fastened intently on one point.
Ivan smiled, but an angry flush suffused his face.
He sat a long time in his place, his head propped on both arms, though he looked sideways at the same point, at the sofa that stood against the opposite wall.
There was evidently something, some object, that irritated him there, worried him and tormented him.
Ivan’s Nightmare I am not a doctor, but yet I feel that the moment has come when I must inevitably give the reader some account of the nature of Ivan’s illness.
Anticipating events I can say at least one thing: he was at that moment on the very eve of an attack of brain fever.
Though his health had long been affected, it had offered a stubborn resistance to the fever which in the end gained complete mastery over it.
Though I know nothing of medicine, I venture to hazard the suggestion that he really had perhaps, by a terrible effort of will, succeeded in delaying the attack for a time, hoping, of course, to check it completely.
After listening to him and examining him the doctor came to the conclusion that he was actually suffering from some disorder of the brain, and was not at all surprised by an admission which Ivan had reluctantly made him.
“Hallucinations are quite likely in your condition,” the doctor opined, “though it would be better to verify them ... you must take steps at once, without a moment’s delay, or things will go badly with you.” But Ivan did not follow this judicious advice and did not take to his bed to be nursed.
“I am walking about, so I am strong enough, if I drop, it’ll be different then, any one may nurse me who likes,” he decided, dismissing the subject.
And so he was sitting almost conscious himself of his delirium and, as I have said already, looking persistently at some object on the sofa against the opposite wall.
Some one appeared to be sitting there, though goodness knows how he had come in, for he had not been in the room when Ivan came into it, on his return from Smerdyakov.
This was a person or, more accurately speaking, a Russian gentleman of a particular kind, no longer young, _qui faisait la cinquantaine_, as the French say, with rather long, still thick, dark hair, slightly streaked with gray and a small pointed beard.
He was wearing a brownish reefer jacket, rather shabby, evidently made by a good tailor though, and of a fashion at least three years old, that had been discarded by smart and well-to-do people for the last two years.
His linen and his long scarf-like neck-tie were all such as are worn by people who aim at being stylish, but on closer inspection his linen was not over-clean and his wide scarf was very threadbare.
The visitor’s check trousers were of excellent cut, but were too light in color and too tight for the present fashion.
In brief there was every appearance of gentility on straitened means.
It looked as though the gentleman belonged to that class of idle landowners who used to flourish in the times of serfdom.
Such gentlemen of accommodating temper and dependent position, who can tell a story, take a hand at cards, and who have a distinct aversion for any duties that may be forced upon them, are usually solitary creatures, either bachelors or widowers.
Sometimes they have children, but if so, the children are always being brought up at a distance, at some aunt’s, to whom these gentlemen never allude in good society, seeming ashamed of the relationship.
They gradually lose sight of their children altogether, though at intervals they receive a birthday or Christmas letter from them and sometimes even answer it.
The countenance of the unexpected visitor was not so much good-natured, as accommodating and ready to assume any amiable expression as occasion might arise.
He had no watch, but he had a tortoise-shell lorgnette on a black ribbon.
Ivan was angrily silent and would not begin the conversation.
The visitor waited and sat exactly like a poor relation who had come down from his room to keep his host company at tea, and was discreetly silent, seeing that his host was frowning and preoccupied.
But he was ready for any affable conversation as soon as his host should begin it.
All at once his face expressed a sudden solicitude.
You went to Smerdyakov’s to find out about Katerina Ivanovna, but you came away without finding out anything about her, you probably forgot—” “Ah, yes,” broke from Ivan and his face grew gloomy with uneasiness.
“Yes, I’d forgotten ... but it doesn’t matter now, never mind, till to-morrow,” he muttered to himself, “and you,” he added, addressing his visitor, “I should have remembered that myself in a minute, for that was just what was tormenting me!
Why do you interfere, as if I should believe that you prompted me, and that I didn’t remember it of myself?” “Don’t believe it then,” said the gentleman, smiling amicably, “what’s the good of believing against your will?
Besides, proofs are no help to believing, especially material proofs.
Thomas believed, not because he saw Christ risen, but because he wanted to believe, before he saw.
Look at the spiritualists, for instance....
I am very fond of them ... only fancy, they imagine that they are serving the cause of religion, because the devils show them their horns from the other world.
That, they say, is a material proof, so to speak, of the existence of another world.
The other world and material proofs, what next!
I want to join an idealist society, I’ll lead the opposition in it, I’ll say I am a realist, but not a materialist, he he!” “Listen,” Ivan suddenly got up from the table.
“I seem to be delirious....
I am delirious, in fact, talk any nonsense you like, I don’t care!
I sometimes don’t see you and don’t even hear your voice as I did last time, but I always guess what you are prating, for it’s I, _I myself speaking, not you_.
Only I don’t know whether I was dreaming last time or whether I really saw you.
“I am so glad you treat me so familiarly,” the visitor began.
“Fool,” laughed Ivan, “do you suppose I should stand on ceremony with you?
I am in good spirits now, though I’ve a pain in my forehead ... and in the top of my head ... only please don’t talk philosophy, as you did last time.
If you can’t take yourself off, talk of something amusing.
Talk gossip, you are a poor relation, you ought to talk gossip.
What a nightmare to have!
I won’t be taken to a mad-house!” “_C’est charmant_, poor relation.
For what am I on earth but a poor relation?
By the way, I am listening to you and am rather surprised to find you are actually beginning to take me for something real, not simply your fancy, as you persisted in declaring last time—” “Never for one minute have I taken you for reality,” Ivan cried with a sort of fury.
You are my hallucination.
You are the incarnation of myself, but only of one side of me ... of my thoughts and feelings, but only the nastiest and stupidest of them.
From that point of view you might be of interest to me, if only I had time to waste on you—” “Excuse me, excuse me, I’ll catch you.
How do you know that _he_ visits me?’ you were thinking of me then.
So for one brief moment you did believe that I really exist,” the gentleman laughed blandly.
“Yes, that was a moment of weakness ... but I couldn’t believe in you.
Perhaps I was only dreaming then and didn’t see you really at all—” “And why were you so surly with Alyosha just now?
But you are ever so much more polite than you were last time and I know why: that great resolution of yours—” “Don’t speak of my resolution,” cried Ivan, savagely.
“I understand, I understand, _c’est noble, c’est charmant_, you are going to defend your brother and to sacrifice yourself ... _C’est chevaleresque_.” “Hold your tongue, I’ll kick you!” “I shan’t be altogether sorry, for then my object will be attained.
‘Fool, flunkey!’ what words!” “Scolding you, I scold myself,” Ivan laughed again, “you are myself, myself, only with a different face.
You just say what I am thinking ... and are incapable of saying anything new!” “If I am like you in my way of thinking, it’s all to my credit,” the gentleman declared, with delicacy and dignity.
“You choose out only my worst thoughts, and what’s more, the stupid ones.
What am I to do, what am I to do?” Ivan said through his clenched teeth.
“My dear friend, above all things I want to behave like a gentleman and to be recognized as such,” the visitor began in an excess of deprecating and simple-hearted pride, typical of a poor relation.
I won’t say very honest, but ... it’s an axiom generally accepted in society that I am a fallen angel.
I certainly can’t conceive how I can ever have been an angel.
If I ever was, it must have been so long ago that there’s no harm in forgetting it.
Now I only prize the reputation of being a gentlemanly person and live as I can, trying to make myself agreeable.
I love men genuinely, I’ve been greatly calumniated!
You see, like you, I suffer from the fantastic and so I love the realism of earth.
Here, with you, everything is circumscribed, here all is formulated and geometrical, while we have nothing but indeterminate equations!
I wander about here dreaming.
Besides, on earth I become superstitious.
Please don’t laugh, that’s just what I like, to become superstitious.
I adopt all your habits here: I’ve grown fond of going to the public baths, would you believe it? and I go and steam myself with merchants and priests.
What I dream of is becoming incarnate once for all and irrevocably in the form of some merchant’s wife weighing eighteen stone, and of believing all she believes.
Then there would be an end to my sufferings.
I like being doctored too; in the spring there was an outbreak of smallpox and I went and was vaccinated in a foundling hospital—if only you knew how I enjoyed myself that day.
I subscribed ten roubles in the cause of the Slavs!...
But you are not listening.
I know you went yesterday to that doctor ... well, what about your health?
You are scolding again?
I didn’t ask out of sympathy.
Now rheumatism has come in again—” “Fool!” repeated Ivan.
“You keep saying the same thing; but I had such an attack of rheumatism last year that I remember it to this day.” “The devil have rheumatism!” “Why not, if I sometimes put on fleshly form?
I put on fleshly form and I take the consequences.
Satan _sum et nihil humanum a me alienum puto_.” “What, what, Satan _sum et nihil humanum_ ... that’s not bad for the devil!” “I am glad I’ve pleased you at last.” “But you didn’t get that from me.” Ivan stopped suddenly, seeming struck.
“That never entered my head, that’s strange.” “_C’est du nouveau, n’est-ce pas?_ This time I’ll act honestly and explain to you.
Listen, in dreams and especially in nightmares, from indigestion or anything, a man sees sometimes such artistic visions, such complex and real actuality, such events, even a whole world of events, woven into such a plot, with such unexpected details from the most exalted matters to the last button on a cuff, as I swear Leo Tolstoy has never invented.
Yet such dreams are sometimes seen not by writers, but by the most ordinary people, officials, journalists, priests....
The subject is a complete enigma.
A statesman confessed to me, indeed, that all his best ideas came to him when he was asleep.
Well, that’s how it is now, though I am your hallucination, yet just as in a nightmare, I say original things which had not entered your head before.
So I don’t repeat your ideas, yet I am only your nightmare, nothing more.” “You are lying, your aim is to convince me you exist apart and are not my nightmare, and now you are asserting you are a dream.” “My dear fellow, I’ve adopted a special method to-day, I’ll explain it to you afterwards.
Can’t you go away?” Ivan exclaimed almost in despair.
He pulled the wet towel off and flung it away in vexation.
It was evidently of no use.
“Your nerves are out of order,” observed the gentleman, with a carelessly easy, though perfectly polite, air.
“You are angry with me even for being able to catch cold, though it happened in a most natural way.
I was hurrying then to a diplomatic _soirée_ at the house of a lady of high rank in Petersburg, who was aiming at influence in the Ministry.
Of course, it took only an instant, but you know a ray of light from the sun takes full eight minutes, and fancy in an evening suit and open waistcoat.
Spirits don’t freeze, but when one’s in fleshly form, well ... in brief, I didn’t think, and set off, and you know in those ethereal spaces, in the water that is above the firmament, there’s such a frost ... at least one can’t call it frost, you can fancy, 150 degrees below zero!
You know the game the village girls play—they invite the unwary to lick an ax in thirty degrees of frost, the tongue instantly freezes to it and the dupe tears the skin off, so it bleeds.
But that’s only in 30 degrees, in 150 degrees I imagine it would be enough to put your finger on the ax and it would be the end of it ... if only there could be an ax there.” “And can there be an ax there?” Ivan interrupted, carelessly and disdainfully.
He was exerting himself to the utmost not to believe in the delusion and not to sink into complete insanity.
“An ax?” the guest interrupted in surprise.
“Yes, what would become of an ax there?” Ivan cried suddenly, with a sort of savage and insistent obstinacy.
“What would become of an ax in space? _Quelle idée!_ If it were to fall to any distance, it would begin, I think, flying round the earth without knowing why, like a satellite.
The astronomers would calculate the rising and the setting of the ax, _Gatzuk_ would put it in his calendar, that’s all.” “You are stupid, awfully stupid,” said Ivan peevishly.
“Fib more cleverly or I won’t listen.
You want to get the better of me by realism, to convince me that you exist, but I don’t want to believe you exist!
I won’t believe it!” “But I am not fibbing, it’s all the truth; the truth is unhappily hardly ever amusing.
I see you persist in expecting something big of me, and perhaps something fine.
That’s a great pity, for I only give what I can—” “Don’t talk philosophy, you ass!” “Philosophy, indeed, when all my right side is numb and I am moaning and groaning.
I’ve tried all the medical faculty: they can diagnose beautifully, they have the whole of your disease at their finger-tips, but they’ve no idea how to cure you.
There was an enthusiastic little student here, ‘You may die,’ said he, ‘but you’ll know perfectly what disease you are dying of!’ And then what a way they have sending people to specialists!
‘We only diagnose,’ they say, ‘but go to such-and-such a specialist, he’ll cure you.’ The old doctor who used to cure all sorts of disease has completely disappeared, I assure you, now there are only specialists and they all advertise in the newspapers.
If anything is wrong with your nose, they send you to Paris: there, they say, is a European specialist who cures noses.
If you go to Paris, he’ll look at your nose; I can only cure your right nostril, he’ll tell you, for I don’t cure the left nostril, that’s not my speciality, but go to Vienna, there there’s a specialist who will cure your left nostril.
I fell back on popular remedies, a German doctor advised me to rub myself with honey and salt in the bath-house.
I bought it by accident, drank a bottle and a half of it, and I was ready to dance, it took it away completely.
I made up my mind to write to the papers to thank him, I was prompted by a feeling of gratitude, and only fancy, it led to no end of a bother: not a single paper would take my letter.
‘It would be very reactionary,’ they said, ‘no one will believe it. _Le diable n’existe point._ You’d better remain anonymous,’ they advised me.
What use is a letter of thanks if it’s anonymous?
I laughed with the men at the newspaper office; ‘It’s reactionary to believe in God in our days,’ I said, ‘but I am the devil, so I may be believed in.’ ‘We quite understand that,’ they said.
Yet it won’t do, it might injure our reputation.
My best feelings, gratitude, for instance, are literally denied me simply from my social position.” “Philosophical reflections again?” Ivan snarled malignantly.
“God preserve me from it, but one can’t help complaining sometimes.
I am a slandered man.
My dear fellow, intelligence isn’t the only thing!
I have naturally a kind and merry heart.
‘I also write vaudevilles of all sorts.’ You seem to take me for Hlestakov grown old, but my fate is a far more serious one.
Before time was, by some decree which I could never make out, I was pre-destined ‘to deny’ and yet I am genuinely good-hearted and not at all inclined to negation.
‘No, you must go and deny, without denial there’s no criticism and what would a journal be without a column of criticism?’ Without criticism it would be nothing but one ‘hosannah.’ But nothing but hosannah is not enough for life, the hosannah must be tried in the crucible of doubt and so on, in the same style.
But I don’t meddle in that, I didn’t create it, I am not answerable for it.
Well, they’ve chosen their scapegoat, they’ve made me write the column of criticism and so life was made possible.
We understand that comedy; I, for instance, simply ask for annihilation.
If everything in the universe were sensible, nothing would happen.
So against the grain I serve to produce events and do what’s irrational because I am commanded to.
For all their indisputable intelligence, men take this farce as something serious, and that is their tragedy.
They suffer, of course ... but then they live, they live a real life, not a fantastic one, for suffering is life.
Without suffering what would be the pleasure of it?
It would be transformed into an endless church service; it would be holy, but tedious.
I am x in an indeterminate equation.
I am a sort of phantom in life who has lost all beginning and end, and who has even forgotten his own name.
You are laughing— no, you are not laughing, you are angry again.
You are for ever angry, all you care about is intelligence, but I repeat again that I would give away all this super-stellar life, all the ranks and honors, simply to be transformed into the soul of a merchant’s wife weighing eighteen stone and set candles at God’s shrine.” “Then even you don’t believe in God?” said Ivan, with a smile of hatred.
“What can I say?—that is, if you are in earnest—” “Is there a God or not?” Ivan cried with the same savage intensity.
You are rubbish, you are my fancy!” “Well, if you like, I have the same philosophy as you, that would be true. _Je pense, donc je suis_, I know that for a fact; all the rest, all these worlds, God and even Satan—all that is not proved, to my mind.
Does all that exist of itself, or is it only an emanation of myself, a logical development of my ego which alone has existed for ever: but I make haste to stop, for I believe you will be jumping up to beat me directly.” “You’d better tell me some anecdote!” said Ivan miserably.
“There is an anecdote precisely on our subject, or rather a legend, not an anecdote.
You reproach me with unbelief, you see, you say, yet you don’t believe.
Once there used to be atoms, five senses, four elements, and then everything hung together somehow.
There were atoms in the ancient world even, but since we’ve learned that you’ve discovered the chemical molecule and protoplasm and the devil knows what, we had to lower our crest.
There’s a regular muddle, and, above all, superstition, scandal; there’s as much scandal among us as among you, you know; a little more in fact, and spying, indeed, for we have our secret police department where private information is received.
Well, this wild legend belongs to our middle ages—not yours, but ours—and no one believes it even among us, except the old ladies of eighteen stone, not your old ladies I mean, but ours.
We’ve everything you have, I am revealing one of our secrets out of friendship for you; though it’s forbidden.
This legend is about Paradise.
There was, they say, here on earth a thinker and philosopher.
He rejected everything, ‘laws, conscience, faith,’ and, above all, the future life.
He died; he expected to go straight to darkness and death and he found a future life before him.
He was astounded and indignant.
‘This is against my principles!’ he said.
In old days we had all sorts, but now they have taken chiefly to moral punishments—‘the stings of conscience’ and all that nonsense.
We got that, too, from you, from the softening of your manners.
Only those who have got no conscience, for how can they be tortured by conscience when they have none?
But decent people who have conscience and a sense of honor suffer for it.
Reforms, when the ground has not been prepared for them, especially if they are institutions copied from abroad, do nothing but mischief!
Well, this man, who was condemned to the quadrillion kilometers, stood still, looked round and lay down across the road.
‘I won’t go, I refuse on principle!’ Take the soul of an enlightened Russian atheist and mix it with the soul of the prophet Jonah, who sulked for three days and nights in the belly of the whale, and you get the character of that thinker who lay across the road.” “What did he lie on there?” “Well, I suppose there was something to lie on.
You are not laughing?” “Bravo!” cried Ivan, still with the same strange eagerness.
Now he was listening with an unexpected curiosity.
He lay there almost a thousand years and then he got up and went on.” “What an ass!” cried Ivan, laughing nervously and still seeming to be pondering something intently.
“Does it make any difference whether he lies there for ever or walks the quadrillion kilometers?
But how did he get the billion years to do it?” “Why, you keep thinking of our present earth!
But our present earth may have been repeated a billion times.
In fact, he sang ‘hosannah’ and overdid it so, that some persons there of lofty ideas wouldn’t shake hands with him at first—he’d become too rapidly reactionary, they said.
The Russian temperament.
So that’s the sort of ideas we have on such subjects even now.” “I’ve caught you!” Ivan cried, with an almost childish delight, as though he had succeeded in remembering something at last.
“That anecdote about the quadrillion years, I made up myself!
I was seventeen then, I was at the high school.
I made up that anecdote and told it to a schoolfellow called Korovkin, it was at Moscow....
The anecdote is so characteristic that I couldn’t have taken it from anywhere.
I thought I’d forgotten it ... but I’ve unconsciously recalled it—I recalled it myself—it was not you telling it!
Thousands of things are unconsciously remembered like that even when people are being taken to execution ... it’s come back to me in a dream.
You are a dream, not a living creature!” “From the vehemence with which you deny my existence,” laughed the gentleman, “I am convinced that you believe in me.” “Not in the slightest!
I haven’t a hundredth part of a grain of faith in you!” “But you have the thousandth of a grain.
Homeopathic doses perhaps are the strongest.
Confess that you have faith even to the ten-thousandth of a grain.” “Not for one minute,” cried Ivan furiously.
“But I should like to believe in you,” he added strangely.
There’s an admission!
I’ll come to your assistance again.
I told you your anecdote you’d forgotten, on purpose, so as to destroy your faith in me completely.” “You are lying.
The object of your visit is to convince me of your existence!” “Just so.
But hesitation, suspense, conflict between belief and disbelief—is sometimes such torture to a conscientious man, such as you are, that it’s better to hang oneself at once.
Knowing that you are inclined to believe in me, I administered some disbelief by telling you that anecdote.
I lead you to belief and disbelief by turns, and I have my motive in it.
As soon as you disbelieve in me completely, you’ll begin assuring me to my face that I am not a dream but a reality.
Then I shall have attained my object, which is an honorable one.
I shall sow in you only a tiny grain of faith and it will grow into an oak-tree—and such an oak-tree that, sitting on it, you will long to enter the ranks of ‘the hermits in the wilderness and the saintly women,’ for that is what you are secretly longing for.
You’ll dine on locusts, you’ll wander into the wilderness to save your soul!” “Then it’s for the salvation of my soul you are working, is it, you scoundrel?” “One must do a good work sometimes.
How ill-humored you are!” “Fool! did you ever tempt those holy men who ate locusts and prayed seventeen years in the wilderness till they were overgrown with moss?” “My dear fellow, I’ve done nothing else.
One forgets the whole world and all the worlds, and sticks to one such saint, because he is a very precious diamond.
One such soul, you know, is sometimes worth a whole constellation.
We have our system of reckoning, you know.
The conquest is priceless!
And some of them, on my word, are not inferior to you in culture, though you won’t believe it.
They can contemplate such depths of belief and disbelief at the same moment that sometimes it really seems that they are within a hair’s-breadth of being ‘turned upside down,’ as the actor Gorbunov says.” “Well, did you get your nose pulled?”[8] “My dear fellow,” observed the visitor sententiously, “it’s better to get off with your nose pulled than without a nose at all.
As an afflicted marquis observed not long ago (he must have been treated by a specialist) in confession to his spiritual father—a Jesuit.
I was present, it was simply charming.
‘My son,’ said the priest evasively, ‘all things are accomplished in accordance with the inscrutable decrees of Providence, and what seems a misfortune sometimes leads to extraordinary, though unapparent, benefits.
If stern destiny has deprived you of your nose, it’s to your advantage that no one can ever pull you by your nose.’ ‘Holy father, that’s no comfort,’ cried the despairing marquis.
‘I’d be delighted to have my nose pulled every day of my life, if it were only in its proper place.’ ‘My son,’ sighs the priest, ‘you can’t expect every blessing at once.
This is murmuring against Providence, who even in this has not forgotten you, for if you repine as you repined just now, declaring you’d be glad to have your nose pulled for the rest of your life, your desire has already been fulfilled indirectly, for when you lost your nose, you were led by the nose.’” “Fool, how stupid!” cried Ivan.
But I swear that’s the genuine Jesuit casuistry and I swear that it all happened word for word as I’ve told you.
It happened lately and gave me a great deal of trouble.
Those Jesuit confessionals are really my most delightful diversion at melancholy moments.
Here’s another incident that happened only the other day.
A little blonde Norman girl of twenty—a buxom, unsophisticated beauty that would make your mouth water—comes to an old priest.
She bends down and whispers her sin into the grating.
‘Why, my daughter, have you fallen again already?’ cries the priest.
Aren’t you ashamed!’ ‘_Ah, mon père_,’ answers the sinner with tears of penitence, ‘_ça lui fait tant de plaisir, et à moi si peu de peine!_’ Fancy, such an answer!
It was the cry of nature, better than innocence itself, if you like.
I absolved her sin on the spot and was turning to go, but I was forced to turn back.
I heard the priest at the grating making an appointment with her for the evening—though he was an old man hard as flint, he fell in an instant!
It was nature, the truth of nature asserted its rights!
I don’t know how to please you—” “Leave me alone, you are beating on my brain like a haunting nightmare,” Ivan moaned miserably, helpless before his apparition.
“I am bored with you, agonizingly and insufferably.
I would give anything to be able to shake you off!” “I repeat, moderate your expectations, don’t demand of me ‘everything great and noble’ and you’ll see how well we shall get on,” said the gentleman impressively.
“You are really angry with me for not having appeared to you in a red glow, with thunder and lightning, with scorched wings, but have shown myself in such a modest form.
You are wounded, in the first place, in your esthetic feelings, and, secondly, in your pride.
Yes, there is that romantic strain in you, that was so derided by Byelinsky.
I can’t help it, young man, as I got ready to come to you I did think as a joke of appearing in the figure of a retired general who had served in the Caucasus, with a star of the Lion and the Sun on my coat.
But I was positively afraid of doing it, for you’d have thrashed me for daring to pin the Lion and the Sun on my coat, instead of, at least, the Polar Star or the Sirius.
I make no claim to be equal to you in intelligence.
Mephistopheles declared to Faust that he desired evil, but did only good.
Well, he can say what he likes, it’s quite the opposite with me.
I am perhaps the one man in all creation who loves the truth and genuinely desires good.
I was there when the Word, Who died on the Cross, rose up into heaven bearing on His bosom the soul of the penitent thief.
I heard the glad shrieks of the cherubim singing and shouting hosannah and the thunderous rapture of the seraphim which shook heaven and all creation, and I swear to you by all that’s sacred, I longed to join the choir and shout hosannah with them all.
The word had almost escaped me, had almost broken from my lips ... you know how susceptible and esthetically impressionable I am.
But common sense—oh, a most unhappy trait in my character—kept me in due bounds and I let the moment pass!
For what would have happened, I reflected, what would have happened after my hosannah?
Everything on earth would have been extinguished at once and no events could have occurred.
And so, solely from a sense of duty and my social position, I was forced to suppress the good moment and to stick to my nasty task.
Somebody takes all the credit of what’s good for Himself, and nothing but nastiness is left for me.
But I don’t envy the honor of a life of idle imposture, I am not ambitious.
Why am I, of all creatures in the world, doomed to be cursed by all decent people and even to be kicked, for if I put on mortal form I am bound to take such consequences sometimes?
I know, of course, there’s a secret in it, but they won’t tell me the secret for anything, for then perhaps, seeing the meaning of it, I might bawl hosannah, and the indispensable minus would disappear at once, and good sense would reign supreme throughout the whole world.
And that, of course, would mean the end of everything, even of magazines and newspapers, for who would take them in?
I know that at the end of all things I shall be reconciled.
I, too, shall walk my quadrillion and learn the secret.
But till that happens I am sulking and fulfill my destiny though it’s against the grain—that is, to ruin thousands for the sake of saving one.
How many souls have had to be ruined and how many honorable reputations destroyed for the sake of that one righteous man, Job, over whom they made such a fool of me in old days!
Yes, till the secret is revealed, there are two sorts of truths for me—one, their truth, yonder, which I know nothing about so far, and the other my own.
“All my stupid ideas—outgrown, thrashed out long ago, and flung aside like a dead carcass—you present to me as something new!” “There’s no pleasing you!
And I thought I should fascinate you by my literary style.
That hosannah in the skies really wasn’t bad, was it?
And then that ironical tone _à la_ Heine, eh?” “No, I was never such a flunkey!
How then could my soul beget a flunkey like you?” “My dear fellow, I know a most charming and attractive young Russian gentleman, a young thinker and a great lover of literature and art, the author of a promising poem entitled _The Grand Inquisitor_.
I was only thinking of him!” “I forbid you to speak of _The Grand Inquisitor_,” cried Ivan, crimson with shame.
“And the _Geological Cataclysm_.
I came to treat myself to that pleasure.
Oh, I love the dreams of my ardent young friends, quivering with eagerness for life!
‘There are new men,’ you decided last spring, when you were meaning to come here, ‘they propose to destroy everything and begin with cannibalism.
I maintain that nothing need be destroyed, that we only need to destroy the idea of God in man, that’s how we have to set to work.
Oh, blind race of men who have no understanding!
As soon as men have all of them denied God—and I believe that period, analogous with geological periods, will come to pass—the old conception of the universe will fall of itself without cannibalism, and, what’s more, the old morality, and everything will begin anew.
Men will unite to take from life all it can give, but only for joy and happiness in the present world.
From hour to hour extending his conquest of nature infinitely by his will and his science, man will feel such lofty joy from hour to hour in doing it that it will make up for all his old dreams of the joys of heaven.
Every one will know that he is mortal and will accept death proudly and serenely like a god.
Love will be sufficient only for a moment of life, but the very consciousness of its momentariness will intensify its fire, which now is dissipated in dreams of eternal love beyond the grave’... and so on and so on in the same style.
Charming!” Ivan sat with his eyes on the floor, and his hands pressed to his ears, but he began trembling all over.
The voice continued.
“The question now is, my young thinker reflected, is it possible that such a period will ever come?
If it does, everything is determined and humanity is settled for ever.
But as, owing to man’s inveterate stupidity, this cannot come about for at least a thousand years, every one who recognizes the truth even now may legitimately order his life as he pleases, on the new principles.
What’s more, even if this period never comes to pass, since there is anyway no God and no immortality, the new man may well become the man-god, even if he is the only one in the whole world, and promoted to his new position, he may lightheartedly overstep all the barriers of the old morality of the old slave-man, if necessary.
Where I stand will be at once the foremost place ...
That’s all very charming; but if you want to swindle why do you want a moral sanction for doing it?
He can’t bring himself to swindle without a moral sanction.
He is so in love with truth—” The visitor talked, obviously carried away by his own eloquence, speaking louder and louder and looking ironically at his host.
But he did not succeed in finishing; Ivan suddenly snatched a glass from the table and flung it at the orator.
“He remembers Luther’s inkstand!
I suspected you were only pretending to stop up your ears.” A loud, persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window.
You’d better open,” cried the visitor; “it’s your brother Alyosha with the most interesting and surprising news, I’ll be bound!” “Be silent, deceiver, I knew it was Alyosha, I felt he was coming, and of course he has not come for nothing; of course he brings ‘news,’” Ivan exclaimed frantically.
There’s a snowstorm and he is your brother. _Monsieur sait-il le temps qu’il fait?
C’est à ne pas mettre un chien dehors_.” The knocking continued.
Ivan wanted to rush to the window, but something seemed to fetter his arms and legs.
He strained every effort to break his chains, but in vain.
The knocking at the window grew louder and louder.
Both candles had almost burnt out, the glass he had just thrown at his visitor stood before him on the table, and there was no one on the sofa opposite.
The knocking on the window frame went on persistently, but it was by no means so loud as it had seemed in his dream; on the contrary, it was quite subdued.
No, I swear it was not a dream, it all happened just now!” cried Ivan.
“Alyosha, I told you not to come,” he cried fiercely to his brother.
In two words, do you hear?” “An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself,” Alyosha answered from the yard.
“It Was He Who Said That” Alyosha coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago Marya Kondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had taken his own life.
“I went in to clear away the samovar and he was hanging on a nail in the wall.” On Alyosha’s inquiring whether she had informed the police, she answered that she had told no one, “but I flew straight to you, I’ve run all the way.” She seemed perfectly crazy, Alyosha reported, and was shaking like a leaf.
When Alyosha ran with her to the cottage, he found Smerdyakov still hanging.
On the table lay a note: “I destroy my life of my own will and desire, so as to throw no blame on any one.” Alyosha left the note on the table and went straight to the police captain and told him all about it.
“And from him I’ve come straight to you,” said Alyosha, in conclusion, looking intently into Ivan’s face.
He had not taken his eyes off him while he told his story, as though struck by something in his expression.
“Brother,” he cried suddenly, “you must be terribly ill.
You look and don’t seem to understand what I tell you.” “It’s a good thing you came,” said Ivan, as though brooding, and not hearing Alyosha’s exclamation.
He told me so just now.” Ivan stood in the middle of the room, and still spoke in the same brooding tone, looking at the ground.
“Who is _he_?” asked Alyosha, involuntarily looking round.
Cherub!... the thunderous rapture of the seraphim.
Perhaps a whole constellation.
But perhaps that constellation is only a chemical molecule.
There’s a constellation of the Lion and the Sun.
“For goodness’ sake, sit down on the sofa!
You are delirious; put your head on the pillow, that’s right.
Don’t worry yourself.
I know where it is—here,” said Alyosha, finding a clean towel, folded up and unused, by Ivan’s dressing-table in the other corner of the room.
Ivan looked strangely at the towel: recollection seemed to come back to him for an instant.
What’s the time?” “Nearly twelve.” “No, no, no!” Ivan cried suddenly.
It has happened before.
He is frightfully stupid, Alyosha, frightfully stupid.” Ivan laughed suddenly and began pacing about the room.
Of whom are you talking, brother?” Alyosha asked anxiously again.
He’s taken to visiting me.
He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil and not Satan, with scorched wings, in thunder and lightning.
If you undressed him, you’d be sure to find he had a tail, long and smooth like a Danish dog’s, a yard long, dun color....
Shall I tell her to bring some? _C’est à ne pas mettre un chien dehors._...” Alyosha ran to the washing-stand, wetted the towel, persuaded Ivan to sit down again, and put the wet towel round his head.
“What were you telling me just now about Lise?” Ivan began again. (He was becoming very talkative.) “I like Lise.
I said something nasty about her.
I am more afraid of her than of anything.
She thinks that I am ruining Mitya from jealousy on her account!
How did I know that Smerdyakov had hanged himself?
Yes, it was _he_ told me so.” “And you are quite convinced that there has been some one here?” asked Alyosha.
You did drive him away: he disappeared when you arrived.
All that’s base in me, all that’s mean and contemptible.
Yes, I am a romantic.
He is frightfully stupid; but it’s to his advantage.
He has cunning, animal cunning—he knew how to infuriate me.
He kept taunting me with believing in him, and that was how he made me listen to him.
Do you know, Alyosha,” Ivan added in an intensely earnest and confidential tone, “I should be awfully glad to think that it was _he_ and not I.” “He has worn you out,” said Alyosha, looking compassionately at his brother.
And you know he does it so cleverly, so cleverly.
Why am I tormented by it?
From the universal habit of mankind for the seven thousand years.
And let him take with him all that you curse now, and never come back!” “Yes, but he is spiteful.
He was impudent, Alyosha,” Ivan said, with a shudder of offense.
‘Oh, you are going to perform an act of heroic virtue: to confess you murdered your father, that the valet murdered him at your instigation.’” “Brother,” Alyosha interposed, “restrain yourself.
It was not you murdered him.
‘You are going to perform an act of heroic virtue, and you don’t believe in virtue; that’s what tortures you and makes you angry, that’s why you are so vindictive.’ He said that to me about me and he knows what he says.” “It’s you say that, not he,” exclaimed Alyosha mournfully, “and you say it because you are ill and delirious, tormenting yourself.” “No, he knows what he says.
‘And do you know you are longing for their praise—“he is a criminal, a murderer, but what a generous soul; he wanted to save his brother and he confessed.”’ That’s a lie, Alyosha!” Ivan cried suddenly, with flashing eyes.
That’s why I threw the glass at him and it broke against his ugly face.” “Brother, calm yourself, stop!” Alyosha entreated him.
He’s cruel,” Ivan went on, unheeding.
‘Granting that you go through pride, still you had a hope that Smerdyakov might be convicted and sent to Siberia, and Mitya would be acquitted, while you would only be punished with moral condemnation’ (‘Do you hear?’ he laughed then)—‘and some people will praise you.
But now Smerdyakov’s dead, he has hanged himself, and who’ll believe you alone?
I can’t endure such questions.
Who dare ask me such questions?” “Brother,” interposed Alyosha—his heart sank with terror, but he still seemed to hope to bring Ivan to reason—“how could he have told you of Smerdyakov’s death before I came, when no one knew of it and there was no time for any one to know of it?” “He told me,” said Ivan firmly, refusing to admit a doubt.
‘And it would be all right if you believed in virtue,’ he said.
‘No matter if they disbelieve you, you are going for the sake of principle.
But you are a little pig like Fyodor Pavlovitch, and what do you want with virtue?
Why do you want to go meddling if your sacrifice is of no use to any one?
Because you don’t know yourself why you go!
Oh, you’d give a great deal to know yourself why you go!
You’ll sit all night deliberating whether to go or not.
You know that whichever way you decide, the decision does not depend on you.
You must guess that for yourself.
And Smerdyakov said the same.
Alyosha recalled what he had just said.
“I seem to be sleeping awake....
By degrees Ivan lost consciousness completely at last.
He still went on talking, talking incessantly, but quite incoherently, and even articulated his words with difficulty.
Suddenly he staggered violently; but Alyosha was in time to support him.
Alyosha undressed him somehow and put him to bed.
He sat watching over him for another two hours.
The sick man slept soundly, without stirring, breathing softly and evenly.
Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa, without undressing.
He began to understand Ivan’s illness.
“The anguish of a proud determination.
An earnest conscience!” God, in Whom he disbelieved, and His truth were gaining mastery over his heart, which still refused to submit.
“Yes,” the thought floated through Alyosha’s head as it lay on the pillow, “yes, if Smerdyakov is dead, no one will believe Ivan’s evidence; but he will go and give it.” Alyosha smiled softly.
“He will either rise up in the light of truth, or ... he’ll perish in hate, revenging on himself and on every one his having served the cause he does not believe in,” Alyosha added bitterly, and again he prayed for Ivan.
The Fatal Day At ten o’clock in the morning of the day following the events I have described, the trial of Dmitri Karamazov began in our district court.
I hasten to emphasize the fact that I am far from esteeming myself capable of reporting all that took place at the trial in full detail, or even in the actual order of events.
I imagine that to mention everything with full explanation would fill a volume, even a very large one.
And so I trust I may not be reproached, for confining myself to what struck me.
I may have selected as of most interest what was of secondary importance, and may have omitted the most prominent and essential details.
But I see I shall do better not to apologize.
And, to begin with, before entering the court, I will mention what surprised me most on that day.
Indeed, as it appeared later, every one was surprised at it, too.
We all knew that the affair had aroused great interest, that every one was burning with impatience for the trial to begin, that it had been a subject of talk, conjecture, exclamation and surmise for the last two months in local society.
Every one knew, too, that the case had become known throughout Russia, but yet we had not imagined that it had aroused such burning, such intense, interest in every one, not only among ourselves, but all over Russia.
Visitors had arrived not only from the chief town of our province, but from several other Russian towns, as well as from Moscow and Petersburg.
Among them were lawyers, ladies, and even several distinguished personages.
Every ticket of admission had been snatched up.
A special place behind the table at which the three judges sat was set apart for the most distinguished and important of the men visitors; a row of arm-chairs had been placed there—something exceptional, which had never been allowed before.
A large proportion—not less than half of the public—were ladies.
There was such a large number of lawyers from all parts that they did not know where to seat them, for every ticket had long since been eagerly sought for and distributed.
I saw at the end of the room, behind the platform, a special partition hurriedly put up, behind which all these lawyers were admitted, and they thought themselves lucky to have standing room there, for all chairs had been removed for the sake of space, and the crowd behind the partition stood throughout the case closely packed, shoulder to shoulder.
Some of the ladies, especially those who came from a distance, made their appearance in the gallery very smartly dressed, but the majority of the ladies were oblivious even of dress.
Their faces betrayed hysterical, intense, almost morbid, curiosity.
A peculiar fact—established afterwards by many observations—was that almost all the ladies, or, at least the vast majority of them, were on Mitya’s side and in favor of his being acquitted.
This was perhaps chiefly owing to his reputation as a conqueror of female hearts.
One of them—Katerina Ivanovna—was an object of general interest.
All sorts of extraordinary tales were told about her, amazing anecdotes of her passion for Mitya, in spite of his crime.
Her pride and “aristocratic connections” were particularly insisted upon (she had called upon scarcely any one in the town).
People said she intended to petition the Government for leave to accompany the criminal to Siberia and to be married to him somewhere in the mines.
The appearance of Grushenka in court was awaited with no less impatience.
The public was looking forward with anxious curiosity to the meeting of the two rivals—the proud aristocratic girl and “the hetaira.” But Grushenka was a more familiar figure to the ladies of the district than Katerina Ivanovna.
They had already seen “the woman who had ruined Fyodor Pavlovitch and his unhappy son,” and all, almost without exception, wondered how father and son could be so in love with “such a very common, ordinary Russian girl, who was not even pretty.” In brief, there was a great deal of talk.
I know for a fact that there were several serious family quarrels on Mitya’s account in our town.
Many ladies quarreled violently with their husbands over differences of opinion about the dreadful case, and it was only natural that the husbands of these ladies, far from being favorably disposed to the prisoner, should enter the court bitterly prejudiced against him.
In fact, one may say pretty certainly that the masculine, as distinguished from the feminine, part of the audience were biased against the prisoner.
There were numbers of severe, frowning, even vindictive faces.
Some of the visitors were, of course, in excellent spirits and quite unconcerned as to the fate of Mitya personally.
But all were interested in the trial, and the majority of the men were certainly hoping for the conviction of the criminal, except perhaps the lawyers, who were more interested in the legal than in the moral aspect of the case.
Everybody was excited at the presence of the celebrated lawyer, Fetyukovitch.
His talent was well known, and this was not the first time he had defended notorious criminal cases in the provinces.
And if he defended them, such cases became celebrated and long remembered all over Russia.
There were stories, too, about our prosecutor and about the President of the Court.
Our prosecutor was not one of those men who lose heart in face of danger.
On the contrary, his self-confidence increased with the increase of danger.
It must be noted that our prosecutor was in general too hasty and morbidly impressionable.
He would put his whole soul into some case and work at it as though his whole fate and his whole fortune depended on its result.
This was the subject of some ridicule in the legal world, for just by this characteristic our prosecutor had gained a wider notoriety than could have been expected from his modest position.
People laughed particularly at his passion for psychology.
In my opinion, they were wrong, and our prosecutor was, I believe, a character of greater depth than was generally supposed.
But with his delicate health he had failed to make his mark at the outset of his career and had never made up for it later.
As for the President of our Court, I can only say that he was a humane and cultured man, who had a practical knowledge of his work and progressive views.
He was rather ambitious, but did not concern himself greatly about his future career.
The great aim of his life was to be a man of advanced ideas.
He was, too, a man of connections and property.
He felt, as we learnt afterwards, rather strongly about the Karamazov case, but from a social, not from a personal standpoint.
He was interested in it as a social phenomenon, in its classification and its character as a product of our social conditions, as typical of the national character, and so on, and so on.
His attitude to the personal aspect of the case, to its tragic significance and the persons involved in it, including the prisoner, was rather indifferent and abstract, as was perhaps fitting, indeed.
The court was packed and overflowing long before the judges made their appearance.
Our court is the best hall in the town—spacious, lofty, and good for sound.
On the right of the judges, who were on a raised platform, a table and two rows of chairs had been put ready for the jury.
On the left was the place for the prisoner and the counsel for the defense.
In the body of the hall, at some distance, came the seats for the public.
But in front of the balustrade a few chairs had been placed for witnesses who remained in the court after giving their evidence.
At ten o’clock the three judges arrived—the President, one honorary justice of the peace, and one other.
The prosecutor, of course, entered immediately after.
The President was a short, stout, thick-set man of fifty, with a dyspeptic complexion, dark hair turning gray and cut short, and a red ribbon, of what Order I don’t remember.
The prosecutor struck me and the others, too, as looking particularly pale, almost green.
His face seemed to have grown suddenly thinner, perhaps in a single night, for I had seen him looking as usual only two days before.
The President began with asking the court whether all the jury were present.
But I see I can’t go on like this, partly because some things I did not hear, others I did not notice, and others I have forgotten, but most of all because, as I have said before, I have literally no time or space to mention everything that was said and done.
I only know that neither side objected to very many of the jurymen.
I remember the twelve jurymen—four were petty officials of the town, two were merchants, and six peasants and artisans of the town.
I remember, long before the trial, questions were continually asked with some surprise, especially by ladies: “Can such a delicate, complex and psychological case be submitted for decision to petty officials and even peasants?” and “What can an official, still more a peasant, understand in such an affair?” All the four officials in the jury were, in fact, men of no consequence and of low rank.
Except one who was rather younger, they were gray-headed men, little known in society, who had vegetated on a pitiful salary, and who probably had elderly, unpresentable wives and crowds of children, perhaps even without shoes and stockings.
The two merchants looked respectable, but were strangely silent and stolid.
One of them was close-shaven, and was dressed in European style; the other had a small, gray beard, and wore a red ribbon with some sort of a medal upon it on his neck.
There is no need to speak of the artisans and the peasants.
The artisans of Skotoprigonyevsk are almost peasants, and even work on the land.
Two of them also wore European dress, and, perhaps for that reason, were dirtier and more uninviting-looking than the others.
So that one might well wonder, as I did as soon as I had looked at them, “what men like that could possibly make of such a case?” Yet their faces made a strangely imposing, almost menacing, impression; they were stern and frowning.
At last the President opened the case of the murder of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov.
I don’t quite remember how he described him.
The court usher was told to bring in the prisoner, and Mitya made his appearance.
I don’t know how it was with others, but Mitya made a most unfavorable impression on me.
I heard afterwards that he had ordered it in Moscow expressly for the occasion from his own tailor, who had his measure.
He wore immaculate black kid gloves and exquisite linen.
He walked in with his yard-long strides, looking stiffly straight in front of him, and sat down in his place with a most unperturbed air.
At the same moment the counsel for defense, the celebrated Fetyukovitch, entered, and a sort of subdued hum passed through the court.
He was a tall, spare man, with long thin legs, with extremely long, thin, pale fingers, clean-shaven face, demurely brushed, rather short hair, and thin lips that were at times curved into something between a sneer and a smile.
His face would have been pleasant, if it had not been for his eyes, which, in themselves small and inexpressive, were set remarkably close together, with only the thin, long nose as a dividing line between them.
In fact, there was something strikingly birdlike about his face.
I remember the President’s first questions to Mitya, about his name, his calling, and so on.
Mitya answered sharply, and his voice was so unexpectedly loud that it made the President start and look at the prisoner with surprise.
Then followed a list of persons who were to take part in the proceedings—that is, of the witnesses and experts.
Four of the witnesses were not present—Miüsov, who had given evidence at the preliminary inquiry, but was now in Paris; Madame Hohlakov and Maximov, who were absent through illness; and Smerdyakov, through his sudden death, of which an official statement from the police was presented.
The news of Smerdyakov’s death produced a sudden stir and whisper in the court.
Many of the audience, of course, had not heard of the sudden suicide.
What struck people most was Mitya’s sudden outburst.
As soon as the statement of Smerdyakov’s death was made, he cried out aloud from his place: “He was a dog and died like a dog!” I remember how his counsel rushed to him, and how the President addressed him, threatening to take stern measures, if such an irregularity were repeated.
Mitya nodded and in a subdued voice repeated several times abruptly to his counsel, with no show of regret: “I won’t again, I won’t.
His character was displayed, and it spoke for itself.
It was under the influence of this incident that the opening statement was read.
It was rather short, but circumstantial.
It only stated the chief reasons why he had been arrested, why he must be tried, and so on.
Yet it made a great impression on me.
The clerk read it loudly and distinctly.
The whole tragedy was suddenly unfolded before us, concentrated, in bold relief, in a fatal and pitiless light.
I remember how, immediately after it had been read, the President asked Mitya in a loud impressive voice: “Prisoner, do you plead guilty?” Mitya suddenly rose from his seat.
“I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation,” he exclaimed, again in a startling, almost frenzied, voice, “to idleness and debauchery.
Dmitri Karamazov is a scoundrel, but not a thief.” He sat down again, visibly trembling all over.
The President again briefly, but impressively, admonished him to answer only what was asked, and not to go off into irrelevant exclamations.
All the witnesses were led up to take the oath.
Then I saw them all together.
The brothers of the prisoner were, however, allowed to give evidence without taking the oath.
After an exhortation from the priest and the President, the witnesses were led away and were made to sit as far as possible apart from one another.
Dangerous Witnesses I do not know whether the witnesses for the defense and for the prosecution were separated into groups by the President, and whether it was arranged to call them in a certain order.
I only know that the witnesses for the prosecution were called first.
I repeat I don’t intend to describe all the questions step by step.
I will only observe that from the first moments of the trial one peculiar characteristic of the case was conspicuous and observed by all, that is, the overwhelming strength of the prosecution as compared with the arguments the defense had to rely upon.
Every one realized it from the first moment that the facts began to group themselves round a single point, and the whole horrible and bloody crime was gradually revealed.
Every one, perhaps, felt from the first that the case was beyond dispute, that there was no doubt about it, that there could be really no discussion, and that the defense was only a matter of form, and that the prisoner was guilty, obviously and conclusively guilty.
I imagine that even the ladies, who were so impatiently longing for the acquittal of the interesting prisoner, were at the same time, without exception, convinced of his guilt.
What’s more, I believe they would have been mortified if his guilt had not been so firmly established, as that would have lessened the effect of the closing scene of the criminal’s acquittal.
That he would be acquitted, all the ladies, strange to say, were firmly persuaded up to the very last moment.
“He is guilty, but he will be acquitted, from motives of humanity, in accordance with the new ideas, the new sentiments that had come into fashion,” and so on, and so on.
And that was why they had crowded into the court so impatiently.
The men were more interested in the contest between the prosecutor and the famous Fetyukovitch.
All were wondering and asking themselves what could even a talent like Fetyukovitch’s make of such a desperate case; and so they followed his achievements, step by step, with concentrated attention.
But Fetyukovitch remained an enigma to all up to the very end, up to his speech.
Persons of experience suspected that he had some design, that he was working towards some object, but it was almost impossible to guess what it was.
His confidence and self-reliance were unmistakable, however.
But meanwhile, conscious of his strength, he seemed to be diverting himself.
So, for instance, when Grigory, Fyodor Pavlovitch’s old servant, who had given the most damning piece of evidence about the open door, was examined, the counsel for the defense positively fastened upon him when his turn came to question him.
It must be noted that Grigory entered the hall with a composed and almost stately air, not the least disconcerted by the majesty of the court or the vast audience listening to him.
He gave evidence with as much confidence as though he had been talking with his Marfa, only perhaps more respectfully.
It was impossible to make him contradict himself.
The prosecutor questioned him first in detail about the family life of the Karamazovs.
It was plain to ear and eye that the witness was guileless and impartial.
In spite of his profound reverence for the memory of his deceased master, he yet bore witness that he had been unjust to Mitya and “hadn’t brought up his children as he should.
He’d have been devoured by lice when he was little, if it hadn’t been for me,” he added, describing Mitya’s early childhood.
Grigory’s description of the scene at the dinner-table, when Dmitri had burst in and beaten his father, threatening to come back to kill him, made a sinister impression on the court, especially as the old servant’s composure in telling it, his parsimony of words and peculiar phraseology, were as effective as eloquence.
He observed that he was not angry with Mitya for having knocked him down and struck him on the face; he had forgiven him long ago, he said.
Of the deceased Smerdyakov he observed, crossing himself, that he was a lad of ability, but stupid and afflicted, and, worse still, an infidel, and that it was Fyodor Pavlovitch and his elder son who had taught him to be so.
But he defended Smerdyakov’s honesty almost with warmth, and related how Smerdyakov had once found the master’s money in the yard, and, instead of concealing it, had taken it to his master, who had rewarded him with a “gold piece” for it, and trusted him implicitly from that time forward.
He maintained obstinately that the door into the garden had been open.
But he was asked so many questions that I can’t recall them all.
From the beginning every one noticed Fetyukovitch’s persistence on this subject.
“Now, with your permission I’ll ask you a question,” Fetyukovitch said, suddenly and unexpectedly.
“Of what was that balsam, or, rather, decoction, made, which, as we learn from the preliminary inquiry, you used on that evening to rub your lumbago, in the hope of curing it?” Grigory looked blankly at the questioner, and after a brief silence muttered, “There was saffron in it.” “Nothing but saffron?
Don’t you remember any other ingredient?” “There was milfoil in it, too.” “And pepper perhaps?” Fetyukovitch queried.
“Yes, there was pepper, too.” “Etcetera.
And all dissolved in vodka?” “In spirit.” There was a faint sound of laughter in the court.
Roughly speaking, a wine-glass or two?” “It might have been a tumbler-full.” “A tumbler-full, even.
You might see the gates of heaven open, not only the door into the garden?” Grigory remained silent.
The President made a movement.
Strange to say, it appeared he really did not know what year it was.
“But perhaps you can tell me how many fingers you have on your hands?” “I am a servant,” Grigory said suddenly, in a loud and distinct voice.
“If my betters think fit to make game of me, it is my duty to suffer it.” Fetyukovitch was a little taken aback, and the President intervened, reminding him that he must ask more relevant questions.
Fetyukovitch bowed with dignity and said that he had no more questions to ask of the witness.
The public and the jury, of course, were left with a grain of doubt in their minds as to the evidence of a man who might, while undergoing a certain cure, have seen “the gates of heaven,” and who did not even know what year he was living in.
But before Grigory left the box another episode occurred.
The President, turning to the prisoner, asked him whether he had any comment to make on the evidence of the last witness.
“For combing the lice off me, I thank him; for forgiving my blows, I thank him.
The old man has been honest all his life and as faithful to my father as seven hundred poodles.” “Prisoner, be careful in your language,” the President admonished him.
“I am not a poodle,” Grigory muttered.
I was cruel to Æsop too.” “What Æsop?” the President asked sternly again.
“Oh, Pierrot ... my father, Fyodor Pavlovitch.” The President again and again warned Mitya impressively and very sternly to be more careful in his language.
“You are injuring yourself in the opinion of your judges.” The counsel for the defense was equally clever in dealing with the evidence of Rakitin.
I may remark that Rakitin was one of the leading witnesses and one to whom the prosecutor attached great significance.
It appeared that he knew everything; his knowledge was amazing, he had been everywhere, seen everything, talked to everybody, knew every detail of the biography of Fyodor Pavlovitch and all the Karamazovs.
Of the envelope, it is true, he had only heard from Mitya himself.
But he described minutely Mitya’s exploits in the “Metropolis,” all his compromising doings and sayings, and told the story of Captain Snegiryov’s “wisp of tow.” But even Rakitin could say nothing positive about Mitya’s inheritance, and confined himself to contemptuous generalities.
“Who could tell which of them was to blame, and which was in debt to the other, with their crazy Karamazov way of muddling things so that no one could make head or tail of it?” He attributed the tragic crime to the habits that had become ingrained by ages of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia, due to the lack of appropriate institutions.
He was, in fact, allowed some latitude of speech.
This was the first occasion on which Rakitin showed what he could do, and attracted notice.
The prosecutor knew that the witness was preparing a magazine article on the case, and afterwards in his speech, as we shall see later, quoted some ideas from the article, showing that he had seen it already.
The picture drawn by the witness was a gloomy and sinister one, and greatly strengthened the case for the prosecution.
Altogether, Rakitin’s discourse fascinated the public by its independence and the extraordinary nobility of its ideas.
There were even two or three outbreaks of applause when he spoke of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia.
But Rakitin, in his youthful ardor, made a slight blunder, of which the counsel for the defense at once adroitly took advantage.
Answering certain questions about Grushenka, and carried away by the loftiness of his own sentiments and his success, of which he was, of course, conscious, he went so far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of Agrafena Alexandrovna as “the kept mistress of Samsonov.” He would have given a good deal to take back his words afterwards, for Fetyukovitch caught him out over it at once.
And it was all because Rakitin had not reckoned on the lawyer having been able to become so intimately acquainted with every detail in so short a time.
“Allow me to ask,” began the counsel for the defense, with the most affable and even respectful smile, “you are, of course, the same Mr.
“Oh, that’s excellent!
A thinker like you can, and indeed ought to, take the widest view of every social question.
Your most instructive pamphlet has been widely circulated through the patronage of the bishop, and has been of appreciable service....
You stated just now that you were very intimately acquainted with Madame Svyetlov.” (It must be noted that Grushenka’s surname was Svyetlov.
I heard it for the first time that day, during the case.) “I cannot answer for all my acquaintances....
I am a young man ... and who can be responsible for every one he meets?” cried Rakitin, flushing all over.
“I understand, I quite understand,” cried Fetyukovitch, as though he, too, were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself.
“You, like any other, might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and beautiful woman who would readily entertain the _élite_ of the youth of the neighborhood, but ...
It has come to my knowledge that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of months ago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and promised you twenty-five roubles, if you would bring him to her in his monastic dress.
And that actually took place on the evening of the day on which the terrible crime, which is the subject of the present investigation, was committed.
You brought Alexey Karamazov to Madame Svyetlov, and did you receive the twenty-five roubles from Madame Svyetlov as a reward, that’s what I wanted to hear from you?” “It was a joke....
I don’t see of what interest that can be to you....
I took it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later....” “Then you did take— But you have not given it back yet ... or have you?” “That’s of no consequence,” muttered Rakitin, “I refuse to answer such questions....
Of course I shall give it back.” The President intervened, but Fetyukovitch declared he had no more questions to ask of the witness.
Rakitin left the witness-box not absolutely without a stain upon his character.
The effect left by the lofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred, and Fetyukovitch’s expression, as he watched him walk away, seemed to suggest to the public “this is a specimen of the lofty-minded persons who accuse him.” I remember that this incident, too, did not pass off without an outbreak from Mitya.
Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred to Grushenka, he suddenly shouted “Bernard!” When, after Rakitin’s cross-examination, the President asked the prisoner if he had anything to say, Mitya cried loudly: “Since I’ve been arrested, he has borrowed money from me!
He is a contemptible Bernard and opportunist, and he doesn’t believe in God; he took the bishop in!” Mitya, of course, was pulled up again for the intemperance of his language, but Rakitin was done for.
Captain Snegiryov’s evidence was a failure, too, but from quite a different reason.
He appeared in ragged and dirty clothes, muddy boots, and in spite of the vigilance and expert observation of the police officers, he turned out to be hopelessly drunk.
‘Father, father, how he insulted you!’ He said that at the stone.
Now he is dying....” The captain suddenly began sobbing, and plumped down on his knees before the President.
He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of the public.
The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at all.
Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity, and amazed people more and more by his minute knowledge of the case.
Thus, for example, Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression, of course, very prejudicial to Mitya.
He calculated almost on his fingers that on his first visit to Mokroe, Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles, “or very little less.
Just think what he squandered on those gypsy girls alone!
And as for our lousy peasants, it wasn’t a case of flinging half a rouble in the street, he made them presents of twenty-five roubles each, at least, he didn’t give them less.
How could one catch the thief when he was flinging his money away all the time?
Our peasants are robbers, you know; they have no care for their souls.
They’re completely set up since then, I tell you, they used to be poor.” He recalled, in fact, every item of expense and added it all up.
So the theory that only fifteen hundred had been spent and the rest had been put aside in a little bag seemed inconceivable.
Karamazov?” Trifon Borissovitch shuffled in vain....
So one of the most dangerous witnesses brought forward by the prosecution was again discredited.
The same thing happened with the Poles.
They took up an attitude of pride and independence; they vociferated loudly that they had both been in the service of the Crown, and that “Pan Mitya” had offered them three thousand “to buy their honor,” and that they had seen a large sum of money in his hands.
Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number of Polish words into his sentences, and seeing that this only increased his consequence in the eyes of the President and the prosecutor, grew more and more pompous, and ended by talking in Polish altogether.
But Fetyukovitch caught them, too, in his snares.
Trifon Borissovitch, recalled, was forced, in spite of his evasions, to admit that Pan Vrublevsky had substituted another pack of cards for the one he had provided, and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheated during the game.
Kalganov confirmed this, and both the Poles left the witness-box with damaged reputations, amidst laughter from the public.
Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerous witnesses.
Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them, and dismissing them with a certain derision.
The lawyers and experts were lost in admiration, and were only at a loss to understand what good purpose could be served by it, for all, I repeat, felt that the case for the prosecution could not be refuted, but was growing more and more tragically overwhelming.
But from the confidence of the “great magician” they saw that he was serene, and they waited, feeling that “such a man” had not come from Petersburg for nothing, and that he was not a man to return unsuccessful.
The Medical Experts And A Pound Of Nuts The evidence of the medical experts, too, was of little use to the prisoner.
And it appeared later that Fetyukovitch had not reckoned much upon it.
The medical line of defense had only been taken up through the insistence of Katerina Ivanovna, who had sent for a celebrated doctor from Moscow on purpose.
The case for the defense could, of course, lose nothing by it and might, with luck, gain something from it.
There was, however, an element of comedy about it, through the difference of opinion of the doctors.
The medical experts were the famous doctor from Moscow, our doctor, Herzenstube, and the young doctor, Varvinsky.
The two latter appeared also as witnesses for the prosecution.
The first to be called in the capacity of expert was Doctor Herzenstube.
He was much esteemed and respected by every one in the town.
He was a conscientious doctor and an excellent and pious man, a Hernguter or Moravian brother, I am not quite sure which.
He had been living amongst us for many years and behaved with wonderful dignity.
He treated the sick poor and peasants for nothing, visited them in their slums and huts, and left money for medicine, but he was as obstinate as a mule.
Almost every one in the town was aware, by the way, that the famous doctor had, within the first two or three days of his presence among us, uttered some extremely offensive allusions to Doctor Herzenstube’s qualifications.
Though the Moscow doctor asked twenty-five roubles for a visit, several people in the town were glad to take advantage of his arrival, and rushed to consult him regardless of expense.
All these had, of course, been previously patients of Doctor Herzenstube, and the celebrated doctor had criticized his treatment with extreme harshness.
Finally, he had asked the patients as soon as he saw them, “Well, who has been cramming you with nostrums?
He, he!” Doctor Herzenstube, of course, heard all this, and now all the three doctors made their appearance, one after another, to be examined.
Doctor Herzenstube roundly declared that the abnormality of the prisoner’s mental faculties was self-evident.
Then giving his grounds for this opinion, which I omit here, he added that the abnormality was not only evident in many of the prisoner’s actions in the past, but was apparent even now at this very moment.
I must add that he spoke Russian readily, but every phrase was formed in German style, which did not, however, trouble him, for it had always been a weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly, better indeed than Russians.
And he was very fond of using Russian proverbs, always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and most expressive sayings in the whole world.
I may remark, too, that in conversation, through absent-mindedness he often forgot the most ordinary words, which sometimes went out of his head, though he knew them perfectly.
The same thing happened, though, when he spoke German, and at such times he always waved his hand before his face as though trying to catch the lost word, and no one could induce him to go on speaking till he had found the missing word.
His remark that the prisoner ought to have looked at the ladies on entering roused a whisper of amusement in the audience.
All our ladies were very fond of our old doctor; they knew, too, that having been all his life a bachelor and a religious man of exemplary conduct, he looked upon women as lofty creatures.
And so his unexpected observation struck every one as very queer.
The Moscow doctor, being questioned in his turn, definitely and emphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner’s mental condition abnormal in the highest degree.
But apart from temporary aberration, the doctor diagnosed mania, which premised, in his words, to lead to complete insanity in the future. (It must be noted that I report this in my own words, the doctor made use of very learned and professional language.) “All his actions are in contravention of common sense and logic,” he continued.
“Not to refer to what I have not seen, that is, the crime itself and the whole catastrophe, the day before yesterday, while he was talking to me, he had an unaccountably fixed look in his eye.
He laughed unexpectedly when there was nothing to laugh at.
According to all accounts, he had even in the past, whenever the subject of the three thousand roubles was touched on, flown into a perfect frenzy, and yet he was reported to be a disinterested and not grasping man.
“As to the opinion of my learned colleague,” the Moscow doctor added ironically in conclusion, “that the prisoner would, on entering the court, have naturally looked at the ladies and not straight before him, I will only say that, apart from the playfulness of this theory, it is radically unsound.
But the unexpected pronouncement of Doctor Varvinsky gave the last touch of comedy to the difference of opinion between the experts.
In his opinion the prisoner was now, and had been all along, in a perfectly normal condition, and, although he certainly must have been in a nervous and exceedingly excited state before his arrest, this might have been due to several perfectly obvious causes, jealousy, anger, continual drunkenness, and so on.
But this nervous condition would not involve the mental aberration of which mention had just been made.
As to the question whether the prisoner should have looked to the left or to the right on entering the court, “in his modest opinion,” the prisoner would naturally look straight before him on entering the court, as he had in fact done, as that was where the judges, on whom his fate depended, were sitting.
So that it was just by looking straight before him that he showed his perfectly normal state of mind at the present.
The young doctor concluded his “modest” testimony with some heat.
“Bravo, doctor!” cried Mitya, from his seat, “just so!” Mitya, of course, was checked, but the young doctor’s opinion had a decisive influence on the judges and on the public, and, as appeared afterwards, every one agreed with him.
But Doctor Herzenstube, when called as a witness, was quite unexpectedly of use to Mitya.
As an old resident in the town who had known the Karamazov family for years, he furnished some facts of great value for the prosecution, and suddenly, as though recalling something, he added: “But the poor young man might have had a very different life, for he had a good heart both in childhood and after childhood, that I know.
But the Russian proverb says, ‘If a man has one head, it’s good, but if another clever man comes to visit him, it would be better still, for then there will be two heads and not only one.’” “One head is good, but two are better,” the prosecutor put in impatiently.
He knew the old man’s habit of talking slowly and deliberately, regardless of the impression he was making and of the delay he was causing, and highly prizing his flat, dull and always gleefully complacent German wit.
“Oh, yes, that’s what I say,” he went on stubbornly.
I’ve forgotten the word.” He went on, passing his hand before his eyes, “Oh, yes, _spazieren_.” “Wandering?” “Oh, yes, wandering, that’s what I say.
Well, his wits went wandering and fell in such a deep hole that he lost himself.
And yet he was a grateful and sensitive boy.
Oh, I remember him very well, a little chap so high, left neglected by his father in the back yard, when he ran about without boots on his feet, and his little breeches hanging by one button.” A note of feeling and tenderness suddenly came into the honest old man’s voice.
Fetyukovitch positively started, as though scenting something, and caught at it instantly.
I’ve forgotten what it’s called.
A pound of what children are very fond of, what is it, what is it?” The doctor began waving his hands again.
“It grows on a tree and is gathered and given to every one....” “Apples?” “Oh, no, no.
You put them in the mouth and crack.” “Nuts?” “Quite so, nuts, I say so.” The doctor repeated in the calmest way as though he had been at no loss for a word.
I am sitting one morning in my study, a white-haired old man, when there walks into the room a blooming young man, whom I should never have recognized, but he held up his finger and said, laughing, ‘_Gott der Vater, Gott der Sohn_, and _Gott der heilige Geist_.
And now, alas!...” “And I am weeping now, German, I am weeping now, too, you saintly man,” Mitya cried suddenly.
In any case the anecdote made a certain favorable impression on the public.
But the chief sensation in Mitya’s favor was created by the evidence of Katerina Ivanovna, which I will describe directly.
Indeed, when the witnesses _à décharge_, that is, called by the defense, began giving evidence, fortune seemed all at once markedly more favorable to Mitya, and what was particularly striking, this was a surprise even to the counsel for the defense.
But before Katerina Ivanovna was called, Alyosha was examined, and he recalled a fact which seemed to furnish positive evidence against one important point made by the prosecution.
Fortune Smiles On Mitya It came quite as a surprise even to Alyosha himself.
He was not required to take the oath, and I remember that both sides addressed him very gently and sympathetically.
It was evident that his reputation for goodness had preceded him.
Alyosha gave his evidence modestly and with restraint, but his warm sympathy for his unhappy brother was unmistakable.
In answer to one question, he sketched his brother’s character as that of a man, violent-tempered perhaps and carried away by his passions, but at the same time honorable, proud and generous, capable of self-sacrifice, if necessary.
He admitted, however, that, through his passion for Grushenka and his rivalry with his father, his brother had been of late in an intolerable position.
As for the rivalry of the two “ladies,” as the prosecutor expressed it—that is, of Grushenka and Katya—he answered evasively and was even unwilling to answer one or two questions altogether.
“Did your brother tell you, anyway, that he intended to kill your father?” asked the prosecutor.
“You can refuse to answer if you think necessary,” he added.
“He did not tell me so directly,” answered Alyosha.
Did he indirectly?” “He spoke to me once of his hatred for our father and his fear that at an extreme moment ... at a moment of fury, he might perhaps murder him.” “And you believed him?” “I am afraid to say that I did.
But I never doubted that some higher feeling would always save him at the fatal moment, as it has indeed saved him, for it was not he killed my father,” Alyosha said firmly, in a loud voice that was heard throughout the court.
The prosecutor started like a war-horse at the sound of a trumpet.
“Let me assure you that I fully believe in the complete sincerity of your conviction and do not explain it by or identify it with your affection for your unhappy brother.
Your peculiar view of the whole tragic episode is known to us already from the preliminary investigation.
I won’t attempt to conceal from you that it is highly individual and contradicts all the other evidence collected by the prosecution.
And so I think it essential to press you to tell me what facts have led you to this conviction of your brother’s innocence and of the guilt of another person against whom you gave evidence at the preliminary inquiry?” “I only answered the questions asked me at the preliminary inquiry,” replied Alyosha, slowly and calmly.
“I made no accusation against Smerdyakov of myself.” “Yet you gave evidence against him?” “I was led to do so by my brother Dmitri’s words.
I was told what took place at his arrest and how he had pointed to Smerdyakov before I was examined.
I believe absolutely that my brother is innocent, and if he didn’t commit the murder, then—” “Then Smerdyakov?
And why are you so completely persuaded of your brother’s innocence?” “I cannot help believing my brother.
Is that all the proof you have?” “I have no other proof.” “And of Smerdyakov’s guilt you have no proof whatever but your brother’s word and the expression of his face?” “No, I have no other proof.” The prosecutor dropped the examination at this point.
The impression left by Alyosha’s evidence on the public was most disappointing.
There had been talk about Smerdyakov before the trial; some one had heard something, some one had pointed out something else, it was said that Alyosha had gathered together some extraordinary proofs of his brother’s innocence and Smerdyakov’s guilt, and after all there was nothing, no evidence except certain moral convictions so natural in a brother.
But Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination.
On his asking Alyosha when it was that the prisoner had told him of his hatred for his father and that he might kill him, and whether he had heard it, for instance, at their last meeting before the catastrophe, Alyosha started as he answered, as though only just recollecting and understanding something.
“I remember one circumstance now which I’d quite forgotten myself.
“I thought, when he struck himself on the breast, he meant that it was in his heart,” Alyosha continued, “that he might find in his heart strength to save himself from some awful disgrace which was awaiting him and which he did not dare confess even to me.
I must confess I did think at the time that he was speaking of our father, and that the disgrace he was shuddering at was the thought of going to our father and doing some violence to him.
Yet it was just then that he pointed to something on his breast, so that I remember the idea struck me at the time that the heart is not on that part of the breast, but below, and that he struck himself much too high, just below the neck, and kept pointing to that place.
My idea seemed silly to me at the time, but he was perhaps pointing then to that little bag in which he had fifteen hundred roubles!” “Just so,” Mitya cried from his place.
“That’s right, Alyosha, it was the little bag I struck with my fist.” Fetyukovitch flew to him in hot haste entreating him to keep quiet, and at the same instant pounced on Alyosha.
Alyosha, carried away himself by his recollection, warmly expressed his theory that this disgrace was probably just that fifteen hundred roubles on him, which he might have returned to Katerina Ivanovna as half of what he owed her, but which he had yet determined not to repay her and to use for another purpose—namely, to enable him to elope with Grushenka, if she consented.
“It is so, it must be so,” exclaimed Alyosha, in sudden excitement.
“My brother cried several times that half of the disgrace, half of it (he said _half_ several times) he could free himself from at once, but that he was so unhappy in his weakness of will that he wouldn’t do it ... that he knew beforehand he was incapable of doing it!” “And you clearly, confidently remember that he struck himself just on this part of the breast?” Fetyukovitch asked eagerly.
“Clearly and confidently, for I thought at the time, ‘Why does he strike himself up there when the heart is lower down?’ and the thought seemed stupid to me at the time ...
I remember its seeming stupid ... it flashed through my mind.
How could I have forgotten it till now?
And when he was arrested at Mokroe he cried out—I know, I was told it—that he considered it the most disgraceful act of his life that when he had the means of repaying Katerina Ivanovna half (half, note!) what he owed her, he yet could not bring himself to repay the money and preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than part with it.
And what torture, what torture that debt has been to him!” Alyosha exclaimed in conclusion.
The prosecutor, of course, intervened.
He asked Alyosha to describe once more how it had all happened, and several times insisted on the question, “Had the prisoner seemed to point to anything?
How could I have so completely forgotten it till this moment?” The President asked Mitya what he had to say to the last witness’s evidence.
Mitya confirmed it, saying that he had been pointing to the fifteen hundred roubles which were on his breast, just below the neck, and that that was, of course, the disgrace, “A disgrace I cannot deny, the most shameful act of my whole life,” cried Mitya.
I preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than give it back.
And the most shameful part of it was that I knew beforehand I shouldn’t give it back!
Thanks, Alyosha!” So Alyosha’s cross-examination ended.
With a flushed face he moved away to the seat assigned to him.
He kept repeating to himself: “How was it I forgot?
How could I have forgotten it?
And what made it come back to me now?” Katerina Ivanovna was called to the witness-box.
As she entered something extraordinary happened in the court.
The ladies clutched their lorgnettes and opera-glasses.
Everybody alleged afterwards that Mitya had turned “white as a sheet” on her entrance.
All in black, she advanced modestly, almost timidly.
It was impossible to tell from her face that she was agitated; but there was a resolute gleam in her dark and gloomy eyes.
I may remark that many people mentioned that she looked particularly handsome at that moment.
She expressed herself with composure, or at least tried to appear composed.
The President began his examination discreetly and very respectfully, as though afraid to touch on “certain chords,” and showing consideration for her great unhappiness.
But in answer to one of the first questions Katerina Ivanovna replied firmly that she had been formerly betrothed to the prisoner, “until he left me of his own accord...” she added quietly.
When they asked her about the three thousand she had entrusted to Mitya to post to her relations, she said firmly, “I didn’t give him the money simply to send it off.
I gave him the three thousand on the understanding that he should post it within the month if he cared to.
There was no need for him to worry himself about that debt afterwards.” I will not repeat all the questions asked her and all her answers in detail.
I will only give the substance of her evidence.
“I was firmly convinced that he would send off that sum as soon as he got money from his father,” she went on.
“I have never doubted his disinterestedness and his honesty ... his scrupulous honesty ... in money matters.
I knew he had a feud with his father and have always believed that he had been unfairly treated by his father.
I don’t remember any threat uttered by him against his father.
He certainly never uttered any such threat before me.
If he had come to me at that time, I should have at once relieved his anxiety about that unlucky three thousand roubles, but he had given up coming to see me ... and I myself was put in such a position ... that I could not invite him....
And I had no right, indeed, to be exacting as to that money,” she added suddenly, and there was a ring of resolution in her voice.
“I was once indebted to him for assistance in money for more than three thousand, and I took it, although I could not at that time foresee that I should ever be in a position to repay my debt.” There was a note of defiance in her voice.
It was then Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination.
“Did that take place not here, but at the beginning of your acquaintance?” Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously, feeling his way, instantly scenting something favorable.
I must mention in parenthesis that, though Fetyukovitch had been brought from Petersburg partly at the instance of Katerina Ivanovna herself, he knew nothing about the episode of the four thousand roubles given her by Mitya, and of her “bowing to the ground to him.” She concealed this from him and said nothing about it, and that was strange.
It may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not know till the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode in the court, and waited for the inspiration of the moment.
She told everything, the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha, and her bowing to the ground, and her reason.
She told about her father and her going to Mitya, and did not in one word, in a single hint, suggest that Mitya had himself, through her sister, proposed they should “send him Katerina Ivanovna” to fetch the money.
She generously concealed that and was not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of her own impulse run to the young officer, relying on something ... to beg him for the money.
It was something tremendous!
I turned cold and trembled as I listened.
It was something unexampled.
Even from such a self-willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was, such an extremely frank avowal, such sacrifice, such self-immolation, seemed incredible.
To save the man who had deceived and insulted her and to help, in however small a degree, in saving him, by creating a strong impression in his favor.
And, indeed, the figure of the young officer who, with a respectful bow to the innocent girl, handed her his last four thousand roubles—all he had in the world—was thrown into a very sympathetic and attractive light, but ...
I had a painful misgiving at heart!
It was repeated all over the town afterwards with spiteful laughter that the story was perhaps not quite complete—that is, in the statement that the officer had let the young lady depart “with nothing but a respectful bow.” It was hinted that something was here omitted.
“And even if nothing had been omitted, if this were the whole story,” the most highly respected of our ladies maintained, “even then it’s very doubtful whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way, even for the sake of saving her father.” And can Katerina Ivanovna, with her intelligence, her morbid sensitiveness, have failed to understand that people would talk like that?
She must have understood it, yet she made up her mind to tell everything.
Of course, all these nasty little suspicions as to the truth of her story only arose afterwards and at the first moment all were deeply impressed by it.
As for the judges and the lawyers, they listened in reverent, almost shame-faced silence to Katerina Ivanovna.
The prosecutor did not venture upon even one question on the subject.
Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her.
Oh, he was almost triumphant!
For a man to give his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for the same man to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of three thousand—the idea seemed too incongruous.
Fetyukovitch felt that now the charge of theft, at least, was as good as disproved.
“The case” was thrown into quite a different light.
There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya.
I was told that once or twice, while Katerina Ivanovna was giving her evidence, he jumped up from his seat, sank back again, and hid his face in his hands.
But when she had finished, he suddenly cried in a sobbing voice: “Katya, why have you ruined me?” and his sobs were audible all over the court.
But he instantly restrained himself, and cried again: “Now I am condemned!” Then he sat rigid in his place, with his teeth clenched and his arms across his chest.
Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down in her place.
Those who were sitting near her declared that for a long time she shivered all over as though in a fever.
Grushenka was called.
I am approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final cause of Mitya’s ruin.
For I am convinced, so is every one—all the lawyers said the same afterwards—that if the episode had not occurred, the prisoner would at least have been recommended to mercy.
A few words first about Grushenka.
She, too, was dressed entirely in black, with her magnificent black shawl on her shoulders.
She walked to the witness-box with her smooth, noiseless tread, with the slightly swaying gait common in women of full figure.
She looked steadily at the President, turning her eyes neither to the right nor to the left.
To my thinking she looked very handsome at that moment, and not at all pale, as the ladies alleged afterwards.
They declared, too, that she had a concentrated and spiteful expression.
I believe that she was simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous and inquisitive eyes of our scandal-loving public.
She was proud and could not stand contempt.
She was one of those people who flare up, angry and eager to retaliate, at the mere suggestion of contempt.
There was an element of timidity, too, of course, and inward shame at her own timidity, so it was not strange that her tone kept changing.
At one moment it was angry, contemptuous and rough, and at another there was a sincere note of self-condemnation.
Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking a desperate plunge; as though she felt, “I don’t care what happens, I’ll say it....” Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch, she remarked curtly, “That’s all nonsense, and was it my fault that he would pester me?” But a minute later she added, “It was all my fault.
I was laughing at them both—at the old man and at him, too—and I brought both of them to this.
It was all on account of me it happened.” Samsonov’s name came up somehow.
“That’s nobody’s business,” she snapped at once, with a sort of insolent defiance.
“He was my benefactor; he took me when I hadn’t a shoe to my foot, when my family had turned me out.” The President reminded her, though very politely, that she must answer the questions directly, without going off into irrelevant details.
Grushenka crimsoned and her eyes flashed.
The envelope with the notes in it she had not seen, but had only heard from “that wicked wretch” that Fyodor Pavlovitch had an envelope with notes for three thousand in it.
“But that was all foolishness.
I was only laughing.
I wouldn’t have gone to him for anything.” “To whom are you referring as ‘that wicked wretch’?” inquired the prosecutor.
“The lackey, Smerdyakov, who murdered his master and hanged himself last night.” She was, of course, at once asked what ground she had for such a definite accusation; but it appeared that she, too, had no grounds for it.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself; you can believe him.
The woman who came between us has ruined him; she is the cause of it all, let me tell you,” Grushenka added.
She seemed to be quivering with hatred, and there was a vindictive note in her voice.
She was again asked to whom she was referring.
“The young lady, Katerina Ivanovna there.
She sent for me, offered me chocolate, tried to fascinate me.
There’s not much true shame about her, I can tell you that....” At this point the President checked her sternly, begging her to moderate her language.
“When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe,” the prosecutor asked, “every one saw and heard you run out of the next room and cry out: ‘It’s all my fault.
We’ll go to Siberia together!’ So you already believed him to have murdered his father?” “I don’t remember what I felt at the time,” answered Grushenka.
“Every one was crying out that he had killed his father, and I felt that it was my fault, that it was on my account he had murdered him.
But when he said he wasn’t guilty, I believed him at once, and I believe him now and always shall believe him.
He is not the man to tell a lie.” Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination.
I remember that among other things he asked about Rakitin and the twenty-five roubles “you paid him for bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you.” “There was nothing strange about his taking the money,” sneered Grushenka, with angry contempt.
“He was always coming to me for money: he used to get thirty roubles a month at least out of me, chiefly for luxuries: he had enough to keep him without my help.” “What led you to be so liberal to Mr.
Rakitin?” Fetyukovitch asked, in spite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President.
But he’s always besought me not to tell any one here of it, he is so dreadfully ashamed of me.” This fact was a complete surprise to every one; no one in the town nor in the monastery, not even Mitya, knew of it.
Grushenka had somehow heard before she came into the court that he had given evidence against Mitya, and so she was angry.
The whole effect on the public, of Rakitin’s speech, of his noble sentiments, of his attacks upon serfdom and the political disorder of Russia, was this time finally ruined.
Fetyukovitch was satisfied: it was another godsend.
Grushenka’s cross-examination did not last long and, of course, there could be nothing particularly new in her evidence.
She left a very disagreeable impression on the public; hundreds of contemptuous eyes were fixed upon her, as she finished giving her evidence and sat down again in the court, at a good distance from Katerina Ivanovna.
Mitya was silent throughout her evidence.
Ivan was called to give evidence.
A Sudden Catastrophe I may note that he had been called before Alyosha.
But the usher of the court announced to the President that, owing to an attack of illness or some sort of fit, the witness could not appear at the moment, but was ready to give his evidence as soon as he recovered.
His entrance was for the first moment almost unnoticed.
The principal witnesses, especially the two rival ladies, had already been questioned.
Curiosity was satisfied for the time; the public was feeling almost fatigued.
Several more witnesses were still to be heard, who probably had little information to give after all that had been given.
Ivan walked up with extraordinary slowness, looking at no one, and with his head bowed, as though plunged in gloomy thought.
He was irreproachably dressed, but his face made a painful impression, on me at least: there was an earthy look in it, a look like a dying man’s.
His eyes were lusterless; he raised them and looked slowly round the court.
Alyosha jumped up from his seat and moaned “Ah!” I remember that, but it was hardly noticed.
The President began by informing him that he was a witness not on oath, that he might answer or refuse to answer, but that, of course, he must bear witness according to his conscience, and so on, and so on.
Ivan listened and looked at him blankly, but his face gradually relaxed into a smile, and as soon as the President, looking at him in astonishment, finished, he laughed outright.
There was a hush in the court; there was a feeling of something strange.
The President showed signs of uneasiness.
“You ... are perhaps still unwell?” he began, looking everywhere for the usher.
“Don’t trouble yourself, your excellency, I am well enough and can tell you something interesting,” Ivan answered with sudden calmness and respectfulness.
“You have some special communication to make?” the President went on, still mistrustfully.
Ivan looked down, waited a few seconds and, raising his head, answered, almost stammering: “No ...
I have nothing particular.” They began asking him questions.
He answered, as it were, reluctantly, with extreme brevity, with a sort of disgust which grew more and more marked, though he answered rationally.
To many questions he answered that he did not know.
He knew nothing of his father’s money relations with Dmitri.
“I wasn’t interested in the subject,” he added.
Threats to murder his father he had heard from the prisoner.
Of the money in the envelope he had heard from Smerdyakov.
“The same thing over and over again,” he interrupted suddenly, with a look of weariness.
“I have nothing particular to tell the court.” “I see you are unwell and understand your feelings,” the President began.
He turned to the prosecutor and the counsel for the defense to invite them to examine the witness, if necessary, when Ivan suddenly asked in an exhausted voice: “Let me go, your excellency, I feel very ill.” And with these words, without waiting for permission, he turned to walk out of the court.
But after taking four steps he stood still, as though he had reached a decision, smiled slowly, and went back.
“I am like the peasant girl, your excellency ... you know.
It’s in some book about the peasantry.” “What do you mean by that?” the President asked severely.
“Why, this,” Ivan suddenly pulled out a roll of notes.
“Here’s the money ... the notes that lay in that envelope” (he nodded towards the table on which lay the material evidence), “for the sake of which our father was murdered.
Superintendent, take them.” The usher of the court took the whole roll and handed it to the President.
“How could this money have come into your possession if it is the same money?” the President asked wonderingly.
“I got them from Smerdyakov, from the murderer, yesterday....
He murdered him and I incited him to do it ...
Who doesn’t desire his father’s death?” “Are you in your right mind?” broke involuntarily from the President.
“I should think I am in my right mind ... in the same nasty mind as all of you ... as all these ... ugly faces.” He turned suddenly to the audience.
“My father has been murdered and they pretend they are horrified,” he snarled, with furious contempt.
It’s a spectacle they want! _Panem et circenses_.
Give me a drink for Christ’s sake!” He suddenly clutched his head.
The usher at once approached him.
Don’t believe him: he has brain fever.” Katerina Ivanovna rose impulsively from her seat and, rigid with horror, gazed at Ivan.
Mitya stood up and greedily looked at his brother and listened to him with a wild, strange smile.
“Don’t disturb yourselves.
I am not mad, I am only a murderer,” Ivan began again.
“You can’t expect eloquence from a murderer,” he added suddenly for some reason and laughed a queer laugh.
The prosecutor bent over to the President in obvious dismay.
The two other judges communicated in agitated whispers.
Fetyukovitch pricked up his ears as he listened: the hall was hushed in expectation.
The President seemed suddenly to recollect himself.
“Witness, your words are incomprehensible and impossible here.
Calm yourself, if you can, and tell your story ... if you really have something to tell.
How can you confirm your statement ... if indeed you are not delirious?” “That’s just it.
That cur Smerdyakov won’t send you proofs from the other world ... in an envelope.
You think of nothing but envelopes—one is enough.
I’ve no witnesses ... except one, perhaps,” he smiled thoughtfully.
“Who is your witness?” “He has a tail, your excellency, and that would be irregular! _Le diable n’existe point!_ Don’t pay attention: he is a paltry, pitiful devil,” he added suddenly.
He ceased laughing and spoke as it were, confidentially.
“He is here somewhere, no doubt—under that table with the material evidence on it, perhaps.
I told him I don’t want to keep quiet, and he talked about the geological cataclysm ... idiocy!
It’s like a drunken man in the street bawling how ‘Vanka went to Petersburg,’ and I would give a quadrillion quadrillions for two seconds of joy.
Oh, how stupid all this business is!
Why, why is everything so stupid?...” And he began slowly, and as it were reflectively, looking round him again.
But the court was all excitement by now.
“What are you about?” he cried, staring into the man’s face, and suddenly seizing him by the shoulders, he flung him violently to the floor.
He screamed furiously.
And all the time he was being removed, he yelled and screamed something incoherent.
The whole court was thrown into confusion.
I don’t remember everything as it happened.
But before every one had completely regained their composure and recovered from this scene, it was followed by another.
Katerina Ivanovna had an attack of hysterics.
She sobbed, shrieking loudly, but refused to leave the court, struggled, and besought them not to remove her.
Suddenly she cried to the President: “There is more evidence I must give at once ... at once!
Here is a document, a letter ... take it, read it quickly, quickly!
“It was he killed his father, you will see that directly.
But the other one is ill, he is ill, he is delirious!” she kept crying out, beside herself.
The court usher took the document she held out to the President, and she, dropping into her chair, hiding her face in her hands, began convulsively and noiselessly sobbing, shaking all over, and stifling every sound for fear she should be ejected from the court.
The document she had handed up was that letter Mitya had written at the “Metropolis” tavern, which Ivan had spoken of as a “mathematical proof.” Alas! its mathematical conclusiveness was recognized, and had it not been for that letter, Mitya might have escaped his doom or, at least, that doom would have been less terrible.
It was, I repeat, difficult to notice every detail.
What followed is still confused to my mind.
The President must, I suppose, have at once passed on the document to the judges, the jury, and the lawyers on both sides.
I only remember how they began examining the witness.
On being gently asked by the President whether she had recovered sufficiently, Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed impetuously: “I am ready, I am ready!
I am quite equal to answering you,” she added, evidently still afraid that she would somehow be prevented from giving evidence.
She was asked to explain in detail what this letter was and under what circumstances she received it.
“I received it the day before the crime was committed, but he wrote it the day before that, at the tavern—that is, two days before he committed the crime.
Look, it is written on some sort of bill!” she cried breathlessly.
“He hated me at that time, because he had behaved contemptibly and was running after that creature ... and because he owed me that three thousand....
Oh! he was humiliated by that three thousand on account of his own meanness!
This is how it happened about that three thousand.
Three weeks before he murdered his father, he came to me one morning.
Yes, yes—to win that creature and carry her off.
And as I gave it him, I looked him in the face and said that he could send it when he liked, ‘in a month’s time would do.’ How, how could he have failed to understand that I was practically telling him to his face, ‘You want money to be false to me with your creature, so here’s the money for you.
Take it, if you have so little honor as to take it!’ I wanted to prove what he was, and what happened?
He took it, he took it, and squandered it with that creature in one night....
I assure you he understood, too, that I gave him that money to test him, to see whether he was so lost to all sense of honor as to take it from me.
I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine, and he understood it all and he took it—he carried off my money!” “That’s true, Katya,” Mitya roared suddenly, “I looked into your eyes and I knew that you were dishonoring me, and yet I took your money.
Despise me as a scoundrel, despise me, all of you!
I’ve deserved it!” “Prisoner,” cried the President, “another word and I will order you to be removed.” “That money was a torment to him,” Katya went on with impulsive haste.
He wanted to, that’s true; but he needed money for that creature, too.
So he murdered his father, but he didn’t repay me, and went off with her to that village where he was arrested.
There, again, he squandered the money he had stolen after the murder of his father.
He wrote it from spite, and feeling certain, positively certain, that I should never show it to any one, even if he did kill him, or else he wouldn’t have written it.
But read it, read it attentively—more attentively, please—and you will see that he had described it all in his letter, all beforehand, how he would kill his father and where his money was kept.
Look, please, don’t overlook that, there’s one phrase there, ‘I shall kill him as soon as Ivan has gone away.’ So he thought it all out beforehand how he would kill him,” Katerina Ivanovna pointed out to the court with venomous and malignant triumph.
Oh! it was clear she had studied every line of that letter and detected every meaning underlining it.
“If he hadn’t been drunk, he wouldn’t have written to me; but, look, everything is written there beforehand, just as he committed the murder after.
A complete program of it!” she exclaimed frantically.
She was reckless now of all consequences to herself, though, no doubt, she had foreseen them even a month ago, for even then, perhaps, shaking with anger, she had pondered whether to show it at the trial or not.
I remember that the letter was read aloud by the clerk, directly afterwards, I believe.
It made an overwhelming impression.
They asked Mitya whether he admitted having written the letter.
We’ve hated each other for many things, Katya, but I swear, I swear I loved you even while I hated you, and you didn’t love me!” He sank back on his seat, wringing his hands in despair.
The prosecutor and counsel for the defense began cross-examining her, chiefly to ascertain what had induced her to conceal such a document and to give her evidence in quite a different tone and spirit just before.
I was lying against my honor and my conscience, but I wanted to save him, for he has hated and despised me so!” Katya cried madly.
“Oh, he has despised me horribly, he has always despised me, and do you know, he has despised me from the very moment that I bowed down to him for that money.
How often I have read it in his eyes, ‘You came of yourself, though.’ Oh, he didn’t understand, he had no idea why I ran to him, he can suspect nothing but baseness, he judged me by himself, he thought every one was like himself!” Katya hissed furiously, in a perfect frenzy.
“And he only wanted to marry me, because I’d inherited a fortune, because of that, because of that!
I always suspected it was because of that!
He was always convinced that I should be trembling with shame all my life before him, because I went to him then, and that he had a right to despise me for ever for it, and so to be superior to me—that’s why he wanted to marry me!
I even tried to forgive his faithlessness; but he understood nothing, nothing!
How could he understand indeed?
I only received that letter the next evening: it was brought me from the tavern—and only that morning, only that morning I wanted to forgive him everything, everything—even his treachery!” The President and the prosecutor, of course, tried to calm her.
I can’t help thinking that they felt ashamed of taking advantage of her hysteria and of listening to such avowals.
I remember hearing them say to her, “We understand how hard it is for you; be sure we are able to feel for you,” and so on, and so on.
And yet they dragged the evidence out of the raving, hysterical woman.
She described at last with extraordinary clearness, which is so often seen, though only for a moment, in such over-wrought states, how Ivan had been nearly driven out of his mind during the last two months trying to save “the monster and murderer,” his brother.
“He tortured himself,” she exclaimed, “he was always trying to minimize his brother’s guilt and confessing to me that he, too, had never loved his father, and perhaps desired his death himself.
Oh, he has a tender, over-tender conscience!
He tormented himself with his conscience!
He told me everything, everything!
I have the honor to be his only friend!” she cried suddenly with a sort of defiance, and her eyes flashed.
“He had been twice to see Smerdyakov.
One day he came to me and said, ‘If it was not my brother, but Smerdyakov committed the murder’ (for the legend was circulating everywhere that Smerdyakov had done it), ‘perhaps I too am guilty, for Smerdyakov knew I didn’t like my father and perhaps believed that I desired my father’s death.’ Then I brought out that letter and showed it him.
He was entirely convinced that his brother had done it, and he was overwhelmed by it.
He couldn’t endure the thought that his own brother was a parricide!
During the last few days he has talked incoherently in my presence.
He walked about, raving; he was seen muttering in the streets.
The doctor from Moscow, at my request, examined him the day before yesterday and told me that he was on the eve of brain fever—and all on his account, on account of this monster!
And last night he learnt that Smerdyakov was dead!
It was such a shock that it drove him out of his mind ... and all through this monster, all for the sake of saving the monster!” Oh, of course, such an outpouring, such an avowal is only possible once in a lifetime—at the hour of death, for instance, on the way to the scaffold!
But it was in Katya’s character, and it was such a moment in her life.
It was the same impetuous Katya who had thrown herself on the mercy of a young profligate to save her father; the same Katya who had just before, in her pride and chastity, sacrificed herself and her maidenly modesty before all these people, telling of Mitya’s generous conduct, in the hope of softening his fate a little.
And now, again, she sacrificed herself; but this time it was for another, and perhaps only now—perhaps only at this moment—she felt and knew how dear that other was to her!
She had sacrificed herself in terror for him, conceiving all of a sudden that he had ruined himself by his confession that it was he who had committed the murder, not his brother, she had sacrificed herself to save him, to save his good name, his reputation!
And yet one terrible doubt occurred to one—was she lying in her description of her former relations with Mitya?—that was the question.
No, she had not intentionally slandered him when she cried that Mitya despised her for her bowing down to him!
She believed it herself.
She had been firmly convinced, perhaps ever since that bow, that the simple-hearted Mitya, who even then adored her, was laughing at her and despising her.
She had loved him with an hysterical, “lacerated” love only from pride, from wounded pride, and that love was not like love, but more like revenge.
Oh! perhaps that lacerated love would have grown into real love, perhaps Katya longed for nothing more than that, but Mitya’s faithlessness had wounded her to the bottom of her heart, and her heart could not forgive him.
The moment of revenge had come upon her suddenly, and all that had been accumulating so long and so painfully in the offended woman’s breast burst out all at once and unexpectedly.
She betrayed Mitya, but she betrayed herself, too.
And no sooner had she given full expression to her feelings than the tension of course was over and she was overwhelmed with shame.
Hysterics began again: she fell on the floor, sobbing and screaming.
At that moment Grushenka, with a wail, rushed towards Mitya before they had time to prevent her.
“Mitya,” she wailed, “your serpent has destroyed you!
At a signal from the President they seized her and tried to remove her from the court.
She fought and struggled to get back to Mitya.
Mitya uttered a cry and struggled to get to her.
Yes, I think the ladies who came to see the spectacle must have been satisfied—the show had been a varied one.
Then I remember the Moscow doctor appeared on the scene.
I believe the President had previously sent the court usher to arrange for medical aid for Ivan.
The doctor announced to the court that the sick man was suffering from a dangerous attack of brain fever, and that he must be at once removed.
In answer to questions from the prosecutor and the counsel for the defense he said that the patient had come to him of his own accord the day before yesterday and that he had warned him that he had such an attack coming on, but he had not consented to be looked after.
“He was certainly not in a normal state of mind: he told me himself that he saw visions when he was awake, that he met several persons in the street, who were dead, and that Satan visited him every evening,” said the doctor, in conclusion.
Having given his evidence, the celebrated doctor withdrew.
After some deliberation, the judges decided to proceed with the trial and to enter both the unexpected pieces of evidence (given by Ivan and Katerina Ivanovna) on the protocol.
But I will not detail the evidence of the other witnesses, who only repeated and confirmed what had been said before, though all with their characteristic peculiarities.
I repeat, all was brought together in the prosecutor’s speech, which I shall quote immediately.
Every one was excited, every one was electrified by the late catastrophe, and all were awaiting the speeches for the prosecution and the defense with intense impatience.
Fetyukovitch was obviously shaken by Katerina Ivanovna’s evidence.
But the prosecutor was triumphant.
When all the evidence had been taken, the court was adjourned for almost an hour.
I believe it was just eight o’clock when the President returned to his seat and our prosecutor, Ippolit Kirillovitch, began his speech.
Sketches Of Character Ippolit Kirillovitch began his speech, trembling with nervousness, with cold sweat on his forehead, feeling hot and cold all over by turns.
He described this himself afterwards.
He regarded this speech as his _chef-d’œuvre_, the _chef-d’œuvre_ of his whole life, as his swan-song.
He died, it is true, nine months later of rapid consumption, so that he had the right, as it turned out, to compare himself to a swan singing his last song.
And poor Ippolit Kirillovitch unexpectedly revealed that at least some feeling for the public welfare and “the eternal question” lay concealed in him.
Where his speech really excelled was in its sincerity.
He genuinely believed in the prisoner’s guilt; he was accusing him not as an official duty only, and in calling for vengeance he quivered with a genuine passion “for the security of society.” Even the ladies in the audience, though they remained hostile to Ippolit Kirillovitch, admitted that he made an extraordinary impression on them.
He began in a breaking voice, but it soon gained strength and filled the court to the end of his speech.
But as soon as he had finished, he almost fainted.
“Gentlemen of the jury,” began the prosecutor, “this case has made a stir throughout Russia.
But what is there to wonder at, what is there so peculiarly horrifying in it for us?
We are so accustomed to such crimes!
That’s what’s so horrible, that such dark deeds have ceased to horrify us.
What ought to horrify us is that we are so accustomed to it, and not this or that isolated crime.
What are the causes of our indifference, our lukewarm attitude to such deeds, to such signs of the times, ominous of an unenviable future?
Is it our cynicism, is it the premature exhaustion of intellect and imagination in a society that is sinking into decay, in spite of its youth?
Is it that our moral principles are shattered to their foundations, or is it, perhaps, a complete lack of such principles among us?
I cannot answer such questions; nevertheless they are disturbing, and every citizen not only must, but ought to be harassed by them.
Our newborn and still timid press has done good service to the public already, for without it we should never have heard of the horrors of unbridled violence and moral degradation which are continually made known by the press, not merely to those who attend the new jury courts established in the present reign, but to every one.
Of things beside which the present case grows pale, and seems almost commonplace.
But what is most important is that the majority of our national crimes of violence bear witness to a widespread evil, now so general among us that it is difficult to contend against it.
Next, a young hero ‘decorated for bravery’ kills the mother of his chief and benefactor, like a highwayman, and to urge his companions to join him he asserts that ‘she loves him like a son, and so will follow all his directions and take no precautions.’ Granted that he is a monster, yet I dare not say in these days that he is unique.
Another man will not commit the murder, but will feel and think like him, and is as dishonorable in soul.
In silence, alone with his conscience, he asks himself perhaps, ‘What is honor, and isn’t the condemnation of bloodshed a prejudice?’ “Perhaps people will cry out against me that I am morbid, hysterical, that it is a monstrous slander, that I am exaggerating.
Oh, don’t believe me, think of me as morbid, but remember my words; if only a tenth, if only a twentieth part of what I say is true—even so it’s awful!
Look how our young people commit suicide, without asking themselves Hamlet’s question what there is beyond, without a sign of such a question, as though all that relates to the soul and to what awaits us beyond the grave had long been erased in their minds and buried under the sands.
Look at our vice, at our profligates.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, the luckless victim in the present case, was almost an innocent babe compared with many of them.
“Yes, one day perhaps the leading intellects of Russia and of Europe will study the psychology of Russian crime, for the subject is worth it.
But this study will come later, at leisure, when all the tragic topsy-turvydom of to-day is farther behind us, so that it’s possible to examine it with more insight and more impartiality than I can do.
Now we are either horrified or pretend to be horrified, though we really gloat over the spectacle, and love strong and eccentric sensations which tickle our cynical, pampered idleness.
Or, like little children, we brush the dreadful ghosts away and hide our heads in the pillow so as to return to our sports and merriment as soon as they have vanished.
But we must one day begin life in sober earnest, we must look at ourselves as a society; it’s time we tried to grasp something of our social position, or at least to make a beginning in that direction.
“A great writer[9] of the last epoch, comparing Russia to a swift troika galloping to an unknown goal, exclaims, ‘Oh, troika, birdlike troika, who invented thee!’ and adds, in proud ecstasy, that all the peoples of the world stand aside respectfully to make way for the recklessly galloping troika to pass.
That may be, they may stand aside, respectfully or no, but in my poor opinion the great writer ended his book in this way either in an access of childish and naïve optimism, or simply in fear of the censorship of the day.
For if the troika were drawn by his heroes, Sobakevitch, Nozdryov, Tchitchikov, it could reach no rational goal, whoever might be driving it.
And those were the heroes of an older generation, ours are worse specimens still....” At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch’s speech was interrupted by applause.
The liberal significance of this simile was appreciated.
The applause was, it’s true, of brief duration, so that the President did not think it necessary to caution the public, and only looked severely in the direction of the offenders.
But Ippolit Kirillovitch was encouraged; he had never been applauded before!
He had been all his life unable to get a hearing, and now he suddenly had an opportunity of securing the ear of all Russia.
“What, after all, is this Karamazov family, which has gained such an unenviable notoriety throughout Russia?” he continued.
“Perhaps I am exaggerating, but it seems to me that certain fundamental features of the educated class of to-day are reflected in this family picture—only, of course, in miniature, ‘like the sun in a drop of water.’ Think of that unhappy, vicious, unbridled old man, who has met with such a melancholy end, the head of a family!
Beginning life of noble birth, but in a poor dependent position, through an unexpected marriage he came into a small fortune.
A petty knave, a toady and buffoon, of fairly good, though undeveloped, intelligence, he was, above all, a moneylender, who grew bolder with growing prosperity.
His abject and servile characteristics disappeared, his malicious and sarcastic cynicism was all that remained.
On the spiritual side he was undeveloped, while his vitality was excessive.
He saw nothing in life but sensual pleasure, and he brought his children up to be the same.
He had no feelings for his duties as a father.
He ridiculed those duties.
He left his little children to the servants, and was glad to be rid of them, forgot about them completely.
He was an example of everything that is opposed to civic duty, of the most complete and malignant individualism.
He swindled his own son and spent his money, his maternal inheritance, on trying to get his mistress from him.
No, I don’t intend to leave the prisoner’s defense altogether to my talented colleague from Petersburg.
I will speak the truth myself, I can well understand what resentment he had heaped up in his son’s heart against him.
Let us remember, however, that he was a father, and one of the typical fathers of to-day.
Alas! many of them only differ in not openly professing such cynicism, for they are better educated, more cultured, but their philosophy is essentially the same as his.
Perhaps I am a pessimist, but you have agreed to forgive me.
Let us agree beforehand, you need not believe me, but let me speak.
Let me say what I have to say, and remember something of my words.
“Now for the children of this father, this head of a family.
One of them is the prisoner before us, all the rest of my speech will deal with him.
Of the other two I will speak only cursorily.
“The elder is one of those modern young men of brilliant education and vigorous intellect, who has lost all faith in everything.
He has denied and rejected much already, like his father.
He never concealed his opinions, quite the contrary in fact, which justifies me in speaking rather openly of him now, of course, not as an individual, but as a member of the Karamazov family.
Another personage closely connected with the case died here by his own hand last night.
I mean an afflicted idiot, formerly the servant, and possibly the illegitimate son, of Fyodor Pavlovitch, Smerdyakov.
At the preliminary inquiry, he told me with hysterical tears how the young Ivan Karamazov had horrified him by his spiritual audacity.
‘Everything in the world is lawful according to him, and nothing must be forbidden in the future—that is what he always taught me.’ I believe that idiot was driven out of his mind by this theory, though, of course, the epileptic attacks from which he suffered, and this terrible catastrophe, have helped to unhinge his faculties.
But he dropped one very interesting observation, which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer, and that is, indeed, why I’ve mentioned it: ‘If there is one of the sons that is like Fyodor Pavlovitch in character, it is Ivan Fyodorovitch.’ “With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character, feeling it indelicate to continue further.
Oh, I don’t want to draw any further conclusions and croak like a raven over the young man’s future.
We’ve seen to-day in this court that there are still good impulses in his young heart, that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faith and cynicism, which have come to him rather by inheritance than by the exercise of independent thought.
Oh, he is a devout and modest youth, who does not share his elder brother’s gloomy and destructive theory of life.
He has sought to cling to the ‘ideas of the people,’ or to what goes by that name in some circles of our intellectual classes.
He clung to the monastery, and was within an ace of becoming a monk.
Ippolit Kirillovitch had been, indeed, carried away by his own eloquence.
All this had little to do with the case in hand, to say nothing of the fact of its being somewhat vague, but the sickly and consumptive man was overcome by the desire to express himself once in his life.
People said afterwards that he was actuated by unworthy motives in his criticism of Ivan, because the latter had on one or two occasions got the better of him in argument, and Ippolit Kirillovitch, remembering it, tried now to take his revenge.
All this was only introductory, however, and the speech passed to more direct consideration of the case.
“But to return to the eldest son,” Ippolit Kirillovitch went on.
“He is the prisoner before us.
While his brothers seem to stand for ‘Europeanism’ and ‘the principles of the people,’ he seems to represent Russia as she is.
God preserve us, if it were!
Oh, he is spontaneous, he is a marvelous mingling of good and evil, he is a lover of culture and Schiller, yet he brawls in taverns and plucks out the beards of his boon companions.
What is more, he can be carried off his feet, positively carried off his feet by noble ideals, but only if they come of themselves, if they fall from heaven for him, if they need not be paid for.
He dislikes paying for anything, but is very fond of receiving, and that’s so with him in everything.
Oh, give him every possible good in life (he couldn’t be content with less), and put no obstacle in his way, and he will show that he, too, can be noble.
He is not greedy, no, but he must have money, a great deal of money, and you will see how generously, with what scorn of filthy lucre, he will fling it all away in the reckless dissipation of one night.
But all this later, let us take events in their chronological order.
“First, we have before us a poor abandoned child, running about the back-yard ‘without boots on his feet,’ as our worthy and esteemed fellow citizen, of foreign origin, alas! expressed it just now.
I repeat it again, I yield to no one the defense of the criminal.
Yes, I, too, am human; I, too, can weigh the influence of home and childhood on the character.
But the boy grows up and becomes an officer; for a duel and other reckless conduct he is exiled to one of the remote frontier towns of Russia.
And, of course, he needed money, money before all things, and so after prolonged disputes he came to a settlement with his father, and the last six thousand was sent him.
A letter is in existence in which he practically gives up his claim to the rest and settles his conflict with his father over the inheritance on the payment of this six thousand.
“Then came his meeting with a young girl of lofty character and brilliant education.
Honor, self-sacrifice were shown there, and I will be silent.
The figure of the young officer, frivolous and profligate, doing homage to true nobility and a lofty ideal, was shown in a very sympathetic light before us.
But the other side of the medal was unexpectedly turned to us immediately after in this very court.
Again I will not venture to conjecture why it happened so, but there were causes.
The same lady, bathed in tears of long-concealed indignation, alleged that he, he of all men, had despised her for her action, which, though incautious, reckless perhaps, was still dictated by lofty and generous motives.
He, he, the girl’s betrothed, looked at her with that smile of mockery, which was more insufferable from him than from any one.
And knowing that he had already deceived her (he had deceived her, believing that she was bound to endure everything from him, even treachery), she intentionally offered him three thousand roubles, and clearly, too clearly, let him understand that she was offering him money to deceive her.
‘Well, will you take it or not, are you so lost to shame?’ was the dumb question in her scrutinizing eyes.
He looked at her, saw clearly what was in her mind (he’s admitted here before you that he understood it all), appropriated that three thousand unconditionally, and squandered it in two days with the new object of his affections.
The first legend of the young officer sacrificing his last farthing in a noble impulse of generosity and doing reverence to virtue, or this other revolting picture?
As a rule, between two extremes one has to find the mean, but in the present case this is not true.
The probability is that in the first case he was genuinely noble, and in the second as genuinely base.
Because he was of the broad Karamazov character—that’s just what I am leading up to—capable of combining the most incongruous contradictions, and capable of the greatest heights and of the greatest depths.
Remember the brilliant remark made by a young observer who has seen the Karamazov family at close quarters—Mr.
Rakitin: ‘The sense of their own degradation is as essential to those reckless, unbridled natures as the sense of their lofty generosity.’ And that’s true, they need continually this unnatural mixture.
Two extremes at the same moment, or they are miserable and dissatisfied and their existence is incomplete.
They are wide, wide as mother Russia; they include everything and put up with everything.
“By the way, gentlemen of the jury, we’ve just touched upon that three thousand roubles, and I will venture to anticipate things a little.
Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns, nor when he was flying into the country, trying to get from God knows whom, the money so essential to him to remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father, did he bring himself to touch that little bag!
Why, if only to avoid abandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous, he would have been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home to keep watch over her, and to await the moment when she would say to him at last ‘I am yours,’ and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings.
“But no, he did not touch his talisman, and what is the reason he gives for it?
The chief reason, as I have just said, was that when she would say, ‘I am yours, take me where you will,’ he might have the wherewithal to take her.
But that first reason, in the prisoner’s own words, was of little weight beside the second.
This frantic, but weak man, who could not resist the temptation of accepting the three thousand roubles at the price of such disgrace, this very man suddenly develops the most stoical firmness, and carries about a thousand roubles without daring to touch it.
Does that fit in at all with the character we have analyzed?
No, and I venture to tell you how the real Dmitri Karamazov would have behaved in such circumstances, if he really had brought himself to put away the money.
“At the first temptation—for instance, to entertain the woman with whom he had already squandered half the money—he would have unpicked his little bag and have taken out some hundred roubles, for why should he have taken back precisely half the money, that is, fifteen hundred roubles? why not fourteen hundred?
He could just as well have said then that he was not a thief, because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles.
Then another time he would have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred, and then a third, and then a fourth, and before the end of the month he would have taken the last note but one, feeling that if he took back only a hundred it would answer the purpose, for a thief would have stolen it all.
And then he would have looked at this last note, and have said to himself, ‘It’s really not worth while to give back one hundred; let’s spend that, too!’ That’s how the real Dmitri Karamazov, as we know him, would have behaved.
One cannot imagine anything more incongruous with the actual fact than this legend of the little bag.
Nothing could be more inconceivable.
An Historical Survey “The medical experts have striven to convince us that the prisoner is out of his mind and, in fact, a maniac.
I maintain that he is in his right mind, and that if he had not been, he would have behaved more cleverly.
As for his being a maniac, that I would agree with, but only in one point, that is, his fixed idea about the three thousand.
Yet I think one might find a much simpler cause than his tendency to insanity.
For my part I agree thoroughly with the young doctor who maintained that the prisoner’s mental faculties have always been normal, and that he has only been irritable and exasperated.
The object of the prisoner’s continual and violent anger was not the sum itself; there was a special motive at the bottom of it.
That motive is jealousy!” Here Ippolit Kirillovitch described at length the prisoner’s fatal passion for Grushenka.
He began from the moment when the prisoner went to the “young person’s” lodgings “to beat her”—“I use his own expression,” the prosecutor explained—“but instead of beating her, he remained there, at her feet.
That was the beginning of the passion.
At the same time the prisoner’s father was captivated by the same young person—a strange and fatal coincidence, for they both lost their hearts to her simultaneously, though both had known her before.
And she inspired in both of them the most violent, characteristically Karamazov passion.
We have her own confession: ‘I was laughing at both of them.’ Yes, the sudden desire to make a jest of them came over her, and she conquered both of them at once.
The old man, who worshiped money, at once set aside three thousand roubles as a reward for one visit from her, but soon after that, he would have been happy to lay his property and his name at her feet, if only she would become his lawful wife.
We have good evidence of this.
As for the prisoner, the tragedy of his fate is evident; it is before us.
But such was the young person’s ‘game.’ The enchantress gave the unhappy young man no hope until the last moment, when he knelt before her, stretching out hands that were already stained with the blood of his father and rival.
It was in that position that he was arrested.
“The talented young man, to whom I have referred already, Mr.
Rakitin, characterized this heroine in brief and impressive terms: ‘She was disillusioned early in life, deceived and ruined by a betrothed, who seduced and abandoned her.
She was left in poverty, cursed by her respectable family, and taken under the protection of a wealthy old man, whom she still, however, considers as her benefactor.
There was perhaps much that was good in her young heart, but it was embittered too early.
She grew sarcastic and resentful against society.’ After this sketch of her character it may well be understood that she might laugh at both of them simply from mischief, from malice.
“After a month of hopeless love and moral degradation, during which he betrayed his betrothed and appropriated money entrusted to his honor, the prisoner was driven almost to frenzy, almost to madness by continual jealousy—and of whom?
And the worst of it was that the crazy old man was alluring and enticing the object of his affection by means of that very three thousand roubles, which the son looked upon as his own property, part of his inheritance from his mother, of which his father was cheating him.
It was not the money, but the fact that this money was used with such revolting cynicism to ruin his happiness!” Then the prosecutor went on to describe how the idea of murdering his father had entered the prisoner’s head, and illustrated his theory with facts.
Ah, he likes being always surrounded with company, and he likes to tell his companions everything, even his most diabolical and dangerous ideas; he likes to share every thought with others, and expects, for some reason, that those he confides in will meet him with perfect sympathy, enter into all his troubles and anxieties, take his part and not oppose him in anything.
“I cannot positively assert,” the prosecutor continued, “that the prisoner fully intended to murder his father before that incident.
Yet the idea had several times presented itself to him, and he had deliberated on it—for that we have facts, witnesses, and his own words.
I confess, gentlemen of the jury,” he added, “that till to-day I have been uncertain whether to attribute to the prisoner conscious premeditation.
I was firmly convinced that he had pictured the fatal moment beforehand, but had only pictured it, contemplating it as a possibility.
He had not definitely considered when and how he might commit the crime.
“But I was only uncertain till to-day, till that fatal document was presented to the court just now.
You yourselves heard that young lady’s exclamation, ‘It is the plan, the program of the murder!’ That is how she defined that miserable, drunken letter of the unhappy prisoner.
And, in fact, from that letter we see that the whole fact of the murder was premeditated.
It was written two days before, and so we know now for a fact that, forty-eight hours before the perpetration of his terrible design, the prisoner swore that, if he could not get money next day, he would murder his father in order to take the envelope with the notes from under his pillow, as soon as Ivan had left.
‘As soon as Ivan had gone away’—you hear that; so he had thought everything out, weighing every circumstance, and he carried it all out just as he had written it.
The proof of premeditation is conclusive; the crime must have been committed for the sake of the money, that is stated clearly, that is written and signed.
The prisoner does not deny his signature.
But that does not diminish the value of the letter, quite the contrary; he wrote when drunk what he had planned when sober.
A man who premeditates such a crime is silent and keeps it to himself.
Afterwards he talked less about it.
On the evening he wrote that letter at the ‘Metropolis’ tavern, contrary to his custom he was silent, though he had been drinking.
He did not play billiards, he sat in a corner, talked to no one.
He did indeed turn a shopman out of his seat, but that was done almost unconsciously, because he could never enter a tavern without making a disturbance.
It is true that after he had taken the final decision, he must have felt apprehensive that he had talked too much about his design beforehand, and that this might lead to his arrest and prosecution afterwards.
He believed in his star, you know!
I must confess, too, that he did a great deal to avoid the fatal catastrophe.
‘To-morrow I shall try and borrow the money from every one,’ as he writes in his peculiar language, ‘and if they won’t give it to me, there will be bloodshed.’” Here Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to a detailed description of all Mitya’s efforts to borrow the money.
He described his visit to Samsonov, his journey to Lyagavy.
“Harassed, jeered at, hungry, after selling his watch to pay for the journey (though he tells us he had fifteen hundred roubles on him—a likely story), tortured by jealousy at having left the object of his affections in the town, suspecting that she would go to Fyodor Pavlovitch in his absence, he returned at last to the town, to find, to his joy, that she had not been near his father.
He accompanied her himself to her protector. (Strange to say, he doesn’t seem to have been jealous of Samsonov, which is psychologically interesting.) Then he hastens back to his ambush in the back gardens, and there learns that Smerdyakov is in a fit, that the other servant is ill—the coast is clear and he knows the ‘signals’—what a temptation!
Still he resists it; he goes off to a lady who has for some time been residing in the town, and who is highly esteemed among us, Madame Hohlakov.
“Had the maid told him that her mistress was at Mokroe with her former lover, nothing would have happened.
But she lost her head, she could only swear and protest her ignorance, and if the prisoner did not kill her on the spot, it was only because he flew in pursuit of his false mistress.
But since he had been contemplating his plan and preparing himself for it for a whole month, he would snatch up anything like a weapon that caught his eye.
He had realized for a month past that any object of the kind would serve as a weapon, so he instantly, without hesitation, recognized that it would serve his purpose.
So it was by no means unconsciously, by no means involuntarily, that he snatched up that fatal pestle.
And then we find him in his father’s garden—the coast is clear, there are no witnesses, darkness and jealousy.
The suspicion that she was there, with him, with his rival, in his arms, and perhaps laughing at him at that moment—took his breath away.
And it was not mere suspicion, the deception was open, obvious.
She must be there, in that lighted room, she must be behind the screen; and the unhappy man would have us believe that he stole up to the window, peeped respectfully in, and discreetly withdrew, for fear something terrible and immoral should happen.
And he tries to persuade us of that, us, who understand his character, who know his state of mind at the moment, and that he knew the signals by which he could at once enter the house.” At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch broke off to discuss exhaustively the suspected connection of Smerdyakov with the murder.
He did this very circumstantially, and every one realized that, although he professed to despise that suspicion, he thought the subject of great importance.
A Treatise On Smerdyakov “To begin with, what was the source of this suspicion?” (Ippolit Kirillovitch began.) “The first person who cried out that Smerdyakov had committed the murder was the prisoner himself at the moment of his arrest, yet from that time to this he had not brought forward a single fact to confirm the charge, nor the faintest suggestion of a fact.
The charge is confirmed by three persons only—the two brothers of the prisoner and Madame Svyetlov.
The elder of these brothers expressed his suspicions only to-day, when he was undoubtedly suffering from brain fever.
But we know that for the last two months he has completely shared our conviction of his brother’s guilt and did not attempt to combat that idea.
The younger brother has admitted that he has not the slightest fact to support his notion of Smerdyakov’s guilt, and has only been led to that conclusion from the prisoner’s own words and the expression of his face.
Yes, that astounding piece of evidence has been brought forward twice to-day by him.
Madame Svyetlov was even more astounding.
And yet the theory of Smerdyakov’s guilt has been noised about, has been and is still maintained.
“He spoke to me himself of his spiritual condition during the last few days at his father’s house,” Ippolit Kirillovitch explained; “but others too have borne witness to it—the prisoner himself, his brother, and the servant Grigory—that is, all who knew him well.
“Moreover, Smerdyakov, whose health was shaken by his attacks of epilepsy, had not the courage of a chicken.
‘He fell at my feet and kissed them,’ the prisoner himself has told us, before he realized how damaging such a statement was to himself.
‘He is an epileptic chicken,’ he declared about him in his characteristic language.
And the prisoner chose him for his confidant (we have his own word for it) and he frightened him into consenting at last to act as a spy for him.
In that capacity he deceived his master, revealing to the prisoner the existence of the envelope with the notes in it and the signals by means of which he could get into the house.
‘He would have killed me, I could see that he would have killed me,’ he said at the inquiry, trembling and shaking even before us, though his tormentor was by that time arrested and could do him no harm.
‘He suspected me at every instant.
In fear and trembling I hastened to tell him every secret to pacify him, that he might see that I had not deceived him and let me off alive.’ Those are his own words.
I wrote them down and I remember them.
‘When he began shouting at me, I would fall on my knees.’ “He was naturally very honest and enjoyed the complete confidence of his master, ever since he had restored him some money he had lost.
So it may be supposed that the poor fellow suffered pangs of remorse at having deceived his master, whom he loved as his benefactor.
Persons severely afflicted with epilepsy are, so the most skillful doctors tell us, always prone to continual and morbid self-reproach.
They worry over their ‘wickedness,’ they are tormented by pangs of conscience, often entirely without cause; they exaggerate and often invent all sorts of faults and crimes.
And here we have a man of that type who had really been driven to wrong-doing by terror and intimidation.
“He had, besides, a strong presentiment that something terrible would be the outcome of the situation that was developing before his eyes.
When Ivan Fyodorovitch was leaving for Moscow, just before the catastrophe, Smerdyakov besought him to remain, though he was too timid to tell him plainly what he feared.
He confined himself to hints, but his hints were not understood.
“It must be observed that he looked on Ivan Fyodorovitch as a protector, whose presence in the house was a guarantee that no harm would come to pass.
Remember the phrase in Dmitri Karamazov’s drunken letter, ‘I shall kill the old man, if only Ivan goes away.’ So Ivan Fyodorovitch’s presence seemed to every one a guarantee of peace and order in the house.
“But he went away, and within an hour of his young master’s departure Smerdyakov was taken with an epileptic fit.
But that’s perfectly intelligible.
Here I must mention that Smerdyakov, oppressed by terror and despair of a sort, had felt during those last few days that one of the fits from which he had suffered before at moments of strain, might be coming upon him again.
The day and hour of such an attack cannot, of course, be foreseen, but every epileptic can feel beforehand that he is likely to have one.
And so, as soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch had driven out of the yard, Smerdyakov, depressed by his lonely and unprotected position, went to the cellar.
He went down the stairs wondering if he would have a fit or not, and what if it were to come upon him at once.
And that very apprehension, that very wonder, brought on the spasm in his throat that always precedes such attacks, and he fell unconscious into the cellar.
And in this perfectly natural occurrence people try to detect a suspicion, a hint that he was shamming an attack _on purpose_.
But, if it were on purpose, the question arises at once, what was his motive?
What was he reckoning on?
I say nothing about medicine: science, I am told, may go astray: the doctors were not able to discriminate between the counterfeit and the real.
That may be so, but answer me one question: what motive had he for such a counterfeit?
Could he, had he been plotting the murder, have desired to attract the attention of the household by having a fit just before?
“You see, gentlemen of the jury, on the night of the murder, there were five persons in Fyodor Pavlovitch’s—Fyodor Pavlovitch himself (but he did not kill himself, that’s evident); then his servant, Grigory, but he was almost killed himself; the third person was Grigory’s wife, Marfa Ignatyevna, but it would be simply shameful to imagine her murdering her master.
Two persons are left—the prisoner and Smerdyakov.
But, if we are to believe the prisoner’s statement that he is not the murderer, then Smerdyakov must have been, for there is no other alternative, no one else can be found.
That is what accounts for the artful, astounding accusation against the unhappy idiot who committed suicide yesterday.
Had a shadow of suspicion rested on any one else, had there been any sixth person, I am persuaded that even the prisoner would have been ashamed to accuse Smerdyakov, and would have accused that sixth person, for to charge Smerdyakov with that murder is perfectly absurd.
“Gentlemen, let us lay aside psychology, let us lay aside medicine, let us even lay aside logic, let us turn only to the facts and see what the facts tell us.
If Smerdyakov killed him, how did he do it?
Alone or with the assistance of the prisoner?
Let us consider the first alternative—that he did it alone.
If he had killed him it must have been with some object, for some advantage to himself.
But not having a shadow of the motive that the prisoner had for the murder—hatred, jealousy, and so on—Smerdyakov could only have murdered him for the sake of gain, in order to appropriate the three thousand roubles he had seen his master put in the envelope.
And yet he tells another person—and a person most closely interested, that is, the prisoner—everything about the money and the signals, where the envelope lay, what was written on it, what it was tied up with, and, above all, told him of those signals by which he could enter the house.
Did he do this simply to betray himself, or to invite to the same enterprise one who would be anxious to get that envelope for himself?
‘Yes,’ I shall be told, ‘but he betrayed it from fear.’ But how do you explain this?
A man who could conceive such an audacious, savage act, and carry it out, tells facts which are known to no one else in the world, and which, if he held his tongue, no one would ever have guessed!
“No, however cowardly he might be, if he had plotted such a crime, nothing would have induced him to tell any one about the envelope and the signals, for that was as good as betraying himself beforehand.
He would have invented something, he would have told some lie if he had been forced to give information, but he would have been silent about that.
For, on the other hand, if he had said nothing about the money, but had committed the murder and stolen the money, no one in the world could have charged him with murder for the sake of robbery, since no one but he had seen the money, no one but he knew of its existence in the house.
Even if he had been accused of the murder, it could only have been thought that he had committed it from some other motive.
But since no one had observed any such motive in him beforehand, and every one saw, on the contrary, that his master was fond of him and honored him with his confidence, he would, of course, have been the last to be suspected.
People would have suspected first the man who had a motive, a man who had himself declared he had such motives, who had made no secret of it; they would, in fact, have suspected the son of the murdered man, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.
Had Smerdyakov killed and robbed him, and the son been accused of it, that would, of course, have suited Smerdyakov.
Yet are we to believe that, though plotting the murder, he told that son, Dmitri, about the money, the envelope, and the signals?
“When the day of the murder planned by Smerdyakov came, we have him falling downstairs in a _feigned_ fit—with what object?
In the first place that Grigory, who had been intending to take his medicine, might put it off and remain on guard, seeing there was no one to look after the house, and, in the second place, I suppose, that his master seeing that there was no one to guard him, and in terror of a visit from his son, might redouble his vigilance and precaution.
And, most of all, I suppose that he, Smerdyakov, disabled by the fit, might be carried from the kitchen, where he always slept, apart from all the rest, and where he could go in and out as he liked, to Grigory’s room at the other end of the lodge, where he was always put, shut off by a screen three paces from their own bed.
This was the immemorial custom established by his master and the kind-hearted Marfa Ignatyevna, whenever he had a fit.
There, lying behind the screen, he would most likely, to keep up the sham, have begun groaning, and so keeping them awake all night (as Grigory and his wife testified).
And all this, we are to believe, that he might more conveniently get up and murder his master!
“But I shall be told that he shammed illness on purpose that he might not be suspected and that he told the prisoner of the money and the signals to tempt him to commit the murder, and when he had murdered him and had gone away with the money, making a noise, most likely, and waking people, Smerdyakov got up, am I to believe, and went in—what for?
Gentlemen, are you laughing?
I am ashamed to put forward such suggestions, but, incredible as it seems, that’s just what the prisoner alleges.
When he had left the house, had knocked Grigory down and raised an alarm, he tells us Smerdyakov got up, went in and murdered his master and stole the money!
I won’t press the point that Smerdyakov could hardly have reckoned on this beforehand, and have foreseen that the furious and exasperated son would simply come to peep in respectfully, though he knew the signals, and beat a retreat, leaving Smerdyakov his booty.
Gentlemen of the jury, I put this question to you in earnest; when was the moment when Smerdyakov could have committed his crime?
“But, perhaps, the fit was a real one, the sick man suddenly recovered, heard a shout, and went out.
He looked about him and said, ‘Why not go and kill the master?’ And how did he know what had happened, since he had been lying unconscious till that moment?
“‘Quite so,’ some astute people will tell me, ‘but what if they were in agreement?
What if they murdered him together and shared the money—what then?’ A weighty question, truly!
And the facts to confirm it are astounding.
One commits the murder and takes all the trouble while his accomplice lies on one side shamming a fit, apparently to arouse suspicion in every one, alarm in his master and alarm in Grigory.
It would be interesting to know what motives could have induced the two accomplices to form such an insane plan.
Supposing that he did agree, it would still follow that Dmitri Karamazov is the murderer and the instigator, and Smerdyakov is only a passive accomplice, and not even an accomplice, but merely acquiesced against his will through terror.
As soon as he is arrested the prisoner instantly throws all the blame on Smerdyakov, not accusing him of being his accomplice, but of being himself the murderer.
‘He murdered and robbed him.
It was the work of his hands.’ Strange sort of accomplices who begin to accuse one another at once!
And think of the risk for Karamazov.
After committing the murder while his accomplice lay in bed, he throws the blame on the invalid, who might well have resented it and in self-preservation might well have confessed the truth.
For he might well have seen that the court would at once judge how far he was responsible, and so he might well have reckoned that if he were punished, it would be far less severely than the real murderer.
But in that case he would have been certain to make a confession, yet he has not done so.
Smerdyakov never hinted at their complicity, though the actual murderer persisted in accusing him and declaring that he had committed the crime alone.
“What’s more, Smerdyakov at the inquiry volunteered the statement that it was _he_ who had told the prisoner of the envelope of notes and of the signals, and that, but for him, he would have known nothing about them.
If he had really been a guilty accomplice, would he so readily have made this statement at the inquiry?
On the contrary, he would have tried to conceal it, to distort the facts or minimize them.
But he was far from distorting or minimizing them.
No one but an innocent man, who had no fear of being charged with complicity, could have acted as he did.
And in a fit of melancholy arising from his disease and this catastrophe he hanged himself yesterday.
He left a note written in his peculiar language, ‘I destroy myself of my own will and inclination so as to throw no blame on any one.’ What would it have cost him to add: ‘I am the murderer, not Karamazov’?
Did his conscience lead him to suicide and not to avowing his guilt?
Notes for three thousand roubles were brought into the court just now, and we were told that they were the same that lay in the envelope now on the table before us, and that the witness had received them from Smerdyakov the day before.
But I need not recall the painful scene, though I will make one or two comments, selecting such trivial ones as might not be obvious at first sight to every one, and so may be overlooked.
In the first place, Smerdyakov must have given back the money and hanged himself yesterday from remorse.
And only yesterday he confessed his guilt to Ivan Karamazov, as the latter informs us.
If it were not so, indeed, why should Ivan Fyodorovitch have kept silence till now?
And so, if he has confessed, then why, I ask again, did he not avow the whole truth in the last letter he left behind, knowing that the innocent prisoner had to face this terrible ordeal the next day?
A week ago, quite by chance, the fact came to the knowledge of myself and two other persons in this court that Ivan Fyodorovitch had sent two five per cent. coupons of five thousand each—that is, ten thousand in all—to the chief town of the province to be changed.
I only mention this to point out that any one may have money, and that it can’t be proved that these notes are the same as were in Fyodor Pavlovitch’s envelope.
“Ivan Karamazov, after receiving yesterday a communication of such importance from the real murderer, did not stir.
I think I have a right to conjecture why.
His health had been giving way for a week past: he had admitted to a doctor and to his most intimate friends that he was suffering from hallucinations and seeing phantoms of the dead: he was on the eve of the attack of brain fever by which he has been stricken down to-day.
In this condition he suddenly heard of Smerdyakov’s death, and at once reflected, ‘The man is dead, I can throw the blame on him and save my brother.
I will take a roll of notes and say that Smerdyakov gave them me before his death.’ You will say that was dishonorable: it’s dishonorable to slander even the dead, and even to save a brother.
True, but what if he slandered him unconsciously?
What if, finally unhinged by the sudden news of the valet’s death, he imagined it really was so?
You saw the recent scene: you have seen the witness’s condition.
He was standing up and was speaking, but where was his mind?
“Then followed the document, the prisoner’s letter written two days before the crime, and containing a complete program of the murder.
The crime was committed precisely according to this program, and by no other than the writer of it.
Yes, gentlemen of the jury, it went off without a hitch!
He did not run respectfully and timidly away from his father’s window, though he was firmly convinced that the object of his affections was with him.
No, that is absurd and unlikely!
He went in and murdered him.
Most likely he killed him in anger, burning with resentment, as soon as he looked on his hated rival.
But having killed him, probably with one blow of the brass pestle, and having convinced himself, after careful search, that she was not there, he did not, however, forget to put his hand under the pillow and take out the envelope, the torn cover of which lies now on the table before us.
“I mention this fact that you may note one, to my thinking, very characteristic circumstance.
Had he been an experienced murderer and had he committed the murder for the sake of gain only, would he have left the torn envelope on the floor as it was found, beside the corpse?
Had it been Smerdyakov, for instance, murdering his master to rob him, he would have simply carried away the envelope with him, without troubling himself to open it over his victim’s corpse, for he would have known for certain that the notes were in the envelope—they had been put in and sealed up in his presence—and had he taken the envelope with him, no one would ever have known of the robbery.
I ask you, gentlemen, would Smerdyakov have behaved in that way?
Would he have left the envelope on the floor?
“No, this was the action of a frantic murderer, a murderer who was not a thief and had never stolen before that day, who snatched the notes from under the pillow, not like a thief stealing them, but as though seizing his own property from the thief who had stolen it.
For that was the idea which had become almost an insane obsession in Dmitri Karamazov in regard to that money.
And pouncing upon the envelope, which he had never seen before, he tore it open to make sure whether the money was in it, and ran away with the money in his pocket, even forgetting to consider that he had left an astounding piece of evidence against himself in that torn envelope on the floor.
All because it was Karamazov, not Smerdyakov, he didn’t think, he didn’t reflect, and how should he?
“The prisoner, moved by pity, leapt down to look at him.
Would you believe it, he tells us that he leapt down out of pity, out of compassion, to see whether he could do anything for him.
Was that a moment to show compassion?
Any other feeling, any other motive would be unnatural.
Note that he took trouble over Grigory, wiped his head with his handkerchief and, convincing himself he was dead, he ran to the house of his mistress, dazed and covered with blood.
How was it he never thought that he was covered with blood and would be at once detected?
But the prisoner himself assures us that he did not even notice that he was covered with blood.
That may be believed, that is very possible, that always happens at such moments with criminals.
On one point they will show diabolical cunning, while another will escape them altogether.
But he was thinking at that moment of one thing only—where was _she_?
He wanted to find out at once where she was, so he ran to her lodging and learnt an unexpected and astounding piece of news—she had gone off to Mokroe to meet her first lover.” Chapter IX.
Ippolit Kirillovitch had chosen the historical method of exposition, beloved by all nervous orators, who find in its limitation a check on their own eager rhetoric.
At this moment in his speech he went off into a dissertation on Grushenka’s “first lover,” and brought forward several interesting thoughts on this theme.
“Karamazov, who had been frantically jealous of every one, collapsed, so to speak, and effaced himself at once before this first lover.
What makes it all the more strange is that he seems to have hardly thought of this formidable rival.
But he had looked upon him as a remote danger, and Karamazov always lives in the present.
Possibly he regarded him as a fiction.
But his wounded heart grasped instantly that the woman had been concealing this new rival and deceiving him, because he was anything but a fiction to her, because he was the one hope of her life.
Grasping this instantly, he resigned himself.
“Gentlemen of the jury, I cannot help dwelling on this unexpected trait in the prisoner’s character.
He suddenly evinces an irresistible desire for justice, a respect for woman and a recognition of her right to love.
And he, luckless man, what could he give her now, what could he offer her?
“Karamazov felt all this, knew that all ways were barred to him by his crime and that he was a criminal under sentence, and not a man with life before him!
And so he instantly flew to one frantic plan, which, to a man of Karamazov’s character, must have appeared the one inevitable way out of his terrible position.
He ran for the pistols he had left in pledge with his friend Perhotin and on the way, as he ran, he pulled out of his pocket the money, for the sake of which he had stained his hands with his father’s gore.
Karamazov would die, Karamazov would shoot himself and it should be remembered!
‘To her, to her! and there, oh, there I will give a feast to the whole world, such as never was before, that will be remembered and talked of long after!
In the midst of shouts of wild merriment, reckless gypsy songs and dances I shall raise the glass and drink to the woman I adore and her new-found happiness!
She will remember Mitya Karamazov sometimes, she will see how Mitya loved her, she will feel for Mitya!’ “Here we see in excess a love of effect, a romantic despair and sentimentality, and the wild recklessness of the Karamazovs.
Yes, but there is something else, gentlemen of the jury, something that cries out in the soul, throbs incessantly in the mind, and poisons the heart unto death—that _something_ is conscience, gentlemen of the jury, its judgment, its terrible torments!
The pistol will settle everything, the pistol is the only way out!
But _beyond_—I don’t know whether Karamazov wondered at that moment ‘What lies beyond,’ and whether Karamazov could, like Hamlet, wonder ‘What lies beyond.’ No, gentlemen of the jury, they have their Hamlets, but we still have our Karamazovs!” Here Ippolit Kirillovitch drew a minute picture of Mitya’s preparations, the scene at Perhotin’s, at the shop, with the drivers.
He quoted numerous words and actions, confirmed by witnesses, and the picture made a terrible impression on the audience.
The guilt of this harassed and desperate man stood out clear and convincing, when the facts were brought together.
“What need had he of precaution?
Two or three times he almost confessed, hinted at it, all but spoke out.” (Then followed the evidence given by witnesses.) “He even cried out to the peasant who drove him, ‘Do you know, you are driving a murderer!’ But it was impossible for him to speak out, he had to get to Mokroe and there to finish his romance.
But what was awaiting the luckless man?
Almost from the first minute at Mokroe he saw that his invincible rival was perhaps by no means so invincible, that the toast to their new-found happiness was not desired and would not be acceptable.
But you know the facts, gentlemen of the jury, from the preliminary inquiry.
Karamazov’s triumph over his rival was complete and his soul passed into quite a new phase, perhaps the most terrible phase through which his soul has passed or will pass.
“One may say with certainty, gentlemen of the jury,” the prosecutor continued, “that outraged nature and the criminal heart bring their own vengeance more completely than any earthly justice.
What’s more, justice and punishment on earth positively alleviate the punishment of nature and are, indeed, essential to the soul of the criminal at such moments, as its salvation from despair.
For I cannot imagine the horror and moral suffering of Karamazov when he learnt that she loved him, that for his sake she had rejected her first lover, that she was summoning him, Mitya, to a new life, that she was promising him happiness—and when?
When everything was over for him and nothing was possible!
“By the way, I will note in parenthesis a point of importance for the light it throws on the prisoner’s position at the moment.
This woman, this love of his, had been till the last moment, till the very instant of his arrest, a being unattainable, passionately desired by him but unattainable.
Yet why did he not shoot himself then, why did he relinquish his design and even forget where his pistol was?
It was just that passionate desire for love and the hope of satisfying it that restrained him.
Throughout their revels he kept close to his adored mistress, who was at the banquet with him and was more charming and fascinating to him than ever—he did not leave her side, abasing himself in his homage before her.
“His passion might well, for a moment, stifle not only the fear of arrest, but even the torments of conscience.
I can picture the state of mind of the criminal hopelessly enslaved by these influences—first, the influence of drink, of noise and excitement, of the thud of the dance and the scream of the song, and of her, flushed with wine, singing and dancing and laughing to him!
Secondly, the hope in the background that the fatal end might still be far off, that not till next morning, at least, they would come and take him.
I imagine that he felt something like what criminals feel when they are being taken to the scaffold.
They have another long, long street to pass down and at walking pace, past thousands of people.
Then there will be a turning into another street and only at the end of that street the dread place of execution!
I fancy that at the beginning of the journey the condemned man, sitting on his shameful cart, must feel that he has infinite life still before him.
The houses recede, the cart moves on—oh, that’s nothing, it’s still far to the turning into the second street and he still looks boldly to right and to left at those thousands of callously curious people with their eyes fixed on him, and he still fancies that he is just such a man as they.
And so to the very end, to the very scaffold.
“This I imagine is how it was with Karamazov then.
He had been in Mokroe more than once before, he had caroused there for two days together already, he knew the old big house with all its passages and outbuildings.
Why, the catastrophe may take place at once, of course; he hadn’t yet considered how to meet it, he hadn’t the time, his head was throbbing and his heart was with _her_, but money—money was indispensable in any case!
Perhaps such foresight at such a moment may strike you as unnatural?
But he assures us himself that a month before, at a critical and exciting moment, he had halved his money and sewn it up in a little bag.
And though that was not true, as we shall prove directly, it shows the idea was a familiar one to Karamazov, he had contemplated it.
What’s more, when he declared at the inquiry that he had put fifteen hundred roubles in a bag (which never existed) he may have invented that little bag on the inspiration of the moment, because he had two hours before divided his money and hidden half of it at Mokroe till morning, in case of emergency, simply not to have it on himself.
Two extremes, gentlemen of the jury, remember that Karamazov can contemplate two extremes and both at once.
It may still be there or it may have disappeared next day and be in the prisoner’s hands now.
In any case he was at her side, on his knees before her, she was lying on the bed, he had his hands stretched out to her and he had so entirely forgotten everything that he did not even hear the men coming to arrest him.
He was caught unawares and confronted with his judges, the arbiters of his destiny.
“Gentlemen of the jury, there are moments in the execution of our duties when it is terrible for us to face a man, terrible on his account, too!
This purgatory of the spirit, this animal thirst for self-preservation, these humiliating moments of the human soul, are awful, and sometimes arouse horror and compassion for the criminal even in the lawyer.
And this was what we all witnessed then.
“At first he was thunderstruck and in his terror dropped some very compromising phrases.
I’ve deserved it!’ But he quickly restrained himself.
He had not prepared what he was to say, what answer he was to make, he had nothing but a bare denial ready.
‘I am not guilty of my father’s death.’ That was his fence for the moment and behind it he hoped to throw up a barricade of some sort.
His first compromising exclamations he hastened to explain by declaring that he was responsible for the death of the servant Grigory only.
‘Of that bloodshed I am guilty, but who has killed my father, gentlemen, who has killed him?
Who can have killed him, _if not I_?’ Do you hear, he asked us that, us, who had come to ask him that question!
Do you hear that phrase uttered with such premature haste—‘if not I’—the animal cunning, the naïveté, the Karamazov impatience of it?
I wanted to kill him, gentlemen, I wanted to kill him,’ he hastens to admit (he was in a hurry, in a terrible hurry), ‘but still I am not guilty, it is not I murdered him.’ He concedes to us that he wanted to murder him, as though to say, you can see for yourselves how truthful I am, so you’ll believe all the sooner that I didn’t murder him.
Oh, in such cases the criminal is often amazingly shallow and credulous.
“At that point one of the lawyers asked him, as it were incidentally, the most simple question, ‘Wasn’t it Smerdyakov killed him?’ Then, as we expected, he was horribly angry at our having anticipated him and caught him unawares, before he had time to pave the way to choose and snatch the moment when it would be most natural to bring in Smerdyakov’s name.
He rushed at once to the other extreme, as he always does, and began to assure us that Smerdyakov could not have killed him, was not capable of it.
But don’t believe him, that was only his cunning; he didn’t really give up the idea of Smerdyakov; on the contrary, he meant to bring him forward again; for, indeed, he had no one else to bring forward, but he would do that later, because for the moment that line was spoiled for him.
He would bring him forward perhaps next day, or even a few days later, choosing an opportunity to cry out to us, ‘You know I was more skeptical about Smerdyakov than you, you remember that yourselves, but now I am convinced.
He killed him, he must have done!’ And for the present he falls back upon a gloomy and irritable denial.
Impatience and anger prompted him, however, to the most inept and incredible explanation of how he looked into his father’s window and how he respectfully withdrew.
The worst of it was that he was unaware of the position of affairs, of the evidence given by Grigory.
“We proceeded to search him.
The search angered, but encouraged him, the whole three thousand had not been found on him, only half of it.
And no doubt only at that moment of angry silence, the fiction of the little bag first occurred to him.
No doubt he was conscious himself of the improbability of the story and strove painfully to make it sound more likely, to weave it into a romance that would sound plausible.
In such cases the first duty, the chief task of the investigating lawyers, is to prevent the criminal being prepared, to pounce upon him unexpectedly so that he may blurt out his cherished ideas in all their simplicity, improbability and inconsistency.
The criminal can only be made to speak by the sudden and apparently incidental communication of some new fact, of some circumstance of great importance in the case, of which he had no previous idea and could not have foreseen.
We had such a fact in readiness—that was Grigory’s evidence about the open door through which the prisoner had run out.
He had completely forgotten about that door and had not even suspected that Grigory could have seen it.
He leapt up and shouted to us, ‘Then Smerdyakov murdered him, it was Smerdyakov!’ and so betrayed the basis of the defense he was keeping back, and betrayed it in its most improbable shape, for Smerdyakov could only have committed the murder after he had knocked Grigory down and run away.
When we told him that Grigory saw the door was open before he fell down, and had heard Smerdyakov behind the screen as he came out of his bedroom—Karamazov was positively crushed.
My esteemed and witty colleague, Nikolay Parfenovitch, told me afterwards that he was almost moved to tears at the sight of him.
And to improve matters, the prisoner hastened to tell us about the much-talked-of little bag—so be it, you shall hear this romance!
“Gentlemen of the jury, I have told you already why I consider this romance not only an absurdity, but the most improbable invention that could have been brought forward in the circumstances.
If one tried for a bet to invent the most unlikely story, one could hardly find anything more incredible.
The worst of such stories is that the triumphant romancers can always be put to confusion and crushed by the very details in which real life is so rich and which these unhappy and involuntary story-tellers neglect as insignificant trifles.
Oh, they have no thought to spare for such details, their minds are concentrated on their grand invention as a whole, and fancy any one daring to pull them up for a trifle!
The prisoner was asked the question, ‘Where did you get the stuff for your little bag and who made it for you?’ ‘I made it myself.’ ‘And where did you get the linen?’ The prisoner was positively offended, he thought it almost insulting to ask him such a trivial question, and would you believe it, his resentment was genuine!
‘I tore it off my shirt.’ ‘Then we shall find that shirt among your linen to-morrow, with a piece torn off.’ And only fancy, gentlemen of the jury, if we really had found that torn shirt (and how could we have failed to find it in his chest of drawers or trunk?) that would have been a fact, a material fact in support of his statement!
But he was incapable of that reflection.
‘I don’t remember, it may not have been off my shirt, I sewed it up in one of my landlady’s caps.’ ‘What sort of a cap?’ ‘It was an old cotton rag of hers lying about.’ ‘And do you remember that clearly?’ ‘No, I don’t.’ And he was angry, very angry, and yet imagine not remembering it!
At the most terrible moments of man’s life, for instance when he is being led to execution, he remembers just such trifles.
He will forget anything but some green roof that has flashed past him on the road, or a jackdaw on a cross—that he will remember.
He concealed the making of that little bag from his household, he must have remembered his humiliating fear that some one might come in and find him needle in hand, how at the slightest sound he slipped behind the screen (there is a screen in his lodgings).
“But, gentlemen of the jury, why do I tell you all this, all these details, trifles?” cried Ippolit Kirillovitch suddenly.
“Just because the prisoner still persists in these absurdities to this moment.
He has not explained anything since that fatal night two months ago, he has not added one actual illuminating fact to his former fantastic statements; all those are trivialities.
Are we jackals thirsting for human blood?
Show us a single fact in the prisoner’s favor and we shall rejoice; but let it be a substantial, real fact, and not a conclusion drawn from the prisoner’s expression by his own brother, or that when he beat himself on the breast he must have meant to point to the little bag, in the darkness, too.
We shall rejoice at the new fact, we shall be the first to repudiate our charge, we shall hasten to repudiate it.
But now justice cries out and we persist, we cannot repudiate anything.” Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to his final peroration.
He looked as though he was in a fever, he spoke of the blood that cried for vengeance, the blood of the father murdered by his son, with the base motive of robbery!
He pointed to the tragic and glaring consistency of the facts.
“And whatever you may hear from the talented and celebrated counsel for the defense,” Ippolit Kirillovitch could not resist adding, “whatever eloquent and touching appeals may be made to your sensibilities, remember that at this moment you are in a temple of justice.
Remember that you are the champions of our justice, the champions of our holy Russia, of her principles, her family, everything that she holds sacred!
Yes, you represent Russia here at this moment, and your verdict will be heard not in this hall only but will reëcho throughout the whole of Russia, and all Russia will hear you, as her champions and her judges, and she will be encouraged or disheartened by your verdict.
Do not disappoint Russia and her expectations.
Our fatal troika dashes on in her headlong flight perhaps to destruction and in all Russia for long past men have stretched out imploring hands and called a halt to its furious reckless course.
And well it is that they stand aside, but maybe they will cease one day to do so and will form a firm wall confronting the hurrying apparition and will check the frenzied rush of our lawlessness, for the sake of their own safety, enlightenment and civilization.
When he had finished his speech, he went out hurriedly and, as I have mentioned before, almost fainted in the adjoining room.
There was no applause in the court, but serious persons were pleased.
The ladies were not so well satisfied, though even they were pleased with his eloquence, especially as they had no apprehensions as to the upshot of the trial and had full trust in Fetyukovitch.
“He will speak at last and of course carry all before him.” Every one looked at Mitya; he sat silent through the whole of the prosecutor’s speech, clenching his teeth, with his hands clasped, and his head bowed.
Only from time to time he raised his head and listened, especially when Grushenka was spoken of.
When the prosecutor mentioned Rakitin’s opinion of her, a smile of contempt and anger passed over his face and he murmured rather audibly, “The Bernards!” When Ippolit Kirillovitch described how he had questioned and tortured him at Mokroe, Mitya raised his head and listened with intense curiosity.
At one point he seemed about to jump up and cry out, but controlled himself and only shrugged his shoulders disdainfully.
People talked afterwards of the end of the speech, of the prosecutor’s feat in examining the prisoner at Mokroe, and jeered at Ippolit Kirillovitch.
“The man could not resist boasting of his cleverness,” they said.
The court was adjourned, but only for a short interval, a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes at most.
There was a hum of conversation and exclamations in the audience.
I remember some of them.
“A weighty speech,” a gentleman in one group observed gravely.
“He brought in too much psychology,” said another voice.
“But it was all true, the absolute truth!” “Yes, he is first rate at it.” “He summed it all up.” “Yes, he summed us up, too,” chimed in another voice.
“Do you remember, at the beginning of his speech, making out we were all like Fyodor Pavlovitch?” “And at the end, too.
That’s vanity.” “He is a man with a grievance, he he!” “Yes, and quick to take offense.
And there was too much rhetoric, such long sentences.” “Yes, he tries to alarm us, he kept trying to alarm us.
Do you remember about the troika?
Something about ‘They have Hamlets, but we have, so far, only Karamazovs!’ That was cleverly said!” “That was to propitiate the liberals.
Ippolit was thinking of him, I know he was.
Why not?” “Why, we’d shut up Kronstadt and not let them have any corn.
They get it from America now.” “Nonsense!” But the bell rang, all rushed to their places.
Fetyukovitch mounted the tribune.
An Argument That Cuts Both Ways All was hushed as the first words of the famous orator rang out.
The eyes of the audience were fastened upon him.
He began very simply and directly, with an air of conviction, but not the slightest trace of conceit.
He made no attempt at eloquence, at pathos, or emotional phrases.
He was like a man speaking in a circle of intimate and sympathetic friends.
His voice was a fine one, sonorous and sympathetic, and there was something genuine and simple in the very sound of it.
But every one realized at once that the speaker might suddenly rise to genuine pathos and “pierce the heart with untold power.” His language was perhaps more irregular than Ippolit Kirillovitch’s, but he spoke without long phrases, and indeed, with more precision.
One thing did not please the ladies: he kept bending forward, especially at the beginning of his speech, not exactly bowing, but as though he were about to dart at his listeners, bending his long spine in half, as though there were a spring in the middle that enabled him to bend almost at right angles.
At the beginning of his speech he spoke rather disconnectedly, without system, one may say, dealing with facts separately, though, at the end, these facts formed a whole.
His speech might be divided into two parts, the first consisting of criticism in refutation of the charge, sometimes malicious and sarcastic.
But in the second half he suddenly changed his tone, and even his manner, and at once rose to pathos.
The audience seemed on the look-out for it, and quivered with enthusiasm.
He went straight to the point, and began by saying that although he practiced in Petersburg, he had more than once visited provincial towns to defend prisoners, of whose innocence he had a conviction or at least a preconceived idea.
“That is what has happened to me in the present case,” he explained.
“From the very first accounts in the newspapers I was struck by something which strongly prepossessed me in the prisoner’s favor.
What interested me most was a fact which often occurs in legal practice, but rarely, I think, in such an extreme and peculiar form as in the present case.
I ought to formulate that peculiarity only at the end of my speech, but I will do so at the very beginning, for it is my weakness to go to work directly, not keeping my effects in reserve and economizing my material.
That may be imprudent on my part, but at least it’s sincere.
What I have in my mind is this: there is an overwhelming chain of evidence against the prisoner, and at the same time not one fact that will stand criticism, if it is examined separately.
As I followed the case more closely in the papers my idea was more and more confirmed, and I suddenly received from the prisoner’s relatives a request to undertake his defense.
I at once hurried here, and here I became completely convinced.
It was to break down this terrible chain of facts, and to show that each piece of evidence taken separately was unproved and fantastic, that I undertook the case.” So Fetyukovitch began.
“Gentlemen of the jury,” he suddenly protested, “I am new to this district.
I have no preconceived ideas.
The prisoner, a man of turbulent and unbridled temper, has not insulted me.
But he has insulted perhaps hundreds of persons in this town, and so prejudiced many people against him beforehand.
Of course I recognize that the moral sentiment of local society is justly excited against him.
The prisoner is of turbulent and violent temper.
Yet he was received in society here; he was even welcome in the family of my talented friend, the prosecutor.” (N.B.
At these words there were two or three laughs in the audience, quickly suppressed, but noticed by all.
All of us knew that the prosecutor received Mitya against his will, solely because he had somehow interested his wife—a lady of the highest virtue and moral worth, but fanciful, capricious, and fond of opposing her husband, especially in trifles.
Mitya’s visits, however, had not been frequent.) “Nevertheless I venture to suggest,” Fetyukovitch continued, “that in spite of his independent mind and just character, my opponent may have formed a mistaken prejudice against my unfortunate client.
Oh, that is so natural; the unfortunate man has only too well deserved such prejudice.
Outraged morality, and still more outraged taste, is often relentless.
We have, in the talented prosecutor’s speech, heard a stern analysis of the prisoner’s character and conduct, and his severe critical attitude to the case was evident.
And, what’s more, he went into psychological subtleties into which he could not have entered, if he had the least conscious and malicious prejudice against the prisoner.
But there are things which are even worse, even more fatal in such cases, than the most malicious and consciously unfair attitude.
It is worse if we are carried away by the artistic instinct, by the desire to create, so to speak, a romance, especially if God has endowed us with psychological insight.
Before I started on my way here, I was warned in Petersburg, and was myself aware, that I should find here a talented opponent whose psychological insight and subtlety had gained him peculiar renown in legal circles of recent years.
But profound as psychology is, it’s a knife that cuts both ways.” (Laughter among the public.) “You will, of course, forgive me my comparison; I can’t boast of eloquence.
But I will take as an example any point in the prosecutor’s speech.
“The prisoner, running away in the garden in the dark, climbed over the fence, was seized by the servant, and knocked him down with a brass pestle.
Then he jumped back into the garden and spent five minutes over the man, trying to discover whether he had killed him or not.
And the prosecutor refuses to believe the prisoner’s statement that he ran to old Grigory out of pity.
The murderer, we are told, leapt down to find out, as a precaution, whether the witness was alive or not, yet he had left in his murdered father’s study, as the prosecutor himself argues, an amazing piece of evidence in the shape of a torn envelope, with an inscription that there had been three thousand roubles in it.
‘If he had carried that envelope away with him, no one in the world would have known of that envelope and of the notes in it, and that the money had been stolen by the prisoner.’ Those are the prosecutor’s own words.
So on one side you see a complete absence of precaution, a man who has lost his head and run away in a fright, leaving that clew on the floor, and two minutes later, when he has killed another man, we are entitled to assume the most heartless and calculating foresight in him.
But even admitting this was so, it is psychological subtlety, I suppose, that discerns that under certain circumstances I become as bloodthirsty and keen-sighted as a Caucasian eagle, while at the next I am as timid and blind as a mole.
But if I am so bloodthirsty and cruelly calculating that when I kill a man I only run back to find out whether he is alive to witness against me, why should I spend five minutes looking after my victim at the risk of encountering other witnesses?
Why soak my handkerchief, wiping the blood off his head so that it may be evidence against me later?
If he were so cold-hearted and calculating, why not hit the servant on the head again and again with the same pestle so as to kill him outright and relieve himself of all anxiety about the witness?
“Again, though he ran to see whether the witness was alive, he left another witness on the path, that brass pestle which he had taken from the two women, and which they could always recognize afterwards as theirs, and prove that he had taken it from them.
And it is not as though he had forgotten it on the path, dropped it through carelessness or haste, no, he had flung away his weapon, for it was found fifteen paces from where Grigory lay.
Just because he was grieved at having killed a man, an old servant; and he flung away the pestle with a curse, as a murderous weapon.
That’s how it must have been, what other reason could he have had for throwing it so far?
And if he was capable of feeling grief and pity at having killed a man, it shows that he was innocent of his father’s murder.
Had he murdered him, he would never have run to another victim out of pity; then he would have felt differently; his thoughts would have been centered on self-preservation.
On the contrary, he would have broken his skull instead of spending five minutes looking after him.
There was room for pity and good-feeling just because his conscience had been clear till then.
Here we have a different psychology.
I have purposely resorted to this method, gentlemen of the jury, to show that you can prove anything by it.
Psychology lures even most serious people into romancing, and quite unconsciously.
I am speaking of the abuse of psychology, gentlemen.” Sounds of approval and laughter, at the expense of the prosecutor, were again audible in the court.
I will not repeat the speech in detail; I will only quote some passages from it, some leading points.
There Was No Robbery There was one point that struck every one in Fetyukovitch’s speech.
He flatly denied the existence of the fatal three thousand roubles, and consequently, the possibility of their having been stolen.
“Gentlemen of the jury,” he began.
“Every new and unprejudiced observer must be struck by a characteristic peculiarity in the present case, namely, the charge of robbery, and the complete impossibility of proving that there was anything to be stolen.
We are told that money was stolen—three thousand roubles—but whether those roubles ever existed, nobody knows.
Consider, how have we heard of that sum, and who has seen the notes?
The only person who saw them, and stated that they had been put in the envelope, was the servant, Smerdyakov.
He had spoken of it to the prisoner and his brother, Ivan Fyodorovitch, before the catastrophe.
Madame Svyetlov, too, had been told of it.
But not one of these three persons had actually seen the notes, no one but Smerdyakov had seen them.
“Here the question arises, if it’s true that they did exist, and that Smerdyakov had seen them, when did he see them for the last time?
Note, that according to Smerdyakov’s story the notes were kept under the mattress; the prisoner must have pulled them out, and yet the bed was absolutely unrumpled; that is carefully recorded in the protocol.
How could the prisoner have found the notes without disturbing the bed?
How could he have helped soiling with his blood-stained hands the fine and spotless linen with which the bed had been purposely made?
“But I shall be asked: What about the envelope on the floor?
Yes, it’s worth saying a word or two about that envelope.
I was somewhat surprised just now to hear the highly talented prosecutor declare of himself—of himself, observe—that but for that envelope, but for its being left on the floor, no one in the world would have known of the existence of that envelope and the notes in it, and therefore of the prisoner’s having stolen it.
And so that torn scrap of paper is, by the prosecutor’s own admission, the sole proof on which the charge of robbery rests, ‘otherwise no one would have known of the robbery, nor perhaps even of the money.’ But is the mere fact that that scrap of paper was lying on the floor a proof that there was money in it, and that that money had been stolen?
Yet, it will be objected, Smerdyakov had seen the money in the envelope.
I talked to Smerdyakov, and he told me that he had seen the notes two days before the catastrophe.
Then why not imagine that old Fyodor Pavlovitch, locked up alone in impatient and hysterical expectation of the object of his adoration, may have whiled away the time by breaking open the envelope and taking out the notes.
‘What’s the use of the envelope?’ he may have asked himself.
‘She won’t believe the notes are there, but when I show her the thirty rainbow-colored notes in one roll, it will make more impression, you may be sure, it will make her mouth water.’ And so he tears open the envelope, takes out the money, and flings the envelope on the floor, conscious of being the owner and untroubled by any fears of leaving evidence.
“Listen, gentlemen, could anything be more likely than this theory and such an action?
Why is it out of the question?
But if anything of the sort could have taken place, the charge of robbery falls to the ground; if there was no money, there was no theft of it.
If the envelope on the floor may be taken as evidence that there had been money in it, why may I not maintain the opposite, that the envelope was on the floor because the money had been taken from it by its owner?
“But I shall be asked what became of the money if Fyodor Pavlovitch took it out of the envelope since it was not found when the police searched the house?
In the first place, part of the money was found in the cash-box, and secondly, he might have taken it out that morning or the evening before to make some other use of it, to give or send it away; he may have changed his idea, his plan of action completely, without thinking it necessary to announce the fact to Smerdyakov beforehand.
And if there is the barest possibility of such an explanation, how can the prisoner be so positively accused of having committed murder for the sake of robbery, and of having actually carried out that robbery?
This is encroaching on the domain of romance.
If it is maintained that something has been stolen, the thing must be produced, or at least its existence must be proved beyond doubt.
“Not long ago in Petersburg a young man of eighteen, hardly more than a boy, who carried on a small business as a costermonger, went in broad daylight into a moneychanger’s shop with an ax, and with extraordinary, typical audacity killed the master of the shop and carried off fifteen hundred roubles.
Five hours later he was arrested, and, except fifteen roubles he had already managed to spend, the whole sum was found on him.
Moreover, the shopman, on his return to the shop after the murder, informed the police not only of the exact sum stolen, but even of the notes and gold coins of which that sum was made up, and those very notes and coins were found on the criminal.
This was followed by a full and genuine confession on the part of the murderer.
That’s what I call evidence, gentlemen of the jury!
In that case I know, I see, I touch the money, and cannot deny its existence.
And yet it is a question of life and death.
“Yes, I shall be told, but he was carousing that night, squandering money; he was shown to have had fifteen hundred roubles—where did he get the money?
But the very fact that only fifteen hundred could be found, and the other half of the sum could nowhere be discovered, shows that that money was not the same, and had never been in any envelope.
By strict calculation of time it was proved at the preliminary inquiry that the prisoner ran straight from those women servants to Perhotin’s without going home, and that he had been nowhere.
So he had been all the time in company and therefore could not have divided the three thousand in half and hidden half in the town.
It’s just this consideration that has led the prosecutor to assume that the money is hidden in some crevice at Mokroe.
Why not in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho, gentlemen?
Isn’t this supposition really too fantastic and too romantic?
And observe, if that supposition breaks down, the whole charge of robbery is scattered to the winds, for in that case what could have become of the other fifteen hundred roubles?
By what miracle could they have disappeared, since it’s proved the prisoner went nowhere else?
The prisoner has made a clear and unflinching statement of the source of that money, and if you will have it so, gentlemen of the jury, nothing can be more probable than that statement, and more consistent with the temper and spirit of the prisoner.
The prosecutor is charmed with his own romance.
A man of weak will, who had brought himself to take the three thousand so insultingly offered by his betrothed, could not, we are told, have set aside half and sewn it up, but would, even if he had done so, have unpicked it every two days and taken out a hundred, and so would have spent it all in a month.
All this, you will remember, was put forward in a tone that brooked no contradiction.
But what if the thing happened quite differently?
What if you’ve been weaving a romance, and about quite a different kind of man?
That’s just it, you have invented quite a different man!
“I shall be told, perhaps, there are witnesses that he spent on one day all that three thousand given him by his betrothed a month before the catastrophe, so he could not have divided the sum in half.
But who are these witnesses?
The value of their evidence has been shown in court already.
Besides, in another man’s hand a crust always seems larger, and no one of these witnesses counted that money; they all judged simply at sight.
And the witness Maximov has testified that the prisoner had twenty thousand in his hand.
You see, gentlemen of the jury, psychology is a two-edged weapon.
“A month before the catastrophe the prisoner was entrusted by Katerina Ivanovna with three thousand roubles to send off by post.
But the question is: is it true that they were entrusted to him in such an insulting and degrading way as was proclaimed just now?
The first statement made by the young lady on the subject was different, perfectly different.
In the second statement we heard only cries of resentment and revenge, cries of long-concealed hatred.
And the very fact that the witness gave her first evidence incorrectly, gives us a right to conclude that her second piece of evidence may have been incorrect also.
The prosecutor will not, dare not (his own words) touch on that story.
I will not touch on it either, but will only venture to observe that if a lofty and high-principled person, such as that highly respected young lady unquestionably is, if such a person, I say, allows herself suddenly in court to contradict her first statement, with the obvious motive of ruining the prisoner, it is clear that this evidence has been given not impartially, not coolly.
Have not we the right to assume that a revengeful woman might have exaggerated much?
Yes, she may well have exaggerated, in particular, the insult and humiliation of her offering him the money.
No, it was offered in such a way that it was possible to take it, especially for a man so easy-going as the prisoner, above all, as he expected to receive shortly from his father the three thousand roubles that he reckoned was owing to him.
It was unreflecting of him, but it was just his irresponsible want of reflection that made him so confident that his father would give him the money, that he would get it, and so could always dispatch the money entrusted to him and repay the debt.
“But the prosecutor refuses to allow that he could the same day have set aside half the money and sewn it up in a little bag.
That’s not his character, he tells us, he couldn’t have had such feelings.
But yet he talked himself of the broad Karamazov nature; he cried out about the two extremes which a Karamazov can contemplate at once.
Karamazov is just such a two-sided nature, fluctuating between two extremes, that even when moved by the most violent craving for riotous gayety, he can pull himself up, if something strikes him on the other side.
And on the other side is love—that new love which had flamed up in his heart, and for that love he needed money; oh, far more than for carousing with his mistress.
If she were to say to him, ‘I am yours, I won’t have Fyodor Pavlovitch,’ then he must have money to take her away.
That was more important than carousing.
Could a Karamazov fail to understand it?
That anxiety was just what he was suffering from—what is there improbable in his laying aside that money and concealing it in case of emergency?
“But time passed, and Fyodor Pavlovitch did not give the prisoner the expected three thousand; on the contrary, the latter heard that he meant to use this sum to seduce the woman he, the prisoner, loved.
Why should you deny the prisoner a sense of honor?
Yes, he has a sense of honor, granted that it’s misplaced, granted it’s often mistaken, yet it exists and amounts to a passion, and he has proved that.
These two questions became so acute that they drove him at last to despair.
He sent his younger brother to beg for the last time for the three thousand roubles, but without waiting for a reply, burst in himself and ended by beating the old man in the presence of witnesses.
After that he had no prospect of getting it from any one; his father would not give it him after that beating.
“The same evening he struck himself on the breast, just on the upper part of the breast where the little bag was, and swore to his brother that he had the means of not being a scoundrel, but that still he would remain a scoundrel, for he foresaw that he would not use that means, that he wouldn’t have the character, that he wouldn’t have the will-power to do it.
Why, why does the prosecutor refuse to believe the evidence of Alexey Karamazov, given so genuinely and sincerely, so spontaneously and convincingly?
And why, on the contrary, does he force me to believe in money hidden in a crevice, in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho?
“The same evening, after his talk with his brother, the prisoner wrote that fatal letter, and that letter is the chief, the most stupendous proof of the prisoner having committed robbery!
‘I shall beg from every one, and if I don’t get it I shall murder my father and shall take the envelope with the pink ribbon on it from under his mattress as soon as Ivan has gone.’ A full program of the murder, we are told, so it must have been he.
‘It has all been done as he wrote,’ cries the prosecutor.
“But in the first place, it’s the letter of a drunken man and written in great irritation; secondly, he writes of the envelope from what he has heard from Smerdyakov again, for he has not seen the envelope himself; and thirdly, he wrote it indeed, but how can you prove that he did it?
Did the prisoner take the envelope from under the pillow, did he find the money, did that money exist indeed?
And was it to get money that the prisoner ran off, if you remember?
He was not running to carry out a program, to carry out what he had written, that is, not for an act of premeditated robbery, but he ran suddenly, spontaneously, in a jealous fury.
I shall be told, but when he got there and murdered him he seized the money, too.
The charge of robbery I repudiate with indignation.
A man cannot be accused of robbery, if it’s impossible to state accurately what he has stolen; that’s an axiom.
And There Was No Murder Either “Allow me, gentlemen of the jury, to remind you that a man’s life is at stake and that you must be careful.
We have heard the prosecutor himself admit that until to-day he hesitated to accuse the prisoner of a full and conscious premeditation of the crime; he hesitated till he saw that fatal drunken letter which was produced in court to-day.
That’s a fact that can’t be disputed.
Had she been at home, he would not have run away, but would have remained at her side, and so would not have done what he promised in the letter.
He ran unexpectedly and accidentally, and by that time very likely he did not even remember his drunken letter.
‘He snatched up the pestle,’ they say, and you will remember how a whole edifice of psychology was built on that pestle—why he was bound to look at that pestle as a weapon, to snatch it up, and so on, and so on.
A very commonplace idea occurs to me at this point: What if that pestle had not been in sight, had not been lying on the shelf from which it was snatched by the prisoner, but had been put away in a cupboard?
It would not have caught the prisoner’s eye, and he would have run away without a weapon, with empty hands, and then he would certainly not have killed any one.
How then can I look upon the pestle as a proof of premeditation?
“Yes, but he talked in the taverns of murdering his father, and two days before, on the evening when he wrote his drunken letter, he was quiet and only quarreled with a shopman in the tavern, because a Karamazov could not help quarreling, forsooth!
But my answer to that is, that, if he was planning such a murder in accordance with his letter, he certainly would not have quarreled even with a shopman, and probably would not have gone into the tavern at all, because a person plotting such a crime seeks quiet and retirement, seeks to efface himself, to avoid being seen and heard, and that not from calculation, but from instinct.
Gentlemen of the jury, the psychological method is a two-edged weapon, and we, too, can use it.
As for all this shouting in taverns throughout the month, don’t we often hear children, or drunkards coming out of taverns shout, ‘I’ll kill you’? but they don’t murder any one.
And that fatal letter—isn’t that simply drunken irritability, too?
Oh, I admit that the chain of evidence—the coincidences—are really suggestive.
But examine all these facts separately, regardless of their connection.
Why, for instance, does the prosecution refuse to admit the truth of the prisoner’s statement that he ran away from his father’s window?
Remember the sarcasms in which the prosecutor indulged at the expense of the respectful and ‘pious’ sentiments which suddenly came over the murderer.
But what if there were something of the sort, a feeling of religious awe, if not of filial respect?
‘My mother must have been praying for me at that moment,’ were the prisoner’s words at the preliminary inquiry, and so he ran away as soon as he convinced himself that Madame Svyetlov was not in his father’s house.
‘But he could not convince himself by looking through the window,’ the prosecutor objects.
The window opened at the signals given by the prisoner.
Some word might have been uttered by Fyodor Pavlovitch, some exclamation which showed the prisoner that she was not there.
Why should we assume everything as we imagine it, as we make up our minds to imagine it?
A thousand things may happen in reality which elude the subtlest imagination.
“‘Yes, but Grigory saw the door open and so the prisoner certainly was in the house, therefore he killed him.’ Now about that door, gentlemen of the jury....
Observe that we have only the statement of one witness as to that door, and he was at the time in such a condition, that— But supposing the door was open; supposing the prisoner has lied in denying it, from an instinct of self-defense, natural in his position; supposing he did go into the house—well, what then?
How does it follow that because he was there he committed the murder?
He might have dashed in, run through the rooms; might have pushed his father away; might have struck him; but as soon as he had made sure Madame Svyetlov was not there, he may have run away rejoicing that she was not there and that he had not killed his father.
And it was perhaps just because he had escaped from the temptation to kill his father, because he had a clear conscience and was rejoicing at not having killed him, that he was capable of a pure feeling, the feeling of pity and compassion, and leapt off the fence a minute later to the assistance of Grigory after he had, in his excitement, knocked him down.
“With terrible eloquence the prosecutor has described to us the dreadful state of the prisoner’s mind at Mokroe when love again lay before him calling him to new life, while love was impossible for him because he had his father’s bloodstained corpse behind him and beyond that corpse—retribution.
And yet the prosecutor allowed him love, which he explained, according to his method, talking about his drunken condition, about a criminal being taken to execution, about it being still far off, and so on and so on.
Prosecutor, have you not invented a new personality?
Is the prisoner so coarse and heartless as to be able to think at that moment of love and of dodges to escape punishment, if his hands were really stained with his father’s blood?
As soon as it was made plain to him that she loved him and called him to her side, promising him new happiness, oh! then, I protest he must have felt the impulse to suicide doubled, trebled, and must have killed himself, if he had his father’s murder on his conscience.
Oh, no! he would not have forgotten where his pistols lay!
I know the prisoner: the savage, stony heartlessness ascribed to him by the prosecutor is inconsistent with his character.
He did not kill himself just because ‘his mother’s prayers had saved him,’ and he was innocent of his father’s blood.
He was troubled, he was grieving that night at Mokroe only about old Grigory and praying to God that the old man would recover, that his blow had not been fatal, and that he would not have to suffer for it.
Why not accept such an interpretation of the facts?
What trustworthy proof have we that the prisoner is lying?
If he ran away without murdering him, who did murder him?’ Here, I repeat, you have the whole logic of the prosecution.
Who murdered him, if not he?
“Gentlemen of the jury, is that really so?
Is it positively, actually true that there is no one else at all?
We’ve heard the prosecutor count on his fingers all the persons who were in that house that night.
They were five in number; three of them, I agree, could not have been responsible—the murdered man himself, old Grigory, and his wife.
There are left then the prisoner and Smerdyakov, and the prosecutor dramatically exclaims that the prisoner pointed to Smerdyakov because he had no one else to fix on, that had there been a sixth person, even a phantom of a sixth person, he would have abandoned the charge against Smerdyakov at once in shame and have accused that other.
But, gentlemen of the jury, why may I not draw the very opposite conclusion?
There are two persons—the prisoner and Smerdyakov.
And you have no one else only because you have determined to exclude Smerdyakov from all suspicion.
“It’s true, indeed, Smerdyakov is accused only by the prisoner, his two brothers, and Madame Svyetlov.
But there are others who accuse him: there are vague rumors of a question, of a suspicion, an obscure report, a feeling of expectation.
Finally, we have the evidence of a combination of facts very suggestive, though, I admit, inconclusive.
In the first place we have precisely on the day of the catastrophe that fit, for the genuineness of which the prosecutor, for some reason, has felt obliged to make a careful defense.
Then Smerdyakov’s sudden suicide on the eve of the trial.
Then the equally startling evidence given in court to-day by the elder of the prisoner’s brothers, who had believed in his guilt, but has to-day produced a bundle of notes and proclaimed Smerdyakov as the murderer.
Oh, I fully share the court’s and the prosecutor’s conviction that Ivan Karamazov is suffering from brain fever, that his statement may really be a desperate effort, planned in delirium, to save his brother by throwing the guilt on the dead man.
But again Smerdyakov’s name is pronounced, again there is a suggestion of mystery.
There is something unexplained, incomplete.
And perhaps it may one day be explained.
“The court has resolved to go on with the trial, but, meantime, I might make a few remarks about the character-sketch of Smerdyakov drawn with subtlety and talent by the prosecutor.
I have visited Smerdyakov, I have seen him and talked to him, and he made a very different impression on me.
He was weak in health, it is true; but in character, in spirit, he was by no means the weak man the prosecutor has made him out to be.
I found in him no trace of the timidity on which the prosecutor so insisted.
There was no simplicity about him, either.
I found in him, on the contrary, an extreme mistrustfulness concealed under a mask of _naïveté_, and an intelligence of considerable range.
The prosecutor was too simple in taking him for weak-minded.
He made a very definite impression on me: I left him with the conviction that he was a distinctly spiteful creature, excessively ambitious, vindictive, and intensely envious.
I made some inquiries: he resented his parentage, was ashamed of it, and would clench his teeth when he remembered that he was the son of ‘stinking Lizaveta.’ He was disrespectful to the servant Grigory and his wife, who had cared for him in his childhood.
He dreamed of going to France and becoming a Frenchman.
I fancy he loved no one but himself and had a strangely high opinion of himself.
His conception of culture was limited to good clothes, clean shirt-fronts and polished boots.
Believing himself to be the illegitimate son of Fyodor Pavlovitch (there is evidence of this), he might well have resented his position, compared with that of his master’s legitimate sons.
They had everything, he nothing.
They had all the rights, they had the inheritance, while he was only the cook.
He told me himself that he had helped Fyodor Pavlovitch to put the notes in the envelope.
The destination of that sum—a sum which would have made his career—must have been hateful to him.
Moreover, he saw three thousand roubles in new rainbow-colored notes. (I asked him about that on purpose.) Oh, beware of showing an ambitious and envious man a large sum of money at once!
The sight of the rainbow-colored notes may have made a morbid impression on his imagination, but with no immediate results.
“The talented prosecutor, with extraordinary subtlety, sketched for us all the arguments for and against the hypothesis of Smerdyakov’s guilt, and asked us in particular what motive he had in feigning a fit.
But he may not have been feigning at all, the fit may have happened quite naturally, but it may have passed off quite naturally, and the sick man may have recovered, not completely perhaps, but still regaining consciousness, as happens with epileptics.
“The prosecutor asks at what moment could Smerdyakov have committed the murder.
He might have waked up from deep sleep (for he was only asleep—an epileptic fit is always followed by a deep sleep) at that moment when the old Grigory shouted at the top of his voice ‘Parricide!’ That shout in the dark and stillness may have waked Smerdyakov whose sleep may have been less sound at the moment: he might naturally have waked up an hour before.
“Getting out of bed, he goes almost unconsciously and with no definite motive towards the sound to see what’s the matter.
His head is still clouded with his attack, his faculties are half asleep; but, once in the garden, he walks to the lighted windows and he hears terrible news from his master, who would be, of course, glad to see him.
He hears all the details from his frightened master, and gradually in his disordered brain there shapes itself an idea—terrible, but seductive and irresistibly logical.
To kill the old man, take the three thousand, and throw all the blame on to his young master.
A terrible lust of money, of booty, might seize upon him as he realized his security from detection.
Oh! these sudden and irresistible impulses come so often when there is a favorable opportunity, and especially with murderers who have had no idea of committing a murder beforehand.
And Smerdyakov may have gone in and carried out his plan.
Why, the three thousand which means a career for him.
Oh, I am not contradicting myself—the money may have existed.
And perhaps Smerdyakov alone knew where to find it, where his master kept it.
And the covering of the money—the torn envelope on the floor?
I fancied that there was an artificial simplicity about him; that he was in a hurry to suggest this idea to me that I might fancy it was my own.
He insinuated it, as it were.
Did he not insinuate the same idea at the inquiry and suggest it to the talented prosecutor?
She heard the sick man moaning close by, all night.’ Yes, she heard it, but that evidence is extremely unreliable.
I knew a lady who complained bitterly that she had been kept awake all night by a dog in the yard.
Yet the poor beast, it appeared, had only yelped once or twice in the night.
If any one is asleep and hears a groan he wakes up, annoyed at being waked, but instantly falls asleep again.
Two hours later, again a groan, he wakes up and falls asleep again; and the same thing again two hours later—three times altogether in the night.
Next morning the sleeper wakes up and complains that some one has been groaning all night and keeping him awake.
And it is bound to seem so to him: the intervals of two hours of sleep he does not remember, he only remembers the moments of waking, so he feels he has been waked up all night.
“But why, why, asks the prosecutor, did not Smerdyakov confess in his last letter?
Why did his conscience prompt him to one step and not to both?
But, excuse me, conscience implies penitence, and the suicide may not have felt penitence, but only despair.
Despair and penitence are two very different things.
Despair may be vindictive and irreconcilable, and the suicide, laying his hands on himself, may well have felt redoubled hatred for those whom he had envied all his life.
“Gentlemen of the jury, beware of a miscarriage of justice!
What is there unlikely in all I have put before you just now?
Find the error in my reasoning; find the impossibility, the absurdity.
And if there is but a shade of possibility, but a shade of probability in my propositions, do not condemn him.
I swear by all that is sacred, I fully believe in the explanation of the murder I have just put forward.
What troubles me and makes me indignant is that of all the mass of facts heaped up by the prosecution against the prisoner, there is not a single one certain and irrefutable.
And yet the unhappy man is to be ruined by the accumulation of these facts.
Yes, the accumulated effect is awful: the blood, the blood dripping from his fingers, the bloodstained shirt, the dark night resounding with the shout ‘Parricide!’ and the old man falling with a broken head.
And then the mass of phrases, statements, gestures, shouts!
Oh! this has so much influence, it can so bias the mind; but, gentlemen of the jury, can it bias your minds?
Remember, you have been given absolute power to bind and to loose, but the greater the power, the more terrible its responsibility.
“I do not draw back one iota from what I have said just now, but suppose for one moment I agreed with the prosecution that my luckless client had stained his hands with his father’s blood.
This is only hypothesis, I repeat; I never for one instant doubt of his innocence.
But, so be it, I assume that my client is guilty of parricide.
I have it in my heart to say something more to you, for I feel that there must be a great conflict in your hearts and minds....
Forgive my referring to your hearts and minds, gentlemen of the jury, but I want to be truthful and sincere to the end.
Let us all be sincere!” At this point the speech was interrupted by rather loud applause.
The last words, indeed, were pronounced with a note of such sincerity that every one felt that he really might have something to say, and that what he was about to say would be of the greatest consequence.
But the President, hearing the applause, in a loud voice threatened to clear the court if such an incident were repeated.
Every sound was hushed and Fetyukovitch began in a voice full of feeling quite unlike the tone he had used hitherto.
A Corrupter Of Thought “It’s not only the accumulation of facts that threatens my client with ruin, gentlemen of the jury,” he began, “what is really damning for my client is one fact—the dead body of his father.
Had it been an ordinary case of murder you would have rejected the charge in view of the triviality, the incompleteness, and the fantastic character of the evidence, if you examine each part of it separately; or, at least, you would have hesitated to ruin a man’s life simply from the prejudice against him which he has, alas! only too well deserved.
But it’s not an ordinary case of murder, it’s a case of parricide.
That impresses men’s minds, and to such a degree that the very triviality and incompleteness of the evidence becomes less trivial and less incomplete even to an unprejudiced mind.
How can such a prisoner be acquitted?
What if he committed the murder and gets off unpunished?
That is what every one, almost involuntarily, instinctively, feels at heart.
“Yes, it’s a fearful thing to shed a father’s blood—the father who has begotten me, loved me, not spared his life for me, grieved over my illnesses from childhood up, troubled all his life for my happiness, and has lived in my joys, in my successes.
To murder such a father—that’s inconceivable.
Gentlemen of the jury, what is a father—a real father?
We have just indicated in part what a true father is and what he ought to be.
In the case in which we are now so deeply occupied and over which our hearts are aching—in the present case, the father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, did not correspond to that conception of a father to which we have just referred.
That’s the misfortune.
And indeed some fathers are a misfortune.
Let us examine this misfortune rather more closely: we must shrink from nothing, gentlemen of the jury, considering the importance of the decision you have to make.
It’s our particular duty not to shrink from any idea, like children or frightened women, as the talented prosecutor happily expresses it.
“But in the course of his heated speech my esteemed opponent (and he was my opponent before I opened my lips) exclaimed several times, ‘Oh, I will not yield the defense of the prisoner to the lawyer who has come down from Petersburg.
“Oh, gentlemen of the jury, why need we look more closely at this misfortune, why repeat what we all know already?
What did my client meet with when he arrived here, at his father’s house, and why depict my client as a heartless egoist and monster?
He is uncontrolled, he is wild and unruly—we are trying him now for that—but who is responsible for his life?
Who is responsible for his having received such an unseemly bringing up, in spite of his excellent disposition and his grateful and sensitive heart?
Did any one train him to be reasonable?
Was he enlightened by study?
Did any one love him ever so little in his childhood?
My client was left to the care of Providence like a beast of the field.
He thirsted perhaps to see his father after long years of separation.
A thousand times perhaps he may, recalling his childhood, have driven away the loathsome phantoms that haunted his childish dreams and with all his heart he may have longed to embrace and to forgive his father!
He was met by cynical taunts, suspicions and wrangling about money.
He heard nothing but revolting talk and vicious precepts uttered daily over the brandy, and at last he saw his father seducing his mistress from him with his own money.
Oh, gentlemen of the jury, that was cruel and revolting!
And that old man was always complaining of the disrespect and cruelty of his son.
He slandered him in society, injured him, calumniated him, bought up his unpaid debts to get him thrown into prison.
“Gentlemen of the jury, people like my client, who are fierce, unruly, and uncontrolled on the surface, are sometimes, most frequently indeed, exceedingly tender-hearted, only they don’t express it.
The talented prosecutor laughed mercilessly just now at my client for loving Schiller—loving the sublime and beautiful!
Yes, such natures—oh, let me speak in defense of such natures, so often and so cruelly misunderstood—these natures often thirst for tenderness, goodness, and justice, as it were, in contrast to themselves, their unruliness, their ferocity—they thirst for it unconsciously.
Passionate and fierce on the surface, they are painfully capable of loving woman, for instance, and with a spiritual and elevated love.
But they cannot hide their passions—sometimes very coarse—and that is conspicuous and is noticed, but the inner man is unseen.
Their passions are quickly exhausted; but, by the side of a noble and lofty creature that seemingly coarse and rough man seeks a new life, seeks to correct himself, to be better, to become noble and honorable, ‘sublime and beautiful,’ however much the expression has been ridiculed.
“I said just now that I would not venture to touch upon my client’s engagement.
What we heard just now was not evidence, but only the scream of a frenzied and revengeful woman, and it was not for her—oh, not for her!—to reproach him with treachery, for she has betrayed him!
If she had had but a little time for reflection she would not have given such evidence.
“The Lover of Mankind on the eve of His Crucifixion said: ‘I am the Good Shepherd.
The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep, so that not one of them might be lost.’ Let not a man’s soul be lost through us!
“I asked just now what does ‘father’ mean, and exclaimed that it was a great word, a precious name.
But one must use words honestly, gentlemen, and I venture to call things by their right names: such a father as old Karamazov cannot be called a father and does not deserve to be.
Filial love for an unworthy father is an absurdity, an impossibility.
Love cannot be created from nothing: only God can create something from nothing.
“‘Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath,’ the apostle writes, from a heart glowing with love.
Who has authorized me to preach to fathers?
So let us all catch a favorable moment when we are all together to say a good word to each other.
That’s what I am doing: while I am in this place I take advantage of my opportunity.
Not for nothing is this tribune given us by the highest authority—all Russia hears us!
I am not speaking only for the fathers here present, I cry aloud to all fathers: ‘Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath.’ Yes, let us first fulfill Christ’s injunction ourselves and only then venture to expect it of our children.
Otherwise we are not fathers, but enemies of our children, and they are not our children, but our enemies, and we have made them our enemies ourselves.
‘What measure ye mete it shall be measured unto you again’—it’s not I who say that, it’s the Gospel precept, measure to others according as they measure to you.
How can we blame children if they measure us according to our measure?
“Not long ago a servant girl in Finland was suspected of having secretly given birth to a child.
She was watched, and a box of which no one knew anything was found in the corner of the loft, behind some bricks.
In the same box were found the skeletons of two other babies which, according to her own confession, she had killed at the moment of their birth.
“Gentlemen of the jury, was she a mother to her children?
Let us be bold, gentlemen, let us be audacious even: it’s our duty to be so at this moment and not to be afraid of certain words and ideas like the Moscow women in Ostrovsky’s play, who are scared at the sound of certain words.
No, let us prove that the progress of the last few years has touched even us, and let us say plainly, the father is not merely he who begets the child, but he who begets it and does his duty by it.
“Oh, of course, there is the other meaning, there is the other interpretation of the word ‘father,’ which insists that any father, even though he be a monster, even though he be the enemy of his children, still remains my father simply because he begot me.
But this is, so to say, the mystical meaning which I cannot comprehend with my intellect, but can only accept by faith, or, better to say, _on faith_, like many other things which I do not understand, but which religion bids me believe.
Then it will be real Christian work, not only mystic, but rational and philanthropic....” There was violent applause at this passage from many parts of the court, but Fetyukovitch waved his hands as though imploring them to let him finish without interruption.
The court relapsed into silence at once.
“Do you suppose, gentlemen, that our children as they grow up and begin to reason can avoid such questions?
No, they cannot, and we will not impose on them an impossible restriction.
The sight of an unworthy father involuntarily suggests tormenting questions to a young creature, especially when he compares him with the excellent fathers of his companions.
The conventional answer to this question is: ‘He begot you, and you are his flesh and blood, and therefore you are bound to love him.’ The youth involuntarily reflects: ‘But did he love me when he begot me?’ he asks, wondering more and more.
He did not know me, not even my sex, at that moment, at the moment of passion, perhaps, inflamed by wine, and he has only transmitted to me a propensity to drunkenness—that’s all he’s done for me....
Why am I bound to love him simply for begetting me when he has cared nothing for me all my life after?’ “Oh, perhaps those questions strike you as coarse and cruel, but do not expect an impossible restraint from a young mind.
‘Drive nature out of the door and it will fly in at the window,’ and, above all, let us not be afraid of words, but decide the question according to the dictates of reason and humanity and not of mystic ideas.
Father, show me that I must love you,’ and if that father is able to answer him and show him good reason, we have a real, normal, parental relation, not resting on mystical prejudice, but on a rational, responsible and strictly humanitarian basis.
He is not a father to him, and the son has a right to look upon him as a stranger, and even an enemy.
Our tribune, gentlemen of the jury, ought to be a school of true and sound ideas.” (Here the orator was interrupted by irrepressible and almost frantic applause.
Of course, it was not the whole audience, but a good half of it applauded.
The fathers and mothers present applauded.
Shrieks and exclamations were heard from the gallery, where the ladies were sitting.
Handkerchiefs were waved.
The President began ringing his bell with all his might.
He was obviously irritated by the behavior of the audience, but did not venture to clear the court as he had threatened.
Even persons of high position, old men with stars on their breasts, sitting on specially reserved seats behind the judges, applauded the orator and waved their handkerchiefs.
So that when the noise died down, the President confined himself to repeating his stern threat to clear the court, and Fetyukovitch, excited and triumphant, continued his speech.) “Gentlemen of the jury, you remember that awful night of which so much has been said to-day, when the son got over the fence and stood face to face with the enemy and persecutor who had begotten him.
I insist most emphatically it was not for money he ran to his father’s house: the charge of robbery is an absurdity, as I proved before.
If he had had that design he would, at least, have taken the precaution of arming himself beforehand.
The brass pestle he caught up instinctively without knowing why he did it.
Granted that he deceived his father by tapping at the window, granted that he made his way in—I’ve said already that I do not for a moment believe that legend, but let it be so, let us suppose it for a moment.
Gentlemen, I swear to you by all that’s holy, if it had not been his father, but an ordinary enemy, he would, after running through the rooms and satisfying himself that the woman was not there, have made off, post-haste, without doing any harm to his rival.
The mere sight of the father who had hated him from his childhood, had been his enemy, his persecutor, and now his unnatural rival, was enough!
A feeling of hatred came over him involuntarily, irresistibly, clouding his reason.
It was an impulse of madness and insanity, but also an impulse of nature, irresistibly and unconsciously (like everything in nature) avenging the violation of its eternal laws.
“But the prisoner even then did not murder him—I maintain that, I cry that aloud!—no, he only brandished the pestle in a burst of indignant disgust, not meaning to kill him, not knowing that he would kill him.
Such a murder is not a parricide.
No, the murder of such a father cannot be called parricide.
Such a murder can only be reckoned parricide by prejudice.
“But I appeal to you again and again from the depths of my soul; did this murder actually take place?
Gentlemen of the jury, if we convict and punish him, he will say to himself: ‘These people have done nothing for my bringing up, for my education, nothing to improve my lot, nothing to make me better, nothing to make me a man.
These people have not given me to eat and to drink, have not visited me in prison and nakedness, and here they have sent me to penal servitude.
I am quits, I owe them nothing now, and owe no one anything for ever.
They are cruel and I will be cruel.’ That is what he will say, gentlemen of the jury.
And I swear, by finding him guilty you will only make it easier for him: you will ease his conscience, he will curse the blood he has shed and will not regret it.
At the same time you will destroy in him the possibility of becoming a new man, for he will remain in his wickedness and blindness all his life.
“But do you want to punish him fearfully, terribly, with the most awful punishment that could be imagined, and at the same time to save him and regenerate his soul?
If so, overwhelm him with your mercy!
“Oh, I know, I know that heart, that wild but grateful heart, gentlemen of the jury!
There are souls which, in their limitation, blame the whole world.
But subdue such a soul with mercy, show it love, and it will curse its past, for there are many good impulses in it.
Such a heart will expand and see that God is merciful and that men are good and just.
He will be horror-stricken; he will be crushed by remorse and the vast obligation laid upon him henceforth.
Do you hear, do you hear that majestic voice from the past century of our glorious history?
It is not for an insignificant person like me to remind you that the Russian court does not exist for the punishment only, but also for the salvation of the criminal!
Let other nations think of retribution and the letter of the law, we will cling to the spirit and the meaning—the salvation and the reformation of the lost.
Do not try to scare us with your frenzied troikas from which all the nations stand aside in disgust.
Not a runaway troika, but the stately chariot of Russia will move calmly and majestically to its goal.
The Peasants Stand Firm This was how Fetyukovitch concluded his speech, and the enthusiasm of the audience burst like an irresistible storm.
It was out of the question to stop it: the women wept, many of the men wept too, even two important personages shed tears.
The President submitted, and even postponed ringing his bell.
The suppression of such an enthusiasm would be the suppression of something sacred, as the ladies cried afterwards.
The orator himself was genuinely touched.
And it was at this moment that Ippolit Kirillovitch got up to make certain objections.
He positively dares to make objections,” the ladies babbled.
But if the whole world of ladies, including his wife, had protested he could not have been stopped at that moment.
He was pale, he was shaking with emotion, his first phrases were even unintelligible, he gasped for breath, could hardly speak clearly, lost the thread.
But he soon recovered himself.
Of this new speech of his I will quote only a few sentences.
I am reproached with having woven a romance.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, while waiting for his mistress, tears open the envelope and throws it on the floor.
The weak-minded idiot, Smerdyakov, transformed into a Byronic hero, avenging society for his illegitimate birth—isn’t this a romance in the Byronic style?
And the son who breaks into his father’s house and murders him without murdering him is not even a romance—this is a sphinx setting us a riddle which he cannot solve himself.
If he murdered him, he murdered him, and what’s the meaning of his murdering him without having murdered him—who can make head or tail of this?
“Then we are admonished that our tribune is a tribune of true and sound ideas and from this tribune of ‘sound ideas’ is heard a solemn declaration that to call the murder of a father ‘parricide’ is nothing but a prejudice!
But if parricide is a prejudice, and if every child is to ask his father why he is to love him, what will become of us?
What will become of the foundations of society?
Parricide, it appears, is only a bogy of Moscow merchants’ wives.
The most precious, the most sacred guarantees for the destiny and future of Russian justice are presented to us in a perverted and frivolous form, simply to attain an object—to obtain the justification of something which cannot be justified.
‘Oh, crush him by mercy,’ cries the counsel for the defense; but that’s all the criminal wants, and to-morrow it will be seen how much he is crushed.
And is not the counsel for the defense too modest in asking only for the acquittal of the prisoner?
Why not found a charity in the honor of the parricide to commemorate his exploit among future generations?
Religion and the Gospel are corrected—that’s all mysticism, we are told, and ours is the only true Christianity which has been subjected to the analysis of reason and common sense.
And so they set up before us a false semblance of Christ!
‘What measure ye mete so it shall be meted unto you again,’ cried the counsel for the defense, and instantly deduces that Christ teaches us to measure as it is measured to us—and this from the tribune of truth and sound sense!
We peep into the Gospel only on the eve of making speeches, in order to dazzle the audience by our acquaintance with what is, anyway, a rather original composition, which may be of use to produce a certain effect—all to serve the purpose!
But what Christ commands us is something very different: He bids us beware of doing this, because the wicked world does this, but we ought to forgive and to turn the other cheek, and not to measure to our persecutors as they measure to us.
This is what our God has taught us and not that to forbid children to murder their fathers is a prejudice.
The audience, too, was uneasy.
The public was restless: there were even exclamations of indignation.
Fetyukovitch did not so much as reply; he only mounted the tribune to lay his hand on his heart and, with an offended voice, utter a few words full of dignity.
He only touched again, lightly and ironically, on “romancing” and “psychology,” and in an appropriate place quoted, “Jupiter, you are angry, therefore you are wrong,” which provoked a burst of approving laughter in the audience, for Ippolit Kirillovitch was by no means like Jupiter.
Then, _à propos_ of the accusation that he was teaching the young generation to murder their fathers, Fetyukovitch observed, with great dignity, that he would not even answer.
As for the prosecutor’s charge of uttering unorthodox opinions, Fetyukovitch hinted that it was a personal insinuation and that he had expected in this court to be secure from accusations “damaging to my reputation as a citizen and a loyal subject.” But at these words the President pulled him up, too, and Fetyukovitch concluded his speech with a bow, amid a hum of approbation in the court.
And Ippolit Kirillovitch was, in the opinion of our ladies, “crushed for good.” Then the prisoner was allowed to speak.
He was fearfully exhausted, physically and mentally.
The look of strength and independence with which he had entered in the morning had almost disappeared.
He seemed as though he had passed through an experience that day, which had taught him for the rest of his life something very important he had not understood till then.
In his words there was a new note of humility, defeat and submission.
“What am I to say, gentlemen of the jury?
The hour of judgment has come for me, I feel the hand of God upon me!
But, before God, I repeat to you, I am innocent of my father’s blood!
I thank the prosecutor, he told me many things about myself that I did not know; but it’s not true that I killed my father, the prosecutor is mistaken.
I cried listening to him; but it’s not true that I killed my father, and he needn’t have supposed it.
I am perfectly sane, only my heart is heavy.
My heart is heavy, gentlemen ... spare me!” He almost fell back in his place: his voice broke: he could hardly articulate the last phrase.
Then the judges proceeded to put the questions and began to ask both sides to formulate their conclusions.
But I will not describe the details.
At last the jury rose to retire for consultation.
The President was very tired, and so his last charge to the jury was rather feeble.
“Be impartial, don’t be influenced by the eloquence of the defense, but yet weigh the arguments.
Remember that there is a great responsibility laid upon you,” and so on and so on.
The jury withdrew and the court adjourned.
People could get up, move about, exchange their accumulated impressions, refresh themselves at the buffet.
All waited with sinking hearts; though that is, perhaps, too much to say, for the ladies were only in a state of hysterical impatience and their hearts were untroubled.
An acquittal, they thought, was inevitable.
They all prepared themselves for a dramatic moment of general enthusiasm.
I must own there were many among the men, too, who were convinced that an acquittal was inevitable.
Some were pleased, others frowned, while some were simply dejected, not wanting him to be acquitted.
Fetyukovitch himself was confident of his success.
He was surrounded by people congratulating him and fawning upon him.
“There are,” he said to one group, as I was told afterwards, “there are invisible threads binding the counsel for the defense with the jury.
Set your mind at rest.” “What will our peasants say now?” said one stout, cross-looking, pock-marked gentleman, a landowner of the neighborhood, approaching a group of gentlemen engaged in conversation.
“But they are not all peasants.
There are four government clerks among them.” “Yes, there are clerks,” said a member of the district council, joining the group.
“And do you know that Nazaryev, the merchant with the medal, a juryman?” “What of him?” “He is a man with brains.” “But he never speaks.” “He is no great talker, but so much the better.
There’s no need for the Petersburg man to teach him: he could teach all Petersburg himself.
He’s the father of twelve children.
Think of that!” “Upon my word, you don’t suppose they won’t acquit him?” one of our young officials exclaimed in another group.
“They’ll acquit him for certain,” said a resolute voice.
“It would be shameful, disgraceful, not to acquit him!” cried the official.
If I’d been in Fetyukovitch’s place, I should simply have said straight out: ‘He murdered him; but he is not guilty, hang it all!’” “That’s what he did, only without saying, ‘Hang it all!’” “No, Mihail Semyonovitch, he almost said that, too,” put in a third voice.
“Why, gentlemen, in Lent an actress was acquitted in our town who had cut the throat of her lover’s lawful wife.” “Oh, but she did not finish cutting it.” “That makes no difference.
She began cutting it.” “What did you think of what he said about children?
Splendid, wasn’t it?” “Splendid!” “And about mysticism, too!” “Oh, drop mysticism, do!” cried some one else; “think of Ippolit and his fate from this day forth.
If she’d been here she’d have scratched them out in court.
She is at home with toothache.
He he he!” “He he he!” In a third group: “I dare say they will acquit Mitenka, after all.” “I should not be surprised if he turns the ‘Metropolis’ upside down to-morrow.
He will be drinking for ten days!” “Oh, the devil!” “The devil’s bound to have a hand in it.
Where should he be if not here?” “Well, gentlemen, I admit it was eloquent.
Do you remember the chariot?” “Yes; he turned a cart into a chariot!” “And to-morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart, just to suit his purpose.” “What cunning chaps there are nowadays!
The jury deliberated for exactly an hour, neither more nor less.
A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the public had taken their seats.
I remember how the jurymen walked into the court.
I won’t repeat the questions in order, and, indeed, I have forgotten them.
I remember only the answer to the President’s first and chief question: “Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake of robbery and with premeditation?” (I don’t remember the exact words.) There was a complete hush.
The foreman of the jury, the youngest of the clerks, pronounced, in a clear, loud voice, amidst the deathlike stillness of the court: “Yes, guilty!” And the same answer was repeated to every question: “Yes, guilty!” and without the slightest extenuating comment.
This no one had expected; almost every one had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy, at least.
The deathlike silence in the court was not broken—all seemed petrified: those who desired his conviction as well as those who had been eager for his acquittal.
But that was only for the first instant, and it was followed by a fearful hubbub.
Many of the men in the audience were pleased.
Those who disagreed with the verdict seemed crushed, shrugged their shoulders, whispered, but still seemed unable to realize this.
But how shall I describe the state the ladies were in?
At first they could scarcely believe their ears.
Then suddenly the whole court rang with exclamations: “What’s the meaning of it?
They seemed to fancy that it might be at once reconsidered and reversed.
At that instant Mitya suddenly stood up and cried in a heartrending voice, stretching his hands out before him: “I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of my father’s blood!
Brothers, friends, have pity on the other woman!” He could not go on, and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard all over the court in a strange, unnatural voice unlike his own.
From the farthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek—it was Grushenka.
She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court again before the beginning of the lawyers’ speeches.
The passing of the sentence was deferred till next day.
I only remember a few exclamations I heard on the steps as I went out.
“He’ll have a twenty years’ trip to the mines!” “Not less.” “Well, our peasants have stood firm.” “And have done for our Mitya.” EPILOGUE Chapter I.
Plans For Mitya’s Escape Very early, at nine o’clock in the morning, five days after the trial, Alyosha went to Katerina Ivanovna’s to talk over a matter of great importance to both of them, and to give her a message.
She sat and talked to him in the very room in which she had once received Grushenka.
In the next room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a high fever.
Katerina Ivanovna had immediately after the scene at the trial ordered the sick and unconscious man to be carried to her house, disregarding the inevitable gossip and general disapproval of the public.
One of the two relations who lived with her had departed to Moscow immediately after the scene in court, the other remained.
But if both had gone away, Katerina Ivanovna would have adhered to her resolution, and would have gone on nursing the sick man and sitting by him day and night.
Varvinsky and Herzenstube were attending him.
The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow, refusing to give an opinion as to the probable end of the illness.
Though the doctors encouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha, it was evident that they could not yet give them positive hopes of recovery.
But this time he had specially urgent business, and he foresaw how difficult it would be to approach the subject, yet he was in great haste.
He had another engagement that could not be put off for that same morning, and there was need of haste.
Katerina Ivanovna was pale and terribly fatigued, yet at the same time in a state of hysterical excitement.
She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had come to her.
“Don’t worry about his decision,” she said, with confident emphasis to Alyosha.
That unhappy man, that hero of honor and principle—not he, not Dmitri Fyodorovitch, but the man lying the other side of that door, who has sacrificed himself for his brother,” Katya added, with flashing eyes—“told me the whole plan of escape long ago.
You know he has already entered into negotiations....
I’ve told you something already....
You see, it will probably come off at the third _étape_ from here, when the party of prisoners is being taken to Siberia.
Ivan Fyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of the third _étape_.
But we don’t know yet who will be in charge of the party, and it’s impossible to find that out so long beforehand.
To-morrow perhaps I will show you in detail the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on the eve of the trial in case of need....
That was when—do you remember?—you found us quarreling.
He had just gone down-stairs, but seeing you I made him come back; do you remember?
Do you know what we were quarreling about then?” “No, I don’t,” said Alyosha.
He had told me the main idea three days before, and we began quarreling about it at once and quarreled for three days.
We quarreled because, when he told me that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were convicted he would escape abroad with that creature, I felt furious at once—I can’t tell you why, I don’t know myself why....
Oh, of course, I was furious then about that creature, and that she, too, should go abroad with Dmitri!” Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly, her lips quivering with anger.
“As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch saw that I was furious about that woman, he instantly imagined I was jealous of Dmitri and that I still loved Dmitri.
I would not give an explanation, I could not ask forgiveness.
It was only resentment against that creature that made me angry with him.
Three days later, on the evening you came, he brought me a sealed envelope, which I was to open at once, if anything happened to him.
He told me that the envelope contained the details of the escape, and that if he died or was taken dangerously ill, I was to save Mitya alone.
Then he left me money, nearly ten thousand—those notes to which the prosecutor referred in his speech, having learnt from some one that he had sent them to be changed.
I was tremendously impressed to find that Ivan Fyodorovitch had not given up his idea of saving his brother, and was confiding this plan of escape to me, though he was still jealous of me and still convinced that I loved Mitya.
Oh, that was a sacrifice!
No, you cannot understand the greatness of such self-sacrifice, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
I wanted to fall at his feet in reverence, but I thought at once that he would take it only for my joy at the thought of Mitya’s being saved (and he certainly would have imagined that!), and I was so exasperated at the mere possibility of such an unjust thought on his part that I lost my temper again, and instead of kissing his feet, flew into a fury again!
It’s my character, my awful, unhappy character!
And when you came in then, and when I called to you and told him to come back, I was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred he turned on me that—do you remember?—I cried out to you that it was he, he alone who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer!
I said that malicious thing on purpose to wound him again.
He had never, never persuaded me that his brother was a murderer.
On the contrary, it was I who persuaded him!
Oh, my vile temper was the cause of everything!
He wanted to show me that he was an honorable man, and that, even if I loved his brother, he would not ruin him for revenge or jealousy.
I am the cause of it all, I alone am to blame!” Katya never had made such confessions to Alyosha before, and he felt that she was now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudest heart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief.
Oh, Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery, though she had carefully concealed it from him during those days since the trial; but it would have been for some reason too painful to him if she had been brought so low as to speak to him now about that.
She was suffering for her “treachery” at the trial, and Alyosha felt that her conscience was impelling her to confess it to him, to him, Alyosha, with tears and cries and hysterical writhings on the floor.
It made the commission on which he had come even more difficult.
“It’s all right, it’s all right, don’t be anxious about him!” she began again, sharply and stubbornly.
“All that is only momentary, I know him, I know his heart only too well.
It’s not as though it would be immediately; he will have time to make up his mind to it.
Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time and will manage it all himself, so that I shall have nothing to do with it.
He has agreed already: do you suppose he would give up that creature?
But you must generously _allow_ it, if your sanction is so necessary,” Katya added viciously.
“He talks about some hymn,” she went on again, “some cross he has to bear, some duty; I remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it, and if you knew how he talked!” Katya cried suddenly, with feeling she could not repress, “if you knew how he loved that wretched man at the moment he told me, and how he hated him, perhaps, at the same moment.
And I heard his story and his tears with sneering disdain.
I am responsible for his fever.
But that man in prison is incapable of suffering,” Katya concluded irritably.
Men like him never suffer!” There was a note of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words.
And yet it was she who had betrayed him.
He hoped that it was only “at moments.” In Katya’s last words he detected a challenging note, but he did not take it up.
“I sent for you this morning to make you promise to persuade him yourself.
Or do you, too, consider that to escape would be dishonorable, cowardly, or something ... unchristian, perhaps?” Katya added, even more defiantly.
I’ll tell him everything,” muttered Alyosha.
“He asks you to come and see him to-day,” he blurted out suddenly, looking her steadily in the face.
Can that be?” she faltered, turning pale.
“It can and ought to be!” Alyosha began emphatically, growing more animated.
“He needs you particularly just now.
I would not have opened the subject and worried you, if it were not necessary.
It is not to be reconciled with you that he wants you, but only that you would go and show yourself at his door.
So much has happened to him since that day.
He realizes that he has injured you beyond all reckoning.
He does not ask your forgiveness—‘It’s impossible to forgive me,’ he says himself—but only that you would show yourself in his doorway.” “It’s so sudden....” faltered Katya.
“I’ve had a presentiment all these days that you would come with that message.
It’s impossible!” “Let it be impossible, but do it.
Only think, he realizes for the first time how he has wounded you, the first time in his life; he had never grasped it before so fully.
He said, ‘If she refuses to come I shall be unhappy all my life.’ Do you hear? though he is condemned to penal servitude for twenty years, he is still planning to be happy—is not that piteous?
Think—you must visit him; though he is ruined, he is innocent,” broke like a challenge from Alyosha.
For the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visit him now.
Go, greet him on his way into the darkness—stand at his door, that is all....
You ought to do it, you ought to!” Alyosha concluded, laying immense stress on the word “ought.” “I ought to ... but I cannot....” Katya moaned.
How will you live all your life, if you don’t make up your mind to do it now?” “Better suffer all my life.” “You ought to go, you ought to go,” Alyosha repeated with merciless emphasis.
If you don’t come, he will be in delirium by to-night.
I would not tell you a lie; have pity on him!” “Have pity on _me!_” Katya said, with bitter reproach, and she burst into tears.
“I’ll go and tell him you will come directly.” “No, don’t tell him so on any account,” cried Katya in alarm.
“I will come, but don’t tell him beforehand, for perhaps I may go, but not go in....
“And what if I meet any one?” she said suddenly, in a low voice, turning white again.
We will expect you,” he concluded emphatically, and went out of the room.
For A Moment The Lie Becomes Truth He hurried to the hospital where Mitya was lying now.
The day after his fate was determined, Mitya had fallen ill with nervous fever, and was sent to the prison division of the town hospital.
But at the request of several persons (Alyosha, Madame Hohlakov, Lise, etc.), Doctor Varvinsky had put Mitya not with other prisoners, but in a separate little room, the one where Smerdyakov had been.
It is true that there was a sentinel at the other end of the corridor, and there was a grating over the window, so that Varvinsky could be at ease about the indulgence he had shown, which was not quite legal, indeed; but he was a kind-hearted and compassionate young man.
He knew how hard it would be for a man like Mitya to pass at once so suddenly into the society of robbers and murderers, and that he must get used to it by degrees.
The visits of relations and friends were informally sanctioned by the doctor and overseer, and even by the police captain.
But only Alyosha and Grushenka had visited Mitya.
Rakitin had tried to force his way in twice, but Mitya persistently begged Varvinsky not to admit him.
Alyosha found him sitting on his bed in a hospital dressing-gown, rather feverish, with a towel, soaked in vinegar and water, on his head.
He looked at Alyosha as he came in with an undefined expression, but there was a shade of something like dread discernible in it.
He had become terribly preoccupied since the trial; sometimes he would be silent for half an hour together, and seemed to be pondering something heavily and painfully, oblivious of everything about him.
If he roused himself from his brooding and began to talk, he always spoke with a kind of abruptness and never of what he really wanted to say.
He looked sometimes with a face of suffering at his brother.
He seemed to be more at ease with Grushenka than with Alyosha.
It is true, he scarcely spoke to her at all, but as soon as she came in, his whole face lighted up with joy.
This time Mitya was waiting for Alyosha in suspense, but he did not dare ask him a question.
He felt it almost unthinkable that Katya would consent to come, and at the same time he felt that if she did not come, something inconceivable would happen.
Alyosha understood his feelings.
“Trifon Borissovitch,” Mitya began nervously, “has pulled his whole inn to pieces, I am told.
He’s taken up the flooring, pulled apart the planks, split up all the gallery, I am told.
He is seeking treasure all the time—the fifteen hundred roubles which the prosecutor said I’d hidden there.
Serve him right, the swindler!
The guard here told me yesterday; he comes from there.” “Listen,” began Alyosha.
But she will come, she will, that’s certain.” Mitya started, would have said something, but was silent.
The news had a tremendous effect on him.
It was evident that he would have liked terribly to know what had been said, but he was again afraid to ask.
Something cruel and contemptuous from Katya would have cut him like a knife at that moment.
“This was what she said among other things; that I must be sure to set your conscience at rest about escaping.
If Ivan is not well by then she will see to it all herself.” “You’ve spoken of that already,” Mitya observed musingly.
“And you have repeated it to Grusha,” observed Alyosha.
“Yes,” Mitya admitted.
When I told her yesterday that Katya was taking measures, she was silent, but she set her mouth.
She only whispered, ‘Let her!’ She understood that it was important.
She understands now, I think, that Katya no longer cares for me, but loves Ivan.” “Does she?” broke from Alyosha.
Only she is not coming this morning,” Mitya hastened to explain again; “I asked her to do something for me.
You know, Ivan is superior to all of us.
He will recover.” “Would you believe it, though Katya is alarmed about him, she scarcely doubts of his recovery,” said Alyosha.
“That means that she is convinced he will die.
It’s because she is frightened she’s so sure he will get well.” “Ivan has a strong constitution, and I, too, believe there’s every hope that he will get well,” Alyosha observed anxiously.
But she is convinced that he will die.
She has a great deal of sorrow to bear...” A silence followed.
A grave anxiety was fretting Mitya.
“Alyosha, I love Grusha terribly,” he said suddenly in a shaking voice, full of tears.
“And there is something else I wanted to tell you,” Mitya went on, with a sudden ring in his voice.
I’ve been lying here all night, passing judgment on myself.
I wanted to sing a ‘hymn’; but if a guard speaks rudely to me, I have not the strength to bear it.
For Grusha I would bear anything ... anything except blows....
If you had murdered our father, it would grieve me that you should reject your punishment.
But you are innocent, and such a cross is too much for you.
You wanted to make yourself another man by suffering.
I say, only remember that other man always, all your life and wherever you go; and that will be enough for you.
Your refusal of that great cross will only serve to make you feel all your life an even greater duty, and that constant feeling will do more to make you a new man, perhaps, than if you went there.
For some they are impossible.
These are my thoughts about it, if you want them so much.
If other men would have to answer for your escape, officers or soldiers, then I would not have ‘allowed’ you,” smiled Alyosha.
“But they declare—the superintendent of that _étape_ told Ivan himself—that if it’s well managed there will be no great inquiry, and that they can get off easily.
Of course, bribing is dishonest even in such a case, but I can’t undertake to judge about it, because if Ivan and Katya commissioned me to act for you, I know I should go and give bribes.
Now I think I’ve gone into everything.” “But I do condemn myself!” cried Mitya.
“I shall escape, that was settled apart from you; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away?
“I love you for always telling the whole truth and never hiding anything,” cried Mitya, with a joyful laugh.
“So I’ve caught my Alyosha being Jesuitical.
If I run away, even with money and a passport, and even to America, I should be cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for pleasure, not for happiness, but to another exile as bad, perhaps, as Siberia.
Just look at her; is she an American?
She is Russian, Russian to the marrow of her bones; she will be homesick for the mother country, and I shall see every hour that she is suffering for my sake, that she has taken up that cross for me.
And though they may be wonderful at machinery, every one of them, damn them, they are not of my soul.
I love Russia, Alyosha, I love the Russian God, though I am a scoundrel myself.
I shall choke there!” he exclaimed, his eyes suddenly flashing.
His voice was trembling with tears.
“So this is what I’ve decided, Alyosha, listen,” he began again, mastering his emotion.
“As soon as I arrive there with Grusha, we will set to work at once on the land, in solitude, somewhere very remote, with wild bears.
I am told there are still Redskins there, somewhere, on the edge of the horizon.
So to the country of the _Last of the Mohicans_, and there we’ll tackle the grammar at once, Grusha and I.
And by that time we shall speak English like any Englishman.
We’ll run here to Russia as American citizens.
We’d hide somewhere, a long way off, in the north or in the south.
The doctors shall make me some sort of wart on my face—what’s the use of their being so mechanical!—or else I’ll put out one eye, let my beard grow a yard, and I shall turn gray, fretting for Russia.
I dare say they won’t recognize us.
We’ll work on the land here, too, somewhere in the wilds, and I’ll make up as an American all my life.
Do you approve?” “Yes,” said Alyosha, not wanting to contradict him.
Mitya paused for a minute and said suddenly: “And how they worked it up at the trial!
Didn’t they work it up!” “If they had not, you would have been convicted just the same,” said Alyosha, with a sigh.
God bless them, but it’s hard,” Mitya moaned miserably.
“Alyosha, put me out of my misery at once!” he exclaimed suddenly.
Do I understand what I want?
It’s the headstrong, evil Karamazov spirit!
No, I am not fit for suffering.
I am a scoundrel, that’s all one can say.” “Here she is!” cried Alyosha.
At that instant Katya appeared in the doorway.
For a moment she stood still, gazing at Mitya with a dazed expression.
He leapt impulsively to his feet, and a scared look came into his face.
He turned pale, but a timid, pleading smile appeared on his lips at once, and with an irresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya.
Seeing it, she flew impetuously to him.
She sat down beside him, and still keeping his hands pressed them violently.
Several times they both strove to speak, but stopped short and again gazed speechless with a strange smile, their eyes fastened on one another.
“Have you forgiven me?” Mitya faltered at last, and at the same moment turning to Alyosha, his face working with joy, he cried, “Do you hear what I am asking, do you hear?” “That’s what I loved you for, that you are generous at heart!” broke from Katya.
“My forgiveness is no good to you, nor yours to me; whether you forgive me or not, you will always be a sore place in my heart, and I in yours—so it must be....” She stopped to take breath.
“What have I come for?” she began again with nervous haste: “to embrace your feet, to press your hands like this, till it hurts—you remember how in Moscow I used to squeeze them—to tell you again that you are my god, my joy, to tell you that I love you madly,” she moaned in anguish, and suddenly pressed his hand greedily to her lips.
Tears streamed from her eyes.
Alyosha stood speechless and confounded; he had never expected what he was seeing.
“Love is over, Mitya!” Katya began again, “but the past is painfully dear to me.
But now let what might have been come true for one minute,” she faltered, with a drawn smile, looking into his face joyfully again.
So it will be, so it will always be—” So they murmured to one another frantic words, almost meaningless, perhaps not even true, but at that moment it was all true, and they both believed what they said implicitly.
“Katya,” cried Mitya suddenly, “do you believe I murdered him?
I know you don’t believe it now, but then ... when you gave evidence....
I’ve never believed it.
I hated you, and for a moment I persuaded myself.
While I was giving evidence I persuaded myself and believed it, but when I’d finished speaking I left off believing it at once.
I have forgotten that I came here to punish myself,” she said, with a new expression in her voice, quite unlike the loving tones of a moment before.
“Woman, yours is a heavy burden,” broke, as it were, involuntarily from Mitya.
“Let me go,” she whispered.
It’s more than I can bear now.” She was getting up from her place, but suddenly uttered a loud scream and staggered back.
Grushenka walked suddenly and noiselessly into the room.
No one had expected her.
Katya moved swiftly to the door, but when she reached Grushenka, she stopped suddenly, turned as white as chalk and moaned softly, almost in a whisper: “Forgive me!” Grushenka stared at her and, pausing for an instant, in a vindictive, venomous voice, answered: “We are full of hatred, my girl, you and I!
Save him, and I’ll worship you all my life.” “You won’t forgive her!” cried Mitya, with frantic reproach.
“Don’t be anxious, I’ll save him for you!” Katya whispered rapidly, and she ran out of the room.
“And you could refuse to forgive her when she begged your forgiveness herself?” Mitya exclaimed bitterly again.
“Her proud lips spoke, not her heart,” Grushenka brought out in a tone of disgust.
“If she saves you I’ll forgive her everything—” She stopped speaking, as though suppressing something.
She had come in, as appeared afterwards, accidentally, with no suspicion of what she would meet.
I don’t know ... don’t let her go away like this!” “I’ll come to you again at nightfall,” said Alyosha, and he ran after Katya.
He overtook her outside the hospital grounds.
I asked her forgiveness because I wanted to punish myself to the bitter end.
I like her for that!” she added, in an unnatural voice, and her eyes flashed with fierce resentment.
“My brother did not expect this in the least,” muttered Alyosha.
If necessary, tell them I’ll never abandon them....
He had died two days after Mitya was sentenced.
At the gate of the house Alyosha was met by the shouts of the boys, Ilusha’s schoolfellows.
They had all been impatiently expecting him and were glad that he had come at last.
There were about twelve of them, they all had their school-bags or satchels on their shoulders.
“Father will cry, be with father,” Ilusha had told them as he lay dying, and the boys remembered it.
Kolya Krassotkin was the foremost of them.
“How glad I am you’ve come, Karamazov!” he cried, holding out his hand to Alyosha.
It’s really horrible to see it.
Snegiryov is not drunk, we know for a fact he’s had nothing to drink to-day, but he seems as if he were drunk ...
Karamazov, if I am not keeping you, one question before you go in?” “What is it, Kolya?” said Alyosha.
“Is your brother innocent or guilty?
I haven’t slept for the last four nights for thinking of it.” “The valet killed him, my brother is innocent,” answered Alyosha.
“So he will perish an innocent victim!” exclaimed Kolya; “though he is ruined he is happy!
Why?” cried Alyosha surprised.
“Oh, if I, too, could sacrifice myself some day for truth!” said Kolya with enthusiasm.
“But not in such a cause, not with such disgrace and such horror!” said Alyosha.
I should like to die for all humanity, and as for disgrace, I don’t care about that—our names may perish.
I respect your brother!” “And so do I!” the boy, who had once declared that he knew who had founded Troy, cried suddenly and unexpectedly, and he blushed up to his ears like a peony as he had done on that occasion.
The expression of his face was serious and, as it were, thoughtful.
His hands, crossed over his breast, looked particularly beautiful, as though chiseled in marble.
There were flowers in his hands and the coffin, inside and out, was decked with flowers, which had been sent early in the morning by Lise Hohlakov.
But there were flowers too from Katerina Ivanovna, and when Alyosha opened the door, the captain had a bunch in his trembling hands and was strewing them again over his dear boy.
He scarcely glanced at Alyosha when he came in, and he would not look at any one, even at his crazy weeping wife, “mamma,” who kept trying to stand on her crippled legs to get a nearer look at her dead boy.
Snegiryov’s face looked eager, yet bewildered and exasperated.
There was something crazy about his gestures and the words that broke from him.
“Old man, dear old man!” he exclaimed every minute, gazing at Ilusha.
It was his habit to call Ilusha “old man,” as a term of affection when he was alive.
“Father, give me a flower, too; take that white one out of his hand and give it me,” the crazy mother begged, whimpering.
Either because the little white rose in Ilusha’s hand had caught her fancy or that she wanted one from his hand to keep in memory of him, she moved restlessly, stretching out her hands for the flower.
“I won’t give it to any one, I won’t give you anything,” Snegiryov cried callously.
Everything is his, nothing is yours!” “Father, give mother a flower!” said Nina, lifting her face wet with tears.
“I won’t give away anything and to her less than any one!
The poor, crazy creature was bathed in noiseless tears, hiding her face in her hands.
“I don’t want him to be buried in the churchyard,” Snegiryov wailed suddenly; “I’ll bury him by the stone, by our stone!
I won’t let him be carried out!” He had been saying for the last three days that he would bury him by the stone, but Alyosha, Krassotkin, the landlady, her sister and all the boys interfered.
“What an idea, bury him by an unholy stone, as though he had hanged himself!” the old landlady said sternly.
“There in the churchyard the ground has been crossed.
One can hear the singing in church and the deacon reads so plainly and verbally that it will reach him every time just as though it were read over his grave.” At last the captain made a gesture of despair as though to say, “Take him where you will.” The boys raised the coffin, but as they passed the mother, they stopped for a moment and lowered it that she might say good-by to Ilusha.
But on seeing that precious little face, which for the last three days she had only looked at from a distance, she trembled all over and her gray head began twitching spasmodically over the coffin.
“Mother, make the sign of the cross over him, give him your blessing, kiss him,” Nina cried to her.
But her head still twitched like an automaton and with a face contorted with bitter grief she began, without a word, beating her breast with her fist.
As Alyosha went out of the house he begged the landlady to look after those who were left behind, but she interrupted him before he had finished.
“To be sure, I’ll stay with them, we are Christians, too.” The old woman wept as she said it.
Snegiryov ran fussing and distracted after the coffin, in his short old summer overcoat, with his head bare and his soft, old, wide-brimmed hat in his hand.
He seemed in a state of bewildered anxiety.
At one minute he stretched out his hand to support the head of the coffin and only hindered the bearers, at another he ran alongside and tried to find a place for himself there.
A flower fell on the snow and he rushed to pick it up as though everything in the world depended on the loss of that flower.
“And the crust of bread, we’ve forgotten the crust!” he cried suddenly in dismay.
But the boys reminded him at once that he had taken the crust of bread already and that it was in his pocket.
He instantly pulled it out and was reassured.
“Ilusha told me to, Ilusha,” he explained at once to Alyosha.
“I was sitting by him one night and he suddenly told me: ‘Father, when my grave is filled up crumble a piece of bread on it so that the sparrows may fly down, I shall hear and it will cheer me up not to be lying alone.’” “That’s a good thing,” said Alyosha, “we must often take some.” “Every day, every day!” said the captain quickly, seeming cheered at the thought.
The boys surrounded it and remained reverently standing so, all through the service.
It was an old and rather poor church; many of the ikons were without settings; but such churches are the best for praying in.
During the mass Snegiryov became somewhat calmer, though at times he had outbursts of the same unconscious and, as it were, incoherent anxiety.
At one moment he went up to the coffin to set straight the cover or the wreath, when a candle fell out of the candlestick he rushed to replace it and was a fearful time fumbling over it, then he subsided and stood quietly by the coffin with a look of blank uneasiness and perplexity.
After the Epistle he suddenly whispered to Alyosha, who was standing beside him, that the Epistle had not been read properly but did not explain what he meant.
During the prayer, “Like the Cherubim,” he joined in the singing but did not go on to the end.
Falling on his knees, he pressed his forehead to the stone floor and lay so for a long while.
At last came the funeral service itself and candles were distributed.
The distracted father began fussing about again, but the touching and impressive funeral prayers moved and roused his soul.
He seemed suddenly to shrink together and broke into rapid, short sobs, which he tried at first to smother, but at last he sobbed aloud.
When they began taking leave of the dead and closing the coffin, he flung his arms about, as though he would not allow them to cover Ilusha, and began greedily and persistently kissing his dead boy on the lips.
At last they succeeded in persuading him to come away from the step, but suddenly he impulsively stretched out his hand and snatched a few flowers from the coffin.
He looked at them and a new idea seemed to dawn upon him, so that he apparently forgot his grief for a minute.
Gradually he seemed to sink into brooding and did not resist when the coffin was lifted up and carried to the grave.
It was an expensive one in the churchyard close to the church, Katerina Ivanovna had paid for it.
After the customary rites the grave-diggers lowered the coffin.
Snegiryov with his flowers in his hands bent down so low over the open grave that the boys caught hold of his coat in alarm and pulled him back.
He did not seem to understand fully what was happening.
When they began filling up the grave, he suddenly pointed anxiously at the falling earth and began trying to say something, but no one could make out what he meant, and he stopped suddenly.
Then he was reminded that he must crumble the bread and he was awfully excited, snatched up the bread and began pulling it to pieces and flinging the morsels on the grave.
“Come, fly down, birds, fly down, sparrows!” he muttered anxiously.
One of the boys observed that it was awkward for him to crumble the bread with the flowers in his hands and suggested he should give them to some one to hold for a time.
But he would not do this and seemed indeed suddenly alarmed for his flowers, as though they wanted to take them from him altogether.
And after looking at the grave, and as it were, satisfying himself that everything had been done and the bread had been crumbled, he suddenly, to the surprise of every one, turned, quite composedly even, and made his way homewards.
I was unkind to mamma,” he began exclaiming suddenly.
But he flung the hat in the snow as though he were angry and kept repeating, “I won’t have the hat, I won’t have the hat.” Smurov picked it up and carried it after him.
All the boys were crying, and Kolya and the boy who discovered about Troy most of all.
Though Smurov, with the captain’s hat in his hand, was crying bitterly too, he managed, as he ran, to snatch up a piece of red brick that lay on the snow of the path, to fling it at the flock of sparrows that was flying by.
Half-way, Snegiryov suddenly stopped, stood still for half a minute, as though struck by something, and suddenly turning back to the church, ran towards the deserted grave.
But the boys instantly overtook him and caught hold of him on all sides.
Then he fell helpless on the snow as though he had been knocked down, and struggling, sobbing, and wailing, he began crying out, “Ilusha, old man, dear old man!” Alyosha and Kolya tried to make him get up, soothing and persuading him.
“Captain, give over, a brave man must show fortitude,” muttered Kolya.
“You’ll spoil the flowers,” said Alyosha, “and mamma is expecting them, she is sitting crying because you would not give her any before.
Ilusha’s little bed is still there—” “Yes, yes, mamma!” Snegiryov suddenly recollected, “they’ll take away the bed, they’ll take it away,” he added as though alarmed that they really would.
He jumped up and ran homewards again.
But it was not far off and they all arrived together.
Snegiryov opened the door hurriedly and called to his wife with whom he had so cruelly quarreled just before: “Mamma, poor crippled darling, Ilusha has sent you these flowers,” he cried, holding out to her a little bunch of flowers that had been frozen and broken while he was struggling in the snow.
But at that instant he saw in the corner, by the little bed, Ilusha’s little boots, which the landlady had put tidily side by side.
Seeing the old, patched, rusty-looking, stiff boots he flung up his hands and rushed to them, fell on his knees, snatched up one boot and, pressing his lips to it, began kissing it greedily, crying, “Ilusha, old man, dear old man, where are your little feet?” “Where have you taken him away?
Where have you taken him?” the lunatic cried in a heartrending voice.
Kolya ran out of the room, the boys followed him.
Let us wait a minute and then go back.” “No, it’s no use, it’s awful,” Kolya assented.
“Do you know, Karamazov,” he dropped his voice so that no one could hear them, “I feel dreadfully sad, and if it were only possible to bring him back, I’d give anything in the world to do it.” “Ah, so would I,” said Alyosha.
“What do you think, Karamazov?
Let us come together, you and I, that will be enough, to spend an hour with them, with the mother and Nina.
If we all come together we shall remind them of everything again,” Alyosha suggested.
“The landlady is laying the table for them now—there’ll be a funeral dinner or something, the priest is coming; shall we go back to it, Karamazov?” “Of course,” said Alyosha.
“It’s all so strange, Karamazov, such sorrow and then pancakes after it, it all seems so unnatural in our religion.” “They are going to have salmon, too,” the boy who had discovered about Troy observed in a loud voice.
“I beg you most earnestly, Kartashov, not to interrupt again with your idiotic remarks, especially when one is not talking to you and doesn’t care to know whether you exist or not!” Kolya snapped out irritably.
Meantime they were strolling slowly along the path and suddenly Smurov exclaimed: “There’s Ilusha’s stone, under which they wanted to bury him.” They all stood still by the big stone.
Alyosha looked and the whole picture of what Snegiryov had described to him that day, how Ilusha, weeping and hugging his father, had cried, “Father, father, how he insulted you,” rose at once before his imagination.
With a serious and earnest expression he looked from one to another of the bright, pleasant faces of Ilusha’s schoolfellows, and suddenly said to them: “Boys, I should like to say one word to you, here at this place.” The boys stood round him and at once bent attentive and expectant eyes upon him.
I shall be for some time with my two brothers, of whom one is going to Siberia and the other is lying at death’s door.
And whatever happens to us later in life, if we don’t meet for twenty years afterwards, let us always remember how we buried the poor boy at whom we once threw stones, do you remember, by the bridge? and afterwards we all grew so fond of him.
He was a fine boy, a kind-hearted, brave boy, he felt for his father’s honor and resented the cruel insult to him and stood up for him.
And so in the first place, we will remember him, boys, all our lives.
And even if we are occupied with most important things, if we attain to honor or fall into great misfortune—still let us remember how good it was once here, when we were all together, united by a good and kind feeling which made us, for the time we were loving that poor boy, better perhaps than we are.
My dear children, perhaps you won’t understand what I am saying to you, because I often speak very unintelligibly, but you’ll remember it all the same and will agree with my words some time.
You must know that there is nothing higher and stronger and more wholesome and good for life in the future than some good memory, especially a memory of childhood, of home.
People talk to you a great deal about your education, but some good, sacred memory, preserved from childhood, is perhaps the best education.
If a man carries many such memories with him into life, he is safe to the end of his days, and if one has only one good memory left in one’s heart, even that may sometime be the means of saving us.
Perhaps we may even grow wicked later on, may be unable to refrain from a bad action, may laugh at men’s tears and at those people who say as Kolya did just now, ‘I want to suffer for all men,’ and may even jeer spitefully at such people.
But however bad we may become—which God forbid—yet, when we recall how we buried Ilusha, how we loved him in his last days, and how we have been talking like friends all together, at this stone, the cruelest and most mocking of us—if we do become so—will not dare to laugh inwardly at having been kind and good at this moment!
That’s only from thoughtlessness.
But I assure you, boys, that as he laughs he will say at once in his heart, ‘No, I do wrong to laugh, for that’s not a thing to laugh at.’” “That will be so, I understand you, Karamazov!” cried Kolya, with flashing eyes.
The boys were excited and they, too, wanted to say something, but they restrained themselves, looking with intentness and emotion at the speaker.
Every face looking at me now I shall remember even for thirty years.
Just now Kolya said to Kartashov that we did not care to know whether he exists or not.
But I cannot forget that Kartashov exists and that he is not blushing now as he did when he discovered the founders of Troy, but is looking at me with his jolly, kind, dear little eyes.
Boys, my dear boys, let us all be generous and brave like Ilusha, clever, brave and generous like Kolya (though he will be ever so much cleverer when he is grown up), and let us all be as modest, as clever and sweet as Kartashov.
Well, and who has united us in this kind, good feeling which we shall remember and intend to remember all our lives?
Who, if not Ilusha, the good boy, the dear boy, precious to us for ever!
May his memory live for ever in our hearts from this time forth!” “Yes, yes, for ever, for ever!” the boys cried in their ringing voices, with softened faces.
“Let us remember his face and his clothes and his poor little boots, his coffin and his unhappy, sinful father, and how boldly he stood up for him alone against the whole school.” “We will remember, we will remember,” cried the boys.
“He was brave, he was good!” “Ah, how I loved him!” exclaimed Kolya.
“Ah, children, ah, dear friends, don’t be afraid of life!
How good life is when one does something good and just!” “Yes, yes,” the boys repeated enthusiastically.
“Karamazov, we love you!” a voice, probably Kartashov’s, cried impulsively.
“Hurrah for Karamazov!” Kolya shouted ecstatically.
“Karamazov,” cried Kolya, “can it be true what’s taught us in religion, that we shall all rise again from the dead and shall live and see each other again, all, Ilusha too?” “Certainly we shall all rise again, certainly we shall see each other and shall tell each other with joy and gladness all that has happened!” Alyosha answered, half laughing, half enthusiastic.
“Ah, how splendid it will be!” broke from Kolya.
Don’t be put out at our eating pancakes—it’s a very old custom and there’s something nice in that!” laughed Alyosha.
If the deceased was a priest as well as a monk the canticle “Our Helper and Defender” is sung instead. [7] i.e. a chime of bells. [8] Literally: “Did you get off with a long nose made at you?”—a proverbial expression in Russia for failure. [9] Gogol is meant.
QUESADA and Others CONTENTS IN EACH VOLUME VOLUME I.
BOULE DE SUIF TWO FRIENDS THE LANCER'S WIFE THE PRISONERS TWO LITTLE SOLDIERS FATHER MILON A COUP D'ETAT LIEUTENANT LARE'S MARRIAGE THE HORRIBLE MADAME PARISSE MADEMOISELLE FIFI A DUEL ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 2.
THE COLONEL'S IDEAS MOTHER SAUVAGE EPIPHANY THE MUSTACHE MADAME BAPTISTE THE QUESTION OF LATIN A MEETING THE BLIND MAN INDISCRETION A FAMILY AFFAIR BESIDE SCHOPENHAUER'S CORPSE ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 3.
MISS HARRIET LITTLE LOUISE ROQUE THE DONKEY MOIRON THE DISPENSER OF HOLY WATER A PARRICIDE BERTHA THE PATRON THE DOOR A SALE THE IMPOLITE SEX A WEDDING GIFT THE RELIC VOLUME IV.
THE MORIBUND THE GAMEKEEPER THE STORY OF A FARM GIRL THE WRECK THEODULE SABOT'S CONFESSION THE WRONG HOUSE THE DIAMOND NECKLACE THE MARQUIS DE FUMEROL THE TRIP OF LE HORLA FAREWELL!
MONSIEUR PARENT QUEEN HORTENSE TIMBUCTOO TOMBSTONES MADEMOISELLE PEARL THE THIEF CLAIR DE LUNE WAITER, A “BOCK” AFTER FORGIVENESS IN THE SPRING A QUEER NIGHT IN PARIS VOLUME VI.
THAT COSTLY RIDE USELESS BEAUTY THE FATHER MY UNCLE SOSTHENES THE BARONESS MOTHER AND SON THE HAND A TRESS OF HAIR ON THE RIVER THE CRIPPLE A STROLL ALEXANDRE THE LOG JULIE ROMAIN THE RONDOLI SISTERS VOLUME VII.
THE FALSE GEMS FASCINATION YVETTE SAMORIS A VENDETTA MY TWENTY-FIVE DAYS “THE TERROR” LEGEND OF MONT ST.
MICHEL A NEW YEAR'S GIFT FRIEND PATIENCE ABANDONED THE MAISON TELLIER DENIS MY WIFE THE UNKNOWN THE APPARITION VOLUME VIII.
CLOCHETTE THE KISS THE LEGION OF HONOR THE TEST FOUND ON A DROWNED MAN THE ORPHAN THE BEGGAR THE RABBIT HIS AVENGER MY UNCLE JULES THE MODEL A VAGABOND THE FISHING HOLE THE SPASM IN THE WOOD MARTINE ALL OVER THE PARROT THE PIECE OF STRING VOLUME IX.
TOINE MADAME HUSSON'S “ROSIER” THE ADOPTED SON COWARD OLD MONGILET MOONLIGHT THE FIRST SNOWFALL SUNDAYS OF A BOURGEOIS A RECOLLECTION OUR LETTERS THE LOVE OF LONG AGO FRIEND JOSEPH THE EFFEMINATES OLD AMABLE VOLUME X.
THE CHRISTENING THE FARMER'S WIFE THE DEVIL THE SNIPE THE WILL WALTER SCHNAFFS' ADVENTURE AT SEA MINUET THE SON THAT PIG OF A MORIN SAINT ANTHONY LASTING LOVE PIERROT A NORMANDY JOKE FATHER MATTHEW VOLUME XI.
THE UMBRELLA BELHOMME'S BEAST DISCOVERY THE ACCURSED BREAD THE DOWRY THE DIARY OF A MADMAN THE MASK THE PENGUINS' ROCK A FAMILY SUICIDES AN ARTIFICE DREAMS SIMON'S PAPA VOLUME XII.
THE CHILD A COUNTRY EXCURSION ROSE ROSALIE PRUDENT REGRET A SISTER'S CONFESSION COCO DEAD WOMAN'S SECRET A HUMBLE DRAMA MADEMOISELLE COCOTTE THE CORSICAN BANDIT THE GRAVE VOLUME XIII.
GUY DE MAUPASSANT A STUDY BY POL.
In the month of April, 1880, an article appeared in the “Le Gaulois” announcing the publication of the Soirees de Medan.
It was signed by a name as yet unknown: Guy de Maupassant.
After a juvenile diatribe against romanticism and a passionate attack on languorous literature, the writer extolled the study of real life, and announced the publication of the new work.
It was picturesque and charming.
And the issue, in collaboration, of these tales in one volume, in which the master jostled elbows with his pupils, took on the appearance of a manifesto, the tone of a challenge, or the utterance of a creed.
In fact, however, the beginnings had been much more simple, and they had confined themselves, beneath the trees of Medan, to deciding on a general title for the work.
Zola had contributed the manuscript of the “Attaque du Moulin,” and it was at Maupassant's house that the five young men gave in their contributions.
Each one read his story, Maupassant being the last.
When he had finished Boule de Suif, with a spontaneous impulse, with an emotion they never forgot, filled with enthusiasm at this revelation, they all rose and, without superfluous words, acclaimed him as a master.
He undertook to write the article for the Gaulois and, in cooperation with his friends, he worded it in the terms with which we are familiar, amplifying and embellishing it, yielding to an inborn taste for mystification which his youth rendered excusable.
The essential point, he said, is to “unmoor” criticism.
The following day Wolff wrote a polemical dissertation in the Figaro and carried away his colleagues.
The volume was a brilliant success, thanks to Boule de Suif.
Relegated to the second rank, they passed without notice.
From his first battle, Maupassant was master of the field in literature.
At once the entire press took him up and said what was appropriate regarding the budding celebrity.
Biographers and reporters sought information concerning his life.
As it was very simple and perfectly straightforward, they resorted to invention.
And thus it is that at the present day Maupassant appears to us like one of those ancient heroes whose origin and death are veiled in mystery.
I will not dwell on Guy de Maupassant's younger days.
His relatives, his old friends, he himself, here and there in his works, have furnished us in their letters enough valuable revelations and touching remembrances of the years preceding his literary debut.
His worthy biographer, H.
Edouard Maynial, after collecting intelligently all the writings, condensing and comparing them, has been able to give us some definite information regarding that early period.
I will simply recall that he was born on the 5th of August, 1850, near Dieppe, in the castle of Miromesnil which he describes in Une Vie. . . .
Maupassant, like Flaubert, was a Norman, through his mother, and through his place of birth he belonged to that strange and adventurous race, whose heroic and long voyages on tramp trading ships he liked to recall.
And just as the author of “Education sentimentale” seems to have inherited in the paternal line the shrewd realism of Champagne, so de Maupassant appears to have inherited from his Lorraine ancestors their indestructible discipline and cold lucidity.
His childhood was passed at Etretat, his beautiful childhood; it was there that his instincts were awakened in the unfoldment of his prehistoric soul.
Years went by in an ecstasy of physical happiness.
The delight of running at full speed through fields of gorse, the charm of voyages of discovery in hollows and ravines, games beneath the dark hedges, a passion for going to sea with the fishermen and, on nights when there was no moon, for dreaming on their boats of imaginary voyages.
Mme. de Maupassant, who had guided her son's early reading, and had gazed with him at the sublime spectacle of nature, put, off as long as possible the hour of separation.
One day, however, she had to take the child to the little seminary at Yvetot.
Later, he became a student at the college at Rouen, and became a literary correspondent of Louis Bouilhet.
Vacation took the rhetorician back to the north of Normandy.
Now it was shooting at Saint Julien l'Hospitalier, across fields, bogs, and through the woods.
From that time on he sealed his pact with the earth, and those “deep and delicate roots” which attached him to his native soil began to grow.
It was of Normandy, broad, fresh and virile, that he would presently demand his inspiration, fervent and eager as a boy's love; it was in her that he would take refuge when, weary of life, he would implore a truce, or when he simply wished to work and revive his energies in old-time joys.
It was at this time that was born in him that voluptuous love of the sea, which in later days could alone withdraw him from the world, calm him, console him.
In 1870 he lived in the country, then he came to Paris to live; for, the family fortunes having dwindled, he had to look for a position.
For several years he was a clerk in the Ministry of Marine, where he turned over musty papers, in the uninteresting company of the clerks of the admiralty.
Then he went into the department of Public Instruction, where bureaucratic servility is less intolerable.
The daily duties are certainly scarcely more onerous and he had as chiefs, or colleagues, Xavier Charmes and Leon Dierx, Henry Roujon and Rene Billotte, but his office looked out on a beautiful melancholy garden with immense plane trees around which black circles of crows gathered in winter.
Maupassant made two divisions of his spare hours, one for boating, and the other for literature.
Every evening in spring, every free day, he ran down to the river whose mysterious current veiled in fog or sparkling in the sun called to him and bewitched him.
In the islands in the Seine between Chatou and Port-Marly, on the banks of Sartrouville and Triel he was long noted among the population of boatmen, who have now vanished, for his unwearying biceps, his cynical gaiety of good- fellowship, his unfailing practical jokes, his broad witticisms.
Without ever becoming despondent, silent and persistent, he accumulated manuscripts, poetry, criticisms, plays, romances and novels.
Every week he docilely submitted his work to the great Flaubert, the childhood friend of his mother and his uncle Alfred Le Poittevin.
The master had consented to assist the young man, to reveal to him the secrets that make chefs-d'oeuvre immortal.
It was he who compelled him to make copious research and to use direct observation and who inculcated in him a horror of vulgarity and a contempt for facility.
Maupassant himself tells us of those severe initiations in the Rue Murillo, or in the tent at Croisset; he has recalled the implacable didactics of his old master, his tender brutality, the paternal advice of his generous and candid heart.
For seven years Flaubert slashed, pulverized, the awkward attempts of his pupil whose success remained uncertain.
Suddenly, in a flight of spontaneous perfection, he wrote Boule de Suif.
His master's joy was great and overwhelming.
Until the end Maupassant remained illuminated by the reflection of the good, vanished giant, by that touching reflection that comes from the dead to those souls they have so profoundly stirred.
The worship of Flaubert was a religion from which nothing could distract him, neither work, nor glory, nor slow moving waves, nor balmy nights.
At the end of his short life, while his mind was still clear: he wrote to a friend: “I am always thinking of my poor Flaubert, and I say to myself that I should like to die if I were sure that anyone would think of me in the same manner.” During these long years of his novitiate Maupassant had entered the social literary circles.
He would remain silent, preoccupied; and if anyone, astonished at his silence, asked him about his plans he answered simply: “I am learning my trade.” However, under the pseudonym of Guy de Valmont, he had sent some articles to the newspapers, and, later, with the approval and by the advice of Flaubert, he published, in the “Republique des Lettres,” poems signed by his name.
These poems, overflowing with sensuality, where the hymn to the Earth describes the transports of physical possession, where the impatience of love expresses itself in loud melancholy appeals like the calls of animals in the spring nights, are valuable chiefly inasmuch as they reveal the creature of instinct, the fawn escaped from his native forests, that Maupassant was in his early youth.
They are the “rhymes of a prose writer” as Jules Lemaitre said.
To mould the expression of his thought according to the strictest laws, and to “narrow it down” to some extent, such was his aim.
Following the example of one of his comrades of Medan, being readily carried away by precision of style and the rhythm of sentences, by the imperious rule of the ballad, of the pantoum or the chant royal, Maupassant also desired to write in metrical lines.
However, he never liked this collection that he often regretted having published.
His encounters with prosody had left him with that monotonous weariness that the horseman and the fencer feel after a period in the riding school, or a bout with the foils.
Such, in very broad lines, is the story of Maupassant's literary apprenticeship.
The day following the publication of “Boule de Suif,” his reputation began to grow rapidly.
The quality of his story was unrivalled, but at the same time it must be acknowledged that there were some who, for the sake of discussion, desired to place a young reputation in opposition to the triumphant brutality of Zola.
From this time on, Maupassant, at the solicitation of the entire press, set to work and wrote story after story.
His talent, free from all influences, his individuality, are not disputed for a moment.
With a quick step, steady and alert, he advanced to fame, a fame of which he himself was not aware, but which was so universal, that no contemporary author during his life ever experienced the same.
The “meteor” sent out its light and its rays were prolonged without limit, in article after article, volume on volume.
He is esteemed all the more as they believe him to be rich and happy.
But they do not know that this young fellow with the sunburnt face, thick neck and salient muscles whom they invariably compare to a young bull at liberty, and whose love affairs they whisper, is ill, very ill.
At the very moment that success came to him, the malady that never afterwards left him came also, and, seated motionless at his side, gazed at him with its threatening countenance.
He suffered from terrible headaches, followed by nights of insomnia.
He had nervous attacks, which he soothed with narcotics and anesthetics, which he used freely.
His sight, which had troubled him at intervals, became affected, and a celebrated oculist spoke of abnormality, asymetry of the pupils.
The famous young man trembled in secret and was haunted by all kinds of terrors.
The reader is charmed at the saneness of this revived art and yet, here and there, he is surprised to discover, amid descriptions of nature that are full of humanity, disquieting flights towards the supernatural, distressing conjurations, veiled at first, of the most commonplace, the most vertiginous shuddering fits of fear, as old as the world and as eternal as the unknown.
But, instead of being alarmed, he thinks that the author must be gifted with infallible intuition to follow out thus the taints in his characters, even through their most dangerous mazes.
Alas! the explanation is only too simple.
All his life, consciously or unconsciously, Maupassant fought this malady, hidden as yet, which was latent in him.
As his malady began to take a more definite form, he turned his steps towards the south, only visiting Paris to see his physicians and publishers.
In the old port of Antibes beyond the causeway of Cannes, his yacht, Bel Ami, which he cherished as a brother, lay at anchor and awaited him.
After several tragic weeks in which, from instinct, he made a desperate fight, on the 1st of January, 1892, he felt he was hopelessly vanquished, and in a moment of supreme clearness of intellect, like Gerard de Nerval, he attempted suicide.
Less fortunate than the author of Sylvia, he was unsuccessful.
But his mind, henceforth “indifferent to all unhappiness,” had entered into eternal darkness.
Meuriot's sanatorium, where, after eighteen months of mechanical existence, the “meteor” quietly passed away.
BOULE DE SUIF For several days in succession fragments of a defeated army had passed through the town.
They were mere disorganized bands, not disciplined forces.
The men wore long, dirty beards and tattered uniforms; they advanced in listless fashion, without a flag, without a leader.
All seemed exhausted, worn out, incapable of thought or resolve, marching onward merely by force of habit, and dropping to the ground with fatigue the moment they halted.
Legions of irregulars with high-sounding names “Avengers of Defeat,” “Citizens of the Tomb,” “Brethren in Death”—passed in their turn, looking like banditti.
Rumor had it that the Prussians were about to enter Rouen.
The members of the National Guard, who for the past two months had been reconnoitering with the utmost caution in the neighboring woods, occasionally shooting their own sentinels, and making ready for fight whenever a rabbit rustled in the undergrowth, had now returned to their homes.
Their arms, their uniforms, all the death-dealing paraphernalia with which they had terrified all the milestones along the highroad for eight miles round, had suddenly and marvellously disappeared.
The last of the French soldiers had just crossed the Seine on their way to Pont-Audemer, through Saint-Sever and Bourg-Achard, and in their rear the vanquished general, powerless to do aught with the forlorn remnants of his army, himself dismayed at the final overthrow of a nation accustomed to victory and disastrously beaten despite its legendary bravery, walked between two orderlies.
Then a profound calm, a shuddering, silent dread, settled on the city.
Many a round-paunched citizen, emasculated by years devoted to business, anxiously awaited the conquerors, trembling lest his roasting-jacks or kitchen knives should be looked upon as weapons.
Life seemed to have stopped short; the shops were shut, the streets deserted.
Now and then an inhabitant, awed by the silence, glided swiftly by in the shadow of the walls.
The anguish of suspense made men even desire the arrival of the enemy.
In the afternoon of the day following the departure of the French troops, a number of uhlans, coming no one knew whence, passed rapidly through the town.
A little later on, a black mass descended St.
Catherine's Hill, while two other invading bodies appeared respectively on the Darnetal and the Boisguillaume roads.
The advance guards of the three corps arrived at precisely the same moment at the Square of the Hotel de Ville, and the German army poured through all the adjacent streets, its battalions making the pavement ring with their firm, measured tread.
For the same thing happens whenever the established order of things is upset, when security no longer exists, when all those rights usually protected by the law of man or of Nature are at the mercy of unreasoning, savage force.
Small detachments of soldiers knocked at each door, and then disappeared within the houses; for the vanquished saw they would have to be civil to their conquerors.
At the end of a short time, once the first terror had subsided, calm was again restored.
In many houses the Prussian officer ate at the same table with the family.
He was often well-bred, and, out of politeness, expressed sympathy with France and repugnance at being compelled to take part in the war.
This sentiment was received with gratitude; besides, his protection might be needful some day or other.
By the exercise of tact the number of men quartered in one's house might be reduced; and why should one provoke the hostility of a person on whom one's whole welfare depended?
Such conduct would savor less of bravery than of fool- hardiness.
And foolhardiness is no longer a failing of the citizens of Rouen as it was in the days when their city earned renown by its heroic defenses.
Last of all-final argument based on the national politeness—the folk of Rouen said to one another that it was only right to be civil in one's own house, provided there was no public exhibition of familiarity with the foreigner.
Out of doors, therefore, citizen and soldier did not know each other; but in the house both chatted freely, and each evening the German remained a little longer warming himself at the hospitable hearth.
Even the town itself resumed by degrees its ordinary aspect.
The French seldom walked abroad, but the streets swarmed with Prussian soldiers.
Moreover, the officers of the Blue Hussars, who arrogantly dragged their instruments of death along the pavements, seemed to hold the simple townsmen in but little more contempt than did the French cavalry officers who had drunk at the same cafes the year before.
But there was something in the air, a something strange and subtle, an intolerable foreign atmosphere like a penetrating odor—the odor of invasion.
It permeated dwellings and places of public resort, changed the taste of food, made one imagine one's self in far-distant lands, amid dangerous, barbaric tribes.
The conquerors exacted money, much money.
The inhabitants paid what was asked; they were rich.
But, the wealthier a Norman tradesman becomes, the more he suffers at having to part with anything that belongs to him, at having to see any portion of his substance pass into the hands of another.
Nevertheless, within six or seven miles of the town, along the course of the river as it flows onward to Croisset, Dieppedalle and Biessart, boat-men and fishermen often hauled to the surface of the water the body of a German, bloated in his uniform, killed by a blow from knife or club, his head crushed by a stone, or perchance pushed from some bridge into the stream below.
The mud of the river-bed swallowed up these obscure acts of vengeance—savage, yet legitimate; these unrecorded deeds of bravery; these silent attacks fraught with greater danger than battles fought in broad day, and surrounded, moreover, with no halo of romance.
For hatred of the foreigner ever arms a few intrepid souls, ready to die for an idea.
At last, as the invaders, though subjecting the town to the strictest discipline, had not committed any of the deeds of horror with which they had been credited while on their triumphal march, the people grew bolder, and the necessities of business again animated the breasts of the local merchants.
Some of these had important commercial interests at Havre —occupied at present by the French army—and wished to attempt to reach that port by overland route to Dieppe, taking the boat from there.
Through the influence of the German officers whose acquaintance they had made, they obtained a permit to leave town from the general in command.
A large four-horse coach having, therefore, been engaged for the journey, and ten passengers having given in their names to the proprietor, they decided to start on a certain Tuesday morning before daybreak, to avoid attracting a crowd.
The ground had been frozen hard for some time-past, and about three o'clock on Monday afternoon—large black clouds from the north shed their burden of snow uninterruptedly all through that evening and night.
At half-past four in the morning the travellers met in the courtyard of the Hotel de Normandie, where they were to take their seats in the coach.
They were still half asleep, and shivering with cold under their wraps.
They could see one another but indistinctly in the darkness, and the mountain of heavy winter wraps in which each was swathed made them look like a gathering of obese priests in their long cassocks.
But two men recognized each other, a third accosted them, and the three began to talk.
“I am bringing my wife,” said one.
“So am I.” “And I, too.” The first speaker added: “We shall not return to Rouen, and if the Prussians approach Havre we will cross to England.” All three, it turned out, had made the same plans, being of similar disposition and temperament.
Still the horses were not harnessed.
A small lantern carried by a stable-boy emerged now and then from one dark doorway to disappear immediately in another.
The stamping of horses' hoofs, deadened by the dung and straw of the stable, was heard from time to time, and from inside the building issued a man's voice, talking to the animals and swearing at them.
A faint tinkle of bells showed that the harness was being got ready; this tinkle soon developed into a continuous jingling, louder or softer according to the movements of the horse, sometimes stopping altogether, then breaking out in a sudden peal accompanied by a pawing of the ground by an iron-shod hoof.
The door suddenly closed.
The frozen townsmen were silent; they remained motionless, stiff with cold.
The man reappeared with his lantern, leading by a rope a melancholy- looking horse, evidently being led out against his inclination.
The hostler placed him beside the pole, fastened the traces, and spent some time in walking round him to make sure that the harness was all right; for he could use only one hand, the other being engaged in holding the lantern.
As he was about to fetch the second horse he noticed the motionless group of travellers, already white with snow, and said to them: “Why don't you get inside the coach?
You'd be under shelter, at least.” This did not seem to have occurred to them, and they at once took his advice.
The three men seated their wives at the far end of the coach, then got in themselves; lastly the other vague, snow-shrouded forms clambered to the remaining places without a word.
The ladies at the far end, having brought with them little copper foot-warmers heated by means of a kind of chemical fuel, proceeded to light these, and spent some time in expatiating in low tones on their advantages, saying over and over again things which they had all known for a long time.
At last, six horses instead of four having been harnessed to the diligence, on account of the heavy roads, a voice outside asked: “Is every one there?” To which a voice from the interior replied: “Yes,” and they set out.
Those light flakes which one traveller, a native of Rouen, had compared to a rain of cotton fell no longer.
A murky light filtered through dark, heavy clouds, which made the country more dazzlingly white by contrast, a whiteness broken sometimes by a row of tall trees spangled with hoarfrost, or by a cottage roof hooded in snow.
Within the coach the passengers eyed one another curiously in the dim light of dawn.
Right at the back, in the best seats of all, Monsieur and Madame Loiseau, wholesale wine merchants of the Rue Grand-Pont, slumbered opposite each other.
Formerly clerk to a merchant who had failed in business, Loiseau had bought his master's interest, and made a fortune for himself.
He sold very bad wine at a very low price to the retail- dealers in the country, and had the reputation, among his friends and acquaintances, of being a shrewd rascal a true Norman, full of quips and wiles.
So well established was his character as a cheat that, in the mouths of the citizens of Rouen, the very name of Loiseau became a byword for sharp practice.
Above and beyond this, Loiseau was noted for his practical jokes of every description—his tricks, good or ill-natured; and no one could mention his name without adding at once: “He's an extraordinary man—Loiseau.” He was undersized and potbellied, had a florid face with grayish whiskers.
His wife-tall, strong, determined, with a loud voice and decided manner —represented the spirit of order and arithmetic in the business house which Loiseau enlivened by his jovial activity.
Beside them, dignified in bearing, belonging to a superior caste, sat Monsieur Carre-Lamadon, a man of considerable importance, a king in the cotton trade, proprietor of three spinning-mills, officer of the Legion of Honor, and member of the General Council.
During the whole time the Empire was in the ascendancy he remained the chief of the well-disposed Opposition, merely in order to command a higher value for his devotion when he should rally to the cause which he meanwhile opposed with “courteous weapons,” to use his own expression.
Madame Carre-Lamadon, much younger than her husband, was the consolation of all the officers of good family quartered at Rouen.
Pretty, slender, graceful, she sat opposite her husband, curled up in her furs, and gazing mournfully at the sorry interior of the coach.
Her neighbors, the Comte and Comtesse Hubert de Breville, bore one of the noblest and most ancient names in Normandy.
A colleague of Monsieur Carre-Lamadon in the General Council, Count Hubert represented the Orleanist party in his department.
The story of his marriage with the daughter of a small shipowner at Nantes had always remained more or less of a mystery.
But as the countess had an air of unmistakable breeding, entertained faultlessly, and was even supposed to have been loved by a son of Louis-Philippe, the nobility vied with one another in doing her honor, and her drawing-room remained the most select in the whole countryside—the only one which retained the old spirit of gallantry, and to which access was not easy.
The fortune of the Brevilles, all in real estate, amounted, it was said, to five hundred thousand francs a year.
These six people occupied the farther end of the coach, and represented Society—with an income—the strong, established society of good people with religion and principle.
It happened by chance that all the women were seated on the same side; and the countess had, moreover, as neighbors two nuns, who spent the time in fingering their long rosaries and murmuring paternosters and aves.
One of them was old, and so deeply pitted with smallpox that she looked for all the world as if she had received a charge of shot full in the face.
The other, of sickly appearance, had a pretty but wasted countenance, and a narrow, consumptive chest, sapped by that devouring faith which is the making of martyrs and visionaries.
A man and woman, sitting opposite the two nuns, attracted all eyes.
The man—a well-known character—was Cornudet, the democrat, the terror of all respectable people.
For the past twenty years his big red beard had been on terms of intimate acquaintance with the tankards of all the republican cafes.
With the help of his comrades and brethren he had dissipated a respectable fortune left him by his father, an old- established confectioner, and he now impatiently awaited the Republic, that he might at last be rewarded with the post he had earned by his revolutionary orgies.
On the fourth of September—possibly as the result of a practical joke—he was led to believe that he had been appointed prefect; but when he attempted to take up the duties of the position the clerks in charge of the office refused to recognize his authority, and he was compelled in consequence to retire.
A good sort of fellow in other respects, inoffensive and obliging, he had thrown himself zealously into the work of making an organized defence of the town.
He had had pits dug in the level country, young forest trees felled, and traps set on all the roads; then at the approach of the enemy, thoroughly satisfied with his preparations, he had hastily returned to the town.
He thought he might now do more good at Havre, where new intrenchments would soon be necessary.
The woman, who belonged to the courtesan class, was celebrated for an embonpoint unusual for her age, which had earned for her the sobriquet of “Boule de Suif” (Tallow Ball).
Short and round, fat as a pig, with puffy fingers constricted at the joints, looking like rows of short sausages; with a shiny, tightly-stretched skin and an enormous bust filling out the bodice of her dress, she was yet attractive and much sought after, owing to her fresh and pleasing appearance.
Her face was like a crimson apple, a peony-bud just bursting into bloom; she had two magnificent dark eyes, fringed with thick, heavy lashes, which cast a shadow into their depths; her mouth was small, ripe, kissable, and was furnished with the tiniest of white teeth.
As soon as she was recognized the respectable matrons of the party began to whisper among themselves, and the words “hussy” and “public scandal” were uttered so loudly that Boule de Suif raised her head.
She forthwith cast such a challenging, bold look at her neighbors that a sudden silence fell on the company, and all lowered their eyes, with the exception of Loiseau, who watched her with evident interest.
But conversation was soon resumed among the three ladies, whom the presence of this girl had suddenly drawn together in the bonds of friendship—one might almost say in those of intimacy.
They decided that they ought to combine, as it were, in their dignity as wives in face of this shameless hussy; for legitimized love always despises its easygoing brother.
The three men, also, brought together by a certain conservative instinct awakened by the presence of Cornudet, spoke of money matters in a tone expressive of contempt for the poor.
Count Hubert related the losses he had sustained at the hands of the Prussians, spoke of the cattle which had been stolen from him, the crops which had been ruined, with the easy manner of a nobleman who was also a tenfold millionaire, and whom such reverses would scarcely inconvenience for a single year.
Monsieur Carre- Lamadon, a man of wide experience in the cotton industry, had taken care to send six hundred thousand francs to England as provision against the rainy day he was always anticipating.
As for Loiseau, he had managed to sell to the French commissariat department all the wines he had in stock, so that the state now owed him a considerable sum, which he hoped to receive at Havre.
And all three eyed one another in friendly, well-disposed fashion.
Although of varying social status, they were united in the brotherhood of money—in that vast freemasonry made up of those who possess, who can jingle gold wherever they choose to put their hands into their breeches' pockets.
The passengers were becoming uneasy, for they had counted on lunching at Totes, and it seemed now as if they would hardly arrive there before nightfall.
Every one was eagerly looking out for an inn by the roadside, when, suddenly, the coach foundered in a snowdrift, and it took two hours to extricate it.
As appetites increased, their spirits fell; no inn, no wine shop could be discovered, the approach of the Prussians and the transit of the starving French troops having frightened away all business.
The men sought food in the farmhouses beside the road, but could not find so much as a crust of bread; for the suspicious peasant invariably hid his stores for fear of being pillaged by the soldiers, who, being entirely without food, would take violent possession of everything they found.
About one o'clock Loiseau announced that he positively had a big hollow in his stomach.
They had all been suffering in the same way for some time, and the increasing gnawings of hunger had put an end to all conversation.
Now and then some one yawned, another followed his example, and each in turn, according to his character, breeding and social position, yawned either quietly or noisily, placing his hand before the gaping void whence issued breath condensed into vapor.
Several times Boule de Suif stooped, as if searching for something under her petticoats.
She would hesitate a moment, look at her neighbors, and then quietly sit upright again.
Loiseau declared he would give a thousand francs for a knuckle of ham.
His wife made an involuntary and quickly checked gesture of protest.
It always hurt her to hear of money being squandered, and she could not even understand jokes on such a subject.
“Why did I not think of bringing provisions?” Each one reproached himself in similar fashion.
Cornudet, however, had a bottle of rum, which he offered to his neighbors.
They all coldly refused except Loiseau, who took a sip, and returned the bottle with thanks, saying: “That's good stuff; it warms one up, and cheats the appetite.” The alcohol put him in good humor, and he proposed they should do as the sailors did in the song: eat the fattest of the passengers.
This indirect allusion to Boule de Suif shocked the respectable members of the party.
No one replied; only Cornudet smiled.
The two good sisters had ceased to mumble their rosary, and, with hands enfolded in their wide sleeves, sat motionless, their eyes steadfastly cast down, doubtless offering up as a sacrifice to Heaven the suffering it had sent them.
At last, at three o'clock, as they were in the midst of an apparently limitless plain, with not a single village in sight, Boule de Suif stooped quickly, and drew from underneath the seat a large basket covered with a white napkin.
From this she extracted first of all a small earthenware plate and a silver drinking cup, then an enormous dish containing two whole chickens cut into joints and imbedded in jelly.
The basket was seen to contain other good things: pies, fruit, dainties of all sorts-provisions, in fine, for a three days' journey, rendering their owner independent of wayside inns.
The necks of four bottles protruded from among the food.
She took a chicken wing, and began to eat it daintily, together with one of those rolls called in Normandy “Regence.” All looks were directed toward her.
An odor of food filled the air, causing nostrils to dilate, mouths to water, and jaws to contract painfully.
The scorn of the ladies for this disreputable female grew positively ferocious; they would have liked to kill her, or throw, her and her drinking cup, her basket, and her provisions, out of the coach into the snow of the road below.
But Loiseau's gaze was fixed greedily on the dish of chicken.
He said: “Well, well, this lady had more forethought than the rest of us.
Some people think of everything.” She looked up at him.
All is fair in war time, is it not, madame?” And, casting a glance on those around, he added: “At times like this it is very pleasant to meet with obliging people.” He spread a newspaper over his knees to avoid soiling his trousers, and, with a pocketknife he always carried, helped himself to a chicken leg coated with jelly, which he thereupon proceeded to devour.
They both accepted the offer unhesitatingly, and after a few stammered words of thanks began to eat quickly, without raising their eyes.
Neither did Cornudet refuse his neighbor's offer, and, in combination with the nuns, a sort of table was formed by opening out the newspaper over the four pairs of knees.
Mouths kept opening and shutting, ferociously masticating and devouring the food.
She held out for a long time, but overstrained Nature gave way at last.
Her husband, assuming his politest manner, asked their “charming companion” if he might be allowed to offer Madame Loiseau a small helping.
“Why, certainly, sir,” she replied, with an amiable smile, holding out the dish.
When the first bottle of claret was opened some embarrassment was caused by the fact that there was only one drinking cup, but this was passed from one to another, after being wiped.
Cornudet alone, doubtless in a spirit of gallantry, raised to his own lips that part of the rim which was still moist from those of his fair neighbor.
Then, surrounded by people who were eating, and well-nigh suffocated by the odor of food, the Comte and Comtesse de Breville and Monsieur and Madame Carre-Lamadon endured that hateful form of torture which has perpetuated the name of Tantalus.
All at once the manufacturer's young wife heaved a sigh which made every one turn and look at her; she was white as the snow without; her eyes closed, her head fell forward; she had fainted.
Her husband, beside himself, implored the help of his neighbors.
No one seemed to know what to do until the elder of the two nuns, raising the patient's head, placed Boule de Suif's drinking cup to her lips, and made her swallow a few drops of wine.
The pretty invalid moved, opened her eyes, smiled, and declared in a feeble voice that she was all right again.
But, to prevent a recurrence of the catastrophe, the nun made her drink a cupful of claret, adding: “It's just hunger —that's what is wrong with you.” Then Boule de Suif, blushing and embarrassed, stammered, looking at the four passengers who were still fasting: “'Mon Dieu', if I might offer these ladies and gentlemen——” She stopped short, fearing a snub.
But Loiseau continued: “Hang it all, in such a case as this we are all brothers and sisters and ought to assist each other.
Come, come, ladies, don't stand on ceremony, for goodness' sake!
At our present rate of going we sha'n't be at Totes till midday to-morrow.” They hesitated, no one daring to be the first to accept.
But the count settled the question.
He turned toward the abashed girl, and in his most distinguished manner said: “We accept gratefully, madame.” As usual, it was only the first step that cost.
It still contained a pate de foie gras, a lark pie, a piece of smoked tongue, Crassane pears, Pont-Leveque gingerbread, fancy cakes, and a cup full of pickled gherkins and onions—Boule de Suif, like all women, being very fond of indigestible things.
They could not eat this girl's provisions without speaking to her.
Mesdames de Breville and Carre-Lamadon, who were accomplished women of the world, were gracious and tactful.
The countess especially displayed that amiable condescension characteristic of great ladies whom no contact with baser mortals can sully, and was absolutely charming.
But the sturdy Madame Loiseau, who had the soul of a gendarme, continued morose, speaking little and eating much.
Conversation naturally turned on the war.
Terrible stories were told about the Prussians, deeds of bravery were recounted of the French; and all these people who were fleeing themselves were ready to pay homage to the courage of their compatriots.
Personal experiences soon followed, and Boule le Suif related with genuine emotion, and with that warmth of language not uncommon in women of her class and temperament, how it came about that she had left Rouen.
“My house was well stocked with provisions, and it seemed better to put up with feeding a few soldiers than to banish myself goodness knows where.
But when I saw these Prussians it was too much for me!
I looked at them from my window—the fat swine, with their pointed helmets!—and my maid held my hands to keep me from throwing my furniture down on them.
Then some of them were quartered on me; I flew at the throat of the first one who entered.
They are just as easy to strangle as other men!
And as soon as I could get an opportunity I left the place, and here I am.” She was warmly congratulated.
She rose in the estimation of her companions, who had not been so brave; and Cornudet listened to her with the approving and benevolent smile of an apostle, the smile a priest might wear in listening to a devotee praising God; for long-bearded democrats of his type have a monopoly of patriotism, just as priests have a monopoly of religion.
He held forth in turn, with dogmatic self- assurance, in the style of the proclamations daily pasted on the walls of the town, winding up with a specimen of stump oratory in which he reviled “that besotted fool of a Louis-Napoleon.” But Boule de Suif was indignant, for she was an ardent Bonapartist.
She turned as red as a cherry, and stammered in her wrath: “I'd just like to have seen you in his place—you and your sort!
It was you who betrayed that man.
It would be impossible to live in France if we were governed by such rascals as you!” Cornudet, unmoved by this tirade, still smiled a superior, contemptuous smile; and one felt that high words were impending, when the count interposed, and, not without difficulty, succeeded in calming the exasperated woman, saying that all sincere opinions ought to be respected.
But the countess and the manufacturer's wife, imbued with the unreasoning hatred of the upper classes for the Republic, and instinct, moreover, with the affection felt by all women for the pomp and circumstance of despotic government, were drawn, in spite of themselves, toward this dignified young woman, whose opinions coincided so closely with their own.
The ten people had finished its contents without difficulty amid general regret that it did not hold more.
Conversation went on a little longer, though it flagged somewhat after the passengers had finished eating.
Night fell, the darkness grew deeper and deeper, and the cold made Boule de Suif shiver, in spite of her plumpness.
So Madame de Breville offered her her foot-warmer, the fuel of which had been several times renewed since the morning, and she accepted the offer at once, for her feet were icy cold.
Mesdames Carre-Lamadon and Loiseau gave theirs to the nuns.
The driver lighted his lanterns.
They cast a bright gleam on a cloud of vapor which hovered over the sweating flanks of the horses, and on the roadside snow, which seemed to unroll as they went along in the changing light of the lamps.
All was now indistinguishable in the coach; but suddenly a movement occurred in the corner occupied by Boule de Suif and Cornudet; and Loiseau, peering into the gloom, fancied he saw the big, bearded democrat move hastily to one side, as if he had received a well- directed, though noiseless, blow in the dark.
Tiny lights glimmered ahead.
The coach had been on the road eleven hours, which, with the three hours allotted the horses in four periods for feeding and breathing, made fourteen.
It entered the town, and stopped before the Hotel du Commerce.
The coach door opened; a well-known noise made all the travellers start; it was the clanging of a scabbard, on the pavement; then a voice called out something in German.
Although the coach had come to a standstill, no one got out; it looked as if they were afraid of being murdered the moment they left their seats.
Thereupon the driver appeared, holding in his hand one of his lanterns, which cast a sudden glow on the interior of the coach, lighting up the double row of startled faces, mouths agape, and eyes wide open in surprise and terror.
His exaggerated mustache, long and straight and tapering to a point at either end in a single blond hair that could hardly be seen, seemed to weigh down the corners of his mouth and give a droop to his lips.
In Alsatian French he requested the travellers to alight, saying stiffly: “Kindly get down, ladies and gentlemen.” The two nuns were the first to obey, manifesting the docility of holy women accustomed to submission on every occasion.
Next appeared the count and countess, followed by the manufacturer and his wife, after whom came Loiseau, pushing his larger and better half before him.
“Good-day, sir,” he said to the officer as he put his foot to the ground, acting on an impulse born of prudence rather than of politeness.
The other, insolent like all in authority, merely stared without replying.
Boule de Suif and Cornudet, though near the door, were the last to alight, grave and dignified before the enemy.
The stout girl tried to control herself and appear calm; the democrat stroked his long russet beard with a somewhat trembling hand.
They entered the spacious kitchen of the inn, and the German, having demanded the passports signed by the general in command, in which were mentioned the name, description and profession of each traveller, inspected them all minutely, comparing their appearance with the written particulars.
Then he said brusquely: “All right,” and turned on his heel.
They breathed freely, All were still hungry; so supper was ordered.
Half an hour was required for its preparation, and while two servants were apparently engaged in getting it ready the travellers went to look at their rooms.
These all opened off a long corridor, at the end of which was a glazed door with a number on it.
They were just about to take their seats at table when the innkeeper appeared in person.
He was a former horse dealer—a large, asthmatic individual, always wheezing, coughing, and clearing his throat.
Follenvie was his patronymic.
He called: “Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset?” Boule de Suif started, and turned round.
“That is my name.” “Mademoiselle, the Prussian officer wishes to speak to you immediately.” “To me?” “Yes; if you are Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset.” She hesitated, reflected a moment, and then declared roundly: “That may be; but I'm not going.” They moved restlessly around her; every one wondered and speculated as to the cause of this order.
The count approached: “You are wrong, madame, for your refusal may bring trouble not only on yourself but also on all your companions.
It never pays to resist those in authority.
Your compliance with this request cannot possibly be fraught with any danger; it has probably been made because some formality or other was forgotten.” All added their voices to that of the count; Boule de Suif was begged, urged, lectured, and at last convinced; every one was afraid of the complications which might result from headstrong action on her part.
She said finally: “I am doing it for your sakes, remember that!” The countess took her hand.
“And we are grateful to you.” She left the room.
All waited for her return before commencing the meal.
Each was distressed that he or she had not been sent for rather than this impulsive, quick-tempered girl, and each mentally rehearsed platitudes in case of being summoned also.
But at the end of ten minutes she reappeared breathing hard, crimson with indignation.
“Oh! the scoundrel! the scoundrel!” she stammered.
All were anxious to know what had happened; but she declined to enlighten them, and when the count pressed the point, she silenced him with much dignity, saying: “No; the matter has nothing to do with you, and I cannot speak of it.” Then they took their places round a high soup tureen, from which issued an odor of cabbage.
In spite of this coincidence, the supper was cheerful.
The cider was good; the Loiseaus and the nuns drank it from motives of economy.
The others ordered wine; Cornudet demanded beer.
He had his own fashion of uncorking the bottle and making the beer foam, gazing at it as he inclined his glass and then raised it to a position between the lamp and his eye that he might judge of its color.
When he drank, his great beard, which matched the color of his favorite beverage, seemed to tremble with affection; his eyes positively squinted in the endeavor not to lose sight of the beloved glass, and he looked for all the world as if he were fulfilling the only function for which he was born.
He seemed to have established in his mind an affinity between the two great passions of his life—pale ale and revolution—and assuredly he could not taste the one without dreaming of the other.
Monsieur and Madame Follenvie dined at the end of the table.
The man, wheezing like a broken-down locomotive, was too short-winded to talk when he was eating.
But the wife was not silent a moment; she told how the Prussians had impressed her on their arrival, what they did, what they said; execrating them in the first place because they cost her money, and in the second because she had two sons in the army.
She addressed herself principally to the countess, flattered at the opportunity of talking to a lady of quality.
Then she lowered her voice, and began to broach delicate subjects.
Her husband interrupted her from time to time, saying: “You would do well to hold your tongue, Madame Follenvie.” But she took no notice of him, and went on: “Yes, madame, these Germans do nothing but eat potatoes and pork, and then pork and potatoes.
And if only you saw them drilling for hours, indeed for days, together; they all collect in a field, then they do nothing but march backward and forward, and wheel this way and that.
If only they would cultivate the land, or remain at home and work on their high roads!
Really, madame, these soldiers are of no earthly use!
True, I am only an old woman with no education, but when I see them wearing themselves out marching about from morning till night, I say to myself: When there are people who make discoveries that are of use to people, why should others take so much trouble to do harm?
Really, now, isn't it a terrible thing to kill people, whether they are Prussians, or English, or Poles, or French?
If we revenge ourselves on any one who injures us we do wrong, and are punished for it; but when our sons are shot down like partridges, that is all right, and decorations are given to the man who kills the most.
“Bravo, citizens!” he said.
Monsieur Carre-Lamadon was reflecting profoundly.
Although an ardent admirer of great generals, the peasant woman's sturdy common sense made him reflect on the wealth which might accrue to a country by the employment of so many idle hands now maintained at a great expense, of so much unproductive force, if they were employed in those great industrial enterprises which it will take centuries to complete.
But Loiseau, leaving his seat, went over to the innkeeper and began chatting in a low voice.
The big man chuckled, coughed, sputtered; his enormous carcass shook with merriment at the pleasantries of the other; and he ended by buying six casks of claret from Loiseau to be delivered in spring, after the departure of the Prussians.
She held a candle in her hand, and directed her steps to the numbered door at the end of the corridor.
But one of the side doors was partly opened, and when, at the end of a few minutes, she returned, Cornudet, in his shirt- sleeves, followed her.
Boule de Suif seemed to be stoutly denying him admission to her room.
Unfortunately, Loiseau could not at first hear what they said; but toward the end of the conversation they raised their voices, and he caught a few words.
Cornudet was loudly insistent.
She seemed indignant, and replied: “No, my good man, there are times when one does not do that sort of thing; besides, in this place it would be shameful.” Apparently he did not understand, and asked the reason.
Can't you understand why?
When there are Prussians in the house!
The patriotic shame of this wanton, who would not suffer herself to be caressed in the neighborhood of the enemy, must have roused his dormant dignity, for after bestowing on her a simple kiss he crept softly back to his room.
Loiseau, much edified, capered round the bedroom before taking his place beside his slumbering spouse.
Then silence reigned throughout the house.
But soon there arose from some remote part—it might easily have been either cellar or attic—a stertorous, monotonous, regular snoring, a dull, prolonged rumbling, varied by tremors like those of a boiler under pressure of steam.
Monsieur Follenvie had gone to sleep.
As they had decided on starting at eight o'clock the next morning, every one was in the kitchen at that hour; but the coach, its roof covered with snow, stood by itself in the middle of the yard, without either horses or driver.
So the men of the party resolved to scour the country for him, and sallied forth.
They found themselves in the square, with the church at the farther side, and to right and left low-roofed houses where there were some Prussian soldiers.
The first soldier they saw was peeling potatoes.
Another, bearded to the eyes, was fondling a crying infant, and dandling it on his knees to quiet it; and the stout peasant women, whose men-folk were for the most part at the war, were, by means of signs, telling their obedient conquerors what work they were to do: chop wood, prepare soup, grind coffee; one of them even was doing the washing for his hostess, an infirm old grandmother.
The count, astonished at what he saw, questioned the beadle who was coming out of the presbytery.
The old man answered: “Oh, those men are not at all a bad sort; they are not Prussians, I am told; they come from somewhere farther off, I don't exactly know where.
And they have all left wives and children behind them; they are not fond of war either, you may be sure!
I am sure they are mourning for the men where they come from, just as we do here; and the war causes them just as much unhappiness as it does us.
As a matter of fact, things are not so very bad here just now, because the soldiers do no harm, and work just as if they were in their own homes.
You see, sir, poor folk always help one another; it is the great ones of this world who make war.” Cornudet indignant at the friendly understanding established between conquerors and conquered, withdrew, preferring to shut himself up in the inn.
“They are repeopling the country,” jested Loiseau.
“They are undoing the harm they have done,” said Monsieur Carre-Lamadon gravely.
At last he was discovered in the village cafe, fraternizing cordially with the officer's orderly.
“Were you not told to harness the horses at eight o'clock?” demanded the count.
“Oh, yes; but I've had different orders since.” “What orders?” “Not to harness at all.” “Who gave you such orders?” “Why, the Prussian officer.” “But why?” “I don't know.
I am forbidden to harness the horses, so I don't harness them—that's all.” “Did he tell you so himself?” “No, sir; the innkeeper gave me the order from him.” “When?” “Last evening, just as I was going to bed.” The three men returned in a very uneasy frame of mind.
They asked for Monsieur Follenvie, but the servant replied that on account of his asthma he never got up before ten o'clock.
They were strictly forbidden to rouse him earlier, except in case of fire.
They wished to see the officer, but that also was impossible, although he lodged in the inn.
Monsieur Follenvie alone was authorized to interview him on civil matters.
The women returned to their rooms, and occupied themselves with trivial matters.
Cornudet settled down beside the tall kitchen fireplace, before a blazing fire.
He had a small table and a jug of beer placed beside him, and he smoked his pipe—a pipe which enjoyed among democrats a consideration almost equal to his own, as though it had served its country in serving Cornudet.
It was a fine meerschaum, admirably colored to a black the shade of its owner's teeth, but sweet-smelling, gracefully curved, at home in its master's hand, and completing his physiognomy.
And Cornudet sat motionless, his eyes fixed now on the dancing flames, now on the froth which crowned his beer; and after each draught he passed his long, thin fingers with an air of satisfaction through his long, greasy hair, as he sucked the foam from his mustache.
Loiseau, under pretence of stretching his legs, went out to see if he could sell wine to the country dealers.
The count and the manufacturer began to talk politics.
They forecast the future of France.
One believed in the Orleans dynasty, the other in an unknown savior—a hero who should rise up in the last extremity: a Du Guesclin, perhaps a Joan of Arc? or another Napoleon the First?
Ah! if only the Prince Imperial were not so young!
Cornudet, listening to them, smiled like a man who holds the keys of destiny in his hands.
His pipe perfumed the whole kitchen.
As the clock struck ten, Monsieur Follenvie appeared.
He was immediately surrounded and questioned, but could only repeat, three or four times in succession, and without variation, the words: “The officer said to me, just like this: 'Monsieur Follenvie, you will forbid them to harness up the coach for those travellers to-morrow.
That is sufficient.'” Then they asked to see the officer.
The count sent him his card, on which Monsieur Carre-Lamadon also inscribed his name and titles.
The Prussian sent word that the two men would be admitted to see him after his luncheon—that is to say, about one o'clock.
The ladies reappeared, and they all ate a little, in spite of their anxiety.
Boule de Suif appeared ill and very much worried.
They were finishing their coffee when the orderly came to fetch the gentlemen.
Loiseau joined the other two; but when they tried to get Cornudet to accompany them, by way of adding greater solemnity to the occasion, he declared proudly that he would never have anything to do with the Germans, and, resuming his seat in the chimney corner, he called for another jug of beer.
The three men went upstairs, and were ushered into the best room in the inn, where the officer received them lolling at his ease in an armchair, his feet on the mantelpiece, smoking a long porcelain pipe, and enveloped in a gorgeous dressing-gown, doubtless stolen from the deserted dwelling of some citizen destitute of taste in dress.
He neither rose, greeted them, nor even glanced in their direction.
He afforded a fine example of that insolence of bearing which seems natural to the victorious soldier.
“No.” “May I ask the reason of your refusal?” “Because I don't choose.” “I would respectfully call your attention, monsieur, to the fact that your general in command gave us a permit to proceed to Dieppe; and I do not think we have done anything to deserve this harshness at your hands.” “I don't choose—that's all.
The afternoon was wretched.
They could not understand the caprice of this German, and the strangest ideas came into their heads.
They all congregated in the kitchen, and talked the subject to death, imagining all kinds of unlikely things.
Perhaps they were to be kept as hostages —but for what reason? or to be extradited as prisoners of war? or possibly they were to be held for ransom?
They were panic-stricken at this last supposition.
The richest among them were the most alarmed, seeing themselves forced to empty bags of gold into the insolent soldier's hands in order to buy back their lives.
They racked their brains for plausible lies whereby they might conceal the fact that they were rich, and pass themselves off as poor—very poor.
The approach of night increased their apprehension.
The lamp was lighted, and as it wanted yet two hours to dinner Madame Loiseau proposed a game of trente et un.
It would distract their thoughts.
The rest agreed, and Cornudet himself joined the party, first putting out his pipe for politeness' sake.
The count shuffled the cards—dealt—and Boule de Suif had thirty-one to start with; soon the interest of the game assuaged the anxiety of the players.
But Cornudet noticed that Loiseau and his wife were in league to cheat.
They were about to sit down to dinner when Monsieur Follenvie appeared, and in his grating voice announced: “The Prussian officer sends to ask Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset if she has changed her mind yet.” Boule de Suif stood still, pale as death.
Then, suddenly turning crimson with anger, she gasped out: “Kindly tell that scoundrel, that cur, that carrion of a Prussian, that I will never consent—you understand?—never, never, never!” The fat innkeeper left the room.
Then Boule de Suif was surrounded, questioned, entreated on all sides to reveal the mystery of her visit to the officer.
He wants to make me his mistress!” she cried.
No one was shocked at the word, so great was the general indignation.
Cornudet broke his jug as he banged it down on the table.
They drew together in common resistance against the foe, as if some part of the sacrifice exacted of Boule de Suif had been demanded of each.
The count declared, with supreme disgust, that those people behaved like ancient barbarians.
The women, above all, manifested a lively and tender sympathy for Boule de Suif.
The nuns, who appeared only at meals, cast down their eyes, and said nothing.
They dined, however, as soon as the first indignant outburst had subsided; but they spoke little and thought much.
The ladies went to bed early; and the men, having lighted their pipes, proposed a game of ecarte, in which Monsieur Follenvie was invited to join, the travellers hoping to question him skillfully as to the best means of vanquishing the officer's obduracy.
But he thought of nothing but his cards, would listen to nothing, reply to nothing, and repeated, time after time: “Attend to the game, gentlemen! attend to the game!” So absorbed was his attention that he even forgot to expectorate.
The consequence was that his chest gave forth rumbling sounds like those of an organ.
His wheezing lungs struck every note of the asthmatic scale, from deep, hollow tones to a shrill, hoarse piping resembling that of a young cock trying to crow.
He refused to go to bed when his wife, overcome with sleep, came to fetch him.
So she went off alone, for she was an early bird, always up with the sun; while he was addicted to late hours, ever ready to spend the night with friends.
When the other men saw that nothing was to be got out of him they declared it was time to retire, and each sought his bed.
They rose fairly early the next morning, with a vague hope of being allowed to start, a greater desire than ever to do so, and a terror at having to spend another day in this wretched little inn.
Alas! the horses remained in the stable, the driver was invisible.
They spent their time, for want of something better to do, in wandering round the coach.
Luncheon was a gloomy affair; and there was a general coolness toward Boule de Suif, for night, which brings counsel, had somewhat modified the judgment of her companions.
In the cold light of the morning they almost bore a grudge against the girl for not having secretly sought out the Prussian, that the rest of the party might receive a joyful surprise when they awoke.
She might have saved appearances by telling the officer that she had taken pity on their distress.
Such a step would be of so little consequence to her.
But no one as yet confessed to such thoughts.
In the afternoon, seeing that they were all bored to death, the count proposed a walk in the neighborhood of the village.
Each one wrapped himself up well, and the little party set out, leaving behind only Cornudet, who preferred to sit over the fire, and the two nuns, who were in the habit of spending their day in the church or at the presbytery.
The cold, which grew more intense each day, almost froze the noses and ears of the pedestrians, their feet began to pain them so that each step was a penance, and when they reached the open country it looked so mournful and depressing in its limitless mantle of white that they all hastily retraced their steps, with bodies benumbed and hearts heavy.
The four women walked in front, and the three men followed a little in their rear.
Loiseau, who saw perfectly well how matters stood, asked suddenly “if that trollop were going to keep them waiting much longer in this Godforsaken spot.” The count, always courteous, replied that they could not exact so painful a sacrifice from any woman, and that the first move must come from herself.
Monsieur Carre-Lamadon remarked that if the French, as they talked of doing, made a counter attack by way of Dieppe, their encounter with the enemy must inevitably take place at Totes.
This reflection made the other two anxious.
“Supposing we escape on foot?” said Loiseau.
The count shrugged his shoulders.
Besides, we should be pursued at once, overtaken in ten minutes, and brought back as prisoners at the mercy of the soldiery.” This was true enough; they were silent.
The ladies talked of dress, but a certain constraint seemed to prevail among them.
Suddenly, at the end of the street, the officer appeared.
His tall, wasp-like, uniformed figure was outlined against the snow which bounded the horizon, and he walked, knees apart, with that motion peculiar to soldiers, who are always anxious not to soil their carefully polished boots.
He bowed as he passed the ladies, then glanced scornfully at the men, who had sufficient dignity not to raise their hats, though Loiseau made a movement to do so.
Boule de Suif flushed crimson to the ears, and the three married women felt unutterably humiliated at being met thus by the soldier in company with the girl whom he had treated with such scant ceremony.
Madame Carre-Lamadon, who had known many officers and judged them as a connoisseur, thought him not at all bad-looking; she even regretted that he was not a Frenchman, because in that case he would have made a very handsome hussar, with whom all the women would assuredly have fallen in love.
When they were once more within doors they did not know what to do with themselves.
Sharp words even were exchanged apropos of the merest trifles.
The silent dinner was quickly over, and each one went to bed early in the hope of sleeping, and thus killing time.
They came down next morning with tired faces and irritable tempers; the women scarcely spoke to Boule de Suif.
A church bell summoned the faithful to a baptism.
Boule de Suif had a child being brought up by peasants at Yvetot.
She did not see him once a year, and never thought of him; but the idea of the child who was about to be baptized induced a sudden wave of tenderness for her own, and she insisted on being present at the ceremony.
As soon as she had gone out, the rest of the company looked at one another and then drew their chairs together; for they realized that they must decide on some course of action.
Loiseau had an inspiration: he proposed that they should ask the officer to detain Boule de Suif only, and to let the rest depart on their way.
Monsieur Follenvie was intrusted with this commission, but he returned to them almost immediately.
He intended to keep all the travellers until his condition had been complied with.
Whereupon Madame Loiseau's vulgar temperament broke bounds.
I may as well tell you she took any lovers she could get at Rouen—even coachmen!
Yes, indeed, madame—the coachman at the prefecture!
And now that it is a question of getting us out of a difficulty she puts on virtuous airs, the drab!
Why, there were three others of us, any one of whom he would undoubtedly have preferred.
But no, he contents himself with the girl who is common property.
He respects married women.
He had only to say: 'I wish it!' and he might have taken us by force, with the help of his soldiers.” The two other women shuddered; the eyes of pretty Madame Carre-Lamadon glistened, and she grew pale, as if the officer were indeed in the act of laying violent hands on her.
The men, who had been discussing the subject among themselves, drew near.
Loiseau, in a state of furious resentment, was for delivering up “that miserable woman,” bound hand and foot, into the enemy's power.
But the count, descended from three generations of ambassadors, and endowed, moreover, with the lineaments of a diplomat, was in favor of more tactful measures.
“We must persuade her,” he said.
The women drew together; they lowered their voices, and the discussion became general, each giving his or her opinion.
But the conversation was not in the least coarse.
The ladies, in particular, were adepts at delicate phrases and charming subtleties of expression to describe the most improper things.
A stranger would have understood none of their allusions, so guarded was the language they employed.
But, seeing that the thin veneer of modesty with which every woman of the world is furnished goes but a very little way below the surface, they began rather to enjoy this unedifying episode, and at bottom were hugely delighted —feeling themselves in their element, furthering the schemes of lawless love with the gusto of a gourmand cook who prepares supper for another.
Their gaiety returned of itself, so amusing at last did the whole business seem to them.
The count uttered several rather risky witticisms, but so tactfully were they said that his audience could not help smiling.
Loiseau in turn made some considerably broader jokes, but no one took offence; and the thought expressed with such brutal directness by his wife was uppermost in the minds of all: “Since it's the girl's trade, why should she refuse this man more than another?” Dainty Madame Carre-Lamadon seemed to think even that in Boule de Suif's place she would be less inclined to refuse him than another.
The blockade was as carefully arranged as if they were investing a fortress.
Each agreed on the role which he or she was to play, the arguments to be used, the maneuvers to be executed.
They decided on the plan of campaign, the stratagems they were to employ, and the surprise attacks which were to reduce this human citadel and force it to receive the enemy within its walls.
But Cornudet remained apart from the rest, taking no share in the plot.
So absorbed was the attention of all that Boule de Suif's entrance was almost unnoticed.
But the count whispered a gentle “Hush!” which made the others look up.
They suddenly stopped talking, and a vague embarrassment prevented them for a few moments from addressing her.
But the countess, more practiced than the others in the wiles of the drawing-room, asked her: “Was the baptism interesting?” The girl, still under the stress of emotion, told what she had seen and heard, described the faces, the attitudes of those present, and even the appearance of the church.
She concluded with the words: “It does one good to pray sometimes.” Until lunch time the ladies contented themselves with being pleasant to her, so as to increase her confidence and make her amenable to their advice.
First they opened a vague conversation on the subject of self-sacrifice.
Ancient examples were quoted: Judith and Holofernes; then, irrationally enough, Lucrece and Sextus; Cleopatra and the hostile generals whom she reduced to abject slavery by a surrender of her charms.
Next was recounted an extraordinary story, born of the imagination of these ignorant millionaires, which told how the matrons of Rome seduced Hannibal, his lieutenants, and all his mercenaries at Capua.
They held up to admiration all those women who from time to time have arrested the victorious progress of conquerors, made of their bodies a field of battle, a means of ruling, a weapon; who have vanquished by their heroic caresses hideous or detested beings, and sacrificed their chastity to vengeance and devotion.
All was said with due restraint and regard for propriety, the effect heightened now and then by an outburst of forced enthusiasm calculated to excite emulation.
A listener would have thought at last that the one role of woman on earth was a perpetual sacrifice of her person, a continual abandonment of herself to the caprices of a hostile soldiery.
During the whole afternoon she was left to her reflections.
But instead of calling her “madame” as they had done hitherto, her companions addressed her simply as “mademoiselle,” without exactly knowing why, but as if desirous of making her descend a step in the esteem she had won, and forcing her to realize her degraded position.
Just as soup was served, Monsieur Follenvie reappeared, repeating his phrase of the evening before: “The Prussian officer sends to ask if Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset has changed her mind.” Boule de Suif answered briefly: “No, monsieur.” But at dinner the coalition weakened.
Loiseau made three unfortunate remarks.
Each was cudgeling his brains for further examples of self- sacrifice, and could find none, when the countess, possibly without ulterior motive, and moved simply by a vague desire to do homage to religion, began to question the elder of the two nuns on the most striking facts in the lives of the saints.
Now, it fell out that many of these had committed acts which would be crimes in our eyes, but the Church readily pardons such deeds when they are accomplished for the glory of God or the good of mankind.
This was a powerful argument, and the countess made the most of it.
Then, whether by reason of a tacit understanding, a thinly veiled act of complaisance such as those who wear the ecclesiastical habit excel in, or whether merely as the result of sheer stupidity—a stupidity admirably adapted to further their designs—the old nun rendered formidable aid to the conspirator.
They had thought her timid; she proved herself bold, talkative, bigoted.
She was not troubled by the ins and outs of casuistry; her doctrines were as iron bars; her faith knew no doubt; her conscience no scruples.
She looked on Abraham's sacrifice as natural enough, for she herself would not have hesitated to kill both father and mother if she had received a divine order to that effect; and nothing, in her opinion, could displease our Lord, provided the motive were praiseworthy.
The countess, putting to good use the consecrated authority of her unexpected ally, led her on to make a lengthy and edifying paraphrase of that axiom enunciated by a certain school of moralists: “The end justifies the means.” “Then, sister,” she asked, “you think God accepts all methods, and pardons the act when the motive is pure?” “Undoubtedly, madame.
An action reprehensible in itself often derives merit from the thought which inspires it.” And in this wise they talked on, fathoming the wishes of God, predicting His judgments, describing Him as interested in matters which assuredly concern Him but little.
All was said with the utmost care and discretion, but every word uttered by the holy woman in her nun's garb weakened the indignant resistance of the courtesan.
Then the conversation drifted somewhat, and the nun began to talk of the convents of her order, of her Superior, of herself, and of her fragile little neighbor, Sister St.
They had been sent for from Havre to nurse the hundreds of soldiers who were in hospitals, stricken with smallpox.
She described these wretched invalids and their malady.
And, while they themselves were detained on their way by the caprices of the Prussian officer, scores of Frenchmen might be dying, whom they would otherwise have saved!
No one spoke when she had finished for fear of spoiling the excellent effect of her words.
As soon as the meal was over the travellers retired to their rooms, whence they emerged the following day at a late hour of the morning.
Luncheon passed off quietly.
The seed sown the preceding evening was being given time to germinate and bring forth fruit.
In the afternoon the countess proposed a walk; then the count, as had been arranged beforehand, took Boule de Suif's arm, and walked with her at some distance behind the rest.
He began talking to her in that familiar, paternal, slightly contemptuous tone which men of his class adopt in speaking to women like her, calling her “my dear child,” and talking down to her from the height of his exalted social position and stainless reputation.
He came straight to the point.
“So you prefer to leave us here, exposed like yourself to all the violence which would follow on a repulse of the Prussian troops, rather than consent to surrender yourself, as you have done so many times in your life?” The girl did not reply.
He tried kindness, argument, sentiment.
He still bore himself as count, even while adopting, when desirable, an attitude of gallantry, and making pretty—nay, even tender—speeches.
He exalted the service she would render them, spoke of their gratitude; then, suddenly, using the familiar “thou”: “And you know, my dear, he could boast then of having made a conquest of a pretty girl such as he won't often find in his own country.” Boule de Suif did not answer, and joined the rest of the party.
As soon as they returned she went to her room, and was seen no more.
If she still resisted, how awkward for them all!
At last Monsieur Follenvie entered, announcing that Mademoiselle Rousset was not well, and that they might sit down to table.
The count drew near the innkeeper, and whispered: “Is it all right?” “Yes.” Out of regard for propriety he said nothing to his companions, but merely nodded slightly toward them.
“By Gad!” shouted Loiseau, “I'll stand champagne all round if there's any to be found in this place.” And great was Madame Loiseau's dismay when the proprietor came back with four bottles in his hands.
They had all suddenly become talkative and merry; a lively joy filled all hearts.
The count seemed to perceive for the first time that Madame Carre- Lamadon was charming; the manufacturer paid compliments to the countess.
The conversation was animated, sprightly, witty, and, although many of the jokes were in the worst possible taste, all the company were amused by them, and none offended—indignation being dependent, like other emotions, on surroundings.
And the mental atmosphere had gradually become filled with gross imaginings and unclean thoughts.
At dessert even the women indulged in discreetly worded allusions.
The count, who even in his moments of relaxation preserved a dignified demeanor, hit on a much-appreciated comparison of the condition of things with the termination of a winter spent in the icy solitude of the North Pole and the joy of shipwrecked mariners who at last perceive a southward track opening out before their eyes.
Loiseau, fairly in his element, rose to his feet, holding aloft a glass of champagne.
“I drink to our deliverance!” he shouted.
All stood up, and greeted the toast with acclamation.
Even the two good sisters yielded to the solicitations of the ladies, and consented to moisten their lips with the foaming wine, which they had never before tasted.
They declared it was like effervescent lemonade, but with a pleasanter flavor.
“It is a pity,” said Loiseau, “that we have no piano; we might have had a quadrille.” Cornudet had not spoken a word or made a movement; he seemed plunged in serious thought, and now and then tugged furiously at his great beard, as if trying to add still further to its length.
Loiseau himself looked foolish and disconcerted for a moment, but soon recovered his aplomb, and, writhing with laughter, exclaimed: “Really, you are all too green for anything!” Pressed for an explanation, he related the “mysteries of the corridor,” whereat his listeners were hugely amused.
The count and Monsieur Carre-Lamadon laughed till they cried.
They could scarcely believe their ears.
He wanted——” “I tell you I saw it with my own eyes.” “And she refused?” “Because the Prussian was in the next room!” “Surely you are mistaken?” “I swear I'm telling you the truth.” The count was choking with laughter.
The manufacturer held his sides.
Loiseau continued: “So you may well imagine he doesn't think this evening's business at all amusing.” And all three began to laugh again, choking, coughing, almost ill with merriment.
Then they separated.
But Madame Loiseau, who was nothing if not spiteful, remarked to her husband as they were on the way to bed that “that stuck-up little minx of a Carre-Lamadon had laughed on the wrong side of her mouth all the evening.” “You know,” she said, “when women run after uniforms it's all the same to them whether the men who wear them are French or Prussian.
It's perfectly sickening!” The next morning the snow showed dazzling white tinder a clear winter sun.
The coach, ready at last, waited before the door; while a flock of white pigeons, with pink eyes spotted in the centres with black, puffed out their white feathers and walked sedately between the legs of the six horses, picking at the steaming manure.
The driver, wrapped in his sheepskin coat, was smoking a pipe on the box, and all the passengers, radiant with delight at their approaching departure, were putting up provisions for the remainder of the journey.
At last she appeared.
She seemed rather shamefaced and embarrassed, and advanced with timid step toward her companions, who with one accord turned aside as if they had not seen her.
The girl stood still, stupefied with astonishment; then, plucking up courage, accosted the manufacturer's wife with a humble “Good-morning, madame,” to which the other replied merely with a slight and insolent nod, accompanied by a look of outraged virtue.
Every one suddenly appeared extremely busy, and kept as far from Boule de Suif as if her skirts had been infected with some deadly disease.
Then they hurried to the coach, followed by the despised courtesan, who, arriving last of all, silently took the place she had occupied during the first part of the journey.
The rest seemed neither to see nor to know her—all save Madame Loiseau, who, glancing contemptuously in her direction, remarked, half aloud, to her husband: “What a mercy I am not sitting beside that creature!” The lumbering vehicle started on its way, and the journey began afresh.
She felt at once indignant with her neighbors, and humiliated at having yielded to the Prussian into whose arms they had so hypocritically cast her.
But the countess, turning toward Madame Carre-Lamadon, soon broke the painful silence: “I think you know Madame d'Etrelles?” “Yes; she is a friend of mine.” “Such a charming woman!” “Delightful!
Exceptionally talented, and an artist to the finger tips.
Cornudet sat still, lost in thought.
Ah the end of three hours Loiseau gathered up the cards, and remarked that he was hungry.
His wife thereupon produced a parcel tied with string, from which she extracted a piece of cold veal.
“We may as well do the same,” said the countess.
The rest agreed, and she unpacked the provisions which had been prepared for herself, the count, and the Carre-Lamadons.
In one of those oval dishes, the lids of which are decorated with an earthenware hare, by way of showing that a game pie lies within, was a succulent delicacy consisting of the brown flesh of the game larded with streaks of bacon and flavored with other meats chopped fine.
A solid wedge of Gruyere cheese, which had been wrapped in a newspaper, bore the imprint: “Items of News,” on its rich, oily surface.
The two good sisters brought to light a hunk of sausage smelling strongly of garlic; and Cornudet, plunging both hands at once into the capacious pockets of his loose overcoat, produced from one four hard- boiled eggs and from the other a crust of bread.
Boule de Suif, in the haste and confusion of her departure, had not thought of anything, and, stifling with rage, she watched all these people placidly eating.
At first, ill-suppressed wrath shook her whole person, and she opened her lips to shriek the truth at them, to overwhelm them with a volley of insults; but she could not utter a word, so choked was she with indignation.
She felt herself swallowed up in the scorn of these virtuous creatures, who had first sacrificed, then rejected her as a thing useless and unclean.
Then she remembered her big basket full of the good things they had so greedily devoured: the two chickens coated in jelly, the pies, the pears, the four bottles of claret; and her fury broke forth like a cord that is overstrained, and she was on the verge of tears.
She made terrible efforts at self- control, drew herself up, swallowed the sobs which choked her; but the tears rose nevertheless, shone at the brink of her eyelids, and soon two heavy drops coursed slowly down her cheeks.
Others followed more quickly, like water filtering from a rock, and fell, one after another, on her rounded bosom.
She sat upright, with a fixed expression, her face pale and rigid, hoping desperately that no one saw her give way.
But the countess noticed that she was weeping, and with a sign drew her husband's attention to the fact.
He shrugged his shoulders, as if to say: “Well, what of it?
The faces of his neighbors clouded; the popular air evidently did not find favor with them; they grew nervous and irritable, and seemed ready to howl as a dog does at the sound of a barrel-organ.
Cornudet saw the discomfort he was creating, and whistled the louder; sometimes he even hummed the words: Amour sacre de la patrie, Conduis, soutiens, nos bras vengeurs, Liberte, liberte cherie, Combats avec tes defenseurs!
And Boule de Suif still wept, and sometimes a sob she could not restrain was heard in the darkness between two verses of the song.
TWO FRIENDS Besieged Paris was in the throes of famine.
Even the sparrows on the roofs and the rats in the sewers were growing scarce.
People were eating anything they could get.
As Monsieur Morissot, watchmaker by profession and idler for the nonce, was strolling along the boulevard one bright January morning, his hands in his trousers pockets and stomach empty, he suddenly came face to face with an acquaintance—Monsieur Sauvage, a fishing chum.
Before the war broke out Morissot had been in the habit, every Sunday morning, of setting forth with a bamboo rod in his hand and a tin box on his back.
He took the Argenteuil train, got out at Colombes, and walked thence to the Ile Marante.
The moment he arrived at this place of his dreams he began fishing, and fished till nightfall.
Every Sunday he met in this very spot Monsieur Sauvage, a stout, jolly, little man, a draper in the Rue Notre Dame de Lorette, and also an ardent fisherman.
They often spent half the day side by side, rod in hand and feet dangling over the water, and a warm friendship had sprung up between the two.
Some days they did not speak; at other times they chatted; but they understood each other perfectly without the aid of words, having similar tastes and feelings.
In the spring, about ten o'clock in the morning, when the early sun caused a light mist to float on the water and gently warmed the backs of the two enthusiastic anglers, Morissot would occasionally remark to his neighbor: “My, but it's pleasant here.” To which the other would reply: “I can't imagine anything better!” And these few words sufficed to make them understand and appreciate each other.
Monsieur Sauvage, with a sigh, murmured: “These are sad times!” Morissot shook his head mournfully.
This is the first fine day of the year.” The sky was, in fact, of a bright, cloudless blue.
They walked along, side by side, reflective and sad.
“And to think of the fishing!” said Morissot.
“What good times we used to have!” “When shall we be able to fish again?” asked Monsieur Sauvage.
They entered a small cafe and took an absinthe together, then resumed their walk along the pavement.
Morissot stopped suddenly.
“Shall we have another absinthe?” he said.
“If you like,” agreed Monsieur Sauvage.
They were quite unsteady when they came out, owing to the effect of the alcohol on their empty stomachs.
The fresh air completed the effect of the alcohol on Monsieur Sauvage.
He stopped suddenly, saying: “Suppose we go there?” “Where?” “Fishing.” “But where?” “Why, to the old place.
The French outposts are close to Colombes.
I know Colonel Dumoulin, and we shall easily get leave to pass.” Morissot trembled with desire.
I agree.” And they separated, to fetch their rods and lines.
An hour later they were walking side by side on the-highroad.
Presently they reached the villa occupied by the colonel.
They resumed their walk, furnished with a password.
Soon they left the outposts behind them, made their way through deserted Colombes, and found themselves on the outskirts of the small vineyards which border the Seine.
Before them lay the village of Argenteuil, apparently lifeless.
The heights of Orgement and Sannois dominated the landscape.
The great plain, extending as far as Nanterre, was empty, quite empty-a waste of dun-colored soil and bare cherry trees.
Monsieur Sauvage, pointing to the heights, murmured: “The Prussians are up yonder!” And the sight of the deserted country filled the two friends with vague misgivings.
They had never seen them as yet, but they had felt their presence in the neighborhood of Paris for months past—ruining France, pillaging, massacring, starving them.
And a kind of superstitious terror mingled with the hatred they already felt toward this unknown, victorious nation.
“Suppose we were to meet any of them?” said Morissot.
“We'd offer them some fish,” replied Monsieur Sauvage, with that Parisian light-heartedness which nothing can wholly quench.
Still, they hesitated to show themselves in the open country, overawed by the utter silence which reigned around them.
At last Monsieur Sauvage said boldly: “Come, we'll make a start; only let us be careful!” And they made their way through one of the vineyards, bent double, creeping along beneath the cover afforded by the vines, with eye and ear alert.
A strip of bare ground remained to be crossed before they could gain the river bank.
They ran across this, and, as soon as they were at the water's edge, concealed themselves among the dry reeds.
Morissot placed his ear to the ground, to ascertain, if possible, whether footsteps were coming their way.
Their confidence was restored, and they began to fish.
Before them the deserted Ile Marante hid them from the farther shore.
The little restaurant was closed, and looked as if it had been deserted for years.
Monsieur Sauvage caught the first gudgeon, Monsieur Morissot the second, and almost every moment one or other raised his line with a little, glittering, silvery fish wriggling at the end; they were having excellent sport.
They slipped their catch gently into a close-meshed bag lying at their feet; they were filled with joy—the joy of once more indulging in a pastime of which they had long been deprived.
The sun poured its rays on their backs; they no longer heard anything or thought of anything.
But suddenly a rumbling sound, which seemed to come from the bowels of the earth, shook the ground beneath them: the cannon were resuming their thunder.
Morissot turned his head and could see toward the left, beyond the banks of the river, the formidable outline of Mont-Valerien, from whose summit arose a white puff of smoke.
The next instant a second puff followed the first, and in a few moments a fresh detonation made the earth tremble.
Others followed, and minute by minute the mountain gave forth its deadly breath and a white puff of smoke, which rose slowly into the peaceful heaven and floated above the summit of the cliff.
Monsieur Sauvage shrugged his shoulders.
Morissot, who was anxiously watching his float bobbing up and down, was suddenly seized with the angry impatience of a peaceful man toward the madmen who were firing thus, and remarked indignantly: “What fools they are to kill one another like that!” “They're worse than animals,” replied Monsieur Sauvage.
And Morissot, who had just caught a bleak, declared: “And to think that it will be just the same so long as there are governments!” “The Republic would not have declared war,” interposed Monsieur Sauvage.
Morissot interrupted him: “Under a king we have foreign wars; under a republic we have civil war.” And the two began placidly discussing political problems with the sound common sense of peaceful, matter-of-fact citizens—agreeing on one point: that they would never be free.
And Mont-Valerien thundered ceaselessly, demolishing the houses of the French with its cannon balls, grinding lives of men to powder, destroying many a dream, many a cherished hope, many a prospective happiness; ruthlessly causing endless woe and suffering in the hearts of wives, of daughters, of mothers, in other lands.
“Such is life!” declared Monsieur Sauvage.
“Say, rather, such is death!” replied Morissot, laughing.
But they suddenly trembled with alarm at the sound of footsteps behind them, and, turning round, they perceived close at hand four tall, bearded men, dressed after the manner of livery servants and wearing flat caps on their heads.
They were covering the two anglers with their rifles.
And behind the house they had thought deserted were about a score of German soldiers.
A shaggy-looking giant, who was bestriding a chair and smoking a long clay pipe, addressed them in excellent French with the words: “Well, gentlemen, have you had good luck with your fishing?” Then a soldier deposited at the officer's feet the bag full of fish, which he had taken care to bring away.
The Prussian smiled.
But we have something else to talk about.
Listen to me, and don't be alarmed: “You must know that, in my eyes, you are two spies sent to reconnoitre me and my movements.
Naturally, I capture you and I shoot you.
You pretended to be fishing, the better to disguise your real errand.
You have fallen into my hands, and must take the consequences.
“But as you came here through the outposts you must have a password for your return.
Tell me that password and I will let you go.” The two friends, pale as death, stood silently side by side, a slight fluttering of the hands alone betraying their emotion.
“No one will ever know,” continued the officer.
“You will return peacefully to your homes, and the secret will disappear with you.
Choose!” They stood motionless, and did not open their lips.
The Prussian, perfectly calm, went on, with hand outstretched toward the river: “Just think that in five minutes you will be at the bottom of that water.
You have relations, I presume?” Mont-Valerien still thundered.
The two fishermen remained silent.
The German turned and gave an order in his own language.
Then he moved his chair a little way off, that he might not be so near the prisoners, and a dozen men stepped forward, rifle in hand, and took up a position, twenty paces off.
“I give you one minute,” said the officer; “not a second longer.” Then he rose quickly, went over to the two Frenchmen, took Morissot by the arm, led him a short distance off, and said in a low voice: “Quick! the password!
I will pretend to relent.” Morissot answered not a word.
Then the Prussian took Monsieur Sauvage aside in like manner, and made him the same proposal.
Monsieur Sauvage made no reply.
The officer issued his orders; the soldiers raised their rifles.
Then by chance Morissot's eyes fell on the bag full of gudgeon lying in the grass a few feet from him.
A ray of sunlight made the still quivering fish glisten like silver.
And Morissot's heart sank.
“Good-by, Monsieur Sauvage,” he faltered.
“Good-by, Monsieur Morissot,” replied Sauvage.
They shook hands, trembling from head to foot with a dread beyond their mastery.
Monsieur Sauvage fell forward instantaneously.
Morissot, being the taller, swayed slightly and fell across his friend with face turned skyward and blood oozing from a rent in the breast of his coat.
His men dispersed, and presently returned with ropes and large stones, which they attached to the feet of the two friends; then they carried them to the river bank.
Mont-Valerien, its summit now enshrouded in smoke, still continued to thunder.
Two soldiers took Morissot by the head and the feet; two others did the same with Sauvage.
The bodies, swung lustily by strong hands, were cast to a distance, and, describing a curve, fell feet foremost into the stream.
The water splashed high, foamed, eddied, then grew calm; tiny waves lapped the shore.
The officer, calm throughout, remarked, with grim humor: “It's the fishes' turn now!” Then he retraced his way to the house.
Suddenly he caught sight of the net full of gudgeons, lying forgotten in the grass.
He picked it up, examined it, smiled, and called: “Wilhelm!” A white-aproned soldier responded to the summons, and the Prussian, tossing him the catch of the two murdered men, said: “Have these fish fried for me at once, while they are still alive; they'll make a tasty dish.” Then he resumed his pipe.
THE LANCER'S WIFE I It was after Bourbaki's defeat in the east of France.
The army, broken up, decimated, and worn out, had been obliged to retreat into Switzerland after that terrible campaign, and it was only its short duration that saved a hundred and fifty thousand men from certain death.
Hunger, the terrible cold, forced marches in the snow without boots, over bad mountain roads, had caused us 'francs-tireurs', especially, the greatest suffering, for we were without tents, and almost without food, always in the van when we were marching toward Belfort, and in the rear when returning by the Jura.
Of our little band that had numbered twelve hundred men on the first of January, there remained only twenty-two pale, thin, ragged wretches, when we at length succeeded in reaching Swiss territory.
Everybody knows what sympathy was shown to the unfortunate French army, and how well it was cared for.
We all gained fresh life, and those who had been rich and happy before the war declared that they had never experienced a greater feeling of comfort than they did then.
We actually had something to eat every day, and could sleep every night.
Meanwhile, the war continued in the east of France, which had been excluded from the armistice.
Besancon still kept the enemy in check, and the latter had their revenge by ravaging Franche Comte.
Sometimes we heard that they had approached quite close to the frontier, and we saw Swiss troops, who were to form a line of observation between us and them, set out on their march.
That pained us in the end, and, as we regained health and strength, the longing to fight took possession of us.
It was disgraceful and irritating to know that within two or three leagues of us the Germans were victorious and insolent, to feel that we were protected by our captivity, and to feel that on that account we were powerless against them.
One day our captain took five or six of us aside, and spoke to us about it, long and furiously.
He had been a sublieutenant in the Zouaves, was tall and thin and as hard as steel, and during the whole campaign he had cut out their work for the Germans.
He fretted in inactivity, and could not accustom himself to the idea of being a prisoner and of doing nothing.
“Confound it!” he said to us, “does it not pain you to know that there is a number of uhlans within two hours of us?
Does it not almost drive you mad to know that those beggarly wretches are walking about as masters in our mountains, when six determined men might kill a whole spitful any day?
It is not very difficult!
Just as if we had not done a thing or two within the last six months, and got out of woods that were guarded by very different men from the Swiss.
The day that you wish to cross over into France, I will undertake to get you there.” “That may be; but what shall we do in France without any arms?” “Without arms?
We will get them over yonder, by Jove!” “You are forgetting the treaty,” another soldier said; “we shall run the risk of doing the Swiss an injury, if Manteuffel learns that they have allowed prisoners to return to France.” “Come,” said the captain, “those are all bad reasons.
I mean to go and kill some Prussians; that is all I care about.
I can quite well go by myself; I do not require anybody's company.” Naturally we all protested, and, as it was quite impossible to make the captain alter his mind, we felt obliged to promise to go with him.
We liked him too much to leave him in the lurch, as he never failed us in any extremity; and so the expedition was decided on.
II The captain had a plan of his own, that he had been cogitating over for some time.
A man in that part of the country whom he knew was going to lend him a cart and six suits of peasants' clothes.
We could hide under some straw at the bottom of the wagon, which would be loaded with Gruyere cheese, which he was supposed to be going to sell in France.
The captain told the sentinels that he was taking two friends with him to protect his goods, in case any one should try to rob him, which did not seem an extraordinary precaution.
A Swiss officer seemed to look at the wagon in a knowing manner, but that was in order to impress his soldiers.
In a word, neither officers nor men could make it out.
I was half suffocated in my box, which only admitted the air through those holes in front, and at the same time I was nearly frozen, for it was terribly cold.
The Prussian lines were very badly guarded, as the enemy trusted to the watchfulness of the Swiss.
The sergeant spoke North German, while our captain spoke the bad German of the Four Cantons, and so they could not understand each other.
The sergeant, however, pretended to be very intelligent; and, in order to make us believe that he understood us, they allowed us to continue our journey; and, after travelling for seven hours, being continually stopped in the same manner, we arrived at a small village of the Jura in ruins, at nightfall.
Our only arms were the captain's whip, our uniforms our peasants' blouses, and our food the Gruyere cheese.
Our sole wealth consisted in our ammunition, packages of cartridges which we had stowed away inside some of the large cheeses.
We had about a thousand of them, just two hundred each, but we needed rifles, and they must be chassepots.
Luckily, however, the captain was a bold man of an inventive mind, and this was the plan that he hit upon: While three of us remained hidden in a cellar in the abandoned village, he continued his journey as far as Besancon with the empty wagon and one man.
The town was invested, but one can always make one's way into a town among the hills by crossing the tableland till within about ten miles of the walls, and then following paths and ravines on foot.
They left their wagon at Omans, among the Germans, and escaped out of it at night on foot; so as to gain the heights which border the River Doubs; the next day they entered Besancon, where there were plenty of chassepots.
There were nearly forty thousand of them left in the arsenal, and General Roland, a brave marine, laughed at the captain's daring project, but let him have six rifles and wished him “good luck.” There he had also found his wife, who had been through all the war with us before the campaign in the East, and who had been only prevented by illness from continuing with Bourbaki's army.
She had recovered, however, in spite of the cold, which was growing more and more intense, and in spite of the numberless privations that awaited her, she persisted in accompanying her husband.
He was obliged to give way to her, and they all three, the captain, his wife, and our comrade, started on their expedition.
Going was nothing in comparison to returning.
They were obliged to travel by night, so as to avoid meeting anybody, as the possession of six rifles would have made them liable to suspicion.
But, in spite of everything, a week after leaving us, the captain and his two men were back with us again.
The campaign was about to begin.
III The first night of his arrival he began it himself, and, under pretext of examining the surrounding country, he went along the high road.
I must tell you that the little village which served as our fortress was a small collection of poor, badly built houses, which had been deserted long before.
It lay on a steep slope, which terminated in a wooded plain.
The country people sell the wood; they send it down the slopes, which are called coulees, locally, and which lead down to the plain, and there they stack it into piles, which they sell thrice a year to the wood merchants.
The spot where this market is held in indicated by two small houses by the side of the highroad, which serve for public houses.
It is nothing to go down these coulees; one just lets one's self slide down; but it is more difficult to get up again; one has to scramble up by catching hold of the hanging branches of the trees, and sometimes on all fours, by sheer strength.
A whole mortal hour passed, and he did not come; nothing moved in the brushwood.
The captain's wife began to grow impatient.
They did not know what to think, but I myself fancied either that he was dead or that his enterprise was successful; and I was merely anxious and curious to know what he had done.
Suddenly we heard the sound of his trumpet, and we were much surprised that instead of coming from below, as we had expected, it came from the village behind us.
It was a mystery to us, but the same idea struck us all, that he had been killed, and that the Prussians were blowing the trumpet to draw us into an ambush.
We therefore returned to the cottage, keeping a careful lookout with our fingers on the trigger, and hiding under the branches; but his wife, in spite of our entreaties, rushed on, leaping like a tigress.
It is he!” We hastened on, and saw the captain smoking his pipe at the entrance of the village, but strangely enough, he was on horseback.
“Ah! ah!” he said to us, “you see that there is something to be done here.
Here I am on horseback already; I knocked over an uhlan yonder, and took his horse; I suppose they were guarding the wood, but it was by drinking and swilling in clover.
One of them, the sentry at the door, had not time to see me before I gave him a sugarplum in his stomach, and then, before the others could come out, I jumped on the horse and was off like a shot.
Eight or ten of them followed me, I think; but I took the crossroads through the woods.
I have got scratched and torn a bit, but here I am, and now, my good fellows, attention, and take care!
Those brigands will not rest until they have caught us, and we must receive them with rifle bullets.
One of us took up his position a good way from the village on the crossroads; I was posted at the entrance of the main street, where the road from the level country enters the village, while the two others, the captain and his wife, were in the middle of the village, near the church, whose tower served for an observatory and citadel.
We had not been in our places long before we heard a shot, followed by another, and then two, then three.
The first was evidently a chassepot —one recognized it by the sharp report, which sounds like the crack of a whip—while the other three came from the lancers' carbines.
He had given orders to the outpost to let the enemy pass and merely to follow them at a distance if they marched toward the village, and to join me when they had gone well between the houses.
Then they were to appear suddenly, take the patrol between two fires, and not allow a single man to escape; for, posted as we were, the six of us could have hemmed in ten Prussians, if needful.
“That confounded Piedelot has roused them,” the captain said, “and they will not venture to come on blindfolded any longer.
And then I am quite sure that he has managed to get a shot into himself somewhere or other, for we hear nothing of him.
It serves him right; why did he not obey orders?” And then, after a moment, he grumbled in his beard: “After all I am sorry for the poor fellow; he is so brave, and shoots so well!” The captain was right in his conjectures.
We waited until evening, without seeing the uhlans; they had retreated after the first attack; but unfortunately we had not seen Piedelot, either.
Was he dead or a prisoner?
When night came, the captain proposed that we should go out and look for him, and so the three of us started.
At the crossroads we found a broken rifle and some blood, while the ground was trampled down; but we did not find either a wounded man or a dead body, although we searched every thicket, and at midnight we returned without having discovered anything of our unfortunate comrade.
“They must have killed him and thrown him into the bushes somewhere; they cannot possibly have taken him prisoner, as he would have called out for help.
I cannot understand it at all.” Just as he said that, bright flames shot up in the direction of the inn on the high road, which illuminated the sky.
“Scoundrels! cowards!” he shouted.
“I will bet that they have set fire to the two houses on the marketplace, in order to have their revenge, and then they will scuttle off without saying a word.
They will be satisfied with having killed a man and set fire to two houses.
We must go for them; they will not like to leave their illuminations in order to fight.” “It would be a great stroke of luck if we could set Piedelot free at the same time,” some one said.
The fire was behind the house, and all we saw of it was the reflection above the roof.
However, we were walking rather slowly, as we were afraid of an ambush, when suddenly we heard Piedelot's well-known voice.
It had a strange sound, however; for it was at the same time—dull and vibrating, stifled and clear, as if he were calling out as loud as he could with a bit of rag stuffed into his mouth.
He seemed to be hoarse and gasping, and the unlucky fellow kept exclaiming: “Help!
Help!” We sent all thoughts of prudence to the devil, and in two bounds we were at the back of the inn, where a terrible sight met our eyes.
IV Piedelot was being burned alive.
He was writhing in the midst of a heap of fagots, tied to a stake, and the flames were licking him with their burning tongues.
It was only the affair of a moment to upset the burning pile, to scatter the embers, and to cut the ropes that fastened him.
In what a terrible state we found him.
The flames had also begun their work on him, and he had two large burns, one on his loins and the other on his right thigh, and his beard and hair were scorched.
No one knows the terrible rage we felt at this sight!
We would have rushed headlong at a hundred thousand Prussians; our thirst for vengeance was intense.
Meanwhile, however, the captain's wife was looking after Piedelot, and dressing his wounds as best she could, while the captain himself shook hands with him excitedly, and in a few minutes he came to himself.
“Ah! the scoundrels, the wretches!
Why, twenty of them came to surprise us.” “Twenty, do you say?” “Yes; there was a whole band of them, and that is why I disobeyed orders, captain, and fired on them, for they would have killed you all, and I preferred to stop them.
That frightened them, and they did not venture to go farther than the crossroads.
My arm was broken, so that I could only use my bayonet with one hand.” “But why did you not call for help?” “I took good care not to do that, for you would all have come; and you would neither have been able to defend me nor yourselves, being only five against twenty.” “You know that we should not have allowed you to have been taken, poor old fellow.” “I preferred to die by myself, don't you see!
Do you feel rather easier?” “No, I am suffocating.
Now I can tell what I am suffering and shed tears; it does one good.
Thank you, my kind friends.” “Poor Piedelot!
There is, in particular, a woman among them who passes as the wife of the lancer whom the captain killed yesterday.
She is dressed like a lancer, and she tortured me the most yesterday, and suggested burning me; and it was she who set fire to the wood.
Ah! how I am suffering!
My loins, my arms!” and he fell back gasping and exhausted, writhing in his terrible agony, while the captain's wife wiped the perspiration from his forehead, and we all shed tears of grief and rage, as if we had been children.
I will not describe the end to you; he died half an hour later, previously telling us in what direction the enemy had gone.
When he was dead we gave ourselves time to bury him, and then we set out in pursuit of them, with our hearts full of fury and hatred.
“We will throw ourselves on the whole Prussian army, if it be necessary,” the captain said; “but we will avenge Piedelot.
We must catch those scoundrels.
Let us swear to die, rather than not to find them; and if I am killed first, these are my orders: All the prisoners that you take are to be shot immediately, and as for the lancer's wife, she is to be tortured before she is put to death.” “She must not be shot, because she is a woman,” the captain's wife said.
Torturing her will be quite sufficient; but if you are killed in this pursuit, I want one thing, and that is to fight with her; I will kill her with my own hands, and the others can do what they like with her if she kills me.” “We will outrage her!
Piedelot shall be avenged!
“An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth!” V The next morning we unexpectedly fell on an outpost of uhlans four leagues away.
Surprised by our sudden attack, they were not able to mount their horses, nor even to defend themselves; and in a few moments we had five prisoner, corresponding to our own number.
The captain questioned them, and from their answers we felt certain that they were the same whom we had encountered the previous day.
Then a very curious operation took place.
One of us was told off to ascertain their sex, and nothing can describe our joy when we discovered what we were seeking among them, the female executioner who had tortured our friend.
The four others were shot on the spot, with their backs to us and close to the muzzles of our rifles; and then we turned our attention to the woman.
I must acknowledge that we were all of us in favor of shooting her.
Hatred, and the wish to avenge Piedelot, had extinguished all pity in us, and we had forgotten that we were going to shoot a woman, but a woman reminded us of it, the captain's wife; at her entreaties, therefore, we determined to keep her a prisoner.
The captain's poor wife was to be severely punished for this act of clemency.
The next day we heard that the armistice had been extended to the eastern part of France, and we had to put an end to our little campaign.
Two of us, who belonged to the neighborhood, returned home, so there were only four of us, all told: the captain, his wife, and two men.
We belonged to Besancon, which was still being besieged in spite of the armistice.
The spring is coming on, and the armistice is only a trap laid for the Prussians.
We shall be ready, and we have a hostage—let us remain here.” We fixed our quarters there.
It was terribly cold, and we did not go out much, and somebody had always to keep the female prisoner in sight.
She was sullen, and never said anything, or else spoke of her husband, whom the captain had killed.
She looked at him continually with fierce eyes, and we felt that she was tortured by a wild longing for revenge.
That seemed to us to be the most suitable punishment for the terrible torments that she had made Piedelot suffer, for impotent vengeance is such intense pain!
It is true that one of us kept watch every night, and that at first we tied her by a long rope to the great oak bench that was fastened to the wall.
But, by and by, as she had never tried to escape, in spite of her hatred for us, we relaxed our extreme prudence, and allowed her to sleep somewhere else except on the bench, and without being tied.
She was at the end of the room, a man was on guard at the door, and between her and the sentinel the captain's wife and two other men used to lie.
One night when we were asleep, and the captain was on guard, the lancer's wife was lying more quietly in her corner than usual, and she had even smiled for the first time since she had been our prisoner during the evening.
Suddenly, however, in the middle of the night, we were all awakened by a terrible cry.
We got up, groping about, and at once stumbled over a furious couple who were rolling about and fighting on the ground.
We threw ourselves on them, and separated them in a moment.
She was shouting and laughing, and he seemed to have the death rattle.
Two of us held her, and when a light was struck a terrible sight met our eyes.
The captain was lying on the floor in a pool of blood, with an enormous gash in his throat, and his sword bayonet, that had been taken from his rifle, was sticking in the red, gaping wound.
A few minutes afterward he died, without having been able to utter a word.
Her eyes were dry, her throat was contracted, and she looked at the lancer's wife steadfastly, and with a calm ferocity that inspired fear.
“This woman belongs to me,” she said to us suddenly.
You must fasten her securely to the fireplace, upright against the back of it, and then you can go where you like, but far from here.
She promised to write to us to Geneva, as we were returning thither.
VI Two days later I received the following letter, dated the day after we had left, that had been written at an inn on the high road: “MY FRIEND: I am writing to you, according to my promise.
For the moment I am at the inn, where I have just handed my prisoner over to a Prussian officer.
“I must tell you, my friend, that this poor woman has left two children in Germany.
She had followed her husband, whom she adored, as she did not wish him to be exposed to the risks of war by himself, and as her children were with their grandparents.
I have learned all this since yesterday, and it has turned my ideas of vengeance into more humane feelings.
At the very moment when I felt pleasure in insulting this woman, and in threatening her with the most fearful torments, in recalling Piedelot, who had been burned alive, and in threatening her with a similar death, she looked at me coldly, and said: “'What have you got to reproach me with, Frenchwoman?
You think that you will do right in avenging your husband's death, is not that so?' “'Yes,' I replied.
I avenged my husband, for your husband killed him.' “'Well,' I replied, 'as you approve of this vengeance, prepare to endure it.' “'I do not fear it.' “And in fact she did not seem to have lost courage.
Her face was calm, and she looked at me without trembling, while I brought wood and dried leaves together, and feverishly threw on to them the powder from some cartridges, which was to make her funeral pile the more cruel.
“I hesitated in my thoughts of persecution for a moment.
Suddenly, however, on raising my head, I saw that she was crying, and I felt rather surprised.
“'So you are frightened?' I said to her.
“'No, but when I saw you kiss your husband, I thought of mine, of all whom I love.' “She continued to sob, but stopping suddenly, she said to me in broken words and in a low voice: “'Have you any children?' “A shiver rare over me, for I guessed that this poor woman had some.
She asked me to look in a pocketbook which was in her bosom, and in it I saw two photographs of quite young children, a boy and a girl, with those kind, gentle, chubby faces that German children have.
In it there were also two locks of light hair and a letter in a large, childish hand, and beginning with German words which meant: “'My dear little mother.
“'I could not restrain my tears, my dear friend, and so I untied her, and without venturing to look at the face of my poor dead husband, who was not to be avenged, I went with her as far as the inn.
I am going upstairs to my husband; come as soon as possible, my dear friend, to look for our two bodies.'” I set off with all speed, and when I arrived there was a Prussian patrol at the cottage; and when I asked what it all meant, I was told that there was a captain of francs-tireurs and his wife inside, both dead.
“Somebody has already undertaken it,” was the reply.
I raised it, and saw that the woman had inflicted a similar wound in her throat to that from which her husband had died.
At the side of the bed there sat, watching and weeping, the woman who had been mentioned to me as their best friend.
THE PRISONERS There was not a sound in the forest save the indistinct, fluttering sound of the snow falling on the trees.
It had been snowing since noon; a little fine snow, that covered the branches as with frozen moss, and spread a silvery covering over the dead leaves in the ditches, and covered the roads with a white, yielding carpet, and made still more intense the boundless silence of this ocean of trees.
Before the door of the forester's dwelling a young woman, her arms bare to the elbow, was chopping wood with a hatchet on a block of stone.
She was tall, slender, strong-a true girl of the woods, daughter and wife of a forester.
A voice called from within the house: “We are alone to-night, Berthine; you must come in.
It is getting dark, and there may be Prussians or wolves about.” “I've just finished, mother,” replied the young woman, splitting as she spoke an immense log of wood with strong, deft blows, which expanded her chest each time she raised her arms to strike.
“Here I am; there's no need to be afraid; it's quite light still.” Then she gathered up her sticks and logs, piled them in the chimney corner, went back to close the great oaken shutters, and finally came in, drawing behind her the heavy bolts of the door.
Her mother, a wrinkled old woman whom age had rendered timid, was spinning by the fireside.
Two women are not much good.” “Oh,” said the younger woman, “I'd cheerfully kill a wolf or a Prussian if it came to that.” And she glanced at a heavy revolver hanging above the hearth.
Her husband had been called upon to serve in the army at the beginning of the Prussian invasion, and the two women had remained alone with the old father, a keeper named Nicolas Pichon, sometimes called Long-legs, who refused obstinately to leave his home and take refuge in the town.
This town was Rethel, an ancient stronghold built on a rock.
Its inhabitants were patriotic, and had made up their minds to resist the invaders, to fortify their native place, and, if need be, to stand a siege as in the good old days.
Twice already, under Henri IV and under Louis XIV, the people of Rethel had distinguished themselves by their heroic defence of their town.
They would do as much now, by gad! or else be slaughtered within their own walls.
They had, therefore, bought cannon and rifles, organized a militia, and formed themselves into battalions and companies, and now spent their time drilling all day long in the square.
All-bakers, grocers, butchers, lawyers, carpenters, booksellers, chemists-took their turn at military training at regular hours of the day, under the auspices of Monsieur Lavigne, a former noncommissioned officer in the dragoons, now a draper, having married the daughter and inherited the business of Monsieur Ravaudan, Senior.
He had taken the rank of commanding officer in Rethel, and, seeing that all the young men had gone off to the war, he had enlisted all the others who were in favor of resisting an attack.
Fat men now invariably walked the streets at a rapid pace, to reduce their weight and improve their breathing, and weak men carried weights to strengthen their muscles.
And they awaited the Prussians.
But the Prussians did not appear.
They were not far off, however, for twice already their scouts had penetrated as far as the forest dwelling of Nicolas Pichon, called Long-legs.
The guns had been got ready, but the enemy had not shown themselves.
Long-legs' dwelling served as an outpost in the Aveline forest.
Twice a week the old man went to the town for provisions and brought the citizens news of the outlying district.
On this particular day he had gone to announce the fact that a small detachment of German infantry had halted at his house the day before, about two o'clock in the afternoon, and had left again almost immediately.
The noncommissioned officer in charge spoke French.
When the old man set out like this he took with him his dogs—two powerful animals with the jaws of lions-as a safeguard against the wolves, which were beginning to get fierce, and he left directions with the two women to barricade themselves securely within their dwelling as soon as night fell.
The younger feared nothing, but her mother was always apprehensive, and repeated continually: “We'll come to grief one of these days.
You see if we don't!” This evening she was, if possible, more nervous than ever.
When he dines with the commandant he's always late.” And Berthine was hanging her pot over the fire to warm the soup when she suddenly stood still, listening attentively to a sound that had reached her through the chimney.
“There are people walking in the wood,” she said; “seven or eight men at least.” The terrified old woman stopped her spinning wheel, and gasped: “Oh, my God!
And your father not here!” She had scarcely finished speaking when a succession of violent blows shook the door.
As the woman made no reply, a loud, guttural voice shouted: “Open the door!” After a brief silence the same voice repeated: “Open the door or I'll break it down!” Berthine took the heavy revolver from its hook, slipped it into the pocket of her skirt, and, putting her ear to the door, asked: “Who are you?” demanded the young woman.
“The detachment that came here the other day,” replied the voice.
Open the door or I'll break it down!” The forester's daughter had no choice; she shot back the heavy bolts, threw open the ponderous shutter, and perceived in the wan light of the snow six men, six Prussian soldiers, the same who had visited the house the day before.
“What are you doing here at this time of night?” she asked dauntlessly.
“I lost my bearings,” replied the officer; “lost them completely.
Then I recognized this house.
I've eaten nothing since morning, nor my men either.” “But I'm quite alone with my mother this evening,” said Berthine.
“We won't do you any harm, but you must give us something to eat.
Then entered, covered with snow, their helmets sprinkled with a creamy- looking froth, which gave them the appearance of meringues.
You certainly look tired out, and no mistake.” Then she bolted the door afresh.
She put more water in the pot, added butter and potatoes; then, taking down a piece of bacon from a hook in the chimney earner, cut it in two and slipped half of it into the pot.
The six men watched her movements with hungry eyes.
They had placed their rifles and helmets in a corner and waited for supper, as well behaved as children on a school bench.
The old mother had resumed her spinning, casting from time to time a furtive and uneasy glance at the soldiers.
Nothing was to be heard save the humming of the wheel, the crackling of the fire, and the singing of the water in the pot.
But suddenly a strange noise—a sound like the harsh breathing of some wild animal sniffing under the door-startled the occupants of the room.
Berthine stopped him with a gesture, and said, smilingly: “It's only the wolves.
They are like you—prowling hungry through the forest.” The incredulous man wanted to see with his own eyes, and as soon as the door was opened he perceived two large grayish animals disappearing with long, swinging trot into the darkness.
He returned to his seat, muttering: “I wouldn't have believed it!” And he waited quietly till supper was ready.
The men devoured their meal voraciously, with mouths stretched to their ears that they might swallow the more.
Their round eyes opened at the same time as their jaws, and as the soup coursed down their throats it made a noise like the gurgling of water in a rainpipe.
The two women watched in silence the movements of the big red beards.
The potatoes seemed to be engulfed in these moving fleeces.
But, as they were thirsty, the forester's daughter went down to the cellar to draw them some cider.
The cellar was small, with an arched ceiling, and had served, so people said, both as prison and as hiding-place during the Revolution.
It was approached by means of a narrow, winding staircase, closed by a trap-door at the farther end of the kitchen.
When Berthine returned she was smiling mysteriously to herself.
The soldiers had finished eating, and were all six falling asleep as they sat round the table.
Every now and then a forehead fell with a thud on the board, and the man, awakened suddenly, sat upright again.
Berthine said to the officer: “Go and lie down, all of you, round the fire.
I'm going up to my room with my mother.” And the two women went upstairs.
They could be heard locking the door and walking about overhead for a time; then they were silent.
The Prussians lay down on the floor, with their feet to the fire and their heads resting on their rolled-up cloaks.
Soon all six snored loudly and uninterruptedly in six different keys.
They had been sleeping for some time when a shot rang out so loudly that it seemed directed against the very walls of the house.
The soldiers rose hastily.
The door opened hastily, and Berthine appeared, barefooted and only half dressed, with her candle in her hand and a scared look on her face.
“There are the French,” she stammered; “at least two hundred of them.
For God's sake, hurry down into the cellar, and don't make a sound, whatever you do.
If you make any noise we are lost.” “We'll go, we'll go,” replied the terrified officer.
“Which is the way?” The young woman hurriedly raised the small, square trap-door, and the six men disappeared one after another down the narrow, winding staircase, feeling their way as they went.
But as soon as the spike of the last helmet was out of sight Berthine lowered the heavy oaken lid—thick as a wall, hard as steel, furnished with the hinges and bolts of a prison cell—shot the two heavy bolts, and began to laugh long and silently, possessed with a mad longing to dance above the heads of her prisoners.
They made no sound, inclosed in the cellar as in a strong-box, obtaining air only from a small, iron-barred vent-hole.
Berthine lighted her fire again, hung the pot over it, and prepared more soup, saying to herself: “Father will be tired to-night.” Then she sat and waited.
The heavy pendulum of the clock swung to and fro with a monotonous tick.
Every now and then the young woman cast an impatient glance at the dial- a glance which seemed to say: “I wish he'd be quick!” But soon there was a sound of voices beneath her feet.
Low, confused words reached her through the masonry which roofed the cellar.
The Prussians were beginning to suspect the trick she had played them, and presently the officer came up the narrow staircase, and knocked at the trap-door.
“What do you want?” she said, rising from her seat and approaching the cellarway.
But it would have resisted a battering-ram.
The forester's daughter heard him go down the stairs again.
Then the soldiers came one after another and tried their strength against the trapdoor.
But, finding their efforts useless, they all returned to the cellar and began to talk among themselves.
The young woman heard them for a short time, then she rose, opened the door of the house; looked out into the night, and listened.
She whistled just as a huntsman would, and almost immediately two great dogs emerged from the darkness, and bounded to her side.
She held them tight, and shouted at the top of her voice: “Hullo, father!” A far-off voice replied: “Hullo, Berthine!” She waited a few seconds, then repeated: “Hullo, father!” The voice, nearer now, replied: “Hullo, Berthine!” “Don't go in front of the vent-hole!” shouted his daughter.
“There are Prussians in the cellar!” Suddenly the man's tall figure could be seen to the left, standing between two tree trunks.
“Prussians in the cellar?” he asked anxiously.
“They are the same as were here yesterday.
They lost their way, and I've given them free lodgings in the cellar.” She told the story of how she had alarmed them by firing the revolver, and had shut them up in the cellar.
The man, still serious, asked: “But what am I to do with them at this time of night?” “Go and fetch Monsieur Lavigne with his men,” she replied.
“He'll take them prisoners.
He'll be delighted.” Her father smiled.
“So he will-delighted.” “Here's some soup for you,” said his daughter.
The Prussians, hearing voices, were silent.
Long-legs set off a quarter of an hour later, and Berthine, with her head between her hands, waited.
The prisoners began to make themselves heard again.
They shouted, called, and beat furiously with the butts of their muskets against the rigid trap-door of the cellar.
Then they fired shots through the vent-hole, hoping, no doubt, to be heard by any German detachment which chanced to be passing that way.
The forester's daughter did not stir, but the noise irritated and unnerved her.
Blind anger rose in her heart against the prisoners; she would have been only too glad to kill them all, and so silence them.
Then, as her impatience grew, she watched the clock, counting the minutes as they passed.
She conjured up a vision of him telling the story to Monsieur Lavigne, who grew pale with emotion, and rang for his servant to bring him his arms and uniform.
Frightened faces appeared at the windows.
The citizen-soldiers emerged from their houses half dressed, out of breath, buckling on their belts, and hurrying to the commandant's house.
Then the troop of soldiers, with Long-legs at its head, set forth through the night and the snow toward the forest.
“They may be here in an hour.” A nervous impatience possessed her.
The minutes seemed interminable.
And she opened the door to listen for their approach.
She perceived a shadowy form creeping toward the house.
Soon a dark mass loomed up under the trees; the advance guard, composed of ten men.
“Don't go in front of the vent-hole!” repeated Long-legs at intervals.
And the first arrivals pointed out the much-dreaded vent-hole to those who came after.
At last the main body of the troop arrived, in all two hundred men, each carrying two hundred cartridges.
Monsieur Lavigne, in a state of intense excitement, posted them in such a fashion as to surround the whole house, save for a large space left vacant in front of the little hole on a level with the ground, through which the cellar derived its supply of air.
Monsieur Lavigne struck the trap-door a blow with his foot, and called: “I wish to speak to the Prussian officer!” The German did not reply.
“The Prussian officer!” again shouted the commandant.
For the space of twenty minutes Monsieur Lavigne called on this silent officer to surrender with bag and baggage, promising him that all lives should be spared, and that he and his men should be accorded military honors.
But he could extort no sign, either of consent or of defiance.
The situation became a puzzling one.
The citizen-soldiers kicked their heels in the snow, slapping their arms across their chest, as cabdrivers do, to warm themselves, and gazing at the vent-hole with a growing and childish desire to pass in front of it.
At last one of them took the risk-a man named Potdevin, who was fleet of limb.
The experiment succeeded.
The prisoners gave no sign of life.
A voice cried: “There's no one there!” And another soldier crossed the open space before the dangerous vent- hole.
Then this hazardous sport developed into a game.
Every minute a man ran swiftly from one side to the other, like a boy playing baseball, kicking up the snow behind him as he ran.
They had lighted big fires of dead wood at which to warm themselves, and the figures of the runners were illumined by the flames as they passed rapidly from the camp on the right to that on the left.
Some one shouted: “It's your turn now, Maloison.” Maloison was a fat baker, whose corpulent person served to point many a joke among his comrades.
Then, nerving himself to the effort, he set off at a little, waddling gait, which shook his fat paunch and made the whole detachment laugh till they cried.
“Bravo, bravo, Maloison!” they shouted for his encouragement.
He had accomplished about two-thirds of his journey when a long, crimson flame shot forth from the vent-hole.
A loud report followed, and the fat baker fell face forward to the ground, uttering a frightful scream.
No one went to his assistance.
Then he was seen to drag himself, groaning, on all-fours through the snow until he was beyond danger, when he fainted.
After the first surprise and fright were over they laughed at him again.
But Monsieur Lavigne appeared on the threshold of the forester's dwelling.
He called in a loud voice “I want Planchut, the plumber, and his workmen.” Three men approached.
“Take the eavestroughs from the roof.” In a quarter of an hour they brought the commandant thirty yards of pipes.
Next, with infinite precaution, he had a small round hole drilled in the trap-door; then, making a conduit with the troughs from the pump to this opening, he said, with an air of extreme satisfaction: “Now we'll give these German gentlemen something to drink.” A shout of frenzied admiration, mingled with uproarious laughter, burst from his followers.
And the commandant organized relays of men, who were to relieve one another every five minutes.
Then he commanded: “Pump!!!” And, the pump handle having been set in motion, a stream of water trickled throughout the length of the piping, and flowed from step to step down the cellar stairs with a gentle, gurgling sound.
The commandant, in a state of feverish agitation, walked up and down the kitchen, putting his ear to the ground every now and then to discover, if possible, what the enemy were doing and whether they would soon capitulate.
They could be heard moving the casks about, talking, splashing through the water.
Then, about eight o'clock in the morning, a voice came from the vent- hole “I want to speak to the French officer.” Lavigne replied from the window, taking care not to put his head out too far: “Do you surrender?” “I surrender.” “Then put your rifles outside.” A rifle immediately protruded from the hole, and fell into the snow, then another and another, until all were disposed of.
I am drowned.” “Stop pumping!” ordered the commandant.
And the pump handle hung motionless.
Then, having filled the kitchen with armed and waiting soldiers, he slowly raised the oaken trapdoor.
Four heads appeared, soaking wet, four fair heads with long, sandy hair, and one after another the six Germans emerged—scared, shivering and dripping from head to foot.
Then, as the French feared a surprise, they set off at once in two convoys, one in charge of the prisoners, and the other conducting Maloison on a mattress borne on poles.
They made a triumphal entry into Rethel.
Monsieur Lavigne was decorated as a reward for having captured a Prussian advance guard, and the fat baker received the military medal for wounds received at the hands of the enemy.
TWO LITTLE SOLDIERS Every Sunday, as soon as they were free, the little soldiers would go for a walk.
They turned to the right on leaving the barracks, crossed Courbevoie with rapid strides, as though on a forced march; then, as the houses grew scarcer, they slowed down and followed the dusty road which leads to Bezons.
They were small and thin, lost in their ill-fitting capes, too large and too long, whose sleeves covered their hands; their ample red trousers fell in folds around their ankles.
Under the high, stiff shako one could just barely perceive two thin, hollow-cheeked Breton faces, with their calm, naive blue eyes.
They never spoke during their journey, going straight before them, the same idea in each one's mind taking the place of conversation.
For at the entrance of the little forest of Champioux they had found a spot which reminded them of home, and they did not feel happy anywhere else.
At the crossing of the Colombes and Chatou roads, when they arrived under the trees, they would take off their heavy, oppressive headgear and wipe their foreheads.
They stood there several minutes, bending over the railing, watching the white sails, which perhaps reminded them of their home, and of the fishing smacks leaving for the open.
As soon as they had crossed the Seine, they would purchase provisions at the delicatessen, the baker's, and the wine merchant's.
A piece of bologna, four cents' worth of bread, and a quart of wine, made up the luncheon which they carried away, wrapped up in their handkerchiefs.
Before them was a plain with a few clumps of trees, which led to the woods, a little forest which seemed to remind them of that other forest at Kermarivan.
The wheat and oat fields bordered on the narrow path, and Jean Kerderen said each time to Luc Le Ganidec: “It's just like home, just like Plounivon.” “Yes, it's just like home.” And they went on, side by side, their minds full of dim memories of home.
Each time they stopped near a large stone on the edge of the private estate, because it reminded them of the dolmen of Locneuven.
As soon as they reached the first clump of trees, Luc Le Ganidec would cut off a small stick, and, whittling it slowly, would walk on, thinking of the folks at home.
Jean Kerderen carried the provisions.
And the home country, so dear and so distant, would little by little gain possession of their minds, sending them back through space, to the well-known forms and noises, to the familiar scenery, with the fragrance of its green fields and sea air.
And in their dreams they saw their friends leaving, perhaps forever, for the dangerous fishing grounds.
They were walking slowly, Luc Le Ganidec and Jean Kerderen, contented and sad, haunted by a sweet sorrow, the slow and penetrating sorrow of a captive animal which remembers the days of its freedom.
And when Luc had finished whittling his stick, they came to a little nook, where every Sunday they took their meal.
They found the two bricks, which they had hidden in a hedge, and they made a little fire of dry branches and roasted their sausages on the ends of their knives.
When their last crumb of bread had been eaten and the last drop of wine had been drunk, they stretched themselves out on the grass side by side, without speaking, their half-closed eyes looking away in the distance, their hands clasped as in prayer, their red-trousered legs mingling with the bright colors of the wild flowers.
Every Sunday she would pass in front of them on the way to milk her cow, the only cow in the neighborhood which was sent out to pasture.
Soon they would see the girl, coming through the fields, and it pleased them to watch the sparkling sunbeams reflected from her shining pail.
They were just glad to see her, without understanding why.
She was a tall, strapping girl, freckled and tanned by the open air—a girl typical of the Parisian suburbs.
Once, on noticing that they were always sitting in the same place, she said to them: “Do you always come here?” Luc Le Ganidec, more daring than his friend, stammered: “Yes, we come here for our rest.” That was all.
But the following Sunday, on seeing them, she smiled with the kindly smile of a woman who understood their shyness, and she asked: “What are you doing here?
Are you watching the grass grow?” Luc, cheered up, smiled: “P'raps.” She continued: “It's not growing fast, is it?” He answered, still laughing: “Not exactly.” She went on.
It will remind you of home.” She had, perhaps instinctively, guessed and touched the right spot.
Then not without difficulty, she poured some milk into the bottle in which they had brought their wine.
Luc started to drink, carefully watching lest he should take more than his share.
She stood before them, her hands on her hips, her pail at her feet, enjoying the pleasure that she was giving them.
Then she went on, saying: “Well, bye-bye until next Sunday!” For a long time they watched her tall form as it receded in the distance, blending with the background, and finally disappeared.
The following week as they left the barracks, Jean said to Luc: “Don't you think we ought to buy her something good?” They were sorely perplexed by the problem of choosing something to bring to the dairy maid.
Luc was in favor of bringing her some chitterlings; but Jean, who had a sweet tooth, thought that candy would be the best thing.
This time they ate more quickly than usual, excited by anticipation.
“There she is,” he said; and Luc answered: “Yes, there she is.” She smiled when she saw them, and cried: “Well, how are you to-day?” They both answered together: “All right!
How's everything with you?” Then she started to talk of simple things which might interest them; of the weather, of the crops, of her masters.
Finally Luc, growing bolder, murmured: “We have brought you something.” She asked: “Let's see it.” Then Jean, blushing to the tips of his ears, reached in his pocket, and drawing out the little paper bag, handed it to her.
She began to eat the little sweet dainties.
The two soldiers sat in front of her, moved and delighted.
They thought of her all through the week and often spoke of her: The following Sunday she sat beside them for a longer time.
The three of them sat there, side by side, their eyes looking far away in the distance, their hands clasped over their knees, and they told each other little incidents and little details of the villages where they were born, while the cow, waiting to be milked, stretched her heavy head toward the girl and mooed.
Soon the girl consented to eat with them and to take a sip of wine.
Her presence enlivened the little Breton soldiers, who chattered away like two birds.
One Tuesday something unusual happened to Luc Le Ganidec; he asked for leave and did not return until ten o'clock at night.
Jean, worried and racked his brain to account for his friend's having obtained leave.
The following Friday, Luc borrowed ten sons from one of his friends, and once more asked and obtained leave for several hours.
When he started out with Jean on Sunday he seemed queer, disturbed, changed.
Kerderen did not understand; he vaguely suspected something, but he could not guess what it might be.
They went straight to the usual place, and lunched slowly.
Soon the girl appeared.
They watched her approach as they always did.
She kissed him passionately, throwing her arms around his neck, without paying attention to Jean, without even noticing that he was there.
Poor Jean was dazed, so dazed that he could not understand.
His mind was upset and his heart broken, without his even realizing why.
He understood now why his friend had gone out twice during the week.
He felt the pain and the sting which treachery and deceit leave in their wake.
Luc and the girl went together to attend to the cow.
Jean followed them with his eyes.
He saw them disappear side by side, the red trousers of his friend making a scarlet spot against the white road.
It was Luc who sank the stake to which the cow was tethered.
The girl stooped down to milk the cow, while he absent-mindedly stroked the animal's glossy neck.
Then they left the pail in the grass and disappeared in the woods.
Jean could no longer see anything but the wall of leaves through which they had passed.
He was unmanned so that he did not have strength to stand.
He stayed there, motionless, bewildered and grieving-simple, passionate grief.
He wanted to weep, to run away, to hide somewhere, never to see anyone again.
Luc was carrying the pail.
After kissing him again, the girl went on, nodding carelessly to Jean.
The two little soldiers sat side by side, motionless as always, silent and quiet, their calm faces in no way betraying the trouble in their hearts.
From time to time they could hear the plaintive lowing of the cow.
Luc was whittling a stick.
He left it at the wine merchant's in Bezons.
Jean leaned over the railing, farther and farther, as though he had seen something in the stream which hypnotized him.
Do you want a drink?” He had hardly said the last word when Jean's head carried away the rest of his body, and the little blue and red soldier fell like a shot and disappeared in the water.
Luc, paralyzed with horror, tried vainly to shout for help.
In the distance he saw something move; then his friend's head bobbed up out of the water only to disappear again.
Farther down he again noticed a hand, just one hand, which appeared and again went out of sight.
Luc ran back to the barracks, crazed, and with eyes and voice full of tears, he related the accident: “He leaned—he—he was leaning —so far over—that his head carried him away—and—he—fell —he fell——” Emotion choked him so that he could say no more.
FATHER MILON For a month the hot sun has been parching the fields.
Nature is expanding beneath its rays; the fields are green as far as the eye can see.
The big azure dome of the sky is unclouded.
The farms of Normandy, scattered over the plains and surrounded by a belt of tall beeches, look, from a distance, like little woods.
On closer view, after lowering the worm-eaten wooden bars, you imagine yourself in an immense garden, for all the ancient apple-trees, as gnarled as the peasants themselves, are in bloom.
The sweet scent of their blossoms mingles with the heavy smell of the earth and the penetrating odor of the stables.
The family is eating under the shade of a pear tree planted in front of the door; father, mother, the four children, and the help—two women and three men are all there.
The soup is eaten and then a dish of potatoes fried with bacon is brought on.
The man, a big fellow about forty years old, is watching a grape vine, still bare, which is winding and twisting like a snake along the side of the house.
Perhaps we may get something from it.” The woman then turns round and looks, without saying a word.
The Prussians were occupying the whole country.
General Faidherbe, with the Northern Division of the army, was opposing them.
The Prussians had established their headquarters at this farm.
The old farmer to whom it belonged, Father Pierre Milon, had received and quartered them to the best of his ability.
For a month the German vanguard had been in this village.
The French remained motionless, ten leagues away; and yet, every night, some of the Uhlans disappeared.
Of all the isolated scouts, of all those who were sent to the outposts, in groups of not more than three, not one ever returned.
The country was terrorized.
Farmers were shot on suspicion, women were imprisoned; children were frightened in order to try and obtain information.
Nothing could be ascertained.
But, one morning, Father Milon was found stretched out in the barn, with a sword gash across his face.
A court-martial was immediately held in the open air, in front of the farm.
He was sixty-eight years old, small, thin, bent, with two big hands resembling the claws of a crab.
His colorless hair was sparse and thin, like the down of a young duck, allowing patches of his scalp to be seen.
The brown and wrinkled skin of his neck showed big veins which disappeared behind his jaws and came out again at the temples.
He had the reputation of being miserly and hard to deal with.
They stood him up between four soldiers, in front of the kitchen table, which had been dragged outside.
Five officers and the colonel seated themselves opposite him.
You have always been obliging and even attentive to us.
But to-day a terrible accusation is hanging over you, and you must clear the matter up.
How did you receive that wound on your face?” The peasant answered nothing.
The colonel continued: “Your silence accuses you, Father Milon.
Do you know who killed the two Uhlans who were found this morning near Calvaire?” The old man answered clearly “I did.” The colonel, surprised, was silent for a minute, looking straight at the prisoner.
Father Milon stood impassive, with the stupid look of the peasant, his eyes lowered as though he were talking to the priest.
Just one thing betrayed an uneasy mind; he was continually swallowing his saliva, with a visible effort, as though his throat were terribly contracted.
The man's family, his son Jean, his daughter-in-law and his two grandchildren were standing a few feet behind him, bewildered and affrighted.
The colonel went on: “Do you also know who killed all the scouts who have been found dead, for a month, throughout the country, every morning?” The old man answered with the same stupid look: “I did.” “You killed them all?” “Uh huh!
All alone?” “Uh huh!” “Tell me how you did it.” This time the man seemed moved; the necessity for talking any length of time annoyed him visibly.
He stammered: “I dunno!
I simply did it.” The colonel continued: “I warn you that you will have to tell me everything.
How did you begin?” The man cast a troubled look toward his family, standing close behind him.
He hesitated a minute longer, and then suddenly made up his mind to obey the order.
You and your soldiers had taken more than fifty ecus worth of forage from me, as well as a cow and two sheep.
Just then I noticed one of your soldiers who was smoking his pipe by the ditch behind the barn.
And I cut his head off with one single blow, just as I would a blade of grass, before he could say 'Booh!' If you should look at the bottom of the pond, you will find him tied up in a potato-sack, with a stone fastened to it.
The officers remained speechless, looking at each other.
The questioning began again, and this is what they learned.
Once this murder committed, the man had lived with this one thought: “Kill the Prussians!” He hated them with the blind, fierce hate of the greedy yet patriotic peasant.
He was allowed to go and come as he pleased, because he had shown himself so humble, submissive and obliging to the invaders.
Each night he saw the outposts leave.
One night he followed them, having heard the name of the village to which the men were going, and having learned the few words of German which he needed for his plan through associating with the soldiers.
Then he began to crawl through the fields, following along the hedges in order to keep out of sight, listening to the slightest noises, as wary as a poacher.
As soon as he thought the time ripe, he approached the road and hid behind a bush.
Finally, toward midnight, he heard the sound of a galloping horse.
The man put his ear to the ground in order to make sure that only one horseman was approaching, then he got ready.
An Uhlan came galloping along, carrying dispatches.
Help!) The horseman stopped, and recognizing a German, he thought he was wounded and dismounted, coming nearer without any suspicion, and just as he was leaning over the unknown man, he received, in the pit of his stomach, a heavy thrust from the long curved blade of the sabre.
He dropped without suffering pain, quivering only in the final throes.
Then the farmer, radiant with the silent joy of an old peasant, got up again, and, for his own pleasure, cut the dead man's throat.
Father Milon mounted him and started galloping across the plains.
About an hour later he noticed two more Uhlans who were returning home, side by side.
He rode straight for them, once more crying “Hilfe!
Hilfe!” The Prussians, recognizing the uniform, let him approach without distrust.
The old man passed between them like a cannon-ball, felling them both, one with his sabre and the other with a revolver.
After that he quickly returned to the woods and hid one of the horses.
For four days he did not go out, waiting for the inquest to be terminated; but on the fifth day he went out again and killed two more soldiers by the same stratagem.
Each night he wandered about in search of adventure, killing Prussians, sometimes here and sometimes there, galloping through deserted fields, in the moonlight, a lost Uhlan, a hunter of men.
Then, his task accomplished, leaving behind him the bodies lying along the roads, the old farmer would return and hide his horse and uniform.
He went, toward noon, to carry oats and water quietly to his mount, and he fed it well as he required from it a great amount of work.
But one of those whom he had attacked the night before, in defending himself slashed the old peasant across the face with his sabre.
He had come back and hidden the horse and put on his ordinary clothes again; but as he reached home he began to feel faint, and had dragged himself as far as the stable, being unable to reach the house.
They had found him there, bleeding, on the straw.
When he had finished his tale, he suddenly lifted up his head and looked proudly at the Prussian officers.
The colonel, who was gnawing at his mustache, asked: “You have nothing else to say?” “Nothing more; I have finished my task; I killed sixteen, not one more or less.” “Do you know that you are going to die?” “I haven't asked for mercy.” “Have you been a soldier?” “Yes, I served my time.
And last month you killed my youngest son, Francois, near Evreux.
We are quits.” The officers were looking at each other.
The old man continued: “Eight for my father, eight for the boy—we are quits.
And here you are, ordering me about in my home as though it were your own.
I'm not sorry.” And, straightening up his bent back, the old man folded his arms in the attitude of a modest hero.
The Prussians talked in a low tone for a long time.
One of them, a captain, who had also lost his son the previous month, was defending the poor wretch.
All the officers had jumped up and were shrieking orders at the same time.
In less than a minute the old man, still impassive, was pushed up against the wall and shot, looking smilingly the while toward Jean, his eldest son, his daughter-in-law and his two grandchildren, who witnessed this scene in dumb terror.
A COUP D'ETAT Paris had just heard of the disaster at Sedan.
A republic had been declared.
All France was wavering on the brink of this madness which lasted until after the Commune.
From one end of the country to the other everybody was playing soldier.
Cap-makers became colonels, fulfilling the duties of generals; revolvers and swords were displayed around big, peaceful stomachs wrapped in flaming red belts; little tradesmen became warriors commanding battalions of brawling volunteers, and swearing like pirates in order to give themselves some prestige.
The sole fact of handling firearms crazed these people, who up to that time had only handled scales, and made them, without any reason, dangerous to all.
Innocent people were shot to prove that they knew how to kill; in forests which had never seen a Prussian, stray dogs, grazing cows and browsing horses were killed.
Each one thought himself called upon to play a great part in military affairs.
The cafes of the smallest villages, full of uniformed tradesmen, looked like barracks or hospitals.
The town of Canneville was still in ignorance of the maddening news from the army and the capital; nevertheless, great excitement had prevailed for the last month, the opposing parties finding themselves face to face.
The mayor, Viscount de Varnetot, a thin, little old man, a conservative, who had recently, from ambition, gone over to the Empire, had seen a determined opponent arise in Dr.
Massarel, a big, full-blooded man, leader of the Republican party of the neighborhood, a high official in the local masonic lodge, president of the Agricultural Society and of the firemen's banquet and the organizer of the rural militia which was to save the country.
In two weeks, he had managed to gather together sixty-three volunteers, fathers of families, prudent farmers and town merchants, and every morning he would drill them in the square in front of the town-hall.
When, perchance, the mayor would come to the municipal building, Commander Massarel, girt with pistols, would pass proudly in front of his troop, his sword in his hand, and make all of them cry: “Long live the Fatherland!” And it had been noticed that this cry excited the little viscount, who probably saw in it a menace, a threat, as well as the odious memory of the great Revolution.
On the morning of the fifth of September, the doctor, in full uniform, his revolver on the table, was giving a consultation to an old couple, a farmer who had been suffering from varicose veins for the last seven years and had waited until his wife had them also, before he would consult the doctor, when the postman brought in the paper.
Massarel opened it, grew pale, suddenly rose, and lifting his hands to heaven in a gesture of exaltation, began to shout at the top of his voice before the two frightened country folks: “Long live the Republic! long live the Republic! long live the Republic!” Then he fell back in his chair, weak from emotion.
Massarel exclaimed: “Shut up!
I haven't got time to bother with your nonsense.
The Republic has been proclaimed, the emperor has been taken prisoner, France is saved!
Long live the Republic!” Running to the door, he howled: “Celeste, quick, Celeste!” The servant, affrighted, hastened in; he was trying to talk so rapidly, that he could only stammer: “My boots, my sword, my cartridge-box and the Spanish dagger which is on my night-table!
Hasten!” As the persistent peasant, taking advantage of a moment's silence, continued, “I seemed to get big lumps which hurt me when I walk,” the physician, exasperated, roared: “Shut up and get out!
If you had washed your feet it would not have happened!” Then, grabbing him by the collar, he yelled at him: “Can't you understand that we are a republic, you brass-plated idiot!” But professional sentiment soon calmed him, and he pushed the bewildered couple out, saying: “Come back to-morrow, come back to-morrow, my friends.
I haven't any time to-day.” As he equipped himself from head to foot, he gave a series of important orders to his servant: “Run over to Lieutenant Picart and to Second Lieutenant Pommel, and tell them that I am expecting them here immediately.
Also send me Torchebeuf with his drum.
Quick! quick!” When Celeste had gone out, he sat down and thought over the situation and the difficulties which he would have to surmount.
The three men arrived together in their working clothes.
The commandant, who expected to see them in uniform, felt a little shocked.
“Don't you people know anything?
The emperor has been taken prisoner, the Republic has been proclaimed.
My position is delicate, I might even say dangerous.” He reflected for a few moments before his bewildered subordinates, then he continued: “We must act and not hesitate; minutes count as hours in times like these.
All depends on the promptness of our decision.
You, Picart, go to the cure and order him to ring the alarm-bell, in order to get together the people, to whom I am going to announce the news.
You, Torchebeuf beat the tattoo throughout the whole neighborhood as far as the hamlets of Gerisaie and Salmare, in order to assemble the militia in the public square.
We are going to the town-hall to demand Monsieur de Varnetot to surrender his powers to me.
Do you understand?” “Yes.” “Now carry out those orders quickly.
While the doctor stopped, bewildered, the four men entered the town-hall and closed the door behind them.
“They have outstripped us,” muttered the physician, “we must now wait for reenforcements.
There is nothing to do for the present.” Lieutenant Picart now appeared on the scene.
“He has even locked himself in the church with the sexton and beadle.” On the other side of the square, opposite the white, tightly closed town-hall, stood the church, silent and dark, with its massive oak door studded with iron.
But just as the perplexed inhabitants were sticking their heads out of the windows or coming out on their doorsteps, the drum suddenly began to be heard, and Torchebeuf appeared, furiously beating the tattoo.
He crossed the square running, and disappeared along the road leading to the fields.
The commandant drew his sword, and advanced alone to half way between the two buildings behind which the enemy had intrenched itself, and, waving his sword over his head, he roared with all his might: “Long live the Republic!
Death to traitors!” Then he returned to his officers.
The butcher, the baker and the druggist, much disturbed, were anxiously pulling down their shades and closing their shops.
However, the militia were arriving by degrees, each man in a different uniform, but all wearing a black cap with gold braid, the cap being the principal part of the outfit.
When he had about thirty men about him, the commandant, in a few words, outlined the situation to them.
The villagers were gathering together and talking the matter over.
The doctor quickly decided on a plan of campaign.
“Lieutenant Picart, you will advance under the windows of this town-hall and summon Monsieur de Varnetot, in the name of the Republic, to hand the keys over to me.” But the lieutenant, a master mason, refused: “You're smart, you are.
Those people in there shoot straight, don't you forget it.
Do your errands yourself.” The commandant grew very red.
“I command you to go in the name of discipline!” The lieutenant rebelled: “I'm not going to have my beauty spoiled without knowing why.” All the notables, gathered in a group near by, began to laugh.
One of them cried: “You are right, Picart, this isn't the right time.” The doctor then muttered: “Cowards!” And, leaving his sword and his revolver in the hands of a soldier, he advanced slowly, his eye fastened on the windows, expecting any minute to see a gun trained on him.
When he was within a few feet of the building, the doors at both ends, leading into the two schools, opened and a flood of children ran out, boys from one side, girls from the other, and began to play around the doctor, in the big empty square, screeching and screaming, and making so much noise that he could not make himself heard.
As soon as the last child was out of the building, the two doors closed again.
Most of the youngsters finally dispersed, and the commandant called in a loud voice: “Monsieur de Varnetot!” A window on the first floor opened and M. de Varnetot appeared.
The commandant continued: “Monsieur, you know that great events have just taken place which have changed the entire aspect of the government.
The one which you represented no longer exists.
The one which I represent is taking control.
Under these painful, but decisive circumstances, I come, in the name of the new Republic, to ask you to turn over to me the office which you held under the former government.” M. de Varnetot answered: “Doctor, I am the mayor of Canneville, duly appointed, and I shall remain mayor of Canneville until I have been dismissed by a decree from my superiors.
As mayor, I am in my place in the townhall, and here I stay.
The commandant returned to his troop.
But before giving any information, eyeing Lieutenant Picart from head to foot, he exclaimed: “You're a great one, you are!
You're a fine specimen of manhood!
You're a disgrace to the army!
I degrade you.” “I don't give a——!” He turned away and mingled with a group of townspeople.
Then the doctor hesitated.
He ran to the telegraph office, opposite the town- hall, and sent off three telegrams: To the new republican government in Paris.
To the new prefect of the Seine-Inferieure, at Rouen.
To the new republican sub-prefect at Dieppe.
He explained the situation, pointed out the danger which the town would run if it should remain in the hands of the royalist mayor; offered his faithful services, asked for orders and signed, putting all his titles after his name.
Then he returned to his battalion, and, drawing ten francs from his pocket, he cried: “Here, my friends, go eat and drink; only leave me a detachment of ten men to guard against anybody's leaving the town-hall.” But ex-Lieutenant Picart, who had been talking with the watchmaker, heard him; he began to laugh, and exclaimed: “By Jove, if they come out, it'll give you a chance to get in.
Otherwise I can see you standing out there for the rest of your life!” The doctor did not reply, and he went to luncheon.
In the afternoon, he disposed his men about the town as though they were in immediate danger of an ambush.
Several times he passed in front of the town-hall and of the church without noticing anything suspicious; the two buildings looked as though empty.
The butcher, the baker and the druggist once more opened up their stores.
Everybody was talking about the affair.
If the emperor were a prisoner, there must have been some kind of treason.
They did not know exactly which of the republics had returned to power.
Toward nine o'clock, the doctor, alone, noiselessly approached the entrance of the public building, persuaded that the enemy must have gone to bed; and, as he was preparing to batter down the door with a pick- axe, the deep voice of a sentry suddenly called: “Who goes there?” And M.
Massarel retreated as fast as his legs could carry him.
Day broke without any change in the situation.
Armed militia occupied the square.
All the citizens had gathered around this troop awaiting developments.
Even neighboring villagers had come to look on.
Then the doctor, seeing that his reputation was at stake, resolved to put an end to the matter in one way or another; and he was about to take some measures, undoubtedly energetic ones, when the door of the telegraph station opened and the little servant of the postmistress appeared, holding in her hands two papers.
First she went to the commandant and gave him one of the despatches; then she crossed the empty square, confused at seeing the eyes of everyone on her, and lowering her head and running along with little quick steps, she went and knocked softly at the door of the barricaded house, as though ignorant of the fact that those behind it were armed.
The door opened wide enough to let a man's hand reach out and receive the message; and the young girl returned blushing, ready to cry at being thus stared at by the whole countryside.
In a clear voice, the doctor cried: “Silence, if you please.” When the populace had quieted down, he continued proudly: “Here is the communication which I have received from the government.” And lifting the telegram he read: Former mayor dismissed.
Inform him immediately, More orders following.
For the sub-prefect: SAPIN, Councillor.
He was-triumphant; his heart was throbbing with joy and his hands were trembling; but Picart, his former subordinate, cried to him from a neighboring group: “That's all right; but supposing the others don't come out, what good is the telegram going to do you?” M.
He had not thought of that; if the others did not come out, he would now have to take some decisive step.
He looked anxiously at the town-hall, hoping to see the door open and his adversary give in.
The door remained closed.
One thought especially tortured the doctor.
If he attacked, he would have to march at the head of his men; and as, with him dead, all strife would cease, it was at him and him only that M. de Varnetot and his three guards would aim.
But an idea struck him and, turning to Pommel, he ordered: “Run quickly to the druggist and ask him to lend me a towel and a stick.” The lieutenant hastened.
He would make a flag of truce, a white flag, at the sight of which the royalist heart of the mayor would perhaps rejoice.
Pommel returned with the cloth and a broom-stick.
With some twine they completed the flag, and M.
Massarel, grasping it in both hands and holding it in front of him, again advanced in the direction of the town- hall.
When he was opposite the door, he once more called: “Monsieur de Varnetot!” The door suddenly opened and M. de Varnetot and his three guards appeared on the threshold.
That's all.” Massarel, stunned, answered nothing; and M. de Varnetot, walking quickly, disappeared around the corner of the square, still followed by his escort.
The doctor, puffed up with pride, returned to the crowd.
Victory crowns the Republic everywhere.” There was no outburst of joy.
The doctor continued: “We are free, you are free, independent!
Be proud!” The motionless villagers were looking at him without any signs of triumph shining in their eyes.
He looked at them, indignant at their indifference, thinking of what he could say or do in order to make an impression to electrify this calm peasantry, to fulfill his mission as a leader.
He had an inspiration and, turning to Pommel, he ordered: “Lieutenant, go get me the bust of the ex-emperor which is in the meeting room of the municipal council, and bring it here with a chair.” The man presently reappeared, carrying on his right shoulder the plaster Bonaparte, and holding in his left hand a cane-seated chair.
Massarel went towards him, took the chair, placed the white bust on it, then stepping back a few steps, he addressed it in a loud voice: “Tyrant, tyrant, you have fallen down in the mud.
The dying fatherland was in its death throes under your oppression.
Vengeful Destiny has struck you.
Defeat and shame have pursued you; you fall conquered, a prisoner of the Prussians; and from the ruins of your crumbling empire, the young and glorious Republic arises, lifting from the ground your broken sword——” He waited for applause.
Not a sound greeted his listening ear.
The peasants, nonplussed, kept silent; and the white, placid, well-groomed statue seemed to look at M.
Massarel with its plaster smile, ineffaceable and sarcastic.
Thus they stood, face to face, Napoleon on his chair, the physician standing three feet away.
Anger seized the commandant.
What could he do to move this crowd and definitely to win over public opinion?
He happened to carry his hand to his stomach, and he felt, under his red belt, the butt of his revolver.
Not another inspiration, not another word cane to his mind.
The bullet made a little black hole: like a spot, in his forehead.
No sensation was created.
Massarel shot a second time and made a second hole, then a third time, then, without stopping, he shot off the three remaining shots.
Napoleon's forehead was blown away in a white powder, but his eyes, nose and pointed mustache remained intact.
As soon as he appeared, the servant told him that some patients had been waiting in his office for over three hours.
They were the same two peasants as a few days before, who had returned at daybreak, obstinate and patient.
The old man immediately began his explanation: “It began with ants, which seemed to be crawling up and down my legs——” LIEUTENANT LARE'S MARRIAGE Since the beginning of the campaign Lieutenant Lare had taken two cannon from the Prussians.
His general had said: “Thank you, lieutenant,” and had given him the cross of honor.
As he was as cautious as he was brave, wary, inventive, wily and resourceful, he was entrusted with a hundred soldiers and he organized a company of scouts who saved the army on several occasions during a retreat.
But the invading army entered by every frontier like a surging sea.
Great waves of men arrived one after the other, scattering all around them a scum of freebooters.
General Carrel's brigade, separated from its division, retreated continually, fighting each day, but remaining almost intact, thanks to the vigilance and agility of Lieutenant Lare, who seemed to be everywhere at the same moment, baffling all the enemy's cunning, frustrating their plans, misleading their Uhlans and killing their vanguards.
“Lieutenant,” said he, “here is a dispatch from General de Lacere, who will be destroyed if we do not go to his aid by sunrise to-morrow.
He is at Blainville, eight leagues from here.
You will start at nightfall with three hundred men, whom you will echelon along the road.
Study the road carefully; I fear we may meet a division of the enemy.” It had been freezing hard for a week.
At two o'clock it began to snow, and by night the ground was covered and heavy white swirls concealed objects hard by.
At six o'clock the detachment set out.
Then came a platoon of ten men commanded by the lieutenant himself.
The rest followed them in two long columns.
To the right and left of the little band, at a distance of about three hundred feet on either side, some soldiers marched in pairs.
The snow, which was still falling, covered them with a white powder in the darkness, and as it did not melt on their uniforms, they were hardly distinguishable in the night amid the dead whiteness of the landscape.
One heard nothing but that indescribable, nameless flutter of falling snow—a sensation rather than a sound, a vague, ominous murmur.
A command was given in a low tone and when the troop resumed its march it left in its wake a sort of white phantom standing in the snow.
It gradually grew fainter and finally disappeared.
It was the echelons who were to lead the army.
The scouts slackened their pace.
Something was ahead of them.
“Turn to the right,” said the lieutenant; “it is the Ronfi wood; the chateau is more to the left.” Presently the command “Halt” was passed along.
The detachment stopped and waited for the lieutenant, who, accompanied by only ten men, had undertaken a reconnoitering expedition to the chateau.
They advanced, creeping under the trees.
Suddenly they all remained motionless.
Then, quite near them, a little clear, musical young voice was heard amid the stillness of the wood.
We shall never reach Blainville.” A deeper voice replied: “Never fear, little daughter; I know the country as well as I know my pocket.” The lieutenant said a few words and four men moved away silently, like shadows.
All at once a woman's shrill cry was heard through the darkness.
Two prisoners were brought back, an old man and a young girl.
The lieutenant questioned them, still in a low tone: “Your name?” “Pierre Bernard.” “Your profession?” “Butler to Comte de Ronfi.” “Is this your daughter?” 'Yes!' “What does she do?” “She is laundress at the chateau.” “Where are you going?” “We are making our escape.” “Why?” “Twelve Uhlans passed by this evening.
They shot three keepers and hanged the gardener.
I was alarmed on account of the little one.” “Whither are you bound?” “To Blainville.” “Why?” “Because there is a French army there.” “Do you know the way?” “Perfectly.” “Well then, follow us.” They rejoined the column and resumed their march across country.
The old man walked in silence beside the lieutenant, his daughter walking at his side.
She was shaking with cold and seemed about to lose consciousness.
“Lieutenant,” said he, sobbing, “we shall only impede your march.
They came back with branches they had cut, and in a minute a litter was ready.
The whole detachment had joined them by this time.
“Here is a woman dying of cold,” said the lieutenant.
It looked like some weird monster stretching itself out like a serpent, then suddenly coiling itself into a mass, darting forth again, then back, and then forward again without ceasing.
Some whispered orders were passed around among the soldiers, and an occasional little, dry, metallic click was heard.
The moving object suddenly came nearer, and twelve Uhlans were seen approaching at a gallop, one behind the other, having lost their way in the darkness.
A brilliant flash suddenly revealed to them two hundred men lying on the ground before them.
The old man whom they had captured acted as guide.
Presently a voice far off in the distance cried out: “Who goes there?” Another voice nearer by gave the countersign.
They made another halt; some conferences took place.
A cold wind was driving the clouds, and innumerable stars were sparkling in the sky behind them, gradually paling in the rosy light of dawn.
A staff officer came forward to receive the detachment.
But when he asked who was being carried in the litter, the form stirred; two little hands moved aside the big blue army capes and, rosy as the dawn, with two eyes that were brighter than the stars that had just faded from sight, and a smile as radiant as the morn, a dainty face appeared.
“It is I, monsieur.” The soldiers, wild with delight, clapped their hands and bore the young girl in triumph into the midst of the camp, that was just getting to arms.
Presently General Carrel arrived on the scene.
At nine o'clock the Prussians made an attack.
That evening, as Lieutenant Lare, overcome by fatigue, was sleeping on a bundle of straw, he was sent for by the general.
He found the commanding officer in his tent, chatting with the old man whom they had come across during the night.
I have only one way of thanking you.
You may come in a few months to tell me—if you like her.” One year later, on the very same day, Captain Lare and Miss Louise- Hortense-Genevieve de Ronfi-Quedissac were married in the church of St.
She brought a dowry of six thousand francs, and was said to be the prettiest bride that had been seen that year.
THE HORRIBLE The shadows of a balmy night were slowly falling.
The women remained in the drawing-room of the villa.
Their lighted cigars shone like eyes in the darkness, which was gradually becoming more dense.
They had been talking about a frightful accident which had occurred the night before—two men and three women drowned in the river before the eyes of the guests.
General de G——remarked: “Yes, these things are affecting, but they are not horrible.
“Horrible, that well-known word, means much more than terrible.
A frightful accident like this affects, upsets, terrifies; it does not horrify.
In order that we should experience horror, something more is needed than emotion, something more than the spectacle of a dreadful death; there must be a shuddering sense of mystery, or a sensation of abnormal terror, more than natural.
A man who dies, even under the most tragic circumstances, does not excite horror; a field of battle is not horrible; blood is not horrible; the vilest crimes are rarely horrible.
“Here are two personal examples which have shown me what is the meaning of horror.
We were retreating toward Pont-Audemer, after having passed through Rouen.
The army, consisting of about twenty thousand men, twenty thousand routed men, disbanded, demoralized, exhausted, were going to disband at Havre.
They had not eaten anything since the day before.
They were fleeing rapidly, the Prussians not being far off.
“All the Norman country, sombre, dotted with the shadows of the trees surrounding the farms, stretched out beneath a black, heavy, threatening sky.
“Nothing else could be heard in the wan twilight but the confused sound, undefined though rapid, of a marching throng, an endless tramping, mingled with the vague clink of tin bowls or swords.
The men, bent, round-shouldered, dirty, in many cases even in rags, dragged themselves along, hurried through the snow, with a long, broken-backed stride.
“The skin of their hands froze to the butt ends of their muskets, for it was freezing hard that night.
I frequently saw a little soldier take off his shoes in order to walk barefoot, as his shoes hurt his weary feet; and at every step he left a track of blood.
“Should we have left behind us those poor, exhausted soldiers, who fondly counted on being able to start afresh as soon as they had somewhat refreshed their stiffened legs?
But scarcely had they ceased to move, and to make their almost frozen blood circulate in their veins, than an unconquerable torpor congealed them, nailed them to the ground, closed their eyes, and paralyzed in one second this overworked human mechanism.
And they gradually sank down, their foreheads on their knees, without, however, falling over, for their loins and their limbs became as hard and immovable as wood, impossible to bend or to stand upright.
“And the rest of us, more robust, kept straggling on, chilled to the marrow, advancing by a kind of inertia through the night, through the snow, through that cold and deadly country, crushed by pain, by defeat, by despair, above all overcome by the abominable sensation of abandonment, of the end, of death, of nothingness.
“I saw two gendarmes holding by the arm a curious-looking little man, old, beardless, of truly surprising aspect.
“They were looking for an officer, believing that they had caught a spy.
The word 'spy' at once spread through the midst of the stragglers, and they gathered in a group round the prisoner.
A voice exclaimed: 'He must be shot!' And all these soldiers who were falling from utter prostration, only holding themselves on their feet by leaning on their guns, felt all of a sudden that thrill of furious and bestial anger which urges on a mob to massacre.
I was at that time in command of a battalion; but they no longer recognized the authority of their commanding officers; they would even have shot me.
“One of the gendarmes said: 'He has been following us for the three last days.
He has been asking information from every one about the artillery.'” I took it on myself to question this person.
Why are you accompanying the army?” “He stammered out some words in some unintelligible dialect.
He was, indeed, a strange being, with narrow shoulders, a sly look, and such an agitated air in my presence that I really no longer doubted that he was a spy.
“The men all round us exclaimed.
To the wall!' “I said to the gendarmes: “'Will you be responsible for the prisoner?' “I had not ceased speaking when a terrible shove threw me on my back, and in a second I saw the man seized by the furious soldiers, thrown down, struck, dragged along the side of the road, and flung against a tree.
“And immediately they shot him.
The soldiers fired at him, reloaded their guns, fired again with the desperate energy of brutes.
They fought with each other to have a shot at him, filed off in front of the corpse, and kept on firing at him, as people at a funeral keep sprinkling holy water in front of a coffin.
“But suddenly a cry arose of 'The Prussians! the Prussians!' “And all along the horizon I heard the great noise of this panic- stricken army in full flight.
“A panic, the result of these shots fired at this vagabond, had filled his very executioners with terror; and, without realizing that they were themselves the originators of the scare, they fled and disappeared in the darkness.
“I remained alone with the corpse, except for the two gendarmes whose duty compelled them to stay with me.
“They lifted up the riddled mass of bruised and bleeding flesh.
“'He must be searched,' I said.
One of the soldiers had another box.
I was standing between the two.
“The gendarme who was examining the body announced: “'Clothed in a blue blouse, a white shirt, trousers, and a pair of shoes.' “The first match went out; we lighted a second.
The man continued, as he turned out his pockets: “'A horn-handled pocketknife, check handkerchief, a snuffbox, a bit of pack thread, a piece of bread.' “The second match went out; we lighted a third.
The gendarme, after having felt the corpse for a long time, said: “'That is all.' “I said: “'Strip him.
We shall perhaps find something next his skin.” “And in order that the two soldiers might help each other in this task, I stood between them to hold the lighted match.
By the rapid and speedily extinguished flame of the match, I saw them take off the garments one by one, and expose to view that bleeding bundle of flesh, still warm, though lifeless.
“And suddenly one of them exclaimed: “'Good God, general, it is a woman!' “I cannot describe to you the strange and poignant sensation of pain that moved my heart.
I could not believe it, and I knelt down in the snow before this shapeless pulp of flesh to see for myself: it was a woman.
“The two gendarmes, speechless and stunned, waited for me to give my opinion on the matter.
“Then the brigadier slowly drawled out: “'Perhaps she came to look for a son of hers in the artillery, whom she had not heard from.' “And the other chimed in: “'Perhaps, indeed, that is so.' “And I, who had seen some very terrible things in my time, began to cry.
And I felt, in the presence of this corpse, on that icy cold night, in the midst of that gloomy plain; at the sight of this mystery, at the sight of this murdered stranger, the meaning of that word 'horror.' “I had the same sensation last year, while interrogating one of the survivors of the Flatters Mission, an Algerian sharpshooter.
“You know the details of that atrocious drama.
It is possible, however, that you are unacquainted with one of them.
“The colonel travelled through the desert into the Soudan, and passed through the immense territory of the Touaregs, who, in that great ocean of sand which stretches from the Atlantic to Egypt and from the Soudan to Algeria, are a kind of pirates, resembling those who ravaged the seas in former days.
“The guides who accompanied the column belonged to the tribe of the Chambaa, of Ouargla.
“Now, one day we encamped in the middle of the desert, and the Arabs declared that, as the spring was still some distance away, they would go with all their camels to look for water.
“One man alone warned the colonel that he had been betrayed.
Flatters did not believe this, and accompanied the convoy with the engineers, the doctors, and nearly all his officers.
“They were massacred round the spring, and all the camels were captured.
“The captain of the Arab Intelligence Department at Ouargla, who had remained in the camp, took command of the survivors, spahis and sharpshooters, and they began to retreat, leaving behind them the baggage and provisions, for want of camels to carry them.
“Then they started on their journey through this solitude without shade and boundless, beneath the devouring sun, which burned them from morning till night.
“One tribe came to tender its submission and brought dates as a tribute.
The dates were poisoned.
Nearly all the Frenchmen died, and, among them, the last officer.
“There now only remained a few spahis with their quartermaster, Pobeguin, and some native sharpshooters of the Chambaa tribe.
They disappeared one night, along with two, Arabs.
“Then the survivors understood that they would be obliged to eat each other, and as soon as they discovered the flight of the two men with the two camels, those who remained separated, and proceeded to march, one by one, through the soft sand, under the glare of a scorching sun, at a distance of more than a gunshot from each other.
“So they went on all day, and when they reached a spring each of them came to drink at it in turn, as soon as each solitary marcher had moved forward the number of yards arranged upon.
And thus they continued marching the whole day, raising everywhere they passed, in that level, burnt up expanse, those little columns of dust which, from a distance, indicate those who are trudging through the desert.
“But one morning one of the travellers suddenly turned round and approached the man behind him.
“The man toward whom the famished soldier drew near did not flee, but lay flat on the ground, and took aim at the one who was coming toward him.
When he believed he was within gunshot, he fired.
The other was not hit, and he continued then to advance, and levelling his gun, in turn, he killed his comrade.
“Then from all directions the others rushed to seek their share.
And he who had killed the fallen man, cutting the corpse into pieces, distributed it.
“And they once more placed themselves at fixed distances, these irreconcilable allies, preparing for the next murder which would bring them together.
Then, becoming famished again, he who had killed the first man began killing afresh.
And again, like a butcher, he cut up the corpse and offered it to his comrades, keeping only his own portion of it.
“And so this retreat of cannibals continued.
“The last Frenchman, Pobeguin, was massacred at the side of a well, the very night before the supplies arrived.
“Do you understand now what I mean by the horrible?” This was the story told us a few nights ago by General de G——.
I had never before seen anything so wonderful and so beautiful.
The small town, enclosed by its massive ramparts, built by Monsieur de Vauban, extended into the open sea, in the middle of the immense Gulf of Nice.
The great waves, coming in from the ocean, broke at its feet, surrounding it with a wreath of foam; and beyond the ramparts the houses climbed up the hill, one after the other, as far as the two towers, which rose up into the sky, like the peaks of an ancient helmet.
And these two towers were outlined against the milky whiteness of the Alps, that enormous distant wall of snow which enclosed the entire horizon.
Between the white foam at the foot of the walls and the white snow on the sky-line the little city, dazzling against the bluish background of the nearest mountain ranges, presented to the rays of the setting sun a pyramid of red-roofed houses, whose facades were also white, but so different one from another that they seemed to be of all tints.
And the sky above the Alps was itself of a blue that was almost white, as if the snow had tinted it; some silvery clouds were floating just over the pale summits, and on the other side of the gulf Nice, lying close to the water, stretched like a white thread between the sea and the mountain.
I looked upon all this, astounded.
This view was one of those sweet, rare, delightful things that seem to permeate you and are unforgettable, like the memory of a great happiness.
He who can feel with the eye experiences the same keen, exquisite and deep pleasure in looking at men and things as the man with the delicate and sensitive ear, whose soul music overwhelms.
I turned to my companion, M.
Martini, a pureblooded Southerner.
“This is certainly one of the rarest sights which it has been vouchsafed to me to admire.
“I have seen Mont Saint-Michel, that monstrous granite jewel, rise out of the sand at sunrise.
“I have seen, in the Sahara, Lake Raianechergui, fifty kilometers long, shining under a moon as brilliant as our sun and breathing up toward it a white cloud, like a mist of milk.
“I have seen, in the Lipari Islands, the weird sulphur crater of the Volcanello, a giant flower which smokes and burns, an enormous yellow flower, opening out in the midst of the sea, whose stem is a volcano.
“But I have seen nothing more wonderful than Antibes, standing against the Alps in the setting sun.
“And I know not how it is that memories of antiquity haunt me; verses of Homer come into my mind; this is a city of the ancient East, a city of the odyssey; this is Troy, although Troy was very far from the sea.” M.
Martini drew the Sarty guide-book out of his pocket and read: “This city was originally a colony founded by the Phocians of Marseilles, about 340 B.C.
They gave it the Greek name of Antipolis, meaning counter-city, city opposite another, because it is in fact opposite to Nice, another colony from Marseilles.
“After the Gauls were conquered, the Romans turned Antibes into a municipal city, its inhabitants receiving the rights of Roman citizenship.
“We know by an epigram of Martial that at this time——” I interrupted him: “I don't care what she was.
The coast of Asia and the coast of Europe resemble each other in their shores, and there is no city on the other coast of the Mediterranean which awakens in me the memories of the heroic age as this one does.” A footstep caused me to turn my head; a woman, a large, dark woman, was walking along the road which skirts the sea in going to the cape.
“That is Madame Parisse, you know,” muttered Monsieur Martini, dwelling on the final syllable.
No, I did not know, but that name, mentioned carelessly, that name of the Trojan shepherd, confirmed me in my dream.
However, I asked: “Who is this Madame Parisse?” He seemed astonished that I did not know the story.
I assured him that I did not know it, and I looked after the woman, who passed by without seeing us, dreaming, walking with steady and slow step, as doubtless the ladies of old walked.
She was perhaps thirty-five years old and still very beautiful, though a trifle stout.
And Monsieur Martini told me the following story: Mademoiselle Combelombe was married, one year before the war of 1870, to Monsieur Parisse, a government official.
She was then a handsome young girl, as slender and lively as she has now become stout and sad.
Unwillingly she had accepted Monsieur Parisse, one of those little fat men with short legs, who trip along, with trousers that are always too large.
After the war Antibes was garrisoned by a single battalion commanded by Monsieur Jean de Carmelin, a young officer decorated during the war, and who had just received his four stripes.
As he found life exceedingly tedious in this fortress this stuffy mole- hole enclosed by its enormous double walls, he often strolled out to the cape, a kind of park or pine wood shaken by all the winds from the sea.
There he met Madame Parisse, who also came out in the summer evenings to get the fresh air under the trees.
They met, they looked at each other, and when out of sight they doubtless thought of each other.
He certainly bowed to her.
And she, surprised, bowed in return, but very, very slightly, just enough not to appear impolite.
But after two weeks she returned his salutation from a distance, even before they were side by side.
Doubtless of the setting sun.
They admired it together, looking for it in each other's eyes more often than on the horizon.
And every evening for two weeks this was the commonplace and persistent pretext for a few minutes' chat.
Then they ventured to take a few steps together, talking of anything that came into their minds, but their eyes were already saying to each other a thousand more intimate things, those secret, charming things that are reflected in the gentle emotion of the glance, and that cause the heart to beat, for they are a better revelation of the soul than the spoken word.
And then he would take her hand, murmuring those words which the woman divines, without seeming to hear them.
And it was agreed between them that they would love each other without evidencing it by anything sensual or brutal.
She would have remained indefinitely at this stage of intimacy, but he wanted more.
She resisted, would not hear of it, seemed determined not to give way.
But one evening she said to him casually: “My husband has just gone to Marseilles.
He will be away four days.” Jean de Carmelin threw himself at her feet, imploring her to open her door to him that very night at eleven o'clock.
But she would not listen to him, and went home, appearing to be annoyed.
He passed part of it in curling his hair and perfuming himself.
As he was sitting down to the dinner-table another envelope was handed to him, and in it he found the following telegram: “My Love: Business completed.
PARISSE.” The commandant let loose such a vehement oath that the waiter dropped the soup-tureen on the floor.
He certainly wanted her, that very, evening at whatever cost; and he would have her.
He would resort to any means, even to arresting and imprisoning the husband.
Calling for paper, he wrote the following note: MADAME: He will not come back this evening, I swear it to you,—and I shall be, you know where, at ten o'clock.
I will answer for everything, on my honor as an officer.
Toward eight o'clock he sent for Captain Gribois, the second in command, and said, rolling between his fingers the crumpled telegram of Monsieur Parisse: “Captain, I have just received a telegram of a very singular nature, which it is impossible for me to communicate to you.
You will immediately have all the gates of the city closed and guarded, so that no one, mind me, no one, will either enter or leave before six in the morning.
You will also have men patrol the streets, who will compel the inhabitants to retire to their houses at nine o'clock.
Any one found outside beyond that time will be conducted to his home 'manu militari'.
If your men meet me this night they will at once go out of my way, appearing not to know me.
You understand me?” “Yes, commandant.” “I hold you responsible for the execution of my orders, my dear captain.” “Yes, commandant.” “Would you like to have a glass of chartreuse?” “With great pleasure, commandant.” They clinked glasses drank down the brown liquor and Captain Gribois left the room.
The train from Marseilles arrived at the station at nine o'clock sharp, left two passengers on the platform and went on toward Nice.
One of them, tall and thin, was Monsieur Saribe, the oil merchant, and the other, short and fat, was Monsieur Parisse.
Together they set out, with their valises, to reach the city, one kilometer distant.
But on arriving at the gate of the port the guards crossed their bayonets, commanding them to retire.
Frightened, surprised, cowed with astonishment, they retired to deliberate; then, after having taken counsel one with the other, they came back cautiously to parley, giving their names.
But the soldiers evidently had strict orders, for they threatened to shoot; and the two scared travellers ran off, throwing away their valises, which impeded their flight.
Making the tour of the ramparts, they presented themselves at the gate on the route to Cannes.
This likewise was closed and guarded by a menacing sentinel.
Saribe and Parisse, like the prudent men they were, desisted from their efforts and went back to the station for shelter, since it was not safe to be near the fortifications after sundown.
The station agent, surprised and sleepy, permitted them to stay till morning in the waiting-room.
And they sat there side by side, in the dark, on the green velvet sofa, too scared to think of sleeping.
At half-past six in the morning they were informed that the gates were open and that people could now enter Antibes.
They set out for the city, but failed to find their abandoned valises on the road.
When they passed through the gates of the city, still somewhat anxious, the Commandant de Carmelin, with sly glance and mustache curled up, came himself to look at them and question them.
Then he bowed to them politely, excusing himself for having caused them a bad night.
Some spoke of a surprise planned by the Italians, others of the landing of the prince imperial and others again believed that there was an Orleanist conspiracy.
The truth was suspected only later, when it became known that the battalion of the commandant had been sent away, to a distance and that Monsieur de Carmelin had been severely punished.
Monsieur Martini had finished his story.
Madame Parisse returned, her promenade being ended.
I longed to speak to her, this poor, sad woman, who would ever be thinking of that night of love, now long past, and of the bold man who for the sake of a kiss from her had dared to put a city into a state of siege and to compromise his whole future.
And to-day he had probably forgotten her, if he did not relate this audacious, comical and tender farce to his comrades over their cups.
And I thought: Here is an instance of modern love, grotesque and yet heroic.
The Homer who should sing of this new Helen and the adventure of her Menelaus must be gifted with the soul of a Paul de Kock.
And yet the hero of this deserted woman was brave, daring, handsome, strong as Achilles and more cunning than Ulysses.
MADEMOISELLE FIFI Major Graf Von Farlsberg, the Prussian commandant, was reading his newspaper as he lay back in a great easy-chair, with his booted feet on the beautiful marble mantelpiece where his spurs had made two holes, which had grown deeper every day during the three months that he had been in the chateau of Uville.
A cup of coffee was smoking on a small inlaid table, which was stained with liqueur, burned by cigars, notched by the penknife of the victorious officer, who occasionally would stop while sharpening a pencil, to jot down figures, or to make a drawing on it, just as it took his fancy.
When he had read his letters and the German newspapers, which his orderly had brought him, he got up, and after throwing three or four enormous pieces of green wood on the fire, for these gentlemen were gradually cutting down the park in order to keep themselves warm, he went to the window.
The rain was descending in torrents, a regular Normandy rain, which looked as if it were being poured out by some furious person, a slanting rain, opaque as a curtain, which formed a kind of wall with diagonal stripes, and which deluged everything, a rain such as one frequently experiences in the neighborhood of Rouen, which is the watering-pot of France.
For a long time the officer looked at the sodden turf and at the swollen Andelle beyond it, which was overflowing its banks; he was drumming a waltz with his fingers on the window-panes, when a noise made him turn round.
It was his second in command, Captain Baron van Kelweinstein.
The major was a giant, with broad shoulders and a long, fan-like beard, which hung down like a curtain to his chest.
His whole solemn person suggested the idea of a military peacock, a peacock who was carrying his tail spread out on his breast.
He had cold, gentle blue eyes, and a scar from a swordcut, which he had received in the war with Austria; he was said to be an honorable man, as well as a brave officer.
The captain, a short, red-faced man, was tightly belted in at the waist, his red hair was cropped quite close to his head, and in certain lights he almost looked as if he had been rubbed over with phosphorus.
He had lost two front teeth one night, though he could not quite remember how, and this sometimes made him speak unintelligibly, and he had a bald patch on top of his head surrounded by a fringe of curly, bright golden hair, which made him look like a monk.
The commandant shook hands with him and drank his cup of coffee (the sixth that morning), while he listened to his subordinate's report of what had occurred; and then they both went to the window and declared that it was a very unpleasant outlook.
The major, who was a quiet man, with a wife at home, could accommodate himself to everything; but the captain, who led a fast life, who was in the habit of frequenting low resorts, and enjoying women's society, was angry at having to be shut up for three months in that wretched hole.
There was a knock at the door, and when the commandant said, “Come in,” one of the orderlies appeared, and by his mere presence announced that breakfast was ready.
In the dining-room they met three other officers of lower rank—a lieutenant, Otto von Grossling, and two sub-lieutenants, Fritz Scheuneberg and Baron von Eyrick, a very short, fair-haired man, who was proud and brutal toward men, harsh toward prisoners and as explosive as gunpowder.
Since he had been in France his comrades had called him nothing but Mademoiselle Fifi.
They had given him that nickname on account of his dandified style and small waist, which looked as if he wore corsets; of his pale face, on which his budding mustache scarcely showed, and on account of the habit he had acquired of employing the French expression, 'Fi, fi donc', which he pronounced with a slight whistle when he wished to express his sovereign contempt for persons or things.
The dining-room of the chateau was a magnificent long room, whose fine old mirrors, that were cracked by pistol bullets, and whose Flemish tapestry, which was cut to ribbons, and hanging in rags in places from sword-cuts, told too well what Mademoiselle Fifi's occupation was during his spare time.
There were three family portraits on the walls a steel-clad knight, a cardinal and a judge, who were all smoking long porcelain pipes, which had been inserted into holes in the canvas, while a lady in a long, pointed waist proudly exhibited a pair of enormous mustaches, drawn with charcoal.
The officers ate their breakfast almost in silence in that mutilated room, which looked dull in the rain and melancholy in its dilapidated condition, although its old oak floor had become as solid as the stone floor of an inn.
When they had finished eating and were smoking and drinking, they began, as usual, to berate the dull life they were leading.
The bottles of brandy and of liqueur passed from hand to hand, and all sat back in their chairs and took repeated sips from their glasses, scarcely removing from their mouths the long, curved stems, which terminated in china bowls, painted in a manner to delight a Hottentot.
As soon as their glasses were empty they filled them again, with a gesture of resigned weariness, but Mademoiselle Fifi emptied his every minute, and a soldier immediately gave him another.
They were enveloped in a cloud of strong tobacco smoke, and seemed to be sunk in a state of drowsy, stupid intoxication, that condition of stupid intoxication of men who have nothing to do, when suddenly the baron sat up and said: “Heavens!
This cannot go on; we must think of something to do.” And on hearing this, Lieutenant Otto and Sub-lieutenant Fritz, who preeminently possessed the serious, heavy German countenance, said: “What, captain?” He thought for a few moments and then replied: “What?
Why, we must get up some entertainment, if the commandant will allow us.” “What sort of an entertainment, captain?” the major asked, taking his pipe out of his mouth.
“I will arrange all that, commandant,” the baron said.
“Very well,” he replied, and the baron immediately sent for Le Devoir.
He was an old non-commissioned officer, who had never been seen to smile, but who carried out all the orders of his superiors to the letter, no matter what they might be.
He stood there, with an impassive face, while he received the baron's instructions, and then went out, and five minutes later a large military wagon, covered with tarpaulin, galloped off as fast as four horses could draw it in the pouring rain.
The officers all seemed to awaken from their lethargy, their looks brightened, and they began to talk.
Although it was raining as hard as ever, the major declared that it was not so dark, and Lieutenant von Grossling said with conviction that the sky was clearing up, while Mademoiselle Fifi did not seem to be able to keep still.
He got up and sat down again, and his bright eyes seemed to be looking for something to destroy.
Suddenly, looking at the lady with the mustaches, the young fellow pulled out his revolver and said: “You shall not see it.” And without leaving his seat he aimed, and with two successive bullets cut out both the eyes of the portrait.
“Let us make a mine!” he then exclaimed, and the conversation was suddenly interrupted, as if they had found some fresh and powerful subject of interest.
The mine was his invention, his method of destruction, and his favorite amusement.
When he left the chateau, the lawful owner, Comte Fernand d'Amoys d'Uville, had not had time to carry away or to hide anything except the plate, which had been stowed away in a hole made in one of the walls.
As he was very rich and had good taste, the large drawing-room, which opened into the dining-room, looked like a gallery in a museum, before his precipitate flight.
Expensive oil paintings, water colors and drawings hung against the walls, while on the tables, on the hanging shelves and in elegant glass cupboards there were a thousand ornaments: small vases, statuettes, groups of Dresden china and grotesque Chinese figures, old ivory and Venetian glass, which filled the large room with their costly and fantastic array.
Scarcely anything was left now; not that the things had been stolen, for the major would not have allowed that, but Mademoiselle Fifi would every now and then have a mine, and on those occasions all the officers thoroughly enjoyed themselves for five minutes.
The little marquis went into the drawing-room to get what he wanted, and he brought back a small, delicate china teapot, which he filled with gunpowder, and carefully introduced a piece of punk through the spout.
This he lighted and took his infernal machine into the next room, but he came back immediately and shut the door.
The Germans all stood expectant, their faces full of childish, smiling curiosity, and as soon as the explosion had shaken the chateau, they all rushed in at once.
He went out first and said with a smile: “That was a great success this time.” But there was such a cloud of smoke in the dining-room, mingled with the tobacco smoke, that they could not breathe, so the commandant opened the window, and all the officers, who had returned for a last glass of cognac, went up to it.
The moist air blew into the room, bringing with it a sort of powdery spray, which sprinkled their beards.
They looked at the tall trees which were dripping with rain, at the broad valley which was covered with mist, and at the church spire in the distance, which rose up like a gray point in the beating rain.
That was the only resistance which the invaders had met with in the neighborhood.
The parish priest had not refused to take in and to feed the Prussian soldiers; he had several times even drunk a bottle of beer or claret with the hostile commandant, who often employed him as a benevolent intermediary; but it was no use to ask him for a single stroke of the bells; he would sooner have allowed himself to be shot.
That was his way of protesting against the invasion, a peaceful and silent protest, the only one, he said, which was suitable to a priest, who was a man of mildness, and not of blood; and every one, for twenty-five miles round, praised Abbe Chantavoine's firmness and heroism in venturing to proclaim the public mourning by the obstinate silence of his church bells.
The whole village, enthusiastic at his resistance, was ready to back up their pastor and to risk anything, for they looked upon that silent protest as the safeguard of the national honor.
It seemed to the peasants that thus they deserved better of their country than Belfort and Strassburg, that they had set an equally valuable example, and that the name of their little village would become immortalized by that; but, with that exception, they refused their Prussian conquerors nothing.
The commandant and his officers laughed among themselves at this inoffensive courage, and as the people in the whole country round showed themselves obliging and compliant toward them, they willingly tolerated their silent patriotism.
He was very angry at his superior's politic compliance with the priest's scruples, and every day begged the commandant to allow him to sound “ding-dong, ding-dong,” just once, only just once, just by way of a joke.
And he asked it in the coaxing, tender voice of some loved woman who is bent on obtaining her wish, but the commandant would not yield, and to console himself, Mademoiselle Fifi made a mine in the Chateau d'Uville.
The five men stood there together for five minutes, breathing in the moist air, and at last Lieutenant Fritz said with a laugh: “The ladies will certainly not have fine weather for their drive.” Then they separated, each to his duty, while the captain had plenty to do in arranging for the dinner.
The commandant's hair did not look so gray as it was in the morning, and the captain had shaved, leaving only his mustache, which made him look as if he had a streak of fire under his nose.
In spite of the rain, they left the window open, and one of them went to listen from time to time; and at a quarter past six the baron said he heard a rumbling in the distance.
They all rushed down, and presently the wagon drove up at a gallop with its four horses steaming and blowing, and splashed with mud to their girths.
Five women dismounted, five handsome girls whom a comrade of the captain, to whom Le Devoir had presented his card, had selected with care.
They had not required much pressing, as they had got to know the Prussians in the three months during which they had had to do with them, and so they resigned themselves to the men as they did to the state of affairs.
They went at once into the dining-room, which looked still more dismal in its dilapidated condition when it was lighted up; while the table covered with choice dishes, the beautiful china and glass, and the plate, which had been found in the hole in the wall where its owner had hidden it, gave it the appearance of a bandits' inn, where they were supping after committing a robbery in the place.
The captain was radiant, and put his arm round the women as if he were familiar with them; and when the three young men wanted to appropriate one each, he opposed them authoritatively, reserving to himself the right to apportion them justly, according to their several ranks, so as not to offend the higher powers.
Therefore, to avoid all discussion, jarring, and suspicion of partiality, he placed them all in a row according to height, and addressing the tallest, he said in a voice of command: “What is your name?” “Pamela,” she replied, raising her voice.
They were all pretty and plump, without any distinctive features, and all had a similarity of complexion and figure.
The three young men wished to carry off their prizes immediately, under the pretext that they might wish to freshen their toilets; but the captain wisely opposed this, for he said they were quite fit to sit down to dinner, and his experience in such matters carried the day.
There were only many kisses, expectant kisses.
Suddenly Rachel choked, and began to cough until the tears came into her eyes, while smoke came through her nostrils.
Under pretence of kissing her, the count had blown a whiff of tobacco into her mouth.
She did not fly into a rage and did not say a word, but she looked at her tormentor with latent hatred in her dark eyes.
He paid the women compliments in French of the Rhine, and sputtered out gallant remarks, only fit for a low pothouse, from between his two broken teeth.
They did not understand him, however, and their intelligence did not seem to be awakened until he uttered foul words and broad expressions, which were mangled by his accent.
Then they all began to laugh at once like crazy women and fell against each other, repeating the words, which the baron then began to say all wrong, in order that he might have the pleasure of hearing them say dirty things.
They gave him as much of that stuff as he wanted, for they were drunk after the first bottle of wine, and resuming their usual habits and manners, they kissed the officers to right and left of them, pinched their arms, uttered wild cries, drank out of every glass and sang French couplets and bits of German songs which they had picked up in their daily intercourse with the enemy.
Soon the men themselves became very unrestrained, shouted and broke the plates and dishes, while the soldiers behind them waited on them stolidly.
The commandant was the only one who kept any restraint upon himself.
Mademoiselle Fifi had taken Rachel on his knee, and, getting excited, at one moment he kissed the little black curls on her neck and at another he pinched her furiously and made her scream, for he was seized by a species of ferocity, and tormented by his desire to hurt her.
They got up, one after the other, trying to say something witty, forcing themselves to be funny, and the women, who were so drunk that they almost fell off their chairs, with vacant looks and clammy tongues applauded madly each time.
As soon as we show ourselves, they run away!” The girl, who was in a terrible rage, shouted into his face: “You are lying, you dirty scoundrel!” For a moment he looked at her steadily with his bright eyes upon her, as he had looked at the portrait before he destroyed it with bullets from his revolver, and then he began to laugh: “Ah! yes, talk about them, my dear!
Should we be here now if they were brave?” And, getting excited, he exclaimed: “We are the masters!
Then the little marquis put his champagne glass, which had just been refilled, on the head of the Jewess and exclaimed: “All the women in France belong to us also!” At that she got up so quickly that the glass upset, spilling the amber- colored wine on her black hair as if to baptize her, and broke into a hundred fragments, as it fell to the floor.
Her lips trembling, she defied the looks of the officer, who was still laughing, and stammered out in a voice choked with rage: “That—that—that—is not true—for you shall not have the women of France!” He sat down again so as to laugh at his ease; and, trying to speak with the Parisian accent, he said: “She is good, very good!
Then why did you come here, my dear?” She was thunderstruck and made no reply for a moment, for in her agitation she did not understand him at first, but as soon as she grasped his meaning she said to him indignantly and vehemently: “I!
I am not a woman, I am only a strumpet, and that is all that Prussians want.” Almost before she had finished he slapped her full in the face; but as he was raising his hand again, as if to strike her, she seized a small dessert knife with a silver blade from the table and, almost mad with rage, stabbed him right in the hollow of his neck.
Something that he was going to say was cut short in his throat, and he sat there with his mouth half open and a terrible look in his eyes.
All the officers shouted in horror and leaped up tumultuously; but, throwing her chair between the legs of Lieutenant Otto, who fell down at full length, she ran to the window, opened it before they could seize her and jumped out into the night and the pouring rain.
In two minutes Mademoiselle Fifi was dead, and Fritz and Otto drew their swords and wanted to kill the women, who threw themselves at their feet and clung to their knees.
With some difficulty the major stopped the slaughter and had the four terrified girls locked up in a room under the care of two soldiers, and then he organized the pursuit of the fugitive as carefully as if he were about to engage in a skirmish, feeling quite sure that she would be caught.
The table, which had been cleared immediately, now served as a bed on which to lay out the lieutenant, and the four officers stood at the windows, rigid and sobered with the stern faces of soldiers on duty, and tried to pierce through the darkness of the night amid the steady torrent of rain.
Suddenly a shot was heard and then another, a long way off; and for four hours they heard from time to time near or distant reports and rallying cries, strange words of challenge, uttered in guttural voices.
In the morning they all returned.
Two soldiers had been killed and three others wounded by their comrades in the ardor of that chase and in the confusion of that nocturnal pursuit, but they had not caught Rachel.
Then the inhabitants of the district were terrorized, the houses were turned topsy-turvy, the country was scoured and beaten up, over and over again, but the Jewess did not seem to have left a single trace of her passage behind her.
When the general was told of it he gave orders to hush up the affair, so as not to set a bad example to the army, but he severely censured the commandant, who in turn punished his inferiors.
The general had said: “One does not go to war in order to amuse one's self and to caress prostitutes.” Graf von Farlsberg, in his exasperation, made up his mind to have his revenge on the district, but as he required a pretext for showing severity, he sent for the priest and ordered him to have the bell tolled at the funeral of Baron von Eyrick.
Contrary to all expectation, the priest showed himself humble and most respectful, and when Mademoiselle Fifi's body left the Chateau d'Uville on its way to the cemetery, carried by soldiers, preceded, surrounded and followed by soldiers who marched with loaded rifles, for the first time the bell sounded its funeral knell in a lively manner, as if a friendly hand were caressing it.
Sometimes even it would start at night and sound gently through the darkness, seized with a strange joy, awakened one could not tell why.
All the peasants in the neighborhood declared that it was bewitched, and nobody except the priest and the sacristan would now go near the church tower.
And they went because a poor girl was living there in grief and solitude and provided for secretly by those two men.
She remained there until the German troops departed, and then one evening the priest borrowed the baker's cart and himself drove his prisoner to Rouen.
When they got there he embraced her, and she quickly went back on foot to the establishment from which she had come, where the proprietress, who thought that she was dead, was very glad to see her.
A short time afterward a patriot who had no prejudices, and who liked her because of her bold deed, and who afterward loved her for herself, married her and made her a lady quite as good as many others.
The Germans occupied France.
The whole country was pulsating like a conquered wrestler beneath the knee of his victorious opponent.
The first trains from Paris, distracted, starving, despairing Paris, were making their way to the new frontiers, slowly passing through the country districts and the villages.
The passengers gazed through the windows at the ravaged fields and burned hamlets.
Prussian soldiers, in their black helmets with brass spikes, were smoking their pipes astride their chairs in front of the houses which were still left standing.
Others were working or talking just as if they were members of the families.
As you passed through the different towns you saw entire regiments drilling in the squares, and, in spite of the rumble of the carriage-wheels, you could every moment hear the hoarse words of command.
Dubuis, who during the entire siege had served as one of the National Guard in Paris, was going to join his wife and daughter, whom he had prudently sent away to Switzerland before the invasion.
Famine and hardship had not diminished his big paunch so characteristic of the rich, peace-loving merchant.
He had gone through the terrible events of the past year with sorrowful resignation and bitter complaints at the savagery of men.
Now that he was journeying to the frontier at the close of the war, he saw the Prussians for the first time, although he had done his duty on the ramparts and mounted guard on many a cold night.
He stared with mingled fear and anger at those bearded armed men, installed all over French soil as if they were at home, and he felt in his soul a kind of fever of impotent patriotism, at the same time also the great need of that new instinct of prudence which since then has, never left us.
In the same railway carriage were two Englishmen, who had come to the country as sightseers and were gazing about them with looks of quiet curiosity.
Suddenly the train stopped at a little village station, and a Prussian officer jumped up with a great clatter of his sabre on the double footboard of the railway carriage.
He was tall, wore a tight-fitting uniform, and had whiskers up to his eyes.
His red hair seemed to be on fire, and his long mustache, of a paler hue, stuck out on both sides of his face, which it seemed to cut in two.
The Englishmen at once began staring at him, with smiles of newly awakened interest, while M.
Dubuis made a show of reading a newspaper.
He sat concealed in his corner like a thief in presence of a gendarme.
Dubuis, laughing conceitedly into his mustache.
The train rolled on, still passing through hamlets occupied by the victorious army.
German soldiers could be seen along the roads, on the edges of fields, standing in front of gates or chatting outside cafes.
The officer said, with a wave of his hand: “If I had been in command, I'd have taken Paris, burned everything, killed everybody.
No more France!” The Englishman, through politeness, replied simply: “Ah! yes.” He went on: “In twenty years all Europe, all of it, will belong to us.
Prussia is more than a match for all of them.” The Englishmen, getting uneasy, no longer replied.
Their faces, which had become impassive, seemed made of wax behind their long whiskers.
Then the Prussian officer began to laugh.
He sneered at the downfall of France, insulted the prostrate enemy; he sneered at Austria, which had been recently conquered; he sneered at the valiant but fruitless defence of the departments; he sneered at the Garde Mobile and at the useless artillery.
He announced that Bismarck was going to build a city of iron with the captured cannon.
And suddenly he placed his boots against the thigh of M.
Dubuis, who turned away his eyes, reddening to the roots of his hair.
The Englishmen seemed to have become indifferent to all that was going on, as if they were suddenly shut up in their own island, far from the din of the world.
The officer took out his pipe, and looking fixedly at the Frenchman, said: “You haven't any tobacco—have you?” M.
Dubuis replied: “No, monsieur.” The German resumed: “You might go and buy some for me when the train stops.” And he began laughing afresh as he added: “I'll give you the price of a drink.” The train whistled, and slackened its pace.
They passed a station that had been burned down; and then they stopped altogether.
The German opened the carriage door, and, catching M.
Dubuis by the arm, said: “Go and do what I told you—quick, quick!” A Prussian detachment occupied the station.
Other soldiers were standing behind wooden gratings, looking on.
The engine was getting up steam before starting off again.
Dubuis hurriedly jumped on the platform, and, in spite of the warnings of the station master, dashed into the adjoining compartment.
He tore open his waistcoat, his heart was beating so rapidly, and, gasping for breath, he wiped the perspiration from his forehead.
And suddenly the officer appeared at the carriage door and jumped in, followed close behind by the two Englishmen, who were impelled by curiosity.
The German sat facing the Frenchman, and, laughing still, said: “You did not want to do what I asked you?” M.
Dubuis replied: “No, monsieur.” The train had just left the station.
The officer said: “I'll cut off your mustache to fill my pipe with.” And he put out his hand toward the Frenchman's face.
The Englishmen stared at them, retaining their previous impassive manner.
The German had already pulled out a few hairs, and was still tugging at the mustache, when M.
Then, excited to a pitch of fury, his temples swollen and his eyes glaring, he kept throttling the officer with one hand, while with the other clenched he began to strike him violent blows in the face.
The Prussian struggled, tried to draw his sword, to clinch with his adversary, who was on top of him.
Dubuis crushed him with his enormous weight and kept punching him without taking breath or knowing where his blows fell.
Blood flowed down the face of the German, who, choking and with a rattling in his throat, spat out his broken teeth and vainly strove to shake off this infuriated man who was killing him.
The Englishmen had got on their feet and came closer in order to see better.
They remained standing, full of mirth and curiosity, ready to bet for, or against, either combatant.
Dubuis, exhausted by his violent efforts, rose and resumed his seat without uttering a word.
The Prussian did not attack him, for the savage assault had terrified and astonished the officer as well as causing him suffering.
When he was able to breathe freely, he said: “Unless you give me satisfaction with pistols I will kill you.” M.
Dubuis replied: “Whenever you like.
I'm quite ready.” The German said: “Here is the town of Strasbourg.
I'll get two officers to be my seconds, and there will be time before the train leaves the station.” M.
Dubuis, who was puffing as hard as the engine, said to the Englishmen: “Will you be my seconds?” They both answered together: “Oh, yes!” And the train stopped.
In a minute the Prussian had found two comrades, who brought pistols, and they made their way toward the ramparts.
The Englishmen were continually looking at their watches, shuffling their feet and hurrying on with the preparations, uneasy lest they should be too late for the train.
He was asked: “Are you ready?” While he was answering, “Yes, monsieur,” he noticed that one of the Englishmen had opened his umbrella in order to keep off the rays of the sun.
Dubuis fired at random without delay, and he was amazed to see the Prussian opposite him stagger, lift up his arms and fall forward, dead.
One of the Englishmen exclaimed: “Ah!” He was quivering with delight, with satisfied curiosity and joyous impatience.
Dubuis' arm and hurried him in double-quick time toward the station, his fellow-countryman marking time as he ran beside them, with closed fists, his elbows at his sides, “One, two; one, two!” And all three, running abreast rapidly, made their way to the station like three grotesque figures in a comic newspaper.
The train was on the point of starting.
They sprang into their carriage.
Then the Englishmen, taking off their travelling caps, waved them three times over their heads, exclaiming: “Hip! hip! hip! hurrah!” And gravely, one after the other, they extended their right hands to M.
ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 2.
GUY DE MAUPASSANT ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES Translated by ALBERT M.
THE COLONEL'S IDEAS “Upon my word,” said Colonel Laporte, “although I am old and gouty, my legs as stiff as two pieces of wood, yet if a pretty woman were to tell me to go through the eye of a needle, I believe I should take a jump at it, like a clown through a hoop.
“We are all very much alike in France in this respect; we still remain knights, knights of love and fortune, since God has been abolished whose bodyguard we really were.
But nobody can ever get woman out of our hearts; there she is, and there she will remain, and we love her, and shall continue to love her, and go on committing all kinds of follies on her account as long as there is a France on the map of Europe; and even if France were to be wiped off the map, there would always be Frenchmen left.
“When I am in the presence of a woman, of a pretty woman, I feel capable of anything.
By Jove! when I feel her looks penetrating me, her confounded looks which set your blood on fire, I should like to do I don't know what; to fight a duel, to have a row, to smash the furniture, in order to show that I am the strongest, the bravest, the most daring and the most devoted of men.
“But I am not the only one, certainly not; the whole French army is like me, I swear to you.
Do you remember what Joan of Arc made us do formerly?
I will make a bet that if a pretty woman had taken command of the army on the eve of Sedan, when Marshal MacMahon was wounded, we should have broken through the Prussian lines, by Jove! and had a drink out of their guns.
“It was not a Trochu, but a Sainte-Genevieve, who was needed in Paris; and I remember a little anecdote of the war which proves that we are capable of everything in presence of a woman.
“I was a captain, a simple captain, at the time, and I was in command of a detachment of scouts, who were retreating through a district which swarmed with Prussians.
We were surrounded, pursued, tired out and half dead with fatigue and hunger, but we were bound to reach Bar-sur-Tain before the morrow, otherwise we should be shot, cut down, massacred.
“It was dark by five o'clock, that wan darkness of the snow, and I shook my men.
Some of them would not get up; they were almost incapable of moving or of standing upright; their joints were stiff from cold and hunger.
“Before us there was a large expanse of flat, bare country; the snow was still falling like a curtain, in large, white flakes, which concealed everything under a thick, frozen coverlet, a coverlet of frozen wool One might have thought that it was the end of the world.
I put the strongest in the rear, with orders to quicken the pace of the sluggards with the points of their bayonets in the back.
“The snow seemed as if it were going to bury us alive; it powdered our kepis and cloaks without melting, and made phantoms of us, a kind of spectres of dead, weary soldiers.
I said to myself: 'We shall never get out of this except by a miracle.' “Sometimes we had to stop for a few minutes, on account of those who could not follow us, and then we heard nothing except the falling snow, that vague, almost undiscernible sound made by the falling flakes.
Some of the men shook themselves, others did not move, and so I gave the order to set off again.
They shouldered their rifles, and with weary feet we resumed our march, when suddenly the scouts fell back.
Something had alarmed them; they had heard voices in front of them.
I sent forward six men and a sergeant and waited.
“All at once a shrill cry, a woman's cry, pierced through the heavy silence of the snow, and in a few minutes they brought back two prisoners, an old man and a girl, whom I questioned in a low voice.
They were escaping from the Prussians, who had occupied their house during the evening and had got drunk.
The father was alarmed on his daughter's account, and, without even telling their servants, they had made their escape in the darkness.
I saw immediately that they belonged to the better class.
I invited them to accompany us, and we started off again, the old man who knew the road acting as our guide.
“It had ceased snowing, the stars appeared and the cold became intense.
The girl, who was leaning on her father's arm, walked unsteadily as though in pain, and several times she murmured: “'I have no feeling at all in my feet'; and I suffered more than she did to see that poor little woman dragging herself like that through the snow.
But suddenly she stopped and said: “'Father, I am so tired that I cannot go any further.' “The old man wanted to carry her, but he could not even lift her up, and she sank to the ground with a deep sigh.
Several of the men went into it, and soon came back with a bundle of branches made into a litter.
It is for a pretty girl, comrades,' Pratique said, and ten cloaks were thrown to him.
In a moment the girl was lying, warm and comfortable, among them, and was raised upon six shoulders.
I placed myself at their head, on the right, well pleased with my position.
A woman is quite enough to electrify Frenchmen, you see.
I gave my orders in a low voice, and heard the harsh, metallic sound of the cocking, of rifles.
It looked like some enormous animal running about, now stretching out like a serpent, now coiling itself into a ball, darting to the right, then to the left, then stopping, and presently starting off again.
But presently that wandering shape came nearer, and I saw a dozen lancers at full gallop, one behind the other.
“They were so near by that time that I could hear the loud breathing of their horses, the clinking of their swords and the creaking of their saddles, and cried: 'Fire!' “Fifty rifle shots broke the stillness of the night, then there were four or five reports, and at last one single shot was heard, and when the smoke had cleared away, we saw that the twelve men and nine horses had fallen.
Three of the animals were galloping away at a furious pace, and one of them was dragging the dead body of its rider, which rebounded violently from the ground; his foot had caught in the stirrup.
“One of the soldiers behind me gave a terrible laugh and said: 'There will be some widows there!' “Perhaps he was married.
“'What is the matter?' she asked; 'are you fighting?' “'It is nothing, mademoiselle,' I replied; 'we have got rid of a dozen Prussians!' “'Poor fellows!' she said.
But as she was cold, she quickly disappeared beneath the cloaks again, and we started off once more.
The snow became quite clear, luminous and glistening, and a rosy tint appeared in the east.
Suddenly a voice in the distance cried: “'Who goes there?' “The whole detachment halted, and I advanced to give the countersign.
“It seemed to me as if we had just saved the whole of France and had done something that other men could not have done, something simple and really patriotic.
I returned there in the autumn to shoot with my friend Serval, who had at last rebuilt his chateau, which the Prussians had destroyed.
I loved that district.
It is one of those delightful spots which have a sensuous charm for the eyes.
You love it with a physical love.
We, whom the country enchants, keep tender memories of certain springs, certain woods, certain pools, certain hills seen very often which have stirred us like joyful events.
At Virelogne I loved the whole countryside, dotted with little woods and crossed by brooks which sparkled in the sun and looked like veins carrying blood to the earth.
You fished in them for crawfish, trout and eels.
I was stepping along light as a goat, watching my two dogs running ahead of me, Serval, a hundred metres to my right, was beating a field of lucerne.
I turned round by the thicket which forms the boundary of the wood of Sandres and I saw a cottage in ruins.
Suddenly I remembered it as I had seen it the last time, in 1869, neat, covered with vines, with chickens before the door.
What is sadder than a dead house, with its skeleton standing bare and sinister?
I also recalled that inside its doors, after a very tiring day, the good woman had given me a glass of wine to drink and that Serval had told me the history of its people.
The father, an old poacher, had been killed by the gendarmes.
People called them “Les Sauvage.” Was that a name or a nickname?
I asked him: “What's become of those people?” This was his story: When war was declared the son Sauvage, who was then thirty-three years old, enlisted, leaving his mother alone in the house.
She remained entirely alone in that isolated dwelling, so far from the village, on the edge of the wood.
The women of the fields laugh but little in any case, that is men's business.
But they themselves have sad and narrowed hearts, leading a melancholy, gloomy life.
The peasants imbibe a little noisy merriment at the tavern, but their helpmates always have grave, stern countenances.
The muscles of their faces have never learned the motions of laughter.
Mother Sauvage continued her ordinary existence in her cottage, which was soon covered by the snows.
Then she returned to her house.
As there was talk of wolves, she went out with a gun upon her shoulder—her son's gun, rusty and with the butt worn by the rubbing of the hand—and she was a strange sight, the tall “Sauvage,” a little bent, going with slow strides over the snow, the muzzle of the piece extending beyond the black headdress, which confined her head and imprisoned her white hair, which no one had ever seen.
One day a Prussian force arrived.
It was billeted upon the inhabitants, according to the property and resources of each.
Four were allotted to the old woman, who was known to be rich.
They were four great fellows with fair complexion, blond beards and blue eyes, who had not grown thin in spite of the fatigue which they had endured already and who also, though in a conquered country, had remained kind and gentle.
Alone with this aged woman, they showed themselves full of consideration, sparing her, as much as they could, all expense and fatigue.
They could be seen, all four of them, making their toilet at the well in their shirt-sleeves in the gray dawn, splashing with great swishes of water their pink-white northern skin, while La Mere Sauvage went and came, preparing their soup.
They would be seen cleaning the kitchen, rubbing the tiles, splitting wood, peeling potatoes, doing up all the housework like four good sons around their mother.
But the old woman thought always of her own son, so tall and thin, with his hooked nose and his brown eyes and his heavy mustache which made a roll of black hair upon his lip.
She asked every day of each of the soldiers who were installed beside her hearth: “Do you know where the French marching regiment, No. 23, was sent?
My boy is in it.” They invariably answered, “No, we don't know, don't know a thing at all.” And, understanding her pain and her uneasiness—they who had mothers, too, there at home—they rendered her a thousand little services.
She loved them well, moreover, her four enemies, since the peasantry have no patriotic hatred; that belongs to the upper class alone.
They said in the district, in speaking of the Germans of La Mere Sauvage: “There are four who have found a soft place.” Now, one morning, when the old woman was alone in the house, she observed, far off on the plain, a man coming toward her dwelling.
Soon she recognized him; it was the postman to distribute the letters.
He gave her a folded paper and she drew out of her case the spectacles which she used for sewing.
Your boy Victor was killed yesterday by a shell which almost cut him in two.
I was near by, as we stood next each other in the company, and he told me about you and asked me to let you know on the same day if anything happened to him.
She remained motionless, so overcome and stupefied that she did not even suffer as yet.
Her thoughts came, one by one, dreadful, torturing.
The gendarmes had killed the father, the Prussians had killed the son.
She seemed to see the thing, the horrible thing: the head falling, the eyes open, while he chewed the corner of his big mustache as he always did in moments of anger.
What had they done with his body afterward?
If they had only let her have her boy back as they had brought back her husband—with the bullet in the middle of the forehead!
It was the Prussians returning from the village.
She hid her letter very quickly in her pocket, and she received them quietly, with her ordinary face, having had time to wipe her eyes.
They were laughing, all four, delighted, for they brought with them a fine rabbit—stolen, doubtless—and they made signs to the old woman that there was to be something good to east.
She set herself to work at once to prepare breakfast, but when it came to killing the rabbit, her heart failed her.
One of the soldiers struck it down with a blow of his fist behind the ears.
The beast once dead, she skinned the red body, but the sight of the blood which she was touching, and which covered her hands, and which she felt cooling and coagulating, made her tremble from head to foot, and she kept seeing her big boy cut in two, bloody, like this still palpitating animal.
She sat down at table with the Prussians, but she could not eat, not even a mouthful.
They devoured the rabbit without bothering themselves about her.
She looked at them sideways, without speaking, her face so impassive that they perceived nothing.
All of a sudden she said: “I don't even know your names, and here's a whole month that we've been together.” They understood, not without difficulty, what she wanted, and told their names.
That was not sufficient; she had them written for her on a paper, with the addresses of their families, and, resting her spectacles on her great nose, she contemplated that strange handwriting, then folded the sheet and put it in her pocket, on top of the letter which told her of the death of her son.
They were astonished at her taking all this trouble; she explained to them that thus they would not be so cold; and they helped her.
They heaped the stacks of hay as high as the straw roof, and in that manner they made a sort of great chamber with four walls of fodder, warm and perfumed, where they should sleep splendidly.
Then she kindled a good fire to warm herself, and the four Germans ascended to their lodging-place by the ladder which served them every night for this purpose.
As soon as they closed the trapdoor the old woman removed the ladder, then opened the outside door noiselessly and went back to look for more bundles of straw, with which she filled her kitchen.
She went barefoot in the snow, so softly that no sound was heard.
From time to time she listened to the sonorous and unequal snoring of the four soldiers who were fast asleep.
When she judged her preparations to be sufficient, she threw one of the bundles into the fireplace, and when it was alight she scattered it over all the others.
In a few seconds the whole interior of the cottage was illumined with a brilliant light and became a frightful brasier, a gigantic fiery furnace, whose glare streamed out of the narrow window and threw a glittering beam upon the snow.
Then a great cry issued from the top of the house; it was a clamor of men shouting heartrending calls of anguish and of terror.
Finally the trapdoor having given way, a whirlwind of fire shot up into the loft, pierced the straw roof, rose to the sky like the immense flame of a torch, and all the cottage flared.
Nothing more was heard therein but the crackling of the fire, the cracking of the walls, the falling of the rafters.
Suddenly the roof fell in and the burning carcass of the dwelling hurled a great plume of sparks into the air, amid a cloud of smoke.
The old “Sauvage” stood before her ruined dwelling, armed with her gun, her son's gun, for fear one of those men might escape.
A loud report followed.
People were coming, the peasants, the Prussians.
They found the woman seated on the trunk of a tree, calm and satisfied.
A German officer, but speaking French like a son of France, demanded: “Where are your soldiers?” She reached her bony arm toward the red heap of fire which was almost out and answered with a strong voice: “There!” They crowded round her.
The Prussian asked: “How did it take fire?” “It was I who set it on fire.” They did not believe her, they thought that the sudden disaster had made her crazy.
While all pressed round and listened, she told the story from beginning to end, from the arrival of the letter to the last shriek of the men who were burned with her house, and never omitted a detail.
When she had finished, she drew two pieces of paper from her pocket, and, in order to distinguish them by the last gleams of the fire, she again adjusted her spectacles.
She had understood; she waited.
An order rang out, followed instantly by a long report.
The Prussian officer approached.
She was almost cut in two, and in her withered hand she held her letter bathed with blood.
My friend Serval added: “It was by way of reprisal that the Germans destroyed the chateau of the district, which belonged to me.” I thought of the mothers of those four fine fellows burned in that house and of the horrible heroism of that other mother shot against the wall.
And I picked up a little stone, still blackened by the flames.
EPIPHANY I should say I did remember that Epiphany supper during the war! exclaimed Count de Garens, an army captain.
I was quartermaster of cavalry at the time, and for a fortnight had been scouting in front of the German advance guard.
The evening before we had cut down a few Uhlans and had lost three men, one of whom was that poor little Raudeville.
You remember Joseph de Raudeville, of course.
Well, on that day my commanding officer ordered me to take six troopers and to go and occupy the village of Porterin, where there had been five skirmishes in three weeks, and to hold it all night.
There were not twenty houses left standing, not a dozen houses in that wasps' nest.
So I took ten troopers and set out about four o'clock, and at five o'clock, while it was still pitch dark, we reached the first houses of Porterin.
I halted and ordered Marchas—you know Pierre de Marchas, who afterward married little Martel-Auvelin, the daughter of the Marquis de Martel- Auvelin—to go alone into the village, and to report to me what he saw.
I had selected nothing but volunteers, all men of good family.
It is pleasant when on duty not to be forced to be on intimate terms with unpleasant fellows.
This Marchas was as smart as possible, cunning as a fox and supple as a serpent.
He could scent the Prussians as a dog can scent a hare, could discover food where we should have died of hunger without him, and obtained information from everybody, and information which was always reliable, with incredible cleverness.
In ten minutes he returned.
“All right,” he said; “there have been no Prussians here for three days.
It is a sinister place, is this village.
I have been talking to a Sister of Mercy, who is caring for four or five wounded men in an abandoned convent.” I ordered them to ride on, and we entered the principal street.
On the right and left we could vaguely see roofless walls, which were hardly visible in the profound darkness.
Here and there a light was burning in a room; some family had remained to keep its house standing as well as they were able; a family of brave or of poor people.
The horses stumbled against stones, against beams, against furniture.
And he replied: “I have a place for us to lodge in, and a rare good one.” And we presently stopped before a small house, evidently belonging to some proprietor of the middle class.
It stood on the street, was quite inclosed, and had a garden in the rear.
Leave me four to look after provisions, to do the cooking and to set the table.
I will go and find out where the wine is hidden.” I went off, to reconnoitre the deserted streets until they ended in the open country, so as to post my sentries there.
Half an hour later I was back, and found Marchas lounging in a great easy-chair, the covering of which he had taken off, from love of luxury, as he said.
He was warming his feet at the fire and smoking an excellent cigar, whose perfume filled the room.
He was alone, his elbows resting on the arms of the chair, his head sunk between his shoulders, his cheeks flushed, his eyes bright, and looking delighted.
I heard the noise of plates and dishes in the next room, and Marchas said to me, smiling in a contented manner: “This is famous; I found the champagne under the flight of steps outside, the brandy—fifty bottles of the very finest in the kitchen garden under a pear tree, which did not seem to me to be quite straight when I looked at it by the light of my lantern.
It is a delightful district.” I sat down opposite him, and the fire in the grate was burning my nose and cheeks.
“Splendid wood,” he replied.
“The owner's carriage.
A capital house!” I laughed, for I saw the creature was funny, and he went on: “Fancy this being the Epiphany!
I have had a bean put into the goose dressing; but there is no queen; it is really very annoying!” And I repeated like an echo: “It is annoying, but what do you want me to do in the matter?” “To find some, of course.” “Some women.
Women?—you must be mad?” “I managed to find the brandy under the pear tree, and the champagne under the steps; and yet there was nothing to guide me, while as for you, a petticoat is a sure bait.
Ha! ha! ha!” But Marchas continued with extraordinary gravity: “I am not laughing; go and find the priest and tell him how we are situated, and, as he must be horribly dull, he will come.
He is sure to know his female parishioners on the tips of his fingers, and if there is one to suit us, and you manage it well, he will suggest her to you.” “Come, come, Marchas, what are you thinking of?” “My dear Garens, you can do this quite well.
We are well bred, by Jove! and we will put on our most distinguished manners and our grandest style.
You are the head of this detachment, and you alone can go and call on the head of the church in this neighborhood.
The parsonage is beside it.” As I went out, he called out: “Tell him the bill of fare, to make him hungry!” I discovered the ecclesiastic's little house without any difficulty; it was by the side of a large, ugly brick church.
The names of the six are: Garens, myself; Pierre de Marchas, Ludovic de Ponderel, Baron d'Streillis, Karl Massouligny, the painter's son, and Joseph Herbon, a young musician.
It is an Epiphany supper, Monsieur le Cure, and we should like to make it a little cheerful.” The priest smiled and murmured: “It seems to me to be hardly a suitable occasion for amusing one's self.” And I replied: “We are fighting during the day, monsieur.
Fourteen of our comrades have been killed in a month, and three fell as late as yesterday.
We stake our life at every moment; have we not, therefore, the right to amuse ourselves freely?
We are Frenchmen, we like to laugh, and we can laugh everywhere.
Our fathers laughed on the scaffold!
This evening we should like to cheer ourselves up a little, like gentlemen, and not like soldiers; you understand me, I hope.
Come, monsieur, think; it would be very nice to have some ladies, I mean to say, some married couples!
I know nothing about your parishioners.
The baker and his wife, the grocer, the—the—the—watchmaker—the—shoemaker—the—the druggist with Mrs.
We have a good spread and plenty of wine, and we should be enchanted to leave pleasant recollections of ourselves with the people here.” The priest thought again for a long time, and then said resolutely: “No, there is nobody.” I began to laugh.
“By Jove, Monsieur le Cure, it is very annoying not to have an Epiphany queen, for we have the bean.
We will laugh and enjoy ourselves, my children; we will have some fun.
How pleased the ladies will be, I say, how delighted they will be!
Where are you staying?” I described the house, and he understood where it was.
“It belongs to Monsieur Bertin-Lavaille.
Ha! ha! ha! four ladies!” He went out with me, still laughing, and left me, repeating: “That is capital; in half an hour at Bertin-Lavaille's house.” I returned quickly, very much astonished and very much puzzled.
There are six of us hussars, besides the priest and four ladies.” He was thunderstruck, and I was triumphant.
He repeated: “Four ladies!
Did you say, four ladies?” “I said four women.” “Real women?” “Real women.” “Well, accept my compliments!” “I will, for I deserve them.” He got out of his armchair, opened the door, and I saw a beautiful white tablecloth on a long table, round which three hussars in blue aprons were setting out the plates and glasses.
Everything was ready, and we were waiting.
We waited for nearly an hour, while a delicious smell of roast poultry pervaded the whole house.
At last, however, a knock against the shutters made us all jump up at the same moment.
Stout Ponderel ran to open the door, and in less than a minute a little Sister of Mercy appeared in the doorway.
She was thin, wrinkled and timid, and successively greeted the four bewildered hussars who saw her enter.
Behind her, the noise of sticks sounded on the tiled floor in the vestibule, and as soon as she had come into the drawing- room, I saw three old heads in white caps, following each other one by one, who came in, swaying with different movements, one inclining to the right, while the other inclined to the left.
And three worthy women appeared, limping, dragging their legs behind them, crippled by illness and deformed through old age, three infirm old women, past service, the only three pensioners who were able to walk in the home presided over by Sister Saint-Benedict.
She had turned round to her invalids, full of anxiety for them, and then, seeing my quartermaster's stripes, she said to me: “I am much obliged to you for thinking of these poor women.
They have very little pleasure in life, and you are at the same time giving them a great treat and doing them a great honor.” I saw the priest, who had remained in the dark hallway, and was laughing heartily, and I began to laugh in my turn, especially when I saw Marchas' face.
She is nearly blind, for her face was terribly singed in a fire, and her right leg was half burned off.” Then she pointed to the third, a sort of dwarf, with protruding, round, stupid eyes, which she rolled incessantly in all directions, “This is La Putois, an idiot.
Stout Ponderel gave his arm to Mother Jean-Jean, who bemoaned her crutch, and little Joseph Herbon took the idiot, La Putois, to the dining-room, which was filled with the odor of the viands.
As soon as we were opposite our plates, the sister clapped her hands three times, and, with the precision of soldiers presenting arms, the women made a rapid sign of the cross, and then the priest slowly repeated the Benedictus in Latin.
Then we sat down, and the two fowls appeared, brought in by Marchas, who chose to wait at table, rather than to sit down as a guest to this ridiculous repast.
But I cried: “Bring the champagne at once!” and a cork flew out with the noise of a pistol, and in spite of the resistance of the priest and of the kind sister, the three hussars, sitting by the side of the three invalids, emptied their three full glasses down their throats by force.
Massouligny, who possessed the faculty of making himself at home, and of being on good terms with every one, wherever he was, made love to Mother Paumelle in the drollest manner.
The dropsical woman, who had retained her cheerfulness in spite of her misfortunes, answered him banteringly in a high falsetto voice which appeared as if it were put on, and she laughed so heartily at her neighbor's jokes that it was quite alarming.
Little Herbon had seriously undertaken the task of making the idiot drunk, and Baron d'Streillis, whose wits were not always particularly sharp, was questioning old Jean-Jean about the life, the habits, and the rules of the hospital.
The nun said to Massouligny in consternation: “Oh! oh! you will make her ill; pray do not make her laugh like that, monsieur.
Oh! monsieur—” Then she got up and rushed at Herbon to take from him a full glass which he was hastily emptying down La Putois' throat, while the priest shook with laughter, and said to the sister: “Never mind; just this once, it will not hurt them.
Do leave them alone.” After the two fowls they ate the duck, which was flanked by the three pigeons and the blackbird, and then the goose appeared, smoking, golden- brown, and diffusing a warm odor of hot, browned roast meat.
La Paumelle, who was getting lively, clapped her hands; La Jean-Jean left off answering the baron's numerous questions, and La Putois uttered grunts of pleasure, half cries and half sighs, as little children do when one shows them candy.
“I understand these sort of operations better than most people.” “Certainly, Monsieur l'Abbe,” and the sister said: “How would it be to open the window a little?
They are too warm, and I am afraid they will be ill.” I turned to Marchas: “Open the window for a minute.” He did so; the cold outer air as it came in made the candles flare, and the steam from the goose, which the cure was scientifically carving, with a table napkin round his neck, whirl about.
We watched him doing it, without speaking now, for we were interested in his attractive handiwork, and seized with renewed appetite at the sight of that enormous golden-brown bird, whose limbs fell one after another into the brown gravy at the bottom of the dish.
At that moment, in the midst of that greedy silence which kept us all attentive, the distant report of a shot came in at the open window.
I shall expect you back here in five minutes.” And while the three riders went off at full gallop through the night, I got into the saddle with my three remaining hussars, in front of the steps of the villa, while the cure, the sister and the three old women showed their frightened faces at the window.
We heard nothing more, except the barking of a dog in the distance.
Then the cure, Marchas, and I took a mattress into the room to lay the wounded man on; the sister tore up a table napkin in order to make lint, while the three frightened women remained huddled up in a corner.
Soon I heard the rattle of sabres on the road, and I took a candle to show a light to the men who were returning; and they soon appeared, carrying that inert, soft, long, sinister object which a human body becomes when life no longer sustains it.
They put the wounded man on the mattress that had been prepared for him, and I saw at the first glance that he was dying.
He had the death rattle and was spitting up blood, which ran out of the corners of his mouth at every gasp.
His cheeks, his beard, his hair, his neck and his clothes seemed to have been soaked, to have been dipped in a red tub; and that blood stuck to him, and had become a dull color which was horrible to look at.
The wounded man, wrapped up in a large shepherd's cloak, occasionally opened his dull, vacant eyes, which seemed stupid with astonishment, like those of animals wounded by a sportsman, which fall at his feet, more than half dead already, stupefied with terror and surprise.
The cure exclaimed: “Ah, it is old Placide, the shepherd from Les Moulins.
Oh, God! they have killed the unhappy man!” The sister had opened his blouse and shirt, and was looking at a little blue hole in his chest, which was not bleeding any more.
The shepherd was gasping terribly and bringing up blood with every last breath, and in his throat, to the very depth of his lungs, they could hear an ominous and continued gurgling.
The cure, standing in front of him, raised his right hand, made the sign of the cross, and in a slow and solemn voice pronounced the Latin words which purify men's souls, but before they were finished, the old man's body trembled violently, as if something had given way inside him, and he ceased to breathe.
When I turned round, I saw a sight which was even more horrible than the death struggle of this unfortunate man; the three old women were standing up huddled close together, hideous, and grimacing with fear and horror.
Sister Saint-Benedict left the dead man, ran up to her infirm old women, and without a word or a look for me, wrapped their shawls round them, gave them their crutches, pushed them to the door, made them go out, and disappeared with them into the dark night.
I saw that I could not even let a hussar accompany them, for the mere rattle of a sword would have sent them mad with fear.
What a horrible thing!” THE MUSTACHE CHATEAU DE SOLLES, July 30, 1883.
We cannot go out in this frightful weather, so we have theatricals.
How stupid they are, my dear, these drawing entertainments in the repertory of real life!
The jokes are like cannon balls, smashing everything in their passage.
No wit, nothing natural, no sprightliness, no elegance.
These literary men, in truth, know nothing of society.
They are perfectly ignorant of how people think and talk in our set.
I do not mind if they despise our customs, our conventionalities, but I do not forgive them for not knowing them.
When they want to be humorous they make puns that would do for a barrack; when they try to be jolly, they give us jokes that they must have picked up on the outer boulevard in those beer houses artists are supposed to frequent, where one has heard the same students' jokes for fifty years.
So we have taken to Theatricals.
As we are only two women, my husband takes the part of a soubrette, and, in order to do that, he has shaved off his mustache.
I no longer recognize him-by day or at night.
In fact, a man without a mustache is no longer a man.
But a mustache, oh, a mustache is indispensable to a manly face.
No, you would never believe how these little hair bristles on the upper lip are a relief to the eye and good in other ways.
I have thought over the matter a great deal but hardly dare to write my thoughts.
Words look so different on paper and the subject is so difficult, so delicate, so dangerous that it requires infinite skill to tackle it.
Well, when my husband appeared, shaven, I understood at once that I never could fall in love with a strolling actor nor a preacher, even if it were Father Didon, the most charming of all!
Oh, my dear Lucy, never let yourself be kissed by a man without a mustache; their kisses have no flavor, none whatever!
They no longer have the charm, the mellowness and the snap —yes, the snap—of a real kiss.
The mustache is the spice.
Imagine placing to your lips a piece of dry—or moist—parchment.
That is the kiss of the man without a mustache.
Whence comes this charm of the mustache, will you tell me?
It tickles your face, you feel it approaching your mouth and it sends a little shiver through you down to the tips of your toes.
Have you ever felt a mustache on your neck?
It intoxicates you, makes you feel creepy, goes to the tips of your fingers.
You wriggle, shake your shoulders, toss back your head.
You wish to get away and at the same time to remain there; it is delightful, but irritating.
A lip without a mustache is like a body without clothing; and one must wear clothes, very few, if you like, but still some clothing.
I recall a sentence (uttered by a politician) which has been running in my mind for three months.
My husband, who keeps up with the newspapers, read me one evening a very singular speech by our Minister of Agriculture, who was called M.
He may have been superseded by this time.
I was paying no attention, but the name Meline struck me.
It recalled, I do not exactly know why, the 'Scenes de la vie de boheme'.
I thought it was about some grisette.
Meline was making this statement to the people of Amiens, I believe, and I have ever since been trying to understand what he meant: “There is no patriotism without agriculture!” Well, I have just discovered his meaning, and I affirm in my turn that there is no love without a mustache.
There is no love without a mustache!
“There is no patriotism without agriculture,” said M.
Meline, and he was right, that minister; I now understand why.
From a very different point of view the mustache is essential.
It gives character to the face.
It makes a man look gentle, tender, violent, a monster, a rake, enterprising!
The hairy man, who does not shave off his whiskers, never has a refined look, for his features are concealed; and the shape of the jaw and the chin betrays a great deal to those who understand.
The man with a mustache retains his own peculiar expression and his refinement at the same time.
And how many different varieties of mustaches there are!
Sometimes they are twisted, curled, coquettish.
Sometimes they are pointed, sharp as needles, and threatening.
Sometimes they are enormous, overhanging, frightful.
These big ones generally conceal a fine disposition, a kindliness that borders on weakness and a gentleness that savors of timidity.
But what I adore above all in the mustache is that it is French, altogether French.
It came from our ancestors, the Gauls, and has remained the insignia of our national character.
It is boastful, gallant and brave.
It sips wine gracefully and knows how to laugh with refinement, while the broad-bearded jaws are clumsy in everything they do.
I recall something that made me weep all my tears and also—I see it now—made me love a mustache on a man's face.
One day there was a skirmish near the chateau.
I had heard the firing of the cannon and of the artillery all the morning, and that evening a German colonel came and took up his abode in our house.
He left the following day.
My father was informed that there were a number of dead bodies in the fields.
He had them brought to our place so that they might be buried together.
They were laid all along the great avenue of pines as fast as they brought them in, on both sides of the avenue, and as they began to smell unpleasant, their bodies were covered with earth until the deep trench could be dug.
Thus one saw only their heads which seemed to protrude from the clayey earth and were almost as yellow, with their closed eyes.
But when I saw those two rows of frightful faces, I thought I should faint.
The uniforms were concealed beneath the earth, and yet immediately, yes, immediately, my dear, I recognized the Frenchmen by their mustache!
Long live the mustache!
MADAME BAPTISTE The first thing I did was to look at the clock as I entered the waiting- room of the station at Loubain, and I found that I had to wait two hours and ten minutes for the Paris express.
I had walked twenty miles and felt suddenly tired.
Not seeing anything on the station walls to amuse me, I went outside and stood there racking my brains to think of something to do.
The street was a kind of boulevard, planted with acacias, and on either side a row of houses of varying shape and different styles of architecture, houses such as one only sees in a small town, and ascended a slight hill, at the extreme end of which there were some trees, as though it ended in a park.
From time to time a cat crossed the street and jumped over the gutters carefully.
A cur sniffed at every tree and hunted for scraps from the kitchens, but I did not see a single human being, and I felt listless and disheartened.
I was already thinking of the inevitable and interminable visit to the small cafe at the railway station, where I should have to sit over a glass of undrinkable beer and the illegible newspaper, when I saw a funeral procession coming out of a side street into the one in which I was, and the sight of the hearse was a relief to me.
It would, at any rate, give me something to do for ten minutes.
Suddenly, however, my curiosity was aroused.
The hearse was followed by eight gentlemen, one of whom was weeping, while the others were chatting together, but there was no priest, and I thought to myself: “This is a non-religious funeral,” and then I reflected that a town like Loubain must contain at least a hundred freethinkers, who would have made a point of making a manifestation.
The rapid pace of the procession clearly proved that the body was to be buried without ceremony, and, consequently, without the intervention of the Church.
My idle curiosity framed the most complicated surmises, and as the hearse passed me, a strange idea struck me, which was to follow it, with the eight gentlemen.
That would take up my time for an hour, at least, and I accordingly walked with the others, with a sad look on my face, and, on seeing this, the two last turned round in surprise, and then spoke to each other in a low voice.
No doubt they were asking each other whether I belonged to the town, and then they consulted the two in front of them, who stared at me in turn.
This close scrutiny annoyed me, and to put an end to it I went up to them, and, after bowing, I said: “I beg your pardon, gentlemen, for interrupting your conversation, but, seeing a civil funeral, I have followed it, although I did not know the deceased gentleman whom you are accompanying.” “It was a woman,” one of them said.
I was much surprised at hearing this, and asked: “But it is a civil funeral, is it not?” The other gentleman, who evidently wished to tell me all about it, then said: “Yes and no.
The clergy have refused to allow us the use of the church.” On hearing this I uttered a prolonged “A-h!” of astonishment.
I could not understand it at all, but my obliging neighbor continued: “It is rather a long story.
This young woman committed suicide, and that is the reason why she cannot be buried with any religious ceremony.
The gentleman who is walking first, and who is crying, is her husband.” I replied with some hesitation: “You surprise and interest me very much, monsieur.
Shall I be indiscreet if I ask you to tell me the facts of the case?
If I am troubling you, forget that I have said anything about the matter.” The gentleman took my arm familiarly.
Let us linger a little behind the others, and I will tell it you, although it is a very sad story.
We have plenty of time before getting to the cemetery, the trees of which you see up yonder, for it is a stiff pull up this hill.” And he began: “This young woman, Madame Paul Hamot, was the daughter of a wealthy merchant in the neighborhood, Monsieur Fontanelle.
When she was a mere child of eleven, she had a shocking adventure; a footman attacked her and she nearly died.
A terrible criminal case was the result, and the man was sentenced to penal servitude for life.
“The little girl grew up, stigmatized by disgrace, isolated, without any companions; and grown-up people would scarcely kiss her, for they thought that they would soil their lips if they touched her forehead, and she became a sort of monster, a phenomenon to all the town.
People said to each other in a whisper: 'You know, little Fontanelle,' and everybody turned away in the streets when she passed.
Her parents could not even get a nurse to take her out for a walk, as the other servants held aloof from her, as if contact with her would poison everybody who came near her.
“It was pitiable to see the poor child go and play every afternoon.
She remained quite by herself, standing by her maid and looking at the other children amusing themselves.
Sometimes, yielding to an irresistible desire to mix with the other children, she advanced timidly, with nervous gestures, and mingled with a group, with furtive steps, as if conscious of her own disgrace.
And immediately the mothers, aunts and nurses would come running from every seat and take the children entrusted to their care by the hand and drag them brutally away.
“Little Fontanelle remained isolated, wretched, without understanding what it meant, and then she began to cry, nearly heartbroken with grief, and then she used to run and hide her head in her nurse's lap, sobbing.
They kept the girls from her, as if she were stricken with the plague.
Remember that she had nothing to learn, nothing; that she no longer had the right to the symbolical wreath of orange-flowers; that almost before she could read she had penetrated that redoubtable mystery which mothers scarcely allow their daughters to guess at, trembling as they enlighten them on the night of their marriage.
People scarcely greeted her; only a few men bowed to her, and the mothers pretended not to see her, while some young blackguards called her Madame Baptiste, after the name of the footman who had attacked her.
“Nobody knew the secret torture of her mind, for she hardly ever spoke, and never laughed, and her parents themselves appeared uncomfortable in her presence, as if they bore her a constant grudge for some irreparable fault.
“An honest man would not willingly give his hand to a liberated convict, would he, even if that convict were his own son?
And Monsieur and Madame Fontanelle looked on their daughter as they would have done on a son who had just been released from the hulks.
She was pretty and pale, tall, slender, distinguished-looking, and she would have pleased me very much, monsieur, but for that unfortunate affair.
“Well, when a new sub-prefect was appointed here, eighteen months ago, he brought his private secretary with him.
He saw Mademoiselle Fontanelle and fell in love with her, and when told of what occurred, he merely said: “'Bah!
That is just a guarantee for the future, and I would rather it should have happened before I married her than afterward.
I shall live tranquilly with that woman.' “He paid his addresses to her, asked for her hand and married her, and then, not being deficient in assurance, he paid wedding calls, as if nothing had happened.
Some people returned them, others did not; but, at last, the affair began to be forgotten, and she took her proper place in society.
“She adored her husband as if he had been a god; for, you must remember, he had restored her to honor and to social life, had braved public opinion, faced insults, and, in a word, performed such a courageous act as few men would undertake, and she felt the most exalted and tender love for him.
“When she became enceinte, and it was known, the most particular people and the greatest sticklers opened their doors to her, as if she had been definitely purified by maternity.
“It is strange, but so it is, and thus everything was going on as well as possible until the other day, which was the feast of the patron saint of our town.
The prefect, surrounded by his staff and the authorities, presided at the musical competition, and when he had finished his speech the distribution of medals began, which Paul Hamot, his private secretary, handed to those who were entitled to them.
“As you know, there are always jealousies and rivalries, which make people forget all propriety.
All the ladies of the town were there on the platform, and, in his turn, the bandmaster from the village of Mourmillon came up.
This band was only to receive a second-class medal, for one cannot give first-class medals to everybody, can one?
But when the private secretary handed him his badge, the man threw it in his face and exclaimed: “'You may keep your medal for Baptiste.
The common herd are neither charitable nor refined, and every eye was turned toward that poor lady.
Have you ever seen a woman going mad, monsieur?
She got up and fell back on her chair three times in succession, as if she wished to make her escape, but saw that she could not make her way through the crowd, and then another voice in the crowd exclaimed: “'Oh!
Madame Baptiste!' “And a great uproar, partly of laughter and partly of indignation, arose.
The word was repeated over and over again; people stood on tiptoe to see the unhappy woman's face; husbands lifted their wives up in their arms, so that they might see her, and people asked: “'Which is she?
The one in blue?' “The boys crowed like cocks, and laughter was heard all over the place.
Her eyelids blinked quickly, as if a vivid light were shining on them, and she breathed heavily, like a horse that is going up a steep hill, so that it almost broke one's heart to see her.
Meanwhile, however, Monsieur Hamot had seized the ruffian by the throat, and they were rolling on the ground together, amid a scene of indescribable confusion, and the ceremony was interrupted.
“An hour later, as the Hamots were returning home, the young woman, who had not uttered a word since the insult, but who was trembling as if all her nerves had been set in motion by springs, suddenly sprang over the parapet of the bridge and threw herself into the river before her husband could prevent her.
The water is very deep under the arches, and it was two hours before her body was recovered.
Of course, she was dead.” The narrator stopped and then added: “It was, perhaps, the best thing she could do under the circumstances.
There are some things which cannot be wiped out, and now you understand why the clergy refused to have her taken into church.
He looked at me in surprise through his tears and then said: “Thank you, monsieur.” And I was not sorry that I had followed the funeral.
THE QUESTION OF LATIN This subject of Latin that has been dinned into our ears for some time past recalls to my mind a story—a story of my youth.
I was finishing my studies with a teacher, in a big central town, at the Institution Robineau, celebrated through the entire province for the special attention paid there to the study of Latin.
For the past ten years, the Robineau Institute beat the imperial lycee of the town at every competitive examination, and all the colleges of the subprefecture, and these constant successes were due, they said, to an usher, a simple usher, M.
Piquedent, or rather Pere Piquedent.
He was one of those middle-aged men quite gray, whose real age it is impossible to tell, and whose history we can guess at first glance.
Having entered as an usher at twenty into the first institution that presented itself so that he could proceed to take first his degree of Master of Arts and afterward the degree of Doctor of Laws, he found himself so enmeshed in this routine that he remained an usher all his life.
But his love for Latin did not leave him and harassed him like an unhealthy passion.
He continued to read the poets, the prose writers, the historians, to interpret them and penetrate their meaning, to comment on them with a perseverance bordering on madness.
One day, the idea came into his head to oblige all the students in his class to answer him in Latin only; and he persisted in this resolution until at last they were capable of sustaining an entire conversation with him just as they would in their mother tongue.
He listened to them, as a leader of an orchestra listens to his musicians rehearsing, and striking his desk every moment with his ruler, he exclaimed: “Monsieur Lefrere, Monsieur Lefrere, you are committing a solecism!
“Monsieur Plantel, your way of expressing yourself is altogether French and in no way Latin.
You must understand the genius of a language.
Look here, listen to me.” Now, it came to pass that the pupils of the Institution Robineau carried off, at the end of the year, all the prizes for composition, translation, and Latin conversation.
Next year, the principal, a little man, as cunning as an ape, whom he resembled in his grinning and grotesque appearance, had had printed on his programmes, on his advertisements, and painted on the door of his institution: “Latin Studies a Specialty.
“Two honor prizes at the general examinations in competition with all the lycees and colleges of France.” For ten years the Institution Robineau triumphed in the same fashion.
Now my father, allured by these successes, sent me as a day pupil to Robineau's—or, as we called it, Robinetto or Robinettino's—and made me take special private lessons from Pere Piquedent at the rate of five francs per hour, out of which the usher got two francs and the principal three francs.
I was then eighteen, and was in the philosophy class.
It so happened that Pere Piquedent, instead of talking Latin to me, as he did when teaching publicly in the institution, kept telling me his troubles in French.
Without relations, without friends, the poor man conceived an attachment to me, and poured out his misery to me.
He had never for the last ten or fifteen years chatted confidentially with any one.
“I am like an oak in a desert,” he said—“'sicut quercus in solitudine'.” The other ushers disgusted him.
He knew nobody in the town, since he had no time to devote to making acquaintances.
The dream of my life is to have a room with my own furniture, my own books, little things that belong to myself and which others may not touch.
And I have nothing of my own, nothing except my trousers and my frock-coat, nothing, not even my mattress and my pillow!
Ah! my dear boy, a key, the key of a door which one can lock—this is happiness, mark you, the only happiness!
“Here, all day long, teaching all those restless rogues, and during the night the dormitory with the same restless rogues snoring.
And I have to sleep in the bed at the end of two rows of beds occupied by these youngsters whom I must look after.
If I go out I find the streets full of people, and, when I am tired of walking, I go into some cafe crowded with smokers and billiard players.
I tell you what, it is the life of a galley slave.” I said: “Why did you not take up some other line, Monsieur Piquedent?” He exclaimed: “What, my little friend?
I am not a shoemaker, or a joiner, or a hatter, or a baker, or a hairdresser.
I only know Latin, and I have no diploma which would enable me to sell my knowledge at a high price.
If I were a doctor I would sell for a hundred francs what I now sell for a hundred sous; and I would supply it probably of an inferior quality, for my title would be enough to sustain my reputation.” Sometimes he would say to me: “I have no rest in life except in the hours spent with you.
I'll make it up to you in the class-room by making you speak twice as much Latin as the others.” One day, I grew bolder, and offered him a cigarette.
He stared at me in astonishment at first, then he gave a glance toward the door.
And we went and leaned our elbows on the windowsill looking on the street, holding concealed in our hands the little rolls of tobacco.
Just opposite to us was a laundry.
Suddenly, another, a fifth, carrying on her arm a large basket which made her stoop, came out to take the customers their shirts, their handkerchiefs, and their sheets.
She stopped on the threshold as if she were already fatigued; then, she raised her eyes, smiled as she saw us smoking, flung at us, with her left hand, which was free, the sly kiss characteristic of a free-and-easy working-woman, and went away at a slow place, dragging her feet as she went.
She was a woman of about twenty, small, rather thin, pale, rather pretty, with a roguish air and laughing eyes beneath her ill-combed fair hair.
Pere Piquedent, affected, began murmuring: “What an occupation for a woman!
He had a heart which swelled with lofty democratic sentiment, and he referred to the fatiguing pursuits of the working class with phrases borrowed from Jean- Jacques Rousseau, and with sobs in his throat.
Next day, as we were leaning our elbows on the same window sill, the same woman perceived us and cried out to us: “Good-day, scholars!” in a comical sort of tone, while she made a contemptuous gesture with her hands.
I flung her a cigarette, which she immediately began to smoke.
And the four other ironers rushed out to the door with outstretched hands to get cigarettes also.
And each day a friendly intercourse was established between the working- women of the pavement and the idlers of the boarding school.
Pere Piquedent was really a comical sight.
He trembled at being noticed, for he might lose his position; and he made timid and ridiculous gestures, quite a theatrical display of love signals, to which the women responded with a regular fusillade of kisses.
A perfidious idea came into my mind.
One day, on entering our room, I said to the old usher in a low tone: “You would not believe it, Monsieur Piquedent, I met the little washerwoman!
“She is laughing at me, of course.
You are all right.” As I felt that my trick had produced its effect on him, I did not press the matter.
But every day I pretended that I had met the little laundress and that I had spoken to her about him, so that in the end he believed me, and sent her ardent and earnest kisses.
Now it happened that one morning, on my way to the boarding school, I really came across her.
I accosted her without hesitation, as if I had known her for the last ten years.
“Good-day, mademoiselle.
Are you quite well?” “Very well, monsieur, thank you.” “Will you have a cigarette?” “Oh! not in the street.” “You can smoke it at home.” “In that case, I will.” “Let me tell you, mademoiselle, there's something you don't know.” “What is that, monsieur?” “The old gentleman—my old professor, I mean—” “Pere Piquedent?” “Yes, Pere Piquedent.
What of that?” “Well, he is in love with you!” She burst out laughing wildly, and exclaimed: “You are only fooling.” “Oh! no, I am not fooling!
I bet that he'll marry you!” She ceased laughing.
The idea of marriage makes every girl serious.
Then she repeated, with an incredulous air: “This is humbug!” “I swear to you, it's true.” She picked up her basket which she had laid down at her feet.
Presently when I had reached the boarding school, I took Pere Piquedent aside, and said: “You must write to her; she is infatuated with you.” And he wrote a long letter, tenderly affectionate, full of phrases and circumlocutions, metaphors and similes, philosophy and academic gallantry; and I took on myself the responsibility of delivering it to the young woman.
She read it with gravity, with emotion; then she murmured: “How well he writes!
It is easy to see he has got education!
Does he really mean to marry me?” I replied intrepidly: “Faith, he has lost his head about you!” “Then he must invite me to dinner on Sunday at the Ile des Fleurs.” I promised that she should be invited.
Pere Piquedent was much touched by everything I told him about her.
I added: “She loves you, Monsieur Piquedent, and I believe her to be a decent girl.
I was playing a practical joke a schoolboy joke, nothing more.
I had been aware of the simplicity of the old usher, his innocence and his weakness.
I was eighteen, and I had been for a long time looked upon at the lycee as a sly practical joker.
So it was agreed that Pere Piquedent and I should set out in a hack for the ferry of Queue de Vache, that we should there pick up Angele, and that I should take them into my boat, for in those days I was fond of boating.
I had inflicted myself on them, the better to enjoy my triumph, and the usher, consenting to my arrangement, proved clearly that he was losing his head by thus risking the loss of his position.
When we arrived at the ferry, where my boat had been moored since morning, I saw in the grass, or rather above the tall weeds of the bank, an enormous red parasol, resembling a monstrous wild poppy.
Beneath the parasol was the little laundress in her Sunday clothes.
She was really pretty, though pale; and graceful, though with a rather suburban grace.
Pere Piquedent raised his hat and bowed.
She put out her hand toward him, and they stared at one another without uttering a word.
“This is nice weather for a row in a boat.” She murmured: “Oh! yes.” She dipped her hand into the water, skimming the surface, making a thin, transparent film like a sheet of glass, which made a soft plashing along the side of the boat.
When they were in the restaurant, she took it on herself to speak, and ordered dinner, fried fish, a chicken, and salad; then she led us on toward the isle, which she knew perfectly.
After this, she was gay, romping, and even rather tantalizing.
Until dessert, no question of love arose.
I had treated them to champagne, and Pere Piquedent was tipsy.
Herself slightly the worse, she called out to him: “Monsieur Piquenez.” He said abruptly: “Mademoiselle, Monsieur Raoul has communicated my sentiments to you.” She became as serious as a judge.
“Yes, monsieur.” “What is your reply?” “We never reply to these questions!” He puffed with emotion, and went on: “Well, will the day ever come that you will like me?” She smiled.
You are very nice.” “In short, mademoiselle, do you think that, later on, we might—” She hesitated a second; then in a trembling voice she said: “Do you mean to marry me when you say that?
For on no other condition, you know.” “Yes, mademoiselle!” “Well, that's all right, Monsieur Piquedent!” It was thus that these two silly creatures promised marriage to each other through the trick of a young scamp.
He stammered, for he was as drunk as Silenus: “I have saved five thousand francs.” She exclaimed triumphantly: “Then we can set up in business?” He became restless.
“In what business?” “What do I know?
With five thousand francs we could do many things.
You don't want me to go and live in your boarding school, do you?” He had not looked forward so far as this, and he stammered in great perplexity: “What business could we set up in?
That would not do, for all I know is Latin!” She reflected in her turn, passing in review all her business ambitions.
She had discovered it.
Not on a big scale, of course; with five thousand francs one does not go far.” He was shocked at the suggestion.
I am—I am—too well known: I only know Latin, that is all I know.” But she poured a glass of champagne down his throat.
It was a frightful catastrophe.
Our escapade was discovered, with the result that Pere Piquedent was dismissed.
And my father, in a fit of anger, sent me to finish my course of philosophy at Ribaudet's school.
Six months later I took my degree of Bachelor of Arts.
Over the door were the words: “Colonial Products—Piquedent”; then underneath, so as to enlighten the most ignorant: “Grocery.” I exclaimed: “'Quantum mutatus ab illo!'” Piquedent raised his head, left his female customer, and rushed toward me with outstretched hands.
What luck! what luck!” A beautiful woman, very plump, abruptly left the cashier's desk and flung herself on my breast.
I had some difficulty in recognizing her, she had grown so stout.
I asked: “So then you're doing well?” Piquedent had gone back to weigh the groceries.
I have made three thousand francs clear this year!” “And what about Latin, Monsieur Piquedent?” “Oh, good heavens!
Latin, Latin, Latin—you see it does not keep the pot boiling!” A MEETING It was nothing but an accident, an accident pure and simple.
On that particular evening the princess' rooms were open, and as they appeared dark after the brilliantly lighted parlors, Baron d'Etraille, who was tired of standing, inadvertently wandered into an empty bedroom.
He looked round for a chair in which to have a doze, as he was sure his wife would not leave before daylight.
As soon as he became accustomed to the light of the room he distinguished the big bed with its azure-and- gold hangings, in the middle of the great room, looking like a catafalque in which love was buried, for the princess was no longer young.
Behind it, a large bright surface looked like a lake seen at a distance.
It was a large mirror, discreetly covered with dark drapery, that was very rarely let down, and seemed to look at the bed, which was its accomplice.
One might almost fancy that it had reminiscences, and that one might see in it charming female forms and the gentle movement of loving arms.
The baron stood still for a moment, smiling, almost experiencing an emotion on the threshold of this chamber dedicated to love.
But suddenly something appeared in the looking-glass, as if the phantoms which he had evoked had risen up before him.
A man and a woman who had been sitting on a low couch concealed in the shadow had arisen, and the polished surface, reflecting their figures, showed that they were kissing each other before separating.
Baron d'Etraille recognized his wife and the Marquis de Cervigne.
He turned and went away like a man who is fully master of himself, and waited till it was day before taking away the baroness; but he had no longer any thoughts of sleeping.
As soon as they were alone he said: “Madame, I saw you just now in Princesse de Raynes' room; I need say no more, and I am not fond either of reproaches, acts of violence, or of ridicule.
As I wish to avoid all such things, we shall separate without any scandal.
Our lawyers will settle your position according to my orders.
You will be free to live as you please when you are no longer under my roof; but, as you will continue to bear my name, I must warn you that should any scandal arise I shall show myself inflexible.” She tried to speak, but he stopped her, bowed, and left the room.
He was more astonished and sad than unhappy.
He had loved her dearly during the first period of their married life; but his ardor had cooled, and now he often amused himself elsewhere, either in a theatre or in society, though he always preserved a certain liking for the baroness.
She was a true Parisian doll: clever, spoiled, elegant, coquettish, witty, with more charm than real beauty.
He used to say familiarly to his brother, when speaking of her: “My wife is charming, attractive, but—there is nothing to lay hold of.
She is like a glass of champagne that is all froth; when you get to the wine it is very good, but there is too little of it, unfortunately.” He walked up and down the room in great agitation, thinking of a thousand things.
At one moment he was furious, and felt inclined to give the marquis a good thrashing, or to slap his face publicly, in the club.
Paris knew in a few days that the Baron and Baroness d'Etraille had agreed to an amicable separation on account of incompatibility of temper.
No one suspected anything, no one laughed, and no one was astonished.
The baron, however, to avoid meeting his wife, travelled for a year, then spent the summer at the seaside, and the autumn in shooting, returning to Paris for the winter.
He did not meet the baroness once.
In any case, she took care to respect appearances, and that was all he asked for.
He became dreadfully bored, travelled again, restored his old castle of Villebosc, which took him two years; then for over a year he entertained friends there, till at last, tired of all these so-called pleasures, he returned to his mansion in the Rue de Lille, just six years after the separation.
He was now forty-five, with a good crop of gray hair, rather stout, and with that melancholy look characteristic of those who have been handsome, sought after, and liked, but who are deteriorating, daily.
He reached the station only a few minutes before the departure of the train on Monday evening, and had barely time to get into a carriage, with only one other occupant, who was sitting in a corner so wrapped in furs and cloaks that he could not even make out whether it was a man or a woman, as nothing of the figure could be seen.
When he perceived that he could not find out, he put on his travelling cap, rolled himself up in his rugs, and stretched out comfortably to sleep.
He did not wake until the day was breaking, and looked at once at his fellow-traveller, who had not stirred all night, and seemed still to be sound asleep.
M. d'Etraille made use of the opportunity to brush his hair and his beard, and to try to freshen himself up a little generally, for a night's travel does not improve one's appearance when one has attained a certain age.
A great poet has said: “When we are young, our mornings are triumphant!” Then we wake up with a cool skin, a bright eye, and glossy hair.
As one grows older one wakes up in a very different condition.
Dull eyes, red, swollen cheeks, dry lips, hair and beard disarranged, impart an old, fatigued, worn-out look to the face.
The baron opened his travelling case, and improved his looks as much as possible.
The engine whistled, the train stopped, and his neighbor moved.
They started off again, and then a slanting ray of sunlight shone into the carriage and on the sleeper, who moved again, shook himself, and then his face could be seen.
It was a young, fair, pretty, plump woman, and the baron looked at her in amazement.
He could really have sworn that it was his wife, but wonderfully changed for the better: stouter —why she had grown as stout as he was, only it suited her much better than it did him.
She looked at him calmly, did not seem to recognize him, and then slowly laid aside her wraps.
She had that quiet assurance of a woman who is sure of herself, who feels that on awaking she is in her full beauty and freshness.
The baron was really bewildered.
Not having seen her for six years, he might be mistaken.
She yawned, and this gesture betrayed her.
She turned and looked at him again, calmly, indifferently, as if she scarcely saw him, and then looked out of the window again.
He was upset and dreadfully perplexed, and kept looking at her sideways.
How could he possibly have doubted it?
There could certainly not be two noses like that, and a thousand recollections flashed through his mind.
He felt the old feeling of the intoxication of love stealing over him, and he called to mind the sweet odor of her skin, her smile when she put her arms on to his shoulders, the soft intonations of her voice, all her graceful, coaxing ways.
But how she had changed and improved!
She seemed riper, more developed, more of a woman, more seductive, more desirable, adorably desirable.
And this strange, unknown woman, whom he had accidentally met in a railway carriage, belonged to him; he had only to say to her: “I insist upon it.” He had formerly slept in her arms, existed only in her love, and now he had found her again certainly, but so changed that he scarcely knew her.
It was she, indeed; she whom he had loved, but who was now altered, with a more assured smile and greater self-possession.
There were two women in one, mingling a great part of what was new and unknown with many sweet recollections of the past.
There was something singular, disturbing, exciting about it —a kind of mystery of love in which there floated a delicious confusion.
And he thought that in a few years nearly every thing changes in us; only the outline can be recognized, and sometimes even that disappears.
The blood, the hair, the skin, all changes and is renewed, and when people have not seen each other for a long time, when they meet they find each other totally different beings, although they are the same and bear the same name.
Ideas may be modified and renewed, so that in forty years of life we may, by gradual and constant transformations, become four or five totally new and different beings.
He dwelt on this thought till it troubled him; it had first taken possession of him when he surprised her in the princess' room.
He was not the least angry; it was not the same woman that he was looking at —that thin, excitable little doll of those days.
Had she recognized him?
If he got into another carriage it would look as if he were running away.
Should he be polite or importunate?
That would look as if he were asking for forgiveness.
During his absence she had hastily arranged her dress and hair, and was now lying stretched out on the seat, radiant, and without showing any emotion.
He turned to her, and said: “My dear Bertha, since this singular chance has brought up together after a separation of six years—a quite friendly separation—are we to continue to look upon each other as irreconcilable enemies?
We are shut up together, tete-a-tete, which is so much the better or so much the worse.
I am not going to get into another carriage, so don't you think it is preferable to talk as friends till the end of our journey?” She answered, quite calmly again: “Just as you please.” Then he suddenly stopped, really not knowing what to say; but as he had plenty of assurance, he sat down on the middle seat, and said: “Well, I see I must pay my court to you; so much the better.
It is, however, really a pleasure, for you are charming.
You cannot imagine how you have improved in the last six years.
I do not know any woman who could give me that delightful sensation which I experienced just now when you emerged from your wraps.
I really could not have thought such a change possible.” Without moving her head or looking at him, she said: “I cannot say the same with regard to you; you have certainly deteriorated a great deal.” He got red and confused, and then, with a smile of resignation, he said: “You are rather hard.” “Why?” was her reply.
It must, therefore, be a matter of perfect indifference to you what I think about you.
But I see it is a painful subject, so let us talk of something else.
What have you been doing since I last saw you?” He felt rather out of countenance, and stammered: “I?
I have travelled, done some shooting, and grown old, as you see.
And you?” She said, quite calmly: “I have taken care of appearances, as you ordered me.” He was very nearly saying something brutal, but he checked himself; and kissed his wife's hand: “And I thank you,” he said.
He was indeed diplomatic, and always master of himself.
He went on: “As you have acceded to my first request, shall we now talk without any bitterness?” She made a little movement of surprise.
I don't feel any; you are a complete stranger to me; I am only trying to keep up a difficult conversation.” He was still looking at her, fascinated in spite of her harshness, and he felt seized with a brutal Beside, the desire of the master.
Perceiving that she had hurt his feelings, she said: “How old are you now?
I thought you were younger than you look.” “I am forty-five”; and then he added: “I forgot to ask after Princesse de Raynes.
Are you still intimate with her?” She looked at him as if she hated him: “Yes, I certainly am.
She is very well, thank you.” They remained sitting side by side, agitated and irritated.
Suddenly he said: “My dear Bertha, I have changed my mind.
You have, I think, improved both morally and physically, and I am going to take you back again.
I am your husband, and it is my right to do so.” She was stupefied, and looked at him, trying to divine his thoughts; but his face was resolute and impenetrable.
“I am very sorry,” she said, “but I have made other engagements.” “So much the worse for you,” was his reply.
“The law gives me the power, and I mean to use it.” They were nearing Marseilles, and the train whistled and slackened speed.
The baroness rose, carefully rolled up her wraps, and then, turning to her husband, said: “My dear Raymond, do not make a bad use of this tete-a tete which I had carefully prepared.
I wished to take precautions, according to your advice, so that I might have nothing to fear from you or from other people, whatever might happen.
You are going to Nice, are you not?” “I shall go wherever you go.” “Not at all; just listen to me, and I am sure that you will leave me in peace.
In a few moments, when we get to the station, you will see the Princesse de Raynes and Comtesse Henriot waiting for me with their husbands.
I wished them to see as, and to know that we had spent the night together in the railway carriage.
Don't be alarmed; they will tell it everywhere as a most surprising fact.
“I told you just now that I had most carefully followed your advice and saved appearances.
Anything else does not matter, does it?
He has certainly changed a good deal, and he agreed to come with me so that I might not travel alone.
We take little trips like this occasionally, like good friends who cannot live together.
We are going to separate here; he has had enough of me already.” She put out her hand, which he took mechanically, and then she jumped out on to the platform among her friends, who were waiting for her.
The baron hastily shut the carriage door, for he was too much disturbed to say a word or come to any determination.
He heard his wife's voice and their merry laughter as they went away.
He never saw her again, nor did he ever discover whether she had told him a lie or was speaking the truth.
THE BLIND MAN How is it that the sunlight gives us such joy?
Why does this radiance when it falls on the earth fill us with the joy of living?
The whole sky is blue, the fields are green, the houses all white, and our enchanted eyes drink in those bright colors which bring delight to our souls.
And then there springs up in our hearts a desire to dance, to run, to sing, a happy lightness of thought, a sort of enlarged tenderness; we feel a longing to embrace the sun.
The blind, as they sit in the doorways, impassive in their eternal darkness, remain as calm as ever in the midst of this fresh gaiety, and, not understanding what is taking place around them, they continually check their dogs as they attempt to play.
When, at the close of the day, they are returning home on the arm of a young brother or a little sister, if the child says: “It was a very fine day!” the other answers: “I could notice that it was fine.
Loulou wouldn't keep quiet.” I knew one of these men whose life was one of the most cruel martyrdoms that could possibly be conceived.
As long as his father and mother lived, he was more or less taken care of; he suffered little save from his horrible infirmity; but as soon as the old people were gone, an atrocious life of misery commenced for him.
Dependent on a sister of his, everybody in the farmhouse treated him as a beggar who is eating the bread of strangers.
At every meal the very food he swallowed was made a subject of reproach against him; he was called a drone, a clown, and although his brother-in-law had taken possession of his portion of the inheritance, he was helped grudgingly to soup, getting just enough to save him from starving.
He remained unmoved at all the insults hurled at him, so reserved that one could not tell whether he felt them.
Moreover, he had never known any tenderness, his mother having always treated him unkindly and caring very little for him; for in country places useless persons are considered a nuisance, and the peasants would be glad to kill the infirm of their species, as poultry do.
As soon as he finished his soup he went and sat outside the door in summer and in winter beside the fireside, and did not stir again all the evening.
He made no gesture, no movement; only his eyelids, quivering from some nervous affection, fell down sometimes over his white, sightless orbs.
Had he any intellect, any thinking faculty, any consciousness of his own existence?
But his incapacity for work as well as his impassiveness eventually exasperated his relatives, and he became a laughingstock, a sort of butt for merriment, a prey to the inborn ferocity, to the savage gaiety of the brutes who surrounded him.
It is easy to imagine all the cruel practical jokes inspired by his blindness.
And, in order to have some fun in return for feeding him, they now converted his meals into hours of pleasure for the neighbors and of punishment for the helpless creature himself.
The peasants from the nearest houses came to this entertainment; it was talked about from door to door, and every day the kitchen of the farmhouse was full of people.
Sometimes they placed before his plate, when he was beginning to eat his soup, some cat or dog.
The animal instinctively perceived the man's infirmity, and, softly approaching, commenced eating noiselessly, lapping up the soup daintily; and, when they lapped the food rather noisily, rousing the poor fellow's attention, they would prudently scamper away to avoid the blow of the spoon directed at random by the blind man!
Then the spectators ranged along the wall would burst out laughing, nudge each other and stamp their feet on the floor.
And he, without ever uttering a word, would continue eating with his right hand, while stretching out his left to protect his plate.
Another time they made him chew corks, bits of wood, leaves or even filth, which he was unable to distinguish.
After this they got tired even of these practical jokes, and the brother-in-law, angry at having to support him always, struck him, cuffed him incessantly, laughing at his futile efforts to ward off or return the blows.
Then came a new pleasure—the pleasure of smacking his face.
And the plough-men, the servant girls and even every passing vagabond were every moment giving him cuffs, which caused his eyelashes to twitch spasmodically.
He did not know where to hide himself and remained with his arms always held out to guard against people coming too close to him.
He was placed somewhere on the high-road on market-days, and as soon as he heard the sound of footsteps or the rolling of a vehicle, he reached out his hat, stammering: “Charity, if you please!” But the peasant is not lavish, and for whole weeks he did not bring back a sou.
Then he became the victim of furious, pitiless hatred.
One winter the ground was covered with snow, and it was freezing hard.
His brother-in-law led him one morning a great distance along the high road in order that he might solicit alms.
The blind man was left there all day; and when night came on, the brother-in-law told the people of his house that he could find no trace of the mendicant.
He'll turn up soon enough tomorrow to eat the soup.” Next day he did not come back.
After long hours of waiting, stiffened with the cold, feeling that he was dying, the blind man began to walk.
Being unable to find his way along the road, owing to its thick coating of ice, he went on at random, falling into ditches, getting up again, without uttering a sound, his sole object being to find some house where he could take shelter.
But, by degrees, the descending snow made a numbness steal over him, and his feeble limbs being incapable of carrying him farther, he sat down in the middle of an open field.
The white flakes which fell continuously buried him, so that his body, quite stiff and stark, disappeared under the incessant accumulation of their rapidly thickening mass, and nothing was left to indicate the place where he lay.
His relatives made a pretence of inquiring about him and searching for him for about a week.
Now, one Sunday, on their way to mass, the farmers noticed a great flight of crows, who were whirling incessantly above the open field, and then descending like a shower of black rain at the same spot, ever going and coming.
The following week these gloomy birds were still there.
There was a crowd of them up in the air, as if they had gathered from all corners of the horizon, and they swooped down with a great cawing into the shining snow, which they covered like black patches, and in which they kept pecking obstinately.
A young fellow went to see what they were doing and discovered the body of the blind man, already half devoured, mangled.
His wan eyes had disappeared, pecked out by the long, voracious beaks.
And I can never feel the glad radiance of sunlit days without sadly remembering and pondering over the fate of the beggar who was such an outcast in life that his horrible death was a relief to all who had known him.
INDISCRETION They had loved each other before marriage with a pure and lofty love.
He had thought this young girl charming, as she passed by with her light-colored parasol and her dainty dress amid the marine landscape against the horizon.
He had loved her, blond and slender, in these surroundings of blue ocean and spacious sky.
He could not distinguish the tenderness which this budding woman awoke in him from the vague and powerful emotion which the fresh salt air and the grand scenery of surf and sunshine and waves aroused in his soul.
She, on the other hand, had loved him because he courted her, because he was young, rich, kind, and attentive.
She had loved him because it is natural for young girls to love men who whisper sweet nothings to them.
The greeting which they exchanged in the morning before the bath, in the freshness of the morning, or in the evening on the sand, under the stars, in the warmth of a calm night, whispered low, very low, already had the flavor of kisses, though their lips had never met.
Each dreamed of the other at night, each thought of the other on awaking, and, without yet having voiced their sentiments, each longing for the other, body and soul.
After marriage their love descended to earth.
It was at first a tireless, sensuous passion, then exalted tenderness composed of tangible poetry, more refined caresses, and new and foolish inventions.
Every glance and gesture was an expression of passion.
But, little by little, without even noticing it, they began to get tired of each other.
Love was still strong, but they had nothing more to reveal to each other, nothing more to learn from each other, no new tale of endearment, no unexpected outburst, no new way of expressing the well-known, oft-repeated verb.
They tried, however, to rekindle the dwindling flame of the first love.
Every day they tried some new trick or desperate attempt to bring back to their hearts the uncooled ardor of their first days of married life.
They tried moonlight walks under the trees, in the sweet warmth of the summer evenings: the poetry of mist-covered beaches; the excitement of public festivals.
One morning Henriette said to Paul: “Will you take me to a cafe for dinner?” “Certainly, dearie.” “To some well-known cafe?” “Of course!” He looked at her with a questioning glance, seeing that she was thinking of something which she did not wish to tell.
She went on: “You know, one of those cafes—oh, how can I explain myself?—a sporty cafe!” He smiled: “Of course, I understand—you mean in one of the cafes which are commonly called bohemian.” “Yes, that's it.
Tell me.” “Well, I—I—I want to be taken for your sweetheart—there! and I want the boys, who do not know that you are married, to take me for such; and you too—I want you to think that I am your sweetheart for one hour, in that place which must hold so many memories for you.
And I will play that I am your sweetheart.
It's awful, I know—I am abominably ashamed, I am as red as a peony.
Don't look at me!” He laughed, greatly amused, and answered: “All right, we will go to-night to a very swell place where I am well known.” Toward seven o'clock they went up the stairs of one of the big cafes on the Boulevard, he, smiling, with the look of a conqueror, she, timid, veiled, delighted.
They were immediately shown to one of the luxurious private dining-rooms, furnished with four large arm-chairs and a red plush couch.
“What do you want to eat?” “I don't care; order whatever is good.” After handing his coat to the waiter, he ordered dinner and champagne.
He took the order and murmured: “Will Monsieur Paul have his champagne sweet or dry?” “Dry, very dry.” Henriette was pleased to hear that this man knew her husband's name.
Ten candles lighted the room and were reflected in the mirrors all around them, which seemed to increase the brilliancy a thousand-fold.
Henriette drank glass after glass in order to keep up her courage, although she felt dizzy after the first few glasses.
Paul, excited by the memories which returned to him, kept kissing his wife's hands.
His eyes were sparkling.
She was feeling strangely excited in this new place, restless, pleased, a little guilty, but full of life.
Two waiters, serious, silent, accustomed to seeing and forgetting everything, to entering the room only when it was necessary and to leaving it when they felt they were intruding, were silently flitting hither and thither.
Toward the middle of the dinner, Henriette was well under the influence of champagne.
She was prattling along fearlessly, her cheeks flushed, her eyes glistening.
“Come, Paul; tell me everything.” “What, sweetheart?” “I don't dare tell you.” “Go on!” “Have you loved many women before me?” He hesitated, a little perplexed, not knowing whether he should hide his adventures or boast of them.
She continued: “Oh! please tell me.
Some years a good many, and some years only a few.” “How many a year, did you say?” “Sometimes twenty or thirty, sometimes only four or five.” “Oh! that makes more than a hundred in all!” “Yes, just about.” “Oh!
I think that is dreadful!” “Why dreadful?” “Because it's dreadful when you think of it—all those women—and always—always the same thing.
Oh! it's dreadful, just the same—more than a hundred women!” He was surprised that she should think that dreadful, and answered, with the air of superiority which men take with women when they wish to make them understand that they have said something foolish: “That's funny!
If it is dreadful to have a hundred women, it's dreadful to have one.” “Oh, no, not at all!” “Why not?” “Because with one woman you have a real bond of love which attaches you to her, while with a hundred women it's not the same at all.
It was full —she drank it in one gulp; then putting it back on the table, she threw her arms around her husband's neck and murmured in his ear: “Oh! how I love you, sweetheart! how I love you!” He threw his arms around her in a passionate embrace.
A waiter, who was just entering, backed out, closing the door discreetly.
In about five minutes the head waiter came back, solemn and dignified, bringing the fruit for dessert.
She murmured in a dreamy voice: “Yes, it must be fun!” A FAMILY AFFAIR The small engine attached to the Neuilly steam-tram whistled as it passed the Porte Maillot to warn all obstacles to get out of its way and puffed like a person out of breath as it sent out its steam, its pistons moving rapidly with a noise as of iron legs running.
The sultry heat at the close of a July day lay over the whole city, and from the road, although there was not a breath of wind stirring, there arose a white, chalky, suffocating, warm dust, which adhered to the moist skin, filled the eyes and got into the lungs.
People stood in the doorways of their houses to try and get a breath of air.
The windows of the steam-tram were open and the curtains fluttered in the wind.
There were very few passengers inside, because on warm days people preferred the outside or the platforms.
They consisted of stout women in peculiar costumes, of those shopkeepers' wives from the suburbs, who made up for the distinguished looks which they did not possess by ill-assumed dignity; of men tired from office-work, with yellow faces, stooped shoulders, and with one shoulder higher than the other, in consequence of, their long hours of writing at a desk.
Their uneasy and melancholy faces also spoke of domestic troubles, of constant want of money, disappointed hopes, for they all belonged to the army of poor, threadbare devils who vegetate economically in cheap, plastered houses with a tiny piece of neglected garden on the outskirts of Paris, in the midst of those fields where night soil is deposited.
A short, corpulent man, with a puffy face, dressed all in black and wearing a decoration in his buttonhole, was talking to a tall, thin man, dressed in a dirty, white linen suit, the coat all unbuttoned, with a white Panama hat on his head.
The former spoke so slowly and hesitatingly that it occasionally almost seemed as if he stammered; he was Monsieur Caravan, chief clerk in the Admiralty.
The other, who had formerly been surgeon on board a merchant ship, had set up in practice in Courbevoie, where he applied the vague remnants of medical knowledge which he had retained after an adventurous life, to the wretched population of that district.
His name was Chenet, and strange rumors were current as to his morality.
Monsieur Caravan had always led the normal life of a man in a Government office.
For the last thirty years he had invariably gone the same way to his office every morning, and had met the same men going to business at the same time, and nearly on the same spot, and he returned home every evening by the same road, and again met the same faces which he had seen growing old.
Every morning, after buying his penny paper at the corner of the Faubourg Saint Honore, he bought two rolls, and then went to his office, like a culprit who is giving himself up to justice, and got to his desk as quickly as possible, always feeling uneasy; as though he were expecting a rebuke for some neglect of duty of which he might have been guilty.
Nothing had ever occurred to change the monotonous order of his existence, for no event affected him except the work of his office, perquisites, gratuities, and promotion.
He never spoke of anything but of his duties, either at the office, or at home—he had married the portionless daughter of one of his colleagues.
He was old now, and had scarcely noticed how his life was passing, for school had merely been exchanged for the office without any intermediate transition, and the ushers, at whom he had formerly trembled, were replaced by his chiefs, of whom he was terribly afraid.
When he had to go into the rooms of these official despots, it made him tremble from head to foot, and that constant fear had given him a very awkward manner in their presence, a humble demeanor, and a kind of nervous stammering.
He knew nothing more about Paris than a blind man might know who was led to the same spot by his dog every day; and if he read the account of any uncommon events or scandals in his penny paper, they appeared to him like fantastic tales, which some pressman had made up out of his own head, in order to amuse the inferior employees.
He did not read the political news, which his paper frequently altered as the cause which subsidized it might require, for he was not fond of innovations, and when he went through the Avenue of the Champs-Elysees every evening, he looked at the surging crowd of pedestrians, and at the stream of carriages, as a traveller might who has lost his way in a strange country.
As he had completed his thirty years of obligatory service that year, on the first of January, he had had the cross of the Legion of Honor bestowed upon him, which, in the semi-military public offices, is a recompense for the miserable slavery—the official phrase is, loyal services—of unfortunate convicts who are riveted to their desk.
That unexpected dignity gave him a high and new idea of his own capacities, and altogether changed him.
He immediately left off wearing light trousers and fancy waistcoats, and wore black trousers and long coats, on which his ribbon, which was very broad, showed off better.
He got shaved every morning, manicured his nails more carefully, changed his linen every two days, from a legitimate sense of what was proper, and out of respect for the national Order, of which he formed a part, and from that day he was another Caravan, scrupulously clean, majestic and condescending.
He became especially angry on seeing strange orders: “Which nobody ought to be allowed to wear in France,” and he bore Chenet a particular grudge, as he met him on a tram-car every evening, wearing a decoration of one kind or another, white, blue, orange, or green.
The conversation of the two men, from the Arc de Triomphe to Neuilly, was always the same, and on that day they discussed, first of all, various local abuses which disgusted them both, and the Mayor of Neuilly received his full share of their censure.
Then, as invariably happens in the company of medical men, Caravan began to enlarge on the chapter of illness, as in that manner, he hoped to obtain a little gratuitous advice, if he was careful not to show his hand.
His mother had been causing him no little anxiety for some time; she had frequent and prolonged fainting fits, and, although she was ninety, she would not take care of herself.
Caravan grew quite tender-hearted when he mentioned her great age, and more than once asked Doctor Chenet, emphasizing the word doctor—although he was not fully qualified, being only an Offcier de Sante—whether he had often met anyone as old as that.
The proprietor, who was a friend of theirs, held out to them two fingers, which they shook across the bottles of the counter; and then they joined three of their friends, who were playing dominoes, and who had been there since midday.
They exchanged cordial greetings, with the usual question: “Anything new?” And then the three players continued their game, and held out their hands without looking up, when the others wished them “Good-night,” and then they both went home to dinner.
Caravan lived in a small two-story house in Courbevaie, near where the roads meet; the ground floor was occupied by a hair-dresser.
Two bed rooms, a dining-room and a kitchen, formed the whole of their apartments, and Madame Caravan spent nearly her whole time in cleaning them up, while her daughter, Marie-Louise, who was twelve, and her son, Phillip-Auguste, were running about with all the little, dirty, mischievous brats of the neighborhood, and playing in the gutter.
Caravan had installed his mother, whose avarice was notorious in the neighborhood, and who was terribly thin, in the room above them.
She was always cross, and she never passed a day without quarreling and flying into furious tempers.
She would apostrophize the neighbors, who were standing at their own doors, the coster-mongers, the street-sweepers, and the street-boys, in the most violent language; and the latter, to have their revenge, used to follow her at a distance when she went out, and call out rude things after her.
A little servant from Normandy, who was incredibly giddy and thoughtless, performed the household work, and slept on the second floor in the same room as the old woman, for fear of anything happening to her in the night.
When Caravan got in, his wife, who suffered from a chronic passion for cleaning, was polishing up the mahogany chairs that were scattered about the room with a piece of flannel.
Every evening during dinner, and afterwards when they were in their room, they talked over the business of the office for a long time, and although she was twenty years younger than he was, he confided everything to her as if she took the lead, and followed her advice in every matter.
She had never been pretty, and now she had grown ugly; in addition to that, she was short and thin, while her careless and tasteless way of dressing herself concealed her few small feminine attractions, which might have been brought out if she had possessed any taste in dress.
Her skirts were always awry, and she frequently scratched herself, no matter on what part of her person, totally indifferent as to who might see her, and so persistently, that anyone who saw her might think that she was suffering from something like the itch.
The only adornments that she allowed herself were silk ribbons, which she had in great profusion, and of various colors mixed together, in the pretentious caps which she wore at home.
As soon as she saw her husband she rose and said, as she kissed his whiskers: “Did you remember Potin, my dear?” He fell into a chair, in consternation, for that was the fourth time on which he had forgotten a commission that he had promised to do for her.
“It is a fatality,” he said; “it is no good for me to think of it all day long, for I am sure to forget it in the evening.” But as he seemed really so very sorry, she merely said, quietly: “You will think of it to-morrow, I dare say.
Anything new at the office?” “Yes, a great piece of news; another tinsmith has been appointed second chief clerk.” She became very serious, and said: “So he succeeds Ramon; this was the very post that I wanted you to have.
And what about Ramon?” “He retires on his pension.” She became furious, her cap slid down on her shoulder, and she continued: “There is nothing more to be done in that shop now.
And what is the name of the new commissioner?” “Bonassot.” She took up the Naval Year Book, which she always kept close at hand, and looked him up.
Student Commissioner in 1871.
Sub- Commissioner in 1875.' Has he been to sea?” she continued.
At that question Caravan's looks cleared up, and he laughed until his sides shook.
When the Chamber hears everything that is going on at the Admiralty, the Minister will be turned out——” She was interrupted by a terrible noise on the stairs.
Marie-Louise and Philippe-Auguste, who had just come in from the gutter, were slapping each other all the way upstairs.
Their mother rushed at them furiously, and taking each of them by an arm she dragged them into the room, shaking them vigorously; but as soon as they saw their father, they rushed up to him, and he kissed them affectionately, and taking one of them on each knee, began to talk to them.
Philippe-Auguste was an ugly, ill-kempt little brat, dirty from head to foot, with the face of an idiot, and Marie-Louise was already like her mother—spoke like her, repeated her words, and even imitated her movements.
She also asked him whether there was anything fresh at the office, and he replied merrily: “Your friend, Ramon, who comes and dines here every Sunday, is going to leave us, little one.
Just imagine: a short time ago Madame Lebaudin, the hairdresser's wife, came upstairs to borrow a packet of starch of me, and, as I was not at home, your mother chased her out as though she were a beggar; but I gave it to the old woman.
She pretended not to hear, as she always does when one tells her unpleasant truths, but she is no more deaf than I am, as you know.
It is all a sham, and the proof of it is, that she went up to her own room immediately, without saying a word.” Caravan, embarrassed, did not utter a word, and at that moment the little servant came in to announce dinner.
Madame Caravan, junior, helped the soup, and waited for the old woman, but she did not come, and as the soup was getting cold, they began to eat slowly, and when their plates were empty, they waited again, and Madame Caravan, who was furious, attacked her husband: “She does it on purpose, you know that as well as I do.
But you always uphold her.” Not knowing which side to take, he sent Marie-Louise to fetch her grandmother, and he sat motionless, with his eyes cast down, while his wife tapped her glass angrily with her knife.
In about a minute, the door flew open suddenly, and the child came in again, out of breath and very pale, and said hurriedly: “Grandmamma has fallen on the floor.” Caravan jumped up, threw his table-napkin down, and rushed upstairs, while his wife, who thought it was some trick of her mother-in-law's, followed more slowly, shrugging her shoulders, as if to express her doubt.
When they got upstairs, however, they found the old woman lying at full length in the middle of the room; and when they turned her over, they saw that she was insensible and motionless, while her skin looked more wrinkled and yellow than usual, her eyes were closed, her teeth clenched, and her thin body was stiff.
She has only fainted again, that is all, and she has done it to prevent us from dining comfortably, you may be sure of that.” They put her on the bed, undressed her completely, and Caravan, his wife, and the servant began to rub her; but, in spite of their efforts, she did not recover consciousness, so they sent Rosalie, the servant, to fetch Doctor Chenet.
He lived a long way off, on the quay, going towards Suresnes, and so it was a considerable time before he arrived.
But, suddenly, Caravan raised himself up, with his thin hair in disorder, and, looking very ugly in his grief, said: “But—are you sure, doctor?
Are you quite sure?” The doctor stooped over the body, and, handling it with professional dexterity, as a shopkeeper might do, when showing off his goods, he said: “See, my dear friend, look at her eye.” He raised the eyelid, and the old woman's eye appeared altogether unaltered, unless, perhaps, the pupil was rather larger, and Caravan felt a severe shock at the sight.
Then Monsieur Chenet took her thin arm, forced the fingers open, and said, angrily, as if he had been contradicted: “Just look at her hand; I never make a mistake, you may be quite sure of that.” Caravan fell on the bed, and almost bellowed, while his wife, still whimpering, did what was necessary.
They put him into a chair, and his wife kissed his forehead, and then began to lecture him.
Chenet enforced her words and preached firmness, courage, and resignation—the very things which are always wanting in such overwhelming misfortunes—and then both of them took him by the arms again and led him out.
He was crying like a great child, with convulsive sobs; his arms hanging down, and his legs weak, and he went downstairs without knowing what he was doing, and moving his feet mechanically.
They put him into the chair which he always occupied at dinner, in front of his empty soup plate.
And there he sat, without moving, his eyes fixed on his glass, and so stupefied with grief, that he could not even think.
In a corner, Madame Caravan was talking with the doctor and asking what the necessary formalities were, as she wanted to obtain practical information.
At last, Monsieur Chenet, who appeared to be waiting for something, took up his hat and prepared to go, saying that he had not dined yet; whereupon she exclaimed: “What! you have not dined?
“It is excellent,” the doctor said, at which she smiled, and, turning to her husband, she said: “Do take a little, my poor Alfred, only just to put something in your stomach.
When a salad bowl full of macaroni was brought in, the doctor said: “By Jove!
That is what I am very fond of.” And this time, Madame Caravan helped everybody.
She even filled the saucers that were being scraped by the children, who, being left to themselves, had been drinking wine without any water, and were now kicking each other under the table.
Chenet remembered that Rossini, the composer, had been very fond of that Italian dish, and suddenly he exclaimed: “Why! that rhymes, and one could begin some lines like this: The Maestro Rossini Was fond of macaroni.” Nobody listened to him, however.
Madame Caravan, who had suddenly grown thoughtful, was thinking of all the probable consequences of the event, while her husband made bread pellets, which he put on the table-cloth, and looked at with a fixed, idiotic stare.
As he was devoured by thirst, he was continually raising his glass full of wine to his lips, and the consequence was that his mind, which had been upset by the shock and grief, seemed to become vague, and his ideas danced about as digestion commenced.
The doctor, who, meanwhile, had been drinking away steadily, was getting visibly drunk, and Madame Caravan herself felt the reaction which follows all nervous shocks, and was agitated and excited, and, although she had drunk nothing but water, her head felt rather confused.
Presently, Chenet began to relate stories of death that appeared comical to him.
Coffee was presently served, and it had been made very strong to give them courage.
As every cup was well flavored with cognac, it made all their faces red, and confused their ideas still more.
To make matters still worse, Chenet suddenly seized the brandy bottle and poured out “a drop for each of them just to wash their mouths out with,” as he termed it, and then, without speaking any more, overcome in spite of themselves, by that feeling of animal comfort which alcohol affords after dinner, they slowly sipped the sweet cognac, which formed a yellowish syrup at the bottom of their cups.
The children had fallen asleep, and Rosalie carried them off to bed.
Caravan, mechanically obeying that wish to forget oneself which possesses all unhappy persons, helped himself to brandy again several times, and his dull eyes grew bright.
When one is in trouble, one must not remain in one spot.” The other obeyed mechanically, put on his hat, took his stick, and went out, and both of them walked arm-in-arm towards the Seine, in the starlight night.
The air was warm and sweet, for all the gardens in the neighborhood were full of flowers at this season of the year, and their fragrance, which is scarcely perceptible during the day, seemed to awaken at the approach of night, and mingled with the light breezes which blew upon them in the darkness.
The broad avenue with its two rows of gas lamps, that extended as far as the Arc de Triomphe, was deserted and silent, but there was the distant roar of Paris, which seemed to have a reddish vapor hanging over it.
It was a kind of continual rumbling, which was at times answered by the whistle of a train in the distance, travelling at full speed to the ocean, through the provinces.
The fresh air on the faces of the two men rather overcame them at first, made the doctor lose his equilibrium a little, and increased Caravan's giddiness, from which he had suffered since dinner.
He walked as if he were in a dream; his thoughts were paralyzed, although he felt no great grief, for he was in a state of mental torpor that prevented him from suffering, and he even felt a sense of relief which was increased by the mildness of the night.
When they reached the bridge, they turned to the right, and got the fresh breeze from the river, which rolled along, calm and melancholy, bordered by tall poplar trees, while the stars looked as if they were floating on the water and were moving with the current.
A slight white mist that floated over the opposite banks, filled their lungs with a sensation of cold, and Caravan stopped suddenly, for he was struck by that smell from the water which brought back old memories to his mind.
For, in his mind, he suddenly saw his mother again, in Picardy, as he had seen her years before, kneeling in front of their door, and washing the heaps of linen at her side in the stream that ran through their garden.
A sudden flash seemed to reveal to him the extent of his calamity, and that breath from the river plunged him into an abyss of hopeless grief.
His life seemed cut in half, his youth disappeared, swallowed up by that death.
All the former days were over and done with, all the recollections of his youth had been swept away; for the future, there would be nobody to talk to him of what had happened in days gone by, of the people he had known of old, of his own part of the country, and of his past life; that was a part of his existence which existed no longer, and the rest might as well end now.
Caravan went on crying for some time, and when he had got to the end of his tears, when his grief had, so to say, run out, he again felt relief, repose and sudden tranquillity.
The tall poplar trees had a silvery sheen on them, and the mist on the plain looked like drifting snow; the river, in which the stars were reflected, and which had a sheen as of mother-of-pearl, was gently rippled by the wind.
The air was soft and sweet, and Caravan inhaled it almost greedily, and thought that he could perceive a feeling of freshness, of calm and of superhuman consolation pervading him.
He actually resisted that feeling of comfort and relief, and kept on saying to himself: “My poor mother, my poor mother!” and tried to make himself cry, from a kind of conscientious feeling; but he could not succeed in doing so any longer, and those sad thoughts, which had made him sob so bitterly a shore time before, had almost passed away.
In a few moments, he rose to go home, and returned slowly, under the influence of that serene night, and with a heart soothed in spite of himself.
When he reached the bridge, he saw that the last tramcar was ready to start, and behind it were the brightly lighted windows of the Cafe du Globe.
He felt a longing to tell somebody of his loss, to excite pity, to make himself interesting.
He put on a woeful face, pushed open the door, and went up to the counter, where the landlord still was.
He had counted on creating a sensation, and had hoped that everybody would get up and come to him with outstretched hands, and say: “Why, what is the matter with you?” But nobody noticed his disconsolate face, so he rested his two elbows on the counter, and, burying his face in his hands, he murmured: “Mon Dieu!
Mon Dieu!” The landlord looked at him and said: “Are you ill, Monsieur Caravan?” “No, my friend,” he replied, “but my mother has just died.” “Ah!” the other exclaimed, and as a customer at the other end of the establishment asked for a glass of Bavarian beer, he went to attend to him, leaving Caravan dumfounded at his want of sympathy.
The three domino players were sitting at the same table which they had occupied before dinner, totally absorbed in their game, and Caravan went up to them, in search of pity, but as none of them appeared to notice him he made up his mind to speak.
“A great misfortune has happened to me since I was here,” he said.
All three slightly raised their heads at the same instant, but keeping their eyes fixed on the pieces which they held in their hands.
“What do you say?” “My mother has just died”; whereupon one of them said: “Oh! the devil,” with that false air of sorrow which indifferent people assume.
When he got home his wife was waiting for him in her nightgown, and sitting in a low chair by the open window, still thinking of the inheritance.
Madame Caravan was thinking.
Her nightcap was adorned with a red bow, and was pushed rather to one side, as was the way with all the caps she wore, and presently she turned towards him and said: “Do you know whether your mother made a will?” He hesitated for a moment, and then replied: “I—I do not think so.
No, I am sure that she did not.” His wife looked at him, and she said, in a low, angry tone: “I call that infamous; here we have been wearing ourselves out for ten years in looking after her, and have boarded and lodged her!
Your sister would not have done so much for her, nor I either, if I had known how I was to be rewarded!
Yes, it is a disgrace to her memory!
I dare say that you will tell me that she paid us, but one cannot pay one's children in ready money for what they do; that obligation is recognized after death; at any rate, that is how honorable people act.
It does not take more than two hours to get here from Charenton, and we can say that you lost your head from grief.
If we let her know in the course of the day, that will be soon enough, and will give us time to look round.” Caravan put his hand to his forehead, and, in the came timid voice in which he always spoke of his chief, the very thought of whom made him tremble, he said: “I must let them know at the office.” “Why?” she replied.
“On occasions like this, it is always excusable to forget.
Take my advice, and don't let him know; your chief will not be able to say anything to you, and you will put him in a nice fix.
“Oh! yes, that I shall, and he will be in a terrible rage, too, when he notices my absence.
Yes, you are right; it is a capital idea, and when I tell him that my mother is dead, he will be obliged to hold his tongue.” And he rubbed his hands in delight at the joke, when he thought of his chief's face; while upstairs lay the body of the dead old woman, with the servant asleep beside it.
“I certainly think so; once it is in our possession, she will know nothing at all about where it came from; it belongs to us.
We will bring it down at the same time.” Caravan, however, seemed incredulous, and said: “But, my dear, it is a great responsibility!” She turned on him furiously.
You would let your children die of hunger, rather than make a move.
And if your sister is not satisfied, let her tell me so, me!
Come, get up, and we will bring down what your mother gave us, immediately.” Trembling and vanquished, he got out of bed and began to put on his trousers, but she stopped him: “It is not worth while to dress yourself; your underwear is quite enough.
Caravan took the clock, which was one of those grotesque objects that were produced so plentifully under the Empire.
A girl in gilt bronze was holding a cup and ball, and the ball formed the pendulum.
“Give that to me,” his wife said, “and take the marble slab off the chest of drawers.” He put the marble slab on his shoulder with considerable effort, and they left the room.
Caravan had to stoop in the doorway, and trembled as he went downstairs, while his wife walked backwards, so as to light him, and held the candlestick in one hand, carrying the clock under the other arm.
“We have got over the worst part of the job,” she said; “so now let us go and fetch the other things.” But the bureau drawers were full of the old woman's wearing apparel, which they must manage to hide somewhere, and Madame Caravan soon thought of a plan.
“Go and get that wooden packing case in the vestibule; it is hardly worth anything, and we may just as well put it here.” And when he had brought it upstairs they began to fill it.
One by one they took out all the collars, cuffs, chemises, caps, all the well-worn things that had belonged to the poor woman lying there behind them, and arranged them methodically in the wooden box in such a manner as to deceive Madame Braux, the deceased woman's other child, who would be coming the next day.
The clock was placed on the chimney-piece in the dining-room, and they looked to see what the effect was, and were both delighted with it and agreed that nothing could be better.
Then they retired, she blew out the candle, and soon everybody in the house was asleep.
It was broad daylight when.
His mind was rather confused when he woke up, and he did not clearly remember what had happened for a few minutes; when he did, he felt a weight at his heart, and jumped out of bed, almost ready to cry again.
He hastened to the room overhead, where Rosalie was still sleeping in the same position as the night before, not having awakened once.
He sent her to do her work, put fresh tapers in the place of those that had burnt out, and then he looked at his mother, revolving in his brain those apparently profound thoughts, those religious and philosophical commonplaces which trouble people of mediocre intelligence in the presence of death.
But, as his wife was calling him, he went downstairs.
She had written out a list of what had to be done during the morning, and he was horrified when he saw the memorandum: 1.
See the doctor who had attended her. 3.
Go to the undertaker. 6.
Telegraph the news to all the family.
Besides all this, there were a number of small commissions; so he took his hat and went out.
As the news had spread abroad, Madame Caravan's female friends and neighbors soon began to come in and begged to be allowed to see the body.
There had been a scene between husband and wife at the hairdresser's on the ground floor about the matter, while a customer was being shaved.
The wife, who was knitting steadily, said: “Well, there is one less, and as great a miser as one ever meets with.
I certainly did not care for her; but, nevertheless, I must go and have a look at her.” The husband, while lathering his patient's chin, said: “That is another queer fancy!
It is not enough for them to worry you during life, but they cannot even leave you at peace when you are dead:” But his wife, without being in the least disconcerted, replied: “The feeling is stronger than I am, and I must go.
If I were not to see her, I should think about it all my life; but when I have had a good look at her, I shall be satisfied.” The knight of the razor shrugged his shoulders and remarked in a low voice to the gentleman whose cheek he was scraping: “I just ask you, what sort of ideas do you think these confounded females have?
The four women went in softly, and, one after the other, sprinkled the bed clothes with the salt water, knelt down, made the sign of the cross while they mumbled a prayer.
Then they rose from their knees and looked for some time at the corpse with round, wide-open eyes and mouths partly open, while the daughter-in-law of the dead woman, with her handkerchief to her face, pretended to be sobbing piteously.
When she turned about to walk away whom should she perceive standing close to the door but Marie-Louise and Philippe-Auguste, who were curiously taking stock of all that was going on.
Then, forgetting her pretended grief, she threw herself upon them with uplifted hands, crying out in a furious voice, “Will you get out of this, you horrid brats!” Ten minutes later, going upstairs again with another contingent of neighbors, she prayed, wept profusely, performed all her duties, and found once more her two children, who had followed her upstairs.
She again boxed their ears soundly, but the next time she paid no heed to them, and at each fresh arrival of visitors the two urchins always followed in the wake, kneeling down in a corner and imitating slavishly everything they saw their mother do.
When the afternoon came the crowds of inquisitive people began to diminish, and soon there were no more visitors.
Madame Caravan, returning to her own apartments, began to make the necessary preparations for the funeral ceremony, and the deceased was left alone.
A torrid heat entered, along with clouds of dust; the flames of the four candles were flickering beside the immobile corpse, and upon the cloth which covered the face, the closed eyes, the two stretched-out hands, small flies alighted, came, went and careered up and down incessantly, being the only companions of the old woman for the time being.
Marie-Louise and Philippe-Auguste, however, had now left the house and were running up and down the street.
They were soon surrounded by their playmates, by little girls especially, who were older and who were much more interested in all the mysteries of life, asking questions as if they were grown people.
“Then your grandmother is dead?” “Yes, she died yesterday evening.” “What does a dead person look like?” Then Marie began to explain, telling all about the candles, the sprig of box and the face of the corpse.
It was not long before great curiosity was aroused in the minds of all the children, and they asked to be allowed to go upstairs to look at the departed.
Marie-Louise at once organized a first expedition, consisting of five girls and two boys—the biggest and the most courageous.
She made them take off their shoes so that they might not be discovered.
The troupe filed into the house and mounted the stairs as stealthily as an army of mice.
Once in the chamber, the little girl, imitating her mother, regulated the ceremony.
She solemnly walked in advance of her comrades, went down on her knees, made the sign of the cross, moved her lips as in prayer, rose, sprinkled the bed, and while the children, all crowded together, were approaching—frightened and curious and eager to look at the face and hands of the deceased—she began suddenly to simulate sobbing and to bury her eyes in her little handkerchief.
Some game or other drew the children away from the house, and the old grandmother was left alone, forgotten suddenly by everybody.
The room was growing dark, and upon the dry and rigid features of the corpse the fitful flames of the candles cast patches of light.
Towards 8 o'clock Caravan ascended to the chamber of death, closed the windows and renewed the candles.
He was now quite composed on entering the room, accustomed already to regard the corpse as though it had been there for months.
He even went the length of declaring that, as yet, there were no signs of decomposition, making this remark just at the moment when he and his wife were about to sit down at table.
“Pshaw!” she responded, “she is now stark and stiff; she will keep for a year.” The soup was eaten in silence.
The children, who had been left to themselves all day, now worn out by fatigue, were sleeping soundly on their chairs, and nobody ventured to break the silence.
Suddenly the flame of the lamp went down.
Madame Caravan immediately turned up the wick, a hollow sound ensued, and the light went out.
They had forgotten to buy oil.
To send for it now to the grocer's would keep back the dinner, and they began to look for candles, but none were to be found except the tapers which had been placed upon the table upstairs in the death chamber.
Madame Caravan, always prompt in her decisions, quickly despatched Marie-Louise to fetch two, and her return was awaited in total darkness.
The footsteps of the girl who had ascended the stairs were distinctly heard.
There was silence for a few seconds and then the child descended precipitately.
She threw open the door and in a choking voice murmured: “Oh! papa, grandmamma is dressing herself!” Caravan bounded to his feet with such precipitance that his chair fell over against the wall.
He stammered out: “You say? . . . .
What are you saying?” But Marie-Louise, gasping with emotion, repeated: “Grand—grand —grandmamma is putting on her clothes, she is coming downstairs.” Caravan rushed boldly up the staircase, followed by his wife, dumfounded; but he came to a standstill before the door of the second floor, overcome with terror, not daring to enter.
Madame Caravan, more courageous, turned the handle of the door and stepped forward into the room.
The old woman was standing up.
In awakening from her lethargic sleep, before even regaining full consciousness, in turning upon her side and raising herself on her elbow, she had extinguished three of the candles which burned near the bed.
Then, gaining strength, she got off the bed and began to look for her clothes.
The absence of her chest of drawers had at first worried her, but, after a little, she had succeeded in finding her things at the bottom of the wooden box, and was now quietly dressing.
She emptied the plateful of water, replaced the sprig of box behind the looking-glass, and arranged the chairs in their places, and was ready to go downstairs when there appeared before her her son and daughter-in-law.
On reaching the first floor, she almost ran against people who were ascending the stairs.
It was the Charenton family, Madame Braux, followed by her husband.
The wife, tall and stout, with a prominent stomach, opened wide her terrified eyes and was ready to make her escape.
The husband, a socialist shoemaker, a little hairy man, the perfect image of a monkey, murmured quite unconcerned: “Well, what next?
Is she resurrected?” As soon as Madame Caravan recognized them, she made frantic gestures to them; then, speaking aloud, she said: “Why, here you are!
What a pleasant surprise!” But Madame Braux, dumfounded, understood nothing.
She responded in a low voice: “It was your telegram that brought us; we thought that all was over.” Her husband, who was behind her, pinched her to make her keep silent.
He added with a sly laugh, which his thick beard concealed: “It was very kind of you to invite us here.
We set out post haste,” which remark showed the hostility which had for a long time reigned between the households.
The old woman, uneasy and suspicious, but without speaking, looked at everyone around her; and her little gray eyes, piercing and hard, fixed themselves now on one and now on the other, and they were so full of meaning that the children became frightened.
Caravan, to explain matters, said: “She has been somewhat ill, but she is better now; quite well, indeed, are you not, mother?” Then the good woman, continuing to walk, replied in a husky voice, as though it came from a distance: “It was syncope.
I heard you all the while.” An embarrassing silence followed.
They entered the dining-room, and in a few minutes all sat down to an improvised dinner.
Braux had retained his self-possession.
His gorilla features grinned wickedly, while he let fall some words of double meaning which painfully disconcerted everyone.
But the door bell kept ringing every second, and Rosalie, distracted, came to call Caravan, who rushed out, throwing down his napkin.
His brother-in-law even asked him whether it was not one of his reception days, to which he stammered out in answer: “No, only a few packages; nothing more.” A parcel was brought in, which he began to open carelessly, and the mourning announcements with black borders appeared unexpectedly.
Reddening up to the very eyes, he closed the package hurriedly and pushed it under his waistcoat.
She was looking intently at her clock which stood on the mantelpiece, and the embarrassment increased in midst of a dead silence.
Turning her wrinkled face towards her daughter, the old woman, in whose eyes gleamed malice, said: “On Monday you must take me away from here, so that I can see your little girl.
I want so much to see her.” Madame Braux, her features all beaming, exclaimed: “Yes, mother, that I will,” while Madame Caravan, the younger, who had turned pale, was ready to faint with annoyance.
The two men, however, gradually drifted into conversation and soon became embroiled in a political discussion.
Braux maintained the most revolutionary and communistic doctrines, his eyes glowing, and gesticulating and throwing about his arms.
“Property, sir,” he said, “is a robbery perpetrated on the working classes; the land is the common property of every man; hereditary rights are an infamy and a disgrace.” But here he suddenly stopped, looking as if he had just said something foolish, then added in softer tones: “But this is not the proper moment to discuss such things.” The door was opened and Dr.
For a moment he seemed bewildered, but regaining his usual smirking expression of countenance, he jauntily approached the old woman and said: “Aha! mamma; you are better to-day.
The old woman, now feeling herself fatigued, wished to retire.
She looked him steadily in the eye and said: “You, you must carry my clock and chest of drawers upstairs again without a moment's delay.” “Yes, mamma,” he replied, gasping; “yes, I will do so.” The old woman then took the arm of her daughter and withdrew from the room.
The two Caravans remained astounded, silent, plunged in the deepest despair, while Braux rubbed his hands and sipped his coffee gleefully.
Suddenly Madame Caravan, consumed with rage, rushed at him, exclaiming: “You are a thief, a footpad, a cur!
I—I —would——” She could find nothing further to say, suffocating as she was with rage, while he went on sipping his coffee with a smile.
His wife returning just then, Madame Caravan attacked her sister-in-law, and the two women—the one with her enormous bulk, the other epileptic and spare, with changed voices and trembling hands flew at one another with words of abuse.
Chenet and Braux now interposed, and the latter, taking his better half by the shoulders, pushed her out of the door before him, shouting: “Go on, you slut; you talk too much”; and the two were heard in the street quarrelling until they disappeared from sight.
Chenet also took his departure, leaving the Caravans alone, face to face.
The husband fell back on his chair, and with the cold sweat standing out in beads on his temples, murmured: “What shall I say to my chief to-morrow?” BESIDE SCHOPENHAUER'S CORPSE He was slowly dying, as consumptives die.
I saw him each day, about two o'clock, sitting beneath the hotel windows on a bench in the promenade, looking out on the calm sea.
He remained for some time without moving, in the heat of the sun, gazing mournfully at the Mediterranean.
Every now and then, he cast a glance at the lofty mountains with beclouded summits that shut in Mentone; then, with a very slow movement, he would cross his long legs, so thin that they seemed like two bones, around which fluttered the cloth of his trousers, and he would open a book, always the same book.
And then he did not stir any more, but read on, read on with his eye and his mind; all his wasting body seemed to read, all his soul plunged, lost, disappeared, in this book, up to the hour when the cool air made him cough a little.
Then, he got up and reentered the hotel.
He was a tall German, with fair beard, who breakfasted and dined in his own room, and spoke to nobody.
A vague, curiosity attracted me to him.
One day, I sat down by his side, having taken up a book, too, to keep up appearances, a volume of Musset's poems.
And I began to look through “Rolla.” Suddenly, my neighbor said to me, in good French: “Do you know German, monsieur?” “Not at all, monsieur.” “I am sorry for that.
Since chance has thrown us side by side, I could have lent you, I could have shown you, an inestimable thing—this book which I hold in my hand.” “What is it, pray?” “It is a copy of my master, Schopenhauer, annotated with his own hand.
All the margins, as you may see, are covered with his handwriting.” I took the book from him reverently, and I gazed at these forms incomprehensible to me, but which revealed the immortal thoughts of the greatest shatterer of dreams who had ever dwelt on earth.
And Musset's verses arose in my memory: “Hast thou found out, Voltaire, that it is bliss to die, And does thy hideous smile over thy bleached bones fly?” And involuntarily I compared the childish sarcasm, the religious sarcasm of Voltaire with the irresistible irony of the German philosopher whose influence is henceforth ineffaceable.
Let us protest and let us be angry, let us be indignant, or let us be enthusiastic, Schopenhauer has marked humanity with the seal of his disdain and of his disenchantment.
A disabused pleasure-seeker, he overthrew beliefs, hopes, poetic ideals and chimeras, destroyed the aspirations, ravaged the confidence of souls, killed love, dragged down the chivalrous worship of women, crushed the illusions of hearts, and accomplished the most gigantic task ever attempted by scepticism.
He spared nothing with his mocking spirit, and exhausted everything.
And even to-day those who execrate him seem to carry in their own souls particles of his thought.
“So, then, you were intimately acquainted with Schopenhauer?” I said to the German.
“Up to the time of his death, monsieur.” And he spoke to me about the philosopher and told me about the almost supernatural impression which this strange being made on all who came near him.
He repeated for me the comment of this Frenchman as he went away, astonished and terrified: “I thought I had spent an hour with the devil.” Then he added: “He had, indeed, monsieur, a frightful smile, which terrified us even after his death.
I can tell you an anecdote about it that is not generally known, if it would interest you.” And he began, in a languid voice, interrupted by frequent fits of coughing.
“Schopenhauer had just died, and it was arranged that we should watch, in turn, two by two, till morning.
“He was lying in a large apartment, very simple, vast and gloomy.
“It was midnight when I went on watch, together with one of our comrades.
The two friends whom we replaced had left the apartment, and we came and sat down at the foot of the bed.
That pucker which we knew so well lingered still around the corners of the lips, and it seemed to us that he was about to open his eyes, to move and to speak.
His thought, or rather his thoughts, enveloped us.
We felt ourselves more than ever in the atmosphere of his genius, absorbed, possessed by him.
His domination seemed to be even more sovereign now that he was dead.
A feeling of mystery was blended with the power of this incomparable spirit.
“The bodies of these men disappear, but they themselves remain; and in the night which follows the cessation of their heart's pulsation I assure you, monsieur, they are terrifying.
“And in hushed tones we talked about him, recalling to mind certain sayings, certain formulas of his, those startling maxims which are like jets of flame flung, in a few words, into the darkness of the Unknown Life.
And we stared with uneasiness bordering on fear at the motionless face, with its eternal laugh.
Gradually, we began to feel ill at ease, oppressed, on the point of fainting.
I faltered: “'I don't know what is the matter with me, but, I assure you I am not well.' “And at that moment we noticed that there was an unpleasant odor from the corpse.
“Then, my comrade suggested that we should go into the adjoining room, and leave the door open; and I assented to his proposal.
Then we went and sat down at the other end of the adjoining apartment, in such a position that we could see the bed and the corpse, clearly revealed by the light.
“But he still held possession of us.
One would have said that his immaterial essence, liberated, free, all-powerful and dominating, was flitting around us.
And sometimes, too, the dreadful odor of the decomposed body came toward us and penetrated us, sickening and indefinable.
“Suddenly a shiver passed through our bones: a sound, a slight sound, came from the death-chamber.
Immediately we fixed our glances on him, and we saw, yes, monsieur, we saw distinctly, both of us, something white pass across the bed, fall on the carpet, and vanish under an armchair.
“We were on our feet before we had time to think of anything, distracted by stupefying terror, ready to run away.
We were horribly pale.
Our hearts throbbed fiercely enough to have raised the clothing on our chests.
I was the first to speak: “'Did you see?' “'Yes, I saw.' “'Can it be that he is not dead?' “'Why, when the body is putrefying?' “'What are we to do?' “My companion said in a hesitating tone: “'We must go and look.' “I took our wax candle and entered first, glancing into all the dark corners in the large apartment.
Nothing was moving now, and I approached the bed.
But I stood transfixed with stupor and fright: “Schopenhauer was no longer laughing!
He was grinning in a horrible fashion, with his lips pressed together and deep hollows in his cheeks.
I stammered out: “'He is not dead!' “But the terrible odor ascended to my nose and stifled me.
And I no longer moved, but kept staring fixedly at him, terrified as if in the presence of an apparition.
“Then my companion, having seized the other wax candle, bent forward.
Next, he touched my arm without uttering a word.
I followed his glance, and saw on the ground, under the armchair by the side of the bed, standing out white on the dark carpet, and open as if to bite, Schopenhauer's set of artificial teeth.
“The work of decomposition, loosening the jaws, had made it jump out of the mouth.
“I was really frightened that day, monsieur.” And as the sun was sinking toward the glittering sea, the consumptive German rose from his seat, gave me a parting bow, and retired into the hotel.
ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 3.
MISS HARRIET There were seven of us on a drag, four women and three men; one of the latter sat on the box seat beside the coachman.
We were ascending, at a snail's pace, the winding road up the steep cliff along the coast.
Setting out from Etretat at break of day in order to visit the ruins of Tancarville, we were still half asleep, benumbed by the fresh air of the morning.
The women especially, who were little accustomed to these early excursions, half opened and closed their eyes every moment, nodding their heads or yawning, quite insensible to the beauties of the dawn.
On both sides of the road stretched the bare fields, yellowed by the stubble of wheat and oats which covered the soil like a beard that had been badly shaved.
The sun rose at length in front of us, bright red on the plane of the horizon, and in proportion as it ascended, growing clearer from minute to minute, the country seemed to awake, to smile, to shake itself like a young girl leaving her bed in her white robe of vapor.
The Comte d'Etraille, who was seated on the box, cried: “Look! look! a hare!” and he extended his arm toward the left, pointing to a patch of clover.
The animal scurried along, almost hidden by the clover, only its large ears showing.
Then it swerved across a furrow, stopped, started off again at full speed, changed its course, stopped anew, uneasy, spying out every danger, uncertain what route to take, when suddenly it began to run with great bounds, disappearing finally in a large patch of beet-root.
Rene Lamanoir exclaimed: “We are not at all gallant this morning,” and; regarding his neighbor, the little Baroness de Serennes, who struggled against sleep, he said to her in a low tone: “You are thinking of your husband, baroness.
Reassure yourself; he will not return before Saturday, so you have still four days.” She answered with a sleepy smile: “How stupid you are!” Then, shaking off her torpor, she added: “Now, let somebody say something to make us laugh.
You, Monsieur Chenal, who have the reputation of having had more love affairs than the Duc de Richelieu, tell us a love story in which you have played a part; anything you like.” Leon Chenal, an old painter, who had once been very handsome, very strong, very proud of his physique and very popular with women, took his long white beard in his hand and smiled.
Then, after a few moments' reflection, he suddenly became serious.
“Ladies, it will not be an amusing tale, for I am going to relate to you the saddest love affair of my life, and I sincerely hope that none of my friends may ever pass through a similar experience.
“I was twenty-five years of age and was pillaging along the coast of Normandy.
I call 'pillaging' wandering about, with a knapsack on one's back, from inn to inn, under the pretext of making studies and sketching landscapes.
I knew nothing more enjoyable than that happy-go-lucky wandering life, in which one is perfectly free, without shackles of any kind, without care, without preoccupation, without thinking even of the morrow.
One goes in any direction one pleases, without any guide save his fancy, without any counsellor save his eyes.
One stops because a running brook attracts one, because the smell of potatoes frying tickles one's olfactories on passing an inn.
Sometimes it is the perfume of clematis which decides one in his choice or the roguish glance of the servant at an inn.
Do not despise me for my affection for these rustics.
A heart that beats at your approach, an eye that weeps when you go away are things so rare, so sweet, so precious that they must never be despised.
“I have had rendezvous in ditches full of primroses, behind the cow stable and in barns among the straw, still warm from the heat of the day.
I have recollections of coarse gray cloth covering supple peasant skin and regrets for simple, frank kisses, more delicate in their unaffected sincerity than the subtle favors of charming and distinguished women.
“But what one loves most amid all these varied adventures is the country, the woods, the rising of the sun, the twilight, the moonlight.
These are, for the painter, honeymoon trips with Nature.
One is alone with her in that long and quiet association.
You go to sleep in the fields, amid marguerites and poppies, and when you open your eyes in the full glare of the sunlight you descry in the distance the little village with its pointed clock tower which sounds the hour of noon.
“You sit down by the side of a spring which gushes out at the foot of an oak, amid a growth of tall, slender weeds, glistening with life.
You go down on your knees, bend forward and drink that cold, pellucid water which wets your mustache and nose; you drink it with a physical pleasure, as though you kissed the spring, lip to lip.
Sometimes, when you find a deep hole along the course of these tiny brooks, you plunge in quite naked, and you feel on your skin, from head to foot, as it were, an icy and delicious caress, the light and gentle quivering of the stream.
“You are gay on the hills, melancholy on the edge of ponds, inspired when the sun is setting in an ocean of blood-red clouds and casts red reflections or the river.
And at night, under the moon, which passes across the vault of heaven, you think of a thousand strange things which would never have occurred to your mind under the brilliant light of day.
“So, in wandering through the same country where we, are this year, I came to the little village of Benouville, on the cliff between Yport and Etretat.
I came from Fecamp, following the coast, a high coast as straight as a wall, with its projecting chalk cliffs descending perpendicularly into the sea.
I had walked since early morning on the short grass, smooth and yielding as a carpet, that grows on the edge of the cliff.
And, singing lustily, I walked with long strides, looking sometimes at the slow circling flight of a gull with its white curved wings outlined on the blue sky, sometimes at the brown sails of a fishing bark on the green sea.
“A little farmhouse where travellers were lodged was pointed out to me, a kind of inn, kept by a peasant woman, which stood in the centre of a Norman courtyard surrounded by a double row of beeches.
“Leaving the coast, I reached the hamlet, which was hemmed in by great trees, and I presented myself at the house of Mother Lecacheur.
“She was an old, wrinkled and stern peasant woman, who seemed always to receive customers under protest, with a kind of defiance.
The spreading apple trees covered the court with a shower of blossoms which rained unceasingly both upon people and upon the grass.
“I said: 'Well, Madame Lecacheur, have you a room for me?' “Astonished to find that I knew her name, she answered: “'That depends; everything is let, but all the same I can find out.” “In five minutes we had come to an agreement, and I deposited my bag upon the earthen floor of a rustic room, furnished with a bed, two chairs, a table and a washbowl.
The room looked into the large, smoky kitchen, where the lodgers took their meals with the people of the farm and the landlady, who was a widow.
The old woman was making a chicken fricassee for dinner in the large fireplace in which hung the iron pot, black with smoke.
“'You have travellers, then, at the present time?' said I to her.
“She answered in an offended tone of voice: “'I have a lady, an English lady, who has reached years of maturity.
She occupies the other room.' “I obtained, by means of an extra five sous a day, the privilege of dining alone out in the yard when the weather was fine.
“My place was set outside the door, and I was beginning to gnaw the lean limbs of the Normandy chicken, to drink the clear cider and to munch the hunk of white bread, which was four days old but excellent.
“Suddenly the wooden gate which gave on the highway was opened, and a strange lady directed her steps toward the house.
She was very thin, very tall, so tightly enveloped in a red Scotch plaid shawl that one might have supposed she had no arms, if one had not seen a long hand appear just above the hips, holding a white tourist umbrella.
Her face was like that of a mummy, surrounded with curls of gray hair, which tossed about at every step she took and made me think, I know not why, of a pickled herring in curl papers.
Lowering her eyes, she passed quickly in front of me and entered the house.
“That singular apparition cheered me.
She undoubtedly was my neighbor, the English lady of mature age of whom our hostess had spoken.
The next day, when I had settled myself to commence painting at the end of that beautiful valley which you know and which extends as far as Etretat, I perceived, on lifting my eyes suddenly, something singular standing on the crest of the cliff, one might have said a pole decked out with flags.
On seeing me, she suddenly disappeared.
I reentered the house at midday for lunch and took my seat at the general table, so as to make the acquaintance of this odd character.
But she did not respond to my polite advances, was insensible even to my little attentions.
I poured out water for her persistently, I passed her the dishes with great eagerness.
A slight, almost imperceptible, movement of the head and an English word, murmured so low that I did not understand it, were her only acknowledgments.
“I ceased occupying myself with her, although she had disturbed my thoughts.
“At the end of three days I knew as much about her as did Madame Lecacheur herself.
Seeking out a secluded village in which to pass the summer, she had been attracted to Benouville some six months before and did not seem disposed to leave it.
She never spoke at table, ate rapidly, reading all the while a small book of the Protestant propaganda.
She gave a copy of it to everybody.
The cure himself had received no less than four copies, conveyed by an urchin to whom she had paid two sous commission.
She said sometimes to our hostess abruptly, without preparing her in the least for the declaration: “'I love the Saviour more than all.
I admire him in all creation; I adore him in all nature; I carry him always in my heart.' “And she would immediately present the old woman with one of her tracts which were destined to convert the universe.
In fact, the schoolmaster having pronounced her an atheist, a kind of stigma attached to her.
The cure, who had been consulted by Madame Lecacheur, responded: “'She is a heretic, but God does not wish the death of the sinner, and I believe her to be a person of pure morals.' “These words, 'atheist,' 'heretic,' words which no one can precisely define, threw doubts into some minds.
It was asserted, however, that this English woman was rich and that she had passed her life in travelling through every country in the world because her family had cast her off.
“Whenever I caught sight of one of these individuals in a hotel I fled like the birds who see a scarecrow in a field.
“This woman, however, appeared so very singular that she did not displease me.
“Madame Lecacheur, hostile by instinct to everything that was not rustic, felt in her narrow soul a kind of hatred for the ecstatic declarations of the old maid.
She had found a phrase by which to describe her, a term of contempt that rose to her lips, called forth by I know not what confused and mysterious mental ratiocination.
She said: 'That woman is a demoniac.' This epithet, applied to that austere and sentimental creature, seemed to me irresistibly droll.
I myself never called her anything now but 'the demoniac,' experiencing a singular pleasure in pronouncing aloud this word on perceiving her.
“One day I asked Mother Lecacheur: 'Well, what is our demoniac about to- day?' “To which my rustic friend replied with a shocked air: “'What do you think, sir?
She picked up a toad which had had its paw crushed and carried it to her room and has put it in her washbasin and bandaged it as if it were a man.
If that is not profanation I should like to know what is!' “On another occasion, when walking along the shore she bought a large fish which had just been caught, simply to throw it back into the sea again.
The sailor from whom she had bought it, although she paid him handsomely, now began to swear, more exasperated, indeed, than if she had put her hand into his pocket and taken his money.
For more than a month he could not speak of the circumstance without becoming furious and denouncing it as an outrage.
She was indeed a demoniac, this Miss Harriet, and Mother Lecacheur must have had an inspiration in thus christening her.
“The stable boy, who was called Sapeur, because he had served in Africa in his youth, entertained other opinions.
“The little kind-hearted Celeste did not wait upon her willingly, but I was never able to understand why.
Probably her only reason was that she was a stranger, of another race; of a different tongue and of another religion.
She was, in fact, a demoniac!
“She passed her time wandering about the country, adoring and seeking God in nature.
Having discovered something red through the leaves, I brushed aside the branches, and Miss Harriet at once rose to her feet, confused at having been found thus, fixing on me terrified eyes like those of an owl surprised in open day.
“Sometimes, when I was working among the rocks, I would suddenly descry her on the edge of the cliff like a lighthouse signal.
She would be gazing in rapture at the vast sea glittering in the sunlight and the boundless sky with its golden tints.
Sometimes I would distinguish her at the end of the valley, walking quickly with her elastic English step, and I would go toward her, attracted by I know not what, simply to see her illuminated visage, her dried-up, ineffable features, which seemed to glow with inward and profound happiness.
“I would often encounter her also in the corner of a field, sitting on the grass under the shadow of an apple tree, with her little religious booklet lying open on her knee while she gazed out at the distance.
“I could not tear myself away from that quiet country neighborhood, to which I was attached by a thousand links of love for its wide and peaceful landscape.
I was happy in this sequestered farm, far removed from everything, but in touch with the earth, the good, beautiful, green earth.
And—must I avow it?—there was, besides, a little curiosity which retained me at the residence of Mother Lecacheur.
I wished to become acquainted a little with this strange Miss Harriet and to know what transpires in the solitary souls of those wandering old English women.
“We became acquainted in a rather singular manner.
I had just finished a study which appeared to me to be worth something, and so it was, as it sold for ten thousand francs fifteen years later.
It was as simple, however, as two and two make four and was not according to academic rules.
The whole right side of my canvas represented a rock, an enormous rock, covered with sea-wrack, brown, yellow and red, across which the sun poured like a stream of oil.
A first bewildering study of blazing, gorgeous light.
“On the left was the sea, not the blue sea, the slate-colored sea, but a sea of jade, greenish, milky and solid beneath the deep-colored sky.
I can remember that I showed it to a cow that was browsing by the wayside, exclaiming as I did so: 'Look at that, my old beauty; you will not often see its like again.' “When I had reached the house I immediately called out to Mother Lecacheur, shouting with all my might: “'Hullo, there!
Landlady, come here and look at this.' “The rustic approached and looked at my work with her stupid eyes which distinguished nothing and could not even tell whether the picture represented an ox or a house.
“Miss Harriet just then came home, and she passed behind me just as I was holding out my canvas at arm's length, exhibiting it to our landlady.
The demoniac could not help but see it, for I took care to exhibit the thing in such a way that it could not escape her notice.
She stopped abruptly and stood motionless, astonished.
It was her rock which was depicted, the one which she climbed to dream away her time undisturbed.
“She uttered a British 'Aoh,' which was at once so accentuated and so flattering that I turned round to her, smiling, and said: “'This is my latest study, mademoiselle.' “She murmured rapturously, comically and tenderly: “'Oh! monsieur, you understand nature as a living thing.' “I colored and was more touched by that compliment than if it had come from a queen.
I was captured, conquered, vanquished.
I could have embraced her, upon my honor.
For the first time she spoke, thinking aloud: “'Oh!
She now accepted these with a little smile of a mummy.
“After the meal we rose from the table together and walked leisurely across the courtyard; then, attracted doubtless by the fiery glow which the setting sun cast over the surface of the sea, I opened the gate which led to the cliff, and we walked along side by side, as contented as two persons might be who have just learned to understand and penetrate each other's motives and feelings.
“It was one of those warm, soft evenings which impart a sense of ease to flesh and spirit alike.
All is enjoyment, everything charms.
The balmy air, laden with the perfume of grasses and the smell of seaweed, soothes the olfactory sense with its wild fragrance, soothes the palate with its sea savor, soothes the mind with its pervading sweetness.
“We were now walking along the edge of the cliff, high above the boundless sea which rolled its little waves below us at a distance of a hundred metres.
And we drank in with open mouth and expanded chest that fresh breeze, briny from kissing the waves, that came from the ocean and passed across our faces.
“Wrapped in her plaid shawl, with a look of inspiration as she faced the breeze, the English woman gazed fixedly at the great sun ball as it descended toward the horizon.
Far off in the distance a three-master in full sail was outlined on the blood-red sky and a steamship, somewhat nearer, passed along, leaving behind it a trail of smoke on the horizon.
The red sun globe sank slowly lower and lower and presently touched the water just behind the motionless vessel, which, in its dazzling effulgence, looked as though framed in a flame of fire.
We saw it plunge, grow smaller and disappear, swallowed up by the ocean.
She seemed longing to embrace the sky, the sea, the whole landscape.
“She murmured: 'Aoh!
She continued: 'I wish I were a little bird, so that I could mount up into the firmament.' “She remained standing as I had often before seen her, perched on the cliff, her face as red as her shawl.
I should have liked to have sketched her in my album.
It would have been a caricature of ecstasy.
“I then spoke to her of painting as I would have done to a fellow artist, using the technical terms common among the devotees of the profession.
She listened attentively, eagerly seeking to divine the meaning of the terms, so as to understand my thoughts.
I understand, I understand.
It is very interesting.' “We returned home.
“The next day, on seeing me, she approached me, cordially holding out her hand; and we at once became firm friends.
“She was a good creature who had a kind of soul on springs, which became enthusiastic at a bound.
She lacked equilibrium like all women who are spinsters at the age of fifty.
She seemed to be preserved in a pickle of innocence, but her heart still retained something very youthful and inflammable.
She loved both nature and animals with a fervor, a love like old wine fermented through age, with a sensuous love that she had never bestowed on men.
“One thing is certain, that the sight of a bitch nursing her puppies, a mare roaming in a meadow with a foal at its side, a bird's nest full of young ones, screaming, with their open mouths and their enormous heads, affected her perceptibly.
“Poor, solitary, sad, wandering beings!
I love you ever since I became acquainted with Miss Harriet.
“I soon discovered that she had something she would like to tell me, but dare not, and I was amused at her timidity.
When I started out in the morning with my knapsack on my back, she would accompany me in silence as far as the end of the village, evidently struggling to find words with which to begin a conversation.
Then she would leave me abruptly and walk away quickly with her springy step.
“One day, however, she plucked up courage: “I would like to see how you paint pictures.
I have been very curious.' “And she blushed as if she had said something very audacious.
“I conducted her to the bottom of the Petit-Val, where I had begun a large picture.
“She remained standing behind me, following all my gestures with concentrated attention.
Then, suddenly, fearing perhaps that she was disturbing me, she said: 'Thank you,' and walked away.
“But she soon became more friendly, and accompanied me every day, her countenance exhibiting visible pleasure.
She carried her camp stool under her arm, not permitting me to carry it.
She would remain there for hours, silent and motionless, following with her eyes the point of my brush, in its every movement.
When I obtained unexpectedly just the effect I wanted by a dash of color put on with the palette knife, she involuntarily uttered a little 'Ah!' of astonishment, of joy, of admiration.
She had the most tender respect for my canvases, an almost religious respect for that human reproduction of a part of nature's work divine.
My studies appeared to her a kind of religious pictures, and sometimes she spoke to me of God, with the idea of converting me.
He was a sort of village philosopher without any great resources and without great power, for she always figured him to herself as inconsolable over injustices committed under his eyes, as though he were powerless to prevent them.
“She was, however, on excellent terms with him, affecting even to be the confidante of his secrets and of his troubles.
She would say: “'God wills' or 'God does not will,' just like a sergeant announcing to a recruit: 'The colonel has commanded.' “At the bottom of her heart she deplored my ignorance of the intentions of the Eternal, which she endeavored to impart to me.
“Almost every day I found in my pockets, in my hat when I lifted it from the ground, in my paintbox, in my polished shoes, standing in front of my door in the morning, those little pious tracts which she no doubt, received directly from Paradise.
“I treated her as one would an old friend, with unaffected cordiality.
But I soon perceived that she had changed somewhat in her manner, though, for a while, I paid little attention to it.
“When I was painting, whether in my valley or in some country lane, I would see her suddenly appear with her rapid, springy walk.
She would then sit down abruptly, out of breath, as though she had been running or were overcome by some profound emotion.
Her face would be red, that English red which is denied to the people of all other countries; then, without any reason, she would turn ashy pale and seem about to faint away.
Gradually, however, her natural color would return and she would begin to speak.
“Then, without warning, she would break off in the middle of a sentence, spring up from her seat and walk away so rapidly and so strangely that I was at my wits' ends to discover whether I had done or said anything to displease or wound her.
“I finally came to the conclusion that those were her normal manners, somewhat modified no doubt in my honor during the first days of our acquaintance.
“When she returned to the farm, after walking for hours on the windy coast, her long curls often hung straight down, as if their springs had been broken.
This had hitherto seldom given her any concern, and she would come to dinner without embarrassment all dishevelled by her sister, the breeze.
“But now she would go to her room and arrange the untidy locks, and when I would say, with familiar gallantry, which, however, always offended her: “'You are as beautiful as a star to-day, Miss Harriet,' a blush would immediately rise to her cheeks, the blush of a young girl, of a girl of fifteen.
“Then she would suddenly become quite reserved and cease coming to watch me paint.
I thought, 'This is only a fit of temper; it will blow over.' But it did not always blow over, and when I spoke to her she would answer me either with affected indifference or with sullen annoyance.
“She became by turns rude, impatient and nervous.
I concluded at length that I must have offended her in some way, and, accordingly, I said to her one evening: “'Miss Harriet, why is it that you do not act toward me as formerly?
What have I done to displease you?
You are causing me much pain!' “She replied in a most comical tone of anger: “'I am just the same with you as formerly.
It is not true, not true,' and she ran upstairs and shut herself up in her room.
“Occasionally she would look at me in a peculiar manner.
I have often said to myself since then that those who are condemned to death must look thus when they are informed that their last day has come.
In her eye there lurked a species of insanity, an insanity at once mystical and violent; and even more, a fever, an aggravated longing, impatient and impotent, for the unattained and unattainable.
“Nay, it seemed to me there was also going on within her a struggle in which her heart wrestled with an unknown force that she sought to master, and even, perhaps, something else.
“It was indeed a singular revelation.
“For some time I had commenced to work, as soon as daylight appeared, on a picture the subject of which was as follows: “A deep ravine, enclosed, surmounted by two thickets of trees and vines, extended into the distance and was lost, submerged in that milky vapor, in that cloud like cotton down that sometimes floats over valleys at daybreak.
And at the extreme end of that heavy, transparent fog one saw, or, rather, surmised, that a couple of human beings were approaching, a human couple, a youth and a maiden, their arms interlaced, embracing each other, their heads inclined toward each other, their lips meeting.
“A first ray of the sun, glistening through the branches, pierced that fog of the dawn, illuminated it with a rosy reflection just behind the rustic lovers, framing their vague shadows in a silvery background.
“I was working on the declivity which led to the Valley of Etretat.
On this particular morning I had, by chance, the sort of floating vapor which I needed.
Suddenly something rose up in front of me like a phantom; it was Miss Harriet.
But I called after her, saying: 'Come here, come here, mademoiselle.
I have a nice little picture for you.' “She came forward, though with seeming reluctance.
She said nothing, but stood for a long time, motionless, looking at it, and suddenly she burst into tears.
She wept spasmodically, like men who have striven hard to restrain their tears, but who can do so no longer and abandon themselves to grief, though still resisting.
I sprang to my feet, moved at the sight of a sorrow I did not comprehend, and I took her by the hand with an impulse of brusque affection, a true French impulse which acts before it reflects.
“She let her hands rest in mine for a few seconds, and I felt them quiver as if all her nerves were being wrenched.
Then she withdrew her hands abruptly, or, rather, snatched them away.
“I recognized that tremor, for I had felt it, and I could not be deceived.
Ah! the love tremor of a woman, whether she be fifteen or fifty years of age, whether she be of the people or of society, goes so straight to my heart that I never have any hesitation in understanding it!
“Her whole frail being had trembled, vibrated, been overcome.
She walked away before I had time to say a word, leaving me as surprised as if I had witnessed a miracle and as troubled as if I had committed a crime.
“I did not go in to breakfast.
I went to take a turn on the edge of the cliff, feeling that I would just as lief weep as laugh, looking on the adventure as both comic and deplorable and my position as ridiculous, believing her unhappy enough to go insane.
It seemed best for me to leave the place, and I immediately resolved to do so.
“Somewhat sad and perplexed, I wandered about until dinner time and entered the farmhouse just when the soup had been served up.
Miss Harriet was there, eating away solemnly, without speaking to any one, without even lifting her eyes.
Her manner and expression were, however, the same as usual.
“I waited patiently till the meal had been finished, when, turning toward the landlady, I said: 'Well, Madame Lecacheur, it will not be long now before I shall have to take my leave of you.' “The good woman, at once surprised and troubled, replied in her drawling voice: 'My dear sir, what is it you say?
You are going to leave us after I have become so accustomed to you?' “I glanced at Miss Harriet out of the corner of my eye.
Her countenance did not change in the least.
She was a fat girl, of about eighteen years of age, rosy, fresh, as strong as a horse, and possessing the rare attribute of cleanliness.
I had kissed her at odd times in out-of-the-way corners, after the manner of travellers—nothing more.
“The dinner being at length over, I went to smoke my pipe under the apple trees, walking up and down from one end of the enclosure to the other.
“Night was coming on, casting its dark shadows under the trees, when I descried Celeste, who had gone to fasten up the poultry yard at the other end of the enclosure.
I darted toward her, running so noiselessly that she heard nothing, and as she got up from closing the small trapdoor by which the chickens got in and out, I clasped her in my arms and rained on her coarse, fat face a shower of kisses.
She struggled, laughing all the time, as she was accustomed to do in such circumstances.
Why did I suddenly loose my grip of her?
Why did I at once experience a shock?
“It was Miss Harriet, who had come upon us, who had seen us and who stood in front of us motionless as a spectre.
Then she disappeared in the darkness.
“I was ashamed, embarrassed, more desperate at having been thus surprised by her than if she had caught me committing some criminal act.
I was completely unnerved and haunted by sad thoughts.
I seemed to hear loud weeping, but in this I was no doubt deceived.
Moreover, I thought several times that I heard some one walking up and down in the house and opening the hall door.
“Toward morning I was overcome by fatigue and fell asleep.
I got up late and did not go downstairs until the late breakfast, being still in a bewildered state, not knowing what kind of expression to put on.
At length Mother Lecacheur went to her room.
“Nobody seemed surprised at this, and we began to eat in silence.
“The weather was hot, very hot, one of those broiling, heavy days when not a leaf stirs.
The table had been placed out of doors, under an apple tree, and from time to time Sapeur had gone to the cellar to draw a jug of cider, everybody was so thirsty.
Celeste brought the dishes from the kitchen, a ragout of mutton with potatoes, a cold rabbit and a salad.
Afterward she placed before us a dish of strawberries, the first of the season.
“In about five minutes she returned, declaring that the well was dry.
Mother Lecacheur, anxious to examine the thing for herself, went and looked down the hole.
She returned, announcing that one could see clearly something in the well, something altogether unusual.
But this no doubt was bundles of straw, which a neighbor had thrown in out of spite.
I perceived indistinctly a white object.
I then conceived the idea of lowering a lantern at the end of a cord.
When I did so the yellow flame danced on the layers of stone and gradually became clearer.
The lantern rested on a black-and-white indistinct mass, singular, incomprehensible.
Sapeur exclaimed: “'It is a horse.
It must have got out of the meadow during the night and fallen in headlong.' “But suddenly a cold shiver froze me to the marrow.
I first recognized a foot, then a leg sticking up; the whole body and the other leg were completely under water.
“I stammered out in a loud voice, trembling so violently that the lantern danced hither and thither over the slipper: “'It is a woman!
It is Miss Harriet!' “Sapeur alone did not manifest horror.
He had witnessed many such scenes in Africa.
“Mother Lecacheur and Celeste began to utter piercing screams and ran away.
“But it was necessary to recover the corpse of the dead woman.
I attached the young man securely by the waist to the end of the pulley rope and lowered him very slowly, watching him disappear in the darkness.
Soon I recognized his voice, which seemed to come from the centre of the earth, saying: “'Stop!' “I then saw him fish something out of the water.
He then bound the two feet together and shouted anew: “'Haul up!' “I began to wind up, but I felt my arms crack, my muscles twitch, and I was in terror lest I should let the man fall to the bottom.
When his head appeared at the brink I asked: “'Well?' as if I expected he had a message from the drowned woman.
“We both got on the stone slab at the edge of the well and from opposite sides we began to haul up the body.
“Mother Lecacheur and Celeste watched us from a distance, concealed from view behind the wall of the house.
When they saw issuing from the hole the black slippers and white stockings of the drowned person they disappeared.
The head was shocking to look at, being bruised and lacerated, and the long gray hair, out of curl forevermore, hanging down tangled and disordered.
“'In the name of all that is holy! how lean she is,' exclaimed Sapeur in a contemptuous tone.
“We carried her into the room, and as the women did not put in an appearance I, with the assistance of the stable lad, dressed the corpse for burial.
“I washed her disfigured face.
Under the touch of my finger an eye was slightly opened and regarded me with that pale, cold look, that terrible look of a corpse which seems to come from the beyond.
I braided as well as I could her dishevelled hair and with my clumsy hands arranged on her head a novel and singular coiffure.
Then I took off her dripping wet garments, baring, not without a feeling of shame, as though I had been guilty of some profanation, her shoulders and her chest and her long arms, as slim as the twigs of a tree.
“I next went to fetch some flowers, poppies, bluets, marguerites and fresh, sweet-smelling grass with which to strew her funeral couch.
“I then had to go through the usual formalities, as I was alone to attend to everything.
A letter found in her pocket, written at the last moment, requested that her body be buried in the village in which she had passed the last days of her life.
A sad suspicion weighed on my heart.
“Toward evening all the female gossips of the locality came to view the remains of the defunct, but I would not allow a single person to enter.
“I looked at the corpse by the flickering light of the candles, at this unhappy woman, unknown to us all, who had died in such a lamentable manner and so far away from home.
Had she left no friends, no relations behind her?
Whence had she come thither alone, a wanderer, lost like a dog driven from home?
What secrets of sufferings and of despair were sealed up in that unprepossessing body, in that poor body whose outward appearance had driven from her all affection, all love?
I felt that there weighed upon that human creature the eternal injustice of implacable nature!
It was all over with her, without her ever having experienced, perhaps, that which sustains the greatest outcasts to wit, the hope of being loved once!
Otherwise why should she thus have concealed herself, fled from the face of others?
Why did she love everything so tenderly and so passionately, everything living that was not a man?
“I recognized the fact that she believed in a God, and that she hoped to receive compensation from the latter for all the miseries she had endured.
She would now disintegrate and become, in turn, a plant.
But that which is called the soul had been extinguished at the bottom of the dark well.
She suffered no longer.
“Hours passed away in this silent and sinister communion with the dead.
A pale light at length announced the dawn of a new day; then a red ray streamed in on the bed, making a bar of light across the coverlet and across her hands.
The awakened birds began to sing in the trees.
“I opened the window to its fullest extent and drew back the curtains that the whole heavens might look in upon us, and, bending over the icy corpse, I took in my hands the mutilated head and slowly, without terror or disgust, I imprinted a kiss, a long kiss, upon those lips which had never before been kissed.” Leon Chenal remained silent.
We heard on the box seat the Count d'Atraille blowing his nose from time to time.
The coachman alone had gone to sleep.
The horses, who no longer felt the sting of the whip, had slackened their pace and moved along slowly.
The drag, hardly advancing at all, seemed suddenly torpid, as if it had been freighted with sorrow. [Miss Harriet appeared in Le Gaulois, July 9, 1883, under the title of Miss Hastings.
The story was later revised, enlarged; and partly reconstructed.
This is what De Maupassant wrote to Editor Havard March 15, 1884, in an unedited letter, in regard to the title of the story that was to give its name to the volume: “I do not believe that Hastings is a bad name, inasmuch as it is known all over the world, and recalls the greatest facts in English history.
Besides, Hastings is as much a name as Duval is with us.
“The name Cherbuliez selected, Miss Revel, is no more like an English name than like a Turkish name.
But here is another name as English as Hastings, and more euphonious; it is Miss Harriet.
I will ask you therefore to substitute Harriet for Hastings.” It was in regard to this very tittle that De Maupassant had a disagreement with Audran and Boucheron director of the Bouffes Parisiens in October, 1890.
They had given this title to an operetta about to be played at the Bouffes.
It ended however, by their ceding to De Maupassant, and the title of the operetta was changed to Miss Helyett.] LITTLE LOUISE ROQUE The former soldier, Mederic Rompel, familiarly called Mederic by the country folks, left the post office of Roily-le-Tors at the usual hour.
After passing through the village with his long stride, he cut across the meadows of Villaume and reached the bank of the Brindille, following the path along the water's edge to the village of Carvelin, where he commenced to deliver his letters.
He walked quickly, following the course of the narrow river, which frothed, murmured and boiled in its grassy bed beneath an arch of willows.
Mederic went on without stopping, with only this thought in his mind: “My first letter is for the Poivron family, then I have one for Monsieur Renardet; so I must cross the wood.” His blue blouse, fastened round his waist by a black leather belt, moved in a quick, regular fashion above the green hedge of willow trees, and his stout stick of holly kept time with his steady tread.
He crossed the Brindille on a bridge consisting of a tree trunk, with a handrail of rope, fastened at either end to a stake driven into the ground.
The wood, which belonged to Monsieur Renardet, the mayor of Carvelin and the largest landowner in the district, consisted of huge old trees, straight as pillars and extending for about half a league along the left bank of the stream which served as a boundary to this immense dome of foliage.
Alongside the water large shrubs had grown up in the sunlight, but under the trees one found nothing but moss, thick, soft and yielding, from which arose, in the still air, an odor of dampness and of dead wood.
Mederic slackened his pace, took off his black cap adorned with red lace and wiped his forehead, for it was by this time hot in the meadows, though it was not yet eight o'clock in the morning.
He had just recovered from the effects of the heat and resumed his quick pace when he noticed at the foot of a tree a knife, a child's small knife.
When he picked it up he discovered a thimble and also a needlecase not far away.
Having taken up these objects, he thought: “I'll entrust them to the mayor,” and he resumed his journey, but now he kept his eyes open, expecting to find something else.
Ten paces in front of him lay stretched on her back on the moss a little girl, perfectly nude, her face covered with a handkerchief.
Meredic advanced on tiptoe, as if he apprehended some danger, and he glanced toward the spot uneasily.
Then he reflected that a person does not go to sleep naked at half-past seven in the morning under the cool trees.
At this thought a cold shiver ran through his frame, although he was an old soldier.
Certainly he must know her, for he knew all the inhabitants of the district; but, not being able to get a look at her face, he could not guess her name.
He stooped forward in order to take off the handkerchief which covered her face, then paused, with outstretched hand, restrained by an idea that occurred to him.
Had he the right to disarrange anything in the condition of the corpse before the official investigation?
He pictured justice to himself as a kind of general whom nothing escapes and who attaches as much importance to a lost button as to the stab of a knife in the stomach.
Perhaps under this handkerchief evidence could be found to sustain a charge of murder; in fact, if such proof were there it might lose its value if touched by an awkward hand.
Then he raised himself with the intention of hastening toward the mayor's residence, but again another thought held him back.
He sank on his knees very gently, a little distance from her, through precaution, and extended his hand toward her foot.
It was icy cold, with the terrible coldness of death which leaves us no longer in doubt.
The letter carrier, as he touched her, felt his heart in his mouth, as he said himself afterward, and his mouth parched.
Rising up abruptly, he rushed off under the trees toward Monsieur Renardet's house.
He walked on faster than ever, with his stick under his arm, his hands clenched and his head thrust forward, while his leathern bag, filled with letters and newspapers, kept flapping at his side.
The mayor's residence was at the end of the wood which served as a park, and one side of it was washed by the Brindille.
From the top of this fortress one could formerly see all the surrounding country.
It was called the Fox's tower, without any one knowing exactly why; and from this appellation, no doubt, had come the name Renardet, borne by the owners of this fief, which had remained in the same family, it was said, for more than two hundred years.
For the Renardets formed part of the upper middle class, all but noble, to be met with so often in the province before the Revolution.
The postman dashed into the kitchen, where the servants were taking breakfast, and exclaimed: “Is the mayor up?
I want to speak to him at once.” Mederic was recognized as a man of standing and authority, and they understood that something serious had happened.
As soon as word was brought to Monsieur Renardet, he ordered the postman to be sent up to him.
Pale and out of breath, with his cap in his hand, Mederic found the mayor seated at a long table covered with scattered papers.
He was a large, tall man, heavy and red-faced, strong as an ox, and was greatly liked in the district, although of an excessively violent disposition.
Almost forty years old and a widower for the past six months, he lived on his estate like a country gentleman.
His choleric temperament had often brought him into trouble from which the magistrates of Roily-le-Tors, like indulgent and prudent friends, had extricated him.
Had he not one day thrown the conductor of the diligence from the top of his seat because he came near running over his retriever, Micmac?
Had he not broken the ribs of a gamekeeper who abused him for having, gun in hand, passed through a neighbor's property?
Had he not even caught by the collar the sub-prefect, who stopped over in the village during an administrative circuit, called by Monsieur Renardet an electioneering circuit, for he was opposed to the government, in accordance with family traditions.
The mayor asked: “What's the matter now, Mederic?” “I found a little girl dead in your wood.” Renardet rose to his feet, his face the color of brick.
Where did you find her?” The postman described the spot, gave full details and offered to conduct the mayor to the place.
But Renardet became brusque: “No, I don't need you.
Send the watchman, the mayor's secretary and the doctor to me at once, and resume your rounds.
Quick, quick, go and tell them to meet me in the wood.” The letter carrier, a man used to discipline, obeyed and withdrew, angry and grieved at not being able to be present at the investigation.
The mayor, in his turn, prepared to go out, took his big soft hat and paused for a few seconds on the threshold of his abode.
In front of him stretched a wide sward, in which were three large beds of flowers in full bloom, one facing the house and the others at either side of it.
Farther on the outlying trees of the wood rose skyward, while at the left, beyond the Brindille, which at that spot widened into a pond, could be seen long meadows, an entirely green flat sweep of country, intersected by trenches and hedges of pollard willows.
To the right, behind the stables, the outhouses and all the buildings connected with the property, might be seen the village, which was wealthy, being mainly inhabited by cattle breeders.
Renardet slowly descended the steps in front of his house, and, turning to the left, gained the water's edge, which he followed at a slow pace, his hand behind his back.
When he stood beneath the trees he stopped, took off his hat and wiped his forehead as Mederic had done, for the burning sun was darting its fiery rays on the earth.
Then the mayor resumed his journey, stopped once more and retraced his steps.
Suddenly, stooping down, he steeped his handkerchief in the stream that glided along at his feet and spread it over his head, under his hat.
As nobody had appeared, he began tapping with his foot, then he called out: “Hello!
Hello!” A voice at his right answered: “Hello!
Hello!” And the doctor appeared under the trees.
He was a thin little man, an ex-military surgeon, who passed in the neighborhood for a very skillful practitioner.
Next came the watchman and the mayor's secretary, who, having been sent for at the same time, arrived together.
They looked scared, and hurried forward, out of breath, walking and running alternately to hasten their progress, and moving their arms up and down so vigorously that they seemed to do more work with them than with their legs.
Renardet said to the doctor: “You know what the trouble is about?” “Yes, a child found dead in the wood by Mederic.” “That's quite correct.
Come on!” They walked along, side by side, followed by the two men.
Suddenly the doctor, extending his arm, said: “See, there she is!” Far ahead of them under the trees they saw something white on which the sun gleamed down through the branches.
As they approached they gradually distinguished a human form lying there, its head toward the river, the face covered and the arms extended as though on a crucifix.
“I am fearfully warm,” said the mayor, and stooping down, he again soaked his handkerchief in the water and placed it round his forehead.
The doctor hastened his steps, interested by the discovery.
As soon as they were near the corpse, he bent down to examine it without touching it.
He had put on his pince-nez, as one does in examining some curious object, and turned round very quietly.
He said, without rising: “Violated and murdered, as we shall prove presently.
This little girl, moreover, is almost a woman—look at her throat.” The doctor lightly drew away the handkerchief which covered her face, which looked black, frightful, the tongue protruding, the eyes bloodshot.
She was strangled the moment the deed was done.” He felt her neck.
“Strangled with the hands without leaving any special trace, neither the mark of the nails nor the imprint of the fingers.
It is little Louise Roque, sure enough!” He carefully replaced the handkerchief.
We must give notice of the matter to the authorities.” Renardet, standing up, with his hands behind his back, kept staring with a stony look at the little body exposed to view on the grass.
He murmured: “What a wretch!
They ought to be at the water's edge.” The mayor thereupon gave directions: “Do you, Principe” (this was his secretary), “go and find those clothes for me along the stream.
You, Maxime” (this was the watchman), “hurry on toward Rouy-le-Tors and bring with you the magistrate with the gendarmes.
You understand?” The two men started at once, and Renardet said to the doctor: “What miscreant could have done such a deed in this part of the country?” The doctor murmured: “Who knows?
Every one in particular and nobody in general.
No matter, it must be some prowler, some workman out of employment.
Since we have become a Republic we meet only this kind of person along the roads.” Both of them were Bonapartists.
The mayor went on: “Yes, it can only be a stranger, a passer-by, a vagabond without hearth or home.” The doctor added, with the shadow of a smile on his face: “And without a wife.
Having neither a good supper nor a good bed, he became reckless.
Did you know that this little girl had disappeared?” And with the end of his stick he touched one after the other the stiffened fingers of the corpse, resting on them as on the keys of a piano.
We looked for her along the roads up to midnight, but we did not think of the wood.
However, we needed daylight to carry out a thorough search.” “Will you have a cigar?” said the doctor.
This thing affects me so.” They remained standing beside the corpse of the young girl, so pale on the dark moss.
A big blue fly was walking over the body with his lively, jerky movements.
The two men kept watching this wandering speck.
But, all of a sudden, he turned round, surprised by a shrill noise.
As soon as she saw Renardet she began to shriek: “My little girl!
Where's my little girl?” so distractedly that she did not glance down at the ground.
Suddenly she saw the corpse, stopped short, clasped her hands and raised both her arms while she uttered a sharp, heartrending cry—the cry of a wounded animal.
Then she rushed toward the body, fell on her knees and snatched away the handkerchief that covered the face.
When she saw that frightful countenance, black and distorted, she rose to her feet with a shudder, then sinking to the ground, face downward, she pressed her face against the ground and uttered frightful, continuous screams on the thick moss.
Her tall, thin frame, with its close-clinging dress, was palpitating, shaken with spasms.
One could see her bony ankles and her dried-up calves covered with coarse blue stockings shaking horribly.
The doctor, much affected, said in a low tone: “Poor old woman!” Renardet felt a strange sensation.
Then he gave vent to a sort of loud sneeze, and, drawing his handkerchief from his pocket, he began to weep internally, coughing, sobbing and blowing his nose noisily.
He stammered: “Damn—damn—damned pig to do this!
I would like to see him guillotined.” Principe reappeared with his hands empty.
Distant voices were heard under the trees, a confused sound, the noise of an approaching crowd, for Mederic had, in the course of his rounds, carried the news from door to door.
The people of the neighborhood, dazed at first, had gossiped about it in the street, from one threshold to another.
Then they gathered together.
They talked over, discussed and commented on the event for some minutes and had now come to see for themselves.
They arrived in groups, a little faltering and uneasy through fear of the first impression of such a scene on their minds.
When they saw the body they stopped, not daring to advance, and speaking low.
Then they grew bolder, went on a few steps, stopped again, advanced once more, and presently formed around the dead girl, her mother, the doctor and Renardet a close circle, restless and noisy, which crowded forward at the sudden impact of newcomers.
But the mayor, waking abruptly out of his torpor, flew into a rage, and seizing Dr.
Labarbe's stick, flung himself on his townspeople, stammering: “Clear out—clear out—you pack of brutes—clear out!” And in a second the crowd of sightseers had fallen back two hundred paces.
Mother La Roque had risen to a sitting posture and now remained weeping, with her hands clasped over her face.
The crowd was discussing the affair, and young lads' eager eyes curiously scrutinized this nude young form.
Renardet perceived this, and, abruptly taking off his coat, he flung it over the little girl, who was entirely hidden from view beneath the large garment.
The secretary drew near quietly.
The wood was filled with people, and a continuous hum of voices rose up under the tangled foliage of the tall trees.
The mayor, in his shirt sleeves, remained standing, with his stick in his hands, in a fighting attitude.
He seemed exasperated by this curiosity on the part of the people and kept repeating: “If one of you come nearer I'll break his head just as I would a dog's.” The peasants were greatly afraid of him.
Labarbe, who was smoking, sat down beside La Roque and spoke to her in order to distract her attention.
The old woman at once removed her hands from her face and replied with a flood of tearful words, emptying her grief in copious talk.
She told the whole story of her life, her marriage, the death of her man, a cattle drover, who had been gored to death, the infancy of her daughter, her wretched existence as a widow without resources and with a child to support.
Then she felt anxious to see her again, and, dragging herself on her knees toward the corpse, she raised up one corner of the garment that covered her; then she let it fall again and began wailing once more.
The crowd remained silent, eagerly watching all the mother's gestures.
But suddenly there was a great commotion at the cry of “The gendarmes! the gendarmes!” Two gendarmes appeared in the distance, advancing at a rapid trot, escorting their captain and a little gentleman with red whiskers, who was bobbing up and down like a monkey on a big white mare.
The watchman had just found Monsieur Putoin, the magistrate, at the moment when he was mounting his horse to take his daily ride, for he posed as a good horseman, to the great amusement of the officers.
He dismounted, along with the captain, and pressed the hands of the mayor and the doctor, casting a ferret-like glance on the linen coat beneath which lay the corpse.
When he was made acquainted with all the facts, he first gave orders to disperse the crowd, whom the gendarmes drove out of the wood, but who soon reappeared in the meadow and formed a hedge, a big hedge of excited and moving heads, on the other side of the stream.
The doctor, in his turn, gave explanations, which Renardet noted down in his memorandum book.
All the evidence was given, taken down and commented on without leading to any discovery.
This disappearance surprised everybody; no one could explain it except on the theory of theft, and as her rags were not worth twenty sous, even this theory was inadmissible.
The magistrate, the mayor, the captain and the doctor set to work searching in pairs, putting aside the smallest branch along the water.
Renardet said to the judge: “How does it happen that this wretch has concealed or carried away the clothes, and has thus left the body exposed, in sight of every one?” The other, crafty and sagacious, answered: “Ha! ha!
This crime has been committed either by a brute or by a sly scoundrel.
It was the deputy magistrate, the doctor and the registrar of the court who had arrived in their turn.
They resumed their search, all chatting in an animated fashion.
Renardet said suddenly: “Do you know that you are to take luncheon with me?” Every one smilingly accepted the invitation, and the magistrate, thinking that the case of little Louise Roque had occupied enough attention for one day, turned toward the mayor.
You have a room in which you can keep it for me till this evening?” The other became confused and stammered: “Yes—no—no.
To tell the truth, I prefer that it should not come into my house on account of—on account of my servants, who are already talking about ghosts in—in my tower, in the Fox's tower.
No—I prefer not to have it in my house.” The magistrate began to smile.
I will have it taken at once to Roily for the legal examination.” And, turning to his deputy, he said: “I can make use of your trap, can I not?” “Yes, certainly.” They all came back to the place where the corpse lay.
Mother La Roque, now seated beside her daughter, was holding her hand and was staring right before her with a wandering, listless eye.
The two doctors endeavored to lead her away, so that she might not witness the dead girl's removal, but she understood at once what they wanted to do, and, flinging herself on the body, she threw both arms round it.
Lying on top of the corpse, she exclaimed: “You shall not have it—it's mine—it's mine now.
They have killed her for me, and I want to keep her—you shall not have her——” All the men, affected and not knowing how to act, remained standing around her.
Renardet fell on his knees and said to her: “Listen, La Roque, it is necessary, in order to find out who killed her.
I promise you this.” This explanation bewildered the woman, and a feeling of hatred manifested itself in her distracted glance.
“So then they'll arrest him?” “Yes, I promise you that.” She rose up, deciding to let them do as they liked, but when the captain remarked: “It is surprising that her clothes were not found,” a new idea, which she had not previously thought of, abruptly entered her mind, and she asked: “Where are her clothes?
Where have they been put?” They explained to her that they had not been found.
Then she demanded them persistently, crying and moaning.
I want them!” The more they tried to calm her the more she sobbed and persisted in her demands.
She no longer wanted the body, she insisted on having the clothes, as much perhaps through the unconscious cupidity of a wretched being to whom a piece of silver represents a fortune as through maternal tenderness.
And when the little body, rolled up in blankets which had been brought out from Renardet's house, had disappeared in the vehicle, the old woman standing under the trees, sustained by the mayor and the captain, exclaimed: “I have nothing, nothing, nothing in the world, not even her little cap —her little cap.” The cure, a young priest, had just arrived.
He took it on himself to accompany the mother, and they went away together toward the village.
The mother's grief was modified by the sugary words of the clergyman, who promised her a thousand compensations.
But she kept repeating: “If I had only her little cap.” This idea now dominated every other.
Renardet called from the distance: “You will lunch with us, Monsieur l'Abbe—in an hour's time.” The priest turned his head round and replied: “With pleasure, Monsieur le Maire.
I'll be with you at twelve.” And they all directed their steps toward the house, whose gray front, with the large tower built on the edge of the Brindille, could be seen through the branches.
Everybody was of the same opinion.
It had been committed by some tramp passing there by mere chance while the little girl was bathing.
Then the magistrates returned to Rouy, announcing that they would return next day at an early hour.
The doctor and the cure went to their respective homes, while Renardet, after a long walk through the meadows, returned to the wood, where he remained walking till nightfall with slow steps, his hands behind his back.
He went to bed early and was still asleep next morning when the magistrate entered his room.
He was rubbing his hands together with a self-satisfied air.
You are still sleeping!
You remember well how the mother clamored yesterday for some memento of her daughter, especially her little cap?
Well, on opening her door this morning she found on the threshold her child's two little wooden shoes.
This proves that the crime was perpetrated by some one from the district, some one who felt pity for her.
So, then, the man in carrying off the clothes to hide them must have let fall the articles which were in the pocket.
As for me, I attach special importance to the wooden shoes, as they indicate a certain moral culture and a faculty for tenderness on the part of the assassin.
We will, therefore, if you have no objection, go over together the principal inhabitants of your district.” The mayor got up.
He rang for his shaving water and said: “With pleasure, but it will take some time, and we may begin at once.” M.
Renardet covered his chin with a white lather while he looked at himself in the glass.
Then he sharpened his razor on the strop and continued: “The principal inhabitant of Carvelin bears the name of Joseph Renardet, mayor, a rich landowner, a rough man who beats guards and coachmen—” The examining magistrate burst out laughing.
Let us pass on to the next.” “The second in importance is Pelledent, his deputy, a cattle breeder, an equally rich landowner, a crafty peasant, very sly, very close-fisted on every question of money, but incapable in my opinion of having perpetrated such a crime.” “Continue,” said M.
Renardet, while proceeding with his toilet, reviewed the characters of all the inhabitants of Carvelin.
After two hours' discussion their suspicions were fixed on three individuals who had hitherto borne a shady reputation—a poacher named Cavalle, a fisherman named Paquet, who caught trout and crabs, and a cattle drover named Clovis.
II The search for the perpetrator of the crime lasted all summer, but he was not discovered.
Those who were suspected and arrested easily proved their innocence, and the authorities were compelled to abandon the attempt to capture the criminal.
But this murder seemed to have moved the entire country in a singular manner.
There remained in every one's mind a disquietude, a vague fear, a sensation of mysterious terror, springing not merely from the impossibility of discovering any trace of the assassin, but also and above all from that strange finding of the wooden shoes in front of La Roque's door the day after the crime.
The certainty that the murderer had assisted at the investigation, that he was still, doubtless, living in the village, possessed all minds and seemed to brood over the neighborhood like a constant menace.
The wood had also become a dreaded spot, a place to be avoided and supposed to be haunted.
Formerly the inhabitants went there to spend every Sunday afternoon.
They used to sit down on the moss at the feet of the huge tall trees or walk along the water's edge watching the trout gliding among the weeds.
The boy's used to play bowls, hide-and-seek and other games where the ground had been cleared and levelled, and the girls, in rows of four or five, would trip along, holding one another by the arms and screaming songs with their shrill voices.
Now nobody ventured there for fear of finding some corpse lying on the ground.
Autumn arrived, the leaves began to fall from the tall trees, whirling round and round to the ground, and the sky could be seen through the bare branches.
Sometimes, when a gust of wind swept over the tree tops, the slow, continuous rain suddenly grew heavier and became a rough storm that covered the moss with a thick yellow carpet that made a kind of creaking sound beneath one's feet.
And the sound of the falling leaves seemed like a wail and the leaves themselves like tears shed by these great, sorrowful trees, that wept in the silence of the bare and empty wood, this dreaded and deserted wood where wandered lonely the soul, the little soul of little Louise Roque.
The Brindille, swollen by the storms, rushed on more quickly, yellow and angry, between its dry banks, bordered by two thin, bare, willow hedges.
And here was Renardet suddenly resuming his walks under the trees.
Every day, at sunset, he came out of his house, descended the front steps slowly and entered the wood in a dreamy fashion, with his hands in his pockets, and paced over the damp soft moss, while a legion of rooks from all the neighboring haunts came thither to rest in the tall trees and then flew off like a black cloud uttering loud, discordant cries.
Night came on, and Renardet was still strolling slowly under the trees; then, when the darkness prevented him from walking any longer, he would go back to the house and sink into his armchair in front of the glowing hearth, stretching his damp feet toward the fire.
One morning an important bit of news was circulated through the district; the mayor was having his wood cut down.
Twenty woodcutters were already at work.
They had commenced at the corner nearest to the house and worked rapidly in the master's presence.
And each day the wood grew thinner, losing its trees, which fell down one by one, as an army loses its soldiers.
Renardet no longer walked up, and down.
He remained from morning till night, contemplating, motionless, with his hands behind his back, the slow destruction of his wood.
Then he raised his eyes to the next with a kind of secret, calm impatience, as if he expected, hoped for something at the end of this slaughter.
Meanwhile they were approaching the place where little Louise Roque had been found.
They came to it one evening in the twilight.
As it was dark, the sky being overcast, the woodcutters wanted to stop their work, putting off till next day the fall of an enormous beech tree, but the mayor objected to this and insisted that they should at once lop and cut down this giant, which had sheltered the crime.
When the lopper had laid it bare and the woodcutters had sapped its base, five men commenced hauling at the rope attached to the top.
The tree resisted; its powerful trunk, although notched to the centre, was as rigid as iron.
The workmen, all together, with a sort of simultaneous motion, strained at the rope, bending backward and uttering a cry which timed and regulated their efforts.
Two woodcutters standing close to the giant remained with axes in their grip, like two executioners ready to strike once more, and Renardet, motionless, with his hand on the trunk, awaited the fall with an uneasy, nervous feeling.
One of the men said to him: “You are too near, Monsieur le Maire.
He seemed ready to catch the beech tree in his open arms and to cast it on the ground like a wrestler.
All at once, at the base of the tall column of wood there was a rent which seemed to run to the top, like a painful shock; it bent slightly, ready to fall, but still resisting.
The men, in a state of excitement, stiffened their arms, renewed their efforts with greater vigor, and, just as the tree came crashing down, Renardet suddenly made a forward step, then stopped, his shoulders raised to receive the irresistible shock, the mortal shock which would crush him to the earth.
But the beech tree, having deviated a little, only rubbed against his loins, throwing him on his face, five metres away.
He had already arisen to his knees, stupefied, with bewildered eyes and passing his hand across his forehead, as if he were awaking from an attack of madness.
When he had got to his feet once more the men, astonished, questioned him, not being able to understand what he had done.
It was a piece of stupidity, he confessed, but every one has these moments of insanity and these temptations to boyish folly.
He made this explanation in a slow tone, searching for his words, and speaking in a colorless tone.
Then he went off, saying: “Till to-morrow, my friends-till to-morrow.” As soon as he got back to his room he sat down at his table which his lamp lighted up brightly, and, burying his head in his hands, he began to cry.
He remained thus for a long time, then wiped his eyes, raised his head and looked at the clock.
Taking from it a revolver, he laid it down on his papers in full view.
The barrel of the firearm glittered, giving out gleams of light.
Renardet gazed at it for some time with the uneasy glance of a drunken man.
He walked from one end of the apartment to the other, stopping from time to time, only to pace up and down again a moment afterward.
Suddenly he opened the door of his dressing-room, steeped a towel in the water pitcher and moistened his forehead, as he had done on the morning of the crime.
Each time he passed the table the gleaming revolver attracted his glance, tempted his hand, but he kept watching the clock and reflected: “I have still time.” It struck half-past six.
Then he took up the revolver, opened his mouth wide with a frightful grimace and stuck the barrel into it as if he wanted to swallow it.
He remained in this position for some seconds without moving, his finger on the trigger.
Then, suddenly seized with a shudder of horror, he dropped the pistol on the carpet.
He fell back on his armchair, sobbing: “I cannot.
He rose up, bewildered.
A servant said: “Monsieur's dinner is ready.” He replied: “All right.
I'm coming down.” Then he picked up the revolver, locked it up again in the drawer and looked at himself in the mirror over the mantelpiece to see whether his face did not look too much troubled.
As soon as he had locked himself in he looked, under the bed, opened all the closets, explored every corner, rummaged through all the furniture.
Then he lighted the candles on the mantelpiece, and, turning round several times, ran his eye all over the apartment with an anguish of terror that distorted his face, for he knew well that he would see her, as he did every night—little Louise Roque, the little girl he had attacked and afterward strangled.
First he seemed to hear a kind of roaring sound, such as is made by a threshing machine or the distant passage of a train over a bridge.
Then he commenced to gasp, to suffocate, and he had to unbutton his collar and his belt.
He moved about to make his blood circulate, he tried to read, he attempted to sing.
His thoughts, in spite of himself, went back to the day of the murder and made him begin it all over again in all its most secret details, with all the violent emotions he had experienced from the first minute to the last.
He had felt on rising that morning, the morning of the horrible day, a little dizziness and headache, which he attributed to the heat, so that he remained in his room until breakfast time.
After the meal he had taken a siesta, then, toward the close of the afternoon, he had gone out to breathe the fresh, soothing breeze under the trees in the wood.
But, as soon as he was outside, the heavy, scorching air of the plain oppressed him still more.
Every beast and bird, even the grasshoppers, were silent.
Renardet reached the tall trees and began to walk over the moss where the Brindille produced a slight freshness of the air beneath the immense roof of branches.
It seemed to him that an unknown, invisible hand was strangling him, and he scarcely thought of anything, having usually few ideas in his head.
For the last three months only one thought haunted him, the thought of marrying again.
He suffered from living alone, suffered from it morally and physically.
Accustomed for ten years past to feeling a woman near him, habituated to her presence every moment, he had need, an imperious and perplexing need of such association.
Since Madame Renardet's death he had suffered continually without knowing why, he had suffered at not feeling her dress brushing past him, and, above all, from no longer being able to calm and rest himself in her arms.
He had been scarcely six months a widower and he was already looking about in the district for some young girl or some widow he might marry when his period of mourning was at an end.
He had a chaste soul, but it was lodged in a powerful, herculean body, and carnal imaginings began to disturb his sleep and his vigils.
He drove them away; they came back again; and he murmured from time to time, smiling at himself: “Here I am, like St.
Anthony.” Having this special morning had several of these visions, the desire suddenly came into his breast to bathe in the Brindille in order to refresh himself and cool his blood.
He knew of a large deep pool, a little farther down, where the people of the neighborhood came sometimes to take a dip in summer.
Thick willow trees hid this clear body of water where the current rested and went to sleep for a while before starting on its way again.
Renardet, as he appeared, thought he heard a light sound, a faint plashing which was not that of the stream on the banks.
A little girl, quite naked in the transparent water, was beating the water with both hands, dancing about in it and dipping herself with pretty movements.
She was plump and developed, while preserving an air of youthful precocity, as of one who had grown rapidly.
He no longer moved, overcome with surprise, with desire, holding his breath with a strange, poignant emotion.
He remained there, his heart beating as if one of his sensuous dreams had just been realized, as if an impure fairy had conjured up before him this young creature, this little rustic Venus, rising from the eddies of the stream as the real Venus rose from the waves of the sea.
Suddenly the little girl came out of the water, and, without seeing him, came over to where he stood, looking for her clothes in order to dress herself.
As she approached gingerly, on account of the sharp-pointed stones, he felt himself pushed toward her by an irresistible force, by a bestial transport of passion, which stirred his flesh, bewildered his mind and made him tremble from head to foot.
She remained standing some seconds behind the willow tree which concealed him from view.
Then, losing his reason entirely, he pushed aside the branches, rushed on her and seized her in his arms.
She fell, too terrified to offer any resistance, too terror-stricken to cry out.
He seemed possessed, not understanding what he was doing.
He woke from his crime as one wakes from a nightmare.
Keep quiet!” he continued.
She kept shrieking as she tried to free herself.
He suddenly realized that he was ruined, and he caught her by the neck to stop her mouth from uttering these heartrending, dreadful screams.
As she continued to struggle with the desperate strength of a being who is seeking to fly from death, he pressed his enormous hands on the little throat swollen with screaming, and in a few seconds he had strangled her, so furiously did he grip her.
He had not intended to kill her, but only to make her keep quiet.
Then he stood up, overwhelmed with horror.
She lay before him, her face bleeding and blackned.
He was about to rush away when there sprang up in his agitated soul the mysterious and undefined instinct that guides all beings in the hour of danger.
Then, as he had a piece of twine in his pocket, he tied it up and hid it in a deep portion of the stream, beneath the trunk of a tree that overhung the Brindille.
Then he went off at a rapid pace, reached the meadows, took a wide turn in order to show himself to some peasants who dwelt some distance away at the opposite side of the district, and came back to dine at the usual hour, telling his servants all that was supposed to have happened during his walk.
He slept, however, that night; he slept with a heavy, brutish sleep like the sleep of certain persons condemned to death.
He did not open his eyes until the first glimmer of dawn, and he waited till his usual hour for riding, so as to excite no suspicion.
He did so like a somnambulist, in a kind of vision which showed him men and things as in a dream, in a cloud of intoxication, with that sense of unreality which perplexes the mind at the time of the greatest catastrophes.
But the agonized cry of Mother Roque pierced his heart.
At that moment he had felt inclined to cast himself at the old woman's feet and to exclaim: “I am the guilty one!” But he had restrained himself.
He went back, however, during the night to fish up the dead girl's wooden shoes, in order to place them on her mother's threshold.
As long as the inquiry lasted, as long as it was necessary to lead justice astray he was calm, master of himself, crafty and smiling.
He discussed quietly with the magistrates all the suppositions that passed through their minds, combated their opinions and demolished their arguments.
He even took a keen and mournful pleasure in disturbing their investigations, in embroiling their ideas, in showing the innocence of those whom they suspected.
But as soon as the inquiry was abandoned he became gradually nervous, more excitable than he had been before, although he mastered his irritability.
Sudden noises made him start with fear; he shuddered at the slightest thing and trembled sometimes from head to foot when a fly alighted on his forehead.
Then he was seized with an imperious desire for motion, which impelled him to take long walks and to remain up whole nights pacing up and down his room.
His brutal nature did not lend itself to any shade of sentiment or of moral terror.
A man of energy and even of violence, born to make war, to ravage conquered countries and to massacre the vanquished, full of the savage instincts of the hunter and the fighter, he scarcely took count of human life.
Though he respected the Church outwardly, from policy, he believed neither in God nor the devil, expecting neither chastisement nor recompense for his acts in another life.
His sole belief was a vague philosophy drawn from all the ideas of the encyclopedists of the last century, and he regarded religion as a moral sanction of the law, the one and the other having been invented by men to regulate social relations.
To kill any one in a duel, or in war, or in a quarrel, or by accident, or for the sake of revenge, or even through bravado would have seemed to him an amusing and clever thing and would not have left more impression on his mind than a shot fired at a hare; but he had experienced a profound emotion at the murder of this child.
He had, in the first place, perpetrated it in the heat of an irresistible gust of passion, in a sort of tempest of the senses that had overpowered his reason.
And he had cherished in his heart, in his flesh, on his lips, even to the very tips of his murderous fingers a kind of bestial love, as well as a feeling of terrified horror, toward this little girl surprised by him and basely killed.
Every moment his thoughts returned to that horrible scene, and, though he endeavored to drive this picture from his mind, though he put it aside with terror, with disgust, he felt it surging through his soul, moving about in him, waiting incessantly for the moment to reappear.
Then, as evening approached, he was afraid of the shadow falling around him.
He did not yet know why the darkness seemed frightful to him, but he instinctively feared it, he felt that it was peopled with terrors.
The bright daylight did not lend itself to fears.
Things and beings were visible then, and only natural things and beings could exhibit themselves in the light of day.
But the night, the impenetrable night, thicker than walls and empty; the infinite night, so black, so vast, in which one might brush against frightful things; the night, when one feels that a mysterious terror is wandering, prowling about, appeared to him to conceal an unknown threatening danger, close beside him.
As he sat in his armchair, rather late one evening when he could not sleep, he thought he saw the curtain of his window move.
He waited, uneasily, with beating heart.
He did not venture to rise; he no longer ventured to breathe, and yet he was brave.
Was it true that this curtain did move? he asked himself, fearing that his eyes had deceived him.
It was, moreover, such a slight thing, a gentle flutter of drapery, a kind of trembling in its folds, less than an undulation caused by the wind.
Renardet sat still, with staring eyes and outstretched neck.
He sprang to his feet abruptly, ashamed of his fear, took four steps, seized the drapery with both hands and pulled it wide apart.
At first he saw nothing but darkened glass, resembling plates of glittering ink.
The night, the vast, impenetrable night, stretched beyond as far as the invisible horizon.
He remained standing in front of this illimitable shadow, and suddenly he perceived a light, a moving light, which seemed some distance away.
Then he put his face close to the window pane, thinking that a person looking for crabs might be poaching in the Brindille, for it was past midnight, and this light rose up at the edge of the stream, under the trees.
As he was not yet able to see clearly, Renardet placed his hands over his eyes, and suddenly this light became an illumination, and he beheld little Louise Roque naked and bleeding on the moss.
He recoiled, frozen with horror, knocked over his chair and fell over on his back.
He remained there some minutes in anguish of mind; then he sat up and began to reflect.
He had had a hallucination—that was all, a hallucination due to the fact that a night marauder was walking with a lantern in his hand near the water's edge.
What was there astonishing, besides, in the circumstance that the recollection of his crime should sometimes bring before him the vision of the dead girl?
He rose from the ground, swallowed a glass of wine and sat down again.
He was thinking: “What am I to do if this occurs again?” And it would occur; he felt it; he was sure of it.
Already his glance was drawn toward the window; it called him; it attracted him.
Then he took a book and tried to read, but it seemed to him that he presently heard something stirring behind him, and he swung round his armchair on one foot.
The curtain was moving again; unquestionably, it moved this time.
He rushed forward and grasped it so violently that he pulled it down with its pole.
All was black outside, and he breathed with the joy of a man whose life has just been saved.
Then he went back to his chair and sat down again, but almost immediately he felt a longing to look out once more through the window.
Since the curtain had fallen down, the window made a sort of gap, fascinating and terrible, on the dark landscape.
In order not to yield to this dangerous temptation, he undressed, blew out the light and closed his eyes.
Lying on his back motionless, his skin warm and moist, he awaited sleep.
Suddenly a great gleam of light flashed across his eyelids.
He opened them, believing that his dwelling was on fire.
All was black as before, and he leaned on his elbow to try to distinguish the window which had still for him an unconquerable attraction.
By dint of, straining his eyes he could perceive some stars, and he rose, groped his way across the room, discovered the panes with his outstretched hands, and placed his forehead close to them.
There below, under the trees, lay the body of the little girl gleaming like phosphorus, lighting up the surrounding darkness.
Renardet uttered a cry and rushed toward his bed, where he lay till morning, his head hidden under the pillow.
From that moment his life became intolerable.
He passed his days in apprehension of each succeeding night, and each night the vision came back again.
An irresistible force lifted him up and pushed him against the window, as if to call the phantom, and he saw it at once, lying first in the spot where the crime was committed in the position in which it had been found.
She advanced quietly, passing straight across the grass and over the bed of withered flowers.
Then she rose up in the air toward Renardet's window.
And the man recoiled before the apparition—he retreated to his bed and sank down upon it, knowing well that the little one had entered the room and that she now was standing behind the curtain, which presently moved.
And until daybreak he kept staring at this curtain with a fixed glance, ever waiting to see his victim depart.
But she did not show herself any more; she remained there behind the curtain, which quivered tremulously now and then.
And Renardet, his fingers clutching the clothes, squeezed them as he had squeezed the throat of little Louise Roque.
He heard the clock striking the hours, and in the stillness the pendulum kept ticking in time with the loud beating of his heart.
And he suffered, the wretched man, more than any man had ever suffered before.
Then, as soon as a white streak of light on the ceiling announced the approaching day, he felt himself free, alone at last, alone in his room; and he went to sleep.
He slept several hours—a restless, feverish sleep in which he retraced in dreams the horrible vision of the past night.
When he went down to the late breakfast he felt exhausted as after unusual exertion, and he scarcely ate anything, still haunted as he was by the fear of what he had seen the night before.
He knew well, however, that it was not an apparition, that the dead do not come back, and that his sick soul, his soul possessed by one thought alone, by an indelible remembrance, was the only cause of his torture, was what brought the dead girl back to life and raised her form before his eyes, on which it was ineffaceably imprinted.
But he knew, too, that there was no cure, that he would never escape from the savage persecution of his memory, and he resolved to die rather than to endure these tortures any longer.
Then he thought of how he would kill himself, It must be something simple and natural, which would preclude the idea of suicide.
For he clung to his reputation, to the name bequeathed to him by his ancestors; and if his death awakened any suspicion people's thoughts might be, perhaps, directed toward the mysterious crime, toward the murderer who could not be found, and they would not hesitate to accuse him of the crime.
A strange idea came into his head, that of allowing himself to be crushed by the tree at the foot of which he had assassinated little Louise Roque.
So he determined to have the wood cut down and to simulate an accident.
Returning to his house, a prey to utter despair, he had snatched up his revolver, and then did not dare to fire it.
The dinner bell summoned him.
He could eat nothing, and he went upstairs again.
Presently he would be ready, brave, decided, master of his courage and of his resolution; now he was weak and feared death as much as he did the dead girl.
He faltered: “I dare not venture it again—I dare not venture it.” Then he glanced with terror, first at the revolver on the table and next at the curtain which hid his window.
It seemed to him, moreover, that something horrible would occur as soon as his life was ended.
She was watching for him; she was waiting for him; she was calling him; and it was in order to seize him in her turn, to draw him toward the doom that would avenge her, and to lead him to die, that she appeared thus every night.
He began to cry like a child, repeating: “I will not venture it again—I will not venture it.” Then he fell on his knees and murmured: “My God! my God!” without believing, nevertheless, in God.
And he no longer dared, in fact, to look at his window, where he knew the apparition was hiding, nor at his table, where his revolver gleamed.
When he had risen up he said: “This cannot last; there must be an end of it” The sound of his voice in the silent room made a chill of fear pass through his limbs, but as he could not bring himself to come to a determination, as he felt certain that his finger would always refuse to pull the trigger of his revolver, he turned round to hide his head under the bedclothes and began to reflect.
He would have to find some way in which he could force himself to die, to play some trick on himself which would not permit of any hesitation on his part, any delay, any possible regrets.
He envied condemned criminals who are led to the scaffold surrounded by soldiers.
Oh! if he could only beg of some one to shoot him; if after confessing his crime to a true friend who would never divulge it he could procure death at his hand.
But from whom could he ask this terrible service?
No, he would talk about it afterward, most probably.
And suddenly a fantastic idea entered his mind.
He would write to the magistrate, who was on terms of close friendship with him, and would denounce himself as the perpetrator of the crime.
He would in this letter confess everything, revealing how his soul had been tortured, how he had resolved to die, how he had hesitated about carrying out his resolution and what means he had employed to strengthen his failing courage.
And in the name of their old friendship he would implore of the other to destroy the letter as soon as he had ascertained that the culprit had inflicted justice on himself.
Renardet could rely on this magistrate; he knew him to be true, discreet, incapable of even an idle word.
He was one of those men who have an inflexible conscience, governed, directed, regulated by their reason alone.
Scarcely had he formed this project when a strange feeling of joy took possession of his heart.
He could climb to the projecting stone which bore the flagstaff displayed on festivals, He would smash this pole with a shake and carry it along with him as he fell.
Who would suspect that it was not an accident?
And he would be killed outright, owing to his weight and the height of the tower.
Presently he got out of bed, went over to the table and began to write.
He omitted nothing, not a single detail of the crime, not a single detail of the torments of his heart, and he ended by announcing that he had passed sentence on himself, that he was going to execute the criminal, and begged his friend, his old friend, to be careful that there should never be any stain on his memory.
When he had finished this letter he saw that the day had dawned.
Then he descended with light steps, hurried toward the little white box fastened to the outside wall in the corner of the farmhouse, and when he had thrown into it this letter, which made his hand tremble, he came back quickly, drew the bolts of the great door and climbed up to his tower to wait for the passing of the postman, who was to bear away his death sentence.
He felt self-possessed now.
He inhaled it eagerly with open mouth, drinking in its chilling kiss.
The sky was red, a wintry red, and all the plain, whitened with frost, glistened under the first rays of the sun, as if it were covered with powdered glass.
Renardet, standing up, his head bare, gazed at the vast tract of country before him, the meadows to the left and to the right the village whose chimneys were beginning to smoke in preparation for the morning meal.
At his feet he saw the Brindille flowing amid the rocks, where he would soon be crushed to death.
He felt new life on that beautiful frosty morning.
A thousand recollections assailed him, recollections of similar mornings, of rapid walks on the hard earth which rang beneath his footsteps, of happy days of shooting on the edges of pools where wild ducks sleep.
All the good things that he loved, the good things of existence, rushed to his memory, penetrated him with fresh desires, awakened all the vigorous appetites of his active, powerful body.
He was going to kill himself stupidly because he was afraid of a shadow-afraid of nothing!
All he needed was distraction, absence, a voyage in order to forget.
This night even he had not seen the little girl because his mind was preoccupied and had wandered toward some other subject.
And even if she still haunted him in this house, certainly she would not follow him elsewhere!
His glance travelled across the meadows, and he perceived a blue spot in the path which wound alongside the Brindille.
Renardet gave a start, a sensation of pain shot through his breast, and he rushed down the winding staircase to get back his letter, to demand it back from the postman.
Little did it matter to him now whether he was seen, He hurried across the grass damp from the light frost of the previous night and arrived in front of the box in the corner of the farmhouse exactly at the same time as the letter carrier.
The latter had opened the little wooden door and drew forth the four papers deposited there by the inhabitants of the locality.
Renardet said to him: “Good-morrow, Mederic.” “Good-morrow, Monsieur le Maire.” “I say, Mederic, I threw a letter into the box that I want back again.
I came to ask you to give it back to me.” “That's all right, Monsieur le Maire—you'll get it.” And the postman raised his eyes.
He stood petrified at the sight of Renardet's face.
The mayor's cheeks were purple, his eyes were anxious and sunken, with black circles round them, his hair was unbrushed, his beard untrimmed, his necktie unfastened.
The postman asked: “Are you ill, Monsieur le Maire?” The other, suddenly comprehending that his appearance must be unusual, lost countenance and faltered: “Oh! no-oh! no.
You understand?” He said in reply: “What letter?” “The one you are going to give back to me.” Mederic now began to hesitate.
The mayor's attitude did not strike him as natural.
There was perhaps a secret in that letter, a political secret.
He knew Renardet was not a Republican, and he knew all the tricks and chicanery employed at elections.
He asked: “To whom is it addressed, this letter of yours?” “To Monsieur Putoin, the magistrate—you know, my friend, Monsieur Putoin!” The postman searched through the papers and found the one asked for.
Then he began looking at it, turning it round and round between his fingers, much perplexed, much troubled by the fear of either committing a grave offence or of making an enemy of the mayor.
Seeing his hesitation, Renardet made a movement for the purpose of seizing the letter and snatching it away from him.
This abrupt action convinced Mederic that some important secret was at stake and made him resolve to do his duty, cost what it may.
So he flung the letter into his bag and fastened it up, with the reply: “No, I can't, Monsieur le Maire.
As long as it is for the magistrate, I can't.” A dreadful pang wrung Renardet's heart and he murmured: “Why, you know me well.
You are even able to recognize my handwriting.
I tell you I want that paper.” “I can't.” “Look here, Mederic, you know that I'm incapable of deceiving you—I tell you I want it.” “No, I can't.” A tremor of rage passed through Renardet's soul.
Without losing his temper, he said emphatically: “Don't touch me, Monsieur le Maire, or I'll strike.
Take care, I'm only doing my duty!” Feeling that he was lost, Renardet suddenly became humble, gentle, appealing to him like a whimpering child: “Look here, look here, my friend, give me back that letter and I'll recompense you—I'll give you money.
I'll give you a hundred francs, you understand—a hundred francs!” The postman turned on his heel and started on his journey.
Renardet followed him, out of breath, stammering: “Mederic, Mederic, listen!
I'll give you a thousand francs, you understand—a thousand francs.” The postman still went on without giving any answer.
Renardet went on: “I'll make your fortune, you understand—whatever you wish—fifty thousand francs—fifty thousand francs for that letter!
Well, a hundred thousand—I say—a hundred thousand francs.
A hundred thousand francs—a hundred thousand francs.” The postman turned back, his face hard, his eye severe: “Enough of this, or else I'll repeat to the magistrate everything you have just said to me.” Renardet stopped abruptly.
Then, in his turn, Mederic stopped and watched his flight with stupefaction.
He saw the mayor reenter his house, and he waited still, as if something astonishing were about to happen.
In fact, presently the tall form of Renardet appeared on the summit of the Fox's tower.
He ran round the platform like a madman.
Then he seized the flagstaff and shook it furiously without succeeding in breaking it; then, all of a sudden, like a diver, with his two hands before him, he plunged into space.
Mederic rushed forward to his assistance.
He saw the woodcutters going to work and called out to them, telling them an accident had occurred.
At the foot of the walls they found a bleeding body, its head crushed on a rock.
The Brindille surrounded this rock, and over its clear, calm waters could be seen a long red thread of mingled brains and blood.
THE DONKEY There was not a breath of air stirring; a heavy mist was lying over the river.
The banks themselves were indistinct, hidden behind strange fogs.
But day was breaking and the hill was becoming visible.
Cocks were crowing in the barnyard.
On the other side of the river, hidden behind the fogs, just opposite Frette, a slight noise from time to time broke the dead silence of the quiet morning.
At times it was an indistinct plashing, like the cautious advance of a boat, then again a sharp noise like the rattle of an oar and then the sound of something dropping in the water.
Sometimes whispered words, coming perhaps from a distance, perhaps from quite near, pierced through these opaque mists.
They passed by like wild birds which have slept in the rushes and which fly away at the first light of day, crossing the mist and uttering a low and timid sound which wakes their brothers along the shores.
Suddenly along the bank, near the village, a barely perceptible shadow appeared on the water.
Then it grew, became more distinct and, coming out of the foggy curtain which hung over the river, a flatboat, manned by two men, pushed up on the grass.
The one who was rowing rose and took a pailful of fish from the bottom of the boat, then he threw the dripping net over his shoulder.
His companion, who had not made a motion, exclaimed: “Say, Mailloche, get your gun and see if we can't land some rabbit along the shore.” The other one answered: “All right.
I'll be with you in a minute.” Then he disappeared, in order to hide their catch.
His name was Labouise, but he was called Chicot, and was in partnership with Maillochon, commonly called Mailloche, to practice the doubtful and undefined profession of junk-gatherers along the shore.
They were a low order of sailors and they navigated regularly only in the months of famine.
The rest of the time they acted as junk-gatherers.
Rowing about on the river day and night, watching for any prey, dead or alive, poachers on the water and nocturnal hunters, sometimes ambushing venison in the Saint-Germain forests, sometimes looking for drowned people and searching their clothes, picking up floating rags and empty bottles; thus did Labouise and Maillochon live easily.
At times they would set out on foot about noon and stroll along straight ahead.
At Joinville or at Nogent some boatman would be looking for his boat, which had disappeared one night, probably stolen, while twenty or thirty miles from there, on the Oise, some shopkeeper would be rubbing his hands, congratulating himself on the bargain he had made when he bought a boat the day before for fifty francs, which two men offered him as they were passing.
Maillochon reappeared with his gun wrapped up in rags.
He was a man of forty or fifty, tall and thin, with the restless eye of people who are worried by legitimate troubles and of hunted animals.
His open shirt showed his hairy chest, but he seemed never to have had any more hair on his face than a short brush of a mustache and a few stiff hairs under his lower lip.
Chicot, on the contrary, was red, fat, short and hairy.
He looked like a raw beefsteak.
He continually kept his left eye closed, as if he were aiming at something or at somebody, and when people jokingly cried to him, “Open your eye, Labouise!” he would answer quietly: “Never fear, sister, I open it when there's cause to.” He had a habit of calling every one “sister,” even his scavenger companion.
He took up the oars again, and once more the boat disappeared in the heavy mist, which was now turned snowy white in the pink-tinted sky.
“What kind of lead did you take, Maillochon?” Labouise asked.
“Very small, number nine; that's the best for rabbits.” They were approaching the other shore so slowly, so quietly that no noise betrayed them.
This bank belongs to the Saint-Germain forest and is the boundary line for rabbit hunting.
It is covered with burrows hidden under the roots of trees, and the creatures at daybreak frisk about, running in and out of the holes.
Maillochon was kneeling in the bow, watching, his gun hidden on the floor.
Suddenly he seized it, aimed, and the report echoed for some time throughout the quiet country.
Labouise, in a few strokes, touched the beach, and his companion, jumping to the ground, picked up a little gray rabbit, not yet dead.
Then the boat once more disappeared into the fog in order to get to the other side, where it could keep away from the game wardens.
The weapon had disappeared under the board which served as a hiding place and the rabbit was stuffed into Chicot's loose shirt.
After about a quarter of an hour Labouise asked: “Well, sister, shall we get one more?” “It will suit me,” Maillochon answered.
The mist, which was hiding both shores, was beginning to rise.
The trees could be barely perceived, as through a veil, and the little clouds of fog were floating up from the water.
When they drew near the island, the end of which is opposite Herblay, the two men slackened their pace and began to watch.
Then they went down until they were half way to Conflans.
From time to time Labouise would sit up and look over the horizon with his open eye.
The last of the morning mist had disappeared and the large summer sun was climbing in the blue sky.
On the other side of the river the vineyard-covered hill stretched out in a semicircle.
Everything was silent.
Something was moving slowly along the tow-path, advancing with difficulty.
It was a woman dragging a donkey.
The stubborn, stiff- jointed beast occasionally stretched out a leg in answer to its companion's efforts, and it proceeded thus, with outstretched neck and ears lying flat, so slowly that one could not tell when it would ever be out of sight.
The woman, bent double, was pulling, turning round occasionally to strike the donkey with a stick.
As soon as he saw her, Labouise exclaimed: “Say, Mailloche!” Mailloche answered: “What's the matter?” “Want to have some fun?” “Of course!” “Then hurry, sister; we're going to have a laugh.” Chicot took the oars.
When he had crossed the river he stopped opposite the woman and called: “Hey, sister!” The woman stopped dragging her donkey and looked.
Labouise continued: “What are you doing—going to the locomotive show?” The woman made no reply.
Chicot continued: “Say, your trotter's prime for a race.
Where are you taking him at that speed?” At last the woman answered: “I'm going to Macquart, at Champioux, to have him killed.
He's worthless.” Labouise answered: “You're right.
How much do you think Macquart will give you for him?” The woman wiped her forehead on the back of her hand and hesitated, saying: “How do I know?
Perhaps three francs, perhaps four.” Chicot exclaimed: “I'll give you five francs and your errand's done!
How's that?” The woman considered the matter for a second and then exclaimed: “Done!” The two men landed.
Labouise grasped the animal by the bridle.
Maillochon asked in surprise: “What do you expect to do with that carcass?” Chicot this time opened his other eye in order to express his gaiety.
His whole red face was grinning with joy.
He chuckled: “Don't worry, sister.
Then Labouise, in great humor, got the gun and held it out to Maillochon, saying: “Each one in turn; we're going after big game, sister.
You must make the pleasure last a little.” He placed his companion about forty paces from the victim.
The ass, feeling itself free, was trying to get a little of the tall grass, but it was so exhausted that it swayed on its legs as if it were about to fall.
Maillochon aimed slowly and said: “A little pepper for the ears; watch, Ghicot!” And he fired.
The tiny shot struck the donkey's long ears and he began to shake them in order to get rid of the stinging sensation.
The two men were doubled up with laughter and stamped their feet with joy.
The woman, indignant, rushed forward; she did not want her donkey to be tortured, and she offered to return the five francs.
Labouise threatened her with a thrashing and pretended to roll up his sleeves.
She went away, threatening to call the police.
They could hear her protesting indignantly and cursing as she went her way.
Maillochon held out the gun to his comrade, saying: “It's your turn, Chicot.” Labouise aimed and fired.
The donkey received the charge in his thighs, but the shot was so small and came from such a distance that he thought he was being stung by flies, for he began to thrash himself with his tail.
Labouise sat down to laugh more comfortably, while Maillochon reloaded the weapon, so happy that he seemed to sneeze into the barrel.
Both men darted after the beast, Maillochon with a long stride, Labouise with the short, breathless trot of a little man.
But the donkey, tired out, had stopped, and, with a bewildered look, was watching his two murderers approach.
Suddenly he stretched his neck and began to bray.
Labouise, out of breath, had taken the gun.
When the poor beast had finished its mournful cry, like a last call for help, the man called: “Hey, Mailloche!
Come here, sister; I'm going to give him some medicine.” And while the other man was forcing the animal's mouth open, Chicot stuck the barrel of his gun down its throat, as if he were trying to make it drink a potion.
The donkey stumbled back a few steps, fell down, tried to get up again and finally lay on its side and closed its eyes: The whole body was trembling, its legs were kicking as if it were, trying to run.
The two men went along, laughing.
Maillochon asked: “Well, what are we going to do now?” Labouise answered: “Don't worry, sister.
The animal's body was placed on the bottom, covered with fresh grass, and the two men stretched out on it and went to sleep.
Toward noon Labouise drew a bottle of wine, some bread and butter and raw onions from a hiding place in their muddy, worm-eaten boat, and they began to eat.
When the meal was over they once more stretched out on the dead donkey and slept.
At nightfall Labouise awoke and shook his comrade, who was snoring like a buzzsaw.
Maillochon began to row.
When they reached the wall of the Eperon, which separates the Saint- Germain forest from the Maisons-Laffitte Park, Labouise stopped his companion and explained his idea to him.
Maillochon was moved by a prolonged, silent laugh.
Then they got into their boat again and went to Maisons-Laffitte.
The night was perfectly black when they reached the wine shop of old man Jules.
Two francs sixty-five and the two rabbits were delivered.
As the two men were getting up to go, old man Jules, who had been watching them, exclaimed: “You have something else, but you won't say what.” Labouise answered: “Possibly, but it is not for you; you're too stingy.” The man, growing eager, kept asking: “What is it?
Perhaps we might make a deal.” Labouise, who seemed perplexed, pretended to consult Maillochon with a glance.
Then he answered in a slow voice: “This is how it is.
We were in the bushes at Eperon when something passed right near us, to the left, at the end of the wall.
Mailloche takes a shot and it drops.
If I told you I'd be lying, and you know, sister, between us everything's above-board.” Anxiously the man asked: “Think it's venison?” Labouise answered: “Might be and then again it might not!
Mind you, I don't say it's a doe, because I don't know, but it might be.” Still the dealer insisted: “Perhaps it's a buck?” Labouise stretched out his hand, exclaiming: “No, it's not that!
No risk for me.” The innkeeper, growing suspicious, exclaimed “Supposing he wasn't there!” Labouise once more raised his hand and said: “He's there, I swear!—first bush to the left.
But it's not a buck, I'm positive.
Twenty-five francs, cash down!” Still the man hesitated: “Couldn't you bring it?” Maillochon exclaimed: “No, indeed!
Then he took out four big five-franc pieces from the cash drawer, and the two friends pocketed the money.
Labouise arose, emptied his glass and left.
As he was disappearing in the shadows he turned round to exclaim: “It isn't a buck.
I'll give you back your money if you find nothing!” And he disappeared in the darkness.
Maillochon, who was following him, kept punching him in the back to express his joy.
MOIRON As we were still talking about Pranzini, M.
Maloureau, who had been attorney general under the Empire, said: “Oh!
I formerly knew a very curious affair, curious for several reasons, as you will see.
“I was at that time imperial attorney in one of the provinces.
I had to take up the case which has remained famous under the name of the Moiron case.
“Monsieur Moiron, who was a teacher in the north of France, enjoyed an excellent reputation throughout the whole country.
He was a person of intelligence, quiet, very religious, a little taciturn; he had married in the district of Boislinot, where he exercised his profession.
He had had three children, who had died of consumption, one after the other.
From this time he seemed to bestow upon the youngsters confided to his care all the tenderness of his heart.
With his own money he bought toys for his best scholars and for the good boys; he gave them little dinners and stuffed them with delicacies, candy and cakes: Everybody loved this good man with his big heart, when suddenly five of his pupils died, in a strange manner, one after the other.
It was supposed that there was an epidemic due to the condition of the water, resulting from drought; they looked for the causes without being able to discover them, the more so that the symptoms were so peculiar.
The children seemed to be attacked by a feeling of lassitude; they would not eat, they complained of pains in their stomachs, dragged along for a short time, and died in frightful suffering.
“A post-mortem examination was held over the last one, but nothing was discovered.
The vitals were sent to Paris and analyzed, and they revealed the presence of no toxic substance.
“For a year nothing new developed; then two little boys, the best scholars in the class, Moiron's favorites, died within four days of each other.
An examination of the bodies was again ordered, and in both of them were discovered tiny fragments of crushed glass.
The conclusion arrived at was that the two youngsters must imprudently have eaten from some carelessly cleaned receptacle.
A glass broken over a pail of milk could have produced this frightful accident, and the affair would have been pushed no further if Moiron's servant had not been taken sick at this time.
The physician who was called in noticed the same symptoms he had seen in the children.
He questioned her and obtained the admission that she had stolen and eaten some candies that had been bought by the teacher for his scholars.
“On an order from the court the schoolhouse was searched, and a closet was found which was full of toys and dainties destined for the children.
Almost all these delicacies contained bits of crushed glass or pieces of broken needles!
“Moiron was immediately arrested; but he seemed so astonished and indignant at the suspicion hanging over him that he was almost released.
How ever, indications of his guilt kept appearing, and baffled in my mind my first conviction, based on his excellent reputation, on his whole life, on the complete absence of any motive for such a crime.
“Why should this good, simple, religious man have killed little children, and the very children whom he seemed to love the most, whom he spoiled and stuffed with sweet things, for whom he spent half his salary in buying toys and bonbons?
“One must consider him insane to believe him guilty of this act.
Now, Moiron seemed so normal, so quiet, so rational and sensible that it seemed impossible to adjudge him insane.
In none of the candies that were bought at the places where the schoolmaster secured his provisions could the slightest trace of anything suspicious be found.
“He then insisted that an unknown enemy must have opened his cupboard with a false key in order to introduce the glass and the needles into the eatables.
And he made up a whole story of an inheritance dependent on the death of a child, determined on and sought by some peasant, and promoted thus by casting suspicions on the schoolmaster.
This brute, he claimed, did not care about the other children who were forced to die as well.
“The story was possible.
The man appeared to be so sure of himself and in such despair that we should undoubtedly have acquitted him, notwithstanding the charges against him, if two crushing discoveries had not been made, one after the other.
“The first one was a snuffbox full of crushed glass; his own snuffbox, hidden in the desk where he kept his money!
“He explained this new find in an acceptable manner, as the ruse of the real unknown criminal.
But a mercer from Saint-Marlouf came to the presiding judge and said that a gentleman had several times come to his store to buy some needles; and he always asked for the thinnest needles he could find, and would break them to see whether they pleased him.
The man was brought forward in the presence of a dozen or more persons, and immediately recognized Moiron.
The inquest revealed that the schoolmaster had indeed gone into Saint-Marlouf on the days mentioned by the tradesman.
“I will pass over the terrible testimony of children on the choice of dainties and the care which he took to have them eat the things in his presence, and to remove the slightest traces.
“Public indignation demanded capital punishment, and it became more and more insistent, overturning all objections.
“Moiron was condemned to death, and his appeal was rejected.
Nothing was left for him but the imperial pardon.
“One morning, as I was working in my study, the visit of the prison almoner was announced.
He was an old priest who knew men well and understood the habits of criminals.
He seemed troubled, ill at ease, nervous.
After talking for a few minutes about one thing and another, he arose and said suddenly: 'If Moiron is executed, monsieur, you will have put an innocent man to death.' “Then he left without bowing, leaving me behind with the deep impression made by his words.
He had pronounced them in such a sincere and solemn manner, opening those lips, closed and sealed by the secret of confession, in order to save a life.
“An hour later I left for Paris, and my father immediately asked that I be granted an audience with the emperor.
“The following day I was received.
His majesty was working in a little reception room when we were introduced.
I described the whole case, and I was just telling about the priest's visit when a door opened behind the sovereign's chair and the empress, who supposed he was alone, appeared.
His majesty, Napoleon, consulted her.
As soon as she had heard the matter, she exclaimed: 'This man must be pardoned.
He must, since he is innocent.' “Why did this sudden conviction of a religious woman cast a terrible doubt in my mind?
“Until then I had ardently desired a change of sentence.
And now I suddenly felt myself the toy, the dupe of a cunning criminal who had employed the priest and confession as a last means of defence.
“I explained my hesitancy to their majesties.
The emperor remained undecided, urged on one side by his natural kindness and held back on the other by the fear of being deceived by a criminal; but the empress, who was convinced that the priest had obeyed a divine inspiration, kept repeating: 'Never mind!
It is better to spare a criminal than to kill an innocent man!' Her advice was taken.
The death sentence was commuted to one of hard labor.
“A few years later I heard that Moiron had again been called to the emperor's attention on account of his exemplary conduct in the prison at Toulon and was now employed as a servant by the director of the penitentiary.
But about two years ago, while I was spending a summer near Lille with my cousin, De Larielle, I was informed one evening, just as we were sitting down to dinner, that a young priest wished to speak to me.
“I had him shown in and he begged me to come to a dying man who desired absolutely to see me.
This had often happened to me in my long career as a magistrate, and, although I had been set aside by the Republic, I was still often called upon in similar circumstances.
I therefore followed the priest, who led me to a miserable little room in a large tenement house.
He was a sort of skeleton, with dark, gleaming eyes.
“As soon as he saw me, he murmured: 'Don't you recognize me?' “'No.' “'I am Moiron.' “I felt a shiver run through me, and I asked 'The schoolmaster?' “'Yes.' “'How do you happen to be here?' “'The story is too long.
It is to you that I wish to confess—since you were the one who once saved my life.' “His hands clutched the straw of his bed through the sheet and he continued in a hoarse, forcible and low tone: 'You see—I owe you the truth—I owe it to you—for it must be told to some one before I leave this earth.
“'It is I who killed the children—all of them.
I was an honest, straightforward, pure man—adoring God—this good Father—this Master who teaches us to love, and not the false God, the executioner, the robber, the murderer who governs the earth.
I had never done any harm; I had never committed an evil act.
I was as good as it is possible to be, monsieur.
“'I married and had children, and I loved them as no father or mother ever loved their children.
I was rebellious, furious; and suddenly my eyes were opened as if I were waking up out of a sleep.
I understood that God is bad.
Why had He killed my children?
He loves only that, monsieur.
God, monsieur, is a murderer!
He has invented sickness and accidents in order to give Him diversion all through the months and the years; and when He grows tired of this, He has epidemics, the plague, cholera, diphtheria, smallpox, everything possible!
But this does not satisfy Him; all these things are too similar; and so from time to time He has wars, in order to see two hundred thousand soldiers killed at once, crushed in blood and in the mud, blown apart, their arms and legs torn off, their heads smashed by bullets, like eggs that fall on the ground.
He has made tiny little animals which live one day, flies who die by the millions in one hour, ants which we are continually crushing under our feet, and so many, many others that we cannot even imagine.
And all these things are continually killing each other and dying.
And the good Lord looks on and is amused, for He sees everything, the big ones as well as the little ones, those who are in the drops of water and those in the other firmaments.
“'Then, monsieur, I began to kill children.
“'I was to be executed.
I no longer fear Him, monsieur; I despise Him too much.' “This poor wretch was frightful to see as he lay there gasping, opening an enormous mouth in order to utter words which could scarcely be heard, his breath rattling, picking at his bed and moving his thin legs under a grimy sheet as though trying to escape.
The mere remembrance of it is frightful!
“'No, monsieur.' “'Then, farewell.' “'Farewell, monsieur, till some day——' “I turned to the ashen-faced priest, whose dark outline stood out against the wall, and asked: 'Are you going to stay here, Monsieur l'Abbe?' “'Yes.' “Then the dying man sneered: 'Yes, yes, He sends His vultures to the corpses.' “I had had enough of this.
I opened the door and ran away.” THE DISPENSER OF HOLY WATER He lived formerly in a little house beside the high road outside the village.
He had set up in business as a wheelwright, after marrying the daughter of a farmer of the neighborhood, and as they were both industrious, they managed to save up a nice little fortune.
But they had no children, and this caused them great sorrow.
They both loved and petted him, enfolding him with their affection, and were unwilling to let him be out of their sight.
When he was five years old some mountebanks passed through the country and set up their tent in the town hall square.
Jean, who had seen them pass by, made his escape from the house, and after his father had made a long search for him, he found him among the learned goats and trick dogs, uttering shouts of laughter and sitting on the knees of an old clown.
Three days later, just as they were sitting down to dinner, the wheelwright and his wife noticed that their son was not in the house.
A brown vapor arose making distant objects look still farther away and giving them a dismal, weird appearance.
Still there was no reply, but the air appeared to be full of indistinct sighing.
The father listened for some time, thinking he heard a sound first in one direction, then in another, and, almost beside himself, he ran, out into the night, calling incessantly “Jean!
Jean!” He ran along thus until daybreak, filling the, darkness with his shouts, terrifying stray animals, torn by a terrible anguish and fearing that he was losing his mind.
They both aged rapidly in their inconsolable sorrow.
Finally they sold their house and set out to search together.
They inquired of the shepherds on the hillsides, of the tradesmen passing by, of the peasants in the villages and of the authorities in the towns.
But their boy had been lost a long time and no one knew anything about him.
He had probably forgotten his own name by this time and also the name of his village, and his parents wept in silence, having lost hope.
Before long their money came to an end, and they worked out by the day in the farms and inns, doing the most menial work, eating what was left from the tables, sleeping on the ground and suffering from cold.
Then as they became enfeebled by hard work no one would employ them any longer, and they were forced to beg along the high roads.
They accosted passers- by in an entreating voice and with sad, discouraged faces; they begged a morsel of bread from the harvesters who were dining around a tree in the fields at noon, and they ate in silence seated on the edge of a ditch.
An innkeeper to whom they told their story said to them one day: “I know some one who had lost their daughter, and they found her in Paris.” They at once set out for Paris.
When they entered the great city they were bewildered by its size and by the crowds that they saw.
Then they feared that they might not recognize him, for he was only five years old when they last saw him.
They visited every place, went through all the streets, stopping whenever they saw a group of people, hoping for some providential meeting, some extraordinary luck, some compassionate fate.
They frequently walked at haphazard straight ahead, leaning one against the other, looking so sad and poverty-stricken that people would give them alms without their asking.
They spent every Sunday at the doors of the churches, watching the crowds entering and leaving, trying to distinguish among the faces one that might be familiar.
Several times they thought they recognized him, but always found they had made a mistake.
In the vestibule of one of the churches which they visited the most frequently there was an old dispenser of holy Water who had become their friend.
He also had a very sad history, and their sympathy for him had established a bond of close friendship between them.
It ended by them all three living together in a poor lodging on the top floor of a large house situated at some distance, quite on the outskirts of the city, and the wheelwright would sometimes take his new friend's place at the church when the latter was ill.
The poor holy water sprinkler died and the parish priest appointed the wheelwright, whose misfortunes had come to his knowledge, to replace him.
He went every morning and sat in the same place, on the same chair, wearing away the old stone pillar by continually leaning against it.
He would gaze steadily at every man who entered the church and looked forward to Sunday with as much impatience as a schoolboy, for on that day the church was filled with people from morning till night.
He became very old, growing weaker each day from the dampness of the church, and his hope oozed away gradually.
He now knew by sight all the people who came to the services; he knew their hours, their manners, could distinguish their step on the stone pavement.
His interests had become so contracted that the entrance of a stranger in the church was for him a great event.
One day two ladies came in; one was old, the other young—a mother and daughter probably.
Behind them came a man who was following them.
He bowed to them as they came out, and after offering them some holy water, he took the arm of the elder lady.
“That must be the fiance of the younger one,” thought the wheelwright.
And until evening he kept trying to recall where he had formerly seen a young man who resembled this one.
But the one he was thinking of must be an old man by this time, for it seemed as if he had known him down home in his youth.
The same man frequently came again to walk home with the ladies, and this vague, distant, familiar resemblance which he could not place worried the old man so much that he made his wife come with him to see if she could help his impaired memory.
One evening as it was growing dusk the three strangers entered together.
When they had passed the old man said: “Well, do you know him?” His wife anxiously tried to ransack her memory.
Suddenly she said in a low tone: “Yes—yes—but he is darker, taller, stouter and is dressed like a gentleman, but, father, all the same, it is your face when you were young!” The old man started violently.
He looked like himself and also like his brother who was dead, and like his father, whom he remembered while he was yet young.
The old couple were so affected that they could not speak.
The man touched his finger to the holy water sprinkler.
Then the old man, whose hand was trembling so that he was fairly sprinkling the ground with holy water, exclaimed: “Jean!” The young man stopped and looked at him.
He repeated in a lower tone: “Jean!” The two women looked at them without understanding.
The two ladies also wept, understanding as they did that some great happiness had come to pass.
For three years he traveled with them in various countries.
Then the troupe disbanded, and one day an old lady in a chateau had paid to have him stay with her because she liked his appearance.
As he was intelligent, he was sent to school, then to college, and the old lady having no children, had left him all her money.
He, for his part, had tried to find his parents, but as he could remember only the two names, “Papa Pierre, Mamma Jeanne,” he had been unable to do so.
Now he was about to be married, and he introduced his fiancee, who was very good and very pretty.
They sat up very late that night, not daring to retire lest the happiness they had so long sought should escape them again while they were asleep.
But misfortune had lost its hold on them and they were happy for the rest of their lives.
A PARRICIDE The lawyer had presented a plea of insanity.
How could anyone explain this strange crime otherwise?
One morning, in the grass near Chatou, two bodies had been found, a man and a woman, well known, rich, no longer young and married since the preceding year, the woman having been a widow for three years before.
They seemed to have been thrown from the roadside into the river, after having been struck, one after the other, with a long iron spike.
The investigation revealed nothing.
The boatmen, who had been questioned, knew nothing.
The matter was about to be given up, when a young carpenter from a neighboring village, Georges Louis, nicknamed “the Bourgeois,” gave himself up.
To all questions he only answered this: “I had known the man for two years, the woman for six months.
They often had me repair old furniture for them, because I am a clever workman.” And when he was asked: “Why did you kill them?” He would obstinately answer: “I killed them because I wanted to kill them.” They could get nothing more out of him.
This man was undoubtedly an illegitimate child, put out to nurse and then abandoned.
He had no other name than Georges Louis, but as on growing up he became particularly intelligent, with the good taste and native refinement which his acquaintances did not have, he was nicknamed “the Bourgeois,” and he was never called otherwise.
He had become remarkably clever in the trade of a carpenter, which he had taken up.
He was also said to be a socialist fanatic, a believer in communistic and nihilistic doctrines, a great reader of bloodthirsty novels, an influential political agitator and a clever orator in the public meetings of workmen or of farmers.
His lawyer had pleaded insanity.
Indeed, how could one imagine that this workman should kill his best customers, rich and generous (as he knew), who in two years had enabled him to earn three thousand francs (his books showed it)?
Only one explanation could be offered: insanity, the fixed idea of the unclassed individual who reeks vengeance on two bourgeois, on all the bourgeoisie, and the lawyer made a clever allusion to this nickname of “The Bourgeois,” given throughout the neighborhood to this poor wretch.
He exclaimed: “Is this irony not enough to unbalance the mind of this poor wretch, who has neither father nor mother?
He is an ardent republican.
He even belongs to the same political party, the members of which, formerly shot or exiled by the government, it now welcomes with open arms this party to which arson is a principle and murder an ordinary occurrence.
“These gloomy doctrines, now applauded in public meetings, have ruined this man.
He has heard republicans—even women, yes, women—ask for the blood of M.
Gambetta, the blood of M.
Grevy; his weakened mind gave way; he wanted blood, the blood of a bourgeois!
“It is not he whom you should condemn, gentlemen; it is the Commune!” Everywhere could be heard murmurs of assent.
Everyone felt that the lawyer had won his case.
The prosecuting attorney did not oppose him.
Then the presiding judge asked the accused the customary question: “Prisoner, is there anything that you wish to add to your defense?” The man stood up.
A strong, frank, sonorous voice came from this frail-looking boy and, at the first words, quickly changed the opinion which had been formed of him.
He spoke loud in a declamatory manner, but so distinctly that every word could be understood in the farthest corners of the big hall: “Your honor, as I do not wish to go to an insane asylum, and as I even prefer death to that, I will tell everything.
“A woman, having given birth to a boy, sent him out, somewhere, to a nurse.
Did she even know where her accomplice carried this innocent little being, condemned to eternal misery, to the shame of an illegitimate birth; to more than that—to death, since he was abandoned and the nurse, no longer receiving the monthly pension, might, as they often do, let him die of hunger and neglect!
It is more humane to let them die, these little wretches who are cast away in suburban villages just as garbage is thrown away.
“I grew up with the indistinct impression that I was carrying some burden of shame.
One day the other children called me a 'b——-'.
I was also ignorant of its meaning, but I felt the sting all the same.
“I was, I may say, one of the cleverest boys in the school.
I would have been a good man, your honor, perhaps a man of superior intellect, if my parents had not committed the crime of abandoning me.
“This crime was committed against me.
I was defenseless, they were pitiless.
Their duty was to love me, they rejected me.
To me, at any rate, it was a misfortune.
After their shameful desertion, I owed them only vengeance.
They committed against me the most inhuman, the most infamous, the most monstrous crime which can be committed against a human creature.
“A man who has been insulted, strikes; a man who has been robbed, takes back his own by force.
A man who has been deceived, played upon, tortured, kills; a man who has been slapped, kills; a man who has been dishonored, kills.
I have been robbed, deceived, tortured, morally slapped, dishonored, all this to a greater degree than those whose anger you excuse.
“I revenged myself, I killed.
It was my legitimate right.
I took their happy life in exchange for the terrible one which they had forced on me.
“You will call me parricide!
Were these people my parents, for whom I was an abominable burden, a terror, an infamous shame; for whom my birth was a calamity and my life a threat of disgrace?
They sought a selfish pleasure; they got an unexpected child.
They suppressed the child.
“And yet, up to quite recently, I was ready to love them.
I suspected nothing.
He ordered two pieces of furniture.
I found out, later on, that, under the seal of secrecy, naturally, he had sought information from the priest.
Sometimes he would even talk to me of one thing or another.
I felt a growing affection for him.
“At the beginning of this year he brought with him his wife, my mother.
When she entered she was trembling so that I thought her to be suffering from some nervous disease.
She said nothing; she looked around abstractedly at my work and only answered 'yes' and 'no,' at random, to all the questions which he asked her.
When she had left I thought her a little unbalanced.
“The following month they returned.
She was calm, self-controlled.
That day they chattered for a long time, and they left me a rather large order.
I saw her three more times, without suspecting anything.
But one day she began to talk to me of my life, of my childhood, of my parents.
I answered: 'Madame, my parents were wretches who deserted me.' Then she clutched at her heart and fell, unconscious.
I immediately thought: 'She is my mother!' but I took care not to let her notice anything.
“I, in turn, sought out information about them.
There had been rumors that they had loved each other during the lifetime of the first husband, but there was no proof of it.
She returned one evening, escorted as usual by my father.
Then, as she was leaving, she said to me: 'I wish you success, because you seem to me to be honest and a hard worker; some day you will undoubtedly think of getting married.
I was married against my inclination once and I know what suffering it causes.
Now I am rich, childless, free, mistress of my fortune.
Here is your dowry.' “She held out to me a large, sealed envelope.
“I looked her straight in the eyes and then said: 'Are you my mother?' “She drew back a few steps and hid her face in her hands so as not to see me.
He, the man, my father, supported her in his arms and cried out to me: 'You must be crazy!' “I answered: 'Not in the least.
I cannot be thus deceived.
Admit it and I will keep the secret; I will bear you no ill will; I will remain what I am, a carpenter.' “He retreated towards the door, still supporting his wife who was beginning to sob.
Quickly I locked the door, put the key in my pocket and continued: 'Look at her and dare to deny that she is my mother.' “Then he flew into a passion, very pale, terrified at the thought that the scandal, which had so far been avoided, might suddenly break out; that their position, their good name, their honor might all at once be lost.
He stammered out: 'You are a rascal, you wish to get money from us!
That's the thanks we get for trying to help such common people!' “My mother, bewildered, kept repeating: 'Let's get out of here, let's get out!' “Then, when he found the door locked, he exclaimed: 'If you do not open this door immediately, I will have you thrown into prison for blackmail and assault!' “I had remained calm; I opened the door and saw them disappear in the darkness.
“Then I seemed to have been suddenly orphaned, deserted, pushed to the wall.
I was seized with an overwhelming sadness, mingled with anger, hatred, disgust; my whole being seemed to rise up in revolt against the injustice, the meanness, the dishonor, the rejected love.
I began to run, in order to overtake them along the Seine, which they had to follow in order to reach the station of Chaton.
I was creeping up behind them softly, that they might not hear me.
It was absurd in our position.
We could have helped him from afar, without showing ourselves.
Of what use are these dangerous visits, since we can't recognize him?' “Then I rushed up to them, beseeching.
You have already rejected me once; would you repulse me again?' “Then, your honor, he struck me.
He struck me, and as I seized him by the collar, he drew from his pocket a revolver.
“Then, when I saw them both lying on the ground, without thinking, I threw them into the Seine.
Now sentence me.” The prisoner sat down.
After this revelation the case was carried over to the following session.
If we were jurymen, what would we do with this parricide?
Bonnet, my old friend—one sometimes has friends older than one's self—had often invited me to spend some time with him at Riom, and, as I did not know Auvergne, I made up my mind to visit him in the summer of 1876.
I arrived by the morning train, and the first person I saw on the platform was the doctor.
He was dressed in a gray suit, and wore a soft, black, wide-brimmed, high-crowned felt hat, narrow at the top like a chimney pot, a hat which hardly any one except an Auvergnat would wear, and which reminded one of a charcoal burner.
Dressed like that, the doctor had the appearance of an old young man, with his spare body under his thin coat, and his large head covered with white hair.
He embraced me with that evident pleasure which country people feel when they meet long-expected friends, and, stretching out his arm, he said proudly: “This is Auvergne!” I saw nothing before me except a range of mountains, whose summits, which resembled truncated cones, must have been extinct volcanoes.
Then, pointing to the name of the station, he said: “Riom, the fatherland of magistrates, the pride of the magistracy, and which ought rather to be the fatherland of doctors.” “Why?” I, asked.
“If you transpose the letters, you have the Latin word 'mori', to die.
That is the reason why I settled here, my young friend.” And, delighted at his own joke, he carried me off, rubbing his hands.
As soon as I had swallowed a cup of coffee, he made me go and see the town.
I admired the druggist's house, and the other noted houses, which were all black, but as pretty as bric-a-brac, with their facades of sculptured stone.
I admired the statue of the Virgin, the patroness of butchers, and he told me an amusing story about this, which I will relate some other time, and then Dr.
Bonnet said to me: “I must beg you to excuse me for a few minutes while I go and see a patient, and then I will take you to Chatel-Guyon, so as to show you the general aspect of the town, and all the mountain chain of the Puy-de- Dome before lunch.
You can wait for me outside; I shall only go upstairs and come down immediately.” He left me outside one of those old, gloomy, silent, melancholy houses, which one sees in the provinces, and this one appeared to look particularly sinister, and I soon discovered the reason.
When the doctor came down again, I told him how it struck me, and he replied: “You are quite right; the poor creature who is living there must never see what is going on outside.
She is a madwoman, or rather an idiot, what you Normans would call a Niente.
It is a miserable story, but a very singular pathological case at the same time.
Shall I tell you?” I begged him to do so, and he continued: “Twenty years ago the owners of this house, who were my patients, had a daughter who was like all other girls, but I soon discovered that while her body became admirably developed, her intellect remained stationary.
At first I thought she was deaf, but I soon discovered that, although she heard perfectly, she did not understand anything that was said to her.
Violent noises made her start and frightened her, without her understanding how they were caused.
“She grew up into a superb woman, but she was dumb, from an absolute want of intellect.
I tried all means to introduce a gleam of intelligence into her brain, but nothing succeeded.
I thought I noticed that she knew her nurse, though as soon as she was weaned, she failed to recognize her mother.
She could never pronounce that word which is the first that children utter and the last which soldiers murmur when they are dying on the field of battle.
She sometimes tried to talk, but she produced nothing but incoherent sounds.
“When the weather was fine, she laughed continually, and emitted low cries which might be compared to the twittering of birds; when it rained she cried and moaned in a mournful, terrifying manner, which sounded like the howling of a dog before a death occurs in a house.
“She was fond of rolling on the grass, as young animals do, and of running about madly, and she would clap her hands every morning, when the sun shone into her room, and would insist, by signs, on being dressed as quickly as possible, so that she might get out.
“She did not appear to distinguish between people, between her mother and her nurse, or between her father and me, or between the coachman and the cook.
I particularly liked her parents, who were very unhappy on her account, and went to see them nearly every day.
I dined with them quite frequently, which enabled me to remark that Bertha (they had called her Bertha) seemed to recognize the various dishes, and to prefer some to others.
At that time she was twelve years old, but as fully formed in figure as a girl of eighteen, and taller than I was.
Then the idea struck me of developing her greediness, and by this means of cultivating some slight power of discrimination in her mind, and to force her, by the diversity of flavors, if not to reason, at any rate to arrive at instinctive distinctions, which would of themselves constitute a kind of process that was necessary to thought.
Later on, by appealing to her passions, and by carefully making use of those which could serve our purpose, we might hope to obtain a kind of reaction on her intellect, and by degrees increase the unconscious action of her brain.
I made her taste each of them successively, and then I let her choose for herself, and she ate the plate of cream.
In a short time I made her very greedy, so greedy that it appeared as if the only idea she had in her head was the desire for eating.
She perfectly recognized the various dishes, and stretched out her hands toward those that she liked, and took hold of them eagerly, and she used to cry when they were taken from her.
It took a long time, but I succeeded in the end.
“It was impossible for me for a long time to attract her attention to the hands, but I succeeded in making her remark the clockwork and the striking apparatus.
The means I employed were very simple; I asked them not to have the bell rung for lunch, and everybody got up and went into the dining-room when the little brass hammer struck twelve o'clock, but I found great difficulty in making her learn to count the strokes.
She ran to the door each time she heard the clock strike, but by degrees she learned that all the strokes had not the same value as far as regarded meals, and she frequently fixed her eyes, guided by her ears, on the dial of the clock.
“When I noticed that, I took care every day at twelve, and at six o'clock, to place my fingers on the figures twelve and six, as soon as the moment she was waiting for had arrived, and I soon noticed that she attentively followed the motion of the small brass hands, which I had often turned in her presence.
“She had understood!
I had succeeded in getting the knowledge, or, rather, the sensation, of the time into her, just as is the case with carp, who certainly have no clocks, when they are fed every day exactly at the same time.
“When once I had obtained that result all the clocks and watches in the house occupied her attention almost exclusively.
She spent her time in looking at them, listening to them, and in waiting for meal time, and once something very funny happened.
The striking apparatus of a pretty little Louis XVI clock that hung at the head of her bed having got out of order, she noticed it.
She sat for twenty minutes with her eyes on the hands, waiting for it to strike ten, but when the hands passed the figure she was astonished at not hearing anything; so stupefied was she, indeed, that she sat down, no doubt overwhelmed by a feeling of violent emotion such as attacks us in the face of some terrible catastrophe.
“It was evident, therefore, that her, brain did act and calculate, obscurely it is true, and within very restricted limits, for I could never succeed in making her distinguish persons as she distinguished the time; and to stir her intellect, it was necessary to appeal to her passions, in the material sense of the word, and we soon had another, and alas! a very terrible proof of this!
“She had grown up into a splendid girl, a perfect type of a race, a sort of lovely and stupid Venus.
She was sixteen, and I have rarely seen such perfection of form, such suppleness and such regular features.
I said she was a Venus; yes, a fair, stout, vigorous Venus, with large, bright, vacant eyes, which were as blue as the flowers of the flax plant; she had a large mouth with full lips, the mouth of a glutton, of a sensualist, a mouth made for kisses.
Well, one morning her father came into my consulting room with a strange look on his face, and, sitting down without even replying to my greeting, he said: “'I want to speak to you about a very serious matter.
Would it be possible—would it be possible for Bertha to marry?' “'Bertha to marry!
Why, it is quite impossible!' “'Yes, I know, I know,' he replied. 'But reflect, doctor.
Don't you think—perhaps—we hoped—if she had children—it would be a great shock to her, but a great happiness, and—who knows whether maternity might not rouse her intellect?' “I was in a state of great perplexity.
He was right, and it was possible that such a new situation, and that wonderful instinct of maternity, which beats in the hearts of the lower animals as it does in the heart of a woman, which makes the hen fly at a dog's jaws to defend her chickens, might bring about a revolution, an utter change in her vacant mind, and set the motionless mechanism of her thoughts in motion.
And then, moreover, I immediately remembered a personal instance.
Some years previously I had owned a spaniel bitch who was so stupid that I could do nothing with her, but when she had had puppies she became, if not exactly intelligent, yet almost like many other dogs who had not been thoroughly broken.
“As soon as I foresaw the possibility of this, the wish to get Bertha married grew in me, not so much out of friendship for her and her poor parents as from scientific curiosity.
It was a singular problem.
You might make the attempt, but you will never find a man to consent to marry her.' “'I have found somebody,' he said, in a low voice.
“I was dumfounded, and said: 'Somebody really suitable?
Some one of your own rank and position in society?' “'Decidedly,' he replied.
It is Monsieur Gaston du Boys de Lucelles.' “I felt inclined to exclaim: 'The wretch!' but I held my tongue, and after a few moments' silence I said: “'Oh!
I see nothing against it.' “The poor man shook me heartily by the hand.
“Monsieur Gaston du Boys de Lucelles was a scapegrace of good family, who, after having spent all that he had inherited from his father, and having incurred debts in all kinds of doubtful ways, had been trying to discover some other means of obtaining money, and he had discovered this method.
He was a good-looking young fellow, and in capital health, but fast; one of that odious race of provincial fast men, and he appeared to me to be as suitable as anyone, and could be got rid of later by making him an allowance.
He came to the house to pay his addresses and to strut about before the idiot girl, who, however, seemed to please him.
He brought her flowers, kissed her hands, sat at her feet, and looked at her with affectionate eyes; but she took no notice of any of his attentions, and did not make any distinction between him and the other persons who were about her.
“However, the marriage took place, and you may guess how my curiosity was aroused.
I went to see Bertha the next day to try and discover from her looks whether any feelings had been awakened in her, but I found her just the same as she was every day, wholly taken up with the clock and dinner, while he, on the contrary, appeared really in love, and tried to rouse his wife's spirits and affection by little endearments and such caresses as one bestows on a kitten.
“I called upon the married couple pretty frequently, and I soon perceived that the young woman knew her husband, and gave him those eager looks which she had hitherto only bestowed on sweet dishes.
“She followed his movements, knew his step on the stairs or in the neighboring rooms, clapped her hands when he came in, and her face was changed and brightened by the flames of profound happiness and of desire.
“She loved him with her whole body and with all her soul to the very depths of her poor, weak soul, and with all her heart, that poor heart of some grateful animal.
It was really a delightful and innocent picture of simple passion, of carnal and yet modest passion, such as nature had implanted in mankind, before man had complicated and disfigured it by all the various shades of sentiment.
But he soon grew tired of this ardent, beautiful, dumb creature, and did not spend more than an hour during the day with her, thinking it sufficient if he came home at night, and she began to suffer in consequence.
She used to wait for him from morning till night with her eyes on the clock; she did not even look after the meals now, for he took all his away from home, Clermont, Chatel-Guyon, Royat, no matter where, as long as he was not obliged to come home.
“She began to grow thin; every other thought, every other wish, every other expectation, and every confused hope disappeared from her mind, and the hours during which she did not see him became hours of terrible suffering to her.
Soon he ceased to come home regularly of nights; he spent them with women at the casino at Royat and did not come home until daybreak.
But she never went to bed before he returned.
She remained sitting motionless in an easy-chair, with her eyes fixed on the hands of the clock, which turned so slowly and regularly round the china face on which the hours were painted.
“She heard the trot of his horse in the distance and sat up with a start, and when he came into the room she got up with the movements of an automaton and pointed to the clock, as if to say: 'Look how late it is!' “And he began to be afraid of this amorous and jealous, half-witted woman, and flew into a rage, as brutes do; and one night he even went so far as to strike her, so they sent for me.
When I arrived she was writhing and screaming in a terrible crisis of pain, anger, passion, how do I know what?
Can one tell what goes on in such undeveloped brains?
“I calmed her by subcutaneous injections of morphine, and forbade her to see that man again, for I saw clearly that marriage would infallibly kill her by degrees.
She is always thinking of him and waiting for him; she waits for him all day and night, awake or asleep, at this very moment, ceaselessly.
When I saw her getting thinner and thinner, and as she persisted in never taking her eyes off the clocks, I had them removed from the house.
I thus made it impossible for her to count the hours, and to try to remember, from her indistinct reminiscences, at what time he used to come home formerly.
I hope to destroy the recollection of it in time, and to extinguish that ray of thought which I kindled with so much difficulty.
“The other day I tried an experiment.
I offered her my watch; she took it and looked at it for some time; then she began to scream terribly, as if the sight of that little object had suddenly awakened her memory, which was beginning to grow indistinct.
She is pitiably thin now, with hollow and glittering eyes, and she walks up and down ceaselessly, like a wild beast in its cage; I have had gratings put on the windows, boarded them up half way, and have had the seats fixed to the floor so as to prevent her from looking to see whether he is coming.
Behind it a green, wooded plain studded with towns and villages, and bathed in a soft blue haze, extended until it was lost in the distance.
Far away, on my right, there was a range of lofty mountains with round summits, or else cut off flat, as if with a sword, and the doctor began to enumerate the villages, towns and hills, and to give me the history of all of them.
But I did not listen to him; I was thinking of nothing but the madwoman, and I only saw her.
I saw nothing except a gray felt hat, cocked over one ear above a pair of broad shoulders, driving off in a cloud of dust.
The son of a provincial bailiff, Jean Marin had come, as do so many others, to study law in the Quartier Latin.
In the various beer-houses that he had frequented he had made friends with several talkative students who spouted politics as they drank their beer.
He had a great admiration for them and followed them persistently from cafe to cafe, even paying for their drinks when he had the money.
However, one morning he read in the papers that one of his former comrades of the Quartier had just been appointed deputy.
He again became his faithful hound, the friend who does the drudgery, the unpleasant tasks, for whom one sends when one has need of him and with whom one does not stand on ceremony.
But it chanced through some parliamentary incident that the deputy became a minister.
Six months later Jean Marin was appointed a state councillor.
He would walk through the streets just to show himself off, as though one could tell by his appearance what position he occupied.
He offered his support to every one on all occasions and with unbounded generosity.
When he met any one he recognized on the boulevards he would advance to meet them with a charmed air, would take their hand, inquire after their health, and, without waiting for any questions, remark: “You know I am state councillor, and I am entirely at your service.
If I can be of any use to you, do not hesitate to call on me.
In my position one has great influence.” Then he would go into some cafe with the friend he had just met and ask for a pen and ink and a sheet of paper.
“Just one, waiter; it is to write a letter of recommendation.” And he wrote ten, twenty, fifty letters of recommendation a day.
He wrote them to the Cafe Americain, to Bignon's, to Tortoni's, to the Maison Doree, to the Cafe Riche, to the Helder, to the Cafe Anglais, to the Napolitain, everywhere, everywhere.
He wrote them to all the officials of the republican government, from the magistrates to the ministers.
And he was happy, perfectly happy.
One morning as he was starting out to go to the council it began to rain.
He hesitated about taking a cab, but decided not to do so and set out on foot.
The rain came down in torrents, swamping the sidewalks and inundating the streets.
An old priest was standing there—an old priest with white hair.
Before he became a councillor M.
Now he treated them with consideration, ever since a cardinal had consulted him on an important matter.
The rain continued to pour down in floods and obliged the two men to take shelter in the porter's lodge so as to avoid getting wet.
Marin, who was always itching to talk so as to let people know who he was, remarked: “This is horrible weather, Monsieur l'Abbe.” The old priest bowed: “Yes indeed, sir, it is very unpleasant when one comes to Paris for only a few days.” “Ah!
You come from the provinces?” “Yes, monsieur.
I am only passing through on my journey.” “It certainly is very disagreeable to have rain during the few days one spends in the capital.
We officials who stay here the year round, we think nothing of it.” The priest did not reply.
And with a sudden resolve he raised his cassock just as women raise their skirts in stepping across water.
Marin, seeing him start away, exclaimed: “You will get drenched, Monsieur l'Abbe.
Wait a few moments longer; the rain will be over.” The good man stopped irresistibly and then said: “But I am in a great hurry.
I have an important engagement.” M.
“But you will be absolutely drenched.
Might I ask in which direction you are going?” The priest appeared to hesitate.
Then he said: “I am going in the direction of the Palais Royal.” “In that case, if you will allow me, Monsieur l'Abbe, I will offer you the shelter of my umbrella: As for me, I am going to the council.
I am a councillor of state.” The old priest raised his head and looked at his neighbor and then exclaimed: “I thank you, monsieur.
He directed him, watched over him and advised him.
“Be careful of that stream, Monsieur l'Abbe.
And be very careful about the carriage wheels; they spatter you with mud sometimes from head to foot.
Look out for the umbrellas of the people passing by; there is nothing more dangerous to the eyes than the tips of the ribs.
Women especially are unbearable; they pay no heed to where they are going and always jab you in the face with the point of their parasols or umbrellas.
One would suppose the town belonged to them.
They monopolize the pavement and the street.
It is my opinion that their education has been greatly neglected.” And M.
He walked along, slightly bent over, picking his steps carefully so as not to get mud on his boots or his cassock.
Marin resumed: “I suppose you have come to Paris to divert your mind a little?” The good man replied: “No, I have some business to attend to.” “Ali!
Is it important business?
If I can be of any service to you, you may command me.” The priest seemed embarrassed.
He murmured: “Oh, it is a little personal matter; a little difficulty with—with my bishop.
It would not interest you.
It is a matter of internal regulation—an ecclesiastical affair.” M.
“But it is precisely the state council that regulates all those things.
In that case, make use of me.” “Yes, monsieur, it is to the council that I am going.
You are a thousand times too kind.
“Why, those are my friends, Monsieur l'Abbe, my best friends, excellent colleagues, charming men.
Count upon me.” The cure thanked him, apologizing for troubling him, and stammered out a thousand grateful promises.
Marin was enchanted.
“Ah, you may be proud of having made a stroke of luck, Monsieur l'Abbe.
You will see—you will see that, thanks to me, your affair will go along swimmingly.” They reached the council hall.
“My dear colleague, allow me to recommend to you most highly a venerable and particularly worthy and deserving priest, M.
L'Abbe——” He stopped and asked: “Your name, if you please?” “L'Abbe Ceinture.” “M. l'Abbe Ceinture, who needs your good office in a little matter which he will communicate to you.
“I am pleased at this incident which gives me an opportunity, my dear colleague——” And he finished with the usual compliments.
When he had written the three letters he handed them to his protege, who took his departure with many protestations of gratitude.
Marin attended to some business and then went home, passed the day quietly, slept well, woke in a good humor and sent for his newspapers.
He read: “OUR CLERGY AND OUR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS “We shall never make an end of enumerating the misdeeds of the clergy.
“We call the, attention of the ministry to the unheard of attitude of this councillor of state——” M.
Marin bounded out of bed, dressed himself and hastened to his colleague, Petitpas, who said to him: “How now?
You were crazy to recommend to me that old conspirator!” M.
Marin, bewildered, stammered out: “Why no—you see—I was deceived.
He played me a trick—a disgraceful trick!
I beg that you will sentence him severely, very severely.
Tell me to whom I should write about having him punished.
I will go and see the attorney-general and the archbishop of Paris—yes, the archbishop.” And seating himself abruptly at M.
Petitpas' desk, he wrote: “Monseigneur, I have the honor to bring to your grace's notice the fact that I have recently been made a victim of the intrigues and lies of a certain Abbe Ceinture, who imposed on my kind-heartedness.
“Deceived by the representations of this ecclesiastic, I was led——” Then, having signed and sealed his letter, he turned to his colleague and exclaimed: “See here; my dear friend, let this be a warning to you never to recommend any one again.” THE DOOR “Bah!” exclaimed Karl Massouligny, “the question of complaisant husbands is a difficult one.
I have often tried to determine whether they are blind, weak or clairvoyant.
I believe that there are some which belong to each of these categories.
They cannot rightly be called complaisant, since they do not know, but they are good creatures who cannot see farther than their nose.
It is a curious and interesting thing to notice the ease with which men and women can, be deceived.
We are taken in by the slightest trick of those who surround us, by our children, our friends, our servants, our tradespeople.
Humanity is credulous, and in order to discover deceit in others, we do not display one-tenth the shrewdness which we use when we, in turn, wish to deceive some one else.
“Clairvoyant husbands may be divided into three classes: Those who have some interest, pecuniary, ambitious or otherwise, in their wife's having love affairs.
These ask only to safeguard appearances as much as possible, and they are satisfied.
What a beautiful novel one could write about them!
“There are also those who are powerless, or, rather, tired, who flee from the duties of matrimony through fear of ataxia or apoplexy, who are satisfied to see a friend run these risks.
“But I once met a husband of a rare species, who guarded against the common accident in a strange and witty manner.
“In Paris I had made the acquaintance of an elegant, fashionable couple.
The woman, nervous, tall, slender, courted, was supposed to have had many love adventures.
I courted her, a trial courting to which she answered with evident provocations.
Soon we got to tender glances, hand pressures, all the little gallantries which precede the final attack.
“Nevertheless, I hesitated.
I consider that, as a rule, the majority of society intrigues, however short they may be, are not worth the trouble which they give us and the difficulties which may arise.
I therefore mentally compared the advantages and disadvantages which I might expect, and I thought I noticed that the husband suspected me.
“One evening, at a ball, as I was saying tender things to the young woman in a little parlor leading from the big hall where the dancing was going on, I noticed in a mirror the reflection of some one who was watching me.
“I murmured: 'Your husband is spying on us.' “She seemed dumbfounded and asked: 'My husband?' “'Yes, he has been watching us for some time: “'Nonsense!
He is usually extraordinarily pleasant to all my friends.' “'Perhaps he guessed that I love you!' “'Nonsense!
You are not the first one to pay attention to me.
Every woman who is a little in view drags behind her a herd of admirers.' “'Yes.
But I love you deeply.' “'Admitting that that is true, does a husband ever guess those things?' “'Then he is not jealous?' “'No-no!' “She thought for an instant and then continued: 'No.
I do not think that I ever noticed any jealousy on his part.' “'Has he never watched you?' “'No.
As I said, he is always agreeable to my friends.' “From that day my courting became much more assiduous.
The woman did not please me any more than before, but the probable jealousy of her husband tempted me greatly.
She had a certain worldly charm, due to a quick, gay, amiable and superficial mind, but no real, deep attraction.
She was, as I have already said, an excitable little being, all on the surface, with rather a showy elegance.
She was an ornament, not a home.
It is a great pleasure to my wife and myself to entertain people whom we like.
It would be very nice of you to do so.' “I was dumbfounded, but I accepted.
“A month later I arrived at their estate of Vertcresson, in Touraine.
There were three of them, she, the husband and a gentleman unknown to me, the Comte de Morterade, to whom I was introduced.
He appeared to be delighted to make my acquaintance, and the strangest ideas passed through my mind while we trotted along the beautiful road between two hedges.
But, then, would these two men tacitly have come to one of these infamous little agreements so common in society?
And it is proposed to me that I should quietly enter into the pact and carry it out.
She cannot be ignorant of everything.
However—however—Well, I cannot understand it.
On leaving the table the husband and his friend began to play cards, while I went out on the porch to look at the moonlight with madame.
She seemed to be greatly affected by nature, and I judged that the moment for my happiness was near.
That evening she was really delightful.
I felt like dragging her out under the trees, throwing myself at her feet and speaking to her words of love.
“Her husband's voice called 'Louise!' “'Yes, dear.' “'You are forgetting the tea.' “'I'll go and see about it, my friend.' “We returned to the house, and she gave us some tea.
When the two men had finished playing cards, they were visibly tired.
“An excursion was decided upon for the following afternoon, and we went in an open carriage to visit some ruins.
She and I were in the back of the vehicle and they were opposite us, riding backward.
The conversation was sympathetic and agreeable.
“Suddenly, as she had stretched out her foot between her husband's legs, he murmured reproachfully: 'Louise, please don't wear out your old shoes yourself.
She was indeed wearing worn-out shoes, and I noticed that her stockings were not pulled up tight.
The friend was looking out in the distance with an indifferent and unconcerned look.
“The husband offered me a cigar, which I accepted.
For a few days it was impossible for me to be alone with her for two minutes; he was with us everywhere.
He was delightful to me, however.
“One morning he came to get me to take a walk before breakfast, and the conversation happened to turn on marriage.
I spoke a little about solitude and about how charming life can be made by the affection of a woman.
Suddenly he interrupted me, saying: 'My friend, don't talk about things you know nothing about.
All the little coquetries which make them so exquisite when they do not definitely belong to us cease as soon as they become ours.
And then—the respectable women—that is to say our wives—are—are not—in fact do not understand their profession of wife.
Do you understand?' “He said no more, and I could not guess his thoughts.
“Two days after this conversation he called me to his room quite early, in order to show me a collection of engravings.
I sat in an easy chair opposite the big door which separated his apartment from his wife's, and behind this door I heard some one walking and moving, and I was thinking very little of the engravings, although I kept exclaiming: 'Oh, charming! delightful! exquisite!' “He suddenly said: 'Oh, I have a beautiful specimen in the next room.
I'll go and get it.' “He ran to the door quickly, and both sides opened as though for a theatrical effect.
“In a large room, all in disorder, in the midst of skirts, collars, waists lying around on the floor, stood a tall, dried-up creature.
The lower part of her body was covered with an old, worn-out silk petticoat, which was hanging limply on her shapeless form, and she was standing in front of a mirror brushing some short, sparse blond hairs.
Her arms formed two acute angles, and as she turned around in astonishment I saw under a common cotton chemise a regular cemetery of ribs, which were hidden from the public gaze by well-arranged pads.
“The husband uttered a natural exclamation and came back, closing the doors, and said: 'Gracious! how stupid I am!
Oh, how thoughtless!
My wife will never forgive me for that!' “I already felt like thanking him.
I left three days later, after cordially shaking hands with the two men and kissing the lady's fingers.
She bade me a cold good-by.” Karl Massouligny was silent.
Some one asked: “But what was the friend?” “I don't know—however—however he looked greatly distressed to see me leaving so soon.” A SALE The defendants, Cesaire-Isidore Brument and Prosper-Napoleon Cornu, appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Seine-Inferieure, on a charge of attempted murder, by drowning, of Mme.
Brument, lawful wife of the first of the aforenamed.
The two prisoners sat side by side on the traditional bench.
They were two peasants; the first was small and stout, with short arms, short legs, and a round head with a red pimply face, planted directly on his trunk, which was also round and short, and with apparently no neck.
He was a raiser of pigs and lived at Cacheville-la-Goupil, in the district of Criquetot.
Cornu (Prosper-Napoleon) was thin, of medium height, with enormously long arms.
His head was on crooked, his jaw awry, and he squinted.
A blue blouse, as long as a shirt, hung down to his knees, and his yellow hair, which was scanty and plastered down on his head, gave his face a worn-out, dirty look, a dilapidated look that was frightful.
He had been nicknamed “the cure” because he could imitate to perfection the chanting in church, and even the sound of the serpent.
This talent attracted to his cafe—for he was a saloon keeper at Criquetot—a great many customers who preferred the “mass at Cornu” to the mass in church.
She sat there motionless, her hands crossed on her knees, gazing fixedly before her with a stupid expression.
The judge continued his interrogation.
She said in a drawling tone: “I was shelling beans.
They do not seem natural, they seem up to some mischief.' They watched me sideways, like this, especially Cornu, because he squints.
I do not like to see them together, for they are two good-for-nothings when they are in company.
“All this time Brument and Cornu were drinking a glass, and then another glass, and then another.
They were finishing their drinks when I said to them: 'You are full, fuller than this barrel.' And Brument answered me. 'Do not worry, go on with your work, your turn will come, each one has his share.' I paid no attention to what he said as he was full.
And Brument said: 'Do you wish to earn a hundred sous more?' 'Yes,' I said, for I am not accustomed to presents like that.
“'How many shall I take off?' “'If it worries you at all, keep on your chemise, that won't bother us.' “A hundred sous is a hundred sous, and I have to undress myself; but I did not fancy undressing before those two good-for-nothings.
Brument said, 'Keep on your stockings, also; we are good fellows.' “And Cornu said, too, 'We are good fellows.' “So there I was, almost like mother Eve.
And they got up from their chairs, but could not stand straight, they were so full, saving your presence, M'sieu le president.
“I said to myself: 'What are they up to?' “And Brument said: 'Are you ready?' “And Cornu said: 'I'm ready!' “And then they took me, Brument by the head, and Cornu by the feet, as one might take, for instance, a sheet that has been washed.
“And Brument said: 'Keep still, wretched creature!' “And they lifted me up in the air and put me into the barrel, which was full of water, so that I had a check of the circulation, a chill to my very insides.
“And Brument said: 'Is that all?' “Cornu said: 'That is all.' “Brument said: 'The head is not in, that will make a difference in the measure.' “Cornu said: 'Put in her head.' “And then Brument pushed down my head as if to drown me, so that the water ran into my nose, so that I could already see Paradise.
And he pushed it down, and I disappeared.
“And then he must have been frightened.
He lent me a skirt belonging to his servant, for I was almost in a state of nature, and he went to fetch Maitre Chicot, the country watchman who went to Criquetot to fetch the police who came to my house with me.
“Then we found Brument and Cornu fighting each other like two rams.
The audience in the court room laughed.
The jurors looked at one another in astonishment.
The judge said: “Defendant Cornu, you seem to have been the instigator of this infamous plot.
“Judge,” he replied, “I was full.” The Judge answered gravely: “I know it.
Well, Brument came to my place about nine o'clock, and ordered two drinks, and said: 'There's one for you, Cornu.' I sat down opposite him and drank, and out of politeness, I offered him a glass.
Then he returned the compliment and so did I, and so it went on from glass to glass until noon, when we were full.
He said: 'I must have a thousand francs by Thursday.' That cooled me off a little, you understand.
You understand, that stirred me up.
I asked him: 'How much would you sell her for?' “He reflected, or pretended to reflect.
When one is full one is not very clear-headed, and he replied: 'I will sell her by the cubic metre.' “That did not surprise me, for I was as drunk as he was, and I knew what a cubic metre is in my business.
It is a thousand litres, that suited me.
“But the price remained to be settled.
I said: 'How much do you want a cubic metre?' “He answered: 'Two thousand francs.' “I gave a bound like a rabbit, and then I reflected that a woman ought not to measure more than three hundred litres.
So I said: 'That's too dear.' “He answered: 'I cannot do it for less.
I should lose by it.' “You understand, one is not a dealer in hogs for nothing.
One understands one's business.
So I said to him: 'If she were new, I would not say anything, but she has been married to you for some time, so she is not as fresh as she was.
Will that suit you?' “He answered: 'That will do.
“But a fear came to me: 'How can you measure her unless you put her into the liquid?' “Then he explained his idea, not without difficulty for he was full.
All the water that comes out we will measure, that is the way to fix it.' “I said: 'I see, I understand.
But this water that overflows will run away; how are you going to gather it up?' “Then he began stuffing me and explained to me that all we should have to do would be to refill the barrel with the water his wife had displaced as soon as she should have left.
I supposed about ten pails; that would be a cubic metre.
“To be brief, we reached his house and I took a look at its mistress.
A beautiful woman she certainly was not.
I said to myself: 'I am disappointed, but never mind, she will be of value; handsome or ugly, it is all the same, is it not, monsieur le president?' And then I saw that she was as thin as a rail.
I said to myself: 'She will not measure four hundred litres.' I understand the matter, it being in liquids.
“She told you about the proceeding.
I even let her keep on her chemise and stockings, to my own disadvantage.
I said: 'Look out, Brument! she is escaping.' “He replied: 'Do not be afraid.
She will have to come back to sleep, I will measure the deficit.' “We measured.
Ha, Ha, Ha!” The witness began to laugh so persistently that a gendarme was obliged to punch him in the back.
Having quieted down, he resumed: “In short, Brument exclaimed: 'Nothing doing, that is not enough.' I bawled and bawled, and bawled again, he punched me, I hit back.
That would have kept on till the Day of judgment, seeing we were both drunk.
“Then came the gendarmes!
Brument confirmed in every particular the statements of his accomplice.
The jury, in consternation, retired to deliberate.
At the end of an hour they returned a verdict of acquittal for the defendants, with some severe strictures on the dignity of marriage, and establishing the precise limitations of business transactions.
Brument went home to the domestic roof accompanied by his wife.
Cornu went back to his business.
THE IMPOLITE SEX Madame de X. to Madame de L.
I shall be at Les Fresnes on the 2d of September, the day before the hunting season opens, as I do not want to miss it, so that I may tease these gentlemen.
You are too good, aunt, and you will allow them, as you usually do when there are no strange guests, to come to table, under pretext of fatigue, without dressing or shaving for the occasion.
They are delighted, of course, when I am not present.
But I shall be there and will hold a review, like a general, at dinner time; and, if I find a single one of them at all careless in dress, no matter how little, I mean to send them down to the kitchen with the servants.
The men of to-day have so little consideration for others and so little good manners that one must be always severe with them.
We live indeed in an age of vulgarity.
When they quarrel, they insult each other in terms worthy of longshoremen, and, in our presence, they do not conduct themselves even as well as our servants.
They are to be found there in battalions, and you can judge them in the lump.
Just imagine, in a train, a gentleman who looked well, as I thought at first sight, thanks to his tailor, carefully took off his boots in order to put on a pair of old shoes!
Another, an old man who was probably some wealthy upstart (these are the most ill-bred), while sitting opposite to me, had the delicacy to place his two feet on the seat quite close to me.
This is a positive fact.
At the watering-places the vulgarity is unrestrained.
I must here make one admission—that my indignation is perhaps due to the fact that I am not accustomed to associate, as a rule, with the sort of people one comes across here, for I should be less shocked by their manners if I had the opportunity of observing them oftener.
In the office of the hotel I was nearly thrown down by a young man who snatched the key over my head.
Another knocked against me so violently without begging my pardon or lifting his hat, coming away from a ball at the Casino, that it gave me a pain in the chest.
Watch them addressing ladies on the terrace; they scarcely ever bow.
They merely raise their hands to their headgear.
But what exasperates and disgusts me particularly is the liberty they take of talking in public, without any kind of precaution, about the most revolting adventures.
When two men are together, they relate to each other, in the broadest language and with the most abominable comments really horrible stories, without caring in the slightest degree whether a woman's ear is within reach of their voices.
Yesterday, on the beach, I was forced to leave the place where I was sitting in order not to be any longer the involuntary confidante of an obscene anecdote, told in such immodest language that I felt just as humiliated as indignant at having heard it.
Would not the most elementary good-breeding teach them to speak in a lower tone about such matters when we are near at hand.
Etretat is, moreover, the country of gossip and scandal.
From five to seven o'clock you can see people wandering about in quest of scandal, which they retail from group to group.
As you remarked to me, my dear aunt, tittle-tattle is the mark of petty individuals and petty minds.
It is also the consolation of women who are no longer loved or sought after.
It is enough for me to observe the women who are fondest of gossiping to be persuaded that you are quite right.
The other day I was present at a musical evening at the Casino, given by a remarkable artist, Madame Masson, who sings in a truly delightful manner.
I took the opportunity of applauding the admirable Coquelin, as well as two charming vaudeville performers, M——and Meillet.
I met, on this occasion, all the bathers who were at the beach.
It is no great distinction this year.
He is not satisfied apparently with imprisoning the subjects of his pictures, he insists on imprisoning himself.
Then I found myself seated on the shingle close to a man still young, of gentle and refined appearance, who was reading poetry.
But he read it with such concentration, with such passion, I may say, that he did not even raise his eyes towards me.
I was somewhat astonished and asked the proprietor of the baths, without appearing to be much concerned, the name of this gentleman.
This person, I thought, must be a simpleton.
Well, aunt, I am now infatuated about this stranger.
Just fancy, his name is Sully Prudhomme!
His face has an expression of calmness and of penetration.
Somebody came to look for him, and I heard his voice, which is sweet and almost timid.
He would certainly not tell obscene stories aloud in public or knock up against ladies without apologizing.
He is assuredly a man of refinement, but his refinement is of an almost morbid, sensitive character, I will try this winter to get an introduction to him.
S.—I should add, however, by way of justification of French politeness, that our fellow-countrymen are, when travelling, models of good manners in comparison with the abominable English, who seem to have been brought up in a stable, so careful are they not to discommode themselves in any way, while they always discommode their neighbors.
LES FRESNES, Saturday.
My Dear Child: Many of the things you have said to me are very sensible, but that does not prevent you from being wrong.
Like you, I used formerly to feel very indignant at the impoliteness of men, who, as I supposed, constantly treated me with neglect; but, as I grew older and reflected on everything, putting aside coquetry, and observing things without taking any part in them myself, I perceived this much—that if men are not always polite, women are always indescribably rude.
We imagine that we should be permitted to do anything, my darling, and at the same time we consider that we have a right to the utmost respect, and in the most flagrant manner we commit actions devoid of that elementary good-breeding of which you speak so feelingly.
I find, on the contrary, that men consider us much more than we consider them.
In a state of society, where women are all true gentlewomen, all men would become gentlemen.
What an attitude each assumes towards the other!
What disparaging looks!
What contempt they throw into each glance!
How they toss their heads while they inspect each other to find something to condemn!
And, if the footpath is narrow, do you think one woman would make room for another, or would beg pardon as she sweeps by?
When two men jostle each other by accident in some narrow lane, each of them bows and at the same time gets out of the other's way, while we women press against each other stomach to stomach, face to face, insolently staring each other out of countenance.
Look at two women who are acquaintances meeting on a staircase outside the door of a friend's drawing-room, one of them just leaving, the other about to go in.
If anyone happens to be coming up behind them, man or woman, do you imagine that they will put themselves half an inch out of their way?
And, behind me, two gentlemen were also waiting without showing any readiness, as I did, to lose their temper.
The reason was that they had long grown accustomed to our unconscionable insolence.
Every table was occupied.
For more than a quarter of an hour she sat there, immovable, putting on her gloves, and calmly staring at those who were waiting like myself.
Now, two young men who were just finishing their dinner, having seen me in their turn, hastily summoned the waiter, paid what they owed, and at once offered me their seats, even insisting on standing while waiting for their change.
It is we, you see, who should be taught politeness, and the task would be such a difficult one that Hercules himself would not be equal to it.
You speak to me about Etretat and about the people who indulged in “tittle-tattle” along the beach of that delightful watering-place.
It is a spot now lost to me, a thing of the past, but I found much amusement therein days gone by.
There were only a few of us, people in good society, really good society, and a few artists, and we all fraternized.
We paid little attention to gossip in those days.
As we had no monotonous Casino, where people only gather for show, where they whisper, where they dance stupidly, where they succeed in thoroughly boring one another, we sought some other way of passing our evenings pleasantly.
Now, just guess what came into the head of one of our husbands?
Nothing less than to go and dance each night in one of the farm-houses in the neighborhood.
We started out in a group with a street-organ, generally played by Le Poittevin, the painter, with a cotton nightcap on his head.
Two men carried lanterns.
We followed in procession, laughing and chattering like a pack of fools.
The cocks waking up began to crow in the darkness of the out-houses; the horses began prancing on the straw of their stables.
The cool air of the country caressed our cheeks with the smell of grass and of new-mown hay.
Why spoil the pleasure of our friends by inflicting on them fashionable toilettes on this day of vigorous exercise in the country?
Your old aunt, GENEVIEVE DE L.
A WEDDING GIFT For a long time Jacques Bourdillere had sworn that he would never marry, but he suddenly changed his mind.
It happened suddenly, one summer, at the seashore.
One morning as he lay stretched out on the sand, watching the women coming out of the water, a little foot had struck him by its neatness and daintiness.
He raised his eyes and was delighted with the whole person, although in fact he could see nothing but the ankles and the head emerging from a flannel bathrobe carefully held closed.
He was supposed to be sensual and a fast liver.
It was therefore by the mere grace of the form that he was at first captured.
He was presented to the family and pleased them.
He immediately fell madly in love.
When he saw Berthe Lannis in the distance, on the long yellow stretch of sand, he would tingle to the roots of his hair.
When he was near her he would become silent, unable to speak or even to think, with a kind of throbbing at his heart, and a buzzing in his ears, and a bewilderment in his mind.
He did not know or understand, but he had fully decided to have this child for his wife.
Her parents hesitated for a long time, restrained by the young man's bad reputation.
It was said that he had an old sweetheart, one of these binding attachments which one always believes to be broken off and yet which always hold.
Jacques paid, but he did not even wish to hear of her, pretending even to ignore her name.
Every week he would recognize the clumsy writing of the abandoned woman, and every week a greater anger surged within him against her, and he would quickly tear the envelope and the paper, without opening it, without reading one single line, knowing in advance the reproaches and complaints which it contained.
As no one had much faith in his constancy, the test was prolonged through the winter, and Berthe's hand was not granted him until the spring.
The wedding took place in Paris at the beginning of May.
Night had come, and the dance was going on in the large parlor. 'The two had retired into a little Japanese boudoir hung with bright silks and dimly lighted by the soft rays of a large colored lantern hanging from the ceiling like a gigantic egg.
They were silent, holding each other's hands and from time to time squeezing them with all their might.
She sat there with a dreamy look, feeling a little lost at this great change in her life, but smiling, moved, ready to cry, often also almost ready to faint from joy, believing the whole world to be changed by what had just happened to her, uneasy, she knew not why, and feeling her whole body and soul filled with an indefinable and delicious lassitude.
He was looking at her persistently with a fixed smile.
He wished to speak, but found nothing to say, and so sat there, expressing all his ardor by pressures of the hand.
From time to time he would murmur: “Berthe!” And each time she would raise her eyes to him with a look of tenderness; they would look at each other for a second and then her look, pierced and fascinated by his, would fall.
They found no thoughts to exchange.
They had been left alone, but occasionally some of the dancers would cast a rapid glance at them, as though they were the discreet and trusty witnesses of a mystery.
A door opened and a servant entered, holding on a tray a letter which a messenger had just brought.
Jacques, trembling, took this paper, overwhelmed by a vague and sudden fear, the mysterious terror of swift misfortune.
He looked for a longtime at the envelope, the writing on which he did not know, not daring to open it, not wishing to read it, with a wild desire to put it in his pocket and say to himself: “I'll leave that till to-morrow, when I'm far away!” But on one corner two big words, underlined, “Very urgent,” filled him with terror.
Saying, “Please excuse me, my dear,” he tore open the envelope.
He read the paper, grew frightfully pale, looked over it again, and, slowly, he seemed to spell it out word for word.
When he raised his head his whole expression showed how upset he was.
He stammered: “My dear, it's—it's from my best friend, who has had a very great misfortune.
He has need of me immediately—for a matter of life or death.
I'll be right back.” Trembling and dazed, she stammered: “Go, my dear!” not having been his wife long enough to dare to question him, to demand to know.
She remained alone, listening to the dancing in the neighboring parlor.
He had seized the first hat and coat he came to and rushed downstairs three steps at a time.
As he was emerging into the street he stopped under the gas-jet of the vestibule and reread the letter.
This is what it said: SIR: A girl by the name of Ravet, an old sweetheart of yours, it seems, has just given birth to a child that she says is yours.
He did not recognize her at first.
And everywhere on the floor were pails full of ice and rags covered with blood.
Water flooded the carpet; two candles were burning on a bureau; behind the bed, in a little wicker crib, the child was crying, and each time it would moan the mother, in torture, would try to move, shivering under her ice bandages.
She was mortally wounded, killed by this birth.
Her life was flowing from her, and, notwithstanding the ice and the care, the merciless hemorrhage continued, hastening her last hour.
She recognized Jacques and wished to raise her arms.
He dropped to his knees beside the bed, seized one of her hands and kissed it frantically.
One of the nurses was lighting them with a candle, and the doctor was watching them from the back of the room.
Then she said in a voice which sounded as though it came from a distance: “I am going to die, dear.
Don't leave me in my last moments!” He kissed her face and her hair, and, weeping, he murmured: “Do not be uneasy; I will stay.” It was several minutes before she could speak again, she was so weak.
She continued: “The little one is yours.
Maddened by remorse and sorrow, he stammered: “I swear to you that I will bring him up and love him.
Powerless to lift her head, she held out her white lips in an appeal for a kiss.
He approached his lips to respond to this piteous entreaty.
As soon as she felt a little calmer, she murmured: “Bring him here and let me see if you love him.” He went and got the child.
She murmured: “Don't move any more!” And he was quiet.
And he stayed there, holding in his burning hand this other hand shaking in the chill of death, just as, a while ago, he had been holding a hand trembling with love.
From time to time he would cast a quick glance at the clock, which marked midnight, then one o'clock, then two.
The physician had returned.
The two nurses, after noiselessly moving about the room for a while, were now sleeping on chairs.
The child was asleep, and the mother, with eyes shut, appeared also to be resting.
Suddenly, just as pale daylight was creeping in behind the curtains, she stretched out her arms with such a quick and violent motion that she almost threw her baby on the floor.
A kind of rattle was heard in her throat, then she lay on her back motionless, dead.
The nurses sprang forward and declared: “All is over!” He looked once more at this woman whom he had so loved, then at the clock, which pointed to four, and he ran away, forgetting his overcoat, in the evening dress, with the child in his arms.
After he had left her alone the young wife had waited, calmly enough at first, in the little Japanese boudoir.
Then, as she did not see him return, she went back to the parlor with an indifferent and calm appearance, but terribly anxious.
When her mother saw her alone she asked: “Where is your husband?” She answered: “In his room; he is coming right back.” After an hour, when everybody had questioned her, she told about the letter, Jacques' upset appearance and her fears of an accident.
The guests left; only the nearest relatives remained.
At midnight the bride was put to bed, sobbing bitterly.
Her mother and two aunts, sitting around the bed, listened to her crying, silent and in despair.
The father had gone to the commissary of police to see if he could obtain some news.
Then suddenly a little cry like the mewing of a cat was heard throughout the silent house.
All the women started forward and Berthe sprang ahead of them all, pushing her way past her aunts, wrapped in a bathrobe.
The four women looked at him, astonished; but Berthe, who had suddenly become courageous, rushed forward with anguish in her heart, exclaiming: “What is it?
What's the matter?” He looked about him wildly and answered shortly: “I—I have a child and the mother has just died.” And with his clumsy hands he held out the screaming infant.
Then she raised her tear-filled eyes to him, asking: “Did you say that the mother was dead?” He answered: “Yes—just now—in my arms.
The physician sent for me.” Then Berthe murmured: “Well, we will bring up the little one.” THE RELIC “To the Abbe Louis d'Ennemare, at Soissons.
“My marriage with your cousin is broken off in the most stupid way, all on account of an idiotic trick which I almost involuntarily played my intended.
In my perplexity I turn to you, my old school chum, for you may be able to help me out of the difficulty.
If you can, I shall be grateful to you until I die.
“You know Gilberte, or, rather, you think you know her, but do we ever understand women?
All their opinions, their ideas, their creeds, are a surprise to us.
They are all full of twists and turns, cf the unforeseen, of unintelligible arguments, of defective logic and of obstinate ideas, which seem final, but which they alter because a little bird came and perched on the window ledge.
“I need not tell you that your cousin is very religious, as she was brought up by the White (or was it the Black?) Ladies at Nancy.
You know that better than I do, but what you perhaps do not know is, that she is just as excitable about other matters as she is about religion.
Her head flies away, just as a leaf is whirled away by the wind; and she is a true woman, or, rather, girl, for she is moved or made angry in a moment, starting off at a gallop in affection, just as she does in hatred, and returning in the same manner; and she is pretty—as you know, and more charming than I can say—as you will never know.
“Well, we became engaged, and I adored her, as I adore her still, and she appeared to love me.
“One evening, I received a telegram summoning me to Cologne for a consultation, which might be followed by a serious and difficult operation, and as I had to start the next morning, I went to wish Gilberte good-by, and tell her why I could not dine with them on Wednesday, but would do so on Friday, the day of my return.
You must bring me back something; a mere trifle, just a souvenir, but a souvenir that you have chosen for me.
And then I shall see whether you have any imagination.' “She thought for a few moments, and then added: “'I forbid you to spend more than twenty francs on it.
I want it for the intention, and for a remembrance of your penetration, and not for its intrinsic value: “And then, after another moment's silence, she said, in a low voice, and with downcast eyes: “'If it costs you nothing in money, but is something very ingenious and pretty, I will—I will kiss you.' “The next day I was in Cologne.
It was a case of a terrible accident, which had plunged a whole family into despair, and a difficult amputation was necessary.
They lodged me in the house; I might say, they almost locked me up, and I saw nobody but people in tears, who almost deafened me with their lamentations; I operated on a man who appeared to be in a moribund state, and who nearly died under my hands, and with whom I remained two nights; and then, when I saw that there was a chance of his recovery, I drove to the station.
I had, however, made a mistake in the trains, and I had an hour to wait, and so I wandered about the streets, still thinking of my poor patient, when a man accosted me.
I do not know German, and he was totally ignorant of French, but at last I made out that he was offering me some relics.
I thought of Gilberte, for I knew her fanatical devotion, and here was my present ready to hand, so I followed the man into a shop where religious objects were for sale, and I bought a small piece of a bone of one of the Eleven Thousand Virgins.
“The pretended relic was inclosed in a charming old silver box, and that determined my choice, and, putting my purchase into my pocket, I went to the railway station, and so on to Paris.
“As soon as I got home, I wished to examine my purchase again, and on taking hold of it, I found that the box was open, and the relic missing!
I searched in vain in my pocket, and turned it inside out; the small bit of bone, which was no bigger than half a pin, had disappeared.
“You know, my dear little Abbe, that my faith is not very fervent, but, as my friend, you are magnanimous enough to put up with my lukewarmness, and to leave me alone, and to wait for the future, so you say.
But I absolutely disbelieve in the relics of secondhand dealers in piety, and you share my doubts in that respect.
Therefore, the loss of that bit of sheep's carcass did not grieve me, and I easily procured a similar fragment, which I carefully fastened inside my jewel-box, and then I went to see my intended.
“As soon as she saw me, she ran up to me, smiling and eager, and, said to me: “'What have you brought me?' “I pretended to have forgotten, but she did not believe me, and I made her beg, and even beseech me.
But when I saw that she was devoured by curiosity, I gave her the sacred silver box.
She appeared overjoyed.
A relic!' “And she kissed the box passionately, so that I was ashamed of my deception.
She was not quite satisfied, however, and her uneasiness soon turned to terrible fear, and looking straight into my eyes, she said: “'Are you sure-that it is genuine?' “'Absolutely certain.' “'How can you be so certain?' “I was trapped; for to say that I had bought it of a man in the streets would be my destruction.
A wild idea struck me, and I said, in a low, mysterious voice: “'I stole it for you.' “She looked at me with astonishment and delight in her large eyes.
Where?' “'In the cathedral; in the very shrine of the Eleven Thousand Virgins.' “Her heart beat with pleasure, and she murmured: “'Oh!
Then I went to a goldsmith's and bought a casket worthy of the relic; and I was not sorry to let her know that the silver box cost me five hundred francs.
“But she did not think of that; she listened to me, trembling, in an ecstasy, and whispering: 'How I love you!' she threw herself into my arms.
“Just note this: I had committed sacrilege for her sake.
I had committed a theft; I had violated a church; I had violated a shrine; violated and stolen holy relics, and for that she adored me, thought me perfect, tender, divine.
“For two months I was the most admirable of lovers.
In her room, she had made a kind of magnificent chapel in which to keep this bit of mutton chop, which, as she thought, had made me commit that divine love-crime, and she worked up her religious enthusiasm in front of it every morning and evening.
I had asked her to keep the matter secret, for fear, as I said, that I might be arrested, condemned, and given over to Germany, and she kept her promise.
“Well, at the beginning of the summer, she was seized with an irresistible desire to see the scene of my exploit, and she teased her father so persistently (without telling him her secret reason), that he took her to Cologne, but without telling me of their trip, according to his daughter's wish.
“I need not tell you that I had not seen the interior of the cathedral.
I do not know where the tomb (if there be a tomb) of the Eleven Thousand Virgins is; and then, it appears, it is unapproachable, alas!
“A week afterward, I received ten lines, breaking off our engagement, and then an explanatory letter from her father, whom she had, somewhat late, taken into her confidence.
“At the sight of the shrine, she had suddenly seen through my trickery and my lie, and at the same time discovered my real innocence of any crime.
Having asked the keeper of the relics whether any robbery had been committed, the man began to laugh, and pointed out to them how impossible such a crime was.
But, from the moment that I had not plunged my profane hand into venerable relics, I was no longer worthy of my fair-haired, sensitive betrothed.
“I was forbidden the house; I begged and prayed in vain; nothing could move the fair devotee, and I became ill from grief.
Well, last week, her cousin, Madame d'Arville, who is your cousin also, sent me word that she should like to see me, and when I called, she told me on what conditions I might obtain my pardon, and here they are.
I must bring her a relic, a real, authentic relic of some virgin and martyr, certified to be such by our Holy Father, the Pope, and I am going mad from embarrassment and anxiety.
“I will go to Rome, if needful, but I cannot call on the Pope unexpectedly, to tell him my stupid misadventure; and, besides, I doubt whether they allow private individuals to have relics.
Could not you give me an introduction to some cardinal, or even to some French prelate who possesses some remains of a female saint?
Or, perhaps, you may have the precious object she wants in your collection?
“Help me out of my difficulty, my dear Abbe, and I promise you that I will be converted ten years sooner than I otherwise should be!
“Madame d'Arville, who takes the matter seriously, said to me the other day: “'Poor Gilberte will never marry.' “My dear old schoolmate, will you allow your cousin to die the victim of a stupid piece of subterfuge on my part?
Pray prevent her from being virgin eleven thousand and one.
“Pardon me, I am unworthy, but I embrace you, and love you with all my heart.
“Your old friend, “HENRI FONTAL.” ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 4.
THE MORIBUND The warm autumn sun was beating down on the farmyard.
Under the grass, which had been cropped close by the cows, the earth soaked by recent rains, was soft and sank in under the feet with a soggy noise, and the apple trees, loaded with apples, were dropping their pale green fruit in the dark green grass.
The fowls made a colored patch on the dung- heap before the stable, scratching, moving about and cackling, while two roosters crowed continually, digging worms for their hens, whom they were calling with a loud clucking.
He might have been forty years old, but he looked at least sixty, wrinkled, bent, walking slowly, impeded by the weight of heavy wooden shoes full of straw.
When he got near the farm a yellow cur, tied at the foot of an enormous pear tree, beside a barrel which served as his kennel, began at first to wag his tail and then to bark for joy.
Her large, flat, bony body was outlined under a long woollen jacket drawn in at the waist.
A gray skirt, too short, fell to the middle of her legs, which were encased in blue stockings.
The white cap, turned yellow, covered a few hairs which were plastered to the scalp, and her brown, thin, ugly, toothless face had that wild, animal expression which is often to be found on the faces of the peasants.
The man asked: “How is he gettin' along?” The woman answered: “The priest said it's the end—that he will never live through the night.” Both of them went into the house.
The big beams, turned brown with age and smoke, crossed the room from one side to the other, supporting the thin floor of the garret, where an army of rats ran about day and night.
The moist, lumpy earthen floor looked greasy, and, at the back of the room, the bed made an indistinct white spot.
A harsh, regular noise, a difficult, hoarse, wheezing breathing, like the gurgling of water from a broken pump, came from the darkened couch where an old man, the father of the peasant woman, was dying.
The man and the woman approached the dying man and looked at him with calm, resigned eyes.
The son-in-law said: “I guess it's all up with him this time; he will not last the night.” The woman answered: “He's been gurglin' like that ever since midday.” They were silent.
Through his open mouth came his harsh, rattling breath, and the gray linen sheet rose and fell with each respiration.
It's a nuisance, just the same, because the weather is good and we've got a lot of work to do.” His wife seemed annoyed at this idea.
She reflected a few moments and then said: “He won't be buried till Saturday, and that will give you all day tomorrow.” The peasant thought the matter over and answered: “Yes, but to-morrow I'll have to invite the people to the funeral.
That means five or six hours to go round to Tourville and Manetot, and to see everybody.” The woman, after meditating two or three minutes, declared: “It isn't three o'clock yet.
You could begin this evening and go all round the country to Tourville.
You can just as well say that he's dead, seem' as he's as good as that now.” The man stood perplexed for a while, weighing the pros and cons of the idea.
At last he declared: “Well, I'll go!” He was leaving the room, but came back after a minute's hesitation: “As you haven't got anythin' to do you might shake down some apples to bake and make four dozen dumplings for those who come to the funeral, for one must have something to cheer them.
It's dry.” He left the room, went back into the kitchen, opened the cupboard, took out a six-pound loaf of bread, cut off a slice, and carefully gathered the crumbs in the palm of his hand and threw them into his mouth, so as not to lose anything.
Then, with the end of his knife, he scraped out a little salt butter from the bottom of an earthen jar, spread it on his bread and began to eat slowly, as he did everything.
He recrossed the farmyard, quieted the dog, which had started barking again, went out on the road bordering on his ditch, and disappeared in the direction of Tourville.
She uncovered the meal-bin and made the dough for the dumplings.
She kneaded it a long time, turning it over and over again, punching, pressing, crushing it.
She chose the fruit with care, only taking the ripe ones, and gathering them in her apron.
It was a neighbor, Osime Favet, the mayor, on his way to fertilize his fields, seated on the manure-wagon, with his feet hanging over the side.
She turned round and answered: “What can I do for you, Maitre Osime?” “And how is the father?” She cried: “He is as good as dead.
The funeral is Saturday at seven, because there's lots of work to be done.” The neighbor answered: “So!
Take care of yourself.” To his kind remarks she answered:” “Thanks; the same to you.” And she continued picking apples.
When she went back to the house, she went over to look at her father, expecting to find him dead.
But as soon as she reached the door she heard his monotonous, noisy rattle, and, thinking it a waste of time to go over to him, she began to prepare her dumplings.
When she had made forty-eight dumplings, arranged in dozens, one in front of the other, she began to think of preparing supper, and she hung her kettle over the fire to cook potatoes, for she judged it useless to heat the oven that day, as she had all the next day in which to finish the preparations.
Her husband returned at about five.
As soon as he had crossed the threshold he asked: “Is it over?” She answered: “Not yet; he's still gurglin'.” They went to look at him.
The old man was in exactly the same condition.
It returned every second, the tone varying a little, according as the air entered or left his chest.
His son-in-law looked at him and then said: “He'll pass away without our noticin' it, just like a candle.” They returned to the kitchen and started to eat without saying a word.
When they had swallowed their soup, they ate another piece of bread and butter.
Then, as soon as the dishes were washed, they returned to the dying man.
The woman, carrying a little lamp with a smoky wick, held it in front of her father's face.
If he had not been breathing, one would certainly have thought him dead.
Silently they retired, put out the light, closed their eyes, and soon two unequal snores, one deep and the other shriller, accompanied the uninterrupted rattle of the dying man.
He shook his wife, worried by the tenacity of the old man.
She answered: “You needn't be afraid; he can't live through the day.
And the mayor won't stop our burying him to-morrow, because he allowed it for Maitre Renard's father, who died just during the planting season.” He was convinced by this argument, and left for the fields.
His wife baked the dumplings and then attended to her housework.
At six o'clock, when the work was over, the father was still breathing.
At last his son-in-law was frightened.
He promised that he would close his eyes and authorize the funeral for the following day.
They also went to the health officer, who likewise promised, in order to oblige Maitre Chicot, to antedate the death certificate.
The man and the woman returned, feeling more at ease.
They went to bed and to sleep, just as they did the preceding day, their sonorous breathing blending with the feeble breathing of the old man.
Then they began to be frightened.
They stood by their father, watching him with distrust, as though he had wished to play them a mean trick, to deceive them, to annoy them on purpose, and they were vexed at him for the time which he was making them lose.
She answered: “It certainly is annoying!” The guests who were expected could not be notified.
Then men, ill at ease in their homespun coats, were coming forward more slowly, in couples, talking business.
Maitre Chicot and his wife, bewildered, received them sorrowfully, and suddenly both of them together began to cry as they approached the first group.
They explained the matter, related their difficulty, offered chairs, bustled about, tried to make excuses, attempting to prove that everybody would have done as they did, talking continually and giving nobody a chance to answer.
They were going from one person to another: “I never would have thought it; it's incredible how he can last this long!” The guests, taken aback, a little disappointed, as though they had missed an expected entertainment, did not know what to do, some remaining seated others standing.
Maitre Chicot held them back: “You must take something, anyhow!
We made some dumplings; might as well make use of 'em.” The faces brightened at this idea.
The yard was filling little by little; the early arrivals were telling the news to those who had arrived later.
Everybody was whispering.
The idea of the dumplings seemed to cheer everyone up.
They crossed themselves beside the bed, muttered a prayer and went out again.
The men, less anxious for this spectacle, cast a look through the window, which had been opened.
Madame Chicot explained her distress: “That's how he's been for two days, neither better nor worse.
Doesn't he sound like a pump that has gone dry?” When everybody had had a look at the dying man, they thought of the refreshments; but as there were too many people for the kitchen to hold, the table was moved out in front of the door.
The four dozen golden dumplings, tempting and appetizing, arranged in two big dishes, attracted the eyes of all.
But four remained over.
He loved them so much when he was alive.” A big, jovial peasant declared: “He won't eat any more now.
It was their turn now to eat dumplings.
Madame Chicot, distressed at the expense, kept running down to the cellar continually for cider.
The pitchers were emptied in quick succession.
The company was laughing and talking loud now.
They were beginning to shout as they do at feasts.
Suddenly an old peasant woman who had stayed beside the dying man, held there by a morbid fear of what would soon happen to herself, appeared at the window and cried in a shrill voice: “He's dead! he's dead!” Everybody was silent.
They hadn't finished eating the dumplings.
Certainly the rascal had not chosen a propitious moment.
It was over; they were relieved.
They kept repeating: “I knew it couldn't 'last.
They would bury him on Monday, that was all, and they would eat some more dumplings for the occasion.
The guests went away, talking the matter over, pleased at having had the chance to see him and of getting something to eat.
And when the husband and wife were alone, face to face, she said, her face distorted with grief: “We'll have to bake four dozen more dumplings!
Why couldn't he have made up his mind last night?” The husband, more resigned, answered: “Well, we'll not have to do this every day.” THE GAMEKEEPER It was after dinner, and we were talking about adventures and accidents which happened while out shooting.
Boniface, a great sportsman and a connoisseur of wine, a man of wonderful physique, witty and gay, and endowed with an ironical and resigned philosophy, which manifested itself in caustic humor, and never in melancholy, suddenly exclaimed: “I know a story, or rather a tragedy, which is somewhat peculiar.
It is not at all like those which one hears of usually, and I have never told it, thinking that it would interest no one.
“It is not at all sympathetic.
I mean by that, that it does not arouse the kind of interest which pleases or which moves one agreeably.
“Here is the story: “I was then about thirty-five years of age, and a most enthusiastic sportsman.
“In those days I owned a lonely bit of property in the neighborhood of Jumieges, surrounded by forests and abounding in hares and rabbits.
I was accustomed to spending four or five days alone there each year, there not being room enough to allow of my bringing a friend with me.
“I had placed there as gamekeeper, an old retired gendarme, a good man, hot-tempered, a severe disciplinarian, a terror to poachers and fearing nothing.
He lived all alone, far from the village, in a little house, or rather hut, consisting of two rooms downstairs, with kitchen and store- room, and two upstairs.
One of them, a kind of box just large enough to accommodate a bed, a cupboard and a chair, was reserved for my use.
“Old man Cavalier lived in the other one.
He had taken his nephew with him, a young scamp about fourteen years old, who used to go to the village and run errands for the old man.
“This young scapegrace was long and lanky, with yellow hair, so light that it resembled the fluff of a plucked chicken, so thin that he seemed bald.
Besides this, he had enormous feet and the hands of a giant.
He struck me as being in the same relation to the human race as ill-smelling beasts are to the animal race.
He reminded me of a polecat.
“But during my short sojourns at the Pavilion—so I called the hut —Marius would give up his nook to an old woman from Ecorcheville, called Celeste, who used to come and cook for me, as old man Cavalier's stews were not sufficient for my healthy appetite.
“You now know the characters and the locality.
Here is the story: “It was on the fifteenth of October, 1854—I shall remember that date as long as I live.
“I left Rouen on horseback, followed by my dog Bock, a big Dalmatian hound from Poitou, full-chested and with a heavy jaw, which could retrieve among the bushes like a Pont-Andemer spaniel.
“I was carrying my satchel slung across my back and my gun diagonally across my chest.
It was a cold, windy, gloomy day, with clouds scurrying across the sky.
“As I went up the hill at Canteleu, I looked over the broad valley of the Seine, the river winding in and out along its course as far as the eye could see.
To the right the towers of Rouen stood out against the sky, and to the left the landscape was bounded by the distant slopes covered with trees.
Then I crossed the forest of Roumare and, toward five o'clock, reached the Pavilion, where Cavalier and Celeste were expecting me.
“For ten years I had appeared there at the same time, in the same manner; and for ten years the same faces had greeted me with the same words: “'Welcome, master!
We hope your health is good.' “Cavalier had hardly changed.
He withstood time like an old tree; but Celeste, especially in the past four years, had become unrecognizable.
“She was bent almost double, and, although still active, when she walked her body was almost at right angles to her legs.
“The old woman, who was very devoted to me, always seemed affected at seeing me again, and each time, as I left, she would say: “'This may be the last time, master.' “The sad, timid farewell of this old servant, this hopeless resignation to the inevitable fate which was not far off for her, moved me strangely each year.
“I dismounted, and while Cavalier, whom I had greeted, was leading my horse to the little shed which served as a stable, I entered the kitchen, which also served as dining-room, followed by Celeste.
“Here the gamekeeper joined us.
I saw at first glance that something was the matter.
He seemed preoccupied, ill at ease, worried.
“I said to him: “'Well, Cavalier, is everything all right?' “He muttered: “'Yes and no.
“'No, not yet, monsieur.
I do not wish to bother you with my little troubles so soon after your arrival.' “I insisted, but he absolutely refused to give me any information before dinner.
From his expression, I could tell that it was something very serious.
Thank heaven, I looked out for that.' “He said this with so much seriousness, with such sad solemnity, that it was really almost funny.
His big gray mustache seemed almost ready to drop from his lips.
“Suddenly I remembered that I had not yet seen his nephew.
Why does he not show himself?' “The gamekeeper started, looking me suddenly in the face: “Well, monsieur, I had rather tell you the whole business right away; it's on account of him that I am worrying.' “'Ah!
Well, where is he?' “'Over in the stable, monsieur.
I was waiting for the right time to bring him out.' “'What has he done?' “'Well, monsieur——' “The gamekeeper, however, hesitated, his voice altered and shaky, his face suddenly furrowed by the deep lines of an old man.
“He continued slowly: “'Well, I found out, last winter, that someone was poaching in the woods of Roseraies, but I couldn't seem to catch the man.
During that time they began poaching over by Ecorcheville.
I was growing thin from vexation.
But as for catching the trespasser, impossible!
One might have thought that the rascal was forewarned of my plans.
“'But one day, while I was brushing Marius' Sunday trousers, I found forty cents in his pocket.
“'I thought the matter over for about a week, and I noticed that he used to go out; he would leave the house just as I was coming home to go to bed—yes, monsieur.
“'Then I started to watch him, without the slightest suspicion of the real facts.
One morning, just after I had gone to bed before him, I got right up again, and followed him.
For shadowing a man, there is nobody like me, monsieur.
“'And I caught him, Marius, poaching on your land, monsieur; he my nephew, I your keeper!
Oh! yes, I thrashed him all right.
And I promised him that he would get another beating from my hand, in your presence, as an example.
“'I told him that if it happened again I would have no more pity for him, all would be over.
Did I do right, monsieur?' “I answered, holding out my hand: “'You did well, Cavalier; you are an honest man.' “He rose.
“'Thank you, monsieur.
I must give him his thrashing, as an example.' “I knew that it was hopeless to try and turn the old man from his idea.
I therefore let him have his own way.
“I was seated on a cane chair, with the solemn expression of a judge.
“Marius seemed to have grown; he was homelier even than the year before, with his evil, sneaking expression.
“His big hands seemed gigantic.
“His uncle pushed him up to me, and, in his soldierly voice, said: “'Beg the gentleman's pardon.' “The boy didn't say a word.
“Then putting one arm round him, the former gendarme lifted him right off the ground, and began to whack him with such force that I rose to stop the blows.
I promise——' “Cavalier put him back on the ground and forced him to his knees: “'Beg for pardon,' he said.
“With eyes lowered, the scamp murmured: “'I ask for pardon!' “Then his uncle lifted him to his feet, and dismissed him with a cuff which almost knocked him down again.
“Cavalier appeared overwhelmed.' “'He is a bad egg,' he said.
“And throughout the whole dinner, he kept repeating: “'Oh! that worries me, monsieur, that worries me.' “I tried to comfort him, but in vain.
“I went to bed early, so that I might start out at daybreak.
“I was awakened toward midnight by the furious barking of my dog Bock.
I immediately noticed that my room was full of smoke.
“I quickly closed the heavy oak door and, drawing on my trousers, I first lowered the dog through the window, by means of a rope made of my sheets; then, having thrown out the rest of my clothes, my game-bag and my gun, I in turn escaped the same way.
“I began to shout with all my might: 'Cavalier!
Cavalier!' “But the gamekeeper did not wake up.
He slept soundly like an old gendarme.
“Somebody must purposely have set fire to the place!
“I continued shrieking wildly: 'Cavalier!' “Then the thought struck me that the smoke might be suffocating him.
I slipped two cartridges into my gun, and shot straight at his window.
“The six panes of glass shattered into the room in a cloud of glass.
This time the old man had heard me, and he appeared, dazed, in his nightshirt, bewildered by the glare which illumined the whole front of his 'house.
Quick!' “The flames were coming out through all the cracks downstairs, were licking along the wall, were creeping toward him and going to surround him.
The thatched roof cracked in the middle, right over the staircase, which formed a kind of flue for the fire downstairs; and an immense red jet jumped up into the air, spreading like a stream of water and sprinkling a shower of sparks around the hut.
“Cavalier, thunderstruck, asked: “'How did the fire start?' “I answered: “'Somebody lit it in the kitchen.' “He muttered: “'Who could have started the fire?' “And I, suddenly guessing, answered: “'Marius!' “The old man understood.
He stammered: “'Good God!
That is why he didn't return.' “A terrible thought flashed through my mind.
The house caved in before us, forming only an enormous, bright, blinding brazier, an awe-inspiring funeral-pile, where the poor woman could no longer be anything but a glowing ember, a glowing ember of human flesh.
“As the fire crept toward the shed, I suddenly bethought me of my horse, and Cavalier ran to free it.
He tried to run after the wretch, but, seeing that he could not catch him, and maddened by an irresistible anger, yielding to one of those thoughtless impulses which we cannot foresee or prevent, he picked up my gun, which was lying on the ground. near him, put it to his shoulder, and, before I could make a motion, he pulled the trigger without even noticing whether or not the weapon was loaded.
“One of the cartridges which I had put in to announce the fire was still intact, and the charge caught the fugitive right in the back,—throwing him forward on the ground, bleeding profusely.
He immediately began to claw the earth with his hands and with his knees, as though trying to run on all fours like a rabbit who has been mortally wounded, and sees the hunter approaching.
He passed away before the fire was extinguished, without having said a word.
“Cavalier, still in his shirt, his legs bare, was standing near us, motionless, dazed.
“When the people from the village arrived, my gamekeeper was taken away, like an insane man.
“I appeared at the trial as witness, and related the facts in detail, without changing a thing.
Cavalier was acquitted.
He disappeared that very day, leaving the country.
“There, gentlemen, that is my story.” THE STORY OF A FARM GIRL PART I As the weather was very fine, the people on the farm had hurried through their dinner and had returned to the fields.
The servant, Rose, remained alone in the large kitchen, where the fire was dying out on the hearth beneath the large boiler of hot water.
From time to time she dipped out some water and slowly washed her dishes, stopping occasionally to look at the two streaks of light which the sun threw across the long table through the window, and which showed the defects in the glass.
Three venturesome hens were picking up the crumbs under the chairs, while the smell of the poultry yard and the warmth from the cow stall came in through the half-open door, and a cock was heard crowing in the distance.
When she had finished her work, wiped down the table, dusted the mantelpiece and put the plates on the high dresser close to the wooden clock with its loud tick-tock, she drew a long breath, as she felt rather oppressed, without exactly knowing why.
She looked at the black clay walls, the rafters that were blackened with smoke and from which hung spiders' webs, smoked herrings and strings of onions, and then she sat down, rather overcome by the stale odor from the earthen floor, on which so many things had been continually spilled and which the heat brought out.
With this there was mingled the sour smell of the pans of milk which were set out to raise the cream in the adjoining dairy.
She wanted to sew, as usual, but she did not feel strong enough, and so she went to the door to get a mouthful of fresh air, which seemed to do her good.
The fowls were lying on the steaming dunghill; some of them were scratching with one claw in search of worms, while the cock stood up proudly in their midst.
When he crowed, the cocks in all the neighboring farmyards replied to him, as if they were uttering challenges from farm to farm.
The girl looked at them without thinking, and then she raised her eyes and was almost dazzled at the sight of the apple trees in blossom.
Just then a colt, full of life and friskiness, jumped over the ditches and then stopped suddenly, as if surprised at being alone.
She also felt inclined to run; she felt inclined to move and to stretch her limbs and to repose in the warm, breathless air.
She took a few undecided steps and closed her eyes, for she was seized with a feeling of animal comfort, and then she went to look for eggs in the hen loft.
There were thirteen of them, which she took in and put into the storeroom; but the smell from the kitchen annoyed her again, and she went out to sit on the grass for a time.
The farmyard, which was surrounded by trees, seemed to be asleep.
The tall grass, amid which the tall yellow dandelions rose up like streaks of yellow light, was of a vivid, fresh spring green.
The apple trees cast their shade all round them, and the thatched roofs, on which grew blue and yellow irises, with their sword-like leaves, steamed as if the moisture of the stables and barns were coming through the straw.
Close to it, in a ditch, there was a large patch of violets, whose fragrance was spread abroad, while beyond the slope the open country could be seen, where grain was growing, with clumps of trees in places, and groups of laborers here and there, who looked as small as dolls, and white horses like toys, who were drawing a child's cart, driven by a man as tall as one's finger.
Then, not feeling comfortable, she undid it, spread it out and lay down upon it at full length on her back, with both arms under her head and her legs stretched out.
Gradually her eyes closed, and she was falling into a state of delightful languor.
It was Jacques, one of the farm laborers, a tall fellow from Picardy, who had been making love to her for a long time.
He had been herding the sheep, and, seeing her lying down in the shade, had come up stealthily and holding his breath, with glistening eyes and bits of straw in his hair.
He tried to kiss her, but she gave him a smack in the face, for she was as strong as he, and he was shrewd enough to beg her pardon; so they sat down side by side and talked amicably.
They spoke about the favorable weather, of their master, who was a good fellow, then of their neighbors, of all the people in the country round, of themselves, of their village, of their youthful days, of their recollections, of their relations, who had left them for a long time, and it might be forever.
“It is very hard to be separated like that,” and she directed her looks into the distance, toward the village in the north which she had left.
Suddenly, however, he seized her by the neck and kissed her again, but she struck him so violently in the face with her clenched fist that his nose began to bleed, and he got up and laid his head against the stem of a tree.
What a devil!” he said, and he looked at her with admiration, for she had inspired him with a feeling of respect and of a very different kind of admiration which was the beginning of a real love for that tall, strong wench.
When the bleeding had stopped, he proposed a walk, as he was afraid of his neighbor's heavy hand, if they remained side by side like that much longer; but she took his arm of her own accord, in the avenue, as if they had been out for an evening's walk, and said: “It is not nice of you to despise me like that, Jacques.” He protested, however.
He hesitated and then looked at her sideways, while she looked straight ahead of her.
She had fat, red cheeks, a full bust beneath her cotton jacket; thick, red lips; and her neck, which was almost bare, was covered with small beads of perspiration.
He felt a fresh access of desire, and, putting his lips to her ear, he murmured: “Yes, of course I do.” Then she threw her arms round his neck and kissed him till they were both out of breath.
They plagued one another in corners; they met in the moonlight beside the haystack and gave each other bruises on the legs, under the table, with their heavy nailed boots.
By degrees, however, Jacques seemed to grow tired of her; he avoided her, scarcely spoke to her, and did not try any longer to meet her alone, which made her sad and anxious; and soon she found that she was enceinte.
At first she was in a state of consternation, but then she got angry, and her rage increased every day because she could not meet him, as he avoided her most carefully.
At last, one night, when every one in the farmhouse was asleep, she went out noiselessly in her petticoat, with bare feet, crossed the yard and opened the door of the stable where Jacques was lying in a large box of straw above his horses.
He pretended to snore when he heard her coming, but she knelt down by his side and shook him until he sat up.
I am enceinte!” He gasped for breath, as he was almost choked, and so they remained, both of them, motionless and without speaking, in the dark silence, which was only broken by the noise made by a horse as he, pulled the hay out of the manger and then slowly munched it.
When Jacques found that she was the stronger, he stammered out: “Very well, I will marry you, as that is the case.” But she did not believe his promises.
“Swear solemnly that you will.” He hesitated for a few moments and then said: “I swear it, by Heaven!” Then she released her grasp and went away without another word.
She had no chance of speaking to him for several days; and, as the stable was now always locked at night, she was afraid to make any noise, for fear of creating a scandal.
One morning, however, she saw another man come in at dinner time, and she said: “Has Jacques left?” “Yes;” the man replied; “I have got his place.” This made her tremble so violently that she could not take the saucepan off the fire; and later, when they were all at work, she went up into her room and cried, burying her head in the bolster, so that she might not be heard.
During the day, however, she tried to obtain some information without exciting any suspicion, but she was so overwhelmed by the thoughts of her misfortune that she fancied that all the people whom she asked laughed maliciously.
All she learned, however, was that he had left the neighborhood altogether.
PART II Then a cloud of constant misery began for her.
She worked mechanically, without thinking of what she was doing, with one fixed idea in her head: “Suppose people were to know.” This continual feeling made her so incapable of reasoning that she did not even try to think of any means of avoiding the disgrace that she knew must ensue, which was irreparable and drawing nearer every day, and which was as sure as death itself.
She got up every morning long before the others and persistently tried to look at her figure in a piece of broken looking-glass, before which she did her hair, as she was very anxious to know whether anybody would notice a change in her, and, during the day, she stopped working every few minutes to look at herself from top to toe, to see whether her apron did not look too short.
One morning the postman brought her a letter, and as she had never received one in her life before she was so upset by it that she was obliged to sit down.
But, as she could not read, she sat anxious and trembling with that piece of paper, covered with ink, in her hand.
She often stopped in her work to look at those lines written at regular intervals, and which terminated in a signature, imagining vaguely that she would suddenly discover their meaning, until at last, as she felt half mad with impatience and anxiety, she went to the schoolmaster, who told her to sit down and read to her as follows: “MY DEAR DAUGHTER: I write to tell you that I am very ill.
Our neighbor, Monsieur Dentu, begs you to come, if you can.
“From your affectionate mother, “CESAIRE DENTU, Deputy Mayor.” She did not say a word and went away, but as soon as she was alone her legs gave way under her, and she fell down by the roadside and remained there till night.
When she got back, she told the farmer her bad news, and he allowed her to go home for as long as she liked, and promised to have her work done by a charwoman and to take her back when she returned.
Her mother died soon after she got there, and the next day Rose gave birth to a seven-months child, a miserable little skeleton, thin enough to make anybody shudder, and which seemed to be suffering continually, to judge from the painful manner in which it moved its poor little hands, which were as thin as a crab's legs; but it lived for all that.
She said she was married, but could not be burdened with the child, so she left it with some neighbors, who promised to take great care of it, and she went back to the farm.
But now in her heart, which had been wounded so long, there arose something like brightness, an unknown love for that frail little creature which she had left behind her, though there was fresh suffering in that very love, suffering which she felt every hour and every minute, because she was parted from her child.
She could not sleep at night; she thought of it the whole day long, and in the evening, when her work was done, she would sit in front of the fire and gaze at it intently, as people do whose thoughts are far away.
They asked her whether he was tall, handsome and rich.
When was the wedding to be and the christening?
And often she ran away to cry by herself, for these questions seemed to hurt her like the prick of a pin; and, in order to forget their jokes, she began to work still more energetically, and, still thinking of her child, she sought some way of saving up money for it, and determined to work so that her master would be obliged to raise her wages.
By degrees she almost monopolized the work and persuaded him to get rid of one servant girl, who had become useless since she had taken to working like two; she economized in the bread, oil and candles; in the corn, which they gave to the chickens too extravagantly, and in the fodder for the horses and cattle, which was rather wasted.
She kept such a strict eye on everything about her that, under her direction, the farm prospered wonderfully, and for five miles around people talked of “Master Vallin's servant,” and the farmer himself said everywhere: “That girl is worth more than her weight in gold.” But time passed by, and her wages remained the same.
Her hard work was accepted as something that was due from every good servant, and as a mere token of good will; and she began to think rather bitterly that if the farmer could put fifty or a hundred crowns extra into the bank every month, thanks to her, she was still only earning her two hundred francs a year, neither more nor less; and so she made up her mind to ask for an increase of wages.
She went to see the schoolmaster three times about it, but when she got there, she spoke about something else.
She felt a kind of modesty in asking for money, as if it were something disgraceful; but, at last, one day, when the farmer was having breakfast by himself in the kitchen, she said to him, with some embarrassment, that she wished to speak to him particularly.
He raised his head in surprise, with both his hands on the table, holding his knife, with its point in the air, in one, and a piece of bread in the other, and he looked fixedly at, the girl, who felt uncomfortable under his gaze, but asked for a week's holiday, so that she might get away, as she was not very well.
He acceded to her request immediately, and then added, in some embarrassment himself: “When you come back, I shall have something to say to you myself.” PART III The child was nearly eight months old, and she did not recognize it.
She threw herself on it, as if it had been some prey, and kissed it so violently that it began to scream with terror; and then she began to cry herself, because it did not know her, and stretched out its arms to its nurse as soon as it saw her.
She sat down, and for some moments they remained side by side, in some embarrassment, with their arms hanging at their sides, as if they did not know what to do with them, and looking each other in the face, after the manner of peasants.
The farmer, a stout, jovial, obstinate man of forty-five, who had lost two wives, evidently felt embarrassed, which was very unusual with him; but, at last, he made up his mind, and began to speak vaguely, hesitating a little, and looking out of the window as he talked.
At last the farmer grew impatient and said: “Come, what more do you want?” She looked at him, almost in terror, then suddenly the tears came into her eyes and she said twice in a choking voice: “I cannot, I cannot!” “Why not?” he asked.
Neither could there be any scruples about an unequal match between them, for in the country every one is very nearly equal; the farmer works with his laborers, who frequently become masters in their turn, and the female servants constantly become the mistresses of the establishments without its making any change in their life or habits.
She threw herself, dressed as she was, on her bed, and she had not even the strength to cry left in her, she was so thoroughly dumfounded.
She remained quite inert, scarcely knowing that she had a body, and without being at all able to collect her thoughts, though, at moments, she remembered something of what had happened, and then she was frightened at the idea of what might happen.
Her terror increased, and every time the great kitchen clock struck the hour she broke out in a perspiration from grief.
She became bewildered, and had the nightmare; her candle went out, and then she began to imagine that some one had cast a spell over her, as country people so often imagine, and she felt a mad inclination to run away, to escape and to flee before her misfortune, like a ship scudding before the wind.
An owl hooted; she shivered, sat up, passed her hands over her face, her hair, and all over her body, and then she went downstairs, as if she were walking in her sleep.
When she got into the yard she stooped down, so as not to be seen by any prowling scamp, for the moon, which was setting, shed a bright light over the fields.
Instead of opening the gate she scrambled over the fence, and as soon as she was outside she started off.
She went on straight before her, with a quick, springy trot, and from time to time she unconsciously uttered a piercing cry.
Her long shadow accompanied her, and now and then some night bird flew over her head, while the dogs in the farmyards barked as they heard her pass; one even jumped over the ditch, and followed her and tried to bite her, but she turned round and gave such a terrible yell that the frightened animal ran back and cowered in silence in its kennel.
The stars grew dim, and the birds began to twitter; day was breaking.
The girl was worn out and panting; and when the sun rose in the purple sky, she stopped, for her swollen feet refused to go any farther; but she saw a pond in the distance, a large pond whose stagnant water looked like blood under the reflection of this new day, and she limped on slowly with her hand on her heart, in order to dip both her feet in it.
She sat down on a tuft of grass, took off her heavy shoes, which were full of dust, pulled off her stockings and plunged her legs into the still water, from which bubbles were rising here and there.
A feeling of delicious coolness pervaded her from head to foot, and suddenly, while she was looking fixedly at the deep pool, she was seized with dizziness, and with a mad longing to throw herself into it.
All her sufferings would be over in there, over forever.
She no longer thought of her child; she only wanted peace, complete rest, and to sleep forever, and she got up with raised arms and took two steps forward.
She was in the water up to her thighs, and she was just about to throw her self in when sharp, pricking pains in her ankles made her jump back, and she uttered a cry of despair, for, from her knees to the tips of her feet, long black leeches were sucking her lifeblood, and were swelling as they adhered to her flesh.
She did not dare to touch them, and screamed with horror, so that her cries of despair attracted a peasant, who was driving along at some distance, to the spot.
She was in bed for a fortnight, and as she was sitting outside the door on the first morning that she got up, the farmer suddenly came and planted himself before her.
“Well,” he said, “I suppose the affair is settled isn't it?” She did not reply at first, and then, as he remained standing and looking at her intently with his piercing eyes, she said with difficulty: “No, master, I cannot.” He immediately flew into a rage.
I should just like to know the reason why?” She began to cry, and repeated: “I cannot.” He looked at her, and then exclaimed angrily: “Then I suppose you have a lover?” “Perhaps that is it,” she replied, trembling with shame.
The man got as red as a poppy, and stammered out in a rage: “Ah!
Some penniless, half- starved ragamuffin, without a roof to his head, I suppose?
Who is it, I say?” And as she gave him no answer, he continued: “Ah!
Then I will tell you; it is Jean Baudu?”—“No, not he,” she exclaimed.
“Then it is Pierre Martin?”—“Oh! no, master.” And he angrily mentioned all the young fellows in the neighborhood, while she denied that he had hit upon the right one, and every moment wiped her eyes with the corner of her blue apron.
But he still tried to find it out, with his brutish obstinacy, and, as it were, scratching at her heart to discover her secret, just as a terrier scratches at a hole to try and get at the animal which he scents inside it.
Suddenly, however, the man shouted: “By George!
Did you ever give him your promise, eh?” This time she looked her master straight in the face.
“No, never, never; I will solemnly swear to you that if he were to come to-day and ask me to marry him I would have nothing to do with him.” She spoke with such an air of sincerity that the farmer hesitated, and then he continued, as if speaking to himself: “What, then?
You have not had a misfortune, as they call it, or it would have been known, and as it has no consequences, no girl would refuse her master on that account.
There must be something at the bottom of it, however.” She could say nothing; she had not the strength to speak, and he asked her again: “You will not?” “I cannot, master,” she said, with a sigh, and he turned on his heel.
She thought she had got rid of him altogether and spent the rest of the day almost tranquilly, but was as exhausted as if she had been turning the thrashing machine all day in the place of the old white horse, and she went to bed as soon as she could and fell asleep immediately.
In the middle of the night, however, two hands touching the bed woke her.
She trembled with fear, but immediately recognized the farmer's voice, when he said to her: “Don't be frightened, Rose; I have come to speak to you.” She was surprised at first, but when he tried to take liberties with her she understood and began to tremble violently, as she felt quite alone in the darkness, still heavy from sleep, and quite unprotected, with that man standing near her.
She certainly did not consent, but she resisted carelessly struggling against that instinct which is always strong in simple natures and very imperfectly protected by the undecided will of inert and gentle races.
She turned her head now to the wall, and now toward the room, in order to avoid the attentions which the farmer tried to press on her, but she was weakened by fatigue, while he became brutal, intoxicated by desire.
They lived together as man and wife, and one morning he said to her: “I have put up our banns, and we will get married next month.” She did not reply, for what could she say?
She felt as if she were in a pit with inaccessible sides from which she could never get out, and all kinds of misfortunes were hanging over her head, like huge rocks, which would fall on the first occasion.
Her husband gave her the impression of a man whom she had robbed, and who would find it out some day or other.
And then she thought of her child, who was the cause of her misfortunes, but who was also the cause of all her happiness on earth, and whom she went to see twice a year, though she came back more unhappy each time.
But she gradually grew accustomed to her life, her fears were allayed, her heart was at rest, and she lived with an easier mind, though still with some vague fear floating in it.
She was almost happy now, when suddenly the farmer's temper grew very bad.
For two or three years he seemed to have been nursing some secret anxiety, to be troubled by some care, some mental disturbance, which was gradually increasing.
He remained sitting at table after dinner, with his head in his hands, sad and devoured by sorrow.
He always spoke hastily, sometimes even brutally, and it even seemed as if he had a grudge against his wife, for at times he answered her roughly, almost angrily.
In consequence she lost her composure, and did not venture to remain alone with him after the meal was over, but left the room and hastened to the church.
It was getting dusk; the narrow nave was in total darkness, but she heard footsteps in the choir, for the sacristan was preparing the tabernacle lamp for the night.
That spot of trembling light, which was lost in the darkness of the arches, looked to Rose like her last hope, and with her eyes fixed on it, she fell on her knees.
The chain rattled as the little lamp swung up into the air, and almost immediately the small bell rang out the Angelus through the increasing mist.
“Is Monsieur le Cure at home?” she asked.
“Of course he is; this is his dinnertime.” She trembled as she rang the bell of the parsonage.
“Yes, yes, I know all about it; your husband has mentioned the matter to me that brings you here.” The poor woman nearly fainted, and the priest continued: “What do you want, my child?” And he hastily swallowed several spoonfuls of soup, some of which dropped on to his greasy cassock.
But Rose did not venture to say anything more, and she got up to go, but the priest said: “Courage.” And she went out and returned to the farm without knowing what she was doing.
The farmer was waiting for her, as the laborers had gone away during her absence, and she fell heavily at his feet, and, shedding a flood of tears, she said to him: “What have you got against me?” He began to shout and to swear: “What have I got against you?
That I have no children, by—-.
When a man takes a wife it is not that they may live alone together to the end of their days.
When a cow has no calves she is not worth anything, and when a woman has no children she is also not worth anything.” She began to cry, and said: “It is not my fault!
It is not my fault!” He grew rather more gentle when he heard that, and added: “I do not say that it is, but it is very provoking, all the same.” PART V From that day forward she had only one thought: to have a child another child; she confided her wish to everybody, and, in consequence of this, a neighbor told her of an infallible method.
The farmer consented to try it, but without success; so they said to each other: “Perhaps there are some secret ways?” And they tried to find out.
They were told of a shepherd who lived ten leagues off, and so Vallin one day drove off to consult him.
The shepherd gave him a loaf on which he had made some marks; it was kneaded up with herbs, and each of them was to eat a piece of it, but they ate the whole loaf without obtaining any results from it.
Next, a schoolmaster unveiled mysteries and processes of love which were unknown in the country, but infallible, so he declared; but none of them had the desired effect.
Then the priest advised them to make a pilgrimage to the shrine at Fecamp.
Rose went with the crowd and prostrated herself in the abbey, and, mingling her prayers with the coarse desires of the peasants around her, she prayed that she might be fruitful a second time; but it was in vain, and then she thought that she was being punished for her first fault, and she was seized by terrible grief.
She was wasting away with sorrow; her husband was also aging prematurely, and was wearing himself out in useless hopes.
They quarrelled all day long, and when they were in their room together at night he flung insults and obscenities at her, choking with rage, until one night, not being able to think of any means of making her suffer more he ordered her to get up and go and stand out of doors in the rain until daylight.
In his exasperation he knelt on her stomach, and with clenched teeth, and mad with rage, he began to beat her.
Then in her despair she rebelled, and flinging him against the wall with a furious gesture, she sat up, and in an altered voice she hissed: “I have had a child, I have had one!
He promised to marry me, but he left this neighborhood without keeping his word.” The man was thunderstruck and could hardly speak, but at last he stammered out: “What are you saying?
What are you saying?” Then she began to sob, and amid her tears she continued: “That was the reason why I did not want to marry you.
You have never had any children, so you cannot understand, you cannot understand!” He said again, mechanically, with increasing surprise: “You have a child?
She was cowering on the bed and crying, and suddenly he stopped in front of her, and said: “Then it is my fault that you have no children?” She gave him no answer, and he began to walk up and down again, and then, stopping again, he continued: “How old is your child?” “Just six,” she whispered.
He remained standing, motionless.
I had just finished breakfast with my old friend Georges Garin when the servant handed him a letter covered with seals and foreign stamps.
Georges said: “Will you excuse me?” “Certainly.” And so he began to read the letter, which was written in a large English handwriting, crossed and recrossed in every direction.
He read them slowly, with serious attention and the interest which we only pay to things which touch our hearts.
Then he put the letter on the mantelpiece and said: “That was a curious story!
Yet it was a sentimental adventure, and it really happened to me.
“I was then an inspector in the Maritime Insurance Company, of which I am now director.
I had arranged to pass New Year's Day in Paris—since it is customary to make that day a fete—when I received a letter from the manager, asking me to proceed at once to the island of Re, where a three-masted vessel from Saint-Nazaire, insured by us, had just been driven ashore.
I arrived at the office at ten to get my advices, and that evening I took the express, which put me down in La Rochelle the next day, the 31st of December.
It is certainly a queer city, La Rochelle, with strong characteristics of its own streets tangled like a labyrinth, sidewalks running under endless arcaded galleries like those of the Rue de Rivoli, but low, mysterious, built as if to form a suitable setting for conspirators and making a striking background for those old-time wars, the savage heroic wars of religion.
It started with angry puffings, passed between the two old towers which guard the harbor, crossed the roadstead and issued from the mole built by Richelieu, the great stones of which can be seen at the water's edge, enclosing the town like a great necklace.
Then the steamboat turned to the right.
“It was one of those sad days which give one the blues, tighten the heart and take away all strength and energy and force-a gray, cold day, with a heavy mist which was as wet as rain, as cold as frost, as bad to breathe as the steam of a wash-tub.
“Under this low sky of dismal fog the shallow, yellow, sandy sea of all practically level beaches lay without a wrinkle, without a movement, without life, a sea of turbid water, of greasy water, of stagnant water.
The Jean Guiton passed over it, rolling a little from habit, dividing the smooth, dark blue water and leaving behind a few waves, a little splashing, a slight swell, which soon calmed down.
I wanted some details of the disaster on which I was to draw up a report.
A great square-rigged three-master, the Marie Joseph, of Saint-Nazaire, had gone ashore one night in a hurricane on the sands of the island of Re.
“The owner wrote us that the storm had thrown the ship so far ashore that it was impossible to float her and that they had to remove everything which could be detached with the utmost possible haste.
Nevertheless I must examine the situation of the wreck, estimate what must have been her condition before the disaster and decide whether all efforts had been used to get her afloat.
I came as an agent of the company in order to give contradictory testimony, if necessary, at the trial.
“On receipt of my report, the manager would take what measures he might think necessary to protect our interests.
“The captain of the Jean Guiton knew all about the affair, having been summoned with his boat to assist in the attempts at salvage.
“He told me the story of the disaster.
The Marie Joseph, driven by a furious gale lost her bearings completely in the night, and steering by chance over a heavy foaming sea—'a milk-soup sea,' said the captain—had gone ashore on those immense sand banks which make the coasts of this country look like limitless Saharas when the tide is low.
Between the ocean and the lowering sky lay an open space where the eye could see into the distance.
We were following a coast.
I asked: “'Is that the island of Re?' “'Yes, sir.' “And suddenly the captain stretched his right hand out before us, pointed to something almost imperceptible in the open sea, and said: “'There's your ship!' “'The Marie Joseph!' “'Yes.' “I was amazed.
This black, almost imperceptible speck, which looked to me like a rock, seemed at least three miles from land.
“I continued: “'But, captain, there must be a hundred fathoms of water in that place.' “He began to laugh.
Well, I should say about two!' “He was from Bordeaux.
He continued: “'It's now nine-forty, just high tide.
Go down along the beach with your hands in your pockets after you've had lunch at the Hotel du Dauphin, and I'll wager that at ten minutes to three, or three o'clock, you'll reach the wreck without wetting your feet, and have from an hour and three-quarters to two hours aboard of her; but not more, or you'll be caught.
But start away at ten minutes to five, as I tell you, and at half-past seven you will be again aboard of the Jean Guiton, which will put you down this same evening on the quay at La Rochelle.' “I thanked the captain and I went and sat down in the bow of the steamer to get a good look at the little city of Saint-Martin, which we were now rapidly approaching.
“It was just like all small seaports which serve as capitals of the barren islands scattered along the coast—a large fishing village, one foot on sea and one on shore, subsisting on fish and wild fowl, vegetables and shell-fish, radishes and mussels.
The island is very low and little cultivated, yet it seems to be thickly populated.
However, I did not penetrate into the interior.
“After breakfast I climbed across a little promontory, and then, as the tide was rapidly falling, I started out across the sands toward a kind of black rock which I could just perceive above the surface of the water, out a considerable distance.
Now I perceived it at a distance, escaping out of sight, and I no longer could distinguish the line which separated the sands from ocean.
I felt as though I were looking at a gigantic supernatural work of enchantment.
The Atlantic had just now been before me, then it had disappeared into the sands, just as scenery disappears through a trap; and I was now walking in the midst of a desert.
Only the feeling, the breath of the salt-water, remained in me.
I perceived the smell of the wrack, the smell of the sea, the good strong smell of sea coasts.
I looked at the stranded wreck, which grew in size as I approached, and came now to resemble an enormous shipwrecked whale.
“It seemed fairly to rise out of the ground, and on that great, flat, yellow stretch of sand assumed wonderful proportions.
It lay upon its side, ruined and shattered, its broken bones showing as though it were an animal, its bones of tarred wood pierced with great bolts.
The sand had already invaded it, entering it by all the crannies, and held it and refused to let it go.
The bow had entered deep into this soft, treacherous beach, while the stern, high in air, seemed to cast at heaven, like a cry of despairing appeal, the two white words on the black planking, Marie Joseph.
The daylight, which entered by the stove-in hatches and the cracks in the sides, showed me dimly long dark cavities full of demolished woodwork.
They contained nothing but sand, which served as foot-soil in this cavern of planks.
“I began to take some notes about the condition of the ship.
I was seated on a broken empty cask, writing by the light of a great crack, through which I could perceive the boundless stretch of the strand.
A strange shivering of cold and loneliness ran over my skin from time to time, and I would often stop writing for a moment to listen to the mysterious noises in the derelict: the noise of crabs scratching the planking with their crooked claws; the noise of a thousand little creatures of the sea already crawling over this dead body or else boring into the wood.
“Suddenly, very near me, I heard human voices.
For a second I really thought I was about to see drowned men rise from the sinister depths of the hold, who would tell me about their death.
There, standing by the bows, was a tall Englishman with three young misses.
Certainly they were a good deal more frightened at seeing this sudden apparition on the abandoned three-master than I was at seeing them.
The youngest girl turned and ran, the two others threw their arms round their father.
“Then, after several seconds, he spoke: “'Mosieu, are you the owner of this ship?' “'I am.' “'May I go over it?' “'You may.' “Then he uttered a long sentence in English, in which I only distinguished the word 'gracious,' repeated several times.
Then we helped up the three girls, who had now quite recovered their composure.
They were charming, especially the oldest, a blonde of eighteen, fresh as a flower, and very dainty and pretty!
Ah, yes! the pretty Englishwomen have indeed the look of tender sea fruit.
They all, with their exquisite freshness, make you think of the delicate colors of pink sea-shells and of shining pearls hidden in the unknown depths of the ocean.
“She spoke French a little better than her father and acted as interpreter.
I had to tell all about the shipwreck, and I romanced as though I had been present at the catastrophe.
Then the whole family descended into the interior of the wreck.
As soon as they had penetrated into this sombre, dimly lit cavity they uttered cries of astonishment and admiration.
Suddenly the father and his three daughters were holding sketch-books in their hands, which they had doubtless carried hidden somewhere in their heavy weather-proof clothes, and were all beginning at once to make pencil sketches of this melancholy and weird place.
“They had seated themselves side by side on a projecting beam, and the four sketch-books on the eight knees were being rapidly covered with little black lines which were intended to represent the half-opened hulk of the Marie Joseph.
“I continued to inspect the skeleton of the ship, and the oldest girl talked to me while she worked.
“They had none of the usual English arrogance; they were simple honest hearts of that class of continuous travellers with which England covers the globe.
The father was long and thin, with a red face framed in white whiskers, and looking like a living sandwich, a piece of ham carved like a face between two wads of hair.
The daughters, who had long legs like young storks, were also thin-except the oldest.
All three were pretty, especially the tallest.
“She had such a droll way of speaking, of laughing, of understanding and of not understanding, of raising her eyes to ask a question (eyes blue as the deep ocean), of stopping her drawing a moment to make a guess at what you meant, of returning once more to work, of saying 'yes' or 'no'—that I could have listened and looked indefinitely.
“Suddenly she murmured: “'I hear a little sound on this boat.' “I listened and I immediately distinguished a low, steady, curious sound.
The sea had come up to us; it would soon surround us!
The water circled us about and was running toward the coast at tremendous speed.
No, it did not run, it glided, crept, spread like an immense, limitless blot.
The water was barely a few centimeters deep, but the rising flood had gone so far that we no longer saw the vanishing line of the imperceptible tide.
“The Englishman wanted to jump.
Flight was impossible because of the deep places which we had been obliged to go round on our way out and into which we should fall on our return.
“There was a minute of horrible anguish in our hearts.
Then the little English girl began to smile and murmured: “'It is we who are shipwrecked.' “I tried to laugh, but fear held me, a fear which was cowardly and horrid and base and treacherous like the tide.
All the danger which we ran appeared to me at once.
“The two younger girls were clinging to their father, who looked in consternation at the measureless sea which hedged us round about.
“The night fell as swiftly as the ocean rose—a lowering, wet, icy night.
“I said: “'There's nothing to do but to stay on the ship: “The Englishman answered: “'Oh, yes!' “And we waited there a quarter of an hour, half an hour, indeed I don't know how long, watching that creeping water growing deeper as it swirled around us, as though it were playing on the beach, which it had regained.
“One of the young girls was cold, and we went below to shelter ourselves from the light but freezing wind that made our skins tingle.
“I leaned over the hatchway.
So we had to cower against the stern planking, which shielded us a little.
“Darkness was now coming on, and we remained huddled together.
I felt the shoulder of the little English girl trembling against mine, her teeth chattering from time to time.
But I also felt the gentle warmth of her body through her ulster, and that warmth was as delicious to me as a kiss.
We no longer spoke; we sat motionless, mute, cowering down like animals in a ditch when a hurricane is raging.
And, nevertheless, despite the night, despite the terrible and increasing danger, I began to feel happy that I was there, glad of the cold and the peril, glad of the long hours of darkness and anguish that I must pass on this plank so near this dainty, pretty little girl.
“I asked myself, 'Why this strange sensation of well-being and of joy?' “Why!
And for all that, I was touched and conquered.
I wanted to save her, to sacrifice myself for her, to commit a thousand follies!
How does it happen that the presence of a woman overwhelms us so?
Is it the seduction of her beauty and youth, which intoxicates one like wine?
“Is it not rather the touch of Love, of Love the Mysterious, who seeks constantly to unite two beings, who tries his strength the instant he has put a man and a woman face to face?
“The silence of the darkness became terrible, the stillness of the sky dreadful, because we could hear vaguely about us a slight, continuous sound, the sound of the rising tide and the monotonous plashing of the water against the ship.
“Suddenly I heard the sound of sobs.
The youngest of the girls was crying.
Her father tried to console her, and they began to talk in their own tongue, which I did not understand.
I guessed that he was reassuring her and that she was still afraid.
“I asked my neighbor: “'You are not too cold, are you, mademoiselle?' “'Oh, yes.
In the short struggle her hand touched mine.
It made a delicious thrill run through my body.
“For some minutes the air had been growing brisker, the dashing of the water stronger against the flanks of the ship.
“The Englishman perceived this at the same time that I did and said simply: “'This is bad for us, this——' “Of course it was bad, it was certain death if any breakers, however feeble, should attack and shake the wreck, which was already so shattered and disconnected that the first big sea would carry it off.
“So our anguish increased momentarily as the squalls grew stronger and stronger.
Now the sea broke a little, and I saw in the darkness white lines appearing and disappearing, lines of foam, while each wave struck the Marie Joseph and shook her with a short quiver which went to our hearts.
“The English girl was trembling.
“Down there, before and behind us, to the left and right, lighthouses were shining along the shore—lighthouses white, yellow and red, revolving like the enormous eyes of giants who were watching us, waiting eagerly for us to disappear.
One of them in especial irritated me.
It went out every thirty seconds and it lit up again immediately.
It was indeed an eye, that one, with its lid incessantly lowered over its fiery glance.
“From time to time the Englishman struck a match to see the hour; then he put his watch back in his pocket.
Suddenly he said to me, over the heads of his daughters, with tremendous gravity: “'I wish you a happy New Year, Mosieu.' “It was midnight.
Then he said something in English, and suddenly he and his daughters began to sing 'God Save the Queen,' which rose through the black and silent air and vanished into space.
“At first I felt a desire to laugh; then I was seized by a powerful, strange emotion.
“It was something sinister and superb, this chant of the shipwrecked, the condemned, something like a prayer and also like something grander, something comparable to the ancient 'Ave Caesar morituri te salutant.' “When they had finished I asked my neighbor to sing a ballad alone, anything she liked, to make us forget our terrors.
She consented, and immediately her clear young voice rang out into the night.
She sang something which was doubtless sad, because the notes were long drawn out and hovered, like wounded birds, above the waves.
My troubled spirit lost itself in the dream!
Was she not really a siren, this daughter of the sea, who had kept me on this worm-eaten ship and who was soon about to go down with me deep into the waters?
“But suddenly we were all five rolling on the deck, because the Marie Joseph had sunk on her right side.
The English girl had fallen upon me, and before I knew what I was doing, thinking that my last moment was come, I had caught her in my arms and kissed her cheek, her temple and her hair.
“The ship did not move again, and we, we also, remained motionless.
“The father said, 'Kate!' The one whom I was holding answered 'Yes' and made a movement to free herself.
“The Englishman continued: “'A little rocking; it's nothing.
I have my three daughters safe.' “Not having seen the oldest, he had thought she was lost overboard!
“I rose slowly, and suddenly I made out a light on the sea quite close to us.
I shouted; they answered.
It was a boat sent out in search of us by the hotelkeeper, who had guessed at our imprudence.
“The Englishman began to rub his hand and murmur: “'A good supper!
I regretted the Marie Joseph.
“We had to separate the next day after much handshaking and many promises to write.
They departed for Biarritz.
If we had passed eight days together, I should have done so!
How weak and incomprehensible a man sometimes is!
Then I received a letter from New York.
She tells me about her life, talks of her children, her sisters, never of her husband!
Circumstances rule one.
That caused me terrible pain.
How sad it all is!” THEODULE SABOT'S CONFESSION When Sabot entered the inn at Martinville it was a signal for laughter.
There was a man who did not like priests, for instance!
Sabot (Theodule), a master carpenter, represented liberal thought in Martinville.
He was a tall, thin man, with gray, cunning eyes, and thin lips, and wore his hair plastered down on his temples.
When he said: “Our holy father, the pope” in a certain manner, everyone laughed.
He killed his pig each year on Monday in Holy Week in order to have enough black pudding to last till Easter, and when the priest passed by, he always said by way of a joke: “There goes one who has just swallowed his God off a salver.” The priest, a stout man and also very tall, dreaded him on account of his boastful talk which attracted followers.
The Abbe Maritime was a politic man, and believed in being diplomatic.
There had been a rivalry between them for ten years, a secret, intense, incessant rivalry.
Sabot was municipal councillor, and they thought he would become mayor, which would inevitably mean the final overthrow of the church.
The elections were about to take place.
The church party was shaking in its shoes in Martinville.
One morning the cure set out for Rouen, telling his servant that he was going to see the archbishop.
He returned in two days with a joyous, triumphant air.
And everyone knew the following day that the chancel of the church was going to be renovated.
A sum of six hundred francs had been contributed by the archbishop out of his private fund.
All the old pine pews were to be removed, and replaced by new pews made of oak.
It would be a big carpentering job, and they talked about it that very evening in all the houses in the village.
Theodule Sabot was not laughing.
When he went through the village the following morning, the neighbors, friends and enemies, all asked him, jokingly: “Are you going to do the work on the chancel of the church?” He could find nothing to say, but he was furious, he was good and angry.
Ill-natured people added: “It is a good piece of work; and will bring in not less than two or three per cent. profit.” Two days later, they heard that the work of renovation had been entrusted to Celestin Chambrelan, the carpenter from Percheville.
That would be well worth the two thousand francs that had been demanded of the church administration.
Theodule Sabot could not sleep for thinking about it.
Never, in all the memory of man, had a country carpenter undertaken a similar piece of work.
Then a rumor spread abroad that the cure felt very grieved that he had to give this work to a carpenter who was a stranger in the community, but that Sabot's opinions were a barrier to his being entrusted with the job.
He called at the parsonage just as it was growing dark.
Two attendants on the altar of the Virgin, two sour old maids, were decorating the altar for the month of Mary, under the direction of the priest, who stood in the middle of the chancel with his portly paunch, directing the two women who, mounted on chairs, were placing flowers around the tabernacle.
Sabot felt ill at ease in there, as though he were in the house of his greatest enemy, but the greed of gain was gnawing at his heart.
He drew nearer, holding his cap in his hand, and not paying any attention to the “demoiselles de la Vierge,” who remained standing startled, astonished, motionless on their chairs.
He faltered: “Good morning, monsieur le cure.” The priest replied without looking at him, all occupied as he was with the altar: “Good morning, Mr.
Carpenter.” Sabot, nonplussed, knew not what to say next.
But after a pause he remarked: “You are making preparations?” Abbe Maritime replied: “Yes, we are near the month of Mary.” “Why, why,” remarked Sabot and then was silent.
He would have liked to retire now without saying anything, but a glance at the chancel held him back.
He saw sixteen seats that had to be remade, six to the right and eight to the left, the door of the sacristy occupying the place of two.
Sixteen oak seats, that would be worth at most three hundred francs, and by figuring carefully one might certainly make two hundred francs on the work if one were not clumsy.
Then he stammered out: “I have come about the work.” The cure appeared surprised.
He asked: “What work?” “The work to be done,” murmured Sabot, in dismay.
Then the priest turned round and looking him straight in the eyes, said: “Do you mean the repairs in the chancel of my church?” At the tone of the abbe, Theodule Sabot felt a chill run down his back and he once more had a longing to take to his heels.
However, he replied humbly: “Why, yes, monsieur le cure.” Then the abbe folded his arms across his large stomach and, as if filled with amazement, said: “Is it you—you—you, Sabot—who have come to ask me for this . . .
You—the only irreligious man in my parish!
The archbishop would give me a reprimand, perhaps transfer me.” He stopped a few seconds, for breath, and then resumed in a calmer tone: “I can understand that it pains you to see a work of such importance entrusted to a carpenter from a neighboring parish.
But I cannot do otherwise, unless—but no—it is impossible—you would not consent, and unless you did, never.” Sabot now looked at the row of benches in line as far as the entrance door.
Christopher, if they were going to change all those!
Tell me.” The priest, in a firm tone replied: “I must have an extraordinary token of your good intentions.” “I do not say—I do not say; perhaps we might come to an understanding,” faltered Sabot.
“You will have to take communion publicly at high mass next Sunday,” declared the cure.
The carpenter felt he was growing pale, and without replying, he asked: “And the benches, are they going to be renovated?” The abbe replied with confidence: “Yes, but later on.” Sabot resumed: “I do not say, I do not say.
I am not calling it off, I am consenting to religion, for sure.
But what rubs me the wrong way is, putting it in practice; but in this case I will not be refractory.” The attendants of the Virgin, having got off their chairs had concealed themselves behind the altar; and they listened pale with emotion.
The cure, seeing he had gained the victory, became all at once very friendly, quite familiar.
That was wisely said, and not stupid, you understand.
“You understand perfectly that you must have a general cleaning up, a thorough cleansing.
So I will expect you to-morrow.” The carpenter, much agitated, asked: “Where do you do that?” “Why—in the confessional.” “In—that box, over there in the corner?
The fact is—is—that it does not suit me, your box.” “How is that?” “Seeing that—seeing that I am not accustomed to that, and also I am rather hard of hearing.” The cure was very affable and said: “Well, then! you shall come to my house and into my parlor.
Does that suit you?” “Yes, that is all right, that will suit me, but your box, no.” “Well, then, to-morrow after the days work, at six o'clock.” “That is understood, that is all right, that is agreed on.
To-morrow, monsieur le cure.
Whoever draws back is a skunk!” And he held out his great rough hand which the priest grasped heartily with a clap that resounded through the church.
Theodule Sabot was not easy in his mind all the following day.
He had a feeling analogous to the apprehension one experiences when a tooth has to be drawn.
The thought recurred to him at every moment: “I must go to confession this evening.” And his troubled mind, the mind of an atheist only half convinced, was bewildered with a confused and overwhelming dread of the divine mystery.
As soon as he had finished his work, he betook himself to the parsonage.
The cure was waiting for him in the garden, reading his breviary as he walked along a little path.
He appeared radiant and greeted him with a good-natured laugh.
Come in, come in, Monsieur Sabot, no one will eat you.” And Sabot preceded him into the house.
He faltered: “If you do not mind I should like to get through with this little matter at once.” The cure replied: “I am at your service.
I have my surplice here.
One minute and I will listen to you.” The carpenter, so disturbed that he had not two ideas in his head, watched him as he put on the white vestment with its pleated folds.
The priest beckoned to him and said: “Kneel down on this cushion.” Sabot remained standing, ashamed of having to kneel.
He stuttered: “Is it necessary?” But the abbe had become dignified.
“You cannot approach the penitent bench except on your knees.” And Sabot knelt down.
“Repeat the confiteor,” said the priest.
If you do not remember it, repeat after me, one by one, the words I am going to say.” And the cure repeated the sacred prayer, in a slow tone, emphasizing the words which the carpenter repeated after him.
Then he said: “Now make your confession.” But Sabot was silent, not knowing where to begin.
“My child, I will ask you questions, since you don't seem familiar with these things.
We will take, one by one, the commandments of God.
Listen to me and do not be disturbed.
“'One God alone, thou shalt adore, And love him perfectly.' “Have you ever loved anything, or anybody, as well as you loved God?
Have you loved him with all your soul, all your heart, all the strength of your love?” Sabot was perspiring with the effort of thinking.
To say that I do not love my children, no—I cannot say that.
But I love him well, for sure, I love him all the same.” The priest said gravely “You must love Him more than all besides.” And Sabot, meaning well, declared “I will do what I possibly can, m'sieu le cure.” The abbe resumed: “'God's name in vain thou shalt not take Nor swear by any other thing.' “Did you ever swear?” “No-oh, that, no!
Sometimes, in a moment of anger, I may say sacre nom de Dieu!
But then, I never swear.” “That is swearing,” cried the priest, and added seriously: “Do not do it again.
“'Thy Sundays thou shalt keep In serving God devoutly.' “What do you do on Sunday?” This time Sabot scratched his ear.
I work on Sunday.” The cure interrupted him, saying magnanimously: “I know, you will do better in future.
I will pass over the following commandments, certain that you have not transgressed the two first.
I will resume: “'Others' goods thou shalt not take Nor keep what is not thine.' “Have you ever taken in any way what belonged to another?” But Theodule Sabot became indignant.
To say that I have not sometimes charged for a few more hours of work to customers who had means, I could not say that.
To say that I never add a few centimes to bills, only a few, I would not say that.
Oh, not that, no!” The priest resumed severely: “To take one single centime constitutes a theft.
To say that I have never made people believe things that were not true when it was to my own interest, I would not like to say that.
But as for lying, I am not a liar.” The priest simply said: “Watch yourself more closely.” Then he continued: “'The works of the flesh thou shalt not desire Except in marriage only.' “Did you ever desire, or live with, any other woman than your wife?” Sabot exclaimed with sincerity: “As to that, no; oh, as to that, no, m'sieu le Cure.
That is the truth.” They were silent a few seconds, then, in a lower tone, as though a doubt had arisen in his mind, he resumed: “When I go to town, to say that I never go into a house, you know, one of the licensed houses, just to laugh and talk and see something different, I could not say that.
But I always pay, monsieur le cure, I always pay.
From the moment you pay, without anyone seeing or knowing you, no one can get you into trouble.” The cure did not insist, and gave him absolution.
Theodule Sabot did the work on the chancel, and goes to communion every month.
THE WRONG HOUSE Quartermaster Varajou had obtained a week's leave to go and visit his sister, Madame Padoie.
Varajou, who was in garrison at Rennes and was leading a pretty gay life, finding himself high and dry, wrote to his sister saying that he would devote a week to her.
It was not that he cared particularly for Mme.
Padoie, a little moralist, a devotee, and always cross; but he needed money, needed it very badly, and he remembered that, of all his relations, the Padoies were the only ones whom he had never approached on the subject.
Pere Varajou, formerly a horticulturist at Angers, but now retired from business, had closed his purse strings to his scapegrace son and had hardly seen him for two years.
His daughter had married Padoie, a former treasury clerk, who had just been appointed tax collector at Vannes.
Varajou, on leaving the train, had some one direct him to the house of his brother-in-law, whom he found in his office arguing with the Breton peasants of the neighborhood.
Padoie rose from his seat, held out his hand across the table littered with papers, murmured, “Take a chair.
I will be at liberty in a moment,” sat down again and resumed his discussion.
The peasants did not understand his explanations, the collector did not understand their line of argument.
He spoke French, they spoke Breton, and the clerk who acted as interpreter appeared not to understand either.
He was tall, thin, bony, slow, hairy, with heavy arched eyebrows.
His speech, his gestures, his thoughts, all were soft.
Varajou said to himself, “What a fool!” He, himself, was one of those noisy roysterers for whom the greatest pleasures in life are the cafe and abandoned women.
He understood nothing outside of these conditions of existence.
A boisterous braggart, filled with contempt for the rest of the world, he despised the entire universe from the height of his ignorance.
When he said: “Nom d'un chien, what a spree!” he expressed the highest degree of admiration of which his mind was capable.
Having finally got rid of his peasants, Padoie inquired: “How are you?” “Pretty well, as you see.
It is very kind of you to have thought of coming to see us.” “Oh, I have been thinking of it for some time; but, you know, in the military profession one has not much freedom.” “Oh, I know, I know.
All the same, it is very kind of you.” “And Josephine, is she well?” “Yes, yes, thank you; you will see her presently.” “Where is she?” “She is making some calls.
She went over to her brother without any eagerness, held her cheek for him to kiss, and asked: “Have you been here long?” “No, hardly half an hour.” “Oh, I thought the train would be late.
Will you come into the parlor?” They went into the adjoining room, leaving Padoie to his accounts and his taxpayers.
As soon as they were alone, she said: “I have heard nice things about you!” “What have you heard?” “It seems that you are behaving like a blackguard, getting drunk and contracting debts.” He appeared very much astonished.
“I! never in the world!” “Oh, do not deny it, I know it.” He attempted to defend himself, but she gave him such a lecture that he could say nothing more.
She then resumed: “We dine at six o'clock, and you can amuse yourself until then.
I cannot entertain you, as I have so many things to do.” When he was alone he hesitated as to whether he should sleep or take a walk.
He sauntered slowly through the quiet Breton town, so sleepy, so calm, so dead, on the shores of its inland bay that is called “le Morbihan.” He looked at the little gray houses, the occasional pedestrians, the empty stores, and he murmured: “Vannes is certainly not gay, not lively.
It was a sad idea, my coming here.” He reached the harbor, the desolate harbor, walked back along a lonely, deserted boulevard, and got home before five o'clock.
The maid woke him, knocking at the door.
“Dinner is ready, sir:” He went downstairs.
In the damp dining-room with the paper peeling from the walls near the floor, he saw a soup tureen on a round table without any table cloth, on which were also three melancholy soup-plates.
They all sat down to table, and the husband and wife crossed themselves over the pit of their stomachs, after which Padoie helped the soup, a meat soup.
The officer ate slowly, with disgust, weariness and rage.
You are not made for society, with your poor health.” She then talked about society in Vannes, of the excellent social circle in which the Padoies moved, thanks to their religious sentiments.
A puree of potatoes and a dish of pork were next served, in honor of the guest.
When Varajou saw that he would have to spend the evening tete-a-tete with his sister, endure her reproaches, listen to her sermons, without even a glass of liqueur to help him to swallow these remonstrances, he felt that he could not stand the torture, and declared that he was obliged to go to the police station to have something attended to regarding his leave of absence.
He had scarcely reached the street before he gave himself a shake like a dog coming out of the water.
He muttered: “Heavens, heavens, heavens, what a galley slave's life!” And he set out to look for a cafe, the best in the town.
Inside the cafe, five or six men, semi-gentlemen, and not noisy, were drinking and chatting quietly, leaning their elbows on the small tables, while two billiard players walked round the green baize, where the balls were hitting each other as they rolled.
One heard them counting: “Eighteen-nineteen.
Wasn't I right?” Varajou ordered: “A demi-tasse and a small decanter of brandy, the best.” Then he sat down and waited for it.
He was accustomed to spending his evenings off duty with his companions, amid noise and the smoke of pipes.
This silence, this quiet, exasperated him.
He began to drink; first the coffee, then the brandy, and asked for another decanter.
There is something for you.” “Thank you, sir.” And Varajou went out of the cafe, repeating, “Second to the left, first to the right, number 15.” But at the end of a few seconds he thought, “second to the left yes.
The hall door was left partly open, and a lamp was burning in the vestibule.
The non-commissioned officer thought to himself: “This looks all right.” He went in and, as no one appeared, he called out: “Hallo there, hallo!” A little maid appeared and looked astonished at seeing a soldier.
Are the ladies upstairs?” “Yes, sir.” “In the parlor?” “Yes, sir.” “May I go up?” “Yes, sir.” “The door opposite the stairs?” “Yes, sir.” He ascended the stairs, opened a door and saw sitting in a room well lighted up by two lamps, a chandelier, and two candelabras with candles in them, four ladies in evening dress, apparently expecting some one.
Three of them, the younger ones, remained seated, with rather a formal air, on some crimson velvet chairs; while the fourth, who was about forty-five, was arranging some flowers in a vase.
She was very stout, and wore a green silk dress with low neck and short sleeves, allowing her red neck, covered with powder, to escape as a huge flower might from its corolla.
The officer saluted them, saying: “Good-day, ladies.” The older woman turned round, appeared surprised, but bowed.
But seeing that they did not welcome him eagerly, he thought that possibly only commissioned officers were admitted to the house, and this made him uneasy.
But he said: “Bah, if one comes in, we can soon tell.” He then remarked: “Are you all well?” The large lady, no doubt the mistress of the house, replied: “Very well, thank you!” He could think of nothing else to say, and they were all silent.
But at last, being ashamed of his bashfulness, and with an awkward laugh, he said: “Do not people have any amusement in this country?
I will pay for a bottle of wine.” He had not finished his sentence when the door opened, and in walked Padoie dressed in a black suit.
Varajou gave a shout of joy, and rising from his seat, he rushed at his brother-in-law, put his arms round him and waltzed him round the room, shouting: “Here is Padoie!
Here is Padoie!” Then letting go of the tax collector he exclaimed as he looked him in the face: “Oh, oh, oh, you scamp, you scamp!
Are you tired of her, say?” As he thought of all that he might gain through this unexpected situation, the forced loan, the inevitable blackmail, he flung himself on the lounge and laughed so heartily that the piece of furniture creaked all over.
The three young ladies, rising simultaneously, made their escape, while the older woman retreated to the door looking as though she were about to faint.
And then two gentlemen appeared in evening dress, and wearing the ribbon of an order.
He was sent to us as a convalescent.
You can see that he is crazy.” Varajou was sitting up now, and not being able to understand it all, he guessed that he had committed some monstrous folly.
Then he rose, and turning to his brother-in-law, said: “What house is this?” But Padoie, becoming suddenly furious, stammered out: “What house—what—what house is this?
Wretch—scoundrel—villain—what house, indeed?
The house of the judge—of the judge of the Supreme Court—of the Supreme Court—of the Supreme Court—Oh, oh—rascal! —rascal!—rascal!” THE DIAMOND NECKLACE The girl was one of those pretty and charming young creatures who sometimes are born, as if by a slip of fate, into a family of clerks.
She had no dowry, no expectations, no way of being known, understood, loved, married by any rich and distinguished man; so she let herself be married to a little clerk of the Ministry of Public Instruction.
Natural ingenuity, instinct for what is elegant, a supple mind are their sole hierarchy, and often make of women of the people the equals of the very greatest ladies.
Mathilde suffered ceaselessly, feeling herself born to enjoy all delicacies and all luxuries.
She was distressed at the poverty of her dwelling, at the bareness of the walls, at the shabby chairs, the ugliness of the curtains.
All those things, of which another woman of her rank would never even have been conscious, tortured her and made her angry.
The sight of the little Breton peasant who did her humble housework aroused in her despairing regrets and bewildering dreams.
She thought of silent antechambers hung with Oriental tapestry, illumined by tall bronze candelabra, and of two great footmen in knee breeches who sleep in the big armchairs, made drowsy by the oppressive heat of the stove.
She thought of long reception halls hung with ancient silk, of the dainty cabinets containing priceless curiosities and of the little coquettish perfumed reception rooms made for chatting at five o'clock with intimate friends, with men famous and sought after, whom all women envy and whose attention they all desire.
When she sat down to dinner, before the round table covered with a tablecloth in use three days, opposite her husband, who uncovered the soup tureen and declared with a delighted air, “Ah, the good soup!
She would have liked so much to please, to be envied, to be charming, to be sought after.
She had a friend, a former schoolmate at the convent, who was rich, and whom she did not like to go to see any more because she felt so sad when she came home.
But one evening her husband reached home with a triumphant air and holding a large envelope in his hand.
“There,” said he, “there is something for you.” She tore the paper quickly and drew out a printed card which bore these words: The Minister of Public Instruction and Madame Georges Ramponneau request the honor of M. and Madame Loisel's company at the palace of the Ministry on Monday evening, January 18th.
Instead of being delighted, as her husband had hoped, she threw the invitation on the table crossly, muttering: “What do you wish me to do with that?” “Why, my dear, I thought you would be glad.
You never go out, and this is such a fine opportunity.
Every one wants to go; it is very select, and they are not giving many invitations to clerks.
The whole official world will be there.” She looked at him with an irritated glance and said impatiently: “And what do you wish me to put on my back?” He had not thought of that.
He stammered: “Why, the gown you go to the theatre in.
It looks very well to me.” He stopped, distracted, seeing that his wife was weeping.
What's the matter?” he answered.
By a violent effort she conquered her grief and replied in a calm voice, while she wiped her wet cheeks: “Nothing.
Only I have no gown, and, therefore, I can't go to this ball.
Give your card to some colleague whose wife is better equipped than I am.” He was in despair.
He resumed: “Come, let us see, Mathilde.
How much would it cost, a suitable gown, which you could use on other occasions—something very simple?” She reflected several seconds, making her calculations and wondering also what sum she could ask without drawing on herself an immediate refusal and a frightened exclamation from the economical clerk.
Finally she replied hesitating: “I don't know exactly, but I think I could manage it with four hundred francs.” He grew a little pale, because he was laying aside just that amount to buy a gun and treat himself to a little shooting next summer on the plain of Nanterre, with several friends who went to shoot larks there of a Sunday.
Come, you have seemed very queer these last three days.” And she answered: “It annoys me not to have a single piece of jewelry, not a single ornament, nothing to put on.
I shall look poverty-stricken.
For ten francs you can get two or three magnificent roses.” She was not convinced.
“No; there's nothing more humiliating than to look poor among other women who are rich.” “How stupid you are!” her husband cried.
“Go look up your friend, Madame Forestier, and ask her to lend you some jewels.
You're intimate enough with her to do that.” She uttered a cry of joy: “True!
I never thought of it.” The next day she went to her friend and told her of her distress.
Madame Forestier went to a wardrobe with a mirror, took out a large jewel box, brought it back, opened it and said to Madame Loisel: “Choose, my dear.” She saw first some bracelets, then a pearl necklace, then a Venetian gold cross set with precious stones, of admirable workmanship.
She tried on the ornaments before the mirror, hesitated and could not make up her mind to part with them, to give them back.
Look further; I don't know what you like.” Suddenly she discovered, in a black satin box, a superb diamond necklace, and her heart throbbed with an immoderate desire.
Her hands trembled as she took it.
She fastened it round her throat, outside her high-necked waist, and was lost in ecstasy at her reflection in the mirror.
Then she asked, hesitating, filled with anxious doubt: “Will you lend me this, only this?” “Why, yes, certainly.” She threw her arms round her friend's neck, kissed her passionately, then fled with her treasure.
She was prettier than any other woman present, elegant, graceful, smiling and wild with joy.
All the men looked at her, asked her name, sought to be introduced.
All the attaches of the Cabinet wished to waltz with her.
She was remarked by the minister himself.
She danced with rapture, with passion, intoxicated by pleasure, forgetting all in the triumph of her beauty, in the glory of her success, in a sort of cloud of happiness comprised of all this homage, admiration, these awakened desires and of that sense of triumph which is so sweet to woman's heart.
Her husband had been sleeping since midnight in a little deserted anteroom with three other gentlemen whose wives were enjoying the ball.
He threw over her shoulders the wraps he had brought, the modest wraps of common life, the poverty of which contrasted with the elegance of the ball dress.
She felt this and wished to escape so as not to be remarked by the other women, who were enveloping themselves in costly furs.
I will call a cab.” But she did not listen to him and rapidly descended the stairs.
When they reached the street they could not find a carriage and began to look for one, shouting after the cabmen passing at a distance.
They went toward the Seine in despair, shivering with cold.
At last they found on the quay one of those ancient night cabs which, as though they were ashamed to show their shabbiness during the day, are never seen round Paris until after dark.
It took them to their dwelling in the Rue des Martyrs, and sadly they mounted the stairs to their flat.
As to him, he reflected that he must be at the ministry at ten o'clock that morning.
But suddenly she uttered a cry.
She no longer had the necklace around her neck!
“What is the matter with you?” demanded her husband, already half undressed.
She turned distractedly toward him.
“I have—I have—I've lost Madame Forestier's necklace,” she cried.
He stood up, bewildered.
Impossible!” They looked among the folds of her skirt, of her cloak, in her pockets, everywhere, but did not find it.
“Yes, I felt it in the vestibule of the minister's house.” “But if you had lost it in the street we should have heard it fall.
It must be in the cab.” “Yes, probably.
And you—didn't you notice it?” “No.” They looked, thunderstruck, at each other.
She sat waiting on a chair in her ball dress, without strength to go to bed, overwhelmed, without any fire, without a thought.
Her husband returned about seven o'clock.
He went to police headquarters, to the newspaper offices to offer a reward; he went to the cab companies—everywhere, in fact, whither he was urged by the least spark of hope.
She waited all day, in the same condition of mad fear before this terrible calamity.
Loisel returned at night with a hollow, pale face.
He had discovered nothing.
“You must write to your friend,” said he, “that you have broken the clasp of her necklace and that you are having it mended.
That will give us time to turn round.” She wrote at his dictation.
Loisel, who had aged five years, declared: “We must consider how to replace that ornament.” The next day they took the box that had contained it and went to the jeweler whose name was found within.
He consulted his books.
“It was not I, madame, who sold that necklace; I must simply have furnished the case.” Then they went from jeweler to jeweler, searching for a necklace like the other, trying to recall it, both sick with chagrin and grief.
They found, in a shop at the Palais Royal, a string of diamonds that seemed to them exactly like the one they had lost.
It was worth forty thousand francs.
And they made a bargain that he should buy it back for thirty-four thousand francs, in case they should find the lost necklace before the end of February.
Loisel possessed eighteen thousand francs which his father had left him.
He did borrow, asking a thousand francs of one, five hundred of another, five louis here, three louis there.
He gave notes, took up ruinous obligations, dealt with usurers and all the race of lenders.
He compromised all the rest of his life, risked signing a note without even knowing whether he could meet it; and, frightened by the trouble yet to come, by the black misery that was about to fall upon him, by the prospect of all the physical privations and moral tortures that he was to suffer, he went to get the new necklace, laying upon the jeweler's counter thirty-six thousand francs.
When Madame Loisel took back the necklace Madame Forestier said to her with a chilly manner: “You should have returned it sooner; I might have needed it.” She did not open the case, as her friend had so much feared.
If she had detected the substitution, what would she have thought, what would she have said?
Thereafter Madame Loisel knew the horrible existence of the needy.
That dreadful debt must be paid.
They dismissed their servant; they changed their lodgings; they rented a garret under the roof.
She came to know what heavy housework meant and the odious cares of the kitchen.
She washed the soiled linen, the shirts and the dishcloths, which she dried upon a line; she carried the slops down to the street every morning and carried up the water, stopping for breath at every landing.
And dressed like a woman of the people, she went to the fruiterer, the grocer, the butcher, a basket on her arm, bargaining, meeting with impertinence, defending her miserable money, sou by sou.
Her husband worked evenings, making up a tradesman's accounts, and late at night he often copied manuscript for five sous a page.
At the end of ten years they had paid everything, everything, with the rates of usury and the accumulations of the compound interest.
She had become the woman of impoverished households—strong and hard and rough.
But sometimes, when her husband was at the office, she sat down near the window and she thought of that gay evening of long ago, of that ball where she had been so beautiful and so admired.
What would have happened if she had not lost that necklace?
How strange and changeful is life!
But one Sunday, having gone to take a walk in the Champs Elysees to refresh herself after the labors of the week, she suddenly perceived a woman who was leading a child.
It was Madame Forestier, still young, still beautiful, still charming.
“Good-day, Jeanne.” The other, astonished to be familiarly addressed by this plain good- wife, did not recognize her at all and stammered: “But—madame!—I do not know—You must have mistaken.” “No.
I am Mathilde Loisel.” Her friend uttered a cry.
“Oh, my poor Mathilde!
How so?” “Do you remember that diamond necklace you lent me to wear at the ministerial ball?” “Yes.
You can understand that it was not easy for us, for us who had nothing.
At last it is ended, and I am very glad.” Madame Forestier had stopped.
“You say that you bought a necklace of diamonds to replace mine?” “Yes.
They were very similar.” And she smiled with a joy that was at once proud and ingenuous.
Madame Forestier, deeply moved, took her hands.
Why, my necklace was paste!
It was worth at most only five hundred francs!” THE MARQUIS DE FUMEROL Roger de Tourneville was whiffing a cigar and blowing out small clouds of smoke every now and then, as he sat astride a chair amid a party of friends.
I call him Don Quixote, because for twelve years he has been running a tilt against the windmill of the Republic, without quite knowing whether it was in the cause of the Bourbons or the Orleanists.
At present he is bearing the lance in the cause of the Orleanists alone, because there is no one else left.
In any case, he thinks himself the first gentleman of France, the best known, the most influential, the head of the party; and as he is an irremovable senator, he thinks that the thrones of the neighboring kings are very insecure.
“As for my mother, she is my father's soul, she is the soul of the kingdom and of religion, and the scourge of all evil-thinkers.
My uncle was scarcely ever mentioned in the house, and I did not know him at all; all I knew from public talk was, that he had led, and was still leading, a gay life.
After having spent his fortune in fast living, he was now in small apartments in the Rue des Martyrs.
“An ancient peer of France and former colonel of cavalry, it was said that he believed in neither God nor devil.
Not believing, therefore, in a future life he had abused the present life in every way, and had become a live wound in my mother's heart.
Here it is: 'Monsieur le Comte, I think I ought to let you know that your brother- in-law, the Comte Fumerol, is going to die.
Perhaps you would like to make some arrangements, and do not forget I told you.
Your servant, 'MELANIE.' “'We must take counsel,' papa murmured. 'In my position, I ought to watch over your brother's last moments.' “Mamma continued: 'I will send for Abbe Poivron and ask his advice, and then I will go to my brother with the abbe and Roger.
Remain here, Paul, for you must not compromise yourself; but a woman can, and ought to do these things.
For a politician in your position, it is another matter.
It would be a fine thing for one of your opponents to be able to bring one of your most laudable actions up against you.' 'You are right,' my father said. 'Do as you think best, my dear wife.' “A quarter of an hour, later, the Abbe Poivron came into the drawing- room, and the situation was explained to him, analyzed and discussed in all its bearings.
If the Marquis de Fumerol, one of the greatest names in France, were to die without the ministrations of religion, it would assuredly be a terrible blow to the nobility in general, and to the Count de Tourneville in particular, and the freethinkers would be triumphant.
The liberal newspapers would sing songs of victory for six months; my mother's name would be dragged through the mire and brought into the prose of Socialistic journals, and my father's name would be smirched.
It was impossible that such a thing should be.
“A crusade was therefore immediately decided upon, which was to be led by the Abbe Poivron, a little, fat, clean, priest with a faint perfume about him, a true vicar of a large church in a noble and rich quarter.
“The landau was ordered and we all three set out, my mother, the cure and I, to administer the last sacraments to my uncle.
“It had been decided first of all we should see Madame Melanie who had written the letter, and who was most likely the porter's wife, or my uncle's servant, and I dismounted, as an advance guard, in front of a seven-story house and went into a dark passage, where I had great difficulty in finding the porter's den.
He looked at me distrustfully, and I said: “'Madame Melanie, if you please.' 'Don't know her!' 'But I have received a letter from her.' 'That may be, but I don't know her.
Are you asking for a lodger?' 'No, a servant probably.
Go and see, the fifth story on the left.' “As soon as he found I was not asking for a doubtful character he became more friendly and came as far as the corridor with me.
He was a tall, thin man with white whiskers, the manners of a beadle and majestic gestures.
“I climbed up a long spiral staircase, the railing of which I did not venture to touch, and I gave three discreet knocks at the left-hand door on the fifth story.
It opened immediately, and an enormous dirty woman appeared before me.
She barred the entrance with her extended arms which she placed against the two doorposts, and growled: “'What do you want?' 'Are you Madame Melanie?' 'Yes.' 'I am the Visconte de Tourneville.' 'Ah!
Come in.' 'Well, the fact is, my mother is downstairs with a priest.' 'Oh!
All right; go and bring them up; but be careful of the porter.' “I went downstairs and came up again with my mother, who was followed by the abbe, and I fancied that I heard other footsteps behind us.
As soon as we were in the kitchen, Melanie offered us chairs, and we all four sat down to deliberate.
“'Is he very ill?' my mother asked. 'Oh! yes, madame; he will not be here long.' 'Does he seem disposed to receive a visit from a priest?' 'Oh!
I shall see how he receives me, and perhaps I shall be able to prepare him to receive you.' “My mother, who did not suspect any trick, replied: 'Yes, go, my dear.' But a woman's voice cried out: 'Melanie!' “The servant ran out and said: 'What do you want, Mademoiselle Claire?' 'The omelette; quickly.' 'In a minute, mademoiselle.' And coming back to us, she explained this summons.
“They had ordered a cheese omelette at two o'clock as a slight collation.
And she at once began to break the eggs into a salad bowl, and to whip them vigorously, while I went out on the landing and pulled the bell, so as to formally announce my arrival.
“I was certainly very much surprised at the sight of my uncle, for he was very handsome, very solemn and very elegant, the old rake.
“Sitting, almost lying, in a large armchair, his legs wrapped in blankets, his hands, his long, white hands, over the arms of the chair, he was waiting for death with the dignity of a patriarch.
“Standing behind his armchair, as if to defend him against me, were two young women, who looked at me with bold eyes.
In their petticoats and morning wrappers, with bare arms, with coal black hair twisted in a knot on the nape of their neck, with embroidered, Oriental slippers, which showed their ankles and silk stockings, they looked like the figures in some symbolical painting, by the side of the dying man.
Between the easy-chair and the bed, there was a table covered with a white cloth, on which two plates, two glasses, two forks and two knives, were waiting for the cheese omelette which had been ordered some time before of Melanie.
“My uncle said in a weak, almost breathless, but clear voice: “'Good-morning, my child; it is rather late in the day to come and see me; our acquaintanceship will not last long.' I stammered out, 'It was not my fault, uncle:' 'No; I know that,' he replied. 'It is your father and mother's fault more than yours.
Why did they not come themselves?' “I looked up at the two girls and said gently: 'It is not their fault if they could not come, uncle.
But it would be difficult for my father, and impossible for my mother to come in here.' The old man did not reply, but raised his hand toward mine, and I took the pale, cold hand and held it in my own.
“The door opened, Melanie came in with the omelette and put it on the table, and the two girls immediately sat down at the table, and began to eat without taking their eyes off me.
Then I said: 'Uncle, it would give great pleasure to my mother to embrace you.' 'I also,' he murmured, 'should like——' He said no more, and I could think of nothing to propose to him, and there was silence except for the noise of the plates and that vague sound of eating.
“Now, the abbe, who was listening behind the door, seeing our embarrassment, and thinking we had won the game, thought the time had come to interpose, and showed himself.
My uncle was so stupefied at sight of him that at first he remained motionless; and then he opened his mouth as if he meant to swallow up the priest, and shouted to him in a strong, deep, furious voice: 'What are you doing here?' “The abbe, who was used to difficult situations, came forward into the room, murmuring: 'I have come in your sister's name, Monsieur le Marquis; she has sent me.
She would be happy, monsieur—' “But the marquis was not listening.
Raising one hand, he pointed to the door with a proud, tragic gesture, and said angrily and breathing hard: 'Leave this room—go out—robber of souls.
Go out from here, you violator of consciences.
“The abbe and I rejoined my mother in the kitchen, and Melanie again offered us chairs. 'I knew quite well that this method would not work; we must try some other means, otherwise he will escape us.' And they began deliberating afresh, my mother being of one opinion and the abbe of another, while I held a third.
“We had been discussing the matter in a low voice for half an hour, perhaps, when a great noise of furniture being moved and of cries uttered by my uncle, more vehement and terrible even than the former had been, made us all four jump up.
“Through the doors and walls we could hear him shouting: 'Go out—out —rascals—humbugs, get out, scoundrels—get out—get out!' “Melanie rushed in, but came back immediately to call me to help her, and I hastened in.
Opposite to my uncle, who was terribly excited by anger, almost standing up and vociferating, stood two men, one behind the other, who seemed to be waiting till he should be dead with rage.
“By his ridiculous long coat, his long English shoes, his manners of a tutor out of a position, his high collar, white necktie and straight hair, his humble face of a false priest of a bastard religion, I immediately recognized the first as a Protestant minister.
“The second was the porter of the house, who belonged to the reformed religion and had followed us, and having seen our defeat, had gone to fetch his own pastor, in hopes that he might meet a better reception.
If the sight of the Catholic priest, of the priest of his ancestors, had irritated the Marquis de Fumerol, who had become a freethinker, the sight of his porter's minister made him altogether beside himself.
I therefore took the two men by the arm and threw them out of the room so roughly that they bumped against each other twice, between the two doors which led to the staircase; and then I disappeared in my turn and returned to the kitchen, which was our headquarters in order to take counsel with my mother and the abbe.
“But Melanie came back in terror, sobbing out: “'He is dying—he is dying—come immediately—he is dying.' “My mother rushed out.
She went straight up to the two girls who were kneeling by the body and trying to raise it up, and pointing to the door with irresistible authority, dignity and majesty, she said: 'Now it is time for you to leave the room.' “And they went out without a word of protest.
I must add, that I was getting ready to turn them out as unceremoniously as I had done the parson and the porter.
“Then the Abbe Poivron administered the last sacraments to my uncle with all the customary prayers, and remitted all his sins, while my mother sobbed as she knelt near her brother.
Suddenly, however, she exclaimed: 'He recognized me; he pressed my hand; I am sure he recognized me!!!—and that he thanked me!
Oh, God, what happiness!' “Poor mamma!
If she had known or guessed for whom those thanks were intended!
“They laid my uncle on his bed; he was certainly dead this time.
“'Madame,' Melanie said, 'we have no sheets to bury him in; all the linen belongs to these two young ladies,' and when I looked at the omelette which they had not finished, I felt inclined to laugh and to cry at the same time.
There are some humorous moments and some humorous situations in life, occasionally!
“We gave my uncle a magnificent funeral, with five speeches at the grave.
Baron de Croiselles, the senator, showed in admirable terms that God always returns victorious into well-born souls which have temporarily been led into error.
All the members of the Royalist and Catholic party followed the funeral procession with the enthusiasm of victors, as they spoke of that beautiful death after a somewhat troublous life.” Viscount Roger ceased speaking; his audience was laughing.
Then somebody said: “Bah!
That is the story of all conversions in extremis.” THE TRIP OF LE HORLA On the morning of July 8th I received the following telegram: “Fine day.
Always my predictions.
Baggage and servants left at noon at the social session.
Beginning of manoeuvres at three.
Jovis.” At five o'clock sharp I entered the gas works of La Villette.
It might have been mistaken for the colossal ruins of an old town inhabited by Cyclops.
There were immense dark avenues separating heavy gasometers standing one behind another, like monstrous columns, unequally high and, undoubtedly, in the past the supports of some tremendous, some fearful iron edifice.
The balloon was lying in the courtyard and had the appearance of a cake made of yellow cloth, flattened on the ground under a rope.
That is called placing a balloon in a sweep-net, and, in fact, it appeared like an enormous fish.
Two or three hundred people were looking at it, sitting or standing, and some were examining the basket, a nice little square basket for a human cargo, bearing on its side in gold letters on a mahogany plate the words: Le Horla.
Suddenly the people began to stand back, for the gas was beginning to enter into the balloon through a long tube of yellow cloth, which lay on the soil, swelling and undulating like an enormous worm.
It is thus that nature itself nourishes beings until their birth.
The creature that will rise soon begins to move, and the attendants of Captain Jovis, as Le Horla grew larger, spread and put in place the net which covers it, so that the pressure will be regular and equally distributed at every point.
The operation is very delicate and very important, for the resistance of the cotton cloth of which the balloon is made is figured not in proportion to the contact surface of this cloth with the net, but in proportion to the links of the basket.
Le Horla, moreover, has been designed by M.
Mallet, constructed under his own eyes and made by himself.
Everything had been made in the shops of M.
We must add that everything was new in this balloon, from the varnish to the valve, those two essential parts of a balloon.
Both must render the cloth gas-proof, as the sides of a ship are waterproof.
The old varnishes, made with a base of linseed oil, sometimes fermented and thus burned the cloth, which in a short time would tear like a piece of paper.
The valves were apt to close imperfectly after being opened and when the covering called “cataplasme” was injured.
L'Hoste in the open sea during the night proved the imperfection of the old system.
The two discoveries of Captain Jovis, the varnish principally, are of inestimable value in the art of ballooning.
The crowd has begun to talk, and some men, who appear to be specialists, affirm with authority that we shall come down before reaching the fortifications.
Several other things have been criticized in this novel type of balloon with which we are about to experiment with so much pleasure and success.
Some small holes and scratches made in transit have been discovered, and we cover them and plug them with a little piece of paper applied on the cloth while wet.
This method of repairing alarms and mystifies the public.
While Captain Jovis and his assistants are busy with the last details, the travellers go to dine in the canteen of the gas-works, according to the established custom.
When we come out again the balloon is swaying, enormous and transparent, a prodigious golden fruit, a fantastic pear which is still ripening, covered by the last rays of the setting sun.
Now the basket is attached, the barometers are brought, the siren, which we will blow to our hearts' content, is also brought, also the two trumpets, the eatables, the overcoats and raincoats, all the small articles that can go with the men in that flying basket.
As the wind pushes the balloon against the gasometers, it is necessary to steady it now and then, to avoid an accident at the start.
Captain Jovis is now ready and calls all the passengers.
Lieutenant Mallet jumps aboard, climbing first on the aerial net between the basket and the balloon, from which he will watch during the night the movements of Le Horla across the skies, as the officer on watch, standing on starboard, watches the course of a ship.
Etierine Beer gets in after him, then comes M.
But the basket is too heavy for the balloon, considering the long trip to be taken, and M.
Joliet, standing erect on the edge of the basket, begs the ladies, in very gallant terms, to stand aside a little, for he is afraid he might throw sand on their hats in rising.
Then he commands: “Let it loose,” and, cutting with one stroke of his knife the ropes that hold the balloon to the ground, he gives Le Horla its liberty.
Paris spreads out beneath us, a dark bluish patch, cut by its streets, from which rise, here and there, domes, towers, steeples, then around it the plain, the country, traversed by long roads, thin and white, amidst green fields of a tender or dark green, and woods almost black.
The Seine appears like a coiled snake, asleep, of which we see neither head nor tail; it crosses Paris, and the entire field resembles an immense basin of prairies and forests dotted here and there by mountains, hardly visible in the horizon.
The sun, which we could no longer see down below, now reappears as though it were about to rise again, and our balloon seems to be lighted; it must appear like a star to the people who are looking up.
Mallet every few seconds throws a cigarette paper intospace and says quietly: “We are rising, always rising,” while Captain Jovis, radiant with joy, rubs his hands together and repeats: “Eh? this varnish?
Isn't it good?” In fact, we can see whether we are rising or sinking only by throwing a cigarette paper out of the basket now and then.
If this paper appears to fall down like a stone, it means that the balloon is rising; if it appears to shoot skyward the balloon is descending.
The two barometers mark about five hundred meters, and we gaze with enthusiastic admiration at the earth we are leaving and to which we are not attached in any way; it looks like a colored map, an immense plan of the country.
All its noises, however, rise to our ears very distinctly, easily recognizable.
We hear the sound of the wheels rolling in the streets, the snap of a whip, the cries of drivers, the rolling and whistling of trains and the laughter of small boys running after one another.
Every time we pass over a village the noise of children's voices is heard above the rest and with the greatest distinctness.
Some men are calling us; the locomotives whistle; we answer with the siren, which emits plaintive, fearfully shrill wails like the voice of a weird being wandering through the world.
We perceive lights here and there, some isolated fire in the farms, and lines of gas in the towns.
We are going toward the northwest, after roaming for some time over the little lake of Enghien.
Is that town Creil or Pontoise—the one with so many lights?
But if we were over Pontoise we could see the junction of the Seine and the Oise; and that enormous fire to the left, isn't it the blast furnaces of Montataire?
Now we begin to hear slight country noises, the double cry of the quail in particular, then the mewing of cats and the barking of dogs.
We can hear them barking all over the plain and making the identical noise they make when baying at the moon.
The delicious odors of the soil rise toward us, the smell of hay, of flowers, of the moist, verdant earth, perfuming the air-a light air, in fact, so light, so sweet, so delightful that I realize I never was so fortunate as to breathe before.
A profound sense of well-being, unknown to me heretofore, pervades me, a well-being of body and spirit, composed of supineness, of infinite rest, of forgetfulness, of indifference to everything and of this novel sensation of traversing space without any of the sensations that make motion unbearable, without noise, without shocks and without fear.
Every few minutes Lieutenant Mallet, suspended in his cobweb of netting, says to Captain Jovis: “We are descending; throw down half a handful.” And the captain, who is talking and laughing with us, with a bag of ballast between his legs, takes a handful of sand out of the bag and throws it overboard.
Nothing is more amusing, more delicate, more interesting than the manoeuvring of a balloon.
It is an enormous toy, free and docile, which obeys with surprising sensitiveness, but it is also, and before all, the slave of the wind, which we cannot control.
A pinch of sand, half a sheet of paper, one or two drops of water, the bones of a chicken which we had just eaten, thrown overboard, makes it go up quickly.
A breath of cool, damp air rising from the river or the wood we are traversing makes the balloon descend two hundred metres.
The earth sleeps now, or, rather, men sleep on the earth, for the beasts awakened by the sight of our balloon announce our approach everywhere.
Now and then the rolling of a train or the whistling of a locomotive is plainly distinguishable.
We sound our siren as we pass over inhabited places; and the peasants, terrified in their beds, must surely tremble and ask themselves if the Angel Gabriel is not passing by.
A strong and continuous odor of gas can be plainly observed.
We must have encountered a current of warm air, and the balloon expands, losing its invisible blood by the escape-valve, which is called the appendix, and which closes of itself as soon as the expansion ceases.
The earth no longer gives back the echo of our trumpets; we have risen almost two thousand feet.
It is not light enough for us to consult the instruments; we only know that the rice paper falls from us like dead butterflies, that we are rising, always rising.
We can no longer see the earth; a light mist separates us from it; and above our head twinkles a world of stars.
A silvery light appears before us and makes the sky turn pale, and suddenly, as if it were rising from unknown depths behind the horizon below us rises the moon on the edge of a cloud.
It seems to be coming from below, while we are looking down upon it from a great height, leaning on the edge of our basket like an audience on a balcony.
The earth no longer seems to exist, it is buried in milky vapors that resemble a sea.
We are now alone in space with the moon, which looks like another balloon travelling opposite us; and our balloon, which shines in the air, appears like another, larger moon, a world wandering in the sky amid the stars, through infinity.
We no longer speak, think nor live; we float along through space in delicious inertia.
The air which is bearing us up has made of us all beings which resemble itself, silent, joyous, irresponsible beings, intoxicated by this stupendous flight, peculiarly alert, although motionless.
One is no longer conscious of one's flesh or one's bones; one's heart seems to have ceased beating; we have become something indescribable, birds who do not even have to flap their wings.
All memory has disappeared from our minds, all trouble from our thoughts; we have no more regrets, plans nor hopes.
We look, we feel, we wildly enjoy this fantastic journey; nothing in the sky but the moon and ourselves!
We are a wandering, travelling world, like our sisters, the planets; and this little world carries five men who have left the earth and who have almost forgotten it.
We can now see as plainly as in daylight; we look at each other, surprised at this brightness, for we have nothing to look at but ourselves and a few silvery clouds floating below us.
The barometers mark twelve hundred metres, then thirteen, fourteen, fifteen hundred; and the little rice papers still fall about us.
Captain Jovis claims that the moon has often made balloons act thus, and that the upward journey will continue.
We are now at two thousand metres; we go up to two thousand three hundred and fifty; then the balloon stops: We blow the siren and are surprised that no one answers us from the stars.
It is now past midnight, and we are crossing a broad, dry, well-cultivated country, with many roads and well populated.
But suddenly from the earth appears a bright fairy light; it disappears, reappears and once more disappears.
Jovis, intoxicated by space, exclaims: “Look, look at this phenomenon of the moon in the water.
One can see nothing more beautiful at night!” Nothing indeed can give one an idea of the wonderful brightness of these spots of light which are not fire, which do not look like reflections, which appear quickly here or there and immediately go out again.
We are now quite near the earth, and Beer exclaims:—“Look at that!
Isn't it a dog?” Indeed, something is running along the ground with great speed, and this something seems to jump over ditches, roads, trees with such ease that we could not understand what it might be.
It will grow as we descend.” I distinctly hear a great noise of foundries in the distance.
And, according to the polar star, which we have been observing all night, 'and which I have so often watched and consulted from the bridge of my little yacht on the Mediterranean, we are heading straight for Belgium.
Our siren and our two horns are continually calling.
We bellow: “Where are we?” But the balloon is going so rapidly that the bewildered man has not even time to answer us.
It goes along steadily, preceding us by about a quarter of a mile; and now I am leaning out of the basket, listening to the roaring of the wind in the trees and across the harvest fields.
I say to Captain Jovis: “How the wind blows!” He answers: “No, those are probably waterfalls.” I insist, sure of my ear that knows the sound of the wind, from hearing it so often whistle through the rigging.
Then Jovis nudges me; he fears to frighten his happy, quiet passengers, for he knows full well that a storm is pursuing us.
At last a man manages to understand us; he answers: “Nord!” We get the same reply from another.
Suddenly the lights of a town, which seems to be of considerable size, appear before us.
As we approach it, such a wonderful flow of fire appears below us that I think myself transported into some fairyland where precious stones are manufactured for giants.
The fusing material bubbles, sparkles, throws out blue, red, yellow, green sparks, reflections from giant diamonds, rubies, emeralds, turquoises, sapphires, topazes.
And near by are great foundries roaring like apocalyptic lions; high chimneys belch forth their clouds of smoke and flame, and we can hear the noise of metal striking against metal.
“Where are we?” The voice of some joker or of a crazy person answers: “In a balloon!” “Where are we?” “At Lille!” We were not mistaken.
We are already out of sight of the town, and we see Roubaix to the right, then some well-cultivated, rectangular fields, of different colors according to the crops, some yellow, some gray or brown.
But the clouds are gathering behind us, hiding the moon, whereas toward the east the sky is growing lighter, becoming a clear blue tinged with red.
And all this passes beneath us with surprising speed.
One hardly has time to notice that other fields, other meadows, other houses have already disappeared.
Cocks are crowing, but the voice of ducks drowns everything.
The early rising peasants are waving their arms and crying to us: “Let yourselves drop!” But we go along steadily, neither rising nor falling, leaning over the edge of the basket and watching the world fleeing under our feet.
Jovis sights another city far off in the distance.
It approaches; everywhere are old church spires.
They are delightful, seen thus from above.
We are already very near it, and we see that it is surrounded by water and crossed in every direction by canals.
The sweet, clear sounds rise to us from this frail roof which we have almost touched in our wandering course.
It is a charming greeting, a friendly welcome from Holland.
We answer with our siren, whose raucous voice echoes throughout the streets.
But we have hardly lost sight of it when my neighbor, Paul Bessand, asks me: “Don't you see something over there, to the right, in front of us?
It looks like a river.” And, indeed, far ahead of us stretches a bright highway, in the light of the dawning day.
Mallet leave his net and return to the basket; then we pack the barometers and everything that could be injured by possible shocks.
Bessand exclaims: “Look at the masts over there to the left!
The sea was everywhere, to the left and opposite us, while to our right the Scheldt, which had joined the Moselle, extended as far as the sea, its mouths vaster than a lake.
It was necessary to descend within a minute or two.
The rope to the escape-valve, which had been religiously enclosed in a little white bag and placed in sight of all so that no one would touch it, is unrolled, and M.
Mallet holds it in his hand while Captain Jovis looks for a favorable landing.
Behind us the thunder was rumbling and not a single bird followed our mad flight.
The basket trembled and tipped over slightly.
But our speed is so great that the long rope now trailing does not seem to slow down, and we pass with frightful rapidity over a large farm, from which the bewildered chickens, pigeons and ducks fly away, while the cows, cats and dogs run, terrified, toward the house.
Jovis throws it overboard, and Le Horla flies lightly across the roof.
Raise yourselves by your wrists.
Once more it falls and bounds upward again, and at last it settles on the ground, while the balloon struggles madly, like a wounded beast.
Peasants run toward us, but they do not dare approach.
They were a long time before they decided to come and deliver us, for one cannot set foot on the ground until the bag is almost completely deflated.
Then, almost at the same time as the bewildered men, some of whom showed their astonishment by jumping, with the wild gestures of savages, all the cows that were grazing along the coast came toward us, surrounding our balloon with a strange and comical circle of horns, big eyes and blowing nostrils.
With the help of the accommodating and hospitable Belgian peasants, we were able in a short time to pack up all our material and carry it to the station at Heyst, where at twenty minutes past eight we took the train for Paris.
The descent occurred at three-fifteen in the morning, preceding by only a few seconds the torrent of rain and the blinding lightning of the storm which had been chasing us before it.
Through the cafe windows they could see the Boulevard, crowded with people.
They could feel the gentle breezes which are wafted over Paris on warm summer evenings and make you feel like going out somewhere, you care not where, under the trees, and make you dream of moonlit rivers, of fireflies and of larks.
Formerly, on evenings like this, I felt full of life.
The other, Pierre Carnier, a trifle older, but thin and lively, answered: “Well, my boy, I have grown old without noticing it in the least.
I have always been merry, healthy, vigorous and all the rest.
As one sees oneself in the mirror every day, one does not realize the work of age, for it is slow, regular, and it modifies the countenance so gently that the changes are unnoticeable.
It is for this reason alone that we do not die of sorrow after two or three years of excitement.
For we cannot understand the alterations which time produces.
In order to appreciate them one would have to remain six months without seeing one's own face —then, oh, what a shock!
“As I said, I aged without noticing it; I thought myself practically a youth, when I was almost fifty years old.
Not feeling the slightest infirmity, I went about, happy and peaceful.
“The revelation of my decline came to me in a simple and terrible manner, which overwhelmed me for almost six months—then I became resigned.
“Like all men, I have often been in love, but most especially once.
“I met her at the seashore, at Etretat, about twelve years ago, shortly after the war.
There is nothing prettier than this beach during the morning bathing hour.
It is small, shaped like a horseshoe, framed by high white cliffs, which are pierced by strange holes called the 'Portes,' one stretching out into the ocean like the leg of a giant, the other short and dumpy.
The women gather on the narrow strip of sand in this frame of high rocks, which they make into a gorgeous garden of beautiful gowns.
The sun beats down on the shores, on the multicolored parasols, on the blue-green sea; and all is gay, delightful, smiling.
The women come down, wrapped in long bath robes, which they throw off daintily when they reach the foamy edge of the rippling waves; and they run into the water with a rapid little step, stopping from time to time for a delightful little thrill from the cold water, a short gasp.
Especially on leaving the water are the defects revealed, although water is a powerful aid to flabby skin.
“The first time that I saw this young woman in the water, I was delighted, entranced.
There are faces whose charms appeal to you at first glance and delight you instantly.
“I was introduced, and was soon smitten worse than I had ever been before.
It is a terrible yet delightful thing thus to be dominated by a young woman.
It is almost torture, and yet infinite delight.
Her look, her smile, her hair fluttering in the wind, the little lines of her face, the slightest movement of her features, delighted me, upset me, entranced me.
She had captured me, body and soul, by her gestures, her manners, even by her clothes, which seemed to take on a peculiar charm as soon as she wore them.
I grew tender at the sight of her veil on some piece of furniture, her gloves thrown on a chair.
Her gowns seemed to me inimitable.
“She was married, but her husband came only on Saturday, and left on Monday.
I wasn't jealous of him, I don't know why; never did a creature seem to me to be of less importance in life, to attract my attention less than this man.
How beautiful, graceful and young she was!
She was youth, elegance, freshness itself!
Never before had I felt so strongly what a pretty, distinguished, delicate, charming, graceful being woman is.
Never before had I appreciated the seductive beauty to be found in the curve of a cheek, the movement of a lip, the pinkness of an ear, the shape of that foolish organ called the nose.
“This lasted three months; then I left for America, overwhelmed with sadness.
But her memory remained in me, persistent, triumphant.
The charming image of her person was ever before my eyes and in my heart.
And my love remained true to her, a quiet tenderness now, something like the beloved memory of the most beautiful and the most enchanting thing I had ever met in my life.
“Twelve years are not much in a lifetime!
They add up so rapidly, they leave so few traces behind them, they disappear so completely, that, when one turns round to look back over bygone years, one sees nothing and yet one does not understand how one happens to be so old.
It seemed to me, really, that hardly a few months separated me from that charming season on the sands of Etretat.
“Last spring I went to dine with some friends at Maisons-Laffitte.
“Just as the train was leaving, a big, fat lady, escorted by four little girls, got into my car.
I hardly looked at this mother hen, very big, very round, with a face as full as the moon framed in an enormous, beribboned hat.
The children began to chatter.
I unfolded my paper and began to read.
“We had just passed Asnieres, when my neighbor suddenly turned to me and said: “'Excuse me, sir, but are you not Monsieur Garnier?' “'Yes, madame.' “Then she began to laugh, the pleased laugh of a good woman; and yet it was sad.
“'You do not seem to recognize me.' “I hesitated.
It seemed to me that I had seen that face somewhere; but where? when?
I answered: “'Yes—and no.
I certainly know you, and yet I cannot recall your name.' “She blushed a little: “'Madame Julie Lefevre.' “Never had I received such a shock.
I felt that a veil had been torn from my eyes and that I was going to make a horrible and heartrending discovery.
And these little beings surprised me as much as their mother.
Whereas she no longer counted, she, that marvel of dainty and charming gracefulness.
It seemed to me that I had seen her but yesterday, and this is how I found her again!
A poignant grief seized my heart; and also a revolt against nature herself, an unreasoning indignation against this brutal, infarious act of destruction.
“I looked at her, bewildered.
“She was also excited, and stammered: “'I am greatly changed, am I not?
What can you expect—everything has its time!
Farewell to the rest, that is over.
I never expected you to recognize me if we met.
It took me quite a while to be sure that I was not mistaken.
And I recognized in her something of her mother's old charm, but something as yet unformed, something which promised for the future.
I had found nothing but the most commonplace remarks.
And I finally remembered what I had been, finally saw in my mind's eye my brown mustache, my black hair and the youthful expression of my face.
Farewell!” THE WOLF This is what the old Marquis d'Arville told us after St.
During that long repast we had talked about hardly anything but the slaughter of animals.
The ladies themselves were interested in bloody and exaggerated tales, and the orators imitated the attacks and the combats of men against beasts, raised their arms, romanced in a thundering voice.
M. d Arville talked well, in a certain flowery, high-sounding, but effective style.
He must have told this story frequently, for he told it fluently, never hesitating for words, choosing them with skill to make his description vivid.
Gentlemen, I have never hunted, neither did my father, nor my grandfather, nor my great-grandfather.
This last was the son of a man who hunted more than all of you put together.
He was married, father of that child who became my great-grandfather, and he lived with his younger brother, Francois d'Arville, in our castle in Lorraine, in the midst of the forest.
Francois d'Arville had remained a bachelor for love of the chase.
They both hunted from one end of the year to the other, without stopping and seemingly without fatigue.
They loved only hunting, understood nothing else, talked only of that, lived only for that.
They had at heart that one passion, which was terrible and inexorable.
It consumed them, had completely absorbed them, leaving room for no other thought.
They had given orders that they should not be interrupted in the chase for any reason whatever.
My great-grandfather was born while his father was following a fox, and Jean d'Arville did not stop the chase, but exclaimed: “The deuce!
The rascal might have waited till after the view —halloo!” His brother Francois was still more infatuated.
In the countryside they were called M. le Marquis and M. le Cadet, the nobles then not being at all like the chance nobility of our time, which wishes to establish an hereditary hierarchy in titles; for the son of a marquis is no more a count, nor the son of a viscount a baron, than a son of a general is a colonel by birth.
But the contemptible vanity of today finds profit in that arrangement.
My ancestors were unusually tall, bony, hairy, violent and vigorous.
The younger, still taller than the older, had a voice so strong that, according to a legend of which he was proud, all the leaves of the forest shook when he shouted.
When they were both mounted to set out hunting, it must have been a superb sight to see those two giants straddling their huge horses.
Now, toward the midwinter of that year, 1764, the frosts were excessive, and the wolves became ferocious.
They even attacked belated peasants, roamed at night outside the houses, howled from sunset to sunrise, and robbed the stables.
And soon a rumor began to circulate.
People talked of a colossal wolf with gray fur, almost white, who had eaten two children, gnawed off a woman's arm, strangled all the watch dogs in the district, and even come without fear into the farmyards.
The people in the houses affirmed that they had felt his breath, and that it made the flame of the lights flicker.
And soon a panic ran through all the province.
No one dared go out any more after nightfall.
The darkness seemed haunted by the image of the beast.
The brothers d'Arville determined to find and kill him, and several times they brought together all the gentlemen of the country to a great hunt.
They beat the forests and searched the coverts in vain; they never met him.
And every night after a battue the beast, as if to avenge himself, attacked some traveller or killed some one's cattle, always far from the place where they had looked for him.
The brothers were roused to anger, considering this attack as a direct insult and a defiance.
They took their strong bloodhounds, used to pursue dangerous animals, and they set off to hunt, their hearts filled with rage.
From dawn until the hour when the empurpled sun descended behind the great naked trees, they beat the woods without finding anything.
At last, furious and disgusted, both were returning, walking their horses along a lane bordered with hedges, and they marvelled that their skill as huntsmen should be baffled by this wolf, and they were suddenly seized with a mysterious fear.
The elder said: “That beast is not an ordinary one.
You would say it had a mind like a man.” The younger answered: “Perhaps we should have a bullet blessed by our cousin, the bishop, or pray some priest to pronounce the words which are needed.” Then they were silent.
Jean continued: “Look how red the sun is.
The great wolf will do some harm to-night.” He had hardly finished speaking when his horse reared; that of Franqois began to kick.
A large thicket covered with dead leaves opened before them, and a mammoth beast, entirely gray, jumped up and ran off through the wood.
Thus they went, plunging through the thickets, dashing across the beds of streams, climbing the hillsides, descending the gorges, and blowing the horn as loud as they could to attract their people and the dogs.
And now, suddenly, in that mad race, my ancestor struck his forehead against an enormous branch which split his skull; and he fell dead on the ground, while his frightened horse took himself off, disappearing in the gloom which enveloped the woods.
The younger d'Arville stopped quick, leaped to the earth, seized his brother in his arms, and saw that the brains were escaping from the wound with the blood.
Then he sat down beside the body, rested the head, disfigured and red, on his knees, and waited, regarding the immobile face of his elder brother.
Little by little a fear possessed him, a strange fear which he had never felt before, the fear of the dark, the fear of loneliness, the fear of the deserted wood, and the fear also of the weird wolf who had just killed his brother to avenge himself upon them both.
The gloom thickened; the acute cold made the trees crack.
Francois got up, shivering, unable to remain there longer, feeling himself growing faint.
Nothing was to be heard, neither the voice of the dogs nor the sound of the horns-all was silent along the invisible horizon; and this mournful silence of the frozen night had something about it terrific and strange.
He seized in his immense hands the great body of Jean, straightened it, and laid it across the saddle to carry it back to the chateau; then he went on his way softly, his mind troubled as if he were in a stupor, pursued by horrible and fear-giving images.
And all at once, in the growing darkness a great shape crossed his path.
A shock of terror shook the hunter; something cold, like a drop of water, seemed to glide down his back, and, like a monk haunted of the devil, he made a great sign of the cross, dismayed at this abrupt return of the horrible prowler.
But his eyes fell again on the inert body before him, and passing abruptly from fear to anger, he shook with an indescribable rage.
He followed it through the copses, the ravines, and the tall trees, traversing woods which he no longer recognized, his eyes fixed on the white speck which fled before him through the night.
His horse also seemed animated by a force and strength hitherto unknown.
It galloped straight ahead with outstretched neck, striking against trees, and rocks, the head and the feet of the dead man thrown across the saddle.
The limbs tore out his hair; the brow, beating the huge trunks, spattered them with blood; the spurs tore their ragged coats of bark.
Suddenly the beast and the horseman issued from the forest and rushed into a valley, just as the moon appeared above the mountains.
The valley here was stony, inclosed by enormous rocks.
Francois then uttered a yell of joy which the echoes repeated like a peal of thunder, and he leaped from his horse, his cutlass in his hand.
The beast, with bristling hair, the back arched, awaited him, its eyes gleaming like two stars.
But, before beginning battle, the strong hunter, seizing his brother, seated him on a rock, and, placing stones under his head, which was no more than a mass of blood, he shouted in the ears as if he was talking to a deaf man: “Look, Jean; look at this!” Then he attacked the monster.
He felt himself strong enough to overturn a mountain, to bruise stones in his hands.
The beast tried to bite him, aiming for his stomach; but he had seized the fierce animal by the neck, without even using his weapon, and he strangled it gently, listening to the cessation of breathing in its throat and the beatings of its heart.
He laughed, wild with joy, pressing closer and closer his formidable embrace, crying in a delirium of joy, “Look, Jean, look!” All resistance ceased; the body of the wolf became limp.
Francois took him up in his arms and carried him to the feet of the elder brother, where he laid him, repeating, in a tender voice: “There, there, there, my little Jean, see him!” Then he replaced on the saddle the two bodies, one upon the other, and rode away.
He returned to the chateau, laughing and crying, like Gargantua at the birth of Pantagruel, uttering shouts of triumph, and boisterous with joy as he related the death of the beast, and grieving and tearing his beard in telling of that of his brother.
And often, later, when he talked again of that day, he would say, with tears in his eyes: “If only poor Jean could have seen me strangle the beast, he would have died content, that I am sure!” The widow of my ancestor inspired her orphan son with that horror of the chase which has transmitted itself from father to son as far down as myself.
It remains open for six months in the year and is inhabited by the family of Jean Hauser; then, as soon as the snow begins to fall and to fill the valley so as to make the road down to Loeche impassable, the father and his three sons go away and leave the house in charge of the old guide, Gaspard Hari, with the young guide, Ulrich Kunsi, and Sam, the great mountain dog.
The two men and the dog remain till the spring in their snowy prison, with nothing before their eyes except the immense white slopes of the Balmhorn, surrounded by light, glistening summits, and are shut in, blocked up and buried by the snow which rises around them and which envelops, binds and crushes the little house, which lies piled on the roof, covering the windows and blocking up the door.
It was the day on which the Hauser family were going to return to Loeche, as winter was approaching, and the descent was becoming dangerous.
Then the mother, Jeanne Hauser, and her daughter Louise mounted a fourth mule and set off in their turn and the father followed them, accompanied by the two men in charge, who were to escort the family as far as the brow of the descent.
First of all they passed round the small lake, which was now frozen over, at the bottom of the mass of rocks which stretched in front of the inn, and then they followed the valley, which was dominated on all sides by the snow-covered summits.
A ray of sunlight fell into that little white, glistening, frozen desert and illuminated it with a cold and dazzling flame.
No living thing appeared among this ocean of mountains.
There was no motion in this immeasurable solitude and no noise disturbed the profound silence.
The younger one looked at him as he approached and appeared to be calling him with her sad eyes.
She was a young, fairhaired little peasant girl, whose milk-white cheeks and pale hair looked as if they had lost their color by their long abode amid the ice.
Mother Hauser began to talk to him, enumerating with the minutest details all that he would have to attend to during the winter.
It was the first time that he was going to stay up there, while old Hari had already spent fourteen winters amid the snow, at the inn of Schwarenbach.
Ulrich Kunsi listened, without appearing to understand and looked incessantly at the girl.
From time to time he replied: “Yes, Madame Hauser,” but his thoughts seemed far away and his calm features remained unmoved.
They reached Lake Daube, whose broad, frozen surface extended to the end of the valley.
On the right one saw the black, pointed, rocky summits of the Daubenhorn beside the enormous moraines of the Lommern glacier, above which rose the Wildstrubel.
As they approached the Gemmi pass, where the descent of Loeche begins, they suddenly beheld the immense horizon of the Alps of the Valais, from which the broad, deep valley of the Rhone separated them.
In the distance there was a group of white, unequal, flat, or pointed mountain summits, which glistened in the sun; the Mischabel with its two peaks, the huge group of the Weisshorn, the heavy Brunegghorn, the lofty and formidable pyramid of Mount Cervin, that slayer of men, and the Dent-Blanche, that monstrous coquette.
Then beneath them, in a tremendous hole, at the bottom of a terrific abyss, they perceived Loeche, where houses looked as grains of sand which had been thrown into that enormous crevice that is ended and closed by the Gemmi and which opens, down below, on the Rhone.
The mule stopped at the edge of the path, which winds and turns continually, doubling backward, then, fantastically and strangely, along the side of the mountain as far as the almost invisible little village at its feet.
“Well,” father Hauser said, “good-by, and keep up your spirits till next year, my friends,” and old Hari replied: “Till next year.” They embraced each other and then Madame Hauser in her turn offered her cheek, and the girl did the same.
When Ulrich Kunsi's turn came, he whispered in Louise's ear, “Do not forget those up yonder,” and she replied, “No,” in such a low voice that he guessed what she had said without hearing it.
“Well, adieu,” Jean Hauser repeated, “and don't fall ill.” And going before the two women, he commenced the descent, and soon all three disappeared at the first turn in the road, while the two men returned to the inn at Schwarenbach.
They walked slowly, side by side, without speaking.
It was over, and they would be alone together for four or five months.
He had remained with Michael Canol, who was too old now to stand it, for an accident might happen during that long solitude.
They had not been dull, however; the only thing was to make up one's mind to it from the first, and in the end one would find plenty of distraction, games and other means of whiling away the time.
Ulrich Kunsi listened to him with his eyes on the ground, for in his thoughts he was following those who were descending to the village.
They soon came in sight of the inn, which was, however, scarcely visible, so small did it look, a black speck at the foot of that enormous billow of snow, and when they opened the door Sam, the great curly dog, began to romp round them.
Go and peel the potatoes.” And they both sat down on wooden stools and began to prepare the soup.
Old Hari smoked and spat on the hearth, while the young man looked out of the window at the snow- covered mountain opposite the house.
In the afternoon he went out, and going over yesterday's ground again, he looked for the traces of the mule that had carried the two women.
The village, in its rocky pit, was not yet buried under the snow, from which it was sheltered by the pine woods which protected it on all sides.
Hauser's little daughter was there now in one of those gray- colored houses.
Ulrich Kunsi was too far away to be able to make them out separately.
But the sun had disappeared behind the lofty crest of the Wildstrubel and the young man returned to the chalet.
Daddy Hari was smoking, and when he saw his mate come in he proposed a game of cards to him, and they sat down opposite each other, on either side of the table.
The following days were like the first, bright and cold, without any fresh snow.
Old Gaspard spent his afternoons in watching the eagles and other rare birds which ventured on those frozen heights, while Ulrich returned regularly to the Gemmi Pass to look at the village.
Then they played cards, dice or dominoes and lost and won a trifle, just to create an interest in the game.
One morning Hari, who was up first, called his companion.
A moving, deep and light cloud of white spray was falling on them noiselessly and was by degrees burying them under a thick, heavy coverlet of foam.
It was necessary to free the door and the windows, to dig out a passage and to cut steps to get over this frozen powder, which a twelve hours' frost had made as hard as the granite of the moraines.
They lived like prisoners and did not venture outside their abode.
They had divided their duties, which they performed regularly.
Ulrich Kunsi undertook the scouring, washing and everything that belonged to cleanliness.
He also chopped up the wood while Gaspard Hari did the cooking and attended to the fire.
Their regular and monotonous work was interrupted by long games at cards or dice, and they never quarrelled, but were always calm and placid.
They were never seen impatient or ill- humored, nor did they ever use hard words, for they had laid in a stock of patience for their wintering on the top of the mountain.
Sometimes old Gaspard took his rifle and went after chamois, and occasionally he killed one.
Then there was a feast in the inn at Schwarenbach and they revelled in fresh meat.
The thermometer outside marked eighteen degrees of frost, and as the sun had not yet risen, the hunter hoped to surprise the animals at the approaches to the Wildstrubel, and Ulrich, being alone, remained in bed until ten o'clock.
He was of a sleepy nature, but he would not have dared to give way like that to his inclination in the presence of the old guide, who was ever an early riser.
He breakfasted leisurely with Sam, who also spent his days and nights in sleeping in front of the fire; then he felt low-spirited and even frightened at the solitude, and was seized by a longing for his daily game of cards, as one is by the craving of a confirmed habit, and so he went out to meet his companion, who was to return at four o'clock.
The snow had levelled the whole deep valley, filled up the crevasses, obliterated all signs of the two lakes and covered the rocks, so that between the high summits there was nothing but an immense, white, regular, dazzling and frozen surface.
For three weeks Ulrich had not been to the edge of the precipice from which he had looked down on the village, and he wanted to go there before climbing the slopes which led to Wildstrubel.
Loeche was now also covered by the snow and the houses could scarcely be distinguished, covered as they were by that white cloak.
Then, turning to the right, he reached the Loemmern glacier.
He went along with a mountaineer's long strides, striking the snow, which was as hard as a rock, with his iron-pointed stick, and with his piercing eyes he looked for the little black, moving speck in the distance, on that enormous, white expanse.
When he reached the end of the glacier he stopped and asked himself whether the old man had taken that road, and then he began to walk along the moraines with rapid and uneasy steps.
The day was declining, the snow was assuming a rosy tint, and a dry, frozen wind blew in rough gusts over its crystal surface.
Ulrich uttered a long, shrill, vibrating call.
His voice sped through the deathlike silence in which the mountains were sleeping; it reached the distance, across profound and motionless waves of glacial foam, like the cry of a bird across the waves of the sea.
Then it died away and nothing answered him.
The sun had sunk yonder behind the mountain tops, which were still purple with the reflection from the sky, but the depths of the valley were becoming gray, and suddenly the young man felt frightened.
It seemed to him as if the silence, the cold, the solitude, the winter death of these mountains were taking possession of him, were going to stop and to freeze his blood, to make his limbs grow stiff and to turn him into a motionless and frozen object, and he set off running, fleeing toward his dwelling.
The old man, he thought, would have returned during his absence.
Sam ran up to him to greet him, but Gaspard Hari had not returned.
Kunsi, in his alarm, turned round suddenly, as if he had expected to find his comrade hidden in a corner.
Then he relighted the fire and made the soup, hoping every moment to see the old man come in.
It was quite night now, that wan, livid night of the mountains, lighted by a thin, yellow crescent moon, just disappearing behind the mountain tops.
Then the young man went in and sat down to warm his hands and feet, while he pictured to himself every possible accident.
Gaspard might have broken a leg, have fallen into a crevasse, taken a false step and dislocated his ankle.
And, perhaps, he was lying on the snow, overcome and stiff with the cold, in agony of mind, lost and, perhaps, shouting for help, calling with all his might in the silence of the night..
The mountain was so vast, so rugged, so dangerous in places, especially at that time of the year, that it would have required ten or twenty guides to walk for a week in all directions to find a man in that immense space.
Ulrich Kunsi, however, made up his mind to set out with Sam if Gaspard did not return by one in the morning, and he made his preparations.
He put provisions for two days into a bag, took his steel climbing iron, tied a long, thin, strong rope round his waist, and looked to see that his iron-shod stick and his axe, which served to cut steps in the ice, were in order.
The fire was burning on the hearth, the great dog was snoring in front of it, and the clock was ticking, as regularly as a heart beating, in its resounding wooden case.
He waited, with his ears on the alert for distant sounds, and he shivered when the wind blew against the roof and the walls.
It struck twelve and he trembled: Then, frightened and shivering, he put some water on the fire, so that he might have some hot coffee before starting, and when the clock struck one he got up, woke Sam, opened the door and went off in the direction of the Wildstrubel.
For five hours he mounted, scaling the rocks by means of his climbing irons, cutting into the ice, advancing continually, and occasionally hauling up the dog, who remained below at the foot of some slope that was too steep for him, by means of the rope.
It was about six o'clock when he reached one of the summits to which old Gaspard often came after chamois, and he waited till it should be daylight.
The sky was growing pale overhead, and a strange light, springing nobody could tell whence, suddenly illuminated the immense ocean of pale mountain summits, which extended for a hundred leagues around him.
One might have said that this vague brightness arose from the snow itself and spread abroad in space.
By degrees the highest distant summits assumed a delicate, pink flesh color, and the red sun appeared behind the ponderous giants of the Bernese Alps.
Ulrich Kunsi set off again, walking like a hunter, bent over, looking for tracks, and saying to his dog: “Seek, old fellow, seek!” He was descending the mountain now, scanning the depths closely, and from time to time shouting, uttering aloud, prolonged cry, which soon died away in that silent vastness.
He thought he could distinguish a voice, and he began to run and shouted again, but he heard nothing more and sat down, exhausted and in despair.
Toward midday he breakfasted and gave Sam, who was as tired as himself, something to eat also, and then he recommenced his search.
When evening came he was still walking, and he had walked more than thirty miles over the mountains.
As he was too far away to return home and too tired to drag himself along any further, he dug a hole in the snow and crouched in it with his dog under a blanket which he had brought with him.
And the man and the dog lay side by side, trying to keep warm, but frozen to the marrow nevertheless.
Ulrich scarcely slept, his mind haunted by visions and his limbs shaking with cold.
Day was breaking when he got up.
His legs were as stiff as iron bars and his spirits so low that he was ready to cry with anguish, while his heart was beating so that he almost fell over with agitation, when he thought he heard a noise.
Suddenly he imagined that he also was going to die of cold in the midst of this vast solitude, and the terror of such a death roused his energies and gave him renewed vigor.
He was descending toward the inn, falling down and getting up again, and followed at a distance by Sam, who was limping on three legs, and they did not reach Schwarenbach until four o'clock in the afternoon.
The house was empty and the young man made a fire, had something to eat and went to sleep, so worn out that he did not think of anything more.
He slept for a long time, for a very long time, an irresistible sleep.
But suddenly a voice, a cry, a name, “Ulrich!” aroused him from his profound torpor and made him sit up in bed.
Had he been dreaming?
Was it one of those strange appeals which cross the dreams of disquieted minds?
No, he heard it still, that reverberating cry-which had entered his ears and remained in his flesh-to the tips of his sinewy fingers.
Certainly somebody had cried out and called “Ulrich!” There was somebody there near the house, there could be no doubt of that, and he opened the door and shouted, “Is it you, Gaspard?” with all the strength of his lungs.
The wind had risen, that icy wind that cracks the rocks and leaves nothing alive on those deserted heights, and it came in sudden gusts, which were more parching and more deadly than the burning wind of the desert, and again Ulrich shouted: “Gaspard!
Everything was silent on the mountain.
Then he shook with terror and with a bound he was inside the inn, when he shut and bolted the door, and then he fell into a chair trembling all over, for he felt certain that his comrade had called him at the moment he was expiring.
Old Gaspard Hari had been dying for two days and three nights somewhere, in some hole, in one of those deep, untrodden ravines whose whiteness is more sinister than subterranean darkness.
He had been dying for two days and three nights and he had just then died, thinking of his comrade.
His soul, almost before it was released, had taken its flight to the inn where Ulrich was sleeping, and it had called him by that terrible and mysterious power which the spirits of the dead have to haunt the living.
That voiceless soul had cried to the worn-out soul of the sleeper; it had uttered its last farewell, or its reproach, or its curse on the man who had not searched carefully enough.
And Ulrich felt that it was there, quite close to him, behind the wall, behind the door which he had just fastened.
It was wandering about, like a night bird which lightly touches a lighted window with his wings, and the terrified young man was ready to scream with horror.
He wanted to run away, but did not dare to go out; he did not dare, and he should never dare to do it in the future, for that phantom would remain there day and night, round the inn, as long as the old man's body was not recovered and had not been deposited in the consecrated earth of a churchyard.
When it was daylight Kunsi recovered some of his courage at the return of the bright sun.
He prepared his meal, gave his dog some food and then remained motionless on a chair, tortured at heart as he thought of the old man lying on the snow, and then, as soon as night once more covered the mountains, new terrors assailed him.
He now walked up and down the dark kitchen, which was scarcely lighted by the flame of one candle, and he walked from one end of it to the other with great strides, listening, listening whether the terrible cry of the other night would again break the dreary silence outside.
He was alone in this immense desert of Snow, alone five thousand feet above the inhabited earth, above human habitation, above that stirring, noisy, palpitating life, alone under an icy sky!
But suddenly the strident cry of the other evening pierced his ears, and it was so shrill that Ulrich stretched out his arms to repulse the ghost, and he fell backward with his chair.
Sam, who was awakened by the noise, began to howl as frightened dogs do howl, and he walked all about the house trying to find out where the danger came from.
When he got to the door, he sniffed beneath it, smelling vigorously, with his coat bristling and his tail stiff, while he growled angrily.
Kunsi, who was terrified, jumped up, and, holding his chair by one leg, he cried: “Don't come in, don't come in, or I shall kill you.” And the dog, excited by this threat, barked angrily at that invisible enemy who defied his master's voice.
By degrees, however, he quieted down and came back and stretched himself in front of the fire, but he was uneasy and kept his head up and growled between his teeth.
Ulrich, in turn, recovered his senses, but as he felt faint with terror, he went and got a bottle of brandy out of the sideboard, and he drank off several glasses, one after anther, at a gulp.
His ideas became vague, his courage revived and a feverish glow ran through his veins.
He ate scarcely anything the next day and limited himself to alcohol, and so he lived for several days, like a drunken brute.
As soon as he thought of Gaspard Hari, he began to drink again, and went on drinking until he fell to the ground, overcome by intoxication.
And there he remained lying on his face, dead drunk, his limbs benumbed, and snoring loudly.
But scarcely had he digested the maddening and burning liquor than the same cry, “Ulrich!” woke him like a bullet piercing his brain, and he got up, still staggering, stretching out his hands to save himself from falling, and calling to Sam to help him.
And the dog, who appeared to be going mad like his master, rushed to the door, scratched it with his claws and gnawed it with his long white teeth, while the young man, with his head thrown back drank the brandy in draughts, as if it had been cold water, so that it might by and by send his thoughts, his frantic terror, and his memory to sleep again.
In three weeks he had consumed all his stock of ardent spirits.
But his continual drunkenness only lulled his terror, which awoke more furiously than ever as soon as it was impossible for him to calm it.
His fixed idea then, which had been intensified by a month of drunkenness, and which was continually increasing in his absolute solitude, penetrated him like a gimlet.
Then, as soon as he dozed, overcome by fatigue, he heard the voice which made him leap to his feet.
At last one night, as cowards do when driven to extremities, he sprang to the door and opened it, to see who was calling him and to force him to keep quiet, but such a gust of cold wind blew into his face that it chilled him to the bone, and he closed and bolted the door again immediately, without noticing that Sam had rushed out.
Then, as he was shivering with cold, he threw some wood on the fire and sat down in front of it to warm himself, but suddenly he started, for somebody was scratching at the wall and crying.
In desperation he called out: “Go away!” but was answered by another long, sorrowful wail.
Then all his remaining senses forsook him from sheer fright.
He repeated: “Go away!” and turned round to try to find some corner in which to hide, while the other person went round the house still crying and rubbing against the wall.
Ulrich went to the oak sideboard, which was full of plates and dishes and of provisions, and lifting it up with superhuman strength, he dragged it to the door, so as to form a barricade.
Then piling up all the rest of the furniture, the mattresses, palliasses and chairs, he stopped up the windows as one does when assailed by an enemy.
But the person outside now uttered long, plaintive, mournful groans, to which the young man replied by similar groans, and thus days and nights passed without their ceasing to howl at each other.
The one was continually walking round the house and scraped the walls with his nails so vigorously that it seemed as if he wished to destroy them, while the other, inside, followed all his movements, stooping down and holding his ear to the walls and replying to all his appeals with terrible cries.
One evening, however, Ulrich heard nothing more, and he sat down, so overcome by fatigue, that he went to sleep immediately and awoke in the morning without a thought, without any recollection of what had happened, just as if his head had been emptied during his heavy sleep, but he felt hungry, and he ate.
The winter was over and the Gemmi Pass was practicable again, so the Hauser family started off to return to their inn.
They were, indeed, rather surprised that neither of them had come down a few days before, as soon as the road was open, in order to tell them all about their long winter sojourn.
The door and the window were closed, but a little smoke was coming out of the chimney, which reassured old Hauser.
On going up to the door, however, he saw the skeleton of an animal which had been torn to pieces by the eagles, a large skeleton lying on its side.
They all looked close at it and the mother said: “That must be Sam,” and then she shouted: “Hi, Gaspard!” A cry from the interior of the house answered her and a sharp cry that one might have thought some animal had uttered it.
Old Hauser repeated, “Hi, Gaspard!” and they heard another cry similar to the first.
Then the three men, the father and the two sons, tried to open the door, but it resisted their efforts.
From the empty cow-stall they took a beam to serve as a battering-ram and hurled it against the door with all their might.
The wood gave way and the boards flew into splinters.
Then the house was shaken by a loud voice, and inside, behind the side board which was overturned, they saw a man standing upright, with his hair falling on his shoulders and a beard descending to his breast, with shining eyes, and nothing but rags to cover him.
They did not recognize him, but Louise Hauser exclaimed: “It is Ulrich, mother.” And her mother declared that it was Ulrich, although his hair was white.
He allowed them to go up to him and to touch him, but he did not reply to any of their questions, and they were obliged to take him to Loeche, where the doctors found that he was mad, and nobody ever found out what had become of his companion.
Little Louise Hauser nearly died that summer of decline, which the physicians attributed to the cold air of the mountains.
ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 5.
MONSIEUR PARENT George's father was sitting in an iron chair, watching his little son with concentrated affection and attention, as little George piled up the sand into heaps during one of their walks.
He would take up the sand with both hands, make a mound of it, and put a chestnut leaf on top.
The sun was just disappearing behind the roofs of the Rue Saint-Lazare, but still shed its rays obliquely on that little, overdressed crowd.
The chestnut trees were lighted up by its yellow rays, and the three fountains before the lofty porch of the church had the appearance of liquid silver.
Monsieur Parent, accidentally looking up at the church clock, saw that he was five minutes late.
He got up, took the child by the arm, shook his dress, which was covered with sand, wiped his hands, and led him in the direction of the Rue Blanche.
An old servant who had brought him up, one of those trusted servants who are the tyrants of families, opened the door to him.
“Has madame come in yet?” he asked anxiously.
The servant shrugged her shoulders: “When have you ever known madame to come home at half-past six, monsieur?” “Very well; all the better; it will give me time to change my things, for I am very warm.” The servant looked at him with angry and contemptuous pity.
“Oh, I can see that well enough,” she grumbled.
“You are covered with perspiration, monsieur.
I shall get it for eight o'clock, and if, you have to wait, I cannot help it; roast meat ought not to be burnt!” Monsieur Parent pretended not to hear, but went into his own room, and as soon as he got in, locked the door, so as to be alone, quite alone.
To get rid of Julie seemed to him such a formidable thing to do that he hardly ventured to think of it, but it was just as impossible to uphold her against his wife, and before another month the situation would become unbearable between the two.
He remained sitting there, with his arms hanging down, vaguely trying to discover some means to set matters straight, but without success.
He said to himself: “It is lucky that I have George; without him I should-be very miserable.” Just then the clock struck seven, and he started up.
Nervous and breathless, he undressed, put on a clean shirt, hastily finished his toilet, as if he had been expected in the next room for some event of extreme importance, and went into the drawing-room, happy at having nothing to fear.
He glanced at the newspaper, went and looked out of the window, and then sat down again, when the door opened, and the boy came in, washed, brushed, and smiling.
Parent took him up in his arms and kissed him passionately; then he tossed him into the air, and held him up to the ceiling, but soon sat down again, as he was tired with all his exertion.
The child laughed and clapped his hands and shouted with pleasure, as did his father, who laughed until his big stomach shook, for it amused him almost more than it did the child.
Parent loved him with all the heart of a weak, resigned, ill-used man.
He loved him with mad bursts of affection, with caresses and with all the bashful tenderness which was hidden in him, and which had never found an outlet, even at the early period of his married life, for his wife had always shown herself cold and reserved.
Just then Julie came to the door, with a pale face and glistening eyes, and said in a voice which trembled with exasperation: “It is half-past seven, monsieur.” Parent gave an uneasy and resigned look at the clock and replied: “Yes, it certainly is half-past seven.” “Well, my dinner is quite ready now.” Seeing the storm which was coming, he tried to turn it aside.
“But did you not tell me when I came in that it would not be ready before eight?” “Eight! what are you thinking about?
What a pity it is that there should be any mothers like her!” Parent thought it was time to cut short a threatened scene.
“Julie,” he said, “I will not allow you to speak like that of your mistress.
You understand me, do you not?
Do not forget it in the future.” The old servant, who was nearly choked with surprise, turned and went out, slamming the door so violently after her that the lustres on the chandelier rattled, and for some seconds it sounded as if a number of little invisible bells were ringing in the drawing-room.
She had lost her look of exasperation, but now she put on an air of cold and determined resolution, which was still more formidable.
I have said nothing, and left you in your ignorance, out of respect and liking for you, but it is too much, and every one in the neighborhood is laughing at you.
Everybody knows about it, and so I must tell you also, although I do not like to repeat it.
The reason why madame comes in at any time she chooses is that she is doing abominable things.” He seemed stupefied and not to understand, and could only stammer out: “Hold your tongue; you know I have forbidden you——” But she interrupted him with irresistible resolution.
“No, monsieur, I must tell you everything now.
For a long time madame has been carrying on with Monsieur Limousin.
Ah! you may be sure that if Monsieur Limousin had been rich, madame would never have married Monsieur Parent.
If you remember how the marriage was brought about, you would understand the matter from beginning to end.” Parent had risen, and stammered out, his face livid: “Hold your tongue —hold your tongue, or——” She went on, however: “No, I mean to tell you everything.
She married you from interest, and she deceived you from the very first day.
It was all settled between them beforehand.
You need only reflect for a few moments to understand it, and then, as she was not satisfied with having married you, as she did not love you, she has made your life miserable, so miserable that it has almost broken my heart when I have seen it.” He walked up and down the room with hands clenched, repeating: “Hold your tongue—hold your tongue——” For he could find nothing else to say.
The old servant, however, would not yield; she seemed resolved on everything.
George, who had been at first astonished and then frightened at those angry voices, began to utter shrill screams, and remained behind his father, with his face puckered up and his mouth open, roaring.
His son's screams exasperated Parent, and filled him with rage and courage.
He rushed at Julie with both arms raised, ready to strike her, exclaiming: “Ah! you wretch.
He is the very image of Monsieur Limousin.
You need only look at his eyes and forehead.
Why, a blind man could not be mistaken in him.” He had taken her by the shoulders, and was now shaking her with all his might.
Go out!” And with a desperate effort he threw her into the next room.
She fell across the table, which was laid for dinner, breaking the glasses.
While he was pursuing her, in order to take hold of her again, she flung terrible words at him.
“You need only go out this evening after dinner, and come in again immediately, and you will see!
Just try it, and you will see.” She had reached the kitchen door and escaped, but he ran after her, up the back stairs to her bedroom, into which she had locked herself, and knocking at the door, he said: “You will leave my house this very instant!” “You may be certain of that, monsieur,” was her reply.
“In an hour's time I shall not be here any longer.” He then went slowly downstairs again, holding on to the banister so as not to fall, and went back to the drawing-room, where little George was sitting on the floor, crying.
He understood nothing, knew nothing more; he felt dazed, stupefied, mad, as if he had just fallen on his head, and he scarcely even remembered the dreadful things the servant had told him.
Then, by degrees, his mind, like muddy water, became calmer and clearer, and the abominable revelations began to work in his heart.
He was no longer thinking of George.
His child remained to him, at any rate!
He held him in his arms and pressed his lips to his light hair, and, relieved and composed, he whispered: “George—my little George—my dear little George——” But he suddenly remembered what Julie had said!
Yes, she had said that he was Limousin's child.
Oh! it could not be possible, surely.
It was one of those low scandals which spring from servants' brains!
And he repeated: “George—my dear little George.” The youngster was quiet again, now that his father was fondling him.
Parent felt the warmth of the little chest penetrate through his clothes, and it filled him with love, courage, and happiness; that gentle warmth soothed him, fortified him and saved him.
Then he put the small, curly head away from him a little, and looked at it affectionately, still repeating: “George!
Oh, my little George!” But suddenly he thought: “Suppose he were to resemble Limousin, after all!” He looked at him with haggard, troubled eyes, and tried to discover whether there was any likeness in his forehead, in his nose, mouth, or cheeks.
His thoughts wandered as they do when a person is going mad, and his child's face changed in his eyes, and assumed a strange look and improbable resemblances.
But in a few moments another ring at the bell made him jump again, and then he remembered that Julie had left, without the housemaid knowing it, and so nobody would go to open the door.
He went himself, and suddenly he felt brave, resolute, ready for dissimulation and the struggle.
The terrible blow had matured him in a few moments.
He wished to know the truth, he desired it with the rage of a timid man, and with the tenacity of an easy-going man who has been exasperated.
Nevertheless, he trembled.
Does one know how much excited cowardice there often is in boldness?
He went to the door with furtive steps, and stopped to listen; his heart beat furiously.
Suddenly, however, the noise of the bell over his head startled him like an explosion.
He seized the lock, turned the key, and opening the door, saw his wife and Limousin standing before him on the stairs.
With an air of astonishment, which also betrayed a little irritation, she said: “So you open the door now?
Where is Julie?” His throat felt tight and his breathing was labored as he tried to. reply, without being able to utter a word.
“Are you dumb?” she continued.
Why?” By degrees he regained his coolness.
He felt an intense hatred rise up in him for that insolent woman who was standing before him.
“Yes, she has gone altogether.
She shut the door quickly, threw her cloak on a chair, and going straight up to her husband, she stammered out: “You say?
I am simply repeating what Julie said to me, as you wanted to know what it was, and I wish you to remark that I turned her off just on account of what she said.” She trembled with a violent longing to tear out his beard and scratch his face.
In his voice and manner she felt that he was asserting his position as master.
Although she had nothing to say by way of reply, she tried to assume the offensive by saying something unpleasant.
“No, I waited for you.” She shrugged her shoulders impatiently.
That was how she had dined with Limousin, if it could be called dining, for they had only some soup and half a chicken, as they were in a great hurry to get back.
I am not finding fault with you.” Then Limousin, who, had not spoken till then, and who had been half hidden behind Henriette, came forward and put out his hand, saying: “Are you very well?” Parent took his hand, and shaking it gently, replied: “Yes, I am very well.” But the young woman had felt a reproach in her husband's last words.
One might think that you meant to imply something.” “Not at all,” he replied, by way of excuse.
“I simply meant that I was not at all anxious although you were late, and that I did not find fault with you for it.” She, however, took the high hand, and tried to find a pretext for a quarrel.
“Although I was late?
One might really think that it was one o'clock in the morning, and that I spent my nights away from home.” “Certainly not, my dear.
You said you should be back at half-past six, and you returned at half- past eight.
I understand it perfectly well.
I am not at all surprised, even.
She gave him a push, and he fell down.” She wanted to see her child, and ran into the dining room, but stopped short at the sight of the table covered with spilt wine, with broken decanters and glasses and overturned saltcellars.
“Who did all that mischief?” she asked.
“It was Julie, who——” But she interrupted him furiously: “That is too much, really!
Julie speaks of me as if I were a shameless woman, beats my child, breaks my plates and dishes, turns my house upside down, and it appears that you think it all quite natural.” “Certainly not, as I have got rid of her.” “Really!
In such cases, one ought to call in the Commissary of Police!” “But—my dear—I really could not.
It would have been very difficult——” She shrugged her shoulders disdainfully.
“There! you will never be anything but a poor, wretched fellow, a man without a will, without any firmness or energy.
I should like to have been here for a minute, only for a minute.” Then she opened the drawing-room door and ran to George, took him into her arms and kissed him, and said: “Georgie, what is it, my darling, my pretty one, my treasure?” Then, suddenly turning to another idea, she said: “But the child has had no dinner?
You have had nothing to eat, my pet?” “No, mamma.” Then she again turned furiously upon her husband.
It is half-past eight, and George has had no dinner!” He excused himself as best he could, for he had nearly lost his wits through the overwhelming scene and the explanation, and felt crushed by this ruin of his life.
As you come home late every day, I expected you every moment.” She threw her bonnet, which she had kept on till then, into an easy- chair, and in an angry voice she said: “It is really intolerable to have to do with people who can understand nothing, who can divine nothing and do nothing by themselves.
Just as if you could not have understood that, as it was after half-past seven, I was prevented from coming home, that I had met with some hindrance!” Parent trembled, for he felt that his anger was getting the upper hand, but Limousin interposed, and turning toward the young woman, said: “My dear friend, you, are altogether unjust.
Parent could not guess that you would come here so late, as you never do so, and then, how could you expect him to get over the difficulty all by himself, after having sent away Julie?” But Henriette was very angry, and replied: “Well, at any rate, he must get over the difficulty himself, for I will not help him,” she replied.
“Let him settle it!” And she went into her own room, quite forgetting that her child had not had anything to eat.
Limousin immediately set to work to help his friend.
He picked up the broken glasses which strewed the table and took them out, replaced the plates and knives and forks, and put the child into his high chair, while Parent went to look for the chambermaid to wait at table.
The girl came in, in great astonishment, as she had heard nothing in George's room, where she had been working.
She soon, however, brought in the soup, a burnt leg of mutton, and mashed potatoes.
Parent sat by the side of the child, very much upset and distressed at all that had happened.
He gave the boy his dinner, and endeavored to eat something himself, but he could only swallow with an effort, as his throat felt paralyzed.
By degrees he was seized with an insane desire to look at Limousin, who was sitting opposite to him, making bread pellets, to see whether George was like him, but he did not venture to raise his eyes for some time.
At last, however, he made up his mind to do so, and gave a quick, sharp look at the face which he knew so well, although he almost fancied that he had never examined it carefully.
It looked so different to what he had imagined.
From time to time he looked at Limousin, trying to recognize a likeness in the smallest lines of his face, in the slightest features, and then he looked at his son, under the pretext of feeding him.
Two words were sounding in his ears: “His father! his father! his father!” They buzzed in his temples at every beat of his heart.
Yes, that man, that tranquil man who was sitting on the other side of the table, was, perhaps, the father of his son, of George, of his little George.
A terrible pain, one of those attacks of pain which make men scream, roll on the ground, and bite the furniture, was tearing at his entrails, and he felt inclined to take a knife and plunge it into his stomach.
“I am hungry,” she said; “are not you, Limousin?” He hesitated a little, and then said: “Yes, I am, upon my word.” She had the leg of mutton brought in again.
Or are they late because they have had a lovers' meeting?” They both ate with a very good appetite.
Henriette was very calm, but laughed and joked.
Her husband watched her furtively.
She had on a pink teagown trimmed with white lace, and her fair head, her white neck and her plump hands stood out from that coquettish and perfumed dress as though it were a sea shell edged with foam.
Was it possible to make a fool of a man, of a worthy man, because his father had left him a little money?
How was it that nothing revealed to upright hearts the deceits of infamous hearts?
Why was a false, deceptive look the same as a sincere one?
And he watched them, waiting to catch a gesture, a word, an intonation.
Then suddenly he thought: “I will surprise them this evening,” and he said: “My dear, as I have dismissed Julie, I will see about getting another girl this very day.
Limousin will keep me company.
We will wait for you.” Then, turning to the maid, she said: “You had better put George to bed, and then you can clear away and go up to your room.” Parent had got up; he was unsteady on his legs, dazed and bewildered, and saying, “I shall see you again later on,” he went out, holding on to the wall, for the floor seemed to roll like a ship.
George had been carried out by his nurse, while Henriette and Limousin went into the drawing-room.
As soon as the door was shut, he said: “You must be mad, surely, to torment your husband as you do?” She immediately turned on him: “Ah!
Do you know that I think the habit you have got into lately, of looking upon Parent as a martyr, is very unpleasant?” Limousin threw himself into an easy-chair and crossed his legs.
“I am not setting him up as a martyr in the least, but I think that, situated as we are, it is ridiculous to defy this man as you do, from morning till night.” She took a cigarette from the mantelpiece, lighted it, and replied: “But I do not defy him; quite the contrary.
Only he irritates me by his stupidity, and I treat him as he deserves.” Limousin continued impatiently: “What you are doing is very foolish!
“But do you not understand; you great booby,” she said, “that I hate him just because he married me, because he bought me, in fact; because everything that he says and does, everything that he thinks, acts on my nerves?
He exasperates me every moment by his stupidity, which you call his kindness; by his dullness, which you call his confidence, and then, above all, because he is my husband, instead of you.
I feel him between us, although he does not interfere with us much.
No, it is, after all, too idiotic of him not to guess anything!
There are moments when I feel inclined to say to him: 'Do you not see, you stupid creature, that Paul is my lover?' “It is quite incomprehensible that you cannot understand how hateful he is to me, how he irritates me.
You always seem to like him, and you shake hands with him cordially.
Men are very extraordinary at times.” “One must know how to dissimulate, my dear.” “It is no question of dissimulation, but of feeling.
One might think that, when you men deceive one another, you like each other better on that account, while we women hate a man from the moment that we have betrayed him.” “I do not see why one should hate an excellent fellow because one is friendly with his wife.” “You do not see it?
You all of you are wanting in refinement of feeling.
And then, moreover, one ought not.
No, you would not understand; it is quite useless!
You men have no delicacy of feeling.” And smiling, with the gentle contempt of an impure woman, she put both her hands on his shoulders and held up her lips to him.
And as they stood in front of the mantel mirror, another couple exactly like them embraced behind the clock.
They had heard nothing, neither the noise of the key nor the creaking of the door, but suddenly Henriette, with a loud cry, pushed Limousin away with both her arms, and they saw Parent looking at them, livid with rage, without his shoes on and his hat over his forehead.
He appeared beside himself.
Then, without saying a word, he threw himself on Limousin, seized him as if he were going to strangle him, and flung him into the opposite corner of the room so violently that the other lost his balance, and, beating the air with his hand, struck his head violently against the wall.
When Henriette saw that her husband was going to murder her lover, she threw herself on Parent, seized him by the neck, and digging her ten delicate, rosy fingers into his neck, she squeezed him so tightly, with all the vigor of a desperate woman, that the blood spurted out under her nails, and she bit his shoulder, as if she wished to tear it with her teeth.
Parent, half-strangled and choking, loosened his hold on Limousin, in order to shake off his wife, who was hanging to his neck.
Then, as his passion was short-lived, like that of most good-tempered men, and his strength was soon exhausted, he remained standing between the two, panting, worn out, not knowing what to do next.
His brutal fury had expended itself in that effort, like the froth of a bottle of champagne, and his unwonted energy ended in a gasping for breath.
As soon as he could speak, however, he said: “Go away—both of you—immediately!
Go away!” Limousin remained motionless in his corner, against the wall, too startled to understand anything as yet, too frightened to move a finger; while Henriette, with her hands resting on a small, round table, her head bent forward, her hair hanging down, the bodice of her dress unfastened, waited like a wild animal which is about to spring.
Parent continued in a stronger voice: “Go away immediately.
Get out of the house!” His wife, however, seeing that he had got over his first exasperation grew bolder, drew herself up, took two steps toward him, and, grown almost insolent, she said: “Have you lost your head?
What is the meaning of this unjustifiable violence?” But he turned toward her, and raising his fist to strike her, he stammered out: “Oh—oh—this is too much, too much!
Everything—do you understand?
You are two wretches!
Immediately, or I shall kill you!
Leave the house!” She saw that it was all over, and that he knew everything; that she could not prove her innocence, and that she must comply.
But all her impudence had returned to her, and her hatred for the man, which was aggravated now, drove her to audacity, made her feel the need of bravado, and of defying him, and she said in a clear voice: “Come, Limousin; as he is going to turn me out of doors, I will go to your lodgings with you.” But Limousin did not move, and Parent, in a fresh access of rage, cried out: “Go, will you?
Henriette walked quickly across the room, took her lover by the arm, dragged him from the wall, to which he appeared fixed, and led him toward the door, saying: “Do come, my friend—you see that the man is mad.
Go, you vile creature!
Go!” She went up to him again, almost smiling, almost avenged already, and defying him, standing close to him, and face to face, she said: “I want my child, and you have no right to keep him, because he is not yours—do you understand?
He is Limousin's!” And Parent cried out in bewilderment: “You lie—you lie—worthless woman!” But she continued: “You fool!
Everybody knows it except you.
You need only look at him to see it.” Parent staggered backward, and then he suddenly turned round, took a candle, and rushed into the next room; returning almost immediately, carrying little George wrapped up in his bedclothes.
The child, who had been suddenly awakened, was crying from fright.
Parent threw him into his wife's arms, and then, without speaking, he pushed her roughly out toward the stairs, where Limousin was waiting, from motives of prudence.
Then he shut the door again, double-locked and bolted it, but had scarcely got back into the drawing-room when he fell to the floor at full length.
During the five weeks that followed their separation, the feeling of surprise at his new life prevented him from thinking much.
He had resumed his bachelor life, his habits of lounging, about, and took his meals at a restaurant, as he had done formerly.
As he wished to avoid any scandal, he made his wife an allowance, which was arranged by their lawyers.
Often, when he was at home alone at night, he suddenly thought he heard George calling out “Papa,” and his heart would begin to beat, and he would get up quickly and open the door, to see whether, by chance, the child might have returned, as dogs or pigeons do.
Why should a child have less instinct than an animal?
On finding that he was mistaken, he would sit down in his armchair again and think of the boy.
It was not only a moral, but still more a physical obsession, a nervous longing to kiss him, to hold and fondle him, to take him on his knees and dance him.
He felt the child's little arms around his neck, his little mouth pressing a kiss on his beard, his soft hair tickling his cheeks, and the remembrance of all those childish ways made him suffer as a man might for some beloved woman who has left him.
Twenty or a hundred times a day he asked himself the question whether he was or was not George's father, and almost before he was in bed every night he recommenced the same series of despairing questionings.
He especially dreaded the darkness of the evening, the melancholy feeling of the twilight.
Then a flood of sorrow invaded his heart, a torrent of despair which seemed to overwhelm him and drive him mad.
He was as afraid of his own thoughts as men are of criminals, and he fled before them as one does from wild beasts.
Above all things, he feared his empty, dark, horrible dwelling and the deserted streets, in which, here and there, a gas lamp flickered, where the isolated foot passenger whom one hears in the distance seems to be a night prowler, and makes one walk faster or slower, according to whether he is coming toward you or following you.
And in spite of himself, and by instinct, Parent went in the direction of the broad, well-lighted, populous streets.
The light and the crowd attracted him, occupied his mind and distracted his thoughts, and when he was tired of walking aimlessly about among the moving crowd, when he saw the foot passengers becoming more scarce and the pavements less crowded, the fear of solitude and silence drove him into some large cafe full of drinkers and of light.
He went there as flies go to a candle, and he would sit down at one of the little round tables and ask for a “bock,” which he would drink slowly, feeling uneasy every time a customer got up to go.
He was scarcely up before he went there to find people to distract his glances and his thoughts, and soon, as he felt too lazy to move, he took his meals there.
After every meal, during more than an hour, he sipped three or four small glasses of brandy, which stupefied him by degrees, and then his head drooped on his chest, he shut his eyes, and went to sleep.
Then, awaking, he raised himself on the red velvet seat, straightened his waistcoat, pulled down his cuffs, and took up the newspapers again, though he had already seen them in the morning, and read them all through again, from beginning to end.
Between four and five o'clock he went for a walk on the boulevards, to get a little fresh air, as he used to say, and then came back to the seat which had been reserved for him, and asked for his absinthe.
He would talk to the regular customers whose acquaintance he had made.
They discussed the news of the day and political events, and that carried him on till dinner time; and he spent the evening as he had the afternoon, until it was time to close.
That was a terrible moment for him when he was obliged to go out into the dark, into his empty room full of dreadful recollections, of horrible thoughts, and of mental agony.
He no longer saw any of his old friends, none of his relatives, nobody who might remind him of his past life.
But as his apartments were a hell to him, he took a room in a large hotel, a good room on the ground floor, so as to see the passers-by.
He was no longer alone in that great building.
Five years passed thus; five miserable years.
But one day, when he was taking his usual walk between the Madeleine and the Rue Drouot, he suddenly saw a lady whose bearing struck him.
A tall gentleman and a child were with her, and all three were walking in front of him.
He asked himself where he had seen them before, when suddenly he recognized a movement of her hand; it was his wife, his wife with Limousin and his child, his little George.
His heart beat as if it would suffocate him, but he did not stop, for he wished to see them, and he followed them.
Henriette was leaning on Paul's arm, and speaking to him in a low voice, and looking at him sideways occasionally.
Parent got a side view of her and recognized her pretty features, the movements of her lips, her smile, and her coaxing glances.
But the child chiefly took up his attention.
He saw them suddenly, all three, as they stopped in front of a shop.
Limousin had grown very gray, had aged and was thinner; his wife, on the contrary, was as young looking as ever, and had grown stouter.
George he would not have recognized, he was so different from what he had been formerly.
They went on again and Parent followed them.
As he passed the child he felt a mad longing to take him into his arms and run off with him, and he knocked against him as if by accident.
He went off like a thief, seized with a horrible fear lest he should have been seen and recognized by his wife and her lover.
He went to his cafe without stopping, and fell breathless into his chair.
That evening he drank three absinthes.
Every night he saw the three again, happy and tranquil, father, mother, and child walking on the boulevard before going in to dinner, and that new vision effaced the old one.
It was another matter, another hallucination now, and also a fresh pain.
Little George, his little George, the child he had so much loved and so often kissed, disappeared in the far distance, and he saw a new one, like a brother of the first, a little boy with bare legs, who did not know him!
He suffered terribly at that thought.
Then, by degrees he grew calmer, his mental torture diminished, the image that had appeared to his eyes and which haunted his nights became more indistinct and less frequent.
He began once more to live nearly like everybody else, like all those idle people who drink beer off marble-topped tables and wear out their clothes on the threadbare velvet of the couches.
He grew old amid the smoke from pipes, lost his hair under the gas lights, looked upon his weekly bath, on his fortnightly visit to the barber's to have his hair cut, and on the purchase of a new coat or hat as an event.
When he got to his cafe in a new hat he would look at himself in the glass for a long time before sitting down, and take it off and put it on again several times, and at last ask his friend, the lady at the bar, who was watching him with interest, whether she thought it suited him.
Two or three times a year he went to the theatre, and in the summer he sometimes spent his evenings at one of the open-air concerts in the Champs Elysees.
And so the years followed each other slow, monotonous, and short, because they were quite uneventful.
He very rarely now thought of the dreadful drama which had wrecked his life; for twenty years had passed since that terrible evening.
The landlord of his cafe would often say to him: “You ought to pull yourself together a little, Monsieur Parent; you should get some fresh air and go into the country.
I assure you that you have changed very much within the last few months.” And when his customer had gone out be used to say to the barmaid: “That poor Monsieur Parent is booked for another world; it is bad never to get out of Paris.
Advise him to go out of town for a day occasionally; he has confidence in you.
Summer will soon be here; that will put him straight.” And she, full of pity and kindness for such a regular customer, said to Parent every day: “Come, monsieur, make up your mind to get a little fresh air.
It is so charming in the country when the weather is fine.
Oh, if I could, I would spend my life there!” By degrees he was seized with a vague desire to go just once and see whether it was really as pleasant there as she said, outside the walls of the great city.
One morning he said to her: “Do you know where one can get a good luncheon in the neighborhood of Paris?” “Go to the Terrace at Saint-Germain; it is delightful there!” He had been there formerly, just when he became engaged.
He made up his mind to go there again, and he chose a Sunday, for no special reason, but merely because people generally do go out on Sundays, even when they have nothing to do all the week; and so one Sunday morning he went to Saint-Germain.
He felt low-spirited and vexed at having yielded to that new longing, and at having broken through his usual habits.
He could remain sitting for whole days, as long as he had the same motionless objects before his eyes, but he found it very trying and fatiguing to remain sitting while he was being whirled along, and to see the whole country fly by, while he himself was motionless.
However, he found the Seine interesting every time he crossed it.
Under the bridge at Chatou he saw some small boats going at great speed under the vigorous strokes of the bare-armed oarsmen, and he thought: “There are some fellows who are certainly enjoying themselves!” The train entered the tunnel just before you get to the station at Saint-Germain, and presently stopped at the platform.
Parent got out, and walked slowly, for he already felt tired, toward the Terrace, with his hands behind his back, and when he got to the iron balustrade, stopped to look at the distant horizon.
The immense plain spread out before him vast as the sea, green and studded with large villages, almost as populous as towns.
The sun bathed the whole landscape in its full, warm light.
The Seine wound like an endless serpent through the plain, flowed round the villages and along the slopes.
Parent inhaled the warm breeze, which seemed to make his heart young again, to enliven his spirits, and to vivify his blood, and said to himself: “Why, it is delightful here.” Then he went on a few steps, and stopped again to look about him.
The utter misery of his existence seemed to be brought into full relief by the intense light which inundated the landscape.
He saw his twenty years of cafe life—dull, monotonous, heartbreaking.
He might have traveled as others did, have gone among foreigners, to unknown countries beyond the sea, have interested himself somewhat in everything which other men are passionately devoted to, in arts and science; he might have enjoyed life in a thousand forms, that mysterious life which is either charming or painful, constantly changing, always inexplicable and strange.
He would go on drinking “bock” after “bock” until he died, without any family, without friends, without hope, without any curiosity about anything, and he was seized with a feeling of misery and a wish to run away, to hide himself in Paris, in his cafe and his lethargy!
All the thoughts, all the dreams, all the desires which are dormant in the slough of stagnating hearts had reawakened, brought to life by those rays of sunlight on the plain.
Parent felt that if he were to remain there any longer he should lose his reason, and he made haste to get to the Pavilion Henri IV for lunch, to try and forget his troubles under—the influence of wine and alcohol, and at any rate to have some one to speak to.
He took a small table in one of the arbors, from which one can see all the surrounding country, ordered his lunch, and asked to be served at once.
He felt more comfortable; he was no longer alone.
Three persons were eating luncheon near him.
He looked at them two or three times without seeing them clearly, as one looks at total strangers.
Suddenly a woman's voice sent a shiver through him which seemed to penetrate to his very marrow.
“George,” it said, “will you carve the chicken?” And another voice replied: “Yes, mamma.” Parent looked up, and he understood; he guessed immediately who those people were!
He should certainly not have known them again.
His wife had grown quite white and very stout, an elderly, serious, respectable lady, and she held her head forward as she ate for fear of spotting her dress, although she had a table napkin tucked under her chin.
He had a slight beard, that uneven and almost colorless beard which adorns the cheeks of youths.
He wore a high hat, a white waistcoat, and a monocle, because it looked swell, no doubt.
Parent looked at him in astonishment.
Limousin had his back to him, and was eating; with his shoulders rather bent.
All three of them seemed happy and satisfied; they came and took luncheon in the country at well-known restaurants.
They had had a calm and pleasant existence, a family existence in a warm and comfortable house, filled with all those trifles which make life agreeable, with affection, with all those tender words which people exchange continually when they love each other.
They had lived thus, thanks to him, Parent, on his money, after having deceived him, robbed him, ruined him!
They had condemned him, the innocent, simple-minded, jovial man, to all the miseries of solitude, to that abominable life which he had led, between the pavement and a bar-room, to every mental torture and every physical misery!
They had made him a useless, aimless being, a waif in the world, a poor old man without any pleasures, any prospects, expecting nothing from anybody or anything.
This idea worked upon him more than any other, the idea of a door which one opens, to see and to embrace somebody behind it.
And that was the fault of those three wretches!
The fault of that worthless woman, of that infamous friend, and of that tall, light-haired lad who put on insolent airs.
Was he not Limousin's son?
Would Limousin have kept him and loved him otherwise?
Would not Limousin very quickly have got rid of the mother and of the child if he had not felt sure that it was his, positively his?
Does anybody bring up other people's children?
Parent looked at them, irritated and excited at the recollection of all his sufferings and of his despair, and was especially exasperated at their placid and satisfied looks.
He felt inclined to kill them, to throw his siphon of Seltzer water at them, to split open Limousin's head as he every moment bent it over his plate, raising it again immediately.
He tried to think of some means, he pictured such dreadful things as one reads of in the newspapers occasionally, but could not hit on anything practical.
And he went on drinking to excite himself, to give himself courage not to allow such an opportunity to escape him, as he might never have another.
Suddenly an idea struck him, a terrible idea; and he left off drinking to mature it.
He smiled as he murmured: “I have them, I have them!
We will see; we will see!” They finished their luncheon slowly, conversing with perfect unconcern.
Parent could not hear what they were saying, but he saw their quiet gestures.
His wife's face especially exasperated him.
She had assumed a haughty air, the air of a comfortable, devout woman, of an unapproachable, devout woman, sheathed in principles, iron-clad in virtue.
Parent then noticed Limousin.
He might have been taken for a retired diplomat, for he looked a man of great importance, with his soft white whiskers, the tips of which touched his coat collar.
Parent rose and followed them.
First they went up and down the terrace, and calmly admired the landscape, and then they went into the forest.
Parent followed them at a distance, hiding himself so as not to excite their suspicion too soon.
Parent came up to them by degrees, breathing hard with emotion and fatigue, for he was unused to walking now.
He soon came up to them, but was seized with fear, an inexplicable fear, and he passed them, so as to turn round and meet them face to face.
They were all three sitting on the grass, at the foot of a huge tree, and were still chatting.
He made up his mind, and walked back rapidly; stopping in front of them in the middle of the road, he said abruptly, in a voice broken by emotion: “It is I!
He continued: “One would suppose that you did not know me again.
Ah! but here I am once more, you see, and now we will have an explanation.” Henriette, terrified, hid her face in her hands, murmuring: “Oh!
Good heavens!” Seeing this stranger, who seemed to be threatening his mother, George sprang up, ready to seize him by the collar.
Limousin, thunderstruck, looked in horror at this apparition, who, after gasping for breath, continued: “So now we will have an explanation; the proper moment has come!
Ah! you deceived me, you condemned me to the life of a convict, and you thought that I should never catch you!” The young man took him by the shoulders and pushed him back.
Go on your way immediately, or I shall give you a thrashing!” “What do I want?” replied Parent.
There, see whether they recognize me now, the wretches!” The young man, thunderstruck, unclenched his fists and turned toward his mother.
Parent, as soon as he was released, approached her.
“Well,” he said, “tell him yourself who I am!
Tell him that my name is Henri Parent, that I am his father because his name is George Parent, because you are my wife, because you are all three living on my money, on the allowance of ten thousand francs which I have made you since I drove you out of my house.
Because I surprised you with this beggar, this wretch, your lover!
Tell him what I was, an honorable man, whom you married for money, and whom you deceived from the very first day.
Tell him who you are, and who I am——” He stammered and gasped for breath in his rage.
The woman exclaimed in a heartrending voice: “Paul, Paul, stop him; make him be quiet!
Do not let him say this before my son!” Limousin had also risen to his feet.
Do you understand what you are doing?” “I quite know what I am doing,” resumed Parent, “and that is not all.
There is one thing that I will know, something that has tormented me for twenty years.” Then, turning to George, who was leaning against a tree in consternation, he said: “Listen to me.
When she left my house she thought it was not enough to have deceived me, but she also wanted to drive me to despair.
You were my only consolation, and she took you with her, swearing that I was not your father, but, that he was your father.
I have been asking myself the question for the last twenty years.” He went close up to her, tragic and terrible, and, pulling away her hands, with which she had covered her face, he continued: “Well, now!
Come! tell us.” Limousin rushed at him.
Parent pushed him back, and, sneering in his fury, he said: “Ah! you are brave now!
You are braver than you were that day when you ran downstairs because you thought I was going to murder you.
If she will not reply, tell me yourself.
I cannot tell you, my boy.” He seemed to be losing his senses; his voice grew shrill and he worked his arms about as if he had an epileptic 'fit.
I am living at the Hotel des Continents . . .
I hope you will enjoy yourselves very much . . .” And he went away gesticulating, talking to himself under the tall trees, in the quiet, the cool air, which was full of the fragrance of growing plants.
He did not turn round to look at them, but went straight on, walking under the stimulus of his rage, under a storm of passion, with that one fixed idea in his mind.
During the journey his anger calmed down, he regained his senses and returned to Paris, astonished at his own boldness, full of aches and pains as if he had broken some bones.
Nevertheless, he went to have a “bock” at his brewery.
When she saw him come in, Mademoiselle Zoe asked in surprise: “What! back already? are you tired?” “Yes—yes, I am tired . . . very tired . . .
For the future, I shall not stir out.” She could not persuade him to tell her about his little excursion, much as she wished to.
For the first time in his life he got thoroughly drunk that night, and had to be carried home.
QUEEN HORTENSE In Argenteuil she was called Queen Hortense.
Perhaps it was because she had a commanding tone of voice; perhaps because she was tall, bony, imperious; perhaps because she governed a kingdom of servants, chickens, dogs, cats, canaries, parrots, all so dear to an old maid's heart.
But she did not spoil these familiar friends; she had for them none of those endearing names, none of the foolish tenderness which women seem to lavish on the soft fur of a purring cat.
She governed these beasts with authority; she reigned.
She never would stand contradiction, argument, hesitation, indifference, laziness nor fatigue.
She had never been heard to complain, to regret anything, to envy anyone.
She would say: “Everyone has his share,” with the conviction of a fatalist.
She did not go to church, she had no use for priests, she hardly believed in God, calling all religious things “weeper's wares.” For thirty years she had lived in her little house, with its tiny garden running along the street; she had never changed her habits, only changing her servants pitilessly, as soon as they reached twenty-one years of age.
When her dogs, cats and birds would die of old age, or from an accident, she would replace them without tears and without regret; with a little spade she would bury the dead animal in a strip of ground, throwing a few shovelfuls of earth over it and stamping it down with her feet in an indifferent manner.
She had a few friends in town, families of clerks who went to Paris every day.
She would inevitably fall asleep, and she would have to be awakened, when it was time for her to go home.
She never allowed anyone to accompany her, fearing neither light nor darkness.
She did not appear to like children.
She kept herself busy doing countless masculine tasks—carpentering, gardening, sawing or chopping wood, even laying bricks when it was necessary.
She had relatives who came to see her twice a year, the Cimmes and the Colombels, her two sisters having married, one of them a florist and the other a retired merchant.
The Cimmes had no children; the Colombels had three: Henri, Pauline and Joseph.
Henri was twenty, Pauline seventeen and Joseph only three.
There was no love lost between the old maid and her relatives.
In the spring of the year 1882 Queen Hortense suddenly fell sick.
The neighbors called in a physician, whom she immediately drove out.
A priest then having presented himself, she jumped out of bed, in order to throw him out of the house.
After lying in bed for three days the situation appeared so serious that the barrel-maker, who lived next door, to the right, acting on advice from the doctor, who had forcibly returned to the house, took it upon himself to call together the two families.
They arrived by the same train, towards ten in the morning, the Colombels bringing little Joseph with them.
The dog was sleeping on the door mat in the broiling sun; two cats, which looked as though they might be dead, were stretched out in front of the two windows, their eyes closed, their paws and tails stretched out at full length.
A big clucking hen was parading through the garden with a whole regiment of yellow, downy chicks, and a big cage hanging from the wall and covered with pimpernel, contained a population of birds which were chirping away in the warmth of this beautiful spring morning.
In another cage, shaped like a chalet, two lovebirds sat motionless side by side on their perch.
Cimme, a fat, puffing person, who always entered first everywhere, pushing aside everyone else, whether man or woman, when it was necessary, asked: “Well, Celeste, aren't things going well?” The little servant moaned through her tears: “She doesn't even recognize me any more.
The doctor says it's the end.” Everybody looked around.
Colombel immediately embraced each other, without saying a word.
They looked very much alike, having always worn their hair in Madonna bands, and loud red French cashmere shawls.
Cimme turned to his brother-in-law, a pale, sallow-complexioned, thin man, wasted by stomach complaints, who limped badly, and said in a serious tone of voice: “Gad!
Colombel was the first to make up his mind, and, swaying from side to side like the mast of a ship, the iron ferule of his cane clattering on the paved hall, he entered.
Cimmes closed the procession.
Little Joseph had remained outside, pleased at the sight of the dog.
A ray of sunlight seemed to cut the bed in two, shining just on the hands, which were moving nervously, continually opening and closing.
The fingers were twitching as though moved by some thought, as though trying to point out a meaning or idea, as though obeying the dictates of a will.
The rest of the body lay motionless under the sheets.
The angular frame showed not a single movement.
The eyes remained closed.
The family spread out in a semi-circle and, without a word, they began to watch the contracted chest and the short, gasping breathing.
The little servant had followed them and was still crying.
At last Cimme asked: “Exactly what did the doctor say?” The girl stammered: “He said to leave her alone, that nothing more could be done for her.” But suddenly the old woman's lips began to move.
She seemed to be uttering silent words, words hidden in the brain of this dying being, and her hands quickened their peculiar movements.
Then she began to speak in a thin, high voice, which no one had ever heard, a voice which seemed to come from the distance, perhaps from the depths of this heart which had always been closed.
Colombel, whose crippled leg was growing tired, sat down.
The two women remained standing.
Queen Hortense was now babbling away, and no one could understand a word.
She was pronouncing names, many names, tenderly calling imaginary people.
“Come here, Philippe, kiss your mother.
Don't play with matches!” She stopped for a while, then, in a louder voice, as though she were calling someone: “Henriette!” then waited a moment and continued: “Tell your father that I wish to speak to him before he goes to business.” And suddenly: “I am not feeling very well to-day, darling; promise not to come home late.
Tell your employer that I am sick.
You know, it isn't safe to leave the children alone when I am in bed.
Look, sweetheart, look; isn't he funny?” Colombel, who was continually lifting his tired leg from place to place, muttered: “She is dreaming that she has children and a husband; it is the beginning of the death agony.” The two sisters had not yet moved, surprised, astounded.
The little maid exclaimed: “You must take off your shawls and your hats!
And Colombel followed them, limping, once more leaving the dying woman alone.
When they were relieved of their travelling garments, the women finally sat down.
Then one of the cats left its window, stretched, jumped into the room and on to Mme.
In the next room could be heard the voice of the dying woman, living, in this last hour, the life for which she had doubtless hoped, living her dreams themselves just when all was over for her.
Cimme, in the garden, was playing with little Joseph and the dog, enjoying himself in the whole hearted manner of a countryman, having completely forgotten the dying woman.
But suddenly he entered the house and said to the girl: “I say, my girl, are we not going to have luncheon?
What do you ladies wish to eat?” They finally agreed on an omelet, a piece of steak with new potatoes, cheese and coffee.
Colombel was fumbling in her pocket for her purse, Cimme stopped her, and, turning to the maid: “Have you got any money?” She answered: “Yes, monsieur.” “How much?” “Fifteen francs.” “That's enough.
Hustle, my girl, because I am beginning to get very hungry:” Mme.
Cimme, looking out over the climbing vines bathed in sunlight, and at the two turtle-doves on the roof opposite, said in an annoyed tone of voice: “What a pity to have had to come for such a sad occasion.
It is so nice in the country to-day.” Her sister sighed without answering, and Colombel mumbled, thinking perhaps of the walk ahead of him: “My leg certainly is bothering me to-day:” Little Joseph and the dog were making a terrible noise; one was shrieking with pleasure, the other was barking wildly.
The dying woman continued to call her children, talking with each one, imagining that she was dressing them, fondling them, teaching them how to read: “Come on!
You are not paying attention, listen—D, D, D; do you hear me?
Now repeat—” Cimme exclaimed: “Funny what people say when in that condition.” Mme.
Colombel then asked: “Wouldn't it be better if we were to return to her?” But Cimme dissuaded her from the idea: “What's the use?
You can't change anything.
We are just as comfortable here.” Nobody insisted.
Cimme observed the two green birds called love- birds.
In a few words she praised this singular faithfulness and blamed the men for not imitating these animals.
Cimme began to laugh, looked at his wife and hummed in a teasing way: “Tra-la-la, tra-la-la” as though to cast a good deal of doubt on his own, Cimme's, faithfulness: Colombel was suffering from cramps and was rapping the floor with his cane.
The other cat, its tail pointing upright to the sky, now came in.
They sat down to luncheon at one o'clock.
Cimme declared: “That is regular invalid's wine.” Colombel, filled with an ardent desire to gain possession of this Bordeaux, once more questioned the girl: “How much of it is left?” “Oh!
Almost all, monsieur; mamz'elle never touched it.
It's in the bottom stack.” Then he turned to his brother-in-law: “If you wish, Cimme, I would be willing to exchange something else for this wine; it suits my stomach marvellously.” The chicken had now appeared with its regiment of young ones.
The two women were enjoying themselves throwing crumbs to them.
Queen Hortense was still talking, but in a low, hushed voice, so that the words could no longer be distinguished.
When they had finished their coffee all went in to observe the condition of the sick woman.
They went outside again and seated themselves in a circle in the garden, in order to complete their digestion.
Suddenly the dog, who was carrying something in his mouth, began to run around the chairs at full speed.
Both disappeared into the house.
Then suddenly she shrieked.
The two women and Colombel rushed in to see what was the matter.
Her dog, in order to escape being pursued by little Joseph, had jumped up on the bed, run over the sick woman, and entrenched behind the pillow, was looking down at his playmate with snapping eyes, ready to jump down and begin the game again.
He was holding in his mouth one of his mistress' slippers, which he had torn to pieces and with which he had been playing for the last hour.
The child, frightened by this woman who had suddenly risen in front of him, stood motionless before the bed.
The hen had also come in, and frightened by the noise, had jumped up on a chair and was wildly calling her chicks, who were chirping distractedly around the four legs of the chair.
Queen Hortense was shrieking: “No, no, I don't want to die, I don't want to!
Who will bring up my children?
The dog, wild with excitement, jumped about the room, barking.
Colombel ran to the window, calling his brother-in-law: “Hurry up, hurry up!
I think that she has just gone.” Then Cimme, resigned, arose and entered the room, mumbling “It didn't take as long as I thought it would!” TIMBUCTOO The boulevard, that river of humanity, was alive with people in the golden light of the setting sun.
The whole sky was red, blinding, and behind the Madeleine an immense bank of flaming clouds cast a shower of light the whole length of the boulevard, vibrant as the heat from a brazier.
The gay, animated crowd went by in this golden mist and seemed to be glorified.
Their faces were gilded, their black hats and clothes took on purple tints, the patent leather of their shoes cast bright reflections on the asphalt of the sidewalk.
Before the cafes a mass of men were drinking opalescent liquids that looked like precious stones dissolved in the glasses.
In the midst of the drinkers two officers in full uniform dazzled all eyes with their glittering gold lace.
They chatted, happy without asking why, in this glory of life, in this radiant light of sunset, and they looked at the crowd, the leisurely men and the hurrying women who left a bewildering odor of perfume as they passed by.
All at once an enormous negro, dressed in black, with a paunch beneath his jean waistcoat, which was covered with charms, his face shining as if it had been polished, passed before them with a triumphant air.
He laughed at the passers-by, at the news venders, at the dazzling sky, at the whole of Paris.
He was so tall that he overtopped everyone else, and when he passed all the loungers turned round to look at his back.
But he suddenly perceived the officers and darted towards them, jostling the drinkers in his path.
As soon as he reached their table he fixed his gleaming and delighted eyes upon them and the corners of his mouth expanded to his ears, showing his dazzling white teeth like a crescent moon in a black sky.
The two men looked in astonishment at this ebony giant, unable to understand his delight.
With a voice that made all the guests laugh, he said: “Good-day, my lieutenant.” One of the officers was commander of a battalion, the other was a colonel.
I am at a loss to know what you want of me.” “Me like you much, Lieutenant Vedie, siege of Bezi, much grapes, find me.” The officer, utterly bewildered, looked at the man intently, trying to refresh his memory.
Then he cried abruptly: “Timbuctoo?” The negro, radiant, slapped his thigh as he uttered a tremendous laugh and roared: “Yes, yes, my lieutenant; you remember Timbuctoo, ya.
How do you do?” The commandant held out his hand, laughing heartily as he did so.
Then Timbuctoo became serious.
He seized the officer's hand and, before the other could prevent it, he kissed it, according to negro and Arab custom.
The officer embarrassed, said in a severe tone: “Come now, Timbuctoo, we are not in Africa.
Sit down there and tell me how it is I find you here.” Timbuctoo swelled himself out and, his words falling over one another, replied hurriedly: “Make much money, much, big restaurant, good food; Prussians, me, much steal, much, French cooking; Timbuctoo cook to the emperor; two thousand francs mine.
Ha, ha, ha, ha!” And he laughed, doubling himself up, roaring, with wild delight in his glances.
When the officer, who understood his strange manner of expressing himself, had questioned him he said: “Well, au revoir, Timbuctoo.
I will see you again.” The negro rose, this time shaking the hand that was extended to him and, smiling still, cried: “Good-day, good-day, my lieutenant!” He went off so happy that he gesticulated as he walked, and people thought he was crazy.
“You know that at the commencement of the war of 1870 I was shut up in Bezieres, that this negro calls Bezi.
We were not besieged, but blockaded.
The Prussian lines surrounded us on all sides, outside the reach of cannon, not firing on us, but slowly starving us out.
“I was then lieutenant.
Our garrison consisted of soldier of all descriptions, fragments of slaughtered regiments, some that had run away, freebooters separated from the main army, etc.
We had all kinds, in fact even eleven Turcos [Algerian soldiers in the service of France], who arrived one evening no one knew whence or how.
They appeared at the gates of the city, exhausted, in rags, starving and dirty.
“I saw very soon that they were absolutely undisciplined, always in the street and always drunk.
They would disappear, sometimes for days at a time, as if they had been swallowed up by the earth, and then come back staggering drunk.
“This began to worry me greatly, all the more as these savages interested me with their everlasting laugh and their characteristics of overgrown frolicsome children.
He made them do as he pleased, planned their mysterious expeditions with the all-powerful and undisputed authority of a leader.
I sent for him and questioned him.
Our conversation lasted fully three hours, for it was hard for me to understand his remarkable gibberish.
As for him, poor devil, he made unheard-of efforts to make himself intelligible, invented words, gesticulated, perspired in his anxiety, mopping his forehead, puffing, stopping and abruptly beginning again when he thought he had found a new method of explaining what he wanted to say.
“I gathered finally that he was the son of a big chief, a sort of negro king of the region around Timbuctoo.
He repeated something like 'Chavaharibouhalikranafotapolara.' It seemed simpler to me to give him the name of his native place, 'Timbuctoo.' And a week later he was known by no other name in the garrison.
“But we were all wildly anxious to find out where this African ex-prince procured his drinks.
I discovered it in a singular manner.
“I was on the ramparts one morning, watching the horizon, when I perceived something moving about in a vineyard.
It was near the time of vintage, the grapes were ripe, but I was not thinking of that.
I thought that a spy was approaching the town, and I organized a complete expedition to catch the prowler.
I took command myself, after obtaining permission from the general.
“I sent out by three different gates three little companies, which were to meet at the suspected vineyard and form a cordon round it.
In order to cut off the spy's retreat, one of these detachments had to make at least an hour's march.
A watch on the walls signalled to me that the person I had seen had not left the place.
We went along in profound silence, creeping, almost crawling, along the ditches.
At last we reached the spot assigned.
“I abruptly disbanded my soldiers, who darted into the vineyard and found Timbuctoo on hands and knees travelling around among the vines and eating grapes, or rather devouring them as a dog eats his sop, snatching them in mouthfuls from the vine with his teeth.
I then understood why he was crawling on his hands and knees.
As soon as we stood him on his feet he began to wabble, then stretched out his arms and fell down on his nose.
He never stopped laughing all the way back, gesticulating with his arms and legs.
“This explained the mystery.
My men also drank the juice of the grapes, and when they were so intoxicated they could not stir they went to sleep in the vineyard.
As for Timbuctoo, his love of the vineyard was beyond all belief and all bounds.
He lived in it as did the thrushes, whom he hated with the jealous hate of a rival.
He repeated incessantly: 'The thrushes eat all the grapes, captain!' “One evening I was sent for.
Something had been seen on the plain coming in our direction.
I had not brought my field-glass and I could not distinguish things clearly.
It looked like a great serpent uncoiling itself—a convoy.
“I sent some men to meet this strange caravan, which presently made its triumphal entry.
Timbuctoo and nine of his comrades were carrying on a sort of altar made of camp stools eight severed, grinning and bleeding heads.
The African was dragging along a horse to whose tail another head was fastened, and six other animals followed, adorned in the same manner.
“This is what I learned: Having started out to the vineyard, my Africans had suddenly perceived a detachment of Prussians approaching a village.
Instead of taking to their heels, they hid themselves, and as soon as the Prussian officers dismounted at an inn to refresh themselves, the eleven rascals rushed on them, put to flight the lancers, who thought they were being attacked by the main army, killed the two sentries, then the colonel and the five officers of his escort.
“That day I kissed Timbuctoo.
I saw, however, that he walked with difficulty and thought he was wounded.
He laughed and said: “'Me provisions for my country.' “Timbuctoo was not fighting for glory, but for gain.
Everything he found that seemed to him to be of the slightest value, especially anything that glistened, he put in his pocket.
He had retained an old term used by the troopers and called it his 'profonde,' and it was his 'profonde' in fact.
“He had taken the gold lace off the Prussian uniforms, the brass off their helmets, detached their buttons, etc., and had thrown them all into his 'profonde,' which was full to overflowing.
“Each day he pocketed every glistening object that came beneath his observation, pieces of tin or pieces of silver, and sometimes his contour was very comical.
“He intended to carry all that back to the land of ostriches, whose brother he might have been, this son of a king, tormented with the longing to gobble up all objects that glistened.
If he had not had his 'profonde' what would he have done?
He doubtless would have swallowed them.
I could not discover it.
“The general, on being informed of Timbuctoo's mighty act of valor, had the headless bodies that had been left in the neighboring village interred at once, that it might not be discovered that they were decapitated.
The Prussians returned thither the following day.
The mayor and seven prominent inhabitants were shot on the spot, by way of reprisal, as having denounced the Prussians.
We were exhausted and desperate.
There were skirmishes now every day.
The famished men could no longer march.
The eight 'Turcos' alone (three had been killed) remained fat and shiny, vigorous and always ready to fight.
Timbuctoo was even getting fatter.
He said to me one day: “'You much hungry; me good meat.' “And he brought me an excellent filet.
It was impossible to get a horse.
I thought of all this after I had devoured my meat.
Then a horrible idea came to me.
And each day such a number of soldiers were killed around the town!
I questioned Timbuctoo.
I did not insist, but from that time on I declined his presents.
One night snow took us by surprise at the outposts.
I looked with pity at those poor negroes shivering beneath this white frozen shower.
At once I felt something fall on me like a large warm quilt.
It was Timbuctoo's cape that he had thrown on my shoulders.
“I rose and returned his garment, saying: “'Keep it, my boy; you need it more than I do.' “'Non, my lieutenant, for you; me no need.
Me hot, hot!' “And he looked at me entreatingly.
“He then stood up, drew his sword, which he had sharpened to an edge like a scythe, and holding in his other hand the large cape which I had refused, said: “'If you not keep cape, me cut.
“Eight days later we capitulated.
Some of us had been able to escape, the rest were to march out of the town and give themselves up to the conquerors.
“I went towards the exercising ground, where we were all to meet, when I was dumfounded at the sight of a gigantic negro dressed in white duck and wearing a straw hat.
He was beaming and was walking with his hands in his pockets in front of a little shop where two plates and two glasses were displayed.
Me eat Prussians; much steal, much.' “There were ten degrees of frost.
I shivered at sight of this negro in white duck.
I noticed an immense flag that he was going to place outside his door as soon as we had left, for he had some shame.” I read this sign, traced by the hand of some accomplice “'ARMY KITCHEN OF M.
TIMBUCTOO, “'Formerly Cook to H.
“'A Parisian Artist.
Moderate Prices.' “In spite of the despair that was gnawing at my heart, I could not help laughing, and I left my negro to his new enterprise.
“Was not that better than taking him prisoner?
“Bezieres to-day belongs to the Germans.
The 'Restaurant Timbuctoo' is the beginning of a retaliation.” TOMBSTONES The five friends had finished dinner, five men of the world, mature, rich, three married, the two others bachelors.
Having remained intimate friends, and enjoying each other's society, they probably considered these the pleasantest evenings of their lives.
They talked on every subject, especially of what interested and amused Parisians.
Their conversation was, as in the majority of salons elsewhere, a verbal rehash of what they had read in the morning papers.
One of the most lively of them was Joseph de Bardon, a celibate living the Parisian life in its fullest and most whimsical manner.
He was not a debauche nor depraved, but a singular, happy fellow, still young, for he was scarcely forty.
As he sat smoking, his elbows on the table, a petit verre half full beside his plate, half torpid in an atmosphere of tobacco blended with steaming coffee, he seemed to be perfectly at home.
He said between two whiffs: “A curious thing happened to me some time ago.” “Tell it to us,” they all exclaimed at once.
You know that I wander about Paris a great deal, like book collectors who ransack book stalls.
“Toward the middle of September—it was beautiful weather—I went out one afternoon, not knowing where I was going.
One chooses among them in one's mental picture gallery, compares them in one's mind, weighs the interest with which they inspire you, their comparative charms and finally decides according to the influence of the day.
I lighted a cigar and sauntered aimlessly along the outer boulevard.
Then, as I strolled on, it occurred to me to walk as far as Montmartre and go into the cemetery.
“I am very fond of cemeteries.
“It is in this cemetery of Montmartre that is buried a romance of my life, a sweetheart who made a great impression on me, a very emotional, charming little woman whose memory, although it causes me great sorrow, also fills me with regrets—regrets of all kinds.
She has finished with life.
“And then I like cemeteries because they are immense cities filled to overflowing with inhabitants.
Think how many dead people there are in this small space, think of all the generations of Parisians who are housed there forever, veritable troglodytes enclosed in their little vaults, in their little graves covered with a stone or marked by a cross, while living beings take up so much room and make so much noise —imbeciles that they are!
“Then, again, in cemeteries there are monuments almost as interesting as in museums.
The tomb of Cavaignac reminded me, I must confess without making any comparison, of the chef d'oeuvre of Jean Goujon: the recumbent statue of Louis de Breze in the subterranean chapel of the Cathedral of Rouen.
All modern and realistic art has originated there, messieurs.
This dead man, Louis de Breze, is more real, more terrible, more like inanimate flesh still convulsed with the death agony than all the tortured corpses that are distorted to-day in funeral monuments.
“But in Montmartre one can yet admire Baudin's monument, which has a degree of grandeur; that of Gautier, of Murger, on which I saw the other day a simple, paltry wreath of immortelles, yellow immortelles, brought thither by whom?
Possibly by the last grisette, very old and now janitress in the neighborhood.
“I walked along slowly amid these streets of tombs, where the neighbors do not visit each other, do not sleep together and do not read the newspapers.
And I began to read the epitaphs.
Never did Labiche or Meilhac make me laugh as I have laughed at the comical inscriptions on tombstones.
Oh, how much superior to the books of Paul de Kock for getting rid of the spleen are these marble slabs and these crosses where the relatives of the deceased have unburdened their sorrow, their desires for the happiness of the vanished ones and their hope of rejoining them—humbugs!
“But I love above all in this cemetery the deserted portion, solitary, full of great yews and cypresses, the older portion, belonging to those dead long since, and which will soon be taken into use again; the growing trees nourished by the human corpses cut down in order to bury in rows beneath little slabs of marble those who have died more recently.
“When I had sauntered about long enough to refresh my mind I felt that I would soon have had enough of it and that I must place the faithful homage of my remembrance on my little friend's last resting place.
I felt a tightening of the heart as I reached her grave.
Poor dear, she was so dainty, so loving and so white and fresh—and now—if one should open the grave— “Leaning over the iron grating, I told her of my sorrow in a low tone, which she doubtless did not hear, and was moving away when I saw a woman in black, in deep mourning, kneeling on the next grave.
Her crape veil was turned back, uncovering a pretty fair head, the hair in Madonna bands looking like rays of dawn beneath her sombre headdress.
“Surely she must be in profound grief.
She had covered her face with her hands and, standing there in meditation, rigid as a statue, given up to her grief, telling the sad rosary of her remembrances within the shadow of her concealed and closed eyes, she herself seemed like a dead person mourning another who was dead.
She wept softly at first, then louder, with quick motions of her neck and shoulders.
Suddenly she uncovered her eyes.
They were full of tears and charming, the eyes of a bewildered woman, with which she glanced about her as if awaking from a nightmare.
She looked at me, seemed abashed and hid her face completely in her hands.
Then she sobbed convulsively, and her head slowly bent down toward the marble.
She leaned her forehead on it, and her veil spreading around her, covered the white corners of the beloved tomb, like a fresh token of mourning.
I heard her sigh, then she sank down with her cheek on the marble slab and remained motionless, unconscious.
“I darted toward her, slapped her hands, blew on her eyelids, while I read this simple epitaph: 'Here lies Louis-Theodore Carrel, Captain of Marine Infantry, killed by the enemy at Tonquin.
I was affected to tears and redoubled my attentions.
They were successful.
She regained consciousness.
I appeared very much moved.
I saw by her first glance that she would be polite and grateful.
She was, and amid more tears she told me her history in detached fragments as well as her gasping breath would allow, how the officer was killed at Tonquin when they had been married a year, how she had married him for love, and being an orphan, she had only the usual dowry.
“I consoled her, I comforted her, raised her and lifted her on her feet.
Come.' “'I am unable to walk,' she murmured.
Love has no law.' “'Yes, madame.' “And we set off together, she leaning on my arm, while I almost carried her along the paths of the cemetery.
When we got outside she faltered: “'I feel as if I were going to be ill.' “'Would you like to go in anywhere, to take something?' “'Yes, monsieur.' “I perceived a restaurant, one of those places where the mourners of the dead go to celebrate the funeral.
It was sad, so sad to be always alone in life, alone in one's home, night and day, to have no one on whom one can bestow affection, confidence, intimacy.
I paid her compliments, which she took in good part.
Then, as time was passing, I suggested taking her home in a carriage.
She accepted, and in the cab we sat so close that our shoulders touched.
“When the cab stopped at her house she murmured: 'I do not feel equal to going upstairs alone, for I live on the fourth floor.
Will you let me take your arm as far as my own door?' “I agreed with eagerness.
She ascended the stairs slowly, breathing hard.
Everything was modest, even rather poor, but simple and in good taste.
“We sat down side by side on a little sofa and she began to talk again about her loneliness.
I was delighted, thinking that this maid probably came in the morning only, what one calls a charwoman.
She was really pretty, and she gazed at me with her clear eyes, gazed so hard and her eyes were so clear that I was terribly tempted.
I caught her in my arms and rained kisses on her eyelids, which she closed suddenly.
“She freed herself and pushed me away, saying: “'Have done, have done.' “But I next kissed her on the mouth and she did not resist, and as our glances met after thus outraging the memory of the captain killed in Tonquin, I saw that she had a languid, resigned expression that set my mind at rest.
“I became very attentive and, after chatting for some time, I said: “'Where do you dine?' “'In a little restaurant in the neighborhood: “'All alone?' “'Why, yes.' “'Will you dine with me?' “'Where?' “'In a good restaurant on the Boulevard.' “She demurred a little.
She yielded, saying by way of apology to herself: 'I am so lonely—so lonely.' Then she added: “'I must put on something less sombre, and went into her bedroom.
When she reappeared she was dressed in half-mourning, charming, dainty and slender in a very simple gray dress.
She evidently had a costume for the cemetery and one for the town.
“The dinner was very enjoyable.
She drank some champagne, brightened up, grew lively and I went home with her.
“This friendship, begun amid the tombs, lasted about three weeks.
But one gets tired of everything, especially of women.
I left her under pretext of an imperative journey.
She seemed to be really rather attached to me.
“Other things occupied my attention, and it was about a month before I thought much about this little cemetery friend.
The recollection of her haunted me like a mystery, like a psychological problem, one of those inexplicable questions whose solution baffles us.
“I do not know why, but one day I thought I might possibly meet her in the Montmartre Cemetery, and I went there.
“I walked about a long time without meeting any but the ordinary visitors to this spot, those who have not yet broken off all relations with their dead.
“But as I wandered in another direction of this great city of the dead I perceived suddenly, at the end of a narrow avenue of crosses, a couple in deep mourning walking toward me, a man and a woman.
As they approached I recognized her.
“She saw me, blushed, and as I brushed past her she gave me a little signal, a tiny little signal with her eye, which meant: 'Do not recognize me!' and also seemed to say, 'Come back to see me again, my dear!' “The man was a gentleman, distingue, chic, an officer of the Legion of Honor, about fifty years old.
He was supporting her as I had supported her myself when we were leaving the cemetery.
“I went my way, filled with amazement, asking myself what this all meant, to what race of beings belonged this huntress of the tombs?
Was she just a common girl, one who went to seek among the tombs for men who were in sorrow, haunted by the recollection of some woman, a wife or a sweetheart, and still troubled by the memory of vanished caresses?
Do they parade the cemetery as they parade the street?
Or else was she only impressed with the admirable, profoundly philosophical idea of exploiting love recollections, which are revived in these funereal places?
“And I would have liked to know whose widow she was on that special day.” MADEMOISELLE PEARL I What a strange idea it was for me to choose Mademoiselle Pearl for queen that evening!
Every year I celebrate Twelfth Night with my old friend Chantal.
My father, who was his most intimate friend, used to take me round there when I was a child.
I continued the custom, and I doubtless shall continue it as long as I live and as long as there is a Chantal in this world.
The Chantals lead a peculiar existence; they live in Paris as though they were in Grasse, Evetot, or Pont-a-Mousson.
They have a house with a little garden near the observatory.
Mademoiselle Chantal goes to lay in her provisions, as it is called in the family.
This is how they go to purchase their provisions: Mademoiselle Pearl, who has the keys to the kitchen closet (for the linen closets are administered by the mistress herself), Mademoiselle Pearl gives warning that the supply of sugar is low, that the preserves are giving out, that there is not much left in the bottom of the coffee bag.
Thus warned against famine, Mademoiselle Chantal passes everything in review, taking notes on a pad.
Then she puts down a lot of figures and goes through lengthy calculations and long discussions with Mademoiselle Pearl.
At last they manage to agree, and they decide upon the quantity of each thing of which they will lay in a three months' provision; sugar, rice, prunes, coffee, preserves, cans of peas, beans, lobster, salt or smoked fish, etc., etc.
After which the day for the purchasing is determined on and they go in a cab with a railing round the top and drive to a large grocery store on the other side of the river in the new sections of the town.
Madame Chantal and Mademoiselle Pearl make this trip together, mysteriously, and only return at dinner time, tired out, although still excited, and shaken up by the cab, the roof of which is covered with bundles and bags, like an express wagon.
For the Chantals all that part of Paris situated on the other side of the Seine constitutes the new quarter, a section inhabited by a strange, noisy population, which cares little for honor, spends its days in dissipation, its nights in revelry, and which throws money out of the windows.
From time to time, however, the young girls are taken to the Opera-Comique or the Theatre Francais, when the play is recommended by the paper which is read by M.
At present the young ladies are respectively nineteen and seventeen.
They are two pretty girls, tall and fresh, very well brought up, in fact, too well brought up, so much so that they pass by unperceived like two pretty dolls.
Never would the idea come to me to pay the slightest attention or to pay court to one of the young Chantal ladies; they are so immaculate that one hardly dares speak to them; one almost feels indecent when bowing to them.
As for the father, he is a charming man, well educated, frank, cordial, but he likes calm and quiet above all else, and has thus contributed greatly to the mummifying of his family in order to live as he pleased in stagnant quiescence.
He reads a lot, loves to talk and is readily affected.
Lack of contact and of elbowing with the world has made his moral skin very tender and sensitive.
The slightest thing moves him, excites him, and makes him suffer.
The Chantals have limited connections carefully chosen in the neighborhood.
They also exchange two or three yearly visits with relatives who live in the distance.
As for me, I take dinner with them on the fifteenth of August and on Twelfth Night.
That is as much one of my duties as Easter communion is for a Catholic.
On the fifteenth of August a few friends are invited, but on Twelfth Night I am the only stranger.
Well, this year, as every former year, I went to the Chantals' for my Epiphany dinner.
According to my usual custom, I kissed M.
Chantal, Madame Chantal and Mademoiselle Pearl, and I made a deep bow to the Misses Louise and Pauline.
I was questioned about a thousand and one things, about what had happened on the boulevards, about politics, about how matters stood in Tong-King, and about our representatives in Parliament.
Madame Chantal, a fat lady, whose ideas always gave me the impression of being carved out square like building stones, was accustomed to exclaiming at the end of every political discussion: “All that is seed which does not promise much for the future!” Why have I always imagined that Madame Chantal's ideas are square?
I don't know; but everything that she says takes that shape in my head: a big square, with four symmetrical angles.
As soon as they begin a sentence on any subject it rolls on and on, coming out in ten, twenty, fifty round ideas, large and small, which I see rolling along, one behind the other, to the end of the horizon.
We sat down as usual and finished our dinner without anything out of the ordinary being said.
I don't know whether this was the result of continued chance or a family convention, but he unfailingly found the bean in his piece of cake, and he would proclaim Madame Chantal to be queen.
Therefore, I was greatly surprised to find something very hard, which almost made me break a tooth, in a mouthful of cake.
Gently I took this thing from my mouth and I saw that it was a little porcelain doll, no bigger than a bean.
Surprise caused me to exclaim: “Ah!” All looked at me, and Chantal clapped his hands and cried: “It's Gaston!
Long live the king!” All took up the chorus: “Long live the king!” And I blushed to the tip of my ears, as one often does, without any reason at all, in situations which are a little foolish.
I sat there looking at my plate, with this absurd little bit of pottery in my fingers, forcing myself to laugh and not knowing what to do or say, when Chantal once more cried out: “Now, you must choose a queen!” Then I was thunderstruck.
In a second a thousand thoughts and suppositions flashed through my mind.
Was it a gentle, light, direct hint of the parents toward a possible marriage?
The idea of marriage roams continually in houses with grown-up girls, and takes every shape and disguise, and employs every subterfuge.
A dread of compromising myself took hold of me as well as an extreme timidity before the obstinately correct and reserved attitude of the Misses Louise and Pauline.
To choose one of them in preference to the other seemed to me as difficult as choosing between two drops of water; and then the fear of launching myself into an affair which might, in spite of me, lead me gently into matrimonial ties, by means as wary and imperceptible and as calm as this insignificant royalty—the fear of all this haunted me.
Suddenly I had an inspiration, and I held out to Mademoiselle Pearl the symbolical emblem.
At first every one was surprised, then they doubtless appreciated my delicacy and discretion, for they applauded furiously.
Everybody was crying: “Long live the queen!
Long live the queen!” As for herself, poor old maid, she was so amazed that she completely lost control of herself; she was trembling and stammering: “No—no—oh! no—not me—please—not me—I beg of you——” Then for the first time in my life I looked at Mademoiselle Pearl and wondered what she was.
I was accustomed to seeing her in this house, just as one sees old upholstered armchairs on which one has been sitting since childhood without ever noticing them.
One day, with no reason at all, because a ray of sunshine happens to strike the seat, you suddenly think: “Why, that chair is very curious”; and then you discover that the wood has been worked by a real artist and that the material is remarkable.
I had never taken any notice of Mademoiselle Pearl.
She was a tall, thin person who tried to remain in the background, but who was by no means insignificant.
She was treated in a friendly manner, better than a housekeeper, not so well as a relative.
I suddenly observed several shades of distinction which I had never noticed before.
Madame Chantal said: “Pearl.” The young ladies: “Mademoiselle Pearl,” and Chantal only addressed her as “Mademoiselle,” with an air of greater respect, perhaps.
I was suddenly struck by this fact.
She fixed her hair and dressed in a ridiculous manner, and, notwithstanding all that, she was not in the least ridiculous, she had such simple, natural gracefulness, veiled and hidden.
Truly, what a strange creature!
How was it I had never observed her before?
Her whole face was refined and discreet, a face the expression of which seemed to have gone out without being used up or faded by the fatigues and great emotions of life.
Suddenly I compared her to Madame Chantal!
Undoubtedly Mademoiselle Pearl was the better of the two, a hundred times better, daintier, prouder, more noble.
I was surprised at my observation.
They were pouring out champagne.
I held my glass up to the queen and, with a well- turned compliment, I drank to her health.
I could see that she felt inclined to hide her head in her napkin.
Then, as she was dipping her lips in the clear wine, everybody cried: “The queen drinks! the queen drinks!” She almost turned purple and choked.
Everybody was laughing; but I could see that all loved her.
When alone he would smoke it out in the street; when guests came to dinner he would take them to the billiard room and smoke while playing.
That evening they had built a fire to celebrate Twelfth Night; my old friend took his cue, a very fine one, and chalked it with great care; then he said: “You break, my boy!” He called me “my boy,” although I was twenty-five, but he had known me as a young child.
I missed some others, but as the thought of Mademoiselle Pearl kept returning to my mind, I suddenly asked: “By the way, Monsieur Chantal, is Mademoiselle Pearl a relative of yours?” Greatly surprised, he stopped playing and looked at me: “What!
Haven't you heard about Mademoiselle Pearl?” “No.” “Didn't your father ever tell you?” “No.” “Well, well, that's funny!
That certainly is funny!
Why, it's a regular romance!” He paused, and then continued: “And if you only knew how peculiar it is that you should ask me that to- day, on Twelfth Night!” “Why?” “Why?
Forty-one years ago to day, the day of the Epiphany, the following events occurred: We were then living at Roily-le-Tors, on the ramparts; but in order that you may understand, I must first explain the house.
Roily is built on a hill, or, rather, on a mound which overlooks a great stretch of prairie.
We had a house there with a beautiful hanging garden supported by the old battlemented wall; so that the house was in the town on the streets, while the garden overlooked the plain.
There was a door leading from the garden to the open country, at the bottom of a secret stairway in the thick wall—the kind you read about in novels.
A road passed in front of this door, which was provided with a big bell; for the peasants, in order to avoid the roundabout way, would bring their provisions up this way.
“You now understand the place, don't you?
Well, this year, at Epiphany, it had been snowing for a week.
When we went to the ramparts to look over the plain, this immense white, frozen country, which shone like varnish, would chill our very souls.
One might have thought that the Lord had packed the world in cotton to put it away in the storeroom for old worlds.
“We were a very numerous family at that time my father, my mother, my uncle and aunt, my two brothers and four cousins; they were pretty little girls; I married the youngest.
Of all that crowd, there are only three of us left: my wife, I, and my sister-in-law, who lives in Marseilles.
Zounds! how quickly a family like that dwindles away!
“We were going to celebrate the Epiphany, and we were all happy, very happy!
Everybody was in the parlor, awaiting dinner, and my oldest brother, Jacques, said: 'There has been a dog howling out in the plain for about ten minutes; the poor beast must be lost.' “He had hardly stopped talking when the garden bell began to ring.
A shiver ran through everybody.
We waited in complete silence; we were thinking of the snow which covered the ground.
When the man returned he declared that he had seen nothing.
The dog kept up its ceaseless howling, and always from the same spot.
“We sat down to dinner; but we were all uneasy, especially the young people.
Everything went well up to the roast, then the bell began to ring again, three times in succession, three heavy, long strokes which vibrated to the tips of our fingers and which stopped our conversation short.
We sat there looking at each other, fork in the air, still listening, and shaken by a kind of supernatural fear.
“At last my mother spoke: 'It's surprising that they should have waited so long to come back.
Do not go alone, Baptiste; one of these gentlemen will accompany you.' “My Uncle Francois arose.
He was a kind of Hercules, very proud of his strength, and feared nothing in the world.
“We others remained there trembling with fear and apprehension, without eating or speaking.
My father tried to reassure us: 'Just wait and see,' he said; 'it will be some beggar or some traveller lost in the snow.
After ringing once, seeing that the door was not immediately opened, he attempted again to find his way, and being unable to, he has returned to our door.' “Our uncle seemed to stay away an hour.
At last he came back, furious, swearing: 'Nothing at all; it's some practical joker!
If I had taken a gun I would have killed him to make him keep quiet.' “We sat down to dinner again, but every one was excited; we felt that all was not over, that something was going to happen, that the bell would soon ring again.
All the men jumped up together.
My Uncle, Francois, who had been drinking champagne, swore so furiously that he would murder it, whatever it might be, that my mother and my aunt threw themselves on him to prevent his going.
My father, although very calm and a little helpless (he limped ever since he had broken his leg when thrown by a horse), declared, in turn, that he wished to find out what was the matter and that he was going.
My brothers, aged eighteen and twenty, ran to get their guns; and as no one was paying any attention to me I snatched up a little rifle that was used in the garden and got ready to accompany the expedition.
“It started out immediately.
My father and uncle were walking ahead with Baptiste, who was carrying a lantern.
My brothers, Jacques and Paul, followed, and I trailed on behind in spite of the prayers of my mother, who stood in front of the house with her sister and my cousins.
“It had been snowing again for the last hour, and the trees were weighted down.
The pines were bending under this heavy, white garment, and looked like white pyramids or enormous sugar cones, and through the gray curtains of small hurrying flakes could be seen the lighter bushes which stood out pale in the shadow.
When we began to go down the winding stairway in the wall I really grew frightened.
I felt as though some one were walking behind me, were going to grab me by the shoulders and carry me away, and I felt a strong desire to return; but, as I would have had to cross the garden all alone, I did not dare.
I heard some one opening the door leading to the plain; my uncle began to swear again, exclaiming: 'By—-!
If I can catch sight of even his shadow, I'll take care not to miss him, the swine!' “It was a discouraging thing to see this great expanse of plain, or, rather, to feel it before us, for we could not see it; we could only see a thick, endless veil of snow, above, below, opposite us, to the right, to the left, everywhere.
My uncle continued: “'Listen!
That will be something gained, anyhow.' “But my father, who was kind-hearted, went on: “'It will be much better to go on and get the poor animal, who is crying for hunger.
The poor fellow is barking for help; he is calling like a man in distress.
Let us go to him.' “So we started out through this mist, through this thick continuous fall of snow, which filled the air, which moved, floated, fell, and chilled the skin with a burning sensation like a sharp, rapid pain as each flake melted.
As we advanced the dog's voice became clearer and stronger.
“I could see nothing, so I ran up to the others, and I caught sight of him; he was frightful and weird-looking; he was a big black shepherd's dog with long hair and a wolf's head, standing just within the gleam of light cast by our lantern on the snow.
He did not move; he was silently watching us.
“My uncle said: 'That's peculiar, he is neither advancing nor retreating.
I feel like taking a shot at him.' “My father answered in a firm voice: 'No, we must capture him.' “Then my brother Jacques added: 'But he is not alone.
There is something behind him.” “There was indeed something behind him, something gray, impossible to distinguish.
We started out again cautiously.
When he saw us approaching the dog sat down.
Instead, he seemed pleased at having been able to attract the attention of some one.
“My father went straight to him and petted him.
We saw that he was tied to the wheel of a little carriage, a sort of toy carriage entirely wrapped up in three or four woolen blankets.
We carefully took off these coverings, and as Baptiste approached his lantern to the front of this little vehicle, which looked like a rolling kennel, we saw in it a little baby sleeping peacefully.
“We were so astonished that we couldn't speak.
“My father was the first to collect his wits, and as he had a warm heart and a broad mind, he stretched his hand over the roof of the carriage and said: 'Poor little waif, you shall be one of us!' And he ordered my brother Jacques to roll the foundling ahead of us.
“The dog, which had been untied, was following us.
At first we had a lot of trouble in getting the carriage up through the winding stairway; but we succeeded and even rolled it into the vestibule.
How happy and astonished!
And my four little cousins (the youngest was only six), they looked like four chickens around a nest.
At last we took the child from the carriage.
It was still sleeping.
In its clothes we found ten thousand francs in gold, yes, my boy, ten thousand francs!—which papa saved for her dowry.
Therefore, it was not a child of poor people, but, perhaps, the child of some nobleman and a little bourgeoise of the town—or again—we made a thousand suppositions, but we never found out anything-never the slightest clue.
The dog himself was recognized by no one.
He was a stranger in the country.
“That is how, at the age of six weeks, Mademoiselle Pearl entered the Chantal household.
“It was not until later that she was called Mademoiselle Pearl.
She was at first baptized 'Marie Simonne Claire,' Claire being intended, for her family name.
“I can assure you that our return to the diningroom was amusing, with this baby now awake and looking round her at these people and these lights with her vague blue questioning eyes.
I was king, and for queen I took Mademoiselle Pearl, just as you did to-day.
On that day she did not appreciate the honor that was being shown her.
She was so gentle and loving and minded so well that every one would have spoiled her abominably had not my mother prevented it.
“My mother was an orderly woman with a great respect for class distinctions.
She consented to treat little Claire as she did her own sons, but, nevertheless, she wished the distance which separated us to be well marked, and our positions well established.
Therefore, as soon as the child could understand, she acquainted her with her story and gently, even tenderly, impressed on the little one's mind that, for the Chantals, she was an adopted daughter, taken in, but, nevertheless, a stranger.
Claire understood the situation with peculiar intelligence and with surprising instinct; she knew how to take the place which was allotted her, and to keep it with so much tact, gracefulness and gentleness that she often brought tears to my father's eyes.
He was sitting on the edge of the billiard table, his feet hanging, and was playing with a ball with his left hand, while with his right he crumpled a rag which served to rub the chalk marks from the slate.
A little red in the face, his voice thick, he was talking away to himself now, lost in his memories, gently drifting through the old scenes and events which awoke in his mind, just as we walk through old family gardens where we were brought up and where each tree, each walk, each hedge reminds us of some occurrence.
I stood opposite him leaning against the wall, my hands resting on my idle cue.
After a slight pause he continued: “By Jove!
She was pretty at eighteen—and graceful—and perfect.
She was so sweet—and good and true—and charming!
She had such eyes—blue- transparent—clear—such eyes as I have never seen since!” He was once more silent.
I asked: “Why did she never marry?” He answered, not to me, but to the word “marry” which had caught his ear: “Why? why?
She had a dowry of thirty thousand francs, and she received several offers—but she never would!
That was when I married my cousin, little Charlotte, my wife, to whom I had been engaged for six years.” I looked at M.
Chantal, and it seemed to me that I was looking into his very soul, and I was suddenly witnessing one of those humble and cruel tragedies of honest, straightforward, blameless hearts, one of those secret tragedies known to no one, not even the silent and resigned victims.
A rash curiosity suddenly impelled me to exclaim: “You should have married her, Monsieur Chantal!” He started, looked at me, and said: “I?
Marry whom?” “Mademoiselle Pearl.” “Why?” “Because you loved her more than your cousin.” He stared at me with strange, round, bewildered eyes and stammered: “I loved her—I?
Who told you that?” “Why, anyone can see that—and it's even on account of her that you delayed for so long your marriage to your cousin who had been waiting for you for six years.” He dropped the ball which he was holding in his left hand, and, seizing the chalk rag in both hands, he buried his face in it and began to sob.
He was weeping with his eyes, nose and mouth in a heartbreaking yet ridiculous manner, like a sponge which one squeezes.
He was coughing, spitting and blowing his nose in the chalk rag, wiping his eyes and sneezing; then the tears would again begin to flow down the wrinkles on his face and he would make a strange gurgling noise in his throat.
I felt bewildered, ashamed; I wanted to run away, and I no longer knew what to say, do, or attempt.
Suddenly Madame Chantal's voice sounded on the stairs.
“Haven't you men almost finished smoking your cigars?” I opened the door and cried: “Yes, madame, we are coming right down.” Then I rushed to her husband, and, seizing him by the shoulders, I cried: “Monsieur Chantal, my friend Chantal, listen to me; your wife is calling; pull yourself together, we must go downstairs.” He stammered: “Yes—yes—I am coming—poor girl!
I am coming—tell her that I am coming.” He began conscientiously to wipe his face on the cloth which, for the last two or three years, had been used for marking off the chalk from the slate; then he appeared, half white and half red, his forehead, nose, cheeks and chin covered with chalk, and his eyes swollen, still full of tears.
I caught him by the hands and dragged him into his bedroom, muttering: “I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon, Monsieur Chantal, for having caused you such sorrow—but—I did not know—you—you understand.” He squeezed my hand, saying: “Yes—yes—there are difficult moments.” Then he plunged his face into a bowl of water.
When he emerged from it he did not yet seem to me to be presentable; but I thought of a little stratagem.
As he was growing worried, looking at himself in the mirror, I said to him: “All you have to do is to say that a little dust flew into your eye and you can cry before everybody to your heart's content.” He went downstairs rubbing his eyes with his handkerchief.
All were worried; each one wished to look for the speck, which could not be found; and stories were told of similar cases where it had been necessary to call in a physician.
I went over to Mademoiselle Pearl and watched her, tormented by an ardent curiosity, which was turning to positive suffering.
Her gown was a little ridiculous, a real old maid's gown, which was unbecoming without appearing clumsy.
It seemed to me as though I were looking into her soul, just as I had into Monsieur Chantal's; that I was looking right from one end to the other of this humble life, so simple and devoted.
I felt an irresistible longing to question her, to find out whether she, too, had loved him; whether she also had suffered, as he had, from this long, secret, poignant grief, which one cannot see, know, or guess, but which breaks forth at night in the loneliness of the dark room.
I was watching her, and I could observe her heart beating under her waist, and I wondered whether this sweet, candid face had wept on the soft pillow and she had sobbed, her whole body shaken by the violence of her anguish.
I said to her in a low voice, like a child who is breaking a toy to see what is inside: “If you could have seen Monsieur Chantal crying a while ago it would have moved you.” She started, asking: “What?
I answered: “On your account.” “On my account?” “Yes.
He was telling me how much he had loved you in the days gone by; and what a pang it had given him to marry his cousin instead of you.” Her pale face seemed to grow a little longer; her calm eyes, which always remained open, suddenly closed so quickly that they seemed shut forever.
Mademoiselle Pearl is ill.” Madame Chantal and her daughters rushed forward, and while they were looking for towels, water and vinegar, I grabbed my hat and ran away.
And yet sometimes I felt pleased; I felt as though I had done a praiseworthy and necessary act.
It was too late for their torture to begin over again and early enough for them to remember it with tenderness.
THE THIEF While apparently thinking of something else, Dr.
Sorbier had been listening quietly to those amazing accounts of burglaries and daring deeds that might have been taken from the trial of Cartouche.
He was ardent in the pursuit of pleasure, and had an irresistible charm about him, one of those men in whom we excuse the greatest excesses as the most natural things in the world.
He had run through all his money at gambling and with pretty girls, and so became, as it were, a soldier of fortune.
He amused himself whenever and however he could, and was at that time quartered at Versailles.
“I knew him to the very depths of his childlike heart, which was only too easily seen through and sounded, and I loved him as some old bachelor uncle loves a nephew who plays him tricks, but who knows how to coax him.
“She loved him, however, or rather she idolized him despotically, madly, with all her enraptured soul and all her being.
“By degrees, the unfortunate man's strength gave way, his heart softened, and he allowed himself to be carried away by that current which buffeted him, surrounded him, and left him on the shore like a waif and a stray.
“They wrote letters full of madness to each other, and not a day passed without their meeting, either accidentally, as it seemed, or at parties and balls.
“One night, when it was darker than usual, and he was hurrying lest he should be later than the time agreed on, he knocked up against a piece of furniture in the anteroom and upset it.
The unfortunate man understood the situation; and, seeing what a terrible fix he was in, and preferring to be taken for a common thief to dishonoring his adored one's name, he ran into the drawing-room, felt on the tables and what-nots, filled his pockets at random with valuable bric-a-brac, and then cowered down behind the grand piano, which barred the corner of a large room.
“The servants, who had run in with lighted candles, found him, and, overwhelming him with abuse, seized him by the collar and dragged him, panting and apparently half dead with shame and terror, to the nearest police station.
“He died there of misery and of bitterness of spirit, with the name of the fair-haired idol, for whom he had sacrificed himself, on his lips, as if it had been an ecstatic prayer, and he intrusted his will 'to the priest who administered extreme unction to him, and requested him to give it to me.
In it, without mentioning anybody, and without in the least lifting the veil, he at last explained the enigma, and cleared himself of those accusations the terrible burden of which he had borne until his last breath.
“I have always thought myself, though I do not know why, that the girl married and had several charming children, whom she brought up with the austere strictness and in the serious piety of former days!” CLAIR DE LUNE Abbe Marignan's martial name suited him well.
He was a tall, thin priest, fanatic, excitable, yet upright.
He believed sincerely that he knew his God, understood His plans, desires and intentions.
When he walked with long strides along the garden walk of his little country parsonage, he would sometimes ask himself the question: “Why has God done this?” And he would dwell on this continually, putting himself in the place of God, and he almost invariably found an answer.
He would never have cried out in an outburst of pious humility: “Thy ways, O Lord, are past finding out.” He said to himself: “I am the servant of God; it is right for me to know the reason of His deeds, or to guess it if I do not know it.” Everything in nature seemed to him to have been created in accordance with an admirable and absolute logic.
The “whys” and “becauses” always balanced.
Dawn was given to make our awakening pleasant, the days to ripen the harvest, the rains to moisten it, the evenings for preparation for slumber, and the dark nights for sleep.
The four seasons corresponded perfectly to the needs of agriculture, and no suspicion had ever come to the priest of the fact that nature has no intentions; that, on the contrary, everything which exists must conform to the hard demands of seasons, climates and matter.
But he hated woman—hated her unconsciously, and despised her by instinct.
He often repeated the words of Christ: “Woman, what have I to do with thee?” and he would add: “It seems as though God, Himself, were dissatisfied with this work of His.” She was the tempter who led the first man astray, and who since then had ever been busy with her work of damnation, the feeble creature, dangerous and mysteriously affecting one.
He had often felt their tenderness directed toward himself, and though he knew that he was invulnerable, he grew angry at this need of love that is always vibrating in them.
According to his belief, God had created woman for the sole purpose of tempting and testing man.
One must not approach her without defensive precautions and fear of possible snares.
She was, indeed, just like a snare, with her lips open and her arms stretched out to man.
He had no indulgence except for nuns, whom their vows had rendered inoffensive; but he was stern with them, nevertheless, because he felt that at the bottom of their fettered and humble hearts the everlasting tenderness was burning brightly—that tenderness which was shown even to him, a priest.
He felt this cursed tenderness, even in their docility, in the low tones of their voices when speaking to him, in their lowered eyes, and in their resigned tears when he reproved them roughly.
And he would shake his cassock on leaving the convent doors, and walk off, lengthening his stride as though flying from danger.
She was a pretty, brainless madcap.
When the abbe preached she laughed, and when he was angry with her she would give him a hug, drawing him to her heart, while he sought unconsciously to release himself from this embrace which nevertheless filled him with a sweet pleasure, awakening in his depths the sensation of paternity which slumbers in every man.
She never listened to him, but looked about her at the sky, the grass and flowers, and one could see the joy of life sparkling in her eyes.
Sometimes she would dart forward to catch some flying creature, crying out as she brought it back: “Look, uncle, how pretty it is!
I want to hug it!” And this desire to “hug” flies or lilac blossoms disquieted, angered, and roused the priest, who saw, even in this, the ineradicable tenderness that is always budding in women's hearts.
Then there came a day when the sexton's wife, who kept house for Abbe Marignan, told him, with caution, that his niece had a lover.
Almost suffocated by the fearful emotion this news roused in him, he stood there, his face covered with soap, for he was in the act of shaving.
When he had sufficiently recovered to think and speak he cried: “It is not true; you lie, Melanie!” But the peasant woman put her hand on her heart, saying: “May our Lord judge me if I lie, Monsieur le Cure!
They meet by the river side; you have only to go there and see, between ten o'clock and midnight.” He ceased scraping his chin, and began to walk up and down impetuously, as he always did when he was in deep thought.
All day long he was silent, full of anger and indignation.
To his priestly hatred of this invincible love was added the exasperation of her spiritual father, of her guardian and pastor, deceived and tricked by a child, and the selfish emotion shown by parents when their daughter announces that she has chosen a husband without them, and in spite of them.
When ten o'clock struck he seized his cane, a formidable oak stick, which he was accustomed to carry in his nocturnal walks when visiting the sick.
And he smiled at the enormous club which he twirled in a threatening manner in his strong, country fist.
Then he raised it suddenly and, gritting his teeth, brought it down on a chair, the broken back of which fell over on the floor.
He opened the door to go out, but stopped on the sill, surprised by the splendid moonlight, of such brilliance as is seldom seen.
And, as he was gifted with an emotional nature, one such as had all those poetic dreamers, the Fathers of the Church, he felt suddenly distracted and moved by all the grand and serene beauty of this pale night.
In his little garden, all bathed in soft light, his fruit trees in a row cast on the ground the shadow of their slender branches, scarcely in full leaf, while the giant honeysuckle, clinging to the wall of his house, exhaled a delicious sweetness, filling the warm moonlit atmosphere with a kind of perfumed soul.
He began to take long breaths, drinking in the air as drunkards drink wine, and he walked along slowly, delighted, marveling, almost forgetting his niece.
As soon as he was outside of the garden, he stopped to gaze upon the plain all flooded with the caressing light, bathed in that tender, languishing charm of serene nights.
At each moment was heard the short, metallic note of the cricket, and distant nightingales shook out their scattered notes—their light, vibrant music that sets one dreaming, without thinking, a music made for kisses, for the seduction of moonlight.
He seemed weakened, suddenly exhausted; he wanted to sit down, to rest there, to think, to admire God in His works.
Down yonder, following the undulations of the little river, a great line of poplars wound in and out.
A fine mist, a white haze through which the moonbeams passed, silvering it and making it gleam, hung around and above the mountains, covering all the tortuous course of the water with a kind of light and transparent cotton.
The priest stopped once again, his soul filled with a growing and irresistible tenderness.
And a doubt, a vague feeling of disquiet came over him; he was asking one of those questions that he sometimes put to himself.
Since the night is destined for sleep, unconsciousness, repose, forgetfulness of everything, why make it more charming than day, softer than dawn or evening?
And why does this seductive planet, more poetic than the sun, that seems destined, so discreet is it, to illuminate things too delicate and mysterious for the light of day, make the darkness so transparent?
“Why does not the greatest of feathered songsters sleep like the others?
Why does it pour forth its voice in the mysterious night?
Why these tremblings of the heart, this emotion of the spirit, this enervation of the body?
Why this display of enchantments that human beings do not see, since they are lying in their beds?
For whom is destined this sublime spectacle, this abundance of poetry cast from heaven to earth?” And the abbe could not understand.
The man was the taller, and held his arm about his sweetheart's neck and kissed her brow every little while.
They imparted life, all at once, to the placid landscape in which they were framed as by a heavenly hand.
The two seemed but a single being, the being for whom was destined this calm and silent night, and they came toward the priest as a living answer, the response his Master sent to his questionings.
He stood still, his heart beating, all upset; and it seemed to him that he saw before him some biblical scene, like the loves of Ruth and Boaz, the accomplishment of the will of the Lord, in some of those glorious stories of which the sacred books tell.
The verses of the Song of Songs began to ring in his ears, the appeal of passion, all the poetry of this poem replete with tenderness.
And he said unto himself: “Perhaps God has made such nights as these to idealize the love of men.” He shrank back from this couple that still advanced with arms intertwined.
But he asked himself now if he would not be disobeying God.
And does not God permit love, since He surrounds it with such visible splendor?
And he went back musing, almost ashamed, as if he had intruded into a temple where he had, no right to enter.
WAITER, A “BOCK” Why did I go into that beer hall on that particular evening?
It was cold; a fine rain, a flying mist, veiled the gas lamps with a transparent fog, made the side walks reflect the light that streamed from the shop windows—lighting up the soft slush and the muddy feet of the passers-by.
I was going nowhere in particular; was simply having a short walk after dinner.
I had passed the Credit Lyonnais, the Rue Vivienne, and several other streets.
I suddenly descried a large beer hall which was more than half full.
From six to eight glasses piled up on the table in front of him indicated the number of “bocks” he had already absorbed.
At a glance I recognized a “regular,” one of those frequenters of beer houses who come in the morning when the place opens, and do not leave till evening when it is about to close.
His clothes, much too large for him, appeared to have been made for him at a time when he was corpulent.
One could guess that he did not wear suspenders, for he could not take ten steps without having to stop to pull up his trousers.
The frayed cuffs were perfectly black at the edges, as were his nails.
As soon as I had seated myself beside him, this individual said to me in a quiet tone of voice: “How goes it?” I turned sharply round and closely scanned his features, whereupon he continued: “I see you do not recognize me.” “No, I do not.” “Des Barrets.” I was stupefied.
I seized him by the hand, and was so dumbfounded that I could find nothing to say.
At length I managed to stammer out: “And you, how goes it with you?” He responded placidly: “I get along as I can.” “What are you doing now?” I asked.
“You see what I am doing,” he answered quit resignedly.
I insisted: “But every day?” “Every day it is the same thing,” was his reply, accompanied with a thick puff of tobacco smoke.
Des Barrets emptied his glass at a single draught and replaced it on the table, while he sucked in the foam that had been left on his mustache.
I stammered: “Nothing, old man.
I am a business man.” In his monotonous tone of voice he said: “Indeed, does it amuse you?” “No, but what can I do?
One must do something!” “Why should one?” “So as to have occupation.” “What's the use of an occupation?
For my part, I do nothing at all, as you see, never anything.
When one has not a sou I can understand why one should work.
Do you work for yourself, or for others?
If you work for yourself, you do it for your own amusement, which is all right; if you work for others, you are a fool.” Then, laying his pipe on the marble table, he called out anew: “Waiter, a 'bock.'” And continued: “It makes me thirsty to keep calling so.
I am not accustomed to that sort of thing.
My only remembrance will be this beer hall.
No wife, no children, no cares, no sorrows, nothing.
I looked at him in astonishment, and said: “But you have not always been like that?” “Pardon me; ever since I left college.” “That is not a proper life to lead, my dear fellow; it is simply horrible.
Come, you must have something to do, you must love something, you must have friends.” “No, I get up at noon, I come here, I have my breakfast, I drink my beer, I remain until the evening, I have my dinner, I drink beer.
Then about half-past one in the morning, I go home to bed, because the place closes up; that annoys me more than anything.
I sometimes chat with the regular customers.” “But when you came to Paris what did you do at first?” “I paid my devoirs to the Cafe de Medicis.” “What next?” “Next I crossed the water and came here.” “Why did you take that trouble?” “What do you mean?
The students make too much noise.
Waiter, a 'bock.'” I began to think that he was making fun of me, and I continued: “Come now, be frank.
You have been the victim of some great sorrow; some disappointment in love, no doubt!
What age are you?” “I am thirty, but I look forty-five, at least.” I looked him straight in the face.
His wrinkled, ill-shaven face gave one the impression that he was an old man.
On the top of his head a few long hairs waved over a skin of doubtful cleanliness.
He had enormous eyelashes, a heavy mustache, and a thick beard.
Suddenly I had a kind of vision, I know not why, of a basin filled with dirty water in which all that hair had been washed.
I said to him: “You certainly look older than your age.
You surely must have experienced some great sorrow.” He replied: “I tell you that I have not.
Nothing makes a man deteriorate more than the life of a cafe.” I still could not believe him.
One could not get as bald- headed as you are without having been in love.” He shook his head, shaking dandruff down on his coat as he did so.
“No, I have always been virtuous.” And, raising his eyes toward the chandelier which heated our heads, he said: “If I am bald, it is the fault of the gas.
It destroys the hair.
But you really interest me.
There is something beneath it all.” “Yes, and it dates from my infancy.
I received a great shock when I was very young, and that turned my life into darkness which will last to the end.” “What was it?” “You wish to know about it?
You recall, of course, the castle in which I was brought up, for you used to spend five or six months there during vacation.
You remember that large gray building, in the middle of a great park, and the long avenues of oaks which opened to the four points of the compass.
You remember my father and mother, both of whom were ceremonious, solemn, and severe.
“I worshipped my mother; I was afraid of my father; but I respected both, accustomed always as I was to see every one bow before them.
They were Monsieur le Comte and Madame la Comtesse to all the country round, and our neighbors, the Tannemares, the Ravelets, the Brennevilles, showed them the utmost consideration.
“I was then thirteen years old.
I was happy, pleased with everything, as one is at that age, full of the joy of life.
“Well, toward the end of September, a few days before returning to college, as I was playing about in the shrubbery of the park, among the branches and leaves, as I was crossing a path, I saw my father and mother, who were walking along.
“I recall it as though it were yesterday.
The whole line of trees swayed beneath the gusts of wind, groaning, and seeming to utter cries-those dull, deep cries that forests give out during a tempest.
“The falling leaves, turning yellow, flew away like birds, circling and falling, and then running along the path like swift animals.
It was dark in the thickets.
The motion of the wind and of the branches excited me, made me tear about as if I were crazy, and howl in imitation of the wolves.
“As soon as I perceived my parents, I crept furtively toward them, under the branches, in order to surprise them, as though I had been a veritable prowler.
My father, who was in a terrible passion, cried: “'Your mother is a fool; moreover, it is not a question of your mother.
I shall guard it for him and I will not allow you to squander it with strange women, as you have your own heritage.' “Then my father, trembling with rage, wheeled round and, seizing his wife by the throat, began to slap her with all his might full in the face with his disengaged hand.
“My mother's hat fell off, her hair became loosened and fell over her shoulders; she tried to parry the blows, but she could not do so.
And my father, like a madman, kept on striking her.
My mother rolled over on the ground, covering her face with her hands.
Then he turned her over on her back in order to slap her still more, pulling away her hands, which were covering her face.
I experienced the overwhelming dread that one has in presence of things supernatural, in presence of irreparable disasters.
My childish mind was bewildered, distracted.
I began to cry with all my might, without knowing why; a prey to a fearful dread, sorrow, and astonishment.
I believe that he wanted to kill me, and I fled like a hunted animal, running straight ahead into the thicket.
I sank on the grass, exhausted, and lay there dismayed, frantic with fear, and devoured by a sorrow capable of breaking forever the heart of a poor child.
I was afraid to get up, to walk, to return home, to run farther, fearing to encounter my father, whom I did not wish to see again.
“I should probably have died of misery and of hunger at the foot of a tree if the park guard had not discovered me and led me home by force.
My mother alone spoke to me “'How you frightened me, you naughty boy.
“Eight days later I returned to school.
I had witnessed the other side of things, the bad side.
I have not been able to perceive the good side since that day.
What has taken place in my mind, what strange phenomenon has warped my ideas, I do not know.
But I no longer had a taste for anything, a wish for anything, a love for anybody, a desire for anything whatever, any ambition, or any hope.
Waiter, a 'bock.'” A waiter brought him his “bock,” which he swallowed at a gulp.
But, in taking up his pipe again, trembling as he was, he broke it.
“Confound it!” he said, with a gesture of annoyance.
It will take me a month to color another!” And he called out across the vast hall, now reeking with smoke and full of men drinking, his everlasting: “Garcon, un 'bock'—and a new pipe.” AFTER “My darlings,” said the comtesse, “you might go to bed.” The three children, two girls and a boy, rose and kissed their grandmother.
Then they said good-night to M. le Cure, who had dined at the chateau, as was his custom every Thursday.
The Abbe Mauduit lifted two of the children on his knees, passing his long arms clad in black round their necks, and kissing them tenderly on the forehead as he drew their heads toward him as a father might.
Then he set them down on the ground, and the little beings went off, the boy ahead, and the girls following.
“You are fond of children, M. le Cure,” said the comtesse.
“And—has your solitude never weighed too heavily on you?” “Yes, sometimes.” He became silent, hesitated, and then added: “But I was never made for ordinary life.” “What do you know about it?” “Oh!
I was made to be a priest; I followed my vocation.” The comtesse kept staring at him: “Come now, M. le Cure, tell me this—tell me how it was you resolved to renounce forever all that makes the rest of us love life—all that consoles and sustains us?
What is it that drove you, impelled you, to separate yourself from the great natural path of marriage and the family?
You are neither an enthusiast nor a fanatic, neither a gloomy person nor a sad person.
Was it some incident, some sorrow, that led you to take life vows?” The Abbe Mauduit rose and approached the fire, then, holding toward the flame his big shoes, such as country priests generally wear, he seemed still hesitating as to what reply he should make.
The peasants said of him: “There's a good man for you!” And indeed he was a good man, benevolent, friendly to all, gentle, and, to crown all, generous.
He laughed readily, and wept also, on slight provocation, just like a woman—which prejudiced him more or less in the hard minds of the country folk.
She persisted: “Look here, M. le Cure! it is your turn now to make a confession!” He repeated: “I was not made for ordinary life.
I saw it fortunately in time, and I have had many proofs since that I made no mistake on the point: “My parents, who were mercers in Verdiers, and were quite well to do, had great ambitions for me.
They sent me to a boarding school while I was very young.
No one knows what a boy may suffer at school through the mere fact of separation, of isolation.
This monotonous life without affection is good for some, and detestable for others.
Young people are often more sensitive than one supposes, and by shutting them up thus too soon, far from those they love, we may develop to an exaggerated extent a sensitiveness which is overwrought and may become sickly and dangerous.
“I scarcely ever played; I had no companions; I passed my hours in homesickness; I spent the whole night weeping in my bed.
I sought to bring before my mind recollections of home, trifling memories of little things, little events.
I thought incessantly of all I had left behind there.
I became almost imperceptibly an over-sensitive youth to whom the slightest annoyances were terrible griefs.
“In this way I remained taciturn, self-absorbed, without expansion, without confidants.
This mental excitement was going on secretly and surely.
The nerves of children are quickly affected, and one should see to it that they live a tranquil life until they are almost fully developed.
But who ever reflects that, for certain boys, an unjust imposition may be as great a pang as the death of a friend in later years?
Who can explain why certain young temperaments are liable to terrible emotions for the slightest cause, and may eventually become morbid and incurable?
This faculty of regret developed in me to such an extent that my existence became a martyrdom.
“I did not speak about it; I said nothing about it; but gradually I became so sensitive that my soul resembled an open wound.
Everything that affected me gave me painful twitchings, frightful shocks, and consequently impaired my health.
Happy are the men whom nature has buttressed with indifference and armed with stoicism.
“I reached my sixteenth year.
An excessive timidity had arisen from this abnormal sensitiveness.
Feeling myself unprotected from all the attacks of chance or fate, I feared every contact, every approach, every current.
I lived as though I were threatened by an unknown and always expected misfortune.
I did not venture either to speak or do anything in public.
I had, indeed, the feeling that life, is a battle, a dreadful conflict in which one receives terrible blows, grievous, mortal wounds.
In place of cherishing, like all men, a cheerful anticipation of the morrow, I had only a confused fear of it, and felt in my own mind a desire to conceal myself to avoid that combat in which I would be vanquished and slain.
“As soon as my studies were finished, they gave me six months' time to choose a career.
A very simple occurrence showed me clearly, all of a sudden, the diseased condition of my mind, made me understand the danger, and determined me to flee from it.
“Verdiers is a little town surrounded with plains and woods.
I now passed my days far from this dwelling which I had so much regretted, so much desired.
Dreams had reawakened in me, and I walked alone in the fields in order to let them escape and fly away.
My father and mother, quite occupied with business, and anxious about my future, talked to me only about their profits or about my possible plans.
They were fond of me after the manner of hardheaded, practical people; they had more reason than heart in their affection for me.
I lived imprisoned in my thoughts, and vibrating with my eternal sensitiveness.
“Now, one evening, after a long walk, as I was making my way home with great strides so as not to be late, I saw a dog trotting toward me.
Then he began wagging his tail, and came over to me with short steps and nervous movements of his whole body, bending down on his paws as if appealing to me, and softly shaking his head.
He then began to crawl along in such a sad, humble, suppliant manner that I felt the tears coming into my eyes.
I approached him; he ran away, then he came back again; and I bent down on one knee trying to coax him to approach me, with soft words.
At last, he was within reach of my hands, and I gently and very carefully stroked him.
“He gained courage, gradually rose and, placing his paws on my shoulders, began to lick my face.
He followed me to the house.
“This was really the first being I had passionately loved, because he returned my affection.
My attachment to this animal was certainly exaggerated and ridiculous.
It seemed to me in a confused sort of way that we were two brothers, lost on this earth, and therefore isolated and without defense, one as well as the other.
He slept at the foot of my bed, ate at the table in spite of the objections of my parents, and followed me in my solitary walks.
Sam immediately rushed up, lay down at my feet, and lifted up my hand with his muzzle that I might caress him.
“One day toward the end of June, as we were on the road from Saint- Pierre de Chavrol, I saw the diligence from Pavereau coming along.
Its four horses were going at a gallop, with its yellow body, and its imperial with the black leather hood.
The coachman cracked his whip; a cloud of dust rose up under the wheels of the heavy vehicle, then floated behind, just as a cloud would do.
“Suddenly, as the vehicle came close to me, Sam, perhaps frightened by the noise and wishing to join me, jumped in front of it.
I saw him roll over, turn round, fall back again beneath the horses' feet, then the coach gave two jolts, and behind it I saw something quivering in the dust on the road.
He was nearly cut in two; all his intestines were hanging out and blood was spurting from the wound.
And he howled dreadfully, mad with pain.
I cannot describe how much I felt and suffered.
I was confined to my room for a month.
“One night, my father, enraged at seeing me so affected by such a trifling occurrence, exclaimed: “'How will it be when you have real griefs—if you lose your wife or children?' “His words haunted me and I began to see my condition clearly.
I understood why all the small miseries of each day assumed in my eyes the importance of a catastrophe; I saw that I was organized in such a way that I suffered dreadfully from everything, that every painful impression was multiplied by my diseased sensibility, and an atrocious fear of life took possession of me.
I was without passions, without ambitions; I resolved to sacrifice possible joys in order to avoid sure sorrows.
Existence is short, but I made up my mind to spend it in the service of others, in relieving their troubles and enjoying their happiness.
Having no direct experience of either one or the other, I should only experience a milder form of emotion.
“And if you only knew how, in spite of this, misery tortures me, ravages me!
But what would formerly have been an intolerable affliction has become commiseration, pity.
“These sorrows which cross my path at every moment, I could not endure if they affected me directly.
I could not have seen one of my children die without dying myself.
And I have, in spite of everything, preserved such a mysterious, overwhelming fear of events that the sight of the postman entering my house makes a shiver pass every day through my veins, and yet I have nothing to be afraid of now.” The Abbe Mauduit ceased speaking.
He stared into the fire in the huge grate, as if he saw there mysterious things, all the unknown of the existence he might have passed had he been more fearless in the face of suffering.
I was not made for this world.” The comtesse said nothing at first; but at length, after a long silence, she remarked: “For my part, if I had not my grandchildren, I believe I would not have the courage to live.” And the cure rose up without saying another word.
As the servants were asleep in the kitchen, she accompanied him herself to the door, which looked out on the garden, and she saw his tall shadow, lit up by the reflection of the lamp, disappearing through the gloom of night.
Then she came back and sat down before the fire, and pondered over many things we never think of when we are young.
FORGIVENESS She had been brought up in one of those families who live entirely to themselves, apart from all the rest of the world.
Such families know nothing of political events, although they are discussed at table; for changes in the Government take place at such a distance from them that they are spoken of as one speaks of a historical event, such as the death of Louis XVI or the landing of Napoleon.
Customs are modified in course of time, fashions succeed one another, but such variations are taken no account of in the placid family circle where traditional usages prevail year after year.
And if some scandalous episode or other occurs in the neighborhood, the disreputable story dies a natural death when it reaches the threshold of the house.
The father and mother may, perhaps, exchange a few words on the subject when alone together some evening, but they speak in hushed tones—for even walls have ears.
The father says, with bated breath: “You've heard of that terrible affair in the Rivoil family?” And the mother answers: “Who would have dreamed of such a thing?
Others, undeceived, but without fully understanding, make mistakes, are dismayed, and become desperate, believing themselves the playthings of a cruel fate, the wretched victims of adverse circumstances, and exceptionally wicked men.
The Savignols married their daughter Bertha at the age of eighteen.
She wedded a young Parisian, George Baron by name, who had dealings on the Stock Exchange.
He was handsome, well-mannered, and apparently all that could be desired.
But in the depths of his heart he somewhat despised his old-fashioned parents-in-law, whom he spoke of among his intimates as “my dear old fossils.” He belonged to a good family, and the girl was rich.
She became one of those provincial Parisians whose name is legion.
She remained in complete ignorance of the great city, of its social side, its pleasures and its customs—just as she remained ignorant also of life, its perfidy and its mysteries.
Devoted to her house, she knew scarcely anything beyond her own street; and when she ventured into another part of Paris it seemed to her that she had accomplished a long and arduous journey into some unknown, unexplored city.
She would then say to her husband in the evening: “I have been through the boulevards to-day.” Two or three times a year her husband took her to the theatre.
These were events the remembrance of which never grew dim; they provided subjects of conversation for long afterward.
Sometimes three months afterward she would suddenly burst into laughter, and exclaim: “Do you remember that actor dressed up as a general, who crowed like a cock?” Her friends were limited to two families related to her own.
She spoke of them as “the Martinets” and “the Michelins.” Her husband lived as he pleased, coming home when it suited him —sometimes not until dawn—alleging business, but not putting himself out overmuch to account for his movements, well aware that no suspicion would ever enter his wife's guileless soul.
But one morning she received an anonymous letter.
She was thunderstruck—too simple-minded to understand the infamy of unsigned information and to despise the letter, the writer of which declared himself inspired by interest in her happiness, hatred of evil, and love of truth.
This missive told her that her husband had had for two years past, a sweetheart, a young widow named Madame Rosset, with whom he spent all his evenings.
Bertha knew neither how to dissemble her grief nor how to spy on her husband.
He had time to take in the situation and to prepare his reply.
He smiled, sat down, drew her to his knee, and in a tone of light raillery began: “My dear child, as a matter of fact, I have a friend named Madame Rosset, whom I have known for the last ten years, and of whom I have a very high opinion.
I may add that I know scores of other people whose names I have never mentioned to you, seeing that you do not care for society, or fresh acquaintances, or functions of any sort.
She felt instinctively that to know a danger is to be already armed against it.
She entered a small, tastefully furnished flat on the fourth floor of an attractive house.
After waiting five minutes in a drawing-room rendered somewhat dark by its many curtains and hangings, a door opened, and a very dark, short, rather plump young woman appeared, surprised and smiling.
George introduced them: “My wife—Madame Julie Rosset.” The young widow uttered a half-suppressed cry of astonishment and joy, and ran forward with hands outstretched.
She had not hoped, she said, to have this pleasure, knowing that Madame Baron never saw any one, but she was delighted to make her acquaintance.
She was so fond of George (she said “George” in a familiar, sisterly sort of way) that, she had been most anxious to know his young wife and to make friends with her, too.
By the end of a month the two new friends were inseparable.
They saw each other every day, sometimes twice a day, and dined together every evening, sometimes at one house, sometimes at the other.
George no longer deserted his home, no longer talked of pressing business.
He adored his own fireside, he said.
When, after a time, a flat in the house where Madame Rosset lived became vacant Madame Baron hastened to take it, in order to be near her friend and spend even more time with her than hitherto.
And for two whole years their friendship was without a cloud, a friendship of heart and mind—absolute, tender, devoted.
Bertha could hardly speak without bringing in Julie's name.
To her Madame Rosset represented perfection.
She was utterly happy, calm and contented.
She spent her nights with her, distracted with grief; even her husband seemed inconsolable.
One morning the doctor, after leaving the invalid's bedside, took George and his wife aside, and told them that he considered Julie's condition very grave.
As soon as he had gone the grief-stricken husband and wife sat down opposite each other and gave way to tears.
Bertha tenderly kissed her friend from time to time, while George stood at the foot of the bed, his eyes gazing steadfastly on the invalid's face.
But toward evening she declared she felt better, and insisted that her friends should go back to their own apartment to dinner.
They were sitting sadly in the dining-room, scarcely even attempting to eat, when the maid gave George a note.
He opened it, turned pale as death, and, rising from the table, said to his wife in a constrained voice: “Wait for me.
But, docile in everything, she would not go back to her friend till he returned.
At length, as he did not reappear, it occurred to her to visit his room and see if he had taken his gloves.
Beside them lay a crumpled paper, evidently thrown down in haste.
She recognized it at once as the note George had received.
And a burning temptation, the first that had ever assailed her urged her to read it and discover the cause of her husband's abrupt departure.
Her rebellious conscience protested but a devouring and fearful curiosity prevailed.
She seized the paper, smoothed it out, recognized the tremulous, penciled writing as Julie's, and read: “Come alone and kiss me, my poor dear.
I am dying.” At first she did not understand, the idea of Julie's death being her uppermost thought.
But all at once the true meaning of what she read burst in a flash upon her; this penciled note threw a lurid light upon her whole existence, revealed the whole infamous truth, all the treachery and perfidy of which she had been the victim.
She understood the long years of deceit, the way in which she had been made their puppet.
She saw them again, sitting side by side in the evening, reading by lamplight out of the same book, glancing at each other at the end of each page.
And her poor, indignant, suffering, bleeding heart was cast into the depths of a despair which knew no bounds.
Footsteps drew near; she fled, and shut herself in her own room.
Presently her husband called her: “Come quickly!
Madame Rosset is dying.” Bertha appeared at her door, and with trembling lips replied: “Go back to her alone; she does not need me.” He looked at her stupidly, dazed with grief, and repeated: “Come at once!
She's dying, I tell you!” Bertha answered: “You would rather it were I.” Then at last he understood, and returned alone to the dying woman's bedside.
He mourned her openly, shamelessly, indifferent to the sorrow of the wife who no longer spoke to him, no longer looked at him; who passed her life in solitude, hedged round with disgust, with indignant anger, and praying night and day to God.
They still lived in the same house, however, and sat opposite each other at table, in silence and despair.
Gradually his sorrow grew less acute; but she did not forgive him.
For a whole year they remained as complete strangers to each other as if they had never met.
At last one morning she went out very early, and returned about eight o'clock bearing in her hands an enormous bouquet of white roses.
“We are going out together,” she said.
“Please carry these flowers; they are too heavy for me.” A carriage took them to the gate of the cemetery, where they alighted.
Then, her eyes filling with tears, she said to George: “Take me to her grave.” He trembled, and could not understand her motive; but he led the way, still carrying the flowers.
She took the bouquet from him, and, kneeling down, placed it on the grave.
Then she offered up a silent, heartfelt prayer.
Behind her stood her husband, overcome by recollections of the past.
IN THE SPRING With the first day of spring, when the awakening earth puts on its garment of green, and the warm, fragrant air fans our faces and fills our lungs and appears even to penetrate to our hearts, we experience a vague, undefined longing for freedom, for happiness, a desire to run, to wander aimlessly, to breathe in the spring.
The previous winter having been unusually severe, this spring feeling was like a form of intoxication in May, as if there were an overabundant supply of sap.
One morning on waking I saw from my window the blue sky glowing in the sun above the neighboring houses.
The canaries hanging in the windows were singing loudly, and so were the servants on every floor; a cheerful noise rose up from the streets, and I went out, my spirits as bright as the day, to go—I did not exactly know where.
Everybody I met seemed to be smiling; an air of happiness appeared to pervade everything in the warm light of returning spring.
One might almost have said that a breeze of love was blowing through the city, and the sight of the young women whom I saw in the streets in their morning toilets, in the depths of whose eyes there lurked a hidden tenderness, and who walked with languid grace, filled my heart with agitation.
Steamboats were starting for Suresnes, and suddenly I was seized by an unconquerable desire to take a walk through the woods.
The deck of the Mouche was covered with passengers, for the sun in early spring draws one out of the house, in spite of themselves, and everybody moves about, goes and comes and talks to his neighbor.
I had a girl neighbor; a little work-girl, no doubt, who possessed the true Parisian charm: a little head, with light curly hair, which looked like a shimmer of light as it danced in the wind, came down to her ears, and descended to the nape of her neck, where it became such fine, light- colored clown that one could scarcely see it, but felt an irresistible desire to shower kisses on it.
Under my persistent gaze, she turned her head toward me, and then immediately looked down, while a slight crease at the side of her mouth, that was ready to break out into a smile, also showed a fine, silky, pale down which the sun was gilding a little.
The calm river grew wider; the atmosphere was warm and perfectly still, but a murmur of life seemed to fill all space.
My neighbor raised her eyes again, and this time, as I was still looking at her, she smiled decidedly.
She was charming, and in her passing glance I saw a thousand things, which I had hitherto been ignorant of, for I perceived unknown depths, all the charm of tenderness, all the poetry which we dream of, all the happiness which we are continually in search of.
I felt an insane longing to open my arms and to carry her off somewhere, so as to whisper the sweet music of words of love into her ears.
I was just about to address her when somebody touched me on the shoulder, and as I turned round in some surprise, I saw an ordinary- looking man, who was neither young nor old, and who gazed at me sadly.
But when spring returns, with its leaves and flowers, its warm, soft breezes and its smell of the fields, all of which causes you vague disquiet and causeless emotion, nobody says to you: “'Monsieur, beware of love!
It is lying in ambush everywhere; it is watching for you at every corner; all its snares are laid, all its weapons are sharpened, all its guiles are prepared!
It is more dangerous than brandy, bronchitis or pleurisy!
It never forgives and makes everybody commit irreparable follies.' “Yes, monsieur, I say that the French Government ought to put large public notices on the walls, with these words: 'Return of spring.
If I see that a man is in danger of being drowned at a dangerous spot, ought I to let him perish?
So just listen to my story and you will see why I ventured to speak to you like this.
“It was about this time last year that it occurred.
But, first of all, I must tell you that I am a clerk in the Admiralty, where our chiefs, the commissioners, take their gold lace as quill-driving officials seriously, and treat us like forecastle men on board a ship.
Well, from my office I could see a small bit of blue sky and the swallows, and I felt inclined to dance among my portfolios.
“My yearning for freedom grew so intense that, in spite of my repugnance, I went to see my chief, a short, bad-tempered man, who was always in a rage.
When I told him that I was not well, he looked at me and said: 'I do not believe it, monsieur, but be off with you!
Ah! what a good thing it would have been if my chief had refused me permission to leave the office that day!
I loved everything—the steamer, the river, the trees, the houses and my fellow-passengers.
I felt inclined to kiss something, no matter what; it was love, laying its snare.
Presently, at the Trocadero, a girl, with a small parcel in her hand, came on board and sat down opposite me.
She was decidedly pretty, but it is surprising, monsieur, how much prettier women seem to us when the day is fine at the beginning of the spring.
Then they have an intoxicating charm, something quite peculiar about them.
It is just like drinking wine after cheese.
“I looked at her and she also looked at me, but only occasionally, as that girl did at you, just now; but at last, by dint of looking at each other constantly, it seemed to me that we knew each other well enough to enter into conversation, and I spoke to her and she replied.
She was decidedly pretty and nice and she intoxicated me, monsieur!
“She got out at Saint-Cloud, and I followed her.
She went and delivered her parcel, and when she returned the boat had just started.
I walked by her side, and the warmth of the 'air made us both sigh. 'It would be very nice in the woods,' I said. 'Indeed, it would!' she replied. 'Shall we go there for a walk, mademoiselie?' “She gave me a quick upward look, as if to see exactly what I was like, and then, after a little hesitation, she accepted my proposal, and soon we were there, walking side by side.
Under the foliage, which was still rather scanty, the tall, thick, bright green grass was inundated by the sun, and the air was full of insects that were also making love to one another, and birds were singing in all directions.
My companion began to jump and to run, intoxicated by the air and the smell of the country, and I ran and jumped, following her example.
How silly we are at times, monsieur!
“Then she sang unrestrainedly a thousand things, opera airs and the song of Musette!
How poetical it seemed to me, then!
Those silly songs make us lose our heads; and, believe me, never marry a woman who sings in the country, especially if she sings the song of Musette!
I said to myself: “'These are the sacred marks of toil.' Oh! monsieur, do you know what those sacred marks of toil mean?
They mean all the gossip of the workroom, the whispered scandal, the mind soiled by all the filth that is talked; they mean lost chastity, foolish chatter, all the wretchedness of their everyday life, all the narrowness of ideas which belongs to women of the lower orders, combined to their fullest extent in the girl whose fingers bear the sacred marks of toil.
How it agitates us, how it invades our very being, takes possession of us, and dominates us!
How profound it seems, how full of infinite promises!
Oh! monsieur, what humbug!
However, I was captivated and was crazy about her and tried to take her into my arms, but she said: 'Paws off!'.
Then I knelt down and opened my heart to her and poured out all the affection that was suffocating me.
She seemed surprised at my change of manner and gave me a sidelong glance, as if to say, 'Ah! so that is the way women make a fool of you, old fellow!
Very well, we will see.' “In love, monsieur, we are always novices, and women artful dealers.
“No doubt I could have had her, and I saw my own stupidity later, but what I wanted was not a woman's person, it was love, it was the ideal.
I was sentimental, when I ought to have been using my time to a better purpose.
“I saw her on the following Sunday, and the next Sunday, and every Sunday.
I took her to Bougival, Saint-Germain, Maisons-Lafitte, Poissy; to every suburban resort of lovers.
“The little jade, in turn, pretended to love me, until, at last, I altogether lost my head, and three months later I married her.
“What can you expect, monsieur, when a man is a clerk, living alone, without any relations, or any one to advise him?
She passed close to me, and gave me a sidelong glance and a furtive smile, one of those smiles that drive you wild.
I sprang forward to follow her, but my neighbor laid hold of my arm.
I shook myself loose, however, whereupon he seized the skirt of my coat and pulled me back, exclaiming: “You shall not go! you shall not go!” in such a loud voice that everybody turned round and laughed, and I remained standing motionless and furious, but without venturing to face scandal and ridicule, and the steamboat started.
The little woman on the landing-stage looked at me as I went off with an air of disappointment, while my persecutor rubbed his hands and whispered to me: “You must acknowledge that I have done you a great service.” A QUEER NIGHT IN PARIS Mattre Saval, notary at Vernon, was passionately fond of music.
Although still young he was already bald; he was always carefully shaven, was somewhat corpulent as was suitable, and wore a gold pince-nez instead of spectacles.
He was active, gallant and cheerful and was considered quite an artist in Vernon.
He played the piano and the violin, and gave musicals where the new operas were interpreted.
He had even what is called a bit of a voice; nothing but a bit, very little bit of a voice; but he managed it with so much taste that cries of “Bravo!” “Exquisite!” “Surprising!” “Adorable!” issued from every throat as soon as he had murmured the last note.
He subscribed to a music publishing house in Paris, and they sent him the latest music, and from time to time he sent invitations after this fashion to the elite of the town: “You are invited to be present on Monday evening at the house of M.
Saval, notary, Vernon, at the first rendering of 'Sais.'” A few officers, gifted with good voices, formed the chorus.
Two or three lady amateurs also sang.
The notary filled the part of leader of the orchestra with so much correctness that the bandmaster of the 190th regiment of the line said of him, one day, at the Cafe de l'Europe.
Now, last year, according to his custom, he went to hear Henri VIII.
He then took the express which arrives in Paris at 4:30 P.M., intending to return by the 12:35 A.M. train, so as not to have to sleep at a hotel.
He had put on evening dress, a black coat and white tie, which he concealed under his overcoat with the collar turned up.
As soon as he set foot on the Rue d'Amsterdam, he felt himself in quite jovial mood.
He said to himself: “Decidedly, the air of Paris does not resemble any other air.
It has in it something indescribably stimulating, exciting, intoxicating, which fills you with a strange longing to dance about and to do many other things.
As soon as I arrive here, it seems to me, all of a sudden, that I have taken a bottle of champagne.
Happy are the elect, the great men who make themselves a reputation in such a city!
What an existence is theirs!” And he made plans; he would have liked to know some of these celebrated men, to talk about them in Vernon, and to spend an evening with them from time to time in Paris.
But suddenly an idea struck him.
He had heard allusions to little cafes in the outer boulevards at which well-known painters, men of letters, and even musicians gathered, and he proceeded to go up to Montmartre at a slow pace.
He passed in front of taverns frequented by belated bohemians, gazing at the different faces, seeking to discover the artists.
Five or six women, with their elbows resting on the marble tables, were talking in low tones about their love affairs, the quarrels of Lucie and Hortense, and the scoundrelism of Octave.
Saval sat down at some distance from them and waited, for the hour for taking absinthe was at hand.
The landlady called him M.
“Romantin.” The notary quivered.
Was this the Romantin who had taken a medal at the last Salon?
“You will bring up my dinner at once, and then carry to my new studio, 15 Boulevard de Clichy, thirty bottles of beer, and the ham I ordered this morning.
We are going to have a housewarming.” M.
Saval immediately ordered dinner.
Then, he took off his overcoat, so that his dress suit and his white tie could be seen.
His neighbor did not seem to notice him.
He had taken up a newspaper, and was reading it.
Saval glanced sideways at him, burning with the desire to speak to him.
They sat down opposite Romantin.
The first of the pair said: “Is it for this evening?” Romantin pressed his hand.
“I believe you, old chap, and everyone will be there.
I have Bonnat, Guillemet, Gervex, Beraud, Hebert, Duez, Clairin, and Jean-Paul Laurens.
It will be a stunning affair!
Every actress without exception—of course I mean, you know, all those who have nothing to do this evening.” The landlord of the establishment came across.
“Do you often have this housewarming?” The painter replied: “I believe you, every three months, each quarter.” M.
Saval could not restrain himself any longer, and in a hesitating voice said: “I beg your pardon for intruding on you, monsieur, but I heard your name mentioned, and I would be very glad to know if you really are M.
Romantin, whose work in the last Salon I have so much admired?” The painter answered: “I am the very person, monsieur.” The notary then paid the artist a very well-turned compliment, showing that he was a man of culture.
The painter, gratified, thanked him politely in reply.
Then they chattered.
Romantin returned to the subject of his house- warming, going into details as to the magnificence of the forthcoming entertainment.
Saval questioned him as to all the men he was going to receive, adding: “It would be an extraordinary piece of good fortune for a stranger to meet at one time so many celebrities assembled in the studio of an artist of your rank.” Romantin, vanquished, replied: “If it would be agreeable to you, come.” M.
Saval accepted the invitation with enthusiasm, reflecting: “I shall have time enough to see Henri VIII.” Both of them had finished their meal.
The notary insisted on paying the two bills, wishing to repay his neighbor's civilities.
He also paid for the drinks of the young fellows in red velvet; then he left the establishment with the painter.
They stopped in front of a very long, low house, the first story having the appearance of an interminable conservatory.
Six studios stood in a row with their fronts facing the boulevards.
Romantin was the first to enter, and, ascending the stairs, he opened a door, and lighted a match and then a candle.
They found themselves in an immense apartment, the furniture of which consisted of three chairs, two easels, and a few sketches standing on the ground along the walls.
Saval remained standing at the door somewhat astonished.
The painter remarked: “Here you are! we've got to the spot; but everything has yet to be done.” Then, examining the high, bare apartment, its ceiling disappearing in the darkness, he said: “We might make a great deal out of this studio.” He walked round it, surveying it with the utmost attention, then went on: “I know someone who might easily give a helping hand.
Women are incomparable for hanging drapery.
It would be embarrassing to my guests.” He reflected for a few seconds, and then added: “She is a good girl, but not easy to deal with.
If she knew that I was holding a reception, she would tear out my eyes.” M.
Saval had not even moved; he did not understand.
“Since I have invited you, you will assist me about something.” The notary said emphatically: “Make any use of me you please.
I am at your disposal.” Romantin took off his jacket.
“Well, citizen, to work!' We are first going to clean up.” He went to the back of the easel, on which there was a canvas representing a cat, and seized a very worn-out broom.
Just brush up while I look after the lighting.” M.
Saval took the broom, inspected it, and then began to sweep the floor very awkwardly, raising a whirlwind of dust.
Romantin, disgusted, stopped him: “Deuce take it! you don't know how to sweep the floor!
Look at me!” And he began to roll before him a heap of grayish sweepings, as if he had done nothing else all his life.
Then, he gave bark the broom to the notary, who imitated him.
In five minutes, such a cloud of dust filled the studio that Rormantin asked: “Where are you?
Saval, who was coughing, came near to him.
The painter said: “How would you set about making a chandelier?” The other, surprised, asked: “What chandelier?” “Why, a chandelier to light the room—a chandelier with wax-candles.” The notary did not understand.
He answered: “I don't know.” The painter began to jump about, cracking his fingers.
“Well, monseigneur, I have found out a way.” Then he went on more calmly: “Have you got five francs about you?” M.
At the end of five minutes, they had returned, one of them with the wax-candles and the other with the hoop of a cask.
Then Romantin plunged his hand into a cupboard, and drew forth twenty empty bottles, which he fixed in the form of a crown around the hoop.
He then went downstairs to borrow a ladder from the janitress, after having explained that he had made interest with the old woman by painting the portrait of her cat, exhibited on the easel.
When he returned with the ladder, he said to M.
Saval: “Are you active?” The other, without understanding, answered: “Why, yes.” “Well, you just climb up there, and fasten this chandelier for me to the ring of the ceiling.
I tell you I have a genius for lighting up.
You are just like a Jeames.” The door was opened brusquely.
A woman appeared, her eyes flashing, and remained standing on the threshold.
Romantin gazed at her with a look of terror.
She waited some seconds, crossing her arms over her breast, and then in a shrill, vibrating, exasperated voice said: “Ha! you dirty scoundrel, is this the way you leave me?” Romantin made no reply.
She went on: “Ha! you scoundrel!
You'll soon see the way I'll settle your jollification.
“I'm going to slap their faces with the bottles and the wax-candles——” Romantin said in a soft tone: “Mathilde——” But she did not pay any attention to him; she went on: “Wait a little, my fine fellow! wait a little!” Romantin went over to her, and tried to take her by the hands.
“Mathilde——” But she was now fairly under way; and on she went, emptying the vials of her wrath with strong words and reproaches.
They flowed out of her mouth like, a stream sweeping a heap of filth along with it.
The words pouring forth seemed struggling for exit.
She stuttered, stammered, yelled, suddenly recovering her voice to cast forth an insult or a curse.
She did not seem to see anything, so taken up was she in scolding and relieving her feelings.
And suddenly she began to weep.
The tears flowed from her eyes, but this did not stop her complaints.
But her words were uttered in a screaming falsetto voice with tears in it and interrupted by sobs.
She commenced afresh twice or three times, till she stopped as if something were choking her, and at last she ceased with a regular flood of tears.
Then he clasped her in his arms and kissed her hair, affected himself.
“Mathilde, my little Mathilde, listen.
You must be reasonable.
You know, if I give a supper-party to my friends, it is to thank these gentlemen for the medal I got at the Salon.
You ought to understand that.
It is not the same with artists as with other people.” She stammered, in the midst of her tears: “Why didn't you tell me this?” He replied: “It was in order not to annoy you, not to give you pain.
You will be very sensible, very nice; you will remain quietly waiting for me in bed, and I'll come back as soon as it's over.” She murmured: “Yes, but you will not begin over again?” “No, I swear to you!” He turned towards M.
Saval, who had at last hooked on the chandelier: “My dear friend, I am coming back in five minutes.
If anyone arrives in my absence, do the honors for me, will you not?” And he carried off Mathilde, who kept drying her eyes with her handkerchief as she went along.
Saval succeeded in putting everything around him in order.
Romantin did not return.
Then, suddenly there was a dreadful noise on the stairs, a song shouted out in chorus by twenty mouths and a regular march like that of a Prussian regiment.
The door flew open, and a motley throng appeared—men and women in file, two and two holding each other by the arm and stamping their heels on the ground to mark time, advanced into the studio like a snake uncoiling itself.
They howled: “Come, and let us all be merry, Pretty maids and soldiers gay!” M.
Saval, thunderstruck, remained standing in evening dress under the chandelier.
The procession of revellers caught sight of him, and uttered a shout: “A Jeames!
A Jeames!” And they began whirling round him, surrounding him with a circle of vociferations.
He attempted to explain: “Messieurs—messieurs—mesdames——” But they did not listen to him.
Saval said: “Gentlemen——” A tall young fellow, fair-haired and bearded to the nose, interrupted him: “What's your name, my friend?” The notary, quite scared, said: “I am M.
Saval.” A voice exclaimed: “You mean Baptiste.” A woman said: “Let the poor waiter alone!
Saval noticed that each guest had brought his own provisions.
The tall, fair young fellow placed in his hands an enormous sausage, and gave orders: “Here, go and arrange the sideboard in the corner over there.
Put the bottles at the left and the provisions at the right.” Saval, getting quite distracted, exclaimed: “But, messieurs, I am a notary!” There was a moment's silence and then a wild outburst of laughter.
One suspicious gentleman asked: “How came you to be here?” He explained, telling about his project of going to the opera, his departure from Vernon, his arrival in Paris, and the way in which he had spent the evening.
They sat around him to listen to him; they greeted him with words of applause, and called him Scheherazade.
Saval was presented to them so that he might begin his story over again.
He declined; they forced him to relate it.
They seated and tied him on one of three chairs between two women who kept constantly filling his glass.
From that moment, he forgot everything.
It seemed to him, however, that they undressed him, put him to bed, and that he was nauseated.
When he awoke, it was broad daylight, and he lay stretched with his feet against a cupboard, in a strange bed.
At last, she said: “Clear out, you blackguard!
He found that he was in no condition to do so.
His clothes had disappeared.
He blurted out: “Madame, I——Then he remembered.
He asked: “Did Monsieur Romantin come back?” The doorkeeper shouted: “Will you take your dirty carcass out of this, so that he at any rate may not catch you here?” M.
Saval said, in a state of confusion: “I haven't got my clothes; they have been taken away from me.” He had to wait, to explain his situation, give notice to his friends, and borrow some money to buy clothes.
And when people talk about music to him in his beautiful drawing-room in Vernon, he declares with an air of authority that painting is a very inferior art.
ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 6.
THAT COSTLY RIDE The household lived frugally on the meager income derived from the husband's insignificant appointments.
Two children had been born of the marriage, and the earlier condition of the strictest economy had become one of quiet, concealed, shamefaced misery, the poverty of a noble family—which in spite of misfortune never forgets its rank.
Hector de Gribelin had been educated in the provinces, under the paternal roof, by an aged priest.
His people were not rich, but they managed to live and to keep up appearances.
At twenty years of age they tried to find him a position, and he entered the Ministry of Marine as a clerk at sixty pounds a year.
He foundered on the rock of life like all those who have not been early prepared for its rude struggles, who look at life through a mist, who do not know how to protect themselves, whose special aptitudes and faculties have not been developed from childhood, whose early training has not developed the rough energy needed for the battle of life or furnished them with tool or weapon.
His first three years of office work were a martyrdom.
He had, however, renewed the acquaintance of a few friends of his family —elderly people, far behind the times, and poor like himself, who lived in aristocratic streets, the gloomy thoroughfares of the Faubourg Saint- Germain; and he had created a social circle for himself.
Strangers to modern life, humble yet proud, these needy aristocrats lived in the upper stories of sleepy, old-world houses.
From top to bottom of their dwellings the tenants were titled, but money seemed just as scarce on the ground floor as in the attics.
Their eternal prejudices, absorption in their rank, anxiety lest they should lose caste, filled the minds and thoughts of these families once so brilliant, now ruined by the idleness of the men of the family.
Hector de Gribelin met in this circle a young girl as well born and as poor as himself and married her.
They had two children in four years.
For four years more the husband and wife, harassed by poverty, knew no other distraction than the Sunday walk in the Champs-Elysees and a few evenings at the theatre (amounting in all to one or two in the course of the winter) which they owed to free passes presented by some comrade or other.
But in the spring of the following year some overtime work was entrusted to Hector de Gribelin by his chief, for which he received the large sum of three hundred francs.
The day he brought the money home he said to his wife: “My dear Henrietta, we must indulge in some sort of festivity—say an outing for the children.” And after a long discussion it was decided that they should go and lunch one day in the country.
“Well,” cried Hector, “once will not break us, so we'll hire a wagonette for you, the children and the maid.
And I'll have a saddle horse; the exercise will do me good.” The whole week long they talked of nothing but the projected excursion.
Oh, he had learned in a good school, and once he felt his steed between his legs he feared nothing—nothing whatever!
Rubbing his hands, he repeated gaily to his wife: “If only they would give me a restive animal I should be all the better pleased.
You'll see how well I can ride; and if you like we'll come back by the Champs-Elysees just as all the people are returning from the Bois.
As we shall make a good appearance, I shouldn't at all object to meeting some one from the ministry.
That is all that is necessary to insure the respect of one's chiefs.” On the day appointed the carriage and the riding horse arrived at the same moment before the door.
Hector went down immediately to examine his mount.
He had had straps sewn to his trousers and flourished in his hand a whip he had bought the evening before.
He raised the horse's legs and felt them one after another, passed his hand over the animal's neck, flank and hocks, opened his mouth, examined his teeth, declared his age; and then, the whole household having collected round him, he delivered a discourse on the horse in general and the specimen before him in particular, pronouncing the latter excellent in every respect.
When the rest of the party had taken their seats in the carriage he examined the saddle-girth; then, putting his foot in the stirrup, he sprang to the saddle.
Hector, not altogether at his ease, tried to soothe him: “Come, come, good horse, gently now!” Then, when the horse had recovered his equanimity and the rider his nerve, the latter asked: “Are you ready?” The occupants of the carriage replied with one voice: “Yes.” “Forward!” he commanded.
And the cavalcade set out.
All looks were centered on him.
He trotted in the English style, rising unnecessarily high in the saddle; looking at times as if he were mounting into space.
Sometimes he seemed on the point of falling forward on the horse's mane; his eyes were fixed, his face drawn, his cheeks pale.
His wife, holding one of the children on her knees, and the servant, who was carrying the other, continually cried out: “Look at papa! look at papa!” And the two boys, intoxicated by the motion of the carriage, by their delight and by the keen air, uttered shrill cries.
The horse, frightened by the noise they made, started off at a gallop, and while Hector was trying to control his steed his hat fell off, and the driver had to get down and pick it up.
When the equestrian had recovered it he called to his wife from a distance: “Don't let the children shout like that!
They'll make the horse bolt!” They lunched on the grass in the Vesinet woods, having brought provisions with them in the carriage.
Although the driver was looking after the three horses, Hector rose every minute to see if his own lacked anything; he patted him on the neck and fed him with bread, cakes and sugar.
“He's an unequal trotter,” he declared.
“He certainly shook me up a little at first, but, as you saw, I soon got used to it.
He knows his master now and won't give any more trouble.” As had been decided, they returned by the Champs-Elysees.
That spacious thoroughfare literally swarmed with vehicles of every kind, and on the sidewalks the pedestrians were so numerous that they looked like two indeterminate black ribbons unfurling their length from the Arc de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde.
A flood of sunlight played on this gay scene, making the varnish of the carriages, the steel of the harness and the handles of the carriage doors shine with dazzling brilliancy.
An intoxication of life and motion seemed to have invaded this assemblage of human beings, carriages and horses.
In the distance the outlines of the Obelisk could be discerned in a cloud of golden vapor.
As soon as Hector's horse had passed the Arc de Triomphe he became suddenly imbued with fresh energy, and, realizing that his stable was not far off, began to trot rapidly through the maze of wheels, despite all his rider's efforts to restrain him.
The carriage was now far behind.
When the horse arrived opposite the Palais de l'Industrie he saw a clear field before him, and, turning to the right, set off at a gallop.
An old woman wearing an apron was crossing the road in leisurely fashion.
She happened to be just in Hector's way as he arrived on the scene riding at full speed.
Powerless to control his mount, he shouted at the top of his voice: “Hi!
Hi!” She must have been deaf, for she continued peacefully on her way until the awful moment when, struck by the horse's chest as by a locomotive under full steam, she rolled ten paces off, turning three somersaults on the way.
Voices yelled: “Stop him!” Hector, frantic with terror, clung to the horse's mane and shouted: “Help! help!” A terrible jolt hurled him, as if shot from a gun, over his horse's ears and cast him into the arms of a policeman who was running up to stop him.
In the space of a second a furious, gesticulating, vociferating group had gathered round him.
An old gentleman with a white mustache, wearing a large round decoration, seemed particularly exasperated.
He repeated: “Confound it!
When a man is as awkward as all that he should remain at home and not come killing people in the streets, if he doesn't know how to handle a horse.” Four men arrived on the scene, carrying the old woman.
She appeared to be dead.
Her skin was like parchment, her cap on one side and she was covered with dust.
“Take her to a druggist's,” ordered the old gentleman, “and let us go to the commissary of police.” Hector started on his way with a policeman on either side of him, a third was leading his horse.
A crowd followed them—and suddenly the wagonette appeared in sight.
His wife alighted in consternation, the servant lost her head, the children whimpered.
He explained that he would soon be at home, that he had knocked a woman down and that there was not much the matter.
And his family, distracted with anxiety, went on their way.
When they arrived before the commissary the explanation took place in few words.
He gave his name—Hector de Gribelin, employed at the Ministry of Marine; and then they awaited news of the injured woman.
A policeman who had been sent to obtain information returned, saying that she had recovered consciousness, but was complaining of frightful internal pain.
She was a charwoman, sixty-five years of age, named Madame Simon.
When he heard that she was not dead Hector regained hope and promised to defray her doctor's bill.
Then he hastened to the druggist's.
The door way was thronged; the injured woman, huddled in an armchair, was groaning.
Two doctors were still engaged in examining her.
No bones were broken, but they feared some internal lesion.
Hector addressed her: “Do you suffer much?” “Oh, yes!” “Where is the pain?” “I feel as if my stomach were on fire.” A doctor approached.
“Are you the gentleman who caused the accident?” “I am.” “This woman ought to be sent to a home.
Would you like me to send her there?” Hector was delighted at the idea, thanked him and returned home much relieved.
His wife, dissolved in tears, was awaiting him.
He found her eating rich soup with an air of great satisfaction.
I feel sort of crushed—not a bit better.” The doctor declared they must wait and see; some complication or other might arise.
Hector waited three days, then he returned.
He asked for the doctor, who merely shrugged his shoulders and said: “What can I do?
They can't even move her chair from one place to another without her uttering the most distressing cries.
So long as I have no chance of seeing her walk I am not justified in supposing her to be telling lies about herself.” The old woman listened, motionless, a malicious gleam in her eyes.
A week passed, then a fortnight, then a month.
Madame Simon did not leave her armchair.
She ate from morning to night, grew fat, chatted gaily with the other patients and seemed to enjoy her immobility as if it were the rest to which she was entitled after fifty years of going up and down stairs, of turning mattresses, of carrying coal from one story to another, of sweeping and dusting.
Every day he found her calm and serene, declaring: “I can't move, sir; I shall never be able to move again.” Every evening Madame de Gribelin, devoured with anxiety, said: “How is Madame Simon?” And every time he replied with a resignation born of despair: “Just the same; no change whatever.” They dismissed the servant, whose wages they could no longer afford.
They economized more rigidly than ever.
The whole of the extra pay had been swallowed up.
Then Hector summoned four noted doctors, who met in consultation over the old woman.
She let them examine her, feel her, sound her, watching them the while with a cunning eye.
“I can't move!” Then they took hold of her, raised her and dragged her a short distance, but she slipped from their grasp and fell to the floor, groaning and giving vent to such heartrending cries that they carried her back to her seat with infinite care and precaution.
They pronounced a guarded opinion—agreeing, however, that work was an impossibility to her.
And when Hector brought this news to his wife she sank on a chair, murmuring: “It would be better to bring her here; it would cost us less.” He started in amazement.
How can you think of such a thing?” But she, resigned now to anything, replied with tears in her eyes: “But what can we do, my love?
It's not my fault!” USELESS BEAUTY I About half-past five one afternoon at the end of June when the sun was shining warm and bright into the large courtyard, a very elegant victoria with two beautiful black horses drew up in front of the mansion.
The Comtesse de Mascaret came down the steps just as her husband, who was coming home, appeared in the carriage entrance.
The countess was very beautiful, graceful and distinguished looking, with her long oval face, her complexion like yellow ivory, her large gray eyes and her black hair; and she got into her carriage without looking at him, without even seeming to have noticed him, with such a particularly high- bred air, that the furious jealousy by which he had been devoured for so long again gnawed at his heart.
Husband and wife sat side by side without speaking.
He was thinking how to begin a conversation, but she maintained such an obstinately hard look that he did not venture to make the attempt.
By that time they were driving up the Champs Elysees, toward the Arc de Triomphe.
That immense monument, at the end of the long avenue, raised its colossal arch against the red sky and the sun seemed to be descending on it, showering fiery dust on it from the sky.
The stream of carriages, with dashes of sunlight reflected in the silver trappings of the harness and the glass of the lamps, flowed on in a double current toward the town and toward the Bois, and the Comte de Mascaret continued: “My dear Gabrielle!” Unable to control herself any longer, she replied in an exasperated voice: “Oh! do leave me in peace, pray!
She replied in a low voice, so that the servants might not hear amid the deafening noise of the wheels: “Ah!
Now I recognize you again!
You will hear some disagreeable things, but you must know that I am prepared for everything, that I fear nothing, and you less than any one to-day.” He also was looking into her eyes and was already shaking with rage as he said in a low voice: “You are mad.” “No, but I will no longer be the victim of the hateful penalty of maternity, which you have inflicted on me for eleven years!
I wish to take my place in society as I have the right to do, as all women have the right to do.” He suddenly grew pale again and stammered: “I do not understand you.” “Oh! yes; you understand me well enough.
I only allowed you to come with me for that object, for I have these witnesses who will oblige you to listen to me and to contain yourself, so now pay attention to what I say.
I have always felt an antipathy to you, and I have always let you see it, for I have never lied, monsieur.
You married me in spite of myself; you forced my parents, who were in embarrassed circumstances, to give me to you, because you were rich, and they obliged me to marry you in spite of my tears.
I had not been married eight months when you suspected me of every perfidiousness, and you even told me so.
I did not understand it for some time, but then I guessed it.
You even boasted about it to your sister, who told me of it, for she is fond of me and was disgusted at your boorish coarseness.
Remember how you have behaved in the past!
How for eleven years you have compelled me to give up all society and simply be a mother to your children.
And then you would grow disgusted with me and I was sent into the country, the family chateau, among fields and meadows.
And when I reappeared, fresh, pretty and unspoiled, still seductive and constantly surrounded by admirers, hoping that at last I should live a little more like a rich young society woman, you were seized with jealousy again, and you began once more to persecute me with that infamous and hateful desire from which you are suffering at this moment by my side.
And it is not the desire of possessing me—for I should never have refused myself to you, but it is the wish to make me unsightly.
“And then that abominable and mysterious thing occurred which I was a long time in understanding (but I grew sharp by dint of watching your thoughts and actions): You attached yourself to your children with all the security which they gave you while I bore them.
You felt affection for them, with all your aversion to me, and in spite of your ignoble fears, which were momentarily allayed by your pleasure in seeing me lose my symmetry.
You loved your children as victories, and not because they were of your own blood.
They were victories over me, over my youth, over my beauty, over my charms, over the compliments which were paid me and over those that were whispered around me without being paid to me personally.
And you are proud of them, you make a parade of them, you take them out for drives in your break in the Bois de Boulogne and you give them donkey rides at Montmorency.
You take them to theatrical matinees so that you may be seen in the midst of them, so that the people may say: 'What a kind father' and that it may be repeated——” He had seized her wrist with savage brutality, and he squeezed it so violently that she was quiet and nearly cried out with the pain and he said to her in a whisper: “I love my children, do you hear?
What you have just told me is disgraceful in a mother.
But you belong to me; I am master—your master—I can exact from you what I like and when I like—and I have the law-on my side.” He was trying to crush her fingers in the strong grip of his large, muscular hand, and she, livid with pain, tried in vain to free them from that vise which was crushing them.
“You see that I am the master and the stronger,” he said.
When he somewhat loosened his grip, she asked him: “Do you think that I am a religious woman?” He was surprised and stammered “Yes.” “Do you think that I could lie if I swore to the truth of anything to you before an altar on which Christ's body is?” “No.” “Will you go with me to some church?” “What for?” “You shall see.
Will you?” “If you absolutely wish it, yes.” She raised her voice and said: “Philippe!” And the coachman, bending down a little, without taking his eyes from his horses, seemed to turn his ear alone toward his mistress, who continued: “Drive to St.
Philippe-du-Roule.” And the victoria, which had reached the entrance of the Bois de Boulogne returned to Paris.
Husband and wife did not exchange a word further during the drive, and when the carriage stopped before the church Madame de Mascaret jumped out and entered it, followed by the count, a few yards distant.
She went, without stopping, as far as the choir-screen, and falling on her knees at a chair, she buried her face in her hands.
She prayed for a long time, and he, standing behind her could see that she was crying.
She wept noiselessly, as women weep when they are in great, poignant grief.
There was a kind of undulation in her body, which ended in a little sob, which was hidden and stifled by her fingers.
But the Comte de Mascaret thought that the situation was lasting too long, and he touched her on the shoulder.
That contact recalled her to herself, as if she had been burned, and getting up, she looked straight into his eyes.
I am afraid of nothing, whatever you may do to me.
One of your children is not yours, and one only; that I swear to you before God, who hears me here.
That was the only revenge that was possible for me in return for all your abominable masculine tyrannies, in return for the penal servitude of childbearing to which you have condemned me.
I gave myself to him, without love and without pleasure, only for the sake of betraying you, and he also made me a mother.
I intended to tell you this later, for one has not avenged oneself on a man by deceiving him, unless he knows it.
I have now finished.” She hurried through the church toward the open door, expecting to hear behind her the quick step: of her husband whom she had defied and to be knocked to the ground by a blow of his fist, but she heard nothing and reached her carriage.
She jumped into it at a bound, overwhelmed with anguish and breathless with fear.
So she called out to the coachman: “Home!” and the horses set off at a quick trot.
II The Comtesse de Mascaret was waiting in her room for dinner time as a criminal sentenced to death awaits the hour of his execution.
Despotic, passionate, ready for any violence as he was, what was he meditating, what had he made up his mind to do?
Eight o'clock struck and almost at the same moment there were two knocks at the door, and the butler came in and announced dinner.
“Has the count come in?” “Yes, Madame la Comtesse.
He is in the diningroom.” For a little moment she felt inclined to arm herself with a small revolver which she had bought some time before, foreseeing the tragedy which was being rehearsed in her heart.
But she remembered that all the children would be there, and she took nothing except a bottle of smelling salts.
He rose somewhat ceremoniously from his chair.
They exchanged a slight bow and sat down.
The three boys with their tutor, Abbe Martin, were on her right and the three girls, with Miss Smith, their English governess, were on her left.
The youngest child, who was only three months old, remained upstairs with his nurse.
The abbe said grace as usual when there was no company, for the children did not come down to dinner when guests were present.
The countess, suffering from emotion, which she had not calculated upon, remained with her eyes cast down, while the count scrutinized now the three boys and now the three girls with an uncertain, unhappy expression, which travelled from one to the other.
Suddenly pushing his wineglass from him, it broke, and the wine was spilt on the tablecloth, and at the slight noise caused by this little accident the countess started up from her chair; and for the first time they looked at each other.
Then, in spite of themselves, in spite of the irritation of their nerves caused by every glance, they continued to exchange looks, rapid as pistol shots.
The abbe, who felt that there was some cause for embarrassment which he could not divine, attempted to begin a conversation and tried various subjects, but his useless efforts gave rise to no ideas and did not bring out a word.
The countess, with feminine tact and obeying her instincts of a woman of the world, attempted to answer him two or three times, but in vain.
She could not find words, in the perplexity of her mind, and her own voice almost frightened her in the silence of the large room, where nothing was heard except the slight sound of plates and knives and forks.
When dinner was over she went into the drawing-room, all her children following her.
She waited, for she had no doubt that the count would come, and she made up her mind then, as her children were not with her, to protect herself as a woman of the world as she would protect her life, and in the pocket of her dress she put the little loaded revolver which she had bought a few days previously.
Only the cabs, continued to rumble through the streets, but their noise was only heard vaguely through the shuttered and curtained windows.
She waited, full of nervous energy, without any fear of him now, ready for anything, and almost triumphant, for she had found means of torturing him continually during every moment of his life.
But the first gleam of dawn came in through the fringe at the bottom of her curtain without his having come into her room, and then she awoke to the fact, with much amazement, that he was not coming.
Having locked and bolted her door, for greater security, she went to bed at last and remained there, with her eyes open, thinking and barely understanding it all, without being able to guess what he was going to do.
He told her that he was going to undertake a longish journey and in a postscript added that his lawyer would provide her with any sums of money she might require for all her expenses.
She appeared to be still very young, and her striking beauty seemed to attract all eyes in every corner of the house.
Her pale complexion, of an ivory tint, gave her the appearance of a statue, while a small diamond coronet glistened on her black hair like a streak of light.
When he had looked at her for some time, Bernard Grandin replied with a jocular accent of sincere conviction: “You may well call her beautiful!” “How old do you think she is?” “Wait a moment.
She is—she is—thirty—thirty-six.” “Impossible!” “I am sure of it.” “She looks twenty-five.” “She has had seven children.” “It is incredible.” “And what is more, they are all seven alive, as she is a very good mother.
I occasionally go to the house, which is a very quiet and pleasant one, where one may see the phenomenon of the family in the midst of society.” “How very strange!
He is peculiar, is he not?” “Yes and no.
Very likely there has been a little drama between them, one of those little domestic dramas which one suspects, never finds out exactly, but guesses at pretty closely.” “What is it?” “I do not know anything about it.
Mascaret leads a very fast life now, after being a model husband.
Ah! my dear fellow, just consider!
Eleven years in a condition of motherhood for such a woman!
All her youth, all her beauty, every hope of success, every poetical ideal of a brilliant life sacrificed to that abominable law of reproduction which turns the normal woman into a mere machine for bringing children into the world.” “What would you have?
It is only Nature!” “Yes, but I say that Nature is our enemy, that we must always fight against Nature, for she is continually bringing us back to an animal state.
You may be sure that God has not put anything on this earth that is clean, pretty, elegant or accessory to our ideal; the human brain has done it.
It is man who has introduced a little grace, beauty, unknown charm and mystery into creation by singing about it, interpreting it, by admiring it as a poet, idealizing it as an artist and by explaining it through science, doubtless making mistakes, but finding ingenious reasons, hidden grace and beauty, unknown charm and mystery in the various phenomena of Nature.
God created only coarse beings, full of the germs of disease, who, after a few years of bestial enjoyment, grow old and infirm, with all the ugliness and all the want of power of human decrepitude.
He seems to have made them only in order that they may reproduce their species in an ignoble manner and then die like ephemeral insects.
I said reproduce their species in an ignoble manner and I adhere to that expression.
What is there as a matter of fact more ignoble and more repugnant than that act of reproduction of living beings, against which all delicate minds always have revolted and always will revolt?
Since all the organs which have been invented by this economical and malicious Creator serve two purposes, why did He not choose another method of performing that sacred mission, which is the noblest and the most exalted of all human functions?
The mouth, which nourishes the body by means of material food, also diffuses abroad speech and thought.
Our flesh renews itself of its own accord, while we are thinking about it.
The olfactory organs, through which the vital air reaches the lungs, communicate all the perfumes of the world to the brain: the smell of flowers, of woods, of trees, of the sea.
The ear, which enables us to communicate with our fellow men, has also allowed us to invent music, to create dreams, happiness, infinite and even physical pleasure by means of sound!
But one might say that the cynical and cunning Creator wished to prohibit man from ever ennobling and idealizing his intercourse with women.
Nevertheless man has found love, which is not a bad reply to that sly Deity, and he has adorned it with so much poetry that woman often forgets the sensual part of it.
Those among us who are unable to deceive themselves have invented vice and refined debauchery, which is another way of laughing at God and paying homage, immodest homage, to beauty.
“But the normal man begets children just like an animal coupled with another by law.
Is it not abominable to think that such a jewel, such a pearl, born to be beautiful, admired, feted and adored, has spent eleven years of her life in providing heirs for the Comte de Mascaret?” Bernard Grandin replied with a laugh: “There is a great deal of truth in all that, but very few people would understand you.” Salnis became more and more animated.
“As an enormous, creative organ beyond our ken, who scatters millions of worlds into space, just as one single fish would deposit its spawn in the sea.
The human mind is a lucky little local, passing accident which was totally unforeseen, and condemned to disappear with this earth and to recommence perhaps here or elsewhere the same or different with fresh combinations of eternally new beginnings.
A fortuitous function of the nerve centres of our brain, like the unforeseen chemical action due to new mixtures and similar also to a charge of electricity, caused by friction or the unexpected proximity of some substance, similar to all phenomena caused by the infinite and fruitful fermentation of living matter.
“But it is sufficient to reflect for a moment, in order to understand that this world was not made for such creatures as we are.
Thought, which is developed by a miracle in the nerves of the cells in our brain, powerless, ignorant and confused as it is, and as it will always remain, makes all of us who are intellectual beings eternal and wretched exiles on earth.
And for them, everything, and they have nothing to do but to eat or go hunting and eat each other, according to their instincts, for God never foresaw gentleness and peaceable manners; He only foresaw the death of creatures which were bent on destroying and devouring each other.
Are not the quail, the pigeon and the partridge the natural prey of the hawk? the sheep, the stag and the ox that of the great flesh-eating animals, rather than meat to be fattened and served up to us with truffles, which have been unearthed by pigs for our special benefit?
“As to ourselves, the more civilized, intellectual and refined we are, the more we ought to conquer and subdue that animal instinct, which represents the will of God in us.
And so, in order to mitigate our lot as brutes, we have discovered and made everything, beginning with houses, then exquisite food, sauces, sweetmeats, pastry, drink, stuffs, clothes, ornaments, beds, mattresses, carriages, railways and innumerable machines, besides arts and sciences, writing and poetry.
Every ideal comes from us as do all the amenities of life, in order to make our existence as simple reproducers, for which divine Providence solely intended us, less monotonous and less hard.
Is there not here a human world created by us, unforeseen and unknown to eternal fate, intelligible to our minds alone, a sensual and intellectual distraction, which has been invented solely by and for that discontented and restless little animal, man?
“Look at that woman, Madame de Mascaret.
God intended her to live in a cave, naked or wrapped up in the skins of wild animals.
But, speaking of her, does any one know why and how her brute of a husband, having such a companion by his side, and especially after having been boorish enough to make her a mother seven times, has suddenly left her, to run after bad women?” Grandin replied: “Oh! my dear fellow, this is probably the only reason.
He found that raising a family was becoming too expensive, and from reasons of domestic economy he has arrived at the same principles which you lay down as a philosopher.” Just then the curtain rose for the third act, and they turned round, took off their hats and sat down.
IV The Comte and Comtesse Mascaret were sitting side by side in the carriage which was taking them home from the Opera, without speaking but suddenly the husband said to his wife: “Gabrielle!” “What do you want?” “Don't you think that this has lasted long enough?” “What?” “The horrible punishment to which you have condemned me for the last six years?” “What do you want?
I cannot help it.” “Then tell me which of them it is.” “Never.” “Think that I can no longer see my children or feel them round me, without having my heart burdened with this doubt.
Tell me which of them it is, and I swear that I will forgive you and treat it like the others.” “I have not the right to do so.” “Do you not see that I can no longer endure this life, this thought which is wearing me out, or this question which I am constantly asking myself, this question which tortures me each time I look at them?
It is driving me mad.” “Then you have suffered a great deal?” she said.
Should I, without that, have accepted the horror of living by your side, and the still greater horror of feeling and knowing that there is one among them whom I cannot recognize and who prevents me from loving the others?” “Then you have really suffered very much?” she repeated.
And he replied in a constrained and sorrowful voice: “Yes, for do I not tell you every day that it is intolerable torture to me?
Should I have remained in that house, near you and them, if I did not love them?
You have behaved abominably toward me.
All the affection of my heart I have bestowed upon my children, and that you know.
I am for them a father of the olden time, as I was for you a husband of one of the families of old, for by instinct I have remained a natural man, a man of former days.
Yes, I will confess it, you have made me terribly jealous, because you are a woman of another race, of another soul, with other requirements.
I shall never forget the things you said to me, but from that day I troubled myself no more about you.
I did not kill you, because then I should have had no means on earth of ever discovering which of our—of your children is not mine.
I have waited, but I have suffered more than you would believe, for I can no longer venture to love them, except, perhaps, the two eldest; I no longer venture to look at them, to call them to me, to kiss them; I cannot take them on my knee without asking myself, 'Can it be this one?' I have been correct in my behavior toward you for six years, and even kind and complaisant.
Tell me the truth, and I swear that I will do nothing unkind.” He thought, in spite of the darkness of the carriage, that he could perceive that she was moved, and feeling certain that she was going to speak at last, he said: “I beg you, I beseech you to tell me” he said.
“I have been more guilty than you think perhaps,” she replied, “but I could no longer endure that life of continual motherhood, and I had only one means of driving you from me.
I lied before God and I lied, with my hand raised to my children's head, for I never have wronged you.” He seized her arm in the darkness, and squeezing it as he had done on that terrible day of their drive in the Bois de Boulogne, he stammered: “Is that true?” “It is true.” But, wild with grief, he said with a groan: “I shall have fresh doubts that will never end!
I would rather you had said to me, 'It is Jacques or it is Jeanne.'” The carriage drove into the courtyard of the house and when it had drawn up in front of the steps the count alighted first, as usual, and offered his wife his arm to mount the stairs.
As soon as they reached the first floor he said: “May I speak to you for a few moments longer?” And she replied, “I am quite willing.” They went into a small drawing-room and a footman, in some surprise, lighted the wax candles.
As soon as he had left the room and they were alone the count continued: “How am I to know the truth?
I have begged you a thousand times to speak, but you have remained dumb, impenetrable, inflexible, inexorable, and now to-day you tell me that you have been lying.
For six years you have actually allowed me to believe such a thing!
I am a woman of the civilized world, monsieur—we all are—and we are no longer, and we refuse to be, mere females to restock the earth.” She got up, but he seized her hands.
“Only one word, Gabrielle.
I never have dishonored you.” He looked her full in the face, and how beautiful she was, with her gray eyes, like the cold sky.
In her dark hair sparkled the diamond coronet, like a radiance.
He suddenly felt, felt by a kind of intuition, that this grand creature was not merely a being destined to perpetuate the race, but the strange and mysterious product of all our complicated desires which have been accumulating in us for centuries but which have been turned aside from their primitive and divine object and have wandered after a mystic, imperfectly perceived and intangible beauty.
There are some women like that, who blossom only for our dreams, adorned with every poetical attribute of civilization, with that ideal luxury, coquetry and esthetic charm which surround woman, a living statue that brightens our life.
Thank you, Gabrielle.” Then he went out, still looking at her, and surprised that she was still so beautiful and feeling a strange emotion arising in him.
THE FATHER I He was a clerk in the Bureau of Public Education and lived at Batignolles.
He took the omnibus to Paris every morning and always sat opposite a girl, with whom he fell in love.
She was employed in a shop and went in at the same time every day.
She was a little brunette, one of those girls whose eyes are so dark that they look like black spots, on a complexion like ivory.
He always saw her coming at the corner of the same street, and she generally had to run to catch the heavy vehicle, and sprang upon the steps before the horses had quite stopped.
The first time that he saw her, Francois Tessier liked the face.
One sometimes meets a woman whom one longs to clasp in one's arms without even knowing her.
That girl seemed to respond to some chord in his being, to that sort of ideal of love which one cherishes in the depths of the heart, without knowing it.
He looked at her intently, not meaning to be rude, and she became embarrassed and blushed.
He noticed it, and tried to turn away his eyes; but he involuntarily fixed them upon her again every moment, although he tried to look in another direction; and, in a few days, they seemed to know each other without having spoken.
By this time she had got so far as to greet him with a little smile; and, although she always dropped her eyes under his looks, which she felt were too ardent, yet she did not appear offended at being looked at in such a manner.
They ended by speaking.
A kind of rapid friendship had become established between them, a daily freemasonry of half an hour, and that was certainly one of the most charming half hours in his life to him.
He thought of her all the rest of the day, saw her image continually during the long office hours.
He was haunted and bewitched by that floating and yet tenacious recollection which the form of a beloved woman leaves in us, and it seemed to him that if he could win that little person it would be maddening happiness to him, almost above human realization.
Every morning she now shook hands with him, and he preserved the sense of that touch and the recollection of the gentle pressure of her little fingers until the next day, and he almost fancied that he preserved the imprint on his palm.
He anxiously waited for this short omnibus ride, while Sundays seemed to him heartbreaking days.
However, there was no doubt that she loved him, for one Saturday, in spring, she promised to go and lunch with him at Maisons-Laffitte the next day.
II She was at the railway station first, which surprised him, but she said: “Before going, I want to speak to you.
He did not know what to reply, for he was happy and disappointed at the same time.
He should love her less, certainly, if he knew that her conduct was light, but then it would be so charming, so delicious to have a little flirtation.
As he did not say anything, she began to speak again in an agitated voice and with tears in her eyes.
“If you do not promise to respect me altogether, I shall return home.” And so he squeezed her arm tenderly and replied: “I promise, you shall only do what you like.” She appeared relieved in mind, and asked, with a smile: “Do you really mean it?” And he looked into her eyes and replied: “I swear it” “Now you may take the tickets,” she said.
During the journey they could hardly speak, as the carriage was full, and when they reached Maisons-Laffite they went toward the Seine.
The sun, which shone full on the river, on the leaves and the grass, seemed to be reflected in their hearts, and they went, hand in hand, along the bank, looking at the shoals of little fish swimming near the bank, and they walked on, brimming over with happiness, as if they were walking on air.
“To come out like this, all alone with you.” “Certainly not; it is quite natural.” “No, no; it is not natural for me —because I do not wish to commit a fault, and yet this is how girls fall.
But if you only knew how wretched it is, every day the same thing, every day in the month and every month in the year.
I live quite alone with mamma, and as she has had a great deal of trouble, she is not very cheerful.
I do the best I can, and try to laugh in spite of everything, but I do not always succeed.
But, all the same, it was wrong in me to come, though you, at any rate, will not be sorry.” By way of an answer, he kissed her ardently on the ear that was nearest him, but she moved from him with an abrupt movement, and, getting suddenly angry, exclaimed: “Oh!
Monsieur Francois, after what you swore to me!” And they went back to Maisons-Laffitte.
They had lunch at the Petit-Havre, a low house, buried under four enormous poplar trees, by the side of the river.
The air, the heat, the weak white wine and the sensation of being so close together made them silent; their faces were flushed and they had a feeling of oppression; but, after the coffee, they regained their high spirits, and, having crossed the Seine, started off along the bank, toward the village of La Frette.
Suddenly he asked: “What-is your name?” “Louise.” “Louise,” he repeated and said nothing more.
The girl picked daisies and made them into a great bunch, while he sang vigorously, as unrestrained as a colt that has been turned into a meadow.
On their left a vine-covered slope followed the river.
Francois stopped motionless with astonishment: “Oh, look there!” he said.
A kind of great carpet of flowers stretched over the earth, reaching as far as the village, more than two miles off.
She also stood, surprised and delighted, and murmured: “Oh! how pretty!” And, crossing a meadow, they ran toward that curious low hill, which, every year, furnishes all the lilac that is drawn through Paris on the carts of the flower venders.
There was a narrow path beneath the trees, so they took it, and when they came to a small clearing, sat down.
Swarms of flies were buzzing around them and making a continuous, gentle sound, and the sun, the bright sun of a perfectly still day, shone over the bright slopes and from that forest of blossoms a powerful fragrance was borne toward them, a breath of perfume, the breath of the flowers.
A church clock struck in the distance, and they embraced gently, then, without the knowledge of anything but that kiss, lay down on the grass.
But she soon came to herself with the feeling of a great misfortune, and began to cry and sob with grief, with her face buried in her hands.
He tried to console her, but she wanted to start to return and to go home immediately; and she kept saying, as she walked along quickly: “Good heavens! good heavens!” He said to her: “Louise!
III When he met her in the omnibus, next day, she appeared to him to be changed and thinner, and she said to him: “I want to speak to you; we will get down at the Boulevard.” As soon as they were on the pavement, she said: “We must bid each other good-by; I cannot meet you again.” “But why?” he asked.
“Because I cannot; I have been culpable, and I will not be so again.” Then he implored her, tortured by his love, but she replied firmly: “No, I cannot, I cannot.” He, however, only grew all the more excited and promised to marry her, but she said again: “No,” and left him.
He could not manage to meet her, and, as he did not know her address, he thought that he had lost her altogether.
He was beginning to grow tired of her, when she whispered something to him, and then he had one idea and wish: to break with her at any price.
As, however, he could not do that, not knowing how to begin, or what to say, full of anxiety through fear of the consequences of his rash indiscretion, he took a decisive step: one night he changed his lodgings and disappeared.
The blow was so heavy that she did not look, for the man who had abandoned her, but threw herself at her mother's knees and confessed her misfortune, and, some months after, gave birth to a boy.
IV Years passed, and Francois Tessier grew old, without there having been any alteration in his life.
He led the dull, monotonous life of an office clerk, without hope and without expectation.
He was alone in the world, alone during the day in the midst of his different colleagues, and alone at night in his bachelor's lodgings, and he laid by a hundred francs a month against old age.
A woman passed by, holding two children by the hand, a little boy of about ten and a little girl of four.
She had not recognized him, and so he came back, wishing to see her again.
She was sitting down now, and the boy was standing by her side very quietly, while the little girl was making sand castles.
It was she, it was certainly she, but she had the reserved appearance of a lady, was dressed simply, and looked self-possessed and dignified.
He looked at her from a distance, for he did not venture to go near; but the little boy raised his head, and Francois Tessier felt himself tremble.
And, as he looked at him, he thought he could recognize himself as he appeared in an old photograph taken years ago.
He remained hidden behind a tree, waiting for her to go that he might follow her.
The idea of the child especially tormented him.
He was told that a neighbor, an honorable man of strict morals, had been touched by her distress and had married her; he knew the fault she had committed and had married her, and had even recognized the child, his, Francois Tessier's child, as his own.
He returned to the Parc Monceau every Sunday, for then he always saw her, and each time he was seized with a mad, an irresistible longing to take his son into his arms, to cover him with kisses and to steal him, to carry him off.
He suffered horribly in his wretched isolation as an old bachelor, with nobody to care for him, and he also suffered atrocious mental torture, torn by paternal tenderness springing from remorse, longing and jealousy and from that need of loving one's own children which nature has implanted in all.
Months passed without his seeing her again, but he suffered, day and night, for he was a prey to his paternal love.
He would gladly have died, if he could only have kissed his son; he would have committed murder, performed any task, braved any danger, ventured anything.
He wrote to her, but she did not reply, and, after writing her some twenty letters, he saw that there was no hope of altering her determination, and then he formed the desperate resolution of writing to her husband, being quite prepared to receive a bullet from a revolver, if need be.
His letter only consisted of a few lines, as follows: “Monsieur: You must have a perfect horror of my name, but I am so wretched, so overcome by misery that my only hope is in you, and, therefore, I venture to request you to grant me an interview of only five minutes.
“I have the honor, etc.” The next day he received the reply: “Monsieur: I shall expect you to-morrow, Tuesday, at five o'clock.” As he went up the staircase, Francois Tessier's heart beat so violently that he had to stop several times.
There was a dull and violent thumping noise in his breast, as of some animal galloping; and he could breathe only with difficulty, and had to hold on to the banisters, in order not to fall.
He rang the bell on the third floor, and when a maid servant had opened the door, he asked: “Does Monsieur Flamel live here?” “Yes, monsieur.
Kindly come in.” He was shown into the drawing-room; he was alone, and waited, feeling bewildered, as in the midst of a catastrophe, until a door opened, and a man came in.
Francois Tessier sat down, and then said, with choking breath: “Monsieur—monsieur—I do not know whether you know my name—whether you know——” Monsieur Flamel interrupted him.
“You need not tell it me, monsieur, I know it.
Then, suddenly, a little boy of ten rushed into the room and ran up to the man whom he believed to be his father, but he stopped when he saw the stranger, and Monsieur Flamel kissed him and said: “Now, go and kiss that gentleman, my dear.” And the child went up to the stranger and looked at him.
Francois Tessier had risen.
He let his hat fall, and was ready to fall himself as he looked at his son, while Monsieur Flamel had turned away, from a feeling of delicacy, and was looking out of the window.
The child waited in surprise; but he picked up the hat and gave it to the stranger.
Then Francois, taking the child up in his arms, began to kiss him wildly all over his face; on his eyes, his cheeks, his mouth, his hair; and the youngster, frightened at the shower of kisses, tried to avoid them, turned away his head, and pushed away the man's face with his little hands.
But suddenly Francois Tessier put him down and cried: “Good-by! good-by!” And he rushed out of the room as if he had been a thief.
MY UNCLE SOSTHENES Some people are Freethinkers from sheer stupidity.
My Uncle Sosthenes was one of these.
Some people are often religious for the same reason.
He would shake his fist and make grimaces at him, and would then touch a piece of iron when the priest's back was turned, forgetting that the latter action showed a belief after all, the belief in the evil eye.
Now, when beliefs are unreasonable, one should have all or none at all.
I myself am a Freethinker; I revolt at all dogmas, but feel no anger toward places of worship, be they Catholic, Apostolic, Roman, Protestant, Greek, Russian, Buddhist, Jewish, or Mohammedan.
My uncle was a Freemason, and I used to declare that they are stupider than old women devotees.
That is my opinion, and I maintain it; if we must have any religion at all, the old one is good enough for me.
Mutual help to be obtained by tickling the palms of each other's hands.
I see no harm in it, for they put into practice the Christian precept: “Do unto others as ye would they should do unto you.” The only difference consists in the tickling, but it does not seem worth while to make such a fuss about lending a poor devil half a crown.
To all my arguments my uncle's reply used to be: “We are raising up a religion against a religion; Free Thought will kill clericalism.
Freemasonry is the stronghold, of those who are demolishing all deities.” “Very well, my dear uncle,” I would reply—in my heart I felt inclined to say, “You old idiot! it is just that which I am blaming you for.
Instead of destroying, you are organizing competition; it is only a case of lowering prices.
And then, if you admitted only Freethinkers among you, I could understand it, but you admit anybody.
You have a number of Catholics among you, even the leaders of the party.
If you call a society with such an organization a bulwark against clericalism, I think it is an extremely weak one.” “My dear boy,” my uncle would reply, with a wink, “we are most to be dreaded in politics; slowly and surely we are everywhere undermining the monarchical spirit.” Then I broke out: “Yes, you are very clever!
If you tell me that Freemasonry is an election machine, I will grant it.
It was, however, indeed a sight to see my uncle when he had a Freemason to dinner.
On meeting they shook hands in a manner that was irresistibly funny; one could see that they were going through a series of secret, mysterious signs.
Then my uncle would take his friend into a corner to tell him something important, and at dinner they had a peculiar way of looking at each other, and of drinking to each other, in a manner as if to say: “We know all about it, don't we?” And to think that there are millions on the face of the globe who are amused at such monkey tricks!
Now, in our town there really was an old Jesuit who was my uncle's detestation.
Every time he met him, or if he only saw him at a distance, he used to say: “Get away, you toad.” And then, taking my arm, he would whisper to me: “See here, that fellow will play me a trick some day or other, I feel sure of it.” My uncle spoke quite truly, and this was how it happened, and through my fault.
It was close on Holy Week, and my uncle made up his mind to give a dinner on Good Friday, a real dinner, with his favorite chitterlings and black puddings.
I resisted as much as I could, and said: “I shall eat meat on that day, but at home, quite by myself.
Your manifestation, as you call it, is an idiotic idea.
Why should you manifest?
What does it matter to you if people do not eat any meat?” But my uncle would not be persuaded.
He asked three of his friends to dine with him at one of the best restaurants in the town, and as he was going to pay the bill I had certainly, after all, no scruples about manifesting.
At four o'clock we took a conspicuous place in the most frequented restaurant in the town, and my uncle ordered dinner in a loud voice for six o'clock.
We sat down punctually, and at ten o'clock we had not yet finished.
Five of us had drunk eighteen bottles of choice, still wine and four of champagne.
Then my uncle proposed what he was in the habit of calling “the archbishop's circuit.” Each man put six small glasses in front of him, each of them filled with a different liqueur, and they had all to be emptied at one gulp, one after another, while one of the waiters counted twenty.
It was very stupid, but my uncle thought it was very suitable to the occasion.
So we had to take him home in a cab and put him to bed, and one could easily foresee that his anti- clerical demonstration would end in a terrible fit of indigestion.
As I was going back to my lodgings, being rather drunk myself, with a cheerful drunkenness, a Machiavellian idea struck me which satisfied all my sceptical instincts.
I arranged my necktie, put on a look of great distress, and went and, rang loudly at the old Jesuit's door.
As he was deaf he made me wait a longish while, but at length appeared at his window in a cotton nightcap and asked what I wanted.
I shouted out at the top of my voice: “Make haste, reverend sir, and open the door; a poor, despairing, sick man is in need of your spiritual ministrations.” The good, kind man put on his trousers as quickly as he could, and came down without his cassock.
I even refused to come and fetch you, so I beg you not to say that you have seen me, but to declare that you had a presentiment—a sort of revelation of his illness.” The priest consented and went off quickly; knocked at my uncle's door, and was soon let in; and I saw the black cassock disappear within that stronghold of Free Thought.
I hid under a neighboring gateway to wait results.
Had he been well, my uncle would have half-murdered the Jesuit, but I knew that he would scarcely be able to move an arm, and I asked myself gleefully what sort of a scene would take place between these antagonists, what disputes, what arguments, what a hubbub, and what would be the issue of the situation, which my uncle's indignation would render still more tragic?
I laughed till my sides ached, and said half aloud: “Oh, what a joke, what a joke!” Meanwhile it was getting very cold, and I noticed that the Jesuit stayed a long time, and I thought: “They are having an argument, I suppose.” One, two, three hours passed, and still the reverend father did not come out.
Had my uncle died in a fit when he saw him, or had he killed the cassocked gentleman?
Perhaps they had mutually devoured each other?
This last supposition appeared very unlikely, for I fancied that my uncle was quite incapable of swallowing a grain more nourishment at that moment.
I was very uneasy, and, not venturing to go into the house myself, went to one of my friends who lived opposite.
I woke him up, explained matters to him, much to his amusement and astonishment, and took possession of his window.
At nine o'clock he relieved me, and I got a little sleep.
At two o'clock I, in my turn, replaced him.
We were utterly astonished.
At six o'clock the Jesuit left, with a very happy and satisfied look on his face, and we saw him go away with a quiet step.
Then, timid and ashamed, I went and knocked at the door of my uncle's house; and when the servant opened it I did not dare to ask her any questions, but went upstairs without saying a word.
My uncle was lying, pale and exhausted, with weary, sorrowful eyes and heavy arms, on his bed.
A little religious picture was fastened to one of the bed curtains with a pin.
Are you not well?” He replied in a feeble voice: “Oh, my dear boy, I have been very ill, nearly dead.” “How was that, uncle?” “I don't know; it was most surprising.
But what is stranger still is that the Jesuit priest who has just left—you know, that excellent man whom I have made such fun of—had a divine revelation of my state, and came to see me.” I was seized with an almost uncontrollable desire to laugh, and with difficulty said: “Oh, really!” “Yes, he came.
I was a revelation.” I pretended to sneeze, so as not to burst out laughing; I felt inclined to roll on the ground with amusement.
In about a minute I managed to say indignantly: “And you received him, uncle?
You, a Freethinker, a Freemason?
You did not have him thrown out of doors?” He seemed confused, and stammered: “Listen a moment, it is so astonishing—so astonishing and providential!
He also spoke to me about my father; it seems he knew him formerly.” “Your father, uncle?
But that is no reason for receiving a Jesuit.” “I know that, but I was very ill, and he looked after me most devotedly all night long.
He was perfect; no doubt he saved my life; those men all know a little of medicine.” “Oh! he looked after you all night?
But you said just now that he had only been gone a very short time.” “That is quite true; I kept him to breakfast after all his kindness.
He had it at a table by my bedside while I drank a cup of tea.” “And he ate meat?” My uncle looked vexed, as if I had said something very uncalled for, and then added: “Don't joke, Gaston; such things are out of place at times.
It is the history of their missions in Central Africa, and is rather a book of travels and adventures.
“Well, good- by, uncle,” I said, “I see you are going to give up Freemasonry for religion; you are a renegade.” He was still rather confused, and stammered: “Well, but religion is a sort of Freemasonry.” “When is your Jesuit coming back?” I asked.
“I don't—I don't know exactly; to-morrow, perhaps; but it is not certain.” I went out, altogether overwhelmed.
My uncle became thoroughly converted, and if that had been all I should not have cared so much.
Clerical or Freemason, to me it is all the same; six of one and half a dozen of the other; but the worst of it is that he has just made his will—yes, made his will—and he has disinherited me in favor of that rascally Jesuit!
THE BARONESS “Come with me,” said my friend Boisrene, “you will see some very interesting bric-a-brac and works of art there.” He conducted me to the first floor of an elegant house in one of the big streets of Paris.
We were welcomed by a very pleasing man, with excellent manners, who led us from room to room, showing us rare things, the price of which he mentioned carelessly.
Large sums, ten, twenty, thirty, fifty thousand francs, dropped from his lips with such grace and ease that one could not doubt that this gentleman-merchant had millions shut up in his safe.
I had known him by reputation for a long time.
Very bright, clever, intelligent, he acted as intermediary in all sorts of transactions.
He kept in touch with all the richest art amateurs in Paris, and even of Europe and America, knowing their tastes and preferences; he apprised them by letter, or by wire if they lived in a distant city, as soon as he knew of some work of art which might suit them.
Men of the best society had had recourse to him in times of difficulty, either to find money for gambling, or to pay off a debt, or to sell a picture, a family jewel, or a tapestry.
It was said that he never refused his services when he saw a chance of gain.
Boisrene seemed very intimate with this strange merchant.
They must have worked together in many a deal.
I observed the man with great interest.
His soft, insinuating voice had a peculiar, tempting charm which seemed to give the objects a special value.
When he held anything in his hands, he turned it round and round, looking at it with such skill, refinement, and sympathy that the object seemed immediately to be beautiful and transformed by his look and touch.
And its value increased in one's estimation, after the object had passed from the showcase into his hands.
“And your Crucifix,” said Boisrene, “that beautiful Renaissance Crucifix which you showed me last year?” The man smiled and answered: “It has been sold, and in a very peculiar manner.
There is a real Parisian story for you!
Would you like to hear it?” “With pleasure.” “Do you know the Baroness Samoris?” “Yes and no.
I have seen her once, but I know what she is!” “You know—everything?” “Yes.” “Would you mind telling me, so that I can see whether you are not mistaken?” “Certainly.
Samoris is a woman of the world who has a daughter, without anyone having known her husband.
At any rate, she is received in a certain tolerant, or blind society.
She goes to church and devoutly partakes of Communion, so that everyone may know it, and she never compromises herself.
She expects her daughter to marry well.
Is that correct?” “Yes, but I will complete your information.
She is a woman who makes herself respected by her admirers in spite of everything.
The man whom she has chosen without his suspecting it courts her for a long time, longs for her timidly, wins her with astonishment and possesses her with consideration.
He does not notice that he is paying, she is so tactful; and she maintains her relations on such a footing of reserve and dignity that he would slap the first man who dared doubt her in the least.
“Several times I have been able to render little services to this woman.
“Toward the beginning of January she came to me in order to borrow thirty thousand francs.
Naturally, I did not lend them to her; but, as I wished to oblige her, I told her to explain her situation to me completely, so that I might see whether there was not something I could do for her.
“She told me her troubles in such cautious language that she could not have spoken more delicately of her child's first communion.
I finally managed to understand that times were hard, and that she was penniless.
“The commercial crisis, political unrest, rumors of war, had made money scarce even in the hands of her clients.
And then, of course, she was very particular.
“She would associate only with a man in the best of society, who could strengthen her reputation as well as help her financially.
A reveller, no matter how rich, would have compromised her forever, and would have made the marriage of her daughter quite doubtful.
“She had to maintain her household expenses and continue to entertain, in order not to lose the opportunity of finding, among her numerous visitors, the discreet and distinguished friend for whom she was waiting, and whom she would choose.
“I showed her that my thirty thousand francs would have but little likelihood of returning to me; for, after spending them all, she would have to find at least sixty thousand more, in a lump, to pay me back.
“She seemed very disheartened when she heard this.
“I had just bought this Renaissance Crucifix which I showed you, an admirable piece of workmanship, one of the finest of its land that I have ever seen.
You will invent some ingenious, touching, poetic story, anything that you wish, to explain your desire for parting with it.
It is, of course, a family heirloom left you by your father.
“'I myself will send you amateurs, or will bring them to you.
The rest concerns you.
Before they come I will drop you a line about their position, both social and financial.
This Crucifix is worth fifty thousand francs; but I will let it go for thirty thousand.
The difference will belong to you.' “She considered the matter seriously for several minutes, and then answered: 'Yes, it is, perhaps, a good idea.
I thank you very-much.' “The next day I sent her my Crucifix, and the same evening the Baron de Saint-Hospital.
“For three months I sent her my best clients, from a business point of view.
“One day I received a visit from a foreigner who spoke very little French.
I decided to introduce him personally to the baroness, in order to see how she was getting along.
“A footman in black livery received us and ushered us into a quiet little parlor, furnished with taste, where we waited for several minutes.
She appeared, charming as usual, extended her hand to me and invited us to be seated; and when I had explained the reason of my visit, she rang.
“The footman appeared.
Isabelle can let us go into her oratory.' The young girl herself brought the answer.
She was about fifteen years of age, modest and good to look upon in the sweet freshness of her youth.
“It was a kind of religious boudoir where a silver lamp was burning before the Crucifix, my Crucifix, on a background of black velvet.
The setting was charming and very clever.
The child crossed herself and then said: “'Look, gentlemen.
Isn't it beautiful?' “I took the object, examined it and declared it to be remarkable.
The foreigner also examined it, but he seemed much more interested in the two women than in the crucifix.
“A delicate odor of incense, flowers and perfume pervaded the whole house.
This really was a comfortable home, where one would have liked to linger.
“When we had returned to the parlor I delicately broached the subject of the price.
Samoris, lowering her eyes, asked fifty thousand francs.
“Then she added: 'If you wish to see it again, monsieur, I very seldom go out before three o'clock; and I can be found at home every day.' “In the street the stranger asked me for some details about the baroness, whom he had found charming.
But I did not hear anything more from either of them.
Here are fifty thousand francs; I am buying your crucifix, and I am paying twenty thousand francs more for it than the price agreed upon, on condition that you always—always send your clients to me—for it is still for sale.'” MOTHER AND SON A party of men were chatting in the smoking room after dinner.
We were talking of unexpected legacies, strange inheritances.
Then M. le Brument, who was sometimes called “the illustrious judge” and at other times “the illustrious lawyer,” went and stood with his back to the fire.
“I have,” said he, “to search for an heir who disappeared under peculiarly distressing circumstances.
It is one of those simple and terrible dramas of ordinary life, a thing which possibly happens every day, and which is nevertheless one of the most dreadful things I know.
She said to me: “'Monsieur, I want to intrust to you the most delicate, the most difficult, and the most wearisome mission that can be conceived.
A sum of five thousand francs is left to you as a fee if you do not succeed, and of a hundred thousand francs if you do succeed.
I want you to find my son after my death.' “She asked me to assist her to sit up in bed, in order that she might talk with greater ease, for her voice, broken and gasping, was whistling in her throat.
“It was a very wealthy establishment.
The luxurious apartment, of an elegant simplicity, was upholstered with materials as thick as walls, with a soft inviting surface.
“The dying woman continued: “'You are the first to hear my horrible story.
I will try to have strength enough to finish it.
“'Listen to me: “'Before my marriage, I loved a young man, whose suit was rejected by my family because he was not rich enough.
Not long afterward, I married a man of great wealth.
I married him through ignorance, through obedience, through indifference, as young girls do marry.
He came to see me; he wept and sobbed so bitterly, that it was enough to break my heart.
Perhaps I ought not to have received him.
I was alone, so sad, so solitary, so hopeless!
What sufferings we women have sometimes to endure!
He came frequently; he spent whole evenings with me.
Do you think it could be otherwise when two human beings are drawn to each other by the irresistible force of mutual affection?
What strength would it not require?
What a renunciation of happiness? what self-denial? and even what virtuous selfishness?
“'In short, monsieur, I was his mistress; and I was happy.
I became—and this was my greatest weakness and my greatest piece of cowardice-I became his wife's friend.
“'We brought up my son together; we made a man of him, a thorough man, intelligent, full of sense and resolution, of large and generous ideas.
The boy reached the age of seventeen.
“'He, the young man, was fond of my—my lover, almost as fond of him as I was myself, for he had been equally cherished and cared for by both of us.
He used to call him his 'dear friend,' and respected him immensely, having never received from him anything but wise counsels and an example of integrity, honor, and probity.
He looked upon him as an old loyal and devoted comrade of his mother, as a sort of moral father, guardian, protector—how am I to describe it?
“'Perhaps the reason why he never asked any questions was that he had been accustomed from his earliest years to see this man in my house, at my side, and at his side, always concerned about us both.
“'One evening the three of us were to dine together—this was my chief amusement—and I waited for the two men, asking myself which of them would be the first to arrive.
I went toward him, with outstretched arms; and he pressed my lips in a long, delicious kiss.
“'All of a sudden, a slight sound, a faint rustling, that mysterious sensation which indicates the presence of another person, made us start and turn round abruptly.
“'There was a moment of atrocious confusion.
I drew back, holding out my hand toward my son as if in supplication; but I could not see him.
“'We remained facing each other—my lover and I—crushed, unable to utter a word.
I sank into an armchair, and I felt a desire, a vague, powerful desire, to flee, to go out into the night, and to disappear forever.
Then convulsive sobs rose in my throat, and I wept, shaken with spasms, my heart breaking, all my nerves writhing with the horrible sensation of an irreparable misfortune, and with that dreadful sense of shame which, in such moments as this, fills a mother's heart.
“'He looked at me in a terrified manner, not venturing to approach, to speak to me, or to touch me, for fear of the boy's return.
“'I waited—waited in a distracted frame of mind, trembling at the least sound, starting with fear and with some unutterably strange and intolerable emotion at every slight crackling of the fire in the grate.
“'I waited an hour, two hours, feeling my heart swell with a dread I had never before experienced, such anguish that I would not wish the greatest criminal to endure ten minutes of such misery.
“'About midnight, a messenger brought me a note from my lover.
I still know its contents by heart: “'Has your son returned?
I do not want to go up at this hour.” “'I wrote in pencil on the same slip of paper: “'Jean has not returned.
You must find him.” “'And I remained all night in the armchair, waiting for him.
But I could form no conception, in spite of my efforts, in spite of the tortures of my soul!
My mind was torn with fearful doubts, with terrible suppositions.
“'You can understand my feelings, can you not, monsieur?
“'My chambermaid, who knew nothing, who understood nothing, came into the room every moment, believing, naturally, that I had lost my reason.
I sent her away with a word or a movement of the hand.
“'When I regained consciousness, after a long illness, I saw beside my bed my—lover—alone.
“'I exclaimed: “'My son?
I stammered: “'Dead-dead.
Has he committed suicide?
“'Then, becoming suddenly exasperated and even indignant—for women are subject to such outbursts of unaccountable and unreasoning anger—I said: “'I forbid you to come near me or to see me again unless you find him.
“'I have never seen one or the other of them since, monsieur, and thus I have lived for the last twenty years.
Can you understand this monstrous punishment, this slow, perpetual laceration of a mother's heart, this abominable, endless waiting?
“'He—the man I loved—has written to me every day for the last twenty years; and I—I have never consented to see him, even for one second; for I had a strange feeling that, if he were to come back here, my son would make his appearance at the same moment.
How cruel one's children are!
Did he understand to what frightful suffering he condemned me, into what depths of despair, into what tortures, he cast me while I was still in the prime of life, leaving me to suffer until this moment, when I am about to die—me, his mother, who loved him with all the intensity of a mother's love?
“'You will tell him all this, monsieur—will you not?
Life is already brutal and savage enough in its dealings with them.
My dear son, think of what the existence of your poor mother has been ever since the day you left her.
My dear child, forgive her, and love her, now that she is dead, for she has had to endure the most frightful penance ever inflicted on a woman.” “She gasped for breath, trembling, as if she had addressed the last words to her son and as if he stood by her bedside.
“Then she added: “'You will tell him also, monsieur, that I never again saw-the other.' “Once more she ceased speaking, then, in a broken voice, she said: “'Leave me now, I beg of you.
I want to die all alone, since they are not with me.'” Maitre Le Brument added: “And I left the house, monsieurs, crying like a fool, so bitterly, indeed, that my coachman turned round to stare at me.
“I have not found the son—that son—well, say what you like about him, but I call him that criminal son!” THE HAND All were crowding around M.
Bermutier, the judge, who was giving his opinion about the Saint-Cloud mystery.
For a month this in explicable crime had been the talk of Paris.
Bermutier, standing with his back to the fireplace, was talking, citing the evidence, discussing the various theories, but arriving at no conclusion.
Some women had risen, in order to get nearer to him, and were standing with their eyes fastened on the clean-shaven face of the judge, who was saying such weighty things.
They, were shaking and trembling, moved by fear and curiosity, and by the eager and insatiable desire for the horrible, which haunts the soul of every woman.
One of them, paler than the others, said during a pause: “It's terrible.
It verges on the supernatural.
The truth will never be known.” The judge turned to her: “True, madame, it is likely that the actual facts will never be discovered.
As for the word 'supernatural' which you have just used, it has nothing to do with the matter.
We are in the presence of a very cleverly conceived and executed crime, so well enshrouded in mystery that we cannot disentangle it from the involved circumstances which surround it.
In fact, the case became so confused that it had to be given up.” Several women exclaimed at once: “Oh!
Bermutier smiled in a dignified manner, as a judge should, and went on: “Do not think, however, that I, for one minute, ascribed anything in the case to supernatural influences.
But if, instead of using the word 'supernatural' to express what we do not understand, we were simply to make use of the word 'inexplicable,' it would be much better.
At any rate, in the affair of which I am about to tell you, it is especially the surrounding, preliminary circumstances which impressed me.
Here are the facts: “I was, at that time, a judge at Ajaccio, a little white city on the edge of a bay which is surrounded by high mountains.
“The majority of the cases which came up before me concerned vendettas.
There are some that are superb, dramatic, ferocious, heroic.
We find there the most beautiful causes for revenge of which one could dream, enmities hundreds of years old, quieted for a time but never extinguished; abominable stratagems, murders becoming massacres and almost deeds of glory.
For two years I heard of nothing but the price of blood, of this terrible Corsican prejudice which compels revenge for insults meted out to the offending person and all his descendants and relatives.
I had seen old men, children, cousins murdered; my head was full of these stories.
“One day I learned that an Englishman had just hired a little villa at the end of the bay for several years.
He had brought with him a French servant, whom he had engaged on the way at Marseilles.
“Soon this peculiar person, living alone, only going out to hunt and fish, aroused a widespread interest.
He never spoke to any one, never went to the town, and every morning he would practice for an hour or so with his revolver and rifle.
It was said that he was some high personage, fleeing from his fatherland for political reasons; then it was affirmed that he was in hiding after having committed some abominable crime.
Some particularly horrible circumstances were even mentioned.
“In my judicial position I thought it necessary to get some information about this man, but it was impossible to learn anything.
“I therefore had to be satisfied with watching him as closely as I could, but I could see nothing suspicious about his actions.
“However, as rumors about him were growing and becoming more widespread, I decided to try to see this stranger myself, and I began to hunt regularly in the neighborhood of his grounds.
“For a long time I watched without finding an opportunity.
At last it came to me in the shape of a partridge which I shot and killed right in front of the Englishman.
“He was a big man, with red hair and beard, very tall, very broad, a kind of calm and polite Hercules.
He had nothing of the so-called British stiffness, and in a broad English accent he thanked me warmly for my attention.
At the end of a month we had had five or six conversations.
“He received me with the most punctilious English courtesy, sang the praises of France and of Corsica, and declared that he was quite in love with this country.
“Then, with great caution and under the guise of a vivid interest, I asked him a few questions about his life and his plans.
He answered without embarrassment, telling me that he had travelled a great deal in Africa, in the Indies, in America.
He added, laughing: “'I have had many adventures.' “Then I turned the conversation on hunting, and he gave me the most curious details on hunting the hippopotamus, the tiger, the elephant and even the gorilla.
“I said: “'Are all these animals dangerous?' “He smiled: “'Oh, no!
Man is the worst.' “And he laughed a good broad laugh, the wholesome laugh of a contented Englishman.
“'I have also frequently been man-hunting.' “Then he began to talk about weapons, and he invited me to come in and see different makes of guns.
“His parlor was draped in black, black silk embroidered in gold.
Big yellow flowers, as brilliant as fire, were worked on the dark material.
“He said: “'It is a Japanese material.' “But in the middle of the widest panel a strange thing attracted my attention.
Not the clean white hand of a skeleton, but a dried black hand, with yellow nails, the muscles exposed and traces of old blood on the bones, which were cut off as clean as though it had been chopped off with an axe, near the middle of the forearm.
“Around the wrist, an enormous iron chain, riveted and soldered to this unclean member, fastened it to the wall by a ring, strong enough to hold an elephant in leash.
“I asked: “'What is that?' “The Englishman answered quietly: “'That is my best enemy.
The bones were severed by a sword and the skin cut off with a sharp stone and dried in the sun for a week.' “I touched these human remains, which must have belonged to a giant.
The uncommonly long fingers were attached by enormous tendons which still had pieces of skin hanging to them in places.
This hand was terrible to see; it made one think of some savage vengeance.
“I said: “'This man must have been very strong.' “The Englishman answered quietly: “'Yes, but I was stronger than he.
I said: “'This chain is useless now, the hand won't run away.' “Sir John Rowell answered seriously: “'It always wants to go away.
This chain is needed.' “I glanced at him quickly, questioning his face, and I asked myself: “'Is he an insane man or a practical joker?' “But his face remained inscrutable, calm and friendly.
I turned to other subjects, and admired his rifles.
“However, I noticed that he kept three loaded revolvers in the room, as though constantly in fear of some attack.
People had become used to his presence; everybody had lost interest in him.
One morning, toward the end of November, my servant awoke me and announced that Sir John Rowell had been murdered during the night.
“Half an hour later I entered the Englishman's house, together with the police commissioner and the captain of the gendarmes.
The servant, bewildered and in despair, was crying before the door.
At first I suspected this man, but he was innocent.
“On entering Sir John's parlor, I noticed the body, stretched out on its back, in the middle of the room.
“His vest was torn, the sleeve of his jacket had been pulled off, everything pointed to, a violent struggle.
“The Englishman had been strangled!
His face was black, swollen and frightful, and seemed to express a terrible fear.
He held something between his teeth, and his neck, pierced by five or six holes which looked as though they had been made by some iron instrument, was covered with blood.
“A physician joined us.
He examined the finger marks on the neck for a long time and then made this strange announcement: “'It looks as though he had been strangled by a skeleton.' “A cold chill seemed to run down my back, and I looked over to where I had formerly seen the terrible hand.
“I bent over the dead man and, in his contracted mouth, I found one of the fingers of this vanished hand, cut—or rather sawed off by the teeth down to the second knuckle.
“Then the investigation began.
Nothing could be discovered.
No door, window or piece of furniture had been forced.
“Here, in a few words, is the testimony of the servant: “For a month his master had seemed excited.
He had received many letters, which he would immediately burn.
“Often, in a fit of passion which approached madness, he had taken a switch and struck wildly at this dried hand riveted to the wall, and which had disappeared, no one knows how, at the very hour of the crime.
“He would go to bed very late and carefully lock himself in.
Often at night he would talk loudly, as though he were quarrelling with some one.
“That night, somehow, he had made no noise, and it was only on going to open the windows that the servant had found Sir John murdered.
He suspected no one.
“I communicated what I knew of the dead man to the judges and public officials.
Throughout the whole island a minute investigation was carried on.
“One night, about three months after the crime, I had a terrible nightmare.
I seemed to see the horrible hand running over my curtains and walls like an immense scorpion or spider.
Three times I awoke, three times I went to sleep again; three times I saw the hideous object galloping round my room and moving its fingers like legs.
“The following day the hand was brought me, found in the cemetery, on the grave of Sir John Rowell, who had been buried there because we had been unable to find his family.
I know nothing more.” The women, deeply stirred, were pale and trembling.
One of them exclaimed: “But that is neither a climax nor an explanation!
We will be unable to sleep unless you give us your opinion of what had occurred.” The judge smiled severely: “Oh!
Ladies, I shall certainly spoil your terrible dreams.
I simply believe that the legitimate owner of the hand was not dead, that he came to get it with his remaining one.
It was a kind of vendetta.” One of the women murmured: “No, it can't be that.” And the judge, still smiling, said: “Didn't I tell you that my explanation would not satisfy you?” A TRESS OF HAIR The walls of the cell were bare and white washed.
A narrow grated window, placed so high that one could not reach it, lighted this sinister little room.
The mad inmate, seated on a straw chair, looked at us with a fixed, vacant and haunted expression.
His clothes appeared to be too large for his shrunken limbs, his sunken chest and empty paunch.
One felt that this man's mind was destroyed, eaten by his thoughts, by one thought, just as a fruit is eaten by a worm.
His craze, his idea was there in his brain, insistent, harassing, destructive.
It—the invisible, impalpable, intangible, immaterial idea—was mining his health, drinking his blood, snuffing out his life.
What strange, tremendous and deadly thoughts dwelt within this forehead which they creased with deep wrinkles which were never still?
“He has terrible attacks of rage,” said the doctor to me.
“His is one of the most peculiar cases I have ever seen.
He has seizures of erotic and macaberesque madness.
He is a sort of necrophile.
He has kept a journal in which he sets forth his disease with the utmost clearness.
If it would interest you, you may go over this document.” I followed the doctor into his office, where he handed me this wretched man's diary, saying: “Read it and tell me what you think of it.” I read as follows: “Until the age of thirty-two I lived peacefully, without knowing love.
Life appeared very simple, very pleasant and very easy.
I enjoyed so many things that I had no passion for anything in particular.
I awoke happy every morning and did those things that pleased me during the day and went to bed at night contented, in the expectation of a peaceful tomorrow and a future without anxiety.
“I had had a few flirtations without my heart being touched by any true passion or wounded by any of the sensations of true love.
It is better to love, but it is terrible.
And yet those who love in the ordinary way must experience ardent happiness, though less than mine possibly, for love came to me in a remarkable manner.
“As I was wealthy, I bought all kinds of old furniture and old curiosities, and I often thought of the unknown hands that had touched these objects, of the eyes that had admired them, of the hearts that had loved them; for one does love things!
I sometimes remained hours and hours looking at a little watch of the last century.
And it kept time as on the day when a woman first bought it, enraptured at owning this dainty trinket.
It had not ceased to vibrate, to live its mechanical life, and it had kept up its regular tick-tock since the last century.
Who had first worn it on her bosom amid the warmth of her clothing, the heart of the watch beating beside the heart of the woman?
What hand had held it in its warm fingers, had turned it over and then wiped the enamelled shepherds on the case to remove the slight moisture from her fingers?
What eyes had watched the hands on its ornamental face for the expected, the beloved, the sacred hour?
“How I wished I had known her, seen her, the woman who had selected this exquisite and rare object!
I am possessed with a longing for women of former days.
Oh, the beauty, the smiles, the youthful caresses, the hopes!
“How I have wept whole nights-thinking of those poor women of former days, so beautiful, so loving, so sweet, whose arms were extended in an embrace, and who now are dead!
“The past attracts me, the present terrifies me because the future means death.
But time goes, it goes, it passes, it takes from me each second a little of myself for the annihilation of to-morrow.
“Farewell, ye women of yesterday.
I found her, the one I was waiting for, and through her I enjoyed inestimable pleasure.
“I was sauntering in Paris on a bright, sunny morning, with a happy heart and a high step, looking in at the shop windows with the vague interest of an idler.
All at once I noticed in the shop of a dealer in antiques a piece of Italian furniture of the seventeenth century.
It was very handsome, very rare.
I set it down as being the work of a Venetian artist named Vitelli, who was celebrated in his day.
“Why did the remembrance of that piece of furniture haunt me with such insistence that I retraced my steps?
“What a singular thing temptation is!
One gazes at an object, and, little by little, it charms you, it disturbs you, it fills your thoughts as a woman's face might do.
The enchantment of it penetrates your being, a strange enchantment of form, color and appearance of an inanimate object.
A longing to own it takes possession of you, gently at first, as though it were timid, but growing, becoming intense, irresistible.
“And the dealers seem to guess, from your ardent gaze, your secret and increasing longing.
“I bought this piece of furniture and had it sent home at once.
“Oh, I am sorry for those who do not know the honeymoon of the collector with the antique he has just purchased.
One looks at it tenderly and passes one's hand over it as if it were human flesh; one comes back to it every moment, one is always thinking of it, wherever one goes, whatever one does.
The dear recollection of it pursues you in the street, in society, everywhere; and when you return home at night, before taking off your gloves or your hat; you go and look at it with the tenderness of a lover.
“Truly, for eight days I worshipped this piece of furniture.
I handled it with rapture, with all the intense joy of possession.
“But one evening I surmised, while I was feeling the thickness of one of the panels, that there must be a secret drawer in it: My heart began to beat, and I spent the night trying to discover this secret cavity.
“I succeeded on the following day by driving a knife into a slit in the wood.
A panel slid back and I saw, spread out on a piece of black velvet, a magnificent tress of hair.
“I stood amazed, trembling, confused.
An almost imperceptible perfume, so ancient that it seemed to be the spirit of a perfume, issued from this mysterious drawer and this remarkable relic.
“I lifted it gently, almost reverently, and took it out of its hiding place.
It at once unwound in a golden shower that reached to the floor, dense but light; soft and gleaming like the tail of a comet.
What adventure, what tragedy did this souvenir conceal?
A lover on a day of farewell, a husband on a day of revenge, or the one whose head it had graced on the day of despair?
Was it when they were going to nail down the coffin of the beautiful young corpse that the one who had adored her had cut off her tresses, the only thing that he could retain of her, the only living part of her body that would not suffer decay, the only thing he could still love, and caress, and kiss in his paroxysms of grief?
“Was it not strange that this tress should have remained as it was in life, when not an atom of the body on which it grew was in existence?
“It fell over my fingers, tickled the skin with a singular caress, the caress of a dead woman.
It affected me so that I felt as though I should weep.
“I held it in my hands for a long time, then it seemed as if it disturbed me, as though something of the soul had remained in it.
And I put it back on the velvet, rusty from age, and pushed in the drawer, closed the doors of the antique cabinet and went out for a walk to meditate.
“And Villon's lines came to my mind like a sob: Tell me where, and in what place Is Flora, the beautiful Roman, Hipparchia and Thais Who was her cousin-german?
The queen, white as lilies, Who sang as sing the birds, Bertha Broadfoot, Beatrice, Alice, Ermengarde, princess of Maine, And Joan, the good Lorraine, Burned by the English at Rouen, Where are they, Virgin Queen?
“When I got home again I felt an irresistible longing to see my singular treasure, and I took it out and, as I touched it, I felt a shiver go all through me.
“For some days, however, I was in my ordinary condition, although the thought of that tress of hair was always present to my mind.
“Whenever I came into the house I had to see it and take it in my, hands.
I turned the key of the cabinet with the same hesitation that one opens the door leading to one's beloved, for in my hands and my heart I felt a confused, singular, constant sensual longing to plunge my hands in the enchanting golden flood of those dead tresses.
“Then, after I had finished caressing it and had locked the cabinet I felt as if it were a living thing, shut up in there, imprisoned; and I longed to see it again.
I felt again the imperious desire to take it in my hands, to touch it, to even feel uncomfortable at the cold, slippery, irritating, bewildering contact.
It obsessed me, haunted me.
I was happy and tormented by turns, as when one falls in love, and after the first vows have been exchanged.
“One night I woke up suddenly, feeling as though I were not alone in my room.
“I was alone, nevertheless, but I could not go to sleep again, and, as I was tossing about feverishly, I got up to look at the golden tress.
I almost lost consciousness as I kissed it.
I took it back with me to bed and pressed it to my lips as if it were my sweetheart.
She came back every evening—the dead woman, the beautiful, adorable, mysterious unknown.
“My happiness was so great that I could not conceal it.
No lover ever tasted such intense, terrible enjoyment.
I loved her so well that I could not be separated from her.
I took her with me always and everywhere.
But they saw her—they guessed—they arrested me.
They put me in prison like a criminal.
Oh, misery!” Here the manuscript stopped.
And as I suddenly raised my astonished eyes to the doctor a terrific cry, a howl of impotent rage and of exasperated longing resounded through the asylum.
Sergeant Bertrand was the only one who was in love with the dead.” Filled with astonishment, horror and pity, I stammered out: “But—that tress—did it really exist?” The doctor rose, opened a cabinet full of phials and instruments and tossed over a long tress of fair hair which flew toward me like a golden bird.
I shivered at feeling its soft, light touch on my hands.
And I sat there, my heart beating with disgust and desire, disgust as at the contact of anything accessory to a crime and desire as at the temptation of some infamous and mysterious thing.
The doctor said as he shrugged his shoulders: “The mind of man is capable of anything.” ON THE RIVER I rented a little country house last summer on the banks of the Seine, several leagues from Paris, and went out there to sleep every evening.
After a few days I made the acquaintance of one of my neighbors, a man between thirty and forty, who certainly was the most curious specimen I ever met.
He must have been born in a boat, and he will certainly die in a boat at the last.
The good man at once became animated, his whole expression changed, he became eloquent, almost poetical.
There was in his heart one great passion, an absorbing, irresistible passion-the river.
Ah, he said to me, how many memories I have, connected with that river that you see flowing beside us!
But listen to a fisherman as he mentions the word.
To him it is a mysterious thing, profound, unknown, a land of mirages and phantasmagoria, where one sees by night things that do not exist, hears sounds that one does not recognize, trembles without knowing why, as in passing through a cemetery—and it is, in fact, the most sinister of cemeteries, one in which one has no tomb.
The land seems limited to the river boatman, and on dark nights, when there is no moon, the river seems limitless.
It is often remorseless and cruel, it is true; but it shrieks, it roars, it is honest, the great sea; while the river is silent and perfidious.
It does not speak, it flows along without a sound; and this eternal motion of flowing water is more terrible to me than the high waves of the ocean.
Dreamers maintain that the sea hides in its bosom vast tracts of blue where those who are drowned roam among the big fishes, amid strange forests and crystal grottoes.
It is beautiful, however, when it sparkles in the light of the rising sun and gently laps its banks covered with whispering reeds.
The poet says, speaking of the ocean, “O waves, what mournful tragedies ye know —Deep waves, the dread of kneeling mothers' hearts!
Ye tell them to each other as ye roll On flowing tide, and this it is that gives The sad despairing tones unto your voice As on ye roll at eve by mounting tide.” Well, I think that the stories whispered by the slender reeds, with their little soft voices, must be more sinister than the lugubrious tragedies told by the roaring of the waves.
But as you have asked for some of my recollections, I will tell you of a singular adventure that happened to me ten years ago.
We dined together every day, sometimes at his house, sometimes at mine.
One evening as I was coming home along and was pretty tired, rowing with difficulty my big boat, a twelve-footer, which I always took out at night, I stopped a few moments to draw breath near the reed-covered point yonder, about two hundred metres from the railway bridge.
It was a magnificent night, the moon shone brightly, the river gleamed, the air was calm and soft.
This peacefulness tempted me.
I thought to myself that it would be pleasant to smoke a pipe in this spot.
The boat floated downstream with the current, to the end of the chain, and then stopped, and I seated myself in the stern on my sheepskin and made myself as comfortable as possible.
There was not a sound to be heard, except that I occasionally thought I could perceive an almost imperceptible lapping of the water against the bank, and I noticed taller groups of reeds which assumed strange shapes and seemed, at times, to move.
The river was perfectly calm, but I felt myself affected by the unusual silence that surrounded me.
All the creatures, frogs and toads, those nocturnal singers of the marsh, were silent.
Suddenly a frog croaked to my right, and close beside me.
It ceased, and I heard nothing more, and resolved to smoke, to soothe my mind.
But, although I was a noted colorer of pipes, I could not smoke; at the second draw I was nauseated, and gave up trying.
The sound of my voice was distressing to me.
So I lay still, but presently the slight motion of the boat disturbed me.
It seemed to me as if she were making huge lurches, from bank to bank of the river, touching each bank alternately.
Then I felt as though an invisible force, or being, were drawing her to the surface of the water and lifting her out, to let her fall again.
The water was glistening, all was calm.
I saw that my nerves were somewhat shaky, and I resolved to leave the spot.
I pulled the anchor chain, the boat began to move; then I felt a resistance.
I pulled harder, the anchor did not come up; it had caught on something at the bottom of the river and I could not raise it.
Then, with my oars, I turned the boat with its head up stream to change the position of the anchor.
I flew into a rage and shook the chain furiously.
I sat down, disheartened, and began to reflect on my situation.
I could not dream of breaking this chain, or detaching it from the boat, for it was massive and was riveted at the bows to a piece of wood as thick as my arm.
However, as the weather was so fine I thought that it probably would not be long before some fisherman came to my aid.
I had a bottle of rum; I drank two or three glasses, and was able to laugh at the situation.
The noise was, doubtless, caused by some piece of wood borne along by the current, but that was enough, and I again became a prey to a strange nervous agitation.
I seized the chain and tensed my muscles in a desperate effort.
I sat down again, exhausted.
The river had slowly become enveloped in a thick white fog which lay close to the water, so that when I stood up I could see neither the river, nor my feet, nor my boat; but could perceive only the tops of the reeds, and farther off in the distance the plain, lying white in the moonlight, with big black patches rising up from it towards the sky, which were formed by groups of Italian poplars.
I was as if buried to the waist in a cloud of cotton of singular whiteness, and all sorts of strange fancies came into my mind.
I thought that someone was trying to climb into my boat which I could no longer distinguish, and that the river, hidden by the thick fog, was full of strange creatures which were swimming all around me.
I felt horribly uncomfortable, my forehead felt as if it had a tight band round it, my heart beat so that it almost suffocated me, and, almost beside myself, I thought of swimming away from the place.
I saw myself, lost, going by guesswork in this heavy fog, struggling about amid the grasses and reeds which I could not escape, my breath rattling with fear, neither seeing the bank, nor finding my boat; and it seemed as if I would feel myself dragged down by the feet to the bottom of these black waters.
My will made me resolve not to be afraid, but there was something in me besides my will, and that other thing was afraid.
My brave “ego” ridiculed my coward “ego,” and never did I realize, as on that day, the existence in us of two rival personalities, one desiring a thing, the other resisting, and each winning the day in turn.
This stupid, inexplicable fear increased, and became terror.
I remained motionless, my eyes staring, my ears on the stretch with expectation.
I did not know, but it must be something terrible.
I believe if it had occurred to a fish to jump out of the water, as often happens, nothing more would have been required to make me fall over, stiff and unconscious.
However, by a violent effort I succeeded in becoming almost rational again.
Then an idea came to me, and I began to shout with all my might towards all the points of the compass in succession.
When my throat was absolutely paralyzed I listened.
A dog was howling, at a great distance.
I drank some more rum and stretched myself out at the bottom of the boat.
I remained there about an hour, perhaps two, not sleeping, my eyes wide open, with nightmares all about me.
I did not dare to rise, and yet I intensely longed to do so.
At last I raised myself with infinite caution as though my life depended on the slightest sound that I might make; and looked over the edge of the boat.
I was dazzled by the most marvellous, the most astonishing sight that it is possible to see.
It was one of those phantasmagoria of fairyland, one of those sights described by travellers on their return from distant lands, whom we listen to without believing.
The fog which, two hours before, had floated on the water, had gradually cleared off and massed on the banks, leaving the river absolutely clear; while it formed on either bank an uninterrupted wall six or seven metres high, which shone in the moonlight with the dazzling brilliance of snow.
One saw nothing but the river gleaming with light between these two white mountains; and high above my head sailed the great full moon, in the midst of a bluish, milky sky.
All the creatures in the water were awake.
The frogs croaked furiously, while every few moments I heard, first to the right and then to the left, the abrupt, monotonous and mournful metallic note of the bullfrogs.
I was in the midst of such an unusual landscape that the most remarkable things would not have astonished me.
The water lapped mournfully, the wind was blowing, it was pitch dark.
I drank the rest of the rum, then listened, while I trembled, to the rustling of the reeds and the foreboding sound of the river.
I tried to see, but could not distinguish my boat, nor even my hands, which I held up close to my eyes.
Little by little, however, the blackness became less intense.
I shouted, a voice replied; it was a fisherman.
He rowed his boat alongside of mine and, together, we pulled at the anchor chain.
Day came, gloomy gray, rainy and cold, one of those days that bring one sorrows and misfortunes.
The man on board of her joined his efforts to ours, and gradually the anchor yielded.
It rose, but slowly, slowly, loaded down by a considerable weight.
At length we perceived a black mass and we drew it on board.
THE CRIPPLE The following adventure happened to me about 1882.
When the man had hoisted his torso into the compartment I noticed, at the loose edge of his trousers, the end of a wooden leg, which was soon followed by its mate.
A head appeared behind this traveller and asked; “Are you all right, monsieur?” “Yes, my boy.” “Then here are your packages and crutches.” And a servant, who looked like an old soldier, climbed in, carrying in his arms a stack of bundles wrapped in black and yellow papers and carefully tied; he placed one after the other in the net over his master's head.
Then he said: “There, monsieur, that is all.
There are five of them—the candy, the doll the drum, the gun, and the pate de foies gras.” “Very well, my boy.” “Thank you, Laurent; good health!” The man closed the door and walked away, and I looked at my neighbor.
He was about thirty-five, although his hair was almost white; he wore the ribbon of the Legion of Honor; he had a heavy mustache and was quite stout, with the stoutness of a strong and active man who is kept motionless on account of some infirmity.
He wiped his brow, sighed, and, looking me full in the face, he asked: “Does smoking annoy you, monsieur?” “No, monsieur.” Surely I knew that eye, that voice, that face.
I had certainly met that man, spoken to him, shaken his hand.
It was lost in the haze wherein the mind seems to feel around blindly for memories and pursues them like fleeing phantoms without being able to seize them.
He, too, was observing me, staring me out of countenance, with the persistence of a man who remembers slightly but not completely.
I met you twelve years ago, before the war, at the Poincels!” “Yes, monsieur.
You are Lieutenant Revaliere?” “Yes.
I was Captain Revaliere even up to the time when I lost my feet —both of them together from one cannon ball.” Now that we knew each other's identity we looked at each other again.
I remembered perfectly the handsome, slender youth who led the cotillons with such frenzied agility and gracefulness that he had been nicknamed “the fury.” Going back into the dim, distant past, I recalled a story which I had heard and forgotten, one of those stories to which one listens but forgets, and which leave but a faint impression upon the memory.
There was something about love in it.
Little by little the shadows cleared up, and the face of a young girl appeared before my eyes.
Then her name struck me with the force of an explosion: Mademoiselle de Mandel.
I remembered everything now.
It was indeed a love story, but quite commonplace.
The young girl loved this young man, and when I had met them there was already talk of the approaching wedding.
I raised my eye to the net, where all the packages which had been brought in by the servant were trembling from the motion of the train, and the voice of the servant came back to me, as if he had just finished speaking.
He had said: “There, monsieur, that is all.
There are five of them: the candy, the doll, the drum, the gun, and the pate de foies gras.” Then, in a second, a whole romance unfolded itself in my head.
It was like all those which I had already read, where the young lady married notwithstanding the catastrophe, whether physical or financial; therefore, this officer who had been maimed in the war had returned, after the campaign, to the young girl who had given him her promise, and she had kept her word.
I considered that very beautiful, but simple, just as one, considers simple all devotions and climaxes in books or in plays.
It always seems, when one reads or listens to these stories of magnanimity, that one could sacrifice one's self with enthusiastic pleasure and overwhelming joy.
But the following day, when an unfortunate friend comes to borrow some money, there is a strange revulsion of feeling.
But, suddenly, another supposition, less poetic and more realistic, replaced the first one.
Perhaps he had married before the war, before this frightful accident, and she, in despair and resignation, had been forced to receive, care for, cheer, and support this husband, who had departed, a handsome man, and had returned without his feet, a frightful wreck, forced into immobility, powerless anger, and fatal obesity.
I was seized with an irresistible desire to know his story, or, at least, the principal points, which would permit me to guess that which he could not or would not tell me.
Still thinking the matter over, I began talking to him.
I had thought that you were when I heard your servant speaking about the toys.
One listens and draws conclusions unconsciously.” He smiled and then murmured: “No, I am not even married.
I am still at the preliminary stage.” I pretended suddenly to remember, and said: “Oh! that's true!
When I knew you, you were engaged to Mademoiselle de Mandel, I believe.” “Yes, monsieur, your memory is excellent.” I grew very bold and added: “I also seem to remember hearing that Mademoiselle de Mandel married Monsieur—Monsieur—” He calmly mentioned the name: “Monsieur de Fleurel.” “Yes, that's it!
I remember it was on that occasion that I heard of your wound.” I looked him full in the face, and he blushed.
His full face, which was already red from the oversupply of blood, turned crimson.
He answered quickly, with a sudden ardor of a man who is pleading a cause which is lost in his mind and in his heart, but which he does not wish to admit.
“It is wrong, monsieur, to couple my name with that of Madame de Fleurel.
When I returned from the war-without my feet, alas!
I never would have permitted her to become my wife.
When one marries, monsieur, it is not in order to parade one's generosity; it is in order to live every day, every hour, every minute, every second beside a man; and if this man is disfigured, as I am, it is a death sentence to marry him!
Oh, I understand, I admire all sacrifices and devotions when they have a limit, but I do not admit that a woman should give up her whole life, all joy, all her dreams, in order to satisfy the admiration of the gallery.
When I hear, on the floor of my room, the tapping of my wooden legs and of my crutches, I grow angry enough to strangle my servant.
Do you think that I would permit a woman to do what I myself am unable to tolerate?
He certainly was right.
Could I blame her, hold her in contempt, even say that she was wrong?
However, the end which conformed to the rule, to the truth, did not satisfy my poetic appetite.
These heroic deeds demand a beautiful sacrifice, which seemed to be lacking, and I felt a certain disappointment.
I suddenly asked: “Has Madame de Fleurel any children?” “Yes, one girl and two boys.
It is for them that I am bringing these toys.
I was about to offer my arm to the wounded officer, in order to help him descend, when two hands were stretched up to him through the open door.
“Hello! my dear Revaliere!” “Ah!
Hello, Fleurel!” Standing behind the man, the woman, still beautiful, was smiling and waving her hands to him.
A little girl, standing beside her, was jumping for joy, and two young boys were eagerly watching the drum and the gun, which were passing from the car into their father's hands.
When the cripple was on the ground, all the children kissed him.
Then they set off, the little girl holding in her hand the small varnished rung of a crutch, just as she might walk beside her big friend and hold his thumb.
A STROLL When Old Man Leras, bookkeeper for Messieurs Labuze and Company, left the store, he stood for a minute bewildered at the glory of the setting sun.
The little room where he had been spending his days for forty years was so dark that even in the middle of summer one could hardly see without gaslight from eleven until three.
For forty years Monsieur Leras had been arriving every morning in this prison at eight o'clock, and he would remain there until seven at night, bending over his books, writing with the industry of a good clerk.
He was now making three thousand francs a year, having started at fifteen hundred.
He had remained a bachelor, as his means did not allow him the luxury of a wife, and as he had never enjoyed anything, he desired nothing.
From time to time, however, tired of this continuous and monotonous work, he formed a platonic wish: “Gad!
If I only had an income of fifteen thousand francs, I would take life easy.” He had never taken life easy, as he had never had anything but his monthly salary.
His life had been uneventful, without emotions, without hopes.
The faculty of dreaming with which every one is blessed had never developed in the mediocrity of his ambitions.
When he was twenty-one he entered the employ of Messieurs Labuze and Company.
Since then the only incident in his life was when he moved, in 1868, because his landlord had tried to raise his rent.
Every day his alarm clock, with a frightful noise of rattling chains, made him spring out of bed at 6 o'clock precisely.
Twice, however, this piece of mechanism had been out of order—once in 1866 and again in 1874; he had never been able to find out the reason why.
Then he would go out, buy a roll at the Lahure Bakery, in which he had seen eleven different owners without the name ever changing, and he would eat this roll on the way to the office.
His entire existence had been spent in the narrow, dark office, which was still decorated with the same wall paper.
He had entered there as a young man, as assistant to Monsieur Brument, and with the desire to replace him.
The whole harvest of memories which other men reap in their span of years, the unexpected events, sweet or tragic loves, adventurous journeys, all the occurrences of a free existence, all these things had remained unknown to him.
He got up every day at the same hour, started out, arrived at the office, ate luncheon, went away, had dinner and went to bed without ever interrupting the regular monotony of similar actions, deeds and thoughts.
Formerly he used to look at his blond mustache and wavy hair in the little round mirror left by his predecessor.
Now, every evening before leaving, he would look at his white mustache and bald head in the same mirror.
Forty years had rolled by, long and rapid, dreary as a day of sadness and as similar as the hours of a sleepless night.
Forty years of which nothing remained, not even a memory, not even a misfortune, since the death of his parents.
That day Monsieur Leras stood by the door, dazzled at the brilliancy of the setting sun; and instead of returning home he decided to take a little stroll before dinner, a thing which happened to him four or five times a year.
He reached the boulevards, where people were streaming along under the green trees.
It was a spring evening, one of those first warm and pleasant evenings which fill the heart with the joy of life.
Monsieur Leras went along with his mincing old man's step; he was going along with joy in his heart, at peace with the world.
He reached the Champs-Elysees, and he continued to walk, enlivened by the sight of the young people trotting along.
The whole sky was aflame; the Arc de Triomphe stood out against the brilliant background of the horizon, like a giant surrounded by fire.
As he approached the immense monument, the old bookkeeper noticed that he was hungry, and he went into a wine dealer's for dinner.
The meal was served in front of the store, on the sidewalk.
It consisted of some mutton, salad and asparagus.
It was the best dinner that Monsieur Leras had had in a long time.
He washed down his cheese with a small bottle of burgundy, had his after-dinner cup of coffee, a thing which he rarely took, and finally a little pony of brandy.
When he had paid he felt quite youthful, even a little moved.
I will continue my stroll as far as the entrance to the Bois de Boulogne.
An old tune which one of his neighbors used to sing kept returning to his mind.
Monsieur Leras walked along the Avenue du Bois de Boulogne and watched the cabs drive by.
It was one long procession of lovers, riding under the warm, starlit sky.
They kept on coming in rapid succession.
They passed by in the carriages, silent, side by side, lost in their dreams, in the emotion of desire, in the anticipation of the approaching embrace.
The warm shadows seemed to be full of floating kisses.
A sensation of tenderness filled the air.
All these carriages full of tender couples, all these people intoxicated with the same idea, with the same thought, seemed to give out a disturbing, subtle emanation.
At last Monsieur Leras grew a little tired of walking, and he sat down on a bench to watch these carriages pass by with their burdens of love.
Almost immediately a woman walked up to him and sat down beside him.
He answered: “Madame, you are mistaken.” She slipped her arm through his, saying: “Come along, now; don't be foolish.
A few yards away another woman walked up to him and asked: “Won't you sit down beside me?” He said: “What makes you take up this life?” She stood before him and in an altered, hoarse, angry voice exclaimed: “Well, it isn't for the fun of it, anyhow!” He insisted in a gentle voice: “Then what makes you?” She grumbled: “I've got to live!
Foolish question!” And she walked away, humming.
Monsieur Leras stood there bewildered.
Other women were passing near him, speaking to him and calling to him.
He felt as though he were enveloped in darkness by something disagreeable.
The carriages were still rolling by.
He thought: “I should have done better not to come here; I feel all upset.” He began to think of all this venal or passionate love, of all these kisses, sold or given, which were passing by in front of him.
He scarcely knew it.
In his lifetime he had only known two or three women, his means forcing him to live a quiet life, and he looked back at the life which he had led, so different from everybody else, so dreary, so mournful, so empty.
Some people are really unfortunate.
And suddenly, as though a veil had been torn from his eyes, he perceived the infinite misery, the monotony of his existence: the past, present and future misery; his last day similar to his first one, with nothing before him, behind him or about him, nothing in his heart or any place.
The stream of carriages was still going by.
In the rapid passage of the open carriage he still saw the two silent, loving creatures.
It seemed to him that the whole of humanity was flowing on before him, intoxicated with joy, pleasure and happiness.
He stood up, took a few steps, and suddenly he felt as tired as though he had taken a long journey on foot, and he sat down on the next bench.
He was thinking of how pleasant it must be in old age to return home and find the little children.
It is pleasant to grow old when one is surrounded by those beings who owe their life to you, who love you, who caress you, who tell you charming and foolish little things which warm your heart and console you for everything.
And, thinking of his empty room, clean and sad, where no one but himself ever entered, a feeling of distress filled his soul; and the place seemed to him more mournful even than his little office.
It seems as though walls retain something of the people who live within them, something of their manner, face and voice.
The very houses inhabited by happy families are gayer than the dwellings of the unhappy.
His room was as barren of memories as his life.
And the thought of returning to this place, all alone, of getting into his bed, of again repeating all the duties and actions of every evening, this thought terrified him.
As though to escape farther from this sinister home, and from the time when he would have to return to it, he arose and walked along a path to a wooded corner, where he sat down on the grass.
About him, above him, everywhere, he heard a continuous, tremendous, confused rumble, composed of countless and different noises, a vague and throbbing pulsation of life: the life breath of Paris, breathing like a giant.
The sun was already high and shed a flood of light on the Bois de Boulogne.
A few carriages were beginning to drive about and people were appearing on horseback.
A couple was walking through a deserted alley.
Suddenly the young woman raised her eyes and saw something brown in the branches.
Surprised and anxious, she raised her hand, exclaiming: “Look! what is that?” Then she shrieked and fell into the arms of her companion, who was forced to lay her on the ground.
The policeman who had been called cut down an old man who had hung himself with his suspenders.
Examination showed that he had died the evening before.
Papers found on him showed that he was a bookkeeper for Messieurs Labuze and Company and that his name was Leras.
His death was attributed to suicide, the cause of which could not be suspected.
ALEXANDRE At four o'clock that day, as on every other day, Alexandre rolled the three-wheeled chair for cripples up to the door of the little house; then, in obedience to the doctor's orders, he would push his old and infirm mistress about until six o'clock.
When he had placed the light vehicle against the step, just at the place where the old lady could most easily enter it, he went into the house; and soon a furious, hoarse old soldier's voice was heard cursing inside the house: it issued from the master, the retired ex-captain of infantry, Joseph Maramballe.
Then could be heard the noise of doors being slammed, chairs being pushed about, and hasty footsteps; then nothing more.
After a few seconds, Alexandre reappeared on the threshold, supporting with all his strength Madame Maramballe, who was exhausted from the exertion of descending the stairs.
When she was at last settled in the rolling chair, Alexandre passed behind it, grasped the handle, and set out toward the river.
Thus they crossed the little town every day amid the respectful greeting, of all.
These bows were perhaps meant as much for the servant as for the mistress, for if she was loved and esteemed by all, this old trooper, with his long, white, patriarchal beard, was considered a model domestic.
The July sun was beating down unmercifully on the street, bathing the low houses in its crude and burning light.
Dogs were sleeping on the sidewalk in the shade of the houses, and Alexandre, a little out of breath, hastened his footsteps in order sooner to arrive at the avenue which leads to the water.
Madame Maramballe was already slumbering under her white parasol, the point of which sometimes grazed along the man's impassive face.
As soon as they had reached the Allee des Tilleuls, she awoke in the shade of the trees, and she said in a kindly voice: “Go more slowly, my poor boy; you will kill yourself in this heat.” Along this path, completely covered by arched linden trees, the Mavettek flowed in its winding bed bordered by willows.
The gurgling of the eddies and the splashing of the little waves against the rocks lent to the walk the charming music of babbling water and the freshness of damp air.
Madame Maramballe inhaled with deep delight the humid charm of this spot and then murmured: “Ah!
But he wasn't in a good humor to-day.” Alexandre answered: “No, madame.” For thirty-five years he had been in the service of this couple, first as officer's orderly, then as simple valet who did not wish to leave his masters; and for the last six years, every afternoon, he had been wheeling his mistress about through the narrow streets of the town.
From this long and devoted service, and then from this daily tete-a-tete, a kind of familiarity arose between the old lady and the devoted servant, affectionate on her part, deferential on his.
Their principal subject of conversation and of worry was the bad disposition of the captain, soured by a long career which had begun with promise, run along without promotion, end ended without glory.
Madame Maramballe continued: “He certainly was not in a good humor today.
This happens too often since he has left the service.” And Alexandre, with a sigh, completed his mistress's thoughts, “Oh, madame might say that it happens every day and that it also happened before leaving the army.” “That is true.
But the poor man has been so unfortunate.
He began with a brave deed, which obtained for him the Legion of Honor at the age of twenty; and then from twenty to fifty he was not able to rise higher than captain, whereas at the beginning he expected to retire with at least the rank of colonel.” “Madame might also admit that it was his fault.
If he had not always been as cutting as a whip, his superiors would have loved and protected him better.
Harshness is of no use; one should try to please if one wishes to advance.
As far as his treatment of us is concerned, it is also our fault, since we are willing to remain with him, but with others it's different.” Madame Maramballe was thinking.
Oh, for how many years had she thus been thinking of the brutality of her husband, whom she had married long ago because he was a handsome officer, decorated quite young, and full of promise, so they said!
What mistakes one makes in life!
She murmured: “Let us stop a while, my poor Alexandre, and you rest on that bench:” It was a little worm-eaten bench, placed at a turn in the alley.
Every time they came in this direction Alexandre was accustomed to making a short pause on this seat.
He sat down and with a proud and familiar gesture he took his beautiful white beard in his hand, and, closing his, fingers over it, ran them down to the point, which he held for a minute at the pit of his stomach, as if once more to verify the length of this growth.
Madame Maramballe continued: “I married him; it is only just and natural that I should bear his injustice; but what I do not understand is why you also should have supported it, my good Alexandre!” He merely shrugged his shoulders and answered: “Oh!
I have often wondered.
When I married him you were his orderly and you could hardly do otherwise than endure him.
Madame Maramballe was following her own train of thought: “You are not a peasant.
How so?” He began to look up in the air, then to one side, then toward the distance, turning his head as do timid people when forced to admit shameful secrets.
There!” She answered nothing, stopped looking at him, hung her head, and thought.
She was good, full of justice, gentleness, reason, and tenderness.
In a second she saw the immense devotion of this poor creature, who had given up everything in order to live beside her, without saying anything.
Then, with a sad but not angry expression, she said: “Let us return home.” He rose and began to push the wheeled chair.
As they approached the village they saw Captain Maramballe coming toward them.
As soon as he joined them he asked his wife, with a visible desire of getting angry: “What have we for dinner?” “Some chicken with flageolets.” He lost his temper: “Chicken! chicken! always chicken!
Have you no ideas in your head, that you make me eat chicken every day?” She answered, in a resigned tone: “But, my dear, you know that the doctor has ordered it for you.
If your stomach were well, I could give you many things which I do not dare set before you now.” Then, exasperated, he planted himself in front of Alexandre, exclaiming: “Well, if my stomach is out of order it's the fault of that brute.
For thirty-five years he has been poisoning me with his abominable cooking.” Madame Maramballe suddenly turned about completely, in order to see the old domestic.
THE LOG The drawing-room was small, full of heavy draperies and discreetly fragrant.
A large fire burned in the grate and a solitary lamp at one end of the mantelpiece threw a soft light on the two persons who were talking.
She, the mistress of the house, was an old lady with white hair, but one of those old ladies whose unwrinkled skin is as smooth as the finest paper, and scented, impregnated with perfume, with the delicate essences which she had used in her bath for so many years.
He was a very old friend, who had never married, a constant friend, a companion in the journey of life, but nothing more.
They had not spoken for about a minute, and were both looking at the fire, dreaming of no matter what, in one of those moments of friendly silence between people who have no need to be constantly talking in order to be happy together, when suddenly a large log, a stump covered with burning roots, fell out.
It fell over the firedogs into the drawing-room and rolled on to the carpet, scattering great sparks around it.
“My old friends were often surprised at the coldness which suddenly sprang up between one of my best friends whose Christian name was Julien, and myself.
They could not understand how two such intimate and inseparable friends, as we had been, could suddenly become almost strangers to one another, and I will tell you the reason of it.
“He and I used to live together at one time.
We were never apart, and the friendship that united us seemed so strong that nothing could break it.
“One evening when he came home, he told me that he was going to get married, and it gave me a shock as if he had robbed me or betrayed me.
The jealous affection of a woman, that suspicious, uneasy and carnal affection, will not tolerate the sturdy and frank attachment, that attachment of the mind, of the heart, and that mutual confidence which exists between two men.
“You see, however great the love may be that unites them a man and a woman are always strangers in mind and intellect; they remain belligerents, they belong to different races.
There must always be a conqueror and a conquered, a master and a slave; now the one, now the other—they are never two equals.
They press each other's hands, those hands trembling with amorous passion; but they never press them with a long, strong, loyal pressure, with that pressure which seems to open hearts and to lay them bare in a burst of sincere, strong, manly affection.
Philosophers of old, instead of marrying, and procreating as a consolation for their old age children, who would abandon them, sought for a good, reliable friend, and grew old with him in that communion of thought which can only exist between men.
His wife was pretty, charming, a little, curly-haired blonde, plump and lively, who seemed to worship him.
But, somehow, they attracted me to their home; they were constantly inviting me, and seemed very fond of me.
Consequently, by degrees, I allowed myself to be allured by the charm of their life.
I often dined with them, and frequently, when I returned home at night, thought that I would do as he had done, and get married, as my empty house now seemed very dull.
“They appeared to be very much in love, and were never apart.
“Well, one evening Julien wrote and asked me to go to dinner, and I naturally went.
“'My dear fellow,' he said, 'I must go out directly afterward on business, and I shall not be back until eleven o'clock; but I shall be back at eleven precisely, and I reckon on you to keep Bertha company.' “The young woman smiled.
“'You are as nice as ever, I said, and I felt a long, friendly pressure of my fingers, but I paid no attention to it; so we sat down to dinner, and at eight o'clock Julien went out.
“As soon as he had gone, a kind of strange embarrassment immediately seemed to arise between his wife and me.
We had never been alone together yet, and in spite of our daily increasing intimacy, this tete- a-tete placed us in a new position.
At first I spoke vaguely of those indifferent matters with which one fills up an embarrassing silence, but she did not reply, and remained opposite to me with her head down in an undecided manner, as if she were thinking over some difficult subject, and as I was at a loss for small talk, I held my tongue.
It is surprising how hard it is at times to find anything to say.
“And then also I felt something in the air, something I could not express, one of those mysterious premonitions that warn one of another person's secret intentions in regard to yourself, whether they be good or evil.
“In a few minutes the log was burning so brightly that it scorched our faces, and the young woman raised her eyes to mine—eyes that had a strange look to me.
Whereupon I made up some story or other.
She listened to me attentively, with frequent signs of disapproval and contempt, and then suddenly she said: “'No, you understand nothing about the subject.
In a minute or two she continued: “'I suppose I have frightened you?' I protested against such a notion, and she leaned against my breast altogether, and without looking at me, she said: 'If I were to tell you that I love you, what would you do?' “And before I could think of an answer, she had thrown her arms around my neck, had quickly drawn my head down, and put her lips to mine.
What! deceive Julien? become the lover of this little, silly, wrong- headed, deceitful woman, who was, no doubt, terribly sensual, and whom her husband no longer satisfied.
“To betray him continually, to deceive him, to play at being in love merely because I was attracted by forbidden fruit, by the danger incurred and the friendship betrayed!
To imitate Joseph would be acting a very stupid and, moreover, difficult part, for this woman was enchanting in her perfidy, inflamed by audacity, palpitating and excited.
“Well, a minute more—you understand what I mean?
The log had fallen into the room, knocking over the fire irons and the fender, and on to the carpet, which it had scorched, and had rolled under an armchair, which it would certainly set alight.
“I jumped up like a madman, and, as I was replacing on the fire that log which had saved me, the door opened hastily, and Julien came in.
“'I am free,' he said, with evident pleasure. 'The business was over two hours sooner than I expected!' “Yes, my dear friend, without that log, I should have been caught in the very act, and you know what the consequences would have been!
“You may be sure that I took good care never to be found in a similar situation again, never, never.
Soon afterward I saw that Julien was giving me the 'cold shoulder,' as they say.
His wife was evidently undermining our friendship.
By degrees he got rid of me, and we have altogether ceased to meet.
“I never married, which ought not to surprise you, I think.” JULIE ROMAIN Two years ago this spring I was making a walking tour along the shore of the Mediterranean.
Is there anything more pleasant than to meditate while walking at a good pace along a highway?
One walks in the sunlight, through the caressing breeze, at the foot of the mountains, along the coast of the sea.
What a flood of illusions, loves, adventures pass through a pedestrian's mind during a two hours' march!
What a crowd of confused and joyous hopes enter into you with the mild, light air!
You drink them in with the breeze, and they awaken in your heart a longing for happiness which increases with the hun ger induced by walking.
The fleeting, charming ideas fly and sing like birds.
I was following that long road which goes from Saint Raphael to Italy, or, rather, that long, splendid panoramic highway which seems made for the representation of all the love-poems of earth.
Suddenly I saw some villas in one of those ravishing bays that one meets at every turn of the mountain; there were only four or five fronting the sea at the foot of the mountains, and behind them a wild fir wood slopes into two great valleys, that were untraversed by roads.
I stopped short before one of these chalets, it was so pretty: a small white house with brown trimmings, overrun with rambler roses up to the top.
The garden was a mass of flowers, of all colors and all kinds, mixed in a coquettish, well-planned disorder.
The lawn was full of them, big pots flanked each side of every step of the porch, pink or yellow clusters framed each window, and the terrace with the stone balustrade, which enclosed this pretty little dwelling, had a garland of enormous red bells, like drops of blood.
Behind the house I saw a long avenue of orange trees in blossom, which went up to the foot of the mountain.
Over the door appeared the name, “Villa d'Antan,” in small gold letters.
I asked myself what poet or what fairy was living there, what inspired, solitary being had discovered this spot and created this dream house, which seemed to nestle in a nosegay.
A workman was breaking stones up the street, and I went to him to ask the name of the proprietor of this jewel.
In my childhood, long ago, I had heard them speak of this great actress, the rival of Rachel.
No woman ever was more applauded and more loved—especially more loved!
What duets and suicides on her account and what sensational adventures!
How old was this seductive woman now?
The woman who had been adored by the greatest musician and the most exquisite poet of our land!
I still remember the sensation (I was then twelve years of age) which her flight to Sicily with the latter, after her rupture with the former, caused throughout France.
She had left one evening, after a premiere, where the audience had applauded her for a whole half hour, and had recalled her eleven times in succession.
Now he was dead, that maker of verses so touching and so profound that they turned, the heads of a whole generation, so subtle and so mysterious that they opened a new world to the younger poets.
The other one also was dead—the deserted one, who had attained through her musical periods that are alive in the memories of all, periods of triumph and of despair, intoxicating triumph and heartrending despair.
I did not hesitate, but rang the bell.
A small servant answered, a boy of eighteen with awkward mien and clumsy hands.
I wrote in pencil on my card a gallant compliment to the actress, begging her to receive me.
He led me to a neat and decorous salon, furnished in the Louis- Philippe style, with stiff and heavy furniture, from which a little maid of sixteen, slender but not pretty, took off the covers in my honor.
On the walls hung three portraits, that of the actress in one of her roles, that of the poet in his close-fitting greatcoat and the ruffled shirt then in style, and that of the musician seated at a piano.
She, blond, charming, but affected, according to the fashion of her day, was smiling, with her pretty mouth and blue eyes; the painting was careful, fine, elegant, but lifeless.
Those faces seemed to be already looking upon posterity.
The whole place had the air of a bygone time, of days that were done and men who had vanished.
A door opened and a little woman entered, old, very old, very small, with white hair and white eyebrows, a veritable white mouse, and as quick and furtive of movement.
She held out her hand to me, saying in a voice still fresh, sonorous and vibrant: “Thank you, monsieur.
How kind it is of the men of to-day to remember the women of yesterday!
Sit down.” I told her that her house had attracted me, that I had inquired for the proprietor's name, and that, on learning it, I could not resist the desire to ring her bell.
“This gives me all the more pleasure, monsieur,” she replied, “as it is the first time that such a thing has happened.
When I received your card, with the gracious note, I trembled as if an old friend who had disappeared for twenty years had been announced to me.
I am like a dead body, whom no one remembers, of whom no one will think until the day when I shall actually die; then the newspapers will mention Julie Romain for three days, relating anecdotes and details of my life, reviving memories, and praising me greatly.
Then all will be over with me.” After a few moments of silence, she continued: “And this will not be so very long now.
From my seat I could see on the highroad the handsome carriages that were whirling from Nice to Monaco; inside them I saw young, pretty, rich and happy women and smiling, satisfied men.
Following my eye, she understood my thought and murmured with a smile of resignation: “One cannot both be and have been.” “How beautiful life must have been for you!” I said.
“Beautiful and sweet!
And for that reason I regret it so much.” I saw that she was disposed to talk of herself, so I began to question her, gently and discreetly, as one might touch bruised flesh.
She spoke of her successes, her intoxications and her friends, of her whole triumphant existence.
“Was it on the stage that you found your most intense joys, your true happiness?” I asked.
I smiled; then, raising her eyes to the two portraits, she said, with a sad glance: “It was with them.” “Which one?” I could not help asking.
I even confuse them up a little now in my old woman's memory, and then I feel remorse.” “Then, madame, your acknowledgment is not to them, but to Love itself.
They were merely its interpreters.” “That is possible.
How they intoxicated me!
And they knew how to make a woman delirious with songs and with words.
Yes, perhaps there was more of illusion than of reality in our passion; but these illusions lift you into the clouds, while realities always leave you trailing in the dust.
If others have loved me more, through these two I have understood, felt and worshipped love.” Suddenly she began to weep.
She wept silently, shedding tears of despair.
I pretended not to see, looking off into the distance.
She resumed, after a few minutes: “You see, monsieur, with nearly every one the heart ages with the body.
But this has not happened with me.
She grew calmer and continued, smiling: “How you would laugh at me, if you knew, if you knew how I pass my evenings, when the weather is fine.
“Already!” she exclaimed.
It would give me a great deal of pleasure.” I accepted at once.
She rang, delighted, and after giving some orders to the little maid she took me over her house.
A kind of glass-enclosed veranda, filled with shrubs, opened into the dining-room, revealing at the farther end the long avenue of orange trees extending to the foot of the mountain.
A low seat, hidden by plants, indicated that the old actress often came there to sit down.
Evening fell softly, one of those calm, moist evenings when the earth breathes forth all her perfumes.
Daylight was almost gone when we sat down at table.
The dinner was good and it lasted a long time, and we became intimate friends, she and I, when she understood what a profound sympathy she had aroused in my heart.
She had taken two thimblefuls of wine, as the phrase goes, and had grown more confiding and expansive.
It seems to me that all my memories are there, and that I need only look at her to bring them all back to me.
I cannot—I dare not—no, no—really—no.” I implored her to tell me what it was.
I swear it to you—come, now!” She hesitated.
She was moved and hesitated.
“You promise me not to laugh?” “Yes, I swear it to you.” “Well, then, come.” She rose, and as the little domestic, awkward in his green livery, removed the chair behind her, she whispered quickly a few words into his ear.
The avenue of oranges was really splendid to see.
As these trees were in bloom, their strong, sweet perfume filled the night, and swarming among their dark foliage I saw thousands of fireflies, which looked like seeds fallen from the stars.
“Oh, what a setting for a love scene!” I exclaimed.
You are speculators, merchants and men of affairs.
Love has been turned into a liaison which very often begins with an unpaid dressmaker's bill.
If you think the bill is dearer than the woman, you disappear; but if you hold the woman more highly, you pay it.
“Look!” I looked, astonished and delighted.
Down there at the end of the avenue, in the moonlight, were two young people, with their arms around each other's waist.
They were walking along, interlaced, charming, with short, little steps, crossing the flakes of light; which illuminated them momentarily, and then sinking back into the shadow.
The youth was dressed in a suit of white satin, such as men wore in the eighteenth century, and had on a hat with an ostrich plume.
The girl was arrayed in a gown with panniers, and the high, powdered coiffure of the handsome dames of the time of the Regency.
They stopped a hundred paces from us, and standing in the middle of the avenue, they kissed each other with graceful gestures.
Suddenly I recognized the two little servants.
Then one of those dreadful fits of laughter that convulse you made me writhe in my chair.
I resisted, convulsed and feeling almost ill, as a man whose leg is cut off resists the impulse to cry out.
As the young pair turned toward the farther end of the avenue they again became delightful.
They went farther and farther away, finally disappearing as a dream disappears.
I took my leave at once, so as not to see them again, for I guessed that this little play would last a long time, awakening, as it did, a whole past of love and of stage scenery; the artificial past, deceitful and seductive, false but charming, which still stirred the heart of this amorous old comedienne.
THE RONDOLI SISTERS I I set out to see Italy thoroughly on two occasions, and each time I was stopped at the frontier and could not get any further.
And yet my two attempts gave me a charming idea of the manners of that beautiful country.
I will make another attempt to penetrate into the interior, which I have not yet succeeded in doing.
You don't understand me, so I will explain: In the spring of 1874 I was seized with an irresistible desire to see Venice, Florence, Rome and Naples.
I am, as you know, not a great traveller; it appears to me a useless and fatiguing business.
After this introduction, we have the miseries of the hotel; of some great hotel full of people, and yet so empty; the strange room and the doubtful bed!
I am most particular about my bed; it is the sanctuary of life.
We entrust our almost naked and fatigued bodies to it so that they may be reanimated by reposing between soft sheets and feathers.
There we find the most delightful hours of our existence, the hours of love and of sleep.
The bed is sacred, and should be respected, venerated and loved by us as the best and most delightful of our earthly possessions.
Who has occupied it the night before?
Perhaps dirty, revolting people have slept in it.
I begin, then, to think of all the horrible people with whom one rubs shoulders every day, people with suspicious-looking skin which makes one think of the feet and all the rest!
I call to mind those who carry about with them the sickening smell of garlic or of humanity.
I think of those who are deformed and unhealthy, of the perspiration emanating from the sick, of everything that is ugly and filthy in man.
And then the hotel dinners—those dreary table d'hote dinners in the midst of all sorts of extraordinary people, or else those terrible solitary dinners at a small table in a restaurant, feebly lighted by a wretched composite candle under a shade.
Again, those terribly dull evenings in some unknown town!
Do you know anything more wretched than the approach of dusk on such an occasion?
One goes about as if almost in a dream, looking at faces that one never has seen before and never will see again; listening to people talking about matters which are quite indifferent to you in a language that perhaps you do not understand.
Then you feel so abominably lonely sitting in front of the glass of flat bock beer that a kind of madness seizes you, the longing to go somewhere or other, no matter where, as long as you need not remain in front of that marble table amid those dazzling lights.
And then, suddenly, you are aware that you are really alone in the world, always and everywhere, and that in places which we know, the familiar jostlings give us the illusion only of human fraternity.
At such moments of self-abandonment and sombre isolation in distant cities one thinks broadly, clearly and profoundly.
Then one suddenly sees the whole of life outside the vision of eternal hope, apart from the deceptions of our innate habits, and of our expectations of happiness, which we indulge in dreams never to be realized.
It is only by going a long distance from home that we can fully understand how short-lived and empty everything near at hand is; by searching for the unknown, we perceive how commonplace and evanescent everything is; only by wandering over the face of the earth can we understand how small the world is, and how very much alike it is everywhere.
How well I know, and how I hate and almost fear, those haphazard walks through unknown streets; and this was the reason why, as nothing would induce me to undertake a tour in Italy by myself, I made up my mind to accompany my friend Paul Pavilly.
You know Paul, and how he idealizes women.
To him the earth is habitable only because they are there; the sun gives light and is warm because it shines upon them; the air is soft and balmy because it blows upon their skin and ruffles the soft hair on their temples; and the moon is charming because it makes them dream and imparts a languorous charm to love.
Every act and action of Paul's has woman for its motive; all his thoughts, all his efforts and hopes are centered in them.
When I mentioned Italy to Paul he at first absolutely refused to leave Paris.
I, however, began to tell him of the adventures I had on my travels.
I assured him that all Italian women are charming, and I made him hope for the most refined pleasures at Naples, thanks to certain letters of introduction which I had; and so at last he allowed himself to be persuaded.
II We took the express one Thursday evening, Paul and I.
Hardly anyone goes south at that time of the year, so that we had the carriages to ourselves, and both of us were in a bad temper on leaving Paris, sorry for having yielded to the temptation of this journey, and regretting Marly, the Seine, and our lazy boating excursions, and all those pleasures in and near Paris which are so dear to every true Parisian.
As soon as the train started Paul stuck himself in his corner, and said, “It is most idiotic to go all that distance,” and as it was too late for him to change his mind then, I said, “Well, you should not have come.” He made no answer, and I felt very much inclined to laugh when I saw how furious he looked.
He is certainly always rather like a squirrel, but then every one of us has retained the type of some animal or other as the mark of his primitive origin.
Paul is a squirrel turned into a man.
He has its bright, quick eyes, its hair, its pointed nose, its small, fine, supple, active body, and a certain mysterious resemblance in his general bearing; in fact, a similarity of movement, of gesture, and of bearing which might almost be taken for a recollection.
At last we both went to sleep with that uncomfortable slumber of the railway carriage, which is interrupted by horrible cramps in the arms and neck, and by the sudden stoppages of the train.
Soon the continued noise of crickets came in through the windows, that cry which seems to be the voice of the warm earth, the song of Provence; and seemed to instill into our looks, our breasts, and our souls the light and happy feeling of the south, that odor of the parched earth, of the stony and light soil of the olive with its gray-green foliage.
When the train stopped again a railway guard ran along the train calling out “Valence” in a sonorous voice, with an accent that again gave us a taste of that Provence which the shrill note of the crickets had already imparted to us.
Nothing fresh happened till we got to Marseilles, where we alighted for breakfast, but when we returned to our carriage we found a woman installed there.
Paul, with a delighted glance at me, gave his short mustache a mechanical twirl, and passed his fingers through his, hair, which had become slightly out of order with the night's journey.
Then he sat down opposite the newcomer.
Whenever I happen to see a striking new face, either in travelling or in society, I always have the strongest inclination to find out what character, mind, and intellectual capacities are hidden beneath those features.
She was a young and pretty woman, certainly a native of the south of France, with splendid eyes, beautiful wavy black hair, which was so thick and long that it seemed almost too heavy for her head.
She was dressed with a certain southern bad taste which made her look a little vulgar.
Her regular features had none of the grace and finish of the refined races, of that slight delicacy which members of the aristocracy inherit from their birth, and which is the hereditary mark of thinner blood.
Her bracelets were too big to be of gold; she wore earrings with large white stones that were certainly not diamonds, and she belonged unmistakably to the People.
One surmised that she would talk too loud, and shout on every occasion with exaggerated gestures.
When the train started she remained motionless in her place, in the attitude of a woman who was indignant, without even looking at us.
Paul began to talk to me, evidently with an eye to effect, trying to attract her attention, as shopkeepers expose their choice wares to catch the notice of passersby.
She, however, did not appear to be paying the least attention.
Refreshment room!” the porters shouted.
Paul motioned to me to get out, and as soon as we had done so, he said: “I wonder who on earth she can be?” I began to laugh.
“She is an uncommonly fresh and pretty girl.
She must have been dreadfully worried, for she takes no notice of anything.” “You will have all your trouble for nothing,” I growled.
I think her an extremely pretty woman, that is all.
However, I should rather think she is some strolling actress who is going to rejoin her company after a love adventure.” He seemed quite upset, as if I had said something insulting.
On the contrary, I think she looks most respectable.” “Just look at her bracelets,” I said, “her earrings and her whole dress.
I should not be the least surprised if she were a dancer or a circus rider, but most likely a dancer.
Her whole style smacks very much of the theatre.” He evidently did not like the idea.
“She is much too young, I am sure; why, she is hardly twenty.” “Well,” I replied, “there are many things which one can do before one is twenty; dancing and elocution are among them.” “Take your seats for Nice, Vintimiglia,” the guards and porters called.
We got in; our fellow passenger was eating an orange, and certainly she did not do it elegantly.
She had spread her pocket-handkerchief on her knees, and the way in which she tore off the peel and opened her mouth to put in the pieces, and then spat the pips out of the window, showed that her training had been decidedly vulgar.
She seemed, also, more put out than ever, and swallowed the fruit with an exceedingly comic air of rage.
Paul devoured her with his eyes, and tried to attract her attention and excite her curiosity; but in spite of his talk, and of the manner in which he brought in well-known names, she did not pay the least attention to him.
Raphael, the train passed through a veritable garden, a paradise of roses, and groves of oranges and lemons covered with fruits and flowers at the same time.
That delightful coast from Marseilles to Genoa is a kingdom of perfumes in a home of flowers.
June is the time to see it in all its beauty, when in every narrow valley and on every slope, the most exquisite flowers are growing luxuriantly.
They climb up the walls, blossom on the roofs, hang from the trees, peep out from among the bushes; they are white, red, yellow, large and small, single, with a simple self-colored dress, or full and heavy in brilliant toilettes.
Their breath makes the air heavy and relaxing, and the still more penetrating odor of the orange blossoms sweetens the atmosphere till it might almost be called the refinement of odor.
The shore, with its brown rocks, was bathed by the motionless Mediterranean.
The hot summer sun stretched like a fiery cloth over the mountains, over the long expanses of sand, and over the motionless, apparently solid blue sea.
The train went on through the tunnels, along the slopes, above the water, on straight, wall-like viaducts, and a soft, vague, saltish smell, a smell of drying seaweed, mingled at times with the strong, heavy perfume of the flowers.
But Paul neither saw, looked at, nor smelled anything, for our fellow traveller engrossed all his attention.
“Do you know, she is really charming.
Just look at her eyes; and I never saw anything like her hair.” “Don't excite yourself,” I replied, “or else address her, if you have any intentions that way.
She does not look unapproachable; I fancy, although she appear to be a little bit grumpy.” “Why don't you speak to her?” he said.
“I don't know what to say, for I am always terribly stupid at first; I can never make advances to a woman in the street.
I only once tried to enter into conversation with a woman in that way.
I felt an absurd inclination to laugh.
“Did she say anything more?” “If you had counted her words you would have noticed that she used exactly six, two of which gave me to understand that she knew no French, so four remained, and much can be said in four words.” Paul seemed quite unhappy, disappointed, and at sea, so to speak.
But suddenly the Italian asked me, in that tone of discontent which seemed habitual to her, “Do you know at what time we shall get to Genoa?” “At eleven o'clock,” I replied.
Then after a moment I went on: “My friend and I are also going to Genoa, and if we can be of any service to you, we shall be very happy, as you are quite alone.” But she interrupted with such a “Mica!” that I did not venture on another word.
“She said she thought you were charming.” But he was in no humor for joking, and begged me dryly not to make fun of him; so I translated her question and my polite offer, which had been so rudely rejected.
Then he really became as restless as a caged squirrel.
Try to find out so as to have another opportunity to make her talk.” It was not particularly easy, and I did not know what pretext to invent, desirous as I was to make the acquaintance of this unapproachable person.
We passed Nice, Monaco, Mentone, and the train stopped at the frontier for the examination of luggage.
Although I hate those ill-bred people who breakfast and dine in railway- carriages, I went and bought a quantity of good things to make one last attack on her by their means.
I felt sure that this girl must, ordinarily, be by no means inaccessible.
Something had put her out and made her irritable, but very little would suffice, a mere word or some agreeable offer, to decide her and vanquish her.
I spread my eatables on the seat.
I cut up the fowl, put the slices of ham neatly on a piece of paper, and then carefully laid out our dessert, strawberries, plums, cherries and cakes, close to the girl.
When she saw that we were about to eat she took a piece of chocolate and two little crisp cakes out of her pocket and began to munch them.
I see you have not drunk anything.
It is Italian wine, and as we are now in your own country, we should be very pleased to see such a pretty Italian mouth accept the offer of its French neighbors.” She shook her head slightly, evidently wishing to refuse, but very desirous of accepting, and her mica this time was almost polite.
“Please drink it,” I said, “to bid us welcome to your country.” She took the glass with her usual look, and emptied it at a draught, like a woman consumed with thirst, and then gave it back to me without even saying “Thank you.” I then offered her the cherries.
“Please take some,” I said; “we shall be so glad if you will.” Out of her corner she looked at all the fruit spread out beside her, and said so rapidly that I could scarcely follow her: “A me non piacciono ne le ciriegie ne le susine; amo soltano le fragole.” “What does she say?” Paul asked.
“That she does riot care for cherries or plums, but only for strawberries.” I put a newspaper full of wild strawberries on her lap, and she ate them quickly, tossing them into her mouth from some distance in a coquettish and charming manner.
When she had finished the little red heap, which soon disappeared under the rapid action of her hands, I asked her: “What may I offer you now?” “I will take a little chicken,” she replied.
She certainly devoured half of it, tearing it to pieces with the rapid movements of her jaws like some carnivorous animal.
Then she made up her mind to have some cherries, which she “did not like,” and then some plums, then some little cakes.
I was much amused, and tried to make her eat more, insisting, in fact, till she suddenly flew into a rage, and flung such a furious mica at me, that I would no longer run the risk of spoiling her digestion.
“My poor Paul,” I said, “I am afraid we have had our trouble for nothing.” The night came on, one of those hot summer nights which extend their warm shade over the burning and exhausted earth.
Here and there, in the distance, by the sea, on capes and promontories, bright stars, which I was, at times, almost inclined to confound with lighthouses, began to shine on the dark horizon: The scent of the orange trees became more penetrating, and we breathed with delight, distending our lungs to inhale it more deeply.
The balmy air was soft, delicious, almost divine.
Suddenly I noticed something like a shower of stars under the dense shade of the trees along the line, where it was quite dark.
It might have been taken for drops of light, leaping, flying, playing and running among the leaves, or for small stars fallen from the skies in order to have an excursion on the earth; but they were only fireflies dancing a strange fiery ballet in the perfumed air.
One of them happened to come into our carriage, and shed its intermittent light, which seemed to be extinguished one moment and to be burning the next.
I covered the carriage-lamp with its blue shade and watched the strange fly careering about in its fiery flight.
Suddenly it settled on the dark hair of our neighbor, who was half dozing after dinner.
Paul seemed delighted, with his eyes fixed on the bright, sparkling spot, which looked like a living jewel on the forehead of the sleeping woman.
When I saw her move, I said: “We are just getting to Genoa, madame,” and she murmured, without answering me, as if possessed by some obstinate and embarrassing thought: “What am I going to do, I wonder?” And then she suddenly asked: “Would you like me to come with you?” I was so taken aback that I really did not understand her.
How do you mean?” She repeated, looking more and more furious: “Would you like me to be your guide now, as soon as we get out of the train?” “I am quite willing; but where do you want to go.” She shrugged her shoulders with an air of supreme indifference.
“Wherever you like; what does it matter to me?” She repeated her “Che mi fa” twice.
“But we are going to the hotel.” “Very well, let us all go to the hotel,” she said, in a contemptuous voice.
I turned to Paul, and said: “She wishes to know whether we should like her to come with us.” My friend's utter surprise restored my self-possession.
He stammered: “With us?
How?” “I don't know, but she made this strange proposal to me in a most irritated voice.
She certainly has a very strange way of making acquaintances.” Paul, who 'was very much excited, exclaimed: “I am quite agreeable.
“In Italy, I believe, when a man looks after a woman, fulfils all her wishes, and satisfies all her caprices, he is called a patito.
Which of us two will you take for your patito?” Without the slightest hesitation she replied: “You!” I turned to Paul.
Then, after thinking for a few moments, he went on: “Do you really care about taking this creature with you?
They will not take us in at any decent hotel.” I, however, just began to find the Italian much nicer than I had thought her at first, and I was now very desirous to take her with us.
The idea delighted me.
I replied, “My dear fellow, we have accepted, and it is too late to recede.
You were the first to advise me to say 'Yes.'” “It is very stupid,” he growled, “but do as you please.” The train whistled, slackened speed, and we ran into the station.
I got out of the carriage, and offered my new companion my hand.
She jumped out lightly, and I gave her my arm, which she took with an air of seeming repugnance.
“It may be difficult to get into the City of Paris with a woman, especially with this Italian.” Paul interrupted me.
However, that is no business of mine.
Do just as you please.” I was in a state of perplexity.
Two commissionaires followed us with our luggage.
I continued: “You might as well go on first, and say that we are coming; and give the landlord to understand that I have a—a friend with me and that we should like rooms quite by themselves for us three, so as not to be brought in contact with other travellers.
He will understand, and we will decide according to his answer.” But Paul growled, “Thank you, such commissions and such parts do not suit me, by any means.
I did not come here to select your apartments or to minister to your pleasures.” But I was urgent: “Look here, don't be angry.
It is surely far better to go to a good hotel than to a bad one, and it is not difficult to ask the landlord for three separate bedrooms and a dining-room.” I put a stress on three, and that decided him.
He went on first, and I saw him go into a large hotel while I remained on the other side of the street, with my fair Italian, who did not say a word, and followed the porters with the luggage.
Paul came back at last, looking as dissatisfied as my companion.
“That is settled,” he said, “and they will take us in; but here are only two bedrooms.
You must settle it as you can.” I followed him, rather ashamed of going in with such a strange companion.
There were two bedrooms separated by a small sitting-room.
I ordered a cold supper, and then I turned to the Italian with a perplexed look.
“We have only been able to get two rooms, so you must choose which you like.” She replied with her eternal “Che mi fa!” I thereupon took up her little black wooden trunk, such as servants use, and took it into the room on the right, which I had chosen for her.
A bit of paper was fastened to the box, on which was written, Mademoiselle Francesca Rondoli, Genoa.
“Your name is Francesca?” I asked, and she nodded her head, without replying.
“We shall have supper directly,” I continued.
I put out all the little instruments for cleanliness and comfort which it contained: a nail-brush, a new toothbrush—I always carry a selection of them about with me—my nail-scissors, a nail-file, and sponges.
I uncorked a bottle of eau de cologne, one of lavender-water, and a little bottle of new-mown hay, so that she might have a choice.
She watched my movements with a look of annoyance in her wide-open eyes, without appearing either astonished or pleased at my forethought.
“Here is all that you require,” I then said; “I will tell you when supper is ready.” When I returned to the sitting-room I found that Paul had shut himself in the other room, so I sat down to wait.
A waiter went to and fro, bringing plates and glasses.
I knocked gently at Mademoiselle Rondoli's door.
“Come in,” she said, and when I did so I was struck by a strong, heavy smell of perfumes, as if I were in a hairdresser's shop.
The Italian was sitting on her trunk in an attitude either of thoughtful discontent or absent-mindedness.
The towel was still folded over the waterjug that was full of water, and the soap, untouched and dry, was lying beside the empty basin; but one would have thought that the young woman had used half the contents of the bottles of perfume.
The eau de cologne, however, had been spared, as only about a third of it had gone; but to make up for that she had used a surprising amount of lavender- water and new-mown hay.
A cloud of violet powder, a vague white mist, seemed still to be floating in the air, from the effects of her over- powdering her face and neck.
It seemed to cover her eyelashes, eyebrows, and the hair on her temples like snow, while her cheeks were plastered with it, and layers of it covered her nostrils, the corners of her eyes, and her chin.
When we sat down to supper, I found that Paul was in a most execrable temper, and I could get nothing out of him but blame, irritable words, and disagreeable remarks.
Mademoiselle Francesca ate like an ogre, and as soon as she had finished her meal she threw herself upon the sofa in the sitting-room.
Sitting down beside her, I said gallantly, kissing her hand: “Shall I have the bed prepared, or will you sleep on the couch?” “It is all the same to me. 'Che mi fa'!” Her indifference vexed me.
A disquieting feeling haunted me.
The next morning she got up early, like a woman who is accustomed to work.
She came and went without hurrying herself, as if she were astonished at having nothing to do.
At length she went to the dressing-table, and in a moment emptied all my bottles of perfume.
She certainly also used some water, but very little.
When she was quite dressed, she sat down on her trunk again, and clasping one knee between her hands, she seemed to be thinking.
At that moment I pretended to first notice her, and said: “Good-morning, Francesca.” Without seeming in at all a better temper than the previous night, she murmured, “Good-morning!” When I asked her whether she had slept well, she nodded her head, and jumping out of bed, I went and kissed her.
She turned her face toward me like a child who is being kissed against its will; but I took her tenderly in my arms, and gently pressed my lips on her eyelids, which she closed with evident distaste under my kisses on her fresh cheek and full lips, which she turned away.
I sat down on the trunk by her side, and passing my arm through hers, I said: “Mica! mica! mica! in reply to everything.
I shall call you Mademoiselle Mica, I think.” For the first time I fancied that I saw the shadow of a smile on her lips, but it passed by so quickly that I may have been mistaken.
“But if you never say anything but Mica, I shall not know what to do to please you.
Let me see; what shall we do to-day?” She hesitated a moment, as if some fancy had flitted through her head, and then she said carelessly: “It is all the same to me; whatever you like.” “Very well, Mademoiselle Mica, we will have a carriage and go for a drive.” “As you please,” she said.
I assumed a delighted air, and shook hands with him with triumphant energy.
“What are you thinking of doing?” he asked.
“First of all, we will go and see a little of the town, and then we might get a carriage and take a drive in the neighborhood.” We breakfasted almost in silence, and then set out.
I dragged Francesca from palace to palace, and she either looked at nothing or merely glanced carelessly at the various masterpieces.
Paul followed us, growling all sorts of disagreeable things.
Then we all three took a drive in silence into the country and returned to dinner.
The next day it was the same thing and the next day again; and on the third Paul said to me: “Look here, I am going to leave you; I am not going to stop here for three weeks watching you make love to this creature.” I was perplexed and annoyed, for to my great surprise I had become singularly attached to Francesca.
A man is but weak and foolish, carried away by the merest trifle, and a coward every time that his senses are excited or mastered.
I clung to this unknown girl, silent and dissatisfied as she always was.
I liked her somewhat ill-tempered face, the dissatisfied droop of her mouth, the weariness of her look; I liked her fatigued movements, the contemptuous way in which she let me kiss her, the very indifference of her caresses.
A secret bond, that mysterious bond of physical love, which does not satisfy, bound me to her.
He treated me as if I were a fool, and then said: “Very well, take her with you.” But she obstinately refused to leave Genoa, without giving any reason.
I besought, I reasoned, I promised, but all was of no avail, and so I stayed on.
Paul declared that he would go by himself, and went so far as to pack up his portmanteau; but he remained all the same.
Thus a fortnight passed.
Francesca was always silent and irritable, lived beside me rather than with me, responded to all my requirements and all my propositions with her perpetual Che mi fa, or with her no less perpetual Mica.
I am not detaining you.” Then he called me names, overwhelmed me with reproaches, and exclaimed: “Where do you think I can go now?
We had three weeks at our disposal, and here is a fortnight gone!
I cannot continue my journey now; and, in any case, I am not going to Venice, Florence and Rome all by myself.
You are not going to bring a man all the way from Paris in order to shut him up at a hotel in Genoa with an Italian adventuress.” When I told him, very calmly, to return to Paris, he exclaimed that he intended to do so the very next day; but the next day he was still there, still in a rage and swearing.
By this time we began to be known in the streets through which we wandered from morning till night.
Sometimes French people would turn round astonished at meeting their fellow-countrymen in the company of this girl with her striking costume, who looked singularly out of place, not to say compromising, beside us.
She used to walk along, leaning on my arm, without looking at anything.
As an adventuress, or by chance meetings?
The better I knew her the more enigmatical she became.
She certainly did not appear to be trying to make a conquest of me, or to make any real profit out of me.
I tried to question her, to speak to her of her childhood and family; but she never gave me an answer.
I stayed with her, my heart unfettered and my senses enchained, never wearied of holding her in my arms, that proud and quarrelsome woman, captivated by my senses, or rather carried away, overcome by a youthful, healthy, powerful charm, which emanated from her fragrant person and from the well-molded lines of her body.
Another week passed, and the term of my journey was drawing on, for I had to be back in Paris by the eleventh of July.
By this time Paul had come to take his part in the adventure, though still grumbling at me, while I invented pleasures, distractions and excursions to amuse Francesca and my friend; and in order to do this I gave myself a great amount of trouble.
One day I proposed an excursion to Sta Margarita, that charming little town in the midst of gardens, hidden at the foot of a slope which stretches far into the sea up to the village of Portofino.
We three walked along the excellent road which goes along the foot of the mountain.
Suddenly Francesca said to me: “I shall not be able to go with you to-morrow; I must go and see some of my relatives.” That was all; I did not ask her any questions, as I was quite sure she would not answer me.
When she spoke to me it was in a constrained and hesitating voice: “If I do not come back again, shall you come and fetch me?” “Most certainly I shall,” was my reply.
“Where shall I go to find you?” Then she explained: “You must go into the Street Victor-Emmanuel, down the Falcone road and the side street San-Rafael and into the furniture shop in the building at the right at the end of a court, and there you must ask for Madame Rondoli.
That is the place.” And so she went away, leaving me rather astonished.
When Paul saw that I was alone, he stammered out: “Where; is Francesca?” And when I told him what had happened, he exclaimed: “My dear fellow, let us make use of our opportunity, and bolt; as it is, our time is up.
Two days, more or less, make no difference.
I could not, as I told him, leave the girl in that manner after such companionship for nearly three weeks.
At any rate, I ought to say good-by to her, and make her accept a present; I certainly had no intention of behaving badly to her.
I remained indoors for several hours, expecting Francesca's return, but she did not come, and at last, at dinner, Paul said with a triumphant air: “She has flown, my dear fellow; it is certainly very strange.” I must acknowledge that I was surprised and rather vexed.
“It is not exactly a bad way of getting rid of you, though rather primitive. 'Just wait for me, I shall be back in a moment,' they often say.
I should not wonder if you were foolish enough to go and look for her at the address she gave you. 'Does Madame Rondoli live here, please?' 'No, monsieur.' I'll bet that you are longing to go there.” “Not in the least,” I protested, “and I assure you that if she does not come back to-morrow morning I shall leave by the express at eight o'clock.
I shall have waited twenty-four hours, and that is enough; my conscience will be quite clear.” I spent an uneasy and unpleasant evening, for I really had at heart a very tender feeling for her.
I got up at six, called Paul, packed up my things, and two hours later we set out for France together.
III The next year, at just about the same period, I was seized as one is with a periodical fever, with a new desire to go to Italy, and I immediately made up my mind to carry it into effect.
There is no doubt that every really well-educated man ought to see Florence, Venice and Rome.
This travel has, also, the additional advantage of providing many subjects of conversation in society, and of giving one an opportunity for bringing forward artistic generalities which appear profound.
This time I went alone, and I arrived at Genoa at the same time as the year before, but without any adventure on the road.
I went to the same hotel, and actually happened to have the same room.
I was hardly in bed when the recollection of Francesca which, since the evening before, had been floating vaguely through my mind, haunted me with strange persistency.
I thought of her nearly the whole night, and by degrees the wish to see her again seized me, a confused desire at first, which gradually grew stronger and more intense.
I remembered the directions she had given me when she left me, perfectly—Victor-Emmanuel Street, house of the furniture-dealer, at the bottom of the yard on the right.
I found it without the least difficulty, and I knocked at the door of a somewhat dilapidated-looking dwelling.
It was opened by a stout woman, who must have been very handsome, but who actually was only very dirty.
Although she had too much embonpoint, she still bore the lines of majestic beauty; her untidy hair fell over her forehead and shoulders, and one fancied one could see her floating about in an enormous dressing-gown covered with spots of dirt and grease.
Round her neck she wore a great gilt necklace, and on her wrists were splendid bracelets of Genoa filigree work.
In rather a hostile manner she asked me what I wanted, and I replied by requesting her to tell me whether Francesca Rondoli lived there.
“I had the pleasure of meeting her last year, and I should like to see her again.” The old woman looked at me suspiciously.
“Why, here in Genoa itself.” “What is your name?” I hesitated a moment, and then I told her.
“Oh! you are the Frenchman how glad I am to see you!
She thought that most likely you were travelling in Italy, and that you would return by Genoa to fetch her, as she would not go with you.
And she waited more than a month, monsieur; and she was so unhappy; so unhappy.
I am her mother.” I really felt a little disconcerted, but I regained my self-possession, and asked: “Where is she now?” “She has gone to Paris with a painter, a delightful man, who loves her very much, and who gives her everything that she wants.
Just look at what she sent me; they are very pretty, are they not?” And she showed me, with quite southern animation, her heavy bracelets and necklace.
“I have also,” she continued, “earrings with stones in them, a silk dress, and some rings; but I only wear them on grand occasions.
Oh! she is very happy, monsieur, very happy.
You will take something or other, surely?” But I refused, as I now wished to get away by the first train; but she took me by the arm and pulled me in, saying: “Please, come in; I must tell her that you have been in here.” I found myself in a small, rather dark room, furnished with only a table and a few chairs.
She continued: “Oh, she is very happy now, very happy.
When you met her in the train she was very miserable; she had had an unfortunate love affair in Marseilles, and she was coming home, poor child.
But she liked you at once, though she was still rather sad, you understand.
Now she has all she wants, and she writes and tells me everything that she does.
His name is Bellemin, and they say he is a great painter in your country.
Are you quite alone, this year?” “Yes,” I said, “quite alone.” I felt an increasing inclination to laugh, as my first disappointment was dispelled by what Mother Rondoli said.
“So you are quite alone?” she continued.
“How sorry I am that Francesca is not here now; she would have been company for you all the time you stayed.
It is not very amusing to go about all by oneself, and she will be very sorry also.” Then, as I was getting up to go, she exclaimed: “But would you not like Carlotta to go with you?
She is my second daughter, monsieur.” No doubt she took my look of surprise for consent, for she opened the inner door and called out up the dark stairs which I could not see: “Carlotta!
Carlotta! make haste down, my dear child.” I tried to protest, but she would not listen.
“No; she will be very glad to go with you; she is very nice, and much more cheerful than her sister, and she is a good girl, a very good girl, whom I love very much.” In a few moments a tall, slender, dark girl appeared, her hair hanging down, and her youthful figure showing unmistakably beneath an old dress of her mother's.
“This is Francesca's Frenchman, you know, the one whom she knew last year.
He is quite alone, and has come to look for her, poor fellow; so I told him that you would go with him to keep him company.” The girl looked at me with her handsome dark eyes, and said, smiling: “I have no objection, if he wishes it” I could not possibly refuse, and merely said: “Of course, I shall be very glad of your company.” Her mother pushed her out.
“Go and get dressed directly; put on your blue dress and your hat with the flowers, and make haste.” As soon as she had left the room the old woman explained herself: “I have two others, but they are much younger.
It costs a lot of money to bring up four children.
Luckily the eldest is off my hands at present.” Then she told all about herself, about her husband, who had been an employee on the railway, but who was dead, and she expatiated on the good qualities of Carlotta, her second girl, who soon returned, dressed, as her sister had been, in a striking, peculiar manner.
We returned to the hotel for lunch, and then I took my new friend to Santa Margarita, just as I had taken her sister the year previously.
During the whole fortnight which I had at my disposal, I took Carlotta to all the places of interest in and about Genoa.
She cried when I left her, and the morning of my departure I gave her four bracelets for her mother, besides a substantial token of my affection for herself.
One of these days I intend to return to Italy, and I cannot help remembering with a certain amount of uneasiness, mingled with hope, that Madame Rondoli has two more daughters.
ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 7.
THE FALSE GEMS Monsieur Lantin had met the young girl at a reception at the house of the second head of his department, and had fallen head over heels in love with her.
She was the daughter of a provincial tax collector, who had been dead several years.
She and her mother came to live in Paris, where the latter, who made the acquaintance of some of the families in her neighborhood, hoped to find a husband for her daughter.
They had very moderate means, and were honorable, gentle, and quiet.
The young girl was a perfect type of the virtuous woman in whose hands every sensible young man dreams of one day intrusting his happiness.
Her simple beauty had the charm of angelic modesty, and the imperceptible smile which constantly hovered about the lips seemed to be the reflection of a pure and lovely soul.
Her praises resounded on every side.
People never tired of repeating: “Happy the man who wins her love!
He could not find a better wife.” Monsieur Lantin, then chief clerk in the Department of the Interior, enjoyed a snug little salary of three thousand five hundred francs, and he proposed to this model young girl, and was accepted.
He was unspeakably happy with her.
She governed his household with such clever economy that they seemed to live in luxury.
She lavished the most delicate attentions on her husband, coaxed and fondled him; and so great was her charm that six years after their marriage, Monsieur Lantin discovered that he loved his wife even more than during the first days of their honeymoon.
He found fault with only two of her tastes: Her love for the theatre, and her taste for imitation jewelry.
Her friends (the wives of some petty officials) frequently procured for her a box at the theatre, often for the first representations of the new plays; and her husband was obliged to accompany her, whether he wished it or not, to these entertainments which bored him excessively after his day's work at the office.
After a time, Monsieur Lantin begged his wife to request some lady of her acquaintance to accompany her, and to bring her home after the theatre.
She opposed this arrangement, at first; but, after much persuasion, finally consented, to the infinite delight of her husband.
Now, with her love for the theatre, came also the desire for ornaments.
Her costumes remained as before, simple, in good taste, and always modest; but she soon began to adorn her ears with huge rhinestones, which glittered and sparkled like real diamonds.
Around her neck she wore strings of false pearls, on her arms bracelets of imitation gold, and combs set with glass jewels.
Her husband frequently remonstrated with her, saying: “My dear, as you cannot afford to buy real jewelry, you ought to appear adorned with your beauty and modesty alone, which are the rarest ornaments of your sex.” But she would smile sweetly, and say: “What can I do?
It is my only weakness.
We cannot change our nature.” Then she would wind the pearl necklace round her fingers, make the facets of the crystal gems sparkle, and say: “Look! are they not lovely?
One would swear they were real.” Monsieur Lantin would then answer, smilingly: “You have bohemian tastes, my dear.” Sometimes, of an evening, when they were enjoying a tete-a-tete by the fireside, she would place on the tea table the morocco leather box containing the “trash,” as Monsieur Lantin called it.
She would examine the false gems with a passionate attention, as though they imparted some deep and secret joy; and she often persisted in passing a necklace around her husband's neck, and, laughing heartily, would exclaim: “How droll you look!” Then she would throw herself into his arms, and kiss him affectionately.
One evening, in winter, she had been to the opera, and returned home chilled through and through.
The next morning she coughed, and eight days later she died of inflammation of the lungs.
Monsieur Lantin's despair was so great that his hair became white in one month.
He wept unceasingly; his heart was broken as he remembered her smile, her voice, every charm of his dead wife.
Often, during office hours, while his colleagues were discussing the topics of the day, his eyes would suddenly fill with tears, and he would give vent to his grief in heartrending sobs.
Everything in his wife's room remained as it was during her lifetime; all her furniture, even her clothing, being left as it was on the day of her death.
Here he was wont to seclude himself daily and think of her who had been his treasure-the joy of his existence.
But life soon became a struggle.
His income, which, in the hands of his wife, covered all household expenses, was now no longer sufficient for his own immediate wants; and he wondered how she could have managed to buy such excellent wine and the rare delicacies which he could no longer procure with his modest resources.
He incurred some debts, and was soon reduced to absolute poverty.
One morning, finding himself without a cent in his pocket, he resolved to sell something, and immediately the thought occurred to him of disposing of his wife's paste jewels, for he cherished in his heart a sort of rancor against these “deceptions,” which had always irritated him in the past.
The very sight of them spoiled, somewhat, the memory of his lost darling.
To the last days of her life she had continued to make purchases, bringing home new gems almost every evening, and he turned them over some time before finally deciding to sell the heavy necklace, which she seemed to prefer, and which, he thought, ought to be worth about six or seven francs; for it was of very fine workmanship, though only imitation.
He put it in his pocket, and started out in search of what seemed a reliable jeweler's shop.
At length he found one, and went in, feeling a little ashamed to expose his misery, and also to offer such a worthless article for sale.
“Sir,” said he to the merchant, “I would like to know what this is worth.” The man took the necklace, examined it, called his clerk, and made some remarks in an undertone; he then put the ornament back on the counter, and looked at it from a distance to judge of the effect.
Monsieur Lantin, annoyed at all these ceremonies, was on the point of saying: “Oh!
I know well enough it is not worth anything,” when the jeweler said: “Sir, that necklace is worth from twelve to fifteen thousand francs; but I could not buy it, unless you can tell me exactly where it came from.” The widower opened his eyes wide and remained gaping, not comprehending the merchant's meaning.
Finally he stammered: “You say—are you sure?” The other replied, drily: “You can try elsewhere and see if any one will offer you more.
I consider it worth fifteen thousand at the most.
Come back; here, if you cannot do better.” Monsieur Lantin, beside himself with astonishment, took up the necklace and left the store.
He wished time for reflection.
Once outside, he felt inclined to laugh, and said to himself: “The fool!
That jeweler cannot distinguish real diamonds from the imitation article.” A few minutes after, he entered another store, in the Rue de la Paix.
As soon as the proprietor glanced at the necklace, he cried out: “Ah, parbleu!
I know it well; it was bought here.” Monsieur Lantin, greatly disturbed, asked: “How much is it worth?” “Well, I sold it for twenty thousand francs.
I am willing to take it back for eighteen thousand, when you inform me, according to our legal formality, how it came to be in your possession.” This time, Monsieur Lantin was dumfounded.
Until this moment I was under the impression that it was imitation.” The jeweler asked: “What is your name, sir?” “Lantin—I am in the employ of the Minister of the Interior.
I live at number sixteen Rue des Martyrs.” The merchant looked through his books, found the entry, and said: “That necklace was sent to Madame Lantin's address, sixteen Rue des Martyrs, July 20, 1876.” The two men looked into each other's eyes—the widower speechless with astonishment; the jeweler scenting a thief.
“Will you leave this necklace here for twenty-four hours?” said he; “I will give you a receipt.” Monsieur Lantin answered hastily: “Yes, certainly.” Then, putting the ticket in his pocket, he left the store.
He wandered aimlessly through the streets, his mind in a state of dreadful confusion.
He tried to reason, to understand.
His wife could not afford to purchase such a costly ornament.
He stopped, and remained standing in the middle of the street.
A horrible doubt entered his mind—She?
Then, all the other jewels must have been presents, too!
The earth seemed to tremble beneath him—the tree before him to be falling; he threw up his arms, and fell to the ground, unconscious.
He recovered his senses in a pharmacy, into which the passers-by had borne him.
He asked to be taken home, and, when he reached the house, he shut himself up in his room, and wept until nightfall.
Finally, overcome with fatigue, he went to bed and fell into a heavy sleep.
He sent a letter to his employer, requesting to be excused.
Then he remembered that he had to return to the jeweler's.
He did not like the idea; but he could not leave the necklace with that man.
Men of leisure were strolling about with their hands in their pockets.
Monsieur Lantin, observing them, said to himself: “The rich, indeed, are happy.
With money it is possible to forget even the deepest sorrow.
One can go where one pleases, and in travel find that distraction which is the surest cure for grief.
Oh if I were only rich!” He perceived that he was hungry, but his pocket was empty.
He again remembered the necklace.
Eighteen thousand francs!
He soon arrived in the Rue de la Paix, opposite the jeweler's.
Twenty times he resolved to go in, but shame kept him back.
He decided quickly, ran across the street, in order not to have time for reflection, and rushed into the store.
The proprietor immediately came forward, and politely offered him a chair; the clerks glanced at him knowingly.
“I have made inquiries, Monsieur Lantin,” said the jeweler, “and if you are still resolved to dispose of the gems, I am ready to pay you the price I offered.” “Certainly, sir,” stammered Monsieur Lantin.
Whereupon the proprietor took from a drawer eighteen large bills, counted, and handed them to Monsieur Lantin, who signed a receipt; and, with trembling hand, put the money into his pocket.
As he was about to leave the store, he turned toward the merchant, who still wore the same knowing smile, and lowering his eyes, said: “I have—I have other gems, which came from the same source.
Will you buy them, also?” The merchant bowed: “Certainly, sir.” Monsieur Lantin said gravely: “I will bring them to you.” An hour later, he returned with the gems.
The large diamond earrings were worth twenty thousand francs; the bracelets, thirty-five thousand; the rings, sixteen thousand; a set of emeralds and sapphires, fourteen thousand; a gold chain with solitaire pendant, forty thousand—making the sum of one hundred and forty-three thousand francs.
The jeweler remarked, jokingly: “There was a person who invested all her savings in precious stones.” Monsieur Lantin replied, seriously: “It is only another way of investing one's money.” That day he lunched at Voisin's, and drank wine worth twenty francs a bottle.
Then he hired a carriage and made a tour of the Bois.
He gazed at the various turnouts with a kind of disdain, and could hardly refrain from crying out to the occupants: “I, too, am rich!—I am worth two hundred thousand francs.” Suddenly he thought of his employer.
He drove up to the bureau, and entered gaily, saying: “Sir, I have come to resign my position.
I have just inherited three hundred thousand francs.” He shook hands with his former colleagues, and confided to them some of his projects for the future; he then went off to dine at the Cafe Anglais.
He seated himself beside a gentleman of aristocratic bearing; and, during the meal, informed the latter confidentially that he had just inherited a fortune of four hundred thousand francs.
For the first time in his life, he was not bored at the theatre, and spent the remainder of the night in a gay frolic.
Six months afterward, he married again.
His second wife was a very virtuous woman; but had a violent temper.
FASCINATION I can tell you neither the name of the country, nor the name of the man.
We had been walking since the morning along the coast, with the blue sea bathed in sunlight on one side of us, and the shore covered with crops on the other.
It was very warm, a soft warmth permeated with the odor of the rich, damp, fertile soil.
One fancied one was inhaling germs.
I had been told, that evening, that I should meet with hospitality at the house of a Frenchman who lived in an orange grove at the end of a promontory.
He had worked, this man, with passionate energy, with fury.
Then as he went on from month to month, year to year, enlarging his boundaries, cultivating incessantly the strong virgin soil, he accumulated a fortune by his indefatigable labor.
Rising at daybreak, he would remain in the fields till evening, superintending everything without ceasing, tormented by one fixed idea, the insatiable desire for money, which nothing can quiet, nothing satisfy.
He now appeared to be very rich.
It was situated as described, at the end of a promontory in the midst of a grove of orange trees.
It was a large square house, quite plain, and overlooked the sea.
As I approached, a man wearing a long beard appeared in the doorway.
He held out his hand and said, smiling: “Come in, monsieur, consider yourself at home.” He led me into a room, and put a man servant at my disposal with the perfect ease and familiar graciousness of a man-of-the-world.
Then he left me saying: “We will dine as soon as you are ready to come downstairs.” We took dinner, sitting opposite each other, on a terrace facing the sea.
He smiled, as he replied carelessly: “Yes, this country is beautiful.
But no country satisfies one when they are far from the one they love.” “You regret France?” “I regret Paris.” “Why do you not go back?” “Oh, I will return there.” And gradually we began to talk of French society, of the boulevards, and things Parisian.
He asked me questions that showed he knew all about these things, mentioned names, all the familiar names in vaudeville known on the sidewalks.
“Always the same crowd, except those who died.” I looked at him attentively, haunted by a vague recollection.
I certainly had seen that head somewhere.
He seemed tired, although he was vigorous; and sad, although he was determined.
He was somewhat bald and had heavy eyebrows and a thick mustache.
The orange blossoms exhaled their powerful, delicious fragrance.
He seemed to see nothing besides me, and gazing steadfastly he appeared to discover in the depths of my mind the far-away, beloved and well-known image of the wide, shady pavement leading from the Madeleine to the Rue Drouot.
“Do you know Boutrelle?” “Yes, indeed.” “Has he changed much?” “Yes, his hair is quite white.” “And La Ridamie?” “The same as ever.” “And the women?
Did you—did you know—” But he ceased abruptly: And then, in a changed voice, his face suddenly turning pale, he continued: “No, it is best that I should not speak of that any more, it breaks my heart.” Then, as if to change the current of his thoughts he rose.
“Yes, I think so.” And he preceded me into the house.
The downstairs rooms were enormous, bare and mournful, and had a deserted look.
Plates and glasses were scattered on the tables, left there by the dark-skinned servants who wandered incessantly about this spacious dwelling.
Two rifles were banging from two nails, on the wall; and in the corners of the rooms were spades, fishing poles, dried palm leaves, every imaginable thing set down at random when people came home in the evening and ready to hand when they went out at any time, or went to work.
My host smiled as he said: “This is the dwelling, or rather the kennel, of an exile, but my own room is cleaner.
Let us go there.” As I entered I thought I was in a second-hand store, it was so full of things of all descriptions, strange things of various kinds that one felt must be souvenirs.
On the walls were two pretty paintings by well- known artists, draperies, weapons, swords and pistols, and exactly in the middle, on the principal panel, a square of white satin in a gold frame.
Somewhat surprised, I approached to look at it, and perceived a hairpin fastened in the centre of the glossy satin.
My host placed his hand on my shoulder.
Prudhomme said: 'This sword is the most memorable day of my life.' I can say: 'This hairpin is all my life.'” I sought for some commonplace remark, and ended by saying: “You have suffered on account of some woman?” He replied abruptly: “Say, rather, that I am suffering like a wretch.” “But come out on my balcony.
A name rose to my lips just now which I dared not utter; for if you had said 'Dead' as you did of Sophie Astier, I should have fired a bullet into my brain, this very day.” We had gone out on the wide balcony from whence we could see two gulfs, one to the right and the other to the left, enclosed by high gray mountains.
It was just twilight and the reflection of the sunset still lingered in the sky.
He continued: “Is Jeanne de Limours still alive?” His eyes were fastened on mine and were full of a trembling anxiety.
“Parbleu—she is prettier than ever.” “Do you know her?” “Yes.” He hesitated and then said: “Very well?” “No.” He took my hand.
She is one of the most charming women, or, rather, girls, and the most admired in Paris.
She leads a delightful existence and lives like a princess, that is all.” “I love her,” he murmured in a tone in which he might have said “I am going to die.” Then suddenly he continued: “Ah!
How can I explain that infatuation?
You would not understand it.” “There must be a simple form of love, the result of the mutual impulse of two hearts and two souls.
But there is also assuredly an atrocious form, that tortures one cruelly, the result of the occult blending of two unlike personalities who detest each other at the same time that they adore one another.” “In three years this woman had ruined me.
I had four million francs which she squandered in her calm manner, quietly, eat them up with a gentle smile that seemed to fall from her eyes on to her lips.” “You know her?
There is something irresistible about her.
Is it those gray eyes whose glance penetrates you like a gimlet and remains there like the point of an arrow?
It is more likely the gentle, indifferent and fascinating smile that she wears like a mask.
Her slow grace pervades you little by little; exhales from her like a perfume, from her slim figure that scarcely sways as she passes you, for she seems to glide rather than walk; from her pretty voice with its slight drawl that would seem to be the music of her smile; from her gestures, also, which are never exaggerated, but always appropriate, and intoxicate your vision with their harmony.
How I suffered; for she deceived me as she deceived everyone!
For no reason; just for the pleasure of deceiving.
And when I found it out, when I treated her as a common girl and a beggar, she said quietly: 'Are we married?' “Since I have been here I have thought so much about her that at last I understand her.
It is Marion, who could not love without deceiving; Marion for whom love, amusement, money, are all one.” He was silent.
After a few minutes he resumed: “When I had spent my last sou on her she said simply: “'You understand, my dear boy, that I cannot live on air and weather.
Poverty and I could not keep house together.” “And if I should tell you what a horrible life I led with her!
I felt a furious desire to open my arms to embrace and strangle her.
She had, back of her eyes, something false and intangible that made me execrate her; and that was, perhaps, the reason I loved her so well.
The eternal feminine, the odious and seductive feminine, was stronger in her than in any other woman.
She was full of it, overcharged, as with a venomous and intoxicating fluid.
This exasperated me, and still it attached me to her all the more.
This creature in just walking along the street belonged to everyone, in spite of me, in spite of herself, by the very fact of her nature, although she had a modest, gentle carriage.
At the theatre, at the restaurant she seemed to belong to others under my very eyes.
A strong perfume of orange blossoms pervaded the air.
I now have here, in land and money, seven to eight thousand francs.
And then, good-bye, my life will be finished.” “But after that?” I asked.
That will be all, I may possibly ask her to take me as a valet de chambre.” YVETTE SAMORIS “The Comtesse Samoris.” “That lady in black over there?” “The very one.
She's wearing mourning for her daughter, whom she killed.” “You don't mean that seriously?
How did she die?” “Oh! it is a very simple story, without any crime in it, any violence.” “Then what really happened?” “Almost nothing.
Many courtesans are born to be virtuous women, they say; and many women called virtuous are born to be courtesans—is that not so?
Now, Madame Samoris, who was born a courtesan, had a daughter born a virtuous woman, that's all.” “I don't quite understand you.” “I'll—explain what I mean.
The comtesse is nothing but a common, ordinary parvenue originating no one knows where.
A Hungarian or Wallachian countess or I know not what.
She appeared one winter in apartments she had taken in the Champs Elysees, that quarter for adventurers and adventuresses, and opened her drawing-room to the first comer or to any one that turned up.
I went there, as every one goes to such places because the women are facile and the men are dishonest.
You know that set composed of filibusters with varied decorations, all noble, all titled, all unknown at the embassies, with the exception of those who are spies.
All talk of their honor without the slightest occasion for doing so, boast of their ancestors, tell you about their lives, braggarts, liars, sharpers, as dangerous as the false cards they have up their sleeves, as delusive as their names—in short, the aristocracy of the bagnio.
They are interesting to study, interesting to know, amusing to understand, often clever, never commonplace like public functionaries.
Their wives are always pretty, with a slight flavor of foreign roguery, with the mystery of their existence, half of it perhaps spent in a house of correction.
They have, as a rule, magnificent eyes and incredible hair.
“Madame Samoris is the type of these adventuresses, elegant, mature and still beautiful.
Charming feline creatures, you feel that they are vicious to the marrow of their bones.
You find them very amusing when you visit them; they give card parties; they have dances and suppers; in short, they offer you all the pleasures of social life.
“And she had a daughter—a tall, fine-looking girl, always ready for amusement, always full of laughter and reckless gaiety—a true adventuress' daughter—but, at the same time, an innocent, unsophisticated, artless girl, who saw nothing, knew nothing, understood nothing of all the things that happened in her father's house.
She lived amid those infamous surroundings with a quiet, tranquil ease that was either terribly criminal or else the result of innocence.
She sprang from the filth of that class like a beautiful flower fed on corruption.” “How do you know about them?” “How do I know?
That's the funniest part of the business!
Joseph Bonenthal wanted to speak to me.
I said directly: “'And who is this gentleman?' My valet replied: 'I don't know, monsieur; perhaps 'tis some one that wants employment.' And so it was.
He answered: 'With the Comtesse Samoris.' 'Ah!' said I, 'but my house is not a bit like hers.' 'I know that well, monsieur,' he said, 'and that's the very reason I want to take service with monsieur.
I've had enough of these people: a man may stay a little while with them, but he won't remain long with them.' I required an additional man servant at the time and so I took him.
“A month later Mademoiselle Yvette Samoris died mysteriously, and here are all the details of her death I could gather from Joseph, who got them from his sweetheart, the comtesse's chambermaid.
“It was a ball night, and two newly arrived guests were chatting behind a door.
Mademoiselle Yvette, who had just been dancing, leaned against this door to get a little air.
“They did not see her approaching, but she heard what they were saying.
And this was what they said: “'But who is the father of the girl?' “'A Russian, it appears; Count Rouvaloff.
He never comes near the mother now.' “'And who is the reigning prince to-day?' “'That English prince standing near the window; Madame Samoris adores him.
But her adoration of any one never lasts longer than a month or six weeks.
Nevertheless, as you see, she has a large circle of admirers.
Now that I know what kind of woman she is and have seen her, I'm off!' “What a shock this was to the mind of a young girl endowed with all the instincts of a virtuous woman!
What despair overwhelmed that simple soul!
What mental tortures quenched her unbounded gaiety, her delightful laughter, her exultant satisfaction with life!
What a conflict took place in that youthful heart up to the moment when the last guest had left!
But, the same night, Yvette abruptly entered her mother's room just as the comtesse was getting into bed, sent out the lady's maid, who was close to the door, and, standing erect and pale and with great staring eyes, she said: “'Mamma, listen to what I heard a little while ago during the ball.' “And she repeated word for word the conversation just as I told it to you.
“The comtesse was so stunned that she did not know what to say in reply at first.
When she recovered her self-possession she denied everything and called God to witness that there was no truth in the story.
“The young girl went away, distracted but not convinced.
“I remember distinctly the strange alteration that then took place in her.
She became grave and melancholy.
“One evening she overheard her mother talking to her admirer and later saw them together, and her doubts were confirmed.
She was heartbroken, and after telling her mother what she had seen, she said coldly, like a man of business laying down the terms of an agreement: “'Here is what I have determined to do, mamma: We will both go away to some little town, or rather into the country.
If you don't consent to do this, I will kill myself.' “This time the comtesse ordered her daughter to go to bed and never to speak again in this manner, so unbecoming in the mouth of a child toward her mother.
If, at the end of that month, we have not changed our way of living, I will kill myself, since there is no other honorable issue left to my life.' “And she left the room.
“At the end of a month the Comtesse Samoris had resumed her usual entertainments, as though nothing had occurred.
One day, under the pretext that she had a bad toothache, Yvette purchased a few drops of chloroform from a neighboring chemist.
The next day she purchased more, and every time she went out she managed to procure small doses of the narcotic.
“One morning she was found in bed, lifeless and already quite cold, with a cotton mask soaked in chloroform over her face.
There was a large crowd at the funeral ceremony.
“Ah! well, if I had known—but you never can know—I would have married that girl, for she was infernally pretty.” “And what became of the mother?” “Oh! she shed a lot of tears over it.
She has only begun to receive visits again for the past week.” “And what explanation is given of the girl's death?” “Oh! they pretended that it was an accident caused by a new stove, the mechanism of which got out of order.
As a good many such accidents have occurred, the thing seemed probable enough.” A VENDETTA The widow of Paolo Saverini lived alone with her son in a poor little house on the outskirts of Bonifacio.
The town, built on an outjutting part of the mountain, in places even overhanging the sea, looks across the straits, full of sandbanks, towards the southernmost coast of Sardinia.
Beneath it, on the other side and almost surrounding it, is a cleft in the cliff like an immense corridor which serves as a harbor, and along it the little Italian and Sardinian fishing boats come by a circuitous route between precipitous cliffs as far as the first houses, and every two weeks the old, wheezy steamer which makes the trip to Ajaccio.
On the white mountain the houses, massed together, makes an even whiter spot.
They look like the nests of wild birds, clinging to this peak, overlooking this terrible passage, where vessels rarely venture.
The wind, which blows uninterruptedly, has swept bare the forbidding coast; it drives through the narrow straits and lays waste both sides.
The pale streaks of foam, clinging to the black rocks, whose countless peaks rise up out of the water, look like bits of rag floating and drifting on the surface of the sea.
The house of widow Saverini, clinging to the very edge of the precipice, looks out, through its three windows, over this wild and desolate picture.
She lived there alone, with her son Antonia and their dog “Semillante,” a big, thin beast, with a long rough coat, of the sheep-dog breed.
One night, after some kind of a quarrel, Antoine Saverini was treacherously stabbed by Nicolas Ravolati, who escaped the same evening to Sardinia.
When the old mother received the body of her child, which the neighbors had brought back to her, she did not cry, but she stayed there for a long time motionless, watching him.
Then, stretching her wrinkled hand over the body, she promised him a vendetta.
She did not wish anybody near her, and she shut herself up beside the body with the dog, which howled continuously, standing at the foot of the bed, her head stretched towards her master and her tail between her legs.
She did not move any more than did the mother, who, now leaning over the body with a blank stare, was weeping silently and watching it.
But he had blood all over him; on his shirt, which had been torn off in order to administer the first aid; on his vest, on his trousers, on his face, on his hands.
Clots of blood had hardened in his beard and in his hair.
And she always keeps her word, your mother does, you know she does.” Slowly she leaned over him, pressing her cold lips to his dead ones.
Then Semillante began to howl again with a long, monotonous, penetrating, horrible howl.
The two of them, the woman and the dog, remained there until morning.
Antoine Saverini was buried the next day and soon his name ceased to be mentioned in Bonifacio.
He had neither brothers nor cousins.
No man was there to carry on the vendetta.
His mother, the old woman, alone pondered over it.
It was the little Sardinian village Longosardo, where Corsican criminals take refuge when they are too closely pursued.
They compose almost the entire population of this hamlet, opposite their native island, awaiting the time to return, to go back to the “maquis.” She knew that Nicolas Ravolati had sought refuge in this village.
All alone, all day long, seated at her window, she was looking over there and thinking of revenge.
How could she do anything without help—she, an invalid and so near death?
But she had promised, she had sworn on the body.
She no longer slept at night; she had neither rest nor peace of mind; she thought persistently.
The dog, dozing at her feet, would sometimes lift her head and howl.
Since her master's death she often howled thus, as though she were calling him, as though her beast's soul, inconsolable too, had also retained a recollection that nothing could wipe out.
One night, as Semillante began to howl, the mother suddenly got hold of an idea, a savage, vindictive, fierce idea.
Then, having arisen at daybreak she went to church.
She prayed, prostrate on the floor, begging the Lord to help her, to support her, to give to her poor, broken-down body the strength which she needed in order to avenge her son.
Then she chained Semillante to this improvised kennel and went into the house.
She walked ceaselessly now, her eyes always fixed on the distant coast of Sardinia.
He was over there, the murderer.
Semillante, exhausted, was sleeping.
The following day her eyes were shining, her hair on end and she was pulling wildly at her chain.
The beast, furious, was barking hoarsely.
Then, at daybreak, Mother Saverini asked a neighbor for some straw.
She took the old rags which had formerly been worn by her husband and stuffed them so as to make them look like a human body.
Having planted a stick in the ground, in front of Semillante's kennel, she tied to it this dummy, which seemed to be standing up.
The dog, surprised, was watching this straw man, and was quiet, although famished.
Semillante, frantic, was jumping about, frothing at the mouth, her eyes fixed on the food, the odor of which went right to her stomach.
She tied it very tight around the neck with string, and when she had finished she untied the dog.
With one leap the beast jumped at the dummy's throat, and with her paws on its shoulders she began to tear at it.
She would fall back with a piece of food in her mouth, then would jump again, sinking her fangs into the string, and snatching few pieces of meat she would fall back again and once more spring forward.
The old woman, motionless and silent, was watching eagerly.
Then she chained the beast up again, made her fast for two more days and began this strange performance again.
For three months she accustomed her to this battle, to this meal conquered by a fight.
As soon as she saw the man, Semillante would begin to tremble.
Then she would look up to her mistress, who, lifting her finger, would cry, “Go!” in a shrill tone.
When she thought that the proper time had come, the widow went to confession and, one Sunday morning she partook of communion with an ecstatic fervor.
Then, putting on men's clothes and looking like an old tramp, she struck a bargain with a Sardinian fisherman who carried her and her dog to the other side of the straits.
Semillante had had nothing to eat for two days.
The old woman kept letting her smell the food and whetting her appetite.
They got to Longosardo.
The Corsican woman walked with a limp.
She went to a baker's shop and asked for Nicolas Ravolati.
He had taken up his old trade, that of carpenter.
Then releasing her dog, she cried: “Go, go!
Eat him up! eat him up!” The maddened animal sprang for his throat.
The man stretched out his arms, clasped the dog and rolled to the ground.
For a few seconds he squirmed, beating the ground with his feet.
Then he stopped moving, while Semillante dug her fangs into his throat and tore it to ribbons.
Two neighbors, seated before their door, remembered perfectly having seen an old beggar come out with a thin, black dog which was eating something that its master was giving him.
At nightfall the old woman was at home again.
MY TWENTY-FIVE DAYS I had just taken possession of my room in the hotel, a narrow den between two papered partitions, through which I could hear every sound made by my neighbors; and I was beginning to arrange my clothes and linen in the wardrobe with a long mirror, when I opened the drawer which is in this piece of furniture.
I immediately noticed a roll of paper.
It was the diary of a guest at the watering place, of the last occupant of my room, and had been forgotten at the moment of departure.
These notes may be of some interest to sensible and healthy persons who never leave their own homes.
It is for their benefit that I transcribe them without altering a letter.
The twenty-five days of any one taking the baths are very like the twenty-eight days of the reserves; they are all devoted to fatigue duty, severe fatigue duty.
I have made the acquaintance of the locality and of the doctor.
Chatel-Guyon consists of a stream in which flows yellow water, in the midst of several hillocks on which are a casino, some houses, and some stone crosses.
On the bank of the stream, at the end of the valley, may be seen a square building surrounded by a little garden; this is the bathing establishment.
Sad people wander around this building—the invalids.
A great silence reigns in the walks shaded by trees, for this is not a pleasure resort, but a true health resort; one takes care of one's health as a business, and one gets well, so it seems.
“Those who know affirm, even, that the mineral springs perform true miracles here.
However, no votive offering is hung around the cashier's office.
“From time to time a gentleman or a lady comes over to a kiosk with a slate roof, which shelters a woman of smiling and gentle aspect, and a spring boiling in a basin of cement: Not a word is exchanged between the invalid and the female custodian of the healing water.
She hands the newcomer a little glass in which air bubbles sparkle in the transparent liquid.
The guest drinks and goes off with a grave step to resume his interrupted walk beneath the trees.
One ought to write at the entrance to this district: 'No one laughs here; they take care of their health.' “The people who chat resemble mutes who merely open their mouths to simulate sounds, so afraid are they that their voices might escape.
It is a big hotel, where you dine solemnly with people of good position, who have nothing to say to each other.
Their manners bespeak good breeding, and their faces reflect the conviction of a superiority of which it might be difficult for some to give actual proofs.
But the view from that height is admirable.
Chatel-Guyon is situated in a very narrow valley, exactly between the plain and the mountain.
I perceive, at the left, the first great billows of the mountains of Auvergne, covered with woods, and here and there big gray patches, hard masses of lava, for we are at the foot of the extinct volcanoes.
At the right, through the narrow cut of the valley, I discover a plain, infinite as the sea, steeped in a bluish fog which lets one only dimly discern the villages, the towns, the yellow fields of ripe grain, and the green squares of meadowland shaded with apple trees.
It is the Limagne, an immense level, always enveloped in a light veil of vapor.
I hear, over there, in front of me, the little orchestra of the Casino, which plays airs just as a foolish bird might sing all alone in the desert.
“A dog barks at intervals.
I have swallowed three glasses of water, and I have walked along the paths in the park, a quarter of an hour between each glass, then half an hour after the last.
“July 17th.—Remarked two mysterious, pretty women who are taking their baths and their meals after every one else has finished.
They have style and a little indescribable air which I like very much.
“July 20th.—Long walk in a charming wooded valley, as far as the Hermitage of Sans-Souci.
This country is delightful, although sad; but so calm; so sweet, so green.
One meets along the mountain roads long wagons loaded with hay, drawn by two cows at a slow pace or held back by them in going down the slopes with a great effort of their heads, which are yoked together.
A man with a big black hat on his head is driving them with a slender stick, tipping them on the side or on the forehead; and often with a simple gesture, an energetic and serious gesture, he suddenly halts them when the excessive load precipitates their journey down the too rugged descents.
And, if it is very warm, the dust bears with it a light odor of vanilla and of the stable, for so many cows pass over these routes that they leave reminders everywhere.
“July 21st.—Excursion to the valley of the Enval.
It is a narrow gorge inclosed by superb rocks at the very foot of the mountain.
A stream flows amid the heaped-up boulders.
“As I reached the bottom of this ravine I heard women's voices, and I soon perceived the two mysterious ladies of my hotel, who were chatting, seated on a stone.
“The occasion appeared to me a good one, and I introduced myself without hesitation.
My overtures were received without embarrassment.
We walked back together to the hotel.
There is nothing more amusing than such meetings as this.
“July 22d.—Day passed almost entirely with the two unknown ladies.
They are very pretty, by Jove!—one a brunette and the other a blonde.
“I offered to accompany them to Royat tomorrow, and they accepted my offer.
Royat is a little patch of hotels at the bottom of a valley, at the gate of Clermont-Ferrand.
Superb view of the Puyde-Dome, seen at the end of a perspective of valleys.
“My fair companions are very popular, which is flattering to me.
The man who escorts a pretty woman always believes himself crowned with an aureole; with much more reason, the man who is accompanied by one on each side of him.
Nothing is so pleasant as to dine in a fashionable restaurant with a female companion at whom everybody stares, and there is nothing better calculated to exalt a man in the estimation of his neighbors.
“To go to the Bois, in a trap drawn by a sorry nag, or to go out into the boulevard escorted by a plain woman, are the two most humiliating things that could happen to a sensitive heart that values the opinion of others.
Of all luxuries, woman is the rarest and the most distinguished; she is the one that costs most and which we desire most; she is, therefore the one that we should seek by preference to exhibit to the jealous eyes of the world.
“To exhibit to the world a pretty woman leaning on your arm is to excite, all at once, every kind of jealousy.
I am rich, since I possess this rare and costly object; I have taste, since I have known how to discover this pearl; perhaps, even, I am loved by her, unless I am deceived by her, which would still prove that others also consider her charming.
“But, what a disgrace it is to walk about town with an ugly woman!
“And how many humiliating things this gives people to understand!
“In the first place, they assume she must be your wife, for how could it be supposed that you would have an unattractive sweetheart?
A true woman may be ungraceful; but then, her ugliness implies a thousand disagreeable things for you.
One supposes you must be a notary or a magistrate, as these two professions have a monopoly of grotesque and well-dowered spouses.
Now, is this not distressing to a man?
And then, it seems to proclaim to the public that you have the odious courage, and are even under a legal obligation, to caress that ridiculous face and that ill-shaped body, and that you will, without doubt, be shameless enough to make a mother of this by no means desirable being—which is the very height of the ridiculous.
“July 24th.—I never leave the side of the two unknown widows, whom I am beginning to know quite well.
This country is delightful and our hotel is excellent.
The treatment is doing me an immense amount of good.
An exquisite and unexpected jaunt decided on at luncheon.
We started immediately on rising from table.
After a long journey through the mountains we suddenly perceived an admirable little lake, quite round, very blue, clear as glass, and situated at the bottom of an extinct crater.
In the midst of the trees is a small house where sleeps a good-natured, intellectual man, a sage who passes his days in this Virgilian region.
He opens his dwelling for us.
I exclaim: “'Supposing we bathe?' “'Yes,' they said, 'but costumes.' “'Bah! we are in the wilderness.' “And we did bathe!
“If I were a poet, how I would describe this unforgettable vision of those lissome young forms in the transparency of the water!
The high, sloping sides shut in the lake, motionless, gleaming and round, as a silver coin; the sun pours into it a flood of warm light; and along the rocks the fair forms move in the almost invisible water in which the swimmers seemed suspended.
“July 26th.—Some persons seem to look with shocked and disapproving eyes at my rapid intimacy with the two fair widows.
There are some people, then, who imagine that life consists in being bored.
Everything that appears to be amusing becomes immediately a breach of good breeding or morality.
For them duty has inflexible and mortally tedious rules.
“I would draw their attention, with all respect, to the fact that duty is not the same for Mormons, Arabs Zulus, Turks, Englishmen, and Frenchmen, and that there are very virtuous people among all these nations.
As for me, I take a little of each people's notion of duty, and of the whole I make a result comparable to the morality of good King Solomon.
Excellent, this water of Chatel-Guyon!
A sad town whose anagram constitutes it an objectionable neighbor to healing springs: Riom, Mori.
My two widows have been visited by two gentlemen who came to look for them.
Two widowers, without doubt.
They have written to me on fancy notepaper.
Long excursion on foot to the extinct crater of Nachere.
I am taking the treatment.
This pretty country is full of polluted streams.
I am drawing the notice of the municipality to the abominable sewer which poisons the road in front of the hotel.
All the kitchen refuse of the establishment is thrown into it.
“August 2d.—Admirable walk to Chateauneuf, a place of sojourn for rheumatic patients, where everybody is lame.
Nothing can be queerer than this population of cripples!
“August 7th.—Drove sixty-six kilometres in a carriage on the mountain.
“This excursion had been pointed out to me as a beautiful one, and one that was rarely made.
After four hours on the road, I arrived at a rather pretty village on the banks of a river in the midst of an admirable wood of walnut trees.
I had not yet seen a forest of walnut trees of such dimensions in Auvergne.
It constitutes, moreover, all the wealth of the district, for it is planted on the village common.
This common was formerly only a hillside covered with brushwood.
The authorities had tried in vain to get it cultivated.
There was scarcely enough pasture on it to feed a few sheep.
“Now I must say that the women of the mountain districts have the reputation of being light, lighter than in the plain.
A bachelor who meets them owes them at least a kiss; and if he does not take more he is only a blockhead.
If we consider this fairly, this way of looking at the matter is the only one that is logical and reasonable.
If he abstains from every sort of demonstration, this means that he considers her ugly; it is almost an insult to her.
If I were a woman, I would not receive, a second time, a man who failed to show me respect at our first meeting, for I would consider that he had failed in appreciation of my beauty, my charm, and my feminine qualities.
“So the bachelors of the village X often proved to the women of the district that they found them to their taste, and, as the cure was unable to prevent these demonstrations, as gallant as they were natural, he resolved to utilize them for the benefit of the general prosperity.
And every night lanterns were seen moving about like will-o'-the-wisps on the hillock, for the erring ones scarcely like to perform their penance in broad daylight.
“In two years there was no longer any room on the lands belonging to the village, and to-day they calculate that there are more than three thousand trees around the belfry which rings out the services amid their foliage.
“Since we have been seeking for so many ways of rewooding France, the Administration of Forests might surely enter into some arrangement with the clergy to employ a method so simple as that employed by this humble cure.
“August 7th.—Treatment.
“August 8th.—I am packing up my trunks and saying good-by to the charming little district so calm and silent, to the green mountain, to the quiet valleys, to the deserted Casino, from which you can see, almost veiled by its light, bluish mist, the immense plain of the Limagne.
“I shall leave to-morrow.” Here the manuscript stopped.
I will add nothing to it, my impressions of the country not having been exactly the same as those of my predecessor.
“THE TERROR” You say you cannot possibly understand it, and I believe you.
I know that there is nothing unpleasing about her, and that is enough for my purpose.
She is small, fair, and stout; so, of course, the day after to- morrow I shall ardently wish for a tall, dark, thin woman.
She is a girl such as you may find by the gross, well adapted for matrimony, without any apparent faults, and with no particularly striking qualities.
Lajolle is a very nice girl,” and tomorrow they will say: “What a very nice woman Madame Raymon is.” She belongs, in a word, to that immense number of girls whom one is glad to have for one's wife, till the moment comes when one discovers that one happens to prefer all other women to that particular woman whom one has married.
“Well,” you will say to me, “what on earth did you get married for?” I hardly like to tell you the strange and seemingly improbable reason that urged me on to this senseless act; the fact, however, is that I am afraid of being alone.
I don't know how to tell you or to make you understand me, but my state of mind is so wretched that you will pity me and despise me.
I want to feel that there is some one close to me, touching me, a being who can speak and say something, no matter what it be.
Oh, you don't understand me yet.
I am not afraid of any danger; if a man were to come into the room, I should kill him without trembling.
I am not afraid of ghosts, nor do I believe in the supernatural.
I am not afraid of dead people, for I believe in the total annihilation of every being that disappears from the face of this earth.
Well—yes, well, it must be told: I am afraid of myself, afraid of that horrible sensation of incomprehensible fear.
It is terrible, and I cannot get over it.
I am afraid of the walls, of the furniture, of the familiar objects; which are animated, as far as I am concerned, by a kind of animal life.
Above all, I am afraid of my own dreadful thoughts, of my reason, which seems as if it were about to leave me, driven away by a mysterious and invisible agony.
At first I feel a vague uneasiness in my mind, which causes a cold shiver to run all over me.
I look round, and of course nothing is to be seen, and I wish that there were something there, no matter what, as long as it were something tangible.
I am frightened merely because I cannot understand my own terror.
If I walk, I am afraid of I know not what, behind the door, behind the curtains, in the cupboard, or under my bed, and yet all the time I know there is nothing anywhere, and I turn round suddenly because I am afraid of what is behind me, although there is nothing there, and I know it.
I feel that my fear increases, and so I shut myself up in my own room, get into bed, and hide under the clothes; and there, cowering down, rolled into a ball, I close my eyes in despair, and remain thus for an indefinite time, remembering that my candle is alight on the table by my bedside, and that I ought to put it out, and yet—I dare not do it.
It is very terrible, is it not, to be like that?
Formerly I felt nothing of all that.
I came home quite calm, and went up and down my apartment without anything disturbing my peace of mind.
Had any one told me that I should be attacked by a malady—for I can call it nothing else—of most improbable fear, such a stupid and terrible malady as it is, I should have laughed outright.
I was certainly never afraid of opening the door in the dark.
I went to bed slowly, without locking it, and never got up in the middle of the night to make sure that everything was firmly closed.
A fine rain was falling, and I felt unhappy, a prey to one of those fits of despondency, without any apparent cause, which make us feel inclined to cry, or to talk, no matter to whom, so as to shake off our depressing thoughts.
I was in the midst of infinite and overwhelming solitude.
I sat down, but a kind of nervous impatience seemed to affect my legs, so I got up and began to walk about again.
I was, perhaps, rather feverish, for my hands, which I had clasped behind me, as one often does when walking slowly, almost seemed to burn one another.
Then suddenly a cold shiver ran down my back, and I thought the damp air might have penetrated into my rooms, so I lit the fire for the first time that year, and sat down again and looked at the flames.
But soon I felt that I could not possibly remain quiet, and so I got up again and determined to go out, to pull myself together, and to find a friend to bear me company.
I could not find anyone, so I walked to the boulevard to try and meet some acquaintance or other there.
It was wretched everywhere, and the wet pavement glistened in the gaslight, while the oppressive warmth of the almost impalpable rain lay heavily over the streets and seemed to obscure the light of the lamps.
I went on slowly, saying to myself: “I shall not find a soul to talk to.” I glanced into several cafes, from the Madeleine as far as the Faubourg Poissoniere, and saw many unhappy-looking individuals sitting at the tables who did not seem even to have enough energy left to finish the refreshments they had ordered.
For a long time I wandered aimlessly up and down, and about midnight I started for home.
My janitor opened the door at once, which was quite unusual for him, and I thought that another lodger had probably just come in.
When I go out I always double-lock the door of my room, and I found it merely closed, which surprised me; but I supposed that some letters had been brought up for me in the course of the evening.
I went in, and found my fire still burning so that it lighted up the room a little, and, while in the act of taking up a candle, I noticed somebody sitting in my armchair by the fire, warming his feet, with his back toward me.
I was not in the slightest degree frightened.
I thought, very naturally, that some friend or other had come to see me.
In a moment I remembered all the circumstances of my return, how the street door had been opened immediately, and that my own door was only latched and not locked.
I could see nothing of my friend but his head, and he had evidently gone to sleep while waiting for me, so I went up to him to rouse him.
I saw him quite distinctly; his right arm was hanging down and his legs were crossed; the position of his head, which was somewhat inclined to the left of the armchair, seemed to indicate that he was asleep.
I could not see clearly, as the room was rather dark, so I put out my hand to touch him on the shoulder, and it came in contact with the back of the chair.
For a moment I drew back as if confronted by some terrible danger; then I turned round again, impelled by an imperious standing upright, panting with fear, so upset that I could not collect my thoughts, and ready to faint.
But I am a cool man, and soon recovered myself.
I thought: “It is a mere hallucination, that is all,” and I immediately began to reflect on this phenomenon.
Thoughts fly quickly at such moments.
I had been suffering from an hallucination, that was an incontestable fact.
My mind had been perfectly lucid and had acted regularly and logically, so there was nothing the matter with the brain.
It was only my eyes that had been deceived; they had had a vision, one of those visions which lead simple folk to believe in miracles.
It was a nervous seizure of the optical apparatus, nothing more; the eyes were rather congested, perhaps.
I lit my candle, and when I stooped down to the fire in doing so I noticed that I was trembling, and I raised myself up with a jump, as if somebody had touched me from behind.
I was certainly not by any means calm.
Then I double- locked the door and felt rather reassured; now, at any rate, nobody could come in.
I sat down again and thought over my adventure for a long time; then I went to bed and blew out my light.
For some minutes all went well; I lay quietly on my back, but presently an irresistible desire seized me to look round the room, and I turned over on my side.
I quickly struck a match, but I had been mistaken; there was nothing there.
I got up, however, and hid the chair behind my bed, and tried to get to sleep, as the room was now dark; but I had not forgotten myself for more than five minutes, when in my dream I saw all the scene which I had previously witnessed as clearly as if it were reality.
I woke up with a start, and having lit the candle, sat up in bed, without venturing even to try to go to sleep again.
Twice, however, sleep overcame me for a few moments in spite of myself, and twice I saw the same thing again, till I fancied I was going mad.
When day broke, however, I thought that I was cured, and slept peacefully till noon.
I had been feverish, had had the nightmare.
I enjoyed myself thoroughly that evening.
I dined at a restaurant and afterward went to the theatre, and then started for home.
But as I got near the house I was once more seized by a strange feeling of uneasiness.
I was not afraid of him, not afraid of his presence, in which I did not believe; but I was afraid of being deceived again.
I was afraid of some fresh hallucination, afraid lest fear should take possession of me.
For more than an hour I wandered up and down the pavement; then, feeling that I was really too foolish, I returned home.
I breathed so hard that I could hardly get upstairs, and remained standing outside my door for more than ten minutes; then suddenly I had a courageous impulse and my will asserted itself.
I inserted my key into the lock, and went into the apartment with a candle in my hand.
I kicked open my bedroom door, which was partly open, and cast a frightened glance toward the fireplace.
I walked up and down briskly and boldly, but I was not altogether reassured, and kept turning round with a jump; the very shadows in the corners disquieted me.
I slept badly, and was constantly disturbed by imaginary noises, but did not see him; no, that was all over.
I feel that the spectre is there, close to me, around me; but it has not appeared to me again.
And supposing it did, what would it matter, since I do not believe in it, and know that it is nothing?
However, it still worries me, because I am constantly thinking of it.
His right arm hanging down and his head inclined to the left like a man who was asleep—I don't want to think about it!
Why, however, am I so persistently possessed with this idea?
I know that he does not exist except in my cowardly imagination, in my fears, and in my agony.
Yes, it is all very well for me to reason with myself, to stiffen my backbone, so to say; but I cannot remain at home because I know he is there.
But he is there, all the same, in my thoughts.
He remains invisible, but that does not prevent his being there.
He is behind the doors, in the closed cupboard, in the wardrobe, under the bed, in every dark corner.
If I open the door or the cupboard, if I take the candle to look under the bed and throw a light on the dark places he is there no longer, but I feel that he is behind me.
It is very stupid, it is dreadful; but what am I to do?
I got an indistinct impression of it as of a gray shadow outlined against the misty sky.
I saw it again from Avranches at sunset.
The immense stretch of sand was red, the horizon was red, the whole boundless bay was red.
The rocky castle rising out there in the distance like a weird, seignorial residence, like a dream palace, strange and beautiful-this alone remained black in the crimson light of the dying day.
The following morning at dawn I went toward it across the sands, my eyes fastened on this, gigantic jewel, as big as a mountain, cut like a cameo, and as dainty as lace.
The nearer I approached the greater my admiration grew, for nothing in the world could be more wonderful or more perfect.
As I was looking up in ecstasy a Lower Normandy peasant came up to me and told me the story of the great quarrel between Saint Michael and the devil.
A sceptical genius has said: “God made man in his image and man has returned the compliment.” This saying is an eternal truth, and it would be very curious to write the history of the local divinity of every continent as well as the history of the patron saints in each one of our provinces.
The negro has his ferocious man-eating idols; the polygamous Mahometan fills his paradise with women; the Greeks, like a practical people, deified all the passions.
Every village in France is under the influence of some protecting saint, modelled according to the characteristics of the inhabitants.
Saint Michael watches over Lower Normandy, Saint Michael, the radiant and victorious angel, the sword-carrier, the hero of Heaven, the victorious, the conqueror of Satan.
But this is how the Lower Normandy peasant, cunning, deceitful and tricky, understands and tells of the struggle between the great saint and the devil.
To escape from the malice of his neighbor, the devil, Saint Michael built himself, in the open ocean, this habitation worthy of an archangel; and only such a saint could build a residence of such magnificence.
But as he still feared the approaches of the wicked one, he surrounded his domains by quicksands, more treacherous even than the sea.
Therefore Satan was rich, whereas Saint Michael was as poor as a church mouse.
After a few years of fasting the saint grew tired of this state of affairs and began to think of some compromise with the devil, but the matter was by no means easy, as Satan kept a good hold on his crops.
He immediately rushed toward him, kissed the hem of his sleeve, invited him in and offered him refreshments.
Saint Michael drank a bowl of milk and then began: “I have come here to propose to you a good bargain.” The devil, candid and trustful, answered: “That will suit me.” “Here it is.
Give me all your lands.” Satan, growing alarmed, wished to speak “But—” The saint continued: “Listen first.
I will take care of all the work, the ploughing, the sowing, the fertilizing, everything, and we will share the crops equally.
How does that suit you?” The devil, who was naturally lazy, accepted.
He only demanded in addition a few of those delicious gray mullet which are caught around the solitary mount.
Saint Michael promised the fish.
They grasped hands and spat on the ground to show that it was a bargain, and the saint continued: “See here, so that you will have nothing to complain of, choose that part of the crops which you prefer: the part that grows above ground or the part that stays in the ground.” Satan cried out: “I will take all that will be above ground.” “It's a bargain!” said the saint.
Satan wished to break the contract, calling Saint Michael a swindler.
But the saint, who had developed quite a taste for agriculture, went back to see the devil and said: “Really, I hadn't thought of that at all; it was just an accident, no fault of mine.
And to make things fair with you, this year I'll let you take everything that is under the ground.” “Very well,” answered Satan.
The following spring all the evil spirit's lands were covered with golden wheat, oats as big as beans, flax, magnificent colza, red clover, peas, cabbage, artichokes, everything that develops into grains or fruit in the sunlight.
Once more Satan received nothing, and this time he completely lost his temper.
He took back his fields and remained deaf to all the fresh propositions of his neighbor.
And he grew angry, exasperated at his powerlessness.
As he was no longer able to deceive Satan, he decided to wreak vengeance on him, and he went out to invite him to dinner for the following Monday.
“You have been very unfortunate in your dealings with me,” he said; “I know it, but I don't want any ill feeling between us, and I expect you to dine with me.
I'll give you some good things to eat.” Satan, who was as greedy as he was lazy, accepted eagerly.
On the day appointed he donned his finest clothes and set out for the castle.
Saint Michael sat him down to a magnificent meal.
First there was a 'vol-au-vent', full of cocks' crests and kidneys, with meat-balls, then two big gray mullet with cream sauce, a turkey stuffed with chestnuts soaked in wine, some salt-marsh lamb as tender as cake, vegetables which melted in the mouth and nice hot pancake which was brought on smoking and spreading a delicious odor of butter.
They drank new, sweet, sparkling cider and heady red wine, and after each course they whetted their appetites with some old apple brandy.
The devil drank and ate to his heart's content; in fact he took so much that he was very uncomfortable, and began to retch.
You dare—before me—” Satan, terrified, ran away, and the saint, seizing a stick, pursued him.
They ran through the halls, turning round the pillars, running up the staircases, galloping along the cornices, jumping from gargoyle to gargoyle.
The poor devil, who was woefully ill, was running about madly and trying hard to escape.
At last he found himself at the top of the last terrace, right at the top, from which could be seen the immense bay, with its distant towns, sands and pastures.
He could no longer escape, and the saint came up behind him and gave him a furious kick, which shot him through space like a cannonball.
His horns and claws stuck deep into the rock, which keeps through eternity the traces of this fall of Satan.
He stood up again, limping, crippled until the end of time, and as he looked at this fatal castle in the distance, standing out against the setting sun, he understood well that he would always be vanquished in this unequal struggle, and he went away limping, heading for distant countries, leaving to his enemy his fields, his hills, his valleys and his marshes.
And this is how Saint Michael, the patron saint of Normandy, vanquished the devil.
Another people would have dreamed of this battle in an entirely different manner.
He ended every year in this manner, writing and dreaming.
He reviewed the events of his life since last New Year's Day, things that were now all over and dead; and, in proportion as the faces of his friends rose up before his eyes, he wrote them a few lines, a cordial New Year's greeting on the first of January.
So he sat down, opened a drawer, took out of it a woman's photograph, gazed at it a few moments, and kissed it.
Then, having laid it beside a sheet of notepaper, he began: “MY DEAR IRENE: You must by this time have received the little souvenir I sent you addressed to the maid.
For the last ten months he had had a sweetheart, not like the others, a woman with whom one engages in a passing intrigue, of the theatrical world or the demi-monde, but a woman whom he loved and won.
He was no longer a young man, although he was still comparatively young for a man, and he looked on life seriously in a positive and practical spirit.
Accordingly, he drew up the balance sheet of his passion, as he drew up every year the balance sheet of friendships that were ended or freshly contracted, of circumstances and persons that had entered into his life.
His first ardor of love having grown calmer, he asked himself with the precision of a merchant making a calculation what was the state of his heart with regard to her, and he tried to form an idea of what it would be in the future.
He found there a great and deep affection; made up of tenderness, gratitude and the thousand subtleties which give birth to long and powerful attachments.
So he took a wax candle, passed through the antechamber, drew back the bolts, turned the key, pulled the door back, and saw his sweetheart standing pale as a corpse, leaning against the wall.
He stammered: “What is the matter with you?” She replied: “Are you alone?” “Yes.” “Without servants?” “Yes.” “You are not going out?” “No.” She entered with the air of a woman who knew the house.
As soon as she was in the drawing-room, she sank down on the sofa, and, covering her face with her hands, began to weep bitterly.
He knelt down at her feet, and tried to remove her hands from her eyes, so that he might look at them, and exclaimed: “Irene, Irene, what is the matter with you?
I implore you to tell me what is the matter with you?” Then, amid her sobs, she murmured: “I can no longer live like this.” “Live like this?
He struck me this afternoon.” “Who?
Your husband?” “Yes, my husband.” “Ah!” He was astonished, having never suspected that her husband could be brutal.
He was a man of the world, of the better class, a clubman, a lover of horses, a theatergoer and an expert swordsman; he was known, talked about, appreciated everywhere, having very courteous manners, a very mediocre intellect, an absence of education and of the real culture needed in order to think like all well-bred people, and finally a respect for conventionalities.
He appeared to devote himself to his wife, as a man ought to do in the case of wealthy and well-bred people.
He displayed enough of anxiety about her wishes, her health, her dresses, and, beyond that, left her perfectly free.
Randal, having become Irene's friend, had a right to the affectionate hand-clasp which every husband endowed with good manners owes to his wife's intimate acquaintance.
Then, when Jacques, after having been for some time the friend, became the lover, his relations with the husband were more cordial, as is fitting.
Jacques had never dreamed that there were storms in this household, and he was bewildered at this unexpected revelation.
Tell me.” Thereupon she related a long story, the entire history of her life since the day of her marriage, the first disagreement arising out of a mere nothing, then becoming accentuated at every new difference of opinion between two dissimilar dispositions.
Then came quarrels, a complete separation, not apparent, but real; next, her husband showed himself aggressive, suspicious, violent.
She added with decision: “I will not go back to him.
Do with me what you like.” Jacques sat down opposite to her, their knees touching.
He took her hands: “My dear love, you are going to commit a gross, an irreparable folly.
You have a high position, a reputation to protect, friends to preserve and relations to deal with.
You must not lose all these through a mere caprice.” She rose up, and said with violence: “Well, no!
It is at an end! it is at an end!” Then, placing her two hands on her lover's shoulders, and looking him straight in the face, she asked: “Do you love me?” “Yes.” “Really and truly?” “Yes.” “Then take care of me.” He exclaimed: “Take care of you?
You are mad!” She replied, slowly and seriously, like a woman who feels the weight of her words: “Listen, Jacques.
He has forbidden me to see you again, and I will not play this comedy of coming secretly to your house.
If you remain here he'll come to-morrow to take you away, seeing that he is your husband, seeing that he has right and law on his side.” “I did not ask you to keep me in your own house, Jacques, but to take me anywhere you like.
Good-by!” She turned round and went toward the door so quickly that he was only able to catch hold of her when she was outside the room: “Listen, Irene.” She struggled, and would not listen to him.
Her eyes were full of tears, and she stammered: “Let me alone! let me alone! let me alone!” He made her sit down by force, and once more falling on his knees at her feet, he now brought forward a number of arguments and counsels to make her understand the folly and terrible risk of her project.
He omitted nothing which he deemed necessary to convince her, finding even in his very affection for her incentives to persuasion.
As she remained silent and cold as ice, he begged of her, implored of her to listen to him, to trust him, to follow his advice.
When he had finished speaking, she only replied: “Are you disposed to let me go away now?
Take away your hands, so that I may rise to my feet.” “Look here, Irene.” “Will you let me go?” “Irene—is your resolution irrevocable?” “Will you let me go.” “Tell me only whether this resolution, this mad resolution of yours, which you will bitterly regret, is irrevocable?” “Yes—let me go!” “Then stay.
I do not want sacrifice; I do not want devotion.” “Stay!
I have no further responsibility on your behalf.
My conscience is at peace.
What do you wish me to explain?” “Everything—everything that you thought about before changing your mind.
It is not a question here of sacrifice or devotion.
On the day when I realized that I loved you, I said to myself what every lover ought to say to himself in the same case: 'The man who loves a woman, who makes an effort to win her, who gets her, and who takes her, enters into a sacred contract with himself and with her.
That is, of course, in dealing with a woman like you, not a woman with a fickle heart and easily impressed.' “Marriage which has a great social value, a great legal value, possesses in my eyes only a very slight moral value, taking into account the conditions under which it generally takes place.
“I say that, if they are both honorable persons, their union must be more intimate, more real, more wholesome, than if all the sacraments had consecrated it.
“This woman risks everything.
And it is exactly because she knows it, because she gives everything, her heart, her body, her soul, her honor, her life, because she has foreseen all miseries, all dangers all catastrophes, because she dares to do a bold act, an intrepid act, because she is prepared, determined to brave everything—her husband, who might kill her, and society, which may cast her out.
This is why she is worthy of respect in the midst of her conjugal infidelity; this is why her lover, in taking her, should also foresee everything, and prefer her to every one else whatever may happen.
I spoke in the beginning like a sensible man whose duty it was to warn you; and now I am only a man—a man who loves you—Command, and I obey.” Radiant, she closed his mouth with a kiss, and said in a low tone: “It is not true, darling!
My husband does not suspect anything.
I wished for a New Year's gift—the gift of your heart—another gift besides the necklace you sent me.
God be thanked for the happiness you have given me!” FRIEND PATIENCE What became of Leremy?” “He is captain in the Sixth Dragoons.” “And Pinson?” “He's a subprefect.” “And Racollet?” “Dead.” We were searching for other names which would remind us of the youthful faces of our younger days.
Once in a while we had met some of these old comrades, bearded, bald, married, fathers of several children, and the realization of these changes had given us an unpleasant shudder, reminding us how short life is, how everything passes away, how everything changes.
My friend asked me: “And Patience, fat Patience?” I almost, howled: “Oh! as for him, just listen to this.
Four or five years ago I was in Limoges, on a tour of inspection, and I was waiting for dinner time.
The tradespeople were coming by twos, threes or fours, to take their absinthe or vermouth, talking all the time of their own or other people's business, laughing loudly, or lowering their voices in order to impart some important or delicate piece of news.
“I was saying to myself: 'What shall I do after dinner?' And I thought of the long evening in this provincial town, of the slow, dreary walk through unknown streets, of the impression of deadly gloom which these provincial people produce on the lonely traveller, and of the whole oppressive atmosphere of the place.
“I was thinking of all these things as I watched the little jets of gas flare up, feeling my loneliness increase with the falling shadows.
“A big, fat man sat down at the next table and called in a stentorian voice: “'Waiter, my bitters!' “The 'my' came out like the report of a cannon.
I immediately understood that everything was his in life, and not another's; that he had his nature, by Jove, his appetite, his trousers, his everything, his, more absolutely and more completely than anyone else's.
Then he looked round him with a satisfied air.
His bitters were brought, and he ordered: “'My newspaper!' “I wondered: 'Which newspaper can his be?' The title would certainly reveal to me his opinions, his theories, his principles, his hobbies, his weaknesses.
Why the Temps, a serious, sombre, doctrinaire, impartial sheet?
I thought: “'He must be a serious man with settled and regular habits; in short, a good bourgeois.' “He put on his gold-rimmed spectacles, leaned back before beginning to read, and once more glanced about him.
He noticed me, and immediately began to stare at me in an annoying manner.
I was even going to ask the reason for this attention, when he exclaimed from his seat: “'Well, by all that's holy, if this isn't Gontran Lardois.' “I answered: “'Yes, monsieur, you are not mistaken.' “Then he quickly rose and came toward me with hands outstretched: “'Well, old man, how are you?' “As I did not recognize him at all I was greatly embarrassed.
I stammered: “'Why-very well-and-you?' “He began to laugh “'I bet you don't recognize me.' “'No, not exactly.
I am Patience, Robert Patience, your friend, your chum.' “I recognized him.
Yes, Robert Patience, my old college chum.
I took his outstretched hand: “'And how are you?' “'Fine!' “His smile was like a paean of victory.
“He asked: “'What are you doing here?' “I explained that I was government inspector of taxes.
“He continued, pointing to my red ribbon: “'Then you have-been a success?' “I answered: “'Fairly so.
And you?' “'I am doing well!' “'What are you doing?' “'I'm in business.' “'Making money?' “'Heaps.
But come around to lunch, to-morrow noon, 17 Rue du Coq-qui-Chante; you will see my place.' “He seemed to hesitate a second, then continued: “'Are you still the good sport that you used to be?' “'I—I hope so.' “'Not married?' “'No.' “'Good.
And do you still love a good time and potatoes?' “I was beginning to find him hopelessly vulgar.
Nevertheless, I answered “'Yes.' “'And pretty girls?' “'Most assuredly.' “He began to laugh good-humoredly.
Do you remember our first escapade, in Bordeaux, after that dinner at Routie's?
What a spree!' “I did, indeed, remember that spree; and the recollection of it cheered me up.
He would say: “'Say, do you remember the time when we locked the proctor up in old man Latoque's cellar?' “And he laughed and banged the table with his fist, and then he continued: “'Yes-yes-yes-and do you remember the face of the geography teacher, M.
Marin, the day we set off a firecracker in the globe, just as he was haranguing about the principal volcanoes of the earth?' “Then suddenly I asked him: “'And you, are you married?' “He exclaimed: “'Ten years, my boy, and I have four children, remarkable youngsters; but you'll see them and their mother.' “We were talking rather loud; the people around us looked at us in surprise.
“Suddenly my friend looked at his watch, a chronometer the size of a pumpkin, and he cried: “'Thunder!
I'm sorry, but I'll have to leave you; I am never free at night.' “He rose, took both my hands, shook them as though he were trying to wrench my arms from their sockets, and exclaimed: “'So long, then; till to-morrow noon!' “'So long!' “I spent the morning working in the office of the collector-general of the Department.
The chief wished me to stay to luncheon, but I told him that I had an engagement with a friend.
As he had to go out, he accompanied me.
“I asked him: “'Can you tell me how I can find the Rue du Coq-qui-Chante?' “He answered: “'Yes, it's only five minutes' walk from here.
As I have nothing special to do, I will take you there.' “We started out and soon found ourselves there.
It was a wide, fine- looking street, on the outskirts of the town.
The facade, decorated with frescoes, in the Italian style, appeared to me as being in bad taste.
There were goddesses holding vases, others swathed in clouds.
Two stone cupids supported the number of the house.
“I said to the treasurer: “'Here is where I am going.' “I held my hand out to him.
I asked: “'Monsieur Patience, if you please?' “She answered: “'Right here, sir.
Is it to monsieur that you wish to speak?' “'Yes.' “The hall was decorated with paintings from the brush of some local artist.
Pauls and Virginias were kissing each other under palm trees bathed in a pink light.
A hideous Oriental lantern was ranging from the ceiling.
Several doors were concealed by bright hangings.
“But what struck me especially was the odor.
It was a sickening and perfumed odor, reminding one of rice powder and the mouldy smell of a cellar.
An indefinable odor in a heavy atmosphere as oppressive as that of public baths.
I followed the maid up a marble stairway, covered with a green, Oriental carpet, and was ushered into a sumptubus parlor.
“The room was richly furnished, but in the pretentious taste of a parvenu.
Rather fine engravings of the last century represented women with powdered hair dressed high surprised by gentlemen in interesting positions.
One drawing showed four feet, bodies concealed behind a curtain.
The large room, surrounded by soft couches, was entirely impregnated with that enervating and insipid odor which I had already noticed.
There seemed to be something suspicious about the walls, the hangings, the exaggerated luxury, everything.
“I approached the window to look into the garden.
It was very big, shady, beautiful.
A wide path wound round a grass plot in the midst of which was a fountain, entered a shrubbery and came out farther away.
And, suddenly, yonder, in the distance, between two clumps of bushes, three women appeared.
Almost immediately they disappeared again behind the trees.
I stood there entranced, delighted with this short and charming apparition, which brought to my mind a whole world of poetry.
They had scarcely allowed themselves to be seen, in just the proper light, in that frame of foliage, in the midst of that mysterious, delightful park.
It seemed to me that I had suddenly seen before me the great ladies of the last century, who were depicted in the engravings on the wall.
And I began to think of the happy, joyous, witty and amorous times when manners were so graceful and lips so approachable.
Patience had come in, beaming, and held out his hands to me.
You chose Fecamp, which is a very dull town, without consulting me in the matter, and now you are seized with such a rage for walking, you who hardly ever stir out on foot, that you want to take a country walk on the hottest day of the year.
As for me, I am going back to have a nap.” Madame de Cadour turned to her old friend and said: “Will you come with me, Monsieur d'Apreval?” He bowed with a smile, and with all the gallantry of former years: “I will go wherever you go,” he replied.
“Very well, then, go and get a sunstroke,” Monsieur de Cadour said; and he went back to the Hotel des Bains to lie down for an hour or two.
As soon as they were alone, the old lady and her old companion set off, and she said to him in a low voice, squeezing his hand: “At last! at last!” “You are mad,” he said in a whisper.
Henri, do not say that man, when you are speaking of him.” “Very well,” he said abruptly, “if our son guesses anything, if he has any suspicions, he will have you, he will have us both in his power.
The white road stretched in front of him, then under a blaze of brilliant sunshine, so they went on slowly in the burning heat.
She had taken her old friend's arm, and was looking straight in front of her, with a fixed and haunted gaze, and at last she said: “And so you have not seen him again, either?” “No, never.” “Is it possible?” “My dear friend, do not let us begin that discussion again.
I have a wife and children and you have a husband, so we both of us have much to fear from other people's opinion.” She did not reply; she was thinking of her long past youth and of many sad things that had occurred.
How well she recalled all the details of their early friendship, his smiles, the way he used to linger, in order to watch her until she was indoors.
What happy days they were, the only really delicious days she had ever enjoyed, and how quickly they were over!
And then—her discovery—of the penalty she paid!
Of that journey to the South, that long journey, her sufferings, her constant terror, that secluded life in the small, solitary house on the shores of the Mediterranean, at the bottom of a garden, which she did not venture to leave.
How well she remembered those long days which she spent lying under an orange tree, looking up at the round, red fruit, amid the green leaves.
She dreamed of its immense blue expanse sparkling under the sun, with the white sails of the small vessels, and a mountain on the horizon.
Suppose anybody had recognized her!
And those days of waiting, those last days of misery and expectation!
The impending suffering, and then that terrible night!
How she had groaned and screamed!
And what a long, void existence hers had been since then, with the thought of that child always, always floating before her.
She had never seen her son, that little creature that had been part of herself, even once since then; they had taken him from her, carried him away, and had hidden him.
All she knew was that he had been brought up by some peasants in Normandy, that he had become a peasant himself, had married well, and that his father, whose name he did not know, had settled a handsome sum of money on him.
She would be unable to restrain and to master herself; their son would guess it and take advantage of her, blackmail her; she would be lost.
I have not seen him again, either.” “Is it possible?
To have a son and not to know him; to be afraid of him and to reject him as if he were a disgrace!
It is horrible.” They went along the dusty road, overcome by the scorching sun, and continually ascending that interminable hill.
“One might take it for a punishment,” she continued; “I have never had another child, and I could no longer resist the longing to see him, which has possessed me for forty years.
You men cannot understand that.
You must remember that I shall not live much longer, and suppose I should never see him, never have seen him! . . .
I have thought about him every day since, and what a terrible existence mine has been!
I have never awakened, never, do you understand, without my first thoughts being of him, of my child.
I ought to have left everything to go after him, to bring him up and to show my love for him.
I should certainly have been much happier, but I did not dare, I was a coward.
How I have suffered!
Oh, how those poor, abandoned children must hate their mothers!” She stopped suddenly, for she was choked by her sobs.
The whole valley was deserted and silent in the dazzling light and the overwhelming heat, and only the grasshoppers uttered their shrill, continuous chirp among the sparse yellow grass on both sides of the road.
She wept, overcome by profound grief, while he stood facing her, uneasy and not knowing what to say, and he merely murmured: “Come, take courage.” She got up.
“I will,” she said, and wiping her eyes, she began to walk again with the uncertain step of an elderly woman.
A little farther on the road passed beneath a clump of trees, which hid a few houses, and they could distinguish the vibrating and regular blows of a blacksmith's hammer on the anvil; and presently they saw a wagon standing on the right side of the road in front of a low cottage, and two men shoeing a horse under a shed.
Monsieur d'Apreval went up to them.
“Where is Pierre Benedict's farm?” he asked.
“Take the road to the left, close to the inn, and then go straight on; it is the third house past Poret's.
She was walking very slowly now, her legs threatened to give way, and her heart was beating so violently that she felt as if she should suffocate, while at every step she murmured, as if in prayer: “Oh!
Heaven!” Monsieur d'Apreval, who was also nervous and rather pale, said to her somewhat gruffly: “If you cannot manage to control your feelings, you will betray yourself at once.
Do try and restrain yourself.” “How can I?” she replied.
When I think that I am going to see my child.” They were going along one of those narrow country lanes between farmyards, that are concealed beneath a double row of beech trees at either side of the ditches, and suddenly they found themselves in front of a gate, beside which there was a young spruce fir.
She stopped suddenly and looked about her.
The courtyard, which was planted with apple trees, was large and extended as far as the small thatched dwelling house.
On the opposite side were the stable, the barn, the cow house and the poultry house, while the gig, the wagon and the manure cart were under a slated outhouse.
Four calves were grazing under the shade of the trees and black hens were wandering all about the enclosure.
All was perfectly still; the house door was open, but nobody was to be seen, and so they went in, when immediately a large black dog came out of a barrel that was standing under a pear tree, and began to bark furiously.
Monsieur d'Apreval stood outside and called out: “Is anybody at home?” Then a child appeared, a little girl of about ten, dressed in a chemise and a linen, petticoat, with dirty, bare legs and a timid and cunning look.
She remained standing in the doorway, as if to prevent any one going in.
She limped with her right leg, and in her brown knitted jacket, that was faded by the sun and washed out by the rain, she looked like a poor, wretched, dirty servant.
When she got close to the house, she looked at the strangers angrily and suspiciously, and then she went in, as if she had not seen them.
She looked old and had a hard, yellow, wrinkled face, one of those wooden faces that country people so often have.
Monsieur d'Apreval called her back.
“I beg your pardon, madame, but we came in to know whether you could sell us two glasses of milk.” She was grumbling when she reappeared in the door, after putting down her pails.
Can we not get something to drink?” The peasant woman gave them an uneasy and cunning glance and then she made up her mind.
“As you are here, I will give you some,” she said, going into the house, and almost immediately the child came out and brought two chairs, which she placed under an apple tree, and then the mother, in turn, brought out two bowls of foaming milk, which she gave to the visitors.
She did not return to the house, however, but remained standing near them, as if to watch them and to find out for what purpose they had come there.
“Yes,” Monsieur d'Apreval replied, “we are staying at Fecamp for the summer.” And then, after a short silence, he continued: “Have you any fowls you could sell us every week?” The woman hesitated for a moment and then replied: “Yes, I think I have.
If anybody should find it, please let us know.” Mother Benedict did not reply, as she thought it a very equivocal sort of answer, but suddenly she exclaimed: “Oh, here is my husband!” She was the only one who had seen him, as she was facing the gate.
D'Apreval started and Madame de Cadour nearly fell as she turned round suddenly on her chair.
A man bent nearly double, and out of breath, stood there, ten-yards from them, dragging a cow at the end of a rope.
Without taking any notice of the visitors, he said: “Confound it!
What a brute!” And he went past them and disappeared in the cow house.
Her tears had dried quickly as she sat there startled, without a word and with the one thought in her mind, that this was her son, and D'Apreval, whom the same thought had struck very unpleasantly, said in an agitated voice: “Is this Monsieur Benedict?” “Who told you his name?” the wife asked, still rather suspiciously.
“The blacksmith at the corner of the highroad,” he replied, and then they were all silent, with their eyes fixed on the door of the cow house, which formed a sort of black hole in the wall of the building.
Nothing could be seen inside, but they heard a vague noise, movements and footsteps and the sound of hoofs, which were deadened by the straw on the floor, and soon the man reappeared in the door, wiping his forehead, and came toward the house with long, slow strides.
He passed the strangers without seeming to notice them and said to his wife: “Go and draw me a jug of cider; I am very thirsty.” Then he went back into the house, while his wife went into the cellar and left the two Parisians alone.
“Let us go, let us go, Henri,” Madame de Cadour said, nearly distracted with grief, and so d'Apreval took her by the arm, helped her to rise, and sustaining her with all his strength, for he felt that she was nearly fainting, he led her out, after throwing five francs on one of the chairs.
His farm is worth eighty thousand francs, and that is more than most of the sons of the middle classes have.” They returned slowly, without speaking a word.
She was still crying; the tears ran down her cheeks continually for a time, but by degrees they stopped, and they went back to Fecamp, where they found Monsieur de Cadour waiting dinner for them.
As soon as he saw them, he began to laugh and exclaimed: “So my wife has had a sunstroke, and I am very glad of it.
I really think she has lost her head for some time past!” Neither of them replied, and when the husband asked them, rubbing his hands: “Well, I hope that, at least, you have had a pleasant walk?” Monsieur d'Apreval replied: “A delightful walk, I assure you; perfectly delightful.” THE MAISON TELLIER They went there every evening about eleven o'clock, just as they would go to the club.
Six or eight of them; always the same set, not fast men, but respectable tradesmen, and young men in government or some other employ, and they would drink their Chartreuse, and laugh with the girls, or else talk seriously with Madame Tellier, whom everybody respected, and then they would go home at twelve o'clock!
The younger men would sometimes stay later.
It was a small, comfortable house painted yellow, at the corner of a street behind Saint Etienne's Church, and from the windows one could see the docks full of ships being unloaded, the big salt marsh, and, rising beyond it, the Virgin's Hill with its old gray chapel.
Madame Tellier, who came of a respectable family of peasant proprietors in the Department of the Eure, had taken up her profession, just as she would have become a milliner or dressmaker.
The prejudice which is so violent and deeply rooted in large towns, does not exist in the country places in Normandy.
The peasant says: “It is a paying-business,” and he sends his daughter to keep an establishment of this character just as he would send her to keep a girls' school.
She had inherited the house from an old uncle, to whom it had belonged.
Monsieur and Madame Tellier, who had formerly been innkeepers near Yvetot, had immediately sold their house, as they thought that the business at Fecamp was more profitable, and they arrived one fine morning to assume the direction of the enterprise, which was declining on account of the absence of the proprietors.
They were good people enough in their way, and soon made themselves liked by their staff and their neighbors.
Monsieur died of apoplexy two years later, for as the new place kept him in idleness and without any exercise, he had grown excessively stout, and his health had suffered.
Since she had been a widow, all the frequenters of the establishment made much of her; but people said that, personally, she was quite virtuous, and even the girls in the house could not discover anything against her.
She was tall, stout and affable, and her complexion, which had become pale in the dimness of her house, the shutters of which were scarcely ever opened, shone as if it had been varnished.
She had a fringe of curly false hair, which gave her a juvenile look, that contrasted strongly with the ripeness of her figure.
She was always smiling and cheerful, and was fond of a joke, but there was a shade of reserve about her, which her occupation had not quite made her lose.
Coarse words always shocked her, and when any young fellow who had been badly brought up called her establishment a hard name, she was angry and disgusted.
In a word, she had a refined mind, and although she treated her women as friends, yet she very frequently used to say that “she and they were not made of the same stuff.” Sometimes during the week she would hire a carriage and take some of her girls into the country, where they used to enjoy themselves on the grass by the side of the little river.
They were like a lot of girls let out from school, and would run races and play childish games.
They had a cold dinner on the grass, and drank cider, and went home at night with a delicious feeling of fatigue, and in the carriage they kissed Madame' Tellier as their kind mother, who was full of goodness and complaisance.
The house had two entrances.
At the corner there was a sort of tap-room, which sailors and the lower orders frequented at night, and she had two girls whose special duty it was to wait on them with the assistance of Frederic, a short, light-haired, beardless fellow, as strong as a horse.
They set the half bottles of wine and the jugs of beer on the shaky marble tables before the customers, and then urged the men to drink.
The three other girls—there were only five of them—formed a kind of aristocracy, and they remained with the company on the first floor, unless they were wanted downstairs and there was nobody on the first floor.
The salon de Jupiter, where the tradesmen used to meet, was papered in blue, and embellished with a large drawing representing Leda and the swan.
The room was reached by a winding staircase, through a narrow door opening on the street, and above this door a lantern inclosed in wire, such as one still sees in some towns, at the foot of the shrine of some saint, burned all night long.
The house, which was old and damp, smelled slightly of mildew.
At times there was an odor of eau de Cologne in the passages, or sometimes from a half-open door downstairs the noisy mirth of the common men sitting and drinking rose to the first floor, much to the disgust of the gentlemen who were there.
Madame Tellier, who was on friendly terms with her customers, did not leave the room, and took much interest in what was going on in the town, and they regularly told her all the news.
Her serious conversation was a change from the ceaseless chatter of the three women; it was a rest from the obscene jokes of those stout individuals who every evening indulged in the commonplace debauchery of drinking a glass of liqueur in company with common women.
The names of the girls on the first floor were Fernande, Raphaele, and Rosa, the Jade.
As the staff was limited, madame had endeavored that each member of it should be a pattern, an epitome of the feminine type, so that every customer might find as nearly as possible the realization of his ideal.
Fernande represented the handsome blonde; she was very tall, rather fat, and lazy; a country girl, who could not get rid of her freckles, and whose short, light, almost colorless, tow-like hair, like combed-out hemp, barely covered her head.
Raphaele, who came from Marseilles, played the indispensable part of the handsome Jewess, and was thin, with high cheekbones, which were covered with rouge, and black hair covered with pomatum, which curled on her forehead.
Her eyes would have been handsome, if the right one had not had a speck in it.
Her Roman nose came down over a square jaw, where two false upper teeth contrasted strangely with the bad color of the rest.
The two women on the ground floor, Lodise, who was nicknamed La Cocotte, and Flora, whom they called Balancoise, because she limped a little, the former always dressed as the Goddess of Liberty, with a tri-colored sash, and the other as a Spanish woman, with a string of copper coins in her carroty hair, which jingled at every uneven step, looked like cooks dressed up for the carnival.
They looked just like servants at an inn, and were generally called “the two pumps.” A jealous peace, which was, however, very rarely disturbed, reigned among these five women, thanks to Madame Tellier's conciliatory wisdom, and to her constant good humor, and the establishment, which was the only one of the kind in the little town, was very much frequented.
Madame Tellier had succeeded in giving it such a respectable appearance, she was so amiable and obliging to everybody, her good heart was so well known, that she was treated with a certain amount of consideration.
The regular customers spent money on her, and were delighted when she was especially friendly toward them, and when they met during the day, they would say: “Until this evening, you know where,” just as men say: “At the club, after dinner.” In a word, Madame Tellier's house was somewhere to go to, and they very rarely missed their daily meetings there.
One evening toward the end of May, the first arrival, Monsieur Poulin, who was a timber merchant, and had been mayor, found the door shut.
The lantern behind the grating was not alight; there was not a sound in the house; everything seemed dead.
He knocked, gently at first, but then more loudly, but nobody answered the door.
Then he went slowly up the street, and when he got to the market place he met Monsieur Duvert, the gunmaker, who was going to the same place, so they went back together, but did not meet with any better success.
But suddenly they heard a loud noise, close to them, and on going round the house, they saw a number of English and French sailors, who were hammering at the closed shutters of the taproom with their fists.
The two tradesmen immediately made their escape, but a low “Pst!” stopped them; it was Monsieur Tournevau, the fish curer, who had recognized them, and was trying to attract their attention.
They told him what had happened, and he was all the more annoyed, as he was a married man and father of a family, and only went on Saturdays.
That was his regular evening, and now he should be deprived of this dissipation for the whole week.
The three men went as far as the quay together, and on the way they met young Monsieur Philippe, the banker's son, who frequented the place regularly, and Monsieur Pinipesse, the collector, and they all returned to the Rue aux Juifs together, to make a last attempt.
But the exasperated sailors were besieging the house, throwing stones at the shutters, and shouting, and the five first-floor customers went away as quickly as possible, and walked aimlessly about the streets.
After going through the street alongside the hill, they returned over the wooden bridge which crosses the Retenue, passed close to the railway, and came out again on the market place, when, suddenly, a quarrel arose between Monsieur Pinipesse, the collector, and Monsieur Tournevau about an edible mushroom which one of them declared he had found in the neighborhood.
As they were out of temper already from having nothing to do, they would very probably have come to blows, if the others had not interfered.
Monsieur Pinipesse went off furious, and soon another altercation arose between the ex-mayor, Monsieur Poulin, and Monsieur Dupuis, the insurance agent, on the subject of the tax collector's salary and the profits which he might make.
Insulting remarks were freely passing between them, when a torrent of formidable cries was heard, and the body of sailors, who were tired of waiting so long outside a closed house, came into the square.
They were walking arm in arm, two and two, and formed a long procession, and were shouting furiously.
The townsmen hid themselves in a doorway, and the yelling crew disappeared in the direction of the abbey.
For a long time they still heard the noise, which diminished like a storm in the distance, and then silence was restored.
Monsieur Poulin and Monsieur Dupuis, who were angry with each other, went in different directions, without wishing each other good-by.
The other four set off again, and instinctively went in the direction of Madame Tellier's establishment, which was still closed, silent, impenetrable.
A quiet, but obstinate drunken man was knocking at the door of the lower room, antd then stopped and called Frederic, in a low voice, but finding that he got no answer, he sat down on the doorstep, and waited the course of events.
The others were just going to retire, when the noisy band of sailors reappeared at the end of the street.
The French sailors were shouting the “Marseillaise,” and the Englishmen “Rule Britannia.” There was a general lurching against the wall, and then the drunken fellows went on their way toward the quay, where a fight broke out between the two nations, in the course of which an Englishman had his arm broken and a Frenchman his nose split.
The drunken man who had waited outside the door, was crying by that time, as drunken men and children cry when they are vexed, and the others went away.
By degrees, calm was restored in the noisy town; here and there, at moments, the distant sound of voices could be heard, and then died away in the distance.
One man only was still wandering about, Monsieur Tournevau, the fish curer, who was annoyed at having to wait until the following Saturday, and he hoped something would turn up, he did not know what; but he was exasperated at the police for thus allowing an establishment of such public utility, which they had under their control, to be closed.
He went back to it and examined the walls, trying to find out some reason, and on the shutter he saw a notice stuck up.
He struck a wax match and read the following, in a large, uneven hand: “Closed on account of the Confirmation.” Then he went away, as he saw it was useless to remain, and left the drunken man lying on the pavement fast asleep, outside that inhospitable door.
When she still kept the inn at Yvetot, she had stood godmother to that brother's daughter, who had received the name of Constance—Constance Rivet; she herself being a Rivet on her father's side.
The carpenter, who knew that his sister was in a good position, did not lose sight of her, although they did not meet often, for they were both kept at home by their occupations, and lived a long way from each other.
But as the girl was twelve years old, and going to be confirmed, he seized that opportunity to write to his sister, asking her to come and be present at the ceremony.
Their old parents were dead, and as she could not well refuse her goddaughter, she accepted the invitation.
Her brother, whose name was Joseph, hoped that by dint of showing his sister attention, she might be induced to make her will in the girl's favor, as she had no children of her own.
His sister's occupation did not trouble his scruples in the least, and, besides, nobody knew anything about it at Virville.
It was quite twenty leagues from Fecamp to Virville, and for a peasant, twenty leagues on land is as long a journey as crossing the ocean would be to city people.
The people at Virville had never been further than Rouen, and nothing attracted the people from Fecamp to a village of five hundred houses in the middle of a plain, and situated in another department; at any rate, nothing was known about her business.
But the Confirmation was coming on, and Madame Tellier was in great embarrassment.
She had no substitute, and did not at all care to leave her house, even for a day; for all the rivalries between the girls upstairs and those downstairs would infallibly break out.
No doubt Frederic would get drunk, and when he was in that state, he would knock anybody down for a mere word.
At last, however, she made up her mind to take them all with her, with the exception of the man, to whom she gave a holiday until the next day but one.
When she asked her brother, he made no objection, but undertook to put them all up for a night, and so on Saturday morning the eight-o'clock express carried off Madame Tellier and her companions in a second-class carriage.
As far as Beuzeville they were alone, and chattered like magpies, but at that station a couple got in.
The man, an old peasant, dressed in a blue blouse with a turned-down collar, wide sleeves tight at the wrist, ornamented with white embroidery, wearing an old high hat with long nap, held an enormous green umbrella in one hand, and a large basket in the other, from which the heads of three frightened ducks protruded.
She sat down opposite her husband and did not stir, as she was startled at finding herself in such smart company.
There was certainly an array of striking colors in the carriage.
Madame Tellier was dressed in blue silk from head to foot, and had on a dazzling red imitation French cashmere shawl.
Fernande was puffing in a Scotch plaid dress, of which her companions had laced the bodice as tight as they could, forcing up her full bust, that was continually heaving up and down.
Raphaele, with a bonnet covered with feathers, so that it looked like a bird's nest, had on a lilac dress with gold spots on it, and there was something Oriental about it that suited her Jewish face.
Rosa had on a pink skirt with largo flounces, and looked like a very fat child, an obese dwarf; while the two Pumps looked as if they had cut their dresses out of old flowered curtains dating from the Restoration.
As soon as they were no longer alone in the compartment, the ladies put on staid looks, and began to talk of subjects which might give others a high opinion of them.
But at Bolbeck a gentleman with light whiskers, a gold chain, and wearing two or three rings, got in, and put several parcels wrapped in oilcloth on the rack over his head.
He looked inclined for a joke, and seemed a good-hearted fellow.
“Are you ladies changing your quarters?” he said, and that question embarrassed them all considerably.
Madame Tellier, however, quickly regained her composure, and said sharply, to avenge the honor of her corps: “I think you might try and be polite!” He excused himself, and said: “I beg your pardon, I ought to have said your nunnery.” She could not think of a retort, so, perhaps thinking she had said enough, madame gave him a dignified bow and compressed her lips.
Then the gentleman, who was sitting between Rosa and the old peasant, began to wink knowingly at the ducks whose heads were sticking out of the basket, and when he felt that he had fixed the attention of his public, he began to tickle them under the bills and spoke funnily to them to make the company smile.
“We have left our little pond, quack! quack! to make the acquaintance of the little spit, qu-ack! qu-ack!” The unfortunate creatures turned their necks away, to avoid his caresses, and made desperate efforts to get out of their wicker prison, and then, suddenly, all at once, uttered the most lamentable quacks of distress.
The women exploded with laughter.
They leaned forward and pushed each other, so as to see better; they were very much interested in the ducks, and the gentleman redoubled his airs, his wit and his teasing.
Rosa joined in, and leaning over her neighbor's legs, she kissed the three animals on the head, and immediately all the girls wanted to kiss them, in turn, and as they did so the gentleman took them on his knee, jumped them up and down and pinched their arms.
The two peasants, who were even in greater consternation than their poultry, rolled their eyes as if they were possessed, without venturing to move, and their old wrinkled faces had not a smile, not a twitch.
Then the gentleman, who was a commercial traveller, offered the ladies suspenders by way of a joke, and taking up one of his packages, he opened it.
It was a joke, for the parcel contained garters.
There were blue silk, pink silk, red silk, violet silk, mauve silk garters, and the buckles were made of two gilt metal cupids embracing each other.
The girls uttered exclamations of delight and looked at them with that gravity natural to all women when they are considering an article of dress.
They consulted one another by their looks or in a whisper, and replied in the same manner, and Madame Tellier was longingly handling a pair of orange garters that were broader and more imposing looking than the rest; really fit for the mistress of such an establishment.
The gentleman waited, for he had an idea.
“Come, my kittens,” he said, “you must try them on.” There was a torrent of exclamations, and they squeezed their petticoats between their legs, but he quietly waited his time and said: “Well, if you will not try them on I shall pack them up again.” And he added cunningly: “I offer any pair they like to those who will try them on.” But they would not, and sat up very straight and looked dignified.
But the two Pumps looked so distressed that he renewed his offer to them, and Flora, especially, visibly hesitated, and he insisted: “Come, my dear, a little courage!
Just look at that lilac pair; it will suit your dress admirably.” That decided her, and pulling up her dress she showed a thick leg fit for a milkmaid, in a badly fitting, coarse stocking.
The commercial traveller stooped down and fastened the garter.
I!” they all shouted at once, and he began on Rosa, who uncovered a shapeless, round thing without any ankle, a regular “sausage of a leg,” as Raphaele used to say.
Lastly, Madame Tellier herself put out her leg, a handsome, muscular Norman leg, and in his surprise and pleasure, the commercial traveller gallantly took off his hat to salute that master calf, like a true French cavalier.
The two peasants, who were speechless from surprise, glanced sideways out of the corner of one eye, and they looked so exactly like fowls that the man with the light whiskers, when he sat up, said: “Co—co—ri—co” under their very noses, and that gave rise to another storm of amusement.
The carpenter politely kissed all the ladies and then helped them into his conveyance.
Three of them sat on three chairs at the back, Raphaele, Madame Tellier and her brother on the three chairs in front, while Rosa, who had no seat, settled herself as comfortably as she could on tall Fernande's knees, and then they set off.
But the horse's jerky trot shook the cart so terribly that the chairs began to dance and threw the travellers about, to the right and to the left, as if they were dancing puppets, which made them scream and make horrible grimaces.
They clung on to the sides of the vehicle, their bonnets fell on their backs, over their faces and on their shoulders, and the white horse went on stretching out his head and holding out his little hairless tail like a rat's, with which he whisked his buttocks from time to time.
Joseph Rivet, with one leg on the shafts and the other doubled under him, held the reins with his elbows very high, and kept uttering a kind of clucking sound, which made the horse prick up its ears and go faster.
The green country extended on either side of the road, and here and there the colza in flower presented a waving expanse of yellow, from which arose a strong, wholesome, sweet and penetrating odor, which the wind carried to some distance.
The cornflowers showed their little blue heads amid the rye, and the women wanted to pick them, but Monsieur Rivet refused to stop.
Then, sometimes, a whole field appeared to be covered with blood, so thick were the poppies, and the cart, which looked as if it were filled with flowers of more brilliant hue, jogged on through fields bright with wild flowers, and disappeared behind the trees of a farm, only to reappear and to go on again through the yellow or green standing crops, which were studded with red or blue.
One o'clock struck as they drove up to the carpenter's door.
Madame Rivet ran out and made them alight, one after another, and kissed them as soon as they were on the ground, and she seemed as if she would never tire of kissing her sister-in-law, whom she apparently wanted to monopolize.
They had lunch in the workshop, which had been cleared out for the next day's dinner.
The capital omelet, followed by boiled chitterlings and washed down with good hard cider, made them all feel comfortable.
Rivet had taken a glass so that he might drink with them, and his wife cooked, waited on them, brought in the dishes, took them out and asked each of them in a whisper whether they had everything they wanted.
A number of boards standing against the walls and heaps of shavings that had been swept into the corners gave out a smell of planed wood, a smell of a carpenter's shop, that resinous odor which penetrates to the lungs.
It was a small village, through which the highroad passed.
Ten or a dozen houses on either side of the single street were inhabited by the butcher, the grocer, the carpenter, the innkeeper, the shoemaker and the baker.
The church was at the end of the street and was surrounded by a small churchyard, and four immense lime-trees, which stood just outside the porch, shaded it completely.
It was built of flint, in no particular style, and had a slate-roofed steeple.
When you got past it, you were again in the open country, which was varied here and there by clumps of trees which hid the homesteads.
Rivet had given his arm to his sister, out of politeness, although he was in his working clothes, and was walking with her in a dignified manner.
His wife, who was overwhelmed by Raphaele's gold-striped dress, walked between her and Fernande, and roly-poly Rosa was trotting behind with Louise and Flora, the Seesaw, who was limping along, quite tired out.
As they passed the church they heard some children singing.
Little shrill voices were singing a hymn, but Madame Tellier would not let them go in, for fear of disturbing the little cherubs.
After the walk, during which Joseph Rivet enumerated the principal landed proprietors, spoke about the yield of the land and the productiveness of the cows and sheep, he took his tribe of women home and installed them in his house, and as it was very small, they had to put them into the rooms, two and two.
Just for once Rivet would sleep in the workshop on the shavings; his wife was to share her bed with her sister-in-law, and Fernande and Raphaele were to sleep together in the next room.
Louise and Flora were put into the kitchen, where they had a mattress on the floor, and Rosa had a little dark cupboard to herself at the top of the stairs, close to the loft, where the candidate for confirmation was to sleep.
When the little girl came in she was overwhelmed with kisses; all the women wished to caress her with that need of tender expansion, that habit of professional affection which had made them kiss the ducks in the railway carriage.
They each of them took her on their knees, stroked her soft, light hair and pressed her in their arms with vehement and spontaneous outbursts of affection, and the child, who was very good and religious, bore it all patiently.
As the day had been a fatiguing one for everybody, they all went to bed soon after dinner.
The whole village was wrapped in that perfect stillness of the country, which is almost like a religious silence, and the girls, who were accustomed to the noisy evenings of their establishment, felt rather impressed by the perfect repose of the sleeping village, and they shivered, not with cold, but with those little shivers of loneliness which come over uneasy and troubled hearts.
As soon as they were in bed, two and two together, they clasped each other in their arms, as if to protect themselves against this feeling of the calm and profound slumber of the earth.
But Rosa, who was alone in her little dark cupboard, felt a vague and painful emotion come over her.
She was tossing about in bed, unable to get to sleep, when she heard the faint sobs of a crying child close to her head, through the partition.
She was frightened, and called out, and was answered by a weak voice, broken by sobs.
It was the little girl, who was always used to sleeping in her mother's room, and who was afraid in her small attic.
Rosa was delighted, got up softly so as not to awaken any one, and went and fetched the child.
She took her into her warm bed, kissed her and pressed her to her bosom, lavished exaggerated manifestations of tenderness on her, and at last grew calmer herself and went to sleep.
And till morning the candidate for confirmation slept with her head on Rosa's bosom.
The villagers were up already, and the women went busily from house to house, carefully bringing short, starched muslin dresses or very long wax tapers tied in the middle with a bow of silk fringed with gold, and with dents in the wax for the fingers.
The sun was already high in the blue sky, which still had a rosy tint toward the horizon, like a faint remaining trace of dawn.
Families of fowls were walking about outside the houses, and here and there a black cock, with a glistening breast, raised his head, which was crowned by his red comb, flapped his wings and uttered his shrill crow, which the other cocks repeated.
Vehicles of all sorts came from neighboring parishes, stopping at the different houses, and tall Norman women dismounted, wearing dark dresses, with kerchiefs crossed over the bosom, fastened with silver brooches a hundred years old.
When the horses were in the stable there was a double line of rustic conveyances along the road: carts, cabriolets, tilburies, wagonettes, traps of every shape and age, tipping forward on their shafts or else tipping backward with the shafts up in the air.
The carpenter's house was as busy as a bee-hive.
The women, in dressing- jackets and petticoats, with their thin, short hair, which looked faded and worn, hanging down their backs, were busy dressing the child, who was standing quietly on a table, while Madame Tellier was directing the movements of her battalion.
They washed her, did her hair, dressed her, and with the help of a number of pins, they arranged the folds of her dress and took in the waist, which was too large.
Then, when she was ready, she was told to sit down and not to move, and the women hurried off to get ready themselves.
The candidates came out of the houses and went toward the parochial building, which contained the two schools and the mansion house, and which stood quite at one end of the village, while the church was situated at the other.
The parents, in their very best clothes, followed their children, with embarrassed looks, and those clumsy movements of a body bent by toil.
The little girls disappeared in a cloud of muslin, which looked like whipped cream, while the lads, who looked like embryo waiters in a cafe and whose heads shone with pomatum, walked with their legs apart, so as not to get any dust or dirt on their black trousers.
It was something for a family, to be proud of, when a large number of relatives, who had come from a distance, surrounded the child, and the carpenter's triumph was complete.
Madame Tellier's regiment, with its leader at its head, followed Constance; her father gave his arm to his sister, her mother walked by the side of Raphaele, Fernande with Rosa and Louise and Flora together, and thus they proceeded majestically through the village, like a general's staff in full uniform, while the effect on the village was startling.
At the school the girls ranged themselves under the Sister of Mercy and the boys under the schoolmaster, and they started off, singing a hymn as they went.
When they went into the church the congregation grew quite excited.
They pressed against each other, turned round and jostled one another in order to see, and some of the devout ones spoke almost aloud, for they were so astonished at the sight of those ladies whose dresses were more elaborate than the priest's vestments.
The mayor offered them his pew, the first one on the right, close to the choir, and Madame Tellier sat there with her sister-in-law, Fernande and Raphaele.
Rosa, Louise and Flora occupied the second seat, in company with the carpenter.
The choir was full of kneeling children, the girls on one side and the boys on the other, and the long wax tapers which they held looked like lances pointing in all directions, and three men were standing in front of the lectern, singing as loud as they could.
They prolonged the syllables of the sonorous Latin indefinitely, holding on to “Amens” with interminable “a-a's,” which the reed stop of the organ sustained in a monotonous, long-drawn-out tone.
A child's shrill voice took up the reply, and from time to time a priest sitting in a stall and wearing a biretta got up, muttered something and sat down again, while the three singers continued, their eyes fixed on the big book of plain chant lying open before them on the outstretched wings of a wooden eagle.
Toward the close Rosa, with her head in both hands, suddenly thought of her mother, her village church and her first communion.
She almost fancied that that day had returned, when she was so small and was almost hidden in her white dress, and she began to cry.
First of all she wept silently, and the tears dropped slowly from her eyes, but her emotion in creased with her recollections, and she began to sob.
She took out her pocket handkerchief, wiped her eyes and held it to her mouth, so as not to scream, but it was in vain.
Soon, throughout the church, here and there, a wife, a mother, a sister, seized by the strange sympathy of poignant emotion, and affected at the sight of those handsome ladies on their knees, shaken with sobs was moistening her cambric pocket handkerchief and pressing her beating heart with her left hand.
Just as the sparks from an engine will set fire to dry grass, so the tears of Rosa and of her companions infected the whole congregation in a moment.
Men, women, old men and lads in new smocks were soon all sobbing, and something superhuman seemed to be hovering over their heads—a spirit, the powerful breath of an invisible and all powerful Being.
Suddenly a species of madness seemed to pervade the church, the noise of a crowd in a state of frenzy, a tempest of sobs and stifled cries.
It came like gusts of wind which blow the trees in a forest, and the priest, paralyzed by emotion, stammered out incoherent prayers, without finding words, ardent prayers of the soul soaring to heaven.
The people behind him gradually grew calmer.
The cantors, in all the dignity of their white surplices, went on in somewhat uncertain voices, and the reed stop itself seemed hoarse, as if the instrument had been weeping; the priest, however, raised his hand to command silence and went and stood on the chancel steps, when everybody was silent at once.
After a few remarks on what had just taken place, and which he attributed to a miracle, he continued, turning to the seats where the carpenter's guests were sitting; “I especially thank you, my dear sisters, who have come from such a distance, and whose presence among us, whose evident faith and ardent piety have set such a salutary example to all.
You have edified my parish; your emotion has warmed all hearts; without you, this great day would not, perhaps, have had this really divine character.
It is sufficient, at times, that there should be one chosen lamb, for the Lord to descend on His flock.” His voice failed him again, from emotion, and he said no more, but concluded the service.
They now left the church as quickly as possible; the children themselves were restless and tired with such a prolonged tension of the mind.
There was a crowd outside, a noisy crowd, a babel of loud voices, where the shrill Norman accent was discernible.
The villagers formed two ranks, and when the children appeared, each family took possession of their own.
The whole houseful of women caught hold of Constance, surrounded her and kissed her, and Rosa was especially demonstrative.
At last she took hold of one hand, while Madame Tellier took the other, and Raphaele and Fernande held up her long muslin skirt, so that it might not drag in the dust; Louise and Flora brought up the rear with Madame Rivet; and the child, who was very silent and thoughtful, set off for home in the midst of this guard of honor.
Dinner was served in the workshop on long boards supported by trestles, and through the open door they could see all the enjoyment that was going on in the village.
Everywhere they were feasting, and through every window were to be seen tables surrounded by people in their Sunday best, and a cheerful noise was heard in every house, while the men sat in their shirt-sleeves, drinking glass after glass of cider.
In the carpenter's house the gaiety maintained somewhat of an air of reserve, the consequence of the emotion of the girls in the morning, and Rivet was the only one who was in a jolly mood, and he was drinking to excess.
When she came down again, her sister-in-law was waiting to speak to her about the child, and a long conversation took place, in which, however, nothing was settled.
The carpenter's wife was artful and pretended to be very much affected, and Madame Tellier, who was holding the girl on her knee, would not pledge herself to anything definite, but merely gave vague promises—she would not forget her, there was plenty of time, and besides, they would meet again.
But the conveyance did not come to the door and the women did not come downstairs.
Upstairs they even heard loud laughter, romping, little screams, and much clapping of hands, and so, while the carpenter's wife went to the stable to see whether the cart was ready, madame went upstairs.
Rivet, who was very drunk, was plaguing Rosa, who was half choking with laughter.
Louise and Flora were holding him by the arms and trying to calm him, as they were shocked at his levity after that morning's ceremony; but Raphaele and Fernande were urging him on, writhing and holding their sides with laughter, and they uttered shrill cries at every rebuff the drunken fellow received.
The man was furious, his face was red, and he was trying to shake off the two women who were clinging to him, while he was pulling Rosa's skirt with all his might and stammering incoherently.
But Madame Tellier, who was very indignant, went up to her brother, seized him by the shoulders, and threw him out of the room with such violence that he fell against the wall in the passage, and a minute afterward they heard him pumping water on his head in the yard, and when he reappeared with the cart he was quite calm.
The girls now were amused at the jolting of the cart, pushed their neighbors' chairs, and burst out laughing every moment.
There was a glare of light over the country, which dazzled their eyes, and the wheels raised two trails of dust along the highroad.
When they got out at the station, the carpenter said: “I am sorry you are going; we might have had some good times together.” But Madame Tellier replied very sensibly: “Everything has its right time, and we cannot always be enjoying ourselves.” And then he had a sudden inspiration: “Look here, I will come and see you at Fecamp next month.” And he gave Rosa a roguish and knowing look.
“Come,” his sister replied, “you must be sensible; you may come if you like, but you are not to be up to any of your tricks.” He did not reply, and as they heard the whistle of the train, he immediately began to kiss them all.
When it came to Rosa's turn, he tried to get to her mouth, which she, however, smiling with her lips closed, turned away from him each time by a rapid movement of her head to one side.
He held her in his arms, but he could not attain his object, as his large whip, which he was holding in his hand and waving behind the girl's back in desperation, interfered with his movements.
“Passengers for Rouen, take your seats!” a guard cried, and they got in.
Monsieur Philippe, the banker's son, even carried his friendliness so far as to send a special messenger to Monsieur Tournevau, who was in the bosom of his family.
Monsieur Tournevau was much excited; he opened the envelope and grew pale; it contained only these words in pencil: “The cargo of cod has been found; the ship has come into port; good business for you.
Come immediately.” He felt in his pockets, gave the messenger two sons, and suddenly blushing to his ears, he said: “I must go out.” He handed his wife the laconic and mysterious note, rang the bell, and when the servant came in, he asked her to bring him has hat and overcoat immediately.
As soon as he was in the street, he began to hurry, and the way seemed to him to be twice as long as usual, in consequence of his impatience.
Madame Tellier's establishment had put on quite a holiday look.
On the ground floor, a number of sailors were making a deafening noise, and Louise and Flora drank with one and the other, and were being called for in every direction at once.
The upstairs room was full by nine o'clock.
Monsieur Vasse, the Judge of the Tribunal of Commerce, Madame Tellier's regular but Platonic wooer, was talking to her in a corner in a low voice, and they were both smiling, as if they were about to come to an understanding.
Monsieur Poulin, the ex-mayor, was talking to Rosa, and she was running her hands through the old gentleman's white whiskers.
Tall Fernande was on the sofa, her feet on the coat of Monsieur Pinipesse, the tax collector, and leaning back against young Monsieur Philippe, her right arm around his neck, while she held a cigarette in her left hand.
Raphaele appeared to be talking seriously with Monsieur Dupuis, the insurance agent, and she finished by saying: “Yes, I will, yes.” Just then, the door opened suddenly, and Monsieur Tournevau came in, and was greeted with enthusiastic cries of “Long live Tournevau!” And Raphaele, who was dancing alone up and down the room, went and threw herself into his arms.
He seized her in a vigorous embrace and, without saying a word, lifted her up as if she had been a feather.
Rosa was chatting to the ex-mayor, kissing him and puffing; both his whiskers at the same time, in order to keep his head straight.
Fernanad and Madame Tellier remained with the four men, and Monsieur Philippe exclaimed: “I will pay for some champagne; get three bottles, Madame Tellier.” And Fernande gave him a hug, and whispered to him: “Play us a waltz, will you?” So he rose and sat down at the old piano in the corner, and managed to get a hoarse waltz out of the depths of the instrument.
The tall girl put her arms round the tax collector, Madame Tellier let Monsieur Vasse take her round the waist, and the two couples turned round, kissing as they danced.
Monsieur Vasse, who had formerly danced in good society, waltzed with such elegance that Madame Tellier was quite captivated.
Frederic brought the champagne; the first cork popped, and Monsieur Philippe played the introduction to a quadrille, through which the four dancers walked in society fashion, decorously, with propriety, deportment, bows and curtsies, and then they began to drink.
Monsieur Philippe next struck up a lively polka, and Monsieur Tournevau started off with the handsome Jewess, whom he held without letting her feet touch the ground.
Monsieur Pinipesse and Monsieur Vasse had started off with renewed vigor, and from time to time one or other couple would stop to toss off a long draught of sparkling wine, and that dance was threatening to become never-ending, when Rosa opened the door.
“I want to dance,” she exclaimed.
And she caught hold of Monsieur Dupuis, who was sitting idle on the couch, and the dance began again.
“I will pay for one,” Monsieur Tournevau said.
“So will I,” Monsieur Vasse declared.
I will do the same,” Monsieur Dupuis remarked.
They all began to clap their hands, and it soon became a regular ball, and from time to time Louise and Flora ran upstairs quickly and had a few turns, while their customers downstairs grew impatient, and then they returned regretfully to the tap-room.
At midnight they were still dancing.
Madame Tellier let them amuse themselves while she had long private talks in corners with Monsieur Vasse, as if to settle the last details of something that had already been settled.
At last, at one o'clock, the two married men, Monsieur Tournevau and Monsieur Pinipesse, declared that they were going home, and wanted to pay.
Nothing was charged for except the champagne, and that cost only six francs a bottle, instead of ten, which was the usual price, and when they expressed their surprise at such generosity, Madame Tellier, who was beaming, said to them: “We don't have a holiday every day.” DENIS To Leon Chapron.
Marambot opened the letter which his servant Denis gave him and smiled.
He was a short, stout, jovial man, who was known throughout the countryside as a model servant.
He asked: “Is monsieur pleased?
Has monsieur received good news?” M.
Marambot was not rich.
He was an old village druggist, a bachelor, who lived on an income acquired with difficulty by selling drugs to the farmers.
He answered: “Yes, my boy.
Old man Malois is afraid of the law-suit with which I am threatening him.
Five thousand francs are not liable to harm the account of an old bachelor.” M.
Marambot rubbed his hands with satisfaction.
He was a man of quiet temperament, more sad than gay, incapable of any prolonged effort, careless in business.
He could undoubtedly have amassed a greater income had he taken advantage of the deaths of colleagues established in more important centers, by taking their places and carrying on their business.
But the trouble of moving and the thought of all the preparations had always stopped him.
After thinking the matter over for a few days, he would be satisfied to say: “Bah!
I'll not lose anything by the delay.
I may even find something better.” Denis, on the contrary, was always urging his master to new enterprises.
Of an energetic temperament, he would continually repeat: “Oh!
One thousand francs would do me.” M.
Marambot would smile without answering and would go out in his little garden, where, his hands behind his back, he would walk about dreaming.
All day long, Denis sang the joyful refrains of the folk-songs of the district.
He even showed an unusual activity, for he cleaned all the windows of the house, energetically rubbing the glass, and singing at the top of his voice.
Marambot, surprised at his zeal, said to him several times, smiling: “My boy, if you work like that there will be nothing left for you to do to-morrow.” The following day, at about nine o'clock in the morning, the postman gave Denis four letters for his master, one of them very heavy.
Marambot immediately shut himself up in his room until late in the afternoon.
One of them was addressed to M.
Malois; it was undoubtedly a receipt for the money.
Denis asked his master no questions; he appeared to be as sad and gloomy that day as he had seemed joyful the day before.
Marambot went to bed as usual and slept.
He was awakened by a strange noise.
He sat up in his bed and listened.
Suddenly the door opened, and Denis appeared, holding in one hand a candle and in the other a carving knife, his eyes staring, his face contracted as though moved by some deep emotion; he was as pale as a ghost.
Marambot, astonished, thought that he was sleep-walking, and he was going to get out of bed and assist him when the servant blew out the light and rushed for the bed.
His master stretched out his hands to receive the shock which knocked him over on his back; he was trying to seize the hands of his servant, whom he now thought to be crazy, in order to avoid the blows which the latter was aiming at him.
He was struck by the knife; once in the shoulder, once in the forehead and the third time in the chest.
He fought wildly, waving his arms around in the darkness, kicking and crying: “Denis!
Listen, Denis!” But the latter, gasping for breath, kept up his furious attack always striking, always repulsed, sometimes with a kick, sometimes with a punch, and rushing forward again furiously.
Marambot was wounded twice more, once in the leg and once in the stomach.
But, suddenly, a thought flashed across his mind, and he began to shriek: “Stop, stop, Denis, I have not yet received my money!” The man immediately ceased, and his master could hear his labored breathing in the darkness.
Marambot then went on: “I have received nothing.
His sheets, his curtains, and even the walls, were spattered with red.
Denis, standing in the middle of the room, was also bloody from head to foot.
Marambot thought himself dead, and fell unconscious.
It was some time, however, before he regained his senses, and was able to understand or remember.
But, suddenly, the memory of the attack and of his wounds returned to him, and he was filled with such terror that he closed his eyes in order not to see anything.
He had not died immediately, therefore he might still recover.
He felt weak, very weak; but he had no real pain, although he noticed an uncomfortable smarting sensation in several parts of his body.
He also felt icy cold, and all wet, and as though wrapped up in bandages.
He thought that this dampness came from the blood which he had lost; and he shivered at the dreadful thought of this red liquid which had come from his veins and covered his bed.
The idea of seeing this terrible spectacle again so upset him that he kept his eyes closed with all his strength, as though they might open in spite of himself.
He had probably escaped.
But what could he, Marambot, do now?
But if he should make the slightest motions, his wounds would undoubtedly open up again and he would die from loss of blood.
Suddenly he heard the door of his room open.
It was certainly Denis who was coming to finish him up.
He held his breath in order to make the murderer think that he had been successful.
Therefore, someone must have discovered the misdeed and he was being cared for.
A wild joy seized him; but prudently, he did not wish to show that he was conscious.
He opened one eye, just one, with the greatest precaution.
He recognized Denis standing beside him, Denis himself!
What awful scheme could he now be carrying out?
And he would now bury him in the garden, under ten feet of earth, so that no one could discover him!
Marambot began to tremble like a leaf.
He kept saying to himself: “I am lost, lost!” He closed his eyes so as not to see the knife as it descended for the final stroke.
Denis was now lifting him up and bandaging him.
Then he began carefully to dress the wound on his leg, as his master had taught him to do.
Marambot, in a dying voice, gave him the practical piece of advice: “Wash the wounds in a dilute solution of carbolic acid!” Denis answered: “This is what I am doing, monsieur.” M.
Marambot opened both his eyes.
There was no sign of blood either on the bed, on the walls, or on the murderer.
The wounded man was stretched out on clean white sheets.
Marambot said calmly: “You have been guilty of a great crime.” Denis answered: “I am trying to make up for it, monsieur.
If you will not tell on me, I will serve you as faithfully as in the past.” This was no time to anger his servant.
Marambot murmured as he closed his eyes: “I swear not to tell on you.” Denis saved his master.
He spent days and nights without sleep, never leaving the sick room, preparing drugs, broths, potions, feeling his pulse, anxiously counting the beats, attending him with the skill of a trained nurse and the devotion of a son.
He continually asked: “Well, monsieur, how do you feel?” M.
Marambot would answer in a weak voice: “A little better, my boy, thank you.” And when the sick man would wake up at night, he would often see his servant seated in an armchair, weeping silently.
Never had the old druggist been so cared for, so fondled, so spoiled.
At first he had said to himself: “As soon as I am well I shall get rid of this rascal.” He was now convalescing, and from day to day he would put off dismissing his murderer.
He thought that no one would ever show him such care and attention, for he held this man through fear; and he warned him that he had left a document with a lawyer denouncing him to the law if any new accident should occur.
This precaution seemed to guarantee him against any future attack; and he then asked himself if it would not be wiser to keep this man near him, in order to watch him closely.
Just as formerly, when he would hesitate about taking some larger place of business, he could not make up his mind to any decision.
Denis continued to show himself an admirable servant.
One morning, just as he was finishing breakfast, he suddenly heard a great noise in the kitchen.
He hastened in there.
Denis was struggling with two gendarmes.
As soon as he saw his master, the servant began to sob, exclaiming: “You told on me, monsieur, that's not right, after what you had promised me.
You have broken your word of honor, Monsieur Marambot; that is not right, that's not right!” M.
Marambot, bewildered and distressed at being suspected, lifted his hand: “I swear to you before the Lord, my boy that I did not tell on you.
I haven't the slightest idea how the police could have found out about your attack on me.” The officer started: “You say that he attacked you, M.
Marambot?” The bewildered druggist answered: “Yes—but I did not tell on him—I haven't said a word—I swear it—he has served me excellently from that time on—” The officer pronounced severely: “I will take down your testimony.
The law will take notice of this new action, of which it was ignorant, Monsieur Marambot.
I was commissioned to arrest your servant for the theft of two ducks surreptitiously taken by him from M.
Duhamel of which act there are witnesses.
I shall make a note of your information.” Then, turning toward his men, he ordered: “Come on, bring him along!” The two gendarmes dragged Denis out.
The lawyer used a plea of insanity, contrasting the two misdeeds in order to strengthen his argument.
He had clearly proved that the theft of the two ducks came from the same mental condition as the eight knife- wounds in the body of Maramlot.
He had cunningly analyzed all the phases of this transitory condition of mental aberration, which could, doubtless, be cured by a few months' treatment in a reputable sanatorium.
He had spoken in enthusiastic terms of the continued devotion of this faithful servant, of the care with which he had surrounded his master, wounded by him in a moment of alienation.
Marambot felt the tears rising to his eyes.
The lawyer noticed it, opened his arms with a broad gesture, spreading out the long black sleeves of his robe like the wings of a bat, and exclaimed: “Look, look, gentleman of the jury, look at those tears.
What speech, what argument, what reasoning would be worth these tears of his master?
They, speak louder than I do, louder than the law; they cry: 'Mercy, for the poor wandering mind of a while ago!
Then the judge, turning to Marambot, whose testimony had been excellent for his servant, asked him: “But, monsieur, even admitting that you consider this man insane, that does not explain why you should have kept him.
He was none the less dangerous.” Marambot, wiping his eyes, answered: “Well, your honor, what can you expect?
Nowadays it's so hard to find good servants—I could never have found a better one.” Denis was acquitted and put in a sanatorium at his master's expense.
These men still came together once in a while without their wives as they had done when they were bachelors.
They would eat for a long time, drink for a long time; they would talk of everything, stir up those old and joyful memories which bring a smile to the lip and a tremor to the heart.
One of them was saying: “Georges, do you remember our excursion to Saint-Germain with those two little girls from Montmartre?” “I should say I do!” And a little detail here or there would be remembered, and all these things brought joy to the hearts.
The conversation turned on marriage, and each one said with a sincere air: “Oh, if it were to do over again!” Georges Duportin added: “It's strange how easily one falls into it.
You have fully decided never to marry; and then, in the springtime, you go to the country; the weather is warm; the summer is beautiful; the fields are full of flowers; you meet a young girl at some friend's house—crash! all is over.
You return married!” Pierre Letoile exclaimed: “Correct! that is exactly my case, only there were some peculiar incidents—” His friend interrupted him: “As for you, you have no cause to complain.
You have the most charming wife in the world, pretty, amiable, perfect!
You are undoubtedly the happiest one of us all.” The other one continued: “It's not my fault.” “How so?” “It is true that I have a perfect wife, but I certainly married her much against my will.” “Nonsense!” “Yes—this is the adventure.
I was thirty-five, and I had no more idea of marrying than I had of hanging myself.
Young girls seemed to me to be inane, and I loved pleasure.
“During the month of May I was invited to the wedding of my cousin, Simon d'Erabel, in Normandy.
It was a regular Normandy wedding.
I had been paired off, for the occasion, with a Mademoiselle Dumoulin, daughter of a retired colonel, a young, blond, soldierly person, well formed, frank and talkative.
She took complete possession of me for the whole day, dragged me into the park, made me dance willy-nilly, bored me to death.
I said to myself: 'That's all very well for to-day, but tomorrow I'll get out.
That's all there is to it!' “Toward eleven o'clock at night the women retired to their rooms; the men stayed, smoking while they drank or drinking while they smoked, whichever you will.
Farmers and peasant girls were jumping about in a circle yelling at the top of their lungs a dance air which was feebly accompanied by two violins and a clarinet.
The wild song of the peasants often completely drowned the sound of the instruments, and the weak music, interrupted by the unrestrained voices, seemed to come to us in little fragments of scattered notes.
Two enormous casks, surrounded by flaming torches, contained drinks for the crowd.
On a table were bread, butter, cheese and sausages.
Each one would step up from time to time and swallow a mouthful, and under the starlit sky this healthy and violent exercise was a pleasing sight, and made one also feel like drinking from these enormous casks and eating the crisp bread and butter with a raw onion.
“A mad desire seized me to take part in this merrymaking, and I left my companions.
I must admit that I was probably a little tipsy, but I was soon entirely so.
In order to refresh myself afterward, I swallowed a bowlful of cider, and I began to bounce around as if possessed.
The boys, delighted, were watching me and trying to imitate me; the girls all wished to dance with me, and jumped about heavily with the grace of cows.
“I realized my condition and tried to reach my room.
Everybody was asleep and the house was silent and dark.
“I had no matches and everybody was in bed.
As soon as I reached the vestibule I began to, feel dizzy.
I had a lot of trouble to find the banister.
At last, by accident, my hand came in contact with it, and I sat down on the first step of the stairs in order to try to gather my scattered wits.
Fortunately I had not forgotten that.
Armed with this knowledge, I arose, not without difficulty, and I began to ascend, step by step.
“Only three or four times did my foot miss the steps, and I went down on my knees; but thanks to the energy of my arms and the strength of my will, I avoided falling completely.
I felt one door; I counted: 'One'; but a sudden dizziness made me lose my hold on the wall, make a strange turn and fall up against the other wall.
I wished to turn in a straight line: The crossing was long and full of hardships.
At last I reached the shore, and, prudently, I began to travel along again until I met another door.
Notwithstanding my befuddled state, I thought: 'Since the door opens, this must be home.' After softly closing the door, I stepped out in the darkness.
I bumped against something soft: my easy- chair.
I immediately stretched myself out on it.
“In my condition it would not have been wise to look for my bureau, my candles, my matches.
It would probably have taken me that long also to undress; and even then I might not have succeeded.
“I only took my shoes off; I unbuttoned my waistcoat, which was choking me, I loosened my trousers and went to sleep.
“This undoubtedly lasted for a long time.
I was suddenly awakened by a deep voice which was saying: 'What, you lazy girl, still in bed?
It's ten o'clock!' “A woman's voice answered: 'Already!
I was so tired yesterday.' “In bewilderment I wondered what this dialogue meant.
My mind was wandering, still surrounded by a heavy fog.
The first voice continued: 'I'm going to raise your curtains.' “I heard steps approaching me.
Completely at a loss what to do, I sat up.
I in turn seized him, and a terrific struggle ensued.
We were rolling around, knocking over the furniture and crashing against the walls.
A woman's voice was shrieking: 'Help! help!' “Servants, neighbors, frightened women crowded around us.
I was struggling with Colonel Dumoulin.
“I had slept beside his daughter's bed!
“When we were separated, I escaped to my room, dumbfounded.
“I heard a great noise through the whole house, doors being opened and closed, whisperings and rapid steps.
I cried: 'Who is there?' It was my uncle, the bridegroom's father.
I opened the door: “He was pale and furious, and he treated me harshly: 'You have behaved like a scoundrel in my house, do you hear?' Then he added more gently 'But, you young fool, why the devil did you let yourself get caught at ten o'clock in the morning?
You go to sleep like a log in that room, instead of leaving immediately—immediately after.' “I exclaimed: 'But, uncle, I assure you that nothing occurred.
I was drunk and got into the wrong room.' “He shrugged his shoulders! 'Don't talk nonsense.' I raised my hand, exclaiming: 'I swear to you on my honor.' My uncle continued: 'Yes, that's all right.
It's your duty to say that.' “I in turn grew angry and told him the whole unfortunate occurrence.
He looked at me with a bewildered expression, not knowing what to believe.
“I heard that a kind of jury of the mothers had been formed, to which were submitted the different phases of the situation.
And you may be sure that he does not threaten idly.
I spoke of a duel and he answered: “No, I tell you that I will blow his brains out.”' “'Let us now examine the question from another point of view.
Either you have misbehaved yourself—and then so much the worse for you, my boy; one should not go near a young girl—or else, being drunk, as you say, you made a mistake in the room.
You shouldn't get yourself into such foolish situations.
Whatever you may say, the poor girl's reputation is lost, for a drunkard's excuses are never believed.
She used every argument.
No one believed my story.
They could not imagine that this young girl could have forgotten to lock her door in a house full of company.
It was a terrible and unforgettable scandal.
We may, perhaps, find some way out of it when we are drawing up the papers.' “This prospect relieved me.
And I agreed to write my proposal.
The following day I was informed that I had been accepted.
“Then, in three weeks, before I had been able to find any excuse, the banns were published, the announcement sent out, the contract signed, and one Monday morning I found myself in a church, beside a weeping young girl, after telling the magistrate that I consented to take her as my companion—for better, for worse.
“I had not seen her since my adventure, and I glanced at her out of the corner of my eye with a certain malevolent surprise.
“Toward the middle of the night I entered the bridal chamber with the full intention of letting her know my resolutions, for I was now master.
I found her sitting in an armchair, fully dressed, pale and with red eyes.
As soon as I entered she rose and came slowly toward me saying: 'Monsieur, I am ready to do whatever you may command.
I will kill myself if you so desire' “The colonel's daughter was as pretty as she could be in this heroic role.
I kissed her; it was my privilege.
His companions were laughing.
One of them said: “Marriage is indeed a lottery; you must never choose your numbers.
The haphazard ones are the best.” Another added by way of conclusion: “Yes, but do not forget that the god of drunkards chose for Pierre.” THE UNKNOWN We were speaking of adventures, and each one of us was relating his story of delightful experiences, surprising meetings, on the train, in a hotel, at the seashore.
According to Roger des Annettes, the seashore was particularly favorable to the little blind god.
“Woman is like a precious trinket, we appreciate her all the more when we meet her in the most unexpected places; but the rarest ones are only to be found in Paris.” He was silent for a moment, and then continued: “By Jove, it's great!
The little women, daintily tripping along, seem to blossom out like flowers.
What a delightful, charming sight!
The dainty perfume of violet is everywhere.
The city is gay, and everybody notices the women.
By Jove, how tempting they are in their light, thin dresses, which occasionally give one a glimpse of the delicate pink flesh beneath!
“One saunters along, head up, mind alert, and eyes open.
You see her in the distance, while still a block away; you already know that she is going to please you at closer quarters.
You can recognize her by the flower on her hat, the toss of her head, or her gait.
She approaches, and you say to yourself: 'Look out, here she is!' You come closer to her and you devour her with your eyes.
“Is it a young girl running errands for some store, a young woman returning from church, or hastening to see her lover?
What difference does it make?
How many of these dear creatures have I met this way, and how wildly in love I would have been had I known them more intimately.
“Have you ever noticed that the ones we would love the most distractedly are those whom we never meet to know?
When I think of all the adorable creatures that I have elbowed in the streets of Paris, I fairly rave.
There is a proverb which says that happiness often passes our way; I am sure that I have often passed alongside the one who could have caught me like a linnet in the snare of her fresh beauty.” Roger des Annettes had listened smilingly.
He answered: “I know that as well as you do.
This is what happened to me: About five years ago, for the first time I met, on the Pont de la Concorde, a young woman who made a wonderful impression on me.
She was dark, rather stout, with glossy hair, and eyebrows which nearly met above two dark eyes.
On her lip was a scarcely perceptible down, which made one dream-dream as one dreams of beloved woods, on seeing a bunch of wild violets.
She had a small waist and a well-developed bust, which seemed to present a challenge, offer a temptation.
Her glance was strange, vacant, unthinking, and yet wonderfully beautiful.
“I imagined that she might be a Jewess.
I followed her, and then turned round to look at her, as did many others.
She walked with a swinging gait that was not graceful, but somehow attracted one.
At the Place de la Concorde she took a carriage, and I stood there like a fool, moved by the strongest desire that had ever assailed me.
“Six months later I descried her in the Rue de la Paix again.
On seeing her I felt the same shock that one experiences on seeing a once dearly loved woman.
When she passed close enough to touch me I felt as though I were standing before a red hot furnace.
Then, when she had passed by, I noticed a delicious sensation, as of a cooling breeze blowing over my face.
I was afraid of doing something foolish.
But just as the sun was going down on one beautiful evening in May I recognized her walking along the Avenue des Champs-Elysees.
The Arc de Triomphe stood out in bold relief against the fiery glow of the sky.
A golden haze filled the air; it was one of those delightful spring evenings which are the glory of Paris.
“I followed her, tormented by a desire to address her, to kneel before her, to pour forth the emotion which was choking me.
Twice I passed by her only to fall back, and each time as I passed by I felt this sensation, as of scorching heat, which I had noticed in the Rue de la Paix.
“She glanced at me, and then I saw her enter a house on the Rue de Presbourg.
Then I decided to question the janitor.
He seemed not to understand me. 'She must be visiting some one,' he said.
But one freezing morning in January, I was walking along the Boulevard Malesherbes at a dog trot, so as to keep warm, when at the corner I bumped into a woman and knocked a small package out of her hand.
I tried to apologize.
“At first I stood stock still from the shock; then having returned to her the package which she had dropped, I said abruptly: “'I am both grieved and delighted, madame, to have jostled you.
For more than two years I have known you, admired you, and had the most ardent wish to be presented to you; nevertheless I have been unable to find out who you are, or where you live.
Attribute them to a passionate desire to be numbered among your acquaintances.
Such sentiments can surely offend you in no way!
My name is Baron Roger des Annettes.
Make inquiries about me, and you will find that I am a gentleman.
Please be good to me and tell me how I can see you.' “She looked at me with her strange vacant stare, and answered smilingly: “'Give me your address.
I will come and see you.' “I was so dumfounded that I must have shown my surprise.
But I quickly gathered my wits together and gave her a visiting card, which she slipped into her pocket with a quick, deft movement.
“Until Sunday my mind was occupied day and night trying to guess who she might be and planning my course of conduct towards her.
I finally decided to buy her a jewel, a beautiful little jewel, which I placed in its box on the mantelpiece, and left it there awaiting her arrival.
“I spent a restless night waiting for her.
“At ten o'clock she came, calm and quiet, and with her hand outstretched, as though she had known me for years.
“Ah, my friends! what a bliss it is, to stand at a discreet distance and watch the hidden pink and blue ribbons, partly concealed, to observe the hazy lines of the beloved one's form, as they become visible through the last of the filmy garments!
“Her back was turned towards me, and suddenly, my eyes were irresistibly drawn to a large black spot right between her shoulders.
Were my eyes deceiving me?
Then my mind reverted to the faint down on her lip, the heavy eyebrows almost meeting over her coal-black eyes, her glossy black hair —I should have been prepared for some surprise.
“Nevertheless I was dumfounded, and my mind was haunted by dim visions of strange adventures.
I seemed to see before me one of the evil genii of the Thousand and One Nights, one of these dangerous and crafty creatures whose mission it is to drag men down to unknown depths.
At first she showed surprise, which soon turned to anger; and she said, quickly putting on her wraps: “'It was hardly worth while for me to go out of my way to come here.' “I wanted her to accept the ring which I had bought for her, but she replied haughtily: 'For whom do you take me, sir?' I blushed to the roots of my hair.
“There is my whole adventure.
I can't see a woman without thinking of her.
I cannot kiss a woman without seeing her face before me, and without suffering the torture of unsatisfied desire.
She is there, beside the other one, visible but intangible.
I am almost willing to believe that she was bewitched, and carried a talisman between her shoulders.
I bowed, but she pretended not to recognize me.
Yes, doubtless an oriental Jewess!
I don't know!” THE APPARITION The subject of sequestration of the person came up in speaking of a recent lawsuit, and each of us had a story to tell—a true story, he said.
We had been spending the evening together at an old family mansion in the Rue de Grenelle, just a party of intimate friends.
The old Marquis de la Tour-Samuel, who was eighty-two, rose, and, leaning his elbow on the mantelpiece, said in his somewhat shaky voice: “I also know of something strange, so strange that it has haunted me all my life.
It is now fifty-six years since the incident occurred, and yet not a month passes that I do not see it again in a dream, so great is the impression of fear it has left on my mind.
For ten minutes I experienced such horrible fright that ever since then a sort of constant terror has remained with me.
Sudden noises startle me violently, and objects imperfectly distinguished at night inspire me with a mad desire to flee from them.
“But I would not have acknowledged that before I reached my present age.
Now I can say anything.
It is, therefore, permissible, at eighty-two years of age, not to be brave in presence of imaginary danger.
“That affair so completely upset me, caused me such deep and mysterious and terrible distress, that I never spoke of it to any one.
I will now tell it to you exactly as it happened, without any attempt at explanation.
“In July, 1827, I was stationed at Rouen.
One day as I was walking along the quay I met a man whom I thought I recognized without being able to recall exactly who he was.
Instinctively I made a movement to stop.
The stranger perceived it and at once extended his hand.
“He was a friend to whom I had been deeply attached as a youth.
His hair was quite white and he walked bent over as though completely exhausted.
He apparently understood my surprise, and he told me of the misfortune which had shattered his life.
“Having fallen madly in love with a young girl, he had married her, but after a year of more than earthly happiness she died suddenly of an affection of the heart.
He left his country home on the very day of her burial and came to his town house in Rouen, where he lived, alone and unhappy, so sad and wretched that he thought constantly of suicide.
“'Since I have found you again in this manner,' he said, 'I will ask you to render me an important service.
I cannot send a servant or a business clerk, as discretion and absolute silence are necessary.
I will give you the key of the room, which I myself locked on leaving, and the key of my desk, also a few words for my gardener, telling him to open the chateau for you.
But come and breakfast with me tomorrow and we will arrange all that.' “I promised to do him the slight favor he asked.
It was, for that matter, only a ride which I could make in an hour on horseback, his property being but a few miles distant from Rouen.
“At ten o'clock the following day I breakfasted, tete-a-tete, with my friend, but he scarcely spoke.
“He begged me to pardon him; the thought of the visit I was about to make to that room, the scene of his dead happiness, overcame him, he said.
He, indeed, seemed singularly agitated and preoccupied, as though undergoing some mysterious mental struggle.
“At length he explained to me exactly what I had to do.
I must take two packages of letters and a roll of papers from the first right-hand drawer of the desk, of which I had the key.
He added: “'I need not beg you to refrain from glancing at them.' “I was wounded at that remark and told him so somewhat sharply.
He stammered: “'Forgive me, I suffer so,' and tears came to his eyes.
“At about one o'clock I took leave of him to accomplish my mission.
“'The weather was glorious, and I trotted across the fields, listening to the song of the larks and the rhythmical clang of my sword against my boot.
Branches of trees caressed my face as I passed, and now and then I caught a leaf with my teeth and chewed it, from sheer gladness of heart at being alive and vigorous on such a radiant day.
“As I approached the chateau I took from my pocket the letter I had for the gardener, and was astonished at finding it sealed.
I was so irritated that I was about to turn back without having fulfilled my promise, but reflected that I should thereby display undue susceptibility.
My friend in his troubled condition might easily have fastened the envelope without noticing that he did so.
“The manor looked as if it had been abandoned for twenty years.
The open gate was falling from its hinges, the walks were overgrown with grass and the flower beds were no longer distinguishable.
He seemed stunned with astonishment at seeing me.
On receiving my letter, he read it, reread it, turned it over and over, looked me up and down, put the paper in his pocket and finally said: “'Well, what is it you wish?' “I replied shortly: “'You ought to know, since you have just read your master's orders.
I wish to enter the chateau.' “He seemed overcome.
“'Then you are going in—into her room?' “I began to lose patience.
Are you presuming to question me?' “He stammered in confusion: “'No—sir—but—but it has not been opened since—since the-death.
If you will be kind enough to wait five minutes I will go and—and see if—' “I interrupted him angrily: “'See here, what do you mean by your tricks?
“'You know very well you cannot enter the room, since here is the key!' “He no longer objected.
“'Then, sir, I will show you the way.' “'Show me the staircase and leave me.
I'll find my way without you.' “'But—sir—indeed—' “This time I lost patience, and pushing him aside, went into the house.
“I first went through the kitchen, then two rooms occupied by this man and his wife.
I then crossed a large hall, mounted a staircase and recognized the door described by my friend.
“I easily opened it, and entered the apartment.
It was so dark that at first I could distinguish nothing.
I stopped short, disagreeably affected by that disagreeable, musty odor of closed, unoccupied rooms.
As my eyes slowly became accustomed to the darkness I saw plainly enough a large and disordered bedroom, the bed without sheets but still retaining its mattresses and pillows, on one of which was a deep impression, as though an elbow or a head had recently rested there.
I noticed that a door, doubtless that of a closet, had remained half open.
“I first went to the window, which I opened to let in the light, but the fastenings of the shutters had grown so rusty that I could not move them.
As I was growing irritated over my useless efforts and could now see fairly well in the semi-darkness, I gave up the hope of getting more light, and went over to the writing desk.
“I seated myself in an armchair and, letting down the lid of the desk, I opened the drawer designated.
I needed but three packages, which I knew how to recognize, and began searching for them.
“I was straining my eyes in the effort to read the superscriptions when I seemed to hear, or, rather, feel, something rustle back of me.
I paid no attention, believing that a draught from the window was moving some drapery.
But in a minute or so another movement, almost imperceptible, sent a strangely disagreeable little shiver over my skin.
It was so stupid to be affected, even slightly, that self-respect prevented my turning around.
I had just found the second package I needed and was about to lay my hand on the third when a long and painful sigh, uttered just at my shoulder, made me bound like a madman from my seat and land several feet off.
“Such a shudder ran through all my limbs that I nearly fell backward.
No one who has not experienced it can understand that frightful, unreasoning terror!
“I do not believe in ghosts, nevertheless I collapsed from a hideous dread of the dead, and I suffered, oh!
I suffered in a few moments more than in all the rest of my life from the irresistible terror of the supernatural.
But she spoke, she spoke in a sweet, sad voice that set my nerves vibrating.
I dare not say that I became master of myself and recovered my reason.
I was terrified and scarcely knew what I was doing.
But a certain innate pride, a remnant of soldierly instinct, made me, almost in spite of myself, maintain a bold front.
She said: “'Oh, sir, you can render me a great service.' “I wanted to reply, but it was impossible for me to pronounce a word.
She continued: “'Will you?
I suffer frightfully.
I suffer, oh! how I suffer!' and she slowly seated herself in my armchair, still looking at me.
“I nodded in assent, my voice still being paralyzed.
“Then she held out to me a tortoise-shell comb and murmured: “'Comb my hair, oh! comb my hair; that will cure me; it must be combed.
Look at my head—how I suffer; and my hair pulls so!' “Her hair, unbound, very long and very black, it seemed to me, hung over the back of the armchair and touched the floor.
Why did I take that comb with a shudder, and why did I hold in my hands her long black hair that gave my skin a frightful cold sensation, as though I were handling snakes?
“That sensation has remained in my fingers, and I still tremble in recalling it.
I twisted, knotted, and unknotted, and braided them.
Suddenly she said, 'Thank you!' snatched the comb from my hands and fled by the door that I had noticed ajar.
“Left alone, I experienced for several seconds the horrible agitation of one who awakens from a nightmare.
At length I regained my senses.
I ran to the window and with a mighty effort burst open the shutters, letting a flood of light into the room.
Immediately I sprang to the door by which that being had departed.
I found it closed and immovable!
“Then the mad desire to flee overcame me like a panic the panic which soldiers know in battle.
I seized the three packets of letters on the open desk, ran from the room, dashed down the stairs four steps at a time, found myself outside, I know not how, and, perceiving my horse a few steps off, leaped into the saddle and galloped away.
“I stopped only when I reached Rouen and alighted at my lodgings.
Throwing the reins to my orderly, I fled to my room and shut myself in to reflect.
For an hour I anxiously asked myself if I were not the victim of a hallucination.
Undoubtedly I had had one of those incomprehensible nervous attacks those exaltations of mind that give rise to visions and are the stronghold of the supernatural.
And I was about to believe I had seen a vision, had a hallucination, when, as I approached the window, my eyes fell, by chance, upon my breast.
My military cape was covered with long black hairs!
One by one, with trembling fingers, I plucked them off and threw them away.
I was too disturbed, too upset to go and see my friend that day, and I also wished to reflect more fully upon what I ought to tell him.
He asked after me most particularly, and, on being told I was ill—had had a sunstroke—appeared exceedingly anxious.
Next morning I went to him, determined to tell him the truth.
He had gone out the evening before and had not yet returned.
After waiting a week longer without news of him, I notified the authorities and a judicial search was instituted.
Not the slightest trace of his whereabouts or manner of disappearance was discovered.
“A minute inspection of the abandoned chateau revealed nothing of a suspicious character.
There was no indication that a woman had been concealed there.
“After fruitless researches all further efforts were abandoned, and for fifty-six years I have heard nothing; I know no more than before.” ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 8.
CLOCHETTE How strange those old recollections are which haunt us, without our being able to get rid of them.
This one is so very old that I cannot understand how it has clung so vividly and tenaciously to my memory.
Since then I have seen so many sinister things, which were either affecting or terrible, that I am astonished at not being able to pass a single day without the face of Mother Bellflower recurring to my mind's eye, just as I knew her formerly, now so long ago, when I was ten or twelve years old.
She was an old seamstress who came to my parents' house once a week, every Thursday, to mend the linen.
My parents lived in one of those country houses called chateaux, which are merely old houses with gable roofs, to which are attached three or four farms lying around them.
The village, a large village, almost a market town, was a few hundred yards away, closely circling the church, a red brick church, black with age.
Well, every Thursday Mother Clochette came between half-past six and seven in the morning, and went immediately into the linen-room and began to work.
She was a tall, thin, bearded or rather hairy woman, for she had a beard all over her face, a surprising, an unexpected beard, growing in improbable tufts, in curly bunches which looked as if they had been sown by a madman over that great face of a gendarme in petticoats.
She had them on her nose, under her nose, round her nose, on her chin, on her cheeks; and her eyebrows, which were extraordinarily thick and long, and quite gray, bushy and bristling, looked exactly like a pair of mustaches stuck on there by mistake.
She limped, not as lame people generally do, but like a ship at anchor.
When she planted her great, bony, swerving body on her sound leg, she seemed to be preparing to mount some enormous wave, and then suddenly she dipped as if to disappear in an abyss, and buried herself in the ground.
Her walk reminded one of a storm, as she swayed about, and her head, which was always covered with an enormous white cap, whose ribbons fluttered down her back, seemed to traverse the horizon from north to south and from south to north, at each step.
I adored Mother Clochette.
As soon as I was up I went into the linen- room where I found her installed at work, with a foot-warmer under her feet.
She told me stories, whilst mending the linen with her long crooked nimble fingers; her eyes behind her magnifying spectacles, for age had impaired her sight, appeared enormous to me, strangely profound, double.
She had, as far as I can remember the things which she told me and by which my childish heart was moved, the large heart of a poor woman.
She told me these simple adventures in such a manner, that in my mind they assumed the proportions of never-to-be-forgotten dramas, of grand and mysterious poems; and the ingenious stories invented by the poets which my mother told me in the evening, had none of the flavor, none of the breadth or vigor of the peasant woman's narratives.
Well, one Tuesday, when I had spent all the morning in listening to Mother Clochette, I wanted to go upstairs to her again during the day after picking hazelnuts with the manservant in the wood behind the farm.
I remember it all as clearly as what happened only yesterday.
On opening the door of the linen-room, I saw the old seamstress lying on the ground by the side of her chair, with her face to the ground and her arms stretched out, but still holding her needle in one hand and one of my shirts in the other.
One of her legs in a blue stocking, the longer one, no doubt, was extended under her chair, and her spectacles glistened against the wall, as they had rolled away from her.
I ran away uttering shrill cries.
They all came running, and in a few minutes I was told that Mother Clochette was dead.
I cannot describe the profound, poignant, terrible emotion which stirred my childish heart.
I went slowly down into the drawing-room and hid myself in a dark corner, in the depths of an immense old armchair, where I knelt down and wept.
I remained there a long time, no doubt, for night came on.
Suddenly somebody came in with a lamp, without seeing me, however, and I heard my father and mother talking with the medical man, whose voice I recognized.
He had been sent for immediately, and he was explaining the causes of the accident, of which I understood nothing, however.
He went on talking, and what he then said will remain engraved on my mind until I die!
She broke her leg the day of my arrival here, and I had not even had time to wash my hands after getting off the diligence before I was sent for in all haste, for it was a bad case, very bad.
“She was seventeen, and a pretty girl, very pretty!
Now that she is dead, I may be less discreet.
“Just then a young assistant-teacher came to live in the village; he was a handsome, well-made fellow, and looked like a non-commissioned officer.
All the girls ran after him, but he paid no attention to them, partly because he was very much afraid of his superior, the schoolmaster, old Grabu, who occasionally got out of bed the wrong foot first.
“Old Grabu already employed pretty Hortense who has just died here, and who was afterwards nicknamed Clochette.
The assistant master singled out the pretty young girl, who was, no doubt, flattered at being chosen by this impregnable conqueror; at any rate, she fell in love with him, and he succeeded in persuading her to give him a first meeting in the hay- loft behind the school, at night, after she had done her day's sewing.
“She pretended to go home, but instead of going downstairs when she left the Grabus' she went upstairs and hid among the hay, to wait for her lover.
I shall lose my position, so get away and hide yourself.' “When the schoolmaster heard the whispering, he continued: 'Why, you are not by yourself?' 'Yes, I am, Monsieur Grabu!' 'But you are not, for you are talking.' 'I swear I am, Monsieur Grabu.' 'I will soon find out,' the old man replied, and double locking the door, he went down to get a light.
“Then the young man, who was a coward such as one frequently meets, lost his head, and becoming furious all of a sudden, he repeated: 'Hide yourself, so that he may not find you.
Do hide yourself!' They could hear the key turning in the lock again, and Hortense ran to the window which looked out on the street, opened it quickly, and then said in a low and determined voice: 'You will come and pick me up when he is gone,' and she jumped out.
“Old Grabu found nobody, and went down again in great surprise, and a quarter of an hour later, Monsieur Sigisbert came to me and related his adventure.
The girl had remained at the foot of the wall unable to get up, as she had fallen from the second story, and I went with him to fetch her.
It was raining in torrents, and I brought the unfortunate girl home with me, for the right leg was broken in three places, and the bones had come trough the flesh.
She did not complain, and merely said, with admirable resignation: 'I am punished, well punished!' “I sent for assistance and for the work-girl's relatives and told them a, made-up story of a runaway carriage which had knocked her down and lamed her outside my door.
They believed me, and the gendarmes for a whole month tried in vain to find the author of this accident.
And I say that this woman was a heroine and belonged to the race of those who accomplish the grandest deeds of history.
She was a martyr, a noble soul, a sublimely devoted woman!
And if I did not absolutely admire her, I should not have told you this story, which I would never tell any one during her life; you understand why.” The doctor ceased.
Mamma cried and papa said some words which I did not catch; then they left the room and I remained on my knees in the armchair and sobbed, whilst I heard a strange noise of heavy footsteps and something knocking against the side of the staircase.
They were carrying away Clochette's body.
THE KISS My Little Darling: So you are crying from morning until night and from night until morning, because your husband leaves you; you do not know what to do and so you ask your old aunt for advice; you must consider her quite an expert.
I don't know as much as you think I do, and yet I am not entirely ignorant of the art of loving, or, rather, of making one's self loved, in which you are a little lacking.
You say that you are all attention, love, kisses and caresses for him.
My dear, we have in our hands the most terrible power in the world: LOVE.
Man is gifted with physical strength, and he exercises force.
Woman is gifted with charm, and she rules with caresses.
It is our weapon, formidable and invincible, but we should know how to use it.
Know well that we are the mistresses of the world!
To tell the history of Love from the beginning of the world would be to tell the history of man himself: Everything springs from it, the arts, great events, customs, wars, the overthrow of empires.
In the Bible you find Delila, Judith; in fables we find Omphale, Helen; in history the Sabines, Cleopatra and many others.
Therefore we reign supreme, all-powerful.
But, like kings, we must make use of delicate diplomacy.
Love, my dear, is made up of imperceptible sensations.
The slightest shock breaks it, and our power crumbles, and we are never able to raise it again.
We have the power of making ourselves adored, but we lack one tiny thing, the understanding of the various kinds of caresses.
In embraces we lose the sentiment of delicacy, while the man over whom we rule remains master of himself, capable of judging the foolishness of certain words.
It is our Achilles' heel.
The kiss is only a preface, however, but a charming preface.
More charming than the realization itself.
Yes, the meeting of lips is the most perfect, the most divine sensation given to human beings, the supreme limit of happiness: It is in the kiss alone that one sometimes seems to feel this union of souls after which we strive, the intermingling of hearts, as it were.
Do you remember the verses of Sully-Prudhomme: Caresses are nothing but anxious bliss, Vain attempts of love to unite souls through a kiss.
One caress alone gives this deep sensation of two beings welded into one —it is the kiss.
No violent delirium of complete possession is worth this trembling approach of the lips, this first moist and fresh contact, and then the long, lingering, motionless rapture.
Therefore, my dear, the kiss is our strongest weapon, but we must take care not to dull it.
Do not forget that its value is only relative, purely conventional.
It continually changes according to circumstances, the state of expectancy and the ecstasy of the mind.
I will call attention to one example.
Another poet, Francois Coppee, has written a line which we all remember, a line which we find delightful, which moves our very hearts.
After describing the expectancy of a lover, waiting in a room one winter's evening, his anxiety, his nervous impatience, the terrible fear of not seeing her, he describes the arrival of the beloved woman, who at last enters hurriedly, out of breath, bringing with her part of the winter breeze, and he exclaims: Oh! the taste of the kisses first snatched through the veil.
Is that not a line of exquisite sentiment, a delicate and charming observation, a perfect truth?
All those who have hastened to a clandestine meeting, whom passion has thrown into the arms of a man, well do they know these first delicious kisses through the veil; and they tremble at the memory of them.
And yet their sole charm lies in the circumstances, from being late, from the anxious expectancy, but from the purely—or, rather, impurely, if you prefer—sensual point of view, they are detestable.
The moist veil, which discolors and carries the dreadful odor of chemical dye, penetrates into the young man's mouth, moistens his mustache.
He does not taste the lips of his beloved, he tastes the dye of this lace moistened with cold breath.
And yet, like the poet, we would all exclaim: Oh! the taste of the kisses first snatched through the veil.
Therefore, the value of this caress being entirely a matter of convention, we must be careful not to abuse it.
However, you were not alone in that fault; the majority of women lose their authority by abusing the kiss with untimely kisses.
When they feel that their husband or their lover is a little tired, at those times when the heart as well as the body needs rest, instead of understanding what is going on within him, they persist in giving inopportune caresses, tire him by the obstinacy of begging lips and give caresses lavished with neither rhyme nor reason.
Trust in the advice of my experience.
First, never kiss your husband in public, in the train, at the restaurant.
He would feel ridiculous and would never forgive you.
Beware of useless kisses lavished in intimacy.
For instance, I remember one day that you did something quite shocking.
Probably you do not remember it.
All three of us were together in the drawing-room, and, as you did not stand on ceremony before me, your husband was holding you on his knees and kissing you at great length on the neck, the lips and throat.
Suddenly you exclaimed: “Oh! the fire!” You had been paying no attention to it, and it was almost out.
A few lingering embers were glowing on the hearth.
Then he rose, ran to the woodbox, from which he dragged two enormous logs with great difficulty, when you came to him with begging lips, murmuring: “Kiss me!” He turned his head with difficulty and tried to hold up the logs at the same time.
Then you gently and slowly placed your mouth on that of the poor fellow, who remained with his neck out of joint, his sides twisted, his arms almost dropping off, trembling with fatigue and tired from his desperate effort.
And you kept drawing out this torturing kiss, without seeing or understanding.
We all have this foolish habit, this unconscious need of choosing the most inconvenient moments.
When he is carrying a glass of water, when he is putting on his shoes, when he is tying his scarf—in short, when he finds himself in any uncomfortable position —then is the time which we choose for a caress which makes him stop for a whole minute in the middle of a gesture with the sole desire of getting rid of us!
Do not think that this criticism is insignificant.
Love, my dear, is a delicate thing.
The least little thing offends it; know that everything depends on the tact of our caresses.
Try following my advice.
Your old aunt, COLLETTE.
This story appeared in the Gaulois in November, 1882, under the pseudonym of “Maufrigneuse.” THE LEGION OF HONOR HOW HE GOT THE LEGION OF HONOR From the time some people begin to talk they seem to have an overmastering desire or vocation.
Caillard had only had one idea in his head —to wear the ribbon of an order.
When he was still quite a small boy he used to wear a zinc cross of the Legion of Honor pinned on his tunic, just as other children wear a soldier's cap, and he took his mother's hand in the street with a proud air, sticking out his little chest with its red ribbon and metal star so that it might show to advantage.
His studies were not a success, and he failed in his examination for Bachelor of Arts; so, not knowing what to do, he married a pretty girl, as he had plenty of money of his own.
They lived in Paris, as many rich middle-class people do, mixing with their own particular set, and proud of knowing a deputy, who might perhaps be a minister some day, and counting two heads of departments among their friends.
Caillard could not get rid of his one absorbing idea, and he felt constantly unhappy because he had not the right to wear a little bit of colored ribbon in his buttonhole.
When he met any men who were decorated on the boulevards, he looked at them askance, with intense jealousy.
Sometimes, when he had nothing to do in the afternoon, he would count them, and say to himself: “Just let me see how many I shall meet between the Madeleine and the Rue Drouot.” Then he would walk slowly, looking at every coat with a practiced eye for the little bit of red ribbon, and when he had got to the end of his walk he always repeated the numbers aloud.
“Eight officers and seventeen knights.
It is stupid to sow the cross broadcast in that fashion.
I wonder how many I shall meet going back?” And he returned slowly, unhappy when the crowd of passers-by interfered with his vision.
Fewer were seen in the Avenue de l'Opera than in the Rue de la Paix, while the right side of the boulevard was more frequented by them than the left.
They also seemed to prefer certain cafes and theatres.
Whenever he saw a group of white-haired old gentlemen standing together in the middle of the pavement, interfering with the traffic, he used to say to himself: “They are officers of the Legion of Honor,” and he felt inclined to take off his hat to them.
He had often remarked that the officers had a different bearing to the mere knights.
They carried their head differently, and one felt that they enjoyed a higher official consideration and a more widely extended importance.
Sometimes, however, the worthy man would be seized with a furious hatred for every one who was decorated; he felt like a Socialist toward them.
Then, when he got home, excited at meeting so many crosses—just as a poor, hungry wretch might be on passing some dainty provision shop—he used to ask in a loud voice: “When shall we get rid of this wretched government?” And his wife would be surprised, and ask: “What is the matter with you to-day?” “I am indignant,” he replied, “at the injustice I see going on around us.
Oh, the Communards were certainly right!” After dinner he would go out again and look at the shops where the decorations were sold, and he examined all the emblems of various shapes and colors.
He would have liked to possess them all, and to have walked gravely at the head of a procession, with his crush hat under his arm and his breast covered with decorations, radiant as a star, amid a buzz of admiring whispers and a hum of respect.
But, alas! he had no right to wear any decoration whatever.
He used to say to himself: “It is really too difficult for any man to obtain the Legion of Honor unless he is some public functionary.
Suppose I try to be appointed an officer of the Academy!” But he did not know how to set about it, and spoke on the subject to his wife, who was stupefied.
I don't understand anything about it.” An idea struck him: “Suppose you were to speak to M.
Rosselin, the deputy; he might be able to advise me.
You understand I cannot broach the subject to him directly.
It is rather difficult and delicate, but coming from you it might seem quite natural.” Mme.
Caillard did what he asked her, and M.
Rosselin promised to speak to the minister about it; and then Caillard began to worry him, till the deputy told him he must make a formal application and put forward his claims.
“He was not even a Bachelor of Arts.” However, he set to work and produced a pamphlet, with the title, “The People's Right to Instruction,” but he could not finish it for want of ideas.
He sought for easier subjects, and began several in succession.
The first was, “The Instruction of Children by Means of the Eye.” He wanted gratuitous theatres to be established in every poor quarter of Paris for little children.
Their parents were to take them there when they were quite young, and, by means of a magic lantern, all the notions of human knowledge were to be imparted to them.
The sight would educate the mind, while the pictures would remain impressed on the brain, and thus science would, so to say, be made visible.
What could be more simple than to teach universal history, natural history, geography, botany, zoology, anatomy, etc., etc., in this manner?
He had his ideas printed in pamphlets, and sent a copy to each deputy, ten to each minister, fifty to the President of the Republic, ten to each Parisian, and five to each provincial newspaper.
Then he wrote on “Street Lending-Libraries.” His idea was to have little pushcarts full of books drawn about the streets.
Everyone would have a right to ten volumes a month in his home on payment of one sou.
Caillard said, “will only disturb itself for the sake of its pleasures, and since it will not go to instruction, instruction must come to it,” etc., etc.
His essays attracted no attention, but he sent in his application, and he got the usual formal official reply.
Then he made up his mind to apply personally.
He begged for an interview with the Minister of Public Instruction, and he was received by a young subordinate, who was very grave and important, and kept touching the knobs of electric bells to summon ushers, and footmen, and officials inferior to himself.
Caillard that his matter was going on quite favorably, and advised him to continue his remarkable labors, and M.
Caillard set at it again.
Rosselin, the deputy, seemed now to take a great interest in his success, and gave him a lot of excellent, practical advice.
He, himself, was decorated, although nobody knew exactly what he had done to deserve such a distinction.
He told Caillard what new studies he ought to undertake; he introduced him to learned societies which took up particularly obscure points of science, in the hope of gaining credit and honors thereby; and he even took him under his wing at the ministry.
One day, when he came to lunch with his friend—for several months past he had constantly taken his meals there—he said to him in a whisper as he shook hands: “I have just obtained a great favor for you.
The Committee of Historical Works is going to intrust you with a commission.
There are some researches to be made in various libraries in France.” Caillard was so delighted that he could scarcely eat or drink, and a week later he set out.
He went from town to town, studying catalogues, rummaging in lofts full of dusty volumes, and was hated by all the librarians.
One day, happening to be at Rouen, he thought he should like to go and visit his wife, whom he had not seen for more than a week, so he took the nine o'clock train, which would land him at home by twelve at night.
He had his latchkey, so he went in without making any noise, delighted at the idea of the surprise he was going to give her.
However, he cried out through the door: “Jeanne, it is I!” She must have been very frightened, for he heard her jump out of her bed and speak to herself, as if she were in a dream.
Then she went to her dressing room, opened and closed the door, and went quickly up and down her room barefoot two or three times, shaking the furniture till the vases and glasses sounded.
Then at last she asked: “Is it you, Alexander?” “Yes, yes,” he replied; “make haste and open the door.” As soon as she had done so, she threw herself into his arms, exclaiming: “Oh, what a fright!
What a pleasure!” He began to undress himself methodically, as he did everything, and took from a chair his overcoat, which he was in the habit of hanging up in the hall.
Just explain—Whose overcoat is it?
It is not mine, as it has the Legion of Honor on it.” She tried to take it from him, terrified and hardly able to say: “Listen—listen!
“I want to know how this overcoat comes to be here?
It does not belong to me.” Then she almost screamed at him: “Yes, it does; listen!
Swear to me—well—you are decorated!” She did not intend to joke at his expense.
He was so overcome that he let the overcoat fall and dropped into an armchair.
“I am—you say I am—decorated?” “Yes, but it is a secret, a great secret.” She had put the glorious garment into a cupboard, and came to her husband pale and trembling.
“Yes,” she continued, “it is a new overcoat that I have had made for you.
But I swore that I would not tell you anything about it, as it will not be officially announced for a month or six weeks, and you were not to have known till your return from your business journey.
Rosselin managed it for you.” “Rosselin!” he contrived to utter in his joy.
“He has obtained the decoration for me?
A little piece of white paper fell to the floor out of the pocket of the overcoat.
Caillard picked it up; it was a visiting card, and he read out: “Rosselin-Deputy.” “You see how it is,” said his wife.
He almost cried with joy, and, a week later, it was announced in the Journal Officiel that M.
Caillard had been awarded the Legion of Honor on account of his exceptional services.
THE TEST The Bondels were a happy family, and although they frequently quarrelled about trifles, they soon became friends again.
Bondel was a merchant who had retired from active business after saving enough to allow him to live quietly; he had rented a little house at Saint-Germain and lived there with his wife.
He was a quiet man with very decided opinions; he had a certain degree of education and read serious newspapers; nevertheless, he appreciated the gaulois wit.
Endowed with a logical mind, and that practical common sense which is the master quality of the industrial French bourgeois, he thought little, but clearly, and reached a decision only after careful consideration of the matter in hand.
He was of medium size, with a distinguished look, and was beginning to turn gray.
His wife, who was full of serious qualities, had also several faults.
She had a quick temper and a frankness that bordered upon violence.
She had once been pretty, but had now become too stout and too red; but in her neighborhood at Saint-Germain she still passed for a very beautiful woman, who exemplified health and an uncertain temper.
Their dissensions almost always began at breakfast, over some trivial matter, and they often continued all day and even until the following day.
Their simple, common, limited life imparted seriousness to the most unimportant matters, and every topic of conversation became a subject of dispute.
This had not been so in the days when business occupied their minds, drew their hearts together, and gave them common interests and occupation.
It had been necessary to make new acquaintances, to create for themselves a new world among strangers, a new existence devoid of occupations.
Then the monotony of loneliness had soured each of them a little; and the quiet happiness which they had hoped and waited for with the coming of riches did not appear.
One June morning, just as they were sitting down to breakfast, Bondel asked: “Do you know the people who live in the little red cottage at the end of the Rue du Berceau?” Madame Bondel was out of sorts.
She answered: “Yes and no; I am acquainted with them, but I do not care to know them.” “Why not?
They seem to be very nice.” “Because—” “This morning I met the husband on the terrace and we took a little walk together.” Seeing that there was danger in the air, Bendel added: “It was he who spoke to me first.” His wife looked at him in a displeased manner.
She continued: “You would have done just as well to avoid him.” “Why?” “Because there are rumors about them.” “What kind?” “Oh! rumors such as one often hears!” M.
Bondel was, unfortunately, a little hasty.
He exclaimed: “My dear, you know that I abhor gossip.
As for those people, I find them very pleasant.” She asked testily: “The wife also?” “Why, yes; although I have barely seen her.” The discussion gradually grew more heated, always on the same subject for lack of others.
Madame Bondel obstinately refused to say what she had heard about these neighbors, allowing things to be understood without saying exactly what they were.
Bendel would shrug his shoulders, grin, and exasperate his wife.
She finally cried out: “Well! that gentleman is deceived by his wife, there!” The husband answered quietly: “I can't see how that affects the honor of a man.” She seemed dumfounded: “What! you don't see?—you don't see?—well, that's too much!
You don't see!—why, it's a public scandal! he is disgraced!” He answered: “Ah! by no means!
Should a man be considered disgraced because he is deceived, because he is betrayed, robbed?
I'll grant you that that may be the case for the wife, but as for him—” She became furious, exclaiming: “For him as well as for her.
They are both in disgrace; it's a public shame.” Bondel, very calm, asked: “First of all, is it true?
Why, everybody! everybody! it's as clear as the nose on your face.
Everybody knows it and is talking about it.
There is not the slightest doubt.” He was grinning: “For a long time people thought that the sun revolved around the earth.
This man loves his wife and speaks of her tenderly and reverently.
This whole business is nothing but lies!” Stamping her foot, she stammered: “Do you think that that fool, that idiot, knows anything about it?” Bondel did not grow angry; he was reasoning clearly: “Excuse me.
This gentleman is no fool.
He seemed to me, on the contrary, to be very intelligent and shrewd; and you can't make me believe that a man with brains doesn't notice such a thing in his own house, when the neighbors, who are not there, are ignorant of no detail of this liaison—for I'll warrant that they know everything.” Madame Bondel had a fit of angry mirth, which irritated her husband's nerves.
There's not a man alive who could discover a thing like that unless his nose was stuck into it!” The discussion was wandering to other topics now.
She was exclaiming over the blindness of deceived husbands, a thing which he doubted and which she affirmed with such airs of personal contempt that he finally grew angry.
Then the discussion became an angry quarrel, where she took the side of the women and he defended the men.
He had the conceit to declare: “Well, I swear that if I had ever been deceived, I should have noticed it, and immediately, too.
And I should have taken away your desire for such things in such a manner that it would have taken more than one doctor to set you on foot again!” Boiling with anger, she cried out to him: “You! you! why, you're as big a fool as the others, do you hear!” He still maintained: “I can swear to you that I am not!” She laughed so impertinently that he felt his heart beat and a chill run down his back.
For the third time he said: “I should have seen it!” She rose, still laughing in the same manner.
She slammed the door and left the room, saying: “Well! if that isn't too much!” Bondel remained alone, ill at ease.
That insolent, provoking laugh had touched him to the quick.
The realization of the loneliness of his new life made him sad and morbid.
The neighbor, whom he had met that morning, came to him with outstretched hands.
They continued their walk together.
After touching on various subjects they came to talk of their wives.
Both seemed to have something to confide, something inexpressible, vague, about these beings associated with their lives; their wives.
The neighbor was saying: “Really, at times, one might think that they bear some particular ill- will toward their husband, just because he is a husband.
I love my wife—I love her very much; I appreciate and respect her; well! there are times when she seems to have more confidence and faith in our friends than in me.” Bondel immediately thought: “There is no doubt; my wife was right!” When he left this man he began to think things over again.
This poor man must also be one of those deceived husbands, like so many others.
He had said sadly: “There are times when she seems to have more confidence and faith in our friends than in me.” That is how a husband formulated his observations on the particular attentions of his wife for another man.
And how strangely Bondel's own wife had laughed as she said: “You, too —you, too.” How wild and imprudent these creatures are who can arouse such suspicions in the heart for the sole purpose of revenge!
He ran over their whole life since their marriage, reviewed his mental list of their acquaintances, to see whether she had ever appeared to show more confidence in any one else than in himself.
He never had suspected any one, he was so calm, so sure of her, so confident.
But, now he thought of it, she had had a friend, an intimate friend, who for almost a year had dined with them three times a week.
Tancret, good old Tancret, whom he, Bendel, loved as a brother and whom he continued to see on the sly, since his wife, he did not know why, had grown angry at the charming fellow.
Then he grew angry at himself for harboring this shameful insinuation of the defiant, jealous, bad ego which lives in all of us.
He blamed and accused himself when he remembered the visits and the demeanor of this friend whom his wife had dismissed for no apparent reason.
But, suddenly, other memories returned to him, similar ruptures due to the vindictive character of Madame Bondel, who never pardoned a slight.
Then he laughed frankly at himself for the doubts which he had nursed; and he remembered the angry looks of his wife as he would tell her, when he returned at night: “I saw good old Tancret, and he wished to be remembered to you,” and he reassured himself.
She would invariably answer: “When you see that gentleman you can tell him that I can very well dispense with his remembrances.” With what an irritated, angry look she would say these words!
How well one could feel that she did not and would not forgive—and he had suspected her even for a second?
Was it?—But no—no—and Bondel declared that he was lowering himself by even thinking of such things.
Yes, he was undoubtedly lowering himself, but he could not help thinking of it, and he asked himself with terror if this thought which had entered into his mind had not come to stop, if he did not carry in his heart the seed of fearful torment.
He knew himself; he was a man to think over his doubts, as formerly he would ruminate over his commercial operations, for days and nights, endlessly weighing the pros and the cons.
He was already becoming excited; he was walking fast and losing his calmness.
It is intangible, cannot be caught, cannot be killed.
Suddenly a plan occurred to him; it was bold, so bold that at first he doubted whether he would carry it out.
Well, he would take the train to Paris, go to Tancret, and bring him back with him that very evening, assuring him that his wife's mysterious anger had disappeared.
When she should come face to face with him, unexpectedly, he certainly ought to be able to read the truth in their expressions.
He immediately went to the station, bought his ticket, got into the car, and as soon as he felt him self being carried away by the train, he felt a fear, a kind of dizziness, at what he was going to do.
In order not to weaken, back down, and return alone, he tried not to think of the matter any longer, to bring his mind to bear on other affairs, to do what he had decided to do with a blind resolution; and he began to hum tunes from operettas and music halls until he reached Paris.
As soon as he found himself walking along the streets that led to Tancret's, he felt like stopping, He paused in front of several shops, noticed the prices of certain objects, was interested in new things, felt like taking a glass of beer, which was not his usual custom; and as he approached his friend's dwelling he ardently hoped not meet him.
He jumped up in surprise, crying: “Ah!
Bondel! what luck!” Bondel, embarrassed, answered: “Yes, my dear fellow, I happened to be in Paris, and I thought I'd drop in and shake hands with you.” “That's very nice, very nice!
The more so that for some time you have not favored me with your presence very often.” “Well, you see—even against one's will, one is often influenced by surrounding conditions, and as my wife seemed to bear you some ill-will” “Jove! 'seemed'—she did better than that, since she showed me the door.” “What was the reason?
I never heard it.” “Oh! nothing at all—a bit of foolishness—a discussion in which we did not both agree.” “But what was the subject of this discussion?” “A lady of my acquaintance, whom you may perhaps know by name, Madame Boutin.” “Ah! really.
Well, I think that my wife has forgotten her grudge, for this very morning she spoke to me of you in very pleasant terms.” Tancret started and seemed so dumfounded that for a few minutes he could find nothing to say.
Then he asked: “She spoke of me—in pleasant terms?” “Yes.” “You are sure?” “Of course I am.
Are we not exposing ourselves to—to—a scene?” “No, no, indeed!” “Because, you know, Madame Bendel bears malice for a long time.” “Yes, but I can assure you that she no longer bears you any ill—will.
I am even convinced that it will be a great pleasure for her to see you thus, unexpectedly.” “Really?” “Yes, really!” “Well, then! let us go along.
You see, this misunderstanding was very unpleasant for me.” They set out together toward the Saint-Lazare station, arm in arm.
Both seemed absorbed in deep meditation.
Seated in the car, one opposite the other, they looked at each other without speaking, each observing that the other was pale.
Bondel ushered his friend into the parlor, called the servant, and asked: “Is madame at home?” “Yes, monsieur.” “Please ask her to come down at once.” They dropped into two armchairs and waited.
Both were filled with the same longing to escape before the appearance of the much-feared person.
A well-known, heavy tread could be heard descending the stairs.
She looked, blushed, trembled, retreated a step, then stood motionless, her cheeks aflame and her hands resting against the sides of the door frame.
FOUND ON A DROWNED MAN Madame, you ask me whether I am laughing at you?
I have never experienced that intoxication of the heart which we call love!
Never have I lived in that dream, in that exaltation, in that state of madness into which the image of a woman casts us.
I have never been pursued, haunted, roused to fever heat, lifted up to Paradise by the thought of meeting, or by the possession of, a being who had suddenly become for me more desirable than any good fortune, more beautiful than any other creature, of more consequence than the whole world!
I have never wept, I have never suffered on account of any of you.
I have not passed my nights sleepless, while thinking of her.
I have no experience of waking thoughts bright with thought and memories of her.
I have never known the wild rapture of hope before her arrival, or the divine sadness of regret when she went from me, leaving behind her a delicate odor of violet powder.
And truly I can scarcely tell.
Nevertheless I have found some reasons for it; but they are of a metaphysical character, and perhaps you will not be able to appreciate them.
I suppose I am too critical of women to submit to their fascination.
In every creature there is a moral being and a physical being.
In order to love, it would be necessary for me to find a harmony between these two beings which I have never found.
One always predominates; sometimes the moral, sometimes the physical.
The intellect which we have a right to require in a woman, in order to love her, is not the same as the virile intellect.
A woman must be frank, delicate, sensitive, refined, impressionable.
She has no need of either power or initiative in thought, but she must have kindness, elegance, tenderness, coquetry and that faculty of assimilation which, in a little while, raises her to an equality with him who shares her life.
Her greatest quality must be tact, that subtle sense which is to the mind what touch is to the body.
It reveals to her a thousand little things, contours, angles and forms on the plane of the intellectual.
Very frequently pretty women have not intellect to correspond with their personal charms.
Now, the slightest lack of harmony strikes me and pains me at the first glance.
In friendship this is not of importance.
Friendship is a compact in which one fairly shares defects and merits.
We may judge of friends, whether man or woman, giving them credit for what is good, and overlooking what is bad in them, appreciating them at their just value, while giving ourselves up to an intimate, intense and charming sympathy.
In order to love, one must be blind, surrender one's self absolutely, see nothing, question nothing, understand nothing.
One must adore the weakness as well as the beauty of the beloved object, renounce all judgment, all reflection, all perspicacity.
I am incapable of such blindness and rebel at unreasoning subjugation.
A woman, in my opinion, may have an exquisite soul and charming body without that body and that soul being in perfect harmony with one another.
I mean that persons who have noses made in a certain shape should not be expected to think in a certain fashion.
The shade of your eyes should correspond, by a sort of fatality, with the shade of your thought.
In perceiving these things, I have the scent of a bloodhound.
And yet, once I imagined that I was in love for an hour, for a day.
I had foolishly yielded to the influence of surrounding circumstances.
I allowed myself to be beguiled by a mirage of Dawn.
I met, one evening, a pretty, enthusiastic little woman who took a poetic fancy to spend a night with me in a boat on a river.
I would have preferred a room and a bed; however, I consented to the river and the boat.
My fair companion chose a moonlight night in order the better to stimulate her imagination.
We had dined at a riverside inn and set out in the boat about ten o'clock.
I thought it a rather foolish kind of adventure, but as my companion pleased me I did not worry about it.
I could not deny that the scene was picturesque.
We glided past a wooded isle full of nightingales, and the current carried us rapidly over the river covered with silvery ripples.
The tree toads uttered their shrill, monotonous cry; the frogs croaked in the grass by the river's bank, and the lapping of the water as it flowed on made around us a kind of confused murmur almost imperceptible, disquieting, and gave us a vague sensation of mysterious fear.
The sweet charm of warm nights and of streams glittering in the moonlight penetrated us.
It was delightful to be alive and to float along thus, and to dream and to feel at one's side a sympathetic and beautiful young woman.
I was somewhat affected, somewhat agitated, somewhat intoxicated by the pale brightness of the night and the consciousness of my proximity to a lovely woman.
She went on: “Recite some poetry for me.” This appeared to be rather too much.
I declined; she persisted.
She certainly wanted to play the game, to have a whole orchestra of sentiment, from the moon to the rhymes of poets.
In the end I had to yield, and, as if in mockery, I repeated to her a charming little poem by Louis Bouilhet, of which the following are the last verses: “I hate the poet who with tearful eye Murmurs some name while gazing tow'rds a star, Who sees no magic in the earth or sky, Unless Lizette or Ninon be not far.
“The bard who in all Nature nothing sees Divine, unless a petticoat he ties Amorously to the branches of the trees Or nightcap to the grass, is scarcely wise.
“He has not heard the Eternal's thunder tone, The voice of Nature in her various moods, Who cannot tread the dim ravines alone, And of no woman dream mid whispering woods.” I expected some reproaches.
She murmured: “How true it is!” I was astonished.
Our boat had gradually approached the bank and become entangled in the branches of a willow which impeded its progress.
I placed my arm round my companion's waist, and very gently approached my lips towards her neck.
But she repulsed me with an abrupt, angry movement.
She resisted, caught hold of the tree, and was near flinging us both into the water.
I deemed it prudent to cease my importunities.
This is so delightful.” Then, in a slightly malicious tone, she added: “Have you already forgotten the verses you repeated to me just now?” She was right.
I began to think the night long and my position ridiculous.
My companion said to me: “Will you make me a promise?” “Yes.
What is it?” “To remain quiet, well-behaved and discreet, if I permit you—” “What?
But I forbid you to touch me, to embrace me —in short—to caress me.” I promised.
She said warningly: “If you move, 'I'll capsize the boat.” And then we lay down side by side, our eyes turned toward the sky, while the boat glided slowly through the water.
The slight sounds of the night came to us more distinctly in the bottom of the boat, sometimes causing us to start.
And I felt springing up within me a strange, poignant emotion, an infinite tenderness, something like an irresistible impulse to open my arms in order to embrace, to open my heart in order to love, to give myself, to give my thoughts, my body, my life, my entire being to some one.
My companion murmured, like one in a dream: “Where are we; Where are we going?
And thus we remained for a long, long time without stirring.
We had clasped each other's hands; some delightful force rendered us motionless, an unknown force stronger than ourselves, an alliance, chaste, intimate, absolute, of our beings lying there side by side, belonging to each other without contact.
Little by little the dawn appeared.
Slowly a great brightness spread over the sky.
The boat knocked up against something.
But I remained enchanted, in an ecstasy.
Before us stretched the firmament, red, pink, violet, spotted with fiery clouds resembling golden vapor.
I bent toward my companion.
I was going to say, “Oh! look!” But I held my tongue, quite dazed, and I could no longer see anything except her.
She, too, was rosy, with rosy flesh tints with a deeper tinge that was partly a reflection of the hue of the sky.
And in truth I believed, so overpowering was the illusion, that the dawn was there in the flesh before me.
She rose softly to her feet, holding out her lips to me; and I moved toward her, trembling, delirious feeling indeed that I was going to kiss Heaven, to kiss happiness, to kiss a dream that had become a woman, to kiss the ideal which had descended into human flesh.
She said to me: “You have a caterpillar in your hair.” And, suddenly, I felt as sad as if I had lost all hope in life.
But I am sure that since that day it would be impossible for me to love.
And yet—who can tell? [The young man upon whom this letter was found was yesterday taken out of the Seine between Bougival and Marly.
An obliging bargeman, who had searched the pockets in order to ascertain the name of the deceased, brought this paper to the author.] THE ORPHAN Mademoiselle Source had adopted this boy under very sad circumstances.
Being disfigured through having as a child slipped off her nurse's lap into the fireplace and burned her face shockingly, she had determined not to marry, for she did not want any man to marry her for her money.
A neighbor of hers, left a widow just before her child was born, died in giving birth, without leaving a sou.
Mademoiselle Source took the new- born child, put him out to nurse, reared him, sent him to a boarding- school, then brought him home in his fourteenth year, in order to have in her empty house somebody who would love her, who would look after her, and make her old age pleasant.
She had a little country place four leagues from Rennes, and she now dispensed with a servant; her expenses having increased to more than double since this orphan's arrival, her income of three thousand francs was no longer sufficient to support three persons.
She attended to the housekeeping and cooking herself, and sent out the boy on errands, letting him also occupy himself in cultivating the garden.
He was gentle, timid, silent, and affectionate.
And she experienced a deep happiness, a fresh happiness when he kissed her without surprise or horror at her disfigurement.
In the evening they both sat down at the fireside, and she made nice little dainties for him.
She heated some wine and toasted a slice of bread, and it made a charming little meal before going to bed.
She often took him on her knees and covered him with kisses, murmuring tender words in his ear.
She called him: “My little flower, my cherub, my adored angel, my divine jewel.” He softly accepted her caresses, hiding his head on the old maid's shoulder.
Although he was now nearly fifteen, he had remained small and weak, and had a rather sickly appearance.
Sometimes Mademoiselle Source took him to the city, to see two married female relatives of hers, distant cousins, who were living in the suburbs, and who were the only members of her family in existence.
The two women had always found fault with her, for having adopted this boy, on account of the inheritance; but for all that, they gave her a cordial welcome, having still hopes of getting a share for themselves, a third, no doubt, if what she possessed were only equally divided.
She was happy, very happy, always occupied with her adopted child.
She bought books for him to improve his mind, and he became passionately fond of reading.
He no longer climbed on her knee to pet her as he had formerly done; but, instead, would go and sit down in his little chair in the chimney- corner and open a volume.
The lamp placed at the edge of the Tittle table above his head shone on his curly hair, and on a portion of his forehead; he did not move, he did not raise his eyes or make any gesture.
He read on, interested, entirely absorbed in the story he was reading.
Seated opposite to him, she would gaze at him earnestly, astonished at his studiousness, often on the point of bursting into tears.
She said to him occasionally: “You will fatigue yourself, my treasure!” hoping that he would raise his head, and come across to embrace her; but he did not even answer her; he had not heard or understood what she was saying; he paid no attention to anything save what he read in those pages.
For two years he devoured an incalculable number of volumes.
His character changed.
After this, he asked Mademoiselle Source several times for money, which she gave him.
As he always wanted more, she ended by refusing, for she was both methodical and decided, and knew how to act rationally when it was necessary to do so.
By dint of entreaties he obtained a large sum from her one night; but when he begged her for more a few days later, she showed herself inflexible, and did not give way to him further, in fact.
He appeared to be satisfied with her decision.
He again became quiet, as he had formerly been, remaining seated for entire hours, without moving, plunged in deep reverie.
He now did not even talk to Madame Source, merely answering her remarks with short, formal words.
Nevertheless, he was agreeable and attentive in his manner toward her; but he never embraced her now.
She had by this time grown slightly afraid of him when they sat facing one another at night on opposite sides of the fireplace.
She wanted to wake him up, to make him say something, no matter what, that would break this dreadful silence, which was like the darkness of a wood.
But he did not appear to listen to her, and she shuddered with the terror of a poor feeble woman when she had spoken to him five or six times successively without being able to get a word out of him.
When she had remained thus two or three hours opposite him, she felt as if she were going insane, and longed to rush away and to escape into the open country in order to avoid that mute, eternal companionship and also some vague danger, which she could not define, but of which she had a presentiment.
She frequently wept when she was alone.
When she expressed a wish, he unmurmuringly carried it into execution.
When she wanted anything brought from the city, he immediately went there to procure it.
She had no complaint to make of him; no, indeed!
She perceived it; she felt it; she divined it.
She was sure she was not mistaken; but she could not have explained in what manner the unknown thoughts of this strange youth had changed.
It seemed to her that, until now, he had been like a person in a hesitating frame of mind, who had suddenly arrived at a determination.
This idea came to her one evening as she met his glance, a fixed, singular glance which she had not seen in his face before.
Then he commenced to watch her incessantly, and she wished she could hide herself in order to avoid that cold eye riveted on her.
He kept staring at her, evening after evening, for hours together, only averting his eyes when she said, utterly unnerved: “Do not look at me like that, my child!” Then he would lower his head.
Wherever she went, he pursued her with his persistent gaze.
Sometimes, when she was walking in her little garden, she suddenly noticed him hidden behind a bush, as if he were lying in wait for her; and, again, when she sat in front of the house mending stockings while he was digging some vegetable bed, he kept continually watching her in a surreptitious manner, as he worked.
For the last three years, you have become very different.
I don't recognize you.
Do tell me what ails you, and what you are thinking of.” He invariably replied, in a quiet, weary tone: “Why, nothing ails me, aunt!” And when she persisted: “Ah! my child, answer me, answer me when I speak to you.
I'll comfort you!” He went away, with a tired air, murmuring: “But there is nothing the matter with me, I assure you.” He had not grown much, having always a childish look, although his features were those of a man.
He seemed incomplete, abortive, only half finished, and disquieting as a mystery.
He was a self-contained, unapproachable being, in whom there seemed always to be some active, dangerous mental labor going on.
Mademoiselle Source was quite conscious of all this, and she could not sleep at night, so great was her anxiety.
Frightful terrors, dreadful nightmares assailed her.
She shut herself up in her own room, and barricaded the door, tortured by fear.
She feared everything, the night, the walls, the shadows thrown by the moon on the white curtains of the windows, and, above all, she feared him.
She felt certain that a misfortune threatened her, a frightful misfortune.
She set forth secretly one morning, and went into the city to see her relatives.
The two women thought she was going mad and tried to reassure her.
At times, I feel a longing to cry for help, to call in the neighbors, so much am I afraid.
Does he give you sharp answers?” She replied: “No, never; he does everything I wish; he works hard: he is steady; but I am so frightened that I care nothing for that.
He is planning something, I am certain of that—quite certain.
I don't care to remain all alone like that with him in the country.” The relatives, astonished at her words, declared that people would be amazed, would not understand; and they advised her to keep silent about her fears and her plans, without, however, dissuading her from coming to reside in the city, hoping in that way that the entire inheritance would eventually fall into their hands.
They even promised to assist her in selling her house, and in finding another, near them.
Mademoiselle Source returned home.
But her mind was so much upset that she trembled at the slightest noise, and her hands shook whenever any trifling disturbance agitated her.
Twice she went again to consult her relatives, quite determined now not to remain any longer in this way in her lonely dwelling.
At last, she found a little cottage in the suburbs, which suited her, and she privately bought it.
The signature of the contract took place on a Tuesday morning, and Mademoiselle Source devoted the rest of the day to the preparations for her change of residence.
At eight o'clock in the evening she got into the diligence which passed within a few hundred yards of her house, and she told the conductor to put her down in the place where she usually alighted.
The man called out to her as he whipped his horses: “Good evening, Mademoiselle Source—good night!” She replied as she walked on: “Good evening, Pere Joseph.” Next morning, at half-past seven, the postman who conveyed letters to the village noticed at the cross-road, not far from the high road, a large splash of blood not yet dry.
He said to himself: “Hallo! some boozer must have had a nose bleed.” But he perceived ten paces farther on a pocket handkerchief also stained with blood.
Mademoiselle Source was lying at the bottom on the grass, her throat cut with a knife.
An hour later, the gendarmes, the examining magistrate, and other authorities made an inquiry as to the cause of death.
The two female relatives, called as witnesses, told all about the old maid's fears and her last plans.
The orphan was arrested.
After the death of the woman who had adopted him, he wept from morning till night, plunged, at least to all appearance, in the most violent grief.
Ten persons had seen him, having remained there till his departure.
The driver of the diligence stated that he had set down the murdered woman on the road between half-past nine and ten o'clock.
The accused was acquitted.
So he inherited everything.
For a long time, the people of the country boycotted him, as they still suspected him.
His house, that of the dead woman, was looked upon as accursed.
But he showed himself so good-natured, so open, so familiar, that gradually these horrible doubts were forgotten.
He was generous, obliging, ready to talk to the humblest about anything, as long as they cared to talk to him.
The notary, Maitre Rameau, was one of the first to take his part, attracted by his smiling loquacity.
He is to-day the mayor of his township.
THE BEGGAR He had seen better days, despite his present misery and infirmities.
At the age of fifteen both his legs had been crushed by a carriage on the Varville highway.
From that time forth he begged, dragging himself along the roads and through the farmyards, supported by crutches which forced his shoulders up to his ears.
His head looked as if it were squeezed in between two mountains.
At one time the Baroness d'Avary allowed him to sleep in a kind of recess spread with straw, close to the poultry yard in the farm adjoining the chateau, and if he was in great need he was sure of getting a glass of cider and a crust of bread in the kitchen.
Moreover, the old lady often threw him a few pennies from her window.
In the villages people gave him scarcely anything—he was too well known.
Everybody had grown tired of seeing him, day after day for forty years, dragging his deformed and tattered person from door to door on his wooden crutches.
But he could not make up his mind to go elsewhere, because he knew no place on earth but this particular corner of the country, these three or four villages where he had spent the whole of his miserable existence.
He had limited his begging operations and would not for worlds have passed his accustomed bounds.
He did not even know whether the world extended for any distance beyond the trees which had always bounded his vision.
He did not ask himself the question.
These last he always instinctively avoided, taking refuge in the bushes or behind heaps of stones when he saw them coming.
When he perceived them in the distance, 'With uniforms gleaming in the sun, he was suddenly possessed with unwonted agility—the agility of a wild animal seeking its lair.
He threw aside his crutches, fell to the ground like a limp rag, made himself as small as possible and crouched like a hare under cover, his tattered vestments blending in hue with the earth on which he cowered.
He had never had any trouble with the police, but the instinct to avoid them was in his blood.
He seemed to have inherited it from the parents he had never known.
In summer he slept out of doors and in winter he showed remarkable skill in slipping unperceived into barns and stables.
He always decamped before his presence could be discovered.
He knew all the holes through which one could creep into farm buildings, and the handling of his crutches having made his arms surprisingly muscular he often hauled himself up through sheer strength of wrist into hay-lofts, where he sometimes remained for four or five days at a time, provided he had collected a sufficient store of food beforehand.
He was in the midst of men, yet knew no one, loved no one, exciting in the breasts of the peasants only a sort of careless contempt and smoldering hostility.
They nicknamed him “Bell,” because he hung between his two crutches like a church bell between its supports.
No one gave him anything now.
Every one's patience was exhausted.
Women shouted to him from their doorsteps when they saw him coming: “Be off with you, you good-for-nothing vagabond!
Why, I gave you a piece of bread only three days ago!” And he turned on his crutches to the next house, where he was received in the same fashion.
The women declared to one another as they stood at their doors: “We can't feed that lazy brute all the year round!” And yet the “lazy brute” needed food every day.
He had exhausted Saint-Hilaire, Varville and Les Billettes without getting a single copper or so much as a dry crust.
His only hope was in Tournolles, but to reach this place he would have to walk five miles along the highroad, and he felt so weary that he could hardly drag himself another yard.
It was December and a cold wind blew over the fields and whistled through the bare branches of the trees; the clouds careered madly across the black, threatening sky.
The cripple dragged himself slowly along, raising one crutch after the other with a painful effort, propping himself on the one distorted leg which remained to him.
Hunger was gnawing his vitals, and in his confused, slow-working mind he had only one idea-to eat-but how this was to be accomplished he did not know.
For three hours he continued his painful journey.
Then at last the sight of the trees of the village inspired him with new energy.
He made the round of the whole village, but received not a halfpenny for his pains.
Then he visited the neighboring farms, toiling through the muddy land, so exhausted that he could hardly raise his crutches from the ground.
He met with the same reception everywhere.
It was one of those cold, bleak days, when the heart is frozen and the temper irritable, and hands do not open either to give money or food.
When he had visited all the houses he knew, “Bell” sank down in the corner of a ditch running across Chiquet's farmyard.
Letting his crutches slip to the ground, he remained motionless, tortured by hunger, but hardly intelligent enough to realize to the full his unutterable misery.
He awaited he knew not what, possessed with that vague hope which persists in the human heart in spite of everything.
He awaited in the corner of the farmyard in the biting December wind, some mysterious aid from Heaven or from men, without the least idea whence it was to arrive.
A number of black hens ran hither and thither, seeking their food in the earth which supports all living things.
Ever now and then they snapped up in their beaks a grain of corn or a tiny insect; then they continued their slow, sure search for nutriment.
“Bell” watched them at first without thinking of anything.
Then a thought occurred rather to his stomach than to his mind—the thought that one of those fowls would be good to eat if it were cooked over a fire of dead wood.
He took up a stone which lay within reach, and, being of skillful aim, killed at the first shot the fowl nearest to him.
The bird fell on its side, flapping its wings.
The others fled wildly hither and thither, and “Bell,” picking up his crutches, limped across to where his victim lay.
Just as he reached the little black body with its crimsoned head he received a violent blow in his back which made him let go his hold of his crutches and sent him flying ten paces distant.
And Farmer Chiquet, beside himself with rage, cuffed and kicked the marauder with all the fury of a plundered peasant as “Bell” lay defenceless before him.
Then when they were tired of beating him they carried him off and shut him up in the woodshed, while they went to fetch the police.
“Bell,” half dead, bleeding and perishing with hunger, lay on the floor.
They opened the door of the woodshed with the utmost precaution, fearing resistance on the beggar's part, for Farmer Chiquet asserted that he had been attacked by him and had had great, difficulty in defending himself.
The sergeant cried: “Come, get up!” But “Bell” could not move.
He did his best to raise himself on his crutches, but without success.
The police, thinking his weakness feigned, pulled him up by main force and set him between the crutches.
Fear seized him—his native fear of a uniform, the fear of the game in presence of the sportsman, the fear of a mouse for a cat-and by the exercise of almost superhuman effort he succeeded in remaining upright.
“Forward!” said the sergeant.
All the inmates of the farm watched his departure.
The women shook their fists at him the men scoffed at and insulted him.
He mustered sufficient energy—the energy of despair—to drag himself along until the evening, too dazed to know what was happening to him, too frightened to understand.
People whom he met on the road stopped to watch him go by and peasants muttered: “It's some thief or other.” Toward evening he reached the country town.
All the terrible and unexpected events of the last two days, all these unfamiliar faces and houses struck dismay into his heart.
He said not a word, having nothing to say because he understood nothing.
Besides, he had spoken to no one for so many years past that he had almost lost the use of his tongue, and his thoughts were too indeterminate to be put into words.
It did not occur to the police that he might need food, and he was left alone until the following day.
Such an astonishing thing!
THE RABBIT Old Lecacheur appeared at the door of his house between five and a quarter past five in the morning, his usual hour, to watch his men going to work.
He was only half awake, his face was red, and with his right eye open and the left nearly closed, he was buttoning his braces over his fat stomach with some difficulty, at the same time looking into every corner of the farmyard with a searching glance.
The sun darted its oblique rays through the beech trees by the side of the ditch and athwart the apple trees outside, and was making the cocks crow on the dunghill, and the pigeons coo on the roof.
The smell of the cow stable came through the open door, and blended in the fresh morning air with the pungent odor of the stable, where the horses were neighing, with their heads turned toward the light.
Somebody has stolen a rabbit?” “The big gray one.” She sighed.
Lecacheur had his own ideas about the matter.
“It must be that fellow, Polyte.” His wife got up suddenly and said in a furious voice: “He did it! he did it!
You have said it, Cacheux!” All her peasant's fury, all her avarice, all her rage of a saving woman against the man of whom she had always been suspicious, and against the girl whom she had always suspected, showed themselves in the contraction of her mouth, and the wrinkles in the cheeks and forehead of her thin, exasperated face.
“I have sent for the gendarmes.” This Polyte was a laborer, who had been employed on the farm for a few days, and who had been dismissed by Lecacheur for an insolent answer.
He was an old soldier, and was supposed to have retained his habits of marauding and debauchery from his campaigns in Africa.
He did anything for a livelihood, but whether he were a mason, a navvy, a reaper, whether he broke stones or lopped trees, he was always lazy, and so he remained nowhere for long, and had, at times, to change his neighborhood to obtain work.
From the first day that he came to the farm, Lecacheur's wife had detested him, and now she was sure that he had committed the theft.
In about half an hour the two gendarmes arrived.
Brigadier Senateur was very tall and thin, and Gendarme Lenient short and fat.
Lecacheur made them sit down, and told them the affair, and then they went and saw the scene of the theft, in order to verify the fact that the hutch had been broken open, and to collect all the proofs they could.
When they got back to the kitchen, the mistress brought in some wine, filled their glasses, and asked with a distrustful look: “Shall you catch him?” The brigadier, who had his sword between his legs, appeared thoughtful.
Certainly, he was sure of taking him, if he was pointed out to him, but if not, he could not answer for being able to discover him, himself, and after reflecting for a long time, he put this simple question: “Do you know the thief?” And Lecacheur replied, with a look of Normandy slyness in his eyes: “As for knowing him, I do not, as I did not see him commit the theft.
Then Madame Lecacheur came to them, and very quietly, with all a peasant's cunning, questioned the brigadier in her turn.
That shepherd Severin, a simpleton, a sort of brute who had been brought up and had grown up among his bleating flocks, and who knew scarcely anything besides them in the world, had nevertheless preserved the peasant's instinct for saving, at the bottom of his heart.
For years and years he must have hidden in hollow trees and crevices in the rocks all that he earned, either as a shepherd or by curing animals' sprains—for the bonesetter's secret had been handed down to him by the old shepherd whose place he took-by touch or word, and one day he bought a small property, consisting of a cottage and a field, for three thousand francs.
A few months later it became known that he was going to marry a servant, notorious for her bad morals, the innkeeper's servant.
The young fellows said that the girl, knowing that he was pretty well off, had been to his cottage every night, and had taken him, captured him, led him on to matrimony, little by little night by night.
And then, having been to the mayor's office and to church, she now lived in the house which her man had bought, while he continued to tend his flocks, day and night, on the plains.
And the brigadier added: “Polyte has been sleeping there for three weeks, for the thief has no place of his own to go to!” The gendarme made a little joke: “He takes the shepherd's blankets.” Madame Lecacheur, who was seized by a fresh access of rage, of rage increased by a married woman's anger against debauchery, exclaimed: “It is she, I am sure.
Ah, the blackguard thieves!” But the brigadier was quite unmoved.
I shall catch them with it under their noses.” The gendarme smiled, pleased at his chief's idea, and Lecacheur also smiled now, for the affair of the shepherd struck him as very funny; deceived husbands are always a joke.
Twelve o'clock had just struck when the brigadier, followed by his man, knocked gently three times at the door of a little lonely house, situated at the corner of a wood, five hundred yards from the village.
They had been standing close against the wall, so as not to be seen from within, and they waited.
As nobody answered, the brigadier knocked again in a minute or two.
It was so quiet that the house seemed uninhabited; but Lenient, the gendarme, who had very quick ears, said that he heard somebody moving about inside, and then Senateur got angry.
He would not allow any one to resist the authority of the law for a moment, and, knocking at the door with the hilt of his sword, he cried out: “Open the door, in the name of the law.” As this order had no effect, he roared out: “If you do not obey, I shall smash the lock.
I am the brigadier of the gendarmerie, by G—!
Here, Lenient.” He had not finished speaking when the door opened and Senateur saw before him a fat girl, with a very red, blowzy face, with drooping breasts, a big stomach and broad hips, a sort of animal, the wife of the shepherd Severin, and he went into the cottage.
On the table there was a plate, a jug of cider and a glass half full, which proved that a meal was in progress.
Two knives were lying side by side, and the shrewd gendarme winked at his superior officer.
“No, thank you; I only want the skin of the rabbit that you are eating.” She pretended not to understand, but she was trembling.
“What rabbit?” The brigadier had taken a seat, and was calmly wiping his forehead.
What were you eating there all by yourself for your dinner?” “I?
Nothing whatever, I swear to you.
You are mistaken; you ought to have said: a mite of butter on the rabbit.
Come, Lenient, open your eyes; look under the sideboard, my good fellow, and I will look under the bed.” Having shut the door, he went up to the bed and tried to move it; but it was fixed to the wall, and had not been moved for more than half a century, apparently.
Then the brigadier stooped, and made his uniform crack.
“Yes, brigadier?” “Come here, my lad, and look under the bed; I am too tall.
I will look after the sideboard.” He got up and waited while his man executed his orders.
Lenient, who was short and stout, took off his kepi, laid himself on his stomach, and, putting his face on the floor, looked at the black cavity under the bed, and then, suddenly, he exclaimed: “All right, here we are!” “What have you got?
Pull him out, pull him out!” The gendarme had put his arms under the bed and laid hold of something, and he was pulling with all his might, and at last a foot, shod in a thick boot, appeared, which he was holding in his right hand.
The brigadier took it, crying: “Pull!
But it was a hard job, for the prisoner kicked out hard, and arched up his back under the bed.
“Courage! courage! pull! pull!” Senateur cried, and they pulled him with all their strength, so that the wooden slat gave way, and he came out as far as his head; but at last they got that out also, and they saw the terrified and furious face of Polyte, whose arms remained stretched out under the bed.
“Pull away!” the brigadier kept on exclaiming.
Then they heard a strange noise, and as the arms followed the shoulders, and the hands the arms, they saw in the hands the handle of a saucepan, and at the end of the handle the saucepan itself, which contained stewed rabbit.
“Good Lord! good Lord!” the brigadier shouted in his delight, while Lenient took charge of the man; the rabbit's skin, an overwhelming proof, was discovered under the mattress, and then the gendarmes returned in triumph to the village with their prisoner and their booty.
A week later, as the affair had made much stir, Lecacheur, on going into the mairie to consult the schoolmaster, was told that the shepherd Severin had been waiting for him for more than an hour, and he found him sitting on a chair in a corner, with his stick between his legs.
When he saw the mayor, he got up, took off his cap, and said: “Good-morning, Maitre Cacheux”; and then he remained standing, timid and embarrassed.
“This is it, monsieur.
Is it true that somebody stole one of your rabbits last week?” “Yes, it is quite true, Severin.” “Who stole the rabbit?” “Polyte Ancas, the laborer.” “Right! right!
And is it also true that it was found under my bed?” “What do you mean, the rabbit?” “The rabbit and then Polyte.” “Yes, my poor Severin, quite true, but who told you?” “Pretty well everybody.
And I suppose you know all about marriages, as you marry people?” “What about marriage?” “With regard to one's rights.” “What rights?” “The husband's rights and then the wife's rights.” “Of course I do.” “Oh!
One night last week, as I had my suspicions, I came in suddenly, and they were not behaving properly.
I chucked Polyte out, to go and sleep somewhere else; but that was all, as I did not know what my rights were.
That is over, and we will not say any more about it; but if I catch them again—by G—, if I catch them again, I will make them lose all taste for such nonsense, Maitre Cacheux, as sure as my name is Severin.” HIS AVENGER When M.
Antoine Leuillet married the widow, Madame Mathilde Souris, he had already been in love with her for ten years.
Leuillet was very much attached to him, but thought he was somewhat of a simpleton.
He would often remark: “That poor Souris who will never set the world on fire.” When Souris married Miss Mathilde Duval, Leuillet was astonished and somewhat annoyed, as he was slightly devoted to her, himself.
She was the daughter of a neighbor, a former proprietor of a draper's establishment who had retired with quite a small fortune.
Then Leuillet thought he would start a flirtation with his friend's wife.
He was a good-looking man, intelligent and also rich.
He thought it would be all plain sailing, but he was mistaken.
Then he really began to admire her with an admiration that his friendship for the husband obliged him to keep within the bounds of discretion, making him timid and embarrassed.
Madame Souris believing that his presumptions had received a wholesome check now treated him as a good friend.
One morning a messenger brought Leuillet a distracted note from the poor woman.
Souris had just died suddenly from the rupture of an aneurism.
He was dreadfully shocked, for they were just the same age.
But almost immediately a feeling of profound joy, of intense relief, of emancipation filled his being.
He managed, however, to assume the sad, sympathetic expression that was appropriate, waited the required time, observed all social appearances.
This was considered to be a very natural, and even a generous action.
He was happy at last, perfectly happy.
They lived in the most cordial intimacy, having understood and appreciated each other from the first.
They had no secrets from one another and even confided to each other their most secret thoughts.
Leuillet loved his wife now with a quiet and trustful affection; he loved her as a tender, devoted companion who is an equal and a confidante.
But there lingered in his mind a strange and inexplicable bitterness towards the defunct Souris, who had first been the husband of this woman, who had had the flower of her youth and of her soul, and had even robbed her of some of her poetry.
The memory of the dead husband marred the happiness of the living husband, and this posthumous jealousy tormented his heart by day and by night.
The consequence was he talked incessantly of Souris, asked about a thousand personal and secret minutia, wanted to know all about his habits and his person.
And he sneered at him even in his grave, recalling with self-satisfaction his whims, ridiculing his absurdities, dwelling on his faults.
He would call to his wife all over the house: “Hallo, Mathilde!” “Here I am, dear.” “Come here a moment.” She would come, always smiling, knowing well that he would say something about Souris and ready to flatter her new husband's inoffensive mania.
“Tell me, do you remember one day how Souris insisted on explaining to me that little men always commanded more affection than big men?” And he made some remarks that were disparaging to the deceased, who was a small man, and decidedly flattering to himself, Leuillet, who was a tall man.
Leuillet allowed him to think he was right, quite right, and she laughed heartily, gently ridiculing her former husband for the sake of pleasing the present one, who always ended by saying: “All the same, what a ninny that Souris was!” They were happy, quite happy, and Leuillet never ceased to show his devotion to his wife.
One night, however, as they lay awake, Leuillet said as he kissed his wife: “See here, dearie.” “Well?” “Was Souris—I don't exactly know how to say it—was Souris very loving?” She gave him a kiss for reply and murmured “Not as loving as you are, mon chat.” He was flattered in his self-love and continued: “He must have been—a ninny—was he not?” She did not reply.
“He must have been a ninny and not—not—not smart?” She shook her head slightly to imply, “No—not at all smart.” He continued: “He must have been an awful nuisance, eh?” This time she was frank and replied: “Oh yes!” He kissed her again for this avowal and said: “What a brute he was!
“It was not always pleasant.” Leuillet was delighted, forming in his mind a comparison, much in his own favor, between his wife's former and present position.
He was silent for a time, and then with a burst of laughter he asked: “Tell me?” “What?” “Will you be frank, very frank with me?” “Why yes, my dear.” “Well then, tell me truly did you never feel tempted to—to—to deceive that imbecile Souris?” Mme.
Leuillet said: “Oh!” pretending to be shocked and hid her face again on her husband's shoulder.
But he saw that she was laughing.
“Come now, own up,” he persisted.
“He looked like a ninny, that creature!
Come, come, dearie, you do not mind telling me, me, of all people.” He insisted on the “me” thinking that if she had wished to deceive Souris she would have chosen him, and he was trembling in anticipation of her avowal, sure that if she had not been a virtuous woman she would have encouraged his own attentions.
But she did not answer, laughing still, as at the recollection of something exceedingly comical.
Leuillet, in his turn began to laugh, thinking he might have been the lucky man, and he muttered amid his mirth: “That poor Souris, that poor Souris, oh, yes, he looked like a fool!” Mme.
Leuillet was almost in spasms of laughter.
You know I will not mind.” Then she stammered out, almost choking with laughter: “Yes, yes.” “Yes, what?” insisted her husband.
She had become serious, understanding too late what she had done.
“With whom?” said Leuillet at length.
He turned suddenly toward her and said drily: “I did not suppose it was the cook.
He snatched the covers from her face, repeating: “I want to know what young man, do you hear?” Then she said sorrowfully: “I was only in fun.” But he was trembling with rage.
But I am not satisfied, do you hear?
I want the name of the young man!” She did not reply, but lay there motionless.
He took her by the arm and squeezed it, saying: “Do you understand me, finally?
I wish you to reply when I speak to you.” “I think you are going crazy,” she said nervously, “let me alone!” He was wild with rage, not knowing what to say, exasperated, and he shook her with all his might, repeating: “Do you hear me, do you hear me?” She made an abrupt effort to disengage herself and the tips of her fingers touched her husband's nose.
He was furious, thinking she had tried to hit him, and he sprang upon her holding her down; and boxing her ears with all his might, he cried: “Take that, and that, there, there, wretch!” When he was out of breath and exhausted, he rose and went toward the dressing table to prepare a glass of eau sucree with orange flower, for he felt as if he should faint.
She was weeping in bed, sobbing bitterly, for she felt as if her happiness was over, through her own fault.
Then, amidst her tears, she stammered out: “Listen, Antoine, come here, I told you a lie, you will understand, listen.” And prepared to defend herself now, armed with excuses and artifice, she raised her disheveled head with its nightcap all awry.
Turning toward her, he approached, ashamed of having struck her, but feeling in the bottom of his heart as a husband, a relentless hatred toward this woman who had deceived the former husband, Souris.
My companion, Joseph Davranche, gave him five francs.
Noticing my surprised look, he said: “That poor unfortunate reminds me of a story which I shall tell you, the memory of which continually pursues me.
Here it is: “My family, which came originally from Havre, was not rich.
“My mother suffered a good deal from our reduced circumstances, and she often had harsh words for her husband, veiled and sly reproaches.
The poor man then made a gesture which used to distress me.
He would pass his open hand over his forehead, as if to wipe away perspiration which did not exist, and he would answer nothing.
I felt his helpless suffering.
We economized on everything, and never would accept an invitation to dinner, so as not to have to return the courtesy.
All our provisions were bought at bargain sales.
My sisters made their own gowns, and long discussions would arise on the price of a piece of braid worth fifteen centimes a yard.
Our meals usually consisted of soup and beef, prepared with every kind of sauce.
“They say it is wholesome and nourishing, but I should have preferred a change.
“I used to go through terrible scenes on account of lost buttons and torn trousers.
“Every Sunday, dressed in our best, we would take our walk along the breakwater.
My father, in a frock coat, high hat and kid gloves, would offer his arm to my mother, decked out and beribboned like a ship on a holiday.
My sisters, who were always ready first, would await the signal for leaving; but at the last minute some one always found a spot on my father's frock coat, and it had to be wiped away quickly with a rag moistened with benzine.
“My father, in his shirt sleeves, his silk hat on his head, would await the completion of the operation, while my mother, putting on her spectacles, and taking off her gloves in order not to spoil them, would make haste.
“Then we set out ceremoniously.
They were of marriageable age and had to be displayed.
I remember the pompous air of my poor parents in these Sunday walks, their stern expression, their stiff walk.
They moved slowly, with a serious expression, their bodies straight, their legs stiff, as if something of extreme importance depended upon their appearance.
“Every Sunday, when the big steamers were returning from unknown and distant countries, my father would invariably utter the same words: “'What a surprise it would be if Jules were on that one!
I had heard about him since childhood, and it seemed to me that I should recognize him immediately, knowing as much about him as I did.
I knew every detail of his life up to the day of his departure for America, although this period of his life was spoken of only in hushed tones.
“It seems that he had led a bad life, that is to say, he had squandered a little money, which action, in a poor family, is one of the greatest crimes.
He is what is generally called a sport.
But among needy families a boy who forces his parents to break into the capital becomes a good-for- nothing, a rascal, a scamp.
And this distinction is just, although the action be the same, for consequences alone determine the seriousness of the act.
“Well, Uncle Jules had visibly diminished the inheritance on which my father had counted, after he had swallowed his own to the last penny.
Then, according to the custom of the times, he had been shipped off to America on a freighter going from Havre to New York.
“Once there, my uncle began to sell something or other, and he soon wrote that he was making a little money and that he soon hoped to be able to indemnify my father for the harm he had done him.
This letter caused a profound emotion in the family.
Jules, who up to that time had not been worth his salt, suddenly became a good man, a kind-hearted fellow, true and honest like all the Davranches.
“One of the captains told us that he had rented a large shop and was doing an important business.
“Two years later a second letter came, saying: 'My dear Philippe, I am writing to tell you not to worry about my health, which is excellent.
I hope that it will not be too long and that we shall all live happily together . . . .' “This letter became the gospel of the family.
It was read on the slightest provocation, and it was shown to everybody.
“For ten years nothing was heard from Uncle Jules; but as time went on my father's hope grew, and my mother, also, often said: “'When that good Jules is here, our position will be different.
There is one who knew how to get along!' “And every Sunday, while watching the big steamers approaching from the horizon, pouring out a stream of smoke, my father would repeat his eternal question: “'What a surprise it would be if Jules were on that one!
Eh?' “We almost expected to see him waving his handkerchief and crying: “'Hey!
Philippe!' “Thousands of schemes had been planned on the strength of this expected return; we were even to buy a little house with my uncle's money—a little place in the country near Ingouville.
In fact, I wouldn't swear that my father had not already begun negotiations.
“At last a suitor presented himself for the younger one.
He was a clerk, not rich, but honorable.
I have always been morally certain that Uncle Jules' letter, which was shown him one evening, had swept away the young man's hesitation and definitely decided him.
“He was accepted eagerly, and it was decided that after the wedding the whole family should take a trip to Jersey.
Thus, a Frenchman, with a two hours' sail, can observe a neighboring people at home and study their customs.
“This trip to Jersey completely absorbed our ideas, was our sole anticipation, the constant thought of our minds.
I see it as plainly as if it had happened yesterday.
The boat was getting up steam against the quay at Granville; my father, bewildered, was superintending the loading of our three pieces of baggage; my mother, nervous, had taken the arm of my unmarried sister, who seemed lost since the departure of the other one, like the last chicken of a brood; behind us came the bride and groom, who always stayed behind, a thing that often made me turn round.
We got on board, and the vessel, leaving the breakwater, forged ahead through a sea as flat as a marble table.
We watched the coast disappear in the distance, happy and proud, like all who do not travel much.
“My father was swelling out his chest in the breeze, beneath his frock coat, which had that morning been very carefully cleaned; and he spread around him that odor of benzine which always made me recognize Sunday.
Suddenly he noticed two elegantly dressed ladies to whom two gentlemen were offering oysters.
An old, ragged sailor was opening them with his knife and passing them to the gentlemen, who would then offer them to the ladies.
They ate them in a dainty manner, holding the shell on a fine handkerchief and advancing their mouths a little in order not to spot their dresses.
Then they would drink the liquid with a rapid little motion and throw the shell overboard.
“My father was probably pleased with this delicate manner of eating oysters on a moving ship.
He considered it good form, refined, and, going up to my mother and sisters, he asked: “'Would you like me to offer you some oysters?' “My mother hesitated on account of the expense, but my two sisters immediately accepted.
My mother said in a provoked manner: “'I am afraid that they will hurt my stomach.
Offer the children some, but not too much, it would make them sick.' Then, turning toward me, she added: “'As for Joseph, he doesn't need any.
Boys shouldn't be spoiled.' “However, I remained beside my mother, finding this discrimination unjust.
I watched my father as he pompously conducted my two sisters and his son-in-law toward the ragged old sailor.
“The two ladies had just left, and my father showed my sisters how to eat them without spilling the liquor.
He attempted to imitate the ladies, and immediately spilled all the liquid over his coat.
I heard my mother mutter: “'He would do far better to keep quiet.' “But, suddenly, my father appeared to be worried; he retreated a few steps, stared at his family gathered around the old shell opener, and quickly came toward us.
He seemed very pale, with a peculiar look.
In a low voice he said to my mother: “'It's extraordinary how that man opening the oysters looks like Jules.' “Astonished, my mother asked: “'What Jules?' “My father continued: “'Why, my brother.
If I did not know that he was well off in America, I should think it was he.' “Bewildered, my mother stammered: “'You are crazy!
As long as you know that it is not he, why do you say such foolish things?' “But my father insisted: “'Go on over and see, Clarisse!
I would rather have you see with your own eyes.' “She arose and walked to her daughters.
I, too, was watching the man.
He was old, dirty, wrinkled, and did not lift his eyes from his work.
“My mother returned.
I noticed that she was trembling.
She exclaimed quickly: “'I believe that it is he.
But be very careful that we don't have this rogue on our hands again!' “My father walked away, but I followed him.
I felt strangely moved.
“The captain, a tall, thin man, with blond whiskers, was walking along the bridge with an important air as if he were commanding the Indian mail steamer.
“My father addressed him ceremoniously, and questioned him about his profession, adding many compliments: “'What might be the importance of Jersey?
What was the population?
“'You have there an old shell opener who seems quite interesting.
Do you know anything about him?' “The captain, whom this conversation began to weary, answered dryly: “'He is some old French tramp whom I found last year in America, and I brought him back.
It seems that he has some relatives in Havre, but that he doesn't wish to return to them because he owes them money.
His name is Jules—Jules Darmanche or Darvanche or something like that.
It seems that he was once rich over there, but you can see what's left of him now.' “My father turned ashy pale and muttered, his throat contracted, his eyes haggard.
I'm not in the least surprised.
Thank you very much, captain.' “He went away, and the astonished sailor watched him disappear.
He returned to my mother so upset that she said to him: “'Sit down; some one will notice that something is the matter.' “He sank down on a bench and stammered: “'It's he!
It's he!' “Then he asked: “'What are we going to do?' “She answered quickly: “'We must get the children out of the way.
Since Joseph knows everything, he can go and get them.
We must take good care that our son- in-law doesn't find out.' “My father seemed absolutely bewildered.
He murmured: “'What a catastrophe!' “Suddenly growing furious, my mother exclaimed: “'I always thought that that thief never would do anything, and that he would drop down on us again!
As if one could expect anything from a Davranche!' “My father passed his hand over his forehead, as he always did when his wife reproached him.
All that it needed to cap the climax would be to be recognized by that beggar.
That would be very pleasant!
“Astonished, my sisters were awaiting their father.
I said that mamma had felt a sudden attack of sea-sickness, and I asked the shell opener: “'How much do we owe you, monsieur?' “I felt like laughing: he was my uncle!
He answered: “'Two francs fifty.' “I held out my five francs and he returned the change.
I looked at his hand; it was a poor, wrinkled, sailor's hand, and I looked at his face, an unhappy old face.
He thanked me: “'God bless you, my young sir!' “He spoke like a poor man receiving alms.
I couldn't help thinking that he must have begged over there!
My sisters looked at me, surprised at my generosity.
When I returned the two francs to my father, my mother asked me in surprise: “'Was there three francs' worth?
That is impossible.' “I answered in a firm voice “'I gave ten cents as a tip.' “My mother started, and, staring at me, she exclaimed: “'You must be crazy!
Give ten cents to that man, to that vagabond—' “She stopped at a look from my father, who was pointing at his son-in- law.
Then everybody was silent.
“As we approached the breakwater a violent desire seized me once more to see my Uncle Jules, to be near him, to say to him something consoling, something tender.
But as no one was eating any more oysters, he had disappeared, having probably gone below to the dirty hold which was the home of the poor wretch.” THE MODEL Curving like a crescent moon, the little town of Etretat, with its white cliffs, its white, shingly beach and its blue sea, lay in the sunlight at high noon one July day.
At either extremity of this crescent its two “gates,” the smaller to the right, the larger one at the left, stretched forth—one a dwarf and the other a colossal limb—into the water, and the bell tower, almost as tall as the cliff, wide below, narrowing at the top, raised its pointed summit to the sky.
On the sands beside the water a crowd was seated watching the bathers.
On the terrace of, the Casino another crowd, seated or walking, displayed beneath the brilliant sky a perfect flower patch of bright costumes, with red and blue parasols embroidered with large flowers in silk.
A young man, well known and celebrated as a painter, Jean Sumner, was walking with a dejected air beside a wheeled chair in which sat a young woman, his wife.
A manservant was gently pushing the chair, and the crippled woman was gazing sadly at the brightness of the sky, the gladness of the day, and the happiness of others.
Those who were passing behind the silent and motionless couple looked at them compassionately.
A whole legend of devotion was attached to them.
He had married her in spite of her infirmity, touched by her affection for him, it was said.
Not far from there, two young men were chatting, seated on a bench and looking out into the horizon.
“No, it is not true; I tell you that I am well acquainted with Jean Sumner.” “But then, why did he marry her?
And, besides, you know very well that painters make a specialty of foolish marriages.
They almost always marry models, former sweethearts, in fact, women of doubtful reputation, frequently.
One would suppose that constant association with the general run of models would disgust them forever with that class of women.
Read that little book, so true, so cruel and so beautiful, by Alphonse Daudet: 'Artists' Wives.' “In the case of the couple you see over there the accident occurred in a special and terrible manner.
The little woman played a frightful comedy, or, rather, tragedy.
Who is able to determine precisely how much is put on and how much is real in the actions of a woman?
They are always sincere in an eternal mobility of impressions.
They are furious, criminal, devoted, admirable and base in obedience to intangible emotions.
They tell lies incessantly without intention, without knowing or understanding why, and in spite of it all are absolutely frank in their feelings and sentiments, which they display by violent, unexpected, incomprehensible, foolish resolutions which overthrow our arguments, our customary poise and all our selfish plans.
The unforeseenness and suddenness of their determinations will always render them undecipherable enigmas as far as we are concerned.
We continually ask ourselves: “'Are they sincere?
Are they pretending?' “But, my friend, they are sincere and insincere at one and the same time, because it is their nature to be extremists in both and to be neither one nor the other.
So complex that we can never guess at them beforehand, and so simple that after having been victimized we cannot help being astonished and exclaiming: 'What!
Did she make a fool of me so easily as that?' “And they always succeed, old man, especially when it is a question of getting married.
As soon as one likes a woman one sincerely believes that they could not get along without her for the rest of their life.
One knows that one has felt the same way before and that disgust invariably succeeded gratification; that in order to pass one's existence side by side with another there must be not a brutal, physical passion which soon dies out, but a sympathy of soul, temperament and temper.
One should know how to determine in the enchantment to which one is subjected whether it proceeds from the physical, from a certain sensuous intoxication, or from a deep spiritual charm.
“Well, he believed himself in love; he made her no end of promises of fidelity, and was devoted to her.
“She was really attractive, gifted with that fashionable flippancy that little Parisians so readily affect.
She chattered, babbled, made foolish remarks that sounded witty from the manner in which they were uttered.
She used graceful gesture's which were calculated to attract a painter's eye.
When she raised her arms, when she bent over, when she got into a carriage, when she held out her hand to you, her gestures were perfect and appropriate.
“As it was a beautiful evening we thought we would take a stroll along the bank of the river.
The moon poured a flood of light on the trembling water, scattering yellow gleams along its ripples in the currents and all along the course of the wide, slow river.
“We strolled along the bank, a little enthused by that vague exaltation that these dreamy evenings produce in us.
We would have liked to undertake some wonderful task, to love some unknown, deliciously poetic being.
We felt ourselves vibrating with raptures, longings, strange aspirations.
And we were silent, our beings pervaded by the serene and living coolness of the beautiful night, the coolness of the moonlight, which seemed to penetrate one's body, permeate it, soothe one's spirit, fill it with fragrance and steep it in happiness.
“Suddenly Josephine (that is her name) uttered an exclamation: “'Oh, did you see the big fish that jumped, over there?' “He replied without looking, without thinking: “'Yes, dear.' “She was angry.
It is so delightful that I am not thinking of anything.' “She was silent, but at the end of a minute she felt as if she must say something and asked: “'Are you going to Paris to-morrow?' “'I do not know,' he replied.
“'Do you think it is very amusing to walk along without speaking?
Then, feeling with her woman's instinct that she was going to make him angry, she began to sing a popular air that had harassed our ears and our minds for two years: “'Je regardais en fair.' “He murmured: “'Please keep quiet.' “She replied angrily: “'Why do you wish me to keep quiet?' “'You spoil the landscape for us!' he said.
“Then followed a scene, a hateful, idiotic scene, with unexpected reproaches, unsuitable recriminations, then tears.
He had allowed her to talk without replying, enervated by the beauty of the scene and dumfounded by this storm of abuse.
“Three months later he strove wildly to free himself from those invincible and invisible bonds with which such a friendship chains our lives.
She kept him under her influence, tyrannizing over him, making his life a burden to him.
They quarreled continually, vituperating and finally fighting each other.
He sold all his canvases, borrowed money from his friends, realizing twenty thousand francs (he was not well known then), and left them for her one morning with a note of farewell.
“About three o'clock that afternoon there was a ring at the bell.
“He had risen when he saw her coming.' “She threw the envelope containing the banknotes at his feet with a truly noble gesture and said in a quick tone: “'There's your money.
I don't want it!' “She was very pale, trembling and ready undoubtedly to commit any folly.
As for him, I saw him grow pale also, pale with rage and exasperation, ready also perhaps to commit any violence.
You implored me to accept you.
Let me settle it.' “I went toward her and quietly, little by little, I began to reason with her, exhausting all the arguments that are used under similar circumstances.
She listened to me, motionless, with a fixed gaze, obstinate and silent.
“Finally, not knowing what more to say, and seeing that there would be a scene, I thought of a last resort and said: “'He loves you still, my dear, but his family want him to marry some one, and you understand—' “She gave a start and exclaimed: “'Ah!
Now I understand: “And turning toward him, she said: “'You are—you are going to get married?' “He replied decidedly” 'Yes.' “She took a step forward.
Do you hear?' “He shrugged his shoulders and replied: “'Well, then kill yourself!' “She stammered out, almost choking with her violent emotion: “'What do you say?
Say it again!' “He repeated: “'Well, then kill yourself if you like!' “With her face almost livid, she replied: “'Do not dare me!
After you!' “She looked at him for a second with terrible, wild, staring eyes.
Then, taking a run as if she were going to jump a hedge in the country, she rushed past me and past him, jumped over the sill and disappeared.
“I shall never forget the impression made on me by that open window after I had seen that body pass through it to fall to the ground.
It appeared to me in a second to be as large as the heavens and as hollow as space.
And I drew back instinctively, not daring to look at it, as though I feared I might fall out myself.
“Jean, dumfounded, stood motionless.
“Jean, wild with remorse and also possibly touched with gratitude, made up his mind to marry her.
The young woman felt chilly and wanted to go home, and the servant wheeled the invalid chair in the direction of the village.
The painter walked beside his wife, neither of them having exchanged a word for an hour.
This story appeared in Le Gaulois, December 17, 1883.
A VAGABOND He was a journeyman carpenter, a good workman and a steady fellow, twenty-seven years old, but, although the eldest son, Jacques Randel had been forced to live on his family for two months, owing to the general lack of work.
He had walked about seeking work for over a month and had left his native town, Ville-Avary, in La Manche, because he could find nothing to do and would no longer deprive his family of the bread they needed themselves, when he was the strongest of them all.
His two sisters earned but little as charwomen.
He went and inquired at the town hall, and the mayor's secretary told him that he would find work at the Labor Agency, and so he started, well provided with papers and certificates, and carrying another pair of shoes, a pair of trousers and a shirt in a blue handkerchief at the end of his stick.
And he had walked almost without stopping, day and night, along interminable roads, in sun and rain, without ever reaching that mysterious country where workmen find work.
At first he had the fixed idea that he must only work as a carpenter, but at every carpenter's shop where he applied he was told that they had just dismissed men on account of work being so slack, and, finding himself at the end of his resources, he made up his mind to undertake any job that he might come across on the road.
And so by turns he was a navvy, stableman, stonecutter; he split wood, lopped the branches of trees, dug wells, mixed mortar, tied up fagots, tended goats on a mountain, and all for a few pence, for he only obtained two or three days' work occasionally by offering himself at a shamefully low price, in order to tempt the avarice of employers and peasants.
It was getting dark, and Jacques Randel, jaded, his legs failing him, his stomach empty, and with despair in his heart, was walking barefoot on the grass by the side of the road, for he was taking care of his last pair of shoes, as the other pair had already ceased to exist for a long time.
It was a Saturday, toward the end of autumn.
The heavy gray clouds were being driven rapidly through the sky by the gusts of wind which whistled among the trees, and one felt that it would rain soon.
The country was deserted at that hour on the eve of Sunday.
Here and there in the fields there rose up stacks of wheat straw, like huge yellow mushrooms, and the fields looked bare, as they had already been sown for the next year.
Worn out and weakened with fatigue, he took longer strides, so as not to take so many steps, and with heavy head, the blood throbbing in his temples, with red eyes and dry mouth, he grasped his stick tightly in his hand, with a longing to strike the first passerby who might be going home to supper.
He looked at the sides of the road, imagining he saw potatoes dug up and lying on the ground before his eyes; if he had found any he would have gathered some dead wood, made a fire in the ditch and have had a capital supper off the warm, round vegetables with which he would first of all have warmed his cold hands.
But it was too late in the year, and he would have to gnaw a raw beetroot which he might pick up in a field as he had done the day before.
For the last two days he had talked to himself as he quickened his steps under the influence of his thoughts.
He had never thought much hitherto, as he had given all his mind, all his simple faculties to his mechanical work.
As he stumbled over the stones which tripped his bare feet, he grumbled: “How wretched! how miserable!
And, without considering that there is another injustice which is human, and which is called robbery and violence, he felt inclined to go into one of those houses to murder the inhabitants and to sit down to table in their stead.
He said to himself: “I have no right to live now, as they are letting me die of hunger, and yet I only ask for work—a set of hogs!” And the pain in his limbs, the gnawing in his heart rose to his head like terrible intoxication, and gave rise to this simple thought in his brain: “I have the right to live because I breathe and because the air is the common property of everybody.
So nobody has the right to leave me without bread!” A fine, thick, icy cold rain was coming down, and he stopped and murmured: “Oh, misery!
Another month of walking before I get home.” He was indeed returning home then, for he saw that he should more easily find work in his native town, where he was known—and he did not mind what he did—than on the highroads, where everybody suspected him.
As the carpentering business was not prosperous, he would turn day laborer, be a mason's hodman, a ditcher, break stones on the road.
If he only earned a franc a day, that would at any rate buy him something to eat.
He tied the remains of his last pocket handkerchief round his neck to prevent the cold rain from running down his back and chest, but he soon found that it was penetrating the thin material of which his clothes were made, and he glanced about him with the agonized look of a man who does not know where to hide his body and to rest his head, and has no place of shelter in the whole world.
Night came on and wrapped the country in obscurity, and in the distance, in a meadow, he saw a dark spot on the grass; it was a cow, and so he got over the ditch by the roadside and went up to her without exactly knowing what he was doing.
When he got close to her she raised her great head to him, and he thought: “If I only had a jug I could get a little milk.” He looked at the cow and the cow looked at him and then, suddenly giving her a kick in the side, he said: “Get up!” The animal got up slowly, letting her heavy udders bang down.
Then the man lay down on his back between the animal's legs and drank for a long time, squeezing her warm, swollen teats, which tasted of the cowstall, with both hands, and he drank as long as she gave any milk.
The cow had lain down again heavily, and he sat down by her side and stroked her head, grateful for the nourishment she had given him.
The animal's strong, thick breath, which came out of her nostrils like two jets of steam in the evening air, blew on the workman's face, and he said: “You are not cold inside there!” He put his hands on her chest and under her stomach to find some warmth there, and then the idea struck him that he might pass the night beside that large, warm animal.
So he found a comfortable place and laid his head on her side, and then, as he was worn out with fatigue, fell asleep immediately.
He woke up, however, several times, with his back or his stomach half frozen, according as he put one or the other against the animal's flank.
Then he turned over to warm and dry that part of his body which had remained exposed to the night air, and soon went soundly to sleep again.
The crowing of a cock woke him; the day was breaking, it was no longer raining, and the sky was bright.
The cow was resting with her muzzle on the ground, and he stooped down, resting on his hands, to kiss those wide, moist nostrils, and said: “Good-by, my beauty, until next time.
Good-by.” Then he put on his shoes and went off, and for two hours walked straight before him, always following the same road, and then he felt so tired that he sat down on the grass.
It was broad daylight by that time, and the church bells were ringing; men in blue blouses, women in white caps, some on foot, some in carts, began to pass along the road, going to the neighboring villages to spend Sunday with friends or relations.
A stout peasant came in sight, driving before him a score of frightened, bleating sheep, with the help of an active dog.
Randel got up, and raising his cap, said: “You do not happen to have any work for a man who is dying of hunger?” But the other, giving an angry look at the vagabond, replied: “I have no work for fellows whom I meet on the road.” And the carpenter went back and sat down by the side of the ditch again.
He waited there for a long time, watching the country people pass and looking for a kind, compassionate face before he renewed his request, and finally selected a man in an overcoat, whose stomach was adorned with a gold chain.
They were walking slowly side by side, glittering in the sun with their shining hats, their yellow accoutrements and their metal buttons, as if to frighten evildoers, and to put them to flight at a distance.
He knew that they were coming after him, but he did not move, for he was seized with a sudden desire to defy them, to be arrested by them, and to have his revenge later.
They came on without appearing to have seen him, walking heavily, with military step, and balancing themselves as if they were doing the goose step; and then, suddenly, as they passed him, appearing to have noticed him, they stopped and looked at him angrily and threateningly, and the brigadier came up to him and asked: “What are you doing here?” “I am resting,” the man replied calmly.
The square was full of people, who immediately formed two lines to see the criminal pass.
He was being followed by a crowd of excited children.
Male and female peasants looked at the prisoner between the two gendarmes, with hatred in their eyes and a longing to throw stones at him, to tear his skin with their nails, to trample him under their feet.
They asked each other whether he had committed murder or robbery.
The butcher, who was an ex- 'spahi', declared that he was a deserter.
The tobacconist thought that he recognized him as the man who had that very morning passed a bad half-franc piece off on him, and the ironmonger declared that he was the murderer of Widow Malet, whom the police had been looking for for six months.
In the municipal court, into which his custodians took him, Randel saw the mayor again, sitting on the magisterial bench, with the schoolmaster by his side.
“Aha! aha!” the magistrate exclaimed, “so here you are again, my fine fellow.
Well, brigadier, what is he charged with?” “He is a vagabond without house or home, Monsieur le Maire, without any resources or money, so he says, who was arrested in the act of begging, but he is provided with good testimonials, and his papers are all in order.” “Show me his papers,” the mayor said.
He took them, read them, reread, returned them and then said: “Search him.” So they searched him, but found nothing, and the mayor seemed perplexed, and asked the workman: “What were you doing on the road this morning?” “I was looking for work.” “Work?
Ah! ah! ah! that is rather too much!” But Randel went on firmly: “If you let me nearly die of hunger again, you will force me to commit a crime, and then, so much the worse for you other fat fellows.” The mayor had risen and he repeated: “Take him away immediately or I shall end by getting angry.” The two gendarmes thereupon seized the carpenter by the arms and dragged him out.
He allowed them to do it without resistance, passed through the village again and found himself on the highroad once more; and when the men had accompanied him two hundred yards beyond the village, the brigadier said: “Now off with you and do not let me catch you about here again, for if I do, you will know it.” Randel went off without replying or knowing where he was going.
He walked on for a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes, so stupefied that he no longer thought of anything.
But suddenly, as he was passing a small house, where the window was half open, the smell of the soup and boiled meat stopped him suddenly, and hunger, fierce, devouring, maddening hunger, seized him and almost drove him against the walls of the house like a wild beast.
Two places were set at the table, and no doubt the proprietors of the house, on going to church, had left their dinner on the fire, their nice Sunday boiled beef and vegetable soup, while there was a loaf of new bread on the chimney-piece, between two bottles which seemed full.
Randel seized the bread first of all and broke it with as much violence as if he were strangling a man, and then he began to eat voraciously, swallowing great mouthfuls quickly.
But almost immediately the smell of the meat attracted him to the fireplace, and, having taken off the lid of the saucepan, he plunged a fork into it and brought out a large piece of beef tied with a string.
When he had eaten nearly all the meat, besides a quantity of vegetables, he felt thirsty and took one of the bottles off the mantelpiece.
Scarcely had he poured the liquor into his glass when he saw it was brandy.
He certainly enjoyed it, for he had grown unaccustomed to it, and he poured himself out another glassful, which he drank at two gulps.
And then almost immediately he felt quite merry and light-hearted from the effects of the alcohol, just as if some great happiness filled his heart.
He continued to eat, but more slowly, and dipping his bread into the soup.
His skin had become burning, and especially his forehead, where the veins were throbbing.
But suddenly the church bells began to ring.
Mass was over, and instinct rather than fear, the instinct of prudence, which guides all beings and makes them clear-sighted in danger, made the carpenter get up.
He put the remains of the loaf into one pocket and the brandy bottle into the other, and he furtively went to the window and looked out into the road.
It was still deserted, so he jumped out and set off walking again, but instead of following the highroad he ran across the fields toward a wood he saw a little way off.
And between each time he began to sing again: “Oh! what joy, what joy it is, To pick the sweet, wild strawberries.” Suddenly he found himself above a deep road, and in the road he saw a tall girl, a servant, who was returning to the village with two pails of milk.
The girl started back from him, frightened at his face, his eyes, his half-open mouth, his outstretched hands, but he seized her by the shoulders, and without a word, threw her down in the road.
She let her two pails fall, and they rolled over noisily, and all the milk was spilt, and then she screamed lustily, but it was of no avail in that lonely spot.
When she got up the thought of her overturned pails suddenly filled her with fury, and, taking off one of her wooden sabots, she threw it at the man to break his head if he did not pay her for her milk.
But he, mistaking the reason of this sudden violent attack, somewhat sobered, and frightened at what he had done, ran off as fast as he could, while she threw stones at him, some of which hit him in the back.
His legs were so weak that they could scarcely carry him; all his ideas were confused, he lost recollection of everything and could no longer think about anything, and so he sat down at the foot of a tree, and in five minutes was fast asleep.
He was soon awakened, however, by a rough shake, and, on opening his eyes, he saw two cocked hats of shiny leather bending over him, and the two gendarmes of the morning, who were holding him and binding his arms.
“I knew I should catch you again,” said the brigadier jeeringly.
But Randel got up without replying.
The two men shook him, quite ready to ill treat him if he made a movement, for he was their prey now.
He had become a jailbird, caught by those hunters of criminals who would not let him go again.
“Now, start!” the brigadier said, and they set off.
It was late afternoon, and the autumn twilight was setting in over the land, and in half an hour they reached the village, where every door was open, for the people had heard what had happened.
Peasants and peasant women and girls, excited with anger, as if every man had been robbed and every woman attacked, wished to see the wretch brought back, so that they might overwhelm him with abuse.
They hooted him from the first house in the village until they reached the Hotel de Ville, where the mayor was waiting for him to be himself avenged on this vagabond, and as soon as he saw him approaching he cried: “Ah! my fine fellow! here we are!” And he rubbed his hands, more pleased than he usually was, and continued: “I said so.
I said so, the moment I saw him in the road.” And then with increased satisfaction: “Oh, you blackguard!
Oh, you dirty blackguard!
You will get your twenty years, my fine fellow!” THE FISHING HOLE “Cuts and wounds which caused death.” Such was the charge upon which Leopold Renard, upholsterer, was summoned before the Court of Assizes.
Round him were the principal witnesses, Madame Flameche, widow of the victim, and Louis Ladureau, cabinetmaker, and Jean Durdent, plumber.
Near the criminal was his wife, dressed in black, an ugly little woman, who looked like a monkey dressed as a lady.
This is how Renard (Leopold) recounted the drama.
“Good heavens, it is a misfortune of which I was the prime victim all the time, and with which my will has nothing to do.
The facts are their own commentary, Monsieur le President.
I am an honest man, a hard- working man, an upholsterer, living in the same street for the last sixteen years, known, liked, respected and esteemed by all, as my neighbors can testify, even the porter's wife, who is not amiable every day.
I am fond of work, I am fond of saving, I like honest men and respectable amusements.
That is what has ruined me, so much the worse for me; but as my will had nothing to do with it, I continue to respect myself.
Melie inspired me with that enthusiasm, the jade, and she is more enthusiastic than I am, the scold, seeing that all the mischief in this business is her fault, as you will see immediately.
“I am strong and mild tempered, without a pennyworth of malice in me.
Very well, she does more mischief than a weasel.
I do not deny that she has some good qualities; she has some, and very important ones for a man in business.
Just ask about it in the neighborhood, and even the porter's wife, who has just sent me about my business—she will tell you something about it.
I would not put up with that.' If I had listened to her, Monsieur le President, I should have had at least three hand-to-hand fights a month . . . .” Madame Renard interrupted him: “And for good reasons, too; they laugh best who laugh last.” He turned toward her frankly: “Well, I can't blame you, since you were not the cause of it.” Then, facing the President again, he said: “I will continue.
We used to go to Passy every Saturday evening, so as to begin fishing at daybreak the next morning.
Three years ago this summer I discovered a place, oh! such a spot.
In the shade, eight feet of water at least and perhaps ten, a hole with cavities under the bank, a regular nest for fish and a paradise for the fisherman.
I might look upon that fishing hole as my property, Monsieur le President, as I was its Christopher Columbus.
Everybody in the neighborhood knew it, without making any opposition.
They would say: 'That is Renard's place'; and nobody would have gone there, not even Monsieur Plumeau, who is well known, be it said without any offense, for poaching on other people's preserves.
“Well, I returned to this place of which I felt certain, just as if I had owned it.
I had scarcely got there on Saturday, when I got into Delila, with my wife.
Delila is my Norwegian boat, which I had built by Fournaire, and which is light and safe.
Well, as I said, we got into the boat and we were going to set bait, and for setting bait there is none to be compared with me, and they all know it.
I cannot answer that question; it has nothing to do with the accident.
There are more than three hundred people who have asked me; I have been offered glasses of brandy and liqueur, fried fish, matelotes, to make me tell.
Is not that so, Melie?” The president of the court interrupted him.
“Just get to the facts as soon as you can,” and the accused continued: “I am getting to them, I am getting to them.
Well, on Saturday, July 8, we left by the twenty-five past five train and before dinner we went to set bait as usual.
The weather promised to keep fine and I said to Melie: 'All right for tomorrow.' And she replied: 'If looks like it,' We never talk more than that together.
“And then we returned to dinner.
I was happy and thirsty, and that was the cause of everything.
I said to Melie: 'Look here, Melie, it is fine weather, suppose I drink a bottle of 'Casque a meche'.' That is a weak white wine which we have christened so, because if you drink too much of it it prevents you from sleeping and takes the place of a nightcap.
“She replied: 'You can do as you please, but you will be ill again and will not be able to get up tomorrow.' That was true, sensible and prudent, clear-sighted, I must confess.
Nevertheless I could not resist, and I drank my bottle.
By Jove! it kept me awake till two o'clock in the morning, and then I went to sleep so soundly that I should not have heard the angel sounding his trump at the last judgment.
“In short, my wife woke me at six o'clock and I jumped out of bed, hastily put on my trousers and jersey, washed my face and jumped on board Delila.
But it was too late, for when I arrived at my hole it was already occupied!
Such a thing had never happened to me in three years, and it made me feel as if I were being robbed under my own eyes.
I said to myself: 'Confound it all! confound it!' And then my wife began to nag at me. 'Eh! what about your 'Casque a meche'?
Get along, you drunkard!
Are you satisfied, you great fool?' I could say nothing, because it was all true, but I landed all the same near the spot and tried to profit by what was left.
“He was a little thin man in white linen coat and waistcoat and a large straw hat, and his wife, a fat woman, doing embroidery, sat behind him.
“When she saw us take up our position close to them she murmured: 'Are there no other places on the river?' My wife, who was furious, replied: 'People who have any manners make inquiries about the habits of the neighborhood before occupying reserved spots.' “As I did not want a fuss, I said to her: 'Hold your tongue, Melie.
Let them alone, let them alone; we shall see.' “Well, we fastened Delila under the willows and had landed and were fishing side by side, Melie and I, close to the two others.
But here, monsieur, I must enter into details.
“We had only been there about five minutes when our neighbor's line began to jerk twice, thrice; and then he pulled out a chub as thick as my thigh; rather less, perhaps, but nearly as big!
Well, not a quarter of an hour had passed when the little man caught another chub, and another almost immediately, and another five minutes later.
Do you think that you will catch anything?
Not even a frog, nothing whatever.
Why, my hands are tingling, just to think of it.' “But I said to myself: 'Let us wait until twelve o'clock.
As for me, Monsieur le President, I lunch on that spot every Sunday.
We bring our provisions in Delila.
At noon the wretch produced a chicken in a newspaper, and while he was eating, he actually caught another chub!
“Then I took up my newspaper to aid my digestion.
It is Columbine's day, you know; Columbine, who writes the articles in the Gil Blas.
I generally put Madame Renard into a rage by pretending to know this Columbine.
“Well, I began to tease my wife, but she got angry immediately, and very angry, so I held my tongue.
At that moment our two witnesses who are present here, Monsieur Ladureau and Monsieur Durdent, appeared on the other side of the river.
Now you are going to run away and surrender your place!
And then my wife began to talk aloud, as if she were thinking, and you can see her tricks.
She said: 'That is what one might call stolen fish, seeing that we set the bait ourselves.
At any rate, they ought to give us back the money we have spent on bait.' “Then the fat woman in the cotton dress said in her turn: 'Do you mean to call us thieves, madame?' Explanations followed and compliments began to fly.
Oh, Lord! those creatures know some good ones.
They shouted so loud that our two witnesses, who were on the other bank, began to call out by way of a joke: 'Less noise over there; you will interfere with your husbands' fishing.' “The fact is that neither the little man nor I moved any more than if we had been two tree stumps.
We remained there, with our eyes fixed on the water, as if we had heard nothing; but, by Jove! we heard all the same. 'You are a thief!
“Suddenly I heard a noise behind me and turned round.
It was the other one, the fat woman, who had attacked my wife with her parasol.
I should have let them fight it out: women together, men together.
I caught the gentleman with the end of my fist, and crash! crash!
“I should have fished him out most certainly, Monsieur le President, if I had had time.
But, to make matters worse, the fat woman had the upper hand and was pounding Melie for all she was worth.
I know I ought not to have interfered while the man was in the water, but I never thought that he would drown and said to myself: 'Bah, it will cool him.' “I therefore ran up to the women to separate them and all I received was scratches and bites.
Good Lord, what creatures!
Well, it took me five minutes, and perhaps ten, to separate those two viragos.
“The water was as smooth as a lake and the others yonder kept shouting: 'Fish him out! fish him out!' It was all very well to say that, but I cannot swim and still less dive.
“At last the man from the dam came and two gentlemen with boathooks, but over a quarter of an hour had passed.
I am innocent, on my honor.” The witnesses having given testimony to the same effect, the accused was acquitted.
The waiters did not hurry themselves, in order to give the late comers a chance and thus avoid the trouble of bringing in the dishes a second time.
The old bathers, the habitues, whose season was almost over, glanced, gazed toward the door whenever it opened, to see what new faces might appear.
This is the principal distraction of watering places.
People look forward to the dinner hour in order to inspect each day's new arrivals, to find out who they are, what they do, and what they think.
We always have a vague desire to meet pleasant people, to make agreeable acquaintances, perhaps to meet with a love adventure.
In this life of elbowings, unknown strangers assume an extreme importance.
Curiosity is aroused, sympathy is ready to exhibit itself, and sociability is the order of the day.
We cherish antipathies for a week and friendships for a month; we see people with different eyes, when we view them through the medium of acquaintanceship at watering places.
We discover in men suddenly, after an hour's chat, in the evening after dinner, under the trees in the park where the healing spring bubbles up, a high intelligence and astonishing merits, and a month afterward we have completely forgotten these new friends, who were so fascinating when we first met them.
Permanent and serious ties are also formed here sooner than anywhere else.
People see each other every day; they become acquainted very quickly, and their affection is tinged with the sweetness and unrestraint of long-standing intimacies.
And the melancholy of watering places, the monotony of days that are all alike, proves hourly an incentive to this heart expansion.
Well, this evening, as on every other evening, we awaited the appearance of strange faces.
Only two appeared, but they were very remarkable, a man and a woman —father and daughter.
They immediately reminded me of some of Edgar Poe's characters; and yet there was about them a charm, the charm associated with misfortune.
The man was very tall and thin, rather stooped, with perfectly white hair, too white for his comparatively youthful physiognomy; and there was in his bearing and in his person that austerity peculiar to Protestants.
The daughter, who was probably twenty-four or twenty-five, was small in stature, and was also very thin, very pale, and she had the air of one who was worn out with utter lassitude.
She was rather pretty; with a transparent, spiritual beauty.
And she ate with extreme slowness, as if she were almost incapable of moving her arms.
It must have been she, assuredly, who had come to take the waters.
They sat facing me, on the opposite side of the table; and I at once noticed that the father had a very singular, nervous twitching.
Every time he wanted to reach an object, his hand described a sort of zigzag before it succeeded in reaching what it was in search of, and after a little while this movement annoyed me so that I turned aside my head in order not to see it.
After dinner I went for a stroll in the park of the bathing establishment.
This led toward the little Auvergnese station of Chatel- Guyon, hidden in a gorge at the foot of the high mountain, from which flowed so many boiling springs, arising from the deep bed of extinct volcanoes.
Over yonder, above our heads, the domes of extinct craters lifted their ragged peaks above the rest in the long mountain chain.
For Chatel-Guyon is situated at the entrance to the land of mountain domes.
Beyond it stretches out the region of peaks, and, farther on again the region of precipitous summits.
The “Puy de Dome” is the highest of the domes, the Peak of Sancy is the loftiest of the peaks, and Cantal is the most precipitous of these mountain heights.
It was a very warm evening, and I was walking up and down a shady path, listening to the opening, strains of the Casino band, which was playing on an elevation overlooking the park.
And I saw the father and the daughter advancing slowly in my direction.
I bowed as one bows to one's hotel companions at a watering place; and the man, coming to a sudden halt, said to me: “Could you not, monsieur, tell us of a nice walk to take, short, pretty, and not steep; and pardon my troubling you?” I offered to show them the way toward the valley through which the little river flowed, a deep valley forming a gorge between two tall, craggy, wooded slopes.
They gladly accepted my offer.
And we talked, naturally, about the virtue of the waters.
“Oh,” he said, “my daughter has a strange malady, the seat of which is unknown.
She suffers from incomprehensible nervous attacks.
At one time the doctors think she has an attack of heart disease, at another time they imagine it is some affection of the liver, and at another they declare it to be a disease of the spine.
To-day this protean malady, that assumes a thousand forms and a thousand modes of attack, is attributed to the stomach, which is the great caldron and regulator of the body.
For my part, I am rather inclined to think it is the nerves.
In any case it is very sad.” Immediately the remembrance of the violent spasmodic movement of his hand came back to my mind, and I asked him: “But is this not the result of heredity?
Are not your own nerves somewhat affected?” He replied calmly: “Mine?
Oh, no-my nerves have always been very steady.” Then, suddenly, after a pause, he went on: “Ah!
You were alluding to the jerking movement of my hand every time I try to reach for anything?
This arises from a terrible experience which I had.
Just imagine, this daughter of mine was actually buried alive!” I could only utter, “Ah!” so great were my astonishment and emotion.
He continued: “Here is the story.
Juliette had been subject for some time to serious attacks of the heart.
We believed that she had disease of that organ, and were prepared for the worst.
“One day she was carried into the house cold, lifeless, dead.
She had fallen down unconscious in the garden.
The doctor certified that life was extinct.
I laid her with my own hands in the coffin, which I accompanied to the cemetery, where she was deposited in the family vault.
It is situated in the very heart of Lorraine.
“I wished to have her interred with her jewels, bracelets, necklaces, rings, all presents which she had received from me, and wearing her first ball dress.
I found my way to my own apartment in a half-distracted condition, utterly exhausted, and sank into my easy-chair, without the capacity to think or the strength to move.
I was nothing better now than a suffering, vibrating machine, a human being who had, as it were, been flayed alive; my soul was like an open wound.
“My old valet, Prosper, who had assisted me in placing Juliette in her coffin, and aided me in preparing her for her last sleep, entered the room noiselessly, and asked: “'Does monsieur want anything?' “I merely shook my head in reply.
“'Monsieur is wrong,' he urged. 'He will injure his health.
Would monsieur like me to put him to bed?' “I answered: 'No, let me alone!' “And he left the room.
My fire had died out in the huge grate; and the wind, the winter wind, an icy wind, a winter hurricane, blew with a regular, sinister noise against the windows.
There I was without sleeping, powerless, crushed, my eyes wide open, my legs stretched out, my body limp, inanimate, and my mind torpid with despair.
Suddenly the great doorbell, the great bell of the vestibule, rang out.
The solemn, ponderous sound vibrated through the empty country house as through a vault.
“And, abruptly, the bell again rang twice.
The servants, without doubt, were afraid to get up.
I took a wax candle and descended the stairs.
I was on the point of asking: 'Who is there?' “Then I felt ashamed of my weakness, and I slowly drew back the heavy bolts.
My heart was throbbing wildly.
I opened the door brusquely, and in the darkness I distinguished a white figure, standing erect, something that resembled an apparition.
“I recoiled petrified with horror, faltering: “'Who-who-who are you?' “A voice replied: “'It is I, father.' “It was my daughter.
“I really thought I must be mad, and I retreated backward before this advancing spectre.
I kept moving away, making a sign with my hand,' as if to drive the phantom away, that gesture which you have noticed—that gesture which has remained with me ever since.
“'Do not be afraid, papa,' said the apparition. 'I was not dead.
Somebody tried to steal my rings and cut one of my fingers; the blood began to flow, and that restored me to life.' “And, in fact, I could see that her hand was covered with blood.
“I fell on my knees, choking with sobs and with a rattling in my throat.
“Then, when I had somewhat collected my thoughts, though I was still so bewildered that I scarcely realized the awesome happiness that had befallen me, I made her go up to my room and sit dawn in my easy-chair; then I rang excitedly for Prosper to get him to rekindle the fire and to bring some wine, and to summon assistance.
“The man entered, stared at my daughter, opened his mouth with a gasp of alarm and stupefaction, and then fell back dead.
“It was he who had opened the vault, who had mutilated and then abandoned my daughter; for he could not efface the traces of the theft.
He had not even taken the trouble to put back the coffin into its place, feeling sure, besides, that he would not be suspected by me, as I trusted him absolutely.
“You see, monsieur, that we are very unfortunate people.” He was silent.
The night had fallen, casting its shadows over the desolate, mournful vale, and a sort of mysterious fear possessed me at finding myself by the side of those strange beings, of this young girl who had come back from the tomb, and this father with his uncanny spasm.
I found it impossible to make any comment on this dreadful story.
I only murmured: “What a horrible thing!” Then, after a minute's silence, I added: “Let us go indoors.
IN THE WOOD As the mayor was about to sit down to breakfast, word was brought to him that the rural policeman, with two prisoners, was awaiting him at the Hotel de Ville.
He went there at once and found old Hochedur standing guard before a middle-class couple whom he was regarding with a severe expression on his face.
The man, a fat old fellow with a red nose and white hair, seemed utterly dejected; while the woman, a little roundabout individual with shining cheeks, looked at the official who had arrested them, with defiant eyes.
What is it, Hochedur?” The rural policeman made his deposition: He had gone out that morning at his usual time, in order to patrol his beat from the forest of Champioux as far as the boundaries of Argenteuil.
He had not noticed anything unusual in the country except that it was a fine day, and that the wheat was doing well, when the son of old Bredel, who was going over his vines, called out to him: “Here, Daddy Hochedur, go and have a look at the outskirts of the wood.
In the first thicket you will find a pair of pigeons who must be a hundred and thirty years old between them!” He went in the direction indicated, entered the thicket, and there he heard words which made him suspect a flagrant breach of morality.
Advancing, therefore, on his hands and knees as if to surprise a poacher, he had arrested the couple whom he found there.
The mayor looked at the culprits in astonishment, for the man was certainly sixty, and the woman fifty-five at least, and he began to question them, beginning with the man, who replied in such a weak voice that he could scarcely be heard.
I told her it was very stupid, but when a woman once gets a thing into her head—you know—you cannot get it out.” The mayor, who liked a joke, smiled and replied: “In your case, the contrary ought to have happened.
You would not be here, if she had had the idea only in her head.” Then Monsieur Beauain was seized with rage and turning to his wife, he said: “Do you see to what you have brought us with your poetry?
And we shall have to shut up the shop, sell our good will, and go to some other neighborhood!
That's what it has come to.” Madame Beaurain got up, and without looking at her husband, she explained herself without embarrassment, without useless modesty, and almost without hesitation.
“Of course, monsieur, I know that we have made ourselves ridiculous.
Will you allow me to plead my cause like an advocate, or rather like a poor woman?
And I hope that you will be kind enough to send us home, and to spare us the disgrace of a prosecution.
“Years ago, when I was young, I made Monsieur Beaurain's acquaintance one Sunday in this neighborhood.
He was employed in a draper's shop, and I was a saleswoman in a ready-made clothing establishment.
I remember it as if it were yesterday.
I used to come and spend Sundays here occasionally with a friend of mine, Rose Leveque, with whom I lived in the Rue Pigalle, and Rose had a sweetheart, while I had none.
He used to bring us here, and one Saturday he told me laughing that he should bring a friend with him the next day.
I quite understood what he meant, but I replied that it would be no good; for I was virtuous, monsieur.
“The next day we met Monsieur Beaurain at the railway station, and in those days he was good-looking, but I had made up my mind not to encourage him, and I did not.
When it is fine even now, just as it used to be formerly, I grow quite foolish, and when I am in the country I utterly lose my head.
The green grass, the swallows flying so swiftly, the smell of the grass, the scarlet poppies, the daisies, all that makes me crazy.
It is like champagne when one is not accustomed to it!
“Well, it was lovely weather, warm and bright, and it seemed to penetrate your body through your eyes when you looked and through your mouth when you breathed.
Monsieur Beaurain and I walked behind them, without speaking much, for when people do not know each other, they do not find anything to talk about.
He looked timid, and I liked to see his embarrassment.
Rose and her lover teased me because I looked rather stern, but you will understand that I could not be otherwise.
And then they began to kiss and hug again, without putting any more restraint upon themselves than if we had not been there; and then they whispered together, and got up and went off among the trees, without saying a word.
I felt so confused at seeing them go that it gave me courage, and I began to talk.
I asked him what his business was, and he said he was a linen draper's assistant, as I told you just now.
We talked for a few minutes, and that made him bold, and he wanted to take liberties with me, but I told him sharply to keep his place.
Is not that true, Monsieur Beaurain?” Monsieur Beaurain, who was looking at his feet in confusion, did not reply, and she continued: “Then he saw that I was virtuous, and he began to make love to me nicely, like an honorable man, and from that time he came every Sunday, for he was very much in love with me.
He was a good-looking fellow, formerly, and in short he married me the next September, and we started in business in the Rue des Martyrs.
“It was a hard struggle for some years, monsieur.
Business did not prosper, and we could not afford many country excursions, and, besides, we had got out of the way of them.
One has other things in one's head, and thinks more of the cash box than of pretty speeches, when one is in business.
We were growing old by degrees without perceiving it, like quiet people who do not think much about love.
One does not regret anything as long as one does not notice what one has lost.
“And then, monsieur, business became better, and we were tranquil as to the future!
Then, you see, I do not exactly know what went on in my mind, no, I really do not know, but I began to dream like a little boarding-school girl.
Then I would get up and go out on the doorstep to look at the blue sky between the roofs.
When one looks up at the sky from the street, it looks like a river which is descending on Paris, winding as it flows, and the swallows pass to and fro in it like fish.
But how can one help it, monsieur, when one has worked all one's life?
A moment comes in which one perceives that one could have done something else, and that one regrets, oh! yes, one feels intense regret!
I used to think how delightful it would be to lie under the trees and be in love with some one!
I dreamed of the moonlight on the water, until I felt inclined to drown myself.
“I did not venture to speak to Monsieur Beaurain about this at first.
And then, to speak the truth, Monsieur Beaurain never said much to me, but when I looked in the glass, I also understood quite well that I no longer appealed to any one!
“Well, I made up my mind, and I proposed to him an excursion into the country, to the place where we had first become acquainted.
He agreed without mistrusting anything, and we arrived here this morning, about nine o'clock.
And really, I no longer saw my husband as he is at present, but just as he was formerly!
That I will swear to you, monsieur.
As true as I am standing here I was crazy.
I began to kiss him, and he was more surprised than if I had tried to murder him.
What is the matter with you?' I did not listen to him, I only listened to my own heart, and I made him come into the wood with me.
I have spoken the truth, Monsieur le Maire, the whole truth.” The mayor was a sensible man.
He rose from his chair, smiled, and said: “Go in peace, madame, and when you again visit our forests, be more discreet.” MARTINE It came to him one Sunday after mass.
Her father walked beside his daughter with the important gait of a rich farmer.
Discarding the smock, he wore a short coat of gray cloth and on his head a round-topped hat with wide brim.
She, laced up in a corset which she wore only once a week, walked along erect, with her squeezed-in waist, her broad shoulders and prominent hips, swinging herself a little.
She wore a hat trimmed with flowers, made by a milliner at Yvetot, and displayed the back of her full, round, supple neck, reddened by the sun and air, on which fluttered little stray locks of hair.
Suddenly he said: “Nom d'un nom, she is a fine girl, all the same, that Martine.” He watched her as she walked, admiring her hastily, feeling a desire taking possession of him.
He kept gazing at her figure, repeating to himself: “Nom d'un nom, she is a fine girl.” Martine turned to the right to enter “La Martiniere,” the farm of her father, Jean Martin, and she cast a glance behind her as she turned round.
He sat down opposite his mother beside the farm hand and the hired man, while the maid servant went to draw some cider.
He ate a few spoonfuls, then pushed away his plate.
I feel as if I had some pap in my stomach and that takes away my appetite.” He watched the others eating, as he cut himself a piece of bread from time to time and carried it lazily to his mouth, masticating it slowly.
When one has no appetite, they should force themselves to eat.” He swallowed a few morsels, then, pushing away his plate, said: “No.
I can't go that, positively.” When they rose from table he walked round the farm, telling the farm hand he might go home and that he would drive up the animals as he passed by them.
The country was deserted, as it was the day of rest.
Unharnessed plows were standing at the end of a furrow; and the upturned earth ready for the seed showed broad brown patches of stubble of wheat and oats that had lately been harvested.
A rather dry autumn wind blew across the plain, promising a cool evening after the sun had set.
Benoist sat down on a ditch, placed his hat on his knees as if he needed to cool off his head, and said aloud in the stillness of the country: “If you want a fine girl, she is a fine girl.” He thought of it again at night, in his bed, and in the morning when he awoke.
He was not sad, he was not discontented, he could not have told what ailed him.
It was something that had hold of him, something fastened in his mind, an idea that would not leave him and that produced a sort of tickling sensation in his heart.
Sometimes a big fly is shut up in a room.
You hear it flying about, buzzing, and the noise haunts you, irritates you.
Suddenly it stops; you forget it; but all at once it begins again, obliging you to look up.
The recollection of Martine disturbed Benoist's mind like an imprisoned fly.
Then he longed to see her again and walked past the Martiniere several times.
He saw her, at last, hanging out some clothes on a line stretched between two apple trees.
He remained there, concealed by the hedge, for more than an hour, even after she had left.
He returned home more obsessed with her image than ever.
For a month his mind was full of her, he trembled when her name was mentioned in his presence.
He could not eat, he had night sweats that kept him from sleeping.
She noticed it and smiled at him, flattered at his appreciation.
One evening, he suddenly met her in the road.
Then he walked right up to her, choking with fear and emotion, but determined to speak to her.
He began falteringly: “See here, Martine, this cannot go on like this any longer.” She replied as if she wanted to tease him: “What cannot go on any longer, Benoist?” “My thinking of you as many hours as there are in the day,” he answered.
“I do not oblige you to do so.” “Yes, it is you,” he stammered; “I cannot sleep, nor rest, nor eat, nor anything.” “What do you need to cure you of all that?” she asked.
He stood there in dismay, his arms swinging, his eyes staring, his mouth agape.
From that day they met each other along the roadside, in by-roads or else at twilight on the edge of a field, when he was going home with his horses and she was driving her cows home to the stable.
He would have liked to squeeze her, strangle her, eat her, make her part of himself.
And he trembled with impotence, impatience, rage, to think she did not belong to him entirely, as if they were one being.
People gossiped about it in the countryside.
He had, besides, asked her if she would be his wife, and she had answered “Yes.” They, were waiting for an opportunity to talk to their parents about it.
He did not even see her as he wandered round the farm.
And one Sunday, after the sermon, the priest actually published the banns of marriage between Victoire- Adelaide Martin and Josephin-Isidore Vallin.
Benoist felt a sensation in his hands as if the blood had been drained off.
He had a buzzing in the ears; and could hear nothing; and presently he perceived that his tears were falling on his prayer book.
She was now married to Vallin, the richest farmer in the district.
Benoist and he did not speak now, though they had been comrades from childhood.
One evening, as Benoist was passing the town hall, he heard that she was enceinte.
Instead of experiencing a feeling of sorrow, he experienced, on the contrary, a feeling of relief.
They were more separated by that than by her marriage.
He really preferred that it should be so.
He caught sight of her, occasionally, going to the village with a heavier step than usual.
She blushed as she saw him, lowered her head and quickened her pace.
What could he say to her now, after all he had said formerly, when he held her hands as he kissed her hair beside her cheeks?
He often thought of those meetings along the roadside.
She had acted horridly after all her promises.
By degrees his grief diminished, leaving only sadness behind.
He looked at the roof from a distance.
The whole dwelling seemed empty, the farm hands had gone to the fields to their spring toil.
A big turkey was strutting before the door, parading before the turkey hens like a singer at the opera.
Benoist leaned against the gate post and was suddenly seized with a desire to weep.
But suddenly, he heard a cry, a loud cry for help coming from the house.
He was struck with dismay, his hands grasping the wooden bars of the gate, and listened attentively.
Another cry, a prolonged, heartrending cry, reached his ears, his soul, his flesh.
He darted inside, crossed the grass patch, pushed open the door, and saw her lying on the floor, her body drawn up, her face livid, her eyes haggard, in the throes of childbirth.
He stood there, trembling and paler than she was, and stammered: “Here I am, here I am, Martine!” She replied in gasps: “Oh, do not leave me, do not leave me, Benoist!” He looked at her, not knowing what to say, what to do.
Oh, Benoist!” She writhed frightfully.
Benoist was suddenly seized with a frantic longing to help her, to quiet her, to remove her pain.
He leaned over, lifted her up and laid her on her bed; and while she kept on moaning he began to take off her clothes, her jacket, her skirt and her petticoat.
Then he did as he was accustomed to doing for cows, ewes, and mares: he assisted in delivering her and found in his hands a large infant who was moaning.
He took her up and placed her on the floor again, then he changed the bedclothes and put her back into bed.
She faltered: “Thank you, Benoist, you have a noble heart.” And then she wept a little as if she felt regretful.
What had happened had cured him better than ten years of absence.
She asked, exhausted and trembling: “What is it?” He replied calmly: “It is a very fine girl.” Then they were silent again.
At the end of a few moments, the mother, in a weak voice, said: “Show her to me, Benoist.” He took up the little one and was showing it to her as if he were holding the consecrated wafer, when the door opened, and Isidore Vallin appeared.
He did not understand at first, then all at once he guessed.
From now on we understand each other.
If you are willing, we will be a pair of friends, a pair of friends!” And Benoist replied: “Indeed I will, certainly, indeed I will.” ALL OVER Compte de Lormerin had just finished dressing.
He cast a parting glance at the large mirror which occupied an entire panel in his dressing-room and smiled.
He was really a fine-looking man still, although quite gray.
Tall, slight, elegant, with no sign of a paunch, with a small mustache of doubtful shade, which might be called fair, he had a walk, a nobility, a “chic,” in short, that indescribable something which establishes a greater difference between two men than would millions of money.
He murmured: “Lormerin is still alive!” And he went into the drawing-room where his correspondence awaited him.
On his table, where everything had its place, the work table of the gentleman who never works, there were a dozen letters lying beside three newspapers of different opinions.
With a single touch he spread out all these letters, like a gambler giving the choice of a card; and he scanned the handwriting, a thing he did each morning before opening the envelopes.
It was for him a moment of delightful expectancy, of inquiry and vague anxiety.
What did these sealed mysterious letters bring him?
What did they contain of pleasure, of happiness, or of grief?
He surveyed them with a rapid sweep of the eye, recognizing the writing, selecting them, making two or three lots, according to what he expected from them.
Here, friends; there, persons to whom he was indifferent; further on, strangers.
The last kind always gave him a little uneasiness.
What hand had traced those curious characters full of thoughts, promises, or threats?
This day one letter in particular caught his eye.
It was simple, nevertheless, without seeming to reveal anything; but he looked at it uneasily, with a sort of chill at his heart.
I certainly know this writing, and yet I can't identify it.” He raised it to a level with his face, holding it delicately between two fingers, striving to read through the envelope, without making up his mind to open it.
Then he smelled it, and snatched up from the table a little magnifying glass which he used in studying all the niceties of handwriting.
He suddenly felt unnerved.
This hand is familiar to me, very familiar.
I must have often read its tracings, yes, very often.
Pooh! it's only somebody asking for money.” And he tore open the letter.
Then he read: MY DEAR FRIEND: You have, without doubt, forgotten me, for it is now twenty-five years since we saw each other.
When I bade you farewell, I left Paris in order to follow into the provinces my husband, my old husband, whom you used to call “my hospital.” Do you remember him?
He died five years ago, and now I am returning to Paris to get my daughter married, for I have a daughter, a beautiful girl of eighteen, whom you have never seen.
I informed you of her birth, but you certainly did not pay much attention to so trifling an event.
You are still the handsome Lormerin; so I have been told.
Well, if you still recollect little Lise, whom you used to call Lison, come and dine with her this evening, with the elderly Baronne de Vance your ever faithful friend, who, with some emotion, although happy, reaches out to you a devoted hand, which you must clasp, but no longer kiss, my poor Jaquelet.
Lormerin's heart began to throb.
He remained sunk in his armchair with the letter on his knees, staring straight before him, overcome by a poignant emotion that made the tears mount up to his eyes!
If he had ever loved a woman in his life it was this one, little Lise, Lise de Vance, whom he called “Ashflower,” on account of the strange color of her hair and the pale gray of her eyes.
Oh! what a dainty, pretty, charming creature she was, this frail baronne, the wife of that gouty, pimply baron, who had abruptly carried her off to the provinces, shut her up, kept her in seclusion through jealousy, jealousy of the handsome Lormerin.
Yes, he had loved her, and he believed that he too, had been truly loved.
She familiarly gave him, the name of Jaquelet, and would pronounce that word in a delicious fashion.
A thousand forgotten memories came back to him, far, off and sweet and melancholy now.
One evening she had called on him on her way home from a ball, and they went for a stroll in the Bois de Boulogne, she in evening dress, he in his dressing-jacket.
It was springtime; the weather was beautiful.
The fragrance from her bodice embalmed the warm air-the odor of her bodice, and perhaps, too, the fragrance of her skin.
When they reached the lake, as the moon's rays fell across the branches into the water, she began to weep.
A little surprised, he asked her why.
The moon and the water have affected me.
Every time I see poetic things I have a tightening at the heart, and I have to cry.” He smiled, affected himself, considering her feminine emotion charming —the unaffected emotion of a poor little woman, whom every sensation overwhelms.
And he embraced her passionately, stammering: “My little Lise, you are exquisite.” What a charming love affair, short-lived and dainty, it had been and over all too quickly, cut short in the midst of its ardor by this old brute of a baron, who had carried off his wife, and never let any one see her afterward.
Lormerin had forgotten, in fact, at the end of two or three months.
One woman drives out another so quickly in Paris, when one is a bachelor!
He rose, and said aloud: “Certainly, I will go and dine with her this evening!” And instinctively he turned toward the mirror to inspect himself from head to foot.
He reflected: “She must look very old, older than I look.” And he felt gratified at the thought of showing himself to her still handsome, still fresh, of astonishing her, perhaps of filling her with emotion, and making her regret those bygone days so far, far distant!
He turned his attention to the other letters.
They were of no importance.
The whole day he kept thinking of this ghost of other days.
But would he recognize her?
He made his toilet with feminine coquetry, put on a white waistcoat, which suited him better with the coat than a black one, sent for the hairdresser to give him a finishing touch with the curling iron, for he had preserved his hair, and started very early in order to show his eagerness to see her.
The first thing he saw on entering a pretty drawing-room newly furnished was his own portrait, an old faded photograph, dating from the days when he was a beau, hanging on the wall in an antique silk frame.
He rose up abruptly, and, turning round, beheld an old woman with white hair who extended both hands toward him.
Yes, it was an old lady, an old lady whom he did not recognize, and who, while she smiled, seemed ready to weep.
He could not abstain from murmuring: “Is it you, Lise?” She replied: “Yes, it is I; it is I, indeed.
Sorrow has consumed my life.
But how handsome you have kept—and young!
If I had by chance met you in the street I would have exclaimed: 'Jaquelet!'.
And then I will call my daughter, my grown-up daughter.
You'll see how she resembles me—or, rather, how I resembled her—no, it is not quite that; she is just like the 'me' of former days—you shall see!
He could no longer recall anything in presence of this grandmotherly face.
He could no longer recall all the nice, tender things, so sweet, so bitter, that had come to his mind that morning when he thought of the other, of little Lise, of the dainty Ashflower.
That woman of far-off dreams, the blonde with gray eyes, the young girl who used to call him “Jaquelet” so prettily?
They remained side by side, motionless, both constrained, troubled, profoundly ill at ease.
As they talked only commonplaces, awkwardly and spasmodically and slowly, she rose and pressed the button of the bell.
There was a tap at the door, then the rustle of a dress; then a young voice exclaimed: “Here I am, mamma!” Lormerin remained bewildered as at the sight of an apparition.
He stammered: “Good-day, mademoiselle” Then, turning toward the mother: “Oh! it is you!” In fact, it was she, she whom he had known in bygone days, the Lise who had vanished and come back!
This one was even younger, fresher, more childlike.
He felt a wild desire to open his arms, to clasp her to his heart again, murmuring in her ear: “Good-morning, Lison!” A man-servant announced: “Dinner is ready, madame.” And they proceeded toward the dining-room.
He found himself plunged in one of those strange dreams which border on insanity.
He gazed at the two women with a fixed idea in his mind, a morbid, self-contradictory idea: “Which is the real one?” The mother smiled again repeating over and over: “Do you remember?” And it was in the bright eyes of the young girl that he found again his memories of the past.
Twenty times he opened his mouth to say to her: “Do you remember, Lison?” forgetting this white- haired lady who was looking at him tenderly.
The other one, the former one, had in her voice, in her glances, in her entire being, something which he did not find again.
And he made prodigious efforts of mind to recall his lady love, to seize again what had escaped from her, what this resuscitated one did not possess.
The baronne said: “You have lost your old vivacity, my poor friend.” He murmured: “There are many other things that I have lost!” But in his heart, touched with emotion, he felt his old love springing to life once more, like an awakened wild beast ready to bite him.
The young girl went on chattering, and every now and then some familiar intonation, some expression of her mother's, a certain style of speaking and thinking, that resemblance of mind and manner which people acquire by living together, shook Lormerin from head to foot.
All these things penetrated him, making the reopened wound of his passion bleed anew.
He got away early, and took a turn along the boulevard.
But the image of this young girl pursued him, haunted him, quickened his heart, inflamed his blood.
He loved her with greater ardor, after an interval of twenty-five years.
He went home to reflect on this strange and terrible thing, and to think what he should do.
But, as he was passing, with a wax candle in his hand, before the glass, the large glass in which he had contemplated himself and admired himself before he started, he saw reflected there an elderly, gray-haired man; and suddenly he recollected what he had been in olden days, in the days of little Lise.
He saw himself charming and handsome, as he had been when he was loved!
Then, drawing the light nearer, he looked at himself more closely, as one inspects a strange thing with a magnifying glass, tracing the wrinkles, discovering those frightful ravages, which he had not perceived till now.
And he sat down, crushed at the sight of himself, at the sight of his lamentable image, murmuring: “All over, Lormerin!” THE PARROT I Everybody in Fecamp knew Mother Patin's story.
She had certainly been unfortunate with her husband, for in his lifetime he used to beat her, just as wheat is threshed in the barn.
He was master of a fishing bark and had married her, formerly, because she was pretty, although poor.
He used to frequent Father Auban's inn, where he would usually drink four or five glasses of brandy, on lucky days eight or ten glasses and even more, according to his mood.
The brandy was served to the customers by Father Auban's daughter, a pleasing brunette, who attracted people to the house only by her pretty face, for nothing had ever been gossiped about her.
Patin, when he entered the inn, would be satisfied to look at her and to compliment her politely and respectfully.
“If you were only willing, Mam'zelle Desiree——” without ever finishing his sentence; at the fourth he would try to hold her back by her skirt in order to kiss her; and when he went as high as ten it was Father Auban who brought him the remaining drinks.
The old innkeeper, who knew all the tricks of the trade, made Desiree walk about between the tables in order to increase the consumption of drinks; and Desiree, who was a worthy daughter of Father Auban, flitted around among the benches and joked with them, her lips smiling and her eyes sparkling.
Patin got so well accustomed to Desiree's face that he thought of it even while at sea, when throwing out his nets, in storms or in calms, on moonlit or dark evenings.
He thought of her while holding the tiller in the stern of his boat, while his four companions were slumbering with their heads on their arms.
He always saw her, smiling, pouring out the yellow brandy with a peculiar shoulder movement and then exclaiming as she turned away: “There, now; are you satisfied?” He saw her so much in his mind's eye that he was overcome by an irresistible desire to marry her, and, not being able to hold out any longer, he asked for her hand.
The marriage was therefore eagerly agreed upon and the wedding took place as soon as possible, as both parties were desirous for the affair to be concluded as early as convenient.
Three days after the wedding Patin could no longer understand how he had ever imagined Desiree to be different from other women.
What a fool he had been to encumber himself with a penniless creature, who had undoubtedly inveigled him with some drug which she had put in his brandy!
After he had sworn by every known term at everything that came his way he would rid himself of his remaining anger on the fish and lobsters, which he pulled from the nets and threw into the baskets amid oaths and foul language.
When he returned home he would find his wife, Father Auban's daughter, within reach of his mouth and hand, and it was not long before he treated her like the lowest creature in the world.
As she listened calmly, accustomed to paternal violence, he grew exasperated at her quiet, and one evening he beat her.
Then life at his home became unbearable.
For ten years the principal topic of conversation on the Retenue was about the beatings that Patin gave his wife and his manner of cursing at her for the least thing.
He could, indeed, curse with a richness of vocabulary in a roundness of tone unequalled by any other man in Fecamp.
As soon as his ship was sighted at the entrance of the harbor, returning from the fishing expedition, every one awaited the first volley he would hurl from the bridge as soon as he perceived his wife's white cap.
Standing at the stern he would steer, his eye fixed on the bows and on the sail, and, notwithstanding the difficulty of the narrow passage and the height of the turbulent waves, he would search among the watching women and try to recognize his wife, Father Auban's daughter, the wretch!
Then, as soon as he saw her, notwithstanding the noise of the wind and waves, he would let loose upon her with such power and volubility that every one would laugh, although they pitied her greatly.
When he arrived at the dock he would relieve his mind, while unloading the fish, in such an expressive manner that he attracted around him all the loafers of the neighborhood.
The words left his mouth sometimes like shots from a cannon, short and terrible, sometimes like peals of thunder, which roll and rumble for five minutes, such a hurricane of oaths that he seemed to have in his lungs one of the storms of the Eternal Father.
When he left his ship and found himself face to face with her, surrounded by all the gossips of the neighborhood, he would bring up a new cargo of insults and bring her back to their dwelling, she in front, he behind, she weeping, he yelling at her.
At last, when alone with her behind closed doors, he would thrash her on the slightest pretext.
The least thing was sufficient to make him raise his hand, and when he had once begun he did not stop, but he would throw into her face the true motive for his anger.
What a bright thing I did when I rinsed my mouth with your rascal of a father's apology for brandy.” The poor woman lived in continual fear, in a ceaseless trembling of body and soul, in everlasting expectation of outrageous thrashings.
She was so timorous that she would grow pale whenever she spoke to any one, and she thought of nothing but the blows with which she was threatened; and she became thinner, more yellow and drier than a smoked fish.
II One night, when her husband was at sea, she was suddenly awakened by the wild roaring of the wind!
She sat up in her bed, trembling, but, as she hear nothing more, she lay down again; almost immediately there was a roar in the chimney which shook the entire house; it seemed to cross the heavens like a pack of furious animals snorting and roaring.
Other women were arriving from all sides, carrying lanterns.
The men also were gathering, and all were watching the foaming crests of the breaking wave.
Eleven sailors never returned; Patin was among them.
In the neighborhood of Dieppe the wreck of his bark, the Jeune-Amelie, was found.
The bodies of his sailors were found near Saint-Valery, but his body was never recovered.
As his vessel seemed to have been cut in two, his wife expected and feared his return for a long time, for if there had been a collision he alone might have been picked up and carried afar off.
Little by little she grew accustomed to the thought that she was rid of him, although she would start every time that a neighbor, a beggar or a peddler would enter suddenly.
One afternoon, about four years after the disappearance of her husband, while she was walking along the Rue aux Juifs, she stopped before the house of an old sea captain who had recently died and whose furniture was for sale.
He had green feathers and a blue head and was watching everybody with a displeased look.
“Three francs!” cried the auctioneer.
Anyhow, you can always sell it for twenty or twenty-five!” Patin's widow added fifty centimes, and the bird was given her in a little cage, which she carried away.
She took it home, and, as she was opening the wire door in order to give it something to drink, he bit her finger and drew blood.
Nevertheless she gave it some hemp-seed and corn and watched it pruning its feathers as it glanced warily at its new home and its new mistress.
On the following morning, just as day was breaking, the Patin woman distinctly heard a loud, deep, roaring voice calling: “Are you going to get up, carrion?” Her fear was so great that she hid her head under the sheets, for when Patin was with her as soon as he would open his eyes he would shout those well-known words into her ears.
Trembling, rolled into a ball, her back prepared for the thrashing which she already expected, her face buried in the pillows, she murmured: “Good Lord! he is here!
Good Lord! he has come back!” Minutes passed; no noise disturbed the quiet room.
Then, trembling, she stuck her head out of the bed, sure that he was there, watching, ready to beat her.
Then, at a complete loss, she looked around her, then in the chimney and under the bed and finally sank into a chair, wild with anxiety, convinced that Patin's soul alone was there, near her, and that he had returned in order to torture her.
Suddenly she remembered the loft, in order to reach which one had to take a ladder.
Surely he must have hidden there in order to surprise her.
He must have been held by savages on some distant shore, unable to escape until now, and he had returned, worse that ever.
There was no doubting the quality of that voice.
Then, with a terrible fear which made her heart tremble, she climbed the ladder, opened the skylight, looked, saw nothing, entered, looked about and found nothing.
Sitting on some straw, she began to cry, but while she was weeping, overcome by a poignant and supernatural terror, she heard Patin talking in the room below.
She felt herself growing weak, as if death were touching her, and she tried to run and get help from the neighbors, when a voice near her cried out: “I haven't had my breakfast, by G—!” And the parrot in his cage watched her with his round, knowing, wicked eye.
She, too, looked at him wildly, murmuring: “Ah! so it's you!” He shook his head and continued: “Just you wait!
I'll teach you how to loaf.” What happened within her?
She felt, she understood that it was he, the dead man, who had come back, who had disguised himself in the feathers of this bird in order to continue to torment her; that he would curse, as formerly, all day long, and bite her, and swear at her, in order to attract the neighbors and make them laugh.
Then she rushed for the cage and seized the bird, which scratched and tore her flesh with its claws and beak.
But she held it with all her strength between her hands.
She threw it on the ground and rolled over it with the frenzy of one possessed.
Then she wrapped it in a cloth, as in a shroud, and she went out in her nightgown, barefoot; she crossed the dock, against which the choppy waves of the sea were beating, and she shook the cloth and let drop this little, dead thing, which looked like so much grass.
Then she returned, threw herself on her knees before the empty cage, and, overcome by what she had done, kneeled and prayed for forgiveness, as if she had committed some heinous crime.
THE PIECE OF STRING It was market-day, and from all the country round Goderville the peasants and their wives were coming toward the town.
The men walked slowly, throwing the whole body forward at every step of their long, crooked legs.
They were deformed from pushing the plough which makes the left-shoulder higher, and bends their figures side-ways; from reaping the grain, when they have to spread their legs so as to keep on their feet.
Their starched blue blouses, glossy as though varnished, ornamented at collar and cuffs with a little embroidered design and blown out around their bony bodies, looked very much like balloons about to soar, whence issued two arms and two feet.
And just behind the animal followed their wives beating it over the back with a leaf-covered branch to hasten its pace, and carrying large baskets out of which protruded the heads of chickens or ducks.
These women walked more quickly and energetically than the men, with their erect, dried-up figures, adorned with scanty little shawls pinned over their flat bosoms, and their heads wrapped round with a white cloth, enclosing the hair and surmounted by a cap.
Now a char-a-banc passed by, jogging along behind a nag and shaking up strangely the two men on the seat, and the woman at the bottom of the cart who held fast to its sides to lessen the hard jolting.
In the market-place at Goderville was a great crowd, a mingled multitude of men and beasts.
The horns of cattle, the high, long-napped hats of wealthy peasants, the head-dresses of the women came to the surface of that sea.
And the sharp, shrill, barking voices made a continuous, wild din, while above it occasionally rose a huge burst of laughter from the sturdy lungs of a merry peasant or a prolonged bellow from a cow tied fast to the wall of a house.
It all smelled of the stable, of milk, of hay and of perspiration, giving off that half-human, half-animal odor which is peculiar to country folks.
Maitre Hauchecorne, of Breaute, had just arrived at Goderville and was making his way toward the square when he perceived on the ground a little piece of string.
Maitre Hauchecorne, economical as are all true Normans, reflected that everything was worth picking up which could be of any use, and he stooped down, but painfully, because he suffered from rheumatism.
He took the bit of thin string from the ground and was carefully preparing to roll it up when he saw Maitre Malandain, the harness maker, on his doorstep staring at him.
Maitre Hauchecorne was overcome with a sort of shame at being seen by his enemy picking up a bit of string in the road.
He quickly hid it beneath his blouse and then slipped it into his breeches, pocket, then pretended to be still looking for something on the ground which he did not discover and finally went off toward the market-place, his head bent forward and his body almost doubled in two by rheumatic pains.
He was at once lost in the crowd, which kept moving about slowly and noisily as it chaffered and bargained.
The peasants examined the cows, went off, came back, always in doubt for fear of being cheated, never quite daring to decide, looking the seller square in the eye in the effort to discover the tricks of the man and the defect in the beast.
The women, having placed their great baskets at their feet, had taken out the poultry, which lay upon the ground, their legs tied together, with terrified eyes and scarlet combs.
At Jourdain's the great room was filled with eaters, just as the vast court was filled with vehicles of every sort—wagons, gigs, chars-a- bancs, tilburies, innumerable vehicles which have no name, yellow with mud, misshapen, pieced together, raising their shafts to heaven like two arms, or it may be with their nose on the ground and their rear in the air.
Just opposite to where the diners were at table the huge fireplace, with its bright flame, gave out a burning heat on the backs of those who sat at the right.
Three spits were turning, loaded with chickens, with pigeons and with joints of mutton, and a delectable odor of roast meat and of gravy flowing over crisp brown skin arose from the hearth, kindled merriment, caused mouths to water.
All the aristocracy of the plough were eating there at Mait' Jourdain's, the innkeeper's, a dealer in horses also and a sharp fellow who had made a great deal of money in his day.
Every one told of his affairs, of his purchases and his sales.
They exchanged news about the crops.
Suddenly the drum began to beat in the courtyard before the house.
Every one, except some of the most indifferent, was on their feet at once and ran to the door, to the windows, their mouths full and napkins in their hand.
When the public crier had finished his tattoo he called forth in a jerky voice, pausing in the wrong places: “Be it known to the inhabitants of Goderville and in general to all persons present at the market that there has been lost this morning on the Beuzeville road, between nine and ten o'clock, a black leather pocketbook containing five hundred francs and business papers.
You are requested to return it to the mayor's office at once or to Maitre Fortune Houlbreque, of Manneville.
They heard once more at a distance the dull beating of the drum and the faint voice of the crier.
Then they all began to talk of this incident, reckoning up the chances which Maitre Houlbreque had of finding or of not finding his pocketbook again.
They were finishing their coffee when the corporal of gendarmes appeared on the threshold.
He asked: “Is Maitre Hauchecorne, of Breaute, here?” Maitre Hauchecorne, seated at the other end of the table answered: “Here I am, here I am.” And he followed the corporal.
The mayor was waiting for him, seated in an armchair.
“Maitre Hauchecorne,” said he, “this morning on the Beuzeville road, you were seen to pick up the pocketbook lost by Maitre Houlbreque, of Manneville.” The countryman looked at the mayor in amazement frightened already at this suspicion which rested on him, he knew not why.
“I—I picked up that pocketbook?” “Yes, YOU.” “I swear I don't even know anything about it.” “You were seen.” “I was seen—I?
Malandain, the harness-maker.” Then the old man remembered, understood, and, reddening with anger, said: “Ah! he saw me, did he, the rascal?
He saw me picking up this string here, M'sieu le Maire.” And fumbling at the bottom of his pocket, he pulled out of it the little end of string.
But the mayor incredulously shook his head: “You will not make me believe, Maitre Hauchecorne, that M.
Malandain, who is a man whose word can be relied on, has mistaken this string for a pocketbook.” The peasant, furious, raised his hand and spat on the ground beside him as if to attest his good faith, repeating: “For all that, it is God's truth, M'sieu le Maire.
On my soul's salvation, I repeat it.” The mayor continued: “After you picked up the object in question, you even looked about for some time in the mud to see if a piece of money had not dropped out of it.” The good man was choking with indignation and fear.
How can they?” His protestations were in vain; he was not believed.
He was confronted with M.
Malandain, who repeated and sustained his testimony.
At his own request Maitre Hauchecorne was searched.
At last the mayor, much perplexed, sent him away, warning him that he would inform the public prosecutor and ask for orders.
When he left the mayor's office the old man was surrounded, interrogated with a curiosity which was serious or mocking, as the case might be, but into which no indignation entered.
He passed on, buttonholed by every one, himself buttonholing his acquaintances, beginning over and over again his tale and his protestations, showing his pockets turned inside out to prove that he had nothing in them.
They said to him: “You old rogue!” He grew more and more angry, feverish, in despair at not being believed, and kept on telling his story.
He left with three of his neighbors, to whom he pointed out the place where he had picked up the string, and all the way he talked of his adventure.
He met only unbelievers.
The next day, about one in the afternoon, Marius Paumelle, a farm hand of Maitre Breton, the market gardener at Ymauville, returned the pocketbook and its contents to Maitre Holbreque, of Manneville.
The news spread to the environs.
Maitre Hauchecorne was informed.
He started off at once and began to relate his story with the denoument.
“What grieved me,” said he, “was not the thing itself, do you understand, but it was being accused of lying.
Nothing does you so much harm as being in disgrace for lying.” All day he talked of his adventure.
He even stopped strangers to tell them about it.
He was easy now, and yet something worried him without his knowing exactly what it was.
People had a joking manner while they listened.
They did not seem convinced.
On Tuesday of the following week he went to market at Goderville, prompted solely by the need of telling his story.
Malandain, standing on his doorstep, began to laugh as he saw him pass.
He accosted a farmer of Criquetot, who did not let him finish, and giving him a punch in the pit of the stomach cried in his face: “Oh, you great rogue!” Then he turned his heel upon him.
Maitre Hauchecorne remained speechless and grew more and more uneasy.
When seated at table in Jourdain's tavern he began again to explain the whole affair.
A horse dealer of Montivilliers shouted at him: “Get out, get out, you old scamp!
I know all about your old string.” Hauchecorne stammered: “But since they found it again, the pocketbook!” But the other continued: “Hold your tongue, daddy; there's one who finds it and there's another who returns it.
And no one the wiser.” The farmer was speechless.
He understood at last.
They accused him of having had the pocketbook brought back by an accomplice, by a confederate.
He went home indignant, choking with rage, with confusion, the more cast down since with his Norman craftiness he was, perhaps, capable of having done what they accused him of and even of boasting of it as a good trick.
He was dimly conscious that it was impossible to prove his innocence, his craftiness being so well known.
He felt himself struck to the heart by the injustice of the suspicion.
He began anew to tell his tale, lengthening his recital every day, each day adding new proofs, more energetic declarations and more sacred oaths, which he thought of, which he prepared in his hours of solitude, for his mind was entirely occupied with the story of the string.
The more he denied it, the more artful his arguments, the less he was believed.
It preyed upon him and he exhausted himself in useless efforts.
Jokers would make him tell the story of “the piece of string” to amuse them, just as you make a soldier who has been on a campaign tell his story of the battle.
His mind kept growing weaker and about the end of December he took to his bed.
He passed away early in January, and, in the ravings of death agony, he protested his innocence, repeating: “A little bit of string—a little bit of string.
See, here it is, M'sieu le Maire.” ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 9.
TOINE He was known for thirty miles round was father Toine—fat Toine, Toine- my-extra, Antoine Macheble, nicknamed Burnt-Brandy—the innkeeper of Tournevent.
It was he who had made famous this hamlet buried in a niche in the valley that led down to the sea, a poor little peasants' hamlet consisting of ten Norman cottages surrounded by ditches and trees.
The houses were hidden behind a curve which had given the place the name of Tournevent.
It seemed to have sought shelter in this ravine overgrown with grass and rushes, from the keen, salt sea wind—the ocean wind that devours and burns like fire, that drys up and withers like the sharpest frost of winter, just as birds seek shelter in the furrows of the fields in time of storm.
But the whole hamlet seemed to be the property of Antoine Macheble, nicknamed Burnt-Brandy, who was called also Toine, or Toine-My-Extra- Special, the latter in consequence of a phrase current in his mouth: “My Extra-Special is the best in France:” His “Extra-Special” was, of course, his cognac.
For the last twenty years he had served the whole countryside with his Extra-Special and his “Burnt-Brandy,” for whenever he was asked: “What shall I drink, Toine?” he invariably answered: “A burnt-brandy, my son- in-law; that warms the inside and clears the head—there's nothing better for your body.” He called everyone his son-in-law, though he had no daughter, either married or to be married.
Well known indeed was Toine Burnt-Brandy, the stoutest man in all Normandy.
His little house seemed ridiculously small, far too small and too low to hold him; and when people saw him standing at his door, as he did all day long, they asked one another how he could possibly get through the door.
But he went in whenever a customer appeared, for it was only right that Toine should be invited to take his thimbleful of whatever was drunk in his wine shop.
His customers came from Fecamp and Montvilliers, just for the fun of seeing him and hearing him talk; for fat Toine would have made a tombstone laugh.
He had a way of chaffing people without offending them, or of winking to express what he didn't say, of slapping his thighs when he was merry in such a way as to make you hold your sides, laughing.
And then, merely to see him drink was a curiosity.
He drank everything that was offered him, his roguish eyes twinkling, both with the enjoyment of drinking and at the thought of the money he was taking in.
His was a double pleasure: first, that of drinking; and second, that of piling up the cash.
You should have heard him quarrelling with his wife!
It was worth paying for to see them together.
They had wrangled all the thirty years they had been married; but Toine was good-humored, while his better-half grew angry.
She was a tall peasant woman, who walked with long steps like a stork, and had a head resembling that of an angry screech-owl.
She spent her time rearing chickens in a little poultry-yard behind the inn, and she was noted for her success in fattening them for the table.
Whenever the gentry of Fecamp gave a dinner they always had at least one of Madame Toine's chickens to be in the fashion.
But she was born ill-tempered, and she went through life in a mood of perpetual discontent.
Annoyed at everyone, she seemed to be particularly annoyed at her husband.
She disliked his gaiety, his reputation, his rude health, his embonpoint.
She treated him as a good-for-nothing creature because he earned his money without working, and as a glutton because he ate and drank as much as ten ordinary men; and not a day went by without her declaring spitefully: “You'd be better in the stye along with the pigs!
He'll burst like a sack of grain!” And off she would go, amid the jeers and laughter of the drinkers.
Toine was, in fact, an astonishing sight, he was so fat, so heavy, so red.
He was one of those enormous beings with whom Death seems to be amusing himself—playing perfidious tricks and pranks, investing with an irresistibly comic air his slow work of destruction.
“You'll see.” At last Toine had an apoplectic fit, and was paralyzed in consequence.
The giant was put to bed in the little room behind the partition of the drinking-room that he might hear what was said and talk to his friends, for his head was quite clear although his enormous body was helplessly inert.
It was hoped at first that his immense legs would regain some degree of power; but this hope soon disappeared, and Toine spent his days and nights in the bed, which was only made up once a week, with the help of four neighbors who lifted the innkeeper, each holding a limb, while his mattress was turned.
He kept his spirits, nevertheless; but his gaiety was of a different kind—more timid, more humble; and he lived in a constant, childlike fear of his wife, who grumbled from morning till night: “Look at him there—the great glutton! the good-for-nothing creature, the old boozer!
Serve him right, serve him right!” He no longer answered her.
He contented himself with winking behind the old woman's back, and turning over on his other side—the only movement of which he was now capable.
He called this exercise a “tack to the north” or a “tack to the south.” His great distraction nowadays was to listen to the conversations in the bar, and to shout through the wall when he recognized a friend's voice: “Hallo, my son-in-law!
Is that you, Celestin?” And Celestin Maloisel answered: “Yes, it's me, Toine.
Are you getting about again yet, old fellow?” “Not exactly getting about,” answered Toine.
“But I haven't grown thin; my carcass is still good.” Soon he got into the way of asking his intimates into his room to keep him company, although it grieved him to see that they had to drink without him.
It pained him to the quick that his customers should be drinking without him.
I can put up with everything else, but going without drink is the very deuce.” Then his wife's screech-owl face would appear at the window, and she would break in with the words: “Look at him!
I've got to feed him and wash him just as if he were a pig!” And when the old woman had gone, a cock with red feathers would sometimes fly up to the window sill and looking into the room with his round inquisitive eye, would begin to crow loudly.
Occasionally, too, a few hens would flutter as far as the foot of the bed, seeking crumbs on the floor.
Toine's friends soon deserted the drinking room to come and chat every afternoon beside the invalid's bed.
Helpless though he was, the jovial Toine still provided them with amusement.
Three men were regular in their attendance at the bedside: Celestin Maloisel, a tall, thin fellow, somewhat gnarled, like the trunk of an apple-tree; Prosper Horslaville, a withered little man with a ferret nose, cunning as a fox; and Cesaire Paumelle, who never spoke, but who enjoyed Toine's society all the same.
They brought a plank from the yard, propped it upon the edge of the bed, and played dominoes from two till six.
But Toine's wife soon became insufferable.
Celestin Maloisel and Cesaire Paumelle bent their heads to the storm, but Prosper Horslaville egged on the old woman, and was only amused at her wrath.
Prosper went on: “Your man is as hot as an oven, and he never leaves his bed—well, I'd make him hatch some eggs.” She was struck dumb at the suggestion, thinking that Prosper could not possibly be in earnest.
But he continued: “I'd put five under one arm, and five under the other, the same day that I set a hen.
They'd all come out at the same time; then I'd take your husband's chickens to the hen to bring up with her own.
You'd rear a fine lot that way.” “Could it be done?” asked the astonished old woman.
Since eggs can be hatched in a warm box why shouldn't they be hatched in a warm bed?” She was struck by this reasoning, and went away soothed and reflective.
“I want you to hatch them, you lazy creature!” she answered.
He laughed at first; then, finding she was serious, he got angry, and refused absolutely to have the eggs put under his great arms, that the warmth of his body might hatch them.
But the old woman declared wrathfully: “You'll get no dinner as long as you won't have them.
You'll see what'll happen.” Tome was uneasy, but answered nothing.
Then he begged, implored, swore, “tacked to the north” and “tacked to the south,” and beat on the wall with his fists, but had to consent at last to five eggs being placed against his left side; after which he had his soup.
When his friends arrived that afternoon they thought he must be ill, he seemed so constrained and queer.
They started the daily game of dominoes.
But Tome appeared to take no pleasure in it, and reached forth his hand very slowly, and with great precaution.
“What's wrong with your arm?” asked Horslaville.
“I have a sort of stiffness in the shoulder,” answered Toine.
Suddenly they heard people come into the inn.
As they were talking in somewhat low tones Toine wanted to put his ear to the wall, and, forgetting all about his eggs, he made a sudden “tack to the north,” which had the effect of plunging him into the midst of an omelette.
At the loud oath he swore his wife came hurrying into the room, and, guessing what had happened, stripped the bedclothes from him with lightning rapidity.
She stood at first without moving or uttering a syllable, speechless with indignation at sight of the yellow poultice sticking to her husband's side.
Then, trembling with fury, she threw herself on the paralytic, showering on him blows such as those with which she cleaned her linen on the seashore.
Tome's three friends were choking with laughter, coughing, spluttering and shouting, and the fat innkeeper himself warded his wife's attacks with all the prudence of which he was capable, that he might not also break the five eggs at his other side.
He had to hatch eggs, he had to give up his games of dominoes and renounce movement of any sort, for the old woman angrily deprived him of food whenever he broke an egg.
He lay on his back, with eyes fixed on the ceiling, motionless, his arms raised like wings, warming against his body the rudimentary chickens enclosed in their white shells.
He spoke now only in hushed tones; as if he feared a noise as much as motion, and he took a feverish interest in the yellow hen who was accomplishing in the poultry-yard the same task as he.
And the old woman went from her fowls to her husband and from her husband to her fowls, devoured by anxiety as to the welfare of the little chickens who were maturing in the bed and in the nest.
The country people who knew the story came, agog with curiosity, to ask news of Toine.
They entered his room on tiptoe, as one enters a sick- chamber, and asked: “Well! how goes it?” “All right,” said Toine; “only it keeps me fearfully hot.” One morning his wife entered in a state of great excitement, and declared: “The yellow hen has seven chickens!
Three of the eggs were addled.” Toine's heart beat painfully.
“It's to be hoped so!” answered the old woman crossly, haunted by fear of failure.
Nothing else was talked about in the neighboring cottages.
Inquirers asked one another for news as they stood at their doors.
He slumbered half his time nowadays.
He was suddenly awakened by an unaccustomed tickling under his right arm.
He put his left hand on the spot, and seized a little creature covered with yellow down, which fluttered in his hand.
The customers rushed to Toine's room, and made a circle round him as they would round a travelling showman; while Madame Toine picked up the chicken, which had taken refuge under her husband's beard.
Toine, who was perspiring with emotion and anxiety, murmured: “I have another now—under the left arm.” His' wife plunged her great bony hand into the bed, and pulled out a second chicken with all the care of a midwife.
The neighbors wanted to see it.
It was passed from one to another, and examined as if it were a phenomenon.
There was a great commotion among the lookers-on.
And Toine smiled with satisfaction, beginning to take pride in this unusual sort of paternity.
Truly, he was a remarkable specimen of humanity!
“That makes six!” he declared.
“Great heavens, what a christening we'll have!” And a loud laugh rose from all present.
Newcomers filled the bar.
They asked one another: “How many are there?” “Six.” Toine's wife took this new family to the hen, who clucked loudly, bristled her feathers, and spread her wings wide to shelter her growing brood of little ones.
It was an unalloyed triumph!
And Toine, beside himself with joy, his brood hatched out, exultant, kissed the tiny creature on the back, almost suffocating it.
He wanted to keep it in his bed until morning, moved by a mother's tenderness toward the tiny being which he had brought to life, but the old woman carried it away like the others, turning a deaf ear to her husband's entreaties.
The tender and the baggage car were also derailed, and lay beside this mutilated engine, which rattled, groaned, hissed, puffed, sputtered, and resembled those horses that fall in the street with their flanks heaving, their breast palpitating, their nostrils steaming and their whole body trembling, but incapable of the slightest effort to rise and start off again.
And we looked with sorrow at the great crippled iron creature that could not draw us along any more, and that blocked the track, perhaps for some time, for no doubt they would have to send to Paris for a special train to come to our aid.
It was then ten o'clock in the morning, and I at once decided to go back to Gisors for breakfast.
Let me see, I have a friend in this town.” A name suddenly came to my mind, “Albert Marambot.” He was an old school friend whom I had not seen for at least twelve years, and who was practicing medicine in Gisors.
He had often written, inviting me to come and see him, and I had always promised to do so, without keeping my word.
But at last I would take advantage of this opportunity.
Marambot lives?” He replied, without hesitation, and with the drawling accent of the Normans: “Rue Dauphine.” I presently saw, on the door of the house he pointed out, a large brass plate on which was engraved the name of my old chum.
I rang the bell, but the servant, a yellow-haired girl who moved slowly, said with a Stupid air: “He isn't here, he isn't here.” I heard a sound of forks and of glasses and I cried: “Hallo, Marambot!” A door opened and a large man, with whiskers and a cross look on his face, appeared, carrying a dinner napkin in his hand.
I certainly should not have recognized him.
One would have said he was forty-five at least, and, in a second, all the provincial life which makes one grow heavy, dull and old came before me.
In a single flash of thought, quicker than the act of extending my hand to him, I could see his life, his manner of existence, his line of thought and his theories of things in general.
I guessed at the prolonged meals that had rounded out his stomach, his after-dinner naps from the torpor of a slow indigestion aided by cognac, and his vague glances cast on the patient while he thought of the chicken that was roasting before the fire.
His conversations about cooking, about cider, brandy and wine, the way of preparing certain dishes and of blending certain sauces were revealed to me at sight of his puffy red cheeks, his heavy lips and his lustreless eyes.
“You do not recognize me.
I am Raoul Aubertin,” I said.
“You have not breakfasted, have you?” “No.” “How fortunate!
I was just sitting down to table and I have an excellent trout.” Five minutes later I was sitting opposite him at breakfast.
I said: “Are you a bachelor?” “Yes, indeed.” “And do you like it here?” “Time does not hang heavy; I am busy.
I have patients and friends.
I eat well, have good health, enjoy laughing and shooting.
I get along.” “Is not life very monotonous in this little town?” “No, my dear boy, not when one knows how to fill in the time.
The incidents and amusements are less varied, but one makes more of them; one has fewer acquaintances, but one meets them more frequently.
When you know all the windows in a street, each one of them interests you and puzzles you more than a whole street in Paris.
I know it at the tips of my fingers, from its beginning up to the present time.
I come from Gournay, its neighbor and rival.
Gournay is to Gisors what Lucullus was to Cicero.
Here, everything is for glory; they say 'the proud people of Gisors.' At Gournay, everything is for the stomach; they say 'the chewers of Gournay.' Gisors despises Gournay, but Gournay laughs at Gisors.
It is a very comical country, this.” I perceived that I was eating something very delicious, hard-boiled eggs wrapped in a covering of meat jelly flavored with herbs and put on ice for a few moments.
I said as I smacked my lips to compliment Marambot: “That is good.” He smiled.
“Two things are necessary, good jelly, which is hard to get, and good eggs.
Oh, how rare good eggs are, with the yolks slightly reddish, and with a good flavor!
I have two poultry yards, one for eggs and the other for chickens.
In an egg, as in the meat of a chicken, in beef, or in mutton, in milk, in everything, one perceives, and ought to taste, the juice, the quintessence of all the food on which the animal has fed.
How much better food we could have if more attention were paid to this!” I laughed as I said: “You are a gourmand?” “Parbleu.
It is only imbeciles who are not.
One is a gourmand as one is an artist, as one is learned, as one is a poet.
The sense of taste, my friend, is very delicate, capable of perfection, and quite as worthy of respect as the eye and the ear.
“Who is General de Blaumont?” “Oh, that's true, you do not know.
I told you just now, my dear boy, that they called the inhabitants of this town 'the proud people of Gisors,' and never was an epithet better deserved.
But let us finish breakfast first, and then I will tell you about our town and take you to see it.” He stopped talking every now and then while he slowly drank a glass of wine which he gazed at affectionately as he replaced the glass on the table.
It was amusing to see him, with a napkin tied around his neck, his cheeks flushed, his eyes eager, and his whiskers spreading round his mouth as it kept working.
The town, of a pretty, provincial type, commanded by its citadel, the most curious monument of military architecture of the seventh century to be found in France, overlooks, in its turn, a long, green valley, where the large Norman cows graze and ruminate in the pastures.
“The spirit of provincialism, my friend, is nothing but natural patriotism,” he said.
“I love my house, my town and my province because I discover in them the customs of my own village; but if I love my country, if I become angry when a neighbor sets foot in it, it is because I feel that my home is in danger, because the frontier that I do not know is the high road to my province.
See, here is the statue of the general.” “What general?” “General Blaumont!
So we discovered General de Blaumont.
Look in this bookseller's window.” He drew me towards the bookstore, where about fifteen red, yellow and blue volumes attracted the eye.
As I read the titles, I began to laugh idiotically.
X. . . ., member of several learned societies; History of Gisors, by the Abbe A . . .; Gisors from the time of Caesar to the present day, by M.
B. . . ., Landowner; Gisors and its environs, by Doctor C.
D. . . .; The Glories of Gisors, by a Discoverer.
“My friend,” resumed Marambot, “not a year, not a single year, you understand, passes without a fresh history of Gisors being published here; we now have twenty-three.” “And the glories of Gisors?” I asked.
“Oh, I will not mention them all, only the principal ones.
We had first General de Blaumont, then Baron Davillier, the celebrated ceramist who explored Spain and the Balearic Isles, and brought to the notice of collectors the wonderful Hispano-Arabic china.
In literature we have a very clever journalist, now dead, Charles Brainne, and among those who are living, the very eminent editor of the Nouvelliste de Rouen, Charles Lapierre . . . and many others, many others.” We were traversing along street with a gentle incline, with a June sun beating down on it and driving the residents into their houses.
Suddenly there appeared at the farther end of the street a drunken man who was staggering along, with his head forward his arms and legs limp.
When these energetic movements landed him in the middle of the road he stopped short and swayed on his feet, hesitating between falling and a fresh start.
Then he would dart off in any direction, sometimes falling against the wall of a house, against which he seemed to be fastened, as though he were trying to get in through the wall.
Then he would suddenly turn round and look ahead of him, his mouth open and his eyes blinking in the sunlight, and getting away from the wall by a movement of the hips, he started off once more.
A little yellow dog, a half-starved cur, followed him, barking; stopping when he stopped, and starting off when he started.
“Hallo,” said Marambot, “there is Madame Husson's 'Rosier'.
“Madame Husson's 'Rosier',” I exclaimed in astonishment.
“Oh, that is what we call drunkards round here.
The name comes from an old story which has now become a legend, although it is true in all respects.” “Is it an amusing story?” “Very amusing.” “Well, then, tell it to me.” “I will.” There lived formerly in this town a very upright old lady who was a great guardian of morals and was called Mme.
You know, I am telling you the real names and not imaginary ones.
Husson took a special interest in good works, in helping the poor and encouraging the deserving.
She was ceremonious, polite, on very good terms with the Almighty in the person of Abby Malon, and had a profound horror, an inborn horror of vice, and, in particular, of the vice the Church calls lasciviousness.
Any irregularity before marriage made her furious, exasperated her till she was beside herself.
Now, this was the period when they presented a prize as a reward of virtue to any girl in the environs of Paris who was found to be chaste.
Husson got the idea that she would institute a similar ceremony at Gisors.
She spoke about it to Abbe Malon, who at once made out a list of candidates.
Husson had a servant, an old woman called Francoise, as upright as her mistress.
As soon as the priest had left, madame called the servant and said: “Here, Francoise, here are the girls whose names M. le cure has submitted to me for the prize of virtue; try and find out what reputation they bear in the district.” And Francoise set out.
She collected all the scandal, all the stories, all the tattle, all the suspicions.
That she might omit nothing, she wrote it all down together with her memoranda in her housekeeping book, and handed it each morning to Mme.
Husson, who, after adjusting her spectacles on her thin nose, read as follows: Bread...........................four sous Milk............................two sous Butter .........................eight sous Malvina Levesque got into trouble last year with Mathurin Poilu.
Leg of mutton...................twenty- five sous Salt............................one sou Rosalie Vatinel was seen in the Riboudet woods with Cesaire Pienoir, by Mme.
Radishes........................one sou Vinegar.........................two sous Oxalic acid.....................two sous Josephine Durdent, who is not believed to have committed a fault, although she corresponds with young Oportun, who is in service in Rouen, and who sent her a present of a cap by diligence.
Not one came out unscathed in this rigorous inquisition.
Francoise inquired of everyone, neighbors, drapers, the principal, the teaching sisters at school, and gathered the slightest details.
As there is not a girl in the world about whom gossips have not found something to say, there was not found in all the countryside one young girl whose name was free from some scandal.
Husson desired that the “Rosiere” of Gisors, like Caesar's wife, should be above suspicion, and she was horrified, saddened and in despair at the record in her servant's housekeeping account-book.
They then extended their circle of inquiries to the neighboring villages; but with no satisfaction.
They consulted the mayor.
His candidates failed.
Barbesol were equally unlucky, in spite of the exactness of his scientific vouchers.
But one morning Francoise, on returning from one of her expeditions, said to her mistress: “You see, madame, that if you wish to give a prize to anyone, there is only Isidore in all the country round.” Mme.
Husson remained thoughtful.
She knew him well, this Isidore, the son of Virginie the greengrocer.
His proverbial virtue had been the delight of Gisors for several years, and served as an entertaining theme of conversation in the town, and of amusement to the young girls who loved to tease him.
He was past twenty-one, was tall, awkward, slow and timid; helped his mother in the business, and spent his days picking over fruit and vegetables, seated on a chair outside the door.
He had an abnormal dread of a petticoat and cast down his eyes whenever a female customer looked at him smilingly, and this well-known timidity made him the butt of all the wags in the country.
Bold words, coarse expressions, indecent allusions, brought the color to his cheeks so quickly that Dr.
Barbesol had nicknamed him “the thermometer of modesty.” Was he as innocent as he looked? ill-natured people asked themselves.
Was it the mere presentiment of unknown and shameful mysteries or else indignation at the relations ordained as the concomitant of love that so strongly affected the son of Virginie the greengrocer?
The urchins of the neighborhood as they ran past the shop would fling disgusting remarks at him just to see him cast down his eyes.
The girls amused themselves by walking up and down before him, cracking jokes that made him go into the store.
The boldest among them teased him to his face just to have a laugh, to amuse themselves, made appointments with him and proposed all sorts of things.
So Madame Husson had become thoughtful.
Certainly, Isidore was an exceptional case of notorious, unassailable virtue.
No one, among the most sceptical, most incredulous, would have been able, would have dared, to suspect Isidore of the slightest infraction of any law of morality.
He was a perfection, a pearl.
Husson still hesitated.
The idea of substituting a boy for a girl, a “rosier” for a “rosiere,” troubled her, worried her a little, and she resolved to consult Abbe Malon.
The abbe responded: “What do you desire to reward, madame?
What does it matter to you, therefore, if it is masculine or feminine?
Virtue is eternal; it has neither sex nor country; it is 'Virtue.'” Thus encouraged, Mme.
He approved heartily.
“We will have a fine ceremony,” he said.
It will even be a good example that we shall set to Nanterre.
Let us not be exclusive; let us welcome all merit.” Isidore, who had been told about this, blushed deeply and seemed happy.
The ceremony was fixed for the 15th of August, the festival of the Virgin Mary and of the Emperor Napoleon.
The municipality had decided to make an imposing ceremony and had built the platform on the couronneaux, a delightful extension of the ramparts of the old citadel where I will take you presently.
With the natural revulsion of public feeling, the virtue of Isidore, ridiculed hitherto, had suddenly become respected and envied, as it would bring him in five hundred francs besides a savings bank book, a mountain of consideration, and glory enough and to spare.
The girls now regretted their frivolity, their ridicule, their bold manners; and Isidore, although still modest and timid, had now a little contented air that bespoke his internal satisfaction.
The evening before the 15th of August the entire Rue Dauphine was decorated with flags.
Oh, I forgot to tell you why this street had been called Rue Dauphine.
It seems that the wife or mother of the dauphin, I do not remember which one, while visiting Gisors had been feted so much by the authorities that during a triumphal procession through the town she stopped before one of the houses in this street, halting the procession, and exclaimed: “Oh, the pretty house!
To whom does it belong?” They told her the name of the owner, who was sent for and brought, proud and embarrassed, before the princess.
She alighted from her carriage, went into the house, wishing to go over it from top to bottom, and even shut herself in one of the rooms alone for a few seconds.
When she came out, the people, flattered at this honor paid to a citizen of Gisors, shouted “Long live the dauphine!” But a rhymester wrote some words to a refrain, and the street retained the title of her royal highness, for “The princess, in a hurry, Without bell, priest, or beadle, But with some water only, Had baptized it.” But to come back to Isidore.
The regiment that he commanded was, besides, a picked regiment celebrated all through the province, and the company of grenadiers of Gisors was called on to attend all important ceremonies for a distance of fifteen to twenty leagues.
The story goes that Louis Philippe, while reviewing the militia of Eure, stopped in astonishment before the company from Gisors, exclaiming: “Oh, who are those splendid grenadiers?” “The grenadiers of Gisors,” replied the general.
“I might have known it,” murmured the king.
So Commandant Desbarres came at the head of his men, preceded by the band, to get Isidore in his mother's store.
After a little air had been played by the band beneath the windows, the “Rosier” himself appeared—on the threshold.
He was dressed in white duck from head to foot and wore a straw hat with a little bunch of orange blossoms as a cockade.
The question of his clothes had bothered Mme.
Husson a good deal, and she hesitated some time between the black coat of those who make their first communion and an entire white suit.
But Francoise, her counsellor, induced her to decide on the white suit, pointing out that the Rosier would look like a swan.
Behind him came his guardian, his godmother, Mme.
Commandant Desbarres gave the order “Present arms!” The procession resumed its march towards the church amid an immense crowd of people who has gathered from the neighboring districts.
After a short mass and an affecting discourse by Abbe Malon, they continued on their way to the couronneaux, where the banquet was served in a tent.
I learned it by heart: “Young man, a woman of means, beloved by the poor and respected by the rich, Mme.
Husson, whom the whole country is thanking here, through me, had the idea, the happy and benevolent idea, of founding in this town a prize for virtue, which should serve as a valuable encouragement to the inhabitants of this beautiful country.
“You, young man, are the first to be rewarded in this dynasty of goodness and chastity.
Your name will remain at the head of this list of the most deserving, and your life, understand me, your whole life, must correspond to this happy commencement.
To-day, in presence of this noble woman, of these soldier-citizens who have taken up their arms in your honor, in presence of this populace, affected, assembled to applaud you, or, rather, to applaud virtue, in your person, you make a solemn contract with the town, with all of us, to continue until your death the excellent example of your youth.
“Do not forget, young man, that you are the first seed cast into this field of hope; give us the fruits that we expect of you.” The mayor advanced three steps, opened his arms and pressed Isidore to his heart.
The “Rosier” was sobbing without knowing why, from a confused emotion, from pride and a vague and happy feeling of tenderness.
And he said in a solemn tone: “Homage, glory and riches to virtue.” Commandant Desbarres shouted “Bravo!” the grenadiers vociferated, and the crowd applauded.
The repast was magnificent and seemed interminable.
One course followed another; yellow cider and red wine in fraternal contact blended in the stomach of the guests.
The rattle of plates, the sound of voices, and of music softly played, made an incessant deep hum, and was dispersed abroad in the clear sky where the swallows were flying.
Husson occasionally readjusted her black wig, which would slip over on one side, and chatted with Abbe Malon.
The mayor, who was excited, talked politics with Commandant Desbarres, and Isidore ate, drank, as if he had never eaten or drunk before.
He helped himself repeatedly to all the dishes, becoming aware for the first time of the pleasure of having one's belly full of good things which tickle the palate in the first place.
He had let out a reef in his belt and, without speaking, and although he was a little uneasy at a wine stain on his white waistcoat, he ceased eating in order to take up his glass and hold it to his mouth as long as possible, to enjoy the taste slowly.
They were many and loudly applauded.
Evening was approaching and they had been at the table since noon.
Fine, milky vapors were already floating in the air in the valley, the light night- robe of streams and meadows; the sun neared the horizon; the cows were lowing in the distance amid the mists of the pasture.
They returned to Gisors.
The procession, now disbanded, walked in detachments.
Husson had taken Isidore's arm and was giving him a quantity of urgent, excellent advice.
Having been invited by her family to celebrate her son's triumph, she had taken luncheon with her sister after having followed the procession as far as the banqueting tent.
So Isidore remained alone in the store, which was growing dark.
Carrots, cabbages, and onions gave out their strong odor of vegetables in the closed room, that coarse smell of the garden blended with the sweet, penetrating odor of strawberries and the delicate, slight, evanescent fragrance of a basket of peaches.
The “Rosier” took one of these and ate it, although he was as full as an egg.
Then, all at once, wild with joy, he began to dance about the store, and something rattled in his waistcoat.
He was surprised, and put his hand in his pocket and brought out the purse containing the five hundred francs, which he had forgotten in his agitation.
He poured the gold pieces out on the counter and spread them out with his big hand with a slow, caressing touch so as to see them all at the same time.
They glistened on the wood in the dim light and he counted them over and over, one by one.
Then he put them back in the purse, which he replaced in his pocket.
Who will ever know or who can tell what a terrible conflict took place in the soul of the “Rosier” between good and evil, the tumultuous attack of Satan, his artifices, the temptations which he offered to this timid virgin heart?
What suggestions, what imaginations, what desires were not invented by the evil one to excite and destroy this chosen one?
Husson's saint, his hat, which still bore the little bunch of orange blossoms, and going out through the alley at the back of the house, he disappeared in the darkness.
Virginie, the fruiterer, on learning that her son had returned, went home at once, and found the house empty.
She waited, without thinking anything about it at first; but at the end of a quarter of an hour she made inquiries.
The neighbors had seen Isidore come home and had not seen him go out again.
Husson had just retired when they informed her that her protege had disappeared.
She immediately put on her wig, dressed herself and went to Virginie's house.
Virginie, whose plebeian soul was readily moved, was weeping copiously amid her cabbages, carrots and onions.
They feared some accident had befallen him.
Commandant Desbarres notified the police, who made a circuit of the town, and on the high road to Pontoise they found the little bunch of orange blossoms.
It was placed on a table around which the authorities were deliberating.
The “Rosier” must have been the victim of some stratagem, some trick, some jealousy; but in what way?
What means had been employed to kidnap this innocent creature, and with what object?
Weary of looking for him without any result, Virginie, alone, remained watching and weeping.
The following evening, when the coach passed by on its return from Paris, Gisors learned with astonishment that its “Rosier” had stopped the vehicle at a distance of about two hundred metres from the town, had climbed up on it and paid his fare, handing over a gold piece and receiving the change, and that he had quietly alighted in the centre of the great city.
There was great excitement all through the countryside.
The days followed one another, a week passed.
Barbesol, who had gone out early, perceived, sitting on a doorstep, a man dressed in a grimy linen suit, who was sleeping with his head leaning against the wall.
He approached him and recognized Isidore.
The ex-“Rosier” was in that profound, invincible sleep that is alarming, and the doctor, in surprise, went to seek assistance to help him in carrying the young man to Boncheval's drugstore.
When they lifted him up they found an empty bottle under him, and when the doctor sniffed at it, he declared that it had contained brandy.
That gave a suggestion as to what treatment he would require.
They succeeded in rousing him.
Isidore was drunk, drunk and degraded by a week of guzzling, drunk and so disgusting that a ragman would not have touched him.
His beautiful white duck suit was a gray rag, greasy, muddy, torn, and destroyed, and he smelt of the gutter and of vice.
He was washed, sermonized, shut up, and did not leave the house for four days.
He seemed ashamed and repentant.
They could not find on him either his purse, containing the five hundred francs, or the bankbook, or even his silver watch, a sacred heirloom left by his father, the fruiterer.
On the fifth day he ventured into the Rue Dauphine, Curious glances followed him and he walked along with a furtive expression in his eyes and his head bent down.
As he got outside the town towards the valley they lost sight of him; but two hours later he returned laughing and rolling against the walls.
He was drunk, absolutely drunk.
Driven from home by his mother, he became a wagon driver, and drove the charcoal wagons for the Pougrisel firm, which is still in existence.
His reputation as a drunkard became so well known and spread so far that even at Evreux they talked of Mme.
Husson's “Rosier,” and the sots of the countryside have been given that nickname.
Marambot rubbed his hands as he finished his story.
I had the honor of closing his eyes.” “What did he die of?” “An attack of delirium tremens, of course.” We had arrived at the old citadel, a pile of ruined walls dominated by the enormous tower of St.
Thomas of Canterbury and the one called the Prisoner's Tower.
Marambot told me the story of this prisoner, who, with the aid of a nail, covered the walls of his dungeon with sculptures, tracing the reflections of the sun as it glanced through the narrow slit of a loophole.
I also learned that Clothaire II had given the patrimony of Gisors to his cousin, Saint Romain, bishop of Rouen; that Gisors ceased to be the capital of the whole of Vexin after the treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte; that the town is the chief strategic centre of all that portion of France, and that in consequence of this advantage she was taken and retaken over and over again.
And Marambot, eager and almost eloquent, continued: “What beggars, those English!
And what sots, my boy; they are all 'Rosiers,' those hypocrites!” Then, after a silence, stretching out his arm towards the tiny river that glistened in the meadows, he said: “Did you know that Henry Monnier was one of the most untiring fishermen on the banks of the Epte?” “No, I did not know it.” “And Bouffe, my boy, Bouffe was a painter on glass.” “You are joking!” “No, indeed.
How is it you do not know these things?” THE ADOPTED SON The two cottages stood beside each other at the foot of a hill near a little seashore resort.
The two peasants labored hard on the unproductive soil to rear their little ones, and each family had four.
Before the adjoining doors a whole troop of urchins played and tumbled about from morning till night.
The two eldest were six years old, and the youngest were about fifteen months; the marriages, and afterward the births, having taken place nearly simultaneously in both families.
The two mothers could hardly distinguish their own offspring among the lot, and as for the fathers, they were altogether at sea.
The first of the two cottages, as you came up from the bathing beach, Rolleport, was occupied by the Tuvaches, who had three girls and one boy; the other house sheltered the Vallins, who had one girl and three boys.
They all subsisted frugally on soup, potatoes and fresh air.
At seven o'clock in the morning, then at noon, then at six o'clock in the evening, the housewives got their broods together to give them their food, as the gooseherds collect their charges.
The children were seated, according to age, before the wooden table, varnished by fifty years of use; the mouths of the youngest hardly reaching the level of the table.
Before them was placed a bowl filled with bread, soaked in the water in which the potatoes had been boiled, half a cabbage and three onions; and the whole line ate until their hunger was appeased.
The mother herself fed the smallest.
A small pot roast on Sunday was a feast for all; and the father on this day sat longer over the meal, repeating: “I wish we could have this every day.” One afternoon, in the month of August, a phaeton stopped suddenly in front of the cottages, and a young woman, who was driving the horses, said to the gentleman sitting at her side: “Oh, look at all those children, Henri!
How pretty they are, tumbling about in the dust, like that!” The man did not answer, accustomed to these outbursts of admiration, which were a pain and almost a reproach to him.
The young woman continued: “I must hug them!
Then she got into the carriage again, and drove off at a lively trot.
But she returned the following week, and seating herself on the ground, took the youngster in her arms, stuffed him with cakes; gave candies to all the others, and played with them like a young girl, while the husband waited patiently in the carriage.
She returned again; made the acquaintance of the parents, and reappeared every day with her pockets full of dainties and pennies.
Her name was Madame Henri d'Hubieres.
One morning, on arriving, her husband alighted with her, and without stopping to talk to the children, who now knew her well, she entered the farmer's cottage.
They were busy chopping wood for the fire.
They rose to their feet in surprise, brought forward chairs, and waited expectantly.
Then the woman, in a broken, trembling voice, began: “My good people, I have come to see you, because I should like—I should like to take—your little boy with me—” The country people, too bewildered to think, did not answer.
She recovered her breath, and continued: “We are alone, my husband and I.
Are you willing?” The peasant woman began to understand.
Oh, no, indeed!” Then M. d'Hubieres intervened: “My wife has not made her meaning clear.
If we, perchance, should have children, he will share equally with them; but if he should not reward our care, we should give him, when he comes of age, a sum of twenty thousand francs, which shall be deposited immediately in his name, with a lawyer.
Do you understand me?” The woman had arisen, furious.
That would be an abomination!” The man, grave and deliberate, said nothing; but approved of what his wife said by a continued nodding of his head.
It's all understood!
Get out of here, and don't let me see you again—the idea of wanting to take away a child like that!” Madame d'Hubieres remembered that there were two children, quite little, and she asked, through her tears, with the tenacity of a wilful and spoiled woman: “But is the other little one not yours?” Father Tuvache answered: “No, it is our neighbors'.
You can go to them if you wish.” And he went back into his house, whence resounded the indignant voice of his wife.
The Vallins were at table, slowly eating slices of bread which they parsimoniously spread with a little rancid butter on a plate between the two.
M. d'Hubieres recommenced his proposals, but with more insinuations, more oratorical precautions, more shrewdness.
The two country people shook their heads, in sign of refusal, but when they learned that they were to have a hundred francs a month, they considered the matter, consulting one another by glances, much disturbed.
They kept silent for a long time, tortured, hesitating.
At last the woman asked: “What do you say to it, man?” In a weighty tone he said: “I say that it's not to be despised.” Madame d'Hubieres, trembling with anguish, spoke of the future of their child, of his happiness, and of the money which he could give them later.
The peasant asked: “This pension of twelve hundred francs, will it be promised before a lawyer?” M. d'Hubieres responded: “Why, certainly, beginning with to-morrow.” The woman, who was thinking it over, continued: “A hundred francs a month is not enough to pay for depriving us of the child.
That child would be working in a few years; we must have a hundred and twenty francs.” Tapping her foot with impatience, Madame d'Hubieres granted it at once, and, as she wished to carry off the child with her, she gave a hundred francs extra, as a present, while her husband drew up a paper.
The Tuvaches, from their door, watched her departure, silent, serious, perhaps regretting their refusal.
They had quarrelled with their neighbors, because Mother Tuvache grossly insulted them, continually, repeating from door to door that one must be unnatural to sell one's child; that it was horrible, disgusting, bribery.
Sometimes she would take her Charlot in her arms, ostentatiously exclaiming, as if he understood: “I didn't sell you, I didn't!
I'm not rich, but I don't sell my children!” The Vallins lived comfortably, thanks to the pension.
That was the cause of the unappeasable fury of the Tuvaches, who had remained miserably poor.
Their eldest went away to serve his time in the army; Charlot alone remained to labor with his old father, to support the mother and two younger sisters.
He had reached twenty-one years when, one morning, a brilliant carriage stopped before the two cottages.
A young gentleman, with a gold watch- chain, got out, giving his hand to an aged, white-haired lady.
The old mother was washing her aprons; the infirm father slumbered at the chimney-corner.
Both raised their heads, and the young man said: “Good-morning, papa; good-morning, mamma!” They both stood up, frightened!
In a flutter, the peasant woman dropped her soap into the water, and stammered: “Is it you, my child?
Is it you, my child?” He took her in his arms and hugged her, repeating: “Good-morning, mamma,” while the old man, all a-tremble, said, in his calm tone which he never lost: “Here you are, back again, Jean,” as if he had just seen him a month ago.
When they had got to know one another again, the parents wished to take their boy out in the neighborhood, and show him.
They took him to the mayor, to the deputy, to the cure, and to the schoolmaster.
Charlot, standing on the threshold of his cottage, watched him pass.
In the evening, at supper, he said to the old people: “You must have been stupid to let the Vallins' boy be taken.” The mother answered, obstinately: “I wouldn't sell my child.” The father remained silent.
The son continued: “It is unfortunate to be sacrificed like that.” Then Father Tuvache, in an angry tone, said: “Are you going to reproach us for having kept you?” And the young man said, brutally: “Yes, I reproach you for having been such fools.
Parents like you make the misfortune of their children.
She moaned, as she swallowed the spoonfuls of soup, half of which she spilled: “One may kill one's self to bring up children!” Then the boy said, roughly: “I'd rather not have been born than be what I am.
I said to myself: 'See what I should have been now!'” He got up: “See here, I feel that I would do better not to stay here, because I would throw it up to you from morning till night, and I would make your life miserable.
I'll never forgive you for that!” The two old people were silent, downcast, in tears.
He continued: “No, the thought of that would be too much.
I'd rather look for a living somewhere else.” He opened the door.
The Vallins were celebrating the return of their child.
COWARD In society he was called “Handsome Signoles.” His name was Vicomte Gontran-Joseph de Signoles.
An orphan, and possessed of an ample fortune, he cut quite a dash, as it is called.
He had an attractive appearance and manner, could talk well, had a certain inborn elegance, an air of pride and nobility, a good mustache, and a tender eye, that always finds favor with women.
He was in great request at receptions, waltzed to perfection, and was regarded by his own sex with that smiling hostility accorded to the popular society man.
He had been suspected of more than one love affair, calculated to enhance the reputation of a bachelor.
He lived a happy, peaceful life—a life of physical and mental well-being.
He had won considerable fame as a swordsman, and still more as a marksman.
With such a weapon I am sure to kill my man.” One evening, having accompanied two women friends of his with their husbands to the theatre, he invited them to take some ice cream at Tortoni's after the performance.
They had been seated a few minutes in the restaurant when Signoles noticed that a man was staring persistently at one of the ladies.
I don't know him; do you?” The husband, who had noticed nothing, glanced across at the offender, and said: “No; not in the least.” His wife continued, half smiling, half angry: “It's very tiresome!
He quite spoils my ice cream.” The husband shrugged his shoulders.
If we were to bother our heads about all the ill-mannered people we should have no time for anything else.” But the vicomte abruptly left his seat.
He could not allow this insolent fellow to spoil an ice for a guest of his.
It was for him to take cognizance of the offence, since it was through him that his friends had come to the restaurant.
I must ask you to desist from your rudeness.” The other replied: “Let me alone, will you!” “Take care, sir,” said the vicomte between his teeth, “or you will force me to extreme measures.” The man replied with a single word—a foul word, which could be heard from one end of the restaurant to the other, and which startled every one there.
All those whose backs were toward the two disputants turned round; all the others raised their heads; three waiters spun round on their heels like tops; the two lady cashiers jumped, as if shot, then turned their bodies simultaneously, like two automata worked by the same spring.
Then suddenly a sharp, crisp sound.
The vicomte had slapped his adversary's face.
Every one rose to interfere.
Cards were exchanged.
He was in a state of too great agitation to think connectedly.
One idea alone possessed him: a duel.
He would be talked about, approved, congratulated.
He repeated aloud, speaking as one does when under the stress of great mental disturbance: “What a brute of a man!” Then he sat down, and began to reflect.
He bethought himself of the most influential and best-known men of his acquaintance.
His choice fell at last on the Marquis de la Tour- Noire and Colonel Bourdin-a nobleman and a soldier.
Their names would carry weight in the newspapers.
If he showed himself brave, determined, prepared to face a duel in deadly earnest, his adversary would probably draw back and proffer excuses.
He read it again, as he had already read it, first at a glance in the restaurant, and afterward on the way home in the light of each gas lamp: “Georges Lamil, 51 Rue Moncey.” That was all.
He examined closely this collection of letters, which seemed to him mysterious, fraught with many meanings.
What was his profession?
Was it not monstrous that a stranger, an unknown, should thus all at once upset one's whole life, simply because it had pleased him to stare rudely at a woman?
And the vicomte once more repeated aloud: “What a brute!” Then he stood motionless, thinking, his eyes still fixed on the card.
Anger rose in his heart against this scrap of paper—a resentful anger, mingled with a strange sense of uneasiness.
It was a stupid business altogether!
He took up a penknife which lay open within reach, and deliberately stuck it into the middle of the printed name, as if he were stabbing some one.
Should he choose swords or pistols?—for he considered himself as the insulted party.
With the sword he would risk less, but with the pistol there was some chance of his adversary backing out.
A duel with swords is rarely fatal, since mutual prudence prevents the combatants from fighting close enough to each other for a point to enter very deep.
With pistols he would seriously risk his life; but, on the other hand, he might come out of the affair with flying colors, and without a duel, after all.
“The fellow will be afraid.” The sound of his own voice startled him, and he looked nervously round the room.
He drank another glass of water, and then began undressing, preparatory to going to bed.
“I have all day to-morrow,” he reflected, “for setting my affairs in order.
I must sleep now, in order to be calm when the time comes.” He was very warm in bed, but he could not succeed in losing consciousness.
He tossed and turned, remained for five minutes lying on his back, then changed to his left side, then rolled over to his right.
Then a qualm seized him: “Can it be possible that I am afraid?” Why did his heart beat so uncontrollably at every well-known sound in his room?
When the clock was about to strike, the prefatory grating of its spring made him start, and for several seconds he panted for breath, so unnerved was he.
He began to reason with himself on the possibility of such a thing: “Could I by any chance be afraid?” No, indeed; he could not be afraid, since he was resolved to proceed to the last extremity, since he was irrevocably determined to fight without flinching.
And yet he was so perturbed in mind and body that he asked himself: “Is it possible to be afraid in spite of one's self?” And this doubt, this fearful question, took possession of him.
If an irresistible power, stronger than his own will, were to quell his courage, what would happen?
He would certainly go to the place appointed; his will would force him that far.
But supposing, when there, he were to tremble or faint?
And he thought of his social standing, his reputation, his name.
And he suddenly determined to get up and look at himself in the glass.
When he saw his face reflected in the mirror he scarcely recognized it.
His eyes looked disproportionately large, and he was very pale.
He remained standing before the mirror.
He put out his tongue, as if to examine the state of his health, and all at once the thought flashed into his mind: “At this time the day after to-morrow I may be dead.” And his heart throbbed painfully.
Here I am, I look at myself, I feel myself to be alive—and yet in twenty-four hours I may be lying on that bed, with closed eyes, dead, cold, inanimate.” He turned round, and could see himself distinctly lying on his back on the couch he had just quitted.
He mechanically took a cigar, lighted it, and began walking back and forth.
His hands quivered nervously as they touched various objects.
His head grew dizzy, his thoughts confused, disjointed, painful; a numbness seized his spirit, as if he had been drinking.
What will become of me?” His whole body trembled spasmodically; he rose, and, going to the window, drew back the curtains.
The day—a summer day-was breaking.
A flush of light enveloped the awakened world, like a caress from the rising sun, and the glimmer of dawn kindled new hope in the breast of the vicomte.
What a fool he was to let himself succumb to fear before anything was decided—before his seconds had interviewed those of Georges Lamil, before he even knew whether he would have to fight or not!
He repeated as he went: “I must be firm—very firm.
I must show that I am not afraid.” His seconds, the marquis and the colonel, placed themselves at his disposal, and, having shaken him warmly by the hand, began to discuss details.
“Yes.” “Do you leave all the other arrangements in our hands?” With a dry, jerky voice the vicomte answered: “Twenty paces—at a given signal—the arm to be raised, not lowered—shots to be exchanged until one or other is seriously wounded.” “Excellent conditions,” declared the colonel in a satisfied tone.
The vicomte returned home to wait for them.
His agitation, only temporarily allayed, now increased momentarily.
He felt, in arms, legs and chest, a sort of trembling—a continuous vibration; he could not stay still, either sitting or standing.
His mouth was parched, and he made every now and then a clicking movement of the tongue, as if to detach it from his palate.
He attempted, to take luncheon, but could not eat.
Then it occurred to him to seek courage in drink, and he sent for a decanter of rum, of which he swallowed, one after another, six small glasses.
A burning warmth, followed by a deadening of the mental faculties, ensued.
Now it will be all right!” But at the end of an hour he had emptied the decanter, and his agitation was worse than ever.
A mad longing possessed him to throw himself on the ground, to bite, to scream.
A ring at the bell so unnerved him that he had not the strength to rise to receive his seconds.
“All is arranged as you wished,” said the colonel.
“Your adversary claimed at first the privilege of the offended part; but he yielded almost at once, and accepted your conditions.
His seconds are two military men.” “Thank you,” said the vicomte.
We shall want a reliable doctor, since the duel is not to end until a serious wound has been inflicted; and you know that bullets are not to be trifled with.
We must select a spot near some house to which the wounded party can be carried if necessary.
In fact, the arrangements will take us another two or three hours at least.” The vicomte articulated for the second time: “Thank you.” “You're all right?” asked the colonel.
“Quite calm?” “Perfectly calm, thank you.” The two men withdrew.
When he had traced at the top of a sheet of paper the words: “This is my last will and testament,” he started from his seat, feeling himself incapable of connected thought, of decision in regard to anything.
What, then, possessed him?
He wished to fight, he was fully determined to fight, and yet, in spite of all his mental effort, in spite of the exertion of all his will power, he felt that he could not even preserve the strength necessary to carry him through the ordeal.
He tried to conjure up a picture of the duel, his own attitude, and that of his enemy.
Every now and then his teeth chattered audibly.
He thought he would read, and took down Chateauvillard's Rules of Dueling.
Then he said: “Is the other man practiced in the use of the pistol?
How can I find out?” He remembered Baron de Vaux's book on marksmen, and searched it from end to end.
Georges Lamil was not mentioned.
And yet, if he were not an adept, would he have accepted without demur such a dangerous weapon and such deadly conditions?
He opened a case of Gastinne Renettes which stood on a small table, and took from it a pistol.
Next he stood in the correct attitude for firing, and raised his arm.
But he was trembling from head to foot, and the weapon shook in his grasp.
Then he said to himself: “It is impossible.
I cannot fight like this.” He looked at the little black, death-spitting hole at the end of the pistol; he thought of dishonor, of the whispers at the clubs, the smiles in his friends' drawing-rooms, the contempt of women, the veiled sneers of the newspapers, the insults that would be hurled at him by cowards.
The pistol had been left loaded by some chance, some oversight.
And the discovery rejoiced him, he knew not why.
If he did not maintain, in presence of his opponent, the steadfast bearing which was so necessary to his honor, he would be ruined forever.
He would be branded, stigmatized as a coward, hounded out of society!
And he felt, he knew, that he could not maintain that calm, unmoved demeanor.
And yet he was brave, since the thought that followed was not even rounded to a finish in his mind; but, opening his mouth wide, he suddenly plunged the barrel of the pistol as far back as his throat, and pressed the trigger.
A spurt of blood had splashed the white paper on the table, and had made a great crimson stain beneath the words: “This is my last will and testament.” OLD MONGILET In the office old Mongilet was considered a type.
He was a good old employee, who had never been outside Paris but once in his life.
Asnieres, Argenteuil, Chatou, Borgival, Maisons, Poissy, had their habitues and their ardent admirers.
We argued about the merits and advantages of all these places, celebrated and delightful to all Parsian employees.
Daddy Mongilet declared: “You are like a lot of sheep!
It must be pretty, this country you talk of!” “Well, how about you, Mongilet?
Don't you ever go on an excursion?” “Yes, indeed.
When I have had a good luncheon, without any hurry, at the wine shop down there, I look up my route with a plan of Paris, and the time table of the lines and connections.
And then I climb up on the box, open my umbrella and off we go.
I change my surroundings.
It is as though I were taking a journey across the world, the people are so different in one street and another.
And then, there is nothing more amusing than the entresols.
One guesses at domestic scenes simply at sight of the face of a man who is roaring; one is amused on passing by a barber's shop, to see the barber leave his customer whose face is covered with lather to look out in the street.
One exchanges heartfelt glances with the milliners just for fun, as one has no time to alight.
I would not give my excursions in the omnibus for all your stupid excursions in the woods.” “Come and try it, Mongilet, come to the country once just to see.” “I was there once,” he replied, “twenty years ago, and you will never catch me there again.” “Tell us about it, Mongilet.” “If you wish to hear it.
This is how it was: “You knew Boivin, the old editorial clerk, whom we called Boileau?” “Yes, perfectly.” “He was my office chum.
The rascal had a house at Colombes and always invited me to spend Sunday with him.
He would say: “'Come along, Maculotte [he called me Maculotte for fun].
You will see what a nice excursion we will take.' “I let myself be entrapped like an animal, and set out, one morning by the 8 o'clock train.
The creature was old, ugly, covered with old clothes that looked dirty and wicked.
It had chicken's feathers in its hair and looked as though it would devour me.
Boivin?' “I felt ill at ease on being questioned by this fury.
I stammered: 'Why- he expects me.' “'Ah, it is you who have come to luncheon?' “'Yes,' I stammered, trembling.
Little Boivin appeared immediately on the threshold of a sort of barrack of plaster covered with zinc, that looked like a foot stove.
He wore white duck trousers covered with stains and a dirty Panama hat.
It was at the end of another alleyway enclosed by high walls and was a little square the size of a pocket handkerchief, surrounded by houses that were so high that the sun, could reach it only two or three hours in the day.
Pansies, pinks, wallflowers and a few rose bushes were languishing in this well without air, and hot as an oven from the refraction of heat from the roofs.
“'I have no trees,' said Boivin, 'but the neighbors' walls take their place.
She is not agreeable, eh?
I took off my coat, rolled up my sleeves, and began to work the handle of a kind of pump that wheezed, puffed and rattled like a consumptive as it emitted a thread of water like a Wallace drinking fountain.
It took me ten minutes to water it and I was in a bath of perspiration.
Boivin directed me: “'Here—this plant—a little more; enough—now this one.' “The watering pot leaked and my feet got more water than the flowers.
The bottoms of my trousers were soaking and covered with mud.
And twenty times running I kept it up, soaking my feet afresh each time, and perspiring anew as I worked the handle of the pump.
And when I was tired out and wanted to stop, Boivin, in a tone of entreaty, said as he put his hand on my arm: “Just one more watering pot full—just one, and that will be all.' “To thank me he gave me a rose, a big rose, but hardly had it touched my button-hole than it fell to pieces, leaving only a hard little green knot as a decoration.
I was surprised, but said nothing.
Boivin's voice was heard in the distance: “'Are you ever coming?
When you know that luncheon is ready!' “We went toward the foot stove.
If the garden was in the shade, the house, on the other hand, was in the blazing sun, and the sweating room in the Turkish bath is not as hot as was my friend's dining room.
“Three plates at the side of which were some half-washed forks, were placed on a table of yellow wood in the middle of which stood an earthenware dish containing boiled beef and potatoes.
“A large water bottle full of water lightly colored with wine attracted my attention.
Boivin, embarrassed, said to his wife: “'See here, my dear, just on a special occasion, are you not going to give us some plain wine?' “She looked at him furiously.
A fig for your special occasion!' “He said no more.
After the stew she brought in another dish of potatoes cooked with bacon.
When this dish was finished, still in silence, she announced: “'That is all!
Now get out!' “Boivin looked at her in astonishment.
Solvin whispered “'Wait for me a second, and we will skip.' “He went into the kitchen where his wife had gone, and I overheard him say: “'Give me twenty sous, my dear.' “'What do you want with twenty sons?' “'Why, one does not know what may happen.
As the man has had luncheon here, the least he can do is to pay your expenses for the day.' “Boivin came back to fetch me.
As I wished to be polite I bowed to the mistress of the house, stammering: “'Madame—many thanks—kind welcome.' “'That's all right,' she replied. 'But do not bring him back drunk, for you will have to answer to me, you know!' “We set out.
We had to cross a perfectly bare plain under the burning sun.
I attempted to gather a flower along the road and gave a cry of pain.
It had hurt my hand frightfully.
And, everywhere, there was a smell of manure, enough to turn your stomach.
“Boivin said, 'Have a little patience and we will reach the river bank.' “We reached the river.
I begged Boivin to go under cover somewhere.
“He said: “'This does not look very grand, but it is very comfortable.' “I was hungry.
But to and behold, at the second glass of wine, that beggar, Boivin, lost his head, and I understand why his wife gave him water diluted.
“He got up, declaimed, wanted to show his strength, interfered in a quarrel between two drunken men who were fighting, and, but for the landlord, who came to the rescue, we should both have been killed.
“I dragged him away, holding him up until we reached the first bush where I deposited him.
We must certainly have slept a long time, for it was dark when I awoke.
“We set out through the darkness across the plain.
We could see neither sky nor earth, and found ourselves lost in the midst of a kind of forest of wooden stakes, that came as high as our noses.
It was a vineyard and these were the supports.
We wandered about in this vineyard for about an hour or two, hesitating, reaching out our arms without finding any limit, for we kept retracing our steps.
“At length Boivin fell against a stake that tore his cheek and he remained in a sitting posture on the ground, uttering with all his might long and resounding hallos, while I screamed 'Help!
Help!' as loud as I could, lighting candle-matches to show the way to our rescuers, and also to keep up my courage.
I took Boivin to his home, but as I was leaving him on the threshold of his garden, the door opened suddenly and his wife appeared, a candle in her hand.
She frightened me horribly.
“As soon as she saw her husband, whom she must have been waiting for since dark, she screamed, as she darted toward me: “'Ah, scoundrel, I knew you would bring him back drunk!' “My, how I made my escape, running all the way to the station, and as I thought the fury was pursuing me I shut myself in an inner room as the train was not due for half an hour.
“That is why I never married, and why I never go out of Paris.” MOONLIGHT Madame Julie Roubere was expecting her elder sister, Madame Henriette Letore, who had just returned from a trip to Switzerland.
The Letore household had left nearly five weeks before.
Madame Henriette had allowed her husband to return alone to their estate in Calvados, where some business required his attention, and had come to spend a few days in Paris with her sister.
In the quiet parlor Madame Roubere was reading in the twilight in an absent-minded way, raising her, eyes whenever she heard a sound.
At last, she heard a ring at the door, and her sister appeared, wrapped in a travelling cloak.
And without any formal greeting, they clasped each other in an affectionate embrace, only desisting for a moment to give each other another hug.
Then they talked about their health, about their respective families, and a thousand other things, gossiping, jerking out hurried, broken sentences as they followed each other about, while Madame Henriette was removing her hat and veil.
Madame Roubere rang for a lamp, and as soon as it was brought in, she scanned her sister's face, and was on the point of embracing her once more.
But she held back, scared and astonished at the other's appearance.
All the rest of her hair was of a glossy, raven-black hue; but there alone, at each side of her head, ran, as it were, two silvery streams which were immediately lost in the black mass surrounding them.
She was, nevertheless, only twenty-four years old, and this change had come on suddenly since her departure for Switzerland.
Without moving, Madame Roubere gazed at her in amazement, tears rising to her eyes, as she thought that some mysterious and terrible calamity must have befallen her sister.
She asked: “What is the matter with you, Henriette?” Smiling with a sad face, the smile of one who is heartsick, the other replied: “Why, nothing, I assure you.
Were you noticing my white hair?” But Madame Roubere impetuously seized her by the shoulders, and with a searching glance at her, repeated: “What is the matter with you?
And if you tell me a falsehood, I'll soon find it out.” They remained face to face, and Madame Henriette, who looked as if she were about to faint, had two pearly tears in the corners of her drooping eyes.
Her sister continued: “What has happened to you?
Answer me!” Then, in a subdued voice, the other murmured: “I have—I have a lover.” And, hiding her forehead on the shoulder of her younger sister, she sobbed.
Then, when she had grown a little calmer, when the heaving of her breast had subsided, she commenced to unbosom herself, as if to cast forth this secret from herself, to empty this sorrow of hers into a sympathetic heart.
Thereupon, holding each other's hands tightly clasped, the two women went over to a sofa in a dark corner of the room, into which they sank, and the younger sister, passing her arm over the elder one's neck, and drawing her close to her heart, listened.
I know that there was no excuse for me; I do not understand myself, and since that day I feel as if I were mad.
Be careful, my child, about yourself—be careful!
It takes so little, so little, so little, a moment of tenderness, one of those sudden fits of melancholy which come over you, one of those longings to open your arms, to love, to cherish something, which we all have at certain moments.
“You know my husband, and you know how fond I am of him; but he is mature and sensible, and cannot even comprehend the tender vibrations of a woman's heart.
Oh! how I sometimes have wished that he would clasp me roughly in his arms, that he would embrace me with those slow, sweet kisses which make two beings intermingle, which are like mute confidences!
How I have wished that he were foolish, even weak, so that he should have need of me, of my caresses, of my tears!
“And yet the thought of deceiving him never entered my mind.
Now it has happened, without love, without reason, without anything, simply because the moon shone one night on the Lake of Lucerne.
“During the month when we were travelling together, my husband, with his calm indifference, paralyzed my enthusiasm, extinguished my poetic ardor.
When we were descending the mountain paths at sunrise, when as the four horses galloped along with the diligence, we saw, in the transparent morning haze, valleys, woods, streams, and villages, I clasped my hands with delight, and said to him: 'How beautiful it is, dear!
Kiss me now!' He only answered, with a smile of chilling kindliness: 'There is no reason why we should kiss each other because you like the landscape.' “And his words froze me to the heart.
It seems to me that when people love each other, they ought to feel more moved by love than ever, in the presence of beautiful scenes.
“In fact, I was brimming over with poetry which he kept me from expressing.
I was almost like a boiler filled with steam and hermetically sealed.
“One evening (we had for four days been staying in a hotel at Fluelen) Robert, having one of his sick headaches, went to bed immediately after dinner, and I went to take a walk all alone along the edge of the lake.
The full moon showed itself in the middle of the sky; the tall mountains, with their snowy crests, seemed to wear silver crowns; the waters of the lake glittered with tiny shining ripples.
The air was mild, with that kind of penetrating warmth which enervates us till we are ready to faint, to be deeply affected without any apparent cause.
But how sensitive, how vibrating the heart is at such moments! how quickly it beats, and how intense is its emotion!
“I sat down on the grass, and gazed at that vast, melancholy, and fascinating lake, and a strange feeling arose in me; I was seized with an insatiable need of love, a revolt against the gloomy dullness of my life.
Was I never to feel on my lips those kisses so deep, delicious, and intoxicating which lovers exchange on nights that seem to have been made by God for tenderness?
Was I never to know ardent, feverish love in the moonlit shadows of a summer's night?
I heard something stirring behind me.
When I turned my head round, he recognized me, and, advancing, said: “'You are weeping, madame?' “It was a young barrister who was travelling with his mother, and whom we had often met.
His eyes had frequently followed me.
“I was so confused that I did not know what answer to give or what to think of the situation.
“He walked on by my side in a natural and respectful manner, and began talking to me about what we had seen during our trip.
All that I had felt he translated into words; everything that made me thrill he understood perfectly, better than I did myself.
And all of a sudden he repeated some verses of Alfred de Musset.
I felt myself choking, seized with indescribable emotion.
It seemed to me that the mountains themselves, the lake, the moonlight, were singing to me about things ineffably sweet.
“And it happened, I don't know how, I don't know why, in a sort of hallucination.
“As for him, I did not see him again till the morning of his departure.
Then, Madame Roubere, with a self-contained and serious air, said very gently: “You see, sister, very often it is not a man that we love, but love itself.
And your real lover that night was the moonlight.” THE FIRST SNOWFALL The long promenade of La Croisette winds in a curve along the edge of the blue water.
Yonder, to the right, Esterel juts out into the sea in the distance, obstructing the view and shutting out the horizon with its pretty southern outline of pointed summits, numerous and fantastic.
To the left, the isles of Sainte Marguerite and Saint Honorat, almost level with the water, display their surface, covered with pine trees.
And all along the great gulf, all along the tall mountains that encircle Cannes, the white villa residences seem to be sleeping in the sunlight.
You can see them from a distance, the white houses, scattered from the top to the bottom of the mountains, dotting the dark greenery with specks like snow.
Those near the water have gates opening on the wide promenade which is washed by the quiet waves.
It is one of those warm winter days when there is scarcely a breath of cool air.
Ladies are walking slowly across the sand of the avenue, followed by children rolling hoops, or chatting with gentlemen.
A young woman has just passed out through the door of her coquettish little house facing La Croisette.
She stops for a moment to gaze at the promenaders, smiles, and with an exhausted air makes her way toward an empty bench facing the sea.
Fatigued after having gone twenty paces, she sits down out of breath.
She coughs, and raises to her lips her transparent fingers as if to stop those paroxysms that exhaust her.
She gazes at the sky full of sunshine and swallows, at the zigzag summits of the Esterel over yonder, and at the sea, the blue, calm, beautiful sea, close beside her.
Everything in life will go on as before for others.
She smiles, and inhales as well as she can, with her diseased lungs, the perfumed air of the gardens.
She had been married, four years ago, to a Norman gentleman.
He was a strong young man, bearded, healthy-looking, with wide shoulders, narrow mind, and joyous disposition.
They had been united through financial motives which she knew nothing about.
She would willingly have said No.
She said Yes, with a movement of the head, in order not to thwart her father and mother.
She was a Parisian, gay, and full of the joy of living.
It was a huge stone building surrounded by tall trees of great age.
On the right, an opening in the trees presented a view of the plain, which stretched out in an unbroken level as far as the distant, farmsteads.
A cross-road passed before the gate and led to the high road three kilometres away.
Oh! she recalls everything, her arrival, her first day in her new abode, and her isolated life afterward.
When she stepped out of the carriage, she glanced at the old building, and laughingly exclaimed: “It does not look cheerful!” Her husband began to laugh in his turn, and replied: “Pooh! we get used to it!
I never feel bored in it, for my part.” That day they passed their time in embracing each other, and she did not find it too long.
The days passed one after the other in insignificant yet absorbing occupations.
She learned the value and the importance of the little things of life.
She knew that people can interest themselves in the price of eggs, which cost a few centimes more or less according to the seasons.
She went to the fields to see the men harvesting.
The brightness of the sunshine found an echo in her heart.
Her husband went out shooting.
She remained alone, without grieving, moreover, at Henry's absence.
When he returned home, her affection was especially bestowed on the dogs.
She took care of them every evening with a mother's tenderness, caressed them incessantly, gave them a thousand charming little names which she had no idea of applying to her husband.
He invariably told her all about his sport.
He described the places where he found partridges, expressed his astonishment at not having caught any hares in Joseph Ledentu's clever, or else appeared indignant at the conduct of M.
Lechapelier, of Havre, who always went along the edge of his property to shoot the game that he, Henry de Parville, had started.
She replied: “Yes, indeed! it is not right,” thinking of something else all the while.
The roads seemed like rivers of mud, the country a plain of mud, and no sound could be heard save that of water falling; no movement could be seen save the whirling flight of crows that settled down like a cloud on a field and then hurried off again.
About four o'clock, the army of dark, flying creatures came and perched in the tall beeches at the left of the chateau, emitting deafening cries.
During nearly an hour, they flew from tree top to tree top, seemed to be fighting, croaked, and made a black disturbance in the gray branches.
She gazed at them each evening with a weight at her heart, so deeply was she impressed by the lugubrious melancholy of the darkness falling on the deserted country.
She burned heaps of wood without succeeding in warming the spacious apartments reeking with humidity.
She was cold all day long, everywhere, in the drawing-room, at meals, in her own apartment.
Her husband only came in to dinner; he was always out shooting, or else he was superintending sowing the seed, tilling the soil, and all the work of the country.
He would come back jovial, and covered with mud, rubbing his hands as he exclaimed: “What wretched weather!” Or else: “A fire looks comfortable!” Or sometimes: “Well, how are you to-day?
Are you in good spirits?” He was happy, in good health, without desires, thinking of nothing save this simple, healthy, and quiet life.
About December, when the snow had come, she suffered so much from the icy-cold air of the chateau which seemed to have become chilled in passing through the centuries just as human beings become chilled with years, that she asked her husband one evening: “Look here, Henry!
I assure you that I cannot keep warm from morning till night.” At first he was stunned at this extravagant idea of introducing a furnace into his manor-house.
He gave a tremendous laugh from the bottom of his chest as he exclaimed: “A furnace here!
Ha! ha! ha! what a good joke!” She persisted: “I assure you, dear, I feel frozen; you don't feel it because you are always moving about; but all the same, I feel frozen.” He replied, still laughing: “Pooh! you'll get used to it, and besides it is excellent for the health.
We are not Parisians, damn it! to live in hot-houses.
And, besides, the spring is quite near.” About the beginning of January, a great misfortune befell her.
Her father and mother died in a carriage accident.
And her sorrow took entire possession of her mind for about six months.
The mildness of the beautiful summer days finally roused her, and she lived along in a state of sad languor until autumn.
When the cold weather returned, she was brought face to face, for the first time, with the gloomy future.
What was going to happen to her henceforth?
What expectation, what hope, could revive her heart?
A doctor who was consulted declared that she would never have children.
Sharper, more penetrating still than the year before, the cold made her suffer continually.
She stretched out her shivering hands to the big flames.
The glaring fire burned her face; but icy whiffs seemed to glide down her back and to penetrate between her skin and her underclothing.
And she shivered from head to foot.
Innumerable draughts of air appeared to have taken up their abode in the apartment, living, crafty currents of air as cruel as enemies.
She encountered them at every moment; they blew on her incessantly their perfidious and frozen hatred, now on her face, now on her hands, and now on her back.
Once more she spoke of a furnace; but her husband listened to her request as if she were asking for the moon.
The introduction of such an apparatus at Parville appeared to him as impossible as the discovery of the Philosopher's Stone.
Having been at Rouen on business one day, he brought back to his wife a dainty foot warmer made of copper, which he laughingly called a “portable furnace”; and he considered that this would prevent her henceforth from ever being cold.
Toward the end of December she understood that she could not always live like this, and she said timidly one evening at dinner: “Listen, dear!
Are we not going to spend a week or two in Paris before spring:” He was stupefied.
What odd ideas come into your head sometimes.” She faltered: “It might distract us a little.” He did not understand.
“What is it you want to distract you?
Theatres, evening parties, dinners in town?
You knew, however, when you came here, that you ought not to expect any distractions of this kind!” She saw a reproach in these words, and in the tone in which they were uttered.
She relapsed into silence.
She was timid and gentle, without resisting power and without strength of will.
In January the cold weather returned with violence.
One evening, as she watched the great black cloud of crows dispersing among the trees, she began to weep, in spite of herself.
He asked in great surprise: “What is the matter with you?” He was happy, quite happy, never having dreamed of another life or other pleasures.
He had been born and had grown up in this melancholy district.
He felt contented in his own house, at ease in body and mind.
He did not understand that one might desire incidents, have a longing for changing pleasures; he did not understand that it does not seem natural to certain beings to remain in the same place during the four seasons; he seemed not to know that spring, summer, autumn, and winter have, for multitudes of persons, fresh amusements in new places.
At last she murmured in a despairing tone: “I am—I—I am a little sad—I am a little bored.” But she was terrified at having even said so much, and added very quickly: “And, besides—I am—I am a little cold.” This last plea made him angry.
She went up to her room, for she had insisted on having a separate apartment.
She would have to be ill, to cough before he could understand what she suffered!
And she was filled with indignation, the angry indignation of a weak, timid being.
Well, she would cough; he should hear her coughing; the doctor should be called in; he should see, her husband, he should see.
She got out of bed, her legs and her feet bare, and a childish idea made her smile: “I want a furnace, and I must have it.
I shall cough so much that he'll have to put one in the house.” And she sat down in a chair in her nightdress.
She shivered, but she did not catch cold.
Then she resolved on a bold expedient.
She noiselessly left her room, descended the stairs, and opened the gate into the garden.
She abruptly thrust forward her bare foot, and plunged it into the icy, fleecy snow.
A sensation of cold, painful as a wound, mounted to her heart.
However, she stretched out the other leg, and began to descend the steps slowly.
Then she advanced through the grass saying to herself: “I'll go as far as the pine trees.” She walked with quick steps, out of breath, gasping every time she plunged her foot into the snow.
Before going in, however, she sat down in that icy fleece, and even took up several handfuls to rub on her chest.
Next day she was coughing and could not get up.
She had inflammation of the lungs.
She became delirious, and in her delirium she asked for a furnace.
The doctor insisted on having one put in.
Henry yielded, but with visible annoyance.
Her lungs were seriously affected, and those about her feared for her life.
She came to Cannes, made the acquaintance of the sun, loved the sea, and breathed the perfume of orange blossoms.
Then, in the spring, she returned north.
But she now lived with the fear of being cured, with the fear of the long winters of Normandy; and as soon as she was better she opened her window by night and recalled the sweet shores of the Mediterranean.
She unfolds a newspaper which she has not already opened, and reads this heading: “The first snow in Paris.” She shivers and then smiles.
She looks across at the Esterel, which is becoming rosy in the rays of the setting sun.
And then she returned to the house with slow steps, only stopping to cough, for she had remained out too long and she was cold, a little cold.
She opens it, still smiling, and she reads: “MY DEAR LOVE: I hope you are well, and that you do not regret too much our beautiful country.
For some days last we have had a good frost, which presages snow.
Her right hand, which holds the letter, falls slowly on her lap, while she raises her left hand to her mouth, as if to calm the obstinate cough which is racking her chest.
SUNDAYS OF A BOURGEOIS PREPARATIONS FOR THE EXCURSION M.
Patissot, born in Paris, after having failed in his examinations at the College Henri IV., like many others, had entered the government service through the influence of one of his aunts, who kept a tobacco store where the head of one of the departments bought his provisions.
He advanced very slowly, and would, perhaps, have died a fourth-class clerk without the aid of a kindly Providence, which sometimes watches over our destiny.
He is today fifty-two years old, and it is only at this age that he is beginning to explore, as a tourist, all that part of France which lies between the fortifications and the provinces.
The story of his advance might be useful to many employees, just as the tale of his excursions may be of value to many Parisians who will take them as a model for their own outings, and will thus, through his example, avoid certain mishaps which occurred to him.
Through a peculiar trait of his character he was unpopular with all his superiors, who let him languish in the eternal and hopeless expectation of the clerk's ideal, an increase of salary.
Nevertheless he worked; but he did not know how to make himself appreciated.
His self-respect consisted in never bowing to his superiors in a low and servile manner, as did, according to him, certain of his colleagues, whom he would not mention.
He added that his frankness embarrassed many people, for, like all the rest, he protested against injustice and the favoritism shown to persons entirely foreign to the bureaucracy.
But his indignant voice never passed beyond the little cage where he worked.
First as a government clerk, then as a Frenchman and finally as a man who believed in order he would adhere to whatever government was established, having an unbounded reverence for authority, except for that of his chiefs.
From his habit of observing the sovereign he did as many others do; he imitated the way he trimmed his beard or arranged his hair, the cut of his clothes, his walk, his mannerisms.
Indeed, how many men in each country seemed to be the living images of the head of the government!
Perhaps he vaguely resembled Napoleon III., but his hair was black; therefore he dyed it, and then the likeness was complete; and when he met another gentleman in the street also imitating the imperial countenance he was jealous and looked at him disdainfully.
This need of imitation soon became his hobby, and, having heard an usher at the Tuilleries imitate the voice of the emperor, he also acquired the same intonations and studied slowness.
He thus became so much like his model that they might easily have been mistaken for each other, and certain high dignitaries were heard to remark that they found it unseemly and even vulgar; the matter was mentioned to the prime minister, who ordered that the employee should appear before him.
But at the sight of him he began to laugh and repeated two or three times: “That's funny, really funny!” This was repeated, and the following day Patissot's immediate superior recommended that his subordinate receive an increase of salary of three hundred francs.
He received it immediately.
From that time on his promotions came regularly, thanks to his ape-like faculty of imitation.
The presentiment that some high honor might come to him some day caused his chiefs to speak to him with deference.
When the Republic was proclaimed it was a disaster for him.
He felt lost, done for, and, losing his head, he stopped dyeing his hair, shaved his face clean and had his hair cut short, thus acquiring a paternal and benevolent expression which could not compromise him in any way.
Then his chiefs took revenge for the long time during which he had imposed upon them, and, having all turned Republican through an instinct of self preservation, they cut down his salary and delayed his promotion.
He, too, changed his opinions.
But the Republic not being a palpable and living person whom one can resemble, and the presidents succeeding each other with rapidity, he found himself plunged in the greatest embarrassment, in terrible distress, and, after an unsuccessful imitation of his last ideal, M.
Thiers, he felt a check put on all his attempts at imitation.
He needed a new manifestation of his personality.
He searched for a long time; then, one morning, he arrived at the office wearing a new hat which had on the side a small red, white and blue rosette.
His colleagues were astounded; they laughed all that day, the next day, all the week, all the month.
But the seriousness of his demeanor at last disconcerted them, and once more his superiors became anxious.
Was it a simple manifestation of patriotism, or an affirmation of his allegiance to the Republic, or perhaps the badge of some powerful association?
But to wear it so persistently he must surely have some powerful and hidden protection.
It would be well to be on one's guard, especially as he received all pleasantries with unruffled calmness.
After that he was treated with respect, and his sham courage saved him; he was appointed head clerk on the first of January, 1880.
He hated noise and bustle, and because of this love of rest and quiet he had remained a bachelor.
He spent his Sundays reading tales of adventure and ruling guide lines which he afterward offered to his colleagues.
In his whole existence he had only taken three vacations of a week each, when he was changing his quarters.
But sometimes, on a holiday, he would leave by an excursion train for Dieppe or Havre in order to elevate his mind by the inspiring sight of the sea.
He was full of that common sense which borders on stupidity.
For a long time he had been living quietly, with economy, temperate through prudence, chaste by temperament, when suddenly he was assailed by a terrible apprehension.
One evening in the street he suddenly felt an attack of dizziness which made him fear a stroke of apoplexy.
He hastened to a physician and for five francs obtained the following prescription: M.
X-, fifty-five years old, bachelor, clerk.
Full-blooded, danger of apoplexy.
Cold-water applications, moderate nourishment, plenty of exercise.
Patissot was greatly distressed, and for a whole month, in his office, he kept a wet towel wrapped around his head like a turban while the water continually dripped on his work, which he would have to do over again.
Every once in a while he would read the prescription over, probably in the hope of finding some hidden meaning, of penetrating into the secret thought of the physician, and also of discovering some forms of exercise which, might perhaps make him immune from apoplexy.
Then he consulted his friends, showing them the fateful paper.
He immediately hunted up an instructor, and, on the first day, he received a punch in the nose which immediately took away all his ambition in this direction.
For a whole week his mind was occupied with thoughts of the equipment which you need for these excursions; and on Sunday, the 30th of May, he began his preparations.
After reading all the extraordinary advertisements which poor, blind and halt beggars distribute on the street corners, he began to visit the stores with the intention of looking about him only and of buying later on.
First of all, he visited a so-called American shoe store, where heavy travelling shoes were shown him.
The clerk brought out a kind of ironclad contrivance, studded with spikes like a harrow, which he claimed to be made from Rocky Mountain bison skin.
He was so carried away with them that he would willingly have bought two pair, but one was sufficient.
He next invested in a pair of corduroy trousers, such as carpenters wear, and a pair of oiled canvas leggings.
Then he needed a knapsack for his provisions, a telescope so as to recognize villages perched on the slope of distant hills, and finally, a government survey map to enable him to find his way about without asking the peasants toiling in the fields.
Lastly, in order more comfortably to stand the heat, he decided to purchase a light alpaca jacket offered by the famous firm of Raminau, according to their advertisement, for the modest sum of six francs and fifty centimes.
He went to this store and was welcomed by a distinguished-looking young man with a marvellous head of hair, nails as pink as those of a lady and a pleasant smile.
It did not correspond with the glowing style of the advertisement.
Patissot examined it and asked the price.
“Twelve francs fifty.” It was very tempting, but before deciding, he once more questioned the big young man, who was observing him attentively.
Do you guarantee it?” “Oh! certainly, monsieur, it is quite good!
Yes, it's really quite good, but you understand that there are goods and goods.
It's excellent for the price.
Naturally a twenty-five-franc coat is much better.
For twenty-five francs you get a superior quality, as strong as linen, and which wears even better.
The color never fades, and it does not turn red in the sunlight.
It is the warmest and lightest material out.” He unfolded his wares, holding them up, shaking them, crumpling and stretching them in order to show the excellent quality of the cloth.
He talked on convincingly, dispelling all hesitation by words and gesture.
Patissot was convinced; he bought the coat.
The pleasant salesman, still talking, tied up the bundle and continued praising the value of the purchase.
When it was paid for he was suddenly silent.
He bowed with a superior air, and, holding the door open, he watched his customer disappear, both arms filled with bundles and vainly trying to reach his hat to bow.
Patissot returned home and carefully studied the map.
He slipped and fell, promising himself to be more careful in the future.
Then he spread out all his purchases on a chair and looked at them for a long time.
He went to sleep with this thought: “Isn't it strange that I didn't think before of taking an excursion to the country?” During the whole week Patissot worked without ambition.
He was dreaming of the outing which he had planned for the following Sunday, and he was seized by a sudden longing for the country, a desire of growing tender over nature, this thirst for rustic scenes which overwhelms the Parisians in spring time.
Only one person gave him any attention; it was a silent old copying clerk named Boivin, nicknamed Boileau.
He himself lived in the country and had a little garden which he cultivated carefully; his needs were small, and he was perfectly happy, so they said.
Patissot was now able to understand his tastes and the similarity of their ideals made them immediately fast friends.
Old man Boivin said to him: “Do I like fishing, monsieur?
Why, it's the delight of my life!” Then Patissot questioned him with deep interest.
Boivin named all the fish who frolicked under this dirty water—and Patissot thought he could see them.
Boivin told about the different hooks, baits, spots and times suitable for each kind.
And Patissot felt himself more like a fisherman than Boivin himself.
They decided that the following Sunday they would meet for the opening of the season for the edification of Patissot, who was delighted to have found such an experienced instructor.
“In this confusion follow or neglect all favorable signs, and just go on fishing; you will march to victory!” In order to catch fish of all sizes, he bought three well-perfected poles, made to be used as a cane in the city, which, on the river, could be transformed into a fishing rod by a simple jerk.
He bought some number fifteen hooks for gudgeon, number twelve for bream, and with his number seven he expected to fill his basket with carp.
He bought no earth worms because he was sure of finding them everywhere; but he laid in a provision of sand worms.
He had a jar full of them, and in the evening he watched them with interest.
The hideous creatures swarmed in their bath of bran as they do in putrid meat.
Patissot wished to practice baiting his hook.
Twenty times he repeated this without success, and he might have continued all night had he not feared to exhaust his supply of vermin.
The station was full of people equipped with fishing lines.
Some, like Patissot's, looked like simple bamboo canes; others, in one piece, pointed their slender ends to the skies.
When the train started fishing rods could be seen sticking out of all the windows and doors, giving to the train the appearance of a huge, bristly caterpillar winding through the fields.
Everybody got off at Courbevoie and rushed for the stage for Bezons.
A crowd of fishermen crowded on top of the coach, holding their rods in their hands, giving the vehicle the appearance of a porcupine.
All along the road men were travelling in the same direction as though on a pilgrimage to an unknown Jerusalem.
They were carrying those long, slender sticks resembling those carried by the faithful returning from Palestine.
A tin box on a strap was fastened to their backs.
At Bezons the river appeared.
People were lined along bath banks, men in frock coats, others in duck suits, others in blouses, women, children and even young girls of marriageable age; all were fishing.
Patissot started for the dam where his friend Boivin was waiting for him.
He had just made the acquaintance of a big, fat man of about fifty, who seemed very strong and whose skin was tanned.
All three hired a big boat and lay off almost under the fall of the dam, where the fish are most plentiful.
Boivin was immediately ready.
He baited his line and threw it out, and then sat motionless, watching the little float with extraordinary concentration.
The fat gentleman threw out his well-baited hooks, put his line down beside him, filled his pipe, lit it, crossed his arms, and, without another glance at the cork, he watched the water flow by.
Patissot once more began trying to stick sand worms on his hooks.
After about five minutes of this occupation he called to Boivin; “Monsieur Boivin, would you be so kind as to help me put these creatures on my hook?
Try as I will, I can't seem to succeed.” Boivin raised his head: “Please don't disturb me, Monsieur Patissot; we are not here for pleasure!” However, he baited the line, which Patissot then threw out, carefully imitating all the motions of his friend.
The boat was tossing wildly, shaken by the waves, and spun round like a top by the current, although anchored at both ends.
Patissot, absorbed in the sport, felt a vague kind of uneasiness; he was uncomfortably heavy and somewhat dizzy.
Little Boivin, very nervous, was gesticulating and shaking his head in despair.
Patissot was as sad as though some disaster had overtaken him.
The fat gentleman alone, still motionless, was quietly smoking without paying any attention to his line.
At last Patissot, disgusted, turned toward him and said in a mournful voice: “They are not biting, are they?” He quietly replied: “Of course not!” Patissot surprised, looked at him.
Never?” The fat man, still smoking like a factory chimney, let out the following words, which completely upset his neighbor: “It would bother me a lot if they did bite.
I don't come here to fish; I come because I'm very comfortable here; I get shaken up as though I were at sea.
If I take a line along, it's only to do as others do.” Monsieur Patissot, on the other hand, did not feel at all well.
His discomfort, at first vague, kept increasing, and finally took on a definite form.
He felt, indeed, as though he were being tossed by the sea, and he was suffering from seasickness.
After the first attack had calmed down, he proposed leaving, but Boivin grew so furious that they almost came to blows.
The fat man, moved by pity, rowed the boat back, and, as soon as Patissot had recovered from his seasickness, they bethought themselves of luncheon.
Two restaurants presented themselves.
One of them, very small, looked like a beer garden, and was patronized by the poorer fishermen.
The other one, which bore the imposing name of “Linden Cottage,” looked like a middle-class residence and was frequented by the aristocracy of the rod.
The two owners, born enemies, watched each other with hatred across a large field, which separated them, and where the white house of the dam keeper and of the inspector of the life-saving department stood out against the green grass.
Moreover, these two officials disagreed, one of them upholding the beer garden and the other one defending the Elms, and the internal feuds which arose in these three houses reproduced the whole history of mankind.
Boivin, who knew the beer garden, wished to go there, exclaiming: “The food is very good, and it isn't expensive; you'll see.
Anyhow, Monsieur Patissot, you needn't expect to get me tipsy the way you did last Sunday.
My wife was furious, you know; and she has sworn never to forgive you!” The fat gentleman declared that he would only eat at the Elms, because it was an excellent place and the cooking was as good as in the best restaurants in Paris.
“Do as you wish,” declared Boivin; “I am going where I am accustomed to go.” He left.
Patissot, displeased at his friend's actions, followed the fat gentleman.
They ate together, exchanged ideas, discussed opinions and found that they were made for each other.
After the meal everyone started to fish again, but the two new friends left together.
Following along the banks, they stopped near the railroad bridge and, still talking, they threw their lines in the water.
The fish still refused to bite, but Patissot was now making the best of it.
A family was approaching.
The father, whose whiskers stamped him as a judge, was holding an extraordinarily long rod; three boys of different sizes were carrying poles of different lengths, according to age; and the mother, who was very stout, gracefully manoeuvred a charming rod with a ribbon tied to the handle.
The father bowed and asked: “Is this spot good, gentlemen?” Patissot was going to speak, when his friend answered: “Fine!” The whole family smiled and settled down beside the fishermen.
The Patissot was seized with a wild desire to catch a fish, just one, any kind, any size, in order to win the consideration of these people; so he began to handle his rod as he had seen Boivin do in the morning.
He would let the cork follow the current to the end of the line, jerk the hooks out of the water, make them describe a large circle in the air and throw them out again a little higher up.
He had even, as he thought, caught the knack of doing this movement gracefully.
He had just jerked his line out rapidly when he felt it caught in something behind him.
He perceived, caught on one of his hooks, and describing in the air a curve like a meteor, a magnificent hat which he placed right in the middle of the river.
He turned around, bewildered, dropping his pole, which followed the hat down the stream, while the fat gentleman, his new friend, lay on his back and roared with laughter.
The lady, hatless and astounded, choked with anger; her husband was outraged and demanded the price of the hat, and Patissot paid about three times its value.
Then the family departed in a very dignified manner.
Patissot took another rod, and, until nightfall, he gave baths to sand worms.
His neighbor was sleeping peacefully on the grass.
Then Patissot withdrew his line, gave a cry and sat down hard from astonishment.
Patissot was filled with a boundless, triumphant joy; he wished to have the fish fried for himself alone.
During the dinner the friends grew still more intimate.
He learned that the fat gentleman lived at Argenteuil and had been sailing boats for thirty years without losing interest in the sport.
He accepted to take luncheon with him the following Sunday and to take a sail in his friend's clipper, Plongeon.
He became so interested in the conversation that he forgot all about his catch.
He did not remember it until after the coffee, and he demanded that it be brought him.
It was alone in the middle of a platter, and looked like a yellow, twisted match, But he ate it with pride and relish, and at night, on the omnibus, he told his neighbors that he had caught fourteen pounds of fish during the day.
TWO CELEBRITIES Monsieur Patissot had promised his friend, the boating man, that he would spend the following Sunday with him.
An unforeseen occurrence changed his plan.
One evening, on the boulevard, he met one of his cousins whom he saw but very seldom.
He was a pleasant journalist, well received in all classes of society, who offered to show Patissot many interesting things.
“What are you going to do next Sunday?” “I'm going boating at Argenteuil.” “Come on!
I'll introduce you to two celebrities.
On the way we'll call on Meissonier, at his place in Poissy; then we'll walk over to Medan, where Zola lives.
I have been commissioned to obtain his next novel for our newspaper.” Patissot, wild with joy, accepted the invitation.
He even bought a new frock coat, as his own was too much worn to make a good appearance.
He was terribly afraid of saying something foolish either to the artist or to the man of letters, as do people who speak of an art which they have never professed.
He mentioned his fears to his cousin, who laughed and answered: “Pshaw!
Just pay them compliments, nothing but compliments, always compliments; in that way, if you say anything foolish it will be overlooked.
Do you know Meissonier's paintings?” “I should say I do.” “Have you read the Rougon-Macquart series?” “From first to last.” “That's enough.
Mention a painting from time to time, speak of a novel here and there and add: “'Superb!
Delightful technique!
Wonderfully powerful!' In that way you can always get along.
I know that those two are very blase about everything, but admiration always pleases an artist.” Sunday morning they left for Poissy.
Just a few steps from the station, at the end of the church square, they found Meissonier's property.
After passing through a low door, painted red, which led into a beautiful alley of vines, the journalist stopped and, turning toward his companion, asked: “What is your idea of Meissonier?” Patissot hesitated.
At last he decided: “A little man, well groomed, clean shaven, a soldierly appearance.” The other smiled: “All right, come along.” A quaint building in the form of a chalet appeared to the left; and to the right side, almost opposite, was the main house.
It was a strange-looking building, where there was a mixture of everything, a mingling of Gothic fortress, manor, villa, hut, residence, cathedral, mosque, pyramid, a, weird combination of Eastern and Western architecture.
The style was complicated enough to set a classical architect crazy, and yet there was something whimsical and pretty about it.
It had been invented and built under the direction of the artist.
They went in; a collection of trunks encumbered a little parlor.
A little man appeared, dressed in a jumper.
The striking thing about him was his beard.
He bowed to the journalist, and said: “My dear sir, I hope that you will excuse me; I only returned yesterday, and everything is all upset here.
Please be seated.” The other refused, excusing himself: “My dear master, I only dropped in to pay my respects while passing by.” Patissot, very much embarrassed, was bowing at every word of his friend's, as though moving automatically, and he murmured, stammering: “What a su—su—superb property!” The artist, flattered, smiled, and suggested visiting it.
He led them first to a little pavilion of feudal aspect, where his former studio was.
Then they crossed a parlor, a dining-room, a vestibule full of beautiful works of art, of beautiful Beauvais, Gobelin and Flanders tapestries.
But the strange external luxury of ornamentation became, inside, a revel of immense stairways.
A magnificent grand stairway, a secret stairway in one tower, a servants' stairway in another, stairways everywhere!
Patissot, by chance, opened a door and stepped back astonished.
It was a veritable temple, this place of which respectable people only mention the name in English, an original and charming sanctuary in exquisite taste, fitted up like a pagoda, and the decoration of which must certainly have caused a great effort.
But the journalist insisted on leaving; and, with many thanks, he took leave of the master: As they left they met a gardener; Patissot asked him: “Has Monsieur Meissonier owned this place for a long time?” The man answered: “Oh, monsieur! that needs explaining.
It must have cost him at least two millions!” As Patissot left he was seized with an immense respect for this man, not on account of his success, glory or talent, but for putting so much money into a whim, because the bourgeois deprive themselves of all pleasure in order to hoard money.
After crossing Poissy, they struck out on foot along the road to Medan.
The road first followed the Seine, which is dotted with charming islands at this place.
Then they went up a hill and crossed the pretty village of Villaines, went down a little; and finally reached the neighborhood inhabited by the author of the Rougon-Macquart series.
A pretty old church with two towers appeared on the left.
They walked along a short distance, and a passing farmer directed them to the writer's dwelling.
Before entering, they examined the house.
A large building, square and new, very high, seemed, as in the fable of the mountain and the mouse, to have given birth to a tiny little white house, which nestled near it.
This little house was the original dwelling, and had been built by the former owner.
An enormous dog, a cross between a Saint Bernard and a Newfoundland, began to howl so terribly that Patissot felt a vague desire to retrace his steps.
But a servant ran forward, calmed “Bertrand,” opened the door, and took the journalist's card in order to carry it to his master.
“I hope that he will receive us!” murmured Patissot.
“It would be too bad if we had come all this distance not to see him.” His companion smiled and answered: “Never fear, I have a plan for getting in.” But the servant, who had returned, simply asked them to follow him.
They entered the new building, and Patissot, who was quite enthusiastic, was panting as he climbed a stairway of ancient style which led to the second story.
At the same time he was trying to picture to himself this man whose glorious name echoes at present in all corners of the earth, amid the exasperated hatred of some, the real or feigned indignation of society, the envious scorn of several of his colleagues, the respect of a mass of readers, and the frenzied admiration of a great number.
He expected to see a kind of bearded giant, of awe-inspiring aspect, with a thundering voice and an appearance little prepossessing at first.
The door opened on a room of uncommonly large dimensions, broad and high, lighted by an enormous window looking out over the valley.
Old tapestries covered the walls; on the left, a monumental fireplace, flanked by two stone men, could have burned a century-old oak in one day.
An immense table littered with books, papers and magazines stood in the middle of this apartment so vast and grand that it first engrossed the eye, and the attention was only afterward drawn to the man, stretched out when they entered on an Oriental divan where twenty persons could have slept.
He took a few steps toward them, bowed, motioned to two seats, and turned back to his divan, where he sat with one leg drawn under him.
A book lay open beside him, and in his right hand he held an ivory paper-cutter, the end of which he observed from time to time with one eye, closing the other with the persistency of a near-sighted person.
While the journalist explained the purpose of the visit, and the writer listened to him without yet answering, at times staring at him fixedly, Patissot, more and more embarrassed, was observing this celebrity.
His head (very similar to those found in many Italian paintings of the sixteenth century), without being beautiful in the plastic sense of the word, gave an impression of great strength of character, power and intelligence.
Short hair stood up straight on the high, well-developed forehead.
A straight nose stopped short, as if cut off suddenly above the upper lip which was covered with a black mustache; over the whole chin was a closely-cropped beard.
The dark, often ironical look was piercing, one felt that behind it there was a mind always actively at work observing people, interpreting words, analyzing gestures, uncovering the heart.
This strong, round head was appropriate to his name, quick and short, with the bounding resonance of the two vowels.
When the journalist had fully explained his proposition, the writer answered him that he did not wish to make any definite arrangement, that he would, however, think the matter over, that his plans were not yet sufficiently defined.
It was a dismissal, and the two men, a little confused, arose.
A desire seized Patissot; he wished this well-known person to say something to him, anything, some word which he could repeat to his colleagues; and, growing bold, he stammered: “Oh, monsieur!
If you knew how I appreciate your works!” The other bowed, but answered nothing.
Patissot became very bold and continued: “It is a great honor for me to speak to you to-day.” The writer once more bowed, but with a stiff and impatient look.
Patissot noticed it, and, completely losing his head, he added as he retreated: “What a su—su —superb property!” Then, in the heart of the man of letters, the landowner awoke, and, smiling, he opened the window to show them the immense stretch of view.
An endless horizon broadened out on all sides, giving a view of Triel, Pisse-Fontaine, Chanteloup, all the heights of Hautrie, and the Seine as far as the eye could see.
The two visitors, delighted, congratulated him, and the house was opened to them.
They saw everything, down to the dainty kitchen, whose walls and even ceilings were covered with porcelain tiles ornamented with blue designs, which excited the wonder of the farmers.
“How did you happen to buy this place?” asked the journalist.
The novelist explained that, while looking for a cottage to hire for the summer, he had found the little house, which was for sale for several thousand francs, a song, almost nothing.
He immediately bought it.
“But everything that you have added must have cost you a good deal!” The writer smiled, and answered: “Yes, quite a little.” The two men left.
He even allowed people to think that he had taken luncheon with one and dinner with the other.
BEFORE THE CELEBRATION The celebration is approaching and preliminary quivers are already running through the streets, just as the ripples disturb the water preparatory to a storm.
The shops, draped with flags, display a variety of gay-colored bunting materials, and the dry-goods people deceive one about the three colors as grocers do about the weight of candles.
Little by little, hearts warm up to the matter; people speak about it in the street after dinner; ideas are exchanged: “What a celebration it will be, my friend; what a celebration!” “Have you heard the news?
And the foreigners dressed like monkeys, English women like giraffes, the water-carrier, cleaned up for the occasion, and the innumerable phalanx of little bourgeois, inoffensive little people, amused at everything.
All this crowding and pressing, the sweat and dust, and the turmoil, all these eddies of human flesh, trampling of corns beneath the feet of your neighbors, this city all topsy-turvy, these vile odors, these frantic efforts toward nothing, the breath of millions of people, all redolent of garlic, give to Monsieur Patissot all the joy which it is possible for his heart to hold.
After reading the proclamation of the mayor on the walls of his district he had made his preparations.
This bit of prose said: I wish to call your attention particularly to the part of individuals in this celebration.
Decorate your homes, illuminate your windows.
Get together, open up a subscription in order to give to your houses and to your street a more brilliant and more artistic appearance than the neighboring houses and streets.
Then Monsieur Patissot tried to imagine how he could give to his home an artistic appearance.
One serious obstacle stood in the way.
His only window looked out on a courtyard, a narrow, dark shaft, where only the rats could have seen his three Japanese lanterns.
On the first floor of his house lived a rich man, a nobleman and a royalist, whose coachman, also a reactionary, occupied a garret-room on the sixth floor, facing the street.
Monsieur Patissot supposed that by paying (every conscience can be bought) he could obtain the use of the room for the day.
He proposed five francs to this citizen of the whip for the use of his room from noon till midnight.
The offer was immediately accepted.
Then he began to busy himself with the decorations.
Three flags, four lanterns, was that enough to give to this box an artistic appearance—to express all the noble feelings of his soul?
But, notwithstanding diligent search and nightly meditation, Monsieur Patissot could think of nothing else.
He consulted his neighbors, who were surprised at the question; he questioned his colleagues—every one had bought lanterns and flags, some adding, for the occasion, red, white and blue bunting.
Then he began to rack his brains for some original idea.
He frequented the cafes, questioning the patrons; they lacked imagination.
A respectable-looking gentleman was smoking a cigar beside him, a little farther away a laborer was smoking his pipe upside down, near the driver two rough fellows were joking, and clerks of every description were going to business for three cents.
Before the stores stacks of flags were resplendent under the rising sun.
Patissot turned to his neighbor.
“It is going to be a fine celebration,” he said.
The gentleman looked at him sideways and answered in a haughty manner: “That makes no difference to me!” “You are not going to take part in it?” asked the surprised clerk.
The other shook his head disdainfully and declared: “They make me tired with their celebrations!
Whose celebration is it?
I do not recognize this government, monsieur!” But Patissot, as government employee, took on his superior manner, and answered in a stern voice: “Monsieur, the Republic is the government.” His neighbor was not in the least disturbed, and, pushing his hands down in his pockets, he exclaimed: “Well, and what then?
It makes no difference to me.
Whether it's for the Republic or something else, I don't care!
What I want, monsieur, is to know my government.
I saw Charles X. and adhered to him, monsieur; I saw Louis-Philippe and adhered to him, monsieur; I saw Napoleon and adhered to him; but I have never seen the Republic.” Patissot, still serious, answered: “The Republic, monsieur, is represented by its president!” The other grumbled: “Well, them, show him to me!” Patissot shrugged his shoulders.
“Every one can see him; he's not shut up in a closet!” Suddenly the fat man grew angry.
“Excuse me, monsieur, he cannot be seen.
I have personally tried more than a hundred times, monsieur.
A passer-by informed me that he was playing billiards in the cafe opposite; I went to the cafe opposite; he was not there.
I had been promised that he would go to Melun for the convention; I went to Melun, I did not see him.
I did not even see Monsieur Gambetta, and I do not know a single deputy.” He was, growing excited: “A government, monsieur, is made to be seen; that's what it's there for, and for nothing else.
One must be able to know that on such and such a day at such an hour the government will pass through such and such a street.
Then one goes there and is satisfied.” Patissot, now calm, was enjoying his arguments.
“It is true,” he said, “that it is agreeable to know the people by whom one is governed.” The gentleman continued more gently: “Do you know how I would manage the celebration?
Well, monsieur, I would have a procession of gilded cars, like the chariots used at the crowning of kings; in them I would parade all the members of the government, from the president to the deputies, throughout Paris all day long.
In that manner, at least, every one would know by sight the personnel of the state.” But one of the toughs near the coachman turned around, exclaiming: “And the fatted ox, where would you put him?” A laugh ran round the two benches.
Patissot understood the objection, and murmured: “It might not perhaps be very dignified.” The gentleman thought the matter over and admitted it.
“Then,” he said, “I would place them in view some place, so that every one could see them without going out of his way; on the Triumphal Arch at the Place de l'Etoile, for instance; and I would have the whole population pass before them.
That would be very imposing.” Once more the tough turned round and said: “You'd have to take telescopes to see their faces.” The gentleman did not answer; he continued: “It's just like the presentation of the flags!
There ought to be some pretext, a mimic war ought to be organized, and the banners would be awarded to the troops as a reward.
I had an idea about which I wrote to the minister; but he has not deigned to answer me.
As the taking of the Bastille has been chosen for the date of the national celebration, a reproduction of this event might be made; there would be a pasteboard Bastille, fixed up by a scene-painter and concealing within its walls the whole Column of July.
Then, monsieur, the troop would attack.
That would be a magnificent spectacle as well as a lesson, to see the army itself overthrow the ramparts of tyranny.
Then this Bastille would be set fire to and from the midst of the flames would appear the Column with the genius of Liberty, symbol of a new order and of the freedom of the people.” This time every one was listening to him and finding his idea excellent.
An old gentleman exclaimed: “That is a great idea, monsieur, which does you honor.
It is to be regretted that the government did not adopt it.” A young man declared that actors ought to recite the “Iambes” of Barbier through the streets in order to teach the people art and liberty simultaneously.
These propositions excited general enthusiasm.
From a passing hand-organ a few strains of the Marseillaise were heard; the laborer started the song, and everybody joined in, roaring the chorus.
Monsieur Patissot was bawling at the top of his lungs, and the passengers inside, frightened, were wondering what hurricane had struck them.
At last they stopped, and Monsieur Patissot, judging his neighbor to be a man of initiative, consulted him about the preparations which he expected to make: “Lanterns and flags are all right,”' said Patissot; “but I prefer something better.” The other thought for a long time, but found nothing.
Then, in despair, the clerk bought three flags and four lanterns.
AN EXPERIMENT IN LOVE Many poets think that nature is incomplete without women, and hence, doubtless, come all the flowery comparisons which, in their songs, make our natural companion in turn a rose, a violet, a tulip, or something of that order.
The need of tenderness which seizes us at dusk, when the evening mist begins to roll in from the hills, and when all the perfumes of the earth intoxicate us, is but imperfectly satisfied by lyric invocations.
Monsieur Patissot, like all others, was seized with a wild desire for tenderness, for sweet kisses exchanged along a path where sunshine steals in at times, for the pressure of a pair of small hands, for a supple waist bending under his embrace.
He began to look at love as an unbounded pleasure, and, in his hours of reverie, he thanked the Great Unknown for having put so much charm into the caresses of human beings.
But he needed a companion, and he did not know where to find one.
There he saw a complete assortment.
He was greatly perplexed to choose between them, for the desires of his heart were chiefly composed of poetic impulses, and poetry did not seem to be the strong point of these young ladies with penciled eyebrows who smiled at him in such a disturbing manner, showing the enamel of their false teeth.
At last his choice fell on a young beginner who seemed poor and timid and whose sad look seemed to announce a nature easily influenced by poetry.
He made an appointment with her for the following day at nine o'clock at the Saint-Lazare station.
She was a tall, red-haired girl, patriotically dressed in three colors, and covered by an immense tunnel hat, of which her head occupied the centre.
Monsieur Patissot, a little disappointed, nevertheless accepted this substitute.
They left for Maisons-Laffite, where regattas and a grand Venetian festival had been announced.
She laughed with a shrillness which almost shattered the windows, familiarly calling her companion “My big darling.” Shame overwhelmed Patissot, who as a government employee, had to observe a certain amount of decorum.
But Octavie stopped talking, glancing at her neighbors, seized with the overpowering desire which haunts all women of a certain class to make the acquaintance of respectable women.
After about five minutes she thought she had found an opening, and, drawing from her pocket a Gil-Blas, she politely offered it to one of the amazed ladies, who declined, shaking her head.
Then the big, red- haired girl began saying things with a double meaning, speaking of women who are stuck up without being any better than the others; sometimes she would let out a vulgar word which acted like a bomb exploding amid the icy dignity of the passengers.
Patissot immediately wished to gain the shady nooks of the park, hoping that the melancholy of the forest would quiet the ruffled temper of his companion.
But an entirely different effect resulted.
As soon as she was amid the leaves and grass she began to sing at the top of her lungs snatches from operas which had stuck in her frivolous mind, warbling and trilling, passing from “Robert le Diable” to the “Muette,” lingering especially on a sentimental love-song, whose last verses she sang in a voice as piercing as a gimlet.
Then suddenly she grew hungry.
Patissot, who was still awaiting the hoped-for tenderness, tried in vain to retain her.
Then she grew angry, exclaiming: “I am not here for a dull time, am I?” He had to take her to the Petit-Havre restaurant, which was near the place where the regatta was to be held.
She ordered an endless luncheon, a succession of dishes substantial enough to feed a regiment.
Then, unable to wait, she called for relishes.
A box of sardines was brought; she started in on it as though she intended to swallow the box itself.
But when she had eaten two or three of the little oily fish she declared that she was no longer hungry and that she wished to see the preparations for the race.
Patissot, in despair and in his turn seized with hunger, absolutely refused to move.
She started off alone, promising to return in time for the dessert.
He began to eat in lonely silence, not knowing how to lead this rebellious nature to the realization of his dreams.
She had found some friends, a troop of boatmen, in scanty garb, sunburned to the tips of their ears, and gesticulating, who were loudly arranging the details of the race in front of the house of Fourmaise, the builder.
Two respectable-looking gentlemen, probably the judges, were listening attentively.
As soon as she saw Patissot, Octavie, who was leaning on the tanned arm of a strapping fellow who probably had more muscle than brains, whispered a few words in his ears.
He answered: “That's an agreement.” She returned to the clerk full of joy, her eyes sparkling, almost caressing.
Pleased to see her so charming, he gave in to this new whim and procured a boat.
But she obstinately refused to go to the races, notwithstanding Patissot's wishes.
“I had rather be alone with you, darling.” His heart thrilled.
An old dilapidated mill, whose worm-eaten wheels hung over the water, stood with its two arches across a little arm of the river.
Slowly they passed beneath it, and, when they were on the other side, they noticed before them a delightful little stretch of river, shaded by great trees which formed an arch over their heads.
The little stream flowed along, winding first to the right and then to the left, continually revealing new scenes, broad fields on one side and on the other side a hill covered with cottages.
They passed before a bathing establishment almost entirely hidden by the foliage, a charming country spot where gentlemen in clean gloves and beribboned ladies displayed all the ridiculous awkwardness of elegant people in the country.
She cried joyously: “Later on we will take a dip there.” Farther on, in a kind of bay, she wished to stop, coaxing: “Come here, honey, right close to me.” She put her arm around his neck and, leaning her head on his shoulder, she murmured: “How nice it is!
How delightful it is on the water!” Patissot was reveling in happiness.
He was thinking of those foolish boatmen who, without ever feeling the penetrating charm of the river banks and the delicate grace of the reeds, row along out of breath, perspiring and tired out, from the tavern where they take luncheon to the tavern where they take dinner.
He was so comfortable that he fell asleep.
He called, but no one answered.
Anxious, he climbed up on the side of the river, fearing that some accident might have happened.
Then, in the distance, coming in his direction, he saw a long, slender gig which four oarsmen as black as negroes were driving through the water like an arrow.
It came nearer, skimming over the water; a woman was holding the tiller.
In order to regulate the rhythm of the stroke, she was singing in her shrill voice a boating song, which she interrupted for a minute as she got in front of Patissot.
Then, throwing him a kiss, she cried: “You big goose!” A DINNER AND SOME OPINIONS On the occasion of the national celebration Monsieur Antoine Perdrix, chief of Monsieur Patissot's department, was made a knight of the Legion of Honor.
He had been in service for thirty years under preceding governments, and for ten years under the present one.
His employees, although grumbling a little at being thus rewarded in the person of their chief, thought it wise, nevertheless, to offer him a cross studded with paste diamonds.
The new knight, in turn, not wishing to be outdone, invited them all to dinner for the following Sunday, at his place at Asnieres.
The house, decorated with Moorish ornaments, looked like a cafe concert, but its location gave it value, as the railroad cut through the whole garden, passing within a hundred and fifty feet of the porch.
On the regulation plot of grass stood a basin of Roman cement, containing goldfish and a stream of water the size of that which comes from a syringe, which occasionally made microscopic rainbows at which the guests marvelled.
The feeding of this irrigator was the constant preoccupation of Monsieur Perdrix, who would sometimes get up at five o'clock in the morning in order to fill the tank.
Then, in his shirt sleeves, his big stomach almost bursting from his trousers, he would pump wildly, so that on returning from the office he could have the satisfaction of letting the fountain play and of imagining that it was cooling off the garden.
On the night of the official dinner all the guests, one after the other, went into ecstasies over the surroundings, and each time they heard a train in the distance, Monsieur Perdrix would announce to them its destination: Saint-Germain, Le Havre, Cherbourg, or Dieppe, and they would playfully wave to the passengers leaning from the windows.
First came Monsieur Capitaine, the assistant chief; Monsieur Patissot, chief clerk; then Messieurs de Sombreterre and Vallin, elegant young employees who only came to the office when they had to; lastly Monsieur Rade, known throughout the ministry for the absurd doctrines which he upheld, and the copying clerk, Monsieur Boivin.
Monsieur Rade passed for a character.
Some called him a dreamer or an idealist, others a revolutionary; every one agreed that he was very clumsy.
Old, thin and small, with bright eyes and long, white hair, he had all his life professed a profound contempt for administrative work.
A book rummager and a great reader, with a nature continually in revolt against everything, a seeker of truth and a despiser of popular prejudices, he had a clear and paradoxical manner of expressing his opinions which closed the mouths of self-satisfied fools and of those that were discontented without knowing why.
People said: “That old fool of a Rade,” or else: “That harebrained Rade”; and the slowness, of his promotion seemed to indicate the reason, according to commonplace minds.
His freedom of speech often made—his colleagues tremble; they asked themselves with terror how he had been able to keep his place as long as he had.
As soon as they had seated themselves, Monsieur Perdrix thanked his “collaborators” in a neat little speech, promising them his protection, the more valuable as his power grew, and he ended with a stirring peroration in which he thanked and glorified a government so liberal and just that it knows how to seek out the worthy from among the humble.
Monsieur Capitaine, the assistant chief, answered in the name of the office, congratulated, greeted, exalted, sang the praises of all; frantic applause greeted these two bits of eloquence.
After that they settled down seriously to the business of eating.
Everything went well up to the dessert; lack of conversation went unnoticed.
But after the coffee a discussion arose, and Monsieur Rade let himself loose and soon began to overstep the bounds of discretion.
They naturally discussed love, and a breath of chivalry intoxicated this room full of bureaucrats; they praised and exalted the superior beauty of woman, the delicacy of her soul, her aptitude for exquisite things, the correctness of her judgment, and the refinement of her sentiments.
All its beauty lies in the instinct of love.
Instead of calling it the fair, it would have been better to call it the unaesthetic sex.
Women have neither the appreciation nor the knowledge of music, any more than they have of poetry or of the plastic arts; with them it is merely an apelike imitation, pure pretence, affectation cultivated from their desire to please.'” “The man who said that is an idiot,” exclaimed Monsieur de Sombreterre.
Monsieur Rade smilingly continued: “And how about Rousseau, gentlemen?
They should also be taught religion, but they should ignore poetry and politics, only being allowed to read religious works or cook- books.'” Monsieur Rade continued: “You see, gentlemen, all of them study painting and music.
But not a single one of them has ever painted a remarkable picture or composed a great opera!
Because they are the 'sexes sequior', the secondary sex in every sense of the word, made to be kept apart, in the background.” Monsieur Patissot was growing angry, and exclaimed: “And how about Madame Sand, monsieur?” “She is the one exception, monsieur, the one exception.
I will quote to you another passage from another great philosopher, this one an Englishman, Herbert Spencer.
Here is what he says: 'Each sex is capable, under the influence of abnormal stimulation, of manifesting faculties ordinarily reserved for the other one.
Thus, for instance, in extreme cases a special excitement may cause the breasts of men to give milk; children deprived of their mothers have often thus been saved in time of famine.
Nevertheless, we do not place this faculty of giving milk among the male attributes.
It is the same with female intelligence, which, in certain cases, will give superior products, but which is not to be considered in an estimate of the feminine nature as a social factor.'” All Monsieur Patissot's chivalric instincts were wounded and he declared: “You are not a Frenchman, monsieur.
Well, if war is a terrible thing, what about patriotism, which is the idea at the base of it?
When a murderer kills he has a fixed idea; it is to steal.
When a good man sticks his bayonet through another good man, father of a family, or, perhaps, a great artist, what idea is he following out?” Everybody was shocked.
“When one has such thoughts, one should not express them in public.” M.
Patissot continued: “There are, however, monsieur, principles which all good people recognize.” M.
Rade asked: “Which ones?” Then very solemnly, M.
Patissot pronounced: “Morality, monsieur.” M.
Rade was beaming; he exclaimed: “Just let me give you one example, gentlemen, one little example.
This game was considered delightful.
This only goes to show that the principles of morality are by no means settled—and that—” M.
Perdrix, visibly embarrassed, stopped him: “M.
Rade, you are sapping the very foundations of society.
One must always have principles.
Thus, in politics, here is M. de Sombreterre, who is a Legitimist; M.
Vallin, an Orleanist; M.
Patissot and myself, Republicans; we all have very different principles, and yet we agree very well because we have them.” But M.
Rade exclaimed: “I also have principles, gentlemen, very distinct ones.” M.
Patissot raised his head and coldly asked: “It would please me greatly to know them, monsieur.” M.
“Here they are, monsieur: “First principle—Government by one person is a monstrosity.
“Second principle—Restricted suffrage is an injustice.
“Third principle—Universal suffrage is idiotic.
“But, admitting that a country must govern itself, to exclude, on some always debatable pretext, a part of the citizens from the administration of affairs is such an injustice that it seems to me unworthy of a further discussion.
“There remains universal suffrage.
I suppose that you will agree with me that geniuses are a rarity.
Now, let us add, perhaps, two hundred men with a decided talent, one thousand others possessing various talents, and ten thousand superior intellects.
This is a staff of eleven thousand two hundred and five minds.
After that you have the army of mediocrities followed by the multitude of fools.
As the mediocrities and the fools always form the immense majority, it is impossible for them to elect an intelligent government.
“In order to be fair I admit that logically universal suffrage seems to me the only admissible principle, but it is impracticable.
When you are able to give to a member of the Institute ten thousand votes to a ragman's one, one hundred votes for a great land-owner as against his farmer's ten, then you will have approached an equilibrium of forces and obtained a national representation which will really represent the strength of the nation.
But I challenge you to do it.
“Here are my conclusions: “Formerly, when a man was a failure at every other profession he turned photographer; now he has himself elected a deputy.
A government thus composed will always be sadly lacking, incapable of evil as well as of good.
On the other hand, a despot, if he be stupid, can do a lot of harm, and, if he be intelligent (a thing which is very scarce), he may do good.
“I cannot decide between these two forms of government; I declare myself to be an anarchist, that is to say, a partisan of that power which is the most unassuming, the least felt, the most liberal, in the broadest sense of the word, and revolutionary at the same time; by that I mean the everlasting enemy of this same power, which can in no way be anything but defective.
That's all!” Cries of indignation rose about the table, and all, whether Legitimist, Orleanist or Republican through force of circumstances, grew red with anger.
Patissot especially was choking with rage, and, turning toward M.
Rade, he cried: “Then, monsieur, you believe in nothing?” The other answered quietly: “You're absolutely correct, monsieur.” The anger felt by all the guests prevented M.
Rade from continuing, and M.
Perdrix, as chief, closed the discussion.
We each have our opinion, and we have no intention of changing it.” All agreed with the wise words.
Rade, never satisfied, wished to have the last word.
“It is simple and always applicable.
One sentence embraces the whole thought; here it is: 'Never do unto another that which you would not have him do unto you.' I defy you to pick any flaw in it, while I will undertake to demolish your most sacred principles with three arguments.” This time there was no answer.
But as they were going home at night, by couples, each one was saying to his companion: “Really, M.
His mind must surely be unbalanced.
He ought to be appointed assistant chief at the Charenton Asylum.” A RECOLLECTION How many recollections of youth come to me in the soft sunlight of early spring!
It was an age when all was pleasant, cheerful, charming, intoxicating.
How exquisite are the remembrances of those old springtimes!
Do you recall, old friends and brothers, those happy years when life was nothing but a triumph and an occasion for mirth?
Do you recall the days of wanderings around Paris, our jolly poverty, our walks in the fresh, green woods, our drinks in the wine-shops on the banks of the Seine and our commonplace and delightful little flirtations?
It was twelve years ago and already appears to me so old, so old that it seems now as if it belonged to the other end of life, before middle age, this dreadful middle age from which I suddenly perceived the end of the journey.
I was in a government office, and Sundays were to me like unusual festivals, full of exuberant happiness, although nothing remarkable occurred.
How enjoyable it was!
On this particular morning I awoke with that sense of freedom that all clerks know so well—the sense of emancipation, of rest, of quiet and of independence.
The weather was charming.
A blue sky full of sunlight and swallows spread above the town.
I dressed quickly and set out, intending to spend the day in the woods breathing the air of the green trees, for I am originally a rustic, having been brought up amid the grass and the trees.
The front of the houses was bathed in sunlight, the janitress' canaries were singing in their cages and there was an air of gaiety in the streets, in the faces of the inhabitants, lighting them up with a smile as if all beings and all things experienced a secret satisfaction at the rising of the brilliant sun.
How I loved waiting for the boat on the wharf: It seemed to me that I was about to set out for the ends of the world, for new and wonderful lands.
I saw the boat approaching yonder, yonder under the second bridge, looking quite small with its plume of smoke, then growing larger and ever larger, as it drew near, until it looked to me like a mail steamer.
People were there already in their Sunday clothes, startling toilettes, gaudy ribbons and bright scarlet designs.
I took up a position in the bows, standing up and looking at the quays, the trees, the houses and the bridges disappearing behind us.
And suddenly I perceived the great viaduct of Point du Jour which blocked the river.
It was the end of Paris, the beginning of the country, and behind the double row of arches the Seine, suddenly spreading out as though it had regained space and liberty, became all at once the peaceful river which flows through the plains, alongside the wooded hills, amid the meadows, along the edge of the forests.
A voice called out: “Bas Meudon” and a little further on, “Sevres,” and still further, “Saint-Cloud.” I went on shore and walked hurriedly through the little town to the road leading to the wood.
I had brought with me a map of the environs of Paris, so that I might not lose my way amid the paths which cross in every direction these little forests where Parisians take their outings.
As soon as I was unperceived I began to study my guide, which seemed to be perfectly clear.
I was to turn to the right, then to the left, then again to the left and I should reach Versailles by evening in time for dinner.
I walked slowly beneath the young leaves, drinking in the air, fragrant with the odor of young buds and sap.
I sauntered along, forgetful of musty papers, of the offices, of my chief, my colleagues, my documents, and thinking of the good things that were sure to come to me, of all the veiled unknown contained in the future.
A thousand recollections of childhood came over me, awakened by these country odors, and I walked along, permeated with the fragrant, living enchantment, the emotional enchantment of the woods warmed by the sun of June.
At times I sat down to look at all sorts of little flowers growing on a bank, with the names of which I was familiar.
I recognized them all just as if they were the ones I had seen long ago in the country.
They were yellow, red, violet, delicate, dainty, perched on long stems or close to the ground.
Insects of all colors and shapes, short, long, of peculiar form, frightful, and microscopic monsters, climbed quietly up the stalks of grass which bent beneath their weight.
Then I went to sleep for some hours in a hollow and started off again, refreshed by my doze.
In front of me lay an enchanting pathway and through its somewhat scanty foliage the sun poured down drops of light on the marguerites which grew there.
It stretched out interminably, quiet and deserted, save for an occasional big wasp, who would stop buzzing now and then to sip from a flower, and then continue his way.
All at once I perceived at the end of the path two persons, a man and a woman, coming towards me.
Annoyed at being disturbed in my quiet walk, I was about to dive into the thicket, when I thought I heard someone calling me.
The woman was, in fact, shaking her parasol, and the man, in his shirt sleeves, his coat over one arm, was waving the other as a signal of distress.
They were walking hurriedly, their faces very red, she with short, quick steps and he with long strides.
They both looked annoyed and fatigued.
The woman asked: “Can you tell me, monsieur, where we are?
My fool of a husband made us lose our way, although he pretended he knew the country perfectly.” I replied confidently: “Madame, you are going towards Saint-Cloud and turning your back on Versailles.” With a look of annoyed pity for her husband, she exclaimed: “What, we are turning our back on Versailles?
Why, that is just where we want to dine!” “I am going there also, madame.” “Mon Dieu, mon Dieu, mon Dieu!” she repeated, shrugging her shoulders, and in that tone of sovereign contempt assumed by women to express their exasperation.
She was quite young, pretty, a brunette with a slight shadow on her upper lip.
As for him, he was perspiring and wiping his forehead.
It was assuredly a little Parisian bourgeois couple.
The man seemed cast down, exhausted and distressed.
“But, my dear friend, it was you—” he murmured.
She did not allow him to finish his sentence.
Was it I who wanted to go out without getting any information, pretending that I knew how to find my way?
Was it I who wanted to take the road to the right on top of the hill, insisting that I recognized the road?
Was it I who undertook to take charge of Cachou—” She had not finished speaking when her husband, as if he had suddenly gone crazy, gave a piercing scream, a long, wild cry that could not be described in any language, but which sounded like 'tuituit'.
The young woman did not appear to be surprised or moved and resumed: “No, really, some people are so stupid and they pretend they know everything.
Letourneur lived in Rue des Martyres?
He strove to check her, to calm her and stammered: “But, my dear, it is useless—before monsieur.
We are making ourselves ridiculous.
This does not interest monsieur.” And he cast mournful glances into the thicket as though he sought to sound its peaceful and mysterious depths, in order to flee thither, to escape and hide from all eyes, and from time to time he uttered a fresh scream, a prolonged and shrill “tuituit.” I took this to be a nervous affection.
The young woman, suddenly turning towards me: and changing her tone with singular rapidity, said: “If monsieur will kindly allow us, we will accompany him on the road, so as not to lose our way again, and be obliged, possibly, to sleep in the wood.” I bowed.
She took my arm and began to talk about a thousand things —about herself, her life, her family, her business.
Her husband walked beside her, casting wild glances into the thick wood and screaming “tuituit” every few moments.
At last I inquired: “Why do you scream like that?” “I have lost my poor dog,” he replied in a tone of discouragement and despair.
He began to run about and bark and he disappeared in the wood.
He will die of hunger in there.” Without turning towards her husband, the young woman said: “If you had left his chain on, it would not have happened.
When people are as stupid as you are they do not keep a dog.” “But, my dear, it was you—” he murmured timidly.
She stopped short, and looking into his eyes as if she were going to tear them out, she began again to cast in his face innumerable reproaches.
The cloud of vapor that covers the country at dusk was slowly rising and there was a poetry in the air, induced by the peculiar and enchanting freshness of the atmosphere that one feels in the woods at nightfall.
Suddenly the young man stopped, and feeling his body feverishly, exclaimed: “Oh, I think that I—” She looked at him.
“Well, what?” “I did not notice that I had my coat on my arm.” “Well—?” “I have lost my pocketbook—my money was in it.” She shook with anger and choked with indignation.
Is it possible that I could have married such an idiot!
I am going on to Versailles with monsieur.
“Where shall I find you?” A restaurant had been recommended to me.
He turned back and, stooping down as he searched the ground with anxious eyes, he moved away, screaming “tuituit” every few moments.
We could see him for some time until the growing darkness concealed all but his outline, but we heard his mournful “tuituit,” shriller and shriller as the night grew darker.
As for me, I stepped along quickly and happily in the soft twilight, with this little unknown woman leaning on my arm.
I remained silent, disturbed, enchanted.
Our path was suddenly crossed by a high road.
To the right I perceived a town lying in a valley.
He replied: “Bougival.” I was dumfounded.
I proposed that we should take a carriage and drive to Versailles.
It is a treat to me to be rid of him for a few hours.” We went into a restaurant beside the water and I ventured to ask for a private compartment.
She sang, drank champagne, committed all sorts of follies.
That was my first serious flirtation.
OUR LETTERS Eight hours of railway travel induce sleep for some persons and insomnia for others; with me, any journey prevents my sleeping on the following night.
It is a pretty house, built by one of their grandfathers in the style of the latter half of the last century.
Therefore it has that intimate character of dwellings that have always been inhabited, furnished and enlivened by the same people.
Nothing changes; nothing alters the soul of the dwelling, from which the furniture has never been taken out, the tapestries never unnailed, thus becoming worn out, faded, discolored, on the same walls.
None of the old furniture leaves the place; only from time to time it is moved a little to make room for a new piece, which enters there like a new-born infant in the midst of brothers and sisters.
Beyond the water the fields stretch out in the distance, and here one can see the cows wandering around, pasturing on the moist grass; their eyes seem full of the dew, mist and freshness of the pasture.
I love this dwelling, just as one loves a thing which one ardently desires to possess.
I return here every autumn with infinite delight; I leave with regret.
After I had dined with this friendly family, by whom I was received like a relative, I asked my friend, Paul Muret: “Which room did you give me this year?” “Aunt Rose's room.” An hour later, followed by her three children, two little girls and a boy, Madame Muret d'Artus installed me in Aunt Rose's room, where I had not yet slept.
When I was alone I examined the walls, the furniture, the general aspect of the room, in order to attune my mind to it.
I knew it but little, as I had entered it only once or twice, and I looked indifferently at a pastel portrait of Aunt Rose, who gave her name to the room.
This old Aunt Rose, with her curls, looking at me from behind the glass, made very little impression on my mind.
She looked to me like a woman of former days, with principles and precepts as strong on the maxims of morality as on cooking recipes, one of these old aunts who are the bugbear of gaiety and the stern and wrinkled angel of provincial families.
Did she belong to this century or to the preceding one?
Had she left this earth after a calm or a stormy existence?
What difference did it make?
The name alone, “Aunt Rose,” seemed ridiculous, common, ugly.
Then, as I found it insignificant, disagreeable, even unsympathetic, I began to examine the furniture.
It dated from the period of Louis XVI, the Revolution and the Directorate.
Not a chair, not a curtain had entered this room since then, and it gave out the subtle odor of memories, which is the combined odor of wood, cloth, chairs, hangings, peculiar to places wherein have lived hearts that have loved and suffered.
I opened a little mahogany desk with brass trimmings, which was placed between the two windows, in hope of finding some ink and paper; but all I found was a quill-pen, very much worn, and chewed at the end.
I was about to close this piece of furniture, when a shining spot attracted my attention it looked like the yellow head of a nail.
I scratched it with my finger, and it seemed to move.
It was a long gold pin which had been slipped into a hole in the wood and remained hidden there.
I immediately thought that it must have served to work some spring which hid a secret, and I looked.
After about two hours of investigation, I discovered another hole opposite the first one, but at the bottom of a groove.
Into this I stuck my pin: a little shelf sprang toward my face, and I saw two packages of yellow letters, tied with a blue ribbon.
I guard against that, for they are my dearest treasure.
I wondered whether, perhaps you might not be feeling some regret!
Not regret at having loved me, for I know that you still do, but the regret of having expressed on white paper this living love in hours when your heart did not confide in me, but in the pen that you held in your hand.
When we love, we have need of confession, need of talking or writing, and we either talk or write.
Words fly away, those sweet words made of music, air and tenderness, warm and light, which escape as soon as they are uttered, which remain in the memory alone, but which one can neither see, touch nor kiss, as one can with the words written by your hand.
Yes, I am returning them to you!
Undoubtedly, you must have had an after thought of delicate shame at expressions that are ineffaceable.
In your sensitive and timid soul you must have regretted having written to a man that you loved him.
You remembered sentences that called up recollections, and you said to yourself: “I will make ashes of those words.” Be satisfied, be calm.
MY FRIEND: No, you have not understood me, you have not guessed.
I do not regret, and I never shall, that I told you of my affection.
It is not poetic, as you imagined, but practical.
I am afraid, not of you, but of some mischance.
You might fall off your horse, since you ride every day; you might die from a sudden attack, from a duel, from heart disease, from a carriage accident, in a thousand ways.
For, if there is only one death, there are more ways of its reaching us than there are days or us to live.
And then, even if they adored me, is it possible for two women and one man to know a secret—such a secret!—and not to tell of it?
I seem to be saying very disagreeable things, speaking first of your death, and then suspecting the discreetness of your relatives.
We must therefore foresee all dangers, even that one.
I will show them to you there, sleeping side by side in their silken hiding place, full of our love, like lovers in a tomb.
I have been thinking of this for a long time, and that is the reason I decided to ask you for my letters.
Think that never, do you understand, never, does a woman burn, tear or destroy the letters in which it is told her that she is loved.
That is our whole life, our whole hope, expectation and dream.
These little papers which bear our name in caressing terms are relics which we adore; they are chapels in which we are the saints.
Our love letters are our titles to beauty, grace, seduction, the intimate vanity of our womanhood; they are the treasures of our heart.
No, a woman does not destroy these secret and delicious archives of her life.
But, like everybody else, we die, and then—then these letters are found!
Just think that every day women are dying who have been loved; every day the traces and proofs of their fault fall into the hands of their husbands, and that there is never a scandal, never a duel.
He avenges himself on a living woman; he fights with the man who has dishonored her, kills him while she lives, because, well, why?
But, if, after her death, he finds similar proofs, he burns them and no one is the wiser, and he continues to shake hands with the friend of the dead woman, and feels quite at ease that these letters should not have fallen into strange hands, and that they are destroyed.
The tomb is the boundary of conjugal sinning.
Therefore, I can safely keep our letters, which, in your hands, would be a menace to both of us.
A few yards from the front of the house was a huge stone basin with marble ladies taking a bath; other, basins were seen at intervals down to the foot of the slope, and a stream of water fell in cascades from one basin to another.
From the manor house, which preserved the grace of a superannuated coquette, down to the grottos incrusted with shell-work, where slumbered the loves of a bygone age, everything in this antique demesne had retained the physiognomy of former days.
Everything seemed to speak still of ancient customs, of the manners of long ago, of former gallantries, and of the elegant trivialities so dear to our grandmothers.
In a parlor in the style of Louis XV, whose walls were covered with shepherds paying court to shepherdesses, beautiful ladies in hoop- skirts, and gallant gentlemen in wigs, a very old woman, who seemed dead as soon as she ceased to move, was almost lying down in a large easy- chair, at each side of which hung a thin, mummy-like hand.
Her dim eyes were gazing dreamily toward the distant horizon as if they sought to follow through the park the visions of her youth.
It made her white locks flutter around her wrinkled forehead and old memories float through her brain.
Beside her, on a tapestried stool, a young girl, with long fair hair hanging in braids down her back, was embroidering an altar-cloth.
There was a pensive expression in her eyes, and it was easy to see that she was dreaming, while her agile fingers flew over her work.
But the old lady turned round her head, and said: “Berthe, read me something out of the newspapers, that I may still know sometimes what is going on in the world.” The young girl took up a newspaper, and cast a rapid glance over it.
“There is a great deal about politics, grandmamma; shall I pass that over?” “Yes, yes, darling.
Is gallantry, then, dead in France, that they no longer talk about abductions or adventures as they did formerly?” The girl made a long search through the columns of the newspaper.
“It is entitled 'A Love Drama!'” The old woman smiled through her wrinkles.
And Berthe commenced.
It was a case of vitriol throwing.
A wife, in order to avenge herself on her husband's mistress, had burned her face and eyes.
She had left the Court of Assizes acquitted, declared to be innocent, amid the applause of the crowd.
The grandmother moved about excitedly in her chair, and exclaimed: “This is horrible—why, it is perfectly horrible!
“See whether you can find anything else to read to me, darling.” Berthe again made a search; and farther down among the reports of criminal cases, she read: “'Gloomy Drama.
Then, to avenge herself on her lover, whose heart proved fickle, she shot him with a revolver.
The jury, all men of moral character, condoning the illicit love of the murderess, honorably acquitted her.'” This time the old grandmother appeared quite shocked, and, in a trembling voice, she said: “Why, you people are mad nowadays.
The good God has given you love, the only enchantment in life.
Man has added to this gallantry the only distraction of our dull hours, and here you are mixing up with it vitriol and revolvers, as if one were to put mud into a flagon of Spanish wine.” Berthe did not seem to understand her grandmother's indignation.
“But, grandmamma, this woman avenged herself.
Remember she was married, and her husband deceived her.” The grandmother gave a start.
“What ideas have they been filling your head with, you young girls of today?” Berthe replied: “But marriage is sacred, grandmamma.” The grandmother's heart, which had its birth in the great age of gallantry, gave a sudden leap.
“Listen, child, to an old woman who has seen three generations, and who has had a long, long experience of men and women.
Marriage and love have nothing in common.
We marry to found a family, and we form families in order to constitute society.
Society cannot dispense with marriage.
When we marry, we must bring together suitable conditions; we must combine fortunes, unite similar races and aim at the common interest, which is riches and children.
We marry only once my child, because the world requires us to do so, but we may love twenty times in one lifetime because nature has made us like this.
Marriage, you see, is law, and love is an instinct which impels us, sometimes along a straight, and sometimes along a devious path.
The world has made laws to combat our instincts—it was necessary to make them; but our instincts are always stronger, and we ought not to resist them too much, because they come from God; while the laws only come from men.
If we did not perfume life with love, as much love as possible, darling, as we put sugar into drugs for children, nobody would care to take it just as it is.” Berthe opened her eyes wide in astonishment.
She murmured: “Oh! grandmamma, we can only love once.” The grandmother raised her trembling hands toward Heaven, as if again to invoke the defunct god of gallantries.
She exclaimed indignantly: “You have become a race of serfs, a race of common people.
Since the Revolution, it is impossible any longer to recognize society.
You have attached big words to every action, and wearisome duties to every corner of existence; you believe in equality and eternal passion.
And we! when we liked a gentleman, my child, we sent him a page.
And when a fresh caprice came into our hearts, we were not slow in getting rid of the last Lover—unless we kept both of them.” The old woman smiled a keen smile, and a gleam of roguery twinkled in her gray eye, the intellectual, skeptical roguery of those people who did not believe that they were made of the same clay as the rest, and who lived as masters for whom common beliefs were not intended.
The young girl, turning very pale, faltered out: “So, then, women have no honor?” The grandmother ceased to smile.
If she had kept in her soul some of Voltaire's irony, she had also a little of Jean Jacques's glowing philosophy: “No honor! because we loved, and dared to say so, and even boasted of it?
But, my child, if one of us, among the greatest ladies in France, had lived without a lover, she would have had the entire court laughing at her.
Those who wished to live differently had only to enter a convent.
And you imagine, perhaps, that your husbands will love but you alone, all their lives.
I tell you that marriage is a thing necessary in order that society should exist, but it is not in the nature of our race, do you understand?
And how you misunderstand it! how you spoil it!
You treat it as something solemn like a sacrament, or something to be bought, like a dress.” The young girl caught the old woman's trembling hands in her own.
One of them had married, but the other had remained in single blessedness.
M. de Meroul lived for six months in Paris and for six months in his little chateau at Tourbeville.
Having married the daughter of a neighboring squire, he had lived a good and peaceful life in the indolence of a man who has nothing to do.
Of a calm and quiet disposition, and not over-intelligent he used to spend his time quietly regretting the past, grieving over the customs and institutions of the day and continually repeating to his wife, who would lift her eyes, and sometimes her hands, to heaven, as a sign of energetic assent: “Good gracious!
What a government!” Madame de Meroul resembled her husband intellectually as though she had been his sister.
She knew, by tradition, that one should above all respect the Pope and the King!
And she loved and respected them from the bottom of her heart, without knowing them, with a poetic fervor, with an hereditary devotion, with the tenderness of a wellborn woman.
She had had no children, and never ceased mourning the fact.
On meeting his old friend, Joseph Mouradour, at a ball, M. de Meroul was filled with a deep and simple joy, for in their youth they had been intimate friends.
After the first exclamations of surprise at the changes which time had wrought in their bodies and countenances, they told each other about their lives since they had last met.
Joseph Mouradour, who was from the south of France, had become a government official.
His manner was frank; he spoke rapidly and without restraint, giving his opinions without any tact.
He was a Republican, one of those good fellows who do not believe in standing on ceremony, and who exercise an almost brutal freedom of speech.
He came to his friend's house and was immediately liked for his easy cordiality, in spite of his radical ideas.
Such a charming man!” Monsieur de Meroul would say to his friend in a serious and confidential tone of voice; “You have no idea the harm that you are doing your country.” He loved him all the same, for nothing is stronger than the ties of childhood taken up again at a riper age.
Joseph Mouradour bantered the wife and the husband, calling them “my amiable snails,” and sometimes he would solemnly declaim against people who were behind the times, against old prejudices and traditions.
When he was once started on his democratic eloquence, the couple, somewhat ill at ease, would keep silent from politeness and good- breeding; then the husband would try to turn the conversation into some other channel in order to avoid a clash.
Joseph Mouradour was only seen in the intimacy of the family.
The Merouls had no greater pleasure than to receive their friends at their country home at Tourbeville.
It was a good, healthy pleasure, the enjoyments of good people and of country proprietors.
They would meet their friends at the neighboring railroad station and would bring them back in their carriage, always on the lookout for compliments on the country, on its natural features, on the condition of the roads, on the cleanliness of the farm-houses, on the size of the cattle grazing in the fields, on everything within sight.
They would call attention to the remarkable speed with which their horse trotted, surprising for an animal that did heavy work part of the year behind a plow; and they would anxiously await the opinion of the newcomer on their family domain, sensitive to the least word, and thankful for the slightest good intention.
Joseph Mouradour was invited, and he accepted the invitation.
Husband and wife had come to the train, delighted to welcome him to their home.
As soon as he saw them, Joseph Mouradour jumped from the train with a briskness which increased their satisfaction.
He shook their hands, congratulated them, overwhelmed them with compliments.
All the way home he was charming, remarking on the height of the trees, the goodness of the crops and the speed of the horse.
When he stepped on the porch of the house, Monsieur de Meroul said, with a certain friendly solemnity: “Consider yourself at home now.” Joseph Mouradour answered: “Thanks, my friend; I expected as much.
Anyhow, I never stand on ceremony with my friends.
That's how I understand hospitality.” Then he went upstairs to dress as a farmer, he said, and he came back all togged out in blue linen, with a little straw hat and yellow shoes, a regular Parisian dressed for an outing.
He also seemed to become more vulgar, more jovial, more familiar; having put on with his country clothes a free and easy manner which he judged suitable to the surroundings.
His new manners shocked Monsieur and Madame de Meroul a little, for they always remained serious and dignified, even in the country, as though compelled by the two letters preceding their name to keep up a certain formality even in the closest intimacy.
After lunch they all went out to visit the farms, and the Parisian astounded the respectful peasants by his tone of comradeship.
In the evening the priest came to dinner, an old, fat priest, accustomed to dining there on Sundays, but who had been especially invited this day in honor of the new guest.
Then he observed him with surprise, as though he were a creature of some peculiar race, which he had never been able to observe at close quarters.
During the meal he told some rather free stories, allowable in the intimacy of the family, but which seemed to the Merouls a little out of place in the presence of a minister of the Church.
He did not say, “Monsieur l'abbe,” but simply, “Monsieur.” He embarrassed the priest greatly by philosophical discussions about diverse superstitions current all over the world.
He said: “Your God, monsieur, is of those who should be respected, but also one of those who should be discussed.
Mine is called Reason; he has always been the enemy of yours.” The Merouls, distressed, tried to turn the trend of the conversation.
Then the husband said, very quietly: “Perhaps you went a little bit too far with the priest.” But Joseph immediately exclaimed: “Well, that's pretty good!
As if I would be on my guard with a shaveling!
And say, do me the pleasure of not imposing him on me any more at meals.
You can both make use of him as much as you wish, but don't serve him up to your friends, hang it!” “But, my friends, think of his holy—” Joseph Mouradour interrupted him: “Yes, I know; they have to be treated like 'rosieres.' But let them respect my convictions, and I will respect theirs!” That was all for that day.
As soon as Madame de Meroul entered the parlor, the next morning, she noticed in the middle of the table three newspapers which made her start the Voltaire, the Republique-Francaise and the Justice.
Immediately Joseph Mouradour, still in blue, appeared on the threshold, attentively reading the Intransigeant.
He cried: “There's a great article in this by Rochefort.
That fellow is a wonder!” He read it aloud, emphasizing the parts which especially pleased him, so carried away by enthusiasm that he did not notice his friend's entrance.
Monsieur de Meroul was holding in his hand the Gaulois for himself, the Clarion for his wife.
The fiery prose of the master writer who overthrew the empire, spouted with violence, sung in the southern accent, rang throughout the peaceful parsons seemed to spatter the walls and century-old furniture with a hail of bold, ironical and destructive words.
The man and the woman, one standing, the other sitting, were listening with astonishment, so shocked that they could not move.
In a burst of eloquence Mouradour finished the last paragraph, then exclaimed triumphantly: “Well! that's pretty strong!” Then, suddenly, he noticed the two sheets which his friend was carrying, and he, in turn, stood speechless from surprise.
Quickly walking toward him he demanded angrily: “What are you doing with those papers?” Monsieur de Meroul answered hesitatingly: “Why—those—those are my papers!” “Your papers!
You will do me the pleasure of reading mine; they will limber up your ideas, and as for yours—there! that's what I do with them.” And before his astonished host could stop him, he had seized the two newspapers and thrown them out of the window.
Then he solemnly handed the Justice to Madame de Meroul, the Voltaire to her husband, while he sank down into an arm-chair to finish reading the Intransigeant.
The couple, through delicacy, made a pretense of reading a little, they then handed him back the Republican sheets, which they handled gingerly, as though they might be poisoned.
He laughed and declared: “One week of this regime and I will have you converted to my ideas.” In truth, at the end of a week he ruled the house.
Other friends were expected, pious and conservative friends.
The unhappy couple saw the impossibility of having them there then, and, not knowing what to do, one evening they announced to Joseph Mouradour that they would be obliged to absent themselves for a few days, on business, and they begged him to stay on alone.
He did not appear disturbed, and answered: “Very well, I don't mind!
I have already said that there should be no formality between friends.
You are perfectly right-go ahead and attend to your business.
It will not offend me in the least; quite the contrary, it will make me feel much more completely one of the family.
Go ahead, my friends, I will wait for you!” Monsieur and Madame de Meroul left the following day.
THE EFFEMINATES How often we hear people say, “He is charming, that man, but he is a girl, a regular girl.” They are alluding to the effeminates, the bane of our land.
For we are all girl-like men in France—that is, fickle, fanciful, innocently treacherous, without consistency in our convictions or our will, violent and weak as women are.
But the most irritating of girl—men is assuredly the Parisian and the boulevardier, in whom the appearance of intelligence is more marked and who combines in himself all the attractions and all the faults of those charming creatures in an exaggerated degree in virtue of his masculine temperament.
Our Chamber of Deputies is full of girl-men.
The newspapers are full of these effeminate men.
That is probably where one finds the most, but it is also where they are most needed.
The Journal des Debats and the Gazette de France are exceptions.
Assuredly, every good journalist must be somewhat effeminate—that is, at the command of the public, supple in following unconsciously the shades of public opinion, wavering and varying, sceptical and credulous, wicked and devout, a braggart and a true man, enthusiastic and ironical, and always convinced while believing in nothing.
Foreigners, our anti-types, as Mme.
Abel called them, the stubborn English and the heavy Germans, regard us with a certain amazement mingled with contempt, and will continue to so regard us till the end of time.
They consider us frivolous.
And that is why people love us in spite of our faults, why they come back to us despite the evil spoken of us; these are lovers' quarrels!
The effeminate man, as one meets him in this world, is so charming that he captivates you after five minutes' chat.
His smile seems made for you; one cannot believe that his voice does not assume specially tender intonations on their account.
He has enchanted you, like a woman.
If he commits any breach of manners towards you, you cannot bear any malice, he is so pleasant when you next meet him.
Does he put you off indefinitely with promises that he does not keep?
One lays as much store by his promises as though he had moved heaven and earth to render them a service.
When he admires anything he goes into such raptures that he convinces you.
He would have fought for Zola, whom he has abandoned for Barbey and d'Aurevilly.
And when he admires, he permits no limitation, he would slap your face for a word.
But when he becomes scornful, his contempt is unbounded and allows of no protest.
In fact, he understands nothing.
Then I gave her a pounding and she left me at once.
But on the following Sunday as one is on the way to Saint Germain two young women get into the same railway carriage.
One recognizes one of them at once; it is Julia's enemy.
And there are endearments, caresses, plans.
The girl-man has his friendships of this kind.
He is the only one who has any intelligence, any sense, any talent.
He alone amounts to anything in Paris.
One meets them everywhere together, they dine together, walk about in company, and every evening walk home with each other back and forth without being able to part with one another.
Three months later, if Jack is mentioned: “There is a drinker, a sorry fellow, a scoundrel for you.
Three months later, and they are living together.
But one morning one hears that they have fought a duel, then embraced each other, amid tears, on the duelling ground.
Just now they are the dearest friends in the world, furious with each other half the year, abusing and loving each other by turns, squeezing each other's hands till they almost crush the bones, and ready to run each other through the body for a misunderstanding.
For the relations of these effeminate men are uncertain.
Their temper is by fits and starts, their delight unexpected, their affection turn- about-face, their enthusiasm subject to eclipse.
One day they love you, the next day they will hardly look at you, for they have in fact a girl's nature, a girl's charm, a girl's temperament, and all their sentiments are like the affections of girls.
It is the dear little Toutou whom they hug, feed with sugar, allow to sleep on the pillow, but whom they would be just as likely to throw out of a window in a moment of impatience, whom they turn round like a sling, holding it by the tail, squeeze in their arms till they almost strangle it, and plunge, without any reason, in a pail of cold water.
He beats her, she scratches him, they execrate each other, cannot bear the sight of each other and yet cannot part, linked together by no one knows what mysterious psychic bonds.
She deceives him, he knows it, sobs and forgives her.
He despises and adores her without seeing that she would be justified in despising him.
They are both atrociously unhappy and yet cannot separate.
They cast invectives, reproaches and abominable accusations at each other from morning till night, and when they have reached the climax and are vibrating with rage and hatred, they fall into each other's arms and kiss each other ardently.
He has, more than another, the exalted sentiment of honor, but is lacking in the sense of simple honesty, and, circumstances favoring him, would defalcate and commit infamies which do not trouble his conscience, for he obeys without questioning the oscillations of his ideas, which are always impulsive.
To him it seems permissible and almost right to cheat a haberdasher.
He considers it honorable not to pay his debts, unless they are gambling debts—that is, somewhat shady.
He dupes people whenever the laws of society admit of his doing so.
When he is short of money he borrows in all ways, not always being scrupulous as to tricking the lenders, but he would, with sincere indignation, run his sword through anyone who should suspect him of only lacking in politeness.
The odor of autumn, the sad odor of bare, moist lands, of fallen leaves, of dead grass made the stagnant evening air more thick and heavy.
The peasants were still at work, scattered through the fields, waiting for the stroke of the Angelus to call them back to the farmhouses, whose thatched roofs were visible here and there through the branches of the leafless trees which protected the apple-gardens against the wind.
At the side of the road, on a heap of clothes, a very small boy seated with his legs apart was playing with a potato, which he now and then let fall on his dress, whilst five women were bending down planting slips of colza in the adjoining plain.
With a slow, continuous movement, all along the mounds of earth which the plough had just turned up, they drove in sharp wooden stakes and in the hole thus formed placed the plant, already a little withered, which sank on one side; then they patted down the earth and went on with their work.
She was a big, red haired girl, with large hips, waist and shoulders, a tall Norman woman, with yellow hair in which there was a blood-red tint.
She said in a resolute voice: “Why, here you are, Cesaire—well?” The man, a thin young fellow with a melancholy air, murmured: “Well, nothing at all—always the same thing.” “He won't have it?” “He won't have it.” “What are you going to do?” “What do you say I ought to do?” “Go see the cure.” “I will.” “Go at once!” “I will.” And they stared at each other.
In the distance, between two farm-houses, could be seen a plough drawn by a horse and driven by a man.
They moved on very gently, the horse, the plough and the laborer, in the dim evening twilight.
The woman went on: “What did your father say?” “He said he would not have it.” “Why wouldn't he have it?” The young man pointed toward the child whom he had just put back on the ground, then with a glance he drew her attention to the man drawing the plough yonder there.
And he said emphatically: “Because 'tis his—this child of yours.” The girl shrugged her shoulders and in an angry tone said: “Faith, every one knows it well—that it is Victor's.
I made a slip with Victor because he took advantage of me while I was asleep in the barn, it's true, and afterward it happened between us when I wasn't asleep.
I certainly would have married him if he weren't a servant man.
All the same, I'll see about settling the business.” She answered: “Go to the cure at once.” “I'm going to him.” And he set forth with his heavy peasant's tread, while the girl, with her hands on her hips, turned round to plant her colza.
In fact, the man who thus went off, Cesaire Houlbreque, the son of deaf old Amable Houlbreque, wanted to marry, in spite of his father, Celeste Levesque, who had a child by Victor Lecoq, a mere laborer on her parents' farm, who had been turned out of doors for this act.
The hierarchy of caste, however, does not exist in the country, and if the laborer is thrifty, he becomes, by taking a farm in his turn, the equal of his former master.
So Cesaire Houlbieque went off, his whip under his arm, brooding over his own thoughts and lifting up one after the other his heavy wooden shoes daubed with clay.
Certainly he desired to marry Celeste Levesque.
He had only to look at her to be convinced of it, to feel quite queer, quite stirred up, simply stupid with happiness.
He even found a pleasure in kissing the little boy, Victor's little boy, because he belonged to her.
But old Amable did not want this marriage.
He opposed it with the obstinacy of a deaf man, with a violent obstinacy.
I tell you she's a good girl and strong, too, and also thrifty.” The old man repeated: “As long as I live I won't see her your wife.” And nothing could get the better of him, nothing could make him waver.
Old Amable was afraid of the cure through the apprehension of death which he felt drawing nigh; he had not much fear of God, nor of the Devil, nor of Hell, nor of Purgatory, of which he had no conception, but he dreaded the priest, who represented to him burial, as one might fear the doctors through horror of diseases.
For the last tight days Celeste, who knew this weakness of the old man, had been urging Cesaire to go and find the cure, but Cesaire always hesitated, because he had not much liking for the black robe, which represented to him hands always stretched out for collections or for blessed bread.
However, he had made up his mind, and he proceeded toward the presbytery, thinking in what manner he would speak about his case.
The Abbe Raffin, a lively little priest, thin and never shaved, was awaiting his dinner-hour while warming his feet at his kitchen fire.
As soon as he saw the peasant entering he asked, merely turning his head: “Well, Cesaire, what do you want?” “I'd like to have a talk with you, M. le Cure.” The man remained standing, intimidated, holding his cap in one hand and his whip in the other.
“Well, talk.” Cesaire looked at the housekeeper, an old woman who dragged her feet while putting on the cover for her master's dinner at the corner of the table in front of the window.
He stammered: “'Tis—'tis a sort of confession.” Thereupon the Abbe Raffin carefully surveyed his peasant.
He saw his confused countenance, his air of constraint, his wandering eyes, and he gave orders to the housekeeper in these words: “Marie, go away for five minutes to your room, while I talk to Cesaire.” The servant cast on the man an angry glance and went away grumbling.
So he won't have it?” “He won't have it.” “What! not at all?” “No, no more than an ass that won't budge an inch, saving your presence.” “What do you say to him yourself in order to make him decide?” “I say to him that she's a good girl, and strong, too, and thrifty also.” “And this does not make him agree to it.
You speak to him.” “And what am I to tell your father?” “Why, what you tell people in your sermons to make them give you sous.” In the peasant's mind every effort of religion consisted in loosening the purse strings, in emptying the pockets of men in order to fill the heavenly coffer.
It was a kind of huge commercial establishment, of which the cures were the clerks; sly, crafty clerks, sharp as any one must be who does business for the good God at the expense of the country people.
The Abbe Raffin, who knew his man and who never lost his temper, burst out laughing.
“Well, yes, I'll tell your father my little story; but you, my lad, you'll come to church.” Houlbreque extended his hand in order to give a solemn assurance: “On the word of a poor man, if you do this for me, I promise that I will.” “Come, that's all right.
When do you wish me to go and find your father?” “Why, the sooner the better-to-night, if you can.” “In half an hour, then, after supper.” “In half an hour.” “That's understood.
So long, my lad.” “Good-by till we meet again, Monsieur le Cure; many thanks.” “Not at all, my lad.” And Cesaire Houlbreque returned home, his heart relieved of a great weight.
Alone with a female servant, a little girl of fifteen, who made the soup, looked after the fowls, milked the cows and churned the butter, they lived frugally, though Cesaire was a good cultivator.
But they did not possess either sufficient lands or sufficient cattle to earn more than the indispensable.
Sad, like all deaf people, crippled with pains, bent double, twisted, he went through the fields leaning on his stick, watching the animals and the men with a hard, distrustful eye.
Sometimes he sat down on the side of the road and remained there without moving for hours, vaguely pondering over the things that had engrossed his whole life, the price of eggs, and corn, the sun and the rain which spoil the crops or make them grow.
And, worn out with rheumatism, his old limbs still drank in the humidity of the soul, as they had drunk in for the past sixty years, the moisture of the walls of his low house thatched with damp straw.
Then he climbed up a ladder into a loft, where he had his straw-bed, while his son slept below stairs at the end of a kind of niche near the chimneypiece and the servant shut herself up in a kind of cellar, a black hole which was formerly used to store the potatoes.
Cesaire and his father scarcely ever talked to each other.
From time to time only, when there was a question of selling a crop or buying a calf, the young man would ask his father's advice, and, making a speaking- trumpet of his two hands, he would bawl out his views into his ear, and old Amable either approved of them or opposed them in a slow, hollow voice that came from the depths of his stomach.
So one evening Cesaire, approaching him as if about to discuss the purchase of a horse or a heifer, communicated to him at the top of his voice his intention to marry Celeste Levesque.
On the score of morality?
The virtue of a girl is of slight importance in the country.
But his avarice, his deep, fierce instinct for saving, revolted at the idea that his son should bring up a child which he had not begotten himself.
He had thought suddenly, in one second, of the soup the little fellow would swallow before becoming useful on the farm.
He had calculated all the pounds of bread, all the pints of cider that this brat would consume up to his fourteenth year, and a mad anger broke loose from him against Cesaire, who had not bestowed a thought on all this.
He replied in an unusually strong voice: “Have you lost your senses?” Thereupon Cesaire began to enumerate his reasons, to speak about Celeste's good qualities, to prove that she would be worth a thousand times what the child would cost.
But the old man doubted these advantages, while he could have no doubts as to the child's existence; and he replied with emphatic repetition, without giving any further explanation: “I will not have it!
As long as I live, this won't be done!” And at this point they had remained for the last three months without one or the other giving in, resuming at least once a week the same discussion, with the same arguments, the same words, the same gestures and the same fruitlessness.
It was then that Celeste had advised Cesaire to go and ask for the cure's assistance.
On arriving home the peasant found his father already seated at table, for he came late through his visit to the presbytery.
Then they remained motionless in their chairs, with scarcely a glimmer of light, the little servant girl having carried off the candle in order to wash the spoons, wipe the glasses and cut the crusts of bread to be ready for next morning's breakfast.
There was a knock, at the door, which was immediately opened, and the priest appeared.
The old man raised toward him an anxious eye full of suspicion, and, foreseeing danger, he was getting ready to climb up his ladder when the Abbe Raffin laid his hand on his shoulder and shouted close to his temple: “I want to have a talk with you, Father Amable.” Cesaire had disappeared, taking advantage of the door being open.
He did not want to listen, for he was afraid and did not want his hopes to crumble slowly with each obstinate refusal of his father.
He preferred to learn the truth at once, good or bad, later on; and he went out into the night.
It was a moonless, starless night, one of those misty nights when the air seems thick with humidity.
A vague odor of apples floated through the farmyard, for it was the season when the earliest applies were gathered, the “early ripe,” as they are called in the cider country.
As Cesaire passed along by the cattlesheds the warm smell of living beasts asleep on manure was exhaled through the narrow windows, and he heard the stamping of the horses, who were standing at the end of the stable, and the sound of their jaws tearing and munching the hay on the racks.
He went straight ahead, thinking about Celeste.
In this simple nature, whose ideas were scarcely more than images generated directly by objects, thoughts of love only formulated themselves by calling up before the mind the picture of a big red-haired girl standing in a hollow road and laughing, with her hands on her hips.
They had stopped to talk for a few minutes and then he went away, and as he walked along he kept repeating: “Faith, she's a fine girl, all the same. 'Tis a pity she made a slip with Victor.” Till evening he kept thinking of her and also on the following morning.
When he saw her again he felt something tickling the end of his throat, as if a cock's feather had been driven through his mouth into his chest, and since then, every time he found himself near her, he was astonished at this nervous tickling which always commenced again.
He could not have said whence came this power over him, but he explained it in these words: “I am possessed by her,” as if the desire for this girl within him were as dominating as one of the powers of hell.
He scarcely bothered himself about her transgression.
He reached the presbytery and seated himself near the little gateway to wait for the priest's return.
He was there perhaps half an hour when he heard steps on the road, and although the night was very dark, he presently distinguished the still darker shadow of the cassock.
He rose up, his legs giving way under him, not even venturing to speak, not daring to ask a question.
The clergyman perceived him and said gaily: “Well, my lad, it's all right.” Cesaire stammered: “All right, 'tisn't possible.” “Yes, my lad, but not without trouble.
What an old ass your father is!” The peasant repeated: “'Tisn't possible!” “Why, yes.
Come and look me up to-morrow at midday in order to settle about the publication of the banns.” The young man seized the cure's hand.
He pressed it, shook it, bruised it as he stammered: “True-true-true, Monsieur le Cure, on the word of an honest man, you'll see me to-morrow-at your sermon.” PART II The wedding took place in the middle of December.
Cesaire, attired in new clothes, was ready since eight o'clock in the morning to go and fetch his betrothed and bring her to the mayor's office, but it was too early.
He seated himself before the kitchen table and waited for the members of the family and the friends who were to accompany him.
For the last eight days it had been snowing, and the brown earth, the earth already fertilized by the autumn sowing, had become a dead white, sleeping under a great sheet of ice.
It was cold in the thatched houses adorned with white caps, and the round apples in the trees of the enclosures seemed to be flowering, covered with white as they had been in the pleasant month of their blossoming.
This day the big clouds to the north, the big great snow clouds, had disappeared and the blue sky showed itself above the white earth on which the rising sun cast silvery reflections.
Cesaire looked straight before him through the window, thinking of nothing, quite happy.
The door opened, two women entered, peasant women in their Sunday clothes, the aunt and the cousin of the bridegroom; then three men, his cousins; then a woman who was a neighbor.
They sat down on chairs and remained, motionless and silent, the women on one side of the kitchen, the men on the other, suddenly seized with timidity, with that embarrassed sadness which takes possession of people assembled for a ceremony.
Then Cesaire, whom a feeling of uneasiness had taken possession of, climbed up the ladder of the loft to see whether his father was ready.
The old man, always as a rule an early riser, had not yet made his appearance.
His son found him on his bed of straw, wrapped up in his blanket, with his eyes open and a malicious gleam in them.
It's time for the wedding.” The deaf man murmured-in a doleful tone: “I can't get up.
I can't stir.” The young man, dumbfounded, stared at him, guessing that this was a dodge.
My back is stiffened up.
This will teach you what comes of acting mulishly.” And he hurried down the ladder and started out, accompanied by his relatives and guests.
The men had turned up the bottoms of their trousers so as not to get them wet in the snow.
The women held up their petticoats and showed their lean ankles with gray woollen stockings and their bony shanks resembling broomsticks.
And they all moved forward with a swinging gait, one behind the other, without uttering a word, moving cautiously, for fear of losing the road which was-hidden beneath the flat, uniform, uninterrupted stretch of snow.
As they approached the farmhouses they saw one or two persons waiting to join them, and the procession went on without stopping and wound its way forward, following the invisible outlines of the road, so that it resembled a living chaplet of black beads undulating through the white countryside.
In front of the bride's door a large group was stamping up and down the open space awaiting the bridegroom.
When he appeared they gave him a loud greeting, and presently Celeste came forth from her room, clad in a blue dress, her shoulders covered with a small red shawl and her head adorned with orange flowers.
But every one asked Cesaire: “Where's your father?” He replied with embarrassment: “He couldn't move on account of the pains.” And the farmers tossed their heads with a sly, incredulous air.
They directed their steps toward the mayor's office.
Behind the pair about to be wedded a peasant woman carried Victor's child, as if it were going to be baptized; and the peasants, in pairs now, with arms linked, walked through the snow with the movements of a sloop at sea.
After having been united by the mayor in the little municipal house the pair were made one by the cure, in his turn, in the modest house of God.
He blessed their union by promising them fruitfulness, then he preached to them on the matrimonial virtues, the simple and healthful virtues of the country, work, concord and fidelity, while the child, who was cold, began to fret behind the bride.
As soon as the couple reappeared on the threshold of the church shots were discharged from the ditch of the cemetery.
Only the barrels of the guns could be seen whence came forth rapid jets of smoke; then a head could be seen gazing at the procession.
It was Victor Lecoq celebrating the marriage of his old sweetheart, wishing her happiness and sending her his good wishes with explosions of powder.
He had employed some friends of his, five or six laboring men, for these salvos of musketry.
It was considered a nice attention.
The repast was given in Polyte Cacheprune's inn.
Twenty covers were laid in the great hall where people dined on market days, and the big leg of mutton turning before the spit, the fowls browned under their own gravy, the chitterlings sputtering over the bright, clear fire filled the house with a thick odor of live coal sprinkled with fat—the powerful, heavy odor of rustic fare.
All faces had already brightened up; mouths opened to utter loud jokes and eyes were laughing with knowing winks.
They were going to amuse themselves and no mistake.
The door opened, and old Amable appeared.
He seemed in a bad humor and his face wore a scowl as he dragged himself forward on his sticks, whining at every step to indicate his suffering.
As soon as they saw him they stopped talking, but suddenly his neighbor, Daddy Malivoire, a big joker, who knew all the little tricks and ways of people, began to yell, just as Cesaire used to do, by making a speaking-trumpet of his hands.
“Hallo, my cute old boy, you have a good nose on you to be able to smell Polyte's cookery from your own house!” A roar of laughter burst forth from the throats of those present.
Malivoire, excited by his success, went on: “There's nothing for the rheumatics like a chitterling poultice!
The women clucked like hens, while the servants wriggled, standing against the walls.
They found a place for him in the middle of the table, facing his daughter-in-law, and, as soon as he was seated, he began to eat.
With each ladleful of soup that went into his stomach, with each mouthful of bread or meat crushed between his gums, with each glass of cider or wine that flowed through his gullet he thought he was regaining something of his own property, getting back a little of his money which all those gluttons were devouring, saving in fact a portion of his own means.
And he ate in silence with the obstinacy of a miser who hides his coppers, with the same gloomy persistence with which he formerly performed his daily labors.
But all of a sudden he noticed at the end of the table Celeste's child on a woman's lap, and his eye remained fixed on the little boy.
He went on eating, with his glance riveted on the youngster, into whose mouth the woman who minded him every now and then put a little morsel which he nibbled at.
And the old man suffered more from the few mouthfuls sucked by this little chap than from all that the others swallowed.
Celeste took her child in her arms, and they went on slowly through the pale night whitened by the snow.
The deaf old man, three-fourths tipsy, and even more malicious under the influence of drink, refused to go forward.
Several times he even sat down with the object of making his daughter-in-law catch cold, and he kept whining, without uttering a word, giving vent to a sort of continuous groaning as if he were in pain.
But as the newly wedded pair could not sleep immediately, they heard the old man for a long time moving about on his bed of straw, and he even talked aloud several times, whether it was that he was dreaming or that he let his thoughts escape through his mouth, in spite of himself, not being able to keep them back, under the obsession of a fixed idea.
When he came down his ladder next morning he saw his daughter-in-law looking after the housekeeping.
Here's some good soup.” And she placed at the end of the table the round black earthen bowl filled with steaming liquid.
He sat down without giving any answer, seized the hot bowl, warmed his hands with it in his customary fashion, and, as it was very cold, even pressed it against his breast to try to make a little of the living heat of the boiling liquid enter into him, into his old body stiffened by so many winters.
Then he took his sticks and went out into the fields, covered with ice, till it was time for dinner, for he had seen Celeste's youngster still asleep in a big soap-box.
He did not take his place in the household.
He lived in the thatched house, as in bygone days, but he seemed not to belong to it any longer, to be no longer interested in anything, to look upon those people, his son, the wife and the child as strangers whom he did not know, to whom he never spoke.
Then the early spring made the seeds sprout forth again, and the peasants once more, like laborious ants, passed their days in the fields, toiling from morning till night, under the wind and under the rain, along the furrows of brown earth which brought forth the bread of men.
The year promised well for the newly married pair.
There were no late frosts, and the apples bursting into bloom scattered on the grass their rosy white snow which promised a hail of fruit for the autumn.
His wife said to him sometimes: “You'll make yourself ill in the long run.” He replied: “Certainly not.
I'm a good judge.” Nevertheless one evening he came home so fatigued that he had to get to bed without supper.
He rose up next morning at the usual hour, but he could not eat, in spite of his fast on the previous night, and he had to come back to the house in the middle of the afternoon in order to go to bed again.
In the course of the night he began to cough; he turned round on his straw couch, feverish, with his forehead burning, his tongue dry and his throat parched by a burning thirst.
However, at daybreak he went toward his grounds, but next morning the doctor had to be sent for and pronounced him very ill with inflammation of the lungs.
He could be heard coughing, gasping and tossing about in this hole.
In order to see him, to give his medicine and to apply cupping-glasses they had to-bring a candle to the entrance.
Then one could see his narrow head with his long matted beard underneath a thick lacework of spiders' webs, which hung and floated when stirred by the air.
Celeste watched him with restless activity, made him take physic, applied blisters to him, went back and forth in the house, while old Amable remained at the edge of his loft, watching at a distance the gloomy cavern where his son lay dying.
He did not come near him, through hatred of the wife, sulking like an ill-tempered dog.
Six more days passed, then one morning, as Celeste, who now slept on the ground on two loose bundles of straw, was going to see whether her man was better, she no longer heard his rapid breathing from the interior of his recess.
Terror stricken, she asked: “Well Cesaire, what sort of a night had you?” He did not answer.
She uttered a great cry, the long cry of a woman overpowered with fright.
At this cry the deaf old man appeared at the top of his ladder, and when he saw Celeste rushing to call for help, he quickly descended, placed his hand on his son's face, and suddenly realizing what had happened, went to shut the door from the inside, to prevent the wife from re- entering and resuming possession of the dwelling, since his son was no longer living.
Some of the neighbors arrived, called out and knocked.
The door was opened again and Celeste reappeared, all in tears, with swollen face and bloodshot eyes.
Then old Amable, vanquished, without uttering a word, climbed back to his loft.
Then, after the ceremony, the father-in-law and the daughter-in-law found themselves alone in the farmhouse with the child.
She lighted the fire, made some soup and placed the plates on the table, while the old man sat on the chair waiting without appearing to look at her.
When the meal was ready she bawled in his ear— “Come, daddy, you must eat.” He rose up, took his seat at the end of the table, emptied his soup bowl, masticated his bread and butter, drank his two glasses of cider and then took himself off.
It was one of those warm days, one of those enjoyable days when life ferments, pulsates, blooms all over the surface of the soil.
He looked at the young wheat and the young oats, thinking that his son was now under the earth, his poor boy!
He walked along wearily, dragging his legs after him in a limping fashion.
And, as he was all alone in the plain, all alone under the blue sky, in the midst of the growing crops, all alone with the larks which he saw hovering above his head, without hearing their light song, he began to weep as he proceeded on his way.
Then he sat down beside a pond and remained there till evening, gazing at the little birds that came there to drink.
Then, as the night was falling, he returned to the house, supped without saying a word and climbed up to his loft.
Nothing was changed, except that his son Cesaire slept in the cemetery.
He could work no longer; he was now good for nothing except to swallow the soup prepared by his daughter-in-law.
And he ate it in silence, morning and evening, watching with an eye of rage the little boy also taking soup, right opposite him, at the other side of the table.
Then he would go out, prowl about the fields after the fashion of a vagabond, hiding behind the barns where he would sleep for an hour or two as if he were afraid of being seen and then come back at the approach of night.
But Celeste's mind began to be occupied by graver anxieties.
The farm needed a man to look after it and cultivate it.
Somebody should be there always to go through the fields, not a mere hired laborer, but a regular farmer, a master who understood the business and would take an interest in the farm.
A lone woman could not manage the farming, watch the price of corn and direct the sale and purchase of cattle.
Then ideas came into her head, simple practical ideas, which she had turned over in her head at night.
She could not marry again before the end of the year, and it was necessary at once to take care of pressing interests, immediate interests.
Only one man could help her out of her difficulties, Victor Lecoq, the father of her child.
He was strong and understood farming; with a little money in his pocket he would make an excellent cultivator.
The man every now and then lifted up his cap to scratch his forehead and began thinking, while she, with flushed cheeks, went on talking warmly, told him about her views, her plans; her projects for the future.
At last he said in a low tone: “Yes, it can be done.” She opened her hand like a countryman clinching a bargain and asked: “Is it agreed?” He pressed her outstretched hand.
“'Tis agreed.” “It's settled, then, for next Sunday?” “It's settled for next Sunday” “Well, good-morning, Victor.” “Good-morning, Madame Houlbreque.” PART III This particular Sunday was the day of the village festival, the annual festival in honor of the patron saint, which in Normandy is called the assembly.
For the last eight days quaint-looking vehicles in which live the families of strolling fair exhibitors, lottery managers, keepers of shooting galleries and other forms of amusement or exhibitors of curiosities whom the peasants call “wonder-makers” could be seen coming along the roads drawn slowly by gray or sorrel horses.
The dirty wagons with their floating curtains, accompanied by a melancholy-looking dog, who trotted, with his head down, between the wheels, drew up one after the other on the green in front of the town hall.
Then a tent was erected in front of each ambulant abode, and inside this tent could be seen, through the holes in the canvas, glittering things which excited the envy or the curiosity of the village youngsters.
As soon as the morning of the fete arrived all the booths were opened, displaying their splendors of glass or porcelain, and the peasants on their way to mass looked with genuine satisfaction at these modest shops which they saw again, nevertheless, each succeeding year.
Early in the afternoon there was a crowd on the green.
From every neighboring village the farmers arrived, shaken along with their wives and children in the two-wheeled open chars-a-bancs, which rattled along, swaying like cradles.
They unharnessed at their friends' houses and the farmyards were filled with strange-looking traps, gray, high, lean, crooked, like long-clawed creatures from the depths of the sea.
And each family, with the youngsters in front and the grown-up ones behind, came to the assembly with tranquil steps, smiling countenances and open hands, big hands, red and bony, accustomed to work and apparently tired of their temporary rest.
The barrel-organ accompanying the carrousel sent through the air its shrill jerky notes.
The lottery-wheel made a whirring sound like that of cloth tearing, and every moment the crack of the rifle could be heard.
And the slow-moving throng passed on quietly in front of the booths resembling paste in a fluid condition, with the motions of a flock of sheep and the awkwardness of heavy animals who had escaped by chance.
The girls, holding one another's arms in groups of six or eight, were singing; the youths followed them, making jokes, with their caps over their ears and their blouses stiffened with starch, swollen out like blue balloons.
The whole countryside was there—masters, laboring men and women servants.
Old Amable himself, wearing his old-fashioned green frock coat, had wished to see the assembly, for he never failed to attend on such an occasion.
He looked at the lotteries, stopped in front of the shooting galleries to criticize the shots and interested himself specially in a very simple game which consisted in throwing a big wooden ball into the open mouth of a mannikin carved and painted on a board.
Suddenly he felt a tap on his shoulder.
It was Daddy Malivoire, who exclaimed: “Ha, daddy!
Come and have a glass of brandy.” And they sat down at the table of an open-air restaurant.
They drank one glass of brandy, then two, then three, and old Amable once more began wandering through the assembly.
His thoughts became slightly confused, he smiled without knowing why, he smiled in front of the lotteries, in front of the wooden horses and especially in front of the killing game.
He remained there a long time, filled with delight, when he saw a holiday-maker knocking down the gendarme or the cure, two authorities whom he instinctively distrusted.
A neighbor came to warn him: “You'll get back home late for the stew, daddy.” Then he set out on his way to the farmhouse.
A soft shadow, the warm shadow of a spring night, was slowly descending on the earth.
He stopped, much surprised, then he went in, and he saw Victor Lecoq seated at the table, with a plate filled with potatoes before him, taking his supper in the very same place where his son had sat.
And he turned round suddenly as if he wanted to go away.
Here's some good stew to finish off the assembly with.” He complied through inertia and sat down, watching in turn the man, the woman and the child.
Then he began to eat quietly as on ordinary days.
And Celeste again served him with food, poured out drink for him and appeared happy while speaking to him.
Old Amable's eyes followed them attentively, though he could not hear what they were saying.
When he had finished supper (and he had scarcely eaten anything, there was such a weight at his heart) he rose up, and instead of ascending to his loft as he did every night he opened the gate of the yard and went out into the open air.
When he had gone, Celeste, a little uneasy, asked: “What is he going to do?” Victor replied in an indifferent tone: “Don't bother yourself.
The yard gate opened and old Amable again appeared.
As he did not see him, he took the candle off the table and approached the dark niche in which his son had died.
In the interior of it he perceived the man lying under the bed clothes and already asleep.
Then the deaf man noiselessly turned round, put back the candle and went out into the yard.
Celeste had finished her work.
She put her son into his bed, arranged everything and waited for her father-in-law's return before lying down herself.
She remained sitting on a chair, without moving her hands and with her eyes fixed on vacancy.
As he did not come back, she murmured in a tone of impatience and annoyance: “This good-for-nothing old man will make us burn four sous' worth of candles.” Victor answered from under the bed clothes: “It's over an hour since he went out.
She rose up, took the light and went out, shading the light with her hand in order to see through the darkness.
She saw nothing in front of the door, nothing on the bench, nothing on the dung heap, where the old man used sometimes to sit in hot weather.
But, just as she was on the point of going in again, she chanced to raise her eyes toward the big apple tree, which sheltered the entrance to the farmyard, and suddenly she saw two feet—two feet at the height of her face belonging to a man who was hanging.
She uttered terrible cries: “Victor!
She could not utter another word, and turning aside her head so as not to see, she pointed toward the tree with her outstretched arm.
Not understanding what she meant, he took the candle in order to find out, and in the midst of the foliage lit up from below he saw old Amable hanging high up with a stable-halter round his neck.
But the old man was already cold and his tongue protruded horribly with a frightful grimace.
ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 10.
THE CHRISTENING “Well doctor, a little brandy?” “With pleasure.” The old ship's surgeon, holding out his glass, watched it as it slowly filled with the golden liquid.
Then he said: “Ah! the charming poison!
Or rather the seductive murderer, the delightful destroyer of peoples!
You may have read that admirable book entitled L'Assommoir, but you have not, as I have, seen alcohol exterminate a whole tribe of savages, a little kingdom of negroes—alcohol calmly unloaded by the barrel by red-bearded English seamen.
“Right near here, in a little village in Brittany near Pont-l'Abbe, I once witnessed a strange and terrible tragedy caused by alcohol.
I was spending my vacation in a little country house left me by my father.
You know this flat coast where the wind whistles day and night, where one sees, standing or prone, these giant rocks which in the olden times were regarded as guardians, and which still retain something majestic and imposing about them.
I always expect to see them come to life and start to walk across the country with the slow and ponderous tread of giants, or to unfold enormous granite wings and fly toward the paradise of the Druids.
“Everywhere is the sea, always ready on the slightest provocation to rise in its anger and shake its foamy mane at those bold enough to brave its wrath.
“And the men who travel on this terrible sea, which, with one motion of its green back, can overturn and swallow up their frail barks—they go out in the little boats, day and night, hardy, weary and drunk.
He remained, there one night, when he had had too much to drink; so did her oldest son.
It consisted of three persons, two sisters and a man, who had married one of them, and who attended to the garden.
“A short time before Christmas my gardener's wife presented him with a boy.
I could hardly deny the request, and so he borrowed ten francs from me for the cost of the christening, as he said.
“The second day of January was chosen as the date of the ceremony.
For a week the earth had been covered by an enormous white carpet of snow, which made this flat, low country seem vast and limitless.
The ocean appeared to be black in contrast with this white plain; one could see it rolling, raging and tossing its waves as though wishing to annihilate its pale neighbor, which appeared to be dead, it was so calm, quiet and cold.
“At nine o'clock the father, Kerandec, came to my door with his sister- in-law, the big Kermagan, and the nurse, who carried the infant wrapped up in a blanket.
I was thinking of the poor little creature who was being carried on ahead of us, and I said to myself that this Breton race must surely be of iron, if their children were able, as soon as they were born, to stand such an outing.
At first I thought there must have been some slight accident, but I saw that they were leaving the poor little fellow naked completely naked, in the icy air.
Furious at such imprudence, I protested: “'Why, you are crazy!
You will kill the child!' “The woman answered quietly: 'Oh, no, sir; he must wait naked before the Lord.' “The father and the aunt looked on undisturbed.
If it were not adhered to misfortune was sure to attend the little one.
“I scolded, threatened and pleaded.
I used force to try to cover the frail creature.
I was about to leave these brutes when I saw the priest coming across the country, followed. by the sexton and a young boy.
I ran towards him and gave vent to my indignation.
He showed no surprise nor did he quicken his pace in the least.
He answered: “'What can you expect, sir?
“He answered: 'But I can't go any faster.' “He entered the vestry, while we remained outside on the church steps.
But what about the poor little creature who was howling from the effects of the biting cold.
But the poor child had to remain naked throughout the ceremony.
It was interminable.
The priest stammered over the Latin words and mispronounced them horribly.
He walked slowly and with a ponderous tread.
His white surplice chilled my heart.
It seemed as though, in the name of a pitiless and barbarous god, he had wrapped himself in another kind of snow in order to torture this little piece of humanity that suffered so from the cold.
“Finally the christening was finished according to the rites and I saw the nurse once more take the frozen, moaning child and wrap it up in the blanket.
“The priest said to me: 'Do you wish to sign the register?' “Turning to my gardener, I said: 'Hurry up and get home quickly so that you can warm that child.' I gave him some advice so as to ward off, if not too late, a bad attack of pneumonia.
He promised to follow my instructions and left with his sister-in-law and the nurse.
I followed the priest into the vestry, and when I had signed he demanded five francs for expenses.
The priest threatened to destroy the paper and to annul the ceremony.
I, in turn, threatened him with the district attorney.
“As soon as I reached home I went down to Kerandec's to find out whether everything was all right.
Neither father, nor sister-in-law, nor nurse had yet returned.
The mother, who had remained alone, was in bed, shivering with cold and starving, for she had had nothing to eat since the day before.
She answered without surprise or anger, 'They're going to drink something to celebrate: It was the custom.
Then I thought, of my ten francs which were to pay the church and would doubtless pay for the alcohol.
I was uneasy and furious and promised myself to drive out these brutes, wondering with terror what was going to happen to the poor infant.
“It was already six, and they had not yet returned.
At daybreak I was awakened by my servant, who was bringing me my hot water.
“As soon as my eyes were open I asked: 'How about Kerandec?' “The man hesitated and then stammered: 'Oh! he came back, all right, after midnight, and so drunk that he couldn't walk, and so were Kermagan and the nurse.
They brought it back to Mother Kerandec.
As Kerandec had no more brandy or money, he took some wood alcohol, which monsieur gave him for the lamp, and all four of them are now drinking that.
The mother is feeling pretty sick now.' “I had hastily put on some clothes, and seizing a stick, with the intention of applying it to the backs of these human beasts, I hastened towards the gardener's house.
Kerandec, the nurse, and the Kermagan woman were snoring on the floor.
He held it up to the lamp, and the light streaming through it imparted to the liquid the amber color of molten topaz.
With one gulp he swallowed the treacherous drink.
THE FARMER'S WIFE Said the Baron Rene du Treilles to me: “Will you come and open the hunting season with me at my farm at Marinville?
I shall be delighted if you will, my dear boy.
It is rather a difficult ground to get at, and the place I live in is so primitive that I can invite only my most intimate friends.” I accepted his invitation, and on Saturday we set off on the train going to Normandy.
Every fall backward on the wooden bench gave me the most dreadful pain.
The peasant kept repeating in his calm, monotonous voice: “There, there!
All right all right, Moutard, all right!” But Moutard scarcely heard, and kept capering along like a goat.
Our two dogs behind us, in the empty part of the hencoop, were standing up and sniffing the air of the plains, where they scented game.
And Rene du Treilles suddenly exclaimed: “I love this soil; I have my very roots in it.” He was a pure Norman, tall and strong, with a slight paunch, and of the old race of adventurers who went to found kingdoms on the shores of every ocean.
After two hours' travelling over stony roads, across that green and monotonous plain, the vehicle entered one of those orchard farmyards and drew up before in old structure falling into decay, where an old maid- servant stood waiting beside a young fellow, who took charge of the horse.
We entered the farmhouse.
The smoky kitchen was high and spacious.
The copper utensils and the crockery shone in the reflection of the hearth.
One perceived an odor of milk, apples, smoke, that indescribable smell peculiar to old farmhouses; the odor of the earth, of the walls, of furniture, the odor of spilled stale soup, of former wash-days and of former inhabitants, the smell of animals and of human beings combined, of things and of persons, the odor of time, and of things that have passed away.
I went out to have a look at the farmyard.
In this farmyard the Norman smell of apples was as strong as that of the bloom of orange trees on the shores of the south of France.
Four rows of beeches surrounded this inclosure.
They were so tall that they seemed to touch the clouds at this hour of nightfall, and their summits, through which the night winds passed, swayed and sang a mournful, interminable song.
I reentered the house.
The baron was warming his feet at the fire, and was listening to the farmer's talk about country matters.
He talked about marriages, births and deaths, then about the fall in the price of grain and the latest news about cattle.
The “Veularde” (as he called a cow that had been bought at the fair of Veules) had calved in the middle of June.
Apricots were almost disappearing from the country.
It was a good rustic meal, simple and abundant, long and tranquil.
And while we were dining I noticed the special kind of friendly familiarity which had struck me from the start between the baron and the peasant.
Outside, the beeches continued sighing in the night wind, and our two dogs, shut up in a shed, were whining and howling in an uncanny fashion.
The fire was dying out in the big fireplace.
Maitre Lebrument said in his turn: “If you don't mind, M'sieu le Baron, I'm going to bed.
I am not used to staying up late.” The baron extended his hand toward him and said: “Go, my friend,” in so cordial a tone that I said, as soon as the man had disappeared: “He is devoted to you, this farmer?” “Better than that, my dear fellow!
It is a drama, an old drama, simple and very sad, that attaches him to me.
Here is the story: “You know that my father was colonel in a cavalry regiment.
We were living in our old chateau of Valrenne, near Caudebec-en-Caux.
“At this period my mother's chambermaid was one of the prettiest girls you could see, fair-haired, slender and sprightly in manner, a genuine soubrette of the old type that no longer exists.
To-day these creatures spring up into hussies before their time.
Paris, with the aid of the railways, attracts them, calls them, takes hold of them, as soon as they are budding into womanhood, these little sluts who in old times remained simple maid-servants.
Every man passing by, as recruiting sergeants did formerly, looking for recruits, with conscripts, entices and ruins them —these foolish lassies—and we have now only the scum of the female sex for servant maids, all that is dull, nasty, common and ill-formed, too ugly, even for gallantry.
“Well, this girl was charming, and I often gave her a kiss in dark corners; nothing more, I swear to you!
She was virtuous, besides; and I had some respect for my mother's house, which is more than can be said of the blackguards of the present day.
“Now, it happened that my man-servant, the ex-soldier, the old farmer you have just seen, fell madly in love with this girl, perfectly daft.
The first thing we noticed was that he forgot everything, he paid no attention to anything.
“My father said incessantly: “'See here, Jean, what's the matter with you?
We thought he must have been attacked by some nervous affection, and sent for the doctor, who thought he could detect symptoms of spinal disease.
Then my father, full of anxiety about his faithful man-servant, decided to place him in a private hospital.
When the poor fellow heard of my father's intentions he made a clean breast of it.
“'M'sieu le Baron' “'Well, my boy?' “'You see, the thing I want is not physic.' “'Ha! what is it, then?' “'It's marriage!' “My father turned round and stared at him in astonishment.
“'What's that you say, eh?' “'It's marriage.” “'Marriage!
“But my mother, instead of laughing, was deeply affected.
“He answered without hesitation: “'With Louise, Madame le Baronne.' “My mother said with the utmost gravity: 'We must try to arrange this matter the best way we can.' “So Louise was sent for and questioned by my mother; and she said in reply that she knew all about Jean's liking for her, that in fact Jean had spoken to her about it several times, but that she did not want him.
As she declared she was not in love with any other man, she could not give any serious reason for her refusal.
My father at last overcame her resistance by means of a big present of money, and started the pair of them on a farm—this very farm.
I did not see them for three years, and then I learned that Louise had died of consumption.
I was shocked to find my father's old servant with perfectly white hair, though he was not more than forty-five or forty-six years of age.
We could hear the rain battering at the roof, the walls, and the windows, flowing in a perfect deluge into the farmyard; and my dog was howling in the shed where the other dogs are howling to-night.
Well, it's this—it wasn't consumption she died of at all.
She was just as I was before I married her, but it was just the opposite, just the opposite.
He said it was her liver that was affected—he said it was what he called a “hepatic” complaint—I don't know these big words, M'sieu le Baron.
Then I bought medicine for her, heaps on heaps of bottles that cost about three hundred francs.
I bought her caps, and dresses, and hair oil, and earrings.
And so one night at the end of November, one snowy night, after she had been in bed the whole day, she told me to send for the cure.
As soon as he came—' “'Jean,' she said, 'I am going to make a confession to you.
If I am dying, it is because I was not able to console myself for leaving the chateau, because I was too fond of the young Baron Monsieur Rene, too fond of him, mind you, Jean, there was no harm in it!
You will tell him, swear you, will, Jean—swear it—in the presence of M'sieu le Cure!
Swear it!' “'Well, I gave her my promise, M'sieu le Baron, and on the faith of an honest man I have kept my word.' “And then he ceased speaking, his eyes filling with tears.
“Good God! my dear boy, you can't form any idea of the emotion that filled me when I heard this poor devil, whose wife I had killed without suspecting it, telling me this story on that wet night in this very kitchen.
“I exclaimed: 'Ah! my poor Jean! my poor Jean!' “He murmured: 'Well, that's all, M'sieu le Baron.
He rose, lighted a lantern, and we walked through the blinding rain by the light of the lantern.
“Suddenly he stopped before a marble slab and said: 'There it is,' and he flashed the lantern close to it so that I could read the inscription: “'TO LOUISE HORTENSE MARINET, “'Wife of Jean-Francois Lebrument, Farmer, “'SHE WAS A FAITHFUL WIFE.
And I thought of the heart of her sleeping there in her grave.
And I don't know why, but I feel as if I were guilty of some crime in the presence of this man who always looks as if he forgave me.” THE DEVIL The peasant and the doctor stood on opposite sides of the bed, beside the old, dying woman.
She was calm and resigned and her mind quite clear as she looked at them and listened to their conversation.
The July sun streamed in at the window and the open door and cast its hot flames on the uneven brown clay floor, which had been stamped down by four generations of clodhoppers.
The smell of the fields came in also, driven by the sharp wind and parched by the noontide heat.
The grass-hoppers chirped themselves hoarse, and filled the country with their shrill noise, which was like that of the wooden toys which are sold to children at fair time.
But the doctor got angry, and, stamping his foot, he said: “You are no better than a brute, do you hear, and I will not allow you to do it, do you understand?
And if you must get in your wheat today, go and fetch Rapet's wife and make her look after your mother; I will have it, do you understand me?
And if you do not obey me, I will let you die like a dog, when you are ill in your turn; do you hear?” The peasant, a tall, thin fellow with slow movements, who was tormented by indecision, by his fear of the doctor and his fierce love of saving, hesitated, calculated, and stammered out: “How much does La Rapet charge for attending sick people?” “How should I know?” the doctor cried.
“I will go for her,” he replied; “don't get angry, doctor.” And the latter left, calling out as he went: “Be careful, be very careful, you know, for I do not joke when I am angry!” As soon as they were alone the peasant turned to his mother and said in a resigned voice: “I will go and fetch La Rapet, as the man will have it.
La Rapet, old was an old washerwoman, watched the dead and the dying of the neighborhood, and then, as soon as she had sewn her customers into that linen cloth from which they would emerge no more, she went and took up her iron to smooth out the linen of the living.
Wrinkled like a last year's apple, spiteful, envious, avaricious with a phenomenal avarice, bent double, as if she had been broken in half across the loins by the constant motion of passing the iron over the linen, one might have said that she had a kind of abnormal and cynical love of a death struggle.
She never spoke of anything but of the people she had seen die, of the various kinds of deaths at which she had been present, and she related with the greatest minuteness details which were always similar, just as a sportsman recounts his luck.
You don't find any made of that stuff nowadays!” La Rapet answered gravely: “There are two prices: Forty sous by day and three francs by night for the rich, and twenty sous by day and forty by night for the others.
You shall pay me the twenty and forty.” But the, peasant reflected, for he knew his mother well.
He knew how tenacious of life, how vigorous and unyielding she was, and she might last another week, in spite of the doctor's opinion; and so he said resolutely: “No, I would rather you would fix a price for the whole time until the end.
If that happens, so much the better for you, and so much the worse for her, but if she holds out till to-morrow or longer, so much the better for her and so much the worse for you!” The nurse looked at the man in astonishment, for she had never treated a death as a speculation, and she hesitated, tempted by the idea of the possible gain, but she suspected that he wanted to play her a trick.
“Then come with me and see her.” She washed her hands, and went with him immediately.
They did not speak on the road; she walked with short, hasty steps, while he strode on with his long legs, as if he were crossing a brook at every step.
The cows lying down in the fields, overcome by the heat, raised their heads heavily and lowed feebly at the two passers-by, as if to ask them for some green grass.
When they got near the house, Honore Bontemps murmured: “Suppose it is all over?” And his unconscious wish that it might be so showed itself in the sound of his voice.
She was lying on her back, on her wretched bed, her hands covered with a purple cotton counterpane, horribly thin, knotty hands, like the claws of strange animals, like crabs, half closed by rheumatism, fatigue and the work of nearly a century which she had accomplished.
La Rapet went up to the bed and looked at the dying woman, felt her pulse, tapped her on the chest, listened to her breathing, and asked her questions, so as to hear her speak; and then, having looked at her for some time, she went out of the room, followed by Honore.
You will have to give me six francs, everything included.” “Six francs! six francs!” he shouted.
I tell you she cannot last more than five or six hours!” And they disputed angrily for some time, but as the nurse said she must go home, as the time was going by, and as his wheat would not come to the farmyard of its own accord, he finally agreed to her terms.
“Very well, then, that is settled; six francs, including everything, until the corpse is taken out.” And he went away, with long strides, to his wheat which was lying on the ground under the hot sun which ripens the grain, while the sick-nurse went in again to the house.
She had brought some work with her, for she worked without ceasing by the side of the dead and dying, sometimes for herself, sometimes for the family which employed her as seamstress and paid her rather more in that capacity.
Suddenly, she asked: “Have you received the last sacraments, Mother Bontemps?” The old peasant woman shook her head, and La Rapet, who was very devout, got up quickly: “Good heavens, is it possible?
I will go and fetch the cure”; and she rushed off to the parsonage so quickly that the urchins in the street thought some accident had happened, when they saw her running.
The priest came immediately in his surplice, preceded by a choir boy who rang a bell to announce the passage of the Host through the parched and quiet country.
The acolyte, in his red cassock, walked quickly, and the priest, with his head inclined toward one shoulder and his square biretta on his head, followed him, muttering some prayers; while last of all came La Rapet, bent almost double as if she wished to prostrate herself, as she walked with folded hands as they do in church.
Honore saw them pass in the distance, and he asked: “Where is our priest going?” His man, who was more intelligent, replied: “He is taking the sacrament to your mother, of course!” The peasant was not surprised, and said: “That may be,” and went on with his work.
Mother Bontemps confessed, received absolution and communion, and the priest took his departure, leaving the two women alone in the suffocating room, while La Rapet began to look at the dying woman, and to ask herself whether it could last much longer.
The day was on the wane, and gusts of cooler air began to blow, causing a view of Epinal, which was fastened to the wall by two pins, to flap up and down; the scanty window curtains, which had formerly been white, but were now yellow and covered with fly-specks, looked as if they were going to fly off, as if they were struggling to get away, like the old woman's soul.
Lying motionless, with her eyes open, she seemed to await with indifference that death which was so near and which yet delayed its coming.
Her short breathing whistled in her constricted throat.
It would stop altogether soon, and there would be one woman less in the world; no one would regret her.
La Rapet, seized with anxiety, went up to the dying woman, who remained in the same state, lethargic and impassive, with her eyes open and her hands clutching the counterpane.
The nurse perceived that this might go on thus for two days, four days, eight days, and her avaricious mind was seized with fear, while she was furious at the sly fellow who had tricked her, and at the woman who would not die.
Nevertheless, she began to work, and waited, looking intently at the wrinkled face of Mother Bontemps.
When Honore returned to breakfast he seemed quite satisfied and even in a bantering humor.
He was decidedly getting in his wheat under very favorable circumstances.
La Rapet was becoming exasperated; every minute now seemed to her so much time and money stolen from her.
She felt a mad inclination to take this old woman, this, headstrong old fool, this obstinate old wretch, and to stop that short, rapid breath, which was robbing her of her time and money, by squeezing her throat a little.
But then she reflected on the danger of doing so, and other thoughts came into her head; so she went up to the bed and said: “Have you ever seen the Devil?” Mother Bontemps murmured: “No.” Then the sick-nurse began to talk and to tell her tales which were likely to terrify the weak mind of the dying woman.
He has a broom in his hand, a saucepan on his head, and he utters loud cries.
She then enumerated all those to whom the Devil had appeared that year: Josephine Loisel, Eulalie Ratier, Sophie Padaknau, Seraphine Grospied.
Mother Bontemps, who had at last become disturbed in mind, moved about, wrung her hands, and tried to turn her head to look toward the end of the room.
Suddenly La Rapet disappeared at the foot of the bed.
She took a sheet out of the cupboard and wrapped herself up in it; she put the iron saucepan on her head, so that its three short bent feet rose up like horns, and she took a broom in her right hand and a tin pail in her left, which she threw up suddenly, so that it might fall to the ground noisily.
When it came down, it certainly made a terrible noise.
Then, climbing upon a chair, the nurse lifted up the curtain which hung at the bottom of the bed, and showed herself, gesticulating and uttering shrill cries into the iron saucepan which covered her face, while she menaced the old peasant woman, who was nearly dead, with her broom.
Terrified, with an insane expression on her face, the dying woman made a superhuman effort to get up and escape; she even got her shoulders and chest out of bed; then she fell back with a deep sigh.
All was over, and La Rapet calmly put everything back into its place; the broom into the corner by the cupboard the sheet inside it, the saucepan on the hearth, the pail on the floor, and the chair against the wall.
Then, with professional movements, she closed the dead woman's large eyes, put a plate on the bed and poured some holy water into it, placing in it the twig of boxwood that had been nailed to the chest of drawers, and kneeling down, she fervently repeated the prayers for the dead, which she knew by heart, as a matter of business.
And when Honore returned in the evening he found her praying, and he calculated immediately that she had made twenty sows out of him, for she had only spent three days and one night there, which made five francs altogether, instead of the six which he owed her.
THE SNIPE Old Baron des Ravots had for forty years been the champion sportsman of his province.
But a stroke of paralysis had kept him in his chair for the last five or six years.
He could now only shoot pigeons from the window of his drawing-room or from the top of his high doorsteps.
He was a good-natured business man, who had much of the literary spirit of a former century.
He worshipped anecdotes, those little risque anecdotes, and also true stories of events that happened in his neighborhood.
As soon as a friend came to see him he asked: “Well, anything new?” And he knew how to worm out information like an examining lawyer.
On sunny days he had his large reclining chair, similar to a bed, wheeled to the hall door.
Another valet, hidden in the bushes, let fly a pigeon from time to time at irregular intervals, so that the baron should be unprepared and be always on the watch.
And from morning till night he fired at the birds, much annoyed if he were taken by surprise and laughing till he cried when the animal fell straight to the earth or, turned over in some comical and unexpected manner.
He would turn to the man who was loading the gun and say, almost choking with laughter: “Did that get him, Joseph?
Did you see how he fell?” Joseph invariably replied: “Oh, monsieur le baron never misses them.” In autumn, when the shooting season opened, he invited his friends as he had done formerly, and loved to hear them firing in the distance.
He counted the shots and was pleased when they followed each other rapidly.
And in the evening he made each guest give a faithful account of his day.
They remained three hours at table telling about their sport.
They were strange and improbable adventures in which the romancing spirit of the sportsmen delighted.
Some of them were memorable stories and were repeated regularly.
The story of a rabbit that little Vicomte de Bourril had missed in his vestibule convulsed them with laughter each year anew.
Every five minutes a fresh speaker would say: “I heard 'birr! birr!' and a magnificent covey rose at ten paces from me.
Pif! paf! and I saw a shower, a veritable shower of birds.
There were seven of them!” And they all went into raptures, amazed, but reciprocally credulous.
But there was an old custom in the house called “The Story of the Snipe.” Whenever this queen of birds was in season the same ceremony took place at each dinner.
As they worshipped this incomparable bird, each guest ate one every evening, but the heads were all left in the dish.
Then the baron, acting the part of a bishop, had a plate brought to him containing a little fat, and he carefully anointed the precious heads, holding them by the tip of their slender, needle-like beak.
A lighted candle was placed beside him and everyone was silent in an anxiety of expectation.
Then he took one of the heads thus prepared, stuck a pin through it and stuck the pin on a cork, keeping the whole contrivance steady by means of little crossed sticks, and carefully placed this object on the neck of a bottle in the manner of a tourniquet.
All the guests counted simultaneously in a loud tone— “One-two-three.” And the baron with a fillip of the finger made this toy whirl round.
The guest to whom the long beak pointed when the head stopped became the possessor of all the heads, a feast fit for a king, which made his neighbors look askance.
The grease sputtered, the roasting flesh smoked and the lucky winner ate the head, holding it by the beak and uttering exclamations of enjoyment.
When he had finished the last head he was obliged, at the baron's orders, to tell an anecdote to compensate the disappointed ones.
THE WILL I knew that tall young fellow, Rene de Bourneval.
He was an agreeable man, though rather melancholy and seemed prejudiced against everything, was very skeptical, and he could with a word tear down social hypocrisy.
He would often say: “There are no honorable men, or, at least, they are only relatively so when compared with those lower than themselves.” He had two brothers, whom he never saw, the Messieurs de Courcils.
I always supposed they were by another father, on account of the difference in the name.
I had frequently heard that the family had a strange history, but did not know the details.
As I took a great liking to Rene we soon became intimate friends, and one evening, when I had been dining with him alone, I asked him, by chance: “Are you a son of the first or second marriage?” He grew rather pale, and then flushed, and did not speak for a few moments; he was visibly embarrassed.
Then he smiled in the melancholy, gentle manner, which was peculiar to him, and said: “My dear friend, if it will not weary you, I can give you some very strange particulars about my life.
I know that you are a sensible man, so I do not fear that our friendship will suffer by my revelations; and should it suffer, I should not care about having you for my friend any longer.
“My mother, Madame de Courcils, was a poor little, timid woman, whom her husband had married for the sake of her fortune, and her whole life was one of martyrdom.
Of a loving, timid, sensitive disposition, she was constantly being ill-treated by the man who ought to have been my father, one of those boors called country gentlemen.
A month after their marriage he was living a licentious life and carrying on liaisons with the wives and daughters of his tenants.
This did not prevent him from having three children by his wife, that is, if you count me in.
Set aside, unnoticed, nervous, she looked at people with her bright, uneasy, restless eyes, the eyes of some terrified creature which can never shake off its fear.
And yet she was pretty, very pretty and fair, a pale blonde, as if her hair had lost its color through her constant fear.
“Among the friends of Monsieur de Courcils who constantly came to her chateau, there was an ex-cavalry officer, a widower, a man who was feared, who was at the same time tender and violent, capable of the most determined resolves, Monsieur de Bourneval, whose name I bear.
He was a tall, thin man, with a heavy black mustache.
His great-grandmother had been a friend of J.
Rousseau's, and one might have said that he had inherited something of this ancestral connection.
He knew the Contrat Social, and the Nouvelle Heloise by heart, and all those philosophical books which prepared in advance the overthrow of our old usages, prejudices, superannuated laws and imbecile morality.
“It seems that he loved my mother, and she loved him, but their liaison was carried on so secretly that no one guessed at its existence.
The poor, neglected, unhappy woman must have clung to him in despair, and in her intimacy with him must have imbibed all his ways of thinking, theories of free thought, audacious ideas of independent love; but being so timid she never ventured to speak out, and it was all driven back, condensed, shut up in her heart.
“My two brothers were very hard towards her, like their father, and never gave her a caress, and, accustomed to seeing her count for nothing in the house, they treated her rather like a servant.
“When she died I was seventeen, and I must add, in order that you may understand what follows, that a lawsuit between my father and mother had been decided in my mother's favor, giving her the bulk of the property, and, thanks to the tricks of the law, and the intelligent devotion of a lawyer to her interests, the right to make her will in favor of whom she pleased.
I can remember it, as if it were yesterday.
It was an imposing scene, dramatic, burlesque and surprising, occasioned by the posthumous revolt of that dead woman, by the cry for liberty, by the demands of that martyred one who had been crushed by our oppression during her lifetime and who, from her closed tomb, uttered a despairing appeal for independence.
“The man who believed he was my father, a stout, ruddy-faced man, who looked like a butcher, and my brothers, two great fellows of twenty and twenty-two, were waiting quietly in their chairs.
Monsieur de Bourneval, who had been invited to be present, came in and stood behind me.
He was very pale and bit his mustache, which was turning gray.
No doubt he was prepared for what was going to happen.
I believe that my child's heart is great enough to understand me, and to forgive me.
I have suffered my whole life long.
I was married out of calculation, then despised, misunderstood, oppressed and constantly deceived by my husband.
“'My elder sons never loved me, never petted me, scarcely treated me as a mother, but during my whole life I did my duty towards them, and I owe them nothing more after my death.
The ties of blood cannot exist without daily and constant affection.
An ungrateful son is less than a stranger; he is a culprit, for he has no right to be indifferent towards his mother.
“'I have always trembled before men, before their unjust laws, their inhuman customs, their shameful prejudices.
Dead, I fling aside disgraceful hypocrisy; I dare to speak my thoughts, and to avow and to sign the secret of my heart.
“'I therefore leave that part of my fortune of which the law allows me to dispose, in trust to my dear lover, Pierre-Germer-Simon de Bourneval, to revert afterwards to our dear son Rene.
“'Monsieur de Courcils is the father of my two eldest sons; Rene, alone, owes his life to Monsieur de Bourneval.
I pray the Master of men and of their destinies, to place father and son above social prejudices, to make them love each other until they die, and to love me also in my coffin.
“'These are my last thoughts, and my last wish.
There they stood, both of them tall, one stout and the other thin, both trembling.
My mother's husband stammered out: 'You are a worthless wretch!' And the other replied in a loud, dry voice: 'We will meet elsewhere, monsieur.
I should have already slapped your ugly face and challenged you long since if I had not, before everything else, thought of the peace of mind during her lifetime of that poor woman whom you caused to suffer so greatly.' “Then, turning to me, he said: 'You are my son; will you come with me?
I have no right to take you away, but I shall assume it, if you are willing to come with me: I shook his hand without replying, and we went out together.
I was certainly three parts mad.
“Two days later Monsieur de Bourneval killed Monsieur de Courcils in a duel.
My brothers, to avoid a terrible scandal, held their tongues.
I offered them and they accepted half the fortune which my mother had left me.
I took my real father's name, renouncing that which the law gave me, but which was not really mine.
Monsieur de Bourneval died three years later and I am still inconsolable.” He rose from his chair, walked up and down the room, and, standing in front of me, said: “Well, I say that my mother's will was one of the most beautiful, the most loyal, as well as one of the grandest acts that a woman could perform.
Do you not think so?” I held out both hands to him, saying: “I most certainly do, my friend.” WALTER SCHNAFFS' ADVENTURE Ever since he entered France with the invading army Walter Schnaffs had considered himself the most unfortunate of men.
He was large, had difficulty in walking, was short of breath and suffered frightfully with his feet, which were very flat and very fat.
But he was a peaceful, benevolent man, not warlike or sanguinary, the father of four children whom he adored, and married to a little blonde whose little tendernesses, attentions and kisses he recalled with despair every evening.
He liked to rise late and retire early, to eat good things in a leisurely manner and to drink beer in the saloon.
He reflected, besides, that all that is sweet in existence vanishes with life, and he maintained in his heart a fearful hatred, instinctive as well as logical, for cannon, rifles, revolvers and swords, but especially for bayonets, feeling that he was unable to dodge this dangerous weapon rapidly enough to protect his big paunch.
And when night fell and he lay on the ground, wrapped in his cape beside his comrades who were snoring, he thought long and deeply about those he had left behind and of the dangers in his path.
Who would provide for them and bring them up?” Just at present they were not rich, although he had borrowed when he left so as to leave them some money.
And Walter Schnaffs wept when he thought of all this.
At the beginning of a battle his legs became so weak that he would have fallen if he had not reflected that the entire army would pass over his body.
The whistling of the bullets gave him gooseflesh.
His company was marching on Normandy, and one day he was sent to reconnoitre with a small detachment, simply to explore a portion of the territory and to return at once.
All seemed quiet in the country; nothing indicated an armed resistance.
But as the Prussians were quietly descending into a little valley traversed by deep ravines a sharp fusillade made them halt suddenly, killing twenty of their men, and a company of sharpshooters, suddenly emerging from a little wood as large as your hand, darted forward with bayonets at the end of their rifles.
Walter Schnaffs remained motionless at first, so surprised and bewildered that he did not even think of making his escape.
Then he was seized with a wild desire to run away, but he remembered at once that he ran like a tortoise compared with those thin Frenchmen, who came bounding along like a lot of goats.
Perceiving a large ditch full of brushwood covered with dead leaves about six paces in front of him, he sprang into it with both feet together, without stopping to think of its depth, just as one jumps from a bridge into the river.
He fell like an arrow through a thick layer of vines and thorny brambles that tore his face and hands and landed heavily in a sitting posture on a bed of stones.
This aperture might betray him, and he crawled along carefully on hands and knees at the bottom of this ditch beneath the covering of interlacing branches, going as fast as he could and getting away from the scene of the skirmish.
Presently he stopped and sat down, crouched like a hare amid the tall dry grass.
Then the noise of fighting grew fainter and ceased.
Suddenly something stirred, beside him.
He was frightfully startled.
For almost an hour Walter Schnaffs' heart beat loud and rapidly.
And he began over again the horrible life of anguish, of terror, of fatigue and suffering that he had led since the commencement of the war.
He would not have the energy necessary to endure long marches and to face the dangers to which one was exposed at every moment.
He could not stay in this ravine in concealment until the end of hostilities.
If it were not for having to eat, this prospect would not have daunted him greatly.
And here he was, alone, armed and in uniform, on the enemy's territory, far from those who would protect him.
All at once he thought: “If I were only a prisoner!” And his heart quivered with a longing, an intense desire to be taken prisoner by the French.
A prisoner, he would be saved, fed, housed, sheltered from bullets and swords, without any apprehension whatever, in a good, well- kept prison.
What a dream: His resolution was formed at once.
“I will constitute myself a prisoner.” He rose, determined to put this plan into execution without a moment's delay.
But he stood motionless, suddenly a prey to disturbing reflections and fresh terrors.
Where would he make himself a prisoner and how?
And frightful pictures, pictures of death came into his mind.
He would run terrible danger in venturing alone through the country with his pointed helmet.
Supposing he should meet some peasants.
These peasants seeing a Prussian who had lost his way, an unprotected Prussian, would kill him as if he were a stray dog!
They would make a stew of him, a pie, with the frenzy of exasperated, conquered enemies.
If he should meet the sharpshooters!
These sharpshooters, madmen without law or discipline, would shoot him just for amusement to pass an hour; it would make them laugh to see his head.
And he fancied he was already leaning against a wall in-front of four rifles whose little black apertures seemed to be gazing at him.
Supposing he should meet the French army itself.
The vanguard would take him for a scout, for some bold and sly trooper who had set off alone to reconnoitre, and they would fire at him.
And he could already hear, in imagination, the irregular shots of soldiers lying in the brush, while he himself, standing in the middle of the field, was sinking to the earth, riddled like a sieve with bullets which he felt piercing his flesh.
His situation seemed hopeless.
He no longer budged, trembling at all the slight and unfamiliar sounds that occur at night.
The sound of a rabbit crouching at the edge of his burrow almost made him run.
The cry of an owl caused him positive anguish, giving him a nervous shock that pained like a wound.
He opened his big eyes as wide as possible to try and see through the darkness, and he imagined every moment that he heard someone walking close beside him.
After interminable hours in which he suffered the tortures of the damned, he noticed through his leafy cover that the sky was becoming bright.
His limbs stretched out, suddenly relaxed, his heart quieted down, his eyes closed; he fell asleep.
When he awoke the sun appeared to be almost at the meridian.
No sound disturbed the gloomy silence.
Walter Schnaffs noticed that he was exceedingly hungry.
He yawned, his mouth watering at the thought of sausage, the good sausage the soldiers have, and he felt a gnawing at his stomach.
For two or three hours he again considered the pros and cons, changing his mind every moment, baffled, unhappy, torn by the most conflicting motives.
Finally he had an idea that seemed logical and practical.
It was to watch for a villager passing by alone, unarmed and with no dangerous tools of his trade, and to run to him and give himself up, making him understand that he was surrendering.
No solitary pedestrian could be perceived on the horizon.
And yonder, to the left, he saw at the end of an avenue of trees a large turreted chateau.
He waited till evening, suffering frightfully from hunger, seeing nothing but flights of crows, hearing nothing but the silent expostulation of his empty stomach.
And darkness once more fell on him.
He stretched himself out in his retreat and slept a feverish sleep, haunted by nightmares, the sleep of a starving man.
Dawn again broke above his head and he began to make his observations.
But the landscape was deserted as on the previous day, and a new fear came into Walter Schnaffs' mind—the fear of death by hunger!
He pictured himself lying at full length on his back at the bottom of his hiding place, with his two eyes closed, and animals, little creatures of all kinds, approached and began to feed on his dead body, attacking it all over at once, gliding beneath his clothing to bite his cold flesh, and a big crow pecked out his eyes with its sharp beak.
He almost became crazy, thinking he was going to faint and would not be able to walk.
And he was just preparing to rush off to the village, determined to dare anything, to brave everything, when he perceived three peasants walking to the fields with their forks across their shoulders, and he dived back into his hiding place.
But as soon as it grew dark he slowly emerged from the ditch and started off, stooping and fearful, with beating heart, towards the distant chateau, preferring to go there rather than to the village, which seemed to him as formidable as a den of tigers.
The lower windows were brilliantly lighted.
One of them was open and from it escaped a strong odor of roast meat, an odor which suddenly penetrated to the olfactories and to the stomach of Walter Schnaffs, tickling his nerves, making him breathe quickly, attracting him irresistibly and inspiring his heart with the boldness of desperation.
And abruptly, without reflection, he placed himself, helmet on head, in front of the window.
Eight servants were at dinner around a large table.
But suddenly one of the maids sat there, her mouth agape, her eyes fixed and letting fall her glass.
They all followed the direction of her gaze.
The Prussians were attacking the chateau!
There was a shriek, only one shriek made up of eight shrieks uttered in eight different keys, a terrific screaming of terror, then a tumultuous rising from their seats, a jostling, a scrimmage and a wild rush to the door at the farther end.
In two seconds the room was empty, deserted, and the table, covered with eatables, stood in front of Walter Schnaffs, lost in amazement and still standing at the window.
After some moments of hesitation he climbed in at the window and approached the table.
The uneasy Prussian listened eagerly to these confused sounds.
Then all motion, all disturbance ceased, and the great chateau became as silent as the grave.
Walter Schnaffs sat down before a clean plate and began to eat.
He took great mouthfuls, as if he feared he might be interrupted before he had swallowed enough.
He shovelled the food into his mouth, open like a trap, with both hands, and chunks of food went into his stomach, swelling out his throat as it passed down.
Then he would take the cider jug and wash down his esophagus as one washes out a clogged rain pipe.
Then, intoxicated with drink and food, besotted, red in the face, shaken by hiccoughs, his mind clouded and his speech thick, he unbuttoned his uniform in order to breathe or he could not have taken a step.
His eyes closed, his mind became torpid; he leaned his heavy forehead on his folded arms on the table and gradually lost all consciousness of things and events.
The last quarter of the moon above the trees in the park shed a faint light on the landscape.
It was the chill hour that precedes the dawn.
Numerous silent shadows glided among the trees and occasionally a blade of steel gleamed in the shadow as a ray of moonlight struck it.
Suddenly a voice thundered: “Forward! nom d'un nom!
To the breach, my lads!” And in an instant the doors, shutters and window panes fell in beneath a wave of men who rushed in, breaking, destroying everything, and took the house by storm.
In a moment fifty soldiers, armed to the teeth, bounded into the kitchen, where Walter Schnaffs was peacefully sleeping, and placing to his breast fifty loaded rifles, they overturned him, rolled him on the floor, seized him and tied his head and feet together.
He gasped in amazement, too besotted to understand, perplexed, bruised and wild with fear.
Suddenly a big soldier, covered with gold lace, put his foot on his stomach, shouting: “You are my prisoner.
Surrender!” The Prussian heard only the one word “prisoner” and he sighed, “Ya, ya, ya.” He was raised from the floor, tied in a chair and examined with lively curiosity by his victors, who were blowing like whales.
Several of them sat down, done up with excitement and fatigue.
He smiled, actually smiled, secure now that he was at last a prisoner.
We are in possession.” The big officer, who was wiping his forehead, exclaimed: “Victory!” And he wrote in a little business memorandum book which he took from his pocket: “After a desperate encounter the Prussians were obliged to beat a retreat, carrying with them their dead and wounded, the number of whom is estimated at fifty men.
Several were taken prisoners.” The young officer inquired: “What steps shall I take, colonel?” “We will retire in good order,” replied the colonel, “to avoid having to return and make another attack with artillery and a larger force of men.” And he gave the command to set out.
The column drew up in line in the darkness beneath the walls of the chateau and filed out, a guard of six soldiers with revolvers in their hands surrounding Walter Schnaffs, who was firmly bound.
Scouts were sent ahead to reconnoitre.
They advanced cautiously, halting from time to time.
At daybreak they arrived at the district of La Roche-Oysel, whose national guard had accomplished this feat of arms.
The uneasy and excited inhabitants were expecting them.
When they saw the prisoner's helmet tremendous shouts arose.
An old grandfather threw his crutch at the Prussian and struck the nose of one of their own defenders.
The colonel roared: “See that the prisoner is secure!” At length they reached the town hall.
The prison was opened and Walter Schnaffs, freed from his bonds, cast into it.
Two hundred armed men mounted guard outside the building.
Then, in spite of the indigestion that had been troubling him for some time, the Prussian, wild with joy, began to dance about, to dance frantically, throwing out his arms and legs and uttering wild shouts until he fell down exhausted beside the wall.
He was a prisoner-saved!
That was how the Chateau de Charnpignet was taken from the enemy after only six hours of occupation.
Colonel Ratier, a cloth merchant, who had led the assault at the head of a body of the national guard of La Roche-Oysel, was decorated with an order.
AT SEA The following paragraphs recently appeared in the papers: “Boulogne-Sur-Mer, January 22.—Our correspondent writes: “A fearful accident has thrown our sea-faring population, which has suffered so much in the last two years, into the greatest consternation.
The fishing smack commanded by Captain Javel, on entering the harbor was wrecked on the rocks of the harbor breakwater.
“In spite of the efforts of the life boat and the shooting of life lines from the shore four sailors and the cabin boy were lost.
“The rough weather continues.
Fresh disasters are anticipated.” Who is this Captain Javel?
If the poor man tossed about in the waves and dead, perhaps, beneath his wrecked boat, is the one I am thinking of, he took part, just eighteen years ago, in another tragedy, terrible and simple as are all these fearful tragedies of the sea.
Javel, senior, was then master of a trawling smack.
The trawling smack is the ideal fishing boat.
The net is fastened all along a big log of wood clamped with iron and is let down by two ropes on pulleys at either end of the boat.
And the boat, driven by the wind and the tide, draws along this apparatus which ransacks and plunders the depths of the sea.
He had set sail from Boulogne on a beautiful day to go trawling.
But presently a wind sprang up, and a hurricane obliged the smack to run to shore.
She gained the English coast, but the high sea broke against the rocks and dashed on the beach, making it impossible to go into port, filling all the harbor entrances with foam and noise and danger.
The smack started off again, riding on the waves, tossed, shaken, dripping, buffeted by masses of water, but game in spite of everything; accustomed to this boisterous weather, which sometimes kept it roving between the two neighboring countries without its being able to make port in either.
At length the hurricane calmed down just as they were in the open, and although the sea was still high the captain gave orders to cast the net.
So it was lifted overboard, and two men in the bows and two in the stern began to unwind the ropes that held it.
It suddenly touched bottom, but a big wave made the boat heel, and Javel, junior, who was in the bows directing the lowering of the net, staggered, and his arm was caught in the rope which the shock had slipped from the pulley for an instant.
He made a desperate effort to raise the rope with the other hand, but the net was down and the taut rope did not give.
They all seized the rope, trying to free the arm it was bruising.
But if the rope were cut the trawling net would be lost, and this net was worth money, a great deal of money, fifteen hundred francs.
And it belonged to Javel, senior, who was tenacious of his property.
“No, do not cut, wait, I will luff,” he cried, in great distress.
But the boat scarcely obeyed it, being impeded by the net which kept it from going forward, and prevented also by the force of the tide and the wind.
Javel, junior, had sunk on his knees, his teeth clenched, his eyes haggard.
“We will let down the anchor.” They cast anchor, and then began to turn the capstan to loosen the moorings of the net.
They loosened them at length and disengaged the imprisoned arm, in its bloody woolen sleeve.
They took off his jersey and saw a horrible sight, a mass of flesh from which the blood spurted as if from a pump.
Then the young man looked at his arm and murmured: “Foutu” (done for).
Then, as the blood was making a pool on the deck of the boat, one of the sailors cried: “He will bleed to death, we must bind the vein.” So they took a cord, a thick, brown, tarry cord, and twisting it around the arm above the wound, tightened it with all their might.
The blood ceased to spurt by slow degrees, and, presently, stopped altogether.
It was all mashed, the bones broken, the muscles alone holding it together.
He looked at it sadly, reflectively.
Then he sat down on a folded sail and his comrades advised him to keep wetting the arm constantly to prevent it from mortifying.
They placed a pail of water beside him, and every few minutes he dipped a glass into it and bathed the frightful wound, letting the clear water trickle on to it.
And, besides, he preferred the fresh air.
The broad fish with their white bellies lay beside him, quivering in the throes of death; he looked at them as he continued to bathe his crushed flesh.
As they were about to return to Boulogne the wind sprang up anew, and the little boat resumed its mad course, bounding and tumbling about, shaking up the poor wounded man.
Towards evening Javel, junior, called his comrades and showed them some black spots, all the horrible tokens of mortification in the portion of the arm below the broken bones.
The sailors examined it, giving their opinion.
Then, as soon as the smarting had abated, he said to his brother: “Give me your knife.” The brother handed it to him.
“Hold my arm up, quite straight, and pull it.” They did as he asked them.
He cut gently, carefully, severing all the tendons with this blade that was sharp as a razor.
And, presently, there was only a stump left.
It was done for.” He seemed relieved and breathed loud.
He then began again to pour water on the stump of arm that remained.
When the day broke, Javel, junior, took the severed portion of his arm and examined it for a long time.
Gangrene had set in.
His comrades also examined it and handed it from one to the other, feeling it, turning it over, and sniffing at it.
In order to preserve the fish when the boat was long at sea, they packed it in salt, in barrels.
He asked: “Why can I not put it in pickle?” “Why, that's a fact,” exclaimed the others.
Then they emptied one of the barrels, which was full from the haul of the last few days; and right at the bottom of the barrel they laid the detached arm.
One of the sailors said by way of joke: “I hope we do not sell it at auction.” And everyone laughed, except the two Javels.
The wind was still boisterous.
They tacked within sight of Boulogne until the following morning at ten o'clock.
Young Javel continued to bathe his wound.
His brother, who was at the tiller, followed him with glances, and shook his head.
The doctor examined the wound and pronounced it to be in good condition.
He dressed it properly and ordered the patient to rest.
But Javel would not go to bed until he got back his severed arm, and he returned at once to the dock to look for the barrel which he had marked with a cross.
It was emptied before him and he seized the arm, which was well preserved in the pickle, had shrunk and was freshened.
His wife and children looked for a long time at this fragment of their father, feeling the fingers, and removing the grains of salt that were under the nails.
Then they sent for a carpenter to make a little coffin.
The next day the entire crew of the trawling smack followed the funeral of the detached arm.
The two brothers, side by side, led the procession; the parish beadle carried the corpse under his arm.
He obtained a small position on the dock, and when he subsequently talked about his accident, he would say confidentially to his auditors: “If my brother had been willing to cut away the net, I should still have my arm, that is sure.
But he was thinking only of his property.” MINUET Great misfortunes do not affect me very much, said John Bridelle, an old bachelor who passed for a sceptic.
I have seen war at quite close quarters; I walked across corpses without any feeling of pity.
The great brutal facts of nature, or of humanity, may call forth cries of horror or indignation, but do not cause us that tightening of the heart, that shudder that goes down your spine at sight of certain little heartrending episodes.
The greatest sorrow that anyone can experience is certainly the loss of a child, to a mother; and the loss of his mother, to a man.
It is intense, terrible, it rends your heart and upsets your mind; but one is healed of these shocks, just as large bleeding wounds become healed.
I have always present to my mind two or three things that others would surely not have noticed, but which penetrated my being like fine, sharp incurable stings.
You might not perhaps understand the emotion that I retained from these hasty impressions.
It may be that my imagination alone is responsible for my emotion.
I was young then and studying law.
I was rather sad, somewhat of a dreamer, full of a pessimistic philosophy and did not care much for noisy cafes, boisterous companions, or stupid girls.
I rose early and one of my chief enjoyments was to walk alone about eight o'clock in the morning in the nursery garden of the Luxembourg.
It was like a forgotten garden of the last century, as pretty as the gentle smile of an old lady.
Thick hedges divided the narrow regular paths,—peaceful paths between two walls of carefully trimmed foliage.
The gardener's great shears were pruning unceasingly these leafy partitions, and here and there one came across beds of flowers, lines of little trees looking like schoolboys out for a walk, companies of magnificent rose bushes, or regiments of fruit trees.
An entire corner of this charming spot was in habited by bees.
Their straw hives skillfully arranged at distances on boards had their entrances—as large as the opening of a thimble—turned towards the sun, and all along the paths one encountered these humming and gilded flies, the true masters of this peaceful spot, the real promenaders of these quiet paths.
Sometimes I let my book fall on my knees, to dream, to listen to the life of Paris around me, and to enjoy the infinite repose of these old- fashioned hedges.
But I soon perceived that I was not the only one to frequent this spot as soon as the gates were opened, and I occasionally met face to face, at a turn in the path, a strange little old man.
He wore shoes with silver buckles, knee-breeches, a snuff-colored frock coat, a lace jabot, and an outlandish gray hat with wide brim and long- haired surface that might have come out of the ark.
He was thin, very thin, angular, grimacing and smiling.
His bright eyes were restless beneath his eyelids which blinked continuously.
He always carried in his hand a superb cane with a gold knob, which must have been for him some glorious souvenir.
This good man astonished me at first, then caused me the intensest interest.
I watched him through the leafy walls, I followed him at a distance, stopping at a turn in the hedge so as not to be seen.
And one morning when he thought he was quite alone, he began to make the most remarkable motions.
First he would give some little springs, then make a bow; then, with his slim legs, he would give a lively spring in the air, clapping his feet as he did so, and then turn round cleverly, skipping and frisking about in a comical manner, smiling as if he had an audience, twisting his poor little puppet-like body, bowing pathetic and ridiculous little greetings into the empty air.
I stood petrified with amazement, asking myself which of us was crazy, he or I.
He stopped suddenly, advanced as actors do on the stage, then bowed and retreated with gracious smiles, and kissing his hand as actors do, his trembling hand, to the two rows of trimmed bushes.
Then he continued his walk with a solemn demeanor.
After that I never lost sight of him, and each morning he began anew his outlandish exercises.
I decided to risk it, and one day, after greeting him, I said: “It is a beautiful day, monsieur.” He bowed.
His beautiful cane was a present from the Comte de Clermont.
And when we spoke about dancing he never stopping talking.
One day he said to me: “I married La Castris, monsieur.
I will introduce you to her if you wish it, but she does not get here till later.
It is old and distingue, is it not?
My wife and I pass all our afternoons here, but I come in the morning because I get up early.” As soon as I had finished luncheon I returned to the Luxembourg, and presently perceived my friend offering his arm ceremoniously to a very old little lady dressed in black, to whom he introduced me.
It was La Castris, the great dancer, beloved by princes, beloved by the king, beloved by all that century of gallantry that seems to have left behind it in the world an atmosphere of love.
An odor of flowers floated in the neat paths; a hot sun glided its rays between the branches and covered us with patches of light.
The black dress of La Castris seemed to be saturated with sunlight.
We heard the rattling of vehicles in the distance.
“The minuet, monsieur, is the queen of dances, and the dance of queens, do you understand?
Since there is no longer any royalty, there is no longer any minuet.” And he began in a pompous manner a long dithyrambic eulogy which I could not understand.
I wanted to have the steps, the movements, the positions, explained to me.
He became confused, was amazed at his inability to make me understand, became nervous and worried.
Then suddenly, turning to his old companion who had remained silent and serious, he said: “Elise, would you like—say—would you like, it would be very nice of you, would you like to show this gentleman what it was?” She turned eyes uneasily in all directions, then rose without saying a word and took her position opposite him.
Then I witnessed an unheard-of thing.
They advanced and retreated with childlike grimaces, smiling, swinging each other, bowing, skipping about like two automaton dolls moved by some old mechanical contrivance, somewhat damaged, but made by a clever workman according to the fashion of his time.
And I looked at them, my heart filled with extraordinary emotions, my soul touched with an indescribable melancholy.
I seemed to see before me a pathetic and comical apparition, the out-of-date ghost of a former century.
They suddenly stopped.
They had finished all the figures of the dance.
For some seconds they stood opposite each other, smiling in an astonishing manner.
I left for the provinces three days later.
When I returned to Paris, two years later, the nursery had been destroyed.
What became of them, deprived of the dear garden of former days, with its mazes, its odor of the past, and the graceful windings of its hedges?
Are they wandering among modern streets like hopeless exiles?
Are they dancing—grotesque spectres—a fantastic minuet in the moonlight, amid the cypresses of a cemetery, along the pathways bordered by graves?
Their memory haunts me, obsesses me, torments me, remains with me like a wound.
THE SON The two old friends were walking in the garden in bloom, where spring was bringing everything to life.
One was a senator, the other a member of the French Academy, both serious men, full of very logical but solemn arguments, men of note and reputation.
They talked first of politics, exchanging opinions; not on ideas, but on men, personalities in this regard taking the predominance over ability.
Then they recalled some memories.
Then they walked along in silence, enervated by the warmth of the air.
A large bed of wallflowers breathed out a delicate sweetness.
A mass of flowers of all species and color flung their fragrance to the breeze, while a cytisus covered with yellow clusters scattered its fine pollen abroad, a golden cloud, with an odor of honey that bore its balmy seed across space, similar to the sachet-powders of perfumers.
Here is one who generates freely, and then lets them go without a pang and troubles himself no more about them.” “We do the same, my friend,” said the academician.
“Yes, I do not deny it; we let them go sometimes,” resumed the senator, “but we are aware that we do, and that constitutes our superiority.” “No, that is not what I mean,” said the other, shaking his head.
“You see, my friend, that there is scarcely a man who has not some children that he does not know, children—'father unknown'—whom he has generated almost unconsciously, just as this tree reproduces.
“If we had to keep account of our amours, we should be just as embarrassed as this cytisus which you apostrophized would be in counting up his descendants, should we not?
“From eighteen to forty years, in fact, counting in every chance cursory acquaintanceship, we may well say that we have been intimate with two or three hundred women.
“Well, then, my friend, among this number can you be sure that you have not had children by at least one of them, and that you have not in the streets, or in the bagnio, some blackguard of a son who steals from and murders decent people, i.e., ourselves; or else a daughter in some disreputable place, or, if she has the good fortune to be deserted by her mother, as cook in some family?
“Consider, also, that almost all those whom we call 'prostitutes' have one or two children of whose paternal parentage they are ignorant, generated by chance at the price of ten or twenty francs.
In every business there is profit and loss.
These wildings constitute the 'loss' in their profession.
You—I—we all did, the men called 'gentlemen'!
They are the consequences of our jovial little dinners, of our gay evenings, of those hours when our comfortable physical being impels us to chance liaisons.
“Thieves, marauders, all these wretches, in fact, are our children.
And that is better for us than if we were their children, for those scoundrels generate also!
“I have in my mind a very horrible story that I will relate to you.
It has caused me incessant remorse, and, further than that, a continual doubt, a disquieting uncertainty, that, at times, torments me frightfully.
“When I was twenty-five I undertook a walking tour through Brittany with one of my friends, now a member of the cabinet.
“After walking steadily for fifteen or twenty days and visiting the Cotes-du-Nord and part of Finistere we reached Douarnenez.
From there we went without halting to the wild promontory of Raz by the bay of Les Trepaases, and passed the night in a village whose name ends in 'of.' The next morning a strange lassitude kept my friend in bed; I say bed from habit, for our couch consisted simply of two bundles of straw.
So I made him get up, and we reached Andierne about four or five o'clock in the evening.
“The following day he felt a little better, and we set out again.
But on the road he was seized with intolerable pain, and we could scarcely get as far as Pont Labbe.
My friend went to bed, and the doctor, who had been sent for from Quimper, announced that he had a high fever, without being able to determine its nature.
Well, then, it is the most Breton of all this Breton Brittany, which extends from the promontory of Raz to the Morbihan, of this land which contains the essence of the Breton manners, legends and customs.
Even to-day this corner of the country has scarcely changed.
“An old chateau laves the walls of its towers in a great melancholy pond, melancholy and frequented by flights of wild birds.
It has an outlet in a river on which boats can navigate as far as the town.
In the narrow streets with their old-time houses the men wear big hats, embroidered waistcoats and four coats, one on top of the other; the inside one, as large as your hand, barely covering the shoulder-blades, and the outside one coming to just above the seat of the trousers.
“The girls, tall, handsome and fresh have their bosoms crushed in a cloth bodice which makes an armor, compresses them, not allowing one even to guess at their robust and tortured neck.
They also wear a strange headdress.
On their temples two bands embroidered in colors frame their face, inclosing the hair, which falls in a shower at the back of their heads, and is then turned up and gathered on top of the head under a singular cap, often woven with gold or silver thread.
“The servant at our inn was eighteen at most, with very blue eyes, a pale blue with two tiny black pupils, short teeth close together, which she showed continually when she laughed, and which seemed strong enough to grind granite.
“She did not know a word of French, speaking only Breton, as did most of her companions.
“As my friend did not improve much, and although he had no definite malady, the doctor forbade him to continue his journey yet, ordering complete rest.
I spent my days with him, and the little maid would come in incessantly, bringing either my dinner or some herb tea.
“I teased her a little, which seemed to amuse her, but we did not chat, of course, as we could not understand each other.
It was just opposite my open door, and, without reflection, and more for fun than anything else, I abruptly seized her round the waist, and before she recovered from her astonishment I had thrown her down and locked her in my room.
She looked at me, amazed, excited, terrified, not daring to cry out for fear of a scandal and of being probably driven out, first by her employers and then, perhaps, by her father.
She defended herself bravely, and at the first chance she ran to the door, drew back the bolt and fled.
“I scarcely saw her for several days.
But when my friend was cured and we were to get out on our travels again I saw her coming into my room about midnight the night before our departure, just after I had retired.
“She threw herself into my arms and embraced me passionately, giving me all the assurances of tenderness and despair that a woman can give when she does not know a word of our language.
“A week later I had forgotten this adventure, so common and frequent when one is travelling, the inn servants being generally destined to amuse travellers in this way.
“I was thirty before I thought of it again, or returned to Pont Labbe.
“But in 1876 I revisited it by chance during a trip into Brittany, which I made in order to look up some data for a book and to become permeated with the atmosphere of the different places.
The chateau still laved its gray wall in the pond outside the little town; the inn was the same, though it had been repaired, renovated and looked more modern.
As I entered it I was received by two young Breton girls of eighteen, fresh and pretty, bound up in their tight cloth bodices, with their silver caps and wide embroidered bands on their ears.
I sat down to dinner, and as the host was assiduous in waiting on me himself, fate, no doubt, impelled me to say: “'Did you know the former proprietors of this house?
I am talking old times.' “'Those were my parents, monsieur,' he replied.
“'Oh, I recollect perfectly.
You slept in the room at the end and your friend in the one I have taken for myself, overlooking the street.' “It was only then that the recollection of the little maid came vividly to my mind.
No doubt he looks like his father.' “'That is very possible,' replied the innkeeper; 'but we never knew whose child it was.
Every one was hugely astonished when they heard she was enceinte, and no one would believe it.' “A sort of unpleasant chill came over me, one of those painful surface wounds that affect us like the shadow of an impending sorrow.
He had just drawn water for the horses and was carrying two buckets, limping as he walked, with a painful effort of his shorter leg.
His clothes were ragged, he was hideously dirty, with long yellow hair, so tangled that it looked like strands of rope falling down at either side of his face.
“'He is not worth much,' continued the innkeeper; 'we have kept him for charity's sake.
But what could one do, monsieur?
My parents took pity on him, but he was not their child, you understand.' “I said nothing.
“I slept in my old room, and all night long I thought of this frightful stableman, saying to myself: 'Supposing it is my own son?
Could I have caused that girl's death and procreated this being?
It was quite possible!' “I resolved to speak to this man and to find out the exact date of his birth.
A variation of two months would set my doubts at rest.
He looked as if he could not understand anything, being absolutely ignorant of his age, which I had inquired of him through one of the maids.
He stood before me like an idiot, twirling his hat in 'his knotted, disgusting hands, laughing stupidly, with something of his mother's laugh in the corners of his mouth and of his eyes.
“The landlord, appearing on the scene, went to look for the birth certificate of this wretched being.
He was born eight months and twenty- six days after my stay at Pont Labbe, for I recollect perfectly that we reached Lorient on the fifteenth of August.
The certificate contained this description: 'Father unknown.' The mother called herself Jeanne Kerradec.
I looked at this animal whose long yellow hair reminded me of a straw heap, and the beggar, embarrassed by my gaze, stopped laughing, turned his head aside, and wanted to get away.
“All day long I wandered beside the little river, giving way to painful reflections.
But what was the use of reflection?
For hours and hours I weighed all the pros and cons in favor of or against the probability of my being the father, growing nervous over inexplicable suppositions, only to return incessantly to the same horrible uncertainty, then to the still more atrocious conviction that this man was my son.
“I lay awake for a long time, and when I finally fell asleep I was haunted by horrible visions.
I saw this laborer laughing in my face and calling me 'papa.' Then he changed into a dog and bit the calves of my legs, and no matter how fast I ran he still followed me, and instead of barking, talked and reviled me.
Then he appeared before my colleagues at the Academy, who had assembled to decide whether I was really his father; and one of them cried out: 'There can be no doubt about it!
See how he resembles him.' And, indeed, I could see that this monster looked like me.
And I awoke with this idea fixed in my mind and with an insane desire to see the man again and assure myself whether or not we had similar features.
“I joined him as he was going to mass (it was Sunday) and I gave him five francs as I gazed at him anxiously.
He began to laugh in an idiotic manner, took the money, and then, embarrassed afresh at my gaze, he ran off, after stammering an almost inarticulate word that, no doubt, meant 'thank you.' “My day passed in the same distress of mind as on the previous night.
I sent for the landlord, and, with the greatest caution, skill and tact, I told him that I was interested in this poor creature, so abandoned by every one and deprived of everything, and I wished to do something for him.
“But the man replied: 'Oh, do not think of it, monsieur; he is of no account; you will only cause yourself annoyance.
If you have an old pair of trousers, you might give them to him, but they will be in rags in a week.' “I did not insist, intending to think it over.
“The poor wretch came home that evening frightfully drunk, came near setting fire to the house, killed a horse by hitting it with a pickaxe, and ended up by lying down to sleep in the mud in the midst of the pouring rain, thanks to my donation.
The landlord added: 'Giving him money is like trying to kill him.' The man had never, never in his life had more than a few centimes, thrown to him by travellers, and he knew of no destination for this metal but the wine shop.
“I spent several hours in my room with an open book before me which I pretended to read, but in reality looking at this animal, my son! my son! trying to discover if he looked anything like me.
After careful scrutiny I seemed to recognize a similarity in the lines of the forehead and the root of the nose, and I was soon convinced that there was a resemblance, concealed by the difference in garb and the man's hideous head of hair.
“I could not stay here any longer without arousing suspicion, and I went away, my heart crushed, leaving with the innkeeper some money to soften the existence of his servant.
“For six years now I have lived with this idea in my mind, this horrible uncertainty, this abominable suspicion.
And each year an irresistible force takes me back to Pont Labbe.
Every year I condemn myself to the torture of seeing this animal raking the manure, imagining that he resembles me, and endeavoring, always vainly, to render him some assistance.
And each year I return more uncertain, more tormented, more worried.
“I tried to have him taught, but he is a hopeless idiot.
He is an irreclaimable drunkard, and spends in drink all the money one gives him, and knows enough to sell his new clothes in order to get brandy.
“I tried to awaken his master's sympathy, so that he should look after him, offering to pay him for doing so.
The innkeeper, finally surprised, said, very wisely: 'All that you do for him, monsieur, will only help to destroy him.
He must be kept like a prisoner.
If you wish to do good, there is no lack of abandoned children, but select one who will appreciate your attention.' “What could I say?
“If I allowed the slightest suspicion of the doubts that tortured me to escape, this idiot would assuredly become cunning, in order to blackmail me, to compromise me and ruin me.
“And I said to myself that I had killed the mother and lost this atrophied creature, this larva of the stable, born and raised amid the manure, this man who, if brought up like others, would have been like others.
“I have an incessant restless, distressing longing to see him, and the sight of him causes me intense suffering, as I look down from my window and watch him for hours removing and carting the horse manure, saying to myself: 'That is my son.' “And I sometimes feel an irresistible longing to embrace him.
I have never even touched his dirty hand.” The academician was silent.
His companion, a tactful man, murmured: “Yes, indeed, we ought to take a closer interest in children who have no father.” A gust of wind passing through the tree shook its yellow clusters, enveloping in a fragrant and delicate mist the two old men, who inhaled in the fragrance with deep breaths.
The senator added: “It is good to be twenty-five and even to have children like that.” THAT PIG OF A MORIN “Here, my friend,” I said to Labarbe, “you have just repeated those five words, that pig of a Morin.
Why on earth do I never hear Morin's name mentioned without his being called a pig?” Labarbe, who is a deputy, looked at me with his owl-like eyes and said: “Do you mean to say that you do not know Morin's story and you come from La Rochelle?” I was obliged to declare that I did not know Morin's story, so Labarbe rubbed his hands and began his recital.
“You knew Morin, did you not, and you remember his large linen-draper's shop on the Quai de la Rochelle?” “Yes, perfectly.” “Well, then.
You must know that in 1862 or '63 Morin went to spend a fortnight in Paris for pleasure; or for his pleasures, but under the pretext of renewing his stock, and you also know what a fortnight in Paris means to a country shopkeeper; it fires his blood.
The theatre every evening, women's dresses rustling up against you and continual excitement; one goes almost mad with it.
One sees nothing but dancers in tights, actresses in very low dresses, round legs, fat shoulders, all nearly within reach of one's hands, without daring, or being able, to touch them, and one scarcely tastes food.
When one leaves the city one's heart is still all in a flutter and one's mind still exhilarated by a sort of longing for kisses which tickles one's lips.
“Morin was in that condition when he took his ticket for La Rochelle by the eight-forty night express.
As he was walking up and down the waiting-room at the station he stopped suddenly in front of a young lady who was kissing an old one.
She had her veil up, and Morin murmured with delight: 'By Jove what a pretty woman!' “When she had said 'good-by' to the old lady she went into the waiting- room, and Morin followed her; then she went on the platform and Morin still followed her; then she got into an empty carriage, and he again followed her.
There were very few travellers on the express.
The engine whistled and the train started.
Morin devoured her with his eyes.
She appeared to be about nineteen or twenty and was fair, tall, with a bold look.
She wrapped a railway rug round her and stretched herself on the seat to sleep.
“Morin asked himself: 'I wonder who she is?' And a thousand conjectures, a thousand projects went through his head.
He said to himself: 'So many adventures are told as happening on railway journeys that this may be one that is going to present itself to me.
A piece of good luck like that happens very suddenly, and perhaps I need only be a little venturesome.
Was it not Danton who said: “Audacity, more audacity and always audacity”?
If it was not Danton it was Mirabeau, but that does not matter.
But then I have no audacity, and that is the difficulty.
I will bet that every day one passes by magnificent opportunities without knowing it, though a gesture would be enough to let me know her mind.' “Then he imagined to himself combinations which conducted him to triumph.
He pictured some chivalrous deed or merely some slight service which he rendered her, a lively, gallant conversation which ended in a declaration.
“But he could find no opening, had no pretext, and he waited for some fortunate circumstance, with his heart beating and his mind topsy-turvy.
The night passed and the pretty girl still slept, while Morin was meditating his own fall.
The day broke and soon the first ray of sunlight appeared in the sky, a long, clear ray which shone on the face of the sleeping girl and woke her.
She smiled like a happy woman, with an engaging and bright look, and Morin trembled.
Certainly that smile was intended for him; it was discreet invitation, the signal which he was waiting for.
“'Just look at me, am I not charming?
And you have sat like that for the whole night, when you have been alone with a pretty woman, you great simpleton!' “She was still smiling as she looked at him; she even began to laugh; and he lost his head trying to find something suitable to say, no matter what.
But he could think of nothing, nothing, and then, seized with a coward's courage, he said to himself: “'So much the worse, I will risk everything,' and suddenly, without the slightest warning, he went toward her, his arms extended, his lips protruding, and, seizing her in his arms, he kissed her.
“She sprang up immediately with a bound, crying out: 'Help! help!' and screaming with terror; and then she opened the carriage door and waved her arm out, mad with terror and trying to jump out, while Morin, who was almost distracted and feeling sure that she would throw herself out, held her by the skirt and stammered: 'Oh, madame! oh, madame!' “The train slackened speed and then stopped.
She threw herself into their arms, stammering: 'That man wanted—wanted—to—to—' And then she fainted.
“They were at Mauze station, and the gendarme on duty arrested Morin.
When the victim of his indiscreet admiration had regained her consciousness, she made her charge against him, and the police drew it up.
The poor linen draper did not reach home till night, with a prosecution hanging over him for an outrage to morals in a public place.” II “At that time I was editor of the Fanal des Charentes, and I used to meet Morin every day at the Cafe du Commerce, and the day after his adventure. he came to see me, as he did not know what to do.
His wife had given him a beating, and he foresaw his trade ruined, his name dragged through the mire and dishonored, his friends scandalized and taking no notice of him.
In the end he excited my pity, and I sent for my colleague, Rivet, a jocular but very sensible little man, to give us his advice.
“He advised me to see the public prosecutor, who was a friend of mine, and so I sent Morin home and went to call on the magistrate.
He told me that the woman who had been insulted was a young lady, Mademoiselle Henriette Bonnel, who had just received her certificate as governess in Paris and spent her holidays with her uncle and aunt, who were very respectable tradespeople in Mauze.
What made Morin's case all the more serious was that the uncle had lodged a complaint, but the public official had consented to let the matter drop if this complaint were withdrawn, so we must try and get him to do this.
“I went back to Morin's and found him in bed, ill with excitement and distress.
His wife, a tall raw-boned woman with a beard, was abusing him continually, and she showed me into the room, shouting at me: 'So you have come to see that pig of a Morin.
It was a delicate mission, but I undertook it, and the poor devil never ceased repeating: 'I assure you I did not even kiss her; no, not even that.
I will take my oath to it!' “I replied: 'It is all the same; you are nothing but a pig.' And I took a thousand francs which he gave me to employ as I thought best, but as I did not care to venture to her uncle's house alone, I begged Rivet to go with me, which he agreed to do on condition that we went immediately, for he had some urgent business at La Rochelle that afternoon.
An attractive girl came and opened the door to us assuredly the young lady in question, and I said to Rivet in a low voice: 'Confound it!
I begin to understand Morin!' “The uncle, Monsieur Tonnelet, subscribed to the Fanal, and was a fervent political coreligionist of ours.
He received us with open arms and congratulated us and wished us joy; he was delighted at having the two editors in his house, and Rivet whispered to me: 'I think we shall be able to arrange the matter of that pig of a Morin for him.' “The niece had left the room and I introduced the delicate subject.
I waved the spectre of scandal before his eyes; I accentuated the inevitable depreciation which the young lady would suffer if such an affair became known, for nobody would believe in a simple kiss, and the good man seemed undecided, but he could not make up his mind about anything without his wife, who would not be in until late that evening.
She did not, however, appear the least confused, and listened to me like a person who was enjoying the whole thing very much.
“I said to her: 'Just think, mademoiselle, how unpleasant it will be for you.
You will have to appear in court, to encounter malicious looks, to speak before everybody and to recount that unfortunate occurrence in the railway carriage in public.
Do you not think, between ourselves, that it would have been much better for you to have put that dirty scoundrel back in his place without calling for assistance, and merely to change your carriage?' She began to laugh and replied: 'What you say is quite true, but what could I do?
I was frightened, and when one is frightened one does not stop to reason with one's self.
As soon as I realized the situation I was very sorry, that I had called out, but then it was too late.
You must also remember that the idiot threw himself upon me like a madman, without saying a word and looking like a lunatic.
But don't do that sort of thing again.' “I put on a humble look and said in a low voice: 'Oh, mademoiselle! as for me, if I long for one thing more than another it is to be summoned before a magistrate for the same reason as Morin.' “'Why?' she asked.
I beg your pardon, mademoiselle.
I have offended you; I have acted like a brute!
If you knew—' I vainly sought for some excuse, and in a few moments she said: 'There is nothing for me to know, monsieur.' But I had found something to say, and I cried: 'Mademoiselle, I love you!' “She was really surprised and raised her eyes to look at me, and I went on: 'Yes, mademoiselle, and pray listen to me.
I do not know Morin, and I do not care anything about him.
It does not matter to me the least if he is committed for trial and locked up meanwhile.
I thought you adorable, and the remembrance of you took such a hold on me that I longed to see you again, and so I made use of that fool Morin as a pretext, and here I am.
Circumstances have made me exceed the due limits of respect, and I can only beg you to pardon me.' “She looked at me to see if I was in earnest and was ready to smile again.
I was pale, anxious and trembling, and I gently put my arm round her waist and spoke to her softly, whispering into the little curls over her ears.
She seemed in a trance, so absorbed in thought was she.
“Then her hand touched mine, and she pressed it, and I gently squeezed her waist with a trembling, and gradually firmer, grasp.
She did not move now, and I touched her cheek with my lips, and suddenly without seeking them my lips met hers.
I will answer for the niece.' 'I have not been so fortunate with him,' he replied.
“Whereupon I took his arm and we went indoors.” III “Dinner made me lose my head altogether.
I sat beside her, and my hand continually met hers under the tablecloth, my foot touched hers and our glances met.
“After dinner we took a walk by moonlight, and I whispered all the tender things I could think of to her.
They went in, and soon a messenger brought a telegram from her aunt, saying that she would not return until the next morning at seven o'clock by the first train.
At last I got some and I went into the passage, feeling half mad, with my candlestick in my hand.
I went a few steps without reflecting, but then I suddenly thought: 'Suppose I should walk into the uncle's room what should I say?' And I stood still, with my head a void and my heart beating.
But in a few moments I thought of an answer: 'Of course, I shall say that I was looking for Rivet's room to speak to him about an important matter,' and I began to inspect all the doors, trying to find hers, and at last I took hold of a handle at a venture, turned it and went in.
There was Henriette, sitting on her bed and looking at me in tears.
So I gently turned the key, and going up to her on tiptoe I said: 'I forgot to ask you for something to read, mademoiselle.' “I was stealthily returning to my room when a rough hand seized me and a voice—it was Rivet's—whispered in my ear: 'So you have not yet quite settled that affair of Morin's?' “At seven o'clock the next morning Henriette herself brought me a cup of chocolate.
I never have drunk anything like it, soft, velvety, perfumed, delicious.
He seemed nervous and irritable, like a man who had not slept, and he said to me crossly: “'If you go on like this you will end by spoiling the affair of that pig of a Morin!' “At eight o'clock the aunt arrived.
Our discussion was very short, for they withdrew their complaint, and I left five hundred francs for the poor of the town.
They wanted to keep us for the day, and they arranged an excursion to go and see some ruins.
Henriette made signs to me to stay, behind her parents' back, and I accepted, but Rivet was determined to go, and though I took him aside and begged and prayed him to do this for me, he appeared quite exasperated and kept saying to me: 'I have had enough of that pig of a Morin's affair, do you hear?' “Of course I was obliged to leave also, and it was one of the hardest moments of my life.
“He was sitting in an easy-chair with mustard plasters on his legs and cold bandages on his head, nearly dead with misery.
In all the country round, moreover, he was called nothing but 'that pig of a Morin,' and that epithet went through him like a sword-thrust every time he heard it.
When a street boy called after him 'Pig!' he turned his head instinctively.
His friends also overwhelmed him with horrible jokes and used to ask him, whenever they were eating ham, 'Is it a bit of yourself?' He died two years later.
“As for myself, when I was a candidate for the Chamber of Deputies in 1875, I called on the new notary at Fousserre, Monsieur Belloncle, to solicit his vote, and a tall, handsome and evidently wealthy lady received me. 'You do not know me again?' she said.
And I stammered out: 'Why—no—madame.' 'Henriette Bonnel.' 'Ah!' And I felt myself turning pale, while she seemed perfectly at her ease and looked at me with a smile.
“As soon as she had left me alone with her husband he took both my hands, and, squeezing them as if he meant to crush them, he said: 'I have been intending to go and see you for a long time, my dear sir, for my wife has very often talked to me about you.
He was a big peasant of the district of Caux, with a red face, large chest and stomach, and perched on two legs that seemed too slight for the bulk of his body.
He was a widower and lived alone with his two men servants and a maid on his farm, which he conducted with shrewd economy.
He was careful of his own interests, understood business and the raising of cattle, and farming.
His two sons and his three daughters, who had married well, were living in the neighborhood and came to dine with their father once a month.
His vigor of body was famous in all the countryside.
At the time of the Prussian invasion Saint Anthony, at the wine shop, promised to eat an army, for he was a braggart, like a true Norman, a bit of a coward and a blusterer.
One morning as he was eating his luncheon with the servants the door opened and the mayor of the commune, Maitre Chicot, appeared, followed by a soldier wearing a black copper-pointed helmet.
Saint Anthony bounded to his feet and his servants all looked at him, expecting to see him slash the Prussian.
Don't do anything foolish, above all things, for they talked of shooting and burning everything if there is the slightest unpleasantness, I have given you warning.
Give him something to eat; he looks like a good fellow.
Father Anthony, who had turned pale, looked at the Prussian.
He was a big, young fellow with plump, white skin, blue eyes, fair hair, unshaven to his cheek bones, who looked stupid, timid and good.
The shrewd Norman read him at once, and, reassured, he made him a sign to sit down.
Then he said: “Will you take some soup?” The stranger did not understand.
Anthony then became bolder, and pushing a plateful of soup right under his nose, he said: “Here, swallow that, big pig!” The soldier answered “Ya,” and began to eat greedily, while the farmer, triumphant, feeling he had regained his reputation, winked his eye at the servants, who were making strange grimaces, what with their terror and their desire to laugh.
Then Saint Anthony, become quite familiar, tapped him on the stomach, saying: “My, there is plenty in my pig's belly!” But suddenly he began to writhe with laughter, unable to speak.
There's my pig!” And the three servants burst out laughing in their turn.
They clinked glasses with the Prussian, who clacked his tongue by way of flattery to show that he enjoyed it.
And Saint Anthony exclaimed in his face: “Eh, is not that superfine?
You don't get anything like that in your home, pig!” From that time Father Anthony never went out without his Prussian.
This was his vengeance, the vengeance of an old rogue.
And the whole countryside, which was in terror, laughed to split its sides at Saint Anthony's joke.
He went to see his neighbors every day, arm in arm with his German, whom he introduced in a jovial manner, tapping him on the shoulder: “See, here is my pig; look and see if he is not growing fat, the animal!” And the peasants would beam with smiles.
“He is so comical, that reckless fellow, Antoine!” “I will sell him to you, Cesaire, for three pistoles” (thirty francs).
“I will take him, Antoine, and I invite you to eat some black pudding.” “What I want is his feet.” “Feel his belly; you will see that it is all fat.” And they all winked at each other, but dared not laugh too loud, for fear the Prussian might finally suspect they were laughing at him.
Anthony, alone growing bolder every day, pinched his thighs, exclaiming, “Nothing but fat”; tapped him on the back, shouting, “That is all bacon”; lifted him up in his arms as an old Colossus that could have lifted an anvil, declaring, “He weighs six hundred and no waste.” He had got into the habit of making people offer his “pig” something to eat wherever they went together.
This was the chief pleasure, the great diversion every day.
“Give him whatever you please, he will swallow everything.” And they offered the man bread and butter, potatoes, cold meat, chitterlings, which caused the remark, “Some of your own, and choice ones.” The soldier, stupid and gentle, ate from politeness, charmed at these attentions, making himself ill rather than refuse, and he was actually growing fat and his uniform becoming tight for him.
This delighted Saint Anthony, who said: “You know, my pig, that we shall have to have another cage made for you.” They had, however, become the best friends in the world, and when the old fellow went to attend to his business in the neighborhood the Prussian accompanied him for the simple pleasure of being with him.
The weather was severe; it was freezing hard.
The terrible winter of 1870 seemed to bring all the scourges on France at one time.
Father Antoine, who made provision beforehand, and took advantage of every opportunity, foreseeing that manure would be scarce for the spring farming, bought from a neighbor who happened to be in need of money all that he had, and it was agreed that he should go every evening with his cart to get a load.
So every day at twilight he set out for the farm of Haules, half a league distant, always accompanied by his “pig.” And each time it was a festival, feeding the animal.
All the neighbors ran over there as they would go to high mass on Sunday.
But the soldier began to suspect something, be mistrustful, and when they laughed too loud he would roll his eyes uneasily, and sometimes they lighted up with anger.
One evening when he had eaten his fill he refused to swallow another morsel, and attempted to rise to leave the table.
But Saint Anthony stopped him by a turn of the wrist and, placing his two powerful hands on his shoulders, he sat him down again so roughly that the chair smashed under him.
A wild burst of laughter broke forth, and Anthony, beaming, picked up his pig, acted as though he were dressing his wounds, and exclaimed: “Since you will not eat, you shall drink, nom de Dieu!” And they went to the wine shop to get some brandy.
The soldier rolled his eyes, which had a wicked expression, but he drank, nevertheless; he drank as long as they wanted him, and Saint Anthony held his head to the great delight of his companions.
And the Prussian, without speaking a word, poured down one after another glassfuls of cognac.
But neither was conquered.
They went out staggering and started for home, walking beside the dung cart which was drawn along slowly by two horses.
Snow began to fall and the moonless night was sadly lighted by this dead whiteness on the plain.
The men began to feel the cold, and this aggravated their intoxication.
Saint Anthony, annoyed at not being the victor, amused himself by shoving his companion so as to make him fall over into the ditch.
The other would dodge backwards, and each time he did he uttered some German expression in an angry tone, which made the peasant roar with laughter.
Finally the Prussian lost his temper, and just as Anthony was rolling towards him he responded with such a terrific blow with his fist that the Colossus staggered.
Then, excited by the brandy, the old man seized the pugilist round the waist, shook him for a few moments as he would have done with a little child, and pitched him at random to the other side of the road.
Then, satisfied with this piece of work, he crossed his arms and began to laugh afresh.
When he saw him coming the peasant seized his whip by the top of the handle, his big holly wood whip, straight, strong and supple as the sinew of an ox.
The Prussian approached, his head down, making a lunge with his sword, sure of killing his adversary.
But the old fellow, squarely hitting the blade, the point of which would have pierced his stomach, turned it aside, and with the butt end of the whip struck the soldier a sharp blow on the temple and he fell to the ground.
Then he, gazed aghast, stupefied with amazement, at the body, twitching convulsively at first and then lying prone and motionless.
The man's eyes were closed, and blood trickled from a wound at the side of his forehead.
Although it was dark, Father Anthony could distinguish the bloodstain on the white snow.
He remained there, at his wit's end, while his cart continued slowly on its way.
They would burn his farm, ruin his district!
How could he hide the body, conceal the fact of his death, deceive the Prussians?
He heard voices in the distance, amid the utter stillness of the snow.
Then, seizing him round the body, he lifted him up in his arms, and thus running with him, he overtook his team, and threw the body on top of the manure.
He entered his courtyard.
He thought that by overturning the manure the body lying on top of it would fall into the ditch and be buried beneath it, and he dumped the cart.
As he had foreseen, the man was buried beneath the manure.
He called his stableman, told him to put up the horses, and went to his room.
He went to bed, still thinking of what he had best do, but no ideas came to him.
His apprehension increased in the quiet of his room.
He was bathed in perspiration from fear, his teeth chattered, he rose shivering, not being able to stay in bed.
He went downstairs to the kitchen, took the bottle of brandy from the sideboard and carried it upstairs.
He drank two large glasses, one after another, adding a fresh intoxication to the late one, without quieting his mental anguish.
He paced up and down, trying to think of some stratagem, some explanations, some cunning trick, and from time to time he rinsed his mouth with a swallow of “fil en dix” to give him courage.
Towards midnight his watch dog, a kind of cross wolf called “Devorant,” began to howl frantically.
Father Anthony shuddered to the marrow of his bones, and each time the beast began his long and lugubrious wail the old man's skin turned to goose flesh.
He had sunk into a chair, his legs weak, stupefied, done up, waiting anxiously for “Devorant” to set up another howl, and starting convulsively from nervousness caused by terror.
The clock downstairs struck five.
He went downstairs, opened the hall door, and stepped out into the darkness.
The earth was all white, the farm buildings standing out like black patches.
He approached the kennel.
The dog was dragging at his chain.
“Devorant” gave a bound, then stopped short, his hair bristling, his legs rigid, his muzzle in the air, his nose pointed towards the manure heap.
Saint Anthony, trembling from head to foot, faltered: “What's the matter with you, you dirty hound?” and he walked a few steps forward, gazing at the indistinct outlines, the sombre shadow of the courtyard.
He gazed at it, paralyzed by fear, and breathing hard.
But all at once he saw, close by, the handle of the manure fork which was sticking in the ground.
He snatched it up and in one of those transports of fear that will make the greatest coward brave he rushed forward to see what it was.
It was he, his Prussian, come to life, covered with filth from his bed of manure which had kept him warm.
He had sat down mechanically, and remained there in the snow which sprinkled down, all covered with dirt and blood as he was, and still stupid from drinking, dazed by the blow and exhausted from his wound.
He perceived Anthony, and too sodden to understand anything, he made an attempt to rise.
But the moment the old man recognized him, he foamed with rage like a wild animal.
“Ah, pig! pig!” he sputtered.
You are going to denounce me now—wait—wait!” And rushing on the German with all the strength of leis arms he flung the raised fork like a lance and buried the four prongs full length in his breast.
The soldier fell over on his back, uttering a long death moan, while the old peasant, drawing the fork out of his breast, plunged it over and over again into his abdomen, his stomach, his throat, like a madman, piercing the body from head to foot, as it still quivered, and the blood gushed out in streams.
Finally he stopped, exhausted by his arduous work, swallowing great mouthfuls of air, calmed down at the completion of the murder.
As the cocks were beginning to crow in the poultry yard and it was near daybreak, he set to work to bury the man.
He dug a hole in the manure till he reached the earth, dug down further, working wildly, in a frenzy of strength with frantic motions of his arms and body.
When the pit was deep enough he rolled the corpse into it with the fork, covered it with earth, which he stamped down for some time, and then put back the manure, and he smiled as he saw the thick snow finishing his work and covering up its traces with a white sheet.
He woke up sober, his mind calm and clear, capable of judgment and thought.
At the end of an hour he was going about the country making inquiries everywhere for his soldier.
He went to see the Prussian officer to find out why they had taken away his man.
As everyone knew what good friends they were, no one suspected him.
He even directed the research, declaring that the Prussian went to see the girls every evening.
An old retired gendarme who had an inn in the next village, and a pretty daughter, was arrested and shot.
LASTING LOVE It was the end of the dinner that opened the shooting season.
The Marquis de Bertrans with his guests sat around a brightly lighted table, covered with fruit and flowers.
The conversation drifted to love.
Immediately there arose an animated discussion, the same eternal discussion as to whether it were possible to love more than once.
Examples were given of persons who had loved once; these were offset by those who had loved violently many times.
The men agreed that passion, like sickness, may attack the same person several times, unless it strikes to kill.
This conclusion seemed quite incontestable.
The women, however, who based their opinion on poetry rather than on practical observation, maintained that love, the great passion, may come only once to mortals.
It resembles lightning, they said, this love.
A heart once touched by it becomes forever such a waste, so ruined, so consumed, that no other strong sentiment can take root there, not even a dream.
The marquis, who had indulged in many love affairs, disputed this belief.
“I tell you it is possible to love several times with all one's heart and soul.
You quote examples of persons who have killed themselves for love, to prove the impossibility of a second passion.
I wager that if they had not foolishly committed suicide, and so destroyed the possibility of a second experience, they would have found a new love, and still another, and so on till death.
He who has once indulged is forever a slave.
It is a thing of temperament.” They chose the old doctor as umpire.
He thought it was as the marquis had said, a thing of temperament.
What bliss to live for fifty-five years enveloped in an intense, unwavering affection!
“You are not mistaken, madame, on this point the loved one was a man.
You even know him; it is Monsieur Chouquet, the chemist.
As to the woman, you also know her, the old chair-mender, who came every year to the chateau.” The enthusiasm of the women fell.
Some expressed their contempt with “Pouah!” for the loves of common people did not interest them.
The doctor continued: “Three months ago I was called to the deathbed of the old chair-mender.
The priest had preceded me.
She wished to make us the executors of her will.
In order that we might understand her conduct, she told us the story of her life.
It is most singular and touching: Her father and mother were both chair-menders.
As a little child she wandered about with them, dirty, unkempt, hungry.
They visited many towns, leaving their horse, wagon and dog just outside the limits, where the child played in the grass alone until her parents had repaired all the broken chairs in the place.
She never heard a word of affection.
Then it was she made friends with the children in the street, but their parents always called them away and scolded them for speaking to the barefooted child.
She saved them most carefully.
“One day—she was then eleven years old—as she was walking through a country town she met, behind the cemetery, little Chouquet, weeping bitterly, because one of his playmates had stolen two precious liards (mills).
The tears of the small bourgeois, one of those much-envied mortals, who, she imagined, never knew trouble, completely upset her.
She approached him and, as soon as she learned the cause of his grief, she put into his hands all her savings.
He took them without hesitation and dried his eyes.
He was busy counting his money, and did not object.
Seeing that she was not repulsed, she threw her arms round him and gave him a hug—then she ran away.
Was it because she had sacrificed all her fortune that she became madly fond of this youngster, or was it because she had given him the first tender kiss?
The mystery is alike for children and for those of riper years.
For months she dreamed of that corner near the cemetery and of the little chap.
She stole a sou here and, there from her parents on the chair money or groceries she was sent to buy.
When she returned to the spot near the cemetery she had two francs in her pocket, but he was not there.
She only loved him the more, quite carried away at the sight of the brilliant-colored globes.
She cherished the recollection of it forever in her heart.
The following year she met him near the school playing marbles.
She rushed up to him, threw her arms round him, and kissed him so passionately that he screamed, in fear.
Three francs and twenty centimes!
During the next four years she put into his hands all her savings, which he pocketed conscientiously in exchange for kisses.
She wept with grief and shame, explaining brokenly that it had been a poor year.
She no longer thought of any one but the boy, and he watched for her with impatience; sometimes he would run to meet her.
Suddenly he disappeared.
He had gone to boarding school.
She found this out by careful investigation.
Then she used great diplomacy to persuade her parents to change their route and pass by this way again during vacation.
After a year of scheming she succeeded.
She had not seen him for two years, and scarcely recognized him, he was so changed, had grown taller, better looking and was imposing in his uniform, with its brass buttons.
He pretended not to see her, and passed by without a glance.
She wept for two days and from that time loved and suffered unceasingly.
He never condescended to turn his head toward her.
She loved him madly, hopelessly.
She continued their work.
“One day, on entering the village, where her heart always remained, she saw Chouquet coming out of his pharmacy with a young lady leaning on his arm.
A drunkard passing the spot pulled her out and took her to the drug store.
Young Chouquet came down in his dressing gown to revive her.
Without seeming to know who she was he undressed her and rubbed her; then he said to her, in a harsh voice: “'You are mad!
He refused remuneration for his trouble, although she insisted.
She worked, thinking always of him.
She began to buy medicines at his pharmacy; this gave her a chance to talk to him and to see him closely.
When she had closed her pathetic story she entreated me to take her earnings to the man she loved.
She had worked only that she might leave him something to remind him of her after her death.
I gave the priest fifty francs for her funeral expenses.
The next morning I went to see the Chouquets.
They were finishing breakfast, sitting opposite each other, fat and red, important and self-satisfied.
They welcomed me and offered me some coffee, which I accepted.
Then I began my story in a trembling voice, sure that they would be softened, even to tears.
As soon as Chouquet understood that he had been loved by 'that vagabond! that chair-mender! that wanderer!' he swore with indignation as though his reputation had been sullied, the respect of decent people lost, his personal honor, something precious and dearer to him than life, gone.
His exasperated wife kept repeating: 'That beggar!
That beggar!' “Seeming unable to find words suitable to the enormity, he stood up and began striding about.
He muttered: 'Can you understand anything so horrible, doctor?
I promise you she would not have escaped.' “I was dumfounded; I hardly knew what to think or say, but I had to finish my mission. 'She commissioned me,' I said, 'to give you her savings, which amount to three thousand five hundred francs.
As what I have just told you seems to be very disagreeable, perhaps you would prefer to give this money to the poor.' “They looked at me, that man and woman,' speechless with amazement.
I took the few thousand francs from out of my pocket.
Wretched-looking money from every country.
Pennies and gold pieces all mixed together.
“The next day Chouquet came to me and said brusquely: “'That woman left her wagon here—what have you done with it?' “'Nothing; take it if you wish.' “'It's just what I wanted,' he added, and walked off.
Don't you need them?' “He stared at me surprised: 'Well, no!
The doctor and the druggist in a country village must not be at enmity.
The wagon is useful to Chouquet, and with the money he has bought railroad stock.
The marquise, whose eyes were full of tears, sighed and said: “There is no denying the fact, only women know how to love.” PIERROT Mme.
Lefevre was a country dame, a widow, one of these half peasants, with ribbons and bonnets with trimming on them, one of those persons who clipped her words and put on great airs in public, concealing the soul of a pretentious animal beneath a comical and bedizened exterior, just as the country-folks hide their coarse red hands in ecru silk gloves.
The two women lived in a little house with green shutters by the side of the high road in Normandy, in the centre of the country of Caux.
As they had a narrow strip of garden in front of the house, they grew some vegetables.
As soon as Rose became aware of the theft, she ran to tell madame, who came downstairs in her woolen petticoat.
It was a shame and a disgrace!
And the two frightened women examined the foot tracks, talking, and supposing all sorts of things.
They stepped on the wall, they jumped into the garden!” And they became apprehensive for the future.
The neighbors came, making examinations and discussing the matter in their turn, while the two women explained to each newcomer what they had observed and their opinion.
But a little dog (in Normandy they say “quin”), a little puppy who would bark.
As soon as everyone had left, Mme.
Lefevre discussed this idea of a dog for some time.
On reflection she made a thousand objections, terrified at the idea of a bowl full of soup, for she belonged to that race of parsimonious country women who always carry centimes in their pocket to give alms in public to beggars on the road and to put in the Sunday collection plate.
Rose, who loved animals, gave her opinion and defended it shrewdly.
The grocer of Rolleville had one, a tiny one, but he demanded two francs to cover the cost of sending it.
Lefevre declared that she would feed a “quin,” but would not buy one.
The baker, who knew all that occurred, brought in his wagon one morning a strange little yellow animal, almost without paws, with the body of a crocodile, the head of a fox, and a curly tail—a true cockade, as big as all the rest of him.
Lefevre thought this common cur that cost nothing was very handsome.
The dog was installed in an old soap box and they gave it some water which it drank.
“When he is thoroughly accustomed to the house we can let him run.
He can find something to eat, roaming about the country.” They let him run, in fact, which did not prevent him from being famished.
Also he never barked except to beg for food, and then he barked furiously.
Lefevre, however, had become accustomed to the animal.
It was immediately decided that they must get rid of Pierrot.
Every one declined to take him for ten leagues around.
Then they resolved, not knowing what else to do, to make him “piquer du mas.” “Piquer du mas” means to eat chalk.
When one wants to get rid of a dog they make him “Piquer du mas.” In the midst of an immense plain one sees a kind of hut, or rather a very small roof standing above the ground.
This is the entrance to the clay pit.
A big perpendicular hole is sunk for twenty metres underground and ends in a series of long subterranean tunnels.
Once a year they go down into the quarry at the time they fertilize the ground.
The rest of the year it serves as a cemetery for condemned dogs, and as one passed by this hole plaintive howls, furious or despairing barks and lamentable appeals reach one's ear.
Sportsmen's dogs and sheep dogs flee in terror from this mournful place, and when one leans over it one perceives a disgusting odor of putrefaction.
Frightful dramas are enacted in the darkness.
When an animal has suffered down there for ten or twelve days, nourished on the foul remains of his predecessors, another animal, larger and more vigorous, is thrown into the hole.
There they are, alone, starving, with glittering eyes.
They watch each other, follow each other, hesitate in doubt.
But hunger impels them; they attack each other, fight desperately for some time, and the stronger eats the weaker, devours him alive.
When it was decided to make Pierrot “piquer du mas” they looked round for an executioner.
The laborer who mended the road demanded six sous to take the dog there.
That seemed wildly exorbitant to Mme.
The neighbor's hired boy wanted five sous; that was still too much.
So Rose having observed that they had better carry it there themselves, as in that way it would not be brutally treated on the way and made to suspect its fate, they resolved to go together at twilight.
He swallowed every morsel of it, and as he wagged his tail with delight Rose put him in her apron.
They soon perceived the chalk pit and walked up to it.
Then Rose, who was crying, kissed the dog and threw him into the chalk pit, and they both leaned over, listening.
First they heard a dull sound, then the sharp, bitter, distracting cry of an animal in pain, then a succession of little mournful cries, then despairing appeals, the cries of a dog who is entreating, his head raised toward the opening of the pit.
They were filled with remorse, with terror, with a wild inexplicable fear, and ran away from the spot.
Lefevre cried: “Wait for me, Rose, wait for me!” At night they were haunted by frightful nightmares.
Lefevre dreamed she was sitting down at table to eat her soup, but when she uncovered the tureen Pierrot was in it.
She listened, but she was mistaken.
She fell asleep again and found herself on a high road, an endless road, which she followed.
Suddenly in the middle of the road she perceived a basket, a large farmer's basket, lying there, and this basket frightened her.
She ended by opening it, and Pierrot, concealed in it, seized her hand and would not let go.
At daybreak she arose, almost beside herself, and ran to the chalk pit.
She began to sob and called him by all sorts of endearing names.
He answered her with all the tender inflections of his dog's voice.
Then she wanted to see him again, promising herself that she would give him a good home till he died.
She ran to the chalk digger, whose business it was to excavate for chalk, and told him the situation.
The man listened, but said nothing.
When she had finished he said: “You want your dog?
Four francs!” “Do you suppose I am going to bring my ropes, my windlass, and set it up, and go down there with my boy and let myself be bitten, perhaps, by your cursed dog for the pleasure of giving it back to you?
You should not have thrown it down there.” She walked away, indignant.
As soon as she entered the house she called Rose and told her of the quarryman's charges.
Rose, always resigned, repeated: “Four francs!
That is a good deal of money, madame.” Then she added: “If we could throw him something to eat, the poor dog, so he will not die of hunger.” Mme.
Lefevre approved of this and was quite delighted.
They cut it in mouthfuls, which they threw down one after the other, speaking by turns to Pierrot.
As soon as the dog finished one piece he yelped for the next.
They returned that evening and the next day and every day.
One morning as they were just letting fall the first mouthful they suddenly heard a tremendous barking in the pit.
But each time they noticed distinctly a terrible struggle going on, then plaintive cries from Pierrot, who had been bitten by his companion, who ate up everything as he was the stronger.
It was in vain that they specified, saying: “That is for you, Pierrot.” Pierrot evidently got nothing.
The two women, dumfounded, looked at each other and Mme.
We must give it up.” And, suffocating at the thought of all the dogs living at her expense, she went away, even carrying back what remained of the bread, which she ate as she walked along.
Rose followed her, wiping her eyes on the corner of her blue apron.
A NORMANDY JOKE It was a wedding procession that was coming along the road between the tall trees that bounded the farms and cast their shadow on the road.
At the head were the bride and groom, then the family, then the invited guests, and last of all the poor of the neighborhood.
The bridegroom was a good-looking young fellow, Jean Patu, the richest farmer in the neighborhood, but he was above all things, an ardent sportsman who seemed to take leave of his senses in order to satisfy that passion, and who spent large sums on his dogs, his keepers, his ferrets and his guns.
The bride, Rosalie Roussel, had been courted by all the likely young fellows in the district, for they all thought her handsome and they knew that she would have a good dowry.
But she had chosen Patu; partly, perhaps, because she liked him better than she did the others, but still more, like a careful Normandy girl, because he had more crown pieces.
As they entered the white gateway of the husband's farm, forty shots resounded without their seeing those who fired, as they were hidden in the ditches.
The noise seemed to please the men, who were slouching along heavily in their best clothes, and Patu left his wife, and running up to a farm servant whom he perceived behind a tree, took his gun and fired a shot himself, as frisky as a young colt.
Then they went on, beneath the apple trees which were heavy with fruit, through the high grass and through the midst of the calves, who looked at them with their great eyes, got up slowly and remained standing, with their muzzles turned toward the wedding party.
The men became serious when they came within measurable distance of the wedding dinner.
Some of them, the rich ones, had on tall, shining silk hats, which seemed altogether out of place there; others had old head- coverings with a long nap, which might have been taken for moleskin, while the humblest among them wore caps.
All the women had on shawls, which they wore loosely on their back, holding the tips ceremoniously under their arms.
They were red, parti-colored, flaming shawls, and their brightness seemed to astonish the black fowls on the dung-heap, the ducks on the side of the pond and the pigeons on the thatched roofs.
The extensive farm buildings seemed to be waiting there at the end of that archway of apple trees, and a sort of vapor came out of open door and windows and an almost overpowering odor of eatables was exhaled from the vast building, from all its openings and from its very walls.
The string of guests extended through the yard; but when the foremost of them reached the house, they broke the chain and dispersed, while those behind were still coming in at the open gate.
The ditches were now lined with urchins and curious poor people, and the firing did not cease, but came from every side at once, and a cloud of smoke, and that odor which has the same intoxicating effect as absinthe, blended with the atmosphere.
The women were shaking their dresses outside the door, to get rid of the dust, were undoing their cap-strings and pulling their shawls over their arms, and then they went into the house to lay them aside altogether for the time.
The table was laid in the great kitchen that would hold a hundred persons; they sat down to dinner at two o'clock; and at eight o'clock they were still eating, and the men, in their shirt-sleeves, with their waistcoats unbuttoned and with red faces, were swallowing down the food and drink as if they had been whirlpools.
The cider sparkled merrily, clear and golden in the large glasses, by the side of the dark, blood-colored wine, and between every dish they made a “hole,” the Normandy hole, with a glass of brandy which inflamed the body and put foolish notions into the head.
Low jokes were exchanged across the table until the whole arsenal of peasant wit was exhausted.
For the last hundred years the same broad stories had served for similar occasions, and, although every one knew them, they still hit the mark and made both rows of guests roar with laughter.
At one end of the table four young fellows, who were neighbors, were preparing some practical jokes for the newly married couple, and they seemed to have got hold of a good one by the way they whispered and laughed, and suddenly one of them, profiting by a moment of silence, exclaimed: “The poachers will have a good time to-night, with this moon!
The young couple went into their own room, which was on the ground floor, as most rooms in farmhouses are.
As it was very warm, they opened the window and closed the shutters.
The young woman had already taken off her wreath and her dress, and she was in her petticoat, unlacing her boots, while Jean was finishing his cigar and looking at her out of the corners of his eyes.
Suddenly, with a brusque movement, like a man who is about to set to work, he took off his coat.
She had already taken off her boots, and was now pulling off her stockings, and then she said to him: “Go and hide yourself behind the curtains while I get into bed.” He seemed as if he were about to refuse; but at last he did as she asked him, and in a moment she unfastened her petticoat, which slipped down, fell at her feet and lay on the ground.
He immediately went up to the bed, and, stooping over his wife, he sought her lips, which she hid beneath the pillow, when a shot was heard in the distance, in the direction of the forest of Rapees, as he thought.
He raised himself anxiously, with his heart beating, and running to the window, he opened the shutters.
The full moon flooded the yard with yellow light, and the reflection of the apple trees made black shadows at their feet, while in the distance the fields gleamed, covered with the ripe corn.
But as he was leaning out, listening to every sound in the still night, two bare arms were put round his neck, and his wife whispered, trying to pull him back: “Do leave them alone; it has nothing to do with you.
Come to bed.” He turned round, put his arms round her, and drew her toward him, but just as he was laying her on the bed, which yielded beneath her weight, they heard another report, considerably nearer this time, and Jean, giving way to his tumultuous rage, swore aloud: “Damn it!
Wait, wait a few minutes!” He put on his shoes again, took down his gun, which was always hanging within reach against the wall, and, as his wife threw herself on her knees in her terror, imploring him not to go, he hastily freed himself, ran to the window and jumped into the yard.
She waited one hour, two hours, until daybreak, but her husband did not return.
Then she lost her head, aroused the house, related how angry Jean was, and said that he had gone after the poachers, and immediately all the male farm-servants, even the boys, went in search of their master.
But if I can only catch them some day they had better look out for themselves!” That is how they amuse themselves in Normandy on a wedding day.
FATHER MATTHEW We had just left Rouen and were galloping along the road to Jumieges.
The light carriage flew along across the level country.
Presently the horse slackened his pace to walk up the hill of Cantelen.
One sees there one of the most magnificent views in the world.
Behind us lay Rouen, the city of churches, with its Gothic belfries, sculptured like ivory trinkets; before us Saint Sever, the manufacturing suburb, whose thousands of smoking chimneys rise amid the expanse of sky, opposite the thousand sacred steeples of the old city.
On the one hand the spire of the cathedral, the highest of human monuments, on the other the engine of the power-house, its rival, and almost as high, and a metre higher than the tallest pyramid in Egypt.
Before us wound the Seine, with its scattered islands and bordered by white banks, covered with a forest on the right and on the left immense meadows, bounded by another forest yonder in the distance.
Three enormous steam boats were starting out, one behind the other, for Havre, and a chain of boats, a bark, two schooners and a brig, were going upstream to Rouen, drawn by a little tug that emitted a cloud of black smoke.
My companion, a native of the country, did not glance at this wonderful landscape, but he smiled continually; he seemed to be amused at his thoughts.
Suddenly he cried: “Ah, you will soon see something comical—Father Matthew's chapel.
That is a sweet morsel, my boy.” I looked at him in surprise.
He continued: “I will give you a whiff of Normandy that will stay by you.
Father Matthew is the handsomest Norman in the province and his chapel is one of the wonders of the world, nothing more nor less.
But I will first give you a few words of explanation.
“Father Matthew, who is also called Father 'La Boisson,' is an old sergeant-major who has come back to his native land.
He combines in admirable proportions, making a perfect whole, the humbug of the old soldier and the sly roguery of the Norman.
On his return to Normandy, thanks to influence and incredible cleverness, he was made doorkeeper of a votive chapel, a chapel dedicated to the Virgin and frequented chiefly by young women who have gone astray . . . .
He composed and had painted a special prayer to his 'Good Virgin.' This prayer is a masterpiece of unintentional irony, of Norman wit, in which jest is blended with fear of the saint and with the superstitious fear of the secret influence of something.
He has not much faith in his protectress, but he believes in her a little through prudence, and he is considerate of her through policy.
“In fact he talks of the good Virgin as the valet de chambre of a redoubted prince might talk of his master who confided in him all his little private secrets.
He knows a number of amusing anecdotes at his expense which he tells confidentially among friends as they sit over their glasses.
“But you will see for yourself.
“As the fees coming from the Virgin did not appear sufficient to him, he added to the main figure a little business in saints.
There was not room enough in the chapel, so he stored them in the wood-shed and brings them forth as soon as the faithful ask for them.
He carved these little wooden statues himself—they are comical in the extreme—and painted them all bright green one year when they were painting his house.
You know that saints cure diseases, but each saint has his specialty, and you must not confound them or make any blunders.
They are as jealous of each other as mountebanks.
“'For diseases of the ear which saint is the best?' “'Why, Saint Osyme is good and Saint Pamphilius is not bad.' But that is not all.
“As Matthew has some time to spare, he drinks; but he drinks like a professional, with conviction, so much so that he is intoxicated regularly every evening.
He is so well aware of it that he notices each day his exact degree of intoxication.
That is his chief occupation; the chapel is a secondary matter.
“And he has invented—listen and catch on—he has invented the 'Saoulometre.' “There is no such instrument, but Matthew's observations are as precise as those of a mathematician.
You may hear him repeating incessantly: 'Since Monday I have had more than forty-five,' or else 'I was between fifty-two and fifty-eight,' or else 'I had at least sixty-six to seventy,' or 'Hullo, cheat, I thought I was in the fifties and here I find I had had seventy-five!' “He never makes a mistake.
“He declares that he never reached his limit, but as he acknowledges that his observations cease to be exact when he has passed ninety, one cannot depend absolutely on the truth of that statement.
“When Matthew acknowledges that he has passed ninety, you may rest assured that he is blind drunk.
“On these occasions his wife, Melie, another marvel, flies into a fury.
She waits for him at the door of the house, and as he enters she roars at him: “'So there you are, slut, hog, giggling sot!' “Then Matthew, who is not laughing any longer, plants himself opposite her and says in a severe tone: “'Be still, Melie; this is no time to talk; wait till to-morrow.' “If she keeps on shouting at him, he goes up to her and says in a shaky voice: “'Don't bawl any more.
I have had about ninety; I am not counting any more.
“If, on the following day, she reverts to the subject, he laughs in her face and says: “'Come, come!
The road entered the delightful forest of Roumare.
Autumn, marvellous autumn, blended its gold and purple with the remaining traces of verdure.
Then, instead of going on to Jumieges, my friend turned to the left and, taking a crosscut, drove in among the trees.
And presently from the top of a high hill we saw again the magnificent valley of the Seine and the winding river beneath us.
At our right a very small slate-covered building, with a bell tower as large as a sunshade, adjoined a pretty house with green Venetian blinds, and all covered with honeysuckle and roses.
“Here are some friends!” cried a big voice, and Matthew appeared on the threshold.
He was a man about sixty, thin and with a goatee and long, white mustache.
My friend shook him by the hand and introduced me, and Matthew took us into a clean kitchen, which served also as a dining-room.
He said: “I have no elegant apartment, monsieur.
The saucepans, you see, keep me company.” Then, turning to my friend: “Why did you come on Thursday?
You know quite well that this is the day I consult my Guardian Saint.
I cannot go out this afternoon.” And running to the door, he uttered a terrific roar: “Melie!” which must have startled the sailors in the ships along the stream in the valley below.
Then Matthew winked his eye knowingly.
“She is not pleased with me, you see, because yesterday I was in the nineties.” My friend began to laugh.
“In the nineties, Matthew!
“Last year I found only twenty rasieres (an old dry measure) of apricots.
So I made some, and yesterday I tapped the barrel.
Polyte was here, and we sat down and drank a glass and another without being satisfied (one could go on drinking it until to- morrow), and at last, with glass after glass, I felt a chill at my stomach.
I said to Polyte: 'Supposing we drink a glass of cognac to warm ourselves?' He agreed.
But by going from chills to heat and heat to chills, I saw that I was in the nineties.
Polyte was not far from his limit.” The door opened and Melie appeared.
“I have never reached my limit.” They gave us a delicious luncheon outside beneath two lime trees, beside the little chapel and overlooking the vast landscape.
And Matthew told us, with a mixture of humor and unexpected credulity, incredible stories of miracles.
We had drunk a good deal of delicious cider, sparkling and sweet, fresh and intoxicating, which he preferred to all other drinks, and were smoking our pipes astride our chairs when two women appeared.
After greeting us they asked for Saint Blanc.
Matthew winked at us as he replied: “I will get him for you.” And he disappeared in his wood shed.
He remained there fully five minutes.
Then he came back with an expression of consternation.
I am quite sure that I had him.” Then making a speaking trumpet of his hands, he roared once more: “Meli-e-a!” “What's the matter?” replied his wife from the end of the garden.
I cannot find him in the wood shed.” Then Melie explained it this way: “Was not that the one you took last week to stop up a hole in the rabbit hutch?” Matthew gave a start.
“By thunder, that may be!” Then turning to the women, he said: “Follow me.” They followed him.
We did the same, almost choking with suppressed laughter.
Saint Blanc was indeed stuck into the earth like an ordinary stake, covered with mud and dirt, and forming a corner for the rabbit hutch.
As soon as they perceived him, the two women fell on their knees, crossed themselves and began to murmur an “Oremus.” But Matthew darted toward them.
“Wait,” he said, “you are in the mud; I will get you a bundle of straw.” He went to fetch the straw and made them a priedieu.
Then, looking at his muddy saint and doubtless afraid of bringing discredit on his business, he added: “I will clean him off a little for you.” He took a pail of water and a brush and began to scrub the wooden image vigorously, while the two old women kept on praying.
When he had finished he said: “Now he is all right.” And he took us back to the house to drink another glass.
As he was carrying the glass to his lips he stopped and said in a rather confused manner: “All the same, when I put Saint Blanc out with the rabbits I thought he would not make any more money.
But the saints, you see, they are never out of date.” ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 11.
Oreille was a very economical woman; she knew the value of a centime, and possessed a whole storehouse of strict principles with regard to the multiplication of money, so that her cook found the greatest difficulty in making what the servants call their market-penny, and her husband was hardly allowed any pocket money at all.
They were, however, very comfortably off, and had no children; but it really pained Mme.
Oreille to see any money spent; it was like tearing at her heartstrings when she had to take any of those nice crown-pieces out of her pocket; and whenever she had to spend anything, no matter how necessary it might be, she slept badly the next night.
Oreille was continually saying to his wife: “You really might be more liberal, as we have no children, and never spend our income.” “You don't know what may happen,” she used to reply.
“It is better to have too much than too little.” She was a little woman of about forty, very active, rather hasty, wrinkled, very neat and tidy, and with a very short temper.
Her husband frequently complained of all the privations she made him endure; some of them were particularly painful to him, as they touched his vanity.
He was one of the head clerks in the War Office, and only stayed on there in obedience to his wife's wish, to increase their income which they did not nearly spend.
For two years he had always come to the office with the same old patched umbrella, to the great amusement of his fellow clerks.
At last he got tired of their jokes, and insisted upon his wife buying him a new one.
She bought one for eight francs and a half, one of those cheap articles which large houses sell as an advertisement.
When the men in the office saw the article, which was being sold in Paris by the thousand, they began their jokes again, and Oreille had a dreadful time of it.
They even made a song about it, which he heard from morning till night all over the immense building.
Oreille was very angry, and peremptorily told his wife to get him a new one, a good silk one, for twenty francs, and to bring him the bill, so that he might see that it was all right.
She bought him one for eighteen francs, and said, getting red with anger as she gave it to her husband: “This will last you for five years at least.” Oreille felt quite triumphant, and received a small ovation at the office with his new acquisition.
When he went home in the evening his wife said to him, looking at the umbrella uneasily: “You should not leave it fastened up with the elastic; it will very likely cut the silk.
You must take care of it, for I shall not buy you a new one in a hurry.” She took it, unfastened it, and remained dumfounded with astonishment and rage; in the middle of the silk there was a hole as big as a six- penny-piece; it had been made with the end of a cigar.
“What is that?” she screamed.
“You—you—have—burned—your umbrella!
Do you wish to ruin us outright?” He turned round, and felt that he was growing pale.
“What are you talking about?” “I say that you have burned your umbrella.
Just look here.” And rushing at him, as if she were going to beat him, she violently thrust the little circular burned hole under his nose.
I don't know what is the matter with the umbrella.” “You have been playing tricks with it at the office; you have been playing the fool and opening it, to show it off!” she screamed.
“I only opened it once, to let them see what a nice one it was, that is all, I swear.” But she shook with rage, and got up one of those conjugal scenes which make a peaceable man dread the domestic hearth more than a battlefield where bullets are raining.
She mended it with a piece of silk cut out of the old umbrella, which was of a different color, and the next day Oreille went off very humbly with the mended article in his hand.
He put it into a cupboard, and thought no more of it than of some unpleasant recollection.
But he had scarcely got home that evening when his wife took the umbrella from him, opened it, and nearly had a fit when she saw what had befallen it, for the disaster was irreparable.
It was covered with small holes, which evidently proceeded from burns, just as if some one had emptied the ashes from a lighted pipe on to it.
It was done for utterly, irreparably.
She looked at it without a word, in too great a passion to be able to say anything.
He, also, when he saw the damage, remained almost dumfounded, in a state of frightened consternation.
They looked at each other, then he looked at the floor; and the next moment she threw the useless article at his head, screaming out in a transport of the most violent rage, for she had recovered her voice by that time: “Oh! you brute! you brute!
He declared that he could not understand it at all, and that it could only proceed from malice or from vengeance.
A ring at the bell saved him; it was a friend whom they were expecting to dinner.
Oreille submitted the case to him.
As for buying a new umbrella, that was out of the question; her husband should not have another.
The friend very sensibly said that in that case his clothes would be spoiled, and they were certainly worth more than the umbrella.
But the little woman, who was still in a rage, replied: “Very well, then, when it rains he may have the kitchen umbrella, for I will not give him a new silk one.” Oreille utterly rebelled at such an idea.
I am not going to the office with the kitchen umbrella.” The friend interposed.
Eight and eighteen are twenty-six.
Just fancy, twenty-six francs for an umbrella!
It is utter madness!” The friend, who was only a poor man of the middle classes, had an inspiration: “Make your fire assurance pay for it.
Oreille fairly jumped, he was so startled at the proposal.
It is eighteen francs lost, that is all.
Oreille could not get over the loss of her eighteen francs by any means.
She had put the umbrella on the dining- room table, and she looked at it without being able to come to any determination.
Every moment she thought of the assurance company, but she did not dare to encounter the quizzical looks of the gentlemen who might receive her, for she was very timid before people, and blushed at a mere nothing, and was embarrassed when she had to speak to strangers.
But the regret at the loss of the eighteen francs pained her as if she had been wounded.
She tried not to think of it any more, and yet every moment the recollection of the loss struck her painfully.
Time went on, and she could not decide; but suddenly, like all cowards, on making a resolve, she became determined.
“I will go, and we will see what will happen.” But first of all she was obliged to prepare the umbrella so that the disaster might be complete, and the reason of it quite evident.
She took a match from the mantelpiece, and between the ribs she burned a hole as big as the palm of her hand; then she delicately rolled it up, fastened it with the elastic band, put on her bonnet and shawl, and went quickly toward the Rue de Rivoli, where the assurance office was.
That was all right, so she had time to consider, and she walked slower and slower.
Suddenly she saw a door on which was a large brass plate with “La Maternelle Fire Assurance Office” engraved on it.
At last she said to herself: “I must go in, however, so I may as well do it sooner as later.” She could not help noticing, however, how her heart beat as she entered.
But the idea of that sum revived her courage, and she went upstairs, out of breath, stopping at almost every other step.
She knocked at a door which she saw on the first landing, and a clear voice said, in answer: “Come in!” She obeyed mechanically, and found herself in a large room where three solemn gentlemen, all with a decoration in their buttonholes, were standing talking.
One of them asked her: “What do you want, madame?” She could hardly get out her words, but stammered: “I have come—I have come on account of an accident, something—“.
He very politely pointed out a seat to her, “If you will kindly sit down I will attend to you in a moment.” And, returning to the other two, he went on with the conversation.
“The company, gentlemen, does not consider that it is under any obligation to you for more than four hundred thousand francs, and we can pay no attention to your claim to the further sum of a hundred thousand, which you wish to make us pay.
Besides that, the surveyor's valuation—” One of the others interrupted him: “That is quite enough, monsieur; the law courts will decide between us, and we have nothing further to do than to take our leave.” And they went out after mutual ceremonious bows.
Oh! if she could only have gone away with them, how gladly she would have done it; she would have run away and given up everything.
But it was too late, for the gentleman came back, and said, bowing: “What can I do for you, madame?” She could scarcely speak, but at last she managed to say: “I have come-for this.” The manager looked at the object which she held out to him in mute astonishment.
With trembling fingers she tried to undo the elastic, and succeeding, after several attempts, she hastily opened the damaged remains of the umbrella.
“It looks to me to be in a very bad state of health,” he said compassionately.
“It cost me twenty francs,” she said, with some hesitation.
He seemed astonished.
As much as that?” “Yes, it was a capital article, and I wanted you to see the condition it is in.” “Yes, yes, I see; very well.
But I really do not understand what it can have to do with me.” She began to feel uncomfortable; perhaps this company did not pay for such small articles, and she said: “But—it is burned.” He could not deny it.
She remained open-mouthed, not knowing what to say next; then, suddenly recollecting that she had left out the main thing, she said hastily: “I am Mme.
Oreille; we are assured in La Maternelle, and I have come to claim the value of this damage.” “I only want you to have it re-covered,” she added quickly, fearing a positive refusal.
We are never asked to give compensation for such trivial losses.
You must allow that we cannot make good pocket-handkerchiefs, gloves, brooms, slippers, all the small articles which are every day exposed to the chances of being burned.” She got red in the face, and felt inclined to fly into a rage.
“But, monsieur, last December one of our chimneys caught fire, and caused at least five hundred francs' damage; M.
Oreille made no claim on the company, and so it is only just that it should pay for my umbrella now.” The manager, guessing that she was telling a lie, said, with a smile: “You must acknowledge, madame, that it is very surprising that M.
Oreille should have asked no compensation for damages amounting to five hundred francs, and should now claim five or six francs for mending an umbrella.” She was not the least put out, and replied: “I beg your pardon, monsieur, the five hundred francs affected M.
Oreille's pocket, whereas this damage, amounting to eighteen francs, concerns Mme.
I must tell you that just above there is a shelf for the candlesticks and matches.
I put out my hand, took three or four matches, and struck one, but it missed fire, so I struck another, which ignited, but went out immediately, and a third did the same.” The manager interrupted her to make a joke.
“I suppose they were government matches, then?” She did not understand him, and went on: “Very likely.
At any rate, the fourth caught fire, and I lit my candle, and went into my room to go to bed; but in a quarter of an hour I fancied that I smelt something burning, and I have always been terribly afraid of fire.
If ever we have an accident it will not be my fault, I assure you.
I am terribly nervous since our chimney was on fire, as I told you; so I got up, and hunted about everywhere, sniffing like a dog after game, and at last I noticed that my umbrella was burning.
You can see how it has damaged it.” The manager had taken his cue, and asked her: “What do you estimate the damage at?” She did not know what to say, as she was not certain what value to put on it, but at last she replied: “Perhaps you had better get it done yourself.
I will leave it to you.” He, however, naturally refused.
Tell me the amount of your claim, that is all I want to know.” “Well, I think that—Look here, monsieur, I do not want to make any money out of you, so I will tell you what we will do.
I will take my umbrella to the maker, who will re-cover it in good, durable silk, and I will bring the bill to you.
Will that suit you, monsieur?” “Perfectly, madame; we will settle it so.
Here is a note for the cashier, who will repay you whatever it costs you.” He gave Mme.
Oreille a slip of paper, who took it, got up and went out, thanking him, for she was in a hurry to escape lest he should change his mind.
She went briskly through the streets, looking out for a really good umbrella maker, and when she found a shop which appeared to be a first- class one, she went in, and said, confidently: “I want this umbrella re-covered in silk, good silk.
Use the very best and strongest you have; I don't mind what it costs.” BELHOMME'S BEAST The coach for Havre was ready to leave Criquetot, and all the passengers were waiting for their names to be called out, in the courtyard of the Commercial Hotel kept by Monsieur Malandain, Jr.
It was a yellow wagon, mounted on wheels which had once been yellow, but were now almost gray through the accumulation of mud.
Three white horses, with enormous heads and great round knees, were the first things one noticed.
They were harnessed ready to draw this coach, which had something of the appearance of a monster in its massive structure.
Large round baskets, full of frightened poultry, were standing in front of the peasant women.
Cesaire Horlaville took them one after the other and packed them on the top of his coach; then more gently, he loaded on those containing eggs; finally he tossed up from below several little bags of grain, small packages wrapped in handkerchiefs, pieces of cloth, or paper.
Then he opened the back door, and drawing a list from his pocket he called: “Monsieur le cure de Gorgeville.” The priest advanced.
He was a large, powerful, robust man with a red face and a genial expression.
“The schoolmaster of Rollebose-les-Grinets.” The man hastened forward, tall, timid, wearing a long frock coat which fell to his knees, and he in turn disappeared through the open door.
“Maitre Poiret, two seats.” Poiret approached, a tall, round-shouldered man, bent by the plow, emaciated through abstinence, bony, with a skin dried by a sparing use of water.
His wife followed him, small and thin, like a tired animal, carrying a large green umbrella in her hands.
“Maitre Rabot, two seats.” Rabot hesitated, being of an undecided nature.
He asked: “You mean me?” The driver was going to answer with a jest, when Rabot dived head first towards the door, pushed forward by a vigorous shove from his wife, a tall, square woman with a large, round stomach like a barrel, and hands as large as hams.
Rabot slipped into the wagon like a rat entering a hole.
“Maitre Caniveau.” A large peasant, heavier than an ox, made the springs bend, and was in turn engulfed in the interior of the yellow chest.
“Maitre Belhomme.” Belhomme, tall and thin, came forward, his neck bent, his head hanging, a handkerchief held to his ear as if he were suffering from a terrible toothache.
All these people wore the blue blouse over quaint and antique coats of a black or greenish cloth, Sunday clothes which they would only uncover in the streets of Havre.
Their heads were covered by silk caps at high as towers, the emblem of supreme elegance in the small villages of Normandy.
Cesaire Horlaville closed the door, climbed up on his box and snapped his whip.
They shook themselves, and, with an effort, started off at a slow, halting gait.
And behind them came the coach, rattling its shaky windows and iron springs, making a terrible clatter of hardware and glass, while the passengers were tossed hither and thither like so many rubber balls.
Being of a loquacious and genial disposition, he started the conversation.
“Well, Maitre Caniveau,” said he, “how are you getting along?” The enormous farmer who, on account of his size, girth and stomach, felt a bond of sympathy for the representative of the Church, answered with a smile: “Pretty well, Monsieur le cure, pretty well.
As she was from a neighboring village, the priest only knew her by name.
“Yes, I'm the one that married Rabot.” Rabot, slender, timid, and self-satisfied, bowed smilingly, bending his head forward as though to say: “Yes, I'm the Rabot whom Blondel married.” Suddenly Maitre Belhomme, still holding his handkerchief to his ear, began groaning in a pitiful fashion.
He was going “Oh-oh-oh!” and stamping his foot in order to show his terrible suffering.
“You must have an awful toothache,” said the priest.
The peasant stopped moaning for a minute and answered: “No, Monsieur le cure, it is not the teeth.
A lump of wax?” “I don't know whether it's wax; but I know that it is a bug, a big bug, that crawled in while I was asleep in the haystack.” “A bug!
As sure as I am of heaven, Monsieur le cure!
Great interest had been aroused among the spectators.
Poiret claimed that it was a spider, the teacher, thought it might be a caterpillar.
He had already seen such a thing once, at Campemuret, in Orne, where he had been for six years.
In this case the caterpillar had gone through the head and out at the nose.
But the man remained deaf in that ear ever after, the drum having been pierced.
Maitre Belhomme, his head resting against the door, for he had been the last one to enter, was still moaning.
Oh, Monsieur le cure, how it hurts! how it hurts!” “Have you seen the doctor?” asked Caniveau.
“I should say not!” “Why?” The fear of the doctor seemed to cure Belhomme.
He straightened up without, however, dropping his handkerchief.
Can you tell me?” Caniveau was laughing.
And he was all right in a couple of hours!” Belhomme thought that Chambrelan must also have used some charm, but he did not dare say so before the priest.
Caniveau replied, laughing: “Are you sure it isn't a rabbit that you have in your ear?
Wait, I'll make him run away.” Whereupon Caniveau, making a megaphone of his hands, began to mimic the barking of hounds.
And everybody in the carriage began to roar, even the schoolmaster, who, as a rule, never ever smiled.
He was responsible for fifteen, he alone, Rabot!
Therefore there could be no doubt about it.
And whose was the sixteenth?
It was doubtless the first.
Perhaps everybody knew, for no one was surprised.
Even Caniveau kept mum.
But Belhomme began to moan again: “Oh-oh-oh!
It's scratching about in the bottom of my ear!
I am willing.” And everybody got out in order to witness the operation.
The priest asked for a bowl, a napkin and a glass of water, then he told the teacher to hold the patient's head over on one side, and, as soon as the liquid should have entered the ear, to turn his head over suddenly on the other side.
But Caniveau, who was already peering into Belhomme's ear to see if he couldn't discover the beast, shouted: “Gosh!
Your rabbit could never get through that; his feet would stick.” The priest in turn examined the passage and saw that it was too narrow and too congested for him to attempt to expel the animal.
Then, in the midst of the general excitement, the priest poured into the passage half a glass of water, which trickled over the face through the hair and down the neck of the patient.
Then the schoolmaster quickly twisted the head round over the bowl, as though he were trying to unscrew it.
All the passengers rushed forward.
However, Belhomme exclaimed: “I don't feel anything any more.” The priest triumphantly exclaimed: “Certainly it has been drowned.” Everybody was happy and got back into the coach.
But hardly had they started when Belhomme began to cry out again.
He even declared that it had now entered his head and was eating his brain.
He was howling with such contortions that Poiret's wife, thinking him possessed by the devil, began to cry and to cross herself.
With his finger he imitated the movements of the body, seeming to see it, to follow it with his eyes: “There it goes up again!
Oh—oh—oh—what torture!” Caniveau was getting impatient.
It is probably more accustomed to wine.” Everybody laughed, and he continued: “When we get to the Cafe Bourbeux, give it some brandy, and it won't bother you any more, I wager.” But Belhomme could contain himself no longer; he began howling as though his soul were being torn from his body.
They asked Cesaire Horlaville to stop at the nearest house.
It was a farmhouse at the side of the road.
Belhomme was carried into it and laid on the kitchen table in order to repeat the operation.
Caniveau advised mixing brandy and water in order to benumb and perhaps kill the insect.
But the priest preferred vinegar.
They poured the liquid in drop by drop this time, that it might penetrate down to the bottom, and they left it several minutes in the organ that the beast had chosen for its home.
A bowl had once more been brought; Belhomme was turned over bodily by the priest and Caniveau, while the schoolmaster was tapping on the healthy ear in order to empty the other.
Cesaire Horlaville himself, whip in hand, had come in to observe the proceedings.
Suddenly, at the bottom of the bowl appeared a little brown spot, no bigger than a tiny seed.
First there were cries of astonishment and then shouts of laughter.
Caniveau was slapping his thigh, Cesaire Horlaville snapped his whip, the priest laughed like a braying donkey, the teacher cackled as though he were sneezing, and the two women were giving little screams of joy, like the clucking of hens.
Belhomme had seated himself on the table and had taken the bowl between his knees; he was observing, with serious attention and a vengeful anger in his eye, the conquered insect which was twisting round in the water.
The driver, wild with joy, kept repeating: “A flea, a flea, ah! there you are, damned little flea, damned little flea, damned little flea!” Then having calmed down a little, he cried: “Well, back to the coach!
We've lost enough time.” DISCOVERY The steamer was crowded with people and the crossing promised to be good.
I was going from Havre to Trouville.
The ropes were thrown off, the whistle blew for the last time, the whole boat started to tremble, and the great wheels began to revolve, slowly at first, and then with ever-increasing rapidity.
Those on board were waving their handkerchiefs, as though they were leaving for America, and their friends on shore were answering in the same manner.
The big July sun was shining down on the red parasols, the light dresses, the joyous faces and on the ocean, barely stirred by a ripple.
On our left was the broad estuary of the Seine, her muddy water, which never mingles with that of the ocean, making large yellow streaks clearly outlined against the immense sheet of the pure green sea.
Therefore I began to thread my way along the deck through the crowd of travellers.
Suddenly I heard my name called.
We shook hands and continued our walk together, talking of one thing or another.
Suddenly Sidoine, who had been observing the crowd of passengers, cried out angrily: “It's disgusting, the boat is full of English people!” It was indeed full of them.
The men were standing about, looking over the ocean with an all-important air, as though to say: “We are the English, the lords of the sea!
Here we are!” The young girls, formless, with shoes which reminded one of the naval constructions of their fatherland, wrapped in multi-colored shawls, were smiling vacantly at the magnificent scenery.
Their small heads, planted at the top of their long bodies, wore English hats of the strangest build.
And the old maids, thinner yet, opening their characteristic jaws to the wind, seemed to threaten one with their long, yellow teeth.
Sidoine repeated, with growing anger: “Disgusting!
As far as I am concerned, they don't worry me.” He snapped out: “Of course they don't worry you!
Does she make you very unhappy?” He shrugged his shoulders.
“No, not exactly.” “Then she—is not true to you?” “Unfortunately, she is.
That would be cause for a divorce, and I could get rid of her.” “Then I'm afraid I don't understand!” “You don't understand?
There is nothing more dangerous than watering-places.
“Donkey rides, surf-bathing, breakfast on the grass, all these things are traps set for the marriageable man.
And, really, there is nothing prettier than a child about eighteen, running through a field or picking flowers along the road.
“I made the acquaintance of an English family who were stopping at the same hotel where I was.
The father looked like those men you see over there, and the mother was like all other Englishwomen.
“They had two sons, the kind of boys who play rough games with balls, bats or rackets from morning till night; then came two daughters, the elder a dry, shrivelled-up Englishwoman, the younger a dream of beauty, a heavenly blonde.
This one had blue eyes, the kind of blue which seems to contain all the poetry, all the dreams, all the hopes and happiness of the world!
“What an infinity of dreams is caused by two such eyes!
How well they answer the dim, eternal question of our heart!
“It must not be forgotten either that we Frenchmen adore foreign women.
As soon as we meet a Russian, an Italian, a Swede, a Spaniard, or an Englishwoman with a pretty face, we immediately fall in love with her.
We enthuse over everything which comes from outside—clothes, hats, gloves, guns and—women.
As soon as a woman speaks our language badly we think she is charming, if she uses the wrong word she is exquisite and if she jabbers in an entirely unintelligible jargon, she becomes irresistible.
“My little English girl, Kate, spoke a language to be marvelled at.
At the beginning I could understand nothing, she invented so many new words; then I fell absolutely in love with this queer, amusing dialect.
All maimed, strange, ridiculous terms became delightful in her mouth.
Every evening, on the terrace of the Casino, we had long conversations which resembled spoken enigmas.
As long as she slaughtered the dictionary and tortured the grammar I adored her.
Our conversations were simple.
They revealed to me her surprising gracefulness and matchless elegance; they showed her to me as a wonderful speaking jewel, a living doll made to be kissed, knowing, after a fashion, how to express what she loved.
She reminded me of the pretty little toys which say 'papa' and 'mamma' when you pull a string.
She makes as many mistakes as ever—but I can understand her.
“Ah! you don't know, as I do, the opinions, the ideas, the theories of a well-educated young English girl, whom I can blame in nothing, and who repeats to me from morning till night sentences from a French reader prepared in England for the use of young ladies' schools.
“You have seen those cotillon favors, those pretty gilt papers, which enclose candies with an abominable taste.
I wished to eat what was inside and it disgusted me so that I feel nauseated at seeing her compatriots.
“I have married a parrot to whom some old English governess might have taught French.
Do you understand?” The harbor of Trouville was now showing its wooden piers covered with people.
I said: “Where is your wife?” He answered: “I took her back to Etretat.” “And you, where are you going?” “I?
Oh, I am going to rest up here at Trouville.” Then, after a pause, he added: “You have no idea what a fool a woman can be at times!” THE ACCURSED BREAD Daddy Taille had three daughters: Anna, the eldest, who was scarcely ever mentioned in the family; Rose, the second girl, who was eighteen, and Clara, the youngest, who was a girl of fifteen.
Lebrument's button manufactory.
He was a very upright man, very well thought of, abstemious; in fact, a sort of model workman.
He lived at Havre, in the Rue d'Angouleme.
He threatened to kill the head clerk in a large draper's establishment in that town, whom he suspected.
After a time, when he was told by various people that she was very steady and investing money in government securities, that she was no gadabout, but was a great friend of Monsieur Dubois, who was a judge of the Tribunal of Commerce, the father was appeased.
He even showed some anxiety as to how she was getting on, and asked some of her old friends who had been to see her, and when told that she had her own furniture, and that her mantelpiece was covered with vases and the walls with pictures, that there were clocks and carpets everywhere, he gave a broad contented smile.
He had been working for thirty years to get together a wretched five or six thousand francs.
This girl was evidently no fool.
One fine morning the son of Touchard, the cooper, at the other end of the street, came and asked him for the hand of Rose, the second girl.
The old man's heart began to beat, for the Touchards were rich and in a good position.
He was decidedly lucky with his girls.
The marriage was agreed upon, and it was settled that it should be a grand affair, and the wedding dinner was to be held at Sainte-Adresse, at Mother Jusa's restaurant.
It would cost a lot certainly, but never mind, it did not matter just for once in a way.
But one morning, just as the old man was going home to luncheon with his two daughters, the door opened suddenly, and Anna appeared.
She was well dressed and looked undeniably pretty and nice.
She did not wish Rose's wedding to take place at Sainte-Adresse—certainly not.
She had settled everything and arranged everything, so it was “no good to say any more about it—there!” “Very well, my dear! very well!” the old man said; “we will leave it so.” But then he felt some doubt.
Would the Touchards consent?
But Rose, the bride-elect, was surprised and asked: “Why should they object, I should like to know?
Just leave that to me; I will talk to Philip about it.” She mentioned it to her lover the very same day, and he declared it would suit him exactly.
Father and Mother Touchard were naturally delighted at the idea of a good dinner which would cost them nothing and said: “You may be quite sure that everything will be in first-rate style.” They asked to be allowed to bring a friend, Madame Florence, the cook on the first floor, and Anna agreed to everything.
After the civil formalities and the religious ceremony the wedding party went to Anna's house.
Among those whom the Tailles had brought was a cousin of a certain age, a Monsieur Sauvetanin, a man given to philosophical reflections, serious, and always very self-possessed, and Madame Lamondois, an old aunt.
Monsieur Sautevanin had been told off to give Anna his arm, as they were looked upon as the two most important persons in the company.
As soon as they had arrived at the door of Anna's house she let go her companion's arm, and ran on ahead, saying: “I will show you the way,” and ran upstairs while the invited guests followed more slowly; and, when they got upstairs, she stood on one side to let them pass, and they rolled their eyes and turned their heads in all directions to admire this mysterious and luxurious dwelling.
Extra knives, forks and spoons had been hired from a neighboring restaurant, and decanters stood full of wine under the rays of the sun which shone in through the window.
The ladies went into the bedroom to take off their shawls and bonnets, and Father Touchard, who was standing at the door, made funny and suggestive signs to the men, with many a wink and nod.
Daddy Taille, who thought a great deal of himself, looked with fatherly pride at his child's well-furnished rooms and went from one to the other, holding his hat in his hand, making a mental inventory of everything, and walking like a verger in a church.
Anna went backward and forward, ran about giving orders and hurrying on the wedding feast.
Soon she appeared at the door of the dining-room and cried: “Come here, all of you, for a moment,” and as the twelve guests entered the room they saw twelve glasses of Madeira on a small table.
Monsieur Sauvetanin never took his eyes off Anna.
They sat down, and the wedding breakfast began, the relations sitting at one end of the table and the young people at the other.
Madame Touchard, the mother, presided on the right and the bride on the left.
Anna looked after everybody, saw that the glasses were kept filled and the plates well supplied.
The guests evidently felt a certain respectful embarrassment at the sight of all the sumptuousness of the rooms and at the lavish manner in which they were treated.
They all ate heartily of the good things provided, but there were no jokes such as are prevalent at weddings of that sort; it was all too grand, and it made them feel uncomfortable.
Old Madame Touchard, who was fond of a bit of fun, tried to enliven matters a little, and at the beginning of the dessert she exclaimed: “I say, Philip, do sing us something.” The neighbors in their street considered that he had the finest voice in all Havre.
The bridegroom got up, smiled, and, turning to his sister-in-law, from politeness and gallantry, tried to think of something suitable for the occasion, something serious and correct, to harmonize with the seriousness of the repast.
Anna had a satisfied look on her face, and leaned back in her chair to listen, and all assumed looks of attention, though prepared to smile should smiles be called for.
The singer announced “The Accursed Bread,” and, extending his right arm, which made his coat ruck up into his neck, he began.
It was decidedly long, three verses of eight lines each, with the last line and the last but one repeated twice.
All went well for the first two verses; they were the usual commonplaces about bread gained by honest labor and by dishonesty.
The aunt and the bride wept outright.
The cook, who was present, at the end of the first verse looked at a roll which she held in her hand, with streaming eyes, as if it applied to her, while all applauded vigorously.
At the end of the second verse the two servants, who were standing with their backs to the wall, joined loudly in the chorus, and the aunt and the bride wept outright.
Daddy Taille blew his nose with the noise of a trombone, and old Touchard brandished a whole loaf half over the table, and the cook shed silent tears on the crust which she was still holding.
Amid the general emotion Monsieur Sauvetanin said: “That is the right sort of song; very different from the nasty, risky things one generally hears at weddings.” Anna, who was visibly affected, kissed her hand to her sister and pointed to her husband with an affectionate nod, as if to congratulate her.
Intoxicated by his success, the young man continued, and unfortunately the last verse contained words about the “bread of dishonor” gained by young girls who had been led astray.
No one took up the refrain about this bread, supposed to be eaten with tears, except old Touchard and the two servants.
Anna had grown deadly pale and cast down her eyes, while the bridegroom looked from one to the other without understanding the reason for this sudden coldness, and the cook hastily dropped the crust as if it were poisoned.
Monsieur Sauvetanin said solemnly, in order to save the situation: “That last couplet is not at all necessary”; and Daddy Taille, who had got red up to his ears, looked round the table fiercely.
Then Anna, her eyes swimming in tears, told the servants in the faltering voice of a woman trying to stifle her sobs, to bring the champagne.
All the guests were suddenly seized with exuberant joy, and all their faces became radiant again.
Maitre Lebrument had bought out the practice of Maitre Papillon; naturally, he had to have money to pay for it; and Mademoiselle Jeanne Cordier had three hundred thousand francs clear in currency, and in bonds payable to bearer.
Maitre Lebrument was a handsome man.
He was stylish, although in a provincial way; but, nevertheless, he was stylish—a rare thing at Boutigny-le-Rebours.
Mademoiselle Cordier was graceful and fresh-looking, although a trifle awkward; nevertheless, she was a handsome girl, and one to be desired.
The marriage ceremony turned all Boutigny topsy-turvy.
Everybody admired the young couple, who quickly returned home to domestic felicity, having decided simply to take a short trip to Paris, after a few days of retirement.
This tete-a-tete was delightful, Maitre Lebrument having shown just the proper amount of delicacy.
He had taken as his motto: “Everything comes to him who waits.” He knew how to be at the same time patient and energetic.
His success was rapid and complete.
After four days, Madame Lebrument adored her husband.
And then, in his turn, he would not have enough caresses to please his wife from morning to night and from night to morning.
When the first week was over, he said to his young companion: “If you wish, we will leave for Paris next Tuesday.
We will be like two lovers, we will go to the restaurants, the theatres, the concert halls, everywhere, everywhere!” She was ready to dance for joy.
Let us go as soon as possible.” He continued: “And then, as we must forget nothing, ask your father to have your dowry ready; I shall pay Maitre Papillon on this trip.” She answered: “All right: I will tell him to-morrow morning.” And he took her in his arms once more, to renew those sweet games of love which she had so enjoyed for the past week.
The following Tuesday, father-in-law and mother-in-law went to the station with their daughter and their son-in-law who were leaving for the capital.
The father-in-law said: “I tell you it is very imprudent to carry so much money about in a pocketbook.” And the young lawyer smiled.
“Don't worry; I am accustomed to such things.
You understand that, in my profession, I sometimes have as much as a million about me.
You needn't worry.” The conductor was crying: “All aboard for Paris!” They scrambled into a car, where two old ladies were already seated.
Lebrument whispered into his wife's ear: “What a bother!
I won't be able to smoke.” She answered in a low voice “It annoys me too, but not an account of your cigar.” The whistle blew and the train started.
As soon as they were in front of the Saint-Lazare Station, Maitre Lebrument said to his wife: “Dearie, let us first go over to the Boulevard and get something to eat; then we can quietly return and get our trunk and bring it to the hotel.” She immediately assented.
Let's eat at the restaurant.
Is it far?” He answered: “Yes, it's quite a distance, but we will take the omnibus.” She was surprised: “Why don't we take a cab?” He began to scold her smilingly: “Is that the way you save money?
You would deprive yourself of nothing.” “That's so,” she said, a little embarrassed.
A big omnibus was passing by, drawn by three big horses, which were trotting along.
Lebrument called out: “Conductor!
Conductor!” The heavy carriage stopped.
And the young lawyer, pushing his wife, said to her quickly: “Go inside; I'm going up on top, so that I may smoke at least one cigarette before lunch.” She had no time to answer.
The conductor, who had seized her by the arm to help her up the step, pushed her inside, and she fell into a seat, bewildered, looking through the back window at the feet of her husband as he climbed up to the top of the vehicle.
And she sat there motionless, between a fat man who smelled of cheap tobacco and an old woman who smelled of garlic.
All the other passengers were lined up in silence—a grocer's boy, a young girl, a soldier, a gentleman with gold-rimmed spectacles and a big silk hat, two ladies with a self-satisfied and crabbed look, which seemed to say: “We are riding in this thing, but we don't have to,” two sisters of charity and an undertaker.
They looked like a collection of caricatures.
The young woman remained motionless.
An unaccountable sadness seemed to be hanging over her.
The sisters motioned to the conductor to stop, and they got off one after the other, leaving in their wake the pungent smell of camphor.
She sat down and placed her basket of provisions on her knees.
“It's further than I imagined,” thought Jeanne.
The undertaker went out, and was replaced by a coachman who seemed to bring the atmosphere of the stable with him.
The young girl had as a successor a messenger, the odor of whose feet showed that he was continually walking.
The lawyer's wife began to feel ill at ease, nauseated, ready to cry without knowing why.
The stage went on through interminable streets, stopping at stations and starting again.
He has been so tired the last few days.” Little by little all the passengers left.
The conductor cried: “Vaugirard!” Seeing that she did not move, he repeated: “Vaugirard!” She looked at him, understanding that he was speaking to her, as there was no one else there.
For the third time the man said: “Vaugirard!” Then she asked: “Where are we?” He answered gruffly: “We're at Vaugirard, of course!
I have been yelling it for the last half hour!” “Is it far from the Boulevard?” she said.
“Which boulevard?” “The Boulevard des Italiens.” “We passed that a long time ago!” “Would you mind telling my husband?” “Your husband!
There hasn't been anybody there for a long time.” She started, terrified.
He must be there.” The conductor was becoming uncivil: “Come on, little one, you've talked enough!
You'll find another one somewhere.” Tears were coming to her eyes.
She insisted: “But, monsieur, you are mistaken; I assure you that you must be mistaken.
He had a big portfolio under his arm.” The man began to laugh: “A big portfolio!
He got off at the Madeleine.
She got out and, in spite of herself, she looked up instinctively to the roof of the bus.
It was absolutely deserted.
Then she began to cry, and, without thinking that anybody was listening or watching her, she said out loud: “What is going to become of me?” An inspector approached: “What's the matter?” The conductor answered, in a bantering tone of voice: “It's a lady who got left by her husband during the trip.” The other continued: “Oh! that's nothing.
You go about your business.” Then he turned on his heels and walked away.
She began to walk straight ahead, too bewildered, too crazed even to understand what had happened to her.
What could have happened to him?
How could he have been so forgetful?
Suddenly she remembered her cousin Barral, one of the assistants in the offices of the Ministry of the Navy.
He was carrying a large portfolio under his arm, just like Lebrument.
She jumped out of the carriage.
He stopped, astonished: “Jeanne!
Where have you come from?” Her eyes full of tears, she stammered: “My husband has just got lost!” “Lost!
Where?” “On an omnibus.” “On an omnibus?” Weeping, she told him her whole adventure.
He listened, thought, and then asked: “Was his mind clear this morning?” “Yes.” “Good.
Did he have much money with him?” “Yes, he was carrying my dowry.” “Your dowry!
The whole of it?” “The whole of it—in order to pay for the practice which he bought.” “Well, my dear cousin, by this time your husband must be well on his way to Belgium.” She could not understand.
She kept repeating: “My husband—you say—” “I say that he has disappeared with your—your capital—that's all!” She stood there, a prey to conflicting emotions, sobbing.
“Then he is—he is—he is a villain!” And, faint from excitement, she leaned her head on her cousin's shoulder and wept.
As people were stopping to look at them, he pushed her gently into the vestibule of his house, and, supporting her with his arm around her waist, he led her up the stairs, and as his astonished servant opened the door, he ordered: “Sophie, run to the restaurant and get a luncheon for two.
I am not going to the office to-day.” THE DIARY OF A MADMAN He was dead—the head of a high tribunal, the upright magistrate whose irreproachable life was a proverb in all the courts of France.
Advocates, young counsellors, judges had greeted him at sight of his large, thin, pale face lighted up by two sparkling deep-set eyes, bowing low in token of respect.
He had passed his life in pursuing crime and in protecting the weak.
Swindlers and murderers had no more redoubtable enemy, for he seemed to read the most secret thoughts of their minds.
He was dead, now, at the age of eighty-two, honored by the homage and followed by the regrets of a whole people.
Soldiers in red trousers had escorted him to the tomb and men in white cravats had spoken words and shed tears that seemed to be sincere beside his grave.
But here is the strange paper found by the dismayed notary in the desk where he had kept the records of great criminals!
It was entitled: WHY? 20th June, 1851.
I have condemned Blondel to death!
Now, why did this man kill his five children?
Frequently one meets with people to whom the destruction of life is a pleasure.
Yes, yes, it should be a pleasure, the greatest of all, perhaps, for is not killing the next thing to creating?
These two words contain the history of the universe, all the history of worlds, all that is, all!
Why is it not intoxicating to kill? 25th June.
That animated thing, that bears in it the principle of motion and a will ruling that motion.
It is attached to nothing, this thing.
It perishes, it is finished. 26th June.
On the contrary, it is the law of nature.
The beast kills without ceasing, all day, every instant of his existence.
Man kills without ceasing, to nourish himself; but since he needs, besides, to kill for pleasure, he has invented hunting!
But this does not suffice for the irresistible need to massacre that is in us.
Long ago this need was satisfied by human sacrifices.
Now the requirements of social life have made murder a crime.
We condemn and punish the assassin!
But as we cannot live without yielding to this natural and imperious instinct of death, we relieve ourselves, from time to time, by wars.
Then a whole nation slaughters another nation.
It is a feast of blood, a feast that maddens armies and that intoxicates civilians, women and children, who read, by lamplight at night, the feverish story of massacre.
One might suppose that those destined to accomplish these butcheries of men would be despised!
They are clad in gold and in resplendent garments; they wear plumes on their heads and ornaments on their breasts, and they are given crosses, rewards, titles of every kind.
They are proud, respected, loved by women, cheered by the crowd, solely because their mission is to shed human blood; They drag through the streets their instruments of death, that the passer-by, clad in black, looks on with envy.
For to kill is the great law set by nature in the heart of existence!
There is nothing more beautiful and honorable than killing! 30th June.
She seems to cry in all her unconscious acts: “Quick! quick! quick!” The more she destroys, the more she renews herself. 2d July.
Through thought it is a reflection of all that is; through memory and science it is an abridged edition of the universe whose history it represents, a mirror of things and of nations, each human being becomes a microcosm in the macrocosm. 3d July.
It must be a pleasure, unique and full of zest, to kill; to have there before one the living, thinking being; to make therein a little hole, nothing but a little hole, to see that red thing flow which is the blood, which makes life; and to have before one only a heap of limp flesh, cold, inert, void of thought! 5th August.
I, who have passed my life in judging, condemning, killing by the spoken word, killing by the guillotine those who had killed by the knife, I, I, if I should do as all the assassins have done whom I have smitten, I—I—who would know it? 10th August.
Who would ever suspect me, me, me, especially if I should choose a being I had no interest in doing away with? 15th August.
The temptation has come to me.
It pervades my whole being; my hands tremble with the desire to kill. 22d August.
I killed a little creature as an experiment, for a beginning.
Jean, my servant, had a goldfinch in a cage hung in the office window.
From time to time I squeezed it tighter; its heart beat faster; this was atrocious and delicious.
Then I took scissors, short-nail scissors, and I cut its throat with three slits, quite gently.
It opened its bill, it struggled to escape me, but I held it, oh!
And then I did as assassins do—real ones.
I washed the scissors, I washed my hands.
I sprinkled water and took the body, the corpse, to the garden to hide it.
I buried it under a strawberry-plant.
Every day I shall eat a strawberry from that plant.
I was thinking of nothing, literally nothing.
President.” And the thought enters my head, “Shall I kill him?” I answer: “You are alone, my boy?” “Yes, sir.” “All alone in the wood?” “Yes, sir.” The wish to kill him intoxicated me like wine.
I approached him quite softly, persuaded that he was going to run away.
And, suddenly, I seized him by the throat.
I returned home, and dined well.
In the evening I was very gay, light, rejuvenated; I passed the evening at the Prefect's.
I am tranquil. 31st August.
The body has been discovered.
They are hunting for the assassin.
Ah! ah! 1st September.
Two tramps have been arrested.
Proofs are lacking. 2d September.
Nothing has been discovered.
Some strolling vagabond must have done the deed.
If I had seen the blood flow, it seems to me I should be tranquil now!
I was walking by the river, after breakfast.
And I saw, under a willow, a fisherman asleep.
A spade was standing in a potato-field near by, as if expressly, for me.
I returned; I raised it like a club, and with one blow of the edge I cleft the fisherman's head.
I should have made an excellent assassin. 25th October.
The affair of the fisherman makes a great stir.
The examining magistrate affirms that the nephew is guilty.
Everybody in town believes it.
He had gone to the village to buy bread and cheese, he declared.
The nephew has all but confessed, they have badgered him so.
Ah! ah! justice! 15th November.
There are overwhelming proofs against the nephew, who was his uncle's heir.
I shall preside at the sessions. 25th January.
I have had him condemned to death!
The advocate-general spoke like an angel!
I shall go to see him executed! 10th March.
They guillotined him this morning.
That gave me pleasure!
The manuscript contained yet other pages, but without relating any new crime.
Alienist physicians to whom the awful story has been submitted declare that there are in the world many undiscovered madmen as adroit and as much to be feared as this monstrous lunatic.
THE MASK There was a masquerade ball at the Elysee-Montmartre that evening.
It was the 'Mi-Careme', and the crowds were pouring into the brightly lighted passage which leads to the dance ball, like water flowing through the open lock of a canal.
The loud call of the orchestra, bursting like a storm of sound, shook the rafters, swelled through the whole neighborhood and awoke, in the streets and in the depths of the houses, an irresistible desire to jump, to get warm, to have fun, which slumbers within each human animal.
The patrons came from every quarter of Paris; there were people of all classes who love noisy pleasures, a little low and tinged with debauch.
There were clerks and girls—girls of every description, some wearing common cotton, some the finest batiste; rich girls, old and covered with diamonds, and poor girls of sixteen, full of the desire to revel, to belong to men, to spend money.
Elegant black evening suits, in search of fresh or faded but appetizing novelty, wandering through the excited crowds, looking, searching, while the masqueraders seemed moved above all by the desire for amusement.
Already the far-famed quadrilles had attracted around them a curious crowd.
The moving hedge which encircled the four dancers swayed in and out like a snake, sometimes nearer and sometimes farther away, according to the motions of the performers.
The two women, whose lower limbs seemed to be attached to their bodies by rubber springs, were making wonderful and surprising motions with their legs.
Their partners hopped and skipped about, waving their arms about.
One of them, who had taken his place in the most famous quadrille, as substitute for an absent celebrity, the handsome “Songe-au-Gosse,” was trying to keep up with the tireless “Arete-de-Veau” and was making strange fancy steps which aroused the joy and sarcasm of the audience.
He was thin, dressed like a dandy, with a pretty varnished mask on his face.
It had a curly blond mustache and a wavy wig.
He looked like a wax figure from the Musee Grevin, like a strange and fantastic caricature of the charming young man of fashion plates, and he danced with visible effort, clumsily, with a comical impetuosity.
He appeared rusty beside the others when he tried to imitate their gambols: he seemed overcome by rheumatism, as heavy as a great Dane playing with greyhounds.
Mocking bravos encouraged him.
And he, carried away with enthusiasm, jigged about with such frenzy that suddenly, carried away by a wild spurt, he pitched head foremost into the living wall formed by the audience, which opened up before him to allow him to pass, then closed around the inanimate body of the dancer, stretched out on his face.
A gentleman stepped forward, young and elegant, in well-fitting evening clothes, with large pearl studs.
“I am a professor of the Faculty of Medicine,” he said in a modest voice.
He was allowed to pass, and he entered a small room full of little cardboard boxes, where the still lifeless dancer had been stretched out on some chairs.
The doctor at first wished to take off the mask, and he noticed that it was attached in a complicated manner, with a perfect network of small metal wires which cleverly bound it to his wig and covered the whole head.
Even the neck was imprisoned in a false skin which continued the chin and was painted the color of flesh, being attached to the collar of the shirt.
All this had to be cut with strong scissors.
When the physician had slit open this surprising arrangement, from the shoulder to the temple, he opened this armor and found the face of an old man, worn out, thin and wrinkled.
The surprise among those who had brought in this seemingly young dancer was so great that no one laughed, no one said a word.
All were watching this sad face as he lay on the straw chairs, his eyes closed, his face covered with white hair, some long, falling from the forehead over the face, others short, growing around the face and the chin, and beside this poor head, that pretty little, neat varnished, smiling mask.
The man regained consciousness after being inanimate for a long time, but he still seemed to be so weak and sick that the physician feared some dangerous complication.
He asked: “Where do you live?” The old dancer seemed to be making an effort to remember, and then he mentioned the name of the street, which no one knew.
He was asked for more definite information about the neighborhood.
He answered with a great slowness, indecision and difficulty, which revealed his upset state of mind.
The physician continued: “I will take you home myself.” Curiosity had overcome him to find out who this strange dancer, this phenomenal jumper might be.
Soon the two rolled away in a cab to the other side of Montmartre.
They stopped before a high building of poor appearance.
They went up a winding staircase.
The doctor held to the banister, which was so grimy that the hand stuck to it, and he supported the dizzy old man, whose forces were beginning to return.
The door at which they had knocked was opened by an old woman, neat looking, with a white nightcap enclosing a thin face with sharp features, one of those good, rough faces of a hard-working and faithful woman.
She cried out: “For goodness sake!
She became reassured and even calmed the physician himself by telling him that the same thing had happened many times.
She said: “He must be put to bed, monsieur, that is all.
Let him sleep and tomorrow he will be all right.” The doctor continued: “But he can hardly speak.” “Oh! that's just a little drink, nothing more; he has eaten no dinner, in order to be nimble, and then he took a few absinthes in order to work himself up to the proper pitch.
You see, drink gives strength to his legs, but it stops his thoughts and words.
Really, his lack of common sense is enough to drive one mad!” The doctor, surprised, insisted: “But why does he dance like that at his age?” She shrugged her shoulders and turned red from the anger which was slowly rising within her and she cried out: “Ah! yes, why?
So that the people will think him young under his mask; so that the women will still take him for a young dandy and whisper nasty things into his ears; so that he can rub up against all their dirty skins, with their perfumes and powders and cosmetics.
Ah! it's a fine business!
When he is like that I can't do anything with him alone.” The old man was sitting on his bed, with a tipsy look, his long white hair falling over his face.
His companion looked at him with tender yet indignant eyes.
She continued: “Just see the fine head he has for his age, and yet he has to go and disguise himself in order to make people think that he is young.
Really, he has a fine head, monsieur!
Wait, I'll show it to you before putting him to bed.” She went to a table on which stood the washbasin a pitcher of water, soap and a comb and brush.
She took the brush, returned to the bed and pushed back the drunkard's tangled hair.
Isn't he fine for his age?” “Very,” agreed the doctor, who was beginning to be highly amused.
But we must get him to bed, otherwise the drink will make him sick.
If you think that he is going to disturb himself when it is time for me to get in you are mistaken.
You old pleasure seeker!” As soon as he felt himself stretched out in his sheets the old man closed his eyes, opened them closed them again, and over his whole face appeared an energetic resolve to sleep.
The doctor examined him with an ever-increasing interest and asked: “Does he go to all the fancy balls and try to be a young man?” “To all of them, monsieur, and he comes back to me in the morning in a deplorable condition.
You see, it's regret that leads him on and that makes him put a pasteboard face over his own.
Yes, the regret of no longer being what he was and of no longer making any conquests!” He was sleeping now and beginning to snore.
She looked at him with a pitying expression and continued: “Oh! how many conquests that man has made!
More than one could believe, monsieur, more than the finest gentlemen of the world, than all the tenors and all the generals.” “Really?
What did he do?” “Oh! it will surprise you at first, as you did not know him in his palmy days.
When I met him it was also at a ball, for he has always frequented them.
Ah! how pretty he was, monsieur, with his curly raven locks and black eyes as large as saucers!
Oh! he has often made it hard for me!” The doctor asked: “Are you married?” She answered simply: “Yes, monsieur, otherwise he would have dropped me as he did the others.
I have been his wife and his servant, everything, everything that he wished.
How he has made me cry—tears which I did not show him; for he would tell all his adventures to me—to me, monsieur—without understanding how it hurt me to listen.” “But what was his business?” “That's so.
He was the foreman at Martel's—a foreman such as they never had had—an artist who averaged ten francs an hour.” “Martel?—who is Martel?” “The hairdresser, monsieur, the great hairdresser of the Opera, who had all the actresses for customers.
Yes, sir, all the smartest actresses had their hair dressed by Ambrose and they would give him tips that made a fortune for him.
Ah! monsieur, all the women are alike, yes, all of them.
When a man pleases their fancy they offer themselves to him.
For he would tell me everything—he simply could not hold his tongue—it was impossible.
They seem to get even more enjoyment out of telling than doing.
I am sure that he has caught one more.' Then I felt a wild desire to question him and then, again, not to know, to stop his talking if he should begin.
I could feel that from his manner, which seemed to laugh and say: 'I had a fine adventure to-day, Madeleine.' I would pretend to notice nothing, to guess nothing; I would set the table, bring on the soup and sit down opposite him.
“At those times, monsieur, it was as if my friendship for him had been crushed in my body as with a stone.
But he did not understand; he did not know; he felt a need to tell all those things to some one, to boast, to show how much he was loved, and I was the only one he had to whom he could talk-the only one.
“He would begin to take his soup and then he would say: 'One more, Madeleine.' “And I would think: 'Here it comes!
Goodness! what a man!
And a beauty, too.' And it would be some little one from the Vaudeville or else from the Varietes, and some of the big ones, too, some of the most famous.
He would tell me their names, how their apartments were furnished, everything, everything, monsieur.
Heartbreaking details.
And he would go over them and tell his story over again from beginning to end, so pleased with himself that I would pretend to laugh so that he would not get angry with me.
“Everything may not have been true!
He liked to glorify himself and was quite capable of inventing such things!
On those evenings he would pretend to be tired and wish to go to bed after supper.
We would take supper at eleven, monsieur, for he could never get back from work earlier.
“When he had finished telling about his adventure he would walk round the room and smoke cigarettes, and he was so handsome, with his mustache and curly hair, that I would think: 'It's true, just the same, what he is telling.
Since I myself am crazy about that man, why should not others be the same?' Then I would feel like crying, shrieking, running away and jumping out of the window while I was clearing the table and he was smoking.
He loved to boast about the women just as a peacock loves to show his feathers.
Oh, monsieur, when I saw his first white hair I felt a terrible shock and then a great joy—a wicked joy—but so great, so great!
I said to myself: 'It's the end-it's the end.' It seemed as if I were about to be released from prison.
He was still sleeping and I leaned over him to wake him up with a kiss, when I noticed in his curls, over his temple, a little thread which shone like silver.
I should not have thought it possible!
At first I thought of tearing it out so that he would not see it, but as I looked carefully I noticed another farther up.
My heart began to thump and perspiration stood out all over me, but away down at the bottom I was happy.
“It was mean to feel thus, but I did my housework with a light heart that morning, without waking him up, and, as soon as he opened his eyes of his own accord, I said to him: 'Do you know what I discovered while you were asleep?' “'No.' “'I found white hairs.' “He started up as if I had tickled him and said angrily: 'It's not true!' “'Yes, it is.
In two years all will be over for you.' “Well, monsieur, I had spoken true; two years later one could not recognize him.
He was still handsome, but he had lost his freshness, and the women no longer ran after him.
He left his trade to go into the hat business, in which he ate up all his money.
Then he unsuccessfully tried to be an actor, and finally he began to frequent public balls.
Fortunately, he had had common sense enough to save a little something on which we now live.
It is sufficient, but it is not enormous.
He has to be young; he has to dance with women who smell of perfume and cosmetics.
Then, gently tiptoeing up to him, she kissed his hair.
The physician had risen and was getting ready to leave, finding nothing to say to this strange couple.
If he should grow worse, I could go and get you.” THE PENGUINS' ROCK This is the season for penguins.
From April to the end of May, before the Parisian visitors arrive, one sees, all at once, on the little beach at Etretat several old gentlemen, booted and belted in shooting costume.
They spend four or five days at the Hotel Hauville, disappear, and return again three weeks later.
Then, after a fresh sojourn, they go away altogether.
One sees them again the following spring.
There were about twenty enthusiasts thirty or forty years ago; now there are only a few of the enthusiastic sportsmen.
The penguin is a very rare bird of passage, with peculiar habits.
It lives the greater part of the year in the latitude of Newfoundland and the islands of St.
Pierre and Miquelon.
But in the breeding season a flight of emigrants crosses the ocean and comes every year to the same spot to lay their eggs, to the Penguins' Rock near Etretat.
As soon as the young birds are grown they all fly away, and disappear for a year.
Why do they not go elsewhere?
Why not choose some other spot on the long white, unending cliff that extends from the Pas-de-Calais to Havre?
What force, what invincible instinct, what custom of centuries impels these birds to come back to this place?
What first migration, what tempest, possibly, once cast their ancestors on this rock?
And why do the children, the grandchildren, all the descendants of the first parents always return here?
There are not many of them, a hundred at most, as if one single family, maintaining the tradition, made this annual pilgrimage.
And each spring, as soon as the little wandering tribe has taken up its abode an the rock, the same sportsmen also reappear in the village.
One knew them formerly when they were young; now they are old, but constant to the regular appointment which they have kept for thirty or forty years.
They would not miss it for anything in the world.
Three of the old sportsmen had arrived; one was missing—M. d'Arnelles.
Dinner was almost over when a carriage drove into the yard of the hotel, and the late comer presently entered the dining room.
When one of his comrades remarked with surprise at his being in a frock-coat, he replied quietly: “Yes, I had no time to change my clothes.” They retired on leaving the table, for they had to set out before daybreak in order to take the birds unawares.
There is nothing so pretty as this sport, this early morning expedition.
At three o'clock in the morning the sailors awoke the sportsmen by throwing sand against the windows.
Although it was still dark, the stars had paled a little.
There was such a fresh breeze that it made one shiver slightly in spite of one's heavy clothing.
Presently two boats were pushed down the beach, by the sailors, with a sound as of tearing cloth, and were floated on the nearest waves.
The brown sail was hoisted, swelled a little, fluttered, hesitated and swelling out again as round as a paunch, carried the boats towards the large arched entrance that could be faintly distinguished in the darkness.
The coast still seemed veiled, the great white coast, perpendicular as a wall.
They passed through the Manne-Porte, an enormous arch beneath which a ship could sail; they doubled the promontory of La Courtine, passed the little valley of Antifer and the cape of the same name; and suddenly caught sight of a beach on which some hundreds of seagulls were perched.
That was the Penguins' Rock.
It was just a little protuberance of the cliff, and on the narrow ledges of rock the birds' heads might be seen watching the boats.
They remained there, motionless, not venturing to fly off as yet.
When they start to fly they cannot make a spring and let themselves fall like stones almost down to the very men who are watching them.
They know their limitation and the danger to which it subjects them, and cannot make up their minds to fly away.
But the boatmen begin to shout, beating the sides of the boat with the wooden boat pins, and the birds, in affright, fly one by one into space until they reach the level of the waves.
For an hour the firing is kept up, obliging them to give up, one after another.
Sometimes the mother birds will not leave their nests, and are riddled with shot, causing drops of blood to spurt out on the white cliff, and the animal dies without having deserted her eggs.
The first day M. d'Arnelles fired at the birds with his habitual zeal; but when the party returned toward ten o'clock, beneath a brilliant sun, which cast great triangles of light on the white cliffs along the coast he appeared a little worried, and absentminded, contrary to his accustomed manner.
As soon as they got on shore a kind of servant dressed in black came up to him and said something in a low tone.
He seemed to reflect, hesitate, and then replied: “No, to-morrow.” The following day they set out again.
This time M, d'Arnelles frequently missed his aim, although the birds were close by.
His friends teased him, asked him if he were in love, if some secret sorrow was troubling his mind and heart.
At length he confessed.
And why?” “Oh, I have some business that calls me back.
As soon as breakfast was over the valet in black appeared.
M. d'Arnelles ordered his carriage, and the man was leaving the room when the three sportsmen interfered, insisting, begging, and praying their friend to stay.
One of them at last said: “Come now, this cannot be a matter of such importance, for you have already waited two days.” M. d'Arnelles, altogether perplexed, began to think, evidently baffled, divided between pleasure and duty, unhappy and disturbed.
After reflecting for some time he stammered: “The fact is—the fact is—I am not alone here.
I have my son-in-law.” There were exclamations and shouts of “Your son-in-law!
Where is he?” He suddenly appeared confused and his face grew red.
He is dead.” They were all silent in amazement.
M. d'Arnelles continued, more and more disturbed: “I had the misfortune to lose him; and as I was taking the body to my house, in Briseville, I came round this way so as not to miss our appointment.
At one time he was my most intimate friend, the friend who knows one's thoughts, with whom one passes long, quiet, happy evenings, to whom one tells one's secret love affairs, and who seems to draw out those rare, ingenious, delicate thoughts born of that sympathy that gives a sense of repose.
For years we had scarcely been separated; we had lived, travelled, thought and dreamed together; had liked the same things, had admired the same books, understood the same authors, trembled with the same sensations, and very often laughed at the same individuals, whom we understood completely by merely exchanging a glance.
He married, quite suddenly, a little girl from the provinces, who had come to Paris in search of a husband.
How in the world could that little thin, insipidly fair girl, with her weak hands, her light, vacant eyes, and her clear, silly voice, who was exactly like a hundred thousand marriageable dolls, have picked up that intelligent, clever young fellow?
Can any one understand these things?
No doubt he had hoped for happiness, simple, quiet and long-enduring happiness, in the arms of a good, tender and faithful woman; he had seen all that in the transparent looks of that schoolgirl with light hair.
He had not dreamed of the fact that an active, living and vibrating man grows weary of everything as soon as he understands the stupid reality, unless, indeed, he becomes so brutalized that he understands nothing whatever.
Still lively, witty, light- hearted and enthusiastic, or in a state of mental torpor induced by provincial life?
The train stopped at a small station, and as I got out of the carriage, a stout, a very stout man with red cheeks and a big stomach rushed up to me with open arms, exclaiming: “George!” I embraced him, but I had not recognized him, and then I said, in astonishment: “By Jove!
Eating and sleeping, that is my existence!” I looked at him closely, trying to discover in that broad face the features I held so dear.
Suddenly he said: “Here are my two eldest children.” A girl of fourteen, who was almost a woman, and a boy of thirteen, in the dress of a boy from a Lycee, came forward in a hesitating and awkward manner, and I said in a low voice: “Are they yours?” “Of course they are,” he replied, laughing.
There are three more at home.” He said this in a proud, self-satisfied, almost triumphant manner, and I felt profound pity, mingled with a feeling of vague contempt, for this vainglorious and simple reproducer of his species.
I got into a carriage which he drove himself, and we set off through the town, a dull, sleepy, gloomy town where nothing was moving in the streets except a few dogs and two or three maidservants.
Here and there a shopkeeper, standing at his door, took off his hat, and Simon returned his salute and told me the man's name; no doubt to show me that he knew all the inhabitants personally, and the thought struck me that he was thinking of becoming a candidate for the Chamber of Deputies, that dream of all those who bury themselves in the provinces.
We were soon out of the town, and the carriage turned into a garden that was an imitation of a park, and stopped in front of a turreted house, which tried to look like a chateau.
“That is my den,” said Simon, so that I might compliment him on it.
“It is charming,” I replied.
A lady appeared on the steps, dressed for company, and with company phrases all ready prepared.
She was no longer the light-haired, insipid girl I had seen in church fifteen years previously, but a stout lady in curls and flounces, one of those ladies of uncertain age, without intellect, without any of those things that go to make a woman.
In short, she was a mother, a stout, commonplace mother, a human breeding machine which procreates without any other preoccupation but her children and her cook-book.
She welcomed me, and I went into the hall, where three children, ranged according to their height, seemed set out for review, like firemen before a mayor, and I said: “Ah! ah! so there are the others?” Simon, radiant with pleasure, introduced them: “Jean, Sophie and Gontran.” The door of the drawing-room was open.
I went in, and in the depths of an easy-chair, I saw something trembling, a man, an old, paralyzed man.
Madame Radevin came forward and said: “This is my grandfather, monsieur; he is eighty-seven.” And then she shouted into the shaking old man's ears: “This is a friend of Simon's, papa.” The old gentleman tried to say “good-day” to me, and he muttered: “Oua, oua, oua,” and waved his hand, and I took a seat saying: “You are very kind, monsieur.” Simon had just come in, and he said with a laugh: “So!
You have made grandpapa's acquaintance.
He is a treasure, that old man; he is the delight of the children.
You never saw anything so funny; you will see presently.” I was then shown to my room, to change my dress for dinner, and hearing a great clatter behind me on the stairs, I turned round and saw that all the children were following me behind their father; to do me honor, no doubt.
My windows looked out across a dreary, interminable plain, an ocean of grass, of wheat and of oats, without a clump of trees or any rising ground, a striking and melancholy picture of the life which they must be leading in that house.
A bell rang; it was for dinner, and I went downstairs.
Madame Radevin took my arm in a ceremonious manner, and we passed into the dining-room.
A footman wheeled in the old man in his armchair.
He gave a greedy and curious look at the dessert, as he turned his shaking head with difficulty from one dish to the other.
“Just look!” Simon whispered.
The old man did not like the soup, and refused to eat it; but he was obliged to do it for the good of his health, and the footman forced the spoon into his mouth, while the old man blew so energetically, so as not to swallow the soup, that it was scattered like a spray all over the table and over his neighbors.
The children writhed with laughter at the spectacle, while their father, who was also amused, said: “Is not the old man comical?” During the whole meal they were taken up solely with him.
He devoured the dishes on the table with his eyes, and tried to seize them and pull them over to him with his trembling hands.
They put them almost within his reach, to see his useless efforts, his trembling clutches at them, the piteous appeal of his whole nature, of his eyes, of his mouth and of his nose as he smelt them, and he slobbered on his table napkin with eagerness, while uttering inarticulate grunts.
And the whole family was highly amused at this horrible and grotesque scene.
Then they put a tiny morsel on his plate, and he ate with feverish gluttony, in order to get something more as soon as possible, and when the sweetened rice was brought in, he nearly had a fit, and groaned with greediness, and Gontran called out to him: “You have eaten too much already; you can have no more.” And they pretended not to give him any.
Then he began to cry; he cried and trembled more violently than ever, while all the children laughed.
At last, however, they gave him his helping, a very small piece; and as he ate the first mouthful, he made a comical noise in his throat, and a movement with his neck as ducks do when they swallow too large a morsel, and when he had swallowed it, he began to stamp his feet, so as to get more.
I was seized with pity for this saddening and ridiculous Tantalus, and interposed on his behalf: “Come, give him a little more rice!” But Simon replied: “Oh! no, my dear fellow, if he were to eat too much, it would harm him, at his age.” I held my tongue, and thought over those words.
So they deprived him of his only remaining pleasure out of regard for his health!
What would he do with it, inert and trembling wreck that he was?
Or to preserve for some time longer the spectacle of his impotent greediness in the family.
There was nothing left for him to do in this life, nothing whatever.
He had one single wish left, one sole pleasure; why not grant him that last solace until he died?
After we had played cards for a long time, I went up to my room and to bed; I was low-spirited and sad, sad, sad! and I sat at my window.
Not a sound could be heard outside but the beautiful warbling of a bird in a tree, somewhere in the distance.
And I thought of my poor friend's five children, and pictured him to myself, snoring by the side of his ugly wife.
SUICIDES To Georges Legrand.
Hardly a day goes by without our reading a news item like the following in some newspaper: “On Wednesday night the people living in No. 40 Rue de——-, were awakened by two successive shots.
The explosions seemed to come from the apartment occupied by M.
The door was broken in and the man was found bathed in his blood, still holding in one hand the revolver with which he had taken his life.
X——was fifty-seven years of age, enjoying a comfortable income, and had everything necessary to make him happy.
No cause can be found for his action.” What terrible grief, what unknown suffering, hidden despair, secret wounds drive these presumably happy persons to suicide?
We search, we imagine tragedies of love, we suspect financial troubles, and, as we never find anything definite, we apply to these deaths the word “mystery.” A letter found on the desk of one of these “suicides without cause,” and written during his last night, beside his loaded revolver, has come into our hands.
We deem it rather interesting.
It reveals none of those great catastrophes which we always expect to find behind these acts of despair; but it shows us the slow succession of the little vexations of life, the disintegration of a lonely existence, whose dreams have disappeared; it gives the reason for these tragic ends, which only nervous and high-strung people can understand.
Here it is: “It is midnight.
When I have finished this letter I shall kill myself.
I shall attempt to give the reasons, not for those who may read these lines, but for myself, to kindle my waning courage, to impress upon myself the fatal necessity of this act which can, at best, be only deferred.
“I was brought up by simple-minded parents who were unquestioning believers.
And I believed as they did.
All the events of Life, which formerly had to me the glow of a beautiful sunset, are now fading away.
“Formerly, I was happy!
Everything pleased me: the passing women, the appearance of the streets, the place where I lived; and I even took an interest in the cut of my clothes.
But the repetition of the same sights has had the result of filling my heart with weariness and disgust, just as one would feel were one to go every night to the same theatre.
“For the last thirty years I have been rising at the same hour; and, at the same restaurant, for thirty years, I have been eating at the same hours the same dishes brought me by different waiters.
The loneliness which one feels in strange places terrified me.
I felt so alone, so small on the earth that I quickly started on my homeward journey.
“But here the unchanging expression of my furniture, which has stood for thirty years in the same place, the smell of my apartments (for, with time, each dwelling takes on a particular odor) each night, these and other things disgust me and make me sick of living thus.
“Everything repeats itself endlessly.
The way in which I put my key in the lock, the place where I always find my matches, the first object which meets my eye when I enter the room, make me feel like jumping out of the window and putting an end to those monotonous events from which we can never escape.
“Each day, when I shave, I feel an inordinate desire to cut my throat; and my face, which I see in the little mirror, always the same, with soap on my cheeks, has several times made me weak from sadness.
“Now I even hate to be with people whom I used to meet with pleasure; I know them so well, I can tell just what they are going to say and what I am going to answer.
Each brain is like a circus, where the same horse keeps circling around eternally.
We must circle round always, around the same ideas, the same joys, the same pleasures, the same habits, the same beliefs, the same sensations of disgust.
“The fog was terrible this evening.
It enfolded the boulevard, where the street lights were dimmed and looked like smoking candles.
A heavier weight than usual oppressed me.
Perhaps my digestion was bad.
“For good digestion is everything in life.
It gives the inspiration to the artist, amorous desires to young people, clear ideas to thinkers, the joy of life to everybody, and it also allows one to eat heartily (which is one of the greatest pleasures).
A sick stomach induces scepticism unbelief, nightmares and the desire for death.
Perhaps I would not kill myself, if my digestion had been good this evening.
“When I sat down in the arm-chair where I have been sitting every day for thirty years, I glanced around me, and just then I was seized by such a terrible distress that I thought I must go mad.
Every occupation struck me as being worse even than inaction.
Then I bethought me of putting my papers in order.
“For a long time I have been thinking of clearing out my drawers; for, for the last thirty years, I have been throwing my letters and bills pell-mell into the same desk, and this confusion has often caused me considerable trouble.
But I feel such moral and physical laziness at the sole idea of putting anything in order that I have never had the courage to begin this tedious business.
“I therefore opened my desk, intending to choose among my old papers and destroy the majority of them.
“At first I was bewildered by this array of documents, yellowed by age, then I chose one.
“And if, perchance, you should, take the contents by the handful, close your eyes that you may not read a word, so that you may not recognize some forgotten handwriting which may plunge you suddenly into a sea of memories; carry these papers to the fire; and when they are in ashes, crush them to an invisible powder, or otherwise you are lost—just as I have been lost for an hour.
“The first letters which I read did not interest me greatly.
They were recent, and came from living men whom I still meet quite often, and whose presence does not move me to any great extent.
But all at once one envelope made me start.
My name was traced on it in a large, bold handwriting; and suddenly tears came to my eyes.
That letter was from my dearest friend, the companion of my youth, the confidant of my hopes; and he appeared before me so clearly, with his pleasant smile and his hand outstretched, that a cold shiver ran down my back.
Our memory is a more perfect world than the universe: it gives back life to those who no longer exist.
“With trembling hand and dimmed eyes I reread everything that he told me, and in my poor sobbing heart I felt a wound so painful that I began to groan as a man whose bones are slowly being crushed.
“Then I travelled over my whole life, just as one travels along a river.
I recognized people, so long forgotten that I no longer knew their names.
In my mother's letters I saw again the old servants, the shape of our house and the little insignificant odds and ends which cling to our minds.
“Yes, I suddenly saw again all my mother's old gowns, the different styles which she adopted and the several ways in which she dressed her hair.
She haunted me especially in a silk dress, trimmed with old lace; and I remembered something she said one day when she was wearing this dress.
She said: 'Robert, my child, if you do not stand up straight you will be round-shouldered all your life.' “Then, opening another drawer, I found myself face to face with memories of tender passions: a dancing-pump, a torn handkerchief, even a garter, locks of hair and dried flowers.
Then the sweet romances of my life, whose living heroines are now white-haired, plunged me into the deep melancholy of things.
Oh, the young brows where blond locks curl, the caress of the hands, the glance which speaks, the hearts which beat, that smile which promises the lips, those lips which promise the embrace!
And the first kiss-that endless kiss which makes you close your eyes, which drowns all thought in the immeasurable joy of approaching possession!
“Taking these old pledges of former love in both my hands, I covered them with furious caresses, and in my soul, torn by these memories, I saw them each again at the hour of surrender; and I suffered a torture more cruel than all the tortures invented in all the fables about hell.
“One last letter remained.
It was written by me and dictated fifty years ago by my writing teacher.
I take advantage of it to thank you for having brought me into this world.
I had gone back to the beginning, and suddenly I turned my glance on what remained to me of life.
I saw hideous and lonely old age, and approaching infirmities, and everything over and gone.
“My revolver is here, on the table.
Never reread your old letters!” And that is how many men come to kill themselves; and we search in vain to discover some great sorrow in their lives.
AN ARTIFICE The old doctor sat by the fireside, talking to his fair patient who was lying on the lounge.
There was nothing much the matter with her, except that she had one of those little feminine ailments from which pretty women frequently suffer—slight anaemia, a nervous attack, etc.
“No, doctor,” she said; “I shall never be able to understand a woman deceiving her husband.
Even allowing that she does not love him, that she pays no heed to her vows and promises, how can she give herself to another man?
How can she conceal the intrigue from other people's eyes?
How can it be possible to love amid lies and treason?” The doctor smiled, and replied: “It is perfectly easy, and I can assure you that a woman does not think of all those little subtle details when she has made up her mind to go astray.
“As for dissimulation, all women have plenty of it on hand for such occasions, and the simplest of them are wonderful, and extricate themselves from the greatest dilemmas in a remarkable manner.” The young woman, however, seemed incredulous.
“No, doctor,” she said; “one never thinks until after it has happened of what one ought to have done in a critical situation, and women are certainly more liable than men to lose their head on such occasions:” The doctor raised his hands.
“After it has happened, you say!
Now I will tell you something that happened to one of my female patients, whom I always considered an immaculate woman.
“It happened in a provincial town, and one night when I was asleep, in that deep first sleep from which it is so difficult to rouse us, it seemed to me, in my dreams, as if the bells in the town were sounding a fire alarm, and I woke up with a start.
It was my own bell, which was ringing wildly, and as my footman did not seem to be answering the door, I, in turn, pulled the bell at the head of my bed, and soon I heard a banging, and steps in the silent house, and Jean came into my room, and handed me a letter which said: 'Madame Lelievre begs Dr.
Simeon to come to her immediately.' “I thought for a few moments, and then I said to myself: 'A nervous attack, vapors; nonsense, I am too tired.' And so I replied: 'As Dr.
They say it is a matter of life and death for two people.' Whereupon I sat up in bed and told him to show the person in.
“A kind of black phantom appeared and raised her veil as soon as Jean had left the room.
It was Madame Berthe Lelievre, quite a young woman, who had been married for three years to a large merchant in the town, who was said to have married the prettiest girl in the neighborhood.
“She was terribly pale, her face was contracted as the faces of insane people are, occasionally, and her hands trembled violently.
Twice she tried to speak without being able to utter a sound, but at last she stammered out: 'Come—quick—quick, doctor.
Then her tears suddenly ceased, as if by an internal fire, and with an air of tragic calmness, she said: 'Let us make haste.' “I was ready, but exclaimed: 'I quite forgot to order my carriage.' 'I have one,' she said; 'it is his, which was waiting for him!' She wrapped herself up, so as to completely conceal her face, and we started.
“When she was by my side in the carriage she suddenly seized my hand, and crushing it in her delicate fingers, she said, with a shaking voice, that proceeded from a distracted heart: 'Oh! if you only knew, if you only knew what I am suffering!
I loved him, I have loved him distractedly, like a madwoman, for the last six months.' 'Is anyone up in your house?' I asked. 'No, nobody except those, who knows everything.' “We stopped at the door, and evidently everybody was asleep.
We went in without making any noise, by means of her latch-key, and walked upstairs on tiptoe.
The frightened servant was sitting on the top of the stairs with a lighted candle by her side, as she was afraid to remain with the dead man, and I went into the room, which was in great disorder.
Wet towels, with which they had bathed the young man's temples, were lying on the floor, by the side of a washbasin and a glass, while a strong smell of vinegar pervaded the room.
I opened the eyes and felt the hands, and then, turning to the two women, who were shaking as if they were freezing, I said to them: 'Help me to lift him on to the bed.' When we had laid him gently on it, I listened to his heart and put a looking-glass to his lips, and then said: 'It is all over.' It was a terrible sight!
“I looked at the man, and said: 'You ought to arrange his hair a little.' The girl went and brought her mistress' comb and brush, but as she was trembling, and pulling out his long, matted hair in doing it, Madame Lelievre took the comb out of her hand, and arranged his hair as if she were caressing him.
She parted it, brushed his beard, rolled his mustaches gently round her fingers, then, suddenly, letting go of his hair, she took the dead man's inert head in her hands and looked for a long time in despair at the dead face, which no longer could smile at her, and then, throwing herself on him, she clasped him in her arms and kissed him ardently.
Come, madame, we have not a moment to lose!' She started up, and I said: “'We must carry him into the drawing-room.' And when we had done this, I placed him on a sofa, and lit the chandeliers, and just then the front door was opened and shut noisily. 'Rose, bring me the basin and the towels, and make the room look tidy.
Monsieur Lelievre is coming in.' “I heard his steps on the stairs, and then his hands feeling along the walls. 'Come here, my dear fellow,' I said; 'we have had an accident.' “And the astonished husband appeared in the door with a cigar in his mouth, and said: 'What is the matter?
What is the meaning of this?' 'My dear friend,' I said, going up to him, 'you find us in great embarrassment.
I had remained late, chatting with your wife and our friend, who had brought me in his carriage, when he suddenly fainted, and in spite of all we have done, he has remained unconscious for two hours.
I did not like to call in strangers, and if you will now help me downstairs with him, I shall be able to attend to him better at his own house.' “The husband, who was surprised, but quite unsuspicious, took off his hat, and then he took his rival, who would be quite inoffensive for the future, under the arms.
I got between his two legs, as if I had been a horse between the shafts, and we went downstairs, while his wife held a light for us.
When we got outside I stood the body up, so as to deceive the coachman, and said: 'Come, my friend; it is nothing; you feel better already I expect.
It will soon be over.' But as I felt that he was slipping out of my hands, I gave him a slap on the shoulder, which sent him forward and made him fall into the carriage, and then I got in after him.
Monsieur Lelievre, who was rather alarmed, said to me: 'Do you think it is anything serious?' To which I replied: 'No,' with a smile, as I looked at his wife, who had put her arm into that of her husband, and was trying to see into the carriage.
“I shook hands with them and told my coachman to start, and during the whole drive the dead man kept falling against me.
They had talked about everything, and a feeling of lassitude came over them, that feeling which precedes and leads to the departure of guests after festive gatherings.
One of those present, who had for the last five minutes been gazing silently at the surging boulevard dotted with gas-lamps, with its rattling vehicles, said suddenly: “When you've nothing to do from morning till night, the days are long.” “And the nights too,” assented the guest who sat next to him.
“I sleep very little; pleasures fatigue me; conversation is monotonous.
Men have however crudely, been seeking for—and working for the object you refer to since the beginning of the world.
The men who came first reached perfection at once in this way.
We are hardly equal to them.” One of the three idlers murmured: “What a pity!” Then, after a minute's pause, he added: “If we could only sleep, sleep well, without feeling hot or cold, sleep with that perfect unconsciousness we experience on nights when we are thoroughly fatigued, sleep without dreams.” “Why without dreams?” asked the guest sitting next to him.
The other replied: “Because dreams are not always pleasant; they are always fantastic, improbable, disconnected; and because when we are asleep we cannot have the sort of dreams we like.
“My dear fellow, in order to dream when you are awake, you need great power and great exercise of will, and when you try to do it, great weariness is the result.
Now, real dreaming, that journey of our thoughts through delightful visions, is assuredly the sweetest experience in the world; but it must come naturally, it must not be provoked in a painful, manner, and must be accompanied by absolute bodily comfort.
This power of dreaming I can give you, provided you promise that you will not abuse it.” The writer shrugged his shoulders: “Ah! yes, I know—hasheesh, opium, green tea—artificial paradises.
I have read Baudelaire, and I even tasted the famous drug, which made me very sick.” But the doctor, without stirring from his seat, said: “No; ether, nothing but ether; and I would suggest that you literary men should use it sometimes.” The three rich bachelors drew closer to the doctor.
I am not talking of medicine or morality; I am talking of pleasure.
You give yourselves up every day to excesses which consume your lives.
I want to indicate to you a new sensation, possible only to intelligent men—let us say even very intelligent men—dangerous, like everything else that overexcites our organs, but exquisite.
I might add that you would require a certain preparation, that is to say, practice, to feel in all their completeness the singular effects of ether.
“They are different from the effects of hasheesh, of opium, or morphia, and they cease as soon as the absorption of the drug is interrupted, while the other generators of day dreams continue their action for hours.
“I am now going to try to analyze these feelings as clearly as possible.
But the thing is not easy, so facile, so delicate, so almost imperceptible, are these sensations.
“It was when I was attacked by violent neuralgia that I made use of this remedy, which since then I have, perhaps, slightly abused.
“I had acute pains in my head and neck, and an intolerable heat of the skin, a feverish restlessness.
“At the end of some minutes I thought I heard a vague murmur, which ere long became a sort of humming, and it seemed to me that all the interior of my body had become light, light as air, that it was dissolving into vapor.
“Then came a sort of torpor, a sleepy sensation of comfort, in spite of the pains which still continued, but which had ceased to make themselves felt.
It was one of those sensations which we are willing to endure and not any of those frightful wrenches against which our tortured body protests.
“Soon the strange and delightful sense of emptiness which I felt in my chest extended to my limbs, which, in their turn, became light, as light as if the flesh and the bones had been melted and the skin only were left, the skin necessary to enable me to realize the sweetness of living, of bathing in this sensation of well-being.
Then I perceived that I was no longer suffering.
The pain had gone, melted away, evaporated.
And I heard voices, four voices, two dialogues, without understanding what was said.
At one time there were only indistinct sounds, at another time a word reached my ear.
But I recognized that this was only the humming I had heard before, but emphasized.
I was not asleep; I was not awake; I comprehended, I felt, I reasoned with the utmost clearness and depth, with extraordinary energy and intellectual pleasure, with a singular intoxication arising from this separation of my mental faculties.
“It was not like the dreams caused by hasheesh or the somewhat sickly visions that come from opium; it was an amazing acuteness of reasoning, a new way of seeing, judging and appreciating the things of life, and with the certainty, the absolute consciousness that this was the true way.
“And the old image of the Scriptures suddenly came back to my mind.
It seemed to me that I had tasted of the Tree of Knowledge, that all the mysteries were unveiled, so much did I find myself under the sway of a new, strange and irrefutable logic.
And arguments, reasonings, proofs rose up in a heap before my brain only to be immediately displaced by some stronger proof, reasoning, argument.
My head had, in fact, become a battleground of ideas.
I was a superior being, armed with invincible intelligence, and I experienced a huge delight at the manifestation of my power.
I still kept inhaling the ether from my flagon.
Suddenly I perceived that it was empty.” The four men exclaimed at the same time: “Doctor, a prescription at once for a liter of ether!” But the doctor, putting on his hat, replied: “As to that, certainly not; go and let some one else poison you!” And he left them.
Ladies and gentlemen, what is your opinion on the subject?
The school door opened and the youngsters darted out, jostling each other in their haste to get out quickly.
But instead of promptly dispersing and going home to dinner as usual, they stopped a few paces off, broke up into knots, and began whispering.
The fact was that, that morning, Simon, the son of La Blanchotte, had, for the first time, attended school.
They had all of them in their families heard talk of La Blanchotte; and, although in public she was welcome enough, the mothers among themselves treated her with a somewhat disdainful compassion, which the children had imitated without in the least knowing why.
And they did not care for him; so it was with a certain delight, mingled with considerable astonishment, that they met and repeated to each other what had been said by a lad of fourteen or fifteen who appeared to know all about it, so sagaciously did he wink.
“You know—Simon—well, he has no papa.” Just then La Blanchotte's son appeared in the doorway of the school.
He was starting home to his mother's house when the groups of his schoolmates, whispering and watching him with the mischievous and heartless eyes of children bent upon playing a nasty trick, gradually closed in around him and ended by surrounding him altogether.
There he stood in their midst, surprised and embarrassed, not understanding what they were going to do with him.
But the lad who had brought the news, puffed up with the success he had met with already, demanded: “What is your name, you?” He answered: “Simon.” “Simon what?” retorted the other.
The child, altogether bewildered, repeated: “Simon.” The lad shouted at him: “One is named Simon something—that is not a name—Simon indeed.” The child, on the brink of tears, replied for the third time: “My name is Simon.” The urchins began to laugh.
The triumphant tormentor cried: “You can see plainly that he has no papa.” A deep silence ensued.
The children were dumfounded by this extraordinary, impossible, monstrous thing—a boy who had not a papa; they looked upon him as a phenomenon, an unnatural being, and they felt that hitherto inexplicable contempt of their mothers for La Blanchotte growing upon them.
As for Simon, he had leaned against a tree to avoid falling, and he remained as if prostrated by an irreparable disaster.
He sought to explain, but could think of nothing-to say to refute this horrible charge that he had no papa.
At last he shouted at them quite recklessly: “Yes, I have one.” “Where is he?” demanded the boy.
The children roared, tremendously excited; and those country boys, little more than animals, experienced that cruel craving which prompts the fowls of a farmyard to destroy one of their number as soon as it is wounded.
Simon suddenly espied a little neighbor, the son of a widow, whom he had seen, as he himself was to be seen, always alone with his mother.
“And no more have you,” he said; “no more have you a papa.” “Yes,” replied the other, “I have one.” “Where is he?” rejoined Simon.
“He is dead,” declared the brat, with superb dignity; “he is in the cemetery, is my papa.” A murmur of approval rose among the little wretches as if this fact of possessing a papa dead in a cemetery had caused their comrade to grow big enough to crush the other one who had no papa at all.
And these boys, whose fathers were for the most part bad men, drunkards, thieves, and who beat their wives, jostled each other to press closer and closer, as though they, the legitimate ones, would smother by their pressure one who was illegitimate.
The boy who chanced to be next Simon suddenly put his tongue out at him with a mocking air and shouted at him: “No papa!
No papa!” Simon seized him by the hair with both hands and set to work to disable his legs with kicks, while he bit his cheek ferociously.
A tremendous struggle ensued between the two combatants, and Simon found himself beaten, torn, bruised, rolled on the ground in the midst of the ring of applauding schoolboys.
As he arose, mechanically brushing with his hand his little blouse all covered with dust, some one shouted at him: “Go and tell your papa.” Then he felt a great sinking at his heart.
They were stronger than he was, they had beaten him, and he had no answer to give them, for he knew well that it was true that he had no papa.
Full of pride, he attempted for some moments to struggle against the tears which were choking him.
He had a feeling of suffocation, and then without any sound he commenced to weep, with great shaking sobs.
A ferocious joy broke out among his enemies, and, with one accord, just like savages in their fearful festivals, they took each other by the hand and danced round him in a circle, repeating as a refrain: “No papa!
No papa!” But suddenly Simon ceased sobbing.
He became ferocious.
There were stones under his feet; he picked them up and with all his strength hurled them at his tormentors.
Two or three were struck and rushed off yelling, and so formidable did he appear that the rest became panic- stricken.
Cowards, as the mob always is in presence of an exasperated man, they broke up and fled.
Left alone, the little fellow without a father set off running toward the fields, for a recollection had been awakened in him which determined his soul to a great resolve.
He remembered, in fact, that eight days before, a poor devil who begged for his livelihood had thrown himself into the water because he had no more money.
Simon had been there when they fished him out again; and the wretched man, who usually seemed to him so miserable, and ugly, had then struck him as being so peaceful with his pale cheeks, his long drenched beard, and his open eyes full of calm.
The bystanders had said: “He is dead.” And some one had said: “He is quite happy now.” And Simon wished to drown himself also, because he had no father, just like the wretched being who had no money.
Some fish were sporting briskly in the clear stream and occasionally made a little bound and caught the flies flying on the surface.
He stopped crying in order to watch them, for their maneuvers interested him greatly.
But, at intervals, as in a tempest intervals of calm alternate suddenly with tremendous gusts of wind, which snap off the trees and then lose themselves in the horizon, this thought would return to him with intense pain: “I am going to drown myself because I have no papa.” It was very warm, fine weather.
The pleasant sunshine warmed the grass.
And Simon enjoyed some minutes of happiness, of that languor which follows weeping, and felt inclined to fall asleep there upon the grass in the warm sunshine.
He endeavored to catch it.
He followed it and lost it three times in succession.
At last he caught it by one of its hind legs and began to laugh as he saw the efforts the creature made to escape.
It gathered itself up on its hind legs and then with a violent spring suddenly stretched them out as stiff as two bars; while it beat the air with its front legs as though they were hands, its round eyes staring in their circle of yellow.
It reminded him of a toy made of straight slips of wood nailed zigzag one on the other; which by a similar movement regulated the movements of the little soldiers fastened thereon.
Then he thought of his home, and then of his mother, and, overcome by sorrow, he again began to weep.
But he was unable to finish them, for tumultuous, violent sobs shook his whole frame.
He no longer thought, he no longer saw anything around him, and was wholly absorbed in crying.
Suddenly a heavy hand was placed upon his shoulder, and a rough voice asked him: “What is it that causes you so much grief, my little man?” Simon turned round.
A tall workman with a beard and black curly hair was staring at him good-naturedly.
He answered with his eyes and throat full of tears: “They beat me—because—I—I have no—papa—no papa.” “What!” said the man, smiling; “why, everybody has one.” The child answered painfully amid his spasms of grief: “But I—I—I have none.” Then the workman became serious.
He had recognized La Blanchotte's son, and, although himself a new arrival in the neighborhood, he had a vague idea of her history.
“Well,” said he, “console yourself, my boy, and come with me home to your mother.
They will give you—a papa.” And so they started on the way, the big fellow holding the little fellow by the hand, and the man smiled, for he was not sorry to see this Blanchotte, who was, it was said, one of the prettiest girls of the countryside, and, perhaps, he was saying to himself, at the bottom of his heart, that a lass who had erred might very well err again.
“There it is,” exclaimed the child, and he cried, “Mamma!” A woman appeared, and the workman instantly left off smiling, for he saw at once that there was no fooling to be done with the tall pale girl who stood austerely at her door as though to defend from one man the threshold of that house where she had already been betrayed by another.
But Simon suddenly ran to him and said: “Will you be my papa?” A deep silence ensued.
La Blanchotte, dumb and tortured with shame, leaned herself against the wall, both her hands upon her heart.
When the child returned to school next day he was received with a spiteful laugh, and at the end of school, when the lads were on the point of recommencing, Simon threw these words at their heads as he would have done a stone: “He is named Philip, my papa.” Yells of delight burst out from all sides.
Where did you pick up your Philip?” Simon answered nothing; and, immovable in his faith, he defied them with his eye, ready to be martyred rather than fly before them.
The school master came to his rescue and he returned home to his mother.
During three months, the tall workman, Philip, frequently passed by La Blanchotte's house, and sometimes he made bold to speak to her when he saw her sewing near the window.
She answered him civilly, always sedately, never joking with him, nor permitting him to enter her house.
Notwithstanding, being, like all men, a bit of a coxcomb, he imagined that she was often rosier than usual when she chatted with him.
But a lost reputation is so difficult to regain and always remains so fragile that, in spite of the shy reserve of La Blanchotte, they already gossiped in the neighborhood.
He went regularly to school, and mixed with great dignity with his schoolfellows without ever answering them back.
One day, however, the lad who had first attacked him said to him: “You have lied.
You have not a papa named Philip.” “Why do you say that?” demanded Simon, much disturbed.
It was very dark there; the red glare of a formidable furnace alone lit up with great flashes five blacksmiths; who hammered upon their anvils with a terrible din.
They were standing enveloped in flame, like demons, their eyes fixed on the red-hot iron they were pounding; and their dull ideas rose and fell with their hammers.
All at once the work came to a standstill, and all the men looked on, very attentive.
Then, in the midst of this unaccustomed silence, rose the slender pipe of Simon: “Say, Philip, the Michaude boy told me just now that you were not altogether my papa.” “Why not?” asked the blacksmith, The child replied with all innocence: “Because you are not my mamma's husband.” No one laughed.
Philip remained standing, leaning his forehead upon the back of his great hands, which supported the handle of his hammer standing upright upon the anvil.
His four companions watched him, and Simon, a tiny mite among these giants, anxiously waited.
Suddenly, one of the smiths, answering to the sentiment of all, said to Philip: “La Blanchotte is a good, honest girl, and upright and steady in spite of her misfortune, and would make a worthy wife for an honest man.” “That is true,” remarked the three others.
The smith continued: “Is it the girl's fault if she went wrong?
She had been promised marriage; and I know more than one who is much respected to-day, and who sinned every bit as much.” “That is true,” responded the three men in chorus.
Philip hastily bent himself down to Simon: “Go and tell your mother that I am coming to speak to her this evening.” Then he pushed the child out by the shoulders.
He returned to his work, and with a single blow the five hammers again fell upon their anvils.
Thus they wrought the iron until nightfall, strong, powerful, happy, like contented hammers.
But just as the great bell of a cathedral resounds upon feast days above the jingling of the other bells, so Philip's hammer, sounding above the rest, clanged second after second with a deafening uproar.
And he stood amid the flying sparks plying his trade vigorously.
The sky was full of stars as he knocked at La Blanchotte's door.
The young woman showed herself upon the threshold, and said in a grieved tone: “It is ill to come thus when night has fallen, Mr.
Philip.” He wished to answer, but stammered and stood confused before her.
She resumed: “You understand, do you not, that it will not do for me to be talked about again.” “What does that matter to me, if you will be my wife!” No voice replied to him, but he believed that he heard in the shadow of the room the sound of a falling body.
He entered quickly; and Simon, who had gone to bed, distinguished the sound of a kiss and some words that his mother murmured softly.
ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 12.
THE CHILD Lemonnier had remained a widower with one child.
He had loved his wife devotedly, with a tender and exalted love, without a slip, during their entire married life.
He was a good, honest man, perfectly simple, sincere, without suspicion or malice.
He fell in love with a poor neighbor, proposed and was accepted.
He was making a very comfortable living out of the wholesale cloth business, and he did not for a minute suspect that the young girl might have accepted him for anything else but himself.
She was everything to him; he only thought of her, looked at her continually, with worshiping eyes.
For five years they had no children.
Then suddenly she announced to him that this state of affairs would soon cease.
He had grown very intimate with a young man who had known his wife since childhood, and who was one of the prefect's secretaries.
Duretour would dine three times a week with the Lemonniers, bringing flowers to madame, and sometimes a box at the theater; and often, at the end of the dinner, Lemonnier, growing tender, turning towards his wife, would explain: “With a companion like you and a friend like him, a man is completely happy on earth.” She died in childbirth.
But the sight of the child, a poor, moaning little creature, gave him courage.
He loved it with a passionate and sorrowful love, with a morbid love in which stuck the memory of death, but in which lived something of his worship for the dead mother.
It was the flesh of his wife, her being continued, a sort of quintessence of herself.
This child was her very life transferred to another body; she had disappeared that it might exist, and the father would smother it in with kisses.
But also, this child had killed her; he had stolen this beloved creature, his life was at the cost of hers.
Lemonnier would place his son in the cradle and would sit down and watch him.
He would sit this way by the hour, looking at him, dreaming of thousands of things, sweet or sad.
Duretour, also seemed to love the boy; he would kiss him wildly, in those frenzies of tenderness which are characteristic of parents.
Lemonnier, delighted, would mutter: “Isn't he a darling?
Duretour would hug the child in his arms and tickle his neck with his mustache.
Celeste, the old nurse, alone, seemed to have no tenderness for the little one.
She would grow angry at his pranks, and seemed impatient at the caresses of the two men.
He was willful, stubborn and quick-tempered.
Duretour would always buy him all the toys he wished, and he fed him on cake and candies.
Then Celeste would grow angry and exclaim: “It's a shame, monsieur, a shame.
You are spoiling this child.
Lemonnier would answer, smiling: “What can you expect?
I love him too much, I can't resist him; you must get used to it.” Jean was delicate, rather.
The doctor said that he was anaemic, prescribed iron, rare meat and broth.
But the little fellow loved only cake and refused all other nourishment; and the father, in despair, stuffed him with cream-puffs and chocolate eclairs.
One evening, as they were sitting down to supper, Celeste brought on the soup with an air of authority and an assurance which she did not usually have.
She took off the cover and, dipping the ladle into the dish, she declared: “Here is some broth such as I have never made; the young one will have to take some this time.” M.
Lemonnier, frightened, bent his head.
He tasted the soup and said: “It is, indeed, excellent.” The servant took the boy's plate and poured a spoonful of soup in it.
Then she retreated a few steps and waited.
Jean smelled the food and pushed his plate away with an expression of disgust.
Celeste, suddenly pale, quickly stepped forward and forcibly poured a spoonful down the child's open mouth.
She received it full in the stomach.
Then, exasperated, she took the young shaver's head under her arm and began pouring spoonful after spoonful of soup down his throat.
He grew as red as a beet, and he would cough it up, stamping, twisting, choking, beating the air with his hands.
At first the father was so surprised that he could not move.
Then, suddenly, he rushed forward, wild with rage, seized the servant by the throat and threw her up against the wall stammering: “Out!
Out! you brute!” But she shook him off, and, her hair streaming down her back, her eyes snapping, she cried out: “What's gettin' hold of you?
You're trying to thrash me because I am making this child eat soup when you are filling him with sweet stuff!” He kept repeating, trembling from head to foot: “Out!
Get out-get out, you brute!” Then, wild, she turned to him and, pushing her face up against his, her voice trembling: “Ah!—you think-you think that you can treat me like that?
Everybody knows it, except yourself!
Ask the grocer, the butcher, the baker, all of them, any one of them!” She was growling and mumbling, choked with passion; then she stopped and looked at him.
He was motionless livid, his arms hanging by his sides.
After a short pause, he murmured in a faint, shaky voice, instinct with deep feeling: “You say? you say?
What do you say?” She remained silent, frightened by his appearance.
Once more he stepped forward, repeating: “You say—what do you say?” Then in a calm voice, she answered: “I say what I know, what everybody knows.” He seized her and, with the fury of a beast, he tried to throw her down.
But, although old, she was strong and nimble.
She slipped under his arm, and running around the table once more furious, she screamed: “Look at him, just look at him, fool that you are!
Durefour? just look at his nose and his eyes!
I tell you that everyone knows it, everyone except yourself!
Look at him!” She went to the door, opened it, and disappeared.
Jean, frightened, sat motionless before his plate of soup.
At the end of an hour, she returned gently, to see how matters stood.
The child, after doing away with all the cakes and a pitcher full of cream and one of syrup, was now emptying the jam-pot with his soup- spoon.
She came back to the dining-room, cleared the table, put everything in place, feeling very uneasy all the time.
Not a single sound could be heard throughout the house.
He seemed to be perfectly still.
Then she returned to the kitchen and sat down, ready for any emergency.
She slept on a chair and awoke at daylight.
She did the rooms as she had been accustomed to every morning; she swept and dusted, and, towards eight o'clock, prepared M.
Lemonnier's breakfast.
But she did not dare bring it to her master, knowing too well how she would be received; she waited for him to ring.
Celeste, not knowing what to think, prepared her tray and started up with it, her heart beating fast.
She stopped before the door and listened.
Everything was still.
Then, gathering up all her courage, she opened the door and entered.
With a wild shriek, she dropped the breakfast tray which she had been holding in her hand.
Lemonnier was hanging by a rope from a ring in the ceiling.
His tongue was sticking out horribly.
An upturned chair had rolled over to the bed.
Celeste, dazed, ran away shrieking.
All the neighbors crowded together.
The physician declared that he had died at about midnight.
A letter addressed to M.
Duretdur was found on the table of the suicide.
It contained these words: “I leave and entrust the child to you!” A COUNTRY EXCURSION For five months they had been talking of going to take luncheon in one of the country suburbs of Paris on Madame Dufour's birthday, and as they were looking forward very impatiently to the outing, they rose very early that morning.
Monsieur Dufour had borrowed the milkman's wagon and drove himself.
It was a very tidy, two-wheeled conveyance, with a cover supported by four iron rods, with curtains that had been drawn up, except the one at the back, which floated out like a sail.
Madame Dufour, resplendent in a wonderful, cherry colored silk dress, sat by the side of her husband.
The old grandmother and a girl sat behind them on two chairs, and a boy with yellow hair was lying at the bottom of the wagon, with nothing to be seen of him except his head.
When they reached the bridge of Neuilly, Monsieur Dufour said: “Here we are in the country at last!” and at that signal his wife grew sentimental about the beauties of nature.
When they got to the crossroads at Courbevoie they were seized with admiration for the distant landscape.
On the right was Argenteuil with its bell tower, and above it rose the hills of Sannois and the mill of Orgemont, while on the left the aqueduct of Marly stood out against the clear morning sky, and in the distance they could see the terrace of Saint-Germain; and opposite them, at the end of a low chain of hills, the new fort of Cormeilles.
Quite in the distance; a very long way off, beyond the plains and village, one could see the sombre green of the forests.
The sun was beginning to burn their faces, the dust got into their eyes, and on either side of the road there stretched an interminable tract of bare, ugly country with an unpleasant odor.
One might have thought that it had been ravaged by a pestilence, which had even attacked the buildings, for skeletons of dilapidated and deserted houses, or small cottages, which were left in an unfinished state, because the contractors had not been paid, reared their four roofless walls on each side.
Here and there tall factory chimneys rose up from the barren soil.
The only vegetation on that putrid land, where the spring breezes wafted an odor of petroleum and slate, blended with another odor that was even less agreeable.
The river sparkled in the sun, and they had a feeling of quiet enjoyment, felt refreshed as they drank in the purer air that was not impregnated by the black smoke of factories nor by the miasma from the deposits of night soil.
Monsieur Dufour pulled up and read the attractive announcement outside an eating house: Restaurant Poulin, matelottes and fried fish, private rooms, arbors, and swings.
Will you make up your mind at last?” She read the announcement in her turn and then looked at the house for some time.
It was a white country inn, built by the roadside, and through the open door she could see the bright zinc of the counter, at which sat two workmen in their Sunday clothes.
At last she made up her mind and said: “Yes, this will do; and, besides, there is a view.” They drove into a large field behind the inn, separated from the river by the towing path, and dismounted.
She was a stout woman, of about thirty-six, full-blown, and delightful to look at.
She could hardly breathe, as her corsets were laced too tightly, and their pressure forced her superabundant bosom up to her double chin.
Next the girl placed her hand on her father's shoulder and jumped down lightly.
The boy with the yellow hair had got down by stepping on the wheel, and he helped Monsieur Dufour to lift his grandmother out.
Then they unharnessed the horse, which they had tied to a tree, and the carriage fell back, with both shafts in the air.
The men took off their coats and washed their hands in a pail of water and then went and joined the ladies, who had already taken possession of the swings.
Mademoiselle Dufour was trying to swing herself standing up, but she could not succeed in getting a start.
She was a pretty girl of about eighteen, one of those women who suddenly excite your desire when you meet them in the street and who leave you with a vague feeling of uneasiness and of excited senses.
Her dress clearly marked the outlines of her firm, full figure, which was accentuated by the motion of her hips as she tried to swing herself higher.
Her arms were stretched upward to hold the rope, so that her bosom rose at every movement she made.
Her hat, which a gust of wind had blown off, was hanging behind her, and as the swing gradually rose higher and higher, she showed her delicate limbs up to the knees each time, and the breeze from her flying skirts, which was more heady than the fumes of wine, blew into the faces of the two men, who were looking at her and smiling.
Sitting in the other swing, Madame Dufour kept saying in a monotonous voice: “Cyprian, come and swing me; do come and swing me, Cyprian!” At last he went, and turning up his shirt sleeves, as if undertaking a hard piece of work, with much difficulty he set his wife in motion.
She clutched the two ropes and held her legs out straight, so as not to touch the ground.
She enjoyed feeling dizzy at the motion of the swing, and her whole figure shook like a jelly on a dish, but as she went higher and higher; she became too giddy and was frightened.
Each time the swing came down she uttered a piercing scream, which made all the little urchins in the neighborhood come round, and down below, beneath the garden hedge, she vaguely saw a row of mischievous heads making various grimaces as they laughed.
When a servant girl came out they ordered luncheon.
“Some fried fish, a rabbit saute, salad and dessert,” Madame Dufour said, with an important air.
The grandmother, who had an affection for cats, had been running after one that belonged to the house, trying to coax it to come to her for the last ten minutes.
The animal, who was no doubt secretly flattered by her attentions, kept close to the good woman, but just out of reach of her hand, and quietly walked round the trees, against which she rubbed herself, with her tail up, purring with pleasure.
“Hello!” suddenly exclaimed the young man with the yellow hair, who was wandering about.
“Here are two swell boats!” They all went to look at them and saw two beautiful canoes in a wooden shed; they were as beautifully finished as if they had been ornamental furniture.
They hung side by side, like two tall, slender girls, in their narrow shining length, and made one wish to float in them on warm summer mornings and evenings along the flower-covered banks of the river, where the trees dip their branches into the water, where the rushes are continually rustling in the breeze and where the swift kingfishers dart about like flashes of blue lightning.
“Oh, they are indeed swell boats!” Monsieur Dufour repeated gravely, as he examined them like a connoiseur.
He had beaten more than one Englishman formerly at the Joinville regattas.
He grew quite excited at last and offered to make a bet that in a boat like that he could row six leagues an hour without exerting himself.
“Luncheon is ready,” the waitress said, appearing at the entrance to the boathouse, and they all hurried off.
But two young men had taken the very seats that Madame Dufour had selected and were eating their luncheon.
They were stretched out, almost lying on the chairs; they were sun-browned and their thin cotton jerseys, with short sleeves, showed their bare arms, which were as strong as a blacksmith's.
They were two strong, athletic fellows, who showed in all their movements that elasticity and grace of limb which can only be acquired by exercise and which is so different to the deformity with which monotonous heavy work stamps the mechanic.
They exchanged a rapid smile when they saw the mother and then a glance on seeing the daughter.
“Let us give up our place,” one of them said; “it will make us acquainted with them.” The other got up immediately, and holding his black and red boating cap in his hand, he politely offered the ladies the only shady place in the garden.
With many excuses they accepted, and that it might be more rural, they sat on the grass, without either tables or chairs.
The two young men took their plates, knives, forks, etc., to a table a little way off and began to eat again, and their bare arms, which they showed continually, rather embarrassed the girl.
She even pretended to turn her head aside and not to see them, while Madame Dufour, who was rather bolder, tempted by feminine curiosity, looked at them every moment, and, no doubt, compared them with the secret unsightliness of her husband.
She had squatted herself on ground, with her legs tucked under her, after the manner of tailors, and she kept moving about restlessly, saying that ants were crawling about her somewhere.
Monsieur Dufour, annoyed at the presence of the polite strangers, was trying to find a comfortable position which he did not, however, succeed in doing, and the young man with the yellow hair was eating as silently as an ogre.
“It is lovely weather, monsieur,” the stout lady said to one of the boating men.
She wished to be friendly because they had given up their place.
The girl raised her eyes and looked at the oarsman with emotion and Monsieur Dufour spoke for the first time.
The girl was looking at them sideways now, and the young fellow with the yellow hair, who had swallowed some wine the wrong way, was coughing violently and bespattering Madame Dufour's cherry-colored silk dress.
Meanwhile it had grown unbearably hot, the sparkling river looked like a blaze of fire and the fumes of the wine were getting into their heads.
Monsieur Dufour, who had a violent hiccough, had unbuttoned his waistcoat and the top button of his trousers, while his wife, who felt choking, was gradually unfastening her dress.
The apprentice was shaking his yellow wig in a happy frame of mind, and kept helping himself to wine, and the old grandmother, feeling the effects of the wine, was very stiff and dignified.
As for the girl, one noticed only a peculiar brightness in her eyes, while the brown cheeks became more rosy.
The coffee finished, they suggested singing, and each of them sang or repeated a couplet, which the others applauded frantically.
Then they got up with some difficulty, and while the two women, who were rather dizzy, were trying to get a breath of air, the two men, who were altogether drunk, were attempting gymnastics.
Heavy, limp and with scarlet faces they hung or, awkwardly to the iron rings, without being able to raise themselves.
Meanwhile the two boating men had got their boats into the water, and they came back and politely asked the ladies whether they would like a row.
“Would you like one, Monsieur Dufour?” his wife exclaimed.
“Please come!” He merely gave her a drunken nod, without understanding what she said.
Then one of the rowers came up with two fishing rods in his hands, and the hope of catching a gudgeon, that great vision of the Parisian shopkeeper, made Dufour's dull eyes gleam, and he politely allowed them to do whatever they liked, while he sat in the shade under the bridge, with his feet dangling over the river, by the side of the young man with the yellow hair, who was sleeping soundly.
The other boat went more slowly, for the rower was looking at his companion so intently that he thought of nothing else, and his emotion seemed to paralyze his strength, while the girl, who was sitting in the bow, gave herself up to the enjoyment of being on the water.
She felt a disinclination to think, a lassitude in her limbs and a total enervation, as if she were intoxicated, and her face was flushed and her breathing quickened.
The effects of the wine, which were increased by the extreme heat, made all the trees on the bank seem to bow as she passed.
A vague wish for enjoyment and a fermentation of her blood seemed to pervade her whole body, which was excited by the heat of the day, and she was also disturbed at this tete-a-tete on the water, in a place which seemed depopulated by the heat, with this young man who thought her pretty, whose ardent looks seemed to caress her skin and were as penetrating and pervading as the sun's rays.
Their inability to speak increased their emotion, and they looked about them.
“Henriette,” she said.
The other boat had passed them and seemed to be waiting for them, and the rower called out: “We will meet you in the wood; we are going as far as Robinson's, because Madame Dufour is thirsty.” Then he bent over his oars again and rowed off so quickly that he was soon out of sight.
Meanwhile a continual roar, which they had heard for some time, came nearer, and the river itself seemed to shiver, as if the dull noise were rising from its depths.
It was the noise of the weir which cut the river in two at the island, and he was explaining it to her, when, above the noise of the waterfall, they heard the song of a bird, which seemed a long way off.
“Listen!” he said; “the nightingales are singing during the day, so the female birds must be sitting.” A nightingale!
She had never heard one before, and the idea of listening to one roused visions of poetic tenderness in her heart.
That is to say, the invisible witness of her love trysts which Juliet invoked on her balcony; that celestial music which it attuned to human kisses, that eternal inspirer of all those languorous romances which open an ideal sky to all the poor little tender hearts of sensitive girls!
She was going to hear a nightingale.
“We must not make a noise,” her companion said, “and then we can go into the wood, and sit down close beside it.” The boat seemed to glide.
They saw the trees on the island, the banks of which were so low that they could look into the depths of the thickets.
They stopped, he made the boat fast, Henriette took hold of Henri's arm, and they went beneath the trees.
“Stoop,” he said, so she stooped down, and they went into an inextricable thicket of creepers, leaves and reed grass, which formed an undiscoverable retreat, and which the young man laughingly called “his private room.” Just above their heads, perched in one of the trees which hid them, the bird was still singing.
He uttered trills and roulades, and then loud, vibrating notes that filled the air and seemed to lose themselves on the horizon, across the level country, through that burning silence which weighed upon the whole landscape.
They did not speak for fear of frightening it away.
They were sitting close together, and, slowly, Henri's arm stole round the girl's waist and squeezed it gently.
She took that daring hand without any anger, and kept removing it whenever he put it round her; without, however, feeling at all embarrassed by this caress, just as if it had been something quite natural, which she was resisting just as naturally.
She was listening to the bird in ecstasy.
She felt an infinite longing for happiness, for some sudden demonstration of tenderness, for the revelation of superhuman poetry, and she felt such a softening at her heart, and relaxation of her nerves, that she began to cry, without knowing why.
The young man was now straining her close to him, yet she did not remove his arm; she did not think of it.
Suddenly the nightingale stopped, and a voice called out in the distance: “Henriette!” “Do not reply,” he said in a low voice; “you will drive the bird away.” But she had no idea of doing so, and they remained in the same position for some time.
Madame Dufour had sat down somewhere or other, for from time to time they heard the stout lady break out into little bursts of laughter.
The girl was still crying; she was filled with strange sensations.
Henri's head was on her shoulder, and suddenly he kissed her on the lips.
She was surprised and angry, and, to avoid him, she stood up.
The blue sky appeared to them clouded and the ardent sun darkened; and they felt the solitude and the silence.
Madame Dufour took his arm, and they returned to the boats, and Henri, who was ahead, walked in silence beside the young girl.
Monsieur Dufour, who was now sober, was waiting for them very impatiently, while the young man with the yellow hair was having a mouthful of something to eat before leaving the inn.
The carriage was waiting in the yard, and the grandmother, who had already got in, was very frightened at the thought of being overtaken by night before they reached Paris, as the outskirts were not safe.
Two months later, as Henri was going along the Rue des Martyrs, he saw Dufour, Ironmonger, over a door, and so he went in, and saw the stout lady sitting at the counter.
They recognized each other immediately, and after an interchange of polite greetings, he asked after them all.
“And how is Mademoiselle Henriette?” he inquired specially.
“Very well, thank you; she is married.” “Ah!” He felt a certain emotion, but said: “Whom did she marry?” “That young man who accompanied us, you know; he has joined us in business.” “I remember him perfectly.” He was going out, feeling very unhappy, though scarcely knowing why, when madame called him back.
“He is very well, thank you.” “Please give him our compliments, and beg him to come and call, when he is in the neighborhood.” She then added: “Tell him it will give me great pleasure.” “I will be sure to do so.
Adieu!” “Do not say that; come again very soon.” The next year, one very hot Sunday, all the details of that adventure, which Henri had never forgotten, suddenly came back to him so clearly that he returned alone to their room in the wood, and was overwhelmed with astonishment when he went in.
She was sitting on the grass, looking very sad, while by her side, still in his shirt sleeves, the young man with the yellow hair was sleeping soundly, like some animal.
She grew so pale when she saw Henri that at first he thought she was going to faint; then, however, they began to talk quite naturally.
But when he told her that he was very fond of that spot, and went there frequently on Sundays to indulge in memories, she looked into his eyes for a long time.
On the front seat are two small hampers of white satin filled with violets, and on the bearskin by which their knees are covered there is a mass of roses, mimosas, pinks, daisies, tuberoses and orange blossoms, interwoven with silk ribbons; the two frail bodies seem buried under this beautiful perfumed bed, which hides everything but the shoulders and arms and a little of the dainty waists.
The coachman's whip is wound with a garland of anemones, the horses' traces are dotted with carnations, the spokes of the wheels are clothed in mignonette, and where the lanterns ought to be are two enormous round bouquets which look as though they were the eyes of this strange, rolling, flower-bedecked creature.
The landau drives rapidly along the road, through the Rue d'Antibes, preceded, followed, accompanied, by a crowd of other carriages covered with flowers, full of women almost hidden by a sea of violets.
It is the flower carnival at Cannes.
The carriage reaches the Boulevard de la Fonciere, where the battle is waged.
All along the immense avenue a double row of flower-bedecked vehicles are going and coming like an endless ribbon.
They pass through the air like balls, striking fresh faces, bouncing and falling into the dust, where an army of youngsters pick them up.
A thick crowd is standing on the sidewalks looking on and held in check by the mounted police, who pass brutally along pushing back the curious pedestrians as though to prevent the common people from mingling with the rich.
In the carriages, people call to each other, recognize each other and bombard each other with roses.
A chariot full of pretty women, dressed in red, like devils, attracts the eyes of all.
A gentleman, who looks like the portraits of Henry IV., is throwing an immense bouquet which is held back by an elastic.
Fearing the shock, the women hide their eyes and the men lower their heads, but the graceful, rapid and obedient missile describes a curve and returns to its master, who immediately throws it at some new face.
The two young women begin to throw their stock of flowers by handfuls, and receive a perfect hail of bouquets; then, after an hour of warfare, a little tired, they tell the coachman to drive along the road which follows the seashore.
The sun disappears behind Esterel, outlining the dark, rugged mountain against the sunset sky.
The clear blue sea, as calm as a mill-pond, stretches out as far as the horizon, where it blends with the sky; and the fleet, anchored in the middle of the bay, looks like a herd of enormous beasts, motionless on the water, apocalyptic animals, armored and hump-backed, their frail masts looking like feathers, and with eyes which light up when evening approaches.
At last one of them says: “How delightful the evenings are!
How good everything seems!
But there is always something lacking.” “What is lacking?
I feel perfectly happy.
I don't need anything else.” “Yes, you do.
You are not thinking of it.
No matter how contented we may be, physically, we always long for something more—for the heart.” The other asked with a smile: “A little love?” “Yes.” They stopped talking, their eyes fastened on the distant horizon, then the one called Marguerite murmured: “Life without that seems to me unbearable.
Do you think, for instance, that it would be pleasant to be loved by—by—” She was thinking by whom she might possibly be loved, glancing across the wide landscape.
Her eyes, after traveling around the horizon, fell on the two bright buttons which were shining on the back of the coachman's livery, and she continued, laughing: “by my coachman?” Madame Margot barely smiled, and said in a low tone of voice: “I assure you that it is very amusing to be loved by a servant.
It has happened to me two or three times.
They roll their eyes in such a funny manner—it's enough to make you die laughing!
Naturally, the more in love they are, the more severe one must be with them, and then, some day, for some reason, you dismiss them, because, if anyone should notice it, you would appear so ridiculous.” Madame Simone was listening, staring straight ahead of her, then she remarked: “No, I'm afraid that my footman's heart would not satisfy me.
Tell me how you noticed that they loved you.” “I noticed it the same way that I do with other men—when they get stupid.” “The others don't seem stupid to me, when they love me.” “They are idiots, my dear, unable to talk, to answer, to understand anything.” “But how did you feel when you were loved by a servant?
Were you—moved—flattered?” “Moved? no, flattered—yes a little.
One is always flattered to be loved by a man, no matter who he may be.” “Oh, Margot!” “Yes, indeed, my dear!
For instance, I will tell you of a peculiar incident which happened to me.
You will see how curious and complex our emotions are, in such cases.
“About four years ago I happened to be without a maid.
I had tried five or six, one right after the other, and I was about ready to give up in despair, when I saw an advertisement in a newspaper of a young girl knowing how to cook, embroider, dress hair, who was looking for a position and who could furnish the best of references.
Besides all these accomplishments, she could speak English.
“I wrote to the given address, and the next day the person in question presented herself.
She had beautiful black eyes and a charming complexion; she pleased me immediately.
I asked for her certificates; she gave me one in English, for she came, as she said, from Lady Rymwell's, where she had been for ten years.
“The certificate showed that the young girl had left of her own free will, in order to return to France, and the only thing which they had had to find fault in her during her long period of service was a little French coquettishness.
“This prudish English phrase even made me smile, and I immediately engaged this maid.
“At the end of a month I would have been helpless without her.
She was a treasure, a pearl, a phenomenon.
“She could dress my hair with infinite taste; she could trim a hat better than most milliners, and she could even make my dresses.
“I was astonished at her accomplishments.
“She dressed me rapidly and with a surprisingly light touch.
I never felt her fingers on my skin, and nothing is so disagreeable to me as contact with a servant's hand.
I soon became excessively lazy; it was so pleasant to be dressed from head to foot, and from lingerie to gloves, by this tall, timid girl, always blushing a little, and never saying a word.
After my bath she would rub and massage me while I dozed a little on my couch; I almost considered her more of a friend than a servant.
“One morning the janitor asked, mysteriously, to speak to me.
I was surprised, and told him to come in.
He was a good, faithful man, an old soldier, one of my husband's former orderlies.
“He seemed to be embarrassed by what he had to say to me.
At last he managed to mumble: “'Madame, the superintendent of police is downstairs.' “I asked quickly: “'What does he wish?' “'He wishes to search the house.' “Of course the police are useful, but I hate them.
I do not think that it is a noble profession.
I answered, angered and hurt: “'Why this search?
He shall not come in.' “The janitor continued: “'He says that there is a criminal hidden in the house.' “This time I was frightened and I told him to bring the inspector to me, so that I might get some explanation.
He was a man with good manners and decorated with the Legion of Honor.
He begged my pardon for disturbing me, and then informed me that I had, among my domestics, a convict.
“I was shocked; and I answered that I could guarantee every servant in the house, and I began to enumerate them.
“'The janitor, Pierre Courtin, an old soldier.' “'It's not he.' “'A stable-boy, son of farmers whom I know, and a groom whom you have just seen.' “'It's not he.' “'Then, monsieur, you see that you must be mistaken.' “'Excuse me, madame, but I am positive that I am not making a mistake.
“As the conviction of a notable criminal is at stake, would you be so kind as to send for all your servants?” “At first I refused, but I finally gave in, and sent downstairs for everybody, men and women.
“The inspector glanced at them and then declared: “'This isn't all.' “'Excuse me, monsieur, there is no one left but my maid, a young girl whom you could not possibly mistake for a convict.' “He asked: “'May I also see her?' “'Certainly.' “I rang for Rose, who immediately appeared.
She had hardly entered the room, when the inspector made a motion, and two men whom I had not seen, hidden behind the door, sprang forward, seized her and tied her hands behind her back.
The inspector stopped me: “'This girl, madame, is a man whose name is Jean Nicolas Lecapet, condemned to death in 1879 for assaulting a woman and injuring her so that death resulted.
His sentence was commuted to imprisonment for life.
We have been looking for him ever since.' “I was terrified, bewildered.
The commissioner continued, laughing: “'I can prove it to you.
His right arm is tattooed.' “'The sleeve was rolled up.
The inspector added, with bad taste: “'You can trust us for the other proofs.' “And they led my maid away!
“Well, would you believe me, the thing that moved me most was not anger at having thus been played upon, deceived and made ridiculous, it was not the shame of having thus been dressed and undressed, handled and touched by this man—but a deep humiliation—a woman's humiliation.
Do you understand?” “I am afraid I don't.” “Just think—this man had been condemned for—for assaulting a woman.
I thought of the one whom he had assaulted—and—and I felt humiliated—There!
Do you understand now?” Madame Margot did not answer.
She was looking straight ahead, her eyes fastened on the two shining buttons of the livery, with that sphinx-like smile which women sometimes have.
ROSALIE PRUDENT There was a real mystery in this affair which neither the jury, nor the president, nor the public prosecutor himself could understand.
The girl Prudent (Rosalie), servant at the Varambots', of Nantes, having become enceinte without the knowledge of her masters, had, during the night, killed and buried her child in the garden.
It was the usual story of the infanticides committed by servant girls.
But there was one inexplicable circumstance about this one.
When the police searched the girl Prudent's room they discovered a complete infant's outfit, made by Rosalie herself, who had spent her nights for the last three months in cutting and sewing it.
It came out, moreover, that the sage-femme of the district, informed by Rosalie of her condition, had given her all necessary instructions and counsel in case the event should happen at a time when it might not be possible to get help.
She had also procured a place at Poissy for the girl Prudent, who foresaw that her present employers would discharge her, for the Varambot couple did not trifle with morality.
There were present at the trial both the man and the woman, a middle- class pair from the provinces, living on their income.
They were so exasperated against this girl, who had sullied their house, that they would have liked to see her guillotined on the spot without a trial.
The spiteful depositions they made against her became accusations in their mouths.
The defendant, a large, handsome girl of Lower Normandy, well educated for her station in life, wept continuously and would not answer to anything.
The court and the spectators were forced to the opinion that she had committed this barbarous act in a moment of despair and madness, since there was every indication that she had expected to keep and bring up her child.
The president tried for the last time to make her speak, to get some confession, and, having urged her with much gentleness, he finally made her understand that all these men gathered here to pass judgment upon her were not anxious for her death and might even have pity on her.
Until then she had obstinately refused to give his name.
But she replied suddenly, looking at her masters who had so cruelly calumniated her: “It is Monsieur Joseph, Monsieur Varambot's nephew.” The couple started in their seats and cried with one voice—“That's not true!
This is infamous!” The president had them silenced and continued, “Go on, please, and tell us how it all happened.” Then she suddenly began to talk freely, relieving her pent-up heart, that poor, solitary, crushed heart—laying bare her sorrow, her whole sorrow, before those severe men whom she had until now taken for enemies and inflexible judges.
“Yes, it was Monsieur Joseph Varambot, when he came on leave last year.” “What does Mr.
Joseph Varambot do?” “He is a non-commissioned officer in the artillery, monsieur.
And I let myself be taken in, monsieur.
He kept saying to me that I was a handsome girl, that I was good company, that I just suited him—and I, I liked him well enough.
I am alone in the world, monsieur.
I have no one to talk to—no one to tell my troubles to.
And then he asked me to go with him to the river one evening, so that we might talk without disturbing any one.
I went—I don't know—I don't know how it happened.
I could have followed him to the ends of the world.
I did not know that I was enceinte.
I did not know it until the month after—” She began to cry so bitterly that they had to give her time to collect herself.
Then the president resumed with the tone of a priest at the confessional: “Come, now, go on.” She began to talk again: “When I realized my condition I went to see Madame Boudin, who is there to tell you, and I asked her how it would be, in case it should come if she were not there.
It came sooner than I expected.
Monsieur and Madame Varambot were already asleep, so I went up, not without difficulty, dragging myself up by the banister, and I lay down on the bare floor.
It lasted perhaps one hour, or two, or three; I don't know, I had such pain; and then I pushed him out with all my strength.
I fell on my knees, and then toppled over backward on the floor; and it griped me again, perhaps one hour, perhaps two.
Is it possible, tell me, two children, and I who get only twenty francs a month?
Say, is it possible?
I could not keep them both; and then I threw myself down, and I lay there, rolling over and over and crying until I saw the daylight come into the window.
Then I took them under my arms and went down the stairs out in the vegetable garden.
I took the gardener's spade and I buried them under the earth, digging as deep a hole as I could, one here and the other one there, not together, so that they might not talk of their mother if these little dead bodies can talk.
They sent for the doctor and he understood it all.
Do what you like with me; I'm ready.” Half of the jury were blowing their noses violently to keep from crying.
The women in the courtroom were sobbing.
The president asked her: “Where did you bury the other one?” “The one that you have?” she asked.
“Why, this one—this one was in the artichokes.” “Oh, then the other one is among the strawberries, by the well.” And she began to sob so piteously that no one could hear her unmoved.
The girl Rosalie Prudent was acquitted.
REGRET Monsieur Saval, who was called in Mantes “Father Saval,” had just risen from bed.
He walked from the fireplace to the window, and from the window to the fireplace.
He is alone, an old bachelor, with nobody about him.
He pondered over his life, so barren, so empty.
He recalled former days, the days of his childhood, the home, the house of his parents; his college days, his follies; the time he studied law in Paris, his father's illness, his death.
He then returned to live with his mother.
They lived together very quietly, and desired nothing more.
He will disappear, and that will be the end.
What a frightful thing!
Yes, people will go on amusing themselves, and he will no longer exist!
Is it not strange that people can laugh, amuse themselves, be joyful under that eternal certainty of death?
If this death were only probable, one could then have hope; but no, it is inevitable, as inevitable as that night follows the day.
If he had done something; if he had had adventures, great pleasures, success, satisfaction of some kind or another.
He might have done so, for he possessed considerable means.
Had he lacked an opportunity?
But one can create opportunities.
He was indifferent; that was all.
Indifference had been his greatest drawback, his defect, his vice.
How many men wreck their lives through indifference!
It is so difficult for some natures to get out of bed, to move about, to take long walks, to speak, to study any question.
No woman had reposed on his bosom, in a complete abandon of love.
He knew nothing of the delicious anguish of expectation, the divine vibration of a hand in yours, of the ecstasy of triumphant passion.
What superhuman happiness must overflow your heart, when lips encounter lips for the first time, when the grasp of four arms makes one being of you, a being unutterably happy, two beings infatuated with one another.
Saval was sitting before the fire, his feet on the fender, in his dressing gown.
Assuredly his life had been spoiled, completely spoiled.
He had loved secretly, sadly, and indifferently, in a manner characteristic of him in everything.
Yes, he had loved his old friend, Madame Sandres, the wife of his old companion, Sandres.
Unquestionably, he would have asked her hand!
How he had loved her, nevertheless, without respite, since the first day he set eyes on her!
He recalled his emotion every time he saw her, his grief on leaving her, the many nights that he could not sleep, because he was thinking of her.
On rising in the morning he was somewhat more rational than on the previous evening.
How pretty she was formerly, so dainty, with fair curly hair, and always laughing.
Had she not guessed anything, seen anything, comprehended anything?
If he had spoken, what would she have answered?
And Saval asked himself a thousand other things.
He reviewed his whole life, seeking to recall a multitude of details.
He recalled all the long evenings spent at the house of Sandres, when the latter's wife was young, and so charming.
He recalled many things that she had said to him, the intonations of her voice, the little significant smiles that meant so much.
He recalled their walks, the three of them together, along the banks of the Seine, their luncheon on the grass on Sundays, for Sandres was employed at the sub-prefecture.
And all at once the distinct recollection came to him of an afternoon spent with her in a little wood on the banks of the river.
They had set out in the morning, carrying their provisions in baskets.
It was a bright spring morning, one of those days which intoxicate one.
Everything smells fresh, everything seems happy.
They had luncheon on the grass, under the willow trees, quite close to the water, which glittered in the sun's rays.
The air was balmy, charged with the odors of fresh vegetation; they drank it in with delight.
How pleasant everything was on that day!
She leaned tenderly on his arm.
She laughed and said to him: “I am intoxicated, my friend, I am quite intoxicated.” He looked at her, his heart going pit-a-pat.
He felt himself grow pale, fearful that he might have looked too boldly at her, and that the trembling of his hand had revealed his passion.
She had made a wreath of wild flowers and water-lilies, and she asked him: “Do I look pretty like that?” As he did not answer—for he could find nothing to say, he would have liked to go down on his knees—she burst out laughing, a sort of annoyed, displeased laugh, as she said: “Great goose, what ails you?
You might at least say something.” He felt like crying, but could not even yet find a word to say.
You might at least say something!” And he recalled how tenderly she had leaned on his arm.
And in passing under a shady tree he had felt her ear brushing his cheek, and he had moved his head abruptly, lest she should suppose he was too familiar.
When he had said to her: “Is it not time to return?” she darted a singular look at him.
“Certainly,” she said, “certainly,” regarding him at the same time in a curious manner.
He had not thought of it at the time, but now the whole thing appeared to him quite plain.
If you are tired let us go back.” And he had answered: “I am not fatigued; but Sandres may be awake now.” And she had said: “If you are afraid of my husband's being awake, that is another thing.
Let us return.” On their way back she remained silent, and leaned no longer on his arm.
At that time it had never occurred to him, to ask himself “why.” Now he seemed to apprehend something that he had not then understood.
Saval felt himself blush, and he got up at a bound, as if he were thirty years younger and had heard Madame Sandres say, “I love you.” Was it possible?
That idea which had just entered his mind tortured him.
Was it possible that he had not seen, had not guessed?
Oh! if that were true, if he had let this opportunity of happiness pass without taking advantage of it!
The Sandres' house was situated on the other side of the street, almost directly opposite his own.
Has some accident happened to you?” “No, my girl,” he replied; “but go and tell your mistress that I want to speak to her at once.” “The fact is madame is preserving pears for the winter, and she is in the preserving room.
She is not dressed, you understand.” “Yes, but go and tell her that I wish to see her on a very important matter.” The little servant went away, and Saval began to walk, with long, nervous strides, up and down the drawing-room.
He did not feel in the least embarrassed, however.
Oh! he was merely going to ask her something, as he would have asked her about some cooking recipe.
The door opened and madame appeared.
She was now a large woman, fat and round, with full cheeks and a sonorous laugh.
She asked anxiously: “What is the matter with you, my friend?
You are not ill, are you?” “No, my dear friend; but I wish to ask you one thing, which to me is of the first importance, something which is torturing my heart, and I want you to promise that you will answer me frankly.” She laughed, “I am always frank.
Can you have any doubt of this?” She responded, laughing, with something of her former tone of voice.
He stammered out: “You knew it?
She asked: “Then?” He answered: “Then—what did you think?
What—what—what would you have answered?” She broke into a peal of laughter.
Why, you did not ask me anything.
It was not for me to declare myself!” He then advanced a step toward her.
You remember the day when Sandres went to sleep on the grass after lunch . . . when we had walked together as far as the bend of the river, below . . .” He waited, expectantly.
She had ceased to laugh, and looked at him, straight in the eyes.
“Yes, certainly, I remember it.” He answered, trembling all over: “Well—that day—if I had been—if I had been—venturesome—what would you have done?” She began to laugh as only a happy woman can laugh, who has nothing to regret, and responded frankly, in a clear voice tinged with irony: “I would have yielded, my friend.” She then turned on her heels and went back to her jam-making.
Saval rushed into the street, cast down, as though he had met with some disaster.
He walked with giant strides through the rain, straight on, until he reached the river bank, without thinking where he was going.
He then turned to the right and followed the river.
He walked a long time, as if urged on by some instinct.
His clothes were running with water, his hat was out of shape, as soft as a rag, and dripping like a roof.
He walked on, straight in front of him.
At last, he came to the place where they had lunched on that day so long ago, the recollection of which tortured his heart.
He sat down under the leafless trees, and wept.
A SISTER'S CONFESSION Marguerite de Therelles was dying.
Although she was only fifty-six years old she looked at least seventy-five.
She gasped for breath, her face whiter than the sheets, and had spasms of violent shivering, with her face convulsed and her eyes haggard as though she saw a frightful vision.
A small table close to the dying woman's couch bore, on a white cloth, two lighted candles, for the priest was expected at any moment to administer extreme unction and the last communion.
The apartment wore that melancholy aspect common to death chambers; a look of despairing farewell.
Medicine bottles littered the furniture; linen lay in the corners into which it had been kicked or swept.
The very chairs looked, in their disarray, as if they were terrified and had run in all directions.
Death—terrible Death—was in the room, hidden, awaiting his prey.
This history of the two sisters was an affecting one.
Suzanne, the elder, had once been passionately loved by a young man, whose affection she returned.
They were engaged to be married, and the wedding day was at hand, when Henry de Sampierre suddenly died.
The young girl's despair was terrible, and she took an oath never to marry.
She faithfully kept her vow and adopted widow's weeds for the remainder of her life.
But one morning her sister, her little sister Marguerite, then only twelve years old, threw herself into Suzanne's arms, sobbing: “Sister, I don't want you to be unhappy.
I'll stay with you always—always!” Suzanne kissed her, touched by the child's devotion, though not putting any faith in her promise.
But the little one kept her word, and, despite her parents' remonstrances, despite her elder sister's prayers, never married.
She was remarkably pretty and refused many offers.
They spent their whole life together, without a single day's separation.
They went everywhere together and were inseparable.
But Marguerite was pensive, melancholy, sadder than her sister, as if her sublime sacrifice had undermined her spirits.
She grew older more quickly; her hair was white at thirty; and she was often ill, apparently stricken with some unknown, wasting malady.
She had not spoken for twenty-four hours, except to whisper at daybreak: “Send at once for the priest.” And she had since remained lying on her back, convulsed with agony, her lips moving as if unable to utter the dreadful words that rose in her heart, her face expressive of a terror distressing to witness.
Suzanne, distracted with grief, her brow pressed against the bed, wept bitterly, repeating over and over again the words: “Margot, my poor Margot, my little one!” She had always called her “my little one,” while Marguerite's name for the elder was invariably “sister.” A footstep sounded on the stairs.
An acolyte appeared, followed by the aged priest in his surplice.
As soon as she saw him the dying woman sat up suddenly in bed, opened her lips, stammered a few words and began to scratch the bed-clothes, as if she would have made hole in them.
Father Simon approached, took her hand, kissed her on the forehead and said in a gentle voice: “May God pardon your sins, my daughter.
Now is the moment to confess them—speak!” Then Marguerite, shuddering from head to foot, so that the very bed shook with her nervous movements, gasped: “Sit down, sister, and listen.” The priest stooped toward the prostrate Suzanne, raised her to her feet, placed her in a chair, and, taking a hand of each of the sisters, pronounced: “Lord God!
Shed Thy mercy upon them.” And Marguerite began to speak.
The words issued from her lips one by one—hoarse, jerky, tremulous.
Oh, if only you knew how I have dreaded this moment all my life!” Suzanne faltered through her tears: “But what have I to pardon, little one?
You have given me everything, sacrificed all to me.
You are an angel.” But Marguerite interrupted her: “Be silent, be silent!
Let me tell all, to the very end, without interruption.
You remember—you remember—Henry—” Suzanne trembled and looked at her sister.
The younger one went on: “In order to understand you must hear everything.
I was twelve years old—only twelve—you remember, don't you?
You remember how everybody spoilt me?
The first time he came he had on his riding boots; he dismounted, saying that he had a message for father.
You remember, don't you?
When I saw him I was struck with admiration.
I thought him so handsome, and I stayed in a corner of the drawing-room all the time he was talking.
Children are strange—and terrible.
I was large for my age and much more precocious than—any one suspected.
I often whispered to myself: “'Henry-Henry de Sampierre!' “Then I was told that he was going to marry you.
Oh, sister, a terrible blow—terrible!
I wept all through three sleepless nights.
“He came every afternoon after lunch.
I could make them still, if necessary.
He would swallow them at one mouthful and wash them down with a glass of wine, saying: 'Delicious!' Do you remember the way he said it?
It was only a fortnight distant.
I shall never love any one half so much.' But one evening, ten days before the wedding, you went for a stroll with him in the moonlight before the house—and yonder—under the pine tree, the big pine tree—he kissed you—kissed you—and held you in his arms so long—so long!
It was probably the first time.
I was there in the shrubbery.
I could not bear it.' And all at once I began to hate him intensely.
I had seen the gardener prepare pellets for killing stray dogs.
“I stole a small medicine bottle from mother's room.
It was a glistening powder.
The next day, when you had made your little cakes; I opened them with a knife and inserted the glass.
It was afterward, later—always—the most terrible—listen.
And on my deathbed I will tell her all.' And now I have told.
It is terrible—oh!—sister— “I have always thought, morning and evening, day and night: 'I shall have to tell her some day!' I waited.
Supposing I should see him again, by and by, when I am dead!
I cannot meet him without your forgiveness.
I cannot die without it.” She was silent and lay back, gasping for breath, still plucking at the sheets with her fingers.
She was thinking of him whom she had loved so long.
What a life of happiness they might have had together!
She had retained the memory of it in her soul.
And, after that, nothing, nothing more throughout her whole existence!
The priest rose suddenly and in a firm, compelling voice said: “Mademoiselle Suzanne, your sister is dying!” Then Suzanne, raising her tear-stained face, put her arms round her sister, and kissing her fervently, exclaimed: “I forgive you, I forgive you, little one!” COCO Throughout the whole countryside the Lucas farn, was known as “the Manor.” No one knew why.
The peasants doubtless attached to this word, “Manor,” a meaning of wealth and of splendor, for this farm was undoubtedly the largest, richest and the best managed in the whole neighborhood.
The immense court, surrounded by five rows of magnificent trees, which sheltered the delicate apple trees from the harsh wind of the plain, inclosed in its confines long brick buildings used for storing fodder and grain, beautiful stables built of hard stone and made to accommodate thirty horses, and a red brick residence which looked like a little chateau.
Thanks for the good care taken, the manure heaps were as little offensive as such things can be; the watch-dogs lived in kennels, and countless poultry paraded through the tall grass.
Every day, at noon, fifteen persons, masters, farmhands and the women folks, seated themselves around the long kitchen table where the soup was brought in steaming in a large, blue-flowered bowl.
Maitre Lucas, a tall man who was getting stout, would go round three times a day, overseeing everything and thinking of everything.
A very old white horse, which the mistress wished to keep until its natural death, because she had brought it up and had always used it, and also because it recalled many happy memories, was housed, through sheer kindness of heart, at the end of the stable.
A young scamp about fifteen years old, Isidore Duval by name, and called, for convenience, Zidore, took care of this pensioner, gave him his measure of oats and fodder in winter, and in summer was supposed to change his pasturing place four times a day, so that he might have plenty of fresh grass.
The animal, almost crippled, lifted with difficulty his legs, large at the knees and swollen above the hoofs.
His coat, which was no longer curried, looked like white hair, and his long eyelashes gave to his eyes a sad expression.
When Zidore took the animal to pasture, he had to pull on the rope with all his might, because it walked so slowly; and the youth, bent over and out of breath, would swear at it, exasperated at having to care for this old nag.
The farmhands, noticing the young rascal's anger against Coco, were amused and would continually talk of the horse to Zidore, in order to exasperate him.
His comrades would make sport with him.
He seemed only half-witted, and stuttered as though ideas were unable to form in his thick, brute-like mind.
For a long time he had been unable to understand why Coco should be kept, indignant at seeing things wasted on this useless beast.
Since the horse could no longer work, it seemed to him unjust that he should be fed; he revolted at the idea of wasting oats, oats which were so expensive, on this paralyzed old plug.
And often, in spite of the orders of Maitre Lucas, he would economize on the nag's food, only giving him half measure.
Hatred grew in his confused, childlike mind, the hatred of a stingy, mean, fierce, brutal and cowardly peasant.
It was some distance away.
The rascal, angrier every morning, would start, with his dragging step, across the wheat fields.
The men working in the fields would shout to him, jokingly: “Hey, Zidore, remember me to Coco.” He would not answer; but on the way he would break off a switch, and, as soon as he had moved the old horse, he would let it begin grazing; then, treacherously sneaking up behind it, he would slash its legs.
The animal would try to escape, to kick, to get away from the blows, and run around in a circle about its rope, as though it had been inclosed in a circus ring.
And the boy would slash away furiously, running along behind, his teeth clenched in anger.
Then he would go away slowly, without turning round, while the horse watched him disappear, his ribs sticking out, panting as a result of his unusual exertions.
He would sit down on an embankment about ten feet away and would stay there about half an hour, from time to time throwing a sharp stone at the old horse, which remained standing tied before his enemy, watching him continually and not daring to eat before he was gone.
This one thought persisted in the mind of the young scamp: “Why feed this horse, which is no longer good for anything?” It seemed to him that this old nag was stealing the food of the others, the goods of man and God, that he was even robbing him, Zidore, who was working.
The hungry animal was growing thinner, and starving.
Too feeble to break his bonds, he would stretch his head out toward the tall, green, tempting grass, so near that he could smell, and yet so far that he could not touch it.
He was tired of walking so far for that old skeleton.
He came, however, in order to enjoy his vengeance.
The beast watched him anxiously.
He even pretended to change his place, but he sank the stake in exactly the same hole, and went away overjoyed with his invention.
The horse, seeing him leave, neighed to call him back; but the rascal began to run, leaving him alone, entirely alone in his field, well tied down and without a blade of grass within reach.
Starving, he tried to reach the grass which he could touch with the end of his nose.
He got on his knees, stretching out his neck and his long, drooling lips.
The old animal spent the whole day in useless, terrible efforts.
The sight of all that green food, which stretched out on all sides of him, served to increase the gnawing pangs of hunger.
He wandered through the woods in search of nests.
The next day he appeared upon the scene again.
Coco, exhausted, had lain down.
When he saw the boy, he got up, expecting at last to have his place changed.
He came nearer, looked at the animal, threw at his head a clump of earth which flattened out against the white hair, and he started off again, whistling.
The horse remained standing as long as he could see him; then, knowing that his attempts to reach the near-by grass would be hopeless, he once more lay down on his side and closed his eyes.
The following day Zidore did not come.
When he did come at last, he found Coco still stretched out; he saw that he was dead.
Then he remained standing, looking at him, pleased with what he had done, surprised that it should already be all over.
He touched him with his foot, lifted one of his legs and then let it drop, sat on him and remained there, his eyes fixed on the grass, thinking of nothing.
He returned to the farm, but did not mention the accident, because he wished to wander about at the hours when he used to change the horse's pasture.
At his approach some crows flew away.
Countless flies were walking over the body and were buzzing around it.
When he returned home, he announced the event.
The animal was so old that nobody was surprised.
And the grass grew thick, green and vigorous, fed by the poor body.
DEAD WOMAN'S SECRET The woman had died without pain, quietly, as a woman should whose life had been blameless.
Now she was resting in her bed, lying on her back, her eyes closed, her features calm, her long white hair carefully arranged as though she had done it up ten minutes before dying.
The whole pale countenance of the dead woman was so collected, so calm, so resigned that one could feel what a sweet soul had lived in that body, what a quiet existence this old soul had led, how easy and pure the death of this parent had been.
Kneeling beside the bed, her son, a magistrate with inflexible principles, and her daughter, Marguerite, known as Sister Eulalie, were weeping as though their hearts would break.
She had, from childhood up, armed them with a strict moral code, teaching them religion, without weakness, and duty, without compromise.
She, the girl, influenced by the virtue which had bathed her in this austere family, had become the bride of the Church through her loathing for man.
The nun was wildly-kissing the dead woman's hand, an ivory hand as white as the large crucifix lying across the bed.
On the other side of the long body the other hand seemed still to be holding the sheet in the death grasp; and the sheet had preserved the little creases as a memory of those last movements which precede eternal immobility.
A few light taps on the door caused the two sobbing heads to look up, and the priest, who had just come from dinner, returned.
He was red and out of breath from his interrupted digestion, for he had made himself a strong mixture of coffee and brandy in order to combat the fatigue of the last few nights and of the wake which was beginning.
He crossed himself and approaching with his professional gesture: “Well, my poor children!
I have come to help you pass these last sad hours.” But Sister Eulalie suddenly arose.
This is our last chance to see her, and we wish to be together, all three of us, as we—we—used to be when we were small and our poor mo—mother——” Grief and tears stopped her; she could not continue.
Once more serene, the priest bowed, thinking of his bed.
“As you wish, my children.” He kneeled, crossed himself, prayed, arose and went out quietly, murmuring: “She was a saint!” They remained alone, the dead woman and her children.
The ticking of the clock, hidden in the shadow, could be heard distinctly, and through the open window drifted in the sweet smell of hay and of woods, together with the soft moonlight.
No other noise could be heard over the land except the occasional croaking of the frog or the chirping of some belated insect.
An infinite peace, a divine melancholy, a silent serenity surrounded this dead woman, seemed to be breathed out from her and to appease nature itself.
Then the judge, still kneeling, his head buried in the bed clothes, cried in a voice altered by grief and deadened by the sheets and blankets: “Mamma, mamma, mamma!” And his sister, frantically striking her forehead against the woodwork, convulsed, twitching and trembling as in an epileptic fit, moaned: “Jesus, Jesus, mamma, Jesus!” And both of them, shaken by a storm of grief, gasped and choked.
And the memories, those distant memories, yesterday so dear, to-day so torturing, came to their minds with all the little forgotten details, those little intimate familiar details which bring back to life the one who has left.
They recalled to each other circumstances, words, smiles, intonations of the mother who was no longer to speak to them.
They remembered things which she had said, and a little motion of the hand, like beating time, which she often used when emphasizing something important.
They measured the depth of their grief, and thus they discovered how lonely they would find themselves.
It was their prop, their guide, their whole youth, all the best part of their lives which was disappearing.
It was their bond with life, their mother, their mamma, the connecting link with their forefathers which they would thenceforth miss.
They now became solitary, lonely beings; they could no longer look back.
The nun said to her brother: “You remember how mamma used always to read her old letters; they are all there in that drawer.
It would be like a road to the cross, like making the acquaintance of her mother, of our grandparents, whom we never knew, but whose letters are there and of whom she so often spoke, do you remember?” Out of the drawer they took about ten little packages of yellow paper, tied with care and arranged one beside the other.
It was one of those old-fashioned letters which one finds in old family desk drawers, those epistles which smell of another century.
The first one started: “My dear,” another one: “My beautiful little girl,” others: “My dear child,” or: “My dear (laughter).” And suddenly the nun began to read aloud, to read over to the dead woman her whole history, all her tender memories.
The judge, resting his elbow on the bed, was listening with his eyes fastened on his mother.
The motionless body seemed happy.
Sister Eulalie, interrupting herself, said suddenly: “These ought to be put in the grave with her; they ought to be used as a shroud and she ought to be buried in it.” She took another package, on which no name was written.
Since yesterday I have been suffering the tortures of the damned, haunted by our memory.
I have kept in my mouth the taste of your kisses—” The judge had straightened himself up.
He snatched the letter from her and looked for the signature.
Therefore this was not from him.
The son then quickly rummaged through the package of letters, took one out and read: “I can no longer live without your caresses.” Standing erect, severe as when sitting on the bench, he looked unmoved at the dead woman.
The nun, straight as a statue, tears trembling in the corners of her eyes, was watching her brother, waiting.
When he turned around again Sister Eulalie, her eyes dry now, was still standing near the bed, her head bent down.
Then he closed the curtains of the bed.
When daylight made the candles on the table turn pale the son slowly left his armchair, and without looking again at the mother upon whom he had passed sentence, severing the tie that united her to son and daughter, he said slowly: “Let us now retire, sister.” A HUMBLE DRAMA Meetings that are unexpected constitute the charm of traveling.
Who has not experienced the joy of suddenly coming across a Parisian, a college friend, or a neighbor, five hundred miles from home?
Who has not passed a night awake in one of those small, rattling country stage-coaches, in regions where steam is still a thing unknown, beside a strange young woman, of whom one has caught only a glimpse in the dim light of the lantern, as she entered the carriage in front of a white house in some small country town?
She glances at you coldly and curiously.
Then she leans back and no longer seems interested in anything but the country.
In spite of yourself, you watch her; and in spite of yourself you keep on thinking of her.
In spite of yourself you spin a little romance around her.
She is pretty; she seems charming!
Life might be delightful with her.
She is perhaps the woman of our dreams, the one suited to our disposition, the one for whom our heart calls.
And how delicious even the disappointment at seeing her get out at the gate of a country house!
A man stands there, who is awaiting her, with two children and two maids.
Then she stoops over the little ones, who hold up their hands to her; she kisses them tenderly; and then they all go away together, down a path, while the maids catch the packages which the driver throws down to them from the coach.
I have had many of these souvenirs of travel, some joyous and some sad.
Once I was in Auvergne, tramping through those delightful French mountains, that are not too high, not too steep, but friendly and familiar.
I had climbed the Sancy, and entered a little inn, near a pilgrim's chapel called Notre-Dame de Vassiviere, when I saw a queer, ridiculous-looking old woman breakfasting alone at the end table.
She was at least seventy years old, tall, skinny, and angular, and her white hair was puffed around her temples in the old-fashioned style.
She was dressed like a traveling Englishwoman, in awkward, queer clothing, like a person who is indifferent to dress.
She was eating an omelet and drinking water.
Her face was peculiar, with restless eyes and the expression of one with whom fate has dealt unkindly.
I watched her, in spite of myself, thinking: “Who is she?
Why is she wandering alone through these mountains?” She paid and rose to leave, drawing up over her shoulders an astonishing little shawl, the two ends of which hung over her arms.
From a corner of the room she took an alpenstock, which was covered with names traced with a hot iron; then she went out, straight, erect, with the long steps of a letter-carrier who is setting out on his route.
She was taller than her companion, and seemed to walk faster than he.
Two hours later I was climbing the edge of the deep funnel that incloses Lake Pavin in a marvelous and enormous basin of verdure, full of trees, bushes, rocks, and flowers.
This lake is so round that it seems as if the outline had been drawn with a pair of compasses, so clear and blue that one might deem it a flood of azure come down from the sky, so charming that one would like to live in a hut on the wooded slope which dominates this crater, where the cold, still water is sleeping.
The Englishwoman was standing there like a statue, gazing upon the transparent sheet down in the dead volcano.
She was straining her eyes to penetrate below the surface down to the unknown depths, where monstrous trout which have devoured all the other fish are said to live.
As I was passing close by her, it seemed to me that two big tears were brimming her eyes.
But she departed at a great pace, to rejoin her guide, who had stayed behind in an inn at the foot of the path leading to the lake.
The next day, at nightfall, I came to the chateau of Murol.
The old fortress, an enormous tower standing on a peak in the midst of a large valley, where three valleys intersect, rears its brown, uneven, cracked surface into the sky; it is round, from its large circular base to the crumbling turrets on its pinnacles.
It astonishes the eye more than any other ruin by its simple mass, its majesty, its grave and imposing air of antiquity.
It stands there, alone, high as a mountain, a dead queen, but still the queen of the valleys stretched out beneath it.
You go up by a slope planted with firs, then you enter a narrow gate, and stop at the foot of the walls, in the first inclosure, in full view of the entire country.
Inside there are ruined halls, crumbling stairways, unknown cavities, dungeons, walls cut through in the middle, vaulted roofs held up one knows not how, and a mass of stones and crevices, overgrown with grass, where animals glide in and out.
I was exploring this ruin alone.
Suddenly I perceived behind a bit of wall a being, a kind of phantom, like the spirit of this ancient and crumbling habitation.
I was taken aback with surprise, almost with fear, when I recognized the old lady whom I had seen twice.
She was weeping, with big tears in her eyes, and held her handkerchief in her hand.
I turned around to go away, when she spoke to me, apparently ashamed to have been surprised in her grief.
“Yes, monsieur, I am crying.
That does not happen often to me.” “Pardon me, madame, for having disturbed you,” I stammered, confused, not knowing what to say.
“Some misfortune has doubtless come to you.” “Yes.
No—I am like a lost dog,” she murmured, and began to sob, with her handkerchief over her eyes.
Moved by these contagious tears, I took her hand, trying to calm her.
Then brusquely she told me her history, as if no longer ably to bear her grief alone.
Monsieur—if you knew—the sorrow in which I live—in what sorrow.
Children don't know.
If I should see him now I should perhaps not recognize him.
How I have kissed and caressed and cherished him!
If you knew how many nights I have passed in watching him sleep, and how many in thinking of him.
When he was eight years old his father sent him to boarding-school.
He no longer belonged to me.
Then he came only four times a year, and every time I was astonished to see how he had changed, to find him taller without having seen him grow.
They stole his childhood from me, his confidence, and his love which otherwise would not have gone away from me; they stole my joy in seeing him grow, in seeing him become a little man.
And at every one of his visits his body, his eye, his movements, his voice his laugh, were no longer the same, were no longer mine.
All these things change so quickly in a child; and it is so sad if one is not there to see them change; one no longer recognizes him.
I was dumfounded —would you believe it?
When Death enters a house it seems as if he were hurrying to do his utmost, so as not to have to return for a long time after that.
My tall son was then studying law.
I was hoping to live and die near him, and I went to him so that we could live together.
But he had fallen into the ways of young men, and he gave me to understand that I was in his way.
I was wrong in doing so, but I suffered too much in feeling myself in his way, I, his mother!
At last we should be together for good.
I should have grandchildren.
His wife was an Englishwoman, who took a dislike to me.
They have him—they have my son for themselves.
His face then was wrinkled and his hair white.
I go east and west, as you see, with no companion.
Adieu, monsieur! don't stay here with me for it hurts me to have told you all this.” I went down the hill, and on turning round to glance back, I saw the old woman standing on a broken wall, looking out upon the mountains, the long valley and Lake Chambon in the distance.
And her skirt and the queer little shawl which she wore around her thin shoulders were fluttering tike a flag in the wind.
MADEMOISELLE COCOTTE We were just leaving the asylum when I saw a tall, thin man in a corner of the court who kept on calling an imaginary dog.
Come here, Cocotte, my beauty!” and slapping his thigh as one does when calling an animal.
I asked the physician, “Who is that man?” He answered: “Oh! he is not at all interesting.
He is a coachman named Francois, who became insane after drowning his dog.” I insisted: “Tell me his story.
The most simple and humble things are sometimes those which touch our hearts most deeply.” Here is this man's adventure, which was obtained from a friend of his, a groom: There was a family of rich bourgeois who lived in a suburb of Paris.
Their coachman was this Francois, a country fellow, somewhat dull, kind- hearted, simple and easy to deceive.
One evening, as he was returning home, a dog began to follow him.
At first he paid no attention to it, but the creature's obstinacy at last made him turn round.
It was a female dog and frightfully thin.
She was trotting behind him with a mournful and famished look, her tail between her legs, her ears flattened against her head and stopping and starting whenever he did.
He tried to chase this skeleton away and cried: “Run along!
Kss! kss!” She retreated a few steps, then sat down and waited.
And when the coachman started to walk again she followed along behind him.
He pretended to pick up some stones.
Then the coachman Francois took pity on the beast and called her.
The dog approached timidly.
The man patted her protruding ribs, moved by the beast's misery, and he cried: “Come! come here!” Immediately she began to wag her tail, and, feeling herself taken in, adopted, she began to run along ahead of her new master.
When his employers heard of this the next day they allowed the coachman to keep the animal.
It was a good beast, caressing and faithful, intelligent and gentle.
Nevertheless Francois adored Cocotte, and he kept repeating: “That beast is human.
She only lacks speech.” He had a magnificent red leather collar made for her which bore these words engraved on a copper plate: “Mademoiselle Cocotte, belonging to the coachman Francois.” She was remarkably prolific and four times a year would give birth to a batch of little animals belonging to every variety of the canine race.
Francois would pick out one which he would leave her and then he would unmercifully throw the others into the river.
But soon the cook joined her complaints to those of the gardener.
She would find dogs under the stove, in the ice box, in the coal bin, and they would steal everything they came across.
Finally the master, tired of complaints, impatiently ordered Francois to get rid of Cocotte.
Then he decided to lose her, and he gave her to a teamster, who was to drop her on the other side of Paris, near Joinville-le-Pont.
Cocotte returned the same day.
Some decision had to be taken.
Five francs was given to a train conductor to take her to Havre.
Three days later she returned to the stable, thin, footsore and tired out.
But other dogs were attracted as before, and one evening, when a big dinner party was on, a stuffed turkey was carried away by one of them right under the cook's nose, and she did not dare to stop him.
This time the master completely lost his temper and said angrily to Francois: “If you don't throw this beast into the water before—to-morrow morning, I'll put you out, do you hear?” The man was dumbfounded, and he returned to his room to pack his trunk, preferring to leave the place.
Then he bethought himself that he could find no other situation as long as he dragged this animal about with him.
He thought of his good position, where he was well paid and well fed, and he decided that a dog was really not worth all that.
At last he decided to rid himself of Cocotte at daybreak.
She stood up slowly, shook herself, stretched and came to welcome her master.
Then his courage forsook him, and he began to pet her affectionately, stroking her long ears, kissing her muzzle and calling her tender names.
But a neighboring clock struck six.
He could no longer hesitate.
He opened the door, calling: “Come!” The beast wagged her tail, understanding that she was to be taken out.
He held her to his breast, rocked her and called her “my dear little Cocotte, my sweet little Cocotte,” and she grunted with pleasure.
But suddenly he made up his mind and threw her as far from him as he could.
At first she tried to swim, as she did when he gave her a bath, but her head, dragged down by the stone, kept going under, and she looked at her master with wild, human glances as she struggled like a drowning person.
Finally those also disappeared.
Then, for five minutes, bubbles rose to the surface as though the river were boiling, and Francois, haggard, his heart beating, thought that he saw Cocotte struggling in the mud, and, with the simplicity of a peasant, he kept saying to himself: “What does the poor beast think of me now?” He almost lost his mind.
It was necessary to call in a physician.
At last he recovered, and toward the 2nd of June his employers took him to their estate at Biesard, near Rouen.
One day, as they were disporting themselves in the water, Francois suddenly cried to his companion: “Look what's coming!
I'm going to give you a chop!” It was an enormous, swollen corpse that was floating down with its feet sticking straight up in the air.
Francois swam up to it, still joking: “Whew! it's not fresh.
It isn't thin, either!” He kept swimming about at a distance from the animal that was in a state of decomposition.
Then, suddenly, he was silent and looked at it: attentively.
He looked fixedly at the collar, then he stretched out his arm, seized the neck, swung the corpse round and drew it up close to him and read on the copper which had turned green and which still stuck to the discolored leather: “Mademoiselle Cocotte, belonging to the coachman Francois.” The dead dog had come more than a hundred miles to find its master.
He let out a frightful shriek and began to swim for the beach with all his might, still howling; and as soon as he touched land he ran away wildly, stark naked, through the country.
THE CORSICAN BANDIT The road ascended gently through the forest of Aitone.
The large pines formed a solemn dome above our heads, and that mysterious sound made by the wind in the trees sounded like the notes of an organ.
After walking for three hours, there was a clearing, and then at intervals an enormous pine umbrella, and then we suddenly came to the edge of the forest, some hundred meters below, the pass leading to the wild valley of Niolo.
On the two projecting heights which commanded a view of this pass, some old trees, grotesquely twisted, seemed to have mounted with painful efforts, like scouts sent in advance of the multitude in the rear.
When we turned round, we saw the entire forest stretched beneath our feet, like a gigantic basin of verdure, inclosed by bare rocks whose summits seemed to reach the sky.
We resumed our walk, and, ten minutes later, found ourselves in the pass.
Then I beheld a remarkable landscape.
Beyond another forest stretched a valley, but a valley such as I had never seen before; a solitude of stone, ten leagues long, hollowed out between two high mountains, without a field or a tree to be seen.
This was the Niolo valley, the fatherland of Corsican liberty, the inaccessible citadel, from which the invaders had never been able to drive out the mountaineers.
My companion said to me: “This is where all our bandits have taken refuge?” Ere long we were at the further end of this gorge, so wild, so inconceivably beautiful.
As far as our eyes could reach, we saw in front of us a desert of glittering stone, heated like an oven by a burning sun, which seemed to hang for that very purpose right above the gorge.
When we raised our eyes towards the crests, we stood dazzled and stupefied by what we saw.
They looked like a festoon of coral; all the summits are of porphyry; and the sky overhead was violet, purple, tinged with the coloring of these strange mountains.
Lower down, the granite was of scintillating gray, and seemed ground to powder beneath our feet.
At our right, along a long and irregular course, roared a tumultuous torrent.
And we staggered along under this heat, in this light, in this burning, arid, desolate valley cut by this torrent of turbulent water which seemed to be ever hurrying onward, without fertilizing the rocks, lost in this furnace which greedily drank it up without being saturated or refreshed by it.
But, suddenly, there was visible at our right a little wooden cross sunk in a little heap of stones.
A man had been killed there; and I said to my companion.
“Tell me about your bandits.” He replied: “I knew the most celebrated of them, the terrible St.
“His father was killed in a quarrel by a young man of the district, it is said; and St.
He did not proclaim vengeance against the assassin of his father.
All his relatives came to see him, and implored of him to avenge his death; he remained deaf to their menaces and their supplications.
“Then, following the old Corsican custom, his sister, in her indignation carried away his black clothes, in order that he might not wear mourning for a dead man who had not been avenged.
He was insensible to even this affront, and rather than take down from the rack his father's gun, which was still loaded, he shut himself up, not daring to brave the looks of the young men of the district.
“He seemed to have even forgotten the crime, and lived with his sister in the seclusion of their dwelling.
“But, one day, the man who was suspected of having committed the murder, was about to get married.
Lucia did not appear to be moved by this news, but, out of sheer bravado, doubtless, the bridegroom, on his way to the church, passed before the house of the two orphans.
“The brother and the sister, at their window, were eating frijoles, when the young man saw the bridal procession going by.
Suddenly he began to tremble, rose to his feet without uttering a word, made the sign of the cross, took the gun which was hanging over the fireplace, and went out.
“When he spoke of this later on, he said: 'I don't know what was the matter with me; it was like fire in my blood; I felt that I must do it, that, in spite of everything, I could not resist, and I concealed the gun in a cave on the road to Corte.
“An hour later, he came back, with nothing in his hand, and with his habitual air of sad weariness.
His sister believed that there was nothing further in his thoughts.
“But when night fell he disappeared.
“His enemy had, the same evening, to repair to Corte on foot, accompanied by his two groomsmen.
Lucia stood before him, and looking straight in the murderer's face, exclaimed: 'Now is the time!' and shot him point-blank in the chest.
Lucia said in a stern tone: “'If you move another step, I'll shoot you in the leg.' “The other, aware of his timidity hitherto, replied: 'You would not dare to do it!' and was hurrying off when he fell instantaneously, his thigh shattered by a bullet.
Lucia, coming over to where he lay, said: “'I am going to look at your wound; if it is not serious, I'll leave you there; if it is mortal I'll finish you off.” “He inspected the wound, considered it mortal, and slowly reloading his gun, told the wounded man to say a prayer, and shot him through the head.
“Next day he was in the mountains.
“All his family were arrested by the gendarmes.
His uncle, the cure, who was suspected of having incited him to this deed of vengeance, was himself put in prison, and accused by the dead man's relatives.
Lucia killed, one after the other, his uncle's accusers, and tore out their eyes to teach the others never to state what they had seen with their eyes.
“He killed all the relatives, all the connections of his enemy's family.
He slew during his life fourteen gendarmes, burned down the houses of his adversaries, and was, up to the day of his death, the most terrible of all the bandits whose memory we have preserved.” The sun disappeared behind Monte Cinto and the tall shadow of the granite mountain went to sleep on the granite of the valley.
We quickened our pace in order to reach before night the little village of Albertaccio, nothing but a pile of stones welded into the stone flanks of a wild gorge.
And I said as I thought of the bandit: “What a terrible custom your vendetta is!” My companion answered with an air of resignation: “What would you have?
A man must do his duty!” THE GRAVE The seventeenth of July, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-three, at half-past two in the morning, the watchman in the cemetery of Besiers, who lived in a small cottage on the edge of this field of the dead, was awakened by the barking of his dog, which was shut up in the kitchen.
Going down quickly, he saw the animal sniffing at the crack of the door and barking furiously, as if some tramp had been sneaking about the house.
The keeper, Vincent, therefore took his gun and went out.
His dog, preceding him, at once ran in the direction of the Avenue General Bonnet, stopping short at the monument of Madame Tomoiseau.
The keeper, advancing cautiously, soon saw a faint light on the side of the Avenue Malenvers, and stealing in among the graves, he came upon a horrible act of profanation.
A man had dug up the coffin of a young woman who had been buried the evening before and was dragging the corpse out of it.
A small dark lantern, standing on a pile of earth, lighted up this hideous scene.
It was a young, wealthy and respected lawyer in town, named Courbataille.
The public prosecutor opened the case by referring to the monstrous deeds of the Sergeant Bertrand.
A wave of indignation swept over the courtroom.
When the magistrate sat down the crowd assembled cried: “Death! death!” With difficulty the presiding judge established silence.
Then he said gravely: “Defendant, what have you to say in your defense?” Courbataille, who had refused counsel, rose.
He was a handsome fellow, tall, brown, with a frank face, energetic manner and a fearless eye.
Paying no attention to the whistlings in the room, he began to speak in a voice that was low and veiled at first, but that grew more firm as he proceeded.
“Monsieur le President, gentlemen of the jury: I have very little to say.
The woman whose grave I violated was my sweetheart.
“I loved her, not with a sensual love and not with mere tenderness of heart and soul, but with an absolute, complete love, with an overpowering passion.
“Hear me: “When I met her for the first time I felt a strange sensation.
It was not astonishment nor admiration, nor yet that which is called love at first sight, but a feeling of delicious well-being, as if I had been plunged into a warm bath.
Her gestures seduced me, her voice enchanted me, and it was with infinite pleasure that I looked upon her person.
She had within her something of my spirit.
“She seemed to me like an answer to a cry uttered by my soul, to that vague and unceasing cry with which we call upon Hope during our whole life.
“When I knew her a little better, the mere thought of seeing her again filled me with exquisite and profound uneasiness; the touch of her hand in mine was more delightful to me than anything that I had imagined; her smile filled me with a mad joy, with the desire to run, to dance, to fling myself upon the ground.
“One evening, when we had gone on a somewhat long walk by the river, we were overtaken by the rain, and she caught cold.
It developed into pneumonia the next day, and a week later she was dead.
“During the hours of her suffering astonishment and consternation prevented my understanding and reflecting upon it, but when she was dead I was so overwhelmed by blank despair that I had no thoughts left.
“During all the horrible details of the interment my keen and wild grief was like a madness, a kind of sensual, physical grief.
“Then when she was gone, when she was under the earth, my mind at once found itself again, and I passed through a series of moral sufferings so terrible that even the love she had vouchsafed to me was dear at that price.
There is a woman whom you adore, a unique woman, for in the whole universe there is not a second one like her.
This woman has given herself to you and has created with you the mysterious union that is called Love.
Her eye seems to you more vast than space, more charming than the world, that clear eye smiling with her tenderness.
“And suddenly she disappears!
She disappears, not only for you, but forever.
Do you understand what that means?
Never, never, never, not anywhere will she exist any more.
Nevermore will that eye look upon anything again; nevermore will that voice, nor any voice like it, utter a word in the same way as she uttered it.
“Nevermore will a face be born that is like hers.
The molds of statues are kept; casts are kept by which one can make objects with the same outlines and forms.
And yet millions and millions of creatures will be born, and more than that, and this one woman will not reappear among all the women of the future.
“She lived for twenty years, not more, and she has disappeared forever, forever, forever!
The idea of this decomposing body, that I might yet recognize, haunted me.
“I went out with a spade, a lantern and a hammer; I jumped over the cemetery wall and I found the grave, which had not yet been closed entirely; I uncovered the coffin and took up a board.
An abominable odor, the stench of putrefaction, greeted my nostrils.
Oh, her bed perfumed with orris!
Her face was blue, swollen, frightful.
But I stretched out my arm to draw this monstrous face toward me.
“All night I have retained the foul odor of this putrid body, the odor of my well beloved, as one retains the perfume of a woman after a love embrace.
They seemed to be waiting for something more.
The jury retired to deliberate.
The president announced with the usual formalities that his judges declared him to be not guilty.
He did not move and the room applauded.
The Grave appeared in Gil Blas, July 29, 1883, under the signature of “Maufrigneuse.” ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 13.
OLD JUDAS This entire stretch of country was amazing; it was characterized by a grandeur that was almost religious, and yet it had an air of sinister desolation.
A great, wild lake, filled with stagnant, black water, in which thousands of reeds were waving to and fro, lay in the midst of a vast circle of naked hills, where nothing grew but broom, or here and there an oak curiously twisted by the wind.
Just one house stood on the banks of that dark lake, a small, low house inhabited by Uncle Joseph, an old boatman, who lived on what he could make by his fishing.
Once a week he carried the fish he caught into the surrounding villages, returning with the few provisions that he needed for his sustenance.
I went to see this old hermit, who offered to take me with him to his nets, and I accepted.
His boat was old, worm-eaten and clumsy, and the skinny old man rowed with a gentle and monotonous stroke that was soothing to the soul, already oppressed by the sadness of the land round about.
It seemed to me as if I were transported to olden times, in the midst of that ancient country, in that primitive boat, which was propelled by a man of another age.
He took up his nets and threw the fish into the bottom of the boat, as the fishermen of the Bible might have done.
Then he took me down to the end of the lake, where I suddenly perceived a ruin on the other side of the bank a dilapidated hut, with an enormous red cross on the wall that looked as if it might have been traced with blood, as it gleamed in the last rays of the setting sun.
“That is where Judas died,” the man replied, crossing himself.
I was not surprised, being almost prepared for this strange answer.
What Judas?” “The Wandering Jew, monsieur,” he added.
This hut had formerly been occupied by a large woman, a kind of beggar, who lived on public charity.
Uncle Joseph did not remember from whom she had this hut.
One evening an old man with a white beard, who seemed to be at least two hundred years old, and who could hardly drag himself along, asked alms of this forlorn woman, as he passed her dwelling.
“Sit down, father,” she replied; “everything here belongs to all the world, since it comes from all the world.” He sat down on a stone before the door.
“It was Our Lady the Virgin who permitted this, monsieur,” Joseph added, “it being a woman who had opened her door to a Judas, for this old vagabond was the Wandering Jew.
It was not known at first in the country, but the people suspected it very soon, because he was always walking; it had become a sort of second nature to him.” And suspicion had been aroused by still another thing.
This woman, who kept that stranger with her, was thought to be a Jewess, for no one had ever seen her at church.
For ten miles around no one ever called her anything else but the Jewess.
When the little country children saw her come to beg they cried out: “Mamma, mamma, here is the Jewess!” The old man and she began to go out together into the neighboring districts, holding out their hands at all the doors, stammering supplications into the ears of all the passers.
They could be seen at all hours of the day, on by-paths, in the villages, or again eating bread, sitting in the noon heat under the shadow of some solitary tree.
One day he brought home in his sack two little live pigs, which a farmer had given him after he had cured the farmer of some sickness.
Soon he stopped begging, and devoted himself entirely to his pigs.
He took them out to feed by the lake, or under isolated oaks, or in the near-by valleys.
He also did not go to church, and no one ever had seen him cross himself before the wayside crucifixes.
All this gave rise to much gossip: One night his companion was attacked by a fever and began to tremble like a leaf in the wind.
He went to the nearest town to get some medicine, and then he shut himself up with her, and was not seen for six days.
The priest, having heard that the “Jewess” was about to die, came to offer the consolation of his religion and administer the last sacrament.
Hardly had he knocked at the door when old Judas appeared on the threshold, breathing hard, his eyes aflame, his long beard agitated, like rippling water, and he hurled blasphemies in an unknown language, extending his skinny arms in order to prevent the priest from entering.
The priest attempted to speak, offered his purse and his aid, but the old man kept on abusing him, making gestures with his hands as if throwing; stones at him.
Then the priest retired, followed by the curses of the beggar.
The companion of old Judas died the following day.
They were people of so little account that no one took any interest in them.
Then they saw the man take his pigs out again to the lake and up the hillsides.
But the people gave him hardly anything, as there was so much gossip about him.
Every one knew, moreover, how he had treated the priest.
Then he disappeared.
That was during Holy Week, but no one paid any attention to him.
His pigs had devoured him.
“This happened on Good Friday, monsieur.” Joseph concluded his story, “three hours after noon.” “How do you know that?” I asked him.
I did not attempt to make him understand that it could easily happen that the famished animals had eaten their master, after he had died suddenly in his hut.
As for the cross on the wall, it had appeared one morning, and no one knew what hand traced it in that strange color.
Since then no one doubted any longer that the Wandering Jew had died on this spot.
I myself believed it for one hour.
THE LITTLE CASK He was a tall man of forty or thereabout, this Jules Chicot, the innkeeper of Spreville, with a red face and a round stomach, and said by those who knew him to be a smart business man.
He stopped his buggy in front of Mother Magloire's farmhouse, and, hitching the horse to the gatepost, went in at the gate.
Chicot owned some land adjoining that of the old woman, which he had been coveting for a long while, and had tried in vain to buy a score of times, but she had always obstinately refused to part with it.
He found her peeling potatoes outside the farmhouse door.
She was a woman of about seventy-two, very thin, shriveled and wrinkled, almost dried up in fact and much bent but as active and untiring as a girl.
Chicot patted her on the back in a friendly fashion and then sat down by her on a stool.
“Well mother, you are always pretty well and hearty, I am glad to see.” “Nothing to complain of, considering, thank you.
And how are you, Monsieur Chicot?” “Oh, pretty well, thank you, except a few rheumatic pains occasionally; otherwise I have nothing to complain of.” “So much the better.” And she said no more, while Chicot watched her going on with her work.
Her crooked, knotted fingers, hard as a lobster's claws, seized the tubers, which were lying in a pail, as if they had been a pair of pincers, and she peeled them rapidly, cutting off long strips of skin with an old knife which she held in the other hand, throwing the potatoes into the water as they were done.
Chicot seemed embarrassed, anxious, with something on the tip of his tongue which he could not say.
At last he said hurriedly: “Listen, Mother Magloire—” “Well, what is it?” “You are quite sure that you do not want to sell your land?” “Certainly not; you may make up your mind to that.
What I have said I have said, so don't refer to it again.” “Very well; only I think I know of an arrangement that might suit us both very well.” “What is it?” “Just this.
You don't understand?
Very well, then follow me in what I am going to say.” The old woman left off peeling potatoes and looked at the innkeeper attentively from under her heavy eyebrows, and he went on: “Let me explain myself.
You understand me! suppose!
Every month I will come and bring you thirty crowns, and it will not make the slightest difference in your life—not the very slightest.
You will have your own home just as you have now, need not trouble yourself about me, and will owe me nothing; all you will have to do will be to take my money.
You have no children, only nephews and nieces for whom you don't care a straw.
You will keep everything during your life, and I will give you the thirty crowns a month.
It is pure gain as far as you are concerned.” The old woman was surprised, rather uneasy, but, nevertheless, very much tempted to agree, and answered: “I don't say that I will not agree to it, but I must think about it.
Come back in a week, and we will talk it over again, and I will then give you my definite answer.” And Chicot went off as happy as a king who had conquered an empire.
Mother Magloire was thoughtful, and did not sleep at all that night; in fact, for four days she was in a fever of hesitation.
She suspected that there was something underneath the offer which was not to her advantage; but then the thought of thirty crowns a month, of all those coins clinking in her apron, falling to her, as it were, from the skies, without her doing anything for it, aroused her covetousness.
He advised her to accept Chicot's offer, but said she ought to ask for an annuity of fifty instead of thirty, as her farm was worth sixty thousand francs at the lowest calculation.
“If you live for fifteen years longer,” he said, “even then he will only have paid forty-five thousand francs for it.” The old woman trembled with joy at this prospect of getting fifty crowns a month, but she was still suspicious, fearing some trick, and she remained a long time with the lawyer asking questions without being able to make up her mind to go.
At last she gave him instructions to draw up the deed and returned home with her head in a whirl, just as if she had drunk four jugs of new cider.
When Chicot came again to receive her answer she declared, after a lot of persuading, that she could not make up her mind to agree to his proposal, though she was all the time trembling lest he should not consent to give the fifty crowns, but at last, when he grew urgent, she told him what she expected for her farm.
He looked surprised and disappointed and refused.
Then, in order to convince him, she began to talk about the probable duration of her life.
“I am certainly not likely to live more than five or six years longer.
I am nearly seventy-three, and far from strong, even considering my age.
“Come, come, old lady, you are as strong as the church tower, and will live till you are a hundred at least; you will no doubt see me put under ground first.” The whole day was spent in discussing the money, and as the old woman would not give in, the innkeeper consented to give the fifty crowns, and she insisted upon having ten crowns over and above to strike the bargain.
She always met him with a cunning look, and one might have supposed that she was congratulating herself on the trick she had played him.
Seeing how well and hearty she seemed he very soon got into his buggy again, growling to himself: “Will you never die, you old hag?” He did not know what to do, and he felt inclined to strangle her when he saw her.
He hated her with a ferocious, cunning hatred, the hatred of a peasant who has been robbed, and began to cast about for some means of getting rid of her.
One day he came to see her again, rubbing his hands as he did the first time he proposed the bargain, and, after having chatted for a few minutes, he said: “Why do you never come and have a bit of dinner at my place when you are in Spreville?
The people are talking about it, and saying we are not on friendly terms, and that pains me.
Come whenever you feel inclined; I shall be very glad to see you.” Old Mother Magloire did not need to be asked twice, and the next day but one, as she had to go to the town in any case, it being market day, she let her man drive her to Chicot's place, where the buggy was put in the barn while she went into the house to get her dinner.
The innkeeper was delighted and treated her like a lady, giving her roast fowl, black pudding, leg of mutton and bacon and cabbage.
She had always been a small eater, and had generally lived on a little soup and a crust of bread and butter.
“Just try that; you will find it first rate.” The good woman drank it slowly in sips, so as to make the pleasure last all the longer, and when she had finished her glass, she said: “Yes, that is first rate!” Almost before she had said it Chicot had poured her out another glassful.
She objected, but he persisted.
“It is as mild as milk, you know; I can drink ten or a dozen glasses without any ill effects; it goes down like sugar and does not go to the head; one would think that it evaporated on the tongue: It is the most wholesome thing you can drink.” She took it, for she really enjoyed it, but she left half the glass.
Then Chicot, in an excess of generosity, said: “Look here, as it is so much to your taste, I will give you a small keg of it, just to show that you and I are still excellent friends.” So she took one away with her, feeling slightly overcome by the effects of what she had drunk.
The next day the innkeeper drove into her yard and took a little iron- hooped keg out of his gig.
He insisted on her tasting the contents, to make sure it was the same delicious article, and, when they had each of them drunk three more glasses, he said as he was going away: “Well, you know when it is all gone there is more left; don't be modest, for I shall not mind.
The sooner it is finished the better pleased I shall be.” Four days later he came again.
Soon, however, it began to be whispered abroad that Mother Magloire was in the habit of getting drunk all by herself.
She was picked up in her kitchen, then in her yard, then in the roads in the neighborhood, and she was often brought home like a log.
The innkeeper did not go near her any more, and, when people spoke to him about her, he used to say, putting on a distressed look: “It is a great pity that she should have taken to drink at her age, but when people get old there is no remedy.
It will be the death of her in the long run.” And it certainly was the death of her.
About Christmas time she fell down, unconscious, in the snow, and was found dead the next morning.
And when Chicot came in for the farm, he said: “It was very stupid of her; if she had not taken to drink she would probably have lived ten years longer.” BOITELLE Father Boitelle (Antoine) made a specialty of undertaking dirty jobs all through the countryside.
Whenever there was a ditch or a cesspool to be cleaned out, a dunghill removed, a sewer cleansed, or any dirt hole whatever, he way always employed to do it.
He would come with the instruments of his trade, his sabots covered with dirt, and set to work, complaining incessantly about his occupation.
When people asked him then why he did this loathsome work, he would reply resignedly: “Faith, 'tis for my children, whom I must support.
This brings me in more than anything else.” He had, indeed, fourteen children.
If any one asked him what had become of them, he would say with an air of indifference: “There are only eight of them left in the house.
One is out at service and five are married.” When the questioner wanted to know whether they were well married, he replied vivaciously: “I did not oppose them.
I am a night scavenger because my parents went against my likings.
But for that I would have become a workman like the others.” Here is the way his parents had thwarted him in his likings: He was at the time a soldier stationed at Havre, not more stupid than another, or sharper either, a rather simple fellow, however.
When he was not on duty, his greatest pleasure was to walk along the quay, where the bird dealers congregate.
Sometimes alone, sometimes with a soldier from his own part of the country, he would slowly saunter along by cages containing parrots with green backs and yellow heads from the banks of the Amazon, or parrots with gray backs and red heads from Senegal, or enormous macaws, which look like birds reared in hot-houses, with their flower-like feathers, their plumes and their tufts.
Boitelle would pause, with wondering eyes, wide-open mouth, laughing and enraptured, showing his teeth to the captive cockatoos, who kept nodding their white or yellow topknots toward the glaring red of his breeches and the copper buckle of his belt.
When he found a bird that could talk he put questions to it, and if it happened at the time to be disposed to reply and to hold a conversation with him he would carry away enough amusement to last him till evening.
He also found heaps of amusement in looking at the monkeys, and could conceive no greater luxury for a rich man than to own these animals as one owns cats and dogs.
This kind of taste for the exotic he had in his blood, as people have a taste for the chase, or for medicine, or for the priesthood.
He could not help returning to the quay every time the gates of the barracks opened, drawn toward it by an irresistible longing.
On one occasion, having stopped almost in ecstasy before an enormous macaw, which was swelling out its plumes, bending forward and bridling up again as if making the court curtseys of parrot-land, he saw the door of a little cafe adjoining the bird dealer's shop open, and a young negress appeared, wearing on her head a red silk handkerchief.
She was sweeping into the street the corks and sand of the establishment.
Boitelle's attention was soon divided between the bird and the woman, and he really could not tell which of these two beings he contemplated with the greater astonishment and delight.
There she stood facing him with her broom in her hands as if she were bringing him a rifle, while the macaw continued bowing.
But at the end of a few seconds the soldier began to feel embarrassed at this attention, and he walked away quietly so as not to look as if he were beating a retreat.
Almost every day he passed before the Cafe des Colonies, and often he could distinguish through the window the figure of the little black-skinned maid serving “bocks” or glasses of brandy to the sailors of the port.
Frequently, too, she would come out to the door on seeing him; soon, without even having exchanged a word, they smiled at one another like acquaintances; and Boitelle felt his heart touched when he suddenly saw, glittering between the dark lips of the girl, a shining row of white teeth.
At length, one day he ventured to enter, and was quite surprised to find that she could speak French like every one else.
The bottle of lemonade, of which she was good enough to accept a glassful, remained in the soldier's recollection memorably delicious, and it became a custom with him to come and absorb in this little tavern on the quay all the agreeable drinks which he could afford.
For him it was a treat, a happiness, on which his thoughts dwelt constantly, to watch the black hand of the little maid pouring something into his glass while her teeth laughed more than her eyes.
At the end of two months they became fast friends, and Boitelle, after his first astonishment at discovering that this negress had as good principles as honest French girls, that she exhibited a regard for economy, industry, religion and good conduct, loved her more on that account, and was so charmed with her that he wanted to marry her.
He told her his intentions, which made her dance with joy.
She had also a little money, left her by a female oyster dealer, who had picked her up when she had been left on the quay at Havre by an American captain.
This captain had found her, when she was only about six years old, lying on bales of cotton in the hold of his ship, some hours after his departure from New York.
On his arrival in Havre he abandoned to the care of this compassionate oyster dealer the little black creature, who had been hidden on board his vessel, he knew not why or by whom.
The oyster woman having died, the young negress became a servant at the Colonial Tavern.
Antoine Boitelle added: “This will be all right if my parents don't oppose it.
I will never go against them, you understand, never!
I'm going to say a word or two to them the first time I go back to the country.” On the following week, in fact, having obtained twenty-four hours' leave, he went to see his family, who cultivated a little farm at Tourteville, near Yvetot.
He waited till the meal was finished, the hour when the coffee baptized with brandy makes people more open-hearted, before informing his parents that he had found a girl who satisfied his tastes, all his tastes, so completely that there could not exist any other in all the world so perfectly suited to him.
The old people, on hearing this, immediately assumed a cautious manner and wanted explanations.
He had concealed nothing from them except the color of her skin.
She was a servant, without much means, but strong, thrifty, clean, well- conducted and sensible.
All these things were better than money would be in the hands of a bad housewife.
Moreover, she had a few sous, left her by a woman who had reared her, a good number of sous, almost a little dowry, fifteen hundred francs in the savings bank.
The old people, persuaded by his talk, and relying also on their own judgment, were gradually weakening, when he came to the delicate point.
Laughing in rather a constrained fashion, he said: “There's only one thing you may not like.
She is not a white slip.” They did not understand, and he had to explain at some length and very cautiously, to avoid shocking them, that she belonged to the dusky race of which they had only seen samples in pictures at Epinal.
Then they became restless, perplexed, alarmed, as if he had proposed a union with the devil.
Is the whole of her?” He replied: “Certainly.
Everywhere, just as you are white everywhere.” The father interposed: “Black?
Is it as black as the pot?” The son answered: “Perhaps a little less than that.
She is black, but not disgustingly black.
The cure's cassock is black, but it is not uglier than a surplice which is white.” The father said: “Are there more black people besides her in her country?” And the son, with an air of conviction, exclaimed: “Certainly!” But the old man shook his head.
Antoine accordingly announced that on Sunday, the 22d of May, the day of his discharge, he would start for Tourteville with his sweetheart.
She had put on, for this journey to the house of her lover's parents, her most beautiful and most gaudy clothes, in which yellow, red and blue were the prevailing colors, so that she looked as if she were adorned for a national festival.
At the terminus, as they were leaving Havre, people stared at her, and Boitelle was proud of giving his arm to a person who commanded so much attention.
Then, in the third-class carriage, in which she took a seat by his side, she aroused so much astonishment among the country folks that the people in the adjoining compartments stood up on their benches to look at her over the wooden partition which divides the compartments.
A child, at sight of her, began to cry with terror, another concealed his face in his mother's apron.
Everything went off well, however, up to their arrival at their destination.
But when the train slackened its rate of motion as they drew near Yvetot, Antoine felt ill at ease, as he would have done at a review when; he did not know his drill practice.
Then, as he; leaned his head out, he recognized in the distance: his father, holding the bridle of the horse harnessed to a carryall, and his mother, who had come forward to the grating, behind which stood those who were expecting friends.
He alighted first, gave his hand to his sweetheart, and holding himself erect, as if he were escorting a general, he went to meet his family.
The mother, on seeing this black lady in variegated costume in her son's company, remained so stupefied that she could not open her mouth; and the father found it hard to hold the horse, which the engine or the negress caused to rear continuously.
But Antoine, suddenly filled with unmixed joy at seeing once more the old people, rushed forward with open arms, embraced his mother, embraced his father, in spite of the nag's fright, and then turning toward his companion, at whom the passengers on the platform stopped to stare with amazement, he proceeded to explain: “Here she is!
I told you that, at first sight, she is not attractive; but as soon as you know her, I can assure you there's not a better sort in the whole world.
Antoine, ill at ease, whistled a barrack-room air; his father whipped the nag; and his mother, from where she sat in the corner, kept casting sly glances at the negress, whose forehead and cheekbones shone in the sunlight like well-polished shoes.
“Well,” said he, “we don't seem inclined to talk.” “We must have time,” replied the old woman.
Tell us the little story about that hen of yours that laid eight eggs.” It was a funny anecdote of long standing in the family.
But, as his mother still remained silent, paralyzed by her emotion, he undertook himself to tell the story, laughing as he did so at the memorable incident.
The father, who knew it by heart brightened at the opening words of the narrative; his wife soon followed his example; and the negress herself, when he reached the drollest part of it, suddenly gave vent to a laugh, such a loud, rolling torrent of laughter that the horse, becoming excited, broke into a gallop for a while.
This served to cement their acquaintance.
They had scarcely reached the house and had all alighted, when Antoine conducted his sweetheart to a room, so that she might take off her dress, to avoid staining it, as she was going to prepare a nice dish, intended to win the old people's affections through their stomachs.
The mother, less timid, exclaimed: “She is too black.
“Perhaps so, but not at first.” They went into the house, where the good woman was somewhat affected at the spectacle of the negress engaged in cooking.
She at once proceeded to assist her, with petticoats tucked up, active in spite of her age.
The meal was an excellent one, very long, very enjoyable.
“Well, dad, what do you say about it?” The peasant took care never to compromise himself.
Ask your mother.” So Antoine went back to his mother, and, detaining her behind the rest, said: “Well, mother, what do you think of her?” “My poor lad, she is really too black.
One would think it was Satan!” He did not press her, knowing how obstinate the old woman had always been, but he felt a tempest of disappointment sweeping over his heart.
He was turning over in his mind what he ought to do, what plan he could devise, surprised, moreover, that she had not conquered them already as she had captivated himself.
And they, all four, walked along through the wheat fields, having gradually relapsed into silence.
Whenever they passed a fence they saw a countryman sitting on the stile, and a group of brats climbed up to stare at them, and every one rushed out into the road to see the “black” whore young Boitelle had brought home with him.
At a distance they noticed people scampering across the fields just as when the drum beats to draw public attention to some living phenomenon.
Pere and Mere Boitelle, alarmed at this curiosity, which was exhibited everywhere through the country at their approach, quickened their pace, walking side by side, and leaving their son far behind.
His dark companion asked what his parents thought of her.
He hesitatingly replied that they had not yet made up their minds.
But on the village green people rushed out of all the houses in a flutter of excitement; and, at the sight of the gathering crowd, old Boitelle took to his heels, and regained his abode, while Antoine; swelling with rage, his sweetheart on his arm, advanced majestically under the staring eyes, which opened wide in amazement.
He understood that it was at an end, and there was no hope for him, that he could not marry his negress.
She also understood it; and as they drew near the farmhouse they both began to weep.
She is too, too black!” And young Boitelle said to his sweetheart: “She will not consent.
I am going to talk to them after you have started.” He then took her to the railway station, still cheering her with hope, and, when he had kissed her, he put her into the train, which he watched as it passed out of sight, his eyes swollen with tears.
And when he had told this story, which was known all over the country, Antoine Boitelle would always add: “From that time forward I have had no heart for anything—for anything at all.
No trade suited me any longer, and so I became what I am—a night scavenger.” People would say to him: “Yet you got married.” “Yes, and I can't say that my wife didn't please me, seeing that I have fourteen children; but she is not the other one, oh, no—certainly not!
The other one, mark you, my negress, she had only to give me one glance, and I felt as if I were in Heaven.” A WIDOW This story was told during the hunting season at the Chateau Baneville.
The red leaves, instead of rustling under the feet, were rotting under the heavy downfalls.
From it came an odor of must, of rain, of soaked grass and wet earth; and the sportsmen, their backs hunched under the downpour, mournful dogs, with tails between their legs and hairs sticking to their sides, and the young women, with their clothes drenched, returned every evening, tired in body and in mind.
After dinner, in the large drawing-room, everybody played lotto, without enjoyment, while the wind whistled madly around the house.
Then they tried telling stories like those they read in books, but no one was able to invent anything amusing.
The hunters told tales of wonderful shots and of the butchery of rabbits; and the women racked their brains for ideas without revealing the imagination of Scheherezade.
They were about to give up this diversion when a young woman, who was idly caressing the hand of an old maiden aunt, noticed a little ring made of blond hair, which she had often seen, without paying any attention to it.
She fingered it gently and asked, “Auntie, what is this ring?
It looks as if it were made from the hair of a child.” The old lady blushed, grew pale, then answered in a trembling voice: “It is sad, so sad that I never wish to speak of it.
All the unhappiness of my life comes from that.
I was very young then, and the memory has remained so painful that I weep every time I think of it.” Immediately everybody wished to know the story, but the old lady refused to tell it.
He was thirteen when he killed himself for me.
“Oh! it was a strange family—mad, if you will, but a charming madness, the madness of love.
From father to son, all had violent passions which filled their whole being, which impelled them to do wild things, drove them to frantic enthusiasm, even to crime.
This was born in them, just as burning devotion is in certain souls.
Trappers have not the same nature as minions of the drawing-room.
There was a saying: 'As passionate as a Santeze.' This could be noticed by looking at them.
“The grandfather of the owner of this hair, of whom it is the last souvenir, after many adventures, duels and elopements, at about sixty- five fell madly in love with his farmer's daughter.
She was blond, pale, distinguished-looking, with a slow manner of talking, a quiet voice and a look so gentle that one might have taken her for a Madonna.
The old nobleman took her to his home and was soon so captivated with her that he could not live without her for a minute.
His daughter and daughter-in-law, who lived in the chateau, found this perfectly natural, love was such a tradition in the family.
Nothing in regard to a passion surprised them, and if one spoke before them of parted lovers, even of vengeance after treachery, both said in the same sad tone: 'Oh, how he must have suffered to come to that point!' That was all.
They grew sad over tragedies of love, but never indignant, even when they were criminal.
“Now, one day a young man named Monsieur de Gradelle, who had been invited for the shooting, eloped with the young girl.
“Monsieur de Santeze remained calm as if nothing had happened, but one morning he was found hanging in the kennels, among his dogs.
“His son died in the same manner in a hotel in Paris during a journey which he made there in 1841, after being deceived by a singer from the opera.
She came to my father's house with the boy, while we were living at Bertillon.
I was then seventeen.
“You have no idea how wonderful and precocious this Santeze child was.
One might have thought that all the tenderness and exaltation of the whole race had been stored up in this last one.
He was always dreaming and walking about alone in a great alley of elms leading from the chateau to the forest.
I watched from my window this sentimental boy, who walked with thoughtful steps, his hands behind his back, his head bent, and at times stopping to raise his eyes as if he could see and understand things that were not comprehensible at his age.
“Often, after dinner on clear evenings, he would say to me: 'Let us go outside and dream, cousin.' And we would go outside together in the park.
He would stop quickly before a clearing where the white vapor of the moon lights the woods, and he would press my hand, saying: 'Look! look! but you don't understand me; I feel it.
If you understood me, we should be happy.
“Often, after dinner, he would sit on my mother's knees. 'Come, auntie,' he would say, 'tell me some love-stories.' And my mother, as a joke, would tell him all the old legends of the family, all the passionate adventures of his forefathers, for thousands of them were current, some true and some false.
It was their reputation for love and gallantry which was the ruin of every one of these men; they gloried in it and then thought that they had to live up to the renown of their house.
“The little fellow became exalted by these tender or terrible stories, and at times he would clap his hands, crying: 'I, too, I, too, know how to love, better than all of them!' “Then, he began to court me in a timid and tender manner, at which every one laughed, it was, so amusing.
Every morning I had some flowers picked by him, and every evening before going to his room he would kiss my hand and murmur: 'I love you!' “I was guilty, very guilty, and I grieved continually about it, and I have been doing penance all my life; I have remained an old maid—or, rather, I have lived as a widowed fiancee, his widow.
“I was amused at this childish tenderness, and I even encouraged him.
I was coquettish, as charming as with a man, alternately caressing and severe.
I maddened this child.
It was a game for me and a joyous diversion for his mother and mine.
Who would have taken this atom's passion seriously?
I kissed him as often as he wished; I even wrote him little notes, which were read by our respective mothers; and he answered me by passionate letters, which I have kept.
Judging himself as a man, he thought that our loving intimacy was secret.
We had forgotten that he was a Santeze.
One evening in the park he fell at my feet and, as he madly kissed the hem of my dress, he kept repeating: 'I love you!
If ever you deceive me, if ever you leave me for another, I'll do as my father did.' And he added in a hoarse voice, which gave me a shiver: 'You know what he did!' “I stood there astonished.
He arose, and standing on the tips of his toes in order to reach my ear, for I was taller than he, he pronounced my first name: 'Genevieve!' in such a gentle, sweet, tender tone that I trembled all over.
I stammered: 'Let us return! let us return!' He said no more and followed me; but as we were going up the steps of the porch, he stopped me, saying: 'You know, if ever you leave me, I'll kill myself.' “This time I understood that I had gone too far, and I became quite reserved.
One day, as he was reproaching me for this, I answered: 'You are now too old for jesting and too young for serious love.
In the autumn he was sent to a boarding-school.
When he returned the following summer I was engaged to be married.
He understood immediately, and for a week he became so pensive that I was quite anxious.
I seized it, opened it and read: 'You have deserted me and you know what I said.
It is death to which you have condemned me.
I dressed as quickly as I could and ran wildly to the place that he had mentioned.
I raised my eyes and saw something swinging among the leaves, for the wind was blowing a gale.
I must have screamed at first, then fainted and fallen, and finally have run to the chateau.
The next thing that I remember I was in bed, with my mother sitting beside me.
“I thought that I had dreamed all this in a frightful nightmare.
I stammered: 'And what of him, what of him, Gontran?' There was no answer.
Here—here it is!” And the old maid stretched out her trembling hand in a despairing gesture.
Then she blew her nose several times, wiped her eyes and continued: “I broke off my marriage—without saying why.
And I—I always have remained the—the widow of this thirteen-year-old boy.” Then her head fell on her breast and she wept for a long time.
As the guests were retiring for the night a large man, whose quiet she had disturbed, whispered in his neighbor's ear: “Isn't it unfortunate to, be so sentimental?” THE ENGLISHMAN OF ETRETAT A great English poet has just crossed over to France in order to greet Victor Hugo.
All the newspapers are full of his name and he is the great topic of conversation in all drawing-rooms.
Fifteen years ago I had occasion several times to meet Algernon Charles Swinburne.
I will attempt to show him just as I saw him and to give an idea of the strange impression he made on me, which will remain with me throughout time.
I believe it was in 1867 or in 1868 that an unknown young Englishman came to Etretat and bought a little hut hidden under great trees.
It was said that he lived there, always alone, in a strange manner; and he aroused the inimical surprise of the natives, for the inhabitants were sullen and foolishly malicious, as they always are in little towns.
They declared that this whimsical Englishman ate nothing but boiled, roasted or stewed monkey; that he would see no one; that he talked to himself hours at a time and many other surprising things that made people think that he was different from other men.
They were surprised that he should live alone with a monkey.
Was that not frightful?
He was short, plump, without being fat, mild-looking, and he wore a little blond mustache, which was almost invisible.
Chance brought us together.
This savage had amiable and pleasing manners, but he was one of those strange Englishmen that one meets here and there throughout the world.
Endowed with remarkable intelligence, he seemed to live in a fantastic dream, as Edgar Poe must have lived.
He had translated into English a volume of strange Icelandic legends, which I ardently desired to see translated into French.
He loved the supernatural, the dismal and grewsome, but he spoke of the most marvellous things with a calmness that was typically English, to which his gentle and quiet voice gave a semblance of reality that was maddening.
Full of a haughty disdain for the world, with its conventions, prejudices and code of morality, he had nailed to his house a name that was boldly impudent.
The keeper of a lonely inn who should write on his door: “Travellers murdered here!” could not make a more sinister jest.
I never had entered his dwelling, when one day I received an invitation to luncheon, following an accident that had occurred to one of his friends, who had been almost drowned and whom I had attempted to rescue.
Although I was unable to reach the man until he had already been rescued, I received the hearty thanks of the two Englishmen, and the following day I called upon them.
He bore an enormous head on a child's body—a body without chest or shoulders.
An immense forehead, which seemed to have engulfed the rest of the man, expanded like a dome above a thin face which ended in a little pointed beard.
Two sharp eyes and a peculiar mouth gave one the impression of the head of a reptile, while the magnificent brow suggested a genius.
A nervous twitching shook this peculiar being, who walked, moved, acted by jerks like a broken spring.
This was Algernon Charles Swinburne, son of an English admiral and grandson, on the maternal side, of the Earl of Ashburnham.
He strange countenance was transfigured when he spoke.
I have seldom seen a man more impressive, more eloquent, incisive or charming in conversation.
His rapid, clear, piercing and fantastic imagination seemed to creep into his voice and to lend life to his words.
His brusque gestures enlivened his speech, which penetrated one like a dagger, and he had bursts of thought, just as lighthouses throw out flashes of fire, great, genial lights that seemed to illuminate a whole world of ideas.
The home of the two friends was pretty and by no means commonplace.
Everywhere were paintings, some superb, some strange, representing different conceptions of insanity.
Unless I am mistaken, there was a water-color which represented the head of a dead man floating in a rose- colored shell on a boundless ocean, under a moon with a human face.
I clearly remember a flayed hand on which was hanging some dried skin and black muscles, and on the snow- white bones could be seen the traces of dried blood.
Some roast monkey took away all desire to make a steady diet of this animal, and the great monkey who roamed about among us at large and playfully pushed his head into my glass when I wished to drink cured me of any desire I might have to take one of his brothers as a companion for the rest of my days.
As for the two men, they gave me the impression of two strange, original, remarkable minds, belonging to that peculiar race of talented madmen from among whom have arisen Poe, Hoffmann and many others.
If genius is, as is commonly believed, a sort of aberration of great minds, then Algernon Charles Swinburne is undoubtedly a genius.
Great minds that are healthy are never considered geniuses, while this sublime qualification is lavished on brains that are often inferior but are slightly touched by madness.
At any rate, this poet remains one of the first of his time, through his originality and polished form.
He is an exalted lyrical singer who seldom bothers about the good and humble truth, which French poets are now seeking so persistently and patiently.
He strives to set down dreams, subtle thoughts, sometimes great, sometimes visibly forced, but sometimes magnificent.
The furniture was being sold.
On the grass an enormous square block of granite bore this simple word: “Nip.” Above this a hollow stone offered water to the birds.
It was the grave of the monkey, who had been hanged by a young, vindictive negro servant.
It was said that this violent domestic had been forced to flee at the point of his exasperated master's revolver.
After wandering about without home or food for several days, he returned and began to peddle barley-sugar in the streets.
He was expelled from the country after he had almost strangled a displeased customer.
This story appeared in the “Gaulois,” November 29, 1882.
It was the original sketch for the introductory study of Swinburne, written by Maupassant for the French translation by Gabriel Mourey of “Poems and Ballads.” MAGNETISM It was a men's dinner party, and they were sitting over their cigars and brandy and discussing magnetism.
Donato's tricks and Charcot's experiments.
Presently, the sceptical, easy-going men, who cared nothing for religion of any sort, began telling stories of strange occurrences, incredible things which, nevertheless, had really occurred, so they said, falling back into superstitious beliefs, clinging to these last remnants of the marvellous, becoming devotees of this mystery of magnetism, defending it in the name of science.
There was only one person who smiled, a vigorous young fellow, a great ladies' man who was so incredulous that he would not even enter upon a discussion of such matters.
He repeated with a sneer: “Humbug! humbug! humbug!
Charcot, who is said to be a remarkable man of science, he produces on me the effect of those story-tellers of the school of Edgar Poe, who end by going mad through constantly reflecting on queer cases of insanity.
He has authenticated some cases of unexplained and inexplicable nervous phenomena; he makes his way into that unknown region which men are exploring every day, and unable always to understand what he sees, he recalls, perhaps, the ecclesiastical interpretation of these mysteries.
I should like to hear what he says himself.” The words of the unbeliever were listened to with a kind of pity, as if he had blasphemed in an assembly of monks.
One of these gentlemen exclaimed: “And yet miracles were performed in olden times.” “I deny it,” replied the other: “Why cannot they be performed now?” Then, each mentioned some fact, some fantastic presentiment some instance of souls communicating with each other across space, or some case of the secret influence of one being over another.
They asserted and maintained that these things had actually occurred, while the sceptic angrily repeated: “Humbug! humbug! humbug!” At last he rose, threw away his cigar, and with his hands in his pockets, said: “Well, I also have two stories to tell you, which I will afterwards explain.
Here they are: “In the little village of Etretat, the men, who are all seafaring folk, go every year to Newfoundland to fish for cod.
One night the little son of one of these fishermen woke up with a start, crying out that his father was dead.
The child was quieted, and again he woke up exclaiming that his father was drowned.
The widow then remembered how her son had woke up and spoken of his father's death.
Everyone said it was a miracle, and the affair caused a great sensation.
The dates were compared, and it was found that the accident and the dream were almost coincident, whence they concluded that they had happened on the same night and at the same hour.
And there is a mystery of magnetism.” The story-teller stopped suddenly.
Thereupon, one of those who had heard him, much affected by the narrative, asked: “And can you explain this?” “Perfectly, monsieur.
I have discovered the secret.
The circumstance surprised me and even perplexed me very much; but you see, I do not believe on principle.
Just as others begin by believing, I begin by doubting; and when I cannot understand, I continue to deny that there can be any telepathic communication between souls; certain that my own intelligence will be able to explain it.
Well, I kept on inquiring into the matter, and by dint of questioning all the wives of the absent seamen, I was convinced that not a week passed without one of them, or one of their children dreaming and declaring when they woke up that the father was drowned.
The horrible and continual fear of this accident makes them always talk about it.
Now, if one of these frequent predictions coincides, by a very simple chance, with the death of the person referred to, people at once declare it to be a miracle; for they suddenly lose sight of all the other predictions of misfortune that have remained unfulfilled.
I have myself known fifty cases where the persons who made the prediction forgot all about it a week afterwards.
But, if, then one happens to die, then the recollection of the thing is immediately revived, and people are ready to believe in the intervention of God, according to some, and magnetism, according to others.” One of the smokers remarked: “What you say is right enough; but what about your second story?” “Oh! my second story is a very delicate matter to relate.
It happened to myself, and so I don't place any great value on my own view of the matter.
An interested party can never give an impartial opinion.
However, here it is: “Among my acquaintances was a young woman on whom I had never bestowed a thought, whom I had never even looked at attentively, never taken any notice of.
“I classed her among the women of no importance, though she was not bad- looking; she appeared, in fact, to possess eyes, a nose, a mouth, some sort of hair—just a colorless type of countenance.
She was one of those beings who awaken only a chance, passing thought, but no special interest, no desire.
I suddenly discovered in her a number of qualities which I had never before observed, a sweet charm, a languorous fascination; she awakened in me that sort of restless emotion that causes one to pursue a woman.
“You have all had these strange dreams which make you overcome the impossible, which open to you double-locked doors, unexpected joys, tightly folded arms?
“Which of us in these troubled, excising, breathless slumbers, has not held, clasped, embraced with rapture, the woman who occupied his thoughts?
And have you ever noticed what superhuman delight these happy dreams give us?
Into what mad intoxication they cast you! with what passionate spasms they shake you! and with what infinite, caressing, penetrating tenderness they fill your heart for her whom you hold clasped in your arms in that adorable illusion that is so like reality!
“All this I felt with unforgettable violence.
This woman was mine, so much mine that the pleasant warmth of her skin remained in my fingers, the odor of her skin, in my brain, the taste of her kisses, on my lips, the sound of her voice lingered in my ears, the touch of her clasp still clung to me, and the burning charm of her tenderness still gratified my senses long after the delight but disillusion of my awakening.
“When the day dawned she haunted me, possessed me, filled my senses to such an extent that I was not one second without thinking of her.
As I went upstairs to her apartment, I was so overcome by emotion that I trembled, and my heart beat rapidly.
“I entered the apartment.
She rose the moment she heard my name mentioned; and suddenly our eyes met in a peculiar fixed gaze.
I stammered out some commonplaces which she seemed not to hear.
Then, abruptly, clasping my arms round her, my dream was realized so suddenly that I began to doubt whether I was really awake.
We were friends after this for two years.” “What conclusion do you draw from it?” said a voice.
The story-teller seemed to hesitate.
“The conclusion I draw from it—well, by Jove, the conclusion is that it was just a coincidence!
Badon- Leremince to the grave, and the last words of the funeral oration pronounced by the delegate of the district remained in the minds of all: “He was an honest man, at least!” An honest man he had been in all the known acts of his life, in his words, in his examples, his attitude, his behavior, his enterprises, in the cut of his beard and the shape of his hats.
He never had said a word that did not set an example, never had given an alms without adding a word of advice, never had extended his hand without appearing to bestow a benediction.
He left two children, a boy and a girl.
His son was counselor general, and his daughter, having married a lawyer, M.
They were inconsolable at the death of their father, for they loved him sincerely.
As soon as the ceremony was over, the son, daughter and son-in-law returned to the house of mourning, and, shutting themselves in the library, they opened the will, the seals of which were to be broken by them alone and only after the coffin had been placed in the ground.
This wish was expressed by a notice on the envelope.
Yes, I committed a crime, a frightful, abominable crime.
I was twenty-six years old, and I had just been called to the bar in Paris, and was living the life off young men from the provinces who are stranded in this town without acquaintances, relatives, or friends.
I took a sweetheart.
Solitude fills me with horrible anguish, the solitude of my room beside my fire in the evening.
I feel then as if I were alone on earth, alone, but surrounded by vague dangers, unknown and terrible things; and the partition that separates me from my neighbor, my neighbor whom I do not know, keeps me at as great a distance from him as the stars that I see through my window.
A sort of fever pervades me, a fever of impatience and of fear, and the silence of the walls terrifies me.
The silence of a room where one lives alone is so intense and so melancholy.
It is not only a silence of the mind; when a piece of furniture cracks a shudder goes through you for you expect no noise in this melancholy abode.
How many times, nervous and timid from this motionless silence, I have begun to talk, to repeat words without rhyme or reason, only to make some sound.
Is there anything more dreadful than talking to one's self in an empty house?
One's voice sounds like that of another, an unknown voice talking aimlessly, to no one, into the empty air, with no ear to listen to it, for one knows before they escape into the solitude of the room exactly what words will be uttered.
And when they resound lugubriously in the silence, they seem no more than an echo, the peculiar echo of words whispered by ones thought.
My sweetheart was a young girl like other young girls who live in Paris on wages that are insufficient to keep them.
I would make a little provision for this one, for it is an understood thing in our social set that a woman's love should be paid for, in money if she is poor, in presents if she is rich.
But one day she told me she was enceinte.
I was thunderstruck, and saw in a second that my life would be ruined.
I saw the fetter that I should wear until my death, everywhere, in my future family life, in my old age, forever; the fetter of a woman bound to my life through a child; the fetter of the child whom I must bring up, watch over, protect, while keeping myself unknown to him, and keeping him hidden from the world.
I was greatly disturbed at this news, and a confused longing, a criminal desire, surged through my mind; I did not formulate it, but I felt it in my heart, ready to come to the surface, as if some one hidden behind a portiere should await the signal to come out.
If some accident might only happen!
I did not wish my sweetheart to die!
But I wished, possibly, that the child might die before I saw it.
I set up housekeeping in my little bachelor apartment, an imitation home, with a horrible child.
He looked like all children; I did not care for him.
Fathers, you see, do not show affection until later.
They have not the instinctive and passionate tenderness of mothers; their affection has to be awakened gradually, their mind must become attached by bonds formed each day between beings that live in each other's society.
I now avoided my home, which was too small, where soiled linen, baby-clothes and stockings the size of gloves were lying round, where a thousand articles of all descriptions lay on the furniture, on the arm of an easy-chair, everywhere.
I went out chiefly that I might not hear the child cry, for he cried on the slightest pretext, when he was bathed, when he was touched, when he was put to bed, when he was taken up in the morning, incessantly.
I had made a few acquaintances, and I met at a reception the woman who was to be your mother.
I fell in love with her and became desirous to marry her.
I courted her; I asked her parents' consent to our marriage and it was granted.
I found myself in this dilemma: I must either marry this young girl whom I adored, having a child already, or else tell the truth and renounce her, and happiness, my future, everything; for her parents, who were people of rigid principles, would not give her to me if they knew.
I passed a month of horrible anguish, of mortal torture, a month haunted by a thousand frightful thoughts; and I felt developing in me a hatred toward my son, toward that little morsel of living, screaming flesh, who blocked my path, interrupted my life, condemned me to an existence without hope, without all those vague expectations that make the charm of youth.
But just then my companion's mother became ill, and I was left alone with the child.
It was in December, and the weather was terribly cold.
My companion had just left.
I sat down in an armchair before the fire.
The wind was blowing, making the windows rattle, a dry, frosty wind; and I saw trough the window the stars shining with that piercing brightness that they have on frosty nights.
Then the idea that had obsessed me for a month rose again to the surface.
As soon as I was quiet it came to me and harassed me.
It was there, in my head, in my heart, in my whole body, it seemed to me; and it swallowed me up as a wild beast might have.
I endeavored to drive it away, to repulse it, to open my mind to other thoughts, as one opens a window to the fresh morning breeze to drive out the vitiated air; but I could not drive it from my brain, not even for a second.
It gnawed at my soul, and I felt a frightful pain, a real physical and moral pain.
How could I escape from this situation?
And I loved the one who was to become your mother with a mad passion, which this insurmountable obstacle only aggravated.
A terrible rage was taking possession of me, choking me, a rage that verged on madness!
The child was sleeping.
It was he, this abortion, this spawn, this nothing, that condemned me to irremediable unhappiness!
What malevolent power took possession of me?
Oh! the temptation to crime came to me without any forewarning.
All I recall is that my heart beat tumultuously.
It beat so hard that I could hear it, as one hears the strokes of a hammer behind a partition.
In my head there was a strange confusion, a tumult, a senseless disorder, a lack of presence of mind.
It was one of those hours of bewilderment and hallucination when a man is neither conscious of his actions nor able to guide his will.
I gently raised the coverings from the body of the child; I turned them down to the foot of the crib, and he lay there uncovered and naked.
A breath of icy air glided in like an assassin; it was so cold that I drew aside, and the two candles flickered.
I remained standing near the window, not daring to turn round, as if for fear of seeing what was doing on behind me, and feeling the icy air continually across my forehead, my cheeks, my hands, the deadly air which kept streaming in.
I was not thinking, I was not reflecting.
All at once a little cough caused me to shudder frightfully from head to foot, a shudder that I feel still to the roots of my hair.
And with a frantic movement I abruptly closed both sides of the window and, turning round, ran over to the crib.
My heart was suddenly touched, grieved, filled with pity, tenderness, love for this poor innocent being that I had wished to kill.
I kissed his fine, soft hair long and tenderly; then I went and sat down before the fire.
I reflected with amazement with horror on what I had done, asking myself whence come those tempests of the soul in which a man loses all perspective of things, all command over himself and acts as in a condition of mad intoxication, not knowing whither he is going—like a vessel in a hurricane.
Seeing him breathing quietly I felt reassured, when he coughed a third time.
It gave me such a shock tat I started backward, just as one does at sight of something horrible, and let my candle fall.
As I stood erect after picking it up, I noticed that my temples were bathed in perspiration, that cold sweat which is the result of anguish of soul.
And I remained until daylight bending over my son, becoming calm when he remained quiet for some time, and filled with atrocious pain when a weak cough came from his mouth.
He awoke with his eyes red, his throat choked, and with an air of suffering.
He came at the end of an hour, and said, after examining the child: “Did he not catch cold?” I began to tremble like a person with palsy, and I faltered: “No, I do not think so.” And then I said: “What is the matter?
My son had remained almost all day in a condition of drowsiness, coughing from time to time.
During the night inflammation of the lungs set in.
I cannot express what I suffered in those interminable hours that divide morning from night, right from morning.
And since—since that moment, I have not passed one hour, not a single hour, without the frightful burning recollection, a gnawing recollection, a memory that seems to wring my heart, awaking in me like a savage beast imprisoned in the depth of my soul.
Poirel de la Voulte raised his spectacles with a motion that was peculiar to him whenever he finished reading a contract; and the three heirs of the defunct looked at one another without speaking, pale and motionless.
At the end of a minute the lawyer resumed: “That must be destroyed.” The other two bent their heads in sign of assent.
He lighted a candle, carefully separated the pages containing the damaging confession from those relating to the disposition of money, then he held them over the candle and threw them into the fireplace.
And they watched the white sheets as they burned, till they were presently reduced to little crumbling black heaps.
And as some words were still visible in white tracing, the daughter, with little strokes of the toe of her shoe, crushed the burning paper, mixing it with the old ashes in the fireplace.
Then all three stood there watching it for some time, as if they feared that the destroyed secret might escape from the fireplace.
A MOTHER OF MONSTERS I recalled this horrible story, the events of which occurred long ago, and this horrible woman, the other day at a fashionable seaside resort, where I saw on the beach a well-known young, elegant and charming Parisienne, adored and respected by everyone.
I had been invited by a friend to pay him a visit in a little provincial town.
He took me about in all directions to do the honors of the place, showed me noted scenes, chateaux, industries, ruins.
He pointed out monuments, churches, old carved doorways, enormous or distorted trees, the oak of St.
Andrew, and the yew tree of Roqueboise.
When I had exhausted my admiration and enthusiasm over all the sights, my friend said with a distressed expression on his face, that there was nothing left to look at.
But, all at once, he uttered an exclamation: “Oh, yes!
We have the 'Mother of Monsters'; I must take you to see her.” “Who is that, the 'Mother of Monsters'?” I asked.
“She is an abominable woman,” he replied, “a regular demon, a being who voluntarily brings into the world deformed, hideous, frightful children, monstrosities, in fact, and then sells them to showmen who exhibit such things.
“These exploiters of freaks come from time to time to find out if she has any fresh monstrosity, and if it meets with their approval they carry it away with them, paying the mother a compensation.
“She has eleven of this description.
“You think I am joking, romancing, exaggerating.
It was attractive and well kept.
The garden was filled with fragrant flowers.
One might have supposed it to be the residence of a retired lawyer.
A maid ushered us into a sort of little country parlor, and the wretch appeared.
She was a tall, big woman with hard features, but well formed, vigorous and healthy, the true type of a robust peasant woman, half animal, and half woman.
She was aware of her reputation and received everyone with a humility that smacked of hatred.
“What do the gentlemen wish?” she asked.
“They tell me that your last child is just like an ordinary child, that he does not resemble his brothers at all,” replied my friend.
Is it true?” She cast on us a malicious and furious look as she said: “Oh, no, oh, no, my poor sir!
“They are all like that, it is heartbreaking!
How can the good God be so hard on a poor woman who is all alone in the world, how can He?” She spoke hurriedly, her eyes cast down, with a deprecating air as of a wild beast who is afraid.
Her harsh voice became soft, and it seemed strange to hear those tearful falsetto tones issuing from that big, bony frame, of unusual strength and with coarse outlines, which seemed fitted for violent action, and made to utter howls like a wolf.
I may have been deceived.
“There are many people to whom you will show it; you know whom I mean.” She gave a start, and resuming her natural voice, and giving free play to her anger, she screamed: “Was that why you came here?
Because my children are like animals, tell me?
At the brutal tone of her voice, a sort of moaning, or rather a mewing, the lamentable cry of an idiot, came from the adjoining room.
I shivered to the marrow of my bones.
We retreated before her.
“Take care, Devil” (they called her the Devil); said my friend, “take care; some day you will get yourself into trouble through this.” She began to tremble, beside herself with fury, shaking her fist and roaring: “Be off with you!
Be off with you, miscreants!” She was about to attack us, but we fled, saddened at what we had seen.
She was an honest girl, steady and economical.
She was never known to have an admirer, and never suspected of any frailty.
“She soon found herself in trouble, and was tortured with fear and shame.
Wishing to conceal her misfortune, she bound her body tightly with a corset of her own invention, made of boards and cord.
The more she developed, the more she bound herself with this instrument of torture, suffering martyrdom, but brave in her sorrow, not allowing anyone to see, or suspect, anything.
She maimed the little unborn being, cramping it with that frightful corset, and made a monster of it.
Its head was squeezed and elongated to a point, and its large eyes seemed popping out of its head.
Its limbs, exaggeratedly long, and twisted like the stalk of a vine, terminated in fingers like the claws of a spider.
“The child was born in an open field, and when the weeders saw it, they fled away, screaming, and the report spread that she had given birth to a demon.
She brought up the monster, whom she hated with a savage hatred, and would have strangled, perhaps, if the priest had not threatened her with arrest.
“One day some travelling showmen heard about the frightful creature, and asked to see it, so that if it pleased them they might take it away.
At first, she had refused to let them see the little animal, as she was ashamed; but when she discovered it had a money value, and that these people were anxious to get it, she began to haggle with them, raising her price with all a peasant's persistence.
“She made them draw up a paper, in which they promised to pay her four hundred francs a year besides, as though they had taken this deformity into their employ.
“Incited by the greed of gain, she continued to produce these phenomena, so as to have an assured income like a bourgeoise.
Several died, and she was heartbroken.
“The law tried to interfere, but as they had no proof they let her continue to produce her freaks.
“She has at this moment eleven alive, and they bring in, on an average, counting good and bad years, from five to six thousand francs a year.
One, alone, is not placed, the one she was unwilling to show us.
But she will not keep it long, for she is known to all the showmen in the world, who come from time to time to see if she has anything new.
“She even gets bids from them when the monster is valuable.” My friend was silent.
A profound disgust stirred my heart, and a feeling of rage, of regret, to think that I had not strangled this brute when I had the opportunity.
I had forgotten this story, when I saw on the beach of a fashionable resort the other day, an elegant, charming, dainty woman, surrounded by men who paid her respect as well as admiration.
I was walking along the beach, arm in arm with a friend, the resident physician.
Ten minutes later, I saw a nursemaid with three children, who were rolling in the sand.
A pair of little crutches lay on the ground, and touched my sympathy.
I then noticed that these three children were all deformed, humpbacked, or crooked; and hideous.
“Those are the offspring of that charming woman you saw just now,” said the doctor.
I was filled with pity for her, as well as for them, and exclaimed: “Oh, the poor mother!
Pity the poor children,” replied the doctor.
“This is the consequence of preserving a slender figure up to the last.
These little deformities were made by the corset.
But what does she care, as long as he can be beautiful and have admirers!” And then I recalled that other woman, the peasant, the “Devil,” who sold her children, her monsters.
AN UNCOMFORTABLE BED One autumn I went to spend the hunting season with some friends in a chateau in Picardy.
My friends were fond of practical jokes.
When I arrived, they gave me a princely reception, which at once awakened suspicion in my mind.
They fired off rifles, embraced me, made much of me, as if they expected to have great fun at my expense.
They have something in store for you.” During the dinner the mirth was excessive, exaggerated, in fact.
I thought: “Here are people who have more than their share of amusement, and apparently without reason.
Assuredly I am to be the victim of the joke.
Attention!” During the entire evening every one laughed in an exaggerated fashion.
I scented a practical joke in the air, as a dog scents game.
I was watchful, restless.
Every one seemed to me an object of suspicion, and I even looked distrustfully at the faces of the servants.
The hour struck for retiring; and the whole household came to escort me to my room.
They called to me: “Good-night.” I entered the apartment, shut the door, and remained standing, without moving a single step, holding the wax candle in my hand.
I heard laughter and whispering in the corridor.
I cast a glance round the walls, the furniture, the ceiling, the hangings, the floor.
I saw nothing to justify suspicion.
An idea came into my head: “My candle may suddenly go out and leave me in darkness.” Then I went across to the mantelpiece and lighted all the wax candles that were on it.
After that I cast another glance around me without discovering anything.
I advanced with short steps, carefully examining the apartment.
I inspected every article, one after the other.
The shutters, large wooden shutters, were open.
I shut them with great care, and then drew the curtains, enormous velvet curtains, and placed a chair in front of them, so as to have nothing to fear from outside.
Then I cautiously sat down.
The armchair was solid.
However, the night was advancing; and I ended by coming to the conclusion that I was foolish.
If they were spying on me, as I supposed, they must, while waiting for the success of the joke they had been preparing for me, have been laughing immoderately at my terror.
But the bed was particularly suspicious-looking.
I pulled at the curtains.
I was going perhaps to receive a cold shower both from overhead, or perhaps, the moment I stretched myself out, to find myself sinking to the floor with my mattress.
I searched in my memory for all the practical jokes of which I ever had experience.
Ah! certainly not! certainly not!
Then I suddenly bethought myself of a precaution which I considered insured safety.
I caught hold of the side of the mattress gingerly, and very slowly drew it toward me.
It came away, followed by the sheet and the rest of the bedclothes.
I dragged all these objects into the very middle of the room, facing the entrance door.
I made my bed over again as best I could at some distance from the suspected bedstead and the corner which had filled me with such anxiety.
Then I extinguished all the candles, and, groping my way, I slipped under the bed clothes.
For at least another hour I remained awake, starting at the slightest sound.
Everything seemed quiet in the chateau.
I must have been in a deep sleep for a long time, but all of a sudden I was awakened with a start by the fall of a heavy body tumbling right on top of my own, and, at the same time, I received on my face, on my neck, and on my chest a burning liquid which made me utter a howl of pain.
And a dreadful noise, as if a sideboard laden with plates and dishes had fallen down, almost deafened me.
I was smothering beneath the weight that was crushing me and preventing me from moving.
I stretched out my hand to find out what was the nature of this object.
I felt a face, a nose, and whiskers.
Then, with all my strength, I launched out a blow at this face.
But I immediately received a hail of cuffings which made me jump straight out of the soaked sheets, and rush in my nightshirt into the corridor, the door of which I found open.
Oh, heavens! it was broad daylight.
The noise brought my friends hurrying into my apartment, and we found, sprawling over my improvised bed, the dismayed valet, who, while bringing me my morning cup of tea, had tripped over this obstacle in the middle of the floor and fallen on his stomach, spilling my breakfast over my face in spite of himself.
The precautions I had taken in closing the shutters and going to sleep in the middle of the room had only brought about the practical joke I had been trying to avoid.
A PORTRAIT “Hello! there's Milial!” said somebody near me.
His gray hair looked a little like those fur bonnets worn by certain Northern peoples, and his long beard, which fell down over his chest, had also somewhat the appearance of fur.
He was talking to a lady, leaning toward her, speaking in a low voice and looking at her with an expression full of respect and tenderness.
He had loved madly several times, and there had been certain tragedies with which his name had been connected.
When I spoke to women who were the loudest in his praise, and asked them whence came this power, they always answered, after thinking for a while: “I don't know—he has a certain charm about him.” He was certainly not handsome.
He had none of the elegance that we ascribe to conquerors of feminine hearts.
I wondered what might be his hidden charm.
The voices of some beings have a certain irresistible attraction, almost suggesting the flavor of things good to eat.
One is hungry for them, and the sound of their words penetrates us like a dainty morsel.
I asked him: “Do you know Monsieur Milial?” “Yes.” “Introduce us.” A minute later we were shaking hands and talking in the doorway.
What he said was correct, agreeable to hear; it contained no irritable thought.
The voice was sweet, soft, caressing, musical; but I had heard others much more attractive, much more moving.
One listened to him with pleasure, just as one would look at a pretty little brook.
No tension of the mind was necessary in order to follow him, no hidden meaning aroused curiosity, no expectation awoke interest.
His conversation was rather restful, but it did not awaken in one either a desire to answer, to contradict or to approve, and it was as easy to answer him as it was to listen to him.
The response came to the lips of its own accord, as soon as he had finished talking, and phrases turned toward him as if he had naturally aroused them.
I had known him for a quarter of an hour, and it seemed as if he were already one of my old friends, that I had known all about him for a long time; his face, his gestures, his voice, his ideas.
Suddenly, after a few minutes of conversation, he seemed already to be installed in my intimacy.
All constraint disappeared between us, and, had he so desired, I might have confided in him as one confides only in old friends.
Certainly there was some mystery about him.
Those barriers that are closed between most people and that are lowered with time when sympathy, similar tastes, equal intellectual culture and constant intercourse remove constraint—those barriers seemed not to exist between him and me, and no doubt this was the case between him and all people, both men and women, whom fate threw in his path.
After half an hour we parted, promising to see each other often, and he gave me his address after inviting me to take luncheon with him in two days.
A correct and silent domestic showed me into a beautiful, quiet, softly lighted parlor.
I felt comfortable there, at home.
How often I have noticed the influence of apartments on the character and on the mind!
There are some which make one feel foolish; in others, on the contrary, one always feels lively.
Some make us sad, although well lighted and decorated in light-colored furniture; others cheer us up, although hung with sombre material.
Our eye, like our heart, has its likes and dislikes, of which it does not inform us, and which it secretly imposes on our temperament.
The harmony of furniture, walls, the style of an ensemble, act immediately on our mental state, just as the air from the woods, the sea or the mountains modifies our physical natures.
I sat down on a cushion-covered divan and felt myself suddenly carried and supported by these little silk bags of feathers, as if the outline of my body had been marked out beforehand on this couch.
There was nothing striking about the room; every- where were beautiful and modest things, simple and rare furniture, Oriental curtains which did not seem to come from a department store but from the interior of a harem; and exactly opposite me hung the portrait of a woman.
It was a portrait of medium size, showing the head and the upper part of the body, and the hands, which were holding a book.
She was young, bareheaded; ribbons were woven in her hair; she was smiling sadly.
Was it because she was bareheaded, was it merely her natural expression?
I never have seen a portrait of a lady which seemed so much in its place as that one in that dwelling.
All those that I know are on exhibition, whether the lady be dressed in her gaudiest gown, with an attractive headdress and a look which shows that she is posing first of all before the artist and then before those who will look at her or whether they have taken a comfortable attitude in an ordinary gown.
Some are standing majestically in all their beauty, which is not at all natural to them in life.
All of them have something, a flower or, a jewel, a crease in the dress or a curve of the lip, which one feels to have been placed there for effect by the artist.
Whether they wear a hat or merely their hair one can immediately notice that they are not entirely natural.
They seem to be calling somewhere, on people whom they wish to please and to whom they wish to appear at their best advantage; and they have studied their attitudes, sometimes modest, Sometimes haughty.
Yes, she was alone, for she was smiling as one smiles when thinking in solitude of something sad or sweet, and not as one smiles when one is being watched.
She seemed so much alone and so much at home that she made the whole large apartment seem absolutely empty.
Many people might come in and converse, laugh, even sing; she would still be alone with a solitary smile, and she alone would give it life with her pictured gaze.
It fell directly on me, fixed and caressing, without seeing me.
All portraits know that they are being watched, and they answer with their eyes, which see, think, follow us without leaving us, from the very moment we enter the apartment they inhabit.
This one did not see me; it saw nothing, although its look was fixed directly on me.
I remembered the surprising verse of Baudelaire: And your eyes, attractive as those of a portrait.
They did indeed attract me in an irresistible manner; those painted eyes which had lived, or which were perhaps still living, threw over me a strange, powerful spell.
Oh, what an infinite and tender charm, like a passing breeze, like a dying sunset of lilac rose and blue, a little sad like the approaching night, which comes behind the sombre frame and out of those impenetrable eyes!
Then I said: “Might I ask you who is this lady?” He answered: “That is my mother.
She died very young.” Then I understood whence came the inexplicable attraction of this man.
THE DRUNKARD The north wind was blowing a hurricane, driving through the sky big, black, heavy clouds from which the rain poured down on the earth with terrific violence.
A high sea was raging and dashing its huge, slow, foamy waves along the coast with the rumbling sound of thunder.
The waves followed each other close, rolling in as high as mountains, scattering the foam as they broke.
The storm engulfed itself in the little valley of Yport, whistling and moaning, tearing the shingles from the roofs, smashing the shutters, knocking down the chimneys, rushing through the narrow streets in such gusts that one could walk only by holding on to the walls, and children would have been lifted up like leaves and carried over the houses into the fields.
Several sailors, sheltered behind the curved bottoms of their boats, were watching this battle of the sky and the sea.
Then, one by one, they went away, for night was falling on the storm, wrapping in shadows the raging ocean and all the battling elements.
Just two men remained, their hands plunged deep into their pockets, bending their backs beneath the squall, their woolen caps pulled down over their ears; two big Normandy fishermen, bearded, their skin tanned through exposure, with the piercing black eyes of the sailor who looks over the horizon like a bird of prey.
One of them was saying: “Come on, Jeremie, let's go play dominoes.
It's my treat.” The other hesitated a while, tempted on one hand by the game and the thought of brandy, knowing well that, if he went to Paumelle's, he would return home drunk; held back, on the other hand, by the idea of his wife remaining alone in the house.
Say, what good is it doing you, since it's always you that's treating?” Nevertheless he was smiling at the idea of all this brandy drunk at the expense of another.
He was smiling the contented smirk of an avaricious Norman.
Mathurin, his friend, kept pulling him by the sleeve.
This isn't the kind of a night to go home without anything to warm you up.
All these men, clad in woolens, their elbows on the tables, were shouting to make themselves heard.
The more people came in, the more one had to shout in order to overcome the noise of voices and the rattling of dominoes on the marble tables.
Jeremie and Mathurin sat down in a corner and began a game, and the glasses were emptied in rapid succession into their thirsty throats.
Mathurin kept pouring and winking to the saloon keeper, a big, red-faced man, who chuckled as though at the thought of some fine joke; and Jeremie kept absorbing alcohol and wagging his head, giving vent to a roar of laughter and looking at his comrade with a stupid and contented expression.
All the customers were going away.
Every time that one of them would open the door to leave a gust of wind would blow into the cafe, making the tobacco smoke swirl around, swinging the lamps at the end of their chains and making their flames flicker, and suddenly one could hear the deep booming of a breaking wave and the moaning of the wind.
Jeremie, his collar unbuttoned, was taking drunkard's poses, one leg outstretched, one arm hanging down and in the other hand holding a domino.
They were alone now with the owner, who had come up to them, interested.
Feel less thirsty after wetting your throat?” Jeremie muttered: “The more I wet it, the drier it gets inside.” The innkeeper cast a sly glance at Mathurin.
He said: “And your brother, Mathurin, where's he now?” The sailor laughed silently: “Don't worry; he's warm, all right.” And both of them looked toward Jeremie, who was triumphantly putting down the double six and announcing: “Game!” Then the owner declared: “Well, boys, I'm goin' to bed.
Lock the door when you go, Mathurin, and slip the key under the mat the way you did the other night.” Mathurin answered: “Don't worry; it'll be all right.” Paumelle shook hands with his two customers and slowly went up the wooden stairs.
Then a loud creaking announced that he had got into bed.
The two men continued to play.
From time to time a more violent gust of wind would shake the whole house, and the two drinkers would look up, as though some one were about to enter.
Then Mathurin would take the bottle and fill Jeremie's glass.
But suddenly the clock over the bar struck twelve.
Its hoarse clang sounded like the rattling of saucepans.
Then Mathurin got up like a sailor whose watch is over.
“Come on, Jeremie, we've got to get out.” The other man rose to his feet with difficulty, got his balance by leaning on the table, reached the door and opened it while his companion was putting out the light.
As soon as they were in the street Mathurin locked the door and then said: “Well, so long.
See you to-morrow night!” And he disappeared in the darkness.
Jeremie took a few steps, staggered, stretched out his hands, met a wall which supported him and began to stumble along.
From time to time a gust of wind would sweep through the street, pushing him forward, making him run for a few steps; then, when the wind would die down, he would stop short, having lost his impetus, and once more he would begin to stagger on his unsteady drunkard's legs.
He went instinctively toward his home, just as birds go to their nests.
Finally he recognized his door, and began to feel about for the keyhole and tried to put the key in it.
Oh, Melina!” As he leaned against the door for support, it gave way and opened, and Jeremie, losing his prop, fell inside, rolling on his face into the middle of his room, and he felt something heavy pass over him and escape in the night.
He was no longer moving, dazed by fright, bewildered, fearing the devil, ghosts, all the mysterious beings of darkness, and he waited a long time without daring to move.
But when he found out that nothing else was moving, a little reason returned to him, the reason of a drunkard.
Then, suddenly, a suspicion crossed his darkened mind, an indistinct, vague suspicion.
He was not moving; he was sitting there in the dark, trying to gather together his scattered wits, his mind stumbling over incomplete ideas, just as his feet stumbled along.
I won't hurt you!” He waited, no voice was raised in the darkness.
He was now reasoning with himself out loud.
I'm drunk!” And he would continue: “Tell me who it was, Melina, or somethin'll happen to you.” After having waited again, he went on with the slow and obstinate logic of a drunkard: “He's been keeping me at that loafer Paumelle's place every night, so as to stop my going home.
A blind fury was gaining possession of him, mingling with the fumes of alcohol.
He continued: “Tell me who it was, Melina, or you'll get a licking—I warn you!” He was now standing, trembling with a wild fury, as though the alcohol had set his blood on fire.
Then, maddened, he roared: “So!
You were there, you piece of dirt, and you wouldn't answer!” And, lifting the chair, which he was holding in his strong sailor's grip, he swung it down before him with an exasperated fury.
A cry burst from the bed, an agonizing, piercing cry.
Then he began to thrash around like a thresher in a barn.
Then tired out, stupefied from his exertion, he stretched himself out on the ground and slept.
When day came a neighbor, seeing the door open, entered.
THE WARDROBE As we sat chatting after dinner, a party of men, the conversation turned on women, for lack of something else.
One of us said: “Here's a funny thing that happened to me on, that very subject.” And he told us the following story: One evening last winter I suddenly felt overcome by that overpowering sense of misery and languor that takes possession of one from time to time.
I was in my own apartment, all alone, and I was convinced that if I gave in to my feelings I should have a terrible attack of melancholia, one of those attacks that lead to suicide when they recur too often.
I put on my overcoat and went out without the slightest idea of what I was going to do.
Having gone as far as the boulevards, I began to wander along by the almost empty cafes.
It was raining, a fine rain that affects your mind as it does your clothing, not one of those good downpours which come down in torrents, driving breathless passers-by into doorways, but a rain without drops that deposits on your clothing an imperceptible spray and soon covers you with a sort of iced foam that chills you through.
I walked in one direction and then came back, looking for some place where I could spend two hours, and discovering for the first time that there is no place of amusement in Paris in the evening.
At last I decided to go to the Folies-Bergere, that entertaining resort for gay women.
In the long horseshoe curve there were only a few ordinary looking people, whose plebeian origin was apparent in their manners, their clothes, the cut of their hair and beard, their hats, their complexion.
It was rarely that one saw from time to time a man whom you suspected of having washed himself thoroughly, and his whole make-up seemed to match.
As for the women, they were always the same, those frightful women you all know, ugly, tired looking, drooping, and walking along in their lackadaisical manner, with that air of foolish superciliousness which they assume, I do not know why.
I thought to myself that, in truth, not one of those languid creatures, greasy rather than fat, puffed out here and thin there, with the contour of a monk and the lower extremities of a bow-legged snipe, was worth the louis that they would get with great difficulty after asking five.
But all at once I saw a little creature whom I thought attractive, not in her first youth, but fresh, comical and tantalizing.
I stopped her, and stupidly, without thinking, I made an appointment with her for that night.
I did not want to go back to my own home alone, all alone; I preferred the company and the caresses of this hussy.
The gas was already extinguished on the stairway.
I ascended the steps slowly, lighting a candle match every few seconds, stubbing my foot against the steps, stumbling and angry as I followed the rustle of the skirt ahead of me.
You know that that was the agreement.” “All right, my dear, I just wanted to know.
Wait for me here a minute, I will be right back.” And she left me in the darkness.
I heard her shutting two doors and then I thought I heard her talking.
I was surprised and uneasy.
The thought that she had a protector staggered me.
I listened attentively with ear and mind.
Some one was stirring about, walking quietly and very carefully.
She came back carrying a lighted candle.
She said “thou” in speaking to me, which was an indication of possession.
I went in and after passing through a dining room in which it was very evident that no one ever ate, I entered a typical room of all these women, a furnished room with red curtains and a soiled eiderdown bed covering.
“Make yourself at home, 'mon chat',” she said.
I gave a suspicious glance at the room, but there seemed no reason for uneasiness.
Come, hurry up.” I did as she suggested.
But this terrible languor that had overcome me at home took possession of me again, and deprived me of energy enough to move and I stayed in spite of the disgust that I felt for this association.
The unusual attractiveness that I supposed I had discovered in this creature over there under the chandeliers of the theater had altogether vanished on closer acquaintance, and she was nothing more to me now than a common woman, like all the others, whose indifferent and complaisant kiss smacked of garlic.
I thought I would say something.
“Over six months on the fifteenth of January.” “Where were you before that?” “In the Rue Clauzel.
But the janitor made me very uncomfortable and I left.” And she began to tell me an interminable story of a janitor who had talked scandal about her.
But, suddenly, I heard something moving quite close to us.
First there was a sigh, then a slight, but distinct, sound as if some one had turned round on a chair.
I sat up abruptly and asked.
“What was that noise?” She answered quietly and confidently: “Do not be uneasy, my dear boy, it is my neighbor.
The partition is so thin that one can hear everything as if it were in the room.
These are wretched rooms, just like pasteboard.” I felt so lazy that I paid no further attention to it.
We resumed our conversation.
Driven by the stupid curiosity that prompts all men to question these creatures about their first experiences, to attempt to lift the veil of their first folly, as though to find in them a trace of pristine innocence, to love them, possibly, in a fleeting memory of their candor and modesty of former days, evoked by a word, I insistently asked her about her earlier lovers.
Among all these lies I might, perhaps, discover something sincere and pathetic.
Where were you?” “I was at Argenteuil.” “What were you doing?” “I was waitress in a restaurant.” “What restaurant?” “'The Freshwater Sailor.' Do you know it?” “I should say so, kept by Bonanfan.” “Yes, that's it.” “And how did he make love to you, this boating man?” “While I was doing his room.
He took advantage of me.” But I suddenly recalled the theory of a friend of mine, an observant and philosophical physician whom constant attendance in hospitals has brought into daily contact with girl-mothers and prostitutes, with all the shame and all the misery of women, of those poor women who have become the frightful prey of the wandering male with money in his pocket.
“A woman,” he said, “is always debauched by a man of her own class and position.
I have volumes of statistics on that subject.
We accuse the rich of plucking the flower of innocence among the girls of the people.
They may gather some, but never for the first time.” Then, turning to my companion, I began to laugh.
The boating man was not the first.” “Oh, yes, my dear, I swear it:” “You are lying, my dear.” “Oh, no, I assure you.” “You are lying; come, tell me all.” She seemed to hesitate in astonishment.
I continued: “I am a sorcerer, my dear girl, I am a clairvoyant.
She faltered: “How did you guess?” “Come, go on telling me,” I said.
“Oh, the first time didn't amount to anything.
“There was a festival in the country.
He bossed every one, even the proprietor and his wife, as if he had been a king.
He was a big handsome man, who did not seem fitted to stand beside a kitchen range.
And as I was passing by him with a pile of plates he said to me, like that: 'Come, girlie, come down to the water with me and show me the country.' I went with him like a fool, and we had hardly got down to the bank of the river when he took advantage of me so suddenly that I did not even know what he was doing.
“Oh, I think Florentin belongs to him.” “Who is Florentin?” “My little boy.” “Oh!
Well, then, you made the boating man believe that he was the father, did you not?” “You bet!” “Did he have any money, this boating man?” “Yes, he left me an income of three hundred francs, settled on Florentin.” I was beginning to be amused and resumed: “All right, my girl, all right.
And how old is he now, Florentin?” She replied: “He is now twelve.
He will make his first communion in the spring.” “That is splendid.
And since then you have carried on your business conscientiously?” She sighed in a resigned manner.
It sounded like some one falling and picking themselves up again by feeling along the wall with their hands.
I had seized the candle and was looking about me, terrified and furious.
She had risen also and was trying to hold me back to stop me, murmuring: “That's nothing, my dear, I assure you it's nothing.” But I had discovered what direction the strange noise came from.
I walked straight towards a door hidden at the head of the bed and I opened it abruptly and saw before me, trembling, his bright, terrified eyes opened wide at sight of me, a little pale, thin boy seated beside a large wicker chair off which he had fallen.
Stretching out his arms to his mother, he cried: “It was not my fault, mamma, it was not my fault.
Do not scold me, it was not my fault.” I turned to the woman and said: “What does this mean?” She seemed confused and worried, and said in a broken voice: “What do you want me to do?
If any one comes for one hour or two he can stay in the wardrobe; he keeps quiet, he understands it.
I should like to see you sleep all night on a chair—you would have something to say.” She was getting angry and excited and was talking loud.
A poor delicate timid little fellow, a veritable child of the wardrobe, of the cold, dark closet, a child who from time to time was allowed to get a little warmth in the bed if it chanced to be unoccupied.
I also felt inclined to cry.
THE MOUNTAIN POOL Saint Agnes, May 6.
MY DEAR FRIEND: You asked me to write to you often and to tell you in particular about the things I might see.
You also begged me to rummage among my recollections of travels for some of those little anecdotes gathered from a chance peasant, from an innkeeper, from some strange traveling acquaintance, which remain as landmarks in the memory.
With a landscape depicted in a few lines, and a little story told in a few sentences you think one can give the true characteristics of a country, make it living, visible, dramatic.
I will, therefore, send you from time to time letters in which I will mention neither you nor myself, but only the landscape and the people who move about in it.
Spring is a season in which one ought, it seems to me, to drink and eat the landscape.
It is the season of chills, just as autumn is the season of reflection.
In spring the country rouses the physical senses, in autumn it enters into the soul.
I desired this year to breathe the odor of orange blossoms and I set out for the South of France just at the time that every one else was returning home.
I visited Monaco, the shrine of pilgrims, rival of Mecca and Jerusalem, without leaving any gold in any one else's pockets, and I climbed the high mountain beneath a covering of lemon, orange and olive branches.
The air that one inhales with delight is a quintessence of perfumes.
The strong yet sweet odor, delicious as some dainty, seems to blend with our being, to saturate us, to intoxicate us, to enervate us, to plunge us into a sleepy, dreamy torpor.
As though it were an opium prepared by the hands of fairies and not by those of druggists.
The surface of the mountains is cleft, hollowed out in all directions, and in these sinuous crevices grow veritable forests of lemon trees.
Here and there where the steep gorge is interrupted by a sort of step, a kind of reservoir has been built which holds the water of the rain storms.
They are large holes with slippery walls with nothing for any one to grasp hold of should they fall in.
I was walking slowly in one of these ascending valleys or gorges, glancing through the foliage at the vivid-hued fruit that remained on the branches.
The narrow gorge made the heavy odor of the flowers still more penetrating; the air seemed to be dense with it.
A feeling of lassitude came over me and I looked for a place to sit down.
A few drops of water glistened in the grass.
But I only reached the edge of one of these large, deep reservoirs.
I sat down tailor fashion, with my legs crossed under me, and remained there in a reverie before this hole, which looked as if it were filled with ink, so black and stagnant was the liquid it contained.
Down yonder, through the branches, I saw, like patches, bits of the Mediterranean gleaming so that they fairly dazzled my eyes.
But my glance always returned to the immense somber well that appeared to be inhabited by no aquatic animals, so motionless was its surface.
Suddenly a voice made me tremble.
An old gentleman who was picking flowers—this country is the richest in Europe for herbalists—asked me: “Are you a relation of those poor children, monsieur?” I looked at him in astonishment.
“What children, monsieur?” He seemed embarrassed and answered with a bow: “I beg your pardon.
On seeing you sitting thus absorbed in front of this reservoir I thought you were recalling the frightful tragedy that occurred here.” Now I wanted to know about it, and I begged him to tell me the story.
Two little boys frequently came to play on the edge of this cistern while their tutor lay under a tree reading a book.
One warm afternoon a piercing cry awoke the tutor who was dozing and the sound of splashing caused by something falling into the water made him jump to his feet abruptly.
The younger of the children, eight years of age, was shouting, as he stood beside the reservoir, the surface of which was stirred and eddying at the spot where the older boy had fallen in as he ran along the stone coping.
Distracted, without waiting or stopping to think what was best to do, the tutor jumped into the black water and did not rise again, having struck his head at the bottom of the cistern.
At the same moment the young boy who had risen to the surface was waving his stretched-out arms toward his brother.
The little fellow on land lay down full length, while the other tried to swim, to approach the wall, and presently the four little hands clasped each other, tightened in each other's grasp, contracted as though they were fastened together.
The older boy tried to climb up to the edge, but could not manage it, as the wall was perpendicular, and his brother, who was too weak, was sliding slowly towards the hole.
Then they remained motionless, filled anew with terror.
The little fellow squeezed his brother's hands with all his might and wept from nervousness as he repeated: “I cannot drag you out, I cannot drag you out.” And all at once he began to shout, “Help!
Help!” But his light voice scarcely penetrated beyond the dome of foliage above their heads.
They remained thus a long time, hours and hours, facing each other, these two children, with one thought, one anguish of heart and the horrible dread that one of them, exhausted, might let go the hands of the other.
At length the older boy, who was shivering with cold, said to the little one: “I cannot hold out any longer.
Good-by, little brother.” And the other, gasping, replied: “Not yet, not yet, wait.” Evening came on, the still evening with its stars mirrored in the water.
The older lad, his endurance giving out, said: “Let go my hand, I am going to give you my watch.” He had received it as a present a few days before, and ever since it had been his chief amusement.
The two unhappy beings, exhausted, had almost loosened their grasp.
The elder, at last, feeling that he was lost, murmured once more: “Good-by, little brother, kiss mamma and papa.” And his numbed fingers relaxed their hold.
Then he darted across the mountain, falling among the stones, overcome by the most frightful anguish that can wring a child's heart, and with a face like death reached the sitting-room, where his parents were waiting.
He became bewildered again as he led them to the gloomy reservoir.
“It is there; yes, it is there!” But the cistern had to be emptied, and the proprietor would not permit it as he needed the water for his lemon trees.
But if you had seen the hole itself your heart would have been wrung, as mine was, at the thought of the agony of that child hanging to his brother's hands, of the long suspense of those little chaps who were accustomed only to laugh and to play, and at the simple incident of the giving of the watch.
I said to myself: “May Fate preserve me from ever receiving a similar relic!” I know of nothing more terrible than such a recollection connected with a familiar object that one cannot dispose of.
Only think of it; each time that he handles this sacred watch the survivor will picture once more the horrible scene; the pool, the wall, the still water, and the distracted face of his brother-alive, and yet as lost as though he were already dead.
And all through his life, at any moment, the vision will be there, awakened the instant even the tip of his finger touches his watch pocket.
I left the spot and kept on climbing, leaving the region of orange trees for the region of olive trees, and the region of olive trees for the region of pines; then I came to a valley of stones, and finally reached the ruins of an ancient castle, built, they say, in the tenth century by a Saracen chief, a good man, who was baptized a Christian through love for a young girl.
Everywhere around me were mountains, and before me the sea, the sea with an almost imperceptible patch on it: Corsica, or, rather, the shadow of Corsica.
But on the mountain summits, blood-red in the glow of the sunset, in the boundless sky and on the sea, in all this superb landscape that I had come here to admire I saw only two poor children, one lying prone on the edge of a hole filled with black water, the other submerged to his neck, their hands intertwined, weeping opposite each other, in despair.
And it seemed as though I continually heard a weak, exhausted voice saying: “Good-by, little brother, I am going to give you my watch.” This letter may seem rather melancholy, dear friend.
I will try to be more cheerful some other day.
A CREMATION Last Monday an Indian prince died at Etretat, Bapu Sahib Khanderao Ghatay, a relation of His Highness, the Maharajah Gaikwar, prince of Baroda, in the province of Guzerat, Presidency of Bombay.
They were men of high rank who had come to Europe to study the military institutions of the principal Western nations.
The little band consisted of three princes, a nobleman, an interpreter and three servants.
The head of the commission had just died, an old man of forty-two and father-in-law of Sampatro Kashivao Gaikwar, brother of His Highness, the Gaikwar of Baroda.
The son-in-law accompanied his father-in-law.
The other East Indians were called Ganpatrao Shravanrao Gaikwar, cousin of His Highness Khasherao Gadhav; Vasudev Madhav Samarth, interpreter and secretary; the slaves: Ramchandra Bajaji, Ganu bin Pukiram Kokate, Rhambhaji bin Fabji.
On leaving his native land the one who died recently was overcome with terrible grief, and feeling convinced that he would never return he wished to give up the journey, but he had to obey the wishes of his noble relative, the Prince of Baroda, and he set out.
They came to spend the latter part of the summer at Etretat, and people would go out of curiosity every morning to see them taking their bath at the Etablissment des Roches-Blanches.
Five or six days ago Bapu Sahib Khanderao Ghatay was taken with pains in his gums; then the inflammation spread to the throat and became ulceration.
Gangrene set in and, on Monday, the doctors told his young friends that their relative was dying.
The final struggle was already beginning, and the breath had almost left the unfortunate man's body when his friends seized him, snatched him from his bed and laid him on the stone floor of the room, so that, stretched out on the earth, our mother, he should yield up his soul, according to the command of Brahma.
Boissaye, for a permit to burn the body that very day so as to fulfill the prescribed ceremonial of the Hindoo religion.
The mayor hesitated, telegraphed to the prefecture to demand instructions, at the same time sending word that a failure to reply would be considered by him tantamount to a consent.
As he had received no reply at 9 o'clock that evening, he decided, in view of the infectious character of the disease of which the East Indian had died, that the cremation of the body should take place that very night, beneath the cliff, on the beach, at ebb tide.
The mayor is being criticized now for this decision, though he acted as an intelligent, liberal and determined man, and was upheld and advised by the three physicians who had watched the case and reported the death.
A pretty strong wind was blowing from the ocean, although as yet there was no sea on, and swift, light, ragged clouds were driving across the sky.
They came from the edge of the horizon, looking dark against the background of the sky, but as they approached the moon they grew whiter and passed hurriedly across her face, veiling it for a few seconds without completely hiding it.
The tall straight cliffs that inclose the rounded beach of Etretat and terminate in two celebrated arches, called “the Gates,” lay in shadow, and made two great black patches in the softly lighted landscape.
The Casino orchestra was playing waltzes, polkas and quadrilles.
A rumor was presently circulated among the groups of dancers.
It was said that an East Indian prince had just died at the Hotel des Bains and that the ministry had been approached for permission to burn the body.
No one believed it, or at least no one supposed that such a thing could occur so foreign was the custom as yet to our customs, and as the night was far advanced every one went home.
At midnight, the lamplighter, running from street to street, extinguished, one after another, the yellow jets of flame that lighted up the sleeping houses, the mud and the puddles of water.
We waited, watching for the hour when the little town should be quiet and deserted.
Ever since noon a carpenter had been cutting up wood and asking himself with amazement what was going to be done with all these planks sawn up into little bits, and why one should destroy so much good merchandise.
This wood was piled up in a cart which went along through side streets as far as the beach, without arousing the suspicion of belated persons who might meet it.
It went along on the shingle at the foot of the cliff, and having dumped its contents on the beach the three Indian servants began to build a funeral pile, a little longer than it was wide.
It was one o'clock in the morning when the relations of the deceased were informed that they might accomplish their part of the work.
The door of the little house they occupied was open, and we perceived, lying on a stretcher in the small, dimly lighted vestibule the corpse covered with white silk.
We could see him plainly as he lay stretched out on his back, his outline clearly defined beneath this white veil.
The East Indians, standing at his feet, remained motionless, while one of them performed the prescribed rites, murmuring unfamiliar words in a low, monotonous tone.
He walked round and round the corpse; touching it occasionally, then, taking an urn suspended from three slender chains, he sprinkled it for some time with the sacred water of the Ganges, that East Indians must always carry with them wherever they go.
Then the stretcher was lifted by four of them who started off at a slow march.
The moon had gone down, leaving the muddy, deserted streets in darkness, but the body on the stretcher appeared to be luminous, so dazzlingly white was the silk, and it was a weird sight to see, passing along through the night, the semi-luminous form of this corpse, borne by those men, the dusky skin of whose faces and hands could scarcely be distinguished from their clothing in the darkness.
Behind the corpse came three Indians, and then, a full head taller than themselves and wrapped in an ample traveling coat of a soft gray color, appeared the outline of an Englishman, a kind and superior man, a friend of theirs, who was their guide and counselor in their European travels.
Beneath the cold, misty sky of this little northern beach I felt as if I were taking part in a sort of symbolical drama.
It seemed to me that they were carrying there, before me, the conquered genius of India, followed, as in a funeral procession, by the victorious genius of England robed in a gray ulster.
On the shingly beach the four bearers halted a few moments to take breath, and then proceeded on their way.
It was erected in an indentation, at the very foot of the cliff, which rose above it perpendicularly a hundred meters high, perfectly white but looking gray in the night.
Then twelve bottles of kerosene were poured over him and he was covered completely with thin slabs of pine wood.
For almost another hour the relations and servants kept piling up the funeral pyre which looked like one of those piles of wood that carpenters keep in their yards.
Then on top of this was poured the contents of twenty bottles of oil, and on top of all they emptied a bag of fine shavings.
A few steps further on, a flame was glimmering in a little bronze brazier, which had remained lighted since the arrival of the corpse.
The relations went to fetch the fire.
As it was barely alight, some oil was poured on it, and suddenly a flame arose lighting up the great wall of rock from summit to base.
An Indian who was leaning over the brazier rose upright, his two hands in the air, his elbows bent, and all at once we saw arising, all black on the immense white cliff, a colossal shadow, the shadow of Buddha in his hieratic posture.
The effect was so striking and unexpected that I felt my heart beat as though some supernatural apparition had risen up before me.
That was just what it was—the ancient and sacred image, come from the heart of the East to the ends of Europe, and watching over its son whom they were going to cremate there.
The shavings on top of the pyre were lighted and then the wood caught fire and a brilliant light illumined the cliff, the shingle and the foam of the waves as they broke on the beach.
It grew brighter from second to second, lighting up on the sea in the distance the dancing crest of the waves.
The breeze from the ocean blew in gusts, increasing the heat of the flame which flattened down, twisted, then shot up again, throwing out millions of sparks.
They mounted with wild rapidity along the cliff and were lost in the sky, mingling with the stars, increasing their number.
Some sea birds who had awakened uttered their plaintive cry, and, describing long curves, flew, with their white wings extended, through the gleam from the funeral pyre and then disappeared in the night.
Before long the pile of wood was nothing but a mass of flame, not red but yellow, a blinding yellow, a furnace lashed by the wind.
And, suddenly, beneath a stronger gust, it tottered, partially crumbling as it leaned towards the sea, and the corpse came to view, full length, blackened on his couch of flame and burning with long blue flames: The pile of wood having crumbled further on the right the corpse turned over as a man does in bed.
They immediately covered him with fresh wood and the fire started up again more furiously than ever.
There was no odor save that of burning pine and petroleum.
Toward five o'clock in the morning nothing remained but a heap of ashes.
The relations gathered them up, cast some of them to the winds, some in the sea, and kept some in a brass vase that they had brought from India.
They then retired to their home to give utterance to lamentations.
These young princes and their servants, by the employment of the most inadequate appliances succeeded in carrying out the cremation of their relation in the most perfect manner, with singular skill and remarkable dignity.
Everything was done according to ritual, according to the rigid ordinances of their religion.
The following morning at daybreak there was an indescribable commotion in Etretat.
Some insisted that they had burned a man alive, others that they were trying to hide a crime, some that the mayor would be put in jail, others that the Indian prince had succumbed to an attack of cholera.
The men were amazed, the women indignant.
A crowd of people spent the day on the site of the funeral pile, looking for fragments of bone in the shingle that was still warm.
They found enough bones to reconstruct ten skeletons, for the farmers on shore frequently throw their dead sheep into the sea.
The finders carefully placed these various fragments in their pocketbooks.
But not one of them possesses a true particle of the Indian prince.
That very night a deputy sent by the government came to hold an inquest.
He, however, formed an estimate of this singular case like a man of intelligence and good sense.
The East Indians declared that if they had been prevented in France from cremating their dead they would have taken him to a freer country where they could have carried out their customs.
Thus, I have seen a man cremated on a funeral pile, and it has given me a wish to disappear in the same manner.
In this way everything ends at once.
Man expedites the slow work of nature, instead of delaying it by the hideous coffin in which one decomposes for months.
Fire which purifies disperses in a few hours all that was a human being; it casts it to the winds, converting it into air and ashes, and not into ignominious corruption.
This is clean and hygienic.
Putrefaction beneath the ground in a closed box where the body becomes like pap, a blackened, stinking pap, has about it something repugnant and disgusting.
The sight of the coffin as it descends into this muddy hole wrings one's heart with anguish.
But the funeral pyre which flames up beneath the sky has about it something grand, beautiful and solemn.
MISTI I was very much interested at that time in a droll little woman.
She was married, of course, as I have a horror of unmarried flirts.
What enjoyment is there in making love to a woman who belongs to nobody and yet belongs to any one?
And, besides, morality aside, I do not understand love as a trade.
That disgusts me somewhat.
The especial attraction in a married woman to a bachelor is that she gives him a home, a sweet, pleasant home where every one takes care of you and spoils you, from the husband to the servants.
I have another weakness; it is that I become attached to the husband as well as the wife.
I acknowledge even that some husbands, ordinary or coarse as they may be, give me a feeling of disgust for their wives, however charming they may be.
But when the husband is intellectual or charming I invariably become very much attached to him.
In this way I have made some of my best friends, and have also proved in many cases the incontestable superiority of the male over the female in the human species.
The latter makes all sorts of trouble-scenes, reproaches, etc.; while the former, who has just as good a right to complain, treats you, on the contrary, as though you were the special Providence of his hearth.
Well, my friend was a quaint little woman, a brunette, fanciful, capricious, pious, superstitious, credulous as a monk, but charming.
She had a way of kissing one that I never saw in any one else—but that was not the attraction—and such a soft skin!
And an eye—her glance was like a slow caress, delicious and unending.
Her husband, inspector of some large public works, was frequently away from home and left us our evenings free.
Sometimes I spent them with her lounging on the divan with my forehead on one of her knees; while on the other lay an enormous black cat called “Misti,” whom she adored.
Our fingers would meet on the cat's back and would intertwine in her soft silky fur.
I felt its warm body against my cheek, trembling with its eternal purring, and occasionally a paw would reach out and place on my mouth, or my eyelid, five unsheathed claws which would prick my eyelids, and then be immediately withdrawn.
Sometimes we would go out on what we called our escapades.
They were very innocent, however.
They consisted in taking supper at some inn in the suburbs, or else, after dining at her house or at mine, in making the round of the cheap cafes, like students out for a lark.
We would go into the common drinking places and take our seats at the end of the smoky den on two rickety chairs, at an old wooden table.
Men in smocks were talking in loud tones as they drank their petits verres, and the astonished waiter placed before us two cherry brandies.
She, trembling, charmingly afraid, would raise her double black veil as far as her nose, and then take up her glass with the enjoyment that one feels at doing something delightfully naughty.
Each cherry she swallowed made her feel as if she had done something wrong, each swallow of the burning liquor had on her the affect of a delicate and forbidden enjoyment.
Then she would say to me in a low tone: “Let us go.” And we would leave, she walking quickly with lowered head between the drinkers who watched her going by with a look of displeasure.
And as soon as we got into the street she would give a great sigh of relief, as if we had escaped some terrible danger.
Sometimes she would ask me with a shudder: “Suppose they, should say something rude to me in those places, what would you do?” “Why, I would defend you, parbleu!” I would reply in a resolute manner.
And she would squeeze my arm for happiness, perhaps with a vague wish that she might be insulted and protected, that she might see men fight on her account, even those men, with me!
One evening as we sat at a table in a tavern at Montmartre, we saw an old woman in tattered garments come in, holding in her hand a pack of dirty cards.
Perceiving a lady, the old woman at once approached us and offered to tell my friend's fortune.
Emma, who in her heart believed in everything, was trembling with longing and anxiety, and she made a place beside her for the old woman.
The latter, old, wrinkled, her eyes with red inflamed rings round them, and her mouth without a single tooth in it, began to deal her dirty cards on the table.
She dealt them in piles, then gathered them up, and then dealt them out again, murmuring indistinguishable words.
Emma, turning pale, listened with bated breath, gasping with anxiety and curiosity.
She predicted vague happenings: happiness and children, a fair young man, a voyage, money, a lawsuit, a dark man, the return of some one, success, a death.
The mention of this death attracted the younger woman's attention.
You must come to my place to-morrow; I will tell you about it with coffee grounds which never make a mistake.” Emma turned anxiously to me: “Say, let us go there to-morrow.
She lived on the sixth floor, in a wretched house behind the Buttes-Chaumont.
We went there the following day.
Her room, an attic containing two chairs and a bed, was filled with strange objects, bunches of herbs hanging from nails, skins of animals, flasks and phials containing liquids of various colors.
He seemed like the demon of this sinister dwelling.
She leaned against the old woman, questioned her, begged her to tell.
I was young then and all alone, a seamstress.
He was as intelligent as a child, and gentle as well, and he worshiped me, my dear lady, he worshiped me more than one does a fetish.
“Well, I happened to make an acquaintance, a fine young man who was working in a white-goods house.
That went on for about three months on a footing of mere friendship.
He wanted us to live together, for economy's sake.
I had not made up my mind to anything definite; oh, no!
But I was pleased at the idea that we should spend an hour together.
I remained motionless, my eyes closed, in a paroxysm of happiness.
But, suddenly, I felt him start violently and he gave a scream, a scream that I shall never forget.
And the blood was streaming down like rain, madame.
“I tried to take the cat away, but he held on tight, scratching all the time; and he bit me, he was so crazy.
“When I began to bathe my poor friend's face, I noticed that his eyes were destroyed, both his eyes!
“He had to go to the hospital.
One would have supposed that he hated me after the occurrence.
If he acted as he did it was because he loved me, was it not?” The old woman was silent and began to stroke the lifeless animal whose body trembled on its iron framework.
Emma, with sorrowful heart, had forgotten about the predicted death—or, at least, she did not allude to it again, and she left, giving the woman five francs.
As her husband was to return the following day, I did not go to the house for several days.
When I did go I was surprised at not seeing Misti.
I was uneasy.” I was astonished.
What about?” She gave me a long kiss and said in a low tone: “I was uneasy about your eyes, my dear.” Misti appeared in.
Gil Blas of January 22, 1884, over the signature of “MAUFRIGNEUSE.” MADAME HERMET Crazy people attract me.
They live in a mysterious land of weird dreams, in that impenetrable cloud of dementia where all that they have witnessed in their previous life, all they have loved, is reproduced for them in an imaginary existence, outside of all laws that govern the things of this life and control human thought.
For them there is no such thing as the impossible, nothing is improbable; fairyland is a constant quantity and the supernatural quite familiar.
The old rampart, logic; the old wall, reason; the old main stay of thought, good sense, break down, fall and crumble before their imagination, set free and escaped into the limitless realm of fancy, and advancing with fabulous bounds, and nothing can check it.
For them everything happens, and anything may happen.
They make no effort to conquer events, to overcome resistance, to overturn obstacles.
By a sudden caprice of their flighty imagination they become princes, emperors, or gods, are possessed of all the wealth of the world, all the delightful things of life, enjoy all pleasures, are always strong, always beautiful, always young, always beloved!
They, alone, can be happy in this world; for, as far as they are concerned, reality does not exist.
I love to look into their wandering intelligence as one leans over an abyss at the bottom of which seethes a foaming torrent whose source and destination are both unknown.
But it is in vain that we lean over these abysses, for we shall never discover the source nor the destination of this water.
After all, it is only water, just like what is flowing in the sunlight, and we shall learn nothing by looking at it.
It is likewise of no use to ponder over the intelligence of crazy people, for their most weird notions are, in fact, only ideas that are already known, which appear strange simply because they are no longer under the restraint of reason.
Their whimsical source surprises us because we do not see it bubbling up.
Doubtless the dropping of a little stone into the current was sufficient to cause these ebullitions.
Nevertheless crazy people attract me and I always return to them, drawn in spite of myself by this trivial mystery of dementia.
One day as I was visiting one of the asylums the physician who was my guide said: “Come, I will show you an interesting case.” And he opened the door of a cell where a woman of about forty, still handsome, was seated in a large armchair, looking persistently at her face in a little hand mirror.
As soon as she saw us she rose to her feet, ran to the other end of the room, picked up a veil that lay on a chair, wrapped it carefully round her face, then came back, nodding her head in reply to our greeting.
“Oh, ill, monsieur, very ill.
The marks are increasing every day.” He replied in a tone of conviction: “Oh, no; oh, no; I assure you that you are mistaken.” She drew near to him and murmured: “No.
I counted ten pittings more this morning, three on the right cheek, four on the left cheek, and three on the forehead.
It is frightful, frightful!
I am lost, I am disfigured forever.” She fell back in her armchair and began to sob.
The doctor took a chair, sat down beside her, and said soothingly in a gentle tone: “Come, let me see; I assure you it is nothing.
With a slight cauterization I will make it all disappear.” She shook her head in denial, without speaking.
He tried to touch her veil, but she seized it with both hands so violently that her fingers went through it.
He continued to reason with her and reassure her.
If you do not let me see them I cannot cure you.” “I do not mind your seeing them,” she murmured, “but I do not know that gentleman who is with you.” “He is a doctor also, who can give you better care than I can.” She then allowed her face to be uncovered, but her dread, her emotion, her shame at being seen brought a rosy flush to her face and her neck, down to the collar of her dress.
She cast down her eyes, turned her face aside, first to the right; then to the left, to avoid our gaze and stammered out: “Oh, it is torture to me to let myself be seen like this!
It is horrible, is it not?
Is it not horrible?” I looked at her in much surprise, for there was nothing on her face, not a mark, not a spot, not a sign of one, nor a scar.
She turned towards me, her eyes still lowered, and said: “It was while taking care of my son that I caught this fearful disease, monsieur.
I saved him, but I am disfigured.
I sacrificed my beauty to him, to my poor child.
However, I did my duty, my conscience is at rest.
“Let me attend to it,” he said, “I will put it all right.” She held out her right cheek, and he began by touching it lightly with the brush here and there, as though he were putting little points of paint on it.
He did the same with the left cheek, then with the chin, and the forehead, and then exclaimed: “See, there is nothing there now, nothing at all!” She took up the mirror, gazed at her reflection with profound, eager attention, with a strong mental effort to discover something, then she sighed: “No.
I am infinitely obliged to you.” The doctor had risen.
He bowed to her, ushered me out and followed me, and, as soon as he had locked the door, said: “Here is the history of this unhappy woman.” Her name is Mme.
She was once very beautiful, a great coquette, very much beloved and very much in-love with life.
She was one of those women who have nothing but their beauty and their love of admiration to sustain, guide or comfort them in this life.
The constant anxiety to retain her freshness, the care of her complexion, of her hands, her teeth, of every portion of body that was visible, occupied all her time and all her attention.
The boy was brought up as are all children of society beauties.
Whether she saw the fatal crisis approaching, I cannot say.
Did she, like so many others, gaze for hours and hours at her skin, once so fine, so transparent and free from blemish, now beginning to shrivel slightly, to be crossed with a thousand little lines, as yet imperceptible, that will grow deeper day by day, month by month?
Did she also see slowly, but surely, increasing traces of those long wrinkles on the forehead, those slender serpents that nothing can check?
Did she suffer the torture, the abominable torture of the mirror, the little mirror with the silver handle which one cannot make up one's mind to lay down on the table, but then throws down in disgust only to take it up again in order to look more closely, and still more closely at the hateful and insidious approaches of old age?
And the mirror, the little round hand-glass in its carved silver frame, tells her horrible things; for it speaks, it seems to laugh, it jeers and tells her all that is going to occur, all the physical discomforts and the atrocious mental anguish she will suffer until the day of her death, which will be the day of her deliverance.
Did she weep, distractedly, on her knees, her forehead to the ground, and pray, pray, pray to Him who thus slays his creatures and gives them youth only that he may render old age more unendurable, and lends them beauty only that he may withdraw it almost immediately?
Did she pray to Him, imploring Him to do for her what He has never yet done for any one, to let her retain until her last day her charm, her freshness and her gracefulness?
Then, finding that she was imploring in vain an inflexible Unknown who drives on the years, one after another, did she roll on the carpet in her room, knocking her head against the furniture and stifling in her throat shrieks of despair?
Doubtless she suffered these tortures, for this is what occurred: One day (she was then thirty-five) her son aged fifteen, fell ill.
He took to his bed without any one being able to determine the cause or nature of his illness.
In the evening she would appear in a decollete dress, in a still greater hurry, for she was always late, and she had just time to inquire: “Well, what does the doctor say?” The priest would reply: “He has not yet given an opinion, madame.” But one evening the abbe replied: “Madame, your son has got the small- pox.” She uttered a scream of terror and fled from the room.
When her maid came to her room the following morning she noticed at once a strong odor of burnt sugar, and she found her mistress, with wide-open eyes, her face pale from lack of sleep, and shivering with terror in her bed.
As soon as the shutters were opened Mme.
Herrnet asked: “How is George?” “Oh, not at all well to-day, madame.” She did not rise until noon, when she ate two eggs with a cup of tea, as if she herself had been ill, and then she went out to a druggist's to inquire about prophylactic measures against the contagion of small-pox.
She did not come home until dinner time, laden with medicine bottles, and shut herself up at once in her room, where she saturated herself with disinfectants.
As soon as she saw him she exclaimed in a voice full of emotion: “Well?” “No improvement.
The next day, as soon as it was light, she sent to inquire for her son, but there was no improvement and she spent the whole day in her room, where little braziers were giving out pungent odors.
She spent a whole week in this manner, only going out for an hour or two during the afternoon to breathe the air.
She now sent to make inquiries every hour, and would sob when the reports were unfavorable.
On the morning of the eleventh day the priest, having been announced, entered her room, his face grave and pale, and said, without taking the chair she offered him: “Madame, your son is very ill and wishes to see you.” She fell on her knees, exclaiming: “Oh, my God!
Help me!” The priest continued: “The doctor holds out little hope, madame, and George is expecting you!” And he left the room.
Two hours later as the young lad, feeling himself dying, again asked for his mother, the abbe went to her again and found her still on her knees, still weeping and repeating: “I will not . . . .
I will not. . . .” He tried to persuade her, to strengthen her, to lead her.
He only succeeded in bringing on an attack of “nerves” that lasted some time and caused her to shriek.
The doctor when he came in the evening was told of this cowardice and declared that he would bring her in himself, of her own volition, or by force.
But after trying all manner of argument and just as he seized her round the waist to carry her into her son's room, she caught hold of the door and clung to it so firmly that they could not drag her away.
Then when they let go of her she fell at the feet of the doctor, begging his forgiveness and acknowledging that she was a wretched creature.
And then she exclaimed: “Oh, he is not going to die; tell me that he is not going to die, I beg of you; tell him that I love him, that I worship him. . .” The young lad was dying.
Feeling that he had only a few moments more to live, he entreated that his mother be persuaded to come and bid him a last farewell.
I cannot.” They endeavored to drag her along, but she held on with both hands to the railings and uttered such plaints that the passers-by in the street raised their heads.
And the dying boy waited, his eyes turned towards that window, waited to die until he could see for the last time the sweet, beloved face, the worshiped face of his mother.
The day following she was crazy.
THE MAGIC COUCH The Seine flowed past my house, without a ripple on its surface, and gleaming in the bright morning sunlight.
It was a beautiful, broad, indolent silver stream, with crimson lights here and there; and on the opposite side of the river were rows of tall trees that covered all the bank with an immense wall of verdure.
The sensation of life which is renewed each day, of fresh, happy, loving life trembled in the leaves, palpitated in the air, was mirrored in the water.
In the first paper I opened I noticed this headline, “Statistics of Suicides,” and I read that more than 8,500 persons had killed themselves in that year.
I saw this voluntary and hideous massacre of the despairing who were weary of life.
I saw men bleeding, their jaws fractured, their skulls cloven, their breasts pierced by a bullet, slowly dying, alone in a little room in a hotel, giving no thought to their wound, but thinking only of their misfortunes.
They would look at it fixedly without moving; then they would drink and await the result; then a spasm would convulse their cheeks and draw their lips together; their eyes would grow wild with terror, for they did not know that the end would be preceded by so much suffering.
They rose to their feet, paused, fell over and with their hands pressed to their stomachs they felt their internal organs on fire, their entrails devoured by the fiery liquid, before their minds began to grow dim.
I saw others hanging from a nail in the wall, from the fastening of the window, from a hook in the ceiling, from a beam in the garret, from a branch of a tree amid the evening rain.
And I surmised all that had happened before they hung there motionless, their tongues hanging out of their mouths.
I imagined the anguish of their heart, their final hesitation, their attempts to fasten the rope, to determine that it was secure, then to pass the noose round their neck and to let themselves fall.
I saw others lying on wretched beds, mothers with their little children, old men dying of hunger, young girls dying for love, all rigid, suffocated, asphyxiated, while in the center of the room the brasier still gave forth the fumes of charcoal.
And I saw others walking at night along the deserted bridges.
These were the most sinister.
A distant clock sounded the hour and, suddenly, in the vast silence of the night, there was heard the splash of a body falling into the river, a scream or two, the sound of hands beating the water, and all was still.
Sometimes, even, there was only the sound of the falling body when they had tied their arms down or fastened a stone to their feet.
I went through all their wretchedness; I endured in one hour all their tortures.
I knew all the sorrows that had led them to this, for I know the deceitful infamy of life, and no one has felt it more than I have.
How I understood them, these who weak, harassed by misfortune, having lost those they loved, awakened from the dream of a tardy compensation, from the illusion of another existence where God will finally be just, after having been ferocious, and their minds disabused of the mirages of happiness, have given up the fight and desire to put an end to this ceaseless tragedy, or this shameful comedy.
Why, it is the strength of those whose strength is exhausted, the hope of those who no longer believe, the sublime courage of the conquered!
Mercy for the despairing!
As for those who are simply disillusioned, let them march ahead with free soul and quiet heart.
They have nothing to fear since they may take their leave; for behind them there is always this door that the gods of our illusions cannot even lock.
I thought of this crowd of suicides: more than eight thousand five hundred in one year.
And it seemed to me that they had combined to send to the world a prayer, to utter a cry of appeal, to demand something that should come into effect later when we understood things better.
It seemed to me that all these victims, their throats cut, poisoned, hung, asphyxiated, or drowned, all came together, a frightful horde, like citizens to the polls, to say to society: “Grant us, at least, a gentle death!
See, we are numerous, we have the right to speak in these days of freedom, of philosophic independence and of popular suffrage.
Give to those who renounce life the charity of a death that will not be repugnant nor terrible.” I began to dream, allowing my fancy to roam at will in weird and mysterious fashion on this subject.
I seemed to be all at once in a beautiful city.
I walked about the streets, looking at the houses, the theaters, the public buildings, and presently found myself in a square where I remarked a large building; very handsome, dainty and attractive.
I was surprised on reading on the facade this inscription in letters of gold, “Suicide Bureau.” Oh, the weirdness of waking dreams where the spirit soars into a world of unrealities and possibilities!
Nothing astonishes one, nothing shocks one; and the unbridled fancy makes no distinction between the comic and the tragic.
I approached the building where footmen in knee-breeches were seated in the vestibule in front of a cloak-room as they do at the entrance of a club.
I entered out of curiosity.
A stout young man with a corporation was writing a letter as he smoked a cigar, the fragrance of which gave evidence of its quality.
We bowed to each other, and as soon as the footman had retired he asked: “What can I do for you?” “Monsieur,” I replied, “pardon my curiosity.
I had never seen this establishment.
The few words inscribed on the facade filled me with astonishment, and I wanted to know what was going on here.” He smiled before replying, then said in a low tone with a complacent air: “Mon Dieu, monsieur, we put to death in a cleanly and gentle—I do not venture to say agreeable manner those persons who desire to die.” I did not feel very shocked, for it really seemed to me natural and right.
What particularly surprised me was that on this planet, with its low, utilitarian, humanitarian ideals, selfish and coercive of all true freedom, any one should venture on a similar enterprise, worthy of an emancipated humanity.
“Monsieur,” he replied, “the number of suicides increased so enormously during the five years succeeding the world exposition of 1889 that some measures were urgently needed.
People killed themselves in the streets, at fetes, in restaurants, at the theater, in railway carriages, at the receptions held by the President of the Republic, everywhere.
It was not only a horrid sight for those who love life, as I do, but also a bad example for children.
Hence it became necessary to centralize suicides.” “What caused this suicidal epidemic?” “I do not know.
People begin to see things clearly and they are getting disgruntled.
It is the same to-day with destiny as with the government, we have found out what it is; people find that they are swindled in every direction, and they just get out of it all.
It is a club.” “A club!” “Yes, monsieur, founded by the most eminent men in the country, by men of the highest intellect and brightest intelligence.
In view of the enormous increase in suicides, and of the hideous spectacle they presented, a purely benevolent society was formed for the protection of those in despair, which placed at their disposal the facilities for a peaceful, painless, if not unforeseen death.” “Who can have authorized such an institution?” “General Boulanger during his brief tenure of power.
He could never refuse anything.
Hence, a society was formed of clear-sighted, disillusioned skeptics who desired to erect in the heart of Paris a kind of temple dedicated to the contempt for death.
This place was formerly a dreaded spot that no one ventured to approach.
Then its founders, who met together here, gave a grand inaugural entertainment with Mmes.
Sarah Bernhardt, Judic, Theo, Granier, and twenty others, and Mme. de Reske, Coquelin, Mounet-Sully, Paulus, etc., present, followed by concerts, the comedies of Dumas, of Meilhac, Halevy and Sardon.
We had only one thing to mar it, one drama by Becque which seemed sad, but which subsequently had a great success at the Comedie-Francaise.
The enterprise was launched.” “In the midst of the festivities!
What a funereal joke!” “Not at all.
Death need not be sad, it should be a matter of indifference.
We made death cheerful, crowned it with flowers, covered it with perfume, made it easy.
One learns to aid others through example; one can see that it is nothing.” “I can well understand that they should come to the entertainments; but did they come to . . .
One finds hardly any more drowned bodies in the Seine.” “Who was the first?” “A club member.” “As a sacrifice to the cause?” “I don't think so.
A man who was sick of everything, a 'down and out' who had lost heavily at baccarat for three months.” “Indeed?” “The second was an Englishman, an eccentric.
We then advertised in the papers, we gave an account of our methods, we invented some attractive instances.
I can explain at the same time.” “Yes, indeed.” He took his hat, opened the door, allowed me to precede him, and we entered a card room, where men sat playing as they, play in all gambling places.
They were chatting cheerfully, eagerly.
I have seldom seen such a jolly, lively, mirthful club.
As I seemed surprised, the secretary said: “Oh, the establishment has an unheard of prestige.
Then, once they get here, they feel obliged to be cheerful that they may not appear to be afraid.
So they joke and laugh and talk flippantly, they are witty and they become so.
At present it is certainly the most frequented and the most entertaining place in Paris.
The women are even thinking of building an annex for themselves.” “And, in spite of all this, you have many suicides in the house?” “As I said, about forty or fifty a day.
The middle class has also a large contingent.
“And how . . . do they do?” “They are asphyxiated . . . very slowly.” “In what manner?” “A gas of our own invention.
On the other side of the building are the public entrances—three little doors opening on small streets.
When a man or a woman present themselves they are interrogated.
Then they are offered assistance, aid, protection.
If a client accepts, inquiries are made; and sometimes we have saved their lives.” “Where do you get your money?” “We have a great deal.
There are a large number of shareholders.
Besides it is fashionable to contribute to the establishment.
The names of the donors are published in Figaro.
Then the suicide of every rich man costs a thousand francs.
It costs the poor nothing.” “How can you tell who is poor?” “Oh, oh, monsieur, we can guess!
And, besides, they must bring a certificate of indigency from the commissary of police of their district.
If you knew how distressing it is to see them come in!
I visited their part of our building once only, and I will never go again.
The place itself is almost as good as this part, almost as luxurious and comfortable; but they themselves . . . they themselves!!!
Then we have so many different cases, without counting those who say nothing, but simply ask: 'Where is it?' These are admitted at once and it is all over in a minute.” With a pang at my heart I repeated: “And . . . where is it?” “Here,” and he opened a door, adding: “Go in; this is the part specially reserved for club members, and the one least used.
We have so far had only eleven annihilations here.” “Ah!
You call that an . . . annihilation!” “Yes, monsieur.
Go in.” I hesitated.
It was a wide corridor, a sort of greenhouse in which panes of glass of pale blue, tender pink and delicate green gave the poetic charm of landscapes to the inclosing walls.
In this pretty salon there were divans, magnificent palms, flowers, especially roses of balmy fragrance, books on the tables, the Revue des Deuxmondes, cigars in government boxes, and, what surprised me, Vichy pastilles in a bonbonniere.
As I expressed my surprise, my guide said: “Oh, they often come here to chat.” He continued: “The public corridors are similar, but more simply furnished.” In reply to a question of mine, he pointed to a couch covered with creamy crepe de Chine with white embroidery, beneath a large shrub of unknown variety at the foot of which was a circular bed of mignonette.
The secretary added in a lower tone: “We change the flower and the perfume at will, for our gas, which is quite imperceptible, gives death the fragrance of the suicide's favorite flower.
It is volatilized with essences.
“Oh, monsieur, there is no danger.
I have tried it myself several times.” I was afraid he would think me a coward, and I said: “Well, I'll try it.” “Stretch yourself out on the 'endormeuse.”' A little uneasy I seated myself on the low couch covered with crepe de Chine and stretched myself full length, and was at once bathed in a delicious odor of mignonette.
I opened my mouth in order to breathe it in, for my mind had already become stupefied and forgetful of the past and was a prey, in the first stages of asphyxia, to the enchanting intoxication of a destroying and magic opium.
“Oh, oh, monsieur,” said the secretary, laughing, “it looks to me as if you were almost caught.” But a voice, a real voice, and no longer a dream voice, greeted me with the peasant intonation: “Good morning, m'sieu.
I saw the Seine distinctly in the sunlight, and, coming along a path, the garde champetre of the district, who with his right hand touched his kepi braided in silver.
Where are you going?” “I am going to look at a drowned man whom they fished up near the Morillons.
He even took off his trousers in order to tie his legs together with them.”
Du Bois Herein is Written The Forethought I.
Of Our Spiritual Strivings II.
Washington and Others IV.
Of the Meaning of Progress V.
Of the Wings of Atalanta VI.
Of the Training of Black Men VII.
Of Alexander Crummell XIII.
Of the Sorrow Songs The Afterthought To Burghardt and Yolande The Lost and the Found The Forethought Herein lie buried many things which if read with patience may show the strange meaning of being black here at the dawning of the Twentieth Century.
This meaning is not without interest to you, Gentle Reader; for the problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color line.
I pray you, then, receive my little book in all charity, studying my words with me, forgiving mistake and foible for sake of the faith and passion that is in me, and seeking the grain of truth hidden there.
I have sought here to sketch, in vague, uncertain outline, the spiritual world in which ten thousand thousand Americans live and strive.
First, in two chapters I have tried to show what Emancipation meant to them, and what was its aftermath.
In a third chapter I have pointed out the slow rise of personal leadership, and criticized candidly the leader who bears the chief burden of his race to-day.
Then, in two other chapters I have sketched in swift outline the two worlds within and without the Veil, and thus have come to the central problem of training men for life.
Venturing now into deeper detail, I have in two chapters studied the struggles of the massed millions of the black peasantry, and in another have sought to make clear the present relations of the sons of master and man.
Leaving, then, the white world, I have stepped within the Veil, raising it that you may view faintly its deeper recesses,—the meaning of its religion, the passion of its human sorrow, and the struggle of its greater souls.
Some of these thoughts of mine have seen the light before in other guise.
For kindly consenting to their republication here, in altered and extended form, I must thank the publishers of the Atlantic Monthly, The World’s Work, the Dial, The New World, and the Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science.
Before each chapter, as now printed, stands a bar of the Sorrow Songs,—some echo of haunting melody from the only American music which welled up from black souls in the dark past.
Of Our Spiritual Strivings O water, voice of my heart, crying in the sand, All night long crying with a mournful cry, As I lie and listen, and cannot understand The voice of my heart in my side or the voice of the sea, O water, crying for rest, is it I, is it I?
Unresting water, there shall never be rest Till the last moon droop and the last tide fail, And the fire of the end begin to burn in the west; And the heart shall be weary and wonder and cry like the sea, All life long crying without avail, As the water all night long is crying to me.
All, nevertheless, flutter round it.
They approach me in a half-hesitant sort of way, eye me curiously or compassionately, and then, instead of saying directly, How does it feel to be a problem? they say, I know an excellent colored man in my town; or, I fought at Mechanicsville; or, Do not these Southern outrages make your blood boil?
At these I smile, or am interested, or reduce the boiling to a simmer, as the occasion may require.
To the real question, How does it feel to be a problem?
And yet, being a problem is a strange experience,—peculiar even for one who has never been anything else, save perhaps in babyhood and in Europe.
It is in the early days of rollicking boyhood that the revelation first bursts upon one, all in a day, as it were.
I remember well when the shadow swept across me.
I was a little thing, away up in the hills of New England, where the dark Housatonic winds between Hoosac and Taghkanic to the sea.
In a wee wooden schoolhouse, something put it into the boys’ and girls’ heads to buy gorgeous visiting-cards—ten cents a package—and exchange.
The exchange was merry, till one girl, a tall newcomer, refused my card,—refused it peremptorily, with a glance.
Then it dawned upon me with a certain suddenness that I was different from the others; or like, mayhap, in heart and life and longing, but shut out from their world by a vast veil.
I had thereafter no desire to tear down that veil, to creep through; I held all beyond it in common contempt, and lived above it in a region of blue sky and great wandering shadows.
That sky was bluest when I could beat my mates at examination-time, or beat them at a foot-race, or even beat their stringy heads.
Alas, with the years all this fine contempt began to fade; for the words I longed for, and all their dazzling opportunities, were theirs, not mine.
Just how I would do it I could never decide: by reading law, by healing the sick, by telling the wonderful tales that swam in my head,—some way.
With other black boys the strife was not so fiercely sunny: their youth shrunk into tasteless sycophancy, or into silent hatred of the pale world about them and mocking distrust of everything white; or wasted itself in a bitter cry, Why did God make me an outcast and a stranger in mine own house?
The shades of the prison-house closed round about us all: walls strait and stubborn to the whitest, but relentlessly narrow, tall, and unscalable to sons of night who must plod darkly on in resignation, or beat unavailing palms against the stone, or steadily, half hopelessly, watch the streak of blue above.
After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and Mongolian, the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and gifted with second-sight in this American world,—a world which yields him no true self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself through the revelation of the other world.
It is a peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one’s self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity.
One ever feels his twoness,—an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
The history of the American Negro is the history of this strife,—this longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into a better and truer self.
He would not Africanize America, for America has too much to teach the world and Africa.
He would not bleach his Negro soul in a flood of white Americanism, for he knows that Negro blood has a message for the world.
He simply wishes to make it possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being cursed and spit upon by his fellows, without having the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in his face.
This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker in the kingdom of culture, to escape both death and isolation, to husband and use his best powers and his latent genius.
These powers of body and mind have in the past been strangely wasted, dispersed, or forgotten.
The shadow of a mighty Negro past flits through the tale of Ethiopia the Shadowy and of Egypt the Sphinx.
Through history, the powers of single black men flash here and there like falling stars, and die sometimes before the world has rightly gauged their brightness.
Here in America, in the few days since Emancipation, the black man’s turning hither and thither in hesitant and doubtful striving has often made his very strength to lose effectiveness, to seem like absence of power, like weakness.
And yet it is not weakness,—it is the contradiction of double aims.
The double-aimed struggle of the black artisan—on the one hand to escape white contempt for a nation of mere hewers of wood and drawers of water, and on the other hand to plough and nail and dig for a poverty-stricken horde—could only result in making him a poor craftsman, for he had but half a heart in either cause.
By the poverty and ignorance of his people, the Negro minister or doctor was tempted toward quackery and demagogy; and by the criticism of the other world, toward ideals that made him ashamed of his lowly tasks.
The would-be black savant was confronted by the paradox that the knowledge his people needed was a twice-told tale to his white neighbors, while the knowledge which would teach the white world was Greek to his own flesh and blood.
The innate love of harmony and beauty that set the ruder souls of his people a-dancing and a-singing raised but confusion and doubt in the soul of the black artist; for the beauty revealed to him was the soul-beauty of a race which his larger audience despised, and he could not articulate the message of another people.
This waste of double aims, this seeking to satisfy two unreconciled ideals, has wrought sad havoc with the courage and faith and deeds of ten thousand thousand people,—has sent them often wooing false gods and invoking false means of salvation, and at times has even seemed about to make them ashamed of themselves.
Away back in the days of bondage they thought to see in one divine event the end of all doubt and disappointment; few men ever worshipped Freedom with half such unquestioning faith as did the American Negro for two centuries.
To him, so far as he thought and dreamed, slavery was indeed the sum of all villainies, the cause of all sorrow, the root of all prejudice; Emancipation was the key to a promised land of sweeter beauty than ever stretched before the eyes of wearied Israelites.
In song and exhortation swelled one refrain—Liberty; in his tears and curses the God he implored had Freedom in his right hand.
At last it came,—suddenly, fearfully, like a dream.
With one wild carnival of blood and passion came the message in his own plaintive cadences:— “Shout, O children!
For God has bought your liberty!” Years have passed away since then,—ten, twenty, forty; forty years of national life, forty years of renewal and development, and yet the swarthy spectre sits in its accustomed seat at the Nation’s feast.
In vain do we cry to this our vastest social problem:— “Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves Shall never tremble!” The Nation has not yet found peace from its sins; the freedman has not yet found in freedom his promised land.
Whatever of good may have come in these years of change, the shadow of a deep disappointment rests upon the Negro people,—a disappointment all the more bitter because the unattained ideal was unbounded save by the simple ignorance of a lowly people.
The first decade was merely a prolongation of the vain search for freedom, the boon that seemed ever barely to elude their grasp,—like a tantalizing will-o’-the-wisp, maddening and misleading the headless host.
The holocaust of war, the terrors of the Ku-Klux Klan, the lies of carpet-baggers, the disorganization of industry, and the contradictory advice of friends and foes, left the bewildered serf with no new watchword beyond the old cry for freedom.
The ideal of liberty demanded for its attainment powerful means, and these the Fifteenth Amendment gave him.
The ballot, which before he had looked upon as a visible sign of freedom, he now regarded as the chief means of gaining and perfecting the liberty with which war had partially endowed him.
Had not votes made war and emancipated millions?
Had not votes enfranchised the freedmen?
Was anything impossible to a power that had done all this?
A million black men started with renewed zeal to vote themselves into the kingdom.
So the decade flew away, the revolution of 1876 came, and left the half-free serf weary, wondering, but still inspired.
Slowly but steadily, in the following years, a new vision began gradually to replace the dream of political power,—a powerful movement, the rise of another ideal to guide the unguided, another pillar of fire by night after a clouded day.
It was the ideal of “book-learning”; the curiosity, born of compulsory ignorance, to know and test the power of the cabalistic letters of the white man, the longing to know.
Here at last seemed to have been discovered the mountain path to Canaan; longer than the highway of Emancipation and law, steep and rugged, but straight, leading to heights high enough to overlook life.
Up the new path the advance guard toiled, slowly, heavily, doggedly; only those who have watched and guided the faltering feet, the misty minds, the dull understandings, of the dark pupils of these schools know how faithfully, how piteously, this people strove to learn.
The cold statistician wrote down the inches of progress here and there, noted also where here and there a foot had slipped or some one had fallen.
To the tired climbers, the horizon was ever dark, the mists were often cold, the Canaan was always dim and far away.
If, however, the vistas disclosed as yet no goal, no resting-place, little but flattery and criticism, the journey at least gave leisure for reflection and self-examination; it changed the child of Emancipation to the youth with dawning self-consciousness, self-realization, self-respect.
In those sombre forests of his striving his own soul rose before him, and he saw himself,—darkly as through a veil; and yet he saw in himself some faint revelation of his power, of his mission.
For the first time he sought to analyze the burden he bore upon his back, that dead-weight of social degradation partially masked behind a half-named Negro problem.
He felt his poverty; without a cent, without a home, without land, tools, or savings, he had entered into competition with rich, landed, skilled neighbors.
To be a poor man is hard, but to be a poor race in a land of dollars is the very bottom of hardships.
He felt the weight of his ignorance,—not simply of letters, but of life, of business, of the humanities; the accumulated sloth and shirking and awkwardness of decades and centuries shackled his hands and feet.
Nor was his burden all poverty and ignorance.
The red stain of bastardy, which two centuries of systematic legal defilement of Negro women had stamped upon his race, meant not only the loss of ancient African chastity, but also the hereditary weight of a mass of corruption from white adulterers, threatening almost the obliteration of the Negro home.
A people thus handicapped ought not to be asked to race with the world, but rather allowed to give all its time and thought to its own social problems.
But alas! while sociologists gleefully count his bastards and his prostitutes, the very soul of the toiling, sweating black man is darkened by the shadow of a vast despair.
Men call the shadow prejudice, and learnedly explain it as the natural defence of culture against barbarism, learning against ignorance, purity against crime, the “higher” against the “lower” races.
To which the Negro cries Amen! and swears that to so much of this strange prejudice as is founded on just homage to civilization, culture, righteousness, and progress, he humbly bows and meekly does obeisance.
But the facing of so vast a prejudice could not but bring the inevitable self-questioning, self-disparagement, and lowering of ideals which ever accompany repression and breed in an atmosphere of contempt and hate.
Whisperings and portents came home upon the four winds: Lo! we are diseased and dying, cried the dark hosts; we cannot write, our voting is vain; what need of education, since we must always cook and serve?
And the Nation echoed and enforced this self-criticism, saying: Be content to be servants, and nothing more; what need of higher culture for half-men?
Nevertheless, out of the evil came something of good,—the more careful adjustment of education to real life, the clearer perception of the Negroes’ social responsibilities, and the sobering realization of the meaning of progress.
So dawned the time of _Sturm und Drang:_ storm and stress to-day rocks our little boat on the mad waters of the world-sea; there is within and without the sound of conflict, the burning of body and rending of soul; inspiration strives with doubt, and faith with vain questionings.
The bright ideals of the past,—physical freedom, political power, the training of brains and the training of hands,—all these in turn have waxed and waned, until even the last grows dim and overcast.
No, not that, but each alone was over-simple and incomplete,—the dreams of a credulous race-childhood, or the fond imaginings of the other world which does not know and does not want to know our power.
The training of the schools we need to-day more than ever,—the training of deft hands, quick eyes and ears, and above all the broader, deeper, higher culture of gifted minds and pure hearts.
Will America be poorer if she replace her brutal dyspeptic blundering with light-hearted but determined Negro humility? or her coarse and cruel wit with loving jovial good-humor? or her vulgar music with the soul of the Sorrow Songs?
Merely a concrete test of the underlying principles of the great republic is the Negro Problem, and the spiritual striving of the freedmen’s sons is the travail of souls whose burden is almost beyond the measure of their strength, but who bear it in the name of an historic race, in the name of this the land of their fathers’ fathers, and in the name of human opportunity.
And now what I have briefly sketched in large outline let me on coming pages tell again in many ways, with loving emphasis and deeper detail, that men may listen to the striving in the souls of black folk.
Of the Dawn of Freedom Careless seems the great Avenger; History’s lessons but record One death-grapple in the darkness ’Twixt old systems and the Word; Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrong forever on the throne; Yet that scaffold sways the future, And behind the dim unknown Standeth God within the shadow Keeping watch above His own.
It was a phase of this problem that caused the Civil War; and however much they who marched South and North in 1861 may have fixed on the technical points, of union and local autonomy as a shibboleth, all nevertheless knew, as we know, that the question of Negro slavery was the real cause of the conflict.
Curious it was, too, how this deeper question ever forced itself to the surface despite effort and disclaimer.
No sooner had Northern armies touched Southern soil than this old question, newly guised, sprang from the earth,—What shall be done with Negroes?
Peremptory military commands this way and that, could not answer the query; the Emancipation Proclamation seemed but to broaden and intensify the difficulties; and the War Amendments made the Negro problems of to-day.
It is the aim of this essay to study the period of history from 1861 to 1872 so far as it relates to the American Negro.
In effect, this tale of the dawn of Freedom is an account of that government of men called the Freedmen’s Bureau,—one of the most singular and interesting of the attempts made by a great nation to grapple with vast problems of race and social condition.
The war has naught to do with slaves, cried Congress, the President, and the Nation; and yet no sooner had the armies, East and West, penetrated Virginia and Tennessee than fugitive slaves appeared within their lines.
They came at night, when the flickering camp-fires shone like vast unsteady stars along the black horizon: old men and thin, with gray and tufted hair; women with frightened eyes, dragging whimpering hungry children; men and girls, stalwart and gaunt,—a horde of starving vagabonds, homeless, helpless, and pitiable, in their dark distress.
Two methods of treating these newcomers seemed equally logical to opposite sorts of minds.
Ben Butler, in Virginia, quickly declared slave property contraband of war, and put the fugitives to work; while Fremont, in Missouri, declared the slaves free under martial law.
Butler’s action was approved, but Fremont’s was hastily countermanded, and his successor, Halleck, saw things differently.
“Hereafter,” he commanded, “no slaves should be allowed to come into your lines at all; if any come without your knowledge, when owners call for them deliver them.” Such a policy was difficult to enforce; some of the black refugees declared themselves freemen, others showed that their masters had deserted them, and still others were captured with forts and plantations.
Evidently, too, slaves were a source of strength to the Confederacy, and were being used as laborers and producers.
“They constitute a military resource,” wrote Secretary Cameron, late in 1861; “and being such, that they should not be turned over to the enemy is too plain to discuss.” So gradually the tone of the army chiefs changed; Congress forbade the rendition of fugitives, and Butler’s “contrabands” were welcomed as military laborers.
This complicated rather than solved the problem, for now the scattering fugitives became a steady stream, which flowed faster as the armies marched.
Then the long-headed man with care-chiselled face who sat in the White House saw the inevitable, and emancipated the slaves of rebels on New Year’s, 1863.
A month later Congress called earnestly for the Negro soldiers whom the act of July, 1862, had half grudgingly allowed to enlist.
Thus the barriers were levelled and the deed was done.
The stream of fugitives swelled to a flood, and anxious army officers kept inquiring: “What must be done with slaves, arriving almost daily?
Are we to find food and shelter for women and children?” It was a Pierce of Boston who pointed out the way, and thus became in a sense the founder of the Freedmen’s Bureau.
He was a firm friend of Secretary Chase; and when, in 1861, the care of slaves and abandoned lands devolved upon the Treasury officials, Pierce was specially detailed from the ranks to study the conditions.
First, he cared for the refugees at Fortress Monroe; and then, after Sherman had captured Hilton Head, Pierce was sent there to found his Port Royal experiment of making free workingmen out of slaves.
Before his experiment was barely started, however, the problem of the fugitives had assumed such proportions that it was taken from the hands of the over-burdened Treasury Department and given to the army officials.
Already centres of massed freedmen were forming at Fortress Monroe, Washington, New Orleans, Vicksburg and Corinth, Columbus, Ky., and Cairo, Ill., as well as at Port Royal.
Army chaplains found here new and fruitful fields; “superintendents of contrabands” multiplied, and some attempt at systematic work was made by enlisting the able-bodied men and giving work to the others.
Then came the Freedmen’s Aid societies, born of the touching appeals from Pierce and from these other centres of distress.
There was the American Missionary Association, sprung from the Amistad, and now full-grown for work; the various church organizations, the National Freedmen’s Relief Association, the American Freedmen’s Union, the Western Freedmen’s Aid Commission,—in all fifty or more active organizations, which sent clothes, money, school-books, and teachers southward.
All they did was needed, for the destitution of the freedmen was often reported as “too appalling for belief,” and the situation was daily growing worse rather than better.
And daily, too, it seemed more plain that this was no ordinary matter of temporary relief, but a national crisis; for here loomed a labor problem of vast dimensions.
Masses of Negroes stood idle, or, if they worked spasmodically, were never sure of pay; and if perchance they received pay, squandered the new thing thoughtlessly.
In these and other ways were camp-life and the new liberty demoralizing the freedmen.
The broader economic organization thus clearly demanded sprang up here and there as accident and local conditions determined.
Here it was that Pierce’s Port Royal plan of leased plantations and guided workmen pointed out the rough way.
In Washington the military governor, at the urgent appeal of the superintendent, opened confiscated estates to the cultivation of the fugitives, and there in the shadow of the dome gathered black farm villages.
General Dix gave over estates to the freedmen of Fortress Monroe, and so on, South and West.
The government and benevolent societies furnished the means of cultivation, and the Negro turned again slowly to work.
The systems of control, thus started, rapidly grew, here and there, into strange little governments, like that of General Banks in Louisiana, with its ninety thousand black subjects, its fifty thousand guided laborers, and its annual budget of one hundred thousand dollars and more.
It made out four thousand pay-rolls a year, registered all freedmen, inquired into grievances and redressed them, laid and collected taxes, and established a system of public schools.
So, too, Colonel Eaton, the superintendent of Tennessee and Arkansas, ruled over one hundred thousand freedmen, leased and cultivated seven thousand acres of cotton land, and fed ten thousand paupers a year.
In South Carolina was General Saxton, with his deep interest in black folk.
He succeeded Pierce and the Treasury officials, and sold forfeited estates, leased abandoned plantations, encouraged schools, and received from Sherman, after that terribly picturesque march to the sea, thousands of the wretched camp followers.
Three characteristic things one might have seen in Sherman’s raid through Georgia, which threw the new situation in shadowy relief: the Conqueror, the Conquered, and the Negro.
Some see all significance in the grim front of the destroyer, and some in the bitter sufferers of the Lost Cause.
But to me neither soldier nor fugitive speaks with so deep a meaning as that dark human cloud that clung like remorse on the rear of those swift columns, swelling at times to half their size, almost engulfing and choking them.
In vain were they ordered back, in vain were bridges hewn from beneath their feet; on they trudged and writhed and surged, until they rolled into Savannah, a starved and naked horde of tens of thousands.
There too came the characteristic military remedy: “The islands from Charleston south, the abandoned rice-fields along the rivers for thirty miles back from the sea, and the country bordering the St.
John’s River, Florida, are reserved and set apart for the settlement of Negroes now made free by act of war.” So read the celebrated “Field-order Number Fifteen.” All these experiments, orders, and systems were bound to attract and perplex the government and the nation.
Directly after the Emancipation Proclamation, Representative Eliot had introduced a bill creating a Bureau of Emancipation; but it was never reported.
The following June a committee of inquiry, appointed by the Secretary of War, reported in favor of a temporary bureau for the “improvement, protection, and employment of refugee freedmen,” on much the same lines as were afterwards followed.
Laws of 1863 and 1864 directed them to take charge of and lease abandoned lands for periods not exceeding twelve months, and to “provide in such leases, or otherwise, for the employment and general welfare” of the freedmen.
Most of the army officers greeted this as a welcome relief from perplexing “Negro affairs,” and Secretary Fessenden, July 29, 1864, issued an excellent system of regulations, which were afterward closely followed by General Howard.
Under Treasury agents, large quantities of land were leased in the Mississippi Valley, and many Negroes were employed; but in August, 1864, the new regulations were suspended for reasons of “public policy,” and the army was again in control.
Meanwhile Congress had turned its attention to the subject; and in March the House passed a bill by a majority of two establishing a Bureau for Freedmen in the War Department.
Charles Sumner, who had charge of the bill in the Senate, argued that freedmen and abandoned lands ought to be under the same department, and reported a substitute for the House bill attaching the Bureau to the Treasury Department.
The debates wandered over the whole policy of the administration and the general question of slavery, without touching very closely the specific merits of the measure in hand.
Then the national election took place; and the administration, with a vote of renewed confidence from the country, addressed itself to the matter more seriously.
A conference between the two branches of Congress agreed upon a carefully drawn measure which contained the chief provisions of Sumner’s bill, but made the proposed organization a department independent of both the War and the Treasury officials.
The bill was conservative, giving the new department “general superintendence of all freedmen.” Its purpose was to “establish regulations” for them, protect them, lease them lands, adjust their wages, and appear in civil and military courts as their “next friend.” There were many limitations attached to the powers thus granted, and the organization was made permanent.
Nevertheless, the Senate defeated the bill, and a new conference committee was appointed.
This committee reported a new bill, February 28, which was whirled through just as the session closed, and became the act of 1865 establishing in the War Department a “Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands.” This last compromise was a hasty bit of legislation, vague and uncertain in outline.
The President might also appoint assistant commissioners in the seceded States, and to all these offices military officials might be detailed at regular pay.
The Secretary of War could issue rations, clothing, and fuel to the destitute, and all abandoned property was placed in the hands of the Bureau for eventual lease and sale to ex-slaves in forty-acre parcels.
Thus did the United States government definitely assume charge of the emancipated Negro as the ward of the nation.
It was a tremendous undertaking.
Here at a stroke of the pen was erected a government of millions of men,—and not ordinary men either, but black men emasculated by a peculiarly complete system of slavery, centuries old; and now, suddenly, violently, they come into a new birthright, at a time of war and passion, in the midst of the stricken and embittered population of their former masters.
Any man might well have hesitated to assume charge of such a work, with vast responsibilities, indefinite powers, and limited resources.
Probably no one but a soldier would have answered such a call promptly; and, indeed, no one but a soldier could be called, for Congress had appropriated no money for salaries and expenses.
Less than a month after the weary Emancipator passed to his rest, his successor assigned Major-Gen.
Howard to duty as Commissioner of the new Bureau.
He had marched with Sherman to the sea, had fought well at Gettysburg, and but the year before had been assigned to the command of the Department of Tennessee.
An honest man, with too much faith in human nature, little aptitude for business and intricate detail, he had had large opportunity of becoming acquainted at first hand with much of the work before him.
A curious mess he looked upon: little despotisms, communistic experiments, slavery, peonage, business speculations, organized charity, unorganized almsgiving,—all reeling on under the guise of helping the freedmen, and all enshrined in the smoke and blood of the war and the cursing and silence of angry men.
On May 19 the new government—for a government it really was—issued its constitution; commissioners were to be appointed in each of the seceded states, who were to take charge of “all subjects relating to refugees and freedmen,” and all relief and rations were to be given by their consent alone.
The Bureau invited continued cooperation with benevolent societies, and declared: “It will be the object of all commissioners to introduce practicable systems of compensated labor,” and to establish schools.
Forthwith nine assistant commissioners were appointed.
First, there were the abandoned lands of the South.
It had long been the more or less definitely expressed theory of the North that all the chief problems of Emancipation might be settled by establishing the slaves on the forfeited lands of their masters,—a sort of poetic justice, said some.
But this poetry done into solemn prose meant either wholesale confiscation of private property in the South, or vast appropriations.
Now Congress had not appropriated a cent, and no sooner did the proclamations of general amnesty appear than the eight hundred thousand acres of abandoned lands in the hands of the Freedmen’s Bureau melted quickly away.
The second difficulty lay in perfecting the local organization of the Bureau throughout the wide field of work.
Thus, after a year’s work, vigorously as it was pushed, the problem looked even more difficult to grasp and solve than at the beginning.
Nevertheless, three things that year’s work did, well worth the doing: it relieved a vast amount of physical suffering; it transported seven thousand fugitives from congested centres back to the farm; and, best of all, it inaugurated the crusade of the New England schoolma’am.
The annals of this Ninth Crusade are yet to be written,—the tale of a mission that seemed to our age far more quixotic than the quest of St.
Behind the mists of ruin and rapine waved the calico dresses of women who dared, and after the hoarse mouthings of the field guns rang the rhythm of the alphabet.
Bereaved now of a father, now of a brother, now of more than these, they came seeking a life work in planting New England schoolhouses among the white and black of the South.
In that first year they taught one hundred thousand souls, and more.
Evidently, Congress must soon legislate again on the hastily organized Bureau, which had so quickly grown into wide significance and vast possibilities.
An institution such as that was well-nigh as difficult to end as to begin.
Early in 1866 Congress took up the matter, when Senator Trumbull, of Illinois, introduced a bill to extend the Bureau and enlarge its powers.
This measure received, at the hands of Congress, far more thorough discussion and attention than its predecessor.
The war cloud had thinned enough to allow a clearer conception of the work of Emancipation.
The champions of the bill argued that the strengthening of the Freedmen’s Bureau was still a military necessity; that it was needed for the proper carrying out of the Thirteenth Amendment, and was a work of sheer justice to the ex-slave, at a trifling cost to the government.
The opponents of the measure declared that the war was over, and the necessity for war measures past; that the Bureau, by reason of its extraordinary powers, was clearly unconstitutional in time of peace, and was destined to irritate the South and pauperize the freedmen, at a final cost of possibly hundreds of millions.
These two arguments were unanswered, and indeed unanswerable: the one that the extraordinary powers of the Bureau threatened the civil rights of all citizens; and the other that the government must have power to do what manifestly must be done, and that present abandonment of the freedmen meant their practical reenslavement.
The bill which finally passed enlarged and made permanent the Freedmen’s Bureau.
It was promptly vetoed by President Johnson as “unconstitutional,” “unnecessary,” and “extrajudicial,” and failed of passage over the veto.
Meantime, however, the breach between Congress and the President began to broaden, and a modified form of the lost bill was finally passed over the President’s second veto, July 16.
The act of 1866 gave the Freedmen’s Bureau its final form,—the form by which it will be known to posterity and judged of men.
It extended the existence of the Bureau to July, 1868; it authorized additional assistant commissioners, the retention of army officers mustered out of regular service, the sale of certain forfeited lands to freedmen on nominal terms, the sale of Confederate public property for Negro schools, and a wider field of judicial interpretation and cognizance.
The government of the unreconstructed South was thus put very largely in the hands of the Freedmen’s Bureau, especially as in many cases the departmental military commander was now made also assistant commissioner.
It was thus that the Freedmen’s Bureau became a full-fledged government of men.
It made laws, executed them and interpreted them; it laid and collected taxes, defined and punished crime, maintained and used military force, and dictated such measures as it thought necessary and proper for the accomplishment of its varied ends.
Lee had surrendered, Lincoln was dead, and Johnson and Congress were at loggerheads; the Thirteenth Amendment was adopted, the Fourteenth pending, and the Fifteenth declared in force in 1870.
Guerrilla raiding, the ever-present flickering after-flame of war, was spending its forces against the Negroes, and all the Southern land was awakening as from some wild dream to poverty and social revolution.
The very name of the Bureau stood for a thing in the South which for two centuries and better men had refused even to argue,—that life amid free Negroes was simply unthinkable, the maddest of experiments.
The agents that the Bureau could command varied all the way from unselfish philanthropists to narrow-minded busybodies and thieves; and even though it be true that the average was far better than the worst, it was the occasional fly that helped spoil the ointment.
Then amid all crouched the freed slave, bewildered between friend and foe.
He had emerged from slavery,—not the worst slavery in the world, not a slavery that made all life unbearable, rather a slavery that had here and there something of kindliness, fidelity, and happiness,—but withal slavery, which, so far as human aspiration and desert were concerned, classed the black man and the ox together.
And the Negro knew full well that, whatever their deeper convictions may have been, Southern men had fought with desperate energy to perpetuate this slavery under which the black masses, with half-articulate thought, had writhed and shivered.
They welcomed freedom with a cry.
They shrank from the master who still strove for their chains; they fled to the friends that had freed them, even though those friends stood ready to use them as a club for driving the recalcitrant South back into loyalty.
Idle to say it never should have been; it was as inevitable as its results were pitiable.
Curiously incongruous elements were left arrayed against each other,—the North, the government, the carpet-bagger, and the slave, here; and there, all the South that was white, whether gentleman or vagabond, honest man or rascal, lawless murderer or martyr to duty.
Thus it is doubly difficult to write of this period calmly, so intense was the feeling, so mighty the human passions that swayed and blinded men.
Here, then, was the field of work for the Freedmen’s Bureau; and since, with some hesitation, it was continued by the act of 1868 until 1869, let us look upon four years of its work as a whole.
There were, in 1868, nine hundred Bureau officials scattered from Washington to Texas, ruling, directly and indirectly, many millions of men.
The deeds of these rulers fall mainly under seven heads: the relief of physical suffering, the overseeing of the beginnings of free labor, the buying and selling of land, the establishment of schools, the paying of bounties, the administration of justice, and the financiering of all these activities.
Up to June, 1869, over half a million patients had been treated by Bureau physicians and surgeons, and sixty hospitals and asylums had been in operation.
In fifty months twenty-one million free rations were distributed at a cost of over four million dollars.
Next came the difficult question of labor.
First, thirty thousand black men were transported from the refuges and relief stations back to the farms, back to the critical trial of a new way of working.
Plain instructions went out from Washington: the laborers must be free to choose their employers, no fixed rate of wages was prescribed, and there was to be no peonage or forced labor.
So far, so good; but where local agents differed _toto cælo_ in capacity and character, where the _personnel_ was continually changing, the outcome was necessarily varied.
The largest element of success lay in the fact that the majority of the freedmen were willing, even eager, to work.
So labor contracts were written,—fifty thousand in a single State,—laborers advised, wages guaranteed, and employers supplied.
In truth, the organization became a vast labor bureau,—not perfect, indeed, notably defective here and there, but on the whole successful beyond the dreams of thoughtful men.
The two great obstacles which confronted the officials were the tyrant and the idler,—the slaveholder who was determined to perpetuate slavery under another name; and, the freedman who regarded freedom as perpetual rest,—the Devil and the Deep Sea.
In the work of establishing the Negroes as peasant proprietors, the Bureau was from the first handicapped and at last absolutely checked.
Something was done, and larger things were planned; abandoned lands were leased so long as they remained in the hands of the Bureau, and a total revenue of nearly half a million dollars derived from black tenants.
Some other lands to which the nation had gained title were sold on easy terms, and public lands were opened for settlement to the very few freedmen who had tools and capital.
But the vision of “forty acres and a mule”—the righteous and reasonable ambition to become a landholder, which the nation had all but categorically promised the freedmen—was destined in most cases to bitter disappointment.
If by 1874 the Georgia Negro alone owned three hundred and fifty thousand acres of land, it was by grace of his thrift rather than by bounty of the government.
The greatest success of the Freedmen’s Bureau lay in the planting of the free school among Negroes, and the idea of free elementary education among all classes in the South.
It not only called the school-mistresses through the benevolent agencies and built them schoolhouses, but it helped discover and support such apostles of human culture as Edmund Ware, Samuel Armstrong, and Erastus Cravath.
The opposition to Negro education in the South was at first bitter, and showed itself in ashes, insult, and blood; for the South believed an educated Negro to be a dangerous Negro.
And the South was not wholly wrong; for education among all kinds of men always has had, and always will have, an element of danger and revolution, of dissatisfaction and discontent.
Nevertheless, men strive to know.
Perhaps some inkling of this paradox, even in the unquiet days of the Bureau, helped the bayonets allay an opposition to human training which still to-day lies smouldering in the South, but not flaming.
Fisk, Atlanta, Howard, and Hampton were founded in these days, and six million dollars were expended for educational work, seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars of which the freedmen themselves gave of their poverty.
Such contributions, together with the buying of land and various other enterprises, showed that the ex-slave was handling some free capital already.
Payments to Negro soldiers were at first complicated by the ignorance of the recipients, and the fact that the quotas of colored regiments from Northern States were largely filled by recruits from the South, unknown to their fellow soldiers.
Consequently, payments were accompanied by such frauds that Congress, by joint resolution in 1867, put the whole matter in the hands of the Freedmen’s Bureau.
In two years six million dollars was thus distributed to five thousand claimants, and in the end the sum exceeded eight million dollars.
Even in this system fraud was frequent; but still the work put needed capital in the hands of practical paupers, and some, at least, was well spent.
The most perplexing and least successful part of the Bureau’s work lay in the exercise of its judicial functions.
The regular Bureau court consisted of one representative of the employer, one of the Negro, and one of the Bureau.
If the Bureau could have maintained a perfectly judicial attitude, this arrangement would have been ideal, and must in time have gained confidence; but the nature of its other activities and the character of its _personnel_ prejudiced the Bureau in favor of the black litigants, and led without doubt to much injustice and annoyance.
On the other hand, to leave the Negro in the hands of Southern courts was impossible.
In a distracted land where slavery had hardly fallen, to keep the strong from wanton abuse of the weak, and the weak from gloating insolently over the half-shorn strength of the strong, was a thankless, hopeless task.
The former masters of the land were peremptorily ordered about, seized, and imprisoned, and punished over and again, with scant courtesy from army officers.
The former slaves were intimidated, beaten, raped, and butchered by angry and revengeful men.
Bureau courts tended to become centres simply for punishing whites, while the regular civil courts tended to become solely institutions for perpetuating the slavery of blacks.
Almost every law and method ingenuity could devise was employed by the legislatures to reduce the Negroes to serfdom,—to make them the slaves of the State, if not of individual owners; while the Bureau officials too often were found striving to put the “bottom rail on top,” and gave the freedmen a power and independence which they could not yet use.
It is all well enough for us of another generation to wax wise with advice to those who bore the burden in the heat of the day.
It is full easy now to see that the man who lost home, fortune, and family at a stroke, and saw his land ruled by “mules and niggers,” was really benefited by the passing of slavery.
It is not difficult now to say to the young freedman, cheated and cuffed about who has seen his father’s head beaten to a jelly and his own mother namelessly assaulted, that the meek shall inherit the earth.
Above all, nothing is more convenient than to heap on the Freedmen’s Bureau all the evils of that evil day, and damn it utterly for every mistake and blunder that was made.
All this is easy, but it is neither sensible nor just.
Someone had blundered, but that was long before Oliver Howard was born; there was criminal aggression and heedless neglect, but without some system of control there would have been far more than there was.
Had that control been from within, the Negro would have been re-enslaved, to all intents and purposes.
Coming as the control did from without, perfect men and methods would have bettered all things; and even with imperfect agents and questionable methods, the work accomplished was not undeserving of commendation.
On the other hand, it failed to begin the establishment of good-will between ex-masters and freedmen, to guard its work wholly from paternalistic methods which discouraged self-reliance, and to carry out to any considerable extent its implied promises to furnish the freedmen with land.
Its successes were the result of hard work, supplemented by the aid of philanthropists and the eager striving of black men.
Its failures were the result of bad local agents, the inherent difficulties of the work, and national neglect.
Such an institution, from its wide powers, great responsibilities, large control of moneys, and generally conspicuous position, was naturally open to repeated and bitter attack.
It sustained a searching Congressional investigation at the instance of Fernando Wood in 1870.
Its archives and few remaining functions were with blunt discourtesy transferred from Howard’s control, in his absence, to the supervision of Secretary of War Belknap in 1872, on the Secretary’s recommendation.
Finally, in consequence of grave intimations of wrong-doing made by the Secretary and his subordinates, General Howard was court-martialed in 1874.
In both of these trials the Commissioner of the Freedmen’s Bureau was officially exonerated from any wilful misdoing, and his work commended.
Nevertheless, many unpleasant things were brought to light,—the methods of transacting the business of the Bureau were faulty; several cases of defalcation were proved, and other frauds strongly suspected; there were some business transactions which savored of dangerous speculation, if not dishonesty; and around it all lay the smirch of the Freedmen’s Bank.
Morally and practically, the Freedmen’s Bank was part of the Freedmen’s Bureau, although it had no legal connection with it.
With the prestige of the government back of it, and a directing board of unusual respectability and national reputation, this banking institution had made a remarkable start in the development of that thrift among black folk which slavery had kept them from knowing.
Then in one sad day came the crash,—all the hard-earned dollars of the freedmen disappeared; but that was the least of the loss,—all the faith in saving went too, and much of the faith in men; and that was a loss that a Nation which to-day sneers at Negro shiftlessness has never yet made good.
Not even ten additional years of slavery could have done so much to throttle the thrift of the freedmen as the mismanagement and bankruptcy of the series of savings banks chartered by the Nation for their especial aid.
Where all the blame should rest, it is hard to say; whether the Bureau and the Bank died chiefly by reason of the blows of its selfish friends or the dark machinations of its foes, perhaps even time will never reveal, for here lies unwritten history.
Of the foes without the Bureau, the bitterest were those who attacked not so much its conduct or policy under the law as the necessity for any such institution at all.
Such attacks came primarily from the Border States and the South; and they were summed up by Senator Davis, of Kentucky, when he moved to entitle the act of 1866 a bill “to promote strife and conflict between the white and black races… by a grant of unconstitutional power.” The argument gathered tremendous strength South and North; but its very strength was its weakness.
For, argued the plain common-sense of the nation, if it is unconstitutional, unpractical, and futile for the nation to stand guardian over its helpless wards, then there is left but one alternative,—to make those wards their own guardians by arming them with the ballot.
Moreover, the path of the practical politician pointed the same way; for, argued this opportunist, if we cannot peacefully reconstruct the South with white votes, we certainly can with black votes.
The alternative thus offered the nation was not between full and restricted Negro suffrage; else every sensible man, black and white, would easily have chosen the latter.
It was rather a choice between suffrage and slavery, after endless blood and gold had flowed to sweep human bondage away.
Not a single Southern legislature stood ready to admit a Negro, under any conditions, to the polls; not a single Southern legislature believed free Negro labor was possible without a system of restrictions that took all its freedom away; there was scarcely a white man in the South who did not honestly regard Emancipation as a crime, and its practical nullification as a duty.
In such a situation, the granting of the ballot to the black man was a necessity, the very least a guilty nation could grant a wronged race, and the only method of compelling the South to accept the results of the war.
Thus Negro suffrage ended a civil war by beginning a race feud.
And some felt gratitude toward the race thus sacrificed in its swaddling clothes on the altar of national integrity; and some felt and feel only indifference and contempt.
All this vast expenditure of money and brains might have formed a great school of prospective citizenship, and solved in a way we have not yet solved the most perplexing and persistent of the Negro problems.
That such an institution was unthinkable in 1870 was due in part to certain acts of the Freedmen’s Bureau itself.
It came to regard its work as merely temporary, and Negro suffrage as a final answer to all present perplexities.
The political ambition of many of its agents and _protégés_ led it far afield into questionable activities, until the South, nursing its own deep prejudices, came easily to ignore all the good deeds of the Bureau and hate its very name with perfect hatred.
So the Freedmen’s Bureau died, and its child was the Fifteenth Amendment.
The passing of a great human institution before its work is done, like the untimely passing of a single soul, but leaves a legacy of striving for other men.
The legacy of the Freedmen’s Bureau is the heavy heritage of this generation.
To-day, when new and vaster problems are destined to strain every fibre of the national mind and soul, would it not be well to count this legacy honestly and carefully?
For this much all men know: despite compromise, war, and struggle, the Negro is not free.
In the backwoods of the Gulf States, for miles and miles, he may not leave the plantation of his birth; in well-nigh the whole rural South the black farmers are peons, bound by law and custom to an economic slavery, from which the only escape is death or the penitentiary.
In the most cultured sections and cities of the South the Negroes are a segregated servile caste, with restricted rights and privileges.
Before the courts, both in law and custom, they stand on a different and peculiar basis.
Taxation without representation is the rule of their political life.
And the result of all this is, and in nature must have been, lawlessness and crime.
That is the large legacy of the Freedmen’s Bureau, the work it did not do because it could not.
I have seen a land right merry with the sun, where children sing, and rolling hills lie like passioned women wanton with harvest.
And there in the King’s Highways sat and sits a figure veiled and bowed, by which the traveller’s footsteps hasten as they go.
Three centuries’ thought has been the raising and unveiling of that bowed human heart, and now behold a century new for the duty and the deed.
The problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color-line.
Know ye not Who would be free themselves must strike the blow?
It began at the time when war memories and ideals were rapidly passing; a day of astonishing commercial development was dawning; a sense of doubt and hesitation overtook the freedmen’s sons,—then it was that his leading began.
Washington came, with a simple definite programme, at the psychological moment when the nation was a little ashamed of having bestowed so much sentiment on Negroes, and was concentrating its energies on Dollars.
Washington first indissolubly linked these things; he put enthusiasm, unlimited energy, and perfect faith into his programme, and changed it from a by-path into a veritable Way of Life.
And the tale of the methods by which he did this is a fascinating study of human life.
It startled the nation to hear a Negro advocating such a programme after many decades of bitter complaint; it startled and won the applause of the South, it interested and won the admiration of the North; and after a confused murmur of protest, it silenced if it did not convert the Negroes themselves.
To gain the sympathy and cooperation of the various elements comprising the white South was Mr.
Washington’s first task; and this, at the time Tuskegee was founded, seemed, for a black man, well-nigh impossible.
And yet ten years later it was done in the word spoken at Atlanta: “In all things purely social we can be as separate as the five fingers, and yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress.” This “Atlanta Compromise” is by all odds the most notable thing in Mr.
Washington’s career.
The South interpreted it in different ways: the radicals received it as a complete surrender of the demand for civil and political equality; the conservatives, as a generously conceived working basis for mutual understanding.
So both approved it, and to-day its author is certainly the most distinguished Southerner since Jefferson Davis, and the one with the largest personal following.
Next to this achievement comes Mr.
Washington’s work in gaining place and consideration in the North.
Others less shrewd and tactful had formerly essayed to sit on these two stools and had fallen between them; but as Mr.
Washington knew the heart of the South from birth and training, so by singular insight he intuitively grasped the spirit of the age which was dominating the North.
And so thoroughly did he learn the speech and thought of triumphant commercialism, and the ideals of material prosperity, that the picture of a lone black boy poring over a French grammar amid the weeds and dirt of a neglected home soon seemed to him the acme of absurdities.
One wonders what Socrates and St.
And yet this very singleness of vision and thorough oneness with his age is a mark of the successful man.
Washington’s cult has gained unquestioning followers, his work has wonderfully prospered, his friends are legion, and his enemies are confounded.
To-day he stands as the one recognized spokesman of his ten million fellows, and one of the most notable figures in a nation of seventy millions.
One hesitates, therefore, to criticise a life which, beginning with so little, has done so much.
And yet the time is come when one may speak in all sincerity and utter courtesy of the mistakes and shortcomings of Mr.
Washington’s career, as well as of his triumphs, without being thought captious or envious, and without forgetting that it is easier to do ill than well in the world.
The criticism that has hitherto met Mr.
Washington has not always been of this broad character.
In the South especially has he had to walk warily to avoid the harshest judgments,—and naturally so, for he is dealing with the one subject of deepest sensitiveness to that section.
Twice—once when at the Chicago celebration of the Spanish-American War he alluded to the color-prejudice that is “eating away the vitals of the South,” and once when he dined with President Roosevelt—has the resulting Southern criticism been violent enough to threaten seriously his popularity.
Washington’s counsels of submission overlooked certain elements of true manhood, and that his educational programme was unnecessarily narrow.
Usually, however, such criticism has not found open expression, although, too, the spiritual sons of the Abolitionists have not been prepared to acknowledge that the schools founded before Tuskegee, by men of broad ideals and self-sacrificing spirit, were wholly failures or worthy of ridicule.
While, then, criticism has not failed to follow Mr.
Washington, yet the prevailing public opinion of the land has been but too willing to deliver the solution of a wearisome problem into his hands, and say, “If that is all you and your race ask, take it.” Among his own people, however, Mr.
Washington has encountered the strongest and most lasting opposition, amounting at times to bitterness, and even today continuing strong and insistent even though largely silenced in outward expression by the public opinion of the nation.
Some of this opposition is, of course, mere envy; the disappointment of displaced demagogues and the spite of narrow minds.
But aside from this, there is among educated and thoughtful colored men in all parts of the land a feeling of deep regret, sorrow, and apprehension at the wide currency and ascendancy which some of Mr.
Washington’s theories have gained.
These same men admire his sincerity of purpose, and are willing to forgive much to honest endeavor which is doing something worth the doing.
They cooperate with Mr.
Washington as far as they conscientiously can; and, indeed, it is no ordinary tribute to this man’s tact and power that, steering as he must between so many diverse interests and opinions, he so largely retains the respect of all.
But the hushing of the criticism of honest opponents is a dangerous thing.
It leads some of the best of the critics to unfortunate silence and paralysis of effort, and others to burst into speech so passionately and intemperately as to lose listeners.
Honest and earnest criticism from those whose interests are most nearly touched,—criticism of writers by readers,—this is the soul of democracy and the safeguard of modern society.
If the best of the American Negroes receive by outer pressure a leader whom they had not recognized before, manifestly there is here a certain palpable gain.
Yet there is also irreparable loss,—a loss of that peculiarly valuable education which a group receives when by search and criticism it finds and commissions its own leaders.
The way in which this is done is at once the most elementary and the nicest problem of social growth.
History is but the record of such group-leadership; and yet how infinitely changeful is its type and character!
And of all types and kinds, what can be more instructive than the leadership of a group within a group?—that curious double movement where real progress may be negative and actual advance be relative retrogression.
All this is the social student’s inspiration and despair.
Now in the past the American Negro has had instructive experience in the choosing of group leaders, founding thus a peculiar dynasty which in the light of present conditions is worth while studying.
When sticks and stones and beasts form the sole environment of a people, their attitude is largely one of determined opposition to and conquest of natural forces.
But when to earth and brute is added an environment of men and ideas, then the attitude of the imprisoned group may take three main forms,—a feeling of revolt and revenge; an attempt to adjust all thought and action to the will of the greater group; or, finally, a determined effort at self-realization and self-development despite environing opinion.
The influence of all of these attitudes at various times can be traced in the history of the American Negro, and in the evolution of his successive leaders.
Before 1750, while the fire of African freedom still burned in the veins of the slaves, there was in all leadership or attempted leadership but the one motive of revolt and revenge,—typified in the terrible Maroons, the Danish blacks, and Cato of Stono, and veiling all the Americas in fear of insurrection.
The liberalizing tendencies of the latter half of the eighteenth century brought, along with kindlier relations between black and white, thoughts of ultimate adjustment and assimilation.
Such aspiration was especially voiced in the earnest songs of Phyllis, in the martyrdom of Attucks, the fighting of Salem and Poor, the intellectual accomplishments of Banneker and Derham, and the political demands of the Cuffes.
Stern financial and social stress after the war cooled much of the previous humanitarian ardor.
The disappointment and impatience of the Negroes at the persistence of slavery and serfdom voiced itself in two movements.
The slaves in the South, aroused undoubtedly by vague rumors of the Haytian revolt, made three fierce attempts at insurrection,—in 1800 under Gabriel in Virginia, in 1822 under Vesey in Carolina, and in 1831 again in Virginia under the terrible Nat Turner.
In the Free States, on the other hand, a new and curious attempt at self-development was made.
In Philadelphia and New York color-prescription led to a withdrawal of Negro communicants from white churches and the formation of a peculiar socio-religious institution among the Negroes known as the African Church,—an organization still living and controlling in its various branches over a million of men.
Walker’s wild appeal against the trend of the times showed how the world was changing after the coming of the cotton-gin.
By 1830 slavery seemed hopelessly fastened on the South, and the slaves thoroughly cowed into submission.
The free Negroes of the North, inspired by the mulatto immigrants from the West Indies, began to change the basis of their demands; they recognized the slavery of slaves, but insisted that they themselves were freemen, and sought assimilation and amalgamation with the nation on the same terms with other men.
Schemes of migration and colonization arose among them; but these they refused to entertain, and they eventually turned to the Abolition movement as a final refuge.
Here, led by Remond, Nell, Wells-Brown, and Douglass, a new period of self-assertion and self-development dawned.
To be sure, ultimate freedom and assimilation was the ideal before the leaders, but the assertion of the manhood rights of the Negro by himself was the main reliance, and John Brown’s raid was the extreme of its logic.
After the war and emancipation, the great form of Frederick Douglass, the greatest of American Negro leaders, still led the host.
Self-assertion, especially in political lines, was the main programme, and behind Douglass came Elliot, Bruce, and Langston, and the Reconstruction politicians, and, less conspicuous but of greater social significance, Alexander Crummell and Bishop Daniel Payne.
Then came the Revolution of 1876, the suppression of the Negro votes, the changing and shifting of ideals, and the seeking of new lights in the great night.
Douglass, in his old age, still bravely stood for the ideals of his early manhood,—ultimate assimilation _through_ self-assertion, and on no other terms.
For a time Price arose as a new leader, destined, it seemed, not to give up, but to re-state the old ideals in a form less repugnant to the white South.
Nearly all the former ones had become leaders by the silent suffrage of their fellows, had sought to lead their own people alone, and were usually, save Douglass, little known outside their race.
Washington arose as essentially the leader not of one race but of two,—a compromiser between the South, the North, and the Negro.
Naturally the Negroes resented, at first bitterly, signs of compromise which surrendered their civil and political rights, even though this was to be exchanged for larger chances of economic development.
The rich and dominating North, however, was not only weary of the race problem, but was investing largely in Southern enterprises, and welcomed any method of peaceful cooperation.
Thus, by national opinion, the Negroes began to recognize Mr.
Washington’s leadership; and the voice of criticism was hushed.
Washington represents in Negro thought the old attitude of adjustment and submission; but adjustment at such a peculiar time as to make his programme unique.
This is an age of unusual economic development, and Mr.
Washington’s programme naturally takes an economic cast, becoming a gospel of Work and Money to such an extent as apparently almost completely to overshadow the higher aims of life.
Moreover, this is an age when the more advanced races are coming in closer contact with the less developed races, and the race-feeling is therefore intensified; and Mr.
Washington’s programme practically accepts the alleged inferiority of the Negro races.
Again, in our own land, the reaction from the sentiment of war time has given impetus to race-prejudice against Negroes, and Mr.
Washington withdraws many of the high demands of Negroes as men and American citizens.
In other periods of intensified prejudice all the Negro’s tendency to self-assertion has been called forth; at this period a policy of submission is advocated.
In the history of nearly all other races and peoples the doctrine preached at such crises has been that manly self-respect is worth more than lands and houses, and that a people who voluntarily surrender such respect, or cease striving for it, are not worth civilizing.
In answer to this, it has been claimed that the Negro can survive only through submission.
Washington distinctly asks that black people give up, at least for the present, three things,— First, political power, Second, insistence on civil rights, Third, higher education of Negro youth,—and concentrate all their energies on industrial education, and accumulation of wealth, and the conciliation of the South.
This policy has been courageously and insistently advocated for over fifteen years, and has been triumphant for perhaps ten years.
In these years there have occurred: 1.
The disfranchisement of the Negro. 2.
The legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority for the Negro. 3.
The steady withdrawal of aid from institutions for the higher training of the Negro.
These movements are not, to be sure, direct results of Mr.
Washington’s teachings; but his propaganda has, without a shadow of doubt, helped their speedier accomplishment.
The question then comes: Is it possible, and probable, that nine millions of men can make effective progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights, made a servile caste, and allowed only the most meagre chance for developing their exceptional men?
If history and reason give any distinct answer to these questions, it is an emphatic _No_.
Washington thus faces the triple paradox of his career: 1.
He is striving nobly to make Negro artisans business men and property-owners; but it is utterly impossible, under modern competitive methods, for workingmen and property-owners to defend their rights and exist without the right of suffrage. 2.
He insists on thrift and self-respect, but at the same time counsels a silent submission to civic inferiority such as is bound to sap the manhood of any race in the long run. 3.
He advocates common-school and industrial training, and depreciates institutions of higher learning; but neither the Negro common-schools, nor Tuskegee itself, could remain open a day were it not for teachers trained in Negro colleges, or trained by their graduates.
Washington’s position is the object of criticism by two classes of colored Americans.
One class is spiritually descended from Toussaint the Savior, through Gabriel, Vesey, and Turner, and they represent the attitude of revolt and revenge; they hate the white South blindly and distrust the white race generally, and so far as they agree on definite action, think that the Negro’s only hope lies in emigration beyond the borders of the United States.
And yet, by the irony of fate, nothing has more effectually made this programme seem hopeless than the recent course of the United States toward weaker and darker peoples in the West Indies, Hawaii, and the Philippines,—for where in the world may we go and be safe from lying and brute force?
Washington has hitherto said little aloud.
They deprecate the sight of scattered counsels, of internal disagreement; and especially they dislike making their just criticism of a useful and earnest man an excuse for a general discharge of venom from small-minded opponents.
Nevertheless, the questions involved are so fundamental and serious that it is difficult to see how men like the Grimkes, Kelly Miller, J.
Bowen, and other representatives of this group, can much longer be silent.
Such men feel in conscience bound to ask of this nation three things: 1.
The education of youth according to ability.
They acknowledge Mr.
They advocate, with Mr.
Washington, a broad system of Negro common schools supplemented by thorough industrial training; but they are surprised that a man of Mr.
Washington’s insight cannot see that no such educational system ever has rested or can rest on any other basis than that of the well-equipped college and university, and they insist that there is a demand for a few such institutions throughout the South to train the best of the Negro youth as teachers, professional men, and leaders.
Washington for his attitude of conciliation toward the white South; they accept the “Atlanta Compromise” in its broadest interpretation; they recognize, with him, many signs of promise, many men of high purpose and fair judgment, in this section; they know that no easy task has been laid upon a region already tottering under heavy burdens.
It is wrong to encourage a man or a people in evil-doing; it is wrong to aid and abet a national crime simply because it is unpopular not to do so.
We have no right to sit silently by while the inevitable seeds are sown for a harvest of disaster to our children, black and white.
First, it is the duty of black men to judge the South discriminatingly.
The present generation of Southerners are not responsible for the past, and they should not be blindly hated or blamed for it.
Furthermore, to no class is the indiscriminate endorsement of the recent course of the South toward Negroes more nauseating than to the best thought of the South.
The South is not “solid”; it is a land in the ferment of social change, wherein forces of all kinds are fighting for supremacy; and to praise the ill the South is today perpetrating is just as wrong as to condemn the good.
Discriminating and broad-minded criticism is what the South needs,—needs it for the sake of her own white sons and daughters, and for the insurance of robust, healthy mental and moral development.
Today even the attitude of the Southern whites toward the blacks is not, as so many assume, in all cases the same; the ignorant Southerner hates the Negro, the workingmen fear his competition, the money-makers wish to use him as a laborer, some of the educated see a menace in his upward development, while others—usually the sons of the masters—wish to help him to rise.
National opinion has enabled this last class to maintain the Negro common schools, and to protect the Negro partially in property, life, and limb.
Through the pressure of the money-makers, the Negro is in danger of being reduced to semi-slavery, especially in the country districts; the workingmen, and those of the educated who fear the Negro, have united to disfranchise him, and some have urged his deportation; while the passions of the ignorant are easily aroused to lynch and abuse any black man.
To praise this intricate whirl of thought and prejudice is nonsense; to inveigh indiscriminately against “the South” is unjust; but to use the same breath in praising Governor Aycock, exposing Senator Morgan, arguing with Mr.
Thomas Nelson Page, and denouncing Senator Ben Tillman, is not only sane, but the imperative duty of thinking black men.
Washington not to acknowledge that in several instances he has opposed movements in the South which were unjust to the Negro; he sent memorials to the Louisiana and Alabama constitutional conventions, he has spoken against lynching, and in other ways has openly or silently set his influence against sinister schemes and unfortunate happenings.
Notwithstanding this, it is equally true to assert that on the whole the distinct impression left by Mr.
Washington’s propaganda is, first, that the South is justified in its present attitude toward the Negro because of the Negro’s degradation; secondly, that the prime cause of the Negro’s failure to rise more quickly is his wrong education in the past; and, thirdly, that his future rise depends primarily on his own efforts.
Each of these propositions is a dangerous half-truth.
Washington is especially to be criticised.
His doctrine has tended to make the whites, North and South, shift the burden of the Negro problem to the Negro’s shoulders and stand aside as critical and rather pessimistic spectators; when in fact the burden belongs to the nation, and the hands of none of us are clean if we bend not our energies to righting these great wrongs.
The South ought to be led, by candid and honest criticism, to assert her better self and do her full duty to the race she has cruelly wronged and is still wronging.
The North—her co-partner in guilt—cannot salve her conscience by plastering it with gold.
We cannot settle this problem by diplomacy and suaveness, by “policy” alone.
If worse come to worst, can the moral fibre of this country survive the slow throttling and murder of nine millions of men?
The black men of America have a duty to perform, a duty stern and delicate,—a forward movement to oppose a part of the work of their greatest leader.
Washington preaches Thrift, Patience, and Industrial Training for the masses, we must hold up his hands and strive with him, rejoicing in his honors and glorying in the strength of this Joshua called of God and of man to lead the headless host.
Washington apologizes for injustice, North or South, does not rightly value the privilege and duty of voting, belittles the emasculating effects of caste distinctions, and opposes the higher training and ambition of our brighter minds,—so far as he, the South, or the Nation, does this,—we must unceasingly and firmly oppose them.
Of the Meaning of Progress Willst Du Deine Macht verkünden, Wähle sie die frei von Sünden, Steh’n in Deinem ew’gen Haus!
Die Unsterblichen, die Reinen, Die nicht fühlen, die nicht weinen!
Nicht die zarte Jungfrau wähle, Nicht der Hirtin weiche Seele!
I was a Fisk student then, and all Fisk men thought that Tennessee—beyond the Veil—was theirs alone, and in vacation time they sallied forth in lusty bands to meet the county school-commissioners.
Young and happy, I too went, and I shall not soon forget that summer, seventeen years ago.
First, there was a Teachers’ Institute at the county-seat; and there distinguished guests of the superintendent taught the teachers fractions and spelling and other mysteries,—white teachers in the morning, Negroes at night.
A picnic now and then, and a supper, and the rough world was softened by laughter and song.
I remember how— But I wander.
There came a day when all the teachers left the Institute and began the hunt for schools.
I learn from hearsay (for my mother was mortally afraid of firearms) that the hunting of ducks and bears and men is wonderfully interesting, but I am sure that the man who has never hunted a country school has something to learn of the pleasures of the chase.
I see now the white, hot roads lazily rise and fall and wind before me under the burning July sun; I feel the deep weariness of heart and limb as ten, eight, six miles stretch relentlessly ahead; I feel my heart sink heavily as I hear again and again, “Got a teacher?
Yes.” So I walked on and on—horses were too expensive—until I had wandered beyond railways, beyond stage lines, to a land of “varmints” and rattlesnakes, where the coming of a stranger was an event, and men lived and died in the shadow of one blue hill.
Sprinkled over hill and dale lay cabins and farmhouses, shut out from the world by the forests and the rolling hills toward the east.
I had crossed the stream at Watertown, and rested under the great willows; then I had gone to the little cabin in the lot where Josie was resting on her way to town.
The gaunt farmer made me welcome, and Josie, hearing my errand, told me anxiously that they wanted a school over the hill; that but once since the war had a teacher been there; that she herself longed to learn,—and thus she ran on, talking fast and loud, with much earnestness and energy.
Next morning I crossed the tall round hill, lingered to look at the blue and yellow mountains stretching toward the Carolinas, then plunged into the wood, and came out at Josie’s home.
The father was a quiet, simple soul, calmly ignorant, with no touch of vulgarity.
The mother was different,—strong, bustling, and energetic, with a quick, restless tongue, and an ambition to live “like folks.” There was a crowd of children.
There remained two growing girls; a shy midget of eight; John, tall, awkward, and eighteen; Jim, younger, quicker, and better looking; and two babies of indefinite age.
She seemed to be the centre of the family: always busy at service, or at home, or berry-picking; a little nervous and inclined to scold, like her mother, yet faithful, too, like her father.
She had about her a certain fineness, the shadow of an unconscious moral heroism that would willingly give all of life to make life broader, deeper, and fuller for her and hers.
I saw much of this family afterwards, and grew to love them for their honest efforts to be decent and comfortable, and for their knowledge of their own ignorance.
There was with them no affectation.
The mother would scold the father for being so “easy”; Josie would roundly berate the boys for carelessness; and all knew that it was a hard thing to dig a living out of a rocky side-hill.
I remember the day I rode horseback out to the commissioner’s house with a pleasant young white fellow who wanted the white school.
“Come in,” said the commissioner,—“come in.
Yes, that certificate will do.
The schoolhouse was a log hut, where Colonel Wheeler used to shelter his corn.
It sat in a lot behind a rail fence and thorn bushes, near the sweetest of springs.
There was an entrance where a door once was, and within, a massive rickety fireplace; great chinks between the logs served as windows.
Furniture was scarce.
A pale blackboard crouched in the corner.
My desk was made of three boards, reinforced at critical points, and my chair, borrowed from the landlady, had to be returned every night.
Seats for the children—these puzzled me much.
They had the one virtue of making naps dangerous,—possibly fatal, for the floor was not to be trusted.
I trembled when I heard the patter of little feet down the dusty road, and saw the growing row of dark solemn faces and bright eager eyes facing me.
First came Josie and her brothers and sisters.
The longing to know, to be a student in the great school at Nashville, hovered like a star above this child-woman amid her work and worry, and she studied doggedly.
There were the Dowells from their farm over toward Alexandria,—Fanny, with her smooth black face and wondering eyes; Martha, brown and dull; the pretty girl-wife of a brother, and the younger brood.
Fat Reuben’s little chubby girl came, with golden face and old-gold hair, faithful and solemn. ’Thenie was on hand early,—a jolly, ugly, good-hearted girl, who slyly dipped snuff and looked after her little bow-legged brother.
When her mother could spare her, ’Tildy came,—a midnight beauty, with starry eyes and tapering limbs; and her brother, correspondingly homely.
And then the big boys,—the hulking Lawrences; the lazy Neills, unfathered sons of mother and daughter; Hickman, with a stoop in his shoulders; and the rest.
There they sat, nearly thirty of them, on the rough benches, their faces shading from a pale cream to a deep brown, the little feet bare and swinging, the eyes full of expectation, with here and there a twinkle of mischief, and the hands grasping Webster’s blue-black spelling-book.
I loved my school, and the fine faith the children had in the wisdom of their teacher was truly marvellous.
We read and spelled together, wrote a little, picked flowers, sang, and listened to stories of the world beyond the hill.
I would visit Mun Eddings, who lived in two very dirty rooms, and ask why little Lugene, whose flaming face seemed ever ablaze with the dark-red hair uncombed, was absent all last week, or why I missed so often the inimitable rags of Mack and Ed.
Then the father, who worked Colonel Wheeler’s farm on shares, would tell me how the crops needed the boys; and the thin, slovenly mother, whose face was pretty when washed, assured me that Lugene must mind the baby.
“But we’ll start them again next week.” When the Lawrences stopped, I knew that the doubts of the old folks about book-learning had conquered again, and so, toiling up the hill, and getting as far into the cabin as possible, I put Cicero “pro Archia Poeta” into the simplest English with local applications, and usually convinced them—for a week or so.
On Friday nights I often went home with some of the children,—sometimes to Doc Burke’s farm.
He was a great, loud, thin Black, ever working, and trying to buy the seventy-five acres of hill and dale where he lived; but people said that he would surely fail, and the “white folks would get it all.” His wife was a magnificent Amazon, with saffron face and shining hair, uncorseted and barefooted, and the children were strong and beautiful.
The front room was full of great fat white beds, scrupulously neat; and there were bad chromos on the walls, and a tired centre-table.
At first I used to be a little alarmed at the approach of bedtime in the one lone bedroom, but embarrassment was very deftly avoided.
First, all the children nodded and slept, and were stowed away in one great pile of goose feathers; next, the mother and the father discreetly slipped away to the kitchen while I went to bed; then, blowing out the dim light, they retired in the dark.
Across the road, where fat Reuben lived, they all went outdoors while the teacher retired, because they did not boast the luxury of a kitchen.
Uncle Bird had a small, rough farm, all woods and hills, miles from the big road; but he was full of tales,—he preached now and then,—and with his children, berries, horses, and wheat he was happy and prosperous.
Often, to keep the peace, I must go where life was less lovely; for instance, ’Tildy’s mother was incorrigibly dirty, Reuben’s larder was limited seriously, and herds of untamed insects wandered over the Eddingses’ beds.
The girls looked at the hill in wistful longing, and the boys fretted and haunted Alexandria.
Alexandria was “town,”—a straggling, lazy village of houses, churches, and shops, and an aristocracy of Toms, Dicks, and Captains.
Cuddled on the hill to the north was the village of the colored folks, who lived in three- or four-room unpainted cottages, some neat and homelike, and some dirty.
The dwellings were scattered rather aimlessly, but they centred about the twin temples of the hamlet, the Methodist, and the Hard-Shell Baptist churches.
These, in turn, leaned gingerly on a sad-colored schoolhouse.
Hither my little world wended its crooked way on Sunday to meet other worlds, and gossip, and wonder, and make the weekly sacrifice with frenzied priest at the altar of the “old-time religion.” Then the soft melody and mighty cadences of Negro song fluttered and thundered.
I have called my tiny community a world, and so its isolation made it; and yet there was among us but a half-awakened common consciousness, sprung from common joy and grief, at burial, birth, or wedding; from a common hardship in poverty, poor land, and low wages; and, above all, from the sight of the Veil that hung between us and Opportunity.
All this caused us to think some thoughts together; but these, when ripe for speech, were spoken in various languages.
Those whose eyes twenty-five and more years before had seen “the glory of the coming of the Lord,” saw in every present hindrance or help a dark fatalism bound to bring all things right in His own good time.
The mass of those to whom slavery was a dim recollection of childhood found the world a puzzling thing: it asked little of them, and they answered with little, and yet it ridiculed their offering.
Such a paradox they could not understand, and therefore sank into listless indifference, or shiftlessness, or reckless bravado.
There were, however, some—such as Josie, Jim, and Ben—to whom War, Hell, and Slavery were but childhood tales, whose young appetites had been whetted to an edge by school and story and half-awakened thought.
And their weak wings beat against their barriers,—barriers of caste, of youth, of life; at last, in dangerous moments, against everything that opposed even a whim.
The ten years that follow youth, the years when first the realization comes that life is leading somewhere,—these were the years that passed after I left my little school.
When they were past, I came by chance once more to the walls of Fisk University, to the halls of the chapel of melody.
As I lingered there in the joy and pain of meeting old school-friends, there swept over me a sudden longing to pass again beyond the blue hill, and to see the homes and the school of other days, and to learn how life had gone with my school-children; and I went.
With a cultured parentage and a social caste to uphold him, he might have made a venturesome merchant or a West Point cadet.
But here he was, angry with life and reckless; and when Fanner Durham charged him with stealing wheat, the old man had to ride fast to escape the stones which the furious fool hurled after him.
They told Jim to run away; but he would not run, and the constable came that afternoon.
At last the two came back together in the dark night.
Brother Dennis, the carpenter, built a new house with six rooms; Josie toiled a year in Nashville, and brought back ninety dollars to furnish the house and change it to a home.
When the spring came, and the birds twittered, and the stream ran proud and full, little sister Lizzie, bold and thoughtless, flushed with the passion of youth, bestowed herself on the tempter, and brought home a nameless child.
Josie shivered and worked on, with the vision of schooldays all fled, with a face wan and tired,—worked until, on a summer’s day, some one married another; then Josie crept to her mother like a hurt child, and slept—and sleeps.
The Lawrences have gone,—father and son forever,—and the other son lazily digs in the earth to live.
Reuben is a Baptist preacher now, but I fear as lazy as ever, though his cabin has three rooms; and little Ella has grown into a bouncing woman, and is ploughing corn on the hot hillside.
Across the valley is a house I did not know before, and there I found, rocking one baby and expecting another, one of my schoolgirls, a daughter of Uncle Bird Dowell.
She looked somewhat worried with her new duties, but soon bristled into pride over her neat cabin and the tale of her thrifty husband, and the horse and cow, and the farm they were planning to buy.
My log schoolhouse was gone.
In its place stood Progress; and Progress, I understand, is necessarily ugly.
The crazy foundation stones still marked the former site of my poor little cabin, and not far away, on six weary boulders, perched a jaunty board house, perhaps twenty by thirty feet, with three windows and a door that locked.
Some of the window-glass was broken, and part of an old iron stove lay mournfully under the house.
I peeped through the window half reverently, and found things that were more familiar.
The blackboard had grown by about two feet, and the seats were still without backs.
I remembered the broken, blighted family that used to live there.
The strong, hard face of the mother, with its wilderness of hair, rose before me.
There was Sam Carlon, an impudent old skinflint, who had definite notions about “niggers,” and hired Ben a summer and would not pay him.
Then the hungry boy gathered his sacks together, and in broad daylight went into Carlon’s corn; and when the hard-fisted farmer set upon him, the angry boy flew at him like a beast.
Doc Burke saved a murder and a lynching that day.
The story reminded me again of the Burkes, and an impatience seized me to know who won in the battle, Doc or the seventy-five acres.
So I hurried on, thinking of the Burkes.
They used to have a certain magnificent barbarism about them that I liked.
They were never vulgar, never immoral, but rather rough and primitive, with an unconventionality that spent itself in loud guffaws, slaps on the back, and naps in the corner.
I saw the home of the Hickmans, but Albert, with his stooping shoulders, had passed from the world.
Then I came to the Burkes’ gate and peered through; the enclosure looked rough and untrimmed, and yet there were the same fences around the old farm save to the left, where lay twenty-five other acres.
And lo! the cabin in the hollow had climbed the hill and swollen to a half-finished six-room cottage.
Indeed, the gaunt father who toiled night and day would scarcely be happy out of debt, being so used to it.
The mother wore shoes, but the lion-like physique of other days was broken.
The children had grown up.
Rob, the image of his father, was loud and rough with laughter.
“Edgar is gone,” said the mother, with head half bowed,—“gone to work in Nashville; he and his father couldn’t agree.” Little Doc, the boy born since the time of my school, took me horseback down the creek next morning toward Farmer Dowell’s.
The road and the stream were battling for mastery, and the stream had the better of it.
We splashed and waded, and the merry boy, perched behind me, chattered and laughed.
He showed me where Simon Thompson had bought a bit of ground and a home; but his daughter Lana, a plump, brown, slow girl, was not there.
We wound on down the stream till we came to a gate that I did not recognize, but the boy insisted that it was “Uncle Bird’s.” The farm was fat with the growing crop.
In that little valley was a strange stillness as I rode up; for death and marriage had stolen youth and left age and childhood there.
We talked of the acres bought,—one hundred and twenty-five,—of the new guest-chamber added, of Martha’s marrying.
Then we talked of death: Fanny and Fred were gone; a shadow hung over the other daughter, and when it lifted she was to go to Nashville to school.
At last we spoke of the neighbors, and as night fell, Uncle Bird told me how, on a night like that, ’Thenie came wandering back to her home over yonder, to escape the blows of her husband.
How shall man measure Progress there where the dark-faced Josie lies?
How many heartfuls of sorrow shall balance a bushel of wheat?
And all this life and love and strife and failure,—is it the twilight of nightfall or the flush of some faint-dawning day?
Thus sadly musing, I rode to Nashville in the Jim Crow car.
Of the Wings of Atalanta O black boy of Atlanta!
But half was spoken; The slave’s chains and the master’s Alike are broken; The one curse of the races Held both in tether; They are rising—all are rising— The black and white together.
I have seen her in the morning, when the first flush of day had half-roused her; she lay gray and still on the crimson soil of Georgia; then the blue smoke began to curl from her chimneys, the tinkle of bell and scream of whistle broke the silence, the rattle and roar of busy life slowly gathered and swelled, until the seething whirl of the city seemed a strange thing in a sleepy land.
Once, they say, even Atlanta slept dull and drowsy at the foot-hills of the Alleghanies, until the iron baptism of war awakened her with its sullen waters, aroused and maddened her, and left her listening to the sea.
And the sea cried to the hills and the hills answered the sea, till the city rose like a widow and cast away her weeds, and toiled for her daily bread; toiled steadily, toiled cunningly,—perhaps with some bitterness, with a touch, of _réclame_,—and yet with real earnestness, and real sweat.
All this is bitter hard; and many a man and city and people have found in it excuse for sulking, and brooding, and listless waiting.
Such are not men of the sturdier make; they of Atlanta turned resolutely toward the future; and that future held aloft vistas of purple and gold:—Atlanta, Queen of the cotton kingdom; Atlanta, Gateway to the Land of the Sun; Atlanta, the new Lachesis, spinner of web and woof for the world.
So the city crowned her hundred hills with factories, and stored her shops with cunning handiwork, and stretched long iron ways to greet the busy Mercury in his coming.
And the Nation talked of her striving.
Perhaps Atlanta was not christened for the winged maiden of dull Boeotia; you know the tale,—how swarthy Atalanta, tall and wild, would marry only him who out-raced her; and how the wily Hippomenes laid three apples of gold in the way.
She fled like a shadow, paused, startled over the first apple, but even as he stretched his hand, fled again; hovered over the second, then, slipping from his hot grasp, flew over river, vale, and hill; but as she lingered over the third, his arms fell round her, and looking on each other, the blazing passion of their love profaned the sanctuary of Love, and they were cursed.
If Atlanta be not named for Atalanta, she ought to have been.
Atalanta is not the first or the last maiden whom greed of gold has led to defile the temple of Love; and not maids alone, but men in the race of life, sink from the high and generous ideals of youth to the gambler’s code of the Bourse; and in all our Nation’s striving is not the Gospel of Work befouled by the Gospel of Pay?
So common is this that one-half think it normal; so unquestioned, that we almost fear to question if the end of racing is not gold, if the aim of man is not rightly to be rich.
And if this is the fault of America, how dire a danger lies before a new land and a new city, lest Atlanta, stooping for mere gold, shall find that gold accursed!
It was no maiden’s idle whim that started this hard racing; a fearful wilderness lay about the feet of that city after the War,—feudalism, poverty, the rise of the Third Estate, serfdom, the re-birth of Law and Order, and above and between all, the Veil of Race.
How heavy a journey for weary feet! what wings must Atalanta have to flit over all this hollow and hill, through sour wood and sullen water, and by the red waste of sun-baked clay!
How fleet must Atalanta be if she will not be tempted by gold to profane the Sanctuary!
The Sanctuary of our fathers has, to be sure, few Gods,—some sneer, “all too few.” There is the thrifty Mercury of New England, Pluto of the North, and Ceres of the West; and there, too, is the half-forgotten Apollo of the South, under whose aegis the maiden ran,—and as she ran she forgot him, even as there in Boeotia Venus was forgot.
She forgot the old ideal of the Southern gentleman,—that new-world heir of the grace and courtliness of patrician, knight, and noble; forgot his honor with his foibles, his kindliness with his carelessness, and stooped to apples of gold,—to men busier and sharper, thriftier and more unscrupulous.
Golden apples are beautiful—I remember the lawless days of boyhood, when orchards in crimson and gold tempted me over fence and field—and, too, the merchant who has dethroned the planter is no despicable parvenu.
Work and wealth are the mighty levers to lift this old new land; thrift and toil and saving are the highways to new hopes and new possibilities; and yet the warning is needed lest the wily Hippomenes tempt Atalanta to thinking that golden apples are the goal of racing, and not mere incidents by the way.
Atlanta must not lead the South to dream of material prosperity as the touchstone of all success; already the fatal might of this idea is beginning to spread; it is replacing the finer type of Southerner with vulgar money-getters; it is burying the sweeter beauties of Southern life beneath pretence and ostentation.
Not only is this true in the world which Atlanta typifies, but it is threatening to be true of a world beneath and beyond that world,—the Black World beyond the Veil.
Today it makes little difference to Atlanta, to the South, what the Negro thinks or dreams or wills.
In the soul-life of the land he is to-day, and naturally will long remain, unthought of, half forgotten; and yet when he does come to think and will and do for himself,—and let no man dream that day will never come,—then the part he plays will not be one of sudden learning, but words and thoughts he has been taught to lisp in his race-childhood.
To-day the ferment of his striving toward self-realization is to the strife of the white world like a wheel within a wheel: beyond the Veil are smaller but like problems of ideals, of leaders and the led, of serfdom, of poverty, of order and subordination, and, through all, the Veil of Race.
Few know of these problems, few who know notice them; and yet there they are, awaiting student, artist, and seer,—a field for somebody sometime to discover.
Hither has the temptation of Hippomenes penetrated; already in this smaller world, which now indirectly and anon directly must influence the larger for good or ill, the habit is forming of interpreting the world in dollars.
The old leaders of Negro opinion, in the little groups where there is a Negro social consciousness, are being replaced by new; neither the black preacher nor the black teacher leads as he did two decades ago.
Into their places are pushing the farmers and gardeners, the well-paid porters and artisans, the business-men,—all those with property and money.
And with all this change, so curiously parallel to that of the Other-world, goes too the same inevitable change in ideals.
The South laments to-day the slow, steady disappearance of a certain type of Negro,—the faithful, courteous slave of other days, with his incorruptible honesty and dignified humility.
He is passing away just as surely as the old type of Southern gentleman is passing, and from not dissimilar causes,—the sudden transformation of a fair far-off ideal of Freedom into the hard reality of bread-winning and the consequent deification of Bread.
In the Black World, the Preacher and Teacher embodied once the ideals of this people—the strife for another and a juster world, the vague dream of righteousness, the mystery of knowing; but to-day the danger is that these ideals, with their simple beauty and weird inspiration, will suddenly sink to a question of cash and a lust for gold.
Here stands this black young Atalanta, girding herself for the race that must be run; and if her eyes be still toward the hills and sky as in the days of old, then we may look for noble running; but what if some ruthless or wily or even thoughtless Hippomenes lay golden apples before her?
What if the Negro people be wooed from a strife for righteousness, from a love of knowing, to regard dollars as the be-all and end-all of life?
What if to the Mammonism of America be added the rising Mammonism of the re-born South, and the Mammonism of this South be reinforced by the budding Mammonism of its half-wakened black millions?
Whither, then, is the new-world quest of Goodness and Beauty and Truth gone glimmering?
Must this, and that fair flower of Freedom which, despite the jeers of latter-day striplings, sprung from our fathers’ blood, must that too degenerate into a dusty quest of gold,—into lawless lust with Hippomenes?
The hundred hills of Atlanta are not all crowned with factories.
On one, toward the west, the setting sun throws three buildings in bold relief against the sky.
The beauty of the group lies in its simple unity:—a broad lawn of green rising from the red street and mingled roses and peaches; north and south, two plain and stately halls; and in the midst, half hidden in ivy, a larger building, boldly graceful, sparingly decorated, and with one low spire.
It is a restful group, —one never looks for more; it is all here, all intelligible.
In winter’s twilight, when the red sun glows, I can see the dark figures pass between the halls to the music of the night-bell.
In the morning, when the sun is golden, the clang of the day-bell brings the hurry and laughter of three hundred young hearts from hall and street, and from the busy city below,—children all dark and heavy-haired,—to join their clear young voices in the music of the morning sacrifice.
In a half-dozen class-rooms they gather then,—here to follow the love-song of Dido, here to listen to the tale of Troy divine; there to wander among the stars, there to wander among men and nations,—and elsewhere other well-worn ways of knowing this queer world.
Nothing new, no time-saving devices,—simply old time-glorified methods of delving for Truth, and searching out the hidden beauties of life, and learning the good of living.
The riddle of existence is the college curriculum that was laid before the Pharaohs, that was taught in the groves by Plato, that formed the _trivium_ and _quadrivium_, and is to-day laid before the freedmen’s sons by Atlanta University.
And this course of study will not change; its methods will grow more deft and effectual, its content richer by toil of scholar and sight of seer; but the true college will ever have one goal,—not to earn meat, but to know the end and aim of that life which meat nourishes.
Not at Oxford or at Leipsic, not at Yale or Columbia, is there an air of higher resolve or more unfettered striving; the determination to realize for men, both black and white, the broadest possibilities of life, to seek the better and the best, to spread with their own hands the Gospel of Sacrifice,—all this is the burden of their talk and dream.
They were right when they sought to found a new educational system upon the University: where, forsooth, shall we ground knowledge save on the broadest and deepest knowledge?
The roots of the tree, rather than the leaves, are the sources of its life; and from the dawn of history, from Academus to Cambridge, the culture of the University has been the broad foundation-stone on which is built the kindergarten’s A B C.
But these builders did make a mistake in minimizing the gravity of the problem before them; in thinking it a matter of years and decades; in therefore building quickly and laying their foundation carelessly, and lowering the standard of knowing, until they had scattered haphazard through the South some dozen poorly equipped high schools and miscalled them universities.
And to seek to make the blacksmith a scholar is almost as silly as the more modern scheme of making the scholar a blacksmith; almost, but not quite.
The function of the university is not simply to teach bread-winning, or to furnish teachers for the public schools or to be a centre of polite society; it is, above all, to be the organ of that fine adjustment between real life and the growing knowledge of life, an adjustment which forms the secret of civilization.
Such an institution the South of to-day sorely needs.
She has religion, earnest, bigoted:—religion that on both sides the Veil often omits the sixth, seventh, and eighth commandments, but substitutes a dozen supplementary ones.
She has, as Atlanta shows, growing thrift and love of toil; but she lacks that broad knowledge of what the world knows and knew of human living and doing, which she may apply to the thousand problems of real life to-day confronting her.
The need of the South is knowledge and culture,—not in dainty limited quantity, as before the war, but in broad busy abundance in the world of work; and until she has this, not all the Apples of Hesperides, be they golden and bejewelled, can save her from the curse of the Boeotian lovers.
The Wings of Atalanta are the coming universities of the South.
They alone can bear the maiden past the temptation of golden fruit.
They will not guide her flying feet away from the cotton and gold; for—ah, thoughtful Hippomenes!—do not the apples lie in the very Way of Life?
But they will guide her over and beyond them, and leave her kneeling in the Sanctuary of Truth and Freedom and broad Humanity, virgin and undefiled.
Sadly did the Old South err in human education, despising the education of the masses, and niggardly in the support of colleges.
Her ancient university foundations dwindled and withered under the foul breath of slavery; and even since the war they have fought a failing fight for life in the tainted air of social unrest and commercial selfishness, stunted by the death of criticism, and starving for lack of broadly cultured men.
And if this is the white South’s need and danger, how much heavier the danger and need of the freedmen’s sons! how pressing here the need of broad ideals and true culture, the conservation of soul from sordid aims and petty passions!
Let us build the Southern university—William and Mary, Trinity, Georgia, Texas, Tulane, Vanderbilt, and the others—fit to live; let us build, too, the Negro universities:—Fisk, whose foundation was ever broad; Howard, at the heart of the Nation; Atlanta at Atlanta, whose ideal of scholarship has been held above the temptation of numbers.
Why not here, and perhaps elsewhere, plant deeply and for all time centres of learning and living, colleges that yearly would send into the life of the South a few white men and a few black men of broad culture, catholic tolerance, and trained ability, joining their hands to other hands, and giving to this squabble of the Races a decent and dignified peace?
Patience, Humility, Manners, and Taste, common schools and kindergartens, industrial and technical schools, literature and tolerance,—all these spring from knowledge and culture, the children of the university.
So must men and nations build, not otherwise, not upside down.
Teach workers to work,—a wise saying; wise when applied to German boys and American girls; wiser when said of Negro boys, for they have less knowledge of working and none to teach them.
Teach thinkers to think,—a needed knowledge in a day of loose and careless logic; and they whose lot is gravest must have the carefulest training to think aright.
If these things are so, how foolish to ask what is the best education for one or seven or sixty million souls! shall we teach them trades, or train them in liberal arts?
Neither and both: teach the workers to work and the thinkers to think; make carpenters of carpenters, and philosophers of philosophers, and fops of fools.
We are training not isolated men but a living group of men,—nay, a group within a group.
And the final product of our training must be neither a psychologist nor a brickmason, but a man.
And to make men, we must have ideals, broad, pure, and inspiring ends of living,—not sordid money-getting, not apples of gold.
The worker must work for the glory of his handiwork, not simply for pay; the thinker must think for truth, not for fame.
And all this is gained only by human strife and longing; by ceaseless training and education; by founding Right on righteousness and Truth on the unhampered search for Truth; by founding the common school on the university, and the industrial school on the common school; and weaving thus a system, not a distortion, and bringing a birth, not an abortion.
When night falls on the City of a Hundred Hills, a wind gathers itself from the seas and comes murmuring westward.
And at its bidding, the smoke of the drowsy factories sweeps down upon the mighty city and covers it like a pall, while yonder at the University the stars twinkle above Stone Hall.
And they say that yon gray mist is the tunic of Atalanta pausing over her golden apples.
Fly, my maiden, fly, for yonder comes Hippomenes!
Of the Training of Black Men Why, if the Soul can fling the Dust aside, And naked on the Air of Heaven ride, Were’t not a Shame—were’t not a Shame for him In this clay carcase crippled to abide?
The larger humanity strives to feel in this contact of living Nations and sleeping hordes a thrill of new life in the world, crying, “If the contact of Life and Sleep be Death, shame on such Life.” To be sure, behind this thought lurks the afterthought of force and dominion,—the making of brown men to delve when the temptation of beads and red calico cloys.
The second thought streaming from the death-ship and the curving river is the thought of the older South,—the sincere and passionate belief that somewhere between men and cattle, God created a _tertium quid_, and called it a Negro,—a clownish, simple creature, at times even lovable within its limitations, but straitly foreordained to walk within the Veil.
To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,—some of them with favoring chance might become men, but in sheer self-defence we dare not let them, and we build about them walls so high, and hang between them and the light a veil so thick, that they shall not even think of breaking through.
And last of all there trickles down that third and darker thought,—the thought of the things themselves, the confused, half-conscious mutter of men who are black and whitened, crying “Liberty, Freedom, Opportunity—vouchsafe to us, O boastful World, the chance of living men!” To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,—suppose, after all, the World is right and we are less than men?
So here we stand among thoughts of human unity, even through conquest and slavery; the inferiority of black men, even if forced by fraud; a shriek in the night for the freedom of men who themselves are not yet sure of their right to demand it.
This is the tangle of thought and afterthought wherein we are called to solve the problem of training men for life.
Behind all its curiousness, so attractive alike to sage and _dilettante_, lie its dim dangers, throwing across us shadows at once grotesque and awful.
Plain it is to us that what the world seeks through desert and wild we have within our threshold,—a stalwart laboring force, suited to the semi-tropics; if, deaf to the voice of the Zeitgeist, we refuse to use and develop these men, we risk poverty and loss.
If, on the other hand, seized by the brutal afterthought, we debauch the race thus caught in our talons, selfishly sucking their blood and brains in the future as in the past, what shall save us from national decadence?
Only that saner selfishness, which Education teaches, can find the rights of all in the whirl of work.
Again, we may decry the color-prejudice of the South, yet it remains a heavy fact.
Such curious kinks of the human mind exist and must be reckoned with soberly.
They cannot be laughed away, nor always successfully stormed at, nor easily abolished by act of legislature.
And yet they must not be encouraged by being let alone.
They must be recognized as facts, but unpleasant facts; things that stand in the way of civilization and religion and common decency.
They can be met in but one way,—by the breadth and broadening of human reason, by catholicity of taste and culture.
And so, too, the native ambition and aspiration of men, even though they be black, backward, and ungraceful, must not lightly be dealt with.
To stimulate wildly weak and untrained minds is to play with mighty fires; to flout their striving idly is to welcome a harvest of brutish crime and shameless lethargy in our very laps.
The guiding of thought and the deft coordination of deed is at once the path of honor and humanity.
But when we have vaguely said that Education will set this tangle straight, what have we uttered but a truism?
Training for life teaches living; but what training for the profitable living together of black men and white?
Johnson blandly assured us that education was needful solely for the embellishments of life, and was useless for ordinary vermin.
To-day we have climbed to heights where we would open at least the outer courts of knowledge to all, display its treasures to many, and select the few to whom its mystery of Truth is revealed, not wholly by birth or the accidents of the stock market, but at least in part according to deftness and aim, talent and character.
This programme, however, we are sorely puzzled in carrying out through that part of the land where the blight of slavery fell hardest, and where we are dealing with two backward peoples.
To make here in human education that ever necessary combination of the permanent and the contingent—of the ideal and the practical in workable equilibrium—has been there, as it ever must be in every age and place, a matter of infinite experiment and frequent mistakes.
In rough approximation we may point out four varying decades of work in Southern education since the Civil War.
From the close of the war until 1876, was the period of uncertain groping and temporary relief.
There were army schools, mission schools, and schools of the Freedmen’s Bureau in chaotic disarrangement seeking system and co-operation.
Then followed ten years of constructive definite effort toward the building of complete school systems in the South.
Normal schools and colleges were founded for the freedmen, and teachers trained there to man the public schools.
There was the inevitable tendency of war to underestimate the prejudices of the master and the ignorance of the slave, and all seemed clear sailing out of the wreckage of the storm.
Meantime, starting in this decade yet especially developing from 1885 to 1895, began the industrial revolution of the South.
The land saw glimpses of a new destiny and the stirring of new ideals.
The educational system striving to complete itself saw new obstacles and a field of work ever broader and deeper.
The Negro colleges, hurriedly founded, were inadequately equipped, illogically distributed, and of varying efficiency and grade; the normal and high schools were doing little more than common-school work, and the common schools were training but a third of the children who ought to be in them, and training these too often poorly.
At the same time the white South, by reason of its sudden conversion from the slavery ideal, by so much the more became set and strengthened in its racial prejudice, and crystallized it into harsh law and harsher custom; while the marvellous pushing forward of the poor white daily threatened to take even bread and butter from the mouths of the heavily handicapped sons of the freedmen.
In the midst, then, of the larger problem of Negro education sprang up the more practical question of work, the inevitable economic quandary that faces a people in the transition from slavery to freedom, and especially those who make that change amid hate and prejudice, lawlessness and ruthless competition.
The industrial school springing to notice in this decade, but coming to full recognition in the decade beginning with 1895, was the proffered answer to this combined educational and economic crisis, and an answer of singular wisdom and timeliness.
From the very first in nearly all the schools some attention had been given to training in handiwork, but now was this training first raised to a dignity that brought it in direct touch with the South’s magnificent industrial development, and given an emphasis which reminded black folk that before the Temple of Knowledge swing the Gates of Toil.
And men ask this to-day all the more eagerly because of sinister signs in recent educational movements.
The tendency is here, born of slavery and quickened to renewed life by the crazy imperialism of the day, to regard human beings as among the material resources of a land to be trained with an eye single to future dividends.
Race-prejudices, which keep brown and black men in their “places,” we are coming to regard as useful allies with such a theory, no matter how much they may dull the ambition and sicken the hearts of struggling human beings.
And above all, we daily hear that an education that encourages aspiration, that sets the loftiest of ideals and seeks as an end culture and character rather than bread-winning, is the privilege of white men and the danger and delusion of black.
Especially has criticism been directed against the former educational efforts to aid the Negro.
In the four periods I have mentioned, we find first, boundless, planless enthusiasm and sacrifice; then the preparation of teachers for a vast public-school system; then the launching and expansion of that school system amid increasing difficulties; and finally the training of workmen for the new and growing industries.
This development has been sharply ridiculed as a logical anomaly and flat reversal of nature.
Soothly we have been told that first industrial and manual training should have taught the Negro to work, then simple schools should have taught him to read and write, and finally, after years, high and normal schools could have completed the system, as intelligence and wealth demanded.
That a system logically so complete was historically impossible, it needs but a little thought to prove.
Progress in human affairs is more often a pull than a push, a surging forward of the exceptional man, and the lifting of his duller brethren slowly and painfully to his vantage-ground.
Thus it was no accident that gave birth to universities centuries before the common schools, that made fair Harvard the first flower of our wilderness.
So in the South: the mass of the freedmen at the end of the war lacked the intelligence so necessary to modern workingmen.
They must first have the common school to teach them to read, write, and cipher; and they must have higher schools to teach teachers for the common schools.
The white teachers who flocked South went to establish such a common-school system.
Few held the idea of founding colleges; most of them at first would have laughed at the idea.
But they faced, as all men since them have faced, that central paradox of the South,—the social separation of the races.
At that time it was the sudden volcanic rupture of nearly all relations between black and white, in work and government and family life.
Since then a new adjustment of relations in economic and political affairs has grown up,—an adjustment subtle and difficult to grasp, yet singularly ingenious, which leaves still that frightful chasm at the color-line across which men pass at their peril.
Thus, then and now, there stand in the South two separate worlds; and separate not simply in the higher realms of social intercourse, but also in church and school, on railway and street-car, in hotels and theatres, in streets and city sections, in books and newspapers, in asylums and jails, in hospitals and graveyards.
There is still enough of contact for large economic and group cooperation, but the separation is so thorough and deep that it absolutely precludes for the present between the races anything like that sympathetic and effective group-training and leadership of the one by the other, such as the American Negro and all backward peoples must have for effectual progress.
This the missionaries of ’68 soon saw; and if effective industrial and trade schools were impracticable before the establishment of a common-school system, just as certainly no adequate common schools could be founded until there were teachers to teach them.
Southern whites would not teach them; Northern whites in sufficient numbers could not be had.
If the Negro was to learn, he must teach himself, and the most effective help that could be given him was the establishment of schools to train Negro teachers.
This conclusion was slowly but surely reached by every student of the situation until simultaneously, in widely separated regions, without consultation or systematic plan, there arose a series of institutions designed to furnish teachers for the untaught.
Above the sneers of critics at the obvious defects of this procedure must ever stand its one crushing rejoinder: in a single generation they put thirty thousand black teachers in the South; they wiped out the illiteracy of the majority of the black people of the land, and they made Tuskegee possible.
Such higher training-schools tended naturally to deepen broader development: at first they were common and grammar schools, then some became high schools.
This development was reached with different degrees of speed in different institutions: Hampton is still a high school, while Fisk University started her college in 1871, and Spelman Seminary about 1896.
In all cases the aim was identical,—to maintain the standards of the lower training by giving teachers and leaders the best practicable training; and above all, to furnish the black world with adequate standards of human culture and lofty ideals of life.
It was not enough that the teachers of teachers should be trained in technical normal methods; they must also, so far as possible, be broad-minded, cultured men and women, to scatter civilization among a people whose ignorance was not simply of letters, but of life itself.
It can thus be seen that the work of education in the South began with higher institutions of training, which threw off as their foliage common schools, and later industrial schools, and at the same time strove to shoot their roots ever deeper toward college and university training.
That this was an inevitable and necessary development, sooner or later, goes without saying; but there has been, and still is, a question in many minds if the natural growth was not forced, and if the higher training was not either overdone or done with cheap and unsound methods.
Among white Southerners this feeling is widespread and positive.
A prominent Southern journal voiced this in a recent editorial.
“The experiment that has been made to give the colored students classical training has not been satisfactory.
Even though many were able to pursue the course, most of them did so in a parrot-like way, learning what was taught, but not seeming to appropriate the truth and import of their instruction, and graduating without sensible aim or valuable occupation for their future.
The whole scheme has proved a waste of time, efforts, and the money of the state.” While most fair-minded men would recognize this as extreme and overdrawn, still without doubt many are asking, Are there a sufficient number of Negroes ready for college training to warrant the undertaking?
Are not too many students prematurely forced into this work?
Does it not have the effect of dissatisfying the young Negro with his environment?
And do these graduates succeed in real life?
Such natural questions cannot be evaded, nor on the other hand must a Nation naturally skeptical as to Negro ability assume an unfavorable answer without careful inquiry and patient openness to conviction.
We must not forget that most Americans answer all queries regarding the Negro a priori, and that the least that human courtesy can do is to listen to evidence.
The advocates of the higher education of the Negro would be the last to deny the incompleteness and glaring defects of the present system: too many institutions have attempted to do college work, the work in some cases has not been thoroughly done, and quantity rather than quality has sometimes been sought.
But all this can be said of higher education throughout the land; it is the almost inevitable incident of educational growth, and leaves the deeper question of the legitimate demand for the higher training of Negroes untouched.
And this latter question can be settled in but one way,—by a first-hand study of the facts.
If we leave out of view all institutions which have not actually graduated students from a course higher than that of a New England high school, even though they be called colleges; if then we take the thirty-four remaining institutions, we may clear up many misapprehensions by asking searchingly, What kind of institutions are they? what do they teach? and what sort of men do they graduate?
And first we may say that this type of college, including Atlanta, Fisk, and Howard, Wilberforce and Claflin, Shaw, and the rest, is peculiar, almost unique.
The teachers in these institutions came not to keep the Negroes in their place, but to raise them out of the defilement of the places where slavery had wallowed them.
The colleges they founded were social settlements; homes where the best of the sons of the freedmen came in close and sympathetic touch with the best traditions of New England.
They lived and ate together, studied and worked, hoped and harkened in the dawning light.
In actual formal content their curriculum was doubtless old-fashioned, but in educational power it was supreme, for it was the contact of living souls.
From such schools about two thousand Negroes have gone forth with the bachelor’s degree.
The number in itself is enough to put at rest the argument that too large a proportion of Negroes are receiving higher training.
If the ratio to population of all Negro students throughout the land, in both college and secondary training, be counted, Commissioner Harris assures us “it must be increased to five times its present average” to equal the average of the land.
Fifty years ago the ability of Negro students in any appreciable numbers to master a modern college course would have been difficult to prove.
To-day it is proved by the fact that four hundred Negroes, many of whom have been reported as brilliant students, have received the bachelor’s degree from Harvard, Yale, Oberlin, and seventy other leading colleges.
Here we have, then, nearly twenty-five hundred Negro graduates, of whom the crucial query must be made, How far did their training fit them for life?
It is of course extremely difficult to collect satisfactory data on such a point,—difficult to reach the men, to get trustworthy testimony, and to gauge that testimony by any generally acceptable criterion of success.
In 1900, the Conference at Atlanta University undertook to study these graduates, and published the results.
First they sought to know what these graduates were doing, and succeeded in getting answers from nearly two-thirds of the living.
The direct testimony was in almost all cases corroborated by the reports of the colleges where they graduated, so that in the main the reports were worthy of credence.
Fifty-three per cent of these graduates were teachers,—presidents of institutions, heads of normal schools, principals of city school-systems, and the like.
Seventeen per cent were clergymen; another seventeen per cent were in the professions, chiefly as physicians.
Over six per cent were merchants, farmers, and artisans, and four per cent were in the government civil-service.
Granting even that a considerable proportion of the third unheard from are unsuccessful, this is a record of usefulness.
Personally I know many hundreds of these graduates, and have corresponded with more than a thousand; through others I have followed carefully the life-work of scores; I have taught some of them and some of the pupils whom they have taught, lived in homes which they have builded, and looked at life through their eyes.
Comparing them as a class with my fellow students in New England and in Europe, I cannot hesitate in saying that nowhere have I met men and women with a broader spirit of helpfulness, with deeper devotion to their life-work, or with more consecrated determination to succeed in the face of bitter difficulties than among Negro college-bred men.
With all their larger vision and deeper sensibility, these men have usually been conservative, careful leaders.
They have seldom been agitators, have withstood the temptation to head the mob, and have worked steadily and faithfully in a thousand communities in the South.
As teachers, they have given the South a commendable system of city schools and large numbers of private normal-schools and academies.
Colored college-bred men have worked side by side with white college graduates at Hampton; almost from the beginning the backbone of Tuskegee’s teaching force has been formed of graduates from Fisk and Atlanta.
And to-day the institute is filled with college graduates, from the energetic wife of the principal down to the teacher of agriculture, including nearly half of the executive council and a majority of the heads of departments.
In the professions, college men are slowly but surely leavening the Negro church, are healing and preventing the devastations of disease, and beginning to furnish legal protection for the liberty and property of the toiling masses.
How could Negroes do it if they were not trained carefully for it?
If white people need colleges to furnish teachers, ministers, lawyers, and doctors, do black people need nothing of the sort?
That the present social separation and acute race-sensitiveness must eventually yield to the influences of culture, as the South grows civilized, is clear.
But such transformation calls for singular wisdom and patience.
It will demand broad-minded, upright men, both white and black, and in its final accomplishment American civilization will triumph.
So far as white men are concerned, this fact is to-day being recognized in the South, and a happy renaissance of university education seems imminent.
But the very voices that cry hail to this good work are, strange to relate, largely silent or antagonistic to the higher education of the Negro.
Strange to relate! for this is certain, no secure civilization can be built in the South with the Negro as an ignorant, turbulent proletariat.
Suppose we seek to remedy this by making them laborers and nothing more: they are not fools, they have tasted of the Tree of Life, and they will not cease to think, will not cease attempting to read the riddle of the world.
By taking away their best equipped teachers and leaders, by slamming the door of opportunity in the faces of their bolder and brighter minds, will you make them satisfied with their lot? or will you not rather transfer their leading from the hands of men taught to think to the hands of untrained demagogues?
We ought not to forget that despite the pressure of poverty, and despite the active discouragement and even ridicule of friends, the demand for higher training steadily increases among Negro youth: there were, in the years from 1875 to 1880, 22 Negro graduates from Northern colleges; from 1885 to 1890 there were 43, and from 1895 to 1900, nearly 100 graduates.
From Southern Negro colleges there were, in the same three periods, 143, 413, and over 500 graduates.
Here, then, is the plain thirst for training; by refusing to give this Talented Tenth the key to knowledge, can any sane man imagine that they will lightly lay aside their yearning and contentedly become hewers of wood and drawers of water?
The dangerously clear logic of the Negro’s position will more and more loudly assert itself in that day when increasing wealth and more intricate social organization preclude the South from being, as it so largely is, simply an armed camp for intimidating black folk.
Such waste of energy cannot be spared if the South is to catch up with civilization.
And as the black third of the land grows in thrift and skill, unless skilfully guided in its larger philosophy, it must more and more brood over the red past and the creeping, crooked present, until it grasps a gospel of revolt and revenge and throws its new-found energies athwart the current of advance.
Even to-day the masses of the Negroes see all too clearly the anomalies of their position and the moral crookedness of yours.
You may marshal strong indictments against them, but their counter-cries, lacking though they be in formal logic, have burning truths within them which you may not wholly ignore, O Southern Gentlemen!
If you deplore their presence here, they ask, Who brought us?
When you cry, Deliver us from the vision of intermarriage, they answer that legal marriage is infinitely better than systematic concubinage and prostitution.
And if in just fury you accuse their vagabonds of violating women, they also in fury quite as just may reply: The rape which your gentlemen have done against helpless black women in defiance of your own laws is written on the foreheads of two millions of mulattoes, and written in ineffaceable blood.
And finally, when you fasten crime upon this race as its peculiar trait, they answer that slavery was the arch-crime, and lynching and lawlessness its twin abortions; that color and race are not crimes, and yet it is they which in this land receive most unceasing condemnation, North, East, South, and West.
I will not say such arguments are wholly justified,—I will not insist that there is no other side to the shield; but I do say that of the nine millions of Negroes in this nation, there is scarcely one out of the cradle to whom these arguments do not daily present themselves in the guise of terrible truth.
I insist that the question of the future is how best to keep these millions from brooding over the wrongs of the past and the difficulties of the present, so that all their energies may be bent toward a cheerful striving and cooperation with their white neighbors toward a larger, juster, and fuller future.
That one wise method of doing this lies in the closer knitting of the Negro to the great industrial possibilities of the South is a great truth.
And this the common schools and the manual training and trade schools are working to accomplish.
The foundations of knowledge in this race, as in others, must be sunk deep in the college and university if we would build a solid, permanent structure.
Is there not, with such a group and in such a crisis, infinitely more danger to be apprehended from half-trained minds and shallow thinking than from over-education and over-refinement?
Surely we have wit enough to found a Negro college so manned and equipped as to steer successfully between the _dilettante_ and the fool.
We shall hardly induce black men to believe that if their stomachs be full, it matters little about their brains.
They already dimly perceive that the paths of peace winding between honest toil and dignified manhood call for the guidance of skilled thinkers, the loving, reverent comradeship between the black lowly and the black men emancipated by training and culture.
The function of the Negro college, then, is clear: it must maintain the standards of popular education, it must seek the social regeneration of the Negro, and it must help in the solution of problems of race contact and cooperation.
Such souls aforetime have inspired and guided worlds, and if we be not wholly bewitched by our Rhinegold, they shall again.
Herein the longing of black men must have respect: the rich and bitter depth of their experience, the unknown treasures of their inner life, the strange rendings of nature they have seen, may give the world new points of view and make their loving, living, and doing precious to all human hearts.
And to themselves in these the days that try their souls, the chance to soar in the dim blue air above the smoke is to their finer spirits boon and guerdon for what they lose on earth by being black.
I sit with Shakespeare and he winces not.
Across the color line I move arm in arm with Balzac and Dumas, where smiling men and welcoming women glide in gilded halls.
From out the caves of evening that swing between the strong-limbed earth and the tracery of the stars, I summon Aristotle and Aurelius and what soul I will, and they come all graciously with no scorn nor condescension.
Is this the life you grudge us, O knightly America?
Is this the life you long to change into the dull red hideousness of Georgia?
Are you so afraid lest peering from this high Pisgah, between Philistine and Amalekite, we sight the Promised Land?
Of the Black Belt I am black but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, As the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
Look not upon me, because I am black, Because the sun hath looked upon me: My mother’s children were angry with me; They made me the keeper of the vineyards; But mine own vineyard have I not kept.
Here and there lay straggling, unlovely villages, and lean men loafed leisurely at the depots; then again came the stretch of pines and clay.
Yet we did not nod, nor weary of the scene; for this is historic ground.
Right across our track, three hundred and sixty years ago, wandered the cavalcade of Hernando de Soto, looking for gold and the Great Sea; and he and his foot-sore captives disappeared yonder in the grim forests to the west.
Here sits Atlanta, the city of a hundred hills, with something Western, something Southern, and something quite its own, in its busy life.
Just this side Atlanta is the land of the Cherokees and to the southwest, not far from where Sam Hose was crucified, you may stand on a spot which is to-day the centre of the Negro problem,—the centre of those nine million men who are America’s dark heritage from slavery and the slave-trade.
Not only is Georgia thus the geographical focus of our Negro population, but in many other respects, both now and yesterday, the Negro problems have seemed to be centered in this State.
No other State in the Union can count a million Negroes among its citizens,—a population as large as the slave population of the whole Union in 1800; no other State fought so long and strenuously to gather this host of Africans.
Oglethorpe thought slavery against law and gospel; but the circumstances which gave Georgia its first inhabitants were not calculated to furnish citizens over-nice in their ideas about rum and slaves.
Despite the prohibitions of the trustees, these Georgians, like some of their descendants, proceeded to take the law into their own hands; and so pliant were the judges, and so flagrant the smuggling, and so earnest were the prayers of Whitefield, that by the middle of the eighteenth century all restrictions were swept away, and the slave-trade went merrily on for fifty years and more.
Down in Darien, where the Delegal riots took place some summers ago, there used to come a strong protest against slavery from the Scotch Highlanders; and the Moravians of Ebenezer did not like the system.
But not till the Haytian Terror of Toussaint was the trade in men even checked; while the national statute of 1808 did not suffice to stop it.
How the Africans poured in!—fifty thousand between 1790 and 1810, and then, from Virginia and from smugglers, two thousand a year for many years more.
So the thirty thousand Negroes of Georgia in 1790 doubled in a decade,—were over a hundred thousand in 1810, had reached two hundred thousand in 1820, and half a million at the time of the war.
Thus like a snake the black population writhed upward.
This that we pass as we near Atlanta is the ancient land of the Cherokees,—that brave Indian nation which strove so long for its fatherland, until Fate and the United States Government drove them beyond the Mississippi.
If you wish to ride with me you must come into the “Jim Crow Car.” There will be no objection,—already four other white men, and a little white girl with her nurse, are in there.
Of course this car is not so good as the other, but it is fairly clean and comfortable.
The discomfort lies chiefly in the hearts of those four black men yonder—and in mine.
We rumble south in quite a business-like way.
The bare red clay and pines of Northern Georgia begin to disappear, and in their place appears a rich rolling land, luxuriant, and here and there well tilled.
This is the land of the Creek Indians; and a hard time the Georgians had to seize it.
The towns grow more frequent and more interesting, and brand-new cotton mills rise on every side.
Below Macon the world grows darker; for now we approach the Black Belt,—that strange land of shadows, at which even slaves paled in the past, and whence come now only faint and half-intelligible murmurs to the world beyond.
The “Jim Crow Car” grows larger and a shade better; three rough field-hands and two or three white loafers accompany us, and the newsboy still spreads his wares at one end.
The sun is setting, but we can see the great cotton country as we enter it,—the soil now dark and fertile, now thin and gray, with fruit-trees and dilapidated buildings,—all the way to Albany.
Two hundred miles south of Atlanta, two hundred miles west of the Atlantic, and one hundred miles north of the Great Gulf lies Dougherty County, with ten thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.
The Flint River winds down from Andersonville, and, turning suddenly at Albany, the county-seat, hurries on to join the Chattahoochee and the sea.
Andrew Jackson knew the Flint well, and marched across it once to avenge the Indian Massacre at Fort Mims.
That was in 1814, not long before the battle of New Orleans; and by the Creek treaty that followed this campaign, all Dougherty County, and much other rich land, was ceded to Georgia.
Still, settlers fought shy of this land, for the Indians were all about, and they were unpleasant neighbors in those days.
The panic of 1837, which Jackson bequeathed to Van Buren, turned the planters from the impoverished lands of Virginia, the Carolinas, and east Georgia, toward the West.
The Indians were removed to Indian Territory, and settlers poured into these coveted lands to retrieve their broken fortunes.
For a radius of a hundred miles about Albany, stretched a great fertile land, luxuriant with forests of pine, oak, ash, hickory, and poplar; hot with the sun and damp with the rich black swamp-land; and here the corner-stone of the Cotton Kingdom was laid.
Albany is to-day a wide-streeted, placid, Southern town, with a broad sweep of stores and saloons, and flanking rows of homes,—whites usually to the north, and blacks to the south.
Six days in the week the town looks decidedly too small for itself, and takes frequent and prolonged naps.
But on Saturday suddenly the whole county disgorges itself upon the place, and a perfect flood of black peasantry pours through the streets, fills the stores, blocks the sidewalks, chokes the thoroughfares, and takes full possession of the town.
They are black, sturdy, uncouth country folk, good-natured and simple, talkative to a degree, and yet far more silent and brooding than the crowds of the Rhine-pfalz, or Naples, or Cracow.
They drink considerable quantities of whiskey, but do not get very drunk; they talk and laugh loudly at times, but seldom quarrel or fight.
Thus Albany is a real capital,—a typical Southern county town, the centre of the life of ten thousand souls; their point of contact with the outer world, their centre of news and gossip, their market for buying and selling, borrowing and lending, their fountain of justice and law.
Once upon a time we knew country life so well and city life so little, that we illustrated city life as that of a closely crowded country district.
Now the world has well-nigh forgotten what the country is, and we must imagine a little city of black people scattered far and wide over three hundred lonesome square miles of land, without train or trolley, in the midst of cotton and corn, and wide patches of sand and gloomy soil.
It gets pretty hot in Southern Georgia in July,—a sort of dull, determined heat that seems quite independent of the sun; so it took us some days to muster courage enough to leave the porch and venture out on the long country roads, that we might see this unknown world.
It was about ten in the morning, bright with a faint breeze, and we jogged leisurely southward in the valley of the Flint.
We passed the scattered box-like cabins of the brickyard hands, and the long tenement-row facetiously called “The Ark,” and were soon in the open country, and on the confines of the great plantations of other days.
Twelve miles his plantation used to run,—a regular barony.
It is nearly all gone now; only straggling bits belong to the family, and the rest has passed to Jews and Negroes.
Even the bits which are left are heavily mortgaged, and, like the rest of the land, tilled by tenants.
Here is one of them now,—a tall brown man, a hard worker and a hard drinker, illiterate, but versed in farmlore, as his nodding crops declare.
This distressingly new board house is his, and he has just moved out of yonder moss-grown cabin with its one square room.
From the curtains in Benton’s house, down the road, a dark comely face is staring at the strangers; for passing carriages are not every-day occurrences here.
Benton is an intelligent yellow man with a good-sized family, and manages a plantation blasted by the war and now the broken staff of the widow.
He might be well-to-do, they say; but he carouses too much in Albany.
And the half-desolate spirit of neglect born of the very soil seems to have settled on these acres.
In times past there were cotton-gins and machinery here; but they have rotted away.
The whole land seems forlorn and forsaken.
Here are the remnants of the vast plantations of the Sheldons, the Pellots, and the Rensons; but the souls of them are passed.
The houses lie in half ruin, or have wholly disappeared; the fences have flown, and the families are wandering in the world.
Strange vicissitudes have met these whilom masters.
Yonder stretch the wide acres of Bildad Reasor; he died in war-time, but the upstart overseer hastened to wed the widow.
Then he went, and his neighbors too, and now only the black tenant remains; but the shadow-hand of the master’s grand-nephew or cousin or creditor stretches out of the gray distance to collect the rack-rent remorselessly, and so the land is uncared-for and poor.
A resistless feeling of depression falls slowly upon us, despite the gaudy sunshine and the green cottonfields.
This, then, is the Cotton Kingdom,—the shadow of a marvellous dream.
Perhaps this is he,—the sweating ploughman, tilling his eighty acres with two lean mules, and fighting a hard battle with debt.
So we sit musing, until, as we turn a corner on the sandy road, there comes a fairer scene suddenly in view,—a neat cottage snugly ensconced by the road, and near it a little store.
A tall bronzed man rises from the porch as we hail him, and comes out to our carriage.
He walks too straight to be a tenant,—yes, he owns two hundred and forty acres.
“The land is run down since the boom-days of eighteen hundred and fifty,” he explains, and cotton is low.
Three black tenants live on his place, and in his little store he keeps a small stock of tobacco, snuff, soap, and soda, for the neighborhood.
Here is his gin-house with new machinery just installed.
Two children he has sent away to school.
Wherever the King may be, the parks and palaces of the Cotton Kingdom have not wholly disappeared.
We plunge even now into great groves of oak and towering pine, with an undergrowth of myrtle and shrubbery.
This was the “home-house” of the Thompsons,—slave-barons who drove their coach and four in the merry past.
The owner put his whole fortune into the rising cotton industry of the fifties, and with the falling prices of the eighties he packed up and stole away.
Yonder is another grove, with unkempt lawn, great magnolias, and grass-grown paths.
The Big House stands in half-ruin, its great front door staring blankly at the street, and the back part grotesquely restored for its black tenant.
A shabby, well-built Negro he is, unlucky and irresolute.
She married a policeman, and lives in Savannah.
Now and again we come to churches.
Here is one now,—Shepherd’s, they call it,—a great whitewashed barn of a thing, perched on stilts of stone, and looking for all the world as though it were just resting here a moment and might be expected to waddle off down the road at almost any time.
And yet it is the centre of a hundred cabin homes; and sometimes, of a Sunday, five hundred persons from far and near gather here and talk and eat and sing.
There is a schoolhouse near,—a very airy, empty shed; but even this is an improvement, for usually the school is held in the church.
The churches vary from log-huts to those like Shepherd’s, and the schools from nothing to this little house that sits demurely on the county line.
It is a tiny plank-house, perhaps ten by twenty, and has within a double row of rough unplaned benches, resting mostly on legs, sometimes on boxes.
Opposite the door is a square home-made desk.
In one corner are the ruins of a stove, and in the other a dim blackboard.
It is the cheerfulest schoolhouse I have seen in Dougherty, save in town.
Back of the schoolhouse is a lodgehouse two stories high and not quite finished.
Societies meet there,—societies “to care for the sick and bury the dead”; and these societies grow and flourish.
We had come to the boundaries of Dougherty, and were about to turn west along the county-line, when all these sights were pointed out to us by a kindly old man, black, white-haired, and seventy.
Forty-five years he had lived here, and now supports himself and his old wife by the help of the steer tethered yonder and the charity of his black neighbors.
He shows us the farm of the Hills just across the county line in Baker,—a widow and two strapping sons, who raised ten bales (one need not add “cotton” down here) last year.
There are fences and pigs and cows, and the soft-voiced, velvet-skinned young Memnon, who sauntered half-bashfully over to greet the strangers, is proud of his home.
Great dismantled trunks of pines tower above the green cottonfields, cracking their naked gnarled fingers toward the border of living forest beyond.
There is little beauty in this region, only a sort of crude abandon that suggests power,—a naked grandeur, as it were.
The houses are bare and straight; there are no hammocks or easy-chairs, and few flowers.
So when, as here at Rawdon’s, one sees a vine clinging to a little porch, and home-like windows peeping over the fences, one takes a long breath.
I think I never before quite realized the place of the Fence in civilization.
This is the Land of the Unfenced, where crouch on either hand scores of ugly one-room cabins, cheerless and dirty.
But now and then the crisscross rails or straight palings break into view, and then we know a touch of culture is near.
Of course Harrison Gohagen,—a quiet yellow man, young, smooth-faced, and diligent,—of course he is lord of some hundred acres, and we expect to see a vision of well-kept rooms and fat beds and laughing children.
It will only increase their rent.
On we wind, through sand and pines and glimpses of old plantations, till there creeps into sight a cluster of buildings,—wood and brick, mills and houses, and scattered cabins.
As it came nearer and nearer, however, the aspect changed: the buildings were rotten, the bricks were falling out, the mills were silent, and the store was closed.
Only in the cabins appeared now and then a bit of lazy life.
I could imagine the place under some weird spell, and was half-minded to search out the princess.
An old ragged black man, honest, simple, and improvident, told us the tale.
The Wizard of the North—the Capitalist—had rushed down in the seventies to woo this coy dark soil.
The agent’s son embezzled the funds and ran off with them.
Then the agent himself disappeared.
Finally the new agent stole even the books, and the company in wrath closed its business and its houses, refused to sell, and let houses and furniture and machinery rust and rot.
So the Waters-Loring plantation was stilled by the spell of dishonesty, and stands like some gaunt rebuke to a scarred land.
Somehow that plantation ended our day’s journey; for I could not shake off the influence of that silent scene.
Back toward town we glided, past the straight and thread-like pines, past a dark tree-dotted pond where the air was heavy with a dead sweet perfume.
A peasant girl was hoeing in the field, white-turbaned and black-limbed.
How curious a land is this,—how full of untold story, of tragedy and laughter, and the rich legacy of human life; shadowed with a tragic past, and big with future promise!
Dougherty County is the west end of the Black Belt, and men once called it the Egypt of the Confederacy.
It is full of historic interest.
First there is the Swamp, to the west, where the Chickasawhatchee flows sullenly southward.
The shadow of an old plantation lies at its edge, forlorn and dark.
Then comes the pool; pendent gray moss and brackish waters appear, and forests filled with wildfowl.
In one place the wood is on fire, smouldering in dull red anger; but nobody minds.
Then the swamp grows beautiful; a raised road, built by chained Negro convicts, dips down into it, and forms a way walled and almost covered in living green.
Spreading trees spring from a prodigal luxuriance of undergrowth; great dark green shadows fade into the black background, until all is one mass of tangled semi-tropical foliage, marvellous in its weird savage splendor.
Once we crossed a black silent stream, where the sad trees and writhing creepers, all glinting fiery yellow and green, seemed like some vast cathedral,—some green Milan builded of wildwood.
Osceola, the Indian-Negro chieftain, had risen in the swamps of Florida, vowing vengeance.
His war-cry reached the red Creeks of Dougherty, and their war-cry rang from the Chattahoochee to the sea.
Men and women and children fled and fell before them as they swept into Dougherty.
In yonder shadows a dark and hideously painted warrior glided stealthily on,—another and another, until three hundred had crept into the treacherous swamp.
Day after day the clank of chained feet marching from Virginia and Carolina to Georgia was heard in these rich swamp lands.
Day after day the songs of the callous, the wail of the motherless, and the muttered curses of the wretched echoed from the Flint to the Chickasawhatchee, until by 1860 there had risen in West Dougherty perhaps the richest slave kingdom the modern world ever knew.
A hundred and fifty barons commanded the labor of nearly six thousand Negroes, held sway over farms with ninety thousand acres tilled land, valued even in times of cheap soil at three millions of dollars.
Twenty thousand bales of ginned cotton went yearly to England, New and Old; and men that came there bankrupt made money and grew rich.
In a single decade the cotton output increased four-fold and the value of lands was tripled.
It was the heyday of the _nouveau riche_, and a life of careless extravagance among the masters.
Four and six bobtailed thoroughbreds rolled their coaches to town; open hospitality and gay entertainment were the rule.
Parks and groves were laid out, rich with flower and vine, and in the midst stood the low wide-halled “big house,” with its porch and columns and great fireplaces.
And yet with all this there was something sordid, something forced,—a certain feverish unrest and recklessness; for was not all this show and tinsel built upon a groan?
We were seated near a roadside blacksmith shop, and behind was the bare ruin of some master’s home.
Down in the guard-house, there’s where the blood ran.” With such foundations a kingdom must in time sway and fall.
The masters moved to Macon and Augusta, and left only the irresponsible overseers on the land.
So we ride on, past phantom gates and falling homes,—past the once flourishing farms of the Smiths, the Gandys, and the Lagores,—and find all dilapidated and half ruined, even there where a solitary white woman, a relic of other days, sits alone in state among miles of Negroes and rides to town in her ancient coach each day.
This was indeed the Egypt of the Confederacy,—the rich granary whence potatoes and corn and cotton poured out to the famished and ragged Confederate troops as they battled for a cause lost long before 1861.
Sheltered and secure, it became the place of refuge for families, wealth, and slaves.
Yet even then the hard ruthless rape of the land began to tell.
The harder the slaves were driven the more careless and fatal was their farming.
Then came the revolution of war and Emancipation, the bewilderment of Reconstruction,—and now, what is the Egypt of the Confederacy, and what meaning has it for the nation’s weal or woe?
It is a land of rapid contrasts and of curiously mingled hope and pain.
Here sits a pretty blue-eyed quadroon hiding her bare feet; she was married only last week, and yonder in the field is her dark young husband, hoeing to support her, at thirty cents a day without board.
Across the way is Gatesby, brown and tall, lord of two thousand acres shrewdly won and held.
There is a store conducted by his black son, a blacksmith shop, and a ginnery.
Five miles below here is a town owned and controlled by one white New Englander.
He owns almost a Rhode Island county, with thousands of acres and hundreds of black laborers.
Their cabins look better than most, and the farm, with machinery and fertilizers, is much more business-like than any in the county, although the manager drives hard bargains in wages.
When now we turn and look five miles above, there on the edge of town are five houses of prostitutes,—two of blacks and three of whites; and in one of the houses of the whites a worthless black boy was harbored too openly two years ago; so he was hanged for rape.
And here, too, is the high whitewashed fence of the “stockade,” as the county prison is called; the white folks say it is ever full of black criminals,—the black folks say that only colored boys are sent to jail, and they not because they are guilty, but because the State needs criminals to eke out its income by their forced labor.
The Jew is the heir of the slave baron in Dougherty; and as we ride westward, by wide stretching cornfields and stubby orchards of peach and pear, we see on all sides within the circle of dark forest a Land of Canaan.
Here and there are tales of projects for money-getting, born in the swift days of Reconstruction,—“improvement” companies, wine companies, mills and factories; most failed, and the Jew fell heir.
It is a beautiful land, this Dougherty, west of the Flint.
The forests are wonderful, the solemn pines have disappeared, and this is the “Oakey Woods,” with its wealth of hickories, beeches, oaks and palmettos.
But a pall of debt hangs over the beautiful land; the merchants are in debt to the wholesalers, the planters are in debt to the merchants, the tenants owe the planters, and laborers bow and bend beneath the burden of it all.
If you don’t look up you can’t get up,’” remarks Jackson, philosophically.
His master helped him to get a start, but when the black man died last fall the master’s sons immediately laid claim to the estate.
I turn from these well-tended acres with a comfortable feeling that the Negro is rising.
Even then, however, the fields, as we proceed, begin to redden and the trees disappear.
Rows of old cabins appear filled with renters and laborers,—cheerless, bare, and dirty, for the most part, although here and there the very age and decay makes the scene picturesque.
So he moved here, where the rent is higher, the land poorer, and the owner inflexible; he rents a forty-dollar mule for twenty dollars a year.
This plantation, owned now by a foreigner, was a part of the famous Bolton estate.
After the war it was for many years worked by gangs of Negro convicts,—and black convicts then were even more plentiful than now; it was a way of making Negroes work, and the question of guilt was a minor one.
Hard tales of cruelty and mistreatment of the chained freemen are told, but the county authorities were deaf until the free-labor market was nearly ruined by wholesale migration.
Then they took the convicts from the plantations, but not until one of the fairest regions of the “Oakey Woods” had been ruined and ravished into a red waste, out of which only a Yankee or an immigrant could squeeze more blood from debt-cursed tenants.
No wonder that Luke Black, slow, dull, and discouraged, shuffles to our carriage and talks hopelessly.
How strange that Georgia, the world-heralded refuge of poor debtors, should bind her own to sloth and misfortune as ruthlessly as ever England did!
The poor land groans with its birth-pains, and brings forth scarcely a hundred pounds of cotton to the acre, where fifty years ago it yielded eight times as much.
Of his meagre yield the tenant pays from a quarter to a third in rent, and most of the rest in interest on food and supplies bought on credit.
Twenty years yonder sunken-cheeked, old black man has labored under that system, and now, turned day-laborer, is supporting his wife and boarding himself on his wages of a dollar and a half a week, received only part of the year.
The Bolton convict farm formerly included the neighboring plantation.
Here it was that the convicts were lodged in the great log prison still standing.
A dismal place it still remains, with rows of ugly huts filled with surly ignorant tenants.
“What rent do you pay here?” I inquired.
“I don’t know,—what is it, Sam?” “All we make,” answered Sam.
It is a depressing place,—bare, unshaded, with no charm of past association, only a memory of forced human toil,—now, then, and before the war.
They are not happy, these black men whom we meet throughout this region.
There is little of the joyous abandon and playfulness which we are wont to associate with the plantation Negro.
At best, the natural good-nature is edged with complaint or has changed into sullenness and gloom.
I remember one big red-eyed black whom we met by the roadside.
Forty-five years he had labored on this farm, beginning with nothing, and still having nothing.
To be sure, he had given four children a common-school training, and perhaps if the new fence-law had not allowed unfenced crops in West Dougherty he might have raised a little stock and kept ahead.
As it is, he is hopelessly in debt, disappointed, and embittered.
He stopped us to inquire after the black boy in Albany, whom it was said a policeman had shot and killed for loud talking on the sidewalk.
And then he said slowly: “Let a white man touch me, and he dies; I don’t boast this,—I don’t say it around loud, or before the children,—but I mean it.
Now Sears, whom we met next lolling under the chubby oak-trees, was of quite different fibre.
He had worked here twelve years and has nothing but a mortgaged mule.
There go part of them to the fields now,—three big boys astride mules, and a strapping girl with bare brown legs.
Careless ignorance and laziness here, fierce hate and vindictiveness there;—these are the extremes of the Negro problem which we met that day, and we scarce knew which we preferred.
Here and there we meet distinct characters quite out of the ordinary.
He was an old, hollow-cheeked man, with a drawn and characterful brown face.
He had a sort of self-contained quaintness and rough humor impossible to describe; a certain cynical earnestness that puzzled one.
He curtsied low, and then bowed almost to the ground, with an imperturbable gravity that seemed almost suspicious.
Then he continued, “My mule died last week,”—a calamity in this land equal to a devastating fire in town,—“but a white man loaned me another.” Then he added, eyeing us, “Oh, I gets along with white folks.” We turned the conversation.
“Bears? deer?” he answered, “well, I should say there were,” and he let fly a string of brave oaths, as he told hunting-tales of the swamp.
We left him standing still in the middle of the road looking after us, and yet apparently not noticing us.
The Whistle place, which includes his bit of land, was bought soon after the war by an English syndicate, the “Dixie Cotton and Corn Company.” A marvellous deal of style their factor put on, with his servants and coach-and-six; so much so that the concern soon landed in inextricable bankruptcy.
Nobody lives in the old house now, but a man comes each winter out of the North and collects his high rents.
I know not which are the more touching,—such old empty houses, or the homes of the masters’ sons.
Sad and bitter tales lie hidden back of those white doors,—tales of poverty, of struggle, of disappointment.
A revolution such as that of ’63 is a terrible thing; they that rose rich in the morning often slept in paupers’ beds.
Beggars and vulgar speculators rose to rule over them, and their children went astray.
It is not glad within; last month the prodigal son of the struggling father wrote home from the city for money.
I remember wheeling around a bend in the road beside a graceful bit of forest and a singing brook.
Half curiously I peered through the unhinged door, and saw where, on the wall across the hall, was written in once gay letters a faded “Welcome.” Quite a contrast to the southwestern part of Dougherty County is the northwest.
Soberly timbered in oak and pine, it has none of that half-tropical luxuriance of the southwest.
Then, too, there are fewer signs of a romantic past, and more of systematic modern land-grabbing and money-getting.
White people are more in evidence here, and farmer and hired labor replace to some extent the absentee landlord and rack-rented tenant.
The crops have neither the luxuriance of the richer land nor the signs of neglect so often seen, and there were fences and meadows here and there.
Since then his poor relations and foreign immigrants have seized it.
There is the Negro Sanford; he has worked fourteen years as overseer on the Ladson place, and “paid out enough for fertilizers to have bought a farm,” but the owner will not sell off a few acres.
Two children—a boy and a girl—are hoeing sturdily in the fields on the farm where Corliss works.
He used to run a successful cotton-gin, but the Cotton Seed Oil Trust has forced the price of ginning so low that he says it hardly pays him.
He points out a stately old house over the way as the home of “Pa Willis.” We eagerly ride over, for “Pa Willis” was the tall and powerful black Moses who led the Negroes for a generation, and led them well.
He was a Baptist preacher, and when he died, two thousand black people followed him to the grave; and now they preach his funeral sermon each year.
His widow lives here,—a weazened, sharp-featured little woman, who curtsied quaintly as we greeted her.
Further on lives Jack Delson, the most prosperous Negro farmer in the county.
It is a joy to meet him,—a great broad-shouldered, handsome black man, intelligent and jovial.
We pass the Munson place, where a plucky white widow is renting and struggling; and the eleven hundred acres of the Sennet plantation, with its Negro overseer.
Then the character of the farms begins to change.
Nearly all the lands belong to Russian Jews; the overseers are white, and the cabins are bare board-houses scattered here and there.
The rents are high, and day-laborers and “contract” hands abound.
It is a keen, hard struggle for living here, and few have time to talk.
Tired with the long ride, we gladly drive into Gillonsville.
It is a silent cluster of farmhouses standing on the crossroads, with one of its stores closed and the other kept by a Negro preacher.
They tell great tales of busy times at Gillonsville before all the railroads came to Albany; now it is chiefly a memory.
Riding down the street, we stop at the preacher’s and seat ourselves before the door.
It was one of those scenes one cannot soon forget:—a wide, low, little house, whose motherly roof reached over and sheltered a snug little porch.
There we sat, after the long hot drive, drinking cool water,—the talkative little storekeeper who is my daily companion; the silent old black woman patching pantaloons and saying never a word; the ragged picture of helpless misfortune who called in just to see the preacher; and finally the neat matronly preacher’s wife, plump, yellow, and intelligent.
Sells was the owner.” “Sells!” echoed the ragged misfortune, who was leaning against the balustrade and listening, “he’s a regular cheat.
I worked for him thirty-seven days this spring, and he paid me in cardboard checks which were to be cashed at the end of the month.
Then the sheriff came and took my mule and corn and furniture—” “Furniture?
But furniture is exempt from seizure by law.” “Well, he took it just the same,” said the hard-faced man.
“On the strong and cunning few Cynic favors I will strew; I will stuff their maw with overplus until their spirit dies; From the patient and the low I will take the joys they know; They shall hunger after vanities and still an-hungered go.
I have sometimes half suspected that here the winged ram Chrysomallus left that Fleece after which Jason and his Argonauts went vaguely wandering into the shadowy East three thousand years ago; and certainly one might frame a pretty and not far-fetched analogy of witchery and dragons’ teeth, and blood and armed men, between the ancient and the modern quest of the Golden Fleece in the Black Sea.
And now the golden fleece is found; not only found, but, in its birthplace, woven.
For the hum of the cotton-mills is the newest and most significant thing in the New South to-day.
All through the Carolinas and Georgia, away down to Mexico, rise these gaunt red buildings, bare and homely, and yet so busy and noisy withal that they scarce seem to belong to the slow and sleepy land.
Even the markets that once defied the parvenu have crept one by one across the seas, and then slowly and reluctantly, but surely, have started toward the Black Belt.
To be sure, there are those who wag their heads knowingly and tell us that the capital of the Cotton Kingdom has moved from the Black to the White Belt,—that the Negro of to-day raises not more than half of the cotton crop.
Such men forget that the cotton crop has doubled, and more than doubled, since the era of slavery, and that, even granting their contention, the Negro is still supreme in a Cotton Kingdom larger than that on which the Confederacy builded its hopes.
So the Negro forms to-day one of the chief figures in a great world-industry; and this, for its own sake, and in the light of historic interest, makes the field-hands of the cotton country worth studying.
We seldom study the condition of the Negro to-day honestly and carefully.
Or perhaps, having already reached conclusions in our own minds, we are loth to have them disturbed by facts.
And yet how little we really know of these millions,—of their daily lives and longings, of their homely joys and sorrows, of their real shortcomings and the meaning of their crimes!
All this we can only learn by intimate contact with the masses, and not by wholesale arguments covering millions separate in time and space, and differing widely in training and culture.
To-day, then, my reader, let us turn our faces to the Black Belt of Georgia and seek simply to know the condition of the black farm-laborers of one county there.
Here in 1890 lived ten thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.
The keynote of the Black Belt is debt; not commercial credit, but debt in the sense of continued inability on the part of the mass of the population to make income cover expense.
This is the direct heritage of the South from the wasteful economies of the slave _régime;_ but it was emphasized and brought to a crisis by the Emancipation of the slaves.
In 1860, Dougherty County had six thousand slaves, worth at least two and a half millions of dollars; its farms were estimated at three millions,—making five and a half millions of property, the value of which depended largely on the slave system, and on the speculative demand for land once marvellously rich but already partially devitalized by careless and exhaustive culture.
The war then meant a financial crash; in place of the five and a half millions of 1860, there remained in 1870 only farms valued at less than two millions.
With this came increased competition in cotton culture from the rich lands of Texas; a steady fall in the normal price of cotton followed, from about fourteen cents a pound in 1860 until it reached four cents in 1898.
Such a financial revolution was it that involved the owners of the cotton-belt in debt.
The plantations of Dougherty County in slavery days were not as imposing and aristocratic as those of Virginia.
Sometimes these cabins stretched off on either side like wings; sometimes only on one side, forming a double row, or edging the road that turned into the plantation from the main thoroughfare.
The form and disposition of the laborers’ cabins throughout the Black Belt is to-day the same as in slavery days.
All are sprinkled in little groups over the face of the land, centering about some dilapidated Big House where the head-tenant or agent lives.
The general character and arrangement of these dwellings remains on the whole unaltered.
There were in the county, outside the corporate town of Albany, about fifteen hundred Negro families in 1898.
Out of all these, only a single family occupied a house with seven rooms; only fourteen have five rooms or more.
The size and arrangements of a people’s homes are no unfair index of their condition.
If, then, we inquire more carefully into these Negro homes, we find much that is unsatisfactory.
All over the face of the land is the one-room cabin,—now standing in the shadow of the Big House, now staring at the dusty road, now rising dark and sombre amid the green of the cotton-fields.
It is nearly always old and bare, built of rough boards, and neither plastered nor ceiled.
Light and ventilation are supplied by the single door and by the square hole in the wall with its wooden shutter.
There is no glass, porch, or ornamentation without.
Within is a fireplace, black and smoky, and usually unsteady with age.
A bed or two, a table, a wooden chest, and a few chairs compose the furniture; while a stray show-bill or a newspaper makes up the decorations for the walls.
Now and then one may find such a cabin kept scrupulously neat, with merry steaming fireplaces and hospitable door; but the majority are dirty and dilapidated, smelling of eating and sleeping, poorly ventilated, and anything but homes.
We have come to associate crowding with homes in cities almost exclusively.
This is primarily because we have so little accurate knowledge of country life.
Here in Dougherty County one may find families of eight and ten occupying one or two rooms, and for every ten rooms of house accommodation for the Negroes there are twenty-five persons.
The worst tenement abominations of New York do not have above twenty-two persons for every ten rooms.
Of course, one small, close room in a city, without a yard, is in many respects worse than the larger single country room.
In other respects it is better; it has glass windows, a decent chimney, and a trustworthy floor.
The single great advantage of the Negro peasant is that he may spend most of his life outside his hovel, in the open fields.
There are four chief causes of these wretched homes: First, long custom born of slavery has assigned such homes to Negroes; white laborers would be offered better accommodations, and might, for that and similar reasons, give better work.
Secondly, the Negroes, used to such accommodations, do not as a rule demand better; they do not know what better houses mean.
Thirdly, the landlords as a class have not yet come to realize that it is a good business investment to raise the standard of living among labor by slow and judicious methods; that a Negro laborer who demands three rooms and fifty cents a day would give more efficient work and leave a larger profit than a discouraged toiler herding his family in one room and working for thirty cents.
Lastly, among such conditions of life there are few incentives to make the laborer become a better farmer.
If he is ambitious, he moves to town or tries other labor; as a tenant-farmer his outlook is almost hopeless, and following it as a makeshift, he takes the house that is given him without protest.
In such homes, then, these Negro peasants live.
The families are both small and large; there are many single tenants,—widows and bachelors, and remnants of broken groups.
The system of labor and the size of the houses both tend to the breaking up of family groups: the grown children go away as contract hands or migrate to town, the sister goes into service; and so one finds many families with hosts of babies, and many newly married couples, but comparatively few families with half-grown and grown sons and daughters.
The average size of Negro families has undoubtedly decreased since the war, primarily from economic stress.
In Russia over a third of the bridegrooms and over half the brides are under twenty; the same was true of the antebellum Negroes.
Such postponement is due to the difficulty of earning sufficient to rear and support a family; and it undoubtedly leads, in the country districts, to sexual immorality.
The form of this immorality, however, is very seldom that of prostitution, and less frequently that of illegitimacy than one would imagine.
Rather, it takes the form of separation and desertion after a family group has been formed.
The number of separated persons is thirty-five to the thousand,—a very large number.
It would of course be unfair to compare this number with divorce statistics, for many of these separated women are in reality widowed, were the truth known, and in other cases the separation is not permanent.
Nevertheless, here lies the seat of greatest moral danger.
There is little or no prostitution among these Negroes, and over three-fourths of the families, as found by house-to-house investigation, deserve to be classed as decent people with considerable regard for female chastity.
Yet the rate of illegitimacy is undoubtedly lower than in Austria or Italy, and the women as a class are modest.
The plague-spot in sexual relations is easy marriage and easy separation.
This is no sudden development, nor the fruit of Emancipation.
It is the plain heritage from slavery.
No ceremony was necessary, and in the busy life of the great plantations of the Black Belt it was usually dispensed with.
If now the master needed Sam’s work in another plantation or in another part of the same plantation, or if he took a notion to sell the slave, Sam’s married life with Mary was usually unceremoniously broken, and then it was clearly to the master’s interest to have both of them take new mates.
This widespread custom of two centuries has not been eradicated in thirty years.
To-day Sam’s grandson “takes up” with a woman without license or ceremony; they live together decently and honestly, and are, to all intents and purposes, man and wife.
Sometimes these unions are never broken until death; but in too many cases family quarrels, a roving spirit, a rival suitor, or perhaps more frequently the hopeless battle to support a family, lead to separation, and a broken household is the result.
The Negro church has done much to stop this practice, and now most marriage ceremonies are performed by the pastors.
Nevertheless, the evil is still deep seated, and only a general raising of the standard of living will finally cure it.
Looking now at the county black population as a whole, it is fair to characterize it as poor and ignorant.
Perhaps ten per cent compose the well-to-do and the best of the laborers, while at least nine per cent are thoroughly lewd and vicious.
The rest, over eighty per cent, are poor and ignorant, fairly honest and well meaning, plodding, and to a degree shiftless, with some but not great sexual looseness.
The degree of ignorance cannot easily be expressed.
We may say, for instance, that nearly two-thirds of them cannot read or write.
This but partially expresses the fact.
They are ignorant of the world about them, of modern economic organization, of the function of government, of individual worth and possibilities,—of nearly all those things which slavery in self-defence had to keep them from learning.
Much that the white boy imbibes from his earliest social atmosphere forms the puzzling problems of the black boy’s mature years.
America is not another word for Opportunity to _all_ her sons.
It is easy for us to lose ourselves in details in endeavoring to grasp and comprehend the real condition of a mass of human beings.
We often forget that each unit in the mass is a throbbing human soul.
Ignorant it may be, and poverty stricken, black and curious in limb and ways and thought; and yet it loves and hates, it toils and tires, it laughs and weeps its bitter tears, and looks in vague and awful longing at the grim horizon of its life,—all this, even as you and I.
Over eighty-eight per cent of them—men, women, and children—are farmers.
Indeed, this is almost the only industry.
Most of the children get their schooling after the “crops are laid by,” and very few there are that stay in school after the spring work has begun.
Child-labor is to be found here in some of its worst phases, as fostering ignorance and stunting physical development.
With the grown men of the county there is little variety in work: thirteen hundred are farmers, and two hundred are laborers, teamsters, etc., including twenty-four artisans, ten merchants, twenty-one preachers, and four teachers.
This narrowness of life reaches its maximum among the women: thirteen hundred and fifty of these are farm laborers, one hundred are servants and washerwomen, leaving sixty-five housewives, eight teachers, and six seamstresses.
We often forget that in the United States over half the youth and adults are not in the world earning incomes, but are making homes, learning of the world, or resting after the heat of the strife.
But here ninety-six per cent are toiling; no one with leisure to turn the bare and cheerless cabin into a home, no old folks to sit beside the fire and hand down traditions of the past; little of careless happy childhood and dreaming youth.
The dull monotony of daily toil is broken only by the gayety of the thoughtless and the Saturday trip to town.
The toil, like all farm toil, is monotonous, and here there are little machinery and few tools to relieve its burdensome drudgery.
But with all this, it is work in the pure open air, and this is something in a day when fresh air is scarce.
For nine or ten months in succession the crops will come if asked: garden vegetables in April, grain in May, melons in June and July, hay in August, sweet potatoes in September, and cotton from then to Christmas.
Away down the Baysan road, where the broad flat fields are flanked by great oak forests, is a plantation; many thousands of acres it used to run, here and there, and beyond the great wood.
Thirteen hundred human beings here obeyed the call of one,—were his in body, and largely in soul.
Just tolerable, he said; just tolerable.
Smith of Albany “furnishes” him, and his rent is eight hundred pounds of cotton.
Can’t make anything at that.
The most piteous thing amid all the black ruin of war-time, amid the broken fortunes of the masters, the blighted hopes of mothers and maidens, and the fall of an empire,—the most piteous thing amid all this was the black freedman who threw down his hoe because the world called him free.
Not a cent of money, not an inch of land, not a mouthful of victuals,—not even ownership of the rags on his back.
On Saturday, once or twice a month, the old master, before the war, used to dole out bacon and meal to his Negroes.
And after the first flush of freedom wore off, and his true helplessness dawned on the freedman, he came back and picked up his hoe, and old master still doled out his bacon and meal.
The legal form of service was theoretically far different; in practice, task-work or “cropping” was substituted for daily toil in gangs; and the slave gradually became a metayer, or tenant on shares, in name, but a laborer with indeterminate wages in fact.
Still the price of cotton fell, and gradually the landlords deserted their plantations, and the reign of the merchant began.
The merchant of the Black Belt is a curious institution,—part banker, part landlord, part banker, and part despot.
His store, which used most frequently to stand at the cross-roads and become the centre of a weekly village, has now moved to town; and thither the Negro tenant follows him.
The merchant keeps everything,—clothes and shoes, coffee and sugar, pork and meal, canned and dried goods, wagons and ploughs, seed and fertilizer,—and what he has not in stock he can give you an order for at the store across the way.
If Sam seems a favorable subject, he and the merchant go to a lawyer, and Sam executes a chattel mortgage on his mule and wagon in return for seed and a week’s rations.
As soon as the green cotton-leaves appear above the ground, another mortgage is given on the “crop.” Every Saturday, or at longer intervals, Sam calls upon the merchant for his “rations”; a family of five usually gets about thirty pounds of fat side-pork and a couple of bushels of cornmeal a month.
Besides this, clothing and shoes must be furnished; if Sam or his family is sick, there are orders on the druggist and doctor; if the mule wants shoeing, an order on the blacksmith, etc.
If Sam is a hard worker and crops promise well, he is often encouraged to buy more,—sugar, extra clothes, perhaps a buggy.
But he is seldom encouraged to save.
When cotton rose to ten cents last fall, the shrewd merchants of Dougherty County sold a thousand buggies in one season, mostly to black men.
The security offered for such transactions—a crop and chattel mortgage—may at first seem slight.
And, indeed, the merchants tell many a true tale of shiftlessness and cheating; of cotton picked at night, mules disappearing, and tenants absconding.
But on the whole the merchant of the Black Belt is the most prosperous man in the section.
So skilfully and so closely has he drawn the bonds of the law about the tenant, that the black man has often simply to choose between pauperism and crime; he “waives” all homestead exemptions in his contract; he cannot touch his own mortgaged crop, which the laws put almost in the full control of the land-owner and of the merchant.
When the crop is growing the merchant watches it like a hawk; as soon as it is ready for market he takes possession of it, sells it, pays the landowner his rent, subtracts his bill for supplies, and if, as sometimes happens, there is anything left, he hands it over to the black serf for his Christmas celebration.
The direct result of this system is an all-cotton scheme of agriculture and the continued bankruptcy of the tenant.
The currency of the Black Belt is cotton.
It is a crop always salable for ready money, not usually subject to great yearly fluctuations in price, and one which the Negroes know how to raise.
The landlord therefore demands his rent in cotton, and the merchant will accept mortgages on no other crop.
There is no use asking the black tenant, then, to diversify his crops,—he cannot under this system.
Moreover, the system is bound to bankrupt the tenant.
I remember once meeting a little one-mule wagon on the River road.
A young black fellow sat in it driving listlessly, his elbows on his knees.
“Hello!” cried my driver,—he has a most imprudent way of addressing these people, though they seem used to it,—“what have you got there?” “Meat and meal,” answered the man, stopping.
The meat lay uncovered in the bottom of the wagon,—a great thin side of fat pork covered with salt; the meal was in a white bushel bag.
This was not his choosing, but the crime of this happy-go-lucky nation which goes blundering along with its Reconstruction tragedies, its Spanish war interludes and Philippine matinees, just as though God really were dead.
In the year of low-priced cotton, 1898, out of three hundred tenant families one hundred and seventy-five ended their year’s work in debt to the extent of fourteen thousand dollars; fifty cleared nothing, and the remaining seventy-five made a total profit of sixteen hundred dollars.
The net indebtedness of the black tenant families of the whole county must have been at least sixty thousand dollars.
In a more prosperous year the situation is far better; but on the average the majority of tenants end the year even, or in debt, which means that they work for board and clothes.
Such an economic organization is radically wrong.
The underlying causes of this situation are complicated but discernible.
And one of the chief, outside the carelessness of the nation in letting the slave start with nothing, is the widespread opinion among the merchants and employers of the Black Belt that only by the slavery of debt can the Negro be kept at work.
Without doubt, some pressure was necessary at the beginning of the free-labor system to keep the listless and lazy at work; and even to-day the mass of the Negro laborers need stricter guardianship than most Northern laborers.
Behind this honest and widespread opinion dishonesty and cheating of the ignorant laborers have a good chance to take refuge.
And to all this must be added the obvious fact that a slave ancestry and a system of unrequited toil has not improved the efficiency or temper of the mass of black laborers.
Nor is this peculiar to Sambo; it has in history been just as true of John and Hans, of Jacques and Pat, of all ground-down peasantries.
Such is the situation of the mass of the Negroes in the Black Belt to-day; and they are thinking about it.
Crime, and a cheap and dangerous socialism, are the inevitable results of this pondering.
I see now that ragged black man sitting on a log, aimlessly whittling a stick.
He muttered to me with the murmur of many ages, when he said: “White man sit down whole year; Nigger work day and night and make crop; Nigger hardly gits bread and meat; white man sittin’ down gits all. _It’s wrong._” And what do the better classes of Negroes do to improve their situation?
One of two things: if any way possible, they buy land; if not, they migrate to town.
Just as centuries ago it was no easy thing for the serf to escape into the freedom of town-life, even so to-day there are hindrances laid in the way of county laborers.
In considerable parts of all the Gulf States, and especially in Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas, the Negroes on the plantations in the back-country districts are still held at forced labor practically without wages.
Especially is this true in districts where the farmers are composed of the more ignorant class of poor whites, and the Negroes are beyond the reach of schools and intercourse with their advancing fellows.
If such a peon should run away, the sheriff, elected by white suffrage, can usually be depended on to catch the fugitive, return him, and ask no questions.
If he escape to another county, a charge of petty thieving, easily true, can be depended upon to secure his return.
Even if some unduly officious person insist upon a trial, neighborly comity will probably make his conviction sure, and then the labor due the county can easily be bought by the master.
Such a system is impossible in the more civilized parts of the South, or near the large towns and cities; but in those vast stretches of land beyond the telegraph and the newspaper the spirit of the Thirteenth Amendment is sadly broken.
This represents the lowest economic depths of the black American peasant; and in a study of the rise and condition of the Negro freeholder we must trace his economic progress from the modern serfdom.
Even in the better-ordered country districts of the South the free movement of agricultural laborers is hindered by the migration-agent laws.
The “Associated Press” recently informed the world of the arrest of a young white man in Southern Georgia who represented the “Atlantic Naval Supplies Company,” and who “was caught in the act of enticing hands from the turpentine farm of Mr.
John Greer.” The crime for which this young man was arrested is taxed five hundred dollars for each county in which the employment agent proposes to gather laborers for work outside the State.
Thus the Negroes’ ignorance of the labor-market outside his own vicinity is increased rather than diminished by the laws of nearly every Southern State.
Similar to such measures is the unwritten law of the back districts and small towns of the South, that the character of all Negroes unknown to the mass of the community must be vouched for by some white man.
This is really a revival of the old Roman idea of the patron under whose protection the new-made freedman was put.
In many instances this system has been of great good to the Negro, and very often under the protection and guidance of the former master’s family, or other white friends, the freedman progressed in wealth and morality.
But the same system has in other cases resulted in the refusal of whole communities to recognize the right of a Negro to change his habitation and to be master of his own fortunes.
A black stranger in Baker County, Georgia, for instance, is liable to be stopped anywhere on the public highway and made to state his business to the satisfaction of any white interrogator.
If he fails to give a suitable answer, or seems too independent or “sassy,” he may be arrested or summarily driven away.
Thus it is that in the country districts of the South, by written or unwritten law, peonage, hindrances to the migration of labor, and a system of white patronage exists over large areas.
Besides this, the chance for lawless oppression and illegal exactions is vastly greater in the country than in the city, and nearly all the more serious race disturbances of the last decade have arisen from disputes in the county between master and man,—as, for instance, the Sam Hose affair.
As a result of such a situation, there arose, first, the Black Belt; and, second, the Migration to Town.
The Black Belt was not, as many assumed, a movement toward fields of labor under more genial climatic conditions; it was primarily a huddling for self-protection,—a massing of the black population for mutual defence in order to secure the peace and tranquillity necessary to economic advance.
This movement took place between Emancipation and 1880, and only partially accomplished the desired results.
The rush to town since 1880 is the counter-movement of men disappointed in the economic opportunities of the Black Belt.
In Dougherty County, Georgia, one can see easily the results of this experiment in huddling for protection.
Only ten per cent of the adult population was born in the county, and yet the blacks outnumber the whites four or five to one.
There is undoubtedly a security to the blacks in their very numbers,—a personal freedom from arbitrary treatment, which makes hundreds of laborers cling to Dougherty in spite of low wages and economic distress.
But a change is coming, and slowly but surely even here the agricultural laborers are drifting to town and leaving the broad acres behind.
Why do not the Negroes become land-owners, and build up the black landed peasantry, which has for a generation and more been the dream of philanthropist and statesman?
To the car-window sociologist, to the man who seeks to understand and know the South by devoting the few leisure hours of a holiday trip to unravelling the snarl of centuries,—to such men very often the whole trouble with the black field-hand may be summed up by Aunt Ophelia’s word, “Shiftless!” They have noted repeatedly scenes like one I saw last summer.
We were riding along the highroad to town at the close of a long hot day.
A couple of young black fellows passed us in a muleteam, with several bushels of loose corn in the ear.
One was driving, listlessly bent forward, his elbows on his knees,—a happy-go-lucky, careless picture of irresponsibility.
A rod farther on we noted another ear on the ground; and between that creeping mule and town we counted twenty-six ears of corn.
Yes, the personification of shiftlessness.
And yet follow those boys: they are not lazy; to-morrow morning they’ll be up with the sun; they work hard when they do work, and they work willingly.
They’ll steal a watermelon, and hand you back your lost purse intact.
Their great defect as laborers lies in their lack of incentive beyond the mere pleasure of physical exertion.
They are careless because they have not found that it pays to be careful; they are improvident because the improvident ones of their acquaintance get on about as well as the provident.
On the other hand, the white land-owner argues that any attempt to improve these laborers by increased responsibility, or higher wages, or better homes, or land of their own, would be sure to result in failure.
He shows his Northern visitor the scarred and wretched land; the ruined mansions, the worn-out soil and mortgaged acres, and says, This is Negro freedom!
Now it happens that both master and man have just enough argument on their respective sides to make it difficult for them to understand each other.
“Why, you niggers have an easier time than I do,” said a puzzled Albany merchant to his black customer.
“Yes,” he replied, “and so does yo’ hogs.” Taking, then, the dissatisfied and shiftless field-hand as a starting-point, let us inquire how the black thousands of Dougherty have struggled from him up toward their ideal, and what that ideal is.
All social struggle is evidenced by the rise, first of economic, then of social classes, among a homogeneous population.
To-day the following economic classes are plainly differentiated among these Negroes.
A “submerged tenth” of croppers, with a few paupers; forty per cent who are metayers and thirty-nine per cent of semi-metayers and wage-laborers.
There are left five per cent of money-renters and six per cent of freeholders,—the “Upper Ten” of the land.
The croppers are entirely without capital, even in the limited sense of food or money to keep them from seed-time to harvest.
All they furnish is their labor; the land-owner furnishes land, stock, tools, seed, and house; and at the end of the year the laborer gets from a third to a half of the crop.
Out of his share, however, comes pay and interest for food and clothing advanced him during the year.
Thus we have a laborer without capital and without wages, and an employer whose capital is largely his employees’ wages.
It is an unsatisfactory arrangement, both for hirer and hired, and is usually in vogue on poor land with hard-pressed owners.
Above the croppers come the great mass of the black population who work the land on their own responsibility, paying rent in cotton and supported by the crop-mortgage system.
After the war this system was attractive to the freedmen on account of its larger freedom and its possibility for making a surplus.
But with the carrying out of the crop-lien system, the deterioration of the land, and the slavery of debt, the position of the metayers has sunk to a dead level of practically unrewarded toil.
Formerly all tenants had some capital, and often considerable; but absentee landlordism, rising rack-rent, and failing cotton have stripped them well-nigh of all, and probably not over half of them to-day own their mules.
The change from cropper to tenant was accomplished by fixing the rent.
If, now, the rent fixed was reasonable, this was an incentive to the tenant to strive.
On the other hand, if the rent was too high, or if the land deteriorated, the result was to discourage and check the efforts of the black peasantry.
There is no doubt that the latter case is true; that in Dougherty County every economic advantage of the price of cotton in market and of the strivings of the tenant has been taken advantage of by the landlords and merchants, and swallowed up in rent and interest.
If cotton rose in price, the rent rose even higher; if cotton fell, the rent remained or followed reluctantly.
If the tenant worked hard and raised a large crop, his rent was raised the next year; if that year the crop failed, his corn was confiscated and his mule sold for debt.
There were, of course, exceptions to this,—cases of personal kindness and forbearance; but in the vast majority of cases the rule was to extract the uttermost farthing from the mass of the black farm laborers.
The result of such rack-rent can only be evil,—abuse and neglect of the soil, deterioration in the character of the laborers, and a widespread sense of injustice.
“Wherever the country is poor,” cried Arthur Young, “it is in the hands of metayers,” and “their condition is more wretched than that of day-laborers.” He was talking of Italy a century ago; but he might have been talking of Dougherty County to-day.
And especially is that true to-day which he declares was true in France before the Revolution: “The metayers are considered as little better than menial servants, removable at pleasure, and obliged to conform in all things to the will of the landlords.” On this low plane half the black population of Dougherty County—perhaps more than half the black millions of this land—are to-day struggling.
A degree above these we may place those laborers who receive money wages for their work.
Some receive a house with perhaps a garden-spot; then supplies of food and clothing are advanced, and certain fixed wages are given at the end of the year, varying from thirty to sixty dollars, out of which the supplies must be paid for, with interest.
About eighteen per cent of the population belong to this class of semi-metayers, while twenty-two per cent are laborers paid by the month or year, and are either “furnished” by their own savings or perhaps more usually by some merchant who takes his chances of payment.
Such laborers receive from thirty-five to fifty cents a day during the working season.
They are usually young unmarried persons, some being women; and when they marry they sink to the class of metayers, or, more seldom, become renters.
The renters for fixed money rentals are the first of the emerging classes, and form five per cent of the families.
The sole advantage of this small class is their freedom to choose their crops, and the increased responsibility which comes through having money transactions.
While some of the renters differ little in condition from the metayers, yet on the whole they are more intelligent and responsible persons, and are the ones who eventually become land-owners.
Their better character and greater shrewdness enable them to gain, perhaps to demand, better terms in rents; rented farms, varying from forty to a hundred acres, bear an average rental of about fifty-four dollars a year.
The men who conduct such farms do not long remain renters; either they sink to metayers, or with a successful series of harvests rise to be land-owners.
In 1870 the tax-books of Dougherty report no Negroes as landholders.
If there were any such at that time,—and there may have been a few,—their land was probably held in the name of some white patron,—a method not uncommon during slavery.
In 1875 ownership of land had begun with seven hundred and fifty acres; ten years later this had increased to over sixty-five hundred acres, to nine thousand acres in 1890 and ten thousand in 1900.
The total assessed property has in this same period risen from eighty thousand dollars in 1875 to two hundred and forty thousand dollars in 1900.
Two circumstances complicate this development and make it in some respects difficult to be sure of the real tendencies; they are the panic of 1893, and the low price of cotton in 1898.
Besides this, the system of assessing property in the country districts of Georgia is somewhat antiquated and of uncertain statistical value; there are no assessors, and each man makes a sworn return to a tax-receiver.
Thus public opinion plays a large part, and the returns vary strangely from year to year.
Certainly these figures show the small amount of accumulated capital among the Negroes, and the consequent large dependence of their property on temporary prosperity.
They have little to tide over a few years of economic depression, and are at the mercy of the cotton-market far more than the whites.
And thus the land-owners, despite their marvellous efforts, are really a transient class, continually being depleted by those who fall back into the class of renters or metayers, and augmented by newcomers from the masses.
If all the black land-owners who had ever held land here had kept it or left it in the hands of black men, the Negroes would have owned nearer thirty thousand acres than the fifteen thousand they now hold.
And yet these fifteen thousand acres are a creditable showing,—a proof of no little weight of the worth and ability of the Negro people.
If they had been given an economic start at Emancipation, if they had been in an enlightened and rich community which really desired their best good, then we might perhaps call such a result small or even insignificant.
But for a few thousand poor ignorant field-hands, in the face of poverty, a falling market, and social stress, to save and capitalize two hundred thousand dollars in a generation has meant a tremendous effort.
The rise of a nation, the pressing forward of a social class, means a bitter struggle, a hard and soul-sickening battle with the world such as few of the more favored classes know or appreciate.
Out of the hard economic conditions of this portion of the Black Belt, only six per cent of the population have succeeded in emerging into peasant proprietorship; and these are not all firmly fixed, but grow and shrink in number with the wavering of the cotton-market.
Fully ninety-four per cent have struggled for land and failed, and half of them sit in hopeless serfdom.
For these there is one other avenue of escape toward which they have turned in increasing numbers, namely, migration to town.
A glance at the distribution of land among the black owners curiously reveals this fact.
In 1898 the holdings were as follows: Under forty acres, forty-nine families; forty to two hundred and fifty acres, seventeen families; two hundred and fifty to one thousand acres, thirteen families; one thousand or more acres, two families.
Now in 1890 there were forty-four holdings, but only nine of these were under forty acres.
The great increase of holdings, then, has come in the buying of small homesteads near town, where their owners really share in the town life; this is a part of the rush to town.
And for every land-owner who has thus hurried away from the narrow and hard conditions of country life, how many field-hands, how many tenants, how many ruined renters, have joined that long procession?
Is it not strange compensation?
The sin of the country districts is visited on the town, and the social sores of city life to-day may, here in Dougherty County, and perhaps in many places near and far, look for their final healing without the city walls.
Indeed, the characteristic of our age is the contact of European civilization with the world’s undeveloped peoples.
Whatever we may say of the results of such contact in the past, it certainly forms a chapter in human action not pleasant to look back upon.
War, murder, slavery, extermination, and debauchery,—this has again and again been the result of carrying civilization and the blessed gospel to the isles of the sea and the heathen without the law.
Nor does it altogether satisfy the conscience of the modern world to be told complacently that all this has been right and proper, the fated triumph of strength over weakness, of righteousness over evil, of superiors over inferiors.
It would certainly be soothing if one could readily believe all this; and yet there are too many ugly facts for everything to be thus easily explained away.
We feel and know that there are many delicate differences in race psychology, numberless changes that our crude social measurements are not yet able to follow minutely, which explain much of history and social development.
At the same time, too, we know that these considerations have never adequately explained or excused the triumph of brute force and cunning over weakness and innocence.
It is, then, the strife of all honorable men of the twentieth century to see that in the future competition of races the survival of the fittest shall mean the triumph of the good, the beautiful, and the true; that we may be able to preserve for future civilization all that is really fine and noble and strong, and not continue to put a premium on greed and impudence and cruelty.
To bring this hope to fruition, we are compelled daily to turn more and more to a conscientious study of the phenomena of race-contact,—to a study frank and fair, and not falsified and colored by our wishes or our fears.
In the civilized life of to-day the contact of men and their relations to each other fall in a few main lines of action and communication: there is, first, the physical proximity of home and dwelling-places, the way in which neighborhoods group themselves, and the contiguity of neighborhoods.
Secondly, and in our age chiefest, there are the economic relations,—the methods by which individuals cooperate for earning a living, for the mutual satisfaction of wants, for the production of wealth.
Next, there are the political relations, the cooperation in social control, in group government, in laying and paying the burden of taxation.
In the fourth place there are the less tangible but highly important forms of intellectual contact and commerce, the interchange of ideas through conversation and conference, through periodicals and libraries; and, above all, the gradual formation for each community of that curious _tertium quid_ which we call public opinion.
Closely allied with this come the various forms of social contact in everyday life, in travel, in theatres, in house gatherings, in marrying and giving in marriage.
Finally, there are the varying forms of religious enterprise, of moral teaching and benevolent endeavor.
These are the principal ways in which men living in the same communities are brought into contact with each other.
It is my present task, therefore, to indicate, from my point of view, how the black race in the South meet and mingle with the whites in these matters of everyday life.
First, as to physical dwelling.
It is usually possible to draw in nearly every Southern community a physical color-line on the map, on the one side of which whites dwell and on the other Negroes.
The winding and intricacy of the geographical color-line varies, of course, in different communities.
I know some towns where a straight line drawn through the middle of the main street separates nine-tenths of the whites from nine-tenths of the blacks.
In other towns the older settlement of whites has been encircled by a broad band of blacks; in still other cases little settlements or nuclei of blacks have sprung up amid surrounding whites.
Usually in cities each street has its distinctive color, and only now and then do the colors meet in close proximity.
Even in the country something of this segregation is manifest in the smaller areas, and of course in the larger phenomena of the Black Belt.
All this segregation by color is largely independent of that natural clustering by social grades common to all communities.
A Negro slum may be in dangerous proximity to a white residence quarter, while it is quite common to find a white slum planted in the heart of a respectable Negro district.
One thing, however, seldom occurs: the best of the whites and the best of the Negroes almost never live in anything like close proximity.
It thus happens that in nearly every Southern town and city, both whites and blacks see commonly the worst of each other.
This is a vast change from the situation in the past, when, through the close contact of master and house-servant in the patriarchal big house, one found the best of both races in close contact and sympathy, while at the same time the squalor and dull round of toil among the field-hands was removed from the sight and hearing of the family.
One can easily see how a person who saw slavery thus from his father’s parlors, and sees freedom on the streets of a great city, fails to grasp or comprehend the whole of the new picture.
On the other hand, the settled belief of the mass of the Negroes that the Southern white people do not have the black man’s best interests at heart has been intensified in later years by this continual daily contact of the better class of blacks with the worst representatives of the white race.
Coming now to the economic relations of the races, we are on ground made familiar by study, much discussion, and no little philanthropic effort.
And yet with all this there are many essential elements in the cooperation of Negroes and whites for work and wealth that are too readily overlooked or not thoroughly understood.
The average American can easily conceive of a rich land awaiting development and filled with black laborers.
To him the Southern problem is simply that of making efficient workingmen out of this material, by giving them the requisite technical skill and the help of invested capital.
The problem, however, is by no means as simple as this, from the obvious fact that these workingmen have been trained for centuries as slaves.
They exhibit, therefore, all the advantages and defects of such training; they are willing and good-natured, but not self-reliant, provident, or careful.
If now the economic development of the South is to be pushed to the verge of exploitation, as seems probable, then we have a mass of workingmen thrown into relentless competition with the workingmen of the world, but handicapped by a training the very opposite to that of the modern self-reliant democratic laborer.
What the black laborer needs is careful personal guidance, group leadership of men with hearts in their bosoms, to train them to foresight, carefulness, and honesty.
Nor does it require any fine-spun theories of racial differences to prove the necessity of such group training after the brains of the race have been knocked out by two hundred and fifty years of assiduous education in submission, carelessness, and stealing.
After Emancipation, it was the plain duty of some one to assume this group leadership and training of the Negro laborer.
For we must never forget that the economic system of the South to-day which has succeeded the old regime is not the same system as that of the old industrial North, of England, or of France, with their trade-unions, their restrictive laws, their written and unwritten commercial customs, and their long experience.
It is, rather, a copy of that England of the early nineteenth century, before the factory acts,—the England that wrung pity from thinkers and fired the wrath of Carlyle.
The rod of empire that passed from the hands of Southern gentlemen in 1865, partly by force, partly by their own petulance, has never returned to them.
Rather it has passed to those men who have come to take charge of the industrial exploitation of the New South,—the sons of poor whites fired with a new thirst for wealth and power, thrifty and avaricious Yankees, and unscrupulous immigrants.
Into the hands of these men the Southern laborers, white and black, have fallen; and this to their sorrow.
For the laborers as such, there is in these new captains of industry neither love nor hate, neither sympathy nor romance; it is a cold question of dollars and dividends.
Even the white laborers are not yet intelligent, thrifty, and well trained enough to maintain themselves against the powerful inroads of organized capital.
The results among them, even, are long hours of toil, low wages, child labor, and lack of protection against usury and cheating.
But among the black laborers all this is aggravated, first, by a race prejudice which varies from a doubt and distrust among the best element of whites to a frenzied hatred among the worst; and, secondly, it is aggravated, as I have said before, by the wretched economic heritage of the freedmen from slavery.
With this training it is difficult for the freedman to learn to grasp the opportunities already opened to him, and the new opportunities are seldom given him, but go by favor to the whites.
Left by the best elements of the South with little protection or oversight, he has been made in law and custom the victim of the worst and most unscrupulous men in each community.
The crop-lien system which is depopulating the fields of the South is not simply the result of shiftlessness on the part of Negroes, but is also the result of cunningly devised laws as to mortgages, liens, and misdemeanors, which can be made by conscienceless men to entrap and snare the unwary until escape is impossible, further toil a farce, and protest a crime.
I have seen, in the Black Belt of Georgia, an ignorant, honest Negro buy and pay for a farm in installments three separate times, and then in the face of law and decency the enterprising American who sold it to him pocketed the money and deed and left the black man landless, to labor on his own land at thirty cents a day.
I have seen a black farmer fall in debt to a white storekeeper, and that storekeeper go to his farm and strip it of every single marketable article,—mules, ploughs, stored crops, tools, furniture, bedding, clocks, looking-glass,—and all this without a sheriff or officer, in the face of the law for homestead exemptions, and without rendering to a single responsible person any account or reckoning.
And such proceedings can happen, and will happen, in any community where a class of ignorant toilers are placed by custom and race-prejudice beyond the pale of sympathy and race-brotherhood.
So long as the best elements of a community do not feel in duty bound to protect and train and care for the weaker members of their group, they leave them to be preyed upon by these swindlers and rascals.
This unfortunate economic situation does not mean the hindrance of all advance in the black South, or the absence of a class of black landlords and mechanics who, in spite of disadvantages, are accumulating property and making good citizens.
But it does mean that this class is not nearly so large as a fairer economic system might easily make it, that those who survive in the competition are handicapped so as to accomplish much less than they deserve to, and that, above all, the _personnel_ of the successful class is left to chance and accident, and not to any intelligent culling or reasonable methods of selection.
As a remedy for this, there is but one possible procedure.
We must accept some of the race prejudice in the South as a fact,—deplorable in its intensity, unfortunate in results, and dangerous for the future, but nevertheless a hard fact which only time can efface.
We cannot hope, then, in this generation, or for several generations, that the mass of the whites can be brought to assume that close sympathetic and self-sacrificing leadership of the blacks which their present situation so eloquently demands.
Such leadership, such social teaching and example, must come from the blacks themselves.
For some time men doubted as to whether the Negro could develop such leaders; but to-day no one seriously disputes the capability of individual Negroes to assimilate the culture and common sense of modern civilization, and to pass it on, to some extent at least, to their fellows.
But if such men are to be effective they must have some power,—they must be backed by the best public opinion of these communities, and able to wield for their objects and aims such weapons as the experience of the world has taught are indispensable to human progress.
Of such weapons the greatest, perhaps, in the modern world is the power of the ballot; and this brings me to a consideration of the third form of contact between whites and blacks in the South,—political activity.
In the attitude of the American mind toward Negro suffrage can be traced with unusual accuracy the prevalent conceptions of government.
In the fifties we were near enough the echoes of the French Revolution to believe pretty thoroughly in universal suffrage.
It was at this time that the question of Negro suffrage in the South was raised.
Here was a defenceless people suddenly made free.
How were they to be protected from those who did not believe in their freedom and were determined to thwart it?
Not by force, said the North; not by government guardianship, said the South; then by the ballot, the sole and legitimate defence of a free people, said the Common Sense of the Nation.
No one thought, at the time, that the ex-slaves could use the ballot intelligently or very effectively; but they did think that the possession of so great power by a great class in the nation would compel their fellows to educate this class to its intelligent use.
Meantime, new thoughts came to the nation: the inevitable period of moral retrogression and political trickery that ever follows in the wake of war overtook us.
So flagrant became the political scandals that reputable men began to leave politics alone, and politics consequently became disreputable.
Men began to pride themselves on having nothing to do with their own government, and to agree tacitly with those who regarded public office as a private perquisite.
In this state of mind it became easy to wink at the suppression of the Negro vote in the South, and to advise self-respecting Negroes to leave politics entirely alone.
The decent and reputable citizens of the North who neglected their own civic duties grew hilarious over the exaggerated importance with which the Negro regarded the franchise.
Thus it easily happened that more and more the better class of Negroes followed the advice from abroad and the pressure from home, and took no further interest in politics, leaving to the careless and the venal of their race the exercise of their rights as voters.
The black vote that still remained was not trained and educated, but further debauched by open and unblushing bribery, or force and fraud; until the Negro voter was thoroughly inoculated with the idea that politics was a method of private gain by disreputable means.
Are we going to tell him still that politics is a disreputable and useless form of human activity?
Are we going to induce the best class of Negroes to take less and less interest in government, and to give up their right to take such an interest, without a protest?
I am not saying a word against all legitimate efforts to purge the ballot of ignorance, pauperism, and crime.
But few have pretended that the present movement for disfranchisement in the South is for such a purpose; it has been plainly and frankly declared in nearly every case that the object of the disfranchising laws is the elimination of the black man from politics.
Now, is this a minor matter which has no influence on the main question of the industrial and intellectual development of the Negro?
Can we establish a mass of black laborers and artisans and landholders in the South who, by law and public opinion, have absolutely no voice in shaping the laws under which they live and work?
Can the modern organization of industry, assuming as it does free democratic government and the power and ability of the laboring classes to compel respect for their welfare,—can this system be carried out in the South when half its laboring force is voiceless in the public councils and powerless in its own defence?
To-day the black man of the South has almost nothing to say as to how much he shall be taxed, or how those taxes shall be expended; as to who shall execute the laws, and how they shall do it; as to who shall make the laws, and how they shall be made.
It is pitiable that frantic efforts must be made at critical times to get law-makers in some States even to listen to the respectful presentation of the black man’s side of a current controversy.
Daily the Negro is coming more and more to look upon law and justice, not as protecting safeguards, but as sources of humiliation and oppression.
The laws are made by men who have little interest in him; they are executed by men who have absolutely no motive for treating the black people with courtesy or consideration; and, finally, the accused law-breaker is tried, not by his peers, but too often by men who would rather punish ten innocent Negroes than let one guilty one escape.
I should be the last one to deny the patent weaknesses and shortcomings of the Negro people; I should be the last to withhold sympathy from the white South in its efforts to solve its intricate social problems.
I freely acknowledged that it is possible, and sometimes best, that a partially undeveloped people should be ruled by the best of their stronger and better neighbors for their own good, until such time as they can start and fight the world’s battles alone.
I have already pointed out how sorely in need of such economic and spiritual guidance the emancipated Negro was, and I am quite willing to admit that if the representatives of the best white Southern public opinion were the ruling and guiding powers in the South to-day the conditions indicated would be fairly well fulfilled.
But the point I have insisted upon and now emphasize again, is that the best opinion of the South to-day is not the ruling opinion.
Moreover, the political status of the Negro in the South is closely connected with the question of Negro crime.
There can be no doubt that crime among Negroes has sensibly increased in the last thirty years, and that there has appeared in the slums of great cities a distinct criminal class among the blacks.
In explaining this unfortunate development, we must note two things: (1) that the inevitable result of Emancipation was to increase crime and criminals, and (2) that the police system of the South was primarily designed to control slaves.
As to the first point, we must not forget that under a strict slave system there can scarcely be such a thing as crime.
But when these variously constituted human particles are suddenly thrown broadcast on the sea of life, some swim, some sink, and some hang suspended, to be forced up or down by the chance currents of a busy hurrying world.
So great an economic and social revolution as swept the South in ’63 meant a weeding out among the Negroes of the incompetents and vicious, the beginning of a differentiation of social grades.
Now a rising group of people are not lifted bodily from the ground like an inert solid mass, but rather stretch upward like a living plant with its roots still clinging in the mould.
The appearance, therefore, of the Negro criminal was a phenomenon to be awaited; and while it causes anxiety, it should not occasion surprise.
Here again the hope for the future depended peculiarly on careful and delicate dealing with these criminals.
Their offences at first were those of laziness, carelessness, and impulse, rather than of malignity or ungoverned viciousness.
Such misdemeanors needed discriminating treatment, firm but reformatory, with no hint of injustice, and full proof of guilt.
For such dealing with criminals, white or black, the South had no machinery, no adequate jails or reformatories; its police system was arranged to deal with blacks alone, and tacitly assumed that every white man was _ipso facto_ a member of that police.
Thus grew up a double system of justice, which erred on the white side by undue leniency and the practical immunity of red-handed criminals, and erred on the black side by undue severity, injustice, and lack of discrimination.
For, as I have said, the police system of the South was originally designed to keep track of all Negroes, not simply of criminals; and when the Negroes were freed and the whole South was convinced of the impossibility of free Negro labor, the first and almost universal device was to use the courts as a means of reenslaving the blacks.
It was not then a question of crime, but rather one of color, that settled a man’s conviction on almost any charge.
Thus Negroes came to look upon courts as instruments of injustice and oppression, and upon those convicted in them as martyrs and victims.
On the other hand, the whites, used to being careless as to the guilt or innocence of accused Negroes, were swept in moments of passion beyond law, reason, and decency.
Such a situation is bound to increase crime, and has increased it.
To natural viciousness and vagrancy are being daily added motives of revolt and revenge which stir up all the latent savagery of both races and make peaceful attention to economic development often impossible.
But the chief problem in any community cursed with crime is not the punishment of the criminals, but the preventing of the young from being trained to crime.
And here again the peculiar conditions of the South have prevented proper precautions.
I have seen twelve-year-old boys working in chains on the public streets of Atlanta, directly in front of the schools, in company with old and hardened criminals; and this indiscriminate mingling of men and women and children makes the chain-gangs perfect schools of crime and debauchery.
The struggle for reformatories, which has gone on in Virginia, Georgia, and other States, is the one encouraging sign of the awakening of some communities to the suicidal results of this policy.
It is the public schools, however, which can be made, outside the homes, the greatest means of training decent self-respecting citizens.
We have been so hotly engaged recently in discussing trade-schools and the higher education that the pitiable plight of the public-school system in the South has almost dropped from view.
Of every five dollars spent for public education in the State of Georgia, the white schools get four dollars and the Negro one dollar; and even then the white public-school system, save in the cities, is bad and cries for reform.
I am becoming more and more convinced, as I look upon the system of common-school training in the South, that the national government must soon step in and aid popular education in some way.
To-day it has been only by the most strenuous efforts on the part of the thinking men of the South that the Negro’s share of the school fund has not been cut down to a pittance in some half-dozen States; and that movement not only is not dead, but in many communities is gaining strength.
What in the name of reason does this nation expect of a people, poorly trained and hard pressed in severe economic competition, without political rights, and with ludicrously inadequate common-school facilities?
What can it expect but crime and listlessness, offset here and there by the dogged struggles of the fortunate and more determined who are themselves buoyed by the hope that in due time the country will come to its senses?
I have thus far sought to make clear the physical, economic, and political relations of the Negroes and whites in the South, as I have conceived them, including, for the reasons set forth, crime and education.
But after all that has been said on these more tangible matters of human contact, there still remains a part essential to a proper description of the South which it is difficult to describe or fix in terms easily understood by strangers.
It is, in fine, the atmosphere of the land, the thought and feeling, the thousand and one little actions which go to make up life.
In any community or nation it is these little things which are most elusive to the grasp and yet most essential to any clear conception of the group life taken as a whole.
What is thus true of all communities is peculiarly true of the South, where, outside of written history and outside of printed law, there has been going on for a generation as deep a storm and stress of human souls, as intense a ferment of feeling, as intricate a writhing of spirit, as ever a people experienced.
Within and without the sombre veil of color vast social forces have been at work,—efforts for human betterment, movements toward disintegration and despair, tragedies and comedies in social and economic life, and a swaying and lifting and sinking of human hearts which have made this land a land of mingled sorrow and joy, of change and excitement and unrest.
The centre of this spiritual turmoil has ever been the millions of black freedmen and their sons, whose destiny is so fatefully bound up with that of the nation.
And yet the casual observer visiting the South sees at first little of this.
He notes the growing frequency of dark faces as he rides along,—but otherwise the days slip lazily on, the sun shines, and this little world seems as happy and contented as other worlds he has visited.
Indeed, on the question of questions—the Negro problem—he hears so little that there almost seems to be a conspiracy of silence; the morning papers seldom mention it, and then usually in a far-fetched academic way, and indeed almost every one seems to forget and ignore the darker half of the land, until the astonished visitor is inclined to ask if after all there IS any problem here.
But if he lingers long enough there comes the awakening: perhaps in a sudden whirl of passion which leaves him gasping at its bitter intensity; more likely in a gradually dawning sense of things he had not at first noticed.
Slowly but surely his eyes begin to catch the shadows of the color-line: here he meets crowds of Negroes and whites; then he is suddenly aware that he cannot discover a single dark face; or again at the close of a day’s wandering he may find himself in some strange assembly, where all faces are tinged brown or black, and where he has the vague, uncomfortable feeling of the stranger.
He realizes at last that silently, resistlessly, the world about flows by him in two great streams: they ripple on in the same sunshine, they approach and mingle their waters in seeming carelessness,—then they divide and flow wide apart.
It is done quietly; no mistakes are made, or if one occurs, the swift arm of the law and of public opinion swings down for a moment, as when the other day a black man and a white woman were arrested for talking together on Whitehall Street in Atlanta.
Now if one notices carefully one will see that between these two worlds, despite much physical contact and daily intermingling, there is almost no community of intellectual life or point of transference where the thoughts and feelings of one race can come into direct contact and sympathy with the thoughts and feelings of the other.
Before and directly after the war, when all the best of the Negroes were domestic servants in the best of the white families, there were bonds of intimacy, affection, and sometimes blood relationship, between the races.
They lived in the same home, shared in the family life, often attended the same church, and talked and conversed with each other.
But the increasing civilization of the Negro since then has naturally meant the development of higher classes: there are increasing numbers of ministers, teachers, physicians, merchants, mechanics, and independent farmers, who by nature and training are the aristocracy and leaders of the blacks.
Between them, however, and the best element of the whites, there is little or no intellectual commerce.
They go to separate churches, they live in separate sections, they are strictly separated in all public gatherings, they travel separately, and they are beginning to read different papers and books.
To most libraries, lectures, concerts, and museums, Negroes are either not admitted at all, or on terms peculiarly galling to the pride of the very classes who might otherwise be attracted.
Moreover, in a land where the tyranny of public opinion and the intolerance of criticism is for obvious historical reasons so strong as in the South, such a situation is extremely difficult to correct.
The white man, as well as the Negro, is bound and barred by the color-line, and many a scheme of friendliness and philanthropy, of broad-minded sympathy and generous fellowship between the two has dropped still-born because some busybody has forced the color-question to the front and brought the tremendous force of unwritten law against the innovators.
It is hardly necessary for me to add very much in regard to the social contact between the races.
Nothing has come to replace that finer sympathy and love between some masters and house servants which the radical and more uncompromising drawing of the color-line in recent years has caused almost completely to disappear.
Here there can be none of that social going down to the people,—the opening of heart and hand of the best to the worst, in generous acknowledgment of a common humanity and a common destiny.
On the other hand, in matters of simple almsgiving, where there can be no question of social contact, and in the succor of the aged and sick, the South, as if stirred by a feeling of its unfortunate limitations, is generous to a fault.
The black beggar is never turned away without a good deal more than a crust, and a call for help for the unfortunate meets quick response.
I remember, one cold winter, in Atlanta, when I refrained from contributing to a public relief fund lest Negroes should be discriminated against, I afterward inquired of a friend: “Were any black people receiving aid?” “Why,” said he, “they were _all_ black.” And yet this does not touch the kernel of the problem.
Human advancement is not a mere question of almsgiving, but rather of sympathy and cooperation among classes who would scorn charity.
And here is a land where, in the higher walks of life, in all the higher striving for the good and noble and true, the color-line comes to separate natural friends and coworkers; while at the bottom of the social group, in the saloon, the gambling-hell, and the brothel, that same line wavers and disappears.
I have sought to paint an average picture of real relations between the sons of master and man in the South.
On the other hand, I have sincerely sought to let no unfair exaggerations creep in.
I do not doubt that in some Southern communities conditions are better than those I have indicated; while I am no less certain that in other communities they are far worse.
Nor does the paradox and danger of this situation fail to interest and perplex the best conscience of the South.
Deeply religious and intensely democratic as are the mass of the whites, they feel acutely the false position in which the Negro problems place them.
Such an essentially honest-hearted and generous people cannot cite the caste-levelling precepts of Christianity, or believe in equality of opportunity for all men, without coming to feel more and more with each generation that the present drawing of the color-line is a flat contradiction to their beliefs and professions.
The argument so put is of great strength, but it is not a whit stronger than the argument of thinking Negroes: granted, they reply, that the condition of our masses is bad; there is certainly on the one hand adequate historical cause for this, and unmistakable evidence that no small number have, in spite of tremendous disadvantages, risen to the level of American civilization.
And when, by proscription and prejudice, these same Negroes are classed with and treated like the lowest of their people, simply because they are Negroes, such a policy not only discourages thrift and intelligence among black men, but puts a direct premium on the very things you complain of,—inefficiency and crime.
Draw lines of crime, of incompetency, of vice, as tightly and uncompromisingly as you will, for these things must be proscribed; but a color-line not only does not accomplish this purpose, but thwarts it.
It is not enough for the Negroes to declare that color-prejudice is the sole cause of their social condition, nor for the white South to reply that their social condition is the main cause of prejudice.
They both act as reciprocal cause and effect, and a change in neither alone will bring the desired effect.
The Negro cannot stand the present reactionary tendencies and unreasoning drawing of the color-line indefinitely without discouragement and retrogression.
And the condition of the Negro is ever the excuse for further discrimination.
Only by a union of intelligence and sympathy across the color-line in this critical period of the Republic shall justice and right triumph, “That mind and soul according well, May make one music as before, But vaster.” X.
Of the Faith of the Fathers Dim face of Beauty haunting all the world, Fair face of Beauty all too fair to see, Where the lost stars adown the heavens are hurled,— There, there alone for thee May white peace be.
Beauty, sad face of Beauty, Mystery, Wonder, What are these dreams to foolish babbling men Who cry with little noises ’neath the thunder Of Ages ground to sand, To a little sand.
The road wandered from our rambling log-house up the stony bed of a creek, past wheat and corn, until we could hear dimly across the fields a rhythmic cadence of song,—soft, thrilling, powerful, that swelled and died sorrowfully in our ears.
I was a country schoolteacher then, fresh from the East, and had never seen a Southern Negro revival.
To be sure, we in Berkshire were not perhaps as stiff and formal as they in Suffolk of olden time; yet we were very quiet and subdued, and I know not what would have happened those clear Sabbath mornings had some one punctuated the sermon with a wild scream, or interrupted the long prayer with a loud Amen!
And so most striking to me, as I approached the village and the little plain church perched aloft, was the air of intense excitement that possessed that mass of black folk.
A sort of suppressed terror hung in the air and seemed to seize us,—a pythian madness, a demoniac possession, that lent terrible reality to song and word.
The black and massive form of the preacher swayed and quivered as the words crowded to his lips and flew at us in singular eloquence.
The people moaned and fluttered, and then the gaunt-cheeked brown woman beside me suddenly leaped straight into the air and shrieked like a lost soul, while round about came wail and groan and outcry, and a scene of human passion such as I had never conceived before.
Those who have not thus witnessed the frenzy of a Negro revival in the untouched backwoods of the South can but dimly realize the religious feeling of the slave; as described, such scenes appear grotesque and funny, but as seen they are awful.
Three things characterized this religion of the slave,—the Preacher, the Music, and the Frenzy.
The Preacher is the most unique personality developed by the Negro on American soil.
A leader, a politician, an orator, a “boss,” an intriguer, an idealist,—all these he is, and ever, too, the centre of a group of men, now twenty, now a thousand in number.
The combination of a certain adroitness with deep-seated earnestness, of tact with consummate ability, gave him his preeminence, and helps him maintain it.
The type, of course, varies according to time and place, from the West Indies in the sixteenth century to New England in the nineteenth, and from the Mississippi bottoms to cities like New Orleans or New York.
The Music of Negro religion is that plaintive rhythmic melody, with its touching minor cadences, which, despite caricature and defilement, still remains the most original and beautiful expression of human life and longing yet born on American soil.
Sprung from the African forests, where its counterpart can still be heard, it was adapted, changed, and intensified by the tragic soul-life of the slave, until, under the stress of law and whip, it became the one true expression of a people’s sorrow, despair, and hope.
Finally the Frenzy of “Shouting,” when the Spirit of the Lord passed by, and, seizing the devotee, made him mad with supernatural joy, was the last essential of Negro religion and the one more devoutly believed in than all the rest.
It varied in expression from the silent rapt countenance or the low murmur and moan to the mad abandon of physical fervor,—the stamping, shrieking, and shouting, the rushing to and fro and wild waving of arms, the weeping and laughing, the vision and the trance.
All this is nothing new in the world, but old as religion, as Delphi and Endor.
And so firm a hold did it have on the Negro, that many generations firmly believed that without this visible manifestation of the God there could be no true communion with the Invisible.
These were the characteristics of Negro religious life as developed up to the time of Emancipation.
Since under the peculiar circumstances of the black man’s environment they were the one expression of his higher life, they are of deep interest to the student of his development, both socially and psychologically.
Numerous are the attractive lines of inquiry that here group themselves.
What was his attitude toward the World and Life?
Whither went his longings and strivings, and wherefore were his heart-burnings and disappointments?
Answers to such questions can come only from a study of Negro religion as a development, through its gradual changes from the heathenism of the Gold Coast to the institutional Negro church of Chicago.
Moreover, the religious growth of millions of men, even though they be slaves, cannot be without potent influence upon their contemporaries.
The Methodists and Baptists of America owe much of their condition to the silent but potent influence of their millions of Negro converts.
Especially is this noticeable in the South, where theology and religious philosophy are on this account a long way behind the North, and where the religion of the poor whites is a plain copy of Negro thought and methods.
The mass of “gospel” hymns which has swept through American churches and well-nigh ruined our sense of song consists largely of debased imitations of Negro melodies made by ears that caught the jingle but not the music, the body but not the soul, of the Jubilee songs.
It is thus clear that the study of Negro religion is not only a vital part of the history of the Negro in America, but no uninteresting part of American history.
The Negro church of to-day is the social centre of Negro life in the United States, and the most characteristic expression of African character.
Take a typical church in a small Virginia town: it is the “First Baptist”—a roomy brick edifice seating five hundred or more persons, tastefully finished in Georgia pine, with a carpet, a small organ, and stained-glass windows.
Underneath is a large assembly room with benches.
This building is the central club-house of a community of a thousand or more Negroes.
Various organizations meet here,—the church proper, the Sunday-school, two or three insurance societies, women’s societies, secret societies, and mass meetings of various kinds.
Entertainments, suppers, and lectures are held beside the five or six regular weekly religious services.
Considerable sums of money are collected and expended here, employment is found for the idle, strangers are introduced, news is disseminated and charity distributed.
At the same time this social, intellectual, and economic centre is a religious centre of great power.
Depravity, Sin, Redemption, Heaven, Hell, and Damnation are preached twice a Sunday after the crops are laid by; and few indeed of the community have the hardihood to withstand conversion.
Back of this more formal religion, the Church often stands as a real conserver of morals, a strengthener of family life, and the final authority on what is Good and Right.
Thus one can see in the Negro church to-day, reproduced in microcosm, all the great world from which the Negro is cut off by color-prejudice and social condition.
In the great city churches the same tendency is noticeable and in many respects emphasized.
The activity of a church like this is immense and far-reaching, and the bishops who preside over these organizations throughout the land are among the most powerful Negro rulers in the world.
Such churches are really governments of men, and consequently a little investigation reveals the curious fact that, in the South, at least, practically every American Negro is a church member.
Some, to be sure, are not regularly enrolled, and a few do not habitually attend services; but, practically, a proscribed people must have a social centre, and that centre for this people is the Negro church.
The census of 1890 showed nearly twenty-four thousand Negro churches in the country, with a total enrolled membership of over two and a half millions, or ten actual church members to every twenty-eight persons, and in some Southern States one in every two persons.
Besides these there is the large number who, while not enrolled as members, attend and take part in many of the activities of the church.
There is an organized Negro church for every sixty black families in the nation, and in some States for every forty families, owning, on an average, a thousand dollars’ worth of property each, or nearly twenty-six million dollars in all.
Such, then, is the large development of the Negro church since Emancipation.
The question now is, What have been the successive steps of this social history and what are the present tendencies?
First, we must realize that no such institution as the Negro church could rear itself without definite historical foundations.
These foundations we can find if we remember that the social history of the Negro did not start in America.
He was brought from a definite social environment,—the polygamous clan life under the headship of the chief and the potent influence of the priest.
His religion was nature-worship, with profound belief in invisible surrounding influences, good and bad, and his worship was through incantation and sacrifice.
The plantation organization replaced the clan and tribe, and the white master replaced the chief with far greater and more despotic powers.
Forced and long-continued toil became the rule of life, the old ties of blood relationship and kinship disappeared, and instead of the family appeared a new polygamy and polyandry, which, in some cases, almost reached promiscuity.
It was a terrific social revolution, and yet some traces were retained of the former group life, and the chief remaining institution was the Priest or Medicine-man.
He early appeared on the plantation and found his function as the healer of the sick, the interpreter of the Unknown, the comforter of the sorrowing, the supernatural avenger of wrong, and the one who rudely but picturesquely expressed the longing, disappointment, and resentment of a stolen and oppressed people.
Thus, as bard, physician, judge, and priest, within the narrow limits allowed by the slave system, rose the Negro preacher, and under him the first church was not at first by any means Christian nor definitely organized; rather it was an adaptation and mingling of heathen rites among the members of each plantation, and roughly designated as Voodooism.
Association with the masters, missionary effort and motives of expediency gave these rites an early veneer of Christianity, and after the lapse of many generations the Negro church became Christian.
Two characteristic things must be noticed in regard to the church.
First, it became almost entirely Baptist and Methodist in faith; secondly, as a social institution it antedated by many decades the monogamic Negro home.
From the very circumstances of its beginning, the church was confined to the plantation, and consisted primarily of a series of disconnected units; although, later on, some freedom of movement was allowed, still this geographical limitation was always important and was one cause of the spread of the decentralized and democratic Baptist faith among the slaves.
At the same time, the visible rite of baptism appealed strongly to their mystic temperament.
To-day the Baptist Church is still largest in membership among Negroes, and has a million and a half communicants.
Next in popularity came the churches organized in connection with the white neighboring churches, chiefly Baptist and Methodist, with a few Episcopalian and others.
The Methodists still form the second greatest denomination, with nearly a million members.
The faith of these two leading denominations was more suited to the slave church from the prominence they gave to religious feeling and fervor.
The Negro membership in other denominations has always been small and relatively unimportant, although the Episcopalians and Presbyterians are gaining among the more intelligent classes to-day, and the Catholic Church is making headway in certain sections.
After Emancipation, and still earlier in the North, the Negro churches largely severed such affiliations as they had had with the white churches, either by choice or by compulsion.
The Baptist churches became independent, but the Methodists were compelled early to unite for purposes of episcopal government.
This gave rise to the great African Methodist Church, the greatest Negro organization in the world, to the Zion Church and the Colored Methodist, and to the black conferences and churches in this and other denominations.
The second fact noted, namely, that the Negro church antedates the Negro home, leads to an explanation of much that is paradoxical in this communistic institution and in the morals of its members.
But especially it leads us to regard this institution as peculiarly the expression of the inner ethical life of a people in a sense seldom true elsewhere.
Let us turn, then, from the outer physical development of the church to the more important inner ethical life of the people who compose it.
The Negro has already been pointed out many times as a religious animal,—a being of that deep emotional nature which turns instinctively toward the supernatural.
Endowed with a rich tropical imagination and a keen, delicate appreciation of Nature, the transplanted African lived in a world animate with gods and devils, elves and witches; full of strange influences,—of Good to be implored, of Evil to be propitiated.
All the hateful powers of the Under-world were striving against him, and a spirit of revolt and revenge filled his heart.
He called up all the resources of heathenism to aid,—exorcism and witch-craft, the mysterious Obi worship with its barbarious rites, spells, and blood-sacrifice even, now and then, of human victims.
Weird midnight orgies and mystic conjurations were invoked, the witch-woman and the voodoo-priest became the centre of Negro group life, and that vein of vague superstition which characterizes the unlettered Negro even to-day was deepened and strengthened.
In spite, however, of such success as that of the fierce Maroons, the Danish blacks, and others, the spirit of revolt gradually died away under the untiring energy and superior strength of the slave masters.
By the middle of the eighteenth century the black slave had sunk, with hushed murmurs, to his place at the bottom of a new economic system, and was unconsciously ripe for a new philosophy of life.
Nothing suited his condition then better than the doctrines of passive submission embodied in the newly learned Christianity.
Slave masters early realized this, and cheerfully aided religious propaganda within certain bounds.
The long system of repression and degradation of the Negro tended to emphasize the elements of his character which made him a valuable chattel: courtesy became humility, moral strength degenerated into submission, and the exquisite native appreciation of the beautiful became an infinite capacity for dumb suffering.
The Negro, losing the joy of this world, eagerly seized upon the offered conceptions of the next; the avenging Spirit of the Lord enjoining patience in this world, under sorrow and tribulation until the Great Day when He should lead His dark children home,—this became his comforting dream.
His preacher repeated the prophecy, and his bards sang,— “Children, we all shall be free When the Lord shall appear!” This deep religious fatalism, painted so beautifully in “Uncle Tom,” came soon to breed, as all fatalistic faiths will, the sensualist side by side with the martyr.
Under the lax moral life of the plantation, where marriage was a farce, laziness a virtue, and property a theft, a religion of resignation and submission degenerated easily, in less strenuous minds, into a philosophy of indulgence and crime.
Many of the worst characteristics of the Negro masses of to-day had their seed in this period of the slave’s ethical growth.
Here it was that the Home was ruined under the very shadow of the Church, white and black; here habits of shiftlessness took root, and sullen hopelessness replaced hopeful strife.
With the beginning of the abolition movement and the gradual growth of a class of free Negroes came a change.
We often neglect the influence of the freedman before the war, because of the paucity of his numbers and the small weight he had in the history of the nation.
But we must not forget that his chief influence was internal,—was exerted on the black world; and that there he was the ethical and social leader.
Huddled as he was in a few centres like Philadelphia, New York, and New Orleans, the masses of the freedmen sank into poverty and listlessness; but not all of them.
The free Negro leader early arose and his chief characteristic was intense earnestness and deep feeling on the slavery question.
His religion became darker and more intense, and into his ethics crept a note of revenge, into his songs a day of reckoning close at hand.
Through fugitive slaves and irrepressible discussion this desire for freedom seized the black millions still in bondage, and became their one ideal of life.
The black bards caught new notes, and sometimes even dared to sing,— “O Freedom, O Freedom, O Freedom over me!
Before I’ll be a slave I’ll be buried in my grave, And go home to my Lord And be free.” For fifty years Negro religion thus transformed itself and identified itself with the dream of Abolition, until that which was a radical fad in the white North and an anarchistic plot in the white South had become a religion to the black world.
Thus, when Emancipation finally came, it seemed to the freedman a literal Coming of the Lord.
His fervid imagination was stirred as never before, by the tramp of armies, the blood and dust of battle, and the wail and whirl of social upheaval.
He stood dumb and motionless before the whirlwind: what had he to do with it?
Was it not the Lord’s doing, and marvellous in his eyes?
Joyed and bewildered with what came, he stood awaiting new wonders till the inevitable Age of Reaction swept over the nation and brought the crisis of to-day.
It is difficult to explain clearly the present critical stage of Negro religion.
First, we must remember that living as the blacks do in close contact with a great modern nation, and sharing, although imperfectly, the soul-life of that nation, they must necessarily be affected more or less directly by all the religious and ethical forces that are to-day moving the United States.
These questions and movements are, however, overshadowed and dwarfed by the (to them) all-important question of their civil, political, and economic status.
They must perpetually discuss the “Negro Problem,”—must live, move, and have their being in it, and interpret all else in its light or darkness.
With this come, too, peculiar problems of their inner life,—of the status of women, the maintenance of Home, the training of children, the accumulation of wealth, and the prevention of crime.
All this must mean a time of intense ethical ferment, of religious heart-searching and intellectual unrest.
From the double life every American Negro must live, as a Negro and as an American, as swept on by the current of the nineteenth while yet struggling in the eddies of the fifteenth century,—from this must arise a painful self-consciousness, an almost morbid sense of personality and a moral hesitancy which is fatal to self-confidence.
The worlds within and without the Veil of Color are changing, and changing rapidly, but not at the same rate, not in the same way; and this must produce a peculiar wrenching of the soul, a peculiar sense of doubt and bewilderment.
Such a double life, with double thoughts, double duties, and double social classes, must give rise to double words and double ideals, and tempt the mind to pretence or revolt, to hypocrisy or radicalism.
In some such doubtful words and phrases can one perhaps most clearly picture the peculiar ethical paradox that faces the Negro of to-day and is tingeing and changing his religious life.
Feeling that his rights and his dearest ideals are being trampled upon, that the public conscience is ever more deaf to his righteous appeal, and that all the reactionary forces of prejudice, greed, and revenge are daily gaining new strength and fresh allies, the Negro faces no enviable dilemma.
Conscious of his impotence, and pessimistic, he often becomes bitter and vindictive; and his religion, instead of a worship, is a complaint and a curse, a wail rather than a hope, a sneer rather than a faith.
On the other hand, another type of mind, shrewder and keener and more tortuous too, sees in the very strength of the anti-Negro movement its patent weaknesses, and with Jesuitic casuistry is deterred by no ethical considerations in the endeavor to turn this weakness to the black man’s strength.
Thus we have two great and hardly reconcilable streams of thought and ethical strivings; the danger of the one lies in anarchy, that of the other in hypocrisy.
The one type of Negro stands almost ready to curse God and die, and the other is too often found a traitor to right and a coward before force; the one is wedded to ideals remote, whimsical, perhaps impossible of realization; the other forgets that life is more than meat and the body more than raiment.
But, after all, is not this simply the writhing of the age translated into black,—the triumph of the Lie which today, with its false culture, faces the hideousness of the anarchist assassin?
To-day the two groups of Negroes, the one in the North, the other in the South, represent these divergent ethical tendencies, the first tending toward radicalism, the other toward hypocritical compromise.
It is no idle regret with which the white South mourns the loss of the old-time Negro,—the frank, honest, simple old servant who stood for the earlier religious age of submission and humility.
With all his laziness and lack of many elements of true manhood, he was at least open-hearted, faithful, and sincere.
Is it not the tendency, born of Reconstruction and Reaction, to found a society on lawlessness and deception, to tamper with the moral fibre of a naturally honest and straightforward people until the whites threaten to become ungovernable tyrants and the blacks criminals and hypocrites?
Deception is the natural defence of the weak against the strong, and the South used it for many years against its conquerors; to-day it must be prepared to see its black proletariat turn that same two-edged weapon against itself.
The death of Denmark Vesey and Nat Turner proved long since to the Negro the present hopelessness of physical defence.
Political defence is becoming less and less available, and economic defence is still only partially effective.
But there is a patent defence at hand,—the defence of deception and flattery, of cajoling and lying.
It is the same defence which peasants of the Middle Age used and which left its stamp on their character for centuries.
To-day the young Negro of the South who would succeed cannot be frank and outspoken, honest and self-assertive, but rather he is daily tempted to be silent and wary, politic and sly; he must flatter and be pleasant, endure petty insults with a smile, shut his eyes to wrong; in too many cases he sees positive personal advantage in deception and lying.
His real thoughts, his real aspirations, must be guarded in whispers; he must not criticise, he must not complain.
Patience, humility, and adroitness must, in these growing black youth, replace impulse, manliness, and courage.
With this sacrifice there is an economic opening, and perhaps peace and some prosperity.
Without this there is riot, migration, or crime.
Nor is this situation peculiar to the Southern United States, is it not rather the only method by which undeveloped races have gained the right to share modern culture?
On the other hand, in the North the tendency is to emphasize the radicalism of the Negro.
Driven from his birthright in the South by a situation at which every fibre of his more outspoken and assertive nature revolts, he finds himself in a land where he can scarcely earn a decent living amid the harsh competition and the color discrimination.
At the same time, through schools and periodicals, discussions and lectures, he is intellectually quickened and awakened.
The soul, long pent up and dwarfed, suddenly expands in new-found freedom.
What wonder that every tendency is to excess,—radical complaint, radical remedies, bitter denunciation or angry silence.
The criminal and the sensualist leave the church for the gambling-hell and the brothel, and fill the slums of Chicago and Baltimore; the better classes segregate themselves from the group-life of both white and black, and form an aristocracy, cultured but pessimistic, whose bitter criticism stings while it points out no way of escape.
They despise the submission and subserviency of the Southern Negroes, but offer no other means by which a poor and oppressed minority can exist side by side with its masters.
Feeling deeply and keenly the tendencies and opportunities of the age in which they live, their souls are bitter at the fate which drops the Veil between; and the very fact that this bitterness is natural and justifiable only serves to intensify it and make it more maddening.
Between the two extreme types of ethical attitude which I have thus sought to make clear wavers the mass of the millions of Negroes, North and South; and their religious life and activity partake of this social conflict within their ranks.
But back of this still broods silently the deep religious feeling of the real Negro heart, the stirring, unguided might of powerful human souls who have lost the guiding star of the past and seek in the great night a new religious ideal.
Some day the Awakening will come, when the pent-up vigor of ten million souls shall sweep irresistibly toward the Goal, out of the Valley of the Shadow of Death, where all that makes life worth living—Liberty, Justice, and Right—is marked “For White People Only.” XI.
Of the Passing of the First-Born O sister, sister, thy first-begotten, The hands that cling and the feet that follow, The voice of the child’s blood crying yet, _Who hath remembered me? who hath forgotten?_ Thou hast forgotten, O summer swallow, But the world shall end when I forget.
Then the fear of fatherhood mingled wildly with the joy of creation; I wondered how it looked and how it felt—what were its eyes, and how its hair curled and crumpled itself.
And I thought in awe of her,—she who had slept with Death to tear a man-child from underneath her heart, while I was unconsciously wandering.
I fled to my wife and child, repeating the while to myself half wonderingly, “Wife and child?
Wife and child?”—fled fast and faster than boat and steam-car, and yet must ever impatiently await them; away from the hard-voiced city, away from the flickering sea into my own Berkshire Hills that sit all sadly guarding the gates of Massachusetts.
Up the stairs I ran to the wan mother and whimpering babe, to the sanctuary on whose altar a life at my bidding had offered itself to win a life, and won.
What is this tiny formless thing, this newborn wail from an unknown world,—all head and voice?
I handle it curiously, and watch perplexed its winking, breathing, and sneezing.
I did not love it then; it seemed a ludicrous thing to love; but her I loved, my girl-mother, she whom now I saw unfolding like the glory of the morning—the transfigured woman.
Through her I came to love the wee thing, as it grew strong; as its little soul unfolded itself in twitter and cry and half-formed word, and as its eyes caught the gleam and flash of life.
How beautiful he was, with his olive-tinted flesh and dark gold ringlets, his eyes of mingled blue and brown, his perfect little limbs, and the soft voluptuous roll which the blood of Africa had moulded into his features!
I held him in my arms, after we had sped far away from our Southern home,—held him, and glanced at the hot red soil of Georgia and the breathless city of a hundred hills, and felt a vague unrest.
Holding in that little head—ah, bitterly!—he unbowed pride of a hunted race, clinging with that tiny dimpled hand—ah, wearily!—to a hope not hopeless but unhopeful, and seeing with those bright wondering eyes that peer into my soul a land whose freedom is to us a mockery and whose liberty a lie.
I saw the shadow of the Veil as it passed over my baby, I saw the cold city towering above the blood-red land.
I held my face beside his little cheek, showed him the star-children and the twinkling lights as they began to flash, and stilled with an even-song the unvoiced terror of my life.
So sturdy and masterful he grew, so filled with bubbling life, so tremulous with the unspoken wisdom of a life but eighteen months distant from the All-life,—we were not far from worshipping this revelation of the divine, my wife and I.
Her own life builded and moulded itself upon the child; he tinged her every dream and idealized her every effort.
No hands but hers must touch and garnish those little limbs; no dress or frill must touch them that had not wearied her fingers; no voice but hers could coax him off to Dreamland, and she and he together spoke some soft and unknown tongue and in it held communion.
I too mused above his little white bed; saw the strength of my own arm stretched onward through the ages through the newer strength of his; saw the dream of my black fathers stagger a step onward in the wild phantasm of the world; heard in his baby voice the voice of the Prophet that was to rise within the Veil.
And so we dreamed and loved and planned by fall and winter, and the full flush of the long Southern spring, till the hot winds rolled from the fetid Gulf, till the roses shivered and the still stern sun quivered its awful light over the hills of Atlanta.
And then one night the little feet pattered wearily to the wee white bed, and the tiny hands trembled; and a warm flushed face tossed on the pillow, and we knew baby was sick.
Cheerily the mother nursed him the first days, and laughed into the little eyes that smiled again.
Tenderly then she hovered round him, till the smile fled away and Fear crouched beside the little bed.
Then the day ended not, and night was a dreamless terror, and joy and sleep slipped away.
I hear now that Voice at midnight calling me from dull and dreamless trance,—crying, “The Shadow of Death!
The Shadow of Death!” Out into the starlight I crept, to rouse the gray physician,—the Shadow of Death, the Shadow of Death.
The hours trembled on; the night listened; the ghastly dawn glided like a tired thing across the lamplight.
Then we two alone looked upon the child as he turned toward us with great eyes, and stretched his stringlike hands,—the Shadow of Death!
He died at eventide, when the sun lay like a brooding sorrow above the western hills, veiling its face; when the winds spoke not, and the trees, the great green trees he loved, stood motionless.
I saw his breath beat quicker and quicker, pause, and then his little soul leapt like a star that travels in the night and left a world of darkness in its train.
Only in the chamber of death writhed the world’s most piteous thing—a childless mother.
I pant for a life full of striving.
Is not this my life hard enough,—is not that dull land that stretches its sneering web about me cold enough,—is not all the world beyond these four little walls pitiless enough, but that thou must needs enter here,—thou, O Death?
About my head the thundering storm beat like a heartless voice, and the crazy forest pulsed with the curses of the weak; but what cared I, within my home beside my wife and baby boy?
Wast thou so jealous of one little coign of happiness that thou must needs enter there,—thou, O Death?
A perfect life was his, all joy and love, with tears to make it brighter,—sweet as a summer’s day beside the Housatonic.
The world loved him; the women kissed his curls, the men looked gravely into his wonderful eyes, and the children hovered and fluttered about him.
I can see him now, changing like the sky from sparkling laughter to darkening frowns, and then to wondering thoughtfulness as he watched the world.
He knew no color-line, poor dear—and the Veil, though it shadowed him, had not yet darkened half his sun.
He loved the white matron, he loved his black nurse; and in his little world walked souls alone, uncolored and unclothed.
I—yea, all men—are larger and purer by the infinite breadth of that one little life.
The trees whispered to the grass, but the children sat with hushed faces.
The busy city dinned about us; they did not say much, those pale-faced hurrying men and women; they did not say much,—they only glanced and said, “Niggers!” We could not lay him in the ground there in Georgia, for the earth there is strangely red; so we bore him away to the northward, with his flowers and his little folded hands.
In vain, in vain!—for where, O God! beneath thy broad blue sky shall my dark baby rest in peace,—where Reverence dwells, and Goodness, and a Freedom that is free?
All that day and all that night there sat an awful gladness in my heart,—nay, blame me not if I see the world thus darkly through the Veil,—and my soul whispers ever to me saying, “Not dead, not dead, but escaped; not bond, but free.” No bitter meanness now shall sicken his baby heart till it die a living death, no taunt shall madden his happy boyhood.
Fool that I was to think or wish that this little soul should grow choked and deformed within the Veil!
I might have known that yonder deep unworldly look that ever and anon floated past his eyes was peering far beyond this narrow Now.
For what, forsooth, shall a Negro want with pride amid the studied humiliations of fifty million fellows?
Well sped, my boy, before the world had dubbed your ambition insolence, had held your ideals unattainable, and taught you to cringe and bow.
Better far this nameless void that stops my life than a sea of sorrow for you.
Surely there shall yet dawn some mighty morning to lift the Veil and set the prisoned free.
But now there wails, on that dark shore within the Veil, the same deep voice, _Thou shalt forego!_ And all have I foregone at that command, and with small complaint,—all save that fair young form that lies so coldly wed with death in the nest I had builded.
Why may I not rest me from this restlessness and sleep from this wide waking?
Are there so many workers in the vineyard that the fair promise of this little body could lightly be tossed away?
The wretched of my race that line the alleys of the nation sit fatherless and unmothered; but Love sat beside his cradle, and in his ear Wisdom waited to speak.
Sleep, then, child,—sleep till I sleep and waken to a baby voice and the ceaseless patter of little feet—above the Veil.
Of Alexander Crummell Then from the Dawn it seemed there came, but faint As from beyond the limit of the world, Like the last echo born of a great cry, Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice Around a king returning from his wars.
Three temptations he met on those dark dunes that lay gray and dismal before the wonder-eyes of the child: the temptation of Hate, that stood out against the red dawn; the temptation of Despair, that darkened noonday; and the temptation of Doubt, that ever steals along with twilight.
Above all, you must hear of the vales he crossed,—the Valley of Humiliation and the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
I saw Alexander Crummell first at a Wilberforce commencement season, amid its bustle and crush.
Tall, frail, and black he stood, with simple dignity and an unmistakable air of good breeding.
I talked with him apart, where the storming of the lusty young orators could not harm us.
I spoke to him politely, then curiously, then eagerly, as I began to feel the fineness of his character,—his calm courtesy, the sweetness of his strength, and his fair blending of the hope and truth of life.
Instinctively I bowed before this man, as one bows before the prophets of the world.
Some seer he seemed, that came not from the crimson Past or the gray To-come, but from the pulsing Now,—that mocking world which seemed to me at once so light and dark, so splendid and sordid.
Fourscore years had he wandered in this same world of mine, within the Veil.
He was born with the Missouri Compromise and lay a-dying amid the echoes of Manila and El Caney: stirring times for living, times dark to look back upon, darker to look forward to.
The black-faced lad that paused over his mud and marbles seventy years ago saw puzzling vistas as he looked down the world.
The slave-ship still groaned across the Atlantic, faint cries burdened the Southern breeze, and the great black father whispered mad tales of cruelty into those young ears.
From the low doorway the mother silently watched her boy at play, and at nightfall sought him eagerly lest the shadows bear him away to the land of slaves.
So his young mind worked and winced and shaped curiously a vision of Life; and in the midst of that vision ever stood one dark figure alone,—ever with the hard, thick countenance of that bitter father, and a form that fell in vast and shapeless folds.
Thus the temptation of Hate grew and shadowed the growing child,—gliding stealthily into his laughter, fading into his play, and seizing his dreams by day and night with rough, rude turbulence.
So the black boy asked of sky and sun and flower the never-answered Why? and loved, as he grew, neither the world nor the world’s rough ways.
Strange temptation for a child, you may think; and yet in this wide land to-day a thousand thousand dark children brood before this same temptation, and feel its cold and shuddering arms.
For them, perhaps, some one will some day lift the Veil,—will come tenderly and cheerily into those sad little lives and brush the brooding hate away, just as Beriah Green strode in upon the life of Alexander Crummell.
Beriah Green had a school in Oneida County, New York, with a score of mischievous boys.
“I’m going to bring a black boy here to educate,” said Beriah Green, as only a crank and an abolitionist would have dared to say.
“Ye-es,” said his wife; and Alexander came.
Once before, the black boy had sought a school, had travelled, cold and hungry, four hundred miles up into free New Hampshire, to Canaan.
But the godly farmers hitched ninety yoke of oxen to the abolition schoolhouse and dragged it into the middle of the swamp.
The nineteenth was the first century of human sympathy,—the age when half wonderingly we began to descry in others that transfigured spark of divinity which we call Myself; when clodhoppers and peasants, and tramps and thieves, and millionaires and—sometimes—Negroes, became throbbing souls whose warm pulsing life touched us so nearly that we half gasped with surprise, crying, “Thou too!
Hast Thou seen Sorrow and the dull waters of Hopelessness?
Hast Thou known Life?” And then all helplessly we peered into those Other-worlds, and wailed, “O World of Worlds, how shall man make you one?” So in that little Oneida school there came to those schoolboys a revelation of thought and longing beneath one black skin, of which they had not dreamed before.
And to the lonely boy came a new dawn of sympathy and inspiration.
The shadowy, formless thing—the temptation of Hate, that hovered between him and the world—grew fainter and less sinister.
It did not wholly fade away, but diffused itself and lingered thick at the edges.
Through it the child now first saw the blue and gold of life,—the sun-swept road that ran ’twixt heaven and earth until in one far-off wan wavering line they met and kissed.
A vision of life came to the growing boy,—mystic, wonderful.
He raised his head, stretched himself, breathed deep of the fresh new air.
Yonder, behind the forests, he heard strange sounds; then glinting through the trees he saw, far, far away, the bronzed hosts of a nation calling,—calling faintly, calling loudly.
He heard the hateful clank of their chains; he felt them cringe and grovel, and there rose within him a protest and a prophecy.
A voice and vision called him to be a priest,—a seer to lead the uncalled out of the house of bondage.
He saw the headless host turn toward him like the whirling of mad waters,—he stretched forth his hands eagerly, and then, even as he stretched them, suddenly there swept across the vision the temptation of Despair.
They were not wicked men,—the problem of life is not the problem of the wicked,—they were calm, good men, Bishops of the Apostolic Church of God, and strove toward righteousness.
Sometime, we trust—sincerely trust—all such distinctions will fade away; but now the world is as it is.” This was the temptation of Despair; and the young man fought it doggedly.
Like some grave shadow he flitted by those halls, pleading, arguing, half angrily demanding admittance, until there came the final _No;_ until men hustled the disturber away, marked him as foolish, unreasonable, and injudicious, a vain rebel against God’s law.
And then from that Vision Splendid all the glory faded slowly away, and left an earth gray and stern rolling on beneath a dark despair.
Even the kind hands that stretched themselves toward him from out the depths of that dull morning seemed but parts of the purple shadows.
And yet, with a way to the priesthood of the Church open at last before him, the cloud lingered there; and even when in old St.
Paul’s the venerable Bishop raised his white arms above the Negro deacon—even then the burden had not lifted from that heart, for there had passed a glory from the earth.
And yet the fire through which Alexander Crummell went did not burn in vain.
More critically he studied the situation.
Deep down below the slavery and servitude of the Negro people he saw their fatal weaknesses, which long years of mistreatment had emphasized.
The dearth of strong moral character, of unbending righteousness, he felt, was their great shortcoming, and here he would begin.
He would gather the best of his people into some little Episcopal chapel and there lead, teach, and inspire them, till the leaven spread, till the children grew, till the world hearkened, till—till—and then across his dream gleamed some faint after-glow of that first fair vision of youth—only an after-glow, for there had passed a glory from the earth.
One day—it was in 1842, and the springtide was struggling merrily with the May winds of New England—he stood at last in his own chapel in Providence, a priest of the Church.
The days sped by, and the dark young clergyman labored; he wrote his sermons carefully; he intoned his prayers with a soft, earnest voice; he haunted the streets and accosted the wayfarers; he visited the sick, and knelt beside the dying.
And yet month by month the congregation dwindled, week by week the hollow walls echoed more sharply, day by day the calls came fewer and fewer, and day by day the third temptation sat clearer and still more clearly within the Veil; a temptation, as it were, bland and smiling, with just a shade of mockery in its smooth tones.
First it came casually, in the cadence of a voice: “Oh, colored folks?
Yes.” Or perhaps more definitely: “What do you _expect?_” In voice and gesture lay the doubt—the temptation of Doubt.
How he hated it, and stormed at it furiously!
“Of course they are capable,” he cried; “of course they can learn and strive and achieve—” and “Of course,” added the temptation softly, “they do nothing of the sort.” Of all the three temptations, this one struck the deepest.
He had outgrown so childish a thing.
He had steeled his right arm against it, and fought it with the vigor of determination.
The evening sunbeams had set the dust to dancing in the gloomy chapel when he arose.
He folded his vestments, put away the hymn-books, and closed the great Bible.
He stepped out into the twilight, looked back upon the narrow little pulpit with a weary smile, and locked the door.
And gaining courage by the confession, he added: “What I need is a larger constituency.
There are comparatively few Negroes here, and perhaps they are not of the best.
I must go where the field is wider, and try again.” So the Bishop sent him to Philadelphia, with a letter to Bishop Onderdonk.
Bishop Onderdonk lived at the head of six white steps,—corpulent, red-faced, and the author of several thrilling tracts on Apostolic Succession.
It was after dinner, and the Bishop had settled himself for a pleasant season of contemplation, when the bell must needs ring, and there must burst in upon the Bishop a letter and a thin, ungainly Negro.
Bishop Onderdonk read the letter hastily and frowned.
Fortunately, his mind was already clear on this point; and he cleared his brow and looked at Crummell.
He marches briskly up to it, peers into the chasm in a surprised sort of way, and rubs his feelers reflectively; then he essays its depths, and, finding it bottomless, draws back again.
The dark-faced priest finds himself wondering if the fly too has faced its Valley of Humiliation, and if it will plunge into it,—when lo! it spreads its tiny wings and buzzes merrily across, leaving the watcher wingless and alone.
The rich walls wheeled away, and before him lay the cold rough moor winding on through life, cut in twain by one thick granite ridge,—here, the Valley of Humiliation; yonder, the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
The Bishop cleared his throat suggestively; then, recollecting that there was really nothing to say, considerately said nothing, only sat tapping his foot impatiently.
But Alexander Crummell said, slowly and heavily: “I will never enter your diocese on such terms.” And saying this, he turned and passed into the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
You might have noted only the physical dying, the shattered frame and hacking cough; but in that soul lay deeper death than that.
He found a chapel in New York,—the church of his father; he labored for it in poverty and starvation, scorned by his fellow priests.
Half in despair, he wandered across the sea, a beggar with outstretched hands.
Englishmen clasped them,—Wilberforce and Stanley, Thirwell and Ingles, and even Froude and Macaulay; Sir Benjamin Brodie bade him rest awhile at Queen’s College in Cambridge, and there he lingered, struggling for health of body and mind, until he took his degree in ’53.
Restless still, and unsatisfied, he turned toward Africa, and for long years, amid the spawn of the slave-smugglers, sought a new heaven and a new earth.
So the man groped for light; all this was not Life,—it was the world-wandering of a soul in search of itself, the striving of one who vainly sought his place in the world, ever haunted by the shadow of a death that is more than death,—the passing of a soul that has missed its duty.
Twenty years he wandered,—twenty years and more; and yet the hard rasping question kept gnawing within him, “What, in God’s name, am I on earth for?” In the narrow New York parish his soul seemed cramped and smothered.
In the fine old air of the English University he heard the millions wailing over the sea.
In the wild fever-cursed swamps of West Africa he stood helpless and alone.
You will not wonder at his weird pilgrimage,—you who in the swift whirl of living, amid its cold paradox and marvellous vision, have fronted life and asked its riddle face to face.
And if you find that riddle hard to read, remember that yonder black boy finds it just a little harder; if it is difficult for you to find and face your duty, it is a shade more difficult for him; if your heart sickens in the blood and dust of battle, remember that to him the dust is thicker and the battle fiercer.
No wonder the wanderers fall!
No wonder we point to thief and murderer, and haunting prostitute, and the never-ending throng of unhearsed dead!
The Valley of the Shadow of Death gives few of its pilgrims back to the world.
But Alexander Crummell it gave back.
Out of the temptation of Hate, and burned by the fire of Despair, triumphant over Doubt, and steeled by Sacrifice against Humiliation, he turned at last home across the waters, humble and strong, gentle and determined.
He bent to all the gibes and prejudices, to all hatred and discrimination, with that rare courtesy which is the armor of pure souls.
He fought among his own, the low, the grasping, and the wicked, with that unbending righteousness which is the sword of the just.
He never faltered, he seldom complained; he simply worked, inspiring the young, rebuking the old, helping the weak, guiding the strong.
So he grew, and brought within his wide influence all that was best of those who walk within the Veil.
They who live without knew not nor dreamed of that full power within, that mighty inspiration which the dull gauze of caste decreed that most men should not know.
I can see his face still, dark and heavy-lined beneath his snowy hair; lighting and shading, now with inspiration for the future, now in innocent pain at some human wickedness, now with sorrow at some hard memory from the past.
The more I met Alexander Crummell, the more I felt how much that world was losing which knew so little of him.
In another age he might have sat among the elders of the land in purple-bordered toga; in another country mothers might have sung him to the cradles.
He did his work,—he did it nobly and well; and yet I sorrow that here he worked alone, with so little human sympathy.
His name to-day, in this broad land, means little, and comes to fifty million ears laden with no incense of memory or emulation.
And herein lies the tragedy of the age: not that men are poor,—all men know something of poverty; not that men are wicked,—who is good? not that men are ignorant,—what is Truth?
I wonder if in that dim world beyond, as he came gliding in, there rose on some wan throne a King,—a dark and pierced Jew, who knows the writhings of the earthly damned, saying, as he laid those heart-wrung talents down, “Well done!” while round about the morning stars sat singing.
Of the Coming of John What bring they ’neath the midnight, Beside the River-sea?
They bring the human heart wherein No nightly calm can be; That droppeth never with the wind, Nor drieth with the dew; O calm it, God; thy calm is broad To cover spirits too.
It is a broad, restful place, with two large buildings outlined against the west.
When at evening the winds come swelling from the east, and the great pall of the city’s smoke hangs wearily above the valley, then the red west glows like a dreamland down Carlisle Street, and, at the tolling of the supper-bell, throws the passing forms of students in dark silhouette against the sky.
Tall and black, they move slowly by, and seem in the sinister light to flit before the city like dim warning ghosts.
Perhaps they are; for this is Wells Institute, and these black students have few dealings with the white city below.
And if you will notice, night after night, there is one dark form that ever hurries last and late toward the twinkling lights of Swain Hall,—for Jones is never on time.
A long, straggling fellow he is, brown and hard-haired, who seems to be growing straight out of his clothes, and walks with a half-apologetic roll.
He used perpetually to set the quiet dining-room into waves of merriment, as he stole to his place after the bell had tapped for prayers; he seemed so perfectly awkward.
And yet one glance at his face made one forgive him much,—that broad, good-natured smile in which lay no bit of art or artifice, but seemed just bubbling good-nature and genuine satisfaction with the world.
He came to us from Altamaha, away down there beneath the gnarled oaks of Southeastern Georgia, where the sea croons to the sands and the sands listen till they sink half drowned beneath the waters, rising only here and there in long, low islands.
The white folk of Altamaha voted John a good boy,—fine plough-hand, good in the rice-fields, handy everywhere, and always good-natured and respectful.
But full half the black folk followed him proudly to the station, and carried his queer little trunk and many bundles.
So the train came, and he pinched his little sister lovingly, and put his great arms about his mother’s neck, and then was away with a puff and a roar into the great yellow world that flamed and flared about the doubtful pilgrim.
Up the coast they hurried, past the squares and palmettos of Savannah, through the cotton-fields and through the weary night, to Millville, and came with the morning to the noise and bustle of Johnstown.
At first he was coming at Christmas-time,—but the vacation proved too short; and then, the next summer,—but times were hard and schooling costly, and so, instead, he worked in Johnstown.
And so it drifted to the next summer, and the next,—till playmates scattered, and mother grew gray, and sister went up to the Judge’s kitchen to work.
And still the legend lingered,—“When John comes.” Up at the Judge’s they rather liked this refrain; for they too had a John—a fair-haired, smooth-faced boy, who had played many a long summer’s day to its close with his darker namesake.
John is at Princeton, sir,” said the broad-shouldered gray-haired Judge every morning as he marched down to the post-office.
“Showing the Yankees what a Southern gentleman can do,” he added; and strode home again with his letters and papers.
Up at the great pillared house they lingered long over the Princeton letter,—the Judge and his frail wife, his sister and growing daughters.
“It’ll make a man of him,” said the Judge, “college is the place.” And then he asked the shy little waitress, “Well, Jennie, how’s your John?” and added reflectively, “Too bad, too bad your mother sent him off—it will spoil him.” And the waitress wondered.
Thus in the far-away Southern village the world lay waiting, half consciously, the coming of two young men, and dreamed in an inarticulate way of new things that would be done and new thoughts that all would think.
And yet it was singular that few thought of two Johns,—for the black folk thought of one John, and he was black; and the white folk thought of another John, and he was white.
Up in Johnstown, at the Institute, we were long puzzled at the case of John Jones.
For a long time the clay seemed unfit for any sort of moulding.
He was loud and boisterous, always laughing and singing, and never able to work consecutively at anything.
He did not know how to study; he had no idea of thoroughness; and with his tardiness, carelessness, and appalling good-humor, we were sore perplexed.
This last escapade was too much, and so we solemnly voted “that Jones, on account of repeated disorder and inattention to work, be suspended for the rest of the term.” It seemed to us that the first time life ever struck Jones as a really serious thing was when the Dean told him he must leave school.
“Why,—why,” he faltered, “but—I haven’t graduated!” Then the Dean slowly and clearly explained, reminding him of the tardiness and the carelessness, of the poor lessons and neglected work, of the noise and disorder, until the fellow hung his head in confusion.
For if you won’t I’ll go out into the city and work, and come back next term and show you something.” So the Dean promised faithfully, and John shouldered his little trunk, giving neither word nor look to the giggling boys, and walked down Carlisle Street to the great city, with sober eyes and a set and serious face.
Perhaps we imagined it, but someway it seemed to us that the serious look that crept over his boyish face that afternoon never left it again.
When he came back to us he went to work with all his rugged strength.
It was a hard struggle, for things did not come easily to him,—few crowding memories of early life and teaching came to help him on his new way; but all the world toward which he strove was of his own building, and he builded slow and hard.
As the light dawned lingeringly on his new creations, he sat rapt and silent before the vision, or wandered alone over the green campus peering through and beyond the world of men into a world of thought.
And the thoughts at times puzzled him sorely; he could not see just why the circle was not square, and carried it out fifty-six decimal places one midnight,—would have gone further, indeed, had not the matron rapped for lights out.
So he thought and puzzled along for himself,—pausing perplexed where others skipped merrily, and walking steadily through the difficulties where the rest stopped and surrendered.
Thus he grew in body and soul, and with him his clothes seemed to grow and arrange themselves; coat sleeves got longer, cuffs appeared, and collars got less soiled.
And we who saw daily a new thoughtfulness growing in his eyes began to expect something of this plodding boy.
Thus he passed out of the preparatory school into college, and we who watched him felt four more years of change, which almost transformed the tall, grave man who bowed to us commencement morning.
He looked now for the first time sharply about him, and wondered he had seen so little before.
He grew slowly to feel almost for the first time the Veil that lay between him and the white world; he first noticed now the oppression that had not seemed oppression before, differences that erstwhile seemed natural, restraints and slights that in his boyhood days had gone unnoticed or been greeted with a laugh.
He felt angry now when men did not call him “Mister,” he clenched his hands at the “Jim Crow” cars, and chafed at the color-line that hemmed in him and his.
A tinge of sarcasm crept into his speech, and a vague bitterness into his life; and he sat long hours wondering and planning a way around these crooked things.
Daily he found himself shrinking from the choked and narrow life of his native town.
And yet he always planned to go back to Altamaha,—always planned to work there.
Still, more and more as the day approached he hesitated with a nameless dread; and even the day after graduation he seized with eagerness the offer of the Dean to send him North with the quartette during the summer vacation, to sing for the Institute.
It was a bright September afternoon, and the streets of New York were brilliant with moving men.
They reminded John of the sea, as he sat in the square and watched them, so changelessly changing, so bright and dark, so grave and gay.
He scanned their rich and faultless clothes, the way they carried their hands, the shape of their hats; he peered into the hurrying carriages.
Then, leaning back with a sigh, he said, “This is the World.” The notion suddenly seized him to see where the world was going; since many of the richer and brighter seemed hurrying all one way.
So when a tall, light-haired young man and a little talkative lady came by, he rose half hesitatingly and followed them.
Up the street they went, past stores and gay shops, across a broad square, until with a hundred others they entered the high portal of a great building.
There seemed really no time for hesitation, so he drew it bravely out, passed it to the busy clerk, and received simply a ticket but no change.
When at last he realized that he had paid five dollars to enter he knew not what, he stood stockstill amazed.
“Be careful,” said a low voice behind him; “you must not lynch the colored gentleman simply because he’s in your way,” and a girl looked up roguishly into the eyes of her fair-haired escort.
A shade of annoyance passed over the escort’s face.
“You _will_ not understand us at the South,” he said half impatiently, as if continuing an argument.
“With all your professions, one never sees in the North so cordial and intimate relations between white and black as are everyday occurrences with us.
Why, I remember my closest playfellow in boyhood was a little Negro named after me, and surely no two,—_well_!” The man stopped short and flushed to the roots of his hair, for there directly beside his reserved orchestra chairs sat the Negro he had stumbled over in the hallway.
He hesitated and grew pale with anger, called the usher and gave him his card, with a few peremptory words, and slowly sat down.
The infinite beauty of the wail lingered and swept through every muscle of his frame, and put it all a-tune.
He closed his eyes and grasped the elbows of the chair, touching unwittingly the lady’s arm.
A deep longing swelled in all his heart to rise with that clear music out of the dirt and dust of that low life that held him prisoned and befouled.
Then the movement changed, and fuller, mightier harmony swelled away.
He looked thoughtfully across the hall, and wondered why the beautiful gray-haired woman looked so listless, and what the little man could be whispering about.
He would not like to be listless and idle, he thought, for he felt with the music the movement of power within him.
If he but had some master-work, some life-service, hard,—aye, bitter hard, but without the cringing and sickening servility, without the cruel hurt that hardened his heart and soul.
And his heart sank below the waters, even as the sea-sand sinks by the shores of Altamaha, only to be lifted aloft again with that last ethereal wail of the swan that quivered and faded away into the sky.
It left John sitting so silent and rapt that he did not for some time notice the usher tapping him lightly on the shoulder and saying politely, “Will you step this way, please, sir?” A little surprised, he arose quickly at the last tap, and, turning to leave his seat, looked full into the face of the fair-haired young man.
For the first time the young man recognized his dark boyhood playmate, and John knew that it was the Judge’s son.
The White John started, lifted his hand, and then froze into his chair; the black John smiled lightly, then grimly, and followed the usher down the aisle.
Then he seized a scrap of paper and wrote: “Dear Mother and Sister—I am coming—John.” “Perhaps,” said John, as he settled himself on the train, “perhaps I am to blame myself in struggling against my manifest destiny simply because it looks hard and unpleasant.
Here is my duty to Altamaha plain before me; perhaps they’ll let me help settle the Negro problems there,—perhaps they won’t.
‘I will go in to the King, which is not according to the law; and if I perish, I perish.’” And then he mused and dreamed, and planned a life-work; and the train flew south.
Down in Altamaha, after seven long years, all the world knew John was coming.
The homes were scrubbed and scoured,—above all, one; the gardens and yards had an unwonted trimness, and Jennie bought a new gingham.
With some finesse and negotiation, all the dark Methodists and Presbyterians were induced to join in a monster welcome at the Baptist Church; and as the day drew near, warm discussions arose on every corner as to the exact extent and nature of John’s accomplishments.
It was noontide on a gray and cloudy day when he came.
The black town flocked to the depot, with a little of the white at the edges,—a happy throng, with “Good-mawnings” and “Howdys” and laughing and joking and jostling.
Mother sat yonder in the window watching; but sister Jennie stood on the platform, nervously fingering her dress, tall and lithe, with soft brown skin and loving eyes peering from out a tangled wilderness of hair.
John rose gloomily as the train stopped, for he was thinking of the “Jim Crow” car; he stepped to the platform, and paused: a little dingy station, a black crowd gaudy and dirty, a half-mile of dilapidated shanties along a straggling ditch of mud.
An overwhelming sense of the sordidness and narrowness of it all seized him; he looked in vain for his mother, kissed coldly the tall, strange girl who called him brother, spoke a short, dry word here and there; then, lingering neither for handshaking nor gossip, started silently up the street, raising his hat merely to the last eager old aunty, to her open-mouthed astonishment.
The people were distinctly bewildered.
“’Peared kind o’ down in the mouf,” said the Methodist preacher thoughtfully.
“Seemed monstus stuck up,” complained a Baptist sister.
But the white postmaster from the edge of the crowd expressed the opinion of his folks plainly.
“That damn Nigger,” said he, as he shouldered the mail and arranged his tobacco, “has gone North and got plum full o’ fool notions; but they won’t work in Altamaha.” And the crowd melted away.
Rain spoiled the barbecue, and thunder turned the milk in the ice-cream.
When the speaking came at night, the house was crowded to overflowing.
The people moved uneasily in their seats as John rose to reply.
He spoke slowly and methodically.
The age, he said, demanded new ideas; we were far different from those men of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,—with broader ideas of human brotherhood and destiny.
Then he spoke of the rise of charity and popular education, and particularly of the spread of wealth and work.
The question was, then, he added reflectively, looking at the low discolored ceiling, what part the Negroes of this land would take in the striving of the new century.
He sketched in vague outline the new Industrial School that might rise among these pines, he spoke in detail of the charitable and philanthropic work that might be organized, of money that might be saved for banks and business.
Finally he urged unity, and deprecated especially religious and denominational bickering.
“To-day,” he said, with a smile, “the world cares little whether a man be Baptist or Methodist, or indeed a churchman at all, so long as he is good and true.
What difference does it make whether a man be baptized in river or washbowl, or not at all?
Let’s leave all that littleness, and look higher.” Then, thinking of nothing else, he slowly sat down.
Little had they understood of what he said, for he spoke an unknown tongue, save the last word about baptism; that they knew, and they sat very still while the clock ticked.
Then at last a low suppressed snarl came from the Amen corner, and an old bent man arose, walked over the seats, and climbed straight up into the pulpit.
He was wrinkled and black, with scant gray and tufted hair; his voice and hands shook as with palsy; but on his face lay the intense rapt look of the religious fanatic.
He seized the Bible with his rough, huge hands; twice he raised it inarticulate, and then fairly burst into words, with rude and awful eloquence.
He quivered, swayed, and bent; then rose aloft in perfect majesty, till the people moaned and wept, wailed and shouted, and a wild shrieking arose from the corners where all the pent-up feeling of the hour gathered itself and rushed into the air.
John never knew clearly what the old man said; he only felt himself held up to scorn and scathing denunciation for trampling on the true Religion, and he realized with amazement that all unknowingly he had put rough, rude hands on something this little world held sacred.
He arose silently, and passed out into the night.
Down toward the sea he went, in the fitful starlight, half conscious of the girl who followed timidly after him.
When at last he stood upon the bluff, he turned to his little sister and looked upon her sorrowfully, remembering with sudden pain how little thought he had given her.
He put his arm about her and let her passion of tears spend itself on his shoulder.
Long they stood together, peering over the gray unresting water.
“And, John, are you glad you studied?” “Yes,” came the answer, slowly but positively.
She watched the flickering lights upon the sea, and said thoughtfully, “I wish I was unhappy,—and—and,” putting both arms about his neck, “I think I am, a little, John.” It was several days later that John walked up to the Judge’s house to ask for the privilege of teaching the Negro school.
The Judge himself met him at the front door, stared a little hard at him, and said brusquely, “Go ’round to the kitchen door, John, and wait.” Sitting on the kitchen steps, John stared at the corn, thoroughly perplexed.
Every step he made offended some one.
He sought to teach them at the church, and had outraged their deepest feelings.
He had schooled himself to be respectful to the Judge, and then blundered into his front door.
And all the time he had meant right,—and yet, and yet, somehow he found it so hard and strange to fit his old surroundings again, to find his place in the world about him.
He could not remember that he used to have any difficulty in the past, when life was glad and gay.
He plunged squarely into the business.
Now I like the colored people, and sympathize with all their reasonable aspirations; but you and I both know, John, that in this country the Negro must remain subordinate, and can never expect to be the equal of white men.
In their place, your people can be honest and respectful; and God knows, I’ll do what I can to help them.
Now, John, the question is, are you, with your education and Northern notions, going to accept the situation and teach the darkies to be faithful servants and laborers as your fathers were,—I knew your father, John, he belonged to my brother, and he was a good Nigger.
Well—well, are you going to be like him, or are you going to try to put fool ideas of rising and equality into these folks’ heads, and make them discontented and unhappy?” “I am going to accept the situation, Judge Henderson,” answered John, with a brevity that did not escape the keen old man.
He hesitated a moment, and then said shortly, “Very well,—we’ll try you awhile.
Good-morning.” It was a full month after the opening of the Negro school that the other John came home, tall, gay, and headstrong.
A proud man was the Judge, and it was a goodly sight to see the two swinging down Main Street together.
And yet all did not go smoothly between them, for the younger man could not and did not veil his contempt for the little town, and plainly had his heart set on New York.
Now the one cherished ambition of the Judge was to see his son mayor of Altamaha, representative to the legislature, and—who could say?—governor of Georgia.
So the argument often waxed hot between them.
“Heah that John is livenin’ things up at the darky school,” volunteered the postmaster, after a pause.
“Oh, nothin’ in particulah,—just his almighty air and uppish ways.
B’lieve I did heah somethin’ about his givin’ talks on the French Revolution, equality, and such like.
He’s what I call a dangerous Nigger.” “Have you heard him say anything out of the way?” “Why, no,—but Sally, our girl, told my wife a lot of rot.
Then, too, I don’t need to heah: a Nigger what won’t say ‘sir’ to a white man, or—” “Who is this John?” interrupted the son.
“Why, it’s little black John, Peggy’s son,—your old playfellow.” The young man’s face flushed angrily, and then he laughed.
“Oh,” said he, “it’s the darky that tried to force himself into a seat beside the lady I was escorting—” But Judge Henderson waited to hear no more.
He had been nettled all day, and now at this he rose with a half-smothered oath, took his hat and cane, and walked straight to the schoolhouse.
For John, it had been a long, hard pull to get things started in the rickety old shanty that sheltered his school.
The Negroes were rent into factions for and against him, the parents were careless, the children irregular and dirty, and books, pencils, and slates largely missing.
Nevertheless, he struggled hopefully on, and seemed to see at last some glimmering of dawn.
The attendance was larger and the children were a shade cleaner this week.
Even the booby class in reading showed a little comforting progress.
So John settled himself with renewed patience this afternoon.
“Now, Mandy,” he said cheerfully, “that’s better; but you mustn’t chop your words up so: ‘If—the-man—goes.’ Why, your little brother even wouldn’t tell a story that way, now would he?” “Naw, suh, he cain’t talk.” “All right; now let’s try again: ‘If the man—’ “John!” The whole school started in surprise, and the teacher half arose, as the red, angry face of the Judge appeared in the open doorway.
You children can go home and get to work.
The white people of Altamaha are not spending their money on black folks to have their heads crammed with impudence and lies.
I’ll lock the door myself.” Up at the great pillared house the tall young son wandered aimlessly about after his father’s abrupt departure.
In the house there was little to interest him; the books were old and stale, the local newspaper flat, and the women had retired with headaches and sewing.
So he sauntered out into the fields, complaining disconsolately, “Good Lord! how long will this imprisonment last!” He was not a bad fellow,—just a little spoiled and self-indulgent, and as headstrong as his proud father.
He seemed a young man pleasant to look upon, as he sat on the great black stump at the edge of the pines idly swinging his legs and smoking.
“Why, there isn’t even a girl worth getting up a respectable flirtation with,” he growled.
Just then his eye caught a tall, willowy figure hurrying toward him on the narrow path.
He looked with interest at first, and then burst into a laugh as he said, “Well, I declare, if it isn’t Jennie, the little brown kitchen-maid!
The young girl stared at him in surprise and confusion,—faltered something inarticulate, and attempted to pass.
Frightened, she slipped by; and half mischievously he turned and ran after her through the tall pines.
He had turned wearily homeward from the schoolhouse; then, thinking to shield his mother from the blow, started to meet his sister as she came from work and break the news of his dismissal to her.
The air scarce breathed.
There came from the wind no warning, not a whisper from the cloudless sky.
There was only a black man hurrying on with an ache in his heart, seeing neither sun nor sea, but starting as from a dream at the frightened cry that woke the pines, to see his dark sister struggling in the arms of a tall and fair-haired man.
He said not a word, but, seizing a fallen limb, struck him with all the pent-up hatred of his great black arm, and the body lay white and still beneath the pines, all bathed in sunshine and in blood.
Yonder in the gray past he had played with that dead boy, romping together under the solemn trees.
The night deepened; he thought of the boys at Johnstown.
He wondered how Brown had turned out, and Carey?
Why, he was Jones, and he wondered what they would all say when they knew, when they knew, in that great long dining-room with its hundreds of merry eyes.
Then as the sheen of the starlight stole over him, he thought of the gilded ceiling of that vast concert hall, heard stealing toward him the faint sweet music of the swan.
Hark! was it music, or the hurry and shouting of men?
Clear and high the faint sweet melody rose and fluttered like a living thing, so that the very earth trembled as with the tramp of horses and murmur of angry men.
He leaned back and smiled toward the sea, whence rose the strange melody, away from the dark shadows where lay the noise of horses galloping, galloping on.
Oh, how he pitied him,—pitied him,—and wondered if he had the coiling twisted rope.
And the world whistled in his ears.
Of the Sorrow Songs I walk through the churchyard To lay this body down; I know moon-rise, I know star-rise; I walk in the moonlight, I walk in the starlight; I’ll lie in the grave and stretch out my arms, I’ll go to judgment in the evening of the day, And my soul and thy soul shall meet that day, When I lay this body down.
And so before each thought that I have written in this book I have set a phrase, a haunting echo of these weird old songs in which the soul of the black slave spoke to men.
Ever since I was a child these songs have stirred me strangely.
Then in after years when I came to Nashville I saw the great temple builded of these songs towering over the pale city.
To me Jubilee Hall seemed ever made of the songs themselves, and its bricks were red with the blood and dust of toil.
Out of them rose for me morning, noon, and night, bursts of wonderful melody, full of the voices of my brothers and sisters, full of the voices of the past.
Little of beauty has America given the world save the rude grandeur God himself stamped on her bosom; the human spirit in this new world has expressed itself in vigor and ingenuity rather than in beauty.
And so by fateful chance the Negro folk-song—the rhythmic cry of the slave—stands to-day not simply as the sole American music, but as the most beautiful expression of human experience born this side the seas.
It has been neglected, it has been, and is, half despised, and above all it has been persistently mistaken and misunderstood; but notwithstanding, it still remains as the singular spiritual heritage of the nation and the greatest gift of the Negro people.
Away back in the thirties the melody of these slave songs stirred the nation, but the songs were soon half forgotten.
Some, like “Near the lake where drooped the willow,” passed into current airs and their source was forgotten; others were caricatured on the “minstrel” stage and their memory died away.
Then in war-time came the singular Port Royal experiment after the capture of Hilton Head, and perhaps for the first time the North met the Southern slave face to face and heart to heart with no third witness.
The Sea Islands of the Carolinas, where they met, were filled with a black folk of primitive type, touched and moulded less by the world about them than any others outside the Black Belt.
Their appearance was uncouth, their language funny, but their hearts were human and their singing stirred men with a mighty power.
Thomas Wentworth Higginson hastened to tell of these songs, and Miss McKim and others urged upon the world their rare beauty.
But the world listened only half credulously until the Fisk Jubilee Singers sang the slave songs so deeply into the world’s heart that it can never wholly forget them again.
There was once a blacksmith’s son born at Cadiz, New York, who in the changes of time taught school in Ohio and helped defend Cincinnati from Kirby Smith.
Then he fought at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg and finally served in the Freedmen’s Bureau at Nashville.
Here he formed a Sunday-school class of black children in 1866, and sang with them and taught them to sing.
So in 1871 the pilgrimage of the Fisk Jubilee Singers began.
North to Cincinnati they rode,—four half-clothed black boys and five girl-women,—led by a man with a cause and a purpose.
They stopped at Wilberforce, the oldest of Negro schools, where a black bishop blessed them.
Then they went, fighting cold and starvation, shut out of hotels, and cheerfully sneered at, ever northward; and ever the magic of their song kept thrilling hearts, until a burst of applause in the Congregational Council at Oberlin revealed them to the world.
They came to New York and Henry Ward Beecher dared to welcome them, even though the metropolitan dailies sneered at his “Nigger Minstrels.” So their songs conquered till they sang across the land and across the sea, before Queen and Kaiser, in Scotland and Ireland, Holland and Switzerland.
Seven years they sang, and brought back a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to found Fisk University.
Since their day they have been imitated—sometimes well, by the singers of Hampton and Atlanta, sometimes ill, by straggling quartettes.
Caricature has sought again to spoil the quaint beauty of the music, and has filled the air with many debased melodies which vulgar ears scarce know from the real.
I know little of music and can say nothing in technical phrase, but I know something of men, and knowing them, I know that these songs are the articulate message of the slave to the world.
They tell us in these eager days that life was joyous to the black slave, careless and happy.
But not all the past South, though it rose from the dead, can gainsay the heart-touching witness of these songs.
They are the music of an unhappy people, of the children of disappointment; they tell of death and suffering and unvoiced longing toward a truer world, of misty wanderings and hidden ways.
The songs are indeed the siftings of centuries; the music is far more ancient than the words, and in it we can trace here and there signs of development.
This was primitive African music; it may be seen in larger form in the strange chant which heralds “The Coming of John”: “You may bury me in the East, You may bury me in the West, But I’ll hear the trumpet sound in that morning,” —the voice of exile.
Ten master songs, more or less, one may pluck from the forest of melody-songs of undoubted Negro origin and wide popular currency, and songs peculiarly characteristic of the slave.
One of these I have just mentioned.
Another whose strains begin this book is “Nobody knows the trouble I’ve seen.” When, struck with a sudden poverty, the United States refused to fulfill its promises of land to the freedmen, a brigadier-general went down to the Sea Islands to carry the news.
An old woman on the outskirts of the throng began singing this song; all the mass joined with her, swaying.
The third song is the cradle-song of death which all men know,—“Swing low, sweet chariot,”—whose bars begin the life story of “Alexander Crummell.” Then there is the song of many waters, “Roll, Jordan, roll,” a mighty chorus with minor cadences.
The last master song is the song of songs—“Steal away,”—sprung from “The Faith of the Fathers.” There are many others of the Negro folk-songs as striking and characteristic as these, as, for instance, the three strains in the third, eighth, and ninth chapters; and others I am sure could easily make a selection on more scientific principles.
The first is African music, the second Afro-American, while the third is a blending of Negro music with the music heard in the foster land.
The result is still distinctively Negro and the method of blending original, but the elements are both Negro and Caucasian.
Such a message is naturally veiled and half articulate.
Words and music have lost each other and new and cant phrases of a dimly understood theology have displaced the older sentiment.
Once in a while we catch a strange word of an unknown tongue, as the “Mighty Myo,” which figures as a river of death; more often slight words or mere doggerel are joined to music of singular sweetness.
Purely secular songs are few in number, partly because many of them were turned into hymns by a change of words, partly because the frolics were seldom heard by the stranger, and the music less often caught.
Of nearly all the songs, however, the music is distinctly sorrowful.
The ten master songs I have mentioned tell in word and music of trouble and exile, of strife and hiding; they grope toward some unseen power and sigh for rest in the End.
The words that are left to us are not without interest, and, cleared of evident dross, they conceal much of real poetry and meaning beneath conventional theology and unmeaning rhapsody.
Like all primitive folk, the slave stood near to Nature’s heart.
Life was a “rough and rolling sea” like the brown Atlantic of the Sea Islands; the “Wilderness” was the home of God, and the “lonesome valley” led to the way of life.
“Winter’ll soon be over,” was the picture of life and death to a tropical imagination.
The sudden wild thunderstorms of the South awed and impressed the Negroes,—at times the rumbling seemed to them “mournful,” at times imperious: “My Lord calls me, He calls me by the thunder, The trumpet sounds it in my soul.” The monotonous toil and exposure is painted in many words.
Mother and child are sung, but seldom father; fugitive and weary wanderer call for pity and affection, but there is little of wooing and wedding; the rocks and the mountains are well known, but home is unknown.
Strange blending of love and helplessness sings through the refrain: “Yonder’s my ole mudder, Been waggin’ at de hill so long; ’Bout time she cross over, Git home bime-by.” Elsewhere comes the cry of the “motherless” and the “Farewell, farewell, my only child.” Love-songs are scarce and fall into two categories—the frivolous and light, and the sad.
Later days transfigured his fatalism, and amid the dust and dirt the toiler sang: “Dust, dust and ashes, fly over my grave, But the Lord shall bear my spirit home.” The things evidently borrowed from the surrounding world undergo characteristic change when they enter the mouth of the slave.
Especially is this true of Bible phrases.
“Weep, O captive daughter of Zion,” is quaintly turned into “Zion, weep-a-low,” and the wheels of Ezekiel are turned every way in the mystic dreaming of the slave, till he says: “There’s a little wheel a-turnin’ in-a-my heart.” As in olden time, the words of these hymns were improvised by some leading minstrel of the religious band.
The circumstances of the gathering, however, the rhythm of the songs, and the limitations of allowable thought, confined the poetry for the most part to single or double lines, and they seldom were expanded to quatrains or longer tales, although there are some few examples of sustained efforts, chiefly paraphrases of the Bible.
The minor cadences of despair change often to triumph and calm confidence.
Sometimes it is faith in life, sometimes a faith in death, sometimes assurance of boundless justice in some fair world beyond.
But whichever it is, the meaning is always clear: that sometime, somewhere, men will judge men by their souls and not by their skins.
Is such a hope justified?
The silently growing assumption of this age is that the probation of races is past, and that the backward races of to-day are of proven inefficiency and not worth the saving.
Such an assumption is the arrogance of peoples irreverent toward Time and ignorant of the deeds of men.
A thousand years ago such an assumption, easily possible, would have made it difficult for the Teuton to prove his right to life.
Two thousand years ago such dogmatism, readily welcome, would have scouted the idea of blond races ever leading civilization.
So wofully unorganized is sociological knowledge that the meaning of progress, the meaning of “swift” and “slow” in human doing, and the limits of human perfectability, are veiled, unanswered sphinxes on the shores of science.
Why should Æschylus have sung two thousand years before Shakespeare was born?
Why has civilization flourished in Europe, and flickered, flamed, and died in Africa?
So long as the world stands meekly dumb before such questions, shall this nation proclaim its ignorance and unhallowed prejudices by denying freedom of opportunity to those who brought the Sorrow Songs to the Seats of the Mighty?
Before the Pilgrims landed we were here.
Here we have brought our three gifts and mingled them with yours: a gift of story and song—soft, stirring melody in an ill-harmonized and unmelodious land; the gift of sweat and brawn to beat back the wilderness, conquer the soil, and lay the foundations of this vast economic empire two hundred years earlier than your weak hands could have done it; the third, a gift of the Spirit.
Around us the history of the land has centred for thrice a hundred years; out of the nation’s heart we have called all that was best to throttle and subdue all that was worst; fire and blood, prayer and sacrifice, have billowed over this people, and they have found peace only in the altars of the God of Right.
Actively we have woven ourselves with the very warp and woof of this nation,—we fought their battles, shared their sorrow, mingled our blood with theirs, and generation after generation have pleaded with a headstrong, careless people to despise not Justice, Mercy, and Truth, lest the nation be smitten with a curse.
Our song, our toil, our cheer, and warning have been given to this nation in blood-brotherhood.
Is not this work and striving?
If somewhere in this whirl and chaos of things there dwells Eternal Good, pitiful yet masterful, then anon in His good time America shall rend the Veil and the prisoned shall go free.
Free, free as the sunshine trickling down the morning into these high windows of mine, free as yonder fresh young voices welling up to me from the caverns of brick and mortar below—swelling with song, instinct with life, tremulous treble and darkening bass.
The Afterthought Hear my cry, O God the Reader; vouchsafe that this my book fall not still-born into the world wilderness.
Let there spring, Gentle One, from out its leaves vigor of thought and thoughtful deed to reap the harvest wonderful.
Let the ears of a guilty people tingle with truth, and seventy millions sigh for the righteousness which exalteth nations, in this drear day when human brotherhood is mockery and a snare.
Thus in Thy good time may infinite reason turn the tangle straight, and these crooked marks on a fragile leaf be not indeed THE END
Rachel Lynde Is Surprised CHAPTER II Matthew Cuthbert Is Surprised CHAPTER III Marilla Cuthbert Is Surprised CHAPTER IV Morning at Green Gables CHAPTER V Anne’s History CHAPTER VI Marilla Makes Up Her Mind CHAPTER VII Anne Says Her Prayers CHAPTER VIII Anne’s Bringing-up Is Begun CHAPTER IX Mrs.
Rachel Lynde Is Surprised MRS.
Rachel Lynde’s door without due regard for decency and decorum; it probably was conscious that Mrs.
Rachel was sitting at her window, keeping a sharp eye on everything that passed, from brooks and children up, and that if she noticed anything odd or out of place she would never rest until she had ferreted out the whys and wherefores thereof.
There are plenty of people, in Avonlea and out of it, who can attend closely to their neighbors’ business by dint of neglecting their own; but Mrs.
Rachel Lynde was one of those capable creatures who can manage their own concerns and those of other folks into the bargain.
She was a notable housewife; her work was always done and well done; she “ran” the Sewing Circle, helped run the Sunday-school, and was the strongest prop of the Church Aid Society and Foreign Missions Auxiliary.
Rachel found abundant time to sit for hours at her kitchen window, knitting “cotton warp” quilts--she had knitted sixteen of them, as Avonlea housekeepers were wont to tell in awed voices--and keeping a sharp eye on the main road that crossed the hollow and wound up the steep red hill beyond.
Since Avonlea occupied a little triangular peninsula jutting out into the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, with water on two sides of it, anybody who went out of it or into it had to pass over that hill road and so run the unseen gauntlet of Mrs.
She was sitting there one afternoon in early June.
Thomas Lynde--a meek little man whom Avonlea people called “Rachel Lynde’s husband”--was sowing his late turnip seed on the hill field beyond the barn; and Matthew Cuthbert ought to have been sowing his on the big red brook field away over by Green Gables.
Rachel knew that he ought because she had heard him tell Peter Morrison the evening before in William J.
Blair’s store over at Carmody that he meant to sow his turnip seed the next afternoon.
Peter had asked him, of course, for Matthew Cuthbert had never been known to volunteer information about anything in his whole life.
And yet here was Matthew Cuthbert, at half-past three on the afternoon of a busy day, placidly driving over the hollow and up the hill; moreover, he wore a white collar and his best suit of clothes, which was plain proof that he was going out of Avonlea; and he had the buggy and the sorrel mare, which betokened that he was going a considerable distance.
Now, where was Matthew Cuthbert going and why was he going there?
Rachel, deftly putting this and that together, might have given a pretty good guess as to both questions.
But Matthew so rarely went from home that it must be something pressing and unusual which was taking him; he was the shyest man alive and hated to have to go among strangers or to any place where he might have to talk.
Matthew, dressed up with a white collar and driving in a buggy, was something that didn’t happen often.
Rachel, ponder as she might, could make nothing of it and her afternoon’s enjoyment was spoiled.
“I’ll just step over to Green Gables after tea and find out from Marilla where he’s gone and why,” the worthy woman finally concluded.
“He doesn’t generally go to town this time of year and he _never_ visits; if he’d run out of turnip seed he wouldn’t dress up and take the buggy to go for more; he wasn’t driving fast enough to be going for a doctor.
Yet something must have happened since last night to start him off.
I’m clean puzzled, that’s what, and I won’t know a minute’s peace of mind or conscience until I know what has taken Matthew Cuthbert out of Avonlea today.” Accordingly after tea Mrs.
Rachel set out; she had not far to go; the big, rambling, orchard-embowered house where the Cuthberts lived was a scant quarter of a mile up the road from Lynde’s Hollow.
Matthew Cuthbert’s father, as shy and silent as his son after him, had got as far away as he possibly could from his fellow men without actually retreating into the woods when he founded his homestead.
Green Gables was built at the furthest edge of his cleared land and there it was to this day, barely visible from the main road along which all the other Avonlea houses were so sociably situated.
“It’s just _staying_, that’s what,” she said as she stepped along the deep-rutted, grassy lane bordered with wild rose bushes.
“It’s no wonder Matthew and Marilla are both a little odd, living away back here by themselves.
To be sure, they seem contented enough; but then, I suppose, they’re used to it.
A body can get used to anything, even to being hanged, as the Irishman said.” With this Mrs.
Rachel stepped out of the lane into the backyard of Green Gables.
Very green and neat and precise was that yard, set about on one side with great patriarchal willows and on the other with prim Lombardies.
Privately she was of the opinion that Marilla Cuthbert swept that yard over as often as she swept her house.
One could have eaten a meal off the ground without overbrimming the proverbial peck of dirt.
The kitchen at Green Gables was a cheerful apartment--or would have been cheerful if it had not been so painfully clean as to give it something of the appearance of an unused parlor.
Its windows looked east and west; through the west one, looking out on the back yard, came a flood of mellow June sunlight; but the east one, whence you got a glimpse of the bloom white cherry-trees in the left orchard and nodding, slender birches down in the hollow by the brook, was greened over by a tangle of vines.
Here sat Marilla Cuthbert, when she sat at all, always slightly distrustful of sunshine, which seemed to her too dancing and irresponsible a thing for a world which was meant to be taken seriously; and here she sat now, knitting, and the table behind her was laid for supper.
Rachel, before she had fairly closed the door, had taken a mental note of everything that was on that table.
There were three plates laid, so that Marilla must be expecting some one home with Matthew to tea; but the dishes were everyday dishes and there was only crab-apple preserves and one kind of cake, so that the expected company could not be any particular company.
Rachel was getting fairly dizzy with this unusual mystery about quiet, unmysterious Green Gables.
How are all your folks?” Something that for lack of any other name might be called friendship existed and always had existed between Marilla Cuthbert and Mrs.
Rachel, in spite of--or perhaps because of--their dissimilarity.
Marilla was a tall, thin woman, with angles and without curves; her dark hair showed some gray streaks and was always twisted up in a hard little knot behind with two wire hairpins stuck aggressively through it.
She looked like a woman of narrow experience and rigid conscience, which she was; but there was a saving something about her mouth which, if it had been ever so slightly developed, might have been considered indicative of a sense of humor.
“I was kind of afraid _you_ weren’t, though, when I saw Matthew starting off today.
I thought maybe he was going to the doctor’s.” Marilla’s lips twitched understandingly.
She had expected Mrs.
Rachel up; she had known that the sight of Matthew jaunting off so unaccountably would be too much for her neighbor’s curiosity.
“Oh, no, I’m quite well although I had a bad headache yesterday,” she said.
We’re getting a little boy from an orphan asylum in Nova Scotia and he’s coming on the train tonight.” If Marilla had said that Matthew had gone to Bright River to meet a kangaroo from Australia Mrs.
Rachel could not have been more astonished.
She was actually stricken dumb for five seconds.
It was unsupposable that Marilla was making fun of her, but Mrs.
“Are you in earnest, Marilla?” she demanded when voice returned to her.
“Yes, of course,” said Marilla, as if getting boys from orphan asylums in Nova Scotia were part of the usual spring work on any well-regulated Avonlea farm instead of being an unheard of innovation.
Rachel felt that she had received a severe mental jolt.
She thought in exclamation points.
Marilla and Matthew Cuthbert of all people adopting a boy!
Well, the world was certainly turning upside down!
She would be surprised at nothing after this!
“What on earth put such a notion into your head?” she demanded disapprovingly.
This had been done without her advice being asked, and must perforce be disapproved.
“Well, we’ve been thinking about it for some time--all winter in fact,” returned Marilla.
Alexander Spencer was up here one day before Christmas and she said she was going to get a little girl from the asylum over in Hopeton in the spring.
His heart troubles him a good deal.
And you know how desperate hard it’s got to be to get hired help.
There’s never anybody to be had but those stupid, half-grown little French boys; and as soon as you do get one broke into your ways and taught something he’s up and off to the lobster canneries or the States.
At first Matthew suggested getting a Home boy.
But I’ll feel easier in my mind and sleep sounder at nights if we get a born Canadian.’ So in the end we decided to ask Mrs.
We mean to give him a good home and schooling.
We had a telegram from Mrs.
Alexander Spencer today--the mail-man brought it from the station--saying they were coming on the five-thirty train tonight.
Rachel prided herself on always speaking her mind; she proceeded to speak it now, having adjusted her mental attitude to this amazing piece of news.
You’re bringing a strange child into your house and home and you don’t know a single thing about him nor what his disposition is like nor what sort of parents he had nor how he’s likely to turn out.
If you had asked my advice in the matter--which you didn’t do, Marilla--I’d have said for mercy’s sake not to think of such a thing, that’s what.” This Job’s comforting seemed neither to offend nor to alarm Marilla.
She knitted steadily on.
“I don’t deny there’s something in what you say, Rachel.
But Matthew was terrible set on it.
It’s so seldom Matthew sets his mind on anything that when he does I always feel it’s my duty to give in.
And as for the risk, there’s risks in pretty near everything a body does in this world.
There’s risks in people’s having children of their own if it comes to that--they don’t always turn out well.
He can’t be much different from ourselves.” “Well, I hope it will turn out all right,” said Mrs.
Rachel in a tone that plainly indicated her painful doubts.
“Only don’t say I didn’t warn you if he burns Green Gables down or puts strychnine in the well--I heard of a case over in New Brunswick where an orphan asylum child did that and the whole family died in fearful agonies.
Only, it was a girl in that instance.” “Well, we’re not getting a girl,” said Marilla, as if poisoning wells were a purely feminine accomplishment and not to be dreaded in the case of a boy.
Alexander Spencer for doing it.
But there, _she_ wouldn’t shrink from adopting a whole orphan asylum if she took it into her head.” Mrs.
Rachel would have liked to stay until Matthew came home with his imported orphan.
But reflecting that it would be a good two hours at least before his arrival she concluded to go up the road to Robert Bell’s and tell the news.
It would certainly make a sensation second to none, and Mrs.
Rachel dearly loved to make a sensation.
So she took herself away, somewhat to Marilla’s relief, for the latter felt her doubts and fears reviving under the influence of Mrs.
“Well, of all things that ever were or will be!” ejaculated Mrs.
“It does really seem as if I must be dreaming.
Matthew and Marilla don’t know anything about children and they’ll expect him to be wiser and steadier than his own grandfather, if so be’s he ever had a grandfather, which is doubtful.
It seems uncanny to think of a child at Green Gables somehow; there’s never been one there, for Matthew and Marilla were grown up when the new house was built--if they ever _were_ children, which is hard to believe when one looks at them.
I wouldn’t be in that orphan’s shoes for anything.
Rachel to the wild rose bushes out of the fulness of her heart; but if she could have seen the child who was waiting patiently at the Bright River station at that very moment her pity would have been still deeper and more profound.
Matthew Cuthbert Is Surprised MATTHEW Cuthbert and the sorrel mare jogged comfortably over the eight miles to Bright River.
It was a pretty road, running along between snug farmsteads, with now and again a bit of balsamy fir wood to drive through or a hollow where wild plums hung out their filmy bloom.
Rachel; he had an uncomfortable feeling that the mysterious creatures were secretly laughing at him.
He may have been quite right in thinking so, for he was an odd-looking personage, with an ungainly figure and long iron-gray hair that touched his stooping shoulders, and a full, soft brown beard which he had worn ever since he was twenty.
In fact, he had looked at twenty very much as he looked at sixty, lacking a little of the grayness.
The long platform was almost deserted; the only living creature in sight being a girl who was sitting on a pile of shingles at the extreme end.
Matthew, barely noting that it _was_ a girl, sidled past her as quickly as possible without looking at her.
Had he looked he could hardly have failed to notice the tense rigidity and expectation of her attitude and expression.
She was sitting there waiting for something or somebody and, since sitting and waiting was the only thing to do just then, she sat and waited with all her might and main.
Matthew encountered the stationmaster locking up the ticket office preparatory to going home for supper, and asked him if the five-thirty train would soon be along.
“The five-thirty train has been in and gone half an hour ago,” answered that brisk official.
“But there was a passenger dropped off for you--a little girl.
She’s sitting out there on the shingles.
I asked her to go into the ladies’ waiting room, but she informed me gravely that she preferred to stay outside.
‘There was more scope for imagination,’ she said.
She’s a case, I should say.” “I’m not expecting a girl,” said Matthew blankly.
Alexander Spencer was to bring him over from Nova Scotia for me.” The stationmaster whistled.
Said you and your sister were adopting her from an orphan asylum and that you would be along for her presently.
That’s all I know about it--and I haven’t got any more orphans concealed hereabouts.” “I don’t understand,” said Matthew helplessly, wishing that Marilla was at hand to cope with the situation.
“Well, you’d better question the girl,” said the stationmaster carelessly.
Maybe they were out of boys of the brand you wanted.” He walked jauntily away, being hungry, and the unfortunate Matthew was left to do that which was harder for him than bearding a lion in its den--walk up to a girl--a strange girl--an orphan girl--and demand of her why she wasn’t a boy.
Matthew groaned in spirit as he turned about and shuffled gently down the platform towards her.
She had been watching him ever since he had passed her and she had her eyes on him now.
Matthew was not looking at her and would not have seen what she was really like if he had been, but an ordinary observer would have seen this: A child of about eleven, garbed in a very short, very tight, very ugly dress of yellowish-gray wincey.
She wore a faded brown sailor hat and beneath the hat, extending down her back, were two braids of very thick, decidedly red hair.
Her face was small, white and thin, also much freckled; her mouth was large and so were her eyes, which looked green in some lights and moods and gray in others.
Matthew, however, was spared the ordeal of speaking first, for as soon as she concluded that he was coming to her she stood up, grasping with one thin brown hand the handle of a shabby, old-fashioned carpet-bag; the other she held out to him.
Matthew Cuthbert of Green Gables?” she said in a peculiarly clear, sweet voice.
I was beginning to be afraid you weren’t coming for me and I was imagining all the things that might have happened to prevent you.
I wouldn’t be a bit afraid, and it would be lovely to sleep in a wild cherry-tree all white with bloom in the moonshine, don’t you think?
You could imagine you were dwelling in marble halls, couldn’t you?
And I was quite sure you would come for me in the morning, if you didn’t tonight.” Matthew had taken the scrawny little hand awkwardly in his; then and there he decided what to do.
She couldn’t be left at Bright River anyhow, no matter what mistake had been made, so all questions and explanations might as well be deferred until he was safely back at Green Gables.
Give me your bag.” “Oh, I can carry it,” the child responded cheerfully.
It’s an extremely old carpet-bag.
Oh, it seems so wonderful that I’m going to live with you and belong to you.
I’ve never belonged to anybody--not really.
I don’t suppose you ever were an orphan in an asylum, so you can’t possibly understand what it is like.
It’s worse than anything you could imagine.
But there is so little scope for the imagination in an asylum--only just in the other orphans.
It was pretty interesting to imagine things about them--to imagine that perhaps the girl who sat next to you was really the daughter of a belted earl, who had been stolen away from her parents in her infancy by a cruel nurse who died before she could confess.
I guess that’s why I’m so thin--I _am_ dreadful thin, ain’t I?
I do love to imagine I’m nice and plump, with dimples in my elbows.” With this Matthew’s companion stopped talking, partly because she was out of breath and partly because they had reached the buggy.
Not another word did she say until they had left the village and were driving down a steep little hill, the road part of which had been cut so deeply into the soft soil that the banks, fringed with blooming wild cherry-trees and slim white birches, were several feet above their heads.
“Isn’t that beautiful?
I’m so homely nobody will ever want to marry me--unless it might be a foreign missionary.
I suppose a foreign missionary mightn’t be very particular.
And I’ve never had a pretty dress in my life that I can remember--but of course it’s all the more to look forward to, isn’t it?
And then I can imagine that I’m dressed gorgeously.
A merchant in Hopeton last winter donated three hundred yards of wincey to the asylum.
Some people said it was because he couldn’t sell it, but I’d rather believe that it was out of the kindness of his heart, wouldn’t you?
When we got on the train I felt as if everybody must be looking at me and pitying me.
But I just went to work and imagined that I had on the most beautiful pale blue silk dress--because when you _are_ imagining you might as well imagine something worth while--and a big hat all flowers and nodding plumes, and a gold watch, and kid gloves and boots.
Spencer, although she generally is.
She said she hadn’t time to get sick, watching to see that I didn’t fall overboard.
She said she never saw the beat of me for prowling about.
And I wanted to see everything that was to be seen on that boat, because I didn’t know whether I’d ever have another opportunity.
This Island is the bloomiest place.
I’ve always heard that Prince Edward Island was the prettiest place in the world, and I used to imagine I was living here, but I never really expected I would.
It’s delightful when your imaginations come true, isn’t it?
When we got into the train at Charlottetown and the red roads began to flash past I asked Mrs.
Spencer what made them red and she said she didn’t know and for pity’s sake not to ask her any more questions.
She said I must have asked her a thousand already.
I suppose I had, too, but how are you going to find out about things if you don’t ask questions?
“Well, that is one of the things to find out sometime.
Isn’t it splendid to think of all the things there are to find out about?
It just makes me feel glad to be alive--it’s such an interesting world.
It wouldn’t be half so interesting if we knew all about everything, would it?
There’d be no scope for imagination then, would there?
I can _stop_ when I make up my mind to it, although it’s difficult.” Matthew, much to his own surprise, was enjoying himself.
Like most quiet folks he liked talkative people when they were willing to do the talking themselves and did not expect him to keep up his end of it.
But he had never expected to enjoy the society of a little girl.
Women were bad enough in all conscience, but little girls were worse.
He detested the way they had of sidling past him timidly, with sidewise glances, as if they expected him to gobble them up at a mouthful if they ventured to say a word.
But this freckled witch was very different, and although he found it rather difficult for his slower intelligence to keep up with her brisk mental processes he thought that he “kind of liked her chatter.” So he said as shyly as usual: “Oh, you can talk as much as you like.
I know you and I are going to get along together fine.
It’s such a relief to talk when one wants to and not be told that children should be seen and not heard.
But if you have big ideas you have to use big words to express them, haven’t you?” “Well now, that seems reasonable,” said Matthew.
But it isn’t--it’s firmly fastened at one end.
And there weren’t any at all about the asylum, only a few poor weeny-teeny things out in front with little whitewashed cagey things about them.
They just looked like orphans themselves, those trees did.
If you were out in a great big woods with other trees all around you and little mosses and June bells growing over your roots and a brook not far away and birds singing in your branches, you could grow, couldn’t you?
You do get so attached to things like that, don’t you?
Is there a brook anywhere near Green Gables?
I never expected I would, though.
But just now I feel pretty nearly perfectly happy.
I can’t feel exactly perfectly happy because--well, what color would you call this?” She twitched one of her long glossy braids over her thin shoulder and held it up before Matthew’s eyes.
Matthew was not used to deciding on the tints of ladies’ tresses, but in this case there couldn’t be much doubt.
“Yes, it’s red,” she said resignedly.
“Now you see why I can’t be perfectly happy.
I don’t mind the other things so much--the freckles and the green eyes and my skinniness.
I can imagine that I have a beautiful rose-leaf complexion and lovely starry violet eyes.
I think to myself, ‘Now my hair is a glorious black, black as the raven’s wing.’ But all the time I _know_ it is just plain red and it breaks my heart.
It will be my lifelong sorrow.
I read of a girl once in a novel who had a lifelong sorrow but it wasn’t red hair.
Her hair was pure gold rippling back from her alabaster brow.
What is an alabaster brow?
“Well, whatever it was it must have been something nice because she was divinely beautiful.
Have you ever imagined what it must feel like to be divinely beautiful?” “Well now, no, I haven’t,” confessed Matthew ingenuously.
Which would you rather be if you had the choice--divinely beautiful or dazzlingly clever or angelically good?” “Well now, I--I don’t know exactly.” “Neither do I.
But it doesn’t make much real difference for it isn’t likely I’ll ever be either.
It’s certain I’ll never be angelically good.
Cuthbert!!!” That was not what Mrs.
Spencer had said; neither had the child tumbled out of the buggy nor had Matthew done anything astonishing.
They had simply rounded a curve in the road and found themselves in the “Avenue.” The “Avenue,” so called by the Newbridge people, was a stretch of road four or five hundred yards long, completely arched over with huge, wide-spreading apple-trees, planted years ago by an eccentric old farmer.
Overhead was one long canopy of snowy fragrant bloom.
Below the boughs the air was full of a purple twilight and far ahead a glimpse of painted sunset sky shone like a great rose window at the end of a cathedral aisle.
She leaned back in the buggy, her thin hands clasped before her, her face lifted rapturously to the white splendor above.
Even when they had passed out and were driving down the long slope to Newbridge she never moved or spoke.
Still with rapt face she gazed afar into the sunset west, with eyes that saw visions trooping splendidly across that glowing background.
Through Newbridge, a bustling little village where dogs barked at them and small boys hooted and curious faces peered from the windows, they drove, still in silence.
She could keep silence, it was evident, as energetically as she could talk.
“I guess you’re feeling pretty tired and hungry,” Matthew ventured to say at last, accounting for her long visitation of dumbness with the only reason he could think of.
“But we haven’t very far to go now--only another mile.” She came out of her reverie with a deep sigh and looked at him with the dreamy gaze of a soul that had been wondering afar, star-led.
Cuthbert,” she whispered, “that place we came through--that white place--what was it?” “Well now, you must mean the Avenue,” said Matthew after a few moments’ profound reflection.
Nor beautiful, either.
Oh, it was wonderful--wonderful.
It’s the first thing I ever saw that couldn’t be improved upon by imagination.
It just satisfied me here”--she put one hand on her breast--“it made a queer funny ache and yet it was a pleasant ache.
Cuthbert?” “Well now, I just can’t recollect that I ever had.” “I have it lots of times--whenever I see anything royally beautiful.
Isn’t that a nice imaginative name?
There was a girl at the asylum whose name was Hepzibah Jenkins, but I always imagined her as Rosalia DeVere.
I’m sorry because this drive has been so pleasant and I’m always sorry when pleasant things end.
Something still pleasanter may come after, but you can never be sure.
And it’s so often the case that it isn’t pleasanter.
That has been my experience anyhow.
You see, I’ve never had a real home since I can remember.
It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home.
A bridge spanned it midway and from there to its lower end, where an amber-hued belt of sand-hills shut it in from the dark blue gulf beyond, the water was a glory of many shifting hues--the most spiritual shadings of crocus and rose and ethereal green, with other elusive tintings for which no name has ever been found.
Above the bridge the pond ran up into fringing groves of fir and maple and lay all darkly translucent in their wavering shadows.
Here and there a wild plum leaned out from the bank like a white-clad girl tiptoeing to her own reflection.
From the marsh at the head of the pond came the clear, mournfully-sweet chorus of the frogs.
There was a little gray house peering around a white apple orchard on a slope beyond and, although it was not yet quite dark, a light was shining from one of its windows.
Do things ever give you a thrill?” Matthew ruminated.
It always kind of gives me a thrill to see them ugly white grubs that spade up in the cucumber beds.
There doesn’t seem to be much connection between grubs and lakes of shining waters, does there?
Her name is Diana.” “Oh!” with a long indrawing of breath.
“What a perfectly lovely name!” “Well now, I dunno.
There’s something dreadful heathenish about it, seems to me.
I’d ruther Jane or Mary or some sensible name like that.
But when Diana was born there was a schoolmaster boarding there and they gave him the naming of her and he called her Diana.” “I wish there had been a schoolmaster like that around when I was born, then.
I can’t help imagining that perhaps, just as we get to the middle, they’ll crumple up like a jack-knife and nip us.
Isn’t it splendid there are so many things to like in this world?
That’s Green Gables over--” “Oh, don’t tell me,” she interrupted breathlessly, catching at his partially raised arm and shutting her eyes that she might not see his gesture.
The sun had set some time since, but the landscape was still clear in the mellow afterlight.
To the west a dark church spire rose up against a marigold sky.
Below was a little valley and beyond a long, gently-rising slope with snug farmsteads scattered along it.
At last they lingered on one away to the left, far back from the road, dimly white with blossoming trees in the twilight of the surrounding woods.
Over it, in the stainless southwest sky, a great crystal-white star was shining like a lamp of guidance and promise.
“That’s it, isn’t it?” she said, pointing.
Matthew slapped the reins on the sorrel’s back delightedly.
Spencer described it so’s you could tell.” “No, she didn’t--really she didn’t.
Every little while a horrible sickening feeling would come over me and I’d be so afraid it was all a dream.
Then I’d pinch myself to see if it was real--until suddenly I remembered that even supposing it was only a dream I’d better go on dreaming as long as I could; so I stopped pinching.
But it _is_ real and we’re nearly home.” With a sigh of rapture she relapsed into silence.
Matthew stirred uneasily.
By the time they arrived at the house Matthew was shrinking from the approaching revelation with an energy he did not understand.
It was not of Marilla or himself he was thinking or of the trouble this mistake was probably going to make for them, but of the child’s disappointment.
When he thought of that rapt light being quenched in her eyes he had an uncomfortable feeling that he was going to assist at murdering something--much the same feeling that came over him when he had to kill a lamb or calf or any other innocent little creature.
The yard was quite dark as they turned into it and the poplar leaves were rustling silkily all round it.
“Listen to the trees talking in their sleep,” she whispered, as he lifted her to the ground.
“What nice dreams they must have!” Then, holding tightly to the carpet-bag which contained “all her worldly goods,” she followed him into the house.
Marilla Cuthbert Is Surprised MARILLA came briskly forward as Matthew opened the door.
But when her eyes fell on the odd little figure in the stiff, ugly dress, with the long braids of red hair and the eager, luminous eyes, she stopped short in amazement.
“Matthew Cuthbert, who’s that?” she ejaculated.
“Where is the boy?” “There wasn’t any boy,” said Matthew wretchedly.
“There was only _her_.” He nodded at the child, remembering that he had never even asked her name.
But there _must_ have been a boy,” insisted Marilla.
I asked the stationmaster.
She couldn’t be left there, no matter where the mistake had come in.” “Well, this is a pretty piece of business!” ejaculated Marilla.
During this dialogue the child had remained silent, her eyes roving from one to the other, all the animation fading out of her face.
Suddenly she seemed to grasp the full meaning of what had been said.
Dropping her precious carpet-bag she sprang forward a step and clasped her hands.
I might have expected it.
I might have known it was all too beautiful to last.
Sitting down on a chair by the table, flinging her arms out upon it, and burying her face in them, she proceeded to cry stormily.
Marilla and Matthew looked at each other deprecatingly across the stove.
“Well, well, there’s no need to cry so about it.” “Yes, there _is_ need!” The child raised her head quickly, revealing a tear-stained face and trembling lips.
Oh, this is the most _tragical_ thing that ever happened to me!” Something like a reluctant smile, rather rusty from long disuse, mellowed Marilla’s grim expression.
You’ll have to stay here until we investigate this affair.
What’s your name?” The child hesitated for a moment.
“Will you please call me Cordelia?” she said eagerly.
“_Call_ you Cordelia?
Is that your name?” “No-o-o, it’s not exactly my name, but I would love to be called Cordelia.
It’s such a perfectly elegant name.” “I don’t know what on earth you mean.
If Cordelia isn’t your name, what is?” “Anne Shirley,” reluctantly faltered forth the owner of that name, “but, oh, please do call me Cordelia.
And Anne is such an unromantic name.” “Unromantic fiddlesticks!” said the unsympathetic Marilla.
“Anne is a real good plain sensible name.
You’ve no need to be ashamed of it.” “Oh, I’m not ashamed of it,” explained Anne, “only I like Cordelia better.
I’ve always imagined that my name was Cordelia--at least, I always have of late years.
When I was young I used to imagine it was Geraldine, but I like Cordelia better now.
But if you call me Anne please call me Anne spelled with an E.” “What difference does it make how it’s spelled?” asked Marilla with another rusty smile as she picked up the teapot.
“Oh, it makes _such_ a difference.
When you hear a name pronounced can’t you always see it in your mind, just as if it was printed out?
I can; and A-n-n looks dreadful, but A-n-n-e looks so much more distinguished.
If you’ll only call me Anne spelled with an E I shall try to reconcile myself to not being called Cordelia.” “Very well, then, Anne spelled with an E, can you tell us how this mistake came to be made?
Were there no boys at the asylum?” “Oh, yes, there was an abundance of them.
Spencer said _distinctly_ that you wanted a girl about eleven years old.
You don’t know how delighted I was.
Oh,” she added reproachfully, turning to Matthew, “why didn’t you tell me at the station that you didn’t want me and leave me there?
If I hadn’t seen the White Way of Delight and the Lake of Shining Waters it wouldn’t be so hard.” “What on earth does she mean?” demanded Marilla, staring at Matthew.
“She--she’s just referring to some conversation we had on the road,” said Matthew hastily.
Spencer bring anybody over besides you?” continued Marilla when Matthew had gone out.
Lily is only five years old and she is very beautiful and had nut-brown hair.
If I was very beautiful and had nut-brown hair would you keep me?” “No.
Matthew came back presently and they sat down to supper.
In vain she nibbled at the bread and butter and pecked at the crab-apple preserve out of the little scalloped glass dish by her plate.
“You’re not eating anything,” said Marilla sharply, eying her as if it were a serious shortcoming.
Can you eat when you are in the depths of despair?” “I’ve never been in the depths of despair, so I can’t say,” responded Marilla.
Well, did you ever try to _imagine_ you were in the depths of despair?” “No, I didn’t.” “Then I don’t think you can understand what it’s like.
It’s a very uncomfortable feeling indeed.
When you try to eat a lump comes right up in your throat and you can’t swallow anything, not even if it was a chocolate caramel.
I had one chocolate caramel once two years ago and it was simply delicious.
I’ve often dreamed since then that I had a lot of chocolate caramels, but I always wake up just when I’m going to eat them.
I do hope you won’t be offended because I can’t eat.
Everything is extremely nice, but still I cannot eat.” “I guess she’s tired,” said Matthew, who hadn’t spoken since his return from the barn.
“Best put her to bed, Marilla.” Marilla had been wondering where Anne should be put to bed.
She had prepared a couch in the kitchen chamber for the desired and expected boy.
But, although it was neat and clean, it did not seem quite the thing to put a girl there somehow.
But the spare room was out of the question for such a stray waif, so there remained only the east gable room.
Marilla lighted a candle and told Anne to follow her, which Anne spiritlessly did, taking her hat and carpet-bag from the hall table as she passed.
The hall was fearsomely clean; the little gable chamber in which she presently found herself seemed still cleaner.
Marilla set the candle on a three-legged, three-cornered table and turned down the bedclothes.
“I suppose you have a nightgown?” she questioned.
They’re fearfully skimpy.
But one can dream just as well in them as in lovely trailing ones, with frills around the neck, that’s one consolation.” “Well, undress as quick as you can and go to bed.
I daren’t trust you to put it out yourself.
You’d likely set the place on fire.” When Marilla had gone Anne looked around her wistfully.
The whitewashed walls were so painfully bare and staring that she thought they must ache over their own bareness.
In one corner was the bed, a high, old-fashioned one, with four dark, low-turned posts.
In the other corner was the aforesaid three-cornered table adorned with a fat, red velvet pincushion hard enough to turn the point of the most adventurous pin.
Midway between table and bed was the window, with an icy white muslin frill over it, and opposite it was the wash-stand.
The whole apartment was of a rigidity not to be described in words, but which sent a shiver to the very marrow of Anne’s bones.
With a sob she hastily discarded her garments, put on the skimpy nightgown and sprang into bed where she burrowed face downward into the pillow and pulled the clothes over her head.
When Marilla came up for the light various skimpy articles of raiment scattered most untidily over the floor and a certain tempestuous appearance of the bed were the only indications of any presence save her own.
She deliberately picked up Anne’s clothes, placed them neatly on a prim yellow chair, and then, taking up the candle, went over to the bed.
“Good night,” she said, a little awkwardly, but not unkindly.
Anne’s white face and big eyes appeared over the bedclothes with a startling suddenness.
“How can you call it a _good_ night when you know it must be the very worst night I’ve ever had?” she said reproachfully.
Then she dived down into invisibility again.
Marilla went slowly down to the kitchen and proceeded to wash the supper dishes.
Matthew was smoking--a sure sign of perturbation of mind.
He seldom smoked, for Marilla set her face against it as a filthy habit; but at certain times and seasons he felt driven to it and then Marilla winked at the practice, realizing that a mere man must have some vent for his emotions.
“Well, this is a pretty kettle of fish,” she said wrathfully.
“This is what comes of sending word instead of going ourselves.
Spencer tomorrow, that’s certain.
This girl will have to be sent back to the asylum.” “Yes, I suppose so,” said Matthew reluctantly.
It’s kind of a pity to send her back when she’s so set on staying here.” “Matthew Cuthbert, you don’t mean to say you think we ought to keep her!” Marilla’s astonishment could not have been greater if Matthew had expressed a predilection for standing on his head.
“Well, now, no, I suppose not--not exactly,” stammered Matthew, uncomfortably driven into a corner for his precise meaning.
“I suppose--we could hardly be expected to keep her.” “I should say not.
What good would she be to us?” “We might be some good to her,” said Matthew suddenly and unexpectedly.
“Matthew Cuthbert, I believe that child has bewitched you!
I can see as plain as plain that you want to keep her.” “Well now, she’s a real interesting little thing,” persisted Matthew.
I don’t like children who have so much to say.
There’s something I don’t understand about her.
No, she’s got to be despatched straightway back to where she came from.” “I could hire a French boy to help me,” said Matthew, “and she’d be company for you.” “I’m not suffering for company,” said Marilla shortly.
And to bed, when she had put her dishes away, went Marilla, frowning most resolutely.
And up-stairs, in the east gable, a lonely, heart-hungry, friendless child cried herself to sleep.
Morning at Green Gables IT was broad daylight when Anne awoke and sat up in bed, staring confusedly at the window through which a flood of cheery sunshine was pouring and outside of which something white and feathery waved across glimpses of blue sky.
For a moment she could not remember where she was.
First came a delightful thrill, as of something very pleasant; then a horrible remembrance.
She pushed up the sash--it went up stiffly and creakily, as if it hadn’t been opened for a long time, which was the case; and it stuck so tight that nothing was needed to hold it up.
Anne dropped on her knees and gazed out into the June morning, her eyes glistening with delight.
Oh, wasn’t it beautiful?
There was scope for imagination here.
A huge cherry-tree grew outside, so close that its boughs tapped against the house, and it was so thick-set with blossoms that hardly a leaf was to be seen.
On both sides of the house was a big orchard, one of apple-trees and one of cherry-trees, also showered over with blossoms; and their grass was all sprinkled with dandelions.
In the garden below were lilac-trees purple with flowers, and their dizzily sweet fragrance drifted up to the window on the morning wind.
Below the garden a green field lush with clover sloped down to the hollow where the brook ran and where scores of white birches grew, upspringing airily out of an undergrowth suggestive of delightful possibilities in ferns and mosses and woodsy things generally.
Beyond it was a hill, green and feathery with spruce and fir; there was a gap in it where the gray gable end of the little house she had seen from the other side of the Lake of Shining Waters was visible.
Off to the left were the big barns and beyond them, away down over green, low-sloping fields, was a sparkling blue glimpse of sea.
Anne’s beauty-loving eyes lingered on it all, taking everything greedily in.
She had looked on so many unlovely places in her life, poor child; but this was as lovely as anything she had ever dreamed.
She knelt there, lost to everything but the loveliness around her, until she was startled by a hand on her shoulder.
Marilla really did not know how to talk to the child, and her uncomfortable ignorance made her crisp and curt when she did not mean to be.
“Oh, isn’t it wonderful?” she said, waving her hand comprehensively at the good world outside.
“It’s a big tree,” said Marilla, “and it blooms great, but the fruit don’t amount to much never--small and wormy.” “Oh, I don’t mean just the tree; of course it’s lovely--yes, it’s _radiantly_ lovely--it blooms as if it meant it--but I meant everything, the garden and the orchard and the brook and the woods, the whole big dear world.
And I can hear the brook laughing all the way up here.
Have you ever noticed what cheerful things brooks are?
They’re always laughing.
Perhaps you think it doesn’t make any difference to me when you’re not going to keep me, but it does.
I shall always like to remember that there is a brook at Green Gables even if I never see it again.
If there wasn’t a brook I’d be _haunted_ by the uncomfortable feeling that there ought to be one.
Isn’t it a splendid thing that there are mornings?
I’ve just been imagining that it was really me you wanted after all and that I was to stay here for ever and ever.
But the worst of imagining things is that the time comes when you have to stop and that hurts.” “You’d better get dressed and come down-stairs and never mind your imaginings,” said Marilla as soon as she could get a word in edgewise.
“Breakfast is waiting.
Leave the window up and turn your bedclothes back over the foot of the bed.
Be as smart as you can.” Anne could evidently be smart to some purpose for she was down-stairs in ten minutes’ time, with her clothes neatly on, her hair brushed and braided, her face washed, and a comfortable consciousness pervading her soul that she had fulfilled all Marilla’s requirements.
As a matter of fact, however, she had forgotten to turn back the bedclothes.
“I’m pretty hungry this morning,” she announced as she slipped into the chair Marilla placed for her.
“The world doesn’t seem such a howling wilderness as it did last night.
I’m so glad it’s a sunshiny morning.
But I like rainy mornings real well, too.
All sorts of mornings are interesting, don’t you think?
You don’t know what’s going to happen through the day, and there’s so much scope for imagination.
But I’m glad it’s not rainy today because it’s easier to be cheerful and bear up under affliction on a sunshiny day.
It’s all very well to read about sorrows and imagine yourself living through them heroically, but it’s not so nice when you really come to have them, is it?” “For pity’s sake hold your tongue,” said Marilla.
“You talk entirely too much for a little girl.” Thereupon Anne held her tongue so obediently and thoroughly that her continued silence made Marilla rather nervous, as if in the presence of something not exactly natural.
As it progressed Anne became more and more abstracted, eating mechanically, with her big eyes fixed unswervingly and unseeingly on the sky outside the window.
This made Marilla more nervous than ever; she had an uncomfortable feeling that while this odd child’s body might be there at the table her spirit was far away in some remote airy cloudland, borne aloft on the wings of imagination.
Yet Matthew wished to keep her, of all unaccountable things!
That was Matthew’s way--take a whim into his head and cling to it with the most amazing silent persistency--a persistency ten times more potent and effectual in its very silence than if he had talked it out.
“Can you wash dishes right?” asked Marilla distrustfully.
I’m better at looking after children, though.
I’ve had so much experience at that.
It’s such a pity you haven’t any here for me to look after.” “I don’t feel as if I wanted any more children to look after than I’ve got at present. _You’re_ problem enough in all conscience.
Matthew is a most ridiculous man.” “I think he’s lovely,” said Anne reproachfully.
“He is so very sympathetic.
I’ve got enough to attend to this morning for I’ll have to drive over to White Sands in the afternoon and see Mrs.
After you’ve finished the dishes go up-stairs and make your bed.” Anne washed the dishes deftly enough, as Marilla, who kept a sharp eye on the process, discerned.
Later on she made her bed less successfully, for she had never learned the art of wrestling with a feather tick.
But it was done somehow and smoothed down; and then Marilla, to get rid of her, told her she might go out-of-doors and amuse herself until dinnertime.
On the very threshold she stopped short, wheeled about, came back and sat down by the table, light and glow as effectually blotted out as if some one had clapped an extinguisher on her.
“What’s the matter now?” demanded Marilla.
“I don’t dare go out,” said Anne, in the tone of a martyr relinquishing all earthly joys.
And if I go out there and get acquainted with all those trees and flowers and the orchard and the brook I’ll not be able to help loving it.
I want to go out so much--everything seems to be calling to me, ‘Anne, Anne, come out to us.
Anne, Anne, we want a playmate’--but it’s better not.
I am resigned to my fate now, so I don’t think I’ll go out for fear I’ll get unresigned again.
What is the name of that geranium on the window-sill, please?” “That’s the apple-scented geranium.” “Oh, I don’t mean that sort of a name.
I mean just a name you gave it yourself.
Oh, do let me!” “Goodness, I don’t care.
But where on earth is the sense of naming a geranium?” “Oh, I like things to have handles even if they are only geraniums.
How do you know but that it hurts a geranium’s feelings just to be called a geranium and nothing else?
Of course, it won’t always be in blossom, but one can imagine that it is, can’t one?” “I never in all my life saw or heard anything to equal her,” muttered Marilla, beating a retreat down to the cellar after potatoes.
“She _is_ kind of interesting, as Matthew says.
I can feel already that I’m wondering what on earth she’ll say next.
That look he gave me when he went out said everything he said or hinted last night over again.
But what’s to be done with a man who just _looks?_” Anne had relapsed into reverie, with her chin in her hands and her eyes on the sky, when Marilla returned from her cellar pilgrimage.
“I suppose I can have the mare and buggy this afternoon, Matthew?” said Marilla.
Matthew nodded and looked wistfully at Anne.
Marilla intercepted the look and said grimly: “I’m going to drive over to White Sands and settle this thing.
Spencer will probably make arrangements to send her back to Nova Scotia at once.
There is nothing more aggravating than a man who won’t talk back--unless it is a woman who won’t.
Marilla looked back once as the buggy bounced along and saw that aggravating Matthew leaning over the gate, looking wistfully after them.
Anne’s History DO you know,” said Anne confidentially, “I’ve made up my mind to enjoy this drive.
It’s been my experience that you can nearly always enjoy things if you make up your mind firmly that you will.
And isn’t pink the most bewitching color in the world?
Redheaded people can’t wear pink, not even in imagination.
Did you ever know of anybody whose hair was red when she was young, but got to be another color when she grew up?” “No, I don’t know as I ever did,” said Marilla mercilessly, “and I shouldn’t think it likely to happen in your case either.” Anne sighed.
‘My life is a perfect graveyard of buried hopes.’ That’s a sentence I read in a book once, and I say it over to comfort myself whenever I’m disappointed in anything.” “I don’t see where the comforting comes in myself,” said Marilla.
“Why, because it sounds so nice and romantic, just as if I were a heroine in a book, you know.
I am so fond of romantic things, and a graveyard full of buried hopes is about as romantic a thing as one can imagine, isn’t it?
We’re going by the shore road.” “Shore road sounds nice,” said Anne dreamily.
How far is it to White Sands?” “It’s five miles; and as you’re evidently bent on talking you might as well talk to some purpose by telling me what you know about yourself.” “Oh, what I _know_ about myself isn’t really worth telling,” said Anne eagerly.
“If you’ll only let me tell you what I _imagine_ about myself you’ll think it ever so much more interesting.” “No, I don’t want any of your imaginings.
Begin at the beginning.
Where were you born and how old are you?” “I was eleven last March,” said Anne, resigning herself to bald facts with a little sigh.
“And I was born in Bolingbroke, Nova Scotia.
My father’s name was Walter Shirley, and he was a teacher in the Bolingbroke High School.
It would be a real disgrace to have a father named--well, say Jedediah, wouldn’t it?” “I guess it doesn’t matter what a person’s name is as long as he behaves himself,” said Marilla, feeling herself called upon to inculcate a good and useful moral.
“Well, I don’t know.” Anne looked thoughtful.
I suppose my father could have been a good man even if he had been called Jedediah; but I’m sure it would have been a cross.
Well, my mother was a teacher in the High School, too, but when she married father she gave up teaching, of course.
A husband was enough responsibility.
They went to live in a weeny-teeny little yellow house in Bolingbroke.
I’ve never seen that house, but I’ve imagined it thousands of times.
I think it must have had honeysuckle over the parlor window and lilacs in the front yard and lilies of the valley just inside the gate.
Yes, and muslin curtains in all the windows.
Muslin curtains give a house such an air.
Thomas said I was the homeliest baby she ever saw, I was so scrawny and tiny and nothing but eyes, but that mother thought I was perfectly beautiful.
I’m glad she was satisfied with me anyhow; I would feel so sad if I thought I was a disappointment to her--because she didn’t live very long after that, you see.
I do wish she’d lived long enough for me to remember calling her mother.
And father died four days afterwards from fever too.
Father and mother had both come from places far away and it was well known they hadn’t any relatives living.
Do you know if there is anything in being brought up by hand that ought to make people who are brought up that way better than other people?
Because whenever I was naughty Mrs.
Thomas would ask me how I could be such a bad girl when she had brought me up by hand--reproachful-like.
Thomas moved away from Bolingbroke to Marysville, and I lived with them until I was eight years old.
I helped look after the Thomas children--there were four of them younger than me--and I can tell you they took a lot of looking after.
Thomas and the children, but she didn’t want me.
Hammond from up the river came down and said she’d take me, seeing I was handy with children, and I went up the river to live with her in a little clearing among the stumps.
It was a very lonesome place.
I’m sure I could never have lived there if I hadn’t had an imagination.
Hammond had eight children.
I like babies in moderation, but twins three times in succession is _too much_.
I used to get so dreadfully tired carrying them about.
Hammond broke up housekeeping.
She divided her children among her relatives and went to the States.
They didn’t want me at the asylum, either; they said they were overcrowded as it was.
Spencer came.” Anne finished up with another sigh, of relief this time.
Evidently she did not like talking about her experiences in a world that had not wanted her.
“Did you ever go to school?” demanded Marilla, turning the sorrel mare down the shore road.
When I went up river we were so far from a school that I couldn’t walk it in winter and there was vacation in summer, so I could only go in the spring and fall.
I can read pretty well and I know ever so many pieces of poetry off by heart--‘The Battle of Hohenlinden’ and ‘Edinburgh after Flodden,’ and ‘Bingen on the Rhine,’ and lots of the ‘Lady of the Lake’ and most of ‘The Seasons,’ by James Thompson.
There is a piece in the Fifth Reader--‘The Downfall of Poland’--that is just full of thrills.
“O-o-o-h,” faltered Anne.
Her sensitive little face suddenly flushed scarlet and embarrassment sat on her brow.
“Oh, they _meant_ to be--I know they meant to be just as good and kind as possible.
It’s very trying to have a drunken husband, you see; and it must be very trying to have twins three times in succession, don’t you think?
But I feel sure they meant to be good to me.” Marilla asked no more questions.
Anne gave herself up to a silent rapture over the shore road and Marilla guided the sorrel abstractedly while she pondered deeply.
Pity was suddenly stirring in her heart for the child.
What a starved, unloved life she had had--a life of drudgery and poverty and neglect; for Marilla was shrewd enough to read between the lines of Anne’s history and divine the truth.
No wonder she had been so delighted at the prospect of a real home.
What if she, Marilla, should indulge Matthew’s unaccountable whim and let her stay?
He was set on it; and the child seemed a nice, teachable little thing.
It’s likely her people were nice folks.” The shore road was “woodsy and wild and lonesome.” On the right hand, scrub firs, their spirits quite unbroken by long years of tussle with the gulf winds, grew thickly.
On the left were the steep red sandstone cliffs, so near the track in places that a mare of less steadiness than the sorrel might have tried the nerves of the people behind her.
Down at the base of the cliffs were heaps of surf-worn rocks or little sandy coves inlaid with pebbles as with ocean jewels; beyond lay the sea, shimmering and blue, and over it soared the gulls, their pinions flashing silvery in the sunlight.
“Isn’t the sea wonderful?” said Anne, rousing from a long, wide-eyed silence.
“Once, when I lived in Marysville, Mr.
I enjoyed every moment of that day, even if I had to look after the children all the time.
But this shore is nicer than the Marysville shore.
Aren’t those gulls splendid?
There are heaps of Americans come there for the summer.
Spencer’s place,” said Anne mournfully.
Somehow, it will seem like the end of everything.” CHAPTER VI.
Spencer lived in a big yellow house at White Sands Cove, and she came to the door with surprise and welcome mingled on her benevolent face.
“Dear, dear,” she exclaimed, “you’re the last folks I was looking for today, but I’m real glad to see you.
And how are you, Anne?” “I’m as well as can be expected, thank you,” said Anne smilelessly.
A blight seemed to have descended on her.
“I suppose we’ll stay a little while to rest the mare,” said Marilla, “but I promised Matthew I’d be home early.
Spencer, there’s been a queer mistake somewhere, and I’ve come over to see where it is.
We told your brother Robert to tell you we wanted a boy ten or eleven years old.” “Marilla Cuthbert, you don’t say so!” said Mrs.
Spencer in distress.
“Why, Robert sent word down by his daughter Nancy and she said you wanted a girl--didn’t she, Flora Jane?” appealing to her daughter who had come out to the steps.
“She certainly did, Miss Cuthbert,” corroborated Flora Jane earnestly.
“I’m dreadful sorry,” said Mrs.
“It’s too bad; but it certainly wasn’t my fault, you see, Miss Cuthbert.
I did the best I could and I thought I was following your instructions.
Nancy is a terrible flighty thing.
I’ve often had to scold her well for her heedlessness.” “It was our own fault,” said Marilla resignedly.
“We should have come to you ourselves and not left an important message to be passed along by word of mouth in that fashion.
Spencer thoughtfully, “but I don’t think it will be necessary to send her back.
Peter Blewett was up here yesterday, and she was saying to me how much she wished she’d sent by me for a little girl to help her.
I call it positively providential.” Marilla did not look as if she thought Providence had much to do with the matter.
Here was an unexpectedly good chance to get this unwelcome orphan off her hands, and she did not even feel grateful for it.
Peter Blewett only by sight as a small, shrewish-faced woman without an ounce of superfluous flesh on her bones.
“A terrible worker and driver,” Mrs.
Peter was said to be; and discharged servant girls told fearsome tales of her temper and stinginess, and her family of pert, quarrelsome children.
Marilla felt a qualm of conscience at the thought of handing Anne over to her tender mercies.
Peter coming up the lane this blessed minute!” exclaimed Mrs.
Spencer, bustling her guests through the hall into the parlor, where a deadly chill struck on them as if the air had been strained so long through dark green, closely drawn blinds that it had lost every particle of warmth it had ever possessed.
Take the armchair, Miss Cuthbert.
Good afternoon, Mrs.
We were just saying how fortunate it was you happened along.
Let me introduce you two ladies.
Blewett, Miss Cuthbert.
Blewett as one fascinated.
She felt a lump coming up in her throat and her eyes smarted painfully.
She was beginning to be afraid she couldn’t keep the tears back when Mrs.
Spencer returned, flushed and beaming, quite capable of taking any and every difficulty, physical, mental or spiritual, into consideration and settling it out of hand.
“I was under the impression that Mr. and Miss Cuthbert wanted a little girl to adopt.
I was certainly told so.
So if you’re still of the same mind you were yesterday, I think she’ll be just the thing for you.” Mrs.
“How old are you and what’s your name?” she demanded.
“Anne Shirley,” faltered the shrinking child, not daring to make any stipulations regarding the spelling thereof, “and I’m eleven years old.” “Humph!
Well, if I take you you’ll have to be a good girl, you know--good and smart and respectful.
Yes, I suppose I might as well take her off your hands, Miss Cuthbert.
The baby’s awful fractious, and I’m clean worn out attending to him.
If you like I can take her right home now.” Marilla looked at Anne and softened at sight of the child’s pale face with its look of mute misery--the misery of a helpless little creature who finds itself once more caught in the trap from which it had escaped.
Marilla felt an uncomfortable conviction that, if she denied the appeal of that look, it would haunt her to her dying day.
Moreover, she did not fancy Mrs.
To hand a sensitive, “highstrung” child over to such a woman!
No, she could not take the responsibility of doing that!
“I didn’t say that Matthew and I had absolutely decided that we wouldn’t keep her.
In fact, I may say that Matthew is disposed to keep her.
I just came over to find out how the mistake had occurred.
I feel that I oughtn’t to decide on anything without consulting him.
If we make up our mind not to keep her we’ll bring or send her over to you tomorrow night.
Blewett ungraciously.
The child was quite transfigured; and, a moment later, when Mrs.
“Oh, Miss Cuthbert, did you really say that perhaps you would let me stay at Green Gables?” she said, in a breathless whisper, as if speaking aloud might shatter the glorious possibility.
Or did I only imagine that you did?” “I think you’d better learn to control that imagination of yours, Anne, if you can’t distinguish between what is real and what isn’t,” said Marilla crossly.
It isn’t decided yet and perhaps we will conclude to let Mrs.
She certainly needs you much more than I do.” “I’d rather go back to the asylum than go to live with her,” said Anne passionately.
“She looks exactly like a--like a gimlet.” Marilla smothered a smile under the conviction that Anne must be reproved for such a speech.
“A little girl like you should be ashamed of talking so about a lady and a stranger,” she said severely.
“Go back and sit down quietly and hold your tongue and behave as a good girl should.” “I’ll try to do and be anything you want me, if you’ll only keep me,” said Anne, returning meekly to her ottoman.
Marilla from afar had noted him prowling along it and guessed his motive.
She was prepared for the relief she read in his face when he saw that she had at least brought Anne back with her.
But she said nothing, to him, relative to the affair, until they were both out in the yard behind the barn milking the cows.
Then she briefly told him Anne’s history and the result of the interview with Mrs.
“I don’t fancy her style myself,” admitted Marilla, “but it’s that or keeping her ourselves, Matthew.
I’ve been thinking over the idea until I’ve got kind of used to it.
I’ve never brought up a child, especially a girl, and I dare say I’ll make a terrible mess of it.
So far as I’m concerned, Matthew, she may stay.” Matthew’s shy face was a glow of delight.
“Well now, I reckoned you’d come to see it in that light, Marilla,” he said.
“She’s such an interesting little thing.” “It’d be more to the point if you could say she was a useful little thing,” retorted Marilla, “but I’ll make it my business to see she’s trained to be that.
And mind, Matthew, you’re not to go interfering with my methods.
Perhaps an old maid doesn’t know much about bringing up a child, but I guess she knows more than an old bachelor.
When I fail it’ll be time enough to put your oar in.” “There, there, Marilla, you can have your own way,” said Matthew reassuringly.
“Only be as good and kind to her as you can without spoiling her.
I kind of think she’s one of the sort you can do anything with if you only get her to love you.” Marilla sniffed, to express her contempt for Matthew’s opinions concerning anything feminine, and walked off to the dairy with the pails.
“I won’t tell her tonight that she can stay,” she reflected, as she strained the milk into the creamers.
Marilla Cuthbert, you’re fairly in for it.
Did you ever suppose you’d see the day when you’d be adopting an orphan girl?
It’s surprising enough; but not so surprising as that Matthew should be at the bottom of it, him that always seemed to have such a mortal dread of little girls.
Anyhow, we’ve decided on the experiment and goodness only knows what will come of it.” CHAPTER VII.
As soon as you take off any article of clothing fold it neatly and place it on the chair.
I haven’t any use at all for little girls who aren’t neat.” “I was so harrowed up in my mind last night that I didn’t think about my clothes at all,” said Anne.
Half the time, though, I’d forget, I’d be in such a hurry to get into bed nice and quiet and imagine things.” “You’ll have to remember a little better if you stay here,” admonished Marilla.
“There, that looks something like.
Say your prayers now and get into bed.” “I never say any prayers,” announced Anne.
Marilla looked horrified astonishment.
Don’t you know who God is, Anne?” “‘God is a spirit, infinite, eternal and unchangeable, in His being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth,’” responded Anne promptly and glibly.
Marilla looked rather relieved.
“So you do know something then, thank goodness!
They made us learn the whole catechism.
There’s something splendid about some of the words.
‘Infinite, eternal and unchangeable.’ Isn’t that grand?
Don’t you know it’s a terrible wicked thing not to say your prayers every night?
I’m afraid you are a very bad little girl.” “You’d find it easier to be bad than good if you had red hair,” said Anne reproachfully.
People who have to look after twins can’t be expected to say their prayers.
Now, do you honestly think they can?” Marilla decided that Anne’s religious training must be begun at once.
“You must say your prayers while you are under my roof, Anne.” “Why, of course, if you want me to,” assented Anne cheerfully.
“I’d do anything to oblige you.
I believe that it will be quite interesting, now that I come to think of it.” “You must kneel down,” said Marilla in embarrassment.
I’d go out into a great big field all alone or into the deep, deep woods, and I’d look up into the sky--up--up--up--into that lovely blue sky that looks as if there was no end to its blueness.
What am I to say?” Marilla felt more embarrassed than ever.
“You’re old enough to pray for yourself, Anne,” she said finally.
“Just thank God for your blessings and ask Him humbly for the things you want.” “Well, I’ll do my best,” promised Anne, burying her face in Marilla’s lap.
“Gracious heavenly Father--that’s the way the ministers say it in church, so I suppose it’s all right in private prayer, isn’t it?” she interjected, lifting her head for a moment.
“Gracious heavenly Father, I thank Thee for the White Way of Delight and the Lake of Shining Waters and Bonny and the Snow Queen.
I’m really extremely grateful for them.
And that’s all the blessings I can think of just now to thank Thee for.
As for the things I want, they’re so numerous that it would take a great deal of time to name them all, so I will only mention the two most important.
I remain, “Yours respectfully, Anne Shirley.
“I could have made it much more flowery if I’d had a little more time to think it over.” Poor Marilla was only preserved from complete collapse by remembering that it was not irreverence, but simply spiritual ignorance on the part of Anne that was responsible for this extraordinary petition.
She tucked the child up in bed, mentally vowing that she should be taught a prayer the very next day, and was leaving the room with the light when Anne called her back.
I should have said ‘Amen’ in place of ‘yours respectfully,’ shouldn’t I?--the way the ministers do.
I’d forgotten it, but I felt a prayer should be finished off in some way, so I put in the other.
Do you suppose it will make any difference?” “I--I don’t suppose it will,” said Marilla.
Good night.” “I can say good night tonight with a clear conscience,” said Anne, cuddling luxuriously down among her pillows.
Marilla retreated to the kitchen, set the candle firmly on the table, and glared at Matthew.
“Matthew Cuthbert, it’s about time somebody adopted that child and taught her something.
I’ll send to the manse tomorrow and borrow the Peep of the Day series, that’s what I’ll do.
And she shall go to Sunday-school just as soon as I can get some suitable clothes made for her.
Anne’s Bringing-up Is Begun FOR reasons best known to herself, Marilla did not tell Anne that she was to stay at Green Gables until the next afternoon.
During the forenoon she kept the child busy with various tasks and watched over her with a keen eye while she did them.
By noon she had concluded that Anne was smart and obedient, willing to work and quick to learn; her most serious shortcoming seemed to be a tendency to fall into daydreams in the middle of a task and forget all about it until such time as she was sharply recalled to earth by a reprimand or a catastrophe.
When Anne had finished washing the dinner dishes she suddenly confronted Marilla with the air and expression of one desperately determined to learn the worst.
Her thin little body trembled from head to foot; her face flushed and her eyes dilated until they were almost black; she clasped her hands tightly and said in an imploring voice: “Oh, please, Miss Cuthbert, won’t you tell me if you are going to send me away or not?
It’s a dreadful feeling.
Please tell me.” “You haven’t scalded the dishcloth in clean hot water as I told you to do,” said Marilla immovably.
“Just go and do it before you ask any more questions, Anne.” Anne went and attended to the dishcloth.
Then she returned to Marilla and fastened imploring eyes on the latter’s face.
“Well,” said Marilla, unable to find any excuse for deferring her explanation longer, “I suppose I might as well tell you.
Matthew and I have decided to keep you--that is, if you will try to be a good little girl and show yourself grateful.
Why, child, whatever is the matter?” “I’m crying,” said Anne in a tone of bewilderment.
I was glad about the White Way and the cherry blossoms--but this!
Oh, it’s something more than glad.
Thomas often told me I was desperately wicked.
But can you tell me why I’m crying?” “I suppose it’s because you’re all excited and worked up,” said Marilla disapprovingly.
“Sit down on that chair and try to calm yourself.
You must go to school; but it’s only a fortnight till vacation so it isn’t worth while for you to start before it opens again in September.” “What am I to call you?” asked Anne.
“Shall I always say Miss Cuthbert?
I’m not used to being called Miss Cuthbert and it would make me nervous.” “It sounds awfully disrespectful to just say Marilla,” protested Anne.
“I guess there’ll be nothing disrespectful in it if you’re careful to speak respectfully.
Everybody, young and old, in Avonlea calls me Marilla except the minister.
He says Miss Cuthbert--when he thinks of it.” “I’d love to call you Aunt Marilla,” said Anne wistfully.
“I’ve never had an aunt or any relation at all--not even a grandmother.
It would make me feel as if I really belonged to you.
“Do you never imagine things different from what they really are?” asked Anne wide-eyed.
“Oh, Miss--Marilla, how much you miss!” “I don’t believe in imagining things different from what they really are,” retorted Marilla.
“When the Lord puts us in certain circumstances He doesn’t mean for us to imagine them away.
Go into the sitting room, Anne--be sure your feet are clean and don’t let any flies in--and bring me out the illustrated card that’s on the mantelpiece.
The Lord’s Prayer is on it and you’ll devote your spare time this afternoon to learning it off by heart.
There’s to be no more of such praying as I heard last night.” “I suppose I was very awkward,” said Anne apologetically, “but then, you see, I’d never had any practice.
I thought out a splendid prayer after I went to bed, just as I promised you I would.
It was nearly as long as a minister’s and so poetical.
I couldn’t remember one word when I woke up this morning.
Have you ever noticed that?” “Here is something for you to notice, Anne.
When I tell you to do a thing I want you to obey me at once and not stand stock-still and discourse about it.
Just you go and do as I bid you.” Anne promptly departed for the sitting-room across the hall; she failed to return; after waiting ten minutes Marilla laid down her knitting and marched after her with a grim expression.
She found Anne standing motionless before a picture hanging on the wall between the two windows, with her eyes astar with dreams.
The white and green light strained through apple-trees and clustering vines outside fell over the rapt little figure with a half-unearthly radiance.
“Anne, whatever are you thinking of?” demanded Marilla sharply.
“That,” she said, pointing to the picture--a rather vivid chromo entitled, “Christ Blessing Little Children”--“and I was just imagining I was one of them--that I was the little girl in the blue dress, standing off by herself in the corner as if she didn’t belong to anybody, like me.
But I wish the artist hadn’t painted Him so sorrowful-looking.
All His pictures are like that, if you’ve noticed.
But I don’t believe He could really have looked so sad or the children would have been afraid of Him.” “Anne,” said Marilla, wondering why she had not broken into this speech long before, “you shouldn’t talk that way.
It’s irreverent--positively irreverent.” Anne’s eyes marveled.
“Why, I felt just as reverent as could be.
I’m sure I didn’t mean to be irreverent.” “Well, I don’t suppose you did--but it doesn’t sound right to talk so familiarly about such things.
And another thing, Anne, when I send you after something you’re to bring it at once and not fall into mooning and imagining before pictures.
Now, sit down in the corner and learn that prayer off by heart.” Anne set the card up against the jugful of apple blossoms she had brought in to decorate the dinner table--Marilla had eyed that decoration askance, but had said nothing--propped her chin on her hands, and fell to studying it intently for several silent minutes.
“I like this,” she announced at length.
I’ve heard it before--I heard the superintendent of the asylum Sunday-school say it over once.
He had such a cracked voice and he prayed it so mournfully.
I really felt sure he thought praying was a disagreeable duty.
‘Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name.’ That is just like a line of music.
Anne tipped the vase of apple blossoms near enough to bestow a soft kiss on a pink-cupped bud, and then studied diligently for some moments longer.
“Marilla,” she demanded presently, “do you think that I shall ever have a bosom friend in Avonlea?” “A--a what kind of friend?” “A bosom friend--an intimate friend, you know--a really kindred spirit to whom I can confide my inmost soul.
I never really supposed I would, but so many of my loveliest dreams have come true all at once that perhaps this one will, too.
Do you think it’s possible?” “Diana Barry lives over at Orchard Slope and she’s about your age.
She’s a very nice little girl, and perhaps she will be a playmate for you when she comes home.
She’s visiting her aunt over at Carmody just now.
You’ll have to be careful how you behave yourself, though.
Barry is a very particular woman.
She won’t let Diana play with any little girl who isn’t nice and good.” Anne looked at Marilla through the apple blossoms, her eyes aglow with interest.
It’s bad enough to have red hair myself, but I positively couldn’t endure it in a bosom friend.” “Diana is a very pretty little girl.
And she is good and smart, which is better than being pretty.” Marilla was as fond of morals as the Duchess in Wonderland, and was firmly convinced that one should be tacked on to every remark made to a child who was being brought up.
But Anne waved the moral inconsequently aside and seized only on the delightful possibilities before it.
Next to being beautiful oneself--and that’s impossible in my case--it would be best to have a beautiful bosom friend.
Thomas she had a bookcase in her sitting room with glass doors.
Thomas kept her best china and her preserves there--when she had any preserves to keep.
Thomas smashed it one night when he was slightly intoxicated.
But the other was whole and I used to pretend that my reflection in it was another little girl who lived in it.
I called her Katie Maurice, and we were very intimate.
I used to talk to her by the hour, especially on Sunday, and tell her everything.
Katie was the comfort and consolation of my life.
We used to pretend that the bookcase was enchanted and that if I only knew the spell I could open the door and step right into the room where Katie Maurice lived, instead of into Mrs.
Thomas’ shelves of preserves and china.
And then Katie Maurice would have taken me by the hand and led me out into a wonderful place, all flowers and sunshine and fairies, and we would have lived there happy for ever after.
She felt it dreadfully, too, I know she did, for she was crying when she kissed me good-bye through the bookcase door.
There was no bookcase at Mrs.
But just up the river a little way from the house there was a long green little valley, and the loveliest echo lived there.
So I imagined that it was a little girl called Violetta and we were great friends and I loved her almost as well as I loved Katie Maurice--not quite, but almost, you know.
The night before I went to the asylum I said good-bye to Violetta, and oh, her good-bye came back to me in such sad, sad tones.
I had become so attached to her that I hadn’t the heart to imagine a bosom friend at the asylum, even if there had been any scope for imagination there.” “I think it’s just as well there wasn’t,” said Marilla drily.
You seem to half believe your own imaginations.
It will be well for you to have a real live friend to put such nonsense out of your head.
Barry hear you talking about your Katie Maurices and your Violettas or she’ll think you tell stories.” “Oh, I won’t.
I couldn’t talk of them to everybody--their memories are too sacred for that.
If I wasn’t a human girl I think I’d like to be a bee and live among the flowers.” “Yesterday you wanted to be a sea-gull,” sniffed Marilla.
But it seems impossible for you to stop talking if you’ve got anybody that will listen to you.
Go to your room and finish learning it well, and stay there until I call you down to help me get tea.” “Can I take the apple blossoms with me for company?” pleaded Anne.
“No; you don’t want your room cluttered up with flowers.
But the temptation was _irresistible_.
What do you do when you meet with an irresistible temptation?” “Anne, did you hear me tell you to go to your room?” Anne sighed, retreated to the east gable, and sat down in a chair by the window.
I learned that last sentence coming upstairs.
Now I’m going to imagine things into this room so that they’ll always stay imagined.
The floor is covered with a white velvet carpet with pink roses all over it and there are pink silk curtains at the windows.
The walls are hung with gold and silver brocade tapestry.
The furniture is mahogany.
I never saw any mahogany, but it does sound _so_ luxurious.
This is a couch all heaped with gorgeous silken cushions, pink and blue and crimson and gold, and I am reclining gracefully on it.
I can see my reflection in that splendid big mirror hanging on the wall.
I am tall and regal, clad in a gown of trailing white lace, with a pearl cross on my breast and pearls in my hair.
My hair is of midnight darkness and my skin is a clear ivory pallor.
My name is the Lady Cordelia Fitzgerald.
Her pointed freckled face and solemn gray eyes peered back at her.
“You’re only Anne of Green Gables,” she said earnestly, “and I see you, just as you are looking now, whenever I try to imagine I’m the Lady Cordelia.
But it’s a million times nicer to be Anne of Green Gables than Anne of nowhere in particular, isn’t it?” She bent forward, kissed her reflection affectionately, and betook herself to the open window.
“Dear Snow Queen, good afternoon.
And good afternoon, dear birches down in the hollow.
And good afternoon, dear gray house up on the hill.
But I must never quite forget Katie Maurice and Violetta.
They would feel so hurt if I did and I’d hate to hurt anybody’s feelings, even a little bookcase girl’s or a little echo girl’s.
I must be careful to remember them and send them a kiss every day.” Anne blew a couple of airy kisses from her fingertips past the cherry blossoms and then, with her chin in her hands, drifted luxuriously out on a sea of daydreams.
Rachel Lynde Is Properly Horrified ANNE had been a fortnight at Green Gables before Mrs.
A severe and unseasonable attack of grippe had confined that good lady to her house ever since the occasion of her last visit to Green Gables.
Rachel was not often sick and had a well-defined contempt for people who were; but grippe, she asserted, was like no other illness on earth and could only be interpreted as one of the special visitations of Providence.
As soon as her doctor allowed her to put her foot out-of-doors she hurried up to Green Gables, bursting with curiosity to see Matthew and Marilla’s orphan, concerning whom all sorts of stories and suppositions had gone abroad in Avonlea.
Anne had made good use of every waking moment of that fortnight.
Already she was acquainted with every tree and shrub about the place.
She had discovered that a lane opened out below the apple orchard and ran up through a belt of woodland; and she had explored it to its furthest end in all its delicious vagaries of brook and bridge, fir coppice and wild cherry arch, corners thick with fern, and branching byways of maple and mountain ash.
She had made friends with the spring down in the hollow--that wonderful deep, clear icy-cold spring; it was set about with smooth red sandstones and rimmed in by great palm-like clumps of water fern; and beyond it was a log bridge over the brook.
That bridge led Anne’s dancing feet up over a wooded hill beyond, where perpetual twilight reigned under the straight, thick-growing firs and spruces; the only flowers there were myriads of delicate “June bells,” those shyest and sweetest of woodland blooms, and a few pale, aerial starflowers, like the spirits of last year’s blossoms.
Gossamers glimmered like threads of silver among the trees and the fir boughs and tassels seemed to utter friendly speech.
All these raptured voyages of exploration were made in the odd half hours which she was allowed for play, and Anne talked Matthew and Marilla half-deaf over her discoveries.
Not that Matthew complained, to be sure; he listened to it all with a wordless smile of enjoyment on his face; Marilla permitted the “chatter” until she found herself becoming too interested in it, whereupon she always promptly quenched Anne by a curt command to hold her tongue.
Rachel came, wandering at her own sweet will through the lush, tremulous grasses splashed with ruddy evening sunshine; so that good lady had an excellent chance to talk her illness fully over, describing every ache and pulse beat with such evident enjoyment that Marilla thought even grippe must bring its compensations.
When details were exhausted Mrs.
Rachel introduced the real reason of her call.
“I’ve been hearing some surprising things about you and Matthew.” “I don’t suppose you are any more surprised than I am myself,” said Marilla.
“I’m getting over my surprise now.” “It was too bad there was such a mistake,” said Mrs.
Rachel sympathetically.
And I must say I like her myself--although I admit she has her faults.
The house seems a different place already.
She’s a real bright little thing.” Marilla said more than she had intended to say when she began, for she read disapproval in Mrs.
Rachel’s expression.
“It’s a great responsibility you’ve taken on yourself,” said that lady gloomily, “especially when you’ve never had any experience with children.
You don’t know much about her or her real disposition, I suppose, and there’s no guessing how a child like that will turn out.
But I don’t want to discourage you I’m sure, Marilla.” “I’m not feeling discouraged,” was Marilla’s dry response, “when I make up my mind to do a thing it stays made up.
I’ll call her in.” Anne came running in presently, her face sparkling with the delight of her orchard rovings; but, abashed at finding the delight herself in the unexpected presence of a stranger, she halted confusedly inside the door.
She certainly was an odd-looking little creature in the short tight wincey dress she had worn from the asylum, below which her thin legs seemed ungracefully long.
Her freckles were more numerous and obtrusive than ever; the wind had ruffled her hatless hair into over-brilliant disorder; it had never looked redder than at that moment.
Rachel Lynde’s emphatic comment.
Rachel was one of those delightful and popular people who pride themselves on speaking their mind without fear or favor.
“She’s terrible skinny and homely, Marilla.
Lawful heart, did any one ever see such freckles?
Rachel, her face scarlet with anger, her lips quivering, and her whole slender form trembling from head to foot.
“I hate you,” she cried in a choked voice, stamping her foot on the floor.
“I hate you--I hate you--I hate you--” a louder stamp with each assertion of hatred.
How dare you say I’m freckled and redheaded?
You are a rude, impolite, unfeeling woman!” “Anne!” exclaimed Marilla in consternation.
But Anne continued to face Mrs.
Rachel undauntedly, head up, eyes blazing, hands clenched, passionate indignation exhaling from her like an atmosphere.
“How dare you say such things about me?” she repeated vehemently.
How would you like to be told that you are fat and clumsy and probably hadn’t a spark of imagination in you?
I don’t care if I do hurt your feelings by saying so!
Thomas’ intoxicated husband.
“Did anybody ever see such a temper!” exclaimed the horrified Mrs.
“Anne go to your room and stay there until I come up,” said Marilla, recovering her powers of speech with difficulty.
Anne, bursting into tears, rushed to the hall door, slammed it until the tins on the porch wall outside rattled in sympathy, and fled through the hall and up the stairs like a whirlwind.
A subdued slam above told that the door of the east gable had been shut with equal vehemence.
“Well, I don’t envy you your job bringing _that_ up, Marilla,” said Mrs.
Rachel with unspeakable solemnity.
Marilla opened her lips to say she knew not what of apology or deprecation.
What she did say was a surprise to herself then and ever afterwards.
“You shouldn’t have twitted her about her looks, Rachel.” “Marilla Cuthbert, you don’t mean to say that you are upholding her in such a terrible display of temper as we’ve just seen?” demanded Mrs.
But we must make allowances for her.
And you _were_ too hard on her, Rachel.” Marilla could not help tacking on that last sentence, although she was again surprised at herself for doing it.
Rachel got up with an air of offended dignity.
“Well, I see that I’ll have to be very careful what I say after this, Marilla, since the fine feelings of orphans, brought from goodness knows where, have to be considered before anything else.
Oh, no, I’m not vexed--don’t worry yourself.
You’ll have your own troubles with that child.
But if you’ll take my advice--which I suppose you won’t do, although I’ve brought up ten children and buried two--you’ll do that ‘talking to’ you mention with a fair-sized birch switch.
I should think _that_ would be the most effective language for that kind of a child.
But you can’t expect me to visit here again in a hurry, if I’m liable to be flown at and insulted in such a fashion.
It’s something new in _my_ experience.” Whereat Mrs.
On the way upstairs she pondered uneasily as to what she ought to do.
How unfortunate that Anne should have displayed such temper before Mrs.
Then Marilla suddenly became aware of an uncomfortable and rebuking consciousness that she felt more humiliation over this than sorrow over the discovery of such a serious defect in Anne’s disposition.
The amiable suggestion of the birch switch--to the efficiency of which all of Mrs.
Rachel’s own children could have borne smarting testimony--did not appeal to Marilla.
No, some other method of punishment must be found to bring Anne to a proper realization of the enormity of her offense.
Marilla found Anne face downward on her bed, crying bitterly, quite oblivious of muddy boots on a clean counterpane.
“Anne,” she said not ungently.
“Anne,” with greater severity, “get off that bed this minute and listen to what I have to say to you.” Anne squirmed off the bed and sat rigidly on a chair beside it, her face swollen and tear-stained and her eyes fixed stubbornly on the floor.
Aren’t you ashamed of yourself?” “She hadn’t any right to call me ugly and redheaded,” retorted Anne, evasive and defiant.
I was ashamed of you--thoroughly ashamed of you.
Lynde, and instead of that you have disgraced me.
You say it yourself often enough.” “Oh, but there’s such a difference between saying a thing yourself and hearing other people say it,” wailed Anne.
When she said those things something just rose right up in me and choked me.
I _had_ to fly out at her.” “Well, you made a fine exhibition of yourself I must say.
Lynde will have a nice story to tell about you everywhere--and she’ll tell it, too.
It was a dreadful thing for you to lose your temper like that, Anne.” “Just imagine how you would feel if somebody told you to your face that you were skinny and ugly,” pleaded Anne tearfully.
An old remembrance suddenly rose up before Marilla.
Lynde was exactly right in saying what she did to you, Anne,” she admitted in a softer tone.
“Rachel is too outspoken.
But that is no excuse for such behavior on your part.
She was a stranger and an elderly person and my visitor--all three very good reasons why you should have been respectful to her.
You were rude and saucy and”--Marilla had a saving inspiration of punishment--“you must go to her and tell her you are very sorry for your bad temper and ask her to forgive you.” “I can never do that,” said Anne determinedly and darkly.
You can shut me up in a dark, damp dungeon inhabited by snakes and toads and feed me only on bread and water and I shall not complain.
Lynde to forgive me.” “We’re not in the habit of shutting people up in dark damp dungeons,” said Marilla drily, “especially as they’re rather scarce in Avonlea.
But apologize to Mrs.
Lynde you must and shall and you’ll stay here in your room until you can tell me you’re willing to do it.” “I shall have to stay here forever then,” said Anne mournfully, “because I can’t tell Mrs.
It was a great satisfaction.
I can’t even _imagine_ I’m sorry.” “Perhaps your imagination will be in better working order by the morning,” said Marilla, rising to depart.
You said you would try to be a very good girl if we kept you at Green Gables, but I must say it hasn’t seemed very much like it this evening.” Leaving this Parthian shaft to rankle in Anne’s stormy bosom, Marilla descended to the kitchen, grievously troubled in mind and vexed in soul.
She was as angry with herself as with Anne, because, whenever she recalled Mrs.
Rachel’s dumbfounded countenance her lips twitched with amusement and she felt a most reprehensible desire to laugh.
Anne’s Apology MARILLA said nothing to Matthew about the affair that evening; but when Anne proved still refractory the next morning an explanation had to be made to account for her absence from the breakfast table.
Marilla told Matthew the whole story, taking pains to impress him with a due sense of the enormity of Anne’s behavior.
“It’s a good thing Rachel Lynde got a calling down; she’s a meddlesome old gossip,” was Matthew’s consolatory rejoinder.
“Matthew Cuthbert, I’m astonished at you.
You know that Anne’s behavior was dreadful, and yet you take her part!
I suppose you’ll be saying next thing that she oughtn’t to be punished at all!” “Well now--no--not exactly,” said Matthew uneasily.
“I reckon she ought to be punished a little.
Recollect she hasn’t ever had anyone to teach her right.
You’re--you’re going to give her something to eat, aren’t you?” “When did you ever hear of me starving people into good behavior?” demanded Marilla indignantly.
But she’ll stay up there until she’s willing to apologize to Mrs.
Lynde, and that’s final, Matthew.” Breakfast, dinner, and supper were very silent meals--for Anne still remained obdurate.
After each meal Marilla carried a well-filled tray to the east gable and brought it down later on not noticeably depleted.
Matthew eyed its last descent with a troubled eye.
Had Anne eaten anything at all?
When Marilla went out that evening to bring the cows from the back pasture, Matthew, who had been hanging about the barns and watching, slipped into the house with the air of a burglar and crept upstairs.
As a general thing Matthew gravitated between the kitchen and the little bedroom off the hall where he slept; once in a while he ventured uncomfortably into the parlor or sitting room when the minister came to tea.
But he had never been upstairs in his own house since the spring he helped Marilla paper the spare bedroom, and that was four years ago.
He tiptoed along the hall and stood for several minutes outside the door of the east gable before he summoned courage to tap on it with his fingers and then open the door to peep in.
Anne was sitting on the yellow chair by the window gazing mournfully out into the garden.
“Anne,” he whispered, as if afraid of being overheard, “how are you making it, Anne?” Anne smiled wanly.
Of course, it’s rather lonesome.
But then, I may as well get used to that.” Anne smiled again, bravely facing the long years of solitary imprisonment before her.
Matthew recollected that he must say what he had come to say without loss of time, lest Marilla return prematurely.
“Well now, Anne, don’t you think you’d better do it and have it over with?” he whispered.
“It’ll have to be done sooner or later, you know, for Marilla’s a dreadful determined woman--dreadful determined, Anne.
Do it right off, I say, and have it over.” “Do you mean apologize to Mrs.
Lynde?” “Yes--apologize--that’s the very word,” said Matthew eagerly.
That’s what I was trying to get at.” “I suppose I could do it to oblige you,” said Anne thoughtfully.
I wasn’t in a temper anymore--and it left a dreadful sort of goneness, too.
It would be so humiliating.
But still--I’d do anything for you--if you really want me to--” “Well now, of course I do.
It’s terrible lonesome downstairs without you.
Just go and smooth things over--that’s a good girl.” “Very well,” said Anne resignedly.
“I’ll tell Marilla as soon as she comes in I’ve repented.” “That’s right--that’s right, Anne.
But don’t tell Marilla I said anything about it.
She might think I was putting my oar in and I promised not to do that.” “Wild horses won’t drag the secret from me,” promised Anne solemnly.
He fled hastily to the remotest corner of the horse pasture lest Marilla should suspect what he had been up to.
Marilla herself, upon her return to the house, was agreeably surprised to hear a plaintive voice calling, “Marilla” over the banisters.
Lynde so.” “Very well.” Marilla’s crispness gave no sign of her relief.
She had been wondering what under the canopy she should do if Anne did not give in.
“I’ll take you down after milking.” Accordingly, after milking, behold Marilla and Anne walking down the lane, the former erect and triumphant, the latter drooping and dejected.
But halfway down Anne’s dejection vanished as if by enchantment.
She lifted her head and stepped lightly along, her eyes fixed on the sunset sky and an air of subdued exhilaration about her.
Marilla beheld the change disapprovingly.
This was no meek penitent such as it behooved her to take into the presence of the offended Mrs.
“What are you thinking of, Anne?” she asked sharply.
“I’m imagining out what I must say to Mrs.
Lynde,” answered Anne dreamily.
This was satisfactory--or should have been so.
But Marilla could not rid herself of the notion that something in her scheme of punishment was going askew.
Anne had no business to look so rapt and radiant.
Rapt and radiant Anne continued until they were in the very presence of Mrs.
Lynde, who was sitting knitting by her kitchen window.
Then the radiance vanished.
Mournful penitence appeared on every feature.
Before a word was spoken Anne suddenly went down on her knees before the astonished Mrs.
Rachel and held out her hands beseechingly.
Lynde, I am so extremely sorry,” she said with a quiver in her voice.
“I could never express all my sorrow, no, not if I used up a whole dictionary.
I behaved terribly to you--and I’ve disgraced the dear friends, Matthew and Marilla, who have let me stay at Green Gables although I’m not a boy.
I’m a dreadfully wicked and ungrateful girl, and I deserve to be punished and cast out by respectable people forever.
My hair is red and I’m freckled and skinny and ugly.
If you refuse it will be a lifelong sorrow on a poor little orphan girl, would you, even if she had a dreadful temper?
Lynde.” Anne clasped her hands together, bowed her head, and waited for the word of judgment.
There was no mistaking her sincerity--it breathed in every tone of her voice.
Lynde recognized its unmistakable ring.
But the former understood in dismay that Anne was actually enjoying her valley of humiliation--was reveling in the thoroughness of her abasement.
Where was the wholesome punishment upon which she, Marilla, had plumed herself?
Anne had turned it into a species of positive pleasure.
Lynde, not being overburdened with perception, did not see this.
She only perceived that Anne had made a very thorough apology and all resentment vanished from her kindly, if somewhat officious, heart.
“There, there, get up, child,” she said heartily.
But I’m such an outspoken person.
It can’t be denied your hair is terrible red; but I knew a girl once--went to school with her, in fact--whose hair was every mite as red as yours when she was young, but when she grew up it darkened to a real handsome auburn.
I wouldn’t be a mite surprised if yours did, too--not a mite.” “Oh, Mrs.
I shall always feel that you are a benefactor.
Oh, I could endure anything if I only thought my hair would be a handsome auburn when I grew up.
It would be so much easier to be good if one’s hair was a handsome auburn, don’t you think?
There is so much more scope for imagination out there.” “Laws, yes, run along, child.
Yes, she certainly is an odd child, but there is something kind of taking about her after all.
I don’t feel so surprised at you and Matthew keeping her as I did--nor so sorry for you, either.
Of course, she has a queer way of expressing herself--a little too--well, too kind of forcible, you know; but she’ll likely get over that now that she’s come to live among civilized folks.
And then, her temper’s pretty quick, I guess; but there’s one comfort, a child that has a quick temper, just blaze up and cool down, ain’t never likely to be sly or deceitful.
Preserve me from a sly child, that’s what.
On the whole, Marilla, I kind of like her.” When Marilla went home Anne came out of the fragrant twilight of the orchard with a sheaf of white narcissi in her hands.
“I apologized pretty well, didn’t I?” she said proudly as they went down the lane.
“I thought since I had to do it I might as well do it thoroughly.” “You did it thoroughly, all right enough,” was Marilla’s comment.
Marilla was dismayed at finding herself inclined to laugh over the recollection.
She had also an uneasy feeling that she ought to scold Anne for apologizing so well; but then, that was ridiculous!
She compromised with her conscience by saying severely: “I hope you won’t have occasion to make many more such apologies.
Do you suppose my hair will really be a handsome auburn when I grow up?” “You shouldn’t think so much about your looks, Anne.
I’m afraid you are a very vain little girl.” “How can I be vain when I know I’m homely?” protested Anne.
“I love pretty things; and I hate to look in the glass and see something that isn’t pretty.
It makes me feel so sorrowful--just as I feel when I look at any ugly thing.
I pity it because it isn’t beautiful.” “Handsome is as handsome does,” quoted Marilla.
“I’ve had that said to me before, but I have my doubts about it,” remarked skeptical Anne, sniffing at her narcissi.
I have no hard feelings against Mrs.
It gives you a lovely, comfortable feeling to apologize and be forgiven, doesn’t it?
I’d like that lovely clear big one away over there above that dark hill.” “Anne, do hold your tongue,” said Marilla, thoroughly worn out trying to follow the gyrations of Anne’s thoughts.
Far up in the shadows a cheerful light gleamed out through the trees from the kitchen at Green Gables.
Anne suddenly came close to Marilla and slipped her hand into the older woman’s hard palm.
I could pray right now and not find it a bit hard.” Something warm and pleasant welled up in Marilla’s heart at touch of that thin little hand in her own--a throb of the maternity she had missed, perhaps.
Its very unaccustomedness and sweetness disturbed her.
She hastened to restore her sensations to their normal calm by inculcating a moral.
And you should never find it hard to say your prayers.” “Saying one’s prayers isn’t exactly the same thing as praying,” said Anne meditatively.
Lynde’s garden and set the flowers dancing--and then I’ll go with one great swoop over the clover field--and then I’ll blow over the Lake of Shining Waters and ripple it all up into little sparkling waves.
Oh, there’s so much scope for imagination in a wind!
So I’ll not talk any more just now, Marilla.” “Thanks be to goodness for that,” breathed Marilla in devout relief.
Anne’s Impressions of Sunday-school WELL, how do you like them?” said Marilla.
Anne was standing in the gable room, looking solemnly at three new dresses spread out on the bed.
One was of snuffy colored gingham which Marilla had been tempted to buy from a peddler the preceding summer because it looked so serviceable; one was of black-and-white checkered sateen which she had picked up at a bargain counter in the winter; and one was a stiff print of an ugly blue shade which she had purchased that week at a Carmody store.
“I don’t want you to imagine it,” said Marilla, offended.
Aren’t they neat and clean and new?” “Yes.” “Then why don’t you like them?” “They’re--they’re not--pretty,” said Anne reluctantly.
I don’t believe in pampering vanity, Anne, I’ll tell you that right off.
Those dresses are good, sensible, serviceable dresses, without any frills or furbelows about them, and they’re all you’ll get this summer.
I should think you’d be grateful to get most anything after those skimpy wincey things you’ve been wearing.” “Oh, I _am_ grateful,” protested Anne.
“But I’d be ever so much gratefuller if--if you’d made just one of them with puffed sleeves.
Puffed sleeves are so fashionable now.
I hadn’t any material to waste on puffed sleeves.
I think they are ridiculous-looking things anyhow.
I prefer the plain, sensible ones.” “But I’d rather look ridiculous when everybody else does than plain and sensible all by myself,” persisted Anne mournfully.
Well, hang those dresses carefully up in your closet, and then sit down and learn the Sunday-school lesson.
I got a quarterly from Mr.
Bell for you and you’ll go to Sunday-school tomorrow,” said Marilla, disappearing downstairs in high dudgeon.
“I did hope there would be a white one with puffed sleeves,” she whispered disconsolately.
Well, fortunately I can imagine that one of them is of snow-white muslin with lovely lace frills and three-puffed sleeves.” The next morning warnings of a sick headache prevented Marilla from going to Sunday-school with Anne.
Now, mind you behave yourself properly.
Stay to preaching afterwards and ask Mrs.
Here’s a cent for collection.
I shall expect you to tell me the text when you come home.” Anne started off irreproachable, arrayed in the stiff black-and-white sateen, which, while decent as regards length and certainly not open to the charge of skimpiness, contrived to emphasize every corner and angle of her thin figure.
Her hat was a little, flat, glossy, new sailor, the extreme plainness of which had likewise much disappointed Anne, who had permitted herself secret visions of ribbon and flowers.
The latter, however, were supplied before Anne reached the main road, for being confronted halfway down the lane with a golden frenzy of wind-stirred buttercups and a glory of wild roses, Anne promptly and liberally garlanded her hat with a heavy wreath of them.
Whatever other people might have thought of the result it satisfied Anne, and she tripped gaily down the road, holding her ruddy head with its decoration of pink and yellow very proudly.
Nothing daunted, Anne proceeded onward to the church alone.
In the porch she found a crowd of little girls, all more or less gaily attired in whites and blues and pinks, and all staring with curious eyes at this stranger in their midst, with her extraordinary head adornment.
They looked at her and whispered to each other behind their quarterlies.
Nobody made any friendly advances, then or later on when the opening exercises were over and Anne found herself in Miss Rogerson’s class.
Miss Rogerson was a middle-aged lady who had taught a Sunday-school class for twenty years.
Her method of teaching was to ask the printed questions from the quarterly and look sternly over its edge at the particular little girl she thought ought to answer the question.
She looked very often at Anne, and Anne, thanks to Marilla’s drilling, answered promptly; but it may be questioned if she understood very much about either question or answer.
She did not think she liked Miss Rogerson, and she felt very miserable; every other little girl in the class had puffed sleeves.
Her wreath having faded, Anne had discarded it in the lane, so Marilla was spared the knowledge of that for a time.
It was horrid.” “Anne Shirley!” said Marilla rebukingly.
Anne sat down on the rocker with a long sigh, kissed one of Bonny’s leaves, and waved her hand to a blossoming fuchsia.
“They might have been lonesome while I was away,” she explained.
I went into the church, with a lot of other little girls, and I sat in the corner of a pew by the window while the opening exercises went on.
I would have been dreadfully tired before he got through if I hadn’t been sitting by that window.
But it looked right out on the Lake of Shining Waters, so I just gazed at that and imagined all sorts of splendid things.” “You shouldn’t have done anything of the sort.
You should have listened to Mr.
Bell.” “But he wasn’t talking to me,” protested Anne.
“He was talking to God and he didn’t seem to be very much interested in it, either.
There was a long row of white birches hanging over the lake and the sunshine fell down through them, ‘way, ‘way down, deep into the water.
Oh, Marilla, it was like a beautiful dream!
It gave me a thrill and I just said, ‘Thank you for it, God,’ two or three times.” “Not out loud, I hope,” said Marilla anxiously.
Bell did get through at last and they told me to go into the classroom with Miss Rogerson’s class.
It was as easy as could be to imagine they were puffed when I was alone in the east gable, but it was awfully hard there among the others who had really truly puffs.” “You shouldn’t have been thinking about your sleeves in Sunday-school.
You should have been attending to the lesson.
I hope you knew it.” “Oh, yes; and I answered a lot of questions.
Miss Rogerson asked ever so many.
Then all the other little girls recited a paraphrase.
It isn’t a really truly religious piece of poetry, but it’s so sad and melancholy that it might as well be.
She said it wouldn’t do and she told me to learn the nineteenth paraphrase for next Sunday.
I read it over in church afterwards and it’s splendid.
There are two lines in particular that just thrill me.
“‘Quick as the slaughtered squadrons fell In Midian’s evil day.’ “I don’t know what ‘squadrons’ means nor ‘Midian,’ either, but it sounds _so_ tragical.
I’ll practice it all the week.
After Sunday-school I asked Miss Rogerson--because Mrs.
I sat just as still as I could and the text was Revelations, third chapter, second and third verses.
If I was a minister I’d pick the short, snappy ones.
I suppose the minister had to match it to the text.
I didn’t think he was a bit interesting.
The trouble with him seems to be that he hasn’t enough imagination.
I just let my thoughts run and I thought of the most surprising things.” Marilla felt helplessly that all this should be sternly reproved, but she was hampered by the undeniable fact that some of the things Anne had said, especially about the minister’s sermons and Mr.
Bell’s prayers, were what she herself had really thought deep down in her heart for years, but had never given expression to.
It almost seemed to her that those secret, unuttered, critical thoughts had suddenly taken visible and accusing shape and form in the person of this outspoken morsel of neglected humanity.
A Solemn Vow and Promise IT was not until the next Friday that Marilla heard the story of the flower-wreathed hat.
Rachel says you went to church last Sunday with your hat rigged out ridiculous with roses and buttercups.
I know pink and yellow aren’t becoming to me,” began Anne.
“Becoming fiddlesticks!
It was putting flowers on your hat at all, no matter what color they were, that was ridiculous.
You are the most aggravating child!” “I don’t see why it’s any more ridiculous to wear flowers on your hat than on your dress,” protested Anne.
“Lots of little girls there had bouquets pinned on their dresses.
What’s the difference?” Marilla was not to be drawn from the safe concrete into dubious paths of the abstract.
She says people talked about it something dreadful.
The roses and buttercups were so sweet and pretty I thought they’d look lovely on my hat.
Lots of the little girls had artificial flowers on their hats.
I’m afraid I’m going to be a dreadful trial to you.
That would be terrible; I don’t think I could endure it; most likely I would go into consumption; I’m so thin as it is, you see.
But that would be better than being a trial to you.” “Nonsense,” said Marilla, vexed at herself for having made the child cry.
All I want is that you should behave like other little girls and not make yourself ridiculous.
Diana Barry came home this afternoon.
Barry, and if you like you can come with me and get acquainted with Diana.” Anne rose to her feet, with clasped hands, the tears still glistening on her cheeks; the dish towel she had been hemming slipped unheeded to the floor.
“Oh, Marilla, I’m frightened--now that it has come I’m actually frightened.
It would be the most tragical disappointment of my life.” “Now, don’t get into a fluster.
If she has heard about your outburst to Mrs.
Lynde and going to church with buttercups round your hat I don’t know what she’ll think of you.
You must be polite and well behaved, and don’t make any of your startling speeches.
For pity’s sake, if the child isn’t actually trembling!” Anne _was_ trembling.
“Oh, Marilla, you’d be excited, too, if you were going to meet a little girl you hoped to be your bosom friend and whose mother mightn’t like you,” she said as she hastened to get her hat.
She was a tall black-eyed, black-haired woman, with a very resolute mouth.
She had the reputation of being very strict with her children.
“How do you do, Marilla?” she said cordially.
“Spelled with an E,” gasped Anne, who, tremulous and excited as she was, was determined there should be no misunderstanding on that important point.
Barry, not hearing or not comprehending, merely shook hands and said kindly: “How are you?” “I am well in body although considerable rumpled up in spirit, thank you ma’am,” said Anne gravely.
Then aside to Marilla in an audible whisper, “There wasn’t anything startling in that, was there, Marilla?” Diana was sitting on the sofa, reading a book which she dropped when the callers entered.
She was a very pretty little girl, with her mother’s black eyes and hair, and rosy cheeks, and the merry expression which was her inheritance from her father.
It will be better for you than straining your eyes over that book.
She reads entirely too much--” this to Marilla as the little girls went out--“and I can’t prevent her, for her father aids and abets her.
I’m glad she has the prospect of a playmate--perhaps it will take her more out-of-doors.” Outside in the garden, which was full of mellow sunset light streaming through the dark old firs to the west of it, stood Anne and Diana, gazing bashfully at each other over a clump of gorgeous tiger lilies.
The Barry garden was a bowery wilderness of flowers which would have delighted Anne’s heart at any time less fraught with destiny.
It was encircled by huge old willows and tall firs, beneath which flourished flowers that loved the shade.
Prim, right-angled paths neatly bordered with clamshells, intersected it like moist red ribbons and in the beds between old-fashioned flowers ran riot.
“Oh, Diana,” said Anne at last, clasping her hands and speaking almost in a whisper, “oh, do you think you can like me a little--enough to be my bosom friend?” Diana laughed.
It will be jolly to have somebody to play with.
There isn’t any other girl who lives near enough to play with, and I’ve no sisters big enough.” “Will you swear to be my friend forever and ever?” demanded Anne eagerly.
“Why it’s dreadfully wicked to swear,” she said rebukingly.
“Oh no, not my kind of swearing.
There are two kinds, you know.” “I never heard of but one kind,” said Diana doubtfully.
It just means vowing and promising solemnly.” “Well, I don’t mind doing that,” agreed Diana, relieved.
I solemnly swear to be faithful to my bosom friend, Diana Barry, as long as the sun and moon shall endure.
Now you say it and put my name in.” Diana repeated the “oath” with a laugh fore and aft.
At the brook they parted with many promises to spend the next afternoon together.
“Oh yes,” sighed Anne, blissfully unconscious of any sarcasm on Marilla’s part.
“Oh Marilla, I’m the happiest girl on Prince Edward Island this very moment.
Diana and I are going to build a playhouse in Mr.
William Bell’s birch grove tomorrow.
Can I have those broken pieces of china that are out in the woodshed?
Diana’s birthday is in February and mine is in March.
Don’t you think that is a very strange coincidence?
She says it’s perfectly splendid and tremendously exciting.
Diana is going to teach me to sing a song called ‘Nelly in the Hazel Dell.’ She’s going to give me a picture to put up in my room; it’s a perfectly beautiful picture, she says--a lovely lady in a pale blue silk dress.
I wish I had something to give Diana.
I’m an inch taller than Diana, but she is ever so much fatter; she says she’d like to be thin because it’s so much more graceful, but I’m afraid she only said it to soothe my feelings.
Isn’t that a perfectly elegant name?
“But remember this in all your planning, Anne.
You’ll have your work to do and it’ll have to be done first.” Anne’s cup of happiness was full, and Matthew caused it to overflow.
He had just got home from a trip to the store at Carmody, and he sheepishly produced a small parcel from his pocket and handed it to Anne, with a deprecatory look at Marilla.
“I heard you say you liked chocolate sweeties, so I got you some,” he said.
He’d better have brought you peppermints.
Don’t sicken yourself eating all them at once now.” “Oh, no, indeed, I won’t,” said Anne eagerly.
It’s delightful to think I have something to give her.” “I will say it for the child,” said Marilla when Anne had gone to her gable, “she isn’t stingy.
I’m glad, for of all faults I detest stinginess in a child.
I’m perfectly willing to own up that I’m glad I consented to keep the child and that I’m getting fond of her, but don’t you rub it in, Matthew Cuthbert.” CHAPTER XIII.
The Delights of Anticipation IT’S time Anne was in to do her sewing,” said Marilla, glancing at the clock and then out into the yellow August afternoon where everything drowsed in the heat.
“She stayed playing with Diana more than half an hour more ‘n I gave her leave to; and now she’s perched out there on the woodpile talking to Matthew, nineteen to the dozen, when she knows perfectly well she ought to be at her work.
And of course he’s listening to her like a perfect ninny.
I never saw such an infatuated man.
The more she talks and the odder the things she says, the more he’s delighted evidently.
Anne Shirley, you come right in here this minute, do you hear me!” A series of staccato taps on the west window brought Anne flying in from the yard, eyes shining, cheeks faintly flushed with pink, unbraided hair streaming behind her in a torrent of brightness.
“Oh, Marilla,” she exclaimed breathlessly, “there’s going to be a Sunday-school picnic next week--in Mr.
Superintendent Bell and Mrs.
What time did I tell you to come in?” “Two o’clock--but isn’t it splendid about the picnic, Marilla?
But you have no idea how fascinating Idlewild is.
Matthew is such a sympathetic listener.
Please can I go?” “You’ll have to learn to resist the fascination of Idle-whatever-you-call-it.
And you needn’t stop to discourse with sympathetic listeners on your way, either.
You’re a Sunday-school scholar, and it’s not likely I’d refuse to let you go when all the other little girls are going.” “But--but,” faltered Anne, “Diana says that everybody must take a basket of things to eat.
I can’t cook, as you know, Marilla, and--and--I don’t mind going to a picnic without puffed sleeves so much, but I’d feel terribly humiliated if I had to go without a basket.
Oh, I’m so much obliged to you.” Getting through with her “ohs” Anne cast herself into Marilla’s arms and rapturously kissed her sallow cheek.
It was the first time in her whole life that childish lips had voluntarily touched Marilla’s face.
Again that sudden sensation of startling sweetness thrilled her.
She was secretly vastly pleased at Anne’s impulsive caress, which was probably the reason why she said brusquely: “There, there, never mind your kissing nonsense.
I’d sooner see you doing strictly as you’re told.
But you’re so featherbrained, Anne, I’ve been waiting to see if you’d sober down a little and learn to be steady before I begin.
You’ve got to keep your wits about you in cooking and not stop in the middle of things to let your thoughts rove all over creation.
Now, get out your patchwork and have your square done before teatime.” “I do _not_ like patchwork,” said Anne dolefully, hunting out her workbasket and sitting down before a little heap of red and white diamonds with a sigh.
“I think some kinds of sewing would be nice; but there’s no scope for imagination in patchwork.
It’s just one little seam after another and you never seem to be getting anywhere.
But of course I’d rather be Anne of Green Gables sewing patchwork than Anne of any other place with nothing to do but play.
I have to furnish most of the imagination, but I’m well able to do that.
William Bell, and right in the corner there is a little ring of white birch trees--the most romantic spot, Marilla.
Diana and I have our playhouse there.
We call it Idlewild.
Isn’t that a poetical name?
I stayed awake nearly a whole night before I invented it.
Then, just as I was dropping off to sleep, it came like an inspiration.
Diana was _enraptured_ when she heard it.
We have got our house fixed up elegantly.
There’s a piece of a plate with a spray of red and yellow ivy on it that is especially beautiful.
It’s all full of rainbows--just little young rainbows that haven’t grown big yet--and Diana’s mother told her it was broken off a hanging lamp they once had.
Barry’s field Willowmere.
That was a thrilling book, Marilla.
I’d be satisfied with one, wouldn’t you?
She was very handsome and she went through great tribulations.
She could faint as easy as anything.
Oh, I do hope it will be fine next Wednesday.
I don’t feel that I could endure the disappointment if anything happened to prevent me from getting to the picnic.
I suppose I’d live through it, but I’m certain it would be a lifelong sorrow.
Diana tried to explain what it was like, but I guess ice cream is one of those things that are beyond imagination.” “Anne, you have talked even on for ten minutes by the clock,” said Marilla.
“Now, just for curiosity’s sake, see if you can hold your tongue for the same length of time.” Anne held her tongue as desired.
On Saturday it rained and she worked herself up into such a frantic state lest it should keep on raining until and over Wednesday that Marilla made her sew an extra patchwork square by way of steadying her nerves.
On Sunday Anne confided to Marilla on the way home from church that she grew actually cold all over with excitement when the minister announced the picnic from the pulpit.
I don’t think I’d ever really believed until then that there was honestly going to be a picnic.
I couldn’t help fearing I’d only imagined it.
But when a minister says a thing in the pulpit you just have to believe it.” “You set your heart too much on things, Anne,” said Marilla, with a sigh.
“I’m afraid there’ll be a great many disappointments in store for you through life.” “Oh, Marilla, looking forward to things is half the pleasure of them,” exclaimed Anne.
“You mayn’t get the things themselves; but nothing can prevent you from having the fun of looking forward to them.
Lynde says, ‘Blessed are they who expect nothing for they shall not be disappointed.’ But I think it would be worse to expect nothing than to be disappointed.” Marilla wore her amethyst brooch to church that day as usual.
Marilla always wore her amethyst brooch to church.
She would have thought it rather sacrilegious to leave it off--as bad as forgetting her Bible or her collection dime.
That amethyst brooch was Marilla’s most treasured possession.
A seafaring uncle had given it to her mother who in turn had bequeathed it to Marilla.
It was an old-fashioned oval, containing a braid of her mother’s hair, surrounded by a border of very fine amethysts.
Marilla knew too little about precious stones to realize how fine the amethysts actually were; but she thought them very beautiful and was always pleasantly conscious of their violet shimmer at her throat, above her good brown satin dress, even although she could not see it.
Anne had been smitten with delighted admiration when she first saw that brooch.
“Oh, Marilla, it’s a perfectly elegant brooch.
I don’t know how you can pay attention to the sermon or the prayers when you have it on.
I think amethysts are just sweet.
They are what I used to think diamonds were like.
I thought they would be lovely glimmering purple stones.
When I saw a real diamond in a lady’s ring one day I was so disappointed I cried.
Do you think amethysts can be the souls of good violets?” CHAPTER XIV.
Anne’s Confession ON the Monday evening before the picnic Marilla came down from her room with a troubled face.
“Anne,” she said to that small personage, who was shelling peas by the spotless table and singing, “Nelly of the Hazel Dell” with a vigor and expression that did credit to Diana’s teaching, “did you see anything of my amethyst brooch?
I thought I stuck it in my pincushion when I came home from church yesterday evening, but I can’t find it anywhere.” “I--I saw it this afternoon when you were away at the Aid Society,” said Anne, a little slowly.
“Y-e-e-s,” admitted Anne, “I took it up and I pinned it on my breast just to see how it would look.” “You had no business to do anything of the sort.
“That brooch isn’t anywhere on the bureau.
You’ve taken it out or something, Anne.” “I did put it back,” said Anne quickly--pertly, Marilla thought.
“I don’t just remember whether I stuck it on the pincushion or laid it in the china tray.
But I’m perfectly certain I put it back.” “I’ll go and have another look,” said Marilla, determining to be just.
If it isn’t I’ll know you didn’t, that’s all!” Marilla went to her room and made a thorough search, not only over the bureau but in every other place she thought the brooch might possibly be.
It was not to be found and she returned to the kitchen.
By your own admission you were the last person to handle it.
Did you take it out and lose it?” “No, I didn’t,” said Anne solemnly, meeting Marilla’s angry gaze squarely.
“I never took the brooch out of your room and that is the truth, if I was to be led to the block for it--although I’m not very certain what a block is.
So there, Marilla.” Anne’s “so there” was only intended to emphasize her assertion, but Marilla took it as a display of defiance.
“I believe you are telling me a falsehood, Anne,” she said sharply.
There now, don’t say anything more unless you are prepared to tell the whole truth.
“No, I’ll finish shelling them myself.
Do as I bid you.” When Anne had gone Marilla went about her evening tasks in a very disturbed state of mind.
She was worried about her valuable brooch.
With such an innocent face, too!
“I don’t know what I wouldn’t sooner have had happen,” thought Marilla, as she nervously shelled the peas.
“Of course, I don’t suppose she meant to steal it or anything like that.
She’s just taken it to play with or help along that imagination of hers.
I suppose she has lost it and is afraid to own up for fear she’ll be punished.
It’s a dreadful thing to think she tells falsehoods.
It’s a fearful responsibility to have a child in your house you can’t trust.
Slyness and untruthfulness--that’s what she has displayed.
If she’d only have told the truth about it I wouldn’t mind so much.” Marilla went to her room at intervals all through the evening and searched for the brooch, without finding it.
A bedtime visit to the east gable produced no result.
Anne persisted in denying that she knew anything about the brooch but Marilla was only the more firmly convinced that she did.
Matthew was confounded and puzzled; he could not so quickly lose faith in Anne but he had to admit that circumstances were against her.
“You’re sure it hasn’t fell down behind the bureau?” was the only suggestion he could offer.
“I’ve moved the bureau and I’ve taken out the drawers and I’ve looked in every crack and cranny” was Marilla’s positive answer.
That’s the plain, ugly truth, Matthew Cuthbert, and we might as well look it in the face.” “Well now, what are you going to do about it?” Matthew asked forlornly, feeling secretly thankful that Marilla and not he had to deal with the situation.
“She’ll stay in her room until she confesses,” said Marilla grimly, remembering the success of this method in the former case.
Perhaps we’ll be able to find the brooch if she’ll only tell where she took it; but in any case she’ll have to be severely punished, Matthew.” “Well now, you’ll have to punish her,” said Matthew, reaching for his hat.
“I’ve nothing to do with it, remember.
You warned me off yourself.” Marilla felt deserted by everyone.
Anne steadfastly refused to confess.
She persisted in asserting that she had not taken the brooch.
The child had evidently been crying and Marilla felt a pang of pity which she sternly repressed.
By night she was, as she expressed it, “beat out.” “You’ll stay in this room until you confess, Anne.
“But the picnic is tomorrow, Marilla,” cried Anne.
You’ll just let me out for the afternoon, won’t you?
Then I’ll stay here as long as you like _afterwards_ cheerfully.
But I _must_ go to the picnic.” “You’ll not go to picnics nor anywhere else until you’ve confessed, Anne.” “Oh, Marilla,” gasped Anne.
Wednesday morning dawned as bright and fair as if expressly made to order for the picnic.
Birds sang around Green Gables; the Madonna lilies in the garden sent out whiffs of perfume that entered in on viewless winds at every door and window, and wandered through halls and rooms like spirits of benediction.
The birches in the hollow waved joyful hands as if watching for Anne’s usual morning greeting from the east gable.
When Marilla took her breakfast up to her she found the child sitting primly on her bed, pale and resolute, with tight-shut lips and gleaming eyes.
Once again her method had succeeded; but her success was very bitter to her.
“Let me hear what you have to say then, Anne.” “I took the amethyst brooch,” said Anne, as if repeating a lesson she had learned.
But it did look so beautiful, Marilla, when I pinned it on my breast that I was overcome by an irresistible temptation.
I imagined how perfectly thrilling it would be to take it to Idlewild and play I was the Lady Cordelia Fitzgerald.
It would be so much easier to imagine I was the Lady Cordelia if I had a real amethyst brooch on.
Diana and I make necklaces of roseberries but what are roseberries compared to amethysts?
I went all the way around by the road to lengthen out the time.
Oh, how it did shine in the sunlight!
And then, when I was leaning over the bridge, it just slipped through my fingers--so--and went down--down--down, all purply-sparkling, and sank forevermore beneath the Lake of Shining Waters.
And that’s the best I can do at confessing, Marilla.” Marilla felt hot anger surge up into her heart again.
This child had taken and lost her treasured amethyst brooch and now sat there calmly reciting the details thereof without the least apparent compunction or repentance.
“Anne, this is terrible,” she said, trying to speak calmly.
“You are the very wickedest girl I ever heard of.” “Yes, I suppose I am,” agreed Anne tranquilly.
“And I know I’ll have to be punished.
That shall be your punishment.
And it isn’t half severe enough either for what you’ve done!” “Not go to the picnic!” Anne sprang to her feet and clutched Marilla’s hand.
“But you _promised_ me I might!
That was why I confessed.
For anything you know I may never have a chance to taste ice cream again.” Marilla disengaged Anne’s clinging hands stonily.
No, not a word.” Anne realized that Marilla was not to be moved.
She clasped her hands together, gave a piercing shriek, and then flung herself face downward on the bed, crying and writhing in an utter abandonment of disappointment and despair.
“For the land’s sake!” gasped Marilla, hastening from the room.
Marilla worked fiercely and scrubbed the porch floor and the dairy shelves when she could find nothing else to do.
A tear-stained face appeared, looking tragically over the banisters.
“Come down to your dinner, Anne.” “I don’t want any dinner, Marilla,” said Anne, sobbingly.
“I couldn’t eat anything.
You’ll feel remorse of conscience someday, I expect, for breaking it, Marilla, but I forgive you.
Remember when the time comes that I forgive you.
But please don’t ask me to eat anything, especially boiled pork and greens.
Boiled pork and greens are so unromantic when one is in affliction.” Exasperated, Marilla returned to the kitchen and poured out her tale of woe to Matthew, who, between his sense of justice and his unlawful sympathy with Anne, was a miserable man.
“Well now, she shouldn’t have taken the brooch, Marilla, or told stories about it,” he admitted, mournfully surveying his plateful of unromantic pork and greens as if he, like Anne, thought it a food unsuited to crises of feeling, “but she’s such a little thing--such an interesting little thing.
Don’t you think it’s pretty rough not to let her go to the picnic when she’s so set on it?” “Matthew Cuthbert, I’m amazed at you.
I think I’ve let her off entirely too easy.
And you don’t seem to realize it, neither; you’re making excuses for her all the time to yourself--I can see that.” “Well now, she’s such a little thing,” feebly reiterated Matthew.
“And there should be allowances made, Marilla.
You know she’s never had any bringing up.” “Well, she’s having it now” retorted Marilla.
The retort silenced Matthew if it did not convince him.
The only cheerful thing about it was Jerry Buote, the hired boy, and Marilla resented his cheerfulness as a personal insult.
When her dishes were washed and her bread sponge set and her hens fed Marilla remembered that she had noticed a small rent in her best black lace shawl when she had taken it off on Monday afternoon on returning from the Ladies’ Aid.
As Marilla lifted it out, the sunlight, falling through the vines that clustered thickly about the window, struck upon something caught in the shawl--something that glittered and sparkled in facets of violet light.
Marilla snatched at it with a gasp.
It was the amethyst brooch, hanging to a thread of the lace by its catch!
Whatever did that girl mean by saying she took it and lost it?
I declare I believe Green Gables is bewitched.
I remember now that when I took off my shawl Monday afternoon I laid it on the bureau for a minute.
Anne had cried herself out and was sitting dejectedly by the window.
“Anne Shirley,” said Marilla solemnly, “I’ve just found my brooch hanging to my black lace shawl.
Now I want to know what that rigmarole you told me this morning meant.” “Why, you said you’d keep me here until I confessed,” returned Anne wearily, “and so I decided to confess because I was bound to get to the picnic.
I thought out a confession last night after I went to bed and made it as interesting as I could.
But her conscience pricked her.
And now get yourself ready for the picnic.” Anne flew up like a rocket.
They won’t be more than well gathered yet and it’ll be an hour before they have tea.
And I’ll get Jerry to hitch up the sorrel and drive you down to the picnic ground.” “Oh, Marilla,” exclaimed Anne, flying to the wash-stand.
“Five minutes ago I was so miserable I was wishing I’d never been born and now I wouldn’t change places with an angel!” That night a thoroughly happy, completely tired-out Anne returned to Green Gables in a state of beatification impossible to describe.
“Oh, Marilla, I’ve had a perfectly scrumptious time.
Scrumptious is a new word I learned today.
Isn’t it very expressive?
Everything was lovely.
We had a splendid tea and then Mr.
And Jane Andrews nearly fell overboard.
It would have been such a romantic experience to have been nearly drowned.
It would be such a thrilling tale to tell.
Words fail me to describe that ice cream.
Marilla, I assure you it was sublime.” That evening Marilla told the whole story to Matthew over her stocking basket.
“I’m willing to own up that I made a mistake,” she concluded candidly, “but I’ve learned a lesson.
I have to laugh when I think of Anne’s ‘confession,’ although I suppose I shouldn’t for it really was a falsehood.
But it doesn’t seem as bad as the other would have been, somehow, and anyhow I’m responsible for it.
That child is hard to understand in some respects.
A Tempest in the School Teapot WHAT a splendid day!” said Anne, drawing a long breath.
And it’s splendider still to have such a lovely way to go to school by, isn’t it?” “It’s a lot nicer than going round by the road; that is so dusty and hot,” said Diana practically, peeping into her dinner basket and mentally calculating if the three juicy, toothsome, raspberry tarts reposing there were divided among ten girls how many bites each girl would have.
The little girls of Avonlea school always pooled their lunches, and to eat three raspberry tarts all alone or even to share them only with one’s best chum would have forever and ever branded as “awful mean” the girl who did it.
And yet, when the tarts were divided among ten girls you just got enough to tantalize you.
Anne thought those walks to and from school with Diana couldn’t be improved upon even by imagination.
Going around by the main road would have been so unromantic; but to go by Lover’s Lane and Willowmere and Violet Vale and the Birch Path was romantic, if ever anything was.
Lover’s Lane opened out below the orchard at Green Gables and stretched far up into the woods to the end of the Cuthbert farm.
“Not that lovers ever really walk there,” she explained to Marilla, “but Diana and I are reading a perfectly magnificent book and there’s a Lover’s Lane in it.
I like that lane because you can think out loud there without people calling you crazy.” Anne, starting out alone in the morning, went down Lover’s Lane as far as the brook.
Here Diana met her, and the two little girls went on up the lane under the leafy arch of maples--“maples are such sociable trees,” said Anne; “they’re always rustling and whispering to you”--until they came to a rustic bridge.
Barry’s back field and past Willowmere.
Beyond Willowmere came Violet Vale--a little green dimple in the shadow of Mr.
“Of course there are no violets there now,” Anne told Marilla, “but Diana says there are millions of them in spring.
It actually takes away my breath.
It’s nice to be clever at something, isn’t it?
She wanted to, so I let her; but I’m sure I could have found something more poetical than plain Birch Path.
But the Birch Path is one of the prettiest places in the world, Marilla.” It was.
Other people besides Anne thought so when they stumbled on it.
It was a little narrow, twisting path, winding down over a long hill straight through Mr.
Bell’s woods, where the light came down sifted through so many emerald screens that it was as flawless as the heart of a diamond.
It was fringed in all its length with slim young birches, white stemmed and lissom boughed; ferns and starflowers and wild lilies-of-the-valley and scarlet tufts of pigeonberries grew thickly along it; and always there was a delightful spiciness in the air and music of bird calls and the murmur and laugh of wood winds in the trees overhead.
Now and then you might see a rabbit skipping across the road if you were quiet--which, with Anne and Diana, happened about once in a blue moon.
The Avonlea school was a whitewashed building, low in the eaves and wide in the windows, furnished inside with comfortable substantial old-fashioned desks that opened and shut, and were carved all over their lids with the initials and hieroglyphics of three generations of school children.
The schoolhouse was set back from the road and behind it was a dusky fir wood and a brook where all the children put their bottles of milk in the morning to keep cool and sweet until dinner hour.
Marilla had seen Anne start off to school on the first day of September with many secret misgivings.
How would she get on with the other children?
“I think I’m going to like school here,” she announced.
He’s all the time curling his mustache and making eyes at Prissy Andrews.
She’s sixteen and she’s studying for the entrance examination into Queen’s Academy at Charlottetown next year.
She’s got a beautiful complexion and curly brown hair and she does it up so elegantly.
But Ruby Gillis says she saw him writing something on her slate and when Prissy read it she blushed as red as a beet and giggled; and Ruby Gillis says she doesn’t believe it had anything to do with the lesson.” “Anne Shirley, don’t let me hear you talking about your teacher in that way again,” said Marilla sharply.
“You don’t go to school to criticize the master.
I guess he can teach _you_ something, and it’s your business to learn.
And I want you to understand right off that you are not to come home telling tales about him.
That is something I won’t encourage.
I hope you were a good girl.” “Indeed I was,” said Anne comfortably.
There are a lot of nice girls in school and we had scrumptious fun playing at dinnertime.
I’m dreadfully far behind the others.
I feel that it’s kind of a disgrace.
But there’s not one of them has such an imagination as I have and I soon found that out.
We had reading and geography and Canadian history and dictation today.
Phillips said my spelling was disgraceful and he held up my slate so that everybody could see it, all marked over.
I felt so mortified, Marilla; he might have been politer to a stranger, I think.
I’m to give it back to her tomorrow.
And Tillie Boulter let me wear her bead ring all the afternoon.
Can I have some of those pearl beads off the old pincushion in the garret to make myself a ring?
And oh, Marilla, Jane Andrews told me that Minnie MacPherson told her that she heard Prissy Andrews tell Sara Gillis that I had a very pretty nose.
Marilla, that is the first compliment I have ever had in my life and you can’t imagine what a strange feeling it gave me.
Secretly she thought Anne’s nose was a remarkable pretty one; but she had no intention of telling her so.
That was three weeks ago and all had gone smoothly so far.
And now, this crisp September morning, Anne and Diana were tripping blithely down the Birch Path, two of the happiest little girls in Avonlea.
“He’s been visiting his cousins over in New Brunswick all summer and he only came home Saturday night.
He’s _aw’fly_ handsome, Anne.
And he teases the girls something terrible.
He just torments our lives out.” Diana’s voice indicated that she rather liked having her life tormented out than not.
I’ve heard him say he studied the multiplication table by her freckles.” “Oh, don’t speak about freckles to me,” implored Anne.
“It isn’t delicate when I’ve got so many.
But I do think that writing take-notices up on the wall about the boys and girls is the silliest ever.
Not, of course,” she hastened to add, “that anybody would.” Anne sighed.
But it was a little humiliating to know that there was no danger of it.
“Nonsense,” said Diana, whose black eyes and glossy tresses had played such havoc with the hearts of Avonlea schoolboys that her name figured on the porch walls in half a dozen take-notices.
He told his mother--his _mother_, mind you--that you were the smartest girl in school.
That’s better than being good-looking.” “No, it isn’t,” said Anne, feminine to the core.
He’s only in the fourth book although he’s nearly fourteen.
I got up yesterday spelling ‘ebullition.’ Josie Pye was head and, mind you, she peeped in her book.
Phillips didn’t see her--he was looking at Prissy Andrews--but I did.
I just swept her a look of freezing scorn and she got as red as a beet and spelled it wrong after all.” “Those Pye girls are cheats all round,” said Diana indignantly, as they climbed the fence of the main road.
“Gertie Pye actually went and put her milk bottle in my place in the brook yesterday.
Phillips was in the back of the room hearing Prissy Andrews’s Latin, Diana whispered to Anne, “That’s Gilbert Blythe sitting right across the aisle from you, Anne.
Just look at him and see if you don’t think he’s handsome.” Anne looked accordingly.
She had a good chance to do so, for the said Gilbert Blythe was absorbed in stealthily pinning the long yellow braid of Ruby Gillis, who sat in front of him, to the back of her seat.
Presently Ruby Gillis started up to take a sum to the master; she fell back into her seat with a little shriek, believing that her hair was pulled out by the roots.
Everybody looked at her and Mr.
Phillips glared so sternly that Ruby began to cry.
Gilbert had whisked the pin out of sight and was studying his history with the soberest face in the world; but when the commotion subsided he looked at Anne and winked with inexpressible drollery.
“I think your Gilbert Blythe _is_ handsome,” confided Anne to Diana, “but I think he’s very bold.
It isn’t good manners to wink at a strange girl.” But it was not until the afternoon that things really began to happen.
Phillips was back in the corner explaining a problem in algebra to Prissy Andrews and the rest of the scholars were doing pretty much as they pleased eating green apples, whispering, drawing pictures on their slates, and driving crickets harnessed to strings, up and down aisle.
Gilbert Blythe was trying to make Anne Shirley look at him and failing utterly, because Anne was at that moment totally oblivious not only to the very existence of Gilbert Blythe, but of every other scholar in Avonlea school itself.
With her chin propped on her hands and her eyes fixed on the blue glimpse of the Lake of Shining Waters that the west window afforded, she was far away in a gorgeous dreamland hearing and seeing nothing save her own wonderful visions.
Gilbert reached across the aisle, picked up the end of Anne’s long red braid, held it out at arm’s length and said in a piercing whisper: “Carrots!
Carrots!” Then Anne looked at him with a vengeance!
She sprang to her feet, her bright fancies fallen into cureless ruin.
She flashed one indignant glance at Gilbert from eyes whose angry sparkle was swiftly quenched in equally angry tears.
“You mean, hateful boy!” she exclaimed passionately.
This was an especially enjoyable one.
Everybody said “Oh” in horrified delight.
Ruby Gillis, who was inclined to be hysterical, began to cry.
Tommy Sloane let his team of crickets escape him altogether while he stared open-mouthed at the tableau.
Phillips stalked down the aisle and laid his hand heavily on Anne’s shoulder.
Anne returned no answer.
Phillips paid no heed to Gilbert.
“I am sorry to see a pupil of mine displaying such a temper and such a vindictive spirit,” he said in a solemn tone, as if the mere fact of being a pupil of his ought to root out all evil passions from the hearts of small imperfect mortals.
“Anne, go and stand on the platform in front of the blackboard for the rest of the afternoon.” Anne would have infinitely preferred a whipping to this punishment under which her sensitive spirit quivered as from a whiplash.
Phillips took a chalk crayon and wrote on the blackboard above her head.
Ann Shirley must learn to control her temper,” and then read it out loud so that even the primer class, who couldn’t read writing, should understand it.
Anne stood there the rest of the afternoon with that legend above her.
Anger was still too hot in her heart for that and it sustained her amid all her agony of humiliation.
With resentful eyes and passion-red cheeks she confronted alike Diana’s sympathetic gaze and Charlie Sloane’s indignant nods and Josie Pye’s malicious smiles.
When school was dismissed Anne marched out with her red head held high.
Gilbert Blythe tried to intercept her at the porch door.
“I’m awfully sorry I made fun of your hair, Anne,” he whispered contritely.
Don’t be mad for keeps, now.” Anne swept by disdainfully, without look or sign of hearing.
“Oh how could you, Anne?” breathed Diana as they went down the road half reproachfully, half admiringly.
Diana felt that _she_ could never have resisted Gilbert’s plea.
Phillips spelled my name without an e, too.
The iron has entered into my soul, Diana.” Diana hadn’t the least idea what Anne meant but she understood it was something terrible.
“You mustn’t mind Gilbert making fun of your hair,” she said soothingly.
He’s called me a crow a dozen times; and I never heard him apologize for anything before, either.” “There’s a great deal of difference between being called a crow and being called carrots,” said Anne with dignity.
“Gilbert Blythe has hurt my feelings _excruciatingly_, Diana.” It is possible the matter might have blown over without more excruciation if nothing else had happened.
Avonlea scholars often spent noon hour picking gum in Mr.
Phillips emerging therefrom they ran for the schoolhouse; but the distance being about three times longer than Mr.
Wright’s lane they were very apt to arrive there, breathless and gasping, some three minutes too late.
On the following day Mr.
Phillips was seized with one of his spasmodic fits of reform and announced before going home to dinner, that he should expect to find all the scholars in their seats when he returned.
Anyone who came in late would be punished.
The boys, who had to wriggle hastily down from the trees, were later; and Anne, who had not been picking gum at all but was wandering happily in the far end of the grove, waist deep among the bracken, singing softly to herself, with a wreath of rice lilies on her hair as if she were some wild divinity of the shadowy places, was latest of all.
Anne could run like a deer, however; run she did with the impish result that she overtook the boys at the door and was swept into the schoolhouse among them just as Mr.
Phillips was in the act of hanging up his hat.
Phillips’s brief reforming energy was over; he didn’t want the bother of punishing a dozen pupils; but it was necessary to do something to save his word, so he looked about for a scapegoat and found it in Anne, who had dropped into her seat, gasping for breath, with a forgotten lily wreath hanging askew over one ear and giving her a particularly rakish and disheveled appearance.
“Anne Shirley, since you seem to be so fond of the boys’ company we shall indulge your taste for it this afternoon,” he said sarcastically.
“Take those flowers out of your hair and sit with Gilbert Blythe.” The other boys snickered.
Diana, turning pale with pity, plucked the wreath from Anne’s hair and squeezed her hand.
“Yes, sir,” said Anne slowly “but I didn’t suppose you really meant it.” “I assure you I did”--still with the sarcastic inflection which all the children, and Anne especially, hated.
Then, realizing that there was no help for it, she rose haughtily, stepped across the aisle, sat down beside Gilbert Blythe, and buried her face in her arms on the desk.
Ruby Gillis, who got a glimpse of it as it went down, told the others going home from school that she’d “acksually never seen anything like it--it was so white, with awful little red spots in it.” To Anne, this was as the end of all things.
It was bad enough to be singled out for punishment from among a dozen equally guilty ones; it was worse still to be sent to sit with a boy, but that that boy should be Gilbert Blythe was heaping insult on injury to a degree utterly unbearable.
Her whole being seethed with shame and anger and humiliation.
At first the other scholars looked and whispered and giggled and nudged.
But as Anne never lifted her head and as Gilbert worked fractions as if his whole soul was absorbed in them and them only, they soon returned to their own tasks and Anne was forgotten.
Phillips called the history class out Anne should have gone, but Anne did not move, and Mr.
Phillips, who had been writing some verses “To Priscilla” before he called the class, was thinking about an obstinate rhyme still and never missed her.
Whereupon Anne arose, took the pink heart gingerly between the tips of her fingers, dropped it on the floor, ground it to powder beneath her heel, and resumed her position without deigning to bestow a glance on Gilbert.
When school went out Anne marched to her desk, ostentatiously took out everything therein, books and writing tablet, pen and ink, testament and arithmetic, and piled them neatly on her cracked slate.
She had not dared to ask the question before.
Phillips will make me sit with that horrid Gertie Pye--I know he will because she is sitting alone.
Do come back, Anne.” “I’d do almost anything in the world for you, Diana,” said Anne sadly.
“We are going to build the loveliest new house down by the brook; and we’ll be playing ball next week and you’ve never played ball, Anne.
It’s tremendously exciting.
And we’re going to learn a new song--Jane Andrews is practicing it up now; and Alice Andrews is going to bring a new Pansy book next week and we’re all going to read it out loud, chapter about, down by the brook.
Phillips again; she told Marilla so when she got home.
“Nonsense,” said Marilla.
“It isn’t nonsense at all,” said Anne, gazing at Marilla with solemn, reproachful eyes.
“Don’t you understand, Marilla?
I’ve been insulted.” “Insulted fiddlesticks!
You’ll go to school tomorrow as usual.” “Oh, no.” Anne shook her head gently.
I’ll learn my lessons at home and I’ll be as good as I can be and hold my tongue all the time if it’s possible at all.
But I will not go back to school, I assure you.” Marilla saw something remarkably like unyielding stubbornness looking out of Anne’s small face.
She understood that she would have trouble in overcoming it; but she resolved wisely to say nothing more just then.
“There’s no use reasoning with Anne now.
She’s too worked up and I’ve an idea she can be awful stubborn if she takes the notion.
Phillips has been carrying matters with a rather high hand.
She’s sent ten children to school and she ought to know something about it.
Lynde knitting quilts as industriously and cheerfully as usual.
“I suppose you know what I’ve come about,” she said, a little shamefacedly.
“She declares she won’t go back to school.
I’ve been expecting trouble ever since she started to school.
Phillips was in the wrong.
Of course, it doesn’t do to say so to the children, you know.
And of course he did right to punish her yesterday for giving way to temper.
But today it was different.
The others who were late should have been punished as well as Anne, that’s what.
And I don’t believe in making the girls sit with the boys for punishment.
Tillie Boulter was real indignant.
She took Anne’s part right through and said all the scholars did too.
I never thought she’d take with them so well.” “Then you really think I’d better let her stay home,” said Marilla in amazement.
Phillips isn’t any good at all as a teacher.
The order he keeps is scandalous, that’s what, and he neglects the young fry and puts all his time on those big scholars he’s getting ready for Queen’s.
I declare, I don’t know what education in this Island is coming to.” Mrs.
Rachel shook her head, as much as to say if she were only at the head of the educational system of the Province things would be much better managed.
She learned her lessons at home, did her chores, and played with Diana in the chilly purple autumn twilights; but when she met Gilbert Blythe on the road or encountered him in Sunday-school she passed him by with an icy contempt that was no whit thawed by his evident desire to appease her.
Even Diana’s efforts as a peacemaker were of no avail.
Anne had evidently made up her mind to hate Gilbert Blythe to the end of life.
As much as she hated Gilbert, however, did she love Diana, with all the love of her passionate little heart, equally intense in its likes and dislikes.
One evening Marilla, coming in from the orchard with a basket of apples, found Anne sitting along by the east window in the twilight, crying bitterly.
“Whatever’s the matter now, Anne?” she asked.
“It’s about Diana,” sobbed Anne luxuriously.
I hate her husband--I just hate him furiously.
I’ve been imagining it all out--the wedding and everything--Diana dressed in snowy garments, with a veil, and looking as beautiful and regal as a queen; and me the bridesmaid, with a lovely dress too, and puffed sleeves, but with a breaking heart hid beneath my smiling face.
And then bidding Diana goodbye-e-e--” Here Anne broke down entirely and wept with increasing bitterness.
Marilla turned quickly away to hide her twitching face; but it was no use; she collapsed on the nearest chair and burst into such a hearty and unusual peal of laughter that Matthew, crossing the yard outside, halted in amazement.
I should think you had an imagination, sure enough.” CHAPTER XVI.
Diana Is Invited to Tea with Tragic Results OCTOBER was a beautiful month at Green Gables, when the birches in the hollow turned as golden as sunshine and the maples behind the orchard were royal crimson and the wild cherry-trees along the lane put on the loveliest shades of dark red and bronzy green, while the fields sunned themselves in aftermaths.
“Oh, Marilla,” she exclaimed one Saturday morning, coming dancing in with her arms full of gorgeous boughs, “I’m so glad I live in a world where there are Octobers.
It would be terrible if we just skipped from September to November, wouldn’t it?
Look at these maple branches.
I’m going to decorate my room with them.” “Messy things,” said Marilla, whose aesthetic sense was not noticeably developed.
“You clutter up your room entirely too much with out-of-doors stuff, Anne.
Bedrooms were made to sleep in.” “Oh, and dream in too, Marilla.
I’m going on a meeting of the Aid Society at Carmody this afternoon, Anne, and I won’t likely be home before dark.
You’ll have to get Matthew and Jerry their supper, so mind you don’t forget to put the tea to draw until you sit down at the table as you did last time.” “It was dreadful of me to forget,” said Anne apologetically, “but that was the afternoon I was trying to think of a name for Violet Vale and it crowded other things out.
It was a beautiful fairy story, Marilla.
And--I don’t really know if I’m doing right--it may make you more addlepated than ever--but you can ask Diana to come over and spend the afternoon with you and have tea here.” “Oh, Marilla!” Anne clasped her hands.
“How perfectly lovely!
You _are_ able to imagine things after all or else you’d never have understood how I’ve longed for that very thing.
No fear of my forgetting to put the tea to draw when I have company.
You know I never use that except for the minister or the Aids.
But you can open the little yellow crock of cherry preserves.
It’s time it was being used anyhow--I believe it’s beginning to work.
And you can cut some fruit cake and have some of the cookies and snaps.” “I can just imagine myself sitting down at the head of the table and pouring out the tea,” said Anne, shutting her eyes ecstatically.
And then pressing her to take another piece of fruit cake and another helping of preserves.
Oh, Marilla, it’s a wonderful sensation just to think of it.
But there’s a bottle half full of raspberry cordial that was left over from the church social the other night.
It’s on the second shelf of the sitting-room closet and you and Diana can have it if you like, and a cooky to eat with it along in the afternoon, for I daresay Matthew ‘ll be late coming in to tea since he’s hauling potatoes to the vessel.” Anne flew down to the hollow, past the Dryad’s Bubble and up the spruce path to Orchard Slope, to ask Diana to tea.
At other times she was wont to run into the kitchen without knocking; but now she knocked primly at the front door.
This unnatural solemnity lasted until after Diana had been taken to the east gable to lay off her hat and then had sat for ten minutes in the sitting room, toes in position.
“How is your mother?” inquired Anne politely, just as if she had not seen Mrs.
Barry picking apples that morning in excellent health and spirits.
Cuthbert is hauling potatoes to the _lily sands_ this afternoon, is he?” said Diana, who had ridden down to Mr.
Have you picked many of your apples yet?” “Oh, ever so many,” said Anne forgetting to be dignified and jumping up quickly.
“Let’s go out to the orchard and get some of the Red Sweetings, Diana.
Marilla is a very generous woman.
She said we could have fruit cake and cherry preserves for tea.
They taste twice as good as any other color.” The orchard, with its great sweeping boughs that bent to the ground with fruit, proved so delightful that the little girls spent most of the afternoon in it, sitting in a grassy corner where the frost had spared the green and the mellow autumn sunshine lingered warmly, eating apples and talking as hard as they could.
She had to sit with Gertie Pye and she hated it; Gertie squeaked her pencil all the time and it just made her--Diana’s--blood run cold; Ruby Gillis had charmed all her warts away, true’s you live, with a magic pebble that old Mary Joe from the Creek gave her.
You had to rub the warts with the pebble and then throw it away over your left shoulder at the time of the new moon and the warts would all go.
Phillips in class and Mr.
Phillips whipped him and Sam’s father came down to the school and dared Mr.
She jumped up hurriedly and said suppose they go in and have some raspberry cordial.
Anne looked on the second shelf of the room pantry but there was no bottle of raspberry cordial there.
Search revealed it away back on the top shelf.
“Now, please help yourself, Diana,” she said politely.
I don’t feel as if I wanted any after all those apples.” Diana poured herself out a tumblerful, looked at its bright-red hue admiringly, and then sipped it daintily.
“That’s awfully nice raspberry cordial, Anne,” she said.
“I didn’t know raspberry cordial was so nice.” “I’m real glad you like it.
There are so many responsibilities on a person’s mind when they’re keeping house, isn’t there?” When Anne came back from the kitchen Diana was drinking her second glassful of cordial; and, being entreated thereto by Anne, she offered no particular objection to the drinking of a third.
The tumblerfuls were generous ones and the raspberry cordial was certainly very nice.
Lynde’s, although she brags of hers so much.
It doesn’t taste a bit like hers.” “I should think Marilla’s raspberry cordial would prob’ly be much nicer than Mrs.
There’s so little scope for imagination in cookery.
I was thinking the loveliest story about you and me, Diana.
I thought you were desperately ill with smallpox and everybody deserted you, but I went boldly to your bedside and nursed you back to life; and then I took the smallpox and died and I was buried under those poplar trees in the graveyard and you planted a rosebush by my grave and watered it with your tears; and you never, never forgot the friend of your youth who sacrificed her life for you.
Oh, it was such a pathetic tale, Diana.
Flour is so essential to cakes, you know.
She was terribly mortified about the pudding sauce last week.
We had a plum pudding for dinner on Tuesday and there was half the pudding and a pitcherful of sauce left over.
I meant to cover it just as much as could be, Diana, but when I carried it in I was imagining I was a nun--of course I’m a Protestant but I imagined I was a Catholic--taking the veil to bury a broken heart in cloistered seclusion; and I forgot all about covering the pudding sauce.
Marilla was out milking and I fully intended to ask her when she came in if I’d give the sauce to the pigs; but when she did come in I was imagining that I was a frost fairy going through the woods turning the trees red and yellow, whichever they wanted to be, so I never thought about the pudding sauce again and Marilla sent me out to pick apples.
Chester Ross from Spencervale came here that morning.
You know they are very stylish people, especially Mrs.
When Marilla called me in dinner was all ready and everybody was at the table.
I tried to be as polite and dignified as I could be, for I wanted Mrs.
Chester Ross to think I was a ladylike little girl even if I wasn’t pretty.
Everything went right until I saw Marilla coming with the plum pudding in one hand and the pitcher of pudding sauce _warmed up_, in the other.
Diana, that was a terrible moment.
I remembered everything and I just stood up in my place and shrieked out ‘Marilla, you mustn’t use that pudding sauce.
Chester Ross just _looked_ at me and I thought I would sink through the floor with mortification.
She is such a perfect housekeeper and fancy what she must have thought of us.
She just carried that sauce and pudding out and brought in some strawberry preserves.
She even offered me some, but I couldn’t swallow a mouthful.
Chester Ross went away, Marilla gave me a dreadful scolding.
Why, Diana, what is the matter?” Diana had stood up very unsteadily; then she sat down again, putting her hands to her head.
“I--I--must go right home.” “Oh, you mustn’t dream of going home without your tea,” cried Anne in distress.
“I’ll get it right off--I’ll go and put the tea down this very minute.” “I must go home,” repeated Diana, stupidly but determinedly.
“Let me get you a lunch anyhow,” implored Anne.
“Let me give you a bit of fruit cake and some of the cherry preserves.
“Oh, Diana, do you suppose that it’s possible you’re really taking the smallpox?
Anne, with tears of disappointment in her eyes, got Diana’s hat and went with her as far as the Barry yard fence.
Then she wept all the way back to Green Gables, where she sorrowfully put the remainder of the raspberry cordial back into the pantry and got tea ready for Matthew and Jerry, with all the zest gone out of the performance.
The next day was Sunday and as the rain poured down in torrents from dawn till dusk Anne did not stir abroad from Green Gables.
Monday afternoon Marilla sent her down to Mrs.
Into the kitchen she dashed and flung herself face downward on the sofa in an agony.
“Whatever has gone wrong now, Anne?” queried Marilla in doubt and dismay.
Lynde again.” No answer from Anne save more tears and stormier sobs!
“Anne Shirley, when I ask you a question I want to be answered.
Sit right up this very minute and tell me what you are crying about.” Anne sat up, tragedy personified.
“She says that I set Diana _drunk_ Saturday and sent her home in a disgraceful condition.
And she says I must be a thoroughly bad, wicked little girl and she’s never, never going to let Diana play with me again.
Oh, Marilla, I’m just overcome with woe.” Marilla stared in blank amazement.
What on earth did you give her?” “Not a thing but raspberry cordial,” sobbed Anne.
“I never thought raspberry cordial would set people drunk, Marilla--not even if they drank three big tumblerfuls as Diana did.
But I didn’t mean to set her drunk.” “Drunk fiddlesticks!” said Marilla, marching to the sitting-room pantry.
There on the shelf was a bottle which she at once recognized as one containing some of her three-year-old homemade currant wine for which she was celebrated in Avonlea, although certain of the stricter sort, Mrs.
Barry among them, disapproved strongly of it.
And at the same time Marilla recollected that she had put the bottle of raspberry cordial down in the cellar instead of in the pantry as she had told Anne.
Her face was twitching in spite of herself.
“Anne, you certainly have a genius for getting into trouble.
You went and gave Diana currant wine instead of raspberry cordial.
Didn’t you know the difference yourself?” “I never tasted it,” said Anne.
I meant to be so--so--hospitable.
She had a fearful headache all day yesterday.
Barry is so indignant.
She will never believe but what I did it on purpose.” “I should think she would better punish Diana for being so greedy as to drink three glassfuls of anything,” said Marilla shortly.
Well, this story will be a nice handle for those folks who are so down on me for making currant wine, although I haven’t made any for three years ever since I found out that the minister didn’t approve.
I just kept that bottle for sickness.
I can’t see as you were to blame although I’m sorry it happened so.” “I must cry,” said Anne.
Oh, Marilla, I little dreamed of this when first we swore our vows of friendship.” “Don’t be foolish, Anne.
I suppose she thinks you’ve done it for a silly joke or something of that sort.
You’re so much more dignified than I am.
Likely she’d listen to you quicker than to me.” “Well, I will,” said Marilla, reflecting that it would probably be the wiser course.
Anne was watching for her coming and flew to the porch door to meet her.
“Oh, Marilla, I know by your face that it’s been no use,” she said sorrowfully.
“Of all the unreasonable women I ever saw she’s the worst.
I just told her plainly that currant wine wasn’t meant to be drunk three tumblerfuls at a time and that if a child I had to do with was so greedy I’d sober her up with a right good spanking.” Marilla whisked into the kitchen, grievously disturbed, leaving a very much distracted little soul in the porch behind her.
Presently Anne stepped out bareheaded into the chill autumn dusk; very determinedly and steadily she took her way down through the sere clover field over the log bridge and up through the spruce grove, lighted by a pale little moon hanging low over the western woods.
Barry, coming to the door in answer to a timid knock, found a white-lipped eager-eyed suppliant on the doorstep.
Barry was a woman of strong prejudices and dislikes, and her anger was of the cold, sullen sort which is always hardest to overcome.
To do her justice, she really believed Anne had made Diana drunk out of sheer malice prepense, and she was honestly anxious to preserve her little daughter from the contamination of further intimacy with such a child.
I did not mean to--to--intoxicate Diana.
Do you think you would intoxicate her on purpose?
I thought it was only raspberry cordial.
I was firmly convinced it was raspberry cordial.
If you do you will cover my life with a dark cloud of woe.” This speech which would have softened good Mrs.
Lynde’s heart in a twinkling, had no effect on Mrs.
Barry except to irritate her still more.
She was suspicious of Anne’s big words and dramatic gestures and imagined that the child was making fun of her.
So she said, coldly and cruelly: “I don’t think you are a fit little girl for Diana to associate with.
You’d better go home and behave yourself.” Anne’s lips quivered.
“Won’t you let me see Diana just once to say farewell?” she implored.
Barry, going in and shutting the door.
Barry myself and she treated me very insultingly.
There is nothing more to do except to pray and I haven’t much hope that that’ll do much good because, Marilla, I do not believe that God Himself can do very much with such an obstinate person as Mrs.
Barry.” “Anne, you shouldn’t say such things” rebuked Marilla, striving to overcome that unholy tendency to laughter which she was dismayed to find growing upon her.
And indeed, when she told the whole story to Matthew that night, she did laugh heartily over Anne’s tribulations.
But when she slipped into the east gable before going to bed and found that Anne had cried herself to sleep an unaccustomed softness crept into her face.
“Poor little soul,” she murmured, lifting a loose curl of hair from the child’s tear-stained face.
A New Interest in Life THE next afternoon Anne, bending over her patchwork at the kitchen window, happened to glance out and beheld Diana down by the Dryad’s Bubble beckoning mysteriously.
In a trice Anne was out of the house and flying down to the hollow, astonishment and hope struggling in her expressive eyes.
But the hope faded when she saw Diana’s dejected countenance.
“Your mother hasn’t relented?” she gasped.
Diana shook her head mournfully.
She said I was only to stay ten minutes and she’s timing me by the clock.” “Ten minutes isn’t very long to say an eternal farewell in,” said Anne tearfully.
“Oh, Diana, will you promise faithfully never to forget me, the friend of your youth, no matter what dearer friends may caress thee?” “Indeed I will,” sobbed Diana, “and I’ll never have another bosom friend--I don’t want to have.
I couldn’t love anybody as I love you.” “Oh, Diana,” cried Anne, clasping her hands, “do you _love_ me?” “Why, of course I do.
Nobody ever has loved me since I can remember.
Oh, this is wonderful!
It’s a ray of light which will forever shine on the darkness of a path severed from thee, Diana.
Oh, just say it once again.” “I love you devotedly, Anne,” said Diana stanchly, “and I always will, you may be sure of that.” “And I will always love thee, Diana,” said Anne, solemnly extending her hand.
“In the years to come thy memory will shine like a star over my lonely life, as that last story we read together says.
Diana, wilt thou give me a lock of thy jet-black tresses in parting to treasure forevermore?” “Have you got anything to cut it with?” queried Diana, wiping away the tears which Anne’s affecting accents had caused to flow afresh, and returning to practicalities.
I’ve got my patchwork scissors in my apron pocket fortunately,” said Anne.
She solemnly clipped one of Diana’s curls.
Henceforth we must be as strangers though living side by side.
But my heart will ever be faithful to thee.” Anne stood and watched Diana out of sight, mournfully waving her hand to the latter whenever she turned to look back.
Then she returned to the house, not a little consoled for the time being by this romantic parting.
“It is all over,” she informed Marilla.
I’m really worse off than ever before, for I haven’t Katie Maurice and Violetta now.
Somehow, little dream girls are not satisfying after a real friend.
Diana and I had such an affecting farewell down by the spring.
I used the most pathetic language I could think of and said ‘thou’ and ‘thee.’ ‘Thou’ and ‘thee’ seem so much more romantic than ‘you.’ Diana gave me a lock of her hair and I’m going to sew it up in a little bag and wear it around my neck all my life.
Barry may feel remorse for what she has done and will let Diana come to my funeral.” “I don’t think there is much fear of your dying of grief as long as you can talk, Anne,” said Marilla unsympathetically.
The following Monday Anne surprised Marilla by coming down from her room with her basket of books on her arm and hip and her lips primmed up into a line of determination.
“I’m going back to school,” she announced.
“That is all there is left in life for me, now that my friend has been ruthlessly torn from me.
In school I can look at her and muse over days departed.” “You’d better muse over your lessons and sums,” said Marilla, concealing her delight at this development of the situation.
“If you’re going back to school I hope we’ll hear no more of breaking slates over people’s heads and such carryings on.
Behave yourself and do just what your teacher tells you.” “I’ll try to be a model pupil,” agreed Anne dolefully.
Phillips said Minnie Andrews was a model pupil and there isn’t a spark of imagination or life in her.
But I feel so depressed that perhaps it will come easy to me now.
I should weep bitter tears if I did.” Anne was welcomed back to school with open arms.
Her imagination had been sorely missed in games, her voice in the singing and her dramatic ability in the perusal aloud of books at dinner hour.
Ruby Gillis smuggled three blue plums over to her during testament reading; Ella May MacPherson gave her an enormous yellow pansy cut from the covers of a floral catalogue--a species of desk decoration much prized in Avonlea school.
Sophia Sloane offered to teach her a perfectly elegant new pattern of knit lace, so nice for trimming aprons.
Katie Boulter gave her a perfume bottle to keep slate water in, and Julia Bell copied carefully on a piece of pale pink paper scalloped on the edges the following effusion: “TO ANNE “When twilight drops her curtain down And pins it with a star Remember that you have a friend Though she may wander far.” “It’s so nice to be appreciated,” sighed Anne rapturously to Marilla that night.
The girls were not the only scholars who “appreciated” her.
Phillips to sit with the model Minnie Andrews--she found on her desk a big luscious “strawberry apple.” Anne caught it up all ready to take a bite when she remembered that the only place in Avonlea where strawberry apples grew was in the old Blythe orchard on the other side of the Lake of Shining Waters.
Anne dropped the apple as if it were a red-hot coal and ostentatiously wiped her fingers on her handkerchief.
The apple lay untouched on her desk until the next morning, when little Timothy Andrews, who swept the school and kindled the fire, annexed it as one of his perquisites.
Charlie Sloane’s slate pencil, gorgeously bedizened with striped red and yellow paper, costing two cents where ordinary pencils cost only one, which he sent up to her after dinner hour, met with a more favorable reception.
Anne was graciously pleased to accept it and rewarded the donor with a smile which exalted that infatuated youth straightway into the seventh heaven of delight and caused him to make such fearful errors in his dictation that Mr.
Phillips kept him in after school to rewrite it.
But as, The Cæsar’s pageant shorn of Brutus’ bust Did but of Rome’s best son remind her more, so the marked absence of any tribute or recognition from Diana Barry who was sitting with Gertie Pye embittered Anne’s little triumph.
But the next morning a note most fearfully and wonderfully twisted and folded, and a small parcel were passed across to Anne.
I made you one of the new bookmarkers out of red tissue paper.
They are awfully fashionable now and only three girls in school know how to make them.
When you look at it remember Your true friend, Diana Barry.
Anne read the note, kissed the bookmark, and dispatched a prompt reply back to the other side of the school.
Minnie Andrews is a very nice little girl--although she has no imagination--but after having been Diana’s busum friend I cannot be Minnie’s.
Please excuse mistakes because my spelling isn’t very good yet, although much improoved.
Yours until death us do part Anne or Cordelia Shirley.
Marilla pessimistically expected more trouble since Anne had again begun to go to school.
Perhaps Anne caught something of the “model” spirit from Minnie Andrews; at least she got on very well with Mr.
Phillips thenceforth.
She flung herself into her studies heart and soul, determined not to be outdone in any class by Gilbert Blythe.
The rivalry between them was soon apparent; it was entirely good natured on Gilbert’s side; but it is much to be feared that the same thing cannot be said of Anne, who had certainly an unpraiseworthy tenacity for holding grudges.
She would not stoop to admit that she meant to rival Gilbert in schoolwork, because that would have been to acknowledge his existence which Anne persistently ignored; but the rivalry was there and honors fluctuated between them.
Now Gilbert was head of the spelling class; now Anne, with a toss of her long red braids, spelled him down.
One morning Gilbert had all his sums done correctly and had his name written on the blackboard on the roll of honor; the next morning Anne, having wrestled wildly with decimals the entire evening before, would be first.
One awful day they were ties and their names were written up together.
It was almost as bad as a take-notice and Anne’s mortification was as evident as Gilbert’s satisfaction.
When the written examinations at the end of each month were held the suspense was terrible.
But her triumph was marred by the fact that Gilbert congratulated her heartily before the whole school.
Phillips might not be a very good teacher; but a pupil so inflexibly determined on learning as Anne was could hardly escape making progress under any kind of teacher.
By the end of the term Anne and Gilbert were both promoted into the fifth class and allowed to begin studying the elements of “the branches”--by which Latin, geometry, French, and algebra were meant.
In geometry Anne met her Waterloo.
“It’s perfectly awful stuff, Marilla,” she groaned.
There is no scope for imagination in it at all.
Phillips says I’m the worst dunce he ever saw at it.
It is extremely mortifying, Marilla.
Even although we meet as strangers now I still love her with an _inextinguishable_ love.
But really, Marilla, one can’t stay sad very long in such an interesting world, can one?” CHAPTER XVIII.
At first glance it might not seem that the decision of a certain Canadian Premier to include Prince Edward Island in a political tour could have much or anything to do with the fortunes of little Anne Shirley at Green Gables.
It was a January the Premier came, to address his loyal supporters and such of his nonsupporters as chose to be present at the monster mass meeting held in Charlottetown.
Most of the Avonlea people were on Premier’s side of politics; hence on the night of the meeting nearly all the men and a goodly proportion of the women had gone to town thirty miles away.
Rachel Lynde was a red-hot politician and couldn’t have believed that the political rally could be carried through without her, although she was on the opposite side of politics.
So she went to town and took her husband--Thomas would be useful in looking after the horse--and Marilla Cuthbert with her.
Marilla had a sneaking interest in politics herself, and as she thought it might be her only chance to see a real live Premier, she promptly took it, leaving Anne and Matthew to keep house until her return the following day.
Rachel were enjoying themselves hugely at the mass meeting, Anne and Matthew had the cheerful kitchen at Green Gables all to themselves.
A bright fire was glowing in the old-fashioned Waterloo stove and blue-white frost crystals were shining on the windowpanes.
Matthew nodded over a _Farmers’ Advocate_ on the sofa and Anne at the table studied her lessons with grim determination, despite sundry wistful glances at the clock shelf, where lay a new book that Jane Andrews had lent her that day.
Jane had assured her that it was warranted to produce any number of thrills, or words to that effect, and Anne’s fingers tingled to reach out for it.
“Matthew, did you ever study geometry when you went to school?” “Well now, no, I didn’t,” said Matthew, coming out of his doze with a start.
“I wish you had,” sighed Anne, “because then you’d be able to sympathize with me.
You can’t sympathize properly if you’ve never studied it.
I’m such a dunce at it, Matthew.” “Well now, I dunno,” said Matthew soothingly.
“I guess you’re all right at anything.
Phillips told me last week in Blair’s store at Carmody that you was the smartest scholar in school and was making rapid progress.
‘Rapid progress’ was his very words.
There’s them as runs down Teddy Phillips and says he ain’t much of a teacher, but I guess he’s all right.” Matthew would have thought anyone who praised Anne was “all right.” “I’m sure I’d get on better with geometry if only he wouldn’t change the letters,” complained Anne.
“I learn the proposition off by heart and then he draws it on the blackboard and puts different letters from what are in the book and I get all mixed up.
I don’t think a teacher should take such a mean advantage, do you?
We’re studying agriculture now and I’ve found out at last what makes the roads red.
Lynde are enjoying themselves.
Lynde says Canada is going to the dogs the way things are being run at Ottawa and that it’s an awful warning to the electors.
What way do you vote, Matthew?” “Conservative,” said Matthew promptly.
To vote Conservative was part of Matthew’s religion.
“Then I’m Conservative too,” said Anne decidedly.
Phillips is a Grit too because Prissy Andrews’s father is one, and Ruby Gillis says that when a man is courting he always has to agree with the girl’s mother in religion and her father in politics.
“Did you ever go courting, Matthew?” “Well now, no, I dunno’s I ever did,” said Matthew, who had certainly never thought of such a thing in his whole existence.
Anne reflected with her chin in her hands.
“It must be rather interesting, don’t you think, Matthew?
Ruby Gillis says when she grows up she’s going to have ever so many beaus on the string and have them all crazy about her; but I think that would be too exciting.
Phillips goes up to see Prissy Andrews nearly every evening.
He says it is to help her with her lessons but Miranda Sloane is studying for Queen’s too, and I should think she needed help a lot more than Prissy because she’s ever so much stupider, but he never goes to help her in the evenings at all.
There are a great many things in this world that I can’t understand very well, Matthew.” “Well now, I dunno as I comprehend them all myself,” acknowledged Matthew.
But it’s a terrible temptation, Matthew.
It’s all very well to say resist temptation, but it’s ever so much easier to resist it if you can’t get the key.
Wouldn’t you like some russets?” “Well now, I dunno but what I would,” said Matthew, who never ate russets but knew Anne’s weakness for them.
Just as Anne emerged triumphantly from the cellar with her plateful of russets came the sound of flying footsteps on the icy board walk outside and the next moment the kitchen door was flung open and in rushed Diana Barry, white faced and breathless, with a shawl wrapped hastily around her head.
Anne promptly let go of her candle and plate in her surprise, and plate, candle, and apples crashed together down the cellar ladder and were found at the bottom embedded in melted grease, the next day, by Marilla, who gathered them up and thanked mercy the house hadn’t been set on fire.
“Whatever is the matter, Diana?” cried Anne.
“Has your mother relented at last?” “Oh, Anne, do come quick,” implored Diana nervously.
Minnie May is awful bad and Young Mary Joe doesn’t know what to do--and oh, Anne, I’m so scared!” Matthew, without a word, reached out for cap and coat, slipped past Diana and away into the darkness of the yard.
“He’s gone to harness the sorrel mare to go to Carmody for the doctor,” said Anne, who was hurrying on hood and jacket.
Matthew and I are such kindred spirits I can read his thoughts without words at all.” “I don’t believe he’ll find the doctor at Carmody,” sobbed Diana.
Oh, Anne!” “Don’t cry, Di,” said Anne cheerily.
When you look after three pairs of twins you naturally get a lot of experience.
They all had croup regularly.
Come on now.” The two little girls hastened out hand in hand and hurried through Lover’s Lane and across the crusted field beyond, for the snow was too deep to go by the shorter wood way.
Anne, although sincerely sorry for Minnie May, was far from being insensible to the romance of the situation and to the sweetness of once more sharing that romance with a kindred spirit.
The night was clear and frosty, all ebony of shadow and silver of snowy slope; big stars were shining over the silent fields; here and there the dark pointed firs stood up with snow powdering their branches and the wind whistling through them.
Anne thought it was truly delightful to go skimming through all this mystery and loveliness with your bosom friend who had been so long estranged.
She lay on the kitchen sofa feverish and restless, while her hoarse breathing could be heard all over the house.
Barry had engaged to stay with the children during her absence, was helpless and bewildered, quite incapable of thinking what to do, or doing it if she thought of it.
Anne went to work with skill and promptness.
I don’t want to hurt your feelings but it seems to me you might have thought of this before if you’d any imagination.
Down that ipecac went, not only once, but many times during the long, anxious night when the two little girls worked patiently over the suffering Minnie May, and Young Mary Joe, honestly anxious to do all she could, kept up a roaring fire and heated more water than would have been needed for a hospital of croupy babies.
It was three o’clock when Matthew came with a doctor, for he had been obliged to go all the way to Spencervale for one.
But the pressing need for assistance was past.
Minnie May was much better and was sleeping soundly.
“I was awfully near giving up in despair,” explained Anne.
I actually thought she was going to choke to death.
You know there are some things that cannot be expressed in words.” “Yes, I know,” nodded the doctor.
He looked at Anne as if he were thinking some things about her that couldn’t be expressed in words.
Later on, however, he expressed them to Mr. and Mrs.
“That little redheaded girl they have over at Cuthbert’s is as smart as they make ‘em.
She seems to have a skill and presence of mind perfectly wonderful in a child of her age.
I never saw anything like the eyes of her when she was explaining the case to me.” Anne had gone home in the wonderful, white-frosted winter morning, heavy eyed from loss of sleep, but still talking unweariedly to Matthew as they crossed the long white field and walked under the glittering fairy arch of the Lover’s Lane maples.
“Oh, Matthew, isn’t it a wonderful morning?
The world looks like something God had just imagined for His own pleasure, doesn’t it?
But I hate to stay home, for Gil--some of the others will get head of the class, and it’s so hard to get up again--although of course the harder it is the more satisfaction you have when you do get up, haven’t you?” “Well now, I guess you’ll manage all right,” said Matthew, looking at Anne’s white little face and the dark shadows under her eyes.
I’ll do all the chores.” Anne accordingly went to bed and slept so long and soundly that it was well on in the white and rosy winter afternoon when she awoke and descended to the kitchen where Marilla, who had arrived home in the meantime, was sitting knitting.
“Oh, did you see the Premier?” exclaimed Anne at once.
I was proud of being a Conservative.
Your dinner is in the oven, Anne, and you can get yourself some blue plum preserve out of the pantry.
I must say it was fortunate you knew what to do.
I can tell by the look of you that you’re just full up with speeches, but they’ll keep.” Marilla had something to tell Anne, but she did not tell it just then for she knew if she did Anne’s consequent excitement would lift her clear out of the region of such material matters as appetite or dinner.
Not until Anne had finished her saucer of blue plums did Marilla say: “Mrs.
Barry was here this afternoon, Anne.
Now, Anne Shirley, for pity’s sake don’t fly up into the air.” The warning seemed not unnecessary, so uplifted and aerial was Anne’s expression and attitude as she sprang to her feet, her face irradiated with the flame of her spirit.
I’ll wash them when I come back, but I cannot tie myself down to anything so unromantic as dishwashing at this thrilling moment.” “Yes, yes, run along,” said Marilla indulgently.
Come back this instant and put something on you.
Look at her tearing through the orchard with her hair streaming.
It’ll be a mercy if she doesn’t catch her death of cold.” Anne came dancing home in the purple winter twilight across the snowy places.
Afar in the southwest was the great shimmering, pearl-like sparkle of an evening star in a sky that was pale golden and ethereal rose over gleaming white spaces and dark glens of spruce.
“You see before you a perfectly happy person, Marilla,” she announced.
“I’m perfectly happy--yes, in spite of my red hair.
I felt fearfully embarrassed, Marilla, but I just said as politely as I could, ‘I have no hard feelings for you, Mrs.
I assure you once for all that I did not mean to intoxicate Diana and henceforth I shall cover the past with the mantle of oblivion.’ That was a pretty dignified way of speaking wasn’t it, Marilla?” “I felt that I was heaping coals of fire on Mrs.
And Diana and I had a lovely afternoon.
Diana gave me a beautiful card with a wreath of roses on it and a verse of poetry:” “If you love me as I love you Nothing but death can part us two.” “And that is true, Marilla.
Phillips to let us sit together in school again, and Gertie Pye can go with Minnie Andrews.
And we had fruit cake and pound cake and doughnuts and two kinds of preserves, Marilla.
Barry asked me if I took tea and said ‘Pa, why don’t you pass the biscuits to Anne?’ It must be lovely to be grown up, Marilla, when just being treated as if you were is so nice.” “I don’t know about that,” said Marilla, with a brief sigh.
“Well, anyway, when I am grown up,” said Anne decidedly, “I’m always going to talk to little girls as if they were too, and I’ll never laugh when they use big words.
I know from sorrowful experience how that hurts one’s feelings.
Diana left me to stir it while she buttered the plates and I forgot and let it burn; and then when we set it out on the platform to cool the cat walked over one plate and that had to be thrown away.
But the making of it was splendid fun.
I assure you, Marilla, that I feel like praying tonight and I’m going to think out a special brand-new prayer in honor of the occasion.” CHAPTER XIX.
A Concert, a Catastrophe, and a Confession MARILLA, can I go over to see Diana just for a minute?” asked Anne, running breathlessly down from the east gable one February evening.
“I don’t see what you want to be traipsing about after dark for,” said Marilla shortly.
“You and Diana walked home from school together and then stood down there in the snow for half an hour more, your tongues going the whole blessed time, clickety-clack.
“She has something very important to tell me.” “How do you know she has?” “Because she just signaled to me from her window.
We have arranged a way to signal with our candles and cardboard.
We set the candle on the window sill and make flashes by passing the cardboard back and forth.
It was my idea, Marilla.” “I’ll warrant you it was,” said Marilla emphatically.
“And the next thing you’ll be setting fire to the curtains with your signaling nonsense.” “Oh, we’re very careful, Marilla.
And it’s so interesting.
Two flashes mean, ‘Are you there?’ Three mean ‘yes’ and four ‘no.’ Five mean, ‘Come over as soon as possible, because I have something important to reveal.’ Diana has just signaled five flashes, and I’m really suffering to know what it is.” “Well, you needn’t suffer any longer,” said Marilla sarcastically.
“You can go, but you’re to be back here in just ten minutes, remember that.” Anne did remember it and was back in the stipulated time, although probably no mortal will ever know just what it cost her to confine the discussion of Diana’s important communication within the limits of ten minutes.
You know tomorrow is Diana’s birthday.
And her cousins are coming over from Newbridge in a big pung sleigh to go to the Debating Club concert at the hall tomorrow night.
You’re better at home in your own bed, and as for that club concert, it’s all nonsense, and little girls should not be allowed to go out to such places at all.” “I’m sure the Debating Club is a most respectable affair,” pleaded Anne.
But you’re not going to begin gadding about to concerts and staying out all hours of the night.
Pretty doings for children.
I’m surprised at Mrs.
Barry’s letting Diana go.” “But it’s such a very special occasion,” mourned Anne, on the verge of tears.
“Diana has only one birthday in a year.
It isn’t as if birthdays were common things, Marilla.
And the choir are going to sing four lovely pathetic songs that are pretty near as good as hymns.
And oh, Marilla, the minister is going to take part; yes, indeed, he is; he’s going to give an address.
It’s past eight.” “There’s just one more thing, Marilla,” said Anne, with the air of producing the last shot in her locker.
Go to bed, Anne, and don’t let me hear another word out of you.” When Anne, with tears rolling over her cheeks, had gone sorrowfully upstairs, Matthew, who had been apparently sound asleep on the lounge during the whole dialogue, opened his eyes and said decidedly: “Well now, Marilla, I think you ought to let Anne go.” “I don’t then,” retorted Marilla.
“Who’s bringing this child up, Matthew, you or me?” “Well now, you,” admitted Matthew.
“Don’t interfere then.” “Well now, I ain’t interfering.
It ain’t interfering to have your own opinion.
And my opinion is that you ought to let Anne go.” “You’d think I ought to let Anne go to the moon if she took the notion, I’ve no doubt,” was Marilla’s amiable rejoinder.
She’d go there and catch cold like as not, and have her head filled up with nonsense and excitement.
It would unsettle her for a week.
I understand that child’s disposition and what’s good for it better than you, Matthew.” “I think you ought to let Anne go,” repeated Matthew firmly.
Argument was not his strong point, but holding fast to his opinion certainly was.
Marilla gave a gasp of helplessness and took refuge in silence.
The next morning, when Anne was washing the breakfast dishes in the pantry, Matthew paused on his way out to the barn to say to Marilla again: “I think you ought to let Anne go, Marilla.” For a moment Marilla looked things not lawful to be uttered.
Then she yielded to the inevitable and said tartly: “Very well, she can go, since nothing else ‘ll please you.” Anne flew out of the pantry, dripping dishcloth in hand.
If you catch pneumonia sleeping in a strange bed or coming out of that hot hall in the middle of the night, don’t blame me, blame Matthew.
Anne Shirley, you’re dripping greasy water all over the floor.
I never saw such a careless child.” “Oh, I know I’m a great trial to you, Marilla,” said Anne repentantly.
“I make so many mistakes.
But then just think of all the mistakes I don’t make, although I might.
Matthew understands me, and it’s so nice to be understood, Marilla.” Anne was too excited to do herself justice as to lessons that morning in school.
Gilbert Blythe spelled her down in class and left her clear out of sight in mental arithmetic.
Anne’s consequent humiliation was less than it might have been, however, in view of the concert and the spare-room bed.
She and Diana talked so constantly about it all day that with a stricter teacher than Mr.
Phillips dire disgrace must inevitably have been their portion.
Anne felt that she could not have borne it if she had not been going to the concert, for nothing else was discussed that day in school.
The Avonlea Debating Club, which met fortnightly all winter, had had several smaller free entertainments; but this was to be a big affair, admission ten cents, in aid of the library.
The Avonlea young people had been practicing for weeks, and all the scholars were especially interested in it by reason of older brothers and sisters who were going to take part.
Everybody in school over nine years of age expected to go, except Carrie Sloane, whose father shared Marilla’s opinions about small girls going out to night concerts.
Carrie Sloane cried into her grammar all the afternoon and felt that life was not worth living.
For Anne the real excitement began with the dismissal of school and increased therefrom in crescendo until it reached to a crash of positive ecstasy in the concert itself.
They had a “perfectly elegant tea;” and then came the delicious occupation of dressing in Diana’s little room upstairs.
Diana did Anne’s front hair in the new pompadour style and Anne tied Diana’s bows with the especial knack she possessed; and they experimented with at least half a dozen different ways of arranging their back hair.
At last they were ready, cheeks scarlet and eyes glowing with excitement.
True, Anne could not help a little pang when she contrasted her plain black tam and shapeless, tight-sleeved, homemade gray-cloth coat with Diana’s jaunty fur cap and smart little jacket.
But she remembered in time that she had an imagination and could use it.
Then Diana’s cousins, the Murrays from Newbridge, came; they all crowded into the big pung sleigh, among straw and furry robes.
Anne reveled in the drive to the hall, slipping along over the satin-smooth roads with the snow crisping under the runners.
There was a magnificent sunset, and the snowy hills and deep-blue water of the St.
Lawrence Gulf seemed to rim in the splendor like a huge bowl of pearl and sapphire brimmed with wine and fire.
Tinkles of sleigh bells and distant laughter, that seemed like the mirth of wood elves, came from every quarter.
“Oh, Diana,” breathed Anne, squeezing Diana’s mittened hand under the fur robe, “isn’t it all like a beautiful dream?
I feel so different that it seems to me it must show in my looks.” “You look awfully nice,” said Diana, who having just received a compliment from one of her cousins, felt that she ought to pass it on.
“You’ve got the loveliest color.” The program that night was a series of “thrills” for at least one listener in the audience, and, as Anne assured Diana, every succeeding thrill was thrillier than the last.
Phillips gave Mark Antony’s oration over the dead body of Cæsar in the most heart-stirring tones--looking at Prissy Andrews at the end of every sentence--Anne felt that she could rise and mutiny on the spot if but one Roman citizen led the way.
Only one number on the program failed to interest her.
When Gilbert Blythe recited “Bingen on the Rhine” Anne picked up Rhoda Murray’s library book and read it until he had finished, when she sat rigidly stiff and motionless while Diana clapped her hands until they tingled.
It was eleven when they got home, sated with dissipation, but with the exceeding sweet pleasure of talking it all over still to come.
Everybody seemed asleep and the house was dark and silent.
It was pleasantly warm and dimly lighted by the embers of a fire in the grate.
“It’s so nice and warm.” “Hasn’t it been a delightful time?” sighed Anne rapturously.
“It must be splendid to get up and recite there.
They’re always wanting the big scholars to recite.
Let’s run a race and see who’ll get to the bed first.” The suggestion appealed to Diana.
And then--something--moved beneath them, there was a gasp and a cry--and somebody said in muffled accents: “Merciful goodness!” Anne and Diana were never able to tell just how they got off that bed and out of the room.
They only knew that after one frantic rush they found themselves tiptoeing shiveringly upstairs.
“Oh, who was it--_what_ was it?” whispered Anne, her teeth chattering with cold and fright.
“It was Aunt Josephine,” said Diana, gasping with laughter.
“Oh, Anne, it was Aunt Josephine, however she came to be there.
It’s dreadful--it’s really dreadful--but did you ever know anything so funny, Anne?” “Who is your Aunt Josephine?” “She’s father’s aunt and she lives in Charlottetown.
We were expecting her out for a visit, but not so soon.
She’s awfully prim and proper and she’ll scold dreadfully about this, I know.
Well, we’ll have to sleep with Minnie May--and you can’t think how she kicks.” Miss Josephine Barry did not appear at the early breakfast the next morning.
I tried to stay awake until you came home, for I wanted to tell you Aunt Josephine had come and that you would have to go upstairs after all, but I was so tired I fell asleep.
I hope you didn’t disturb your aunt, Diana.” Diana preserved a discreet silence, but she and Anne exchanged furtive smiles of guilty amusement across the table.
Anne hurried home after breakfast and so remained in blissful ignorance of the disturbance which presently resulted in the Barry household until the late afternoon, when she went down to Mrs.
“So you and Diana nearly frightened poor old Miss Barry to death last night?” said Mrs.
Lynde severely, but with a twinkle in her eye.
Old Miss Barry was in a terrible temper when she got up this morning--and Josephine Barry’s temper is no joke, I can tell you that.
She wouldn’t speak to Diana at all.” “It wasn’t Diana’s fault,” said Anne contritely.
I suggested racing to see who would get into bed first.” “I knew it!” said Mrs.
Lynde, with the exultation of a correct guesser.
Old Miss Barry came out to stay for a month, but she declares she won’t stay another day and is going right back to town tomorrow, Sunday and all as it is.
She had promised to pay for a quarter’s music lessons for Diana, but now she is determined to do nothing at all for such a tomboy.
Lynde?” “It’s because you’re too heedless and impulsive, child, that’s what.
You never stop to think--whatever comes into your head to say or do you say or do it without a moment’s reflection.” “Oh, but that’s the best of it,” protested Anne.
“Something just flashes into your mind, so exciting, and you must out with it.
Haven’t you never felt that yourself, Mrs.
The proverb you need to go by is ‘Look before you leap’--especially into spare-room beds.” Mrs.
Lynde laughed comfortably over her mild joke, but Anne remained pensive.
She saw nothing to laugh at in the situation, which to her eyes appeared very serious.
“Your Aunt Josephine was very cross about it, wasn’t she?” whispered Anne.
“Yes,” answered Diana, stifling a giggle with an apprehensive glance over her shoulder at the closed sitting-room door.
But Father and Mother do.” “Why didn’t you tell them it was my fault?” demanded Anne.
“I’m no telltale, Anne Shirley, and anyhow I was just as much to blame as you.” “Well, I’m going in to tell her myself,” said Anne resolutely.
“Anne Shirley, you’d never! why--she’ll eat you alive!” “Don’t frighten me any more than I am frightened,” implored Anne.
I’ve had practice in confessing, fortunately.” “Well, she’s in the room,” said Diana.
And I don’t believe you’ll do a bit of good.” With this encouragement Anne bearded the lion in its den--that is to say, walked resolutely up to the sitting-room door and knocked faintly.
A sharp “Come in” followed.
Miss Josephine Barry, thin, prim, and rigid, was knitting fiercely by the fire, her wrath quite unappeased and her eyes snapping through her gold-rimmed glasses.
She wheeled around in her chair, expecting to see Diana, and beheld a white-faced girl whose great eyes were brimmed up with a mixture of desperate courage and shrinking terror.
“Who are you?” demanded Miss Josephine Barry, without ceremony.
“I’m Anne of Green Gables,” said the small visitor tremulously, clasping her hands with her characteristic gesture, “and I’ve come to confess, if you please.” “Confess what?” “That it was all my fault about jumping into bed on you last night.
Diana is a very ladylike girl, Miss Barry.
Such carryings on in a respectable house!” “But we were only in fun,” persisted Anne.
“I think you ought to forgive us, Miss Barry, now that we’ve apologized.
I’ve been so used in my early days to having people cross at me that I can endure it much better than Diana can.” Much of the snap had gone out of the old lady’s eyes by this time and was replaced by a twinkle of amused interest.
But she still said severely: “I don’t think it is any excuse for you that you were only in fun.
Little girls never indulged in that kind of fun when I was young.
You don’t know what it is to be awakened out of a sound sleep, after a long and arduous journey, by two great girls coming bounce down on you.” “I don’t _know_, but I can _imagine_,” said Anne eagerly.
“I’m sure it must have been very disturbing.
Have you any imagination, Miss Barry?
If you have, just put yourself in our place.
And then we couldn’t sleep in the spare room after being promised.
I suppose you are used to sleeping in spare rooms.
Miss Barry actually laughed--a sound which caused Diana, waiting in speechless anxiety in the kitchen outside, to give a great gasp of relief.
“I’m afraid my imagination is a little rusty--it’s so long since I used it,” she said.
“I dare say your claim to sympathy is just as strong as mine.
Sit down here and tell me about yourself.” “I am very sorry I can’t,” said Anne firmly.
“I would like to, because you seem like an interesting lady, and you might even be a kindred spirit although you don’t look very much like it.
But it is my duty to go home to Miss Marilla Cuthbert.
Miss Marilla Cuthbert is a very kind lady who has taken me to bring up properly.
She is doing her best, but it is very discouraging work.
But before I go I do wish you would tell me if you will forgive Diana and stay just as long as you meant to in Avonlea.” “I think perhaps I will if you will come over and talk to me occasionally,” said Miss Barry.
That evening Miss Barry gave Diana a silver bangle bracelet and told the senior members of the household that she had unpacked her valise.
“I’ve made up my mind to stay simply for the sake of getting better acquainted with that Anne-girl,” she said frankly.
She was a more agreeable guest than usual, for Anne kept her in good humor.
When Miss Barry went away she said: “Remember, you Anne-girl, when you come to town you’re to visit me and I’ll put you in my very sparest spare-room bed to sleep.” “Miss Barry was a kindred spirit, after all,” Anne confided to Marilla.
It’s splendid to find out there are so many of them in the world.” CHAPTER XX.
A Good Imagination Gone Wrong SPRING had come once more to Green Gables--the beautiful capricious, reluctant Canadian spring, lingering along through April and May in a succession of sweet, fresh, chilly days, with pink sunsets and miracles of resurrection and growth.
Silas Sloane’s place, the Mayflowers blossomed out, pink and white stars of sweetness under their brown leaves.
All the school girls and boys had one golden afternoon gathering them, coming home in the clear, echoing twilight with arms and baskets full of flowery spoil.
“I’m so sorry for people who live in lands where there are no Mayflowers,” said Anne.
“Diana says perhaps they have something better, but there couldn’t be anything better than Mayflowers, could there, Marilla?
I think it would be _tragic_, Marilla, not to know what Mayflowers are like and _not_ to miss them.
Do you know what I think Mayflowers are, Marilla?
But we had a splendid time today, Marilla.
We had our lunch down in a big mossy hollow by an old well--such a _romantic_ spot.
It is very _fashionable_ to dare.
Phillips gave all the Mayflowers he found to Prissy Andrews and I heard him to say ‘sweets to the sweet.’ He got that out of a book, I know; but it shows he has some imagination.
I was offered some Mayflowers too, but I rejected them with scorn.
We made wreaths of the Mayflowers and put them on our hats; and when the time came to go home we marched in procession down the road, two by two, with our bouquets and wreaths, singing ‘My Home on the Hill.’ Oh, it was so thrilling, Marilla.
Silas Sloane’s folks rushed out to see us and everybody we met on the road stopped and stared after us.
We made a real sensation.” “Not much wonder!
Such silly doings!” was Marilla’s response.
After the Mayflowers came the violets, and Violet Vale was empurpled with them.
Anne walked through it on her way to school with reverent steps and worshiping eyes, as if she trod on holy ground.
But when I’m up in school it’s all different and I care as much as ever.
There’s such a lot of different Annes in me.
I sometimes think that is why I’m such a troublesome person.
If I was just the one Anne it would be ever so much more comfortable, but then it wouldn’t be half so interesting.” One June evening, when the orchards were pink blossomed again, when the frogs were singing silverly sweet in the marshes about the head of the Lake of Shining Waters, and the air was full of the savor of clover fields and balsamic fir woods, Anne was sitting by her gable window.
She had been studying her lessons, but it had grown too dark to see the book, so she had fallen into wide-eyed reverie, looking out past the boughs of the Snow Queen, once more bestarred with its tufts of blossom.
In all essential respects the little gable chamber was unchanged.
The walls were as white, the pincushion as hard, the chairs as stiffly and yellowly upright as ever.
Yet the whole character of the room was altered.
It was full of a new vital, pulsing personality that seemed to pervade it and to be quite independent of schoolgirl books and dresses and ribbons, and even of the cracked blue jug full of apple blossoms on the table.
It was as if all the dreams, sleeping and waking, of its vivid occupant had taken a visible although unmaterial form and had tapestried the bare room with splendid filmy tissues of rainbow and moonshine.
Presently Marilla came briskly in with some of Anne’s freshly ironed school aprons.
She had had one of her headaches that afternoon, and although the pain had gone she felt weak and “tuckered out,” as she expressed it.
Anne looked at her with eyes limpid with sympathy.
“I do truly wish I could have had the headache in your place, Marilla.
I would have endured it joyfully for your sake.” “I guess you did your part in attending to the work and letting me rest,” said Marilla.
“You seem to have got on fairly well and made fewer mistakes than usual.
Of course it wasn’t exactly necessary to starch Matthew’s handkerchiefs!
But that doesn’t seem to be your way evidently.” Headaches always left Marilla somewhat sarcastic.
“Oh, I’m so sorry,” said Anne penitently.
“I never thought about that pie from the moment I put it in the oven till now, although I felt _instinctively_ that there was something missing on the dinner table.
I was firmly resolved, when you left me in charge this morning, not to imagine anything, but keep my thoughts on facts.
I did pretty well until I put the pie in, and then an irresistible temptation came to me to imagine I was an enchanted princess shut up in a lonely tower with a handsome knight riding to my rescue on a coal-black steed.
I didn’t know I starched the handkerchiefs.
All the time I was ironing I was trying to think of a name for a new island Diana and I have discovered up the brook.
It’s the most ravishing spot, Marilla.
At last it struck me that it would be splendid to call it Victoria Island because we found it on the Queen’s birthday.
But I’m sorry about that pie and the handkerchiefs.
I wanted to be extra good today because it’s an anniversary.
Do you remember what happened this day last year, Marilla?” “No, I can’t think of anything special.” “Oh, Marilla, it was the day I came to Green Gables.
Of course it wouldn’t seem so important to you.
Of course, I’ve had my troubles, but one can live down troubles.
Are you sorry you kept me, Marilla?” “No, I can’t say I’m sorry,” said Marilla, who sometimes wondered how she could have lived before Anne came to Green Gables, “no, not exactly sorry.
If you’ve finished your lessons, Anne, I want you to run over and ask Mrs.
Why, it’s only twilight.
And goodness knows you’ve gone over often enough after dark.” “I’ll go over early in the morning,” said Anne eagerly.
Go at once and be smart too.” “I’ll have to go around by the road, then,” said Anne, taking up her hat reluctantly.
I’d like to catch you!” “I can’t go through the Haunted Wood, Marilla,” cried Anne desperately.
There is no such thing as a haunted wood anywhere.
Who has been telling you such stuff?” “Nobody,” confessed Anne.
“Diana and I just imagined the wood was haunted.
All the places around here are so--so--_commonplace_.
We just got this up for our own amusement.
A haunted wood is so very romantic, Marilla.
Oh, we have imagined the most harrowing things.
And the ghost of a little murdered child haunts the corner up by Idlewild; it creeps up behind you and lays its cold fingers on your hand--so.
And there’s a headless man stalks up and down the path and skeletons glower at you between the boughs.
Oh, Marilla, I wouldn’t go through the Haunted Wood after dark now for anything.
I’d be sure that white things would reach out from behind the trees and grab me.” “Did ever anyone hear the like!” ejaculated Marilla, who had listened in dumb amazement.
“Anne Shirley, do you mean to tell me you believe all that wicked nonsense of your own imagination?” “Not believe _exactly_,” faltered Anne.
“At least, I don’t believe it in daylight.
But after dark, Marilla, it’s different.
And they are respectable people.
Charlie Sloane says that his grandmother saw his grandfather driving home the cows one night after he’d been buried for a year.
You know Charlie Sloane’s grandmother wouldn’t tell a story for anything.
She’s a very religious woman.
And Ruby Gillis says--” “Anne Shirley,” interrupted Marilla firmly, “I never want to hear you talking in this fashion again.
I’ve had my doubts about that imagination of yours right along, and if this is going to be the outcome of it, I won’t countenance any such doings.
Her imagination had run away with her and she held the spruce grove in mortal dread after nightfall.
But Marilla was inexorable.
She marched the shrinking ghost-seer down to the spring and ordered her to proceed straightway over the bridge and into the dusky retreats of wailing ladies and headless specters beyond.
“What would you feel like if a white thing did snatch me up and carry me off?” “I’ll risk it,” said Marilla unfeelingly.
I’ll cure you of imagining ghosts into places.
That is, she stumbled over the bridge and went shuddering up the horrible dim path beyond.
Bitterly did she repent the license she had given to her imagination.
The goblins of her fancy lurked in every shadow about her, reaching out their cold, fleshless hands to grasp the terrified small girl who had called them into being.
The long-drawn wail of two old boughs rubbing against each other brought out the perspiration in beads on her forehead.
The swoop of bats in the darkness over her was as the wings of unearthly creatures.
The dreadful return journey had to be faced.
Anne went back over it with shut eyes, preferring to take the risk of dashing her brains out among the boughs to that of seeing a white thing.
When she finally stumbled over the log bridge she drew one long shivering breath of relief.
“Well, so nothing caught you?” said Marilla unsympathetically.
“Oh, Mar--Marilla,” chattered Anne, “I’ll b-b-be contt-tented with c-c-commonplace places after this.” CHAPTER XXI.
A New Departure in Flavorings DEAR me, there is nothing but meetings and partings in this world, as Mrs.
Lynde says,” remarked Anne plaintively, putting her slate and books down on the kitchen table on the last day of June and wiping her red eyes with a very damp handkerchief.
“Wasn’t it fortunate, Marilla, that I took an extra handkerchief to school today?
I had a presentiment that it would be needed.” “I never thought you were so fond of Mr.
Phillips that you’d require two handkerchiefs to dry your tears just because he was going away,” said Marilla.
“I don’t think I was crying because I was really so very fond of him,” reflected Anne.
Ruby Gillis has always declared she hated Mr.
Phillips, but just as soon as he got up to make his farewell speech she burst into tears.
I tried to remember the time Mr.
Phillips made me sit with Gil--with a boy; and the time he spelled my name without an ‘e’ on the blackboard; and how he said I was the worst dunce he ever saw at geometry and laughed at my spelling; and all the times he had been so horrid and sarcastic; but somehow I couldn’t, Marilla, and I just had to cry too.
Phillips went away and she declared she’d never shed a tear.
Well, she was worse than any of us and had to borrow a handkerchief from her brother--of course the boys didn’t cry--because she hadn’t brought one of her own, not expecting to need it.
Oh, Marilla, it was heartrending.
Phillips made such a beautiful farewell speech beginning, ‘The time has come for us to part.’ It was very affecting.
Oh, I felt dreadfully sorry and remorseful for all the times I’d talked in school and drawn pictures of him on my slate and made fun of him and Prissy.
She hadn’t anything on her conscience.
Carrie Sloane kept saying every few minutes, ‘The time has come for us to part,’ and that would start us off again whenever we were in any danger of cheering up.
I do feel dreadfully sad, Marilla.
But one can’t feel quite in the depths of despair with two months’ vacation before them, can they, Marilla?
And besides, we met the new minister and his wife coming from the station.
Phillips going away I couldn’t help taking a little interest in a new minister, could I?
Not exactly regally lovely, of course--it wouldn’t do, I suppose, for a minister to have a regally lovely wife, because it might set a bad example.
Lynde says the minister’s wife over at Newbridge sets a very bad example because she dresses so fashionably.
Our new minister’s wife was dressed in blue muslin with lovely puffed sleeves and a hat trimmed with roses.
Jane Andrews said she thought puffed sleeves were too worldly for a minister’s wife, but I didn’t make any such uncharitable remark, Marilla, because I know what it is to long for puffed sleeves.
Besides, she’s only been a minister’s wife for a little while, so one should make allowances, shouldn’t they?
Lynde’s that evening, was actuated by any motive save her avowed one of returning the quilting frames she had borrowed the preceding winter, it was an amiable weakness shared by most of the Avonlea people.
Lynde had lent, sometimes never expecting to see it again, came home that night in charge of the borrowers thereof.
A new minister, and moreover a minister with a wife, was a lawful object of curiosity in a quiet little country settlement where sensations were few and far between.
Bentley, the minister whom Anne had found lacking in imagination, had been pastor of Avonlea for eighteen years.
He was a widower when he came, and a widower he remained, despite the fact that gossip regularly married him to this, that, or the other one, every year of his sojourn.
In the preceding February he had resigned his charge and departed amid the regrets of his people, most of whom had the affection born of long intercourse for their good old minister in spite of his shortcomings as an orator.
Since then the Avonlea church had enjoyed a variety of religious dissipation in listening to the many and various candidates and “supplies” who came Sunday after Sunday to preach on trial.
These stood or fell by the judgment of the fathers and mothers in Israel; but a certain small, red-haired girl who sat meekly in the corner of the old Cuthbert pew also had her opinions about them and discussed the same in full with Matthew, Marilla always declining from principle to criticize ministers in any shape or form.
Lynde says his delivery was so poor, but I think his worst fault was just like Mr.
Bentley’s--he had no imagination.
Lynde says his theology wasn’t sound.
Gresham was a very good man and a very religious man, but he told too many funny stories and made the people laugh in church; he was undignified, and you must have some dignity about a minister, mustn’t you, Matthew?
Marshall was decidedly attractive; but Mrs.
Lynde says he isn’t married, or even engaged, because she made special inquiries about him, and she says it would never do to have a young unmarried minister in Avonlea, because he might marry in the congregation and that would make trouble.
Lynde is a very farseeing woman, isn’t she, Matthew?
I liked him because his sermon was interesting and he prayed as if he meant it and not just as if he did it because he was in the habit of it.
Lynde says he isn’t perfect, but she says she supposes we couldn’t expect a perfect minister for seven hundred and fifty dollars a year, and anyhow his theology is sound because she questioned him thoroughly on all the points of doctrine.
And she knows his wife’s people and they are most respectable and the women are all good housekeepers.
Lynde says that sound doctrine in the man and good housekeeping in the woman make an ideal combination for a minister’s family.” The new minister and his wife were a young, pleasant-faced couple, still on their honeymoon, and full of all good and beautiful enthusiasms for their chosen lifework.
Old and young liked the frank, cheerful young man with his high ideals, and the bright, gentle little lady who assumed the mistress-ship of the manse.
Allan Anne fell promptly and wholeheartedly in love.
She had discovered another kindred spirit.
Allan is perfectly lovely,” she announced one Sunday afternoon.
“She’s taken our class and she’s a splendid teacher.
She said right away she didn’t think it was fair for the teacher to ask all the questions, and you know, Marilla, that is exactly what I’ve always thought.
She said we could ask her any question we liked and I asked ever so many.
I’m good at asking questions, Marilla.” “I believe you,” was Marilla’s emphatic comment.
I didn’t think that was a very proper question to ask because it hadn’t any connection with the lesson--the lesson was about Daniel in the lions’ den--but Mrs.
Allan has a lovely smile; she has such _exquisite_ dimples in her cheeks.
If I had perhaps I could influence people for good.
Allan said we ought always to try to influence other people for good.
She talked so nice about everything.
I never knew before that religion was such a cheerful thing.
I always thought it was kind of melancholy, but Mrs.
Allan’s isn’t, and I’d like to be a Christian if I could be one like her.
Superintendent Bell.” “It’s very naughty of you to speak so about Mr.
Bell,” said Marilla severely.
Allan is too old to dance and sing and of course it wouldn’t be dignified in a minister’s wife.
But I can just feel she’s glad she’s a Christian and that she’d be one even if she could get to heaven without it.” “I suppose we must have Mr. and Mrs.
Allan up to tea someday soon,” said Marilla reflectively.
“They’ve been most everywhere but here.
Next Wednesday would be a good time to have them.
Bentley he didn’t mind him, but he’s going to find it hard to get acquainted with a new minister, and a new minister’s wife will frighten him to death.” “I’ll be as secret as the dead,” assured Anne.
“But oh, Marilla, will you let me make a cake for the occasion?
I’d love to do something for Mrs.
Allan, and you know I can make a pretty good cake by this time.” “You can make a layer cake,” promised Marilla.
Monday and Tuesday great preparations went on at Green Gables.
Having the minister and his wife to tea was a serious and important undertaking, and Marilla was determined not to be eclipsed by any of the Avonlea housekeepers.
Anne was wild with excitement and delight.
She talked it all over with Diana Tuesday night in the twilight, as they sat on the big red stones by the Dryad’s Bubble and made rainbows in the water with little twigs dipped in fir balsam.
“Everything is ready, Diana, except my cake which I’m to make in the morning, and the baking-powder biscuits which Marilla will make just before teatime.
It’s such a responsibility having a minister’s family to tea.
I never went through such an experience before.
We’re to have two kinds of jelly, red and yellow, and whipped cream and lemon pie, and cherry pie, and three kinds of cookies, and fruit cake, and Marilla’s famous yellow plum preserves that she keeps especially for ministers, and pound cake and layer cake, and biscuits as aforesaid; and new bread and old both, in case the minister is dyspeptic and can’t eat new.
Lynde says ministers are dyspeptic, but I don’t think Mr.
Allan has been a minister long enough for it to have had a bad effect on him.
I dreamed last night that I was chased all around by a fearful goblin with a big layer cake for a head.” “It’ll be good, all right,” assured Diana, who was a very comfortable sort of friend.
“I’m sure that piece of the one you made that we had for lunch in Idlewild two weeks ago was perfectly elegant.” “Yes; but cakes have such a terrible habit of turning out bad just when you especially want them to be good,” sighed Anne, setting a particularly well-balsamed twig afloat.
“However, I suppose I shall just have to trust to Providence and be careful to put in the flour.
Diana’s mother had found out about the Haunted Wood and had been decidedly angry over it.
As a result Diana had abstained from any further imitative flights of imagination and did not think it prudent to cultivate a spirit of belief even in harmless dryads.
Sometimes I look for her footprints in the dew in the morning.
Oh, Diana, don’t give up your faith in the dryad!” Wednesday morning came.
She had caught a severe cold in the head by reason of her dabbling in the spring on the preceding evening; but nothing short of absolute pneumonia could have quenched her interest in culinary matters that morning.
After breakfast she proceeded to make her cake.
“I’m sure I haven’t forgotten anything this time, Marilla.
Lynde says you can never be sure of getting good baking powder nowadays when everything is so adulterated.
Lynde says the Government ought to take the matter up, but she says we’ll never see the day when a Tory Government will do it.
Marilla, what if that cake doesn’t rise?” “We’ll have plenty without it” was Marilla’s unimpassioned way of looking at the subject.
The cake did rise, however, and came out of the oven as light and feathery as golden foam.
Anne, flushed with delight, clapped it together with layers of ruby jelly and, in imagination, saw Mrs.
Allan eating it and possibly asking for another piece!
“Can I fix the table with ferns and wild roses?” “I think that’s all nonsense,” sniffed Marilla.
“In my opinion it’s the eatables that matter and not flummery decorations.” “Mrs.
Barry had _her_ table decorated,” said Anne, who was not entirely guiltless of the wisdom of the serpent, “and the minister paid her an elegant compliment.
He said it was a feast for the eye as well as the palate.” “Well, do as you like,” said Marilla, who was quite determined not to be surpassed by Mrs.
“Only mind you leave enough room for the dishes and the food.” Anne laid herself out to decorate in a manner and after a fashion that should leave Mrs.
Having abundance of roses and ferns and a very artistic taste of her own, she made that tea table such a thing of beauty that when the minister and his wife sat down to it they exclaimed in chorus over it loveliness.
Allan’s approving smile was almost too much happiness for this world.
Matthew was there, having been inveigled into the party only goodness and Anne knew how.
He had been in such a state of shyness and nervousness that Marilla had given him up in despair, but Anne took him in hand so successfully that he now sat at the table in his best clothes and white collar and talked to the minister not uninterestingly.
Allan, but that perhaps was not to be expected.
All went merry as a marriage bell until Anne’s layer cake was passed.
Allan, having already been helped to a bewildering variety, declined it.
But Marilla, seeing the disappointment on Anne’s face, said smilingly: “Oh, you must take a piece of this, Mrs.
Allan, helping herself to a plump triangle, as did also the minister and Marilla.
Allan took a mouthful of hers and a most peculiar expression crossed her face; not a word did she say, however, but steadily ate away at it.
Marilla saw the expression and hastened to taste the cake.
“Anne Shirley!” she exclaimed, “what on earth did you put into that cake?” “Nothing but what the recipe said, Marilla,” cried Anne with a look of anguish.
It’s simply horrible.
Anne, taste it yourself.
What flavoring did you use?” “Vanilla,” said Anne, her face scarlet with mortification after tasting the cake.
I had my suspicions of that bak--” “Baking powder fiddlesticks!
Go and bring me the bottle of vanilla you used.” Anne fled to the pantry and returned with a small bottle partially filled with a brown liquid and labeled yellowly, “Best Vanilla.” Marilla took it, uncorked it, smelled it.
“Mercy on us, Anne, you’ve flavored that cake with _Anodyne Liniment_.
I broke the liniment bottle last week and poured what was left into an old empty vanilla bottle.
I suppose it’s partly my fault--I should have warned you--but for pity’s sake why couldn’t you have smelled it?” Anne dissolved into tears under this double disgrace.
“I couldn’t--I had such a cold!” and with this she fairly fled to the gable chamber, where she cast herself on the bed and wept as one who refuses to be comforted.
Presently a light step sounded on the stairs and somebody entered the room.
“Oh, Marilla,” sobbed Anne, without looking up, “I’m disgraced forever.
I shall always be pointed at as the girl who flavored a cake with anodyne liniment.
Gil--the boys in school will never get over laughing at it.
Oh, Marilla, if you have a spark of Christian pity don’t tell me that I must go down and wash the dishes after this.
I’ll wash them when the minister and his wife are gone, but I cannot ever look Mrs.
Lynde says she knows an orphan girl who tried to poison her benefactor.
But the liniment isn’t poisonous.
It’s meant to be taken internally--although not in cakes.
Allan so, Marilla?” “Suppose you jump up and tell her so yourself,” said a merry voice.
Allan standing by her bed, surveying her with laughing eyes.
“My dear little girl, you mustn’t cry like this,” she said, genuinely disturbed by Anne’s tragic face.
“Why, it’s all just a funny mistake that anybody might make.” “Oh, no, it takes me to make such a mistake,” said Anne forlornly.
And I assure you I appreciate your kindness and thoughtfulness just as much as if it had turned out all right.
Miss Cuthbert tells me you have a little plot all your own.
I want to see it, for I’m very much interested in flowers.” Anne permitted herself to be led down and comforted, reflecting that it was really providential that Mrs.
Nothing more was said about the liniment cake, and when the guests went away Anne found that she had enjoyed the evening more than could have been expected, considering that terrible incident.
Nevertheless, she sighed deeply.
“Marilla, isn’t it nice to think that tomorrow is a new day with no mistakes in it yet?” “I’ll warrant you’ll make plenty in it,” said Marilla.
“I never saw your beat for making mistakes, Anne.” “Yes, and well I know it,” admitted Anne mournfully.
“But have you ever noticed one encouraging thing about me, Marilla?
There must be a limit to the mistakes one person can make, and when I get to the end of them, then I’ll be through with them.
That’s a very comforting thought.” “Well, you’d better go and give that cake to the pigs,” said Marilla.
“Have you discovered another kindred spirit?” Excitement hung around Anne like a garment, shone in her eyes, kindled in every feature.
She had come dancing up the lane, like a wind-blown sprite, through the mellow sunshine and lazy shadows of the August evening.
I am invited to tea at the manse tomorrow afternoon!
I shall cherish it forever among my choicest treasures.” “Mrs.
Allan told me she meant to have all the members of her Sunday-school class to tea in turn,” said Marilla, regarding the wonderful event very coolly.
All “spirit and fire and dew,” as she was, the pleasures and pains of life came to her with trebled intensity.
Marilla felt this and was vaguely troubled over it, realizing that the ups and downs of existence would probably bear hardly on this impulsive soul and not sufficiently understanding that the equally great capacity for delight might more than compensate.
Therefore Marilla conceived it to be her duty to drill Anne into a tranquil uniformity of disposition as impossible and alien to her as to a dancing sunbeam in one of the brook shallows.
She did not make much headway, as she sorrowfully admitted to herself.
The downfall of some dear hope or plan plunged Anne into “deeps of affliction.” The fulfillment thereof exalted her to dizzy realms of delight.
Marilla had almost begun to despair of ever fashioning this waif of the world into her model little girl of demure manners and prim deportment.
Neither would she have believed that she really liked Anne much better as she was.
Anne went to bed that night speechless with misery because Matthew had said the wind was round northeast and he feared it would be a rainy day tomorrow.
The rustle of the poplar leaves about the house worried her, it sounded so like pattering raindrops, and the full, faraway roar of the gulf, to which she listened delightedly at other times, loving its strange, sonorous, haunting rhythm, now seemed like a prophecy of storm and disaster to a small maiden who particularly wanted a fine day.
The morning, in spite of Matthew’s predictions, was fine and Anne’s spirits soared to their highest.
“Oh, Marilla, there is something in me today that makes me just love everybody I see,” she exclaimed as she washed the breakfast dishes.
But oh, Marilla, it’s a solemn occasion too.
What if I shouldn’t behave properly?
You know I never had tea at a manse before, and I’m not sure that I know all the rules of etiquette, although I’ve been studying the rules given in the Etiquette Department of the Family Herald ever since I came here.
I’m so afraid I’ll do something silly or forget to do something I should do.
Would it be good manners to take a second helping of anything if you wanted to _very_ much?” “The trouble with you, Anne, is that you’re thinking too much about yourself.
Allan and what would be nicest and most agreeable to her,” said Marilla, hitting for once in her life on a very sound and pithy piece of advice.
Anne instantly realized this.
A cool wind was blowing down over the long harvest fields from the rims of firry western hills and whistling through the poplars.
One clear star hung over the orchard and the fireflies were flitting over in Lover’s Lane, in and out among the ferns and rustling boughs.
Anne watched them as she talked and somehow felt that wind and stars and fireflies were all tangled up together into something unutterably sweet and enchanting.
“Oh, Marilla, I’ve had a most _fascinating_ time.
She was dressed in the sweetest dress of pale-pink organdy, with dozens of frills and elbow sleeves, and she looked just like a seraph.
I really think I’d like to be a minister’s wife when I grow up, Marilla.
A minister mightn’t mind my red hair because he wouldn’t be thinking of such worldly things.
But then of course one would have to be naturally good and I’ll never be that, so I suppose there’s no use in thinking about it.
Some people are naturally good, you know, and others are not.
Lynde says I’m full of original sin.
No matter how hard I try to be good I can never make such a success of it as those who are naturally good.
It’s a good deal like geometry, I expect.
But don’t you think the trying so hard ought to count for something?
Allan is one of the naturally good people.
I love her passionately.
You know you _ought_ to love them because they know so much and are such active workers in the church, but you have to keep reminding yourself of it all the time or else you forget.
Her name was Laurette Bradley, and she was a very nice little girl.
We had an elegant tea, and I think I kept all the rules of etiquette pretty well.
Allan played and sang and she got Lauretta and me to sing too.
You can’t think how I was thrilled at the mere thought.
Lauretta had to go home early because there is a big concert in the White Sands Hotel tonight and her sister is to recite at it.
Lauretta says that the Americans at the hotel give a concert every fortnight in aid of the Charlottetown hospital, and they ask lots of the White Sands people to recite.
Lauretta said she expected to be asked herself someday.
I told her everything--about Mrs.
Thomas and the twins and Katie Maurice and Violetta and coming to Green Gables and my troubles over geometry.
Allan told me she was a dunce at geometry too.
You don’t know how that encouraged me.
The trustees have hired a new teacher and it’s a lady.
Isn’t that a romantic name?
Lynde says they’ve never had a female teacher in Avonlea before and she thinks it is a dangerous innovation.
But I think it will be splendid to have a lady teacher, and I really don’t see how I’m going to live through the two weeks before school begins.
I’m so impatient to see her.” CHAPTER XXIII.
Anne Comes to Grief in an Affair of Honor ANNE had to live through more than two weeks, as it happened.
“Just the girls in our class.” They had a very good time and nothing untoward happened until after tea, when they found themselves in the Barry garden, a little tired of all their games and ripe for any enticing form of mischief which might present itself.
This presently took the form of “daring.” Daring was the fashionable amusement among the Avonlea small fry just then.
It had begun among the boys, but soon spread to the girls, and all the silly things that were done in Avonlea that summer because the doers thereof were “dared” to do them would fill a book by themselves.
First of all Carrie Sloane dared Ruby Gillis to climb to a certain point in the huge old willow tree before the front door; which Ruby Gillis, albeit in mortal dread of the fat green caterpillars with which said tree was infested and with the fear of her mother before her eyes if she should tear her new muslin dress, nimbly did, to the discomfiture of the aforesaid Carrie Sloane.
Then Josie Pye dared Jane Andrews to hop on her left leg around the garden without stopping once or putting her right foot to the ground; which Jane Andrews gamely tried to do, but gave out at the third corner and had to confess herself defeated.
Josie’s triumph being rather more pronounced than good taste permitted, Anne Shirley dared her to walk along the top of the board fence which bounded the garden to the east.
Now, to “walk” board fences requires more skill and steadiness of head and heel than one might suppose who has never tried it.
But Josie Pye, if deficient in some qualities that make for popularity, had at least a natural and inborn gift, duly cultivated, for walking board fences.
Josie walked the Barry fence with an airy unconcern which seemed to imply that a little thing like that wasn’t worth a “dare.” Reluctant admiration greeted her exploit, for most of the other girls could appreciate it, having suffered many things themselves in their efforts to walk fences.
Josie descended from her perch, flushed with victory, and darted a defiant glance at Anne.
“I don’t think it’s such a very wonderful thing to walk a little, low, board fence,” she said.
“I knew a girl in Marysville who could walk the ridgepole of a roof.” “I don’t believe it,” said Josie flatly.
“I don’t believe anybody could walk a ridgepole. _You_ couldn’t, anyhow.” “Couldn’t I?” cried Anne rashly.
“Then I dare you to do it,” said Josie defiantly.
“I dare you to climb up there and walk the ridgepole of Mr.
All the fifth-class girls said, “Oh!” partly in excitement, partly in dismay.
“Don’t you do it, Anne,” entreated Diana.
It isn’t fair to dare anybody to do anything so dangerous.” “I must do it.
My honor is at stake,” said Anne solemnly.
“I shall walk that ridgepole, Diana, or perish in the attempt.
If I am killed you are to have my pearl bead ring.” Anne climbed the ladder amid breathless silence, gained the ridgepole, balanced herself uprightly on that precarious footing, and started to walk along it, dizzily conscious that she was uncomfortably high up in the world and that walking ridgepoles was not a thing in which your imagination helped you out much.
Nevertheless, she managed to take several steps before the catastrophe came.
Then she swayed, lost her balance, stumbled, staggered, and fell, sliding down over the sun-baked roof and crashing off it through the tangle of Virginia creeper beneath--all before the dismayed circle below could give a simultaneous, terrified shriek.
If Anne had tumbled off the roof on the side up which she had ascended Diana would probably have fallen heir to the pearl bead ring then and there.
Fortunately she fell on the other side, where the roof extended down over the porch so nearly to the ground that a fall therefrom was a much less serious thing.
Nevertheless, when Diana and the other girls had rushed frantically around the house--except Ruby Gillis, who remained as if rooted to the ground and went into hysterics--they found Anne lying all white and limp among the wreck and ruin of the Virginia creeper.
“Anne, are you killed?” shrieked Diana, throwing herself on her knees beside her friend.
Barry appeared on the scene.
At sight of her Anne tried to scramble to her feet, but sank back again with a sharp little cry of pain.
Where have you hurt yourself?” demanded Mrs.
Barry beside him and a whole procession of little girls trailing after him.
In his arms he carried Anne, whose head lay limply against his shoulder.
At that moment Marilla had a revelation.
In the sudden stab of fear that pierced her very heart she realized what Anne had come to mean to her.
She would have admitted that she liked Anne--nay, that she was very fond of Anne.
But now she knew as she hurried wildly down the slope that Anne was dearer to her than anything else on earth.
Barry, what has happened to her?” she gasped, more white and shaken than the self-contained, sensible Marilla had been for many years.
Anne herself answered, lifting her head.
“Don’t be very frightened, Marilla.
I was walking the ridgepole and I fell off.
I expect I have sprained my ankle.
Let us look on the bright side of things.” “I might have known you’d go and do something of the sort when I let you go to that party,” said Marilla, sharp and shrewish in her very relief.
Overcome by the pain of her injury, Anne had one more of her wishes granted to her.
Matthew, hastily summoned from the harvest field, was straightway dispatched for the doctor, who in due time came, to discover that the injury was more serious than they had supposed.
That night, when Marilla went up to the east gable, where a white-faced girl was lying, a plaintive voice greeted her from the bed.
“Aren’t you very sorry for me, Marilla?” “It was your own fault,” said Marilla, twitching down the blind and lighting a lamp.
But what would you have done, Marilla, if you had been dared to walk a ridgepole?” “I’d have stayed on good firm ground and let them dare away.
Such absurdity!” said Marilla.
“But you have such strength of mind, Marilla.
And I think I have been punished so much that you needn’t be very cross with me, Marilla.
And the doctor hurt me dreadfully when he was setting my ankle.
And Gil--everybody will get ahead of me in class.
Oh, I am an afflicted mortal.
“You’re an unlucky child, there’s no doubt about that; but as you say, you’ll have the suffering of it.
Here now, try and eat some supper.” “Isn’t it fortunate I’ve got such an imagination?” said Anne.
“It will help me through splendidly, I expect.
What do people who haven’t any imagination do when they break their bones, do you suppose, Marilla?” Anne had good reason to bless her imagination many a time and oft during the tedious seven weeks that followed.
But she was not solely dependent on it.
She had many visitors and not a day passed without one or more of the schoolgirls dropping in to bring her flowers and books and tell her all the happenings in the juvenile world of Avonlea.
“Everybody has been so good and kind, Marilla,” sighed Anne happily, on the day when she could first limp across the floor.
“It isn’t very pleasant to be laid up; but there is a bright side to it, Marilla.
Why, even Superintendent Bell came to see me, and he’s really a very fine man.
Not a kindred spirit, of course; but still I like him and I’m awfully sorry I ever criticized his prayers.
I told him how hard I tried to make my own little private prayers interesting.
It does seem so strange to think of Superintendent Bell ever being a boy.
Even my imagination has its limits, for I can’t imagine _that_.
When I try to imagine him as a boy I see him with gray whiskers and spectacles, just as he looks in Sunday-school, only small.
Allan has been to see me fourteen times.
Isn’t that something to be proud of, Marilla?
When a minister’s wife has so many claims on her time!
She is such a cheerful person to have visit you, too.
I received her as politely as I could, because I think she was sorry she dared me to walk a ridgepole.
Diana has been a faithful friend.
But oh, I shall be so glad when I can go to school for I’ve heard such exciting things about the new teacher.
The girls all think she is perfectly sweet.
Diana says she has the loveliest fair curly hair and such fascinating eyes.
She dresses beautifully, and her sleeve puffs are bigger than anybody else’s in Avonlea.
Every other Friday afternoon she has recitations and everybody has to say a piece or take part in a dialogue.
Oh, it’s just glorious to think of it.
Josie Pye says she hates it but that is just because Josie has so little imagination.
Diana and Ruby Gillis and Jane Andrews are preparing a dialogue, called ‘A Morning Visit,’ for next Friday.
And the Friday afternoons they don’t have recitations Miss Stacy takes them all to the woods for a ‘field’ day and they study ferns and flowers and birds.
And they have physical culture exercises every morning and evening.
But I think it must be splendid and I believe I shall find that Miss Stacy is a kindred spirit.” “There’s one thing plain to be seen, Anne,” said Marilla, “and that is that your fall off the Barry roof hasn’t injured your tongue at all.” CHAPTER XXIV.
Miss Stacy and Her Pupils Get Up a Concert IT was October again when Anne was ready to go back to school--a glorious October, all red and gold, with mellow mornings when the valleys were filled with delicate mists as if the spirit of autumn had poured them in for the sun to drain--amethyst, pearl, silver, rose, and smoke-blue.
The dews were so heavy that the fields glistened like cloth of silver and there were such heaps of rustling leaves in the hollows of many-stemmed woods to run crisply through.
There was a tang in the very air that inspired the hearts of small maidens tripping, unlike snails, swiftly and willingly to school; and it _was_ jolly to be back again at the little brown desk beside Diana, with Ruby Gillis nodding across the aisle and Carrie Sloane sending up notes and Julia Bell passing a “chew” of gum down from the back seat.
Anne drew a long breath of happiness as she sharpened her pencil and arranged her picture cards in her desk.
Life was certainly very interesting.
Miss Stacy was a bright, sympathetic young woman with the happy gift of winning and holding the affections of her pupils and bringing out the best that was in them mentally and morally.
Anne expanded like a flower under this wholesome influence and carried home to the admiring Matthew and the critical Marilla glowing accounts of schoolwork and aims.
She is so ladylike and she has such a sweet voice.
When she pronounces my name I feel _instinctively_ that she’s spelling it with an E.
We had recitations this afternoon.
Ruby Gillis told me coming home that the way I said the line, ‘Now for my father’s arm,’ she said, ‘my woman’s heart farewell,’ just made her blood run cold.” “Well now, you might recite it for me some of these days, out in the barn,” suggested Matthew.
“Of course I will,” said Anne meditatively, “but I won’t be able to do it so well, I know.
It won’t be so exciting as it is when you have a whole schoolful before you hanging breathlessly on your words.
Lynde says it made _her_ blood run cold to see the boys climbing to the very tops of those big trees on Bell’s hill after crows’ nests last Friday,” said Marilla.
“I wonder at Miss Stacy for encouraging it.” “But we wanted a crow’s nest for nature study,” explained Anne.
“That was on our field afternoon.
Field afternoons are splendid, Marilla.
And Miss Stacy explains everything so beautifully.
We have to write compositions on our field afternoons and I write the best ones.” “It’s very vain of you to say so then.
How can I be, when I’m such a dunce at geometry?
Although I’m really beginning to see through it a little, too.
Still, I’ll never be good at it and I assure you it is a humbling reflection.
But I love writing compositions.
Mostly Miss Stacy lets us choose our own subjects; but next week we are to write a composition on some remarkable person.
It’s hard to choose among so many remarkable people who have lived.
Mustn’t it be splendid to be remarkable and have compositions written about you after you’re dead?
Oh, I would dearly love to be remarkable.
I think when I grow up I’ll be a trained nurse and go with the Red Crosses to the field of battle as a messenger of mercy.
That is, if I don’t go out as a foreign missionary.
That would be very romantic, but one would have to be very good to be a missionary, and that would be a stumbling block.
We have physical culture exercises every day, too.
They make you graceful and promote digestion.” “Promote fiddlesticks!” said Marilla, who honestly thought it was all nonsense.
But all the field afternoons and recitation Fridays and physical culture contortions paled before a project which Miss Stacy brought forward in November.
This was that the scholars of Avonlea school should get up a concert and hold it in the hall on Christmas Night, for the laudable purpose of helping to pay for a schoolhouse flag.
The pupils one and all taking graciously to this plan, the preparations for a program were begun at once.
And of all the excited performers-elect none was so excited as Anne Shirley, who threw herself into the undertaking heart and soul, hampered as she was by Marilla’s disapproval.
Marilla thought it all rank foolishness.
“It’s just filling your heads up with nonsense and taking time that ought to be put on your lessons,” she grumbled.
“I don’t approve of children’s getting up concerts and racing about to practices.
“A flag will cultivate a spirit of patriotism, Marilla.” “Fudge!
There’s precious little patriotism in the thoughts of any of you.
All you want is a good time.” “Well, when you can combine patriotism and fun, isn’t it all right?
We’re going to have six choruses and Diana is to sing a solo.
I’m in two dialogues--‘The Society for the Suppression of Gossip’ and ‘The Fairy Queen.’ The boys are going to have a dialogue too.
And I’m to have two recitations, Marilla.
I’m to be Hope, with my hands clasped--so--and my eyes uplifted.
I’m going to practice my recitations in the garret.
Don’t be alarmed if you hear me groaning.
I have to groan heartrendingly in one of them, and it’s really hard to get up a good artistic groan, Marilla.
Josie Pye is sulky because she didn’t get the part she wanted in the dialogue.
That would have been ridiculous, for who ever heard of a fairy queen as fat as Josie?
Josie says she thinks a red-haired fairy is just as ridiculous as a fat one, but I do not let myself mind what Josie says.
I’m to have a wreath of white roses on my hair and Ruby Gillis is going to lend me her slippers because I haven’t any of my own.
It’s necessary for fairies to have slippers, you know.
Especially with copper toes?
We are going to decorate the hall with creeping spruce and fir mottoes with pink tissue-paper roses in them.
And we are all to march in two by two after the audience is seated, while Emma White plays a march on the organ.
Oh, Marilla, I know you are not so enthusiastic about it as I am, but don’t you hope your little Anne will distinguish herself?” “All I hope is that you’ll behave yourself.
I’ll be heartily glad when all this fuss is over and you’ll be able to settle down.
You are simply good for nothing just now with your head stuffed full of dialogues and groans and tableaus.
As for your tongue, it’s a marvel it’s not clean worn out.” Anne sighed and betook herself to the back yard, over which a young new moon was shining through the leafless poplar boughs from an apple-green western sky, and where Matthew was splitting wood.
Anne perched herself on a block and talked the concert over with him, sure of an appreciative and sympathetic listener in this instance at least.
And I expect you’ll do your part fine,” he said, smiling down into her eager, vivacious little face.
Those two were the best of friends and Matthew thanked his stars many a time and oft that he had nothing to do with bringing her up.
That was Marilla’s exclusive duty; if it had been his he would have been worried over frequent conflicts between inclination and said duty.
As it was, he was free to, “spoil Anne”--Marilla’s phrasing--as much as he liked.
But it was not such a bad arrangement after all; a little “appreciation” sometimes does quite as much good as all the conscientious “bringing up” in the world.
He had come into the kitchen, in the twilight of a cold, gray December evening, and had sat down in the woodbox corner to take off his heavy boots, unconscious of the fact that Anne and a bevy of her schoolmates were having a practice of “The Fairy Queen” in the sitting room.
Presently they came trooping through the hall and out into the kitchen, laughing and chattering gaily.
They did not see Matthew, who shrank bashfully back into the shadows beyond the woodbox with a boot in one hand and a bootjack in the other, and he watched them shyly for the aforesaid ten minutes as they put on caps and jackets and talked about the dialogue and the concert.
Anne stood among them, bright eyed and animated as they; but Matthew suddenly became conscious that there was something about her different from her mates.
And what worried Matthew was that the difference impressed him as being something that should not exist.
Anne had a brighter face, and bigger, starrier eyes, and more delicate features than the other; even shy, unobservant Matthew had learned to take note of these things; but the difference that disturbed him did not consist in any of these respects.
Matthew was haunted by this question long after the girls had gone, arm in arm, down the long, hard-frozen lane and Anne had betaken herself to her books.
He could not refer it to Marilla, who, he felt, would be quite sure to sniff scornfully and remark that the only difference she saw between Anne and the other girls was that they sometimes kept their tongues quiet while Anne never did.
He had recourse to his pipe that evening to help him study it out, much to Marilla’s disgust.
After two hours of smoking and hard reflection Matthew arrived at a solution of his problem.
The more Matthew thought about the matter the more he was convinced that Anne never had been dressed like the other girls--never since she had come to Green Gables.
Marilla kept her clothed in plain, dark dresses, all made after the same unvarying pattern.
He recalled the cluster of little girls he had seen around her that evening--all gay in waists of red and blue and pink and white--and he wondered why Marilla always kept her so plainly and soberly gowned.
Marilla knew best and Marilla was bringing her up.
Probably some wise, inscrutable motive was to be served thereby.
But surely it would do no harm to let the child have one pretty dress--something like Diana Barry always wore.
Matthew decided that he would give her one; that surely could not be objected to as an unwarranted putting in of his oar.
Christmas was only a fortnight off.
Matthew, with a sigh of satisfaction, put away his pipe and went to bed, while Marilla opened all the doors and aired the house.
The very next evening Matthew betook himself to Carmody to buy the dress, determined to get the worst over and have done with it.
It would be, he felt assured, no trifling ordeal.
There were some things Matthew could buy and prove himself no mean bargainer; but he knew he would be at the mercy of shopkeepers when it came to buying a girl’s dress.
After much cogitation Matthew resolved to go to Samuel Lawson’s store instead of William Blair’s.
To be sure, the Cuthberts always had gone to William Blair’s; it was almost as much a matter of conscience with them as to attend the Presbyterian church and vote Conservative.
But William Blair’s two daughters frequently waited on customers there and Matthew held them in absolute dread.
He could contrive to deal with them when he knew exactly what he wanted and could point it out; but in such a matter as this, requiring explanation and consultation, Matthew felt that he must be sure of a man behind the counter.
Matthew did not know that Samuel, in the recent expansion of his business, had set up a lady clerk also; she was a niece of his wife’s and a very dashing young person indeed, with a huge, drooping pompadour, big, rolling brown eyes, and a most extensive and bewildering smile.
She was dressed with exceeding smartness and wore several bangle bracelets that glittered and rattled and tinkled with every movement of her hands.
Matthew was covered with confusion at finding her there at all; and those bangles completely wrecked his wits at one fell swoop.
Cuthbert?” Miss Lucilla Harris inquired, briskly and ingratiatingly, tapping the counter with both hands.
“Have you any--any--any--well now, say any garden rakes?” stammered Matthew.
Miss Harris looked somewhat surprised, as well she might, to hear a man inquiring for garden rakes in the middle of December.
“I believe we have one or two left over,” she said, “but they’re upstairs in the lumber room.
I’ll go and see.” During her absence Matthew collected his scattered senses for another effort.
When Miss Harris returned with the rake and cheerfully inquired: “Anything else tonight, Mr.
Cuthbert?” Matthew took his courage in both hands and replied: “Well now, since you suggest it, I might as well--take--that is--look at--buy some--some hayseed.” Miss Harris had heard Matthew Cuthbert called odd.
She now concluded that he was entirely crazy.
“We only keep hayseed in the spring,” she explained loftily.
“We’ve none on hand just now.” “Oh, certainly--certainly--just as you say,” stammered unhappy Matthew, seizing the rake and making for the door.
At the threshold he recollected that he had not paid for it and he turned miserably back.
While Miss Harris was counting out his change he rallied his powers for a final desperate attempt.
“Well now--if it isn’t too much trouble--I might as well--that is--I’d like to look at--at--some sugar.” “White or brown?” queried Miss Harris patiently.
“It’s the only kind we have.” “I’ll--I’ll take twenty pounds of it,” said Matthew, with beads of perspiration standing on his forehead.
It had been a gruesome experience, but it served him right, he thought, for committing the heresy of going to a strange store.
“Brown sugar!” exclaimed Marilla.
“Whatever possessed you to get so much?
You know I never use it except for the hired man’s porridge or black fruit cake.
It’s not good sugar, either--it’s coarse and dark--William Blair doesn’t usually keep sugar like that.” “I--I thought it might come in handy sometime,” said Matthew, making good his escape.
When Matthew came to think the matter over he decided that a woman was required to cope with the situation.
Marilla was out of the question.
Lynde he went accordingly, and that good lady promptly took the matter out of the harassed man’s hands.
I’m going to Carmody tomorrow and I’ll attend to it.
Have you something particular in mind?
Well, I’ll just go by my own judgment then.
Perhaps you’d like me to make it up for her, too, seeing that if Marilla was to make it Anne would probably get wind of it before the time and spoil the surprise?
I’ll make it to fit my niece, Jenny Gillis, for she and Anne are as like as two peas as far as figure goes.” “Well now, I’m much obliged,” said Matthew, “and--and--I dunno--but I’d like--I think they make the sleeves different nowadays to what they used to be.
To herself she added when Matthew had gone: “It’ll be a real satisfaction to see that poor child wearing something decent for once.
The way Marilla dresses her is positively ridiculous, that’s what, and I’ve ached to tell her so plainly a dozen times.
I’ve held my tongue though, for I can see Marilla doesn’t want advice and she thinks she knows more about bringing children up than I do for all she’s an old maid.
Folks that has brought up children know that there’s no hard and fast method in the world that’ll suit every child.
But flesh and blood don’t come under the head of arithmetic and that’s where Marilla Cuthbert makes her mistake.
I suppose she’s trying to cultivate a spirit of humility in Anne by dressing her as she does; but it’s more likely to cultivate envy and discontent.
I’m sure the child must feel the difference between her clothes and the other girls’.
That man is waking up after being asleep for over sixty years.” Marilla knew all the following fortnight that Matthew had something on his mind, but what it was she could not guess, until Christmas Eve, when Mrs.
Marilla behaved pretty well on the whole, although it is very likely she distrusted Mrs.
Lynde’s diplomatic explanation that she had made the dress because Matthew was afraid Anne would find out about it too soon if Marilla made it.
“So this is what Matthew has been looking so mysterious over and grinning about to himself for two weeks, is it?” she said a little stiffly but tolerantly.
“I knew he was up to some foolishness.
I made her three good, warm, serviceable ones this fall, and anything more is sheer extravagance.
There’s enough material in those sleeves alone to make a waist, I declare there is.
Well, I hope she’ll be satisfied at last, for I know she’s been hankering after those silly sleeves ever since they came in, although she never said a word after the first.
The puffs have been getting bigger and more ridiculous right along; they’re as big as balloons now.
Next year anybody who wears them will have to go through a door sideways.” Christmas morning broke on a beautiful white world.
It had been a very mild December and people had looked forward to a green Christmas; but just enough snow fell softly in the night to transfigure Avonlea.
Anne peeped out from her frosted gable window with delighted eyes.
The firs in the Haunted Wood were all feathery and wonderful; the birches and wild cherry-trees were outlined in pearl; the plowed fields were stretches of snowy dimples; and there was a crisp tang in the air that was glorious.
Anne ran downstairs singing until her voice reechoed through Green Gables.
“Merry Christmas, Marilla!
Merry Christmas, Matthew!
Isn’t it a lovely Christmas?
Any other kind of Christmas doesn’t seem real, does it?
I don’t like green Christmases.
Oh, Matthew!” Matthew had sheepishly unfolded the dress from its paper swathings and held it out with a deprecatory glance at Marilla, who feigned to be contemptuously filling the teapot, but nevertheless watched the scene out of the corner of her eye with a rather interested air.
Anne took the dress and looked at it in reverent silence.
Oh, how pretty it was--a lovely soft brown gloria with all the gloss of silk; a skirt with dainty frills and shirrings; a waist elaborately pintucked in the most fashionable way, with a little ruffle of filmy lace at the neck.
But the sleeves--they were the crowning glory!
Long elbow cuffs, and above them two beautiful puffs divided by rows of shirring and bows of brown-silk ribbon.
“That’s a Christmas present for you, Anne,” said Matthew shyly.
Well now--well now.” For Anne’s eyes had suddenly filled with tears.
“Matthew, it’s perfectly exquisite.
Oh, it seems to me this must be a happy dream.” “Well, well, let us have breakfast,” interrupted Marilla.
Come now, sit in.” “I don’t see how I’m going to eat breakfast,” said Anne rapturously.
“Breakfast seems so commonplace at such an exciting moment.
I’m so glad that puffed sleeves are still fashionable.
I’d never have felt quite satisfied, you see.
But somehow it’s hard to carry out your resolutions when irresistible temptations come.
Still, I really will make an extra effort after this.” When the commonplace breakfast was over Diana appeared, crossing the white log bridge in the hollow, a gay little figure in her crimson ulster.
“Merry Christmas, Diana!
And oh, it’s a wonderful Christmas.
I’ve something splendid to show you.
Matthew has given me the loveliest dress, with _such_ sleeves.
I couldn’t even imagine any nicer.” “I’ve got something more for you,” said Diana breathlessly.
Aunt Josephine sent us out a big box with ever so many things in it--and this is for you.
I’d have brought it over last night, but it didn’t come until after dark, and I never feel very comfortable coming through the Haunted Wood in the dark now.” Anne opened the box and peeped in.
First a card with “For the Anne-girl and Merry Christmas,” written on it; and then, a pair of the daintiest little kid slippers, with beaded toes and satin bows and glistening buckles.
I must be dreaming.” “I call it providential,” said Diana.
“You won’t have to borrow Ruby’s slippers now, and that’s a blessing, for they’re two sizes too big for you, and it would be awful to hear a fairy shuffling.
Josie Pye would be delighted.
Mind you, Rob Wright went home with Gertie Pye from the practice night before last.
Did you ever hear anything equal to that?” All the Avonlea scholars were in a fever of excitement that day, for the hall had to be decorated and a last grand rehearsal held.
The concert came off in the evening and was a pronounced success.
The little hall was crowded; all the performers did excellently well, but Anne was the bright particular star of the occasion, as even envy, in the shape of Josie Pye, dared not deny.
“Oh, hasn’t it been a brilliant evening?” sighed Anne, when it was all over and she and Diana were walking home together under a dark, starry sky.
“Everything went off very well,” said Diana practically.
Allan is going to send an account of it to the Charlottetown papers.” “Oh, Diana, will we really see our names in print?
Your solo was perfectly elegant, Diana.
I just said to myself, ‘It is my dear bosom friend who is so honored.’” “Well, your recitations just brought down the house, Anne.
That sad one was simply splendid.” “Oh, I was so nervous, Diana.
Allan called out my name I really cannot tell how I ever got up on that platform.
I felt as if a million eyes were looking at me and through me, and for one dreadful moment I was sure I couldn’t begin at all.
It’s providential that I practiced those recitations so often up in the garret, or I’d never have been able to get through.
It was splendid to think I had touched somebody’s heart.
It’s so romantic to take part in a concert, isn’t it?
Oh, it’s been a very memorable occasion indeed.” “Wasn’t the boys’ dialogue fine?” said Diana.
“Gilbert Blythe was just splendid.
When you ran off the platform after the fairy dialogue one of your roses fell out of your hair.
You’re so romantic that I’m sure you ought to be pleased at that.” “It’s nothing to me what that person does,” said Anne loftily.
“Yes, she did,” admitted Marilla.
Anyhow, I was proud of Anne tonight, although I’m not going to tell her so.” “Well now, I was proud of her and I did tell her so ‘fore she went upstairs,” said Matthew.
I guess she’ll need something more than Avonlea school by and by.” “There’s time enough to think of that,” said Marilla.
“She’s only thirteen in March.
But nothing need be said about that for a year or two yet.” “Well now, it’ll do no harm to be thinking it over off and on,” said Matthew.
“Things like that are all the better for lots of thinking over.” CHAPTER XXVI.
The Story Club Is Formed JUNIOR Avonlea found it hard to settle down to humdrum existence again.
To Anne in particular things seemed fearfully flat, stale, and unprofitable after the goblet of excitement she had been sipping for weeks.
Could she go back to the former quiet pleasures of those faraway days before the concert?
“I’m positively certain, Diana, that life can never be quite the same again as it was in those olden days,” she said mournfully, as if referring to a period of at least fifty years back.
“Perhaps after a while I’ll get used to it, but I’m afraid concerts spoil people for everyday life.
I suppose that is why Marilla disapproves of them.
Marilla is such a sensible woman.
It must be a great deal better to be sensible; but still, I don’t believe I’d really want to be a sensible person, because they are so unromantic.
I feel just now that I may grow up to be sensible yet.
I just lay awake and imagined the concert over and over again.
That’s one splendid thing about such affairs--it’s so lovely to look back to them.” Eventually, however, Avonlea school slipped back into its old groove and took up its old interests.
Ruby Gillis and Emma White, who had quarreled over a point of precedence in their platform seats, no longer sat at the same desk, and a promising friendship of three years was broken up.
None of the Sloanes would have any dealings with the Bells, because the Bells had declared that the Sloanes had too much to do in the program, and the Sloanes had retorted that the Bells were not capable of doing the little they had to do properly.
Finally, Charlie Sloane fought Moody Spurgeon MacPherson, because Moody Spurgeon had said that Anne Shirley put on airs about her recitations, and Moody Spurgeon was “licked”; consequently Moody Spurgeon’s sister, Ella May, would not “speak” to Anne Shirley all the rest of the winter.
With the exception of these trifling frictions, work in Miss Stacy’s little kingdom went on with regularity and smoothness.
It was an unusually mild winter, with so little snow that Anne and Diana could go to school nearly every day by way of the Birch Path.
On Anne’s birthday they were tripping lightly down it, keeping eyes and ears alert amid all their chatter, for Miss Stacy had told them that they must soon write a composition on “A Winter’s Walk in the Woods,” and it behooved them to be observant.
“Just think, Diana, I’m thirteen years old today,” remarked Anne in an awed voice.
“I can scarcely realize that I’m in my teens.
When I woke this morning it seemed to me that everything must be different.
You’ve been thirteen for a month, so I suppose it doesn’t seem such a novelty to you as it does to me.
It makes life seem so much more interesting.
“Ruby Gillis thinks of nothing but beaus,” said Anne disdainfully.
“She’s actually delighted when anyone writes her name up in a take-notice for all she pretends to be so mad.
But I’m afraid that is an uncharitable speech.
Allan says we should never make uncharitable speeches; but they do slip out so often before you think, don’t they?
I simply can’t talk about Josie Pye without making an uncharitable speech, so I never mention her at all.
Allan as I possibly can, for I think she’s perfect.
Lynde says he just worships the ground she treads on and she doesn’t really think it right for a minister to set his affections so much on a mortal being.
But then, Diana, even ministers are human and have their besetting sins just like everybody else.
I had such an interesting talk with Mrs.
Allan about besetting sins last Sunday afternoon.
My besetting sin is imagining too much and forgetting my duties.
I’m striving very hard to overcome it and now that I’m really thirteen perhaps I’ll get on better.” “In four more years we’ll be able to put our hair up,” said Diana.
“Alice Bell is only sixteen and she is wearing hers up, but I think that’s ridiculous.
I shall wait until I’m seventeen.” “If I had Alice Bell’s crooked nose,” said Anne decidedly, “I wouldn’t--but there!
I won’t say what I was going to because it was extremely uncharitable.
Besides, I was comparing it with my own nose and that’s vanity.
I’m afraid I think too much about my nose ever since I heard that compliment about it long ago.
That’s something to remember for our woods composition.
They’re so white and still, as if they were asleep and dreaming pretty dreams.” “I won’t mind writing that composition when its time comes,” sighed Diana.
“I can manage to write about the woods, but the one we’re to hand in Monday is terrible.
“It’s easy for you because you have an imagination,” retorted Diana, “but what would you do if you had been born without one?
I suppose you have your composition all done?” Anne nodded, trying hard not to look virtuously complacent and failing miserably.
It’s called ‘The Jealous Rival; or In Death Not Divided.’ I read it to Marilla and she said it was stuff and nonsense.
It’s about two beautiful maidens called Cordelia Montmorency and Geraldine Seymour who lived in the same village and were devotedly attached to each other.
Cordelia was a regal brunette with a coronet of midnight hair and duskly flashing eyes.
Geraldine was a queenly blonde with hair like spun gold and velvety purple eyes.” “I never saw anybody with purple eyes,” said Diana dubiously.
I just imagined them.
I wanted something out of the common.
Geraldine had an alabaster brow too.
I’ve found out what an alabaster brow is.
That is one of the advantages of being thirteen.
You know so much more than you did when you were only twelve.” “Well, what became of Cordelia and Geraldine?” asked Diana, who was beginning to feel rather interested in their fate.
Then Bertram DeVere came to their native village and fell in love with the fair Geraldine.
He saved her life when her horse ran away with her in a carriage, and she fainted in his arms and he carried her home three miles; because, you understand, the carriage was all smashed up.
I found it rather hard to imagine the proposal because I had no experience to go by.
I asked Ruby Gillis if she knew anything about how men proposed because I thought she’d likely be an authority on the subject, having so many sisters married.
Ruby told me she was hid in the hall pantry when Malcolm Andres proposed to her sister Susan.
But I didn’t think that sort of a proposal was a very romantic one, so in the end I had to imagine it out as well as I could.
I made it very flowery and poetical and Bertram went on his knees, although Ruby Gillis says it isn’t done nowadays.
Geraldine accepted him in a speech a page long.
I rewrote it five times and I look upon it as my masterpiece.
Bertram gave her a diamond ring and a ruby necklace and told her they would go to Europe for a wedding tour, for he was immensely wealthy.
Cordelia was secretly in love with Bertram herself and when Geraldine told her about the engagement she was simply furious, especially when she saw the necklace and the diamond ring.
All her affection for Geraldine turned to bitter hate and she vowed that she should never marry Bertram.
But she pretended to be Geraldine’s friend the same as ever.
Their bodies were washed ashore soon afterwards.
They were buried in the one grave and their funeral was most imposing, Diana.
It’s so much more romantic to end a story up with a funeral than a wedding.
As for Cordelia, she went insane with remorse and was shut up in a lunatic asylum.
I thought that was a poetical retribution for her crime.” “How perfectly lovely!” sighed Diana, who belonged to Matthew’s school of critics.
“I don’t see how you can make up such thrilling things out of your own head, Anne.
I wish my imagination was as good as yours.” “It would be if you’d only cultivate it,” said Anne cheeringly.
Let you and me have a story club all our own and write stories for practice.
I’ll help you along until you can do them by yourself.
You ought to cultivate your imagination, you know.
I told her about the Haunted Wood, but she said we went the wrong way about it in that.” This was how the story club came into existence.
It was limited to Diana and Anne at first, but soon it was extended to include Jane Andrews and Ruby Gillis and one or two others who felt that their imaginations needed cultivating.
No boys were allowed in it--although Ruby Gillis opined that their admission would make it more exciting--and each member had to produce one story a week.
“It’s extremely interesting,” Anne told Marilla.
We are going to keep them all sacredly and have them to read to our descendants.
Mine is Rosamond Montmorency.
Ruby Gillis is rather sentimental.
She puts too much lovemaking into her stories and you know too much is worse than too little.
Jane’s stories are extremely sensible.
I mostly always have to tell them what to write about, but that isn’t hard for I’ve millions of ideas.” “I think this story-writing business is the foolishest yet,” scoffed Marilla.
“You’ll get a pack of nonsense into your heads and waste time that should be put on your lessons.
Reading stories is bad enough but writing them is worse.” “But we’re so careful to put a moral into them all, Marilla,” explained Anne.
All the good people are rewarded and all the bad ones are suitably punished.
I’m sure that must have a wholesome effect.
Allan and they both agreed that the moral was excellent.
Jane and Ruby almost always cry when I come to the pathetic parts.
Diana wrote her Aunt Josephine about our club and her Aunt Josephine wrote back that we were to send her some of our stories.
Miss Josephine Barry wrote back that she had never read anything so amusing in her life.
That kind of puzzled us because the stories were all very pathetic and almost everybody died.
Allan says that ought to be our object in everything.
Do you think there is any prospect of it, Marilla?” “I shouldn’t say there was a great deal” was Marilla’s encouraging answer.
Allan was never such a silly, forgetful little girl as you are.” “No; but she wasn’t always so good as she is now either,” said Anne seriously.
“She told me so herself--that is, she said she was a dreadful mischief when she was a girl and was always getting into scrapes.
I felt so encouraged when I heard that.
Is it very wicked of me, Marilla, to feel encouraged when I hear that other people have been bad and mischievous?
Lynde says she once heard a minister confess that when he was a boy he stole a strawberry tart out of his aunt’s pantry and she never had any respect for that minister again.
I’d have thought that it was real noble of him to confess it, and I’d have thought what an encouraging thing it would be for small boys nowadays who do naughty things and are sorry for them to know that perhaps they may grow up to be ministers in spite of it.
You’ve taken half an hour longer than you should with all your chattering.
Learn to work first and talk afterwards.” CHAPTER XXVII.
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit MARILLA, walking home one late April evening from an Aid meeting, realized that the winter was over and gone with the thrill of delight that spring never fails to bring to the oldest and saddest as well as to the youngest and merriest.
Marilla was not given to subjective analysis of her thoughts and feelings.
The spring was abroad in the land and Marilla’s sober, middle-aged step was lighter and swifter because of its deep, primal gladness.
Her eyes dwelt affectionately on Green Gables, peering through its network of trees and reflecting the sunlight back from its windows in several little coruscations of glory.
Marilla, as she picked her steps along the damp lane, thought that it was really a satisfaction to know that she was going home to a briskly snapping wood fire and a table nicely spread for tea, instead of to the cold comfort of old Aid meeting evenings before Anne had come to Green Gables.
Consequently, when Marilla entered her kitchen and found the fire black out, with no sign of Anne anywhere, she felt justly disappointed and irritated.
“I’ll settle Miss Anne when she comes home,” said Marilla grimly, as she shaved up kindlings with a carving knife and with more vim than was strictly necessary.
Matthew had come in and was waiting patiently for his tea in his corner.
“She’s gadding off somewhere with Diana, writing stories or practicing dialogues or some such tomfoolery, and never thinking once about the time or her duties.
Allan does say she’s the brightest and sweetest child she ever knew.
She may be bright and sweet enough, but her head is full of nonsense and there’s never any knowing what shape it’ll break out in next.
Allan spoke up for Anne, for if she hadn’t I know I’d have said something too sharp to Rachel before everybody.
Anne’s got plenty of faults, goodness knows, and far be it from me to deny it.
But I’m bringing her up and not Rachel Lynde, who’d pick faults in the Angel Gabriel himself if he lived in Avonlea.
Just the same, Anne has no business to leave the house like this when I told her she was to stay home this afternoon and look after things.
Don’t call her untrustworthy until you’re sure she has disobeyed you.
Mebbe it can all be explained--Anne’s a great hand at explaining.” “She’s not here when I told her to stay,” retorted Marilla.
“I reckon she’ll find it hard to explain _that_ to my satisfaction.
But I’m bringing her up, not you.” It was dark when supper was ready, and still no sign of Anne, coming hurriedly over the log bridge or up Lover’s Lane, breathless and repentant with a sense of neglected duties.
Then, wanting a candle to light her way down the cellar, she went up to the east gable for the one that generally stood on Anne’s table.
Lighting it, she turned around to see Anne herself lying on the bed, face downward among the pillows.
“Mercy on us,” said astonished Marilla, “have you been asleep, Anne?” “No,” was the muffled reply.
“Are you sick then?” demanded Marilla anxiously, going over to the bed.
Anne cowered deeper into her pillows as if desirous of hiding herself forever from mortal eyes.
I’m in the depths of despair and I don’t care who gets head in class or writes the best composition or sings in the Sunday-school choir any more.
Little things like that are of no importance now because I don’t suppose I’ll ever be able to go anywhere again.
Please, Marilla, go away and don’t look at me.” “Did anyone ever hear the like?” the mystified Marilla wanted to know.
“Anne Shirley, whatever is the matter with you?
There now, what is it?” Anne had slid to the floor in despairing obedience.
“Look at my hair, Marilla,” she whispered.
Accordingly, Marilla lifted her candle and looked scrutinizingly at Anne’s hair, flowing in heavy masses down her back.
It certainly had a very strange appearance.
Why, it’s _green!_” Green it might be called, if it were any earthly color--a queer, dull, bronzy green, with streaks here and there of the original red to heighten the ghastly effect.
Never in all her life had Marilla seen anything so grotesque as Anne’s hair at that moment.
Oh, Marilla, you little know how utterly wretched I am.” “I little know how you got into this fix, but I mean to find out,” said Marilla.
I’ve been expecting something queer for some time.
Anne Shirley, didn’t you know it was a wicked thing to do?” “Yes, I knew it was a little wicked,” admitted Anne.
Besides, I meant to be extra good in other ways to make up for it.” “Well,” said Marilla sarcastically, “if I’d decided it was worth while to dye my hair I’d have dyed it a decent color at least.
I wouldn’t have dyed it green.” “But I didn’t mean to dye it green, Marilla,” protested Anne dejectedly.
He said it would turn my hair a beautiful raven black--he positively assured me that it would.
But I hadn’t then and I believed every word he said _implicitly_.” “Who said?
Who are you talking about?” “The peddler that was here this afternoon.
I bought the dye from him.” “Anne Shirley, how often have I told you never to let one of those Italians in the house!
I don’t believe in encouraging them to come around at all.” “Oh, I didn’t let him in the house.
I remembered what you told me, and I went out, carefully shut the door, and looked at his things on the step.
He had a big box full of very interesting things and he told me he was working hard to make enough money to bring his wife and children out from Germany.
He spoke so feelingly about them that it touched my heart.
I wanted to buy something from him to help him in such a worthy object.
The peddler said it was warranted to dye any hair a beautiful raven black and wouldn’t wash off.
In a trice I saw myself with beautiful raven-black hair and the temptation was irresistible.
So I bought it, and as soon as he had gone I came up here and applied it with an old hairbrush as the directions said.
I used up the whole bottle, and oh, Marilla, when I saw the dreadful color it turned my hair I repented of being wicked, I can tell you.
And I’ve been repenting ever since.” “Well, I hope you’ll repent to good purpose,” said Marilla severely, “and that you’ve got your eyes opened to where your vanity has led you, Anne.
Goodness knows what’s to be done.
I suppose the first thing is to give your hair a good washing and see if that will do any good.” Accordingly, Anne washed her hair, scrubbing it vigorously with soap and water, but for all the difference it made she might as well have been scouring its original red.
The peddler had certainly spoken the truth when he declared that the dye wouldn’t wash off, however his veracity might be impeached in other respects.
“Oh, Marilla, what shall I do?” questioned Anne in tears.
People have pretty well forgotten my other mistakes--the liniment cake and setting Diana drunk and flying into a temper with Mrs.
They will think I am not respectable.
Oh, Marilla, ‘what a tangled web we weave when first we practice to deceive.’ That is poetry, but it is true.
I am the unhappiest girl in Prince Edward Island.” Anne’s unhappiness continued for a week.
During that time she went nowhere and shampooed her hair every day.
Diana alone of outsiders knew the fatal secret, but she promised solemnly never to tell, and it may be stated here and now that she kept her word.
At the end of the week Marilla said decidedly: “It’s no use, Anne.
You can’t go out with it looking like that.” Anne’s lips quivered, but she realized the bitter truth of Marilla’s remarks.
With a dismal sigh she went for the scissors.
This is such an unromantic affliction.
But there is nothing comforting in having your hair cut off because you’ve dyed it a dreadful color, is there?
I’m going to weep all the time you’re cutting it off, if it won’t interfere.
It seems such a tragic thing.” Anne wept then, but later on, when she went upstairs and looked in the glass, she was calm with despair.
Marilla had done her work thoroughly and it had been necessary to shingle the hair as closely as possible.
The result was not becoming, to state the case as mildly as may be.
Anne promptly turned her glass to the wall.
“I’ll never, never look at myself again until my hair grows,” she exclaimed passionately.
Then she suddenly righted the glass.
I expect something will happen to my nose next.” Anne’s clipped head made a sensation in school on the following Monday, but to her relief nobody guessed the real reason for it, not even Josie Pye, who, however, did not fail to inform Anne that she looked like a perfect scarecrow.
“I didn’t say anything when Josie said that to me,” Anne confided that evening to Marilla, who was lying on the sofa after one of her headaches, “because I thought it was part of my punishment and I ought to bear it patiently.
It’s hard to be told you look like a scarecrow and I wanted to say something back.
I just swept her one scornful look and then I forgave her.
It makes you feel very virtuous when you forgive people, doesn’t it?
I mean to devote all my energies to being good after this and I shall never try to be beautiful again.
I know it is, but it’s sometimes so hard to believe a thing even when you know it.
She says she thinks it will be very becoming.
I will call it a snood--that sounds so romantic.
It was terrible bad this afternoon, though.
These headaches of mine are getting worse and worse.
An Unfortunate Lily Maid OF course you must be Elaine, Anne,” said Diana.
“I don’t mind floating down when there’s two or three of us in the flat and we can sit up.
I’d die really of fright.” “Of course it would be romantic,” conceded Jane Andrews, “but I know I couldn’t keep still.
I’d be popping up every minute or so to see where I was and if I wasn’t drifting too far out.
And you know, Anne, that would spoil the effect.” “But it’s so ridiculous to have a redheaded Elaine,” mourned Anne.
But it’s ridiculous just the same.
Ruby ought to be Elaine because she is so fair and has such lovely long golden hair--Elaine had ‘all her bright hair streaming down,’ you know.
Now, a red-haired person cannot be a lily maid.” “Your complexion is just as fair as Ruby’s,” said Diana earnestly, “and your hair is ever so much darker than it used to be before you cut it.” “Oh, do you really think so?” exclaimed Anne, flushing sensitively with delight.
“I’ve sometimes thought it was myself--but I never dared to ask anyone for fear she would tell me it wasn’t.
Do you think it could be called auburn now, Diana?” “Yes, and I think it is real pretty,” said Diana, looking admiringly at the short, silky curls that clustered over Anne’s head and were held in place by a very jaunty black velvet ribbon and bow.
They were standing on the bank of the pond, below Orchard Slope, where a little headland fringed with birches ran out from the bank; at its tip was a small wooden platform built out into the water for the convenience of fishermen and duck hunters.
Ruby and Jane were spending the midsummer afternoon with Diana, and Anne had come over to play with them.
Anne and Diana had spent most of their playtime that summer on and about the pond.
Idlewild was a thing of the past, Mr.
Bell having ruthlessly cut down the little circle of trees in his back pasture in the spring.
Anne had sat among the stumps and wept, not without an eye to the romance of it; but she was speedily consoled, for, after all, as she and Diana said, big girls of thirteen, going on fourteen, were too old for such childish amusements as playhouses, and there were more fascinating sports to be found about the pond.
It was splendid to fish for trout over the bridge and the two girls learned to row themselves about in the little flat-bottomed dory Mr.
Barry kept for duck shooting.
It was Anne’s idea that they dramatize Elaine.
They had studied Tennyson’s poem in school the preceding winter, the Superintendent of Education having prescribed it in the English course for the Prince Edward Island schools.
They had analyzed and parsed it and torn it to pieces in general until it was a wonder there was any meaning at all left in it for them, but at least the fair lily maid and Lancelot and Guinevere and King Arthur had become very real people to them, and Anne was devoured by secret regret that she had not been born in Camelot.
Those days, she said, were so much more romantic than the present.
Anne’s plan was hailed with enthusiasm.
The girls had discovered that if the flat were pushed off from the landing place it would drift down with the current under the bridge and finally strand itself on another headland lower down which ran out at a curve in the pond.
They had often gone down like this and nothing could be more convenient for playing Elaine.
“Well, I’ll be Elaine,” said Anne, yielding reluctantly, for, although she would have been delighted to play the principal character, yet her artistic sense demanded fitness for it and this, she felt, her limitations made impossible.
“Ruby, you must be King Arthur and Jane will be Guinevere and Diana must be Lancelot.
But first you must be the brothers and the father.
We can’t have the old dumb servitor because there isn’t room for two in the flat when one is lying down.
We must pall the barge all its length in blackest samite.
That old black shawl of your mother’s will be just the thing, Diana.” The black shawl having been procured, Anne spread it over the flat and then lay down on the bottom, with closed eyes and hands folded over her breast.
“Oh, she does look really dead,” whispered Ruby Gillis nervously, watching the still, white little face under the flickering shadows of the birches.
“It makes me feel frightened, girls.
Lynde says that all play-acting is abominably wicked.” “Ruby, you shouldn’t talk about Mrs.
Lynde,” said Anne severely.
“It spoils the effect because this is hundreds of years before Mrs.
It’s silly for Elaine to be talking when she’s dead.” Jane rose to the occasion.
Cloth of gold for coverlet there was none, but an old piano scarf of yellow Japanese crepe was an excellent substitute.
A white lily was not obtainable just then, but the effect of a tall blue iris placed in one of Anne’s folded hands was all that could be desired.
“We must kiss her quiet brows and, Diana, you say, ‘Sister, farewell forever,’ and Ruby, you say, ‘Farewell, sweet sister,’ both of you as sorrowfully as you possibly can.
Anne, for goodness sake smile a little.
Now push the flat off.” The flat was accordingly pushed off, scraping roughly over an old embedded stake in the process.
Diana and Jane and Ruby only waited long enough to see it caught in the current and headed for the bridge before scampering up through the woods, across the road, and down to the lower headland where, as Lancelot and Guinevere and the King, they were to be in readiness to receive the lily maid.
For a few minutes Anne, drifting slowly down, enjoyed the romance of her situation to the full.
Then something happened not at all romantic.
In a very few moments it was necessary for Elaine to scramble to her feet, pick up her cloth of gold coverlet and pall of blackest samite and gaze blankly at a big crack in the bottom of her barge through which the water was literally pouring.
Anne did not know this, but it did not take her long to realize that she was in a dangerous plight.
At this rate the flat would fill and sink long before it could drift to the lower headland.
Anne gave one gasping little scream which nobody ever heard; she was white to the lips, but she did not lose her self-possession.
“I was horribly frightened,” she told Mrs.
Allan the next day, “and it seemed like years while the flat was drifting down to the bridge and the water rising in it every moment.
Allan, most earnestly, but I didn’t shut my eyes to pray, for I knew the only way God could save me was to let the flat float close enough to one of the bridge piles for me to climb up on it.
It was proper to pray, but I had to do my part by watching out and right well I knew it.
Under such circumstances you don’t think much about making a flowery prayer.
But mine was answered, for the flat bumped right into a pile for a minute and I flung the scarf and the shawl over my shoulder and scrambled up on a big providential stub.
Allan, clinging to that slippery old pile with no way of getting up or down.
It was a very unromantic position, but I didn’t think about that at the time.
I said a grateful prayer at once and then I gave all my attention to holding on tight, for I knew I should probably have to depend on human aid to get back to dry land.” The flat drifted under the bridge and then promptly sank in midstream.
Ruby, Jane, and Diana, already awaiting it on the lower headland, saw it disappear before their very eyes and had not a doubt but that Anne had gone down with it.
For a moment they stood still, white as sheets, frozen with horror at the tragedy; then, shrieking at the tops of their voices, they started on a frantic run up through the woods, never pausing as they crossed the main road to glance the way of the bridge.
Anne, clinging desperately to her precarious foothold, saw their flying forms and heard their shrieks.
Help would soon come, but meanwhile her position was a very uncomfortable one.
The minutes passed by, each seeming an hour to the unfortunate lily maid.
Why didn’t somebody come?
Anne looked at the wicked green depths below her, wavering with long, oily shadows, and shivered.
Her imagination began to suggest all manner of gruesome possibilities to her.
Gilbert glanced up and, much to his amazement, beheld a little white scornful face looking down upon him with big, frightened but also scornful gray eyes.
How on earth did you get there?” he exclaimed.
Without waiting for an answer he pulled close to the pile and extended his hand.
There was no help for it; Anne, clinging to Gilbert Blythe’s hand, scrambled down into the dory, where she sat, drabbled and furious, in the stern with her arms full of dripping shawl and wet crepe.
It was certainly extremely difficult to be dignified under the circumstances!
“What has happened, Anne?” asked Gilbert, taking up his oars.
“We were playing Elaine,” explained Anne frigidly, without even looking at her rescuer, “and I had to drift down to Camelot in the barge--I mean the flat.
Will you be kind enough to row me to the landing?” Gilbert obligingly rowed to the landing and Anne, disdaining assistance, sprang nimbly on shore.
“I’m very much obliged to you,” she said haughtily as she turned away.
But Gilbert had also sprung from the boat and now laid a detaining hand on her arm.
“Anne,” he said hurriedly, “look here.
Let’s be friends.” For a moment Anne hesitated.
She had an odd, newly awakened consciousness under all her outraged dignity that the half-shy, half-eager expression in Gilbert’s hazel eyes was something that was very good to see.
But the bitterness of her old grievance promptly stiffened up her wavering determination.
That scene of two years before flashed back into her recollection as vividly as if it had taken place yesterday.
Gilbert had called her “carrots” and had brought about her disgrace before the whole school.
Her resentment, which to other and older people might be as laughable as its cause, was in no whit allayed and softened by time seemingly.
She held her head very high, but she was conscious of an odd feeling of regret.
She almost wished she had answered Gilbert differently.
Of course, he had insulted her terribly, but still--!
Altogether, Anne rather thought it would be a relief to sit down and have a good cry.
She was really quite unstrung, for the reaction from her fright and cramped clinging was making itself felt.
Halfway up the path she met Jane and Diana rushing back to the pond in a state narrowly removed from positive frenzy.
Here Ruby Gillis had succumbed to hysterics, and was left to recover from them as best she might, while Jane and Diana flew through the Haunted Wood and across the brook to Green Gables.
“Oh, Anne,” gasped Diana, fairly falling on the former’s neck and weeping with relief and delight, “oh, Anne--we thought--you were--drowned--and we felt like murderers--because we had made--you be--Elaine.
And Ruby is in hysterics--oh, Anne, how did you escape?” “I climbed up on one of the piles,” explained Anne wearily, “and Gilbert Blythe came along in Mr.
Andrews’s dory and brought me to land.” “Oh, Anne, how splendid of him!
Why, it’s so romantic!” said Jane, finding breath enough for utterance at last.
“Of course you’ll speak to him after this.” “Of course I won’t,” flashed Anne, with a momentary return of her old spirit.
“And I don’t want ever to hear the word ‘romantic’ again, Jane Andrews.
I’m awfully sorry you were so frightened, girls.
Everything I do gets me or my dearest friends into a scrape.
We’ve gone and lost your father’s flat, Diana, and I have a presentiment that we’ll not be allowed to row on the pond any more.” Anne’s presentiment proved more trustworthy than presentiments are apt to do.
Great was the consternation in the Barry and Cuthbert households when the events of the afternoon became known.
“Oh, yes, I think I will, Marilla,” returned Anne optimistically.
A good cry, indulged in the grateful solitude of the east gable, had soothed her nerves and restored her to her wonted cheerfulness.
“I think my prospects of becoming sensible are brighter now than ever.” “I don’t see how,” said Marilla.
“Well,” explained Anne, “I’ve learned a new and valuable lesson today.
Ever since I came to Green Gables I’ve been making mistakes, and each mistake has helped to cure me of some great shortcoming.
The affair of the amethyst brooch cured me of meddling with things that didn’t belong to me.
The Haunted Wood mistake cured me of letting my imagination run away with me.
The liniment cake mistake cured me of carelessness in cooking.
And today’s mistake is going to cure me of being too romantic.
I have come to the conclusion that it is no use trying to be romantic in Avonlea.
It was probably easy enough in towered Camelot hundreds of years ago, but romance is not appreciated now.
I feel quite sure that you will soon see a great improvement in me in this respect, Marilla.” “I’m sure I hope so,” said Marilla skeptically.
But Matthew, who had been sitting mutely in his corner, laid a hand on Anne’s shoulder when Marilla had gone out.
“Don’t give up all your romance, Anne,” he whispered shyly, “a little of it is a good thing--not too much, of course--but keep a little of it, Anne, keep a little of it.” CHAPTER XXIX.
An Epoch in Anne’s Life ANNE was bringing the cows home from the back pasture by way of Lover’s Lane.
It was a September evening and all the gaps and clearings in the woods were brimmed up with ruby sunset light.
Here and there the lane was splashed with it, but for the most part it was already quite shadowy beneath the maples, and the spaces under the firs were filled with a clear violet dusk like airy wine.
The cows swung placidly down the lane, and Anne followed them dreamily, repeating aloud the battle canto from _Marmion_--which had also been part of their English course the preceding winter and which Miss Stacy had made them learn off by heart--and exulting in its rushing lines and the clash of spears in its imagery.
When she came to the lines The stubborn spearsmen still made good Their dark impenetrable wood, she stopped in ecstasy to shut her eyes that she might the better fancy herself one of that heroic ring.
When she opened them again it was to behold Diana coming through the gate that led into the Barry field and looking so important that Anne instantly divined there was news to be told.
But betray too eager curiosity she would not.
In the mornings I always think the mornings are best; but when evening comes I think it’s lovelier still.” “It’s a very fine evening,” said Diana, “but oh, I have such news, Anne.
You can have three guesses.” “Charlotte Gillis is going to be married in the church after all and Mrs.
Allan wants us to decorate it,” cried Anne.
Charlotte’s beau won’t agree to that, because nobody ever has been married in the church yet, and he thinks it would seem too much like a funeral.
Guess again.” “Jane’s mother is going to let her have a birthday party?” Diana shook her head, her black eyes dancing with merriment.
“I can’t think what it can be,” said Anne in despair, “unless it’s that Moody Spurgeon MacPherson saw you home from prayer meeting last night.
Did he?” “I should think not,” exclaimed Diana indignantly.
“I wouldn’t be likely to boast of it if he did, the horrid creature!
Mother had a letter from Aunt Josephine today, and Aunt Josephine wants you and me to go to town next Tuesday and stop with her for the Exhibition.
There!” “Oh, Diana,” whispered Anne, finding it necessary to lean up against a maple tree for support, “do you really mean it?
She will say that she can’t encourage gadding about.
That was what she said last week when Jane invited me to go with them in their double-seated buggy to the American concert at the White Sands Hotel.
I wanted to go, but Marilla said I’d be better at home learning my lessons and so would Jane.
I was bitterly disappointed, Diana.
I felt so heartbroken that I wouldn’t say my prayers when I went to bed.
But I repented of that and got up in the middle of the night and said them.” “I’ll tell you,” said Diana, “we’ll get Mother to ask Marilla.
I’ve never been to an Exhibition, and it’s so aggravating to hear the other girls talking about their trips.
Jane and Ruby have been twice, and they’re going this year again.” “I’m not going to think about it at all until I know whether I can go or not,” said Anne resolutely.
“If I did and then was disappointed, it would be more than I could bear.
She said my old one would do very well for another winter and that I ought to be satisfied with having a new dress.
The dress is very pretty, Diana--navy blue and made so fashionably.
Marilla always makes my dresses fashionably now, because she says she doesn’t intend to have Matthew going to Mrs.
It is ever so much easier to be good if your clothes are fashionable.
I suppose it doesn’t make such a difference to naturally good people.
But Matthew said I must have a new coat, so Marilla bought a lovely piece of blue broadcloth, and it’s being made by a real dressmaker over at Carmody.
It’s to be done Saturday night, and I’m trying not to imagine myself walking up the church aisle on Sunday in my new suit and cap, because I’m afraid it isn’t right to imagine such things.
Your new hat is elegant, Diana, and so becoming.
But it is such an interesting subject, isn’t it?” Marilla agreed to let Anne go to town, and it was arranged that Mr.
Barry should take the girls in on the following Tuesday.
As Charlottetown was thirty miles away and Mr.
Barry wished to go and return the same day, it was necessary to make a very early start.
A glance from her window assured her that the day would be fine, for the eastern sky behind the firs of the Haunted Wood was all silvery and cloudless.
Anne was dressed by the time Matthew had the fire on and had the breakfast ready when Marilla came down, but for her own part was much too excited to eat.
After breakfast the jaunty new cap and jacket were donned, and Anne hastened over the brook and up through the firs to Orchard Slope.
It was delightful to rattle along over the moist roads in the early red sunlight that was creeping across the shorn harvest fields.
It was almost noon when they reached town and found their way to “Beechwood.” It was quite a fine old mansion, set back from the street in a seclusion of green elms and branching beeches.
But I dare say you know that without being told.” “Indeed I didn’t,” said Anne radiantly.
“I know I’m not so freckled as I used to be, so I’ve much to be thankful for, but I really hadn’t dared to hope there was any other improvement.
I’m so glad you think there is, Miss Barry.” Miss Barry’s house was furnished with “great magnificence,” as Anne told Marilla afterward.
The two little country girls were rather abashed by the splendor of the parlor where Miss Barry left them when she went to see about dinner.
“Isn’t it just like a palace?” whispered Diana.
“I never was in Aunt Josephine’s house before, and I’d no idea it was so grand.
I just wish Julia Bell could see this--she puts on such airs about her mother’s parlor.” “Velvet carpet,” sighed Anne luxuriously, “and silk curtains!
But do you know I don’t believe I feel very comfortable with them after all.
There are so many things in this room and all so splendid that there is no scope for imagination.
That is one consolation when you are poor--there are so many more things you can imagine about.” Their sojourn in town was something that Anne and Diana dated from for years.
From first to last it was crowded with delights.
On Wednesday Miss Barry took them to the Exhibition grounds and kept them there all day.
“It was splendid,” Anne related to Marilla later on.
“I never imagined anything so interesting.
I don’t really know which department was the most interesting.
I think I liked the horses and the flowers and the fancywork best.
And I was glad that I felt glad, for it shows I’m improving, don’t you think, Marilla, when I can rejoice in Josie’s success?
Harmon Andrews took second prize for Gravenstein apples and Mr.
Diana said she thought it was ridiculous for a Sunday-school superintendent to take a prize in pigs, but I don’t see why.
She said she would always think of it after this when he was praying so solemnly.
Clara Louise MacPherson took a prize for painting, and Mrs.
Lynde got first prize for homemade butter and cheese.
So Avonlea was pretty well represented, wasn’t it?
Lynde was there that day, and I never knew how much I really liked her until I saw her familiar face among all those strangers.
There were thousands of people there, Marilla.
It made me feel dreadfully insignificant.
And Miss Barry took us up to the grandstand to see the horse races.
Lynde wouldn’t go; she said horse racing was an abomination and, she being a church member, thought it her bounden duty to set a good example by staying away.
I don’t think, though, that I ought to go very often to horse races, because they _are_ awfully fascinating.
Allan all about everything, and I felt sure it wouldn’t do to tell her that.
It’s always wrong to do anything you can’t tell the minister’s wife.
It’s as good as an extra conscience to have a minister’s wife for your friend.
I’d love to go up in a balloon, Marilla; it would be simply thrilling; and we saw a man selling fortunes.
Miss Barry gave Diana and me ten cents each to have our fortunes told.
Mine was that I would marry a dark-complected man who was very wealthy, and I would go across water to live.
I looked carefully at all the dark men I saw after that, but I didn’t care much for any of them, and anyhow I suppose it’s too early to be looking out for him yet.
Oh, it was a never-to-be-forgotten day, Marilla.
Miss Barry put us in the spare room, according to promise.
It was an elegant room, Marilla, but somehow sleeping in a spare room isn’t what I used to think it was.
That’s the worst of growing up, and I’m beginning to realize it.
The things you wanted so much when you were a child don’t seem half so wonderful to you when you get them.” Thursday the girls had a drive in the park, and in the evening Miss Barry took them to a concert in the Academy of Music, where a noted prima donna was to sing.
To Anne the evening was a glittering vision of delight.
“Oh, Marilla, it was beyond description.
I just sat in enraptured silence.
Madame Selitsky was perfectly beautiful, and wore white satin and diamonds.
But when she began to sing I never thought about anything else.
She said she thought if we went over to the restaurant across the street and had an ice cream it might help me.
That sounded so prosaic; but to my surprise I found it true.
The ice cream was delicious, Marilla, and it was so lovely and dissipated to be sitting there eating it at eleven o’clock at night.
Diana said she believed she was born for city life.
Miss Barry asked me what my opinion was, but I said I would have to think it over very seriously before I could tell her what I really thought.
And I came to the conclusion, Marilla, that I wasn’t born for city life and that I was glad of it.
It’s nice to be eating ice cream at brilliant restaurants at eleven o’clock at night once in a while; but as a regular thing I’d rather be in the east gable at eleven, sound asleep, but kind of knowing even in my sleep that the stars were shining outside and that the wind was blowing in the firs across the brook.
I told Miss Barry so at breakfast the next morning and she laughed.
Miss Barry generally laughed at anything I said, even when I said the most solemn things.
But she is a most hospitable lady and treated us royally.” Friday brought going-home time, and Mr.
“Well, I hope you’ve enjoyed yourselves,” said Miss Barry, as she bade them good-bye.
“And you, Anne-girl?” “I’ve enjoyed every minute of the time,” said Anne, throwing her arms impulsively about the old woman’s neck and kissing her wrinkled cheek.
Anne had amused her, and consequently stood high in the old lady’s good graces.
But Miss Barry found herself thinking less about Anne’s quaint speeches than of her fresh enthusiasms, her transparent emotions, her little winning ways, and the sweetness of her eyes and lips.
“I thought Marilla Cuthbert was an old fool when I heard she’d adopted a girl out of an orphan asylum,” she said to herself, “but I guess she didn’t make much of a mistake after all.
If I’d a child like Anne in the house all the time I’d be a better and happier woman.” Anne and Diana found the drive home as pleasant as the drive in--pleasanter, indeed, since there was the delightful consciousness of home waiting at the end of it.
Behind them the moon was rising out of the sea that grew all radiant and transfigured in her light.
“Oh, but it’s good to be alive and to be going home,” breathed Anne.
When she crossed the log bridge over the brook the kitchen light of Green Gables winked her a friendly welcome back, and through the open door shone the hearth fire, sending out its warm red glow athwart the chilly autumn night.
Anne ran blithely up the hill and into the kitchen, where a hot supper was waiting on the table.
“So you’ve got back?” said Marilla, folding up her knitting.
“Yes, and oh, it’s so good to be back,” said Anne joyously.
“I could kiss everything, even to the clock.
“I thought you’d be hungry after such a drive and need something real appetizing.
It’s been fearful lonesome here without you, and I never put in four longer days.” After supper Anne sat before the fire between Matthew and Marilla, and gave them a full account of her visit.
“I’ve had a splendid time,” she concluded happily, “and I feel that it marks an epoch in my life.
The Queen’s Class Is Organized MARILLA laid her knitting on her lap and leaned back in her chair.
It was nearly dark, for the full November twilight had fallen around Green Gables, and the only light in the kitchen came from the dancing red flames in the stove.
Anne was curled up Turk-fashion on the hearthrug, gazing into that joyous glow where the sunshine of a hundred summers was being distilled from the maple cordwood.
She had been reading, but her book had slipped to the floor, and now she was dreaming, with a smile on her parted lips.
Glittering castles in Spain were shaping themselves out of the mists and rainbows of her lively fancy; adventures wonderful and enthralling were happening to her in cloudland--adventures that always turned out triumphantly and never involved her in scrapes like those of actual life.
Marilla looked at her with a tenderness that would never have been suffered to reveal itself in any clearer light than that soft mingling of fireshine and shadow.
But she had learned to love this slim, gray-eyed girl with an affection all the deeper and stronger from its very undemonstrativeness.
Her love made her afraid of being unduly indulgent, indeed.
She had an uneasy feeling that it was rather sinful to set one’s heart so intensely on any human creature as she had set hers on Anne, and perhaps she performed a sort of unconscious penance for this by being stricter and more critical than if the girl had been less dear to her.
Certainly Anne herself had no idea how Marilla loved her.
She sometimes thought wistfully that Marilla was very hard to please and distinctly lacking in sympathy and understanding.
But she always checked the thought reproachfully, remembering what she owed to Marilla.
“Anne,” said Marilla abruptly, “Miss Stacy was here this afternoon when you were out with Diana.” Anne came back from her other world with a start and a sigh.
All the little wood things--the ferns and the satin leaves and the crackerberries--have gone to sleep, just as if somebody had tucked them away until spring under a blanket of leaves.
I think it was a little gray fairy with a rainbow scarf that came tiptoeing along the last moonlight night and did it.
Diana has never forgotten the scolding her mother gave her about imagining ghosts into the Haunted Wood.
It had a very bad effect on Diana’s imagination.
Lynde says Myrtle Bell is a blighted being.
I asked Ruby Gillis why Myrtle was blighted, and Ruby said she guessed it was because her young man had gone back on her.
Young men are all very well in their place, but it doesn’t do to drag them into everything, does it?
Diana and I are thinking seriously of promising each other that we will never marry but be nice old maids and live together forever.
Diana and I talk a great deal about serious subjects now, you know.
We feel that we are so much older than we used to be that it isn’t becoming to talk of childish matters.
It’s such a solemn thing to be almost fourteen, Marilla.
Miss Stacy took all us girls who are in our teens down to the brook last Wednesday, and talked to us about it.
She said we couldn’t be too careful what habits we formed and what ideals we acquired in our teens, because by the time we were twenty our characters would be developed and the foundation laid for our whole future life.
And she said if the foundation was shaky we could never build anything really worth while on it.
We felt extremely solemn, Marilla.
And we decided that we would try to be very careful indeed and form respectable habits and learn all we could and be as sensible as possible, so that by the time we were twenty our characters would be properly developed.
It’s perfectly appalling to think of being twenty, Marilla.
It sounds so fearfully old and grown up.
But why was Miss Stacy here this afternoon?” “That is what I want to tell you, Anne, if you’ll ever give me a chance to get a word in edgewise.
Then she flushed and exclaimed: “Oh, I know what she was saying.
I meant to tell you, Marilla, honestly I did, but I forgot.
Miss Stacy caught me reading Ben Hur in school yesterday afternoon when I should have been studying my Canadian history.
I was simply wild to know how it turned out--although I felt sure Ben Hur must win, because it wouldn’t be poetical justice if he didn’t--so I spread the history open on my desk lid and then tucked Ben Hur between the desk and my knee.
I just looked as if I were studying Canadian history, you know, while all the while I was reveling in Ben Hur.
I was so interested in it that I never noticed Miss Stacy coming down the aisle until all at once I just looked up and there she was looking down at me, so reproachful-like.
I can’t tell you how ashamed I felt, Marilla, especially when I heard Josie Pye giggling.
She said I had done very wrong in two respects.
First, I was wasting the time I ought to have put on my studies; and secondly, I was deceiving my teacher in trying to make it appear I was reading a history when it was a storybook instead.
I had never realized until that moment, Marilla, that what I was doing was deceitful.
I cried bitterly, and asked Miss Stacy to forgive me and I’d never do such a thing again; and I offered to do penance by never so much as looking at Ben Hur for a whole week, not even to see how the chariot race turned out.
So I think it wasn’t very kind of her to come up here to you about it after all.” “Miss Stacy never mentioned such a thing to me, Anne, and its only your guilty conscience that’s the matter with you.
You have no business to be taking storybooks to school.
When I was a girl I wasn’t so much as allowed to look at a novel.” “Oh, how can you call Ben Hur a novel when it’s really such a religious book?” protested Anne.
“Of course it’s a little too exciting to be proper reading for Sunday, and I only read it on weekdays.
Allan thinks it is a proper book for a girl thirteen and three-quarters to read.
It was one Ruby Gillis had lent me, and, oh, Marilla, it was so fascinating and creepy.
But Miss Stacy said it was a very silly, unwholesome book, and she asked me not to read any more of it or any like it.
I didn’t mind promising not to read any more like it, but it was _agonizing_ to give back that book without knowing how it turned out.
It’s really wonderful, Marilla, what you can do when you’re truly anxious to please a certain person.” “Well, I guess I’ll light the lamp and get to work,” said Marilla.
You’re more interested in the sound of your own tongue than in anything else.” “Oh, indeed, Marilla, I do want to hear it,” cried Anne contritely.
I know I talk too much, but I am really trying to overcome it, and although I say far too much, yet if you only knew how many things I want to say and don’t, you’d give me some credit for it.
Please tell me, Marilla.” “Well, Miss Stacy wants to organize a class among her advanced students who mean to study for the entrance examination into Queen’s.
What do you think about it yourself, Anne?
Would you like to go to Queen’s and pass for a teacher?” “Oh, Marilla!” Anne straightened to her knees and clasped her hands.
“It’s been the dream of my life--that is, for the last six months, ever since Ruby and Jane began to talk of studying for the Entrance.
But I didn’t say anything about it, because I supposed it would be perfectly useless.
But won’t it be dreadfully expensive?
Andrews says it cost him one hundred and fifty dollars to put Prissy through, and Prissy wasn’t a dunce in geometry.” “I guess you needn’t worry about that part of it.
When Matthew and I took you to bring up we resolved we would do the best we could for you and give you a good education.
You’ll always have a home at Green Gables as long as Matthew and I are here, but nobody knows what is going to happen in this uncertain world, and it’s just as well to be prepared.
So you can join the Queen’s class if you like, Anne.” “Oh, Marilla, thank you.” Anne flung her arms about Marilla’s waist and looked up earnestly into her face.
“I’m extremely grateful to you and Matthew.
I warn you not to expect much in geometry, but I think I can hold my own in anything else if I work hard.” “I dare say you’ll get along well enough.
Miss Stacy says you are bright and diligent.” Not for worlds would Marilla have told Anne just what Miss Stacy had said about her; that would have been to pamper vanity.
“You needn’t rush to any extreme of killing yourself over your books.
You won’t be ready to try the Entrance for a year and a half yet.
But it’s well to begin in time and be thoroughly grounded, Miss Stacy says.” “I shall take more interest than ever in my studies now,” said Anne blissfully, “because I have a purpose in life.
Allan says everybody should have a purpose in life and pursue it faithfully.
I think it’s a very noble profession.” The Queen’s class was organized in due time.
Gilbert Blythe, Anne Shirley, Ruby Gillis, Jane Andrews, Josie Pye, Charlie Sloane, and Moody Spurgeon MacPherson joined it.
This seemed nothing short of a calamity to Anne.
Never, since the night on which Minnie May had had the croup, had she and Diana been separated in anything.
On the evening when the Queen’s class first remained in school for the extra lessons and Anne saw Diana go slowly out with the others, to walk home alone through the Birch Path and Violet Vale, it was all the former could do to keep her seat and refrain from rushing impulsively after her chum.
A lump came into her throat, and she hastily retired behind the pages of her uplifted Latin grammar to hide the tears in her eyes.
“But, oh, Marilla, I really felt that I had tasted the bitterness of death, as Mr.
Allan said in his sermon last Sunday, when I saw Diana go out alone,” she said mournfully that night.
“I thought how splendid it would have been if Diana had only been going to study for the Entrance, too.
But we can’t have things perfect in this imperfect world, as Mrs.
Lynde isn’t exactly a comforting person sometimes, but there’s no doubt she says a great many very true things.
And I think the Queen’s class is going to be extremely interesting.
Jane and Ruby are just going to study to be teachers.
That is the height of their ambition.
Jane says she will devote her whole life to teaching, and never, never marry, because you are paid a salary for teaching, but a husband won’t pay you anything, and growls if you ask for a share in the egg and butter money.
I expect Jane speaks from mournful experience, for Mrs.
Lynde says that her father is a perfect old crank, and meaner than second skimmings.
Josie Pye says she is just going to college for education’s sake, because she won’t have to earn her own living; she says of course it is different with orphans who are living on charity--_they_ have to hustle.
Moody Spurgeon is going to be a minister.
Lynde says he couldn’t be anything else with a name like that to live up to.
I hope it isn’t wicked of me, Marilla, but really the thought of Moody Spurgeon being a minister makes me laugh.
He’s such a funny-looking boy with that big fat face, and his little blue eyes, and his ears sticking out like flaps.
But perhaps he will be more intellectual-looking when he grows up.
Charlie Sloane says he’s going to go into politics and be a member of Parliament, but Mrs.
Lynde says he’ll never succeed at that, because the Sloanes are all honest people, and it’s only rascals that get on in politics nowadays.” “What is Gilbert Blythe going to be?” queried Marilla, seeing that Anne was opening her Cæsar.
“I don’t happen to know what Gilbert Blythe’s ambition in life is--if he has any,” said Anne scornfully.
Previously the rivalry had been rather one-sided, but there was no longer any doubt that Gilbert was as determined to be first in class as Anne was.
The other members of the class tacitly acknowledged their superiority, and never dreamed of trying to compete with them.
Since the day by the pond when she had refused to listen to his plea for forgiveness, Gilbert, save for the aforesaid determined rivalry, had evinced no recognition whatever of the existence of Anne Shirley.
He talked and jested with the other girls, exchanged books and puzzles with them, discussed lessons and plans, sometimes walked home with one or the other of them from prayer meeting or Debating Club.
But Anne Shirley he simply ignored, and Anne found out that it is not pleasant to be ignored.
Deep down in her wayward, feminine little heart she knew that she did care, and that if she had that chance of the Lake of Shining Waters again she would answer very differently.
All at once, as it seemed, and to her secret dismay, she found that the old resentment she had cherished against him was gone--gone just when she most needed its sustaining power.
It was in vain that she recalled every incident and emotion of that memorable occasion and tried to feel the old satisfying anger.
That day by the pond had witnessed its last spasmodic flicker.
Anne realized that she had forgiven and forgotten without knowing it.
She determined to “shroud her feelings in deepest oblivion,” and it may be stated here and now that she did it, so successfully that Gilbert, who possibly was not quite so indifferent as he seemed, could not console himself with any belief that Anne felt his retaliatory scorn.
The only poor comfort he had was that she snubbed Charlie Sloane, unmercifully, continually, and undeservedly.
Otherwise the winter passed away in a round of pleasant duties and studies.
For Anne the days slipped by like golden beads on the necklace of the year.
She was happy, eager, interested; there were lessons to be learned and honor to be won; delightful books to read; new pieces to be practiced for the Sunday-school choir; pleasant Saturday afternoons at the manse with Mrs.
Allan; and then, almost before Anne realized it, spring had come again to Green Gables and all the world was abloom once more.
Studies palled just a wee bit then; the Queen’s class, left behind in school while the others scattered to green lanes and leafy wood cuts and meadow byways, looked wistfully out of the windows and discovered that Latin verbs and French exercises had somehow lost the tang and zest they had possessed in the crisp winter months.
Even Anne and Gilbert lagged and grew indifferent.
Teacher and taught were alike glad when the term was ended and the glad vacation days stretched rosily before them.
“But you’ve done good work this past year,” Miss Stacy told them on the last evening, “and you deserve a good, jolly vacation.
Have the best time you can in the out-of-door world and lay in a good stock of health and vitality and ambition to carry you through next year.
It will be the tug of war, you know--the last year before the Entrance.” “Are you going to be back next year, Miss Stacy?” asked Josie Pye.
The Queen’s class listened in breathless suspense for her answer.
To tell the truth, I’ve grown so interested in my pupils here that I found I couldn’t leave them.
So I’ll stay and see you through.” “Hurrah!” said Moody Spurgeon.
Moody Spurgeon had never been so carried away by his feelings before, and he blushed uncomfortably every time he thought about it for a week.
“Dear Stacy, it would be perfectly dreadful if you didn’t come back.
I don’t believe I could have the heart to go on with my studies at all if another teacher came here.” When Anne got home that night she stacked all her textbooks away in an old trunk in the attic, locked it, and threw the key into the blanket box.
“I’m not even going to look at a schoolbook in vacation,” she told Marilla.
“I’ve studied as hard all the term as I possibly could and I’ve pored over that geometry until I know every proposition in the first book off by heart, even when the letters _are_ changed.
I just feel tired of everything sensible and I’m going to let my imagination run riot for the summer.
I’ll only let it run riot within reasonable limits.
Lynde says that if I keep stretching out next year as I’ve done this I’ll have to put on longer skirts.
And when I put on longer skirts I shall feel that I have to live up to them and be very dignified.
I think we’re going to have a very gay vacation.
Ruby Gillis is going to have a birthday party soon and there’s the Sunday-school picnic and the missionary concert next month.
Jane Andrews was over once last summer and she says it was a dazzling sight to see the electric lights and the flowers and all the lady guests in such beautiful dresses.
Lynde came up the next afternoon to find out why Marilla had not been at the Aid meeting on Thursday.
When Marilla was not at Aid meeting people knew there was something wrong at Green Gables.
“Matthew had a bad spell with his heart Thursday,” Marilla explained, “and I didn’t feel like leaving him.
The doctor says he must be careful to avoid excitement.
That’s easy enough, for Matthew doesn’t go about looking for excitement by any means and never did, but he’s not to do any very heavy work either and you might as well tell Matthew not to breathe as not to work.
You’ll stay to tea?” “Well, seeing you’re so pressing, perhaps I might as well, stay” said Mrs.
Rachel, who had not the slightest intention of doing anything else.
Rachel and Marilla sat comfortably in the parlor while Anne got the tea and made hot biscuits that were light and white enough to defy even Mrs.
“I must say Anne has turned out a real smart girl,” admitted Mrs.
Rachel, as Marilla accompanied her to the end of the lane at sunset.
“She must be a great help to you.” “She is,” said Marilla, “and she’s real steady and reliable now.
I used to be afraid she’d never get over her featherbrained ways, but she has and I wouldn’t be afraid to trust her in anything now.” “I never would have thought she’d have turned out so well that first day I was here three years ago,” said Mrs.
When I went home that night I says to Thomas, says I, ‘Mark my words, Thomas, Marilla Cuthbert ‘ll live to rue the step she’s took.’ But I was mistaken and I’m real glad of it.
No, that never was my way, thank goodness.
I did make a mistake in judging Anne, but it weren’t no wonder, for an odder, unexpecteder witch of a child there never was in this world, that’s what.
There was no ciphering her out by the rules that worked with other children.
It’s nothing short of wonderful how she’s improved these three years, but especially in looks.
But somehow--I don’t know how it is but when Anne and them are together, though she ain’t half as handsome, she makes them look kind of common and overdone--something like them white June lilies she calls narcissus alongside of the big, red peonies, that’s what.” CHAPTER XXXI.
Where the Brook and River Meet ANNE had her “good” summer and enjoyed it wholeheartedly.
She and Diana fairly lived outdoors, reveling in all the delights that Lover’s Lane and the Dryad’s Bubble and Willowmere and Victoria Island afforded.
Marilla offered no objections to Anne’s gypsyings.
The Spencervale doctor who had come the night Minnie May had the croup met Anne at the house of a patient one afternoon early in vacation, looked her over sharply, screwed up his mouth, shook his head, and sent a message to Marilla Cuthbert by another person.
It was: “Keep that redheaded girl of yours in the open air all summer and don’t let her read books until she gets more spring into her step.” This message frightened Marilla wholesomely.
She read Anne’s death warrant by consumption in it unless it was scrupulously obeyed.
She walked, rowed, berried, and dreamed to her heart’s content; and when September came she was bright-eyed and alert, with a step that would have satisfied the Spencervale doctor and a heart full of ambition and zest once more.
“I feel just like studying with might and main,” she declared as she brought her books down from the attic.
“Oh, you good old friends, I’m glad to see your honest faces once more--yes, even you, geometry.
I’ve had a perfectly beautiful summer, Marilla, and now I’m rejoicing as a strong man to run a race, as Mr.
Allan preach magnificent sermons?
Lynde says he is improving every day and the first thing we know some city church will gobble him up and then we’ll be left and have to turn to and break in another green preacher.
If I were a man I think I’d be a minister.
They can have such an influence for good, if their theology is sound; and it must be thrilling to preach splendid sermons and stir your hearers’ hearts.
Why can’t women be ministers, Marilla?
Lynde that and she was shocked and said it would be a scandalous thing.
She said there might be female ministers in the States and she believed there was, but thank goodness we hadn’t got to that stage in Canada yet and she hoped we never would.
I think women would make splendid ministers.
When there is a social to be got up or a church tea or anything else to raise money the women have to turn to and do the work.
Lynde can pray every bit as well as Superintendent Bell and I’ve no doubt she could preach too with a little practice.” “Yes, I believe she could,” said Marilla dryly.
“She does plenty of unofficial preaching as it is.
Nobody has much of a chance to go wrong in Avonlea with Rachel to oversee them.” “Marilla,” said Anne in a burst of confidence, “I want to tell you something and ask you what you think about it.
It has worried me terribly--on Sunday afternoons, that is, when I think specially about such matters.
Lynde I feel desperately wicked and as if I wanted to go and do the very thing she tells me I oughtn’t to do.
I feel irresistibly tempted to do it.
Do you think it’s because I’m really bad and unregenerate?” Marilla looked dubious for a moment.
I sometimes think she’d have more of an influence for good, as you say yourself, if she didn’t keep nagging people to do right.
There should have been a special commandment against nagging.
Rachel is a good Christian woman and she means well.
There isn’t a kinder soul in Avonlea and she never shirks her share of work.” “I’m very glad you feel the same,” said Anne decidedly.
“It’s so encouraging.
You settle one question and there’s another right after.
There are so many things to be thought over and decided when you’re beginning to grow up.
It keeps me busy all the time thinking them over and deciding what is right.
Allan and Miss Stacy I ought to grow up successfully, and I’m sure it will be my own fault if I don’t.
I feel it’s a great responsibility because I have only the one chance.
Gillis measured me at Ruby’s party.
Of course I know it wasn’t really necessary, but flounces are so stylish this fall and Josie Pye has flounces on all her dresses.
I shall have such a comfortable feeling deep down in my mind about that flounce.” “It’s worth something to have that,” admitted Marilla.
Especially did the Queen’s class gird up their loins for the fray, for at the end of the coming year, dimly shadowing their pathway already, loomed up that fateful thing known as “the Entrance,” at the thought of which one and all felt their hearts sink into their very shoes.
That thought was doomed to haunt Anne through the waking hours of that winter, Sunday afternoons inclusive, to the almost entire exclusion of moral and theological problems.
When Anne had bad dreams she found herself staring miserably at pass lists of the Entrance exams, where Gilbert Blythe’s name was blazoned at the top and in which hers did not appear at all.
Schoolwork was as interesting, class rivalry as absorbing, as of yore.
New worlds of thought, feeling, and ambition, fresh, fascinating fields of unexplored knowledge seemed to be opening out before Anne’s eager eyes.
“Hills peeped o’er hill and Alps on Alps arose.” Much of all this was due to Miss Stacy’s tactful, careful, broadminded guidance.
She led her class to think and explore and discover for themselves and encouraged straying from the old beaten paths to a degree that quite shocked Mrs.
Lynde and the school trustees, who viewed all innovations on established methods rather dubiously.
Apart from her studies Anne expanded socially, for Marilla, mindful of the Spencervale doctor’s dictum, no longer vetoed occasional outings.
The Debating Club flourished and gave several concerts; there were one or two parties almost verging on grown-up affairs; there were sleigh drives and skating frolics galore.
Between times Anne grew, shooting up so rapidly that Marilla was astonished one day, when they were standing side by side, to find the girl was taller than herself.
“Why, Anne, how you’ve grown!” she said, almost unbelievingly.
A sigh followed on the words.
The child she had learned to love had vanished somehow and here was this tall, serious-eyed girl of fifteen, with the thoughtful brows and the proudly poised little head, in her place.
Marilla loved the girl as much as she had loved the child, but she was conscious of a queer sorrowful sense of loss.
And that night, when Anne had gone to prayer meeting with Diana, Marilla sat alone in the wintry twilight and indulged in the weakness of a cry.
Matthew, coming in with a lantern, caught her at it and gazed at her in such consternation that Marilla had to laugh through her tears.
“I was thinking about Anne,” she explained.
“She’s got to be such a big girl--and she’ll probably be away from us next winter.
I’ll miss her terrible.” “She’ll be able to come home often,” comforted Matthew, to whom Anne was as yet and always would be the little, eager girl he had brought home from Bright River on that June evening four years before.
“The branch railroad will be built to Carmody by that time.” “It won’t be the same thing as having her here all the time,” sighed Marilla gloomily, determined to enjoy her luxury of grief uncomforted.
“But there--men can’t understand these things!” There were other changes in Anne no less real than the physical change.
Perhaps she thought all the more and dreamed as much as ever, but she certainly talked less.
Marilla noticed and commented on this also.
What has come over you?” Anne colored and laughed a little, as she dropped her book and looked dreamily out of the window, where big fat red buds were bursting out on the creeper in response to the lure of the spring sunshine.
“I don’t know--I don’t want to talk as much,” she said, denting her chin thoughtfully with her forefinger.
“It’s nicer to think dear, pretty thoughts and keep them in one’s heart, like treasures.
I don’t like to have them laughed at or wondered over.
It’s fun to be almost grown up in some ways, but it’s not the kind of fun I expected, Marilla.
Besides, Miss Stacy says the short ones are much stronger and better.
She makes us write all our essays as simply as possible.
I was so used to crowding in all the fine big words I could think of--and I thought of any number of them.
I haven’t heard you speak of it for a long time.” “The story club isn’t in existence any longer.
It was silly to be writing about love and murder and elopements and mysteries.
Miss Stacy sometimes has us write a story for training in composition, but she won’t let us write anything but what might happen in Avonlea in our own lives, and she criticizes it very sharply and makes us criticize our own too.
I never thought my compositions had so many faults until I began to look for them myself.
I felt so ashamed I wanted to give up altogether, but Miss Stacy said I could learn to write well if I only trained myself to be my own severest critic.
And so I am trying to.” “You’ve only two more months before the Entrance,” said Marilla.
“Do you think you’ll be able to get through?” Anne shivered.
Sometimes I think I’ll be all right--and then I get horribly afraid.
We’ve studied hard and Miss Stacy has drilled us thoroughly, but we mayn’t get through for all that.
We’ve each got a stumbling block.
Mine is geometry of course, and Jane’s is Latin, and Ruby and Charlie’s is algebra, and Josie’s is arithmetic.
Moody Spurgeon says he feels it in his bones that he is going to fail in English history.
Miss Stacy is going to give us examinations in June just as hard as we’ll have at the Entrance and mark us just as strictly, so we’ll have some idea.
Sometimes I wake up in the night and wonder what I’ll do if I don’t pass.” “Why, go to school next year and try again,” said Marilla unconcernedly.
It would be such a disgrace to fail, especially if Gil--if the others passed.
And I get so nervous in an examination that I’m likely to make a mess of it.
Nothing rattles her.” Anne sighed and, dragging her eyes from the witcheries of the spring world, the beckoning day of breeze and blue, and the green things upspringing in the garden, buried herself resolutely in her book.
There would be other springs, but if she did not succeed in passing the Entrance, Anne felt convinced that she would never recover sufficiently to enjoy them.
Red eyes and damp handkerchiefs bore convincing testimony to the fact that Miss Stacy’s farewell words must have been quite as touching as Mr.
Phillips’s had been under similar circumstances three years before.
Diana looked back at the schoolhouse from the foot of the spruce hill and sighed deeply.
“It does seem as if it was the end of everything, doesn’t it?” she said dismally.
“You oughtn’t to feel half as badly as I do,” said Anne, hunting vainly for a dry spot on her handkerchief.
Miss Stacy won’t be there, nor you nor Jane nor Ruby probably.
I shall have to sit all alone, for I couldn’t bear to have another deskmate after you.
It’s dreadful to think they’re all over.” Two big tears rolled down by Diana’s nose.
“If you would stop crying I could,” said Anne imploringly.
“Just as soon as I put away my hanky I see you brimming up and that starts me off again.
Lynde says, ‘If you can’t be cheerful, be as cheerful as you can.’ After all, I dare say I’ll be back next year.
They’re getting alarmingly frequent.” “Why, you came out splendidly in the exams Miss Stacy gave.” “Yes, but those exams didn’t make me nervous.
When I think of the real thing you can’t imagine what a horrid cold fluttery feeling comes round my heart.
And then my number is thirteen and Josie Pye says it’s so unlucky.
I am _not_ superstitious and I know it can make no difference.
But still I wish it wasn’t thirteen.” “I do wish I was going in with you,” said Diana.
“Wouldn’t we have a perfectly elegant time?
But I suppose you’ll have to cram in the evenings.” “No; Miss Stacy has made us promise not to open a book at all.
Prissy Andrews told me that she sat up half the night every night of her Entrance week and crammed for dear life; and I had determined to sit up _at least_ as long as she did.
It was so kind of your Aunt Josephine to ask me to stay at Beechwood while I’m in town.” “You’ll write to me while you’re in, won’t you?” “I’ll write Tuesday night and tell you how the first day goes,” promised Anne.
“I’ll be haunting the post office Wednesday,” vowed Diana.
Anne went to town the following Monday and on Wednesday Diana haunted the post office, as agreed, and got her letter.
“Dearest Diana” [wrote Anne], “Here it is Tuesday night and I’m writing this in the library at Beechwood.
Last night I was horribly lonesome all alone in my room and wished so much you were with me.
I couldn’t ‘cram’ because I’d promised Miss Stacy not to, but it was as hard to keep from opening my history as it used to be to keep from reading a story before my lessons were learned.
There are times and seasons even yet when I don’t feel that I’ve made any great headway in learning to like Josie Pye!
“When we reached the Academy there were scores of students there from all over the Island.
The first person we saw was Moody Spurgeon sitting on the steps and muttering away to himself.
Jane asked him what on earth he was doing and he said he was repeating the multiplication table over and over to steady his nerves and for pity’s sake not to interrupt him, because if he stopped for a moment he got frightened and forgot everything he ever knew, but the multiplication table kept all his facts firmly in their proper place!
“When we were assigned to our rooms Miss Stacy had to leave us.
Jane and I sat together and Jane was so composed that I envied her.
No need of the multiplication table for good, steady, sensible Jane!
I wondered if I looked as I felt and if they could hear my heart thumping clear across the room.
Then a man came in and began distributing the English examination sheets.
Just one awful moment--Diana, I felt exactly as I did four years ago when I asked Marilla if I might stay at Green Gables--and then everything cleared up in my mind and my heart began beating again--I forgot to say that it had stopped altogether!--for I knew I could do something with _that_ paper anyhow.
“At noon we went home for dinner and then back again for history in the afternoon.
The history was a pretty hard paper and I got dreadfully mixed up in the dates.
But oh, Diana, tomorrow the geometry exam comes off and when I think of it it takes every bit of determination I possess to keep from opening my Euclid.
If I thought the multiplication table would help me any I would recite it from now till tomorrow morning.
On my way I met Moody Spurgeon wandering distractedly around.
He said he knew he had failed in history and he was born to be a disappointment to his parents and he was going home on the morning train; and it would be easier to be a carpenter than a minister, anyhow.
I cheered him up and persuaded him to stay to the end because it would be unfair to Miss Stacy if he didn’t.
Sometimes I have wished I was born a boy, but when I see Moody Spurgeon I’m always glad I’m a girl and not his sister.
“Ruby was in hysterics when I reached their boardinghouse; she had just discovered a fearful mistake she had made in her English paper.
When she recovered we went uptown and had an ice cream.
“Oh, Diana, if only the geometry examination were over!
Lynde would say, the sun will go on rising and setting whether I fail in geometry or not.
That is true but not especially comforting.
“Yours devotedly, “Anne” The geometry examination and all the others were over in due time and Anne arrived home on Friday evening, rather tired but with an air of chastened triumph about her.
“You old darling, it’s perfectly splendid to see you back again.
It seems like an age since you went to town and oh, Anne, how did you get along?” “Pretty well, I think, in everything but the geometry.
I don’t know whether I passed in it or not and I have a creepy, crawly presentiment that I didn’t.
Green Gables is the dearest, loveliest spot in the world.” “How did the others do?” “The girls say they know they didn’t pass, but I think they did pretty well.
Josie says the geometry was so easy a child of ten could do it!
Moody Spurgeon still thinks he failed in history and Charlie says he failed in algebra.
But we don’t really know anything about it and won’t until the pass list is out.
That won’t be for a fortnight.
Fancy living a fortnight in such suspense!
Don’t worry.” “I’d rather not pass at all than not come out pretty well up on the list,” flashed Anne, by which she meant--and Diana knew she meant--that success would be incomplete and bitter if she did not come out ahead of Gilbert Blythe.
With this end in view Anne had strained every nerve during the examinations.
They had met and passed each other on the street a dozen times without any sign of recognition and every time Anne had held her head a little higher and wished a little more earnestly that she had made friends with Gilbert when he asked her, and vowed a little more determinedly to surpass him in the examination.
She knew that all Avonlea junior was wondering which would come out first; she even knew that Jimmy Glover and Ned Wright had a bet on the question and that Josie Pye had said there was no doubt in the world that Gilbert would be first; and she felt that her humiliation would be unbearable if she failed.
She wanted to “pass high” for the sake of Matthew and Marilla--especially Matthew.
Matthew had declared to her his conviction that she “would beat the whole Island.” That, Anne felt, was something it would be foolish to hope for even in the wildest dreams.
But she did hope fervently that she would be among the first ten at least, so that she might see Matthew’s kindly brown eyes gleam with pride in her achievement.
That, she felt, would be a sweet reward indeed for all her hard work and patient grubbing among unimaginative equations and conjugations.
At the end of the fortnight Anne took to “haunting” the post office also, in the distracted company of Jane, Ruby, and Josie, opening the Charlottetown dailies with shaking hands and cold, sinkaway feelings as bad as any experienced during the Entrance week.
Charlie and Gilbert were not above doing this too, but Moody Spurgeon stayed resolutely away.
“I’m just going to wait until somebody comes and tells me suddenly whether I’ve passed or not.” When three weeks had gone by without the pass list appearing Anne began to feel that she really couldn’t stand the strain much longer.
Her appetite failed and her interest in Avonlea doings languished.
Lynde wanted to know what else you could expect with a Tory superintendent of education at the head of affairs, and Matthew, noting Anne’s paleness and indifference and the lagging steps that bore her home from the post office every afternoon, began seriously to wonder if he hadn’t better vote Grit at the next election.
Anne was sitting at her open window, for the time forgetful of the woes of examinations and the cares of the world, as she drank in the beauty of the summer dusk, sweet-scented with flower breaths from the garden below and sibilant and rustling from the stir of poplars.
The eastern sky above the firs was flushed faintly pink from the reflection of the west, and Anne was wondering dreamily if the spirit of color looked like that, when she saw Diana come flying down through the firs, over the log bridge, and up the slope, with a fluttering newspaper in her hand.
Anne sprang to her feet, knowing at once what that paper contained.
It seemed an hour to her before Diana came rushing along the hall and burst into the room without even knocking, so great was her excitement.
Oh, I’m so proud!” Diana flung the paper on the table and herself on Anne’s bed, utterly breathless and incapable of further speech.
Anne lighted the lamp, oversetting the match safe and using up half a dozen matches before her shaking hands could accomplish the task.
Then she snatched up the paper.
“You did just splendidly, Anne,” puffed Diana, recovering sufficiently to sit up and speak, for Anne, starry eyed and rapt, had not uttered a word.
“Father brought the paper home from Bright River not ten minutes ago--it came out on the afternoon train, you know, and won’t be here till tomorrow by mail--and when I saw the pass list I just rushed over like a wild thing.
You’ve all passed, every one of you, Moody Spurgeon and all, although he’s conditioned in history.
Won’t Miss Stacy be delighted?
I let myself think _once_, ‘What if I should come out first?’ quakingly, you know, for it seemed so vain and presumptuous to think I could lead the Island.
Then we’ll go up the road and tell the good news to the others.” They hurried to the hayfield below the barn where Matthew was coiling hay, and, as luck would have it, Mrs.
“Oh, Matthew,” exclaimed Anne, “I’ve passed and I’m first--or one of the first!
I’m not vain, but I’m thankful.” “Well now, I always said it,” said Matthew, gazing at the pass list delightedly.
Rachel’s critical eye.
But that good soul said heartily: “I just guess she has done well, and far be it from me to be backward in saying it.
You’re a credit to your friends, Anne, that’s what, and we’re all proud of you.” That night Anne, who had wound up the delightful evening with a serious little talk with Mrs.
Allan at the manse, knelt sweetly by her open window in a great sheen of moonshine and murmured a prayer of gratitude and aspiration that came straight from her heart.
There was in it thankfulness for the past and reverent petition for the future; and when she slept on her white pillow her dreams were as fair and bright and beautiful as maidenhood might desire.
The Hotel Concert PUT on your white organdy, by all means, Anne,” advised Diana decidedly.
They were together in the east gable chamber; outside it was only twilight--a lovely yellowish-green twilight with a clear-blue cloudless sky.
A big round moon, slowly deepening from her pallid luster into burnished silver, hung over the Haunted Wood; the air was full of sweet summer sounds--sleepy birds twittering, freakish breezes, faraway voices and laughter.
But in Anne’s room the blind was drawn and the lamp lighted, for an important toilet was being made.
The east gable was a very different place from what it had been on that night four years before, when Anne had felt its bareness penetrate to the marrow of her spirit with its inhospitable chill.
Changes had crept in, Marilla conniving at them resignedly, until it was as sweet and dainty a nest as a young girl could desire.
The velvet carpet with the pink roses and the pink silk curtains of Anne’s early visions had certainly never materialized; but her dreams had kept pace with her growth, and it is not probable she lamented them.
The floor was covered with a pretty matting, and the curtains that softened the high window and fluttered in the vagrant breezes were of pale-green art muslin.
The walls, hung not with gold and silver brocade tapestry, but with a dainty apple-blossom paper, were adorned with a few good pictures given Anne by Mrs.
Miss Stacy’s photograph occupied the place of honor, and Anne made a sentimental point of keeping fresh flowers on the bracket under it.
Tonight a spike of white lilies faintly perfumed the room like the dream of a fragrance.
There was no “mahogany furniture,” but there was a white-painted bookcase filled with books, a cushioned wicker rocker, a toilet table befrilled with white muslin, a quaint, gilt-framed mirror with chubby pink Cupids and purple grapes painted over its arched top, that used to hang in the spare room, and a low white bed.
Anne was dressing for a concert at the White Sands Hotel.
The guests had got it up in aid of the Charlottetown hospital, and had hunted out all the available amateur talent in the surrounding districts to help it along.
Bertha Sampson and Pearl Clay of the White Sands Baptist choir had been asked to sing a duet; Milton Clark of Newbridge was to give a violin solo; Winnie Adella Blair of Carmody was to sing a Scotch ballad; and Laura Spencer of Spencervale and Anne Shirley of Avonlea were to recite.
As Anne would have said at one time, it was “an epoch in her life,” and she was deliciously athrill with the excitement of it.
Matthew was in the seventh heaven of gratified pride over the honor conferred on his Anne and Marilla was not far behind, although she would have died rather than admit it, and said she didn’t think it was very proper for a lot of young folks to be gadding over to the hotel without any responsible person with them.
There was a party of visitors expected out from town, and after the concert a supper was to be given to the performers.
“Do you really think the organdy will be best?” queried Anne anxiously.
“I don’t think it’s as pretty as my blue-flowered muslin--and it certainly isn’t so fashionable.” “But it suits you ever so much better,” said Diana.
“It’s so soft and frilly and clinging.
Diana was beginning to have a reputation for notable taste in dressing, and her advice on such subjects was much sought after.
She was looking very pretty herself on this particular night in a dress of the lovely wild-rose pink, from which Anne was forever debarred; but she was not to take any part in the concert, so her appearance was of minor importance.
All her pains were bestowed upon Anne, who, she vowed, must, for the credit of Avonlea, be dressed and combed and adorned to the Queen’s taste.
“Pull out that frill a little more--so; here, let me tie your sash; now for your slippers.
I’m going to braid your hair in two thick braids, and tie them halfway up with big white bows--no, don’t pull out a single curl over your forehead--just have the soft part.
“Matthew brought me a string from town last week, and I know he’d like to see them on me.” Diana pursed up her lips, put her black head on one side critically, and finally pronounced in favor of the beads, which were thereupon tied around Anne’s slim milk-white throat.
“There’s something so stylish about you, Anne,” said Diana, with unenvious admiration.
I am just a dumpling.
Well, I suppose I shall just have to resign myself to it.” “But you have such dimples,” said Anne, smiling affectionately into the pretty, vivacious face so near her own.
My dimple-dream will never come true; but so many of my dreams have that I mustn’t complain.
Am I all ready now?” “All ready,” assured Diana, as Marilla appeared in the doorway, a gaunt figure with grayer hair than of yore and no fewer angles, but with a much softer face.
“Come right in and look at our elocutionist, Marilla.
Organdy’s the most unserviceable stuff in the world anyhow, and I told Matthew so when he got it.
But there is no use in saying anything to Matthew nowadays.
Time was when he would take my advice, but now he just buys things for Anne regardless, and the clerks at Carmody know they can palm anything off on him.
Just let them tell him a thing is pretty and fashionable, and Matthew plunks his money down for it.
Mind you keep your skirt clear of the wheel, Anne, and put your warm jacket on.” Then Marilla stalked downstairs, thinking proudly how sweet Anne looked, with that “One moonbeam from the forehead to the crown” and regretting that she could not go to the concert herself to hear her girl recite.
“I wonder if it _is_ too damp for my dress,” said Anne anxiously.
Look at the moonlight.” “I’m so glad my window looks east into the sun rising,” said Anne, going over to Diana.
“It’s so splendid to see the morning coming up over those long hills and glowing through those sharp fir tops.
It’s new every morning, and I feel as if I washed my very soul in that bath of earliest sunshine.
“I don’t want to think of it, it makes me so miserable, and I do want to have a good time this evening.
I’ve decided to give ‘The Maiden’s Vow.’ It’s so pathetic.
Laura Spencer is going to give a comic recitation, but I’d rather make people cry than laugh.” “What will you recite if they encore you?” “They won’t dream of encoring me,” scoffed Anne, who was not without her own secret hopes that they would, and already visioned herself telling Matthew all about it at the next morning’s breakfast table.
Come on.” Billy Andrews insisted that Anne should ride on the front seat with him, so she unwillingly climbed up.
She would have much preferred to sit back with the girls, where she could have laughed and chattered to her heart’s content.
There was not much of either laughter or chatter in Billy.
He was a big, fat, stolid youth of twenty, with a round, expressionless face, and a painful lack of conversational gifts.
But he admired Anne immensely, and was puffed up with pride over the prospect of driving to White Sands with that slim, upright figure beside him.
Anne, by dint of talking over her shoulder to the girls and occasionally passing a sop of civility to Billy--who grinned and chuckled and never could think of any reply until it was too late--contrived to enjoy the drive in spite of all.
It was a night for enjoyment.
The road was full of buggies, all bound for the hotel, and laughter, silver clear, echoed and reechoed along it.
They were met by the ladies of the concert committee, one of whom took Anne off to the performers’ dressing room which was filled with the members of a Charlottetown Symphony Club, among whom Anne felt suddenly shy and frightened and countrified.
Her dress, which, in the east gable, had seemed so dainty and pretty, now seemed simple and plain--too simple and plain, she thought, among all the silks and laces that glistened and rustled around her.
What were her pearl beads compared to the diamonds of the big, handsome lady near her?
And how poor her one wee white rose must look beside all the hothouse flowers the others wore!
Anne laid her hat and jacket away, and shrank miserably into a corner.
It was still worse on the platform of the big concert hall of the hotel, where she presently found herself.
The electric lights dazzled her eyes, the perfume and hum bewildered her.
She wished she were sitting down in the audience with Diana and Jane, who seemed to be having a splendid time away at the back.
She was wedged in between a stout lady in pink silk and a tall, scornful-looking girl in a white-lace dress.
Anne believed that she would hate that white-lace girl to the end of life.
Unfortunately for Anne, a professional elocutionist was staying at the hotel and had consented to recite.
She was a lithe, dark-eyed woman in a wonderful gown of shimmering gray stuff like woven moonbeams, with gems on her neck and in her dark hair.
She had a marvelously flexible voice and wonderful power of expression; the audience went wild over her selection.
Anne, forgetting all about herself and her troubles for the time, listened with rapt and shining eyes; but when the recitation ended she suddenly put her hands over her face.
At this unpropitious moment her name was called.
Somehow Anne--who did not notice the rather guilty little start of surprise the white-lace girl gave, and would not have understood the subtle compliment implied therein if she had--got on her feet, and moved dizzily out to the front.
She was so pale that Diana and Jane, down in the audience, clasped each other’s hands in nervous sympathy.
Anne was the victim of an overwhelming attack of stage fright.
Often as she had recited in public, she had never before faced such an audience as this, and the sight of it paralyzed her energies completely.
Everything was so strange, so brilliant, so bewildering--the rows of ladies in evening dress, the critical faces, the whole atmosphere of wealth and culture about her.
Very different this from the plain benches at the Debating Club, filled with the homely, sympathetic faces of friends and neighbors.
These people, she thought, would be merciless critics.
Perhaps, like the white-lace girl, they anticipated amusement from her “rustic” efforts.
She felt hopelessly, helplessly ashamed and miserable.
Her knees trembled, her heart fluttered, a horrible faintness came over her; not a word could she utter, and the next moment she would have fled from the platform despite the humiliation which, she felt, must ever after be her portion if she did so.
But suddenly, as her dilated, frightened eyes gazed out over the audience, she saw Gilbert Blythe away at the back of the room, bending forward with a smile on his face--a smile which seemed to Anne at once triumphant and taunting.
Josie Pye, whom he had driven over, sat beside him, and her face certainly was both triumphant and taunting.
She drew a long breath and flung her head up proudly, courage and determination tingling over her like an electric shock.
Her fright and nervousness vanished; and she began her recitation, her clear, sweet voice reaching to the farthest corner of the room without a tremor or a break.
Self-possession was fully restored to her, and in the reaction from that horrible moment of powerlessness she recited as she had never done before.
When she finished there were bursts of honest applause.
Anne, stepping back to her seat, blushing with shyness and delight, found her hand vigorously clasped and shaken by the stout lady in pink silk.
“My dear, you did splendidly,” she puffed.
“I’ve been crying like a baby, actually I have.
There, they’re encoring you--they’re bound to have you back!” “Oh, I can’t go,” said Anne confusedly.
“But yet--I must, or Matthew will be disappointed.
He said they would encore me.” “Then don’t disappoint Matthew,” said the pink lady, laughing.
Smiling, blushing, limpid eyed, Anne tripped back and gave a quaint, funny little selection that captivated her audience still further.
When the concert was over, the stout, pink lady--who was the wife of an American millionaire--took her under her wing, and introduced her to everybody; and everybody was very nice to her.
The professional elocutionist, Mrs.
Evans, came and chatted with her, telling her that she had a charming voice and “interpreted” her selections beautifully.
Even the white-lace girl paid her a languid little compliment.
They had supper in the big, beautifully decorated dining room; Diana and Jane were invited to partake of this, also, since they had come with Anne, but Billy was nowhere to be found, having decamped in mortal fear of some such invitation.
He was in waiting for them, with the team, however, when it was all over, and the three girls came merrily out into the calm, white moonshine radiance.
Anne breathed deeply, and looked into the clear sky beyond the dark boughs of the firs.
How great and still and wonderful everything was, with the murmur of the sea sounding through it and the darkling cliffs beyond like grim giants guarding enchanted coasts.
“Hasn’t it been a perfectly splendid time?” sighed Jane, as they drove away.
“I just wish I was a rich American and could spend my summer at a hotel and wear jewels and low-necked dresses and have ice cream and chicken salad every blessed day.
I’m sure it would be ever so much more fun than teaching school.
Anne, your recitation was simply great, although I thought at first you were never going to begin.
Evans’s, you know, for she is a professional, and I’m only a schoolgirl, with a little knack of reciting.
I’m quite satisfied if the people just liked mine pretty well.” “I’ve a compliment for you, Anne,” said Diana.
“At least I think it must be a compliment because of the tone he said it in.
There was an American sitting behind Jane and me--such a romantic-looking man, with coal-black hair and eyes.
Josie Pye says he is a distinguished artist, and that her mother’s cousin in Boston is married to a man that used to go to school with him.
Well, we heard him say--didn’t we, Jane?--‘Who is that girl on the platform with the splendid Titian hair?
But what does Titian hair mean?” “Being interpreted it means plain red, I guess,” laughed Anne.
“Titian was a very famous artist who liked to paint red-haired women.” “_Did_ you see all the diamonds those ladies wore?” sighed Jane.
“They were simply dazzling.
Wouldn’t you just love to be rich, girls?” “We _are_ rich,” said Anne staunchly.
“Why, we have sixteen years to our credit, and we’re happy as queens, and we’ve all got imaginations, more or less.
We couldn’t enjoy its loveliness any more if we had millions of dollars and ropes of diamonds.
She must have been dreadfully unhappy sometime to have such a look.
You _know_ you wouldn’t, Jane Andrews!” “I _don’t_ know--exactly,” said Jane unconvinced.
“I think diamonds would comfort a person for a good deal.” “Well, I don’t want to be anyone but myself, even if I go uncomforted by diamonds all my life,” declared Anne.
A Queen’s Girl THE next three weeks were busy ones at Green Gables, for Anne was getting ready to go to Queen’s, and there was much sewing to be done, and many things to be talked over and arranged.
Anne’s outfit was ample and pretty, for Matthew saw to that, and Marilla for once made no objections whatever to anything he purchased or suggested.
More--one evening she went up to the east gable with her arms full of a delicate pale green material.
“Anne, here’s something for a nice light dress for you.
I don’t suppose you really need it; you’ve plenty of pretty waists; but I thought maybe you’d like something real dressy to wear if you were asked out anywhere of an evening in town, to a party or anything like that.
I don’t believe you ought to be so kind to me--it’s making it harder every day for me to go away.” The green dress was made up with as many tucks and frills and shirrings as Emily’s taste permitted.
As Marilla watched the bright, animated face and graceful motions her thoughts went back to the evening Anne had arrived at Green Gables, and memory recalled a vivid picture of the odd, frightened child in her preposterous yellowish-brown wincey dress, the heartbreak looking out of her tearful eyes.
Something in the memory brought tears to Marilla’s own eyes.
“I declare, my recitation has made you cry, Marilla,” said Anne gaily stooping over Marilla’s chair to drop a butterfly kiss on that lady’s cheek.
“Now, I call that a positive triumph.” “No, I wasn’t crying over your piece,” said Marilla, who would have scorned to be betrayed into such weakness by any poetry stuff.
“I just couldn’t help thinking of the little girl you used to be, Anne.
You’ve grown up now and you’re going away; and you look so tall and stylish and so--so--different altogether in that dress--as if you didn’t belong in Avonlea at all--and I just got lonesome thinking it all over.” “Marilla!” Anne sat down on Marilla’s gingham lap, took Marilla’s lined face between her hands, and looked gravely and tenderly into Marilla’s eyes.
I’m only just pruned down and branched out.
It won’t make a bit of difference where I go or how much I change outwardly; at heart I shall always be your little Anne, who will love you and Matthew and dear Green Gables more and better every day of her life.” Anne laid her fresh young cheek against Marilla’s faded one, and reached out a hand to pat Matthew’s shoulder.
Marilla would have given much just then to have possessed Anne’s power of putting her feelings into words; but nature and habit had willed it otherwise, and she could only put her arms close about her girl and hold her tenderly to her heart, wishing that she need never let her go.
Matthew, with a suspicious moisture in his eyes, got up and went out-of-doors.
Under the stars of the blue summer night he walked agitatedly across the yard to the gate under the poplars.
“Well now, I guess she ain’t been much spoiled,” he muttered, proudly.
“I guess my putting in my oar occasional never did much harm after all.
She’s been a blessing to us, and there never was a luckier mistake than what Mrs.
It was Providence, because the Almighty saw we needed her, I reckon.” The day finally came when Anne must go to town.
She and Matthew drove in one fine September morning, after a tearful parting with Diana and an untearful practical one--on Marilla’s side at least--with Marilla.
But when Anne had gone Diana dried her tears and went to a beach picnic at White Sands with some of her Carmody cousins, where she contrived to enjoy herself tolerably well; while Marilla plunged fiercely into unnecessary work and kept at it all day long with the bitterest kind of heartache--the ache that burns and gnaws and cannot wash itself away in ready tears.
Anne and the rest of the Avonlea scholars reached town just in time to hurry off to the Academy.
That first day passed pleasantly enough in a whirl of excitement, meeting all the new students, learning to know the professors by sight and being assorted and organized into classes.
Anne intended taking up the Second Year work being advised to do so by Miss Stacy; Gilbert Blythe elected to do the same.
This meant getting a First Class teacher’s license in one year instead of two, if they were successful; but it also meant much more and harder work.
Jane, Ruby, Josie, Charlie, and Moody Spurgeon, not being troubled with the stirrings of ambition, were content to take up the Second Class work.
Anne was conscious of a pang of loneliness when she found herself in a room with fifty other students, not one of whom she knew, except the tall, brown-haired boy across the room; and knowing him in the fashion she did, did not help her much, as she reflected pessimistically.
Yet she was undeniably glad that they were in the same class; the old rivalry could still be carried on, and Anne would hardly have known what to do if it had been lacking.
“I wouldn’t feel comfortable without it,” she thought.
“Gilbert looks awfully determined.
What a splendid chin he has!
I suppose I won’t feel so much like a cat in a strange garret when I get acquainted, though.
It’s really an interesting speculation.
Of course I promised Diana that no Queen’s girl, no matter how much I liked her, should ever be as dear to me as she is; but I’ve lots of second-best affections to bestow.
I’d like to know them both--know them well--well enough to walk with my arm about their waists, and call them nicknames.
But just now I don’t know them and they don’t know me, and probably don’t want to know me particularly.
Oh, it’s lonesome!” It was lonesomer still when Anne found herself alone in her hall bedroom that night at twilight.
She was not to board with the other girls, who all had relatives in town to take pity on them.
Miss Josephine Barry would have liked to board her, but Beechwood was so far from the Academy that it was out of the question; so Miss Barry hunted up a boarding-house, assuring Matthew and Marilla that it was the very place for Anne.
“The lady who keeps it is a reduced gentlewoman,” explained Miss Barry.
“Her husband was a British officer, and she is very careful what sort of boarders she takes.
Anne will not meet with any objectionable persons under her roof.
The table is good, and the house is near the Academy, in a quiet neighborhood.” All this might be quite true, and indeed, proved to be so, but it did not materially help Anne in the first agony of homesickness that seized upon her.
Here there was nothing of this; Anne knew that outside of her window was a hard street, with a network of telephone wires shutting out the sky, the tramp of alien feet, and a thousand lights gleaming on stranger faces.
It’s silly--and weak--there’s the third tear splashing down by my nose.
I must think of something funny to stop them.
But there’s nothing funny except what is connected with Avonlea, and that only makes things worse--four--five--I’m going home next Friday, but that seems a hundred years away.
Oh, Matthew is nearly home by now--and Marilla is at the gate, looking down the lane for him--six--seven--eight--oh, there’s no use in counting them!
They’re coming in a flood presently.
It’s nicer to be miserable!” The flood of tears would have come, no doubt, had not Josie Pye appeared at that moment.
In the joy of seeing a familiar face Anne forgot that there had never been much love lost between her and Josie.
“I’m so glad you came up,” Anne said sincerely.
“You’ve been crying,” remarked Josie, with aggravating pity.
“I suppose you’re homesick--some people have so little self-control in that respect.
I’ve no intention of being homesick, I can tell you.
You shouldn’t cry, Anne; it isn’t becoming, for your nose and eyes get red, and then you seem _all_ red.
I’d a perfectly scrumptious time in the Academy today.
Our French professor is simply a duck.
His moustache would give you kerwollowps of the heart.
Have you anything eatable around, Anne?
I’m literally starving.
Otherwise I’d have gone to the park to hear the band play with Frank Stockley.
I told him you were an orphan that the Cuthberts had adopted, and nobody knew very much about what you’d been before that.” Anne was wondering if, after all, solitude and tears were not more satisfactory than Josie Pye’s companionship when Jane and Ruby appeared, each with an inch of Queen’s color ribbon--purple and scarlet--pinned proudly to her coat.
As Josie was not “speaking” to Jane just then she had to subside into comparative harmlessness.
I ought to be home studying my Virgil--that horrid old professor gave us twenty lines to start in on tomorrow.
Anne, methinks I see the traces of tears.
It will restore my self-respect, for I was shedding tears freely before Ruby came along.
I don’t mind being a goose so much if somebody else is goosey, too.
It has the real Avonlea flavor.” Ruby, perceiving the Queen’s calendar lying on the table, wanted to know if Anne meant to try for the gold medal.
Anne blushed and admitted she was thinking of it.
“Oh, that reminds me,” said Josie, “Queen’s is to get one of the Avery scholarships after all.
Frank Stockley told me--his uncle is one of the board of governors, you know.
It will be announced in the Academy tomorrow.” An Avery scholarship!
Anne felt her heart beat more quickly, and the horizons of her ambition shifted and broadened as if by magic.
Before Josie had told the news Anne’s highest pinnacle of aspiration had been a teacher’s provincial license, First Class, at the end of the year, and perhaps the medal!
But now in one moment Anne saw herself winning the Avery scholarship, taking an Arts course at Redmond College, and graduating in a gown and mortar board, before the echo of Josie’s words had died away.
For the Avery scholarship was in English, and Anne felt that here her foot was on native heath.
A wealthy manufacturer of New Brunswick had died and left part of his fortune to endow a large number of scholarships to be distributed among the various high schools and academies of the Maritime Provinces, according to their respective standings.
There had been much doubt whether one would be allotted to Queen’s, but the matter was settled at last, and at the end of the year the graduate who made the highest mark in English and English Literature would win the scholarship--two hundred and fifty dollars a year for four years at Redmond College.
No wonder that Anne went to bed that night with tingling cheeks!
“I’ll win that scholarship if hard work can do it,” she resolved.
Oh, it’s delightful to have ambitions.
Just as soon as you attain to one ambition you see another one glittering higher up still.
It does make life so interesting.” CHAPTER XXXV.
The Winter at Queen’s ANNE’S homesickness wore off, greatly helped in the wearing by her weekend visits home.
As long as the open weather lasted the Avonlea students went out to Carmody on the new branch railway every Friday night.
Diana and several other Avonlea young folks were generally on hand to meet them and they all walked over to Avonlea in a merry party.
Anne thought those Friday evening gypsyings over the autumnal hills in the crisp golden air, with the homelights of Avonlea twinkling beyond, were the best and dearest hours in the whole week.
Ruby was a very handsome young lady, now thinking herself quite as grown up as she really was; she wore her skirts as long as her mother would let her and did her hair up in town, though she had to take it down when she went home.
She had large, bright-blue eyes, a brilliant complexion, and a plump showy figure.
She laughed a great deal, was cheerful and good-tempered, and enjoyed the pleasant things of life frankly.
“But I shouldn’t think she was the sort of girl Gilbert would like,” whispered Jane to Anne.
Anne did not think so either, but she would not have said so for the Avery scholarship.
She could not help thinking, too, that it would be very pleasant to have such a friend as Gilbert to jest and chatter with and exchange ideas about books and studies and ambitions.
Gilbert had ambitions, she knew, and Ruby Gillis did not seem the sort of person with whom such could be profitably discussed.
There was no silly sentiment in Anne’s ideas concerning Gilbert.
Boys were to her, when she thought about them at all, merely possible good comrades.
She had a genius for friendship; girl friends she had in plenty; but she had a vague consciousness that masculine friendship might also be a good thing to round out one’s conceptions of companionship and furnish broader standpoints of judgment and comparison.
Not that Anne could have put her feelings on the matter into just such clear definition.
But she thought that if Gilbert had ever walked home with her from the train, over the crisp fields and along the ferny byways, they might have had many and merry and interesting conversations about the new world that was opening around them and their hopes and ambitions therein.
Gilbert was a clever young fellow, with his own thoughts about things and a determination to get the best out of life and put the best into it.
Ruby Gillis told Jane Andrews that she didn’t understand half the things Gilbert Blythe said; he talked just like Anne Shirley did when she had a thoughtful fit on and for her part she didn’t think it any fun to be bothering about books and that sort of thing when you didn’t have to.
Frank Stockley had lots more dash and go, but then he wasn’t half as good-looking as Gilbert and she really couldn’t decide which she liked best!
In the Academy Anne gradually drew a little circle of friends about her, thoughtful, imaginative, ambitious students like herself.
With the “rose-red” girl, Stella Maynard, and the “dream girl,” Priscilla Grant, she soon became intimate, finding the latter pale spiritual-looking maiden to be full to the brim of mischief and pranks and fun, while the vivid, black-eyed Stella had a heartful of wistful dreams and fancies, as aerial and rainbow-like as Anne’s own.
After the Christmas holidays the Avonlea students gave up going home on Fridays and settled down to hard work.
By this time all the Queen’s scholars had gravitated into their own places in the ranks and the various classes had assumed distinct and settled shadings of individuality.
Certain facts had become generally accepted.
It was admitted that the medal contestants had practically narrowed down to three--Gilbert Blythe, Anne Shirley, and Lewis Wilson; the Avery scholarship was more doubtful, any one of a certain six being a possible winner.
The bronze medal for mathematics was considered as good as won by a fat, funny little up-country boy with a bumpy forehead and a patched coat.
Ruby Gillis was the handsomest girl of the year at the Academy; in the Second Year classes Stella Maynard carried off the palm for beauty, with small but critical minority in favor of Anne Shirley.
Ethel Marr was admitted by all competent judges to have the most stylish modes of hair-dressing, and Jane Andrews--plain, plodding, conscientious Jane--carried off the honors in the domestic science course.
Even Josie Pye attained a certain preeminence as the sharpest-tongued young lady in attendance at Queen’s.
So it may be fairly stated that Miss Stacy’s old pupils held their own in the wider arena of the academical course.
Anne worked hard and steadily.
Her rivalry with Gilbert was as intense as it had ever been in Avonlea school, although it was not known in the class at large, but somehow the bitterness had gone out of it.
Anne no longer wished to win for the sake of defeating Gilbert; rather, for the proud consciousness of a well-won victory over a worthy foeman.
It would be worth while to win, but she no longer thought life would be insupportable if she did not.
In spite of lessons the students found opportunities for pleasant times.
Anne spent many of her spare hours at Beechwood and generally ate her Sunday dinners there and went to church with Miss Barry.
The latter was, as she admitted, growing old, but her black eyes were not dim nor the vigor of her tongue in the least abated.
But she never sharpened the latter on Anne, who continued to be a prime favorite with the critical old lady.
“That Anne-girl improves all the time,” she said.
“I get tired of other girls--there is such a provoking and eternal sameness about them.
Anne has as many shades as a rainbow and every shade is the prettiest while it lasts.
It saves me so much trouble in making myself love them.” Then, almost before anybody realized it, spring had come; out in Avonlea the Mayflowers were peeping pinkly out on the sere barrens where snow-wreaths lingered; and the “mist of green” was on the woods and in the valleys.
But in Charlottetown harassed Queen’s students thought and talked only of examinations.
“It doesn’t seem possible that the term is nearly over,” said Anne.
Girls, sometimes I feel as if those exams meant everything, but when I look at the big buds swelling on those chestnut trees and the misty blue air at the end of the streets they don’t seem half so important.” Jane and Ruby and Josie, who had dropped in, did not take this view of it.
To them the coming examinations were constantly very important indeed--far more important than chestnut buds or Maytime hazes.
It was all very well for Anne, who was sure of passing at least, to have her moments of belittling them, but when your whole future depended on them--as the girls truly thought theirs did--you could not regard them philosophically.
Worrying helps you some--it seems as if you were doing something when you’re worrying.
It would be dreadful if I failed to get my license after going to Queen’s all winter and spending so much money.” “_I_ don’t care,” said Josie Pye.
I’ve done my best and I begin to understand what is meant by the ‘joy of the strife.’ Next to trying and winning, the best thing is trying and failing.
Look at that arch of pale green sky over those houses and picture to yourself what it must look like over the purply-dark beech-woods back of Avonlea.” “What are you going to wear for commencement, Jane?” asked Ruby practically.
Jane and Josie both answered at once and the chatter drifted into a side eddy of fashions.
But Anne, with her elbows on the window sill, her soft cheek laid against her clasped hands, and her eyes filled with visions, looked out unheedingly across city roof and spire to that glorious dome of sunset sky and wove her dreams of a possible future from the golden tissue of youth’s own optimism.
All the Beyond was hers with its possibilities lurking rosily in the oncoming years--each year a rose of promise to be woven into an immortal chaplet.
The Glory and the Dream ON the morning when the final results of all the examinations were to be posted on the bulletin board at Queen’s, Anne and Jane walked down the street together.
Jane was smiling and happy; examinations were over and she was comfortably sure she had made a pass at least; further considerations troubled Jane not at all; she had no soaring ambitions and consequently was not affected with the unrest attendant thereon.
For we pay a price for everything we get or take in this world; and although ambitions are well worth having, they are not to be cheaply won, but exact their dues of work and self-denial, anxiety and discouragement.
Beyond those ten minutes there did not seem, just then, to be anything worth being called Time.
“Of course you’ll win one of them anyhow,” said Jane, who couldn’t understand how the faculty could be so unfair as to order it otherwise.
“Everybody says Emily Clay will win it.
And I’m not going to march up to that bulletin board and look at it before everybody.
I’m going straight to the girls’ dressing room.
You must read the announcements and then come and tell me, Jane.
And I implore you in the name of our old friendship to do it as quickly as possible.
If I have failed just say so, without trying to break it gently; and whatever you do _don’t_ sympathize with me.
Promise me this, Jane.” Jane promised solemnly; but, as it happened, there was no necessity for such a promise.
When they went up the entrance steps of Queen’s they found the hall full of boys who were carrying Gilbert Blythe around on their shoulders and yelling at the tops of their voices, “Hurrah for Blythe, Medalist!” For a moment Anne felt one sickening pang of defeat and disappointment.
Somebody called out: “Three cheers for Miss Shirley, winner of the Avery!” “Oh, Anne,” gasped Jane, as they fled to the girls’ dressing room amid hearty cheers.
Isn’t it splendid?” And then the girls were around them and Anne was the center of a laughing, congratulating group.
Her shoulders were thumped and her hands shaken vigorously.
I must write the news home right away.” Commencement was the next important happening.
The exercises were held in the big assembly hall of the Academy.
Addresses were given, essays read, songs sung, the public award of diplomas, prizes and medals made.
Matthew and Marilla were there, with eyes and ears for only one student on the platform--a tall girl in pale green, with faintly flushed cheeks and starry eyes, who read the best essay and was pointed out and whispered about as the Avery winner.
“Reckon you’re glad we kept her, Marilla?” whispered Matthew, speaking for the first time since he had entered the hall, when Anne had finished her essay.
“It’s not the first time I’ve been glad,” retorted Marilla.
“You do like to rub things in, Matthew Cuthbert.” Miss Barry, who was sitting behind them, leaned forward and poked Marilla in the back with her parasol.
The apple blossoms were out and the world was fresh and young.
In her own white room, where Marilla had set a flowering house rose on the window sill, Anne looked about her and drew a long breath of happiness.
Isn’t the breath of the mint delicious?
And it’s _good_ to see you again, Diana!” “I thought you liked that Stella Maynard better than me,” said Diana reproachfully.
Josie said you were _infatuated_ with her.” Anne laughed and pelted Diana with the faded “June lilies” of her bouquet.
I’m tired, I think--tired of being studious and ambitious.
I mean to spend at least two hours tomorrow lying out in the orchard grass, thinking of absolutely nothing.” “You’ve done splendidly, Anne.
I suppose you won’t be teaching now that you’ve won the Avery?” “No.
I’m going to Redmond in September.
Doesn’t it seem wonderful?
I’ll have a brand new stock of ambition laid in by that time after three glorious, golden months of vacation.
Isn’t it splendid to think we all got through even to Moody Spurgeon and Josie Pye?” “The Newbridge trustees have offered Jane their school already,” said Diana.
I expect he’ll get the school here if Miss Ames decides to leave.” Anne felt a queer little sensation of dismayed surprise.
She had not known this; she had expected that Gilbert would be going to Redmond also.
What would she do without their inspiring rivalry?
Would not work, even at a coeducational college with a real degree in prospect, be rather flat without her friend the enemy?
The next morning at breakfast it suddenly struck Anne that Matthew was not looking well.
“Marilla,” she said hesitatingly when he had gone out, “is Matthew quite well?” “No, he isn’t,” said Marilla in a troubled tone.
“You are not looking as well yourself as I’d like to see you, Marilla.
I’m just going to take this one day off to visit all the dear old spots and hunt up my old dreams, and then it will be your turn to be lazy while I do the work.” Marilla smiled affectionately at her girl.
There is a distinguished oculist coming to the Island the last of June and the doctor says I must see him.
To take First Class License in one year and win the Avery scholarship--well, well, Mrs.
Lynde says pride goes before a fall and she doesn’t believe in the higher education of women at all; she says it unfits them for woman’s true sphere.
Speaking of Rachel reminds me--did you hear anything about the Abbey Bank lately, Anne?” “I heard it was shaky,” answered Anne.
“He is a very old man; his nephews are really at the head of the institution.” “Well, when Rachel told us that, I wanted Matthew to draw our money right out and he said he’d think of it.
Russell told him yesterday that the bank was all right.” Anne had her good day in the companionship of the outdoor world.
Anne spent some of its rich hours in the orchard; she went to the Dryad’s Bubble and Willowmere and Violet Vale; she called at the manse and had a satisfying talk with Mrs.
The woods were all gloried through with sunset and the warm splendor of it streamed down through the hill gaps in the west.
Matthew walked slowly with bent head; Anne, tall and erect, suited her springing step to his.
“You’ve been working too hard today, Matthew,” she said reproachfully.
“It’s only that I’m getting old, Anne, and keep forgetting it.
Well, well, I’ve always worked pretty hard and I’d rather drop in harness.” “If I had been the boy you sent for,” said Anne wistfully, “I’d be able to help you so much now and spare you in a hundred ways.
Well now, I guess it wasn’t a boy that took the Avery scholarship, was it?
Anne took the memory of it with her when she went to her room that night and sat for a long while at her open window, thinking of the past and dreaming of the future.
Outside the Snow Queen was mistily white in the moonshine; the frogs were singing in the marsh beyond Orchard Slope.
Anne always remembered the silvery, peaceful beauty and fragrant calm of that night.
It was the last night before sorrow touched her life; and no life is ever quite the same again when once that cold, sanctifying touch has been laid upon it.
Anne came through the hall, her hands full of white narcissus,--it was long before Anne could love the sight or odor of white narcissus again,--in time to hear her and to see Matthew standing in the porch doorway, a folded paper in his hand, and his face strangely drawn and gray.
They were both too late; before they could reach him Matthew had fallen across the threshold.
They found Anne and Marilla distractedly trying to restore Matthew to consciousness.
She looked at their anxious faces sorrowfully and the tears came into her eyes.
“I don’t think--we can do anything for him.” “Mrs.
Lynde, you don’t think--you can’t think Matthew is--is--” Anne could not say the dreadful word; she turned sick and pallid.
When you’ve seen that look as often as I have you’ll know what it means.” Anne looked at the still face and there beheld the seal of the Great Presence.
When the doctor came he said that death had been instantaneous and probably painless, caused in all likelihood by some sudden shock.
The secret of the shock was discovered to be in the paper Matthew had held and which Martin had brought from the office that morning.
It contained an account of the failure of the Abbey Bank.
The news spread quickly through Avonlea, and all day friends and neighbors thronged Green Gables and came and went on errands of kindness for the dead and living.
For the first time shy, quiet Matthew Cuthbert was a person of central importance; the white majesty of death had fallen on him and set him apart as one crowned.
When the calm night came softly down over Green Gables the old house was hushed and tranquil.
In the parlor lay Matthew Cuthbert in his coffin, his long gray hair framing his placid face on which there was a little kindly smile as if he but slept, dreaming pleasant dreams.
There were flowers about him--sweet old-fashioned flowers which his mother had planted in the homestead garden in her bridal days and for which Matthew had always had a secret, wordless love.
Anne had gathered them and brought them to him, her anguished, tearless eyes burning in her white face.
Diana, going to the east gable, where Anne was standing at her window, said gently: “Anne dear, would you like to have me sleep with you tonight?” “Thank you, Diana.” Anne looked earnestly into her friend’s face.
“I think you won’t misunderstand me when I say I want to be alone.
I haven’t been alone one minute since it happened--and I want to be.
Half the time it seems to me that Matthew can’t be dead; and the other half it seems as if he must have been dead for a long time and I’ve had this horrible dull ache ever since.” Diana did not quite understand.
Marilla’s impassioned grief, breaking all the bounds of natural reserve and lifelong habit in its stormy rush, she could comprehend better than Anne’s tearless agony.
Anne hoped that the tears would come in solitude.
It seemed to her a terrible thing that she could not shed a tear for Matthew, whom she had loved so much and who had been so kind to her, Matthew who had walked with her last evening at sunset and was now lying in the dim room below with that awful peace on his brow.
But no tears came at first, even when she knelt by her window in the darkness and prayed, looking up to the stars beyond the hills--no tears, only the same horrible dull ache of misery that kept on aching until she fell asleep, worn out with the day’s pain and excitement.
In the night she awakened, with the stillness and the darkness about her, and the recollection of the day came over her like a wave of sorrow.
“It seems like disloyalty to Matthew, somehow, to find pleasure in these things now that he has gone,” she said wistfully to Mrs.
Allan one evening when they were together in the manse garden.
Allan, the world and life seem very beautiful and interesting to me for all.
Today Diana said something funny and I found myself laughing.
I thought when it happened I could never laugh again.
And it somehow seems as if I oughtn’t to.” “When Matthew was here he liked to hear you laugh and he liked to know that you found pleasure in the pleasant things around you,” said Mrs.
I am sure we should not shut our hearts against the healing influences that nature offers us.
But I can understand your feeling.
I think we all experience the same thing.
We resent the thought that anything can please us when someone we love is no longer here to share the pleasure with us, and we almost feel as if we were unfaithful to our sorrow when we find our interest in life returning to us.” “I was down to the graveyard to plant a rosebush on Matthew’s grave this afternoon,” said Anne dreamily.
“I took a slip of the little white Scotch rosebush his mother brought out from Scotland long ago; Matthew always liked those roses the best--they were so small and sweet on their thorny stems.
It made me feel glad that I could plant it by his grave--as if I were doing something that must please him in taking it there to be near him.
Marilla is all alone and she gets lonely at twilight.” “She will be lonelier still, I fear, when you go away again to college,” said Mrs.
The door was open behind them, held back by a big pink conch shell with hints of sea sunsets in its smooth inner convolutions.
Anne gathered some sprays of pale-yellow honeysuckle and put them in her hair.
She liked the delicious hint of fragrance, as some aerial benediction, above her every time she moved.
“He says that the specialist will be in town tomorrow and he insists that I must go in and have my eyes examined.
I’ll be more than thankful if the man can give me the right kind of glasses to suit my eyes.
I shall attend to the ironing and baking beautifully--you needn’t fear that I’ll starch the handkerchiefs or flavor the cake with liniment.” Marilla laughed.
“What a girl you were for making mistakes in them days, Anne.
I did use to think you were possessed.
I shall never forget it,” smiled Anne, touching the heavy braid of hair that was wound about her shapely head.
“I laugh a little now sometimes when I think what a worry my hair used to be to me--but I don’t laugh _much_, because it was a very real trouble then.
I did suffer terribly over my hair and my freckles.
My freckles are really gone; and people are nice enough to tell me my hair is auburn now--all but Josie Pye.
She informed me yesterday that she really thought it was redder than ever, or at least my black dress made it look redder, and she asked me if people who had red hair ever got used to having it.
I’ve made what I would once have called a heroic effort to like her, but Josie Pye won’t _be_ liked.” “Josie is a Pye,” said Marilla sharply, “so she can’t help being disagreeable.
I suppose people of that kind serve some useful purpose in society, but I must say I don’t know what it is any more than I know the use of thistles.
So are Moody Spurgeon and Charlie Sloane.
Jane and Ruby are going to teach and they have both got schools--Jane at Newbridge and Ruby at some place up west.” “Gilbert Blythe is going to teach too, isn’t he?” “Yes”--briefly.
“What a nice-looking fellow he is,” said Marilla absently.
People called him my beau.” Anne looked up with swift interest.
“Oh, Marilla--and what happened?--why didn’t you--” “We had a quarrel.
He never came back--the Blythes were all mighty independent.
I’ve always kind of wished I’d forgiven him when I had the chance.” “So you’ve had a bit of romance in your life, too,” said Anne softly.
But you never can tell about people from their outsides.
Everybody has forgot about me and John.
I’d forgotten myself.
The Bend in the Road MARILLA went to town the next day and returned in the evening.
Something in her dejected attitude struck a chill to Anne’s heart.
What did he say?” asked Anne anxiously.
He examined my eyes.
He says that if I give up all reading and sewing entirely and any kind of work that strains the eyes, and if I’m careful not to cry, and if I wear the glasses he’s given me he thinks my eyes may not get any worse and my headaches will be cured.
But if I don’t he says I’ll certainly be stone-blind in six months.
Anne, just think of it!” For a minute Anne, after her first quick exclamation of dismay, was silent.
If you are careful you won’t lose your sight altogether; and if his glasses cure your headaches it will be a great thing.” “I don’t call it much hope,” said Marilla bitterly.
“What am I to live for if I can’t read or sew or do anything like that?
And as for crying, I can’t help that when I get lonesome.
If you’ll get me a cup of tea I’ll be thankful.
Don’t say anything about this to any one for a spell yet, anyway.
I can’t bear that folks should come here to question and sympathize and talk about it.” When Marilla had eaten her lunch Anne persuaded her to go to bed.
Then Anne went herself to the east gable and sat down by her window in the darkness alone with her tears and her heaviness of heart.
She had looked her duty courageously in the face and found it a friend--as duty ever is when we meet it frankly.
One afternoon a few days later Marilla came slowly in from the front yard where she had been talking to a caller--a man whom Anne knew by sight as Sadler from Carmody.
Anne wondered what he could have been saying to bring that look to Marilla’s face.
There were tears in her eyes in defiance of the oculist’s prohibition and her voice broke as she said: “He heard that I was going to sell Green Gables and he wants to buy it.” “Buy it!
Buy Green Gables?” Anne wondered if she had heard aright.
I may lose my sight altogether; and anyway I’ll not be fit to run things.
Lynde advises me to sell the farm and board somewhere--with her I suppose.
It won’t bring much--it’s small and the buildings are old.
I’m thankful you’re provided for with that scholarship, Anne.
I’m sorry you won’t have a home to come to in your vacations, that’s all, but I suppose you’ll manage somehow.” Marilla broke down and wept bitterly.
“You mustn’t sell Green Gables,” said Anne resolutely.
But you can see for yourself.
I’d go crazy with trouble and loneliness.
I’m not going to take the scholarship.
I’ve been thinking and planning.
I’ve applied for the school here--but I don’t expect to get it for I understand the trustees have promised it to Gilbert Blythe.
Of course that won’t be quite as nice or convenient as if I had the Avonlea school.
You sha’n’t be dull or lonesome.
And we’ll be real cozy and happy here together, you and I.” Marilla had listened like a woman in a dream.
But I can’t let you sacrifice yourself so for me.
It would be terrible.” “Nonsense!” Anne laughed merrily.
“There is no sacrifice.
Don’t you worry about me a bit.” “But your ambitions--and--” “I’m just as ambitious as ever.
Only, I’ve changed the object of my ambitions.
I’m going to be a good teacher--and I’m going to save your eyesight.
I’ve been thinking them out for a week.
When I left Queen’s my future seemed to stretch out before me like a straight road.
I thought I could see along it for many a milestone.
It has a fascination of its own, that bend, Marilla.
I wonder how the road beyond it goes--what there is of green glory and soft, checkered light and shadows--what new landscapes--what new beauties--what curves and hills and valleys further on.” “I don’t feel as if I ought to let you give it up,” said Marilla, referring to the scholarship.
I’m sixteen and a half, ‘obstinate as a mule,’ as Mrs.
Nobody could love it as you and I do--so we must keep it.” “You blessed girl!” said Marilla, yielding.
I’ll make it up to you though, Anne.” When it became noised abroad in Avonlea that Anne Shirley had given up the idea of going to college and intended to stay home and teach there was a good deal of discussion over it.
She told Anne so in approving words that brought tears of pleasure to the girl’s eyes.
They liked to sit there when the twilight came down and the white moths flew about in the garden and the odor of mint filled the dewy air.
Rachel deposited her substantial person upon the stone bench by the door, behind which grew a row of tall pink and yellow hollyhocks, with a long breath of mingled weariness and relief.
It’s a great blessing not to be fat, Marilla.
I hope you appreciate it.
You’ve got as much education now as a woman can be comfortable with.
I don’t believe in girls going to college with the men and cramming their heads full of Latin and Greek and all that nonsense.” “But I’m going to study Latin and Greek just the same, Mrs.
Lynde,” said Anne laughing.
“I’m going to take my Arts course right here at Green Gables, and study everything that I would at college.” Mrs.
“Anne Shirley, you’ll kill yourself.” “Not a bit of it.
But I’ll have lots of spare time in the long winter evenings, and I’ve no vocation for fancy work.
The trustees have decided to give you the school.” “Mrs.
Lynde!” cried Anne, springing to her feet in her surprise.
“Why, I thought they had promised it to Gilbert Blythe!” “So they did.
But as soon as Gilbert heard that you had applied for it he went to them--they had a business meeting at the school last night, you know--and told them that he withdrew his application, and suggested that they accept yours.
Of course he knew how much you wanted to stay with Marilla, and I must say I think it was real kind and thoughtful in him, that’s what.
Real self-sacrificing, too, for he’ll have his board to pay at White Sands, and everybody knows he’s got to earn his own way through college.
So the trustees decided to take you.
I was tickled to death when Thomas came home and told me.” “I don’t feel that I ought to take it,” murmured Anne.
“I mean--I don’t think I ought to let Gilbert make such a sacrifice for--for me.” “I guess you can’t prevent him now.
He’s signed papers with the White Sands trustees.
There’s been some Pye or other going to Avonlea school for the last twenty years, and I guess their mission in life was to keep school teachers reminded that earth isn’t their home.
What does all that winking and blinking at the Barry gable mean?” “Diana is signaling for me to go over,” laughed Anne.
Excuse me while I run over and see what she wants.” Anne ran down the clover slope like a deer, and disappeared in the firry shadows of the Haunted Wood.
Lynde looked after her indulgently.
“There’s a good deal of the child about her yet in some ways.” “There’s a good deal more of the woman about her in others,” retorted Marilla, with a momentary return of her old crispness.
But crispness was no longer Marilla’s distinguishing characteristic.
“Marilla Cuthbert has got _mellow_.
That’s what.” Anne went to the little Avonlea graveyard the next evening to put fresh flowers on Matthew’s grave and water the Scotch rosebush.
She lingered there until dusk, liking the peace and calm of the little place, with its poplars whose rustle was like low, friendly speech, and its whispering grasses growing at will among the graves.
When she finally left it and walked down the long hill that sloped to the Lake of Shining Waters it was past sunset and all Avonlea lay before her in a dreamlike afterlight--“a haunt of ancient peace.” There was a freshness in the air as of a wind that had blown over honey-sweet fields of clover.
Home lights twinkled out here and there among the homestead trees.
Beyond lay the sea, misty and purple, with its haunting, unceasing murmur.
The west was a glory of soft mingled hues, and the pond reflected them all in still softer shadings.
The beauty of it all thrilled Anne’s heart, and she gratefully opened the gates of her soul to it.
“Dear old world,” she murmured, “you are very lovely, and I am glad to be alive in you.” Halfway down the hill a tall lad came whistling out of a gate before the Blythe homestead.
It was Gilbert, and the whistle died on his lips as he recognized Anne.
He lifted his cap courteously, but he would have passed on in silence, if Anne had not stopped and held out her hand.
It was very good of you--and I want you to know that I appreciate it.” Gilbert took the offered hand eagerly.
“It wasn’t particularly good of me at all, Anne.
Have you really forgiven me my old fault?” Anne laughed and tried unsuccessfully to withdraw her hand.
“I forgave you that day by the pond landing, although I didn’t know it.
What a stubborn little goose I was.
I’ve been--I may as well make a complete confession--I’ve been sorry ever since.” “We are going to be the best of friends,” said Gilbert, jubilantly.
You’ve thwarted destiny enough.
Come, I’m going to walk home with you.” Marilla looked curiously at Anne when the latter entered the kitchen.
“Who was that came up the lane with you, Anne?” “Gilbert Blythe,” answered Anne, vexed to find herself blushing.
But we have decided that it will be much more sensible to be good friends in the future.
But, you see, we have five years’ lost conversations to catch up with, Marilla.” Anne sat long at her window that night companioned by a glad content.
The stars twinkled over the pointed firs in the hollow and Diana’s light gleamed through the old gap.
Anne’s horizons had closed in since the night she had sat there after coming home from Queen’s; but if the path set before her feet was to be narrow she knew that flowers of quiet happiness would bloom along it.
The joy of sincere work and worthy aspiration and congenial friendship were to be hers; nothing could rob her of her birthright of fancy or her ideal world of dreams.
“‘God’s in his heaven, all’s right with the world,’” whispered Anne softly.
May it haunt their houses pleasantly, and no one wish to lay it.
Their faithful Friend and Servant, C.
CONTENTS Stave I: Marley's Ghost Stave II: The First of the Three Spirits Stave III: The Second of the Three Spirits Stave IV: The Last of the Spirits Stave V: The End of It STAVE I: MARLEY'S GHOST MARLEY was dead: to begin with.
There is no doubt whatever about that.
The register of his burial was signed by the clergyman, the clerk, the undertaker, and the chief mourner.
Scrooge signed it: and Scrooge's name was good upon 'Change, for anything he chose to put his hand to.
I don't mean to say that I know, of my own knowledge, what there is particularly dead about a door-nail.
I might have been inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest piece of ironmongery in the trade.
But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the simile; and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the Country's done for.
You will therefore permit me to repeat, emphatically, that Marley was as dead as a door-nail.
How could it be otherwise?
Scrooge and he were partners for I don't know how many years.
Scrooge was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his sole assign, his sole residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole mourner.
And even Scrooge was not so dreadfully cut up by the sad event, but that he was an excellent man of business on the very day of the funeral, and solemnised it with an undoubted bargain.
This must be distinctly understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I am going to relate.
If we were not perfectly convinced that Hamlet's Father died before the play began, there would be nothing more remarkable in his taking a stroll at night, in an easterly wind, upon his own ramparts, than there would be in any other middle-aged gentleman rashly turning out after dark in a breezy spot--say Saint Paul's Churchyard for instance-- literally to astonish his son's weak mind.
There it stood, years afterwards, above the warehouse door: Scrooge and Marley.
Sometimes people new to the business called Scrooge Scrooge, and sometimes Marley, but he answered to both names.
But he was a tight-fisted hand at the grind-stone, Scrooge! a squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old sinner!
Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck out generous fire; secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an oyster.
The cold within him froze his old features, nipped his pointed nose, shrivelled his cheek, stiffened his gait; made his eyes red, his thin lips blue; and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice.
A frosty rime was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry chin.
He carried his own low temperature always about with him; he iced his office in the dog-days; and didn't thaw it one degree at Christmas.
External heat and cold had little influence on Scrooge.
No wind that blew was bitterer than he, no falling snow was more intent upon its purpose, no pelting rain less open to entreaty.
The heaviest rain, and snow, and hail, and sleet, could boast of the advantage over him in only one respect.
They often "came down" handsomely, and Scrooge never did.
Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say, with gladsome looks, "My dear Scrooge, how are you?
When will you come to see me?" No beggars implored him to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what it was o'clock, no man or woman ever once in all his life inquired the way to such and such a place, of Scrooge.
Even the blind men's dogs appeared to know him; and when they saw him coming on, would tug their owners into doorways and up courts; and then would wag their tails as though they said, "No eye at all is better than an evil eye, dark master!" But what did Scrooge care!
To edge his way along the crowded paths of life, warning all human sympathy to keep its distance, was what the knowing ones call "nuts" to Scrooge.
Once upon a time--of all the good days in the year, on Christmas Eve--old Scrooge sat busy in his counting-house.
It was cold, bleak, biting weather: foggy withal: and he could hear the people in the court outside, go wheezing up and down, beating their hands upon their breasts, and stamping their feet upon the pavement stones to warm them.
The city clocks had only just gone three, but it was quite dark already-- it had not been light all day--and candles were flaring in the windows of the neighbouring offices, like ruddy smears upon the palpable brown air.
The fog came pouring in at every chink and keyhole, and was so dense without, that although the court was of the narrowest, the houses opposite were mere phantoms.
To see the dingy cloud come drooping down, obscuring everything, one might have thought that Nature lived hard by, and was brewing on a large scale.
The door of Scrooge's counting-house was open that he might keep his eye upon his clerk, who in a dismal little cell beyond, a sort of tank, was copying letters.
But he couldn't replenish it, for Scrooge kept the coal-box in his own room; and so surely as the clerk came in with the shovel, the master predicted that it would be necessary for them to part.
Wherefore the clerk put on his white comforter, and tried to warm himself at the candle; in which effort, not being a man of a strong imagination, he failed.
"A merry Christmas, uncle!
God save you!" cried a cheerful voice.
It was the voice of Scrooge's nephew, who came upon him so quickly that this was the first intimation he had of his approach.
"Bah!" said Scrooge, "Humbug!" He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost, this nephew of Scrooge's, that he was all in a glow; his face was ruddy and handsome; his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again.
"Christmas a humbug, uncle!" said Scrooge's nephew.
You're poor enough." "Come, then," returned the nephew gaily.
You're rich enough." Scrooge having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said, "Bah!" again; and followed it up with "Humbug." "Don't be cross, uncle!" said the nephew.
"What else can I be," returned the uncle, "when I live in such a world of fools as this?
Out upon merry Christmas!
What's Christmas time to you but a time for paying bills without money; a time for finding yourself a year older, but not an hour richer; a time for balancing your books and having every item in 'em through a round dozen of months presented dead against you?
If I could work my will," said Scrooge indignantly, "every idiot who goes about with 'Merry Christmas' on his lips, should be boiled with his own pudding, and buried with a stake of holly through his heart.
"Nephew!" returned the uncle sternly, "keep Christmas in your own way, and let me keep it in mine." "Keep it!" repeated Scrooge's nephew.
Much good it has ever done you!" "There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which I have not profited, I dare say," returned the nephew.
"Christmas among the rest.
And therefore, uncle, though it has never put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I believe that it has done me good, and will do me good; and I say, God bless it!" The clerk in the Tank involuntarily applauded.
Becoming immediately sensible of the impropriety, he poked the fire, and extinguished the last frail spark for ever.
"Let me hear another sound from you," said Scrooge, "and you'll keep your Christmas by losing your situation!
You're quite a powerful speaker, sir," he added, turning to his nephew.
"I wonder you don't go into Parliament." "Don't be angry, uncle.
He went the whole length of the expression, and said that he would see him in that extremity first.
"Because I fell in love." "Because you fell in love!" growled Scrooge, as if that were the only one thing in the world more ridiculous than a merry Christmas.
"Good afternoon!" "Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened.
Why give it as a reason for not coming now?" "Good afternoon," said Scrooge.
"I want nothing from you; I ask nothing of you; why cannot we be friends?" "Good afternoon," said Scrooge.
"I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute.
But I have made the trial in homage to Christmas, and I'll keep my Christmas humour to the last.
So A Merry Christmas, uncle!" "Good afternoon!" said Scrooge.
"And A Happy New Year!" "Good afternoon!" said Scrooge.
His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding.
He stopped at the outer door to bestow the greetings of the season on the clerk, who, cold as he was, was warmer than Scrooge; for he returned them cordially.
"There's another fellow," muttered Scrooge; who overheard him: "my clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking about a merry Christmas.
They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold, and now stood, with their hats off, in Scrooge's office.
"Scrooge and Marley's, I believe," said one of the gentlemen, referring to his list.
"Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr.
"He died seven years ago, this very night." "We have no doubt his liberality is well represented by his surviving partner," said the gentleman, presenting his credentials.
It certainly was; for they had been two kindred spirits.
At the ominous word "liberality," Scrooge frowned, and shook his head, and handed the credentials back.
Scrooge," said the gentleman, taking up a pen, "it is more than usually desirable that we should make some slight provision for the Poor and destitute, who suffer greatly at the present time.
Many thousands are in want of common necessaries; hundreds of thousands are in want of common comforts, sir." "Are there no prisons?" asked Scrooge.
"Plenty of prisons," said the gentleman, laying down the pen again.
"And the Union workhouses?" demanded Scrooge.
"Are they still in operation?" "They are.
Still," returned the gentleman, "I wish I could say they were not." "The Treadmill and the Poor Law are in full vigour, then?" said Scrooge.
I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had occurred to stop them in their useful course," said Scrooge.
"I'm very glad to hear it." "Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of mind or body to the multitude," returned the gentleman, "a few of us are endeavouring to raise a fund to buy the Poor some meat and drink, and means of warmth.
We choose this time, because it is a time, of all others, when Want is keenly felt, and Abundance rejoices.
"You wish to be anonymous?" "I wish to be left alone," said Scrooge.
"Since you ask me what I wish, gentlemen, that is my answer.
I don't make merry myself at Christmas and I can't afford to make idle people merry.
I help to support the establishments I have mentioned--they cost enough; and those who are badly off must go there." "Many can't go there; and many would rather die." "If they would rather die," said Scrooge, "they had better do it, and decrease the surplus population.
Besides--excuse me--I don't know that." "But you might know it," observed the gentleman.
"It's not my business," Scrooge returned.
"It's enough for a man to understand his own business, and not to interfere with other people's.
Mine occupies me constantly.
Good afternoon, gentlemen!" Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the gentlemen withdrew.
Scrooge resumed his labours with an improved opinion of himself, and in a more facetious temper than was usual with him.
Meanwhile the fog and darkness thickened so, that people ran about with flaring links, proffering their services to go before horses in carriages, and conduct them on their way.
The ancient tower of a church, whose gruff old bell was always peeping slily down at Scrooge out of a Gothic window in the wall, became invisible, and struck the hours and quarters in the clouds, with tremulous vibrations afterwards as if its teeth were chattering in its frozen head up there.
In the main street, at the corner of the court, some labourers were repairing the gas-pipes, and had lighted a great fire in a brazier, round which a party of ragged men and boys were gathered: warming their hands and winking their eyes before the blaze in rapture.
The water-plug being left in solitude, its overflowings sullenly congealed, and turned to misanthropic ice.
The brightness of the shops where holly sprigs and berries crackled in the lamp heat of the windows, made pale faces ruddy as they passed.
Poulterers' and grocers' trades became a splendid joke: a glorious pageant, with which it was next to impossible to believe that such dull principles as bargain and sale had anything to do.
The Lord Mayor, in the stronghold of the mighty Mansion House, gave orders to his fifty cooks and butlers to keep Christmas as a Lord Mayor's household should; and even the little tailor, whom he had fined five shillings on the previous Monday for being drunk and bloodthirsty in the streets, stirred up to-morrow's pudding in his garret, while his lean wife and the baby sallied out to buy the beef.
Piercing, searching, biting cold.
If the good Saint Dunstan had but nipped the Evil Spirit's nose with a touch of such weather as that, instead of using his familiar weapons, then indeed he would have roared to lusty purpose.
The owner of one scant young nose, gnawed and mumbled by the hungry cold as bones are gnawed by dogs, stooped down at Scrooge's keyhole to regale him with a Christmas carol: but at the first sound of "God bless you, merry gentleman!
May nothing you dismay!" Scrooge seized the ruler with such energy of action, that the singer fled in terror, leaving the keyhole to the fog and even more congenial frost.
At length the hour of shutting up the counting-house arrived.
With an ill-will Scrooge dismounted from his stool, and tacitly admitted the fact to the expectant clerk in the Tank, who instantly snuffed his candle out, and put on his hat.
"If quite convenient, sir." "It's not convenient," said Scrooge, "and it's not fair.
If I was to stop half-a-crown for it, you'd think yourself ill-used, I'll be bound?" The clerk smiled faintly.
"And yet," said Scrooge, "you don't think me ill-used, when I pay a day's wages for no work." The clerk observed that it was only once a year.
"A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty-fifth of December!" said Scrooge, buttoning his great-coat to the chin.
Be here all the earlier next morning." The clerk promised that he would; and Scrooge walked out with a growl.
The office was closed in a twinkling, and the clerk, with the long ends of his white comforter dangling below his waist (for he boasted no great-coat), went down a slide on Cornhill, at the end of a lane of boys, twenty times, in honour of its being Christmas Eve, and then ran home to Camden Town as hard as he could pelt, to play at blindman's-buff.
Scrooge took his melancholy dinner in his usual melancholy tavern; and having read all the newspapers, and beguiled the rest of the evening with his banker's-book, went home to bed.
He lived in chambers which had once belonged to his deceased partner.
They were a gloomy suite of rooms, in a lowering pile of building up a yard, where it had so little business to be, that one could scarcely help fancying it must have run there when it was a young house, playing at hide-and-seek with other houses, and forgotten the way out again.
The fog and frost so hung about the black old gateway of the house, that it seemed as if the Genius of the Weather sat in mournful meditation on the threshold.
Now, it is a fact, that there was nothing at all particular about the knocker on the door, except that it was very large.
It is also a fact, that Scrooge had seen it, night and morning, during his whole residence in that place; also that Scrooge had as little of what is called fancy about him as any man in the city of London, even including--which is a bold word--the corporation, aldermen, and livery.
Let it also be borne in mind that Scrooge had not bestowed one thought on Marley, since his last mention of his seven years' dead partner that afternoon.
And then let any man explain to me, if he can, how it happened that Scrooge, having his key in the lock of the door, saw in the knocker, without its undergoing any intermediate process of change--not a knocker, but Marley's face.
It was not in impenetrable shadow as the other objects in the yard were, but had a dismal light about it, like a bad lobster in a dark cellar.
It was not angry or ferocious, but looked at Scrooge as Marley used to look: with ghostly spectacles turned up on its ghostly forehead.
The hair was curiously stirred, as if by breath or hot air; and, though the eyes were wide open, they were perfectly motionless.
That, and its livid colour, made it horrible; but its horror seemed to be in spite of the face and beyond its control, rather than a part of its own expression.
As Scrooge looked fixedly at this phenomenon, it was a knocker again.
To say that he was not startled, or that his blood was not conscious of a terrible sensation to which it had been a stranger from infancy, would be untrue.
But he put his hand upon the key he had relinquished, turned it sturdily, walked in, and lighted his candle.
He did pause, with a moment's irresolution, before he shut the door; and he did look cautiously behind it first, as if he half expected to be terrified with the sight of Marley's pigtail sticking out into the hall.
The sound resounded through the house like thunder.
Every room above, and every cask in the wine-merchant's cellars below, appeared to have a separate peal of echoes of its own.
Scrooge was not a man to be frightened by echoes.
He fastened the door, and walked across the hall, and up the stairs; slowly too: trimming his candle as he went.
You may talk vaguely about driving a coach-and-six up a good old flight of stairs, or through a bad young Act of Parliament; but I mean to say you might have got a hearse up that staircase, and taken it broadwise, with the splinter-bar towards the wall and the door towards the balustrades: and done it easy.
There was plenty of width for that, and room to spare; which is perhaps the reason why Scrooge thought he saw a locomotive hearse going on before him in the gloom.
Darkness is cheap, and Scrooge liked it.
He had just enough recollection of the face to desire to do that.
Nobody under the table, nobody under the sofa; a small fire in the grate; spoon and basin ready; and the little saucepan of gruel (Scrooge had a cold in his head) upon the hob.
Nobody under the bed; nobody in the closet; nobody in his dressing-gown, which was hanging up in a suspicious attitude against the wall.
Quite satisfied, he closed his door, and locked himself in; double-locked himself in, which was not his custom.
Thus secured against surprise, he took off his cravat; put on his dressing-gown and slippers, and his nightcap; and sat down before the fire to take his gruel.
He was obliged to sit close to it, and brood over it, before he could extract the least sensation of warmth from such a handful of fuel.
The fireplace was an old one, built by some Dutch merchant long ago, and paved all round with quaint Dutch tiles, designed to illustrate the Scriptures.
There were Cains and Abels, Pharaoh's daughters; Queens of Sheba, Angelic messengers descending through the air on clouds like feather-beds, Abrahams, Belshazzars, Apostles putting off to sea in butter-boats, hundreds of figures to attract his thoughts; and yet that face of Marley, seven years dead, came like the ancient Prophet's rod, and swallowed up the whole.
If each smooth tile had been a blank at first, with power to shape some picture on its surface from the disjointed fragments of his thoughts, there would have been a copy of old Marley's head on every one.
As he threw his head back in the chair, his glance happened to rest upon a bell, a disused bell, that hung in the room, and communicated for some purpose now forgotten with a chamber in the highest story of the building.
It was with great astonishment, and with a strange, inexplicable dread, that as he looked, he saw this bell begin to swing.
It swung so softly in the outset that it scarcely made a sound; but soon it rang out loudly, and so did every bell in the house.
The bells ceased as they had begun, together.
They were succeeded by a clanking noise, deep down below; as if some person were dragging a heavy chain over the casks in the wine-merchant's cellar.
Scrooge then remembered to have heard that ghosts in haunted houses were described as dragging chains.
The cellar-door flew open with a booming sound, and then he heard the noise much louder, on the floors below; then coming up the stairs; then coming straight towards his door.
Marley in his pigtail, usual waistcoat, tights and boots; the tassels on the latter bristling, like his pigtail, and his coat-skirts, and the hair upon his head.
It was long, and wound about him like a tail; and it was made (for Scrooge observed it closely) of cash-boxes, keys, padlocks, ledgers, deeds, and heavy purses wrought in steel.
His body was transparent; so that Scrooge, observing him, and looking through his waistcoat, could see the two buttons on his coat behind.
Scrooge had often heard it said that Marley had no bowels, but he had never believed it until now.
Though he looked the phantom through and through, and saw it standing before him; though he felt the chilling influence of its death-cold eyes; and marked the very texture of the folded kerchief bound about its head and chin, which wrapper he had not observed before; he was still incredulous, and fought against his senses.
"You're particular, for a shade." He was going to say "to a shade," but substituted this, as more appropriate.
"In life I was your partner, Jacob Marley." "Can you--can you sit down?" asked Scrooge, looking doubtfully at him.
"I can." "Do it, then." Scrooge asked the question, because he didn't know whether a ghost so transparent might find himself in a condition to take a chair; and felt that in the event of its being impossible, it might involve the necessity of an embarrassing explanation.
But the ghost sat down on the opposite side of the fireplace, as if he were quite used to it.
"You don't believe in me," observed the Ghost.
"What evidence would you have of my reality beyond that of your senses?" "I don't know," said Scrooge.
A slight disorder of the stomach makes them cheats.
You may be an undigested bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an underdone potato.
There's more of gravy than of grave about you, whatever you are!" Scrooge was not much in the habit of cracking jokes, nor did he feel, in his heart, by any means waggish then.
The truth is, that he tried to be smart, as a means of distracting his own attention, and keeping down his terror; for the spectre's voice disturbed the very marrow in his bones.
There was something very awful, too, in the spectre's being provided with an infernal atmosphere of its own.
Scrooge could not feel it himself, but this was clearly the case; for though the Ghost sat perfectly motionless, its hair, and skirts, and tassels, were still agitated as by the hot vapour from an oven.
"You see this toothpick?" said Scrooge, returning quickly to the charge, for the reason just assigned; and wishing, though it were only for a second, to divert the vision's stony gaze from himself.
"But I see it," said the Ghost, "notwithstanding." "Well!" returned Scrooge, "I have but to swallow this, and be for the rest of my days persecuted by a legion of goblins, all of my own creation.
Humbug, I tell you! humbug!" At this the spirit raised a frightful cry, and shook its chain with such a dismal and appalling noise, that Scrooge held on tight to his chair, to save himself from falling in a swoon.
"Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?" "Man of the worldly mind!" replied the Ghost, "do you believe in me or not?" "I do," said Scrooge.
But why do spirits walk the earth, and why do they come to me?" "It is required of every man," the Ghost returned, "that the spirit within him should walk abroad among his fellowmen, and travel far and wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned to do so after death.
It is doomed to wander through the world--oh, woe is me!--and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!" Again the spectre raised a cry, and shook its chain and wrung its shadowy hands.
"You are fettered," said Scrooge, trembling.
Is its pattern strange to you?" Scrooge trembled more and more.
"Or would you know," pursued the Ghost, "the weight and length of the strong coil you bear yourself?
It was full as heavy and as long as this, seven Christmas Eves ago.
You have laboured on it, since.
It is a ponderous chain!" Scrooge glanced about him on the floor, in the expectation of finding himself surrounded by some fifty or sixty fathoms of iron cable: but he could see nothing.
"Jacob," he said, imploringly.
"It comes from other regions, Ebenezer Scrooge, and is conveyed by other ministers, to other kinds of men.
A very little more is all permitted to me.
I cannot rest, I cannot stay, I cannot linger anywhere.
My spirit never walked beyond our counting-house--mark me!--in life my spirit never roved beyond the narrow limits of our money-changing hole; and weary journeys lie before me!" It was a habit with Scrooge, whenever he became thoughtful, to put his hands in his breeches pockets.
Pondering on what the Ghost had said, he did so now, but without lifting up his eyes, or getting off his knees.
"You must have been very slow about it, Jacob," Scrooge observed, in a business-like manner, though with humility and deference.
"Slow!" the Ghost repeated.
"And travelling all the time!" "The whole time," said the Ghost.
Incessant torture of remorse." "You travel fast?" said Scrooge.
"You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years," said Scrooge.
The Ghost, on hearing this, set up another cry, and clanked its chain so hideously in the dead silence of the night, that the Ward would have been justified in indicting it for a nuisance.
"Oh! captive, bound, and double-ironed," cried the phantom, "not to know, that ages of incessant labour by immortal creatures, for this earth must pass into eternity before the good of which it is susceptible is all developed.
Not to know that any Christian spirit working kindly in its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find its mortal life too short for its vast means of usefulness.
Not to know that no space of regret can make amends for one life's opportunity misused!
Oh! such was I!" "But you were always a good man of business, Jacob," faltered Scrooge, who now began to apply this to himself.
"Business!" cried the Ghost, wringing its hands again.
"Mankind was my business.
The common welfare was my business; charity, mercy, forbearance, and benevolence, were, all, my business.
The dealings of my trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my business!" It held up its chain at arm's length, as if that were the cause of all its unavailing grief, and flung it heavily upon the ground again.
Were there no poor homes to which its light would have conducted me!" Scrooge was very much dismayed to hear the spectre going on at this rate, and began to quake exceedingly.
I have sat invisible beside you many and many a day." It was not an agreeable idea.
Scrooge shivered, and wiped the perspiration from his brow.
"I am here to-night to warn you, that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping my fate.
A chance and hope of my procuring, Ebenezer." "You were always a good friend to me," said Scrooge.
"Thank'ee!" "You will be haunted," resumed the Ghost, "by Three Spirits." Scrooge's countenance fell almost as low as the Ghost's had done.
"Is that the chance and hope you mentioned, Jacob?" he demanded, in a faltering voice.
Look to see me no more; and look that, for your own sake, you remember what has passed between us!" When it had said these words, the spectre took its wrapper from the table, and bound it round its head, as before.
Scrooge knew this, by the smart sound its teeth made, when the jaws were brought together by the bandage.
He ventured to raise his eyes again, and found his supernatural visitor confronting him in an erect attitude, with its chain wound over and about its arm.
The apparition walked backward from him; and at every step it took, the window raised itself a little, so that when the spectre reached it, it was wide open.
It beckoned Scrooge to approach, which he did.
Not so much in obedience, as in surprise and fear: for on the raising of the hand, he became sensible of confused noises in the air; incoherent sounds of lamentation and regret; wailings inexpressibly sorrowful and self-accusatory.
The spectre, after listening for a moment, joined in the mournful dirge; and floated out upon the bleak, dark night.
Scrooge followed to the window: desperate in his curiosity.
The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in restless haste, and moaning as they went.
Every one of them wore chains like Marley's Ghost; some few (they might be guilty governments) were linked together; none were free.
Many had been personally known to Scrooge in their lives.
He had been quite familiar with one old ghost, in a white waistcoat, with a monstrous iron safe attached to its ankle, who cried piteously at being unable to assist a wretched woman with an infant, whom it saw below, upon a door-step.
The misery with them all was, clearly, that they sought to interfere, for good, in human matters, and had lost the power for ever.
Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he could not tell.
But they and their spirit voices faded together; and the night became as it had been when he walked home.
Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the Ghost had entered.
It was double-locked, as he had locked it with his own hands, and the bolts were undisturbed.
He tried to say "Humbug!" but stopped at the first syllable.
And being, from the emotion he had undergone, or the fatigues of the day, or his glimpse of the Invisible World, or the dull conversation of the Ghost, or the lateness of the hour, much in need of repose; went straight to bed, without undressing, and fell asleep upon the instant.
STAVE II: THE FIRST OF THE THREE SPIRITS WHEN Scrooge awoke, it was so dark, that looking out of bed, he could scarcely distinguish the transparent window from the opaque walls of his chamber.
He was endeavouring to pierce the darkness with his ferret eyes, when the chimes of a neighbouring church struck the four quarters.
So he listened for the hour.
To his great astonishment the heavy bell went on from six to seven, and from seven to eight, and regularly up to twelve; then stopped.
He touched the spring of his repeater, to correct this most preposterous clock.
"Why, it isn't possible," said Scrooge, "that I can have slept through a whole day and far into another night.
It isn't possible that anything has happened to the sun, and this is twelve at noon!" The idea being an alarming one, he scrambled out of bed, and groped his way to the window.
He was obliged to rub the frost off with the sleeve of his dressing-gown before he could see anything; and could see very little then.
All he could make out was, that it was still very foggy and extremely cold, and that there was no noise of people running to and fro, and making a great stir, as there unquestionably would have been if night had beaten off bright day, and taken possession of the world.
This was a great relief, because "three days after sight of this First of Exchange pay to Mr.
Ebenezer Scrooge or his order," and so forth, would have become a mere United States' security if there were no days to count by.
The more he thought, the more perplexed he was; and the more he endeavoured not to think, the more he thought.
Marley's Ghost bothered him exceedingly.
He resolved to lie awake until the hour was passed; and, considering that he could no more go to sleep than go to Heaven, this was perhaps the wisest resolution in his power.
The quarter was so long, that he was more than once convinced he must have sunk into a doze unconsciously, and missed the clock.
At length it broke upon his listening ear.
"Ding, dong!" "A quarter past," said Scrooge, counting.
"Ding, dong!" "The hour itself," said Scrooge, triumphantly, "and nothing else!" He spoke before the hour bell sounded, which it now did with a deep, dull, hollow, melancholy ONE.
Light flashed up in the room upon the instant, and the curtains of his bed were drawn.
The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, I tell you, by a hand.
Not the curtains at his feet, nor the curtains at his back, but those to which his face was addressed.
The curtains of his bed were drawn aside; and Scrooge, starting up into a half-recumbent attitude, found himself face to face with the unearthly visitor who drew them: as close to it as I am now to you, and I am standing in the spirit at your elbow.
It was a strange figure--like a child: yet not so like a child as like an old man, viewed through some supernatural medium, which gave him the appearance of having receded from the view, and being diminished to a child's proportions.
Its hair, which hung about its neck and down its back, was white as if with age; and yet the face had not a wrinkle in it, and the tenderest bloom was on the skin.
The arms were very long and muscular; the hands the same, as if its hold were of uncommon strength.
Its legs and feet, most delicately formed, were, like those upper members, bare.
It wore a tunic of the purest white; and round its waist was bound a lustrous belt, the sheen of which was beautiful.
It held a branch of fresh green holly in its hand; and, in singular contradiction of that wintry emblem, had its dress trimmed with summer flowers.
But the strangest thing about it was, that from the crown of its head there sprung a bright clear jet of light, by which all this was visible; and which was doubtless the occasion of its using, in its duller moments, a great extinguisher for a cap, which it now held under its arm.
Even this, though, when Scrooge looked at it with increasing steadiness, was not its strangest quality.
And in the very wonder of this, it would be itself again; distinct and clear as ever.
"Are you the Spirit, sir, whose coming was foretold to me?" asked Scrooge.
Singularly low, as if instead of being so close beside him, it were at a distance.
"Who, and what are you?" Scrooge demanded.
"I am the Ghost of Christmas Past." "Long Past?" inquired Scrooge: observant of its dwarfish stature.
"What!" exclaimed the Ghost, "would you so soon put out, with worldly hands, the light I give?
Is it not enough that you are one of those whose passions made this cap, and force me through whole trains of years to wear it low upon my brow!" Scrooge reverently disclaimed all intention to offend or any knowledge of having wilfully "bonneted" the Spirit at any period of his life.
He then made bold to inquire what business brought him there.
Scrooge expressed himself much obliged, but could not help thinking that a night of unbroken rest would have been more conducive to that end.
The Spirit must have heard him thinking, for it said immediately: "Your reclamation, then.
"Rise! and walk with me!" It would have been in vain for Scrooge to plead that the weather and the hour were not adapted to pedestrian purposes; that bed was warm, and the thermometer a long way below freezing; that he was clad but lightly in his slippers, dressing-gown, and nightcap; and that he had a cold upon him at that time.
The grasp, though gentle as a woman's hand, was not to be resisted.
He rose: but finding that the Spirit made towards the window, clasped his robe in supplication.
"I am a mortal," Scrooge remonstrated, "and liable to fall." "Bear but a touch of my hand there," said the Spirit, laying it upon his heart, "and you shall be upheld in more than this!" As the words were spoken, they passed through the wall, and stood upon an open country road, with fields on either hand.
The city had entirely vanished.
The darkness and the mist had vanished with it, for it was a clear, cold, winter day, with snow upon the ground.
"Good Heaven!" said Scrooge, clasping his hands together, as he looked about him.
Its gentle touch, though it had been light and instantaneous, appeared still present to the old man's sense of feeling.
He was conscious of a thousand odours floating in the air, each one connected with a thousand thoughts, and hopes, and joys, and cares long, long, forgotten!
"Your lip is trembling," said the Ghost.
"And what is that upon your cheek?" Scrooge muttered, with an unusual catching in his voice, that it was a pimple; and begged the Ghost to lead him where he would.
"You recollect the way?" inquired the Spirit.
"Remember it!" cried Scrooge with fervour; "I could walk it blindfold." "Strange to have forgotten it for so many years!" observed the Ghost.
"Let us go on." They walked along the road, Scrooge recognising every gate, and post, and tree; until a little market-town appeared in the distance, with its bridge, its church, and winding river.
Some shaggy ponies now were seen trotting towards them with boys upon their backs, who called to other boys in country gigs and carts, driven by farmers.
"They have no consciousness of us." The jocund travellers came on; and as they came, Scrooge knew and named them every one.
Why was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see them!
Why was he filled with gladness when he heard them give each other Merry Christmas, as they parted at cross-roads and bye-ways, for their several homes!
What was merry Christmas to Scrooge?
"The school is not quite deserted," said the Ghost.
"A solitary child, neglected by his friends, is left there still." Scrooge said he knew it.
They left the high-road, by a well-remembered lane, and soon approached a mansion of dull red brick, with a little weathercock-surmounted cupola, on the roof, and a bell hanging in it.
It was a large house, but one of broken fortunes; for the spacious offices were little used, their walls were damp and mossy, their windows broken, and their gates decayed.
Fowls clucked and strutted in the stables; and the coach-houses and sheds were over-run with grass.
Nor was it more retentive of its ancient state, within; for entering the dreary hall, and glancing through the open doors of many rooms, they found them poorly furnished, cold, and vast.
There was an earthy savour in the air, a chilly bareness in the place, which associated itself somehow with too much getting up by candle-light, and not too much to eat.
It opened before them, and disclosed a long, bare, melancholy room, made barer still by lines of plain deal forms and desks.
At one of these a lonely boy was reading near a feeble fire; and Scrooge sat down upon a form, and wept to see his poor forgotten self as he used to be.
Suddenly a man, in foreign garments: wonderfully real and distinct to look at: stood outside the window, with an axe stuck in his belt, and leading by the bridle an ass laden with wood.
"Why, it's Ali Baba!" Scrooge exclaimed in ecstasy.
One Christmas time, when yonder solitary child was left here all alone, he did come, for the first time, just like that.
And Valentine," said Scrooge, "and his wild brother, Orson; there they go!
And what's his name, who was put down in his drawers, asleep, at the Gate of Damascus; don't you see him!
What business had he to be married to the Princess!" To hear Scrooge expending all the earnestness of his nature on such subjects, in a most extraordinary voice between laughing and crying; and to see his heightened and excited face; would have been a surprise to his business friends in the city, indeed.
Poor Robin Crusoe, he called him, when he came home again after sailing round the island. 'Poor Robin Crusoe, where have you been, Robin Crusoe?' The man thought he was dreaming, but he wasn't.
Halloo!" Then, with a rapidity of transition very foreign to his usual character, he said, in pity for his former self, "Poor boy!" and cried again.
"I wish," Scrooge muttered, putting his hand in his pocket, and looking about him, after drying his eyes with his cuff: "but it's too late now." "What is the matter?" asked the Spirit.
There was a boy singing a Christmas Carol at my door last night.
I should like to have given him something: that's all." The Ghost smiled thoughtfully, and waved its hand: saying as it did so, "Let us see another Christmas!" Scrooge's former self grew larger at the words, and the room became a little darker and more dirty.
The panels shrunk, the windows cracked; fragments of plaster fell out of the ceiling, and the naked laths were shown instead; but how all this was brought about, Scrooge knew no more than you do.
He only knew that it was quite correct; that everything had happened so; that there he was, alone again, when all the other boys had gone home for the jolly holidays.
He was not reading now, but walking up and down despairingly.
Scrooge looked at the Ghost, and with a mournful shaking of his head, glanced anxiously towards the door.
It opened; and a little girl, much younger than the boy, came darting in, and putting her arms about his neck, and often kissing him, addressed him as her "Dear, dear brother." "I have come to bring you home, dear brother!" said the child, clapping her tiny hands, and bending down to laugh.
"To bring you home, home, home!" "Home, little Fan?" returned the boy.
And you're to be a man!" said the child, opening her eyes, "and are never to come back here; but first, we're to be together all the Christmas long, and have the merriest time in all the world." "You are quite a woman, little Fan!" exclaimed the boy.
Then she began to drag him, in her childish eagerness, towards the door; and he, nothing loth to go, accompanied her.
A terrible voice in the hall cried, "Bring down Master Scrooge's box, there!" and in the hall appeared the schoolmaster himself, who glared on Master Scrooge with a ferocious condescension, and threw him into a dreadful state of mind by shaking hands with him.
He then conveyed him and his sister into the veriest old well of a shivering best-parlour that ever was seen, where the maps upon the wall, and the celestial and terrestrial globes in the windows, were waxy with cold.
Here he produced a decanter of curiously light wine, and a block of curiously heavy cake, and administered instalments of those dainties to the young people: at the same time, sending out a meagre servant to offer a glass of "something" to the postboy, who answered that he thanked the gentleman, but if it was the same tap as he had tasted before, he had rather not.
Master Scrooge's trunk being by this time tied on to the top of the chaise, the children bade the schoolmaster good-bye right willingly; and getting into it, drove gaily down the garden-sweep: the quick wheels dashing the hoar-frost and snow from off the dark leaves of the evergreens like spray.
"Always a delicate creature, whom a breath might have withered," said the Ghost.
God forbid!" "She died a woman," said the Ghost, "and had, as I think, children." "One child," Scrooge returned.
"Your nephew!" Scrooge seemed uneasy in his mind; and answered briefly, "Yes." Although they had but that moment left the school behind them, they were now in the busy thoroughfares of a city, where shadowy passengers passed and repassed; where shadowy carts and coaches battled for the way, and all the strife and tumult of a real city were.
It was made plain enough, by the dressing of the shops, that here too it was Christmas time again; but it was evening, and the streets were lighted up.
The Ghost stopped at a certain warehouse door, and asked Scrooge if he knew it.
"Was I apprenticed here!" They went in.
At sight of an old gentleman in a Welsh wig, sitting behind such a high desk, that if he had been two inches taller he must have knocked his head against the ceiling, Scrooge cried in great excitement: "Why, it's old Fezziwig!
Bless his heart; it's Fezziwig alive again!" Old Fezziwig laid down his pen, and looked up at the clock, which pointed to the hour of seven.
He rubbed his hands; adjusted his capacious waistcoat; laughed all over himself, from his shoes to his organ of benevolence; and called out in a comfortable, oily, rich, fat, jovial voice: "Yo ho, there!
Dick!" Scrooge's former self, now grown a young man, came briskly in, accompanied by his fellow-'prentice.
He was very much attached to me, was Dick.
Dear, dear!" "Yo ho, my boys!" said Fezziwig.
Christmas Eve, Dick.
Christmas, Ebenezer!
Let's have the shutters up," cried old Fezziwig, with a sharp clap of his hands, "before a man can say Jack Robinson!" You wouldn't believe how those two fellows went at it!
They charged into the street with the shutters--one, two, three--had 'em up in their places--four, five, six--barred 'em and pinned 'em--seven, eight, nine--and came back before you could have got to twelve, panting like race-horses.
"Hilli-ho!" cried old Fezziwig, skipping down from the high desk, with wonderful agility.
Chirrup, Ebenezer!" Clear away!
There was nothing they wouldn't have cleared away, or couldn't have cleared away, with old Fezziwig looking on.
Every movable was packed off, as if it were dismissed from public life for evermore; the floor was swept and watered, the lamps were trimmed, fuel was heaped upon the fire; and the warehouse was as snug, and warm, and dry, and bright a ball-room, as you would desire to see upon a winter's night.
In came a fiddler with a music-book, and went up to the lofty desk, and made an orchestra of it, and tuned like fifty stomach-aches.
Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile.
In came the three Miss Fezziwigs, beaming and lovable.
In came the six young followers whose hearts they broke.
In came all the young men and women employed in the business.
In came the housemaid, with her cousin, the baker.
In came the cook, with her brother's particular friend, the milkman.
In came the boy from over the way, who was suspected of not having board enough from his master; trying to hide himself behind the girl from next door but one, who was proved to have had her ears pulled by her mistress.
In they all came, one after another; some shyly, some boldly, some gracefully, some awkwardly, some pushing, some pulling; in they all came, anyhow and everyhow.
Away they all went, twenty couple at once; hands half round and back again the other way; down the middle and up again; round and round in various stages of affectionate grouping; old top couple always turning up in the wrong place; new top couple starting off again, as soon as they got there; all top couples at last, and not a bottom one to help them!
When this result was brought about, old Fezziwig, clapping his hands to stop the dance, cried out, "Well done!" and the fiddler plunged his hot face into a pot of porter, especially provided for that purpose.
But scorning rest, upon his reappearance, he instantly began again, though there were no dancers yet, as if the other fiddler had been carried home, exhausted, on a shutter, and he were a bran-new man resolved to beat him out of sight, or perish.
There were more dances, and there were forfeits, and more dances, and there was cake, and there was negus, and there was a great piece of Cold Roast, and there was a great piece of Cold Boiled, and there were mince-pies, and plenty of beer.
The sort of man who knew his business better than you or I could have told it him!) struck up "Sir Roger de Coverley." Then old Fezziwig stood out to dance with Mrs.
Top couple, too; with a good stiff piece of work cut out for them; three or four and twenty pair of partners; people who were not to be trifled with; people who would dance, and had no notion of walking.
But if they had been twice as many--ah, four times--old Fezziwig would have been a match for them, and so would Mrs.
A positive light appeared to issue from Fezziwig's calves.
You couldn't have predicted, at any given time, what would have become of them next.
And when old Fezziwig and Mrs.
Fezziwig had gone all through the dance; advance and retire, both hands to your partner, bow and curtsey, corkscrew, thread-the-needle, and back again to your place; Fezziwig "cut"--cut so deftly, that he appeared to wink with his legs, and came upon his feet again without a stagger.
When the clock struck eleven, this domestic ball broke up.
Fezziwig took their stations, one on either side of the door, and shaking hands with every person individually as he or she went out, wished him or her a Merry Christmas.
When everybody had retired but the two 'prentices, they did the same to them; and thus the cheerful voices died away, and the lads were left to their beds; which were under a counter in the back-shop.
He corroborated everything, remembered everything, enjoyed everything, and underwent the strangest agitation.
It was not until now, when the bright faces of his former self and Dick were turned from them, that he remembered the Ghost, and became conscious that it was looking full upon him, while the light upon its head burnt very clear.
"A small matter," said the Ghost, "to make these silly folks so full of gratitude." "Small!" echoed Scrooge.
The Spirit signed to him to listen to the two apprentices, who were pouring out their hearts in praise of Fezziwig: and when he had done so, said, "Why!
Is that so much that he deserves this praise?" "It isn't that," said Scrooge, heated by the remark, and speaking unconsciously like his former, not his latter, self.
He has the power to render us happy or unhappy; to make our service light or burdensome; a pleasure or a toil.
Say that his power lies in words and looks; in things so slight and insignificant that it is impossible to add and count 'em up: what then?
The happiness he gives, is quite as great as if it cost a fortune." He felt the Spirit's glance, and stopped.
"Nothing particular," said Scrooge.
"Something, I think?" the Ghost insisted.
That's all." His former self turned down the lamps as he gave utterance to the wish; and Scrooge and the Ghost again stood side by side in the open air.
"My time grows short," observed the Spirit.
"Quick!" This was not addressed to Scrooge, or to any one whom he could see, but it produced an immediate effect.
There was an eager, greedy, restless motion in the eye, which showed the passion that had taken root, and where the shadow of the growing tree would fall.
He was not alone, but sat by the side of a fair young girl in a mourning-dress: in whose eyes there were tears, which sparkled in the light that shone out of the Ghost of Christmas Past.
Another idol has displaced me; and if it can cheer and comfort you in time to come, as I would have tried to do, I have no just cause to grieve." "What Idol has displaced you?" he rejoined.
"There is nothing on which it is so hard as poverty; and there is nothing it professes to condemn with such severity as the pursuit of wealth!" "You fear the world too much," she answered, gently.
"All your other hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its sordid reproach.
I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off one by one, until the master-passion, Gain, engrosses you.
Have I not?" "What then?" he retorted.
"Am I?" "Our contract is an old one.
It was made when we were both poor and content to be so, until, in good season, we could improve our worldly fortune by our patient industry.
When it was made, you were another man." "I was a boy," he said impatiently.
"Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are," she returned.
That which promised happiness when we were one in heart, is fraught with misery now that we are two.
Never." "In what, then?" "In a changed nature; in an altered spirit; in another atmosphere of life; another Hope as its great end.
In everything that made my love of any worth or value in your sight.
If this had never been between us," said the girl, looking mildly, but with steadiness, upon him; "tell me, would you seek me out and try to win me now?
Ah, no!" He seemed to yield to the justice of this supposition, in spite of himself.
But he said with a struggle, "You think not." "I would gladly think otherwise if I could," she answered, "Heaven knows!
When I have learned a Truth like this, I know how strong and irresistible it must be.
But if you were free to-day, to-morrow, yesterday, can even I believe that you would choose a dowerless girl--you who, in your very confidence with her, weigh everything by Gain: or, choosing her, if for a moment you were false enough to your one guiding principle to do so, do I not know that your repentance and regret would surely follow?
A very, very brief time, and you will dismiss the recollection of it, gladly, as an unprofitable dream, from which it happened well that you awoke.
Why do you delight to torture me?" "One shadow more!" exclaimed the Ghost.
Show me no more!" But the relentless Ghost pinioned him in both his arms, and forced him to observe what happened next.
They were in another scene and place; a room, not very large or handsome, but full of comfort.
Near to the winter fire sat a beautiful young girl, so like that last that Scrooge believed it was the same, until he saw her, now a comely matron, sitting opposite her daughter.
The noise in this room was perfectly tumultuous, for there were more children there, than Scrooge in his agitated state of mind could count; and, unlike the celebrated herd in the poem, they were not forty children conducting themselves like one, but every child was conducting itself like forty.
The consequences were uproarious beyond belief; but no one seemed to care; on the contrary, the mother and daughter laughed heartily, and enjoyed it very much; and the latter, soon beginning to mingle in the sports, got pillaged by the young brigands most ruthlessly.
I wouldn't for the wealth of all the world have crushed that braided hair, and torn it down; and for the precious little shoe, I wouldn't have plucked it off, God bless my soul! to save my life.
As to measuring her waist in sport, as they did, bold young brood, I couldn't have done it; I should have expected my arm to have grown round it for a punishment, and never come straight again.
But now a knocking at the door was heard, and such a rush immediately ensued that she with laughing face and plundered dress was borne towards it the centre of a flushed and boisterous group, just in time to greet the father, who came home attended by a man laden with Christmas toys and presents.
Then the shouting and the struggling, and the onslaught that was made on the defenceless porter!
The scaling him with chairs for ladders to dive into his pockets, despoil him of brown-paper parcels, hold on tight by his cravat, hug him round his neck, pommel his back, and kick his legs in irrepressible affection!
The shouts of wonder and delight with which the development of every package was received!
The terrible announcement that the baby had been taken in the act of putting a doll's frying-pan into his mouth, and was more than suspected of having swallowed a fictitious turkey, glued on a wooden platter!
The joy, and gratitude, and ecstasy!
They are all indescribable alike.
It is enough that by degrees the children and their emotions got out of the parlour, and by one stair at a time, up to the top of the house; where they went to bed, and so subsided.
And now Scrooge looked on more attentively than ever, when the master of the house, having his daughter leaning fondly on him, sat down with her and her mother at his own fireside; and when he thought that such another creature, quite as graceful and as full of promise, might have called him father, and been a spring-time in the haggard winter of his life, his sight grew very dim indeed.
"Belle," said the husband, turning to his wife with a smile, "I saw an old friend of yours this afternoon." "Who was it?" "Guess!" "How can I?
Tut, don't I know?" she added in the same breath, laughing as he laughed.
I passed his office window; and as it was not shut up, and he had a candle inside, I could scarcely help seeing him.
"That they are what they are, do not blame me!" "Remove me!" Scrooge exclaimed, "I cannot bear it!" He turned upon the Ghost, and seeing that it looked upon him with a face, in which in some strange way there were fragments of all the faces it had shown him, wrestled with it.
Haunt me no longer!" In the struggle, if that can be called a struggle in which the Ghost with no visible resistance on its own part was undisturbed by any effort of its adversary, Scrooge observed that its light was burning high and bright; and dimly connecting that with its influence over him, he seized the extinguisher-cap, and by a sudden action pressed it down upon its head.
The Spirit dropped beneath it, so that the extinguisher covered its whole form; but though Scrooge pressed it down with all his force, he could not hide the light: which streamed from under it, in an unbroken flood upon the ground.
He was conscious of being exhausted, and overcome by an irresistible drowsiness; and, further, of being in his own bedroom.
STAVE III: THE SECOND OF THE THREE SPIRITS AWAKING in the middle of a prodigiously tough snore, and sitting up in bed to get his thoughts together, Scrooge had no occasion to be told that the bell was again upon the stroke of One.
He felt that he was restored to consciousness in the right nick of time, for the especial purpose of holding a conference with the second messenger despatched to him through Jacob Marley's intervention.
But finding that he turned uncomfortably cold when he began to wonder which of his curtains this new spectre would draw back, he put them every one aside with his own hands; and lying down again, established a sharp look-out all round the bed.
For he wished to challenge the Spirit on the moment of its appearance, and did not wish to be taken by surprise, and made nervous.
Gentlemen of the free-and-easy sort, who plume themselves on being acquainted with a move or two, and being usually equal to the time-of-day, express the wide range of their capacity for adventure by observing that they are good for anything from pitch-and-toss to manslaughter; between which opposite extremes, no doubt, there lies a tolerably wide and comprehensive range of subjects.
Without venturing for Scrooge quite as hardily as this, I don't mind calling on you to believe that he was ready for a good broad field of strange appearances, and that nothing between a baby and rhinoceros would have astonished him very much.
Now, being prepared for almost anything, he was not by any means prepared for nothing; and, consequently, when the Bell struck One, and no shape appeared, he was taken with a violent fit of trembling.
At last, however, he began to think--as you or I would have thought at first; for it is always the person not in the predicament who knows what ought to have been done in it, and would unquestionably have done it too--at last, I say, he began to think that the source and secret of this ghostly light might be in the adjoining room, from whence, on further tracing it, it seemed to shine.
This idea taking full possession of his mind, he got up softly and shuffled in his slippers to the door.
But it had undergone a surprising transformation.
The walls and ceiling were so hung with living green, that it looked a perfect grove; from every part of which, bright gleaming berries glistened.
The crisp leaves of holly, mistletoe, and ivy reflected back the light, as if so many little mirrors had been scattered there; and such a mighty blaze went roaring up the chimney, as that dull petrification of a hearth had never known in Scrooge's time, or Marley's, or for many and many a winter season gone.
Heaped up on the floor, to form a kind of throne, were turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, great joints of meat, sucking-pigs, long wreaths of sausages, mince-pies, plum-puddings, barrels of oysters, red-hot chestnuts, cherry-cheeked apples, juicy oranges, luscious pears, immense twelfth-cakes, and seething bowls of punch, that made the chamber dim with their delicious steam.
In easy state upon this couch, there sat a jolly Giant, glorious to see; who bore a glowing torch, in shape not unlike Plenty's horn, and held it up, high up, to shed its light on Scrooge, as he came peeping round the door.
"Come in!" exclaimed the Ghost.
"I am the Ghost of Christmas Present," said the Spirit.
"Look upon me!" Scrooge reverently did so.
It was clothed in one simple green robe, or mantle, bordered with white fur.
This garment hung so loosely on the figure, that its capacious breast was bare, as if disdaining to be warded or concealed by any artifice.
Its feet, observable beneath the ample folds of the garment, were also bare; and on its head it wore no other covering than a holly wreath, set here and there with shining icicles.
Its dark brown curls were long and free; free as its genial face, its sparkling eye, its open hand, its cheery voice, its unconstrained demeanour, and its joyful air.
Girded round its middle was an antique scabbard; but no sword was in it, and the ancient sheath was eaten up with rust.
"You have never seen the like of me before!" exclaimed the Spirit.
"Have never walked forth with the younger members of my family; meaning (for I am very young) my elder brothers born in these later years?" pursued the Phantom.
Have you had many brothers, Spirit?" "More than eighteen hundred," said the Ghost.
"A tremendous family to provide for!" muttered Scrooge.
The Ghost of Christmas Present rose.
"Spirit," said Scrooge submissively, "conduct me where you will.
I went forth last night on compulsion, and I learnt a lesson which is working now.
Holly, mistletoe, red berries, ivy, turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, meat, pigs, sausages, oysters, pies, puddings, fruit, and punch, all vanished instantly.
The sky was gloomy, and the shortest streets were choked up with a dingy mist, half thawed, half frozen, whose heavier particles descended in a shower of sooty atoms, as if all the chimneys in Great Britain had, by one consent, caught fire, and were blazing away to their dear hearts' content.
There was nothing very cheerful in the climate or the town, and yet was there an air of cheerfulness abroad that the clearest summer air and brightest summer sun might have endeavoured to diffuse in vain.
For, the people who were shovelling away on the housetops were jovial and full of glee; calling out to one another from the parapets, and now and then exchanging a facetious snowball--better-natured missile far than many a wordy jest-- laughing heartily if it went right and not less heartily if it went wrong.
The poulterers' shops were still half open, and the fruiterers' were radiant in their glory.
There were great, round, pot-bellied baskets of chestnuts, shaped like the waistcoats of jolly old gentlemen, lolling at the doors, and tumbling out into the street in their apoplectic opulence.
There were ruddy, brown-faced, broad-girthed Spanish Onions, shining in the fatness of their growth like Spanish Friars, and winking from their shelves in wanton slyness at the girls as they went by, and glanced demurely at the hung-up mistletoe.
The very gold and silver fish, set forth among these choice fruits in a bowl, though members of a dull and stagnant-blooded race, appeared to know that there was something going on; and, to a fish, went gasping round and round their little world in slow and passionless excitement.
The Grocers'! oh, the Grocers'! nearly closed, with perhaps two shutters down, or one; but through those gaps such glimpses!
But soon the steeples called good people all, to church and chapel, and away they came, flocking through the streets in their best clothes, and with their gayest faces.
And at the same time there emerged from scores of bye-streets, lanes, and nameless turnings, innumerable people, carrying their dinners to the bakers' shops.
The sight of these poor revellers appeared to interest the Spirit very much, for he stood with Scrooge beside him in a baker's doorway, and taking off the covers as their bearers passed, sprinkled incense on their dinners from his torch.
And it was a very uncommon kind of torch, for once or twice when there were angry words between some dinner-carriers who had jostled each other, he shed a few drops of water on them from it, and their good humour was restored directly.
For they said, it was a shame to quarrel upon Christmas Day.
In time the bells ceased, and the bakers were shut up; and yet there was a genial shadowing forth of all these dinners and the progress of their cooking, in the thawed blotch of wet above each baker's oven; where the pavement smoked as if its stones were cooking too.
"Is there a peculiar flavour in what you sprinkle from your torch?" asked Scrooge.
"Because it needs it most." "Spirit," said Scrooge, after a moment's thought, "I wonder you, of all the beings in the many worlds about us, should desire to cramp these people's opportunities of innocent enjoyment." "I!" cried the Spirit.
"And it comes to the same thing." "I seek!" exclaimed the Spirit.
"There are some upon this earth of yours," returned the Spirit, "who lay claim to know us, and who do their deeds of passion, pride, ill-will, hatred, envy, bigotry, and selfishness in our name, who are as strange to us and all our kith and kin, as if they had never lived.
Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us." Scrooge promised that he would; and they went on, invisible, as they had been before, into the suburbs of the town.
It was a remarkable quality of the Ghost (which Scrooge had observed at the baker's), that notwithstanding his gigantic size, he could accommodate himself to any place with ease; and that he stood beneath a low roof quite as gracefully and like a supernatural creature, as it was possible he could have done in any lofty hall.
Bob had but fifteen "Bob" a-week himself; he pocketed on Saturdays but fifteen copies of his Christian name; and yet the Ghost of Christmas Present blessed his four-roomed house!
"What has ever got your precious father then?" said Mrs.
And Martha warn't as late last Christmas Day by half-an-hour?" "Here's Martha, mother!" said a girl, appearing as she spoke.
"Here's Martha, mother!" cried the two young Cratchits.
Cratchit, kissing her a dozen times, and taking off her shawl and bonnet for her with officious zeal.
There's father coming," cried the two young Cratchits, who were everywhere at once.
"Hide, Martha, hide!" So Martha hid herself, and in came little Bob, the father, with at least three feet of comforter exclusive of the fringe, hanging down before him; and his threadbare clothes darned up and brushed, to look seasonable; and Tiny Tim upon his shoulder.
Alas for Tiny Tim, he bore a little crutch, and had his limbs supported by an iron frame!
"Why, where's our Martha?" cried Bob Cratchit, looking round.
"Not coming!" said Bob, with a sudden declension in his high spirits; for he had been Tim's blood horse all the way from church, and had come home rampant.
"Not coming upon Christmas Day!" Martha didn't like to see him disappointed, if it were only in joke; so she came out prematurely from behind the closet door, and ran into his arms, while the two young Cratchits hustled Tiny Tim, and bore him off into the wash-house, that he might hear the pudding singing in the copper.
Cratchit, when she had rallied Bob on his credulity, and Bob had hugged his daughter to his heart's content.
Somehow he gets thoughtful, sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest things you ever heard.
He told me, coming home, that he hoped the people saw him in the church, because he was a cripple, and it might be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas Day, who made lame beggars walk, and blind men see." Bob's voice was tremulous when he told them this, and trembled more when he said that Tiny Tim was growing strong and hearty.
Such a bustle ensued that you might have thought a goose the rarest of all birds; a feathered phenomenon, to which a black swan was a matter of course--and in truth it was something very like it in that house.
It was succeeded by a breathless pause, as Mrs.
Cratchit, looking slowly all along the carving-knife, prepared to plunge it in the breast; but when she did, and when the long expected gush of stuffing issued forth, one murmur of delight arose all round the board, and even Tiny Tim, excited by the two young Cratchits, beat on the table with the handle of his knife, and feebly cried Hurrah!
Its tenderness and flavour, size and cheapness, were the themes of universal admiration.
Eked out by apple-sauce and mashed potatoes, it was a sufficient dinner for the whole family; indeed, as Mrs.
Cratchit said with great delight (surveying one small atom of a bone upon the dish), they hadn't ate it all at last!
Yet every one had had enough, and the youngest Cratchits in particular, were steeped in sage and onion to the eyebrows!
Cratchit left the room alone--too nervous to bear witnesses--to take the pudding up and bring it in.
Suppose somebody should have got over the wall of the back-yard, and stolen it, while they were merry with the goose--a supposition at which the two young Cratchits became livid!
All sorts of horrors were supposed.
A smell like an eating-house and a pastrycook's next door to each other, with a laundress's next door to that!
Cratchit entered--flushed, but smiling proudly--with the pudding, like a speckled cannon-ball, so hard and firm, blazing in half of half-a-quartern of ignited brandy, and bedight with Christmas holly stuck into the top.
Oh, a wonderful pudding!
Bob Cratchit said, and calmly too, that he regarded it as the greatest success achieved by Mrs.
Cratchit since their marriage.
Cratchit said that now the weight was off her mind, she would confess she had had her doubts about the quantity of flour.
Everybody had something to say about it, but nobody said or thought it was at all a small pudding for a large family.
Any Cratchit would have blushed to hint at such a thing.
The compound in the jug being tasted, and considered perfect, apples and oranges were put upon the table, and a shovel-full of chestnuts on the fire.
Then all the Cratchit family drew round the hearth, in what Bob Cratchit called a circle, meaning half a one; and at Bob Cratchit's elbow stood the family display of glass.
Two tumblers, and a custard-cup without a handle.
These held the hot stuff from the jug, however, as well as golden goblets would have done; and Bob served it out with beaming looks, while the chestnuts on the fire sputtered and cracked noisily.
Then Bob proposed: "A Merry Christmas to us all, my dears.
Bob held his withered little hand in his, as if he loved the child, and wished to keep him by his side, and dreaded that he might be taken from him.
"Spirit," said Scrooge, with an interest he had never felt before, "tell me if Tiny Tim will live." "I see a vacant seat," replied the Ghost, "in the poor chimney-corner, and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved.
If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, the child will die." "No, no," said Scrooge.
"Oh, no, kind Spirit! say he will be spared." "If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, none other of my race," returned the Ghost, "will find him here.
If he be like to die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus population." Scrooge hung his head to hear his own words quoted by the Spirit, and was overcome with penitence and grief.
"Man," said the Ghost, "if man you be in heart, not adamant, forbear that wicked cant until you have discovered What the surplus is, and Where it is.
It may be, that in the sight of Heaven, you are more worthless and less fit to live than millions like this poor man's child.
Oh God! to hear the Insect on the leaf pronouncing on the too much life among his hungry brothers in the dust!" Scrooge bent before the Ghost's rebuke, and trembling cast his eyes upon the ground.
But he raised them speedily, on hearing his own name.
Cratchit, reddening.
I'd give him a piece of my mind to feast upon, and I hope he'd have a good appetite for it." "My dear," said Bob, "the children!
Christmas Day." "It should be Christmas Day, I am sure," said she, "on which one drinks the health of such an odious, stingy, hard, unfeeling man as Mr.
Nobody knows it better than you do, poor fellow!" "My dear," was Bob's mild answer, "Christmas Day." "I'll drink his health for your sake and the Day's," said Mrs.
Cratchit, "not for his.
A merry Christmas and a happy new year!
He'll be very merry and very happy, I have no doubt!" The children drank the toast after her.
It was the first of their proceedings which had no heartiness.
Tiny Tim drank it last of all, but he didn't care twopence for it.
The mention of his name cast a dark shadow on the party, which was not dispelled for full five minutes.
Bob Cratchit told them how he had a situation in his eye for Master Peter, which would bring in, if obtained, full five-and-sixpence weekly.
The two young Cratchits laughed tremendously at the idea of Peter's being a man of business; and Peter himself looked thoughtfully at the fire from between his collars, as if he were deliberating what particular investments he should favour when he came into the receipt of that bewildering income.
Martha, who was a poor apprentice at a milliner's, then told them what kind of work she had to do, and how many hours she worked at a stretch, and how she meant to lie abed to-morrow morning for a good long rest; to-morrow being a holiday she passed at home.
Also how she had seen a countess and a lord some days before, and how the lord "was much about as tall as Peter;" at which Peter pulled up his collars so high that you couldn't have seen his head if you had been there.
All this time the chestnuts and the jug went round and round; and by-and-bye they had a song, about a lost child travelling in the snow, from Tiny Tim, who had a plaintive little voice, and sang it very well indeed.
They were not a handsome family; they were not well dressed; their shoes were far from being water-proof; their clothes were scanty; and Peter might have known, and very likely did, the inside of a pawnbroker's.
But, they were happy, grateful, pleased with one another, and contented with the time; and when they faded, and looked happier yet in the bright sprinklings of the Spirit's torch at parting, Scrooge had his eye upon them, and especially on Tiny Tim, until the last.
By this time it was getting dark, and snowing pretty heavily; and as Scrooge and the Spirit went along the streets, the brightness of the roaring fires in kitchens, parlours, and all sorts of rooms, was wonderful.
Here, the flickering of the blaze showed preparations for a cosy dinner, with hot plates baking through and through before the fire, and deep red curtains, ready to be drawn to shut out cold and darkness.
There all the children of the house were running out into the snow to meet their married sisters, brothers, cousins, uncles, aunts, and be the first to greet them.
Here, again, were shadows on the window-blind of guests assembling; and there a group of handsome girls, all hooded and fur-booted, and all chattering at once, tripped lightly off to some near neighbour's house; where, woe upon the single man who saw them enter--artful witches, well they knew it--in a glow!
But, if you had judged from the numbers of people on their way to friendly gatherings, you might have thought that no one was at home to give them welcome when they got there, instead of every house expecting company, and piling up its fires half-chimney high.
Blessings on it, how the Ghost exulted!
How it bared its breadth of breast, and opened its capacious palm, and floated on, outpouring, with a generous hand, its bright and harmless mirth on everything within its reach!
The very lamplighter, who ran on before, dotting the dusky street with specks of light, and who was dressed to spend the evening somewhere, laughed out loudly as the Spirit passed, though little kenned the lamplighter that he had any company but Christmas!
And now, without a word of warning from the Ghost, they stood upon a bleak and desert moor, where monstrous masses of rude stone were cast about, as though it were the burial-place of giants; and water spread itself wheresoever it listed, or would have done so, but for the frost that held it prisoner; and nothing grew but moss and furze, and coarse rank grass.
Down in the west the setting sun had left a streak of fiery red, which glared upon the desolation for an instant, like a sullen eye, and frowning lower, lower, lower yet, was lost in the thick gloom of darkest night.
"A place where Miners live, who labour in the bowels of the earth," returned the Spirit.
See!" A light shone from the window of a hut, and swiftly they advanced towards it.
Passing through the wall of mud and stone, they found a cheerful company assembled round a glowing fire.
An old, old man and woman, with their children and their children's children, and another generation beyond that, all decked out gaily in their holiday attire.
The old man, in a voice that seldom rose above the howling of the wind upon the barren waste, was singing them a Christmas song--it had been a very old song when he was a boy--and from time to time they all joined in the chorus.
To Scrooge's horror, looking back, he saw the last of the land, a frightful range of rocks, behind them; and his ears were deafened by the thundering of water, as it rolled and roared, and raged among the dreadful caverns it had worn, and fiercely tried to undermine the earth.
Built upon a dismal reef of sunken rocks, some league or so from shore, on which the waters chafed and dashed, the wild year through, there stood a solitary lighthouse.
But even here, two men who watched the light had made a fire, that through the loophole in the thick stone wall shed out a ray of brightness on the awful sea.
Joining their horny hands over the rough table at which they sat, they wished each other Merry Christmas in their can of grog; and one of them: the elder, too, with his face all damaged and scarred with hard weather, as the figure-head of an old ship might be: struck up a sturdy song that was like a Gale in itself.
They stood beside the helmsman at the wheel, the look-out in the bow, the officers who had the watch; dark, ghostly figures in their several stations; but every man among them hummed a Christmas tune, or had a Christmas thought, or spoke below his breath to his companion of some bygone Christmas Day, with homeward hopes belonging to it.
And every man on board, waking or sleeping, good or bad, had had a kinder word for another on that day than on any day in the year; and had shared to some extent in its festivities; and had remembered those he cared for at a distance, and had known that they delighted to remember him.
It was a great surprise to Scrooge, while listening to the moaning of the wind, and thinking what a solemn thing it was to move on through the lonely darkness over an unknown abyss, whose depths were secrets as profound as Death: it was a great surprise to Scrooge, while thus engaged, to hear a hearty laugh.
It was a much greater surprise to Scrooge to recognise it as his own nephew's and to find himself in a bright, dry, gleaming room, with the Spirit standing smiling by his side, and looking at that same nephew with approving affability!
"Ha, ha, ha!" If you should happen, by any unlikely chance, to know a man more blest in a laugh than Scrooge's nephew, all I can say is, I should like to know him too.
Introduce him to me, and I'll cultivate his acquaintance.
It is a fair, even-handed, noble adjustment of things, that while there is infection in disease and sorrow, there is nothing in the world so irresistibly contagious as laughter and good-humour.
When Scrooge's nephew laughed in this way: holding his sides, rolling his head, and twisting his face into the most extravagant contortions: Scrooge's niece, by marriage, laughed as heartily as he.
And their assembled friends being not a bit behindhand, roared out lustily.
Ha, ha, ha, ha!" "He said that Christmas was a humbug, as I live!" cried Scrooge's nephew.
"He believed it too!" "More shame for him, Fred!" said Scrooge's niece, indignantly.
Bless those women; they never do anything by halves.
She was very pretty: exceedingly pretty.
With a dimpled, surprised-looking, capital face; a ripe little mouth, that seemed made to be kissed--as no doubt it was; all kinds of good little dots about her chin, that melted into one another when she laughed; and the sunniest pair of eyes you ever saw in any little creature's head.
Altogether she was what you would have called provoking, you know; but satisfactory, too.
Oh, perfectly satisfactory.
"He's a comical old fellow," said Scrooge's nephew, "that's the truth: and not so pleasant as he might be.
However, his offences carry their own punishment, and I have nothing to say against him." "I'm sure he is very rich, Fred," hinted Scrooge's niece.
He don't make himself comfortable with it.
He hasn't the satisfaction of thinking--ha, ha, ha!--that he is ever going to benefit US with it." "I have no patience with him," observed Scrooge's niece.
Scrooge's niece's sisters, and all the other ladies, expressed the same opinion.
What's the consequence?
He don't lose much of a dinner." "Indeed, I think he loses a very good dinner," interrupted Scrooge's niece.
Everybody else said the same, and they must be allowed to have been competent judges, because they had just had dinner; and, with the dessert upon the table, were clustered round the fire, by lamplight.
I'm very glad to hear it," said Scrooge's nephew, "because I haven't great faith in these young housekeepers.
What do you say, Topper?" Topper had clearly got his eye upon one of Scrooge's niece's sisters, for he answered that a bachelor was a wretched outcast, who had no right to express an opinion on the subject.
"Do go on, Fred," said Scrooge's niece, clapping her hands.
"He never finishes what he begins to say!
He is such a ridiculous fellow!" Scrooge's nephew revelled in another laugh, and as it was impossible to keep the infection off; though the plump sister tried hard to do it with aromatic vinegar; his example was unanimously followed.
"I was only going to say," said Scrooge's nephew, "that the consequence of his taking a dislike to us, and not making merry with us, is, as I think, that he loses some pleasant moments, which could do him no harm.
I am sure he loses pleasanter companions than he can find in his own thoughts, either in his mouldy old office, or his dusty chambers.
He may rail at Christmas till he dies, but he can't help thinking better of it--I defy him--if he finds me going there, in good temper, year after year, and saying Uncle Scrooge, how are you?
If it only puts him in the vein to leave his poor clerk fifty pounds, that's something; and I think I shook him yesterday." It was their turn to laugh now at the notion of his shaking Scrooge.
But being thoroughly good-natured, and not much caring what they laughed at, so that they laughed at any rate, he encouraged them in their merriment, and passed the bottle joyously.
For they were a musical family, and knew what they were about, when they sung a Glee or Catch, I can assure you: especially Topper, who could growl away in the bass like a good one, and never swell the large veins in his forehead, or get red in the face over it.
Scrooge's niece played well upon the harp; and played among other tunes a simple little air (a mere nothing: you might learn to whistle it in two minutes), which had been familiar to the child who fetched Scrooge from the boarding-school, as he had been reminded by the Ghost of Christmas Past.
When this strain of music sounded, all the things that Ghost had shown him, came upon his mind; he softened more and more; and thought that if he could have listened to it often, years ago, he might have cultivated the kindnesses of life for his own happiness with his own hands, without resorting to the sexton's spade that buried Jacob Marley.
After a while they played at forfeits; for it is good to be children sometimes, and never better than at Christmas, when its mighty Founder was a child himself.
My opinion is, that it was a done thing between him and Scrooge's nephew; and that the Ghost of Christmas Present knew it.
The way he went after that plump sister in the lace tucker, was an outrage on the credulity of human nature.
Knocking down the fire-irons, tumbling over the chairs, bumping against the piano, smothering himself among the curtains, wherever she went, there went he!
If you had fallen up against him (as some of them did), on purpose, he would have made a feint of endeavouring to seize you, which would have been an affront to your understanding, and would instantly have sidled off in the direction of the plump sister.
But when at last, he caught her; when, in spite of all her silken rustlings, and her rapid flutterings past him, he got her into a corner whence there was no escape; then his conduct was the most execrable.
For his pretending not to know her; his pretending that it was necessary to touch her head-dress, and further to assure himself of her identity by pressing a certain ring upon her finger, and a certain chain about her neck; was vile, monstrous!
No doubt she told him her opinion of it, when, another blind-man being in office, they were so very confidential together, behind the curtains.
Scrooge's niece was not one of the blind-man's buff party, but was made comfortable with a large chair and a footstool, in a snug corner, where the Ghost and Scrooge were close behind her.
But she joined in the forfeits, and loved her love to admiration with all the letters of the alphabet.
Likewise at the game of How, When, and Where, she was very great, and to the secret joy of Scrooge's nephew, beat her sisters hollow: though they were sharp girls too, as Topper could have told you.
The Ghost was greatly pleased to find him in this mood, and looked upon him with such favour, that he begged like a boy to be allowed to stay until the guests departed.
"One half hour, Spirit, only one!" It was a Game called Yes and No, where Scrooge's nephew had to think of something, and the rest must find out what; he only answering to their questions yes or no, as the case was.
At every fresh question that was put to him, this nephew burst into a fresh roar of laughter; and was so inexpressibly tickled, that he was obliged to get up off the sofa and stamp.
"It's your Uncle Scro-o-o-o-oge!" Which it certainly was.
Admiration was the universal sentiment, though some objected that the reply to "Is it a bear?" ought to have been "Yes;" inasmuch as an answer in the negative was sufficient to have diverted their thoughts from Mr.
Scrooge, supposing they had ever had any tendency that way.
"He has given us plenty of merriment, I am sure," said Fred, "and it would be ungrateful not to drink his health.
"A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to the old man, whatever he is!" said Scrooge's nephew.
"He wouldn't take it from me, but may he have it, nevertheless.
Uncle Scrooge!" Uncle Scrooge had imperceptibly become so gay and light of heart, that he would have pledged the unconscious company in return, and thanked them in an inaudible speech, if the Ghost had given him time.
The Spirit stood beside sick beds, and they were cheerful; on foreign lands, and they were close at home; by struggling men, and they were patient in their greater hope; by poverty, and it was rich.
In almshouse, hospital, and jail, in misery's every refuge, where vain man in his little brief authority had not made fast the door, and barred the Spirit out, he left his blessing, and taught Scrooge his precepts.
It was a long night, if it were only a night; but Scrooge had his doubts of this, because the Christmas Holidays appeared to be condensed into the space of time they passed together.
It was strange, too, that while Scrooge remained unaltered in his outward form, the Ghost grew older, clearly older.
Scrooge had observed this change, but never spoke of it, until they left a children's Twelfth Night party, when, looking at the Spirit as they stood together in an open place, he noticed that its hair was grey.
"To-night at midnight.
The time is drawing near." The chimes were ringing the three quarters past eleven at that moment.
"Forgive me if I am not justified in what I ask," said Scrooge, looking intently at the Spirit's robe, "but I see something strange, and not belonging to yourself, protruding from your skirts.
Is it a foot or a claw?" "It might be a claw, for the flesh there is upon it," was the Spirit's sorrowful reply.
"Look here." From the foldings of its robe, it brought two children; wretched, abject, frightful, hideous, miserable.
Look, look, down here!" exclaimed the Ghost.
Yellow, meagre, ragged, scowling, wolfish; but prostrate, too, in their humility.
Where graceful youth should have filled their features out, and touched them with its freshest tints, a stale and shrivelled hand, like that of age, had pinched, and twisted them, and pulled them into shreds.
Where angels might have sat enthroned, devils lurked, and glared out menacing.
No change, no degradation, no perversion of humanity, in any grade, through all the mysteries of wonderful creation, has monsters half so horrible and dread.
Scrooge started back, appalled.
Having them shown to him in this way, he tried to say they were fine children, but the words choked themselves, rather than be parties to a lie of such enormous magnitude.
"And they cling to me, appealing from their fathers.
This boy is Ignorance.
Deny it!" cried the Spirit, stretching out its hand towards the city.
Admit it for your factious purposes, and make it worse.
And bide the end!" "Have they no refuge or resource?" cried Scrooge.
"Are there no workhouses?" The bell struck twelve.
As the last stroke ceased to vibrate, he remembered the prediction of old Jacob Marley, and lifting up his eyes, beheld a solemn Phantom, draped and hooded, coming, like a mist along the ground, towards him.
STAVE IV: THE LAST OF THE SPIRITS THE Phantom slowly, gravely, silently, approached.
It was shrouded in a deep black garment, which concealed its head, its face, its form, and left nothing of it visible save one outstretched hand.
But for this it would have been difficult to detach its figure from the night, and separate it from the darkness by which it was surrounded.
He felt that it was tall and stately when it came beside him, and that its mysterious presence filled him with a solemn dread.
"I am in the presence of the Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come?" said Scrooge.
The Spirit answered not, but pointed onward with its hand.
"You are about to show me shadows of the things that have not happened, but will happen in the time before us," Scrooge pursued.
"Is that so, Spirit?" The upper portion of the garment was contracted for an instant in its folds, as if the Spirit had inclined its head.
That was the only answer he received.
Although well used to ghostly company by this time, Scrooge feared the silent shape so much that his legs trembled beneath him, and he found that he could hardly stand when he prepared to follow it.
The Spirit paused a moment, as observing his condition, and giving him time to recover.
It thrilled him with a vague uncertain horror, to know that behind the dusky shroud, there were ghostly eyes intently fixed upon him, while he, though he stretched his own to the utmost, could see nothing but a spectral hand and one great heap of black.
"Ghost of the Future!" he exclaimed, "I fear you more than any spectre I have seen.
But as I know your purpose is to do me good, and as I hope to live to be another man from what I was, I am prepared to bear you company, and do it with a thankful heart.
The hand was pointed straight before them.
The night is waning fast, and it is precious time to me, I know.
Scrooge followed in the shadow of its dress, which bore him up, he thought, and carried him along.
They scarcely seemed to enter the city; for the city rather seemed to spring up about them, and encompass them of its own act.
But there they were, in the heart of it; on 'Change, amongst the merchants; who hurried up and down, and chinked the money in their pockets, and conversed in groups, and looked at their watches, and trifled thoughtfully with their great gold seals; and so forth, as Scrooge had seen them often.
The Spirit stopped beside one little knot of business men.
Observing that the hand was pointed to them, Scrooge advanced to listen to their talk.
"No," said a great fat man with a monstrous chin, "I don't know much about it, either way.
I only know he's dead." "When did he die?" inquired another.
"Last night, I believe." "Why, what was the matter with him?" asked a third, taking a vast quantity of snuff out of a very large snuff-box.
"What has he done with his money?" asked a red-faced gentleman with a pendulous excrescence on the end of his nose, that shook like the gills of a turkey-cock.
That's all I know." This pleasantry was received with a general laugh.
Suppose we make up a party and volunteer?" "I don't mind going if a lunch is provided," observed the gentleman with the excrescence on his nose.
"Well, I am the most disinterested among you, after all," said the first speaker, "for I never wear black gloves, and I never eat lunch.
When I come to think of it, I'm not at all sure that I wasn't his most particular friend; for we used to stop and speak whenever we met.
Bye, bye!" Speakers and listeners strolled away, and mixed with other groups.
Scrooge knew the men, and looked towards the Spirit for an explanation.
Scrooge listened again, thinking that the explanation might lie here.
He knew these men, also, perfectly.
They were men of business: very wealthy, and of great importance.
He had made a point always of standing well in their esteem: in a business point of view, that is; strictly in a business point of view.
"How are you?" returned the other.
"Old Scratch has got his own at last, hey?" "So I am told," returned the second.
"Cold, isn't it?" "Seasonable for Christmas time.
Something else to think of.
That was their meeting, their conversation, and their parting.
Scrooge was at first inclined to be surprised that the Spirit should attach importance to conversations apparently so trivial; but feeling assured that they must have some hidden purpose, he set himself to consider what it was likely to be.
They could scarcely be supposed to have any bearing on the death of Jacob, his old partner, for that was Past, and this Ghost's province was the Future.
Nor could he think of any one immediately connected with himself, to whom he could apply them.
But nothing doubting that to whomsoever they applied they had some latent moral for his own improvement, he resolved to treasure up every word he heard, and everything he saw; and especially to observe the shadow of himself when it appeared.
For he had an expectation that the conduct of his future self would give him the clue he missed, and would render the solution of these riddles easy.
He looked about in that very place for his own image; but another man stood in his accustomed corner, and though the clock pointed to his usual time of day for being there, he saw no likeness of himself among the multitudes that poured in through the Porch.
It gave him little surprise, however; for he had been revolving in his mind a change of life, and thought and hoped he saw his new-born resolutions carried out in this.
Quiet and dark, beside him stood the Phantom, with its outstretched hand.
When he roused himself from his thoughtful quest, he fancied from the turn of the hand, and its situation in reference to himself, that the Unseen Eyes were looking at him keenly.
They left the busy scene, and went into an obscure part of the town, where Scrooge had never penetrated before, although he recognised its situation, and its bad repute.
The ways were foul and narrow; the shops and houses wretched; the people half-naked, drunken, slipshod, ugly.
Alleys and archways, like so many cesspools, disgorged their offences of smell, and dirt, and life, upon the straggling streets; and the whole quarter reeked with crime, with filth, and misery.
Far in this den of infamous resort, there was a low-browed, beetling shop, below a pent-house roof, where iron, old rags, bottles, bones, and greasy offal, were bought.
Secrets that few would like to scrutinise were bred and hidden in mountains of unseemly rags, masses of corrupted fat, and sepulchres of bones.
Sitting in among the wares he dealt in, by a charcoal stove, made of old bricks, was a grey-haired rascal, nearly seventy years of age; who had screened himself from the cold air without, by a frousy curtaining of miscellaneous tatters, hung upon a line; and smoked his pipe in all the luxury of calm retirement.
Scrooge and the Phantom came into the presence of this man, just as a woman with a heavy bundle slunk into the shop.
But she had scarcely entered, when another woman, similarly laden, came in too; and she was closely followed by a man in faded black, who was no less startled by the sight of them, than they had been upon the recognition of each other.
After a short period of blank astonishment, in which the old man with the pipe had joined them, they all three burst into a laugh.
"Let the charwoman alone to be the first!" cried she who had entered first.
"Let the laundress alone to be the second; and let the undertaker's man alone to be the third.
If we haven't all three met here without meaning it!" "You couldn't have met in a better place," said old Joe, removing his pipe from his mouth.
You were made free of it long ago, you know; and the other two an't strangers.
We're all suitable to our calling, we're well matched.
The old man raked the fire together with an old stair-rod, and having trimmed his smoky lamp (for it was night), with the stem of his pipe, put it in his mouth again.
While he did this, the woman who had already spoken threw her bundle on the floor, and sat down in a flaunting manner on a stool; crossing her elbows on her knees, and looking with a bold defiance at the other two.
"Every person has a right to take care of themselves.
He always did." "That's true, indeed!" said the laundress.
Dilber and the man together.
"If he wanted to keep 'em after he was dead, a wicked old screw," pursued the woman, "why wasn't he natural in his lifetime?
If he had been, he'd have had somebody to look after him when he was struck with Death, instead of lying gasping out his last there, alone by himself." "It's the truest word that ever was spoke," said Mrs.
"It's a judgment on him." "I wish it was a little heavier judgment," replied the woman; "and it should have been, you may depend upon it, if I could have laid my hands on anything else.
We know pretty well that we were helping ourselves, before we met here, I believe.
Open the bundle, Joe." But the gallantry of her friends would not allow of this; and the man in faded black, mounting the breach first, produced his plunder.
It was not extensive.
They were severally examined and appraised by old Joe, who chalked the sums he was disposed to give for each, upon the wall, and added them up into a total when he found there was nothing more to come.
"That's your account," said Joe, "and I wouldn't give another sixpence, if I was to be boiled for not doing it.
Sheets and towels, a little wearing apparel, two old-fashioned silver teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a few boots.
It's a weakness of mine, and that's the way I ruin myself," said old Joe.
If you asked me for another penny, and made it an open question, I'd repent of being so liberal and knock off half-a-crown." "And now undo my bundle, Joe," said the first woman.
Joe went down on his knees for the greater convenience of opening it, and having unfastened a great many knots, dragged out a large and heavy roll of some dark stuff.
"Bed-curtains!" "Ah!" returned the woman, laughing and leaning forward on her crossed arms.
"Bed-curtains!" "You don't mean to say you took 'em down, rings and all, with him lying there?" said Joe.
"Why not?" "You were born to make your fortune," said Joe, "and you'll certainly do it." "I certainly shan't hold my hand, when I can get anything in it by reaching it out, for the sake of such a man as He was, I promise you, Joe," returned the woman coolly.
"Don't drop that oil upon the blankets, now." "His blankets?" asked Joe.
"He isn't likely to take cold without 'em, I dare say." "I hope he didn't die of anything catching?
Eh?" said old Joe, stopping in his work, and looking up.
"Don't you be afraid of that," returned the woman.
Ah! you may look through that shirt till your eyes ache; but you won't find a hole in it, nor a threadbare place.
"Somebody was fool enough to do it, but I took it off again.
If calico an't good enough for such a purpose, it isn't good enough for anything.
It's quite as becoming to the body.
He can't look uglier than he did in that one." Scrooge listened to this dialogue in horror.
As they sat grouped about their spoil, in the scanty light afforded by the old man's lamp, he viewed them with a detestation and disgust, which could hardly have been greater, though they had been obscene demons, marketing the corpse itself.
"Ha, ha!" laughed the same woman, when old Joe, producing a flannel bag with money in it, told out their several gains upon the ground.
He frightened every one away from him when he was alive, to profit us when he was dead!
Ha, ha, ha!" "Spirit!" said Scrooge, shuddering from head to foot.
Merciful Heaven, what is this!" He recoiled in terror, for the scene had changed, and now he almost touched a bed: a bare, uncurtained bed: on which, beneath a ragged sheet, there lay a something covered up, which, though it was dumb, announced itself in awful language.
The room was very dark, too dark to be observed with any accuracy, though Scrooge glanced round it in obedience to a secret impulse, anxious to know what kind of room it was.
A pale light, rising in the outer air, fell straight upon the bed; and on it, plundered and bereft, unwatched, unwept, uncared for, was the body of this man.
The cover was so carelessly adjusted that the slightest raising of it, the motion of a finger upon Scrooge's part, would have disclosed the face.
He thought of it, felt how easy it would be to do, and longed to do it; but had no more power to withdraw the veil than to dismiss the spectre at his side.
Oh cold, cold, rigid, dreadful Death, set up thine altar here, and dress it with such terrors as thou hast at thy command: for this is thy dominion!
But of the loved, revered, and honoured head, thou canst not turn one hair to thy dread purposes, or make one feature odious.
It is not that the hand is heavy and will fall down when released; it is not that the heart and pulse are still; but that the hand WAS open, generous, and true; the heart brave, warm, and tender; and the pulse a man's.
And see his good deeds springing from the wound, to sow the world with life immortal!
No voice pronounced these words in Scrooge's ears, and yet he heard them when he looked upon the bed.
He thought, if this man could be raised up now, what would be his foremost thoughts?
What they wanted in the room of death, and why they were so restless and disturbed, Scrooge did not dare to think.
"I understand you," Scrooge returned, "and I would do it, if I could.
"If there is any person in the town, who feels emotion caused by this man's death," said Scrooge quite agonised, "show that person to me, Spirit, I beseech you!" The Phantom spread its dark robe before him for a moment, like a wing; and withdrawing it, revealed a room by daylight, where a mother and her children were.
She was expecting some one, and with anxious eagerness; for she walked up and down the room; started at every sound; looked out from the window; glanced at the clock; tried, but in vain, to work with her needle; and could hardly bear the voices of the children in their play.
At length the long-expected knock was heard.
She hurried to the door, and met her husband; a man whose face was careworn and depressed, though he was young.
There was a remarkable expression in it now; a kind of serious delight of which he felt ashamed, and which he struggled to repress.
He sat down to the dinner that had been hoarding for him by the fire; and when she asked him faintly what news (which was not until after a long silence), he appeared embarrassed how to answer.
There is hope yet, Caroline." "If he relents," she said, amazed, "there is!
Nothing is past hope, if such a miracle has happened." "He is past relenting," said her husband.
"He is dead." She was a mild and patient creature if her face spoke truth; but she was thankful in her soul to hear it, and she said so, with clasped hands.
She prayed forgiveness the next moment, and was sorry; but the first was the emotion of her heart.
He was not only very ill, but dying, then." "To whom will our debt be transferred?" "I don't know.
But before that time we shall be ready with the money; and even though we were not, it would be a bad fortune indeed to find so merciless a creditor in his successor.
We may sleep to-night with light hearts, Caroline!" Yes.
The children's faces, hushed and clustered round to hear what they so little understood, were brighter; and it was a happier house for this man's death!
The only emotion that the Ghost could show him, caused by the event, was one of pleasure.
"Let me see some tenderness connected with a death," said Scrooge; "or that dark chamber, Spirit, which we left just now, will be for ever present to me." The Ghost conducted him through several streets familiar to his feet; and as they went along, Scrooge looked here and there to find himself, but nowhere was he to be seen.
They entered poor Bob Cratchit's house; the dwelling he had visited before; and found the mother and the children seated round the fire.
The noisy little Cratchits were as still as statues in one corner, and sat looking up at Peter, who had a book before him.
The mother and her daughters were engaged in sewing.
The boy must have read them out, as he and the Spirit crossed the threshold.
"They're better now again," said Cratchit's wife.
It must be near his time." "Past it rather," Peter answered, shutting up his book.
"But I think he has walked a little slower than he used, these few last evenings, mother." They were very quiet again.
At last she said, and in a steady, cheerful voice, that only faltered once: "I have known him walk with--I have known him walk with Tiny Tim upon his shoulder, very fast indeed." "And so have I," cried Peter.
"Often." "And so have I," exclaimed another.
And there is your father at the door!" She hurried out to meet him; and little Bob in his comforter --he had need of it, poor fellow--came in.
Then the two young Cratchits got upon his knees and laid, each child a little cheek, against his face, as if they said, "Don't mind it, father.
Don't be grieved!" Bob was very cheerful with them, and spoke pleasantly to all the family.
He looked at the work upon the table, and praised the industry and speed of Mrs.
Cratchit and the girls.
"Yes, my dear," returned Bob.
I promised him that I would walk there on a Sunday.
He left the room, and went up-stairs into the room above, which was lighted cheerfully, and hung with Christmas.
Poor Bob sat down in it, and when he had thought a little and composed himself, he kissed the little face.
He was reconciled to what had happened, and went down again quite happy.
Bob told them of the extraordinary kindness of Mr.
Scrooge's nephew, whom he had scarcely seen but once, and who, meeting him in the street that day, and seeing that he looked a little--"just a little down you know," said Bob, inquired what had happened to distress him.
"On which," said Bob, "for he is the pleasantest-spoken gentleman you ever heard, I told him. 'I am heartily sorry for it, Mr.
Cratchit,' he said, 'and heartily sorry for your good wife.' By the bye, how he ever knew that, I don't know." "Knew what, my dear?" "Why, that you were a good wife," replied Bob.
"Everybody knows that!" said Peter.
"Very well observed, my boy!" cried Bob.
"I hope they do. 'Heartily sorry,' he said, 'for your good wife.
Pray come to me.' Now, it wasn't," cried Bob, "for the sake of anything he might be able to do for us, so much as for his kind way, that this was quite delightful.
"You would be surer of it, my dear," returned Bob, "if you saw and spoke to him.
I shouldn't be at all surprised-- mark what I say!--if he got Peter a better situation." "Only hear that, Peter," said Mrs.
"And then," cried one of the girls, "Peter will be keeping company with some one, and setting up for himself." "Get along with you!" retorted Peter, grinning.
But however and whenever we part from one another, I am sure we shall none of us forget poor Tiny Tim--shall we--or this first parting that there was among us?" "Never, father!" cried they all.
"And I know," said Bob, "I know, my dears, that when we recollect how patient and how mild he was; although he was a little, little child; we shall not quarrel easily among ourselves, and forget poor Tiny Tim in doing it." "No, never, father!" they all cried again.
Cratchit kissed him, his daughters kissed him, the two young Cratchits kissed him, and Peter and himself shook hands.
Spirit of Tiny Tim, thy childish essence was from God!
"Spectre," said Scrooge, "something informs me that our parting moment is at hand.
Tell me what man that was whom we saw lying dead?" The Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come conveyed him, as before--though at a different time, he thought: indeed, there seemed no order in these latter visions, save that they were in the Future--into the resorts of business men, but showed him not himself.
Indeed, the Spirit did not stay for anything, but went straight on, as to the end just now desired, until besought by Scrooge to tarry for a moment.
"This court," said Scrooge, "through which we hurry now, is where my place of occupation is, and has been for a length of time.
Let me behold what I shall be, in days to come!" The Spirit stopped; the hand was pointed elsewhere.
"The house is yonder," Scrooge exclaimed.
"Why do you point away?" The inexorable finger underwent no change.
Scrooge hastened to the window of his office, and looked in.
The furniture was not the same, and the figure in the chair was not himself.
He joined it once again, and wondering why and whither he had gone, accompanied it until they reached an iron gate.
He paused to look round before entering.
Here, then; the wretched man whose name he had now to learn, lay underneath the ground.
Walled in by houses; overrun by grass and weeds, the growth of vegetation's death, not life; choked up with too much burying; fat with repleted appetite.
He advanced towards it trembling.
"Before I draw nearer to that stone to which you point," said Scrooge, "answer me one question.
Are these the shadows of the things that Will be, or are they shadows of things that May be, only?" Still the Ghost pointed downward to the grave by which it stood.
"Men's courses will foreshadow certain ends, to which, if persevered in, they must lead," said Scrooge.
"But if the courses be departed from, the ends will change.
Say it is thus with what you show me!" The Spirit was immovable as ever.
Scrooge crept towards it, trembling as he went; and following the finger, read upon the stone of the neglected grave his own name, EBENEZER SCROOGE.
"Spirit!" he cried, tight clutching at its robe, "hear me!
I will not be the man I must have been but for this intercourse.
Why show me this, if I am past all hope!" For the first time the hand appeared to shake.
"Good Spirit," he pursued, as down upon the ground he fell before it: "Your nature intercedes for me, and pities me.
Assure me that I yet may change these shadows you have shown me, by an altered life!" The kind hand trembled.
"I will honour Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year.
Oh, tell me I may sponge away the writing on this stone!" In his agony, he caught the spectral hand.
It sought to free itself, but he was strong in his entreaty, and detained it.
The Spirit, stronger yet, repulsed him.
Holding up his hands in a last prayer to have his fate reversed, he saw an alteration in the Phantom's hood and dress.
It shrunk, collapsed, and dwindled down into a bedpost.
Best and happiest of all, the Time before him was his own, to make amends in!
"I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future!" Scrooge repeated, as he scrambled out of bed.
Heaven, and the Christmas Time be praised for this!
I say it on my knees, old Jacob; on my knees!" He was so fluttered and so glowing with his good intentions, that his broken voice would scarcely answer to his call.
He had been sobbing violently in his conflict with the Spirit, and his face was wet with tears.
"They are not torn down," cried Scrooge, folding one of his bed-curtains in his arms, "they are not torn down, rings and all.
They are here--I am here--the shadows of the things that would have been, may be dispelled.
I know they will!" His hands were busy with his garments all this time; turning them inside out, putting them on upside down, tearing them, mislaying them, making them parties to every kind of extravagance.
"I don't know what to do!" cried Scrooge, laughing and crying in the same breath; and making a perfect Laocoön of himself with his stockings.
"I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I am as merry as a schoolboy.
A merry Christmas to everybody!
Hallo!" He had frisked into the sitting-room, and was now standing there: perfectly winded.
"There's the saucepan that the gruel was in!" cried Scrooge, starting off again, and going round the fireplace.
There's the corner where the Ghost of Christmas Present, sat!
There's the window where I saw the wandering Spirits!
It's all right, it's all true, it all happened.
Ha ha ha!" Really, for a man who had been out of practice for so many years, it was a splendid laugh, a most illustrious laugh.
The father of a long, long line of brilliant laughs!
I don't know anything.
Hallo here!" He was checked in his transports by the churches ringing out the lustiest peals he had ever heard.
Oh, glorious, glorious!
No fog, no mist; clear, bright, jovial, stirring, cold; cold, piping for the blood to dance to; Golden sunlight; Heavenly sky; sweet fresh air; merry bells.
"What's to-day!" cried Scrooge, calling downward to a boy in Sunday clothes, who perhaps had loitered in to look about him.
"EH?" returned the boy, with all his might of wonder.
"Why, CHRISTMAS DAY." "It's Christmas Day!" said Scrooge to himself.
They can do anything they like.
Hallo, my fine fellow!" "Hallo!" returned the boy.
"Do you know the Poulterer's, in the next street but one, at the corner?" Scrooge inquired.
"An intelligent boy!" said Scrooge.
Do you know whether they've sold the prize Turkey that was hanging up there?--Not the little prize Turkey: the big one?" "What, the one as big as me?" returned the boy.
"What a delightful boy!" said Scrooge.
"It's a pleasure to talk to him.
"Go and buy it." "Walk-ER!" exclaimed the boy.
Go and buy it, and tell 'em to bring it here, that I may give them the direction where to take it.
Come back with the man, and I'll give you a shilling.
"I'll send it to Bob Cratchit's!" whispered Scrooge, rubbing his hands, and splitting with a laugh.
Joe Miller never made such a joke as sending it to Bob's will be!" The hand in which he wrote the address was not a steady one, but write it he did, somehow, and went down-stairs to open the street door, ready for the coming of the poulterer's man.
"I scarcely ever looked at it before.
What an honest expression it has in its face!
It's a wonderful knocker!--Here's the Turkey!
Merry Christmas!" It was a Turkey!
"Why, it's impossible to carry that to Camden Town," said Scrooge.
"You must have a cab." The chuckle with which he said this, and the chuckle with which he paid for the Turkey, and the chuckle with which he paid for the cab, and the chuckle with which he recompensed the boy, were only to be exceeded by the chuckle with which he sat down breathless in his chair again, and chuckled till he cried.
Shaving was not an easy task, for his hand continued to shake very much; and shaving requires attention, even when you don't dance while you are at it.
But if he had cut the end of his nose off, he would have put a piece of sticking-plaister over it, and been quite satisfied.
The people were by this time pouring forth, as he had seen them with the Ghost of Christmas Present; and walking with his hands behind him, Scrooge regarded every one with a delighted smile.
He looked so irresistibly pleasant, in a word, that three or four good-humoured fellows said, "Good morning, sir!
A merry Christmas to you!" And Scrooge said often afterwards, that of all the blithe sounds he had ever heard, those were the blithest in his ears.
He had not gone far, when coming on towards him he beheld the portly gentleman, who had walked into his counting-house the day before, and said, "Scrooge and Marley's, I believe?" It sent a pang across his heart to think how this old gentleman would look upon him when they met; but he knew what path lay straight before him, and he took it.
"My dear sir," said Scrooge, quickening his pace, and taking the old gentleman by both his hands.
I hope you succeeded yesterday.
A merry Christmas to you, sir!" "Mr.
"That is my name, and I fear it may not be pleasant to you.
And will you have the goodness"--here Scrooge whispered in his ear.
"Lord bless me!" cried the gentleman, as if his breath were taken away.
"Not a farthing less.
A great many back-payments are included in it, I assure you.
"I don't know what to say to such munifi--" "Don't say anything, please," retorted Scrooge.
Will you come and see me?" "I will!" cried the old gentleman.
Bless you!" He went to church, and walked about the streets, and watched the people hurrying to and fro, and patted children on the head, and questioned beggars, and looked down into the kitchens of houses, and up to the windows, and found that everything could yield him pleasure.
He had never dreamed that any walk--that anything--could give him so much happiness.
In the afternoon he turned his steps towards his nephew's house.
"He's in the dining-room, sir, along with mistress.
They were looking at the table (which was spread out in great array); for these young housekeepers are always nervous on such points, and like to see that everything is right.
Dear heart alive, how his niece by marriage started!
Scrooge had forgotten, for the moment, about her sitting in the corner with the footstool, or he wouldn't have done it, on any account.
Nothing could be heartier.
Wonderful party, wonderful games, wonderful unanimity, won-der-ful happiness!
If he could only be there first, and catch Bob Cratchit coming late!
He was full eighteen minutes and a half behind his time.
His hat was off, before he opened the door; his comforter too.
He was on his stool in a jiffy; driving away with his pen, as if he were trying to overtake nine o'clock.
"Hallo!" growled Scrooge, in his accustomed voice, as near as he could feign it.
"I am behind my time." "You are?" repeated Scrooge.
Step this way, sir, if you please." "It's only once a year, sir," pleaded Bob, appearing from the Tank.
"It shall not be repeated.
I was making rather merry yesterday, sir." "Now, I'll tell you what, my friend," said Scrooge, "I am not going to stand this sort of thing any longer.
And therefore," he continued, leaping from his stool, and giving Bob such a dig in the waistcoat that he staggered back into the Tank again; "and therefore I am about to raise your salary!" Bob trembled, and got a little nearer to the ruler.
He had a momentary idea of knocking Scrooge down with it, holding him, and calling to the people in the court for help and a strait-waistcoat.
"A merry Christmas, Bob!" said Scrooge, with an earnestness that could not be mistaken, as he clapped him on the back.
"A merrier Christmas, Bob, my good fellow, than I have given you, for many a year!
I'll raise your salary, and endeavour to assist your struggling family, and we will discuss your affairs this very afternoon, over a Christmas bowl of smoking bishop, Bob!
Make up the fires, and buy another coal-scuttle before you dot another i, Bob Cratchit!" Scrooge was better than his word.
He did it all, and infinitely more; and to Tiny Tim, who did NOT die, he was a second father.
He had no further intercourse with Spirits, but lived upon the Total Abstinence Principle, ever afterwards; and it was always said of him, that he knew how to keep Christmas well, if any man alive possessed the knowledge.
And so, as Tiny Tim observed, God bless Us, Every One!
“It’s so dreadful to be poor!” sighed Meg, looking down at her old dress.
“We’ve got Father and Mother, and each other,” said Beth contentedly from her corner.
The four young faces on which the firelight shone brightened at the cheerful words, but darkened again as Jo said sadly, “We haven’t got Father, and shall not have him for a long time.” She didn’t say “perhaps never,” but each silently added it, thinking of Father far away, where the fighting was.
Nobody spoke for a minute; then Meg said in an altered tone, “You know the reason Mother proposed not having any presents this Christmas was because it is going to be a hard winter for everyone; and she thinks we ought not to spend money for pleasure, when our men are suffering so in the army.
We can’t do much, but we can make our little sacrifices, and ought to do it gladly.
But I am afraid I don’t,” and Meg shook her head, as she thought regretfully of all the pretty things she wanted.
I agree not to expect anything from Mother or you, but I do want to buy _Undine and Sintran_ for myself.
I’ve wanted it so long,” said Jo, who was a bookworm.
“I shall get a nice box of Faber’s drawing pencils; I really need them,” said Amy decidedly.
“Mother didn’t say anything about our money, and she won’t wish us to give up everything.
Let’s each buy what we want, and have a little fun; I’m sure we work hard enough to earn it,” cried Jo, examining the heels of her shoes in a gentlemanly manner.
“I know I do—teaching those tiresome children nearly all day, when I’m longing to enjoy myself at home,” began Meg, in the complaining tone again.
“How would you like to be shut up for hours with a nervous, fussy old lady, who keeps you trotting, is never satisfied, and worries you till you’re ready to fly out the window or cry?” “It’s naughty to fret, but I do think washing dishes and keeping things tidy is the worst work in the world.
It makes me cross, and my hands get so stiff, I can’t practice well at all.” And Beth looked at her rough hands with a sigh that any one could hear that time.
“I don’t believe any of you suffer as I do,” cried Amy, “for you don’t have to go to school with impertinent girls, who plague you if you don’t know your lessons, and laugh at your dresses, and label your father if he isn’t rich, and insult you when your nose isn’t nice.” “If you mean libel, I’d say so, and not talk about labels, as if Papa was a pickle bottle,” advised Jo, laughing.
“I know what I mean, and you needn’t be statirical about it.
It’s proper to use good words, and improve your vocabilary,” returned Amy, with dignity.
“Don’t peck at one another, children.
How happy and good we’d be, if we had no worries!” said Meg, who could remember better times.
“You said the other day you thought we were a deal happier than the King children, for they were fighting and fretting all the time, in spite of their money.” “So I did, Beth.
For though we do have to work, we make fun of ourselves, and are a pretty jolly set, as Jo would say.” “Jo does use such slang words!” observed Amy, with a reproving look at the long figure stretched on the rug.
Jo immediately sat up, put her hands in her pockets, and began to whistle.
It’s so boyish!” “That’s why I do it.” “I detest rude, unladylike girls!” “I hate affected, niminy-piminy chits!” “Birds in their little nests agree,” sang Beth, the peacemaker, with such a funny face that both sharp voices softened to a laugh, and the “pecking” ended for that time.
“Really, girls, you are both to be blamed,” said Meg, beginning to lecture in her elder-sisterly fashion.
“You are old enough to leave off boyish tricks, and to behave better, Josephine.
It didn’t matter so much when you were a little girl, but now you are so tall, and turn up your hair, you should remember that you are a young lady.” “I’m not!
And if turning up my hair makes me one, I’ll wear it in two tails till I’m twenty,” cried Jo, pulling off her net, and shaking down a chestnut mane.
I can’t get over my disappointment in not being a boy.
And I can only stay home and knit, like a poky old woman!” And Jo shook the blue army sock till the needles rattled like castanets, and her ball bounded across the room.
So you must try to be contented with making your name boyish, and playing brother to us girls,” said Beth, stroking the rough head with a hand that all the dish washing and dusting in the world could not make ungentle in its touch.
“As for you, Amy,” continued Meg, “you are altogether too particular and prim.
Your airs are funny now, but you’ll grow up an affected little goose, if you don’t take care.
I like your nice manners and refined ways of speaking, when you don’t try to be elegant.
“You’re a dear, and nothing else,” answered Meg warmly, and no one contradicted her, for the ‘Mouse’ was the pet of the family.
As young readers like to know ‘how people look’, we will take this moment to give them a little sketch of the four sisters, who sat knitting away in the twilight, while the December snow fell quietly without, and the fire crackled cheerfully within.
It was a comfortable room, though the carpet was faded and the furniture very plain, for a good picture or two hung on the walls, books filled the recesses, chrysanthemums and Christmas roses bloomed in the windows, and a pleasant atmosphere of home peace pervaded it.
Margaret, the eldest of the four, was sixteen, and very pretty, being plump and fair, with large eyes, plenty of soft brown hair, a sweet mouth, and white hands, of which she was rather vain.
Fifteen-year-old Jo was very tall, thin, and brown, and reminded one of a colt, for she never seemed to know what to do with her long limbs, which were very much in her way.
She had a decided mouth, a comical nose, and sharp, gray eyes, which appeared to see everything, and were by turns fierce, funny, or thoughtful.
Round shoulders had Jo, big hands and feet, a flyaway look to her clothes, and the uncomfortable appearance of a girl who was rapidly shooting up into a woman and didn’t like it.
Elizabeth, or Beth, as everyone called her, was a rosy, smooth-haired, bright-eyed girl of thirteen, with a shy manner, a timid voice, and a peaceful expression which was seldom disturbed.
Her father called her ‘Little Miss Tranquility’, and the name suited her excellently, for she seemed to live in a happy world of her own, only venturing out to meet the few whom she trusted and loved.
Amy, though the youngest, was a most important person, in her own opinion at least.
A regular snow maiden, with blue eyes, and yellow hair curling on her shoulders, pale and slender, and always carrying herself like a young lady mindful of her manners.
What the characters of the four sisters were we will leave to be found out.
The clock struck six and, having swept up the hearth, Beth put a pair of slippers down to warm.
Somehow the sight of the old shoes had a good effect upon the girls, for Mother was coming, and everyone brightened to welcome her.
Meg stopped lecturing, and lighted the lamp, Amy got out of the easy chair without being asked, and Jo forgot how tired she was as she sat up to hold the slippers nearer to the blaze.
“I’m the oldest,” began Meg, but Jo cut in with a decided, “I’m the man of the family now Papa is away, and I shall provide the slippers, for he told me to take special care of Mother while he was gone.” “I’ll tell you what we’ll do,” said Beth, “let’s each get her something for Christmas, and not get anything for ourselves.” “That’s like you, dear!
What will we get?” exclaimed Jo.
Everyone thought soberly for a minute, then Meg announced, as if the idea was suggested by the sight of her own pretty hands, “I shall give her a nice pair of gloves.” “Army shoes, best to be had,” cried Jo.
“Some handkerchiefs, all hemmed,” said Beth.
Don’t you remember how we used to do on our birthdays?” answered Jo.
“I used to be so frightened when it was my turn to sit in the chair with the crown on, and see you all come marching round to give the presents, with a kiss.
I liked the things and the kisses, but it was dreadful to have you sit looking at me while I opened the bundles,” said Beth, who was toasting her face and the bread for tea at the same time.
“Let Marmee think we are getting things for ourselves, and then surprise her.
We must go shopping tomorrow afternoon, Meg.
There is so much to do about the play for Christmas night,” said Jo, marching up and down, with her hands behind her back, and her nose in the air.
I’m getting too old for such things,” observed Meg, who was as much a child as ever about ‘dressing-up’ frolics.
You are the best actress we’ve got, and there’ll be an end of everything if you quit the boards,” said Jo.
“We ought to rehearse tonight.
Come here, Amy, and do the fainting scene, for you are as stiff as a poker in that.” “I can’t help it.
I never saw anyone faint, and I don’t choose to make myself all black and blue, tumbling flat as you do.
If I can’t, I shall fall into a chair and be graceful.
I don’t care if Hugo does come at me with a pistol,” returned Amy, who was not gifted with dramatic power, but was chosen because she was small enough to be borne out shrieking by the villain of the piece.
Clasp your hands so, and stagger across the room, crying frantically, ‘Roderigo!
Save me!’” and away went Jo, with a melodramatic scream which was truly thrilling.
Amy followed, but she poked her hands out stiffly before her, and jerked herself along as if she went by machinery, and her “Ow!” was more suggestive of pins being run into her than of fear and anguish.
Jo gave a despairing groan, and Meg laughed outright, while Beth let her bread burn as she watched the fun with interest.
Do the best you can when the time comes, and if the audience laughs, don’t blame me.
Come on, Meg.” Then things went smoothly, for Don Pedro defied the world in a speech of two pages without a single break.
Hagar, the witch, chanted an awful incantation over her kettleful of simmering toads, with weird effect.
Roderigo rent his chains asunder manfully, and Hugo died in agonies of remorse and arsenic, with a wild, “Ha!
“I don’t see how you can write and act such splendid things, Jo.
You’re a regular Shakespeare!” exclaimed Beth, who firmly believed that her sisters were gifted with wonderful genius in all things.
“Not quite,” replied Jo modestly.
“I do think _The Witches Curse, an Operatic Tragedy_ is rather a nice thing, but I’d like to try _Macbeth_, if we only had a trapdoor for Banquo.
‘Is that a dagger that I see before me?” muttered Jo, rolling her eyes and clutching at the air, as she had seen a famous tragedian do.
“No, it’s the toasting fork, with Mother’s shoe on it instead of the bread.
Beth’s stage-struck!” cried Meg, and the rehearsal ended in a general burst of laughter.
“Glad to find you so merry, my girls,” said a cheery voice at the door, and actors and audience turned to welcome a tall, motherly lady with a ‘can I help you’ look about her which was truly delightful.
She was not elegantly dressed, but a noble-looking woman, and the girls thought the gray cloak and unfashionable bonnet covered the most splendid mother in the world.
There was so much to do, getting the boxes ready to go tomorrow, that I didn’t come home to dinner.
Come and kiss me, baby.” While making these maternal inquiries Mrs.
March got her wet things off, her warm slippers on, and sitting down in the easy chair, drew Amy to her lap, preparing to enjoy the happiest hour of her busy day.
The girls flew about, trying to make things comfortable, each in her own way.
Meg arranged the tea table, Jo brought wood and set chairs, dropping, over-turning, and clattering everything she touched.
Beth trotted to and fro between parlor kitchen, quiet and busy, while Amy gave directions to everyone, as she sat with her hands folded.
As they gathered about the table, Mrs.
March said, with a particularly happy face, “I’ve got a treat for you after supper.” A quick, bright smile went round like a streak of sunshine.
Beth clapped her hands, regardless of the biscuit she held, and Jo tossed up her napkin, crying, “A letter!
He sends all sorts of loving wishes for Christmas, and an especial message to you girls,” said Mrs.
March, patting her pocket as if she had got a treasure there.
Don’t stop to quirk your little finger and simper over your plate, Amy,” cried Jo, choking on her tea and dropping her bread, butter side down, on the carpet in her haste to get at the treat.
“I think it was so splendid in Father to go as chaplain when he was too old to be drafted, and not strong enough for a soldier,” said Meg warmly.
Or a nurse, so I could be near him and help him,” exclaimed Jo, with a groan.
“It must be very disagreeable to sleep in a tent, and eat all sorts of bad-tasting things, and drink out of a tin mug,” sighed Amy.
He will stay and do his work faithfully as long as he can, and we won’t ask for him back a minute sooner than he can be spared.
Now come and hear the letter.” They all drew to the fire, Mother in the big chair with Beth at her feet, Meg and Amy perched on either arm of the chair, and Jo leaning on the back, where no one would see any sign of emotion if the letter should happen to be touching.
Very few letters were written in those hard times that were not touching, especially those which fathers sent home.
In this one little was said of the hardships endured, the dangers faced, or the homesickness conquered.
It was a cheerful, hopeful letter, full of lively descriptions of camp life, marches, and military news, and only at the end did the writer’s heart over-flow with fatherly love and longing for the little girls at home.
Tell them I think of them by day, pray for them by night, and find my best comfort in their affection at all times.
I know they will remember all I said to them, that they will be loving children to you, will do their duty faithfully, fight their bosom enemies bravely, and conquer themselves so beautifully that when I come back to them I may be fonder and prouder than ever of my little women.” Everybody sniffed when they came to that part.
Jo wasn’t ashamed of the great tear that dropped off the end of her nose, and Amy never minded the rumpling of her curls as she hid her face on her mother’s shoulder and sobbed out, “I am a selfish girl!
But I’ll truly try to be better, so he mayn’t be disappointed in me by-and-by.” “We all will,” cried Meg.
“I think too much of my looks and hate to work, but won’t any more, if I can help it.” “I’ll try and be what he loves to call me, ‘a little woman’ and not be rough and wild, but do my duty here instead of wanting to be somewhere else,” said Jo, thinking that keeping her temper at home was a much harder task than facing a rebel or two down South.
Beth said nothing, but wiped away her tears with the blue army sock and began to knit with all her might, losing no time in doing the duty that lay nearest her, while she resolved in her quiet little soul to be all that Father hoped to find her when the year brought round the happy coming home.
March broke the silence that followed Jo’s words, by saying in her cheery voice, “Do you remember how you used to play Pilgrims Progress when you were little things?
“I liked the place where the bundles fell off and tumbled downstairs,” said Meg.
“I don’t remember much about it, except that I was afraid of the cellar and the dark entry, and always liked the cake and milk we had up at the top.
If I wasn’t too old for such things, I’d rather like to play it over again,” said Amy, who began to talk of renouncing childish things at the mature age of twelve.
Our burdens are here, our road is before us, and the longing for goodness and happiness is the guide that leads us through many troubles and mistakes to the peace which is a true Celestial City.
Now, my little pilgrims, suppose you begin again, not in play, but in earnest, and see how far on you can get before Father comes home.” “Really, Mother?
Mine is dishes and dusters, and envying girls with nice pianos, and being afraid of people.” Beth’s bundle was such a funny one that everybody wanted to laugh, but nobody did, for it would have hurt her feelings very much.
“Let us do it,” said Meg thoughtfully.
We ought to have our roll of directions, like Christian.
What shall we do about that?” asked Jo, delighted with the fancy which lent a little romance to the very dull task of doing her duty.
It was uninteresting sewing, but tonight no one grumbled.
They adopted Jo’s plan of dividing the long seams into four parts, and calling the quarters Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, and in that way got on capitally, especially when they talked about the different countries as they stitched their way through them.
No one but Beth could get much music out of the old piano, but she had a way of softly touching the yellow keys and making a pleasant accompaniment to the simple songs they sang.
Amy chirped like a cricket, and Jo wandered through the airs at her own sweet will, always coming out at the wrong place with a croak or a quaver that spoiled the most pensive tune.
Crinkle, crinkle, ’ittle ’tar, and it had become a household custom, for the mother was a born singer.
The first sound in the morning was her voice as she went about the house singing like a lark, and the last sound at night was the same cheery sound, for the girls never grew too old for that familiar lullaby.
CHAPTER TWO A MERRY CHRISTMAS Jo was the first to wake in the gray dawn of Christmas morning.
No stockings hung at the fireplace, and for a moment she felt as much disappointed as she did long ago, when her little sock fell down because it was crammed so full of goodies.
Then she remembered her mother’s promise and, slipping her hand under her pillow, drew out a little crimson-covered book.
She woke Meg with a “Merry Christmas,” and bade her see what was under her pillow.
A green-covered book appeared, with the same picture inside, and a few words written by their mother, which made their one present very precious in their eyes.
Presently Beth and Amy woke to rummage and find their little books also, one dove-colored, the other blue, and all sat looking at and talking about them, while the east grew rosy with the coming day.
In spite of her small vanities, Margaret had a sweet and pious nature, which unconsciously influenced her sisters, especially Jo, who loved her very tenderly, and obeyed her because her advice was so gently given.
“Girls,” said Meg seriously, looking from the tumbled head beside her to the two little night-capped ones in the room beyond, “Mother wants us to read and love and mind these books, and we must begin at once.
We used to be faithful about it, but since Father went away and all this war trouble unsettled us, we have neglected many things.
Jo put her arm round her and, leaning cheek to cheek, read also, with the quiet expression so seldom seen on her restless face.
I’ll help you with the hard words, and they’ll explain things if we don’t understand,” whispered Beth, very much impressed by the pretty books and her sisters’ example.
“I’m glad mine is blue,” said Amy. and then the rooms were very still while the pages were softly turned, and the winter sunshine crept in to touch the bright heads and serious faces with a Christmas greeting.
“Goodness only knows.
Some poor creeter came a-beggin’, and your ma went straight off to see what was needed.
There never was such a woman for givin’ away vittles and drink, clothes and firin’,” replied Hannah, who had lived with the family since Meg was born, and was considered by them all more as a friend than a servant.
“She will be back soon, I think, so fry your cakes, and have everything ready,” said Meg, looking over the presents which were collected in a basket and kept under the sofa, ready to be produced at the proper time.
“She took it out a minute ago, and went off with it to put a ribbon on it, or some such notion,” replied Jo, dancing about the room to take the first stiffness off the new army slippers.
“How nice my handkerchiefs look, don’t they?
Hannah washed and ironed them for me, and I marked them all myself,” said Beth, looking proudly at the somewhat uneven letters which had cost her such labor.
I thought it was better to do it so, because Meg’s initials are M.M., and I don’t want anyone to use these but Marmee,” said Beth, looking troubled.
“It’s all right, dear, and a very pretty idea, quite sensible too, for no one can ever mistake now.
“Where have you been, and what are you hiding behind you?” asked Meg, surprised to see, by her hood and cloak, that lazy Amy had been out so early.
“You see I felt ashamed of my present, after reading and talking about being good this morning, so I ran round the corner and changed it the minute I was up, and I’m so glad, for mine is the handsomest now.” Another bang of the street door sent the basket under the sofa, and the girls to the table, eager for breakfast.
“Merry Christmas, Marmee!
“Merry Christmas, little daughters!
Six children are huddled into one bed to keep from freezing, for they have no fire.
There is nothing to eat over there, and the oldest boy came to tell me they were suffering hunger and cold.
My girls, will you give them your breakfast as a Christmas present?” They were all unusually hungry, having waited nearly an hour, and for a minute no one spoke, only a minute, for Jo exclaimed impetuously, “I’m so glad you came before we began!” “May I go and help carry the things to the poor little children?” asked Beth eagerly.
“I shall take the cream and the muffings,” added Amy, heroically giving up the article she most liked.
Meg was already covering the buckwheats, and piling the bread into one big plate.
March, smiling as if satisfied.
“You shall all go and help me, and when we come back we will have bread and milk for breakfast, and make it up at dinnertime.” They were soon ready, and the procession set out.
Fortunately it was early, and they went through back streets, so few people saw them, and no one laughed at the queer party.
A poor, bare, miserable room it was, with broken windows, no fire, ragged bedclothes, a sick mother, wailing baby, and a group of pale, hungry children cuddled under one old quilt, trying to keep warm.
“Funny angels in hoods and mittens,” said Jo, and set them to laughing.
March gave the mother tea and gruel, and comforted her with promises of help, while she dressed the little baby as tenderly as if it had been her own.
The girls meantime spread the table, set the children round the fire, and fed them like so many hungry birds, laughing, talking, and trying to understand the funny broken English.
“Das ist gut!” “Die Engel-kinder!” cried the poor things as they ate and warmed their purple hands at the comfortable blaze.
The girls had never been called angel children before, and thought it very agreeable, especially Jo, who had been considered a ‘Sancho’ ever since she was born.
That was a very happy breakfast, though they didn’t get any of it.
And when they went away, leaving comfort behind, I think there were not in all the city four merrier people than the hungry little girls who gave away their breakfasts and contented themselves with bread and milk on Christmas morning.
“That’s loving our neighbor better than ourselves, and I like it,” said Meg, as they set out their presents while their mother was upstairs collecting clothes for the poor Hummels.
Not a very splendid show, but there was a great deal of love done up in the few little bundles, and the tall vase of red roses, white chrysanthemums, and trailing vines, which stood in the middle, gave quite an elegant air to the table.
Three cheers for Marmee!” cried Jo, prancing about while Meg went to conduct Mother to the seat of honor.
March was both surprised and touched, and smiled with her eyes full as she examined her presents and read the little notes which accompanied them.
The slippers went on at once, a new handkerchief was slipped into her pocket, well scented with Amy’s cologne, the rose was fastened in her bosom, and the nice gloves were pronounced a perfect fit.
There was a good deal of laughing and kissing and explaining, in the simple, loving fashion which makes these home festivals so pleasant at the time, so sweet to remember long afterward, and then all fell to work.
The morning charities and ceremonies took so much time that the rest of the day was devoted to preparations for the evening festivities.
Being still too young to go often to the theater, and not rich enough to afford any great outlay for private performances, the girls put their wits to work, and necessity being the mother of invention, made whatever they needed.
Very clever were some of their productions, pasteboard guitars, antique lamps made of old-fashioned butter boats covered with silver paper, gorgeous robes of old cotton, glittering with tin spangles from a pickle factory, and armor covered with the same useful diamond shaped bits left in sheets when the lids of preserve pots were cut out.
The big chamber was the scene of many innocent revels.
No gentleman were admitted, so Jo played male parts to her heart’s content and took immense satisfaction in a pair of russet leather boots given her by a friend, who knew a lady who knew an actor.
These boots, an old foil, and a slashed doublet once used by an artist for some picture, were Jo’s chief treasures and appeared on all occasions.
The smallness of the company made it necessary for the two principal actors to take several parts apiece, and they certainly deserved some credit for the hard work they did in learning three or four different parts, whisking in and out of various costumes, and managing the stage besides.
It was excellent drill for their memories, a harmless amusement, and employed many hours which otherwise would have been idle, lonely, or spent in less profitable society.
On Christmas night, a dozen girls piled onto the bed which was the dress circle, and sat before the blue and yellow chintz curtains in a most flattering state of expectancy.
There was a good deal of rustling and whispering behind the curtain, a trifle of lamp smoke, and an occasional giggle from Amy, who was apt to get hysterical in the excitement of the moment.
Presently a bell sounded, the curtains flew apart, and the _operatic tragedy_ began.
“A gloomy wood,” according to the one playbill, was represented by a few shrubs in pots, green baize on the floor, and a cave in the distance.
The stage was dark and the glow of the furnace had a fine effect, especially as real steam issued from the kettle when the witch took off the cover.
A moment was allowed for the first thrill to subside, then Hugo, the villain, stalked in with a clanking sword at his side, a slouching hat, black beard, mysterious cloak, and the boots.
After pacing to and fro in much agitation, he struck his forehead, and burst out in a wild strain, singing of his hatred for Roderigo, his love for Zara, and his pleasing resolution to kill the one and win the other.
The gruff tones of Hugo’s voice, with an occasional shout when his feelings overcame him, were very impressive, and the audience applauded the moment he paused for breath.
Bowing with the air of one accustomed to public praise, he stole to the cavern and ordered Hagar to come forth with a commanding, “What ho, minion!
I need thee!” Out came Meg, with gray horsehair hanging about her face, a red and black robe, a staff, and cabalistic signs upon her cloak.
Hugo demanded a potion to make Zara adore him, and one to destroy Roderigo.
Hagar, in a fine dramatic melody, promised both, and proceeded to call up the spirit who would bring the love philter.
Bring me here, with elfin speed, The fragrant philter which I need.
A soft strain of music sounded, and then at the back of the cave appeared a little figure in cloudy white, with glittering wings, golden hair, and a garland of roses on its head.
And dropping a small, gilded bottle at the witch’s feet, the spirit vanished.
Another chant from Hagar produced another apparition, not a lovely one, for with a bang an ugly black imp appeared and, having croaked a reply, tossed a dark bottle at Hugo and disappeared with a mocking laugh.
Having warbled his thanks and put the potions in his boots, Hugo departed, and Hagar informed the audience that as he had killed a few of her friends in times past, she had cursed him, and intends to thwart his plans, and be revenged on him.
Then the curtain fell, and the audience reposed and ate candy while discussing the merits of the play.
A good deal of hammering went on before the curtain rose again, but when it became evident what a masterpiece of stage carpentery had been got up, no one murmured at the delay.
A tower rose to the ceiling, halfway up appeared a window with a lamp burning in it, and behind the white curtain appeared Zara in a lovely blue and silver dress, waiting for Roderigo.
He came in gorgeous array, with plumed cap, red cloak, chestnut lovelocks, a guitar, and the boots, of course.
Kneeling at the foot of the tower, he sang a serenade in melting tones.
Zara replied and, after a musical dialogue, consented to fly.
Roderigo produced a rope ladder, with five steps to it, threw up one end, and invited Zara to descend.
Timidly she crept from her lattice, put her hand on Roderigo’s shoulder, and was about to leap gracefully down when “Alas!
It caught in the window, the tower tottered, leaned forward, fell with a crash, and buried the unhappy lovers in the ruins.
A universal shriek arose as the russet boots waved wildly from the wreck and a golden head emerged, exclaiming, “I told you so!
I told you so!” With wonderful presence of mind, Don Pedro, the cruel sire, rushed in, dragged out his daughter, with a hasty aside...
Act as if it was all right!” and, ordering Roderigo up, banished him from the kingdom with wrath and scorn.
Though decidedly shaken by the fall from the tower upon him, Roderigo defied the old gentleman and refused to stir.
This dauntless example fired Zara.
She also defied her sire, and he ordered them both to the deepest dungeons of the castle.
A stout little retainer came in with chains and led them away, looking very much frightened and evidently forgetting the speech he ought to have made.
Act third was the castle hall, and here Hagar appeared, having come to free the lovers and finish Hugo.
She hears him coming and hides, sees him put the potions into two cups of wine and bid the timid little servant, “Bear them to the captives in their cells, and tell them I shall come anon.” The servant takes Hugo aside to tell him something, and Hagar changes the cups for two others which are harmless.
Ferdinando, the ‘minion’, carries them away, and Hagar puts back the cup which holds the poison meant for Roderigo.
Hugo, getting thirsty after a long warble, drinks it, loses his wits, and after a good deal of clutching and stamping, falls flat and dies, while Hagar informs him what she has done in a song of exquisite power and melody.
This was a truly thrilling scene, though some persons might have thought that the sudden tumbling down of a quantity of long red hair rather marred the effect of the villain’s death.
He was called before the curtain, and with great propriety appeared, leading Hagar, whose singing was considered more wonderful than all the rest of the performance put together.
Act fourth displayed the despairing Roderigo on the point of stabbing himself because he has been told that Zara has deserted him.
Just as the dagger is at his heart, a lovely song is sung under his window, informing him that Zara is true but in danger, and he can save her if he will.
He wishes her to go into a convent, but she won’t hear of it, and after a touching appeal, is about to faint when Roderigo dashes in and demands her hand.
They shout and gesticulate tremendously but cannot agree, and Rodrigo is about to bear away the exhausted Zara, when the timid servant enters with a letter and a bag from Hagar, who has mysteriously disappeared.
The latter informs the party that she bequeaths untold wealth to the young pair and an awful doom to Don Pedro, if he doesn’t make them happy.
The bag is opened, and several quarts of tin money shower down upon the stage till it is quite glorified with the glitter.
This entirely softens the stern sire.
He consents without a murmur, all join in a joyful chorus, and the curtain falls upon the lovers kneeling to receive Don Pedro’s blessing in attitudes of the most romantic grace.
Tumultuous applause followed but received an unexpected check, for the cot bed, on which the dress circle was built, suddenly shut up and extinguished the enthusiastic audience.
Roderigo and Don Pedro flew to the rescue, and all were taken out unhurt, though many were speechless with laughter.
The excitement had hardly subsided when Hannah appeared, with “Mrs.
March’s compliments, and would the ladies walk down to supper.” This was a surprise even to the actors, and when they saw the table, they looked at one another in rapturous amazement.
It was like Marmee to get up a little treat for them, but anything so fine as this was unheard of since the departed days of plenty.
There was ice cream, actually two dishes of it, pink and white, and cake and fruit and distracting French bonbons and, in the middle of the table, four great bouquets of hot house flowers.
It quite took their breath away, and they stared first at the table and then at their mother, who looked as if she enjoyed it immensely.
“Mother did it.” And Meg smiled her sweetest, in spite of her gray beard and white eyebrows.
“Aunt March had a good fit and sent the supper,” cried Jo, with a sudden inspiration.
Laurence sent it,” replied Mrs.
“The Laurence boy’s grandfather!
We don’t know him!” exclaimed Meg.
“Hannah told one of his servants about your breakfast party.
He is an odd old gentleman, but that pleased him.
He knew my father years ago, and he sent me a polite note this afternoon, saying he hoped I would allow him to express his friendly feeling toward my children by sending them a few trifles in honor of the day.
I could not refuse, and so you have a little feast at night to make up for the bread-and-milk breakfast.” “That boy put it into his head, I know he did!
He’s a capital fellow, and I wish we could get acquainted.
He looks as if he’d like to know us but he’s bashful, and Meg is so prim she won’t let me speak to him when we pass,” said Jo, as the plates went round, and the ice began to melt out of sight, with ohs and ahs of satisfaction.
Laurence, but says he’s very proud and doesn’t like to mix with his neighbors.
He keeps his grandson shut up, when he isn’t riding or walking with his tutor, and makes him study very hard.
Mother says he’s very nice, though he never speaks to us girls.” “Our cat ran away once, and he brought her back, and we talked over the fence, and were getting on capitally, all about cricket, and so on, when he saw Meg coming, and walked off.
I mean to know him some day, for he needs fun, I’m sure he does,” said Jo decidedly.
“I like his manners, and he looks like a little gentleman, so I’ve no objection to your knowing him, if a proper opportunity comes.
He brought the flowers himself, and I should have asked him in, if I had been sure what was going on upstairs.
He looked so wistful as he went away, hearing the frolic and evidently having none of his own.” “It’s a mercy you didn’t, Mother!” laughed Jo, looking at her boots.
“But we’ll have another play sometime that he can see.
How pretty it is!” And Meg examined her flowers with great interest.
March, smelling the half-dead posy in her belt.
Beth nestled up to her, and whispered softly, “I wish I could send my bunch to Father.
I’m afraid he isn’t having such a merry Christmas as we are.” CHAPTER THREE THE LAURENCE BOY “Jo!
“Here!” answered a husky voice from above, and, running up, Meg found her sister eating apples and crying over the Heir of Redclyffe, wrapped up in a comforter on an old three-legged sofa by the sunny window.
This was Jo’s favorite refuge, and here she loved to retire with half a dozen russets and a nice book, to enjoy the quiet and the society of a pet rat who lived near by and didn’t mind her a particle.
As Meg appeared, Scrabble whisked into his hole.
A regular note of invitation from Mrs.
Gardiner for tomorrow night!” cried Meg, waving the precious paper and then proceeding to read it with girlish delight.
Gardiner would be happy to see Miss March and Miss Josephine at a little dance on New Year’s Eve.’ Marmee is willing we should go, now what shall we wear?” “What’s the use of asking that, when you know we shall wear our poplins, because we haven’t got anything else?” answered Jo with her mouth full.
“Mother says I may when I’m eighteen perhaps, but two years is an everlasting time to wait.” “I’m sure our pops look like silk, and they are nice enough for us.
Whatever shall I do?
I shall have a new ribbon for my hair, and Marmee will lend me her little pearl pin, and my new slippers are lovely, and my gloves will do, though they aren’t as nice as I’d like.” “Mine are spoiled with lemonade, and I can’t get any new ones, so I shall have to go without,” said Jo, who never troubled herself much about dress.
“You must have gloves, or I won’t go,” cried Meg decidedly.
“Gloves are more important than anything else.
You can’t dance without them, and if you don’t I should be so mortified.” “Then I’ll stay still.
I like to fly about and cut capers.” “You can’t ask Mother for new ones, they are so expensive, and you are so careless.
Can’t you make them do?” “I can hold them crumpled up in my hand, so no one will know how stained they are.
Don’t you see?” “Your hands are bigger than mine, and you will stretch my glove dreadfully,” began Meg, whose gloves were a tender point with her.
Don’t put your hands behind you, or stare, or say ‘Christopher Columbus!’ will you?” “Don’t worry about me.
Now go and answer your note, and let me finish this splendid story.” So Meg went away to ‘accept with thanks’, look over her dress, and sing blithely as she did up her one real lace frill, while Jo finished her story, her four apples, and had a game of romps with Scrabble.
On New Year’s Eve the parlor was deserted, for the two younger girls played dressing maids and the two elder were absorbed in the all-important business of ‘getting ready for the party’.
Simple as the toilets were, there was a great deal of running up and down, laughing and talking, and at one time a strong smell of burned hair pervaded the house.
Meg wanted a few curls about her face, and Jo undertook to pinch the papered locks with a pair of hot tongs.
“It’s the dampness drying,” replied Jo.
It’s like burned feathers,” observed Amy, smoothing her own pretty curls with a superior air.
“There, now I’ll take off the papers and you’ll see a cloud of little ringlets,” said Jo, putting down the tongs.
She did take off the papers, but no cloud of ringlets appeared, for the hair came with the papers, and the horrified hairdresser laid a row of little scorched bundles on the bureau before her victim.
My hair, oh, my hair!” wailed Meg, looking with despair at the uneven frizzle on her forehead.
I always spoil everything.
I’m so sorry, but the tongs were too hot, and so I’ve made a mess,” groaned poor Jo, regarding the little black pancakes with tears of regret.
Just frizzle it, and tie your ribbon so the ends come on your forehead a bit, and it will look like the last fashion.
I’ve seen many girls do it so,” said Amy consolingly.
I wish I’d let my hair alone,” cried Meg petulantly.
After various lesser mishaps, Meg was finished at last, and by the united exertions of the entire family Jo’s hair was got up and her dress on.
Jo in maroon, with a stiff, gentlemanly linen collar, and a white chrysanthemum or two for her only ornament.
Each put on one nice light glove, and carried one soiled one, and all pronounced the effect “quite easy and fine”.
Meg’s high-heeled slippers were very tight and hurt her, though she would not own it, and Jo’s nineteen hairpins all seemed stuck straight into her head, which was not exactly comfortable, but, dear me, let us be elegant or die.
March, as the sisters went daintily down the walk.
Gardiner’s dressing room after a prolonged prink.
If you see me doing anything wrong, just remind me by a wink, will you?” returned Jo, giving her collar a twitch and her head a hasty brush.
“No, winking isn’t ladylike.
I’ll lift my eyebrows if any thing is wrong, and nod if you are all right.
Now hold your shoulder straight, and take short steps, and don’t shake hands if you are introduced to anyone.
Isn’t that music gay?” Down they went, feeling a trifle timid, for they seldom went to parties, and informal as this little gathering was, it was an event to them.
Gardiner, a stately old lady, greeted them kindly and handed them over to the eldest of her six daughters.
Meg knew Sallie and was at her ease very soon, but Jo, who didn’t care much for girls or girlish gossip, stood about, with her back carefully against the wall, and felt as much out of place as a colt in a flower garden.
She telegraphed her wish to Meg, but the eyebrows went up so alarmingly that she dared not stir.
No one came to talk to her, and one by one the group dwindled away till she was left alone.
She could not roam about and amuse herself, for the burned breadth would show, so she stared at people rather forlornly till the dancing began.
Meg was asked at once, and the tight slippers tripped about so briskly that none would have guessed the pain their wearer suffered smilingly.
Jo saw a big red headed youth approaching her corner, and fearing he meant to engage her, she slipped into a curtained recess, intending to peep and enjoy herself in peace.
Unfortunately, another bashful person had chosen the same refuge, for, as the curtain fell behind her, she found herself face to face with the ‘Laurence boy’.
“Dear me, I didn’t know anyone was here!” stammered Jo, preparing to back out as speedily as she had bounced in.
But the boy laughed and said pleasantly, though he looked a little startled, “Don’t mind me, stay if you like.” “Shan’t I disturb you?” “Not a bit.
Don’t go away, please, unless you’d rather.” The boy sat down again and looked at his pumps, till Jo said, trying to be polite and easy, “I think I’ve had the pleasure of seeing you before.
You live near us, don’t you?” “Next door.” And he looked up and laughed outright, for Jo’s prim manner was rather funny when he remembered how they had chatted about cricket when he brought the cat home.
That put Jo at her ease and she laughed too, as she said, in her heartiest way, “We did have such a good time over your nice Christmas present.” “Grandpa sent it.” “But you put it into his head, didn’t you, now?” “How is your cat, Miss March?” asked the boy, trying to look sober while his black eyes shone with fun.
But I am not Miss March, I’m only Jo,” returned the young lady.
Laurence, I’m only Laurie.” “Laurie Laurence, what an odd name.” “My first name is Theodore, but I don’t like it, for the fellows called me Dora, so I made them say Laurie instead.” “I hate my name, too, so sentimental!
I wish every one would say Jo instead of Josephine.
How did you make the boys stop calling you Dora?” “I thrashed ’em.” “I can’t thrash Aunt March, so I suppose I shall have to bear it.” And Jo resigned herself with a sigh.
“I like it well enough if there is plenty of room, and everyone is lively.
In a place like this I’m sure to upset something, tread on people’s toes, or do something dreadful, so I keep out of mischief and let Meg sail about.
Don’t you dance?” “Sometimes.
I love dearly to hear people describe their travels.” Laurie didn’t seem to know where to begin, but Jo’s eager questions soon set him going, and he told her how he had been at school in Vevay, where the boys never wore hats and had a fleet of boats on the lake, and for holiday fun went on walking trips about Switzerland with their teachers.
“Did you go to Paris?” “We spent last winter there.” “Can you talk French?” “We were not allowed to speak anything else at Vevay.” “Do say some!
I can read it, but can’t pronounce.” “Quel nom a cette jeune demoiselle en les pantoufles jolis?” “How nicely you do it!
Let me see ... you said, ‘Who is the young lady in the pretty slippers’, didn’t you?” “Oui, mademoiselle.” “It’s my sister Margaret, and you knew it was!
Do you think she is pretty?” “Yes, she makes me think of the German girls, she looks so fresh and quiet, and dances like a lady.” Jo quite glowed with pleasure at this boyish praise of her sister, and stored it up to repeat to Meg.
Both peeped and criticized and chatted till they felt like old acquaintances.
Laurie’s bashfulness soon wore off, for Jo’s gentlemanly demeanor amused and set him at his ease, and Jo was her merry self again, because her dress was forgotten and nobody lifted their eyebrows at her.
She liked the ‘Laurence boy’ better than ever and took several good looks at him, so that she might describe him to the girls, for they had no brothers, very few male cousins, and boys were almost unknown creatures to them.
“Curly black hair, brown skin, big black eyes, handsome nose, fine teeth, small hands and feet, taller than I am, very polite, for a boy, and altogether jolly.
I see you pegging away at your books, no, I mean studying hard.” And Jo blushed at the dreadful ‘pegging’ which had escaped her.
Laurie smiled but didn’t seem shocked, and answered with a shrug.
I won’t go before seventeen, anyway.” “Aren’t you but fifteen?” asked Jo, looking at the tall lad, whom she had imagined seventeen already.
Nothing but grinding or skylarking.
And I don’t like the way fellows do either, in this country.” “What do you like?” “To live in Italy, and to enjoy myself in my own way.” Jo wanted very much to ask what his own way was, but his black brows looked rather threatening as he knit them, so she changed the subject by saying, as her foot kept time, “That’s a splendid polka!
Why don’t you go and try it?” “If you will come too,” he answered, with a gallant little bow.
“I can’t, for I told Meg I wouldn’t, because...” There Jo stopped, and looked undecided whether to tell or to laugh.
“Because, what?” “You won’t tell?” “Never!” “Well, I have a bad trick of standing before the fire, and so I burn my frocks, and I scorched this one, and though it’s nicely mended, it shows, and Meg told me to keep still so no one would see it.
He only looked down a minute, and the expression of his face puzzled Jo when he said very gently, “Never mind that.
The hall was empty, and they had a grand polka, for Laurie danced well, and taught her the German step, which delighted Jo, being full of swing and spring.
When the music stopped, they sat down on the stairs to get their breath, and Laurie was in the midst of an account of a students’ festival at Heidelberg when Meg appeared in search of her sister.
She beckoned, and Jo reluctantly followed her into a side room, where she found her on a sofa, holding her foot, and looking pale.
“I’ve sprained my ankle.
But I don’t see what you can do, except get a carriage, or stay here all night,” answered Jo, softly rubbing the poor ankle as she spoke.
“I can’t have a carriage without its costing ever so much.
He will go,” said Jo, looking relieved as the idea occurred to her.
Get me my rubbers, and put these slippers with our things.
I’m so tired I can’t stir.” So Meg reclined, with rubbers well hidden, and Jo went blundering away to the dining room, which she found after going into a china closet, and opening the door of a room where old Mr.
Gardiner was taking a little private refreshment.
Making a dart at the table, she secured the coffee, which she immediately spilled, thereby making the front of her dress as bad as the back.
“Oh, dear, what a blunderbuss I am!” exclaimed Jo, finishing Meg’s glove by scrubbing her gown with it.
“Can I help you?” said a friendly voice.
“I was trying to get something for Meg, who is very tired, and someone shook me, and here I am in a nice state,” answered Jo, glancing dismally from the stained skirt to the coffee-colored glove.
I don’t offer to take it myself, for I should only get into another scrape if I did.” Jo led the way, and as if used to waiting on ladies, Laurie drew up a little table, brought a second installment of coffee and ice for Jo, and was so obliging that even particular Meg pronounced him a ‘nice boy’.
They had a merry time over the bonbons and mottoes, and were in the midst of a quiet game of _Buzz_, with two or three other young people who had strayed in, when Hannah appeared.
Meg forgot her foot and rose so quickly that she was forced to catch hold of Jo, with an exclamation of pain.
Don’t say anything,” she whispered, adding aloud, “It’s nothing.
I turned my foot a little, that’s all,” and limped upstairs to put her things on.
Slipping out, she ran down and, finding a servant, asked if he could get her a carriage.
It happened to be a hired waiter who knew nothing about the neighborhood and Jo was looking round for help when Laurie, who had heard what she said, came up and offered his grandfather’s carriage, which had just come for him, he said.
You can’t mean to go yet?” began Jo, looking relieved but hesitating to accept the offer.
It’s all on my way, you know, and it rains, they say.” That settled it, and telling him of Meg’s mishap, Jo gratefully accepted and rushed up to bring down the rest of the party.
Hannah hated rain as much as a cat does so she made no trouble, and they rolled away in the luxurious close carriage, feeling very festive and elegant.
Did you?” asked Jo, rumpling up her hair, and making herself comfortable.
She is going in the spring when the opera comes, and it will be perfectly splendid, if Mother only lets me go,” answered Meg, cheering up at the thought.
His hair is auburn, not red, and he was very polite, and I had a delicious redowa with him.” “He looked like a grasshopper in a fit when he did the new step.
Laurie and I couldn’t help laughing.
What were you about all that time, hidden away there?” Jo told her adventures, and by the time she had finished they were at home.
With many thanks, they said good night and crept in, hoping to disturb no one, but the instant their door creaked, two little nightcaps bobbed up, and two sleepy but eager voices cried out...
Tell about the party!” With what Meg called ‘a great want of manners’ Jo had saved some bonbons for the little girls, and they soon subsided, after hearing the most thrilling events of the evening.
“I declare, it really seems like being a fine young lady, to come home from the party in a carriage and sit in my dressing gown with a maid to wait on me,” said Meg, as Jo bound up her foot with arnica and brushed her hair.
“I don’t believe fine young ladies enjoy themselves a bit more than we do, in spite of our burned hair, old gowns, one glove apiece and tight slippers that sprain our ankles when we are silly enough to wear them.” And I think Jo was quite right.
CHAPTER FOUR BURDENS “Oh, dear, how hard it does seem to take up our packs and go on,” sighed Meg the morning after the party, for now the holidays were over, the week of merrymaking did not fit her for going on easily with the task she never liked.
“I wish it was Christmas or New Year’s all the time.
Wouldn’t it be fun?” answered Jo, yawning dismally.
“We shouldn’t enjoy ourselves half so much as we do now.
But it does seem so nice to have little suppers and bouquets, and go to parties, and drive home, and read and rest, and not work.
“Well, we can’t have it, so don’t let us grumble but shoulder our bundles and trudge along as cheerfully as Marmee does.
I’m sure Aunt March is a regular Old Man of the Sea to me, but I suppose when I’ve learned to carry her without complaining, she will tumble off, or get so light that I shan’t mind her.” This idea tickled Jo’s fancy and put her in good spirits, but Meg didn’t brighten, for her burden, consisting of four spoiled children, seemed heavier than ever.
She had not heart enough even to make herself pretty as usual by putting on a blue neck ribbon and dressing her hair in the most becoming way.
“Where’s the use of looking nice, when no one sees me but those cross midgets, and no one cares whether I’m pretty or not?” she muttered, shutting her drawer with a jerk.
It’s a shame!” So Meg went down, wearing an injured look, and wasn’t at all agreeable at breakfast time.
Everyone seemed rather out of sorts and inclined to croak.
Beth had a headache and lay on the sofa, trying to comfort herself with the cat and three kittens.
Amy was fretting because her lessons were not learned, and she couldn’t find her rubbers.
“There never was such a cross family!” cried Jo, losing her temper when she had upset an inkstand, broken both boot lacings, and sat down upon her hat.
“You’re the crossest person in it!” returned Amy, washing out the sum that was all wrong with the tears that had fallen on her slate.
“Beth, if you don’t keep these horrid cats down cellar I’ll have them drowned,” exclaimed Meg angrily as she tried to get rid of the kitten which had scrambled up her back and stuck like a burr just out of reach.
Jo laughed, Meg scolded, Beth implored, and Amy wailed because she couldn’t remember how much nine times twelve was.
I must get this off by the early mail, and you drive me distracted with your worry,” cried Mrs.
March, crossing out the third spoiled sentence in her letter.
There was a momentary lull, broken by Hannah, who stalked in, laid two hot turnovers on the table, and stalked out again.
These turnovers were an institution, and the girls called them ‘muffs’, for they had no others and found the hot pies very comforting to their hands on cold mornings.
“Cuddle your cats and get over your headache, Bethy.
Now then, Meg!” And Jo tramped away, feeling that the pilgrims were not setting out as they ought to do.
Somehow it seemed as if they couldn’t have got through the day without that, for whatever their mood might be, the last glimpse of that motherly face was sure to affect them like sunshine.
“If Marmee shook her fist instead of kissing her hand to us, it would serve us right, for more ungrateful wretches than we are were never seen,” cried Jo, taking a remorseful satisfaction in the snowy walk and bitter wind.
“Don’t use such dreadful expressions,” replied Meg from the depths of the veil in which she had shrouded herself like a nun sick of the world.
“I like good strong words that mean something,” replied Jo, catching her hat as it took a leap off her head preparatory to flying away altogether.
“Call yourself any names you like, but I am neither a rascal nor a wretch and I don’t choose to be called so.” “You’re a blighted being, and decidedly cross today because you can’t sit in the lap of luxury all the time.
Poor dear, just wait till I make my fortune, and you shall revel in carriages and ice cream and high-heeled slippers, and posies, and red-headed boys to dance with.” “How ridiculous you are, Jo!” But Meg laughed at the nonsense and felt better in spite of herself.
Thank goodness, I can always find something funny to keep me up.
Don’t croak any more, but come home jolly, there’s a dear.” Jo gave her sister an encouraging pat on the shoulder as they parted for the day, each going a different way, each hugging her little warm turnover, and each trying to be cheerful in spite of wintry weather, hard work, and the unsatisfied desires of pleasure-loving youth.
March lost his property in trying to help an unfortunate friend, the two oldest girls begged to be allowed to do something toward their own support, at least.
Believing that they could not begin too early to cultivate energy, industry, and independence, their parents consented, and both fell to work with the hearty good will which in spite of all obstacles is sure to succeed at last.
Margaret found a place as nursery governess and felt rich with her small salary.
She found it harder to bear than the others because she could remember a time when home was beautiful, life full of ease and pleasure, and want of any kind unknown.
She tried not to be envious or discontented, but it was very natural that the young girl should long for pretty things, gay friends, accomplishments, and a happy life.
At the Kings’ she daily saw all she wanted, for the children’s older sisters were just out, and Meg caught frequent glimpses of dainty ball dresses and bouquets, heard lively gossip about theaters, concerts, sleighing parties, and merrymakings of all kinds, and saw money lavished on trifles which would have been so precious to her.
Poor Meg seldom complained, but a sense of injustice made her feel bitter toward everyone sometimes, for she had not yet learned to know how rich she was in the blessings which alone can make life happy.
Jo happened to suit Aunt March, who was lame and needed an active person to wait upon her.
The childless old lady had offered to adopt one of the girls when the troubles came, and was much offended because her offer was declined.
Other friends told the Marches that they had lost all chance of being remembered in the rich old lady’s will, but the unworldly Marches only said...
“We can’t give up our girls for a dozen fortunes.
Rich or poor, we will keep together and be happy in one another.” The old lady wouldn’t speak to them for a time, but happening to meet Jo at a friend’s, something in her comical face and blunt manners struck the old lady’s fancy, and she proposed to take her for a companion.
This did not suit Jo at all, but she accepted the place since nothing better appeared and, to every one’s surprise, got on remarkably well with her irascible relative.
There was an occasional tempest, and once Jo marched home, declaring she couldn’t bear it longer, but Aunt March always cleared up quickly, and sent for her to come back again with such urgency that she could not refuse, for in her heart she rather liked the peppery old lady.
I suspect that the real attraction was a large library of fine books, which was left to dust and spiders since Uncle March died.
Jo remembered the kind old gentleman, who used to let her build railroads and bridges with his big dictionaries, tell her stories about queer pictures in his Latin books, and buy her cards of gingerbread whenever he met her in the street.
The dim, dusty room, with the busts staring down from the tall bookcases, the cozy chairs, the globes, and best of all, the wilderness of books in which she could wander where she liked, made the library a region of bliss to her.
The moment Aunt March took her nap, or was busy with company, Jo hurried to this quiet place, and curling herself up in the easy chair, devoured poetry, romance, history, travels, and pictures like a regular bookworm.
But, like all happiness, it did not last long, for as sure as she had just reached the heart of the story, the sweetest verse of a song, or the most perilous adventure of her traveler, a shrill voice called, “Josy-phine!
Josy-phine!” and she had to leave her paradise to wind yarn, wash the poodle, or read Belsham’s Essays by the hour together.
Jo’s ambition was to do something very splendid.
What it was, she had no idea as yet, but left it for time to tell her, and meanwhile, found her greatest affliction in the fact that she couldn’t read, run, and ride as much as she liked.
A quick temper, sharp tongue, and restless spirit were always getting her into scrapes, and her life was a series of ups and downs, which were both comic and pathetic.
But the training she received at Aunt March’s was just what she needed, and the thought that she was doing something to support herself made her happy in spite of the perpetual “Josy-phine!” Beth was too bashful to go to school.
It had been tried, but she suffered so much that it was given up, and she did her lessons at home with her father.
Even when he went away, and her mother was called to devote her skill and energy to Soldiers’ Aid Societies, Beth went faithfully on by herself and did the best she could.
She was a housewifely little creature, and helped Hannah keep home neat and comfortable for the workers, never thinking of any reward but to be loved.
Long, quiet days she spent, not lonely nor idle, for her little world was peopled with imaginary friends, and she was by nature a busy bee.
Not one whole or handsome one among them, all were outcasts till Beth took them in, for when her sisters outgrew these idols, they passed to her because Amy would have nothing old or ugly.
Beth cherished them all the more tenderly for that very reason, and set up a hospital for infirm dolls.
No pins were ever stuck into their cotton vitals, no harsh words or blows were ever given them, no neglect ever saddened the heart of the most repulsive, but all were fed and clothed, nursed and caressed with an affection which never failed.
One forlorn fragment of dollanity had belonged to Jo and, having led a tempestuous life, was left a wreck in the rag bag, from which dreary poorhouse it was rescued by Beth and taken to her refuge.
Having no top to its head, she tied on a neat little cap, and as both arms and legs were gone, she hid these deficiencies by folding it in a blanket and devoting her best bed to this chronic invalid.
If anyone had known the care lavished on that dolly, I think it would have touched their hearts, even while they laughed.
She loved music so dearly, tried so hard to learn, and practiced away so patiently at the jingling old instrument, that it did seem as if someone (not to hint Aunt March) ought to help her.
If anybody had asked Amy what the greatest trial of her life was, she would have answered at once, “My nose.” When she was a baby, Jo had accidently dropped her into the coal hod, and Amy insisted that the fall had ruined her nose forever.
It was not big nor red, like poor ‘Petrea’s’, it was only rather flat, and all the pinching in the world could not give it an aristocratic point.
No one minded it but herself, and it was doing its best to grow, but Amy felt deeply the want of a Grecian nose, and drew whole sheets of handsome ones to console herself.
“Little Raphael,” as her sisters called her, had a decided talent for drawing, and was never so happy as when copying flowers, designing fairies, or illustrating stories with queer specimens of art.
Her teachers complained that instead of doing her sums she covered her slate with animals, the blank pages of her atlas were used to copy maps on, and caricatures of the most ludicrous description came fluttering out of all her books at unlucky moments.
She got through her lessons as well as she could, and managed to escape reprimands by being a model of deportment.
She was a great favorite with her mates, being good-tempered and possessing the happy art of pleasing without effort.
Her little airs and graces were much admired, so were her accomplishments, for besides her drawing, she could play twelve tunes, crochet, and read French without mispronouncing more than two-thirds of the words.
She had a plaintive way of saying, “When Papa was rich we did so-and-so,” which was very touching, and her long words were considered ‘perfectly elegant’ by the girls.
Amy was in a fair way to be spoiled, for everyone petted her, and her small vanities and selfishnesses were growing nicely.
One thing, however, rather quenched the vanities.
Now Florence’s mama hadn’t a particle of taste, and Amy suffered deeply at having to wear a red instead of a blue bonnet, unbecoming gowns, and fussy aprons that did not fit.
Everything was good, well made, and little worn, but Amy’s artistic eyes were much afflicted, especially this winter, when her school dress was a dull purple with yellow dots and no trimming.
“My only comfort,” she said to Meg, with tears in her eyes, “is that Mother doesn’t take tucks in my dresses whenever I’m naughty, as Maria Parks’s mother does.
My dear, it’s really dreadful, for sometimes she is so bad her frock is up to her knees, and she can’t come to school.
When I think of this _deggerredation_, I feel that I can bear even my flat nose and purple gown with yellow sky-rockets on it.” Meg was Amy’s confidant and monitor, and by some strange attraction of opposites Jo was gentle Beth’s.
To Jo alone did the shy child tell her thoughts, and over her big harum-scarum sister Beth unconsciously exercised more influence than anyone in the family.
The two older girls were a great deal to one another, but each took one of the younger sisters into her keeping and watched over her in her own way, ‘playing mother’ they called it, and put their sisters in the places of discarded dolls with the maternal instinct of little women.
“Has anybody got anything to tell?
It’s been such a dismal day I’m really dying for some amusement,” said Meg, as they sat sewing together that evening.
“I was reading that everlasting Belsham, and droning away as I always do, for Aunt soon drops off, and then I take out some nice book, and read like fury till she wakes up.
I actually made myself sleepy, and before she began to nod, I gave such a gape that she asked me what I meant by opening my mouth wide enough to take the whole book in at once.” “I wish I could, and be done with it,” said I, trying not to be saucy.
She never finds herself very soon, so the minute her cap began to bob like a top-heavy dahlia, I whipped the _Vicar of Wakefield_ out of my pocket, and read away, with one eye on him and one on Aunt.
Aunt woke up and, being more good-natured after her nap, told me to read a bit and show what frivolous work I preferred to the worthy and instructive Belsham.
“‘I don’t understand what it’s all about.
Go back and begin it, child.’” “Back I went, and made the Primroses as interesting as ever I could.
Once I was wicked enough to stop in a thrilling place, and say meekly, ‘I’m afraid it tires you, ma’am.
Shan’t I stop now?’” “She caught up her knitting, which had dropped out of her hands, gave me a sharp look through her specs, and said, in her short way, ‘Finish the chapter, and don’t be impertinent, miss’.” “Did she own she liked it?” asked Meg.
But she let old Belsham rest, and when I ran back after my gloves this afternoon, there she was, so hard at the Vicar that she didn’t hear me laugh as I danced a jig in the hall because of the good time coming.
What a pleasant life she might have if only she chose!
“That reminds me,” said Meg, “that I’ve got something to tell.
At the Kings’ today I found everybody in a flurry, and one of the children said that her oldest brother had done something dreadful, and Papa had sent him away.
I didn’t ask any questions, of course, but I felt so sorry for them and was rather glad I hadn’t any wild brothers to do wicked things and disgrace the family.” “I think being disgraced in school is a great deal try_inger_ than anything bad boys can do,” said Amy, shaking her head, as if her experience of life had been a deep one.
“Susie Perkins came to school today with a lovely red carnelian ring.
I wanted it dreadfully, and wished I was her with all my might.
Davis, with a monstrous nose and a hump, and the words, ‘Young ladies, my eye is upon you!’ coming out of his mouth in a balloon thing.
We were laughing over it when all of a sudden his eye _was_ on us, and he ordered Susie to bring up her slate.
Just fancy how horrid!—and led her to the recitation platform, and made her stand there half an hour, holding the slate so everyone could see.” “Didn’t the girls laugh at the picture?” asked Jo, who relished the scrape.
I didn’t envy her then, for I felt that millions of carnelian rings wouldn’t have made me happy after that.
I never, never should have got over such a agonizing mortification.” And Amy went on with her work, in the proud consciousness of virtue and the successful utterance of two long words in a breath.
“I saw something I liked this morning, and I meant to tell it at dinner, but I forgot,” said Beth, putting Jo’s topsy-turvy basket in order as she talked.
Laurence was in the fish shop, but he didn’t see me, for I kept behind the fish barrel, and he was busy with Mr.
Cutter if he would let her do some scrubbing for a bit of fish, because she hadn’t any dinner for her children, and had been disappointed of a day’s work.
Laurence hooked up a big fish with the crooked end of his cane and held it out to her.
She was so glad and surprised she took it right into her arms, and thanked him over and over.
Oh, she did look so funny, hugging the big, slippery fish, and hoping Mr.
Laurence’s bed in heaven would be ‘aisy’.” When they had laughed at Beth’s story, they asked their mother for one, and after a moments thought, she said soberly, “As I sat cutting out blue flannel jackets today at the rooms, I felt very anxious about Father, and thought how lonely and helpless we should be, if anything happened to him.
It was not a wise thing to do, but I kept on worrying till an old man came in with an order for some clothes.
I had four, but two were killed, one is a prisoner, and I’m going to the other, who is very sick in a Washington hospital.’ he answered quietly.” “‘You have done a great deal for your country, sir,’ I said, feeling respect now, instead of pity.” “‘Not a mite more than I ought, ma’am.
As I ain’t, I give my boys, and give ’em free.’” “He spoke so cheerfully, looked so sincere, and seemed so glad to give his all, that I was ashamed of myself.
I’d given one man and thought it too much, while he gave four without grudging them.
I felt so rich, so happy thinking of my blessings, that I made him a nice bundle, gave him some money, and thanked him heartily for the lesson he had taught me.” “Tell another story, Mother, one with a moral to it, like this.
I like to think about them afterward, if they are real and not too preachy,” said Jo, after a minute’s silence.
March smiled and began at once, for she had told stories to this little audience for many years, and knew how to please them.
So they asked an old woman what spell they could use to make them happy, and she said, ‘When you feel discontented, think over your blessings, and be grateful.’” (Here Jo looked up quickly, as if about to speak, but changed her mind, seeing that the story was not done yet.) “Being sensible girls, they decided to try her advice, and soon were surprised to see how well off they were.
So they agreed to stop complaining, to enjoy the blessings already possessed, and try to deserve them, lest they should be taken away entirely, instead of increased, and I believe they were never disappointed or sorry that they took the old woman’s advice.” “Now, Marmee, that is very cunning of you to turn our own stories against us, and give us a sermon instead of a romance!” cried Meg.
It’s the sort Father used to tell us,” said Beth thoughtfully, putting the needles straight on Jo’s cushion.
“I don’t complain near as much as the others do, and I shall be more careful than ever now, for I’ve had warning from Susie’s downfall,” said Amy morally.
CHAPTER FIVE BEING NEIGHBORLY “What in the world are you going to do now, Jo?” asked Meg one snowy afternoon, as her sister came tramping through the hall, in rubber boots, old sack, and hood, with a broom in one hand and a shovel in the other.
“Going out for exercise,” answered Jo with a mischievous twinkle in her eyes.
Can’t keep still all day, and not being a pussycat, I don’t like to doze by the fire.
I like adventures, and I’m going to find some.” Meg went back to toast her feet and read _Ivanhoe_, and Jo began to dig paths with great energy.
Now, the garden separated the Marches’ house from that of Mr.
On one side was an old, brown house, looking rather bare and shabby, robbed of the vines that in summer covered its walls and the flowers, which then surrounded it.
On the other side was a stately stone mansion, plainly betokening every sort of comfort and luxury, from the big coach house and well-kept grounds to the conservatory and the glimpses of lovely things one caught between the rich curtains.
Yet it seemed a lonely, lifeless sort of house, for no children frolicked on the lawn, no motherly face ever smiled at the windows, and few people went in and out, except the old gentleman and his grandson.
To Jo’s lively fancy, this fine house seemed a kind of enchanted palace, full of splendors and delights which no one enjoyed.
She had long wanted to behold these hidden glories, and to know the Laurence boy, who looked as if he would like to be known, if he only knew how to begin.
Since the party, she had been more eager than ever, and had planned many ways of making friends with him, but he had not been seen lately, and Jo began to think he had gone away, when she one day spied a brown face at an upper window, looking wistfully down into their garden, where Beth and Amy were snow-balling one another.
“That boy is suffering for society and fun,” she said to herself.
He needs a party of jolly boys to play with, or somebody young and lively.
I’ve a great mind to go over and tell the old gentleman so!” The idea amused Jo, who liked to do daring things and was always scandalizing Meg by her queer performances.
The plan of ‘going over’ was not forgotten.
And when the snowy afternoon came, Jo resolved to try what could be done.
Lawrence drive off, and then sallied out to dig her way down to the hedge, where she paused and took a survey.
All quiet, curtains down at the lower windows, servants out of sight, and nothing human visible but a curly black head leaning on a thin hand at the upper window.
I’ll toss up a snowball and make him look out, and then say a kind word to him.” Up went a handful of soft snow, and the head turned at once, showing a face which lost its listless look in a minute, as the big eyes brightened and the mouth began to smile.
Jo nodded and laughed, and flourished her broom as she called out...
Are you sick?” Laurie opened the window, and croaked out as hoarsely as a raven...
What do you amuse yourself with?” “Nothing.
They won’t let me.” “Can’t somebody read to you?” “Grandpa does sometimes, but my books don’t interest him, and I hate to ask Brooke all the time.” “Have someone come and see you then.” “There isn’t anyone I’d like to see.
Shut the window, like a good boy, and wait till I come.” With that, Jo shouldered her broom and marched into the house, wondering what they would all say to her.
Laurie was in a flutter of excitement at the idea of having company, and flew about to get ready, for as Mrs.
March said, he was ‘a little gentleman’, and did honor to the coming guest by brushing his curly pate, putting on a fresh color, and trying to tidy up the room, which in spite of half a dozen servants, was anything but neat.
Presently there came a loud ring, then a decided voice, asking for ‘Mr.
Laurie’, and a surprised-looking servant came running up to announce a young lady.
“All right, show her up, it’s Miss Jo,” said Laurie, going to the door of his little parlor to meet Jo, who appeared, looking rosy and quite at her ease, with a covered dish in one hand and Beth’s three kittens in the other.
“Mother sent her love, and was glad if I could do anything for you.
Meg wanted me to bring some of her blanc mange, she makes it very nicely, and Beth thought her cats would be comforting.
I knew you’d laugh at them, but I couldn’t refuse, she was so anxious to do something.” It so happened that Beth’s funny loan was just the thing, for in laughing over the kits, Laurie forgot his bashfulness, and grew sociable at once.
“That looks too pretty to eat,” he said, smiling with pleasure, as Jo uncovered the dish, and showed the blanc mange, surrounded by a garland of green leaves, and the scarlet flowers of Amy’s pet geranium.
“It isn’t anything, only they all felt kindly and wanted to show it.
It worries me though.” “I’ll right it up in two minutes, for it only needs to have the hearth brushed, so—and the things made straight on the mantelpiece, so—and the books put here, and the bottles there, and your sofa turned from the light, and the pillows plumped up a bit.
Now then, you’re fixed.” And so he was, for, as she laughed and talked, Jo had whisked things into place and given quite a different air to the room.
Laurie watched her in respectful silence, and when she beckoned him to his sofa, he sat down with a sigh of satisfaction, saying gratefully...
Now please take the big chair and let me do something to amuse my company.” “No, I came to amuse you.
Shall I read aloud?” and Jo looked affectionately toward some inviting books near by.
I’ve read all those, and if you don’t mind, I’d rather talk,” answered Laurie.
Beth says I never know when to stop.” “Is Beth the rosy one, who stays at home good deal and sometimes goes out with a little basket?” asked Laurie with interest.
She’s my girl, and a regular good one she is, too.” “The pretty one is Meg, and the curly-haired one is Amy, I believe?” “How did you find that out?” Laurie colored up, but answered frankly, “Why, you see I often hear you calling to one another, and when I’m alone up here, I can’t help looking over at your house, you always seem to be having such good times.
I beg your pardon for being so rude, but sometimes you forget to put down the curtain at the window where the flowers are.
Her face is right opposite, and it looks so sweet behind the flowers, I can’t help watching it.
I haven’t got any mother, you know.” And Laurie poked the fire to hide a little twitching of the lips that he could not control.
The solitary, hungry look in his eyes went straight to Jo’s warm heart.
She had been so simply taught that there was no nonsense in her head, and at fifteen she was as innocent and frank as any child.
Laurie was sick and lonely, and feeling how rich she was in home and happiness, she gladly tried to share it with him.
Her face was very friendly and her sharp voice unusually gentle as she said...
Mother is so splendid, she’d do you heaps of good, and Beth would sing to you if I begged her to, and Amy would dance.
Meg and I would make you laugh over our funny stage properties, and we’d have jolly times.
He’s very kind, though he does not look so, and he lets me do what I like, pretty much, only he’s afraid I might be a bother to strangers,” began Laurie, brightening more and more.
“We are not strangers, we are neighbors, and you needn’t think you’d be a bother.
We haven’t been here a great while, you know, but we have got acquainted with all our neighbors but you.” “You see, Grandpa lives among his books, and doesn’t mind much what happens outside.
You ought to make an effort and go visiting everywhere you are asked, then you’ll have plenty of friends, and pleasant places to go to.
It won’t last long if you keep going.” Laurie turned red again, but wasn’t offended at being accused of bashfulness, for there was so much good will in Jo it was impossible not to take her blunt speeches as kindly as they were meant.
“Do you like your school?” asked the boy, changing the subject, after a little pause, during which he stared at the fire and Jo looked about her, well pleased.
“Don’t go to school, I’m a businessman—girl, I mean.
I go to wait on my great-aunt, and a dear, cross old soul she is, too,” answered Jo.
Laurie opened his mouth to ask another question, but remembering just in time that it wasn’t manners to make too many inquiries into people’s affairs, he shut it again, and looked uncomfortable.
Jo liked his good breeding, and didn’t mind having a laugh at Aunt March, so she gave him a lively description of the fidgety old lady, her fat poodle, the parrot that talked Spanish, and the library where she reveled.
Laurie enjoyed that immensely, and when she told about the prim old gentleman who came once to woo Aunt March, and in the middle of a fine speech, how Poll had tweaked his wig off to his great dismay, the boy lay back and laughed till the tears ran down his cheeks, and a maid popped her head in to see what was the matter.
Tell on, please,” he said, taking his face out of the sofa cushion, red and shining with merriment.
Much elated with her success, Jo did ‘tell on’, all about their plays and plans, their hopes and fears for Father, and the most interesting events of the little world in which the sisters lived.
Grandfather is out, so you needn’t be afraid,” said Laurie, getting up.
“I’m not afraid of anything,” returned Jo, with a toss of the head.
“I don’t believe you are!” exclaimed the boy, looking at her with much admiration, though he privately thought she would have good reason to be a trifle afraid of the old gentleman, if she met him in some of his moods.
The atmosphere of the whole house being summerlike, Laurie led the way from room to room, letting Jo stop to examine whatever struck her fancy.
And so, at last they came to the library, where she clapped her hands and pranced, as she always did when especially delighted.
It was lined with books, and there were pictures and statues, and distracting little cabinets full of coins and curiosities, and Sleepy Hollow chairs, and queer tables, and bronzes, and best of all, a great open fireplace with quaint tiles all round it.
“What richness!” sighed Jo, sinking into the depth of a velour chair and gazing about her with an air of intense satisfaction.
“Theodore Laurence, you ought to be the happiest boy in the world,” she added impressively.
“A fellow can’t live on books,” said Laurie, shaking his head as he perched on a table opposite.
Before he could say more, a bell rang, and Jo flew up, exclaiming with alarm, “Mercy me!
You are not afraid of anything, you know,” returned the boy, looking wicked.
Marmee said I might come, and I don’t think you’re any the worse for it,” said Jo, composing herself, though she kept her eyes on the door.
It was so pleasant, I couldn’t bear to stop,” said Laurie gratefully.
“The doctor to see you, sir,” and the maid beckoned as she spoke.
I’m happy as a cricket here,” answered Jo.
She was standing before a fine portrait of the old gentleman when the door opened again, and without turning, she said decidedly, “I’m sure now that I shouldn’t be afraid of him, for he’s got kind eyes, though his mouth is grim, and he looks as if he had a tremendous will of his own.
He isn’t as handsome as my grandfather, but I like him.” “Thank you, ma’am,” said a gruff voice behind her, and there, to her great dismay, stood old Mr.
Poor Jo blushed till she couldn’t blush any redder, and her heart began to beat uncomfortably fast as she thought what she had said.
For a minute a wild desire to run away possessed her, but that was cowardly, and the girls would laugh at her, so she resolved to stay and get out of the scrape as she could.
A second look showed her that the living eyes, under the bushy eyebrows, were kinder even than the painted ones, and there was a sly twinkle in them, which lessened her fear a good deal.
The gruff voice was gruffer than ever, as the old gentleman said abruptly, after the dreadful pause, “So you’re not afraid of me, hey?” “Not much, sir.” “And you don’t think me as handsome as your grandfather?” “Not quite, sir.” “And I’ve got a tremendous will, have I?” “I only said I thought so.” “But you like me in spite of it?” “Yes, I do, sir.” That answer pleased the old gentleman.
He gave a short laugh, shook hands with her, and, putting his finger under her chin, turned up her face, examined it gravely, and let it go, saying with a nod, “You’ve got your grandfather’s spirit, if you haven’t his face.
He was a fine man, my dear, but what is better, he was a brave and an honest one, and I was proud to be his friend.” “Thank you, sir,” And Jo was quite comfortable after that, for it suited her exactly.
“What have you been doing to this boy of mine, hey?” was the next question, sharply put.
“Only trying to be neighborly, sir.” And Jo told how her visit came about.
“You think he needs cheering up a bit, do you?” “Yes, sir, he seems a little lonely, and young folks would do him good perhaps.
We are only girls, but we should be glad to help if we could, for we don’t forget the splendid Christmas present you sent us,” said Jo eagerly.
How is the poor woman?” “Doing nicely, sir.” And off went Jo, talking very fast, as she told all about the Hummels, in whom her mother had interested richer friends than they were.
Come down and go on being neighborly.” “If you’d like to have me, sir.” “Shouldn’t ask you, if I didn’t.” And Mr.
Laurence offered her his arm with old-fashioned courtesy.
“What would Meg say to this?” thought Jo, as she was marched away, while her eyes danced with fun as she imagined herself telling the story at home.
Why, what the dickens has come to the fellow?” said the old gentleman, as Laurie came running downstairs and brought up with a start of surprise at the astounding sight of Jo arm in arm with his redoubtable grandfather.
“I didn’t know you’d come, sir,” he began, as Jo gave him a triumphant little glance.
“That’s evident, by the way you racket downstairs.
Come to your tea, sir, and behave like a gentleman.” And having pulled the boy’s hair by way of a caress, Mr.
Laurence walked on, while Laurie went through a series of comic evolutions behind their backs, which nearly produced an explosion of laughter from Jo.
The old gentleman did not say much as he drank his four cups of tea, but he watched the young people, who soon chatted away like old friends, and the change in his grandson did not escape him.
There was color, light, and life in the boy’s face now, vivacity in his manner, and genuine merriment in his laugh.
Laurence, as he looked and listened.
He liked Jo, for her odd, blunt ways suited him, and she seemed to understand the boy almost as well as if she had been one herself.
If the Laurences had been what Jo called ‘prim and poky’, she would not have got on at all, for such people always made her shy and awkward.
But finding them free and easy, she was so herself, and made a good impression.
When they rose she proposed to go, but Laurie said he had something more to show her, and took her away to the conservatory, which had been lighted for her benefit.
It seemed quite fairylike to Jo, as she went up and down the walks, enjoying the blooming walls on either side, the soft light, the damp sweet air, and the wonderful vines and trees that hung about her, while her new friend cut the finest flowers till his hands were full.
Then he tied them up, saying, with the happy look Jo liked to see, “Please give these to your mother, and tell her I like the medicine she sent me very much.” They found Mr.
Laurence standing before the fire in the great drawing room, but Jo’s attention was entirely absorbed by a grand piano, which stood open.
“Do you play?” she asked, turning to Laurie with a respectful expression.
“Sometimes,” he answered modestly.
Too stupid to learn, but I love music dearly.” So Laurie played and Jo listened, with her nose luxuriously buried in heliotrope and tea roses.
Her respect and regard for the ‘Laurence’ boy increased very much, for he played remarkably well and didn’t put on any airs.
She wished Beth could hear him, but she did not say so, only praised him till he was quite abashed, and his grandfather came to his rescue.
Too many sugarplums are not good for him.
His music isn’t bad, but I hope he will do as well in more important things.
My respects to your mother.
Good night, Doctor Jo.” He shook hands kindly, but looked as if something did not please him.
When they got into the hall, Jo asked Laurie if she had said something amiss.
Take care of yourself, won’t you?” “Yes, but you will come again, I hope?” “If you promise to come and see us after you are well.” “I will.” “Good night, Laurie!” “Good night, Jo, good night!” When all the afternoon’s adventures had been told, the family felt inclined to go visiting in a body, for each found something very attractive in the big house on the other side of the hedge.
March wanted to talk of her father with the old man who had not forgotten him, Meg longed to walk in the conservatory, Beth sighed for the grand piano, and Amy was eager to see the fine pictures and statues.
Laurence like to have Laurie play?” asked Jo, who was of an inquiring disposition.
“I am not sure, but I think it was because his son, Laurie’s father, married an Italian lady, a musician, which displeased the old man, who is very proud.
The lady was good and lovely and accomplished, but he did not like her, and never saw his son after he married.
They both died when Laurie was a little child, and then his grandfather took him home.
Laurie comes naturally by his love of music, for he is like his mother, and I dare say his grandfather fears that he may want to be a musician.
At any rate, his skill reminds him of the woman he did not like, and so he ‘glowered’ as Jo said.” “Dear me, how romantic!” exclaimed Meg.
“Let him be a musician if he wants to, and not plague his life out sending him to college, when he hates to go.” “That’s why he has such handsome black eyes and pretty manners, I suppose.
Italians are always nice,” said Meg, who was a little sentimental.
You never spoke to him, hardly,” cried Jo, who was not sentimental.
That was a nice little speech about the medicine Mother sent him.” “He meant the blanc mange, I suppose.” “How stupid you are, child!
He meant you, of course.” “Did he?” And Jo opened her eyes as if it had never occurred to her before.
You don’t know a compliment when you get it,” said Meg, with the air of a young lady who knew all about the matter.
“I think they are great nonsense, and I’ll thank you not to be silly and spoil my fun.
Laurie’s a nice boy and I like him, and I won’t have any sentimental stuff about compliments and such rubbish.
We’ll all be good to him because he hasn’t got any mother, and he may come over and see us, mayn’t he, Marmee?” “Yes, Jo, your little friend is very welcome, and I hope Meg will remember that children should be children as long as they can.” “I don’t call myself a child, and I’m not in my teens yet,” observed Amy.
“What do you say, Beth?” “I was thinking about our ‘_Pilgrim’s Progress_’,” answered Beth, who had not heard a word.
“How we got out of the Slough and through the Wicket Gate by resolving to be good, and up the steep hill by trying, and that maybe the house over there, full of splendid things, is going to be our Palace Beautiful.” “We have got to get by the lions first,” said Jo, as if she rather liked the prospect.
CHAPTER SIX BETH FINDS THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL The big house did prove a Palace Beautiful, though it took some time for all to get in, and Beth found it very hard to pass the lions.
Laurence was the biggest one, but after he had called, said something funny or kind to each one of the girls, and talked over old times with their mother, nobody felt much afraid of him, except timid Beth.
The other lion was the fact that they were poor and Laurie rich, for this made them shy of accepting favors which they could not return.
But, after a while, they found that he considered them the benefactors, and could not do enough to show how grateful he was for Mrs.
March’s motherly welcome, their cheerful society, and the comfort he took in that humble home of theirs.
So they soon forgot their pride and interchanged kindnesses without stopping to think which was the greater.
All sorts of pleasant things happened about that time, for the new friendship flourished like grass in spring.
Every one liked Laurie, and he privately informed his tutor that “the Marches were regularly splendid girls.” With the delightful enthusiasm of youth, they took the solitary boy into their midst and made much of him, and he found something very charming in the innocent companionship of these simple-hearted girls.
Never having known mother or sisters, he was quick to feel the influences they brought about him, and their busy, lively ways made him ashamed of the indolent life he led.
He was tired of books, and found people so interesting now that Mr.
Brooke was obliged to make very unsatisfactory reports, for Laurie was always playing truant and running over to the Marches’.
“Never mind, let him take a holiday, and make it up afterward,” said the old gentleman.
“The good lady next door says he is studying too hard and needs young society, amusement, and exercise.
I suspect she is right, and that I’ve been coddling the fellow as if I’d been his grandmother.
He can’t get into mischief in that little nunnery over there, and Mrs.
Such plays and tableaux, such sleigh rides and skating frolics, such pleasant evenings in the old parlor, and now and then such gay little parties at the great house.
Meg could walk in the conservatory whenever she liked and revel in bouquets, Jo browsed over the new library voraciously, and convulsed the old gentleman with her criticisms, Amy copied pictures and enjoyed beauty to her heart’s content, and Laurie played ‘lord of the manor’ in the most delightful style.
But Beth, though yearning for the grand piano, could not pluck up courage to go to the ‘Mansion of Bliss’, as Meg called it.
She went once with Jo, but the old gentleman, not being aware of her infirmity, stared at her so hard from under his heavy eyebrows, and said “Hey!” so loud, that he frightened her so much her ‘feet chattered on the floor’, she never told her mother, and she ran away, declaring she would never go there any more, not even for the dear piano.
No persuasions or enticements could overcome her fear, till, the fact coming to Mr.
Laurence’s ear in some mysterious way, he set about mending matters.
During one of the brief calls he made, he artfully led the conversation to music, and talked away about great singers whom he had seen, fine organs he had heard, and told such charming anecdotes that Beth found it impossible to stay in her distant corner, but crept nearer and nearer, as if fascinated.
At the back of his chair she stopped and stood listening, with her great eyes wide open and her cheeks red with excitement of this unusual performance.
Laurence talked on about Laurie’s lessons and teachers.
And presently, as if the idea had just occurred to him, he said to Mrs.
“The boy neglects his music now, and I’m glad of it, for he was getting too fond of it.
Wouldn’t some of your girls like to run over, and practice on it now and then, just to keep it in tune, you know, ma’am?” Beth took a step forward, and pressed her hands tightly together to keep from clapping them, for this was an irresistible temptation, and the thought of practicing on that splendid instrument quite took her breath away.
Laurence went on with an odd little nod and smile...
For I’m shut up in my study at the other end of the house, Laurie is out a great deal, and the servants are never near the drawing room after nine o’clock.” Here he rose, as if going, and Beth made up her mind to speak, for that last arrangement left nothing to be desired.
“Please, tell the young ladies what I say, and if they don’t care to come, why, never mind.” Here a little hand slipped into his, and Beth looked up at him with a face full of gratitude, as she said, in her earnest yet timid way...
“Oh sir, they do care, very very much!” “Are you the musical girl?” he asked, without any startling “Hey!” as he looked down at her very kindly.
I love it dearly, and I’ll come, if you are quite sure nobody will hear me, and be disturbed,” she added, fearing to be rude, and trembling at her own boldness as she spoke.
The house is empty half the day, so come and drum away as much as you like, and I shall be obliged to you.” “How kind you are, sir!” Beth blushed like a rose under the friendly look he wore, but she was not frightened now, and gave the hand a grateful squeeze because she had no words to thank him for the precious gift he had given her.
The old gentleman softly stroked the hair off her forehead, and, stooping down, he kissed her, saying, in a tone few people ever heard...
Beth had a rapture with her mother, and then rushed up to impart the glorious news to her family of invalids, as the girls were not home.
How blithely she sang that evening, and how they all laughed at her because she woke Amy in the night by playing the piano on her face in her sleep.
Next day, having seen both the old and young gentleman out of the house, Beth, after two or three retreats, fairly got in at the side door, and made her way as noiselessly as any mouse to the drawing room where her idol stood.
Quite by accident, of course, some pretty, easy music lay on the piano, and with trembling fingers and frequent stops to listen and look about, Beth at last touched the great instrument, and straightway forgot her fear, herself, and everything else but the unspeakable delight which the music gave her, for it was like the voice of a beloved friend.
She stayed till Hannah came to take her home to dinner, but she had no appetite, and could only sit and smile upon everyone in a general state of beatitude.
Laurence opened his study door to hear the old-fashioned airs he liked.
She never saw Laurie mount guard in the hall to warn the servants away.
She never suspected that the exercise books and new songs which she found in the rack were put there for her especial benefit, and when he talked to her about music at home, she only thought how kind he was to tell things that helped her so much.
So she enjoyed herself heartily, and found, what isn’t always the case, that her granted wish was all she had hoped.
Perhaps it was because she was so grateful for this blessing that a greater was given her.
At any rate she deserved both.
Laurence a pair of slippers.
Can I do it?” asked Beth, a few weeks after that eventful call of his.
It will please him very much, and be a nice way of thanking him.
March, who took peculiar pleasure in granting Beth’s requests because she so seldom asked anything for herself.
After many serious discussions with Meg and Jo, the pattern was chosen, the materials bought, and the slippers begun.
A cluster of grave yet cheerful pansies on a deeper purple ground was pronounced very appropriate and pretty, and Beth worked away early and late, with occasional lifts over hard parts.
She was a nimble little needlewoman, and they were finished before anyone got tired of them.
Then she wrote a short, simple note, and with Laurie’s help, got them smuggled onto the study table one morning before the old gentleman was up.
When this excitement was over, Beth waited to see what would happen.
All day passed and a part of the next before any acknowledgement arrived, and she was beginning to fear she had offended her crochety friend.
On the afternoon of the second day, she went out to do an errand, and give poor Joanna, the invalid doll, her daily exercise.
As she came up the street, on her return, she saw three, yes, four heads popping in and out of the parlor windows, and the moment they saw her, several hands were waved, and several joyful voices screamed...
“Here’s a letter from the old gentleman!
Come quick, and read it!” “Oh, Beth, he’s sent you...” began Amy, gesticulating with unseemly energy, but she got no further, for Jo quenched her by slamming down the window.
Beth hurried on in a flutter of suspense.
At the door her sisters seized and bore her to the parlor in a triumphal procession, all pointing and all saying at once, “Look there!
Look there!” Beth did look, and turned pale with delight and surprise, for there stood a little cabinet piano, with a letter lying on the glossy lid, directed like a sign board to “Miss Elizabeth March.” “For me?” gasped Beth, holding onto Jo and feeling as if she should tumble down, it was such an overwhelming thing altogether.
“Yes, all for you, my precious!
Isn’t it splendid of him?
We didn’t open it, but we are dying to know what he says,” cried Jo, hugging her sister and offering the note.
I wish someone would write to me so!” said Amy, who thought the old-fashioned address very elegant.
“‘I have had many pairs of slippers in my life, but I never had any that suited me so well as yours,’” continues Jo.
“‘Heart’s-ease is my favorite flower, and these will always remind me of the gentle giver.
I like to pay my debts, so I know you will allow ‘the old gentleman’ to send you something which once belonged to the little grand daughter he lost.
With hearty thanks and best wishes, I remain “‘Your grateful friend and humble servant, ‘JAMES LAURENCE’.” “There, Beth, that’s an honor to be proud of, I’m sure!
Laurence used to be of the child who died, and how he kept all her little things carefully.
That comes of having big blue eyes and loving music,” said Jo, trying to soothe Beth, who trembled and looked more excited than she had ever been before.
“See the cunning brackets to hold candles, and the nice green silk, puckered up, with a gold rose in the middle, and the pretty rack and stool, all complete,” added Meg, opening the instrument and displaying its beauties.
“‘Your humble servant, James Laurence’.
They’ll think it’s splendid,” said Amy, much impressed by the note.
So Beth tried it, and everyone pronounced it the most remarkable piano ever heard.
It had evidently been newly tuned and put in apple-pie order, but, perfect as it was, I think the real charm lay in the happiest of all happy faces which leaned over it, as Beth lovingly touched the beautiful black and white keys and pressed the bright pedals.
I guess I’ll go now, before I get frightened thinking about it.” And, to the utter amazement of the assembled family, Beth walked deliberately down the garden, through the hedge, and in at the Laurences’ door.
“Well, I wish I may die if it ain’t the queerest thing I ever see!
She’d never have gone in her right mind,” cried Hannah, staring after her, while the girls were rendered quite speechless by the miracle.
They would have been still more amazed if they had seen what Beth did afterward.
Laurence, who looked quite taken aback, and held out her hand, saying, with only a small quaver in her voice, “I came to thank you, sir, for...” But she didn’t finish, for he looked so friendly that she forgot her speech and, only remembering that he had lost the little girl he loved, she put both arms round his neck and kissed him.
If the roof of the house had suddenly flown off, the old gentleman wouldn’t have been more astonished.
Oh, dear, yes, he liked it amazingly!
And was so touched and pleased by that confiding little kiss that all his crustiness vanished, and he just set her on his knee, and laid his wrinkled cheek against her rosy one, feeling as if he had got his own little granddaughter back again.
Beth ceased to fear him from that moment, and sat there talking to him as cozily as if she had known him all her life, for love casts out fear, and gratitude can conquer pride.
When she went home, he walked with her to her own gate, shook hands cordially, and touched his hat as he marched back again, looking very stately and erect, like a handsome, soldierly old gentleman, as he was.
And very handsome ones they are, too,” cried Jo, who resented any slighting remarks about her friend.
“I didn’t say anything about his eyes, and I don’t see why you need fire up when I admire his riding.” “Oh, my goodness!
That little goose means a centaur, and she called him a Cyclops,” exclaimed Jo, with a burst of laughter.
Davis says,” retorted Amy, finishing Jo with her Latin.
I’m dreadfully in debt, and it won’t be my turn to have the rag money for a month.” “In debt, Amy?
“Why, I owe at least a dozen pickled limes, and I can’t pay them, you know, till I have money, for Marmee forbade my having anything charged at the shop.” “Tell me all about it.
It used to be pricking bits of rubber to make balls.” And Meg tried to keep her countenance, Amy looked so grave and important.
It’s nothing but limes now, for everyone is sucking them in their desks in schooltime, and trading them off for pencils, bead rings, paper dolls, or something else, at recess.
They treat by turns, and I’ve had ever so many but haven’t returned them, and I ought for they are debts of honor, you know.” “How much will pay them off and restore your credit?” asked Meg, taking out her purse.
I felt delicate about taking any, as I couldn’t return them, and I’m actually suffering for one.” Next day Amy was rather late at school, but could not resist the temptation of displaying, with pardonable pride, a moist brown-paper parcel, before she consigned it to the inmost recesses of her desk.
During the next few minutes the rumor that Amy March had got twenty-four delicious limes (she ate one on the way) and was going to treat circulated through her ‘set’, and the attentions of her friends became quite overwhelming.
Mary Kingsley insisted on lending her her watch till recess, and Jenny Snow, a satirical young lady, who had basely twitted Amy upon her limeless state, promptly buried the hatchet and offered to furnish answers to certain appalling sums.
Pride goes before a fall, and the revengeful Snow turned the tables with disastrous success.
No sooner had the guest paid the usual stale compliments and bowed himself out, than Jenny, under pretense of asking an important question, informed Mr.
Davis had declared limes a contraband article, and solemnly vowed to publicly ferrule the first person who was found breaking the law.
This much-enduring man had succeeded in banishing chewing gum after a long and stormy war, had made a bonfire of the confiscated novels and newspapers, had suppressed a private post office, had forbidden distortions of the face, nicknames, and caricatures, and done all that one man could do to keep half a hundred rebellious girls in order.
Boys are trying enough to human patience, goodness knows, but girls are infinitely more so, especially to nervous gentlemen with tyrannical tempers and no more talent for teaching than Dr.
Davis knew any quantity of Greek, Latin, algebra, and ologies of all sorts so he was called a fine teacher, and manners, morals, feelings, and examples were not considered of any particular importance.
It was a most unfortunate moment for denouncing Amy, and Jenny knew it.
Davis had evidently taken his coffee too strong that morning, there was an east wind, which always affected his neuralgia, and his pupils had not done him the credit which he felt he deserved.
Therefore, to use the expressive, if not elegant, language of a schoolgirl, “He was as nervous as a witch and as cross as a bear”.
The word ‘limes’ was like fire to powder, his yellow face flushed, and he rapped on his desk with an energy which made Jenny skip to her seat with unusual rapidity.
“Young ladies, attention, if you please!” At the stern order the buzz ceased, and fifty pairs of blue, black, gray, and brown eyes were obediently fixed upon his awful countenance.
“Miss March, come to the desk.” Amy rose to comply with outward composure, but a secret fear oppressed her, for the limes weighed upon her conscience.
“Bring with you the limes you have in your desk,” was the unexpected command which arrested her before she got out of her seat.
“Don’t take all.” whispered her neighbor, a young lady of great presence of mind.
Davis, feeling that any man possessing a human heart would relent when that delicious perfume met his nose.
Davis particularly detested the odor of the fashionable pickle, and disgust added to his wrath.
“Is that all?” “Not quite,” stammered Amy.
“Bring the rest immediately.” With a despairing glance at her set, she obeyed.
Now take these disgusting things two by two, and throw them out of the window.” There was a simultaneous sigh, which created quite a little gust, as the last hope fled, and the treat was ravished from their longing lips.
Scarlet with shame and anger, Amy went to and fro six dreadful times, and as each doomed couple, looking oh, so plump and juicy, fell from her reluctant hands, a shout from the street completed the anguish of the girls, for it told them that their feast was being exulted over by the little Irish children, who were their sworn foes.
All flashed indignant or appealing glances at the inexorable Davis, and one passionate lime lover burst into tears.
As Amy returned from her last trip, Mr.
Davis gave a portentous “Hem!” and said, in his most impressive manner...
“Young ladies, you remember what I said to you a week ago.
I am sorry this has happened, but I never allow my rules to be infringed, and I never break my word.
Miss March, hold out your hand.” Amy started, and put both hands behind her, turning on him an imploring look which pleaded for her better than the words she could not utter.
She was rather a favorite with ‘old Davis’, as, of course, he was called, and it’s my private belief that he would have broken his word if the indignation of one irrepressible young lady had not found vent in a hiss.
That hiss, faint as it was, irritated the irascible gentleman, and sealed the culprit’s fate.
“Your hand, Miss March!” was the only answer her mute appeal received, and too proud to cry or beseech, Amy set her teeth, threw back her head defiantly, and bore without flinching several tingling blows on her little palm.
They were neither many nor heavy, but that made no difference to her.
For the first time in her life she had been struck, and the disgrace, in her eyes, was as deep as if he had knocked her down.
“You will now stand on the platform till recess,” said Mr.
Davis, resolved to do the thing thoroughly, since he had begun.
It would have been bad enough to go to her seat, and see the pitying faces of her friends, or the satisfied ones of her few enemies, but to face the whole school, with that shame fresh upon her, seemed impossible, and for a second she felt as if she could only drop down where she stood, and break her heart with crying.
A bitter sense of wrong and the thought of Jenny Snow helped her to bear it, and, taking the ignominious place, she fixed her eyes on the stove funnel above what now seemed a sea of faces, and stood there, so motionless and white that the girls found it hard to study with that pathetic figure before them.
During the fifteen minutes that followed, the proud and sensitive little girl suffered a shame and pain which she never forgot.
To others it might seem a ludicrous or trivial affair, but to her it was a hard experience, for during the twelve years of her life she had been governed by love alone, and a blow of that sort had never touched her before.
The smart of her hand and the ache of her heart were forgotten in the sting of the thought, “I shall have to tell at home, and they will be so disappointed in me!” The fifteen minutes seemed an hour, but they came to an end at last, and the word ‘Recess!’ had never seemed so welcome to her before.
Davis, looking, as he felt, uncomfortable.
He did not soon forget the reproachful glance Amy gave him, as she went, without a word to anyone, straight into the anteroom, snatched her things, and left the place “forever,” as she passionately declared to herself.
She was in a sad state when she got home, and when the older girls arrived, some time later, an indignation meeting was held at once.
March did not say much but looked disturbed, and comforted her afflicted little daughter in her tenderest manner.
Meg bathed the insulted hand with glycerine and tears, Beth felt that even her beloved kittens would fail as a balm for griefs like this, Jo wrathfully proposed that Mr.
Davis be arrested without delay, and Hannah shook her fist at the ‘villain’ and pounded potatoes for dinner as if she had him under her pestle.
No notice was taken of Amy’s flight, except by her mates, but the sharp-eyed demoiselles discovered that Mr.
Davis was quite benignant in the afternoon, also unusually nervous.
Just before school closed, Jo appeared, wearing a grim expression as she stalked up to the desk, and delivered a letter from her mother, then collected Amy’s property, and departed, carefully scraping the mud from her boots on the door mat, as if she shook the dust of the place off her feet.
“Yes, you can have a vacation from school, but I want you to study a little every day with Beth,” said Mrs.
“I don’t approve of corporal punishment, especially for girls.
Davis’s manner of teaching and don’t think the girls you associate with are doing you any good, so I shall ask your father’s advice before I send you anywhere else.” “That’s good!
It’s perfectly maddening to think of those lovely limes,” sighed Amy, with the air of a martyr.
“I am not sorry you lost them, for you broke the rules, and deserved some punishment for disobedience,” was the severe reply, which rather disappointed the young lady, who expected nothing but sympathy.
“Do you mean you are glad I was disgraced before the whole school?” cried Amy.
You are getting to be rather conceited, my dear, and it is quite time you set about correcting it.
You have a good many little gifts and virtues, but there is no need of parading them, for conceit spoils the finest genius.
There is not much danger that real talent or goodness will be overlooked long, even if it is, the consciousness of possessing and using it well should satisfy one, and the great charm of all power is modesty.” “So it is!” cried Laurie, who was playing chess in a corner with Jo.
“I knew a girl once, who had a really remarkable talent for music, and she didn’t know it, never guessed what sweet little things she composed when she was alone, and wouldn’t have believed it if anyone had told her.” “I wish I’d known that nice girl.
Maybe she would have helped me, I’m so stupid,” said Beth, who stood beside him, listening eagerly.
“You do know her, and she helps you better than anyone else could,” answered Laurie, looking at her with such mischievous meaning in his merry black eyes that Beth suddenly turned very red, and hid her face in the sofa cushion, quite overcome by such an unexpected discovery.
Jo let Laurie win the game to pay for that praise of her Beth, who could not be prevailed upon to play for them after her compliment.
So Laurie did his best, and sang delightfully, being in a particularly lively humor, for to the Marches he seldom showed the moody side of his character.
When he was gone, Amy, who had been pensive all evening, said suddenly, as if busy over some new idea, “Is Laurie an accomplished boy?” “Yes, he has had an excellent education, and has much talent.
“And he isn’t conceited, is he?” asked Amy.
That is why he is so charming and we all like him so much.” “I see.
It’s nice to have accomplishments and be elegant, but not to show off or get perked up,” said Amy thoughtfully.
“These things are always seen and felt in a person’s manner and conversations, if modestly used, but it is not necessary to display them,” said Mrs.
CHAPTER EIGHT JO MEETS APOLLYON “Girls, where are you going?” asked Amy, coming into their room one Saturday afternoon, and finding them getting ready to go out with an air of secrecy which excited her curiosity.
Little girls shouldn’t ask questions,” returned Jo sharply.
Now if there is anything mortifying to our feelings when we are young, it is to be told that, and to be bidden to “run away, dear” is still more trying to us.
Amy bridled up at this insult, and determined to find out the secret, if she teased for an hour.
Turning to Meg, who never refused her anything very long, she said coaxingly, “Do tell me!
I should think you might let me go, too, for Beth is fussing over her piano, and I haven’t got anything to do, and am so lonely.” “I can’t, dear, because you aren’t invited,” began Meg, but Jo broke in impatiently, “Now, Meg, be quiet or you will spoil it all.
You can’t go, Amy, so don’t be a baby and whine about it.” “You are going somewhere with Laurie, I know you are.
You were whispering and laughing together on the sofa last night, and you stopped when I came in.
Now do be still, and stop bothering.” Amy held her tongue, but used her eyes, and saw Meg slip a fan into her pocket.
You’re going to the theater to see the _Seven Castles!_” she cried, adding resolutely, “and I shall go, for Mother said I might see it, and I’ve got my rag money, and it was mean not to tell me in time.” “Just listen to me a minute, and be a good child,” said Meg soothingly.
I’ll be ever so good,” pleaded Amy, looking as pathetic as she could.
I should think she’d hate to poke herself where she isn’t wanted,” said Jo crossly, for she disliked the trouble of overseeing a fidgety child when she wanted to enjoy herself.
Her tone and manner angered Amy, who began to put her boots on, saying, in her most aggravating way, “I shall go.
Meg says I may, and if I pay for myself, Laurie hasn’t anything to do with it.” “You can’t sit with us, for our seats are reserved, and you mustn’t sit alone, so Laurie will give you his place, and that will spoil our pleasure.
Just as the party was setting out, Amy called over the banisters in a threatening tone, “You’ll be sorry for this, Jo March, see if you ain’t.” “Fiddlesticks!” returned Jo, slamming the door.
They had a charming time, for _The Seven Castles Of The Diamond Lake_ was as brilliant and wonderful as heart could wish.
But in spite of the comical red imps, sparkling elves, and the gorgeous princes and princesses, Jo’s pleasure had a drop of bitterness in it.
The fairy queen’s yellow curls reminded her of Amy, and between the acts she amused herself with wondering what her sister would do to make her ‘sorry for it’.
She and Amy had had many lively skirmishes in the course of their lives, for both had quick tempers and were apt to be violent when fairly roused.
Amy teased Jo, and Jo irritated Amy, and semioccasional explosions occurred, of which both were much ashamed afterward.
Although the oldest, Jo had the least self-control, and had hard times trying to curb the fiery spirit which was continually getting her into trouble.
Her anger never lasted long, and having humbly confessed her fault, she sincerely repented and tried to do better.
Her sisters used to say that they rather liked to get Jo into a fury because she was such an angel afterward.
Poor Jo tried desperately to be good, but her bosom enemy was always ready to flame up and defeat her, and it took years of patient effort to subdue it.
She assumed an injured air as they came in, never lifted her eyes from her book, or asked a single question.
Perhaps curiosity might have conquered resentment, if Beth had not been there to inquire and receive a glowing description of the play.
On going up to put away her best hat, Jo’s first look was toward the bureau, for in their last quarrel Amy had soothed her feelings by turning Jo’s top drawer upside down on the floor.
Everything was in its place, however, and after a hasty glance into her various closets, bags, and boxes, Jo decided that Amy had forgiven and forgotten her wrongs.
There Jo was mistaken, for next day she made a discovery which produced a tempest.
Meg, Beth, and Amy were sitting together, late in the afternoon, when Jo burst into the room, looking excited and demanding breathlessly, “Has anyone taken my book?” Meg and Beth said, “No.” at once, and looked surprised.
“Amy, you’ve got it!” “No, I haven’t.” “You know where it is, then!” “No, I don’t.” “That’s a fib!” cried Jo, taking her by the shoulders, and looking fierce enough to frighten a much braver child than Amy.
I haven’t got it, don’t know where it is now, and don’t care.” “You know something about it, and you’d better tell at once, or I’ll make you.” And Jo gave her a slight shake.
Have you really burned it?” said Jo, turning very pale, while her eyes kindled and her hands clutched Amy nervously.
I told you I’d make you pay for being so cross yesterday, and I have, so...” Amy got no farther, for Jo’s hot temper mastered her, and she shook Amy till her teeth chattered in her head, crying in a passion of grief and anger...
I never can write it again, and I’ll never forgive you as long as I live.” Meg flew to rescue Amy, and Beth to pacify Jo, but Jo was quite beside herself, and with a parting box on her sister’s ear, she rushed out of the room up to the old sofa in the garret, and finished her fight alone.
Jo’s book was the pride of her heart, and was regarded by her family as a literary sprout of great promise.
It was only half a dozen little fairy tales, but Jo had worked over them patiently, putting her whole heart into her work, hoping to make something good enough to print.
She had just copied them with great care, and had destroyed the old manuscript, so that Amy’s bonfire had consumed the loving work of several years.
It seemed a small loss to others, but to Jo it was a dreadful calamity, and she felt that it never could be made up to her.
Beth mourned as for a departed kitten, and Meg refused to defend her pet.
March looked grave and grieved, and Amy felt that no one would love her till she had asked pardon for the act which she now regretted more than any of them.
When the tea bell rang, Jo appeared, looking so grim and unapproachable that it took all Amy’s courage to say meekly...
I’m very, very sorry.” “I never shall forgive you,” was Jo’s stern answer, and from that moment she ignored Amy entirely.
March, for all had learned by experience that when Jo was in that mood words were wasted, and the wisest course was to wait till some little accident, or her own generous nature, softened Jo’s resentment and healed the breach.
It was not a happy evening, for though they sewed as usual, while their mother read aloud from Bremer, Scott, or Edgeworth, something was wanting, and the sweet home peace was disturbed.
But in spite of their efforts to be as cheery as larks, the flutelike voices did not seem to chord as well as usual, and all felt out of tune.
As Jo received her good-night kiss, Mrs.
March whispered gently, “My dear, don’t let the sun go down upon your anger.
Forgive each other, help each other, and begin again tomorrow.” Jo wanted to lay her head down on that motherly bosom, and cry her grief and anger all away, but tears were an unmanly weakness, and she felt so deeply injured that she really couldn’t quite forgive yet.
So she winked hard, shook her head, and said gruffly because Amy was listening, “It was an abominable thing, and she doesn’t deserve to be forgiven.” With that she marched off to bed, and there was no merry or confidential gossip that night.
Amy was much offended that her overtures of peace had been repulsed, and began to wish she had not humbled herself, to feel more injured than ever, and to plume herself on her superior virtue in a way which was particularly exasperating.
It was bitter cold in the morning, she dropped her precious turnover in the gutter, Aunt March had an attack of the fidgets, Meg was sensitive, Beth would look grieved and wistful when she got home, and Amy kept making remarks about people who were always talking about being good and yet wouldn’t even try when other people set them a virtuous example.
“Everybody is so hateful, I’ll ask Laurie to go skating.
Amy heard the clash of skates, and looked out with an impatient exclamation.
She promised I should go next time, for this is the last ice we shall have.
But it’s no use to ask such a crosspatch to take me.” “Don’t say that.
You were very naughty, and it is hard to forgive the loss of her precious little book, but I think she might do it now, and I guess she will, if you try her at the right minute,” said Meg.
Don’t say anything till Jo has got good-natured with Laurie, than take a quiet minute and just kiss her, or do some kind thing, and I’m sure she’ll be friends again with all her heart.” “I’ll try,” said Amy, for the advice suited her, and after a flurry to get ready, she ran after the friends, who were just disappearing over the hill.
Laurie did not see, for he was carefully skating along the shore, sounding the ice, for a warm spell had preceded the cold snap.
Jo heard Amy panting after her run, stamping her feet and blowing on her fingers as she tried to put her skates on, but Jo never turned and went slowly zigzagging down the river, taking a bitter, unhappy sort of satisfaction in her sister’s troubles.
She had cherished her anger till it grew strong and took possession of her, as evil thoughts and feelings always do unless cast out at once.
It isn’t safe in the middle.” Jo heard, but Amy was struggling to her feet and did not catch a word.
Jo glanced over her shoulder, and the little demon she was harboring said in her ear...
“No matter whether she heard or not, let her take care of herself.” Laurie had vanished round the bend, Jo was just at the turn, and Amy, far behind, striking out toward the smoother ice in the middle of the river.
For a minute Jo stood still with a strange feeling in her heart, then she resolved to go on, but something held and turned her round, just in time to see Amy throw up her hands and go down, with a sudden crash of rotten ice, the splash of water, and a cry that made Jo’s heart stand still with fear.
She tried to rush forward, but her feet seemed to have no strength in them, and for a second, she could only stand motionless, staring with a terror-stricken face at the little blue hood above the black water.
Something rushed swiftly by her, and Laurie’s voice cried out...
Quick, quick!” How she did it, she never knew, but for the next few minutes she worked as if possessed, blindly obeying Laurie, who was quite self-possessed, and lying flat, held Amy up by his arm and hockey stick till Jo dragged a rail from the fence, and together they got the child out, more frightened than hurt.
Pile our things on her, while I get off these confounded skates,” cried Laurie, wrapping his coat round Amy, and tugging away at the straps which never seemed so intricate before.
Shivering, dripping, and crying, they got Amy home, and after an exciting time of it, she fell asleep, rolled in blankets before a hot fire.
During the bustle Jo had scarcely spoken but flown about, looking pale and wild, with her things half off, her dress torn, and her hands cut and bruised by ice and rails and refractory buckles.
When Amy was comfortably asleep, the house quiet, and Mrs.
“Are you sure she is safe?” whispered Jo, looking remorsefully at the golden head, which might have been swept away from her sight forever under the treacherous ice.
She is not hurt, and won’t even take cold, I think, you were so sensible in covering and getting her home quickly,” replied her mother cheerfully.
Mother, if she should die, it would be my fault.” And Jo dropped down beside the bed in a passion of penitent tears, telling all that had happened, bitterly condemning her hardness of heart, and sobbing out her gratitude for being spared the heavy punishment which might have come upon her.
“It’s my dreadful temper!
“Watch and pray, dear, never get tired of trying, and never think it is impossible to conquer your fault,” said Mrs.
March, drawing the blowzy head to her shoulder and kissing the wet cheek so tenderly that Jo cried even harder.
It seems as if I could do anything when I’m in a passion.
I’m afraid I shall do something dreadful some day, and spoil my life, and make everybody hate me.
Don’t cry so bitterly, but remember this day, and resolve with all your soul that you will never know another like it.
Jo, dear, we all have our temptations, some far greater than yours, and it often takes us all our lives to conquer them.
Why, you are never angry!” And for the moment Jo forgot remorse in surprise.
“I’ve been trying to cure it for forty years, and have only succeeded in controlling it.
I am angry nearly every day of my life, Jo, but I have learned not to show it, and I still hope to learn not to feel it, though it may take me another forty years to do so.” The patience and the humility of the face she loved so well was a better lesson to Jo than the wisest lecture, the sharpest reproof.
She felt comforted at once by the sympathy and confidence given her.
The knowledge that her mother had a fault like hers, and tried to mend it, made her own easier to bear and strengthened her resolution to cure it, though forty years seemed rather a long time to watch and pray to a girl of fifteen.
“Mother, are you angry when you fold your lips tight together and go out of the room sometimes, when Aunt March scolds or people worry you?” asked Jo, feeling nearer and dearer to her mother than ever before.
“Yes, I’ve learned to check the hasty words that rise to my lips, and when I feel that they mean to break out against my will, I just go away for a minute, and give myself a little shake for being so weak and wicked,” answered Mrs.
March with a sigh and a smile, as she smoothed and fastened up Jo’s disheveled hair.
That is what troubles me, for the sharp words fly out before I know what I’m about, and the more I say the worse I get, till it’s a pleasure to hurt people’s feelings and say dreadful things.
Tell me how you do it, Marmee dear.” “My good mother used to help me...” “As you do us...” interrupted Jo, with a grateful kiss.
“But I lost her when I was a little older than you are, and for years had to struggle on alone, for I was too proud to confess my weakness to anyone else.
I had a hard time, Jo, and shed a good many bitter tears over my failures, for in spite of my efforts I never seemed to get on.
But by-and-by, when I had four little daughters round me and we were poor, then the old trouble began again, for I am not patient by nature, and it tried me very much to see my children wanting anything.” “Poor Mother!
He never loses patience, never doubts or complains, but always hopes, and works and waits so cheerfully that one is ashamed to do otherwise before him.
He helped and comforted me, and showed me that I must try to practice all the virtues I would have my little girls possess, for I was their example.
A startled or surprised look from one of you when I spoke sharply rebuked me more than any words could have done, and the love, respect, and confidence of my children was the sweetest reward I could receive for my efforts to be the woman I would have them copy.” “Oh, Mother, if I’m ever half as good as you, I shall be satisfied,” cried Jo, much touched.
Remember it, and try with heart and soul to master this quick temper, before it brings you greater sorrow and regret than you have known today.” “I will try, Mother, I truly will.
I used to see Father sometimes put his finger on his lips, and look at you with a very kind but sober face, and you always folded your lips tight and went away.
Was he reminding you then?” asked Jo softly.
I asked him to help me so, and he never forgot it, but saved me from many a sharp word by that little gesture and kind look.” Jo saw that her mother’s eyes filled and her lips trembled as she spoke, and fearing that she had said too much, she whispered anxiously, “Was it wrong to watch you and to speak of it?
Why should I complain, when we both have merely done our duty and will surely be the happier for it in the end?
My child, the troubles and temptations of your life are beginning and may be many, but you can overcome and outlive them all if you learn to feel the strength and tenderness of your Heavenly Father as you do that of your earthly one.
His love and care never tire or change, can never be taken from you, but may become the source of lifelong peace, happiness, and strength.
Believe this heartily, and go to God with all your little cares, and hopes, and sins, and sorrows, as freely and confidingly as you come to your mother.” Jo’s only answer was to hold her mother close, and in the silence which followed the sincerest prayer she had ever prayed left her heart without words.
For in that sad yet happy hour, she had learned not only the bitterness of remorse and despair, but the sweetness of self-denial and self-control, and led by her mother’s hand, she had drawn nearer to the Friend who always welcomes every child with a love stronger than that of any father, tenderer than that of any mother.
Amy stirred and sighed in her sleep, and as if eager to begin at once to mend her fault, Jo looked up with an expression on her face which it had never worn before.
How could I be so wicked?” said Jo, half aloud, as she leaned over her sister softly stroking the wet hair scattered on the pillow.
As if she heard, Amy opened her eyes, and held out her arms, with a smile that went straight to Jo’s heart.
Neither said a word, but they hugged one another close, in spite of the blankets, and everything was forgiven and forgotten in one hearty kiss.
CHAPTER NINE MEG GOES TO VANITY FAIR “I do think it was the most fortunate thing in the world that those children should have the measles just now,” said Meg, one April day, as she stood packing the ‘go abroady’ trunk in her room, surrounded by her sisters.
A whole fortnight of fun will be regularly splendid,” replied Jo, looking like a windmill as she folded skirts with her long arms.
“And such lovely weather, I’m so glad of that,” added Beth, tidily sorting neck and hair ribbons in her best box, lent for the great occasion.
“I wish I was going to have a fine time and wear all these nice things,” said Amy with her mouth full of pins, as she artistically replenished her sister’s cushion.
“I wish you were all going, but as you can’t, I shall keep my adventures to tell you when I come back.
I’m sure it’s the least I can do when you have been so kind, lending me things and helping me get ready,” said Meg, glancing round the room at the very simple outfit, which seemed nearly perfect in their eyes.
“What did Mother give you out of the treasure box?” asked Amy, who had not been present at the opening of a certain cedar chest in which Mrs.
March kept a few relics of past splendor, as gifts for her girls when the proper time came.
“A pair of silk stockings, that pretty carved fan, and a lovely blue sash.
I wanted the violet silk, but there isn’t time to make it over, so I must be contented with my old tarlaton.” “It will look nice over my new muslin skirt, and the sash will set it off beautifully.
I wish I hadn’t smashed my coral bracelet, for you might have had it,” said Jo, who loved to give and lend, but whose possessions were usually too dilapidated to be of much use.
“There is a lovely old-fashioned pearl set in the treasure chest, but Mother said real flowers were the prettiest ornament for a young girl, and Laurie promised to send me all I want,” replied Meg.
Oh, dear!” “Never mind, you’ve got the tarlaton for the big party, and you always look like an angel in white,” said Amy, brooding over the little store of finery in which her soul delighted.
My blue housedress looks so well, turned and freshly trimmed, that I feel as if I’d got a new one.
I didn’t like to say anything, but I was sadly disappointed in my umbrella.
I told Mother black with a white handle, but she forgot and bought a green one with a yellowish handle.
It’s strong and neat, so I ought not to complain, but I know I shall feel ashamed of it beside Annie’s silk one with a gold top,” sighed Meg, surveying the little umbrella with great disfavor.
“I won’t be so silly, or hurt Marmee’s feelings, when she took so much pains to get my things.
It’s a nonsensical notion of mine, and I’m not going to give up to it.
My silk stockings and two pairs of new gloves are my comfort.
I feel so rich and sort of elegant, with two new pairs, and the old ones cleaned up for common.” And Meg took a refreshing peep at her glove box.
“Annie Moffat has blue and pink bows on her nightcaps.
“No, I wouldn’t, for the smart caps won’t match the plain gowns without any trimming on them.
Poor folks shouldn’t rig,” said Jo decidedly.
“I wonder if I shall ever be happy enough to have real lace on my clothes and bows on my caps?” said Meg impatiently.
“You said the other day that you’d be perfectly happy if you could only go to Annie Moffat’s,” observed Beth in her quiet way.
There now, the trays are ready, and everything in but my ball dress, which I shall leave for Mother to pack,” said Meg, cheering up, as she glanced from the half-filled trunk to the many times pressed and mended white tarlaton, which she called her ‘ball dress’ with an important air.
The next day was fine, and Meg departed in style for a fortnight of novelty and pleasure.
March had consented to the visit rather reluctantly, fearing that Margaret would come back more discontented than she went.
But she begged so hard, and Sallie had promised to take good care of her, and a little pleasure seemed so delightful after a winter of irksome work that the mother yielded, and the daughter went to take her first taste of fashionable life.
The Moffats were very fashionable, and simple Meg was rather daunted, at first, by the splendor of the house and the elegance of its occupants.
But they were kindly people, in spite of the frivolous life they led, and soon put their guest at her ease.
Perhaps Meg felt, without understanding why, that they were not particularly cultivated or intelligent people, and that all their gilding could not quite conceal the ordinary material of which they were made.
It certainly was agreeable to fare sumptuously, drive in a fine carriage, wear her best frock every day, and do nothing but enjoy herself.
It suited her exactly, and soon she began to imitate the manners and conversation of those about her, to put on little airs and graces, use French phrases, crimp her hair, take in her dresses, and talk about the fashions as well as she could.
Home now looked bare and dismal as she thought of it, work grew harder than ever, and she felt that she was a very destitute and much-injured girl, in spite of the new gloves and silk stockings.
She had not much time for repining, however, for the three young girls were busily employed in ‘having a good time’.
They shopped, walked, rode, and called all day, went to theaters and operas or frolicked at home in the evening, for Annie had many friends and knew how to entertain them.
Her older sisters were very fine young ladies, and one was engaged, which was extremely interesting and romantic, Meg thought.
Moffat was a fat, jolly old gentleman, who knew her father, and Mrs.
Moffat, a fat, jolly old lady, who took as great a fancy to Meg as her daughter had done.
Everyone petted her, and ‘Daisey’, as they called her, was in a fair way to have her head turned.
When the evening for the small party came, she found that the poplin wouldn’t do at all, for the other girls were putting on thin dresses and making themselves very fine indeed.
So out came the tarlatan, looking older, limper, and shabbier than ever beside Sallie’s crisp new one.
Meg saw the girls glance at it and then at one another, and her cheeks began to burn, for with all her gentleness she was very proud.
But in their kindness Meg saw only pity for her poverty, and her heart felt very heavy as she stood by herself, while the others laughed, chattered, and flew about like gauzy butterflies.
Before she could speak, Annie had the cover off, and all were exclaiming at the lovely roses, heath, and fern within.
“It’s for Belle, of course, George always sends her some, but these are altogether ravishing,” cried Annie, with a great sniff.
Didn’t know you had a lover,” cried the girls, fluttering about Meg in a high state of curiosity and surprise.
“The note is from Mother, and the flowers from Laurie,” said Meg simply, yet much gratified that he had not forgotten her.
“Oh, indeed!” said Annie with a funny look, as Meg slipped the note into her pocket as a sort of talisman against envy, vanity, and false pride, for the few loving words had done her good, and the flowers cheered her up by their beauty.
Feeling almost happy again, she laid by a few ferns and roses for herself, and quickly made up the rest in dainty bouquets for the breasts, hair, or skirts of her friends, offering them so prettily that Clara, the elder sister, told her she was ‘the sweetest little thing she ever saw’, and they looked quite charmed with her small attention.
Somehow the kind act finished her despondency, and when all the rest went to show themselves to Mrs.
Moffat, she saw a happy, bright-eyed face in the mirror, as she laid her ferns against her rippling hair and fastened the roses in the dress that didn’t strike her as so very shabby now.
Everyone was very kind, and she had three compliments.
Annie made her sing, and some one said she had a remarkably fine voice.
Major Lincoln asked who ‘the fresh little girl with the beautiful eyes’ was, and Mr.
Moffat insisted on dancing with her because she ‘didn’t dawdle, but had some spring in her’, as he gracefully expressed it.
So altogether she had a very nice time, till she overheard a bit of conversation, which disturbed her extremely.
She was sitting just inside the conservatory, waiting for her partner to bring her an ice, when she heard a voice ask on the other side of the flowery wall...
“How old is he?” “Sixteen or seventeen, I should say,” replied another voice.
Sallie says they are very intimate now, and the old man quite dotes on them.” “Mrs.
The girl evidently doesn’t think of it yet,” said Mrs.
“She told that fib about her momma, as if she did know, and colored up when the flowers came quite prettily.
Do you think she’d be offended if we offered to lend her a dress for Thursday?” asked another voice.
“She’s proud, but I don’t believe she’d mind, for that dowdy tarlaton is all she has got.
She may tear it tonight, and that will be a good excuse for offering a decent one.” Here Meg’s partner appeared, to find her looking much flushed and rather agitated.
She was proud, and her pride was useful just then, for it helped her hide her mortification, anger, and disgust at what she had just heard.
For, innocent and unsuspicious as she was, she could not help understanding the gossip of her friends.
She tried to forget it, but could not, and kept repeating to herself, “Mrs.
M. has made her plans,” “that fib about her mamma,” and “dowdy tarlaton,” till she was ready to cry and rush home to tell her troubles and ask for advice.
As that was impossible, she did her best to seem gay, and being rather excited, she succeeded so well that no one dreamed what an effort she was making.
Those foolish, yet well meant words, had opened a new world to Meg, and much disturbed the peace of the old one in which till now she had lived as happily as a child.
Her innocent friendship with Laurie was spoiled by the silly speeches she had overheard.
Her faith in her mother was a little shaken by the worldly plans attributed to her by Mrs.
Moffat, who judged others by herself, and the sensible resolution to be contented with the simple wardrobe which suited a poor man’s daughter was weakened by the unnecessary pity of girls who thought a shabby dress one of the greatest calamities under heaven.
Poor Meg had a restless night, and got up heavy-eyed, unhappy, half resentful toward her friends, and half ashamed of herself for not speaking out frankly and setting everything right.
Everybody dawdled that morning, and it was noon before the girls found energy enough even to take up their worsted work.
Something in the manner of her friends struck Meg at once.
They treated her with more respect, she thought, took quite a tender interest in what she said, and looked at her with eyes that plainly betrayed curiosity.
All this surprised and flattered her, though she did not understand it till Miss Belle looked up from her writing, and said, with a sentimental air...
“Daisy, dear, I’ve sent an invitation to your friend, Mr.
Laurence, for Thursday.
We should like to know him, and it’s only a proper compliment to you.” Meg colored, but a mischievous fancy to tease the girls made her reply demurely, “You are very kind, but I’m afraid he won’t come.” “Why not, Cherie?” asked Miss Belle.
“Nearly seventy, I believe,” answered Meg, counting stitches to hide the merriment in her eyes.
Of course we meant the young man,” exclaimed Miss Belle, laughing.
“There isn’t any, Laurie is only a little boy.” And Meg laughed also at the queer look which the sisters exchanged as she thus described her supposed lover.
“Nearer my sister Jo’s; I am seventeen in August,” returned Meg, tossing her head.
Laurence are friends, you know, so it is quite natural that we children should play together,” and Meg hoped they would say no more.
“Quite a pastoral state of innocence all round,” returned Miss Belle with a shrug.
Can I do anything for you, young ladies?” asked Mrs.
Moffat, lumbering in like an elephant in silk and lace.
“I’ve got my new pink silk for Thursday and don’t want a thing.” “Nor I...” began Meg, but stopped because it occurred to her that she did want several things and could not have them.
“My old white one again, if I can mend it fit to be seen, it got sadly torn last night,” said Meg, trying to speak quite easily, but feeling very uncomfortable.
“Why don’t you send home for another?” said Sallie, who was not an observing young lady.
“I haven’t got any other.” It cost Meg an effort to say that, but Sallie did not see it and exclaimed in amiable surprise, “Only that?
There’s no need of sending home, Daisy, even if you had a dozen, for I’ve got a sweet blue silk laid away, which I’ve outgrown, and you shall wear it to please me, won’t you, dear?” “You are very kind, but I don’t mind my old dress if you don’t, it does well enough for a little girl like me,” said Meg.
“Now do let me please myself by dressing you up in style.
I shan’t let anyone see you till you are done, and then we’ll burst upon them like Cinderella and her godmother going to the ball,” said Belle in her persuasive tone.
Meg couldn’t refuse the offer so kindly made, for a desire to see if she would be ‘a little beauty’ after touching up caused her to accept and forget all her former uncomfortable feelings toward the Moffats.
On the Thursday evening, Belle shut herself up with her maid, and between them they turned Meg into a fine lady.
They crimped and curled her hair, they polished her neck and arms with some fragrant powder, touched her lips with coralline salve to make them redder, and Hortense would have added ‘a soupcon of rouge’, if Meg had not rebelled.
A set of silver filagree was added, bracelets, necklace, brooch, and even earrings, for Hortense tied them on with a bit of pink silk which did not show.
A cluster of tea-rose buds at the bosom, and a ruche, reconciled Meg to the display of her pretty, white shoulders, and a pair of high-heeled silk boots satisfied the last wish of her heart.
A lace handkerchief, a plumy fan, and a bouquet in a shoulder holder finished her off, and Miss Belle surveyed her with the satisfaction of a little girl with a newly dressed doll.
“Mademoiselle is charmante, tres jolie, is she not?” cried Hortense, clasping her hands in an affected rapture.
“Come and show yourself,” said Miss Belle, leading the way to the room where the others were waiting.
As Meg went rustling after, with her long skirts trailing, her earrings tinkling, her curls waving, and her heart beating, she felt as if her fun had really begun at last, for the mirror had plainly told her that she was ‘a little beauty’.
Her friends repeated the pleasing phrase enthusiastically, and for several minutes she stood, like a jackdaw in the fable, enjoying her borrowed plumes, while the rest chattered like a party of magpies.
“While I dress, do you drill her, Nan, in the management of her skirt and those French heels, or she will trip herself up.
Take your silver butterfly, and catch up that long curl on the left side of her head, Clara, and don’t any of you disturb the charming work of my hands,” said Belle, as she hurried away, looking well pleased with her success.
“You don’t look a bit like yourself, but you are very nice.
Let your flowers hang, don’t be so careful of them, and be sure you don’t trip,” returned Sallie, trying not to care that Meg was prettier than herself.
Keeping that warning carefully in mind, Margaret got safely down stairs and sailed into the drawing rooms where the Moffats and a few early guests were assembled.
She very soon discovered that there is a charm about fine clothes which attracts a certain class of people and secures their respect.
Several young ladies, who had taken no notice of her before, were very affectionate all of a sudden.
Several young gentlemen, who had only stared at her at the other party, now not only stared, but asked to be introduced, and said all manner of foolish but agreeable things to her, and several old ladies, who sat on the sofas, and criticized the rest of the party, inquired who she was with an air of interest.
“Daisy March—father a colonel in the army—one of our first families, but reverses of fortune, you know; intimate friends of the Laurences; sweet creature, I assure you; my Ned is quite wild about her.” “Dear me!” said the old lady, putting up her glass for another observation of Meg, who tried to look as if she had not heard and been rather shocked at Mrs.
The ‘queer feeling’ did not pass away, but she imagined herself acting the new part of fine lady and so got on pretty well, though the tight dress gave her a side-ache, the train kept getting under her feet, and she was in constant fear lest her earrings should fly off and get lost or broken.
She was flirting her fan and laughing at the feeble jokes of a young gentleman who tried to be witty, when she suddenly stopped laughing and looked confused, for just opposite, she saw Laurie.
He was staring at her with undisguised surprise, and disapproval also, she thought, for though he bowed and smiled, yet something in his honest eyes made her blush and wish she had her old dress on.
To complete her confusion, she saw Belle nudge Annie, and both glance from her to Laurie, who, she was happy to see, looked unusually boyish and shy.
“Silly creatures, to put such thoughts into my head.
“Jo wanted me to come, and tell her how you looked, so I did,” answered Laurie, without turning his eyes upon her, though he half smiled at her maternal tone.
“What shall you tell her?” asked Meg, full of curiosity to know his opinion of her, yet feeling ill at ease with him for the first time.
“I shall say I didn’t know you, for you look so grown-up and unlike yourself, I’m quite afraid of you,” he said, fumbling at his glove button.
Wouldn’t Jo stare if she saw me?” said Meg, bent on making him say whether he thought her improved or not.
“Yes, I think she would,” returned Laurie gravely.
He glanced at her frizzled head, bare shoulders, and fantastically trimmed dress with an expression that abashed her more than his answer, which had not a particle of his usual politeness in it.
“I don’t like fuss and feathers.” That was altogether too much from a lad younger than herself, and Meg walked away, saying petulantly, “You are the rudest boy I ever saw.” Feeling very much ruffled, she went and stood at a quiet window to cool her cheeks, for the tight dress gave her an uncomfortably brilliant color.
I wanted you to see her, but they have spoiled her entirely.
“Please forgive my rudeness, and come and dance with me.” “I’m afraid it will be too disagreeable to you,” said Meg, trying to look offended and failing entirely.
I don’t like your gown, but I do think you are just splendid.” And he waved his hands, as if words failed to express his admiration.
Meg smiled and relented, and whispered as they stood waiting to catch the time, “Take care my skirt doesn’t trip you up.
It’s the plague of my life and I was a goose to wear it.” “Pin it round your neck, and then it will be useful,” said Laurie, looking down at the little blue boots, which he evidently approved of.
Away they went fleetly and gracefully, for having practiced at home, they were well matched, and the blithe young couple were a pleasant sight to see, as they twirled merrily round and round, feeling more friendly than ever after their small tiff.
“Won’t I!” said Laurie, with alacrity.
They won’t understand the joke, and it will worry Mother.” “Then why did you do it?” said Laurie’s eyes, so plainly that Meg hastily added...
Are you?” And Laurie looked at her with an expression which made her answer in a whisper...
What does he want?” said Laurie, knitting his black brows as if he did not regard his young host in the light of a pleasant addition to the party.
What a bore!” said Meg, assuming a languid air which amused Laurie immensely.
He did not speak to her again till suppertime, when he saw her drinking champagne with Ned and his friend Fisher, who were behaving ‘like a pair of fools’, as Laurie said to himself, for he felt a brotherly sort of right to watch over the Marches and fight their battles whenever a defender was needed.
“You’ll have a splitting headache tomorrow, if you drink much of that.
I wouldn’t, Meg, your mother doesn’t like it, you know,” he whispered, leaning over her chair, as Ned turned to refill her glass and Fisher stooped to pick up her fan.
Tomorrow I shall put away my ‘fuss and feathers’ and be desperately good again,” she answered with an affected little laugh.
“Wish tomorrow was here, then,” muttered Laurie, walking off, ill-pleased at the change he saw in her.
Meg danced and flirted, chattered and giggled, as the other girls did.
After supper she undertook the German, and blundered through it, nearly upsetting her partner with her long skirt, and romping in a way that scandalized Laurie, who looked on and meditated a lecture.
“Remember!” she said, trying to smile, for the splitting headache had already begun.
“Silence a la mort,” replied Laurie, with a melodramatic flourish, as he went away.
This little bit of byplay excited Annie’s curiosity, but Meg was too tired for gossip and went to bed, feeling as if she had been to a masquerade and hadn’t enjoyed herself as much as she expected.
She was sick all the next day, and on Saturday went home, quite used up with her fortnight’s fun and feeling that she had ‘sat in the lap of luxury’ long enough.
“It does seem pleasant to be quiet, and not have company manners on all the time.
Home is a nice place, though it isn’t splendid,” said Meg, looking about her with a restful expression, as she sat with her mother and Jo on the Sunday evening.
“I’m glad to hear you say so, dear, for I was afraid home would seem dull and poor to you after your fine quarters,” replied her mother, who had given her many anxious looks that day.
For motherly eyes are quick to see any change in children’s faces.
Meg had told her adventures gayly and said over and over what a charming time she had had, but something still seemed to weigh upon her spirits, and when the younger girls were gone to bed, she sat thoughtfully staring at the fire, saying little and looking worried.
As the clock struck nine and Jo proposed bed, Meg suddenly left her chair and, taking Beth’s stool, leaned her elbows on her mother’s knee, saying bravely...
What is it, dear?” “Shall I go away?” asked Jo discreetly.
Don’t I always tell you everything?
I was ashamed to speak of it before the younger children, but I want you to know all the dreadful things I did at the Moffats’.” “We are prepared,” said Mrs.
“I told you they dressed me up, but I didn’t tell you that they powdered and squeezed and frizzled, and made me look like a fashion-plate.
I knew it was silly, but they flattered me and said I was a beauty, and quantities of nonsense, so I let them make a fool of me.” “Is that all?” asked Jo, as Mrs.
March looked silently at the downcast face of her pretty daughter, and could not find it in her heart to blame her little follies.
“No, I drank champagne and romped and tried to flirt, and was altogether abominable,” said Meg self-reproachfully.
“There is something more, I think.” And Mrs.
March smoothed the soft cheek, which suddenly grew rosy as Meg answered slowly...
It’s very silly, but I want to tell it, because I hate to have people say and think such things about us and Laurie.” Then she told the various bits of gossip she had heard at the Moffats’, and as she spoke, Jo saw her mother fold her lips tightly, as if ill pleased that such ideas should be put into Meg’s innocent mind.
“Well, if that isn’t the greatest rubbish I ever heard,” cried Jo indignantly.
“Why didn’t you pop out and tell them so on the spot?” “I couldn’t, it was so embarrassing for me.
I couldn’t help hearing at first, and then I was so angry and ashamed, I didn’t remember that I ought to go away.” “Just wait till I see Annie Moffat, and I’ll show you how to settle such ridiculous stuff.
Won’t he shout when I tell him what those silly things say about us poor children?” And Jo laughed, as if on second thoughts the thing struck her as a good joke.
She mustn’t, must she, Mother?” said Meg, looking distressed.
I am more sorry than I can express for the mischief this visit may have done you, Meg.” “Don’t be sorry, I won’t let it hurt me.
I’ll forget all the bad and remember only the good, for I did enjoy a great deal, and thank you very much for letting me go.
I’ll not be sentimental or dissatisfied, Mother.
But it is nice to be praised and admired, and I can’t help saying I like it,” said Meg, looking half ashamed of the confession.
“That is perfectly natural, and quite harmless, if the liking does not become a passion and lead one to do foolish or unmaidenly things.
Learn to know and value the praise which is worth having, and to excite the admiration of excellent people by being modest as well as pretty, Meg.” Margaret sat thinking a moment, while Jo stood with her hands behind her, looking both interested and a little perplexed, for it was a new thing to see Meg blushing and talking about admiration, lovers, and things of that sort.
And Jo felt as if during that fortnight her sister had grown up amazingly, and was drifting away from her into a world where she could not follow.
Moffat said?” asked Meg bashfully.
“Yes, my dear, I have a great many, all mothers do, but mine differ somewhat from Mrs.
I will tell you some of them, for the time has come when a word may set this romantic little head and heart of yours right, on a very serious subject.
You are young, Meg, but not too young to understand me, and mothers’ lips are the fittest to speak of such things to girls like you.
Holding a hand of each, and watching the two young faces wistfully, Mrs.
“I want my daughters to be beautiful, accomplished, and good.
To be admired, loved, and respected.
To have a happy youth, to be well and wisely married, and to lead useful, pleasant lives, with as little care and sorrow to try them as God sees fit to send.
To be loved and chosen by a good man is the best and sweetest thing which can happen to a woman, and I sincerely hope my girls may know this beautiful experience.
My dear girls, I am ambitious for you, but not to have you make a dash in the world, marry rich men merely because they are rich, or have splendid houses, which are not homes because love is wanting.
Money is a needful and precious thing, and when well used, a noble thing, but I never want you to think it is the first or only prize to strive for.
I’d rather see you poor men’s wives, if you were happy, beloved, contented, than queens on thrones, without self-respect and peace.” “Poor girls don’t stand any chance, Belle says, unless they put themselves forward,” sighed Meg.
Better be happy old maids than unhappy wives, or unmaidenly girls, running about to find husbands,” said Mrs.
“Don’t be troubled, Meg, poverty seldom daunts a sincere lover.
Make this home happy, so that you may be fit for homes of your own, if they are offered you, and contented here if they are not.
One thing remember, my girls.
Mother is always ready to be your confidant, Father to be your friend, and both of us hope and trust that our daughters, whether married or single, will be the pride and comfort of our lives.” “We will, Marmee, we will!” cried both, with all their hearts, as she bade them good night.
As spring came on, a new set of amusements became the fashion, and the lengthening days gave long afternoons for work and play of all sorts.
Hannah used to say, “I’d know which each of them gardings belonged to, ef I see ’em in Chiny,” and so she might, for the girls’ tastes differed as much as their characters.
Meg’s had roses and heliotrope, myrtle, and a little orange tree in it.
Jo’s bed was never alike two seasons, for she was always trying experiments.
This year it was to be a plantation of sun flowers, the seeds of which cheerful and aspiring plant were to feed Aunt Cockle-top and her family of chicks.
Beth had old-fashioned fragrant flowers in her garden, sweet peas and mignonette, larkspur, pinks, pansies, and southernwood, with chickweed for the birds and catnip for the pussies.
Amy had a bower in hers, rather small and earwiggy, but very pretty to look at, with honeysuckle and morning-glories hanging their colored horns and bells in graceful wreaths all over it, tall white lilies, delicate ferns, and as many brilliant, picturesque plants as would consent to blossom there.
Gardening, walks, rows on the river, and flower hunts employed the fine days, and for rainy ones, they had house diversions, some old, some new, all more or less original.
One of these was the ‘P.C.’, for as secret societies were the fashion, it was thought proper to have one, and as all of the girls admired Dickens, they called themselves the Pickwick Club.
At seven o’clock, the four members ascended to the clubroom, tied their badges round their heads, and took their seats with great solemnity.
Meg, as the eldest, was Samuel Pickwick, Jo, being of a literary turn, Augustus Snodgrass, Beth, because she was round and rosy, Tracy Tupman, and Amy, who was always trying to do what she couldn’t, was Nathaniel Winkle.
Pickwick, the president, read the paper, which was filled with original tales, poetry, local news, funny advertisements, and hints, in which they good-naturedly reminded each other of their faults and short comings.
On one occasion, Mr.
Pickwick put on a pair of spectacles without any glass, rapped upon the table, hemmed, and having stared hard at Mr.
Snodgrass, who was tilting back in his chair, till he arranged himself properly, began to read: “THE PICKWICK PORTFOLIO” MAY 20, 18— POET’S CORNER ANNIVERSARY ODE Again we meet to celebrate With badge and solemn rite, Our fifty-second anniversary, In Pickwick Hall, tonight.
We all are here in perfect health, None gone from our small band: Again we see each well-known face, And press each friendly hand.
Our Pickwick, always at his post, With reverence we greet, As, spectacles on nose, he reads Our well-filled weekly sheet.
Although he suffers from a cold, We joy to hear him speak, For words of wisdom from him fall, In spite of croak or squeak.
Old six-foot Snodgrass looms on high, With elephantine grace, And beams upon the company, With brown and jovial face.
Poetic fire lights up his eye, He struggles ’gainst his lot.
Behold ambition on his brow, And on his nose, a blot.
Next our peaceful Tupman comes, So rosy, plump, and sweet, Who chokes with laughter at the puns, And tumbles off his seat.
Prim little Winkle too is here, With every hair in place, A model of propriety, Though he hates to wash his face.
The year is gone, we still unite To joke and laugh and read, And tread the path of literature That doth to glory lead.
Long may our paper prosper well, Our club unbroken be, And coming years their blessings pour On the useful, gay ‘P.
SNODGRASS THE MASKED MARRIAGE (A Tale Of Venice) Gondola after gondola swept up to the marble steps, and left its lovely load to swell the brilliant throng that filled the stately halls of Count Adelon.
Sweet voices and rich melody filled the air, and so with mirth and music the masquerade went on.
“Has your Highness seen the Lady Viola tonight?” asked a gallant troubadour of the fairy queen who floated down the hall upon his arm.
Her dress is well chosen, too, for in a week she weds Count Antonio, whom she passionately hates.” “By my faith, I envy him.
Yonder he comes, arrayed like a bridegroom, except the black mask.
When that is off we shall see how he regards the fair maid whose heart he cannot win, though her stern father bestows her hand,” returned the troubadour.
“Tis whispered that she loves the young English artist who haunts her steps, and is spurned by the old Count,” said the lady, as they joined the dance.
The revel was at its height when a priest appeared, and withdrawing the young pair to an alcove, hung with purple velvet, he motioned them to kneel.
Instant silence fell on the gay throng, and not a sound, but the dash of fountains or the rustle of orange groves sleeping in the moonlight, broke the hush, as Count de Adelon spoke thus: “My lords and ladies, pardon the ruse by which I have gathered you here to witness the marriage of my daughter.
Father, we wait your services.” All eyes turned toward the bridal party, and a murmur of amazement went through the throng, for neither bride nor groom removed their masks.
Curiosity and wonder possessed all hearts, but respect restrained all tongues till the holy rite was over.
Then the eager spectators gathered round the count, demanding an explanation.
Now, my children, let the play end.
Unmask and receive my blessing.” But neither bent the knee, for the young bridegroom replied in a tone that startled all listeners as the mask fell, disclosing the noble face of Ferdinand Devereux, the artist lover, and leaning on the breast where now flashed the star of an English earl was the lovely Viola, radiant with joy and beauty.
“My lord, you scornfully bade me claim your daughter when I could boast as high a name and vast a fortune as the Count Antonio.
PICKWICK Why is the P.
THE HISTORY OF A SQUASH Once upon a time a farmer planted a little seed in his garden, and after a while it sprouted and became a vine and bore many squashes.
A grocerman bought and put it in his shop.
And to the rest she added a pint of milk, two eggs, four spoons of sugar, nutmeg, and some crackers, put it in a deep dish, and baked it till it was brown and nice, and next day it was eaten by a family named March.
Yours respectably, N.
WINKLE [The above is a manly and handsome acknowledgment of past misdemeanors.
If our young friend studied punctuation, it would be well.] A SAD ACCIDENT On Friday last, we were startled by a violent shock in our basement, followed by cries of distress.
On rushing in a body to the cellar, we discovered our beloved President prostrate upon the floor, having tripped and fallen while getting wood for domestic purposes.
Pickwick had plunged his head and shoulders into a tub of water, upset a keg of soft soap upon his manly form, and torn his garments badly.
On being removed from this perilous situation, it was discovered that he had suffered no injury but several bruises, and we are happy to add, is now doing well.
THE PUBLIC BEREAVEMENT It is our painful duty to record the sudden and mysterious disappearance of our cherished friend, Mrs.
This lovely and beloved cat was the pet of a large circle of warm and admiring friends; for her beauty attracted all eyes, her graces and virtues endeared her to all hearts, and her loss is deeply felt by the whole community.
When last seen, she was sitting at the gate, watching the butcher’s cart, and it is feared that some villain, tempted by her charms, basely stole her.
Weeks have passed, but no trace of her has been discovered, and we relinquish all hope, tie a black ribbon to her basket, set aside her dish, and weep for her as one lost to us forever.
A sympathizing friend sends the following gem: A LAMENT FOR S.
The little grave where her infant sleeps Is ’neath the chestnut tree.
Her stealthy paws tread the very hall Where Snowball used to play, But she only spits at the dogs our pet So gallantly drove away.
ADVERTISEMENTS MISS ORANTHY BLUGGAGE, the accomplished strong-minded lecturer, will deliver her famous lecture on “WOMAN AND HER POSITION” at Pickwick Hall, next Saturday Evening, after the usual performances.
THE DUSTPAN SOCIETY will meet on Wednesday next, and parade in the upper story of the Club House.
All members to appear in uniform and shoulder their brooms at nine precisely.
BETH BOUNCER will open her new assortment of Doll’s Millinery next week.
The latest Paris fashions have arrived, and orders are respectfully solicited.
A NEW PLAY will appear at the Barnville Theatre, in the course of a few weeks, which will surpass anything ever seen on the American stage.
“THE GREEK SLAVE, or Constantine the Avenger,” is the name of this thrilling drama!!!
HINTS If S.P. didn’t use so much soap on his hands, he wouldn’t always be late at breakfast.
A.S. is requested not to whistle in the street.
As the President finished reading the paper (which I beg leave to assure my readers is a bona fide copy of one written by bona fide girls once upon a time), a round of applause followed, and then Mr.
Snodgrass rose to make a proposition.
President and gentlemen,” he began, assuming a parliamentary attitude and tone, “I wish to propose the admission of a new member—one who highly deserves the honor, would be deeply grateful for it, and would add immensely to the spirit of the club, the literary value of the paper, and be no end jolly and nice.
Theodore Laurence as an honorary member of the P.
Come now, do have him.” Jo’s sudden change of tone made the girls laugh, but all looked rather anxious, and no one said a word as Snodgrass took his seat.
“We’ll put it to a vote,” said the President.
“All in favor of this motion please to manifest it by saying, ‘Aye’.” A loud response from Snodgrass, followed, to everybody’s surprise, by a timid one from Beth.
“Contrary-minded say, ‘No’.” Meg and Amy were contrary-minded, and Mr.
Winkle rose to say with great elegance, “We don’t wish any boys, they only joke and bounce about.
This is a ladies’ club, and we wish to be private and proper.” “I’m afraid he’ll laugh at our paper, and make fun of us afterward,” observed Pickwick, pulling the little curl on her forehead, as she always did when doubtful.
Up rose Snodgrass, very much in earnest.
“Sir, I give you my word as a gentleman, Laurie won’t do anything of the sort.
He likes to write, and he’ll give a tone to our contributions and keep us from being sentimental, don’t you see?
We can do so little for him, and he does so much for us, I think the least we can do is to offer him a place here, and make him welcome if he comes.” This artful allusion to benefits conferred brought Tupman to his feet, looking as if he had quite made up his mind.
I say he may come, and his grandpa, too, if he likes.” This spirited burst from Beth electrified the club, and Jo left her seat to shake hands approvingly.
Everybody remember it’s our Laurie, and say, ‘Aye!’” cried Snodgrass excitedly.
Now, as there’s nothing like ‘taking time by the fetlock’, as Winkle characteristically observes, allow me to present the new member.” And, to the dismay of the rest of the club, Jo threw open the door of the closet, and displayed Laurie sitting on a rag bag, flushed and twinkling with suppressed laughter.
Jo, how could you?” cried the three girls, as Snodgrass led her friend triumphantly forth, and producing both a chair and a badge, installed him in a jiffy.
“The coolness of you two rascals is amazing,” began Mr.
Pickwick, trying to get up an awful frown and only succeeding in producing an amiable smile.
But the new member was equal to the occasion, and rising, with a grateful salutation to the Chair, said in the most engaging manner, “Mr.
President and ladies—I beg pardon, gentlemen—allow me to introduce myself as Sam Weller, the very humble servant of the club.” “Good!
Good!” cried Jo, pounding with the handle of the old warming pan on which she leaned.
“My faithful friend and noble patron,” continued Laurie with a wave of the hand, “who has so flatteringly presented me, is not to be blamed for the base stratagem of tonight.
I planned it, and she only gave in after lots of teasing.” “Come now, don’t lay it all on yourself.
You know I proposed the cupboard,” broke in Snodgrass, who was enjoying the joke amazingly.
I’m the wretch that did it, sir,” said the new member, with a Welleresque nod to Mr.
“But on my honor, I never will do so again, and henceforth devote myself to the interest of this immortal club.” “Hear!
Hear!” cried Jo, clashing the lid of the warming pan like a cymbal.
“Go on, go on!” added Winkle and Tupman, while the President bowed benignly.
“I merely wish to say, that as a slight token of my gratitude for the honor done me, and as a means of promoting friendly relations between adjoining nations, I have set up a post office in the hedge in the lower corner of the garden, a fine, spacious building with padlocks on the doors and every convenience for the mails, also the females, if I may be allowed the expression.
It’s the old martin house, but I’ve stopped up the door and made the roof open, so it will hold all sorts of things, and save our valuable time.
Letters, manuscripts, books, and bundles can be passed in there, and as each nation has a key, it will be uncommonly nice, I fancy.
Allow me to present the club key, and with many thanks for your favor, take my seat.” Great applause as Mr.
Weller deposited a little key on the table and subsided, the warming pan clashed and waved wildly, and it was some time before order could be restored.
A long discussion followed, and everyone came out surprising, for everyone did her best.
So it was an unusually lively meeting, and did not adjourn till a late hour, when it broke up with three shrill cheers for the new member.
No one ever regretted the admittance of Sam Weller, for a more devoted, well-behaved, and jovial member no club could have.
He certainly did add ‘spirit’ to the meetings, and ‘a tone’ to the paper, for his orations convulsed his hearers and his contributions were excellent, being patriotic, classical, comical, or dramatic, but never sentimental.
Jo regarded them as worthy of Bacon, Milton, or Shakespeare, and remodeled her own works with good effect, she thought.
O. was a capital little institution, and flourished wonderfully, for nearly as many queer things passed through it as through the real post office.
Tragedies and cravats, poetry and pickles, garden seeds and long letters, music and gingerbread, rubbers, invitations, scoldings, and puppies.
The old gentleman liked the fun, and amused himself by sending odd bundles, mysterious messages, and funny telegrams, and his gardener, who was smitten with Hannah’s charms, actually sent a love letter to Jo’s care.
How they laughed when the secret came out, never dreaming how many love letters that little post office would hold in the years to come.
CHAPTER ELEVEN EXPERIMENTS “The first of June!
The Kings are off to the seashore tomorrow, and I’m free.
Three months’ vacation—how I shall enjoy it!” exclaimed Meg, coming home one warm day to find Jo laid upon the sofa in an unusual state of exhaustion, while Beth took off her dusty boots, and Amy made lemonade for the refreshment of the whole party.
“I was mortally afraid she’d ask me to go with her.
If she had, I should have felt as if I ought to do it, but Plumfield is about as gay as a churchyard, you know, and I’d rather be excused.
We had a flurry getting the old lady off, and I had a fright every time she spoke to me, for I was in such a hurry to be through that I was uncommonly helpful and sweet, and feared she’d find it impossible to part from me.
I quaked till she was fairly in the carriage, and had a final fright, for as it drove of, she popped out her head, saying, ‘Josyphine, won’t you—?’ I didn’t hear any more, for I basely turned and fled.
I did actually run, and whisked round the corner where I felt safe.” “Poor old Jo!
She came in looking as if bears were after her,” said Beth, as she cuddled her sister’s feet with a motherly air.
“Aunt March is a regular samphire, is she not?” observed Amy, tasting her mixture critically.
It’s too warm to be particular about one’s parts of speech,” murmured Jo.
“What shall you do all your vacation?” asked Amy, changing the subject with tact.
I’ve laid in a heap of books, and I’m going to improve my shining hours reading on my perch in the old apple tree, when I’m not having l——” “Don’t say ‘larks!’” implored Amy, as a return snub for the ‘samphire’ correction.
“I’ll say ‘nightingales’ then, with Laurie.
That’s proper and appropriate, since he’s a warbler.” “Don’t let us do any lessons, Beth, for a while, but play all the time and rest, as the girls mean to,” proposed Amy.
I want to learn some new songs, and my children need fitting up for the summer.
They are dreadfully out of order and really suffering for clothes.” “May we, Mother?” asked Meg, turning to Mrs.
“You may try your experiment for a week and see how you like it.
I think by Saturday night you will find that all play and no work is as bad as all work and no play.” “Oh, dear, no!
It will be delicious, I’m sure,” said Meg complacently.
Fun forever, and no grubbing!” cried Jo, rising, glass in hand, as the lemonade went round.
They all drank it merrily, and began the experiment by lounging for the rest of the day.
Her solitary breakfast did not taste good, and the room seemed lonely and untidy, for Jo had not filled the vases, Beth had not dusted, and Amy’s books lay scattered about.
Nothing was neat and pleasant but ‘Marmee’s corner’, which looked as usual.
Jo spent the morning on the river with Laurie and the afternoon reading and crying over _The Wide, Wide World_, up in the apple tree.
Beth began by rummaging everything out of the big closet where her family resided, but getting tired before half done, she left her establishment topsy-turvy and went to her music, rejoicing that she had no dishes to wash.
Amy arranged her bower, put on her best white frock, smoothed her curls, and sat down to draw under the honeysuckle, hoping someone would see and inquire who the young artist was.
As no one appeared but an inquisitive daddy-longlegs, who examined her work with interest, she went to walk, got caught in a shower, and came home dripping.
At teatime they compared notes, and all agreed that it had been a delightful, though unusually long day.
Meg, who went shopping in the afternoon and got a ‘sweet blue muslin’, had discovered, after she had cut the breadths off, that it wouldn’t wash, which mishap made her slightly cross.
Jo had burned the skin off her nose boating, and got a raging headache by reading too long.
Beth was worried by the confusion of her closet and the difficulty of learning three or four songs at once, and Amy deeply regretted the damage done her frock, for Katy Brown’s party was to be the next day and now like Flora McFlimsey, she had ‘nothing to wear’.
But these were mere trifles, and they assured their mother that the experiment was working finely.
She smiled, said nothing, and with Hannah’s help did their neglected work, keeping home pleasant and the domestic machinery running smoothly.
The days kept getting longer and longer, the weather was unusually variable and so were tempers; an unsettled feeling possessed everyone, and Satan found plenty of mischief for the idle hands to do.
As the height of luxury, Meg put out some of her sewing, and then found time hang so heavily, that she fell to snipping and spoiling her clothes in her attempts to furbish them up a la Moffat.
Jo read till her eyes gave out and she was sick of books, got so fidgety that even good-natured Laurie had a quarrel with her, and so reduced in spirits that she desperately wished she had gone with Aunt March.
Beth got on pretty well, for she was constantly forgetting that it was to be all play and no work, and fell back into her old ways now and then.
But something in the air affected her, and more than once her tranquility was much disturbed, so much so that on one occasion she actually shook poor dear Joanna and told her she was ‘a fright’.
Amy fared worst of all, for her resources were small, and when her sisters left her to amuse herself, she soon found that accomplished and important little self a great burden.
She didn’t like dolls, fairy tales were childish, and one couldn’t draw all the time.
Tea parties didn’t amount to much, neither did picnics, unless very well conducted.
“If one could have a fine house, full of nice girls, or go traveling, the summer would be delightful, but to stay at home with three selfish sisters and a grown-up boy was enough to try the patience of a Boaz,” complained Miss Malaprop, after several days devoted to pleasure, fretting, and ennui.
No one would own that they were tired of the experiment, but by Friday night each acknowledged to herself that she was glad the week was nearly done.
March, who had a good deal of humor, resolved to finish off the trial in an appropriate manner, so she gave Hannah a holiday and let the girls enjoy the full effect of the play system.
When they got up on Saturday morning, there was no fire in the kitchen, no breakfast in the dining room, and no mother anywhere to be seen.
What has happened?” cried Jo, staring about her in dismay.
Meg ran upstairs and soon came back again, looking relieved but rather bewildered, and a little ashamed.
But she says it has been a hard week for her, so we mustn’t grumble but take care of ourselves.” “That’s easy enough, and I like the idea, I’m aching for something to do, that is, some new amusement, you know,” added Jo quickly.
In fact it was an immense relief to them all to have a little work, and they took hold with a will, but soon realized the truth of Hannah’s saying, “Housekeeping ain’t no joke.” There was plenty of food in the larder, and while Beth and Amy set the table, Meg and Jo got breakfast, wondering as they did why servants ever talked about hard work.
“I shall take some up to Mother, though she said we were not to think of her, for she’d take care of herself,” said Meg, who presided and felt quite matronly behind the teapot.
So a tray was fitted out before anyone began, and taken up with the cook’s compliments.
The boiled tea was very bitter, the omelet scorched, and the biscuits speckled with saleratus, but Mrs.
March received her repast with thanks and laughed heartily over it after Jo was gone.
“Poor little souls, they will have a hard time, I’m afraid, but they won’t suffer, and it will do them good,” she said, producing the more palatable viands with which she had provided herself, and disposing of the bad breakfast, so that their feelings might not be hurt, a motherly little deception for which they were grateful.
Many were the complaints below, and great the chagrin of the head cook at her failures.
“Never mind, I’ll get the dinner and be servant, you be mistress, keep your hands nice, see company, and give orders,” said Jo, who knew still less than Meg about culinary affairs.
This obliging offer was gladly accepted, and Margaret retired to the parlor, which she hastily put in order by whisking the litter under the sofa and shutting the blinds to save the trouble of dusting.
Jo, with perfect faith in her own powers and a friendly desire to make up the quarrel, immediately put a note in the office, inviting Laurie to dinner.
“You’d better see what you have got before you think of having company,” said Meg, when informed of the hospitable but rash act.
“Oh, there’s corned beef and plenty of potatoes, and I shall get some asparagus and a lobster, ‘for a relish’, as Hannah says.
I’ll have blanc mange and strawberries for dessert, and coffee too, if you want to be elegant.” “Don’t try too many messes, Jo, for you can’t make anything but gingerbread and molasses candy fit to eat.
I wash my hands of the dinner party, and since you have asked Laurie on your own responsibility, you may just take care of him.” “I don’t want you to do anything but be civil to him and help to the pudding.
You had better ask Mother’s leave before you order anything,” returned Meg prudently.
I’m not a fool.” And Jo went off in a huff at the doubts expressed of her powers.
“I never enjoyed housekeeping, and I’m going to take a vacation today, and read, write, go visiting, and amuse myself.” The unusual spectacle of her busy mother rocking comfortably and reading early in the morning made Jo feel as if some unnatural phenomenon had occurred, for an eclipse, an earthquake, or a volcanic eruption would hardly have seemed stranger.
“Everything is out of sorts, somehow,” she said to herself, going downstairs.
“There’s Beth crying, that’s a sure sign that something is wrong in this family.
If Amy is bothering, I’ll shake her.” Feeling very much out of sorts herself, Jo hurried into the parlor to find Beth sobbing over Pip, the canary, who lay dead in the cage with his little claws pathetically extended, as if imploring the food for want of which he had died.
“Put him in the oven, and maybe he will get warm and revive,” said Amy hopefully.
I’ll make him a shroud, and he shall be buried in the garden, and I’ll never have another bird, never, my Pip! for I am too bad to own one,” murmured Beth, sitting on the floor with her pet folded in her hands.
“The funeral shall be this afternoon, and we will all go.
It’s a pity, but nothing goes right this week, and Pip has had the worst of the experiment.
Make the shroud, and lay him in my box, and after the dinner party, we’ll have a nice little funeral,” said Jo, beginning to feel as if she had undertaken a good deal.
Leaving the others to console Beth, she departed to the kitchen, which was in a most discouraging state of confusion.
Putting on a big apron, she fell to work and got the dishes piled up ready for washing, when she discovered that the fire was out.
“Here’s a sweet prospect!” muttered Jo, slamming the stove door open, and poking vigorously among the cinders.
Having rekindled the fire, she thought she would go to market while the water heated.
The walk revived her spirits, and flattering herself that she had made good bargains, she trudged home again, after buying a very young lobster, some very old asparagus, and two boxes of acid strawberries.
Hannah had left a pan of bread to rise, Meg had worked it up early, set it on the hearth for a second rising, and forgotten it.
Meg was entertaining Sallie Gardiner in the parlor, when the door flew open and a floury, crocky, flushed, and disheveled figure appeared, demanding tartly...
“I say, isn’t bread ‘riz’ enough when it runs over the pans?” Sallie began to laugh, but Meg nodded and lifted her eyebrows as high as they would go, which caused the apparition to vanish and put the sour bread into the oven without further delay.
March went out, after peeping here and there to see how matters went, also saying a word of comfort to Beth, who sat making a winding sheet, while the dear departed lay in state in the domino box.
A strange sense of helplessness fell upon the girls as the gray bonnet vanished round the corner, and despair seized them when a few minutes later Miss Crocker appeared, and said she’d come to dinner.
Now this lady was a thin, yellow spinster, with a sharp nose and inquisitive eyes, who saw everything and gossiped about all she saw.
They disliked her, but had been taught to be kind to her, simply because she was old and poor and had few friends.
So Meg gave her the easy chair and tried to entertain her, while she asked questions, criticized everything, and told stories of the people whom she knew.
Language cannot describe the anxieties, experiences, and exertions which Jo underwent that morning, and the dinner she served up became a standing joke.
Fearing to ask any more advice, she did her best alone, and discovered that something more than energy and good will is necessary to make a cook.
She boiled the asparagus for an hour and was grieved to find the heads cooked off and the stalks harder than ever.
The bread burned black; for the salad dressing so aggravated her that she could not make it fit to eat.
The lobster was a scarlet mystery to her, but she hammered and poked till it was unshelled and its meager proportions concealed in a grove of lettuce leaves.
The potatoes had to be hurried, not to keep the asparagus waiting, and were not done at the last.
The blanc mange was lumpy, and the strawberries not as ripe as they looked, having been skilfully ‘deaconed’.
“Well, they can eat beef and bread and butter, if they are hungry, only it’s mortifying to have to spend your whole morning for nothing,” thought Jo, as she rang the bell half an hour later than usual, and stood, hot, tired, and dispirited, surveying the feast spread before Laurie, accustomed to all sorts of elegance, and Miss Crocker, whose tattling tongue would report them far and wide.
Poor Jo would gladly have gone under the table, as one thing after another was tasted and left, while Amy giggled, Meg looked distressed, Miss Crocker pursed her lips, and Laurie talked and laughed with all his might to give a cheerful tone to the festive scene.
Her hot cheeks cooled a trifle, and she drew a long breath as the pretty glass plates went round, and everyone looked graciously at the little rosy islands floating in a sea of cream.
Jo, who refused, thinking there might not be enough, for they dwindled sadly after the picking over, glanced at Laurie, but he was eating away manfully, though there was a slight pucker about his mouth and he kept his eye fixed on his plate.
Amy, who was fond of delicate fare, took a heaping spoonful, choked, hid her face in her napkin, and left the table precipitately.
“Oh, what is it?” exclaimed Jo, trembling.
Jo uttered a groan and fell back in her chair, remembering that she had given a last hasty powdering to the berries out of one of the two boxes on the kitchen table, and had neglected to put the milk in the refrigerator.
The comical side of the affair suddenly struck her, and she laughed till the tears ran down her cheeks.
So did everyone else, even ‘Croaker’ as the girls called the old lady, and the unfortunate dinner ended gaily, with bread and butter, olives and fun.
“I haven’t strength of mind enough to clear up now, so we will sober ourselves with a funeral,” said Jo, as they rose, and Miss Crocker made ready to go, being eager to tell the new story at another friend’s dinner table.
They did sober themselves for Beth’s sake.
Laurie dug a grave under the ferns in the grove, little Pip was laid in, with many tears by his tender-hearted mistress, and covered with moss, while a wreath of violets and chickweed was hung on the stone which bore his epitaph, composed by Jo while she struggled with the dinner.
Here lies Pip March, Who died the 7th of June; Loved and lamented sore, And not forgotten soon.
At the conclusion of the ceremonies, Beth retired to her room, overcome with emotion and lobster, but there was no place of repose, for the beds were not made, and she found her grief much assuaged by beating up the pillows and putting things in order.
Meg helped Jo clear away the remains of the feast, which took half the afternoon and left them so tired that they agreed to be contented with tea and toast for supper.
March came home to find the three older girls hard at work in the middle of the afternoon, and a glance at the closet gave her an idea of the success of one part of the experiment.
Before the housewives could rest, several people called, and there was a scramble to get ready to see them.
Then tea must be got, errands done, and one or two necessary bits of sewing neglected until the last minute.
As twilight fell, dewy and still, one by one they gathered on the porch where the June roses were budding beautifully, and each groaned or sighed as she sat down, as if tired or troubled.
“What a dreadful day this has been!” began Jo, usually the first to speak.
“It has seemed shorter than usual, but so uncomfortable,” said Meg.
“It can’t seem so without Marmee and little Pip,” sighed Beth, glancing with full eyes at the empty cage above her head.
“Here’s Mother, dear, and you shall have another bird tomorrow, if you want it.” As she spoke, Mrs.
March came and took her place among them, looking as if her holiday had not been much pleasanter than theirs.
“Are you satisfied with your experiment, girls, or do you want another week of it?” she asked, as Beth nestled up to her and the rest turned toward her with brightening faces, as flowers turn toward the sun.
“I don’t!” cried Jo decidedly.
“You think then, that it is better to have a few duties and live a little for others, do you?” “Lounging and larking doesn’t pay,” observed Jo, shaking her head.
“I’m tired of it and mean to go to work at something right off.” “Suppose you learn plain cooking.
That’s a useful accomplishment, which no woman should be without,” said Mrs.
March, laughing inaudibly at the recollection of Jo’s dinner party, for she had met Miss Crocker and heard her account of it.
“Mother, did you go away and let everything be, just to see how we’d get on?” cried Meg, who had had suspicions all day.
“Yes, I wanted you to see how the comfort of all depends on each doing her share faithfully.
So I thought, as a little lesson, I would show you what happens when everyone thinks only of herself.
Don’t you feel that it is pleasanter to help one another, to have daily duties which make leisure sweet when it comes, and to bear and forbear, that home may be comfortable and lovely to us all?” “We do, Mother, we do!” cried the girls.
“Then let me advise you to take up your little burdens again, for though they seem heavy sometimes, they are good for us, and lighten as we learn to carry them.
Work is wholesome, and there is plenty for everyone.
It keeps us from ennui and mischief, is good for health and spirits, and gives us a sense of power and independence better than money or fashion.” “We’ll work like bees, and love it too, see if we don’t,” said Jo.
I am a stupid thing, and ought to be studying, not playing,” was Beth’s resolution, while Amy followed their example by heroically declaring, “I shall learn to make buttonholes, and attend to my parts of speech.” “Very good!
Then I am quite satisfied with the experiment, and fancy that we shall not have to repeat it, only don’t go to the other extreme and delve like slaves.
Have regular hours for work and play, make each day both useful and pleasant, and prove that you understand the worth of time by employing it well.
Then youth will be delightful, old age will bring few regrets, and life become a beautiful success, in spite of poverty.” “We’ll remember, Mother!” and they did.
CHAPTER TWELVE CAMP LAURENCE Beth was postmistress, for, being most at home, she could attend to it regularly, and dearly liked the daily task of unlocking the little door and distributing the mail.
Laurie never forgets that,” she said, putting the fresh nosegay in the vase that stood in ‘Marmee’s corner’, and was kept supplied by the affectionate boy.
“Miss Meg March, one letter and a glove,” continued Beth, delivering the articles to her sister, who sat near her mother, stitching wristbands.
My letter is only a translation of the German song I wanted.
March smiled and was satisfied.
“Two letters for Doctor Jo, a book, and a funny old hat, which covered the whole post office and stuck outside,” said Beth, laughing as she went into the study where Jo sat writing.
Wear a big hat, and be comfortable!’ I said I would if I had one, and he has sent me this, to try me.
My Dear: I write a little word to tell you with how much satisfaction I watch your efforts to control your temper.
I, too, have seen them all, and heartily believe in the sincerity of your resolution, since it begins to bear fruit.
Go on, dear, patiently and bravely, and always believe that no one sympathizes more tenderly with you than your loving...
That’s worth millions of money and pecks of praise.
I will keep on trying, and not get tired, since I have you to help me.” Laying her head on her arms, Jo wet her little romance with a few happy tears, for she had thought that no one saw and appreciated her efforts to be good, and this assurance was doubly precious, doubly encouraging, because unexpected and from the person whose commendation she most valued.
Feeling stronger than ever to meet and subdue her Apollyon, she pinned the note inside her frock, as a shield and a reminder, lest she be taken unaware, and proceeded to open her other letter, quite ready for either good or bad news.
Some English girls and boys are coming to see me tomorrow and I want to have a jolly time.
If it’s fine, I’m going to pitch my tent in Longmeadow, and row up the whole crew to lunch and croquet—have a fire, make messes, gypsy fashion, and all sorts of larks.
Brooke will go to keep us boys steady, and Kate Vaughn will play propriety for the girls.
Don’t bother about rations, I’ll see to that and everything else, only do come, there’s a good fellow!
“Here’s richness!” cried Jo, flying in to tell the news to Meg.
It will be such a help to Laurie, for I can row, and Meg see to the lunch, and the children be useful in some way.” “I hope the Vaughns are not fine grown-up people.
Do you know anything about them, Jo?” asked Meg.
I fancied, from the way he primmed up his mouth in speaking of her, that he didn’t admire Kate much.” “I’m so glad my French print is clean, it’s just the thing and so becoming!” observed Meg complacently.
“Have you anything decent, Jo?” “Scarlet and gray boating suit, good enough for me.
But I don’t want to play, or sing, or say anything.
Fighting faults isn’t easy, as I know, and a cheery word kind of gives a lift.
Thank you, Mother,” And Jo gave the thin cheek a grateful kiss, more precious to Mrs.
March than if it had given back the rosy roundness of her youth.
“I had a box of chocolate drops, and the picture I wanted to copy,” said Amy, showing her mail.
Laurence, asking me to come over and play to him tonight, before the lamps are lighted, and I shall go,” added Beth, whose friendship with the old gentleman prospered finely.
“Now let’s fly round, and do double duty today, so that we can play tomorrow with free minds,” said Jo, preparing to replace her pen with a broom.
Each had made such preparation for the fete as seemed necessary and proper.
Meg had an extra row of little curlpapers across her forehead, Jo had copiously anointed her afflicted face with cold cream, Beth had taken Joanna to bed with her to atone for the approaching separation, and Amy had capped the climax by putting a clothespin on her nose to uplift the offending feature.
It was one of the kind artists use to hold the paper on their drawing boards, therefore quite appropriate and effective for the purpose it was now being put.
This funny spectacle appeared to amuse the sun, for he burst out with such radiance that Jo woke up and roused her sisters by a hearty laugh at Amy’s ornament.
Sunshine and laughter were good omens for a pleasure party, and soon a lively bustle began in both houses.
Beth, who was ready first, kept reporting what went on next door, and enlivened her sisters’ toilets by frequent telegrams from the window.
Laurence is looking up at the sky and the weathercock.
Here’s a carriage full of people, a tall lady, a little girl, and two dreadful boys.
Meg, isn’t that the man who bowed to you one day when we were shopping?” “So it is.
I thought he was at the mountains.
Hold up your dress and put your hat on straight, it looks sentimental tipped that way and will fly off at the first puff.
You shall not make a guy of yourself,” remonstrated Meg, as Jo tied down with a red ribbon the broad-brimmed, old-fashioned leghorn Laurie had sent for a joke.
It will make fun, and I don’t mind being a guy if I’m comfortable.” With that Jo marched straight away and the rest followed, a bright little band of sisters, all looking their best in summer suits, with happy faces under the jaunty hatbrims.
The lawn was the reception room, and for several minutes a lively scene was enacted there.
Meg was grateful to see that Miss Kate, though twenty, was dressed with a simplicity which American girls would do well to imitate, and who was much flattered by Mr.
Ned’s assurances that he came especially to see her.
Jo understood why Laurie ‘primmed up his mouth’ when speaking of Kate, for that young lady had a standoff-don’t-touch-me air, which contrasted strongly with the free and easy demeanor of the other girls.
Beth took an observation of the new boys and decided that the lame one was not ‘dreadful’, but gentle and feeble, and she would be kind to him on that account.
Amy found Grace a well-mannered, merry, little person, and after staring dumbly at one another for a few minutes, they suddenly became very good friends.
Tents, lunch, and croquet utensils having been sent on beforehand, the party was soon embarked, and the two boats pushed off together, leaving Mr.
Laurence waving his hat on the shore.
Brooke and Ned the other, while Fred Vaughn, the riotous twin, did his best to upset both by paddling about in a wherry like a disturbed water bug.
Jo’s funny hat deserved a vote of thanks, for it was of general utility.
It broke the ice in the beginning by producing a laugh, it created quite a refreshing breeze, flapping to and fro as she rowed, and would make an excellent umbrella for the whole party, if a shower came up, she said.
Meg, in the other boat, was delightfully situated, face to face with the rowers, who both admired the prospect and feathered their oars with uncommon ‘skill and dexterity’.
Brooke was a grave, silent young man, with handsome brown eyes and a pleasant voice.
Meg liked his quiet manners and considered him a walking encyclopedia of useful knowledge.
He never talked to her much, but he looked at her a good deal, and she felt sure that he did not regard her with aversion.
Ned, being in college, of course put on all the airs which freshmen think it their bounden duty to assume.
He was not very wise, but very good-natured, and altogether an excellent person to carry on a picnic.
Sallie Gardiner was absorbed in keeping her white pique dress clean and chattering with the ubiquitous Fred, who kept Beth in constant terror by his pranks.
It was not far to Longmeadow, but the tent was pitched and the wickets down by the time they arrived.
A pleasant green field, with three wide-spreading oaks in the middle and a smooth strip of turf for croquet.
“Welcome to Camp Laurence!” said the young host, as they landed with exclamations of delight.
“Brooke is commander in chief, I am commissary general, the other fellows are staff officers, and you, ladies, are company.
The tent is for your especial benefit and that oak is your drawing room, this is the messroom and the third is the camp kitchen.
The English played well, but the Americans played better, and contested every inch of the ground as strongly as if the spirit of ’76 inspired them.
Jo and Fred had several skirmishes and once narrowly escaped high words.
Now, Miss Jo, I’ll settle you, and get in first,” cried the young gentleman, swinging his mallet for another blow.
“Yankees are a deal the most tricky, everybody knows.
There you go!” returned Fred, croqueting her ball far away.
Jo opened her lips to say something rude, but checked herself in time, colored up to her forehead and stood a minute, hammering down a wicket with all her might, while Fred hit the stake and declared himself out with much exultation.
She went off to get her ball, and was a long time finding it among the bushes, but she came back, looking cool and quiet, and waited her turn patiently.
Miss Jo owes me one, so you are finished,” cried Fred excitedly, as they all drew near to see the finish.
“Yankees have a trick of being generous to their enemies,” said Jo, with a look that made the lad redden, “especially when they beat them,” she added, as, leaving Kate’s ball untouched, she won the game by a clever stroke.
Laurie threw up his hat, then remembered that it wouldn’t do to exult over the defeat of his guests, and stopped in the middle of the cheer to whisper to his friend, “Good for you, Jo!
We can’t tell him so, but he won’t do it again, take my word for it.” Meg drew her aside, under pretense of pinning up a loose braid, and said approvingly, “It was dreadfully provoking, but you kept your temper, and I’m so glad, Jo.” “Don’t praise me, Meg, for I could box his ears this minute.
I should certainly have boiled over if I hadn’t stayed among the nettles till I got my rage under control enough to hold my tongue.
It’s simmering now, so I hope he’ll keep out of my way,” returned Jo, biting her lips as she glowered at Fred from under her big hat.
“Commissary general, will you make the fire and get water, while Miss March, Miss Sallie, and I spread the table?
Who can make good coffee?” “Jo can,” said Meg, glad to recommend her sister.
So Jo, feeling that her late lessons in cookery were to do her honor, went to preside over the coffeepot, while the children collected dry sticks, and the boys made a fire and got water from a spring near by.
Miss Kate sketched and Frank talked to Beth, who was making little mats of braided rushes to serve as plates.
The commander in chief and his aides soon spread the tablecloth with an inviting array of eatables and drinkables, prettily decorated with green leaves.
Jo announced that the coffee was ready, and everyone settled themselves to a hearty meal, for youth is seldom dyspeptic, and exercise develops wholesome appetites.
A very merry lunch it was, for everything seemed fresh and funny, and frequent peals of laughter startled a venerable horse who fed near by.
There was a pleasing inequality in the table, which produced many mishaps to cups and plates, acorns dropped in the milk, little black ants partook of the refreshments without being invited, and fuzzy caterpillars swung down from the tree to see what was going on.
Three white-headed children peeped over the fence, and an objectionable dog barked at them from the other side of the river with all his might and main.
“I had an uncommonly good time that day, and haven’t got over it yet.
This is no credit to me, you know, I don’t do anything.
I brought Authors, and I dare say Miss Kate knows something new and nice.
I thought she’d suit Brooke, but he keeps talking to Meg, and Kate just stares at them through that ridiculous glass of hers.
I’m going, so you needn’t try to preach propriety, for you can’t do it, Jo.” Miss Kate did know several new games, and as the girls would not, and the boys could not, eat any more, they all adjourned to the drawing room to play Rig-marole.
“One person begins a story, any nonsense you like, and tells as long as he pleases, only taking care to stop short at some exciting point, when the next takes it up and does the same.
It’s very funny when well done, and makes a perfect jumble of tragical comical stuff to laugh over.
Brooke,” said Kate, with a commanding air, which surprised Meg, who treated the tutor with as much respect as any other gentleman.
Brooke obediently began the story, with the handsome brown eyes steadily fixed upon the sunshiny river.
He traveled a long while, nearly eight-and-twenty years, and had a hard time of it, till he came to the palace of a good old king, who had offered a reward to anyone who could tame and train a fine but unbroken colt, of which he was very fond.
The knight agreed to try, and got on slowly but surely, for the colt was a gallant fellow, and soon learned to love his new master, though he was freakish and wild.
Every day, when he gave his lessons to this pet of the king’s, the knight rode him through the city, and as he rode, he looked everywhere for a certain beautiful face, which he had seen many times in his dreams, but never found.
One day, as he went prancing down a quiet street, he saw at the window of a ruinous castle the lovely face.
He was delighted, inquired who lived in this old castle, and was told that several captive princesses were kept there by a spell, and spun all day to lay up money to buy their liberty.
The knight wished intensely that he could free them, but he was poor and could only go by each day, watching for the sweet face and longing to see it out in the sunshine.
At last he resolved to get into the castle and ask how he could help them.
The great door flew open, and he beheld...” “A ravishingly lovely lady, who exclaimed, with a cry of rapture, ‘At last!
At last!’” continued Kate, who had read French novels, and admired the style.
‘Oh, rise!’ she said, extending a hand of marble fairness.
Till you tell me how I may rescue you,’ swore the knight, still kneeling.
‘Alas, my cruel fate condemns me to remain here till my tyrant is destroyed.’ ‘Where is the villain?’ ‘In the mauve salon.
Go, brave heart, and save me from despair.’ ‘I obey, and return victorious or dead!’ With these thrilling words he rushed away, and flinging open the door of the mauve salon, was about to enter, when he received...” “A stunning blow from the big Greek lexicon, which an old fellow in a black gown fired at him,” said Ned.
“Instantly, Sir What’s-his-name recovered himself, pitched the tyrant out of the window, and turned to join the lady, victorious, but with a bump on his brow, found the door locked, tore up the curtains, made a rope ladder, got halfway down when the ladder broke, and he went headfirst into the moat, sixty feet below.
“It beckoned, gliding noiselessly before him down a corridor as dark and cold as any tomb.
Shadowy effigies in armor stood on either side, a dead silence reigned, the lamp burned blue, and the ghostly figure ever and anon turned its face toward him, showing the glitter of awful eyes through its white veil.
They reached a curtained door, behind which sounded lovely music.
He sprang forward to enter, but the specter plucked him back, and waved threateningly before him a...” “Snuffbox,” said Jo, in a sepulchral tone, which convulsed the audience.
“‘Thankee,’ said the knight politely, as he took a pinch and sneezed seven times so violently that his head fell off.
‘Up with the jib, reef the tops’l halliards, helm hard alee, and man the guns!’ roared the captain, as a Portuguese pirate hove in sight, with a flag black as ink flying from her foremast.
‘Go in and win, my hearties!’ says the captain, and a tremendous fight began.
“Having taken the pirate captain prisoner, sailed slap over the schooner, whose decks were piled high with dead and whose lee scuppers ran blood, for the order had been ‘Cutlasses, and die hard!’ ‘Bosun’s mate, take a bight of the flying-jib sheet, and start this villain if he doesn’t confess his sins double quick,’ said the British captain.
The Portuguese held his tongue like a brick, and walked the plank, while the jolly tars cheered like mad.
But the sly dog dived, came up under the man-of-war, scuttled her, and down she went, with all sail set, ‘To the bottom of the sea, sea, sea’ where...” “Oh, gracious!
What shall I say?” cried Sallie, as Fred ended his rigmarole, in which he had jumbled together pell-mell nautical phrases and facts out of one of his favorite books.
“Well, they went to the bottom, and a nice mermaid welcomed them, but was much grieved on finding the box of headless knights, and kindly pickled them in brine, hoping to discover the mystery about them, for being a woman, she was curious.
So the diver hoisted it up, and was much disappointed on opening it to find no pearls.
He left it in a great lonely field, where it was found by a...” “Little goose girl, who kept a hundred fat geese in the field,” said Amy, when Sallie’s invention gave out.
‘Your geese will tell you, they know everything.’ said the old woman.
So she asked what she should use for new heads, since the old ones were lost, and all the geese opened their hundred mouths and screamed...” “‘Cabbages!’” continued Laurie promptly.
She put them on, the knights revived at once, thanked her, and went on their way rejoicing, never knowing the difference, for there were so many other heads like them in the world that no one thought anything of it.
The knight in whom I’m interested went back to find the pretty face, and learned that the princesses had spun themselves free and all gone and married, but one.
He was in a great state of mind at that, and mounting the colt, who stood by him through thick and thin, rushed to the castle to see which was left.
Peeping over the hedge, he saw the queen of his affections picking flowers in her garden.
So he patiently broke twig after twig till he had made a little hole through which he peeped, saying imploringly, ‘Let me in!
Let me in!’ But the pretty princess did not seem to understand, for she picked her roses quietly, and left him to fight his way in.
I’m not playing, I never do,” said Frank, dismayed at the sentimental predicament out of which he was to rescue the absurd couple.
Beth had disappeared behind Jo, and Grace was asleep.
“So the poor knight is to be left sticking in the hedge, is he?” asked Mr.
Brooke, still watching the river, and playing with the wild rose in his buttonhole.
“I guess the princess gave him a posy, and opened the gate after a while,” said Laurie, smiling to himself, as he threw acorns at his tutor.
“What a piece of nonsense we have made!
With practice we might do something quite clever.
“Why, you pile up your hands, choose a number, and draw out in turn, and the person who draws at the number has to answer truly any question put by the rest.
It’s great fun.” “Let’s try it,” said Jo, who liked new experiments.
Brooke, Meg, and Ned declined, but Fred, Sallie, Jo, and Laurie piled and drew, and the lot fell to Laurie.
“Grandfather and Napoleon.” “Which lady here do you think prettiest?” said Sallie.
“Margaret.” “Which do you like best?” from Fred.
“Jo, of course.” “What silly questions you ask!” And Jo gave a disdainful shrug as the rest laughed at Laurie’s matter-of-fact tone.
“It’s a very good one for you,” retorted Jo in a low voice.
“What is your greatest fault?” asked Fred, by way of testing in her the virtue he lacked himself.
“A pair of boot lacings,” returned Jo, guessing and defeating his purpose.
Don’t you wish you could give it to me, Laurie?” And she slyly smiled in his disappointed face.
“Let’s give it to him,” whispered Laurie to Jo, who nodded and asked at once...
I’ll harrrow up your feelings first by asking if you don’t think you are something of a flirt,” said Laurie, as Jo nodded to Fred as a sign that peace was declared.
“You impertinent boy!
Of course I’m not,” exclaimed Sallie, with an air that proved the contrary.
Let’s have a sensible game of Authors to refresh our minds,” proposed Jo.
Miss Kate took out her sketch again, and Margaret watched her, while Mr.
“How beautifully you do it!
I wish I could draw,” said Meg, with mingled admiration and regret in her voice.
I should think you had taste and talent for it,” replied Miss Kate graciously.
“I haven’t time.” “Your mamma prefers other accomplishments, I fancy.
So did mine, but I proved to her that I had talent by taking a few lessons privately, and then she was quite willing I should go on.
Can’t you do the same with your governess?” “I have none.” “I forgot young ladies in America go to school more than with us.
I am a governess myself.” “Oh, indeed!” said Miss Kate, but she might as well have said, “Dear me, how dreadful!” for her tone implied it, and something in her face made Meg color, and wish she had not been so frank.
Brooke looked up and said quickly, “Young ladies in America love independence as much as their ancestors did, and are admired and respected for supporting themselves.” “Oh, yes, of course it’s very nice and proper in them to do so.
We have many most respectable and worthy young women who do the same and are employed by the nobility, because, being the daughters of gentlemen, they are both well bred and accomplished, you know,” said Miss Kate in a patronizing tone that hurt Meg’s pride, and made her work seem not only more distasteful, but degrading.
“Did the German song suit, Miss March?” inquired Mr.
Brooke, breaking an awkward pause.
It was very sweet, and I’m much obliged to whoever translated it for me.” And Meg’s downcast face brightened as she spoke.
“Don’t you read German?” asked Miss Kate with a look of surprise.
My father, who taught me, is away, and I don’t get on very fast alone, for I’ve no one to correct my pronunciation.” “Try a little now.
Here is Schiller’s Mary Stuart and a tutor who loves to teach.” And Mr.
Brooke laid his book on her lap with an inviting smile.
“It’s so hard I’m afraid to try,” said Meg, grateful, but bashful in the presence of the accomplished young lady beside her.
“I’ll read a bit to encourage you.” And Miss Kate read one of the most beautiful passages in a perfectly correct but perfectly expressionless manner.
Brooke made no comment as she returned the book to Meg, who said innocently, “I thought it was poetry.” “Some of it is.
Meg obediently following the long grass-blade which her new tutor used to point with, read slowly and timidly, unconsciously making poetry of the hard words by the soft intonation of her musical voice.
Down the page went the green guide, and presently, forgetting her listener in the beauty of the sad scene, Meg read as if alone, giving a little touch of tragedy to the words of the unhappy queen.
Brooke, as she paused, quite ignoring her many mistakes, and looking as if he did indeed love to teach.
Miss Kate put up her glass, and, having taken a survey of the little tableau before her, shut her sketch book, saying with condescension, “You’ve a nice accent and in time will be a clever reader.
I advise you to learn, for German is a valuable accomplishment to teachers.
I must look after Grace, she is romping.” And Miss Kate strolled away, adding to herself with a shrug, “I didn’t come to chaperone a governess, though she is young and pretty.
I’m afraid Laurie will be quite spoiled among them.” “I forgot that English people rather turn up their noses at governesses and don’t treat them as we do,” said Meg, looking after the retreating figure with an annoyed expression.
There’s no place like America for us workers, Miss Margaret.” And Mr.
Brooke looked so contented and cheerful that Meg was ashamed to lament her hard lot.
I don’t like my work, but I get a good deal of satisfaction out of it after all, so I won’t complain.
I only wished I liked teaching as you do.” “I think you would if you had Laurie for a pupil.
Brooke, busily punching holes in the turf.
“Going to college, I suppose?” Meg’s lips asked the question, but her eyes added, “And what becomes of you?” “Yes, it’s high time he went, for he is ready, and as soon as he is off, I shall turn soldier.
I am needed.” “I am glad of that!” exclaimed Meg.
“I should think every young man would want to go, though it is hard for the mothers and sisters who stay at home,” she added sorrowfully.
Brooke rather bitterly as he absently put the dead rose in the hole he had made and covered it up, like a little grave.
“Laurie and his grandfather would care a great deal, and we should all be very sorry to have any harm happen to you,” said Meg heartily.
“Thank you, that sounds pleasant,” began Mr.
Brooke, looking cheerful again, but before he could finish his speech, Ned, mounted on the old horse, came lumbering up to display his equestrian skill before the young ladies, and there was no more quiet that day.
My sister, Meg, used to ride when Papa was rich, but we don’t keep any horses now, except Ellen Tree,” added Amy, laughing.
Is it a donkey?” asked Grace curiously.
“Why, you see, Jo is crazy about horses and so am I, but we’ve only got an old sidesaddle and no horse.
Out in our garden is an apple tree that has a nice low branch, so Jo put the saddle on it, fixed some reins on the part that turns up, and we bounce away on Ellen Tree whenever we like.” “How funny!” laughed Grace.
It’s very nice, for my friends go too, and the Row is full of ladies and gentlemen.” “Dear, how charming!
I hope I shall go abroad some day, but I’d rather go to Rome than the Row,” said Amy, who had not the remotest idea what the Row was and wouldn’t have asked for the world.
Frank, sitting just behind the little girls, heard what they were saying, and pushed his crutch away from him with an impatient gesture as he watched the active lads going through all sorts of comical gymnastics.
Beth, who was collecting the scattered Author cards, looked up and said, in her shy yet friendly way, “I’m afraid you are tired.
Can I do anything for you?” “Talk to me, please.
It’s dull, sitting by myself,” answered Frank, who had evidently been used to being made much of at home.
If he asked her to deliver a Latin oration, it would not have seemed a more impossible task to bashful Beth, but there was no place to run to, no Jo to hide behind now, and the poor boy looked so wistfully at her that she bravely resolved to try.
“What do you like to talk about?” she asked, fumbling over the cards and dropping half as she tried to tie them up.
“Well, I like to hear about cricket and boating and hunting,” said Frank, who had not yet learned to suit his amusements to his strength.
“Your deer are much prettier than our ugly buffaloes,” she said, turning to the prairies for help and feeling glad that she had read one of the boys’ books in which Jo delighted.
Buffaloes proved soothing and satisfactory, and in her eagerness to amuse another, Beth forgot herself, and was quite unconscious of her sisters’ surprise and delight at the unusual spectacle of Beth talking away to one of the dreadful boys, against whom she had begged protection.
“I haven’t heard Frank laugh so much for ever so long,” said Grace to Amy, as they sat discussing dolls and making tea sets out of the acorn cups.
“My sister Beth is a very fastidious girl, when she likes to be,” said Amy, well pleased at Beth’s success.
She meant ‘facinating’, but as Grace didn’t know the exact meaning of either word, fastidious sounded well and made a good impression.
An impromptu circus, fox and geese, and an amicable game of croquet finished the afternoon.
Ned, getting sentimental, warbled a serenade with the pensive refrain...
We each are young, we each have a heart, Oh, why should we stand thus coldly apart? he looked at Meg with such a lackadaisical expression that she laughed outright and spoiled his song.
“How can you be so cruel to me?” he whispered, under cover of a lively chorus.
“You’ve kept close to that starched-up Englishwoman all day, and now you snub me.” “I didn’t mean to, but you looked so funny I really couldn’t help it,” replied Meg, passing over the first part of his reproach, for it was quite true that she had shunned him, remembering the Moffat party and the talk after it.
Ned was offended and turned to Sallie for consolation, saying to her rather pettishly, “There isn’t a bit of flirt in that girl, is there?” “Not a particle, but she’s a dear,” returned Sallie, defending her friend even while confessing her shortcomings.
“She’s not a stricken deer anyway,” said Ned, trying to be witty, and succeeding as well as very young gentlemen usually do.
On the lawn where it had gathered, the little party separated with cordial good nights and good-byes, for the Vaughns were going to Canada.
As the four sisters went home through the garden, Miss Kate looked after them, saying, without the patronizing tone in her voice, “In spite of their demonstrative manners, American girls are very nice when one knows them.” “I quite agree with you,” said Mr.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN CASTLES IN THE AIR Laurie lay luxuriously swinging to and fro in his hammock one warm September afternoon, wondering what his neighbors were about, but too lazy to go and find out.
He was in one of his moods, for the day had been both unprofitable and unsatisfactory, and he was wishing he could live it over again.
The hot weather made him indolent, and he had shirked his studies, tried Mr.
Staring up into the green gloom of the horse-chestnut trees above him, he dreamed dreams of all sorts, and was just imagining himself tossing on the ocean in a voyage round the world, when the sound of voices brought him ashore in a flash.
Peeping through the meshes of the hammock, he saw the Marches coming out, as if bound on some expedition.
“What in the world are those girls about now?” thought Laurie, opening his sleepy eyes to take a good look, for there was something rather peculiar in the appearance of his neighbors.
Each wore a large, flapping hat, a brown linen pouch slung over one shoulder, and carried a long staff.
Meg had a cushion, Jo a book, Beth a basket, and Amy a portfolio.
I’ll take it to them, and see what’s going on.” Though possessed of half a dozen hats, it took him some time to find one, then there was a hunt for the key, which was at last discovered in his pocket, so that the girls were quite out of sight when he leaped the fence and ran after them.
Taking the shortest way to the boathouse, he waited for them to appear, but no one came, and he went up the hill to take an observation.
A grove of pines covered one part of it, and from the heart of this green spot came a clearer sound than the soft sigh of the pines or the drowsy chirp of the crickets.
“Here’s a landscape!” thought Laurie, peeping through the bushes, and looking wide-awake and good-natured already.
It was a rather pretty little picture, for the sisters sat together in the shady nook, with sun and shadow flickering over them, the aromatic wind lifting their hair and cooling their hot cheeks, and all the little wood people going on with their affairs as if these were no strangers but old friends.
Meg sat upon her cushion, sewing daintily with her white hands, and looking as fresh and sweet as a rose in her pink dress among the green.
Amy was sketching a group of ferns, and Jo was knitting as she read aloud.
A shadow passed over the boy’s face as he watched them, feeling that he ought to go away because uninvited; yet lingering because home seemed very lonely and this quiet party in the woods most attractive to his restless spirit.
He stood so still that a squirrel, busy with its harvesting, ran down a pine close beside him, saw him suddenly and skipped back, scolding so shrilly that Beth looked up, espied the wistful face behind the birches, and beckoned with a reassuring smile.
Or shall I be a bother?” he asked, advancing slowly.
Meg lifted her eyebrows, but Jo scowled at her defiantly and said at once, “Of course you may.
We should have asked you before, only we thought you wouldn’t care for such a girl’s game as this.” “I always like your games, but if Meg doesn’t want me, I’ll go away.” “I’ve no objection, if you do something.
It’s against the rules to be idle here,” replied Meg gravely but graciously.
I’ll do anything if you’ll let me stop a bit, for it’s as dull as the Desert of Sahara down there.
I’m ready.” And Laurie sat down with a submissive expression delightful to behold.
“Yes’m.” was the meek answer, as he began, doing his best to prove his gratitude for the favor of admission into the ‘Busy Bee Society’.
The story was not a long one, and when it was finished, he ventured to ask a few questions as a reward of merit.
“Please, ma’am, could I inquire if this highly instructive and charming institution is a new one?” “Would you tell him?” asked Meg of her sisters.
“He’ll laugh,” said Amy warningly.
Well, you see we used to play Pilgrim’s Progress, and we have been going on with it in earnest, all winter and summer.” “Yes, I know,” said Laurie, nodding wisely.
“Who told you?” demanded Jo.
Never mind, it saves trouble now.” “Go on, please,” said Laurie, as Jo became absorbed in her work, looking a trifle displeased.
The vacation is nearly over, the stints are all done, and we are ever so glad that we didn’t dawdle.” “Yes, I should think so,” and Laurie thought regretfully of his own idle days.
“Mother likes to have us out-of-doors as much as possible, so we bring our work here and have nice times.
For the fun of it we bring our things in these bags, wear the old hats, use poles to climb the hill, and play pilgrims, as we used to do years ago.
We call this hill the Delectable Mountain, for we can look far away and see the country where we hope to live some time.” Jo pointed, and Laurie sat up to examine, for through an opening in the wood one could look cross the wide, blue river, the meadows on the other side, far over the outskirts of the great city, to the green hills that rose to meet the sky.
The sun was low, and the heavens glowed with the splendor of an autumn sunset.
Gold and purple clouds lay on the hilltops, and rising high into the ruddy light were silvery white peaks that shone like the airy spires of some Celestial City.
“How beautiful that is!” said Laurie softly, for he was quick to see and feel beauty of any kind.
“It’s often so, and we like to watch it, for it is never the same, but always splendid,” replied Amy, wishing she could paint it.
“Jo talks about the country where we hope to live sometime—the real country, she means, with pigs and chickens and haymaking.
It would be nice, but I wish the beautiful country up there was real, and we could ever go to it,” said Beth musingly.
“There is a lovelier country even than that, where we shall go, by-and-by, when we are good enough,” answered Meg with her sweetest voice.
I want to fly away at once, as those swallows fly, and go in at that splendid gate.” “You’ll get there, Beth, sooner or later, no fear of that,” said Jo.
I shall have to do a deal of traveling before I come in sight of your Celestial City.
If I arrive late, you’ll say a good word for me, won’t you, Beth?” Something in the boy’s face troubled his little friend, but she said cheerfully, with her quiet eyes on the changing clouds, “If people really want to go, and really try all their lives, I think they will get in, for I don’t believe there are any locks on that door or any guards at the gate.
I always imagine it is as it is in the picture, where the shining ones stretch out their hands to welcome poor Christian as he comes up from the river.” “Wouldn’t it be fun if all the castles in the air which we make could come true, and we could live in them?” said Jo, after a little pause.
“I’ve made such quantities it would be hard to choose which I’d have,” said Laurie, lying flat and throwing cones at the squirrel who had betrayed him.
“You’d have to take your favorite one.
I’m to be a famous musician myself, and all creation is to rush to hear me.
And I’m never to be bothered about money or business, but just enjoy myself and live for what I like.
That’s my favorite castle.
What’s yours, Meg?” Margaret seemed to find it a little hard to tell hers, and waved a brake before her face, as if to disperse imaginary gnats, while she said slowly, “I should like a lovely house, full of all sorts of luxurious things—nice food, pretty clothes, handsome furniture, pleasant people, and heaps of money.
I am to be mistress of it, and manage it as I like, with plenty of servants, so I never need work a bit.
For I wouldn’t be idle, but do good, and make everyone love me dearly.” “Wouldn’t you have a master for your castle in the air?” asked Laurie slyly.
“I said ‘pleasant people’, you know,” and Meg carefully tied up her shoe as she spoke, so that no one saw her face.
“Why don’t you say you’d have a splendid, wise, good husband and some angelic little children?
“You’d have nothing but horses, inkstands, and novels in yours,” answered Meg petulantly.
I’d have a stable full of Arabian steeds, rooms piled high with books, and I’d write out of a magic inkstand, so that my works should be as famous as Laurie’s music.
I want to do something splendid before I go into my castle, something heroic or wonderful that won’t be forgotten after I’m dead.
I don’t know what, but I’m on the watch for it, and mean to astonish you all some day.
I think I shall write books, and get rich and famous, that would suit me, so that is my favorite dream.” “Mine is to stay at home safe with Father and Mother, and help take care of the family,” said Beth contentedly.
“Don’t you wish for anything else?” asked Laurie.
“Since I had my little piano, I am perfectly satisfied.
I only wish we may all keep well and be together, nothing else.” “I have ever so many wishes, but the pet one is to be an artist, and go to Rome, and do fine pictures, and be the best artist in the whole world,” was Amy’s modest desire.
“We’re an ambitious set, aren’t we?
Every one of us, but Beth, wants to be rich and famous, and gorgeous in every respect.
I do wonder if any of us will ever get our wishes,” said Laurie, chewing grass like a meditative calf.
“I’ve got the key to my castle in the air, but whether I can unlock the door remains to be seen,” observed Jo mysteriously.
Hang college!” muttered Laurie with an impatient sigh.
“I haven’t got any,” said Meg forlornly.
“Where?” “In your face.” “Nonsense, that’s of no use.” “Wait and see if it doesn’t bring you something worth having,” replied the boy, laughing at the thought of a charming little secret which he fancied he knew.
Meg colored behind the brake, but asked no questions and looked across the river with the same expectant expression which Mr.
How old I shall be, twenty-seven!” exclaimed Meg, who felt grown up already, having just reached seventeen.
What a venerable party!” said Jo.
“I hope I shall have done something to be proud of by that time, but I’m such a lazy dog, I’m afraid I shall dawdle, Jo.” “You need a motive, Mother says, and when you get it, she is sure you’ll work splendidly.” “Is she?
“I ought to be satisfied to please Grandfather, and I do try, but it’s working against the grain, you see, and comes hard.
He wants me to be an India merchant, as he was, and I’d rather be shot.
Going to college ought to satisfy him, for if I give him four years he ought to let me off from the business.
If there was anyone left to stay with the old gentleman, I’d do it tomorrow.” Laurie spoke excitedly, and looked ready to carry his threat into execution on the slightest provocation, for he was growing up very fast and, in spite of his indolent ways, had a young man’s hatred of subjection, a young man’s restless longing to try the world for himself.
“I advise you to sail away in one of your ships, and never come home again till you have tried your own way,” said Jo, whose imagination was fired by the thought of such a daring exploit, and whose sympathy was excited by what she called ‘Teddy’s Wrongs’.
You should do just what your grandfather wishes, my dear boy,” said Meg in her most maternal tone.
As you say, there is no one else to stay with and love him, and you’d never forgive yourself if you left him without his permission.
Brooke has, by being respected and loved.” “What do you know about him?” asked Laurie, grateful for the good advice, but objecting to the lecture, and glad to turn the conversation from himself after his unusual outbreak.
And how he provides now for an old woman who nursed his mother, and never tells anyone, but is just as generous and patient and good as he can be.” “So he is, dear old fellow!” said Laurie heartily, as Meg paused, looking flushed and earnest with her story.
“It’s like Grandpa to find out all about him without letting him know, and to tell all his goodness to others, so that they might like him.
Brooke couldn’t understand why your mother was so kind to him, asking him over with me and treating him in her beautiful friendly way.
If ever I do get my wish, you see what I’ll do for Brooke.” “Begin to do something now by not plaguing his life out,” said Meg sharply.
If you have been good, he looks satisfied and walks briskly.
I see him bow and smile as he passes your window, but I didn’t know you’d got up a telegraph.” “We haven’t.
Don’t be angry, and oh, don’t tell him I said anything!
It was only to show that I cared how you get on, and what is said here is said in confidence, you know,” cried Meg, much alarmed at the thought of what might follow from her careless speech.
“I don’t tell tales,” replied Laurie, with his ‘high and mighty’ air, as Jo called a certain expression which he occasionally wore.
“Only if Brooke is going to be a thermometer, I must mind and have fair weather for him to report.” “Please don’t be offended.
I only thought Jo was encouraging you in a feeling which you’d be sorry for by-and-by.
Forgive me, I meant it kindly.” And Meg offered her hand with a gesture both affectionate and timid.
Ashamed of his momentary pique, Laurie squeezed the kind little hand, and said frankly, “I’m the one to be forgiven.
I like to have you tell me my faults and be sisterly, so don’t mind if I am grumpy sometimes.
I thank you all the same.” Bent on showing that he was not offended, he made himself as agreeable as possible, wound cotton for Meg, recited poetry to please Jo, shook down cones for Beth, and helped Amy with her ferns, proving himself a fit person to belong to the ‘Busy Bee Society’.
In the midst of an animated discussion on the domestic habits of turtles (one of those amiable creatures having strolled up from the river), the faint sound of a bell warned them that Hannah had put the tea ‘to draw’, and they would just have time to get home to supper.
“I’ll try.” “Then you may come, and I’ll teach you to knit as the Scotchmen do.
Laurence in the twilight, Laurie, standing in the shadow of the curtain, listened to the little David, whose simple music always quieted his moody spirit, and watched the old man, who sat with his gray head on his hand, thinking tender thoughts of the dead child he had loved so much.
Remembering the conversation of the afternoon, the boy said to himself, with the resolve to make the sacrifice cheerfully, “I’ll let my castle go, and stay with the dear old gentleman while he needs me, for I am all he has.” CHAPTER FOURTEEN SECRETS Jo was very busy in the garret, for the October days began to grow chilly, and the afternoons were short.
For two or three hours the sun lay warmly in the high window, showing Jo seated on the old sofa, writing busily, with her papers spread out upon a trunk before her, while Scrabble, the pet rat, promenaded the beams overhead, accompanied by his oldest son, a fine young fellow, who was evidently very proud of his whiskers.
Quite absorbed in her work, Jo scribbled away till the last page was filled, when she signed her name with a flourish and threw down her pen, exclaiming...
If this won’t suit I shall have to wait till I can do better.” Lying back on the sofa, she read the manuscript carefully through, making dashes here and there, and putting in many exclamation points, which looked like little balloons.
Then she tied it up with a smart red ribbon, and sat a minute looking at it with a sober, wistful expression, which plainly showed how earnest her work had been.
In it she kept her papers, and a few books, safely shut away from Scrabble, who, being likewise of a literary turn, was fond of making a circulating library of such books as were left in his way by eating the leaves.
From this tin receptacle Jo produced another manuscript, and putting both in her pocket, crept quietly downstairs, leaving her friends to nibble on her pens and taste her ink.
She put on her hat and jacket as noiselessly as possible, and going to the back entry window, got out upon the roof of a low porch, swung herself down to the grassy bank, and took a roundabout way to the road.
Once there, she composed herself, hailed a passing omnibus, and rolled away to town, looking very merry and mysterious.
If anyone had been watching her, he would have thought her movements decidedly peculiar, for on alighting, she went off at a great pace till she reached a certain number in a certain busy street.
Having found the place with some difficulty, she went into the doorway, looked up the dirty stairs, and after standing stock still a minute, suddenly dived into the street and walked away as rapidly as she came.
This maneuver she repeated several times, to the great amusement of a black-eyed young gentleman lounging in the window of a building opposite.
On returning for the third time, Jo gave herself a shake, pulled her hat over her eyes, and walked up the stairs, looking as if she were going to have all her teeth out.
When she saw the young gentleman she looked anything but pleased, and passed him with a nod.
But he followed, asking with an air of sympathy, “Did you have a bad time?” “Not very.” “You got through quickly.” “Yes, thank goodness!” “Why did you go alone?” “Didn’t want anyone to know.” “You’re the oddest fellow I ever saw.
How many did you have out?” Jo looked at her friend as if she did not understand him, then began to laugh as if mightily amused at something.
“There are two which I want to have come out, but I must wait a week.” “What are you laughing at?
You are up to some mischief, Jo,” said Laurie, looking mystified.
It’s grand fun and will straighten you up capitally.
I have billiards at home, but it’s no fun unless you have good players, so, as I’m fond of it, I come sometimes and have a game with Ned Moffat or some of the other fellows.” “Oh, dear, I’m so sorry, for you’ll get to liking it better and better, and will waste time and money, and grow like those dreadful boys.
I did hope you’d stay respectable and be a satisfaction to your friends,” said Jo, shaking her head.
“Can’t a fellow take a little innocent amusement now and then without losing his respectability?” asked Laurie, looking nettled.
And if you grow like him she won’t be willing to have us frolic together as we do now.” “Won’t she?” asked Laurie anxiously.
“No, she can’t bear fashionable young men, and she’d shut us all up in bandboxes rather than have us associate with them.” “Well, she needn’t get out her bandboxes yet.
I’m not a fashionable party and don’t mean to be, but I do like harmless larks now and then, don’t you?” “Yes, nobody minds them, so lark away, but don’t get wild, will you?
Or there will be an end of all our good times.” “I’ll be a double distilled saint.” “I can’t bear saints.
Just be a simple, honest, respectable boy, and we’ll never desert you.
He had plenty of money, but didn’t know how to spend it, and got tipsy and gambled, and ran away, and forged his father’s name, I believe, and was altogether horrid.” “You think I’m likely to do the same?
Much obliged.” “No, I don’t—oh, dear, no!—but I hear people talking about money being such a temptation, and I sometimes wish you were poor.
I shouldn’t worry then.” “Do you worry about me, Jo?” “A little, when you look moody and discontented, as you sometimes do, for you’ve got such a strong will, if you once get started wrong, I’m afraid it would be hard to stop you.” Laurie walked in silence a few minutes, and Jo watched him, wishing she had held her tongue, for his eyes looked angry, though his lips smiled as if at her warnings.
“Are you going to deliver lectures all the way home?” he asked presently.
If you’re not, I’d like to walk with you and tell you something very interesting.” “I won’t preach any more, and I’d like to hear the news immensely.” “Very well, then, come on.
It’s a secret, and if I tell you, you must tell me yours.” “I haven’t got any,” began Jo, but stopped suddenly, remembering that she had.
“You know you have—you can’t hide anything, so up and ’fess, or I won’t tell,” cried Laurie.
Come, you begin.” “You’ll not say anything about it at home, will you?” “Not a word.” “And you won’t tease me in private?” “I never tease.” “Yes, you do.
You get everything you want out of people.
I don’t know how you do it, but you are a born wheedler.” “Thank you.
Fire away.” “Well, I’ve left two stories with a newspaperman, and he’s to give his answer next week,” whispered Jo, in her confidant’s ear.
“Hurrah for Miss March, the celebrated American authoress!” cried Laurie, throwing up his hat and catching it again, to the great delight of two ducks, four cats, five hens, and half a dozen Irish children, for they were out of the city now.
It won’t come to anything, I dare say, but I couldn’t rest till I had tried, and I said nothing about it because I didn’t want anyone else to be disappointed.” “It won’t fail.
Why, Jo, your stories are works of Shakespeare compared to half the rubbish that is published every day.
Won’t it be fun to see them in print, and shan’t we feel proud of our authoress?” Jo’s eyes sparkled, for it is always pleasant to be believed in, and a friend’s praise is always sweeter than a dozen newspaper puffs.
Play fair, Teddy, or I’ll never believe you again,” she said, trying to extinguish the brilliant hopes that blazed up at a word of encouragement.
I know where Meg’s glove is.” “Is that all?” said Jo, looking disappointed, as Laurie nodded and twinkled with a face full of mysterious intelligence.
“It’s quite enough for the present, as you’ll agree when I tell you where it is.” “Tell, then.” Laurie bent, and whispered three words in Jo’s ear, which produced a comical change.
She stood and stared at him for a minute, looking both surprised and displeased, then walked on, saying sharply, “How do you know?” “Saw it.” “Where?” “Pocket.” “All this time?” “Yes, isn’t that romantic?” “No, it’s horrid.” “Don’t you like it?” “Of course I don’t.
It’s ridiculous, it won’t be allowed.
Mind that.” “I didn’t promise.” “That was understood, and I trusted you.” “Well, I won’t for the present, anyway, but I’m disgusted, and wish you hadn’t told me.” “I thought you’d be pleased.” “At the idea of anybody coming to take Meg away?
No, thank you.” “You’ll feel better about it when somebody comes to take you away.” “I’d like to see anyone try it,” cried Jo fiercely.
“So should I!” and Laurie chuckled at the idea.
“I don’t think secrets agree with me, I feel rumpled up in my mind since you told me that,” said Jo rather ungratefully.
“Race down this hill with me, and you’ll be all right,” suggested Laurie.
No one was in sight, the smooth road sloped invitingly before her, and finding the temptation irresistible, Jo darted away, soon leaving hat and comb behind her and scattering hairpins as she ran.
Laurie reached the goal first and was quite satisfied with the success of his treatment, for his Atlanta came panting up with flying hair, bright eyes, ruddy cheeks, and no signs of dissatisfaction in her face.
“I wish I was a horse, then I could run for miles in this splendid air, and not lose my breath.
Go, pick up my things, like a cherub, as you are,” said Jo, dropping down under a maple tree, which was carpeting the bank with crimson leaves.
Laurie leisurely departed to recover the lost property, and Jo bundled up her braids, hoping no one would pass by till she was tidy again.
But someone did pass, and who should it be but Meg, looking particularly ladylike in her state and festival suit, for she had been making calls.
“What in the world are you doing here?” she asked, regarding her disheveled sister with well-bred surprise.
“Getting leaves,” meekly answered Jo, sorting the rosy handful she had just swept up.
“And hairpins,” added Laurie, throwing half a dozen into Jo’s lap.
When will you stop such romping ways?” said Meg reprovingly, as she settled her cuffs and smoothed her hair, with which the wind had taken liberties.
Let me be a little girl as long as I can.” As she spoke, Jo bent over the leaves to hide the trembling of her lips, for lately she had felt that Margaret was fast getting to be a woman, and Laurie’s secret made her dread the separation which must surely come some time and now seemed very near.
He saw the trouble in her face and drew Meg’s attention from it by asking quickly, “Where have you been calling, all so fine?” “At the Gardiners’, and Sallie has been telling me all about Belle Moffat’s wedding.
It was very splendid, and they have gone to spend the winter in Paris.
Just think how delightful that must be!” “Do you envy her, Meg?” said Laurie.
“I’m afraid I do.” “I’m glad of it!” muttered Jo, tying on her hat with a jerk.
“Why?” asked Meg, looking surprised.
“Because if you care much about riches, you will never go and marry a poor man,” said Jo, frowning at Laurie, who was mutely warning her to mind what she said.
“I shall never ‘_go_ and marry’ anyone,” observed Meg, walking on with great dignity while the others followed, laughing, whispering, skipping stones, and ‘behaving like children’, as Meg said to herself, though she might have been tempted to join them if she had not had her best dress on.
For a week or two, Jo behaved so queerly that her sisters were quite bewildered.
Brooke whenever they met, would sit looking at Meg with a woe-begone face, occasionally jumping up to shake and then kiss her in a very mysterious manner.
Laurie and she were always making signs to one another, and talking about ‘Spread Eagles’ till the girls declared they had both lost their wits.
On the second Saturday after Jo got out of the window, Meg, as she sat sewing at her window, was scandalized by the sight of Laurie chasing Jo all over the garden and finally capturing her in Amy’s bower.
What went on there, Meg could not see, but shrieks of laughter were heard, followed by the murmur of voices and a great flapping of newspapers.
She never _will_ behave like a young lady,” sighed Meg, as she watched the race with a disapproving face.
She is so funny and dear as she is,” said Beth, who had never betrayed that she was a little hurt at Jo’s having secrets with anyone but her.
“It’s very trying, but we never can make her _commy la fo_,” added Amy, who sat making some new frills for herself, with her curls tied up in a very becoming way, two agreeable things that made her feel unusually elegant and ladylike.
In a few minutes Jo bounced in, laid herself on the sofa, and affected to read.
“Have you anything interesting there?” asked Meg, with condescension.
“Nothing but a story, won’t amount to much, I guess,” returned Jo, carefully keeping the name of the paper out of sight.
That will amuse us and keep you out of mischief,” said Amy in her most grown-up tone.
“What’s the name?” asked Beth, wondering why Jo kept her face behind the sheet.
“The Rival Painters.” “That sounds well.
The girls listened with interest, for the tale was romantic, and somewhat pathetic, as most of the characters died in the end.
“I like that about the splendid picture,” was Amy’s approving remark, as Jo paused.
“I prefer the lovering part.
Viola and Angelo are two of our favorite names, isn’t that queer?” said Meg, wiping her eyes, for the lovering part was tragical.
The reader suddenly sat up, cast away the paper, displaying a flushed countenance, and with a funny mixture of solemnity and excitement replied in a loud voice, “Your sister.” “You?” cried Meg, dropping her work.
“It’s very good,” said Amy critically.
Oh, my Jo, I am so proud!” and Beth ran to hug her sister and exult over this splendid success.
Dear me, how delighted they all were, to be sure!
“Miss Josephine March,” actually printed in the paper.
How graciously Amy criticized the artistic parts of the story, and offered hints for a sequel, which unfortunately couldn’t be carried out, as the hero and heroine were dead.
How Hannah came in to exclaim, “Sakes alive, well I never!” in great astonishment at ‘that Jo’s doin’s’.
How Jo laughed, with tears in her eyes, as she declared she might as well be a peacock and done with it, and how the ‘Spread Eagle’ might be said to flap his wings triumphantly over the House of March, as the paper passed from hand to hand.
“Tell us about it.” “When did it come?” “How much did you get for it?” “What will Father say?” “Won’t Laurie laugh?” cried the family, all in one breath as they clustered about Jo, for these foolish, affectionate people made a jubilee of every little household joy.
“Stop jabbering, girls, and I’ll tell you everything,” said Jo, wondering if Miss Burney felt any grander over her Evelina than she did over her ‘Rival Painters’.
Having told how she disposed of her tales, Jo added, “And when I went to get my answer, the man said he liked them both, but didn’t pay beginners, only let them print in his paper, and noticed the stories.
It was good practice, he said, and when the beginners improved, anyone would pay.
So I let him have the two stories, and today this was sent to me, and Laurie caught me with it and insisted on seeing it, so I let him.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN A TELEGRAM “November is the most disagreeable month in the whole year,” said Margaret, standing at the window one dull afternoon, looking out at the frostbitten garden.
“That’s the reason I was born in it,” observed Jo pensively, quite unconscious of the blot on her nose.
“If something very pleasant should happen now, we should think it a delightful month,” said Beth, who took a hopeful view of everything, even November.
“I dare say, but nothing pleasant ever does happen in this family,” said Meg, who was out of sorts.
“We go grubbing along day after day, without a bit of change, and very little fun.
We might as well be in a treadmill.” “My patience, how blue we are!” cried Jo.
“I don’t much wonder, poor dear, for you see other girls having splendid times, while you grind, grind, year in and year out.
Oh, don’t I wish I could manage things for you as I do for my heroines!
You’re pretty enough and good enough already, so I’d have some rich relation leave you a fortune unexpectedly.
Then you’d dash out as an heiress, scorn everyone who has slighted you, go abroad, and come home my Lady Something in a blaze of splendor and elegance.” “People don’t have fortunes left them in that style nowadays, men have to work and women marry for money.
It’s a dreadfully unjust world,” said Meg bitterly.
“Jo and I are going to make fortunes for you all.
“Can’t wait, and I’m afraid I haven’t much faith in ink and dirt, though I’m grateful for your good intentions.” Meg sighed, and turned to the frostbitten garden again.
Jo groaned and leaned both elbows on the table in a despondent attitude, but Amy spatted away energetically, and Beth, who sat at the other window, said, smiling, “Two pleasant things are going to happen right away.
Marmee is coming down the street, and Laurie is tramping through the garden as if he had something nice to tell.” In they both came, Mrs.
March with her usual question, “Any letter from Father, girls?” and Laurie to say in his persuasive way, “Won’t some of you come for a drive?
I’ve been working away at mathematics till my head is in a muddle, and I’m going to freshen my wits by a brisk turn.
Come, Jo, you and Beth will go, won’t you?” “Of course we will.” “Much obliged, but I’m busy.” And Meg whisked out her workbasket, for she had agreed with her mother that it was best, for her at least, not to drive too often with the young gentleman.
“Can I do anything for you, Madam Mother?” asked Laurie, leaning over Mrs.
March’s chair with the affectionate look and tone he always gave her.
Father is as regular as the sun, but there’s some delay on the way, perhaps.” A sharp ring interrupted her, and a minute after Hannah came in with a letter.
“It’s one of them horrid telegraph things, mum,” she said, handling it as if she was afraid it would explode and do some damage.
At the word ‘telegraph’, Mrs.
March snatched it, read the two lines it contained, and dropped back into her chair as white as if the little paper had sent a bullet to her heart.
Laurie dashed downstairs for water, while Meg and Hannah supported her, and Jo read aloud, in a frightened voice...
HALE Blank Hospital, Washington.
How still the room was as they listened breathlessly, how strangely the day darkened outside, and how suddenly the whole world seemed to change, as the girls gathered about their mother, feeling as if all the happiness and support of their lives was about to be taken from them.
March was herself again directly, read the message over, and stretched out her arms to her daughters, saying, in a tone they never forgot, “I shall go at once, but it may be too late.
Oh, children, children, help me to bear it!” For several minutes there was nothing but the sound of sobbing in the room, mingled with broken words of comfort, tender assurances of help, and hopeful whispers that died away in tears.
Poor Hannah was the first to recover, and with unconscious wisdom she set all the rest a good example, for with her, work was panacea for most afflictions.
I won’t waste no time a-cryin’, but git your things ready right away, mum,” she said heartily, as she wiped her face on her apron, gave her mistress a warm shake of the hand with her own hard one, and went away to work like three women in one.
“Where’s Laurie?” she asked presently, when she had collected her thoughts and decided on the first duties to be done.
Oh, let me do something!” cried the boy, hurrying from the next room whither he had withdrawn, feeling that their first sorrow was too sacred for even his friendly eyes to see.
“Send a telegram saying I will come at once.
I can go anywhere, do anything,” he said, looking ready to fly to the ends of the earth.
Jo, give me that pen and paper.” Tearing off the blank side of one of her newly copied pages, Jo drew the table before her mother, well knowing that money for the long, sad journey must be borrowed, and feeling as if she could do anything to add a little to the sum for her father.
“Now go, dear, but don’t kill yourself driving at a desperate pace.
March’s warning was evidently thrown away, for five minutes later Laurie tore by the window on his own fleet horse, riding as if for his life.
I’ll put them down, they’ll be needed and I must go prepared for nursing.
Hospital stores are not always good.
Laurence for a couple of bottles of old wine.
He shall have the best of everything.
Amy, tell Hannah to get down the black trunk, and Meg, come and help me find my things, for I’m half bewildered.” Writing, thinking, and directing all at once might well bewilder the poor lady, and Meg begged her to sit quietly in her room for a little while, and let them work.
Everyone scattered like leaves before a gust of wind, and the quiet, happy household was broken up as suddenly as if the paper had been an evil spell.
Laurence came hurrying back with Beth, bringing every comfort the kind old gentleman could think of for the invalid, and friendliest promises of protection for the girls during the mother’s absence, which comforted her very much.
There was nothing he didn’t offer, from his own dressing gown to himself as escort.
But the last was impossible.
March would not hear of the old gentleman’s undertaking the long journey, yet an expression of relief was visible when he spoke of it, for anxiety ill fits one for traveling.
He saw the look, knit his heavy eyebrows, rubbed his hands, and marched abruptly away, saying he’d be back directly.
No one had time to think of him again till, as Meg ran through the entry, with a pair of rubbers in one hand and a cup of tea in the other, she came suddenly upon Mr.
“I’m very sorry to hear of this, Miss March,” he said, in the kind, quiet tone which sounded very pleasantly to her perturbed spirit.
Laurence has commissions for me in Washington, and it will give me real satisfaction to be of service to her there.” Down dropped the rubbers, and the tea was very near following, as Meg put out her hand, with a face so full of gratitude that Mr.
Brooke would have felt repaid for a much greater sacrifice than the trifling one of time and comfort which he was about to take.
Thank you very, very much!” Meg spoke earnestly, and forgot herself entirely till something in the brown eyes looking down at her made her remember the cooling tea, and lead the way into the parlor, saying she would call her mother.
Everything was arranged by the time Laurie returned with a note from Aunt March, enclosing the desired sum, and a few lines repeating what she had often said before, that she had always told them it was absurd for March to go into the army, always predicted that no good would come of it, and she hoped they would take her advice the next time.
March put the note in the fire, the money in her purse, and went on with her preparations, with her lips folded tightly in a way which Jo would have understood if she had been there.
The short afternoon wore away.
All other errands were done, and Meg and her mother busy at some necessary needlework, while Beth and Amy got tea, and Hannah finished her ironing with what she called a ‘slap and a bang’, but still Jo did not come.
Jo, I hope you haven’t done anything rash?” “No, it’s mine honestly.
I earned it, and I don’t think you’ll blame me, for I only sold what was my own.” As she spoke, Jo took off her bonnet, and a general outcry arose, for all her abundant hair was cut short.
Your beautiful hair!” “Oh, Jo, how could you?
My head feels deliciously light and cool, and the barber said I could soon have a curly crop, which will be boyish, becoming, and easy to keep in order.
I’m satisfied, so please take the money and let’s have supper.” “Tell me all about it, Jo.
I am not quite satisfied, but I can’t blame you, for I know how willingly you sacrificed your vanity, as you call it, to your love.
But, my dear, it was not necessary, and I’m afraid you will regret it one of these days,” said Mrs.
“No, I won’t!” returned Jo stoutly, feeling much relieved that her prank was not entirely condemned.
“Well, I was wild to do something for Father,” replied Jo, as they gathered about the table, for healthy young people can eat even in the midst of trouble.
“I hate to borrow as much as Mother does, and I knew Aunt March would croak, she always does, if you ask for a ninepence.
Meg gave all her quarterly salary toward the rent, and I only got some clothes with mine, so I felt wicked, and was bound to have some money, if I sold the nose off my face to get it.” “You needn’t feel wicked, my child!
You had no winter things and got the simplest with your own hard earnings,” said Mrs.
“I hadn’t the least idea of selling my hair at first, but as I went along I kept thinking what I could do, and feeling as if I’d like to dive into some of the rich stores and help myself.
It came to me all of a sudden that I had one thing to make money out of, and without stopping to think, I walked in, asked if they bought hair, and what they would give for mine.” “I don’t see how you dared to do it,” said Beth in a tone of awe.
He said he didn’t care about mine, it wasn’t the fashionable color, and he never paid much for it in the first place.
I’d do as much for our Jimmy any day if I had a spire of hair worth selling.” “Who was Jimmy?” asked Amy, who liked to have things explained as they went along.
How friendly such things make strangers feel, don’t they?
She talked away all the time the man clipped, and diverted my mind nicely.” “Didn’t you feel dreadfully when the first cut came?” asked Meg, with a shiver.
I’ll give it to you, Marmee, just to remember past glories by, for a crop is so comfortable I don’t think I shall ever have a mane again.” Mrs.
March folded the wavy chestnut lock, and laid it away with a short gray one in her desk.
She only said, “Thank you, deary,” but something in her face made the girls change the subject, and talk as cheerfully as they could about Mr.
Brooke’s kindness, the prospect of a fine day tomorrow, and the happy times they would have when Father came home to be nursed.
March put by the last finished job, and said, “Come girls.” Beth went to the piano and played the father’s favorite hymn.
All began bravely, but broke down one by one till Beth was left alone, singing with all her heart, for to her music was always a sweet consoler.
Good night, my darlings,” said Mrs.
They kissed her quietly, and went to bed as silently as if the dear invalid lay in the next room.
Beth and Amy soon fell asleep in spite of the great trouble, but Meg lay awake, thinking the most serious thoughts she had ever known in her short life.
Jo lay motionless, and her sister fancied that she was asleep, till a stifled sob made her exclaim, as she touched a wet cheek...
It did not seem at all comical to Meg, who kissed and caressed the afflicted heroine in the tenderest manner.
“I’m not sorry,” protested Jo, with a choke.
“I’d do it again tomorrow, if I could.
“Think about something pleasant, and you’ll soon drop off.” “I tried it, but felt wider awake than ever.” “What did you think of?” “Handsome faces—eyes particularly,” answered Meg, smiling to herself in the dark.
“What color do you like best?” “Brown, that is, sometimes.
Blue are lovely.” Jo laughed, and Meg sharply ordered her not to talk, then amiably promised to make her hair curl, and fell asleep to dream of living in her castle in the air.
The clocks were striking midnight and the rooms were very still as a figure glided quietly from bed to bed, smoothing a coverlet here, settling a pillow there, and pausing to look long and tenderly at each unconscious face, to kiss each with lips that mutely blessed, and to pray the fervent prayers which only mothers utter.
As she lifted the curtain to look out into the dreary night, the moon broke suddenly from behind the clouds and shone upon her like a bright, benignant face, which seemed to whisper in the silence, “Be comforted, dear soul!
There is always light behind the clouds.” CHAPTER SIXTEEN LETTERS In the cold gray dawn the sisters lit their lamp and read their chapter with an earnestness never felt before.
For now the shadow of a real trouble had come, the little books were full of help and comfort, and as they dressed, they agreed to say goodbye cheerfully and hopefully, and send their mother on her anxious journey unsaddened by tears or complaints from them.
Everything seemed very strange when they went down, so dim and still outside, so full of light and bustle within.
Breakfast at that early hour seemed odd, and even Hannah’s familiar face looked unnatural as she flew about her kitchen with her nightcap on.
The big trunk stood ready in the hall, Mother’s cloak and bonnet lay on the sofa, and Mother herself sat trying to eat, but looking so pale and worn with sleeplessness and anxiety that the girls found it very hard to keep their resolution.
Meg’s eyes kept filling in spite of herself, Jo was obliged to hide her face in the kitchen roller more than once, and the little girls wore a grave, troubled expression, as if sorrow was a new experience to them.
Nobody talked much, but as the time drew very near and they sat waiting for the carriage, Mrs.
March said to the girls, who were all busied about her, one folding her shawl, another smoothing out the strings of her bonnet, a third putting on her overshoes, and a fourth fastening up her travelling bag...
“Children, I leave you to Hannah’s care and Mr.
Laurence’s protection.
Hannah is faithfulness itself, and our good neighbor will guard you as if you were his own.
Don’t grieve and fret when I am gone, or think that you can be idle and comfort yourselves by being idle and trying to forget.
Hope and keep busy, and whatever happens, remember that you never can be fatherless.” “Yes, Mother.” “Meg, dear, be prudent, watch over your sisters, consult Hannah, and in any perplexity, go to Mr.
Be patient, Jo, don’t get despondent or do rash things, write to me often, and be my brave girl, ready to help and cheer all.
Beth, comfort yourself with your music, and be faithful to the little home duties, and you, Amy, help all you can, be obedient, and keep happy safe at home.” “We will, Mother!
We will!” The rattle of an approaching carriage made them all start and listen.
No one cried, no one ran away or uttered a lamentation, though their hearts were very heavy as they sent loving messages to Father, remembering, as they spoke that it might be too late to deliver them.
They kissed their mother quietly, clung about her tenderly, and tried to wave their hands cheerfully when she drove away.
Laurie and his grandfather came over to see her off, and Mr.
Brooke looked so strong and sensible and kind that the girls christened him ‘Mr.
Greatheart’ on the spot.
“Good-by, my darlings!
God bless and keep us all!” whispered Mrs.
March, as she kissed one dear little face after the other, and hurried into the carriage.
They saw it also, and smiled and waved their hands, and the last thing she beheld as she turned the corner was the four bright faces, and behind them like a bodyguard, old Mr.
Laurence, faithful Hannah, and devoted Laurie.
“How kind everyone is to us!” she said, turning to find fresh proof of it in the respectful sympathy of the young man’s face.
“I don’t see how they can help it,” returned Mr.
Brooke, laughing so infectiously that Mrs.
And so the journey began with the good omens of sunshine, smiles, and cheerful words.
“I feel as if there had been an earthquake,” said Jo, as their neighbors went home to breakfast, leaving them to rest and refresh themselves.
“It seems as if half the house was gone,” added Meg forlornly.
Beth opened her lips to say something, but could only point to the pile of nicely mended hose which lay on Mother’s table, showing that even in her last hurried moments she had thought and worked for them.
It was a little thing, but it went straight to their hearts, and in spite of their brave resolutions, they all broke down and cried bitterly.
Hannah wisely allowed them to relieve their feelings, and when the shower showed signs of clearing up, she came to the rescue, armed with a coffeepot.
“Now, my dear young ladies, remember what your ma said, and don’t fret.
No one could resist her persuasive nods, or the fragrant invitation issuing from the nose of the coffee pot.
They drew up to the table, exchanged their handkerchiefs for napkins, and in ten minutes were all right again.
“‘Hope and keep busy’, that’s the motto for us, so let’s see who will remember it best.
Oh, won’t she lecture though!” said Jo, as she sipped with returning spirit.
Beth and I can keep house perfectly well,” put in Amy, with an important air.
“Hannah will tell us what to do, and we’ll have everything nice when you come home,” added Beth, getting out her mop and dish tub without delay.
“I think anxiety is very interesting,” observed Amy, eating sugar pensively.
The girls couldn’t help laughing, and felt better for it, though Meg shook her head at the young lady who could find consolation in a sugar bowl.
The sight of the turnovers made Jo sober again; and when the two went out to their daily tasks, they looked sorrowfully back at the window where they were accustomed to see their mother’s face.
It was gone, but Beth had remembered the little household ceremony, and there she was, nodding away at them like a rosyfaced mandarin.
“That’s so like my Beth!” said Jo, waving her hat, with a grateful face.
Your hair is becoming, and it looks very boyish and nice,” returned Meg, trying not to smile at the curly head, which looked comically small on her tall sister’s shoulders.
“That’s my only comfort.” And, touching her hat a la Laurie, away went Jo, feeling like a shorn sheep on a wintry day.
News from their father comforted the girls very much, for though dangerously ill, the presence of the best and tenderest of nurses had already done him good.
Brooke sent a bulletin every day, and as the head of the family, Meg insisted on reading the dispatches, which grew more cheerful as the week passed.
At first, everyone was eager to write, and plump envelopes were carefully poked into the letter box by one or other of the sisters, who felt rather important with their Washington correspondence.
As one of these packets contained characteristic notes from the party, we will rob an imaginary mail, and read them.
My dearest Mother: It is impossible to tell you how happy your last letter made us, for the news was so good we couldn’t help laughing and crying over it.
Brooke is, and how fortunate that Mr.
Laurence’s business detains him near you so long, since he is so useful to you and Father.
She does her own hair, and I am teaching her to make buttonholes and mend her stockings.
She tries very hard, and I know you will be pleased with her improvement when you come.
Laurence watches over us like a motherly old hen, as Jo says, and Laurie is very kind and neighborly.
He and Jo keep us merry, for we get pretty blue sometimes, and feel like orphans, with you so far away.
She does not scold at all, and always calls me Miss Margaret, which is quite proper, you know, and treats me with respect.
MEG This note, prettily written on scented paper, was a great contrast to the next, which was scribbled on a big sheet of thin foreign paper, ornamented with blots and all manner of flourishes and curly-tailed letters.
My precious Marmee: Three cheers for dear Father!
Brooke was a trump to telegraph right off, and let us know the minute he was better.
We have such funny times, and now I can enjoy them, for everyone is so desperately good, it’s like living in a nest of turtledoves.
You’d laugh to see Meg head the table and try to be motherish.
She gets prettier every day, and I’m in love with her sometimes.
The children are regular archangels, and I—well, I’m Jo, and never shall be anything else.
I freed my mind about a silly little thing, and he was offended.
I declared I wouldn’t and got mad.
He didn’t come, and just at night I remembered what you said when Amy fell into the river.
I read my little book, felt better, resolved not to let the sun set on my anger, and ran over to tell Laurie I was sorry.
We both laughed, begged each other’s pardon, and felt all good and comfortable again.
I made a ‘pome’ yesterday, when I was helping Hannah wash, and as Father likes my silly little things, I put it in to amuse him.
Give him my lovingest hug that ever was, and kiss yourself a dozen times for your...
TOPSY-TURVY JO A SONG FROM THE SUDS Queen of my tub, I merrily sing, While the white foam rises high, And sturdily wash and rinse and wring, And fasten the clothes to dry.
I wish we could wash from our hearts and souls The stains of the week away, And let water and air by their magic make Ourselves as pure as they.
Then on the earth there would be indeed, A glorious washing day!
And anxious thoughts may be swept away, As we bravely wield a broom.
I am glad a task to me is given, To labor at day by day, For it brings me health and strength and hope, And I cheerfully learn to say, “Head, you may think, Heart, you may feel, But, Hand, you shall work alway!” Dear Mother, There is only room for me to send my love, and some pressed pansies from the root I have been keeping safe in the house for Father to see.
Everyone is very kind, and we are as happy as we can be without you.
LITTLE BETH Ma Chere Mamma, We are all well I do my lessons always and never corroberate the girls—Meg says I mean contradick so I put in both words and you can take the properest.
Meg is a great comfort to me and lets me have jelly every night at tea its so good for me Jo says because it keeps me sweet tempered.
Laurie is not as respeckful as he ought to be now I am almost in my teens, he calls me Chick and hurts my feelings by talking French to me very fast when I say Merci or Bon jour as Hattie King does.
I felt bad but did not fret I bear my troubles well but I do wish Hannah would put more starch in my aprons and have buckwheats every day.
Didn’t I make that interrigation point nice?
Meg says my punchtuation and spelling are disgraceful and I am mortyfied but dear me I have so many things to do, I can’t stop.
Your affectionate daughter...
Miss Meg is going to make a proper good housekeeper.
She hes the liking for it, and gits the hang of things surprisin quick.
She done out a tub of clothes on Monday, but she starched ’em afore they was wrenched, and blued a pink calico dress till I thought I should a died a laughin.
Beth is the best of little creeters, and a sight of help to me, bein so forehanded and dependable.
She tries to learn everything, and really goes to market beyond her years, likewise keeps accounts, with my help, quite wonderful.
We have got on very economical so fur.
I don’t let the girls hev coffee only once a week, accordin to your wish, and keep em on plain wholesome vittles.
Laurie is as full of didoes as usual, and turns the house upside down frequent, but he heartens the girls, so I let em hev full swing.
The old gentleman sends heaps of things, and is rather wearin, but means wal, and it aint my place to say nothin.
March, and hope he’s seen the last of his Pewmonia.
Yours respectful, Hannah Mullet Head Nurse of Ward No. 2, All serene on the Rappahannock, troops in fine condition, commisary department well conducted, the Home Guard under Colonel Teddy always on duty, Commander in Chief General Laurence reviews the army daily, Quartermaster Mullet keeps order in camp, and Major Lion does picket duty at night.
A salute of twenty-four guns was fired on receipt of good news from Washington, and a dress parade took place at headquarters.
Commander in chief sends best wishes, in which he is heartily joined by...
Pray make Brooke useful, and draw on me for funds if expenses exceed your estimate.
Don’t let your husband want anything.
Your sincere friend and servant, JAMES LAURENCE CHAPTER SEVENTEEN LITTLE FAITHFUL For a week the amount of virtue in the old house would have supplied the neighborhood.
It was really amazing, for everyone seemed in a heavenly frame of mind, and self-denial was all the fashion.
Relieved of their first anxiety about their father, the girls insensibly relaxed their praiseworthy efforts a little, and began to fall back into old ways.
They did not forget their motto, but hoping and keeping busy seemed to grow easier, and after such tremendous exertions, they felt that Endeavor deserved a holiday, and gave it a good many.
Jo liked this, and after an energetic rummage from garret to cellar, subsided on the sofa to nurse her cold with arsenicum and books.
Amy found that housework and art did not go well together, and returned to her mud pies.
Meg went daily to her pupils, and sewed, or thought she did, at home, but much time was spent in writing long letters to her mother, or reading the Washington dispatches over and over.
Beth kept on, with only slight relapses into idleness or grieving.
All the little duties were faithfully done each day, and many of her sisters’ also, for they were forgetful, and the house seemed like a clock whose pendulum was gone a-visiting.
When her heart got heavy with longings for Mother or fears for Father, she went away into a certain closet, hid her face in the folds of a dear old gown, and made her little moan and prayed her little prayer quietly by herself.
Nobody knew what cheered her up after a sober fit, but everyone felt how sweet and helpful Beth was, and fell into a way of going to her for comfort or advice in their small affairs.
All were unconscious that this experience was a test of character, and when the first excitement was over, felt that they had done well and deserved praise.
“I’m too tired to go this afternoon,” replied Meg, rocking comfortably as she sewed.
“Too stormy for me with my cold.” “I thought it was almost well.” “It’s well enough for me to go out with Laurie, but not well enough to go to the Hummels’,” said Jo, laughing, but looking a little ashamed of her inconsistency.
“Why don’t you go yourself?” asked Meg.
Hummel goes away to work, and Lottchen takes care of it.
But it gets sicker and sicker, and I think you or Hannah ought to go.” Beth spoke earnestly, and Meg promised she would go tomorrow.
“Ask Hannah for some nice little mess, and take it round, Beth, the air will do you good,” said Jo, adding apologetically, “I’d go but I want to finish my writing.” “My head aches and I’m tired, so I thought maybe some of you would go,” said Beth.
“Amy will be in presently, and she will run down for us,” suggested Meg.
So Beth lay down on the sofa, the others returned to their work, and the Hummels were forgotten.
Amy did not come, Meg went to her room to try on a new dress, Jo was absorbed in her story, and Hannah was sound asleep before the kitchen fire, when Beth quietly put on her hood, filled her basket with odds and ends for the poor children, and went out into the chilly air with a heavy head and a grieved look in her patient eyes.
It was late when she came back, and no one saw her creep upstairs and shut herself into her mother’s room.
Half an hour after, Jo went to ‘Mother’s closet’ for something, and there found little Beth sitting on the medicine chest, looking very grave, with red eyes and a camphor bottle in her hand.
“Christopher Columbus!
“My poor dear, how dreadful for you!
I ought to have gone,” said Jo, taking her sister in her arms as she sat down in her mother’s big chair, with a remorseful face.
“It wasn’t dreadful, Jo, only so sad!
I saw in a minute it was sicker, but Lottchen said her mother had gone for a doctor, so I took Baby and let Lotty rest.
It seemed asleep, but all of a sudden if gave a little cry and trembled, and then lay very still.
He said it was dead, and looked at Heinrich and Minna, who have sore throats.
He smiled then, and was kinder, but it was very sad, and I cried with them till he turned round all of a sudden, and told me to go home and take belladonna right away, or I’d have the fever.” “No, you won’t!” cried Jo, hugging her close, with a frightened look.
What shall we do?” “Don’t be frightened, I guess I shan’t have it badly.
I looked in Mother’s book, and saw that it begins with headache, sore throat, and queer feelings like mine, so I did take some belladonna, and I feel better,” said Beth, laying her cold hands on her hot forehead and trying to look well.
“If Mother was only at home!” exclaimed Jo, seizing the book, and feeling that Washington was an immense way off.
I’ll call Hannah, she knows all about sickness.” “Don’t let Amy come.
Can’t you and Meg have it over again?” asked Beth, anxiously.
Serve me right, selfish pig, to let you go, and stay writing rubbish myself!” muttered Jo, as she went to consult Hannah.
The good soul was wide awake in a minute, and took the lead at once, assuring that there was no need to worry; every one had scarlet fever, and if rightly treated, nobody died, all of which Jo believed, and felt much relieved as they went up to call Meg.
“Now I’ll tell you what we’ll do,” said Hannah, when she had examined and questioned Beth, “we will have Dr.
Then we’ll send Amy off to Aunt March’s for a spell, to keep her out of harm’s way, and one of you girls can stay at home and amuse Beth for a day or two.” “I shall stay, of course, I’m oldest,” began Meg, looking anxious and self-reproachful.
I told Mother I’d do the errands, and I haven’t,” said Jo decidedly.
“Jo, please.” And Beth leaned her head against her sister with a contented look, which effectually settled that point.
“I’ll go and tell Amy,” said Meg, feeling a little hurt, yet rather relieved on the whole, for she did not like nursing, and Jo did.
Amy rebelled outright, and passionately declared that she had rather have the fever than go to Aunt March.
Meg reasoned, pleaded, and commanded, all in vain.
Amy protested that she would not go, and Meg left her in despair to ask Hannah what should be done.
Before she came back, Laurie walked into the parlor to find Amy sobbing, with her head in the sofa cushions.
She told her story, expecting to be consoled, but Laurie only put his hands in his pockets and walked about the room, whistling softly, as he knit his brows in deep thought.
Presently he sat down beside her, and said, in his most wheedlesome tone, “Now be a sensible little woman, and do as they say.
Change of air and care will keep you well, I dare say, or if it does not entirely, you will have the fever more lightly.
I advise you to be off as soon as you can, for scarlet fever is no joke, miss.” “But it’s dull at Aunt March’s, and she is so cross,” said Amy, looking rather frightened.
“It won’t be dull with me popping in every day to tell you how Beth is, and take you out gallivanting.
Call Meg, and tell her you’ll give in,” said Laurie, with an approving pat, which annoyed Amy more than the ‘giving in’.
Meg and Jo came running down to behold the miracle which had been wrought, and Amy, feeling very precious and self-sacrificing, promised to go, if the doctor said Beth was going to be ill.
“How is the little dear?” asked Laurie, for Beth was his especial pet, and he felt more anxious about her than he liked to show.
The baby’s death troubled her, but I dare say she has only got cold.
Hannah says she thinks so, but she looks worried, and that makes me fidgety,” answered Meg.
“What a trying world it is!” said Jo, rumpling up her hair in a fretful way.
There doesn’t seem to be anything to hold on to when Mother’s gone, so I’m all at sea.” “Well, don’t make a porcupine of yourself, it isn’t becoming.
Settle your wig, Jo, and tell me if I shall telegraph to your mother, or do anything?” asked Laurie, who never had been reconciled to the loss of his friend’s one beauty.
“That is what troubles me,” said Meg.
Suppose you ask Grandfather after the doctor has been.” “We will.
Bangs at once,” commanded Meg.
“We can’t decide anything till he has been.” “Stay where you are, Jo.
I’m errand boy to this establishment,” said Laurie, taking up his cap.
“No, I’ve done my lessons for the day.” “Do you study in vacation time?” asked Jo.
“I follow the good example my neighbors set me,” was Laurie’s answer, as he swung himself out of the room.
“I have great hopes for my boy,” observed Jo, watching him fly over the fence with an approving smile.
“He does very well, for a boy,” was Meg’s somewhat ungracious answer, for the subject did not interest her.
Bangs came, said Beth had symptoms of the fever, but he thought she would have it lightly, though he looked sober over the Hummel story.
Amy was ordered off at once, and provided with something to ward off danger, she departed in great state, with Jo and Laurie as escort.
Aunt March received them with her usual hospitality.
“What do you want now?” she asked, looking sharply over her spectacles, while the parrot, sitting on the back of her chair, called out...
“No more than I expected, if you are allowed to go poking about among poor folks.
Don’t cry, child, it worries me to hear people sniff.” Amy was on the point of crying, but Laurie slyly pulled the parrot’s tail, which caused Polly to utter an astonished croak and call out, “Bless my boots!” in such a funny way, that she laughed instead.
March never had any stamina,” was the cheerful reply.
Never say die, take a pinch of snuff, goodbye, goodbye!” squalled Polly, dancing on her perch, and clawing at the old lady’s cap as Laurie tweaked him in the rear.
“Hold your tongue, you disrespectful old bird!
It isn’t proper to be gadding about so late with a rattlepated boy like...” “Hold your tongue, you disrespectful old bird!” cried Polly, tumbling off the chair with a bounce, and running to peck the ‘rattlepated’ boy, who was shaking with laughter at the last speech.
“Get along, you fright!” screamed Polly, and at that rude speech Amy could not restrain a sniff.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN DARK DAYS Beth did have the fever, and was much sicker than anyone but Hannah and the doctor suspected.
Laurence was not allowed to see her, so Hannah had everything her own way, and busy Dr.
Bangs did his best, but left a good deal to the excellent nurse.
March bein’ told, and worried just for sech a trifle.’ Jo devoted herself to Beth day and night, not a hard task, for Beth was very patient, and bore her pain uncomplainingly as long as she could control herself.
But there came a time when during the fever fits she began to talk in a hoarse, broken voice, to play on the coverlet as if on her beloved little piano, and try to sing with a throat so swollen that there was no music left, a time when she did not know the familiar faces around her, but addressed them by wrong names, and called imploringly for her mother.
Then Jo grew frightened, Meg begged to be allowed to write the truth, and even Hannah said she ‘would think of it, though there was no danger yet’.
A letter from Washington added to their trouble, for Mr.
Then it was that Margaret, sitting alone with tears dropping often on her work, felt how rich she had been in things more precious than any luxuries money could buy—in love, protection, peace, and health, the real blessings of life.
And Amy, in her exile, longed eagerly to be at home, that she might work for Beth, feeling now that no service would be hard or irksome, and remembering, with regretful grief, how many neglected tasks those willing hands had done for her.
Laurie haunted the house like a restless ghost, and Mr.
Laurence locked the grand piano, because he could not bear to be reminded of the young neighbor who used to make the twilight pleasant for him.
Everyone missed Beth.
The milkman, baker, grocer, and butcher inquired how she did, poor Mrs.
Hummel came to beg pardon for her thoughtlessness and to get a shroud for Minna, the neighbors sent all sorts of comforts and good wishes, and even those who knew her best were surprised to find how many friends shy little Beth had made.
Meanwhile she lay on her bed with old Joanna at her side, for even in her wanderings she did not forget her forlorn protege.
She sent loving messages to Amy, bade them tell her mother that she would write soon, and often begged for pencil and paper to try to say a word, that Father might not think she had neglected him.
But soon even these intervals of consciousness ended, and she lay hour after hour, tossing to and fro, with incoherent words on her lips, or sank into a heavy sleep which brought her no refreshment.
Bangs came twice a day, Hannah sat up at night, Meg kept a telegram in her desk all ready to send off at any minute, and Jo never stirred from Beth’s side.
The first of December was a wintry day indeed to them, for a bitter wind blew, snow fell fast, and the year seemed getting ready for its death.
March can leave her husband she’d better be sent for.” Hannah nodded without speaking, for her lips twitched nervously, Meg dropped down into a chair as the strength seemed to go out of her limbs at the sound of those words, and Jo, standing with a pale face for a minute, ran to the parlor, snatched up the telegram, and throwing on her things, rushed out into the storm.
She was soon back, and while noiselessly taking off her cloak, Laurie came in with a letter, saying that Mr.
Jo read it thankfully, but the heavy weight did not seem lifted off her heart, and her face was so full of misery that Laurie asked quickly, “What is it?
Is Beth worse?” “I’ve sent for Mother,” said Jo, tugging at her rubber boots with a tragic expression.
Did you do it on your own responsibility?” asked Laurie, as he seated her in the hall chair and took off the rebellious boots, seeing how her hands shook.
The doctor told us to.” “Oh, Jo, it’s not so bad as that?” cried Laurie, with a startled face.
Mother and father both gone, and God seems so far away I can’t find Him.” As the tears streamed fast down poor Jo’s cheeks, she stretched out her hand in a helpless sort of way, as if groping in the dark, and Laurie took it in his, whispering as well as he could with a lump in his throat, “I’m here.
Hold on to me, Jo, dear!” She could not speak, but she did ‘hold on’, and the warm grasp of the friendly human hand comforted her sore heart, and seemed to lead her nearer to the Divine arm which alone could uphold her in her trouble.
Laurie longed to say something tender and comfortable, but no fitting words came to him, so he stood silent, gently stroking her bent head as her mother used to do.
It was the best thing he could have done, far more soothing than the most eloquent words, for Jo felt the unspoken sympathy, and in the silence learned the sweet solace which affection administers to sorrow.
Soon she dried the tears which had relieved her, and looked up with a grateful face.
Soon your mother will be here, and then everything will be all right.” “I’m so glad Father is better.
It does seem as if all the troubles came in a heap, and I got the heaviest part on my shoulders,” sighed Jo, spreading her wet handkerchief over her knees to dry.
“Doesn’t Meg pull fair?” asked Laurie, looking indignant.
Beth is my conscience, and I can’t give her up.
I can’t!” Down went Jo’s face into the wet handkerchief, and she cried despairingly, for she had kept up bravely till now and never shed a tear.
Laurie drew his hand across his eyes, but could not speak till he had subdued the choky feeling in his throat and steadied his lips.
Presently, as Jo’s sobs quieted, he said hopefully, “I don’t think she will die.
It must have possessed some magic, for the submissive spirit of its gentle owner seemed to enter into Jo, and when Laurie came running down with a glass of wine, she took it with a smile, and said bravely, “I drink— Health to my Beth!
You are a good doctor, Teddy, and such a comfortable friend.
How can I ever pay you?” she added, as the wine refreshed her body, as the kind words had done her troubled mind.
“I’ll send my bill, by-and-by, and tonight I’ll give you something that will warm the cockles of your heart better than quarts of wine,” said Laurie, beaming at her with a face of suppressed satisfaction at something.
“What is it?” cried Jo, forgetting her woes for a minute in her wonder.
“I telegraphed to your mother yesterday, and Brooke answered she’d come at once, and she’ll be here tonight, and everything will be all right.
Aren’t you glad I did it?” Laurie spoke very fast, and turned red and excited all in a minute, for he had kept his plot a secret, for fear of disappointing the girls or harming Beth.
Jo grew quite white, flew out of her chair, and the moment he stopped speaking she electrified him by throwing her arms round his neck, and crying out, with a joyful cry, “Oh, Laurie!
I am so glad!” She did not weep again, but laughed hysterically, and trembled and clung to her friend as if she was a little bewildered by the sudden news.
Laurie, though decidedly amazed, behaved with great presence of mind.
He patted her back soothingly, and finding that she was recovering, followed it up by a bashful kiss or two, which brought Jo round at once.
Holding on to the banisters, she put him gently away, saying breathlessly, “Oh, don’t!
I didn’t mean to, it was dreadful of me, but you were such a dear to go and do it in spite of Hannah that I couldn’t help flying at you.
We thought Hannah was overdoing the authority business, and your mother ought to know.
Well, if anything happened, you know.
So I got grandpa to say it was high time we did something, and off I pelted to the office yesterday, for the doctor looked sober, and Hannah most took my head off when I proposed a telegram.
I rather liked it,” said Laurie, looking mischievous, a thing he had not done for a fortnight.
Bless you, Teddy, bless you!” Jo had backed into a corner, and as she finished her speech, she vanished precipitately into the kitchen, where she sat down upon a dresser and told the assembled cats that she was “happy, oh, so happy!” while Laurie departed, feeling that he had made a rather neat thing of it.
“That’s the interferingest chap I ever see, but I forgive him and do hope Mrs.
Meg had a quiet rapture, and then brooded over the letter, while Jo set the sickroom in order, and Hannah “knocked up a couple of pies in case of company unexpected”.
A breath of fresh air seemed to blow through the house, and something better than sunshine brightened the quiet rooms.
Everything appeared to feel the hopeful change.
Beth’s bird began to chirp again, and a half-blown rose was discovered on Amy’s bush in the window.
The fires seemed to burn with unusual cheeriness, and every time the girls met, their pale faces broke into smiles as they hugged one another, whispering encouragingly, “Mother’s coming, dear!
Mother’s coming!” Every one rejoiced but Beth.
She lay in that heavy stupor, alike unconscious of hope and joy, doubt and danger.
It was a piteous sight, the once rosy face so changed and vacant, the once busy hands so weak and wasted, the once smiling lips quite dumb, and the once pretty, well-kept hair scattered rough and tangled on the pillow.
All day Jo and Meg hovered over her, watching, waiting, hoping, and trusting in God and Mother, and all day the snow fell, the bitter wind raged, and the hours dragged slowly by.
But night came at last, and every time the clock struck, the sisters, still sitting on either side of the bed, looked at each other with brightening eyes, for each hour brought help nearer.
The doctor had been in to say that some change, for better or worse, would probably take place about midnight, at which time he would return.
Laurence marched to and fro in the parlor, feeling that he would rather face a rebel battery than Mrs.
March’s countenance as she entered.
Laurie lay on the rug, pretending to rest, but staring into the fire with the thoughtful look which made his black eyes beautifully soft and clear.
The girls never forgot that night, for no sleep came to them as they kept their watch, with that dreadful sense of powerlessness which comes to us in hours like those.
“If God spares Beth, I never will complain again,” whispered Meg earnestly.
“If God spares Beth, I’ll try to love and serve Him all my life,” answered Jo, with equal fervor.
“If life is often as hard as this, I don’t see how we ever shall get through it,” added her sister despondently.
Here the clock struck twelve, and both forgot themselves in watching Beth, for they fancied a change passed over her wan face.
An hour went by, and nothing happened except Laurie’s quiet departure for the station.
Another hour, still no one came, and anxious fears of delay in the storm, or accidents by the way, or, worst of all, a great grief at Washington, haunted the girls.
It was past two, when Jo, who stood at the window thinking how dreary the world looked in its winding sheet of snow, heard a movement by the bed, and turning quickly, saw Meg kneeling before their mother’s easy chair with her face hidden.
A dreadful fear passed coldly over Jo, as she thought, “Beth is dead, and Meg is afraid to tell me.” She was back at her post in an instant, and to her excited eyes a great change seemed to have taken place.
The fever flush and the look of pain were gone, and the beloved little face looked so pale and peaceful in its utter repose that Jo felt no desire to weep or to lament.
Leaning low over this dearest of her sisters, she kissed the damp forehead with her heart on her lips, and softly whispered, “Good-by, my Beth.
Good-by!” As if awaked by the stir, Hannah started out of her sleep, hurried to the bed, looked at Beth, felt her hands, listened at her lips, and then, throwing her apron over her head, sat down to rock to and fro, exclaiming, under her breath, “The fever’s turned, she’s sleepin’ nat’ral, her skin’s damp, and she breathes easy.
Oh, my goodness me!” Before the girls could believe the happy truth, the doctor came to confirm it.
He was a homely man, but they thought his face quite heavenly when he smiled and said, with a fatherly look at them, “Yes, my dears, I think the little girl will pull through this time.
Keep the house quiet, let her sleep, and when she wakes, give her...” What they were to give, neither heard, for both crept into the dark hall, and, sitting on the stairs, held each other close, rejoicing with hearts too full for words.
When they went back to be kissed and cuddled by faithful Hannah, they found Beth lying, as she used to do, with her cheek pillowed on her hand, the dreadful pallor gone, and breathing quietly, as if just fallen asleep.
“See,” said Meg, coming up with a white, half-opened rose, “I thought this would hardly be ready to lay in Beth’s hand tomorrow if she—went away from us.
But it has blossomed in the night, and now I mean to put it in my vase here, so that when the darling wakes, the first thing she sees will be the little rose, and Mother’s face.” Never had the sun risen so beautifully, and never had the world seemed so lovely as it did to the heavy eyes of Meg and Jo, as they looked out in the early morning, when their long, sad vigil was done.
“It looks like a fairy world,” said Meg, smiling to herself, as she stood behind the curtain, watching the dazzling sight.
“Hark!” cried Jo, starting to her feet.
She’s come!” CHAPTER NINETEEN AMY’S WILL While these things were happening at home, Amy was having hard times at Aunt March’s.
She felt her exile deeply, and for the first time in her life, realized how much she was beloved and petted at home.
Aunt March never petted any one; she did not approve of it, but she meant to be kind, for the well-behaved little girl pleased her very much, and Aunt March had a soft place in her old heart for her nephew’s children, though she didn’t think it proper to confess it.
She really did her best to make Amy happy, but, dear me, what mistakes she made.
Some old people keep young at heart in spite of wrinkles and gray hairs, can sympathize with children’s little cares and joys, make them feel at home, and can hide wise lessons under pleasant plays, giving and receiving friendship in the sweetest way.
Finding the child more docile and amiable than her sister, the old lady felt it her duty to try and counteract, as far as possible, the bad effects of home freedom and indulgence.
She had to wash the cups every morning, and polish up the old-fashioned spoons, the fat silver teapot, and the glasses till they shone.
Not a speck escaped Aunt March’s eye, and all the furniture had claw legs and much carving, which was never dusted to suit.
Then Polly had to be fed, the lap dog combed, and a dozen trips upstairs and down to get things or deliver orders, for the old lady was very lame and seldom left her big chair.
After these tiresome labors, she must do her lessons, which was a daily trial of every virtue she possessed.
Then she was allowed one hour for exercise or play, and didn’t she enjoy it?
Laurie came every day, and wheedled Aunt March till Amy was allowed to go out with him, when they walked and rode and had capital times.
Then patchwork or towels appeared, and Amy sewed with outward meekness and inward rebellion till dusk, when she was allowed to amuse herself as she liked till teatime.
The evenings were the worst of all, for Aunt March fell to telling long stories about her youth, which were so unutterably dull that Amy was always ready to go to bed, intending to cry over her hard fate, but usually going to sleep before she had squeezed out more than a tear or two.
If it had not been for Laurie, and old Esther, the maid, she felt that she never could have got through that dreadful time.
The parrot alone was enough to drive her distracted, for he soon felt that she did not admire him, and revenged himself by being as mischievous as possible.
He pulled her hair whenever she came near him, upset his bread and milk to plague her when she had newly cleaned his cage, made Mop bark by pecking at him while Madam dozed, called her names before company, and behaved in all respects like an reprehensible old bird.
Then she could not endure the dog, a fat, cross beast who snarled and yelped at her when she made his toilet, and who lay on his back with all his legs in the air and a most idiotic expression of countenance when he wanted something to eat, which was about a dozen times a day.
The cook was bad-tempered, the old coachman was deaf, and Esther the only one who ever took any notice of the young lady.
Esther was a Frenchwoman, who had lived with ‘Madame’, as she called her mistress, for many years, and who rather tyrannized over the old lady, who could not get along without her.
Her real name was Estelle, but Aunt March ordered her to change it, and she obeyed, on condition that she was never asked to change her religion.
She took a fancy to Mademoiselle, and amused her very much with odd stories of her life in France, when Amy sat with her while she got up Madame’s laces.
She also allowed her to roam about the great house, and examine the curious and pretty things stored away in the big wardrobes and the ancient chests, for Aunt March hoarded like a magpie.
Amy’s chief delight was an Indian cabinet, full of queer drawers, little pigeonholes, and secret places, in which were kept all sorts of ornaments, some precious, some merely curious, all more or less antique.
To examine and arrange these things gave Amy great satisfaction, especially the jewel cases, in which on velvet cushions reposed the ornaments which had adorned a belle forty years ago.
“Which would Mademoiselle choose if she had her will?” asked Esther, who always sat near to watch over and lock up the valuables.
“I like the diamonds best, but there is no necklace among them, and I’m fond of necklaces, they are so becoming.
I should choose this if I might,” replied Amy, looking with great admiration at a string of gold and ebony beads from which hung a heavy cross of the same.
“I, too, covet that, but not as a necklace.
To me it is a rosary, and as such I should use it like a good catholic,” said Esther, eyeing the handsome thing wistfully.
“Is it meant to use as you use the string of good-smelling wooden beads hanging over your glass?” asked Amy.
It would be pleasing to the saints if one used so fine a rosary as this, instead of wearing it as a vain bijou.” “You seem to take a great deal of comfort in your prayers, Esther, and always come down looking quiet and satisfied.
I wish I could.” “If Mademoiselle was a Catholic, she would find true comfort, but as that is not to be, it would be well if you went apart each day to meditate and pray, as did the good mistress whom I served before Madame.
She had a little chapel, and in it found solacement for much trouble.” “Would it be right for me to do so too?” asked Amy, who in her loneliness felt the need of help of some sort, and found that she was apt to forget her little book, now that Beth was not there to remind her of it.
“It would be excellent and charming, and I shall gladly arrange the little dressing room for you if you like it.
Say nothing to Madame, but when she sleeps go you and sit alone a while to think good thoughts, and pray the dear God preserve your sister.” Esther was truly pious, and quite sincere in her advice, for she had an affectionate heart, and felt much for the sisters in their anxiety.
“I wish I knew where all these pretty things would go when Aunt March dies,” she said, as she slowly replaced the shining rosary and shut the jewel cases one by one.
I know it, Madame confides in me.
I witnessed her will, and it is to be so,” whispered Esther smiling.
Procrastination is not agreeable,” observed Amy, taking a last look at the diamonds.
The first one who is affianced will have the pearls, Madame has said it, and I have a fancy that the little turquoise ring will be given to you when you go, for Madame approves your good behavior and charming manners.” “Do you think so?
It’s ever so much prettier than Kitty Bryant’s.
I do like Aunt March after all.” And Amy tried on the blue ring with a delighted face and a firm resolve to earn it.
From that day she was a model of obedience, and the old lady complacently admired the success of her training.
Esther fitted up the closet with a little table, placed a footstool before it, and over it a picture taken from one of the shut-up rooms.
She thought it was of no great value, but, being appropriate, she borrowed it, well knowing that Madame would never know it, nor care if she did.
It was, however, a very valuable copy of one of the famous pictures of the world, and Amy’s beauty-loving eyes were never tired of looking up at the sweet face of the Divine Mother, while her tender thoughts of her own were busy at her heart.
On the table she laid her little testament and hymnbook, kept a vase always full of the best flowers Laurie brought her, and came every day to ‘sit alone’ thinking good thoughts, and praying the dear God to preserve her sister.
Esther had given her a rosary of black beads with a silver cross, but Amy hung it up and did not use it, feeling doubtful as to its fitness for Protestant prayers.
The little girl was very sincere in all this, for being left alone outside the safe home nest, she felt the need of some kind hand to hold by so sorely that she instinctively turned to the strong and tender Friend, whose fatherly love most closely surrounds His little children.
She missed her mother’s help to understand and rule herself, but having been taught where to look, she did her best to find the way and walk in it confidingly.
She tried to forget herself, to keep cheerful, and be satisfied with doing right, though no one saw or praised her for it.
In her first effort at being very, very good, she decided to make her will, as Aunt March had done, so that if she did fall ill and die, her possessions might be justly and generously divided.
It cost her a pang even to think of giving up the little treasures which in her eyes were as precious as the old lady’s jewels.
During one of her play hours she wrote out the important document as well as she could, with some help from Esther as to certain legal terms, and when the good-natured Frenchwoman had signed her name, Amy felt relieved and laid it by to show Laurie, whom she wanted as a second witness.
As it was a rainy day, she went upstairs to amuse herself in one of the large chambers, and took Polly with her for company.
In this room there was a wardrobe full of old-fashioned costumes with which Esther allowed her to play, and it was her favorite amusement to array herself in the faded brocades, and parade up and down before the long mirror, making stately curtsies, and sweeping her train about with a rustle which delighted her ears.
So busy was she on this day that she did not hear Laurie’s ring nor see his face peeping in at her as she gravely promenaded to and fro, flirting her fan and tossing her head, on which she wore a great pink turban, contrasting oddly with her blue brocade dress and yellow quilted petticoat.
She was obliged to walk carefully, for she had on high-heeled shoes, and, as Laurie told Jo afterward, it was a comical sight to see her mince along in her gay suit, with Polly sidling and bridling just behind her, imitating her as well as he could, and occasionally stopping to laugh or exclaim, “Ain’t we fine?
Ha!” Having with difficulty restrained an explosion of merriment, lest it should offend her majesty, Laurie tapped and was graciously received.
“Sit down and rest while I put these things away, then I want to consult you about a very serious matter,” said Amy, when she had shown her splendor and driven Polly into a corner.
“That bird is the trial of my life,” she continued, removing the pink mountain from her head, while Laurie seated himself astride a chair.
“Yesterday, when Aunt was asleep and I was trying to be as still as a mouse, Polly began to squall and flap about in his cage, so I went to let him out, and found a big spider there.
I poked it out, and it ran under the bookcase.
Polly marched straight after it, stooped down and peeped under the bookcase, saying, in his funny way, with a cock of his eye, ‘Come out and take a walk, my dear.’ I couldn’t help laughing, which made Poll swear, and Aunt woke up and scolded us both.” “Did the spider accept the old fellow’s invitation?” asked Laurie, yawning.
“Yes, out it came, and away ran Polly, frightened to death, and scrambled up on Aunt’s chair, calling out, ‘Catch her!
“I’d wring your neck if you were mine, you old torment,” cried Laurie, shaking his fist at the bird, who put his head on one side and gravely croaked, “Allyluyer! bless your buttons, dear!” “Now I’m ready,” said Amy, shutting the wardrobe and taking a piece of paper out of her pocket.
To my mother, all my clothes, except the blue apron with pockets—also my likeness, and my medal, with much love.
To my dear sister Margaret, I give my turkquoise ring (if I get it), also my green box with the doves on it, also my piece of real lace for her neck, and my sketch of her as a memorial of her ‘little girl’.
To Jo I leave my breastpin, the one mended with sealing wax, also my bronze inkstand—she lost the cover—and my most precious plaster rabbit, because I am sorry I burned up her story.
To Beth (if she lives after me) I give my dolls and the little bureau, my fan, my linen collars and my new slippers if she can wear them being thin when she gets well.
And I herewith also leave her my regret that I ever made fun of old Joanna.
To my friend and neighbor Theodore Laurence I bequeethe my paper mashay portfolio, my clay model of a horse though he did say it hadn’t any neck.
Also in return for his great kindness in the hour of affliction any one of my artistic works he likes, Noter Dame is the best.
To our venerable benefactor Mr.
Laurence I leave my purple box with a looking glass in the cover which will be nice for his pens and remind him of the departed girl who thanks him for his favors to her family, especially Beth.
I wish my favorite playmate Kitty Bryant to have the blue silk apron and my gold-bead ring with a kiss.
To Hannah I give the bandbox she wanted and all the patchwork I leave hoping she ‘will remember me, when it you see’.
And now having disposed of my most valuable property I hope all will be satisfied and not blame the dead.
I forgive everyone, and trust we may all meet when the trump shall sound.
To this will and testiment I set my hand and seal on this 20th day of Nov.
Amy Curtis March Witnesses: Estelle Valnor, Theodore Laurence.
The last name was written in pencil, and Amy explained that he was to rewrite it in ink and seal it up for her properly.
Did anyone tell you about Beth’s giving away her things?” asked Laurie soberly, as Amy laid a bit of red tape, with sealing wax, a taper, and a standish before him.
She explained and then asked anxiously, “What about Beth?” “I’m sorry I spoke, but as I did, I’ll tell you.
Amy’s face was full of trouble, but she only said, “Don’t people put sort of postscripts to their wills, sometimes?” “Yes, ‘codicils’, they call them.” “Put one in mine then, that I wish all my curls cut off, and given round to my friends.
I forgot it, but I want it done though it will spoil my looks.” Laurie added it, smiling at Amy’s last and greatest sacrifice.
Then he amused her for an hour, and was much interested in all her trials.
But when he came to go, Amy held him back to whisper with trembling lips, “Is there really any danger about Beth?” “I’m afraid there is, but we must hope for the best, so don’t cry, dear.” And Laurie put his arm about her with a brotherly gesture which was very comforting.
When he had gone, she went to her little chapel, and sitting in the twilight, prayed for Beth, with streaming tears and an aching heart, feeling that a million turquoise rings would not console her for the loss of her gentle little sister.
CHAPTER TWENTY CONFIDENTIAL I don’t think I have any words in which to tell the meeting of the mother and daughters.
Such hours are beautiful to live, but very hard to describe, so I will leave it to the imagination of my readers, merely saying that the house was full of genuine happiness, and that Meg’s tender hope was realized, for when Beth woke from that long, healing sleep, the first objects on which her eyes fell were the little rose and Mother’s face.
Too weak to wonder at anything, she only smiled and nestled close in the loving arms about her, feeling that the hungry longing was satisfied at last.
Hannah had ‘dished up’ an astonishing breakfast for the traveler, finding it impossible to vent her excitement in any other way, and Meg and Jo fed their mother like dutiful young storks, while they listened to her whispered account of Father’s state, Mr.
Brooke’s promise to stay and nurse him, the delays which the storm occasioned on the homeward journey, and the unspeakable comfort Laurie’s hopeful face had given her when she arrived, worn out with fatigue, anxiety, and cold.
What a strange yet pleasant day that was.
So brilliant and gay without, for all the world seemed abroad to welcome the first snow.
So quiet and reposeful within, for everyone slept, spent with watching, and a Sabbath stillness reigned through the house, while nodding Hannah mounted guard at the door.
With a blissful sense of burdens lifted off, Meg and Jo closed their weary eyes, and lay at rest, like storm-beaten boats safe at anchor in a quiet harbor.
March would not leave Beth’s side, but rested in the big chair, waking often to look at, touch, and brood over her child, like a miser over some recovered treasure.
Laurie meanwhile posted off to comfort Amy, and told his story so well that Aunt March actually ‘sniffed’ herself, and never once said “I told you so”.
Amy came out so strong on this occasion that I think the good thoughts in the little chapel really began to bear fruit.
She dried her tears quickly, restrained her impatience to see her mother, and never even thought of the turquoise ring, when the old lady heartily agreed in Laurie’s opinion, that she behaved ‘like a capital little woman’.
Even Polly seemed impressed, for he called her a good girl, blessed her buttons, and begged her to “come and take a walk, dear”, in his most affable tone.
She would very gladly have gone out to enjoy the bright wintry weather, but discovering that Laurie was dropping with sleep in spite of manful efforts to conceal the fact, she persuaded him to rest on the sofa, while she wrote a note to her mother.
She was a long time about it, and when she returned, he was stretched out with both arms under his head, sound asleep, while Aunt March had pulled down the curtains and sat doing nothing in an unusual fit of benignity.
After a while, they began to think he was not going to wake up till night, and I’m not sure that he would, had he not been effectually roused by Amy’s cry of joy at sight of her mother.
There probably were a good many happy little girls in and about the city that day, but it is my private opinion that Amy was the happiest of all, when she sat in her mother’s lap and told her trials, receiving consolation and compensation in the shape of approving smiles and fond caresses.
They were alone together in the chapel, to which her mother did not object when its purpose was explained to her.
“On the contrary, I like it very much, dear,” looking from the dusty rosary to the well-worn little book, and the lovely picture with its garland of evergreen.
“It is an excellent plan to have some place where we can go to be quiet, when things vex or grieve us.
I think my little girl is learning this.” “Yes, Mother, and when I go home I mean to have a corner in the big closet to put my books and the copy of that picture which I’ve tried to make.
The woman’s face is not good, it’s too beautiful for me to draw, but the baby is done better, and I love it very much.
March saw something on the lifted hand that made her smile.
She said nothing, but Amy understood the look, and after a minute’s pause, she added gravely, “I wanted to speak to you about this, but I forgot it.
She gave that funny guard to keep the turquoise on, as it’s too big.
I’d like to wear them Mother, can I?” “They are very pretty, but I think you’re rather too young for such ornaments, Amy,” said Mrs.
March, looking at the plump little hand, with the band of sky-blue stones on the forefinger, and the quaint guard formed of two tiny golden hands clasped together.
“I don’t think I like it only because it’s so pretty, but I want to wear it as the girl in the story wore her bracelet, to remind me of something.” “Do you mean Aunt March?” asked her mother, laughing.
“No, to remind me not to be selfish.” Amy looked so earnest and sincere about it that her mother stopped laughing, and listened respectfully to the little plan.
“I’ve thought a great deal lately about my ‘bundle of naughties’, and being selfish is the largest one in it, so I’m going to try hard to cure it, if I can.
Beth isn’t selfish, and that’s the reason everyone loves her and feels so bad at the thoughts of losing her.
I’m apt to forget my resolutions, but if I had something always about me to remind me, I guess I should do better.
Keep up your heart, little daughter, and we will soon have you home again.” That evening while Meg was writing to her father to report the traveler’s safe arrival, Jo slipped upstairs into Beth’s room, and finding her mother in her usual place, stood a minute twisting her fingers in her hair, with a worried gesture and an undecided look.
March, holding out her hand, with a face which invited confidence.
“I want to tell you something, Mother.” “About Meg?” “How quickly you guessed!
I should have shut the door in his face if he had,” said Jo, settling herself on the floor at her mother’s feet.
“Last summer Meg left a pair of gloves over at the Laurences’ and only one was returned.
Now, isn’t it a dreadful state of things?” “Do you think Meg cares for him?” asked Mrs.
I don’t know anything about love and such nonsense!” cried Jo, with a funny mixture of interest and contempt.
“In novels, the girls show it by starting and blushing, fainting away, growing thin, and acting like fools.
Now Meg does not do anything of the sort.
She eats and drinks and sleeps like a sensible creature, she looks straight in my face when I talk about that man, and only blushes a little bit when Teddy jokes about lovers.
I forbid him to do it, but he doesn’t mind me as he ought.” “Then you fancy that Meg is not interested in John?” “Who?” cried Jo, staring.
We fell into the way of doing so at the hospital, and he likes it.” “Oh, dear!
To go petting Papa and helping you, just to wheedle you into liking him.” And Jo pulled her hair again with a wrathful tweak.
“My dear, don’t get angry about it, and I will tell you how it happened.
Laurence’s request, and was so devoted to poor Father that we couldn’t help getting fond of him.
He was perfectly open and honorable about Meg, for he told us he loved her, but would earn a comfortable home before he asked her to marry him.
He is a truly excellent young man, and we could not refuse to listen to him, but I will not consent to Meg’s engaging herself so young.” “Of course not.
I knew there was mischief brewing.
I felt it, and now it’s worse than I imagined.
I just wish I could marry Meg myself, and keep her safe in the family.” This odd arrangement made Mrs.
March smile, but she said gravely, “Jo, I confide in you and don’t wish you to say anything to Meg yet.
When John comes back, and I see them together, I can judge better of her feelings toward him.” “She’ll see those handsome eyes that she talks about, and then it will be all up with her.
She’s got such a soft heart, it will melt like butter in the sun if anyone looks sentimentlly at her.
She read the short reports he sent more than she did your letters, and pinched me when I spoke of it, and likes brown eyes, and doesn’t think John an ugly name, and she’ll go and fall in love, and there’s an end of peace and fun, and cozy times together.
They’ll go lovering around the house, and we shall have to dodge.
Meg will be absorbed and no good to me any more.
Brooke will scratch up a fortune somehow, carry her off, and make a hole in the family, and I shall break my heart, and everything will be abominably uncomfortable.
Why weren’t we all boys, then there wouldn’t be any bother.” Jo leaned her chin on her knees in a disconsolate attitude and shook her fist at the reprehensible John.
Let’s send him about his business, and not tell Meg a word of it, but all be happy together as we always have been.” “I did wrong to sigh, Jo.
It is natural and right you should all go to homes of your own in time, but I do want to keep my girls as long as I can, and I am sorry that this happened so soon, for Meg is only seventeen and it will be some years before John can make a home for her.
She is conscientious, and I have no fear of her treating him unkindly.
I hope things will go happily with her.” “Hadn’t you rather have her marry a rich man?” asked Jo, as her mother’s voice faltered a little over the last words.
“Money is a good and useful thing, Jo, and I hope my girls will never feel the need of it too bitterly, nor be tempted by too much.
I should like to know that John was firmly established in some good business, which gave him an income large enough to keep free from debt and make Meg comfortable.
I’m not ambitious for a splendid fortune, a fashionable position, or a great name for my girls.
If rank and money come with love and virtue, also, I should accept them gratefully, and enjoy your good fortune, but I know, by experience, how much genuine happiness can be had in a plain little house, where the daily bread is earned, and some privations give sweetness to the few pleasures.
I am content to see Meg begin humbly, for if I am not mistaken, she will be rich in the possession of a good man’s heart, and that is better than a fortune.” “I understand, Mother, and quite agree, but I’m disappointed about Meg, for I’d planned to have her marry Teddy by-and-by and sit in the lap of luxury all her days.
Wouldn’t it be nice?” asked Jo, looking up with a brighter face.
Then he’s rich and generous and good, and loves us all, and I say it’s a pity my plan is spoiled.” “I’m afraid Laurie is hardly grown-up enough for Meg, and altogether too much of a weathercock just now for anyone to depend on.
We can’t meddle safely in such matters, and had better not get ‘romantic rubbish’ as you call it, into our heads, lest it spoil our friendship.” “Well, I won’t, but I hate to see things going all crisscross and getting snarled up, when a pull here and a snip there would straighten it out.
I wish wearing flatirons on our heads would keep us from growing up.
But buds will be roses, and kittens cats, more’s the pity!” “What’s that about flatirons and cats?” asked Meg, as she crept into the room with the finished letter in her hand.
“Only one of my stupid speeches.
Come, Peggy,” said Jo, unfolding herself like an animated puzzle.
“Quite right, and beautifully written.
“Do you call him ‘John’?” asked Meg, smiling, with her innocent eyes looking down into her mother’s.
March, returning the look with a keen one.
It is so inexpressibly comfortable to have you here,” was Meg’s answer.
March said, with a mixture of satisfaction and regret, “She does not love John yet, but will soon learn to.” CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE LAURIE MAKES MISCHIEF, AND JO MAKES PEACE Jo’s face was a study next day, for the secret rather weighed upon her, and she found it hard not to look mysterious and important.
Meg observed it, but did not trouble herself to make inquiries, for she had learned that the best way to manage Jo was by the law of contraries, so she felt sure of being told everything if she did not ask.
She was rather surprised, therefore, when the silence remained unbroken, and Jo assumed a patronizing air, which decidedly aggravated Meg, who in turn assumed an air of dignified reserve and devoted herself to her mother.
March had taken her place as nurse, and bade her rest, exercise, and amuse herself after her long confinement.
Amy being gone, Laurie was her only refuge, and much as she enjoyed his society, she rather dreaded him just then, for he was an incorrigible tease, and she feared he would coax the secret from her.
She was quite right, for the mischief-loving lad no sooner suspected a mystery than he set himself to find it out, and led Jo a trying life of it.
He wheedled, bribed, ridiculed, threatened, and scolded; affected indifference, that he might surprise the truth from her; declared he knew, then that he didn’t care; and at last, by dint of perseverance, he satisfied himself that it concerned Meg and Mr.
Feeling indignant that he was not taken into his tutor’s confidence, he set his wits to work to devise some proper retaliation for the slight.
Meg meanwhile had apparently forgotten the matter and was absorbed in preparations for her father’s return, but all of a sudden a change seemed to come over her, and, for a day or two, she was quite unlike herself.
She started when spoken to, blushed when looked at, was very quiet, and sat over her sewing, with a timid, troubled look on her face.
To her mother’s inquiries she answered that she was quite well, and Jo’s she silenced by begging to be let alone.
She’s got most of the symptoms—is twittery and cross, doesn’t eat, lies awake, and mopes in corners.
Whatever shall we do?” said Jo, looking ready for any measures, however violent.
Let her alone, be kind and patient, and Father’s coming will settle everything,” replied her mother.
Teddy never seals mine,” said Jo next day, as she distributed the contents of the little post office.
March and Jo were deep in their own affairs, when a sound from Meg made them look up to see her staring at her note with a frightened face.
“My child, what is it?” cried her mother, running to her, while Jo tried to take the paper which had done the mischief.
What’s she talking about?” cried Jo, bewildered.
Meg’s mild eyes kindled with anger as she pulled a crumpled note from her pocket and threw it at Jo, saying reproachfully, “You wrote it, and that bad boy helped you.
How could you be so rude, so mean, and cruel to us both?” Jo hardly heard her, for she and her mother were reading the note, which was written in a peculiar hand.
“My Dearest Margaret, “I can no longer restrain my passion, and must know my fate before I return.
Laurence will help me to some good place, and then, my sweet girl, you will make me happy.
I’ll give him a hearty scolding and bring him over to beg pardon,” cried Jo, burning to execute immediate justice.
“Stop, Jo, you must clear yourself first.
I never saw that note before, and don’t know anything about it, as true as I live!” said Jo, so earnestly that they believed her.
“If I had taken part in it I’d have done it better than this, and have written a sensible note.
Brooke wouldn’t write such stuff as that,” she added, scornfully tossing down the paper.
“It’s like his writing,” faltered Meg, comparing it with the note in her hand.
“Yes, I did!” and Meg hid her face again, overcome with shame.
Do let me bring that wicked boy over to explain and be lectured.
Margaret, tell me the whole story,” commanded Mrs.
“I received the first letter from Laurie, who didn’t look as if he knew anything about it,” began Meg, without looking up.
“I was worried at first and meant to tell you, then I remembered how you liked Mr.
I’m so silly that I liked to think no one knew, and while I was deciding what to say, I felt like the girls in books, who have such things to do.
Forgive me, Mother, I’m paid for my silliness now.
“I only said I was too young to do anything about it yet, that I didn’t wish to have secrets from you, and he must speak to father.
I was very grateful for his kindness, and would be his friend, but nothing more, for a long while.” Mrs.
March smiled, as if well pleased, and Jo clapped her hands, exclaiming, with a laugh, “You are almost equal to Caroline Percy, who was a pattern of prudence!
What did he say to that?” “He writes in a different way entirely, telling me that he never sent any love letter at all, and is very sorry that my roguish sister, Jo, should take liberties with our names.
It’s very kind and respectful, but think how dreadful for me!” Meg leaned against her mother, looking the image of despair, and Jo tramped about the room, calling Laurie names.
All of a sudden she stopped, caught up the two notes, and after looking at them closely, said decidedly, “I don’t believe Brooke ever saw either of these letters.
Tell it to Mother and keep out of trouble, as I should have done,” said Meg warningly.
Brooke’s real feelings.
Do you love him enough to wait till he can make a home for you, or will you keep yourself quite free for the present?” “I’ve been so scared and worried, I don’t want to have anything to do with lovers for a long while, perhaps never,” answered Meg petulantly.
“If John doesn’t know anything about this nonsense, don’t tell him, and make Jo and Laurie hold their tongues.
I won’t be deceived and plagued and made a fool of.
It’s a shame!” Seeing Meg’s usually gentle temper was roused and her pride hurt by this mischievous joke, Mrs.
March soothed her by promises of entire silence and great discretion for the future.
March received the culprit alone.
March’s face, and stood twirling his hat with a guilty air which convicted him at once.
Jo was dismissed, but chose to march up and down the hall like a sentinel, having some fear that the prisoner might bolt.
The sound of voices in the parlor rose and fell for half an hour, but what happened during that interview the girls never knew.
When they were called in, Laurie was standing by their mother with such a penitent face that Jo forgave him on the spot, but did not think it wise to betray the fact.
Meg received his humble apology, and was much comforted by the assurance that Brooke knew nothing of the joke.
“I’ll never tell him to my dying day, wild horses shan’t drag it out of me, so you’ll forgive me, Meg, and I’ll do anything to show how out-and-out sorry I am,” he added, looking very much ashamed of himself.
“I’ll try, but it was a very ungentlemanly thing to do, I didn’t think you could be so sly and malicious, Laurie,” replied Meg, trying to hide her maidenly confusion under a gravely reproachful air.
“It was altogether abominable, and I don’t deserve to be spoken to for a month, but you will, though, won’t you?” And Laurie folded his hands together with such and imploring gesture, as he spoke in his irresistibly persuasive tone, that it was impossible to frown upon him in spite of his scandalous behavior.
Meg pardoned him, and Mrs.
March’s grave face relaxed, in spite of her efforts to keep sober, when she heard him declare that he would atone for his sins by all sorts of penances, and abase himself like a worm before the injured damsel.
Jo stood aloof, meanwhile, trying to harden her heart against him, and succeeding only in primming up her face into an expression of entire disapprobation.
Laurie looked at her once or twice, but as she showed no sign of relenting, he felt injured, and turned his back on her till the others were done with him, when he made her a low bow and walked off without a word.
As soon as he had gone, she wished she had been more forgiving, and when Meg and her mother went upstairs, she felt lonely and longed for Teddy.
After resisting for some time, she yielded to the impulse, and armed with a book to return, went over to the big house.
Laurence in?” asked Jo, of a housemaid, who was coming downstairs.
Laurie, who is in one of his tantrums about something, which vexes the old gentleman, so I dursn’t go nigh him.” “Where is Laurie?” “Shut up in his room, and he won’t answer, though I’ve been a-tapping.
“Stop that, or I’ll open the door and make you!” called out the young gentleman in a threatening tone.
Jo immediately knocked again.
The door flew open, and in she bounced before Laurie could recover from his surprise.
Seeing that he really was out of temper, Jo, who knew how to manage him, assumed a contrite expression, and going artistically down upon her knees, said meekly, “Please forgive me for being so cross.
Get up, and don’t be a goose, Jo,” was the cavalier reply to her petition.
You don’t look exactly easy in your mind.” “I’ve been shaken, and I won’t bear it!” growled Laurie indignantly.
“Who did it?” demanded Jo.
If it had been anyone else I’d have...” And the injured youth finished his sentence by an energetic gesture of the right arm.
I often shake you, and you don’t mind,” said Jo soothingly.
You’re a girl, and it’s fun, but I’ll allow no man to shake me!” “I don’t think anyone would care to try it, if you looked as much like a thundercloud as you do now.
I’d promised not to tell, and of course I wasn’t going to break my word.” “Couldn’t you satisfy your grandpa in any other way?” “No, he would have the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
I’d have told my part of the scrape, if I could without bringing Meg in.
As I couldn’t, I held my tongue, and bore the scolding till the old gentleman collared me.
I’m not going to be lectured and pummelled by everyone, just for a bit of a frolic.
He won’t do that.” “I won’t go down till he does.” “Now, Teddy, be sensible.
You can’t stay here, so what’s the use of being melodramatic?” “I don’t intend to stay here long, anyway.
I’ll slip off and take a journey somewhere, and when Grandpa misses me he’ll come round fast enough.” “I dare say, but you ought not to go and worry him.” “Don’t preach.
I’ll go to Washington and see Brooke.
It’s gay there, and I’ll enjoy myself after the troubles.” “What fun you’d have!
I wish I could run off too,” said Jo, forgetting her part of mentor in lively visions of martial life at the capital.
You go and surprise your father, and I’ll stir up old Brooke.
It would be a glorious joke.
She was tired of care and confinement, longed for change, and thoughts of her father blended temptingly with the novel charms of camps and hospitals, liberty and fun.
Her eyes kindled as they turned wistfully toward the window, but they fell on the old house opposite, and she shook her head with sorrowful decision.
“If I was a boy, we’d run away together, and have a capital time, but as I’m a miserable girl, I must be proper and stop at home.
Don’t tempt me, Teddy, it’s a crazy plan.” “That’s the fun of it,” began Laurie, who had got a willful fit on him and was possessed to break out of bounds in some way.
“Hold your tongue!” cried Jo, covering her ears.
I came here to moralize, not to hear things that make me skip to think of.” “I know Meg would wet-blanket such a proposal, but I thought you had more spirit,” began Laurie insinuatingly.
If I get your grandpa to apologize for the shaking, will you give up running away?” asked Jo seriously.
“Yes, but you won’t do it,” answered Laurie, who wished to make up, but felt that his outraged dignity must be appeased first.
“If I can manage the young one, I can the old one,” muttered Jo, as she walked away, leaving Laurie bent over a railroad map with his head propped up on both hands.
Laurence’s gruff voice sounded gruffer than ever, as Jo tapped at his door.
“Want any more?” asked the old gentleman, looking grim and vexed, but trying not to show it.
I like old Sam so well, I think I’ll try the second volume,” returned Jo, hoping to propitiate him by accepting a second dose of Boswell’s Johnson, as he had recommended that lively work.
The shaggy eyebrows unbent a little as he rolled the steps toward the shelf where the Johnsonian literature was placed.
Jo skipped up, and sitting on the top step, affected to be searching for her book, but was really wondering how best to introduce the dangerous object of her visit.
Laurence seemed to suspect that something was brewing in her mind, for after taking several brisk turns about the room, he faced round on her, speaking so abruptly that Rasselas tumbled face downward on the floor.
I know he has been in mischief by the way he acted when he came home.
I can’t get a word from him, and when I threatened to shake the truth out of him he bolted upstairs and locked himself into his room.” “He did wrong, but we forgave him, and all promised not to say a word to anyone,” began Jo reluctantly.
He shall not shelter himself behind a promise from you softhearted girls.
If he’s done anything amiss, he shall confess, beg pardon, and be punished.
Laurence looked so alarming and spoke so sharply that Jo would have gladly run away, if she could, but she was perched aloft on the steps, and he stood at the foot, a lion in the path, so she had to stay and brave it out.
Laurie has confessed, asked pardon, and been punished quite enough.
We don’t keep silence to shield him, but someone else, and it will make more trouble if you interfere.
So let’s forget it, and talk about the _Rambler_ or something pleasant.” “Hang the _Rambler!_ Come down and give me your word that this harum-scarum boy of mine hasn’t done anything ungrateful or impertinent.
If he has, after all your kindness to him, I’ll thrash him with my own hands.” The threat sounded awful, but did not alarm Jo, for she knew the irascible old gentleman would never lift a finger against his grandson, whatever he might say to the contrary.
She obediently descended, and made as light of the prank as she could without betraying Meg or forgetting the truth.
“Hum... ha... well, if the boy held his tongue because he promised, and not from obstinacy, I’ll forgive him.
He’s a stubborn fellow and hard to manage,” said Mr.
Laurence, rubbing up his hair till it looked as if he had been out in a gale, and smoothing the frown from his brow with an air of relief.
You are rather too kind sometimes, and then just a trifle hasty when he tries your patience.
Don’t you think you are?” Jo was determined to have it out now, and tried to look quite placid, though she quaked a little after her bold speech.
To her great relief and surprise, the old gentleman only threw his spectacles onto the table with a rattle and exclaimed frankly, “You’re right, girl, I am!
I love the boy, but he tries my patience past bearing, and I know how it will end, if we go on so.” “I’ll tell you, he’ll run away.” Jo was sorry for that speech the minute it was made.
She meant to warn him that Laurie would not bear much restraint, and hoped he would be more forebearing with the lad.
Laurence’s ruddy face changed suddenly, and he sat down, with a troubled glance at the picture of a handsome man, which hung over his table.
It was Laurie’s father, who had run away in his youth, and married against the imperious old man’s will.
Jo fancied he remembered and regretted the past, and she wished she had held her tongue.
“He won’t do it unless he is very much worried, and only threatens it sometimes, when he gets tired of studying.
I often think I should like to, especially since my hair was cut, so if you ever miss us, you may advertise for two boys and look among the ships bound for India.” She laughed as she spoke, and Mr.
Laurence looked relieved, evidently taking the whole as a joke.
Where’s your respect for me, and your proper bringing up?
What torments they are, yet we can’t do without them,” he said, pinching her cheeks good-humoredly.
“Go and bring that boy down to his dinner, tell him it’s all right, and advise him not to put on tragedy airs with his grandfather.
I think the shaking hurt his feelings very much.” Jo tried to look pathetic but must have failed, for Mr.
Laurence began to laugh, and she knew the day was won.
What the dickens does the fellow expect?” and the old gentleman looked a trifle ashamed of his own testiness.
He says he won’t come down till he has one, and talks about Washington, and goes on in an absurd way.
Laurence gave her a sharp look, and put on his spectacles, saying slowly, “You’re a sly puss, but I don’t mind being managed by you and Beth.
Here, give me a bit of paper, and let us have done with this nonsense.” The note was written in the terms which one gentleman would use to another after offering some deep insult.
Laurence’s bald head, and ran up to slip the apology under Laurie’s door, advising him through the keyhole to be submissive, decorous, and a few other agreeable impossibilities.
Finding the door locked again, she left the note to do its work, and was going quietly away, when the young gentleman slid down the banisters, and waited for her at the bottom, saying, with his most virtuous expression of countenance, “What a good fellow you are, Jo!
Did you get blown up?” he added, laughing.
Even you cast me off over there, and I felt just ready to go to the deuce,” he began apologetically.
“Don’t talk that way, turn over a new leaf and begin again, Teddy, my son.” “I keep turning over new leaves, and spoiling them, as I used to spoil my copybooks, and I make so many beginnings there never will be an end,” he said dolefully.
“That’s a ‘label’ on my ‘sect’,” answered Laurie, quoting Amy, as he went to partake of humble pie dutifully with his grandfather, who was quite saintly in temper and overwhelmingly respectful in manner all the rest of the day.
Everyone thought the matter ended and the little cloud blown over, but the mischief was done, for though others forgot it, Meg remembered.
She never alluded to a certain person, but she thought of him a good deal, dreamed dreams more than ever, and once Jo, rummaging her sister’s desk for stamps, found a bit of paper scribbled over with the words, ‘Mrs.
John Brooke’, whereat she groaned tragically and cast it into the fire, feeling that Laurie’s prank had hastened the evil day for her.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO PLEASANT MEADOWS Like sunshine after a storm were the peaceful weeks which followed.
The invalids improved rapidly, and Mr.
March began to talk of returning early in the new year.
Meg cheerfully blackened and burned her white hands cooking delicate messes for ‘the dear’, while Amy, a loyal slave of the ring, celebrated her return by giving away as many of her treasures as she could prevail on her sisters to accept.
As Christmas approached, the usual mysteries began to haunt the house, and Jo frequently convulsed the family by proposing utterly impossible or magnificently absurd ceremonies, in honor of this unusually merry Christmas.
Laurie was equally impracticable, and would have had bonfires, skyrockets, and triumphal arches, if he had had his own way.
After many skirmishes and snubbings, the ambitious pair were considered effectually quenched and went about with forlorn faces, which were rather belied by explosions of laughter when the two got together.
Several days of unusually mild weather fitly ushered in a splendid Christmas Day.
Hannah ‘felt in her bones’ that it was going to be an unusually fine day, and she proved herself a true prophetess, for everybody and everything seemed bound to produce a grand success.
March wrote that he should soon be with them, then Beth felt uncommonly well that morning, and, being dressed in her mother’s gift, a soft crimson merino wrapper, was borne in high triumph to the window to behold the offering of Jo and Laurie.
The Unquenchables had done their best to be worthy of the name, for like elves they had worked by night and conjured up a comical surprise.
Out in the garden stood a stately snow maiden, crowned with holly, bearing a basket of fruit and flowers in one hand, a great roll of music in the other, a perfect rainbow of an Afghan round her chilly shoulders, and a Christmas carol issuing from her lips on a pink paper streamer.
THE JUNGFRAU TO BETH God bless you, dear Queen Bess!
May nothing you dismay, But health and peace and happiness Be yours, this Christmas day.
Here’s music for her pianee, An afghan for her toes, A portrait of Joanna, see, By Raphael No. 2, Who laboured with great industry To make it fair and true.
How Beth laughed when she saw it, how Laurie ran up and down to bring in the gifts, and what ridiculous speeches Jo made as she presented them.
“I’m so full of happiness, that if Father was only here, I couldn’t hold one drop more,” said Beth, quite sighing with contentment as Jo carried her off to the study to rest after the excitement, and to refresh herself with some of the delicious grapes the ‘Jungfrau’ had sent her.
“So am I,” added Jo, slapping the pocket wherein reposed the long-desired _Undine and Sintram_.
“I’m sure I am,” echoed Amy, poring over the engraved copy of the Madonna and Child, which her mother had given her in a pretty frame.
“Of course I am!” cried Meg, smoothing the silvery folds of her first silk dress, for Mr.
Laurence had insisted on giving it.
“How can I be otherwise?” said Mrs.
March gratefully, as her eyes went from her husband’s letter to Beth’s smiling face, and her hand caressed the brooch made of gray and golden, chestnut and dark brown hair, which the girls had just fastened on her breast.
Now and then, in this workaday world, things do happen in the delightful storybook fashion, and what a comfort it is.
Half an hour after everyone had said they were so happy they could only hold one drop more, the drop came.
Of course there was a general stampede, and for several minutes everybody seemed to lose their wits, for the strangest things were done, and no one said a word.
March became invisible in the embrace of four pairs of loving arms.
Jo disgraced herself by nearly fainting away, and had to be doctored by Laurie in the china closet.
Brooke kissed Meg entirely by mistake, as he somewhat incoherently explained.
And Amy, the dignified, tumbled over a stool, and never stopping to get up, hugged and cried over her father’s boots in the most touching manner.
Remember Beth.” But it was too late.
The study door flew open, the little red wrapper appeared on the threshold, joy put strength into the feeble limbs, and Beth ran straight into her father’s arms.
Never mind what happened just after that, for the full hearts overflowed, washing away the bitterness of the past and leaving only the sweetness of the present.
It was not at all romantic, but a hearty laugh set everybody straight again, for Hannah was discovered behind the door, sobbing over the fat turkey, which she had forgotten to put down when she rushed up from the kitchen.
As the laugh subsided, Mrs.
Brooke for his faithful care of her husband, at which Mr.
Brooke suddenly remembered that Mr.
March needed rest, and seizing Laurie, he precipitately retired.
Then the two invalids were ordered to repose, which they did, by both sitting in one big chair and talking hard.
March told how he had longed to surprise them, and how, when the fine weather came, he had been allowed by his doctor to take advantage of it, how devoted Brooke had been, and how he was altogether a most estimable and upright young man.
March paused a minute just there, and after a glance at Meg, who was violently poking the fire, looked at his wife with an inquiring lift of the eyebrows, I leave you to imagine.
March gently nodded her head and asked, rather abruptly, if he wouldn’t like to have something to eat.
Jo saw and understood the look, and she stalked grimly away to get wine and beef tea, muttering to herself as she slammed the door, “I hate estimable young men with brown eyes!” There never was such a Christmas dinner as they had that day.
The fat turkey was a sight to behold, when Hannah sent him up, stuffed, browned, and decorated.
So was the plum pudding, which melted in one’s mouth, likewise the jellies, in which Amy reveled like a fly in a honeypot.
Everything turned out well, which was a mercy, Hannah said, “For my mind was that flustered, Mum, that it’s a merrycle I didn’t roast the pudding, and stuff the turkey with raisins, let alone bilin’ of it in a cloth.” Mr.
Laurence and his grandson dined with them, also Mr.
Brooke, at whom Jo glowered darkly, to Laurie’s infinite amusement.
Two easy chairs stood side by side at the head of the table, in which sat Beth and her father, feasting modestly on chicken and a little fruit.
They drank healths, told stories, sang songs, ‘reminisced’, as the old folks say, and had a thoroughly good time.
A sleigh ride had been planned, but the girls would not leave their father, so the guests departed early, and as twilight gathered, the happy family sat together round the fire.
“Just a year ago we were groaning over the dismal Christmas we expected to have.
Do you remember?” asked Jo, breaking a short pause which had followed a long conversation about many things.
“Rather a pleasant year on the whole!” said Meg, smiling at the fire, and congratulating herself on having treated Mr.
“I think it’s been a pretty hard one,” observed Amy, watching the light shine on her ring with thoughtful eyes.
“I’m glad it’s over, because we’ve got you back,” whispered Beth, who sat on her father’s knee.
“Rather a rough road for you to travel, my little pilgrims, especially the latter part of it.
March, looking with fatherly satisfaction at the four young faces gathered round him.
Straws show which way the wind blows, and I’ve made several discoveries today.” “Oh, tell us what they are!” cried Meg, who sat beside him.
“Here is one.” And taking up the hand which lay on the arm of his chair, he pointed to the roughened forefinger, a burn on the back, and two or three little hard spots on the palm.
“I remember a time when this hand was white and smooth, and your first care was to keep it so.
It was very pretty then, but to me it is much prettier now, for in this seeming blemishes I read a little history.
A burnt offering has been made to vanity, this hardened palm has earned something better than blisters, and I’m sure the sewing done by these pricked fingers will last a long time, so much good will went into the stitches.
Meg, my dear, I value the womanly skill which keeps home happy more than white hands or fashionable accomplishments.
I’m proud to shake this good, industrious little hand, and hope I shall not soon be asked to give it away.” If Meg had wanted a reward for hours of patient labor, she received it in the hearty pressure of her father’s hand and the approving smile he gave her.
Please say something nice, for she has tried so hard and been so very, very good to me,” said Beth in her father’s ear.
He laughed and looked across at the tall girl who sat opposite, with an unusually mild expression in her face.
“I see a young lady who pins her collar straight, laces her boots neatly, and neither whistles, talks slang, nor lies on the rug as she used to do.
Her face is rather thin and pale just now, with watching and anxiety, but I like to look at it, for it has grown gentler, and her voice is lower.
She doesn’t bounce, but moves quietly, and takes care of a certain little person in a motherly way which delights me.
I rather miss my wild girl, but if I get a strong, helpful, tenderhearted woman in her place, I shall feel quite satisfied.
I don’t know whether the shearing sobered our black sheep, but I do know that in all Washington I couldn’t find anything beautiful enough to be bought with the five-and-twenty dollars my good girl sent me.” Jo’s keen eyes were rather dim for a minute, and her thin face grew rosy in the firelight as she received her father’s praise, feeling that she did deserve a portion of it.
“There’s so little of her, I’m afraid to say much, for fear she will slip away altogether, though she is not so shy as she used to be,” began their father cheerfully.
But recollecting how nearly he had lost her, he held her close, saying tenderly, with her cheek against his own, “I’ve got you safe, my Beth, and I’ll keep you so, please God.” After a minute’s silence, he looked down at Amy, who sat on the cricket at his feet, and said, with a caress of the shining hair...
“I observed that Amy took drumsticks at dinner, ran errands for her mother all the afternoon, gave Meg her place tonight, and has waited on every one with patience and good humor.
I also observe that she does not fret much nor look in the glass, and has not even mentioned a very pretty ring which she wears, so I conclude that she has learned to think of other people more and of herself less, and has decided to try and mold her character as carefully as she molds her little clay figures.
I am glad of this, for though I should be very proud of a graceful statue made by her, I shall be infinitely prouder of a lovable daughter with a talent for making life beautiful to herself and others.” “What are you thinking of, Beth?” asked Jo, when Amy had thanked her father and told about her ring.
“I read in _Pilgrim’s Progress_ today how, after many troubles, Christian and Hopeful came to a pleasant green meadow where lilies bloomed all year round, and there they rested happily, as we do now, before they went on to their journey’s end,” answered Beth, adding, as she slipped out of her father’s arms and went to the instrument, “It’s singing time now, and I want to be in my old place.
I’ll try to sing the song of the shepherd boy which the Pilgrims heard.
I made the music for Father, because he likes the verses.” So, sitting at the dear little piano, Beth softly touched the keys, and in the sweet voice they had never thought to hear again, sang to her own accompaniment the quaint hymn, which was a singularly fitting song for her.
Contentment still I crave, Because Thou savest such.
Fulness to them a burden is, That go on pilgrimage.
Here little, and hereafter bliss, Is best from age to age!
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE AUNT MARCH SETTLES THE QUESTION Like bees swarming after their queen, mother and daughters hovered about Mr.
March the next day, neglecting everything to look at, wait upon, and listen to the new invalid, who was in a fair way to be killed by kindness.
As he sat propped up in a big chair by Beth’s sofa, with the other three close by, and Hannah popping in her head now and then ‘to peek at the dear man’, nothing seemed needed to complete their happiness.
But something was needed, and the elder ones felt it, though none confessed the fact.
March looked at one another with an anxious expression, as their eyes followed Meg.
Jo had sudden fits of sobriety, and was seen to shake her fist at Mr.
Brooke’s umbrella, which had been left in the hall.
Meg was absent-minded, shy, and silent, started when the bell rang, and colored when John’s name was mentioned.
Amy said, “Everyone seemed waiting for something, and couldn’t settle down, which was queer, since Father was safe at home,” and Beth innocently wondered why their neighbors didn’t run over as usual.
Laurie went by in the afternoon, and seeing Meg at the window, seemed suddenly possessed with a melodramatic fit, for he fell down on one knee in the snow, beat his breast, tore his hair, and clasped his hands imploringly, as if begging some boon.
And when Meg told him to behave himself and go away, he wrung imaginary tears out of his handkerchief, and staggered round the corner as if in utter despair.
“What does the goose mean?” said Meg, laughing and trying to look unconscious.
Touching, isn’t it?” answered Jo scornfully.
“Don’t say my John, it isn’t proper or true,” but Meg’s voice lingered over the words as if they sounded pleasant to her.
“Please don’t plague me, Jo, I’ve told you I don’t care much about him, and there isn’t to be anything said, but we are all to be friendly, and go on as before.” “We can’t, for something has been said, and Laurie’s mischief has spoiled you for me.
I hate to wait, so if you mean ever to do it, make haste and have it over quickly,” said Jo pettishly.
“I can’t say anything till he speaks, and he won’t, because Father said I was too young,” began Meg, bending over her work with a queer little smile, which suggested that she did not quite agree with her father on that point.
I know just what I should say, for I’ve planned it all, so I needn’t be taken unawares.
There’s no knowing what may happen, and I wished to be prepared.” Jo couldn’t help smiling at the important air which Meg had unconsciously assumed and which was as becoming as the pretty color varying in her cheeks.
“Would you mind telling me what you’d say?” asked Jo more respectfully.
You are sixteen now, quite old enough to be my confidant, and my experience will be useful to you by-and-by, perhaps, in your own affairs of this sort.” “Don’t mean to have any.
It’s fun to watch other people philander, but I should feel like a fool doing it myself,” said Jo, looking alarmed at the thought.
“I think not, if you liked anyone very much, and he liked you.” Meg spoke as if to herself, and glanced out at the lane where she had often seen lovers walking together in the summer twilight.
“I thought you were going to tell your speech to that man,” said Jo, rudely shortening her sister’s little reverie.
“Oh, I should merely say, quite calmly and decidedly, ‘Thank you, Mr.
Brooke, you are very kind, but I agree with Father that I am too young to enter into any engagement at present, so please say no more, but let us be friends as we were.’” “Hum, that’s stiff and cool enough!
I don’t believe you’ll ever say it, and I know he won’t be satisfied if you do.
If he goes on like the rejected lovers in books, you’ll give in, rather than hurt his feelings.” “No, I won’t.
I shall tell him I’ve made up my mind, and shall walk out of the room with dignity.” Meg rose as she spoke, and was just going to rehearse the dignified exit, when a step in the hall made her fly into her seat and begin to sew as fast as if her life depended on finishing that particular seam in a given time.
Jo smothered a laugh at the sudden change, and when someone gave a modest tap, opened the door with a grim aspect which was anything but hospitable.
I came to get my umbrella, that is, to see how your father finds himself today,” said Mr.
Brooke, getting a trifle confused as his eyes went from one telltale face to the other.
I’ll get him, and tell it you are here.” And having jumbled her father and the umbrella well together in her reply, Jo slipped out of the room to give Meg a chance to make her speech and air her dignity.
But the instant she vanished, Meg began to sidle toward the door, murmuring...
Are you afraid of me, Margaret?” and Mr.
Brooke looked so hurt that Meg thought she must have done something very rude.
She blushed up to the little curls on her forehead, for he had never called her Margaret before, and she was surprised to find how natural and sweet it seemed to hear him say it.
Anxious to appear friendly and at her ease, she put out her hand with a confiding gesture, and said gratefully...
“Oh no, please don’t, I’d rather not,” she said, trying to withdraw her hand, and looking frightened in spite of her denial.
She forgot every word of it, hung her head, and answered, “I don’t know,” so softly that John had to stoop down to catch the foolish little reply.
He seemed to think it was worth the trouble, for he smiled to himself as if quite satisfied, pressed the plump hand gratefully, and said in his most persuasive tone, “Will you try and find out?
I want to know so much, for I can’t go to work with any heart until I learn whether I am to have my reward in the end or not.” “I’m too young,” faltered Meg, wondering why she was so fluttered, yet rather enjoying it.
“I’ll wait, and in the meantime, you could be learning to like me.
I love to teach, and this is easier than German,” broke in John, getting possession of the other hand, so that she had no way of hiding her face as he bent to look into it.
His tone was properly beseeching, but stealing a shy look at him, Meg saw that his eyes were merry as well as tender, and that he wore the satisfied smile of one who had no doubt of his success.
Annie Moffat’s foolish lessons in coquetry came into her mind, and the love of power, which sleeps in the bosoms of the best of little women, woke up all of a sudden and took possession of her.
She felt excited and strange, and not knowing what else to do, followed a capricious impulse, and, withdrawing her hands, said petulantly, “I don’t choose.
Brooke looked as if his lovely castle in the air was tumbling about his ears, for he had never seen Meg in such a mood before, and it rather bewildered him.
“Do you really mean that?” he asked anxiously, following her as she walked away.
I’d rather you wouldn’t,” said Meg, taking a naughty satisfaction in trying her lover’s patience and her own power.
He was grave and pale now, and looked decidedly more like the novel heroes whom she admired, but he neither slapped his forehead nor tramped about the room as they did.
He just stood looking at her so wistfully, so tenderly, that she found her heart relenting in spite of herself.
What would have happened next I cannot say, if Aunt March had not come hobbling in at this interesting minute.
March’s arrival, drove straight out to see him.
The family were all busy in the back part of the house, and she had made her way quietly in, hoping to surprise them.
She did surprise two of them so much that Meg started as if she had seen a ghost, and Mr.
Brooke vanished into the study.
“Bless me, what’s all this?” cried the old lady with a rap of her cane as she glanced from the pale young gentleman to the scarlet young lady.
I’m so surprised to see you!” stammered Meg, feeling that she was in for a lecture now.
“That’s evident,” returned Aunt March, sitting down.
There’s mischief going on, and I insist upon knowing what it is,” with another rap.
Brooke came for his umbrella,” began Meg, wishing that Mr.
Brooke and the umbrella were safely out of the house.
Jo blundered into a wrong message in one of your Father’s letters, and I made her tell me.
You haven’t gone and accepted him, child?” cried Aunt March, looking scandalized.
Shan’t I call Mother?” said Meg, much troubled.
I’ve something to say to you, and I must free my mind at once.
Remember that, and be a sensible girl,” said the old lady impressively.
Now Aunt March possessed in perfection the art of rousing the spirit of opposition in the gentlest people, and enjoyed doing it.
The best of us have a spice of perversity in us, especially when we are young and in love.
If Aunt March had begged Meg to accept John Brooke, she would probably have declared she couldn’t think of it, but as she was preemptorily ordered not to like him, she immediately made up her mind that she would.
Inclination as well as perversity made the decision easy, and being already much excited, Meg opposed the old lady with unusual spirit.
“I shall marry whom I please, Aunt March, and you can leave your money to anyone you like,” she said, nodding her head with a resolute air.
You’ll be sorry for it by-and-by, when you’ve tried love in a cottage and found it a failure.” “It can’t be a worse one than some people find in big houses,” retorted Meg.
Meg hardly knew herself, she felt so brave and independent, so glad to defend John and assert her right to love him, if she liked.
Aunt March saw that she had begun wrong, and after a little pause, made a fresh start, saying as mildly as she could, “Now, Meg, my dear, be reasonable and take my advice.
I mean it kindly, and don’t want you to spoil your whole life by making a mistake at the beginning.
It’s your duty to make a rich match and it ought to be impressed upon you.” “Father and Mother don’t think so.
“This Rook is poor and hasn’t got any rich relations, has he?” “No, but he has many warm friends.” “You can’t live on friends, try it and see how cool they’ll grow.
He hasn’t any business, has he?” “Not yet.
Laurence is going to help him.” “That won’t last long.
James Laurence is a crotchety old fellow and not to be depended on.
So you intend to marry a man without money, position, or business, and go on working harder than you do now, when you might be comfortable all your days by minding me and doing better?
John is good and wise, he’s got heaps of talent, he’s willing to work and sure to get on, he’s so energetic and brave.
Everyone likes and respects him, and I’m proud to think he cares for me, though I’m so poor and young and silly,” said Meg, looking prettier than ever in her earnestness.
“He knows you have got rich relations, child.
John is above such meanness, and I won’t listen to you a minute if you talk so,” cried Meg indignantly, forgetting everything but the injustice of the old lady’s suspicions.
I’m not afraid of being poor, for I’ve been happy so far, and I know I shall be with him because he loves me, and I...” Meg stopped there, remembering all of a sudden that she hadn’t made up her mind, that she had told ‘her John’ to go away, and that he might be overhearing her inconsistent remarks.
Aunt March was very angry, for she had set her heart on having her pretty niece make a fine match, and something in the girl’s happy young face made the lonely old woman feel both sad and sour.
I’m disappointed in you, and haven’t spirits to see your father now.
Don’t expect anything from me when you are married.
I’m done with you forever.” And slamming the door in Meg’s face, Aunt March drove off in high dudgeon.
She seemed to take all the girl’s courage with her, for when left alone, Meg stood for a moment, undecided whether to laugh or cry.
Before she could make up her mind, she was taken possession of by Mr.
Thank you for defending me, and Aunt March for proving that you do care for me a little bit.” “I didn’t know how much till she abused you,” began Meg.
“And I needn’t go away, but may stay and be happy, may I, dear?” Here was another fine chance to make the crushing speech and the stately exit, but Meg never thought of doing either, and disgraced herself forever in Jo’s eyes by meekly whispering, “Yes, John,” and hiding her face on Mr.
Fifteen minutes after Aunt March’s departure, Jo came softly downstairs, paused an instant at the parlor door, and hearing no sound within, nodded and smiled with a satisfied expression, saying to herself, “She has seen him away as we planned, and that affair is settled.
I’ll go and hear the fun, and have a good laugh over it.” But poor Jo never got her laugh, for she was transfixed upon the threshold by a spectacle which held her there, staring with her mouth nearly as wide open as her eyes.
Going in to exult over a fallen enemy and to praise a strong-minded sister for the banishment of an objectionable lover, it certainly was a shock to behold the aforesaid enemy serenely sitting on the sofa, with the strongminded sister enthroned upon his knee and wearing an expression of the most abject submission.
Jo gave a sort of gasp, as if a cold shower bath had suddenly fallen upon her, for such an unexpected turning of the tables actually took her breath away.
Meg jumped up, looking both proud and shy, but ‘that man’, as Jo called him, actually laughed and said coolly, as he kissed the astonished newcomer, “Sister Jo, congratulate us!” That was adding insult to injury, it was altogether too much, and making some wild demonstration with her hands, Jo vanished without a word.
Rushing upstairs, she startled the invalids by exclaiming tragically as she burst into the room, “Oh, do somebody go down quick!
John Brooke is acting dreadfully, and Meg likes it!” Mr. and Mrs.
March left the room with speed, and casting herself upon the bed, Jo cried and scolded tempestuously as she told the awful news to Beth and Amy.
The little girls, however, considered it a most agreeable and interesting event, and Jo got little comfort from them, so she went up to her refuge in the garret, and confided her troubles to the rats.
Nobody ever knew what went on in the parlor that afternoon, but a great deal of talking was done, and quiet Mr.
Brooke astonished his friends by the eloquence and spirit with which he pleaded his suit, told his plans, and persuaded them to arrange everything just as he wanted it.
The tea bell rang before he had finished describing the paradise which he meant to earn for Meg, and he proudly took her in to supper, both looking so happy that Jo hadn’t the heart to be jealous or dismal.
Amy was very much impressed by John’s devotion and Meg’s dignity, Beth beamed at them from a distance, while Mr. and Mrs.
March surveyed the young couple with such tender satisfaction that it was perfectly evident Aunt March was right in calling them as ‘unworldly as a pair of babies’.
No one ate much, but everyone looked very happy, and the old room seemed to brighten up amazingly when the first romance of the family began there.
“You can’t say nothing pleasant ever happens now, can you, Meg?” said Amy, trying to decide how she would group the lovers in a sketch she was planning to make.
How much has happened since I said that!
It seems a year ago,” answered Meg, who was in a blissful dream lifted far above such common things as bread and butter.
“In most families there comes, now and then, a year full of events.
This has been such a one, but it ends well, after all.” “Hope the next will end better,” muttered Jo, who found it very hard to see Meg absorbed in a stranger before her face, for Jo loved a few persons very dearly and dreaded to have their affection lost or lessened in any way.
Brooke, smiling at Meg, as if everything had become possible to him now.
“I’ve got so much to learn before I shall be ready, it seems a short time to me,” answered Meg, with a sweet gravity in her face never seen there before.
“You have only to wait, I am to do the work,” said John beginning his labors by picking up Meg’s napkin, with an expression which caused Jo to shake her head, and then say to herself with an air of relief as the front door banged, “Here comes Laurie.
Now we shall have some sensible conversation.” But Jo was mistaken, for Laurie came prancing in, overflowing with good spirits, bearing a great bridal-looking bouquet for ‘Mrs.
John Brooke’, and evidently laboring under the delusion that the whole affair had been brought about by his excellent management.
“I knew Brooke would have it all his own way, he always does, for when he makes up his mind to accomplish anything, it’s done though the sky falls,” said Laurie, when he had presented his offering and his congratulations.
“Much obliged for that recommendation.
I take it as a good omen for the future and invite you to my wedding on the spot,” answered Mr.
Brooke, who felt at peace with all mankind, even his mischievous pupil.
“I’ll come if I’m at the ends of the earth, for the sight of Jo’s face alone on that occasion would be worth a long journey.
You don’t look festive, ma’am, what’s the matter?” asked Laurie, following her into a corner of the parlor, whither all had adjourned to greet Mr.
“I don’t approve of the match, but I’ve made up my mind to bear it, and shall not say a word against it,” said Jo solemnly.
“You can’t know how hard it is for me to give up Meg,” she continued with a little quiver in her voice.
You only go halves,” said Laurie consolingly.
You are always a great comfort to me, Teddy,” returned Jo, gratefully shaking hands.
Meg is happy, Brooke will fly round and get settled immediately, Grandpa will attend to him, and it will be very jolly to see Meg in her own little house.
Wouldn’t that console you?” “I rather think it would, but there’s no knowing what may happen in three years,” said Jo thoughtfully.
I do,” returned Laurie.
“I think not, for I might see something sad, and everyone looks so happy now, I don’t believe they could be much improved.” And Jo’s eyes went slowly round the room, brightening as they looked, for the prospect was a pleasant one.
Father and Mother sat together, quietly reliving the first chapter of the romance which for them began some twenty years ago.
Amy was drawing the lovers, who sat apart in a beautiful world of their own, the light of which touched their faces with a grace the little artist could not copy.
Beth lay on her sofa, talking cheerily with her old friend, who held her little hand as if he felt that it possessed the power to lead him along the peaceful way she walked.
Jo lounged in her favorite low seat, with the grave quiet look which best became her, and Laurie, leaning on the back of her chair, his chin on a level with her curly head, smiled with his friendliest aspect, and nodded at her in the long glass which reflected them both.
Whether it ever rises again, depends upon the reception given the first act of the domestic drama called _Little Women_.
And here let me premise that if any of the elders think there is too much ‘lovering’ in the story, as I fear they may (I’m not afraid the young folks will make that objection), I can only say with Mrs.
March, “What can you expect when I have four gay girls in the house, and a dashing young neighbor over the way?” The three years that have passed have brought but few changes to the quiet family.
March safely at home, busy with his books and the small parish which found in him a minister by nature as by grace, a quiet, studious man, rich in the wisdom that is better than learning, the charity which calls all mankind ‘brother’, the piety that blossoms into character, making it august and lovely.
These attributes, in spite of poverty and the strict integrity which shut him out from the more worldly successes, attracted to him many admirable persons, as naturally as sweet herbs draw bees, and as naturally he gave them the honey into which fifty years of hard experience had distilled no bitter drop.
Earnest young men found the gray-headed scholar as young at heart as they; thoughtful or troubled women instinctively brought their doubts to him, sure of finding the gentlest sympathy, the wisest counsel.
Gifted men found a companion in him.
Ambitious men caught glimpses of nobler ambitions than their own, and even worldlings confessed that his beliefs were beautiful and true, although ‘they wouldn’t pay’.
To outsiders the five energetic women seemed to rule the house, and so they did in many things, but the quiet scholar, sitting among his books, was still the head of the family, the household conscience, anchor, and comforter, for to him the busy, anxious women always turned in troublous times, finding him, in the truest sense of those sacred words, husband and father.
The girls gave their hearts into their mother’s keeping, their souls into their father’s, and to both parents, who lived and labored so faithfully for them, they gave a love that grew with their growth and bound them tenderly together by the sweetest tie which blesses life and outlives death.
March is as brisk and cheery, though rather grayer, than when we saw her last, and just now so absorbed in Meg’s affairs that the hospitals and homes still full of wounded ‘boys’ and soldiers’ widows, decidedly miss the motherly missionary’s visits.
John Brooke did his duty manfully for a year, got wounded, was sent home, and not allowed to return.
He received no stars or bars, but he deserved them, for he cheerfully risked all he had, and life and love are very precious when both are in full bloom.
Perfectly resigned to his discharge, he devoted himself to getting well, preparing for business, and earning a home for Meg.
With the good sense and sturdy independence that characterized him, he refused Mr.
Laurence’s more generous offers, and accepted the place of bookkeeper, feeling better satisfied to begin with an honestly earned salary than by running any risks with borrowed money.
Meg had spent the time in working as well as waiting, growing womanly in character, wise in housewifely arts, and prettier than ever, for love is a great beautifier.
She had her girlish ambitions and hopes, and felt some disappointment at the humble way in which the new life must begin.
Ned Moffat had just married Sallie Gardiner, and Meg couldn’t help contrasting their fine house and carriage, many gifts, and splendid outfit with her own, and secretly wishing she could have the same.
But somehow envy and discontent soon vanished when she thought of all the patient love and labor John had put into the little home awaiting her, and when they sat together in the twilight, talking over their small plans, the future always grew so beautiful and bright that she forgot Sallie’s splendor and felt herself the richest, happiest girl in Christendom.
Jo never went back to Aunt March, for the old lady took such a fancy to Amy that she bribed her with the offer of drawing lessons from one of the best teachers going, and for the sake of this advantage, Amy would have served a far harder mistress.
So she gave her mornings to duty, her afternoons to pleasure, and prospered finely.
Jo meantime devoted herself to literature and Beth, who remained delicate long after the fever was a thing of the past.
Not an invalid exactly, but never again the rosy, healthy creature she had been, yet always hopeful, happy, and serene, and busy with the quiet duties she loved, everyone’s friend, and an angel in the house, long before those who loved her most had learned to know it.
As long as _The Spread Eagle_ paid her a dollar a column for her ‘rubbish’, as she called it, Jo felt herself a woman of means, and spun her little romances diligently.
But great plans fermented in her busy brain and ambitious mind, and the old tin kitchen in the garret held a slowly increasing pile of blotted manuscript, which was one day to place the name of March upon the roll of fame.
Laurie, having dutifully gone to college to please his grandfather, was now getting through it in the easiest possible manner to please himself.
Being only ‘a glorious human boy’, of course he frolicked and flirted, grew dandified, aquatic, sentimental, or gymnastic, as college fashions ordained, hazed and was hazed, talked slang, and more than once came perilously near suspension and expulsion.
But as high spirits and the love of fun were the causes of these pranks, he always managed to save himself by frank confession, honorable atonement, or the irresistible power of persuasion which he possessed in perfection.
In fact, he rather prided himself on his narrow escapes, and liked to thrill the girls with graphic accounts of his triumphs over wrathful tutors, dignified professors, and vanquished enemies.
The ‘men of my class’, were heroes in the eyes of the girls, who never wearied of the exploits of ‘our fellows’, and were frequently allowed to bask in the smiles of these great creatures, when Laurie brought them home with him.
Amy especially enjoyed this high honor, and became quite a belle among them, for her ladyship early felt and learned to use the gift of fascination with which she was endowed.
They all liked Jo immensely, but never fell in love with her, though very few escaped without paying the tribute of a sentimental sigh or two at Amy’s shrine.
And speaking of sentiment brings us very naturally to the ‘Dovecote’.
Brooke had prepared for Meg’s first home.
Laurie had christened it, saying it was highly appropriate to the gentle lovers who ‘went on together like a pair of turtledoves, with first a bill and then a coo’.
It was a tiny house, with a little garden behind and a lawn about as big as a pocket handkerchief in the front.
Here Meg meant to have a fountain, shrubbery, and a profusion of lovely flowers, though just at present the fountain was represented by a weather-beaten urn, very like a dilapidated slopbowl, the shrubbery consisted of several young larches, undecided whether to live or die, and the profusion of flowers was merely hinted by regiments of sticks to show where seeds were planted.
But inside, it was altogether charming, and the happy bride saw no fault from garret to cellar.
To be sure, the hall was so narrow it was fortunate that they had no piano, for one never could have been got in whole, the dining room was so small that six people were a tight fit, and the kitchen stairs seemed built for the express purpose of precipitating both servants and china pell-mell into the coalbin.
But once get used to these slight blemishes and nothing could be more complete, for good sense and good taste had presided over the furnishing, and the result was highly satisfactory.
There were no marble-topped tables, long mirrors, or lace curtains in the little parlor, but simple furniture, plenty of books, a fine picture or two, a stand of flowers in the bay window, and, scattered all about, the pretty gifts which came from friendly hands and were the fairer for the loving messages they brought.
I also doubt if any young matron ever began life with so rich a supply of dusters, holders, and piece bags, for Beth made enough to last till the silver wedding came round, and invented three different kinds of dishcloths for the express service of the bridal china.
People who hire all these things done for them never know what they lose, for the homeliest tasks get beautified if loving hands do them, and Meg found so many proofs of this that everything in her small nest, from the kitchen roller to the silver vase on her parlor table, was eloquent of home love and tender forethought.
What happy times they had planning together, what solemn shopping excursions, what funny mistakes they made, and what shouts of laughter arose over Laurie’s ridiculous bargains.
In his love of jokes, this young gentleman, though nearly through college, was a much of a boy as ever.
His last whim had been to bring with him on his weekly visits some new, useful, and ingenious article for the young housekeeper.
He was possessed with a mania for patronizing Yankee ingenuity, and seeing his friends fitly furnished forth.
So each week beheld some fresh absurdity.
Everything was done at last, even to Amy’s arranging different colored soaps to match the different colored rooms, and Beth’s setting the table for the first meal.
March, as she and her daughter went through the new kingdom arm in arm, for just then they seemed to cling together more tenderly than ever.
“Yes, Mother, perfectly satisfied, thanks to you all, and so happy that I can’t talk about it,” with a look that was far better than words.
“If she only had a servant or two it would be all right,” said Amy, coming out of the parlor, where she had been trying to decide whether the bronze Mercury looked best on the whatnot or the mantlepiece.
There will be so little to do that with Lotty to run my errands and help me here and there, I shall only have enough work to keep me from getting lazy or homesick,” answered Meg tranquilly.
“If Meg had four, the house wouldn’t hold them, and master and missis would have to camp in the garden,” broke in Jo, who, enveloped in a big blue pinafore, was giving the last polish to the door handles.
“Sallie isn’t a poor man’s wife, and many maids are in keeping with her fine establishment.
Meg and John begin humbly, but I have a feeling that there will be quite as much happiness in the little house as in the big one.
It’s a great mistake for young girls like Meg to leave themselves nothing to do but dress, give orders, and gossip.
When I was first married, I used to long for my new clothes to wear out or get torn, so that I might have the pleasure of mending them, for I got heartily sick of doing fancywork and tending my pocket handkerchief.” “Why didn’t you go into the kitchen and make messes, as Sallie says she does to amuse herself, though they never turn out well and the servants laugh at her,” said Meg.
“I did after a while, not to ‘mess’ but to learn of Hannah how things should be done, that my servants need not laugh at me.
It was play then, but there came a time when I was truly grateful that I not only possessed the will but the power to cook wholesome food for my little girls, and help myself when I could no longer afford to hire help.
“Do you know I like this room most of all in my baby house,” added Meg, a minute after, as they went upstairs and she looked into her well-stored linen closet.
Beth was there, laying the snowy piles smoothly on the shelves and exulting over the goodly array.
You see, having said that if Meg married ‘that Brooke’ she shouldn’t have a cent of her money, Aunt March was rather in a quandary when time had appeased her wrath and made her repent her vow.
She never broke her word, and was much exercised in her mind how to get round it, and at last devised a plan whereby she could satisfy herself.
Carrol, Florence’s mamma, was ordered to buy, have made, and marked a generous supply of house and table linen, and send it as her present, all of which was faithfully done, but the secret leaked out, and was greatly enjoyed by the family, for Aunt March tried to look utterly unconscious, and insisted that she could give nothing but the old-fashioned pearls long promised to the first bride.
“That’s a housewifely taste which I am glad to see.
I had a young friend who set up housekeeping with six sheets, but she had finger bowls for company and that satisfied her,” said Mrs.
March, patting the damask tablecloths, with a truly feminine appreciation of their fineness.
“I haven’t a single finger bowl, but this is a setout that will last me all my days, Hannah says.” And Meg looked quite contented, as well she might.
A tall, broad-shouldered young fellow, with a cropped head, a felt basin of a hat, and a flyaway coat, came tramping down the road at a great pace, walked over the low fence without stopping to open the gate, straight up to Mrs.
Yes, it’s all right.” The last words were in answer to the look the elder lady gave him, a kindly questioning look which the handsome eyes met so frankly that the little ceremony closed, as usual, with a motherly kiss.
John Brooke, with the maker’s congratulations and compliments.
What a refreshing spectacle you are, Jo.
Amy, you are getting altogether too handsome for a single lady.” As Laurie spoke, he delivered a brown paper parcel to Meg, pulled Beth’s hair ribbon, stared at Jo’s big pinafore, and fell into an attitude of mock rapture before Amy, then shook hands all round, and everyone began to talk.
“Where is John?” asked Meg anxiously.
“Stopped to get the license for tomorrow, ma’am.” “Which side won the last match, Teddy?” inquired Jo, who persisted in feeling an interest in manly sports despite her nineteen years.
Wish you’d been there to see.” “How is the lovely Miss Randal?” asked Amy with a significant smile.
Don’t you see how I’m pining away?” and Laurie gave his broad chest a sounding slap and heaved a melodramatic sigh.
Undo the bundle and see, Meg,” said Beth, eying the knobby parcel with curiosity.
“It’s a useful thing to have in the house in case of fire or thieves,” observed Laurie, as a watchman’s rattle appeared, amid the laughter of the girls.
“Any time when John is away and you get frightened, Mrs.
Meg, just swing that out of the front window, and it will rouse the neighborhood in a jiffy.
“There’s gratitude for you!
And speaking of gratitude reminds me to mention that you may thank Hannah for saving your wedding cake from destruction.
I saw it going into your house as I came by, and if she hadn’t defended it manfully I’d have had a pick at it, for it looked like a remarkably plummy one.” “I wonder if you will ever grow up, Laurie,” said Meg in a matronly tone.
“I’m doing my best, ma’am, but can’t get much higher, I’m afraid, as six feet is about all men can do in these degenerate days,” responded the young gentleman, whose head was about level with the little chandelier.
“I suppose it would be profanation to eat anything in this spick-and-span bower, so as I’m tremendously hungry, I propose an adjournment,” he added presently.
There are some last things to settle,” said Meg, bustling away.
“Beth and I are going over to Kitty Bryant’s to get more flowers for tomorrow,” added Amy, tying a picturesque hat over her picturesque curls, and enjoying the effect as much as anybody.
I’m in such a state of exhaustion I can’t get home without help.
Don’t take off your apron, whatever you do, it’s peculiarly becoming,” said Laurie, as Jo bestowed his especial aversion in her capacious pocket and offered her arm to support his feeble steps.
“Now, Teddy, I want to talk seriously to you about tomorrow,” began Jo, as they strolled away together.
You are the one for that.” “And I implore you not to look at me during the ceremony.
I shall certainly laugh if you do.” “You won’t see me, you’ll be crying so hard that the thick fog round you will obscure the prospect.” “I never cry unless for some great affliction.” “Such as fellows going to college, hey?” cut in Laurie, with suggestive laugh.
“No, I don’t.” “Then don’t go and be suspicious.
I only want some money,” said Laurie, walking on again, appeased by her hearty tone.
“You spend a great deal, Teddy.” “Bless you, I don’t spend it, it spends itself somehow, and is gone before I know it.” “You are so generous and kind-hearted that you let people borrow, and can’t say ‘No’ to anyone.
“Oh, he made a mountain out of a molehill.
You wouldn’t have me let that fine fellow work himself to death just for want of a little help, when he is worth a dozen of us lazy chaps, would you?” “Of course not, but I don’t see the use of your having seventeen waistcoats, endless neckties, and a new hat every time you come home.
Just now it’s the fashion to be hideous, to make your head look like a scrubbing brush, wear a strait jacket, orange gloves, and clumping square-toed boots.
I’ll get myself up regardless of expense tomorrow and be a satisfaction to my friends.” “I’ll leave you in peace if you’ll only let your hair grow.
I’m not aristocratic, but I do object to being seen with a person who looks like a young prize fighter,” observed Jo severely.
“This unassuming style promotes study, that’s why we adopt it,” returned Laurie, who certainly could not be accused of vanity, having voluntarily sacrificed a handsome curly crop to the demand for quarter-inch-long stubble.
“By the way, Jo, I think that little Parker is really getting desperate about Amy.
He talks of her constantly, writes poetry, and moons about in a most suspicious manner.
He’d better nip his little passion in the bud, hadn’t he?” added Laurie, in a confidential, elder brotherly tone, after a minute’s silence.
We don’t want any more marrying in this family for years to come.
Mercy on us, what are the children thinking of?” and Jo looked as much scandalized as if Amy and little Parker were not yet in their teens.
You are a mere infant, but you’ll go next, Jo, and we’ll be left lamenting,” said Laurie, shaking his head over the degeneracy of the times.
I’m not one of the agreeable sort.
Nobody will want me, and it’s a mercy, for there should always be one old maid in a family.” “You won’t give anyone a chance,” said Laurie, with a sidelong glance and a little more color than before in his sunburned face.
“You won’t show the soft side of your character, and if a fellow gets a peep at it by accident and can’t help showing that he likes it, you treat him as Mrs.
Gummidge did her sweetheart, throw cold water over him, and get so thorny no one dares touch or look at you.” “I don’t like that sort of thing.
I’m too busy to be worried with nonsense, and I think it’s dreadful to break up families so.
Meg’s wedding has turned all our heads, and we talk of nothing but lovers and such absurdities.
I don’t wish to get cross, so let’s change the subject;” and Jo looked quite ready to fling cold water on the slightest provocation.
Whatever his feelings might have been, Laurie found a vent for them in a long low whistle and the fearful prediction as they parted at the gate, “Mark my words, Jo, you’ll go next.” CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE THE FIRST WEDDING The June roses over the porch were awake bright and early on that morning, rejoicing with all their hearts in the cloudless sunshine, like friendly little neighbors, as they were.
Meg looked very like a rose herself, for all that was best and sweetest in heart and soul seemed to bloom into her face that day, making it fair and tender, with a charm more beautiful than beauty.
“I don’t want a fashionable wedding, but only those about me whom I love, and to them I wish to look and be my familiar self.” So she made her wedding gown herself, sewing into it the tender hopes and innocent romances of a girlish heart.
Her sisters braided up her pretty hair, and the only ornaments she wore were the lilies of the valley, which ‘her John’ liked best of all the flowers that grew.
“You do look just like our own dear Meg, only so very sweet and lovely that I should hug you if it wouldn’t crumple your dress,” cried Amy, surveying her with delight when all was done.
“Then I am satisfied.
But please hug and kiss me, everyone, and don’t mind my dress.
I want a great many crumples of this sort put into it today,” and Meg opened her arms to her sisters, who clung about her with April faces for a minute, feeling that the new love had not changed the old.
“Now I’m going to tie John’s cravat for him, and then to stay a few minutes with Father quietly in the study,” and Meg ran down to perform these little ceremonies, and then to follow her mother wherever she went, conscious that in spite of the smiles on the motherly face, there was a secret sorrow hid in the motherly heart at the flight of the first bird from the nest.
As the younger girls stand together, giving the last touches to their simple toilet, it may be a good time to tell of a few changes which three years have wrought in their appearance, for all are looking their best just now.
Jo’s angles are much softened, she has learned to carry herself with ease, if not grace.
The curly crop has lengthened into a thick coil, more becoming to the small head atop of the tall figure.
The beautiful, kind eyes are larger, and in them lies an expression that saddens one, although it is not sad itself.
It is the shadow of pain which touches the young face with such pathetic patience, but Beth seldom complains and always speaks hopefully of ‘being better soon’.
Amy is with truth considered ‘the flower of the family’, for at sixteen she has the air and bearing of a full-grown woman, not beautiful, but possessed of that indescribable charm called grace.
One saw it in the lines of her figure, the make and motion of her hands, the flow of her dress, the droop of her hair, unconscious yet harmonious, and as attractive to many as beauty itself.
Amy’s nose still afflicted her, for it never would grow Grecian, so did her mouth, being too wide, and having a decided chin.
These offending features gave character to her whole face, but she never could see it, and consoled herself with her wonderfully fair complexion, keen blue eyes, and curls more golden and abundant than ever.
All three wore suits of thin silver gray (their best gowns for the summer), with blush roses in hair and bosom, and all three looked just what they were, fresh-faced, happy-hearted girls, pausing a moment in their busy lives to read with wistful eyes the sweetest chapter in the romance of womanhood.
“Upon my word, here’s a state of things!” cried the old lady, taking the seat of honor prepared for her, and settling the folds of her lavender moire with a great rustle.
“You oughtn’t to be seen till the last minute, child.” “I’m not a show, Aunty, and no one is coming to stare at me, to criticize my dress, or count the cost of my luncheon.
John, dear, here’s your hammer.” And away went Meg to help ‘that man’ in his highly improper employment.
Brooke didn’t even say, “Thank you,” but as he stooped for the unromantic tool, he kissed his little bride behind the folding door, with a look that made Aunt March whisk out her pocket handkerchief with a sudden dew in her sharp old eyes.
A crash, a cry, and a laugh from Laurie, accompanied by the indecorous exclamation, “Jupiter Ammon!
Jo’s upset the cake again!” caused a momentary flurry, which was hardly over when a flock of cousins arrived, and ‘the party came in’, as Beth used to say when a child.
“Don’t let that young giant come near me, he worries me worse than mosquitoes,” whispered the old lady to Amy, as the rooms filled and Laurie’s black head towered above the rest.
“He has promised to be very good today, and he can be perfectly elegant if he likes,” returned Amy, and gliding away to warn Hercules to beware of the dragon, which warning caused him to haunt the old lady with a devotion that nearly distracted her.
There was no bridal procession, but a sudden silence fell upon the room as Mr.
Mother and sisters gathered close, as if loath to give Meg up.
The fatherly voice broke more than once, which only seemed to make the service more beautiful and solemn.
The bridegroom’s hand trembled visibly, and no one heard his replies.
But Meg looked straight up in her husband’s eyes, and said, “I will!” with such tender trust in her own face and voice that her mother’s heart rejoiced and Aunt March sniffed audibly.
Jo did not cry, though she was very near it once, and was only saved from a demonstration by the consciousness that Laurie was staring fixedly at her, with a comical mixture of merriment and emotion in his wicked black eyes.
Beth kept her face hidden on her mother’s shoulder, but Amy stood like a graceful statue, with a most becoming ray of sunshine touching her white forehead and the flower in her hair.
During the next fifteen minutes she looked more like a rose than ever, for everyone availed themselves of their privileges to the fullest extent, from Mr.
Laurence to old Hannah, who, adorned with a headdress fearfully and wonderfully made, fell upon her in the hall, crying with a sob and a chuckle, “Bless you, deary, a hundred times!
The cake ain’t hurt a mite, and everything looks lovely.” Everybody cleared up after that, and said something brilliant, or tried to, which did just as well, for laughter is ready when hearts are light.
There was no display of gifts, for they were already in the little house, nor was there an elaborate breakfast, but a plentiful lunch of cake and fruit, dressed with flowers.
Laurence and Aunt March shrugged and smiled at one another when water, lemonade, and coffee were found to be to only sorts of nectar which the three Hebes carried round.
No one said anything, till Laurie, who insisted on serving the bride, appeared before her, with a loaded salver in his hand and a puzzled expression on his face.
“Has Jo smashed all the bottles by accident?” he whispered, “or am I merely laboring under a delusion that I saw some lying about loose this morning?” “No, your grandfather kindly offered us his best, and Aunt March actually sent some, but Father put away a little for Beth, and dispatched the rest to the Soldier’s Home.
You know he thinks that wine should be used only in illness, and Mother says that neither she nor her daughters will ever offer it to any young man under her roof.” Meg spoke seriously and expected to see Laurie frown or laugh, but he did neither, for after a quick look at her, he said, in his impetuous way, “I like that!
For I’ve seen enough harm done to wish other women would think as you do.” “You are not made wise by experience, I hope?” and there was an anxious accent in Meg’s voice.
Don’t think too well of me, either, this is not one of my temptations.
Being brought up where wine is as common as water and almost as harmless, I don’t care for it, but when a pretty girl offers it, one doesn’t like to refuse, you see.” “But you will, for the sake of others, if not for your own.
Come, Laurie, promise, and give me one more reason to call this the happiest day of my life.” A demand so sudden and so serious made the young man hesitate a moment, for ridicule is often harder to bear than self-denial.
She did not speak, but she looked up at him with a face made very eloquent by happiness, and a smile which said, “No one can refuse me anything today.” Laurie certainly could not, and with an answering smile, he gave her his hand, saying heartily, “I promise, Mrs.
Brooke!” “I thank you, very, very much.” “And I drink ‘long life to your resolution’, Teddy,” cried Jo, baptizing him with a splash of lemonade, as she waved her glass and beamed approvingly upon him.
So the toast was drunk, the pledge made and loyally kept in spite of many temptations, for with instinctive wisdom, the girls seized a happy moment to do their friend a service, for which he thanked them all his life.
After lunch, people strolled about, by twos and threes, through the house and garden, enjoying the sunshine without and within.
Meg and John happened to be standing together in the middle of the grass plot, when Laurie was seized with an inspiration which put the finishing touch to this unfashionable wedding.
“All the married people take hands and dance round the new-made husband and wife, as the Germans do, while we bachelors and spinsters prance in couples outside!” cried Laurie, promenading down the path with Amy, with such infectious spirit and skill that everyone else followed their example without a murmur.
March, Aunt and Uncle Carrol began it, others rapidly joined in, even Sallie Moffat, after a moment’s hesitation, threw her train over her arm and whisked Ned into the ring.
But the crowning joke was Mr.
Laurence and Aunt March, for when the stately old gentleman chasseed solemnly up to the old lady, she just tucked her cane under her arm, and hopped briskly away to join hands with the rest and dance about the bridal pair, while the young folks pervaded the garden like butterflies on a midsummer day.
Want of breath brought the impromptu ball to a close, and then people began to go.
“I wish you well, my dear, I heartily wish you well, but I think you’ll be sorry for it,” said Aunt March to Meg, adding to the bridegroom, as he led her to the carriage, “You’ve got a treasure, young man, see that you deserve it.” “That is the prettiest wedding I’ve been to for an age, Ned, and I don’t see why, for there wasn’t a bit of style about it,” observed Mrs.
“Laurie, my lad, if you ever want to indulge in this sort of thing, get one of those little girls to help you, and I shall be perfectly satisfied,” said Mr.
Laurence, settling himself in his easy chair to rest after the excitement of the morning.
“I’ll do my best to gratify you, Sir,” was Laurie’s unusually dutiful reply, as he carefully unpinned the posy Jo had put in his buttonhole.
When she came down, looking like a pretty Quakeress in her dove-colored suit and straw bonnet tied with white, they all gathered about her to say ‘good-by’, as tenderly as if she had been going to make the grand tour.
“Don’t feel that I am separated from you, Marmee dear, or that I love you any the less for loving John so much,” she said, clinging to her mother, with full eyes for a moment.
Beth is going to be with me a great deal, and the other girls will drop in now and then to laugh at my housekeeping struggles.
Good-by, good-by!” They stood watching her, with faces full of love and hope and tender pride as she walked away, leaning on her husband’s arm, with her hands full of flowers and the June sunshine brightening her happy face—and so Meg’s married life began.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX ARTISTIC ATTEMPTS It takes people a long time to learn the difference between talent and genius, especially ambitious young men and women.
Amy was learning this distinction through much tribulation, for mistaking enthusiasm for inspiration, she attempted every branch of art with youthful audacity.
For a long time there was a lull in the ‘mud-pie’ business, and she devoted herself to the finest pen-and-ink drawing, in which she showed such taste and skill that her graceful handiwork proved both pleasant and profitable.
But over-strained eyes caused pen and ink to be laid aside for a bold attempt at poker-sketching.
While this attack lasted, the family lived in constant fear of a conflagration, for the odor of burning wood pervaded the house at all hours, smoke issued from attic and shed with alarming frequency, red-hot pokers lay about promiscuously, and Hannah never went to bed without a pail of water and the dinner bell at her door in case of fire.
Raphael’s face was found boldly executed on the underside of the moulding board, and Bacchus on the head of a beer barrel.
A chanting cherub adorned the cover of the sugar bucket, and attempts to portray Romeo and Juliet supplied kindling for some time.
From fire to oil was a natural transition for burned fingers, and Amy fell to painting with undiminished ardor.
An artist friend fitted her out with his castoff palettes, brushes, and colors, and she daubed away, producing pastoral and marine views such as were never seen on land or sea.
Her monstrosities in the way of cattle would have taken prizes at an agricultural fair, and the perilous pitching of her vessels would have produced seasickness in the most nautical observer, if the utter disregard to all known rules of shipbuilding and rigging had not convulsed him with laughter at the first glance.
Charcoal portraits came next, and the entire family hung in a row, looking as wild and crocky as if just evoked from a coalbin.
Softened into crayon sketches, they did better, for the likenesses were good, and Amy’s hair, Jo’s nose, Meg’s mouth, and Laurie’s eyes were pronounced ‘wonderfully fine’.
A return to clay and plaster followed, and ghostly casts of her acquaintances haunted corners of the house, or tumbled off closet shelves onto people’s heads.
Children were enticed in as models, till their incoherent accounts of her mysterious doings caused Miss Amy to be regarded in the light of a young ogress.
Her efforts in this line, however, were brought to an abrupt close by an untoward accident, which quenched her ardor.
Other models failing her for a time, she undertook to cast her own pretty foot, and the family were one day alarmed by an unearthly bumping and screaming and running to the rescue, found the young enthusiast hopping wildly about the shed with her foot held fast in a pan full of plaster, which had hardened with unexpected rapidity.
With much difficulty and some danger she was dug out, for Jo was so overcome with laughter while she excavated that her knife went too far, cut the poor foot, and left a lasting memorial of one artistic attempt, at least.
After this Amy subsided, till a mania for sketching from nature set her to haunting river, field, and wood, for picturesque studies, and sighing for ruins to copy.
She caught endless colds sitting on damp grass to book ‘a delicious bit’, composed of a stone, a stump, one mushroom, and a broken mullein stalk, or ‘a heavenly mass of clouds’, that looked like a choice display of featherbeds when done.
She sacrificed her complexion floating on the river in the midsummer sun to study light and shade, and got a wrinkle over her nose trying after ‘points of sight’, or whatever the squint-and-string performance is called.
If ‘genius is eternal patience’, as Michelangelo affirms, Amy had some claim to the divine attribute, for she persevered in spite of all obstacles, failures, and discouragements, firmly believing that in time she should do something worthy to be called ‘high art’.
She was learning, doing, and enjoying other things, meanwhile, for she had resolved to be an attractive and accomplished woman, even if she never became a great artist.
Here she succeeded better, for she was one of those happily created beings who please without effort, make friends everywhere, and take life so gracefully and easily that less fortunate souls are tempted to believe that such are born under a lucky star.
Everybody liked her, for among her good gifts was tact.
Money, position, fashionable accomplishments, and elegant manners were most desirable things in her eyes, and she liked to associate with those who possessed them, often mistaking the false for the true, and admiring what was not admirable.
Never forgetting that by birth she was a gentlewoman, she cultivated her aristocratic tastes and feelings, so that when the opportunity came she might be ready to take the place from which poverty now excluded her.
“My lady,” as her friends called her, sincerely desired to be a genuine lady, and was so at heart, but had yet to learn that money cannot buy refinement of nature, that rank does not always confer nobility, and that true breeding makes itself felt in spite of external drawbacks.
“I want to ask a favor of you, Mamma,” Amy said, coming in with an important air one day.
“Well, little girl, what is it?” replied her mother, in whose eyes the stately young lady still remained ‘the baby’.
“Our drawing class breaks up next week, and before the girls separate for the summer, I want to ask them out here for a day.
They have been very kind to me in many ways, and I am grateful, for they are all rich and I know I am poor, yet they never made any difference.” “Why should they?” and Mrs.
March put the question with what the girls called her ‘Maria Theresa air’.
“You know as well as I that it does make a difference with nearly everyone, so don’t ruffle up like a dear, motherly hen, when your chickens get pecked by smarter birds.
The ugly duckling turned out a swan, you know.” and Amy smiled without bitterness, for she possessed a happy temper and hopeful spirit.
March laughed, and smoothed down her maternal pride as she asked, “Well, my swan, what is your plan?” “I should like to ask the girls out to lunch next week, to take them for a drive to the places they want to see, a row on the river, perhaps, and make a little artistic fete for them.” “That looks feasible.
Cake, sandwiches, fruit, and coffee will be all that is necessary, I suppose?” “Oh, dear, no!
We must have cold tongue and chicken, French chocolate and ice cream, besides.
The girls are used to such things, and I want my lunch to be proper and elegant, though I do work for my living.” “How many young ladies are there?” asked her mother, beginning to look sober.
“Twelve or fourteen in the class, but I dare say they won’t all come.” “Bless me, child, you will have to charter an omnibus to carry them about.” “Why, Mother, how can you think of such a thing?
Not more than six or eight will probably come, so I shall hire a beach wagon and borrow Mr.
Laurence’s cherry-bounce.” (Hannah’s pronunciation of char-a-banc.) “All of this will be expensive, Amy.” “Not very.
I know that I can carry it out perfectly well, if you and the girls will help a little, and I don’t see why I can’t if I’m willing to pay for it,” said Amy, with the decision which opposition was apt to change into obstinacy.
March knew that experience was an excellent teacher, and when it was possible she left her children to learn alone the lessons which she would gladly have made easier, if they had not objected to taking advice as much as they did salts and senna.
Talk it over with the girls, and whichever way you decide, I’ll do my best to help you.” “Thanks, Mother, you are always so kind.” and away went Amy to lay her plan before her sisters.
Meg agreed at once, and promised her aid, gladly offering anything she possessed, from her little house itself to her very best saltspoons.
“Why in the world should you spend your money, worry your family, and turn the house upside down for a parcel of girls who don’t care a sixpence for you?
I thought you had too much pride and sense to truckle to any mortal woman just because she wears French boots and rides in a coupe,” said Jo, who, being called from the tragic climax of her novel, was not in the best mood for social enterprises.
“I don’t truckle, and I hate being patronized as much as you do!” returned Amy indignantly, for the two still jangled when such questions arose.
“The girls do care for me, and I for them, and there’s a great deal of kindness and sense and talent among them, in spite of what you call fashionable nonsense.
You don’t care to make people like you, to go into good society, and cultivate your manners and tastes.
You can go through the world with your elbows out and your nose in the air, and call it independence, if you like.
That’s not my way.” When Amy had whetted her tongue and freed her mind she usually got the best of it, for she seldom failed to have common sense on her side, while Jo carried her love of liberty and hate of conventionalities to such an unlimited extent that she naturally found herself worsted in an argument.
Amy’s definition of Jo’s idea of independence was such a good hit that both burst out laughing, and the discussion took a more amiable turn.
Much against her will, Jo at length consented to sacrifice a day to Mrs.
Grundy, and help her sister through what she regarded as ‘a nonsensical business’.
The invitations were sent, nearly all accepted, and the following Monday was set apart for the grand event.
Hannah was out of humor because her week’s work was deranged, and prophesied that “ef the washin’ and ironin’ warn’t done reg’lar, nothin’ would go well anywheres”.
This hitch in the mainspring of the domestic machinery had a bad effect upon the whole concern, but Amy’s motto was ‘Nil desperandum’, and having made up her mind what to do, she proceeded to do it in spite of all obstacles.
The chicken was tough, the tongue too salty, and the chocolate wouldn’t froth properly.
Then the cake and ice cost more than Amy expected, so did the wagon, and various other expenses, which seemed trifling at the outset, counted up rather alarmingly afterward.
Meg had an unusual number of callers to keep her at home, and Jo was in such a divided state of mind that her breakages, accidents, and mistakes were uncommonly numerous, serious, and trying.
If it was not fair on Monday, the young ladies were to come on Tuesday, an arrangement which aggravated Jo and Hannah to the last degree.
On Monday morning the weather was in that undecided state which is more exasperating than a steady pour.
It drizzled a little, shone a little, blew a little, and didn’t make up its mind till it was too late for anyone else to make up theirs.
Amy was up at dawn, hustling people out of their beds and through their breakfasts, that the house might be got in order.
The parlor struck her as looking uncommonly shabby, but without stopping to sigh for what she had not, she skillfully made the best of what she had, arranging chairs over the worn places in the carpet, covering stains on the walls with homemade statuary, which gave an artistic air to the room, as did the lovely vases of flowers Jo scattered about.
The lunch looked charming, and as she surveyed it, she sincerely hoped it would taste well, and that the borrowed glass, china, and silver would get safely home again.
Then came the hours of suspense, during which she vibrated from parlor to porch, while public opinion varied like the weathercock.
A smart shower at eleven had evidently quenched the enthusiasm of the young ladies who were to arrive at twelve, for nobody came, and at two the exhausted family sat down in a blaze of sunshine to consume the perishable portions of the feast, that nothing might be lost.
“No doubt about the weather today, they will certainly come, so we must fly round and be ready for them,” said Amy, as the sun woke her next morning.
She spoke briskly, but in her secret soul she wished she had said nothing about Tuesday, for her interest like her cake was getting a little stale.
“I can’t get any lobsters, so you will have to do without salad today,” said Mr.
March, coming in half an hour later, with an expression of placid despair.
“Use the chicken then, the toughness won’t matter in a salad,” advised his wife.
I’m very sorry, Amy,” added Beth, who was still a patroness of cats.
“Then I must have a lobster, for tongue alone won’t do,” said Amy decidedly.
“Shall I rush into town and demand one?” asked Jo, with the magnanimity of a martyr.
“You’d come bringing it home under your arm without any paper, just to try me.
I’ll go myself,” answered Amy, whose temper was beginning to fail.
Shrouded in a thick veil and armed with a genteel traveling basket, she departed, feeling that a cool drive would soothe her ruffled spirit and fit her for the labors of the day.
After some delay, the object of her desire was procured, likewise a bottle of dressing to prevent further loss of time at home, and off she drove again, well pleased with her own forethought.
As the omnibus contained only one other passenger, a sleepy old lady, Amy pocketed her veil and beguiled the tedium of the way by trying to find out where all her money had gone to.
So busy was she with her card full of refractory figures that she did not observe a newcomer, who entered without stopping the vehicle, till a masculine voice said, “Good morning, Miss March,” and, looking up, she beheld one of Laurie’s most elegant college friends.
Fervently hoping that he would get out before she did, Amy utterly ignored the basket at her feet, and congratulating herself that she had on her new traveling dress, returned the young man’s greeting with her usual suavity and spirit.
They got on excellently, for Amy’s chief care was soon set at rest by learning that the gentleman would leave first, and she was chatting away in a peculiarly lofty strain, when the old lady got out.
In stumbling to the door, she upset the basket, and—oh horror!—the lobster, in all its vulgar size and brilliancy, was revealed to the highborn eyes of a Tudor!
“By Jove, she’s forgotten her dinner!” cried the unconscious youth, poking the scarlet monster into its place with his cane, and preparing to hand out the basket after the old lady.
“Please don’t—it’s—it’s mine,” murmured Amy, with a face nearly as red as her fish.
It’s an uncommonly fine one, isn’t it?” said Tudor, with great presence of mind, and an air of sober interest that did credit to his breeding.
Amy recovered herself in a breath, set her basket boldly on the seat, and said, laughing, “Don’t you wish you were to have some of the salad he’s going to make, and to see the charming young ladies who are to eat it?” Now that was tact, for two of the ruling foibles of the masculine mind were touched.
The lobster was instantly surrounded by a halo of pleasing reminiscences, and curiosity about ‘the charming young ladies’ diverted his mind from the comical mishap.
“I suppose he’ll laugh and joke over it with Laurie, but I shan’t see them, that’s a comfort,” thought Amy, as Tudor bowed and departed.
She did not mention this meeting at home (though she discovered that, thanks to the upset, her new dress was much damaged by the rivulets of dressing that meandered down the skirt), but went through with the preparations which now seemed more irksome than before, and at twelve o’clock all was ready again.
Feeling that the neighbors were interested in her movements, she wished to efface the memory of yesterday’s failure by a grand success today, so she ordered the ‘cherry bounce’, and drove away in state to meet and escort her guests to the banquet.
It looks hospitable, and I want the poor child to have a good time after all her trouble,” said Mrs.
But after one glance, she retired, with an indescribable expression, for looking quite lost in the big carriage, sat Amy and one young lady.
It will be too absurd to put a luncheon for twelve before a single girl,” cried Jo, hurrying away to the lower regions, too excited to stop even for a laugh.
In came Amy, quite calm and delightfully cordial to the one guest who had kept her promise.
The rest of the family, being of a dramatic turn, played their parts equally well, and Miss Eliott found them a most hilarious set, for it was impossible to control entirely the merriment which possessed them.
The remodeled lunch being gaily partaken of, the studio and garden visited, and art discussed with enthusiasm, Amy ordered a buggy (alas for the elegant cherry-bounce), and drove her friend quietly about the neighborhood till sunset, when ‘the party went out’.
As she came walking in, looking very tired but as composed as ever, she observed that every vestige of the unfortunate fete had disappeared, except a suspicious pucker about the corners of Jo’s mouth.
“You’ve had a loverly afternoon for your drive, dear,” said her mother, as respectfully as if the whole twelve had come.
“Miss Eliott is a very sweet girl, and seemed to enjoy herself, I thought,” observed Beth, with unusual warmth.
I really need some, I have so much company, and I can’t make such delicious stuff as yours,” asked Meg soberly.
I’m the only one here who likes sweet things, and it will mold before I can dispose of it,” answered Amy, thinking with a sigh of the generous store she had laid in for such an end as this.
March mildly observed, “salad was one of the favorite dishes of the ancients, and Evelyn...” Here a general explosion of laughter cut short the ‘history of salads’, to the great surprise of the learned gentleman.
“Bundle everything into a basket and send it to the Hummels.
“I thought I should have died when I saw you two girls rattling about in the what-you-call-it, like two little kernels in a very big nutshell, and Mother waiting in state to receive the throng,” sighed Jo, quite spent with laughter.
“I’m very sorry you were disappointed, dear, but we all did our best to satisfy you,” said Mrs.
March, in a tone full of motherly regret.
I’ve done what I undertook, and it’s not my fault that it failed.
“I thank you all very much for helping me, and I’ll thank you still more if you won’t allude to it for a month, at least.” No one did for several months, but the word ‘fete’ always produced a general smile, and Laurie’s birthday gift to Amy was a tiny coral lobster in the shape of a charm for her watch guard.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN LITERARY LESSONS Fortune suddenly smiled upon Jo, and dropped a good luck penny in her path.
Not a golden penny, exactly, but I doubt if half a million would have given more real happiness then did the little sum that came to her in this wise.
Every few weeks she would shut herself up in her room, put on her scribbling suit, and ‘fall into a vortex’, as she expressed it, writing away at her novel with all her heart and soul, for till that was finished she could find no peace.
Her ‘scribbling suit’ consisted of a black woolen pinafore on which she could wipe her pen at will, and a cap of the same material, adorned with a cheerful red bow, into which she bundled her hair when the decks were cleared for action.
This cap was a beacon to the inquiring eyes of her family, who during these periods kept their distance, merely popping in their heads semi-occasionally to ask, with interest, “Does genius burn, Jo?” They did not always venture even to ask this question, but took an observation of the cap, and judged accordingly.
If this expressive article of dress was drawn low upon the forehead, it was a sign that hard work was going on, in exciting moments it was pushed rakishly askew, and when despair seized the author it was plucked wholly off, and cast upon the floor.
At such times the intruder silently withdrew, and not until the red bow was seen gaily erect upon the gifted brow, did anyone dare address Jo.
She did not think herself a genius by any means, but when the writing fit came on, she gave herself up to it with entire abandon, and led a blissful life, unconscious of want, care, or bad weather, while she sat safe and happy in an imaginary world, full of friends almost as real and dear to her as any in the flesh.
Sleep forsook her eyes, meals stood untasted, day and night were all too short to enjoy the happiness which blessed her only at such times, and made these hours worth living, even if they bore no other fruit.
The divine afflatus usually lasted a week or two, and then she emerged from her ‘vortex’, hungry, sleepy, cross, or despondent.
She was just recovering from one of these attacks when she was prevailed upon to escort Miss Crocker to a lecture, and in return for her virtue was rewarded with a new idea.
They were early, and while Miss Crocker set the heel of her stocking, Jo amused herself by examining the faces of the people who occupied the seat with them.
On her left were two matrons, with massive foreheads and bonnets to match, discussing Women’s Rights and making tatting.
Beyond sat a pair of humble lovers, artlessly holding each other by the hand, a somber spinster eating peppermints out of a paper bag, and an old gentleman taking his preparatory nap behind a yellow bandanna.
On her right, her only neighbor was a studious looking lad absorbed in a newspaper.
“Prime, isn’t it?” asked the boy, as her eye went down the last paragraph of her portion.
“I think you and I could do as well as that if we tried,” returned Jo, amused at his admiration of the trash.
Northbury, under the title of the tale.
“Do you know her?” asked Jo, with sudden interest.
“No, but I read all her pieces, and I know a fellow who works in the office where this paper is printed.” “Do you say she makes a good living out of stories like this?” and Jo looked more respectfully at the agitated group and thickly sprinkled exclamation points that adorned the page.
She knows just what folks like, and gets paid well for writing it.” Here the lecture began, but Jo heard very little of it, for while Professor Sands was prosing away about Belzoni, Cheops, scarabei, and hieroglyphics, she was covertly taking down the address of the paper, and boldly resolving to try for the hundred-dollar prize offered in its columns for a sensational story.
By the time the lecture ended and the audience awoke, she had built up a splendid fortune for herself (not the first founded on paper), and was already deep in the concoction of her story, being unable to decide whether the duel should come before the elopement or after the murder.
She said nothing of her plan at home, but fell to work next day, much to the disquiet of her mother, who always looked a little anxious when ‘genius took to burning’.
Jo had never tried this style before, contenting herself with very mild romances for _The Spread Eagle_.
Her experience and miscellaneous reading were of service now, for they gave her some idea of dramatic effect, and supplied plot, language, and costumes.
Her story was as full of desperation and despair as her limited acquaintance with those uncomfortable emotions enabled her to make it, and having located it in Lisbon, she wound up with an earthquake, as a striking and appropriate denouement.
The manuscript was privately dispatched, accompanied by a note, modestly saying that if the tale didn’t get the prize, which the writer hardly dared expect, she would be very glad to receive any sum it might be considered worth.
Six weeks is a long time to wait, and a still longer time for a girl to keep a secret, but Jo did both, and was just beginning to give up all hope of ever seeing her manuscript again, when a letter arrived which almost took her breath away, for on opening it, a check for a hundred dollars fell into her lap.
A prouder young woman was seldom seen than she, when, having composed herself, she electrified the family by appearing before them with the letter in one hand, the check in the other, announcing that she had won the prize.
Of course there was a great jubilee, and when the story came everyone read and praised it, though after her father had told her that the language was good, the romance fresh and hearty, and the tragedy quite thrilling, he shook his head, and said in his unworldly way...
What will you do with such a fortune?” asked Amy, regarding the magic slip of paper with a reverential eye.
“Send Beth and Mother to the seaside for a month or two,” answered Jo promptly.
To the seaside they went, after much discussion, and though Beth didn’t come home as plump and rosy as could be desired, she was much better, while Mrs.
March declared she felt ten years younger.
So Jo was satisfied with the investment of her prize money, and fell to work with a cheery spirit, bent on earning more of those delightful checks.
She did earn several that year, and began to feel herself a power in the house, for by the magic of a pen, her ‘rubbish’ turned into comforts for them all.
The Duke’s Daughter paid the butcher’s bill, A Phantom Hand put down a new carpet, and the Curse of the Coventrys proved the blessing of the Marches in the way of groceries and gowns.
Wealth is certainly a most desirable thing, but poverty has its sunny side, and one of the sweet uses of adversity is the genuine satisfaction which comes from hearty work of head or hand, and to the inspiration of necessity, we owe half the wise, beautiful, and useful blessings of the world.
Jo enjoyed a taste of this satisfaction, and ceased to envy richer girls, taking great comfort in the knowledge that she could supply her own wants, and need ask no one for a penny.
Little notice was taken of her stories, but they found a market, and encouraged by this fact, she resolved to make a bold stroke for fame and fortune.
Having copied her novel for the fourth time, read it to all her confidential friends, and submitted it with fear and trembling to three publishers, she at last disposed of it, on condition that she would cut it down one third, and omit all the parts which she particularly admired.
“Now I must either bundle it back in to my tin kitchen to mold, pay for printing it myself, or chop it up to suit purchasers and get what I can for it.
Fame is a very good thing to have in the house, but cash is more convenient, so I wish to take the sense of the meeting on this important subject,” said Jo, calling a family council.
Let it wait and ripen,” was her father’s advice, and he practiced what he preached, having waited patiently thirty years for fruit of his own to ripen, and being in no haste to gather it even now when it was sweet and mellow.
“Criticism is the best test of such work, for it will show her both unsuspected merits and faults, and help her to do better next time.
We are too partial, but the praise and blame of outsiders will prove useful, even if she gets but little money.” “Yes,” said Jo, knitting her brows, “that’s just it.
I’ve been fussing over the thing so long, I really don’t know whether it’s good, bad, or indifferent.
It will be a great help to have cool, impartial persons take a look at it, and tell me what they think of it.” “I wouldn’t leave a word out of it.
You’ll spoil it if you do, for the interest of the story is more in the minds than in the actions of the people, and it will be all a muddle if you don’t explain as you go on,” said Meg, who firmly believed that this book was the most remarkable novel ever written.
Allen says, ‘Leave out the explanations, make it brief and dramatic, and let the characters tell the story’,” interrupted Jo, turning to the publisher’s note.
By-and-by, when you’ve got a name, you can afford to digress, and have philosophical and metaphysical people in your novels,” said Amy, who took a strictly practical view of the subject.
“Well,” said Jo, laughing, “if my people are ‘philosophical and metaphysical’, it isn’t my fault, for I know nothing about such things, except what I hear father say, sometimes.
But there was an unconscious emphasis on the last word, and a wistful look in the eyes that never lost their childlike candor, which chilled Jo’s heart for a minute with a forboding fear, and decided her to make her little venture ‘soon’.
So, with Spartan firmness, the young authoress laid her first-born on her table, and chopped it up as ruthlessly as any ogre.
In the hope of pleasing everyone, she took everyone’s advice, and like the old man and his donkey in the fable suited nobody.
Her father liked the metaphysical streak which had unconsciously got into it, so that was allowed to remain though she had her doubts about it.
Her mother thought that there was a trifle too much description.
Out, therefore it came, and with it many necessary links in the story.
Meg admired the tragedy, so Jo piled up the agony to suit her, while Amy objected to the fun, and, with the best intentions in life, Jo quenched the spritly scenes which relieved the somber character of the story.
Then, to complicate the ruin, she cut it down one third, and confidingly sent the poor little romance, like a picked robin, out into the big, busy world to try its fate.
Well, it was printed, and she got three hundred dollars for it, likewise plenty of praise and blame, both so much greater than she expected that she was thrown into a state of bewilderment from which it took her some time to recover.
“You said, Mother, that criticism would help me.
But how can it, when it’s so contradictory that I don’t know whether I’ve written a promising book or broken all the ten commandments?” cried poor Jo, turning over a heap of notices, the perusal of which filled her with pride and joy one minute, wrath and dismay the next.
“This man says, ‘An exquisite book, full of truth, beauty, and earnestness.’ ‘All is sweet, pure, and healthy.’” continued the perplexed authoress.
“The next, ‘The theory of the book is bad, full of morbid fancies, spiritualistic ideas, and unnatural characters.’ Now, as I had no theory of any kind, don’t believe in Spiritualism, and copied my characters from life, I don’t see how this critic can be right.
Another says, ‘It’s one of the best American novels which has appeared for years.’ (I know better than that), and the next asserts that ‘Though it is original, and written with great force and feeling, it is a dangerous book.’ ’Tisn’t!
Some make fun of it, some overpraise, and nearly all insist that I had a deep theory to expound, when I only wrote it for the pleasure and the money.
I wish I’d printed the whole or not at all, for I do hate to be so misjudged.” Her family and friends administered comfort and commendation liberally.
Yet it was a hard time for sensitive, high-spirited Jo, who meant so well and had apparently done so ill.
But it did her good, for those whose opinion had real value gave her the criticism which is an author’s best education, and when the first soreness was over, she could laugh at her poor little book, yet believe in it still, and feel herself the wiser and stronger for the buffeting she had received.
“Not being a genius, like Keats, it won’t kill me,” she said stoutly, “and I’ve got the joke on my side, after all, for the parts that were taken straight out of real life are denounced as impossible and absurd, and the scenes that I made up out of my own silly head are pronounced ‘charmingly natural, tender, and true’.
So I’ll comfort myself with that, and when I’m ready, I’ll up again and take another.” CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT DOMESTIC EXPERIENCES Like most other young matrons, Meg began her married life with the determination to be a model housekeeper.
John should find home a paradise, he should always see a smiling face, should fare sumptuously every day, and never know the loss of a button.
She brought so much love, energy, and cheerfulness to the work that she could not but succeed, in spite of some obstacles.
Her paradise was not a tranquil one, for the little woman fussed, was over-anxious to please, and bustled about like a true Martha, cumbered with many cares.
She was too tired, sometimes, even to smile, John grew dyspeptic after a course of dainty dishes and ungratefully demanded plain fare.
As for buttons, she soon learned to wonder where they went, to shake her head over the carelessness of men, and to threaten to make him sew them on himself, and see if his work would stand impatient and clumsy fingers any better than hers.
They were very happy, even after they discovered that they couldn’t live on love alone.
John did not find Meg’s beauty diminished, though she beamed at him from behind the familiar coffee pot.
Nor did Meg miss any of the romance from the daily parting, when her husband followed up his kiss with the tender inquiry, “Shall I send some veal or mutton for dinner, darling?” The little house ceased to be a glorified bower, but it became a home, and the young couple soon felt that it was a change for the better.
At first they played keep-house, and frolicked over it like children.
Then John took steadily to business, feeling the cares of the head of a family upon his shoulders, and Meg laid by her cambric wrappers, put on a big apron, and fell to work, as before said, with more energy than discretion.
Cornelius’s Receipt Book as if it were a mathematical exercise, working out the problems with patience and care.
Sometimes her family were invited in to help eat up a too bounteous feast of successes, or Lotty would be privately dispatched with a batch of failures, which were to be concealed from all eyes in the convenient stomachs of the little Hummels.
An evening with John over the account books usually produced a temporary lull in the culinary enthusiasm, and a frugal fit would ensue, during which the poor man was put through a course of bread pudding, hash, and warmed-over coffee, which tried his soul, although he bore it with praiseworthy fortitude.
Before the golden mean was found, however, Meg added to her domestic possessions what young couples seldom get on long without, a family jar.
Fired with a housewifely wish to see her storeroom stocked with homemade preserves, she undertook to put up her own currant jelly.
John was requested to order home a dozen or so of little pots and an extra quantity of sugar, for their own currants were ripe and were to be attended to at once.
As John firmly believed that ‘my wife’ was equal to anything, and took a natural pride in her skill, he resolved that she should be gratified, and their only crop of fruit laid by in a most pleasing form for winter use.
Home came four dozen delightful little pots, half a barrel of sugar, and a small boy to pick the currants for her.
With her pretty hair tucked into a little cap, arms bared to the elbow, and a checked apron which had a coquettish look in spite of the bib, the young housewife fell to work, feeling no doubts about her success, for hadn’t she seen Hannah do it hundreds of times?
The array of pots rather amazed her at first, but John was so fond of jelly, and the nice little jars would look so well on the top shelf, that Meg resolved to fill them all, and spent a long day picking, boiling, straining, and fussing over her jelly.
Cornelius, she racked her brain to remember what Hannah did that she left undone, she reboiled, resugared, and restrained, but that dreadful stuff wouldn’t ‘jell’.
She longed to run home, bib and all, and ask Mother to lend her a hand, but John and she had agreed that they would never annoy anyone with their private worries, experiments, or quarrels.
They had laughed over that last word as if the idea it suggested was a most preposterous one, but they had held to their resolve, and whenever they could get on without help they did so, and no one interfered, for Mrs.
So Meg wrestled alone with the refractory sweetmeats all that hot summer day, and at five o’clock sat down in her topsy-turvey kitchen, wrung her bedaubed hands, lifted up her voice and wept.
Now, in the first flush of the new life, she had often said, “My husband shall always feel free to bring a friend home whenever he likes.
I shall always be prepared.
There shall be no flurry, no scolding, no discomfort, but a neat house, a cheerful wife, and a good dinner.
John, dear, never stop to ask my leave, invite whom you please, and be sure of a welcome from me.” How charming that was, to be sure!
John quite glowed with pride to hear her say it, and felt what a blessed thing it was to have a superior wife.
But, although they had had company from time to time, it never happened to be unexpected, and Meg had never had an opportunity to distinguish herself till now.
It always happens so in this vale of tears, there is an inevitability about such things which we can only wonder at, deplore, and bear as we best can.
If John had not forgotten all about the jelly, it really would have been unpardonable in him to choose that day, of all the days in the year, to bring a friend home to dinner unexpectedly.
Congratulating himself that a handsome repast had been ordered that morning, feeling sure that it would be ready to the minute, and indulging in pleasant anticipations of the charming effect it would produce, when his pretty wife came running out to meet him, he escorted his friend to his mansion, with the irrepressible satisfaction of a young host and husband.
It is a world of disappointments, as John discovered when he reached the Dovecote.
The front door usually stood hospitably open.
Now it was not only shut, but locked, and yesterday’s mud still adorned the steps.
The parlor windows were closed and curtained, no picture of the pretty wife sewing on the piazza, in white, with a distracting little bow in her hair, or a bright-eyed hostess, smiling a shy welcome as she greeted her guest.
Nothing of the sort, for not a soul appeared but a sanginary-looking boy asleep under the current bushes.
“I’m afraid something has happened.
Brooke,” said John, alarmed at the silence and solitude.
Scott strolled after him, with a queer look on his face.
He paused discreetly at a distance when Brooke disappeared, but he could both see and hear, and being a bachelor, enjoyed the prospect mightily.
In the kitchen reigned confusion and despair.
One edition of jelly was trickled from pot to pot, another lay upon the floor, and a third was burning gaily on the stove.
Lotty, with Teutonic phlegm, was calmly eating bread and currant wine, for the jelly was still in a hopelessly liquid state, while Mrs.
Brooke, with her apron over her head, sat sobbing dismally.
“My dearest girl, what is the matter?” cried John, rushing in, with awful visions of scalded hands, sudden news of affliction, and secret consternation at the thought of the guest in the garden.
Do come and help me or I shall die!” and the exhausted housewife cast herself upon his breast, giving him a sweet welcome in every sense of the word, for her pinafore had been baptized at the same time as the floor.
Has anything dreadful happened?” asked the anxious John, tenderly kissing the crown of the little cap, which was all askew.
“Yes,” sobbed Meg despairingly.
I can bear anything better than that.
The jelly won’t jell and I don’t know what to do!” John Brooke laughed then as he never dared to laugh afterward, and the derisive Scott smiled involuntarily as he heard the hearty peal, which put the finishing stroke to poor Meg’s woe.
I’ll buy you quarts if you want it, but for heaven’s sake don’t have hysterics, for I’ve brought Jack Scott home to dinner, and...” John got no further, for Meg cast him off, and clasped her hands with a tragic gesture as she fell into a chair, exclaiming in a tone of mingled indignation, reproach, and dismay...
“A man to dinner, and everything in a mess!
I forgot the confounded jelly, but it can’t be helped now,” said John, surveying the prospect with an anxious eye.
“You ought to have sent word, or told me this morning, and you ought to have remembered how busy I was,” continued Meg petulantly, for even turtledoves will peck when ruffled.
I never tried it before, and hang me if I ever do again!” added John, with an aggrieved air.
Where’s the beef and vegetables I sent home, and the pudding you promised?” cried John, rushing to the larder.
“I hadn’t time to cook anything.
John was a mild man, but he was human, and after a long day’s work to come home tired, hungry, and hopeful, to find a chaotic house, an empty table, and a cross wife was not exactly conducive to repose of mind or manner.
He restrained himself however, and the little squall would have blown over, but for one unlucky word.
“It’s a scrape, I acknowledge, but if you will lend a hand, we’ll pull through and have a good time yet.
Don’t cry, dear, but just exert yourself a bit, and fix us up something to eat.
Meg thought it was too cruel to hint about her sad failure, and the last atom of patience vanished as he spoke.
“You must get yourself out of the scrape as you can.
I won’t have anything of the sort in my house.
Take that Scott up to Mother’s, and tell him I’m away, sick, dead, anything.
You won’t have anything else here.” and having delivered her defiance all on one breath, Meg cast away her pinafore and precipitately left the field to bemoan herself in her own room.
What those two creatures did in her absence, she never knew, but Mr.
Scott was not taken ‘up to Mother’s’, and when Meg descended, after they had strolled away together, she found traces of a promiscuous lunch which filled her with horror.
Unfortunately, John didn’t come, not seeing the matter in that light.
He had carried it off as a good joke with Scott, excused his little wife as well as he could, and played the host so hospitably that his friend enjoyed the impromptu dinner, and promised to come again, but John was angry, though he did not show it, he felt that Meg had deserted him in his hour of need.
And Meg must know it.” He had fumed inwardly during the feast, but when the flurry was over and he strolled home after seeing Scott off, a milder mood came over him.
It was hard upon her when she tried so heartily to please me.
I must be patient and teach her.” He hoped she had not gone home—he hated gossip and interference.
For a minute he was ruffled again at the mere thought of it, and then the fear that Meg would cry herself sick softened his heart, and sent him on at a quicker pace, resolving to be calm and kind, but firm, quite firm, and show her where she had failed in her duty to her spouse.
Meg likewise resolved to be ‘calm and kind, but firm’, and show him his duty.
She longed to run to meet him, and beg pardon, and be kissed and comforted, as she was sure of being, but, of course, she did nothing of the sort, and when she saw John coming, began to hum quite naturally, as she rocked and sewed, like a lady of leisure in her best parlor.
John was a little disappointed not to find a tender Niobe, but feeling that his dignity demanded the first apology, he made none, only came leisurely in and laid himself upon the sofa with the singularly relevant remark, “We are going to have a new moon, my dear.” “I’ve no objection,” was Meg’s equally soothing remark.
A few other topics of general interest were introduced by Mr.
Brooke and wet-blanketed by Mrs.
Brooke, and conversation languished.
John went to one window, unfolded his paper, and wrapped himself in it, figuratively speaking.
Meg went to the other window, and sewed as if new rosettes for slippers were among the necessaries of life.
Both looked quite ‘calm and firm’, and both felt desperately uncomfortable.
“Oh, dear,” thought Meg, “married life is very trying, and does need infinite patience as well as love, as Mother says.” The word ‘Mother’ suggested other maternal counsels given long ago, and received with unbelieving protests.
“John is a good man, but he has his faults, and you must learn to see and bear with them, remembering your own.
He is very decided, but never will be obstinate, if you reason kindly, not oppose impatiently.
He is very accurate, and particular about the truth—a good trait, though you call him ‘fussy’.
Never deceive him by look or word, Meg, and he will give you the confidence you deserve, the support you need.
Be careful, be very careful, not to wake his anger against yourself, for peace and happiness depend on keeping his respect.
Watch yourself, be the first to ask pardon if you both err, and guard against the little piques, misunderstandings, and hasty words that often pave the way for bitter sorrow and regret.” These words came back to Meg, as she sat sewing in the sunset, especially the last.
This was the first serious disagreement, her own hasty speeches sounded both silly and unkind, as she recalled them, her own anger looked childish now, and thoughts of poor John coming home to such a scene quite melted her heart.
She put down her work and got up, thinking, “I will be the first to say, ‘Forgive me’”, but he did not seem to hear her.
For a minute she felt as if she really couldn’t do it, then came the thought, “This is the beginning.
I’ll do my part, and have nothing to reproach myself with,” and stooping down, she softly kissed her husband on the forehead.
The penitent kiss was better than a world of words, and John had her on his knee in a minute, saying tenderly...
I never will again!” But he did, oh bless you, yes, hundreds of times, and so did Meg, both declaring that it was the sweetest jelly they ever made, for family peace was preserved in that little family jar.
Scott to dinner by special invitation, and served him up a pleasant feast without a cooked wife for the first course, on which occasion she was so gay and gracious, and made everything go off so charmingly, that Mr.
Scott told John he was a lucky fellow, and shook his head over the hardships of bachelorhood all the way home.
In the autumn, new trials and experiences came to Meg.
Sallie Moffat renewed her friendship, was always running out for a dish of gossip at the little house, or inviting ‘that poor dear’ to come in and spend the day at the big house.
It was pleasant, for in dull weather Meg often felt lonely.
So it naturally fell out that Meg got into the way of gadding and gossiping with her friend.
Sallie was very kind, and often offered her the coveted trifles, but Meg declined them, knowing that John wouldn’t like it, and then this foolish little woman went and did what John disliked even worse.
She knew her husband’s income, and she loved to feel that he trusted her, not only with his happiness, but what some men seem to value more—his money.
She knew where it was, was free to take what she liked, and all he asked was that she should keep account of every penny, pay bills once a month, and remember that she was a poor man’s wife.
But that autumn the serpent got into Meg’s paradise, and tempted her like many a modern Eve, not with apples, but with dress.
It irritated her, but she was ashamed to confess it, and now and then she tried to console herself by buying something pretty, so that Sallie needn’t think she had to economize.
She always felt wicked after it, for the pretty things were seldom necessaries, but then they cost so little, it wasn’t worth worrying about, so the trifles increased unconsciously, and in the shopping excursions she was no longer a passive looker-on.
But the trifles cost more than one would imagine, and when she cast up her accounts at the end of the month the sum total rather scared her.
John was busy that month and left the bills to her, the next month he was absent, but the third he had a grand quarterly settling up, and Meg never forgot it.
A few days before she had done a dreadful thing, and it weighed upon her conscience.
Sallie had been buying silks, and Meg longed for a new one, just a handsome light one for parties, her black silk was so common, and thin things for evening wear were only proper for girls.
John always said what was his was hers, but would he think it right to spend not only the prospective five-and-twenty, but another five-and-twenty out of the household fund?
That was the question.
Sallie had urged her to do it, had offered to lend the money, and with the best intentions in life had tempted Meg beyond her strength.
In an evil moment the shopman held up the lovely, shimmering folds, and said, “A bargain, I assure, you, ma’am.” She answered, “I’ll take it,” and it was cut off and paid for, and Sallie had exulted, and she had laughed as if it were a thing of no consequence, and driven away, feeling as if she had stolen something, and the police were after her.
When she got home, she tried to assuage the pangs of remorse by spreading forth the lovely silk, but it looked less silvery now, didn’t become her, after all, and the words ‘fifty dollars’ seemed stamped like a pattern down each breadth.
She put it away, but it haunted her, not delightfully as a new dress should, but dreadfully like the ghost of a folly that was not easily laid.
The kind, brown eyes looked as if they could be stern, and though he was unusually merry, she fancied he had found her out, but didn’t mean to let her know it.
John had praised her, and was undoing the old pocketbook which they called the ‘bank’, when Meg, knowing that it was quite empty, stopped his hand, saying nervously...
That night he looked as if he would like the fun of quizzing her figures and pretending to be horrified at her extravagance, as he often did, being particularly proud of his prudent wife.
Meg got behind his chair under pretense of smoothing the wrinkles out of his tired forehead, and standing there, she said, with her panic increasing with every word...
“John, dear, I’m ashamed to show you my book, for I’ve really been dreadfully extravagant lately.
I go about so much I must have things, you know, and Sallie advised my getting it, so I did, and my New Year’s money will partly pay for it, but I was sorry after I had done it, for I knew you’d think it wrong in me.” John laughed, and drew her round beside him, saying goodhumoredly, “Don’t go and hide.
“It’s worse than boots, it’s a silk dress,” she said, with the calmness of desperation, for she wanted the worst over.
Mantalini says?” That didn’t sound like John, and she knew he was looking up at her with the straightforward look that she had always been ready to meet and answer with one as frank till now.
She turned the page and her head at the same time, pointing to the sum which would have been bad enough without the fifty, but which was appalling to her with that added.
For a minute the room was very still, then John said slowly—but she could feel it cost him an effort to express no displeasure—. . .
“Well, I don’t know that fifty is much for a dress, with all the furbelows and notions you have to have to finish it off these days.” “It isn’t made or trimmed,” sighed Meg, faintly, for a sudden recollection of the cost still to be incurred quite overwhelmed her.
I try to be contented, but it is hard, and I’m tired of being poor.” The last words were spoken so low she thought he did not hear them, but he did, and they wounded him deeply, for he had denied himself many pleasures for Meg’s sake.
She ran to him and held him close, crying, with repentant tears, “Oh, John, my dear, kind, hard-working boy.
It was so wicked, so untrue and ungrateful, how could I say it!
Oh, how could I say it!” He was very kind, forgave her readily, and did not utter one reproach, but Meg knew that she had done and said a thing which would not be forgotten soon, although he might never allude to it again.
She had promised to love him for better or worse, and then she, his wife, had reproached him with his poverty, after spending his earnings recklessly.
It was dreadful, and the worst of it was John went on so quietly afterward, just as if nothing had happened, except that he stayed in town later, and worked at night when she had gone to cry herself to sleep.
A week of remorse nearly made Meg sick, and the discovery that John had countermanded the order for his new greatcoat reduced her to a state of despair which was pathetic to behold.
He had simply said, in answer to her surprised inquiries as to the change, “I can’t afford it, my dear.” Meg said no more, but a few minutes after he found her in the hall with her face buried in the old greatcoat, crying as if her heart would break.
They had a long talk that night, and Meg learned to love her husband better for his poverty, because it seemed to have made a man of him, given him the strength and courage to fight his own way, and taught him a tender patience with which to bear and comfort the natural longings and failures of those he loved.
Moffat willingly did so, and had the delicacy not to make her a present of it immediately afterward.
Then Meg ordered home the greatcoat, and when John arrived, she put it on, and asked him how he liked her new silk gown.
One can imagine what answer he made, how he received his present, and what a blissful state of things ensued.
John came home early, Meg gadded no more, and that greatcoat was put on in the morning by a very happy husband, and taken off at night by a most devoted little wife.
So the year rolled round, and at midsummer there came to Meg a new experience, the deepest and tenderest of a woman’s life.
Laurie came sneaking into the kitchen of the Dovecote one Saturday, with an excited face, and was received with the clash of cymbals, for Hannah clapped her hands with a saucepan in one and the cover in the other.
Every soul of ’em is upstairs a worshipin’.
We didn’t want no hurrycanes round.
Now you go into the parlor, and I’ll send ’em down to you,” with which somewhat involved reply Hannah vanished, chuckling ecstatically.
Presently Jo appeared, proudly bearing a flannel bundle laid forth upon a large pillow.
Jo’s face was very sober, but her eyes twinkled, and there was an odd sound in her voice of repressed emotion of some sort.
“Shut your eyes and hold out your arms,” she said invitingly.
Laurie backed precipitately into a corner, and put his hands behind him with an imploring gesture.
I shall drop it or smash it, as sure as fate.” “Then you shan’t see your nevvy,” said Jo decidedly, turning as if to go.
Only you must be responsible for damages.” and obeying orders, Laurie heroically shut his eyes while something was put into his arms.
A peal of laughter from Jo, Amy, Mrs.
March, Hannah, and John caused him to open them the next minute, to find himself invested with two babies instead of one.
No wonder they laughed, for the expression of his face was droll enough to convulse a Quaker, as he stood and stared wildly from the unconscious innocents to the hilarious spectators with such dismay that Jo sat down on the floor and screamed.
“Twins, by Jupiter!” was all he said for a minute, then turning to the women with an appealing look that was comically piteous, he added, “Take ’em quick, somebody!
I’m going to laugh, and I shall drop ’em.” Jo rescued his babies, and marched up and down, with one on each arm, as if already initiated into the mysteries of babytending, while Laurie laughed till the tears ran down his cheeks.
I wouldn’t have told you, for I set my heart on surprising you, and I flatter myself I’ve done it,” said Jo, when she got her breath.
“I never was more staggered in my life.
Hold me up, Jo, for upon my life it’s one too many for me,” returned Laurie, regarding the infants with the air of a big, benevolent Newfoundland looking at a pair of infantile kittens.
Aren’t they beauties?” said the proud papa, beaming upon the little red squirmers as if they were unfledged angels.
“Most remarkable children I ever saw.
Which is which?” and Laurie bent like a well-sweep to examine the prodigies.
“I’m afraid they mightn’t like it,” began Laurie, with unusual timidity in such matters.
Do it this minute, sir!” commanded Jo, fearing he might propose a proxy.
Laurie screwed up his face and obeyed with a gingerly peck at each little cheek that produced another laugh, and made the babies squeal.
Now then, young Brooke, pitch into a man of your own size, will you?” cried Laurie, delighted with a poke in the face from a tiny fist, flapping aimlessly about.
“He’s to be named John Laurence, and the girl Margaret, after mother and grandmother.
We shall call her Daisey, so as not to have two Megs, and I suppose the mannie will be Jack, unless we find a better name,” said Amy, with aunt-like interest.
“Name him Demijohn, and call him Demi for short,” said Laurie.
I knew Teddy would do it,” cried Jo clapping her hands.
Teddy certainly had done it that time, for the babies were ‘Daisy’ and ‘Demi’ to the end of the chapter.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE CALLS “Come, Jo, it’s time.” “For what?” “You don’t mean to say you have forgotten that you promised to make half a dozen calls with me today?” “I’ve done a good many rash and foolish things in my life, but I don’t think I ever was mad enough to say I’d make six calls in one day, when a single one upsets me for a week.” “Yes, you did, it was a bargain between us.
I was to finish the crayon of Beth for you, and you were to go properly with me, and return our neighbors’ visits.” “If it was fair, that was in the bond, and I stand to the letter of my bond, Shylock.
There is a pile of clouds in the east, it’s not fair, and I don’t go.” “Now, that’s shirking.
It’s a lovely day, no prospect of rain, and you pride yourself on keeping promises, so be honorable, come and do your duty, and then be at peace for another six months.” At that minute Jo was particularly absorbed in dressmaking, for she was mantua-maker general to the family, and took especial credit to herself because she could use a needle as well as a pen.
It was very provoking to be arrested in the act of a first trying-on, and ordered out to make calls in her best array on a warm July day.
She hated calls of the formal sort, and never made any till Amy compelled her with a bargain, bribe, or promise.
In the present instance there was no escape, and having clashed her scissors rebelliously, while protesting that she smelled thunder, she gave in, put away her work, and taking up her hat and gloves with an air of resignation, told Amy the victim was ready.
“Jo March, you are perverse enough to provoke a saint!
You don’t intend to make calls in that state, I hope,” cried Amy, surveying her with amazement.
I’m neat and cool and comfortable, quite proper for a dusty walk on a warm day.
It doesn’t for me, and furbelows only worry me.” “Oh, dear!” sighed Amy, “now she’s in a contrary fit, and will drive me distracted before I can get her properly ready.
I’m sure it’s no pleasure to me to go today, but it’s a debt we owe society, and there’s no one to pay it but you and me.
I’ll do anything for you, Jo, if you’ll only dress yourself nicely, and come and help me do the civil.
You can talk so well, look so aristocratic in your best things, and behave so beautifully, if you try, that I’m proud of you.
The idea of my being aristocratic and well-bred, and your being afraid to go anywhere alone!
You shall be commander of the expedition, and I’ll obey blindly, will that satisfy you?” said Jo, with a sudden change from perversity to lamblike submission.
Now put on all your best things, and I’ll tell you how to behave at each place, so that you will make a good impression.
I want people to like you, and they would if you’d only try to be a little more agreeable.
It’s becoming, and you look too sober in your plain suit.
Take your light gloves and the embroidered handkerchief.
“I’m perfectly miserable, but if you consider me presentable, I die happy.” “You’re highly satisfactory.
Turn slowly round, and let me get a careful view.” Jo revolved, and Amy gave a touch here and there, then fell back, with her head on one side, observing graciously, “Yes, you’ll do.
Your head is all I could ask, for that white bonnet with the rose is quite ravishing.
Hold back your shoulders, and carry your hands easily, no matter if your gloves do pinch.
It’s simple, but handsome, and those folds over the arm are really artistic.
I like to show my boots, for my feet are pretty, though my nose isn’t.” “You are a thing of beauty and a joy forever,” said Jo, looking through her hand with the air of a connoisseur at the blue feather against the golden hair.
The sweeping style suits you best, and you must learn to trail your skirts gracefully.
You haven’t half buttoned one cuff, do it at once.
You’ll never look finished if you are not careful about the little details, for they make up the pleasing whole.” Jo sighed, and proceeded to burst the buttons off her glove, in doing up her cuff, but at last both were ready, and sailed away, looking as ‘pretty as picters’, Hannah said, as she hung out of the upper window to watch them.
“Now, Jo dear, the Chesters consider themselves very elegant people, so I want you to put on your best deportment.
Don’t make any of your abrupt remarks, or do anything odd, will you?
Just be calm, cool, and quiet, that’s safe and ladylike, and you can easily do it for fifteen minutes,” said Amy, as they approached the first place, having borrowed the white parasol and been inspected by Meg, with a baby on each arm.
My powers are great, as you shall see, so be easy in your mind, my child.” Amy looked relieved, but naughty Jo took her at her word, for during the first call she sat with every limb gracefully composed, every fold correctly draped, calm as a summer sea, cool as a snowbank, and as silent as the sphinx.
Chester alluded to her ‘charming novel’, and the Misses Chester introduced parties, picnics, the opera, and the fashions.
Each and all were answered by a smile, a bow, and a demure “Yes” or “No” with the chill on.
In vain Amy telegraphed the word ‘talk’, tried to draw her out, and administered covert pokes with her foot.
Jo sat as if blandly unconscious of it all, with deportment like Maud’s face, ‘icily regular, splendidly null’.
“What a haughty, uninteresting creature that oldest Miss March is!” was the unfortunately audible remark of one of the ladies, as the door closed upon their guests.
Jo laughed noiselessly all through the hall, but Amy looked disgusted at the failure of her instructions, and very naturally laid the blame upon Jo.
I merely meant you to be properly dignified and composed, and you made yourself a perfect stock and stone.
Try to be sociable at the Lambs’.
Gossip as other girls do, and be interested in dress and flirtations and whatever nonsense comes up.
They move in the best society, are valuable persons for us to know, and I wouldn’t fail to make a good impression there for anything.” “I’ll be agreeable.
I’ll gossip and giggle, and have horrors and raptures over any trifle you like.
I rather enjoy this, and now I’ll imitate what is called ‘a charming girl’.
See if the Lambs don’t say, ‘What a lively, nice creature that Jo March is!” Amy felt anxious, as well she might, for when Jo turned freakish there was no knowing where she would stop.
Amy’s face was a study when she saw her sister skim into the next drawing room, kiss all the young ladies with effusion, beam graciously upon the young gentlemen, and join in the chat with a spirit which amazed the beholder.
Amy was taken possession of by Mrs.
Lamb, with whom she was a favorite, and forced to hear a long account of Lucretia’s last attack, while three delightful young gentlemen hovered near, waiting for a pause when they might rush in and rescue her.
So situated, she was powerless to check Jo, who seemed possessed by a spirit of mischief, and talked away as volubly as the lady.
A knot of heads gathered about her, and Amy strained her ears to hear what was going on, for broken sentences filled her with curiosity, and frequent peals of laughter made her wild to share the fun.
One may imagine her suffering on overhearing fragments of this sort of conversation.
“She rides splendidly.
She used to practice mounting, holding the reins, and sitting straight on an old saddle in a tree.
Now she rides anything, for she doesn’t know what fear is, and the stableman lets her have horses cheap because she trains them to carry ladies so well.
She has such a passion for it, I often tell her if everything else fails, she can be a horsebreaker, and get her living so.” At this awful speech Amy contained herself with difficulty, for the impression was being given that she was rather a fast young lady, which was her especial aversion.
For the old lady was in the middle of her story, and long before it was done, Jo was off again, making more droll revelations and committing still more fearful blunders.
Nice animal for a pleasure party, wasn’t it?” “Which did she choose?” asked one of the laughing gentlemen, who enjoyed the subject.
She heard of a young horse at the farm house over the river, and though a lady had never ridden him, she resolved to try, because he was handsome and spirited.
Her struggles were really pathetic.
My dear creature, she actually rowed it over the river, put it on her head, and marched up to the barn to the utter amazement of the old man!” “Did she ride the horse?” “Of course she did, and had a capital time.
I expected to see her brought home in fragments, but she managed him perfectly, and was the life of the party.” “Well, I call that plucky!” and young Mr.
Lamb turned an approving glance upon Amy, wondering what his mother could be saying to make the girl look so red and uncomfortable.
She was still redder and more uncomfortable a moment after, when a sudden turn in the conversation introduced the subject of dress.
One of the young ladies asked Jo where she got the pretty drab hat she wore to the picnic and stupid Jo, instead of mentioning the place where it was bought two years ago, must needs answer with unnecessary frankness, “Oh, Amy painted it.
It’s a great comfort to have an artistic sister.” “Isn’t that an original idea?” cried Miss Lamb, who found Jo great fun.
“That’s nothing compared to some of her brilliant performances.
Why, she wanted a pair of blue boots for Sallie’s party, so she just painted her soiled white ones the loveliest shade of sky blue you ever saw, and they looked exactly like satin,” added Jo, with an air of pride in her sister’s accomplishments that exasperated Amy till she felt that it would be a relief to throw her cardcase at her.
“We read a story of yours the other day, and enjoyed it very much,” observed the elder Miss Lamb, wishing to compliment the literary lady, who did not look the character just then, it must be confessed.
Any mention of her ‘works’ always had a bad effect upon Jo, who either grew rigid and looked offended, or changed the subject with a brusque remark, as now.
I write that rubbish because it sells, and ordinary people like it.
Are you going to New York this winter?” As Miss Lamb had ‘enjoyed’ the story, this speech was not exactly grateful or complimentary.
The minute it was made Jo saw her mistake, but fearing to make the matter worse, suddenly remembered that it was for her to make the first move toward departure, and did so with an abruptness that left three people with half-finished sentences in their mouths.
Lamb, but if you should come, I don’t think I shall have the heart to send you away.” Jo said this with such a droll imitation of May Chester’s gushing style that Amy got out of the room as rapidly as possible, feeling a strong desire to laugh and cry at the same time.
“Didn’t I do well?” asked Jo, with a satisfied air as they walked away.
“Nothing could have been worse,” was Amy’s crushing reply.
“What possessed you to tell those stories about my saddle, and the hats and boots, and all the rest of it?” “Why, it’s funny, and amuses people.
They know we are poor, so it’s no use pretending that we have grooms, buy three or four hats a season, and have things as easy and fine as they do.” “You needn’t go and tell them all our little shifts, and expose our poverty in that perfectly unnecessary way.
You haven’t a bit of proper pride, and never will learn when to hold your tongue and when to speak,” said Amy despairingly.
Poor Jo looked abashed, and silently chafed the end of her nose with the stiff handkerchief, as if performing a penance for her misdemeanors.
“How shall I behave here?” she asked, as they approached the third mansion.
The boys are at home, and we’ll have a comfortable time.
Goodness knows I need a little change, for elegance has a bad effect upon my constitution,” returned Jo gruffly, being disturbed by her failure to suit.
An enthusiastic welcome from three big boys and several pretty children speedily soothed her ruffled feelings, and leaving Amy to entertain the hostess and Mr.
Tudor, who happened to be calling likewise, Jo devoted herself to the young folks and found the change refreshing.
Leaving her sister to her own devices, Amy proceeded to enjoy herself to her heart’s content.
But even the satisfaction of talking with a distant connection of the British nobility did not render Amy forgetful of time, and when the proper number of minutes had passed, she reluctantly tore herself from this aristocratic society, and looked about for Jo, fervently hoping that her incorrigible sister would not be found in any position which should bring disgrace upon the name of March.
It might have been worse, but Amy considered it bad.
For Jo sat on the grass, with an encampment of boys about her, and a dirty-footed dog reposing on the skirt of her state and festival dress, as she related one of Laurie’s pranks to her admiring audience.
One small child was poking turtles with Amy’s cherished parasol, a second was eating gingerbread over Jo’s best bonnet, and a third playing ball with her gloves, but all were enjoying themselves, and when Jo collected her damaged property to go, her escort accompanied her, begging her to come again, “It was such fun to hear about Laurie’s larks.” “Capital boys, aren’t they?
I feel quite young and brisk again after that.” said Jo, strolling along with her hands behind her, partly from habit, partly to conceal the bespattered parasol.
Tudor?” asked Amy, wisely refraining from any comment upon Jo’s dilapidated appearance.
“Don’t like him, he puts on airs, snubs his sisters, worries his father, and doesn’t speak respectfully of his mother.
Laurie says he is fast, and I don’t consider him a desirable acquaintance, so I let him alone.” “You might treat him civilly, at least.
You gave him a cool nod, and just now you bowed and smiled in the politest way to Tommy Chamberlain, whose father keeps a grocery store.
If you had just reversed the nod and the bow, it would have been right,” said Amy reprovingly.
“No, it wouldn’t,” returned Jo, “I neither like, respect, nor admire Tudor, though his grandfather’s uncle’s nephew’s niece was a third cousin to a lord.
I think well of him, and like to show that I do, for he is a gentleman in spite of the brown paper parcels.” “It’s no use trying to argue with you,” began Amy.
“Not the least, my dear,” interrupted Jo, “so let us look amiable, and drop a card here, as the Kings are evidently out, for which I’m deeply grateful.” The family cardcase having done its duty the girls walked on, and Jo uttered another thanksgiving on reaching the fifth house, and being told that the young ladies were engaged.
We can run down there any time, and it’s really a pity to trail through the dust in our best bibs and tuckers, when we are tired and cross.” “Speak for yourself, if you please.
Aunt March likes to have us pay her the compliment of coming in style, and making a formal call.
It’s a little thing to do, but it gives her pleasure, and I don’t believe it will hurt your things half so much as letting dirty dogs and clumping boys spoil them.
Stoop down, and let me take the crumbs off of your bonnet.” “What a good girl you are, Amy!” said Jo, with a repentant glance from her own damaged costume to that of her sister, which was fresh and spotless still.
I think of them, but it takes too much time to do them, so I wait for a chance to confer a great favor, and let the small ones slip, but they tell best in the end, I fancy.” Amy smiled and was mollified at once, saying with a maternal air, “Women should learn to be agreeable, particularly poor ones, for they have no other way of repaying the kindnesses they receive.
If you’d remember that, and practice it, you’d be better liked than I am, because there is more of you.” “I’m a crotchety old thing, and always shall be, but I’m willing to own that you are right, only it’s easier for me to risk my life for a person than to be pleasant to him when I don’t feel like it.
It’s a great misfortune to have such strong likes and dislikes, isn’t it?” “It’s a greater not to be able to hide them.
Neither are you, and there is no use in making yourself disagreeable because he is.” “But I think girls ought to show when they disapprove of young men, and how can they do it except by their manners?
Preaching does not do any good, as I know to my sorrow, since I’ve had Teddie to manage.
But there are many little ways in which I can influence him without a word, and I say we ought to do it to others if we can.” “Teddy is a remarkable boy, and can’t be taken as a sample of other boys,” said Amy, in a tone of solemn conviction, which would have convulsed the ‘remarkable boy’ if he had heard it.
That’s a nice sort of morality.” “I can’t argue about it, I only know that it’s the way of the world, and people who set themselves against it only get laughed at for their pains.
I don’t like reformers, and I hope you never try to be one.” “I do like them, and I shall be one if I can, for in spite of the laughing the world would never get on without them.
You will get on the best, but I shall have the liveliest time of it.
I should rather enjoy the brickbats and hooting, I think.” “Well, compose yourself now, and don’t worry Aunt with your new ideas.” “I’ll try not to, but I’m always possessed to burst out with some particularly blunt speech or revolutionary sentiment before her.
It’s my doom, and I can’t help it.” They found Aunt Carrol with the old lady, both absorbed in some very interesting subject, but they dropped it as the girls came in, with a conscious look which betrayed that they had been talking about their nieces.
Jo was not in a good humor, and the perverse fit returned, but Amy, who had virtuously done her duty, kept her temper and pleased everybody, was in a most angelic frame of mind.
This amiable spirit was felt at once, and both aunts ‘my deared’ her affectionately, looking what they afterward said emphatically, “That child improves every day.” “Are you going to help about the fair, dear?” asked Mrs.
Carrol, as Amy sat down beside her with the confiding air elderly people like so well in the young.
Chester asked me if I would, and I offered to tend a table, as I have nothing but my time to give.” “I’m not,” put in Jo decidedly.
“I hate to be patronized, and the Chesters think it’s a great favor to allow us to help with their highly connected fair.
I wonder you consented, Amy, they only want you to work.” “I am willing to work.
It’s for the freedmen as well as the Chesters, and I think it very kind of them to let me share the labor and the fun.
Patronage does not trouble me when it is well meant.” “Quite right and proper.
I like your grateful spirit, my dear.
It’s a pleasure to help people who appreciate our efforts.
Some do not, and that is trying,” observed Aunt March, looking over her spectacles at Jo, who sat apart, rocking herself, with a somewhat morose expression.
If Jo had only known what a great happiness was wavering in the balance for one of them, she would have turned dove-like in a minute, but unfortunately, we don’t have windows in our breasts, and cannot see what goes on in the minds of our friends.
By her next speech, Jo deprived herself of several years of pleasure, and received a timely lesson in the art of holding her tongue.
I’d rather do everything for myself, and be perfectly independent.” “Ahem!” coughed Aunt Carrol softly, with a look at Aunt March.
Mercifully unconscious of what she had done, Jo sat with her nose in the air, and a revolutionary aspect which was anything but inviting.
“Pretty well, thanks to Aunt March, who lets Esther talk to me as often as I like,” replied Amy, with a grateful look, which caused the old lady to smile affably.
“How are you about languages?” asked Mrs.
I’m very stupid about studying anything, can’t bear French, it’s such a slippery, silly sort of language,” was the brusque reply.
I’m very well, and mean to do great things next winter, so that I may be ready for Rome, whenever that joyful time arrives.” “Good girl!
You deserve to go, and I’m sure you will some day,” said Aunt March, with an approving pat on the head, as Amy picked up her ball for her.
Crosspatch, draw the latch, Sit by the fire and spin, squalled Polly, bending down from his perch on the back of her chair to peep into Jo’s face, with such a comical air of impertinent inquiry that it was impossible to help laughing.
“Most observing bird,” said the old lady.
“Come and take a walk, my dear?” cried Polly, hopping toward the china closet, with a look suggestive of a lump of sugar.
Come Amy.” and Jo brought the visit to an end, feeling more strongly than ever that calls did have a bad effect upon her constitution.
She shook hands in a gentlemanly manner, but Amy kissed both the aunts, and the girls departed, leaving behind them the impression of shadow and sunshine, which impression caused Aunt March to say, as they vanished...
I’ll supply the money.” and Aunt Carrol to reply decidedly, “I certainly will, if her father and mother consent.” CHAPTER THIRTY CONSEQUENCES Mrs.
Chester’s fair was so very elegant and select that it was considered a great honor by the young ladies of the neighborhood to be invited to take a table, and everyone was much interested in the matter.
Amy was asked, but Jo was not, which was fortunate for all parties, as her elbows were decidedly akimbo at this period of her life, and it took a good many hard knocks to teach her how to get on easily.
The ‘haughty, uninteresting creature’ was let severely alone, but Amy’s talent and taste were duly complimented by the offer of the art table, and she exerted herself to prepare and secure appropriate and valuable contributions to it.
Everything went on smoothly till the day before the fair opened, then there occurred one of the little skirmishes which it is almost impossible to avoid, when some five-and-twenty women, old and young, with all their private piques and prejudices, try to work together.
May Chester was rather jealous of Amy because the latter was a greater favorite than herself, and just at this time several trifling circumstances occurred to increase the feeling.
Amy’s dainty pen-and-ink work entirely eclipsed May’s painted vases—that was one thorn.
Then the all conquering Tudor had danced four times with Amy at a late party and only once with May—that was thorn number two.
But the chief grievance that rankled in her soul, and gave an excuse for her unfriendly conduct, was a rumor which some obliging gossip had whispered to her, that the March girls had made fun of her at the Lambs’.
All the blame of this should have fallen upon Jo, for her naughty imitation had been too lifelike to escape detection, and the frolicsome Lambs had permitted the joke to escape.
No hint of this had reached the culprits, however, and Amy’s dismay can be imagined, when, the very evening before the fair, as she was putting the last touches to her pretty table, Mrs.
Chester, who, of course, resented the supposed ridicule of her daughter, said, in a bland tone, but with a cold look...
As this is the most prominent, and some say the most attractive table of all, and they are the chief getters-up of the fair, it is thought best for them to take this place.
I’m sorry, but I know you are too sincerely interested in the cause to mind a little personal disappointment, and you shall have another table if you like.” Mrs.
Chester fancied beforehand that it would be easy to deliver this little speech, but when the time came, she found it rather difficult to utter it naturally, with Amy’s unsuspicious eyes looking straight at her full of surprise and trouble.
Amy felt that there was something behind this, but could not guess what, and said quietly, feeling hurt, and showing that she did, “Perhaps you had rather I took no table at all?” “Now, my dear, don’t have any ill feeling, I beg.
It’s merely a matter of expediency, you see, my girls will naturally take the lead, and this table is considered their proper place.
I think it very appropriate to you, and feel very grateful for your efforts to make it so pretty, but we must give up our private wishes, of course, and I will see that you have a good place elsewhere.
The little girls undertook it, but they are discouraged.
You could make a charming thing of it, and the flower table is always attractive you know.” “Especially to gentlemen,” added May, with a look which enlightened Amy as to one cause of her sudden fall from favor.
She colored angrily, but took no other notice of that girlish sarcasm, and answered with unexpected amiability...
I’ll give up my place here at once, and attend to the flowers, if you like.” “You can put your own things on your own table, if you prefer,” began May, feeling a little conscience-stricken, as she looked at the pretty racks, the painted shells, and quaint illuminations Amy had so carefully made and so gracefully arranged.
“Oh, certainly, if they are in your way,” and sweeping her contributions into her apron, pell-mell, she walked off, feeling that herself and her works of art had been insulted past forgiveness.
Oh, dear, I wish I hadn’t asked you to speak, Mama,” said May, looking disconsolately at the empty spaces on her table.
“Girls’ quarrels are soon over,” returned her mother, feeling a trifle ashamed of her own part in this one, as well she might.
The little girls hailed Amy and her treasures with delight, which cordial reception somewhat soothed her perturbed spirit, and she fell to work, determined to succeed florally, if she could not artistically.
But everything seemed against her.
Everyone was too busy with their own affairs to help her, and the little girls were only hindrances, for the dears fussed and chattered like so many magpies, making a great deal of confusion in their artless efforts to preserve the most perfect order.
The evergreen arch wouldn’t stay firm after she got it up, but wiggled and threatened to tumble down on her head when the hanging baskets were filled.
She bruised her hands with hammering, and got cold working in a draft, which last affliction filled her with apprehensions for the morrow.
Any girl reader who has suffered like afflictions will sympathize with poor Amy and wish her well through her task.
There was great indignation at home when she told her story that evening.
Beth declared she wouldn’t go to the fair at all, and Jo demanded why she didn’t take all her pretty things and leave those mean people to get on without her.
They will feel that more than angry speeches or huffy actions, won’t they, Marmee?” “That’s the right spirit, my dear.
A kiss for a blow is always best, though it’s not very easy to give it sometimes,” said her mother, with the air of one who had learned the difference between preaching and practicing.
In spite of various very natural temptations to resent and retaliate, Amy adhered to her resolution all the next day, bent on conquering her enemy by kindness.
She began well, thanks to a silent reminder that came to her unexpectedly, but most opportunely.
As she arranged her table that morning, while the little girls were in the anteroom filling the baskets, she took up her pet production, a little book, the antique cover of which her father had found among his treasures, and in which on leaves of vellum she had beautifully illuminated different texts.
As she turned the pages rich in dainty devices with very pardonable pride, her eye fell upon one verse that made her stop and think.
Amy stood a minute, turning the leaves in her hand, reading on each some sweet rebuke for all heartburnings and uncharitableness of spirit.
Many wise and true sermons are preached us every day by unconscious ministers in street, school, office, or home.
Amy’s conscience preached her a little sermon from that text, then and there, and she did what many of us do not always do, took the sermon to heart, and straightway put it in practice.
A group of girls were standing about May’s table, admiring the pretty things, and talking over the change of saleswomen.
They dropped their voices, but Amy knew they were speaking of her, hearing one side of the story and judging accordingly.
It was not pleasant, but a better spirit had come over her, and presently a chance offered for proving it.
She heard May say sorrowfully...
The table was just complete then.
Now it’s spoiled.” “I dare say she’d put them back if you asked her,” suggested someone.
“How could I after all the fuss?” began May, but she did not finish, for Amy’s voice came across the hall, saying pleasantly...
I was just thinking I’d offer to put them back, for they belong to your table rather than mine.
Here they are, please take them, and forgive me if I was hasty in carrying them away last night.” As she spoke, Amy returned her contribution, with a nod and a smile, and hurried away again, feeling that it was easier to do a friendly thing than it was to stay and be thanked for it.
May’s answer was inaudible, but another young lady, whose temper was evidently a little soured by making lemonade, added, with a disagreeable laugh, “Very lovely, for she knew she wouldn’t sell them at her own table.” Now, that was hard.
When we make little sacrifices we like to have them appreciated, at least, and for a minute Amy was sorry she had done it, feeling that virtue was not always its own reward.
But it is, as she presently discovered, for her spirits began to rise, and her table to blossom under her skillful hands, the girls were very kind, and that one little act seemed to have cleared the atmosphere amazingly.
It was a very long day and a hard one for Amy, as she sat behind her table, often quite alone, for the little girls deserted very soon.
Few cared to buy flowers in summer, and her bouquets began to droop long before night.
The art table was the most attractive in the room.
There was a crowd about it all day long, and the tenders were constantly flying to and fro with important faces and rattling money boxes.
Amy often looked wistfully across, longing to be there, where she felt at home and happy, instead of in a corner with nothing to do.
It might seem no hardship to some of us, but to a pretty, blithe young girl, it was not only tedious, but very trying, and the thought of Laurie and his friends made it a real martyrdom.
She did not go home till night, and then she looked so pale and quiet that they knew the day had been a hard one, though she made no complaint, and did not even tell what she had done.
Beth helped her dress, and made a charming little wreath for her hair, while Jo astonished her family by getting herself up with unusual care, and hinting darkly that the tables were about to be turned.
“Don’t do anything rude, pray Jo; I won’t have any fuss made, so let it all pass and behave yourself,” begged Amy, as she departed early, hoping to find a reinforcement of flowers to refresh her poor little table.
“I merely intend to make myself entrancingly agreeable to every one I know, and to keep them in your corner as long as possible.
Teddy and his boys will lend a hand, and we’ll have a good time yet.” returned Jo, leaning over the gate to watch for Laurie.
Presently the familiar tramp was heard in the dusk, and she ran out to meet him.
“Is that my boy?” “As sure as this is my girl!” and Laurie tucked her hand under his arm with the air of a man whose every wish was gratified.
“Oh, Teddy, such doings!” and Jo told Amy’s wrongs with sisterly zeal.
“A flock of our fellows are going to drive over by-and-by, and I’ll be hanged if I don’t make them buy every flower she’s got, and camp down before her table afterward,” said Laurie, espousing her cause with warmth.
I don’t wish to be unjust or suspicious, but I shouldn’t wonder if they never came at all.
When people do one mean thing they are very likely to do another,” observed Jo in a disgusted tone.
Don’t we always go halves in everything?” began Laurie, in the tone that always made Jo turn thorny.
“Gracious, I hope not!
But we mustn’t stand philandering here.
Then the March family turned out en masse, and Jo exerted herself to some purpose, for people not only came, but stayed, laughing at her nonsense, admiring Amy’s taste, and apparently enjoying themselves very much.
Laurie and his friends gallantly threw themselves into the breach, bought up the bouquets, encamped before the table, and made that corner the liveliest spot in the room.
Amy was in her element now, and out of gratitude, if nothing more, was as spritely and gracious as possible, coming to the conclusion, about that time, that virtue was its own reward, after all.
Jo behaved herself with exemplary propriety, and when Amy was happily surrounded by her guard of honor, Jo circulated about the Hall, picking up various bits of gossip, which enlightened her upon the subject of the Chester change of base.
She reproached herself for her share of the ill feeling and resolved to exonerate Amy as soon as possible.
She also discovered what Amy had done about the things in the morning, and considered her a model of magnanimity.
“Tucked away out of sight, I dare say,” thought Jo, who could forgive her own wrongs, but hotly resented any insult offered her family.
How does Amy get on?” asked May with a conciliatory air, for she wanted to show that she also could be generous.
“She has sold everything she had that was worth selling, and now she is enjoying herself.
The flower table is always attractive, you know, ‘especially to gentlemen’.” Jo couldn’t resist giving that little slap, but May took it so meekly she regretted it a minute after, and fell to praising the great vases, which still remained unsold.
“Is Amy’s illumination anywhere about?
“Everything of Amy’s sold long ago.
I took care that the right people saw them, and they made a nice little sum of money for us,” returned May, who had overcome sundry small temptations, as well as Amy had, that day.
Much gratified, Jo rushed back to tell the good news, and Amy looked both touched and surprised by the report of May’s word and manner.
“Now, gentlemen, I want you to go and do your duty by the other tables as generously as you have by mine, especially the art table,” she said, ordering out ‘Teddy’s own’, as the girls called the college friends.
“‘Charge, Chester, charge!’ is the motto for that table, but do your duty like men, and you’ll get your money’s worth of art in every sense of the word,” said the irrepressible Jo, as the devoted phalanx prepared to take the field.
“To hear is to obey, but March is fairer far than May,” said little Parker, making a frantic effort to be both witty and tender, and getting promptly quenched by Laurie, who said...
“Very well, my son, for a small boy!” and walked him off, with a paternal pat on the head.
“Buy the vases,” whispered Amy to Laurie, as a final heaping of coals of fire on her enemy’s head.
Laurence not only bought the vases, but pervaded the hall with one under each arm.
The other gentlemen speculated with equal rashness in all sorts of frail trifles, and wandered helplessly about afterward, burdened with wax flowers, painted fans, filigree portfolios, and other useful and appropriate purchases.
Aunt Carrol was there, heard the story, looked pleased, and said something to Mrs.
March in a corner, which made the latter lady beam with satisfaction, and watch Amy with a face full of mingled pride and anxiety, though she did not betray the cause of her pleasure till several days later.
The fair was pronounced a success, and when May bade Amy goodnight, she did not gush as usual, but gave her an affectionate kiss, and a look which said ‘forgive and forget’.
That satisfied Amy, and when she got home she found the vases paraded on the parlor chimney piece with a great bouquet in each.
“The reward of merit for a magnanimous March,” as Laurie announced with a flourish.
“You’ve a deal more principle and generosity and nobleness of character than I ever gave you credit for, Amy.
You’ve behaved sweetly, and I respect you with all my heart,” said Jo warmly, as they brushed their hair together late that night.
It must have been dreadfully hard, after working so long and setting your heart on selling your own pretty things.
You laugh at me when I say I want to be a lady, but I mean a true gentlewoman in mind and manners, and I try to do it as far as I know how.
I can’t explain exactly, but I want to be above the little meannesses and follies and faults that spoil so many women.
I’m far from it now, but I do my best, and hope in time to be what Mother is.” Amy spoke earnestly, and Jo said, with a cordial hug, “I understand now what you mean, and I’ll never laugh at you again.
You are getting on faster than you think, and I’ll take lessons of you in true politeness, for you’ve learned the secret, I believe.
Try away, deary, you’ll get your reward some day, and no one will be more delighted than I shall.” A week later Amy did get her reward, and poor Jo found it hard to be delighted.
March’s face was illuminated to such a degree when she read it that Jo and Beth, who were with her, demanded what the glad tidings were.
“Aunt Carrol is going abroad next month, and wants...” “Me to go with her!” burst in Jo, flying out of her chair in an uncontrollable rapture.
It would do me so much good, and be so altogether splendid.
I must go!” “I’m afraid it’s impossible, Jo.
Aunt says Amy, decidedly, and it is not for us to dictate when she offers such a favor.” “It’s always so.
It isn’t fair, oh, it isn’t fair!” cried Jo passionately.
When Aunt spoke to me the other day, she regretted your blunt manners and too independent spirit, and here she writes, as if quoting something you had said—‘I planned at first to ask Jo, but as ‘favors burden her’, and she ‘hates French’, I think I won’t venture to invite her.
Amy is more docile, will make a good companion for Flo, and receive gratefully any help the trip may give her.” “Oh, my tongue, my abominable tongue!
Why can’t I learn to keep it quiet?” groaned Jo, remembering words which had been her undoing.
When she had heard the explanation of the quoted phrases, Mrs.
March said sorrowfully...
“I wish you could have gone, but there is no hope of it this time, so try to bear it cheerfully, and don’t sadden Amy’s pleasure by reproaches or regrets.” “I’ll try,” said Jo, winking hard as she knelt down to pick up the basket she had joyfully upset.
“I’ll take a leaf out of her book, and try not only to seem glad, but to be so, and not grudge her one minute of happiness.
But it won’t be easy, for it is a dreadful disappointment,” and poor Jo bedewed the little fat pincushion she held with several very bitter tears.
“Jo, dear, I’m very selfish, but I couldn’t spare you, and I’m glad you are not going quite yet,” whispered Beth, embracing her, basket and all, with such a clinging touch and loving face that Jo felt comforted in spite of the sharp regret that made her want to box her own ears, and humbly beg Aunt Carrol to burden her with this favor, and see how gratefully she would bear it.
By the time Amy came in, Jo was able to take her part in the family jubilation, not quite as heartily as usual, perhaps, but without repinings at Amy’s good fortune.
The young lady herself received the news as tidings of great joy, went about in a solemn sort of rapture, and began to sort her colors and pack her pencils that evening, leaving such trifles as clothes, money, and passports to those less absorbed in visions of art than herself.
“It isn’t a mere pleasure trip to me, girls,” she said impressively, as she scraped her best palette.
“It will decide my career, for if I have any genius, I shall find it out in Rome, and will do something to prove it.” “Suppose you haven’t?” said Jo, sewing away, with red eyes, at the new collars which were to be handed over to Amy.
“Then I shall come home and teach drawing for my living,” replied the aspirant for fame, with philosophic composure.
But she made a wry face at the prospect, and scratched away at her palette as if bent on vigorous measures before she gave up her hopes.
“Your predictions sometimes come to pass, but I don’t believe that one will.
I’m sure I wish it would, for if I can’t be an artist myself, I should like to be able to help those who are,” said Amy, smiling, as if the part of Lady Bountiful would suit her better than that of a poor drawing teacher.
“If you wish it you’ll have it, for your wishes are always granted—mine never.” “Would you like to go?” asked Amy, thoughtfully patting her nose with her knife.
I’ll remind you of your promise when that joyful day comes, if it ever does,” returned Jo, accepting the vague but magnificent offer as gratefully as she could.
There was not much time for preparation, and the house was in a ferment till Amy was off.
Jo bore up very well till the last flutter of blue ribbon vanished, when she retired to her refuge, the garret, and cried till she couldn’t cry any more.
Amy likewise bore up stoutly till the steamer sailed.
Then just as the gangway was about to be withdrawn, it suddenly came over her that a whole ocean was soon to roll between her and those who loved her best, and she clung to Laurie, the last lingerer, saying with a sob...
“Oh, take care of them for me, and if anything should happen...” “I will, dear, I will, and if anything happens, I’ll come and comfort you,” whispered Laurie, little dreaming that he would be called upon to keep his word.
So Amy sailed away to find the Old World, which is always new and beautiful to young eyes, while her father and friend watched her from the shore, fervently hoping that none but gentle fortunes would befall the happy-hearted girl, who waved her hand to them till they could see nothing but the summer sunshine dazzling on the sea.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE OUR FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT London Dearest People, Here I really sit at a front window of the Bath Hotel, Piccadilly.
It’s not a fashionable place, but Uncle stopped here years ago, and won’t go anywhere else.
I sent a line from Halifax, when I felt pretty miserable, but after that I got on delightfully, seldom ill, on deck all day, with plenty of pleasant people to amuse me.
Everyone was very kind to me, especially the officers.
Don’t laugh, Jo, gentlemen really are very necessary aboard ship, to hold on to, or to wait upon one, and as they have nothing to do, it’s a mercy to make them useful, otherwise they would smoke themselves to death, I’m afraid.
Such walks on deck, such sunsets, such splendid air and waves!
It was almost as exciting as riding a fast horse, when we went rushing on so grandly.
As for Jo, she would have gone up and sat on the maintop jib, or whatever the high thing is called, made friends with the engineers, and tooted on the captain’s speaking trumpet, she’d have been in such a state of rapture.
It was all heavenly, but I was glad to see the Irish coast, and found it very lovely, so green and sunny, with brown cabins here and there, ruins on some of the hills, and gentlemen’s countryseats in the valleys, with deer feeding in the parks.
It was early in the morning, but I didn’t regret getting up to see it, for the bay was full of little boats, the shore so picturesque, and a rosy sky overhead.
At Queenstown one of my new acquaintances left us, Mr.
Lennox, and when I said something about the Lakes of Killarney, he sighed, and sung, with a look at me...
She lives on the banks of Killarney; From the glance of her eye, Shun danger and fly, For fatal’s the glance of Kate Kearney.” Wasn’t that nonsensical?
We only stopped at Liverpool a few hours.
Uncle rushed out and bought a pair of dogskin gloves, some ugly, thick shoes, and an umbrella, and got shaved _à la_ mutton chop, the first thing.
Then he flattered himself that he looked like a true Briton, but the first time he had the mud cleaned off his shoes, the little bootblack knew that an American stood in them, and said, with a grin, “There yer har, sir.
I’ve given ’em the latest Yankee shine.” It amused Uncle immensely.
He got his friend Ward, who came on with us, to order a bouquet for me, and the first thing I saw in my room was a lovely one, with “Robert Lennox’s compliments,” on the card.
The trip was like riding through a long picture gallery, full of lovely landscapes.
The farmhouses were my delight, with thatched roofs, ivy up to the eaves, latticed windows, and stout women with rosy children at the doors.
The very cattle looked more tranquil than ours, as they stood knee-deep in clover, and the hens had a contented cluck, as if they never got nervous like Yankee biddies.
So was Flo, and we kept bouncing from one side to the other, trying to see everything while we were whisking along at the rate of sixty miles an hour.
Amy, flying up—“Oh, that must be Kenilworth, that gray place among the trees!” Flo, darting to my window—“How sweet!
We must go there sometime, won’t we Papa?” Uncle, calmly admiring his boots—“No, my dear, not unless you want beer, that’s a brewery.” A pause—then Flo cried out, “Bless me, there’s a gallows and a man going up.” “Where, where?” shrieks Amy, staring out at two tall posts with a crossbeam and some dangling chains.
“A colliery,” remarks Uncle, with a twinkle of the eye.
“See, Papa, aren’t they pretty?” added Flo sentimentally.
“Geese, young ladies,” returns Uncle, in a tone that keeps us quiet till Flo settles down to enjoy the _Flirtations of Captain Cavendish_, and I have the scenery all to myself.
Of course it rained when we got to London, and there was nothing to be seen but fog and umbrellas.
We rested, unpacked, and shopped a little between the showers.
A white hat and blue feather, a muslin dress to match, and the loveliest mantle you ever saw.
Shopping in Regent Street is perfectly splendid.
Things seem so cheap, nice ribbons only sixpence a yard.
Flo and I, for the fun of it, ordered a hansom cab, while Aunt and Uncle were out, and went for a drive, though we learned afterward that it wasn’t the thing for young ladies to ride in them alone.
For when we were shut in by the wooden apron, the man drove so fast that Flo was frightened, and told me to stop him, but he was up outside behind somewhere, and I couldn’t get at him.
He didn’t hear me call, nor see me flap my parasol in front, and there we were, quite helpless, rattling away, and whirling around corners at a breakneck pace.
At last, in my despair, I saw a little door in the roof, and on poking it open, a red eye appeared, and a beery voice said...
“Now, then, mum?” I gave my order as soberly as I could, and slamming down the door, with an “Aye, aye, mum,” the man made his horse walk, as if going to a funeral.
I poked again and said, “A little faster,” then off he went, helter-skelter as before, and we resigned ourselves to our fate.
Today was fair, and we went to Hyde Park, close by, for we are more aristocratic than we look.
The Duke of Devonshire lives near.
I often see his footmen lounging at the back gate, and the Duke of Wellington’s house is not far off.
It was as good as Punch, for there were fat dowagers rolling about in their red and yellow coaches, with gorgeous Jeameses in silk stockings and velvet coats, up behind, and powdered coachmen in front.
Smart maids, with the rosiest children I ever saw, handsome girls, looking half asleep, dandies in queer English hats and lavender kids lounging about, and tall soldiers, in short red jackets and muffin caps stuck on one side, looking so funny I longed to sketch them.
Rotten Row means ‘Route de Roi’, or the king’s way, but now it’s more like a riding school than anything else.
The horses are splendid, and the men, especially the grooms, ride well, but the women are stiff, and bounce, which isn’t according to our rules.
I longed to show them a tearing American gallop, for they trotted solemnly up and down, in their scant habits and high hats, looking like the women in a toy Noah’s Ark.
Everyone rides—old men, stout ladies, little children—and the young folks do a deal of flirting here, I saw a pair exchange rose buds, for it’s the thing to wear one in the button-hole, and I thought it rather a nice little idea.
In the P.M. to Westminster Abbey, but don’t expect me to describe it, that’s impossible, so I’ll only say it was sublime!
This evening we are going to see Fechter, which will be an appropriate end to the happiest day of my life.
It’s very late, but I can’t let my letter go in the morning without telling you what happened last evening.
I was so surprised, for I shouldn’t have known them but for the cards.
Both are tall fellows with whiskers, Fred handsome in the English style, and Frank much better, for he only limps slightly, and uses no crutches.
Fred laughed when I spoke of Jo, and sent his ‘respectful compliments to the big hat’.
Neither of them had forgotten Camp Laurence, or the fun we had there.
I really feel like a dissipated London fine lady, writing here so late, with my room full of pretty things, and my head a jumble of parks, theaters, new gowns, and gallant creatures who say “Ah!” and twirl their blond mustaches with the true English lordliness.
I long to see you all, and in spite of my nonsense am, as ever, your loving...
AMY PARIS Dear girls, In my last I told you about our London visit, how kind the Vaughns were, and what pleasant parties they made for us.
I enjoyed the trips to Hampton Court and the Kensington Museum more than anything else, for at Hampton I saw Raphael’s cartoons, and at the Museum, rooms full of pictures by Turner, Lawrence, Reynolds, Hogarth, and the other great creatures.
The day in Richmond Park was charming, for we had a regular English picnic, and I had more splendid oaks and groups of deer than I could copy, also heard a nightingale, and saw larks go up.
We ‘did’ London to our heart’s content, thanks to Fred and Frank, and were sorry to go away, for though English people are slow to take you in, when they once make up their minds to do it they cannot be outdone in hospitality, I think.
The Vaughns hope to meet us in Rome next winter, and I shall be dreadfully disappointed if they don’t, for Grace and I are great friends, and the boys very nice fellows, especially Fred.
Well, we were hardly settled here, when he turned up again, saying he had come for a holiday, and was going to Switzerland.
Uncle doesn’t know ten words, and insists on talking English very loud, as if it would make people understand him.
Aunt’s pronunciation is old-fashioned, and Flo and I, though we flattered ourselves that we knew a good deal, find we don’t, and are very grateful to have Fred do the ‘_parley vooing_’, as Uncle calls it.
Such delightful times as we are having!
Sight-seeing from morning till night, stopping for nice lunches in the gay _cafes_, and meeting with all sorts of droll adventures.
Rainy days I spend in the Louvre, revelling in pictures.
Jo would turn up her naughty nose at some of the finest, because she has no soul for art, but I have, and I’m cultivating eye and taste as fast as I can.
She would like the relics of great people better, for I’ve seen her Napoleon’s cocked hat and gray coat, his baby’s cradle and his old toothbrush, also Marie Antoinette’s little shoe, the ring of Saint Denis, Charlemagne’s sword, and many other interesting things.
The Palais Royale is a heavenly place, so full of _bijouterie_ and lovely things that I’m nearly distracted because I can’t buy them.
Then the Bois and Champs Elysees are _tres magnifique_.
I’ve seen the imperial family several times, the emperor an ugly, hard-looking man, the empress pale and pretty, but dressed in bad taste, I thought—purple dress, green hat, and yellow gloves.
Little Nap is a handsome boy, who sits chatting to his tutor, and kisses his hand to the people as he passes in his four-horse barouche, with postilions in red satin jackets and a mounted guard before and behind.
We often walk in the Tuileries Gardens, for they are lovely, though the antique Luxembourg Gardens suit me better.
Pere la Chaise is very curious, for many of the tombs are like small rooms, and looking in, one sees a table, with images or pictures of the dead, and chairs for the mourners to sit in when they come to lament.
Our rooms are on the Rue de Rivoli, and sitting on the balcony, we look up and down the long, brilliant street.
It is so pleasant that we spend our evenings talking there when too tired with our day’s work to go out.
Fred is very entertaining, and is altogether the most agreeable young man I ever knew—except Laurie, whose manners are more charming.
I wish Fred was dark, for I don’t fancy light men, however, the Vaughns are very rich and come of an excellent family, so I won’t find fault with their yellow hair, as my own is yellower.
Next week we are off to Germany and Switzerland, and as we shall travel fast, I shall only be able to give you hasty letters.
I keep my diary, and try to ‘remember correctly and describe clearly all that I see and admire’, as Father advised.
It is good practice for me, and with my sketchbook will give you a better idea of my tour than these scribbles.
Adieu, I embrace you tenderly. _“Votre Amie.”_ HEIDELBERG My dear Mamma, Having a quiet hour before we leave for Berne, I’ll try to tell you what has happened, for some of it is very important, as you will see.
I haven’t words beautiful enough to describe it.
At Coblentz we had a lovely time, for some students from Bonn, with whom Fred got acquainted on the boat, gave us a serenade.
It was a moonlight night, and about one o’clock Flo and I were waked by the most delicious music under our windows.
We flew up, and hid behind the curtains, but sly peeps showed us Fred and the students singing away down below.
It was the most romantic thing I ever saw—the river, the bridge of boats, the great fortress opposite, moonlight everywhere, and music fit to melt a heart of stone.
When they were done we threw down some flowers, and saw them scramble for them, kiss their hands to the invisible ladies, and go laughing away, to smoke and drink beer, I suppose.
Next morning Fred showed me one of the crumpled flowers in his vest pocket, and looked very sentimental.
I laughed at him, and said I didn’t throw it, but Flo, which seemed to disgust him, for he tossed it out of the window, and turned sensible again.
Frankfurt was delightful.
I saw Goethe’s house, Schiller’s statue, and Dannecker’s famous ‘Ariadne.’ It was very lovely, but I should have enjoyed it more if I had known the story better.
I didn’t like to ask, as everyone knew it or pretended they did.
I ought to have read more, for I find I don’t know anything, and it mortifies me.
Now comes the serious part, for it happened here, and Fred has just gone.
I never thought of anything but a traveling friendship till the serenade night.
Since then I’ve begun to feel that the moonlight walks, balcony talks, and daily adventures were something more to him than fun.
I haven’t flirted, Mother, truly, but remembered what you said to me, and have done my very best.
Now I know Mother will shake her head, and the girls say, “Oh, the mercenary little wretch!”, but I’ve made up my mind, and if Fred asks me, I shall accept him, though I’m not madly in love.
I like him, and we get on comfortably together.
He is handsome, young, clever enough, and very rich—ever so much richer than the Laurences.
I don’t think his family would object, and I should be very happy, for they are all kind, well-bred, generous people, and they like me.
Fred, as the eldest twin, will have the estate, I suppose, and such a splendid one it is!
A city house in a fashionable street, not so showy as our big houses, but twice as comfortable and full of solid luxury, such as English people believe in.
I’ve seen the plate, the family jewels, the old servants, and pictures of the country place, with its park, great house, lovely grounds, and fine horses.
I may be mercenary, but I hate poverty, and don’t mean to bear it a minute longer than I can help.
Meg didn’t, Jo won’t, Beth can’t yet, so I shall, and make everything okay all round.
I wouldn’t marry a man I hated or despised.
So I’ve been turning the matter over in my mind the last week, for it was impossible to help seeing that Fred liked me.
He never goes with Flo, always gets on my side of the carriage, table, or promenade, looks sentimental when we are alone, and frowns at anyone else who ventures to speak to me.
Yesterday at dinner, when an Austrian officer stared at us and then said something to his friend, a rakish-looking baron, about ‘_ein wonderschones Blondchen’_, Fred looked as fierce as a lion, and cut his meat so savagely it nearly flew off his plate.
He isn’t one of the cool, stiff Englishmen, but is rather peppery, for he has Scotch blood in him, as one might guess from his bonnie blue eyes.
Well, last evening we went up to the castle about sunset, at least all of us but Fred, who was to meet us there after going to the Post Restante for letters.
We had a charming time poking about the ruins, the vaults where the monster tun is, and the beautiful gardens made by the elector long ago for his English wife.
I liked the great terrace best, for the view was divine, so while the rest went to see the rooms inside, I sat there trying to sketch the gray stone lion’s head on the wall, with scarlet woodbine sprays hanging round it.
I felt as if I’d got into a romance, sitting there, watching the Neckar rolling through the valley, listening to the music of the Austrian band below, and waiting for my lover, like a real storybook girl.
I had a feeling that something was going to happen and I was ready for it.
By-and-by I heard Fred’s voice, and then he came hurrying through the great arch to find me.
He looked so troubled that I forgot all about myself, and asked what the matter was.
I was very sorry for him, and disappointed for myself, but only for a minute because he said, as he shook hands, and said it in a way that I could not mistake, “I shall soon come back, you won’t forget me, Amy?” I didn’t promise, but I looked at him, and he seemed satisfied, and there was no time for anything but messages and good-byes, for he was off in an hour, and we all miss him very much.
I know he wanted to speak, but I think, from something he once hinted, that he had promised his father not to do anything of the sort yet a while, for he is a rash boy, and the old gentleman dreads a foreign daughter-in-law.
Don’t be anxious about me, remember I am your ‘prudent Amy’, and be sure I will do nothing rashly.
Ever your AMY CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO TENDER TROUBLES “Jo, I’m anxious about Beth.” “Why, Mother, she has seemed unusually well since the babies came.” “It’s not her health that troubles me now, it’s her spirits.
I’m sure there is something on her mind, and I want you to discover what it is.” “What makes you think so, Mother?” “She sits alone a good deal, and doesn’t talk to her father as much as she used.
When she sings, the songs are always sad ones, and now and then I see a look in her face that I don’t understand.
This isn’t like Beth, and it worries me.” “Have you asked her about it?” “I have tried once or twice, but she either evaded my questions or looked so distressed that I stopped.
I never force my children’s confidence, and I seldom have to wait for long.” Mrs.
March glanced at Jo as she spoke, but the face opposite seemed quite unconscious of any secret disquietude but Beth’s, and after sewing thoughtfully for a minute, Jo said, “I think she is growing up, and so begins to dream dreams, and have hopes and fears and fidgets, without knowing why or being able to explain them.
Why, Mother, Beth’s eighteen, but we don’t realize it, and treat her like a child, forgetting she’s a woman.” “So she is.
Dear heart, how fast you do grow up,” returned her mother with a sigh and a smile.
“Can’t be helped, Marmee, so you must resign yourself to all sorts of worries, and let your birds hop out of the nest, one by one.
Amy is splendid in fine works and I’m not, but I feel in my element when all the carpets are to be taken up, or half the family fall sick at once.
Amy is distinguishing herself abroad, but if anything is amiss at home, I’m your man.” “I leave Beth to your hands, then, for she will open her tender little heart to her Jo sooner than to anyone else.
If she only would get quite strong and cheerful again, I shouldn’t have a wish in the world.” “Happy woman!
I’ve got heaps.” “My dear, what are they?” “I’ll settle Bethy’s troubles, and then I’ll tell you mine.
They are not very wearing, so they’ll keep.” and Jo stitched away, with a wise nod which set her mother’s heart at rest about her for the present at least.
While apparently absorbed in her own affairs, Jo watched Beth, and after many conflicting conjectures, finally settled upon one which seemed to explain the change in her.
A slight incident gave Jo the clue to the mystery, she thought, and lively fancy, loving heart did the rest.
She was affecting to write busily one Saturday afternoon, when she and Beth were alone together.
Yet as she scribbled, she kept her eye on her sister, who seemed unusually quiet.
Sitting at the window, Beth’s work often dropped into her lap, and she leaned her head upon her hand, in a dejected attitude, while her eyes rested on the dull, autumnal landscape.
Suddenly some one passed below, whistling like an operatic blackbird, and a voice called out, “All serene!
Coming in tonight.” Beth started, leaned forward, smiled and nodded, watched the passer-by till his quick tramp died away, then said softly as if to herself, “How strong and well and happy that dear boy looks.” “Hum!” said Jo, still intent upon her sister’s face, for the bright color faded as quickly as it came, the smile vanished, and presently a tear lay shining on the window ledge.
Fearing to betray herself, she slipped away, murmuring something about needing more paper.
“Mercy on me, Beth loves Laurie!” she said, sitting down in her own room, pale with the shock of the discovery which she believed she had just made.
“If he shouldn’t love back again, how dreadful it would be.
I’ll make him!” and she shook her head threateningly at the picture of the mischievous-looking boy laughing at her from the wall.
“Oh dear, we are growing up with a vengeance.
Here’s Meg married and a mamma, Amy flourishing away at Paris, and Beth in love.
I’m the only one that has sense enough to keep out of mischief.” Jo thought intently for a minute with her eyes fixed on the picture, then she smoothed out her wrinkled forehead and said, with a decided nod at the face opposite, “No thank you, sir, you’re very charming, but you’ve no more stability than a weathercock.
So you needn’t write touching notes and smile in that insinuating way, for it won’t do a bit of good, and I won’t have it.” Then she sighed, and fell into a reverie from which she did not wake till the early twilight sent her down to take new observations, which only confirmed her suspicion.
Though Laurie flirted with Amy and joked with Jo, his manner to Beth had always been peculiarly kind and gentle, but so was everybody’s.
Therefore, no one thought of imagining that he cared more for her than for the others.
Indeed, a general impression had prevailed in the family of late that ‘our boy’ was getting fonder than ever of Jo, who, however, wouldn’t hear a word upon the subject and scolded violently if anyone dared to suggest it.
If they had known the various tender passages which had been nipped in the bud, they would have had the immense satisfaction of saying, “I told you so.” But Jo hated ‘philandering’, and wouldn’t allow it, always having a joke or a smile ready at the least sign of impending danger.
When Laurie first went to college, he fell in love about once a month, but these small flames were as brief as ardent, did no damage, and much amused Jo, who took great interest in the alternations of hope, despair, and resignation, which were confided to her in their weekly conferences.
But there came a time when Laurie ceased to worship at many shrines, hinted darkly at one all-absorbing passion, and indulged occasionally in Byronic fits of gloom.
Then he avoided the tender subject altogether, wrote philosophical notes to Jo, turned studious, and gave out that he was going to ‘dig’, intending to graduate in a blaze of glory.
This suited the young lady better than twilight confidences, tender pressures of the hand, and eloquent glances of the eye, for with Jo, brain developed earlier than heart, and she preferred imaginary heroes to real ones, because when tired of them, the former could be shut up in the tin kitchen till called for, and the latter were less manageable.
Things were in this state when the grand discovery was made, and Jo watched Laurie that night as she had never done before.
But having given the rein to her lively fancy, it galloped away with her at a great pace, and common sense, being rather weakened by a long course of romance writing, did not come to the rescue.
As usual Beth lay on the sofa and Laurie sat in a low chair close by, amusing her with all sorts of gossip, for she depended on her weekly ‘spin’, and he never disappointed her.
But that evening Jo fancied that Beth’s eyes rested on the lively, dark face beside her with peculiar pleasure, and that she listened with intense interest to an account of some exciting cricket match, though the phrases, ‘caught off a tice’, ‘stumped off his ground’, and ‘the leg hit for three’, were as intelligible to her as Sanskrit.
She also fancied, having set her heart upon seeing it, that she saw a certain increase of gentleness in Laurie’s manner, that he dropped his voice now and then, laughed less than usual, was a little absent-minded, and settled the afghan over Beth’s feet with an assiduity that was really almost tender.
Stranger things have happened,” thought Jo, as she fussed about the room.
“She will make quite an angel of him, and he will make life delightfully easy and pleasant for the dear, if they only love each other.
I don’t see how he can help it, and I do believe he would if the rest of us were out of the way.” As everyone was out of the way but herself, Jo began to feel that she ought to dispose of herself with all speed.
And burning to lay herself upon the shrine of sisterly devotion, she sat down to settle that point.
Now, the old sofa was a regular patriarch of a sofa—long, broad, well-cushioned, and low, a trifle shabby, as well it might be, for the girls had slept and sprawled on it as babies, fished over the back, rode on the arms, and had menageries under it as children, and rested tired heads, dreamed dreams, and listened to tender talk on it as young women.
They all loved it, for it was a family refuge, and one corner had always been Jo’s favorite lounging place.
Among the many pillows that adorned the venerable couch was one, hard, round, covered with prickly horsehair, and furnished with a knobby button at each end.
This repulsive pillow was her especial property, being used as a weapon of defense, a barricade, or a stern preventive of too much slumber.
Laurie knew this pillow well, and had cause to regard it with deep aversion, having been unmercifully pummeled with it in former days when romping was allowed, and now frequently debarred by it from the seat he most coveted next to Jo in the sofa corner.
If ‘the sausage’ as they called it, stood on end, it was a sign that he might approach and repose, but if it lay flat across the sofa, woe to man, woman, or child who dared disturb it!
That evening Jo forgot to barricade her corner, and had not been in her seat five minutes, before a massive form appeared beside her, and with both arms spread over the sofa back, both long legs stretched out before him, Laurie exclaimed, with a sigh of satisfaction...
“Now, this is filling at the price.” “No slang,” snapped Jo, slamming down the pillow.
But it was too late, there was no room for it, and coasting onto the floor, it disappeared in a most mysterious manner.
After studying himself to a skeleton all the week, a fellow deserves petting and ought to get it.” “Beth will pet you.
I’m busy.” “No, she’s not to be bothered with me, but you like that sort of thing, unless you’ve suddenly lost your taste for it.
Do you hate your boy, and want to fire pillows at him?” Anything more wheedlesome than that touching appeal was seldom heard, but Jo quenched ‘her boy’ by turning on him with a stern query, “How many bouquets have you sent Miss Randal this week?” “Not one, upon my word.
Now then.” “I’m glad of it, that’s one of your foolish extravagances, sending flowers and things to girls for whom you don’t care two pins,” continued Jo reprovingly.
“Sensible girls for whom I do care whole papers of pins won’t let me send them ‘flowers and things’, so what can I do?
My feelings need a ‘vent’.” “Mother doesn’t approve of flirting even in fun, and you do flirt desperately, Teddy.” “I’d give anything if I could answer, ‘So do you’.
As I can’t, I’ll merely say that I don’t see any harm in that pleasant little game, if all parties understand that it’s only play.” “Well, it does look pleasant, but I can’t learn how it’s done.
I’ve tried, because one feels awkward in company not to do as everybody else is doing, but I don’t seem to get on”, said Jo, forgetting to play mentor.
“Take lessons of Amy, she has a regular talent for it.” “Yes, she does it very prettily, and never seems to go too far.
It’s really refreshing to see a sensible, straightforward girl, who can be jolly and kind without making a fool of herself.
Between ourselves, Jo, some of the girls I know really do go on at such a rate I’m ashamed of them.
They don’t mean any harm, I’m sure, but if they knew how we fellows talked about them afterward, they’d mend their ways, I fancy.” “They do the same, and as their tongues are the sharpest, you fellows get the worst of it, for you are as silly as they, every bit.
If you behaved properly, they would, but knowing you like their nonsense, they keep it up, and then you blame them.” “Much you know about it, ma’am,” said Laurie in a superior tone.
“We don’t like romps and flirts, though we may act as if we did sometimes.
The pretty, modest girls are never talked about, except respectfully, among gentleman.
Bless your innocent soul!
If you could be in my place for a month you’d see things that would astonish you a trifle.
“Out upon you, fie upon you, Bold-faced jig!” It was impossible to help laughing at the funny conflict between Laurie’s chivalrous reluctance to speak ill of womankind, and his very natural dislike of the unfeminine folly of which fashionable society showed him many samples.
Jo knew that ‘young Laurence’ was regarded as a most eligible parti by worldly mamas, was much smiled upon by their daughters, and flattered enough by ladies of all ages to make a coxcomb of him, so she watched him rather jealously, fearing he would be spoiled, and rejoiced more than she confessed to find that he still believed in modest girls.
Returning suddenly to her admonitory tone, she said, dropping her voice, “If you must have a ‘vent’, Teddy, go and devote yourself to one of the ‘pretty, modest girls’ whom you do respect, and not waste your time with the silly ones.” “You really advise it?” and Laurie looked at her with an odd mixture of anxiety and merriment in his face.
“Yes, I do, but you’d better wait till you are through college, on the whole, and be fitting yourself for the place meantime.
You’re not half good enough for—well, whoever the modest girl may be.” and Jo looked a little queer likewise, for a name had almost escaped her.
“That I’m not!” acquiesced Laurie, with an expression of humility quite new to him, as he dropped his eyes and absently wound Jo’s apron tassel round his finger.
Go and make yourself useful, since you are too big to be ornamental.
I thought you hated to be tied to a woman’s apron string?” retorted Jo, quoting certain rebellious words of his own.
“Ah, that depends on who wears the apron!” and Laurie gave an audacious tweak at the tassel.
“Are you going?” demanded Jo, diving for the pillow.
He fled at once, and the minute it was well, “Up with the bonnets of bonnie Dundee,” she slipped away to return no more till the young gentleman departed in high dudgeon.
Jo lay long awake that night, and was just dropping off when the sound of a stifled sob made her fly to Beth’s bedside, with the anxious inquiry, “What is it, dear?” “I thought you were asleep,” sobbed Beth.
“Is it the old pain, my precious?” “No, it’s a new one, but I can bear it,” and Beth tried to check her tears.
“Tell me all about it, and let me cure it as I often did the other.” “You can’t, there is no cure.” There Beth’s voice gave way, and clinging to her sister, she cried so despairingly that Jo was frightened.
I’ll be quiet and go to sleep, indeed I will.” Jo obeyed, but as her hand went softly to and fro across Beth’s hot forehead and wet eyelids, her heart was very full and she longed to speak.
But young as she was, Jo had learned that hearts, like flowers, cannot be rudely handled, but must open naturally, so though she believed she knew the cause of Beth’s new pain, she only said, in her tenderest tone, “Does anything trouble you, deary?” “Yes, Jo,” after a long pause.
“Wouldn’t it comfort you to tell me what it is?” “Not now, not yet.” “Then I won’t ask, but remember, Bethy, that Mother and Jo are always glad to hear and help you, if they can.” “I know it.
I’ll tell you by-and-by.” “Is the pain better now?” “Oh, yes, much better, you are so comfortable, Jo.” “Go to sleep, dear.
I’ll stay with you.” So cheek to cheek they fell asleep, and on the morrow Beth seemed quite herself again, for at eighteen neither heads nor hearts ache long, and a loving word can medicine most ills.
But Jo had made up her mind, and after pondering over a project for some days, she confided it to her mother.
I’ll tell you one of them, Marmee,” she began, as they sat along together.
“I want to go away somewhere this winter for a change.” “Why, Jo?” and her mother looked up quickly, as if the words suggested a double meaning.
With her eyes on her work Jo answered soberly, “I want something new.
I feel restless and anxious to be seeing, doing, and learning more than I am.
I brood too much over my own small affairs, and need stirring up, so as I can be spared this winter, I’d like to hop a little way and try my wings.” “Where will you hop?” “To New York.
I had a bright idea yesterday, and this is it.
Kirke wrote to you for some respectable young person to teach her children and sew.
It’s rather hard to find just the thing, but I think I should suit if I tried.” “My dear, go out to service in that great boarding house!” and Mrs.
March looked surprised, but not displeased.
Kirke is your friend—the kindest soul that ever lived—and would make things pleasant for me, I know.
Her family is separate from the rest, and no one knows me there.
I shall see and hear new things, get new ideas, and even if I haven’t much time there, I shall bring home quantities of material for my rubbish.” “I have no doubt of it, but are these your only reasons for this sudden fancy?” “No, Mother.” “May I know the others?” Jo looked up and Jo looked down, then said slowly, with sudden color in her cheeks.
March looked anxious as she put the question.
I love the dear boy, as I always have, and am immensely proud of him, but as for anything more, it’s out of the question.” “I’m glad of that, Jo.” “Why, please?” “Because, dear, I don’t think you suited to one another.
As friends you are very happy, and your frequent quarrels soon blow over, but I fear you would both rebel if you were mated for life.
You are too much alike and too fond of freedom, not to mention hot tempers and strong wills, to get on happily together, in a relation which needs infinite patience and forbearance, as well as love.” “That’s just the feeling I had, though I couldn’t express it.
I’m glad you think he is only beginning to care for me.
It would trouble me sadly to make him unhappy, for I couldn’t fall in love with the dear old fellow merely out of gratitude, could I?” “You are sure of his feeling for you?” The color deepened in Jo’s cheeks as she answered, with the look of mingled pleasure, pride, and pain which young girls wear when speaking of first lovers, “I’m afraid it is so, Mother.
He hasn’t said anything, but he looks a great deal.
I think I had better go away before it comes to anything.” “I agree with you, and if it can be managed you shall go.” Jo looked relieved, and after a pause, said, smiling, “How Mrs.
Moffat would wonder at your want of management, if she knew, and how she will rejoice that Annie may still hope.” “Ah, Jo, mothers may differ in their management, but the hope is the same in all—the desire to see their children happy.
You I leave to enjoy your liberty till you tire of it, for only then will you find that there is something sweeter.
By the way, she seems brighter this last day or two.
Have you spoken to her?’ “Yes, she owned she had a trouble, and promised to tell me by-and-by.
March shook her head, and did not take so romantic a view of the case, but looked grave, and repeated her opinion that for Laurie’s sake Jo should go away for a time.
But she can pet and comfort him after I’m gone, and so cure him of this romantic notion.
He’s been through so many little trials of the sort, he’s used to it, and will soon get over his lovelornity.” Jo spoke hopefully, but could not rid herself of the foreboding fear that this ‘little trial’ would be harder than the others, and that Laurie would not get over his ‘lovelornity’ as easily as heretofore.
Kirke gladly accepted Jo, and promised to make a pleasant home for her.
The teaching would render her independent, and such leisure as she got might be made profitable by writing, while the new scenes and society would be both useful and agreeable.
Jo liked the prospect and was eager to be gone, for the home nest was growing too narrow for her restless nature and adventurous spirit.
When all was settled, with fear and trembling she told Laurie, but to her surprise he took it very quietly.
He had been graver than usual of late, but very pleasant, and when jokingly accused of turning over a new leaf, he answered soberly, “So I am, and I mean this one shall stay turned.” Jo was very much relieved that one of his virtuous fits should come on just then, and made her preparations with a lightened heart, for Beth seemed more cheerful, and hoped she was doing the best for all.
“One thing I leave in your especial care,” she said, the night before she left.
Be very good to him, won’t you?” “Of course I will, but I can’t fill your place, and he’ll miss you sadly.” “It won’t hurt him, so remember, I leave him in your charge, to plague, pet, and keep in order.” “I’ll do my best, for your sake,” promised Beth, wondering why Jo looked at her so queerly.
When Laurie said good-by, he whispered significantly, “It won’t do a bit of good, Jo.
My eye is on you, so mind what you do, or I’ll come and bring you home.” CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE JO’S JOURNAL New York, November Dear Marmee and Beth, I’m going to write you a regular volume, for I’ve got heaps to tell, though I’m not a fine young lady traveling on the continent.
When I lost sight of Father’s dear old face, I felt a trifle blue, and might have shed a briny drop or two, if an Irish lady with four small children, all crying more or less, hadn’t diverted my mind, for I amused myself by dropping gingerbread nuts over the seat every time they opened their mouths to roar.
Soon the sun came out, and taking it as a good omen, I cleared up likewise and enjoyed my journey with all my heart.
Kirke welcomed me so kindly I felt at home at once, even in that big house full of strangers.
She gave me a funny little sky parlor—all she had, but there is a stove in it, and a nice table in a sunny window, so I can sit here and write whenever I like.
A fine view and a church tower opposite atone for the many stairs, and I took a fancy to my den on the spot.
The nursery, where I am to teach and sew, is a pleasant room next Mrs.
Kirke’s private parlor, and the two little girls are pretty children, rather spoiled, I fancy, but they took to me after telling them The Seven Bad Pigs, and I’ve no doubt I shall make a model governess.
I am to have my meals with the children, if I prefer it to the great table, and for the present I do, for I am bashful, though no one will believe it.
“Now, my dear, make yourself at home,” said Mrs.
K. in her motherly way, “I’m on the drive from morning to night, as you may suppose with such a family, but a great anxiety will be off my mind if I know the children are safe with you.
My rooms are always open to you, and your own shall be as comfortable as I can make it.
There are some pleasant people in the house if you feel sociable, and your evenings are always free.
Come to me if anything goes wrong, and be as happy as you can.
As I went downstairs soon after, I saw something I liked.
The flights are very long in this tall house, and as I stood waiting at the head of the third one for a little servant girl to lumber up, I saw a gentleman come along behind her, take the heavy hod of coal out of her hand, carry it all the way up, put it down at a door near by, and walk away, saying, with a kind nod and a foreign accent, “It goes better so.
The little back is too young to haf such heaviness.” Wasn’t it good of him?
I like such things, for as Father says, trifles show character.
When I mentioned it to Mrs.
K., that evening, she laughed, and said, “That must have been Professor Bhaer, he’s always doing things of that sort.” Mrs.
K. told me he was from Berlin, very learned and good, but poor as a church mouse, and gives lessons to support himself and two little orphan nephews whom he is educating here, according to the wishes of his sister, who married an American.
Not a very romantic story, but it interested me, and I was glad to hear that Mrs.
K. lends him her parlor for some of his scholars.
After tea and a go-to-bed romp with the little girls, I attacked the big workbasket, and had a quiet evening chatting with my new friend.
I shall keep a journal-letter, and send it once a week, so goodnight, and more tomorrow.
Tuesday Eve Had a lively time in my seminary this morning, for the children acted like Sancho, and at one time I really thought I should shake them all round.
Some good angel inspired me to try gymnastics, and I kept it up till they were glad to sit down and keep still.
After luncheon, the girl took them out for a walk, and I went to my needlework like little Mabel ‘with a willing mind’.
I was thanking my stars that I’d learned to make nice buttonholes, when the parlor door opened and shut, and someone began to hum, Kennst Du Das Land, like a big bumblebee.
It was dreadfully improper, I know, but I couldn’t resist the temptation, and lifting one end of the curtain before the glass door, I peeped in.
Professor Bhaer was there, and while he arranged his books, I took a good look at him.
A regular German—rather stout, with brown hair tumbled all over his head, a bushy beard, good nose, the kindest eyes I ever saw, and a splendid big voice that does one’s ears good, after our sharp or slipshod American gabble.
His clothes were rusty, his hands were large, and he hadn’t a really handsome feature in his face, except his beautiful teeth, yet I liked him, for he had a fine head, his linen was very nice, and he looked like a gentleman, though two buttons were off his coat and there was a patch on one shoe.
He looked sober in spite of his humming, till he went to the window to turn the hyacinth bulbs toward the sun, and stroke the cat, who received him like an old friend.
Then he smiled, and when a tap came at the door, called out in a loud, brisk tone, “Herein!” I was just going to run, when I caught sight of a morsel of a child carrying a big book, and stopped, to see what was going on.
“Me wants me Bhaer,” said the mite, slamming down her book and running to meet him.
Come, then, and take a goot hug from him, my Tina,” said the Professor, catching her up with a laugh, and holding her so high over his head that she had to stoop her little face to kiss him.
So he put her up at the table, opened the great dictionary she had brought, and gave her a paper and pencil, and she scribbled away, turning a leaf now and then, and passing her little fat finger down the page, as if finding a word, so soberly that I nearly betrayed myself by a laugh, while Mr.
Bhaer stood stroking her pretty hair with a fatherly look that made me think she must be his own, though she looked more French than German.
Another knock and the appearance of two young ladies sent me back to my work, and there I virtuously remained through all the noise and gabbling that went on next door.
One of the girls kept laughing affectedly, and saying, “Now Professor,” in a coquettish tone, and the other pronounced her German with an accent that must have made it hard for him to keep sober.
Both seemed to try his patience sorely, for more than once I heard him say emphatically, “No, no, it is not so, you haf not attend to what I say,” and once there was a loud rap, as if he struck the table with his book, followed by the despairing exclamation, “Prut!
It all goes bad this day.” Poor man, I pitied him, and when the girls were gone, took just one more peep to see if he survived it.
Kirke asked me if I wouldn’t go down to the five o’clock dinner, and feeling a little bit homesick, I thought I would, just to see what sort of people are under the same roof with me.
So I made myself respectable and tried to slip in behind Mrs.
Kirke, but as she is short and I’m tall, my efforts at concealment were rather a failure.
The long table was full, and every one intent on getting their dinner, the gentlemen especially, who seemed to be eating on time, for they bolted in every sense of the word, vanishing as soon as they were done.
There was the usual assortment of young men absorbed in themselves, young couples absorbed in each other, married ladies in their babies, and old gentlemen in politics.
I don’t think I shall care to have much to do with any of them, except one sweetfaced maiden lady, who looks as if she had something in her.
Cast away at the very bottom of the table was the Professor, shouting answers to the questions of a very inquisitive, deaf old gentleman on one side, and talking philosophy with a Frenchman on the other.
If Amy had been here, she’d have turned her back on him forever because, sad to relate, he had a great appetite, and shoveled in his dinner in a manner which would have horrified ‘her ladyship’.
I didn’t mind, for I like ‘to see folks eat with a relish’, as Hannah says, and the poor man must have needed a deal of food after teaching idiots all day.
As I went upstairs after dinner, two of the young men were settling their hats before the hall mirror, and I heard one say low to the other, “Who’s the new party?” “Governess, or something of that sort.” “What the deuce is she at our table for?” “Friend of the old lady’s.” “Handsome head, but no style.” “Not a bit of it.
Give us a light and come on.” I felt angry at first, and then I didn’t care, for a governess is as good as a clerk, and I’ve got sense, if I haven’t style, which is more than some people have, judging from the remarks of the elegant beings who clattered away, smoking like bad chimneys.
I hate ordinary people!
Thursday Yesterday was a quiet day spent in teaching, sewing, and writing in my little room, which is very cozy, with a light and fire.
I picked up a few bits of news and was introduced to the Professor.
It seems that Tina is the child of the Frenchwoman who does the fine ironing in the laundry here.
Bhaer, and follows him about the house like a dog whenever he is at home, which delights him, as he is very fond of children, though a ‘bacheldore’.
Kitty and Minnie Kirke likewise regard him with affection, and tell all sorts of stories about the plays he invents, the presents he brings, and the splendid tales he tells.
Kirke says, and takes it so good-naturedly that they all like him in spite of his foreign ways.
The maiden lady is a Miss Norton, rich, cultivated, and kind.
She has fine books and pictures, knows interesting persons, and seems friendly, so I shall make myself agreeable, for I do want to get into good society, only it isn’t the same sort that Amy likes.
Bhaer came in with some newspapers for Mrs.
She wasn’t there, but Minnie, who is a little old woman, introduced me very prettily.
“This is Mamma’s friend, Miss March.” “Yes, and she’s jolly and we like her lots,” added Kitty, who is an ‘enfant terrible’.
We both bowed, and then we laughed, for the prim introduction and the blunt addition were rather a comical contrast.
If so again, call at me and I come,” he said, with a threatening frown that delighted the little wretches.
I promised I would, and he departed, but it seems as if I was doomed to see a good deal of him, for today as I passed his door on my way out, by accident I knocked against it with my umbrella.
It flew open, and there he stood in his dressing gown, with a big blue sock on one hand and a darning needle in the other.
He didn’t seem at all ashamed of it, for when I explained and hurried on, he waved his hand, sock and all, saying in his loud, cheerful way...
Bon voyage, Mademoiselle.” I laughed all the way downstairs, but it was a little pathetic, also to think of the poor man having to mend his own clothes.
The German gentlemen embroider, I know, but darning hose is another thing and not so pretty.
Saturday Nothing has happened to write about, except a call on Miss Norton, who has a room full of pretty things, and who was very charming, for she showed me all her treasures, and asked me if I would sometimes go with her to lectures and concerts, as her escort, if I enjoyed them.
Kirke has told her about us, and she does it out of kindness to me.
I’m as proud as Lucifer, but such favors from such people don’t burden me, and I accepted gratefully.
Bhaer down on his hands and knees, with Tina on his back, Kitty leading him with a jump rope, and Minnie feeding two small boys with seedcakes, as they roared and ramped in cages built of chairs.
“We are playing nargerie,” explained Kitty.
“Dis is mine effalunt!” added Tina, holding on by the Professor’s hair.
“Mamma always allows us to do what we like Saturday afternoon, when Franz and Emil come, doesn’t she, Mr.
The ‘effalunt’ sat up, looking as much in earnest as any of them, and said soberly to me, “I gif you my wort it is so, if we make too large a noise you shall say Hush! to us, and we go more softly.” I promised to do so, but left the door open and enjoyed the fun as much as they did, for a more glorious frolic I never witnessed.
They played tag and soldiers, danced and sang, and when it began to grow dark they all piled onto the sofa about the Professor, while he told charming fairy stories of the storks on the chimney tops, and the little ‘koblods’, who ride the snowflakes as they fall.
I wish Americans were as simple and natural as Germans, don’t you?
I’m so fond of writing, I should go spinning on forever if motives of economy didn’t stop me, for though I’ve used thin paper and written fine, I tremble to think of the stamps this long letter will need.
My small news will sound very flat after her splendors, but you will like them, I know.
Is Teddy studying so hard that he can’t find time to write to his friends?
Take good care of him for me, Beth, and tell me all about the babies, and give heaps of love to everyone.
From your faithful Jo.
On reading over my letter, it strikes me as rather Bhaery, but I am always interested in odd people, and I really had nothing else to write about.
DECEMBER My Precious Betsey, As this is to be a scribble-scrabble letter, I direct it to you, for it may amuse you, and give you some idea of my goings on, for though quiet, they are rather amusing, for which, oh, be joyful!
After what Amy would call Herculaneum efforts, in the way of mental and moral agriculture, my young ideas begin to shoot and my little twigs to bend as I could wish.
They are not so interesting to me as Tina and the boys, but I do my duty by them, and they are fond of me.
Franz and Emil are jolly little lads, quite after my own heart, for the mixture of German and American spirit in them produces a constant state of effervescence.
Saturday afternoons are riotous times, whether spent in the house or out, for on pleasant days they all go to walk, like a seminary, with the Professor and myself to keep order, and then such fun!
To begin at the beginning, Mrs.
Bhaer’s room where she was rummaging.
Just come and help me put these books to rights, for I’ve turned everything upside down, trying to discover what he has done with the six new handkerchiefs I gave him not long ago.” I went in, and while we worked I looked about me, for it was ‘a den’ to be sure.
Books and papers everywhere, a broken meerschaum, and an old flute over the mantlepiece as if done with, a ragged bird without any tail chirped on one window seat, and a box of white mice adorned the other.
Half-finished boats and bits of string lay among the manuscripts.
After a grand rummage three of the missing articles were found, one over the bird cage, one covered with ink, and a third burned brown, having been used as a holder.
It’s dreadful, but I can’t scold him.
He’s so absent-minded and goodnatured, he lets those boys ride over him roughshod.
I agreed to do his washing and mending, but he forgets to give out his things and I forget to look them over, so he comes to a sad pass sometimes.” “Let me mend them,” said I.
I’d like to, he’s so kind to me about bringing my letters and lending books.” So I have got his things in order, and knit heels into two pairs of the socks, for they were boggled out of shape with his queer darns.
Hearing the lessons he gives to others has interested and amused me so much that I took a fancy to learn, for Tina runs in and out, leaving the door open, and I can hear.
I had been sitting near this door, finishing off the last sock, and trying to understand what he said to a new scholar, who is as stupid as I am.
The girl had gone, and I thought he had also, it was so still, and I was busily gabbling over a verb, and rocking to and fro in a most absurd way, when a little crow made me look up, and there was Mr.
Bhaer looking and laughing quietly, while he made signs to Tina not to betray him.
“So!” he said, as I stopped and stared like a goose, “you peep at me, I peep at you, and this is not bad, but see, I am not pleasanting when I say, haf you a wish for German?” “Yes, but you are too busy.
I am too stupid to learn,” I blundered out, as red as a peony.
Come, a little lesson then and now, or—no more good fairy works for me and mine.” Of course I couldn’t say anything after that, and as it really is a splendid opportunity, I made the bargain, and we began.
I took four lessons, and then I stuck fast in a grammatical bog.
The Professor was very patient with me, but it must have been torment to him, and now and then he’d look at me with such an expression of mild despair that it was a toss-up with me whether to laugh or cry.
I tried both ways, and when it came to a sniff or utter mortification and woe, he just threw the grammar on to the floor and marched out of the room.
I felt myself disgraced and deserted forever, but didn’t blame him a particle, and was scrambling my papers together, meaning to rush upstairs and shake myself hard, when in he came, as brisk and beaming as if I’d covered myself in glory.
You and I will read these pleasant little _marchen_ together, and dig no more in that dry book, that goes in the corner for making us trouble.” He spoke so kindly, and opened Hans Anderson’s fairy tales so invitingly before me, that I was more ashamed than ever, and went at my lesson in a neck-or-nothing style that seemed to amuse him immensely.
I forgot my bashfulness, and pegged away (no other word will express it) with all my might, tumbling over long words, pronouncing according to inspiration of the minute, and doing my very best.
When I finished reading my first page, and stopped for breath, he clapped his hands and cried out in his hearty way, “Das ist gut!
I do him in German, gif me your ear.” And away he went, rumbling out the words with his strong voice and a relish which was good to see as well as hear.
Fortunately the story was _The Constant Tin Soldier_, which is droll, you know, so I could laugh, and I did, though I didn’t understand half he read, for I couldn’t help it, he was so earnest, I so excited, and the whole thing so comical.
After that we got on better, and now I read my lessons pretty well, for this way of studying suits me, and I can see that the grammar gets tucked into the tales and poetry as one gives pills in jelly.
I mean to give him something on Christmas, for I dare not offer money.
Tell me something nice, Marmee.
I’m afraid I couldn’t like him without a spice of human naughtiness.
Thank Heaven Beth continues so comfortable.
JANUARY A Happy New Year to you all, my dearest family, which of course includes Mr.
I can’t tell you how much I enjoyed your Christmas bundle, for I didn’t get it till night and had given up hoping.
Your letter came in the morning, but you said nothing about a parcel, meaning it for a surprise, so I was disappointed, for I’d had a ‘kind of feeling’ that you wouldn’t forget me.
I felt a little low in my mind as I sat up in my room after tea, and when the big, muddy, battered-looking bundle was brought to me, I just hugged it and pranced.
It was so homey and refreshing that I sat down on the floor and read and looked and ate and laughed and cried, in my usual absurd way.
Beth’s new ‘ink bib’ was capital, and Hannah’s box of hard gingerbread will be a treasure.
I’ll be sure and wear the nice flannels you sent, Marmee, and read carefully the books Father has marked.
Speaking of books reminds me that I’m getting rich in that line, for on New Year’s Day Mr.
Bhaer gave me a fine Shakespeare.
It is one he values much, and I’ve often admired it, set up in the place of honor with his German Bible, Plato, Homer, and Milton, so you may imagine how I felt when he brought it down, without its cover, and showed me my own name in it, “from my friend Friedrich Bhaer”.
Read him well, and he will help you much, for the study of character in this book will help you to read it in the world and paint it with your pen.” I thanked him as well as I could, and talk now about ‘my library’, as if I had a hundred books.
I never knew how much there was in Shakespeare before, but then I never had a Bhaer to explain it to me.
It isn’t pronounced either Bear or Beer, as people will say it, but something between the two, as only Germans can give it.
I admire both, and feel rich in my new ‘friend Friedrich Bhaer’.
Not having much money, or knowing what he’d like, I got several little things, and put them about the room, where he would find them unexpectedly.
They were useful, pretty, or funny, a new standish on his table, a little vase for his flower, he always has one, or a bit of green in a glass, to keep him fresh, he says, and a holder for his blower, so that he needn’t burn up what Amy calls ‘mouchoirs’.
I made it like those Beth invented, a big butterfly with a fat body, and black and yellow wings, worsted feelers, and bead eyes.
It took his fancy immensely, and he put it on his mantlepiece as an article of virtue, so it was rather a failure after all.
Poor as he is, he didn’t forget a servant or a child in the house, and not a soul here, from the French laundrywoman to Miss Norton forgot him.
They got up a masquerade, and had a gay time New Year’s Eve.
Kirke remembered some old brocades, and Miss Norton lent me lace and feathers.
Malaprop, and sailed in with a mask on.
No one knew me, for I disguised my voice, and no one dreamed of the silent, haughty Miss March (for they think I am very stiff and cool, most of them, and so I am to whippersnappers) could dance and dress, and burst out into a ‘nice derangement of epitaphs, like an allegory on the banks of the Nile’.
I enjoyed it very much, and when we unmasked it was fun to see them stare at me.
I heard one of the young men tell another that he knew I’d been an actress, in fact, he thought he remembered seeing me at one of the minor theaters.
To see them dance was ‘quite a landscape’, to use a Teddyism.
I had a very happy New Year, after all, and when I thought it over in my room, I felt as if I was getting on a little in spite of my many failures, for I’m cheerful all the time now, work with a will, and take more interest in other people than I used to, which is satisfactory.
Jo CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR FRIEND Though very happy in the social atmosphere about her, and very busy with the daily work that earned her bread and made it sweeter for the effort, Jo still found time for literary labors.
The purpose which now took possession of her was a natural one to a poor and ambitious girl, but the means she took to gain her end were not the best.
She saw that money conferred power, money and power, therefore, she resolved to have, not to be used for herself alone, but for those whom she loved more than life.
The dream of filling home with comforts, giving Beth everything she wanted, from strawberries in winter to an organ in her bedroom, going abroad herself, and always having more than enough, so that she might indulge in the luxury of charity, had been for years Jo’s most cherished castle in the air.
The prize-story experience had seemed to open a way which might, after long traveling and much uphill work, lead to this delightful chateau en Espagne.
But the novel disaster quenched her courage for a time, for public opinion is a giant which has frightened stouter-hearted Jacks on bigger beanstalks than hers.
Like that immortal hero, she reposed awhile after the first attempt, which resulted in a tumble and the least lovely of the giant’s treasures, if I remember rightly.
But the ‘up again and take another’ spirit was as strong in Jo as in Jack, so she scrambled up on the shady side this time and got more booty, but nearly left behind her what was far more precious than the moneybags.
She took to writing sensation stories, for in those dark ages, even all-perfect America read rubbish.
She told no one, but concocted a ‘thrilling tale’, and boldly carried it herself to Mr.
Dashwood, editor of the Weekly Volcano.
She had never read Sartor Resartus, but she had a womanly instinct that clothes possess an influence more powerful over many than the worth of character or the magic of manners.
So she dressed herself in her best, and trying to persuade herself that she was neither excited nor nervous, bravely climbed two pairs of dark and dirty stairs to find herself in a disorderly room, a cloud of cigar smoke, and the presence of three gentlemen, sitting with their heels rather higher than their hats, which articles of dress none of them took the trouble to remove on her appearance.
Somewhat daunted by this reception, Jo hesitated on the threshold, murmuring in much embarrassment...
Dashwood.” Down went the highest pair of heels, up rose the smokiest gentleman, and carefully cherishing his cigar between his fingers, he advanced with a nod and a countenance expressive of nothing but sleep.
Feeling that she must get through the matter somehow, Jo produced her manuscript and, blushing redder and redder with each sentence, blundered out fragments of the little speech carefully prepared for the occasion.
“A friend of mine desired me to offer—a story—just as an experiment—would like your opinion—be glad to write more if this suits.” While she blushed and blundered, Mr.
Dashwood had taken the manuscript, and was turning over the leaves with a pair of rather dirty fingers, and casting critical glances up and down the neat pages.
“Not a first attempt, I take it?” observing that the pages were numbered, covered only on one side, and not tied up with a ribbon—sure sign of a novice.
She has had some experience, and got a prize for a tale in the _Blarneystone Banner_.” “Oh, did she?” and Mr.
Dashwood gave Jo a quick look, which seemed to take note of everything she had on, from the bow in her bonnet to the buttons on her boots.
Dashwood didn’t suit her at all, but, under the circumstances, there was nothing for her to do but bow and walk away, looking particularly tall and dignified, as she was apt to do when nettled or abashed.
Half resolving never to return, she went home, and worked off her irritation by stitching pinafores vigorously, and in an hour or two was cool enough to laugh over the scene and long for next week.
Dashwood was alone, whereat she rejoiced.
Dashwood was much wider awake than before, which was agreeable, and Mr.
Dashwood was not too deeply absorbed in a cigar to remember his manners, so the second interview was much more comfortable than the first.
“We’ll take this (editors never say I), if you don’t object to a few alterations.
It’s too long, but omitting the passages I’ve marked will make it just the right length,” he said, in a businesslike tone.
Jo hardly knew her own MS. again, so crumpled and underscored were its pages and paragraphs, but feeling as a tender parent might on being asked to cut off her baby’s legs in order that it might fit into a new cradle, she looked at the marked passages and was surprised to find that all the moral reflections—which she had carefully put in as ballast for much romance—had been stricken out.
Dashwoods’s editorial gravity relaxed into a smile, for Jo had forgotten her ‘friend’, and spoken as only an author could.
“People want to be amused, not preached at, you know.
Morals don’t sell nowadays.” Which was not quite a correct statement, by the way.
“You think it would do with these alterations, then?” “Yes, it’s a new plot, and pretty well worked up—language good, and so on,” was Mr.
Dashwood’s affable reply.
“What do you—that is, what compensation—” began Jo, not exactly knowing how to express herself.
Pay when it comes out,” returned Mr.
Dashwood, as if that point had escaped him.
Such trifles do escape the editorial mind, it is said.
“Very well, you can have it,” said Jo, handing back the story with a satisfied air, for after the dollar-a-column work, even twenty-five seemed good pay.
“Shall I tell my friend you will take another if she has one better than this?” asked Jo, unconscious of her little slip of the tongue, and emboldened by her success.
What name would your friend like to put on it?” in a careless tone.
“None at all, if you please, she doesn’t wish her name to appear and has no nom de plume,” said Jo, blushing in spite of herself.
Dashwood, who felt a natural desire to know who his new contributor might be.
Good morning, Sir.” As she departed, Mr.
Dashwood put up his feet, with the graceful remark, “Poor and proud, as usual, but she’ll do.” Following Mr.
Dashwood’s directions, and making Mrs.
Northbury her model, Jo rashly took a plunge into the frothy sea of sensational literature, but thanks to the life preserver thrown her by a friend, she came up again not much the worse for her ducking.
Like most young scribblers, she went abroad for her characters and scenery, and banditti, counts, gypsies, nuns, and duchesses appeared upon her stage, and played their parts with as much accuracy and spirit as could be expected.
Her readers were not particular about such trifles as grammar, punctuation, and probability, and Mr.
Dashwood graciously permitted her to fill his columns at the lowest prices, not thinking it necessary to tell her that the real cause of his hospitality was the fact that one of his hacks, on being offered higher wages, had basely left him in the lurch.
She soon became interested in her work, for her emaciated purse grew stout, and the little hoard she was making to take Beth to the mountains next summer grew slowly but surely as the weeks passed.
One thing disturbed her satisfaction, and that was that she did not tell them at home.
She had a feeling that Father and Mother would not approve, and preferred to have her own way first, and beg pardon afterward.
It was easy to keep her secret, for no name appeared with her stories.
Dashwood had of course found it out very soon, but promised to be dumb, and for a wonder kept his word.
She thought it would do her no harm, for she sincerely meant to write nothing of which she would be ashamed, and quieted all pricks of conscience by anticipations of the happy minute when she should show her earnings and laugh over her well-kept secret.
Dashwood rejected any but thrilling tales, and as thrills could not be produced except by harrowing up the souls of the readers, history and romance, land and sea, science and art, police records and lunatic asylums, had to be ransacked for the purpose.
Jo soon found that her innocent experience had given her but few glimpses of the tragic world which underlies society, so regarding it in a business light, she set about supplying her deficiencies with characteristic energy.
Eager to find material for stories, and bent on making them original in plot, if not masterly in execution, she searched newspapers for accidents, incidents, and crimes.
She excited the suspicions of public librarians by asking for works on poisons.
She studied faces in the street, and characters, good, bad, and indifferent, all about her.
She delved in the dust of ancient times for facts or fictions so old that they were as good as new, and introduced herself to folly, sin, and misery, as well as her limited opportunities allowed.
She thought she was prospering finely, but unconsciously she was beginning to desecrate some of the womanliest attributes of a woman’s character.
She was living in bad society, and imaginary though it was, its influence affected her, for she was feeding heart and fancy on dangerous and unsubstantial food, and was fast brushing the innocent bloom from her nature by a premature acquaintance with the darker side of life, which comes soon enough to all of us.
She was beginning to feel rather than see this, for much describing of other people’s passions and feelings set her to studying and speculating about her own, a morbid amusement in which healthy young minds do not voluntarily indulge.
Wrongdoing always brings its own punishment, and when Jo most needed hers, she got it.
I don’t know whether the study of Shakespeare helped her to read character, or the natural instinct of a woman for what was honest, brave, and strong, but while endowing her imaginary heroes with every perfection under the sun, Jo was discovering a live hero, who interested her in spite of many human imperfections.
Bhaer, in one of their conversations, had advised her to study simple, true, and lovely characters, wherever she found them, as good training for a writer.
Jo took him at his word, for she coolly turned round and studied him—a proceeding which would have much surprised him, had he known it, for the worthy Professor was very humble in his own conceit.
Why everybody liked him was what puzzled Jo, at first.
He was neither rich nor great, young nor handsome, in no respect what is called fascinating, imposing, or brilliant, and yet he was as attractive as a genial fire, and people seemed to gather about him as naturally as about a warm hearth.
He was poor, yet always appeared to be giving something away; a stranger, yet everyone was his friend; no longer young, but as happy-hearted as a boy; plain and peculiar, yet his face looked beautiful to many, and his oddities were freely forgiven for his sake.
Jo often watched him, trying to discover the charm, and at last decided that it was benevolence which worked the miracle.
There were lines upon his forehead, but Time seemed to have touched him gently, remembering how kind he was to others.
The pleasant curves about his mouth were the memorials of many friendly words and cheery laughs, his eyes were never cold or hard, and his big hand had a warm, strong grasp that was more expressive than words.
His very clothes seemed to partake of the hospitable nature of the wearer.
They looked as if they were at ease, and liked to make him comfortable.
His capacious waistcoat was suggestive of a large heart underneath.
His very boots were benevolent, and his collars never stiff and raspy like other people’s.
“That’s it!” said Jo to herself, when she at length discovered that genuine good will toward one’s fellow men could beautify and dignify even a stout German teacher, who shoveled in his dinner, darned his own socks, and was burdened with the name of Bhaer.
Jo valued goodness highly, but she also possessed a most feminine respect for intellect, and a little discovery which she made about the Professor added much to her regard for him.
He never spoke of himself, and no one ever knew that in his native city he had been a man much honored and esteemed for learning and integrity, till a countryman came to see him.
He never spoke of himself, and in a conversation with Miss Norton divulged the pleasing fact.
She felt proud to know that he was an honored Professor in Berlin, though only a poor language-master in America, and his homely, hard-working life was much beautified by the spice of romance which this discovery gave it.
Another and a better gift than intellect was shown her in a most unexpected manner.
The solitary woman felt an interest in the ambitious girl, and kindly conferred many favors of this sort both on Jo and the Professor.
She took them with her one night to a select symposium, held in honor of several celebrities.
Jo went prepared to bow down and adore the mighty ones whom she had worshiped with youthful enthusiasm afar off.
But her reverence for genius received a severe shock that night, and it took her some time to recover from the discovery that the great creatures were only men and women after all.
Imagine her dismay, on stealing a glance of timid admiration at the poet whose lines suggested an ethereal being fed on ‘spirit, fire, and dew’, to behold him devouring his supper with an ardor which flushed his intellectual countenance.
Turning as from a fallen idol, she made other discoveries which rapidly dispelled her romantic illusions.
The scientific celebrities, forgetting their mollusks and glacial periods, gossiped about art, while devoting themselves to oysters and ices with characteristic energy; the young musician, who was charming the city like a second Orpheus, talked horses; and the specimen of the British nobility present happened to be the most ordinary man of the party.
Before the evening was half over, Jo felt so completely disillusioned, that she sat down in a corner to recover herself.
Bhaer soon joined her, looking rather out of his element, and presently several of the philosophers, each mounted on his hobby, came ambling up to hold an intellectual tournament in the recess.
The conversations were miles beyond Jo’s comprehension, but she enjoyed it, though Kant and Hegel were unknown gods, the Subjective and Objective unintelligible terms, and the only thing ‘evolved from her inner consciousness’ was a bad headache after it was all over.
It dawned upon her gradually that the world was being picked to pieces, and put together on new and, according to the talkers, on infinitely better principles than before, that religion was in a fair way to be reasoned into nothingness, and intellect was to be the only God.
Jo knew nothing about philosophy or metaphysics of any sort, but a curious excitement, half pleasurable, half painful, came over her as she listened with a sense of being turned adrift into time and space, like a young balloon out on a holiday.
She looked round to see how the Professor liked it, and found him looking at her with the grimmest expression she had ever seen him wear.
He shook his head and beckoned her to come away, but she was fascinated just then by the freedom of Speculative Philosophy, and kept her seat, trying to find out what the wise gentlemen intended to rely upon after they had annihilated all the old beliefs.
Bhaer was a diffident man and slow to offer his own opinions, not because they were unsettled, but too sincere and earnest to be lightly spoken.
As he glanced from Jo to several other young people, attracted by the brilliancy of the philosophic pyrotechnics, he knit his brows and longed to speak, fearing that some inflammable young soul would be led astray by the rockets, to find when the display was over that they had only an empty stick or a scorched hand.
He bore it as long as he could, but when he was appealed to for an opinion, he blazed up with honest indignation and defended religion with all the eloquence of truth—an eloquence which made his broken English musical and his plain face beautiful.
God was not a blind force, and immortality was not a pretty fable, but a blessed fact.
Bhaer paused, outtalked but not one whit convinced, Jo wanted to clap her hands and thank him.
She did neither, but she remembered the scene, and gave the Professor her heartiest respect, for she knew it cost him an effort to speak out then and there, because his conscience would not let him be silent.
She began to see that character is a better possession than money, rank, intellect, or beauty, and to feel that if greatness is what a wise man has defined it to be, ‘truth, reverence, and good will’, then her friend Friedrich Bhaer was not only good, but great.
This belief strengthened daily.
She valued his esteem, she coveted his respect, she wanted to be worthy of his friendship, and just when the wish was sincerest, she came near to losing everything.
It all grew out of a cocked hat, for one evening the Professor came in to give Jo her lesson with a paper soldier cap on his head, which Tina had put there and he had forgotten to take off.
“It’s evident he doesn’t look in his glass before coming down,” thought Jo, with a smile, as he said “Goot efening,” and sat soberly down, quite unconscious of the ludicrous contrast between his subject and his headgear, for he was going to read her the Death of Wallenstein.
She said nothing at first, for she liked to hear him laugh out his big, hearty laugh when anything funny happened, so she left him to discover it for himself, and presently forgot all about it, for to hear a German read Schiller is rather an absorbing occupation.
After the reading came the lesson, which was a lively one, for Jo was in a gay mood that night, and the cocked hat kept her eyes dancing with merriment.
The Professor didn’t know what to make of her, and stopped at last to ask with an air of mild surprise that was irresistible. . .
Haf you no respect for me, that you go on so bad?” “How can I be respectful, Sir, when you forget to take your hat off?” said Jo.
Lifting his hand to his head, the absent-minded Professor gravely felt and removed the little cocked hat, looked at it a minute, and then threw back his head and laughed like a merry bass viol.
Bhaer caught sight of a picture on the hat, and unfolding it, said with great disgust, “I wish these papers did not come in the house.
They are not for children to see, nor young people to read.
It is not well, and I haf no patience with those who make this harm.” Jo glanced at the sheet and saw a pleasing illustration composed of a lunatic, a corpse, a villain, and a viper.
She did not like it, but the impulse that made her turn it over was not one of displeasure but fear, because for a minute she fancied the paper was the Volcano.
It was not, however, and her panic subsided as she remembered that even if it had been and one of her own tales in it, there would have been no name to betray her.
She had betrayed herself, however, by a look and a blush, for though an absent man, the Professor saw a good deal more than people fancied.
He knew that Jo wrote, and had met her down among the newspaper offices more than once, but as she never spoke of it, he asked no questions in spite of a strong desire to see her work.
Now it occurred to him that she was doing what she was ashamed to own, and it troubled him.
He did not say to himself, “It is none of my business.
I’ve no right to say anything,” as many people would have done.
He only remembered that she was young and poor, a girl far away from mother’s love and father’s care, and he was moved to help her with an impulse as quick and natural as that which would prompt him to put out his hand to save a baby from a puddle.
All this flashed through his mind in a minute, but not a trace of it appeared in his face, and by the time the paper was turned, and Jo’s needle threaded, he was ready to say quite naturally, but very gravely...
They are made pleasant to some, but I would more rather give my boys gunpowder to play with than this bad trash.” “All may not be bad, only silly, you know, and if there is a demand for it, I don’t see any harm in supplying it.
Many very respectable people make an honest living out of what are called sensation stories,” said Jo, scratching gathers so energetically that a row of little slits followed her pin.
If the respectable people knew what harm they did, they would not feel that the living was honest.
They haf no right to put poison in the sugarplum, and let the small ones eat it.
Bhaer spoke warmly, and walked to the fire, crumpling the paper in his hands.
Jo sat still, looking as if the fire had come to her, for her cheeks burned long after the cocked hat had turned to smoke and gone harmlessly up the chimney.
“I should like much to send all the rest after him,” muttered the Professor, coming back with a relieved air.
Jo thought what a blaze her pile of papers upstairs would make, and her hard-earned money lay rather heavily on her conscience at that minute.
Then she thought consolingly to herself, “Mine are not like that, they are only silly, never bad, so I won’t be worried,” and taking up her book, she said, with a studious face, “Shall we go on, Sir?
I’ll be very good and proper now.” “I shall hope so,” was all he said, but he meant more than she imagined, and the grave, kind look he gave her made her feel as if the words Weekly Volcano were printed in large type on her forehead.
As soon as she went to her room, she got out her papers, and carefully reread every one of her stories.
Being a little shortsighted, Mr.
Bhaer sometimes used eye glasses, and Jo had tried them once, smiling to see how they magnified the fine print of her book.
Now she seemed to have on the Professor’s mental or moral spectacles also, for the faults of these poor stories glared at her dreadfully and filled her with dismay.
“They are trash, and will soon be worse trash if I go on, for each is more sensational than the last.
I know it’s so, for I can’t read this stuff in sober earnest without being horribly ashamed of it, and what should I do if they were seen at home or Mr.
“Yes, that’s the best place for such inflammable nonsense.
I’d better burn the house down, I suppose, than let other people blow themselves up with my gunpowder,” she thought as she watched the Demon of the Jura whisk away, a little black cinder with fiery eyes.
But when nothing remained of all her three month’s work except a heap of ashes and the money in her lap, Jo looked sober, as she sat on the floor, wondering what she ought to do about her wages.
“I think I haven’t done much harm yet, and may keep this to pay for my time,” she said, after a long meditation, adding impatiently, “I almost wish I hadn’t any conscience, it’s so inconvenient.
If I didn’t care about doing right, and didn’t feel uncomfortable when doing wrong, I should get on capitally.
Jo wrote no more sensational stories, deciding that the money did not pay for her share of the sensation, but going to the other extreme, as is the way with people of her stamp, she took a course of Mrs.
Sherwood, Miss Edgeworth, and Hannah More, and then produced a tale which might have been more properly called an essay or a sermon, so intensely moral was it.
She had her doubts about it from the beginning, for her lively fancy and girlish romance felt as ill at ease in the new style as she would have done masquerading in the stiff and cumbrous costume of the last century.
She sent this didactic gem to several markets, but it found no purchaser, and she was inclined to agree with Mr.
Dashwood that morals didn’t sell.
Then she tried a child’s story, which she could easily have disposed of if she had not been mercenary enough to demand filthy lucre for it.
The only person who offered enough to make it worth her while to try juvenile literature was a worthy gentleman who felt it his mission to convert all the world to his particular belief.
But much as she liked to write for children, Jo could not consent to depict all her naughty boys as being eaten by bears or tossed by mad bulls because they did not go to a particular Sabbath school, nor all the good infants who did go as rewarded by every kind of bliss, from gilded gingerbread to escorts of angels when they departed this life with psalms or sermons on their lisping tongues.
So nothing came of these trials, and Jo corked up her inkstand, and said in a fit of very wholesome humility...
“I don’t know anything.
I’ll wait until I do before I try again, and meantime, ‘sweep mud in the street’ if I can’t do better, that’s honest, at least.” Which decision proved that her second tumble down the beanstalk had done her some good.
While these internal revolutions were going on, her external life had been as busy and uneventful as usual, and if she sometimes looked serious or a little sad no one observed it but Professor Bhaer.
He did it so quietly that Jo never knew he was watching to see if she would accept and profit by his reproof, but she stood the test, and he was satisfied, for though no words passed between them, he knew that she had given up writing.
Not only did he guess it by the fact that the second finger of her right hand was no longer inky, but she spent her evenings downstairs now, was met no more among newspaper offices, and studied with a dogged patience, which assured him that she was bent on occupying her mind with something useful, if not pleasant.
He helped her in many ways, proving himself a true friend, and Jo was happy, for while her pen lay idle, she was learning other lessons besides German, and laying a foundation for the sensation story of her own life.
It was a pleasant winter and a long one, for she did not leave Mrs.
Everyone seemed sorry when the time came.
The children were inconsolable, and Mr.
Bhaer’s hair stuck straight up all over his head, for he always rumpled it wildly when disturbed in mind.
Ah, you are happy that you haf a home to go in,” he said, when she told him, and sat silently pulling his beard in the corner, while she held a little levee on that last evening.
She was going early, so she bade them all goodbye overnight, and when his turn came, she said warmly, “Now, Sir, you won’t forget to come and see us, if you ever travel our way, will you?
Shall I come?” he asked, looking down at her with an eager expression which she did not see.
Laurie graduates then, and you’d enjoy commencement as something new.” “That is your best friend, of whom you speak?” he said in an altered tone.
I’m very proud of him and should like you to see him.” Jo looked up then, quite unconscious of anything but her own pleasure in the prospect of showing them to one another.
Bhaer’s face suddenly recalled the fact that she might find Laurie more than a ‘best friend’, and simply because she particularly wished not to look as if anything was the matter, she involuntarily began to blush, and the more she tried not to, the redder she grew.
Fortunately the child was moved to hug her, so she managed to hide her face an instant, hoping the Professor did not see it.
But he did, and his own changed again from that momentary anxiety to its usual expression, as he said cordially...
“I fear I shall not make the time for that, but I wish the friend much success, and you all happiness.
Gott bless you!” And with that, he shook hands warmly, shouldered Tina, and went away.
But after the boys were abed, he sat long before his fire with the tired look on his face and the ‘heimweh’, or homesickness, lying heavy at his heart.
Once, when he remembered Jo as she sat with the little child in her lap and that new softness in her face, he leaned his head on his hands a minute, and then roamed about the room, as if in search of something that he could not find.
Then, as if reproaching himself for the longing that he could not repress, he went and kissed the two tousled heads upon the pillow, took down his seldom-used meerschaum, and opened his Plato.
He did his best and did it manfully, but I don’t think he found that a pair of rampant boys, a pipe, or even the divine Plato, were very satisfactory substitutes for wife and child at home.
They were all there, his grandfather—oh, so proud—Mr. and Mrs.
March, John and Meg, Jo and Beth, and all exulted over him with the sincere admiration which boys make light of at the time, but fail to win from the world by any after-triumphs.
“I’ve got to stay for this confounded supper, but I shall be home early tomorrow.
You’ll come and meet me as usual, girls?” Laurie said, as he put the sisters into the carriage after the joys of the day were over.
She had not the heart to refuse her splendid, successful boy anything, and answered warmly...
“I’ll come, Teddy, rain or shine, and march before you, playing ‘Hail the conquering hero comes’ on a jew’s-harp.” Laurie thanked her with a look that made her think in a sudden panic, “Oh, deary me!
I know he’ll say something, and then what shall I do?” Evening meditation and morning work somewhat allayed her fears, and having decided that she wouldn’t be vain enough to think people were going to propose when she had given them every reason to know what her answer would be, she set forth at the appointed time, hoping Teddy wouldn’t do anything to make her hurt his poor feelings.
A call at Meg’s, and a refreshing sniff and sip at the Daisy and Demijohn, still further fortified her for the tete-a-tete, but when she saw a stalwart figure looming in the distance, she had a strong desire to turn about and run away.
“Where’s the jew’s-harp, Jo?” cried Laurie, as soon as he was within speaking distance.
“I forgot it.” And Jo took heart again, for that salutation could not be called lover-like.
She always used to take his arm on these occasions, now she did not, and he made no complaint, which was a bad sign, but talked on rapidly about all sorts of faraway subjects, till they turned from the road into the little path that led homeward through the grove.
Then he walked more slowly, suddenly lost his fine flow of language, and now and then a dreadful pause occurred.
To rescue the conversation from one of the wells of silence into which it kept falling, Jo said hastily, “Now you must have a good long holiday!” “I intend to.” Something in his resolute tone made Jo look up quickly to find him looking down at her with an expression that assured her the dreaded moment had come, and made her put out her hand with an imploring, “No, Teddy.
It’s no use, Jo, we’ve got to have it out, and the sooner the better for both of us,” he answered, getting flushed and excited all at once.
I’ll listen,” said Jo, with a desperate sort of patience.
Laurie was a young lover, but he was in earnest, and meant to ‘have it out’, if he died in the attempt, so he plunged into the subject with characteristic impetuousity, saying in a voice that would get choky now and then, in spite of manful efforts to keep it steady...
I thought you’d understand...” began Jo, finding it a great deal harder than she expected.
They say no when they mean yes, and drive a man out of his wits just for the fun of it,” returned Laurie, entrenching himself behind an undeniable fact.
I only loved you all the more, and I worked hard to please you, and I gave up billiards and everything you didn’t like, and waited and never complained, for I hoped you’d love me, though I’m not half good enough...” Here there was a choke that couldn’t be controlled, so he decapitated buttercups while he cleared his ‘confounded throat’.
“You, you are, you’re a great deal too good for me, and I’m so grateful to you, and so proud and fond of you, I don’t know why I can’t love you as you want me to.
I’ve tried, but I can’t change the feeling, and it would be a lie to say I do when I don’t.” “Really, truly, Jo?” He stopped short, and caught both her hands as he put his question with a look that she did not soon forget.
“Really, truly, dear.” They were in the grove now, close by the stile, and when the last words fell reluctantly from Jo’s lips, Laurie dropped her hands and turned as if to go on, but for once in his life the fence was too much for him.
So he just laid his head down on the mossy post, and stood so still that Jo was frightened.
“Oh, Teddy, I’m sorry, so desperately sorry, I could kill myself if it would do any good!
You know it’s impossible for people to make themselves love other people if they don’t,” cried Jo inelegantly but remorsefully, as she softly patted his shoulder, remembering the time when he had comforted her so long ago.
“They do sometimes,” said a muffled voice from the post.
There was a long pause, while a blackbird sung blithely on the willow by the river, and the tall grass rustled in the wind.
Presently Jo said very soberly, as she sat down on the step of the stile, “Laurie, I want to tell you something.” He started as if he had been shot, threw up his head, and cried out in a fierce tone, “Don’t tell me that, Jo, I can’t bear it now!” “Tell what?” she asked, wondering at his violence.
“That you love that old man.” “What old man?” demanded Jo, thinking he must mean his grandfather.
“That devilish Professor you were always writing about.
If you say you love him, I know I shall do something desperate;” and he looked as if he would keep his word, as he clenched his hands with a wrathful spark in his eyes.
Jo wanted to laugh, but restrained herself and said warmly, for she too, was getting excited with all this, “Don’t swear, Teddy!
He isn’t old, nor anything bad, but good and kind, and the best friend I’ve got, next to you.
I want to be kind, but I know I shall get angry if you abuse my Professor.
I haven’t the least idea of loving him or anybody else.” “But you will after a while, and then what will become of me?” “You’ll love someone else too, like a sensible boy, and forget all this trouble.” “I can’t love anyone else, and I’ll never forget you, Jo, Never!
Never!” with a stamp to emphasize his passionate words.
“What shall I do with him?” sighed Jo, finding that emotions were more unmanagable than she expected.
Seeing a ray of hope in that last speech, Laurie threw himself down on the grass at her feet, leaned his arm on the lower step of the stile, and looked up at her with an expectant face.
Now that arrangement was not conducive to calm speech or clear thought on Jo’s part, for how could she say hard things to her boy while he watched her with eyes full of love and longing, and lashes still wet with the bitter drop or two her hardness of heart had wrung from him?
She gently turned his head away, saying, as she stroked the wavy hair which had been allowed to grow for her sake—how touching that was, to be sure!
“I agree with Mother that you and I are not suited to each other, because our quick tempers and strong wills would probably make us very miserable, if we were so foolish as to...” Jo paused a little over the last word, but Laurie uttered it with a rapturous expression.
If you loved me, Jo, I should be a perfect saint, for you could make me anything you like.” “No, I can’t.
I’ve tried and failed, and I won’t risk our happiness by such a serious experiment.
We don’t agree and we never shall, so we’ll be good friends all our lives, but we won’t go and do anything rash.” “Yes, we will if we get the chance,” muttered Laurie rebelliously.
“Now do be reasonable, and take a sensible view of the case,” implored Jo, almost at her wit’s end.
“I won’t be reasonable.
I don’t want to take what you call ‘a sensible view’.
I don’t believe you’ve got any heart.” “I wish I hadn’t.” There was a little quiver in Jo’s voice, and thinking it a good omen, Laurie turned round, bringing all his persuasive powers to bear as he said, in the wheedlesome tone that had never been so dangerously wheedlesome before, “Don’t disappoint us, dear!
Everyone expects it.
Do, do!” Not until months afterward did Jo understand how she had the strength of mind to hold fast to the resolution she had made when she decided that she did not love her boy, and never could.
You’ll see that I’m right, by-and-by, and thank me for it...” she began solemnly.
“I’ll be hanged if I do!” and Laurie bounced up off the grass, burning with indignation at the very idea.
“Yes, you will!” persisted Jo.
“You’ll get over this after a while, and find some lovely accomplished girl, who will adore you, and make a fine mistress for your fine house.
“You think so now, but there’ll come a time when you will care for somebody, and you’ll love him tremendously, and live and die for him.
I know you will, it’s your way, and I shall have to stand by and see it,” and the despairing lover cast his hat upon the ground with a gesture that would have seemed comical, if his face had not been so tragic.
“Yes, I will live and die for him, if he ever comes and makes me love him in spite of myself, and you must do the best you can!” cried Jo, losing patience with poor Teddy.
“I’ve done my best, but you won’t be reasonable, and it’s selfish of you to keep teasing for what I can’t give.
I shall always be fond of you, very fond indeed, as a friend, but I’ll never marry you, and the sooner you believe it the better for both of us—so now!” That speech was like gunpowder.
Laurie looked at her a minute as if he did not quite know what to do with himself, then turned sharply away, saying in a desperate sort of tone, “You’ll be sorry some day, Jo.” “Oh, where are you going?” she cried, for his face frightened her.
“To the devil!” was the consoling answer.
For a minute Jo’s heart stood still, as he swung himself down the bank toward the river, but it takes much folly, sin or misery to send a young man to a violent death, and Laurie was not one of the weak sort who are conquered by a single failure.
He had no thought of a melodramatic plunge, but some blind instinct led him to fling hat and coat into his boat, and row away with all his might, making better time up the river than he had done in any race.
Jo drew a long breath and unclasped her hands as she watched the poor fellow trying to outstrip the trouble which he carried in his heart.
“That will do him good, and he’ll come home in such a tender, penitent state of mind, that I shan’t dare to see him,” she said, adding, as she went slowly home, feeling as if she had murdered some innocent thing, and buried it under the leaves.
Laurence to be very kind to my poor boy.
I wish he’d love Beth, perhaps he may in time, but I begin to think I was mistaken about her.
I think it’s dreadful.” Being sure that no one could do it so well as herself, she went straight to Mr.
Laurence, told the hard story bravely through, and then broke down, crying so dismally over her own insensibility that the kind old gentleman, though sorely disappointed, did not utter a reproach.
He found it difficult to understand how any girl could help loving Laurie, and hoped she would change her mind, but he knew even better than Jo that love cannot be forced, so he shook his head sadly and resolved to carry his boy out of harm’s way, for Young Impetuosity’s parting words to Jo disturbed him more than he would confess.
When Laurie came home, dead tired but quite composed, his grandfather met him as if he knew nothing, and kept up the delusion very successfully for an hour or two.
But when they sat together in the twilight, the time they used to enjoy so much, it was hard work for the old man to ramble on as usual, and harder still for the young one to listen to praises of the last year’s success, which to him now seemed like love’s labor lost.
The windows were open, and Jo, walking in the garden with Beth, for once understood music better than her sister, for he played the ‘_Sonata Pathetique_’, and played it as he never did before.
Give us something gayer, lad,” said Mr.
Laurence, whose kind old heart was full of sympathy, which he longed to show but knew not how.
Laurie dashed into a livelier strain, played stormily for several minutes, and would have got through bravely, if in a momentary lull Mrs.
I want you.” Just what Laurie longed to say, with a different meaning!
As he listened, he lost his place, the music ended with a broken chord, and the musician sat silent in the dark.
“I can’t stand this,” muttered the old gentleman.
I want to say one thing, and then there shall be an end of it,” returned Mr.
Laurence with unusual mildness.
Jo can’t prevent my seeing her, and I shall stay and do it as long as I like,” interrupted Laurie in a defiant tone.
“Not if you are the gentleman I think you.
I’m disappointed, but the girl can’t help it, and the only thing left for you to do is to go away for a time.
Where will you go?” “Anywhere.
I don’t care what becomes of me,” and Laurie got up with a reckless laugh that grated on his grandfather’s ear.
“Take it like a man, and don’t do anything rash, for God’s sake.
Why not go abroad, as you planned, and forget it?” “I can’t.” “But you’ve been wild to go, and I promised you should when you got through college.” “Ah, but I didn’t mean to go alone!” and Laurie walked fast through the room with an expression which it was well his grandfather did not see.
There’s someone ready and glad to go with you, anywhere in the world.” “Who, Sir?” stopping to listen.
“Myself.” Laurie came back as quickly as he went, and put out his hand, saying huskily, “I’m a selfish brute, but—you know—Grandfather—” “Lord help me, yes, I do know, for I’ve been through it all before, once in my own young days, and then with your father.
Laurence, keeping hold of the young man, as if fearful that he would break away as his father had done before him.
“Well, sir, what is it?” and Laurie sat down, without a sign of interest in face or voice.
“There is business in London that needs looking after.
My partners do almost everything, I’m merely holding on until you take my place, and can be off at any time.” “But you hate traveling, Sir.
I can’t ask it of you at your age,” began Laurie, who was grateful for the sacrifice, but much preferred to go alone, if he went at all.
The old gentleman knew that perfectly well, and particularly desired to prevent it, for the mood in which he found his grandson assured him that it would not be wise to leave him to his own devices.
So, stifling a natural regret at the thought of the home comforts he would leave behind him, he said stoutly, “Bless your soul, I’m not superannuated yet.
It will do me good, and my old bones won’t suffer, for traveling nowadays is almost as easy as sitting in a chair.” A restless movement from Laurie suggested that his chair was not easy, or that he did not like the plan, and made the old man add hastily, “I don’t mean to be a marplot or a burden.
He sighed, and then said, in a spiritless tone, “Just as you like, Sir.
It doesn’t matter where I go or what I do.” “It does to me, remember that, my lad.
Promise me that, Laurie.” “Anything you like, Sir.” “Good,” thought the old gentleman.
“You don’t care now, but there’ll come a time when that promise will keep you out of mischief, or I’m much mistaken.” Being an energetic individual, Mr.
Laurence struck while the iron was hot, and before the blighted being recovered spirit enough to rebel, they were off.
During the time necessary for preparation, Laurie bore himself as young gentleman usually do in such cases.
He was moody, irritable, and pensive by turns, lost his appetite, neglected his dress and devoted much time to playing tempestuously on his piano, avoided Jo, but consoled himself by staring at her from his window, with a tragic face that haunted her dreams by night and oppressed her with a heavy sense of guilt by day.
Unlike some sufferers, he never spoke of his unrequited passion, and would allow no one, not even Mrs.
March, to attempt consolation or offer sympathy.
On some accounts, this was a relief to his friends, but the weeks before his departure were very uncomfortable, and everyone rejoiced that the ‘poor, dear fellow was going away to forget his trouble, and come home happy’.
Of course, he smiled darkly at their delusion, but passed it by with the sad superiority of one who knew that his fidelity like his love was unalterable.
When the parting came he affected high spirits, to conceal certain inconvenient emotions which seemed inclined to assert themselves.
March kissed him, with a whisper full of motherly solicitude.
Then feeling that he was going very fast, he hastily embraced them all round, not forgetting the afflicted Hannah, and ran downstairs as if for his life.
Jo followed a minute after to wave her hand to him if he looked round.
He did look round, came back, put his arms about her as she stood on the step above him, and looked up at her with a face that made his short appeal eloquent and pathetic.
Then Laurie straightened himself up, said, “It’s all right, never mind,” and went away without another word.
No one spoke of it or seemed aware of it, for it had come too gradually to startle those who saw her daily, but to eyes sharpened by absence, it was very plain and a heavy weight fell on Jo’s heart as she saw her sister’s face.
It was no paler and but littler thinner than in the autumn, yet there was a strange, transparent look about it, as if the mortal was being slowly refined away, and the immortal shining through the frail flesh with an indescribably pathetic beauty.
Jo saw and felt it, but said nothing at the time, and soon the first impression lost much of its power, for Beth seemed happy, no one appeared to doubt that she was better, and presently in other cares Jo for a time forgot her fear.
But when Laurie was gone, and peace prevailed again, the vague anxiety returned and haunted her.
She had confessed her sins and been forgiven, but when she showed her savings and proposed a mountain trip, Beth had thanked her heartily, but begged not to go so far away from home.
Another little visit to the seashore would suit her better, and as Grandma could not be prevailed upon to leave the babies, Jo took Beth down to the quiet place, where she could live much in the open air, and let the fresh sea breezes blow a little color into her pale cheeks.
It was not a fashionable place, but even among the pleasant people there, the girls made few friends, preferring to live for one another.
So they were all in all to each other, and came and went, quite unconscious of the interest they excited in those about them, who watched with sympathetic eyes the strong sister and the feeble one, always together, as if they felt instinctively that a long separation was not far away.
They did feel it, yet neither spoke of it, for often between ourselves and those nearest and dearest to us there exists a reserve which it is very hard to overcome.
Jo felt as if a veil had fallen between her heart and Beth’s, but when she put out her hand to lift it up, there seemed something sacred in the silence, and she waited for Beth to speak.
She wondered, and was thankful also, that her parents did not seem to see what she saw, and during the quiet weeks when the shadows grew so plain to her, she said nothing of it to those at home, believing that it would tell itself when Beth came back no better.
She wondered still more if her sister really guessed the hard truth, and what thoughts were passing through her mind during the long hours when she lay on the warm rocks with her head in Jo’s lap, while the winds blew healthfully over her and the sea made music at her feet.
But she could not find enough to satisfy her, for the cheeks were very thin, and the hands seemed too feeble to hold even the rosy little shells they had been collecting.
It came to her then more bitterly than ever that Beth was slowly drifting away from her, and her arms instinctively tightened their hold upon the dearest treasure she possessed.
For a minute her eyes were too dim for seeing, and when they cleared, Beth was looking up at her so tenderly that there was hardly any need for her to say, “Jo, dear, I’m glad you know it.
She was the weaker then, and Beth tried to comfort and sustain her, with her arms about her and the soothing words she whispered in her ear.
Try to see it so and don’t be troubled about me, because it’s best, indeed it is.” “Is this what made you so unhappy in the autumn, Beth?
You did not feel it then, and keep it to yourself so long, did you?” asked Jo, refusing to see or say that it was best, but glad to know that Laurie had no part in Beth’s trouble.
But when I saw you all so well and strong and full of happy plans, it was hard to feel that I could never be like you, and then I was miserable, Jo.” “Oh, Beth, and you didn’t tell me, didn’t let me comfort and help you?
How could you shut me out, bear it all alone?” Jo’s voice was full of tender reproach, and her heart ached to think of the solitary struggle that must have gone on while Beth learned to say goodbye to health, love, and life, and take up her cross so cheerfully.
I wasn’t sure, no one said anything, and I hoped I was mistaken.
It would have been selfish to frighten you all when Marmee was so anxious about Meg, and Amy away, and you so happy with Laurie—at least I thought so then.” “And I thought you loved him, Beth, and I went away because I couldn’t,” cried Jo, glad to say all the truth.
I was afraid it was so, and imagined your poor little heart full of lovelornity all that while.” “Why, Jo, how could I, when he was so fond of you?” asked Beth, as innocently as a child.
But he could never be anything to me but my brother.
I hope he truly will be, sometime.” “Not through me,” said Jo decidedly.
“Amy is left for him, and they would suit excellently, but I have no heart for such things, now.
It’s like the tide, Jo, when it turns, it goes slowly, but it can’t be stopped.” “It shall be stopped, your tide must not turn so soon, nineteen is too young, Beth.
I’ll keep you in spite of everything.
God won’t be so cruel as to take you from me,” cried poor Jo rebelliously, for her spirit was far less piously submissive than Beth’s.
It shows itself in acts rather than in words, and has more influence than homilies or protestations.
Beth could not reason upon or explain the faith that gave her courage and patience to give up life, and cheerfully wait for death.
Like a confiding child, she asked no questions, but left everything to God and nature, Father and Mother of us all, feeling sure that they, and they only, could teach and strengthen heart and spirit for this life and the life to come.
She did not rebuke Jo with saintly speeches, only loved her better for her passionate affection, and clung more closely to the dear human love, from which our Father never means us to be weaned, but through which He draws us closer to Himself.
She could only sob out, “I try to be willing,” while she held fast to Jo, as the first bitter wave of this great sorrow broke over them together.
By and by Beth said, with recovered serenity, “You’ll tell them this when we go home?” “I think they will see it without words,” sighed Jo, for now it seemed to her that Beth changed every day.
I’ve heard that the people who love best are often blindest to such things.
I’m going to believe that it is a sick fancy, and not let you think it’s true.” said Jo, trying to speak cheerfully.
Beth lay a minute thinking, and then said in her quiet way, “I don’t know how to express myself, and shouldn’t try to anyone but you, because I can’t speak out except to my Jo.
I only mean to say that I have a feeling that it never was intended I should live long.
I couldn’t seem to imagine myself anything but stupid little Beth, trotting about at home, of no use anywhere but there.
I’m not afraid, but it seems as if I should be homesick for you even in heaven.” Jo could not speak, and for several minutes there was no sound but the sigh of the wind and the lapping of the tide.
A white-winged gull flew by, with the flash of sunshine on its silvery breast.
Beth watched it till it vanished, and her eyes were full of sadness.
A little gray-coated sand bird came tripping over the beach ‘peeping’ softly to itself, as if enjoying the sun and sea.
It came quite close to Beth, and looked at her with a friendly eye and sat upon a warm stone, dressing its wet feathers, quite at home.
Beth smiled and felt comforted, for the tiny thing seemed to offer its small friendship and remind her that a pleasant world was still to be enjoyed.
They are not so wild and handsome, but they seem happy, confiding little things.
I used to call them my birds last summer, and Mother said they reminded her of me—busy, quaker-colored creatures, always near the shore, and always chirping that contented little song of theirs.
Meg is the turtledove, and Amy is like the lark she writes about, trying to get up among the clouds, but always dropping down into its nest again.
She’s so ambitious, but her heart is good and tender, and no matter how high she flies, she never will forget home.
I’m going to have you well and rosy by that time,” began Jo, feeling that of all the changes in Beth, the talking change was the greatest, for it seemed to cost no effort now, and she thought aloud in a way quite unlike bashful Beth.
We won’t be miserable, but enjoy being together while we wait.
We’ll have happy times, for I don’t suffer much, and I think the tide will go out easily, if you help me.” Jo leaned down to kiss the tranquil face, and with that silent kiss, she dedicated herself soul and body to Beth.
Her father stood leaning his head on the mantelpiece and did not turn as she came in, but her mother stretched out her arms as if for help, and Jo went to comfort her without a word.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN NEW IMPRESSIONS At three o’clock in the afternoon, all the fashionable world at Nice may be seen on the Promenade des Anglais—a charming place, for the wide walk, bordered with palms, flowers, and tropical shrubs, is bounded on one side by the sea, on the other by the grand drive, lined with hotels and villas, while beyond lie orange orchards and the hills.
Many nations are represented, many languages spoken, many costumes worn, and on a sunny day the spectacle is as gay and brilliant as a carnival.
Haughty English, lively French, sober Germans, handsome Spaniards, ugly Russians, meek Jews, free-and-easy Americans, all drive, sit, or saunter here, chatting over the news, and criticizing the latest celebrity who has arrived—Ristori or Dickens, Victor Emmanuel or the Queen of the Sandwich Islands.
The equipages are as varied as the company and attract as much attention, especially the low basket barouches in which ladies drive themselves, with a pair of dashing ponies, gay nets to keep their voluminous flounces from overflowing the diminutive vehicles, and little grooms on the perch behind.
Along this walk, on Christmas Day, a tall young man walked slowly, with his hands behind him, and a somewhat absent expression of countenance.
He looked like an Italian, was dressed like an Englishman, and had the independent air of an American—a combination which caused sundry pairs of feminine eyes to look approvingly after him, and sundry dandies in black velvet suits, with rose-colored neckties, buff gloves, and orange flowers in their buttonholes, to shrug their shoulders, and then envy him his inches.
Presently he strolled out of the promenade and stood a moment at the crossing, as if undecided whether to go and listen to the band in the Jardin Publique, or to wander along the beach toward Castle Hill.
The quick trot of ponies’ feet made him look up, as one of the little carriages, containing a single young lady, came rapidly down the street.
I thought you’d never come!” cried Amy, dropping the reins and holding out both hands, to the great scandalization of a French mamma, who hastened her daughter’s steps, lest she should be demoralized by beholding the free manners of these ‘mad English’.
“I was detained by the way, but I promised to spend Christmas with you, and here I am.” “How is your grandfather?
Where are you staying?” “Very well—last night—at the Chauvain.
Flo’s saving up for tonight.” “What happens then, a ball?” “A Christmas party at our hotel.
There are many Americans there, and they give it in honor of the day.
Where now?” asked Laurie, leaning back and folding his arms, a proceeding which suited Amy, who preferred to drive, for her parasol whip and blue reins over the white ponies’ backs afforded her infinite satisfaction.
The view is so lovely, and I like to feed the peacocks.
Have you ever been there?” “Often, years ago, but I don’t mind having a look at it.” “Now tell me all about yourself.
The last I heard of you, your grandfather wrote that he expected you from Berlin.” “Yes, I spent a month there and then joined him in Paris, where he has settled for the winter.
He has friends there and finds plenty to amuse him, so I go and come, and we get on capitally.” “That’s a sociable arrangement,” said Amy, missing something in Laurie’s manner, though she couldn’t tell what.
“Why, you see, he hates to travel, and I hate to keep still, so we each suit ourselves, and there is no trouble.
I am often with him, and he enjoys my adventures, while I like to feel that someone is glad to see me when I get back from my wanderings.
Dirty old hole, isn’t it?” he added, with a look of disgust as they drove along the boulevard to the Place Napoleon in the old city.
“The dirt is picturesque, so I don’t mind.
The river and the hills are delicious, and these glimpses of the narrow cross streets are my delight.
Now we shall have to wait for that procession to pass.
John.” While Laurie listlessly watched the procession of priests under their canopies, white-veiled nuns bearing lighted tapers, and some brotherhood in blue chanting as they walked, Amy watched him, and felt a new sort of shyness steal over her, for he was changed, and she could not find the merry-faced boy she left in the moody-looking man beside her.
He was handsomer than ever and greatly improved, she thought, but now that the flush of pleasure at meeting her was over, he looked tired and spiritless—not sick, nor exactly unhappy, but older and graver than a year or two of prosperous life should have made him.
She couldn’t understand it and did not venture to ask questions, so she shook her head and touched up her ponies, as the procession wound away across the arches of the Paglioni bridge and vanished in the church.
“Que pensez-vous?” she said, airing her French, which had improved in quantity, if not in quality, since she came abroad.
“That mademoiselle has made good use of her time, and the result is charming,” replied Laurie, bowing with his hand on his heart and an admiring look.
She blushed with pleasure, but somehow the compliment did not satisfy her like the blunt praises he used to give her at home, when he promenaded round her on festival occasions, and told her she was ‘altogether jolly’, with a hearty smile and an approving pat on the head.
She didn’t like the new tone, for though not blase, it sounded indifferent in spite of the look.
“If that’s the way he’s going to grow up, I wish he’d stay a boy,” she thought, with a curious sense of disappointment and discomfort, trying meantime to seem quite easy and gay.
At Avigdor’s she found the precious home letters and, giving the reins to Laurie, read them luxuriously as they wound up the shady road between green hedges, where tea roses bloomed as freshly as in June.
Presently she laughed and showed him a small sketch of Jo in her scribbling suit, with the bow rampantly erect upon her cap, and issuing from her mouth the words, ‘Genius burns!’.
Laurie smiled, took it, put it in his vest pocket ‘to keep it from blowing away’, and listened with interest to the lively letter Amy read him.
“This will be a regularly merry Christmas to me, with presents in the morning, you and letters in the afternoon, and a party at night,” said Amy, as they alighted among the ruins of the old fort, and a flock of splendid peacocks came trooping about them, tamely waiting to be fed.
While Amy stood laughing on the bank above him as she scattered crumbs to the brilliant birds, Laurie looked at her as she had looked at him, with a natural curiosity to see what changes time and absence had wrought.
He found nothing to perplex or disappoint, much to admire and approve, for overlooking a few little affectations of speech and manner, she was as sprightly and graceful as ever, with the addition of that indescribable something in dress and bearing which we call elegance.
Always mature for her age, she had gained a certain aplomb in both carriage and conversation, which made her seem more of a woman of the world than she was, but her old petulance now and then showed itself, her strong will still held its own, and her native frankness was unspoiled by foreign polish.
Laurie did not read all this while he watched her feed the peacocks, but he saw enough to satisfy and interest him, and carried away a pretty little picture of a bright-faced girl standing in the sunshine, which brought out the soft hue of her dress, the fresh color of her cheeks, the golden gloss of her hair, and made her a prominent figure in the pleasant scene.
As they came up onto the stone plateau that crowns the hill, Amy waved her hand as if welcoming him to her favorite haunt, and said, pointing here and there, “Do you remember the Cathedral and the Corso, the fishermen dragging their nets in the bay, and the lovely road to Villa Franca, Schubert’s Tower, just below, and best of all, that speck far out to sea which they say is Corsica?” “I remember.
It’s not much changed,” he answered without enthusiasm.
“Yes,” was all he said, but he turned and strained his eyes to see the island which a greater usurper than even Napoleon now made interesting in his sight.
“Take a good look at it for her sake, and then come and tell me what you have been doing with yourself all this while,” said Amy, seating herself, ready for a good talk.
But she did not get it, for though he joined her and answered all her questions freely, she could only learn that he had roved about the Continent and been to Greece.
So after idling away an hour, they drove home again, and having paid his respects to Mrs.
Carrol, Laurie left them, promising to return in the evening.
It must be recorded of Amy that she deliberately prinked that night.
She had seen her old friend in a new light, not as ‘our boy’, but as a handsome and agreeable man, and she was conscious of a very natural desire to find favor in his sight.
Tarlatan and tulle were cheap at Nice, so she enveloped herself in them on such occasions, and following the sensible English fashion of simple dress for young girls, got up charming little toilettes with fresh flowers, a few trinkets, and all manner of dainty devices, which were both inexpensive and effective.
It must be confessed that the artist sometimes got possession of the woman, and indulged in antique coiffures, statuesque attitudes, and classic draperies.
But, dear heart, we all have our little weaknesses, and find it easy to pardon such in the young, who satisfy our eyes with their comeliness, and keep our hearts merry with their artless vanities.
“I do want him to think I look well, and tell them so at home,” said Amy to herself, as she put on Flo’s old white silk ball dress, and covered it with a cloud of fresh illusion, out of which her white shoulders and golden head emerged with a most artistic effect.
Her hair she had the sense to let alone, after gathering up the thick waves and curls into a Hebe-like knot at the back of her head.
“It’s not the fashion, but it’s becoming, and I can’t afford to make a fright of myself,” she used to say, when advised to frizzle, puff, or braid, as the latest style commanded.
Having no ornaments fine enough for this important occasion, Amy looped her fleecy skirts with rosy clusters of azalea, and framed the white shoulders in delicate green vines.
Remembering the painted boots, she surveyed her white satin slippers with girlish satisfaction, and chasseed down the room, admiring her aristocratic feet all by herself.
“My new fan just matches my flowers, my gloves fit to a charm, and the real lace on Aunt’s mouchoir gives an air to my whole dress.
If I only had a classical nose and mouth I should be perfectly happy,” she said, surveying herself with a critical eye and a candle in each hand.
In spite of this affliction, she looked unusually gay and graceful as she glided away.
She seldom ran—it did not suit her style, she thought, for being tall, the stately and Junoesque was more appropriate than the sportive or piquante.
She walked up and down the long saloon while waiting for Laurie, and once arranged herself under the chandelier, which had a good effect upon her hair, then she thought better of it, and went away to the other end of the room, as if ashamed of the girlish desire to have the first view a propitious one.
It so happened that she could not have done a better thing, for Laurie came in so quietly she did not hear him, and as she stood at the distant window, with her head half turned and one hand gathering up her dress, the slender, white figure against the red curtains was as effective as a well-placed statue.
“Good evening, Diana!” said Laurie, with the look of satisfaction she liked to see in his eyes when they rested on her.
“Good evening, Apollo!” she answered, smiling back at him, for he too looked unusually debonair, and the thought of entering the ballroom on the arm of such a personable man caused Amy to pity the four plain Misses Davis from the bottom of her heart.
I arranged them myself, remembering that you didn’t like what Hannah calls a ‘sot-bookay’,” said Laurie, handing her a delicate nosegay, in a holder that she had long coveted as she daily passed it in Cardiglia’s window.
“How kind you are!” she exclaimed gratefully.
“If I’d known you were coming I’d have had something ready for you today, though not as pretty as this, I’m afraid.” “Thank you.
It isn’t what it should be, but you have improved it,” he added, as she snapped the silver bracelet on her wrist.
“Please don’t.” “I thought you liked that sort of thing.” “Not from you, it doesn’t sound natural, and I like your old bluntness better.” “I’m glad of it,” he answered, with a look of relief, then buttoned her gloves for her, and asked if his tie was straight, just as he used to do when they went to parties together at home.
The company assembled in the long salle a manger, that evening, was such as one sees nowhere but on the Continent.
The hospitable Americans had invited every acquaintance they had in Nice, and having no prejudice against titles, secured a few to add luster to their Christmas ball.
A Russian prince condescended to sit in a corner for an hour and talk with a massive lady, dressed like Hamlet’s mother in black velvet with a pearl bridle under her chin.
A Polish count, aged eighteen, devoted himself to the ladies, who pronounced him, ‘a fascinating dear’, and a German Serene Something, having come to supper alone, roamed vaguely about, seeking what he might devour.
Baron Rothschild’s private secretary, a large-nosed Jew in tight boots, affably beamed upon the world, as if his master’s name crowned him with a golden halo.
A stout Frenchman, who knew the Emperor, came to indulge his mania for dancing, and Lady de Jones, a British matron, adorned the scene with her little family of eight.
Of course, there were many light-footed, shrill-voiced American girls, handsome, lifeless-looking English ditto, and a few plain but piquante French demoiselles, likewise the usual set of traveling young gentlemen who disported themselves gaily, while mammas of all nations lined the walls and smiled upon them benignly when they danced with their daughters.
She knew she looked well, she loved to dance, she felt that her foot was on her native heath in a ballroom, and enjoyed the delightful sense of power which comes when young girls first discover the new and lovely kingdom they are born to rule by virtue of beauty, youth, and womanhood.
She did pity the Davis girls, who were awkward, plain, and destitute of escort, except a grim papa and three grimmer maiden aunts, and she bowed to them in her friendliest manner as she passed, which was good of her, as it permitted them to see her dress, and burn with curiosity to know who her distinguished-looking friend might be.
With the first burst of the band, Amy’s color rose, her eyes began to sparkle, and her feet to tap the floor impatiently, for she danced well and wanted Laurie to know it.
Therefore the shock she received can better be imagined than described, when he said in a perfectly tranquil tone, “Do you care to dance?” “One usually does at a ball.” Her amazed look and quick answer caused Laurie to repair his error as fast as possible.
He dances divinely, but he will excuse me, as you are an old friend,” said Amy, hoping that the name would have a good effect, and show Laurie that she was not to be trifled with.
A daughter of the gods, Devinely tall, and most divinely fair,” was all the satisfaction she got, however.
The set in which they found themselves was composed of English, and Amy was compelled to walk decorously through a cotillion, feeling all the while as if she could dance the tarantella with relish.
Laurie resigned her to the ‘nice little boy’, and went to do his duty to Flo, without securing Amy for the joys to come, which reprehensible want of forethought was properly punished, for she immediately engaged herself till supper, meaning to relent if he then gave any signs penitence.
She showed him her ball book with demure satisfaction when he strolled instead of rushed up to claim her for the next, a glorious polka redowa.
But his polite regrets didn’t impose upon her, and when she galloped away with the Count, she saw Laurie sit down by her aunt with an actual expression of relief.
That was unpardonable, and Amy took no more notice of him for a long while, except a word now and then when she came to her chaperon between the dances for a necessary pin or a moment’s rest.
Her anger had a good effect, however, for she hid it under a smiling face, and seemed unusually blithe and brilliant.
Laurie’s eyes followed her with pleasure, for she neither romped nor sauntered, but danced with spirit and grace, making the delightsome pastime what it should be.
He very naturally fell to studying her from this new point of view, and before the evening was half over, had decided that ‘little Amy was going to make a very charming woman’.
It was a lively scene, for soon the spirit of the social season took possession of everyone, and Christmas merriment made all faces shine, hearts happy, and heels light.
The musicians fiddled, tooted, and banged as if they enjoyed it, everybody danced who could, and those who couldn’t admired their neighbors with uncommon warmth.
The air was dark with Davises, and many Joneses gamboled like a flock of young giraffes.
The golden secretary darted through the room like a meteor with a dashing French-woman who carpeted the floor with her pink satin train.
The serene Teuton found the supper-table and was happy, eating steadily through the bill of fare, and dismayed the garcons by the ravages he committed.
But the Emperor’s friend covered himself with glory, for he danced everything, whether he knew it or not, and introduced impromptu pirouettes when the figures bewildered him.
The boyish abandon of that stout man was charming to behold, for though he ‘carried weight’, he danced like an India-rubber ball.
He ran, he flew, he pranced, his face glowed, his bald head shown, his coattails waved wildly, his pumps actually twinkled in the air, and when the music stopped, he wiped the drops from his brow, and beamed upon his fellow men like a French Pickwick without glasses.
Amy and her Pole distinguished themselves by equal enthusiasm but more graceful agility, and Laurie found himself involuntarily keeping time to the rhythmic rise and fall of the white slippers as they flew by as indefatigably as if winged.
When little Vladimir finally relinquished her, with assurances that he was ‘desolated to leave so early’, she was ready to rest, and see how her recreant knight had borne his punishment.
It had been successful, for at three-and-twenty, blighted affections find a balm in friendly society, and young nerves will thrill, young blood dance, and healthy young spirits rise, when subjected to the enchantment of beauty, light, music, and motion.
Laurie had a waked-up look as he rose to give her his seat, and when he hurried away to bring her some supper, she said to herself, with a satisfied smile, “Ah, I thought that would do him good!” “You look like Balzac’s ‘_Femme Peinte Par Elle-Meme_’,” he said, as he fanned her with one hand and held her coffee cup in the other.
“My rouge won’t come off.” and Amy rubbed her brilliant cheek, and showed him her white glove with a sober simplicity that made him laugh outright.
“What do you call this stuff?” he asked, touching a fold of her dress that had blown over his knee.
“Illusion.” “Good name for it.
You have seen it on dozens of girls, and you never found out that it was pretty till now—stupide!” “I never saw it on you before, which accounts for the mistake, you see.” “None of that, it is forbidden.
I’d rather take coffee than compliments just now.
No, don’t lounge, it makes me nervous.” Laurie sat bold upright, and meekly took her empty plate feeling an odd sort of pleasure in having ‘little Amy’ order him about, for she had lost her shyness now, and felt an irrestible desire to trample on him, as girls have a delightful way of doing when lords of creation show any signs of subjection.
“Where did you learn all this sort of thing?” he asked with a quizzical look.
“As ‘this sort of thing’ is rather a vague expression, would you kindly explain?” returned Amy, knowing perfectly well what he meant, but wickedly leaving him to describe what is indescribable.
“Well—the general air, the style, the self-possession, the—the—illusion—you know”, laughed Laurie, breaking down and helping himself out of his quandary with the new word.
Amy was gratified, but of course didn’t show it, and demurely answered, “Foreign life polishes one in spite of one’s self.
Amy did not know why he looked at her so kindly, nor why he filled up her book with his own name, and devoted himself to her for the rest of the evening in the most delightful manner; but the impulse that wrought this agreeable change was the result of one of the new impressions which both of them were unconsciously giving and receiving.
In America, as everyone knows, girls early sign the declaration of independence, and enjoy their freedom with republican zest, but the young matrons usually abdicate with the first heir to the throne and go into a seclusion almost as close as a French nunnery, though by no means as quiet.
As she was a womanly little woman, the maternal instinct was very strong, and she was entirely absorbed in her children, to the utter exclusion of everything and everybody else.
Day and night she brooded over them with tireless devotion and anxiety, leaving John to the tender mercies of the help, for an Irish lady now presided over the kitchen department.
Being a domestic man, John decidedly missed the wifely attentions he had been accustomed to receive, but as he adored his babies, he cheerfully relinquished his comfort for a time, supposing with masculine ignorance that peace would soon be restored.
Meg looked worn and nervous, the babies absorbed every minute of her time, the house was neglected, and Kitty, the cook, who took life ‘aisy’, kept him on short commons.
When he went out in the morning he was bewildered by small commissions for the captive mamma, if he came gaily in at night, eager to embrace his family, he was quenched by a “Hush!
They are just asleep after worrying all day.” If he proposed a little amusement at home, “No, it would disturb the babies.” If he hinted at a lecture or a concert, he was answered with a reproachful look, and a decided—“Leave my children for pleasure, never!” His sleep was broken by infant wails and visions of a phantom figure pacing noiselessly to and fro in the watches of the night.
His meals were interrupted by the frequent flight of the presiding genius, who deserted him, half-helped, if a muffled chirp sounded from the nest above.
And when he read his paper of an evening, Demi’s colic got into the shipping list and Daisy’s fall affected the price of stocks, for Mrs.
Brooke was only interested in domestic news.
The poor man was very uncomfortable, for the children had bereft him of his wife, home was merely a nursery and the perpetual ‘hushing’ made him feel like a brutal intruder whenever he entered the sacred precincts of Babyland.
He bore it very patiently for six months, and when no signs of amendment appeared, he did what other paternal exiles do—tried to get a little comfort elsewhere.
Scott had married and gone to housekeeping not far off, and John fell into the way of running over for an hour or two of an evening, when his own parlor was empty, and his own wife singing lullabies that seemed to have no end.
Scott was a lively, pretty girl, with nothing to do but be agreeable, and she performed her mission most successfully.
The parlor was always bright and attractive, the chessboard ready, the piano in tune, plenty of gay gossip, and a nice little supper set forth in tempting style.
John would have preferred his own fireside if it had not been so lonely, but as it was he gratefully took the next best thing and enjoyed his neighbor’s society.
Meg rather approved of the new arrangement at first, and found it a relief to know that John was having a good time instead of dozing in the parlor, or tramping about the house and waking the children.
But by-and-by, when the teething worry was over and the idols went to sleep at proper hours, leaving Mamma time to rest, she began to miss John, and find her workbasket dull company, when he was not sitting opposite in his old dressing gown, comfortably scorching his slippers on the fender.
She would not ask him to stay at home, but felt injured because he did not know that she wanted him without being told, entirely forgetting the many evenings he had waited for her in vain.
She was nervous and worn out with watching and worry, and in that unreasonable frame of mind which the best of mothers occasionally experience when domestic cares oppress them.
Want of exercise robs them of cheerfulness, and too much devotion to that idol of American women, the teapot, makes them feel as if they were all nerve and no muscle.
John doesn’t find me interesting any longer, so he leaves his faded wife and goes to see his pretty neighbor, who has no incumbrances.
Well, the babies love me, they don’t care if I am thin and pale and haven’t time to crimp my hair, they are my comfort, and some day John will see what I’ve gladly sacrificed for them, won’t he, my precious?” To which pathetic appeal Daisy would answer with a coo, or Demi with a crow, and Meg would put by her lamentations for a maternal revel, which soothed her solitude for the time being.
But the pain increased as politics absorbed John, who was always running over to discuss interesting points with Scott, quite unconscious that Meg missed him.
Not a word did she say, however, till her mother found her in tears one day, and insisted on knowing what the matter was, for Meg’s drooping spirits had not escaped her observation.
“Goes on how, my dear?” asked her mother anxiously.
“He’s away all day, and at night when I want to see him, he is continually going over to the Scotts’.
It isn’t fair that I should have the hardest work, and never any amusement.
Don’t blame John till you see where you are wrong yourself.” “But it can’t be right for him to neglect me.” “Don’t you neglect him?” “Why, Mother, I thought you’d take my part!” “So I do, as far as sympathizing goes, but I think the fault is yours, Meg.” “I don’t see how.” “Let me show you.
May I speak quite freely, and will you remember that it’s Mother who blames as well as Mother who sympathizes?” “Indeed I will!
I often feel as if I needed teaching more than ever since these babies look to me for everything.” Meg drew her low chair beside her mother’s, and with a little interruption in either lap, the two women rocked and talked lovingly together, feeling that the tie of motherhood made them more one than ever.
“You have only made the mistake that most young wives make—forgotten your duty to your husband in your love for your children.
A very natural and forgivable mistake, Meg, but one that had better be remedied before you take to different ways, for children should draw you nearer than ever, not separate you, as if they were all yours, and John had nothing to do but support them.
He doesn’t see that I want him, and I don’t know how to tell him without words.” “Make it so pleasant he won’t want to go away.
My dear, he’s longing for his little home, but it isn’t home without you, and you are always in the nursery.” “Oughtn’t I to be there?” “Not all the time, too much confinement makes you nervous, and then you are unfitted for everything.
Besides, you owe something to John as well as to the babies.
Don’t neglect husband for children, don’t shut him out of the nursery, but teach him how to help in it.
His place is there as well as yours, and the children need him.
Let him feel that he has a part to do, and he will do it gladly and faithfully, and it will be better for you all.” “You really think so, Mother?” “I know it, Meg, for I’ve tried it, and I seldom give advice unless I’ve proved its practicability.
Poor Father took to his books, after I had refused all offers of help, and left me to try my experiment alone.
I struggled along as well as I could, but Jo was too much for me.
I nearly spoiled her by indulgence.
Then Father came to the rescue, quietly managed everything, and made himself so helpful that I saw my mistake, and never have been able to get on without him since.
That is the secret of our home happiness.
He does not let business wean him from the little cares and duties that affect us all, and I try not to let domestic worries destroy my interest in his pursuits.
Each do our part alone in many things, but at home we work together, always.” “It is so, Mother, and my great wish is to be to my husband and children what you have been to yours.
Show me how, I’ll do anything you say.” “You always were my docile daughter.
Well, dear, if I were you, I’d let John have more to do with the management of Demi, for the boy needs training, and it’s none too soon to begin.
Then I’d do what I have often proposed, let Hannah come and help you.
She is a capital nurse, and you may trust the precious babies to her while you do more housework.
You need the exercise, Hannah would enjoy the rest, and John would find his wife again.
Go out more, keep cheerful as well as busy, for you are the sunshine-maker of the family, and if you get dismal there is no fair weather.
Then I’d try to take an interest in whatever John likes—talk with him, let him read to you, exchange ideas, and help each other in that way.
Don’t shut yourself up in a bandbox because you are a woman, but understand what is going on, and educate yourself to take your part in the world’s work, for it all affects you and yours.” “John is so sensible, I’m afraid he will think I’m stupid if I ask questions about politics and things.” “I don’t believe he would.
Love covers a multitude of sins, and of whom could you ask more freely than of him?
Try it, and see if he doesn’t find your society far more agreeable than Mrs.
I’m afraid I have neglected him sadly, but I thought I was right, and he never said anything.” “He tried not to be selfish, but he has felt rather forlorn, I fancy.
This is just the time, Meg, when young married people are apt to grow apart, and the very time when they ought to be most together, for the first tenderness soon wears off, unless care is taken to preserve it.
And no time is so beautiful and precious to parents as the first years of the little lives given to them to train.
Don’t let John be a stranger to the babies, for they will do more to keep him safe and happy in this world of trial and temptation than anything else, and through them you will learn to know and love one another as you should.
Think over Mother’s preachment, act upon it if it seems good, and God bless you all.” Meg did think it over, found it good, and acted upon it, though the first attempt was not made exactly as she planned to have it.
Of course the children tyrannized over her, and ruled the house as soon as they found out that kicking and squalling brought them whatever they wanted.
Mamma was an abject slave to their caprices, but Papa was not so easily subjugated, and occasionally afflicted his tender spouse by an attempt at paternal discipline with his obstreperous son.
For Demi inherited a trifle of his sire’s firmness of character, we won’t call it obstinacy, and when he made up his little mind to have or to do anything, all the king’s horses and all the king’s men could not change that pertinacious little mind.
Mamma thought the dear too young to be taught to conquer his prejudices, but Papa believed that it never was too soon to learn obedience.
So Master Demi early discovered that when he undertook to ‘wrastle’ with ‘Parpar’, he always got the worst of it, yet like the Englishman, baby respected the man who conquered him, and loved the father whose grave “No, no,” was more impressive than all Mamma’s love pats.
A few days after the talk with her mother, Meg resolved to try a social evening with John, so she ordered a nice supper, set the parlor in order, dressed herself prettily, and put the children to bed early, that nothing should interfere with her experiment.
But unfortunately Demi’s most unconquerable prejudice was against going to bed, and that night he decided to go on a rampage.
So poor Meg sang and rocked, told stories and tried every sleep-prevoking wile she could devise, but all in vain, the big eyes wouldn’t shut, and long after Daisy had gone to byelow, like the chubby little bunch of good nature she was, naughty Demi lay staring at the light, with the most discouragingly wide-awake expression of countenance.
“Me has tea!” said Demi, preparing to join in the revel.
“No, but I’ll save you some little cakies for breakfast, if you’ll go bye-bye like Daisy.
Taking advantage of the propitious moment, Meg slipped away and ran down to greet her husband with a smiling face and the little blue bow in her hair which was his especial admiration.
He saw it at once and said with pleased surprise, “Why, little mother, how gay we are tonight.
Do you expect company?” “Only you, dear.” “Is it a birthday, anniversary, or anything?” “No, I’m tired of being dowdy, so I dressed up as a change.
You always make yourself nice for table, no matter how tired you are, so why shouldn’t I when I have the time?” “I do it out of respect for you, my dear,” said old-fashioned John.
“Well, it’s altogether delightful, and like old times.
I drink your health, dear.” and John sipped his tea with an air of reposeful rapture, which was of very short duration however, for as he put down his cup, the door handle rattled mysteriously, and a little voice was heard, saying impatiently...
I told him to go to sleep alone, and here he is, downstairs, getting his death a-cold pattering over that canvas,” said Meg, answering the call.
“Mornin’ now,” announced Demi in joyful tone as he entered, with his long nightgown gracefully festooned over his arm and every curl bobbing gayly as he pranced about the table, eyeing the ‘cakies’ with loving glances.
Then you can have the little cake with sugar on it.” “Me loves Parpar,” said the artful one, preparing to climb the paternal knee and revel in forbidden joys.
Come, Demi,” and Meg led her son away, feeling a strong desire to spank the little marplot who hopped beside her, laboring under the delusion that the bribe was to be administered as soon as they reached the nursery.
Nor was he disappointed, for that shortsighted woman actually gave him a lump of sugar, tucked him into his bed, and forbade any more promenades till morning.
“Iss!” said Demi the perjured, blissfully sucking his sugar, and regarding his first attempt as eminently successful.
Meg returned to her place, and supper was progressing pleasantly, when the little ghost walked again, and exposed the maternal delinquencies by boldly demanding, “More sudar, Marmar.” “Now this won’t do,” said John, hardening his heart against the engaging little sinner.
“We shall never know any peace till that child learns to go to bed properly.
You have made a slave of yourself long enough.
Demi, go upstairs, and get into your bed, as Mamma bids you.” “S’ant!” replied the young rebel, helping himself to the coveted ‘cakie’, and beginning to eat the same with calm audacity.
I shall carry you if you don’t go yourself.” “Go ’way, me don’t love Parpar.” and Demi retired to his mother’s skirts for protection.
But even that refuge proved unavailing, for he was delivered over to the enemy, with a “Be gentle with him, John,” which struck the culprit with dismay, for when Mamma deserted him, then the judgment day was at hand.
Bereft of his cake, defrauded of his frolic, and borne away by a strong hand to that detested bed, poor Demi could not restrain his wrath, but openly defied Papa, and kicked and screamed lustily all the way upstairs.
The minute he was put into bed on one side, he rolled out on the other, and made for the door, only to be ignominiously caught up by the tail of his little toga and put back again, which lively performance was kept up till the young man’s strength gave out, when he devoted himself to roaring at the top of his voice.
This vocal exercise usually conquered Meg, but John sat as unmoved as the post which is popularly believed to be deaf.
No coaxing, no sugar, no lullaby, no story, even the light was put out and only the red glow of the fire enlivened the ‘big dark’ which Demi regarded with curiosity rather than fear.
This new order of things disgusted him, and he howled dismally for ‘Marmar’, as his angry passions subsided, and recollections of his tender bondwoman returned to the captive autocrat.
The plaintive wail which succeeded the passionate roar went to Meg’s heart, and she ran up to say beseechingly...
I’ve told him he must go to sleep, as you bid him, and he must, if I stay here all night.” “But he’ll cry himself sick,” pleaded Meg, reproaching herself for deserting her boy.
“No, he won’t, he’s so tired he will soon drop off and then the matter is settled, for he will understand that he has got to mind.
Don’t interfere, I’ll manage him.” “He’s my child, and I can’t have his spirit broken by harshness.” “He’s my child, and I won’t have his temper spoiled by indulgence.
Go down, my dear, and leave the boy to me.” When John spoke in that masterful tone, Meg always obeyed, and never regretted her docility.
“Please let me kiss him once, John?” “Certainly.
Demi, say good night to Mamma, and let her go and rest, for she is very tired with taking care of you all day.” Meg always insisted upon it that the kiss won the victory, for after it was given, Demi sobbed more quietly, and lay quite still at the bottom of the bed, whither he had wriggled in his anguish of mind.
I’ll cover him up, and then go and set Meg’s heart at rest,” thought John, creeping to the bedside, hoping to find his rebellious heir asleep.
But he wasn’t, for the moment his father peeped at him, Demi’s eyes opened, his little chin began to quiver, and he put up his arms, saying with a penitent hiccough, “Me’s dood, now.” Sitting on the stairs outside Meg wondered at the long silence which followed the uproar, and after imagining all sorts of impossible accidents, she slipped into the room to set her fears at rest.
Demi lay fast asleep, not in his usual spreadeagle attitude, but in a subdued bunch, cuddled close in the circle of his father’s arm and holding his father’s finger, as if he felt that justice was tempered with mercy, and had gone to sleep a sadder and wiser baby.
So held, John had waited with a womanly patience till the little hand relaxed its hold, and while waiting had fallen asleep, more tired by that tussle with his son than with his whole day’s work.
As Meg stood watching the two faces on the pillow, she smiled to herself, and then slipped away again, saying in a satisfied tone, “I never need fear that John will be too harsh with my babies.
He does know how to manage them, and will be a great help, for Demi is getting too much for me.” When John came down at last, expecting to find a pensive or reproachful wife, he was agreeably surprised to find Meg placidly trimming a bonnet, and to be greeted with the request to read something about the election, if he was not too tired.
John saw in a minute that a revolution of some kind was going on, but wisely asked no questions, knowing that Meg was such a transparent little person, she couldn’t keep a secret to save her life, and therefore the clue would soon appear.
He read a long debate with the most amiable readiness and then explained it in his most lucid manner, while Meg tried to look deeply interested, to ask intelligent questions, and keep her thoughts from wandering from the state of the nation to the state of her bonnet.
“She is trying to like politics for my sake, so I’ll try and like millinery for hers, that’s only fair,” thought John the Just, adding aloud, “That’s very pretty.
Is it what you call a breakfast cap?” “My dear man, it’s a bonnet!
My very best go-to-concert-and-theater bonnet.” “I beg your pardon, it was so small, I naturally mistook it for one of the flyaway things you sometimes wear.
How do you keep it on?” “These bits of lace are fastened under the chin with a rosebud, so,” and Meg illustrated by putting on the bonnet and regarding him with an air of calm satisfaction that was irresistible.
“It’s a love of a bonnet, but I prefer the face inside, for it looks young and happy again,” and John kissed the smiling face, to the great detriment of the rosebud under the chin.
“I’m glad you like it, for I want you to take me to one of the new concerts some night.
Will you, please?” “Of course I will, with all my heart, or anywhere else you like.
It’s only an experiment, John, and I want to try it for your sake as much as for mine, because I’ve neglected you shamefully lately, and I’m going to make home what it used to be, if I can.
All that we have any business to know is that John did not appear to object, judging from the changes which gradually took place in the house and its inmates.
It was not all Paradise by any means, but everyone was better for the division of labor system.
The children throve under the paternal rule, for accurate, steadfast John brought order and obedience into Babydom, while Meg recovered her spirits and composed her nerves by plenty of wholesome exercise, a little pleasure, and much confidential conversation with her sensible husband.
Home grew homelike again, and John had no wish to leave it, unless he took Meg with him.
The Scotts came to the Brookes’ now, and everyone found the little house a cheerful place, full of happiness, content, and family love.
“It is always so quiet and pleasant here, it does me good, Meg,” she used to say, looking about her with wistful eyes, as if trying to discover the charm, that she might use it in her great house, full of splendid loneliness, for there were no riotous, sunny-faced babies there, and Ned lived in a world of his own, where there was no place for her.
This household happiness did not come all at once, but John and Meg had found the key to it, and each year of married life taught them how to use it, unlocking the treasuries of real home love and mutual helpfulness, which the poorest may possess, and the richest cannot buy.
CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE LAZY LAURENCE Laurie went to Nice intending to stay a week, and remained a month.
He was tired of wandering about alone, and Amy’s familiar presence seemed to give a homelike charm to the foreign scenes in which she bore a part.
He rather missed the ‘petting’ he used to receive, and enjoyed a taste of it again, for no attentions, however flattering, from strangers, were half so pleasant as the sisterly adoration of the girls at home.
Amy never would pet him like the others, but she was very glad to see him now, and quite clung to him, feeling that he was the representative of the dear family for whom she longed more than she would confess.
They naturally took comfort in each other’s society and were much together, riding, walking, dancing, or dawdling, for at Nice no one can be very industrious during the gay season.
But, while apparently amusing themselves in the most careless fashion, they were half-consciously making discoveries and forming opinions about each other.
Amy rose daily in the estimation of her friend, but he sank in hers, and each felt the truth before a word was spoken.
Amy tried to please, and succeeded, for she was grateful for the many pleasures he gave her, and repaid him with the little services to which womanly women know how to lend an indescribable charm.
Laurie made no effort of any kind, but just let himself drift along as comfortably as possible, trying to forget, and feeling that all women owed him a kind word because one had been cold to him.
It cost him no effort to be generous, and he would have given Amy all the trinkets in Nice if she would have taken them, but at the same time he felt that he could not change the opinion she was forming of him, and he rather dreaded the keen blue eyes that seemed to watch him with such half-sorrowful, half-scornful surprise.
I preferred to stay at home and write letters.
“Well, yes, but isn’t it rather warm for such a long walk?” he answered slowly, for the shaded salon looked inviting after the glare without.
“I’m going to have the little carriage, and Baptiste can drive, so you’ll have nothing to do but hold your umbrella, and keep your gloves nice,” returned Amy, with a sarcastic glance at the immaculate kids, which were a weak point with Laurie.
“Then I’ll go with pleasure.” and he put out his hand for her sketchbook.
It’s no exertion to me, but you don’t look equal to it.” Laurie lifted his eyebrows and followed at a leisurely pace as she ran downstairs, but when they got into the carriage he took the reins himself, and left little Baptiste nothing to do but fold his arms and fall asleep on his perch.
The two never quarreled.
Amy was too well-bred, and just now Laurie was too lazy, so in a minute he peeped under her hatbrim with an inquiring air.
She answered him with a smile, and they went on together in the most amicable manner.
It was a lovely drive, along winding roads rich in the picturesque scenes that delight beauty-loving eyes.
Here an ancient monastery, whence the solemn chanting of the monks came down to them.
There a bare-legged shepherd, in wooden shoes, pointed hat, and rough jacket over one shoulder, sat piping on a stone while his goats skipped among the rocks or lay at his feet.
Meek, mouse-colored donkeys, laden with panniers of freshly cut grass passed by, with a pretty girl in a capaline sitting between the green piles, or an old woman spinning with a distaff as she went.
Brown, soft-eyed children ran out from the quaint stone hovels to offer nosegays, or bunches of oranges still on the bough.
Gnarled olive trees covered the hills with their dusky foliage, fruit hung golden in the orchard, and great scarlet anemones fringed the roadside, while beyond green slopes and craggy heights, the Maritime Alps rose sharp and white against the blue Italian sky.
Valrosa well deserved its name, for in that climate of perpetual summer roses blossomed everywhere.
They overhung the archway, thrust themselves between the bars of the great gate with a sweet welcome to passers-by, and lined the avenue, winding through lemon trees and feathery palms up to the villa on the hill.
Every shadowy nook, where seats invited one to stop and rest, was a mass of bloom, every cool grotto had its marble nymph smiling from a veil of flowers and every fountain reflected crimson, white, or pale pink roses, leaning down to smile at their own beauty.
Roses covered the walls of the house, draped the cornices, climbed the pillars, and ran riot over the balustrade of the wide terrace, whence one looked down on the sunny Mediterranean, and the white-walled city on its shore.
“This is a regular honeymoon paradise, isn’t it?
Did you ever see such roses?” asked Amy, pausing on the terrace to enjoy the view, and a luxurious whiff of perfume that came wandering by.
“No, nor felt such thorns,” returned Laurie, with his thumb in his mouth, after a vain attempt to capture a solitary scarlet flower that grew just beyond his reach.
“Try lower down, and pick those that have no thorns,” said Amy, gathering three of the tiny cream-colored ones that starred the wall behind her.
She put them in his buttonhole as a peace offering, and he stood a minute looking down at them with a curious expression, for in the Italian part of his nature there was a touch of superstition, and he was just then in that state of half-sweet, half-bitter melancholy, when imaginative young men find significance in trifles and food for romance everywhere.
He had thought of Jo in reaching after the thorny red rose, for vivid flowers became her, and she had often worn ones like that from the greenhouse at home.
The pale roses Amy gave him were the sort that the Italians lay in dead hands, never in bridal wreaths, and for a moment he wondered if the omen was for Jo or for himself, but the next instant his American common sense got the better of sentimentality, and he laughed a heartier laugh than Amy had heard since he came.
“It’s good advice, you’d better take it and save your fingers,” she said, thinking her speech amused him.
“Thank you, I will,” he answered in jest, and a few months later he did it in earnest.
“Laurie, when are you going to your grandfather?” she asked presently, as she settled herself on a rustic seat.
“Very soon.” “You have said that a dozen times within the last three weeks.” “I dare say, short answers save trouble.” “He expects you, and you really ought to go.” “Hospitable creature!
I know it.” “Then why don’t you do it?” “Natural depravity, I suppose.” “Natural indolence, you mean.
It’s really dreadful!” and Amy looked severe.
“Not so bad as it seems, for I should only plague him if I went, so I might as well stay and plague you a little longer, you can bear it better, in fact I think it agrees with you excellently,” and Laurie composed himself for a lounge on the broad ledge of the balustrade.
Amy shook her head and opened her sketchbook with an air of resignation, but she had made up her mind to lecture ‘that boy’ and in a minute she began again.
“What are you doing just now?” “Watching lizards.” “No, no.
I mean what do you intend and wish to do?” “Smoke a cigarette, if you’ll allow me.” “How provoking you are!
I don’t approve of cigars and I will only allow it on condition that you let me put you into my sketch.
I need a figure.” “With all the pleasure in life.
How will you have me, full length or three-quarters, on my head or my heels?
I should respectfully suggest a recumbent posture, then put yourself in also and call it ‘Dolce far niente’.” “Stay as you are, and go to sleep if you like.
I intend to work hard,” said Amy in her most energetic tone.
“What delightful enthusiasm!” and he leaned against a tall urn with an air of entire satisfaction.
“What would Jo say if she saw you now?” asked Amy impatiently, hoping to stir him up by the mention of her still more energetic sister’s name.
I’m busy!’” He laughed as he spoke, but the laugh was not natural, and a shade passed over his face, for the utterance of the familiar name touched the wound that was not healed yet.
Both tone and shadow struck Amy, for she had seen and heard them before, and now she looked up in time to catch a new expression on Laurie’s face—a hard bitter look, full of pain, dissatisfaction, and regret.
It was gone before she could study it and the listless expression back again.
She watched him for a moment with artistic pleasure, thinking how like an Italian he looked, as he lay basking in the sun with uncovered head and eyes full of southern dreaminess, for he seemed to have forgotten her and fallen into a reverie.
“You look like the effigy of a young knight asleep on his tomb,” she said, carefully tracing the well-cut profile defined against the dark stone.
You are so changed, I sometimes think—” there Amy stopped, with a half-timid, half-wistful look, more significant than her unfinished speech.
Laurie saw and understood the affectionate anxiety which she hesitated to express, and looking straight into her eyes, said, just as he used to say it to her mother, “It’s all right, ma’am.” That satisfied her and set at rest the doubts that had begun to worry her lately.
I didn’t think you’d been a very bad boy, but I fancied you might have wasted money at that wicked Baden-Baden, lost your heart to some charming Frenchwoman with a husband, or got into some of the scrapes that young men seem to consider a necessary part of a foreign tour.
Don’t stay out there in the sun, come and lie on the grass here and ‘let us be friendly’, as Jo used to say when we got in the sofa corner and told secrets.” Laurie obediently threw himself down on the turf, and began to amuse himself by sticking daisies into the ribbons of Amy’s hat, that lay there.
“I’m all ready for the secrets.” and he glanced up with a decided expression of interest in his eyes.
I’m roving about so, it’s impossible to be regular, you know.
When do you begin your great work of art, Raphaella?” he asked, changing the subject abruptly after another pause, in which he had been wondering if Amy knew his secret and wanted to talk about it.
“Never,” she answered, with a despondent but decided air.
“Rome took all the vanity out of me, for after seeing the wonders there, I felt too insignificant to live and gave up all my foolish hopes in despair.” “Why should you, with so much energy and talent?” “That’s just why, because talent isn’t genius, and no amount of energy can make it so.
I won’t be a common-place dauber, so I don’t intend to try any more.” “And what are you going to do with yourself now, if I may ask?” “Polish up my other talents, and be an ornament to society, if I get the chance.” It was a characteristic speech, and sounded daring, but audacity becomes young people, and Amy’s ambition had a good foundation.
Laurie smiled, but he liked the spirit with which she took up a new purpose when a long-cherished one died, and spent no time lamenting.
And here is where Fred Vaughn comes in, I fancy.” Amy preserved a discreet silence, but there was a conscious look in her downcast face that made Laurie sit up and say gravely, “Now I’m going to play brother, and ask questions.
You aren’t woman of the world enough yet to hide your feelings, my dear.
I heard rumors about Fred and you last year, and it’s my private opinion that if he had not been called home so suddenly and detained so long, something would have come of it, hey?” “That’s not for me to say,” was Amy’s grim reply, but her lips would smile, and there was a traitorous sparkle of the eye which betrayed that she knew her power and enjoyed the knowledge.
“You are not engaged, I hope?” and Laurie looked very elder-brotherly and grave all of a sudden.
“No.” “But you will be, if he comes back and goes properly down on his knees, won’t you?” “Very likely.” “Then you are fond of old Fred?” “I could be, if I tried.” “But you don’t intend to try till the proper moment?
Bless my soul, what unearthly prudence!
He’s a good fellow, Amy, but not the man I fancied you’d like.” “He is rich, a gentleman, and has delightful manners,” began Amy, trying to be quite cool and dignified, but feeling a little ashamed of herself, in spite of the sincerity of her intentions.
Quite right and proper, as the world goes, but it sounds odd from the lips of one of your mother’s girls.” “True, nevertheless.” A short speech, but the quiet decision with which it was uttered contrasted curiously with the young speaker.
Laurie felt this instinctively and laid himself down again, with a sense of disappointment which he could not explain.
His look and silence, as well as a certain inward self-disapproval, ruffled Amy, and made her resolve to deliver her lecture without delay.
“I wish you’d do me the favor to rouse yourself a little,” she said sharply.
I give you leave,” returned Laurie, who enjoyed having someone to tease, after his long abstinence from his favorite pastime.
Snow produces a glow and a tingle, if applied rightly.
Your indifference is half affectation, and a good stirring up would prove it.” “Stir away, it won’t hurt me and it may amuse you, as the big man said when his little wife beat him.
Regard me in the light of a husband or a carpet, and beat till you are tired, if that sort of exercise agrees with you.” Being decidedly nettled herself, and longing to see him shake off the apathy that so altered him, Amy sharpened both tongue and pencil, and began.
How do you like it?” She thought it would annoy him, but he only folded his arms under his head, with an imperturbable, “That’s not bad.
Thank you, ladies.” “Do you want to know what I honestly think of you?” “Pining to be told.” “Well, I despise you.” If she had even said ‘I hate you’ in a petulant or coquettish tone, he would have laughed and rather liked it, but the grave, almost sad, accent in her voice made him open his eyes, and ask quickly...
“Why, if you please?” “Because, with every chance for being good, useful, and happy, you are faulty, lazy, and miserable.” “Strong language, mademoiselle.” “If you like it, I’ll go on.” “Pray do, it’s quite interesting.” “I thought you’d find it so.
Selfish people always like to talk about themselves.” “Am I selfish?” the question slipped out involuntarily and in a tone of surprise, for the one virtue on which he prided himself was generosity.
“Yes, very selfish,” continued Amy, in a calm, cool voice, twice as effective just then as an angry one.
“I’ll show you how, for I’ve studied you while we were frolicking, and I’m not at all satisfied with you.
Here you have been abroad nearly six months, and done nothing but waste time and money and disappoint your friends.” “Isn’t a fellow to have any pleasure after a four-year grind?” “You don’t look as if you’d had much.
I said when we first met that you had improved.
You have grown abominably lazy, you like gossip, and waste time on frivolous things, you are contented to be petted and admired by silly people, instead of being loved and respected by wise ones.
With money, talent, position, health, and beauty, ah you like that old Vanity!
But it’s the truth, so I can’t help saying it, with all these splendid things to use and enjoy, you can find nothing to do but dawdle, and instead of being the man you ought to be, you are only...” there she stopped, with a look that had both pain and pity in it.
“Saint Laurence on a gridiron,” added Laurie, blandly finishing the sentence.
But the lecture began to take effect, for there was a wide-awake sparkle in his eyes now and a half-angry, half-injured expression replaced the former indifference.
“I supposed you’d take it so.
You men tell us we are angels, and say we can make you what we will, but the instant we honestly try to do you good, you laugh at us and won’t listen, which proves how much your flattery is worth.” Amy spoke bitterly, and turned her back on the exasperating martyr at her feet.
In a minute a hand came down over the page, so that she could not draw, and Laurie’s voice said, with a droll imitation of a penitent child, “I will be good, oh, I will be good!” But Amy did not laugh, for she was in earnest, and tapping on the outspread hand with her pencil, said soberly, “Aren’t you ashamed of a hand like that?
It’s as soft and white as a woman’s, and looks as if it never did anything but wear Jouvin’s best gloves and pick flowers for ladies.
You are not a dandy, thank Heaven, so I’m glad to see there are no diamonds or big seal rings on it, only the little old one Jo gave you so long ago.
Dear soul, I wish she was here to help me!” “So do I!” The hand vanished as suddenly as it came, and there was energy enough in the echo of her wish to suit even Amy.
She glanced down at him with a new thought in her mind, but he was lying with his hat half over his face, as if for shade, and his mustache hid his mouth.
She only saw his chest rise and fall, with a long breath that might have been a sigh, and the hand that wore the ring nestled down into the grass, as if to hide something too precious or too tender to be spoken of.
All in a minute various hints and trifles assumed shape and significance in Amy’s mind, and told her what her sister never had confided to her.
She remembered that Laurie never spoke voluntarily of Jo, she recalled the shadow on his face just now, the change in his character, and the wearing of the little old ring which was no ornament to a handsome hand.
Girls are quick to read such signs and feel their eloquence.
Amy had fancied that perhaps a love trouble was at the bottom of the alteration, and now she was sure of it.
Her keen eyes filled, and when she spoke again, it was in a voice that could be beautifully soft and kind when she chose to make it so.
“I know I have no right to talk so to you, Laurie, and if you weren’t the sweetest-tempered fellow in the world, you’d be very angry with me.
But we are all so fond and proud of you, I couldn’t bear to think they should be disappointed in you at home as I have been, though, perhaps they would understand the change better than I do.” “I think they would,” came from under the hat, in a grim tone, quite as touching as a broken one.
“They ought to have told me, and not let me go blundering and scolding, when I should have been more kind and patient than ever.
“Hang Miss Randal!” and Laurie knocked the hat off his face with a look that left no doubt of his sentiments toward that young lady.
“I beg pardon, I thought...” and there she paused diplomatically.
“No, you didn’t, you knew perfectly well I never cared for anyone but Jo,” Laurie said that in his old, impetuous tone, and turned his face away as he spoke.
“I did think so, but as they never said anything about it, and you came away, I supposed I was mistaken.
It’s her fault though, and you may tell her so.” The hard, bitter look came back again as he said that, and it troubled Amy, for she did not know what balm to apply.
I’m very sorry I was so cross, but I can’t help wishing you’d bear it better, Teddy, dear.” “Don’t, that’s her name for me!” and Laurie put up his hand with a quick gesture to stop the words spoken in Jo’s half-kind, half-reproachful tone.
“Wait till you’ve tried it yourself,” he added in a low voice, as he pulled up the grass by the handful.
“I’d take it manfully, and be respected if I couldn’t be loved,” said Amy, with the decision of one who knew nothing about it.
Now, Laurie flattered himself that he had borne it remarkably well, making no moan, asking no sympathy, and taking his trouble away to live it down alone.
Amy’s lecture put the matter in a new light, and for the first time it did look weak and selfish to lose heart at the first failure, and shut himself up in moody indifference.
He felt as if suddenly shaken out of a pensive dream and found it impossible to go to sleep again.
Presently he sat up and asked slowly, “Do you think Jo would despise me as you do?” “Yes, if she saw you now.
Why don’t you do something splendid, and make her love you?” “I did my best, but it was no use.” “Graduating well, you mean?
That was no more than you ought to have done, for your grandfather’s sake.
It would have been shameful to fail after spending so much time and money, when everyone knew that you could do well.” “I did fail, say what you will, for Jo wouldn’t love me,” began Laurie, leaning his head on his hand in a despondent attitude.
“No, you didn’t, and you’ll say so in the end, for it did you good, and proved that you could do something if you tried.
If you’d only set about another task of some sort, you’d soon be your hearty, happy self again, and forget your trouble.” “That’s impossible.” “Try it and see.
You needn’t shrug your shoulders, and think, ‘Much she knows about such things’.
I don’t pretend to be wise, but I am observing, and I see a great deal more than you’d imagine.
I’m interested in other people’s experiences and inconsistencies, and though I can’t explain, I remember and use them for my own benefit.
There, I won’t lecture any more, for I know you’ll wake up and be a man in spite of that hardhearted girl.” Neither spoke for several minutes.
Presently she put it on his knee, merely saying, “How do you like that?” He looked and then he smiled, as he could not well help doing, for it was capitally done, the long, lazy figure on the grass, with listless face, half-shut eyes, and one hand holding a cigar, from which came the little wreath of smoke that encircled the dreamer’s head.
“How well you draw!” he said, with a genuine surprise and pleasure at her skill, adding, with a half-laugh, “Yes, that’s me.” “As you are.
It was not nearly so well done, but there was a life and spirit in it which atoned for many faults, and it recalled the past so vividly that a sudden change swept over the young man’s face as he looked.
Hat and coat were off, and every line of the active figure, resolute face, and commanding attitude was full of energy and meaning.
The handsome brute, just subdued, stood arching his neck under the tightly drawn rein, with one foot impatiently pawing the ground, and ears pricked up as if listening for the voice that had mastered him.
In the ruffled mane, the rider’s breezy hair and erect attitude, there was a suggestion of suddenly arrested motion, of strength, courage, and youthful buoyancy that contrasted sharply with the supine grace of the ‘_Dolce far Niente_’ sketch.
Laurie said nothing but as his eye went from one to the other, Amy saw him flush up and fold his lips together as if he read and accepted the little lesson she had given him.
That satisfied her, and without waiting for him to speak, she said, in her sprightly way...
“Don’t you remember the day you played Rarey with Puck, and we all looked on?
Meg and Beth were frightened, but Jo clapped and pranced, and I sat on the fence and drew you.
I found that sketch in my portfolio the other day, touched it up, and kept it to show you.” “Much obliged.
You’ve improved immensely since then, and I congratulate you.
May I venture to suggest in ‘a honeymoon paradise’ that five o’clock is the dinner hour at your hotel?” Laurie rose as he spoke, returned the pictures with a smile and a bow and looked at his watch, as if to remind her that even moral lectures should have an end.
He tried to resume his former easy, indifferent air, but it was an affectation now, for the rousing had been more effacious than he would confess.
Amy felt the shade of coldness in his manner, and said to herself...
“Now, I’ve offended him.
Well, if it does him good, I’m glad, if it makes him hate me, I’m sorry, but it’s true, and I can’t take back a word of it.” They laughed and chatted all the way home, and little Baptiste, up behind, thought that monsieur and madamoiselle were in charming spirits.
The friendly frankness was disturbed, the sunshine had a shadow over it, and despite their apparent gaiety, there was a secret discontent in the heart of each.
“Unfortunately I have an engagement.
Au revoir, madamoiselle,” and Laurie bent as if to kiss her hand, in the foreign fashion, which became him better than many men.
Something in his face made Amy say quickly and warmly...
“No, be yourself with me, Laurie, and part in the good old way.
I’d rather have a hearty English handshake than all the sentimental salutations in France.” “Goodbye, dear,” and with these words, uttered in the tone she liked, Laurie left her, after a handshake almost painful in its heartiness.
Next morning, instead of the usual call, Amy received a note which made her smile at the beginning and sigh at the end.
My Dear Mentor, Please make my adieux to your aunt, and exult within yourself, for ‘Lazy Laurence’ has gone to his grandpa, like the best of boys.
A pleasant winter to you, and may the gods grant you a blissful honeymoon at Valrosa!
I think Fred would be benefited by a rouser.
Tell him so, with my congratulations.
Yours gratefully, Telemachus “Good boy!
I’m glad he’s gone,” said Amy, with an approving smile.
The pleasantest room in the house was set apart for Beth, and in it was gathered everything that she most loved, flowers, pictures, her piano, the little worktable, and the beloved pussies.
Father’s best books found their way there, Mother’s easy chair, Jo’s desk, Amy’s finest sketches, and every day Meg brought her babies on a loving pilgrimage, to make sunshine for Aunty Beth.
John quietly set apart a little sum, that he might enjoy the pleasure of keeping the invalid supplied with the fruit she loved and longed for.
Old Hannah never wearied of concocting dainty dishes to tempt a capricious appetite, dropping tears as she worked, and from across the sea came little gifts and cheerful letters, seeming to bring breaths of warmth and fragrance from lands that know no winter.
Here, cherished like a household saint in its shrine, sat Beth, tranquil and busy as ever, for nothing could change the sweet, unselfish nature, and even while preparing to leave life, she tried to make it happier for those who should remain behind.
If Beth had wanted any reward, she found it in the bright little faces always turned up to her window, with nods and smiles, and the droll little letters which came to her, full of blots and gratitude.
Simple sermons, that went straight to the souls of those who listened, for the father’s heart was in the minister’s religion, and the frequent falter in the voice gave a double eloquence to the words he spoke or read.
It was well for all that this peaceful time was given them as preparation for the sad hours to come, for by-and-by, Beth said the needle was ‘so heavy’, and put it down forever.
Talking wearied her, faces troubled her, pain claimed her for its own, and her tranquil spirit was sorrowfully perturbed by the ills that vexed her feeble flesh.
Such heavy days, such long, long nights, such aching hearts and imploring prayers, when those who loved her best were forced to see the thin hands stretched out to them beseechingly, to hear the bitter cry, “Help me, help me!” and to feel that there was no help.
A sad eclipse of the serene soul, a sharp struggle of the young life with death, but both were mercifully brief, and then the natural rebellion over, the old peace returned more beautiful than ever.
With the wreck of her frail body, Beth’s soul grew strong, and though she said little, those about her felt that she was ready, saw that the first pilgrim called was likewise the fittest, and waited with her on the shore, trying to see the Shining Ones coming to receive her when she crossed the river.
Jo never left her for an hour since Beth had said “I feel stronger when you are here.” She slept on a couch in the room, waking often to renew the fire, to feed, lift, or wait upon the patient creature who seldom asked for anything, and ‘tried not to be a trouble’.
Precious and helpful hours to Jo, for now her heart received the teaching that it needed.
Lessons in patience were so sweetly taught her that she could not fail to learn them, charity for all, the lovely spirit that can forgive and truly forget unkindness, the loyalty to duty that makes the hardest easy, and the sincere faith that fears nothing, but trusts undoubtingly.
Seeing this did more for Jo than the wisest sermons, the saintliest hymns, the most fervent prayers that any voice could utter.
For with eyes made clear by many tears, and a heart softened by the tenderest sorrow, she recognized the beauty of her sister’s life—uneventful, unambitious, yet full of the genuine virtues which ‘smell sweet, and blossom in the dust’, the self-forgetfulness that makes the humblest on earth remembered soonest in heaven, the true success which is possible to all.
One night when Beth looked among the books upon her table, to find something to make her forget the mortal weariness that was almost as hard to bear as pain, as she turned the leaves of her old favorite, Pilgrims’s Progress, she found a little paper, scribbled over in Jo’s hand.
MY BETH Sitting patient in the shadow Till the blessed light shall come, A serene and saintly presence Sanctifies our troubled home.
O my sister, passing from me, Out of human care and strife, Leave me, as a gift, those virtues Which have beautified your life.
Dear, bequeath me that great patience Which has power to sustain A cheerful, uncomplaining spirit In its prison-house of pain.
Give me that unselfish nature, That with charity divine Can pardon wrong for love’s dear sake— Meek heart, forgive me mine!
Thus our parting daily loseth Something of its bitter pain, And while learning this hard lesson, My great loss becomes my gain.
For the touch of grief will render My wild nature more serene, Give to life new aspirations, A new trust in the unseen.
Henceforth, safe across the river, I shall see forever more A beloved, household spirit Waiting for me on the shore.
Hope and faith, born of my sorrow, Guardian angels shall become, And the sister gone before me By their hands shall lead me home.
Blurred and blotted, faulty and feeble as the lines were, they brought a look of inexpressible comfort to Beth’s face, for her one regret had been that she had done so little, and this seemed to assure her that her life had not been useless, that her death would not bring the despair she feared.
Have I been all that to you, Jo?” she asked, with wistful, humble earnestness.
I used to think I couldn’t let you go, but I’m learning to feel that I don’t lose you, that you’ll be more to me than ever, and death can’t part us, though it seems to.” “I know it cannot, and I don’t fear it any longer, for I’m sure I shall be your Beth still, to love and help you more than ever.
You must take my place, Jo, and be everything to Father and Mother when I’m gone.
So the spring days came and went, the sky grew clearer, the earth greener, the flowers were up fairly early, and the birds came back in time to say goodbye to Beth, who, like a tired but trustful child, clung to the hands that had led her all her life, as Father and Mother guided her tenderly through the Valley of the Shadow, and gave her up to God.
Seldom except in books do the dying utter memorable words, see visions, or depart with beatified countenances, and those who have sped many parting souls know that to most the end comes as naturally and simply as sleep.
As Beth had hoped, the ‘tide went out easily’, and in the dark hour before dawn, on the bosom where she had drawn her first breath, she quietly drew her last, with no farewell but one loving look, one little sigh.
With tears and prayers and tender hands, Mother and sisters made her ready for the long sleep that pain would never mar again, seeing with grateful eyes the beautiful serenity that soon replaced the pathetic patience that had wrung their hearts so long, and feeling with reverent joy that to their darling death was a benignant angel, not a phantom full of dread.
But a bird sang blithely on a budding bough, close by, the snowdrops blossomed freshly at the window, and the spring sunshine streamed in like a benediction over the placid face upon the pillow, a face so full of painless peace that those who loved it best smiled through their tears, and thanked God that Beth was well at last.
CHAPTER FORTY-ONE LEARNING TO FORGET Amy’s lecture did Laurie good, though, of course, he did not own it till long afterward.
Men seldom do, for when women are the advisers, the lords of creation don’t take the advice till they have persuaded themselves that it is just what they intended to do.
Then they act upon it, and, if it succeeds, they give the weaker vessel half the credit of it.
If it fails, they generously give her the whole.
Laurie went back to his grandfather, and was so dutifully devoted for several weeks that the old gentleman declared the climate of Nice had improved him wonderfully, and he had better try it again.
There was nothing the young gentleman would have liked better, but elephants could not have dragged him back after the scolding he had received.
He felt that his blighted affections were quite dead now, and though he should never cease to be a faithful mourner, there was no occasion to wear his weeds ostentatiously.
Jo wouldn’t love him, but he might make her respect and admire him by doing something which should prove that a girl’s ‘No’ had not spoiled his life.
He had always meant to do something, and Amy’s advice was quite unnecessary.
He had only been waiting till the aforesaid blighted affections were decently interred.
That being done, he felt that he was ready to ‘hide his stricken heart, and still toil on’.
As Goethe, when he had a joy or a grief, put it into a song, so Laurie resolved to embalm his love sorrow in music, and to compose a Requiem which should harrow up Jo’s soul and melt the heart of every hearer.
Therefore the next time the old gentleman found him getting restless and moody and ordered him off, he went to Vienna, where he had musical friends, and fell to work with the firm determination to distinguish himself.
But whether the sorrow was too vast to be embodied in music, or music too ethereal to uplift a mortal woe, he soon discovered that the Requiem was beyond him just at present.
It was evident that his mind was not in working order yet, and his ideas needed clarifying, for often in the middle of a plaintive strain, he would find himself humming a dancing tune that vividly recalled the Christmas ball at Nice, especially the stout Frenchman, and put an effectual stop to tragic composition for the time being.
Then he tried an opera, for nothing seemed impossible in the beginning, but here again unforeseen difficulties beset him.
He wanted Jo for his heroine, and called upon his memory to supply him with tender recollections and romantic visions of his love.
Jo wouldn’t be put into the opera at any price, and he had to give her up with a “Bless that girl, what a torment she is!” and a clutch at his hair, as became a distracted composer.
When he looked about him for another and a less intractable damsel to immortalize in melody, memory produced one with the most obliging readiness.
This phantom wore many faces, but it always had golden hair, was enveloped in a diaphanous cloud, and floated airily before his mind’s eye in a pleasing chaos of roses, peacocks, white ponies, and blue ribbons.
He did not give the complacent wraith any name, but he took her for his heroine and grew quite fond of her, as well he might, for he gifted her with every gift and grace under the sun, and escorted her, unscathed, through trials which would have annihilated any mortal woman.
Thanks to this inspiration, he got on swimmingly for a time, but gradually the work lost its charm, and he forgot to compose, while he sat musing, pen in hand, or roamed about the gay city to get some new ideas and refresh his mind, which seemed to be in a somewhat unsettled state that winter.
He did not do much, but he thought a great deal and was conscious of a change of some sort going on in spite of himself.
“It’s genius simmering, perhaps.
I’ll let it simmer, and see what comes of it,” he said, with a secret suspicion all the while that it wasn’t genius, but something far more common.
Whatever it was, it simmered to some purpose, for he grew more and more discontented with his desultory life, began to long for some real and earnest work to go at, soul and body, and finally came to the wise conclusion that everyone who loved music was not a composer.
Returning from one of Mozart’s grand operas, splendidly performed at the Royal Theatre, he looked over his own, played a few of the best parts, sat staring at the busts of Mendelssohn, Beethoven, and Bach, who stared benignly back again.
Then suddenly he tore up his music sheets, one by one, and as the last fluttered out of his hand, he said soberly to himself...
Now what shall I do?” That seemed a hard question to answer, and Laurie began to wish he had to work for his daily bread.
Now if ever, occurred an eligible opportunity for ‘going to the devil’, as he once forcibly expressed it, for he had plenty of money and nothing to do, and Satan is proverbially fond of providing employment for full and idle hands.
The poor fellow had temptations enough from without and from within, but he withstood them pretty well, for much as he valued liberty, he valued good faith and confidence more, so his promise to his grandfather, and his desire to be able to look honestly into the eyes of the women who loved him, and say “All’s well,” kept him safe and steady.
Grundy will observe, “I don’t believe it, boys will be boys, young men must sow their wild oats, and women must not expect miracles.” I dare say you don’t, Mrs.
Grundy, but it’s true nevertheless.
Women work a good many miracles, and I have a persuasion that they may perform even that of raising the standard of manhood by refusing to echo such sayings.
But mothers, sisters, and friends may help to make the crop a small one, and keep many tares from spoiling the harvest, by believing, and showing that they believe, in the possibility of loyalty to the virtues which make men manliest in good women’s eyes.
If it is a feminine delusion, leave us to enjoy it while we may, for without it half the beauty and the romance of life is lost, and sorrowful forebodings would embitter all our hopes of the brave, tenderhearted little lads, who still love their mothers better than themselves and are not ashamed to own it.
Laurie thought that the task of forgetting his love for Jo would absorb all his powers for years, but to his great surprise he discovered it grew easier every day.
He refused to believe it at first, got angry with himself, and couldn’t understand it, but these hearts of ours are curious and contrary things, and time and nature work their will in spite of us.
The wound persisted in healing with a rapidity that astonished him, and instead of trying to forget, he found himself trying to remember.
He had not foreseen this turn of affairs, and was not prepared for it.
He was disgusted with himself, surprised at his own fickleness, and full of a queer mixture of disappointment and relief that he could recover from such a tremendous blow so soon.
He carefully stirred up the embers of his lost love, but they refused to burst into a blaze.
There was only a comfortable glow that warmed and did him good without putting him into a fever, and he was reluctantly obliged to confess that the boyish passion was slowly subsiding into a more tranquil sentiment, very tender, a little sad and resentful still, but that was sure to pass away in time, leaving a brotherly affection which would last unbroken to the end.
As the word ‘brotherly’ passed through his mind in one of his reveries, he smiled, and glanced up at the picture of Mozart that was before him...
I haven’t forgotten, I never can.
I’ll try again, and if that fails, why then...” Leaving his sentence unfinished, he seized pen and paper and wrote to Jo, telling her that he could not settle to anything while there was the least hope of her changing her mind.
While waiting for an answer he did nothing, but he did it energetically, for he was in a fever of impatience.
It came at last, and settled his mind effectually on one point, for Jo decidedly couldn’t and wouldn’t.
Then she begged him to be happy with somebody else, but always keep a little corner of his heart for his loving sister Jo.
In a postscript she desired him not to tell Amy that Beth was worse, she was coming home in the spring and there was no need of saddening the remainder of her stay.
That would be time enough, please God, but Laurie must write to her often, and not let her feel lonely, homesick or anxious.
Poor little girl, it will be a sad going home for her, I’m afraid,” and Laurie opened his desk, as if writing to Amy had been the proper conclusion of the sentence left unfinished some weeks before.
But he did not write the letter that day, for as he rummaged out his best paper, he came across something which changed his purpose.
Tumbling about in one part of the desk among bills, passports, and business documents of various kinds were several of Jo’s letters, and in another compartment were three notes from Amy, carefully tied up with one of her blue ribbons and sweetly suggestive of the little dead roses put away inside.
The letter went very soon, however, and was promptly answered, for Amy was homesick, and confessed it in the most delightfully confiding manner.
The correspondence flourished famously, and letters flew to and fro with unfailing regularity all through the early spring.
Laurie sold his busts, made allumettes of his opera, and went back to Paris, hoping somebody would arrive before long.
He wanted desperately to go to Nice, but would not till he was asked, and Amy would not ask him, for just then she was having little experiences of her own, which made her rather wish to avoid the quizzical eyes of ‘our boy’.
Fred Vaughn had returned, and put the question to which she had once decided to answer, “Yes, thank you,” but now she said, “No, thank you,” kindly but steadily, for when the time came, her courage failed her, and she found that something more than money and position was needed to satisfy the new longing that filled her heart so full of tender hopes and fears.
The words, “Fred is a good fellow, but not at all the man I fancied you would ever like,” and Laurie’s face when he uttered them, kept returning to her as pertinaciously as her own did when she said in look, if not in words, “I shall marry for money.” It troubled her to remember that now, she wished she could take it back, it sounded so unwomanly.
She didn’t want Laurie to think her a heartless, worldly creature.
She was so glad he didn’t hate her for the dreadful things she said, but took them so beautifully and was kinder than ever.
His letters were such a comfort, for the home letters were very irregular and not half so satisfactory as his when they did come.
It was not only a pleasure, but a duty to answer them, for the poor fellow was forlorn, and needed petting, since Jo persisted in being stonyhearted.
If all brothers were treated as well as Laurie was at this period, they would be a much happier race of beings than they are.
Amy never lectured now.
She asked his opinion on all subjects, she was interested in everything he did, made charming little presents for him, and sent him two letters a week, full of lively gossip, sisterly confidences, and captivating sketches of the lovely scenes about her.
As few brothers are complimented by having their letters carried about in their sister’s pockets, read and reread diligently, cried over when short, kissed when long, and treasured carefully, we will not hint that Amy did any of these fond and foolish things.
But she certainly did grow a little pale and pensive that spring, lost much of her relish for society, and went out sketching alone a good deal.
Her aunt thought that she regretted her answer to Fred, and finding denials useless and explanations impossible, Amy left her to think what she liked, taking care that Laurie should know that Fred had gone to Egypt.
That was all, but he understood it, and looked relieved, as he said to himself, with a venerable air...
I’ve been through it all, and I can sympathize.” With that he heaved a great sigh, and then, as if he had discharged his duty to the past, put his feet up on the sofa and enjoyed Amy’s letter luxuriously.
The sad news met her at Vevay, for the heat had driven them from Nice in May, and they had travelled slowly to Switzerland, by way of Genoa and the Italian lakes.
She bore it very well, and quietly submitted to the family decree that she should not shorten her visit, for since it was too late to say goodbye to Beth, she had better stay, and let absence soften her sorrow.
But her heart was very heavy, she longed to be at home, and every day looked wistfully across the lake, waiting for Laurie to come and comfort her.
The moment he read it, he packed his knapsack, bade adieu to his fellow pedestrians, and was off to keep his promise, with a heart full of joy and sorrow, hope and suspense.
The garcon was in despair that the whole family had gone to take a promenade on the lake, but no, the blonde mademoiselle might be in the chateau garden.
If monsieur would give himself the pain of sitting down, a flash of time should present her.
But monsieur could not wait even a ‘flash of time’, and in the middle of the speech departed to find mademoiselle himself.
A pleasant old garden on the borders of the lovely lake, with chestnuts rustling overhead, ivy climbing everywhere, and the black shadow of the tower falling far across the sunny water.
She was sitting here that day, leaning her head on her hand, with a homesick heart and heavy eyes, thinking of Beth and wondering why Laurie did not come.
She did not hear him cross the courtyard beyond, nor see him pause in the archway that led from the subterranean path into the garden.
He stood a minute looking at her with new eyes, seeing what no one had ever seen before, the tender side of Amy’s character.
Everything about her mutely suggested love and sorrow, the blotted letters in her lap, the black ribbon that tied up her hair, the womanly pain and patience in her face, even the little ebony cross at her throat seemed pathetic to Laurie, for he had given it to her, and she wore it as her only ornament.
If he had any doubts about the reception she would give him, they were set at rest the minute she looked up and saw him, for dropping everything, she ran to him, exclaiming in a tone of unmistakable love and longing...
“Oh, Laurie, Laurie, I knew you’d come to me!” I think everything was said and settled then, for as they stood together quite silent for a moment, with the dark head bent down protectingly over the light one, Amy felt that no one could comfort and sustain her so well as Laurie, and Laurie decided that Amy was the only woman in the world who could fill Jo’s place and make him happy.
He did not tell her so, but she was not disappointed, for both felt the truth, were satisfied, and gladly left the rest to silence.
In a minute Amy went back to her place, and while she dried her tears, Laurie gathered up the scattered papers, finding in the sight of sundry well-worn letters and suggestive sketches good omens for the future.
As he sat down beside her, Amy felt shy again, and turned rosy red at the recollection of her impulsive greeting.
It was such a surprise to look up and find you, just as I was beginning to fear you wouldn’t come,” she said, trying in vain to speak quite naturally.
I wish I could say something to comfort you for the loss of dear little Beth, but I can only feel, and...” He could not get any further, for he too turned bashful all of a sudden, and did not quite know what to say.
He longed to lay Amy’s head down on his shoulder, and tell her to have a good cry, but he did not dare, so took her hand instead, and gave it a sympathetic squeeze that was better than words.
“You needn’t say anything, this comforts me,” she said softly.
Aunt and Flo are very kind, but you seem like one of the family, and it would be so comfortable to have you for a little while.” Amy spoke and looked so like a homesick child whose heart was full that Laurie forgot his bashfulness all at once, and gave her just what she wanted—the petting she was used to and the cheerful conversation she needed.
“Poor little soul, you look as if you’d grieved yourself half sick!
I’m going to take care of you, so don’t cry any more, but come and walk about with me, the wind is too chilly for you to sit still,” he said, in the half-caressing, half-commanding way that Amy liked, as he tied on her hat, drew her arm through his, and began to pace up and down the sunny walk under the new-leaved chestnuts.
He felt more at ease upon his legs, and Amy found it pleasant to have a strong arm to lean upon, a familiar face to smile at her, and a kind voice to talk delightfully for her alone.
The quaint old garden had sheltered many pairs of lovers, and seemed expressly made for them, so sunny and secluded was it, with nothing but the tower to overlook them, and the wide lake to carry away the echo of their words, as it rippled by below.
For an hour this new pair walked and talked, or rested on the wall, enjoying the sweet influences which gave such a charm to time and place, and when an unromantic dinner bell warned them away, Amy felt as if she left her burden of loneliness and sorrow behind her in the chateau garden.
Carrol saw the girl’s altered face, she was illuminated with a new idea, and exclaimed to herself, “Now I understand it all—the child has been pining for young Laurence.
Bless my heart, I never thought of such a thing!” With praiseworthy discretion, the good lady said nothing, and betrayed no sign of enlightenment, but cordially urged Laurie to stay and begged Amy to enjoy his society, for it would do her more good than so much solitude.
Amy was a model of docility, and as her aunt was a good deal occupied with Flo, she was left to entertain her friend, and did it with more than her usual success.
At Vevay, Laurie was never idle, but always walking, riding, boating, or studying in the most energetic manner, while Amy admired everything he did and followed his example as far and as fast as she could.
He said the change was owing to the climate, and she did not contradict him, being glad of a like excuse for her own recovered health and spirits.
The invigorating air did them both good, and much exercise worked wholesome changes in minds as well as bodies.
They seemed to get clearer views of life and duty up there among the everlasting hills.
The fresh winds blew away desponding doubts, delusive fancies, and moody mists.
The warm spring sunshine brought out all sorts of aspiring ideas, tender hopes, and happy thoughts.
The lake seemed to wash away the troubles of the past, and the grand old mountains to look benignly down upon them saying, “Little children, love one another.” In spite of the new sorrow, it was a very happy time, so happy that Laurie could not bear to disturb it by a word.
It took him a little while to recover from his surprise at the cure of his first, and as he had firmly believed, his last and only love.
He consoled himself for the seeming disloyalty by the thought that Jo’s sister was almost the same as Jo’s self, and the conviction that it would have been impossible to love any other woman but Amy so soon and so well.
His first wooing had been of the tempestuous order, and he looked back upon it as if through a long vista of years with a feeling of compassion blended with regret.
He was not ashamed of it, but put it away as one of the bitter-sweet experiences of his life, for which he could be grateful when the pain was over.
His second wooing, he resolved, should be as calm and simple as possible.
It all came about so naturally that no one could complain, and he knew that everybody would be pleased, even Jo.
But when our first little passion has been crushed, we are apt to be wary and slow in making a second trial, so Laurie let the days pass, enjoying every hour, and leaving to chance the utterance of the word that would put an end to the first and sweetest part of his new romance.
He had rather imagined that the denoument would take place in the chateau garden by moonlight, and in the most graceful and decorous manner, but it turned out exactly the reverse, for the matter was settled on the lake at noonday in a few blunt words.
They had been floating about all the morning, from gloomy St.
Gingolf to sunny Montreux, with the Alps of Savoy on one side, Mont St.
Bernard and the Dent du Midi on the other, pretty Vevay in the valley, and Lausanne upon the hill beyond, a cloudless blue sky overhead, and the bluer lake below, dotted with the picturesque boats that look like white-winged gulls.
They had been talking of Bonnivard, as they glided past Chillon, and of Rousseau, as they looked up at Clarens, where he wrote his Heloise.
Neither had read it, but they knew it was a love story, and each privately wondered if it was half as interesting as their own.
Amy had been dabbling her hand in the water during the little pause that fell between them, and when she looked up, Laurie was leaning on his oars with an expression in his eyes that made her say hastily, merely for the sake of saying something...
It will do me good, for since you came I have been altogether lazy and luxurious.” “I’m not tired, but you may take an oar, if you like.
There’s room enough, though I have to sit nearly in the middle, else the boat won’t trim,” returned Laurie, as if he rather liked the arrangement.
Feeling that she had not mended matters much, Amy took the offered third of a seat, shook her hair over her face, and accepted an oar.
She rowed as well as she did many other things, and though she used both hands, and Laurie but one, the oars kept time, and the boat went smoothly through the water.
“How well we pull together, don’t we?” said Amy, who objected to silence just then.
Will you, Amy?” very tenderly.
Then they both stopped rowing, and unconsciously added a pretty little tableau of human love and happiness to the dissolving views reflected in the lake.
CHAPTER FORTY-TWO ALL ALONE It was easy to promise self-abnegation when self was wrapped up in another, and heart and soul were purified by a sweet example.
But when the helpful voice was silent, the daily lesson over, the beloved presence gone, and nothing remained but loneliness and grief, then Jo found her promise very hard to keep.
She tried in a blind, hopeless way to do her duty, secretly rebelling against it all the while, for it seemed unjust that her few joys should be lessened, her burdens made heavier, and life get harder and harder as she toiled along.
Some people seemed to get all sunshine, and some all shadow.
It was not fair, for she tried more than Amy to be good, but never got any reward, only disappointment, trouble and hard work.
Poor Jo, these were dark days to her, for something like despair came over her when she thought of spending all her life in that quiet house, devoted to humdrum cares, a few small pleasures, and the duty that never seemed to grow any easier.
I wasn’t meant for a life like this, and I know I shall break away and do something desperate if somebody doesn’t come and help me,” she said to herself, when her first efforts failed and she fell into the moody, miserable state of mind which often comes when strong wills have to yield to the inevitable.
But someone did come and help her, though Jo did not recognize her good angels at once because they wore familiar shapes and used the simple spells best fitted to poor humanity.
Often she started up at night, thinking Beth called her, and when the sight of the little empty bed made her cry with the bitter cry of unsubmissive sorrow, “Oh, Beth, come back!
Come back!” she did not stretch out her yearning arms in vain.
For, as quick to hear her sobbing as she had been to hear her sister’s faintest whisper, her mother came to comfort her, not with words only, but the patient tenderness that soothes by a touch, tears that were mute reminders of a greater grief than Jo’s, and broken whispers, more eloquent than prayers, because hopeful resignation went hand-in-hand with natural sorrow.
Sacred moments, when heart talked to heart in the silence of the night, turning affliction to a blessing, which chastened grief and strengthened love.
Feeling this, Jo’s burden seemed easier to bear, duty grew sweeter, and life looked more endurable, seen from the safe shelter of her mother’s arms.
When aching heart was a little comforted, troubled mind likewise found help, for one day she went to the study, and leaning over the good gray head lifted to welcome her with a tranquil smile, she said very humbly, “Father, talk to me as you did to Beth.
I need it more than she did, for I’m all wrong.” “My dear, nothing can comfort me like this,” he answered, with a falter in his voice, and both arms round her, as if he too, needed help, and did not fear to ask for it.
Then, sitting in Beth’s little chair close beside him, Jo told her troubles, the resentful sorrow for her loss, the fruitless efforts that discouraged her, the want of faith that made life look so dark, and all the sad bewilderment which we call despair.
She gave him entire confidence, he gave her the help she needed, and both found consolation in the act.
For the time had come when they could talk together not only as father and daughter, but as man and woman, able and glad to serve each other with mutual sympathy as well as mutual love.
Happy, thoughtful times there in the old study which Jo called ‘the church of one member’, and from which she came with fresh courage, recovered cheerfulness, and a more submissive spirit.
For the parents who had taught one child to meet death without fear, were trying now to teach another to accept life without despondency or distrust, and to use its beautiful opportunities with gratitude and power.
Other helps had Jo—humble, wholesome duties and delights that would not be denied their part in serving her, and which she slowly learned to see and value.
Brooms and dishcloths never could be as distasteful as they once had been, for Beth had presided over both, and something of her housewifely spirit seemed to linger around the little mop and the old brush, never thrown away.
As she used them, Jo found herself humming the songs Beth used to hum, imitating Beth’s orderly ways, and giving the little touches here and there that kept everything fresh and cozy, which was the first step toward making home happy, though she didn’t know it till Hannah said with an approving squeeze of the hand...
“You thoughtful creeter, you’re determined we shan’t miss that dear lamb ef you can help it.
We don’t say much, but we see it, and the Lord will bless you for’t, see ef He don’t.” As they sat sewing together, Jo discovered how much improved her sister Meg was, how well she could talk, how much she knew about good, womanly impulses, thoughts, and feelings, how happy she was in husband and children, and how much they were all doing for each other.
“Marriage is an excellent thing, after all.
I wonder if I should blossom out half as well as you have, if I tried it?, always _‘perwisin’_ I could,” said Jo, as she constructed a kite for Demi in the topsy-turvy nursery.
You are like a chestnut burr, prickly outside, but silky-soft within, and a sweet kernal, if one can only get at it.
Love will make you show your heart one day, and then the rough burr will fall off.” “Frost opens chestnut burrs, ma’am, and it takes a good shake to bring them down.
Boys go nutting, and I don’t care to be bagged by them,” returned Jo, pasting away at the kite which no wind that blows would ever carry up, for Daisy had tied herself on as a bob.
Meg laughed, for she was glad to see a glimmer of Jo’s old spirit, but she felt it her duty to enforce her opinion by every argument in her power, and the sisterly chats were not wasted, especially as two of Meg’s most effective arguments were the babies, whom Jo loved tenderly.
A little more sunshine to ripen the nut, then, not a boy’s impatient shake, but a man’s hand reached up to pick it gently from the burr, and find the kernal sound and sweet.
If she suspected this, she would have shut up tight, and been more prickly than ever, fortunately she wasn’t thinking about herself, so when the time came, down she dropped.
Now, if she had been the heroine of a moral storybook, she ought at this period of her life to have become quite saintly, renounced the world, and gone about doing good in a mortified bonnet, with tracts in her pocket.
But, you see, Jo wasn’t a heroine, she was only a struggling human girl like hundreds of others, and she just acted out her nature, being sad, cross, listless, or energetic, as the mood suggested.
It’s highly virtuous to say we’ll be good, but we can’t do it all at once, and it takes a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all together before some of us even get our feet set in the right way.
Jo had got so far, she was learning to do her duty, and to feel unhappy if she did not, but to do it cheerfully, ah, that was another thing!
She had often said she wanted to do something splendid, no matter how hard, and now she had her wish, for what could be more beautiful than to devote her life to Father and Mother, trying to make home as happy to them as they had to her?
And if difficulties were necessary to increase the splendor of the effort, what could be harder for a restless, ambitious girl than to give up her own hopes, plans, and desires, and cheerfully live for others?
Providence had taken her at her word.
Here was the task, not what she had expected, but better because self had no part in it.
She decided that she would try, and in her first attempt she found the helps I have suggested.
Still another was given her, and she took it, not as a reward, but as a comfort, as Christian took the refreshment afforded by the little arbor where he rested, as he climbed the hill called Difficulty.
That always used to make you happy,” said her mother once, when the desponding fit over-shadowed Jo.
Write something for us, and never mind the rest of the world.
I’m sure it would do you good, and please us very much.” “Don’t believe I can.” But Jo got out her desk and began to overhaul her half-finished manuscripts.
An hour afterward her mother peeped in and there she was, scratching away, with her black pinafore on, and an absorbed expression, which caused Mrs.
March to smile and slip away, well pleased with the success of her suggestion.
Jo never knew how it happened, but something got into that story that went straight to the hearts of those who read it, for when her family had laughed and cried over it, her father sent it, much against her will, to one of the popular magazines, and to her utter surprise, it was not only paid for, but others requested.
Letters from several persons, whose praise was honor, followed the appearance of the little story, newspapers copied it, and strangers as well as friends admired it.
For a small thing it was a great success, and Jo was more astonished than when her novel was commended and condemned all at once.
“I don’t understand it.
What can there be in a simple little story like that to make people praise it so?” she said, quite bewildered.
You wrote with no thoughts of fame and money, and put your heart into it, my daughter.
Do your best, and grow as happy as we are in your success.” “If there is anything good or true in what I write, it isn’t mine.
So taught by love and sorrow, Jo wrote her little stories, and sent them away to make friends for themselves and her, finding it a very charitable world to such humble wanderers, for they were kindly welcomed, and sent home comfortable tokens to their mother, like dutiful children whom good fortune overtakes.
When Amy and Laurie wrote of their engagement, Mrs.
March feared that Jo would find it difficult to rejoice over it, but her fears were soon set at rest, for though Jo looked grave at first, she took it very quietly, and was full of hopes and plans for ‘the children’ before she read the letter twice.
It was a sort of written duet, wherein each glorified the other in loverlike fashion, very pleasant to read and satisfactory to think of, for no one had any objection to make.
I felt sure then that something better than what you call the ‘mercenary spirit’ had come over her, and a hint here and there in her letters made me suspect that love and Laurie would win the day.” “How sharp you are, Marmee, and how silent!
You never said a word to me.” “Mothers have need of sharp eyes and discreet tongues when they have girls to manage.
I was half afraid to put the idea into your head, lest you should write and congratulate them before the thing was settled.” “I’m not the scatterbrain I was.
Forgive me, dear, I can’t help seeing that you are very lonely, and sometimes there is a hungry look in your eyes that goes to my heart.
There are plenty to love you, so try to be satisfied with Father and Mother, sisters and brothers, friends and babies, till the best lover of all comes to give you your reward.” “Mothers are the best lovers in the world, but I don’t mind whispering to Marmee that I’d like to try all kinds.
It’s very curious, but the more I try to satisfy myself with all sorts of natural affections, the more I seem to want.
Mine is so elastic, it never seems full now, and I used to be quite contented with my family.
I don’t understand it.” “I do,” and Mrs.
“It is so beautiful to be loved as Laurie loves me.
He isn’t sentimental, doesn’t say much about it, but I see and feel it in all he says and does, and it makes me so happy and so humble that I don’t seem to be the same girl I was.
I never knew how good and generous and tender he was till now, for he lets me read his heart, and I find it full of noble impulses and hopes and purposes, and am so proud to know it’s mine.
He says he feels as if he ‘could make a prosperous voyage now with me aboard as mate, and lots of love for ballast’.
I pray he may, and try to be all he believes me, for I love my gallant captain with all my heart and soul and might, and never will desert him, while God lets us be together.
Oh, Mother, I never knew how much like heaven this world could be, when two people love and live for one another!” “And that’s our cool, reserved, and worldly Amy!
Truly, love does work miracles.
How very, very happy they must be!” and Jo laid the rustling sheets together with a careful hand, as one might shut the covers of a lovely romance, which holds the reader fast till the end comes, and he finds himself alone in the workaday world again.
By-and-by Jo roamed away upstairs, for it was rainy, and she could not walk.
A restless spirit possessed her, and the old feeling came again, not bitter as it once was, but a sorrowfully patient wonder why one sister should have all she asked, the other nothing.
It was not true, she knew that and tried to put it away, but the natural craving for affection was strong, and Amy’s happiness woke the hungry longing for someone to ‘love with heart and soul, and cling to while God let them be together’.
Up in the garret, where Jo’s unquiet wanderings ended stood four little wooden chests in a row, each marked with its owners name, and each filled with relics of the childhood and girlhood ended now for all.
Jo glanced into them, and when she came to her own, leaned her chin on the edge, and stared absently at the chaotic collection, till a bundle of old exercise books caught her eye.
She drew them out, turned them over, and relived that pleasant winter at kind Mrs.
She had smiled at first, then she looked thoughtful, next sad, and when she came to a little message written in the Professor’s hand, her lips began to tremble, the books slid out of her lap, and she sat looking at the friendly words, as they took a new meaning, and touched a tender spot in her heart.
I didn’t value him half enough when I had him, but now how I should love to see him, for everyone seems going away from me, and I’m all alone.” And holding the little paper fast, as if it were a promise yet to be fulfilled, Jo laid her head down on a comfortable rag bag, and cried, as if in opposition to the rain pattering on the roof.
Was it all self-pity, loneliness, or low spirits?
Or was it the waking up of a sentiment which had bided its time as patiently as its inspirer?
CHAPTER FORTY-THREE SURPRISES Jo was alone in the twilight, lying on the old sofa, looking at the fire, and thinking.
It was her favorite way of spending the hour of dusk.
No one disturbed her, and she used to lie there on Beth’s little red pillow, planning stories, dreaming dreams, or thinking tender thoughts of the sister who never seemed far away.
Her face looked tired, grave, and rather sad, for tomorrow was her birthday, and she was thinking how fast the years went by, how old she was getting, and how little she seemed to have accomplished.
Jo was mistaken in that.
There was a good deal to show, and by-and-by she saw, and was grateful for it.
A literary spinster, with a pen for a spouse, a family of stories for children, and twenty years hence a morsel of fame, perhaps, when, like poor Johnson, I’m old and can’t enjoy it, solitary, and can’t share it, independent, and don’t need it.
Well, I needn’t be a sour saint nor a selfish sinner, and, I dare say, old maids are very comfortable when they get used to it, but...” and there Jo sighed, as if the prospect was not inviting.
But it’s not as bad as it looks, and one can get on quite happily if one has something in one’s self to fall back upon.
At twenty-five, girls begin to talk about being old maids, but secretly resolve that they never will be.
At thirty they say nothing about it, but quietly accept the fact, and if sensible, console themselves by remembering that they have twenty more useful, happy years, in which they may be learning to grow old gracefully.
Don’t laugh at the spinsters, dear girls, for often very tender, tragic romances are hidden away in the hearts that beat so quietly under the sober gowns, and many silent sacrifices of youth, health, ambition, love itself, make the faded faces beautiful in God’s sight.
Even the sad, sour sisters should be kindly dealt with, because they have missed the sweetest part of life, if for no other reason.
And looking at them with compassion, not contempt, girls in their bloom should remember that they too may miss the blossom time.
That rosy cheeks don’t last forever, that silver threads will come in the bonnie brown hair, and that, by-and-by, kindness and respect will be as sweet as love and admiration now.
Gentlemen, which means boys, be courteous to the old maids, no matter how poor and plain and prim, for the only chivalry worth having is that which is the readiest to pay deference to the old, protect the feeble, and serve womankind, regardless of rank, age, or color.
The bright-eyed girls are quick to see such traits, and will like you all the better for them, and if death, almost the only power that can part mother and son, should rob you of yours, you will be sure to find a tender welcome and maternal cherishing from some Aunt Priscilla, who has kept the warmest corner of her lonely old heart for ‘the best nevvy in the world’.
Jo must have fallen asleep (as I dare say my reader has during this little homily), for suddenly Laurie’s ghost seemed to stand before her, a substantial, lifelike ghost, leaning over her with the very look he used to wear when he felt a good deal and didn’t like to show it.
“She could not think it he,” and lay staring up at him in startled silence, till he stooped and kissed her.
Then she knew him, and flew up, crying joyfully...
My blessed boy, words can’t express my gladness.
We stopped there by the way, and there was no getting my wife out of their clutches.” “Your what?” cried Jo, for Laurie uttered those two words with an unconscious pride and satisfaction which betrayed him.
“You’ve gone and got married!” “Yes, please, but I never will again,” and he went down upon his knees, with a penitent clasping of hands, and a face full of mischief, mirth, and triumph.
“Actually married?” “Very much so, thank you.” “Mercy on us.
What dreadful thing will you do next?” and Jo fell into her seat with a gasp.
“A characteristic, but not exactly complimentary, congratulation,” returned Laurie, still in an abject attitude, but beaming with satisfaction.
“What can you expect, when you take one’s breath away, creeping in like a burglar, and letting cats out of bags like that?
Get up, you ridiculous boy, and tell me all about it.” “Not a word, unless you let me come in my old place, and promise not to barricade.” Jo laughed at that as she had not done for many a long day, and patted the sofa invitingly, as she said in a cordial tone, “The old pillow is up garret, and we don’t need it now.
Well, you look it,” and Jo’s eye plainly betrayed that she found her boy comelier than ever.
The pillow was gone, but there was a barricade, nevertheless, a natural one, raised by time, absence, and change of heart.
Both felt it, and for a minute looked at one another as if that invisible barrier cast a little shadow over them.
It was gone directly however, for Laurie said, with a vain attempt at dignity...
You’ve grown bigger and bonnier, but you are the same scapegrace as ever.” “Now really, Jo, you ought to treat me with more respect,” began Laurie, who enjoyed it all immensely.
“How can I, when the mere idea of you, married and settled, is so irresistibly funny that I can’t keep sober!” answered Jo, smiling all over her face, so infectiously that they had another laugh, and then settled down for a good talk, quite in the pleasant old fashion.
“It’s no use your going out in the cold to get Amy, for they are all coming up presently.
I wanted to be the one to tell you the grand surprise, and have ‘first skim’ as we used to say when we squabbled about the cream.” “Of course you did, and spoiled your story by beginning at the wrong end.
Now, start right, and tell me how it all happened.
Go on, and tell the truth, if you can, sir.” “Now she’s beginning to marm it.
Isn’t it jolly to hear her?” said Laurie to the fire, and the fire glowed and sparkled as if it quite agreed.
We planned to come home with the Carrols, a month or more ago, but they suddenly changed their minds, and decided to pass another winter in Paris.
Carrol had got English notions about chaperons and such nonsense, and wouldn’t let Amy come with us.
So I just settled the difficulty by saying, ‘Let’s be married, and then we can do as we like’.” “Of course you did.
You always have things to suit you.” “Not always,” and something in Laurie’s voice made Jo say hastily...
“A trifle, perhaps, she’s such a captivating little woman I can’t help being proud of her.
Well, then Uncle and Aunt were there to play propriety.
We were so absorbed in one another we were of no mortal use apart, and that charming arrangement would make everything easy all round, so we did it.” “When, where, how?” asked Jo, in a fever of feminine interest and curiosity, for she could not realize it a particle.
“Six weeks ago, at the American consul’s, in Paris, a very quiet wedding of course, for even in our happiness we didn’t forget dear little Beth.” Jo put her hand in his as he said that, and Laurie gently smoothed the little red pillow, which he remembered well.
“Why didn’t you let us know afterward?” asked Jo, in a quieter tone, when they had sat quite still a minute.
“We wanted to surprise you.
We thought we were coming directly home, at first, but the dear old gentleman, as soon as we were married, found he couldn’t be ready under a month, at least, and sent us off to spend our honeymoon wherever we liked.
Amy had once called Valrosa a regular honeymoon home, so we went there, and were as happy as people are but once in their lives.
Wasn’t it love among the roses!” Laurie seemed to forget Jo for a minute, and Jo was glad of it, for the fact that he told her these things so freely and so naturally assured her that he had quite forgiven and forgotten.
She tried to draw away her hand, but as if he guessed the thought that prompted the half-involuntary impulse, Laurie held it fast, and said, with a manly gravity she had never seen in him before...
I think it was meant to be so, and would have come about naturally, if I had waited, as you tried to make me, but I never could be patient, and so I got a heartache.
I was a boy then, headstrong and violent, and it took a hard lesson to show me my mistake.
But I couldn’t, and when I saw her in Switzerland, everything seemed to clear up all at once.
You both got into your right places, and I felt sure that it was well off with the old love before it was on with the new, that I could honestly share my heart between sister Jo and wife Amy, and love them dearly.
We are man and woman now, with sober work to do, for playtime is over, and we must give up frolicking.
We can’t be little playmates any longer, but we will be brother and sister, to love and help one another all our lives, won’t we, Laurie?” He did not say a word, but took the hand she offered him, and laid his face down on it for a minute, feeling that out of the grave of a boyish passion, there had risen a beautiful, strong friendship to bless them both.
Presently Jo said cheerfully, for she didn’t want the coming home to be a sad one, “I can’t make it true that you children are really married and going to set up housekeeping.
Why, it seems only yesterday that I was buttoning Amy’s pinafore, and pulling your hair when you teased.
Mercy me, how time does fly!” “As one of the children is older than yourself, you needn’t talk so like a grandma.
I flatter myself I’m a ‘gentleman growed’ as Peggotty said of David, and when you see Amy, you’ll find her rather a precocious infant,” said Laurie, looking amused at her maternal air.
We left you to bear it alone, while we went pleasuring.
What a selfish beast I’ve been!” and Laurie pulled his own hair, with a remorseful look.
But Jo only turned over the traitorous pillow, and answered, in a tone which she tried to make more cheerful, “No, I had Father and Mother to help me, and the dear babies to comfort me, and the thought that you and Amy were safe and happy, to make the troubles here easier to bear.
I am lonely, sometimes, but I dare say it’s good for me, and...” “You never shall be again,” broke in Laurie, putting his arm about her, as if to fence out every human ill.
“Amy and I can’t get on without you, so you must come and teach ‘the children’ to keep house, and go halves in everything, just as we used to do, and let us pet you, and all be blissfully happy and friendly together.” “If I shouldn’t be in the way, it would be very pleasant.
I begin to feel quite young already, for somehow all my troubles seemed to fly away when you came.
You always were a comfort, Teddy,” and Jo leaned her head on his shoulder, just as she did years ago, when Beth lay ill and Laurie told her to hold on to him.
He looked down at her, wondering if she remembered the time, but Jo was smiling to herself, as if in truth her troubles had all vanished at his coming.
“You are the same Jo still, dropping tears about one minute, and laughing the next.
What is it, Grandma?” “I was wondering how you and Amy get on together.” “Like angels!” “Yes, of course, but which rules?” “I don’t mind telling you that she does now, at least I let her think so, it pleases her, you know.
By-and-by we shall take turns, for marriage, they say, halves one’s rights and doubles one’s duties.” “You’ll go on as you begin, and Amy will rule you all the days of your life.” “Well, she does it so imperceptibly that I don’t think I shall mind much.
In fact, I rather like it, for she winds one round her finger as softly and prettily as a skein of silk, and makes you feel as if she was doing you a favor all the while.” “That ever I should live to see you a henpecked husband and enjoying it!” cried Jo, with uplifted hands.
It was good to see Laurie square his shoulders, and smile with masculine scorn at that insinuation, as he replied, with his “high and mighty” air, “Amy is too well-bred for that, and I am not the sort of man to submit to it.
My wife and I respect ourselves and one another too much ever to tyrannize or quarrel.” Jo liked that, and thought the new dignity very becoming, but the boy seemed changing very fast into the man, and regret mingled with her pleasure.
She is the sun and I the wind, in the fable, and the sun managed the man best, you remember.” “She can blow him up as well as shine on him,” laughed Laurie.
I give you my word it was a deal worse than any of your scoldings, a regular rouser.
I’ll tell you all about it sometime, she never will, because after telling me that she despised and was ashamed of me, she lost her heart to the despicable party and married the good-for-nothing.” “What baseness!
Well, if she abuses you, come to me, and I’ll defend you.” “I look as if I needed it, don’t I?” said Laurie, getting up and striking an attitude which suddenly changed from the imposing to the rapturous, as Amy’s voice was heard calling, “Where is she?
Where’s my dear old Jo?” In trooped the whole family, and everyone was hugged and kissed all over again, and after several vain attempts, the three wanderers were set down to be looked at and exulted over.
Laurence, hale and hearty as ever, was quite as much improved as the others by his foreign tour, for the crustiness seemed to be nearly gone, and the old-fashioned courtliness had received a polish which made it kindlier than ever.
It was good to see him beam at ‘my children’, as he called the young pair.
It was better still to see Amy pay him the daughterly duty and affection which completely won his old heart, and best of all, to watch Laurie revolve about the two, as if never tired of enjoying the pretty picture they made.
The minute she put her eyes upon Amy, Meg became conscious that her own dress hadn’t a Parisian air, that young Mrs.
Moffat would be entirely eclipsed by young Mrs.
Laurence, and that ‘her ladyship’ was altogether a most elegant and graceful woman.
Jo thought, as she watched the pair, “How well they look together!
I was right, and Laurie has found the beautiful, accomplished girl who will become his home better than clumsy old Jo, and be a pride, not a torment to him.” Mrs.
March and her husband smiled and nodded at each other with happy faces, for they saw that their youngest had done well, not only in worldly things, but the better wealth of love, confidence, and happiness.
For Amy’s face was full of the soft brightness which betokens a peaceful heart, her voice had a new tenderness in it, and the cool, prim carriage was changed to a gentle dignity, both womanly and winning.
No little affectations marred it, and the cordial sweetness of her manner was more charming than the new beauty or the old grace, for it stamped her at once with the unmistakable sign of the true gentlewoman she had hoped to become.
March whispered back, with a loving look at the worn face and gray head beside him.
Daisy found it impossible to keep her eyes off her ‘pitty aunty’, but attached herself like a lap dog to the wonderful chatelaine full of delightful charms.
Demi paused to consider the new relationship before he compromised himself by the rash acceptance of a bribe, which took the tempting form of a family of wooden bears from Berne.
A flank movement produced an unconditional surrender, however, for Laurie knew where to have him.
“Young man, when I first had the honor of making your acquaintance you hit me in the face.
Now I demand the satisfaction of a gentleman,” and with that the tall uncle proceeded to toss and tousle the small nephew in a way that damaged his philosophical dignity as much as it delighted his boyish soul.
“Blest if she ain’t in silk from head to foot; ain’t it a relishin’ sight to see her settin’ there as fine as a fiddle, and hear folks calling little Amy ‘Mis.
Laurence!’” muttered old Hannah, who could not resist frequent “peeks” through the slide as she set the table in a most decidedly promiscuous manner.
Mercy on us, how they did talk! first one, then the other, then all burst out together—trying to tell the history of three years in half an hour.
It was fortunate that tea was at hand, to produce a lull and provide refreshment—for they would have been hoarse and faint if they had gone on much longer.
Such a happy procession as filed away into the little dining room!
March proudly escorted Mrs.
Didn’t they steal sips of tea, stuff gingerbread ad libitum, get a hot biscuit apiece, and as a crowning trespass, didn’t they each whisk a captivating little tart into their tiny pockets, there to stick and crumble treacherously, teaching them that both human nature and a pastry are frail?
Burdened with the guilty consciousness of the sequestered tarts, and fearing that Dodo’s sharp eyes would pierce the thin disguise of cambric and merino which hid their booty, the little sinners attached themselves to ‘Dranpa’, who hadn’t his spectacles on.
Amy, who was handed about like refreshments, returned to the parlor on Father Laurence’s arm.
The others paired off as before, and this arrangement left Jo companionless.
She did not mind it at the minute, for she lingered to answer Hannah’s eager inquiry.
“Will Miss Amy ride in her coop (coupe), and use all them lovely silver dishes that’s stored away over yander?” “Shouldn’t wonder if she drove six white horses, ate off gold plate, and wore diamonds and point lace every day.
Teddy thinks nothing too good for her,” returned Jo with infinite satisfaction.
Will you have hash or fishballs for breakfast?” asked Hannah, who wisely mingled poetry and prose.
“I don’t care,” and Jo shut the door, feeling that food was an uncongenial topic just then.
She stood a minute looking at the party vanishing above, and as Demi’s short plaid legs toiled up the last stair, a sudden sense of loneliness came over her so strongly that she looked about her with dim eyes, as if to find something to lean upon, for even Teddy had deserted her.
If she had known what birthday gift was coming every minute nearer and nearer, she would not have said to herself, “I’ll weep a little weep when I go to bed.
It won’t do to be dismal now.” Then she drew her hand over her eyes, for one of her boyish habits was never to know where her handkerchief was, and had just managed to call up a smile when there came a knock at the porch door.
She opened with hospitable haste, and started as if another ghost had come to surprise her, for there stood a tall bearded gentleman, beaming on her from the darkness like a midnight sun.
“And I to see Miss Marsch, but no, you haf a party,” and the Professor paused as the sound of voices and the tap of dancing feet came down to them.
Bhaer would have gone decorously away, and come again another day, but how could he, when Jo shut the door behind him, and bereft him of his hat?
Perhaps her face had something to do with it, for she forgot to hide her joy at seeing him, and showed it with a frankness that proved irresistible to the solitary man, whose welcome far exceeded his boldest hopes.
“If I shall not be Monsieur de Trop, I will so gladly see them all.
You haf been ill, my friend?” He put the question abruptly, for, as Jo hung up his coat, the light fell on her face, and he saw a change in it.
“Not ill, but tired and sorrowful.
My heart was sore for you when I heard that,” and he shook hands again, with such a sympathetic face that Jo felt as if no comfort could equal the look of the kind eyes, the grasp of the big, warm hand.
“Father, Mother, this is my friend, Professor Bhaer,” she said, with a face and tone of such irrepressible pride and pleasure that she might as well have blown a trumpet and opened the door with a flourish.
If the stranger had any doubts about his reception, they were set at rest in a minute by the cordial welcome he received.
Everyone greeted him kindly, for Jo’s sake at first, but very soon they liked him for his own.
They could not help it, for he carried the talisman that opens all hearts, and these simple people warmed to him at once, feeling even the more friendly because he was poor.
For poverty enriches those who live above it, and is a sure passport to truly hospitable spirits.
Bhaer sat looking about him with the air of a traveler who knocks at a strange door, and when it opens, finds himself at home.
The children went to him like bees to a honeypot, and establishing themselves on each knee, proceeded to captivate him by rifling his pockets, pulling his beard, and investigating his watch, with juvenile audacity.
The women telegraphed their approval to one another, and Mr.
March, feeling that he had got a kindred spirit, opened his choicest stores for his guest’s benefit, while silent John listened and enjoyed the talk, but said not a word, and Mr.
Laurence found it impossible to go to sleep.
If Jo had not been otherwise engaged, Laurie’s behavior would have amused her, for a faint twinge, not of jealousy, but something like suspicion, caused that gentleman to stand aloof at first, and observe the newcomer with brotherly circumspection.
He got interested in spite of himself, and before he knew it, was drawn into the circle.
Bhaer talked well in this genial atmosphere, and did himself justice.
He seldom spoke to Laurie, but he looked at him often, and a shadow would pass across his face, as if regretting his own lost youth, as he watched the young man in his prime.
Then his eyes would turn to Jo so wistfully that she would have surely answered the mute inquiry if she had seen it.
But Jo had her own eyes to take care of, and feeling that they could not be trusted, she prudently kept them on the little sock she was knitting, like a model maiden aunt.
A stealthy glance now and then refreshed her like sips of fresh water after a dusty walk, for the sidelong peeps showed her several propitious omens.
Bhaer’s face had lost the absent-minded expression, and looked all alive with interest in the present moment, actually young and handsome, she thought, forgetting to compare him with Laurie, as she usually did strange men, to their great detriment.
Then he seemed quite inspired, though the burial customs of the ancients, to which the conversation had strayed, might not be considered an exhilarating topic.
Jo quite glowed with triumph when Teddy got quenched in an argument, and thought to herself, as she watched her father’s absorbed face, “How he would enjoy having such a man as my Professor to talk with every day!” Lastly, Mr.
Bhaer was dressed in a new suit of black, which made him look more like a gentleman than ever.
His bushy hair had been cut and smoothly brushed, but didn’t stay in order long, for in exciting moments, he rumpled it up in the droll way he used to do, and Jo liked it rampantly erect better than flat, because she thought it gave his fine forehead a Jove-like aspect.
Poor Jo, how she did glorify that plain man, as she sat knitting away so quietly, yet letting nothing escape her, not even the fact that Mr.
Bhaer actually had gold sleeve-buttons in his immaculate wristbands.
He couldn’t have got himself up with more care if he’d been going a-wooing,” said Jo to herself, and then a sudden thought born of the words made her blush so dreadfully that she had to drop her ball, and go down after it to hide her face.
The maneuver did not succeed as well as she expected, however, for though just in the act of setting fire to a funeral pyre, the Professor dropped his torch, metaphorically speaking, and made a dive after the little blue ball.
Of course they bumped their heads smartly together, saw stars, and both came up flushed and laughing, without the ball, to resume their seats, wishing they had not left them.
Nobody knew where the evening went to, for Hannah skillfully abstracted the babies at an early hour, nodding like two rosy poppies, and Mr.
Laurence went home to rest.
The others sat round the fire, talking away, utterly regardless of the lapse of time, till Meg, whose maternal mind was impressed with a firm conviction that Daisy had tumbled out of bed, and Demi set his nightgown afire studying the structure of matches, made a move to go.
“We must have our sing, in the good old way, for we are all together again once more,” said Jo, feeling that a good shout would be a safe and pleasant vent for the jubilant emotions of her soul.
But no one found the words thoughtless or untrue, for Beth still seemed among them, a peaceful presence, invisible, but dearer than ever, since death could not break the household league that love made dissoluble.
The tidy basket, with the bit of work she left unfinished when the needle grew ‘so heavy’, was still on its accustomed shelf.
The beloved instrument, seldom touched now had not been moved, and above it Beth’s face, serene and smiling, as in the early days, looked down upon them, seeming to say, “Be happy.
I am here.” “Play something, Amy.
Let them hear how much you have improved,” said Laurie, with pardonable pride in his promising pupil.
But Amy whispered, with full eyes, as she twirled the faded stool, “Not tonight, dear.
I can’t show off tonight.” But she did show something better than brilliancy or skill, for she sang Beth’s songs with a tender music in her voice which the best master could not have taught, and touched the listener’s hearts with a sweeter power than any other inspiration could have given her.
The room was very still, when the clear voice failed suddenly at the last line of Beth’s favorite hymn.
Bhaer cleared his throat with a gratified “Hem!” as he stepped into the corner where Jo stood, saying...
We go excellently well together.” A pleasing fiction, by the way, for Jo had no more idea of music than a grasshopper.
But she would have consented if he had proposed to sing a whole opera, and warbled away, blissfully regardless of time and tune.
Bhaer sang like a true German, heartily and well, and Jo soon subsided into a subdued hum, that she might listen to the mellow voice that seemed to sing for her alone.
Know’st thou the land where the citron blooms, used to be the Professor’s favorite line, for ‘das land’ meant Germany to him, but now he seemed to dwell, with peculiar warmth and melody, upon the words...
There, oh there, might I with thee, O, my beloved, go and one listener was so thrilled by the tender invitation that she longed to say she did know the land, and would joyfully depart thither whenever he liked.
The song was considered a great success, and the singer retired covered with laurels.
But a few minutes afterward, he forgot his manners entirely, and stared at Amy putting on her bonnet, for she had been introduced simply as ‘my sister’, and no one had called her by her new name since he came.
He forgot himself still further when Laurie said, in his most gracious manner, at parting...
Please remember that there is always a welcome waiting for you over the way.” Then the Professor thanked him so heartily, and looked so suddenly illuminated with satisfaction, that Laurie thought him the most delightfully demonstrative old fellow he ever met.
“I too shall go, but I shall gladly come again, if you will gif me leave, dear madame, for a little business in the city will keep me here some days.” He spoke to Mrs.
March, but he looked at Jo, and the mother’s voice gave as cordial an assent as did the daughter’s eyes, for Mrs.
March was not so blind to her children’s interest as Mrs.
“I suspect that is a wise man,” remarked Mr.
March, with placid satisfaction, from the hearthrug, after the last guest had gone.
March, with decided approval, as she wound up the clock.
She wondered what the business was that brought Mr.
Bhaer to the city, and finally decided that he had been appointed to some great honor, somewhere, but had been too modest to mention the fact.
If she had seen his face when, safe in his own room, he looked at the picture of a severe and rigid young lady, with a good deal of hair, who appeared to be gazing darkly into futurity, it might have thrown some light upon the subject, especially when he turned off the gas, and kissed the picture in the dark.
Laurence sitting in her mother’s lap, as if being made ‘the baby’ again.
March pressed the white hand that wore the wedding ring, as if asking pardon for her maternal covetousness.
“I shouldn’t have come over if I could have helped it, but I can’t get on without my little woman any more than a...” “Weathercock can without the wind,” suggested Jo, as he paused for a simile.
“Exactly, for Amy keeps me pointing due west most of the time, with only an occasional whiffle round to the south, and I haven’t had an easterly spell since I was married.
Don’t know anything about the north, but am altogether salubrious and balmy, hey, my lady?” “Lovely weather so far.
I don’t know how long it will last, but I’m not afraid of storms, for I’m learning how to sail my ship.
Come home, dear, and I’ll find your bootjack.
I suppose that’s what you are rummaging after among my things.
Men are so helpless, Mother,” said Amy, with a matronly air, which delighted her husband.
“What are you going to do with yourselves after you get settled?” asked Jo, buttoning Amy’s cloak as she used to button her pinafores.
I’m going into business with a devotion that shall delight Grandfather, and prove to him that I’m not spoiled.
I need something of the sort to keep me steady.
I’m tired of dawdling, and mean to work like a man.” “And Amy, what is she going to do?” asked Mrs.
March, well pleased at Laurie’s decision and the energy with which he spoke.
“After doing the civil all round, and airing our best bonnet, we shall astonish you by the elegant hospitalities of our mansion, the brilliant society we shall draw about us, and the beneficial influence we shall exert over the world at large.
That’s about it, isn’t it, Madame Recamier?” asked Laurie with a quizzical look at Amy.
Come away, Impertinence, and don’t shock my family by calling me names before their faces,” answered Amy, resolving that there should be a home with a good wife in it before she set up a salon as a queen of society.
“How happy those children seem together!” observed Mr.
March, finding it difficult to become absorbed in his Aristotle after the young couple had gone.
March, with the restful expression of a pilot who has brought a ship safely into port.
Happy Amy!” and Jo sighed, then smiled brightly as Professor Bhaer opened the gate with an impatient push.
Later in the evening, when his mind had been set at rest about the bootjack, Laurie said suddenly to his wife, “Mrs.
Laurence.” “My Lord!” “That man intends to marry our Jo!” “I hope so, don’t you, dear?” “Well, my love, I consider him a trump, in the fullest sense of that expressive word, but I do wish he was a little younger and a good deal richer.” “Now, Laurie, don’t be too fastidious and worldly-minded.
If they love one another it doesn’t matter a particle how old they are nor how poor.
Women never should marry for money...” Amy caught herself up short as the words escaped her, and looked at her husband, who replied, with malicious gravity...
“Certainly not, though you do hear charming girls say that they intend to do it sometimes.
That accounts, perhaps, for your marrying a good-for-nothing like me.” “Oh, my dearest boy, don’t, don’t say that!
I’d have married you if you hadn’t a penny, and I sometimes wish you were poor that I might show how much I love you.” And Amy, who was very dignified in public and very fond in private, gave convincing proofs of the truth of her words.
“You don’t really think I am such a mercenary creature as I tried to be once, do you?
Girls do it every day, poor things, and are taught to think it is their only salvation, but you had better lessons, and though I trembled for you at one time, I was not disappointed, for the daughter was true to the mother’s teaching.
I told Mamma so yesterday, and she looked as glad and grateful as if I’d given her a check for a million, to be spent in charity.
You are not listening to my moral remarks, Mrs.
Laurence,” and Laurie paused, for Amy’s eyes had an absent look, though fixed upon his face.
“Yes, I am, and admiring the mole in your chin at the same time.
I don’t wish to make you vain, but I must confess that I’m prouder of my handsome husband than of all his money.
Don’t laugh, but your nose is such a comfort to me,” and Amy softly caressed the well-cut feature with artistic satisfaction.
Laurie had received many compliments in his life, but never one that suited him better, as he plainly showed though he did laugh at his wife’s peculiar taste, while she said slowly, “May I ask you a question, dear?” “Of course, you may.” “Shall you care if Jo does marry Mr.
I thought there was something in the dimple that didn’t quite suit you.
Not being a dog in the manger, but the happiest fellow alive, I assure you I can dance at Jo’s wedding with a heart as light as my heels.
Do you doubt it, my darling?” Amy looked up at him, and was satisfied.
Her little jealous fear vanished forever, and she thanked him, with a face full of love and confidence.
“I wish we could do something for that capital old Professor.
Couldn’t we invent a rich relation, who shall obligingly die out there in Germany, and leave him a tidy little fortune?” said Laurie, when they began to pace up and down the long drawing room, arm in arm, as they were fond of doing, in memory of the chateau garden.
She is very proud of him, just as he is, and said yesterday that she thought poverty was a beautiful thing.” “Bless her dear heart!
She won’t think so when she has a literary husband, and a dozen little professors and professorins to support.
We won’t interfere now, but watch our chance, and do them a good turn in spite of themselves.
I owe Jo for a part of my education, and she believes in people’s paying their honest debts, so I’ll get round her in that way.” “How delightful it is to be able to help others, isn’t it?
That was always one of my dreams, to have the power of giving freely, and thanks to you, the dream has come true.” “Ah, we’ll do quantities of good, won’t we?
There’s one sort of poverty that I particularly like to help.
Yet there are a thousand ways of helping them, if one only knows how to do it so delicately that it does not offend.
I must say, I like to serve a decayed gentleman better than a blarnerying beggar.
I suppose it’s wrong, but I do, though it is harder.” “Because it takes a gentleman to do it,” added the other member of the domestic admiration society.
“Thank you, I’m afraid I don’t deserve that pretty compliment.
But I was going to say that while I was dawdling about abroad, I saw a good many talented young fellows making all sorts of sacrifices, and enduring real hardships, that they might realize their dreams.
Splendid fellows, some of them, working like heros, poor and friendless, but so full of courage, patience, and ambition that I was ashamed of myself, and longed to give them a right good lift.
Those are people whom it’s a satisfaction to help, for if they’ve got genius, it’s an honor to be allowed to serve them, and not let it be lost or delayed for want of fuel to keep the pot boiling.
If they haven’t, it’s a pleasure to comfort the poor souls, and keep them from despair when they find it out.” “Yes, indeed, and there’s another class who can’t ask, and who suffer in silence.
I know something of it, for I belonged to it before you made a princess of me, as the king does the beggarmaid in the old story.
Ambitious girls have a hard time, Laurie, and often have to see youth, health, and precious opportunities go by, just for want of a little help at the right minute.
People have been very kind to me, and whenever I see girls struggling along, as we used to do, I want to put out my hand and help them, as I was helped.” “And so you shall, like an angel as you are!” cried Laurie, resolving, with a glow of philanthropic zeal, to found and endow an institution for the express benefit of young women with artistic tendencies.
“Rich people have no right to sit down and enjoy themselves, or let their money accumulate for others to waste.
It’s not half so sensible to leave legacies when one dies as it is to use the money wisely while alive, and enjoy making one’s fellow creatures happy with it.
We’ll have a good time ourselves, and add an extra relish to our own pleasure by giving other people a generous taste.
Will you be a little Dorcas, going about emptying a big basket of comforts, and filling it up with good deeds?” “With all my heart, if you will be a brave St.
CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE DAISY AND DEMI I cannot feel that I have done my duty as humble historian of the March family, without devoting at least one chapter to the two most precious and important members of it.
Daisy and Demi had now arrived at years of discretion, for in this fast age babies of three or four assert their rights, and get them, too, which is more than many of their elders do.
If there ever were a pair of twins in danger of being utterly spoiled by adoration, it was these prattling Brookes.
Of course they were the most remarkable children ever born, as will be shown when I mention that they walked at eight months, talked fluently at twelve months, and at two years they took their places at table, and behaved with a propriety which charmed all beholders.
At three, Daisy demanded a ‘needler’, and actually made a bag with four stitches in it.
She likewise set up housekeeping in the sideboard, and managed a microscopic cooking stove with a skill that brought tears of pride to Hannah’s eyes, while Demi learned his letters with his grandfather, who invented a new mode of teaching the alphabet by forming letters with his arms and legs, thus uniting gymnastics for head and heels.
The boy early developed a mechanical genius which delighted his father and distracted his mother, for he tried to imitate every machine he saw, and kept the nursery in a chaotic condition, with his ‘sewinsheen’, a mysterious structure of string, chairs, clothespins, and spools, for wheels to go ‘wound and wound’.
Of course, Demi tyrannized over Daisy, and gallantly defended her from every other aggressor, while Daisy made a galley slave of herself, and adored her brother as the one perfect being in the world.
A rosy, chubby, sunshiny little soul was Daisy, who found her way to everybody’s heart, and nestled there.
One of the captivating children, who seem made to be kissed and cuddled, adorned and adored like little goddesses, and produced for general approval on all festive occasions.
Her small virtues were so sweet that she would have been quite angelic if a few small naughtinesses had not kept her delightfully human.
It was all fair weather in her world, and every morning she scrambled up to the window in her little nightgown to look out, and say, no matter whether it rained or shone, “Oh, pitty day, oh, pitty day!” Everyone was a friend, and she offered kisses to a stranger so confidingly that the most inveterate bachelor relented, and baby-lovers became faithful worshipers.
“Me loves evvybody,” she once said, opening her arms, with her spoon in one hand, and her mug in the other, as if eager to embrace and nourish the whole world.
As she grew, her mother began to feel that the Dovecote would be blessed by the presence of an inmate as serene and loving as that which had helped to make the old house home, and to pray that she might be spared a loss like that which had lately taught them how long they had entertained an angel unawares.
Her grandfather often called her ‘Beth’, and her grandmother watched over her with untiring devotion, as if trying to atone for some past mistake, which no eye but her own could see.
“What makes my legs go, Dranpa?” asked the young philosopher, surveying those active portions of his frame with a meditative air, while resting after a go-to-bed frolic one night.
“It’s your little mind, Demi,” replied the sage, stroking the yellow head respectfully.
“What is a little mine?” “It is something which makes your body move, as the spring made the wheels go in my watch when I showed it to you.” “Open me.
He’s getting great bumps over his eyes, and learning to ask the most unanswerable questions.” “If he is old enough to ask the question he is old enough to receive true answers.
I am not putting the thoughts into his head, but helping him unfold those already there.
These children are wiser than we are, and I have no doubt the boy understands every word I have said to him.
Meg made many moral rules, and tried to keep them, but what mother was ever proof against the winning wiles, the ingenious evasions, or the tranquil audacity of the miniature men and women who so early show themselves accomplished Artful Dodgers?
They’ll make you sick,” says Mamma to the young person who offers his services in the kitchen with unfailing regularity on plum-pudding day.
“Me likes to be sick.” “I don’t want to have you, so run away and help Daisy make patty cakes.” He reluctantly departs, but his wrongs weigh upon his spirit, and by-and-by when an opportunity comes to redress them, he outwits Mamma by a shrewd bargain.
“Now you have been good children, and I’ll play anything you like,” says Meg, as she leads her assistant cooks upstairs, when the pudding is safely bouncing in the pot.
“Truly, Marmar?” asks Demi, with a brilliant idea in his well-powdered head.
Anything you say,” replies the shortsighted parent, preparing herself to sing, “The Three Little Kittens” half a dozen times over, or to take her family to “Buy a penny bun,” regardless of wind or limb.
“Then we’ll go and eat up all the raisins.” Aunt Dodo was chief playmate and confidante of both children, and the trio turned the little house topsy-turvy.
Aunt Amy was as yet only a name to them, Aunt Beth soon faded into a pleasantly vague memory, but Aunt Dodo was a living reality, and they made the most of her, for which compliment she was deeply grateful.
Bhaer came, Jo neglected her playfellows, and dismay and desolation fell upon their little souls.
Daisy, who was fond of going about peddling kisses, lost her best customer and became bankrupt.
Demi, with infantile penetration, soon discovered that Dodo like to play with ‘the bear-man’ better than she did him, but though hurt, he concealed his anguish, for he hadn’t the heart to insult a rival who kept a mine of chocolate drops in his waistcoat pocket, and a watch that could be taken out of its case and freely shaken by ardent admirers.
Some persons might have considered these pleasing liberties as bribes, but Demi didn’t see it in that light, and continued to patronize the ‘the bear-man’ with pensive affability, while Daisy bestowed her small affections upon him at the third call, and considered his shoulder her throne, his arm her refuge, his gifts treasures surpassing worth.
Gentlemen are sometimes seized with sudden fits of admiration for the young relatives of ladies whom they honor with their regard, but this counterfeit philoprogenitiveness sits uneasily upon them, and does not deceive anybody a particle.
Bhaer’s devotion was sincere, however likewise effective—for honesty is the best policy in love as in law.
He was one of the men who are at home with children, and looked particularly well when little faces made a pleasant contrast with his manly one.
His business, whatever it was, detained him from day to day, but evening seldom failed to bring him out to see—well, he always asked for Mr.
March, so I suppose he was the attraction.
The excellent papa labored under the delusion that he was, and reveled in long discussions with the kindred spirit, till a chance remark of his more observing grandson suddenly enlightened him.
Bhaer came in one evening to pause on the threshold of the study, astonished by the spectacle that met his eye.
March, with his respectable legs in the air, and beside him, likewise prone, was Demi, trying to imitate the attitude with his own short, scarlet-stockinged legs, both grovelers so seriously absorbed that they were unconscious of spectators, till Mr.
Bhaer laughed his sonorous laugh, and Jo cried out, with a scandalized face...
“Father, Father, here’s the Professor!” Down went the black legs and up came the gray head, as the preceptor said, with undisturbed dignity, “Good evening, Mr.
We are just finishing our lesson.
“Me went to see little Mary.” “And what did you there?” “I kissed her,” began Demi, with artless frankness.
Thou beginnest early.
Bhaer, continuing to confess the young sinner, who stood upon the knee, exploring the waistcoat pocket.
Don’t little boys like little girls?” asked Demi, with his mouth full, and an air of bland satisfaction.
“You precocious chick!
Who put that into your head?” said Jo, enjoying the innocent revelation as much as the Professor.
“’Tisn’t in mine head, it’s in mine mouf,” answered literal Demi, putting out his tongue, with a chocolate drop on it, thinking she alluded to confectionery, not ideas.
“Thou shouldst save some for the little friend.
Sweets to the sweet, mannling,” and Mr.
Bhaer offered Jo some, with a look that made her wonder if chocolate was not the nectar drunk by the gods.
Demi also saw the smile, was impressed by it, and artlessy inquired. ..
“Do great boys like great girls, to, ’Fessor?” Like young Washington, Mr.
Bhaer ‘couldn’t tell a lie’, so he gave the somewhat vague reply that he believed they did sometimes, in a tone that made Mr.
March put down his clothesbrush, glance at Jo’s retiring face, and then sink into his chair, looking as if the ‘precocious chick’ had put an idea into his head that was both sweet and sour.
CHAPTER FORTY-SIX UNDER THE UMBRELLA While Laurie and Amy were taking conjugal strolls over velvet carpets, as they set their house in order, and planned a blissful future, Mr.
Bhaer and Jo were enjoying promenades of a different sort, along muddy roads and sodden fields.
“I always do take a walk toward evening, and I don’t know why I should give it up, just because I happen to meet the Professor on his way out,” said Jo to herself, after two or three encounters, for though there were two paths to Meg’s whichever one she took she was sure to meet him, either going or returning.
He was always walking rapidly, and never seemed to see her until quite close, when he would look as if his short-sighted eyes had failed to recognize the approaching lady till that moment.
Then, if she was going to Meg’s he always had something for the babies.
If her face was turned homeward, he had merely strolled down to see the river, and was just returning, unless they were tired of his frequent calls.
Under the circumstances, what could Jo do but greet him civilly, and invite him in?
If she was tired of his visits, she concealed her weariness with perfect skill, and took care that there should be coffee for supper, “as Friedrich—I mean Mr.
Bhaer—doesn’t like tea.” By the second week, everyone knew perfectly well what was going on, yet everyone tried to look as if they were stone-blind to the changes in Jo’s face.
They never asked why she sang about her work, did up her hair three times a day, and got so blooming with her evening exercise.
And no one seemed to have the slightest suspicion that Professor Bhaer, while talking philosophy with the father, was giving the daughter lessons in love.
Jo couldn’t even lose her heart in a decorous manner, but sternly tried to quench her feelings, and failing to do so, led a somewhat agitated life.
She was mortally afraid of being laughed at for surrendering, after her many and vehement declarations of independence.
Laurie was her especial dread, but thanks to the new manager, he behaved with praiseworthy propriety, never called Mr.
Bhaer ‘a capital old fellow’ in public, never alluded, in the remotest manner, to Jo’s improved appearance, or expressed the least surprise at seeing the Professor’s hat on the Marches’ table nearly every evening.
But he exulted in private and longed for the time to come when he could give Jo a piece of plate, with a bear and a ragged staff on it as an appropriate coat of arms.
For a fortnight, the Professor came and went with lover-like regularity.
Then he stayed away for three whole days, and made no sign, a proceeding which caused everybody to look sober, and Jo to become pensive, at first, and then—alas for romance—very cross.
“Disgusted, I dare say, and gone home as suddenly as he came.
It’s nothing to me, of course, but I should think he would have come and bid us goodbye like a gentleman,” she said to herself, with a despairing look at the gate, as she put on her things for the customary walk one dull afternoon.
“You’d better take the little umbrella, dear.
It looks like rain,” said her mother, observing that she had on her new bonnet, but not alluding to the fact.
“Yes, Marmee, do you want anything in town?
I’ve got to run in and get some paper,” returned Jo, pulling out the bow under her chin before the glass as an excuse for not looking at her mother.
“Yes, I want some twilled silesia, a paper of number nine needles, and two yards of narrow lavender ribbon.
Have you got your thick boots on, and something warm under your cloak?” “I believe so,” answered Jo absently.
Jo heard that, but made no answer, except to kiss her mother, and walk rapidly away, thinking with a glow of gratitude, in spite of her heartache, “How good she is to me!
A drop of rain on her cheek recalled her thoughts from baffled hopes to ruined ribbons.
For the drops continued to fall, and being a woman as well as a lover, she felt that, though it was too late to save her heart, she might her bonnet.
Now she remembered the little umbrella, which she had forgotten to take in her hurry to be off, but regret was unavailing, and nothing could be done but borrow one or submit to a drenching.
She looked up at the lowering sky, down at the crimson bow already flecked with black, forward along the muddy street, then one long, lingering look behind, at a certain grimy warehouse, with ‘Hoffmann, Swartz, & Co.’ over the door, and said to herself, with a sternly reproachful air...
“It serves me right! what business had I to put on all my best things and come philandering down here, hoping to see the Professor?
No, you shall not go there to borrow an umbrella, or find out where he is, from his friends.
Now then!” With that she rushed across the street so impetuously that she narrowly escaped annihilation from a passing truck, and precipitated herself into the arms of a stately old gentleman, who said, “I beg pardon, ma’am,” and looked mortally offended.
Somewhat daunted, Jo righted herself, spread her handkerchief over the devoted ribbons, and putting temptation behind her, hurried on, with increasing dampness about the ankles, and much clashing of umbrellas overhead.
The fact that a somewhat dilapidated blue one remained stationary above the unprotected bonnet attracted her attention, and looking up, she saw Mr.
What do you down here, my friend?” “I’m shopping.” Mr.
Bhaer smiled, as he glanced from the pickle factory on one side to the wholesale hide and leather concern on the other, but he only said politely, “You haf no umbrella.
Her bonnet wasn’t big enough to hide her face, and she feared he might think the joy it betrayed unmaidenly.
“Did you believe that I should go with no farewell to those who haf been so heavenly kind to me?” he asked so reproachfully that she felt as if she had insulted him by the suggestion, and answered heartily...
I knew you were busy about your own affairs, but we rather missed you, Father and Mother especially.” “And you?” “I’m always glad to see you, sir.” In her anxiety to keep her voice quite calm, Jo made it rather cool, and the frosty little monosyllable at the end seemed to chill the Professor, for his smile vanished, as he said gravely...
“I thank you, and come one more time before I go.” “You are going, then?” “I haf no longer any business here, it is done.” “Successfully, I hope?” said Jo, for the bitterness of disappointment was in that short reply of his.
“I ought to think so, for I haf a way opened to me by which I can make my bread and gif my Junglings much help.” “Tell me, please!
For this I should be grateful, should I not?” “Indeed you should.
How splendid it will be to have you doing what you like, and be able to see you often, and the boys!” cried Jo, clinging to the lads as an excuse for the satisfaction she could not help betraying.
Bhaer could read several languages, but he had not learned to read women yet.
He flattered himself that he knew Jo pretty well, and was, therefore, much amazed by the contradictions of voice, face, and manner, which she showed him in rapid succession that day, for she was in half a dozen different moods in the course of half an hour.
When she met him she looked surprised, though it was impossible to help suspecting that she had come for that express purpose.
On learning his good fortune she almost clapped her hands.
Then on hearing his destination, she said, “So far away!” in a tone of despair that lifted him on to a pinnacle of hope, but the next minute she tumbled him down again by observing, like one entirely absorbed in the matter...
It won’t take long.” Jo rather prided herself upon her shopping capabilities, and particularly wished to impress her escort with the neatness and dispatch with which she would accomplish the business.
But owing to the flutter she was in, everything went amiss.
She upset the tray of needles, forgot the silesia was to be ‘twilled’ till it was cut off, gave the wrong change, and covered herself with confusion by asking for lavender ribbon at the calico counter.
Bhaer stood by, watching her blush and blunder, and as he watched, his own bewilderment seemed to subside, for he was beginning to see that on some occasions, women, like dreams, go by contraries.
When they came out, he put the parcel under his arm with a more cheerful aspect, and splashed through the puddles as if he rather enjoyed it on the whole.
“Should we no do a little what you call shopping for the babies, and haf a farewell feast tonight if I go for my last call at your so pleasant home?” he asked, stopping before a window full of fruit and flowers.
“What will we buy?” asked Jo, ignoring the latter part of his speech, and sniffing the mingled odors with an affectation of delight as they went in.
Bhaer, with a paternal air.
“They eat them when they can get them.” “Do you care for nuts?” “Like a squirrel.” “Hamburg grapes.
Yes, we shall drink to the Fatherland in those?” Jo frowned upon that piece of extravagance, and asked why he didn’t buy a frail of dates, a cask of raisins, and a bag of almonds, and be done with it?
Bhaer confiscated her purse, produced his own, and finished the marketing by buying several pounds of grapes, a pot of rosy daisies, and a pretty jar of honey, to be regarded in the light of a demijohn.
Then distorting his pockets with knobby bundles, and giving her the flowers to hold, he put up the old umbrella, and they traveled on again.
“Miss Marsch, I haf a great favor to ask of you,” began the Professor, after a moist promenade of half a block.
“I am bold to say it in spite of the rain, because so short a time remains to me.” “Yes, sir,” and Jo nearly crushed the small flowerpot with the sudden squeeze she gave it.
Will you kindly gif me a word of taste and help?” “Yes, sir,” and Jo felt as calm and cool all of a sudden as if she had stepped into a refrigerator.
Yes, yes, a thick, warm shawl would be a friendly thing to take the little mother.” “I’ll do it with pleasure, Mr.
Bhaer.” “I’m going very fast, and he’s getting dearer every minute,” added Jo to herself, then with a mental shake she entered into the business with an energy that was pleasant to behold.
The clerk, being a married man, condescended to take an interest in the couple, who appeared to be shopping for their family.
It’s a superior article, a most desirable color, quite chaste and genteel,” he said, shaking out a comfortable gray shawl, and throwing it over Jo’s shoulders.
Bhaer?” she asked, turning her back to him, and feeling deeply grateful for the chance of hiding her face.
“Excellently well, we will haf it,” answered the Professor, smiling to himself as he paid for it, while Jo continued to rummage the counters like a confirmed bargain-hunter.
“Now shall we go home?” he asked, as if the words were very pleasant to him.
“Yes, it’s late, and I’m _so_ tired.” Jo’s voice was more pathetic than she knew.
For now the sun seemed to have gone in as suddenly as it came out, and the world grew muddy and miserable again, and for the first time she discovered that her feet were cold, her head ached, and that her heart was colder than the former, fuller of pain than the latter.
With this idea in her head, she hailed an approaching omnibus with such a hasty gesture that the daisies flew out of the pot and were badly damaged.
“This is not our omniboos,” said the Professor, waving the loaded vehicle away, and stopping to pick up the poor little flowers.
I didn’t see the name distinctly.
I’m used to plodding in the mud,” returned Jo, winking hard, because she would have died rather than openly wipe her eyes.
The sight seemed to touch him very much, for suddenly stooping down, he asked in a tone that meant a great deal, “Heart’s dearest, why do you cry?” Now, if Jo had not been new to this sort of thing she would have said she wasn’t crying, had a cold in her head, or told any other feminine fib proper to the occasion.
Instead of which, that undignified creature answered, with an irrepressible sob, “Because you are going away.” “Ach, mein Gott, that is so good!” cried Mr.
Bhaer, managing to clasp his hands in spite of the umbrella and the bundles, “Jo, I haf nothing but much love to gif you.
I came to see if you could care for it, and I waited to be sure that I was something more than a friend.
“Oh, yes!” said Jo, and he was quite satisfied, for she folded both hands over his arm, and looked up at him with an expression that plainly showed how happy she would be to walk through life beside him, even though she had no better shelter than the old umbrella, if he carried it.
It was certainly proposing under difficulties, for even if he had desired to do so, Mr.
Neither could he offer Jo his hand, except figuratively, for both were full.
Much less could he indulge in tender remonstrations in the open street, though he was near it.
So the only way in which he could express his rapture was to look at her, with an expression which glorified his face to such a degree that there actually seemed to be little rainbows in the drops that sparkled on his beard.
If he had not loved Jo very much, I don’t think he could have done it then, for she looked far from lovely, with her skirts in a deplorable state, her rubber boots splashed to the ankle, and her bonnet a ruin.
Bhaer considered her the most beautiful woman living, and she found him more “Jove-like” than ever, though his hatbrim was quite limp with the little rills trickling thence upon his shoulders (for he held the umbrella all over Jo), and every finger of his gloves needed mending.
Passers-by probably thought them a pair of harmless lunatics, for they entirely forgot to hail a bus, and strolled leisurely along, oblivious of deepening dusk and fog.
Little they cared what anybody thought, for they were enjoying the happy hour that seldom comes but once in any life, the magical moment which bestows youth on the old, beauty on the plain, wealth on the poor, and gives human hearts a foretaste of heaven.
The Professor looked as if he had conquered a kingdom, and the world had nothing more to offer him in the way of bliss.
While Jo trudged beside him, feeling as if her place had always been there, and wondering how she ever could have chosen any other lot.
Of course, she was the first to speak—intelligibly, I mean, for the emotional remarks which followed her impetuous “Oh, yes!” were not of a coherent or reportable character.
“Friedrich, why didn’t you...” “Ah, heaven, she gifs me the name that no one speaks since Minna died!” cried the Professor, pausing in a puddle to regard her with grateful delight.
Say ‘thou’, also, and I shall say your language is almost as beautiful as mine.” “Isn’t ‘thou’ a little sentimental?” asked Jo, privately thinking it a lovely monosyllable.
Thank Gott, we Germans believe in sentiment, and keep ourselves young mit it.
Bhaer, more like a romantic student than a grave professor.
“Well, then, why didn’t thou tell me all this sooner?” asked Jo bashfully.
“Now I shall haf to show thee all my heart, and I so gladly will, because thou must take care of it hereafter.
See, then, my Jo—ah, the dear, funny little name—I had a wish to tell something the day I said goodbye in New York, but I thought the handsome friend was betrothed to thee, and so I spoke not.
Ah, well, ‘Die erste Liebe ist die beste’, but that I should not expect.” “Yes, the first love is the best, but be so contented, for I never had another.
Teddy was only a boy, and soon got over his little fancy,” said Jo, anxious to correct the Professor’s mistake.
I haf waited so long, I am grown selfish, as thou wilt find, Professorin.” “I like that,” cried Jo, delighted with her new name.
Bhaer took a little worn paper out of his waistcoat pocket.
Jo unfolded it, and looked much abashed, for it was one of her own contributions to a paper that paid for poetry, which accounted for her sending it an occasional attempt.
“How could that bring you?” she asked, wondering what he meant.
I knew it by the names and the initials, and in it there was one little verse that seemed to call me.
I will see that you go not in the wet.” IN THE GARRET Four little chests all in a row, Dim with dust, and worn by time, All fashioned and filled, long ago, By children now in their prime.
Four little keys hung side by side, With faded ribbons, brave and gay When fastened there, with childish pride, Long ago, on a rainy day.
Four little names, one on each lid, Carved out by a boyish hand, And underneath there lieth hid Histories of the happy band Once playing here, and pausing oft To hear the sweet refrain, That came and went on the roof aloft, In the falling summer rain.
I look in with loving eyes, For folded here, with well-known care, A goodly gathering lies, The record of a peaceful life— Gifts to gentle child and girl, A bridal gown, lines to a wife, A tiny shoe, a baby curl.
Well I know You hear, like a sweet refrain, Lullabies ever soft and low In the falling summer rain.
Death canonized for us one saint, Ever less human than divine, And still we lay, with tender plaint, Relics in this household shrine— The silver bell, so seldom rung, The little cap which last she wore, The fair, dead Catherine that hung By angels borne above her door.
Upon the last lid’s polished field— Legend now both fair and true A gallant knight bears on his shield, “Amy” in letters gold and blue.
Four sisters, parted for an hour, None lost, one only gone before, Made by love’s immortal power, Nearest and dearest evermore.
Oh, when these hidden stores of ours Lie open to the Father’s sight, May they be rich in golden hours, Deeds that show fairer for the light, Lives whose brave music long shall ring, Like a spirit-stirring strain, Souls that shall gladly soar and sing In the long sunshine after rain.
I never thought it would go where it could tell tales,” said Jo, tearing up the verses the Professor had treasured so long.
Bhaer with a smile as he watched the fragments fly away on the wind.
“Yes,” he added earnestly, “I read that, and I think to myself, She has a sorrow, she is lonely, she would find comfort in true love.
Shall I not go and say, ‘If this is not too poor a thing to gif for what I shall hope to receive, take it in Gott’s name?’” “And so you came to find that it was not too poor, but the one precious thing I needed,” whispered Jo.
“I had no courage to think that at first, heavenly kind as was your welcome to me.
Bhaer, with a defiant nod, as if the walls of mist closing round them were barriers which he was to surmount or valiantly knock down.
Jo thought that was splendid, and resolved to be worthy of her knight, though he did not come prancing on a charger in gorgeous array.
“What made you stay away so long?” she asked presently, finding it so pleasant to ask confidential questions and get delightful answers that she could not keep silent.
“It was not easy, but I could not find the heart to take you from that so happy home until I could haf a prospect of one to gif you, after much time, perhaps, and hard work.
How could I ask you to gif up so much for a poor old fellow, who has no fortune but a little learning?” “I’m glad you are poor.
I couldn’t bear a rich husband,” said Jo decidedly, adding in a softer tone, “Don’t fear poverty.
I’ve known it long enough to lose my dread and be happy working for those I love, and don’t call yourself old—forty is the prime of life.
I couldn’t help loving you if you were seventy!” The Professor found that so touching that he would have been glad of his handkerchief, if he could have got at it.
As he couldn’t, Jo wiped his eyes for him, and said, laughing, as she took away a bundle or two...
“I may be strong-minded, but no one can say I’m out of my sphere now, for woman’s special mission is supposed to be drying tears and bearing burdens.
I’m to carry my share, Friedrich, and help to earn the home.
Make up your mind to that, or I’ll never go,” she added resolutely, as he tried to reclaim his load.
Haf you patience to wait a long time, Jo?
I couldn’t enjoy myself if I neglected them even for you, so there’s no need of hurry or impatience.
Thou gifest me such hope and courage, and I haf nothing to gif back but a full heart and these empty hands,” cried the Professor, quite overcome.
Jo never, never would learn to be proper, for when he said that as they stood upon the steps, she just put both hands into his, whispering tenderly, “Not empty now,” and stooping down, kissed her Friedrich under the umbrella.
It was dreadful, but she would have done it if the flock of draggle-tailed sparrows on the hedge had been human beings, for she was very far gone indeed, and quite regardless of everything but her own happiness.
Though it came in such a very simple guise, that was the crowning moment of both their lives, when, turning from the night and storm and loneliness to the household light and warmth and peace waiting to receive them, with a glad “Welcome home!” Jo led her lover in, and shut the door.
CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN HARVEST TIME For a year Jo and her Professor worked and waited, hoped and loved, met occasionally, and wrote such voluminous letters that the rise in the price of paper was accounted for, Laurie said.
The second year began rather soberly, for their prospects did not brighten, and Aunt March died suddenly.
But when their first sorrow was over—for they loved the old lady in spite of her sharp tongue—they found they had cause for rejoicing, for she had left Plumfield to Jo, which made all sorts of joyful things possible.
“It’s a fine old place, and will bring a handsome sum, for of course you intend to sell it,” said Laurie, as they were all talking the matter over some weeks later.
“No, I don’t,” was Jo’s decided answer, as she petted the fat poodle, whom she had adopted, out of respect to his former mistress.
Well, that sounds paradisiacal, but you’ll find it desperate hard work.” “The crop we are going to raise is a profitable one,” and Jo laughed.
I want to open a school for little lads—a good, happy, homelike school, with me to take care of them and Fritz to teach them.” “That’s a truly Joian plan for you!
Isn’t that just like her?” cried Laurie, appealing to the family, who looked as much surprised as he.
“So do I,” added her husband, who welcomed the thought of a chance for trying the Socratic method of education on modern youth.
“It will be an immense care for Jo,” said Meg, stroking the head of her one all-absorbing son.
It’s a splendid idea.
Laurence, who had been longing to lend the lovers a hand, but knew that they would refuse his help.
Amy does too—I see it in her eyes, though she prudently waits to turn it over in her mind before she speaks.
Now, my dear people,” continued Jo earnestly, “just understand that this isn’t a new idea of mine, but a long cherished plan.
I see so many going to ruin for want of help at the right minute, I love so to do anything for them, I seem to feel their wants, and sympathize with their troubles, and oh, I should so like to be a mother to them!” Mrs.
March held out her hand to Jo, who took it, smiling, with tears in her eyes, and went on in the old enthusiastic way, which they had not seen for a long while.
But now, thanks to my good old aunt, who loved me better than I ever deserved, I’m rich, at least I feel so, and we can live at Plumfield perfectly well, if we have a flourishing school.
It’s just the place for boys, the house is big, and the furniture strong and plain.
There’s plenty of room for dozens inside, and splendid grounds outside.
Think what luxury— Plumfield my own, and a wilderness of boys to enjoy it with me.” As Jo waved her hands and gave a sigh of rapture, the family went off into a gale of merriment, and Mr.
Laurence laughed till they thought he’d have an apoplectic fit.
“I don’t see anything funny,” she said gravely, when she could be heard.
“Nothing could be more natural and proper than for my Professor to open a school, and for me to prefer to reside in my own estate.” “She is putting on airs already,” said Laurie, who regarded the idea in the light of a capital joke.
“But may I inquire how you intend to support the establishment?
If all the pupils are little ragamuffins, I’m afraid your crop won’t be profitable in a worldly sense, Mrs.
Of course I shall have rich pupils, also—perhaps begin with such altogether.
Then, when I’ve got a start, I can take in a ragamuffin or two, just for a relish.
Rich people’s children often need care and comfort, as well as poor.
I’ve seen unfortunate little creatures left to servants, or backward ones pushed forward, when it’s real cruelty.
Some are naughty through mismanagment or neglect, and some lose their mothers.
Besides, the best have to get through the hobbledehoy age, and that’s the very time they need most patience and kindness.
People laugh at them, and hustle them about, try to keep them out of sight, and expect them to turn all at once from pretty children into fine young men.
They don’t complain much—plucky little souls—but they feel it.
I’ve been through something of it, and I know all about it.
I’ve a special interest in such young bears, and like to show them that I see the warm, honest, well-meaning boys’ hearts, in spite of the clumsy arms and legs and the topsy-turvy heads.
I’ve had experience, too, for haven’t I brought up one boy to be a pride and honor to his family?” “I’ll testify that you tried to do it,” said Laurie with a grateful look.
“And I’ve succeeded beyond my hopes, for here you are, a steady, sensible businessman, doing heaps of good with your money, and laying up the blessings of the poor, instead of dollars.
But you are not merely a businessman, you love good and beautiful things, enjoy them yourself, and let others go halves, as you always did in the old times.
I am proud of you, Teddy, for you get better every year, and everyone feels it, though you won’t let them say so.
Yes, and when I have my flock, I’ll just point to you, and say ‘There’s your model, my lads’.” Poor Laurie didn’t know where to look, for, man though he was, something of the old bashfulness came over him as this burst of praise made all faces turn approvingly upon him.
“You have all done more for me than I can ever thank you for, except by doing my best not to disappoint you.
You have rather cast me off lately, Jo, but I’ve had the best of help, nevertheless.
So, if I’ve got on at all, you may thank these two for it,” and he laid one hand gently on his grandfather’s head, and the other on Amy’s golden one, for the three were never far apart.
“I do think that families are the most beautiful things in all the world!” burst out Jo, who was in an unusually up-lifted frame of mind just then.
And that night when she went to her room after a blissful evening of family counsels, hopes, and plans, her heart was so full of happiness that she could only calm it by kneeling beside the empty bed always near her own, and thinking tender thoughts of Beth.
It was a very astonishing year altogether, for things seemed to happen in an unusually rapid and delightful manner.
Almost before she knew where she was, Jo found herself married and settled at Plumfield.
Then a family of six or seven boys sprung up like mushrooms, and flourished surprisingly, poor boys as well as rich, for Mr.
Laurence was continually finding some touching case of destitution, and begging the Bhaers to take pity on the child, and he would gladly pay a trifle for its support.
In this way, the sly old gentleman got round proud Jo, and furnished her with the style of boy in which she most delighted.
Of course it was uphill work at first, and Jo made queer mistakes, but the wise Professor steered her safely into calmer waters, and the most rampant ragamuffin was conquered in the end.
How Jo did enjoy her ‘wilderness of boys’, and how poor, dear Aunt March would have lamented had she been there to see the sacred precincts of prim, well-ordered Plumfield overrun with Toms, Dicks, and Harrys!
There was a sort of poetic justice about it, after all, for the old lady had been the terror of the boys for miles around, and now the exiles feasted freely on forbidden plums, kicked up the gravel with profane boots unreproved, and played cricket in the big field where the irritable ‘cow with a crumpled horn’ used to invite rash youths to come and be tossed.
It became a sort of boys’ paradise, and Laurie suggested that it should be called the ‘Bhaer-garten’, as a compliment to its master and appropriate to its inhabitants.
It never was a fashionable school, and the Professor did not lay up a fortune, but it was just what Jo intended it to be—‘a happy, homelike place for boys, who needed teaching, care, and kindness’.
A regular menagerie appeared in barn and shed, for pet animals were allowed.
And three times a day, Jo smiled at her Fritz from the head of a long table lined on either side with rows of happy young faces, which all turned to her with affectionate eyes, confiding words, and grateful hearts, full of love for ‘Mother Bhaer’.
She had boys enough now, and did not tire of them, though they were not angels, by any means, and some of them caused both Professor and Professorin much trouble and anxiety.
But her faith in the good spot which exists in the heart of the naughtiest, sauciest, most tantalizing little ragamuffin gave her patience, skill, and in time success, for no mortal boy could hold out long with Father Bhaer shining on him as benevolently as the sun, and Mother Bhaer forgiving him seventy times seven.
Very precious to Jo was the friendship of the lads, their penitent sniffs and whispers after wrongdoing, their droll or touching little confidences, their pleasant enthusiasms, hopes, and plans, even their misfortunes, for they only endeared them to her all the more.
There were slow boys and bashful boys, feeble boys and riotous boys, boys that lisped and boys that stuttered, one or two lame ones, and a merry little quadroon, who could not be taken in elsewhere, but who was welcome to the ‘Bhaer-garten’, though some people predicted that his admission would ruin the school.
Yes, Jo was a very happy woman there, in spite of hard work, much anxiety, and a perpetual racket.
She enjoyed it heartily and found the applause of her boys more satisfying than any praise of the world, for now she told no stories except to her flock of enthusiastic believers and admirers.
As the years went on, two little lads of her own came to increase her happiness—Rob, named for Grandpa, and Teddy, a happy-go-lucky baby, who seemed to have inherited his papa’s sunshiny temper as well as his mother’s lively spirit.
How they ever grew up alive in that whirlpool of boys was a mystery to their grandma and aunts, but they flourished like dandelions in spring, and their rough nurses loved and served them well.
There were a great many holidays at Plumfield, and one of the most delightful was the yearly apple-picking.
For then the Marches, Laurences, Brookes and Bhaers turned out in full force and made a day of it.
Five years after Jo’s wedding, one of these fruitful festivals occurred, a mellow October day, when the air was full of an exhilarating freshness which made the spirits rise and the blood dance healthily in the veins.
Goldenrod and asters fringed the mossy walls.
Grasshoppers skipped briskly in the sere grass, and crickets chirped like fairy pipers at a feast.
Squirrels were busy with their small harvesting.
Birds twittered their adieux from the alders in the lane, and every tree stood ready to send down its shower of red or yellow apples at the first shake.
Everybody was there.
Everybody laughed and sang, climbed up and tumbled down.
Everybody declared that there never had been such a perfect day or such a jolly set to enjoy it, and everyone gave themselves up to the simple pleasures of the hour as freely as if there were no such things as care or sorrow in the world.
March strolled placidly about, quoting Tusser, Cowley, and Columella to Mr.
Laurence, while enjoying...
The Professor charged up and down the green aisles like a stout Teutonic knight, with a pole for a lance, leading on the boys, who made a hook and ladder company of themselves, and performed wonders in the way of ground and lofty tumbling.
Laurie devoted himself to the little ones, rode his small daughter in a bushel-basket, took Daisy up among the bird’s nests, and kept adventurous Rob from breaking his neck.
March and Meg sat among the apple piles like a pair of Pomonas, sorting the contributions that kept pouring in, while Amy with a beautiful motherly expression in her face sketched the various groups, and watched over one pale lad, who sat adoring her with his little crutch beside him.
Jo was in her element that day, and rushed about, with her gown pinned up, and her hat anywhere but on her head, and her baby tucked under her arm, ready for any lively adventure which might turn up.
Little Teddy bore a charmed life, for nothing ever happened to him, and Jo never felt any anxiety when he was whisked up into a tree by one lad, galloped off on the back of another, or supplied with sour russets by his indulgent papa, who labored under the Germanic delusion that babies could digest anything, from pickled cabbage to buttons, nails, and their own small shoes.
She knew that little Ted would turn up again in time, safe and rosy, dirty and serene, and she always received him back with a hearty welcome, for Jo loved her babies tenderly.
At four o’clock a lull took place, and baskets remained empty, while the apple pickers rested and compared rents and bruises.
Then Jo and Meg, with a detachment of the bigger boys, set forth the supper on the grass, for an out-of-door tea was always the crowning joy of the day.
The land literally flowed with milk and honey on such occasions, for the lads were not required to sit at table, but allowed to partake of refreshment as they liked—freedom being the sauce best beloved by the boyish soul.
They availed themselves of the rare privilege to the fullest extent, for some tried the pleasing experiment of drinking milk while standing on their heads, others lent a charm to leapfrog by eating pie in the pauses of the game, cookies were sown broadcast over the field, and apple turnovers roosted in the trees like a new style of bird.
When no one could eat any more, the Professor proposed the first regular toast, which was always drunk at such times—“Aunt March, God bless her!” A toast heartily given by the good man, who never forgot how much he owed her, and quietly drunk by the boys, who had been taught to keep her memory green.
“Now, Grandma’s sixtieth birthday!
Long life to her, with three times three!” That was given with a will, as you may well believe, and the cheering once begun, it was hard to stop it.
Everybody’s health was proposed, from Mr.
Laurence, who was considered their special patron, to the astonished guinea pig, who had strayed from its proper sphere in search of its young master.
Demi, as the oldest grandchild, then presented the queen of the day with various gifts, so numerous that they were transported to the festive scene in a wheelbarrow.
Funny presents, some of them, but what would have been defects to other eyes were ornaments to Grandma’s—for the children’s gifts were all their own.
Every stitch Daisy’s patient little fingers had put into the handkerchiefs she hemmed was better than embroidery to Mrs.
Demi’s miracle of mechanical skill, though the cover wouldn’t shut, Rob’s footstool had a wiggle in its uneven legs that she declared was soothing, and no page of the costly book Amy’s child gave her was so fair as that on which appeared in tipsy capitals, the words—“To dear Grandma, from her little Beth.” During the ceremony the boys had mysteriously disappeared, and when Mrs.
March had tried to thank her children, and broken down, while Teddy wiped her eyes on his pinafore, the Professor suddenly began to sing.
Then, from above him, voice after voice took up the words, and from tree to tree echoed the music of the unseen choir, as the boys sang with all their hearts the little song that Jo had written, Laurie set to music, and the Professor trained his lads to give with the best effect.
This was something altogether new, and it proved a grand success, for Mrs.
March couldn’t get over her surprise, and insisted on shaking hands with every one of the featherless birds, from tall Franz and Emil to the little quadroon, who had the sweetest voice of all.
After this, the boys dispersed for a final lark, leaving Mrs.
March and her daughters under the festival tree.
“I don’t think I ever ought to call myself ‘unlucky Jo’ again, when my greatest wish has been so beautifully gratified,” said Mrs.
Bhaer, taking Teddy’s little fist out of the milk pitcher, in which he was rapturously churning.
“And yet your life is very different from the one you pictured so long ago.
Do you remember our castles in the air?” asked Amy, smiling as she watched Laurie and John playing cricket with the boys.
It does my heart good to see them forget business and frolic for a day,” answered Jo, who now spoke in a maternal way of all mankind.
“Yes, I remember, but the life I wanted then seems selfish, lonely, and cold to me now.
“My castle was the most nearly realized of all.
I asked for splendid things, to be sure, but in my heart I knew I should be satisfied, if I had a little home, and John, and some dear children like these.
I’ve got them all, thank God, and am the happiest woman in the world,” and Meg laid her hand on her tall boy’s head, with a face full of tender and devout content.
“My castle is very different from what I planned, but I would not alter it, though, like Jo, I don’t relinquish all my artistic hopes, or confine myself to helping others fulfill their dreams of beauty.
I think so, myself, and mean to do it in marble, so that, whatever happens, I may at least keep the image of my little angel.” As Amy spoke, a great tear dropped on the golden hair of the sleeping child in her arms, for her one well-beloved daughter was a frail little creature and the dread of losing her was the shadow over Amy’s sunshine.
This cross was doing much for both father and mother, for one love and sorrow bound them closely together.
Laurie was growing more serious, strong, and firm, and both were learning that beauty, youth, good fortune, even love itself, cannot keep care and pain, loss and sorrow, from the most blessed for ...
March, as tenderhearted Daisy stooped from her knee to lay her rosy cheek against her little cousin’s pale one.
So, in spite of my one cross, I can say with Meg, ‘Thank God, I’m a happy woman.’” “There’s no need for me to say it, for everyone can see that I’m far happier than I deserve,” added Jo, glancing from her good husband to her chubby children, tumbling on the grass beside her.
We never shall be rich, and Plumfield may burn up any night, for that incorrigible Tommy Bangs will smoke sweet-fern cigars under the bed-clothes, though he’s set himself afire three times already.
But in spite of these unromantic facts, I have nothing to complain of, and never was so jolly in my life.
Excuse the remark, but living among boys, I can’t help using their expressions now and then.” “Yes, Jo, I think your harvest will be a good one,” began Mrs.
March, frightening away a big black cricket that was staring Teddy out of countenance.
Here it is, and we never can thank you enough for the patient sowing and reaping you have done,” cried Jo, with the loving impetuosity which she never would outgrow.
March could only stretch out her arms, as if to gather children and grandchildren to herself, and say, with face and voice full of motherly love, gratitude, and humility...
“Oh, my girls, however long you may live, I never can wish you a greater happiness than this!”
For this reason, theory of knowledge occupies a larger space than metaphysics in the present volume, and some topics much discussed by philosophers are treated very briefly, if at all.
I have derived valuable assistance from unpublished writings of G.
Keynes: from the former, as regards the relations of sense-data to physical objects, and from the latter as regards probability and induction.
I have also profited greatly by the criticisms and suggestions of Professor Gilbert Murray. 1912 CHAPTER I.
APPEARANCE AND REALITY Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no reasonable man could doubt it?
This question, which at first sight might not seem difficult, is really one of the most difficult that can be asked.
In daily life, we assume as certain many things which, on a closer scrutiny, are found to be so full of apparent contradictions that only a great amount of thought enables us to know what it is that we really may believe.
In the search for certainty, it is natural to begin with our present experiences, and in some sense, no doubt, knowledge is to be derived from them.
But any statement as to what it is that our immediate experiences make us know is very likely to be wrong.
By turning my head I see out of the window buildings and clouds and the sun.
I believe that the sun is about ninety-three million miles from the earth; that it is a hot globe many times bigger than the earth; that, owing to the earth's rotation, it rises every morning, and will continue to do so for an indefinite time in the future.
I believe that, if any other normal person comes into my room, he will see the same chairs and tables and books and papers as I see, and that the table which I see is the same as the table which I feel pressing against my arm.
All this seems to be so evident as to be hardly worth stating, except in answer to a man who doubts whether I know anything.
Yet all this may be reasonably doubted, and all of it requires much careful discussion before we can be sure that we have stated it in a form that is wholly true.
To make our difficulties plain, let us concentrate attention on the table.
Any one else who sees and feels and hears the table will agree with this description, so that it might seem as if no difficulty would arise; but as soon as we try to be more precise our troubles begin.
Although I believe that the table is 'really' of the same colour all over, the parts that reflect the light look much brighter than the other parts, and some parts look white because of reflected light.
I know that, if I move, the parts that reflect the light will be different, so that the apparent distribution of colours on the table will change.
It follows that if several people are looking at the table at the same moment, no two of them will see exactly the same distribution of colours, because no two can see it from exactly the same point of view, and any change in the point of view makes some change in the way the light is reflected.
For most practical purposes these differences are unimportant, but to the painter they are all-important: the painter has to unlearn the habit of thinking that things seem to have the colour which common sense says they 'really' have, and to learn the habit of seeing things as they appear.
Here we have already the beginning of one of the distinctions that cause most trouble in philosophy--the distinction between 'appearance' and 'reality', between what things seem to be and what they are.
The painter wants to know what things seem to be, the practical man and the philosopher want to know what they are; but the philosopher's wish to know this is stronger than the practical man's, and is more troubled by knowledge as to the difficulties of answering the question.
It is evident from what we have found, that there is no colour which pre-eminently appears to be _the_ colour of the table, or even of any one particular part of the table--it appears to be of different colours from different points of view, and there is no reason for regarding some of these as more really its colour than others.
And we know that even from a given point of view the colour will seem different by artificial light, or to a colour-blind man, or to a man wearing blue spectacles, while in the dark there will be no colour at all, though to touch and hearing the table will be unchanged.
This colour is not something which is inherent in the table, but something depending upon the table and the spectator and the way the light falls on the table.
When, in ordinary life, we speak of _the_ colour of the table, we only mean the sort of colour which it will seem to have to a normal spectator from an ordinary point of view under usual conditions of light.
But the other colours which appear under other conditions have just as good a right to be considered real; and therefore, to avoid favouritism, we are compelled to deny that, in itself, the table has any one particular colour.
With the naked eye one can see the grain, but otherwise the table looks smooth and even.
If we looked at it through a microscope, we should see roughnesses and hills and valleys, and all sorts of differences that are imperceptible to the naked eye.
We are naturally tempted to say that what we see through the microscope is more real, but that in turn would be changed by a still more powerful microscope.
If, then, we cannot trust what we see with the naked eye, why should we trust what we see through a microscope?
Thus, again, the confidence in our senses with which we began deserts us.
We are all in the habit of judging as to the 'real' shapes of things, and we do this so unreflectingly that we come to think we actually see the real shapes.
But, in fact, as we all have to learn if we try to draw, a given thing looks different in shape from every different point of view.
If our table is 'really' rectangular, it will look, from almost all points of view, as if it had two acute angles and two obtuse angles.
If opposite sides are parallel, they will look as if they converged to a point away from the spectator; if they are of equal length, they will look as if the nearer side were longer.
All these things are not commonly noticed in looking at a table, because experience has taught us to construct the 'real' shape from the apparent shape, and the 'real' shape is what interests us as practical men.
But the 'real' shape is not what we see; it is something inferred from what we see.
And what we see is constantly changing in shape as we move about the room; so that here again the senses seem not to give us the truth about the table itself, but only about the appearance of the table.
Similar difficulties arise when we consider the sense of touch.
It is true that the table always gives us a sensation of hardness, and we feel that it resists pressure.
And the same applies still more obviously to the sounds which can be elicited by rapping the table.
Thus it becomes evident that the real table, if there is one, is not the same as what we immediately experience by sight or touch or hearing.
The real table, if there is one, is not _immediately_ known to us at all, but must be an inference from what is immediately known.
Hence, two very difficult questions at once arise; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, what sort of object can it be?
It will help us in considering these questions to have a few simple terms of which the meaning is definite and clear.
Let us give the name of 'sense-data' to the things that are immediately known in sensation: such things as colours, sounds, smells, hardnesses, roughnesses, and so on.
We shall give the name 'sensation' to the experience of being immediately aware of these things.
Thus, whenever we see a colour, we have a sensation _of_ the colour, but the colour itself is a sense-datum, not a sensation.
The colour is that _of_ which we are immediately aware, and the awareness itself is the sensation.
It is plain that if we are to know anything about the table, it must be by means of the sense-data--brown colour, oblong shape, smoothness, etc.--which we associate with the table; but, for the reasons which have been given, we cannot say that the table is the sense-data, or even that the sense-data are directly properties of the table.
Thus a problem arises as to the relation of the sense-data to the real table, supposing there is such a thing.
The real table, if it exists, we will call a 'physical object'.
Thus we have to consider the relation of sense-data to physical objects.
The collection of all physical objects is called 'matter'.
Thus our two questions may be re-stated as follows: (1) Is there any such thing as matter? (2) If so, what is its nature?
The philosopher who first brought prominently forward the reasons for regarding the immediate objects of our senses as not existing independently of us was Bishop Berkeley (1685-1753).
His _Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous, in Opposition to Sceptics and Atheists_, undertake to prove that there is no such thing as matter at all, and that the world consists of nothing but minds and their ideas.
Hylas has hitherto believed in matter, but he is no match for Philonous, who mercilessly drives him into contradictions and paradoxes, and makes his own denial of matter seem, in the end, as if it were almost common sense.
The arguments employed are of very different value: some are important and sound, others are confused or quibbling.
But Berkeley retains the merit of having shown that the existence of matter is capable of being denied without absurdity, and that if there are any things that exist independently of us they cannot be the immediate objects of our sensations.
There are two different questions involved when we ask whether matter exists, and it is important to keep them clear.
We commonly mean by 'matter' something which is opposed to 'mind', something which we think of as occupying space and as radically incapable of any sort of thought or consciousness.
It is chiefly in this sense that Berkeley denies matter; that is to say, he does not deny that the sense-data which we commonly take as signs of the existence of the table are really signs of the existence of _something_ independent of us, but he does deny that this something is non-mental, that it is neither mind nor ideas entertained by some mind.
He admits that there must be something which continues to exist when we go out of the room or shut our eyes, and that what we call seeing the table does really give us reason for believing in something which persists even when we are not seeing it.
But he thinks that this something cannot be radically different in nature from what we see, and cannot be independent of seeing altogether, though it must be independent of _our_ seeing.
Such an idea has the required permanence and independence of ourselves, without being--as matter would otherwise be--something quite unknowable, in the sense that we can only infer it, and can never be directly and immediately aware of it.
Other philosophers since Berkeley have also held that, although the table does not depend for its existence upon being seen by me, it does depend upon being seen (or otherwise apprehended in sensation) by _some_ mind--not necessarily the mind of God, but more often the whole collective mind of the universe.
This they hold, as Berkeley does, chiefly because they think there can be nothing real--or at any rate nothing known to be real except minds and their thoughts and feelings.
But whether valid or not, the argument has been very widely advanced in one form or another; and very many philosophers, perhaps a majority, have held that there is nothing real except minds and their ideas.
Such philosophers are called 'idealists'.
When they come to explaining matter, they either say, like Berkeley, that matter is really nothing but a collection of ideas, or they say, like Leibniz (1646-1716), that what appears as matter is really a collection of more or less rudimentary minds.
But these philosophers, though they deny matter as opposed to mind, nevertheless, in another sense, admit matter.
It will be remembered that we asked two questions; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, what sort of object can it be?
Now both Berkeley and Leibniz admit that there is a real table, but Berkeley says it is certain ideas in the mind of God, and Leibniz says it is a colony of souls.
Thus both of them answer our first question in the affirmative, and only diverge from the views of ordinary mortals in their answer to our second question.
Now obviously this point in which the philosophers are agreed--the view that there _is_ a real table, whatever its nature may be--is vitally important, and it will be worth while to consider what reasons there are for accepting this view before we go on to the further question as to the nature of the real table.
Our next chapter, therefore, will be concerned with the reasons for supposing that there is a real table at all.
Before we go farther it will be well to consider for a moment what it is that we have discovered so far.
It has appeared that, if we take any common object of the sort that is supposed to be known by the senses, what the senses _immediately_ tell us is not the truth about the object as it is apart from us, but only the truth about certain sense-data which, so far as we can see, depend upon the relations between us and the object.
Thus what we directly see and feel is merely 'appearance', which we believe to be a sign of some 'reality' behind.
Such questions are bewildering, and it is difficult to know that even the strangest hypotheses may not be true.
Thus our familiar table, which has roused but the slightest thoughts in us hitherto, has become a problem full of surprising possibilities.
Beyond this modest result, so far, we have the most complete liberty of conjecture.
Leibniz tells us it is a community of souls: Berkeley tells us it is an idea in the mind of God; sober science, scarcely less wonderful, tells us it is a vast collection of electric charges in violent motion.
Among these surprising possibilities, doubt suggests that perhaps there is no table at all.
Philosophy, if it cannot _answer_ so many questions as we could wish, has at least the power of _asking_ questions which increase the interest of the world, and show the strangeness and wonder lying just below the surface even in the commonest things of daily life.
THE EXISTENCE OF MATTER In this chapter we have to ask ourselves whether, in any sense at all, there is such a thing as matter.
Is there a table which has a certain intrinsic nature, and continues to exist when I am not looking, or is the table merely a product of my imagination, a dream-table in a very prolonged dream?
This question is of the greatest importance.
For if we cannot be sure of the independent existence of objects, we cannot be sure of the independent existence of other people's bodies, and therefore still less of other people's minds, since we have no grounds for believing in their minds except such as are derived from observing their bodies.
Thus if we cannot be sure of the independent existence of objects, we shall be left alone in a desert--it may be that the whole outer world is nothing but a dream, and that we alone exist.
This is an uncomfortable possibility; but although it cannot be strictly proved to be false, there is not the slightest reason to suppose that it is true.
Before we embark upon doubtful matters, let us try to find some more or less fixed point from which to start.
Although we are doubting the physical existence of the table, we are not doubting the existence of the sense-data which made us think there was a table; we are not doubting that, while we look, a certain colour and shape appear to us, and while we press, a certain sensation of hardness is experienced by us.
All this, which is psychological, we are not calling in question.
In fact, whatever else may be doubtful, some at least of our immediate experiences seem absolutely certain.
Descartes (1596-1650), the founder of modern philosophy, invented a method which may still be used with profit--the method of systematic doubt.
He determined that he would believe nothing which he did not see quite clearly and distinctly to be true.
Whatever he could bring himself to doubt, he would doubt, until he saw reason for not doubting it.
By applying this method he gradually became convinced that the only existence of which he could be _quite_ certain was his own.
He imagined a deceitful demon, who presented unreal things to his senses in a perpetual phantasmagoria; it might be very improbable that such a demon existed, but still it was possible, and therefore doubt concerning things perceived by the senses was possible.
But doubt concerning his own existence was not possible, for if he did not exist, no demon could deceive him.
If he doubted, he must exist; if he had any experiences whatever, he must exist.
Thus his own existence was an absolute certainty to him. 'I think, therefore I am,' he said (_Cogito, ergo sum_); and on the basis of this certainty he set to work to build up again the world of knowledge which his doubt had laid in ruins.
By inventing the method of doubt, and by showing that subjective things are the most certain, Descartes performed a great service to philosophy, and one which makes him still useful to all students of the subject.
But some care is needed in using Descartes' argument. 'I think, therefore I am' says rather more than is strictly certain.
It might seem as though we were quite sure of being the same person to-day as we were yesterday, and this is no doubt true in some sense.
But the real Self is as hard to arrive at as the real table, and does not seem to have that absolute, convincing certainty that belongs to particular experiences.
This of course involves something (or somebody) which (or who) sees the brown colour; but it does not of itself involve that more or less permanent person whom we call 'I'.
So far as immediate certainty goes, it might be that the something which sees the brown colour is quite momentary, and not the same as the something which has some different experience the next moment.
Thus it is our particular thoughts and feelings that have primitive certainty.
And this applies to dreams and hallucinations as well as to normal perceptions: when we dream or see a ghost, we certainly do have the sensations we think we have, but for various reasons it is held that no physical object corresponds to these sensations.
Thus the certainty of our knowledge of our own experiences does not have to be limited in any way to allow for exceptional cases.
Here, therefore, we have, for what it is worth, a solid basis from which to begin our pursuit of knowledge.
The problem we have to consider is this: Granted that we are certain of our own sense-data, have we any reason for regarding them as signs of the existence of something else, which we can call the physical object?
When we have enumerated all the sense-data which we should naturally regard as connected with the table, have we said all there is to say about the table, or is there still something else--something not a sense-datum, something which persists when we go out of the room?
Common sense unhesitatingly answers that there is.
What can be bought and sold and pushed about and have a cloth laid on it, and so on, cannot be a _mere_ collection of sense-data.
If the cloth completely hides the table, we shall derive no sense-data from the table, and therefore, if the table were merely sense-data, it would have ceased to exist, and the cloth would be suspended in empty air, resting, by a miracle, in the place where the table formerly was.
This seems plainly absurd; but whoever wishes to become a philosopher must learn not to be frightened by absurdities.
One great reason why it is felt that we must secure a physical object in addition to the sense-data, is that we want the same object for different people.
When ten people are sitting round a dinner-table, it seems preposterous to maintain that they are not seeing the same tablecloth, the same knives and forks and spoons and glasses.
But the sense-data are private to each separate person; what is immediately present to the sight of one is not immediately present to the sight of another: they all see things from slightly different points of view, and therefore see them slightly differently.
Thus, if there are to be public neutral objects, which can be in some sense known to many different people, there must be something over and above the private and particular sense-data which appear to various people.
What reason, then, have we for believing that there are such public neutral objects?
The first answer that naturally occurs to one is that, although different people may see the table slightly differently, still they all see more or less similar things when they look at the table, and the variations in what they see follow the laws of perspective and reflection of light, so that it is easy to arrive at a permanent object underlying all the different people's sense-data.
I bought my table from the former occupant of my room; I could not buy _his_ sense-data, which died when he went away, but I could and did buy the confident expectation of more or less similar sense-data.
Thus it is the fact that different people have similar sense-data, and that one person in a given place at different times has similar sense-data, which makes us suppose that over and above the sense-data there is a permanent public object which underlies or causes the sense-data of various people at various times.
Now in so far as the above considerations depend upon supposing that there are other people besides ourselves, they beg the very question at issue.
Other people are represented to me by certain sense-data, such as the sight of them or the sound of their voices, and if I had no reason to believe that there were physical objects independent of my sense-data, I should have no reason to believe that other people exist except as part of my dream.
Thus, when we are trying to show that there must be objects independent of our own sense-data, we cannot appeal to the testimony of other people, since this testimony itself consists of sense-data, and does not reveal other people's experiences unless our own sense-data are signs of things existing independently of us.
We must therefore, if possible, find, in our own purely private experiences, characteristics which show, or tend to show, that there are in the world things other than ourselves and our private experiences.
In one sense it must be admitted that we can never prove the existence of things other than ourselves and our experiences.
No logical absurdity results from the hypothesis that the world consists of myself and my thoughts and feelings and sensations, and that everything else is mere fancy.
But although, in this case, there is a physical cause for the sense-data, there is not a physical object corresponding to the sense-data in the way in which an actual naval battle would correspond.) There is no logical impossibility in the supposition that the whole of life is a dream, in which we ourselves create all the objects that come before us.
But although this is not logically impossible, there is no reason whatever to suppose that it is true; and it is, in fact, a less simple hypothesis, viewed as a means of accounting for the facts of our own life, than the common-sense hypothesis that there really are objects independent of us, whose action on us causes our sensations.
The way in which simplicity comes in from supposing that there really are physical objects is easily seen.
If the cat appears at one moment in one part of the room, and at another in another part, it is natural to suppose that it has moved from the one to the other, passing over a series of intermediate positions.
But if it is merely a set of sense-data, it cannot have ever been in any place where I did not see it; thus we shall have to suppose that it did not exist at all while I was not looking, but suddenly sprang into being in a new place.
If the cat exists whether I see it or not, we can understand from our own experience how it gets hungry between one meal and the next; but if it does not exist when I am not seeing it, it seems odd that appetite should grow during non-existence as fast as during existence.
And if the cat consists only of sense-data, it cannot be hungry, since no hunger but my own can be a sense-datum to me.
Thus the behaviour of the sense-data which represent the cat to me, though it seems quite natural when regarded as an expression of hunger, becomes utterly inexplicable when regarded as mere movements and changes of patches of colour, which are as incapable of hunger as a triangle is of playing football.
But the difficulty in the case of the cat is nothing compared to the difficulty in the case of human beings.
When human beings speak--that is, when we hear certain noises which we associate with ideas, and simultaneously see certain motions of lips and expressions of face--it is very difficult to suppose that what we hear is not the expression of a thought, as we know it would be if we emitted the same sounds.
Of course similar things happen in dreams, where we are mistaken as to the existence of other people.
But dreams are more or less suggested by what we call waking life, and are capable of being more or less accounted for on scientific principles if we assume that there really is a physical world.
Thus every principle of simplicity urges us to adopt the natural view, that there really are objects other than ourselves and our sense-data which have an existence not dependent upon our perceiving them.
Of course it is not by argument that we originally come by our belief in an independent external world.
We find this belief ready in ourselves as soon as we begin to reflect: it is what may be called an _instinctive_ belief.
We should never have been led to question this belief but for the fact that, at any rate in the case of sight, it seems as if the sense-datum itself were instinctively believed to be the independent object, whereas argument shows that the object cannot be identical with the sense-datum.
This discovery, however--which is not at all paradoxical in the case of taste and smell and sound, and only slightly so in the case of touch--leaves undiminished our instinctive belief that there _are_ objects _corresponding_ to our sense-data.
Since this belief does not lead to any difficulties, but on the contrary tends to simplify and systematize our account of our experiences, there seems no good reason for rejecting it.
We may therefore admit--though with a slight doubt derived from dreams--that the external world does really exist, and is not wholly dependent for its existence upon our continuing to perceive it.
The argument which has led us to this conclusion is doubtless less strong than we could wish, but it is typical of many philosophical arguments, and it is therefore worth while to consider briefly its general character and validity.
All knowledge, we find, must be built up upon our instinctive beliefs, and if these are rejected, nothing is left.
But among our instinctive beliefs some are much stronger than others, while many have, by habit and association, become entangled with other beliefs, not really instinctive, but falsely supposed to be part of what is believed instinctively.
Philosophy should show us the hierarchy of our instinctive beliefs, beginning with those we hold most strongly, and presenting each as much isolated and as free from irrelevant additions as possible.
It should take care to show that, in the form in which they are finally set forth, our instinctive beliefs do not clash, but form a harmonious system.
There can never be any reason for rejecting one instinctive belief except that it clashes with others; thus, if they are found to harmonize, the whole system becomes worthy of acceptance.
It is of course _possible_ that all or any of our beliefs may be mistaken, and therefore all ought to be held with at least some slight element of doubt.
This function, at least, philosophy can perform.
Most philosophers, rightly or wrongly, believe that philosophy can do much more than this--that it can give us knowledge, not otherwise attainable, concerning the universe as a whole, and concerning the nature of ultimate reality.
Whether this be the case or not, the more modest function we have spoken of can certainly be performed by philosophy, and certainly suffices, for those who have once begun to doubt the adequacy of common sense, to justify the arduous and difficult labours that philosophical problems involve.
THE NATURE OF MATTER In the preceding chapter we agreed, though without being able to find demonstrative reasons, that it is rational to believe that our sense-data--for example, those which we regard as associated with my table--are really signs of the existence of something independent of us and our perceptions.
That is to say, over and above the sensations of colour, hardness, noise, and so on, which make up the appearance of the table to me, I assume that there is something else, of which these things are appearances.
The colour ceases to exist if I shut my eyes, the sensation of hardness ceases to exist if I remove my arm from contact with the table, the sound ceases to exist if I cease to rap the table with my knuckles.
On the contrary, I believe that it is because the table exists continuously that all these sense-data will reappear when I open my eyes, replace my arm, and begin again to rap with my knuckles.
The question we have to consider in this chapter is: What is the nature of this real table, which persists independently of my perception of it?
To this question physical science gives an answer, somewhat incomplete it is true, and in part still very hypothetical, but yet deserving of respect so far as it goes.
Physical science, more or less unconsciously, has drifted into the view that all natural phenomena ought to be reduced to motions.
Light and heat and sound are all due to wave-motions, which travel from the body emitting them to the person who sees light or feels heat or hears sound.
That which has the wave-motion is either aether or 'gross matter', but in either case is what the philosopher would call matter.
The only properties which science assigns to it are position in space, and the power of motion according to the laws of motion.
Science does not deny that it _may_ have other properties; but if so, such other properties are not useful to the man of science, and in no way assist him in explaining the phenomena.
It is sometimes said that 'light _is_ a form of wave-motion', but this is misleading, for the light which we immediately see, which we know directly by means of our senses, is _not_ a form of wave-motion, but something quite different--something which we all know if we are not blind, though we cannot describe it so as to convey our knowledge to a man who is blind.
A wave-motion, on the contrary, could quite well be described to a blind man, since he can acquire a knowledge of space by the sense of touch; and he can experience a wave-motion by a sea voyage almost as well as we can.
But this, which a blind man can understand, is not what we mean by _light_: we mean by _light_ just that which a blind man can never understand, and which we can never describe to him.
Now this something, which all of us who are not blind know, is not, according to science, really to be found in the outer world: it is something caused by the action of certain waves upon the eyes and nerves and brain of the person who sees the light.
When it is said that light _is_ waves, what is really meant is that waves are the physical cause of our sensations of light.
But light itself, the thing which seeing people experience and blind people do not, is not supposed by science to form any part of the world that is independent of us and our senses.
And very similar remarks would apply to other kinds of sensations.
It is not only colours and sounds and so on that are absent from the scientific world of matter, but also _space_ as we get it through sight or touch.
It is essential to science that its matter should be in _a_ space, but the space in which it is cannot be exactly the space we see or feel.
To begin with, space as we see it is not the same as space as we get it by the sense of touch; it is only by experience in infancy that we learn how to touch things we see, or how to get a sight of things which we feel touching us.
Again, different people see the same object as of different shapes, according to their point of view.
A circular coin, for example, though we should always _judge_ it to be circular, will _look_ oval unless we are straight in front of it.
When we judge that it _is_ circular, we are judging that it has a real shape which is not its apparent shape, but belongs to it intrinsically apart from its appearance.
But this real shape, which is what concerns science, must be in a real space, not the same as anybody's _apparent_ space.
The real space is public, the apparent space is private to the percipient.
In different people's _private_ spaces the same object seems to have different shapes; thus the real space, in which it has its real shape, must be different from the private spaces.
The space of science, therefore, though _connected_ with the spaces we see and feel, is not identical with them, and the manner of its connexion requires investigation.
We agreed provisionally that physical objects cannot be quite like our sense-data, but may be regarded as _causing_ our sensations.
These physical objects are in the space of science, which we may call 'physical' space.
It is important to notice that, if our sensations are to be caused by physical objects, there must be a physical space containing these objects and our sense-organs and nerves and brain.
We get a sensation of touch from an object when we are in contact with it; that is to say, when some part of our body occupies a place in physical space quite close to the space occupied by the object.
We see an object (roughly speaking) when no opaque body is between the object and our eyes in physical space.
Similarly, we only hear or smell or taste an object when we are sufficiently near to it, or when it touches the tongue, or has some suitable position in physical space relatively to our body.
We cannot begin to state what different sensations we shall derive from a given object under different circumstances unless we regard the object and our body as both in one physical space, for it is mainly the relative positions of the object and our body that determine what sensations we shall derive from the object.
Now our sense-data are situated in our private spaces, either the space of sight or the space of touch or such vaguer spaces as other senses may give us.
If, as science and common sense assume, there is one public all-embracing physical space in which physical objects are, the relative positions of physical objects in physical space must more or less correspond to the relative positions of sense-data in our private spaces.
There is no difficulty in supposing this to be the case.
Other people will agree that the house which looks nearer to us is nearer; the ordnance map will take the same view; and thus everything points to a spatial relation between the houses corresponding to the relation between the sense-data which we see when we look at the houses.
Thus we may assume that there is a physical space in which physical objects have spatial relations corresponding to those which the corresponding sense-data have in our private spaces.
It is this physical space which is dealt with in geometry and assumed in physics and astronomy.
Assuming that there is physical space, and that it does thus correspond to private spaces, what can we know about it?
We can know _only_ what is required in order to secure the correspondence.
That is to say, we can know nothing of what it is like in itself, but we can know the sort of arrangement of physical objects which results from their spatial relations.
We can know, for example, that the earth and moon and sun are in one straight line during an eclipse, though we cannot know what a physical straight line is in itself, as we know the look of a straight line in our visual space.
We can know all those things about physical space which a man born blind might know through other people about the space of sight; but the kind of things which a man born blind could never know about the space of sight we also cannot know about physical space.
We can know the properties of the relations required to preserve the correspondence with sense-data, but we cannot know the nature of the terms between which the relations hold.
With regard to time, our _feeling_ of duration or of the lapse of time is notoriously an unsafe guide as to the time that has elapsed by the clock.
Times when we are bored or suffering pain pass slowly, times when we are agreeably occupied pass quickly, and times when we are sleeping pass almost as if they did not exist.
Thus, in so far as time is constituted by duration, there is the same necessity for distinguishing a public and a private time as there was in the case of space.
But in so far as time consists in an _order_ of before and after, there is no need to make such a distinction; the time-order which events seem to have is, so far as we can see, the same as the time-order which they do have.
At any rate no reason can be given for supposing that the two orders are not the same.
The same is usually true of space: if a regiment of men are marching along a road, the shape of the regiment will look different from different points of view, but the men will appear arranged in the same order from all points of view.
Hence we regard the order as true also in physical space, whereas the shape is only supposed to correspond to the physical space so far as is required for the preservation of the order.
In saying that the time-order which events seem to have is the same as the time-order which they really have, it is necessary to guard against a possible misunderstanding.
It must not be supposed that the various states of different physical objects have the same time-order as the sense-data which constitute the perceptions of those objects.
Considered as physical objects, the thunder and lightning are simultaneous; that is to say, the lightning is simultaneous with the disturbance of the air in the place where the disturbance begins, namely, where the lightning is.
But the sense-datum which we call hearing the thunder does not take place until the disturbance of the air has travelled as far as to where we are.
Similarly, it takes about eight minutes for the sun's light to reach us; thus, when we see the sun we are seeing the sun of eight minutes ago.
So far as our sense-data afford evidence as to the physical sun they afford evidence as to the physical sun of eight minutes ago; if the physical sun had ceased to exist within the last eight minutes, that would make no difference to the sense-data which we call 'seeing the sun'.
This affords a fresh illustration of the necessity of distinguishing between sense-data and physical objects.
What we have found as regards space is much the same as what we find in relation to the correspondence of the sense-data with their physical counterparts.
If one object looks blue and another red, we may reasonably presume that there is some corresponding difference between the physical objects; if two objects both look blue, we may presume a corresponding similarity.
But we cannot hope to be acquainted directly with the quality in the physical object which makes it look blue or red.
Science tells us that this quality is a certain sort of wave-motion, and this sounds familiar, because we think of wave-motions in the space we see.
But the wave-motions must really be in physical space, with which we have no direct acquaintance; thus the real wave-motions have not that familiarity which we might have supposed them to have.
Thus we find that, although the _relations_ of physical objects have all sorts of knowable properties, derived from their correspondence with the relations of sense-data, the physical objects themselves remain unknown in their intrinsic nature, so far at least as can be discovered by means of the senses.
The question remains whether there is any other method of discovering the intrinsic nature of physical objects.
The most natural, though not ultimately the most defensible, hypothesis to adopt in the first instance, at any rate as regards visual sense-data, would be that, though physical objects cannot, for the reasons we have been considering, be _exactly_ like sense-data, yet they may be more or less like.
According to this view, physical objects will, for example, really have colours, and we might, by good luck, see an object as of the colour it really is.
The colour which an object seems to have at any given moment will in general be very similar, though not quite the same, from many different points of view; we might thus suppose the 'real' colour to be a sort of medium colour, intermediate between the various shades which appear from the different points of view.
Such a theory is perhaps not capable of being definitely refuted, but it can be shown to be groundless.
To begin with, it is plain that the colour we see depends only upon the nature of the light-waves that strike the eye, and is therefore modified by the medium intervening between us and the object, as well as by the manner in which light is reflected from the object in the direction of the eye.
The intervening air alters colours unless it is perfectly clear, and any strong reflection will alter them completely.
Thus the colour we see is a result of the ray as it reaches the eye, and not simply a property of the object from which the ray comes.
Hence, also, provided certain waves reach the eye, we shall see a certain colour, whether the object from which the waves start has any colour or not.
Thus it is quite gratuitous to suppose that physical objects have colours, and therefore there is no justification for making such a supposition.
Exactly similar arguments will apply to other sense-data.
It remains to ask whether there are any general philosophical arguments enabling us to say that, if matter is real, it must be of such and such a nature.
As explained above, very many philosophers, perhaps most, have held that whatever is real must be in some sense mental, or at any rate that whatever we can know anything about must be in some sense mental.
Idealists tell us that what appears as matter is really something mental; namely, either (as Leibniz held) more or less rudimentary minds, or (as Berkeley contended) ideas in the minds which, as we should commonly say, 'perceive' the matter.
Thus idealists deny the existence of matter as something intrinsically different from mind, though they do not deny that our sense-data are signs of something which exists independently of our private sensations.
In the following chapter we shall consider briefly the reasons--in my opinion fallacious--which idealists advance in favour of their theory.
IDEALISM The word 'idealism' is used by different philosophers in somewhat different senses.
We shall understand by it the doctrine that whatever exists, or at any rate whatever can be known to exist, must be in some sense mental.
This doctrine, which is very widely held among philosophers, has several forms, and is advocated on several different grounds.
The doctrine is so widely held, and so interesting in itself, that even the briefest survey of philosophy must give some account of it.
Those who are unaccustomed to philosophical speculation may be inclined to dismiss such a doctrine as obviously absurd.
There is no doubt that common sense regards tables and chairs and the sun and moon and material objects generally as something radically different from minds and the contents of minds, and as having an existence which might continue if minds ceased.
We think of matter as having existed long before there were any minds, and it is hard to think of it as a mere product of mental activity.
But whether true or false, idealism is not to be dismissed as obviously absurd.
We have seen that, even if physical objects do have an independent existence, they must differ very widely from sense-data, and can only have a _correspondence_ with sense-data, in the same sort of way in which a catalogue has a correspondence with the things catalogued.
Hence common sense leaves us completely in the dark as to the true intrinsic nature of physical objects, and if there were good reason to regard them as mental, we could not legitimately reject this opinion merely because it strikes us as strange.
The truth about physical objects _must_ be strange.
It may be unattainable, but if any philosopher believes that he has attained it, the fact that what he offers as the truth is strange ought not to be made a ground of objection to his opinion.
The grounds on which idealism is advocated are generally grounds derived from the theory of knowledge, that is to say, from a discussion of the conditions which things must satisfy in order that we may be able to know them.
The first serious attempt to establish idealism on such grounds was that of Bishop Berkeley.
He proved first, by arguments which were largely valid, that our sense-data cannot be supposed to have an existence independent of us, but must be, in part at least, 'in' the mind, in the sense that their existence would not continue if there were no seeing or hearing or touching or smelling or tasting.
So far, his contention was almost certainly valid, even if some of his arguments were not so.
But he went on to argue that sense-data were the only things of whose existence our perceptions could assure us; and that to be known is to be 'in' a mind, and therefore to be mental.
Hence he concluded that nothing can ever be known except what is in some mind, and that whatever is known without being in my mind must be in some other mind.
In order to understand his argument, it is necessary to understand his use of the word 'idea'.
He gives the name 'idea' to anything which is _immediately_ known, as, for example, sense-data are known.
Thus a particular colour which we see is an idea; so is a voice which we hear, and so on.
But the term is not wholly confined to sense-data.
There will also be things remembered or imagined, for with such things also we have immediate acquaintance at the moment of remembering or imagining.
All such immediate data he calls 'ideas'.
He then proceeds to consider common objects, such as a tree, for instance.
He shows that all we know immediately when we 'perceive' the tree consists of ideas in his sense of the word, and he argues that there is not the slightest ground for supposing that there is anything real about the tree except what is perceived.
Its being, he says, consists in being perceived: in the Latin of the schoolmen its '_esse_' is '_percipi_'.
He fully admits that the tree must continue to exist even when we shut our eyes or when no human being is near it.
But this continued existence, he says, is due to the fact that God continues to perceive it; the 'real' tree, which corresponds to what we called the physical object, consists of ideas in the mind of God, ideas more or less like those we have when we see the tree, but differing in the fact that they are permanent in God's mind so long as the tree continues to exist.
All our perceptions, according to him, consist in a partial participation in God's perceptions, and it is because of this participation that different people see more or less the same tree.
Thus apart from minds and their ideas there is nothing in the world, nor is it possible that anything else should ever be known, since whatever is known is necessarily an idea.
There are in this argument a good many fallacies which have been important in the history of philosophy, and which it will be as well to bring to light.
In the first place, there is a confusion engendered by the use of the word 'idea'.
We think of an idea as essentially something in somebody's mind, and thus when we are told that a tree consists entirely of ideas, it is natural to suppose that, if so, the tree must be entirely in minds.
But the notion of being 'in' the mind is ambiguous.
When a man says that some business he had to arrange went clean out of his mind, he does not mean to imply that the business itself was ever in his mind, but only that a thought of the business was formerly in his mind, but afterwards ceased to be in his mind.
And so when Berkeley says that the tree must be in our minds if we can know it, all that he really has a right to say is that a thought of the tree must be in our minds.
This confusion may seem too gross to have been really committed by any competent philosopher, but various attendant circumstances rendered it possible.
In order to see how it was possible, we must go more deeply into the question as to the nature of ideas.
Before taking up the general question of the nature of ideas, we must disentangle two entirely separate questions which arise concerning sense-data and physical objects.
We saw that, for various reasons of detail, Berkeley was right in treating the sense-data which constitute our perception of the tree as more or less subjective, in the sense that they depend upon us as much as upon the tree, and would not exist if the tree were not being perceived.
But this is an entirely different point from the one by which Berkeley seeks to prove that whatever can be immediately known must be in a mind.
For this purpose arguments of detail as to the dependence of sense-data upon us are useless.
It is necessary to prove, generally, that by being known, things are shown to be mental.
This is what Berkeley believes himself to have done.
It is this question, and not our previous question as to the difference between sense-data and the physical object, that must now concern us.
Taking the word 'idea' in Berkeley's sense, there are two quite distinct things to be considered whenever an idea is before the mind.
There is on the one hand the thing of which we are aware--say the colour of my table--and on the other hand the actual awareness itself, the mental act of apprehending the thing.
The mental act is undoubtedly mental, but is there any reason to suppose that the thing apprehended is in any sense mental?
Our previous arguments concerning the colour did not prove it to be mental; they only proved that its existence depends upon the relation of our sense organs to the physical object--in our case, the table.
That is to say, they proved that a certain colour will exist, in a certain light, if a normal eye is placed at a certain point relatively to the table.
They did not prove that the colour is in the mind of the percipient.
Berkeley's view, that obviously the colour must be in the mind, seems to depend for its plausibility upon confusing the thing apprehended with the act of apprehension.
Either of these might be called an 'idea'; probably either would have been called an idea by Berkeley.
The act is undoubtedly in the mind; hence, when we are thinking of the act, we readily assent to the view that ideas must be in the mind.
Then, forgetting that this was only true when ideas were taken as acts of apprehension, we transfer the proposition that 'ideas are in the mind' to ideas in the other sense, i.e. to the things apprehended by our acts of apprehension.
Thus, by an unconscious equivocation, we arrive at the conclusion that whatever we can apprehend must be in our minds.
This seems to be the true analysis of Berkeley's argument, and the ultimate fallacy upon which it rests.
This question of the distinction between act and object in our apprehending of things is vitally important, since our whole power of acquiring knowledge is bound up with it.
The faculty of being acquainted with things other than itself is the main characteristic of a mind.
Acquaintance with objects essentially consists in a relation between the mind and something other than the mind; it is this that constitutes the mind's power of knowing things.
If we say that the things known must be in the mind, we are either unduly limiting the mind's power of knowing, or we are uttering a mere tautology.
We are uttering a mere tautology if we mean by '_in_ the mind' the same as by '_before_ the mind', i.e. if we mean merely being apprehended by the mind.
But if we mean this, we shall have to admit that what, _in this sense_, is in the mind, may nevertheless be not mental.
Thus when we realize the nature of knowledge, Berkeley's argument is seen to be wrong in substance as well as in form, and his grounds for supposing that 'ideas'--i.e. the objects apprehended--must be mental, are found to have no validity whatever.
Hence his grounds in favour of idealism may be dismissed.
It is often said, as though it were a self-evident truism, that we cannot know that anything exists which we do not know.
It is inferred that whatever can in any way be relevant to our experience must be at least capable of being known by us; whence it follows that if matter were essentially something with which we could not become acquainted, matter would be something which we could not know to exist, and which could have for us no importance whatever.
It is generally also implied, for reasons which remain obscure, that what can have no importance for us cannot be real, and that therefore matter, if it is not composed of minds or of mental ideas, is impossible and a mere chimaera.
To go into this argument fully at our present stage would be impossible, since it raises points requiring a considerable preliminary discussion; but certain reasons for rejecting the argument may be noticed at once.
To begin at the end: there is no reason why what cannot have any _practical_ importance for us should not be real.
It is true that, if _theoretical_ importance is included, everything real is of _some_ importance to us, since, as persons desirous of knowing the truth about the universe, we have some interest in everything that the universe contains.
But if this sort of interest is included, it is not the case that matter has no importance for us, provided it exists even if we cannot know that it exists.
We can, obviously, suspect that it may exist, and wonder whether it does; hence it is connected with our desire for knowledge, and has the importance of either satisfying or thwarting this desire.
Again, it is by no means a truism, and is in fact false, that we cannot know that anything exists which we do not know.
The word 'know' is here used in two different senses. (1) In its first use it is applicable to the sort of knowledge which is opposed to error, the sense in which what we know is _true_, the sense which applies to our beliefs and convictions, i.e. to what are called _judgements_.
In this sense of the word we know _that_ something is the case.
This sort of knowledge may be described as knowledge of _truths_. (2) In the second use of the word 'know' above, the word applies to our knowledge of _things_, which we may call _acquaintance_.
I have not the honour to be acquainted with the Emperor of China, but I truly judge that he exists.
It may be said, of course, that I judge this because of other people's acquaintance with him.
This, however, would be an irrelevant retort, since, if the principle were true, I could not know that any one else is acquainted with him.
But further: there is no reason why I should not know of the existence of something with which nobody is acquainted.
This point is important, and demands elucidation.
If I am acquainted with a thing which exists, my acquaintance gives me the knowledge that it exists.
But it is not true that, conversely, whenever I can know that a thing of a certain sort exists, I or some one else must be acquainted with the thing.
What happens, in cases where I have true judgement without acquaintance, is that the thing is known to me by _description_, and that, in virtue of some general principle, the existence of a thing answering to this description can be inferred from the existence of something with which I am acquainted.
In order to understand this point fully, it will be well first to deal with the difference between knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description, and then to consider what knowledge of general principles, if any, has the same kind of certainty as our knowledge of the existence of our own experiences.
These subjects will be dealt with in the following chapters.
KNOWLEDGE BY ACQUAINTANCE AND KNOWLEDGE BY DESCRIPTION In the preceding chapter we saw that there are two sorts of knowledge: knowledge of things, and knowledge of truths.
In this chapter we shall be concerned exclusively with knowledge of things, of which in turn we shall have to distinguish two kinds.
Knowledge of things, when it is of the kind we call knowledge by _acquaintance_, is essentially simpler than any knowledge of truths, and logically independent of knowledge of truths, though it would be rash to assume that human beings ever, in fact, have acquaintance with things without at the same time knowing some truth about them.
Knowledge of things by _description_, on the contrary, always involves, as we shall find in the course of the present chapter, some knowledge of truths as its source and ground.
But first of all we must make clear what we mean by 'acquaintance' and what we mean by 'description'.
We shall say that we have _acquaintance_ with anything of which we are directly aware, without the intermediary of any process of inference or any knowledge of truths.
Thus in the presence of my table I am acquainted with the sense-data that make up the appearance of my table--its colour, shape, hardness, smoothness, etc.; all these are things of which I am immediately conscious when I am seeing and touching my table.
The particular shade of colour that I am seeing may have many things said about it--I may say that it is brown, that it is rather dark, and so on.
But such statements, though they make me know truths about the colour, do not make me know the colour itself any better than I did before so far as concerns knowledge of the colour itself, as opposed to knowledge of truths about it, I know the colour perfectly and completely when I see it, and no further knowledge of it itself is even theoretically possible.
Thus the sense-data which make up the appearance of my table are things with which I have acquaintance, things immediately known to me just as they are.
My knowledge of the table as a physical object, on the contrary, is not direct knowledge.
Such as it is, it is obtained through acquaintance with the sense-data that make up the appearance of the table.
We have seen that it is possible, without absurdity, to doubt whether there is a table at all, whereas it is not possible to doubt the sense-data.
My knowledge of the table is of the kind which we shall call 'knowledge by description'.
The table is 'the physical object which causes such-and-such sense-data'.
This describes the table by means of the sense-data.
In order to know anything at all about the table, we must know truths connecting it with things with which we have acquaintance: we must know that 'such-and-such sense-data are caused by a physical object'.
There is no state of mind in which we are directly aware of the table; all our knowledge of the table is really knowledge of truths, and the actual thing which is the table is not, strictly speaking, known to us at all.
We know a description, and we know that there is just one object to which this description applies, though the object itself is not directly known to us.
In such a case, we say that our knowledge of the object is knowledge by description.
All our knowledge, both knowledge of things and knowledge of truths, rests upon acquaintance as its foundation.
It is therefore important to consider what kinds of things there are with which we have acquaintance.
Sense-data, as we have already seen, are among the things with which we are acquainted; in fact, they supply the most obvious and striking example of knowledge by acquaintance.
But if they were the sole example, our knowledge would be very much more restricted than it is.
We have therefore to consider acquaintance with other things besides sense-data if we are to obtain any tolerably adequate analysis of our knowledge.
The first extension beyond sense-data to be considered is acquaintance by _memory_.
It is obvious that we often remember what we have seen or heard or had otherwise present to our senses, and that in such cases we are still immediately aware of what we remember, in spite of the fact that it appears as past and not as present.
This immediate knowledge by memory is the source of all our knowledge concerning the past: without it, there could be no knowledge of the past by inference, since we should never know that there was anything past to be inferred.
The next extension to be considered is acquaintance by _introspection_.
When I see the sun, I am often aware of my seeing the sun; thus 'my seeing the sun' is an object with which I have acquaintance.
When I desire food, I may be aware of my desire for food; thus 'my desiring food' is an object with which I am acquainted.
Similarly we may be aware of our feeling pleasure or pain, and generally of the events which happen in our minds.
This kind of acquaintance, which may be called self-consciousness, is the source of all our knowledge of mental things.
It is obvious that it is only what goes on in our own minds that can be thus known immediately.
What goes on in the minds of others is known to us through our perception of their bodies, that is, through the sense-data in us which are associated with their bodies.
But for our acquaintance with the contents of our own minds, we should be unable to imagine the minds of others, and therefore we could never arrive at the knowledge that they have minds.
It seems natural to suppose that self-consciousness is one of the things that distinguish men from animals: animals, we may suppose, though they have acquaintance with sense-data, never become aware of this acquaintance.
I do not mean that they _doubt_ whether they exist, but that they have never become conscious of the fact that they have sensations and feelings, nor therefore of the fact that they, the subjects of their sensations and feelings, exist.
We have spoken of acquaintance with the contents of our minds as _self_-consciousness, but it is not, of course, consciousness of our _self_: it is consciousness of particular thoughts and feelings.
The question whether we are also acquainted with our bare selves, as opposed to particular thoughts and feelings, is a very difficult one, upon which it would be rash to speak positively.
When we try to look into ourselves we always seem to come upon some particular thought or feeling, and not upon the 'I' which has the thought or feeling.
Nevertheless there are some reasons for thinking that we are acquainted with the 'I', though the acquaintance is hard to disentangle from other things.
To make clear what sort of reason there is, let us consider for a moment what our acquaintance with particular thoughts really involves.
When I am acquainted with 'my seeing the sun', it seems plain that I am acquainted with two different things in relation to each other.
On the one hand there is the sense-datum which represents the sun to me, on the other hand there is that which sees this sense-datum.
All acquaintance, such as my acquaintance with the sense-datum which represents the sun, seems obviously a relation between the person acquainted and the object with which the person is acquainted.
When a case of acquaintance is one with which I can be acquainted (as I am acquainted with my acquaintance with the sense-datum representing the sun), it is plain that the person acquainted is myself.
Thus, when I am acquainted with my seeing the sun, the whole fact with which I am acquainted is 'Self-acquainted-with-sense-datum'.
Further, we know the truth 'I am acquainted with this sense-datum'.
It is hard to see how we could know this truth, or even understand what is meant by it, unless we were acquainted with something which we call 'I'.
It does not seem necessary to suppose that we are acquainted with a more or less permanent person, the same to-day as yesterday, but it does seem as though we must be acquainted with that thing, whatever its nature, which sees the sun and has acquaintance with sense-data.
Thus, in some sense it would seem we must be acquainted with our Selves as opposed to our particular experiences.
But the question is difficult, and complicated arguments can be adduced on either side.
Hence, although acquaintance with ourselves seems _probably_ to occur, it is not wise to assert that it undoubtedly does occur.
We may therefore sum up as follows what has been said concerning acquaintance with things that exist.
We have acquaintance in sensation with the data of the outer senses, and in introspection with the data of what may be called the inner sense--thoughts, feelings, desires, etc.; we have acquaintance in memory with things which have been data either of the outer senses or of the inner sense.
Further, it is probable, though not certain, that we have acquaintance with Self, as that which is aware of things or has desires towards things.
In addition to our acquaintance with particular existing things, we also have acquaintance with what we shall call _universals_, that is to say, general ideas, such as _whiteness_, _diversity_, _brotherhood_, and so on.
Every complete sentence must contain at least one word which stands for a universal, since all verbs have a meaning which is universal.
We shall return to universals later on, in Chapter IX; for the present, it is only necessary to guard against the supposition that whatever we can be acquainted with must be something particular and existent.
Awareness of universals is called _conceiving_, and a universal of which we are aware is called a _concept_.
It will be seen that among the objects with which we are acquainted are not included physical objects (as opposed to sense-data), nor other people's minds.
These things are known to us by what I call 'knowledge by description', which we must now consider.
By a 'description' I mean any phrase of the form 'a so-and-so' or 'the so-and-so'.
A phrase of the form 'a so-and-so' I shall call an 'ambiguous' description; a phrase of the form 'the so-and-so' (in the singular) I shall call a 'definite' description.
Thus 'a man' is an ambiguous description, and 'the man with the iron mask' is a definite description.
There are various problems connected with ambiguous descriptions, but I pass them by, since they do not directly concern the matter we are discussing, which is the nature of our knowledge concerning objects in cases where we know that there is an object answering to a definite description, though we are not acquainted with any such object.
This is a matter which is concerned exclusively with definite descriptions.
I shall therefore, in the sequel, speak simply of 'descriptions' when I mean 'definite descriptions'.
Thus a description will mean any phrase of the form 'the so-and-so' in the singular.
We shall say that an object is 'known by description' when we know that it is 'the so-and-so', i.e. when we know that there is one object, and no more, having a certain property; and it will generally be implied that we do not have knowledge of the same object by acquaintance.
We know that the man with the iron mask existed, and many propositions are known about him; but we do not know who he was.
We shall say that we have 'merely descriptive knowledge' of the so-and-so when, although we know that the so-and-so exists, and although we may possibly be acquainted with the object which is, in fact, the so-and-so, yet we do not know any proposition '_a_ is the so-and-so', where _a_ is something with which we are acquainted.
The proposition '_a_ is the so-and-so' means that _a_ has the property so-and-so, and nothing else has. 'Mr.
A. is the Unionist candidate for this constituency' means 'Mr.
A. is a Unionist candidate for this constituency, and no one else is'. 'The Unionist candidate for this constituency exists' means 'some one is a Unionist candidate for this constituency, and no one else is'.
Thus, when we are acquainted with an object which is the so-and-so, we know that the so-and-so exists; but we may know that the so-and-so exists when we are not acquainted with any object which we know to be the so-and-so, and even when we are not acquainted with any object which, in fact, is the so-and-so.
Common words, even proper names, are usually really descriptions.
That is to say, the thought in the mind of a person using a proper name correctly can generally only be expressed explicitly if we replace the proper name by a description.
Moreover, the description required to express the thought will vary for different people, or for the same person at different times.
The only thing constant (so long as the name is rightly used) is the object to which the name applies.
But so long as this remains constant, the particular description involved usually makes no difference to the truth or falsehood of the proposition in which the name appears.
Let us take some illustrations.
Suppose some statement made about Bismarck.
Assuming that there is such a thing as direct acquaintance with oneself, Bismarck himself might have used his name directly to designate the particular person with whom he was acquainted.
In this case, if he made a judgement about himself, he himself might be a constituent of the judgement.
Here the proper name has the direct use which it always wishes to have, as simply standing for a certain object, and not for a description of the object.
But if a person who knew Bismarck made a judgement about him, the case is different.
What this person was acquainted with were certain sense-data which he connected (rightly, we will suppose) with Bismarck's body.
His body, as a physical object, and still more his mind, were only known as the body and the mind connected with these sense-data.
That is, they were known by description.
It is, of course, very much a matter of chance which characteristics of a man's appearance will come into a friend's mind when he thinks of him; thus the description actually in the friend's mind is accidental.
The essential point is that he knows that the various descriptions all apply to the same entity, in spite of not being acquainted with the entity in question.
When we, who did not know Bismarck, make a judgement about him, the description in our minds will probably be some more or less vague mass of historical knowledge--far more, in most cases, than is required to identify him.
But, for the sake of illustration, let us assume that we think of him as 'the first Chancellor of the German Empire'.
Here all the words are abstract except 'German'.
The word 'German' will, again, have different meanings for different people.
But if we are to obtain a description which we know to be applicable, we shall be compelled, at some point, to bring in a reference to a particular with which we are acquainted.
Such reference is involved in any mention of past, present, and future (as opposed to definite dates), or of here and there, or of what others have told us.
Thus it would seem that, in some way or other, a description known to be applicable to a particular must involve some reference to a particular with which we are acquainted, if our knowledge about the thing described is not to be merely what follows _logically_ from the description.
For example, 'the most long-lived of men' is a description involving only universals, which must apply to some man, but we can make no judgements concerning this man which involve knowledge about him beyond what the description gives.
If, however, we say, 'The first Chancellor of the German Empire was an astute diplomatist', we can only be assured of the truth of our judgement in virtue of something with which we are acquainted--usually a testimony heard or read.
Apart from the information we convey to others, apart from the fact about the actual Bismarck, which gives importance to our judgement, the thought we really have contains the one or more particulars involved, and otherwise consists wholly of concepts.
All names of places--London, England, Europe, the Earth, the Solar System--similarly involve, when used, descriptions which start from some one or more particulars with which we are acquainted.
I suspect that even the Universe, as considered by metaphysics, involves such a connexion with particulars.
In logic, on the contrary, where we are concerned not merely with what does exist, but with whatever might or could exist or be, no reference to actual particulars is involved.
It would seem that, when we make a statement about something only known by description, we often _intend_ to make our statement, not in the form involving the description, but about the actual thing described.
That is to say, when we say anything about Bismarck, we should like, if we could, to make the judgement which Bismarck alone can make, namely, the judgement of which he himself is a constituent.
In this we are necessarily defeated, since the actual Bismarck is unknown to us.
But we know that there is an object B, called Bismarck, and that B was an astute diplomatist.
We can thus _describe_ the proposition we should like to affirm, namely, 'B was an astute diplomatist', where B is the object which was Bismarck.
If we are describing Bismarck as 'the first Chancellor of the German Empire', the proposition we should like to affirm may be described as 'the proposition asserting, concerning the actual object which was the first Chancellor of the German Empire, that this object was an astute diplomatist'.
What enables us to communicate in spite of the varying descriptions we employ is that we know there is a true proposition concerning the actual Bismarck, and that however we may vary the description (so long as the description is correct) the proposition described is still the same.
This proposition, which is described and is known to be true, is what interests us; but we are not acquainted with the proposition itself, and do not know it, though we know it is true.
It will be seen that there are various stages in the removal from acquaintance with particulars: there is Bismarck to people who knew him; Bismarck to those who only know of him through history; the man with the iron mask; the longest-lived of men.
There is a similar hierarchy in the region of universals.
Many universals, like many particulars, are only known to us by description.
But here, as in the case of particulars, knowledge concerning what is known by description is ultimately reducible to knowledge concerning what is known by acquaintance.
The fundamental principle in the analysis of propositions containing descriptions is this: _Every proposition which we can understand must be composed wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted_.
We shall not at this stage attempt to answer all the objections which may be urged against this fundamental principle.
For the present, we shall merely point out that, in some way or other, it must be possible to meet these objections, for it is scarcely conceivable that we can make a judgement or entertain a supposition without knowing what it is that we are judging or supposing about.
We must attach _some_ meaning to the words we use, if we are to speak significantly and not utter mere noise; and the meaning we attach to our words must be something with which we are acquainted.
Thus when, for example, we make a statement about Julius Caesar, it is plain that Julius Caesar himself is not before our minds, since we are not acquainted with him.
The chief importance of knowledge by description is that it enables us to pass beyond the limits of our private experience.
In spite of the fact that we can only know truths which are wholly composed of terms which we have experienced in acquaintance, we can yet have knowledge by description of things which we have never experienced.
In view of the very narrow range of our immediate experience, this result is vital, and until it is understood, much of our knowledge must remain mysterious and therefore doubtful.
ON INDUCTION In almost all our previous discussions we have been concerned in the attempt to get clear as to our data in the way of knowledge of existence.
What things are there in the universe whose existence is known to us owing to our being acquainted with them?
So far, our answer has been that we are acquainted with our sense-data, and, probably, with ourselves.
And past sense-data which are remembered are known to have existed in the past.
This knowledge supplies our data.
But if we are to be able to draw inferences from these data--if we are to know of the existence of matter, of other people, of the past before our individual memory begins, or of the future, we must know general principles of some kind by means of which such inferences can be drawn.
It must be known to us that the existence of some one sort of thing, A, is a sign of the existence of some other sort of thing, B, either at the same time as A or at some earlier or later time, as, for example, thunder is a sign of the earlier existence of lightning.
If this were not known to us, we could never extend our knowledge beyond the sphere of our private experience; and this sphere, as we have seen, is exceedingly limited.
The question we have now to consider is whether such an extension is possible, and if so, how it is effected.
Let us take as an illustration a matter about which none of us, in fact, feel the slightest doubt.
We are all convinced that the sun will rise to-morrow.
Is this belief a mere blind outcome of past experience, or can it be justified as a reasonable belief?
It is not easy to find a test by which to judge whether a belief of this kind is reasonable or not, but we can at least ascertain what sort of general beliefs would suffice, if true, to justify the judgement that the sun will rise to-morrow, and the many other similar judgements upon which our actions are based.
It is obvious that if we are asked why we believe that the sun will rise to-morrow, we shall naturally answer 'Because it always has risen every day'.
If we are challenged as to why we believe that it will continue to rise as heretofore, we may appeal to the laws of motion: the earth, we shall say, is a freely rotating body, and such bodies do not cease to rotate unless something interferes from outside, and there is nothing outside to interfere with the earth between now and to-morrow.
Of course it might be doubted whether we are quite certain that there is nothing outside to interfere, but this is not the interesting doubt.
The interesting doubt is as to whether the laws of motion will remain in operation until to-morrow.
If this doubt is raised, we find ourselves in the same position as when the doubt about the sunrise was first raised.
The _only_ reason for believing that the laws of motion will remain in operation is that they have operated hitherto, so far as our knowledge of the past enables us to judge.
It is true that we have a greater body of evidence from the past in favour of the laws of motion than we have in favour of the sunrise, because the sunrise is merely a particular case of fulfilment of the laws of motion, and there are countless other particular cases.
But the real question is: Do _any_ number of cases of a law being fulfilled in the past afford evidence that it will be fulfilled in the future?
If not, it becomes plain that we have no ground whatever for expecting the sun to rise to-morrow, or for expecting the bread we shall eat at our next meal not to poison us, or for any of the other scarcely conscious expectations that control our daily lives.
It is to be observed that all such expectations are only _probable_; thus we have not to seek for a proof that they _must_ be fulfilled, but only for some reason in favour of the view that they are _likely_ to be fulfilled.
Now in dealing with this question we must, to begin with, make an important distinction, without which we should soon become involved in hopeless confusions.
Experience has shown us that, hitherto, the frequent repetition of some uniform succession or coexistence has been a _cause_ of our expecting the same succession or coexistence on the next occasion.
Food that has a certain appearance generally has a certain taste, and it is a severe shock to our expectations when the familiar appearance is found to be associated with an unusual taste.
Things which we see become associated, by habit, with certain tactile sensations which we expect if we touch them; one of the horrors of a ghost (in many ghost-stories) is that it fails to give us any sensations of touch.
Uneducated people who go abroad for the first time are so surprised as to be incredulous when they find their native language not understood.
And this kind of association is not confined to men; in animals also it is very strong.
A horse which has been often driven along a certain road resists the attempt to drive him in a different direction.
Domestic animals expect food when they see the person who usually feeds them.
We know that all these rather crude expectations of uniformity are liable to be misleading.
The man who has fed the chicken every day throughout its life at last wrings its neck instead, showing that more refined views as to the uniformity of nature would have been useful to the chicken.
But in spite of the misleadingness of such expectations, they nevertheless exist.
The mere fact that something has happened a certain number of times causes animals and men to expect that it will happen again.
Thus our instincts certainly cause us to believe that the sun will rise to-morrow, but we may be in no better a position than the chicken which unexpectedly has its neck wrung.
We have therefore to distinguish the fact that past uniformities _cause_ expectations as to the future, from the question whether there is any reasonable ground for giving weight to such expectations after the question of their validity has been raised.
The problem we have to discuss is whether there is any reason for believing in what is called 'the uniformity of nature'.
The belief in the uniformity of nature is the belief that everything that has happened or will happen is an instance of some general law to which there are no exceptions.
The crude expectations which we have been considering are all subject to exceptions, and therefore liable to disappoint those who entertain them.
But science habitually assumes, at least as a working hypothesis, that general rules which have exceptions can be replaced by general rules which have no exceptions. 'Unsupported bodies in air fall' is a general rule to which balloons and aeroplanes are exceptions.
But the laws of motion and the law of gravitation, which account for the fact that most bodies fall, also account for the fact that balloons and aeroplanes can rise; thus the laws of motion and the law of gravitation are not subject to these exceptions.
The belief that the sun will rise to-morrow might be falsified if the earth came suddenly into contact with a large body which destroyed its rotation; but the laws of motion and the law of gravitation would not be infringed by such an event.
The business of science is to find uniformities, such as the laws of motion and the law of gravitation, to which, so far as our experience extends, there are no exceptions.
In this search science has been remarkably successful, and it may be conceded that such uniformities have held hitherto.
This brings us back to the question: Have we any reason, assuming that they have always held in the past, to suppose that they will hold in the future?
It has been argued that we have reason to know that the future will resemble the past, because what was the future has constantly become the past, and has always been found to resemble the past, so that we really have experience of the future, namely of times which were formerly future, which we may call past futures.
But such an argument really begs the very question at issue.
We have experience of past futures, but not of future futures, and the question is: Will future futures resemble past futures?
This question is not to be answered by an argument which starts from past futures alone.
We have therefore still to seek for some principle which shall enable us to know that the future will follow the same laws as the past.
The reference to the future in this question is not essential.
The same question arises when we apply the laws that work in our experience to past things of which we have no experience--as, for example, in geology, or in theories as to the origin of the Solar System.
It must be conceded, to begin with, that the fact that two things have been found often together and never apart does not, by itself, suffice to _prove_ demonstratively that they will be found together in the next case we examine.
The most we can hope is that the oftener things are found together, the more probable it becomes that they will be found together another time, and that, if they have been found together often enough, the probability will amount _almost_ to certainty.
It can never quite reach certainty, because we know that in spite of frequent repetitions there sometimes is a failure at the last, as in the case of the chicken whose neck is wrung.
Thus probability is all we ought to seek.
It might be urged, as against the view we are advocating, that we know all natural phenomena to be subject to the reign of law, and that sometimes, on the basis of observation, we can see that only one law can possibly fit the facts of the case.
The first is that, even if _some_ law which has no exceptions applies to our case, we can never, in practice, be sure that we have discovered that law and not one to which there are exceptions.
The second is that the reign of law would seem to be itself only probable, and that our belief that it will hold in the future, or in unexamined cases in the past, is itself based upon the very principle we are examining.
As just stated, the principle applies only to the verification of our expectation in a single fresh instance.
But we want also to know that there is a probability in favour of the general law that things of the sort A are _always_ associated with things of the sort B, provided a sufficient number of cases of association are known, and no cases of failure of association are known.
The probability of the general law is obviously less than the probability of the particular case, since if the general law is true, the particular case must also be true, whereas the particular case may be true without the general law being true.
Nevertheless the probability of the general law is increased by repetitions, just as the probability of the particular case is.
It should be noted that probability is always relative to certain data.
In our case, the data are merely the known cases of coexistence of A and B.
There may be other data, which _might_ be taken into account, which would gravely alter the probability.
For example, a man who had seen a great many white swans might argue, by our principle, that on the data it was _probable_ that all swans were white, and this might be a perfectly sound argument.
The argument is not disproved by the fact that some swans are black, because a thing may very well happen in spite of the fact that some data render it improbable.
In the case of the swans, a man might know that colour is a very variable characteristic in many species of animals, and that, therefore, an induction as to colour is peculiarly liable to error.
But this knowledge would be a fresh datum, by no means proving that the probability relatively to our previous data had been wrongly estimated.
The fact, therefore, that things often fail to fulfil our expectations is no evidence that our expectations will not _probably_ be fulfilled in a given case or a given class of cases.
Thus our inductive principle is at any rate not capable of being _disproved_ by an appeal to experience.
The inductive principle, however, is equally incapable of being _proved_ by an appeal to experience.
Experience might conceivably confirm the inductive principle as regards the cases that have been already examined; but as regards unexamined cases, it is the inductive principle alone that can justify any inference from what has been examined to what has not been examined.
All arguments which, on the basis of experience, argue as to the future or the unexperienced parts of the past or present, assume the inductive principle; hence we can never use experience to prove the inductive principle without begging the question.
Thus we must either accept the inductive principle on the ground of its intrinsic evidence, or forgo all justification of our expectations about the future.
If the principle is unsound, we have no reason to expect the sun to rise to-morrow, to expect bread to be more nourishing than a stone, or to expect that if we throw ourselves off the roof we shall fall.
When we see what looks like our best friend approaching us, we shall have no reason to suppose that his body is not inhabited by the mind of our worst enemy or of some total stranger.
All our conduct is based upon associations which have worked in the past, and which we therefore regard as likely to work in the future; and this likelihood is dependent for its validity upon the inductive principle.
The general principles of science, such as the belief in the reign of law, and the belief that every event must have a cause, are as completely dependent upon the inductive principle as are the beliefs of daily life All such general principles are believed because mankind have found innumerable instances of their truth and no instances of their falsehood.
But this affords no evidence for their truth in the future, unless the inductive principle is assumed.
Thus all knowledge which, on a basis of experience tells us something about what is not experienced, is based upon a belief which experience can neither confirm nor confute, yet which, at least in its more concrete applications, appears to be as firmly rooted in us as many of the facts of experience.
The existence and justification of such beliefs--for the inductive principle, as we shall see, is not the only example--raises some of the most difficult and most debated problems of philosophy.
We will, in the next chapter, consider briefly what may be said to account for such knowledge, and what is its scope and its degree of certainty.
ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES We saw in the preceding chapter that the principle of induction, while necessary to the validity of all arguments based on experience, is itself not capable of being proved by experience, and yet is unhesitatingly believed by every one, at least in all its concrete applications.
In these characteristics the principle of induction does not stand alone.
There are a number of other principles which cannot be proved or disproved by experience, but are used in arguments which start from what is experienced.
Some of these principles have even greater evidence than the principle of induction, and the knowledge of them has the same degree of certainty as the knowledge of the existence of sense-data.
They constitute the means of drawing inferences from what is given in sensation; and if what we infer is to be true, it is just as necessary that our principles of inference should be true as it is that our data should be true.
The principles of inference are apt to be overlooked because of their very obviousness--the assumption involved is assented to without our realizing that it is an assumption.
But it is very important to realize the use of principles of inference, if a correct theory of knowledge is to be obtained; for our knowledge of them raises interesting and difficult questions.
In all our knowledge of general principles, what actually happens is that first of all we realize some particular application of the principle, and then we realize that the particularity is irrelevant, and that there is a generality which may equally truly be affirmed.
This is of course familiar in such matters as teaching arithmetic: 'two and two are four' is first learnt in the case of some particular pair of couples, and then in some other particular case, and so on, until at last it becomes possible to see that it is true of any pair of couples.
The same thing happens with logical principles.
Suppose two men are discussing what day of the month it is.
But it depends for its truth upon an instance of a general logical principle.
The logical principle is as follows: 'Suppose it known that _if_ this is true, then that is true.
Thus our principle states that if this implies that, and this is true, then that is true.
In other words, 'anything implied by a true proposition is true', or 'whatever follows from a true proposition is true'.
This principle is really involved--at least, concrete instances of it are involved--in all demonstrations.
Whenever one thing which we believe is used to prove something else, which we consequently believe, this principle is relevant.
If any one asks: 'Why should I accept the results of valid arguments based on true premisses?' we can only answer by appealing to our principle.
In fact, the truth of the principle is impossible to doubt, and its obviousness is so great that at first sight it seems almost trivial.
Such principles, however, are not trivial to the philosopher, for they show that we may have indubitable knowledge which is in no way derived from objects of sense.
The above principle is merely one of a certain number of self-evident logical principles.
Some at least of these principles must be granted before any argument or proof becomes possible.
When some of them have been granted, others can be proved, though these others, so long as they are simple, are just as obvious as the principles taken for granted.
For no very good reason, three of these principles have been singled out by tradition under the name of 'Laws of Thought'.
The name 'laws of thought' is also misleading, for what is important is not the fact that we think in accordance with these laws, but the fact that things behave in accordance with them; in other words, the fact that when we think in accordance with them we think _truly_.
But this is a large question, to which we must return at a later stage.
In addition to the logical principles which enable us to prove from a given premiss that something is _certainly_ true, there are other logical principles which enable us to prove, from a given premiss, that there is a greater or less probability that something is true.
An example of such principles--perhaps the most important example is the inductive principle, which we considered in the preceding chapter.
One of the great historic controversies in philosophy is the controversy between the two schools called respectively 'empiricists' and 'rationalists'.
It has now become possible to decide with some confidence as to the truth or falsehood of these opposing schools.
It must be admitted, for the reasons already stated, that logical principles are known to us, and cannot be themselves proved by experience, since all proof presupposes them.
In this, therefore, which was the most important point of the controversy, the rationalists were in the right.
On the other hand, even that part of our knowledge which is _logically_ independent of experience (in the sense that experience cannot prove it) is yet elicited and caused by experience.
It is on occasion of particular experiences that we become aware of the general laws which their connexions exemplify.
It would certainly be absurd to suppose that there are innate principles in the sense that babies are born with a knowledge of everything which men know and which cannot be deduced from what is experienced.
For this reason, the word 'innate' would not now be employed to describe our knowledge of logical principles.
The phrase '_a priori_' is less objectionable, and is more usual in modern writers.
Thus, while admitting that all knowledge is elicited and caused by experience, we shall nevertheless hold that some knowledge is _a priori_, in the sense that the experience which makes us think of it does not suffice to prove it, but merely so directs our attention that we see its truth without requiring any proof from experience.
There is another point of great importance, in which the empiricists were in the right as against the rationalists.
Nothing can be known to _exist_ except by the help of experience.
That is to say, if we wish to prove that something of which we have no direct experience exists, we must have among our premisses the existence of one or more things of which we have direct experience.
Our belief that the Emperor of China exists, for example, rests upon testimony, and testimony consists, in the last analysis, of sense-data seen or heard in reading or being spoken to.
Rationalists believed that, from general consideration as to what must be, they could deduce the existence of this or that in the actual world.
In this belief they seem to have been mistaken.
All the knowledge that we can acquire _a priori_ concerning existence seems to be hypothetical: it tells us that if one thing exists, another must exist, or, more generally, that if one proposition is true, another must be true.
This is exemplified by the principles we have already dealt with, such as '_if_ this is true, and this implies that, then that is true', or '_if_ this and that have been repeatedly found connected, they will probably be connected in the next instance in which one of them is found'.
Thus the scope and power of _a priori_ principles is strictly limited.
All knowledge that something exists must be in part dependent on experience.
When anything is known immediately, its existence is known by experience alone; when anything is proved to exist, without being known immediately, both experience and _a priori_ principles must be required in the proof.
Knowledge is called _empirical_ when it rests wholly or partly upon experience.
Thus all knowledge which asserts existence is empirical, and the only _a priori_ knowledge concerning existence is hypothetical, giving connexions among things that exist or may exist, but not giving actual existence. _A priori_ knowledge is not all of the logical kind we have been hitherto considering.
Perhaps the most important example of non-logical _a priori_ knowledge is knowledge as to ethical value.
I am not speaking of judgements as to what is useful or as to what is virtuous, for such judgements do require empirical premisses; I am speaking of judgements as to the intrinsic desirability of things.
If something is useful, it must be useful because it secures some end; the end must, if we have gone far enough, be valuable on its own account, and not merely because it is useful for some further end.
Thus all judgements as to what is useful depend upon judgements as to what has value on its own account.
We judge, for example, that happiness is more desirable than misery, knowledge than ignorance, goodwill than hatred, and so on.
Such judgements must, in part at least, be immediate and _a priori_.
Like our previous _a priori_ judgements, they may be elicited by experience, and indeed they must be; for it seems not possible to judge whether anything is intrinsically valuable unless we have experienced something of the same kind.
But it is fairly obvious that they cannot be proved by experience; for the fact that a thing exists or does not exist cannot prove either that it is good that it should exist or that it is bad.
The pursuit of this subject belongs to ethics, where the impossibility of deducing what ought to be from what is has to be established.
In the present connexion, it is only important to realize that knowledge as to what is intrinsically of value is _a priori_ in the same sense in which logic is _a priori_, namely in the sense that the truth of such knowledge can be neither proved nor disproved by experience.
All pure mathematics is _a priori_, like logic.
This was strenuously denied by the empirical philosophers, who maintained that experience was as much the source of our knowledge of arithmetic as of our knowledge of geography.
They maintained that by the repeated experience of seeing two things and two other things, and finding that altogether they made four things, we were led by induction to the conclusion that two things and two other things would _always_ make four things altogether.
If, however, this were the source of our knowledge that two and two are four, we should proceed differently, in persuading ourselves of its truth, from the way in which we do actually proceed.
In fact, a certain number of instances are needed to make us think of two abstractly, rather than of two coins or two books or two people, or two of any other specified kind.
But as soon as we are able to divest our thoughts of irrelevant particularity, we become able to see the general principle that two and two are four; any one instance is seen to be _typical_, and the examination of other instances becomes unnecessary.(1) (1) Cf.
Whitehead, _Introduction to Mathematics_ (Home University Library).
The same thing is exemplified in geometry.
If we want to prove some property of _all_ triangles, we draw some one triangle and reason about it; but we can avoid making use of any property which it does not share with all other triangles, and thus, from our particular case, we obtain a general result.
We do not, in fact, feel our certainty that two and two are four increased by fresh instances, because, as soon as we have seen the truth of this proposition, our certainty becomes so great as to be incapable of growing greater.
Moreover, we feel some quality of necessity about the proposition 'two and two are four', which is absent from even the best attested empirical generalizations.
Such generalizations always remain mere facts: we feel that there might be a world in which they were false, though in the actual world they happen to be true.
In any possible world, on the contrary, we feel that two and two would be four: this is not a mere fact, but a necessity to which everything actual and possible must conform.
Neglecting the second ground, and considering merely our experience of men's mortality, it is plain that we should not be content with one quite clearly understood instance of a man dying, whereas, in the case of 'two and two are four', one instance does suffice, when carefully considered, to persuade us that the same must happen in any other instance.
Also we can be forced to admit, on reflection, that there may be some doubt, however slight, as to whether _all_ men are mortal.
This may be made plain by the attempt to imagine two different worlds, in one of which there are men who are not mortal, while in the other two and two make five.
When Swift invites us to consider the race of Struldbugs who never die, we are able to acquiesce in imagination.
But a world where two and two make five seems quite on a different level.
We feel that such a world, if there were one, would upset the whole fabric of our knowledge and reduce us to utter doubt.
The fact is that, in simple mathematical judgements such as 'two and two are four', and also in many judgements of logic, we can know the general proposition without inferring it from instances, although some instance is usually necessary to make clear to us what the general proposition means.
This is why there is real utility in the process of _deduction_, which goes from the general to the general, or from the general to the particular, as well as in the process of _induction_, which goes from the particular to the particular, or from the particular to the general.
It is an old debate among philosophers whether deduction ever gives _new_ knowledge.
If we already know that two and two always make four, and we know that Brown and Jones are two, and so are Robinson and Smith, we can deduce that Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are four.
This is new knowledge, not contained in our premisses, because the general proposition, 'two and two are four', never told us there were such people as Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith, and the particular premisses do not tell us that there were four of them, whereas the particular proposition deduced does tell us both these things.
But the newness of the knowledge is much less certain if we take the stock instance of deduction that is always given in books on logic, namely, 'All men are mortal; Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal.' In this case, what we really know beyond reasonable doubt is that certain men, A, B, C, were mortal, since, in fact, they have died.
If Socrates is one of these men, it is foolish to go the roundabout way through 'all men are mortal' to arrive at the conclusion that _probably_ Socrates is mortal.
If Socrates is not one of the men on whom our induction is based, we shall still do better to argue straight from our A, B, C, to Socrates, than to go round by the general proposition, 'all men are mortal'.
This illustrates the difference between general propositions known _a priori_ such as 'two and two are four', and empirical generalizations such as 'all men are mortal'.
In regard to the former, deduction is the right mode of argument, whereas in regard to the latter, induction is always theoretically preferable, and warrants a greater confidence in the truth of our conclusion, because all empirical generalizations are more uncertain than the instances of them.
We have now seen that there are propositions known _a priori_, and that among them are the propositions of logic and pure mathematics, as well as the fundamental propositions of ethics.
The question which must next occupy us is this: How is it possible that there should be such knowledge?
And more particularly, how can there be knowledge of general propositions in cases where we have not examined all the instances, and indeed never can examine them all, because their number is infinite?
These questions, which were first brought prominently forward by the German philosopher Kant (1724-1804), are very difficult, and historically very important.
HOW _A PRIORI_ KNOWLEDGE IS POSSIBLE Immanuel Kant is generally regarded as the greatest of the modern philosophers.
Though he lived through the Seven Years War and the French Revolution, he never interrupted his teaching of philosophy at Königsberg in East Prussia.
His most distinctive contribution was the invention of what he called the 'critical' philosophy, which, assuming as a datum that there is knowledge of various kinds, inquired how such knowledge comes to be possible, and deduced, from the answer to this inquiry, many metaphysical results as to the nature of the world.
But Kant undoubtedly deserves credit for two things: first, for having perceived that we have _a priori_ knowledge which is not purely 'analytic', i.e. such that the opposite would be self-contradictory, and secondly, for having made evident the philosophical importance of the theory of knowledge.
Before the time of Kant, it was generally held that whatever knowledge was _a priori_ must be 'analytic'.
What this word means will be best illustrated by examples.
If I say, 'A bald man is a man', 'A plane figure is a figure', 'A bad poet is a poet', I make a purely analytic judgement: the subject spoken about is given as having at least two properties, of which one is singled out to be asserted of it.
Such propositions as the above are trivial, and would never be enunciated in real life except by an orator preparing the way for a piece of sophistry.
They are called 'analytic' because the predicate is obtained by merely analysing the subject.
Before the time of Kant it was thought that all judgements of which we could be certain _a priori_ were of this kind: that in all of them there was a predicate which was only part of the subject of which it was asserted.
If this were so, we should be involved in a definite contradiction if we attempted to deny anything that could be known _a priori_. 'A bald man is not bald' would assert and deny baldness of the same man, and would therefore contradict itself.
Thus according to the philosophers before Kant, the law of contradiction, which asserts that nothing can at the same time have and not have a certain property, sufficed to establish the truth of all _a priori_ knowledge.
Hume (1711-76), who preceded Kant, accepting the usual view as to what makes knowledge _a priori_, discovered that, in many cases which had previously been supposed analytic, and notably in the case of cause and effect, the connexion was really synthetic.
Before Hume, rationalists at least had supposed that the effect could be logically deduced from the cause, if only we had sufficient knowledge.
Hume argued--correctly, as would now be generally admitted--that this could not be done.
Hence he inferred the far more doubtful proposition that nothing could be known _a priori_ about the connexion of cause and effect.
Kant, who had been educated in the rationalist tradition, was much perturbed by Hume's scepticism, and endeavoured to find an answer to it.
He perceived that not only the connexion of cause and effect, but all the propositions of arithmetic and geometry, are 'synthetic', i.e. not analytic: in all these propositions, no analysis of the subject will reveal the predicate.
His stock instance was the proposition 7 + 5 = 12.
He pointed out, quite truly, that 7 and 5 have to be put together to give 12: the idea of 12 is not contained in them, nor even in the idea of adding them together.
Thus he was led to the conclusion that all pure mathematics, though _a priori_, is synthetic; and this conclusion raised a new problem of which he endeavoured to find the solution.
The question which Kant put at the beginning of his philosophy, namely 'How is pure mathematics possible?' is an interesting and difficult one, to which every philosophy which is not purely sceptical must find some answer.
Thus our knowledge of the general propositions of mathematics (and the same applies to logic) must be accounted for otherwise than our (merely probable) knowledge of empirical generalizations such as 'all men are mortal'.
The problem arises through the fact that such knowledge is general, whereas all experience is particular.
It seems strange that we should apparently be able to know some truths in advance about particular things of which we have as yet no experience; but it cannot easily be doubted that logic and arithmetic will apply to such things.
We do not know who will be the inhabitants of London a hundred years hence; but we know that any two of them and any other two of them will make four of them.
This apparent power of anticipating facts about things of which we have no experience is certainly surprising.
Kant's solution of the problem, though not valid in my opinion, is interesting.
It is, however, very difficult, and is differently understood by different philosophers.
We can, therefore, only give the merest outline of it, and even that will be thought misleading by many exponents of Kant's system.
What Kant maintained was that in all our experience there are two elements to be distinguished, the one due to the object (i.e. to what we have called the 'physical object'), the other due to our own nature.
We saw, in discussing matter and sense-data, that the physical object is different from the associated sense-data, and that the sense-data are to be regarded as resulting from an interaction between the physical object and ourselves.
So far, we are in agreement with Kant.
But what is distinctive of Kant is the way in which he apportions the shares of ourselves and the physical object respectively.
He considers that the crude material given in sensation--the colour, hardness, etc.--is due to the object, and that what we supply is the arrangement in space and time, and all the relations between sense-data which result from comparison or from considering one as the cause of the other or in any other way.
His chief reason in favour of this view is that we seem to have _a priori_ knowledge as to space and time and causality and comparison, but not as to the actual crude material of sensation.
We can be sure, he says, that anything we shall ever experience must show the characteristics affirmed of it in our _a priori_ knowledge, because these characteristics are due to our own nature, and therefore nothing can ever come into our experience without acquiring these characteristics.
The physical object, which he calls the 'thing in itself',(1) he regards as essentially unknowable; what can be known is the object as we have it in experience, which he calls the 'phenomenon'.
The phenomenon, being a joint product of us and the thing in itself, is sure to have those characteristics which are due to us, and is therefore sure to conform to our _a priori_ knowledge.
Hence this knowledge, though true of all actual and possible experience, must not be supposed to apply outside experience.
Thus in spite of the existence of _a priori_ knowledge, we cannot know anything about the thing in itself or about what is not an actual or possible object of experience.
In this way he tries to reconcile and harmonize the contentions of the rationalists with the arguments of the empiricists. (1) Kant's 'thing in itself' is identical in _definition_ with the physical object, namely, it is the cause of sensations.
In the properties deduced from the definition it is not identical, since Kant held (in spite of some inconsistency as regards cause) that we can know that none of the categories are applicable to the 'thing in itself'.
Apart from minor grounds on which Kant's philosophy may be criticized, there is one main objection which seems fatal to any attempt to deal with the problem of _a priori_ knowledge by his method.
The thing to be accounted for is our certainty that the facts must always conform to logic and arithmetic.
To say that logic and arithmetic are contributed by us does not account for this.
Our nature is as much a fact of the existing world as anything, and there can be no certainty that it will remain constant.
This possibility seems never to have occurred to him, yet it is one which utterly destroys the certainty and universality which he is anxious to vindicate for arithmetical propositions.
It is true that this possibility, formally, is inconsistent with the Kantian view that time itself is a form imposed by the subject upon phenomena, so that our real Self is not in time and has no to-morrow.
But he will still have to suppose that the time-order of phenomena is determined by characteristics of what is behind phenomena, and this suffices for the substance of our argument.
Reflection, moreover, seems to make it clear that, if there is any truth in our arithmetical beliefs, they must apply to things equally whether we think of them or not.
Two physical objects and two other physical objects must make four physical objects, even if physical objects cannot be experienced.
To assert this is certainly within the scope of what we mean when we state that two and two are four.
Its truth is just as indubitable as the truth of the assertion that two phenomena and two other phenomena make four phenomena.
Thus Kant's solution unduly limits the scope of _a priori_ propositions, in addition to failing in the attempt at explaining their certainty.
Apart from the special doctrines advocated by Kant, it is very common among philosophers to regard what is _a priori_ as in some sense mental, as concerned rather with the way we must think than with any fact of the outer world.
We noted in the preceding chapter the three principles commonly called 'laws of thought'.
The view which led to their being so named is a natural one, but there are strong reasons for thinking that it is erroneous.
Let us take as an illustration the law of contradiction.
This is commonly stated in the form 'Nothing can both be and not be', which is intended to express the fact that nothing can at once have and not have a given quality.
Thus, for example, if a tree is a beech it cannot also be not a beech; if my table is rectangular it cannot also be not rectangular, and so on.
Now what makes it natural to call this principle a law of _thought_ is that it is by thought rather than by outward observation that we persuade ourselves of its necessary truth.
When we have seen that a tree is a beech, we do not need to look again in order to ascertain whether it is also not a beech; thought alone makes us know that this is impossible.
But the conclusion that the law of contradiction is a law of _thought_ is nevertheless erroneous.
What we believe, when we believe the law of contradiction, is not that the mind is so made that it must believe the law of contradiction. _This_ belief is a subsequent result of psychological reflection, which presupposes the belief in the law of contradiction.
The belief in the law of contradiction is a belief about things, not only about thoughts.
Thus the law of contradiction is about things, and not merely about thoughts; and although belief in the law of contradiction is a thought, the law of contradiction itself is not a thought, but a fact concerning the things in the world.
If this, which we believe when we believe the law of contradiction, were not true of the things in the world, the fact that we were compelled to _think_ it true would not save the law of contradiction from being false; and this shows that the law is not a law of _thought_.
A similar argument applies to any other _a priori_ judgement.
When we judge that two and two are four, we are not making a judgement about our thoughts, but about all actual or possible couples.
The fact that our minds are so constituted as to believe that two and two are four, though it is true, is emphatically not what we assert when we assert that two and two are four.
And no fact about the constitution of our minds could make it _true_ that two and two are four.
Thus our _a priori_ knowledge, if it is not erroneous, is not merely knowledge about the constitution of our minds, but is applicable to whatever the world may contain, both what is mental and what is non-mental.
The fact seems to be that all our _a priori_ knowledge is concerned with entities which do not, properly speaking, _exist_, either in the mental or in the physical world.
These entities are such as can be named by parts of speech which are not substantives; they are such entities as qualities and relations.
Suppose, for instance, that I am in my room.
Yet obviously the word 'in' has a meaning; it denotes a relation which holds between me and my room.
This relation is something, although we cannot say that it exists _in the same sense_ in which I and my room exist.
The relation 'in' is something which we can think about and understand, for, if we could not understand it, we could not understand the sentence 'I am in my room'.
Many philosophers, following Kant, have maintained that relations are the work of the mind, that things in themselves have no relations, but that the mind brings them together in one act of thought and thus produces the relations which it judges them to have.
This view, however, seems open to objections similar to those which we urged before against Kant.
It seems plain that it is not thought which produces the truth of the proposition 'I am in my room'.
It may be true that an earwig is in my room, even if neither I nor the earwig nor any one else is aware of this truth; for this truth concerns only the earwig and the room, and does not depend upon anything else.
Thus relations, as we shall see more fully in the next chapter, must be placed in a world which is neither mental nor physical.
This world is of great importance to philosophy, and in particular to the problems of _a priori_ knowledge.
In the next chapter we shall proceed to develop its nature and its bearing upon the questions with which we have been dealing.
THE WORLD OF UNIVERSALS At the end of the preceding chapter we saw that such entities as relations appear to have a being which is in some way different from that of physical objects, and also different from that of minds and from that of sense-data.
In the present chapter we have to consider what is the nature of this kind of being, and also what objects there are that have this kind of being.
We will begin with the latter question.
The problem with which we are now concerned is a very old one, since it was brought into philosophy by Plato.
Plato's 'theory of ideas' is an attempt to solve this very problem, and in my opinion it is one of the most successful attempts hitherto made.
The theory to be advocated in what follows is largely Plato's, with merely such modifications as time has shown to be necessary.
Let us consider, say, such a notion as _justice_.
If we ask ourselves what justice is, it is natural to proceed by considering this, that, and the other just act, with a view to discovering what they have in common.
They must all, in some sense, partake of a common nature, which will be found in whatever is just and in nothing else.
This common nature, in virtue of which they are all just, will be justice itself, the pure essence the admixture of which with facts of ordinary life produces the multiplicity of just acts.
Similarly with any other word which may be applicable to common facts, such as 'whiteness' for example.
The word will be applicable to a number of particular things because they all participate in a common nature or essence.
This pure essence is what Plato calls an 'idea' or 'form'. (It must not be supposed that 'ideas', in his sense, exist in minds, though they may be apprehended by minds.) The 'idea' _justice_ is not identical with anything that is just: it is something other than particular things, which particular things partake of.
Not being particular, it cannot itself exist in the world of sense.
Moreover it is not fleeting or changeable like the things of sense: it is eternally itself, immutable and indestructible.
Thus Plato is led to a supra-sensible world, more real than the common world of sense, the unchangeable world of ideas, which alone gives to the world of sense whatever pale reflection of reality may belong to it.
The truly real world, for Plato, is the world of ideas; for whatever we may attempt to say about things in the world of sense, we can only succeed in saying that they participate in such and such ideas, which, therefore, constitute all their character.
Hence it is easy to pass on into a mysticism.
We may hope, in a mystic illumination, to see the ideas as we see objects of sense; and we may imagine that the ideas exist in heaven.
These mystical developments are very natural, but the basis of the theory is in logic, and it is as based in logic that we have to consider it.
The word 'idea' has acquired, in the course of time, many associations which are quite misleading when applied to Plato's 'ideas'.
We shall therefore use the word 'universal' instead of the word 'idea', to describe what Plato meant.
The essence of the sort of entity that Plato meant is that it is opposed to the particular things that are given in sensation.
We speak of whatever is given in sensation, or is of the same nature as things given in sensation, as a _particular_; by opposition to this, a _universal_ will be anything which may be shared by many particulars, and has those characteristics which, as we saw, distinguish justice and whiteness from just acts and white things.
When we examine common words, we find that, broadly speaking, proper names stand for particulars, while other substantives, adjectives, prepositions, and verbs stand for universals.
Pronouns stand for particulars, but are ambiguous: it is only by the context or the circumstances that we know what particulars they stand for.
The word 'now' stands for a particular, namely the present moment; but like pronouns, it stands for an ambiguous particular, because the present is always changing.
It will be seen that no sentence can be made up without at least one word which denotes a universal.
The nearest approach would be some such statement as 'I like this'.
But even here the word 'like' denotes a universal, for I may like other things, and other people may like things.
Thus all truths involve universals, and all knowledge of truths involves acquaintance with universals.
Seeing that nearly all the words to be found in the dictionary stand for universals, it is strange that hardly anybody except students of philosophy ever realizes that there are such entities as universals.
We do not naturally dwell upon those words in a sentence which do not stand for particulars; and if we are forced to dwell upon a word which stands for a universal, we naturally think of it as standing for some one of the particulars that come under the universal.
Hence we succeed in avoiding all notice of universals as such, until the study of philosophy forces them upon our attention.
Even among philosophers, we may say, broadly, that only those universals which are named by adjectives or substantives have been much or often recognized, while those named by verbs and prepositions have been usually overlooked.
This omission has had a very great effect upon philosophy; it is hardly too much to say that most metaphysics, since Spinoza, has been largely determined by it.
The way this has occurred is, in outline, as follows: Speaking generally, adjectives and common nouns express qualities or properties of single things, whereas prepositions and verbs tend to express relations between two or more things.
Thus the neglect of prepositions and verbs led to the belief that every proposition can be regarded as attributing a property to a single thing, rather than as expressing a relation between two or more things.
Hence it was supposed that, ultimately, there can be no such entities as relations between things.
Hence either there can be only one thing in the universe, or, if there are many things, they cannot possibly interact in any way, since any interaction would be a relation, and relations are impossible.
The first of these views, advocated by Spinoza and held in our own day by Bradley and many other philosophers, is called _monism_; the second, advocated by Leibniz but not very common nowadays, is called _monadism_, because each of the isolated things is called a _monad_.
Both these opposing philosophies, interesting as they are, result, in my opinion, from an undue attention to one sort of universals, namely the sort represented by adjectives and substantives rather than by verbs and prepositions.
As a matter of fact, if any one were anxious to deny altogether that there are such things as universals, we should find that we cannot strictly prove that there are such entities as _qualities_, i.e. the universals represented by adjectives and substantives, whereas we can prove that there must be _relations_, i.e. the sort of universals generally represented by verbs and prepositions.
Let us take in illustration the universal _whiteness_.
If we believe that there is such a universal, we shall say that things are white because they have the quality of whiteness.
This view, however, was strenuously denied by Berkeley and Hume, who have been followed in this by later empiricists.
The form which their denial took was to deny that there are such things as 'abstract ideas '.
When we want to think of whiteness, they said, we form an image of some particular white thing, and reason concerning this particular, taking care not to deduce anything concerning it which we cannot see to be equally true of any other white thing.
As an account of our actual mental processes, this is no doubt largely true.
In geometry, for example, when we wish to prove something about all triangles, we draw a particular triangle and reason about it, taking care not to use any characteristic which it does not share with other triangles.
The beginner, in order to avoid error, often finds it useful to draw several triangles, as unlike each other as possible, in order to make sure that his reasoning is equally applicable to all of them.
But a difficulty emerges as soon as we ask ourselves how we know that a thing is white or a triangle.
If we wish to avoid the universals _whiteness_ and _triangularity_, we shall choose some particular patch of white or some particular triangle, and say that anything is white or a triangle if it has the right sort of resemblance to our chosen particular.
But then the resemblance required will have to be a universal.
Since there are many white things, the resemblance must hold between many pairs of particular white things; and this is the characteristic of a universal.
It will be useless to say that there is a different resemblance for each pair, for then we shall have to say that these resemblances resemble each other, and thus at last we shall be forced to admit resemblance as a universal.
The relation of resemblance, therefore, must be a true universal.
And having been forced to admit this universal, we find that it is no longer worth while to invent difficult and unplausible theories to avoid the admission of such universals as whiteness and triangularity.
Berkeley and Hume failed to perceive this refutation of their rejection of 'abstract ideas', because, like their adversaries, they only thought of _qualities_, and altogether ignored _relations_ as universals.
We have therefore here another respect in which the rationalists appear to have been in the right as against the empiricists, although, owing to the neglect or denial of relations, the deductions made by rationalists were, if anything, more apt to be mistaken than those made by empiricists.
Having now seen that there must be such entities as universals, the next point to be proved is that their being is not merely mental.
By this is meant that whatever being belongs to them is independent of their being thought of or in any way apprehended by minds.
We have already touched on this subject at the end of the preceding chapter, but we must now consider more fully what sort of being it is that belongs to universals.
Consider such a proposition as 'Edinburgh is north of London'.
Here we have a relation between two places, and it seems plain that the relation subsists independently of our knowledge of it.
When we come to know that Edinburgh is north of London, we come to know something which has to do only with Edinburgh and London: we do not cause the truth of the proposition by coming to know it, on the contrary we merely apprehend a fact which was there before we knew it.
The part of the earth's surface where Edinburgh stands would be north of the part where London stands, even if there were no human being to know about north and south, and even if there were no minds at all in the universe.
This is, of course, denied by many philosophers, either for Berkeley's reasons or for Kant's.
But we have already considered these reasons, and decided that they are inadequate.
We may therefore now assume it to be true that nothing mental is presupposed in the fact that Edinburgh is north of London.
But this fact involves the relation 'north of', which is a universal; and it would be impossible for the whole fact to involve nothing mental if the relation 'north of', which is a constituent part of the fact, did involve anything mental.
Hence we must admit that the relation, like the terms it relates, is not dependent upon thought, but belongs to the independent world which thought apprehends but does not create.
This conclusion, however, is met by the difficulty that the relation 'north of' does not seem to _exist_ in the same sense in which Edinburgh and London exist.
If we ask 'Where and when does this relation exist?' the answer must be 'Nowhere and nowhen'.
There is no place or time where we can find the relation 'north of'.
It does not exist in Edinburgh any more than in London, for it relates the two and is neutral as between them.
Nor can we say that it exists at any particular time.
Now everything that can be apprehended by the senses or by introspection exists at some particular time.
Hence the relation 'north of' is radically different from such things.
It is neither in space nor in time, neither material nor mental; yet it is something.
It is largely the very peculiar kind of being that belongs to universals which has led many people to suppose that they are really mental.
We can think _of_ a universal, and our thinking then exists in a perfectly ordinary sense, like any other mental act.
Suppose, for example, that we are thinking of whiteness.
Then _in one sense_ it may be said that whiteness is 'in our mind'.
We have here the same ambiguity as we noted in discussing Berkeley in Chapter IV.
In the strict sense, it is not whiteness that is in our mind, but the act of thinking of whiteness.
The connected ambiguity in the word 'idea', which we noted at the same time, also causes confusion here.
In one sense of this word, namely the sense in which it denotes the _object_ of an act of thought, whiteness is an 'idea'.
Hence, if the ambiguity is not guarded against, we may come to think that whiteness is an 'idea' in the other sense, i.e. an act of thought; and thus we come to think that whiteness is mental.
But in so thinking, we rob it of its essential quality of universality.
One man's act of thought is necessarily a different thing from another man's; one man's act of thought at one time is necessarily a different thing from the same man's act of thought at another time.
Hence, if whiteness were the thought as opposed to its object, no two different men could think of it, and no one man could think of it twice.
That which many different thoughts of whiteness have in common is their _object_, and this object is different from all of them.
Thus universals are not thoughts, though when known they are the objects of thoughts.
We shall find it convenient only to speak of things _existing_ when they are in time, that is to say, when we can point to some time at which they exist (not excluding the possibility of their existing at all times).
Thus thoughts and feelings, minds and physical objects exist.
But universals do not exist in this sense; we shall say that they _subsist_ or _have being_, where 'being' is opposed to 'existence' as being timeless.
The world of universals, therefore, may also be described as the world of being.
The world of being is unchangeable, rigid, exact, delightful to the mathematician, the logician, the builder of metaphysical systems, and all who love perfection more than life.
The world of existence is fleeting, vague, without sharp boundaries, without any clear plan or arrangement, but it contains all thoughts and feelings, all the data of sense, and all physical objects, everything that can do either good or harm, everything that makes any difference to the value of life and the world.
According to our temperaments, we shall prefer the contemplation of the one or of the other.
The one we do not prefer will probably seem to us a pale shadow of the one we prefer, and hardly worthy to be regarded as in any sense real.
But the truth is that both have the same claim on our impartial attention, both are real, and both are important to the metaphysician.
Indeed no sooner have we distinguished the two worlds than it becomes necessary to consider their relations.
But first of all we must examine our knowledge of universals.
This consideration will occupy us in the following chapter, where we shall find that it solves the problem of _a priori_ knowledge, from which we were first led to consider universals.
ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF UNIVERSALS In regard to one man's knowledge at a given time, universals, like particulars, may be divided into those known by acquaintance, those known only by description, and those not known either by acquaintance or by description.
Let us consider first the knowledge of universals by acquaintance.
It is obvious, to begin with, that we are acquainted with such universals as white, red, black, sweet, sour, loud, hard, etc., i.e. with qualities which are exemplified in sense-data.
When we see a white patch, we are acquainted, in the first instance, with the particular patch; but by seeing many white patches, we easily learn to abstract the whiteness which they all have in common, and in learning to do this we are learning to be acquainted with whiteness.
A similar process will make us acquainted with any other universal of the same sort.
Universals of this sort may be called 'sensible qualities'.
They can be apprehended with less effort of abstraction than any others, and they seem less removed from particulars than other universals are.
We come next to relations.
The easiest relations to apprehend are those which hold between the different parts of a single complex sense-datum.
For example, I can see at a glance the whole of the page on which I am writing; thus the whole page is included in one sense-datum.
But I perceive that some parts of the page are to the left of other parts, and some parts are above other parts.
In this way I become acquainted with the universal relation.
In like manner I become aware of the relation of before and after in time.
Suppose I hear a chime of bells: when the last bell of the chime sounds, I can retain the whole chime before my mind, and I can perceive that the earlier bells came before the later ones.
Also in memory I perceive that what I am remembering came before the present time.
From either of these sources I can abstract the universal relation of before and after, just as I abstracted the universal relation 'being to the left of'.
Thus time-relations, like space-relations, are among those with which we are acquainted.
Another relation with which we become acquainted in much the same way is resemblance.
If I see simultaneously two shades of green, I can see that they resemble each other; if I also see a shade of red: at the same time, I can see that the two greens have more resemblance to each other than either has to the red.
In this way I become acquainted with the universal _resemblance_ or _similarity_.
Between universals, as between particulars, there are relations of which we may be immediately aware.
We have just seen that we can perceive that the resemblance between two shades of green is greater than the resemblance between a shade of red and a shade of green.
Here we are dealing with a relation, namely 'greater than', between two relations.
Our knowledge of such relations, though it requires more power of abstraction than is required for perceiving the qualities of sense-data, appears to be equally immediate, and (at least in some cases) equally indubitable.
Thus there is immediate knowledge concerning universals as well as concerning sense-data.
Returning now to the problem of _a priori_ knowledge, which we left unsolved when we began the consideration of universals, we find ourselves in a position to deal with it in a much more satisfactory manner than was possible before.
Let us revert to the proposition 'two and two are four'.
It is fairly obvious, in view of what has been said, that this proposition states a relation between the universal 'two' and the universal 'four'.
This suggests a proposition which we shall now endeavour to establish: namely, _All _a priori_ knowledge deals exclusively with the relations of universals_.
This proposition is of great importance, and goes a long way towards solving our previous difficulties concerning _a priori_ knowledge.
The only case in which it might seem, at first sight, as if our proposition were untrue, is the case in which an _a priori_ proposition states that _all_ of one class of particulars belong to some other class, or (what comes to the same thing) that _all_ particulars having some one property also have some other.
In this case it might seem as though we were dealing with the particulars that have the property rather than with the property.
The proposition 'two and two are four' is really a case in point, for this may be stated in the form 'any two and any other two are four', or 'any collection formed of two twos is a collection of four'.
If we can show that such statements as this really deal only with universals, our proposition may be regarded as proved.
One way of discovering what a proposition deals with is to ask ourselves what words we must understand--in other words, what objects we must be acquainted with--in order to see what the proposition means.
As soon as we see what the proposition means, even if we do not yet know whether it is true or false, it is evident that we must have acquaintance with whatever is really dealt with by the proposition.
By applying this test, it appears that many propositions which might seem to be concerned with particulars are really concerned only with universals.
In the special case of 'two and two are four', even when we interpret it as meaning 'any collection formed of two twos is a collection of four', it is plain that we can understand the proposition, i.e. we can see what it is that it asserts, as soon as we know what is meant by 'collection' and 'two' and 'four'.
It is quite unnecessary to know all the couples in the world: if it were necessary, obviously we could never understand the proposition, since the couples are infinitely numerous and therefore cannot all be known to us.
Thus although our general statement _implies_ statements about particular couples, _as soon as we know that there are such particular couples_, yet it does not itself assert or imply that there are such particular couples, and thus fails to make any statement whatever about any actual particular couple.
The statement made is about 'couple', the universal, and not about this or that couple.
Thus the statement 'two and two are four' deals exclusively with universals, and therefore may be known by anybody who is acquainted with the universals concerned and can perceive the relation between them which the statement asserts.
It must be taken as a fact, discovered by reflecting upon our knowledge, that we have the power of sometimes perceiving such relations between universals, and therefore of sometimes knowing general _a priori_ propositions such as those of arithmetic and logic.
The thing that seemed mysterious, when we formerly considered such knowledge, was that it seemed to anticipate and control experience.
This, however, we can now see to have been an error. _No_ fact concerning anything capable of being experienced can be known independently of experience.
We know _a priori_ that two things and two other things together make four things, but we do _not_ know _a priori_ that if Brown and Jones are two, and Robinson and Smith are two, then Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are four.
The reason is that this proposition cannot be understood at all unless we know that there are such people as Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith, and this we can only know by experience.
Hence, although our general proposition is _a priori_, all its applications to actual particulars involve experience and therefore contain an empirical element.
In this way what seemed mysterious in our _a priori_ knowledge is seen to have been based upon an error.
It will serve to make the point clearer if we contrast our genuine _a priori_ judgement with an empirical generalization, such as 'all men are mortals'.
Here as before, we can _understand_ what the proposition means as soon as we understand the universals involved, namely _man_ and _mortal_.
It is obviously unnecessary to have an individual acquaintance with the whole human race in order to understand what our proposition means.
Thus the difference between an _a priori_ general proposition and an empirical generalization does not come in the _meaning_ of the proposition; it comes in the nature of the _evidence_ for it.
In the empirical case, the evidence consists in the particular instances.
We believe that all men are mortal because we know that there are innumerable instances of men dying, and no instances of their living beyond a certain age.
We do not believe it because we see a connexion between the universal _man_ and the universal _mortal_.
It is true that if physiology can prove, assuming the general laws that govern living bodies, that no living organism can last for ever, that gives a connexion between _man_ and _mortality_ which would enable us to assert our proposition without appealing to the special evidence of _men_ dying.
But that only means that our generalization has been subsumed under a wider generalization, for which the evidence is still of the same kind, though more extensive.
The progress of science is constantly producing such subsumptions, and therefore giving a constantly wider inductive basis for scientific generalizations.
But although this gives a greater _degree_ of certainty, it does not give a different _kind_: the ultimate ground remains inductive, i.e. derived from instances, and not an _a priori_ connexion of universals such as we have in logic and arithmetic.
Two opposite points are to be observed concerning _a priori_ general propositions.
The first is that, if many particular instances are known, our general proposition may be arrived at in the first instance by induction, and the connexion of universals may be only subsequently perceived.
For example, it is known that if we draw perpendiculars to the sides of a triangle from the opposite angles, all three perpendiculars meet in a point.
It would be quite possible to be first led to this proposition by actually drawing perpendiculars in many cases, and finding that they always met in a point; this experience might lead us to look for the general proof and find it.
Such cases are common in the experience of every mathematician.
The other point is more interesting, and of more philosophical importance.
It is, that we may sometimes know a general proposition in cases where we do not know a single instance of it.
Take such a case as the following: We know that any two numbers can be multiplied together, and will give a third called their _product_.
We know that all pairs of integers the product of which is less than 100 have been actually multiplied together, and the value of the product recorded in the multiplication table.
But we also know that the number of integers is infinite, and that only a finite number of pairs of integers ever have been or ever will be thought of by human beings.
Hence it follows that there are pairs of integers which never have been and never will be thought of by human beings, and that all of them deal with integers the product of which is over 100.
Hence we arrive at the proposition: 'All products of two integers, which never have been and never will be thought of by any human being, are over 100.' Here is a general proposition of which the truth is undeniable, and yet, from the very nature of the case, we can never give an instance; because any two numbers we may think of are excluded by the terms of the proposition.
This possibility, of knowledge of general propositions of which no instance can be given, is often denied, because it is not perceived that the knowledge of such propositions only requires a knowledge of the relations of universals, and does not require any knowledge of instances of the universals in question.
Yet the knowledge of such general propositions is quite vital to a great deal of what is generally admitted to be known.
For example, we saw, in our early chapters, that knowledge of physical objects, as opposed to sense-data, is only obtained by an inference, and that they are not things with which we are acquainted.
Hence we can never know any proposition of the form 'this is a physical object', where 'this' is something immediately known.
It follows that all our knowledge concerning physical objects is such that no actual instance can be given.
We can give instances of the associated sense-data, but we cannot give instances of the actual physical objects.
Hence our knowledge as to physical objects depends throughout upon this possibility of general knowledge where no instance can be given.
And the same applies to our knowledge of other people's minds, or of any other class of things of which no instance is known to us by acquaintance.
We may now take a survey of the sources of our knowledge, as they have appeared in the course of our analysis.
We have first to distinguish knowledge of things and knowledge of truths.
In each there are two kinds, one immediate and one derivative.
Our immediate knowledge of things, which we called _acquaintance_, consists of two sorts, according as the things known are particulars or universals.
Among particulars, we have acquaintance with sense-data and (probably) with ourselves.
Among universals, there seems to be no principle by which we can decide which can be known by acquaintance, but it is clear that among those that can be so known are sensible qualities, relations of space and time, similarity, and certain abstract logical universals.
Our derivative knowledge of things, which we call knowledge by _description_, always involves both acquaintance with something and knowledge of truths.
Our immediate knowledge of _truths_ may be called _intuitive_ knowledge, and the truths so known may be called _self-evident_ truths.
Among such truths are included those which merely state what is given in sense, and also certain abstract logical and arithmetical principles, and (though with less certainty) some ethical propositions.
Our _derivative_ knowledge of truths consists of everything that we can deduce from self-evident truths by the use of self-evident principles of deduction.
If the above account is correct, all our knowledge of truths depends upon our intuitive knowledge.
It therefore becomes important to consider the nature and scope of intuitive knowledge, in much the same way as, at an earlier stage, we considered the nature and scope of knowledge by acquaintance.
But knowledge of truths raises a further problem, which does not arise in regard to knowledge of things, namely the problem of _error_.
Some of our beliefs turn out to be erroneous, and therefore it becomes necessary to consider how, if at all, we can distinguish knowledge from error.
This problem does not arise with regard to knowledge by acquaintance, for, whatever may be the object of acquaintance, even in dreams and hallucinations, there is no error involved so long as we do not go beyond the immediate object: error can only arise when we regard the immediate object, i.e. the sense-datum, as the mark of some physical object.
Thus the problems connected with knowledge of truths are more difficult than those connected with knowledge of things.
As the first of the problems connected with knowledge of truths, let us examine the nature and scope of our intuitive judgements.
ON INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE There is a common impression that everything that we believe ought to be capable of proof, or at least of being shown to be highly probable.
It is felt by many that a belief for which no reason can be given is an unreasonable belief.
Almost all our common beliefs are either inferred, or capable of being inferred, from other beliefs which may be regarded as giving the reason for them.
As a rule, the reason has been forgotten, or has even never been consciously present to our minds.
Few of us ever ask ourselves, for example, what reason there is to suppose the food we are just going to eat will not turn out to be poison.
Yet we feel, when challenged, that a perfectly good reason could be found, even if we are not ready with it at the moment.
And in this belief we are usually justified.
But let us imagine some insistent Socrates, who, whatever reason we give him, continues to demand a reason for the reason.
We must sooner or later, and probably before very long, be driven to a point where we cannot find any further reason, and where it becomes almost certain that no further reason is even theoretically discoverable.
Starting with the common beliefs of daily life, we can be driven back from point to point, until we come to some general principle, or some instance of a general principle, which seems luminously evident, and is not itself capable of being deduced from anything more evident.
In most questions of daily life, such as whether our food is likely to be nourishing and not poisonous, we shall be driven back to the inductive principle, which we discussed in Chapter VI.
The principle itself is constantly used in our reasoning, sometimes consciously, sometimes unconsciously; but there is no reasoning which, starting from some simpler self-evident principle, leads us to the principle of induction as its conclusion.
And the same holds for other logical principles.
Their truth is evident to us, and we employ them in constructing demonstrations; but they themselves, or at least some of them, are incapable of demonstration.
Self-evidence, however, is not confined to those among general principles which are incapable of proof.
When a certain number of logical principles have been admitted, the rest can be deduced from them; but the propositions deduced are often just as self-evident as those that were assumed without proof.
All arithmetic, moreover, can be deduced from the general principles of logic, yet the simple propositions of arithmetic, such as 'two and two are four', are just as self-evident as the principles of logic.
It would seem, also, though this is more disputable, that there are some self-evident ethical principles, such as 'we ought to pursue what is good'.
It should be observed that, in all cases of general principles, particular instances, dealing with familiar things, are more evident than the general principle.
For example, the law of contradiction states that nothing can both have a certain property and not have it.
Only those who are practised in dealing with abstractions can readily grasp a general principle without the help of instances.
In addition to general principles, the other kind of self-evident truths are those immediately derived from sensation.
We will call such truths 'truths of perception', and the judgements expressing them we will call 'judgements of perception'.
But here a certain amount of care is required in getting at the precise nature of the truths that are self-evident.
A particular patch of colour which I see, for example, simply exists: it is not the sort of thing that is true or false.
It is true that there is such a patch, true that it has a certain shape and degree of brightness, true that it is surrounded by certain other colours.
But the patch itself, like everything else in the world of sense, is of a radically different kind from the things that are true or false, and therefore cannot properly be said to be _true_.
Thus whatever self-evident truths may be obtained from our senses must be different from the sense-data from which they are obtained.
It would seem that there are two kinds of self-evident truths of perception, though perhaps in the last analysis the two kinds may coalesce.
First, there is the kind which simply asserts the _existence_ of the sense-datum, without in any way analysing it.
We see a patch of red, and we judge 'there is such-and-such a patch of red', or more strictly 'there is that'; this is one kind of intuitive judgement of perception.
The other kind arises when the object of sense is complex, and we subject it to some degree of analysis.
If, for instance, we see a _round_ patch of red, we may judge 'that patch of red is round'.
This is again a judgement of perception, but it differs from our previous kind.
Our judgement analyses the datum into colour and shape, and then recombines them by stating that the red colour is round in shape.
Another example of this kind of judgement is 'this is to the right of that', where 'this' and 'that' are seen simultaneously.
In this kind of judgement the sense-datum contains constituents which have some relation to each other, and the judgement asserts that these constituents have this relation.
Another class of intuitive judgements, analogous to those of sense and yet quite distinct from them, are judgements of _memory_.
There is some danger of confusion as to the nature of memory, owing to the fact that memory of an object is apt to be accompanied by an image of the object, and yet the image cannot be what constitutes memory.
This is easily seen by merely noticing that the image is in the present, whereas what is remembered is known to be in the past.
Moreover, we are certainly able to some extent to compare our image with the object remembered, so that we often know, within somewhat wide limits, how far our image is accurate; but this would be impossible, unless the object, as opposed to the image, were in some way before the mind.
Thus the essence of memory is not constituted by the image, but by having immediately before the mind an object which is recognized as past.
But for the fact of memory in this sense, we should not know that there ever was a past at all, nor should we be able to understand the word 'past', any more than a man born blind can understand the word 'light'.
Thus there must be intuitive judgements of memory, and it is upon them, ultimately, that all our knowledge of the past depends.
The case of memory, however, raises a difficulty, for it is notoriously fallacious, and thus throws doubt on the trustworthiness of intuitive judgements in general.
This difficulty is no light one.
But let us first narrow its scope as far as possible.
Broadly speaking, memory is trustworthy in proportion to the vividness of the experience and to its nearness in time.
If the house next door was struck by lightning half a minute ago, my memory of what I saw and heard will be so reliable that it would be preposterous to doubt whether there had been a flash at all.
And the same applies to less vivid experiences, so long as they are recent.
I am absolutely certain that half a minute ago I was sitting in the same chair in which I am sitting now.
Going backward over the day, I find things of which I am quite certain, other things of which I am almost certain, other things of which I can become certain by thought and by calling up attendant circumstances, and some things of which I am by no means certain.
I am quite certain that I ate my breakfast this morning, but if I were as indifferent to my breakfast as a philosopher should be, I should be doubtful.
As to the conversation at breakfast, I can recall some of it easily, some with an effort, some only with a large element of doubt, and some not at all.
Thus there is a continual gradation in the degree of self-evidence of what I remember, and a corresponding gradation in the trustworthiness of my memory.
Thus the first answer to the difficulty of fallacious memory is to say that memory has degrees of self-evidence, and that these correspond to the degrees of its trustworthiness, reaching a limit of perfect self-evidence and perfect trustworthiness in our memory of events which are recent and vivid.
It is probable that, in these cases, what is really remembered, in the sense of being immediately before the mind, is something other than what is falsely believed in, though something generally associated with it.
George IV is said to have at last believed that he was at the battle of Waterloo, because he had so often said that he was.
It would seem that cases of fallacious memory can probably all be dealt with in this way, i.e. they can be shown to be not cases of memory in the strict sense at all.
One important point about self-evidence is made clear by the case of memory, and that is, that self-evidence has degrees: it is not a quality which is simply present or absent, but a quality which may be more or less present, in gradations ranging from absolute certainty down to an almost imperceptible faintness.
Truths of perception and some of the principles of logic have the very highest degree of self-evidence; truths of immediate memory have an almost equally high degree.
The inductive principle has less self-evidence than some of the other principles of logic, such as 'what follows from a true premiss must be true'.
Memories have a diminishing self-evidence as they become remoter and fainter; the truths of logic and mathematics have (broadly speaking) less self-evidence as they become more complicated.
Judgements of intrinsic ethical or aesthetic value are apt to have some self-evidence, but not much.
Degrees of self-evidence are important in the theory of knowledge, since, if propositions may (as seems likely) have some degree of self-evidence without being true, it will not be necessary to abandon all connexion between self-evidence and truth, but merely to say that, where there is a conflict, the more self-evident proposition is to be retained and the less self-evident rejected.
It seems, however, highly probable that two different notions are combined in 'self-evidence' as above explained; that one of them, which corresponds to the highest degree of self-evidence, is really an infallible guarantee of truth, while the other, which corresponds to all the other degrees, does not give an infallible guarantee, but only a greater or less presumption.
This, however, is only a suggestion, which we cannot as yet develop further.
After we have dealt with the nature of truth, we shall return to the subject of self-evidence, in connexion with the distinction between knowledge and error.
TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD Our knowledge of truths, unlike our knowledge of things, has an opposite, namely _error_.
So far as things are concerned, we may know them or not know them, but there is no positive state of mind which can be described as erroneous knowledge of things, so long, at any rate, as we confine ourselves to knowledge by acquaintance.
Whatever we are acquainted with must be something; we may draw wrong inferences from our acquaintance, but the acquaintance itself cannot be deceptive.
Thus there is no dualism as regards acquaintance.
But as regards knowledge of truths, there is a dualism.
We know that on very many subjects different people hold different and incompatible opinions: hence some beliefs must be erroneous.
Since erroneous beliefs are often held just as strongly as true beliefs, it becomes a difficult question how they are to be distinguished from true beliefs.
How are we to know, in a given case, that our belief is not erroneous?
This is a question of the very greatest difficulty, to which no completely satisfactory answer is possible.
There is, however, a preliminary question which is rather less difficult, and that is: What do we _mean_ by truth and falsehood?
It is this preliminary question which is to be considered in this chapter.
In this chapter we are not asking how we can know whether a belief is true or false: we are asking what is meant by the question whether a belief is true or false.
There are three points to observe in the attempt to discover the nature of truth, three requisites which any theory must fulfil. (1) Our theory of truth must be such as to admit of its opposite, falsehood.
A good many philosophers have failed adequately to satisfy this condition: they have constructed theories according to which all our thinking ought to have been true, and have then had the greatest difficulty in finding a place for falsehood.
In this respect our theory of belief must differ from our theory of acquaintance, since in the case of acquaintance it was not necessary to take account of any opposite. (2) It seems fairly evident that if there were no beliefs there could be no falsehood, and no truth either, in the sense in which truth is correlative to falsehood.
If we imagine a world of mere matter, there would be no room for falsehood in such a world, and although it would contain what may be called 'facts', it would not contain any truths, in the sense in which truths are things of the same kind as falsehoods.
In fact, truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs and statements: hence a world of mere matter, since it would contain no beliefs or statements, would also contain no truth or falsehood. (3) But, as against what we have just said, it is to be observed that the truth or falsehood of a belief always depends upon something which lies outside the belief itself.
If I believe that Charles I died on the scaffold, I believe truly, not because of any intrinsic quality of my belief, which could be discovered by merely examining the belief, but because of an historical event which happened two and a half centuries ago.
If I believe that Charles I died in his bed, I believe falsely: no degree of vividness in my belief, or of care in arriving at it, prevents it from being false, again because of what happened long ago, and not because of any intrinsic property of my belief.
Hence, although truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs, they are properties dependent upon the relations of the beliefs to other things, not upon any internal quality of the beliefs.
The third of the above requisites leads us to adopt the view--which has on the whole been commonest among philosophers--that truth consists in some form of correspondence between belief and fact.
It is, however, by no means an easy matter to discover a form of correspondence to which there are no irrefutable objections.
By this partly--and partly by the feeling that, if truth consists in a correspondence of thought with something outside thought, thought can never know when truth has been attained--many philosophers have been led to try to find some definition of truth which shall not consist in relation to something wholly outside belief.
The most important attempt at a definition of this sort is the theory that truth consists in _coherence_.
It is said that the mark of falsehood is failure to cohere in the body of our beliefs, and that it is the essence of a truth to form part of the completely rounded system which is The Truth.
There is, however, a great difficulty in this view, or rather two great difficulties.
The first is that there is no reason to suppose that only _one_ coherent body of beliefs is possible.
It may be that, with sufficient imagination, a novelist might invent a past for the world that would perfectly fit on to what we know, and yet be quite different from the real past.
In more scientific matters, it is certain that there are often two or more hypotheses which account for all the known facts on some subject, and although, in such cases, men of science endeavour to find facts which will rule out all the hypotheses except one, there is no reason why they should always succeed.
In philosophy, again, it seems not uncommon for two rival hypotheses to be both able to account for all the facts.
Thus, for example, it is possible that life is one long dream, and that the outer world has only that degree of reality that the objects of dreams have; but although such a view does not seem inconsistent with known facts, there is no reason to prefer it to the common-sense view, according to which other people and things do really exist.
Thus coherence as the definition of truth fails because there is no proof that there can be only one coherent system.
The other objection to this definition of truth is that it assumes the meaning of 'coherence' known, whereas, in fact, 'coherence' presupposes the truth of the laws of logic.
Two propositions are coherent when both may be true, and are incoherent when one at least must be false.
Now in order to know whether two propositions can both be true, we must know such truths as the law of contradiction.
For example, the two propositions, 'this tree is a beech' and 'this tree is not a beech', are not coherent, because of the law of contradiction.
But if the law of contradiction itself were subjected to the test of coherence, we should find that, if we choose to suppose it false, nothing will any longer be incoherent with anything else.
Thus the laws of logic supply the skeleton or framework within which the test of coherence applies, and they themselves cannot be established by this test.
For the above two reasons, coherence cannot be accepted as giving the _meaning_ of truth, though it is often a most important _test_ of truth after a certain amount of truth has become known.
Hence we are driven back to _correspondence with fact_ as constituting the nature of truth.
It remains to define precisely what we mean by 'fact', and what is the nature of the correspondence which must subsist between belief and fact, in order that belief may be true.
In accordance with our three requisites, we have to seek a theory of truth which (1) allows truth to have an opposite, namely falsehood, (2) makes truth a property of beliefs, but (3) makes it a property wholly dependent upon the relation of the beliefs to outside things.
The necessity of allowing for falsehood makes it impossible to regard belief as a relation of the mind to a single object, which could be said to be what is believed.
If belief were so regarded, we should find that, like acquaintance, it would not admit of the opposition of truth and falsehood, but would have to be always true.
This may be made clear by examples.
Othello believes falsely that Desdemona loves Cassio.
We cannot say that this belief consists in a relation to a single object, 'Desdemona's love for Cassio', for if there were such an object, the belief would be true.
There is in fact no such object, and therefore Othello cannot have any relation to such an object.
Hence his belief cannot possibly consist in a relation to this object.
It might be said that his belief is a relation to a different object, namely 'that Desdemona loves Cassio'; but it is almost as difficult to suppose that there is such an object as this, when Desdemona does not love Cassio, as it was to suppose that there is 'Desdemona's love for Cassio'.
Hence it will be better to seek for a theory of belief which does not make it consist in a relation of the mind to a single object.
It is common to think of relations as though they always held between two terms, but in fact this is not always the case.
Some relations demand three terms, some four, and so on.
Take, for instance, the relation 'between'.
So long as only two terms come in, the relation 'between' is impossible: three terms are the smallest number that render it possible.
York is between London and Edinburgh; but if London and Edinburgh were the only places in the world, there could be nothing which was between one place and another.
Similarly _jealousy_ requires three people: there can be no such relation that does not involve three at least.
Such a proposition as 'A wishes B to promote C's marriage with D' involves a relation of four terms; that is to say, A and B and C and D all come in, and the relation involved cannot be expressed otherwise than in a form involving all four.
Instances might be multiplied indefinitely, but enough has been said to show that there are relations which require more than two terms before they can occur.
The relation involved in _judging_ or _believing_ must, if falsehood is to be duly allowed for, be taken to be a relation between several terms, not between two.
When Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio, he must not have before his mind a single object, 'Desdemona's love for Cassio', or 'that Desdemona loves Cassio ', for that would require that there should be objective falsehoods, which subsist independently of any minds; and this, though not logically refutable, is a theory to be avoided if possible.
Thus it is easier to account for falsehood if we take judgement to be a relation in which the mind and the various objects concerned all occur severally; that is to say, Desdemona and loving and Cassio must all be terms in the relation which subsists when Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio.
This relation, therefore, is a relation of four terms, since Othello also is one of the terms of the relation.
When we say that it is a relation of four terms, we do not mean that Othello has a certain relation to Desdemona, and has the same relation to loving and also to Cassio.
This may be true of some other relation than believing; but believing, plainly, is not a relation which Othello has to _each_ of the three terms concerned, but to _all_ of them together: there is only one example of the relation of believing involved, but this one example knits together four terms.
Thus the actual occurrence, at the moment when Othello is entertaining his belief, is that the relation called 'believing' is knitting together into one complex whole the four terms Othello, Desdemona, loving, and Cassio.
What is called belief or judgement is nothing but this relation of believing or judging, which relates a mind to several things other than itself.
An _act_ of belief or of judgement is the occurrence between certain terms at some particular time, of the relation of believing or judging.
We are now in a position to understand what it is that distinguishes a true judgement from a false one.
For this purpose we will adopt certain definitions.
In every act of judgement there is a mind which judges, and there are terms concerning which it judges.
We will call the mind the _subject_ in the judgement, and the remaining terms the _objects_.
Thus, when Othello judges that Desdemona loves Cassio, Othello is the subject, while the objects are Desdemona and loving and Cassio.
The subject and the objects together are called the _constituents_ of the judgement.
It will be observed that the relation of judging has what is called a 'sense' or 'direction'.
Similarly, if Cassio judges that Desdemona loves Othello, the constituents of the judgement are still the same, but their order is different.
This property of having a 'sense' or 'direction' is one which the relation of judging shares with all other relations.
The 'sense' of relations is the ultimate source of order and series and a host of mathematical concepts; but we need not concern ourselves further with this aspect.
We spoke of the relation called 'judging' or 'believing' as knitting together into one complex whole the subject and the objects.
In this respect, judging is exactly like every other relation.
Whenever a relation holds between two or more terms, it unites the terms into a complex whole.
If Othello loves Desdemona, there is such a complex whole as 'Othello's love for Desdemona'.
The terms united by the relation may be themselves complex, or may be simple, but the whole which results from their being united must be complex.
Wherever there is a relation which relates certain terms, there is a complex object formed of the union of those terms; and conversely, wherever there is a complex object, there is a relation which relates its constituents.
When an act of believing occurs, there is a complex, in which 'believing' is the uniting relation, and subject and objects are arranged in a certain order by the 'sense' of the relation of believing.
Among the objects, as we saw in considering 'Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio', one must be a relation--in this instance, the relation 'loving'.
But this relation, as it occurs in the act of believing, is not the relation which creates the unity of the complex whole consisting of the subject and the objects.
The relation 'loving', as it occurs in the act of believing, is one of the objects--it is a brick in the structure, not the cement.
The cement is the relation 'believing'.
When the belief is _true_, there is another complex unity, in which the relation which was one of the objects of the belief relates the other objects.
Thus, e.g., if Othello believes _truly_ that Desdemona loves Cassio, then there is a complex unity, 'Desdemona's love for Cassio', which is composed exclusively of the _objects_ of the belief, in the same order as they had in the belief, with the relation which was one of the objects occurring now as the cement that binds together the other objects of the belief.
On the other hand, when a belief is _false_, there is no such complex unity composed only of the objects of the belief.
If Othello believes _falsely_ that Desdemona loves Cassio, then there is no such complex unity as 'Desdemona's love for Cassio'.
Thus a belief is _true_ when it _corresponds_ to a certain associated complex, and _false_ when it does not.
Assuming, for the sake of definiteness, that the objects of the belief are two terms and a relation, the terms being put in a certain order by the 'sense' of the believing, then if the two terms in that order are united by the relation into a complex, the belief is true; if not, it is false.
This constitutes the definition of truth and falsehood that we were in search of.
Judging or believing is a certain complex unity of which a mind is a constituent; if the remaining constituents, taken in the order which they have in the belief, form a complex unity, then the belief is true; if not, it is false.
Thus although truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs, yet they are in a sense extrinsic properties, for the condition of the truth of a belief is something not involving beliefs, or (in general) any mind at all, but only the _objects_ of the belief.
A mind, which believes, believes truly when there is a _corresponding_ complex not involving the mind, but only its objects.
This correspondence ensures truth, and its absence entails falsehood.
Hence we account simultaneously for the two facts that beliefs (a) depend on minds for their _existence_, (b) do not depend on minds for their _truth_.
We may restate our theory as follows: If we take such a belief as 'Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio', we will call Desdemona and Cassio the _object-terms_, and loving the _object-relation_.
If there is a complex unity 'Desdemona's love for Cassio', consisting of the object-terms related by the object-relation in the same order as they have in the belief, then this complex unity is called the _fact corresponding to the belief_.
Thus a belief is true when there is a corresponding fact, and is false when there is no corresponding fact.
It will be seen that minds do not _create_ truth or falsehood.
They create beliefs, but when once the beliefs are created, the mind cannot make them true or false, except in the special case where they concern future things which are within the power of the person believing, such as catching trains.
What makes a belief true is a _fact_, and this fact does not (except in exceptional cases) in any way involve the mind of the person who has the belief.
Having now decided what we _mean_ by truth and falsehood, we have next to consider what ways there are of knowing whether this or that belief is true or false.
This consideration will occupy the next chapter.
KNOWLEDGE, ERROR, AND PROBABLE OPINION The question as to what we mean by truth and falsehood, which we considered in the preceding chapter, is of much less interest than the question as to how we can know what is true and what is false.
This question will occupy us in the present chapter.
There can be no doubt that _some_ of our beliefs are erroneous; thus we are led to inquire what certainty we can ever have that such and such a belief is not erroneous.
In other words, can we ever _know_ anything at all, or do we merely sometimes by good luck believe what is true?
Before we can attack this question, we must, however, first decide what we mean by 'knowing', and this question is not so easy as might be supposed.
At first sight we might imagine that knowledge could be defined as 'true belief'.
When what we believe is true, it might be supposed that we had achieved a knowledge of what we believe.
But this would not accord with the way in which the word is commonly used.
To take a very trivial instance: If a man believes that the late Prime Minister's last name began with a B, he believes what is true, since the late Prime Minister was Sir Henry Campbell Bannerman.
But if he believes that Mr.
Balfour was the late Prime Minister, he will still believe that the late Prime Minister's last name began with a B, yet this belief, though true, would not be thought to constitute knowledge.
If a newspaper, by an intelligent anticipation, announces the result of a battle before any telegram giving the result has been received, it may by good fortune announce what afterwards turns out to be the right result, and it may produce belief in some of its less experienced readers.
But in spite of the truth of their belief, they cannot be said to have knowledge.
Thus it is clear that a true belief is not knowledge when it is deduced from a false belief.
In like manner, a true belief cannot be called knowledge when it is deduced by a fallacious process of reasoning, even if the premisses from which it is deduced are true.
If I know that all Greeks are men and that Socrates was a man, and I infer that Socrates was a Greek, I cannot be said to _know_ that Socrates was a Greek, because, although my premisses and my conclusion are true, the conclusion does not follow from the premisses.
But are we to say that nothing is knowledge except what is validly deduced from true premisses?
Obviously we cannot say this.
Such a definition is at once too wide and too narrow.
In the first place, it is too wide, because it is not enough that our premisses should be _true_, they must also be _known_.
The man who believes that Mr.
Balfour was the late Prime Minister may proceed to draw valid deductions from the true premiss that the late Prime Minister's name began with a B, but he cannot be said to _know_ the conclusions reached by these deductions.
Thus we shall have to amend our definition by saying that knowledge is what is validly deduced from _known_ premisses.
This, however, is a circular definition: it assumes that we already know what is meant by 'known premisses'.
It can, therefore, at best define one sort of knowledge, the sort we call derivative, as opposed to intuitive knowledge.
We may say: '_Derivative_ knowledge is what is validly deduced from premisses known intuitively'.
In this statement there is no formal defect, but it leaves the definition of _intuitive_ knowledge still to seek.
Leaving on one side, for the moment, the question of intuitive knowledge, let us consider the above suggested definition of derivative knowledge.
The chief objection to it is that it unduly limits knowledge.
It constantly happens that people entertain a true belief, which has grown up in them because of some piece of intuitive knowledge from which it is capable of being validly inferred, but from which it has not, as a matter of fact, been inferred by any logical process.
If the newspapers announce the death of the King, we are fairly well justified in believing that the King is dead, since this is the sort of announcement which would not be made if it were false.
And we are quite amply justified in believing that the newspaper asserts that the King is dead.
But here the intuitive knowledge upon which our belief is based is knowledge of the existence of sense-data derived from looking at the print which gives the news.
This knowledge scarcely rises into consciousness, except in a person who cannot read easily.
A child may be aware of the shapes of the letters, and pass gradually and painfully to a realization of their meaning.
But anybody accustomed to reading passes at once to what the letters mean, and is not aware, except on reflection, that he has derived this knowledge from the sense-data called seeing the printed letters.
Thus although a valid inference from the-letters to their meaning is possible, and _could_ be performed by the reader, it is not in fact performed, since he does not in fact perform any operation which can be called logical inference.
Yet it would be absurd to say that the reader does not _know_ that the newspaper announces the King's death.
We must, therefore, admit as derivative knowledge whatever is the result of intuitive knowledge even if by mere association, provided there _is_ a valid logical connexion, and the person in question could become aware of this connexion by reflection.
There are in fact many ways, besides logical inference, by which we pass from one belief to another: the passage from the print to its meaning illustrates these ways.
These ways may be called 'psychological inference'.
We shall, then, admit such psychological inference as a means of obtaining derivative knowledge, provided there is a discoverable logical inference which runs parallel to the psychological inference.
This renders our definition of derivative knowledge less precise than we could wish, since the word 'discoverable' is vague: it does not tell us how much reflection may be needed in order to make the discovery.
But in fact 'knowledge' is not a precise conception: it merges into 'probable opinion', as we shall see more fully in the course of the present chapter.
A very precise definition, therefore, should not be sought, since any such definition must be more or less misleading.
The chief difficulty in regard to knowledge, however, does not arise over derivative knowledge, but over intuitive knowledge.
So long as we are dealing with derivative knowledge, we have the test of intuitive knowledge to fall back upon.
But in regard to intuitive beliefs, it is by no means easy to discover any criterion by which to distinguish some as true and others as erroneous.
In this question it is scarcely possible to reach any very precise result: all our knowledge of truths is infected with some degree of doubt, and a theory which ignored this fact would be plainly wrong.
Something may be done, however, to mitigate the difficulties of the question.
Our theory of truth, to begin with, supplies the possibility of distinguishing certain truths as _self-evident_ in a sense which ensures infallibility.
When a belief is true, we said, there is a corresponding fact, in which the several objects of the belief form a single complex.
The belief is said to constitute _knowledge_ of this fact, provided it fulfils those further somewhat vague conditions which we have been considering in the present chapter.
But in regard to any fact, besides the knowledge constituted by belief, we may also have the kind of knowledge constituted by _perception_ (taking this word in its widest possible sense).
For example, if you know the hour of the sunset, you can at that hour know the fact that the sun is setting: this is knowledge of the fact by way of knowledge of _truths_; but you can also, if the weather is fine, look to the west and actually see the setting sun: you then know the same fact by the way of knowledge of _things_.
Thus in regard to any complex fact, there are, theoretically, two ways in which it may be known: (1) by means of a judgement, in which its several parts are judged to be related as they are in fact related; (2) by means of _acquaintance_ with the complex fact itself, which may (in a large sense) be called perception, though it is by no means confined to objects of the senses.
Now it will be observed that the second way of knowing a complex fact, the way of acquaintance, is only possible when there really is such a fact, while the first way, like all judgement, is liable to error.
The second way gives us the complex whole, and is therefore only possible when its parts do actually have that relation which makes them combine to form such a complex.
The first way, on the contrary, gives us the parts and the relation severally, and demands only the reality of the parts and the relation: the relation may not relate those parts in that way, and yet the judgement may occur.
It will be remembered that at the end of Chapter XI we suggested that there might be two kinds of self-evidence, one giving an absolute guarantee of truth, the other only a partial guarantee.
These two kinds can now be distinguished.
We may say that a truth is self-evident, in the first and most absolute sense, when we have acquaintance with the fact which corresponds to the truth.
When Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio, the corresponding fact, if his belief were true, would be 'Desdemona's love for Cassio'.
This would be a fact with which no one could have acquaintance except Desdemona; hence in the sense of self-evidence that we are considering, the truth that Desdemona loves Cassio (if it were a truth) could only be self-evident to Desdemona.
All mental facts, and all facts concerning sense-data, have this same privacy: there is only one person to whom they can be self-evident in our present sense, since there is only one person who can be acquainted with the mental things or the sense-data concerned.
Thus no fact about any particular existing thing can be self-evident to more than one person.
On the other hand, facts about universals do not have this privacy.
Many minds may be acquainted with the same universals; hence a relation between universals may be known by acquaintance to many different people.
In all cases where we know by acquaintance a complex fact consisting of certain terms in a certain relation, we say that the truth that these terms are so related has the first or absolute kind of self-evidence, and in these cases the judgement that the terms are so related _must_ be true.
Thus this sort of self-evidence is an absolute guarantee of truth.
But although this sort of self-evidence is an absolute guarantee of truth, it does not enable us to be _absolutely_ certain, in the case of any given judgement, that the judgement in question is true.
Suppose we first perceive the sun shining, which is a complex fact, and thence proceed to make the judgement 'the sun is shining'.
In passing from the perception to the judgement, it is necessary to analyse the given complex fact: we have to separate out 'the sun' and 'shining' as constituents of the fact.
In this process it is possible to commit an error; hence even where a _fact_ has the first or absolute kind of self-evidence, a judgement believed to correspond to the fact is not absolutely infallible, because it may not really correspond to the fact.
But if it does correspond (in the sense explained in the preceding chapter), then it _must_ be true.
The second sort of self-evidence will be that which belongs to judgements in the first instance, and is not derived from direct perception of a fact as a single complex whole.
This second kind of self-evidence will have degrees, from the very highest degree down to a bare inclination in favour of the belief.
Take, for example, the case of a horse trotting away from us along a hard road.
At first our certainty that we hear the hoofs is complete; gradually, if we listen intently, there comes a moment when we think perhaps it was imagination or the blind upstairs or our own heartbeats; at last we become doubtful whether there was any noise at all; then we _think_ we no longer hear anything, and at last we _know_ we no longer hear anything.
In this process, there is a continual gradation of self-evidence, from the highest degree to the least, not in the sense-data themselves, but in the judgements based on them.
Or again: Suppose we are comparing two shades of colour, one blue and one green.
We can be quite sure they are different shades of colour; but if the green colour is gradually altered to be more and more like the blue, becoming first a blue-green, then a greeny-blue, then blue, there will come a moment when we are doubtful whether we can see any difference, and then a moment when we know that we cannot see any difference.
The same thing happens in tuning a musical instrument, or in any other case where there is a continuous gradation.
Thus self-evidence of this sort is a matter of degree; and it seems plain that the higher degrees are more to be trusted than the lower degrees.
In derivative knowledge our ultimate premisses must have some degree of self-evidence, and so must their connexion with the conclusions deduced from them.
Take for example a piece of reasoning in geometry.
It is not enough that the axioms from which we start should be self-evident: it is necessary also that, at each step in the reasoning, the connexion of premiss and conclusion should be self-evident.
In difficult reasoning, this connexion has often only a very small degree of self-evidence; hence errors of reasoning are not improbable where the difficulty is great.
What we firmly believe, if it is true, is called _knowledge_, provided it is either intuitive or inferred (logically or psychologically) from intuitive knowledge from which it follows logically.
What we firmly believe, if it is neither knowledge nor error, and also what we believe hesitatingly, because it is, or is derived from, something which has not the highest degree of self-evidence, may be called _probable opinion_.
Thus the greater part of what would commonly pass as knowledge is more or less probable opinion.
In regard to probable opinion, we can derive great assistance from _coherence_, which we rejected as the _definition_ of truth, but may often use as a _criterion_.
A body of individually probable opinions, if they are mutually coherent, become more probable than any one of them would be individually.
It is in this way that many scientific hypotheses acquire their probability.
They fit into a coherent system of probable opinions, and thus become more probable than they would be in isolation.
The same thing applies to general philosophical hypotheses.
Often in a single case such hypotheses may seem highly doubtful, while yet, when we consider the order and coherence which they introduce into a mass of probable opinion, they become pretty nearly certain.
This applies, in particular, to such matters as the distinction between dreams and waking life.
If our dreams, night after night, were as coherent one with another as our days, we should hardly know whether to believe the dreams or the waking life.
As it is, the test of coherence condemns the dreams and confirms the waking life.
But this test, though it increases probability where it is successful, never gives absolute certainty, unless there is certainty already at some point in the coherent system.
Thus the mere organization of probable opinion will never, by itself, transform it into indubitable knowledge.
THE LIMITS OF PHILOSOPHICAL KNOWLEDGE In all that we have said hitherto concerning philosophy, we have scarcely touched on many matters that occupy a great space in the writings of most philosophers.
Most philosophers--or, at any rate, very many--profess to be able to prove, by _a priori_ metaphysical reasoning, such things as the fundamental dogmas of religion, the essential rationality of the universe, the illusoriness of matter, the unreality of all evil, and so on.
There can be no doubt that the hope of finding reason to believe such theses as these has been the chief inspiration of many life-long students of philosophy.
It would seem that knowledge concerning the universe as a whole is not to be obtained by metaphysics, and that the proposed proofs that, in virtue of the laws of logic such and such things _must_ exist and such and such others cannot, are not capable of surviving a critical scrutiny.
In this chapter we shall briefly consider the kind of way in which such reasoning is attempted, with a view to discovering whether we can hope that it may be valid.
The great representative, in modern times, of the kind of view which we wish to examine, was Hegel (1770-1831).
Hegel's philosophy is very difficult, and commentators differ as to the true interpretation of it.
According to the interpretation I shall adopt, which is that of many, if not most, of the commentators and has the merit of giving an interesting and important type of philosophy, his main thesis is that everything short of the Whole is obviously fragmentary, and obviously incapable of existing without the complement supplied by the rest of the world.
Just as a comparative anatomist, from a single bone, sees what kind of animal the whole must have been, so the metaphysician, according to Hegel, sees, from any one piece of reality, what the whole of reality must be--at least in its large outlines.
Every apparently separate piece of reality has, as it were, hooks which grapple it to the next piece; the next piece, in turn, has fresh hooks, and so on, until the whole universe is reconstructed.
This essential incompleteness appears, according to Hegel, equally in the world of thought and in the world of things.
In the world of thought, if we take any idea which is abstract or incomplete, we find, on examination, that if we forget its incompleteness, we become involved in contradictions; these contradictions turn the idea in question into its opposite, or antithesis; and in order to escape, we have to find a new, less incomplete idea, which is the synthesis of our original idea and its antithesis.
This new idea, though less incomplete than the idea we started with, will be found, nevertheless, to be still not wholly complete, but to pass into its antithesis, with which it must be combined in a new synthesis.
In this way Hegel advances until he reaches the 'Absolute Idea', which, according to him, has no incompleteness, no opposite, and no need of further development.
The Absolute Idea, therefore, is adequate to describe Absolute Reality; but all lower ideas only describe reality as it appears to a partial view, not as it is to one who simultaneously surveys the Whole.
Thus Hegel reaches the conclusion that Absolute Reality forms one single harmonious system, not in space or time, not in any degree evil, wholly rational, and wholly spiritual.
Any appearance to the contrary, in the world we know, can be proved logically--so he believes--to be entirely due to our fragmentary piecemeal view of the universe.
If we saw the universe whole, as we may suppose God sees it, space and time and matter and evil and all striving and struggling would disappear, and we should see instead an eternal perfect unchanging spiritual unity.
In this conception, there is undeniably something sublime, something to which we could wish to yield assent.
Nevertheless, when the arguments in support of it are carefully examined, they appear to involve much confusion and many unwarrantable assumptions.
The fundamental tenet upon which the system is built up is that what is incomplete must be not self-subsistent, but must need the support of other things before it can exist.
It is held that whatever has relations to things outside itself must contain some reference to those outside things in its own nature, and could not, therefore, be what it is if those outside things did not exist.
A man's nature, for example, is constituted by his memories and the rest of his knowledge, by his loves and hatreds, and so on; thus, but for the objects which he knows or loves or hates, he could not be what he is.
He is essentially and obviously a fragment: taken as the sum-total of reality he would be self-contradictory.
It is of course the case that a truth which connects one thing with another thing could not subsist if the other thing did not subsist.
But a truth about a thing is not part of the thing itself, although it must, according to the above usage, be part of the 'nature' of the thing.
If we mean by a thing's 'nature' all the truths about the thing, then plainly we cannot know a thing's 'nature' unless we know all the thing's relations to all the other things in the universe.
But if the word 'nature' is used in this sense, we shall have to hold that the thing may be known when its 'nature' is not known, or at any rate is not known completely.
There is a confusion, when this use of the word 'nature' is employed, between knowledge of things and knowledge of truths.
We may have knowledge of a thing by acquaintance even if we know very few propositions about it--theoretically we need not know any propositions about it.
Thus, acquaintance with a thing does not involve knowledge of its 'nature' in the above sense.
And although acquaintance with a thing is involved in our knowing any one proposition about a thing, knowledge of its 'nature', in the above sense, is not involved.
Hence, (1) acquaintance with a thing does not logically involve a knowledge of its relations, and (2) a knowledge of some of its relations does not involve a knowledge of all of its relations nor a knowledge of its 'nature' in the above sense.
I may be acquainted, for example, with my toothache, and this knowledge may be as complete as knowledge by acquaintance ever can be, without knowing all that the dentist (who is not acquainted with it) can tell me about its cause, and without therefore knowing its 'nature' in the above sense.
Thus the fact that a thing has relations does not prove that its relations are logically necessary.
That is to say, from the mere fact that it is the thing it is we cannot deduce that it must have the various relations which in fact it has.
It follows that we cannot prove that the universe as a whole forms a single harmonious system such as Hegel believes that it forms.
And if we cannot prove this, we also cannot prove the unreality of space and time and matter and evil, for this is deduced by Hegel from the fragmentary and relational character of these things.
Thus we are left to the piecemeal investigation of the world, and are unable to know the characters of those parts of the universe that are remote from our experience.
This result, disappointing as it is to those whose hopes have been raised by the systems of philosophers, is in harmony with the inductive and scientific temper of our age, and is borne out by the whole examination of human knowledge which has occupied our previous chapters.
Most of the great ambitious attempts of metaphysicians have proceeded by the attempt to prove that such and such apparent features of the actual world were self-contradictory, and therefore could not be real.
The whole tendency of modern thought, however, is more and more in the direction of showing that the supposed contradictions were illusory, and that very little can be proved _a priori_ from considerations of what _must_ be.
A good illustration of this is afforded by space and time.
Space and time appear to be infinite in extent, and infinitely divisible.
If we travel along a straight line in either direction, it is difficult to believe that we shall finally reach a last point, beyond which there is nothing, not even empty space.
Similarly, if in imagination we travel backwards or forwards in time, it is difficult to believe that we shall reach a first or last time, with not even empty time beyond it.
Thus space and time appear to be infinite in extent.
Again, if we take any two points on a line, it seems evident that there must be other points between them however small the distance between them may be: every distance can be halved, and the halves can be halved again, and so on _ad infinitum_.
In time, similarly, however little time may elapse between two moments, it seems evident that there will be other moments between them.
Thus space and time appear to be infinitely divisible.
But as against these apparent facts--infinite extent and infinite divisibility--philosophers have advanced arguments tending to show that there could be no infinite collections of things, and that therefore the number of points in space, or of instants in time, must be finite.
Thus a contradiction emerged between the apparent nature of space and time and the supposed impossibility of infinite collections.
Kant, who first emphasized this contradiction, deduced the impossibility of space and time, which he declared to be merely subjective; and since his time very many philosophers have believed that space and time are mere appearance, not characteristic of the world as it really is.
Now, however, owing to the labours of the mathematicians, notably Georg Cantor, it has appeared that the impossibility of infinite collections was a mistake.
They are not in fact self-contradictory, but only contradictory of certain rather obstinate mental prejudices.
Hence the reasons for regarding space and time as unreal have become inoperative, and one of the great sources of metaphysical constructions is dried up.
The mathematicians, however, have not been content with showing that space as it is commonly supposed to be is possible; they have shown also that many other forms of space are equally possible, so far as logic can show.
Some of Euclid's axioms, which appear to common sense to be necessary, and were formerly supposed to be necessary by philosophers, are now known to derive their appearance of necessity from our mere familiarity with actual space, and not from any _a priori_ logical foundation.
By imagining worlds in which these axioms are false, the mathematicians have used logic to loosen the prejudices of common sense, and to show the possibility of spaces differing--some more, some less--from that in which we live.
And some of these spaces differ so little from Euclidean space, where distances such as we can measure are concerned, that it is impossible to discover by observation whether our actual space is strictly Euclidean or of one of these other kinds.
Thus the position is completely reversed.
Formerly it appeared that experience left only one kind of space to logic, and logic showed this one kind to be impossible.
Now, logic presents many kinds of space as possible apart from experience, and experience only partially decides between them.
Thus, while our knowledge of what is has become less than it was formerly supposed to be, our knowledge of what may be is enormously increased.
Instead of being shut in within narrow walls, of which every nook and cranny could be explored, we find ourselves in an open world of free possibilities, where much remains unknown because there is so much to know.
What has happened in the case of space and time has happened, to some extent, in other directions as well.
Thus knowledge as to what exists becomes limited to what we can learn from experience--not to what we can actually experience, for, as we have seen, there is much knowledge by description concerning things of which we have no direct experience.
But in all cases of knowledge by description, we need some connexion of universals, enabling us, from such and such a datum, to infer an object of a certain sort as implied by our datum.
Thus in regard to physical objects, for example, the principle that sense-data are signs of physical objects is itself a connexion of universals; and it is only in virtue of this principle that experience enables us to acquire knowledge concerning physical objects.
The same applies to the law of causality, or, to descend to what is less general, to such principles as the law of gravitation.
Principles such as the law of gravitation are proved, or rather are rendered highly probable, by a combination of experience with some wholly _a priori_ principle, such as the principle of induction.
Our derivative knowledge always depends upon some pure _a priori_ knowledge and usually also depends upon some pure empirical knowledge.
Philosophical knowledge, if what has been said above is true, does not differ essentially from scientific knowledge; there is no special source of wisdom which is open to philosophy but not to science, and the results obtained by philosophy are not radically different from those obtained from science.
The essential characteristic of philosophy, which makes it a study distinct from science, is criticism.
It examines critically the principles employed in science and in daily life; it searches out any inconsistencies there may be in these principles, and it only accepts them when, as the result of a critical inquiry, no reason for rejecting them has appeared.
But as regards what would be commonly accepted as knowledge, our result is in the main positive: we have seldom found reason to reject such knowledge as the result of our criticism, and we have seen no reason to suppose man incapable of the kind of knowledge which he is generally believed to possess.
When, however, we speak of philosophy as a _criticism_ of knowledge, it is necessary to impose a certain limitation.
If we adopt the attitude of the complete sceptic, placing ourselves wholly outside all knowledge, and asking, from this outside position, to be compelled to return within the circle of knowledge, we are demanding what is impossible, and our scepticism can never be refuted.
For all refutation must begin with some piece of knowledge which the disputants share; from blank doubt, no argument can begin.
Hence the criticism of knowledge which philosophy employs must not be of this destructive kind, if any result is to be achieved.
Against this absolute scepticism, no _logical_ argument can be advanced.
But it is not difficult to see that scepticism of this kind is unreasonable.
Descartes' 'methodical doubt', with which modern philosophy began, is not of this kind, but is rather the kind of criticism which we are asserting to be the essence of philosophy.
His 'methodical doubt' consisted in doubting whatever seemed doubtful; in pausing, with each apparent piece of knowledge, to ask himself whether, on reflection, he could feel certain that he really knew it.
This is the kind of criticism which constitutes philosophy.
Some knowledge, such as knowledge of the existence of our sense-data, appears quite indubitable, however calmly and thoroughly we reflect upon it.
In regard to such knowledge, philosophical criticism does not require that we should abstain from belief.
But there are beliefs--such, for example, as the belief that physical objects exactly resemble our sense-data--which are entertained until we begin to reflect, but are found to melt away when subjected to a close inquiry.
Such beliefs philosophy will bid us reject, unless some new line of argument is found to support them.
But to reject the beliefs which do not appear open to any objections, however closely we examine them, is not reasonable, and is not what philosophy advocates.
The criticism aimed at, in a word, is not that which, without reason, determines to reject, but that which considers each piece of apparent knowledge on its merits, and retains whatever still appears to be knowledge when this consideration is completed.
That some risk of error remains must be admitted, since human beings are fallible.
Philosophy may claim justly that it diminishes the risk of error, and that in some cases it renders the risk so small as to be practically negligible.
To do more than this is not possible in a world where mistakes must occur; and more than this no prudent advocate of philosophy would claim to have performed.
THE VALUE OF PHILOSOPHY Having now come to the end of our brief and very incomplete review of the problems of philosophy, it will be well to consider, in conclusion, what is the value of philosophy and why it ought to be studied.
It is the more necessary to consider this question, in view of the fact that many men, under the influence of science or of practical affairs, are inclined to doubt whether philosophy is anything better than innocent but useless trifling, hair-splitting distinctions, and controversies on matters concerning which knowledge is impossible.
This view of philosophy appears to result, partly from a wrong conception of the ends of life, partly from a wrong conception of the kind of goods which philosophy strives to achieve.
Physical science, through the medium of inventions, is useful to innumerable people who are wholly ignorant of it; thus the study of physical science is to be recommended, not only, or primarily, because of the effect on the student, but rather because of the effect on mankind in general.
Thus utility does not belong to philosophy.
If the study of philosophy has any value at all for others than students of philosophy, it must be only indirectly, through its effects upon the lives of those who study it.
It is in these effects, therefore, if anywhere, that the value of philosophy must be primarily sought.
But further, if we are not to fail in our endeavour to determine the value of philosophy, we must first free our minds from the prejudices of what are wrongly called 'practical' men.
The 'practical' man, as this word is often used, is one who recognizes only material needs, who realizes that men must have food for the body, but is oblivious of the necessity of providing food for the mind.
If all men were well off, if poverty and disease had been reduced to their lowest possible point, there would still remain much to be done to produce a valuable society; and even in the existing world the goods of the mind are at least as important as the goods of the body.
It is exclusively among the goods of the mind that the value of philosophy is to be found; and only those who are not indifferent to these goods can be persuaded that the study of philosophy is not a waste of time.
Philosophy, like all other studies, aims primarily at knowledge.
The knowledge it aims at is the kind of knowledge which gives unity and system to the body of the sciences, and the kind which results from a critical examination of the grounds of our convictions, prejudices, and beliefs.
But it cannot be maintained that philosophy has had any very great measure of success in its attempts to provide definite answers to its questions.
If you ask a mathematician, a mineralogist, a historian, or any other man of learning, what definite body of truths has been ascertained by his science, his answer will last as long as you are willing to listen.
But if you put the same question to a philosopher, he will, if he is candid, have to confess that his study has not achieved positive results such as have been achieved by other sciences.
It is true that this is partly accounted for by the fact that, as soon as definite knowledge concerning any subject becomes possible, this subject ceases to be called philosophy, and becomes a separate science.
The whole study of the heavens, which now belongs to astronomy, was once included in philosophy; Newton's great work was called 'the mathematical principles of natural philosophy'.
Similarly, the study of the human mind, which was a part of philosophy, has now been separated from philosophy and has become the science of psychology.
Thus, to a great extent, the uncertainty of philosophy is more apparent than real: those questions which are already capable of definite answers are placed in the sciences, while those only to which, at present, no definite answer can be given, remain to form the residue which is called philosophy.
This is, however, only a part of the truth concerning the uncertainty of philosophy.
There are many questions--and among them those that are of the profoundest interest to our spiritual life--which, so far as we can see, must remain insoluble to the human intellect unless its powers become of quite a different order from what they are now.
Has the universe any unity of plan or purpose, or is it a fortuitous concourse of atoms?
Is consciousness a permanent part of the universe, giving hope of indefinite growth in wisdom, or is it a transitory accident on a small planet on which life must ultimately become impossible?
Are good and evil of importance to the universe or only to man?
Such questions are asked by philosophy, and variously answered by various philosophers.
But it would seem that, whether answers be otherwise discoverable or not, the answers suggested by philosophy are none of them demonstrably true.
Yet, however slight may be the hope of discovering an answer, it is part of the business of philosophy to continue the consideration of such questions, to make us aware of their importance, to examine all the approaches to them, and to keep alive that speculative interest in the universe which is apt to be killed by confining ourselves to definitely ascertainable knowledge.
Many philosophers, it is true, have held that philosophy could establish the truth of certain answers to such fundamental questions.
They have supposed that what is of most importance in religious beliefs could be proved by strict demonstration to be true.
In order to judge of such attempts, it is necessary to take a survey of human knowledge, and to form an opinion as to its methods and its limitations.
On such a subject it would be unwise to pronounce dogmatically; but if the investigations of our previous chapters have not led us astray, we shall be compelled to renounce the hope of finding philosophical proofs of religious beliefs.
We cannot, therefore, include as part of the value of philosophy any definite set of answers to such questions.
Hence, once more, the value of philosophy must not depend upon any supposed body of definitely ascertainable knowledge to be acquired by those who study it.
The value of philosophy is, in fact, to be sought largely in its very uncertainty.
The man who has no tincture of philosophy goes through life imprisoned in the prejudices derived from common sense, from the habitual beliefs of his age or his nation, and from convictions which have grown up in his mind without the co-operation or consent of his deliberate reason.
To such a man the world tends to become definite, finite, obvious; common objects rouse no questions, and unfamiliar possibilities are contemptuously rejected.
As soon as we begin to philosophize, on the contrary, we find, as we saw in our opening chapters, that even the most everyday things lead to problems to which only very incomplete answers can be given.
Philosophy, though unable to tell us with certainty what is the true answer to the doubts which it raises, is able to suggest many possibilities which enlarge our thoughts and free them from the tyranny of custom.
Thus, while diminishing our feeling of certainty as to what things are, it greatly increases our knowledge as to what they may be; it removes the somewhat arrogant dogmatism of those who have never travelled into the region of liberating doubt, and it keeps alive our sense of wonder by showing familiar things in an unfamiliar aspect.
Apart from its utility in showing unsuspected possibilities, philosophy has a value--perhaps its chief value--through the greatness of the objects which it contemplates, and the freedom from narrow and personal aims resulting from this contemplation.
The life of the instinctive man is shut up within the circle of his private interests: family and friends may be included, but the outer world is not regarded except as it may help or hinder what comes within the circle of instinctive wishes.
In such a life there is something feverish and confined, in comparison with which the philosophic life is calm and free.
The private world of instinctive interests is a small one, set in the midst of a great and powerful world which must, sooner or later, lay our private world in ruins.
Unless we can so enlarge our interests as to include the whole outer world, we remain like a garrison in a beleagured fortress, knowing that the enemy prevents escape and that ultimate surrender is inevitable.
In such a life there is no peace, but a constant strife between the insistence of desire and the powerlessness of will.
One way of escape is by philosophic contemplation.
Philosophic contemplation does not, in its widest survey, divide the universe into two hostile camps--friends and foes, helpful and hostile, good and bad--it views the whole impartially.
Philosophic contemplation, when it is unalloyed, does not aim at proving that the rest of the universe is akin to man.
All acquisition of knowledge is an enlargement of the Self, but this enlargement is best attained when it is not directly sought.
It is obtained when the desire for knowledge is alone operative, by a study which does not wish in advance that its objects should have this or that character, but adapts the Self to the characters which it finds in its objects.
This enlargement of Self is not obtained when, taking the Self as it is, we try to show that the world is so similar to this Self that knowledge of it is possible without any admission of what seems alien.
The desire to prove this is a form of self-assertion and, like all self-assertion, it is an obstacle to the growth of Self which it desires, and of which the Self knows that it is capable.
Self-assertion, in philosophic speculation as elsewhere, views the world as a means to its own ends; thus it makes the world of less account than Self, and the Self sets bounds to the greatness of its goods.
In contemplation, on the contrary, we start from the not-Self, and through its greatness the boundaries of Self are enlarged; through the infinity of the universe the mind which contemplates it achieves some share in infinity.
For this reason greatness of soul is not fostered by those philosophies which assimilate the universe to Man.
Knowledge is a form of union of Self and not-Self; like all union, it is impaired by dominion, and therefore by any attempt to force the universe into conformity with what we find in ourselves.
There is a widespread philosophical tendency towards the view which tells us that Man is the measure of all things, that truth is man-made, that space and time and the world of universals are properties of the mind, and that, if there be anything not created by the mind, it is unknowable and of no account for us.
This view, if our previous discussions were correct, is untrue; but in addition to being untrue, it has the effect of robbing philosophic contemplation of all that gives it value, since it fetters contemplation to Self.
What it calls knowledge is not a union with the not-Self, but a set of prejudices, habits, and desires, making an impenetrable veil between us and the world beyond.
The man who finds pleasure in such a theory of knowledge is like the man who never leaves the domestic circle for fear his word might not be law.
The true philosophic contemplation, on the contrary, finds its satisfaction in every enlargement of the not-Self, in everything that magnifies the objects contemplated, and thereby the subject contemplating.
Everything, in contemplation, that is personal or private, everything that depends upon habit, self-interest, or desire, distorts the object, and hence impairs the union which the intellect seeks.
By thus making a barrier between subject and object, such personal and private things become a prison to the intellect.
The free intellect will see as God might see, without a _here_ and _now_, without hopes and fears, without the trammels of customary beliefs and traditional prejudices, calmly, dispassionately, in the sole and exclusive desire of knowledge--knowledge as impersonal, as purely contemplative, as it is possible for man to attain.
Hence also the free intellect will value more the abstract and universal knowledge into which the accidents of private history do not enter, than the knowledge brought by the senses, and dependent, as such knowledge must be, upon an exclusive and personal point of view and a body whose sense-organs distort as much as they reveal.
The mind which has become accustomed to the freedom and impartiality of philosophic contemplation will preserve something of the same freedom and impartiality in the world of action and emotion.
It will view its purposes and desires as parts of the whole, with the absence of insistence that results from seeing them as infinitesimal fragments in a world of which all the rest is unaffected by any one man's deeds.
The impartiality which, in contemplation, is the unalloyed desire for truth, is the very same quality of mind which, in action, is justice, and in emotion is that universal love which can be given to all, and not only to those who are judged useful or admirable.
Thus contemplation enlarges not only the objects of our thoughts, but also the objects of our actions and our affections: it makes us citizens of the universe, not only of one walled city at war with all the rest.
In this citizenship of the universe consists man's true freedom, and his liberation from the thraldom of narrow hopes and fears.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE The student who wishes to acquire an elementary knowledge of philosophy will find it both easier and more profitable to read some of the works of the great philosophers than to attempt to derive an all-round view from handbooks.
The following are specially recommended: Plato: _Republic_, especially Books VI and VII.
Descartes: _Meditations_.
Leibniz: _The Monadology_.
Berkeley: _Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous_.
Hume: _Enquiry concerning Human Understanding_.
Kant: _Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysic_.
Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A. and Flaxman’s Designs. 1899 Contents INTRODUCTION.
Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of scepticism.
And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu of their conventional value.
The same principles which have swept away traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues of sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society.
The credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as powerful a touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy scepticism of a temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of conservatism, or the impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church.
History and tradition, whether of ancient or comparatively recent times, are subjected to very different handling from that which the indulgence or credulity of former ages could allow.
Mere statements are jealously watched, and the motives of the writer form as important an ingredient in the analysis of his history, as the facts he records.
Probability is a powerful and troublesome test; and it is by this troublesome standard that a large portion of historical evidence is sifted.
Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in its demands.
Human nature, viewed under an induction of extended experience, is the best help to the criticism of human history.
Historical characters can only be estimated by the standard which human experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished.
To form correct views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a great whole—we must measure them by their relation to the mass of beings by whom they are surrounded, and, in contemplating the incidents in their lives or condition which tradition has handed down to us, we must rather consider the general bearing of the whole narrative, than the respective probability of its details.
It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know least, and talk most.
Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere[1] have, perhaps, contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any other three writers who could be named, and yet the history of all three has given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has left us little save the option of choosing which theory or theories we will follow.
The personality of Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in which critics will allow us to believe without controversy; but upon everything else, even down to the authorship of plays, there is more or less of doubt and uncertainty.
Of Socrates we know as little as the contradictions of Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know.
He was one of the _dramatis personæ_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as in style.
He appears as the enunciator of opinions as different in their tone as those of the writers who have handed them down.
When we have read Plato _or_ Xenophon, we think we know something of Socrates; when we have fairly read and examined both, we feel convinced that we are something worse than ignorant.
It has been an easy, and a popular expedient, of late years, to deny the personal or real existence of men and things whose life and condition were too much for our belief.
This system—which has often comforted the religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of Strauss for those of the New Testament—has been of incalculable value to the historical theorists of the last and present centuries.
To question the existence of Alexander the Great, would be a more excusable act, than to believe in that of Romulus.
What few authorities exist on the subject, are summarily dismissed, although the arguments appear to run in a circle.
“This cannot be true, because it is not true; and, that is not true, because it cannot be true.” Such seems to be the style, in which testimony upon testimony, statement upon statement, is consigned to denial and oblivion.
It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which truth is the requisite most wanting.
Before taking a brief review of the Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken of the treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to Herodotus.
According to this document, the city of Cumæ in Æolia, was, at an early period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of Greece.
Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes.
Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl named Critheïs.
The girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the guardianship of Cleanax, of Argos.
It is to the indiscretion of this maiden that we “are indebted for so much happiness.” Homer was the first fruit of her juvenile frailty, and received the name of Melesigenes, from having been born near the river Meles, in Bœotia, whither Critheïs had been transported in order to save her reputation.
“At this time,” continues our narrative, “there lived at Smyrna a man named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being married, engaged Critheïs to manage his household, and spin the flax he received as the price of his scholastic labours.
Phemius died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon followed.
Melesigenes carried on his adopted father’s school with great success, exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna, but also of the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially in the exportation of corn, attracted to that city.
Among these visitors, one Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who evinced a knowledge and intelligence rarely found in those times, persuaded Melesigenes to close his school, and accompany him on his travels.
Here Melesigenes, who had already suffered in his eyes, became much worse, and Mentes, who was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to the medical superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of Alcinor.
Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly became acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards formed the subject of the Odyssey.
The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that it was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophomans make their city the seat of that misfortune.
He then returned to Smyrna, where he applied himself to the study of poetry.[3] But poverty soon drove him to Cumæ.
Here his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of one Tychias, an armourer.
“And up to my time,” continued the author, “the inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a recitation of his verses, and they greatly honoured the spot.
Here also a poplar grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes arrived”.[4] But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being the most convenient road.
Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph on Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater probability, been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.[5] Arrived at Cumæ, he frequented the _converzationes_[6] of the old men, and delighted all by the charms of his poetry.
Encouraged by this favourable reception, he declared that, if they would allow him a public maintenance, he would render their city most gloriously renowned.
They avowed their willingness to support him in the measure he proposed, and procured him an audience in the council.
Having made the speech, with the purport of which our author has forgotten to acquaint us, he retired, and left them to debate respecting the answer to be given to his proposal.
At Phocœa, Homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the verses of the poet passing in his name.
Having collected sufficient poetry to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be-literary publishers, neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him.
This at once determined him to set out for Chios.
No vessel happened then to be setting sail thither, but he found one ready to start for Erythræ, a town of Ionia, which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the seamen to allow him to accompany them.
Having embarked, he invoked a favourable wind, and prayed that he might be able to expose the imposture of Thestorides, who, by his breach of hospitality, had drawn down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.
At Erythræ, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in Phocœa, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty, reached the little hamlet of Pithys.
Here he met with an adventure, which we will continue in the words of our author.
“Having set out from Pithys, Homer went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were pasturing.
The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out.
For some time he stood wondering how a blind man should have reached such a place alone, and what could be his design in coming.
He then went up to him, and inquired who he was, and how he had come to desolate places and untrodden spots, and of what he stood in need.
Homer, by recounting to him the whole history of his misfortunes, moved him with compassion; and he took him, and led him to his cot, and having lit a fire, bade him sup.[9] “The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according to their usual habit.
Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O Glaucus, my friend, prythee attend to my behest.
First give the dogs their supper at the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since, whilst they watch, nor thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.
Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author.
Having finished supper, they banqueted[10] afresh on conversation, Homer narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had visited.
At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with Homer.
Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left Homer at home, promising to return quickly.
Having arrived at Bolissus, a place near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole story respecting Homer and his journey.
He paid little attention to what he said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and feeding maimed and enfeebled persons.
However, he bade him bring the stranger to him.
Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him, assuring him that good fortune would be the result.
Conversation soon showed that the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general knowledge, and the Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the charge of his children.[11] Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher.
In the town of Chios he established a school where he taught the precepts of poetry.
“To this day,” says Chandler,[12] “the most curious remaining is that which has been named, without reason, the School of Homer.
It is on the coast, at some distance from the city, northward, and appears to have been an open temple of Cybele, formed on the top of a rock.
She is represented, as usual, sitting.
The whole is hewn out of the mountain, is rude, indistinct, and probably of the most remote antiquity.” So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable fortune.
He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single, the other married a Chian.
The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the personages of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already been mentioned:— “In his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his poem as the companion of Ulysses,[13] in return for the care taken of him when afflicted with blindness.
He also testifies his gratitude to Phemius, who had given him both sustenance and instruction.” His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to visit Greece, whither his reputation had now extended.
Having, it is said, made some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity of the Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention,[14] he sent out for Samos.
Here being recognized by a Samian, who had met with him in Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in celebrating the Apaturian festival.
He recited some verses, which gave great satisfaction, and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon festivals, he earned a subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich, with whose children he was very popular.
In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios, now Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died.
It is said that his death arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma proposed by some fishermen’s children.[15] Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we possess, and so broad are the evidences of its historical worthlessness, that it is scarcely necessary to point them out in detail.
Let us now consider some of the opinions to which a persevering, patient, and learned—but by no means consistent—series of investigations has led.
In doing so, I profess to bring forward statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or probability.
The history of this poet and his works is lost in doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who have done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness.
The majestic stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the Nile, through many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the Nile, its fountains will ever remain concealed.” Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German critics has eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of the Homeric question is involved.
With no less truth and feeling he proceeds:— “It seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of things makes possible.
If the period of tradition in history is the region of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light.
The creations of genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for the most part, created far out of the reach of observation.
Was Homer an individual?[17] or were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an ingenious arrangement of fragments by earlier poets?
Well has Landor remarked: “Some tell us there were twenty Homers; some deny that there was ever one.
It were idle and foolish to shake the contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last.
We are perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our devotion to superior power.
My opinion is, that what is best for us is our admiration of good.
Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of this unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must express my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following remarks:— “We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the better, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its original composition.
It was not till the age of the grammarians that its primitive integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to assert, that the minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not the best qualification for the profound feeling, the comprehensive conception of an harmonious whole.
The most exquisite anatomist may be no judge of the symmetry of the human frame: and we would take the opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general beauty of a form, rather than that of Mr.
The grave and cautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,[20] the authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern critics.
Longinus, in an oft quoted passage, merely expressed an opinion touching the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the Iliad,[21] and, among a mass of ancient authors, whose very names[22] it would be tedious to detail, no suspicion of the personal non-existence of Homer ever arose.
So far, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favour of our early ideas on the subject; let us now see what are the discoveries to which more modern investigations lay claim.
At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on the subject, and we find Bentley remarking that “Homer wrote a sequel of songs and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and good cheer, at festivals and other days of merriment.
These loose songs were not collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about Peisistratus’ time, about five hundred years after.”[23] Two French writers—Hedelin and Perrault—avowed a similar scepticism on the subject; but it is in the “Scienza Nuova” of Battista Vico, that we first meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf with so much learning and acuteness.
Indeed, it is with the Wolfian theory that we have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold hypothesis, which we will detail in the words of Grote:—[24] “Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F.
Wolf, turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of the Homeric text.
A considerable part of that dissertation (though by no means the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously announced by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent portions of the Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into any compact body and unchangeable order, until the days of Peisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ.
As a step towards that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either poem could be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which their composition is referred; and that without writing, neither the perfect symmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceived by any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance to posterity.
The absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must be indispensably supposed for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks, was thus one of the points in Wolf’s case against the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey.
By Nitzsch, and other leading opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other seems to have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been considered incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of the Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from the beginning.
“To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are nowise admissible.
But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that view of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to controvert it, we were driven to the necessity of admitting long written poems, in the ninth century before the Christian æra.
Few things, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and Mr.
Payne Knight, opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less than Wolf himself.
The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventh century before the Christian æra, are exceedingly trifling.
We have no remaining inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the early inscriptions are rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assure ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonidês of Amorgus, Kallinus, Tyrtæus, Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and lyric poets, committed their compositions to writing, or at what time the practice of doing so became familiar.
The first positive ground which authorizes us to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the famous ordinance of Solôn, with regard to the rhapsodies at the Panathenæa: but for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we are unable to say.
But here we only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for the existence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory,[25] is far less astonishing than that of long manuscripts, in an age essentially non-reading and non-writing, and when even suitable instruments and materials for the process are not obvious.
Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the Homeric poems could have suffered by this change, had written copies been preserved.
If Chaucer’s poetry, for instance, had not been written, it could only have come down to us in a softened form, more like the effeminate version of Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble original.
“At what period,” continues Grote, “these poems, or indeed any other Greek poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture, though there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of Solôn.
If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any more determinate period, the question at once suggests itself, What were the purposes which, in that state of society, a manuscript at its first commencement must have been intended to answer?
For whom was a written Iliad necessary?
Not for the rhapsodes; for with them it was not only planted in the memory, but also interwoven with the feelings, and conceived in conjunction with all those flexions and intonations of voice, pauses, and other oral artifices which were required for emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could never reproduce.
Not for the general public—they were accustomed to receive it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a solemn and crowded festival.
The only persons for whom the written Iliad would be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class of readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the impression communicated by the reciter.
Incredible as the statement may seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed.
If we could discover at what time such a class first began to be formed, we should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic poems were first committed to writing.
Now the period which may with the greatest probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the formation even of the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle of the seventh century before the Christian æra (B.C. 660 to B.C. 630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simonidês of Amorgus, &c.
I ground this supposition on the change then operated in the character and tendencies of Grecian poetry and music—the elegiac and the iambic measures having been introduced as rivals to the primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions having been transferred from the epical past to the affairs of present and real life.
Such a change was important at a time when poetry was the only known mode of publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable, yet the nearest approaching to the sense).
Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies which no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the Homeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may have perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among the heroes of her age, however Mr.
It is not quite in character with such a period to imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an imperfect poem in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott has done in his continuation of Sir Tristram.
“If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of Athenian compilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the total absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy of observation.
In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times, the Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of their ancestors.
But, amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greece embodied in the Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and insignificant part.
Even the few passages which relate to their ancestors, Mr.
Knight suspects to be interpolations.
The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no doubt, of far inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid would have been much more likely to have emanated from an Athenian synod of compilers of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid.
Could France have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the hero of the Jerusalem.
While it is to be confessed, that Wolf’s objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey have never been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they have failed to enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the difficulties with which the whole subject is beset, are rather augmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis.
Nor is Lachmann’s[28] modification of his theory any better.
He divides the first twenty-two books of the Iliad into sixteen different songs, and treats as ridiculous the belief that their amalgamation into one regular poem belongs to a period earlier than the age of Peisistratus.
Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian theory, and of Lachmann’s modifications with the character of Peisistratus.
But he has also shown, and we think with equal success, that the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems, or, supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by Peisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct.
“Moreover,” he continues, “the whole tenor of the poems themselves confirms what is here remarked.
These alterations Onomakritus, and the other literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to notice, even without design, had they then, for the first time, undertaken the task of piecing together many self existent epics into one large aggregate.
Everything in the two great Homeric poems, both in substance and in language, belongs to an age two or three centuries earlier than Peisistratus.
At the same time, so far from believing that the composition or primary arrangement of these poems, in their present form, was the work of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste and elegant mind of that Athenian[31] would lead him to preserve an ancient and traditional order of the poems, rather than to patch and re-construct them according to a fanciful hypothesis.
I will not repeat the many discussions respecting whether the poems were written or not, or whether the art of writing was known in the time of their reputed author.
Suffice it to say, that the more we read, the less satisfied we are upon either subject.
I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version of the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical probability must be measured by that of many others relating to the Spartan Confucius.
I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt, made by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like consistency.
It is as follows:— “No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common sailors of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to ‘discourse in excellent music’ among them.
Many of these, like those of the negroes in the United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events passing around them.
The grand events of a spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as the mystical legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besides which, a retentive memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, and was cultivated accordingly in those ancient times.
Ballads at first, and down to the beginning of the war with Troy, were merely recitations, with an intonation.
Then followed a species of recitative, probably with an intoned burden.
Tune next followed, as it aided the memory considerably.
“It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war, that a poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Mœonides, but most probably the former.
He saw that these ballads might be made of great utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position of Hellas, and, as a collection, he published these lays, connecting them by a tale of his own.
This poem now exists, under the title of the ‘Odyssea.’ The author, however, did not affix his own name to the poem, which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled from the archaic dialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him.
His noble mind seized the hint that there presented itself, and the Achilleïs[32] grew under his hand.
Unity of design, however, caused him to publish the poem under the same pseudonyme as his former work: and the disjointed lays of the ancient bards were joined together, like those relating to the Cid, into a chronicle history, named the Iliad.
Melesigenes knew that the poem was destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but, first, the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the streets, assemblies, and agoras.
To deny that many corruptions and interpolations disfigure them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here and there have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of the copyist, would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is to a higher criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or enjoy these poems.
The minutiæ of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise.
Indeed, considering the character of some of my own books, such an attempt would be gross inconsistency.
But, while I appreciate its importance in a philological view, I am inclined to set little store on its æsthetic value, especially in poetry.
Three parts of the emendations made upon poets are mere alterations, some of which, had they been suggested to the author by his Mæcenas or Africanus, he would probably have adopted.
Moreover, those who are most exact in laying down rules of verbal criticism and interpretation, are often least competent to carry out their own precepts.
Grammarians are not poets by profession, but may be so _per accidens_.
I do not at this moment remember two emendations on Homer, calculated to substantially improve the poetry of a passage, although a mass of remarks, from Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history of a thousand minute points, without which our Greek knowledge would be gloomy and jejune.
But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity.
If we compare the theories of Knight, Wolf, Lachmann, and others, we shall feel better satisfied of the utter uncertainty of criticism than of the apocryphal position of Homer.
One rejects what another considers the turning-point of his theory.
One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another would explain by omitting something else.
Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon as a literary novelty.
With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin astonished the world with the startling announcement that the Æneid of Virgil, and the satires of Horace, were literary deceptions.
Now, without wishing to say one word of disrespect against the industry and learning—nay, the refined acuteness—which scholars, like Wolf, have bestowed upon this subject, I must express my fears, that many of our modern Homeric theories will become matter for the surprise and entertainment, rather than the instruction, of posterity.
Nor can I help thinking, that the literary history of more recent times will account for many points of difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to a period so remote from that of their first creation.
I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus were of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason why corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in his day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should have given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others.
But, after all, the main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand too great a sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully appeals, and which are its most fitting judges.
The ingenuity which has sought to rob us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much violence to that inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with love and admiration for the blind bard of Chios.
To believe the author of the Iliad a mere compiler, is to degrade the powers of human invention; to elevate analytical judgment at the expense of the most ennobling impulses of the soul; and to forget the ocean in the contemplation of a polypus.
There is a catholicity, so to speak, in the very name of Homer.
Our faith in the author of the Iliad may be a mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us a better.
But it is one thing to _use_ existing romances in the embellishment of a poem, another to patch up the poem itself from such materials.
What consistency of style and execution can be hoped for from such an attempt? or, rather, what bad taste and tedium will not be the infallible result?
A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other bards, are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality.
In fact, the most original writer is still drawing upon outward impressions—nay, even his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents which support and feed the impulses of imagination.
But unless there be some grand pervading principle—some invisible, yet most distinctly stamped archetypus of the great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never come to the birth.
Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware as I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief, it still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved for a higher criticism than it has often obtained.
We are not by nature intended to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which the greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal.
Were faith no virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our ignorance on any matter.
But we are too well taught the contrary lesson; and it seems as though our faith should be especially tried touching the men and the events which have wrought most influence upon the condition of humanity.
And there is a kind of sacredness attached to the memory of the great and the good, which seems to bid us repulse the scepticism which would allegorize their existence into a pleasing apologue, and measure the giants of intellect by an homeopathic dynameter.
Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply wrapped in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots which mere analysis can discover.
In reading an heroic poem we must transform ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination must fight over the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the same sense of injury, as an Achilles or a Hector.
And if we can but attain this degree of enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely suffice for the reading of Homer), we shall feel that the poems of Homer are not only the work of one writer, but of the greatest writer that ever touched the hearts of men by the power of song.
And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems their powerful influence over the minds of the men of old.
Heeren, who is evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely observes:— “It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation.
No poet has ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his countrymen.
Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the character of other nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that of the Greeks.
This is a feature in their character which was not wholly erased even in the period of their degeneracy.
When lawgivers and sages appeared in Greece, the work of the poet had already been accomplished; and they paid homage to his superior genius.
He held up before his nation the mirror, in which they were to behold the world of gods and heroes no less than of feeble mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity and truth.
His poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature; on the love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which outweighs all others, the love of glory.
His songs were poured forth from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of man; and therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every breast which cherishes the same sympathies.
The more we read, and the more we think—think as becomes the readers of Homer,—the more rooted becomes the conviction that the Father of Poetry gave us this rich inheritance, whole and entire.
Whatever were the means of its preservation, let us rather be thankful for the treasury of taste and eloquence thus laid open to our use, than seek to make it a mere centre around which to drive a series of theories, whose wildness is only equalled by their inconsistency with each other.
As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not included in Pope’s translation, I will content myself with a brief account of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer who has done it full justice[37]:— “This poem,” says Coleridge, “is a short mock-heroic of ancient date.
His whole education had been irregular, and his earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby.
It is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive deeply into the minute and delicate features of language.
Hence his whole work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a translation.
There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes, which prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical attainments were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it is probable that these examinations were the result rather of the contradictory versions already existing, than of a desire to make a perfect transcript of the original.
And in those days, what is called literal translation was less cultivated than at present.
If something like the general sense could be decorated with the easy gracefulness of a practised poet; if the charms of metrical cadence and a pleasing fluency could be made consistent with a fair interpretation of the poet’s meaning, his _words_ were less jealously sought for, and those who could read so good a poem as Pope’s Iliad had fair reason to be satisfied.
It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope’s translation by our own advancing knowledge of the original text.
We must be content to look at it as a most delightful work in itself,—a work which is as much a part of English literature as Homer himself is of Greek.
We must not be torn from our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to ἀμφικύπελλον being an adjective, and not a substantive.
Far be it from us to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapman’s fine, bold, rough old English;—far be it from us to hold up his translation as what a translation of Homer _might_ be.
But we can still dismiss Pope’s Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the consciousness that they must have read a very great number of books before they have read its fellow.
As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn up without pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the general reader.
Having some little time since translated all the works of Homer for another publisher, I might have brought a large amount of accumulated matter, sometimes of a critical character, to bear upon the text.
But Pope’s version was no field for such a display; and my purpose was to touch briefly on antiquarian or mythological allusions, to notice occasionally _some_ departures from the original, and to give a few parallel passages from our English Homer, Milton.
In the latter task I cannot pretend to novelty, but I trust that my other annotations, while utterly disclaiming high scholastic views, will be found to convey as much as is wanted; at least, as far as the necessary limits of these volumes could be expected to admit.
To write a commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I have made Pope’s translation a little more entertaining and instructive to a mass of miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily accomplished.
THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY. _Christ Church_.
POPE’S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any writer whatever.
The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested with him, and others may have their pretensions as to particular excellences; but his invention remains yet unrivalled.
Nor is it a wonder if he has ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most excelled in that which is the very foundation of poetry.
It is the invention that, in different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses: the utmost stretch of human study, learning, and industry, which masters everything besides, can never attain to this.
It furnishes art with all her materials, and without it judgment itself can at best but “steal wisely:” for art is only like a prudent steward that lives on managing the riches of nature.
Whatever praises may be given to works of judgment, there is not even a single beauty in them to which the invention must not contribute: as in the most regular gardens, art can only reduce beauties of nature to more regularity, and such a figure, which the common eye may better take in, and is, therefore, more entertained with.
And, perhaps, the reason why common critics are inclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to a great and fruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves to pursue their observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art, than to comprehend the vast and various extent of nature.
Our author’s work is a wild paradise, where, if we cannot see all the beauties so distinctly as in an ordered garden, it is only because the number of them is infinitely greater.
It is like a copious nursery, which contains the seeds and first productions of every kind, out of which those who followed him have but selected some particular plants, each according to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify.
If some things are too luxuriant it is owing to the richness of the soil; and if others are not arrived to perfection or maturity, it is only because they are overrun and oppressed by those of a stronger nature.
It is to the strength of this amazing invention we are to attribute that unequalled fire and rapture which is so forcible in Homer, that no man of a true poetical spirit is master of himself while he reads him.
What he writes is of the most animated nature imaginable; every thing moves, every thing lives, and is put in action.
If a council be called, or a battle fought, you are not coldly informed of what was said or done as from a third person; the reader is hurried out of himself by the force of the poet’s imagination, and turns in one place to a hearer, in another to a spectator.
The course of his verses resembles that of the army he describes, Οἵδ’ ἄῤ ἴσαν, ὡσεί τε πυρὶ χθὼν πἆσα νέμοιτο.
“They pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it.” It is, however, remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere vigorous, is not discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in its fullest splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself and others, and becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity.
Exact disposition, just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers, may have been found in a thousand; but this poetic fire, this “vivida vis animi,” in a very few.
Even in works where all those are imperfect or neglected, this can overpower criticism, and make us admire even while we disapprove.
Nay, where this appears, though attended with absurdities, it brightens all the rubbish about it, till we see nothing but its own splendour.
I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in a manner superior to that of any poet through all the main constituent parts of his work: as it is the great and peculiar characteristic which distinguishes him from all other authors.
This strong and ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in the violence of its course, drew all things within its vortex.
That which Aristotle calls “the soul of poetry,” was first breathed into it by Homer.
I shall begin with considering him in his part, as it is naturally the first; and I speak of it both as it means the design of a poem, and as it is taken for fiction.
Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the marvellous.
The probable fable is the recital of such actions as, though they did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature; or of such as, though they did, became fables by the additional episodes and manner of telling them.
Of this sort is the main story of an epic poem, “The return of Ulysses, the settlement of the Trojans in Italy,” or the like.
That of the Iliad is the “anger of Achilles,” the most short and single subject that ever was chosen by any poet.
Yet this he has supplied with a vaster variety of incidents and events, and crowded with a greater number of councils, speeches, battles, and episodes of all kinds, than are to be found even in those poems whose schemes are of the utmost latitude and irregularity.
The action is hurried on with the most vehement spirit, and its whole duration employs not so much as fifty days.
Virgil, for want of so warm a genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive subject, as well as a greater length of time, and contracting the design of both Homer’s poems into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his.
The other epic poets have used the same practice, but generally carried it so far as to superinduce a multiplicity of fables, destroy the unity of action, and lose their readers in an unreasonable length of time.
Nor is it only in the main design that they have been unable to add to his invention, but they have followed him in every episode and part of story.
If he has given a regular catalogue of an army, they all draw up their forces in the same order.
If he has funeral games for Patroclus, Virgil has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit them) destroys the unity of his actions for those of Archemorus.
If he be detained from his return by the allurements of Calypso, so is Æneas by Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida.
If Achilles be absent from the army on the score of a quarrel through half the poem, Rinaldo must absent himself just as long on the like account.
If he gives his hero a suit of celestial armour, Virgil and Tasso make the same present to theirs.
Virgil has not only observed this close imitation of Homer, but, where he had not led the way, supplied the want from other Greek authors.
Thus the story of Sinon, and the taking of Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word from Pisander, as the loves of Dido and Æneas are taken from those of Medea and Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner.
To proceed to the allegorical fable—If we reflect upon those innumerable knowledges, those secrets of nature and physical philosophy which Homer is generally supposed to have wrapped up in his allegories, what a new and ample scene of wonder may this consideration afford us!
How fertile will that imagination appear, which was able to clothe all the properties of elements, the qualifications of the mind, the virtues and vices, in forms and persons, and to introduce them into actions agreeable to the nature of the things they shadowed!
This is a field in which no succeeding poets could dispute with Homer, and whatever commendations have been allowed them on this head, are by no means for their invention in having enlarged his circle, but for their judgment in having contracted it.
For when the mode of learning changed in the following ages, and science was delivered in a plainer manner, it then became as reasonable in the more modern poets to lay it aside, as it was in Homer to make use of it.
And perhaps it was no unhappy circumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that demand upon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing all those allegorical parts of a poem.
The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially the machines of the gods.
We come now to the characters of his persons; and here we shall find no author has ever drawn so many, with so visible and surprising a variety, or given us such lively and affecting impressions of them.
Every one has something so singularly his own, that no painter could have distinguished them more by their features, than the poet has by their manners.
Nothing can be more exact than the distinctions he has observed in the different degrees of virtues and vices.
The single quality of courage is wonderfully diversified in the several characters of the Iliad.
Nor is this judicious and astonishing diversity to be found only in the principal quality which constitutes the main of each character, but even in the under parts of it, to which he takes care to give a tincture of that principal one.
For example: the main characters of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct in this, that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other natural, open, and regular.
But they have, besides, characters of courage; and this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference of his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other upon experience.
It would be endless to produce instances of these kinds.
The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open manner; they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and, where they are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to those of Homer.
His characters of valour are much alike; even that of Turnus seems no way peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; and we see nothing that differences the courage of Mnestheus from that of Sergestus, Cloanthus, or the rest.
In like manner it may be remarked of Statius’s heroes, that an air of impetuosity runs through them all; the same horrid and savage courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus, Hippomedon, &c.
They have a parity of character, which makes them seem brothers of one family.
I believe when the reader is led into this tract of reflection, if he will pursue it through the epic and tragic writers, he will be convinced how infinitely superior, in this point, the invention of Homer was to that of all others.
The speeches are to be considered as they flow from the characters; being perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with the manners, of those who utter them.
As there is more variety of characters in the Iliad, so there is of speeches, than in any other poem.
“Everything in it has manner” (as Aristotle expresses it), that is, everything is acted or spoken.
It is hardly credible, in a work of such length, how small a number of lines are employed in narration.
In Virgil the dramatic part is less in proportion to the narrative, and the speeches often consist of general reflections or thoughts, which might be equally just in any person’s mouth upon the same occasion.
As many of his persons have no apparent characters, so many of his speeches escape being applied and judged by the rule of propriety.
We oftener think of the author himself when we read Virgil, than when we are engaged in Homer, all which are the effects of a colder invention, that interests us less in the action described.
If, in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the same presiding faculty is eminent in the sublimity and spirit of his thoughts.
Longinus has given his opinion, that it was in this part Homer principally excelled.
What were alone sufficient to prove the grandeur and excellence of his sentiments in general, is, that they have so remarkable a parity with those of the Scripture.
Duport, in his Gnomologia Homerica, has collected innumerable instances of this sort.
And it is with justice an excellent modern writer allows, that if Virgil has not so many thoughts that are low and vulgar, he has not so many that are sublime and noble; and that the Roman author seldom rises into very astonishing sentiments where he is not fired by the Iliad.
If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall find the invention still predominant.
To what else can we ascribe that vast comprehension of images of every sort, where we see each circumstance of art, and individual of nature, summoned together by the extent and fecundity of his imagination to which all things, in their various views presented themselves in an instant, and had their impressions taken off to perfection at a heat?
Nay, he not only gives us the full prospects of things, but several unexpected peculiarities and side views, unobserved by any painter but Homer.
Nothing is so surprising as the descriptions of his battles, which take up no less than half the Iliad, and are supplied with so vast a variety of incidents, that no one bears a likeness to another; such different kinds of deaths, that no two heroes are wounded in the same manner, and such a profusion of noble ideas, that every battle rises above the last in greatness, horror, and confusion.
It is certain there is not near that number of images and descriptions in any epic poet, though every one has assisted himself with a great quantity out of him; and it is evident of Virgil especially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are not drawn from his master.
If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright imagination of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it.
We acknowledge him the father of poetical diction; the first who taught that “language of the gods” to men.
His expression is like the colouring of some great masters, which discovers itself to be laid on boldly, and executed with rapidity.
It is, indeed, the strongest and most glowing imaginable, and touched with the greatest spirit.
Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who had found out “living words;” there are in him more daring figures and metaphors than in any good author whatever.
An arrow is “impatient” to be on the wing, a weapon “thirsts” to drink the blood of an enemy, and the like, yet his expression is never too big for the sense, but justly great in proportion to it.
To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected the compound epithets.
This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper to poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted and filled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise conduced in some measure to thicken the images.
On this last consideration I cannot but attribute these also to the fruitfulness of his invention, since (as he has managed them) they are a sort of supernumerary pictures of the persons or things to which they were joined.
We see the motion of Hector’s plumes in the epithet Κορυθαίολος, the landscape of Mount Neritus in that of Εἰνοσίφυλλος, and so of others, which particular images could not have been insisted upon so long as to express them in a description (though but of a single line) without diverting the reader too much from the principal action or figure.
As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these epithets is a short description.
Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be sensible what a share of praise is due to his invention in that also.
He was not satisfied with his language as he found it settled in any one part of Greece, but searched through its different dialects with this particular view, to beautify and perfect his numbers he considered these as they had a greater mixture of vowels or consonants, and accordingly employed them as the verse required either a greater smoothness or strength.
What he most affected was the Ionic, which has a peculiar sweetness, from its never using contractions, and from its custom of resolving the diphthongs into two syllables, so as to make the words open themselves with a more spreading and sonorous fluency.
With this he mingled the Attic contractions, the broader Doric, and the feebler Æolic, which often rejects its aspirate, or takes off its accent, and completed this variety by altering some letters with the licence of poetry.
Thus his measures, instead of being fetters to his sense, were always in readiness to run along with the warmth of his rapture, and even to give a further representation of his notions, in the correspondence of their sounds to what they signified.
This is so great a truth, that whoever will but consult the tune of his verses, even without understanding them (with the same sort of diligence as we daily see practised in the case of Italian operas), will find more sweetness, variety, and majesty of sound, than in any other language of poetry.
The beauty of his numbers is allowed by the critics to be copied but faintly by Virgil himself, though they are so just as to ascribe it to the nature of the Latin tongue: indeed the Greek has some advantages both from the natural sound of its words, and the turn and cadence of its verse, which agree with the genius of no other language.
Virgil was very sensible of this, and used the utmost diligence in working up a more intractable language to whatsoever graces it was capable of, and, in particular, never failed to bring the sound of his line to a beautiful agreement with its sense.
If the Grecian poet has not been so frequently celebrated on this account as the Roman, the only reason is, that fewer critics have understood one language than the other.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus has pointed out many of our author’s beauties in this kind, in his treatise of the Composition of Words.
It suffices at present to observe of his numbers, that they flow with so much ease, as to make one imagine Homer had no other care than to transcribe as fast as the Muses dictated, and, at the same time, with so much force and inspiriting vigour, that they awaken and raise us like the sound of a trumpet.
They roll along as a plentiful river, always in motion, and always full; while we are borne away by a tide of verse, the most rapid, and yet the most smooth imaginable.
Thus on whatever side we contemplate Homer, what principally strikes us is his invention.
I hope, in what has been said of Virgil, with regard to any of these heads, I have no way derogated from his character.
Nothing is more absurd or endless, than the common method of comparing eminent writers by an opposition of particular passages in them, and forming a judgment from thence of their merit upon the whole.
We ought to have a certain knowledge of the principal character and distinguishing excellence of each: it is in that we are to consider him, and in proportion to his degree in that we are to admire him.
No author or man ever excelled all the world in more than one faculty; and as Homer has done this in invention, Virgil has in judgment.
Not that we are to think that Homer wanted judgment, because Virgil had it in a more eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted invention, because Homer possessed a larger share of it; each of these great authors had more of both than perhaps any man besides, and are only said to have less in comparison with one another.
Homer hurries and transports us with a commanding impetuosity; Virgil leads us with an attractive majesty; Homer scatters with a generous profusion; Virgil bestows with a careful magnificence; Homer, like the Nile, pours out his riches with a boundless overflow; Virgil, like a river in its banks, with a gentle and constant stream.
When we behold their battles, methinks the two poets resemble the heroes they celebrate.
Homer, boundless and resistless as Achilles, bears all before him, and shines more and more as the tumult increases; Virgil, calmly daring, like Æneas, appears undisturbed in the midst of the action; disposes all about him, and conquers with tranquillity.
And when we look upon their machines, Homer seems like his own Jupiter in his terrors, shaking Olympus, scattering the lightnings, and firing the heavens: Virgil, like the same power in his benevolence, counselling with the gods, laying plans for empires, and regularly ordering his whole creation.
But after all, it is with great parts, as with great virtues, they naturally border on some imperfection; and it is often hard to distinguish exactly where the virtue ends, or the fault begins.
As prudence may sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment decline to coldness; and as magnanimity may run up to profusion or extravagance, so may a great invention to redundancy or wildness.
If we look upon Homer in this view, we shall perceive the chief objections against him to proceed from so noble a cause as the excess of this faculty.
Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon which so much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds of probability.
Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as with gigantic bodies, which, exerting themselves with unusual strength, exceed what is commonly thought the due proportion of parts, to become miracles in the whole; and, like the old heroes of that make, commit something near extravagance, amidst a series of glorious and inimitable performances.
Thus Homer has his “speaking horses;” and Virgil his “myrtles distilling blood;” where the latter has not so much as contrived the easy intervention of a deity to save the probability.
It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have been thought too exuberant and full of circumstances.
The force of this faculty is seen in nothing more, than in its inability to confine itself to that single circumstance upon which the comparison is grounded: it runs out into embellishments of additional images, which, however, are so managed as not to overpower the main one.
His similes are like pictures, where the principal figure has not only its proportion given agreeable to the original, but is also set off with occasional ornaments and prospects.
The same will account for his manner of heaping a number of comparisons together in one breath, when his fancy suggested to him at once so many various and correspondent images.
The reader will easily extend this observation to more objections of the same kind.
If there are others which seem rather to charge him with a defect or narrowness of genius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects will be found upon examination to proceed wholly from the nature of the times he lived in.
Such are his grosser representations of the gods; and the vicious and imperfect manners of his heroes; but I must here speak a word of the latter, as it is a point generally carried into extremes, both by the censurers and defenders of Homer.
On the other side, I would not be so delicate as those modern critics, who are shocked at the servile offices and mean employments in which we sometimes see the heroes of Homer engaged.
There is a pleasure in taking a view of that simplicity, in opposition to the luxury of succeeding ages: in beholding monarchs without their guards; princes tending their flocks, and princesses drawing water from the springs.
When we read Homer, we ought to reflect that we are reading the most ancient author in the heathen world; and those who consider him in this light, will double their pleasure in the perusal of him.
Let them think they are growing acquainted with nations and people that are now no more; that they are stepping almost three thousand years back into the remotest antiquity, and entertaining themselves with a clear and surprising vision of things nowhere else to be found, the only true mirror of that ancient world.
By this means alone their greatest obstacles will vanish; and what usually creates their dislike, will become a satisfaction.
This consideration may further serve to answer for the constant use of the same epithets to his gods and heroes; such as the “far-darting Phœbus,” the “blue-eyed Pallas,” the “swift-footed Achilles,” &c., which some have censured as impertinent, and tediously repeated.
Those of the gods depended upon the powers and offices then believed to belong to them; and had contracted a weight and veneration from the rites and solemn devotions in which they were used: they were a sort of attributes with which it was a matter of religion to salute them on all occasions, and which it was an irreverence to omit.
As for the epithets of great men, Mons.
Boileau is of opinion, that they were in the nature of surnames, and repeated as such; for the Greeks having no names derived from their fathers, were obliged to add some other distinction of each person; either naming his parents expressly, or his place of birth, profession, or the like: as Alexander the son of Philip, Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic, &c.
Homer, therefore, complying with the custom of his country, used such distinctive additions as better agreed with poetry.
And, indeed, we have something parallel to these in modern times, such as the names of Harold Harefoot, Edmund Ironside, Edward Longshanks, Edward the Black Prince, &c.
If yet this be thought to account better for the propriety than for the repetition, I shall add a further conjecture.
Many have been occasioned by an injudicious endeavour to exalt Virgil; which is much the same, as if one should think to raise the superstructure by undermining the foundation: one would imagine, by the whole course of their parallels, that these critics never so much as heard of Homer’s having written first; a consideration which whoever compares these two poets ought to have always in his eye.
Others select those particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as some that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of Scaliger in his Poetics.
Others quarrel with what they take for low and mean expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy and refinement, oftener from an ignorance of the graces of the original, and then triumph in the awkwardness of their own translations: this is the conduct of Perrault in his Parallels.
The same might as well be said of Virgil, or any great author whose general character will infallibly raise many casual additions to their reputation.
This is the method of Mons. de la Mott; who yet confesses upon the whole that in whatever age Homer had lived, he must have been the greatest poet of his nation, and that he may be said in his sense to be the master even of those who surpassed him.
In all these objections we see nothing that contradicts his title to the honour of the chief invention: and as long as this (which is indeed the characteristic of poetry itself) remains unequalled by his followers, he still continues superior to them.
A cooler judgment may commit fewer faults, and be more approved in the eyes of one sort of critics: but that warmth of fancy will carry the loudest and most universal applauses which holds the heart of a reader under the strongest enchantment.
Homer not only appears the inventor of poetry, but excels all the inventors of other arts, in this, that he has swallowed up the honour of those who succeeded him.
What he has done admitted no increase, it only left room for contraction or regulation.
He showed all the stretch of fancy at once; and if he has failed in some of his flights, it was but because he attempted everything.
Having now spoken of the beauties and defects of the original, it remains to treat of the translation, with the same view to the chief characteristic.
As far as that is seen in the main parts of the poem, such as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudice it but by wilful omissions or contractions.
As it also breaks out in every particular image, description, and simile, whoever lessens or too much softens those, takes off from this chief character.
It is the first grand duty of an interpreter to give his author entire and unmaimed; and for the rest, the diction and versification only are his proper province, since these must be his own, but the others he is to take as he finds them.
It should then be considered what methods may afford some equivalent in our language for the graces of these in the Greek.
It is certain no literal translation can be just to an excellent original in a superior language: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have done) that a rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect; which is no less in danger to lose the spirit of an ancient, by deviating into the modern manners of expression.
If there be sometimes a darkness, there is often a light in antiquity, which nothing better preserves than a version almost literal.
I know no liberties one ought to take, but those which are necessary to transfusing the spirit of the original, and supporting the poetical style of the translation: and I will venture to say, there have not been more men misled in former times by a servile, dull adherence to the letter, than have been deluded in ours by a chimerical, insolent hope of raising and improving their author.
It is not to be doubted, that the fire of the poem is what a translator should principally regard, as it is most likely to expire in his managing: however, it is his safest way to be content with preserving this to his utmost in the whole, without endeavouring to be more than he finds his author is, in any particular place.
It is a great secret in writing, to know when to be plain, and when poetical and figurative; and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will but follow modestly in his footsteps.
Where his diction is bold and lofty, let us raise ours as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we ought not to be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the censure of a mere English critic.
Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to have been more commonly mistaken than the just pitch of his style: some of his translators having swelled into fustian in a proud confidence of the sublime; others sunk into flatness, in a cold and timorous notion of simplicity.
Methinks I see these different followers of Homer, some sweating and straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (the certain signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping in his train, while the poet himself is all the time proceeding with an unaffected and equal majesty before them.
However, of the two extremes one could sooner pardon frenzy than frigidity; no author is to be envied for such commendations, as he may gain by that character of style, which his friends must agree together to call simplicity, and the rest of the world will call dulness.
There is a graceful and dignified simplicity, as well as a bold and sordid one; which differ as much from each other as the air of a plain man from that of a sloven: it is one thing to be tricked up, and another not to be dressed at all.
Simplicity is the mean between ostentation and rusticity.
This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in such perfection as in the Scripture and our author.
One may affirm, with all respect to the inspired writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other words but what were intelligible and common to men at that time, and in that part of the world; and, as Homer is the author nearest to those, his style must of course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books than that of any other writer.
For a further preservation of this air of simplicity, a particular care should be taken to express with all plainness those moral sentences and proverbial speeches which are so numerous in this poet.
They have something venerable, and as I may say, oracular, in that unadorned gravity and shortness with which they are delivered: a grace which would be utterly lost by endeavouring to give them what we call a more ingenious (that is, a more modern) turn in the paraphrase.
Perhaps the mixture of some Græcisms and old words after the manner of Milton, if done without too much affectation, might not have an ill effect in a version of this particular work, which most of any other seems to require a venerable, antique cast.
But certainly the use of modern terms of war and government, such as “platoon, campaign, junto,” or the like, (into which some of his translators have fallen) cannot be allowable; those only excepted without which it is impossible to treat the subjects in any living language.
There are two peculiarities in Homer’s diction, which are a sort of marks or moles by which every common eye distinguishes him at first sight; those who are not his greatest admirers look upon them as defects, and those who are, seemed pleased with them as beauties.
I speak of his compound epithets, and of his repetitions.
Many of the former cannot be done literally into English without destroying the purity of our language.
I believe such should be retained as slide easily of themselves into an English compound, without violence to the ear or to the received rules of composition, as well as those which have received a sanction from the authority of our best poets, and are become familiar through their use of them; such as “the cloud-compelling Jove,” &c.
As for the rest, whenever any can be as fully and significantly expressed in a single word as in a compounded one, the course to be taken is obvious.
As for Homer’s repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of whole narrations and speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse or hemistitch.
I hope it is not impossible to have such a regard to these, as neither to lose so known a mark of the author on the one hand, nor to offend the reader too much on the other.
The repetition is not ungraceful in those speeches, where the dignity of the speaker renders it a sort of insolence to alter his words; as in the messages from gods to men, or from higher powers to inferiors in concerns of state, or where the ceremonial of religion seems to require it, in the solemn forms of prayers, oaths, or the like.
In other cases, I believe the best rule is, to be guided by the nearness, or distance, at which the repetitions are placed in the original: when they follow too close, one may vary the expression; but it is a question, whether a professed translator be authorized to omit any: if they be tedious, the author is to answer for it.
It only remains to speak of the versification.
Homer (as has been said) is perpetually applying the sound to the sense, and varying it on every new subject.
This is indeed one of the most exquisite beauties of poetry, and attainable by very few: I only know of Homer eminent for it in the Greek, and Virgil in the Latin.
I am sensible it is what may sometimes happen by chance, when a writer is warm, and fully possessed of his image: however, it may reasonably be believed they designed this, in whose verse it so manifestly appears in a superior degree to all others.
Few readers have the ear to be judges of it: but those who have, will see I have endeavoured at this beauty.
Upon the whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doing justice to Homer.
I attempt him in no other hope but that which one may entertain without much vanity, of giving a more tolerable copy of him than any entire translation in verse has yet done.
Chapman has taken the advantage of an immeasurable length of verse, notwithstanding which, there is scarce any paraphrase more loose and rambling than his.
He has frequent interpolations of four or six lines; and I remember one in the thirteenth book of the Odyssey, ver. 312, where he has spun twenty verses out of two.
He is often mistaken in so bold a manner, that one might think he deviated on purpose, if he did not in other places of his notes insist so much upon verbal trifles.
He appears to have had a strong affectation of extracting new meanings out of his author; insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of the mysteries he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to strain the obvious sense to this end.
His expression is involved in fustian; a fault for which he was remarkable in his original writings, as in the tragedy of Bussy d’Amboise, &c.
In a word, the nature of the man may account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface and remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in poetry.
His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than fifteen weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed.
But that which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation, which is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have writ before he arrived at years of discretion.
Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but for particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often omits the most beautiful.
As for its being esteemed a close translation, I doubt not many have been led into that error by the shortness of it, which proceeds not from his following the original line by line, but from the contractions above mentioned.
He sometimes omits whole similes and sentences; and is now and then guilty of mistakes, into which no writer of his learning could have fallen, but through carelessness.
His poetry, as well as Ogilby’s, is too mean for criticism.
It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr.
Dryden did not live to translate the Iliad.
He has left us only the first book, and a small part of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly interpreted the sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of the haste he was obliged to write in.
He seems to have had too much regard to Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies, and has unhappily followed him in passages where he wanders from the original.
However, had he translated the whole work, I would no more have attempted Homer after him than Virgil: his version of whom (notwithstanding some human errors) is the most noble and spirited translation I know in any language.
But the fate of great geniuses is like that of great ministers: though they are confessedly the first in the commonwealth of letters, they must be envied and calumniated only for being at the head of it.
What I would further recommend to him is, to study his author rather from his own text, than from any commentaries, how learned soever, or whatever figure they may make in the estimation of the world; to consider him attentively in comparison with Virgil above all the ancients, and with Milton above all the moderns.
Next these, the Archbishop of Cambray’s Telemachus may give him the truest idea of the spirit and turn of our author; and Bossu’s admirable Treatise of the Epic Poem the justest notion of his design and conduct.
But after all, with whatever judgment and study a man may proceed, or with whatever happiness he may perform such a work, he must hope to please but a few; those only who have at once a taste of poetry, and competent learning.
For to satisfy such a want either, is not in the nature of this undertaking; since a mere modern wit can like nothing that is not modern, and a pedant nothing that is not Greek.
What I have done is submitted to the public; from whose opinions I am prepared to learn; though I fear no judges so little as our best poets, who are most sensible of the weight of this task.
As for the worst, whatever they shall please to say, they may give me some concern as they are unhappy men, but none as they are malignant writers.
I was guided in this translation by judgments very different from theirs, and by persons for whom they can have no kindness, if an old observation be true, that the strongest antipathy in the world is that of fools to men of wit.
Addison was the first whose advice determined me to undertake this task; who was pleased to write to me upon that occasion in such terms as I cannot repeat without vanity.
I was obliged to Sir Richard Steele for a very early recommendation of my undertaking to the public.
Swift promoted my interest with that warmth with which he always serves his friend.
The humanity and frankness of Sir Samuel Garth are what I never knew wanting on any occasion.
I must also acknowledge, with infinite pleasure, the many friendly offices, as well as sincere criticisms, of Mr.
Congreve, who had led me the way in translating some parts of Homer.
Parnell, though I shall take a further opportunity of doing justice to the last, whose good nature (to give it a great panegyric), is no less extensive than his learning.
The favour of these gentlemen is not entirely undeserved by one who bears them so true an affection.
But what can I say of the honour so many of the great have done me; while the first names of the age appear as my subscribers, and the most distinguished patrons and ornaments of learning as my chief encouragers?
I cannot deny myself the pride of confessing, that I have had the advantage not only of their advice for the conduct in general, but their correction of several particulars of this translation.
I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being distinguished by the Earl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize any one generous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series of them.
Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon my desire of having it known that he was pleased to promote this affair.
The particular zeal of Mr.
Harcourt (the son of the late Lord Chancellor) gave me a proof how much I am honoured in a share of his friendship.
I must attribute to the same motive that of several others of my friends: to whom all acknowledgments are rendered unnecessary by the privileges of a familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I can no way better oblige men of their turn than by my silence.
He would have thought himself happy to have met the same favour at Athens that has been shown me by its learned rival, the University of Oxford.
And I can hardly envy him those pompous honours he received after death, when I reflect on the enjoyment of so many agreeable obligations, and easy friendships, which make the satisfaction of life.
This distinction is the more to be acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose pen has never gratified the prejudices of particular parties, or the vanities of particular men.
Whatever the success may prove, I shall never repent of an undertaking in which I have experienced the candour and friendship of so many persons of merit; and in which I hope to pass some of those years of youth that are generally lost in a circle of follies, after a manner neither wholly unuseful to others, nor disagreeable to myself.
ARGUMENT.[40] THE CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.
In the war of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighbouring towns, and taken from thence two beautiful captives, Chryseïs and Briseïs, allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to Achilles.
The priest being refused, and insolently dismissed by Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god; who inflicts a pestilence on the Greeks.
Achilles calls a council, and encourages Chalcas to declare the cause of it; who attributes it to the refusal of Chryseïs.
The king, being obliged to send back his captive, enters into a furious contest with Achilles, which Nestor pacifies; however, as he had the absolute command of the army, he seizes on Briseïs in revenge.
Achilles in discontent withdraws himself and his forces from the rest of the Greeks; and complaining to Thetis, she supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of the wrong done to her son, by giving victory to the Trojans.
Jupiter, granting her suit, incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs high, till they are reconciled by the address of Vulcan.
The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine during the plague, one in the council and quarrel of the princes, and twelve for Jupiter’s stay with the Æthiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers her petition.
Achilles’ wrath, to Greece the direful spring Of woes unnumber’d, heavenly goddess, sing!
For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain His captive daughter from the victor’s chain.
Suppliant the venerable father stands; Apollo’s awful ensigns grace his hands: By these he begs; and lowly bending down, Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown.
He sued to all, but chief implored for grace The brother-kings, of Atreus’ royal race[46] “Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown’d, And Troy’s proud walls lie level with the ground.
May Jove restore you when your toils are o’er Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
But, oh! relieve a wretched parent’s pain, And give Chryseïs to these arms again; If mercy fail, yet let my presents move, And dread avenging Phœbus, son of Jove.” The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare, The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride, Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied: “Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains, Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains: Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod, Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.
Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain; And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain; Till time shall rifle every youthful grace, And age dismiss her from my cold embrace, In daily labours of the loom employ’d, Or doom’d to deck the bed she once enjoy’d.
Disconsolate, not daring to complain, Silent he wander’d by the sounding main; Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays, The god who darts around the world his rays.
“O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona’s line,[47] Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,[48] Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores, And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa’s shores.
If e’er with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,[49] Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain; God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ, Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy.” Thus Chryses pray’d:—the favouring power attends, And from Olympus’ lofty tops descends.
Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread, And gloomy darkness roll’d about his head.
On mules and dogs the infection first began;[51] And last, the vengeful arrows fix’d in man.
But ere the tenth revolving day was run, Inspired by Juno, Thetis’ godlike son Convened to council all the Grecian train; For much the goddess mourn’d her heroes slain.[52] The assembly seated, rising o’er the rest, Achilles thus the king of men address’d: “Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore, And measure back the seas we cross’d before?
The plague destroying whom the sword would spare, ’Tis time to save the few remains of war.
But let some prophet, or some sacred sage, Explore the cause of great Apollo’s rage; Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.[53] If broken vows this heavy curse have laid, Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
Still must that tongue some wounding message bring, And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king?
For this are Phœbus’ oracles explored, To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord?
For this with falsehood is my honour stain’d, Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned; Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold, And heavenly charms prefer to proffer’d gold?
A maid, unmatch’d in manners as in face, Skill’d in each art, and crown’d with every grace; Not half so dear were Clytæmnestra’s charms, When first her blooming beauties bless’d my arms.
The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign, So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
But since for common good I yield the fair, My private loss let grateful Greece repair; Nor unrewarded let your prince complain, That he alone has fought and bled in vain.” “Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies), Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain, We share with justice, as with toil we gain; But to resume whate’er thy avarice craves (That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
Yet if our chief for plunder only fight, The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite, Whene’er, by Jove’s decree, our conquering powers Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers.” Then thus the king: “Shall I my prize resign With tame content, and thou possess’d of thine?
First let the just equivalent be paid; Such as a king might ask; and let it be A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
The man who suffers, loudly may complain; And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
But this when time requires.—It now remains We launch a bark to plough the watery plains, And waft the sacrifice to Chrysa’s shores, With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
Inglorious slave to interest, ever join’d With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
What generous Greek, obedient to thy word, Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?
The distant Trojans never injured me; To Phthia’s realms no hostile troops they led: Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed; Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main, And walls of rocks, secure my native reign, Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace, Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.
Hither we sail’d, a voluntary throng, To avenge a private, not a public wrong: What else to Troy the assembled nations draws, But thine, ungrateful, and thy brother’s cause?
Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve; Disgraced and injured by the man we serve?
And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away, Due to the deeds of many a dreadful day?
A prize as small, O tyrant! match’d with thine, As thy own actions if compared to mine.
Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey, Though mine the sweat and danger of the day.
But know, proud monarch, I’m thy slave no more; My fleet shall waft me to Thessalia’s shore: Left by Achilles on the Trojan plain, What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?” To this the king: “Fly, mighty warrior! fly; Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.
Of all the kings (the god’s distinguish’d care) To power superior none such hatred bear: Strife and debate thy restless soul employ, And wars and horrors are thy savage joy, If thou hast strength, ’twas Heaven that strength bestow’d; For know, vain man! thy valour is from God.
Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed away; Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway; I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate Thy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate.
Go, threat thy earth-born Myrmidons:—but here[56] ’Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear.
Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand, My bark shall waft her to her native land; But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare, Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive fair: Even in thy tent I’ll seize the blooming prize, Thy loved Briseïs with the radiant eyes.
Just as in anguish of suspense he stay’d, While half unsheathed appear’d the glittering blade,[57] Minerva swift descended from above, Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove (For both the princes claim’d her equal care); Behind she stood, and by the golden hair Achilles seized; to him alone confess’d; A sable cloud conceal’d her from the rest.
The force of keen reproaches let him feel; But sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel.
For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power) Thy injured honour has its fated hour, When the proud monarch shall thy arms implore, And bribe thy friendship with a boundless store.
Then let revenge no longer bear the sway; Command thy passions, and the gods obey.” To her Pelides:—“With regardful ear, ’Tis just, O goddess!
I thy dictates hear.
Hard as it is, my vengeance I suppress: Those who revere the gods the gods will bless.” He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid; Then in the sheath return’d the shining blade.
Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook, Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke: “O monster! mix’d of insolence and fear, Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
When wert thou known in ambush’d fights to dare, Or nobly face the horrid front of war? ’Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try; Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die: So much ’tis safer through the camp to go, And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
Sent in Jove’s anger on a slavish race; Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past, Are tamed to wrongs;—or this had been thy last.
When, flush’d with slaughter, Hector comes to spread The purpled shore with mountains of the dead, Then shalt thou mourn the affront thy madness gave, Forced to deplore when impotent to save: Then rage in bitterness of soul to know This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe.” He spoke; and furious hurl’d against the ground His sceptre starr’d with golden studs around: Then sternly silent sat.
To calm their passion with the words of age, Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage, Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill’d; Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill’d:[58] Two generations now had pass’d away, Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway; Two ages o’er his native realm he reign’d, And now the example of the third remain’d.
All view’d with awe the venerable man; Who thus with mild benevolence began:— “What shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy To Troy’s proud monarch, and the friends of Troy!
Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain, Nor think your Nestor’s years and wisdom vain.
Lives there a chief to match Pirithous’ fame, Dryas the bold, or Ceneus’ deathless name; Theseus, endued with more than mortal might, Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?
If in my youth, even these esteem’d me wise; Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise.
Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave; That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave: Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride; Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside.
Thee, the first honours of the war adorn, Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born; Him, awful majesty exalts above The powers of earth, and sceptred sons of Jove.
Let both unite with well-consenting mind, So shall authority with strength be join’d.
Leave me, O king! to calm Achilles’ rage; Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.
Achilles should be lost, The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host.” This said, he ceased.
But that imperious, that unconquer’d soul, No laws can limit, no respect control.
Before his pride must his superiors fall; His word the law, and he the lord of all?
Grant that the gods his matchless force have given; Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?” Here on the monarch’s speech Achilles broke, And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke: “Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain, To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain, Should I submit to each unjust decree:— Command thy vassals, but command not me.
Seize on Briseïs, whom the Grecians doom’d My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed; And seize secure; no more Achilles draws His conquering sword in any woman’s cause.
The gods command me to forgive the past: But let this first invasion be the last: For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade, Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade.” At this they ceased: the stern debate expired: The chiefs in sullen majesty retired.
Achilles with Patroclus took his way Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
Meantime Atrides launch’d with numerous oars A well-rigg’d ship for Chrysa’s sacred shores: High on the deck was fair Chryseïs placed, And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced: Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow’d, Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.
The host to expiate next the king prepares, With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
Wash’d by the briny wave, the pious train[59] Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.
Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid, And bulls and goats to Phœbus’ altars paid; The sable fumes in curling spires arise, And waft their grateful odours to the skies.
The army thus in sacred rites engaged, Atrides still with deep resentment raged.
To wait his will two sacred heralds stood, Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
“Haste to the fierce Achilles’ tent (he cries), Thence bear Briseïs as our royal prize: Submit he must; or if they will not part, Ourself in arms shall tear her from his heart.” The unwilling heralds act their lord’s commands; Pensive they walk along the barren sands: Arrived, the hero in his tent they find, With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined.
At awful distance long they silent stand, Loth to advance, and speak their hard command; Decent confusion!
This the godlike man Perceived, and thus with accent mild began: “With leave and honour enter our abodes, Ye sacred ministers of men and gods![60] I know your message; by constraint you came; Not you, but your imperious lord I blame.
Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseïs bring; Conduct my captive to the haughty king.
But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow, Witness to gods above, and men below!
The waves divide; And like a mist she rose above the tide; Beheld him mourning on the naked shores, And thus the sorrows of his soul explores.
From Thebé, sacred to Apollo’s name[62] (Aëtion’s realm), our conquering army came, With treasure loaded and triumphant spoils, Whose just division crown’d the soldier’s toils; But bright Chryseïs, heavenly prize! was led, By vote selected, to the general’s bed.
But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.
To high Olympus’ shining court ascend, Urge all the ties to former service owed, And sue for vengeance to the thundering god.
Oft hast thou triumph’d in the glorious boast, That thou stood’st forth of all the ethereal host, When bold rebellion shook the realms above, The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove: When the bright partner of his awful reign, The warlike maid, and monarch of the main, The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven, Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far Behold the field, not mingle in the war.
The sire of gods and all the ethereal train, On the warm limits of the farthest main, Now mix with mortals, nor disdain to grace The feasts of Æthiopia’s blameless race,[66] Twelve days the powers indulge the genial rite, Returning with the twelfth revolving light.
Then will I mount the brazen dome, and move The high tribunal of immortal Jove.” The goddess spoke: the rolling waves unclose; Then down the steep she plunged from whence she rose, And left him sorrowing on the lonely coast, In wild resentment for the fair he lost.
In Chrysa’s port now sage Ulysses rode; Beneath the deck the destined victims stow’d: The sails they furl’d, they lash the mast aside, And dropp’d their anchors, and the pinnace tied.
Next on the shore their hecatomb they land; Chryseïs last descending on the strand.
If, fired to vengeance at thy priest’s request, Thy direful darts inflict the raging pest: Once more attend! avert the wasteful woe, And smile propitious, and unbend thy bow.” So Chryses pray’d.
Apollo heard his prayer: And now the Greeks their hecatomb prepare; Between their horns the salted barley threw, And, with their heads to heaven, the victims slew:[68] The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide; The thighs, selected to the gods, divide: On these, in double cauls involved with art, The choicest morsels lay from every part.
The priest himself before his altar stands, And burns the offering with his holy hands.
Pours the black wine, and sees the flames aspire; The youth with instruments surround the fire: The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress’d, The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest: Then spread the tables, the repast prepare; Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
Far on the beach they haul their bark to land, (The crooked keel divides the yellow sand,) Then part, where stretch’d along the winding bay, The ships and tents in mingled prospect lay.
But raging still, amidst his navy sat The stern Achilles, stedfast in his hate; Nor mix’d in combat, nor in council join’d; But wasting cares lay heavy on his mind: In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll, And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul.
Twelve days were past, and now the dawning light The gods had summon’d to the Olympian height: Jove, first ascending from the watery bowers, Leads the long order of ethereal powers.
When, like the morning-mist in early day, Rose from the flood the daughter of the sea: And to the seats divine her flight address’d.
There, far apart, and high above the rest, The thunderer sat; where old Olympus shrouds His hundred heads in heaven, and props the clouds.
Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed Beneath his beard, and one his knees embraced.
Fame is at least by heavenly promise due To life so short, and now dishonour’d too.
Not so repulsed, the goddess closer press’d, Still grasp’d his knees, and urged the dear request.
“O sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear; Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
Or oh! declare, of all the powers above, Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?” She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies, Who rolls the thunder o’er the vaulted skies: “What hast thou ask’d? ah, why should Jove engage In foreign contests and domestic rage, The gods’ complaints, and Juno’s fierce alarms, While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms?
The shining synod of the immortals wait The coming god, and from their thrones of state Arising silent, wrapp’d in holy fear, Before the majesty of heaven appear.
Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne, All, but the god’s imperious queen alone: Late had she view’d the silver-footed dame, And all her passions kindled into flame.
“Say, artful manager of heaven (she cries), Who now partakes the secrets of the skies?
Thy Juno knows not the decrees of fate, In vain the partner of imperial state.
What favourite goddess then those cares divides, Which Jove in prudence from his consort hides?” To this the thunderer: “Seek not thou to find The sacred counsels of almighty mind: Involved in darkness lies the great decree, Nor can the depths of fate be pierced by thee.
What fits thy knowledge, thou the first shalt know; The first of gods above, and men below; But thou, nor they, shall search the thoughts that roll Deep in the close recesses of my soul.” Full on the sire the goddess of the skies Roll’d the large orbs of her majestic eyes, And thus return’d:—“Austere Saturnius, say, From whence this wrath, or who controls thy sway?
Thy boundless will, for me, remains in force, And all thy counsels take the destined course.
What fatal favour has the goddess won, To grace her fierce, inexorable son?
Perhaps in Grecian blood to drench the plain, And glut his vengeance with my people slain.” Then thus the god: “O restless fate of pride, That strives to learn what heaven resolves to hide; Vain is the search, presumptuous and abhorr’d, Anxious to thee, and odious to thy lord.
Let this suffice: the immutable decree No force can shake: what is, that ought to be.
The feast disturb’d, with sorrow Vulcan saw His mother menaced, and the gods in awe; Peace at his heart, and pleasure his design, Thus interposed the architect divine: “The wretched quarrels of the mortal state Are far unworthy, gods! of your debate: Let men their days in senseless strife employ, We, in eternal peace and constant joy.
Thou, goddess-mother, with our sire comply, Nor break the sacred union of the sky: Lest, roused to rage, he shake the bless’d abodes, Launch the red lightning, and dethrone the gods.
If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased; The gracious power is willing to be pleased.” Thus Vulcan spoke: and rising with a bound, The double bowl with sparkling nectar crown’d,[72] Which held to Juno in a cheerful way, “Goddess (he cried), be patient and obey.
Once in your cause I felt his matchless might, Hurl’d headlong down from the ethereal height;[73] Toss’d all the day in rapid circles round, Nor till the sun descended touch’d the ground.
Breathless I fell, in giddy motion lost; The Sinthians raised me on the Lemnian coast;[74] He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved, Which, with a smile, the white-arm’d queen received Then, to the rest he fill’d; and in his turn, Each to his lips applied the nectar’d urn, Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies, And unextinguish’d laughter shakes the skies.
Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong, In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.[75] Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round With voice alternate aid the silver sound.
THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY, AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES.
Jupiter, in pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitful vision to Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the army to battle, in order to make the Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles.
The general, who is deluded with the hopes of taking Troy without his assistance, but fears the army was discouraged by his absence, and the late plague, as well as by the length of time, contrives to make trial of their disposition by a stratagem.
He first communicates his design to the princes in council, that he would propose a return to the soldiers, and that they should put a stop to them if the proposal was embraced.
Then he assembles the whole host, and upon moving for a return to Greece, they unanimously agree to it, and run to prepare the ships.
They are detained by the management of Ulysses, who chastises the insolence of Thersites.
The assembly is recalled, several speeches made on the occasion, and at length the advice of Nestor followed, which was to make a general muster of the troops, and to divide them into their several nations, before they proceeded to battle.
This gives occasion to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the Greeks and Trojans, and in a large catalogue.
The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day.
Now pleasing sleep had seal’d each mortal eye, Stretch’d in the tents the Grecian leaders lie: The immortals slumber’d on their thrones above; All, but the ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.[76] To honour Thetis’ son he bends his care, And plunge the Greeks in all the woes of war: Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight, And thus commands the vision of the night.
“Fly hence, deluding Dream! and light as air,[77] To Agamemnon’s ample tent repair.
Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train, Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.
Declare, e’en now ’tis given him to destroy The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend, At Juno’s suit the heavenly factions end.
In just array draw forth the embattled train, Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain; E’en now, O king! ’tis given thee to destroy The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
Destruction hangs o’er yon devoted wall, And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.
Awake, but waking this advice approve, And trust the vision that descends from Jove.” The phantom said; then vanish’d from his sight, Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.
A thousand schemes the monarch’s mind employ; Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy: Vain as he was, and to the future blind, Nor saw what Jove and secret fate design’d, What mighty toils to either host remain, What scenes of grief, and numbers of the slain!
Eager he rises, and in fancy hears The voice celestial murmuring in his ears.
First on his limbs a slender vest he drew, Around him next the regal mantle threw, The embroider’d sandals on his feet were tied; The starry falchion glitter’d at his side; And last, his arm the massy sceptre loads, Unstain’d, immortal, and the gift of gods.
The king despatch’d his heralds with commands To range the camp and summon all the bands: The gathering hosts the monarch’s word obey; While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.
In his black ship the Pylian prince he found; There calls a senate of the peers around: The assembly placed, the king of men express’d The counsels labouring in his artful breast.
“Friends and confederates! with attentive ear Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
Monarch, awake! ’tis Jove’s command I bear, Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
In just array draw forth the embattled train, And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain; E’en now, O king! ’tis given thee to destroy The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
This hear observant, and the gods obey!’ The vision spoke, and pass’d in air away.
But first, with caution, try what yet they dare, Worn with nine years of unsuccessful war.
To move the troops to measure back the main, Be mine; and yours the province to detain.” He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said, (Nestor, whom Pylos’ sandy realms obey’d,) “Princes of Greece, your faithful ears incline, Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine; Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host, Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!
Then let us haste, obey the god’s alarms, And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms.” Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay Dissolve the council, and their chief obey: The sceptred rulers lead; the following host, Pour’d forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.
Fame flies before the messenger of Jove, And shining soars, and claps her wings above.
Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud[82] The monarch’s will, suspend the listening crowd.
Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear, And fainter murmurs died upon the ear, The king of kings his awful figure raised: High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed; The golden sceptre, of celestial flame, By Vulcan form’d, from Jove to Hermes came.
Of partial Jove with justice I complain, And heavenly oracles believed in vain A safe return was promised to our toils, Renown’d, triumphant, and enrich’d with spoils.
Now shameful flight alone can save the host, Our blood, our treasure, and our glory lost.
So Jove decrees, resistless lord of all!
What shame to Greece a fruitful war to wage, Oh, lasting shame in every future age!
Once great in arms, the common scorn we grow, Repulsed and baffled by a feeble foe.
So small their number, that if wars were ceased, And Greece triumphant held a general feast, All rank’d by tens, whole decades when they dine Must want a Trojan slave to pour the wine.[84] But other forces have our hopes o’erthrown, And Troy prevails by armies not her own.
Now nine long years of mighty Jove are run, Since first the labours of this war begun: Our cordage torn, decay’d our vessels lie, And scarce insure the wretched power to fly.
Our weeping wives, our tender children call: Love, duty, safety, summon us away, ’Tis nature’s voice, and nature we obey.
Our shatter’d barks may yet transport us o’er, Safe and inglorious, to our native shore.
Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars employ, And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy.” His deep design unknown, the hosts approve Atrides’ speech.
So roll the billows to the Icarian shore, From east and south when winds begin to roar, Burst their dark mansions in the clouds, and sweep The whitening surface of the ruffled deep.
And as on corn when western gusts descend,[85] Before the blast the lofty harvests bend: Thus o’er the field the moving host appears, With nodding plumes and groves of waving spears.
The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feet Beat the loose sands, and thicken to the fleet; With long-resounding cries they urge the train To fit the ships, and launch into the main.
They toil, they sweat, thick clouds of dust arise, The doubling clamours echo to the skies.
E’en then the Greeks had left the hostile plain, And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain; But Jove’s imperial queen their flight survey’d, And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid: “Shall then the Grecians fly!
And leave unpunish’d this perfidious race?
Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse, In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?
And bravest chiefs, in Helen’s quarrel slain, Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms, Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain, Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main.” Pallas obeys, and from Olympus’ height Swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
Ulysses, first in public cares, she found, For prudent counsel like the gods renown’d: Oppress’d with generous grief the hero stood, Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood.
“And is it thus, divine Laertes’ son, Thus fly the Greeks (the martial maid begun), Thus to their country bear their own disgrace, And fame eternal leave to Priam’s race?
Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed, Still unrevenged, a thousand heroes bleed!
Haste, generous Ithacus! prevent the shame, Recall your armies, and your chiefs reclaim.
Your own resistless eloquence employ, And to the immortals trust the fall of Troy.” The voice divine confess’d the warlike maid, Ulysses heard, nor uninspired obey’d: Then meeting first Atrides, from his hand Received the imperial sceptre of command.
Thus graced, attention and respect to gain, He runs, he flies through all the Grecian train; Each prince of name, or chief in arms approved, He fired with praise, or with persuasion moved.
“Warriors like you, with strength and wisdom bless’d, By brave examples should confirm the rest.
Jove loves our chief, from Jove his honour springs, Beware! for dreadful is the wrath of kings.” But if a clamorous vile plebeian rose, Him with reproof he check’d or tamed with blows.
Ye gods, what dastards would our host command!
Be silent, wretch, and think not here allow’d That worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.
To one sole monarch Jove commits the sway; His are the laws, and him let all obey.”[86] With words like these the troops Ulysses ruled, The loudest silenced, and the fiercest cool’d.
Back to the assembly roll the thronging train, Desert the ships, and pour upon the plain.
Murmuring they move, as when old ocean roars, And heaves huge surges to the trembling shores; The groaning banks are burst with bellowing sound, The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound.
Thersites only clamour’d in the throng, Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue: Awed by no shame, by no respect controll’d, In scandal busy, in reproaches bold: With witty malice studious to defame, Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:— But chief he gloried with licentious style To lash the great, and monarchs to revile.
His figure such as might his soul proclaim; One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame: His mountain shoulders half his breast o’erspread, Thin hairs bestrew’d his long misshapen head.
Spleen to mankind his envious heart possess’d, And much he hated all, but most the best: Ulysses or Achilles still his theme; But royal scandal his delight supreme, Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek, Vex’d when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.
Sharp was his voice; which in the shrillest tone, Thus with injurious taunts attack’d the throne.
“Amidst the glories of so bright a reign, What moves the great Atrides to complain? ’Tis thine whate’er the warrior’s breast inflames, The golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames.
Say, shall we march with our unconquer’d powers (The Greeks and I) to Ilion’s hostile towers, And bring the race of royal bastards here, For Troy to ransom at a price too dear?
But safer plunder thy own host supplies; Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leader’s prize?
Or, if thy heart to generous love be led, Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly bed?
Hence let us fly, and let him waste his store In loves and pleasures on the Phrygian shore.
We may be wanted on some busy day, When Hector comes: so great Achilles may: From him he forced the prize we jointly gave, From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave: And durst he, as he ought, resent that wrong, This mighty tyrant were no tyrant long.” Fierce from his seat at this Ulysses springs,[87] In generous vengeance of the king of kings.
With indignation sparkling in his eyes, He views the wretch, and sternly thus replies: “Peace, factious monster, born to vex the state, With wrangling talents form’d for foul debate: Curb that impetuous tongue, nor rashly vain, And singly mad, asperse the sovereign reign.
Have we not known thee, slave! of all our host, The man who acts the least, upbraids the most?
Think not the Greeks to shameful flight to bring, Nor let those lips profane the name of king.
For our return we trust the heavenly powers; Be that their care; to fight like men be ours.
But grant the host with wealth the general load, Except detraction, what hast thou bestow’d?
Great in the council, glorious in the field.
Generous he rises in the crown’s defence, To curb the factious tongue of insolence, Such just examples on offenders shown, Sedition silence, and assert the throne.” ’Twas thus the general voice the hero praised, Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised: The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend, (In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend.
The expecting crowds in still attention hung, To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke, His silence thus the prudent hero broke: “Unhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
Not such at Argos was their generous vow: Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now: Ne’er to return, was then the common cry, Till Troy’s proud structures should in ashes lie.
Behold them weeping for their native shore; What could their wives or helpless children more?
Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat, When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat: Then well may this long stay provoke their tears, The tedious length of nine revolving years.
Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame; But vanquish’d! baffled! oh, eternal shame!
Expect the time to Troy’s destruction given.
What pass’d at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,[89] And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.
Beside a fountain’s sacred brink we raised Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed: ’Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around, The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent; From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he roll’d, And curl’d around in many a winding fold; The topmost branch a mother-bird possess’d; Eight callow infants fill’d the mossy nest; Herself the ninth; the serpent, as he hung, Stretch’d his black jaws and crush’d the crying young; While hovering near, with miserable moan, The drooping mother wail’d her children gone.
The mother last, as round the nest she flew, Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew; Nor long survived: to marble turn’d, he stands A lasting prodigy on Aulis’ sands.
For while around we gazed with wondering eyes, And trembling sought the powers with sacrifice, Full of his god, the reverend Chalcas cried,[90] ‘Ye Grecian warriors! lay your fears aside.
This wondrous signal Jove himself displays, Of long, long labours, but eternal praise.
Obey, ye Grecians! with submission wait, Nor let your flight avert the Trojan fate.” He said: the shores with loud applauses sound, The hollow ships each deafening shout rebound.
Then Nestor thus—“These vain debates forbear, Ye talk like children, not like heroes dare.
Where now are all your high resolves at last?
Your leagues concluded, your engagements past?
Vow’d with libations and with victims then, Now vanish’d like their smoke: the faith of men!
While useless words consume the unactive hours, No wonder Troy so long resists our powers.
But leave the few that dare resist thy laws, The mean deserters of the Grecian cause, To grudge the conquests mighty Jove prepares, And view with envy our successful wars.
On that great day, when first the martial train, Big with the fate of Ilion, plough’d the main, Jove, on the right, a prosperous signal sent, And thunder rolling shook the firmament.
Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious strife, Till every soldier grasp a Phrygian wife, Till Helen’s woes at full revenged appear, And Troy’s proud matrons render tear for tear.
Before that day, if any Greek invite His country’s troops to base, inglorious flight, Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his sail to fly, And die the dastard first, who dreads to die.
Among those counsels, let not mine be vain; In tribes and nations to divide thy train: His separate troops let every leader call, Each strengthen each, and all encourage all.
What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band, Or bravely fights, or ill obeys command, When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known And what the cause of Ilion not o’erthrown; If fate resists, or if our arms are slow, If gods above prevent, or men below.” To him the king: “How much thy years excel In arts of counsel, and in speaking well!
But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates In fierce contention and in vain debates: Now great Achilles from our aid withdraws, By me provoked; a captive maid the cause: If e’er as friends we join, the Trojan wall Must shake, and heavy will the vengeance fall!
But now, ye warriors, take a short repast; And, well refresh’d, to bloody conflict haste.
His sharpen’d spear let every Grecian wield, And every Grecian fix his brazen shield, Let all excite the fiery steeds of war, And all for combat fit the rattling car.
This day, this dreadful day, let each contend; No rest, no respite, till the shades descend; Till darkness, or till death, shall cover all: Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall; Till bathed in sweat be every manly breast, With the huge shield each brawny arm depress’d, Each aching nerve refuse the lance to throw, And each spent courser at the chariot blow.
Who dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay, Who dares to tremble on this signal day; That wretch, too mean to fall by martial power, The birds shall mangle, and the dogs devour.” The monarch spoke; and straight a murmur rose, Loud as the surges when the tempest blows, That dash’d on broken rocks tumultuous roar, And foam and thunder on the stony shore.
Straight to the tents the troops dispersing bend, The fires are kindled, and the smokes ascend; With hasty feasts they sacrifice, and pray, To avert the dangers of the doubtful day.
A steer of five years’ age, large limb’d, and fed,[92] To Jove’s high altars Agamemnon led: There bade the noblest of the Grecian peers; And Nestor first, as most advanced in years.
Hear! and before the burning sun descends, Before the night her gloomy veil extends, Low in the dust be laid yon hostile spires, Be Priam’s palace sunk in Grecian fires.
In Hector’s breast be plunged this shining sword, And slaughter’d heroes groan around their lord!” Thus prayed the chief: his unavailing prayer Great Jove refused, and toss’d in empty air: The God averse, while yet the fumes arose, Prepared new toils, and doubled woes on woes.
Their prayers perform’d the chiefs the rite pursue, The barley sprinkled, and the victim slew.
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide, The thighs, selected to the gods, divide.
On these, in double cauls involved with art, The choicest morsels lie from every part, From the cleft wood the crackling flames aspire While the fat victims feed the sacred fire.
The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress’d The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest; Then spread the tables, the repast prepare, Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
Soon as the rage of hunger was suppress’d, The generous Nestor thus the prince address’d.
“Now bid thy heralds sound the loud alarms, And call the squadrons sheathed in brazen arms; Now seize the occasion, now the troops survey, And lead to war when heaven directs the way.” He said; the monarch issued his commands; Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands; The chiefs inclose their king; the hosts divide, In tribes and nations rank’d on either side.
As on some mountain, through the lofty grove, The crackling flames ascend, and blaze above; The fires expanding, as the winds arise, Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies: So from the polish’d arms, and brazen shields, A gleamy splendour flash’d along the fields.
Not less their number than the embodied cranes, Or milk-white swans in Asius’ watery plains.
That, o’er the windings of Cayster’s springs,[97] Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings, Now tower aloft, and course in airy rounds, Now light with noise; with noise the field resounds.
Thus numerous and confused, extending wide, The legions crowd Scamander’s flowery side;[98] With rushing troops the plains are cover’d o’er, And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
Along the river’s level meads they stand, Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land, Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play, The wandering nation of a summer’s day: That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours, In gather’d swarms surround the rural bowers; From pail to pail with busy murmur run The gilded legions, glittering in the sun.
So throng’d, so close, the Grecian squadrons stood In radiant arms, and thirst for Trojan blood.
Each leader now his scatter’d force conjoins In close array, and forms the deepening lines.
Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swain Collects his flocks from thousands on the plain.
The king of kings, majestically tall, Towers o’er his armies, and outshines them all; Like some proud bull, that round the pastures leads His subject herds, the monarch of the meads, Great as the gods, the exalted chief was seen, His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his mien;[99] Jove o’er his eyes celestial glories spread, And dawning conquest played around his head.
Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine, All-knowing goddesses! immortal nine![100] Since earth’s wide regions, heaven’s umneasur’d height, And hell’s abyss, hide nothing from your sight, (We, wretched mortals! lost in doubts below, But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,) O say what heroes, fired by thirst of fame, Or urged by wrongs, to Troy’s destruction came.
To count them all, demands a thousand tongues, A throat of brass, and adamantine lungs.
Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by you The mighty labour dauntless I pursue; What crowded armies, from what climes they bring, Their names, their numbers, and their chiefs I sing.
Full fifty ships they send, and each conveys Twice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.[102] To these succeed Aspledon’s martial train, Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain.
Two valiant brothers rule the undaunted throng, Iälmen and Ascalaphus the strong: Sons of Astyochè, the heavenly fair, Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war: (In Actor’s court as she retired to rest, The strength of Mars the blushing maid compress’d) Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep, With equal oars, the hoarse-resounding deep.
The Phocians next in forty barks repair; Epistrophus and Schedius head the war: From those rich regions where Cephisus leads His silver current through the flowery meads; From Panopëa, Chrysa the divine, Where Anemoria’s stately turrets shine, Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood, And fair Lilæ views the rising flood.
These, ranged in order on the floating tide, Close, on the left, the bold Bœotians’ side.
Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on, Ajax the less, Oïleus’ valiant son; Skill’d to direct the flying dart aright; Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight.
Him, as their chief, the chosen troops attend, Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send; Opus, Calliarus, and Scarphe’s bands; And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands, And where Boägrius floats the lowly lands, Or in fair Tarphe’s sylvan seats reside: In forty vessels cut the yielding tide.
Eubœa next her martial sons prepares, And sends the brave Abantes to the wars: Breathing revenge, in arms they take their way From Chalcis’ walls, and strong Eretria; The Isteian fields for generous vines renown’d, The fair Caristos, and the Styrian ground; Where Dios from her towers o’erlooks the plain, And high Cerinthus views the neighbouring main.
Down their broad shoulders falls a length of hair; Their hands dismiss not the long lance in air; But with protended spears in fighting fields Pierce the tough corslets and the brazen shields.
Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands, Which bold Elphenor, fierce in arms, commands.
Full fifty more from Athens stem the main, Led by Menestheus through the liquid plain. (Athens the fair, where great Erectheus sway’d, That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid, But from the teeming furrow took his birth, The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.
Him Pallas placed amidst her wealthy fane, Adored with sacrifice and oxen slain; Where, as the years revolve, her altars blaze, And all the tribes resound the goddess’ praise.) No chief like thee, Menestheus!
Greece could yield, To marshal armies in the dusty field, The extended wings of battle to display, Or close the embodied host in firm array.
Nestor alone, improved by length of days, For martial conduct bore an equal praise.
With these appear the Salaminian bands, Whom the gigantic Telamon commands; In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course, And with the great Athenians join their force.
Next move to war the generous Argive train, From high Trœzenè, and Maseta’s plain, And fair Ægina circled by the main: Whom strong Tyrinthe’s lofty walls surround, And Epidaure with viny harvests crown’d: And where fair Asinen and Hermoin show Their cliffs above, and ample bay below.
These by the brave Euryalus were led, Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed; But chief Tydides bore the sovereign sway: In fourscore barks they plough the watery way.
The proud Mycenè arms her martial powers, Cleonè, Corinth, with imperial towers,[103] Fair Aræthyrea, Ornia’s fruitful plain, And Ægion, and Adrastus’ ancient reign; And those who dwell along the sandy shore, And where Pellenè yields her fleecy store, Where Helicè and Hyperesia lie, And Gonoëssa’s spires salute the sky.
Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band, A hundred vessels in long order stand, And crowded nations wait his dread command.
High on the deck the king of men appears, And his refulgent arms in triumph wears; Proud of his host, unrivall’d in his reign, In silent pomp he moves along the main.
His brother follows, and to vengeance warms The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms: Phares and Brysia’s valiant troops, and those Whom Lacedæmon’s lofty hills inclose; Or Messé’s towers for silver doves renown’d, Amyclæ, Laäs, Augia’s happy ground, And those whom Œtylos’ low walls contain, And Helos, on the margin of the main.
These, o’er the bending ocean, Helen’s cause, In sixty ships with Menelaus draws: Eager and loud from man to man he flies, Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes; While vainly fond, in fancy oft he hears The fair one’s grief, and sees her falling tears.
Too daring bard! whose unsuccessful pride The immortal Muses in their art defied.
The avenging Muses of the light of day Deprived his eyes, and snatch’d his voice away; No more his heavenly voice was heard to sing, His hand no more awaked the silver string.
Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head, (Ancæus’ son) the mighty squadron led.
Their ships, supplied by Agamemnon’s care, Through roaring seas the wondering warriors bear; The first to battle on the appointed plain, But new to all the dangers of the main.
Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join; Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine, And bounded there, where o’er the valleys rose The Olenian rock; and where Alisium flows; Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came: The strength and glory of the Epean name.
In separate squadrons these their train divide, Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.
One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one; (Eurytus’ this, and that Teätus’ son;) Diores sprung from Amarynceus’ line; And great Polyxenus, of force divine.
But those who view fair Elis o’er the seas From the blest islands of the Echinades, In forty vessels under Meges move, Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove: To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled, And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.
With those whom Cephalenia’s line inclosed, Or till their fields along the coast opposed; Or where fair Ithaca o’erlooks the floods, Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods, Where Ægilipa’s rugged sides are seen, Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores, Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores.
He led the warriors from the Ætolian shore, For now the sons of Œneus were no more!
The glories of the mighty race were fled! Œneus himself, and Meleager dead!
Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands, Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortyna’s bands; And those who dwell where Rhytion’s domes arise, Or white Lycastus glitters to the skies, Or where by Phæstus silver Jardan runs; Crete’s hundred cities pour forth all her sons.
These march’d, Idomeneus, beneath thy care, And Merion, dreadful as the god of war.
Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules, Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas, From Rhodes, with everlasting sunshine bright, Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.
His captive mother fierce Alcides bore From Ephyr’s walls and Sellè’s winding shore, Where mighty towns in ruins spread the plain, And saw their blooming warriors early slain.
Three ships with Nireus sought the Trojan shore, Nireus, whom Agäle to Charopus bore, Nireus, in faultless shape and blooming grace, The loveliest youth of all the Grecian race;[104] Pelides only match’d his early charms; But few his troops, and small his strength in arms.
Next thirty galleys cleave the liquid plain, Of those Calydnæ’s sea-girt isles contain; With them the youth of Nisyrus repair, Casus the strong, and Crapathus the fair; Cos, where Eurypylus possess’d the sway, Till great Alcides made the realms obey: These Antiphus and bold Phidippus bring, Sprung from the god by Thessalus the king.
Now, Muse, recount Pelasgic Argos’ powers, From Alos, Alopé, and Trechin’s towers: From Phthia’s spacious vales; and Hella, bless’d With female beauty far beyond the rest.
Full fifty ships beneath Achilles’ care, The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear; Thessalians all, though various in their name; The same their nation, and their chief the same.
But now inglorious, stretch’d along the shore, They hear the brazen voice of war no more; No more the foe they face in dire array: Close in his fleet the angry leader lay; Since fair Briseïs from his arms was torn, The noblest spoil from sack’d Lyrnessus borne, Then, when the chief the Theban walls o’erthrew, And the bold sons of great Evenus slew.
There mourn’d Achilles, plunged in depth of care, But soon to rise in slaughter, blood, and war.
To these the youth of Phylacè succeed, Itona, famous for her fleecy breed, And grassy Pteleon deck’d with cheerful greens, The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes.
Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crown’d, And Antron’s watery dens, and cavern’d ground.
These own’d, as chief, Protesilas the brave, Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave: The first who boldly touch’d the Trojan shore, And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore; There lies, far distant from his native plain; Unfinish’d his proud palaces remain, And his sad consort beats her breast in vain.
His troops in forty ships Podarces led, Iphiclus’ son, and brother to the dead; Nor he unworthy to command the host; Yet still they mourn’d their ancient leader lost.
But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground, A poisonous hydra gave the burning wound; There groan’d the chief in agonizing pain, Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain.
His forces Medon led from Lemnos’ shore, Oïleus’ son, whom beauteous Rhena bore.
The Œchalian race, in those high towers contain’d Where once Eurytus in proud triumph reign’d, Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears, Or where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears, In thirty sail the sparkling waves divide, Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.
To these his skill their parent-god imparts, Divine professors of the healing arts.
The bold Ormenian and Asterian bands In forty barks Eurypylus commands.
Where Titan hides his hoary head in snow, And where Hyperia’s silver fountains flow.
Thy troops, Argissa, Polypœtes leads, And Eleon, shelter’d by Olympus’ shades, Gyrtonè’s warriors; and where Orthè lies, And Oloösson’s chalky cliffs arise.
Sprung from Pirithous of immortal race, The fruit of fair Hippodame’s embrace, (That day, when hurl’d from Pelion’s cloudy head, To distant dens the shaggy Centaurs fled) With Polypœtes join’d in equal sway Leonteus leads, and forty ships obey.
With these the Enians join’d, and those who freeze Where cold Dodona lifts her holy trees; Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides, And into Peneus rolls his easy tides; Yet o’er the silvery surface pure they flow, The sacred stream unmix’d with streams below, Sacred and awful! from the dark abodes Styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods!
Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood, (Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredon’s blood;) Who dwell where Pelion, crown’d with piny boughs, Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows; Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus stray’d: (The region stretch’d beneath his mighty shade:) In forty sable barks they stemm’d the main; Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian train.
Eumelus’ mares were foremost in the chase, As eagles fleet, and of Pheretian race; Bred where Pieria’s fruitful fountains flow, And train’d by him who bears the silver bow.
Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a flame, Their height, their colour, and their age the same; O’er fields of death they whirl the rapid car, And break the ranks, and thunder through the war.
Ajax in arms the first renown acquired, While stern Achilles in his wrath retired: (His was the strength that mortal might exceeds, And his the unrivall’d race of heavenly steeds:) But Thetis’ son now shines in arms no more; His troops, neglected on the sandy shore.
In empty air their sportive javelins throw, Or whirl the disk, or bend an idle bow: Unstain’d with blood his cover’d chariots stand; The immortal coursers graze along the strand; But the brave chiefs the inglorious life deplored, And, wandering o’er the camp, required their lord.
Now, like a deluge, covering all around, The shining armies sweep along the ground; Swift as a flood of fire, when storms arise, Floats the wild field, and blazes to the skies.
Earth groan’d beneath them; as when angry Jove Hurls down the forky lightning from above, On Arimé when he the thunder throws, And fires Typhœus with redoubled blows, Where Typhon, press’d beneath the burning load, Still feels the fury of the avenging god.
But various Iris, Jove’s commands to bear, Speeds on the wings of winds through liquid air; In Priam’s porch the Trojan chiefs she found, The old consulting, and the youths around.
Polites’ shape, the monarch’s son, she chose, Who from Æsetes’ tomb observed the foes,[105] High on the mound; from whence in prospect lay The fields, the tents, the navy, and the bay.
In this dissembled form, she hastes to bring The unwelcome message to the Phrygian king.
“Cease to consult, the time for action calls; War, horrid war, approaches to your walls!
Assembled armies oft have I beheld; But ne’er till now such numbers charged a field: Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand, The moving squadrons blacken all the strand.
Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ, Assemble all the united bands of Troy; In just array let every leader call The foreign troops: this day demands them all!” The voice divine the mighty chief alarms; The council breaks, the warriors rush to arms.
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train, Nations on nations fill the dusky plain, Men, steeds, and chariots, shake the trembling ground: The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.
Amidst the plain, in sight of Ilion, stands A rising mount, the work of human hands; (This for Myrinne’s tomb the immortals know, Though call’d Bateïa in the world below;) Beneath their chiefs in martial order here, The auxiliar troops and Trojan hosts appear.
Divine Æneas brings the Dardan race, Anchises’ son, by Venus’ stolen embrace, Born in the shades of Ida’s secret grove; (A mortal mixing with the queen of love;) Archilochus and Acamas divide The warrior’s toils, and combat by his side.
Who fair Zeleia’s wealthy valleys till,[106] Fast by the foot of Ida’s sacred hill, Or drink, Æsepus, of thy sable flood, Were led by Pandarus, of royal blood; To whom his art Apollo deign’d to show, Graced with the presents of his shafts and bow.
From rich Apæsus and Adrestia’s towers, High Teree’s summits, and Pityea’s bowers; From these the congregated troops obey Young Amphius and Adrastus’ equal sway; Old Merops’ sons; whom, skill’d in fates to come, The sire forewarn’d, and prophesied their doom: Fate urged them on! the sire forewarn’d in vain, They rush’d to war, and perish’d on the plain.
From Practius’ stream, Percotè’s pasture lands, And Sestos and Abydos’ neighbouring strands, From great Arisba’s walls and Sellè’s coast, Asius Hyrtacides conducts his host: High on his car he shakes the flowing reins, His fiery coursers thunder o’er the plains.
The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renown’d, March from Larissa’s ever-fertile ground: In equal arms their brother leaders shine, Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the divine.
Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts, In dread array, from Thracia’s wintry coasts; Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars, And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores.
With great Euphemus the Ciconians move, Sprung from Trœzenian Ceüs, loved by Jove.
Pyræchmes the Pæonian troops attend, Skill’d in the fight their crooked bows to bend; From Axius’ ample bed he leads them on, Axius, that laves the distant Amydon, Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills, And wide around the floating region fills.
The Paphlagonians Pylæmenes rules, Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules, Where Erythinus’ rising cliffs are seen, Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green, And where Ægialus and Cromna lie, And lofty Sesamus invades the sky, And where Parthenius, roll’d through banks of flowers, Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers.
Here march’d in arms the Halizonian band, Whom Odius and Epistrophus command, From those far regions where the sun refines The ripening silver in Alybean mines.
There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train, And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain; For stern Achilles lopp’d his sacred head, Roll’d down Scamander with the vulgar dead.
Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight.
Of those who round Mæonia’s realms reside, Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide, Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake, Born on the banks of Gyges’ silent lake.
There, from the fields where wild Mæander flows, High Mycale, and Latmos’ shady brows, And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs, With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.[107] Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train, Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain, Who, trick’d with gold, and glittering on his car, Rode like a woman to the field of war.
Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain, The river swept him to the briny main: There whelm’d with waves the gaudy warrior lies The valiant victor seized the golden prize.
The forces last in fair array succeed, Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead The warlike bands that distant Lycia yields, Where gulfy Xanthus foams along the fields.
THE DUEL OF MENELAUS AND PARIS.
The armies being ready to engage, a single combat is agreed upon between Menelaus and Paris (by the intervention of Hector) for the determination of the war.
She leads her to the walls of Troy, where Priam sat with his counsellers observing the Grecian leaders on the plain below, to whom Helen gives an account of the chief of them.
The kings on either part take the solemn oath for the conditions of the combat.
The duel ensues; wherein Paris being overcome, he is snatched away in a cloud by Venus, and transported to his apartment.
She then calls Helen from the walls, and brings the lovers together.
Agamemnon, on the part of the Grecians, demands the restoration of Helen, and the performance of the articles.
The three-and-twentieth day still continues throughout this book.
The scene is sometimes in the fields before Troy, and sometimes in Troy itself.
Thus by their leaders’ care each martial band Moves into ranks, and stretches o’er the land.
With shouts the Trojans, rushing from afar, Proclaim their motions, and provoke the war.
Thus from his flaggy wings when Notus sheds A night of vapours round the mountain heads, Swift-gliding mists the dusky fields invade, To thieves more grateful than the midnight shade; While scarce the swains their feeding flocks survey, Lost and confused amidst the thicken’d day: So wrapp’d in gathering dust, the Grecian train, A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the plain.
As thus, with glorious air and proud disdain, He boldly stalk’d, the foremost on the plain, Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies, With heart elated, and with joyful eyes: So joys a lion, if the branching deer, Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear; Eager he seizes and devours the slain, Press’d by bold youths and baying dogs in vain.
Thus fond of vengeance, with a furious bound, In clanging arms he leaps upon the ground From his high chariot: him, approaching near, The beauteous champion views with marks of fear, Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind, And shuns the fate he well deserved to find.
As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees[110] Shot forth to view, a scaly serpent sees, Trembling and pale, he starts with wild affright And all confused precipitates his flight: So from the king the shining warrior flies, And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.
As godlike Hector sees the prince retreat, He thus upbraids him with a generous heat: “Unhappy Paris![111] but to women brave!
Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see Their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
Thy figure promised with a martial air, But ill thy soul supplies a form so fair.
In former days, in all thy gallant pride, When thy tall ships triumphant stemm’d the tide, When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow, And crowds stood wondering at the passing show, Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien, You met the approaches of the Spartan queen, Thus from her realm convey’d the beauteous prize, And both her warlike lords outshined in Helen’s eyes?
This deed, thy foes’ delight, thy own disgrace, Thy father’s grief, and ruin of thy race; This deed recalls thee to the proffer’d fight; Or hast thou injured whom thou dar’st not right?
Thy force, like steel, a temper’d hardness shows, Still edged to wound, and still untired with blows, Like steel, uplifted by some strenuous swain, With falling woods to strew the wasted plain.
Thy gifts I praise; nor thou despise the charms With which a lover golden Venus arms; Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show, No wish can gain them, but the gods bestow.
Yet, would’st thou have the proffer’d combat stand, The Greeks and Trojans seat on either hand; Then let a midway space our hosts divide, And, on that stage of war, the cause be tried: By Paris there the Spartan king be fought, For beauteous Helen and the wealth she brought; And who his rival can in arms subdue, His be the fair, and his the treasure too.
Thus with a lasting league your toils may cease, And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace; Thus may the Greeks review their native shore, Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more.” He said.
The challenge Hector heard with joy, Then with his spear restrain’d the youth of Troy, Held by the midst, athwart; and near the foe Advanced with steps majestically slow: While round his dauntless head the Grecians pour Their stones and arrows in a mingled shower.
Then thus the monarch, great Atrides, cried: “Forbear, ye warriors! lay the darts aside: A parley Hector asks, a message bears; We know him by the various plume he wears.” Awed by his high command the Greeks attend, The tumult silence, and the fight suspend.
Your shining swords within the sheath restrain, And pitch your lances in the yielding plain.
Let these the brave triumphant victor grace, And different nations part in leagues of peace.” He spoke: in still suspense on either side Each army stood: the Spartan chief replied: “Me too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal right A world engages in the toils of fight.
Two lambs, devoted by your country’s rite, To earth a sable, to the sun a white, Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bring Select to Jove, the inviolable king.
Let reverend Priam in the truce engage, And add the sanction of considerate age; His sons are faithless, headlong in debate, And youth itself an empty wavering state; Cool age advances, venerably wise, Turns on all hands its deep-discerning eyes; Sees what befell, and what may yet befall, Concludes from both, and best provides for all.
The nations hear with rising hopes possess’d, And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.
Within the lines they drew their steeds around, And from their chariots issued on the ground; Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore, Laid their bright arms along the sable shore.
Two heralds now, despatch’d to Troy, invite The Phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite.
Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring The lamb for Jove, the inviolable king.
Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skies The various goddess of the rainbow flies: (Like fair Laodice in form and face, The loveliest nymph of Priam’s royal race:) Her in the palace, at her loom she found; The golden web her own sad story crown’d, The Trojan wars she weaved (herself the prize) And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes.
To whom the goddess of the painted bow: “Approach, and view the wondrous scene below![112] Each hardy Greek, and valiant Trojan knight, So dreadful late, and furious for the fight, Now rest their spears, or lean upon their shields; Ceased is the war, and silent all the fields.
Her handmaids, Clymene and Æthra, wait Her silent footsteps to the Scæan gate.
These, when the Spartan queen approach’d the tower, In secret own’d resistless beauty’s power: They cried, “No wonder[113] such celestial charms For nine long years have set the world in arms; What winning graces! what majestic mien!
Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fatal face, And from destruction save the Trojan race.” The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried, “Approach, my child, and grace thy father’s side.
No crime of thine our present sufferings draws, Not thou, but Heaven’s disposing will, the cause The gods these armies and this force employ, The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy.
Though some of larger stature tread the green, None match his grandeur and exalted mien: He seems a monarch, and his country’s pride.” Thus ceased the king, and thus the fair replied: “Before thy presence, father, I appear, With conscious shame and reverential fear.
Ah! had I died, ere to these walls I fled, False to my country, and my nuptial bed; My brothers, friends, and daughter left behind, False to them all, to Paris only kind!
And oh! that still he bore a brother’s name!” With wonder Priam view’d the godlike man, Extoll’d the happy prince, and thus began: “O bless’d Atrides! born to prosperous fate, Successful monarch of a mighty state!
Of your matchless train What numbers lost, what numbers yet remain!
But far inferior those, in martial grace, And strength of numbers, to this Grecian race.” This said, once more he view’d the warrior train; “What’s he, whose arms lie scatter’d on the plain?
Broad is his breast, his shoulders larger spread, Though great Atrides overtops his head.
Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view; Ulysses seated, greater reverence drew.
When Atreus’ son harangued the listening train, Just was his sense, and his expression plain, His words succinct, yet full, without a fault; He spoke no more than just the thing he ought.
But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,[116] His modest eyes he fix’d upon the ground; As one unskill’d or dumb, he seem’d to stand, Nor raised his head, nor stretch’d his sceptred hand; But, when he speaks, what elocution flows!
Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,[117] The copious accents fall, with easy art; Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!
Wondering we hear, and fix’d in deep surprise, Our ears refute the censure of our eyes.” The king then ask’d (as yet the camp he view’d) “What chief is that, with giant strength endued, Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest, And lofty stature, far exceed the rest?
“Ajax the great, (the beauteous queen replied,) Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride.
See! bold Idomeneus superior towers Amid yon circle of his Cretan powers, Great as a god!
I saw him once before, With Menelaus on the Spartan shore.
Yet two are wanting of the numerous train, Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain: Castor and Pollux, first in martial force, One bold on foot, and one renown’d for horse.
My brothers these; the same our native shore, One house contain’d us, as one mother bore.
Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease, For distant Troy refused to sail the seas; Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws, Ashamed to combat in their sister’s cause.” So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothers’ doom;[118] Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb; Adorn’d with honours in their native shore, Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more.
Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town, Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.
Idæus’ arms the golden goblets press’d,[119] Who thus the venerable king address’d: “Arise, O father of the Trojan state!
Paris, thy son, and Sparta’s king advance, In measured lists to toss the weighty lance; And who his rival shall in arms subdue, His be the dame, and his the treasure too.
Infernal furies, and Tartarean gods, Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
If, by Paris slain, Great Menelaus press the fatal plain; The dame and treasures let the Trojan keep, And Greece returning plough the watery deep.
If by my brother’s lance the Trojan bleed, Be his the wealth and beauteous dame decreed: The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay, And every age record the signal day.
This if the Phrygians shall refuse to yield, Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the field.” With that the chief the tender victims slew, And in the dust their bleeding bodies threw; The vital spirit issued at the wound, And left the members quivering on the ground.
From the same urn they drink the mingled wine, And add libations to the powers divine.
And may their blood, who first the league confound, Shed like this wine, disdain the thirsty ground; May all their consorts serve promiscuous lust, And all their lust be scatter’d as the dust!” Thus either host their imprecations join’d, Which Jove refused, and mingled with the wind.
The rites now finish’d, reverend Priam rose, And thus express’d a heart o’ercharged with woes: “Ye Greeks and Trojans, let the chiefs engage, But spare the weakness of my feeble age: In yonder walls that object let me shun, Nor view the danger of so dear a son.
Whose arms shall conquer and what prince shall fall, Heaven only knows; for heaven disposes all.” This said, the hoary king no longer stay’d, But on his car the slaughter’d victims laid: Then seized the reins his gentle steeds to guide, And drove to Troy, Antenor at his side.
The people pray with elevated hands, And words like these are heard through all the bands: “Immortal Jove, high Heaven’s superior lord, On lofty Ida’s holy mount adored!
Whoe’er involved us in this dire debate, O give that author of the war to fate And shades eternal! let division cease, And joyful nations join in leagues of peace.” With eyes averted Hector hastes to turn The lots of fight and shakes the brazen urn.
Beside each chief his azure armour lay, And round the lists the generous coursers neigh.
With equal speed and fired by equal charms, The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms.
Now round the lists the admiring armies stand, With javelins fix’d, the Greek and Trojan band.
Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance, All pale with rage, and shake the threatening lance.
Atrides then his massy lance prepares, In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers: “Give me, great Jove! to punish lawless lust, And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust: Destroy the aggressor, aid my righteous cause, Avenge the breach of hospitable laws!
Let this example future times reclaim, And guard from wrong fair friendship’s holy name,” He said, and poised in air the javelin sent, Through Paris’ shield the forceful weapon went, His corslet pierces, and his garment rends, And glancing downward, near his flank descends.
The wary Trojan, bending from the blow, Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe: But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook; The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand, Broke short: the fragments glitter’d on the sand.
The raging warrior to the spacious skies Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes: “Then is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies; The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies.” Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew (Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew; Struggling he followed, while the embroider’d thong That tied his helmet, dragg’d the chief along.
Then had his ruin crown’d Atrides’ joy, But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy: Unseen she came, and burst the golden band; And left an empty helmet in his hand.
Then, as once more he lifts the deadly dart, In thirst of vengeance, at his rival’s heart; The queen of love her favour’d champion shrouds (For gods can all things) in a veil of clouds.
Raised from the field the panting youth she led, And gently laid him on the bridal bed, With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews, And all the dome perfumes with heavenly dews.
Fair Venus’ neck, her eyes that sparkled fire, And breast, reveal’d the queen of soft desire.[123] Struck with her presence, straight the lively red Forsook her cheek; and trembling, thus she said: “Then is it still thy pleasure to deceive?
Left to Atrides, (victor in the strife,) An odious conquest and a captive wife, Hence let me sail; and if thy Paris bear My absence ill, let Venus ease his care.
A handmaid goddess at his side to wait, Renounce the glories of thy heavenly state, Be fix’d for ever to the Trojan shore, His spouse, or slave; and mount the skies no more.
Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee more The world’s aversion, than their love before; Now the bright prize for which mankind engage, Than, the sad victim, of the public rage.” At this, the fairest of her sex obey’d, And veil’d her blushes in a silken shade; Unseen, and silent, from the train she moves, Led by the goddess of the Smiles and Loves.
Arrived, and enter’d at the palace gate, The maids officious round their mistress wait; Then, all dispersing, various tasks attend; The queen and goddess to the prince ascend.
Full in her Paris’ sight, the queen of love Had placed the beauteous progeny of Jove; Where, as he view’d her charms, she turn’d away Her glowing eyes, and thus began to say: “Is this the chief, who, lost to sense of shame, Late fled the field, and yet survives his fame?
O hadst thou died beneath the righteous sword Of that brave man whom once I call’d my lord!
Not thus I loved thee, when from Sparta’s shore My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore, When first entranced in Cranae’s isle I lay,[124] Mix’d with thy soul, and all dissolved away!” Thus having spoke, the enamour’d Phrygian boy Rush’d to the bed, impatient for the joy.
Him Helen follow’d slow with bashful charms, And clasp’d the blooming hero in her arms.
While these to love’s delicious rapture yield, The stern Atrides rages round the field: So some fell lion whom the woods obey, Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.
Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy, But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy; Even those had yielded to a foe so brave The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.
Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose, “Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!
The gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agree upon the continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to break the truce.
She persuades Pandarus to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is wounded, but cured by Machaon.
In the meantime some of the Trojan troops attack the Greeks.
Agamemnon is distinguished in all the parts of a good general; he reviews the troops, and exhorts the leaders, some by praises and others by reproof.
Nestor is particularly celebrated for his military discipline.
The same day continues through this as through the last book (as it does also through the two following, and almost to the end of the seventh book).
And now Olympus’ shining gates unfold; The gods, with Jove, assume their thrones of gold: Immortal Hebe, fresh with bloom divine, The golden goblet crowns with purple wine: While the full bowls flow round, the powers employ Their careful eyes on long-contended Troy.
When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturnia’s spleen, Thus waked the fury of his partial queen, “Two powers divine the son of Atreus aid, Imperial Juno, and the martial maid;[125] But high in heaven they sit, and gaze from far, The tame spectators of his deeds of war.
Not thus fair Venus helps her favour’d knight, The queen of pleasures shares the toils of fight, Each danger wards, and constant in her care, Saves in the moment of the last despair.
Her act has rescued Paris’ forfeit life, Though great Atrides gain’d the glorious strife.
Shall Heaven by peace the bleeding kingdoms spare, Or rouse the furies, and awake the war?
Yet, would the gods for human good provide, Atrides soon might gain his beauteous bride, Still Priam’s walls in peaceful honours grow, And through his gates the crowding nations flow.” Thus while he spoke, the queen of heaven, enraged, And queen of war, in close consult engaged: Apart they sit, their deep designs employ, And meditate the future woes of Troy.
Have I, for this, shook Ilion with alarms, Assembled nations, set two worlds in arms?
To spread the war, I flew from shore to shore; The immortal coursers scarce the labour bore.
At length ripe vengeance o’er their heads impends, But Jove himself the faithless race defends.
Loth as thou art to punish lawless lust, Not all the gods are partial and unjust.” The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies, Sighs from his inmost soul, and thus replies: “Oh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hate To Phrygia’s monarch, and the Phrygian state!
Can wretched mortals harm the powers above, That Troy, and Troy’s whole race thou wouldst confound, And yon fair structures level with the ground!
Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more, Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore: To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given, Till vast destruction glut the queen of heaven!
But should this arm prepare to wreak our hate On thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their fate; Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay, Remember Troy, and give the vengeance way.
For know, of all the numerous towns that rise Beneath the rolling sun and starry skies, Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy, None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.
No mortals merit more distinguish’d grace Than godlike Priam, or than Priam’s race.
Of power superior why should I complain?
Yet some distinction Juno might require, Sprung with thyself from one celestial sire, A goddess born, to share the realms above, And styled the consort of the thundering Jove; Nor thou a wife and sister’s right deny;[128] Let both consent, and both by terms comply; So shall the gods our joint decrees obey, And heaven shall act as we direct the way.
See ready Pallas waits thy high commands To raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands; Their sudden friendship by her arts may cease, And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace.” The sire of men and monarch of the sky The advice approved, and bade Minerva fly, Dissolve the league, and all her arts employ To make the breach the faithless act of Troy.
Fired with the charge, she headlong urged her flight, And shot like lightning from Olympus’ height.
“The gods (they cried), the gods this signal sent, And fate now labours with some vast event: Jove seals the league, or bloodier scenes prepares; Jove, the great arbiter of peace and wars.” They said, while Pallas through the Trojan throng, (In shape a mortal,) pass’d disguised along.
Like bold Laodocus, her course she bent, Who from Antenor traced his high descent.
Amidst the ranks Lycaon’s son she found, The warlike Pandarus, for strength renown’d; Whose squadrons, led from black Æsepus’ flood,[130] With flaming shields in martial circle stood.
To him the goddess: “Phrygian! canst thou hear A well-timed counsel with a willing ear?
Then seize the occasion, dare the mighty deed, Aim at his breast, and may that aim succeed!
But first, to speed the shaft, address thy vow To Lycian Phœbus with the silver bow, And swear the firstlings of thy flock to pay, On Zelia’s altars, to the god of day.”[131] He heard, and madly at the motion pleased, His polish’d bow with hasty rashness seized. ’Twas form’d of horn, and smooth’d with artful toil: A mountain goat resign’d the shining spoil.
This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior bends, Screen’d by the shields of his surrounding friends: There meditates the mark; and couching low, Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.
One from a hundred feather’d deaths he chose, Fated to wound, and cause of future woes; Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown Apollo’s altars in his native town.
Now with full force the yielding horn he bends, Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends; Close to his breast he strains the nerve below, Till the barb’d points approach the circling bow; The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing; Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.
But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power, Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force) Diverts the weapon from its destined course: So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye, The watchful mother wafts the envenom’d fly.
As when some stately trappings are decreed To grace a monarch on his bounding steed, A nymph in Caria or Mæonia bred, Stains the pure ivory with a lively red; With equal lustre various colours vie, The shining whiteness, and the Tyrian dye: So great Atrides! show’d thy sacred blood, As down thy snowy thigh distill’d the streaming flood.
With horror seized, the king of men descried The shaft infix’d, and saw the gushing tide: Nor less the Spartan fear’d, before he found The shining barb appear above the wound, Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manly breast, The royal brother thus his grief express’d, And grasp’d his hand; while all the Greeks around With answering sighs return’d the plaintive sound.
The race of Trojans in thy ruin join, And faith is scorn’d by all the perjured line.
Not thus our vows, confirm’d with wine and gore, Those hands we plighted, and those oaths we swore, Shall all be vain: when Heaven’s revenge is slow, Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer blow.
The day shall come, that great avenging day, When Troy’s proud glories in the dust shall lay, When Priam’s powers and Priam’s self shall fall, And one prodigious ruin swallow all.
Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait; But thou, alas! deserv’st a happier fate.
Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no more Shall dream of conquests on the hostile shore; Troy seized of Helen, and our glory lost, Thy bones shall moulder on a foreign coast; While some proud Trojan thus insulting cries, (And spurns the dust where Menelaus lies,) ‘Such are the trophies Greece from Ilion brings, And such the conquest of her king of kings!
Now seek some skilful hand, whose powerful art May stanch the effusion, and extract the dart.
Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bring His speedy succour to the Spartan king; Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy), The Grecian’s sorrow, and the Dardan’s joy.” With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies; Through the thick files he darts his searching eyes, And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands[132] In arms incircled with his native bands.
Then thus: “Machaon, to the king repair, His wounded brother claims thy timely care; Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow, A grief to us, a triumph to the foe.” The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man: Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.
The dauntless king yet standing firm he found, And all the chiefs in deep concern around.
Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced, He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced; Then suck’d the blood, and sovereign balm infused,[133] Which Chiron gave, and Æsculapius used.
While round the prince the Greeks employ their care, The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war; Once more they glitter in refulgent arms, Once more the fields are fill’d with dire alarms.
Nor had you seen the king of men appear Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear; But fond of glory, with severe delight, His beating bosom claim’d the rising fight.
No longer with his warlike steeds he stay’d, Or press’d the car with polish’d brass inlaid But left Eurymedon the reins to guide; The fiery coursers snorted at his side.
On foot through all the martial ranks he moves And these encourages, and those reproves.
Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain, Prepared for flight, but doom’d to fly in vain?
Confused and panting thus, the hunted deer Falls as he flies, a victim to his fear.
Or trust ye, Jove a valiant foe shall chase, To save a trembling, heartless, dastard race?” This said, he stalk’d with ample strides along, To Crete’s brave monarch and his martial throng; High at their head he saw the chief appear, And bold Meriones excite the rear.
At this the king his generous joy express’d, And clasp’d the warrior to his armed breast.
“Divine Idomeneus! what thanks we owe To worth like thine! what praise shall we bestow?
To thee the foremost honours are decreed, First in the fight and every graceful deed.
For this, in banquets, when the generous bowls Restore our blood, and raise the warriors’ souls, Though all the rest with stated rules we bound, Unmix’d, unmeasured, are thy goblets crown’d.
Be still thyself, in arms a mighty name; Maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame.” To whom the Cretan thus his speech address’d: “Secure of me, O king! exhort the rest.
Fix’d to thy side, in every toil I share, Thy firm associate in the day of war.
The field shall prove how perjuries succeed, And chains or death avenge the impious deed.” Charm’d with this heat, the king his course pursues, And next the troops of either Ajax views: In one firm orb the bands were ranged around, A cloud of heroes blacken’d all the ground.
Thus from the lofty promontory’s brow A swain surveys the gathering storm below; Slow from the main the heavy vapours rise, Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies, Till black as night the swelling tempest shows, The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows: He dreads the impending storm, and drives his flock To the close covert of an arching rock.
Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood, With spears erect, a moving iron wood: A shady light was shot from glimmering shields, And their brown arms obscured the dusky fields.
“O heroes! worthy such a dauntless train, Whose godlike virtue we but urge in vain, (Exclaim’d the king), who raise your eager bands With great examples, more than loud commands.
Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him wait, Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.
He whom the fortune of the field shall cast From forth his chariot, mount the next in haste; Nor seek unpractised to direct the car, Content with javelins to provoke the war.
Our great forefathers held this prudent course, Thus ruled their ardour, thus preserved their force; By laws like these immortal conquests made, And earth’s proud tyrants low in ashes laid.” So spoke the master of the martial art, And touch’d with transport great Atrides’ heart.
“Oh! hadst thou strength to match thy brave desires, And nerves to second what thy soul inspires!
And age the lot of any chief but thee.” Thus to the experienced prince Atrides cried; He shook his hoary locks, and thus replied: “Well might I wish, could mortal wish renew[134] That strength which once in boiling youth I knew; Such as I was, when Ereuthalion, slain Beneath this arm, fell prostrate on the plain.
But heaven its gifts not all at once bestows, These years with wisdom crowns, with action those: The field of combat fits the young and bold, The solemn council best becomes the old: To you the glorious conflict I resign, Let sage advice, the palm of age, be mine.” He said.
With joy the monarch march’d before, And found Menestheus on the dusty shore, With whom the firm Athenian phalanx stands; And next Ulysses, with his subject bands.
Remote their forces lay, nor knew so far The peace infringed, nor heard the sounds of war; The tumult late begun, they stood intent To watch the motion, dubious of the event.
The king, who saw their squadrons yet unmoved, With hasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved: “Can Peleus’ son forget a warrior’s part.
Why stand you distant, and the rest expect To mix in combat which yourselves neglect?
From you ’twas hoped among the first to dare The shock of armies, and commence the war; For this your names are call’d before the rest, To share the pleasures of the genial feast: And can you, chiefs! without a blush survey Whole troops before you labouring in the fray?
The first in banquets, but the last in fight.” Ulysses heard: the hero’s warmth o’erspread His cheek with blushes: and severe, he said: “Take back the unjust reproach!
Behold we stand Sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.
If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight, Behold me plunging in the thickest fight.
Then give thy warrior-chief a warrior’s due, Who dares to act whate’er thou dar’st to view.” Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies: “O great in action, and in council wise!
Sage as thou art, and learn’d in human kind, Forgive the transport of a martial mind.
Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fear’d; Still first in front the matchless prince appear’d: What glorious toils, what wonders they recite, Who view’d him labouring through the ranks of fight?
The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found, And dared to combat all those chiefs around: Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord; For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword.
Stung with the shame, within the winding way, To bar his passage fifty warriors lay; Two heroes led the secret squadron on, Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon; Those fifty slaughter’d in the gloomy vale.
He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale, Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire; Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!” No words the godlike Diomed return’d, But heard respectful, and in secret burn’d: Not so fierce Capaneus’ undaunted son; Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun: “What needs, O monarch! this invidious praise, Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
With fewer troops we storm’d the Theban wall, And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,[137] In impious acts the guilty father died; The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
Far more than heirs of all our parents’ fame, Our glories darken their diminish’d name.” To him Tydides thus: “My friend, forbear; Suppress thy passion, and the king revere: His high concern may well excuse this rage, Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage: His the first praise, were Ilion’s towers o’erthrown, And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his own.
Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite, ’Tis ours to labour in the glorious fight.” He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling ground Sprung from his car: his ringing arms resound.
Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar, Of arm’d Tydides rushing to the war.
As when the winds, ascending by degrees,[138] First move the whitening surface of the seas, The billows float in order to the shore, The wave behind rolls on the wave before; Till, with the growing storm, the deeps arise, Foam o’er the rocks, and thunder to the skies.
So to the fight the thick battalions throng, Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along Sedate and silent move the numerous bands; No sound, no whisper, but the chief’s commands, Those only heard; with awe the rest obey, As if some god had snatch’d their voice away.
As when the fleecy flocks unnumber’d stand In wealthy folds, and wait the milker’s hand, The hollow vales incessant bleating fills, The lambs reply from all the neighbouring hills: Such clamours rose from various nations round, Mix’d was the murmur, and confused the sound.
Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed, To armour armour, lance to lance opposed, Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew, The sounding darts in iron tempests flew, Victors and vanquish’d join’d promiscuous cries, And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise; With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed, And slaughter’d heroes swell the dreadful tide.
As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills, With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills Rush to the vales, and pour’d along the plain, Roar through a thousand channels to the main: The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound; So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.
The bold Antilochus the slaughter led, The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead: At great Echepolus the lance arrives, Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives; Warm’d in the brain the brazen weapon lies, And shades eternal settle o’er his eyes.
So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood Of force and fire, its walls besmear’d with blood.
Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,[140] Seized to despoil, and dragg’d the corpse along: But while he strove to tug the inserted dart, Agenor’s javelin reach’d the hero’s heart.
His flank, unguarded by his ample shield, Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field; The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more; The soul comes floating in a tide of gore.
Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain; The war renews, the warriors bleed again: As o’er their prey rapacious wolves engage, Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage.
In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell, Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell; Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore Amid the flocks on silver Simois’ shore: The nymph descending from the hills of Ide, To seek her parents on his flowery side, Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy, And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.
Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain, He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw; The pointed lance with erring fury flew, And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.
He drops the corpse of Simoisius slain, And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.
This saw Ulysses, and with grief enraged, Strode where the foremost of the foes engaged; Arm’d with his spear, he meditates the wound, In act to throw; but cautious look’d around, Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew, And trembling heard the javelin as it flew.
A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos came, Old Priam’s son, Democoon was his name.
The weapon entered close above his ear, Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;[141] With piercing shrieks the youth resigns his breath, His eye-balls darken with the shades of death; Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound, And his broad buckler rings against the ground.
Seized with affright the boldest foes appear; E’en godlike Hector seems himself to fear; Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled; The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead: But Phœbus now from Ilion’s towering height Shines forth reveal’d, and animates the fight.
“Trojans, be bold, and force with force oppose; Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!
The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more.” Apollo thus from Ilion’s lofty towers, Array’d in terrors, roused the Trojan powers: While war’s fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe, And shouts and thunders in the fields below.
Then great Diores fell, by doom divine, In vain his valour and illustrious line.
A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw, (Who from cold Ænus led the Thracian crew,)[142] Full on his ankle dropp’d the ponderous stone, Burst the strong nerves, and crash’d the solid bone.
Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands, Before his helpless friends, and native bands, And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.
The foe rush’d furious as he pants for breath, And through his navel drove the pointed death: His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground, And the warm life came issuing from the wound.
Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes, In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.
Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace, And one the leader of the Epeian race; Death’s sable shade at once o’ercast their eyes, In dust the vanquish’d and the victor lies.
With copious slaughter all the fields are red, And heap’d with growing mountains of the dead.
Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld, By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field; Might darts be bid to turn their points away, And swords around him innocently play; The war’s whole art with wonder had he seen, And counted heroes where he counted men.
Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this day’s battle.
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables him to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending with any of the former, excepting Venus. Æneas joins Pandarus to oppose him; Pandarus is killed, and Æneas in great danger but for the assistance of Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight, is wounded on the hand by Diomed.
Apollo seconds her in his rescue, and at length carries off Æneas to Troy, where he is healed in the temple of Pergamus.
In the meantime Æneas is restored to the field, and they overthrow several of the Greeks; among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by Sarpedon.
Juno and Minerva descend to resist Mars; the latter incites Diomed to go against that god; he wounds him, and sends him groaning to heaven.
The first battle continues through this book.
But Pallas now Tydides’ soul inspires,[143] Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires, Above the Greeks his deathless fame to raise, And crown her hero with distinguish’d praise.
High on his helm celestial lightnings play, His beamy shield emits a living ray; The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies, Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies, When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight, And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light.
Such glories Pallas on the chief bestow’d, Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flow’d: Onward she drives him, furious to engage, Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage.
The sons of Dares first the combat sought, A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault; In Vulcan’s fane the father’s days were led, The sons to toils of glorious battle bred; These singled from their troops the fight maintain, These, from their steeds, Tydides on the plain.
Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near, And first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear, Which o’er the warrior’s shoulder took its course, And spent in empty air its erring force.
And had not Vulcan lent celestial aid, He too had sunk to death’s eternal shade; But in a smoky cloud the god of fire Preserved the son, in pity to the sire.
The steeds and chariot, to the navy led, Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed.
Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide; And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide: While we from interdicted fields retire, Nor tempt the wrath of heaven’s avenging sire.” Her words allay the impetuous warrior’s heat, The god of arms and martial maid retreat; Removed from fight, on Xanthus’ flowery bounds They sat, and listen’d to the dying sounds.
Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue, And some bold chieftain every leader slew: First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand, His death ennobled by Atrides’ hand: As he to flight his wheeling car address’d, The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
In dust the mighty Halizonian lay, His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.
Thy fate was next, O Phæstus! doom’d to feel The great Idomeneus’ protended steel; Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy) From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
The Cretan javelin reach’d him from afar, And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car; Back from the car he tumbles to the ground, And everlasting shades his eyes surround.
Next artful Phereclus untimely fell; Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
Thy father’s skill, O Phereclus! was thine, The graceful fabric and the fair design; For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart To him the shipwright’s and the builder’s art.
The hapless artist, while confused he fled, The spear of Merion mingled with the dead.
Through his right hip, with forceful fury cast, Between the bladder and the bone it pass’d; Prone on his knees he falls with fruitless cries, And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes.
From Meges’ force the swift Pedaeus fled, Antenor’s offspring from a foreign bed, Whose generous spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair, Nursed the young stranger with a mother’s care.
How vain those cares! when Meges in the rear Full in his nape infix’d the fatal spear; Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides, And the cold tongue and grinning teeth divides.
Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine, Sprung from the brave Dolopion’s mighty line, Who near adored Scamander made abode, Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god.
On him, amidst the flying numbers found, Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound; On his broad shoulders fell the forceful brand, Thence glancing downwards, lopp’d his holy hand, Which stain’d with sacred blood the blushing sand.
Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of death Closed his dim eye, and fate suppress’d his breath.
Thus toil’d the chiefs, in different parts engaged.
In every quarter fierce Tydides raged; Amid the Greek, amid the Trojan train, Rapt through the ranks he thunders o’er the plain; Now here, now there, he darts from place to place, Pours on the rear, or lightens in their face.
Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strong Deluge whole fields, and sweep the trees along, Through ruin’d moles the rushing wave resounds, O’erwhelm’s the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds; The yellow harvests of the ripen’d year, And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear![144] While Jove descends in sluicy sheets of rain, And all the labours of mankind are vain.
So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire, Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire.
With grief the leader of the Lycian band Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand: His bended bow against the chief he drew; Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew, Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore, Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore: The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed, While the proud archer thus exulting cried: “Hither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds!
Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds, Not long the deathful dart he can sustain; Or Phœbus urged me to these fields in vain.” So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart Stopp’d short of life, and mock’d the shooter’s art.
The wounded chief, behind his car retired, The helping hand of Sthenelus required; Swift from his seat he leap’d upon the ground, And tugg’d the weapon from the gushing wound; When thus the king his guardian power address’d, The purple current wandering o’er his vest: “O progeny of Jove! unconquer’d maid!
If e’er my godlike sire deserved thy aid, If e’er I felt thee in the fighting field; Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.
O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight, Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guard’st in fight; And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore, That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more.” Thus pray’d Tydides, and Minerva heard, His nerves confirm’d, his languid spirits cheer’d; He feels each limb with wonted vigour light; His beating bosom claim’d the promised fight.
“Be bold, (she cried), in every combat shine, War be thy province, thy protection mine; Rush to the fight, and every foe control; Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul: Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me, And all thy godlike father breathes in thee; Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,[145] And set to view the warring deities.
These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain; Nor rashly strive where human force is vain.
If Venus mingle in the martial band, Her shalt thou wound: so Pallas gives command.” With that, the blue-eyed virgin wing’d her flight; The hero rush’d impetuous to the fight; With tenfold ardour now invades the plain, Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain.
As on the fleecy flocks when hunger calls, Amidst the field a brindled lion falls; If chance some shepherd with a distant dart The savage wound, he rouses at the smart, He foams, he roars; the shepherd dares not stay, But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey; Heaps fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground, Then leaps victorious o’er the lofty mound.
Not with less fury stern Tydides flew; And two brave leaders at an instant slew; Astynous breathless fell, and by his side, His people’s pastor, good Hypenor, died; Astynous’ breast the deadly lance receives, Hypenor’s shoulder his broad falchion cleaves.
Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rage Abas and Polyidus to engage; Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old, Could fate foresee, and mystic dreams unfold; The youths return’d not from the doubtful plain, And the sad father tried his arts in vain; No mystic dream could make their fates appear, Though now determined by Tydides’ spear.
Young Xanthus next, and Thoon felt his rage; The joy and hope of Phaenops’ feeble age: Vast was his wealth, and these the only heirs Of all his labours and a life of cares.
Cold death o’ertakes them in their blooming years, And leaves the father unavailing tears: To strangers now descends his heapy store, The race forgotten, and the name no more.
Two sons of Priam in one chariot ride, Glittering in arms, and combat side by side.
With deep concern divine Æneas view’d The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued; Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies, Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
At length he found Lycaon’s mighty son; To whom the chief of Venus’ race begun: “Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours now, Thy winged arrows and unerring bow, Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall’d fame, And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call That wondrous force by which whole armies fall; Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice; (Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
Whoe’er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer; If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare.” To him the Lycian: “Whom your eyes behold, If right I judge, is Diomed the bold: Such coursers whirl him o’er the dusty field, So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
If ’tis a god, he wears that chief’s disguise: Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies, Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray, And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
I wing’d an arrow, which not idly fell, The stroke had fix’d him to the gates of hell; And, but some god, some angry god withstands, His fate was due to these unerring hands.
Ten polish’d chariots I possess’d at home, And still they grace Lycaon’s princely dome: There veil’d in spacious coverlets they stand; And twice ten coursers wait their lord’s command.
The good old warrior bade me trust to these, When first for Troy I sail’d the sacred seas; In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide, And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined, I heard his counsels with unheedful mind, And thought the steeds (your large supplies unknown) Might fail of forage in the straiten’d town; So took my bow and pointed darts in hand And left the chariots in my native land.
“Too late, O friend! my rashness I deplore; These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.
Tydeus’ and Atreus’ sons their points have found, And undissembled gore pursued the wound.
In vain they bleed: this unavailing bow Serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe.
If e’er with life I quit the Trojan plain, If e’er I see my spouse and sire again, This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims, Broke by my hand, shall feed the blazing flames.” To whom the leader of the Dardan race: “Be calm, nor Phœbus’ honour’d gift disgrace.
The distant dart be praised, though here we need The rushing chariot and the bounding steed.
Against yon hero let us bend our course, And, hand to hand, encounter force with force.
Now mount my seat, and from the chariot’s height Observe my father’s steeds, renown’d in fight; Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase, To dare the shock, or urge the rapid race; Secure with these, through fighting fields we go; Or safe to Troy, if Jove assist the foe.
The horses, practised to their lord’s command, Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand; But, if, unhappy, we desert the fight, Thy voice alone can animate their flight; Else shall our fates be number’d with the dead, And these, the victor’s prize, in triumph led.
Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?
I hate the cumbrous chariot’s slow advance, And the long distance of the flying lance; But while my nerves are strong, my force entire, Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire.
Nor shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight convey Those threatening heroes, bear them both away; One chief at least beneath this arm shall die; So Pallas tells me, and forbids to fly.
Hence great Anchises stole a breed unknown, By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon: Four of this race his ample stalls contain, And two transport Æneas o’er the plain.
These, were the rich immortal prize our own, Through the wide world should make our glory known.” Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on, And stern Lycaon’s warlike race begun: “Prince, thou art met.
Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the ground: Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound; The starting coursers tremble with affright; The soul indignant seeks the realms of night.
To guard his slaughter’d friend, Æneas flies, His spear extending where the carcase lies; Watchful he wheels, protects it every way, As the grim lion stalks around his prey.
O’er the fall’n trunk his ample shield display’d, He hides the hero with his mighty shade, And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes Behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise, Such men as live in these degenerate days:[147] He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw, Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites, Full on the bone the pointed marble lights; Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone, And stripp’d the skin, and crack’d the solid bone.
Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains, His falling bulk his bended arm sustains; Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies; A sudden cloud comes swimming o’er his eyes.
There the brave chief, who mighty numbers sway’d, Oppress’d had sunk to death’s eternal shade, But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove, His danger views with anguish and despair, And guards her offspring with a mother’s care.
About her much-loved son her arms she throws, Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
Screen’d from the foe behind her shining veil, The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail; Safe through the rushing horse, and feather’d flight Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.
Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands, Remain’d unheedful of his lord’s commands: His panting steeds, removed from out the war, He fix’d with straiten’d traces to the car, Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes: These in proud triumph to the fleet convey’d, No longer now a Trojan lord obey’d.
That charge to bold Deipylus he gave, (Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,) Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein, And follow’d where Tydides swept the plain.
Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes) The raging chief in chase of Venus flies: No goddess she, commission’d to the field, Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield, Or fierce Bellona thundering at the wall, While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall; He knew soft combats suit the tender dame, New to the field, and still a foe to fame.
Unlike our gross, diseased, terrestrial blood: (For not the bread of man their life sustains, Nor wine’s inflaming juice supplies their veins:) With tender shrieks the goddess fill’d the place, And dropp’d her offspring from her weak embrace.
Him Phœbus took: he casts a cloud around The fainting chief, and wards the mortal wound.
Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies, The king insults the goddess as she flies: “Ill with Jove’s daughter bloody fights agree, The field of combat is no scene for thee: Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care, Go, lull the coward, or delude the fair.
Taught by this stroke renounce the war’s alarms, And learn to tremble at the name of arms.” Tydides thus.
The goddess, seized with dread, Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.
To Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way: Far, on the left, with clouds involved he lay; Beside him stood his lance, distain’d with gore, And, rein’d with gold, his foaming steeds before.
Low at his knee, she begg’d with streaming eyes Her brother’s car, to mount the distant skies, And show’d the wound by fierce Tydides given, A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven.
Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain, And to her hand commits the golden rein; She mounts the seat, oppress’d with silent woe, Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.
The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage; But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage.” Dione then: “Thy wrongs with patience bear, And share those griefs inferior powers must share: Unnumber’d woes mankind from us sustain, And men with woes afflict the gods again.
The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,[149] And lodged in brazen dungeons underground, Full thirteen moons imprison’d roar’d in vain; Otus and Ephialtes held the chain: Perhaps had perish’d had not Hermes’ care Restored the groaning god to upper air.
Great Juno’s self has borne her weight of pain, The imperial partner of the heavenly reign; Amphitryon’s son infix’d the deadly dart,[150] And fill’d with anguish her immortal heart.
E’en hell’s grim king Alcides’ power confess’d, The shaft found entrance in his iron breast; To Jove’s high palace for a cure he fled, Pierced in his own dominions of the dead; Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around, Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found, To stretch thee pale and gasping on the ground; Thy distant wife, Ægialé the fair,[151] Starting from sleep with a distracted air, Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord deplore, The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!” This said, she wiped from Venus’ wounded palm The sacred ichor, and infused the balm.
Thrice rushing furious, at the chief he strook; His blazing buckler thrice Apollo shook: He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud, A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.
“O son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and see How vast the difference of the gods and thee; Distance immense! between the powers that shine Above, eternal, deathless, and divine, And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth, A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth.” So spoke the god who darts celestial fires: He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.
Around the spectre bloody wars are waged, And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
Meantime on Ilion’s tower Apollo stood, And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god: “Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall; Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall, Rise in thy wrath! to hell’s abhorr’d abodes Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.
Still unresisted shall the foe destroy, And stretch the slaughter to the gates of Troy?
Lo, brave Æneas sinks beneath his wound, Not godlike Hector more in arms renown’d: Haste all, and take the generous warrior’s part.
Sarpedon first his ardent soul express’d, And, turn’d to Hector, these bold words address’d: “Say, chief, is all thy ancient valour lost?
Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast, That propp’d alone by Priam’s race should stand Troy’s sacred walls, nor need a foreign hand?
Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends, And the proud vaunt in just derision ends.
Remote they stand while alien troops engage, Like trembling hounds before the lion’s rage.
Haste, warrior, haste! preserve thy threaten’d state, Or one vast burst of all-involving fate Full o’er your towers shall fall, and sweep away Sons, sires, and wives, an undistinguish’d prey.
Rouse all thy Trojans, urge thy aids to fight; These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night; With force incessant the brave Greeks oppose; Such cares thy friends deserve, and such thy foes.” Stung to the heart the generous Hector hears, But just reproof with decent silence bears.
From his proud car the prince impetuous springs, On earth he leaps, his brazen armour rings.
Two shining spears are brandish’d in his hands; Thus arm’d, he animates his drooping bands, Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight, And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
They turn, they stand; the Greeks their fury dare, Condense their powers, and wait the growing war.
As when, on Ceres’ sacred floor, the swain Spreads the wide fan to clear the golden grain, And the light chaff, before the breezes borne, Ascends in clouds from off the heapy corn; The grey dust, rising with collected winds, Drives o’er the barn, and whitens all the hinds: So white with dust the Grecian host appears, From trampling steeds, and thundering charioteers.
Mars hovers o’er them with his sable shield, And adds new horrors to the darken’d field: Pleased with his charge, and ardent to fulfil, In Troy’s defence, Apollo’s heavenly will: Soon as from fight the blue-eyed maid retires, Each Trojan bosom with new warmth he fires.
And now the god, from forth his sacred fane, Produced Æneas to the shouting train; Alive, unharm’d, with all his peers around, Erect he stood, and vigorous from his wound: Inquiries none they made; the dreadful day No pause of words admits, no dull delay; Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims, Fame calls, Mars thunders, and the field’s in flames.
Embodied close, the labouring Grecian train The fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.
Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait Serenely dreadful, and as fix’d as fate.
So when the embattled clouds in dark array, Along the skies their gloomy lines display; When now the North his boisterous rage has spent, And peaceful sleeps the liquid element: The low-hung vapours, motionless and still, Rest on the summits of the shaded hill; Till the mass scatters as the winds arise, Dispersed and broken through the ruffled skies.
Nor was the general wanting to his train; From troop to troop he toils through all the plain, “Ye Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear; Your brave associates and yourselves revere!
Let glorious acts more glorious acts inspire, And catch from breast to breast the noble fire!
Then fierce Æneas, brandishing his blade, In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid, Whose sire Diocleus, wealthy, brave and great, In well-built Pheræ held his lofty seat:[152] Sprung from Alpheus’ plenteous stream, that yields Increase of harvests to the Pylian fields.
He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he, And these descended in the third degree.
Too early expert in the martial toil, In sable ships they left their native soil, To avenge Atrides: now, untimely slain, They fell with glory on the Phrygian plain.
So two young mountain lions, nursed with blood In deep recesses of the gloomy wood, Rush fearless to the plains, and uncontroll’d Depopulate the stalls and waste the fold: Till pierced at distance from their native den, O’erpowered they fall beneath the force of men.
Prostrate on earth their beauteous bodies lay, Like mountain firs, as tall and straight as they.
Great Menelaus views with pitying eyes, Lifts his bright lance, and at the victor flies; Mars urged him on; yet, ruthless in his hate, The god but urged him to provoke his fate.
He thus advancing, Nestor’s valiant son Shakes for his danger, and neglects his own; Struck with the thought, should Helen’s lord be slain, And all his country’s glorious labours vain.
Already met, the threatening heroes stand; The spears already tremble in their hand: In rush’d Antilochus, his aid to bring, And fall or conquer by the Spartan king.
These seen, the Dardan backward turn’d his course, Brave as he was, and shunn’d unequal force.
The breathless bodies to the Greeks they drew, Then mix in combat, and their toils renew.
First, Pylæmenes, great in battle, bled, Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians led.
Great Hector saw, and, raging at the view, Pours on the Greeks: the Trojan troops pursue: He fires his host with animating cries, And brings along the furies of the skies, Mars, stern destroyer! and Bellona dread, Flame in the front, and thunder at their head: This swells the tumult and the rage of fight; That shakes a spear that casts a dreadful light.
As when some simple swain his cot forsakes, And wide through fens an unknown journey takes: If chance a swelling brook his passage stay, And foam impervious ’cross the wanderer’s way, Confused he stops, a length of country pass’d, Eyes the rough waves, and tired, returns at last.
Amazed no less the great Tydides stands: He stay’d, and turning thus address’d his bands: “No wonder, Greeks! that all to Hector yield; Secure of favouring gods, he takes the field; His strokes they second, and avert our spears.
Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow; Retire, but with your faces to the foe.
Trust not too much your unavailing might; ’Tis not with Troy, but with the gods ye fight.” Now near the Greeks the black battalions drew; And first two leaders valiant Hector slew: His force Anchialus and Mnesthes found, In every art of glorious war renown’d; In the same car the chiefs to combat ride, And fought united, and united died.
Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax glows With thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes.
His massy spear with matchless fury sent, Through Amphius’ belt and heaving belly went; Amphius Apæsus’ happy soil possess’d, With herds abounding, and with treasure bless’d; But fate resistless from his country led The chief, to perish at his people’s head.
Shook with his fall his brazen armour rung, And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax sprung; Around his head an iron tempest rain’d; A wood of spears his ample shield sustain’d: Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he press’d, And drew his javelin from the bleeding breast: He could no more; the showering darts denied To spoil his glittering arms, and plumy pride.
Now foes on foes came pouring on the fields, With bristling lances, and compacted shields; Till in the steely circle straiten’d round, Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground.
While thus they strive, Tlepolemus the great,[153] Urged by the force of unresisted fate, Burns with desire Sarpedon’s strength to prove; Alcides’ offspring meets the son of Jove.
Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.
Jove’s great descendant, and his greater son.
Prepared for combat, ere the lance he toss’d, The daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast: “What brings this Lycian counsellor so far, To tremble at our arms, not mix in war!
Know thy vain self, nor let their flattery move, Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove.
How far unlike those chiefs of race divine, How vast the difference of their deeds and thine!
Troy felt his arm, and yon proud ramparts stand Raised on the ruins of his vengeful hand: With six small ships, and but a slender train, He left the town a wide-deserted plain.
But what art thou, who deedless look’st around, While unrevenged thy Lycians bite the ground!
Pierced by my spear, to endless darkness go!
I make this present to the shades below.” The son of Hercules, the Rhodian guide, Thus haughty spoke.
The Lycian king replied: “Thy sire, O prince! o’erturn’d the Trojan state, Whose perjured monarch well deserved his fate; Those heavenly steeds the hero sought so far, False he detain’d, the just reward of war.
Nor so content, the generous chief defied, With base reproaches and unmanly pride.
Yet not in vain, Tlepolemus, was thrown Thy angry lance; which piercing to the bone Sarpedon’s thigh, had robb’d the chief of breath; But Jove was present, and forbade the death.
Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng, The wounded hero dragg’d the lance along. (His friends, each busied in his several part, Through haste, or danger, had not drawn the dart.) The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired; Whose fall Ulysses view’d, with fury fired; Doubtful if Jove’s great son he should pursue, Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew.
But heaven and fate the first design withstand, Nor this great death must grace Ulysses’ hand.
Minerva drives him on the Lycian train; Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strew’d the plain, Alcander, Prytanis, Noëmon fell:[154] And numbers more his sword had sent to hell, But Hector saw; and, furious at the sight, Rush’d terrible amidst the ranks of fight.
Beneath a beech, Jove’s consecrated shade, His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid: Brave Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nigh, Who wrench’d the javelin from his sinewy thigh.
The fainting soul stood ready wing’d for flight, And o’er his eye-balls swam the shades of night; But Boreas rising fresh, with gentle breath, Recall’d his spirit from the gates of death.
The generous Greeks recede with tardy pace, Though Mars and Hector thunder in their face; None turn their backs to mean ignoble flight, Slow they retreat, and even retreating fight.
Tenthras the great, Orestes the renown’d For managed steeds, and Trechus press’d the ground; Next Œnomaus and OEnops’ offspring died; Oresbius last fell groaning at their side: Oresbius, in his painted mitre gay, In fat Bœotia held his wealthy sway, Where lakes surround low Hylè’s watery plain; A prince and people studious of their gain.
The carnage Juno from the skies survey’d, And touch’d with grief bespoke the blue-eyed maid: “Oh, sight accursed!
Shall faithless Troy prevail, And shall our promise to our people fail?
How vain the word to Menelaus given By Jove’s great daughter and the queen of heaven, Beneath his arms that Priam’s towers should fall, If warring gods for ever guard the wall!
Mars, red with slaughter, aids our hated foes: Haste, let us arm, and force with force oppose!” She spoke; Minerva burns to meet the war: And now heaven’s empress calls her blazing car.
At her command rush forth the steeds divine; Rich with immortal gold their trappings shine.
Bright Hebe waits; by Hebe, ever young, The whirling wheels are to the chariot hung.
On the bright axle turns the bidden wheel Of sounding brass; the polished axle steel.
Eight brazen spokes in radiant order flame; The circles gold, of uncorrupted frame, Such as the heavens produce: and round the gold Two brazen rings of work divine were roll’d.
Silver the beam, the extended yoke was gold, And golden reins the immortal coursers hold.
Herself, impatient, to the ready car, The coursers joins, and breathes revenge and war.
Pallas disrobes; her radiant veil untied, With flowers adorn’d, with art diversified, (The laboured veil her heavenly fingers wove,) Flows on the pavement of the court of Jove.
Now heaven’s dread arms her mighty limbs invest, Jove’s cuirass blazes on her ample breast; Deck’d in sad triumph for the mournful field, O’er her broad shoulders hangs his horrid shield, Dire, black, tremendous!
Round the margin roll’d, A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold: Here all the terrors of grim War appear, Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and Fear, Here storm’d Contention, and here Fury frown’d, And the dire orb portentous Gorgon crown’d.
The massy golden helm she next assumes, That dreadful nods with four o’ershading plumes; So vast, the broad circumference contains A hundred armies on a hundred plains.
The goddess thus the imperial car ascends; Shook by her arm the mighty javelin bends, Ponderous and huge; that when her fury burns, Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o’erturns.
Swift at the scourge the ethereal coursers fly, While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky.
Heaven’s gates spontaneous open to the powers,[155] Heaven’s golden gates, kept by the winged Hours;[156] Commission’d in alternate watch they stand, The sun’s bright portals and the skies command, Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day, Or the dark barrier roll with ease away.
The sounding hinges ring, on either side The gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.
The chariot mounts, where deep in ambient skies, Confused, Olympus’ hundred heads arise; Where far apart the Thunderer fills his throne, O’er all the gods superior and alone.
There with her snowy hand the queen restrains The fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains: “O sire! can no resentment touch thy soul?
What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain, What rash destruction! and what heroes slain!
Venus, and Phœbus with the dreadful bow, Smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe.
Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mind No god can govern, and no justice bind.
Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride, And drive from fight the impetuous homicide?” To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said: “Go! and the great Minerva be thy aid.
To tame the monster-god Minerva knows, And oft afflicts his brutal breast with woes.” He said; Saturnia, ardent to obey, Lash’d her white steeds along the aerial way.
Swift down the steep of heaven the chariot rolls, Between the expanded earth and starry poles.
Far as a shepherd, from some point on high,[157] O’er the wide main extends his boundless eye, Through such a space of air, with thundering sound, At every leap the immortal coursers bound Troy now they reach’d and touch’d those banks divine, Where silver Simois and Scamander join.
There Juno stopp’d, and (her fair steeds unloosed) Of air condensed a vapour circumfused: For these, impregnate with celestial dew, On Simois’ brink ambrosial herbage grew.
Thence to relieve the fainting Argive throng, Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.
Heaven’s empress mingles with the mortal crowd, And shouts, in Stentor’s sounding voice, aloud; Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,[158] Whose throats surpass’d the force of fifty tongues.
“Inglorious Argives! to your race a shame, And only men in figure and in name!
The goddess leaning o’er the bending yoke, Beside his coursers, thus her silence broke: “Degenerate prince! and not of Tydeus’ kind, Whose little body lodged a mighty mind; Foremost he press’d in glorious toils to share, And scarce refrain’d when I forbade the war.
Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go, And feast, incircled by the Theban foe; There braved, and vanquish’d, many a hardy knight; Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight.
Thou too no less hast been my constant care; Thy hands I arm’d, and sent thee forth to war: But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains; No drop of all thy father warms thy veins.” The chief thus answered mild: “Immortal maid!
I own thy presence, and confess thy aid.
Not fear, thou know’st, withholds me from the plains, Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains: From warring gods thou bad’st me turn my spear, And Venus only found resistance here.
Hence, goddess! heedful of thy high commands, Loth I gave way, and warn’d our Argive bands: For Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld, With slaughter red, and raging round the field.” Then thus Minerva:—“Brave Tydides, hear!
Not Mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear.
Full on the god impel thy foaming horse: Pallas commands, and Pallas lends thee force.
Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies, And every side of wavering combat tries; Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made: Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid.”[159] She said, and to the steeds approaching near, Drew from his seat the martial charioteer.
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends, Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends: The groaning axle bent beneath the load; So great a hero, and so great a god.
Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appear The daring Greek, the dreadful god of war!
Full at the chief, above his courser’s head, From Mars’s arm the enormous weapon fled: Pallas opposed her hand, and caused to glance Far from the car the strong immortal lance.
Then threw the force of Tydeus’ warlike son; The javelin hiss’d; the goddess urged it on: Where the broad cincture girt his armour round, It pierced the god: his groin received the wound.
Mars bellows with the pain: Loud as the roar encountering armies yield, When shouting millions shake the thundering field.
Both armies start, and trembling gaze around; And earth and heaven re-bellow to the sound.
As vapours blown by Auster’s sultry breath, Pregnant with plagues, and shedding seeds of death, Beneath the rage of burning Sirius rise, Choke the parch’d earth, and blacken all the skies; In such a cloud the god from combat driven, High o’er the dusky whirlwind scales the heaven.
Wild with his pain, he sought the bright abodes, There sullen sat beneath the sire of gods, Show’d the celestial blood, and with a groan Thus pour’d his plaints before the immortal throne: “Can Jove, supine, flagitious facts survey, And brook the furies of this daring day?
For mortal men celestial powers engage, And gods on gods exert eternal rage: From thee, O father! all these ills we bear, And thy fell daughter with the shield and spear; Thou gavest that fury to the realms of light, Pernicious, wild, regardless of the right.
All heaven beside reveres thy sovereign sway, Thy voice we hear, and thy behests obey: ’Tis hers to offend, and even offending share Thy breast, thy counsels, thy distinguish’d care: So boundless she, and thou so partial grown, Well may we deem the wondrous birth thy own.
Now frantic Diomed, at her command, Against the immortals lifts his raging hand: The heavenly Venus first his fury found, Me next encountering, me he dared to wound; Vanquish’d I fled; even I, the god of fight, From mortal madness scarce was saved by flight.
Or pierced with Grecian darts, for ages lie, Condemn’d to pain, though fated not to die.” Him thus upbraiding, with a wrathful look The lord of thunders view’d, and stern bespoke: “To me, perfidious! this lamenting strain?
Of lawless force shall lawless Mars complain?
Of all the gods who tread the spangled skies, Thou most unjust, most odious in our eyes!
Inhuman discord is thy dire delight, The waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight.
Yet long the inflicted pangs thou shall not mourn, Sprung since thou art from Jove, and heavenly-born.
Else, singed with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown, Where chain’d on burning rocks the Titans groan.” Thus he who shakes Olympus with his nod; Then gave to Pæon’s care the bleeding god.[160] With gentle hand the balm he pour’d around, And heal’d the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.
As when the fig’s press’d juice, infused in cream, To curds coagulates the liquid stream, Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined; Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture join’d.
Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dress’d His mighty limbs in an immortal vest.
Glorious he sat, in majesty restored, Fast by the throne of heaven’s superior lord.
THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.
The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail.
Helenus, the chief augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to appoint a solemn procession of the queen and the Trojan matrons to the temple of Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight.
The battle relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have an interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge, of the friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors, they make exchange of their arms.
Hector, having performed the orders of Helenus, prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking a tender leave of his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field.
The scene is first in the field of battle, between the rivers Simois and Scamander, and then changes to Troy.
Now heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yield To human force and human skill the field: Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes; Now here, now there, the tide of combat flows; While Troy’s famed streams, that bound the deathful plain On either side, run purple to the main.
Great Ajax first to conquest led the way, Broke the thick ranks, and turn’d the doubtful day.
The Thracian Acamas his falchion found, And hew’d the enormous giant to the ground; His thundering arm a deadly stroke impress’d Where the black horse-hair nodded o’er his crest; Fix’d in his front the brazen weapon lies, And seals in endless shades his swimming eyes.
Next Teuthras’ son distain’d the sands with blood, Axylus, hospitable, rich, and good: In fair Arisbe’s walls (his native place)[161] He held his seat! a friend to human race.
Fast by the road, his ever-open door Obliged the wealthy, and relieved the poor.
To stern Tydides now he falls a prey, No friend to guard him in the dreadful day!
Breathless the good man fell, and by his side His faithful servant, old Calesius died.
By great Euryalus was Dresus slain, And next he laid Opheltius on the plain.
Two twins were near, bold, beautiful, and young, From a fair naiad and Bucolion sprung: (Laomedon’s white flocks Bucolion fed, That monarch’s first-born by a foreign bed; In secret woods he won the naiad’s grace, And two fair infants crown’d his strong embrace:) Here dead they lay in all their youthful charms; The ruthless victor stripp’d their shining arms.
Astyalus by Polypœtes fell; Ulysses’ spear Pidytes sent to hell; By Teucer’s shaft brave Aretaon bled, And Nestor’s son laid stern Ablerus dead; Great Agamemnon, leader of the brave, The mortal wound of rich Elatus gave, Who held in Pedasus his proud abode,[162] And till’d the banks where silver Satnio flow’d.
Melanthius by Eurypylus was slain; And Phylacus from Leitus flies in vain.
Unbless’d Adrastus next at mercy lies Beneath the Spartan spear, a living prize.
Scared with the din and tumult of the fight, His headlong steeds, precipitate in flight, Rush’d on a tamarisk’s strong trunk, and broke The shatter’d chariot from the crooked yoke; Wide o’er the field, resistless as the wind, For Troy they fly, and leave their lord behind.
Prone on his face he sinks beside the wheel: Atrides o’er him shakes his vengeful steel; The fallen chief in suppliant posture press’d The victor’s knees, and thus his prayer address’d: “O spare my youth, and for the life I owe Large gifts of price my father shall bestow.
Well hast thou known proud Troy’s perfidious land, And well her natives merit at thy hand!
Not one of all the race, nor sex, nor age, Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage: Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all; Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall fall;[165] A dreadful lesson of exampled fate, To warn the nations, and to curb the great!” The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth address’d, To rigid justice steel’d his brother’s breast.
Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he thrust; The monarch’s javelin stretch’d him in the dust, Then pressing with his foot his panting heart, Forth from the slain he tugg’d the reeking dart.
Old Nestor saw, and roused the warrior’s rage; “Thus, heroes! thus the vigorous combat wage; No son of Mars descend, for servile gains, To touch the booty, while a foe remains.
Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!
First gain the conquest, then reward the toil.” And now had Greece eternal fame acquired, And frighted Troy within her walls, retired, Had not sage Helenus her state redress’d, Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast.
Where Hector stood, with great Æneas join’d, The seer reveal’d the counsels of his mind: “Ye generous chiefs! on whom the immortals lay The cares and glories of this doubtful day; On whom your aids, your country’s hopes depend; Wise to consult, and active to defend!
When your commands have hearten’d every band, Ourselves, here fix’d, will make the dangerous stand; Press’d as we are, and sore of former fight, These straits demand our last remains of might.
Meanwhile thou, Hector, to the town retire, And teach our mother what the gods require: Direct the queen to lead the assembled train Of Troy’s chief matrons to Minerva’s fane;[166] Unbar the sacred gates, and seek the power, With offer’d vows, in Ilion’s topmost tower.
With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow, And turn the tide of conflict on the foe: Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling spears; All Greece recedes, and ’midst her triumphs fears; Some god, they thought, who ruled the fate of wars, Shot down avenging from the vault of stars.
Then thus aloud: “Ye dauntless Dardans, hear!
Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore; Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more.
One hour demands me in the Trojan wall, To bid our altars flame, and victims fall: Nor shall, I trust, the matrons’ holy train, And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain.” This said, with ample strides the hero pass’d; The shield’s large orb behind his shoulder cast, His neck o’ershading, to his ankle hung; And as he march’d the brazen buckler rung.
Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),[167] Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeus’ son Between both armies met: the chiefs from far Observed each other, and had mark’d for war.
Our eyes till now that aspect ne’er beheld, Where fame is reap’d amid the embattled field; Yet far before the troops thou dar’st appear, And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear.
Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires, Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires!
But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend, Know with immortals we no more contend.
Not long Lycurgus view’d the golden light, That daring man who mix’d with gods in fight.
Bacchus, and Bacchus’ votaries, he drove, With brandish’d steel, from Nyssa’s sacred grove: Their consecrated spears lay scatter’d round, With curling vines and twisted ivy bound; While Bacchus headlong sought the briny flood, And Thetis’ arms received the trembling god.
Nor fail’d the crime the immortals’ wrath to move; (The immortals bless’d with endless ease above;) Deprived of sight by their avenging doom, Cheerless he breathed, and wander’d in the gloom, Then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes, A wretch accursed, and hated by the gods!
I brave not heaven: but if the fruits of earth Sustain thy life, and human be thy birth, Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath, Approach, and enter the dark gates of death.” “What, or from whence I am, or who my sire, (Replied the chief,) can Tydeus’ son inquire?
Like leaves on trees the race of man is found, Now green in youth, now withering on the ground; Another race the following spring supplies; They fall successive, and successive rise: So generations in their course decay; So flourish these, when those are pass’d away.
But if thou still persist to search my birth, Then hear a tale that fills the spacious earth.
“A city stands on Argos’ utmost bound, (Argos the fair, for warlike steeds renown’d,) Æolian Sisyphus, with wisdom bless’d, In ancient time the happy wall possess’d, Then call’d Ephyre: Glaucus was his son; Great Glaucus, father of Bellerophon, Who o’er the sons of men in beauty shined, Loved for that valour which preserves mankind.
Then mighty Praetus Argos’ sceptre sway’d, Whose hard commands Bellerophon obey’d.
With direful jealousy the monarch raged, And the brave prince in numerous toils engaged.
For him Antaea burn’d with lawless flame, And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame: In vain she tempted the relentless youth, Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth.
But when the tenth bright morning orient glow’d, The faithful youth his monarch’s mandate show’d: The fatal tablets, till that instant seal’d, The deathful secret to the king reveal’d.
First, dire Chimaera’s conquest was enjoin’d; A mingled monster of no mortal kind!
Behind, a dragon’s fiery tail was spread; A goat’s rough body bore a lion’s head; Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire; Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.
“This pest he slaughter’d, (for he read the skies, And trusted heaven’s informing prodigies,) Then met in arms the Solymæan crew,[169] (Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew; Next the bold Amazons’ whole force defied; And conquer’d still, for heaven was on his side.
“Nor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes, At his return, a treacherous ambush rose, With levell’d spears along the winding shore: There fell they breathless, and return’d no more.
“At length the monarch, with repentant grief, Confess’d the gods, and god-descended chief; His daughter gave, the stranger to detain, With half the honours of his ample reign: The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground, With woods, with vineyards, and with harvests crown’d.
Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace, Nor stain the sacred friendship of our race.
Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of old; Œneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold: Our ancient seat his honour’d presence graced, Where twenty days in genial rites he pass’d.
Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state, Great Hector, enter’d at the Scæan gate.[172] Beneath the beech-tree’s consecrated shades, The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids Around him flock’d, all press’d with pious care For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war.
He bids the train in long procession go, And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe.
And now to Priam’s stately courts he came, Rais’d on arch’d columns of stupendous frame; O’er these a range of marble structure runs, The rich pavilions of his fifty sons, In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,[173] Opposed to those, where Priam’s daughters sate.
Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crown’d, In Jove’s high name, to sprinkle on the ground, And pay due vows to all the gods around.
Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy soul, And draw new spirits from the generous bowl; Spent as thou art with long laborious fight, The brave defender of thy country’s right.” “Far hence be Bacchus’ gifts; (the chief rejoin’d;) Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind, Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind.
Let chiefs abstain, and spare the sacred juice To sprinkle to the gods, its better use.
By me that holy office were profaned; Ill fits it me, with human gore distain’d, To the pure skies these horrid hands to raise, Or offer heaven’s great Sire polluted praise.
You, with your matrons, go! a spotless train, And burn rich odours in Minerva’s fane.
The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold, Most prized for art, and labour’d o’er with gold, Before the goddess’ honour’d knees be spread, And twelve young heifers to her altar led.
So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer, Our wives, our infants, and our city spare; And far avert Tydides’ wasteful ire, Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.
Be this, O mother, your religious care: I go to rouse soft Paris to the war; If yet not lost to all the sense of shame, The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.
Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace, That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race![174] Deep to the dark abyss might he descend, Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end.” This heard, she gave command: and summon’d came Each noble matron and illustrious dame.
The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went, Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
There lay the vestures of no vulgar art, Sidonian maids embroider’d every part, Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore, With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore.
Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes The various textures and the various dyes, She chose a veil that shone superior far, And glow’d refulgent as the morning star.
Herself with this the long procession leads; The train majestically slow proceeds.
Soon as to Ilion’s topmost tower they come, And awful reach the high Palladian dome, Antenor’s consort, fair Theano, waits As Pallas’ priestess, and unbars the gates.
With hands uplifted and imploring eyes, They fill the dome with supplicating cries.
The priestess then the shining veil displays, Placed on Minerva’s knees, and thus she prays: “Oh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid, Troy’s strong defence, unconquer’d Pallas, aid!
So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke, Shall fill thy temple with a grateful smoke.
But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer, Ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!” So pray’d the priestess in her holy fane; So vow’d the matrons, but they vow’d in vain.
While these appear before the power with prayers, Hector to Paris’ lofty dome repairs.[175] Himself the mansion raised, from every part Assembling architects of matchless art.
Near Priam’s court and Hector’s palace stands The pompous structure, and the town commands.
A spear the hero bore of wondrous strength, Of full ten cubits was the lance’s length, The steely point with golden ringlets join’d, Before him brandish’d, at each motion shined Thus entering, in the glittering rooms he found His brother-chief, whose useless arms lay round, His eyes delighting with their splendid show, Brightening the shield, and polishing the bow.
Beside him Helen with her virgins stands, Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.
Him thus inactive, with an ardent look The prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke.
“Thy hate to Troy, is this the time to show? (O wretch ill-fated, and thy country’s foe!) Paris and Greece against us both conspire, Thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire.
For thee great Ilion’s guardian heroes fall, Till heaps of dead alone defend her wall, For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns, And wasteful war in all its fury burns.
Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care, Our troops to hearten, and our toils to share?
Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend, And all the Phrygian glories at an end.” “Brother, ’tis just, (replied the beauteous youth,) Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth: Yet charge my absence less, O generous chief!
On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief: Here, hid from human eyes, thy brother sate, And mourn’d, in secret, his and Ilion’s fate. ’Tis now enough; now glory spreads her charms, And beauteous Helen calls her chief to arms.
Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless, ’Tis man’s to fight, but heaven’s to give success.
Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide, And midst the roarings of the waters died?
Heaven fill’d up all my ills, and I accursed Bore all, and Paris of those ills the worst.
If to the fane she went, Where late the mourning matrons made resort; Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?” “Not to the court, (replied the attendant train,) Nor mix’d with matrons to Minerva’s fane: To Ilion’s steepy tower she bent her way, To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword; She heard, and trembled for her absent lord: Distracted with surprise, she seem’d to fly, Fear on her cheek, and sorrow in her eye.
The nurse attended with her infant boy, The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy.” Hector this heard, return’d without delay; Swift through the town he trod his former way, Through streets of palaces, and walks of state; And met the mourner at the Scæan gate.
His blameless wife, Aëtion’s wealthy heir (Cilician Thebe great Aëtion sway’d, And Hippoplacus’ wide extended shade): The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press’d, His only hope hung smiling at her breast, Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn, Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn.
To this loved infant Hector gave the name Scamandrius, from Scamander’s honour’d stream; Astyanax the Trojans call’d the boy, From his great father, the defence of Troy.
Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!
And think’st thou not how wretched we shall be, A widow I, a helpless orphan he?
For sure such courage length of life denies, And thou must fall, thy virtue’s sacrifice.
The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire, Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
His fate compassion in the victor bred; Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead, His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil, And laid him decent on the funeral pile; Then raised a mountain where his bones were burn’d, The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorn’d, Jove’s sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow A barren shade, and in his honour grow.
“By the same arm my seven brave brothers fell; In one sad day beheld the gates of hell; While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed, Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled!
My mother lived to wear the victor’s bands, The queen of Hippoplacia’s sylvan lands: Redeem’d too late, she scarce beheld again Her pleasing empire and her native plain, When ah! oppress’d by life-consuming woe, She fell a victim to Diana’s bow.
“Yet while my Hector still survives, I see My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee: Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all Once more will perish, if my Hector fall, Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share: Oh, prove a husband’s and a father’s care!
That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy, Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy; Thou, from this tower defend the important post; There Agamemnon points his dreadful host, That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain, And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given, Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
How would the sons of Troy, in arms renown’d, And Troy’s proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground Attaint the lustre of my former name, Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?
My early youth was bred to martial pains, My soul impels me to the embattled plains!
Let me be foremost to defend the throne, And guard my father’s glories, and my own.
“Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates! (How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!) The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend, And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind, My mother’s death, the ruin of my kind, Not Priam’s hoary hairs defiled with gore, Not all my brothers gasping on the shore; As thine, Andromache!
Thy griefs I dread: I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
To bear the victor’s hard commands, or bring The weight of waters from Hyperia’s spring.
There while you groan beneath the load of life, They cry, ‘Behold the mighty Hector’s wife!’ Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see, Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me.
The thoughts of glory past, and present shame, A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!
May I lie cold before that dreadful day, Press’d with a load of monumental clay!
Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep, Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep.” Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy Stretch’d his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
The babe clung crying to his nurse’s breast, Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest.
With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled, And Hector hasted to relieve his child, The glittering terrors from his brows unbound, And placed the beaming helmet on the ground; Then kiss’d the child, and, lifting high in air, Thus to the gods preferr’d a father’s prayer: “O thou! whose glory fills the ethereal throne, And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown, To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown, Against his country’s foes the war to wage, And rise the Hector of the future age!
The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear, She mingled with a smile a tender tear.
The soften’d chief with kind compassion view’d, And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued: “Andromache! my soul’s far better part, Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
No hostile hand can antedate my doom, Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
Fix’d is the term to all the race of earth; And such the hard condition of our birth: No force can then resist, no flight can save, All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim, The first in danger as the first in fame.” Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
His princess parts with a prophetic sigh, Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye That stream’d at every look; then, moving slow, Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
There, while her tears deplored the godlike man, Through all her train the soft infection ran; The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed, And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.
The wanton courser thus with reins unbound[176] Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground; Pamper’d and proud, he seeks the wonted tides, And laves, in height of blood his shining sides; His head now freed, he tosses to the skies; His mane dishevell’d o’er his shoulders flies; He snuffs the females in the distant plain, And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay, In arms refulgent as the god of day, The son of Priam, glorying in his might, Rush’d forth with Hector to the fields of fight.
And now, the warriors passing on the way, The graceful Paris first excused his stay.
Thy power in war with justice none contest; Known is thy courage, and thy strength confess’d.
Haste then, in all their glorious labours share, For much they suffer, for thy sake, in war.
ARGUMENT THE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX.
The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector, Minerva is under apprehensions for the Greeks.
They agree to put off the general engagement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge the Greeks to a single combat.
Nine of the princes accepting the challenge, the lot is cast and falls upon Ajax.
The Trojans calling a council, Antenor purposes the delivery of Helen to the Greeks, to which Paris will not consent, but offers to restore them her riches.
Priam sends a herald to make this offer, and to demand a truce for burning the dead, the last of which only is agreed to by Agamemnon.
When the funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the advice of Nestor, erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp, flanked with towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades.
Neptune testifies his jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from Jupiter.
Both armies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens the Trojans with thunder, and other signs of his wrath.
The three and twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax, the next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up in the funeral rites of the slain and one more in building the fortification before the ships.
So that somewhat about three days is employed in this book.
So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state, Then rush’d impetuous through the Scæan gate.
Him Paris follow’d to the dire alarms; Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
As when to sailors labouring through the main, That long have heaved the weary oar in vain, Jove bids at length the expected gales arise; The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies.
So welcome these to Troy’s desiring train, The bands are cheer’d, the war awakes again.
Bold Paris first the work of death begun On great Menestheus, Areithous’ son, Sprung from the fair Philomeda’s embrace, The pleasing Arnè was his native place.
By Glaucus’ spear the bold Iphinous bleeds, Fix’d in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds; Headlong he tumbles: his slack nerves unbound, Drop the cold useless members on the ground.
When now Minerva saw her Argives slain, From vast Olympus to the gleaming plain Fierce she descends: Apollo marked her flight, Nor shot less swift from Ilion’s towery height.
Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade; When thus Apollo to the blue-eyed maid: “What cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove!
Thus wings thy progress from the realms above?
Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way, To give to Greece the long divided day?
Go forth persuasive, and a while engage The warring nations to suspend their rage; Then dare the boldest of the hostile train To mortal combat on the listed plain.
For not this day shall end thy glorious date; The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate.” He said: the warrior heard the word with joy; Then with his spear restrain’d the youth of Troy, Held by the midst athwart.
On either hand The squadrons part; the expecting Trojans stand; Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear: They breathe, and hush the tumult of the war.
The Athenian maid,[178] and glorious god of day, With silent joy the settling hosts survey: In form of vultures, on the beech’s height They sit conceal’d, and wait the future fight.
The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields, Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.
As when a general darkness veils the main, (Soft Zephyr curling the wide wat’ry plain,) The waves scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps, And a still horror saddens all the deeps; Thus in thick orders settling wide around, At length composed they sit, and shade the ground.
Great Hector first amidst both armies broke The solemn silence, and their powers bespoke: “Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands, What my soul prompts, and what some god commands.
Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose, O’erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes; War with a fiercer tide once more returns, Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.
Stern Menelaus first the silence broke, And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke: “Women of Greece!
O scandal of your race, Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace, How great the shame, when every age shall know That not a Grecian met this noble foe!
Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew, A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
Be what ye seem, unanimated clay, Myself will dare the danger of the day; ’Tis man’s bold task the generous strife to try, But in the hands of God is victory.” These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour press’d, His manly limbs in azure arms he dress’d.
That day, Atrides! a superior hand Had stretch’d thee breathless on the hostile strand; But all at once, thy fury to compose, The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose; Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, press’d Thy daring hand, and this advice address’d: “Whither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run, And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design; Great Hector’s arm is mightier far than thine: Even fierce Achilles learn’d its force to fear, And trembling met this dreadful son of war.
Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band; Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand.
The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name, Though bold and burning with desire of fame, Content the doubtful honour might forego, So great the danger, and so brave the foe.” He said, and turn’d his brother’s vengeful mind; He stoop’d to reason, and his rage resign’d, No longer bent to rush on certain harms; His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.
He from whose lips divine persuasion flows, Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose; Thus to the kings he spoke: “What grief, what shame Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!
How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
Once with what joy the generous prince would hear Of every chief who fought this glorious war, Participate their fame, and pleased inquire Each name, each action, and each hero’s sire!
Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand, And trembling all before one hostile hand; How would he lift his aged arms on high, Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!
Oh! would to all the immortal powers above, Minerva, Phœbus, and almighty Jove!
Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew, Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew, Deep in a winding way his breast assailed, Nor aught the warrior’s thundering mace avail’d.
Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before Had given the vanquish’d, now the victor bore: But when old age had dimm’d Lycurgus’ eyes, To Ereuthalion he consign’d the prize.
Furious with this he crush’d our levell’d bands, And dared the trial of the strongest hands; Nor could the strongest hands his fury stay: All saw, and fear’d, his huge tempestuous sway Till I, the youngest of the host, appear’d, And, youngest, met whom all our army fear’d.
All these, alike inspired with noble rage, Demand the fight.
By heaven inspired, Leap’d forth the lot, of every Greek desired.
This from the right to left the herald bears, Held out in order to the Grecian peers; Each to his rival yields the mark unknown, Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own; Surveys the inscription with rejoicing eyes, Then casts before him, and with transport cries: “Warriors!
I claim the lot, and arm with joy; Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy.
Now while my brightest arms my limbs invest, To Saturn’s son be all your vows address’d: But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear, And deem your prayers the mean effect of fear.
The troops with elevated eyes, Implore the god whose thunder rends the skies: “O father of mankind, superior lord!
Through every Argive heart new transport ran; All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man: Even Hector paused; and with new doubt oppress’d, Felt his great heart suspended in his breast: ’Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear; Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.
Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds o’ercast, Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last, (The work of Tychius, who in Hylè dwell’d And in all arts of armoury excell’d,) This Ajax bore before his manly breast, And, threatening, thus his adverse chief address’d: “Hector! approach my arm, and singly know What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
Full on the brass descending from above Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove, Till in the seventh it fix’d.
Then Ajax threw; Through Hector’s shield the forceful javelin flew, His corslet enters, and his garment rends, And glancing downwards, near his flank descends.
The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins drew, Then close impetuous, and the charge renew; Fierce as the mountain-lions bathed in blood, Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.
At Ajax, Hector his long lance extends; The blunted point against the buckler bends; But Ajax, watchful as his foe drew near, Drove through the Trojan targe the knotty spear; It reach’d his neck, with matchless strength impell’d!
And now both heroes their broad falchions drew In flaming circles round their heads they flew; But then by heralds’ voice the word was given.
To either host your matchless worth is known, Each sounds your praise, and war is all your own.
Let him, who first provoked our chiefs to fight, Let him demand the sanction of the night; If first he ask’d it, I content obey, And cease the strife when Hector shows the way.” “O first of Greeks! (his noble foe rejoin’d) Whom heaven adorns, superior to thy kind, With strength of body, and with worth of mind!
Now martial law commands us to forbear; Hereafter we shall meet in glorious war, Some future day shall lengthen out the strife, And let the gods decide of death or life!
But let us, on this memorable day, Exchange some gift: that Greece and Troy may say, ‘Not hate, but glory, made these chiefs contend; And each brave foe was in his soul a friend.’” With that, a sword with stars of silver graced, The baldric studded, and the sheath enchased, He gave the Greek.
The generous Greek bestow’d A radiant belt that rich with purple glow’d.
Then with majestic grace they quit the plain; This seeks the Grecian, that the Phrygian train.
The Trojan bands returning Hector wait, And hail with joy the Champion of their state; Escaped great Ajax, they survey him round, Alive, unarm’d, and vigorous from his wound; To Troy’s high gates the godlike man they bear Their present triumph, as their late despair.
But Ajax, glorying in his hardy deed, The well-arm’d Greeks to Agamemnon lead.
A steer for sacrifice the king design’d, Of full five years, and of the nobler kind.
The victim falls; they strip the smoking hide, The beast they quarter, and the joints divide; Then spread the tables, the repast prepare, Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
The king himself (an honorary sign) Before great Ajax placed the mighty chine.[185] When now the rage of hunger was removed, Nestor, in each persuasive art approved, The sage whose counsels long had sway’d the rest, In words like these his prudent thought express’d: “How dear, O kings! this fatal day has cost, What Greeks are perish’d! what a people lost!
What tides of blood have drench’d Scamander’s shore!
Then hear me, chief! nor let the morrow’s light Awake thy squadrons to new toils of fight: Some space at least permit the war to breathe, While we to flames our slaughter’d friends bequeath, From the red field their scatter’d bodies bear, And nigh the fleet a funeral structure rear; So decent urns their snowy bones may keep, And pious children o’er their ashes weep.
Here, where on one promiscuous pile they blazed, High o’er them all a general tomb be raised; Next, to secure our camp and naval powers, Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers; From space to space be ample gates around, For passing chariots; and a trench profound.
So Greece to combat shall in safety go, Nor fear the fierce incursions of the foe.” ’Twas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved; The sceptred kings of Greece his words approved.
Meanwhile, convened at Priam’s palace-gate, The Trojan peers in nightly council sate; A senate void of order, as of choice: Their hearts were fearful, and confused their voice.
Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear: “Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear! ’Tis heaven the counsel of my breast inspires, And I but move what every god requires: Let Sparta’s treasures be this hour restored, And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke, Our impious battles the just gods provoke.
As this advice ye practise, or reject, So hope success, or dread the dire effect.” The senior spoke and sate.
To whom replied The graceful husband of the Spartan bride: “Cold counsels, Trojan, may become thy years But sound ungrateful in a warrior’s ears: Old man, if void of fallacy or art, Thy words express the purpose of thy heart, Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given; But wisdom has its date, assign’d by heaven.
Their treasures I’ll restore, but not the dame; My treasures too, for peace, I will resign; But be this bright possession ever mine.” ’Twas then, the growing discord to compose, Slow from his seat the reverend Priam rose: His godlike aspect deep attention drew: He paused, and these pacific words ensue: “Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar bands!
Now take refreshment as the hour demands; Guard well the walls, relieve the watch of night.
Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.
Then shall our herald, to the Atrides sent, Before their ships proclaim my son’s intent.
Next let a truce be ask’d, that Troy may burn Her slaughter’d heroes, and their bones inurn; That done, once more the fate of war be tried, And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!” The monarch spoke: the warriors snatch’d with haste (Each at his post in arms) a short repast.
Soon as the rosy morn had waked the day, To the black ships Idæus bent his way; There, to the sons of Mars, in council found, He raised his voice: the host stood listening round.
Pleased may ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers) What Paris, author of the war, declares.
The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore (Oh had he perish’d ere they touch’d our shore!) He proffers injured Greece: with large increase Of added Trojan wealth to buy the peace.
But to restore the beauteous bride again, This Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain.
Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to burn Our slaughter’d heroes, and their bones inurn.
That done, once more the fate of war be tried, And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!” The Greeks gave ear, but none the silence broke; At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke: “Oh, take not, friends! defrauded of your fame, Their proffer’d wealth, nor even the Spartan dame.
Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall, And Troy already totters to her fall.” The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name, With general shouts return’d him loud acclaim.
Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace: “Herald! in him thou hear’st the voice of Greece For what remains; let funeral flames be fed With heroes’ corps: I war not with the dead: Go search your slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain, And gratify the manes of the slain.
He came, and standing in the midst, explain’d The peace rejected, but the truce obtain’d.
Straight to their several cares the Trojans move, Some search the plains, some fell the sounding grove: Nor less the Greeks, descending on the shore, Hew’d the green forests, and the bodies bore.
And now from forth the chambers of the main, To shed his sacred light on earth again, Arose the golden chariot of the day, And tipp’d the mountains with a purple ray.
In mingled throngs the Greek and Trojan train Through heaps of carnage search’d the mournful plain.
Scarce could the friend his slaughter’d friend explore, With dust dishonour’d, and deformed with gore.
The wounds they wash’d, their pious tears they shed, And, laid along their cars, deplored the dead.
Now, ere the morn had streak’d with reddening light The doubtful confines of the day and night, About the dying flames the Greeks appear’d, And round the pile a general tomb they rear’d.
Then, to secure the camp and naval powers, They raised embattled walls with lofty towers:[186] From space to space were ample gates around, For passing chariots, and a trench profound Of large extent; and deep in earth below, Strong piles infix’d stood adverse to the foe.
So toil’d the Greeks: meanwhile the gods above, In shining circle round their father Jove, Amazed beheld the wondrous works of man: Then he, whose trident shakes the earth, began: “What mortals henceforth shall our power adore, Our fanes frequent, our oracles implore, If the proud Grecians thus successful boast Their rising bulwarks on the sea-beat coast?
See the long walls extending to the main, No god consulted, and no victim slain!
Their fame shall fill the world’s remotest ends, Wide as the morn her golden beam extends; While old Laomedon’s divine abodes, Those radiant structures raised by labouring gods, Shall, razed and lost, in long oblivion sleep.” Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep.
The almighty Thunderer with a frown replies, That clouds the world, and blackens half the skies: “Strong god of ocean! thou, whose rage can make The solid earth’s eternal basis shake!
Where’er the sun’s refulgent rays are cast, Thy power is honour’d, and thy fame shall last.
The sapp’d foundations by thy force shall fall, And, whelm’d beneath the waves, drop the huge wall: Vast drifts of sand shall change the former shore: The ruin vanish’d, and the name no more.” Thus they in heaven: while, o’er the Grecian train, The rolling sun descending to the main Beheld the finish’d work.
And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnos’ strands, With Bacchus’ blessings cheered the generous bands.
Of fragrant wines the rich Eunaeus sent A thousant measures to the royal tent. (Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle of yore To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,) The rest they purchased at their proper cost, And well the plenteous freight supplied the host: Each, in exchange, proportion’d treasures gave;[188] Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.
But Jove averse the signs of wrath display’d, And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade: Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all, While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.
THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS.
Jupiter assembles a council of the deities, and threatens them with the pains of Tartarus if they assist either side: Minerva only obtains of him that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels.
The armies join battle: Jupiter on Mount Ida weighs in his balances the fates of both, and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and lightnings.
Nestor alone continues in the field in great danger: Diomed relieves him; whose exploits, and those of Hector, are excellently described.
Juno endeavours to animate Neptune to the assistance of the Greeks, but in vain.
Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the Grecians, but are restrained by Iris, sent from Jupiter.
Hector continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven to their fortifications before the ships,) and gives orders to keep the watch all night in the camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking and escaping by flight.
The time of seven and twenty days is employed from the opening of the poem to the end of this book.
The scene here (except of the celestial machines) lies in the field towards the seashore.
Let him who tempts me, dread those dire abodes: And know, the Almighty is the god of gods.
League all your forces, then, ye powers above, Join all, and try the omnipotence of Jove.
Let down our golden everlasting chain[191] Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and main Strive all, of mortal and immortal birth, To drag, by this, the Thunderer down to earth: Ye strive in vain! if I but stretch this hand, I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land; I fix the chain to great Olympus’ height, And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight!
For such I reign, unbounded and above; And such are men, and gods, compared to Jove.” The all-mighty spoke, nor durst the powers reply: A reverend horror silenced all the sky; Trembling they stood before their sovereign’s look; At length his best-beloved, the power of wisdom, spoke: “O first and greatest!
High on the throne he shines: his coursers fly Between the extended earth and starry sky.
Now had the Grecians snatch’d a short repast, And buckled on their shining arms with haste.
Troy roused as soon; for on this dreadful day The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.
Long as the morning beams, increasing bright, O’er heaven’s clear azure spread the sacred light, Commutual death the fate of war confounds, Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But when the sun the height of heaven ascends, The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,[192] With equal hand: in these explored the fate Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight: Press’d with its load, the Grecian balance lies Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.
Then Jove from Ida’s top his horrors spreads; The clouds burst dreadful o’er the Grecian heads; Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls; Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls.
Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire; The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire.
Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear, Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war: Nor he, the king of war, the alarm sustain’d Nestor alone, amidst the storm remain’d.
Unwilling he remain’d, for Paris’ dart Had pierced his courser in a mortal part; Fix’d in the forehead, where the springing mane Curl’d o’er the brow, it stung him to the brain; Mad with his anguish, he begins to rear, Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air.
Scarce had his falchion cut the reins, and freed The encumber’d chariot from the dying steed, When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war, Pour’d to the tumult on his whirling car.
That day had stretch’d beneath his matchless hand The hoary monarch of the Pylian band, But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowd He rush’d, and on Ulysses call’d aloud: “Whither, oh whither does Ulysses run?
Oh, flight unworthy great Laertes’ son!
Mix’d with the vulgar shall thy fate be found, Pierced in the back, a vile, dishonest wound?
Oh turn and save from Hector’s direful rage The glory of the Greeks, the Pylian sage.” His fruitless words are lost unheard in air, Ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there.
But bold Tydides to the rescue goes, A single warrior midst a host of foes; Before the coursers with a sudden spring He leap’d, and anxious thus bespoke the king: “Great perils, father! wait the unequal fight; These younger champions will oppress thy might.
Thy veins no more with ancient vigour glow, Weak is thy servant, and thy coursers slow.
Hector they face; unknowing how to fear, Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirl’d his spear.
The spear with erring haste mistook its way, But plunged in Eniopeus’ bosom lay.
His opening hand in death forsakes the rein; The steeds fly back: he falls, and spurns the plain.
Great Hector sorrows for his servant kill’d, Yet unrevenged permits to press the field; Till, to supply his place and rule the car, Rose Archeptolemus, the fierce in war.
This day, averse, the sovereign of the skies Assists great Hector, and our palm denies.
Some other sun may see the happier hour, When Greece shall conquer by his heavenly power. ’Tis not in man his fix’d decree to move: The great will glory to submit to Jove.” “O reverend prince! (Tydides thus replies) Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
But ah, what grief! should haughty Hector boast I fled inglorious to the guarded coast.
Before that dire disgrace shall blast my fame, O’erwhelm me, earth; and hide a warrior’s shame!” To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:[194] “Gods! can thy courage fear the Phrygian’s pride?
Not those who felt thy arm, the Dardan host, Nor Troy, yet bleeding in her heroes lost; Not even a Phrygian dame, who dreads the sword That laid in dust her loved, lamented lord.” He said, and, hasty, o’er the gasping throng Drives the swift steeds: the chariot smokes along; The shouts of Trojans thicken in the wind; The storm of hissing javelins pours behind.
“Go, mighty hero! graced above the rest In seats of council and the sumptuous feast: Now hope no more those honours from thy train; Go less than woman, in the form of man!
To scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames, To lead in exile the fair Phrygian dames, Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled; This arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead.” Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite.
To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight; Thrice turn’d the chief, and thrice imperial Jove On Ida’s summits thunder’d from above.
Great Hector heard; he saw the flashing light, (The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight: “Hear, every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band, All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand.
Be mindful of the wreaths your arms have won, Your great forefathers’ glories, and your own.
In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall, Weak bulwarks; destined by this arm to fall.
High o’er their slighted trench our steeds shall bound, And pass victorious o’er the levell’d mound.
For this, high-fed, in plenteous stalls ye stand, Served with pure wheat, and by a princess’ hand; For this my spouse, of great Aëtion’s line, So oft has steep’d the strengthening grain in wine.
Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontroll’d: Give me to seize rich Nestor’s shield of gold; From Tydeus’ shoulders strip the costly load, Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god: These if we gain, then victory, ye powers!
This night, this glorious night, the fleet is ours!” That heard, deep anguish stung Saturnia’s soul; She shook her throne, that shook the starry pole: And thus to Neptune: “Thou, whose force can make The stedfast earth from her foundations shake, Seest thou the Greeks by fates unjust oppress’d, Nor swells thy heart in that immortal breast?
Yet Ægae, Helicè, thy power obey,[195] And gifts unceasing on thine altars lay.
Would all the deities of Greece combine, In vain the gloomy Thunderer might repine: Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend, And see his Trojans to the shades descend: Such be the scene from his Idaean bower; Ungrateful prospect to the sullen power!” Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design: “What rage, what madness, furious queen! is thine?
All above Submit and tremble at the hand of Jove.” Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless might Jove gave the glory of the destined fight, Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills the fields With close-ranged chariots, and with thicken’d shields.
Where the deep trench in length extended lay, Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array, A dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threat With long-destroying flames the hostile fleet.
The king of men, by Juno’s self inspired, Toil’d through the tents, and all his army fired.
High on the midmost bark the king appear’d: There, from Ulysses’ deck, his voice was heard: To Ajax and Achilles reach’d the sound, Whose distant ships the guarded navy bound.
“O Argives! shame of human race! (he cried: The hollow vessels to his voice replied,) Where now are all your glorious boasts of yore, Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore?
Each fearless hero dares a hundred foes, While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows; But who to meet one martial man is found, When the fight rages, and the flames surround?
O sire of the distress’d!
To thee my vows were breathed from every shore; What altar smoked not with our victims’ gore?
With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame, And ask’d destruction to the Trojan name.
Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand; Give these at least to ’scape from Hector’s hand, And save the relics of the Grecian land!” Thus pray’d the king, and heaven’s great father heard His vows, in bitterness of soul preferr’d: The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares, And gives the people to their monarch’s prayers.
His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he sent, A fawn his talons truss’d, (divine portent!) High o’er the wondering hosts he soar’d above, Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove; Then let the prey before his altar fall; The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all: Encouraged by the sign, the troops revive, And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive.
Tydides first, of all the Grecian force, O’er the broad ditch impell’d his foaming horse, Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore, And dyed his javelin red with Trojan gore.
Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire) With flying coursers shunn’d his dreadful ire; Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell oppress’d; The dart drove on, and issued at his breast: Headlong he quits the car: his arms resound; His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground.
Forth rush a tide of Greeks, the passage freed; The Atridae first, the Ajaces next succeed: Meriones, like Mars in arms renown’d, And godlike Idomen, now passed the mound; Evaemon’s son next issues to the foe, And last young Teucer with his bended bow.
Secure behind the Telamonian shield The skilful archer wide survey’d the field, With every shaft some hostile victim slew, Then close beneath the sevenfold orb withdrew: The conscious infant so, when fear alarms, Retires for safety to the mother’s arms.
Orsilochus; then fell Ormenus dead: The godlike Lycophon next press’d the plain, With Chromius, Daetor, Ophelestes slain: Bold Hamopaon breathless sunk to ground; The bloody pile great Melanippus crown’d.
Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his art, A Trojan ghost attending every dart.
Great Agamemnon views with joyful eye The ranks grow thinner as his arrows fly: “O youth forever dear! (the monarch cried) Thus, always thus, thy early worth be tried; Thy brave example shall retrieve our host, Thy country’s saviour, and thy father’s boast!
Sprung from an alien’s bed thy sire to grace, The vigorous offspring of a stolen embrace: Proud of his boy, he own’d the generous flame, And the brave son repays his cares with fame.
What strength I have, be now in battle tried, Till every shaft in Phrygian blood be dyed.
Since rallying from our wall we forced the foe, Still aim’d at Hector have I bent my bow: Eight forky arrows from this hand have fled, And eight bold heroes by their points lie dead: But sure some god denies me to destroy This fury of the field, this dog of Troy.” He said, and twang’d the string.
Another shaft the raging archer drew, That other shaft with erring fury flew, (From Hector, Phœbus turn’d the flying wound,) Yet fell not dry or guiltless to the ground: Thy breast, brave Archeptolemus! it tore, And dipp’d its feathers in no vulgar gore.
Headlong he falls: his sudden fall alarms The steeds, that startle at his sounding arms.
Hector with grief his charioteer beheld All pale and breathless on the sanguine field: Then bids Cebriones direct the rein, Quits his bright car, and issues on the plain.
Dreadful he shouts: from earth a stone he took, And rush’d on Teucer with the lifted rock.
The youth already strain’d the forceful yew; The shaft already to his shoulder drew; The feather in his hand, just wing’d for flight, Touch’d where the neck and hollow chest unite; There, where the juncture knits the channel bone, The furious chief discharged the craggy stone: The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow, And his numb’d hand dismiss’d his useless bow.
He fell: but Ajax his broad shield display’d, And screen’d his brother with the mighty shade; Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus, bore The batter’d archer groaning to the shore.
Troy yet found grace before the Olympian sire, He arm’d their hands, and fill’d their breasts with fire.
The Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall, Or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall.
As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase, With beating bosom, and with eager pace, Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels, Guards as he turns, and circles as he wheels; Thus oft the Grecians turn’d, but still they flew; Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew.
When flying they had pass’d the trench profound, And many a chief lay gasping on the ground; Before the ships a desperate stand they made, And fired the troops, and called the gods to aid.
Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came: His eyes like Gorgon shot a sanguine flame That wither’d all their host: like Mars he stood: Dire as the monster, dreadful as the god!
Their strong distress the wife of Jove survey’d; Then pensive thus, to war’s triumphant maid: “O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield The avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield!
Now, in this moment of her last despair, Shall wretched Greece no more confess our care, Condemn’d to suffer the full force of fate, And drain the dregs of heaven’s relentless hate?
Oh had my wisdom known this dire event, When to grim Pluto’s gloomy gates he went; The triple dog had never felt his chain, Nor Styx been cross’d, nor hell explored in vain.
Averse to me of all his heaven of gods, At Thetis’ suit the partial Thunderer nods; To grace her gloomy, fierce, resenting son, My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone.
Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then? (That terror of the Greeks, that man of men) When Juno’s self, and Pallas shall appear, All dreadful in the crimson walks of war!
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends: Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends: Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o’erturns.
Saturnia lends the lash; the coursers fly; Smooth glides the chariot through the liquid sky.
Heaven’s gates spontaneous open to the powers, Heaven’s golden gates, kept by the winged Hours.
Commission’d in alternate watch they stand, The sun’s bright portals and the skies command; Close, or unfold, the eternal gates of day Bar heaven with clouds, or roll those clouds away.
The sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide.
If furious yet they dare the vain debate, Thus have I spoke, and what I speak is fate: Their coursers crush’d beneath the wheels shall lie, Their car in fragments, scatter’d o’er the sky: My lightning these rebellious shall confound, And hurl them flaming, headlong, to the ground, Condemn’d for ten revolving years to weep The wounds impress’d by burning thunder deep.
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still, She claims some title to transgress our will.” Swift as the wind, the various-colour’d maid From Ida’s top her golden wings display’d; To great Olympus’ shining gate she flies, There meets the chariot rushing down the skies, Restrains their progress from the bright abodes, And speaks the mandate of the sire of gods.
“What frenzy goddesses! what rage can move Celestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove?
Desist, obedient to his high command: This is his word; and know his word shall stand: His lightning your rebellion shall confound, And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground; Your horses crush’d beneath the wheels shall lie, Your car in fragments scatter’d o’er the sky; Yourselves condemn’d ten rolling years to weep The wounds impress’d by burning thunder deep.
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still, She claims some title to transgress his will: But thee, what desperate insolence has driven To lift thy lance against the king of heaven?” Then, mounting on the pinions of the wind, She flew; and Juno thus her rage resign’d: “O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield The avenging bolt, and shake the saber shield!
No more let beings of superior birth Contend with Jove for this low race of earth; Triumphant now, now miserably slain, They breathe or perish as the fates ordain: But Jove’s high counsels full effect shall find; And, ever constant, ever rule mankind.” She spoke, and backward turn’d her steeds of light, Adorn’d with manes of gold, and heavenly bright.
The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood, And heap’d their mangers with ambrosial food.
Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly, Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky. ’Twas Neptune’s charge his coursers to unbrace, And fix the car on its immortal base; There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays, Till with a snowy veil he screen’d the blaze.
He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold, The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes, And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes.
Trembling afar the offending powers appear’d, Confused and silent, for his frown they fear’d.
But know, whoe’er almighty power withstand!
Unmatch’d our force, unconquer’d is our hand: Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take, And each immortal nerve with horror shake.
For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand; What power soe’er provokes our lifted hand, On this our hill no more shall hold his place; Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race.” Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom, But feast their souls on Ilion’s woes to come.
Though secret anger swell’d Minerva’s breast, The prudent goddess yet her wrath repress’d; But Juno, impotent of rage, replies: “What hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!
Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne; ’Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.
For Greece we grieve, abandon’d by her fate To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate.
From fields forbidden we submiss refrain, With arms unaiding see our Argives slain; Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move, Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove.” The goddess thus; and thus the god replies, Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies: “The morning sun, awaked by loud alarms, Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms.
Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight, The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight, Even till the day when certain fates ordain That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain) Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.
The victors keep the field; and Hector calls A martial council near the navy walls; These to Scamander’s bank apart he led, Where thinly scatter’d lay the heaps of dead.
The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground, Attend his order, and their prince surround.
A massy spear he bore of mighty strength, Of full ten cubits was the lance’s length; The point was brass, refulgent to behold, Fix’d to the wood with circling rings of gold: The noble Hector on his lance reclined, And, bending forward, thus reveal’d his mind: “Ye valiant Trojans, with attention hear!
Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame.
But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls, And guards them trembling in their wooden walls.
Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.
Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought, And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought.
Wide o’er the field, high blazing to the sky, Let numerous fires the absent sun supply, The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise, Till the bright morn her purple beam displays; Lest, in the silence and the shades of night, Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight.
Not unmolested let the wretches gain Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main; Some hostile wound let every dart bestow, Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe, Wounds, that long hence may ask their spouses’ care.
And warn their children from a Trojan war.
Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall, Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call; To bid the sires with hoary honours crown’d, And beardless youths, our battlements surround.
Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers, And let the matrons hang with lights the towers; Lest, under covert of the midnight shade, The insidious foe the naked town invade.
The gods, I trust, shall give to Hector’s hand From these detested foes to free the land, Who plough’d, with fates averse, the watery way: For Trojan vultures a predestined prey.
Our common safety must be now the care; But soon as morning paints the fields of air, Sheathed in bright arms let every troop engage, And the fired fleet behold the battle rage.
Then, then shall Hector and Tydides prove Whose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove.
To-morrow’s light (O haste the glorious morn!) Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne, With this keen javelin shall his breast be gored, And prostrate heroes bleed around their lord.
Certain as this, oh! might my days endure, From age inglorious, and black death secure; So might my life and glory know no bound, Like Pallas worshipp’d, like the sun renown’d!
From all his host around Shouts of applause along the shores resound.
Each from the yoke the smoking steeds untied, And fix’d their headstalls to his chariot-side.
Fat sheep and oxen from the town are led, With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread, Full hecatombs lay burning on the shore: The winds to heaven the curling vapours bore.
Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers![197] Whose wrath hung heavy o’er the Trojan towers: Nor Priam nor his sons obtain’d their grace; Proud Troy they hated, and her guilty race.
The troops exulting sat in order round, And beaming fires illumined all the ground.
So many flames before proud Ilion blaze, And lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays.
The long reflections of the distant fires Gleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires.
A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild, And shoot a shady lustre o’er the field.
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.
Agamemnon, after the last day’s defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit the siege, and return to their country.
Diomed opposes this, and Nestor seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution.
He orders the guard to be strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures are to be followed in this emergency.
Agamemnon pursues this advice, and Nestor further prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, in order to move him to a reconciliation.
Ulysses and Ajax are made choice of, who are accompanied by old Phœnix.
They make, each of them, very moving and pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by Achilles, who notwithstanding retains Phœnix in his tent.
The ambassadors return unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake themselves to sleep.
This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night, which is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem.
Thus joyful Troy maintain’d the watch of night; While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,[199] And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part, Sat on each face, and sadden’d every heart.
The king amidst the mournful circle rose: Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
So silent fountains, from a rock’s tall head, In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed.
With more than vulgar grief he stood oppress’d; Words, mix’d with sighs, thus bursting from his breast: “Ye sons of Greece! partake your leader’s care; Fellows in arms and princes of the war!
Of partial Jove too justly we complain, And heavenly oracles believed in vain.
A safe return was promised to our toils, With conquest honour’d and enrich’d with spoils: Now shameful flight alone can save the host; Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost.
So Jove decrees, almighty lord of all!
If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold, The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight, Durst brand my courage, and defame my might: Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appear’d, The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard.
The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring, The gods have made thee but by halves a king: They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command; They gave dominion o’er the seas and land; The noblest power that might the world control They gave thee not—a brave and virtuous soul.
Confiding in our want of worth, he stands; And if we fly, ’tis what our king commands.
Go thou, inglorious! from the embattled plain; Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the main; A noble care the Grecians shall employ, To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy.
Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire, Myself shall stay, till Troy or I expire; Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame; God bade us fight, and ’twas with God we came.” He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise, And voice to voice resounds Tydides’ praise.
Wise Nestor then his reverend figure rear’d; He spoke: the host in still attention heard:[200] “O truly great! in whom the gods have join’d Such strength of body with such force of mind: In conduct, as in courage, you excel, Still first to act what you advise so well.
These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves, Applauding Greece with common voice approves.
And yet those years that since thy birth have run Would hardly style thee Nestor’s youngest son.
This night, refresh and fortify thy train; Between the trench and wall let guards remain: Be that the duty of the young and bold; But thou, O king, to council call the old; Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares; Thy high commands must spirit all our wars.
With Thracian wines recruit thy honour’d guests, For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distress’d, And such a monarch as can choose the best.
See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires, How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!
Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
This dreadful interval determines all; To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall.” Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey; Swift through the gates the guards direct their way.
His son was first to pass the lofty mound, The generous Thrasymed, in arms renown’d: Next him, Ascalaphus, Iälmen, stood, The double offspring of the warrior-god: Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join, And Lycomed of Creon’s noble line.
Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands, And each bold chief a hundred spears commands.
The king of men, on public counsels bent, Convened the princes in his ample tent, Each seized a portion of the kingly feast, But stay’d his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.
Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved, And slowly rising, thus the council moved.
“Monarch of nations! whose superior sway Assembled states, and lords of earth obey, The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given, And millions own the care of thee and Heaven.
O king! the counsels of my age attend; With thee my cares begin, with thee must end.
Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and hear, Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear, To see no wholesome motion be withstood, And ratify the best for public good.
Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste, At once my present judgment and my past.
When from Pelides’ tent you forced the maid, I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade; But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired, You wronged the man, by men and gods admired: Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end, With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend.” To whom the king.
Bless’d in his love, this wondrous hero stands; Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.
Fain would my heart, which err’d through frantic rage, The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.
Yet hear me further: when our wars are o’er, If safe we land on Argos’ fruitful shore, There shall he live my son, our honours share, And with Orestes’ self divide my care.
Yet more—three daughters in my court are bred, And each well worthy of a royal bed; Laodice and Iphigenia fair,[203] And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair; Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve, I ask no presents, no reward for love: Myself will give the dower; so vast a store As never father gave a child before.
Seven ample cities shall confess his sway, Him Enope, and Pheræ him obey, Cardamyle with ample turrets crown’d, And sacred Pedasus for vines renown’d; Æpea fair, the pastures Hira yields, And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:[204] The whole extent to Pylos’ sandy plain, Along the verdant margin of the main.
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil; Bold are the men, and generous is the soil; There shall he reign, with power and justice crown’d, And rule the tributary realms around.
All this I give, his vengeance to control, And sure all this may move his mighty soul.
Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares, Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers, Lives dark and dreadful in deep hell’s abodes, And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods.
The reverend Nestor then: “Great Agamemnon! glorious king of men!
Such are thy offers as a prince may take, And such as fits a generous king to make.
Let chosen delegates this hour be sent (Myself will name them) to Pelides’ tent.
Yet more to sanctify the word you send, Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
The heralds bring The cleansing water from the living spring.
The youth with wine the sacred goblets crown’d, And large libations drench’d the sands around.
The rite perform’d, the chiefs their thirst allay, Then from the royal tent they take their way; Wise Nestor turns on each his careful eye, Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply; Much he advised them all, Ulysses most, To deprecate the chief, and save the host.
Through the still night they march, and hear the roar Of murmuring billows on the sounding shore.
To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound, Whose liquid arms the mighty globe surround, They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless, And calm the rage of stern Æacides.
And now, arrived, where on the sandy bay The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay; Amused at ease, the godlike man they found, Pleased with the solemn harp’s harmonious sound. (The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came; Of polish’d silver was its costly frame.) With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings The immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
Patroclus only of the royal train, Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain: Full opposite he sat, and listen’d long, In silence waiting till he ceased the song.
Unseen the Grecian embassy proceeds To his high tent; the great Ulysses leads.
Achilles starting, as the chiefs he spied, Leap’d from his seat, and laid the harp aside.
With like surprise arose Menoetius’ son: Pelides grasp’d their hands, and thus begun: “Princes, all hail! whatever brought you here.
Or strong necessity, or urgent fear; Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came; To me more dear than all that bear the name.” With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led, And placed in seats with purple carpets spread.
Then thus—“Patroclus, crown a larger bowl, Mix purer wine, and open every soul.
Of all the warriors yonder host can send, Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend.” He said: Patroclus o’er the blazing fire Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire: The brazen vase Automedon sustains, Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.
Achilles at the genial feast presides, The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
The first fat offering to the immortals due, Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw; Then each, indulging in the social feast, His thirst and hunger soberly repress’d.
That done, to Phœnix Ajax gave the sign: Not unperceived; Ulysses crown’d with wine The foaming bowl, and instant thus began, His speech addressing to the godlike man.
“Health to Achilles! happy are thy guests!
Not those more honour’d whom Atrides feasts: Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards, That, Agamemnon’s regal tent affords; But greater cares sit heavy on our souls, Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.
What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
The dead we mourn, and for the living fear; Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands, And owns no help but from thy saving hands: Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call; Their threatening tents already shade our wall: Hear how with shouts their conquest they proclaim, And point at every ship their vengeful flame!
For them the father of the gods declares, Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies; What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes!
Heavens! how my country’s woes distract my mind, Lest Fate accomplish all his rage design’d!
And must we, gods! our heads inglorious lay In Trojan dust, and this the fatal day?
Return, Achilles: oh return, though late, To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of Fate; If in that heart or grief or courage lies, Rise to redeem; ah, yet to conquer, rise!
The day may come, when, all our warriors slain, That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain: Regard in time, O prince divinely brave!
Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave.
When Peleus in his aged arms embraced His parting son, these accents were his last: “‘My child! with strength, with glory, and success, Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless!
Trust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cares engage To calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage: From gentler manners let thy glory grow, And shun contention, the sure source of woe; That young and old may in thy praise combine, The virtues of humanity be thine—’ This now-despised advice thy father gave; Ah! check thy anger; and be truly brave.
If thou wilt yield to great Atrides’ prayers, Gifts worthy thee his royal hand prepares; If not—but hear me, while I number o’er The proffer’d presents, an exhaustless store.
All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid, And, join’d with these, the long-contested maid; With all her charms, Briseïs he’ll resign, And solemn swear those charms were only thine; Untouch’d she stay’d, uninjured she removes, Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race With copious love shall crown thy warm embrace; Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none, Or yield to Helen’s heavenly charms alone.
Yet hear me further: when our wars are o’er, If safe we land on Argos’ fruitful shore, There shalt thou live his son, his honour share, And with Orestes’ self divide his care.
Yet more—three daughters in his court are bred, And each well worthy of a royal bed: Laodice and Iphigenia fair, And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair: Her shalt thou wed whom most thy eyes approve; He asks no presents, no reward for love: Himself will give the dower; so vast a store As never father gave a child before.
Seven ample cities shall confess thy sway, The Enope and Pheræ thee obey, Cardamyle with ample turrets crown’d, And sacred Pedasus, for vines renown’d: Æpea fair, the pastures Hira yields, And rich Antheia with her flowery fields; The whole extent to Pylos’ sandy plain, Along the verdant margin of the main.
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil; Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.
There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crown’d, And rule the tributary realms around.
Such are the proffers which this day we bring, Such the repentance of a suppliant king.
But if all this, relentless, thou disdain, If honour and if interest plead in vain, Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford, And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored.
Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain: Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
“Then thus in short my fix’d resolves attend, Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend; Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore, But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
Alike regretted in the dust he lies, Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains, A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
As the bold bird her helpless young attends, From danger guards them, and from want defends; In search of prey she wings the spacious air, And with the untasted food supplies her care: For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved, Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved; Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood, And sweat laborious days in dust and blood.
I sack’d twelve ample cities on the main,[207] And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain: Then at Atrides’ haughty feet were laid The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
Your mighty monarch these in peace possess’d; Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
Some present, too, to every prince was paid; And every prince enjoys the gift he made: I only must refund, of all his train; See what pre-eminence our merits gain!
My spoil alone his greedy soul delights: My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights: The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy; But what’s the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?
What to these shores the assembled nations draws, What calls for vengeance but a woman’s cause?
Are fair endowments and a beauteous face Beloved by none but those of Atreus’ race?
Nor did my fair one less distinction claim; Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame.
Wrong’d in my love, all proffers I disdain; Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
Has he not fenced his guarded navy round With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound?
There was a time (’twas when for Greece I fought) When Hector’s prowess no such wonders wrought; He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait Achilles’ fury at the Scæan gate; He tried it once, and scarce was saved by fate.
But now those ancient enmities are o’er; To-morrow we the favouring gods implore; Then shall you see our parting vessels crown’d, And hear with oars the Hellespont resound.
The third day hence shall Pythia greet our sails,[208] If mighty Neptune send propitious gales; Pythia to her Achilles shall restore The wealth he left for this detested shore: Thither the spoils of this long war shall pass, The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass: My beauteous captives thither I’ll convey, And all that rests of my unravish’d prey.
One only valued gift your tyrant gave, And that resumed—the fair Lyrnessian slave.
Atrides’ daughter never shall be led (An ill-match’d consort) to Achilles’ bed; Like golden Venus though she charm’d the heart, And vied with Pallas in the works of art; Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace, I hate alliance with a tyrant’s race.
If heaven restore me to my realms with life, The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife; Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine, And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine.
Bless’d in kind love, my years shall glide away, Content with just hereditary sway; There, deaf for ever to the martial strife, Enjoy the dear prerogative of life.
Not all Apollo’s Pythian treasures hold, Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway, Can bribe the poor possession of a day!
Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain, And steeds unrivall’d on the dusty plain: But from our lips the vital spirit fled, Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed, And each alternate, life or fame, proposed; Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town, Short is my date, but deathless my renown: If I return, I quit immortal praise For years on years, and long-extended days.
Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake, And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make; To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy, Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.
Her hearts are strengthen’d, and her glories rise.
Go then to Greece, report our fix’d design; Bid all your counsels, all your armies join, Let all your forces, all your arts conspire, To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.
One stratagem has fail’d, and others will: Ye find, Achilles is unconquer’d still.
Go then—digest my message as ye may— But here this night let reverend Phœnix stay: His tedious toils and hoary hairs demand A peaceful death in Pythia’s friendly land.
If wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless mind, How shall thy friend, thy Phœnix, stay behind?
The royal Peleus, when from Pythia’s coast He sent thee early to the Achaian host; Thy youth as then in sage debates unskill’d, And new to perils of the direful field: He bade me teach thee all the ways of war, To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.
No time shall part us, and no fate divide, Not though the god, that breathed my life, restore The bloom I boasted, and the port I bore, When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames (Delightful Greece, the land of lovely dames), My father faithless to my mother’s arms, Old as he was, adored a stranger’s charms.
My sire with curses loads my hated head, And cries, ‘Ye furies! barren be his bed.’ Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below, And ruthless Proserpine, confirm’d his vow.
Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!
I thought (but some kind god that thought suppress’d) To plunge the poniard in my father’s breast; Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain With prayers entreat me, and with force detain.
On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine, They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine; Strong guards they placed, and watch’d nine nights entire; The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire.
The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all: And, favour’d by the night, o’erleap’d the wall, My travels thence through spacious Greece extend; In Phthia’s court at last my labours end.
Your sire received me, as his son caress’d, With gifts enrich’d, and with possessions bless’d.
The strong Dolopians thenceforth own’d my reign, And all the coast that runs along the main.
By love to thee his bounties I repaid, And early wisdom to thy soul convey’d: Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave: A child I took thee, but a hero gave.
Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resign’d; A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind: The gods (the only great, and only wise) Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice; Offending man their high compassion wins, And daily prayers atone for daily sins.
Prayers are Jove’s daughters, of celestial race, Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face; With humble mien, and with dejected eyes, Constant they follow, where injustice flies.
Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined, Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples o’er mankind, While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind.
Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove, For him they mediate to the throne above: When man rejects the humble suit they make, The sire revenges for the daughters’ sake; From Jove commission’d, fierce injustice then Descends to punish unrelenting men.
O let not headlong passion bear the sway These reconciling goddesses obey: Due honours to the seed of Jove belong, Due honours calm the fierce, and bend the strong.
Were these not paid thee by the terms we bring, Were rage still harbour’d in the haughty king; Nor Greece nor all her fortunes should engage Thy friend to plead against so just a rage.
But since what honour asks the general sends, And sends by those whom most thy heart commends; The best and noblest of the Grecian train; Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain!
“Where Calydon on rocky mountains stands[212] Once fought the Ætolian and Curetian bands; To guard it those; to conquer, these advance; And mutual deaths were dealt with mutual chance.
The silver Cynthia bade contention rise, In vengeance of neglected sacrifice; On Œneus fields she sent a monstrous boar, That levell’d harvests, and whole forests tore: This beast (when many a chief his tusks had slain) Great Meleager stretch’d along the plain, Then, for his spoils, a new debate arose, The neighbour nations thence commencing foes.
Strong as they were, the bold Curetes fail’d, While Meleager’s thundering arm prevail’d: Till rage at length inflamed his lofty breast (For rage invades the wisest and the best).
In vain Ætolia her deliverer waits, War shakes her walls, and thunders at her gates.
Meanwhile the victor’s shouts ascend the skies; The walls are scaled; the rolling flames arise; At length his wife (a form divine) appears, With piercing cries, and supplicating tears; She paints the horrors of a conquer’d town, The heroes slain, the palaces o’erthrown, The matrons ravish’d, the whole race enslaved: The warrior heard, he vanquish’d, and he saved.
A generous friendship no cold medium knows, Burns with one love, with one resentment glows; One should our interests and our passions be; My friend must hate the man that injures me.
Do this, my Phœnix, ’tis a generous part; And share my realms, my honours, and my heart.
Let these return: our voyage, or our stay, Rest undetermined till the dawning day.” He ceased; then order’d for the sage’s bed A warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.
With that, stern Ajax his long silence broke, And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke: “Hence let us go—why waste we time in vain?
See what effect our low submissions gain!
Proud as he is, that iron heart retains Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed, On just atonement, we remit the deed; A sire the slaughter of his son forgives; The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives: The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign, And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.[213] The gods that unrelenting breast have steel’d, And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.
Meantime Achilles’ slaves prepared a bed, With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread: There, till the sacred morn restored the day, In slumber sweet the reverend Phœnix lay.
But in his inner tent, an ampler space, Achilles slept; and in his warm embrace Fair Diomede of the Lesbian race.
Last, for Patroclus was the couch prepared, Whose nightly joys the beauteous Iphis shared; Achilles to his friend consign’d her charms When Scyros fell before his conquering arms.
Achilles’ high resolves declare to all: Returns the chief, or must our navy fall?” “Great king of nations! (Ithacus replied) Fix’d is his wrath, unconquer’d is his pride; He slights thy friendship, thy proposals scorns, And, thus implored, with fiercer fury burns.
Your eyes shall view, when morning paints the sky, Beneath his oars the whitening billows fly; Us too he bids our oars and sails employ, Nor hope the fall of heaven-protected Troy; For Jove o’ershades her with his arm divine, Inspires her war, and bids her glory shine.
Such was his word: what further he declared, These sacred heralds and great Ajax heard.
But Phœnix in his tent the chief retains, Safe to transport him to his native plains When morning dawns; if other he decree, His age is sacred, and his choice is free.” Ulysses ceased: the great Achaian host, With sorrow seized, in consternation lost, Attend the stern reply.
Tydides broke The general silence, and undaunted spoke.
“Why should we gifts to proud Achilles send, Or strive with prayers his haughty soul to bend?
His country’s woes he glories to deride, And prayers will burst that swelling heart with pride.
THE NIGHT-ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES.
Upon the refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress of Agamemnon is described in the most lively manner.
He takes no rest that night, but passes through the camp, awaking the leaders, and contriving all possible methods for the public safety.
Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses, and Diomed are employed in raising the rest of the captains.
They call a council of war, and determine to send scouts into the enemies’ camp, to learn their posture, and discover their intentions.
Diomed undertakes this hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses for his companion.
In their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector had sent on a like design to the camp of the Grecians.
From him they are informed of the situation of the Trojan and auxiliary forces, and particularly of Rhesus, and the Thracians who were lately arrived.
They pass on with success; kill Rhesus, with several of his officers, and seize the famous horses of that prince, with which they return in triumph to the camp.
The same night continues; the scene lies in the two camps.
All night the chiefs before their vessels lay, And lost in sleep the labours of the day: All but the king: with various thoughts oppress’d,[215] His country’s cares lay rolling in his breast.
As when by lightnings Jove’s ethereal power Foretels the rattling hail, or weighty shower, Or sends soft snows to whiten all the shore, Or bids the brazen throat of war to roar; By fits one flash succeeds as one expires, And heaven flames thick with momentary fires: So bursting frequent from Atrides’ breast, Sighs following sighs his inward fears confess’d.
Now o’er the fields, dejected, he surveys From thousand Trojan fires the mounting blaze; Hears in the passing wind their music blow, And marks distinct the voices of the foe.
Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast, Anxious he sorrows for the endangered host.
He rends his hair, in sacrifice to Jove, And sues to him that ever lives above: Inly he groans; while glory and despair Divide his heart, and wage a double war.
A thousand cares his labouring breast revolves; To seek sage Nestor now the chief resolves, With him, in wholesome counsels, to debate What yet remains to save the afflicted state.
Meanwhile his brother, press’d with equal woes, Alike denied the gifts of soft repose, Laments for Greece, that in his cause before So much had suffer’d and must suffer more.
A leopard’s spotted hide his shoulders spread: A brazen helmet glitter’d on his head: Thus (with a javelin in his hand) he went To wake Atrides in the royal tent.
Already waked, Atrides he descried, His armour buckling at his vessel’s side.
Such bold exploits uncommon courage ask; Guideless, alone, through night’s dark shade to go, And midst a hostile camp explore the foe.” To whom the king: “In such distress we stand, No vulgar counsel our affairs demand; Greece to preserve, is now no easy part, But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art.
For Jove, averse, our humble prayer denies, And bows his head to Hector’s sacrifice.
What eye has witness’d, or what ear believed, In one great day, by one great arm achieved, Such wondrous deeds as Hector’s hand has done, And we beheld, the last revolving sun?
Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers raise, Urge by their fathers’ fame their future praise.
Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head, The hoary monarch raised his eyes and said: “What art thou, speak, that on designs unknown, While others sleep, thus range the camp alone; Seek’st thou some friend or nightly sentinel?
Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell.” “O son of Neleus, (thus the king rejoin’d,) Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind!
Lo, here the wretched Agamemnon stands, The unhappy general of the Grecian bands, Whom Jove decrees with daily cares to bend, And woes, that only with his life shall end!
Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain, And scarce my heart support its load of pain.
No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known, Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone, With fears distracted, with no fix’d design; And all my people’s miseries are mine.
Audacious Hector, if the gods ordain That great Achilles rise and rage again, What toils attend thee, and what woes remain!
Lo, faithful Nestor thy command obeys; The care is next our other chiefs to raise: Ulysses, Diomed, we chiefly need; Meges for strength, Oïleus famed for speed.
The camp he traversed through the sleeping crowd, Stopp’d at Ulysses’ tent, and call’d aloud.
Without his tent, bold Diomed they found, All sheathed in arms, his brave companions round: Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field, His head reclining on his bossy shield.
A wood of spears stood by, that, fix’d upright, Shot from their flashing points a quivering light.
A bull’s black hide composed the hero’s bed; A splendid carpet roll’d beneath his head.
Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakes The slumbering chief, and in these words awakes: “Rise, son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong Rest seems inglorious, and the night too long.
Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed, The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead.
And now the chiefs approach the nightly guard; A wakeful squadron, each in arms prepared: The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep, And, couching close, repel invading sleep.
So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain, With toil protected from the prowling train; When the gaunt lioness, with hunger bold, Springs from the mountains toward the guarded fold: Through breaking woods her rustling course they hear; Loud, and more loud, the clamours strike their ear Of hounds and men: they start, they gaze around, Watch every side, and turn to every sound.
Thus watch’d the Grecians, cautious of surprise, Each voice, each motion, drew their ears and eyes: Each step of passing feet increased the affright; And hostile Troy was ever full in sight.
Nestor with joy the wakeful band survey’d, And thus accosted through the gloomy shade.
Watch thus, and Greece shall live.” The hero said; Then o’er the trench the following chieftains led.
The trenches pass’d, the assembled kings around In silent state the consistory crown’d.
Lives there a man, who singly dares to go To yonder camp, or seize some straggling foe?
Or favour’d by the night approach so near, Their speech, their counsels, and designs to hear?
This could he learn, and to our peers recite, And pass unharm’d the dangers of the night; What fame were his through all succeeding days, While Phœbus shines, or men have tongues to praise!
What gifts his grateful country would bestow!
What must not Greece to her deliverer owe?
A sable ewe each leader should provide, With each a sable lambkin by her side; At every rite his share should be increased, And his the foremost honours of the feast.” Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear, Tydides spoke—“The man you seek is here.
Through yon black camps to bend my dangerous way, Some god within commands, and I obey.
Then thus the king of men the contest ends: “Thou first of warriors, and thou best of friends, Undaunted Diomed! what chief to join In this great enterprise, is only thine.
Just be thy choice, without affection made; To birth, or office, no respect be paid; Let worth determine here.” The monarch spake, And inly trembled for his brother’s sake.
“Then thus (the godlike Diomed rejoin’d) My choice declares the impulse of my mind.
How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands To lend his counsels and assist our hands?
A chief, whose safety is Minerva’s care; So famed, so dreadful, in the works of war: Bless’d in his conduct, I no aid require; Wisdom like his might pass through flames of fire.” “It fits thee not, before these chiefs of fame, (Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame: Praise from a friend, or censure from a foe, Are lost on hearers that our merits know.
But let us haste—Night rolls the hours away, The reddening orient shows the coming day, The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains, And of night’s empire but a third remains.” Thus having spoke, with generous ardour press’d, In arms terrific their huge limbs they dress’d.
A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave, And ample buckler, to Tydides gave: Then in a leathern helm he cased his head, Short of its crest, and with no plume o’erspread: (Such as by youths unused to arms are worn:) No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn.
Next him Ulysses took a shining sword, A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored: A well-proved casque, with leather braces bound, (Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crown’d; Soft wool within; without, in order spread,[217] A boar’s white teeth grinn’d horrid o’er his head.
This from Amyntor, rich Ormenus’ son, Autolycus by fraudful rapine won, And gave Amphidamas; from him the prize Molus received, the pledge of social ties; The helmet next by Merion was possess’d, And now Ulysses’ thoughtful temples press’d.
Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake, And dark through paths oblique their progress take.
Just then, in sign she favour’d their intent, A long-wing’d heron great Minerva sent: This, though surrounding shades obscured their view, By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew.
As from the right she soar’d, Ulysses pray’d, Hail’d the glad omen, and address’d the maid: “O daughter of that god whose arm can wield The avenging bolt, and shake the saber shield!
Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy shade, Safe by thy succour to our ships convey’d, And let some deed this signal night adorn, To claim the tears of Trojans yet unborn.” Then godlike Diomed preferr’d his prayer: “Daughter of Jove, unconquer’d Pallas! hear.
When on Æsopus’ banks the banded powers Of Greece he left, and sought the Theban towers, Peace was his charge; received with peaceful show, He went a legate, but return’d a foe: Then help’d by thee, and cover’d by thy shield, He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield.
So now be present, O celestial maid!
So still continue to the race thine aid!
A youthful steer shall fall beneath the stroke, Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke, With ample forehead, and with spreading horns, Whose taper tops refulgent gold adorns.” The heroes pray’d, and Pallas from the skies Accords their vow, succeeds their enterprise.
Now, like two lions panting for the prey, With dreadful thoughts they trace the dreary way, Through the black horrors of the ensanguined plain, Through dust, through blood, o’er arms, and hills of slain.
Nor less bold Hector, and the sons of Troy, On high designs the wakeful hours employ; The assembled peers their lofty chief enclosed; Who thus the counsels of his breast proposed: “What glorious man, for high attempts prepared, Dares greatly venture for a rich reward?
Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make, What watch they keep, and what resolves they take?
If now subdued they meditate their flight, And, spent with toil, neglect the watch of night?
“Hector! (he said) my courage bids me meet This high achievement, and explore the fleet: But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies, And swear to grant me the demanded prize; The immortal coursers, and the glittering car, That bear Pelides through the ranks of war.
Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go, Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know, Even to the royal tent pursue my way, And all their counsels, all their aims betray.” The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high, Attesting thus the monarch of the sky: “Be witness thou! immortal lord of all!
Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall: By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne, And him alone the immortal steeds adorn.” Thus Hector swore: the gods were call’d in vain, But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain: Across his back the bended bow he flung, A wolf’s grey hide around his shoulders hung, A ferret’s downy fur his helmet lined, And in his hand a pointed javelin shined.
Scarce had he pass’d the steeds and Trojan throng, (Still bending forward as he coursed along,) When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread Ulysses mark’d, and thus to Diomed; “O friend!
I hear some step of hostile feet, Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet; Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main; Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.
But if too swift of foot he flies before, Confine his course along the fleet and shore, Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ, And intercept his hoped return to Troy.” With that they stepp’d aside, and stoop’d their head, (As Dolon pass’d,) behind a heap of dead: Along the path the spy unwary flew; Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue.
So distant they, and such the space between, As when two teams of mules divide the green, (To whom the hind like shares of land allows,) When now new furrows part the approaching ploughs.
Now Dolon, listening, heard them as they pass’d; Hector (he thought) had sent, and check’d his haste, Till scarce at distance of a javelin’s throw, No voice succeeding, he perceived the foe.
As when two skilful hounds the leveret wind; Or chase through woods obscure the trembling hind; Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way, And from the herd still turn the flying prey: So fast, and with such fears, the Trojan flew; So close, so constant, the bold Greeks pursue.
Now almost on the fleet the dastard falls, And mingles with the guards that watch the walls; When brave Tydides stopp’d; a gen’rous thought (Inspired by Pallas) in his bosom wrought, Lest on the foe some forward Greek advance, And snatch the glory from his lifted lance.
Then thus aloud: “Whoe’er thou art, remain; This javelin else shall fix thee to the plain.” He said, and high in air the weapon cast, Which wilful err’d, and o’er his shoulder pass’d; Then fix’d in earth.
Against the trembling wood The wretch stood propp’d, and quiver’d as he stood; A sudden palsy seized his turning head; His loose teeth chatter’d, and his colour fled; The panting warriors seize him as he stands, And with unmanly tears his life demands.
“O spare my youth, and for the breath I owe, Large gifts of price my father shall bestow: Vast heaps of brass shall in your ships be told, And steel well-temper’d and refulgent gold.” To whom Ulysses made this wise reply: “Whoe’er thou art, be bold, nor fear to die.
Cam’st thou the secrets of our camp to find, By Hector prompted, or thy daring mind?
But say, be faithful, and the truth recite!
Where stand his coursers? in what quarter sleep Their other princes? tell what watch they keep: Say, since this conquest, what their counsels are; Or here to combat, from their city far, Or back to Ilion’s walls transfer the war?” Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedes’ son: “What Dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own.
Hector, the peers assembling in his tent, A council holds at Ilus’ monument.
Not distant far, lie higher on the land The Lycian, Mysian, and Mæonian band, And Phrygia’s horse, by Thymbras’ ancient wall; The Thracians utmost, and apart from all.
These Troy but lately to her succour won, Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneus’ son: I saw his coursers in proud triumph go, Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow; Rich silver plates his shining car infold; His solid arms, refulgent, flame with gold; No mortal shoulders suit the glorious load, Celestial panoply, to grace a god!
Let me, unhappy, to your fleet be borne, Or leave me here, a captive’s fate to mourn, In cruel chains, till your return reveal The truth or falsehood of the news I tell.” To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown: “Think not to live, though all the truth be shown: Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strife To risk more bravely thy now forfeit life?
No—once a traitor, thou betray’st no more.” Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch prepared With humble blandishment to stroke his beard, Like lightning swift the wrathful falchion flew, Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two; One instant snatch’d his trembling soul to hell, The head, yet speaking, mutter’d as it fell.
Through the still night they cross the devious fields, Slippery with blood, o’er arms and heaps of shields, Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay, And eased in sleep the labours of the day.
Ranged in three lines they view the prostrate band: The horses yoked beside each warrior stand.
Their arms in order on the ground reclined, Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined: Amidst lay Rhesus, stretch’d in sleep profound, And the white steeds behind his chariot bound.
The welcome sight Ulysses first descries, And points to Diomed the tempting prize.
“The man, the coursers, and the car behold!
Described by Dolon, with the arms of gold.
So the grim lion, from his nightly den, O’erleaps the fences, and invades the pen, On sheep or goats, resistless in his way, He falls, and foaming rends the guardless prey; Nor stopp’d the fury of his vengeful hand, Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian band.
Ulysses following, as his partner slew, Back by the foot each slaughter’d warrior drew; The milk-white coursers studious to convey Safe to the ships, he wisely cleared the way: Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles bred, Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead.
Now twelve despatch’d, the monarch last they found; Tydides’ falchion fix’d him to the ground.
Not unobserved they pass’d: the god of light Had watch’d his Troy, and mark’d Minerva’s flight, Saw Tydeus’ son with heavenly succour bless’d, And vengeful anger fill’d his sacred breast.
Say whence these coursers? by what chance bestow’d, The spoil of foes, or present of a god?
Old as I am, to age I scorn to yield, And daily mingle in the martial field; But sure till now no coursers struck my sight Like these, conspicuous through the ranks of fight.
Some god, I deem, conferred the glorious prize, Bless’d as ye are, and favourites of the skies; The care of him who bids the thunder roar, And her, whose fury bathes the world with gore.” “Father! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoin’d,) The gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind.
Of Thracian lineage are the steeds ye view, Whose hostile king the brave Tydides slew; Sleeping he died, with all his guards around, And twelve beside lay gasping on the ground.
These other spoils from conquer’d Dolon came, A wretch, whose swiftness was his only fame; By Hector sent our forces to explore, He now lies headless on the sandy shore.” Then o’er the trench the bounding coursers flew; The joyful Greeks with loud acclaim pursue.
Straight to Tydides’ high pavilion borne, The matchless steeds his ample stalls adorn: The neighing coursers their new fellows greet, And the full racks are heap’d with generous wheat.
Now from nocturnal sweat and sanguine stain They cleanse their bodies in the neighb’ring main: Then in the polished bath, refresh’d from toil, Their joints they supple with dissolving oil, In due repast indulge the genial hour, And first to Pallas the libations pour: They sit, rejoicing in her aid divine, And the crown’d goblet foams with floods of wine.
ARGUMENT THE THIRD BATTLE, AND THE ACTS OF AGAMEMNON.
Agamemnon, having armed himself, leads the Grecians to battle; Hector prepares the Trojans to receive them, while Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva give the signals of war.
Agamemnon bears all before him and Hector is commanded by Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the engagement, till the king shall be wounded and retire from the field.
He then makes a great slaughter of the enemy.
Ulysses and Diomed put a stop to him for a time but the latter, being wounded by Paris, is obliged to desert his companion, who is encompassed by the Trojans, wounded, and in the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him.
Hector comes against Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes, and rallies the Greeks.
In the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of the army, is pierced with an arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight in Nestor’s chariot.
Patroclus, on his return, meets Eurypylus also wounded, and assists him in that distress.
This book opens with the eight-and-twentieth day of the poem, and the same day, with its various actions and adventures is extended through the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and part of the eighteenth books.
The scene lies in the field near the monument of Ilus.
The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,[219] Now rose refulgent from Tithonus’ bed; With new-born day to gladden mortal sight, And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light: When baleful Eris, sent by Jove’s command, The torch of discord blazing in her hand, Through the red skies her bloody sign extends, And, wrapt in tempests, o’er the fleet descends.
Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound, Whose ships, remote, the guarded navy bound, Thence the black fury through the Grecian throng With horror sounds the loud Orthian song: The navy shakes, and at the dire alarms Each bosom boils, each warrior starts to arms.
A radiant baldric, o’er his shoulder tied, Sustain’d the sword that glitter’d at his side: Gold was the hilt, a silver sheath encased The shining blade, and golden hangers graced.
Last o’er his brows his fourfold helm he placed, With nodding horse-hair formidably graced; And in his hands two steely javelins wields, That blaze to heaven, and lighten all the fields.
That instant Juno, and the martial maid, In happy thunders promised Greece their aid; High o’er the chief they clash’d their arms in air, And, leaning from the clouds, expect the war.
Close to the limits of the trench and mound, The fiery coursers to their chariots bound The squires restrain’d: the foot, with those who wield The lighter arms, rush forward to the field.
To second these, in close array combined, The squadrons spread their sable wings behind.
Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy sun, As with the light the warriors’ toils begun.
Even Jove, whose thunder spoke his wrath, distill’d Red drops of blood o’er all the fatal field;[220] The woes of men unwilling to survey, And all the slaughters that must stain the day.
Near Ilus’ tomb, in order ranged around, The Trojan lines possess’d the rising ground: There wise Polydamas and Hector stood; Æneas, honour’d as a guardian god; Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine; The brother-warriors of Antenor’s line: With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous face And fair proportion match’d the ethereal race.
Great Hector, cover’d with his spacious shield, Plies all the troops, and orders all the field.
As the red star now shows his sanguine fires Through the dark clouds, and now in night retires, Thus through the ranks appear’d the godlike man, Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van; While streamy sparkles, restless as he flies, Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies.
As sweating reapers in some wealthy field, Ranged in two bands, their crooked weapons wield, Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet; Thick fall the heapy harvests at their feet: So Greece and Troy the field of war divide, And falling ranks are strow’d on every side.
None stoop’d a thought to base inglorious flight;[221] But horse to horse, and man to man they fight, Not rabid wolves more fierce contest their prey; Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the day.
Discord with joy the scene of death descries, And drinks large slaughter at her sanguine eyes: Discord alone, of all the immortal train, Swells the red horrors of this direful plain: The gods in peace their golden mansions fill, Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill: But general murmurs told their griefs above, And each accused the partial will of Jove.
Meanwhile apart, superior, and alone, The eternal Monarch, on his awful throne, Wrapt in the blaze of boundless glory sate; And fix’d, fulfill’d the just decrees of fate.
On earth he turn’d his all-considering eyes, And mark’d the spot where Ilion’s towers arise; The sea with ships, the fields with armies spread, The victor’s rage, the dying, and the dead.
Thus while the morning-beams, increasing bright, O’er heaven’s pure azure spread the glowing light, Commutual death the fate of war confounds, Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But now (what time in some sequester’d vale The weary woodman spreads his sparing meal, When his tired arms refuse the axe to rear, And claim a respite from the sylvan war; But not till half the prostrate forests lay Stretch’d in long ruin, and exposed to day) Then, nor till then, the Greeks’ impulsive might Pierced the black phalanx, and let in the light.
Great Agamemnon then the slaughter led, And slew Bienor at his people’s head: Whose squire Oïleus, with a sudden spring, Leap’d from the chariot to revenge his king; But in his front he felt the fatal wound, Which pierced his brain, and stretch’d him on the ground.
Atrides spoil’d, and left them on the plain: Vain was their youth, their glittering armour vain: Now soil’d with dust, and naked to the sky, Their snowy limbs and beauteous bodies lie.
Two sons of Priam next to battle move, The product, one of marriage, one of love:[222] In the same car the brother-warriors ride; This took the charge to combat, that to guide: Far other task, than when they wont to keep, On Ida’s tops, their father’s fleecy sheep.
These on the mountains once Achilles found, And captive led, with pliant osiers bound; Then to their sire for ample sums restored; But now to perish by Atrides’ sword: Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds: Cleft through the head his brother’s fate succeeds, Swift to the spoil the hasty victor falls, And, stript, their features to his mind recalls.
The Trojans see the youths untimely die, But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
So when a lion ranging o’er the lawns, Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns, Their bones he cracks, their reeking vitals draws, And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody jaws; The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay, But swift through rustling thickets bursts her way; All drown’d in sweat, the panting mother flies, And the big tears roll trickling from her eyes.
Amidst the tumult of the routed train, The sons of false Antimachus were slain; He who for bribes his faithless counsels sold, And voted Helen’s stay for Paris’ gold.
No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race.” This said, Pisander from the car he cast, And pierced his breast: supine he breathed his last.
His brother leap’d to earth; but, as he lay, The trenchant falchion lopp’d his hands away; His sever’d head was toss’d among the throng, And, rolling, drew a bloody train along.
Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew; The king’s example all his Greeks pursue.
From the dry fields thick clouds of dust arise, Shade the black host, and intercept the skies.
The steeds fly trembling from his waving sword, And many a car, now lighted of its lord, Wide o’er the field with guideless fury rolls, Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls; While his keen falchion drinks the warriors’ lives; More grateful, now, to vultures than their wives!
Now past the tomb where ancient Ilus lay, Through the mid field the routed urge their way: Where the wild figs the adjoining summit crown, The path they take, and speed to reach the town.
Now near the beech-tree, and the Scæan gates, The hero halts, and his associates waits.
Meanwhile on every side around the plain, Dispersed, disorder’d, fly the Trojan train.
So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismay’d The lion’s roaring through the midnight shade; On heaps they tumble with successless haste; The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.
Not with less fury stern Atrides flew, Still press’d the rout, and still the hindmost slew; Hurl’d from their cars the bravest chiefs are kill’d, And rage, and death, and carnage load the field.
Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall; Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
The chief she found amidst the ranks of war, Close to the bulwarks, on his glittering car.
Hector, with a bound, Springs from his chariot on the trembling ground, In clanging arms: he grasps in either hand A pointed lance, and speeds from band to band; Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight, And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
They stand to arms: the Greeks their onset dare, Condense their powers, and wait the coming war.
Ye sacred nine! celestial Muses! tell, Who faced him first, and by his prowess fell?
The great Iphidamas, the bold and young, From sage Antenor and Theano sprung; Whom from his youth his grandsire Cisseus bred, And nursed in Thrace where snowy flocks are fed.
Scarce did the down his rosy cheeks invest, And early honour warm his generous breast, When the kind sire consign’d his daughter’s charms (Theano’s sister) to his youthful arms.
But call’d by glory to the wars of Troy, He leaves untasted the first fruits of joy; From his loved bride departs with melting eyes, And swift to aid his dearer country flies.
With twelve black ships he reach’d Percope’s strand, Thence took the long laborious march by land.
Now fierce for fame, before the ranks he springs, Towering in arms, and braves the king of kings.
Atrides first discharged the missive spear; The Trojan stoop’d, the javelin pass’d in air.
Then near the corslet, at the monarch’s heart, With all his strength, the youth directs his dart: But the broad belt, with plates of silver bound, The point rebated, and repell’d the wound.
Encumber’d with the dart, Atrides stands, Till, grasp’d with force, he wrench’d it from his hands; At once his weighty sword discharged a wound Full on his neck, that fell’d him to the ground.
Stretch’d in the dust the unhappy warrior lies, And sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes.
Thy country’s friend; and virtuous, though in vain!
No more with presents her embraces meet, Or lay the spoils of conquest at her feet, On whom his passion, lavish of his store, Bestow’d so much, and vainly promised more!
Coon, Antenor’s eldest hope, was nigh: Tears, at the sight, came starting from his eye, While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he view’d, And the pale features now deform’d with blood.
The thrilling steel transpierced the brawny part, And through his arm stood forth the barbed dart.
Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fear On Coon rushes with his lifted spear: His brother’s corpse the pious Trojan draws, And calls his country to assert his cause; Defends him breathless on the sanguine field, And o’er the body spreads his ample shield.
Atrides, marking an unguarded part, Transfix’d the warrior with his brazen dart; Prone on his brother’s bleeding breast he lay, The monarch’s falchion lopp’d his head away: The social shades the same dark journey go, And join each other in the realms below.
The vengeful victor rages round the fields, With every weapon art or fury yields: By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone, Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops o’erthrown.
O Greeks! assert your honours won; Proceed, and finish what this arm begun: Lo! angry Jove forbids your chief to stay, And envies half the glories of the day.” He said: the driver whirls his lengthful thong; The horses fly; the chariot smokes along.
Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow, And from their sides the foam descends in snow; Shot through the battle in a moment’s space, The wounded monarch at his tent they place.
Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face: Now call to mind your ancient trophies won, Your great forefathers’ virtues, and your own.
Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest ours!
Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds; And, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds.” With words like these the fiery chief alarms His fainting host, and every bosom warms.
As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tear The brindled lion, or the tusky bear: With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart, And springs the foremost with his lifted dart: So godlike Hector prompts his troops to dare; Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war.
Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died, Opites next was added to their side; Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight, Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless night; Æsymnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name; The rest were vulgar deaths unknown to fame.
As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms, Dispels the gather’d clouds that Notus forms: The gust continued, violent and strong, Rolls sable clouds in heaps on heaps along; Now to the skies the foaming billows rears, Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares: Thus, raging Hector, with resistless hands, O’erturns, confounds, and scatters all their bands.
Now the last ruin the whole host appals; Now Greece had trembled in her wooden walls; But wise Ulysses call’d Tydides forth, His soul rekindled, and awaked his worth.
“And stand we deedless, O eternal shame!
But Jove with conquest crowns the Trojan train: And, Jove our foe, all human force is vain.” He sigh’d; but, sighing, raised his vengeful steel, And from his car the proud Thymbraeus fell: Molion, the charioteer, pursued his lord, His death ennobled by Ulysses’ sword.
There slain, they left them in eternal night, Then plunged amidst the thickest ranks of fight.
So two wild boars outstrip the following hounds, Then swift revert, and wounds return for wounds.
Stern Hector’s conquests in the middle plain Stood check’d awhile, and Greece respired again.
The sons of Merops shone amidst the war; Towering they rode in one refulgent car: In deep prophetic arts their father skill’d, Had warn’d his children from the Trojan field.
Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies, And rich Hippodamus becomes his prize.
Great Jove from Ide with slaughter fills his sight, And level hangs the doubtful scale of fight.
By Tydeus’ lance Agastrophus was slain, The far-famed hero of Pæonian strain; Wing’d with his fears, on foot he strove to fly, His steeds too distant, and the foe too nigh: Through broken orders, swifter than the wind, He fled, but flying left his life behind.
This Hector sees, as his experienced eyes Traverse the files, and to the rescue flies; Shouts, as he pass’d, the crystal regions rend, And moving armies on his march attend.
Great Diomed himself was seized with fear, And thus bespoke his brother of the war: “Mark how this way yon bending squadrons yield!
The storm rolls on, and Hector rules the field: Here stand his utmost force.”—The warrior said; Swift at the word his ponderous javelin fled; Nor miss’d its aim, but where the plumage danced Razed the smooth cone, and thence obliquely glanced.
Safe in his helm (the gift of Phœbus’ hands) Without a wound the Trojan hero stands; But yet so stunn’d, that, staggering on the plain.
His arm and knee his sinking bulk sustain; O’er his dim sight the misty vapours rise, And a short darkness shades his swimming eyes.
Tydides followed to regain his lance; While Hector rose, recover’d from the trance, Remounts his car, and herds amidst the crowd: The Greek pursues him, and exults aloud: “Once more thank Phœbus for thy forfeit breath, Or thank that swiftness which outstrips the death.
Thou shall not long the death deserved withstand, If any god assist Tydides’ hand.
The laughing Trojan, with a joyful spring.
So Troy, relieved from that wide-wasting hand, Should breathe from slaughter and in combat stand: Whose sons now tremble at his darted spear, As scatter’d lambs the rushing lion fear.” He dauntless thus: “Thou conqueror of the fair, Thou woman-warrior with the curling hair; Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart, Unskill’d in arms to act a manly part!
Now on the field Ulysses stands alone, The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on; But stands collected in himself, and whole, And questions thus his own unconquer’d soul: “What further subterfuge, what hopes remain?
What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain?
Yet wherefore doubtful? let this truth suffice, The brave meets danger, and the coward flies.
To die or conquer, proves a hero’s heart; And, knowing this, I know a soldier’s part.” Such thoughts revolving in his careful breast, Near, and more near, the shady cohorts press’d; These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose; And round him deep the steely circle grows.
So fares a boar whom all the troop surrounds Of shouting huntsmen and of clamorous hounds; He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with ire; His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire; By these, by those, on every part is plied; And the red slaughter spreads on every side.
Pierced through the shoulder, first Deiopis fell; Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell; Chersidamas, beneath the navel thrust, Falls prone to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
Charops, the son of Hippasus, was near; Ulysses reach’d him with the fatal spear; But to his aid his brother Socus flies, Socus the brave, the generous, and the wise.
Near as he drew, the warrior thus began: “O great Ulysses! much-enduring man!
This day two brothers shall thy conquest grace, And end at once the great Hippasian race, Or thou beneath this lance must press the field.” He said, and forceful pierced his spacious shield: Through the strong brass the ringing javelin thrown, Plough’d half his side, and bared it to the bone.
By Pallas’ care, the spear, though deep infix’d, Stopp’d short of life, nor with his entrails mix’d.
The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew, Then furious thus (but first some steps withdrew): “Unhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace, Fate calls thee hence and finish’d is thy race.
Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain: “Famed son of Hippasus! there press the plain; There ends thy narrow span assign’d by fate, Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.
Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose; Thy dying eyes no tender mother close; But hungry birds shall tear those balls away, And hovering vultures scream around their prey.
Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom, With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb.” Then raging with intolerable smart, He writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued, And gladden’d Troy with sight of hostile blood.
Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade, Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.
Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears; The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears: Alarm’d, to Ajax Telamon he cried, Who shares his labours, and defends his side: “O friend!
Ulysses’ shouts invade my ear; Distressed he seems, and no assistance near; Strong as he is, yet one opposed to all, Oppress’d by multitudes, the best may fall.
Ulysses thus, unconquer’d by his pains, A single warrior half a host sustains: But soon as Ajax leaves his tower-like shield, The scattered crowds fly frighted o’er the field; Atrides’ arm the sinking hero stays, And, saved from numbers, to his car conveys.
Victorious Ajax plies the routed crew; And first Doryclus, Priam’s son, he slew, On strong Pandocus next inflicts a wound, And lays Lysander bleeding on the ground.
As when a torrent, swell’d with wintry rains, Pours from the mountains o’er the deluged plains, And pines and oaks, from their foundations torn, A country’s ruins! to the seas are borne: Fierce Ajax thus o’erwhelms the yielding throng; Men, steeds, and chariots, roll in heaps along.
But Hector, from this scene of slaughter far, Raged on the left, and ruled the tide of war: Loud groans proclaim his progress through the plain, And deep Scamander swells with heaps of slain.
There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose The warrior’s fury; there the battle glows; There fierce on foot, or from the chariot’s height, His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight.
The spouse of Helen, dealing darts around, Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound: In his right shoulder the broad shaft appear’d, And trembling Greece for her physician fear’d.
To Nestor then Idomeneus begun: “Glory of Greece, old Neleus’ valiant son!
Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away, And great Machaon to the ships convey; A wise physician skill’d our wounds to heal, Is more than armies to the public weal.” Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rode The wounded offspring of the healing god.
He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feet Shake the dry field, and thunder toward the fleet.
But now Cebriones, from Hector’s car, Survey’d the various fortune of the war: “While here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain, Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain.
Before great Ajax see the mingled throng Of men and chariots driven in heaps along!
I know him well, distinguish’d o’er the field By the broad glittering of the sevenfold shield.
Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds, There danger calls, and there the combat bleeds; There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite, And groans of slaughter mix with shouts of fight.” Thus having spoke, the driver’s lash resounds; Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds; Stung by the stroke, the coursers scour the fields, O’er heaps of carcases, and hills of shields.
The horses’ hoofs are bathed in heroes’ gore, And, dashing, purple all the car before; The groaning axle sable drops distils, And mangled carnage clogs the rapid wheels.
Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight, Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light: (By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone, The ranks he scatter’d and the troops o’erthrown:) Ajax he shuns, through all the dire debate, And fears that arm whose force he felt so late.
But partial Jove, espousing Hector’s part, Shot heaven-bred horror through the Grecian’s heart; Confused, unnerved in Hector’s presence grown, Amazed he stood, with terrors not his own.
O’er his broad back his moony shield he threw, And, glaring round, by tardy steps withdrew.
Thus the grim lion his retreat maintains, Beset with watchful dogs, and shouting swains; Repulsed by numbers from the nightly stalls, Though rage impels him, and though hunger calls, Long stands the showering darts, and missile fires; Then sourly slow the indignant beast retires: So turn’d stern Ajax, by whole hosts repell’d, While his swoln heart at every step rebell’d.
Fix’d as the bar between two warring powers, While hissing darts descend in iron showers: In his broad buckler many a weapon stood, Its surface bristled with a quivering wood; And many a javelin, guiltless on the plain, Marks the dry dust, and thirsts for blood in vain.
But bold Eurypylus his aid imparts, And dauntless springs beneath a cloud of darts; Whose eager javelin launch’d against the foe, Great Apisaon felt the fatal blow; From his torn liver the red current flow’d, And his slack knees desert their dying load.
The victor rushing to despoil the dead, From Paris’ bow a vengeful arrow fled; Fix’d in his nervous thigh the weapon stood, Fix’d was the point, but broken was the wood.
Back to the lines the wounded Greek retired, Yet thus retreating, his associates fired: “What god, O Grecians! has your hearts dismay’d?
Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires, While Nestor’s chariot far from fight retires: His coursers steep’d in sweat, and stain’d with gore, The Greeks’ preserver, great Machaon, bore.
That hour Achilles, from the topmost height Of his proud fleet, o’erlook’d the fields of fight; His feasted eyes beheld around the plain The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.
His friend Machaon singled from the rest, A transient pity touch’d his vengeful breast.
Straight to Menoetius’ much-loved son he sent: Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent; In evil hour!
“Why calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay; Whate’er thy will, Patroclus shall obey.” “O first of friends! (Pelides thus replied) Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
The time is come, when yon despairing host Shall learn the value of the man they lost: Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan, And proud Atrides tremble on his throne.
Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught What wounded warrior late his chariot brought: For, seen at distance, and but seen behind, His form recall’d Machaon to my mind; Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his face, The coursers pass’d me with so swift a pace.” The hero said.
His friend obey’d with haste, Through intermingled ships and tents he pass’d; The chiefs descending from their car he found: The panting steeds Eurymedon unbound.
The warriors standing on the breezy shore, To dry their sweat, and wash away the gore, Here paused a moment, while the gentle gale Convey’d that freshness the cool seas exhale; Then to consult on farther methods went, And took their seats beneath the shady tent.
Temper’d in this, the nymph of form divine Pours a large portion of the Pramnian wine; With goat’s-milk cheese a flavourous taste bestows, And last with flour the smiling surface strows: This for the wounded prince the dame prepares: The cordial beverage reverend Nestor shares: Salubrious draughts the warriors’ thirst allay, And pleasing conference beguiles the day.
Meantime Patroclus, by Achilles sent, Unheard approached, and stood before the tent.
Old Nestor, rising then, the hero led To his high seat: the chief refused and said: “’Tis now no season for these kind delays; The great Achilles with impatience stays.
To great Achilles this respect I owe; Who asks, what hero, wounded by the foe, Was borne from combat by thy foaming steeds?
This to report, my hasty course I bend; Thou know’st the fiery temper of my friend.” “Can then the sons of Greece (the sage rejoin’d) Excite compassion in Achilles’ mind?
Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds alone, Our bravest heroes in the navy groan, Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed, And stern Eurypylus, already bleed.
But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain!
Achilles heeds not, but derides our pain: Even till the flames consume our fleet he stays, And waits the rising of the fatal blaze.
Chief after chief the raging foe destroys; Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.
Now the slow course of all-impairing time Unstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime; Oh! had I still that strength my youth possess’d, When this bold arm the Epeian powers oppress’d, The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led, And stretch’d the great Itymonaeus dead!
Then from my fury fled the trembling swains, And ours was all the plunder of the plains: Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine, As many goats, as many lowing kine: And thrice the number of unrivall’d steeds, All teeming females, and of generous breeds.
These, as my first essay of arms, I won; Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son.
Thus Elis forced, her long arrears restored, And shares were parted to each Pylian lord.
The state of Pyle was sunk to last despair, When the proud Elians first commenced the war: For Neleus’ sons Alcides’ rage had slain; Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain!
Oppress’d, we arm’d; and now this conquest gain’d, My sire three hundred chosen sheep obtain’d. (That large reprisal he might justly claim, For prize defrauded, and insulted fame, When Elis’ monarch, at the public course, Detain’d his chariot, and victorious horse.) The rest the people shared; myself survey’d The just partition, and due victims paid.
Three days were past, when Elis rose to war, With many a courser, and with many a car; The sons of Actor at their army’s head (Young as they were) the vengeful squadrons led.
High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands, Our utmost frontier on the Pylian lands: Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus flow: The stream they pass’d, and pitch’d their tents below.
Pallas, descending in the shades of night, Alarms the Pylians and commands the fight.
Each burns for fame, and swells with martial pride, Myself the foremost; but my sire denied; Fear’d for my youth, exposed to stern alarms; And stopp’d my chariot, and detain’d my arms.
My sire denied in vain: on foot I fled Amidst our chariots; for the goddess led.
“Along fair Arene’s delightful plain Soft Minyas rolls his waters to the main: There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite, And sheathed in arms, expect the dawning light.
Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame, To great Alphaeus’ sacred source we came.
There first to Jove our solemn rites were paid; An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid; A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull was slain To the blue monarch of the watery main.
Soon as the sun, with all-revealing ray, Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day.
The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled; King Augias’ son, and spouse of Agamede: (She that all simples’ healing virtues knew, And every herb that drinks the morning dew:) I seized his car, the van of battle led; The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled.
The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior kill’d, Fierce as the whirlwind now I swept the field: Full fifty captive chariots graced my train; Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain.
Then Actor’s sons had died, but Neptune shrouds The youthful heroes in a veil of clouds.
O’er heapy shields, and o’er the prostrate throng, Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all along, Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes, Where o’er the vales the Olenian rocks arose; Till Pallas stopp’d us where Alisium flows.
Even there the hindmost of the rear I slay, And the same arm that led concludes the day; Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way.
Such then I was, impell’d by youthful blood; So proved my valour for my country’s good.
“Achilles with unactive fury glows, And gives to passion what to Greece he owes.
O friend! my memory recalls the day, When, gathering aids along the Grecian sea, I, and Ulysses, touch’d at Phthia’s port, And entered Peleus’ hospitable court.
A bull to Jove he slew in sacrifice, And pour’d libations on the flaming thighs.
Thyself, Achilles, and thy reverend sire Menoetius, turn’d the fragments on the fire.
Achilles sees us, to the feast invites; Social we sit, and share the genial rites.
We then explained the cause on which we came, Urged you to arms, and found you fierce for fame.
Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave; Peleus said only this:—‘My son! be brave.’ Menoetius thus: ‘Though great Achilles shine In strength superior, and of race divine, Yet cooler thoughts thy elder years attend; Let thy just counsels aid, and rule thy friend.’ Thus spoke your father at Thessalia’s court: Words now forgot, though now of vast import.
Ah! try the utmost that a friend can say: Such gentle force the fiercest minds obey; Some favouring god Achilles’ heart may move; Though deaf to glory, he may yield to love.
As faintly reeling he confess’d the smart, Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his heart.
Divine compassion touch’d Patroclus’ breast, Who, sighing, thus his bleeding friend address’d: “Ah, hapless leaders of the Grecian host!
Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast?
Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand?
Or are her heroes doom’d to die with shame, And this the period of our wars and fame?” Eurypylus replies: “No more, my friend; Greece is no more! this day her glories end; Even to the ships victorious Troy pursues, Her force increasing as her toil renews.
Those chiefs, that used her utmost rage to meet, Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the fleet.
But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part, Lead to my ships, and draw this deadly dart; With lukewarm water wash the gore away; With healing balms the raging smart allay, Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy, Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee.
Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius stands This hour surrounded by the Trojan bands; And great Machaon, wounded in his tent, Now wants that succour which so oft he lent.” To him the chief: “What then remains to do?
Charged by Achilles’ great command I fly, And bear with haste the Pylian king’s reply: But thy distress this instant claims relief.” He said, and in his arms upheld the chief.
The slaves their master’s slow approach survey’d, And hides of oxen on the floor display’d: There stretch’d at length the wounded hero lay; Patroclus cut the forky steel away: Then in his hands a bitter root he bruised; The wound he wash’d, the styptic juice infused.
The Greeks having retired into their intrenchments, Hector attempts to force them; but it proving impossible to pass the ditch, Polydamas advises to quit their chariots, and manage the attack on foot.
But upon the signal of an eagle with a serpent in his talons, which appeared on the left hand of the Trojans, Polydamas endeavours to withdraw them again.
This Hector opposes, and continues the attack; in which, after many actions, Sarpedon makes the first breach in the wall.
Hector also, casting a stone of vast size, forces open one of the gates, and enters at the head of his troops, who victoriously pursue the Grecians even to their ships.
While thus the hero’s pious cares attend The cure and safety of his wounded friend, Trojans and Greeks with clashing shields engage, And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage.
Nor long the trench or lofty walls oppose; With gods averse the ill-fated works arose; Their powers neglected, and no victim slain, The walls were raised, the trenches sunk in vain.
Without the gods, how short a period stands The proudest monument of mortal hands!
Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours, And half the skies descend in sluicy showers.
The god of ocean, marching stern before, With his huge trident wounds the trembling shore, Vast stones and piles from their foundation heaves, And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves.
Now smooth’d with sand, and levell’d by the flood, No fragment tells where once the wonder stood; In their old bounds the rivers roll again, Shine ’twixt the hills, or wander o’er the plain.[225] But this the gods in later times perform; As yet the bulwark stood, and braved the storm; The strokes yet echoed of contending powers; War thunder’d at the gates, and blood distain’d the towers.
Smote by the arm of Jove with dire dismay, Close by their hollow ships the Grecians lay: Hector’s approach in every wind they hear, And Hector’s fury every moment fear.
He, like a whirlwind, toss’d the scattering throng, Mingled the troops, and drove the field along.
So ’midst the dogs and hunters’ daring bands, Fierce of his might, a boar or lion stands; Arm’d foes around a dreadful circle form, And hissing javelins rain an iron storm: His powers untamed, their bold assault defy, And where he turns the rout disperse or die: He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all, And if he falls, his courage makes him fall.
With equal rage encompass’d Hector glows; Exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows.
The panting steeds impatient fury breathe, And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath; Just at the brink they neigh, and paw the ground, And the turf trembles, and the skies resound.
Eager they view’d the prospect dark and deep, Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the steep; The bottom bare, (a formidable show!) And bristled thick with sharpen’d stakes below.
The foot alone this strong defence could force, And try the pass impervious to the horse.
This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave, Restrain’d great Hector, and this counsel gave: “O thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands!
And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands!
What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find, The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind?
No pass through those, without a thousand wounds, No space for combat in yon narrow bounds.
Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused, In one promiscuous carnage crush’d and bruised, All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail, Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the tale.
Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with speed; Back from the trenches let your steeds be led; Then all alighting, wedged in firm array, Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way.
The chief’s example follow’d by his train, Each quits his car, and issues on the plain, By orders strict the charioteers enjoin’d Compel the coursers to their ranks behind.
The forces part in five distinguish’d bands, And all obey their several chiefs’ commands.
The best and bravest in the first conspire, Pant for the fight, and threat the fleet with fire: Great Hector glorious in the van of these, Polydamas, and brave Cebriones.
Before the next the graceful Paris shines, And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins.
The sons of Priam with the third appear, Deiphobus, and Helenas the seer; In arms with these the mighty Asius stood, Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble blood, And whom Arisba’s yellow coursers bore, The coursers fed on Sellè’s winding shore.
Antenor’s sons the fourth battalion guide, And great Æneas, born on fountful Ide.
Divine Sarpedon the last band obey’d, Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid.
Now with compacted shields in close array, The moving legions speed their headlong way: Already in their hopes they fire the fleet, And see the Grecians gasping at their feet.
While every Trojan thus, and every aid, The advice of wise Polydamas obey’d, Asius alone, confiding in his car, His vaunted coursers urged to meet the war.
Unhappy hero! and advised in vain; Those wheels returning ne’er shall mark the plain; No more those coursers with triumphant joy Restore their master to the gates of Troy!
Black death attends behind the Grecian wall, And great Idomeneus shall boast thy fall!
Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plain The flying Grecians strove their ships to gain; Swift through the wall their horse and chariots pass’d, The gates half-open’d to receive the last.
Thither, exulting in his force, he flies: His following host with clamours rend the skies: To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main, Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!
To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend, Who from the Lapiths’ warlike race descend; This Polypœtes, great Perithous’ heir, And that Leonteus, like the god of war.
As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise; Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies: Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crown’d, Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground; High on the hills appears their stately form, And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.
So graceful these, and so the shock they stand Of raging Asius, and his furious band.
Orestes, Acamas, in front appear, And Œnomaus and Thoon close the rear: In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields, In vain around them beat their hollow shields; The fearless brothers on the Grecians call, To guard their navies, and defend the wall.
Even when they saw Troy’s sable troops impend, And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend, Forth from the portals rush’d the intrepid pair, Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war.
So two wild boars spring furious from their den, Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men; On every side the crackling trees they tear, And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare; They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll, Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul.
Around their heads the whistling javelins sung, With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung; Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers Maintain’d the walls, and mann’d the lofty towers: To save their fleet their last efforts they try, And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly.
As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings The dreary winter on his frozen wings; Beneath the low-hung clouds the sheets of snow Descend, and whiten all the fields below: So fast the darts on either army pour, So down the rampires rolls the rocky shower: Heavy, and thick, resound the batter’d shields, And the deaf echo rattles round the fields.
With shame repulsed, with grief and fury driven, The frantic Asius thus accuses Heaven: “In powers immortal who shall now believe?
What man could doubt but Troy’s victorious power Should humble Greece, and this her fatal hour?
But like when wasps from hollow crannies drive, To guard the entrance of their common hive, Darkening the rock, while with unwearied wings They strike the assailants, and infix their stings; A race determined, that to death contend: So fierce these Greeks their last retreats defend.
Gods! shall two warriors only guard their gates, Repel an army, and defraud the fates?” These empty accents mingled with the wind, Nor moved great Jove’s unalterable mind; To godlike Hector and his matchless might Was owed the glory of the destined fight.
While Greece unconquer’d kept alive the war, Secure of death, confiding in despair; And all her guardian gods, in deep dismay, With unassisting arms deplored the day.
Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintain The dreadful pass, and round them heap the slain.
The warrior sinks, tremendous now no more!
Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their breath: Nor less Leonteus strews the field with death; First through the belt Hippomachus he gored, Then sudden waved his unresisted sword: Antiphates, as through the ranks he broke, The falchion struck, and fate pursued the stroke: Iamenus, Orestes, Menon, bled; And round him rose a monument of dead.
Meantime, the bravest of the Trojan crew, Bold Hector and Polydamas, pursue; Fierce with impatience on the works to fall, And wrap in rolling flames the fleet and wall.
These on the farther bank now stood and gazed, By Heaven alarm’d, by prodigies amazed: A signal omen stopp’d the passing host, Their martial fury in their wonder lost.
Jove’s bird on sounding pinions beat the skies; A bleeding serpent of enormous size, His talons truss’d; alive, and curling round, He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound: Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey, In airy circles wings his painful way, Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries: Amidst the host the fallen serpent lies.
Then first Polydamas the silence broke, Long weigh’d the signal, and to Hector spoke: “How oft, my brother, thy reproach I bear, For words well meant, and sentiments sincere?
True to those counsels which I judge the best, I tell the faithful dictates of my breast.
To speak his thoughts is every freeman’s right, In peace, in war, in council, and in fight; And all I move, deferring to thy sway, But tends to raise that power which I obey.
So bodes my soul, and bids me thus advise; For thus a skilful seer would read the skies.” To him then Hector with disdain return’d: (Fierce as he spoke, his eyes with fury burn’d:) “Are these the faithful counsels of thy tongue?
What coward counsels would thy madness move Against the word, the will reveal’d of Jove?
The leading sign, the irrevocable nod, And happy thunders of the favouring god, These shall I slight, and guide my wavering mind By wandering birds that flit with every wind?
Ye vagrants of the sky! your wings extend, Or where the suns arise, or where descend; To right, to left, unheeded take your way, While I the dictates of high heaven obey.
None fears it more, as none promotes it less: Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire, Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire.
Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests Spread their cold poison through our soldiers’ breasts, My javelin can revenge so base a part, And free the soul that quivers in thy heart.” Furious he spoke, and, rushing to the wall, Calls on his host; his host obey the call; With ardour follow where their leader flies: Redoubling clamours thunder in the skies.
Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide, And drifts of dust the clouded navy hide; He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay, And gives great Hector the predestined day.
Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid, Close to the works their rigid siege they laid.
In vain the mounds and massy beams defend, While these they undermine, and those they rend; Upheaved the piles that prop the solid wall; And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall.
Greece on her ramparts stands the fierce alarms; The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving arms, Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row; Whence hissing darts, incessant, rain below.
The generous impulse every Greek obeys; Threats urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise.
Urge those who stand, and those who faint, excite; Drown Hector’s vaunts in loud exhorts of fight; Conquest, not safety, fill the thoughts of all; Seek not your fleet, but sally from the wall; So Jove once more may drive their routed train, And Troy lie trembling in her walls again.” Their ardour kindles all the Grecian powers; And now the stones descend in heavier showers.
Thus godlike Hector and his troops contend To force the ramparts, and the gates to rend: Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield, Till great Sarpedon tower’d amid the field; For mighty Jove inspired with martial flame His matchless son, and urged him on to fame.
In arms he shines, conspicuous from afar, And bears aloft his ample shield in air; Within whose orb the thick bull-hides were roll’d, Ponderous with brass, and bound with ductile gold: And while two pointed javelins arm his hands, Majestic moves along, and leads his Lycian bands.
So press’d with hunger, from the mountain’s brow Descends a lion on the flocks below; So stalks the lordly savage o’er the plain, In sullen majesty, and stern disdain: In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar, And shepherds gall him with an iron war; Regardless, furious, he pursues his way; He foams, he roars, he rends the panting prey.
Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glows With generous rage that drives him on the foes.
Could all our care elude the gloomy grave, Which claims no less the fearful and the brave, For lust of fame I should not vainly dare In fighting fields, nor urge thy soul to war.
Menestheus from on high the storm beheld Threatening the fort, and blackening in the field: Around the walls he gazed, to view from far What aid appear’d to avert the approaching war, And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood, Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood.
In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields, The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound, Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground.
Then thus to Thoos: “Hence with speed (he said), And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid; Their strength, united, best may help to bear The bloody labours of the doubtful war: Hither the Lycian princes bend their course, The best and bravest of the hostile force.
But if too fiercely there the foes contend, Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend, And Teucer haste with his unerring bow To share the danger, and repel the foe.” Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng, And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore, Opposed in combat on the dusty shore.
Your aid (said Thoos) Peteus’ son demands; Your strength, united, best may help to bear The bloody labours of the doubtful war: Thither the Lycian princes bend their course, The best and bravest of the hostile force.
Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away.” With equal steps bold Teucer press’d the shore, Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore.
High on the walls appear’d the Lycian powers, Like some black tempest gathering round the towers: The Greeks, oppress’d, their utmost force unite, Prepared to labour in the unequal fight: The war renews, mix’d shouts and groans arise; Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies.
Fierce Ajax first the advancing host invades, And sends the brave Epicles to the shades, Sarpedon’s friend.
Across the warrior’s way, Rent from the walls, a rocky fragment lay; In modern ages not the strongest swain Could heave the unwieldy burden from the plain: He poised, and swung it round; then toss’d on high, It flew with force, and labour’d up the sky; Full on the Lycian’s helmet thundering down, The ponderous ruin crush’d his batter’d crown.
As skilful divers from some airy steep Headlong descend, and shoot into the deep, So falls Epicles; then in groans expires, And murmuring to the shades the soul retires.
While to the ramparts daring Glaucus drew, From Teucer’s hand a winged arrow flew; The bearded shaft the destined passage found, And on his naked arm inflicts a wound.
The chief, who fear’d some foe’s insulting boast Might stop the progress of his warlike host, Conceal’d the wound, and, leaping from his height Retired reluctant from the unfinish’d fight.
Divine Sarpedon with regret beheld Disabled Glaucus slowly quit the field; His beating breast with generous ardour glows, He springs to fight, and flies upon the foes.
Alcmaon first was doom’d his force to feel; Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel; Then from the yawning wound with fury tore The spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore: Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound, His brazen armour rings against the ground.
Swift to the battlement the victor flies, Tugs with full force, and every nerve applies: It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield; The rolling ruins smoke along the field.
At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow, And Ajax sends his javelin at the foe; Fix’d in his belt the feather’d weapon stood, And through his buckler drove the trembling wood; But Jove was present in the dire debate, To shield his offspring, and avert his fate.
The prince gave back, not meditating flight, But urging vengeance, and severer fight; Then raised with hope, and fired with glory’s charms, His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.
“O where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast?
As on the confines of adjoining grounds, Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds; They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield, One foot, one inch, of the contended field; Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall; Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound, Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound; The copious slaughter covers all the shore, And the high ramparts drip with human gore.
As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads, From side to side the trembling balance nods, (While some laborious matron, just and poor, With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,) Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:[227] So stood the war, till Hector’s matchless might, With fates prevailing, turn’d the scale of fight.
Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies, And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
“Advance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands, Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!” They hear, they run; and, gathering at his call, Raise scaling engines, and ascend the wall: Around the works a wood of glittering spears Shoots up, and all the rising host appears.
A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw, Pointed above, and rough and gross below: Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise, Such men as live in these degenerate days: Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear The snowy fleece, he toss’d, and shook in air; For Jove upheld, and lighten’d of its load The unwieldy rock, the labour of a god.
Thus arm’d, before the folded gates he came, Of massy substance, and stupendous frame; With iron bars and brazen hinges strong, On lofty beams of solid timber hung: Then thundering through the planks with forceful sway, Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way, The folds are shatter’d; from the crackling door Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar.
Now rushing in, the furious chief appears, Gloomy as night![228] and shakes two shining spears: A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came, And from his eye-balls flash’d the living flame.
He moves a god, resistless in his course, And seems a match for more than mortal force.
THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THE ACTS OF IDOMENEUS.
Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the fortification forced by Hector, (who had entered the gate near the station of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires those heroes to oppose him: then, in the form of one of the generals, encourages the other Greeks who had retired to their vessels.
Several deeds of valour are performed; Meriones, losing his spear in the encounter, repairs to seek another at the tent of Idomeneus: this occasions a conversation between those two warriors, who return together to the battle.
Idomeneus signalizes his courage above the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and Alcathous: Deiphobus and Æneas march against him, and at length Idomeneus retires.
Menelaus wounds Helenus, and kills Pisander.
The Trojans are repulsed on the left wing; Hector still keeps his ground against the Ajaces, till, being galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas advises to call a council of war: Hector approves of his advice, but goes first to rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax again, and renews the attack.
The eight-and-twentieth day still continues.
When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coast Had fix’d great Hector and his conquering host, He left them to the fates, in bloody fray To toil and struggle through the well-fought day.
Meantime the monarch of the watery main Observed the Thunderer, nor observed in vain.
In Samothracia, on a mountain’s brow, Whose waving woods o’erhung the deeps below, He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes Where Ida’s misty tops confusedly rise; Below, fair Ilion’s glittering spires were seen; The crowded ships and sable seas between.
There, from the crystal chambers of the main Emerged, he sat, and mourn’d his Argives slain.
At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung, Prone down the rocky steep he rush’d along; Fierce as he pass’d, the lofty mountains nod, The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod, And felt the footsteps of the immortal god.
Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold, Immortal arms of adamant and gold.
Then, as a falcon from the rocky height, Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight, Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high, Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky: Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew; The wide horizon shut him from their view.
The inspiring god Oïleus’ active son Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon: “Some god, my friend, some god in human form Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm.
Not Calchas this, the venerable seer; Short as he turned, I saw the power appear: I mark’d his parting, and the steps he trod; His own bright evidence reveals a god.
Even now some energy divine I share, And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!” “With equal ardour (Telamon returns) My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns; New rising spirits all my force alarm, Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm.
This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart; The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart: Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet, And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet.” Full of the god that urged their burning breast, The heroes thus their mutual warmth express’d.
Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired; Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired, Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls, And swarms victorious o’er their yielding walls: Trembling before the impending storm they lie, While tears of rage stand burning in their eye.
Teucer and Leitus first his words excite; Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight; Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms renown’d, And Merion next, the impulsive fury found; Last Nestor’s son the same bold ardour takes, While thus the god the martial fire awakes: “Oh lasting infamy, oh dire disgrace To chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race!
I trusted in the gods, and you, to see Brave Greece victorious, and her navy free: Ah, no—the glorious combat you disclaim, And one black day clouds all her former fame.
Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey, Unseen, unthought, till this amazing day!
And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands?
A rout undisciplined, a straggling train, Not born to glories of the dusty plain; Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued, A prey to every savage of the wood: Shall these, so late who trembled at your name, Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?
A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
The soldiers’ baseness, or the general’s fault?
Fools! will ye perish for your leader’s vice; The purchase infamy, and life the price? ’Tis not your cause, Achilles’ injured fame: Another’s is the crime, but yours the shame.
Prevent this evil, and your country save: Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame I waste no anger, for they feel no shame: But you, the pride, the flower of all our host, My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!
Let each reflect, who prizes fame or breath, On endless infamy, on instant death: For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore: Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall; The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall.” These words the Grecians’ fainting hearts inspire, And listening armies catch the godlike fire.
Fix’d at his post was each bold Ajax found, With well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round: So close their order, so disposed their fight, As Pallas’ self might view with fix’d delight; Or had the god of war inclined his eyes, The god of war had own’d a just surprise.
A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate, Descending Hector and his battle wait.
An iron scene gleams dreadful o’er the fields, Armour in armour lock’d, and shields in shields, Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng, Helms stuck to helms, and man drove man along.
The floating plumes unnumber’d wave above, As when an earthquake stirs the nodding grove; And levell’d at the skies with pointing rays, Their brandish’d lances at each motion blaze.
Thus breathing death, in terrible array, The close compacted legions urged their way: Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy; Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
Their whole force he proved,[230] Resistless when he raged, and, when he stopp’d, unmoved.
On him the war is bent, the darts are shed, And all their falchions wave around his head: Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand retires; But with repeated shouts his army fires.
Bold Merion aim’d a stroke (nor aim’d it wide); The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide; But pierced not through: unfaithful to his hand, The point broke short, and sparkled in the sand.
The Trojan warrior, touch’d with timely fear, On the raised orb to distance bore the spear.
The Greek, retreating, mourn’d his frustrate blow, And cursed the treacherous lance that spared a foe; Then to the ships with surly speed he went, To seek a surer javelin in his tent.
Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows, The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.
By Teucer’s arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds, The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds.
Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear: He groans beneath the Telamonian spear.
As from some far-seen mountain’s airy crown, Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down, And soils its verdant tresses on the ground; So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.
Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead, From Hector’s hand a shining javelin fled: He saw, and shunn’d the death; the forceful dart Sung on, and pierced Amphimachus’s heart, Cteatus’ son, of Neptune’s forceful line; Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound, And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
To seize his beamy helm the victor flies, And just had fastened on the dazzling prize, When Ajax’ manly arm a javelin flung; Full on the shield’s round boss the weapon rung; He felt the shock, nor more was doom’d to feel, Secure in mail, and sheath’d in shining steel.
Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
Between the leaders of the Athenian line, (Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,) Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies; Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces’ prize.
As two grim lions bear across the lawn, Snatch’d from devouring hounds, a slaughter’d fawn.
In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood, And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood; So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead Strips his bright arms; Oïleus lops his head: Toss’d like a ball, and whirl’d in air away, At Hector’s feet the gory visage lay.
The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain, And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain, Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands, And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
Her hardy heroes from the well-fought plains Nor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains: ’Tis heaven, alas! and Jove’s all-powerful doom, That far, far distant from our native home Wills us to fall inglorious!
Once foremost in the fight, still prone to lend Or arms or counsels, now perform thy best, And what thou canst not singly, urge the rest.” Thus he: and thus the god whose force can make The solid globe’s eternal basis shake: “Ah! never may he see his native land, But feed the vultures on this hateful strand, Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay, Nor dares to combat on this signal day!
Him, near his tent, Meriones attends; Whom thus he questions: “Ever best of friends!
On some important message art thou bound, Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound?
Enter, and see on heaps the helmets roll’d, And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold.” “Nor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils; We too can boast of no ignoble spoils: But those my ship contains; whence distant far, I fight conspicuous in the van of war, What need I more?
If any Greek there be Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee.” To this, Idomeneus: “The fields of fight Have proved thy valour, and unconquer’d might: And were some ambush for the foes design’d, Even there thy courage would not lag behind: In that sharp service, singled from the rest, The fear of each, or valour, stands confess’d.
No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows; He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes: A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part; Against his bosom beats his quivering heart; Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare; With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair, And looks a bloodless image of despair!
Not so the brave—still dauntless, still the same, Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame: Composed his thought, determined is his eye, And fix’d his soul, to conquer or to die: If aught disturb the tenour of his breast, ’Tis but the wish to strike before the rest.
“In such assays thy blameless worth is known, And every art of dangerous war thy own.
By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore, Those wounds were glorious all, and all before; Such as may teach, ’twas still thy brave delight T’oppose thy bosom where thy foremost fight.
Go—from my conquer’d spears the choicest take, And to their owners send them nobly back.” Swift at the word bold Merion snatch’d a spear And, breathing slaughter, follow’d to the war.
Hazard and fame all parts alike attend.” “Not in the centre (Idomen replied:) Our ablest chieftains the main battle guide; Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care, And gallant Teucer deals destruction there, Skill’d or with shafts to gall the distant field, Or bear close battle on the sounding shield.
These can the rage of haughty Hector tame: Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame, Till Jove himself descends, his bolts to shed, And hurl the blazing ruin at our head.
Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound, Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguined ground.
In standing fight he mates Achilles’ force, Excell’d alone in swiftness in the course.
Then to the left our ready arms apply, And live with glory, or with glory die.” He said: and Merion to th’ appointed place, Fierce as the god of battles, urged his pace.
Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheld Rush like a fiery torrent o’er the field, Their force embodied in a tide they pour; The rising combat sounds along the shore.
As warring winds, in Sirius’ sultry reign, From different quarters sweep the sandy plain; On every side the dusty whirlwinds rise, And the dry fields are lifted to the skies: Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven, Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darken’d heaven.
All dreadful glared the iron face of war, Bristled with upright spears, that flash’d afar; Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields, And polish’d arms emblazed the flaming fields: Tremendous scene! that general horror gave, But touch’d with joy the bosoms of the brave.
Saturn’s great sons in fierce contention vied, And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won To crown with glory Peleus’ godlike son, Will’d not destruction to the Grecian powers, But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers; While Neptune, rising from his azure main, Warr’d on the king of heaven with stern disdain, And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
Gods of one source, of one ethereal race, Alike divine, and heaven their native place; But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies, And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
For this, of Jove’s superior might afraid, Neptune in human form conceal’d his aid.
These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train In war and discord’s adamantine chain, Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie Is stretch’d on both, and close compell’d they die.
Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey, The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
First by his hand Othryoneus was slain, Swell’d with false hopes, with mad ambition vain; Call’d by the voice of war to martial fame, From high Cabesus’ distant walls he came; Cassandra’s love he sought, with boasts of power, And promised conquest was the proffer’d dower.
The king consented, by his vaunts abused; The king consented, but the fates refused.
Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride, The field he measured with a larger stride.
Him as he stalk’d, the Cretan javelin found; Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound: His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell; His arms resounded as the boaster fell.
The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead; “And thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped!
Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring, And such the contract of the Phrygian king!
Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive; For such an aid what will not Argos give?
To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces join, And count Atrides’ fairest daughter thine.
Meantime, on further methods to advise, Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies; There hear what Greece has on her part to say.” He spoke, and dragg’d the gory corse away.
This Asius view’d, unable to contain, Before his chariot warring on the plain: (His crowded coursers, to his squire consign’d, Impatient panted on his neck behind:) To vengeance rising with a sudden spring, He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king.
The wary Cretan, as his foe drew near, Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear: Beneath the chin the point was seen to glide, And glitter’d, extant at the further side.
As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall, Or pine, fit mast for some great admiral, Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound, Then spreads a length of ruin o’er the ground: So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day, And stretch’d before his much-loved coursers lay.
He grinds the dust distain’d with streaming gore, And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore.
Deprived of motion, stiff with stupid fear, Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer, Nor shuns the foe, nor turns the steeds away, But falls transfix’d, an unresisting prey: Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath The stately car, and labours out his breath.
Thus Asius’ steeds (their mighty master gone) Remain the prize of Nestor’s youthful son.
Stabb’d at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh, And made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly.
The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glance From his slope shield the disappointed lance.
Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round, Thick with bull-hides and brazen orbits bound, On his raised arm by two strong braces stay’d,) He lay collected in defensive shade.
O’er his safe head the javelin idly sung, And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung.
Even then the spear the vigorous arm confess’d, And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenor’s breast: Warm’d in his liver, to the ground it bore The chief, his people’s guardian now no more!
“Not unattended (the proud Trojan cries) Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies: For thee, through hell’s black portals stand display’d, This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade.” Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast, Touch’d every Greek, but Nestor’s son the most.
Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend, And his broad buckler shields his slaughter’d friend: Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore His honour’d body to the tented shore.
Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws; Resolved to perish in his country’s cause, Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom To wail his fate in death’s eternal gloom.
He sees Alcathous in the front aspire: Great Æsyetes was the hero’s sire; His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair, Anchises’ eldest hope, and darling care: Who charm’d her parents’ and her husband’s heart With beauty, sense, and every work of art: He once of Ilion’s youth the loveliest boy, The fairest she of all the fair of Troy.
By Neptune now the hapless hero dies, Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes, And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
Fix’d as some column, or deep-rooted oak, While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.
Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields, Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.
The riven armour sends a jarring sound; His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound, The long lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound; Fast flowing from its source, as prone he lay, Life’s purple tide impetuous gush’d away.
Then Idomen, insulting o’er the slain: “Behold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain: See! on one Greek three Trojan ghosts attend; This, my third victim, to the shades I send.
Approaching now thy boasted might approve, And try the prowess of the seed of Jove.
To him, ambitious of so great an aid, The bold Deiphobus approach’d, and said: “Now, Trojan prince, employ thy pious arms, If e’er thy bosom felt fair honour’s charms.
Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend; Come, and the warrior’s loved remains defend.
This deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe; Haste, and revenge it on th’ insulting foe.” Æneas heard, and for a space resign’d To tender pity all his manly mind; Then rising in his rage, he burns to fight: The Greek awaits him with collected might.
Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near, The youthful offspring of the god of war, Merion, and Aphareus, in field renown’d: To these the warrior sent his voice around.
With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads: So joys Æneas, as his native band Moves on in rank, and stretches o’er the land.
Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose; On every side the steely circle grows; Now batter’d breast-plates and hack’d helmets ring, And o’er their heads unheeded javelins sing.
Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear, There great Idomeneus, Æneas here.
Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood, And burn’d to drench the ground with mutual blood.
But OEnomas received the Cretan’s stroke; The forceful spear his hollow corslet broke, It ripp’d his belly with a ghastly wound, And roll’d the smoking entrails on the ground.
Though now unfit an active war to wage, Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff with cold age, His listless limbs unable for the course, In standing fight he yet maintains his force; Till faint with labour, and by foes repell’d, His tired slow steps he drags from off the field.
Deiphobus beheld him as he pass’d, And, fired with hate, a parting javelin cast: The javelin err’d, but held its course along, And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young: The son of Mars fell gasping on the ground, And gnash’d the dust, all bloody with his wound.
Nor knew the furious father of his fall; High-throned amidst the great Olympian hall, On golden clouds th’ immortal synod sate; Detain’d from bloody war by Jove and Fate.
Now, where in dust the breathless hero lay, For slain Ascalaphus commenced the fray, Deiphobus to seize his helmet flies, And from his temples rends the glittering prize; Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near, And on his loaded arm discharged his spear: He drops the weight, disabled with the pain; The hollow helmet rings against the plain.
His wounded brother good Polites tends; Around his waist his pious arms he threw, And from the rage of battle gently drew: Him his swift coursers, on his splendid car, Rapt from the lessening thunder of the war; To Troy they drove him, groaning from the shore, And sprinkling, as he pass’d, the sands with gore.
Meanwhile fresh slaughter bathes the sanguine ground, Heaps fall on heaps, and heaven and earth resound.
Bold Aphareus by great Æneas bled; As toward the chief he turn’d his daring head, He pierced his throat; the bending head, depress’d Beneath his helmet, nods upon his breast; His shield reversed o’er the fallen warrior lies, And everlasting slumber seals his eyes.
Antilochus, as Thoon turn’d him round, Transpierced his back with a dishonest wound: The hollow vein, that to the neck extends Along the chine, his eager javelin rends: Supine he falls, and to his social train Spreads his imploring arms, but spreads in vain.
Thv exulting victor, leaping where he lay, From his broad shoulders tore the spoils away; His time observed; for closed by foes around, On all sides thick the peals of arms resound.
His shield emboss’d the ringing storm sustains, But he impervious and untouch’d remains. (Great Neptune’s care preserved from hostile rage This youth, the joy of Nestor’s glorious age.) In arms intrepid, with the first he fought, Faced every foe, and every danger sought; His winged lance, resistless as the wind, Obeys each motion of the master’s mind!
Restless it flies, impatient to be free, And meditates the distant enemy.
The son of Asius, Adamas, drew near, And struck his target with the brazen spear Fierce in his front: but Neptune wards the blow, And blunts the javelin of th’ eluded foe: In the broad buckler half the weapon stood, Splinter’d on earth flew half the broken wood.
Disarm’d, he mingled in the Trojan crew; But Merion’s spear o’ertook him as he flew, Deep in the belly’s rim an entrance found, Where sharp the pang, and mortal is the wound.
Thus an ox in fetters tied, While death’s strong pangs distend his labouring side, His bulk enormous on the field displays; His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life decays.
The spear the conqueror from his body drew, And death’s dim shadows swarm before his view.
Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid: King Helenus waved high the Thracian blade, And smote his temples with an arm so strong, The helm fell off, and roll’d amid the throng: There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize; For dark in death the godlike owner lies!
Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns, And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns: That shook the ponderous lance, in act to throw; And this stood adverse with the bended bow: Full on his breast the Trojan arrow fell, But harmless bounded from the plated steel.
As on some ample barn’s well harden’d floor, (The winds collected at each open door,) While the broad fan with force is whirl’d around, Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground: So from the steel that guards Atrides’ heart, Repell’d to distance flies the bounding dart.
Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe, Pierced with his lance the hand that grasp’d the bow.
And nailed it to the yew: the wounded hand Trail’d the long lance that mark’d with blood the sand: But good Agenor gently from the wound The spear solicits, and the bandage bound; A sling’s soft wool, snatch’d from a soldier’s side, At once the tent and ligature supplied.
Pisander, urged by fate’s decree, Springs through the ranks to fall, and fall by thee, Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame: High-towering in the front, the warrior came.
Nor pierced Pisander through Atrides’ shield: Pisander’s spear fell shiver’d on the field.
Not so discouraged, to the future blind, Vain dreams of conquest swell his haughty mind; Dauntless he rushes where the Spartan lord Like lightning brandish’d his far beaming sword.
His left arm high opposed the shining shield: His right beneath, the cover’d pole-axe held; (An olive’s cloudy grain the handle made, Distinct with studs, and brazen was the blade;) This on the helm discharged a noble blow; The plume dropp’d nodding to the plain below, Shorn from the crest.
Atrides waved his steel: Deep through his front the weighty falchion fell; The crashing bones before its force gave way; In dust and blood the groaning hero lay: Forced from their ghastly orbs, and spouting gore, The clotted eye-balls tumble on the shore.
And fierce Atrides spurn’d him as he bled, Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said: “Thus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear; O race perfidious, who delight in war!
Already noble deeds ye have perform’d; A princess raped transcends a navy storm’d: In such bold feats your impious might approve, Without th’ assistance, or the fear of Jove.
The violated rites, the ravish’d dame; Our heroes slaughter’d and our ships on flame, Crimes heap’d on crimes, shall bend your glory down, And whelm in ruins yon flagitious town.
O thou, great father! lord of earth and skies, Above the thought of man, supremely wise!
A godless crew, abandon’d and unjust, Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?
The best of things, beyond their measure, cloy; Sleep’s balmy blessing, love’s endearing joy; The feast, the dance; whate’er mankind desire, Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire.
But Troy for ever reaps a dire delight In thirst of slaughter, and in lust of fight.” This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved) The bloody armour, which his train received: Then sudden mix’d among the warring crew, And the bold son of Pylæmenes slew.
Harpalion had through Asia travell’d far, Following his martial father to the war: Through filial love he left his native shore, Never, ah, never to behold it more!
His unsuccessful spear he chanced to fling Against the target of the Spartan king; Thus of his lance disarm’d, from death he flies, And turns around his apprehensive eyes.
Him, through the hip transpiercing as he fled, The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.
Beneath the bone the glancing point descends, And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends: Sunk in his sad companions’ arms he lay, And in short pantings sobb’d his soul away; (Like some vile worm extended on the ground;) While life’s red torrent gush’d from out the wound.
Him on his car the Paphlagonian train In slow procession bore from off the plain.
Attends the mournful pomp along the shore; And unavailing tears profusely shed; And, unrevenged, deplored his offspring dead.
Paris from far the moving sight beheld, With pity soften’d and with fury swell’d: His honour’d host, a youth of matchless grace, And loved of all the Paphlagonian race!
With his full strength he bent his angry bow, And wing’d the feather’d vengeance at the foe.
A chief there was, the brave Euchenor named, For riches much, and more for virtue famed.
Oft had the father told his early doom, By arms abroad, or slow disease at home: He climb’d his vessel, prodigal of breath, And chose the certain glorious path to death.
Beneath his ear the pointed arrow went; The soul came issuing at the narrow vent: His limbs, unnerved, drop useless on the ground, And everlasting darkness shades him round.
Nor knew great Hector how his legions yield, (Wrapp’d in the cloud and tumult of the field:) Wide on the left the force of Greece commands, And conquest hovers o’er th’ Achaian bands; With such a tide superior virtue sway’d, And he that shakes the solid earth gave aid.
But in the centre Hector fix’d remain’d, Where first the gates were forced, and bulwarks gain’d; There, on the margin of the hoary deep, (Their naval station where the Ajaces keep.
And where low walls confine the beating tides, Whose humble barrier scarce the foe divides; Where late in fight both foot and horse engaged, And all the thunder of the battle raged,) There join’d, the whole Bœotian strength remains, The proud Iaonians with their sweeping trains, Locrians and Phthians, and th’ Epaean force; But join’d, repel not Hector’s fiery course.
The flower of Athens, Stichius, Phidas, led; Bias and great Menestheus at their head: Meges the strong the Epaean bands controll’d, And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold: The Phthians, Medon, famed for martial might, And brave Podarces, active in the fight.
This drew from Phylacus his noble line; Iphiclus’ son: and that (Oïleus) thine: (Young Ajax’ brother, by a stolen embrace; He dwelt far distant from his native place, By his fierce step-dame from his father’s reign Expell’d and exiled for her brother slain:) These rule the Phthians, and their arms employ, Mix’d with Bœotians, on the shores of Troy.
Now side by side, with like unwearied care, Each Ajax laboured through the field of war: So when two lordly bulls, with equal toil, Force the bright ploughshare through the fallow soil, Join’d to one yoke, the stubborn earth they tear, And trace large furrows with the shining share; O’er their huge limbs the foam descends in snow, And streams of sweat down their sour foreheads flow.
A train of heroes followed through the field, Who bore by turns great Ajax’ sevenfold shield; Whene’er he breathed, remissive of his might, Tired with the incessant slaughters of the fight.
No following troops his brave associate grace: In close engagement an unpractised race, The Locrian squadrons nor the javelin wield, Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield; But skill’d from far the flying shaft to wing, Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling, Dexterous with these they aim a certain wound, Or fell the distant warrior to the ground.
Thus in the van the Telamonian train, Throng’d in bright arms, a pressing fight maintain: Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie, Whose stones and arrows intercept the sky, The mingled tempest on the foes they pour; Troy’s scattering orders open to the shower.
Content with what the bounteous gods have given, Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven.
To some the powers of bloody war belong, To some sweet music and the charm of song; To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assign’d A wise, extensive, all-considering mind; Their guardians these, the nations round confess, And towns and empires for their safety bless.
Behold! distress’d within yon hostile wall, How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
What troops, out-number’d, scarce the war maintain!
Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kings Convoked to council, weigh the sum of things.
Whether (the gods succeeding our desires) To yon tall ships to bear the Trojan fires; Or quit the fleet, and pass unhurt away, Contented with the conquest of the day.
I fear, I fear, lest Greece, not yet undone, Pay the large debt of last revolving sun; Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains On yonder decks, and yet o’erlooks the plains!” The counsel pleased; and Hector, with a bound, Leap’d from his chariot on the trembling ground; Swift as he leap’d his clanging arms resound.
“To guard this post (he cried) thy art employ, And here detain the scatter’d youth of Troy; Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way, And hasten back to end the doubtful day.” This said, the towering chief prepares to go, Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow, And seems a moving mountain topp’d with snow.
Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies, And bids anew the martial thunder rise.
Far on the left, amid the throng he found (Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths around) The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved, Opprobrious thus, th’ impatient chief reproved: “Ill-fated Paris! slave to womankind, As smooth of face as fraudulent of mind!
Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?
The godlike father, and th’ intrepid son?
The force of Helenus, dispensing fate; And great Othryoneus, so fear’d of late?
The chiefs you seek on yonder shore lie slain; Of all those heroes, two alone remain; Deiphobus, and Helenus the seer, Each now disabled by a hostile spear.
Go then, successful, where thy soul inspires: This heart and hand shall second all thy fires: What with this arm I can, prepare to know, Till death for death be paid, and blow for blow.
But ’tis not ours, with forces not our own To combat: strength is of the gods alone.” These words the hero’s angry mind assuage: Then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage.
Around Polydamas, distain’d with blood, Cebrion, Phalces, stern Orthaeus stood, Palmus, with Polypœtes the divine, And two bold brothers of Hippotion’s line (Who reach’d fair Ilion, from Ascania far, The former day; the next engaged in war).
Far o’er the plains, in dreadful order bright, The brazen arms reflect a beamy light: Full in the blazing van great Hector shined, Like Mars commission’d to confound mankind.
Before him flaming his enormous shield, Like the broad sun, illumined all the field; His nodding helm emits a streamy ray; His piercing eyes through all the battle stray, And, while beneath his targe he flash’d along, Shot terrors round, that wither’d e’en the strong.
Thus stalk’d he, dreadful; death was in his look: Whole nations fear’d; but not an Argive shook.
The towering Ajax, with an ample stride, Advanced the first, and thus the chief defied: “Hector! come on; thy empty threats forbear; ’Tis not thy arm, ’tis thundering Jove we fear: The skill of war to us not idly given, Lo!
Long ere in flames our lofty navy fall, Your boasted city, and your god-built wall, Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the ground; And spread a long unmeasured ruin round.
The time shall come, when, chased along the plain, Even thou shalt call on Jove, and call in vain; Even thou shalt wish, to aid thy desperate course, The wings of falcons for thy flying horse; Shalt run, forgetful of a warrior’s fame, While clouds of friendly dust conceal thy shame.” As thus he spoke, behold, in open view, On sounding wings a dexter eagle flew.
To Jove’s glad omen all the Grecians rise, And hail, with shouts, his progress through the skies: Far-echoing clamours bound from side to side; They ceased; and thus the chief of Troy replied: “From whence this menace, this insulting strain?
Enormous boaster! doom’d to vaunt in vain.
So may the gods on Hector life bestow, (Not that short life which mortals lead below, But such as those of Jove’s high lineage born, The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,) As this decisive day shall end the fame Of Greece, and Argos be no more a name.
ARGUMENT.[231] JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENUS.
Nestor, sitting at the table with Machaon, is alarmed with the increasing clamour of war, and hastens to Agamemnon; on his way he meets that prince with Diomed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the extremity of the danger.
Agamemnon proposes to make their escape by night, which Ulysses withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that, wounded as they were, they should go forth and encourage the army with their presence, which advice is pursued.
Juno, seeing the partiality of Jupiter to the Trojans, forms a design to over-reach him: she sets off her charms with the utmost care, and (the more surely to enchant him) obtains the magic girdle of Venus.
She then applies herself to the god of sleep, and, with some difficulty, persuades him to seal the eyes of Jupiter: this done, she goes to mount Ida, where the god, at first sight, is ravished with her beauty, sinks in her embraces, and is laid asleep.
Neptune takes advantage of his slumber, and succours the Greeks: Hector is struck to the ground with a prodigious stone by Ajax, and carried off from the battle: several actions succeed, till the Trojans, much distressed, are obliged to give way: the lesser Ajax signalizes himself in a particular manner.
But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl, Could charm the cares of Nestor’s watchful soul; His startled ears the increasing cries attend; Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend: “What new alarm, divine Machaon, say, What mix’d events attend this mighty day?
Here with the cordial draught dispel thy care, Let Hecamede the strengthening bath prepare, Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore; While I the adventures of the day explore.” He said: and, seizing Thrasymedes’ shield, (His valiant offspring,) hasten’d to the field; (That day the son his father’s buckler bore;) Then snatch’d a lance, and issued from the door.
Soon as the prospect open’d to his view, His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew; Dire disarray! the tumult of the fight, The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight.
As when old ocean’s silent surface sleeps, The waves just heaving on the purple deeps: While yet the expected tempest hangs on high, Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in the sky, The mass of waters will no wind obey; Jove sends one gust, and bids them roll away.
While wavering counsels thus his mind engage, Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage, To join the host, or to the general haste; Debating long, he fixes on the last: Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms, The field rings dreadful with the clang of arms, The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins fly; Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die.
Nestor’s approach alarm’d each Grecian breast, Whom thus the general of the host address’d: “O grace and glory of the Achaian name; What drives thee, Nestor, from the field of fame?
Is every heart inflamed with equal rage Against your king, nor will one chief engage?
And have I lived to see with mournful eyes In every Greek a new Achilles rise?” Gerenian Nestor then: “So fate has will’d; And all-confirming time has fate fulfill’d.
Not he that thunders from the aerial bower, Not Jove himself, upon the past has power.
The wall, our late inviolable bound, And best defence, lies smoking on the ground: Even to the ships their conquering arms extend, And groans of slaughter’d Greeks to heaven ascend.
Cease we at length to waste our blood in vain, And launch what ships lie nearest to the main; Leave these at anchor, till the coming night: Then, if impetuous Troy forbear the fight, Bring all to sea, and hoist each sail for flight.
Better from evils, well foreseen, to run, Than perish in the danger we may shun.” Thus he.
The sage Ulysses thus replies, While anger flash’d from his disdainful eyes: “What shameful words (unkingly as thou art) Fall from that trembling tongue and timorous heart?
A host, by Jove endued with martial might, And taught to conquer, or to fall in fight: Adventurous combats and bold wars to wage, Employ’d our youth, and yet employs our age.
In such base sentence if thou couch thy fear, Speak it in whispers, lest a Greek should hear.
Lives there a man so dead to fame, who dares To think such meanness, or the thought declares?
And comes it even from him whose sovereign sway The banded legions of all Greece obey?
Is this a general’s voice that calls to flight, While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight?
No more the troops (our hoisted sails in view, Themselves abandon’d) shall the fight pursue; But thy ships flying, with despair shall see; And owe destruction to a prince like thee.” “Thy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies) Like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise.
Hear then in me the great OEnides’ son, Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run) Lies whelm’d in ruins of the Theban wall; Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall.
With three bold sons was generous Prothous bless’d, Who Pleuron’s walls and Calydon possess’d; Melas and Agrius, but (who far surpass’d The rest in courage) Œneus was the last.
From Calydon expell’d, He pass’d to Argos, and in exile dwell’d; The monarch’s daughter there (so Jove ordain’d) He won, and flourish’d where Adrastus reign’d; There, rich in fortune’s gifts, his acres till’d, Beheld his vines their liquid harvest yield, And numerous flocks that whiten’d all the field.
Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in fame!
Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name.
Then, what for common good my thoughts inspire, Attend, and in the son respect the sire.
Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppress’d, Let each go forth, and animate the rest, Advance the glory which he cannot share, Though not partaker, witness of the war.
But lest new wounds on wounds o’erpower us quite, Beyond the missile javelin’s sounding flight, Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult far, Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war.” He added not: the listening kings obey, Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.
The god of ocean (to inflame their rage) Appears a warrior furrowed o’er with age; Press’d in his own, the general’s hand he took, And thus the venerable hero spoke: “Atrides! lo! with what disdainful eye Achilles sees his country’s forces fly; Blind, impious man! whose anger is his guide, Who glories in unutterable pride.
So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim The wretch relentless, and o’erwhelm with shame!
Each Argive bosom beats to meet the fight, And grisly war appears a pleasing sight.
Meantime Saturnia from Olympus’ brow, High-throned in gold, beheld the fields below; With joy the glorious conflict she survey’d, Where her great brother gave the Grecians aid.
But placed aloft, on Ida’s shady height She sees her Jove, and trembles at the sight.
Jove to deceive, what methods shall she try, What arts, to blind his all-beholding eye?
At length she trusts her power; resolved to prove The old, yet still successful, cheat of love; Against his wisdom to oppose her charms, And lull the lord of thunders in her arms.
Swift to her bright apartment she repairs, Sacred to dress and beauty’s pleasing cares: With skill divine had Vulcan form’d the bower, Safe from access of each intruding power.
Here first she bathes; and round her body pours Soft oils of fragrance, and ambrosial showers: The winds, perfumed, the balmy gale convey Through heaven, through earth, and all the aerial way: Spirit divine! whose exhalation greets The sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.
Thus while she breathed of heaven, with decent pride Her artful hands the radiant tresses tied; Part on her head in shining ringlets roll’d, Part o’er her shoulders waved like melted gold.
Around her next a heavenly mantle flow’d, That rich with Pallas’ labour’d colours glow’d: Large clasps of gold the foldings gather’d round, A golden zone her swelling bosom bound.
Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear, Each gem illumined with a triple star.
Then o’er her head she cast a veil more white Than new-fallen snow, and dazzling as the light.
Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.
Thus issuing radiant with majestic pace, Forth from the dome the imperial goddess moves, And calls the mother of the smiles and loves.
“How long (to Venus thus apart she cried) Shall human strife celestial minds divide?
Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturnia’s joy, And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?” “Let heaven’s dread empress (Cytheraea said) Speak her request, and deem her will obey’d.” “Then grant me (said the queen) those conquering charms, That power, which mortals and immortals warms, That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires, And burns the sons of heaven with sacred fires!
With awe divine, the queen of love Obey’d the sister and the wife of Jove; And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,[233] With various skill and high embroidery graced.
In this was every art, and every charm, To win the wisest, and the coldest warm: Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire, The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire, Persuasive speech, and the more persuasive sighs, Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes.
With smiles she took the charm; and smiling press’d The powerful cestus to her snowy breast.
Then Venus to the courts of Jove withdrew; Whilst from Olympus pleased Saturnia flew.
O’er high Pieria thence her course she bore, O’er fair Emathia’s ever-pleasing shore, O’er Hemus’ hills with snows eternal crown’d; Nor once her flying foot approach’d the ground.
Then taking wing from Athos’ lofty steep, She speeds to Lemnos o’er the rolling deep, And seeks the cave of Death’s half-brother, Sleep.[234] “Sweet pleasing Sleep! (Saturnia thus began) Who spread’st thy empire o’er each god and man; If e’er obsequious to thy Juno’s will, O power of slumbers! hear, and favour still.
Shed thy soft dews on Jove’s immortal eyes, While sunk in love’s entrancing joys he lies.
A splendid footstool, and a throne, that shine With gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine; The work of Vulcan; to indulge thy ease, When wine and feasts thy golden humours please.” “Imperial dame (the balmy power replies), Great Saturn’s heir, and empress of the skies!
But how, unbidden, shall I dare to steep Jove’s awful temples in the dew of sleep?
Long since, too venturous, at thy bold command, On those eternal lids I laid my hand; What time, deserting Ilion’s wasted plain, His conquering son, Alcides, plough’d the main.
I visit these, to whose indulgent cares I owe the nursing of my tender years: For strife, I hear, has made that union cease Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
The steeds, prepared my chariot to convey O’er earth and seas, and through the aerial way, Wait under Ide: of thy superior power To ask consent, I leave the Olympian bower; Nor seek, unknown to thee, the sacred cells Deep under seas, where hoary Ocean dwells.” “For that (said Jove) suffice another day!
Ne’er did my soul so strong a passion prove, Or for an earthly, or a heavenly love: Not when I press’d Ixion’s matchless dame, Whence rose Pirithous like the gods in fame: Not when fair Danae felt the shower of gold Stream into life, whence Perseus brave and bold.
Not thus I burn’d for either Theban dame: (Bacchus from this, from that Alcides came:) Nor Phœnix’ daughter, beautiful and young, Whence godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.[236] Not thus I burn’d for fair Latona’s face, Nor comelier Ceres’ more majestic grace.
Not thus even for thyself I felt desire, As now my veins receive the pleasing fire.” He spoke; the goddess with the charming eyes Glows with celestial red, and thus replies: “Is this a scene for love?
On Ida’s height, Exposed to mortal and immortal sight!
Our joys profaned by each familiar eye; The sport of heaven, and fable of the sky: How shall I e’er review the blest abodes, Or mix among the senate of the gods?
Shall I not think, that, with disorder’d charms, All heaven beholds me recent from thy arms?
Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care, And towering in the foremost ranks of war, Indignant thus—“Oh once of martial fame!
Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet with fires, While stern Achilles in his wrath retires.
One hero’s loss too tamely you deplore, Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more.
Oh yet, if glory any bosom warms, Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms: His strongest spear each valiant Grecian wield, Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield; Let to the weak the lighter arms belong, The ponderous targe be wielded by the strong.
The kings, though wounded, and oppress’d with pain, With helpful hands themselves assist the train.
The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield, The weaker warrior takes a lighter shield.
Thus sheath’d in shining brass, in bright array The legions march, and Neptune leads the way: His brandish’d falchion flames before their eyes, Like lightning flashing through the frighted skies.
Troy’s great defender stands alone unawed, Arms his proud host, and dares oppose a god: And lo! the god, and wondrous man, appear: The sea’s stern ruler there, and Hector here.
The roaring main, at her great master’s call, Rose in huge ranks, and form’d a watery wall Around the ships: seas hanging o’er the shores, Both armies join: earth thunders, ocean roars.
Not half so loud the bellowing deeps resound, When stormy winds disclose the dark profound; Less loud the winds that from the Æolian hall Roar through the woods, and make whole forests fall; Less loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour, Catch the dry mountain, and its shades devour; With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven, And such a clamour shakes the sounding heaven.
As when the bolt, red-hissing from above, Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove, The mountain-oak in flaming ruin lies, Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise; Stiff with amaze the pale beholders stand, And own the terrors of the almighty hand!
So lies great Hector prostrate on the shore; His slacken’d hand deserts the lance it bore; His following shield the fallen chief o’erspread; Beneath his helmet dropp’d his fainting head; His load of armour, sinking to the ground, Clanks on the field, a dead and hollow sound.
Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain; Greece sees, in hope, Troy’s great defender slain: All spring to seize him; storms of arrows fly, And thicker javelins intercept the sky.
When now they touch’d the mead’s enamell’d side, Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy tide, With watery drops the chief they sprinkle round, Placed on the margin of the flowery ground.
Raised on his knees, he now ejects the gore; Now faints anew, low-sinking on the shore; By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting skies, And seals again, by fits, his swimming eyes.
Oilean Ajax first his javelin sped, Pierced by whose point the son of Enops bled; (Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis bore Amidst her flocks on Satnio’s silver shore;) Struck through the belly’s rim, the warrior lies Supine, and shades eternal veil his eyes.
Fired with revenge, Polydamas drew near, And at Prothoënor shook the trembling spear; The driving javelin through his shoulder thrust, He sinks to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
“Lo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field, And thus their arms the race of Panthus wield: From this unerring hand there flies no dart But bathes its point within a Grecian heart.
Propp’d on that spear to which thou owest thy fall, Go, guide thy darksome steps to Pluto’s dreary hall.” He said, and sorrow touch’d each Argive breast: The soul of Ajax burn’d above the rest.
“Here, proud Polydamas, here turn thy eyes! (The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:) Say, is this chief extended on the plain A worthy vengeance for Prothoënor slain?
Mark well his port! his figure and his face Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race; Some lines, methinks, may make his lineage known, Antenor’s brother, or perhaps his son.” He spake, and smiled severe, for well he knew The bleeding youth: Troy sadden’d at the view.
But furious Acamas avenged his cause; As Promachus his slaughtered brother draws, He pierced his heart—“Such fate attends you all, Proud Argives! destined by our arms to fall.
Behold your Promachus deprived of breath, A victim owed to my brave brother’s death.
Not unappeased he enters Pluto’s gate, Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate.” Heart-piercing anguish struck the Grecian host, But touch’d the breast of bold Peneleus most; At the proud boaster he directs his course; The boaster flies, and shuns superior force.
But young Ilioneus received the spear; Ilioneus, his father’s only care: (Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan train Whom Hermes loved, and taught the arts of gain:) Full in his eye the weapon chanced to fall, And from the fibres scoop’d the rooted ball, Drove through the neck, and hurl’d him to the plain; He lifts his miserable arms in vain!
Swift his broad falchion fierce Peneleus spread, And from the spouting shoulders struck his head; To earth at once the head and helmet fly; The lance, yet sticking through the bleeding eye, The victor seized; and, as aloft he shook The gory visage, thus insulting spoke: “Trojans! your great Ilioneus behold!
Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine, Ye all-beholding, all-recording nine!
Of all the Grecians what immortal name, And whose bless’d trophies, will ye raise to fame?
Thou first, great Ajax! on the unsanguined plain Laid Hyrtius, leader of the Mysian train.
Phalces and Mermer, Nestor’s son o’erthrew, Bold Merion, Morys and Hippotion slew.
Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled, By Teucer’s arrows mingled with the dead, Pierced in the flank by Menelaus’ steel, His people’s pastor, Hyperenor fell; Eternal darkness wrapp’d the warrior round, And the fierce soul came rushing through the wound.
Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector in a swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highly incensed at the artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions; she is then sent to Iris and Apollo.
Juno, repairing to the assembly of the gods, attempts, with extraordinary address, to incense them against Jupiter; in particular she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he is ready to take arms, but is prevented by Minerva.
Iris and Apollo obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris commands Neptune to leave the battle, to which, after much reluctance and passion, he consents.
Apollo reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him back to the battle, marches before him with his ægis, and turns the fortune of the fight.
He breaks down great part of the Grecian wall: the Trojans rush in, and attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are, as yet, repelled by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.
Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound, And many a chief lay gasping on the ground: Then stopp’d and panted, where the chariots lie Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
Meanwhile, awaken’d from his dream of love, On Ida’s summit sat imperial Jove: Round the wide fields he cast a careful view, There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue; These proud in arms, those scatter’d o’er the plain And, ’midst the war, the monarch of the main.
Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies, (His sad associates round with weeping eyes,) Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath, His senses wandering to the verge of death.
The god beheld him with a pitying look, And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke: “O thou, still adverse to the eternal will, For ever studious in promoting ill!
Thy arts have made the godlike Hector yield, And driven his conquering squadrons from the field.
Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstand Our power immense, and brave the almighty hand?
Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fix’d on high, From the vast concave of the spangled sky, I hung thee trembling in a golden chain, And all the raging gods opposed in vain?
Headlong I hurl’d them from the Olympian hall, Stunn’d in the whirl, and breathless with the fall.
For godlike Hercules these deeds were done, Nor seem’d the vengeance worthy such a son: When, by thy wiles induced, fierce Boreas toss’d The shipwreck’d hero on the Coan coast, Him through a thousand forms of death I bore, And sent to Argos, and his native shore.
If truth inspires thy tongue, proclaim our will To yon bright synod on the Olympian hill; Our high decree let various Iris know, And call the god that bears the silver bow.
Let her descend, and from the embattled plain Command the sea-god to his watery reign: While Phœbus hastes great Hector to prepare To rise afresh, and once more wake the war: His labouring bosom re-inspires with breath, And calls his senses from the verge of death.
Greece chased by Troy, even to Achilles’ fleet, Shall fall by thousands at the hero’s feet.
He, not untouch’d with pity, to the plain Shall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain.
What youths he slaughters under Ilion’s walls!
Even my loved son, divine Sarpedon, falls!
Vanquish’d at last by Hector’s lance he lies.
Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise: And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies.
Not till that day shall Jove relax his rage, Nor one of all the heavenly host engage In aid of Greece.
The promise of a god I gave, and seal’d it with the almighty nod, Achilles’ glory to the stars to raise; Such was our word, and fate the word obeys.” The trembling queen (the almighty order given) Swift from the Idaean summit shot to heaven.
As some wayfaring man, who wanders o’er In thought a length of lands he trod before, Sends forth his active mind from place to place, Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space: So swift flew Juno to the bless’d abodes, If thought of man can match the speed of gods.
There sat the powers in awful synod placed; They bow’d, and made obeisance as she pass’d Through all the brazen dome:[239] with goblets crown’d They hail her queen; the nectar streams around.
Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl, And anxious asks what cares disturb her soul?
To whom the white-arm’d goddess thus replies: “Enough thou know’st the tyrant of the skies, Severely bent his purpose to fulfil, Unmoved his mind, and unrestrain’d his will.
Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy call; Bid the crown’d nectar circle round the hall: But Jove shall thunder through the ethereal dome Such stern decrees, such threaten’d woes to come, As soon shall freeze mankind with dire surprise, And damp the eternal banquets of the skies.” The goddess said, and sullen took her place; Black horror sadden’d each celestial face.
To see the gathering grudge in every breast, Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy express’d; While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent, Sat stedfast care, and lowering discontent.
Thus she proceeds—“Attend, ye powers above!
Your vassal godheads grudgingly obey: Fierce in the majesty of power controls; Shakes all the thrones of heaven, and bends the poles.
Submiss, immortals! all he wills, obey: And thou, great Mars, begin and show the way.
And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven, Discharged his wrath on half the host of heaven; But Pallas, springing through the bright abode, Starts from her azure throne to calm the god.
Struck for the immortal race with timely fear, From frantic Mars she snatch’d the shield and spear; Then the huge helmet lifting from his head, Thus to the impetuous homicide she said: “By what wild passion, furious! art thou toss’d?
Shall not the Thunderer’s dread command restrain, And was imperial Juno heard in vain?
Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage, The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage; Guilty and guiltless find an equal fate And one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state.
Cease then thy offspring’s death unjust to call; Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
Why should heaven’s law with foolish man comply Exempted from the race ordain’d to die?” This menace fix’d the warrior to his throne; Sullen he sat, and curb’d the rising groan.
“Go wait the Thunderer’s will (Saturnia cried) On yon tall summit of the fountful Ide: There in the father’s awful presence stand, Receive, and execute his dread command.” She said, and sat; the god that gilds the day, And various Iris, wing their airy way.
Swift as the wind, to Ida’s hills they came, (Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game) There sat the eternal; he whose nod controls The trembling world, and shakes the steady poles.
Veil’d in a mist of fragrance him they found, With clouds of gold and purple circled round.
Well-pleased the Thunderer saw their earnest care, And prompt obedience to the queen of air; Then (while a smile serenes his awful brow) Commands the goddess of the showery bow: “Iris! descend, and what we here ordain, Report to yon mad tyrant of the main.
Bid him from fight to his own deeps repair, Or breathe from slaughter in the fields of air.
If he refuse, then let him timely weigh Our elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms, If heaven’s omnipotence descend in arms?
Swift as the rattling hail, or fleecy snows, Drive through the skies, when Boreas fiercely blows; So from the clouds descending Iris falls, And to blue Neptune thus the goddess calls: “Attend the mandate of the sire above!
In me behold the messenger of Jove: He bids thee from forbidden wars repair To thine own deeps, or to the fields of air.
This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh His elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarms If heaven’s omnipotence descend in arms?
And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?” “What means the haughty sovereign of the skies? (The king of ocean thus, incensed, replies;) Rule as he will his portion’d realms on high; No vassal god, nor of his train, am I.
Far in the distant clouds let him control, And awe the younger brothers of the pole; There to his children his commands be given, The trembling, servile, second race of heaven.” “And must I then (said she), O sire of floods!
Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent; A noble mind disdains not to repent.
To elder brothers guardian fiends are given, To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven.” “Great is the profit (thus the god rejoin’d) When ministers are blest with prudent mind: Warn’d by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield, And quit, though angry, the contended field: Not but his threats with justice I disclaim, The same our honours, and our birth the same.
Well was the crime, and well the vengeance spared; Even power immense had found such battle hard.
Go thou, my son! the trembling Greeks alarm, Shake my broad ægis on thy active arm, Be godlike Hector thy peculiar care, Swell his bold heart, and urge his strength to war: Let Ilion conquer, till the Achaian train Fly to their ships and Hellespont again: Then Greece shall breathe from toils.” The godhead said; His will divine the son of Jove obey’d.
Not half so swift the sailing falcon flies, That drives a turtle through the liquid skies, As Phœbus, shooting from the Idaean brow, Glides down the mountain to the plain below.
There Hector seated by the stream he sees, His sense returning with the coming breeze; Again his pulses beat, his spirits rise; Again his loved companions meet his eyes; Jove thinking of his pains, they pass’d away, To whom the god who gives the golden day: “Why sits great Hector from the field so far?
What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?” The fainting hero, as the vision bright Stood shining o’er him, half unseal’d his sight: “What blest immortal, with commanding breath, Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death?
Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored, The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow Had almost sunk me to the shades below?
Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy, And hell’s black horrors swim before my eye.” To him Apollo: “Be no more dismay’d; See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.
Behold! thy Phœbus shall his arms employ, Phœbus, propitious still to thee and Troy.
Inspire thy warriors then with manly force, And to the ships impel thy rapid horse: Even I will make thy fiery coursers way, And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea.” Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove, And breathed immortal ardour from above.
As when the force of men and dogs combined Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind; Far from the hunter’s rage secure they lie Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die) When lo! a lion shoots across the way!
So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued, And mark’d their progress through the ranks in blood, Soon as they see the furious chief appear, Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear.
Thoas with grief observed his dreadful course, Thoas, the bravest of the Ætolian force; Skill’d to direct the javelin’s distant flight, And bold to combat in the standing fight, Not more in councils famed for solid sense, Than winning words and heavenly eloquence.
We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax kill’d: What god restores him to the frighted field; And not content that half of Greece lie slain, Pours new destruction on her sons again?
He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful will; Lo! still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!
Yet hear my counsel, and his worst withstand: The Greeks’ main body to the fleet command; But let the few whom brisker spirits warm, Stand the first onset, and provoke the storm.
Thus point your arms; and when such foes appear, Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to fear.” The warrior spoke; the listening Greeks obey, Thickening their ranks, and form a deep array.
Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion gave command, The valiant leader of the Cretan band; And Mars-like Meges: these the chiefs excite, Approach the foe, and meet the coming fight.
Behind, unnumber’d multitudes attend, To flank the navy, and the shores defend.
Full on the front the pressing Trojans bear, And Hector first came towering to the war.
Phœbus himself the rushing battle led; A veil of clouds involved his radiant head: High held before him, Jove’s enormous shield Portentous shone, and shaded all the field; Vulcan to Jove the immortal gift consign’d, To scatter hosts and terrify mankind, The Greeks expect the shock, the clamours rise From different parts, and mingle in the skies.
Dire was the hiss of darts, by heroes flung, And arrows leaping from the bow-string sung; These drink the life of generous warriors slain: Those guiltless fall, and thirst for blood in vain.
As long as Phœbus bore unmoved the shield, Sat doubtful conquest hovering o’er the field; But when aloft he shakes it in the skies, Shouts in their ears, and lightens in their eyes, Deep horror seizes every Grecian breast, Their force is humbled, and their fear confess’d.
So flies a herd of oxen, scatter’d wide, No swain to guard them, and no day to guide, When two fell lions from the mountain come, And spread the carnage through the shady gloom.
Impending Phœbus pours around them fear, And Troy and Hector thunder in the rear.
Heaps fall on heaps: the slaughter Hector leads, First great Arcesilas, then Stichius bleeds; One to the bold Bœotians ever dear, And one Menestheus’ friend and famed compeer.
Medon and Iasus, Æneas sped; This sprang from Phelus, and the Athenians led; But hapless Medon from Oïleus came; Him Ajax honour’d with a brother’s name, Though born of lawless love: from home expell’d, A banish’d man, in Phylacè he dwell’d, Press’d by the vengeance of an angry wife; Troy ends at last his labours and his life.
Mecystes next Polydamas o’erthrew; And thee, brave Clonius, great Agenor slew.
By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies, Pierced through the shoulder as he basely flies.
The Greeks dismay’d, confused, disperse or fall, Some seek the trench, some skulk behind the wall.
While these fly trembling, others pant for breath, And o’er the slaughter stalks gigantic death.
On rush’d bold Hector, gloomy as the night; Forbids to plunder, animates the fight, Points to the fleet: “For, by the gods! who flies,[240] Who dares but linger, by this hand he dies; No weeping sister his cold eye shall close, No friendly hand his funeral pyre compose.
Who stops to plunder at this signal hour, The birds shall tear him, and the dogs devour.” Furious he said; the smarting scourge resounds; The coursers fly; the smoking chariot bounds; The hosts rush on; loud clamours shake the shore; The horses thunder, earth and ocean roar!
Apollo, planted at the trench’s bound, Push’d at the bank: down sank the enormous mound: Roll’d in the ditch the heapy ruin lay; A sudden road! a long and ample way.
O’er the dread fosse (a late impervious space) Now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass.
The wondering crowds the downward level trod; Before them flamed the shield, and march’d the god.
Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall; And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall: Easy as when ashore an infant stands, And draws imagined houses in the sands; The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play, Sweeps the slight works and fashion’d domes away: Thus vanish’d at thy touch, the towers and walls; The toil of thousands in a moment falls.
The Grecians gaze around with wild despair, Confused, and weary all the powers with prayer: Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands; And urge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands.
Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies, And weeps his country with a father’s eyes.
“O Jove! if ever, on his native shore, One Greek enrich’d thy shrine with offer’d gore; If e’er, in hope our country to behold, We paid the fattest firstlings of the fold; If e’er thou sign’st our wishes with thy nod: Perform the promise of a gracious god!
This day preserve our navies from the flame, And save the relics of the Grecian name.” Thus prayed the sage: the eternal gave consent, And peals of thunder shook the firmament.
Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting sign, And catch’d new fury at the voice divine.
As, when black tempests mix the seas and skies, The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise, Above the sides of some tall ship ascend, Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they rend: Thus loudly roaring, and o’erpowering all, Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian wall; Legions on legions from each side arise: Thick sound the keels; the storm of arrows flies.
While thus the thunder of the battle raged, And labouring armies round the works engaged, Still in the tent Patroclus sat to tend The good Eurypylus, his wounded friend.
He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind, And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.
But when he saw, ascending up the fleet, Victorious Troy; then, starting from his seat, With bitter groans his sorrows he express’d, He wrings his hands, he beats his manly breast.
Charged with Achilles’ high command I go, A mournful witness of this scene of woe; I haste to urge him by his country’s care To rise in arms, and shine again in war.
Perhaps some favouring god his soul may bend; The voice is powerful of a faithful friend.” He spoke; and, speaking, swifter than the wind Sprung from the tent, and left the war behind.
The embodied Greeks the fierce attack sustain, But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain: Nor could the Trojans, through that firm array, Force to the fleet and tents the impervious way.
As when a shipwright, with Palladian art, Smooths the rough wood, and levels every part; With equal hand he guides his whole design, By the just rule, and the directing line: The martial leaders, with like skill and care, Preserved their line, and equal kept the war.
Brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were tried, And every ship sustained an equal tide.
At one proud bark, high-towering o’er the fleet, Ajax the great, and godlike Hector meet; For one bright prize the matchless chiefs contend, Nor this the ships can fire, nor that defend: One kept the shore, and one the vessel trod; That fix’d as fate, this acted by a god.
The son of Clytius in his daring hand, The deck approaching, shakes a flaming brand; But, pierced by Telamon’s huge lance, expires: Thundering he falls, and drops the extinguish’d fires.
Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space: Lo! where the son of royal Clytius lies; Ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!” This said, his eager javelin sought the foe: But Ajax shunn’d the meditated blow.
Not vainly yet the forceful lance was thrown; It stretch’d in dust unhappy Lycophron: An exile long, sustain’d at Ajax’ board, A faithful servant to a foreign lord; In peace, and war, for ever at his side, Near his loved master, as he lived, he died.
From the high poop he tumbles on the sand, And lies a lifeless load along the land.
With anguish Ajax views the piercing sight, And thus inflames his brother to the fight: “Teucer, behold! extended on the shore Our friend, our loved companion! now no more!
This death deplored, to Hector’s rage we owe; Revenge, revenge it on the cruel foe.
And where the bow which Phœbus taught to bend?” Impatient Teucer, hastening to his aid, Before the chief his ample bow display’d; The well-stored quiver on his shoulders hung: Then hiss’d his arrow, and the bowstring sung.
Clytus, Pisenor’s son, renown’d in fame, (To thee, Polydamas! an honour’d name) Drove through the thickest of the embattled plains The startling steeds, and shook his eager reins.
As all on glory ran his ardent mind, The pointed death arrests him from behind: Through his fair neck the thrilling arrow flies; In youth’s first bloom reluctantly he dies.
Hurl’d from the lofty seat, at distance far, The headlong coursers spurn his empty car; Till sad Polydamas the steeds restrain’d, And gave, Astynous, to thy careful hand; Then, fired to vengeance, rush’d amidst the foe: Rage edged his sword, and strengthen’d every blow.
Once more bold Teucer, in his country’s cause, At Hector’s breast a chosen arrow draws: And had the weapon found the destined way, Thy fall, great Trojan! had renown’d that day.
But Hector was not doom’d to perish then: The all-wise disposer of the fates of men (Imperial Jove) his present death withstands; Nor was such glory due to Teucer’s hands.
At its full stretch as the tough string he drew, Struck by an arm unseen, it burst in two; Down dropp’d the bow: the shaft with brazen head Fell innocent, and on the dust lay dead.
This Hector saw, and thus express’d his joy: “Ye troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!
Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame, And spread your glory with the navy’s flame.
Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but now, From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow: Indulgent Jove! how plain thy favours shine, When happy nations bear the marks divine!
How easy then, to see the sinking state Of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
Such is the fate of Greece, and such is ours: Behold, ye warriors, and exert your powers.
Mark how the flames approach, how near they fall, How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call!
Then mutual slaughters spread on either side; By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died; There, pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas, Chief of the foot, of old Antenor’s race.
Polydamas laid Otus on the sand, The fierce commander of the Epeian band.
His lance bold Meges at the victor threw; The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew; (That valued life, O Phœbus! was thy care) But Croesmus’ bosom took the flying spear: His corpse fell bleeding on the slippery shore; His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore.
Meantime their fight the Spartan king survey’d, And stood by Meges’ side a sudden aid.
Through Dolops’ shoulder urged his forceful dart, Which held its passage through the panting heart, And issued at his breast.
With thundering sound The warrior falls, extended on the ground.
In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain: But Hector’s voice excites his kindred train; The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung, Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.
He (ere to Troy the Grecians cross’d the main) Fed his large oxen on Percotè’s plain; But when oppress’d, his country claim’d his care, Return’d to Ilion, and excell’d in war; For this, in Priam’s court, he held his place, Beloved no less than Priam’s royal race.
Him Hector singled, as his troops he led, And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead.
“Lo, Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies; And is it thus our royal kinsman dies?
The fiery Spartan first, with loud applause.
Lift the bold lance, and make some Trojan bleed.” He said; and backward to the lines retired; Forth rush’d the youth with martial fury fired, Beyond the foremost ranks; his lance he threw, And round the black battalions cast his view.
Advancing Melanippus met the dart With his bold breast, and felt it in his heart: Thundering he falls; his falling arms resound, And his broad buckler rings against the ground.
The victor leaps upon his prostrate prize: Thus on a roe the well-breath’d beagle flies, And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the dart The distant hunter sent into his heart.
Observing Hector to the rescue flew; Bold as he was, Antilochus withdrew.
Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove, Fierce to fulfil the stern decrees of Jove: The sire of gods, confirming Thetis’ prayer, The Grecian ardour quench’d in deep despair; But lifts to glory Troy’s prevailing bands, Swells all their hearts, and strengthens all their hands.
These fates revolved in his almighty mind, He raises Hector to the work design’d, Bids him with more than mortal fury glow, And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.
So Mars, when human crimes for vengeance call, Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies fall.
Not with more rage a conflagration rolls, Wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles.
He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy brow Like fiery meteors his red eye-balls glow: The radiant helmet on his temple burns, Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns: For Jove his splendour round the chief had thrown, And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one.
Now all on fire for fame, his breast, his eyes Burn at each foe, and single every prize; Still at the closest ranks, the thickest fight, He points his ardour, and exerts his might.
The Grecian phalanx, moveless as a tower, On all sides batter’d, yet resists his power: So some tall rock o’erhangs the hoary main,[241] By winds assail’d, by billows beat in vain, Unmoved it hears, above, the tempest blow, And sees the watery mountains break below.
Girt in surrounding flames, he seems to fall Like fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all: Bursts as a wave that from the cloud impends, And, swell’d with tempests, on the ship descends; White are the decks with foam; the winds aloud Howl o’er the masts, and sing through every shroud: Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears; And instant death on every wave appears.
So pale the Greeks the eyes of Hector meet, The chief so thunders, and so shakes the fleet.
As when a lion, rushing from his den, Amidst the plain of some wide-water’d fen, (Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed, At large expatiate o’er the ranker mead) Leaps on the herds before the herdsman’s eyes; The trembling herdsman far to distance flies; Some lordly bull (the rest dispersed and fled) He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.
On the fallen chief the invading Trojan press’d, And plunged the pointed javelin in his breast.
His circling friends, who strove to guard too late The unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate.
Chased from the foremost line, the Grecian train Now man the next, receding toward the main: Wedged in one body at the tents they stand, Wall’d round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band.
Now manly shame forbids the inglorious flight; Now fear itself confines them to the fight: Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most (The sage preserver of the Grecian host) Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores; And by their parents, by themselves implores.
“Oh friends! be men: your generous breasts inflame With mutual honour, and with mutual shame!
So when a horseman from the watery mead (Skill’d in the manage of the bounding steed) Drives four fair coursers, practised to obey, To some great city through the public way; Safe in his art, as side by side they run, He shifts his seat, and vaults from one to one; And now to this, and now to that he flies; Admiring numbers follow with their eyes.
As furious, Hector thunder’d threats aloud, And rush’d enraged before the Trojan crowd; Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky prores Lay rank’d contiguous on the bending shores; So the strong eagle from his airy height, Who marks the swans’ or cranes’ embodied flight, Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food, And, stooping, darkens with his wings the flood.
Jove leads him on with his almighty hand, And breathes fierce spirits in his following band.
The warring nations meet, the battle roars, Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.
No room to poise the lance or bend the bow; But hand to hand, and man to man, they grow: Wounded, they wound; and seek each other’s hearts With falchions, axes, swords, and shorten’d darts.
The falchions ring, shields rattle, axes sound, Swords flash in air, or glitter on the ground; With streaming blood the slippery shores are dyed, And slaughter’d heroes swell the dreadful tide.
This happy day with acclamations greet, Bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet.
The coward-counsels of a timorous throng Of reverend dotards check’d our glory long: Too long Jove lull’d us with lethargic charms, But now in peals of thunder calls to arms: In this great day he crowns our full desires, Wakes all our force, and seconds all our fires.” He spoke—the warriors at his fierce command Pour a new deluge on the Grecian band.
Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javelins fly,) Stepp’d back, and doubted or to live or die.
Yet, where the oars are placed, he stands to wait What chief approaching dares attempt his fate: Even to the last his naval charge defends, Now shakes his spear, now lifts, and now protends; Even yet, the Greeks with piercing shouts inspires, Amidst attacks, and deaths, and darts, and fires.
O heroes! names for ever dear, Once sons of Mars, and thunderbolts of war!
Ah! yet be mindful of your old renown, Your great forefathers’ virtues and your own.
What bulwarks rising between you and fate?
No aids, no bulwarks your retreat attend, No friends to help, no city to defend.
ARGUMENT THE SIXTH BATTLE, THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS Patroclus (in pursuance of the request of Nestor in the eleventh book) entreats Achilles to suffer him to go to the assistance of the Greeks with Achilles’ troops and armour.
He agrees to it, but at the same time charges him to content himself with rescuing the fleet, without further pursuit of the enemy.
The armour, horses, soldiers, and officers are described.
Achilles offers a libation for the success of his friend, after which Patroclus leads the Myrmidons to battle.
The Trojans, at the sight of Patroclus in Achilles’ armour, taking him for that hero, are cast into the uttermost consternation; he beats them off from the vessels, Hector himself flies, Sarpedon is killed, though Jupiter was averse to his fate.
Several other particulars of the battle are described; in the heat of which, Patroclus, neglecting the orders of Achilles, pursues the foe to the walls of Troy, where Apollo repulses and disarms him, Euphorbus wounds him, and Hector kills him, which concludes the book.
So warr’d both armies on the ensanguined shore, While the black vessels smoked with human gore.
Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies; The streaming tears fall copious from his eyes.
Not faster, trickling to the plains below, From the tall rock the sable waters flow.
Divine Pelides, with compassion moved.
Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:[243] “Patroclus, say, what grief thy bosom bears, That flows so fast in these unmanly tears?
No girl, no infant whom the mother keeps From her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps; Not more the mother’s soul, that infant warms, Clung to her knees, and reaching at her arms, Than thou hast mine!
Our fathers live (our first, most tender care), Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital air, And hoary Peleus yet extends his days; Pleased in their age to hear their children’s praise.
Whate’er the cause, reveal thy secret care, And speak those sorrows which a friend would share.” A sigh that instant from his bosom broke, Another follow’d, and Patroclus spoke: “Let Greece at length with pity touch thy breast, Thyself a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!
Lo! every chief that might her fate prevent, Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent: Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreus’ son, And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan, More for their country’s wounds than for their own.
Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease, Thy breast alone no lenitives appease.
May never rage like thine my soul enslave, O great in vain! unprofitably brave!
Thy country slighted in her last distress, What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress?
No—men unborn, and ages yet behind, Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind.
“O man unpitying! if of man thy race; But sure thou spring’st not from a soft embrace, Nor ever amorous hero caused thy birth, Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth: Some rugged rock’s hard entrails gave thee form, And raging seas produced thee in a storm, A soul well suiting that tempestuous kind, So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind.
“If some dire oracle thy breast alarm, If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm, Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine, If I but lead the Myrmidonian line: Clad in thy dreadful arms if I appear, Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the war; Without thy person Greece shall win the day, And thy mere image chase her foes away.
Press’d by fresh forces, her o’erlabour’d train Shall quit the ships, and Greece respire again.” Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath, Thou begg’st his arms, and in his arms thy death.
Unfortunately good! a boding sigh Thy friend return’d; and with it, this reply: “Patroclus! thy Achilles knows no fears; Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears; Nor aught a mother’s caution can suggest; The tyrant’s pride lies rooted in my breast.
My wrongs, my wrongs, my constant thought engage, Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage: I made him tyrant: gave him power to wrong Even me: I felt it; and shall feel it long.
The maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away, Due to the toils of many a well-fought day; Due to my conquest of her father’s reign; Due to the votes of all the Grecian train.
From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave, Disgraced, dishonour’d, like the meanest slave.
Go then, Patroclus! court fair honour’s charms In Troy’s famed fields, and in Achilles’ arms: Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight, Go save the fleets, and conquer in my right.
See the thin relics of their baffled band At the last edge of yon deserted land!
Behold all Ilion on their ships descends; How the cloud blackens, how the storm impends!
It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed, Troy saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed: Had not the injurious king our friendship lost, Yon ample trench had buried half her host.
No camps, no bulwarks now the Trojans fear, Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there; No longer flames the lance of Tydeus’ son; No more your general calls his heroes on: Hector, alone, I hear; his dreadful breath Commands your slaughter, or proclaims your death.
Yet now, Patroclus, issue to the plain: Now save the ships, the rising fires restrain, And give the Greeks to visit Greece again.
But heed my words, and mark a friend’s command, Who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand, And from thy deeds expects the Achaian host Shall render back the beauteous maid he lost: Rage uncontroll’d through all the hostile crew, But touch not Hector, Hector is my due.
The fleet once saved, desist from further chase, Nor lead to Ilion’s walls the Grecian race; Some adverse god thy rashness may destroy; Some god, like Phœbus, ever kind to Troy.
Let Greece, redeem’d from this destructive strait, Do her own work; and leave the rest to fate.
O! would to all the immortal powers above, Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!
That not one Trojan might be left alive, And not a Greek of all the race survive: Might only we the vast destruction shun, And only we destroy the accursed town!” Such conference held the chiefs; while on the strand Great Jove with conquest crown’d the Trojan band.
Ajax no more the sounding storm sustain’d, So thick the darts an iron tempest rain’d: On his tired arm the weighty buckler hung; His hollow helm with falling javelins rung; His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes; And painful sweat from all his members flows.
Spent and o’erpower’d, he barely breathes at most; Yet scarce an army stirs him from his post; Dangers on dangers all around him glow, And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe.
Stern Hector waved his sword, and standing near, Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear, Full on the lance a stroke so justly sped, That the broad falchion lopp’d its brazen head; His pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain; The brazen head falls sounding on the plain.
Great Ajax saw, and own’d the hand divine; Confessing Jove, and trembling at the sign, Warn’d he retreats.
Divine Achilles view’d the rising flames, And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims: “Arm, arm, Patroclus!
Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame; Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name; I haste to bring the troops.”—The hero said; The friend with ardour and with joy obey’d.
Whom the wing’d harpy, swift Podarge, bore, By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy shore: Swift Pedasus was added to their side, (Once great Aëtion’s, now Achilles’ pride) Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace, A mortal courser match’d the immortal race.
Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms His hardy Myrmidons to blood and arms.
Like furious, rush’d the Myrmidonian crew, Such their dread strength, and such their deathful view.
High in the midst the great Achilles stands, Directs their order, and the war commands.
First march’d Menestheus, of celestial birth, Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth, Divine Sperchius!
Jove-descended flood!
Such was Menestheus, but miscall’d by fame The son of Borus, that espoused the dame.
Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay, Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day.
Her, sly Cellenius loved: on her would gaze, As with swift step she form’d the running maze: To her high chamber from Diana’s quire, The god pursued her, urged, and crown’d his fire.
The son confess’d his father’s heavenly race, And heir’d his mother’s swiftness in the chase.
Strong Echecleus, bless’d in all those charms That pleased a god, succeeded to her arms; Not conscious of those loves, long hid from fame, With gifts of price he sought and won the dame; Her secret offspring to her sire she bare; Her sire caress’d him with a parent’s care.
Pisander follow’d; matchless in his art To wing the spear, or aim the distant dart; No hand so sure of all the Emathian line, Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.
The fourth by Phœnix’ grave command was graced, Laerces’ valiant offspring led the last.
Soon as Achilles with superior care Had call’d the chiefs, and order’d all the war, This stern remembrance to his troops he gave: “Ye far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave!
Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng, Think what reproach these ears endured so long; ‘Stern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say, While restless, raging, in your ships you lay) Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to yield; Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field: If that dire fury must for ever burn, What make we here?
Return, ye chiefs, return!’ Such were your words—Now, warriors! grieve no more, Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore!
As when a circling wall the builder forms, Of strength defensive against wind and storms, Compacted stones the thickening work compose, And round him wide the rising structure grows: So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng, Shield urged on shield, and man drove man along; Thick, undistinguish’d plumes, together join’d, Float in one sea, and wave before the wind.
Far o’er the rest in glittering pomp appear, There bold Automedon, Patroclus here; Brothers in arms, with equal fury fired; Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired.
Then cleansed his hands; and fixing for a space His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the place Of sacrifice, the purple draught he pour’d Forth in the midst; and thus the god implored: “O thou supreme! high-throned all height above!
O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!
Who ’midst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill, Presid’st on bleak Dodona’s vocal hill: (Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround, Their feet unwash’d, their slumbers on the ground; Who hear, from rustling oaks, thy dark decrees; And catch the fates, low-whispered in the breeze;) Hear, as of old!
Lo, to the dangers of the fighting field The best, the dearest of my friends, I yield, Though still determined, to my ships confined; Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind.
Oh! be his guard thy providential care, Confirm his heart, and string his arm to war: Press’d by his single force let Hector see His fame in arms not owing all to me.
But when the fleets are saved from foes and fire, Let him with conquest and renown retire; Preserve his arms, preserve his social train, And safe return him to these eyes again!” Great Jove consents to half the chief’s request, But heaven’s eternal doom denies the rest; To free the fleet was granted to his prayer; His safe return, the winds dispersed in air.
Back to his tent the stern Achilles flies, And waits the combat with impatient eyes.
Meanwhile the troops beneath Patroclus’ care, Invade the Trojans, and commence the war.
As wasps, provoked by children in their play, Pour from their mansions by the broad highway, In swarms the guiltless traveller engage, Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage: All rise in arms, and, with a general cry, Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny.
Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms, So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms: Their rising rage Patroclus’ breath inspires, Who thus inflames them with heroic fires: “O warriors, partners of Achilles’ praise!
Be mindful of your deeds in ancient days; Your godlike master let your acts proclaim, And add new glories to his mighty name.
Think your Achilles sees you fight: be brave, And humble the proud monarch whom you save.” Joyful they heard, and kindling as he spoke, Flew to the fleet, involved in fire and smoke.
From shore to shore the doubling shouts resound, The hollow ships return a deeper sound.
The war stood still, and all around them gazed, When great Achilles’ shining armour blazed: Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh, At once they see, they tremble, and they fly.
Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus! flew, Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.
Close to the stern of that famed ship which bore Unbless’d Protesilaus to Ilion’s shore, The great Pæonian, bold Pyrechmes stood; (Who led his bands from Axius’ winding flood;) His shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound; The groaning warrior pants upon the ground.
Patroclus’ arm forbids the spreading fires, And from the half-burn’d ship proud Troy retires; Clear’d from the smoke the joyful navy lies; In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies; Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends, And loud acclaim the starry region rends.
So when thick clouds enwrap the mountain’s head, O’er heaven’s expanse like one black ceiling spread; Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray, Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day: The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise, And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes; The smiling scene wide opens to the sight, And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.
But Troy repulsed, and scatter’d o’er the plains, Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.
Now every Greek some hostile hero slew, But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew: As Areilycus had turn’d him round, Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound; The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown, The thigh transfix’d, and broke the brittle bone: Headlong he fell.
Next, Thoas was thy chance; Thy breast, unarm’d, received the Spartan lance.
Phylides’ dart (as Amphidus drew nigh) His blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh, Tore all the brawn, and rent the nerves away; In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay.
Slain by two brothers, thus two brothers bleed, Sarpedon’s friends, Amisodarus’ seed; Amisodarus, who, by Furies led, The bane of men, abhorr’d Chimaera bred; Skill’d in the dart in vain, his sons expire, And pay the forfeit of their guilty sire.
Stopp’d in the tumult Cleobulus lies, Beneath Oïleus’ arm, a living prize; A living prize not long the Trojan stood; The thirsty falchion drank his reeking blood: Plunged in his throat the smoking weapon lies; Black death, and fate unpitying, seal his eyes.
Amid the ranks, with mutual thirst of fame, Lycon the brave, and fierce Peneleus came; In vain their javelins at each other flew, Now, met in arms, their eager swords they drew.
On the plumed crest of his Bœotian foe The daring Lycon aim’d a noble blow; The sword broke short; but his, Peneleus sped Full on the juncture of the neck and head: The head, divided by a stroke so just, Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust.
O’ertaken Neamas by Merion bleeds, Pierced through the shoulder as he mounts his steeds; Back from the car he tumbles to the ground: His swimming eyes eternal shades surround.
Next Erymas was doom’d his fate to feel, His open’d mouth received the Cretan steel: Beneath the brain the point a passage tore, Crash’d the thin bones, and drown’d the teeth in gore: His mouth, his eyes, his nostrils, pour a flood; He sobs his soul out in the gush of blood.
As when the flocks neglected by the swain, Or kids, or lambs, lie scatter’d o’er the plain, A troop of wolves the unguarded charge survey, And rend the trembling, unresisting prey: Thus on the foe the Greeks impetuous came; Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame.
The Trojan chief, experienced in the field, O’er his broad shoulders spread the massy shield, Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour, And on his buckler caught the ringing shower: He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise, Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved allies.
As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms, And rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms, Dark o’er the fields the ascending vapour flies, And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies: So from the ships, along the dusky plain, Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train.
Even Hector fled; through heads of disarray The fiery coursers forced their lord away: While far behind his Trojans fall confused; Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage bruised: Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokes Shock; while the madding steeds break short their yokes.
In vain they labour up the steepy mound; Their charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies; Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies; Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight; Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatch’d from sight.
The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down, Scour o’er the fields, and stretch to reach the town.
Loud o’er the rout was heard the victor’s cry, Where the war bleeds, and where the thickest die, Where horse and arms, and chariots lie o’erthrown, And bleeding heroes under axles groan.
No stop, no check, the steeds of Peleus knew: From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew.
High-bounding o’er the fosse, the whirling car Smokes through the ranks, o’ertakes the flying war, And thunders after Hector; Hector flies, Patroclus shakes his lance; but fate denies.
And now the chief (the foremost troops repell’d) Back to the ships his destined progress held, Bore down half Troy in his resistless way, And forced the routed ranks to stand the day.
Between the space where silver Simois flows, Where lay the fleets, and where the rampires rose, All grim in dust and blood Patroclus stands, And turns the slaughter on the conquering bands.
Thestor was next, who saw the chief appear, And fell the victim of his coward fear; Shrunk up he sat, with wild and haggard eye, Nor stood to combat, nor had force to fly; Patroclus mark’d him as he shunn’d the war, And with unmanly tremblings shook the car, And dropp’d the flowing reins.
As on a rock that overhangs the main, An angler, studious of the line and cane, Some mighty fish draws panting to the shore: Not with less ease the barbed javelin bore The gaping dastard; as the spear was shook, He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook.
Next on Eryalus he flies; a stone, Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown: Full on his crown the ponderous fragment flew, And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two: Prone to the ground the breathless warrior fell, And death involved him with the shades of hell.
Then low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie; Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die; Amphoterus and Erymas succeed; And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.
Where’er he moves, the growing slaughters spread In heaps on heaps a monument of dead.
When now Sarpedon his brave friends beheld Grovelling in dust, and gasping on the field, With this reproach his flying host he warms: “Oh stain to honour! oh disgrace to arms!
Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain; This hand unaided shall the war sustain: The task be mine this hero’s strength to try, Who mows whole troops, and makes an army fly.” He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car: Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the war.
As when two vultures on the mountain’s height Stoop with resounding pinions to the fight; They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming cry; The desert echoes, and the rocks reply: The warriors thus opposed in arms, engage With equal clamours, and with equal rage.
Jove view’d the combat: whose event foreseen, He thus bespoke his sister and his queen: “The hour draws on; the destinies ordain,[245] My godlike son shall press the Phrygian plain: Already on the verge of death he stands, His life is owed to fierce Patroclus’ hands, What passions in a parent’s breast debate!
Say, shall I snatch him from impending fate, And send him safe to Lycia, distant far From all the dangers and the toils of war; Or to his doom my bravest offspring yield, And fatten, with celestial blood, the field?” Then thus the goddess with the radiant eyes: “What words are these, O sovereign of the skies!
Short is the date prescribed to mortal man; Shall Jove for one extend the narrow span, Whose bounds were fix’d before his race began?
How many sons of gods, foredoom’d to death, Before proud Ilion must resign their breath!
Were thine exempt, debate would rise above, And murmuring powers condemn their partial Jove.
Give the bold chief a glorious fate in fight; And when the ascending soul has wing’d her flight, Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy command, The breathless body to his native land.
His friends and people, to his future praise, A marble tomb and pyramid shall raise, And lasting honours to his ashes give; His fame (’tis all the dead can have) shall live.” She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome, Assents to fate, and ratifies the doom.
Then touch’d with grief, the weeping heavens distill’d A shower of blood o’er all the fatal field: The god, his eyes averting from the plain, Laments his son, predestined to be slain, Far from the Lycian shores, his happy native reign.
Now met in arms, the combatants appear; Each heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear; From strong Patroclus’ hand the javelin fled, And pass’d the groin of valiant Thrasymed; The nerves unbraced no more his bulk sustain, He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain.
Two sounding darts the Lycian leader threw: The first aloof with erring fury flew, The next transpierced Achilles’ mortal steed, The generous Pedasus of Theban breed: Fix’d in the shoulder’s joint, he reel’d around, Roll’d in the bloody dust, and paw’d the slippery ground.
His sudden fall the entangled harness broke; Each axle crackled, and the chariot shook: When bold Automedon, to disengage The starting coursers, and restrain their rage, Divides the traces with his sword, and freed The encumbered chariot from the dying steed: The rest move on, obedient to the rein: The car rolls slowly o’er the dusty plain.
The towering chiefs to fiercer fight advance: And first Sarpedon whirl’d his weighty lance, Which o’er the warrior’s shoulder took its course, And spent in empty air its dying force.
Not so Patroclus’ never-erring dart; Aim’d at his breast it pierced a mortal part, Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart.
Then as the mountain oak, or poplar tall, Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral) Nods to the axe, till with a groaning sound It sinks, and spreads its honours on the ground, Thus fell the king; and laid on earth supine, Before his chariot stretch’d his form divine: He grasp’d the dust distain’d with streaming gore, And, pale in death, lay groaning on the shore.
So lies a bull beneath the lion’s paws, While the grim savage grinds with foamy jaws The trembling limbs, and sucks the smoking blood; Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the wood.
Then to the leader of the Lycian band The dying chief address’d his last command; “Glaucus, be bold; thy task be first to dare The glorious dangers of destructive war, To lead my troops, to combat at their head, Incite the living, and supply the dead.
Tell them, I charged them with my latest breath Not unrevenged to bear Sarpedon’s death.
Then as a friend, and as a warrior fight; Defend my body, conquer in my right: That, taught by great examples, all may try Like thee to vanquish, or like me to die.” He ceased; the Fates suppress’d his labouring breath, And his eyes darken’d with the shades of death.
The insulting victor with disdain bestrode The prostrate prince, and on his bosom trod; Then drew the weapon from his panting heart, The reeking fibres clinging to the dart; From the wide wound gush’d out a stream of blood, And the soul issued in the purple flood.
His flying steeds the Myrmidons detain, Unguided now, their mighty master slain.
Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain, That thrills my arm, and shoots through every vein, I stand unable to sustain the spear, And sigh, at distance from the glorious war.
Renew’d by art divine, the hero stands, And owns the assistance of immortal hands.
First to the fight his native troops he warms, Then loudly calls on Troy’s vindictive arms; With ample strides he stalks from place to place; Now fires Agenor, now Polydamas: Æneas next, and Hector he accosts; Inflaming thus the rage of all their hosts.
“What thoughts, regardless chief! thy breast employ?
Oh too forgetful of the friends of Troy!
Those generous friends, who, from their country far, Breathe their brave souls out in another’s war.
See! where in dust the great Sarpedon lies, In action valiant, and in council wise, Who guarded right, and kept his people free; To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee!
Stretch’d by Patroclus’ arm on yonder plains, O save from hostile rage his loved remains!
Ah let not Greece his conquer’d trophies boast, Nor on his corse revenge her heroes lost!” He spoke: each leader in his grief partook: Troy, at the loss, through all her legions shook.
Transfix’d with deep regret, they view o’erthrown At once his country’s pillar, and their own; A chief, who led to Troy’s beleaguer’d wall A host of heroes, and outshined them all.
Fired, they rush on; first Hector seeks the foes, And with superior vengeance greatly glows.
But o’er the dead the fierce Patroclus stands, And rousing Ajax, roused the listening bands: “Heroes, be men; be what you were before; Or weigh the great occasion, and be more.
The chief who taught our lofty walls to yield, Lies pale in death, extended on the field.
To guard his body Troy in numbers flies; ’Tis half the glory to maintain our prize.
Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread, And send the living Lycians to the dead.” The heroes kindle at his fierce command; The martial squadrons close on either hand: Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms, Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.
Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight, O’er the fierce armies pours pernicious night, And round his son confounds the warring hosts, His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts.
Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls; Agacleus’ son, from Budium’s lofty walls; Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame; Now sent to Troy, Achilles’ arms to aid, He pays due vengeance to his kinsman’s shade.
Soon as his luckless hand had touch’d the dead, A rock’s large fragment thunder’d on his head; Hurl’d by Hectorean force it cleft in twain His shatter’d helm, and stretch’d him o’er the slain.
Fierce to the van of fight Patroclus came, And, like an eagle darting at his game, Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian band.
What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand, O generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown, At Sthenelaus flew the weighty stone, Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near That arm, drew back; and Hector learn’d to fear.
Far as an able hand a lance can throw, Or at the lists, or at the fighting foe; So far the Trojans from their lines retired; Till Glaucus, turning, all the rest inspired.
Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage, The only hope of Chalcon’s trembling age; Wide o’er the land was stretch’d his large domain, With stately seats, and riches blest in vain: Him, bold with youth, and eager to pursue The flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew; Pierced through the bosom with a sudden wound, He fell, and falling made the fields resound.
The Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain; With conquering shouts the Trojans shake the plain, And crowd to spoil the dead: the Greeks oppose; An iron circle round the carcase grows.
Then brave Laogonus resign’d his breath, Despatch’d by Merion to the shades of death: On Ida’s holy hill he made abode, The priest of Jove, and honour’d like his god.
Between the jaw and ear the javelin went; The soul, exhaling, issued at the vent.
His spear Æneas at the victor threw, Who stooping forward from the death withdrew; The lance hiss’d harmless o’er his covering shield, And trembling struck, and rooted in the field; There yet scarce spent, it quivers on the plain, Sent by the great Æneas’ arm in vain.
“Swift as thou art (the raging hero cries) And skill’d in dancing to dispute the prize, My spear, the destined passage had it found, Had fix’d thy active vigour to the ground.” “O valiant leader of the Dardan host! (Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast) Strong as you are, ’tis mortal force you trust, An arm as strong may stretch thee in the dust.
And if to this my lance thy fate be given, Vain are thy vaunts; success is still from heaven: This, instant, sends thee down to Pluto’s coast; Mine is the glory, his thy parting ghost.” “O friend (Menoetius’ son this answer gave) With words to combat, ill befits the brave; Not empty boasts the sons of Troy repel, Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell.
To speak, beseems the council; but to dare In glorious action, is the task of war.” This said, Patroclus to the battle flies; Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise: Shields, helmets rattle, as the warriors close; And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows.
As through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground, The labours of the woodman’s axe resound; Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide, While crackling forests fall on every side: Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms, So fell the warriors, and so rung their arms.
Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore, His heavenly form defaced with dust and gore, And stuck with darts by warring heroes shed, Lies undistinguish’d from the vulgar dead.
His long-disputed corse the chiefs enclose, On every side the busy combat grows; Thick as beneath some shepherd’s thatch’d abode (The pails high foaming with a milky flood) The buzzing flies, a persevering train, Incessant swarm, and chased return again.
Jove view’d the combat with a stern survey, And eyes that flash’d intolerable day.
Fix’d on the field his sight, his breast debates The vengeance due, and meditates the fates: Whether to urge their prompt effect, and call The force of Hector to Patroclus’ fall, This instant see his short-lived trophies won, And stretch him breathless on his slaughter’d son; Or yet, with many a soul’s untimely flight, Augment the fame and horror of the fight.
To crown Achilles’ valiant friend with praise At length he dooms; and, that his last of days Shall set in glory, bids him drive the foe; Nor unattended see the shades below.
Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled, And left their monarch with the common dead: Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful wall Of carnage rises, as the heroes fall. (So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtain The prize contested, and despoil the slain.
The radiant arms are by Patroclus borne; Patroclus’ ships the glorious spoils adorn.
Then thus to Phœbus, in the realms above, Spoke from his throne the cloud-compelling Jove: “Descend, my Phœbus! on the Phrygian plain, And from the fight convey Sarpedon slain; Then bathe his body in the crystal flood, With dust dishonour’d, and deform’d with blood; O’er all his limbs ambrosial odours shed, And with celestial robes adorn the dead.
Those rites discharged, his sacred corse bequeath To the soft arms of silent Sleep and Death.
Then Sleep and Death, two twins of winged race, Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace, Received Sarpedon, at the god’s command, And in a moment reach’d the Lycian land; The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid, Where endless honours wait the sacred shade.
Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains, With foaming coursers, and with loosen’d reins.
Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew, Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew: Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain, Vain was thy friend’s command, thy courage vain.
For he, the god, whose counsels uncontroll’d Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold; The god who gives, resumes, and orders all, He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.
Who first, brave hero! by that arm was slain, Who last beneath thy vengeance press’d the plain; When heaven itself thy fatal fury led, And call’d to fill the number of the dead?
Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds; Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds, Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground; The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crown’d: Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night; The rest, dispersing, trust their fates to flight.
Now Troy had stoop’d beneath his matchless power, But flaming Phœbus kept the sacred tower.
Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;[246] His blazing ægis thrice Apollo shook; He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the cloud, A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.
“Patroclus! cease; this heaven-defended wall Defies thy lance; not fated yet to fall; Thy friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand, Troy shall not stoop even to Achilles’ hand.” So spoke the god who darts celestial fires; The Greek obeys him, and with awe retires.
While Hector, checking at the Scæan gates His panting coursers, in his breast debates, Or in the field his forces to employ, Or draw the troops within the walls of Troy.
“What a shameful sight!
God! is it Hector that forbears the fight?
Were thine my vigour this successful spear Should soon convince thee of so false a fear.
Turn thee, ah turn thee to the field of fame, And in Patroclus’ blood efface thy shame.
Perhaps Apollo shall thy arms succeed, And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed.” So spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight, And plunged amidst the tumult of the fight.
He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car; The lash resounds, the coursers rush to war.
The god the Grecians’ sinking souls depress’d, And pour’d swift spirits through each Trojan breast.
Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight; A spear his left, a stone employs his right: With all his nerves he drives it at the foe.
Pointed above, and rough and gross below: The falling ruin crush’d Cebrion’s head, The lawless offspring of king Priam’s bed; His front, brows, eyes, one undistinguish’d wound: The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground.
The charioteer, while yet he held the rein, Struck from the car, falls headlong on the plain.
To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides, While the proud victor thus his fall derides.
What skilful divers are our Phrygian foes!
Pity that all their practice is by land!” Then rushing sudden on his prostrate prize, To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies: Swift as a lion, terrible and bold, That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold; Pierced through the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain, And from his fatal courage finds his bane.
At once bold Hector leaping from his car, Defends the body, and provokes the war.
Thus for some slaughter’d hind, with equal rage, Two lordly rulers of the wood engage; Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades, And echoing roars rebellow through the shades.
Stern Hector fastens on the warrior’s head, And by the foot Patroclus drags the dead: While all around, confusion, rage, and fright, Mix the contending hosts in mortal fight.
So pent by hills, the wild winds roar aloud In the deep bosom of some gloomy wood; Leaves, arms, and trees, aloft in air are blown, The broad oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan; This way and that, the rattling thicket bends, And the whole forest in one crash descends.
Not with less noise, with less tumultuous rage, In dreadful shock the mingled hosts engage.
Darts shower’d on darts, now round the carcase ring; Now flights of arrows bounding from the string: Stones follow stones; some clatter on the fields, Some hard, and heavy, shake the sounding shields.
But where the rising whirlwind clouds the plains, Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief remains, And, stretch’d in death, forgets the guiding reins!
Now flaming from the zenith, Sol had driven His fervid orb through half the vault of heaven; While on each host with equal tempests fell The showering darts, and numbers sank to hell.
But when his evening wheels o’erhung the main, Glad conquest rested on the Grecian train.
Then rash Patroclus with new fury glows, And breathing slaughter, pours amid the foes.
There ends thy glory! there the Fates untwine The last, black remnant of so bright a line: Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way; Death calls, and heaven allows no longer day!
For lo! the god in dusky clouds enshrined, Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.
The weighty shock his neck and shoulders feel; His eyes flash sparkles, his stunn’d senses reel In giddy darkness; far to distance flung, His bounding helmet on the champaign rung.
Achilles’ plume is stain’d with dust and gore; That plume which never stoop’d to earth before; Long used, untouch’d, in fighting fields to shine, And shade the temples of the mad divine.
His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field: The corslet his astonish’d breast forsakes: Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes; Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands: Such is the force of more than mortal hands!
A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame, From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name; Famed for the manage of the foaming horse, Skill’d in the dart, and matchless in the course: Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car, While yet he learn’d his rudiments of war.
His venturous spear first drew the hero’s gore; He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.
Nor, though disarm’d, Patroclus’ fury stood: But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.
Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear, Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear, Retires for succour to his social train, And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.
Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views, Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues: The lance arrests him with a mortal wound; He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all Her yet-surviving heroes seem’d to fall.
So, scorch’d with heat, along the desert score, The roaming lion meets a bristly boar, Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood, With flaming eyes, and jaws besmear’d with blood; At length the sovereign savage wins the strife; And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life.
Patroclus thus, so many chiefs o’erthrown, So many lives effused, expires his own.
As dying now at Hector’s feet he lies, He sternly views him, and triumphant cries: “Lie there, Patroclus! and with thee, the joy Thy pride once promised, of subverting Troy; The fancied scenes of Ilion wrapt in flames, And thy soft pleasures served with captive dames.
I fought those towers to free, And guard that beauteous race from lords like thee: But thou a prey to vultures shalt be made; Thy own Achilles cannot lend thee aid; Though much at parting that great chief might say, And much enjoin thee, this important day.
‘Return not, my brave friend (perhaps he said), Without the bloody arms of Hector dead.’ He spoke, Patroclus march’d, and thus he sped.” Supine, and wildly gazing on the skies, With faint, expiring breath, the chief replies: “Vain boaster! cease, and know the powers divine!
Had twenty mortals, each thy match in might, Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight: By fate and Phœbus was I first o’erthrown, Euphorbus next; the third mean part thy own.
Then Hector pausing, as his eyes he fed On the pale carcase, thus address’d the dead: “From whence this boding speech, the stern decree Of death denounced, or why denounced to me?
Why not as well Achilles’ fate be given To Hector’s lance?
Who knows the will of heaven?” Pensive he said; then pressing as he lay His breathless bosom, tore the lance away; And upwards cast the corse: the reeking spear He shakes, and charges the bold charioteer.
THE SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.—THE ACTS OF MENELAUS.
Menelaus, upon the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy: Euphorbus, who attempts it, is slain.
Hector advancing, Menelaus retires; but soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off.
This, Glaucus objects to Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts on the armour he had won from Patroclus, and renews the battle.
The Greeks give way, till Ajax rallies them: Æneas sustains the Trojans. Æneas and Hector attempt the chariot of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon.
The horses of Achilles deplore the loss of Patroclus: Jupiter covers his body with a thick darkness: the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion.
Menelaus sends Antilochus to Achilles, with the news of Patroclus’ death: then returns to the fight, where, though attacked with the utmost fury, he and Meriones, assisted by the Ajaces, bear off the body to the ships.
The time is the evening of the eight-and-twentieth day.
On the cold earth divine Patroclus spread, Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead.
Great Menelaus, touch’d with generous woe, Springs to the front, and guards him from the foe.
Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves, Fruit of her throes, and first-born of her loves; And anxious (helpless as he lies, and bare) Turns, and re-turns her, with a mother’s care, Opposed to each that near the carcase came, His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame.
“This hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low; Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow: To me the spoils my prowess won, resign: Depart with life, and leave the glory mine.” The Trojan thus: the Spartan monarch burn’d With generous anguish, and in scorn return’d: “Laugh’st thou not, Jove! from thy superior throne, When mortals boast of prowess not their own?
But far the vainest of the boastful kind, These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind.
Yet ’twas but late, beneath my conquering steel This boaster’s brother, Hyperenor, fell; Against our arm which rashly he defied, Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride.
Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom, Go, wait thy brother to the Stygian gloom; Or, while thou may’st, avoid the threaten’d fate; Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.” Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: “That action known, Come, for my brother’s blood repay thy own.
His weeping father claims thy destined head, And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.
No longer then defer the glorious strife, Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life.” Swift as the word the missile lance he flings; The well-aim’d weapon on the buckler rings, But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls.
The shining circlets of his golden hair, Which even the Graces might be proud to wear, Instarr’d with gems and gold, bestrow the shore, With dust dishonour’d, and deform’d with gore.
Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize, Affrighted Troy the towering victor flies: Flies, as before some mountain lion’s ire The village curs and trembling swains retire, When o’er the slaughter’d bull they hear him roar, And see his jaws distil with smoking gore: All pale with fear, at distance scatter’d round, They shout incessant, and the vales resound.
Meanwhile Apollo view’d with envious eyes, And urged great Hector to dispute the prize; (In Mentes’ shape, beneath whose martial care The rough Ciconians learn’d the trade of war;)[247] “Forbear (he cried) with fruitless speed to chase Achilles’ coursers, of ethereal race; They stoop not, these, to mortal man’s command, Or stoop to none but great Achilles’ hand.
Sheath’d in bright arms, through cleaving ranks he flies, And sends his voice in thunder to the skies: Fierce as a flood of flame by Vulcan sent, It flew, and fired the nations as it went.
Atrides from the voice the storm divined, And thus explored his own unconquer’d mind: “Then shall I quit Patroclus on the plain, Slain in my cause, and for my honour slain!
Yet, nor the god, nor heaven, should give me fear, Did but the voice of Ajax reach my ear: Still would we turn, still battle on the plains, And give Achilles all that yet remains Of his and our Patroclus—” This, no more The time allow’d: Troy thicken’d on the shore.
So from the fold the unwilling lion parts, Forced by loud clamours, and a storm of darts; He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies, With heart indignant and retorted eyes.
Now enter’d in the Spartan ranks, he turn’d His manly breast, and with new fury burn’d; O’er all the black battalions sent his view, And through the cloud the godlike Ajax knew; Where labouring on the left the warrior stood, All grim in arms, and cover’d o’er with blood; There breathing courage, where the god of day Had sunk each heart with terror and dismay.
Haste, and Patroclus’ loved remains defend: The body to Achilles to restore Demands our care; alas, we can no more!
For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies; And Hector glories in the dazzling prize.” He said, and touch’d his heart.
Already had stern Hector seized his head, And doom’d to Trojan gods the unhappy dead; But soon as Ajax rear’d his tower-like shield, Sprung to his car, and measured back the field, His train to Troy the radiant armour bear, To stand a trophy of his fame in war.
Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield display’d) Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade; And now before, and now behind he stood: Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood, With many a step, the lioness surrounds Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds; Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers, Dark o’er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours.
Fast by his side the generous Spartan glows With great revenge, and feeds his inward woes.
But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids, On Hector frowning, thus his flight upbraids: “Where now in Hector shall we Hector find?
Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employ What other methods may preserve thy Troy: ’Tis time to try if Ilion’s state can stand By thee alone, nor ask a foreign hand: Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stake Their lives for you? those Lycians you forsake?
What from thy thankless arms can we expect?
Thy friend Sarpedon proves thy base neglect; Say, shall our slaughter’d bodies guard your walls, While unreveng’d the great Sarpedon falls?
Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain Sarpedon’s arms and honour’d corse again!
Greece with Achilles’ friend should be repaid, And thus due honours purchased to his shade.
But words are vain—Let Ajax once appear, And Hector trembles and recedes with fear; Thou dar’st not meet the terrors of his eye; And lo! already thou prepar’st to fly.” The Trojan chief with fix’d resentment eyed The Lycian leader, and sedate replied: “Say, is it just, my friend, that Hector’s ear From such a warrior such a speech should hear?
I desert my train? ’Tis mine to prove the rash assertion vain; I joy to mingle where the battle bleeds, And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds.
But Jove’s high will is ever uncontroll’d, The strong he withers, and confounds the bold; Now crowns with fame the mighty man, and now Strikes the fresh garland from the victor’s brow!
Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way, And thou be witness, if I fear to-day; If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread, Or yet their hero dare defend the dead.” Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries: “Ye Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies!
Hector in proud Achilles’ arms shall shine, Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine.” He strode along the field, as thus he said: (The sable plumage nodded o’er his head:) Swift through the spacious plain he sent a look; One instant saw, one instant overtook The distant band, that on the sandy shore The radiant spoils to sacred Ilion bore.
There his own mail unbraced the field bestrow’d; His train to Troy convey’d the massy load.
Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands; The work and present of celestial hands; By aged Peleus to Achilles given, As first to Peleus by the court of heaven: His father’s arms not long Achilles wears, Forbid by fate to reach his father’s years.
Him, proud in triumph, glittering from afar, The god whose thunder rends the troubled air Beheld with pity; as apart he sat, And, conscious, look’d through all the scene of fate.
He shook the sacred honours of his head; Olympus trembled, and the godhead said; “Ah, wretched man! unmindful of thy end!
In heavenly panoply divinely bright Thou stand’st, and armies tremble at thy sight, As at Achilles’ self! beneath thy dart Lies slain the great Achilles’ dearer part.
Thou from the mighty dead those arms hast torn, Which once the greatest of mankind had worn.
I give thee one illustrious day, A blaze of glory ere thou fad’st away.
For ah! no more Andromache shall come With joyful tears to welcome Hector home; No more officious, with endearing charms, From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelides’ arms!” Then with his sable brow he gave the nod That seals his word; the sanction of the god.
The stubborn arms (by Jove’s command disposed) Conform’d spontaneous, and around him closed: Fill’d with the god, enlarged his members grew, Through all his veins a sudden vigour flew, The blood in brisker tides began to roll, And Mars himself came rushing on his soul.
Exhorting loud through all the field he strode, And look’d, and moved, Achilles, or a god.
Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, he inspires, Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires; The great Thersilochus like fury found, Asteropaeus kindled at the sound, And Ennomus, in augury renown’d.
“Hear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumber’d bands Of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands! ’Twas not for state we summon’d you so far, To boast our numbers, and the pomp of war: Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase, To save our present, and our future race.
For this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy, And glean the relics of exhausted Troy.
Great Ajax mark’d the growing storm from far, And thus bespoke his brother of the war: “Our fatal day, alas! is come, my friend; And all our wars and glories at an end! ’Tis not this corse alone we guard in vain, Condemn’d to vultures on the Trojan plain; We too must yield: the same sad fate must fall On thee, on me, perhaps, my friend, on all.
See what a tempest direful Hector spreads, And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our heads!
Call on our Greeks, if any hear the call, The bravest Greeks: this hour demands them all.” The warrior raised his voice, and wide around The field re-echoed the distressful sound.
Whom with due honours both Atrides grace: Ye guides and guardians of our Argive race!
All, whom this well-known voice shall reach from far, All, whom I see not through this cloud of war; Come all! let generous rage your arms employ, And save Patroclus from the dogs of Troy.” Oilean Ajax first the voice obey’d, Swift was his pace, and ready was his aid: Next him Idomeneus, more slow with age, And Merion, burning with a hero’s rage.
The long-succeeding numbers who can name?
Fierce to the charge great Hector led the throng; Whole Troy embodied rush’d with shouts along.
Thus, when a mountain billow foams and raves, Where some swoln river disembogues his waves, Full in the mouth is stopp’d the rushing tide, The boiling ocean works from side to side, The river trembles to his utmost shore, And distant rocks re-bellow to the roar.
Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian band With brazen shields in horrid circle stand.
Jove, pouring darkness o’er the mingled fight, Conceals the warriors’ shining helms in night: To him, the chief for whom the hosts contend Had lived not hateful, for he lived a friend: Dead he protects him with superior care.
Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon. (Ajax to Peleus’ son the second name, In graceful stature next, and next in fame.) With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore; So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar, And rudely scatters, for a distance round, The frighted hunter and the baying hound.
Lamented youth! in life’s first bloom he fell, Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.
Once more at Ajax Hector’s javelin flies; The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies, Shunn’d the descending death; which hissing on, Stretch’d in the dust the great Iphytus’ son, Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian kind The boldest warrior and the noblest mind: In little Panope, for strength renown’d, He held his seat, and ruled the realms around.
Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood, And deep transpiercing through the shoulder stood; In clanging arms the hero fell and all The fields resounded with his weighty fall.
Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends, The Telamonian lance his belly rends; The hollow armour burst before the stroke, And through the wound the rushing entrails broke: In strong convulsions panting on the sands He lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands.
Struck at the sight, recede the Trojan train: The shouting Argives strip the heroes slain.
A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms, And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan arms.” He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew: The bold example all his hosts pursue.
Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled, In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede; Who view’d his fall, and, grieving at the chance, Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance; The whirling lance, with vigorous force address’d, Descends, and pants in Apisaon’s breast; From rich Paeonia’s vales the warrior came, Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and fame.
Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain, And rush’d to combat, but he rush’d in vain: Indissolubly firm, around the dead, Rank within rank, on buckler buckler spread, And hemm’d with bristled spears, the Grecians stood, A brazen bulwark, and an iron wood.
Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care, And in an orb contracts the crowded war, Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall, And stands the centre and the soul of all: Fix’d on the spot they war, and wounded, wound; A sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground: On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the Trojans bled, And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead.
Greece, in close order, and collected might, Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering fight; Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns, And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
In one thick darkness all the fight was lost; The sun, the moon, and all the ethereal host Seem’d as extinct: day ravish’d from their eyes, And all heaven’s splendours blotted from the skies.
Such o’er Patroclus’ body hung the night, The rest in sunshine fought, and open light; Unclouded there, the aerial azure spread, No vapour rested on the mountain’s head, The golden sun pour’d forth a stronger ray, And all the broad expansion flamed with day.
Dispersed around the plain, by fits they fight, And here and there their scatter’d arrows light: But death and darkness o’er the carcase spread, There burn’d the war, and there the mighty bled.
Meanwhile the sons of Nestor, in the rear, (Their fellows routed,) toss the distant spear, And skirmish wide: so Nestor gave command, When from the ships he sent the Pylian band.
The youthful brothers thus for fame contend, Nor knew the fortune of Achilles’ friend; In thought they view’d him still, with martial joy, Glorious in arms, and dealing death to Troy.
But round the corse the heroes pant for breath, And thick and heavy grows the work of death: O’erlabour’d now, with dust, and sweat, and gore, Their knees, their legs, their feet, are covered o’er; Drops follow drops, the clouds on clouds arise, And carnage clogs their hands, and darkness fills their eyes.
As when a slaughter’d bull’s yet reeking hide, Strain’d with full force, and tugg’d from side to side, The brawny curriers stretch; and labour o’er The extended surface, drunk with fat and gore: So tugging round the corse both armies stood; The mangled body bathed in sweat and blood; While Greeks and Ilians equal strength employ, Now to the ships to force it, now to Troy.
Achilles in his ships at distance lay, Nor knew the fatal fortune of the day; He, yet unconscious of Patroclus’ fall, In dust extended under Ilion’s wall, Expects him glorious from the conquered plain, And for his wish’d return prepares in vain; Though well he knew, to make proud Ilion bend Was more than heaven had destined to his friend.
Still raged the conflict round the hero dead, And heaps on heaps by mutual wounds they bled.
“Cursed be the man (even private Greeks would say) Who dares desert this well-disputed day!
First may the cleaving earth before our eyes Gape wide, and drink our blood for sacrifice; First perish all, ere haughty Troy shall boast We lost Patroclus, and our glory lost!” Thus they: while with one voice the Trojans said, “Grant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!” Then clash their sounding arms; the clangours rise, And shake the brazen concave of the skies.
Along their face The big round drops coursed down with silent pace, Conglobing on the dust.
For ah! what is there of inferior birth, That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth; What wretched creature of what wretched kind, Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
A miserable race! but cease to mourn: For not by you shall Priam’s son be borne High on the splendid car: one glorious prize He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.
Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart, Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
Automedon your rapid flight shall bear Safe to the navy through the storm of war.
From danger now with swiftest speed they flew, And now to conquest with like speed pursue; Sole in the seat the charioteer remains, Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins: Him brave Alcimedon beheld distress’d, Approach’d the chariot, and the chief address’d: “What god provokes thee rashly thus to dare, Alone, unaided, in the thickest war?
Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector wields Achilles’ arms triumphant in the fields.” “In happy time (the charioteer replies) The bold Alcimedon now greets my eyes; No Greek like him the heavenly steeds restrains, Or holds their fury in suspended reins: Patroclus, while he lived, their rage could tame, But now Patroclus is an empty name!
Alcimedon, with active heat, Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.
His friend descends.
The chief of Troy descried, And call’d Æneas fighting near his side.
“Lo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored, Achilles’ car, deserted of its lord!
The glorious steeds our ready arms invite, Scarce their weak drivers guide them through the fight.
Can such opponents stand when we assail?
Unite thy force, my friend, and we prevail.” The son of Venus to the counsel yields; Then o’er their backs they spread their solid shields: With brass refulgent the broad surface shined, And thick bull-hides the spacious concave lined.
Them Chromius follows, Aretus succeeds; Each hopes the conquest of the lofty steeds: In vain, brave youths, with glorious hopes ye burn, In vain advance! not fated to return.
Unmov’d, Automedon attends the fight, Implores the Eternal, and collects his might.
Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind: “Oh keep the foaming coursers close behind!
Full on my shoulders let their nostrils blow, For hard the fight, determined is the foe; ’Tis Hector comes: and when he seeks the prize, War knows no mean; he wins it or he dies.” Then through the field he sends his voice aloud, And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd, With great Atrides.
“Hither turn, (he said,) Turn where distress demands immediate aid; The dead, encircled by his friends, forego, And save the living from a fiercer foe.
Unhelp’d we stand, unequal to engage The force of Hector, and Æneas’ rage: Yet mighty as they are, my force to prove Is only mine: the event belongs to Jove.” He spoke, and high the sounding javelin flung, Which pass’d the shield of Aretus the young: It pierced his belt, emboss’d with curious art, Then in the lower belly struck the dart.
As when a ponderous axe, descending full, Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:[249] Struck ’twixt the horns, he springs with many a bound, Then tumbling rolls enormous on the ground: Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received, And the spear trembled as his entrails heaved.
Now at Automedon the Trojan foe Discharged his lance; the meditated blow, Stooping, he shunn’d; the javelin idly fled, And hiss’d innoxious o’er the hero’s head; Deep rooted in the ground, the forceful spear In long vibrations spent its fury there.
And now Minerva from the realms of air Descends impetuous, and renews the war; For, pleased at length the Grecian arms to aid, The lord of thunders sent the blue-eyed maid.
As when high Jove denouncing future woe, O’er the dark clouds extends his purple bow, (In sign of tempests from the troubled air, Or from the rage of man, destructive war,) The drooping cattle dread the impending skies, And from his half-till’d field the labourer flies: In such a form the goddess round her drew A livid cloud, and to the battle flew.
Assuming Phœnix’ shape on earth she falls, And in his well-known voice to Sparta calls: “And lies Achilles’ friend, beloved by all, A prey to dogs beneath the Trojan wall?
What shame 'o Greece for future times to tell, To thee the greatest in whose cause he fell!” “O chief, O father! (Atreus’ son replies) O full of days! by long experience wise!
Ah, would Minerva send me strength to rear This wearied arm, and ward the storm of war!
But Hector, like the rage of fire, we dread, And Jove’s own glories blaze around his head!” Pleased to be first of all the powers address’d, She breathes new vigour in her hero’s breast, And fills with keen revenge, with fell despite, Desire of blood, and rage, and lust of fight.
So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all o’er), Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore; (Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings Untamed, untired, he turns, attacks, and stings.
There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame, Aëtion’s son, and Podes was his name: With riches honour’d, and with courage bless’d, By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest; Through his broad belt the spear a passage found, And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.
Sudden at Hector’s side Apollo stood, Like Phaenops, Asius’ son, appear’d the god; (Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.) “Oh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!
Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield, A chief once thought no terror of the field?
Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize He bears victorious, while our army flies: By the same arm illustrious Podes bled; The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!” This heard, o’er Hector spreads a cloud of woe, Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe.
A rolling cloud Involved the mount; the thunder roar’d aloud; The affrighted hills from their foundations nod, And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god: At one regard of his all-seeing eye The vanquish’d triumph, and the victors fly.
Then trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led; For as the brave Bœotian turn’d his head To face the foe, Polydamas drew near, And razed his shoulder with a shorten’d spear: By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain, Pierced through the wrist; and raging with the pain, Grasps his once formidable lance in vain.
As Hector follow’d, Idomen address’d The flaming javelin to his manly breast; The brittle point before his corslet yields; Exulting Troy with clamour fills the fields: High on his chariots the Cretan stood, The son of Priam whirl’d the massive wood.
But erring from its aim, the impetuous spear Struck to the dust the squire and charioteer Of martial Merion: Coeranus his name, Who left fair Lyctus for the fields of fame.
On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low, Had graced the triumphs of his Trojan foe, But the brave squire the ready coursers brought, And with his life his master’s safety bought.
Prone from the seat he tumbles to the plain; His dying hand forgets the falling rein: This Merion reaches, bending from the car, And urges to desert the hopeless war: Idomeneus consents; the lash applies; And the swift chariot to the navy flies.
Not Ajax less the will of heaven descried, And conquest shifting to the Trojan side, Turn’d by the hand of Jove.
Then thus begun, To Atreus’s seed, the godlike Telamon: “Alas! who sees not Jove’s almighty hand Transfers the glory to the Trojan band?
Whether the weak or strong discharge the dart, He guides each arrow to a Grecian heart: Not so our spears; incessant though they rain, He suffers every lance to fall in vain.
Deserted of the god, yet let us try What human strength and prudence can supply; If yet this honour’d corse, in triumph borne, May glad the fleets that hope not our return, Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their fates, And still hear Hector thundering at their gates.
Some hero too must be despatch’d to bear The mournful message to Pelides’ ear; For sure he knows not, distant on the shore, His friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more.
But such a chief I spy not through the host: The men, the steeds, the armies, all are lost In general darkness—Lord of earth and air!
Oh father! hear my humble prayer: Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore; Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more: If Greece must perish, we thy will obey, But let us perish in the face of day!” With tears the hero spoke, and at his prayer The god relenting clear’d the clouded air; Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray; The blaze of armour flash’d against the day.
“Now, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight; If yet Antilochus survives the fight, Let him to great Achilles’ ear convey The fatal news”—Atrides hastes away.
As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye Of all that wings the mid aërial sky, The sacred eagle, from his walks above Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move; Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare, Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.
Not with less quickness, his exerted sight Pass’d this and that way, through the ranks of fight: Till on the left the chief he sought, he found, Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around: To him the king: “Beloved of Jove! draw near, For sadder tidings never touch’d thy ear; Thy eyes have witness’d what a fatal turn!
How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn.
This is not all: Patroclus, on the shore Now pale and dead, shall succour Greece no more.
Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and tell The sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell: He too may haste the naked corse to gain: The arms are Hector’s, who despoil’d the slain.” The youthful warrior heard with silent woe, From his fair eyes the tears began to flow: Big with the mighty grief, he strove to say What sorrow dictates, but no word found way.
To brave Laodocus his arms he flung, Who, near him wheeling, drove his steeds along; Then ran the mournful message to impart, With tearful eyes, and with dejected heart.
Swift fled the youth: nor Menelaus stands (Though sore distress’d) to aid the Pylian bands; But bids bold Thrasymede those troops sustain; Himself returns to his Patroclus slain.
High from the ground the warriors heave the dead.
Not fiercer rush along the gloomy wood, With rage insatiate, and with thirst of blood, Voracious hounds, that many a length before Their furious hunters, drive the wounded boar; But if the savage turns his glaring eye, They howl aloof, and round the forest fly.
Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour, Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower: But Ajax turning, to their fears they yield, All pale they tremble and forsake the field.
The heroes sweat beneath their honour’d load: As when two mules, along the rugged road, From the steep mountain with exerted strength Drag some vast beam, or mast’s unwieldy length; Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil, The enormous timber lumbering down the hill: So these—Behind, the bulk of Ajax stands, And breaks the torrent of the rushing bands.
Thus when a river swell’d with sudden rains Spreads his broad waters o’er the level plains, Some interposing hill the stream divides, And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides.
Still close they follow, close the rear engage; Æneas storms, and Hector foams with rage: While Greece a heavy, thick retreat maintains, Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes, That shriek incessant, while the falcon, hung High on poised pinions, threats their callow young.
THE GRIEF OF ACHILLES, AND NEW ARMOUR MADE HIM BY VULCAN.
The news of the death of Patroclus is brought to Achilles by Antilochus.
Thetis, hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea- nymphs to comfort him.
The speeches of the mother and son on this occasion.
Iris appears to Achilles by the command of Juno, and orders him to show himself at the head of the intrenchments.
The sight of him turns the fortunes of the day, and the body of Patroclus is carried off by the Greeks.
The Trojans call a council, where Hector and Polydamas disagree in their opinions: but the advice of the former prevails, to remain encamped in the field.
The grief of Achilles over the body of Patroclus.
The description of the wonderful works of Vulcan: and, lastly, that noble one of the shield of Achilles.
The latter part of the nine-and-twentieth day, and the night ensuing, take up this book: the scene is at Achilles’ tent on the sea-shore, from whence it changes to the palace of Vulcan.
Meanwhile, where Hellespont’s broad waters flow, Stood Nestor’s son, the messenger of woe: There sat Achilles, shaded by his sails, On hoisted yards extended to the gales; Pensive he sat; for all that fate design’d Rose in sad prospect to his boding mind.
Thus to his soul he said: “Ah! what constrains The Greeks, late victors, now to quit the plains?
Is this the day, which heaven so long ago Ordain’d, to sink me with the weight of woe? (So Thetis warn’d;) when by a Trojan hand The bravest of the Myrmidonian band Should lose the light!
Fulfilled is that decree; Fallen is the warrior, and Patroclus he!
In vain I charged him soon to quit the plain, And warn’d to shun Hectorean force in vain!” Thus while he thinks, Antilochus appears, And tells the melancholy tale with tears.
“Sad tidings, son of Peleus! thou must hear; And wretched I, the unwilling messenger!
The virgin captives, with disorder’d charms, (Won by his own, or by Patroclus’ arms,) Rush’d from their tents with cries; and gathering round, Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the ground: While Nestor’s son sustains a manlier part, And mourns the warrior with a warrior’s heart; Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe, And oft prevents the meditated blow.
The circling Nereids with their mistress weep, And all the sea-green sisters of the deep.
Thalia, Glauce (every watery name), Nesaea mild, and silver Spio came: Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh, And the blue languish of soft Alia’s eye.
All these, and all that deep in ocean held Their sacred seats, the glimmering grotto fill’d; Each beat her ivory breast with silent woe, Till Thetis’ sorrows thus began to flow: “Hear me, and judge, ye sisters of the main!
How just a cause has Thetis to complain!
How wretched, were I mortal, were my fate!
How more than wretched in the immortal state!
Sprung from my bed a godlike hero came, The bravest far that ever bore the name; Like some fair olive, by my careful hand He grew, he flourish’d and adorn’d the land!
I cannot ease them, but I must deplore; I go at least to bear a tender part, And mourn my loved-one with a mother’s heart.” She said, and left the caverns of the main, All bathed in tears; the melancholy train Attend her way.
Approaching now, they touch’d the Trojan land; Then, two by two, ascended up the strand.
Patroclus—Ah!—say, goddess, can I boast A pleasure now? revenge itself is lost; Patroclus, loved of all my martial train, Beyond mankind, beyond myself is slain!
Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestow’d On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious load.
Cursed be that day, when all the powers above Thy charms submitted to a mortal love: O hadst thou still, a sister of the main, Pursued the pleasures of the watery reign: And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led A mortal beauty to his equal bed!
For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain, New woes, new sorrows, shall create again. ’Tis not in fate the alternate now to give; Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.
Let me revenge it on proud Hector’s heart, Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart; On these conditions will I breathe: till then, I blush to walk among the race of men.” A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed: “Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!
When Hector falls, thou diest.”—“Let Hector die, And let me fall! (Achilles made reply) Far lies Patroclus from his native plain!
Ah then, since from this miserable day I cast all hope of my return away; Since, unrevenged, a hundred ghosts demand The fate of Hector from Achilles’ hand; Since here, for brutal courage far renown’d, I live an idle burden to the ground, (Others in council famed for nobler skill, More useful to preserve, than I to kill,) Let me—But oh! ye gracious powers above!
Wrath and revenge from men and gods remove: Far, far too dear to every mortal breast, Sweet to the soul, as honey to the taste: Gathering like vapours of a noxious kind From fiery blood, and darkening all the mind.
Me Agamemnon urged to deadly hate; ’Tis past—I quell it; I resign to fate.
Yes—I will meet the murderer of my friend; Or (if the gods ordain it) meet my end.
The stroke of fate the strongest cannot shun: The great Alcides, Jove’s unequall’d son, To Juno’s hate, at length resign’d his breath, And sunk the victim of all-conquering death.
So shall Achilles fall! stretch’d pale and dead, No more the Grecian hope, or Trojan dread!
Shall I not force some widow’d dame to tear With frantic hands her long dishevell’d hair?
Yes, I shall give the fair those mournful charms— In vain you hold me—Hence! my arms! my arms!— Soon shall the sanguine torrent spread so wide, That all shall know Achilles swells the tide.” “My son (coerulean Thetis made reply, To fate submitting with a secret sigh,) The host to succour, and thy friends to save, Is worthy thee; the duty of the brave.
Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high, But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
Thrice the slain hero by the foot he drew; Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew: As oft the Ajaces his assault sustain; But check’d, he turns; repuls’d, attacks again.
With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires, Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires: So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain, The hungry lion from a carcase slain.
Even yet Patroclus had he borne away, And all the glories of the extended day, Had not high Juno from the realms of air, Secret, despatch’d her trusty messenger.
The various goddess of the showery bow, Shot in a whirlwind to the shore below; To great Achilles at his ships she came, And thus began the many-colour’d dame: “Rise, son of Peleus! rise, divinely brave!
Assist the combat, and Patroclus save: For him the slaughter to the fleet they spread, And fall by mutual wounds around the dead.
To drag him back to Troy the foe contends: Nor with his death the rage of Hector ends: A prey to dogs he dooms the corse to lie, And marks the place to fix his head on high.
Rise, and prevent (if yet you think of fame) Thy friend’s disgrace, thy own eternal shame!” “Who sends thee, goddess, from the ethereal skies?” Achilles thus.
And Iris thus replies: “I come, Pelides! from the queen of Jove, The immortal empress of the realms above; Unknown to him who sits remote on high, Unknown to all the synod of the sky.” “Thou comest in vain (he cries, with fury warm’d); Arms I have none, and can I fight unarm’d?
Unwilling as I am, of force I stay, Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of day Vulcanian arms: what other can I wield, Except the mighty Telamonian shield?
That, in my friend’s defence, has Ajax spread, While his strong lance around him heaps the dead: The gallant chief defends Menoetius’ son, And does what his Achilles should have done.” “Thy want of arms (said Iris) well we know; But though unarm’d, yet clad in terrors, go!
Let but Achilles o’er yon trench appear, Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear; Greece from one glance of that tremendous eye Shall take new courage, and disdain to fly.” She spoke, and pass’d in air.
The hero rose: Her ægis Pallas o’er his shoulder throws; Around his brows a golden cloud she spread; A stream of glory flamed above his head.
Forth march’d the chief, and distant from the crowd, High on the rampart raised his voice aloud; With her own shout Minerva swells the sound; Troy starts astonish’d, and the shores rebound.
As the loud trumpet’s brazen mouth from far With shrilling clangour sounds the alarm of war, Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high, And the round bulwarks and thick towers reply; So high his brazen voice the hero rear’d: Hosts dropp’d their arms, and trembled as they heard: And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound, And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
Aghast they see the living lightnings play, And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised, And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rush’d On their own spears, by their own chariots crush’d: While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain The long-contended carcase of the slain.
A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears: Around, his sad companions melt in tears.
But chief Achilles, bending down his head, Pours unavailing sorrows o’er the dead, Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car, He sent refulgent to the field of war; (Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found, Stretch’d forth, and gash’d with many a gaping wound.
Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way, In ocean’s waves the unwilling light of day Quench’d his red orb, at Juno’s high command, And from their labours eased the Achaian band.
The frighted Trojans (panting from the war, Their steeds unharness’d from the weary car) A sudden council call’d: each chief appear’d In haste, and standing; for to sit they fear’d. ’Twas now no season for prolong’d debate; They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.
I deem’d not Greece so dreadful, while engaged In mutual feuds her king and hero raged; Then, while we hoped our armies might prevail We boldly camp’d beside a thousand sail.
I dread Pelides now: his rage of mind Not long continues to the shores confined, Nor to the fields, where long in equal fray Contending nations won and lost the day; For Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the strife, And the hard contest not for fame, but life.
Haste then to Ilion, while the favouring night Detains these terrors, keeps that arm from fight.
Let not my fatal prophecy be true, Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue.
Whatever be our fate, yet let us try What force of thought and reason can supply; Let us on counsel for our guard depend; The town her gates and bulwarks shall defend.
When morning dawns, our well-appointed powers, Array’d in arms, shall line the lofty towers.
Let the fierce hero, then, when fury calls, Vent his mad vengeance on our rocky walls, Or fetch a thousand circles round the plain, Till his spent coursers seek the fleet again: So may his rage be tired, and labour’d down!
Was’t not enough, ye valiant warriors, say, Nine years imprison’d in those towers ye lay?
Wide o’er the world was Ilion famed of old For brass exhaustless, and for mines of gold: But while inglorious in her walls we stay’d, Sunk were her treasures, and her stores decay’d; The Phrygians now her scatter’d spoils enjoy, And proud Mæonia wastes the fruits of Troy.
Great Jove at length my arms to conquest calls, And shuts the Grecians in their wooden walls, Darest thou dispirit whom the gods incite?
To better counsel then attention lend; Take due refreshment, and the watch attend.
If there be one whose riches cost him care, Forth let him bring them for the troops to share; ’Tis better generously bestow’d on those, Than left the plunder of our country’s foes.
If great Achilles rise in all his might, His be the danger: I shall stand the fight.
Honour, ye gods! or let me gain or give; And live he glorious, whosoe’er shall live!
Mars is our common lord, alike to all; And oft the victor triumphs, but to fall.” The shouting host in loud applauses join’d; So Pallas robb’d the many of their mind; To their own sense condemn’d, and left to choose The worst advice, the better to refuse.
While the long night extends her sable reign, Around Patroclus mourn’d the Grecian train.
Stern in superior grief Pelides stood; Those slaughtering arms, so used to bathe in blood, Now clasp his clay-cold limbs: then gushing start The tears, and sighs burst from his swelling heart.
The lion thus, with dreadful anguish stung, Roars through the desert, and demands his young; When the grim savage, to his rifled den Too late returning, snuffs the track of men, And o’er the vales and o’er the forest bounds; His clamorous grief the bellowing wood resounds.
So grieves Achilles; and, impetuous, vents To all his Myrmidons his loud laments.
“In what vain promise, gods! did I engage, When to console Menoetius’ feeble age, I vowed his much-loved offspring to restore, Charged with rich spoils, to fair Opuntia’s shore?[252] But mighty Jove cuts short, with just disdain, The long, long views of poor designing man!
One fate the warrior and the friend shall strike, And Troy’s black sands must drink our blood alike: Me too a wretched mother shall deplore, An aged father never see me more!
Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay, Then swift pursue thee on the darksome way.
Ere thy dear relics in the grave are laid, Shall Hector’s head be offer’d to thy shade; That, with his arms, shall hang before thy shrine; And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan line, Sacred to vengeance, by this hand expire; Their lives effused around thy flaming pyre.
While Trojan captives here thy mourners stay, Weep all the night and murmur all the day: Spoils of my arms, and thine; when, wasting wide, Our swords kept time, and conquer’d side by side.” He spoke, and bade the sad attendants round Cleanse the pale corse, and wash each honour’d wound.
A massy caldron of stupendous frame They brought, and placed it o’er the rising flame: Then heap’d the lighted wood; the flame divides Beneath the vase, and climbs around the sides: In its wide womb they pour the rushing stream; The boiling water bubbles to the brim.
The body then they bathe with pious toil, Embalm the wounds, anoint the limbs with oil, High on a bed of state extended laid, And decent cover’d with a linen shade; Last o’er the dead the milk-white veil they threw; That done, their sorrows and their sighs renew.
Meanwhile to Juno, in the realms above, (His wife and sister,) spoke almighty Jove.
“At last thy will prevails: great Peleus’ son Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won.
Meanwhile the silver-footed dame Reach’d the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
High-eminent amid the works divine, Where heaven’s far-beaming brazen mansions shine.
There the lame architect the goddess found, Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round, While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew; And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.
That day no common task his labour claim’d: Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed, That placed on living wheels of massy gold, (Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit roll’d From place to place, around the bless’d abodes Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods: For their fair handles now, o’erwrought with flowers, In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours.
Just as responsive to his thought the frame Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came: Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair, (With purple fillets round her braided hair,) Observed her entering; her soft hand she press’d, And, smiling, thus the watery queen address’d: “What, goddess! this unusual favour draws?
When my proud mother hurl’d me from the sky, (My awkward form, it seems, displeased her eye,) She, and Eurynome, my griefs redress’d, And soft received me on their silver breast.
Even then these arts employ’d my infant thought: Chains, bracelets, pendants, all their toys, I wrought.
Now, since her presence glads our mansion, say, For such desert what service can I pay?
Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our board to share The genial rites, and hospitable fare; While I the labours of the forge forego, And bid the roaring bellows cease to blow.” Then from his anvil the lame artist rose; Wide with distorted legs oblique he goes, And stills the bellows, and (in order laid) Locks in their chests his instruments of trade.
Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepare For Thetis only such a weight of care?
I, only I, of all the watery race By force subjected to a man’s embrace, Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, pays The mighty fine imposed on length of days.
Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came, The bravest sure that ever bore the name; Like some fair plant beneath my careful hand He grew, he flourish’d, and adorn’d the land!
Robb’d of the prize the Grecian suffrage gave, The king of nations forced his royal slave: For this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppress’d Required his arm, he sorrow’d unredress’d.
Large gifts they promise, and their elders send; In vain—he arms not, but permits his friend His arms, his steeds, his forces to employ: He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy: Then slain by Phœbus (Hector had the name) At once resigns his armour, life, and fame.
But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won: Grace with immortal arms this short-lived son, And to the field in martial pomp restore, To shine with glory, till he shines no more!” To her the artist-god: “Thy griefs resign, Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.
O could I hide him from the Fates, as well, Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel, As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze Of wondering ages, and the world’s amaze!” Thus having said, the father of the fires To the black labours of his forge retires.
Then first he form’d the immense and solid shield; Rich various artifice emblazed the field; Its utmost verge a threefold circle bound;[253] A silver chain suspends the massy round; Five ample plates the broad expanse compose, And godlike labours on the surface rose.
Here sacred pomp and genial feast delight, And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite; Along the street the new-made brides are led, With torches flaming, to the nuptial bed: The youthful dancers in a circle bound To the soft flute, and cithern’s silver sound: Through the fair streets the matrons in a row Stand in their porches, and enjoy the show.
Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight, The prize of him who best adjudged the right.
Another part (a prospect differing far)[255] Glow’d with refulgent arms, and horrid war.
Meantime the townsmen, arm’d with silent care, A secret ambush on the foe prepare: Their wives, their children, and the watchful band Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand.
They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold: Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold, And gold their armour: these the squadron led, August, divine, superior by the head!
Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.
Soon the white flocks proceeded o’er the plains, And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains; Behind them piping on their reeds they go, Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe.
In arms the glittering squadron rising round Rush sudden; hills of slaughter heap the ground; Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the plains, And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains!
The bellowing oxen the besiegers hear; They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war, They fight, they fall, beside the silver flood; The waving silver seem’d to blush with blood.
There Tumult, there Contention stood confess’d; One rear’d a dagger at a captive’s breast; One held a living foe, that freshly bled With new-made wounds; another dragg’d a dead; Now here, now there, the carcases they tore: Fate stalk’d amidst them, grim with human gore.
A field deep furrow’d next the god design’d,[256] The third time labour’d by the sweating hind; The shining shares full many ploughmen guide, And turn their crooked yokes on every side.
Still as at either end they wheel around, The master meets them with his goblet crown’d; The hearty draught rewards, renews their toil, Then back the turning ploughshares cleave the soil: Behind, the rising earth in ridges roll’d; And sable look’d, though form’d of molten gold.
Another field rose high with waving grain; With bended sickles stand the reaper train: Here stretched in ranks the levell’d swarths are found, Sheaves heap’d on sheaves here thicken up the ground.
With sweeping stroke the mowers strow the lands; The gatherers follow, and collect in bands; And last the children, in whose arms are borne (Too short to gripe them) the brown sheaves of corn.
The rustic monarch of the field descries, With silent glee, the heaps around him rise.
A ready banquet on the turf is laid, Beneath an ample oak’s expanded shade.
Next, ripe in yellow gold, a vineyard shines, Bent with the ponderous harvest of its vines; A deeper dye the dangling clusters show, And curl’d on silver props, in order glow: A darker metal mix’d intrench’d the place; And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace.
To this, one pathway gently winding leads, Where march a train with baskets on their heads, (Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bear The purple product of the autumnal year.
To these a youth awakes the warbling strings, Whose tender lay the fate of Linus sings; In measured dance behind him move the train, Tune soft the voice, and answer to the strain.
Here herds of oxen march, erect and bold, Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold, And speed to meadows on whose sounding shores A rapid torrent through the rushes roars: Four golden herdsmen as their guardians stand, And nine sour dogs complete the rustic band.
Two lions rushing from the wood appear’d; And seized a bull, the master of the herd: He roar’d: in vain the dogs, the men withstood; They tore his flesh, and drank his sable blood.
The dogs (oft cheer’d in vain) desert the prey, Dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay.
A figured dance succeeds; such once was seen In lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen, Form’d by Daedalean art; a comely band Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand.
The maids in soft simars of linen dress’d; The youths all graceful in the glossy vest: Of those the locks with flowery wreath inroll’d; Of these the sides adorn’d with swords of gold, That glittering gay, from silver belts depend.
Now all at once they rise, at once descend, With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways, Confusedly regular, the moving maze: Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring, And undistinguish’d blend the flying ring: So whirls a wheel, in giddy circle toss’d, And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost.
The gazing multitudes admire around: Two active tumblers in the centre bound; Now high, now low, their pliant limbs they bend: And general songs the sprightly revel end.
Thus the broad shield complete the artist crown’d With his last hand, and pour’d the ocean round: In living silver seem’d the waves to roll, And beat the buckler’s verge, and bound the whole.
This done, whate’er a warrior’s use requires He forged; the cuirass that outshone the fires, The greaves of ductile tin, the helm impress’d With various sculpture, and the golden crest.
At Thetis’ feet the finished labour lay: She, as a falcon cuts the aerial way, Swift from Olympus’ snowy summit flies, And bears the blazing present through the skies.[257] BOOK XIX.
THE RECONCILIATION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.
She preserves the body of his friend from corruption, and commands him to assemble the army, to declare his resentment at an end.
Agamemnon and Achilles are solemnly reconciled: the speeches, presents, and ceremonies on that occasion.
Achilles is with great difficulty persuaded to refrain from the battle till the troops have refreshed themselves by the advice of Ulysses.
The presents are conveyed to the tent of Achilles, where Briseïs laments over the body of Patroclus.
The hero obstinately refuses all repast, and gives himself up to lamentations for his friend.
Minerva descends to strengthen him, by the order of Jupiter.
He arms for the fight: his appearance described.
He addresses himself to his horses, and reproaches them with the death of Patroclus.
One of them is miraculously endued with voice, and inspired to prophesy his fate: but the hero, not astonished by that prodigy, rushes with fury to the combat.
Soon as Aurora heaved her Orient head Above the waves, that blush’d with early red, (With new-born day to gladden mortal sight, And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,) The immortal arms the goddess-mother bears Swift to her son: her son she finds in tears Stretch’d o’er Patroclus’ corse; while all the rest Their sovereign’s sorrows in their own express’d.
Unmoved the hero kindles at the show, And feels with rage divine his bosom glow; From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire, And flash incessant like a stream of fire: He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind On all the immortal artist had design’d.
“Goddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine With matchless art, confess the hand divine.
Now to the bloody battle let me bend: But ah! the relics of my slaughter’d friend!
In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled, Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?” “That unavailing care be laid aside, (The azure goddess to her son replied,) Whole years untouch’d, uninjured shall remain, Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.
Achilles to the strand obedient went: The shores resounded with the voice he sent.
The heroes heard, and all the naval train That tend the ships, or guide them o’er the main, Alarm’d, transported, at the well-known sound, Frequent and full, the great assembly crown’d; Studious to see the terror of the plain, Long lost to battle, shine in arms again.
Achilles (rising in the midst) begun: “O monarch! better far had been the fate Of thee, of me, of all the Grecian state, If (ere the day when by mad passion sway’d, Rash we contended for the black-eyed maid) Preventing Dian had despatch’d her dart, And shot the shining mischief to the heart!
Long, long shall Greece the woes we caused bewail, And sad posterity repeat the tale.
But this, no more the subject of debate, Is past, forgotten, and resign’d to fate.
I deem, their mightiest, when this arm he knows, Shall ’scape with transport, and with joy repose.” He said: his finish’d wrath with loud acclaim The Greeks accept, and shout Pelides’ name.
And grant your monarch an impartial ear: Awhile your loud, untimely joy suspend, And let your rash, injurious clamours end: Unruly murmurs, or ill-timed applause, Wrong the best speaker, and the justest cause.
Nor charge on me, ye Greeks, the dire debate: Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate, With fell Erinnys, urged my wrath that day When from Achilles’ arms I forced the prey.
Not by myself, but vengeful Ate driven; She, Jove’s dread daughter, fated to infest The race of mortals, enter’d in my breast.
Not on the ground that haughty fury treads, But prints her lofty footsteps on the heads Of mighty men; inflicting as she goes Long-festering wounds, inextricable woes!
The Thunderer, unsuspicious of the fraud, Pronounced those solemn words that bind a god.
The joyful goddess, from Olympus’ height, Swift to Achaian Argos bent her flight: Scarce seven moons gone, lay Sthenelus’s wife; She push’d her lingering infant into life: Her charms Alcmena’s coming labours stay, And stop the babe, just issuing to the day.
Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind; ‘A youth (said she) of Jove’s immortal kind Is this day born: from Sthenelus he springs, And claims thy promise to be king of kings.’ Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath engaged; Stung to the soul, he sorrow’d, and he raged.
From his ambrosial head, where perch’d she sate, He snatch’d the fury-goddess of debate, The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore, The immortal seats should ne’er behold her more; And whirl’d her headlong down, for ever driven From bright Olympus and the starry heaven: Thence on the nether world the fury fell; Ordain’d with man’s contentious race to dwell.
My martial troops, my treasures are thy own: This instant from the navy shall be sent Whate’er Ulysses promised at thy tent: But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer, Resume thy arms, and shine again in war.” “O king of nations! whose superior sway (Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!
To keep or send the presents, be thy care; To us, ’tis equal: all we ask is war.
While yet we talk, or but an instant shun The fight, our glorious work remains undone.
Strength is derived from spirits and from blood, And those augment by generous wine and food: What boastful son of war, without that stay, Can last a hero through a single day?
Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his strength, Mere unsupported man must yield at length; Shrunk with dry famine, and with toils declined, The drooping body will desert the mind: But built anew with strength-conferring fare, With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a war.
Dismiss the people, then, and give command, With strong repast to hearten every band; But let the presents to Achilles made, In full assembly of all Greece be laid.
The king of men shall rise in public sight, And solemn swear (observant of the rite) That, spotless, as she came, the maid removes, Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
That done, a sumptuous banquet shall be made, And the full price of injured honour paid.
Stretch not henceforth, O prince! thy sovereign might Beyond the bounds of reason and of right; ’Tis the chief praise that e’er to kings belong’d, To right with justice whom with power they wrong’d.” To him the monarch: “Just is thy decree, Thy words give joy, and wisdom breathes in thee.
Each due atonement gladly I prepare; And heaven regard me as I justly swear!
Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay, Nor great Achilles grudge this short delay.
Till from the fleet our presents be convey’d, And Jove attesting, the firm compact made.
By Hector slain, their faces to the sky, All grim with gaping wounds, our heroes lie: Those call to war! and might my voice incite, Now, now, this instant, shall commence the fight: Then, when the day’s complete, let generous bowls, And copious banquets, glad your weary souls.
Let not my palate know the taste of food, Till my insatiate rage be cloy’d with blood: Pale lies my friend, with wounds disfigured o’er, And his cold feet are pointed to the door.
Revenge is all my soul! no meaner care, Interest, or thought, has room to harbour there; Destruction be my feast, and mortal wounds, And scenes of blood, and agonizing sounds.” “O first of Greeks, (Ulysses thus rejoin’d,) The best and bravest of the warrior kind!
Thy praise it is in dreadful camps to shine, But old experience and calm wisdom mine.
Then hear my counsel, and to reason yield, The bravest soon are satiate of the field; Though vast the heaps that strow the crimson plain, The bloody harvest brings but little gain: The scale of conquest ever wavering lies, Great Jove but turns it, and the victor dies!
The great, the bold, by thousands daily fall, And endless were the grief, to weep for all.
Greece honours not with solemn fasts the dead: Enough, when death demands the brave, to pay The tribute of a melancholy day.
One chief with patience to the grave resign’d, Our care devolves on others left behind.
Let generous food supplies of strength produce, Let rising spirits flow from sprightly juice, Let their warm heads with scenes of battle glow, And pour new furies on the feebler foe.
Yet a short interval, and none shall dare Expect a second summons to the war; Who waits for that, the dire effects shall find, If trembling in the ships he lags behind.
Embodied, to the battle let us bend, And all at once on haughty Troy descend.” And now the delegates Ulysses sent, To bear the presents from the royal tent: The sons of Nestor, Phyleus’ valiant heir, Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war, With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain, And Melanippus, form’d the chosen train.
His hands uplifted to the attesting skies, On heaven’s broad marble roof were fixed his eyes.
The solemn words a deep attention draw, And Greece around sat thrill’d with sacred awe.
“Witness thou first! thou greatest power above, All-good, all-wise, and all-surveying Jove!
And mother-earth, and heaven’s revolving light, And ye, fell furies of the realms of night, Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
The black-eyed maid inviolate removes, Pure and unconscious of my manly loves.
If this be false, heaven all its vengeance shed, And levell’d thunder strike my guilty head!” With that, his weapon deep inflicts the wound; The bleeding savage tumbles to the ground; The sacred herald rolls the victim slain (A feast for fish) into the foaming main.
Then thus Achilles: “Hear, ye Greeks! and know Whate’er we feel, ’tis Jove inflicts the woe; Not else Atrides could our rage inflame, Nor from my arms, unwilling, force the dame. ’Twas Jove’s high will alone, o’erruling all, That doom’d our strife, and doom’d the Greeks to fall.
Go then, ye chiefs! indulge the genial rite; Achilles waits ye, and expects the fight.” The speedy council at his word adjourn’d: To their black vessels all the Greeks return’d.
Achilles sought his tent.
Those in the tents the squires industrious spread: The foaming coursers to the stalls they led; To their new seats the female captives move.
Briseïs, radiant as the queen of love, Slow as she pass’d, beheld with sad survey Where, gash’d with cruel wounds, Patroclus lay.
Prone on the body fell the heavenly fair, Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair; All beautiful in grief, her humid eyes Shining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries: “Ah, youth for ever dear, for ever kind, Once tender friend of my distracted mind!
I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay; Now find thee cold, inanimated clay!
What woes my wretched race of life attend!
Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow, For thee, that ever felt another’s woe!” Her sister captives echoed groan for groan, Nor mourn’d Patroclus’ fortunes, but their own.
“If yet Achilles have a friend, whose care Is bent to please him, this request forbear; Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay To grief and anguish one abstemious day.” He spoke, and from the warriors turn’d his face: Yet still the brother-kings of Atreus’ race.
Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage, And Phœnix, strive to calm his grief and rage: His rage they calm not, nor his grief control; He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul.
“Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents) Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents: Thy sweet society, thy winning care, Once stay’d Achilles, rushing to the war.
What greater sorrow could afflict my breast, What more if hoary Peleus were deceased?
What more, should Neoptolemus the brave, My only offspring, sink into the grave?
If yet that offspring lives; (I distant far, Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.) I could not this, this cruel stroke attend; Fate claim’d Achilles, but might spare his friend.
I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear My tender orphan with a parent’s care, From Scyros’ isle conduct him o’er the main, And glad his eyes with his paternal reign, The lofty palace, and the large domain.
For Peleus breathes no more the vital air; Or drags a wretched life of age and care, But till the news of my sad fate invades His hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades.” Sighing he said: his grief the heroes join’d, Each stole a tear for what he left behind.
Their mingled grief the sire of heaven survey’d, And thus with pity to his blue-eyed maid: “Is then Achilles now no more thy care, And dost thou thus desert the great in war?
Lo, where yon sails their canvas wings extend, All comfortless he sits, and wails his friend: Ere thirst and want his forces have oppress’d, Haste and infuse ambrosia in his breast.” He spoke; and sudden, at the word of Jove, Shot the descending goddess from above.
So swift through ether the shrill harpy springs, The wide air floating to her ample wings, To great Achilles she her flight address’d, And pour’d divine ambrosia in his breast,[259] With nectar sweet, (refection of the gods!) Then, swift ascending, sought the bright abodes.
Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire, His glowing eyeballs roll with living fire; He grinds his teeth, and furious with delay O’erlooks the embattled host, and hopes the bloody day.
The silver cuishes first his thighs infold; Then o’er his breast was braced the hollow gold; The brazen sword a various baldric tied, That, starr’d with gems, hung glittering at his side; And, like the moon, the broad refulgent shield Blazed with long rays, and gleam’d athwart the field.
So to night-wandering sailors, pale with fears, Wide o’er the watery waste, a light appears, Which on the far-seen mountain blazing high, Streams from some lonely watch-tower to the sky: With mournful eyes they gaze, and gaze again; Loud howls the storm, and drives them o’er the main.
Next, his high head the helmet graced; behind The sweepy crest hung floating in the wind: Like the red star, that from his flaming hair Shakes down diseases, pestilence, and war; So stream’d the golden honours from his head, Trembled the sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed.
The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes; His arms he poises, and his motions tries; Buoy’d by some inward force, he seems to swim, And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
And now he shakes his great paternal spear, Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear, From Pelion’s cloudy top an ash entire Old Chiron fell’d, and shaped it for his sire; A spear which stern Achilles only wields, The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.
Automedon and Alcimus prepare The immortal coursers, and the radiant car; (The silver traces sweeping at their side;) Their fiery mouths resplendent bridles tied; The ivory-studded reins, return’d behind, Waved o’er their backs, and to the chariot join’d.
The charioteer then whirl’d the lash around, And swift ascended at one active bound.
All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire; Not brighter Phœbus in the ethereal way Flames from his chariot, and restores the day.
When, strange to tell! (so Juno will’d) he broke Eternal silence, and portentous spoke.
“Achilles! yes! this day at least we bear Thy rage in safety through the files of war: But come it will, the fatal time must come, Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom.
Not through our crime, or slowness in the course, Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly force; The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day (Confess’d we saw him) tore his arms away.
No—could our swiftness o’er the winds prevail, Or beat the pinions of the western gale, All were in vain—the Fates thy death demand, Due to a mortal and immortal hand.” Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied, His fateful voice.
The intrepid chief replied With unabated rage—“So let it be!
Portents and prodigies are lost on me.
THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES.
Jupiter, upon Achilles’ return to the battle, calls a council of the gods, and permits them to assist either party.
The terrors of the combat described, when the deities are engaged.
Apollo encourages Æneas to meet Achilles.
After a long conversation, these two heroes encounter; but Æneas is preserved by the assistance of Neptune.
Achilles falls upon the rest of the Trojans, and is upon the point of killing Hector, but Apollo conveys him away in a cloud.
Achilles pursues the Trojans with a great slaughter.
The same day continues.
Thus round Pelides breathing war and blood Greece, sheathed in arms, beside her vessels stood; While near impending from a neighbouring height, Troy’s black battalions wait the shock of fight.
These shining on, in long procession come To Jove’s eternal adamantine dome.
Even he whose trident sways the watery reign Heard the loud summons, and forsook the main, Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes, And question’d thus the sire of men and gods: “What moves the god who heaven and earth commands, And grasps the thunder in his awful hands, Thus to convene the whole ethereal state?
Already met, the louring hosts appear, And death stands ardent on the edge of war.” “’Tis true (the cloud-compelling power replies) This day we call the council of the skies In care of human race; even Jove’s own eye Sees with regret unhappy mortals die.
Celestial powers! descend, And as your minds direct, your succour lend To either host.
Troy soon must lie o’erthrown, If uncontroll’d Achilles fights alone: Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes; What can they now, if in his rage he rise?
Assist them, gods! or Ilion’s sacred wall May fall this day, though fate forbids the fall.” He said, and fired their heavenly breasts with rage.
On adverse parts the warring gods engage: Heaven’s awful queen; and he whose azure round Girds the vast globe; the maid in arms renown’d; Hermes, of profitable arts the sire; And Vulcan, the black sovereign of the fire: These to the fleet repair with instant flight; The vessels tremble as the gods alight.
In aid of Troy, Latona, Phœbus came, Mars fiery-helm’d, the laughter-loving dame, Xanthus, whose streams in golden currents flow, And the chaste huntress of the silver bow.
Ere yet the gods their various aid employ, Each Argive bosom swell’d with manly joy, While great Achilles (terror of the plain), Long lost to battle, shone in arms again.
Dreadful he stood in front of all his host; Pale Troy beheld, and seem’d already lost; Her bravest heroes pant with inward fear, And trembling see another god of war.
But when the powers descending swell’d the fight, Then tumult rose: fierce rage and pale affright Varied each face: then Discord sounds alarms, Earth echoes, and the nations rush to arms.
Now through the trembling shores Minerva calls, And now she thunders from the Grecian walls.
Mars hovering o’er his Troy, his terror shrouds In gloomy tempests, and a night of clouds: Now through each Trojan heart he fury pours With voice divine, from Ilion’s topmost towers: Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous hill; The mountain shook, the rapid stream stood still.
Above, the sire of gods his thunder rolls, And peals on peals redoubled rend the poles.
Beneath, stern Neptune shakes the solid ground; The forests wave, the mountains nod around; Through all their summits tremble Ida’s woods, And from their sources boil her hundred floods.
The god of arms his giant bulk display’d, Opposed to Pallas, war’s triumphant maid.
The quiver’d Dian, sister of the day, (Her golden arrows sounding at her side,) Saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied.
With fiery Vulcan last in battle stands The sacred flood that rolls on golden sands; Xanthus his name with those of heavenly birth, But called Scamander by the sons of earth.
What mortal man Achilles can sustain?
The immortals guard him through the dreadful plain, And suffer not his dart to fall in vain.
Were God my aid, this arm should check his power, Though strong in battle as a brazen tower.” To whom the son of Jove: “That god implore, And be what great Achilles was before.
From heavenly Venus thou deriv’st thy strain, And he but from a sister of the main; An aged sea-god father of his line; But Jove himself the sacred source of thine.
Then lift thy weapon for a noble blow, Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe.” This said, and spirit breathed into his breast, Through the thick troops the embolden’d hero press’d: His venturous act the white-arm’d queen survey’d, And thus, assembling all the powers, she said: “Behold an action, gods! that claims your care, Lo great Æneas rushing to the war!
Restrain his bold career; at least, to attend Our favour’d hero, let some power descend.
To guard his life, and add to his renown, We, the great armament of heaven, came down.
But if the armipotent, or god of light, Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight, Thence on the gods of Troy we swift descend: Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end; And these, in ruin and confusion hurl’d, Yield to our conquering arms the lower world.” Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea, Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way.
Advanced upon the field there stood a mound Of earth congested, wall’d, and trench’d around; In elder times to guard Alcides made, (The work of Trojans, with Minerva’s aid,) What time a vengeful monster of the main Swept the wide shore, and drove him to the plain.
Here Neptune and the gods of Greece repair, With clouds encompass’d, and a veil of air: The adverse powers, around Apollo laid, Crown the fair hills that silver Simois shade.
In circle close each heavenly party sat, Intent to form the future scheme of fate; But mix not yet in fight, though Jove on high Gives the loud signal, and the heavens reply.
Meanwhile the rushing armies hide the ground; The trampled centre yields a hollow sound: Steeds cased in mail, and chiefs in armour bright, The gleaming champaign glows with brazen light.
Amid both hosts (a dreadful space) appear, There great Achilles; bold Æneas, here.
With towering strides Æneas first advanced; The nodding plumage on his helmet danced: Spread o’er his breast the fencing shield he bore, And, so he moved, his javelin flamed before.
Not so Pelides; furious to engage, He rush’d impetuous.
So fierce Achilles on Æneas flies; So stands Æneas, and his force defies.
Ere yet the stern encounter join’d, begun The seed of Thetis thus to Venus’ son: “Why comes Æneas through the ranks so far?
Seeks he to meet Achilles’ arm in war, In hope the realms of Priam to enjoy, And prove his merits to the throne of Troy?
Grant that beneath thy lance Achilles dies, The partial monarch may refuse the prize; Sons he has many; those thy pride may quell: And ’tis his fault to love those sons too well, Or, in reward of thy victorious hand, Has Troy proposed some spacious tract of land, An ample forest, or a fair domain, Of hills for vines, and arable for grain?
But can Achilles be so soon forgot?
Once (as I think) you saw this brandish’d spear, And then the great Æneas seem’d to fear: With hearty haste from Ida’s mount he fled, Nor, till he reach’d Lyrnessus, turn’d his head.
Her lofty walls not long our progress stay’d; Those, Pallas, Jove, and we, in ruins laid: In Grecian chains her captive race were cast; ’Tis true, the great Æneas fled too fast.
Defrauded of my conquest once before, What then I lost, the gods this day restore.
Thetis’ this day, or Venus’ offspring dies, And tears shall trickle from celestial eyes: For when two heroes, thus derived, contend, ’Tis not in words the glorious strife can end.
If yet thou further seek to learn my birth (A tale resounded through the spacious earth) Hear how the glorious origin we prove From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove: Dardania’s walls he raised; for Ilion, then, (The city since of many-languaged men,) Was not.
The natives were content to till The shady foot of Ida’s fountful hill.[264] From Dardanus great Erichthonius springs, The richest, once, of Asia’s wealthy kings; Three thousand mares his spacious pastures bred, Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed.
Boreas, enamour’d of the sprightly train, Conceal’d his godhead in a flowing mane, With voice dissembled to his loves he neigh’d, And coursed the dappled beauties o’er the mead: Hence sprung twelve others of unrivall’d kind, Swift as their mother mares, and father wind.
These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain, Nor plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain; And when along the level seas they flew,[265] Scarce on the surface curl’d the briny dew.
Such Erichthonius was: from him there came The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name.
Three sons renown’d adorn’d his nuptial bed, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed: The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair, Whom heaven, enamour’d, snatch’d to upper air, To bear the cup of Jove (ethereal guest, The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast).
The two remaining sons the line divide: First rose Laomedon from Ilus’ side; From him Tithonus, now in cares grown old, And Priam, bless’d with Hector, brave and bold; Clytius and Lampus, ever-honour’d pair; And Hicetaon, thunderbolt of war.
From great Assaracus sprang Capys, he Begat Anchises, and Anchises me.
Such is our race: ’tis fortune gives us birth, But Jove alone endues the soul with worth: He, source of power and might! with boundless sway, All human courage gives, or takes away.
Cease then—Our business in the field of fight Is not to question, but to prove our might.
Far on his outstretch’d arm, Pelides held (To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful shield, That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fear Saw, ere it fell, the immeasurable spear.
His fears were vain; impenetrable charms Secured the temper of the ethereal arms.
Five plates of various metal, various mould, Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold, Of tin each inward, and the middle gold: There stuck the lance.
Achilles, rushing in with dreadful cries, Draws his broad blade, and at Æneas flies: Æneas rousing as the foe came on, With force collected, heaves a mighty stone: A mass enormous! which in modern days No two of earth’s degenerate sons could raise.
But ocean’s god, whose earthquakes rock the ground Saw the distress, and moved the powers around: “Lo! on the brink of fate Æneas stands, An instant victim to Achilles’ hands; By Phœbus urged; but Phœbus has bestow’d His aid in vain: the man o’erpowers the god.
And can ye see this righteous chief atone With guiltless blood for vices not his own?
To all the gods his constant vows were paid; Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our aid.
That done, with force divine he snatch’d on high The Dardan prince, and bore him through the sky, Smooth-gliding without step, above the heads Of warring heroes, and of bounding steeds: Till at the battle’s utmost verge they light, Where the slow Caucans close the rear of fight.
The godhead there (his heavenly form confess’d) With words like these the panting chief address’d: “What power, O prince! with force inferior far, Urged thee to meet Achilles’ arm in war?
Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom, Defrauding fate of all thy fame to come.
But when the day decreed (for come it must) Shall lay this dreadful hero in the dust, Let then the furies of that arm be known, Secure no Grecian force transcends thy own.” With that, he left him wondering as he lay, Then from Achilles chased the mist away: Sudden, returning with a stream of light, The scene of war came rushing on his sight.
I thought alone with mortals to contend, But powers celestial sure this foe defend.
Now then let others bleed.” This said, aloud He vents his fury and inflames the crowd: “O Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms) Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms! ’Tis not in me, though favour’d by the sky, To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly: No god can singly such a host engage, Not Mars himself, nor great Minerva’s rage.
But whatsoe’er Achilles can inspire, Whate’er of active force, or acting fire; Whate’er this heart can prompt, or hand obey; All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.
Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear, And thin the squadrons with my single spear.” He said: nor less elate with martial joy, The godlike Hector warm’d the troops of Troy: “Trojans, to war!
E’en these with words Insult the brave, who tremble at their swords: The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven defies, But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies.
Nor from yon boaster shall your chief retire, Not though his heart were steel, his hands were fire; That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand, And brave that vengeful heart, that dreadful hand.” Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said; A wood of lances rises round his head, Clamours on clamours tempest all the air, They join, they throng, they thicken to the war.
He hears, obedient to the god of light, And, plunged within the ranks, awaits the fight.
Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the skies, On Troy’s whole force with boundless fury flies.
First falls Iphytion, at his army’s head; Brave was the chief, and brave the host he led; From great Otrynteus he derived his blood, His mother was a Nais, of the flood; Beneath the shades of Tmolus, crown’d with snow, From Hyde’s walls he ruled the lands below.
Demoleon next, Antenor’s offspring, laid Breathless in dust, the price of rashness paid.
The impatient steel with full-descending sway Forced through his brazen helm its furious way, Resistless drove the batter’d skull before, And dash’d and mingled all the brains with gore.
This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright, Deserts his chariot for a swifter flight: The lance arrests him: an ignoble wound The panting Trojan rivets to the ground.
He groans away his soul: not louder roars, At Neptune’s shrine on Helicè’s high shores, The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round, And ocean listens to the grateful sound.
Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,[268] The youngest hope of Priam’s stooping age: (Whose feet for swiftness in the race surpass’d:) Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last.
When Hector view’d, all ghastly in his gore, Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore, A cloud of sorrow overcast his sight, His soul no longer brook’d the distant fight: Full in Achilles’ dreadful front he came, And shook his javelin like a waving flame.
The son of Peleus sees, with joy possess’d, His heart high-bounding in his rising breast.
“And, lo! the man on whom black fates attend; The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend!
No more shall Hector’s and Pelides’ spear Turn from each other in the walks of war.”— Then with revengeful eyes he scann’d him o’er: “Come, and receive thy fate!” He spake no more.
Hector, undaunted, thus: “Such words employ To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike boy: Such we could give, defying and defied, Mean intercourse of obloquy and pride!
I know thy force to mine superior far; But heaven alone confers success in war: Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dart, And give it entrance in a braver heart.” Then parts the lance: but Pallas’ heavenly breath Far from Achilles wafts the winged death: The bidden dart again to Hector flies, And at the feet of its great master lies.
Achilles closes with his hated foe, His heart and eyes with flaming fury glow: But present to his aid, Apollo shrouds The favour’d hero in a veil of clouds.
Thrice struck Pelides with indignant heart, Thrice in impassive air he plunged the dart; The spear a fourth time buried in the cloud.
He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud: “Wretch! thou hast ’scaped again; once more thy flight Has saved thee, and the partial god of light.
But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand, If any power assist Achilles’ hand.
Fly then inglorious! but thy flight this day Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay.” With that, he gluts his rage on numbers slain: Then Dryops tumbled to the ensanguined plain, Pierced through the neck: he left him panting there, And stopp’d Demuchus, great Philetor’s heir.
Gigantic chief! deep gash’d the enormous blade, And for the soul an ample passage made.
Laoganus and Dardanus expire, The valiant sons of an unhappy sire; Both in one instant from the chariot hurl’d, Sunk in one instant to the nether world: This difference only their sad fates afford That one the spear destroy’d, and one the sword.
Nor less unpitied, young Alastor bleeds; In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pleads; In vain he begs thee, with a suppliant’s moan, To spare a form, an age so like thy own!
Unhappy boy! no prayer, no moving art, E’er bent that fierce, inexorable heart!
While yet he trembled at his knees, and cried, The ruthless falchion oped his tender side; The panting liver pours a flood of gore That drowns his bosom till he pants no more.
Through Mulius’ head then drove the impetuous spear: The warrior falls, transfix’d from ear to ear.
Thy life, Echeclus! next the sword bereaves, Deep though the front the ponderous falchion cleaves; Warm’d in the brain the smoking weapon lies, The purple death comes floating o’er his eyes.
Then brave Deucalion died: the dart was flung Where the knit nerves the pliant elbow strung; He dropp’d his arm, an unassisting weight, And stood all impotent, expecting fate: Full on his neck the falling falchion sped, From his broad shoulders hew’d his crested head: Forth from the bone the spinal marrow flies, And, sunk in dust, the corpse extended lies.
Rhigmas, whose race from fruitful Thracia came, (The son of Pierus, an illustrious name,) Succeeds to fate: the spear his belly rends; Prone from his car the thundering chief descends.
The squire, who saw expiring on the ground His prostrate master, rein’d the steeds around; His back, scarce turn’d, the Pelian javelin gored, And stretch’d the servant o’er his dying lord.
THE BATTLE IN THE RIVER SCAMANDER.[269] The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town, others to the river Scamander: he falls upon the latter with great slaughter: takes twelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; and kills Lycaon and Asteropeus.
Scamander attacks him with all his waves: Neptune and Pallas assist the hero: Simois joins Scamander: at length Vulcan, by the instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river.
Meanwhile Achilles continues the slaughter, drives the rest into Troy: Agenor only makes a stand, and is conveyed away in a cloud by Apollo; who (to delude Achilles) takes upon him Agenor’s shape, and while he pursues him in that disguise, gives the Trojans an opportunity of retiring into their city.
The scene is on the banks and in the stream of Scamander.
And now to Xanthus’ gliding stream they drove, Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove.
As the scorch’d locusts from their fields retire, While fast behind them runs the blaze of fire; Driven from the land before the smoky cloud, The clustering legions rush into the flood: So, plunged in Xanthus by Achilles’ force, Roars the resounding surge with men and horse.
His bloody lance the hero casts aside, (Which spreading tamarisks on the margin hide,) Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves, Arm’d with his sword, high brandish’d o’er the waves: Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round, Deep groan’d the waters with the dying sound; Repeated wounds the reddening river dyed, And the warm purple circled on the tide.
Swift through the foamy flood the Trojans fly, And close in rocks or winding caverns lie: So the huge dolphin tempesting the main, In shoals before him fly the scaly train, Confusedly heap’d they seek their inmost caves, Or pant and heave beneath the floating waves.
Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land; With their rich belts their captive arms restrains (Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).
Ten days were past, since in his father’s reign He felt the sweets of liberty again; The next, that god whom men in vain withstand Gives the same youth to the same conquering hand Now never to return! and doom’d to go A sadder journey to the shades below.
His well-known face when great Achilles eyed, (The helm and visor he had cast aside With wild affright, and dropp’d upon the field His useless lance and unavailing shield,) As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled, And knock’d his faltering knees, the hero said: “Ye mighty gods! what wonders strike my view!
Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?
Not him the sea’s unmeasured deeps detain, That bar such numbers from their native plain; Lo! he returns.
Try, if the grave can hold the wanderer; If earth, at length this active prince can seize, Earth, whose strong grasp has held down Hercules.” Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with fears Approach’d, and sought his knees with suppliant tears Loth as he was to yield his youthful breath, And his soul shivering at the approach of death.
Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound; He kiss’d his feet, extended on the ground: And while, above, the spear suspended stood, Longing to dip its thirsty point in blood, One hand embraced them close, one stopp’d the dart, While thus these melting words attempt his heart: “Thy well-known captive, great Achilles! see, Once more Lycaon trembles at thy knee.
Some pity to a suppliant’s name afford, Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board; Whom late thy conquering arm to Lemnos bore, Far from his father, friends, and native shore; A hundred oxen were his price that day, Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay.
Scarce respited from woes I yet appear, And scarce twelve morning suns have seen me here; Lo!
I sprang from Priam, and Laothoe fair, (Old Altes’ daughter, and Lelegia’s heir; Who held in Pedasus his famed abode, And ruled the fields where silver Satnio flow’d,) Two sons (alas! unhappy sons) she bore; For ah! one spear shall drink each brother’s gore, And I succeed to slaughter’d Polydore.
Not the same mother gave thy suppliant breath, With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclus’ death.” These words, attended with a shower of tears, The youth address’d to unrelenting ears: “Talk not of life, or ransom (he replies): Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies: In vain a single Trojan sues for grace; But least, the sons of Priam’s hateful race.
The great, the good Patroclus is no more!
He, far thy better, was foredoom’d to die, And thou, dost thou bewail mortality?
The day shall come (which nothing can avert) When by the spear, the arrow, or the dart, By night, or day, by force, or by design, Impending death and certain fate are mine!
Die then,”—He said; and as the word he spoke, The fainting stripling sank before the stroke: His hand forgot its grasp, and left the spear, While all his trembling frame confess’d his fear: Sudden, Achilles his broad sword display’d, And buried in his neck the reeking blade.
The victor to the stream the carcase gave, And thus insults him, floating on the wave: “Lie there, Lycaon! let the fish surround Thy bloated corpse, and suck thy gory wound: There no sad mother shall thy funerals weep, But swift Scamander roll thee to the deep, Whose every wave some watery monster brings, To feast unpunish’d on the fat of kings.
Such ruin theirs, and such compassion mine.
What boots ye now Scamander’s worshipp’d stream, His earthly honours, and immortal name?
In vain your immolated bulls are slain, Your living coursers glut his gulfs in vain!
Thus he rewards you, with this bitter fate; Thus, till the Grecian vengeance is complete: Thus is atoned Patroclus’ honour’d shade, And the short absence of Achilles paid.” These boastful words provoked the raging god; With fury swells the violated flood.
What means divine may yet the power employ To check Achilles, and to rescue Troy?
Near as they drew, Achilles thus began: “What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
Unhappy is the sire Whose son encounters our resistless ire.” “O son of Peleus! what avails to trace (Replied the warrior) our illustrious race?
Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies: Its erring fury hiss’d along the skies; Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear, Even to the middle earth; and quiver’d there.
The foe thrice tugg’d, and shook the rooted wood; Repulsive of his might the weapon stood: The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain; Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain; His belly open’d with a ghastly wound, The reeking entrails pour upon the ground.
Beneath the hero’s feet he panting lies, And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies; While the proud victor thus triumphing said, His radiant armour tearing from the dead: “So ends thy glory!
Such the fate they prove, Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove!
But great Saturnius is the source of mine.
The race of these superior far to those, As he that thunders to the stream that flows.
What rivers can, Scamander might have shown; But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.
Even Achelous might contend in vain, And all the roaring billows of the main.
The eternal ocean, from whose fountains flow The seas, the rivers, and the springs below, The thundering voice of Jove abhors to hear, And in his deep abysses shakes with fear.” He said: then from the bank his javelin tore, And left the breathless warrior in his gore.
The floating tides the bloody carcase lave, And beat against it, wave succeeding wave; Till, roll’d between the banks, it lies the food Of curling eels, and fishes of the flood.
All scatter’d round the stream (their mightiest slain) The amazed Pæonians scour along the plain; He vents his fury on the flying crew, Thrasius, Astyplus, and Mnesus slew; Mydon, Thersilochus, with Ænius, fell; And numbers more his lance had plunged to hell, But from the bottom of his gulfs profound Scamander spoke; the shores return’d the sound.
“O first of mortals! (for the gods are thine) In valour matchless, and in force divine!
Was not the mandate of the sire above Full and express, that Phœbus should employ His sacred arrows in defence of Troy, And make her conquer, till Hyperion’s fall In awful darkness hide the face of all?” He spoke in vain—The chief without dismay Ploughs through the boiling surge his desperate way.
Then rising in his rage above the shores, From all his deep the bellowing river roars, Huge heaps of slain disgorges on the coast, And round the banks the ghastly dead are toss’d.
Now bursting on his head with thundering sound, The falling deluge whelms the hero round: His loaded shield bends to the rushing tide; His feet, upborne, scarce the strong flood divide, Sliddering, and staggering.
On the border stood A spreading elm, that overhung the flood; He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay; The plant uprooted to his weight gave way.[270] Heaving the bank, and undermining all; Loud flash the waters to the rushing fall Of the thick foliage.
Then blacken’d the wild waves: the murmur rose: The god pursues, a huger billow throws, And bursts the bank, ambitious to destroy The man whose fury is the fate of Troy.
He like the warlike eagle speeds his pace (Swiftest and strongest of the aerial race); Far as a spear can fly, Achilles springs; At every bound his clanging armour rings: Now here, now there, he turns on every side, And winds his course before the following tide; The waves flow after, wheresoe’er he wheels, And gather fast, and murmur at his heels.
Still flies Achilles, but before his eyes Still swift Scamander rolls where’er he flies: Not all his speed escapes the rapid floods; The first of men, but not a match for gods.
Oft as he turn’d the torrent to oppose, And bravely try if all the powers were foes; So oft the surge, in watery mountains spread, Beats on his back, or bursts upon his head.
Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he braves, And still indignant bounds above the waves.
Tired by the tides, his knees relax with toil; Wash’d from beneath him slides the slimy soil; When thus (his eyes on heaven’s expansion thrown) Forth bursts the hero with an angry groan: “Is there no god Achilles to befriend, No power to avert his miserable end?
Prevent, O Jove! this ignominious date,[271] And make my future life the sport of fate.
Of all heaven’s oracles believed in vain, But most of Thetis must her son complain; By Phœbus’ darts she prophesied my fall, In glorious arms before the Trojan wall.
Might Hector’s spear this dauntless bosom rend, And my swift soul o’ertake my slaughter’d friend.
Achilles meets a shameful fate, Oh how unworthy of the brave and great!
Like some vile swain, whom on a rainy day, Crossing a ford, the torrent sweeps away, An unregarded carcase to the sea.” Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief, And thus in human form address’d the chief: The power of ocean first: “Forbear thy fear, O son of Peleus!
Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid, Propitious Neptune, and the blue-eyed maid.
But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend, Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall: Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance, And Hector’s blood shall smoke upon thy lance.
Thine is the glory doom’d.” Thus spake the gods: Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.
Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impell’d, He springs impetuous, and invades the field: O’er all the expanded plain the waters spread; Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead, Floating ’midst scatter’d arms; while casques of gold And turn’d-up bucklers glitter’d as they roll’d.
High o’er the surging tide, by leaps and bounds, He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds.
Not a whole river stops the hero’s course, While Pallas fills him with immortal force.
With equal rage, indignant Xanthus roars, And lifts his billows, and o’erwhelms his shores.
“Haste, my brother flood; And check this mortal that controls a god; Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight, And Ilion tumble from her towery height.
Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar, From all thy fountains swell thy watery store, With broken rocks, and with a load of dead, Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head.
Mark how resistless through the floods he goes, And boldly bids the warring gods be foes!
But nor that force, nor form divine to sight, Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite: Whelm’d under our dark gulfs those arms shall lie, That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan eye; And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurl’d, Immersed remain this terror of the world.
Then, murmuring from his beds, he boils, he raves, And a foam whitens on the purple waves: At every step, before Achilles stood The crimson surge, and deluged him with blood.
“Rise to the war! the insulting flood requires Thy wasteful arm! assemble all thy fires!
Go, mighty in thy rage! display thy power, Drink the whole flood, the crackling trees devour.
Scorch all the banks! and (till our voice reclaim) Exert the unwearied furies of the flame!” The power ignipotent her word obeys: Wide o’er the plain he pours the boundless blaze; At once consumes the dead, and dries the soil And the shrunk waters in their channel boil.
As when autumnal Boreas sweeps the sky, And instant blows the water’d gardens dry: So look’d the field, so whiten’d was the ground, While Vulcan breathed the fiery blast around.
Swift on the sedgy reeds the ruin preys; Along the margin winds the running blaze: The trees in flaming rows to ashes turn, The flowering lotos and the tamarisk burn, Broad elm, and cypress rising in a spire; The watery willows hiss before the fire.
Now glow the waves, the fishes pant for breath, The eels lie twisting in the pangs of death: Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry, Or, gasping, turn their bellies to the sky.
I faint, I sink, unequal to the fight— I yield—Let Ilion fall; if fate decree— Ah—bend no more thy fiery arms on me!” He ceased; wide conflagration blazing round; The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.
As when the flames beneath a cauldron rise,[272] To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice, Amid the fierce embrace of circling fires The waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires: So boils the imprison’d flood, forbid to flow, And choked with vapours feels his bottom glow.
To Juno then, imperial queen of air, The burning river sends his earnest prayer: “Ah why, Saturnia; must thy son engage Me, only me, with all his wasteful rage?
On other gods his dreadful arm employ, For mightier gods assert the cause of Troy.
Submissive I desist, if thou command; But ah! withdraw this all-destroying hand.
While these by Juno’s will the strife resign, The warring gods in fierce contention join: Rekindling rage each heavenly breast alarms: With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms: Heaven in loud thunder bids the trumpet sound; And wide beneath them groans the rending ground.
Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries, And views contending gods with careless eyes.
The power of battles lifts his brazen spear, And first assaults the radiant queen of war: “What moved thy madness, thus to disunite Ethereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight?
Thy impious hand Tydides’ javelin bore, And madly bathed it in celestial gore.” He spoke, and smote the long-resounding shield, Which bears Jove’s thunder on its dreadful field: The adamantine ægis of her sire, That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire.
Then heaved the goddess in her mighty hand A stone, the limit of the neighbouring land, There fix’d from eldest times; black, craggy, vast; This at the heavenly homicide she cast.
Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size: And seven broad acres covers as he lies.
The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound: Loud o’er the fields his ringing arms resound: The scornful dame her conquest views with smiles, And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles: “Hast thou not yet, insatiate fury! known How far Minerva’s force transcends thy own?
Juno, whom thou rebellious darest withstand, Corrects thy folly thus by Pallas’ hand; Thus meets thy broken faith with just disgrace, And partial aid to Troy’s perfidious race.” The goddess spoke, and turn’d her eyes away, That, beaming round, diffused celestial day.
Jove’s Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land, Lent to the wounded god her tender hand: Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain, And, propp’d on her fair arm, forsakes the plain.
This the bright empress of the heavens survey’d, And, scoffing, thus to war’s victorious maid: “Lo! what an aid on Mars’s side is seen!
The smiles’ and loves’ unconquerable queen!
Mark with what insolence, in open view, She moves: let Pallas, if she dares, pursue.” Minerva smiling heard, the pair o’ertook, And slightly on her breast the wanton strook: She, unresisting, fell (her spirits fled); On earth together lay the lovers spread.
To Grecian gods such let the Phrygian be, So dread, so fierce, as Venus is to me; Then from the lowest stone shall Troy be moved.” Thus she, and Juno with a smile approved.
Meantime, to mix in more than mortal fight, The god of ocean dares the god of light.
“What sloth has seized us, when the fields around Ring with conflicting powers, and heaven returns the sound: Shall, ignominious, we with shame retire, No deed perform’d, to our Olympian sire?
Come, prove thy arm! for first the war to wage, Suits not my greatness, or superior age: Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan throne, (Forgetful of my wrongs, and of thy own,) And guard the race of proud Laomedon!
Hast thou forgot, how, at the monarch’s prayer, We shared the lengthen’d labours of a year?
Troy walls I raised (for such were Jove’s commands), And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands: Thy task it was to feed the bellowing droves Along fair Ida’s vales and pendant groves.
But when the circling seasons in their train Brought back the grateful day that crown’d our pain, With menace stern the fraudful king defied Our latent godhead, and the prize denied: Mad as he was, he threaten’d servile bands, And doom’d us exiles far in barbarous lands.[273] Incensed, we heavenward fled with swiftest wing, And destined vengeance on the perjured king.
Dost thou, for this, afford proud Ilion grace, And not, like us, infest the faithless race; Like us, their present, future sons destroy, And from its deep foundations heave their Troy?” Apollo thus: “To combat for mankind Ill suits the wisdom of celestial mind; For what is man?
Calamitous by birth, They owe their life and nourishment to earth; Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crown’d, Smile on the sun; now, wither on the ground.
To their own hands commit the frantic scene, Nor mix immortals in a cause so mean.” Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly fires, And from the senior power submiss retires: Him thus retreating, Artemis upbraids, The quiver’d huntress of the sylvan shades: “And is it thus the youthful Phœbus flies, And yields to ocean’s hoary sire the prize?
How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show Of pointed arrows and the silver bow!
Now boast no more in yon celestial bower, Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power.” Silent he heard the queen of woods upbraid: Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid: But furious thus: “What insolence has driven Thy pride to face the majesty of heaven?
What though by Jove the female plague design’d, Fierce to the feeble race of womankind, The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart; Thy sex’s tyrant, with a tiger’s heart?
What though tremendous in the woodland chase Thy certain arrows pierce the savage race?
How dares thy rashness on the powers divine Employ those arms, or match thy force with mine?
About her temples flies the busy bow; Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow; The scattering arrows, rattling from the case, Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.
Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies, And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes: So, when the falcon wings her way above, To the cleft cavern speeds the gentle dove; (Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats, Yet still her heart against the marble beats.
To her Latona hastes with tender care; Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the war: “How shall I face the dame, who gives delight To him whose thunders blacken heaven with night?
The sire superior smiled, and bade her show What heavenly hand had caused his daughter’s woe?
Abash’d, she names his own imperial spouse; And the pale crescent fades upon her brows.
Thus they above: while, swiftly gliding down, Apollo enters Ilion’s sacred town; The guardian-god now trembled for her wall, And fear’d the Greeks, though fate forbade her fall.
Back to Olympus, from the war’s alarms, Return the shining bands of gods in arms; Some proud in triumph, some with rage on fire; And take their thrones around the ethereal sire.
Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds, O’er slaughter’d heroes, and o’er rolling steeds.
As when avenging flames with fury driven On guilty towns exert the wrath of heaven; The pale inhabitants, some fall, some fly; And the red vapours purple all the sky: So raged Achilles: death and dire dismay, And toils, and terrors, fill’d the dreadful day.
High on a turret hoary Priam stands, And marks the waste of his destructive hands; Views, from his arm, the Trojans’ scatter’d flight, And the near hero rising on his sight!
With feeble pace, And settled sorrow on his aged face, Fast as he could, he sighing quits the walls; And thus descending, on the guards he calls: “You to whose care our city-gates belong, Set wide your portals to the flying throng: For lo! he comes, with unresisted sway; He comes, and desolation marks his way!
But when within the walls our troops take breath, Lock fast the brazen bars, and shut out death.” Thus charged the reverend monarch: wide were flung The opening folds; the sounding hinges rung.
Phœbus rush’d forth, the flying bands to meet; Struck slaughter back, and cover’d the retreat, On heaps the Trojans crowd to gain the gate, And gladsome see their last escape from fate.
Thither, all parch’d with thirst, a heartless train, Hoary with dust, they beat the hollow plain: And gasping, panting, fainting, labour on With heavier strides, that lengthen toward the town.
Enraged Achilles follows with his spear; Wild with revenge, insatiable of war.
Then had the Greeks eternal praise acquired, And Troy inglorious to her walls retired; But he, the god who darts ethereal flame, Shot down to save her, and redeem her fame: To young Agenor force divine he gave; (Antenor’s offspring, haughty, bold, and brave;) In aid of him, beside the beech he sate, And wrapt in clouds, restrain’d the hand of fate.
When now the generous youth Achilles spies, Thick beats his heart, the troubled motions rise. (So, ere a storm, the waters heave and roll.) He stops, and questions thus his mighty soul; “What, shall I fly this terror of the plain!
Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same road Yon line of slaughter’d Trojans lately trod.
No: with the common heap I scorn to fall— What if they pass’d me to the Trojan wall, While I decline to yonder path, that leads To Ida’s forests and surrounding shades?
What if?—But wherefore all this vain debate?
Even now perhaps, ere yet I turn the wall, The fierce Achilles sees me, and I fall: Such is his swiftness, ’tis in vain to fly, And such his valour, that who stands must die.
Howe’er ’tis better, fighting for the state, Here, and in public view, to meet my fate.
One only soul informs that dreadful frame: And Jove’s sole favour gives him all his fame.” He said, and stood, collected, in his might; And all his beating bosom claim’d the fight.
So from some deep-grown wood a panther starts, Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts: Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the sounds Of shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds; Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain; And the barb’d javelin stings his breast in vain: On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies; And tears his hunter, or beneath him dies.
Not less resolved, Antenor’s valiant heir Confronts Achilles, and awaits the war, Disdainful of retreat: high held before, His shield (a broad circumference) he bore; Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw The lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe: “How proud Achilles glories in his fame!
Know, that hope is vain; A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.
Parents and children our just arms employ, And strong and many are the sons of Troy.
Great as thou art, even thou may’st stain with gore These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore.” He said: with matchless force the javelin flung Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms He stands impassive in the ethereal arms.
Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe, His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow: But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds.
Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view, Dismiss’d with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape, Assumes Agenor’s habit, voice and shape, Flies from the furious chief in this disguise; The furious chief still follows where he flies.
Pale Troy against Achilles shuts her gate: And nations breathe, deliver’d from their fate.
The Trojans being safe within the walls, Hector only stays to oppose Achilles.
Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his son to re-enter the town.
Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in vain.
Hector consults within himself what measures to take; but at the advance of Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies.
Achilles pursues him thrice round the walls of Troy.
The gods debate concerning the fate of Hector; at length Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles.
She deludes Hector in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and is slain.
Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot in the sight of Priam and Hecuba.
Their lamentations, tears, and despair.
Their cries reach the ears of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into the inner part of the palace: she mounts up to the walls, and beholds her dead husband.
She swoons at the spectacle.
Her excess of grief and lamentation.
The thirtieth day still continues.
The scene lies under the walls, and on the battlements of Troy.
Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic fear, The herded Ilians rush like driven deer: There safe they wipe the briny drops away, And drown in bowls the labours of the day.
Close to the walls, advancing o’er the fields Beneath one roof of well-compacted shields, March, bending on, the Greeks’ embodied powers, Far stretching in the shade of Trojan towers.
Great Hector singly stay’d: chain’d down by fate There fix’d he stood before the Scæan gate; Still his bold arms determined to employ, The guardian still of long-defended Troy.
Apollo now to tired Achilles turns: (The power confess’d in all his glory burns:) “And what (he cries) has Peleus’ son in view, With mortal speed a godhead to pursue?
Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain: Safe in their walls are now her troops bestow’d, While here thy frantic rage attacks a god.” The chief incensed—“Too partial god of day!
To check my conquests in the middle way: How few in Ilion else had refuge found!
Thou robb’st me of a glory justly mine, Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine: Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain, To cheat a mortal who repines in vain.” Then to the city, terrible and strong, With high and haughty steps he tower’d along, So the proud courser, victor of the prize, To the near goal with double ardour flies.
Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,[274] Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night, Orion’s dog (the year when autumn weighs), And o’er the feebler stars exerts his rays; Terrific glory! for his burning breath Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
Methinks already I behold thee slain, And stretch’d beneath that fury of the plain.
Implacable Achilles! might’st thou be To all the gods no dearer than to me!
Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore, And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.
How many valiant sons I late enjoy’d, Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroy’d: Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant isles To shameful bondage, and unworthy toils.
Two, while I speak, my eyes in vain explore, Two from one mother sprung, my Polydore, And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!
Oh! if in yonder hostile camp they live, What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give! (Their grandsire’s wealth, by right of birth their own, Consign’d his daughter with Lelegia’s throne:) But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost, All pale they wander on the Stygian coast; What sorrows then must their sad mother know, What anguish I? unutterable woe!
Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me, Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee.
Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall; And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs; While yet thy father feels the woes he bears, Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage (All trembling on the verge of helpless age) Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
The bitter dregs of fortune’s cup to drain: To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes, And number all his days by miseries!
My heroes slain, my bridal bed o’erturn’d, My daughters ravish’d, and my city burn’d, My bleeding infants dash’d against the floor; These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate, The last sad relic of my ruin’d state, (Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall, And stain the pavement of my regal hall; Where famish’d dogs, late guardians of my door, Shall lick their mangled master’s spatter’d gore.
But when the fates, in fulness of their rage, Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age, In dust the reverend lineaments deform, And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm: This, this is misery! the last, the worse, That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!” He said, and acting what no words could say, Rent from his head the silver locks away.
With him the mournful mother bears a part; Yet all her sorrows turn not Hector’s heart.
The zone unbraced, her bosom she display’d; And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said: “Have mercy on me, O my son! revere The words of age; attend a parent’s prayer!
If ever thee in these fond arms I press’d, Or still’d thy infant clamours at this breast; Ah do not thus our helpless years forego, But, by our walls secured, repel the foe.
Far from our pious rites those dear remains Must feast the vultures on the naked plains.” So they, while down their cheeks the torrents roll; But fix’d remains the purpose of his soul; Resolved he stands, and with a fiery glance Expects the hero’s terrible advance.
So, roll’d up in his den, the swelling snake Beholds the traveller approach the brake; When fed with noxious herbs his turgid veins Have gather’d half the poisons of the plains; He burns, he stiffens with collected ire, And his red eyeballs glare with living fire.
Beneath a turret, on his shield reclined, He stood, and question’d thus his mighty mind:[275] “Where lies my way? to enter in the wall?
Honour and shame the ungenerous thought recall: Shall proud Polydamas before the gate Proclaim, his counsels are obey’d too late, Which timely follow’d but the former night, What numbers had been saved by Hector’s flight?
That wise advice rejected with disdain, I feel my folly in my people slain.
Methinks my suffering country’s voice I hear, But most her worthless sons insult my ear, On my rash courage charge the chance of war, And blame those virtues which they cannot share.
No—if I e’er return, return I must Glorious, my country’s terror laid in dust: Or if I perish, let her see me fall In field at least, and fighting for her wall.
Unarm’d if I should go, What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe, But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow?
He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind: Achilles follows like the winged wind.
As when some hero’s funerals are decreed In grateful honour of the mighty dead; Where high rewards the vigorous youth inflame (Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame) The panting coursers swiftly turn the goal, And with them turns the raised spectator’s soul: Thus three times round the Trojan wall they fly.
The gazing gods lean forward from the sky; To whom, while eager on the chase they look, The sire of mortals and immortals spoke: “Unworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven, Behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
My heart partakes the generous Hector’s pain; Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain, Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy, From Ida’s summits, and the towers of Troy: Now see him flying; to his fears resign’d, And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
Consult, ye powers! (’tis worthy your debate) Whether to snatch him from impending fate, Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain, (Good as he is) the lot imposed on man.” Then Pallas thus: “Shall he whose vengeance forms The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms, Shall he prolong one Trojan’s forfeit breath?
No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?” “Go then (return’d the sire) without delay, Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.” Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies, And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.
As through the forest, o’er the vale and lawn, The well-breath’d beagle drives the flying fawn, In vain he tries the covert of the brakes, Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes; Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews, The certain hound his various maze pursues.
Thus step by step, where’er the Trojan wheel’d, There swift Achilles compass’d round the field.
Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends, And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends, (Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below, From the high turrets might oppress the foe,) So oft Achilles turns him to the plain: He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.
As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace, One to pursue, and one to lead the chase, Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake, Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake: No less the labouring heroes pant and strain: While that but flies, and this pursues in vain.
What god, O muse, assisted Hector’s force With fate itself so long to hold the course?
Phœbus it was; who, in his latest hour, Endued his knees with strength, his nerves with power: And great Achilles, lest some Greek’s advance Should snatch the glory from his lifted lance, Sign’d to the troops to yield his foe the way, And leave untouch’d the honours of the day.
Jove lifts the golden balances, that show The fates of mortal men, and things below: Here each contending hero’s lot he tries, And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies.
Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hector’s fate; Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight.
Fierce Minerva flies To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries: “O loved of Jove! this day our labours cease, And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.
Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far, Drunk with renown, insatiable of war, Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight, Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
Since you, of all our numerous race alone Defend my life, regardless of your own.” Again the goddess: “Much my father’s prayer, And much my mother’s, press’d me to forbear: My friends embraced my knees, adjured my stay, But stronger love impell’d, and I obey.
Come then, the glorious conflict let us try, Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly; Or let us stretch Achilles on the field, Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield.” Fraudful she said; then swiftly march’d before: The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more.
The silence Hector broke: His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke: “Enough, O son of Peleus!
Rouse then thy forces this important hour, Collect thy soul, and call forth all thy power.
No further subterfuge, no further chance; ’Tis Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my lance.
Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath, Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy death.” He spoke, and launch’d his javelin at the foe; But Hector shunn’d the meditated blow: He stoop’d, while o’er his head the flying spear Sang innocent, and spent its force in air.
Minerva watch’d it falling on the land, Then drew, and gave to great Achilles’ hand, Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy, Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.
My fate depends on Heaven, To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown, Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own.
Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind, And with false terrors sink another’s mind.
But know, whatever fate I am to try, By no dishonest wound shall Hector die.
I shall not fall a fugitive at least, My soul shall bravely issue from my breast.
But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart End all my country’s woes, deep buried in thy heart.” The weapon flew, its course unerring held, Unerring, but the heavenly shield repell’d The mortal dart; resulting with a bound From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.
Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain, Nor other lance, nor other hope remain; He calls Deiphobus, demands a spear— In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh; “’Tis so—Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!
I deem’d Deiphobus had heard my call, But he secure lies guarded in the wall.
A god deceived me; Pallas, ’twas thy deed, Death and black fate approach! ’tis I must bleed.
No refuge now, no succour from above, Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove, Propitious once, and kind!
Then welcome fate! ’Tis true I perish, yet I perish great: Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire, Let future ages hear it, and admire!” Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew, And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
So Jove’s bold bird, high balanced in the air, Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare.
Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares: Before his breast the flaming shield he bears, Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun.
Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!) And as he moved, his figure seem’d on flame.
As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,[277] Far-beaming o’er the silver host of night, When all the starry train emblaze the sphere: So shone the point of great Achilles’ spear.
In his right hand he waves the weapon round, Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound; But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore Securely cased the warrior’s body o’er.
One space at length he spies, to let in fate, Where ’twixt the neck and throat the jointed plate Gave entrance: through that penetrable part Furious he drove the well-directed dart: Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour.
Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies, While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries: “At last is Hector stretch’d upon the plain, Who fear’d no vengeance for Patroclus slain: Then, prince! you should have fear’d, what now you feel; Achilles absent was Achilles still: Yet a short space the great avenger stayed, Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.
Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adorn’d, For ever honour’d, and for ever mourn’d: While cast to all the rage of hostile power, Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour.” Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death: “By thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath!
By all the sacred prevalence of prayer; Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!
The common rites of sepulture bestow, To soothe a father’s and a mother’s woe: Let their large gifts procure an urn at least, And Hector’s ashes in his country rest.” “No, wretch accursed! relentless he replies; (Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;) Not those who gave me breath should bid me spare, Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer.
The Fates suppress’d his labouring breath, And his eyes stiffen’d at the hand of death; To the dark realm the spirit wings its way, (The manly body left a load of clay,) And plaintive glides along the dreary coast, A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!
Achilles, musing as he roll’d his eyes O’er the dead hero, thus unheard, replies: “Die thou the first!
Then forcing backward from the gaping wound The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
Since now at length the powerful will of heaven The dire destroyer to our arm has given, Is not Troy fallen already?
See, if already their deserted towers Are left unmann’d; or if they yet retain The souls of heroes, their great Hector slain.
Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee, Divine Patroclus!
Death hath seal’d his eyes; Unwept, unhonour’d, uninterr’d he lies!
If in the melancholy shades below, The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow, Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecay’d, Burn on through death, and animate my shade.
Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring The corpse of Hector, and your pæans sing.
Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore, “Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more.”” Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred; (Unworthy of himself, and of the dead;) The nervous ancles bored, his feet he bound With thongs inserted through the double wound; These fix’d up high behind the rolling wain, His graceful head was trail’d along the plain.
Proud on his car the insulting victor stood, And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.
He smites the steeds; the rapid chariot flies; The sudden clouds of circling dust arise.
Now lost is all that formidable air; The face divine, and long-descending hair, Purple the ground, and streak the sable sand; Deform’d, dishonour’d, in his native land, Given to the rage of an insulting throng, And, in his parents’ sight, now dragg’d along!
The mother first beheld with sad survey; She rent her tresses, venerable grey, And cast, far off, the regal veils away.
With piercing shrieks his bitter fate she moans, While the sad father answers groans with groans, Tears after tears his mournful cheeks o’erflow, And the whole city wears one face of woe: No less than if the rage of hostile fires, From her foundations curling to her spires, O’er the proud citadel at length should rise, And the last blaze send Ilion to the skies.
The wretched monarch of the falling state, Distracted, presses to the Dardan gate.
Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course, While strong affliction gives the feeble force: Grief tears his heart, and drives him to and fro, In all the raging impotence of woe.
At length he roll’d in dust, and thus begun, Imploring all, and naming one by one: “Ah! let me, let me go where sorrow calls; I, only I, will issue from your walls (Guide or companion, friends!
I ask ye none), And bow before the murderer of my son.
He has a father too; a man like me; One, not exempt from age and misery (Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace Begot this pest of me, and all my race).
How many valiant sons, in early bloom, Has that cursed hand sent headlong to the tomb!
Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave) Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
O had thy gentle spirit pass’d in peace, The son expiring in the sire’s embrace, While both thy parents wept the fatal hour, And, bending o’er thee, mix’d the tender shower!
Some comfort that had been, some sad relief, To melt in full satiety of grief!” Thus wail’d the father, grovelling on the ground, And all the eyes of Ilion stream’d around.
Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears: (A mourning princess, and a train in tears;) “Ah why has Heaven prolong’d this hated breath, Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
O fatal change! become in one sad day A senseless corse! inanimated clay!” But not as yet the fatal news had spread To fair Andromache, of Hector dead; As yet no messenger had told his fate, Not e’en his stay without the Scæan gate.
Far in the close recesses of the dome, Pensive she plied the melancholy loom; A growing work employ’d her secret hours, Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn, The bath preparing for her lord’s return In vain; alas! her lord returns no more; Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
My faltering knees their trembling frame desert, A pulse unusual flutters at my heart; Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate (Ye gods avert it!) threats the Trojan state.
Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!
But much I fear my Hector’s dauntless breast Confronts Achilles; chased along the plain, Shut from our walls!
Safe in the crowd he ever scorn’d to wait, And sought for glory in the jaws of fate: Perhaps that noble heat has cost his breath, Now quench’d for ever in the arms of death.” She spoke: and furious, with distracted pace, Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face, Flies through the dome (the maids her steps pursue), And mounts the walls, and sends around her view.
A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes: She faints, she falls; her breath, her colour flies.
Her hair’s fair ornaments, the braids that bound, The net that held them, and the wreath that crown’d, The veil and diadem flew far away (The gift of Venus on her bridal day).
Around a train of weeping sisters stands, To raise her sinking with assistant hands.
For sure one star its baneful beam display’d On Priam’s roof, and Hippoplacia’s shade.
From different parents, different climes we came.
At different periods, yet our fate the same!
Would I had never been!—O thou, the ghost Of my dead husband! miserably lost!
And I abandon’d, desolate, alone!
Even from his own paternal roof expell’d, Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
Heedless, they who boast Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost, Shall cry, ‘Begone! thy father feasts not here:’ The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears, To my sad soul Astyanax appears!
Forced by repeated insults to return, And to his widow’d mother vainly mourn: He, who, with tender delicacy bred, With princes sported, and on dainties fed, And when still evening gave him up to rest, Sunk soft in down upon the nurse’s breast, Must—ah what must he not?
Whom Ilion calls Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,[279] Is now that name no more, unhappy boy!
But thou, my Hector, liest exposed in air, Far from thy parents’ and thy consort’s care; Whose hand in vain, directed by her love, The martial scarf and robe of triumph wove.
Now to devouring flames be these a prey, Useless to thee, from this accursed day!
Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid, An honour to the living, not the dead!” So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear, Sigh back her sighs, and answer tear with tear.
FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF PATROCLUS.[280] Achilles and the Myrmidons do honours to the body of Patroclus.
After the funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep, the ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites of burial; the next morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggons to fetch wood for the pyre.
The funeral procession, and the offering their hair to the dead.
Achilles sacrifices several animals, and lastly twelve Trojan captives, at the pile; then sets fire to it.
He pays libations to the Winds, which (at the instance of Iris) rise, and raise the flames.
Achilles institutes the funeral games: the chariot-race, the fight of the caestus, the wrestling, the foot-race, the single combat, the discus, the shooting with arrows, the darting the javelin: the various descriptions of which, and the various success of the several antagonists, make the greatest part of the book.
In this book ends the thirtieth day.
The night following, the ghost of Patroclus appears to Achilles: the one-and-thirtieth day is employed in felling the timber for the pile: the two-and-thirtieth in burning it; and the three-and-thirtieth in the games.
The scene is generally on the sea-shore.
The body soil’d with dust, and black with gore, Lies on broad Hellespont’s resounding shore.
The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand, All, but the martial Myrmidonian band: These yet assembled great Achilles holds, And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds: “Not yet, my brave companions of the war, Release your smoking coursers from the car; But, with his chariot each in order led, Perform due honours to Patroclus dead.
Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief, Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief.” The troops obey’d; and thrice in order led[281] (Achilles first) their coursers round the dead; And thrice their sorrows and laments renew; Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.
But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs Burst from his heart, and torrents from his eyes: His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laid On his dead friend’s cold breast, and thus he said: “All hail, Patroclus! let thy honour’d ghost Hear, and rejoice on Pluto’s dreary coast; Behold!
Achilles’ promise is complete; The bloody Hector stretch’d before thy feet.
Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign; And twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line, Sacred to vengeance, instant shall expire; Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre.” Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view) Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw, Prone on the dust.
The Myrmidons around Unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.
All to Achilles’ sable ship repair, Frequent and full, the genial feast to share.
Now from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire, The bristly victims hissing o’er the fire: The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries Expires the goat; the sheep in silence dies.
Around the hero’s prostrate body flow’d, In one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
And now a band of Argive monarchs brings The glorious victor to the king of kings.
From his dead friend the pensive warrior went, With steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
The attending heralds, as by office bound, With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround: To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore, They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:[282] “No drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
The first and greatest of the gods above!
But great Pelides, stretch’d along the shore, Where, dash’d on rocks, the broken billows roar, Lies inly groaning; while on either hand The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
When lo! the shade, before his closing eyes, Of sad Patroclus rose, or seem’d to rise: In the same robe he living wore, he came: In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same.
The form familiar hover’d o’er his head, “And sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom said:) Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
Living, I seem’d his dearest, tenderest care, But now forgot, I wander in the air.
Let my pale corse the rites of burial know, And give me entrance in the realms below: Till then the spirit finds no resting-place, But here and there the unbodied spectres chase The vagrant dead around the dark abode, Forbid to cross the irremeable flood.
Now give thy hand; for to the farther shore When once we pass, the soul returns no more: When once the last funereal flames ascend, No more shall meet Achilles and his friend; No more our thoughts to those we loved make known; Or quit the dearest, to converse alone.
Together have we lived; together bred, One house received us, and one table fed; That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave, May mix our ashes in one common grave.” “And is it thou? (he answers) To my sight[283] Once more return’st thou from the realms of night?
Think each office paid, Whate’er can rest a discontented shade; But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!
Afford at least that melancholy joy.” He said, and with his longing arms essay’d In vain to grasp the visionary shade!
Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,[284] And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.
Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands, Pensive he muses with uplifted hands: “’Tis true, ’tis certain; man, though dead, retains Part of himself; the immortal mind remains: The form subsists without the body’s aid, Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
This night my friend, so late in battle lost, Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost: Even now familiar, as in life, he came; Alas! how different! yet how like the same!” Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears: And now the rosy-finger’d morn appears, Shows every mournful face with tears o’erspread, And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
But Agamemnon, as the rites demand, With mules and waggons sends a chosen band To load the timber, and the pile to rear; A charge consign’d to Merion’s faithful care.
With proper instruments they take the road, Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
First march the heavy mules, securely slow, O’er hills, o’er dales, o’er crags, o’er rocks they go:[285] Jumping, high o’er the shrubs of the rough ground, Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock’d axles bound.
But when arrived at Ida’s spreading woods,[286] (Fair Ida, water’d with descending floods,) Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes; On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks Headlong.
Deep echoing groan the thickets brown; Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn; And the slow mules the same rough road return.
The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore (Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore; There on the spot which great Achilles show’d, They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load; Circling around the place, where times to come Shall view Patroclus’ and Achilles’ tomb.
The hero bids his martial troops appear High on their cars in all the pomp of war; Each in refulgent arms his limbs attires, All mount their chariots, combatants and squires.
The chariots first proceed, a shining train; Then clouds of foot that smoke along the plain; Next these the melancholy band appear; Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the bier; O’er all the corse their scattered locks they throw; Achilles next, oppress’d with mighty woe, Supporting with his hands the hero’s head, Bends o’er the extended body of the dead.
Patroclus decent on the appointed ground They place, and heap the sylvan pile around.
But great Achilles stands apart in prayer, And from his head divides the yellow hair; Those curling locks which from his youth he vow’d,[287] And sacred grew, to Sperchius’ honour’d flood: Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast, And roll’d his eyes around the watery waste: “Sperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost Delightful roll along my native coast!
To whom we vainly vow’d, at our return, These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn: Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice, Where to the day thy silver fountains rise, And where in shade of consecrated bowers Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers!
So vow’d my father, but he vow’d in vain; No more Achilles sees his native plain; In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow, Patroclus bears them to the shades below.” Thus o’er Patroclus while the hero pray’d, On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid.
Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown.
Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board, Fall two, selected to attend their lord, Then last of all, and horrible to tell, Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.[289] On these the rage of fire victorious preys, Involves and joins them in one common blaze.
Smear’d with the bloody rites, he stands on high, And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:[290] “All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost Hear, and exult, on Pluto’s dreary coast.
The winged Iris heard the hero’s call, And instant hasten’d to their airy hall, Where in old Zephyr’s open courts on high, Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky.
She shone amidst them, on her painted bow; The rocky pavement glitter’d with the show.
“Not so (the dame replied), I haste to go To sacred Ocean, and the floods below: Even now our solemn hecatombs attend, And heaven is feasting on the world’s green end With righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!) Far on the extremest limits of the main.
But Peleus’ son entreats, with sacrifice, The western spirit, and the north, to rise!
Let on Patroclus’ pile your blast be driven, And bear the blazing honours high to heaven.” Swift as the word she vanish’d from their view; Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew; Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar, And heaps on heaps the clouds are toss’d before.
To the wide main then stooping from the skies, The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise: Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls, Till on the pile the gather’d tempest falls.
The structure crackles in the roaring fires, And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
All night Achilles hails Patroclus’ soul, With large libations from the golden bowl.
Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep, And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep, Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood; The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke: “Ye kings and princes of the Achaian name!
Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands, A common structure on the humble sands: Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise, And late posterity record our praise!” The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow, Wide o’er the pile the sable wine they throw, And deep subsides the ashy heap below.
Next the white bones his sad companions place, With tears collected, in the golden vase.
That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire, And cast the deep foundations round the pyre; High in the midst they heap the swelling bed Of rising earth, memorial of the dead.
The swarming populace the chief detains, And leads amidst a wide extent of plains; There placed them round: then from the ships proceeds A train of oxen, mules, and stately steeds, Vases and tripods (for the funeral games), Resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames.
First stood the prizes to reward the force Of rapid racers in the dusty course: A woman for the first, in beauty’s bloom, Skill’d in the needle, and the labouring loom; And a large vase, where two bright handles rise, Of twenty measures its capacious size.
The second victor claims a mare unbroke, Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke: The third, a charger yet untouch’d by flame; Four ample measures held the shining frame: Two golden talents for the fourth were placed: An ample double bowl contents the last.
Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand, And trail those graceful honours on the sand!
Let others for the noble task prepare, Who trust the courser and the flying car.” Fired at his word the rival racers rise; But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize, Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed, And skill’d to manage the high-bounding steed.
Then Menelaus his Podargus brings, And the famed courser of the king of kings: Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave), To ’scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave, (Æthe her name) at home to end his days; Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
Next him Antilochus demands the course With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.
Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins, Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains; Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears The prudent son with unattending ears.
“My son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast, The gods have loved thee, and with arts have bless’d; Neptune and Jove on thee conferr’d the skill Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel.
In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive, And short, or wide, the ungovern’d courser drive: While with sure skill, though with inferior steeds, The knowing racer to his end proceeds; Fix’d on the goal his eye foreruns the course, His hand unerring steers the steady horse, And now contracts, or now extends the rein, Observing still the foremost on the plain.
Yet (not to break the car, or lame the horse) Clear of the stony heap direct the course; Lest through incaution failing, thou mayst be A joy to others, a reproach to me.
So shalt thou pass the goal, secure of mind, And leave unskilful swiftness far behind: Though thy fierce rival drove the matchless steed Which bore Adrastus, of celestial breed; Or the famed race, through all the regions known, That whirl’d the car of proud Laomedon.” Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sage Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
Next bold Meriones was seen to rise, The last, but not least ardent for the prize.
They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose (Roll’d in his helmet, these Achilles throws).
Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then; And next the brother of the king of men: Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast; And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
They stand in order, an impatient train: Pelides points the barrier on the plain, And sends before old Phœnix to the place, To mark the racers, and to judge the race.
While hot for fame, and conquest all their care, (Each o’er his flying courser hung in air,) Erect with ardour, poised upon the rein, They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain.
Now (the last compass fetch’d around the goal) At the near prize each gathers all his soul, Each burns with double hope, with double pain, Tears up the shore, and thunders toward the main.
First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds; With those of Tros bold Diomed succeeds: Close on Eumelus’ back they puff the wind, And seem just mounting on his car behind; Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze, And, hovering o’er, their stretching shadows sees.
Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize; But angry Phœbus to Tydides flies, Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain His matchless horses’ labour on the plain.
The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain, Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again, And fills his steeds with vigour.
The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds; While thus young Nestor animates his steeds: “Now, now, my generous pair, exert your force; Not that we hope to match Tydides’ horse, Since great Minerva wings their rapid way, And gives their lord the honours of the day; But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo Your swiftness? vanquish’d by a female foe?
Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight, Presents the occasion, could we use it right.” Thus he.
The coursers at their master’s threat With quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.
And now Antilochus with nice survey Observes the compass of the hollow way. ’Twas where, by force of wintry torrents torn, Fast by the road a precipice was worn: Here, where but one could pass, to shun the throng The Spartan hero’s chariot smoked along.
Close up the venturous youth resolves to keep, Still edging near, and bears him toward the steep.
Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below, And wonders at the rashness of his foe.
Far as an able arm the disk can send, When youthful rivals their full force extend, So far, Antilochus! thy chariot flew Before the king: he, cautious, backward drew His horse compell’d; foreboding in his fears The rattling ruin of the clashing cars, The floundering coursers rolling on the plain, And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain.
But thus upbraids his rival as he flies: “Go, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise!
Go, but expect not I’ll the prize resign; Add perjury to fraud, and make it thine—” Then to his steeds with all his force he cries, “Be swift, be vigorous, and regain the prize!
Your rivals, destitute of youthful force, With fainting knees shall labour in the course, And yield the glory yours.”—The steeds obey; Already at their heels they wing their way, And seem already to retrieve the day.
Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld The coursers bounding o’er the dusty field.
The first who mark’d them was the Cretan king; High on a rising ground, above the ring, The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey He well observed the chief who led the way, And heard from far his animating cries, And saw the foremost steed with sharpen’d eyes; On whose broad front a blaze of shining white, Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight.
Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld, Lie sure disabled in the middle field: For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain I search to find them, but I search in vain.
Perchance the reins forsook the driver’s hand, And, turn’d too short, he tumbled on the strand, Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray With frantic fury from the destined way.
Rise then some other, and inform my sight, For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right; Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air, The great Ætolian chief, renown’d in war.” “Old man! (Oïleus rashly thus replies) Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize; Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed, Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
Eumelus’ steeds, high bounding in the chase, Still, as at first, unrivall’d lead the race: I well discern him, as he shakes the rein, And hear his shouts victorious o’er the plain.” Thus he.
Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin’d: “Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside The last in merit, as the first in pride!
To vile reproach what answer can we make?
The most unwise Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price.” He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne, Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn To fell extremes.
But Thetis’ godlike son Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun: “Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend; Much would ye blame, should others thus offend: And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end.” No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near, Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer.
High o’er his head the circling lash he wields: His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields: His car amidst the dusty whirlwind roll’d, Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold, Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find The track his flying wheels had left behind: And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace So swift, it seem’d a flight, and not a race.
Now victor at the goal Tydides stands, Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands; From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream; The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam: With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize, The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes: These to the ships his train triumphant leads, The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds.
Behind, Atrides urged the race, more near Than to the courser in his swift career The following car, just touching with his heel And brushing with his tail the whirling wheel: Such, and so narrow now the space between The rivals, late so distant on the green; So soon swift Æthe her lost ground regain’d, One length, one moment, had the race obtain’d.
Merion pursued, at greater distance still, With tardier coursers, and inferior skill.
Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son; Slow dragged the steeds his batter’d chariot on: Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun: “Behold! the man whose matchless art surpass’d The sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!
Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay (Since great Tydides bears the first away) To him the second honours of the day.” The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries, And then Eumelus had received the prize, But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame, The award opposes, and asserts his claim.
What if the gods, the skilful to confound, Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground?
Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice, And vows omitted forfeited the prize.
If yet (distinction to thy friend to show, And please a soul desirous to bestow) Some gift must grace Eumelus, view thy store Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore; An ample present let him thence receive, And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to give.
But this my prize I never shall forego; This, who but touches, warriors! is my foe.” Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend; Pleased with the well-turn’d flattery of a friend, Achilles smiled: “The gift proposed (he cried), Antilochus! we shall ourself provide.
With plates of brass the corslet cover’d o’er, (The same renown’d Asteropaeus wore,) Whose glittering margins raised with silver shine, (No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine.” He said: Automedon at his command The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
Distinguish’d by his friend, his bosom glows With generous joy: then Menelaus rose; The herald placed the sceptre in his hands, And still’d the clamour of the shouting bands.
Not without cause incensed at Nestor’s son, And inly grieving, thus the king begun: “The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain’d, An act so rash, Antilochus! has stain’d.
Robb’d of my glory and my just reward, To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared: So not a leader shall our conduct blame, Or judge me envious of a rival’s fame.
But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise, And vindicate by oath th’ ill-gotten prize?
Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand, The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand; And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!” The prudent chief with calm attention heard; Then mildly thus: “Excuse, if youth have err’d; Superior as thou art, forgive the offence, Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.
Thou know’st the errors of unripen’d age, Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign; The mare, or aught thou ask’st, be freely thine Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn) Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn.” So spoke Antilochus; and at the word The mare contested to the king restored.
Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain Lifts the green ear above the springing plain, The fields their vegetable life renew, And laugh and glitter with the morning dew; Such joy the Spartan’s shining face o’erspread, And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said: “Still may our souls, O generous youth! agree ’Tis now Atrides’ turn to yield to thee.
Not but (my friend) ’tis still the wiser way To waive contention with superior sway; For ah! how few, who should like thee offend, Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone, Suffice thy father’s merit and thy own: Generous alike, for me, the sire and son Have greatly suffer’d, and have greatly done.
I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend, Nor is my pride preferr’d before my friend.” He said; and pleased his passion to command, Resign’d the courser to Noemon’s hand, Friend of the youthful chief: himself content, The shining charger to his vessel sent.
Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears.
And thus the purpose of his gift declares: “Accept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said) In dear memorial of Patroclus dead; Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies, For ever snatch’d from our desiring eyes!
Too true it is, deserted of my strength, These wither’d arms and limbs have fail’d at length.
Oh! had I now that force I felt of yore, Known through Buprasium and the Pylian shore!
Victorious then in every solemn game, Ordain’d to Amarynces’ mighty name; The brave Epeians gave my glory way, Ætolians, Pylians, all resign’d the day.
I quell’d Clytomedes in fights of hand, And backward hurl’d Ancæus on the sand, Surpass’d Iphyclus in the swift career, Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear.
The sons of Actor won the prize of horse, But won by numbers, not by art or force: For the famed twins, impatient to survey Prize after prize by Nestor borne away, Sprung to their car; and with united pains One lash’d the coursers, while one ruled the reins.
Now to these tasks succeeds A younger race, that emulate our deeds: I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?) Though once the foremost hero of the field.
The prizes next are order’d to the field, For the bold champions who the caestus wield.
A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke, Of six years’ age, unconscious of the yoke, Is to the circus led, and firmly bound; Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round.
Achilles rising, thus: “Let Greece excite Two heroes equal to this hardy fight; Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke, And rush beneath the long-descending stroke.
Him great Tydides urges to contend, Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend; Officious with the cincture girds him round; And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
Amid the circle now each champion stands, And poises high in air his iron hands; With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close, Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows, And painful sweat from all their members flows.
At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow Full on the cheek of his unwary foe; Beneath that ponderous arm’s resistless sway Down dropp’d he, nerveless, and extended lay.
As a large fish, when winds and waters roar, By some huge billow dash’d against the shore, Lies panting; not less batter’d with his wound, The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends, Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends; Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng, And dragging his disabled legs along; Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o’er; His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;[292] Wrapp’d round in mists he lies, and lost to thought; His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.
The third bold game Achilles next demands, And calls the wrestlers to the level sands: A massy tripod for the victor lies, Of twice six oxen its reputed price; And next, the loser’s spirits to restore, A female captive, valued but at four.
Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife propose When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
Amid the ring each nervous rival stands, Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
Close lock’d above, their heads and arms are mix’d: Below, their planted feet at distance fix’d; Like two strong rafters which the builder forms, Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms, Their tops connected, but at wider space Fix’d on the centre stands their solid base.
Now to the grasp each manly body bends; The humid sweat from every pore descends; Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.
Nor could Ulysses, for his art renown’d, O’erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground; Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow The watchful caution of his artful foe.
Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays; He barely stirr’d him, but he could not raise: His knee lock’d fast, the foe’s attempt denied; And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.
Defiled with honourable dust they roll, Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul: Again they rage, again to combat rise; When great Achilles thus divides the prize: “Your noble vigour, O my friends, restrain; Nor weary out your generous strength in vain.
Ye both have won: let others who excel, Now prove that prowess you have proved so well.” The hero’s words the willing chiefs obey, From their tired bodies wipe the dust away, And, clothed anew, the following games survey.
Achilles rising then bespoke the train: “Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain, Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain.” The hero said, and starting from his place, Oilean Ajax rises to the race; Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass’d His youthful equals, Nestor’s son, the last.
Now three times turn’d in prospect of the goal, The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul: “Assist, O goddess!” thus in thought he pray’d!
And present at his thought descends the maid.
Buoy’d by her heavenly force, he seems to swim, And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast, The baffled hero thus the Greeks address’d: “Accursed fate! the conquest I forego; A mortal I, a goddess was my foe; She urged her favourite on the rapid way, And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day.” Thus sourly wail’d he, sputtering dirt and gore; A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
Antilochus, more humorous than the rest, Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest: “Why with our wiser elders should we strive?
Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize: He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise; (A green old age unconscious of decays, That proves the hero born in better days!) Behold his vigour in this active race!
Achilles only boasts a swifter pace: For who can match Achilles?
He who can, Must yet be more than hero, more than man.” The effect succeeds the speech.
Pelides cries, “Thy artful praise deserves a better prize.
Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings; Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings: Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore, And great Patroclus in short triumph bore.
“Stand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries) Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize, Now grace the lists before our army’s sight, And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.
Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand, The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand; Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight; Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
But Greece, now trembling for her hero’s life, Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
Then hurl’d the hero, thundering on the ground, A mass of iron (an enormous round), Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire, Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
This mighty quoit Aëtion wont to rear, And from his whirling arm dismiss in air; The giant by Achilles slain, he stow’d Among his spoils this memorable load.
Each stood in order: first Epeus threw; High o’er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
Leonteus next a little space surpass’d; And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
O’er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung From Polypœtes’ arm the discus sung: Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws, That distant falls among the grazing cows, So past them all the rapid circle flies: His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies, With force conjoin’d heave off the weighty prize.
Those, who in skilful archery contend, He next invites the twanging bow to bend; And twice ten axes casts amidst the round, Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore, The hero fixes in the sandy shore; To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie, The trembling mark at which their arrows fly.
“Whose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear These two-edged axes, terrible in war; The single, he whose shaft divides the cord.” He said: experienced Merion took the word; And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies; But flies unbless’d!
No grateful sacrifice, No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow To Phœbus, patron of the shaft and bow.
The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last, With flagging wings alighted on the mast, A moment hung, and spread her pinions there, Then sudden dropp’d, and left her life in air.
To close the funeral games, Achilles last A massy spear amid the circle placed, And ample charger of unsullied frame, With flowers high-wrought, not blacken’d yet by flame.
For these he bids the heroes prove their art, Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
With joy Pelides saw the honour paid, Rose to the monarch, and respectful said: “Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme, O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim; In every martial game thy worth attest, And know thee both their greatest and their best.
THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.
The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector’s body.
Jupiter sends Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it.
The old king, notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for the journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter.
He sets forth in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the charge of Idæus the herald.
Mercury descends in the shape of a young man, and conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles.
Their conversation on the way.
Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his feet, and begs for the body of his son: Achilles, moved with compassion, grants his request, detains him one night in his tent, and the next morning sends him home with the body: the Trojans run out to meet him.
The lamentations of Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the solemnities of the funeral.
The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of Hector lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the truce allowed for his interment.
The scene is partly in Achilles’ camp, and partly in Troy.
Now from the finish’d games the Grecian band Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand, All stretch’d at ease the genial banquet share, And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.
Not so Achilles: he, to grief resign’d, His friend’s dear image present to his mind, Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep; Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.
Restless he roll’d around his weary bed, And all his soul on his Patroclus fed: The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind, That youthful vigour, and that manly mind, What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought, What seas they measured, and what fields they fought; All pass’d before him in remembrance dear, Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.
And now supine, now prone, the hero lay, Now shifts his side, impatient for the day: Then starting up, disconsolate he goes Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.
There as the solitary mourner raves, The ruddy morning rises o’er the waves: Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he join’d!
And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument Was Hector dragg’d, then hurried to the tent.
There sleep at last o’ercomes the hero’s eyes; While foul in dust the unhonour’d carcase lies, But not deserted by the pitying skies: For Phœbus watch’d it with superior care, Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air; And, ignominious as it swept the field, Spread o’er the sacred corse his golden shield.
All heaven was moved, and Hermes will’d to go By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe: But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies, And th’ unrelenting empress of the skies, E’er since that day implacable to Troy, What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy, Won by destructive lust (reward obscene), Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen.
Is then the dire Achilles all your care?
That iron heart, inflexibly severe; A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide, In strength of rage, and impotence of pride; Who hastes to murder with a savage joy, Invades around, and breathes but to destroy!
Shame is not of his soul; nor understood, The greatest evil and the greatest good.
Still for one loss he rages unresign’d, Repugnant to the lot of all mankind; To lose a friend, a brother, or a son, Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done: Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care; Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.
But this insatiate, the commission given By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven: Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along Hector’s dead earth, insensible of wrong!
But mine, and every god’s peculiar grace Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race: Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay, (The only honours men to gods can pay,) Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased The pure libation, and the holy feast: Howe’er by stealth to snatch the corse away, We will not: Thetis guards it night and day.
But haste, and summon to our courts above The azure queen; let her persuasion move Her furious son from Priam to receive The proffer’d ransom, and the corse to leave.” He added not: and Iris from the skies, Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies, Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps, Refulgent gliding o’er the sable deeps.
Between where Samos wide his forests spreads, And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads, Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;) She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
As bearing death in the fallacious bait, From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight; So pass’d the goddess through the closing wave, Where Thetis sorrow’d in her secret cave: There placed amidst her melancholy train (The blue-hair’d sisters of the sacred main) Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come, And wept her godlike son’s approaching doom.
Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
Howe’er, be heaven’s almighty sire obey’d—” She spake, and veil’d her head in sable shade, Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad; And forth she paced, majestically sad.
The deeps dividing, o’er the coast they rise, And touch with momentary flight the skies.
There in the lightning’s blaze the sire they found, And all the gods in shining synod round.
Thetis approach’d with anguish in her face, (Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,) Even Juno sought her sorrows to console, And offer’d from her hand the nectar-bowl: She tasted, and resign’d it: then began The sacred sire of gods and mortal man: “Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o’ercast; Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares; But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares.
Nine days are past since all the court above In Hector’s cause have moved the ear of Jove; ’Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe By stealth should bear him, but we will’d not so: We will, thy son himself the corse restore, And to his conquest add this glory more.
Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave, And bear what stern Achilles may receive: Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near Except, to place the dead with decent care, Some aged herald, who with gentle hand May the slow mules and funeral car command.
Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread, Safe through the foe by our protection led: Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey, Guard of his life, and partner of his way.
From room to room his pensive daughters roam; Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome; Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy, Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
Nor shalt thou death, nor shalt thou danger dread: Safe through the foe by his protection led: Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey, Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way.
Fierce as he is, Achilles’ self shall spare Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair; Some thought there must be in a soul so brave, Some sense of duty, some desire to save.” She spoke, and vanish’d.
Then pass’d the monarch to his bridal-room, Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume, And where the treasures of his empire lay; Then call’d his queen, and thus began to say: “Unhappy consort of a king distress’d!
Partake the troubles of thy husband’s breast: I saw descend the messenger of Jove, Who bids me try Achilles’ mind to move; Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain.
Her piercing cries Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies: “Ah! whither wanders thy distemper’d mind?
And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known; Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face (O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!
To view that deathful eye, and wander o’er Those hands yet red with Hector’s noble gore!
No—pent in this sad palace, let us give To grief the wretched days we have to live.
Doom’d from the hour his luckless life begun, To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleus’ son!
Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay My rage, and these barbarities repay!
For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
He poured his latest blood in manly fight, And fell a hero in his country’s right.” “Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affright With words of omen, like a bird of night, (Replied unmoved the venerable man;) ’Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
Had any mortal voice the injunction laid, Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey’d.
I go, ye gods! obedient to your call: If in yon camp your powers have doom’d my fall, Content—By the same hand let me expire!
Add to the slaughter’d son the wretched sire!
“What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries): Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
Am I become my people’s common show, Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall; The same stern god to ruin gives you all: Nor is great Hector lost by me alone; Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come, A willing ghost to Pluto’s dreary dome!” He said, and feebly drives his friends away: The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
Next on his sons his erring fury falls, Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls; His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear, Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer, And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine Survived, sad relics of his numerous line.
“Inglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain.
You, the disgrace of Priam’s house, remain!
Mestor the brave, renown’d in ranks of war, With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,[293] And last great Hector, more than man divine, For sure he seem’d not of terrestrial line!
All those relentless Mars untimely slew, And left me these, a soft and servile crew, Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ, Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy!
Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run, And speed my journey to redeem my son?” The sons their father’s wretched age revere, Forgive his anger, and produce the car.
High on the seat the cabinet they bind: The new-made car with solid beauty shined; Box was the yoke, emboss’d with costly pains, And hung with ringlets to receive the reins; Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground: These to the chariot’s polish’d pole they bound.
Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain) The sad attendants load the groaning wain: Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring, (The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.) But the fair horses, long his darling care, Himself received, and harness’d to his car: Grieved as he was, he not this task denied; The hoary herald help’d him, at his side.
While careful these the gentle coursers join’d, Sad Hecuba approach’d with anxious mind; A golden bowl that foam’d with fragrant wine, (Libation destined to the power divine,) Held in her right, before the steed she stands, And thus consigns it to the monarch’s hands: “Take this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms His grace restore thee to our roof and arms.
Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine, Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design; Pray to that god, who high on Ida’s brow Surveys thy desolated realms below, His winged messenger to send from high, And lead thy way with heavenly augury: Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race Tower on the right of yon ethereal space.
To stern Achilles now direct my ways, And teach him mercy when a father prays.
If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race Tower on the right of yon ethereal space; So shall thy suppliant, strengthen’d from above, Fearless pursue the journey mark’d by Jove.” Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high, Despatch’d his bird, celestial augury!
Wide as appears some palace-gate display’d, So broad, his pinions stretch’d their ample shade, As stooping dexter with resounding wings The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
A dawn of joy in every face appears: The mourning matron dries her timorous tears: Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung; The brazen portal in his passage rung; The mules preceding draw the loaded wain, Charged with the gifts: Idæus holds the rein: The king himself his gentle steeds controls, And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.
On his slow wheels the following people wait, Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate; With hands uplifted eye him as he pass’d, And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
Great Jove beheld him as he cross’d the plain, And felt the woes of miserable man.
A beauteous youth, majestic and divine, He seem’d; fair offspring of some princely line!
For much I fear destruction hovers nigh: Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along, Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view; These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread; From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head; From Greece I’ll guard thee too; for in those lines The living image of my father shines.” “Thy words, that speak benevolence of mind, Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoin’d:) Great are my hazards; but the gods survey My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way.
For scarce of mortal kind Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind.” “Nor true are all thy words, nor erring wide; (The sacred messenger of heaven replied;) But say, convey’st thou through the lonely plains What yet most precious of thy store remains, To lodge in safety with some friendly hand: Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?
Or fliest thou now?—What hopes can Troy retain, Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?” The king, alarm’d: “Say what, and whence thou art Who search the sorrows of a parent’s heart, And know so well how godlike Hector died?” Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied: “You tempt me, father, and with pity touch: On this sad subject you inquire too much.
Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector view’d In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued: I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he toss’d On thousand ships, and wither’d half a host: I saw, but help’d not: stern Achilles’ ire Forbade assistance, and enjoy’d the fire.
For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race; One ship convey’d us from our native place; Polyctor is my sire, an honour’d name, Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame; Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.
To watch this quarter, my adventure falls: For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls; Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage, And scarce their rulers check their martial rage.” “If then thou art of stern Pelides’ train, (The mournful monarch thus rejoin’d again,) Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid My son’s dear relics? what befalls him dead?
Have dogs dismember’d (on the naked plains), Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?” “O favour’d of the skies! (thus answered then The power that mediates between god and men) Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent, But whole he lies, neglected in the tent: This the twelfth evening since he rested there, Untouch’d by worms, untainted by the air.
Still as Aurora’s ruddy beam is spread, Round his friend’s tomb Achilles drags the dead: Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face, All fresh he lies, with every living grace, Majestical in death!
Some heavenly care, Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair: Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led A life so grateful, still regard him dead.” Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide, And joyful thus the royal sire replied: “Blest is the man who pays the gods above The constant tribute of respect and love!
Those who inhabit the Olympian bower My son forgot not, in exalted power; And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind, Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take, A pledge of gratitude for Hector’s sake; And while the favouring gods our steps survey, Safe to Pelides’ tent conduct my way.” To whom the latent god: “O king, forbear To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.
What from our master’s interest thus we draw, Is but a licensed theft that ’scapes the law.
Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence; And as the crime, I dread the consequence.
Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey; Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way: On thee attend, thy safety to maintain, O’er pathless forests, or the roaring main.” He said, then took the chariot at a bound, And snatch’d the reins, and whirl’d the lash around: Before the inspiring god that urged them on, The coursers fly with spirit not their own.
And now they reach’d the naval walls, and found The guards repasting, while the bowls go round; On these the virtue of his wand he tries, And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes: Then heaved the massy gates, removed the bars, And o’er the trenches led the rolling cars.
Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went, And now approach’d Pelides’ lofty tent.
On firs the roof was raised, and cover’d o’er With reeds collected from the marshy shore; And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state, (The work of soldiers,) where the hero sat: Large was the door, whose well-compacted strength A solid pine-tree barr’d of wondrous length: Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty weight, But great Achilles singly closed the gate.
This Hermes (such the power of gods) set wide; Then swift alighted the celestial guide, And thus reveal’d—”Hear, prince! and understand Thou ow’st thy guidance to no mortal hand: Hermes I am, descended from above, The king of arts, the messenger of Jove, Farewell: to shun Achilles’ sight I fly; Uncommon are such favours of the sky, Nor stand confess’d to frail mortality.
Unseen by these, the king his entry made: And, prostrate now before Achilles laid, Sudden (a venerable sight!) appears; Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in tears; Those direful hands his kisses press’d, embrued Even with the best, the dearest of his blood!
In me that father’s reverend image trace, Those silver hairs, that venerable face; His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!
Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate Expels him helpless from his peaceful state; Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly, And beg protection with a feeble cry.
Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came, The pledge of many a loved and loving dame: Nineteen one mother bore—Dead, all are dead!
How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!
Still one was left their loss to recompense; His father’s hope, his country’s last defence.
“For him through hostile camps I bent my way, For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay; Large gifts proportion’d to thy wrath I bear; O hear the wretched, and the gods revere!
See him in me, as helpless and as old!
Though not so wretched: there he yields to me, The first of men in sovereign misery!
Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to embrace The scourge and ruin of my realm and race; Suppliant my children’s murderer to implore, And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!” These words soft pity in the chief inspire, Touch’d with the dear remembrance of his sire.
Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay) The old man’s cheek he gently turn’d away.
Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe; And now the mingled tides together flow: This low on earth, that gently bending o’er; A father one, and one a son deplore: But great Achilles different passions rend, And now his sire he mourns, and now his friend.
The infectious softness through the heroes ran; One universal solemn shower began; They bore as heroes, but they felt as man.
Heaven sure has arm’d thee with a heart of steel, A strength proportion’d to the woes you feel.
Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care: To mourn avails not: man is born to bear.
Two urns by Jove’s high throne have ever stood, The source of evil one, and one of good; From thence the cup of mortal man he fills, Blessings to these, to those distributes ill; To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed To taste the bad unmix’d, is cursed indeed; Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven, He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
The happiest taste not happiness sincere; But find the cordial draught is dash’d with care.
Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power What stars concurring bless’d his natal hour!
One evil yet o’ertakes his latest day: No race succeeding to imperial sway; An only son; and he, alas! ordain’d To fall untimely in a foreign land.
Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld; In riches once, in children once excell’d; Extended Phrygia own’d thy ample reign, And all fair Lesbos’ blissful seats contain, And all wide Hellespont’s unmeasured main.
War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
Bear thy lot, nor shed These unavailing sorrows o’er the dead; Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore, But thou, alas! may’st live to suffer more!” To whom the king: “O favour’d of the skies!
Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jove’s command, I show thee, king! thou tread’st on hostile land; Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give o’er, And shake the purpose of my soul no more.” The sire obey’d him, trembling and o’eraw’d.
Achilles, like a lion, rush’d abroad: Automedon and Alcimus attend, (Whom most he honour’d, since he lost his friend,) These to unyoke the mules and horses went, And led the hoary herald to the tent; Next, heap’d on high, the numerous presents bear, (Great Hector’s ransom,) from the polish’d car.
Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread, They leave: to cover and enwrap the dead.
Then call the handmaids, with assistant toil To wash the body and anoint with oil, Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy sire, Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age, Nor Jove’s command, should check the rising rage.
This done, the garments o’er the corse they spread; Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed: Then, while the body on the car they laid, He groans, and calls on loved Patroclus’ shade: “If, in that gloom which never light must know, The deeds of mortals touch the ghosts below, O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil (Restoring Hector) heaven’s unquestion’d will.
Steep’d in their blood, and in the dust outspread, Nine days, neglected, lay exposed the dead; None by to weep them, to inhume them none; (For Jove had turn’d the nation all to stone.) The gods themselves, at length relenting gave The unhappy race the honours of a grave.
Herself a rock (for such was heaven’s high will) Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill; Where round the bed whence Achelous springs, The watery fairies dance in mazy rings; There high on Sipylus’s shaggy brow, She stands, her own sad monument of woe; The rock for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow.
“Such griefs, O king! have other parents known; Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
The care of heaven thy Hector has appear’d, Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr’d; Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drown’d, And all the eyes of Ilion stream around.” He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe With silver fleece, which his attendants slew.
The limbs they sever from the reeking hide, With skill prepare them, and in parts divide: Each on the coals the separate morsels lays, And, hasty, snatches from the rising blaze.
With bread the glittering canisters they load, Which round the board Automedon bestow’d.
The chief himself to each his portion placed, And each indulging shared in sweet repast.
When now the rage of hunger was repress’d, The wondering hero eyes his royal guest: No less the royal guest the hero eyes, His godlike aspect and majestic size; Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage; And there, the mild benevolence of age.
Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke, (A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke: “Permit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep My careful temples in the dew of sleep: For, since the day that number’d with the dead My hapless son, the dust has been my bed; Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes; My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!
Till now, encouraged by the grace you give, I share thy banquet, and consent to live.” With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed, With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread; Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way, And place the couches, and the coverings lay.
Then he: “Now, father, sleep, but sleep not here; Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear, Lest any Argive, at this hour awake, To ask our counsel, or our orders take, Approaching sudden to our open’d tent, Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent.
For, so long we stay Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey.” “If then thy will permit (the monarch said) To finish all due honours to the dead, This of thy grace accord: to thee are known The fears of Ilion, closed within her town; And at what distance from our walls aspire The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.
But in the porch the king and herald rest; Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.
Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake; Industrious Hermes only was awake, The king’s return revolving in his mind, To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind.
The power descending hover’d o’er his head: “And sleep’st thou, father! (thus the vision said:) Now dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored?
Thy presence here should stern Atrides see, Thy still surviving sons may sue for thee; May offer all thy treasures yet contain, To spare thy age; and offer all in vain.” Waked with the word the trembling sire arose, And raised his friend: the god before him goes: He joins the mules, directs them with his hand, And moves in silence through the hostile land.
When now to Xanthus’ yellow stream they drove, (Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,) The winged deity forsook their view, And in a moment to Olympus flew.
Now shed Aurora round her saffron ray, Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day: Charged with the mournful load, to Ilion go The sage and king, majestically slow.
Cassandra first beholds, from Ilion’s spire, The sad procession of her hoary sire; Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near, (Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,) A shower of tears o’erflows her beauteous eyes, Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries: “Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ, Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy!
If e’er ye rush’d in crowds, with vast delight, To hail your hero glorious from the fight, Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow; Your common triumph, and your common woe.” In thronging crowds they issue to the plains; Nor man nor woman in the walls remains; In every face the self-same grief is shown; And Troy sends forth one universal groan.
At Scæa’s gates they meet the mourning wain, Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
A melancholy choir attend around, With plaintive sighs, and music’s solemn sound: Alternately they sing, alternate flow The obedient tears, melodious in their woe.
Oh, my lord! (she cries) Snatch’d in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
Never to manly age that son shall rise, Or with increasing graces glad my eyes: For Ilion now (her great defender slain) Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain.
Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
And why received not I thy last command?
Some word thou would’st have spoke, which, sadly dear, My soul might keep, or utter with a tear; Which never, never could be lost in air, Fix’d in my heart, and oft repeated there!” Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan, Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.
The mournful mother next sustains her part: “O thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!
Of all my race thou most by heaven approved, And by the immortals even in death beloved!
While all my other sons in barbarous bands Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands, This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost, Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast.
Sentenced, ’tis true, by his inhuman doom, Thy noble corse was dragg’d around the tomb; (The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;) Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!
Yet glow’st thou fresh with every living grace; No mark of pain, or violence of face: Rosy and fair! as Phœbus’ silver bow Dismiss’d thee gently to the shades below.” Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
“Ah, dearest friend! in whom the gods had join’d[298] The mildest manners with the bravest mind, Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are o’er Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore, (O had I perish’d, ere that form divine Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!) Yet was it ne’er my fate, from thee to find A deed ungentle, or a word unkind.
When others cursed the authoress of their woe, Thy pity check’d my sorrows in their flow.
If some proud brother eyed me with disdain, Or scornful sister with her sweeping train, Thy gentle accents soften’d all my pain.
For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee, The wretched source of all this misery.
In Troy deserted, as abhorr’d at home!” So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye.
Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.
These toils continue nine succeeding days, And high in air a sylvan structure raise.
But when the tenth fair morn began to shine, Forth to the pile was borne the man divine, And placed aloft; while all, with streaming eyes, Beheld the flames and rolling smokes arise.
Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn, With rosy lustre streak’d the dewy lawn, Again the mournful crowds surround the pyre, And quench with wine the yet remaining fire.
The snowy bones his friends and brothers place (With tears collected) in a golden vase; The golden vase in purple palls they roll’d, Of softest texture, and inwrought with gold.
Last o’er the urn the sacred earth they spread, And raised the tomb, memorial of the dead. (Strong guards and spies, till all the rites were done, Watch’d from the rising to the setting sun.) All Troy then moves to Priam’s court again, A solemn, silent, melancholy train: Assembled there, from pious toil they rest, And sadly shared the last sepulchral feast.
Such honours Ilion to her hero paid, And peaceful slept the mighty Hector’s shade.[300] CONCLUDING NOTE.
I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hector by the stratagem of the wooden horse, the particulars of which are described by Virgil in the second book of the Æneid.
Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of an arrow in his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii.
The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.
Ajax, after the death of Achilles, had a contest with Ulysses for the armour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his aim, he slew himself through indignation.
Helen, after the death of Paris, married Deiphobus his brother, and at the taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to Menelaus her first husband, who received her again into favour.
Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by Ægysthus, at the instigation of Clytemnestra his wife, who in his absence had dishonoured his bed with Ægysthus.
Diomed, after the fall of Troy, was expelled his own country, and scarce escaped with his life from his adulterous wife Ægialé; but at last was received by Daunus in Apulia, and shared his kingdom; it is uncertain how he died.
Nestor lived in peace with his children, in Pylos, his native country.
Ulysses also, after innumerable troubles by sea and land, at last returned in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homer’s Odyssey.
For what remains, I beg to be excused from the ceremonies of taking leave at the end of my work, and from embarrassing myself, or others, with any defences or apologies about it.
To him, therefore, having brought this long work to a conclusion, I desire to dedicate it, and to have the honour and satisfaction of placing together, in this manner, the names of Mr.
CONGREVE, and of March 25, 1720 A.
POPE Ton theon de eupoiia—to mae epi pleon me procophai en poiaetiki kai allois epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan euodos proionta.
“Somewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to idolize those great lawgivers of man’s race, who have given expression, in the immortal language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our nature.
The thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal inheritance of the human race.
In this mutual ground every man meets his brother, they have been set forth by the providence of God to vindicate for all of us what nature could effect, and that, in these representatives of our race, we might recognize our common benefactors.’—_Doctrine of the Incarnation_, pp. 9, 10. [2] Εἰκος δέ μιν ἦν καὶ μνημόσυνα πάντων γράφεσθαι.
I may observe that this Life has been paraphrased in English by my learned young friend Kenneth R.
Mackenzie, and appended to my prose translation of the Odyssey.
The present abridgement however, will contain all that is of use to the reader, for the biographical value of the treatise is most insignificant. [3] _I.e._ both of composing and reciting verses for as Blair observes, “The first poets sang their own verses.” Sextus Empir. adv.
“The voice,” observes Heeren, “was always accompanied by some instrument.
The bard was provided with a harp on which he played a prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he accompanied the song when begun.
His voice probably preserved a medium between singing and recitation; the words, and not the melody were regarded by the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to remain intelligible to all.
In countries where nothing similar is found, it is difficult to represent such scenes to the mind; but whoever has had an opportunity of listening to the improvisation of Italy, can easily form an idea of Demodocus and Phemius.”—_Ancient Greece_, p. 94. [4] “Should it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing that “poplars can hardly live so long”.
But setting aside the fact that we must not expect consistency in a mere romance, the ancients had a superstitious belief in the great age of trees which grew near places consecrated by the presence of gods and great men.
See Cicero de Legg II I, sub init., where he speaks of the plane tree under which Socrates used to walk and of the tree at Delos, where Latona gave birth to Apollo.
This passage is referred to by Stephanus of Byzantium, _s. v._ N.
I omit quoting any of the dull epigrams ascribed to Homer for, as Mr.
Justice Talfourd rightly observes, “The authenticity of these fragments depends upon that of the pseudo Herodotean Life of Homer, from which they are taken.” Lit of Greece, pp. 38 in Encycl.
Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 317. [5] It is quoted as the work of Cleobulus, by Diogenes Laert.
Casaub. [6] I trust I am justified in employing this as an equivalent for the Greek λέσχαι. [7] Ὡς εἰ τοὺς Ὁμήρους δόξει τρέφειν αὐτοῖς, ὅμιλον πολλόν τε και ἀχρεοῖν ἕξουσιν. ἐι τεῦθεν δὲ και τοὔνομα Ὁμηρος ἐπεκράτησε τῷ Μελησιγενεῖ ἀπὸ τῆς συμφορης. οἱ γὰρ Κυμαῖοι τοὺς τυφλοὺς Ὁμήρους λέγουσιν.
The etymology has been condemned by recent scholars.
See Welcker, Epische Cyclus, p. 127, and Mackenzie’s note, p. xiv. [8] Θεστορίδης, θνητοῖσιν ἀνωἷστων πολεών περ, οὐδὲν ἀφραστότερον πέλεται νόου ἀνθρώποισιν.
During his stay at Phocœa, Homer is said to have composed the Little Iliad, and the Phocœid.
Lit. vol. ii. p. 284, sq. [9] This is so pretty a picture of early manners and hospitality, that it is almost a pity to find that it is obviously a copy from the Odyssey.
See the fourteenth book.
In fact, whoever was the author of this fictitious biography, he showed some tact in identifying Homer with certain events described in his poems, and in eliciting from them the germs of something like a personal narrative. [10] Διὰ λόγων ἐστιῶντο.
So Plato calls the parties conversing δαιτύμονες, or ἐστιάτορες, Tim. i. p. 522 A.
So διηγήμασι σοφοῖς ὁμοῦ καὶ τερπνοῖς ἡδίω τὴν θοινην τοῖς ἑστιωμένοις ἐποίει, Choricius in Fabric.
P. 851. λόγοις γὰρ ἑστίᾳ, Athenæus vii p 275, A. [11] It was at Bolissus, and in the house of this Chian citizen, that Homer is said to have written the Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of the Frogs and Mice, the Epicichlidia, and some other minor works. [12] Chandler, Travels, vol. i. p. 61, referred to in the Voyage Pittoresque dans la Grèce, vol. i.
P. 92, where a view of the spot is given of which the author candidly says,— “Je ne puis répondre d’une exactitude scrupuleuse dans la vue générale que j’en donne, car étant allé seul pour l’examiner je perdis mon crayon, et je fus obligé de m’en fier à ma mémoire.
Je ne crois cependant pas avoir trop à me plaindre d’elle en cette occasion.” [13] A more probable reason for this companionship, and for the character of Mentor itself, is given by the allegorists, viz.: the assumption of Mentor’s form by the guardian deity of the wise Ulysses, Minerva.
The classical reader may compare Plutarch, Opp. t. ii. p. 880; _Xyland_.
Compare Mackenzie’s note, p. xxx. [16] Heeren’s Ancient Greece, p. 96. [17] Compare Sir E.
Bulwer’s Caxtons v. i. p. 4. [18] Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387. [19] Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147. [20] Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation of which I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.
Mackenzie has given three brief but elaborate papers on the different writers on the subject, which deserve to be consulted.
His own views are moderate, and perhaps as satisfactory, on the whole, as any of the hypotheses hitherto put forth.
In fact, they consist in an attempt to blend those hypotheses into something like consistency, rather than in advocating any individual theory. [23] Letters to Phileleuth; Lips. [24] Hist. of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq. [25] It is, indeed not easy to calculate the height to which the memory may be cultivated.
To take an ordinary case, we might refer to that of any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short warning, to ‘rhapsodize,’ night after night, parts which when laid together, would amount to an immense number of lines.
But all this is nothing to two instances of our own day.
Our informant went on to state that this singular being was proceeding to learn the Orlando Furioso in the same manner.
But even this instance is less wonderful than one as to which we may appeal to any of our readers that happened some twenty years ago to visit the town of Stirling, in Scotland.
No such person can have forgotten the poor, uneducated man Blind Jamie who could actually repeat, after a few minutes consideration any verse required from any part of the Bible—even the obscurest and most unimportant enumeration of mere proper names not excepted.
Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, “The Dschungariade of the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer in length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit, and yet it exists only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted with writing.
But the songs of a nation are probably the last things which are committed to writing, for the very reason that they are remembered.”— _Ancient Greece_. p. 100. [26] Vol.
II p. 198, sqq. [27] Quarterly Review, _l. c._, p. 131 sq. [28] Betrachtungen über die Ilias.
Mackenzie, Notes and Queries, p. 222 sqq. [34] See his Epistle to Raphelingius, in Schroeder’s edition, 4to., Delphis, 1728. [35] Ancient Greece, p. 101. [36] The best description of this monument will be found in Vaux’s “Antiquities of the British Museum,” p. 198 sq.
The monument itself (Towneley Sculptures, No. 123) is well known. [37] Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 276. [38] Preface to her Homer. [39] Hesiod.
I. vers. 155, &c. [40] The following argument of the Iliad, corrected in a few particulars, is translated from Bitaubé, and is, perhaps, the neatest summary that has ever been drawn up:—“A hero, injured by his general, and animated with a noble resentment, retires to his tent; and for a season withdraws himself and his troops from the war.
During this interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has been occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of which the honour of their country depends.
The general, at length opening his eyes to the fault which he had committed, deputes the principal officers of his army to the incensed hero, with commission to make compensation for the injury, and to tender magnificent presents.
The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his character, persists in his animosity; the army is again defeated, and is on the verge of entire destruction.
This inexorable man has a friend; this friend weeps before him, and asks for the hero’s arms, and for permission to go to the war in his stead.
The eloquence of friendship prevails more than the intercession of the ambassadors or the gifts of the general.
He lends his armour to his friend, but commands him not to engage with the chief of the enemy’s army, because he reserves to himself the honour of that combat, and because he also fears for his friend’s life.
The prohibition is forgotten; the friend listens to nothing but his courage; his corpse is brought back to the hero, and the hero’s arms become the prize of the conqueror.
Strabo, however, says, that when the Teucri were migrating from Crete, they were told by an oracle to settle in that place, where they should not be attacked by the original inhabitants of the land, and that, having halted for the night, a number of field-mice came and gnawed away the leathern straps of their baggage, and thongs of their armour.
In fulfilment of the oracle, they settled on the spot, and raised a temple to Sminthean Apollo.
Grote, “History of Greece,” i. p. 68, remarks that the “worship of Sminthean Apollo, in various parts of the Troad and its neighboring territory, dates before the earliest period of Æolian colonization.” [48] _Cilla_, a town of Troas near Thebe, so called from Cillus, a sister of Hippodamia, slain by Œnomaus. [49] A mistake.
It should be, “If e’er I roofed thy graceful fane,” for the custom of decorating temples with garlands was of later date. [50] _Bent was his bow_ “The Apollo of Homer, it must be borne in mind, is a different character from the deity of the same name in the later classical pantheon.
Throughout both poems, all deaths from unforeseen or invisible causes, the ravages of pestilence, the fate of the young child or promising adult, cut off in the germ of infancy or flower of youth, of the old man dropping peacefully into the grave, or of the reckless sinner suddenly checked in his career of crime, are ascribed to the arrows of Apollo or Diana.
The oracular functions of the god rose naturally out of the above fundamental attributes, for who could more appropriately impart to mortals what little foreknowledge Fate permitted of her decrees than the agent of her most awful dispensations?
The close union of the arts of prophecy and song explains his additional office of god of music, while the arrows with which he and his sister were armed, symbols of sudden death in every age, no less naturally procured him that of god of archery.
Of any connection between Apollo and the Sun, whatever may have existed in the more esoteric doctrine of the Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace in either Iliad or Odyssey.”—Mure, “History of Greek Literature,” vol. i. p. 478, sq. [51] It has frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin with animals, and that Homer had this fact in mind. [52] _Convened to council_.
The public assembly in the heroic times is well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92.
“It is an assembly for talk.
The same idea is rather cleverly worked out by Apuleius, “De Deo Socratis.” [58] Compare Milton, “Paradise Lost,” bk. ii: “Though his tongue Dropp’d manna.” So Proverbs v. 3, “For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honey-comb.” [59] Salt water was chiefly used in lustrations, from its being supposed to possess certain fiery particles.
Hence, if sea-water could not be obtained, salt was thrown into the fresh water to be used for the lustration.
Alex. vii. p.713, hydati perriranai, embalon alas, phakois. [60] The persons of heralds were held inviolable, and they were at liberty to travel whither they would without fear of molestation.
The office was generally given to old men, and they were believed to be under the especial protection of Jove and Mercury. [61] His mother, Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, who was courted by Neptune and Jupiter.
When, however, it was known that the son to whom she would give birth must prove greater than his father, it was determined to wed her to a mortal, and Peleus, with great difficulty, succeeded in obtaining her hand, as she eluded him by assuming various forms.
Her children were all destroyed by fire through her attempts to see whether they were immortal, and Achilles would have shared the same fate had not his father rescued him.
She afterwards rendered him invulnerable by plunging him into the waters of the Styx, with the exception of that part of the heel by which she held him.
Fab. 54 [62] Thebé was a city of Mysia, north of Adramyttium. [63] That is, defrauds me of the prize allotted me by their votes. [64] Quintus Calaber goes still further in his account of the service rendered to Jove by Thetis: “Nay more, the fetters of Almighty Jove She loosed”—Dyce’s “Calaber,” s. 58. [65] _To Fates averse_.
“I think,” says Heeren, after quoting a passage from Diodorus about the holy ship, “that this procession is represented in one of the great sculptured reliefs on the temple of Karnak.
The sacred ship of Ammon is on the shore with its whole equipment, and is towed along by another boat.
It is therefore on its voyage.
This must have been one of the most celebrated festivals, since, even according to the interpretation of antiquity, Homer alludes to it when he speaks of Jupiter’s visit to the Ethiopians, and his twelve days’ absence.”—Long, “Egyptian Antiquities” vol. 1 p. 96.
Eustathius, vol. 1 p. 98, sq. (ed.
Basil) gives this interpretation, and likewise an allegorical one, which we will spare the reader. [67] _Atoned_, i.e. reconciled.
This is the proper and most natural meaning of the word, as may be seen from Taylor’s remarks in Calmet’s Dictionary, p.110, of my edition. [68] That is, drawing back their necks while they cut their throats.
“If the sacrifice was in honour of the celestial gods, the throat was bent upwards towards heaven; but if made to the heroes, or infernal deities, it was killed with its throat toward the ground.”— “Elgin Marbles,” vol i. p.81.
“The jolly crew, unmindful of the past, The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste, Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil; The limbs yet trembling, in the caldrons boil; Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil.
Stretch’d on the grassy turf, at ease they dine, Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with wine.” Dryden’s “Virgil,” i. 293. [69] _Crown’d, i.e._ filled to the brim.
The custom of adorning goblets with flowers was of later date. [70] _He spoke_, &c.
“When a friend inquired of Phidias what pattern he had formed his Olympian Jupiter, he is said to have answered by repeating the lines of the first Iliad in which the poet represents the majesty of the god in the most sublime terms; thereby signifying that the genius of Homer had inspired him with it.
See Buttmann, Lexic. p. 93 sq. [73] “Paradise Lost,” i. 44.
“Him th’ Almighty power Hurl’d headlong flaming from th ethereal sky, With hideous ruin and combustion” [74] The occasion on which Vulcan incurred Jove’s displeasure was this—After Hercules, had taken and pillaged Troy, Juno raised a storm, which drove him to the island of Cos, having previously cast Jove into a sleep, to prevent him aiding his son.
Jove, in revenge, fastened iron anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and Vulcan, attempting to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in the manner described.
The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep explanations for this amusing fiction.
See Heraclides, “Ponticus,” p. 463 sq., ed Gale.
The Sinthians were a race of robbers, the ancient inhabitants of Lemnos which island was ever after sacred to Vulcan.
Compare “Paradise Lost,” v. 646: “And roseate dews disposed All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest.” [77] —_Dream_ ought to be spelt with a capital letter, being, I think, evidently personified as the god of dreams.
“When, by Minerva sent, a _fraudful_ Dream Rush’d from the skies, the bane of her and Troy.” Dyce’s “Select Translations from Quintus Calaber,” p.10. [78] “Sleep’st thou, companion dear, what sleep can close Thy eye-lids?”—“Paradise Lost,” v. 673. [79] This truly military sentiment has been echoed by the approving voice of many a general and statesman of antiquity.
See Pliny’s Panegyric on Trajan.
Silius neatly translates it, “Turpe duci totam somno consumere noctem.” [80] _The same in habit_, &c.
So thick the very crowd Swarm’d and were straiten’d.”—“Paradise Lost” i. 768. [82] It was the herald’s duty to make the people sit down.
“A _standing_ agora is a symptom of manifest terror (II.
Xviii. 246) an evening agora, to which men came elevated by wine, is also the forerunner of mischief (‘Odyssey,’ iii. 138).”—Grote, ii. p. 91, _note_. [83] This sceptre, like that of Judah (Genesis xlix. 10), is a type of the supreme and far-spread dominion of the house of the Atrides.
See Thucydides i. 9.
“It is traced through the hands of Hermes, he being the wealth giving god, whose blessing is most efficacious in furthering the process of acquisition.”—Grote, i. p. 212.
Compare Quintus Calaber (Dyce’s Selections, p. 43).
Nichols makes a total of 135,000. [85] “As thick as when a field Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends His bearded grove of ears, which way the wind Sways them.”—Paradise Lost,” iv. 980, sqq. [86] This sentiment used to be a popular one with some of the greatest tyrants, who abused it into a pretext for unlimited usurpation of power.
Dion, Caligula, and Domitian were particularly fond of it, and, in an extended form, we find the maxim propounded by Creon in the Antigone of Sophocles.
See some important remarks of Heeren, “Ancient Greece,” ch. vi. p. 105. [87] It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting and contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the disposition of Ulysses in a new light, in which mere cunning is less prominent.
Of the gradual and individual development of Homer’s heroes, Schlegel well observes, “In bas-relief the figures are usually in profile, and in the epos all are characterized in the simplest manner in relief; they are not grouped together, but follow one another; so Homer’s heroes advance, one by one, in succession before us.
It has been remarked that the _Iliad_ is not definitively closed, but that we are left to suppose something both to precede and to follow it.
Reading Homer is very much like such a circuit; the present object alone arresting our attention, we lose sight of what precedes, and do not concern ourselves about what is to follow.”—“Dramatic Literature,” p. 75. [88] “There cannot be a clearer indication than this description —so graphic in the original poem—of the true character of the Homeric agora.
The multitude who compose it are listening and acquiescent, not often hesitating, and never refractory to the chief.
The tragedians, Lucretius and others, adopted a different fable to account for the stoppage at Aulis, and seem to have found the sacrifice of Iphigena better suited to form the subject of a tragedy.
Compare Dryden’s “Æneid,” vol. iii. sqq. [90] _Full of his god, i.e._, Apollo, filled with the prophetic spirit.
“_The_ god” would be more simple and emphatic. [91] Those critics who have maintained that the “Catalogue of Ships” is an interpolation, should have paid more attention to these lines, which form a most natural introduction to their enumeration. [92] The following observation will be useful to Homeric readers: “Particular animals were, at a later time, consecrated to particular deities.
To Jupiter, Ceres, Juno, Apollo, and Bacchus victims of advanced age might be offered.
An ox of five years old was considered especially acceptable to Jupiter.
A black bull, a ram, or a boar pig, were offerings for Neptune.
To Ceres a sow was sacrificed, as an enemy to corn.
Diana was propitiated with a stag; and to Venus the dove was consecrated.
The infernal and evil deities were to be appeased with black victims.
The most acceptable of all sacrifices was the heifer of a year old, which had never borne the yoke.
It was to be perfect in every limb, healthy, and without blemish.”—“Elgin Marbles,” vol. i. p. 78. [93] _Idomeneus_, son of Deucalion, was king of Crete.
Having vowed, during a tempest, on his return from Troy, to sacrifice to Neptune the first creature that should present itself to his eye on the Cretan shore, his son fell a victim to his rash vow. [94] _Tydeus’ son, i.e._ Diomed. [95] That is, Ajax, the son of Oïleus, a Locrian.
He must be distinguished from the other, who was king of Salamis. [96] A great deal of nonsense has been written to account for the word _unbid_, in this line.
Even Plato, “Sympos.” p. 315, has found some curious meaning in what, to us, appears to need no explanation.
Was there any _heroic_ rule of etiquette which prevented one brother-king visiting another without a formal invitation? [97] Fresh water fowl, especially swans, were found in great numbers about the Asian Marsh, a fenny tract of country in Lydia, formed by the river Cayster, near its mouth.
Clarke successfully combats the opinion of those who make the Scamander to have arisen from the springs of Bounabarshy, and traces the source of the river to the highest mountain in the chain of Ida, now Kusdaghy; receives the Simois in its course; towards its mouth it is very muddy, and flows through marshes.
Between the Scamander and Simois, Homer’s Troy is supposed to have stood: this river, according to Homer, was called Xanthus by the gods, Scamander by men.
“Ma di’ tu, Musa, come i primi danni Mandassero à Cristiani, e di quai parti: Tu ’l sai; ma di tant’ opra a noi si lunge Debil aura di fama appena giunge.”—“Gier.
Lib.” iv. 19. [101] “The Catalogue is, perhaps, the portion of the poem in favour of which a claim to separate authorship has been most plausibly urged.
Although the example of Homer has since rendered some such formal enumeration of the forces engaged, a common practice in epic poems descriptive of great warlike adventures, still so minute a statistical detail can neither be considered as imperatively required, nor perhaps such as would, in ordinary cases, suggest itself to the mind of a poet.
Yet there is scarcely any portion of the Iliad where both historical and internal evidence are more clearly in favour of a connection from the remotest period, with the remainder of the work.
The composition of the Catalogue, whensoever it may have taken place, necessarily presumes its author’s acquaintance with a previously existing Iliad.
The average would be eighty-five, and Thucydides supposes the troops to have rowed and navigated themselves; and that very few, besides the chiefs, went as mere passengers or landsmen.
In short, we have in the Homeric descriptions the complete picture of an Indian or African war canoe, many of which are considerably larger than the largest scale assigned to those of the Greeks.
If the total number of the Greek ships be taken at twelve hundred, according to Thucydides, although in point of fact there are only eleven hundred and eighty-six in the Catalogue, the amount of the army, upon the foregoing average, will be about a hundred and two thousand men.
The historian considers this a small force as representing all Greece.
Bryant, comparing it with the allied army at Platae, thinks it so large as to prove the entire falsehood of the whole story; and his reasonings and calculations are, for their curiosity, well worth a careful perusal.”—Coleridge, p. 211, sq. [103] The mention of Corinth is an anachronism, as that city was called Ephyre before its capture by the Dorians.
But Velleius, vol. i. p. 3, well observes, that the poet would naturally speak of various towns and cities by the names by which they were known in his own time. [104] “Adam, the goodliest man of men since born, His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.’—“Paradise Lost,” iv. 323. [105] _Æsetes’ tomb_.
Monuments were often built on the sea-coast, and of a considerable height, so as to serve as watch-towers or land marks.
See my notes to my prose translations of the “Odyssey,” ii. p. 21, or on Eur.
The inhabitants were greatly devoted to the worship of Apollo.
See Muller, “Dorians,” vol. i. p. 248. [107] _Barbarous tongues_.
“Various as were the dialects of the Greeks—and these differences existed not only between the several tribes, but even between neighbouring cities—they yet acknowledged in their language that they formed but one nation were but branches of the same family.
“Marking the tracts of air, the clamorous cranes Wheel their due flight in varied ranks descried: And each with outstretch’d neck his rank maintains, In marshall’d order through th’ ethereal void.” Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoe’s Life, Appendix.
Zeuxis, the celebrated artist, is said to have appended these lines to his picture of Helen, as a motto.
Valer Max. iii. 7. [114] The early epic was largely occupied with the exploits and sufferings of women, or heroines, the wives and daughters of the Grecian heroes.
A nation of courageous, hardy, indefatigable women, dwelling apart from men, permitting only a short temporary intercourse, for the purpose of renovating their numbers, burning out their right breast with a view of enabling themselves to draw the bow freely; this was at once a general type, stimulating to the fancy of the poet, and a theme eminently popular with his hearers.
We find these warlike females constantly reappearing in the ancient poems, and universally accepted as past realities in the Iliad.
When Priam wishes to illustrate emphatically the most numerous host in which he ever found himself included, he tells us that it was assembled in Phrygia, on the banks of the Sangarius, for the purpose of resisting the formidable Amazons.
When Bellerophon is to be employed in a deadly and perilous undertaking, by those who prudently wished to procure his death, he is despatched against the Amazons.—Grote, vol. i p. 289. [115] _Antenor_, like Æneas, had always been favourable to the restoration of Helen.
Unskill’d and uninspired he seems to stand, Nor lifts the eye, nor graceful moves the hand: Then, while the chiefs in still attention hung, Pours the full tide of eloquence along; While from his lips the melting torrent flows, Soft as the fleeces of descending snows.
Now stronger notes engage the listening crowd, Louder the accents rise, and yet more loud, Like thunders rolling from a distant cloud.” Merrick’s “Tryphiodorus,” 148, 99. [117] Duport, “Gnomol.
Homer,” p. 20, well observes that this comparison may also be sarcastically applied to the _frigid_ style of oratory.
It, of course, here merely denotes the ready fluency of Ulysses. [118] _Her brothers’ doom_.
They perished in combat with Lynceus and Idas, whilst besieging Sparta.
Virgil and others, however, make them share immortality by turns. [119] Idreus was the arm-bearer and charioteer of king Priam, slain during this war.
Cf. Æn, vi. 487. [120] _Scæa’s gates_, rather _Scæan gates_, _i.e._ the left-hand gates. [121] This was customary in all sacrifices.
Hence we find Iras descending to cut off the hair of Dido, before which she could not expire. [122] _Nor pierced_.
“Thus having said, she turn’d and made appear Her neck refulgent and dishevell’d hair, Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach’d the ground, And widely spread ambrosial scents around.
In length of train descends her sweeping gown; And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known.” Dryden’s Virgil, i. 556. [124] _Cranae’s isle, i.e._ Athens.
See the “Schol.” and Alberti’s “Hesychius,” vol. ii. p. 338.
In the original, “Minerva Alalcomeneis,” _i.e. the defender_, so called from her temple at Alalcomene in Bœotia. [126] “Anything for a quiet life!” [127] —_Argos_.
The worship of Juno at Argos was very celebrated in ancient times, and she was regarded as the patron deity of that city.
A river of Mysia, rising from Mount Cotyius, in the southern part of the chain of Ida. [131] _Zelia_, a town of Troas, at the foot of Ida. [132] _Podaleirius_ and _Machäon_ are the leeches of the Grecian army, highly prized and consulted by all the wounded chiefs.
Their medical renown was further prolonged in the subsequent poem of Arktinus, the Iliou Persis, wherein the one was represented as unrivalled in surgical operations, the other as sagacious in detecting and appreciating morbid symptoms.
It was Podaleirius who first noticed the glaring eyes and disturbed deportment which preceded the suicide of Ajax.
“Galen appears uncertain whether Asklepius (as well as Dionysus) was originally a god, or whether he was first a man and then became afterwards a god; but Apollodorus professed to fix the exact date of his apotheosis.
Throughout all the historical ages the descendants of Asklepius were numerous and widely diffused.
The same portent has already been mentioned.
To this day, modern nations are not wholly free from this superstition. [137] _Sevenfold city_, Bœotian Thebes, which had seven gates. [138] _As when the winds_.
Gl’ empie d’ honor la faccia, e vi riduce Di giovinezza il bel purpureo lume.” [144] “Or deluges, descending on the plains, Sweep o’er the yellow year, destroy the pains Of lab’ring oxen, and the peasant’s gains; Uproot the forest oaks, and bear away Flocks, folds, and trees, an undistinguish’d prey.” Dryden’s Virgil ii. 408. [145] _From mortal mists_.
“But to nobler sights Michael from Adam’s eyes the film removed.” “Paradise Lost,” xi. 411. [146] _The race of those_.
“A pair of coursers, born of heav’nly breed, Who from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire; Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire, By substituting mares produced on earth, Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth.
Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 386, sqq. [147] The belief in the existence of men of larger stature in earlier times, is by no means confined to Homer. [148] _Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor_, or blood of the gods.
“A stream of nect’rous humour issuing flow’d, Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed.” “Paradise Lost,” vi. 339. [149] This was during the wars with the Titans. [150] _Amphitryon’s son_, Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon. [151] _Ægialé_ daughter of Adrastus.
The Cyclic poets (See Anthon’s Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in revenge for the wound she had received from her husband. [152] _Pheræ_, a town of Pelasgiotis, in Thessaly. [153] _Tlepolemus_, son of Hercules and Astyochia.
Having left his native country, Argos, in consequence of the accidental murder of Liscymnius, he was commanded by an oracle to retire to Rhodes.
Here he was chosen king, and accompanied the Trojan expedition.
After his death, certain games were instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the victors being rewarded with crowns of poplar. [154] These heroes’ names have since passed into a kind of proverb, designating the _oi polloi_ or mob. [155] _Spontaneous open_.
He here measures the leap of the horses by the extent of the world.
Hence arose the value of a loud voice in a commander; Stentor was an indispensable officer...
“The halls of Alkinous and Menelaus glitter with gold, copper, and electrum; while large stocks of yet unemployed metal—gold, copper, and iron are stored up in the treasure-chamber of Odysseus and other chiefs.
In reference also to the metals, it deserves to be remarked, that the Homeric descriptions universally suppose copper, and not iron, to be employed for arms, both offensive and defensive.
By what process the copper was tempered and hardened, so as to serve the purpose of the warrior, we do not know; but the use of iron for these objects belongs to a later age.”—Grote, vol. ii. p. 142. [164] _Oh impotent_, &c.
“In battle, quarter seems never to have been given, except with a view to the ransom of the prisoner.
Agamemnon reproaches Menelaus with unmanly softness, when he is on the point of sparing a fallen enemy, and himself puts the suppliant to the sword.”—Thirlwall, vol. i. p. 181 [165] “The ruthless steel, impatient of delay, Forbade the sire to linger out the day.
Where, for example, one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to be executed at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of this task is not, as a general rule, immediately described.
A certain interval is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action, which interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further account of the mission is resumed.” [168] _With tablets sealed_.
These probably were only devices of a hieroglyphical character.
Whether writing was known in the Homeric times is utterly uncertain.
See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq. [169] _Solymæan crew_, a people of Lycia. [170] From this “melancholy madness” of Bellerophon, hypochondria received the name of “Morbus Bellerophonteus.” See my notes in my prose translation, p. 112.
The “Aleian field,” _i.e._ “the plain of wandering,” was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in Cilicia. [171] _His own, of gold_.
See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23. [172] _Scæan, i e._ left hand. [173] _In fifty chambers_.
“It is apparently a sudden, irregular burst of popular indignation to which Hector alludes, when he regrets that the Trojans had not spirit enough to cover Paris with a mantle of stones.
This, however, was also one of the ordinary formal modes of punishment for great public offences.
It may have been originally connected with the same feeling—the desire of avoiding the pollution of bloodshed—which seems to have suggested the practice of burying prisoners alive, with a scantling of food by their side.
Though Homer makes no mention of this horrible usage, the example of the Roman Vestals affords reasons for believing that, in ascribing it to the heroic ages, Sophocles followed an authentic tradition.”—Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i. p. 171, sq. [175] _Paris’ lofty dome_.
“With respect to the private dwellings, which are oftenest described, the poet’s language barely enables us to form a general notion of their ordinary plan, and affords no conception of the style which prevailed in them or of their effect on the eye.
“Come destrier, che da le regie stalle Ove a l’usa de l’arme si riserba, Fugge, e libero al fiu per largo calle Va tragl’ armenti, o al fiume usato, o a l’herba.” Gier, Lib. ix. 75. [177] _Casque_.
The original word is stephanae, about the meaning of which there is some little doubt.
Some take it for a different kind of cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone, of the helmet. [178] _Athenian maid:_ Minerva. [179] _Celadon_, a river of Elis. [180] _Oïleus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of Oïleus, in contradistinction to Ajax, son of Telamon. [181] _In the general’s helm_.
It was customary to put the lots into a helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his choice. [182] _God of Thrace_.
Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian epithet.
Hence “Mavortia Mœnia.” [183] _Grimly he smiled_.
“And death Grinn’d horribly a ghastly smile.” —“Paradise Lost,” ii. 845.
“There Mavors stands Grinning with ghastly feature.” —Carey’s Dante: Hell, v. [184] “Sete ò guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro, Con pari honor di pari ambo possenti, Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotte Le ragioni, e ’l riposo, e de la notte.” —Gier.
Lib. vi. 51. [185] It was an ancient style of compliment to give a larger portion of food to the conqueror, or person to whom respect was to be shown.
Thus Benjamin was honoured with a “double portion.” Gen. xliii. 34. [186] _Embattled walls._ “Another essential basis of mechanical unity in the poem is the construction of the rampart.
The reason ascribed for the glaring improbability that the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet unfortified during nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely poetical one: ‘So long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name sufficed to keep every foe at a distance.’ The disasters consequent on his secession first led to the necessity of other means of protection.
Accordingly, in the battles previous to the eighth book, no allusion occurs to a rampart; in all those which follow it forms a prominent feature.
Here, then, in the anomaly as in the propriety of the Iliad, the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis of it, forms the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem.”—Mure, vol. i., p. 257. [187] _What cause of fear_, &c.
Or do we fear in vain Thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?” Dryden’s Virgil, iv. 304. [188] _In exchange_.
These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the Roman lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. § 1, as exhibiting the most ancient mention of barter. [189] “A similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the narrative, is the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of the eighth book, against any further interference of the gods in the battles.
In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is withdrawn.
During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily in view.
See however, Muller, “Greek Literature,” ch. v.
Section 6, and Grote, vol. ii. p. 252. [190] “As far removed from God and light of heaven, As from the centre thrice to th’ utmost pole.” —“Paradise Lost.” “E quanto è da le stelle al basso inferno, Tanto è più in sù de la stellata spera” —Gier.
“Some of the epithets which Homer applies to the heavens seem to imply that he considered it as a solid vault of metal.
But it is not necessary to construe these epithets so literally, nor to draw any such inference from his description of Atlas, who holds the lofty pillars which keep earth and heaven asunder.
Yet it would seem, from the manner in which the height of heaven is compared with the depth of Tartarus, that the region of light was thought to have certain bounds.
“Jove now, sole arbiter of peace and war, Held forth the fatal balance from afar: Each host he weighs; by turns they both prevail, Till Troy descending fix’d the doubtful scale.” Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, v 687, sqq.
“Oh’ Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray, Hung forth in heav’n his golden scales, Wherein all things created first he weighed; The pendulous round earth, with balanced air In counterpoise; now ponders all events, Battles and realms.
In these he puts two weights, The sequel each of parting and of fight: The latter quick up flew, and kick’d the beam.” “Paradise Lost,” iv. 496. [193] _And now_, &c.
“And now all heaven Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread; Had not th’ Almighty Father, where he sits ... foreseen.” —“Paradise Lost,” vi. 669. [194] _Gerenian Nestor_.
The epithet _Gerenian_ either refers to the name of a place in which Nestor was educated, or merely signifies honoured, revered.
Both these towns were conspicuous for their worship of Neptune. [196] _As full blown_, &c.
“Il suo Lesbia quasi bel fior succiso, E in atto si gentil languir tremanti Gl’ occhi, e cader siu ’l tergo il collo mira.” Gier.
Lib. ix. 85. [197] _Ungrateful_, because the cause in which they were engaged was unjust.
“Struck by the lab’ring priests’ uplifted hands The victims fall: to heav’n they make their pray’r, The curling vapours load the ambient air.
Such gifts gradually became regular, and formed the income of the German, (Tacit.
So, too, in the middle ages, ‘The feudal aids are the beginning of taxation, of which they for a long time answered the purpose.’ (Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. 189) This fact frees Achilles from the apparent charge of sordidness.
Purity, and retiring delicacy, are features well contrasted with the rough, but tender disposition of the hero. [203] _Laodice_.
Iphianassa, or Iphigenia, is not mentioned by Homer, among the daughters of Agamemnon. [204] “Agamemnon, when he offers to transfer to Achilles seven towns inhabited by wealthy husbandmen, who would enrich their lord by presents and tribute, seems likewise to assume rather a property in them, than an authority over them.
And the same thing may be intimated when it is said that Peleus bestowed a great people, the Dolopes of Phthia, on Phœnix.”—Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i Section 6, p. 162, note. [205] _Pray in deep silence_.
Rather: “use well-omened words;” or, as Kennedy has explained it, “Abstain from expressions unsuitable to the solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might defeat the object of their supplications.” [206] _Purest hands_.
This is one of the most ancient superstitions respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in tradition. [207] It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in piratical expeditions about its neighborhood.
Such a one was that of which Achilles now speaks.
From the following verses, it is evident that fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the expedition, and not to the successful plunderer. [208] _Pythia_, the capital of Achilles’ Thessalian domains. [209] _Orchomenian town_.
The topography of Orchomenus, in Bœotia, “situated,” as it was, “on the northern bank of the lake Æpais, which receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of Phocis, but also other rivers from Parnassus and Helicon” (Grote, vol. p. 181), was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay.
“As long as the channels of these waters were diligently watched and kept clear, a large portion of the lake was in the condition of alluvial land, pre-eminently rich and fertile.
But when the channels came to be either neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy, the water accumulated in such a degree as to occupy the soil of more than one ancient islet, and to occasion the change of the site of Orchomenus itself from the plain to the declivity of Mount Hyphanteion.” (Ibid.) [210] The phrase “hundred gates,” &c., seems to be merely expressive of a great number.
See notes to my prose translation, p. 162. [211] Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dyce’s Select Translations, p 88).— “Many gifts he gave, and o’er Dolopia bade me rule; thee in his arms He brought an infant, on my bosom laid The precious charge, and anxiously enjoin’d That I should rear thee as my own with all A parent’s love.
This image is very natural; for a man in his condition awakes no farther than to see confusedly what environs him, and to think it not a reality but a dream.”—Pope.
“There’s one did laugh in his sleep, and one cry’d murder; They wak’d each other.” —_Macbeth_. [219] “Aurora now had left her saffron bed, And beams of early light the heavens o’erspread.” Dryden’s Virgil, iv. 639 [220] _Red drops of blood_.
“This phenomenon, if a mere fruit of the poet’s imagination, might seem arbitrary or far-fetched.
It is one, however, of ascertained reality, and of no uncommon occurrence in the climate of Greece.”—Mure, i p. 493.
Lib. ix. 15: “La terra in vece del notturno gelo Bagnan rugiade tepide, e sanguigne.” [221] “No thought of flight, None of retreat, no unbecoming deed That argued fear.” —“Paradise Lost,” vi. 236. [222] _One of love_.
Although a bastard brother received only a small portion of the inheritance, he was commonly very well treated.
Priam appears to be the only one of whom polygamy is directly asserted in the Iliad.
“In those bloody fields Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields Of heroes.” —Dryden’s Virgil, i. 142. [225] “Where yon disorder’d heap of ruin lies, Stones rent from stones,—where clouds of dust arise,— Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place, Below the wall’s foundation drives his mace, And heaves the building from the solid base.” Dryden’s Virgil, ii. 825. [226] _Why boast we_.
“Wherefore do I assume These royalties and not refuse to reign, Refusing to accept as great a share Of hazard as of honour, due alike to him Who reigns, and so much to him due Of hazard more, as he above the rest High honour’d sits.” —“Paradise Lost,” ii. 450. [227] _Each equal weight_.
“Long time in even scale The battle hung.” —“Paradise Lost,” vi. 245. [228] “He on his impious foes right onward drove, _Gloomy as night_.” —“Paradise Lost,” vi. 831 [229] _Renown’d for justice and for length of days_, Arrian. de Exp.
Alex. iv. p. 239, also speaks of the independence of these people, which he regards as the result of their poverty and uprightness.
Some authors have regarded the phrase “Hippomolgian,” _i.e._ “milking their mares,” as an epithet applicable to numerous tribes, since the oldest of the Samatian nomads made their mares’ milk one of their chief articles of diet.
The epithet abion or abion, in this passage, has occasioned much discussion.
It is as well to observe, that the sameness of these scenes renders many notes unnecessary. [232] _Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed. [233] Compare Tasso:— Teneri sdegni, e placide, e tranquille Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci, Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci stille Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci.” Gier.
Lib. xvi. 25 [234] Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando Furioso, bk. vi. [235] “Twice seven, the charming daughters of the main— Around my person wait, and bear my train: Succeed my wish, and second my design, The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine.” Dryden’s Virgil, Æn. i. 107, seq. [236] _And Minos_.
“By Homer, Minos is described as the son of Jupiter, and of the daughter of Phœnix, whom all succeeding authors name Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of Cretan antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero, Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow his descent to be traced to any other source.
“Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run By angels many and strong, who interpos’d Defence, while others bore him on their shields Back to his chariot, where it stood retir’d From off the files of war; there they him laid, Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame.” “Paradise Lost,” vi. 335, seq. [239] _The brazen dome_.
Observe the bold ellipsis of “he cries,” and the transition from the direct to the oblique construction.
So in Milton:— “Thus at their shady lodge arriv’d, both stood, Both turn’d, and under open sky ador’d The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven, Which they beheld, the moon’s resplendent globe, And starry pole.—Thou also mad’st the night, Maker omnipotent, and thou the day.” Milton, “Paradise Lost,” Book iv. [241] _So some tall rock_.
“But like a rock unmov’d, a rock that braves The raging tempest, and the rising waves— Propp’d on himself he stands: his solid sides Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides.” Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 809. [242] Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he leaped from the vessel to the Trojan shore.
He was buried on the Chersonese, near the city of Plagusa.
There is a most elegant tribute to his memory in the Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus. [243] _His best beloved_.
The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall (Greece, vol. i, p. 176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the friendship subsisting between these two heroes— “One of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek character, is the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate and durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in the earliest than in later times.
It was indeed connected with the comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but the devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were maintained, was not the less admirable and engaging.
The heroic companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the same feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a wish or object apart, and only to live as they are always ready to die for one another.
It is true that the relation between them is not always one of perfect equality; but this is a circumstance which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the poetical description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it presents.
Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may owe the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the period to which the traditions are referred.
The argument of the Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus, whose love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for his higher birth and his unequalled prowess.
But the mutual regard which united Idomeneus and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus, though, as the persons themselves are less important, it is kept more in the back-ground, is manifestly viewed by the poet in the same light.
Zeus or Jupiter is popularly to be taken as omnipotent.
No distinct empire is assigned to fate or fortune; the will of the father of gods and men is absolute and uncontrollable.
This seems to be the true character of the Homeric deity, and it is very necessary that the student of Greek literature should bear it constantly in mind.
A strong instance in the Iliad itself to illustrate this position, is the passage where Jupiter laments to Juno the approaching death of Sarpedon.
‘Alas me!’ says he ‘since it is fated (moira) that Sarpedon, dearest to me of men, should be slain by Patroclus, the son of Menoetius!
“The art military of the Homeric age is upon a level with the state of navigation just described, personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale.
The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a captain in the guards is like Achilles.
There is no mention of a ditch or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself was accessible without a ladder.
It was probably a vast mound of earth with a declivity outwards.
Patroclus thrice mounts it in armour.
The Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive assistance from their allies to the very end.”—Coleridge, p. 212. [247] _Ciconians_.—A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus. [248] _They wept_.
“Fast by the manger stands the inactive steed, And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head; He stands, and careless of his golden grain, Weeps his associates and his master slain.” Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.
“Nothing is heard upon the mountains now, But pensive herds that for their master low, Straggling and comfortless about they rove, Unmindful of their pasture and their love.” Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._ “To close the pomp, Æthon, the steed of state, Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait.
Stripp’d of his trappings, with a sullen pace He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face.” Dryden’s Virgil, bk. ii [249] _Some brawny bull_.
“Like to a bull, that with impetuous spring Darts, at the moment when the fatal blow Hath struck him, but unable to proceed Plunges on either side.” —Carey’s Dante: Hell, c. xii. [250] This is connected with the earlier part of last book, the regular narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and the lamentations of Achilles. [251] _Far in the deep_.
So Oceanus hears the lamentations of Prometheus, in the play of Æschylus, and comes from the depths of the sea to comfort him. [252] Opuntia, a city of Locris. [253] Quintus Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his description of the shield of the same hero.
A few extracts from Mr.
Dyce’s version (Select Translations, p. 104, seq.) may here be introduced.
Around the shield the waves of ocean flow’d, The realms of Tethys, which unnumber’d streams, In azure mazes rolling o’er the earth, Seem’d to augment.” [254] _On seats of stone_.
“Several of the old northern Sagas represent the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting on great stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsring”— Grote, ii. p. 100, note.
On the independence of the judicial office in The heroic times, see Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i. p. 166. [255] _Another part_, &c.
“And here Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale Were heroes lying with their slaughter’d steeds Upon the ground incarnadin’d with blood.
Stern stalked Bellona, smear’d with reeking gore, Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen, And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames: Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng, Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat; And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes.
That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
Such were the horrors of dire war.” —Dyce’s Calaber. [256] _A field deep furrowed_.
“Here was a corn field; reapers in a row, Each with a sharp-tooth’d sickle in his hand, Work’d busily, and, as the harvest fell, Others were ready still to bind the sheaves: Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here The plough were drawing, and the furrow’d glebe Was black behind them, while with goading wand The active youths impell’d them.
Here a feast Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre A band of blooming virgins led the dance.
As if endued with life.” —Dyce’s Calaber. [257] Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by Hesiod.
He remarks that, “with two or three exceptions, the imagery differs in little more than the names and arrangements; and the difference of arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether for the worse.
The natural consecution of the Homeric images needs no exposition: it constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the work.
His recompense is reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are brought to a close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives in marriage Hebe.”—Grote, vol. i. p. 128. [259] _Ambrosia_.
Brings nectar temper’d with ambrosial dews.” Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, vi. 249. [260] “Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering.
He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.
Compare Virgil’s description of Camilla, who “Outstripp’d the winds in speed upon the plain, Flew o’er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain: She swept the seas, and, as she skimm’d along, Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung.” Dryden, vii. 1100. [266] _The future father_.
The overwhelming fury of the stream finds the natural interpretation in the character of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor.
Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to be easily forded by the foot passenger.
But a thunder-shower in the mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may suddenly immerse him in the flood of a mighty river.
The rescue of Achilles by the fiery arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same ready explanation from physical causes.
Drowning, as compared with a death in the field of battle, was considered utterly disgraceful. [272] _Beneath a caldron_.
“So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries, The bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
Above the brims they force their fiery way; Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.” Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 644. [273] “This tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by order of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not unfrequently among the incidents of the Mythical world.”—Grote, vol. i. p. 156. [274] _Not half so dreadful_.
“Fairest of stars, last in the train of night, If better thou belong not to the dawn.” “Paradise Lost,” v. 166. [278] Such was his fate.
After chasing the Trojans into the town, he was slain by an arrow from the quiver of Paris, directed under the unerring auspices of Apollo.
The greatest efforts were made by the Trojans to possess themselves of the body, which was however rescued and borne off to the Grecian camp by the valour of Ajax and Ulysses.
Thetis stole away the body, just as the Greeks were about to burn it with funeral honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of immortality in the isle of Leuke in the Euxine. [279] _Astyanax_, i.e. the _city-king_ or guardian.
It is amusing that Plato, who often finds fault with Homer without reason, should have copied this twaddling etymology into his Cratylus. [280] This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book, but it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for comparison. [281] _Thrice in order led_.
This was a frequent rite at funerals.
The Romans had the same custom, which they called _decursio_.
Plutarch states that Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to the memory of Achilles himself. [282] _And swore_.
Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to witness.
See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436. [283] “O, long expected by thy friends! from whence Art thou so late return’d for our defence?
After so many funerals of thy own, Art thou restored to thy declining town?
But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace Deforms the manly features of thy face?” Dryden, xi. 369. [284] _Like a thin smoke_.
“In vain I reach my feeble hands to join In sweet embraces—ah! no longer thine!
The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed: Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the tow’ring pride Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke, And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
High trunks of trees, fell’d from the steepy crown Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down.” Dryden’s Virgil, vi. 261. [287] _He vowed_.
This was a very ancient custom. [288] The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity of the deceased, and the honour in which he was held. [289] On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern nations, see Mallet, p. 213. [290] _And calls the spirit_.
Such was the custom anciently, even at the Roman funerals.
“Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again, Paternal ashes, now revived in vain.” Dryden’s Virgil, v. 106. [291] Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better moral from this episode than Homer.
His match is sought, but, through the trembling band, No one dares answer to the proud demand.
The whole scene between Achilles and Priam, when the latter comes to the Greek camp for the purpose of redeeming the body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly skilful, and yet the simplest and most affecting passage in the Iliad.
Quinctilian has taken notice of the following speech of Priam, the rhetorical artifice of which is so transcendent, that if genius did not often, especially in oratory, unconsciously fulfil the most subtle precepts of criticism, we might be induced, on this account alone, to consider the last book of the Iliad as what is called spurious, in other words, of later date than the rest of the poem.
Observe the exquisite taste of Priam in occupying the mind of Achilles, from the outset, with the image of his father; in gradually introducing the parallel of his own situation; and, lastly, mentioning Hector’s name when he perceives that the hero is softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of the conqueror.
The ego d’eleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha geronta, are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the Iliad.
They are almost too fine and pathetic.
The whole passage defies translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to transfuse it into another language.”—Coleridge, p. 195. [296] “Achilles’ ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot but offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity.
Retributive vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated by the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that evil inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured man; but made the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the fate of the body from which it had separated.
Hence a denial of the rites essential to the soul’s admission into the more favoured regions of the lower world was a cruel punishment to the wanderer on the dreary shores of the infernal river.
The complaint of the ghost of Patroclus to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own obsequies, shows how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his destroyer must have been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which, even after death, was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades.
Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession of his just rights of retribution.”—Mure, vol. i. 289. [297] Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.
She is through the Iliad a genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech, noble in her associations, full of remorse for a fault for which higher powers seem responsible, yet grateful and affectionate towards those with whom that fault had committed her.
I have always thought the following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and hints at her own invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as almost the sweetest passage in the poem.
It is another striking instance of that refinement of feeling and softness of tone which so generally distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the rest.”—Classic Poets, p. 198, seq. [299] “And here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to exalt and purify our impression of his character.
We had accompanied him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of his stormy passions.
We now leave him in repose and under the full influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of his great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a few short days the mighty being in whom they were united was himself to be suddenly cut off in the full vigour of their exercise.
It is like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has entertained magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not contemptuous, yet without much ceremony.” Coleridge, p. 227, considers the termination of “Paradise Lost” somewhat similar.
A LETTER FROM CAPTAIN GULLIVER TO HIS COUSIN SYMPSON.
A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT.
A VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNAG.
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA, BALNIBARBI, GLUBBDUBDRIB, LUGGNAGG AND JAPAN.
A VOYAGE TO THE COUNTRY OF THE HOUYHNHNMS.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. [_As given in the original edition_.] The author of these Travels, Mr.
Lemuel Gulliver, is my ancient and intimate friend; there is likewise some relation between us on the mother’s side.
Gulliver growing weary of the concourse of curious people coming to him at his house in Redriff, made a small purchase of land, with a convenient house, near Newark, in Nottinghamshire, his native country; where he now lives retired, yet in good esteem among his neighbours.
Gulliver was born in Nottinghamshire, where his father dwelt, yet I have heard him say his family came from Oxfordshire; to confirm which, I have observed in the churchyard at Banbury in that county, several tombs and monuments of the Gullivers.
Before he quitted Redriff, he left the custody of the following papers in my hands, with the liberty to dispose of them as I should think fit.
I have carefully perused them three times.
The style is very plain and simple; and the only fault I find is, that the author, after the manner of travellers, is a little too circumstantial.
There is an air of truth apparent through the whole; and indeed the author was so distinguished for his veracity, that it became a sort of proverb among his neighbours at Redriff, when any one affirmed a thing, to say, it was as true as if Mr.
Gulliver had spoken it.
By the advice of several worthy persons, to whom, with the author’s permission, I communicated these papers, I now venture to send them into the world, hoping they may be, at least for some time, a better entertainment to our young noblemen, than the common scribbles of politics and party.
Gulliver may be a little dissatisfied.
But I was resolved to fit the work as much as possible to the general capacity of readers.
However, if my own ignorance in sea affairs shall have led me to commit some mistakes, I alone am answerable for them.
And if any traveller hath a curiosity to see the whole work at large, as it came from the hands of the author, I will be ready to gratify him.
As for any further particulars relating to the author, the reader will receive satisfaction from the first pages of the book.
Likewise in the account of the academy of projectors, and several passages of my discourse to my master _Houyhnhnm_, you have either omitted some material circumstances, or minced or changed them in such a manner, that I do hardly know my own work.
When I formerly hinted to you something of this in a letter, you were pleased to answer that you were afraid of giving offence; that people in power were very watchful over the press, and apt not only to interpret, but to punish every thing which looked like an _innuendo_ (as I think you call it).
But, pray how could that which I spoke so many years ago, and at about five thousand leagues distance, in another reign, be applied to any of the _Yahoos_, who now are said to govern the herd; especially at a time when I little thought, or feared, the unhappiness of living under them?
Have not I the most reason to complain, when I see these very _Yahoos_ carried by _Houyhnhnms_ in a vehicle, as if they were brutes, and those the rational creatures?
And indeed to avoid so monstrous and detestable a sight was one principal motive of my retirement hither.
Thus much I thought proper to tell you in relation to yourself, and to the trust I reposed in you.
I do, in the next place, complain of my own great want of judgment, in being prevailed upon by the entreaties and false reasoning of you and some others, very much against my own opinion, to suffer my travels to be published.
These, and a thousand other reformations, I firmly counted upon by your encouragement; as indeed they were plainly deducible from the precepts delivered in my book.
And it must be owned, that seven months were a sufficient time to correct every vice and folly to which _Yahoos_ are subject, if their natures had been capable of the least disposition to virtue or wisdom.
Yet, so far have you been from answering my expectation in any of your letters; that on the contrary you are loading our carrier every week with libels, and keys, and reflections, and memoirs, and second parts; wherein I see myself accused of reflecting upon great state folk; of degrading human nature (for so they have still the confidence to style it), and of abusing the female sex.
I find likewise that the writers of those bundles are not agreed among themselves; for some of them will not allow me to be the author of my own travels; and others make me author of books to which I am wholly a stranger.
I hear some of our sea _Yahoos_ find fault with my sea-language, as not proper in many parts, nor now in use.
In my first voyages, while I was young, I was instructed by the oldest mariners, and learned to speak as they did.
But I have since found that the sea _Yahoos_ are apt, like the land ones, to become new-fangled in their words, which the latter change every year; insomuch, as I remember upon each return to my own country their old dialect was so altered, that I could hardly understand the new.
And I observe, when any _Yahoo_ comes from London out of curiosity to visit me at my house, we neither of us are able to deliver our conceptions in a manner intelligible to the other.
If the censure of the _Yahoos_ could any way affect me, I should have great reason to complain, that some of them are so bold as to think my book of travels a mere fiction out of mine own brain, and have gone so far as to drop hints, that the _Houyhnhnms_ and _Yahoos_ have no more existence than the inhabitants of Utopia.
Indeed I must confess, that as to the people of _Lilliput_, _Brobdingrag_ (for so the word should have been spelt, and not erroneously _Brobdingnag_), and _Laputa_, I have never yet heard of any _Yahoo_ so presumptuous as to dispute their being, or the facts I have related concerning them; because the truth immediately strikes every reader with conviction.
And is there less probability in my account of the _Houyhnhnms_ or _Yahoos_, when it is manifest as to the latter, there are so many thousands even in this country, who only differ from their brother brutes in _Houyhnhnmland_, because they use a sort of jabber, and do not go naked?
I wrote for their amendment, and not their approbation.
The united praise of the whole race would be of less consequence to me, than the neighing of those two degenerate _Houyhnhnms_ I keep in my stable; because from these, degenerate as they are, I still improve in some virtues without any mixture of vice.
I have other complaints to make upon this vexatious occasion; but I forbear troubling myself or you any further.
His first inducements to travel.
He is shipwrecked, and swims for his life, gets safe on shore in the country of Lilliput; is made a prisoner, and carried up the country.
My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire; I was the third of five sons.
He sent me to Emanuel College in Cambridge at fourteen years old, where I resided three years, and applied myself close to my studies; but the charge of maintaining me, although I had a very scanty allowance, being too great for a narrow fortune, I was bound apprentice to Mr.
James Bates, an eminent surgeon in London, with whom I continued four years.
My father now and then sending me small sums of money, I laid them out in learning navigation, and other parts of the mathematics, useful to those who intend to travel, as I always believed it would be, some time or other, my fortune to do.
Bates, I went down to my father: where, by the assistance of him and my uncle John, and some other relations, I got forty pounds, and a promise of thirty pounds a year to maintain me at Leyden: there I studied physic two years and seven months, knowing it would be useful in long voyages.
Soon after my return from Leyden, I was recommended by my good master, Mr.
Bates, to be surgeon to the Swallow, Captain Abraham Pannel, commander; with whom I continued three years and a half, making a voyage or two into the Levant, and some other parts.
When I came back I resolved to settle in London; to which Mr.
Bates, my master, encouraged me, and by him I was recommended to several patients.
I took part of a small house in the Old Jewry; and being advised to alter my condition, I married Mrs.
Mary Burton, second daughter to Mr.
Edmund Burton, hosier, in Newgate-street, with whom I received four hundred pounds for a portion.
But my good master Bates dying in two years after, and I having few friends, my business began to fail; for my conscience would not suffer me to imitate the bad practice of too many among my brethren.
Having therefore consulted with my wife, and some of my acquaintance, I determined to go again to sea.
I was surgeon successively in two ships, and made several voyages, for six years, to the East and West Indies, by which I got some addition to my fortune.
My hours of leisure I spent in reading the best authors, ancient and modern, being always provided with a good number of books; and when I was ashore, in observing the manners and dispositions of the people, as well as learning their language; wherein I had a great facility, by the strength of my memory.
The last of these voyages not proving very fortunate, I grew weary of the sea, and intended to stay at home with my wife and family.
I removed from the Old Jewry to Fetter Lane, and from thence to Wapping, hoping to get business among the sailors; but it would not turn to account.
After three years expectation that things would mend, I accepted an advantageous offer from Captain William Prichard, master of the Antelope, who was making a voyage to the South Sea.
We set sail from Bristol, May 4, 1699, and our voyage was at first very prosperous.
It would not be proper, for some reasons, to trouble the reader with the particulars of our adventures in those seas; let it suffice to inform him, that in our passage from thence to the East Indies, we were driven by a violent storm to the north-west of Van Diemen’s Land.
By an observation, we found ourselves in the latitude of 30 degrees 2 minutes south.
Twelve of our crew were dead by immoderate labour and ill food; the rest were in a very weak condition.
On the 5th of November, which was the beginning of summer in those parts, the weather being very hazy, the seamen spied a rock within half a cable’s length of the ship; but the wind was so strong, that we were driven directly upon it, and immediately split.
We rowed, by my computation, about three leagues, till we were able to work no longer, being already spent with labour while we were in the ship.
We therefore trusted ourselves to the mercy of the waves, and in about half an hour the boat was overset by a sudden flurry from the north.
What became of my companions in the boat, as well as of those who escaped on the rock, or were left in the vessel, I cannot tell; but conclude they were all lost.
For my own part, I swam as fortune directed me, and was pushed forward by wind and tide.
I often let my legs drop, and could feel no bottom; but when I was almost gone, and able to struggle no longer, I found myself within my depth; and by this time the storm was much abated.
The declivity was so small, that I walked near a mile before I got to the shore, which I conjectured was about eight o’clock in the evening.
I then advanced forward near half a mile, but could not discover any sign of houses or inhabitants; at least I was in so weak a condition, that I did not observe them.
I was extremely tired, and with that, and the heat of the weather, and about half a pint of brandy that I drank as I left the ship, I found myself much inclined to sleep.
I lay down on the grass, which was very short and soft, where I slept sounder than ever I remembered to have done in my life, and, as I reckoned, about nine hours; for when I awaked, it was just day-light.
I attempted to rise, but was not able to stir: for, as I happened to lie on my back, I found my arms and legs were strongly fastened on each side to the ground; and my hair, which was long and thick, tied down in the same manner.
I likewise felt several slender ligatures across my body, from my arm-pits to my thighs.
I could only look upwards; the sun began to grow hot, and the light offended my eyes.
I heard a confused noise about me; but in the posture I lay, could see nothing except the sky.
In a little time I felt something alive moving on my left leg, which advancing gently forward over my breast, came almost up to my chin; when, bending my eyes downwards as much as I could, I perceived it to be a human creature not six inches high, with a bow and arrow in his hands, and a quiver at his back.
In the mean time, I felt at least forty more of the same kind (as I conjectured) following the first.
I was in the utmost astonishment, and roared so loud, that they all ran back in a fright; and some of them, as I was afterwards told, were hurt with the falls they got by leaping from my sides upon the ground.
However, they soon returned, and one of them, who ventured so far as to get a full sight of my face, lifting up his hands and eyes by way of admiration, cried out in a shrill but distinct voice, _Hekinah degul_: the others repeated the same words several times, but then I knew not what they meant.
I lay all this while, as the reader may believe, in great uneasiness.
When this shower of arrows was over, I fell a groaning with grief and pain; and then striving again to get loose, they discharged another volley larger than the first, and some of them attempted with spears to stick me in the sides; but by good luck I had on a buff jerkin, which they could not pierce.
I thought it the most prudent method to lie still, and my design was to continue so till night, when, my left hand being already loose, I could easily free myself: and as for the inhabitants, I had reason to believe I might be a match for the greatest army they could bring against me, if they were all of the same size with him that I saw.
But fortune disposed otherwise of me.
He appeared to be of a middle age, and taller than any of the other three who attended him, whereof one was a page that held up his train, and seemed to be somewhat longer than my middle finger; the other two stood one on each side to support him.
He acted every part of an orator, and I could observe many periods of threatenings, and others of promises, pity, and kindness.
The _hurgo_ (for so they call a great lord, as I afterwards learnt) understood me very well.
He descended from the stage, and commanded that several ladders should be applied to my sides, on which above a hundred of the inhabitants mounted and walked towards my mouth, laden with baskets full of meat, which had been provided and sent thither by the king’s orders, upon the first intelligence he received of me.
I observed there was the flesh of several animals, but could not distinguish them by the taste.
There were shoulders, legs, and loins, shaped like those of mutton, and very well dressed, but smaller than the wings of a lark.
I ate them by two or three at a mouthful, and took three loaves at a time, about the bigness of musket bullets.
They supplied me as fast as they could, showing a thousand marks of wonder and astonishment at my bulk and appetite.
They found by my eating that a small quantity would not suffice me; and being a most ingenious people, they slung up, with great dexterity, one of their largest hogsheads, then rolled it towards my hand, and beat out the top; I drank it off at a draught, which I might well do, for it did not hold half a pint, and tasted like a small wine of Burgundy, but much more delicious.
They brought me a second hogshead, which I drank in the same manner, and made signs for more; but they had none to give me.
When I had performed these wonders, they shouted for joy, and danced upon my breast, repeating several times as they did at first, _Hekinah degul_.
They made me a sign that I should throw down the two hogsheads, but first warning the people below to stand out of the way, crying aloud, _Borach mevolah_; and when they saw the vessels in the air, there was a universal shout of _Hekinah degul_.
I confess I was often tempted, while they were passing backwards and forwards on my body, to seize forty or fifty of the first that came in my reach, and dash them against the ground.
But the remembrance of what I had felt, which probably might not be the worst they could do, and the promise of honour I made them—for so I interpreted my submissive behaviour—soon drove out these imaginations.
Besides, I now considered myself as bound by the laws of hospitality, to a people who had treated me with so much expense and magnificence.
However, in my thoughts I could not sufficiently wonder at the intrepidity of these diminutive mortals, who durst venture to mount and walk upon my body, while one of my hands was at liberty, without trembling at the very sight of so prodigious a creature as I must appear to them.
After some time, when they observed that I made no more demands for meat, there appeared before me a person of high rank from his imperial majesty.
I answered in few words, but to no purpose, and made a sign with my hand that was loose, putting it to the other (but over his excellency’s head for fear of hurting him or his train) and then to my own head and body, to signify that I desired my liberty.
It appeared that he understood me well enough, for he shook his head by way of disapprobation, and held his hand in a posture to show that I must be carried as a prisoner.
However, he made other signs to let me understand that I should have meat and drink enough, and very good treatment.
Whereupon I once more thought of attempting to break my bonds; but again, when I felt the smart of their arrows upon my face and hands, which were all in blisters, and many of the darts still sticking in them, and observing likewise that the number of my enemies increased, I gave tokens to let them know that they might do with me what they pleased.
Upon this, the _hurgo_ and his train withdrew, with much civility and cheerful countenances.
But before this, they had daubed my face and both my hands with a sort of ointment, very pleasant to the smell, which, in a few minutes, removed all the smart of their arrows.
These circumstances, added to the refreshment I had received by their victuals and drink, which were very nourishing, disposed me to sleep.
I slept about eight hours, as I was afterwards assured; and it was no wonder, for the physicians, by the emperor’s order, had mingled a sleepy potion in the hogsheads of wine.
It seems, that upon the first moment I was discovered sleeping on the ground, after my landing, the emperor had early notice of it by an express; and determined in council, that I should be tied in the manner I have related, (which was done in the night while I slept;) that plenty of meat and drink should be sent to me, and a machine prepared to carry me to the capital city.
This resolution perhaps may appear very bold and dangerous, and I am confident would not be imitated by any prince in Europe on the like occasion.
These people are most excellent mathematicians, and arrived to a great perfection in mechanics, by the countenance and encouragement of the emperor, who is a renowned patron of learning.
This prince has several machines fixed on wheels, for the carriage of trees and other great weights.
Five hundred carpenters and engineers were immediately set at work to prepare the greatest engine they had.
It was brought parallel to me, as I lay.
But the principal difficulty was to raise and place me in this vehicle.
Eighty poles, each of one foot high, were erected for this purpose, and very strong cords, of the bigness of packthread, were fastened by hooks to many bandages, which the workmen had girt round my neck, my hands, my body, and my legs.
Nine hundred of the strongest men were employed to draw up these cords, by many pulleys fastened on the poles; and thus, in less than three hours, I was raised and slung into the engine, and there tied fast.
All this I was told; for, while the operation was performing, I lay in a profound sleep, by the force of that soporiferous medicine infused into my liquor.
Fifteen hundred of the emperor’s largest horses, each about four inches and a half high, were employed to draw me towards the metropolis, which, as I said, was half a mile distant.
We made a long march the remaining part of the day, and, rested at night with five hundred guards on each side of me, half with torches, and half with bows and arrows, ready to shoot me if I should offer to stir.
The next morning at sunrise we continued our march, and arrived within two hundred yards of the city gates about noon.
The emperor, and all his court, came out to meet us; but his great officers would by no means suffer his majesty to endanger his person by mounting on my body.
At the place where the carriage stopped there stood an ancient temple, esteemed to be the largest in the whole kingdom; which, having been polluted some years before by an unnatural murder, was, according to the zeal of those people, looked upon as profane, and therefore had been applied to common use, and all the ornaments and furniture carried away.
In this edifice it was determined I should lodge.
The great gate fronting to the north was about four feet high, and almost two feet wide, through which I could easily creep.
On each side of the gate was a small window, not above six inches from the ground: into that on the left side, the king’s smith conveyed fourscore and eleven chains, like those that hang to a lady’s watch in Europe, and almost as large, which were locked to my left leg with six-and-thirty padlocks.
Over against this temple, on the other side of the great highway, at twenty feet distance, there was a turret at least five feet high.
Here the emperor ascended, with many principal lords of his court, to have an opportunity of viewing me, as I was told, for I could not see them.
It was reckoned that above a hundred thousand inhabitants came out of the town upon the same errand; and, in spite of my guards, I believe there could not be fewer than ten thousand at several times, who mounted my body by the help of ladders.
But a proclamation was soon issued, to forbid it upon pain of death.
When the workmen found it was impossible for me to break loose, they cut all the strings that bound me; whereupon I rose up, with as melancholy a disposition as ever I had in my life.
But the noise and astonishment of the people, at seeing me rise and walk, are not to be expressed.
The chains that held my left leg were about two yards long, and gave me not only the liberty of walking backwards and forwards in a semicircle, but, being fixed within four inches of the gate, allowed me to creep in, and lie at my full length in the temple.
The emperor of Lilliput, attended by several of the nobility, comes to see the author in his confinement.
The emperor’s person and habit described.
Learned men appointed to teach the author their language.
He gains favour by his mild disposition.
His pockets are searched, and his sword and pistols taken from him.
When I found myself on my feet, I looked about me, and must confess I never beheld a more entertaining prospect.
The country around appeared like a continued garden, and the enclosed fields, which were generally forty feet square, resembled so many beds of flowers.
These fields were intermingled with woods of half a stang, [301] and the tallest trees, as I could judge, appeared to be seven feet high.
I had been for some hours extremely pressed by the necessities of nature; which was no wonder, it being almost two days since I had last disburdened myself.
I was under great difficulties between urgency and shame.
The best expedient I could think of, was to creep into my house, which I accordingly did; and shutting the gate after me, I went as far as the length of my chain would suffer, and discharged my body of that uneasy load.
But this was the only time I was ever guilty of so uncleanly an action; for which I cannot but hope the candid reader will give some allowance, after he has maturely and impartially considered my case, and the distress I was in.
From this time my constant practice was, as soon as I rose, to perform that business in open air, at the full extent of my chain; and due care was taken every morning before company came, that the offensive matter should be carried off in wheel-barrows, by two servants appointed for that purpose.
I would not have dwelt so long upon a circumstance that, perhaps, at first sight, may appear not very momentous, if I had not thought it necessary to justify my character, in point of cleanliness, to the world; which, I am told, some of my maligners have been pleased, upon this and other occasions, to call in question.
When this adventure was at an end, I came back out of my house, having occasion for fresh air.
When he alighted, he surveyed me round with great admiration; but kept beyond the length of my chain.
He ordered his cooks and butlers, who were already prepared, to give me victuals and drink, which they pushed forward in a sort of vehicles upon wheels, till I could reach them.
I took these vehicles and soon emptied them all; twenty of them were filled with meat, and ten with liquor; each of the former afforded me two or three good mouthfuls; and I emptied the liquor of ten vessels, which was contained in earthen vials, into one vehicle, drinking it off at a draught; and so I did with the rest.
The empress, and young princes of the blood of both sexes, attended by many ladies, sat at some distance in their chairs; but upon the accident that happened to the emperor’s horse, they alighted, and came near his person, which I am now going to describe.
He is taller by almost the breadth of my nail, than any of his court; which alone is enough to strike an awe into the beholders.
His features are strong and masculine, with an Austrian lip and arched nose, his complexion olive, his countenance erect, his body and limbs well proportioned, all his motions graceful, and his deportment majestic.
He was then past his prime, being twenty-eight years and three quarters old, of which he had reigned about seven in great felicity, and generally victorious.
For the better convenience of beholding him, I lay on my side, so that my face was parallel to his, and he stood but three yards off: however, I have had him since many times in my hand, and therefore cannot be deceived in the description.
His dress was very plain and simple, and the fashion of it between the Asiatic and the European; but he had on his head a light helmet of gold, adorned with jewels, and a plume on the crest.
He held his sword drawn in his hand to defend himself, if I should happen to break loose; it was almost three inches long; the hilt and scabbard were gold enriched with diamonds.
His voice was shrill, but very clear and articulate; and I could distinctly hear it when I stood up.
The ladies and courtiers were all most magnificently clad; so that the spot they stood upon seemed to resemble a petticoat spread upon the ground, embroidered with figures of gold and silver.
His imperial majesty spoke often to me, and I returned answers: but neither of us could understand a syllable.
There were several of his priests and lawyers present (as I conjectured by their habits), who were commanded to address themselves to me; and I spoke to them in as many languages as I had the least smattering of, which were High and Low Dutch, Latin, French, Spanish, Italian, and Lingua Franca, but all to no purpose.
After about two hours the court retired, and I was left with a strong guard, to prevent the impertinence, and probably the malice of the rabble, who were very impatient to crowd about me as near as they durst; and some of them had the impudence to shoot their arrows at me, as I sat on the ground by the door of my house, whereof one very narrowly missed my left eye.
But the colonel ordered six of the ringleaders to be seized, and thought no punishment so proper as to deliver them bound into my hands; which some of his soldiers accordingly did, pushing them forward with the butt-ends of their pikes into my reach.
I took them all in my right hand, put five of them into my coat-pocket; and as to the sixth, I made a countenance as if I would eat him alive.
The poor man squalled terribly, and the colonel and his officers were in much pain, especially when they saw me take out my penknife: but I soon put them out of fear; for, looking mildly, and immediately cutting the strings he was bound with, I set him gently on the ground, and away he ran.
I treated the rest in the same manner, taking them one by one out of my pocket; and I observed both the soldiers and people were highly delighted at this mark of my clemency, which was represented very much to my advantage at court.
Towards night I got with some difficulty into my house, where I lay on the ground, and continued to do so about a fortnight; during which time, the emperor gave orders to have a bed prepared for me.
Six hundred beds of the common measure were brought in carriages, and worked up in my house; a hundred and fifty of their beds, sewn together, made up the breadth and length; and these were four double: which, however, kept me but very indifferently from the hardness of the floor, that was of smooth stone.
By the same computation, they provided me with sheets, blankets, and coverlets, tolerable enough for one who had been so long inured to hardships.
As the news of my arrival spread through the kingdom, it brought prodigious numbers of rich, idle, and curious people to see me; so that the villages were almost emptied; and great neglect of tillage and household affairs must have ensued, if his imperial majesty had not provided, by several proclamations and orders of state, against this inconveniency.
He directed that those who had already beheld me should return home, and not presume to come within fifty yards of my house, without license from the court; whereby the secretaries of state got considerable fees.
In the mean time the emperor held frequent councils, to debate what course should be taken with me; and I was afterwards assured by a particular friend, a person of great quality, who was as much in the secret as any, that the court was under many difficulties concerning me.
They apprehended my breaking loose; that my diet would be very expensive, and might cause a famine.
Sometimes they determined to starve me; or at least to shoot me in the face and hands with poisoned arrows, which would soon despatch me; but again they considered, that the stench of so large a carcass might produce a plague in the metropolis, and probably spread through the whole kingdom.
An establishment was also made of six hundred persons to be my domestics, who had board-wages allowed for their maintenance, and tents built for them very conveniently on each side of my door.
It was likewise ordered, that three hundred tailors should make me a suit of clothes, after the fashion of the country; that six of his majesty’s greatest scholars should be employed to instruct me in their language; and lastly, that the emperor’s horses, and those of the nobility and troops of guards, should be frequently exercised in my sight, to accustom themselves to me.
All these orders were duly put in execution; and in about three weeks I made a great progress in learning their language; during which time the emperor frequently honoured me with his visits, and was pleased to assist my masters in teaching me.
We began already to converse together in some sort; and the first words I learnt, were to express my desire “that he would please give me my liberty;” which I every day repeated on my knees.
His answer, as I could comprehend it, was, “that this must be a work of time, not to be thought on without the advice of his council, and that first I must _lumos kelmin pesso desmar lon emposo_;” that is, swear a peace with him and his kingdom.
However, that I should be used with all kindness.
In one of my fobs there was a silver watch, and in the other a small quantity of gold in a purse.
These gentlemen, having pen, ink, and paper, about them, made an exact inventory of every thing they saw; and when they had done, desired I would set them down, that they might deliver it to the emperor.
This inventory I afterwards translated into English, and is, word for word, as follows: “_Imprimis_: In the right coat-pocket of the great man-mountain” (for so I interpret the words _quinbus flestrin_,) “after the strictest search, we found only one great piece of coarse-cloth, large enough to be a foot-cloth for your majesty’s chief room of state.
In the left pocket we saw a huge silver chest, with a cover of the same metal, which we, the searchers, were not able to lift.
We desired it should be opened, and one of us stepping into it, found himself up to the mid leg in a sort of dust, some part whereof flying up to our faces set us both a sneezing for several times together.
In his right waistcoat-pocket we found a prodigious bundle of white thin substances, folded one over another, about the bigness of three men, tied with a strong cable, and marked with black figures; which we humbly conceive to be writings, every letter almost half as large as the palm of our hands.
In the left there was a sort of engine, from the back of which were extended twenty long poles, resembling the pallisados before your majesty’s court: wherewith we conjecture the man-mountain combs his head; for we did not always trouble him with questions, because we found it a great difficulty to make him understand us.
In the large pocket, on the right side of his middle cover” (so I translate the word _ranfulo_, by which they meant my breeches,) “we saw a hollow pillar of iron, about the length of a man, fastened to a strong piece of timber larger than the pillar; and upon one side of the pillar, were huge pieces of iron sticking out, cut into strange figures, which we know not what to make of.
In the smaller pocket on the right side, were several round flat pieces of white and red metal, of different bulk; some of the white, which seemed to be silver, were so large and heavy, that my comrade and I could hardly lift them.
In the left pocket were two black pillars irregularly shaped: we could not, without difficulty, reach the top of them, as we stood at the bottom of his pocket.
One of them was covered, and seemed all of a piece: but at the upper end of the other there appeared a white round substance, about twice the bigness of our heads.
Within each of these was enclosed a prodigious plate of steel; which, by our orders, we obliged him to show us, because we apprehended they might be dangerous engines.
He took them out of their cases, and told us, that in his own country his practice was to shave his beard with one of these, and cut his meat with the other.
There were two pockets which we could not enter: these he called his fobs; they were two large slits cut into the top of his middle cover, but squeezed close by the pressure of his belly.
Out of the right fob hung a great silver chain, with a wonderful kind of engine at the bottom.
We directed him to draw out whatever was at the end of that chain; which appeared to be a globe, half silver, and half of some transparent metal; for, on the transparent side, we saw certain strange figures circularly drawn, and thought we could touch them, till we found our fingers stopped by the lucid substance.
He put this engine into our ears, which made an incessant noise, like that of a water-mill: and we conjecture it is either some unknown animal, or the god that he worships; but we are more inclined to the latter opinion, because he assured us, (if we understood him right, for he expressed himself very imperfectly) that he seldom did any thing without consulting it.
From the left fob he took out a net almost large enough for a fisherman, but contrived to open and shut like a purse, and served him for the same use: we found therein several massy pieces of yellow metal, which, if they be real gold, must be of immense value.
“Having thus, in obedience to your majesty’s commands, diligently searched all his pockets, we observed a girdle about his waist made of the hide of some prodigious animal, from which, on the left side, hung a sword of the length of five men; and on the right, a bag or pouch divided into two cells, each cell capable of holding three of your majesty’s subjects.
In one of these cells were several globes, or balls, of a most ponderous metal, about the bigness of our heads, and requiring a strong hand to lift them: the other cell contained a heap of certain black grains, but of no great bulk or weight, for we could hold above fifty of them in the palms of our hands.
“This is an exact inventory of what we found about the body of the man-mountain, who used us with great civility, and due respect to your majesty’s commission.
Signed and sealed on the fourth day of the eighty-ninth moon of your majesty’s auspicious reign.
Clefrin Frelock, Marsi Frelock.” When this inventory was read over to the emperor, he directed me, although in very gentle terms, to deliver up the several particulars.
He first called for my scimitar, which I took out, scabbard and all.
In the mean time he ordered three thousand of his choicest troops (who then attended him) to surround me at a distance, with their bows and arrows just ready to discharge; but I did not observe it, for my eyes were wholly fixed upon his majesty.
He then desired me to draw my scimitar, which, although it had got some rust by the sea water, was, in most parts, exceeding bright.
I did so, and immediately all the troops gave a shout between terror and surprise; for the sun shone clear, and the reflection dazzled their eyes, as I waved the scimitar to and fro in my hand.
His majesty, who is a most magnanimous prince, was less daunted than I could expect: he ordered me to return it into the scabbard, and cast it on the ground as gently as I could, about six feet from the end of my chain.
The next thing he demanded was one of the hollow iron pillars; by which he meant my pocket pistols.
I drew it out, and at his desire, as well as I could, expressed to him the use of it; and charging it only with powder, which, by the closeness of my pouch, happened to escape wetting in the sea (an inconvenience against which all prudent mariners take special care to provide,) I first cautioned the emperor not to be afraid, and then I let it off in the air.
The astonishment here was much greater than at the sight of my scimitar.
Hundreds fell down as if they had been struck dead; and even the emperor, although he stood his ground, could not recover himself for some time.
I delivered up both my pistols in the same manner as I had done my scimitar, and then my pouch of powder and bullets; begging him that the former might be kept from fire, for it would kindle with the smallest spark, and blow up his imperial palace into the air.
I likewise delivered up my watch, which the emperor was very curious to see, and commanded two of his tallest yeomen of the guards to bear it on a pole upon their shoulders, as draymen in England do a barrel of ale.
He was amazed at the continual noise it made, and the motion of the minute-hand, which he could easily discern; for their sight is much more acute than ours: he asked the opinions of his learned men about it, which were various and remote, as the reader may well imagine without my repeating; although indeed I could not very perfectly understand them.
I then gave up my silver and copper money, my purse, with nine large pieces of gold, and some smaller ones; my knife and razor, my comb and silver snuff-box, my handkerchief and journal-book.
My scimitar, pistols, and pouch, were conveyed in carriages to his majesty’s stores; but the rest of my goods were returned me.
The author diverts the emperor, and his nobility of both sexes, in a very uncommon manner.
The diversions of the court of Lilliput described.
The author has his liberty granted him upon certain conditions.
My gentleness and good behaviour had gained so far on the emperor and his court, and indeed upon the army and people in general, that I began to conceive hopes of getting my liberty in a short time.
I took all possible methods to cultivate this favourable disposition.
The natives came, by degrees, to be less apprehensive of any danger from me.
I would sometimes lie down, and let five or six of them dance on my hand; and at last the boys and girls would venture to come and play at hide-and-seek in my hair.
I had now made a good progress in understanding and speaking the language.
The emperor had a mind one day to entertain me with several of the country shows, wherein they exceed all nations I have known, both for dexterity and magnificence.
I was diverted with none so much as that of the rope-dancers, performed upon a slender white thread, extended about two feet, and twelve inches from the ground.
Upon which I shall desire liberty, with the reader’s patience, to enlarge a little.
This diversion is only practised by those persons who are candidates for great employments, and high favour at court.
They are trained in this art from their youth, and are not always of noble birth, or liberal education.
When a great office is vacant, either by death or disgrace (which often happens) five or six of those candidates petition the emperor to entertain his majesty and the court with a dance on the rope; and whoever jumps the highest, without falling, succeeds in the office.
Very often the chief ministers themselves are commanded to show their skill, and to convince the emperor that they have not lost their faculty.
Flimnap, the treasurer, is allowed to cut a caper on the straight rope, at least an inch higher than any other lord in the whole empire.
I have seen him do the summerset several times together, upon a trencher fixed on a rope which is no thicker than a common packthread in England.
My friend Reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs, is, in my opinion, if I am not partial, the second after the treasurer; the rest of the great officers are much upon a par.
These diversions are often attended with fatal accidents, whereof great numbers are on record.
I myself have seen two or three candidates break a limb.
But the danger is much greater, when the ministers themselves are commanded to show their dexterity; for, by contending to excel themselves and their fellows, they strain so far that there is hardly one of them who has not received a fall, and some of them two or three.
I was assured that, a year or two before my arrival, Flimnap would infallibly have broke his neck, if one of the king’s cushions, that accidentally lay on the ground, had not weakened the force of his fall.
There is likewise another diversion, which is only shown before the emperor and empress, and first minister, upon particular occasions.
These threads are proposed as prizes for those persons whom the emperor has a mind to distinguish by a peculiar mark of his favour.
The ceremony is performed in his majesty’s great chamber of state, where the candidates are to undergo a trial of dexterity very different from the former, and such as I have not observed the least resemblance of in any other country of the new or old world.
The emperor holds a stick in his hands, both ends parallel to the horizon, while the candidates advancing, one by one, sometimes leap over the stick, sometimes creep under it, backward and forward, several times, according as the stick is advanced or depressed.
Sometimes the emperor holds one end of the stick, and his first minister the other; sometimes the minister has it entirely to himself.
Whoever performs his part with most agility, and holds out the longest in leaping and creeping, is rewarded with the blue-coloured silk; the red is given to the next, and the green to the third, which they all wear girt twice round about the middle; and you see few great persons about this court who are not adorned with one of these girdles.
The horses of the army, and those of the royal stables, having been daily led before me, were no longer shy, but would come up to my very feet without starting.
The riders would leap them over my hand, as I held it on the ground; and one of the emperor’s huntsmen, upon a large courser, took my foot, shoe and all; which was indeed a prodigious leap.
I had the good fortune to divert the emperor one day after a very extraordinary manner.
I desired he would order several sticks of two feet high, and the thickness of an ordinary cane, to be brought me; whereupon his majesty commanded the master of his woods to give directions accordingly; and the next morning six woodmen arrived with as many carriages, drawn by eight horses to each.
When I had finished my work, I desired the emperor to let a troop of his best horses twenty-four in number, come and exercise upon this plain.
His majesty approved of the proposal, and I took them up, one by one, in my hands, ready mounted and armed, with the proper officers to exercise them.
As soon as they got into order they divided into two parties, performed mock skirmishes, discharged blunt arrows, drew their swords, fled and pursued, attacked and retired, and in short discovered the best military discipline I ever beheld.
The horse that fell was strained in the left shoulder, but the rider got no hurt; and I repaired my handkerchief as well as I could: however, I would not trust to the strength of it any more, in such dangerous enterprises.
I presently knew what they meant, and was glad at heart to receive this intelligence.
Two days after this adventure, the emperor, having ordered that part of his army which quarters in and about his metropolis, to be in readiness, took a fancy of diverting himself in a very singular manner.
He desired I would stand like a Colossus, with my legs as far asunder as I conveniently could.
He then commanded his general (who was an old experienced leader, and a great patron of mine) to draw up the troops in close order, and march them under me; the foot by twenty-four abreast, and the horse by sixteen, with drums beating, colours flying, and pikes advanced.
This body consisted of three thousand foot, and a thousand horse.
His majesty gave orders, upon pain of death, that every soldier in his march should observe the strictest decency with regard to my person; which however could not prevent some of the younger officers from turning up their eyes as they passed under me: and, to confess the truth, my breeches were at that time in so ill a condition, that they afforded some opportunities for laughter and admiration.
I had sent so many memorials and petitions for my liberty, that his majesty at length mentioned the matter, first in the cabinet, and then in a full council; where it was opposed by none, except Skyresh Bolgolam, who was pleased, without any provocation, to be my mortal enemy.
But it was carried against him by the whole board, and confirmed by the emperor.
That minister was _galbet_, or admiral of the realm, very much in his master’s confidence, and a person well versed in affairs, but of a morose and sour complexion.
However, he was at length persuaded to comply; but prevailed that the articles and conditions upon which I should be set free, and to which I must swear, should be drawn up by himself.
These articles were brought to me by Skyresh Bolgolam in person attended by two under-secretaries, and several persons of distinction.
After they were read, I was demanded to swear to the performance of them; first in the manner of my own country, and afterwards in the method prescribed by their laws; which was, to hold my right foot in my left hand, and to place the middle finger of my right hand on the crown of my head, and my thumb on the tip of my right ear.
But because the reader may be curious to have some idea of the style and manner of expression peculiar to that people, as well as to know the article upon which I recovered my liberty, I have made a translation of the whole instrument, word for word, as near as I was able, which I here offer to the public.
“2d, He shall not presume to come into our metropolis, without our express order; at which time, the inhabitants shall have two hours warning to keep within doors.
“3d, The said man-mountain shall confine his walks to our principal high roads, and not offer to walk, or lie down, in a meadow or field of corn.
“4th, As he walks the said roads, he shall take the utmost care not to trample upon the bodies of any of our loving subjects, their horses, or carriages, nor take any of our subjects into his hands without their own consent.
“5th, If an express requires extraordinary despatch, the man-mountain shall be obliged to carry, in his pocket, the messenger and horse a six days journey, once in every moon, and return the said messenger back (if so required) safe to our imperial presence.
“6th, He shall be our ally against our enemies in the island of Blefuscu, and do his utmost to destroy their fleet, which is now preparing to invade us.
“7th, That the said man-mountain shall, at his times of leisure, be aiding and assisting to our workmen, in helping to raise certain great stones, towards covering the wall of the principal park, and other our royal buildings.
“8th, That the said man-mountain shall, in two moons’ time, deliver in an exact survey of the circumference of our dominions, by a computation of his own paces round the coast.
“Lastly, That, upon his solemn oath to observe all the above articles, the said man-mountain shall have a daily allowance of meat and drink sufficient for the support of 1724 of our subjects, with free access to our royal person, and other marks of our favour.
Given at our palace at Belfaborac, the twelfth day of the ninety-first moon of our reign.” I swore and subscribed to these articles with great cheerfulness and content, although some of them were not so honourable as I could have wished; which proceeded wholly from the malice of Skyresh Bolgolam, the high-admiral: whereupon my chains were immediately unlocked, and I was at full liberty.
The emperor himself, in person, did me the honour to be by at the whole ceremony.
By which the reader may conceive an idea of the ingenuity of that people, as well as the prudent and exact economy of so great a prince.
Mildendo, the metropolis of Lilliput, described, together with the emperor’s palace.
A conversation between the author and a principal secretary, concerning the affairs of that empire.
The first request I made, after I had obtained my liberty, was, that I might have license to see Mildendo, the metropolis; which the emperor easily granted me, but with a special charge to do no hurt either to the inhabitants or their houses.
The people had notice, by proclamation, of my design to visit the town.
The wall which encompassed it is two feet and a half high, and at least eleven inches broad, so that a coach and horses may be driven very safely round it; and it is flanked with strong towers at ten feet distance.
I stepped over the great western gate, and passed very gently, and sidling, through the two principal streets, only in my short waistcoat, for fear of damaging the roofs and eaves of the houses with the skirts of my coat.
I walked with the utmost circumspection, to avoid treading on any stragglers who might remain in the streets, although the orders were very strict, that all people should keep in their houses, at their own peril.
The garret windows and tops of houses were so crowded with spectators, that I thought in all my travels I had not seen a more populous place.
The two great streets, which run across and divide it into four quarters, are five feet wide.
The lanes and alleys, which I could not enter, but only view them as I passed, are from twelve to eighteen inches.
The town is capable of holding five hundred thousand souls: the houses are from three to five stories: the shops and markets well provided.
It is enclosed by a wall of two feet high, and twenty feet distance from the buildings.
I had his majesty’s permission to step over this wall; and, the space being so wide between that and the palace, I could easily view it on every side.
The outward court is a square of forty feet, and includes two other courts: in the inmost are the royal apartments, which I was very desirous to see, but found it extremely difficult; for the great gates, from one square into another, were but eighteen inches high, and seven inches wide.
Now the buildings of the outer court were at least five feet high, and it was impossible for me to stride over them without infinite damage to the pile, though the walls were strongly built of hewn stone, and four inches thick.
At the same time the emperor had a great desire that I should see the magnificence of his palace; but this I was not able to do till three days after, which I spent in cutting down with my knife some of the largest trees in the royal park, about a hundred yards distant from the city.
The people having received notice a second time, I went again through the city to the palace with my two stools in my hands.
I then stept over the building very conveniently from one stool to the other, and drew up the first after me with a hooked stick.
By this contrivance I got into the inmost court; and, lying down upon my side, I applied my face to the windows of the middle stories, which were left open on purpose, and discovered the most splendid apartments that can be imagined.
There I saw the empress and the young princes, in their several lodgings, with their chief attendants about them.
Her imperial majesty was pleased to smile very graciously upon me, and gave me out of the window her hand to kiss.
One morning, about a fortnight after I had obtained my liberty, Reldresal, principal secretary (as they style him) for private affairs, came to my house attended only by one servant.
He ordered his coach to wait at a distance, and desired I would give him an hour’s audience; which I readily consented to, on account of his quality and personal merits, as well as of the many good offices he had done me during my solicitations at court.
I offered to lie down that he might the more conveniently reach my ear, but he chose rather to let me hold him in my hand during our conversation.
He began with compliments on my liberty; said “he might pretend to some merit in it;” but, however, added, “that if it had not been for the present situation of things at court, perhaps I might not have obtained it so soon.
For,” said he, “as flourishing a condition as we may appear to be in to foreigners, we labour under two mighty evils: a violent faction at home, and the danger of an invasion, by a most potent enemy, from abroad.
As to the first, you are to understand, that for about seventy moons past there have been two struggling parties in this empire, under the names of _Tramecksan_ and _Slamecksan_, from the high and low heels of their shoes, by which they distinguish themselves.
The animosities between these two parties run so high, that they will neither eat, nor drink, nor talk with each other.
We compute the _Tramecksan_, or high heels, to exceed us in number; but the power is wholly on our side.
We apprehend his imperial highness, the heir to the crown, to have some tendency towards the high heels; at least we can plainly discover that one of his heels is higher than the other, which gives him a hobble in his gait.
Now, in the midst of these intestine disquiets, we are threatened with an invasion from the island of Blefuscu, which is the other great empire of the universe, almost as large and powerful as this of his majesty.
Which two mighty powers have, as I was going to tell you, been engaged in a most obstinate war for six-and-thirty moons past.
It began upon the following occasion.
It is allowed on all hands, that the primitive way of breaking eggs, before we eat them, was upon the larger end; but his present majesty’s grandfather, while he was a boy, going to eat an egg, and breaking it according to the ancient practice, happened to cut one of his fingers.
Whereupon the emperor his father published an edict, commanding all his subjects, upon great penalties, to break the smaller end of their eggs.
The people so highly resented this law, that our histories tell us, there have been six rebellions raised on that account; wherein one emperor lost his life, and another his crown.
These civil commotions were constantly fomented by the monarchs of Blefuscu; and when they were quelled, the exiles always fled for refuge to that empire.
It is computed that eleven thousand persons have at several times suffered death, rather than submit to break their eggs at the smaller end.
Many hundred large volumes have been published upon this controversy: but the books of the Big-endians have been long forbidden, and the whole party rendered incapable by law of holding employments.
During the course of these troubles, the emperors of Blefuscu did frequently expostulate by their ambassadors, accusing us of making a schism in religion, by offending against a fundamental doctrine of our great prophet Lustrog, in the fifty-fourth chapter of the Blundecral (which is their Alcoran).
This, however, is thought to be a mere strain upon the text; for the words are these: ‘that all true believers break their eggs at the convenient end.’ And which is the convenient end, seems, in my humble opinion to be left to every man’s conscience, or at least in the power of the chief magistrate to determine.
The author, by an extraordinary stratagem, prevents an invasion.
A high title of honour is conferred upon him.
Ambassadors arrive from the emperor of Blefuscu, and sue for peace.
The empress’s apartment on fire by an accident; the author instrumental in saving the rest of the palace.
The empire of Blefuscu is an island situated to the north-east of Lilliput, from which it is parted only by a channel of eight hundred yards wide.
I had not yet seen it, and upon this notice of an intended invasion, I avoided appearing on that side of the coast, for fear of being discovered, by some of the enemy’s ships, who had received no intelligence of me; all intercourse between the two empires having been strictly forbidden during the war, upon pain of death, and an embargo laid by our emperor upon all vessels whatsoever.
I communicated to his majesty a project I had formed of seizing the enemy’s whole fleet; which, as our scouts assured us, lay at anchor in the harbour, ready to sail with the first fair wind.
I consulted the most experienced seamen upon the depth of the channel, which they had often plumbed; who told me, that in the middle, at high-water, it was seventy _glumgluffs_ deep, which is about six feet of European measure; and the rest of it fifty _glumgluffs_ at most.
I walked towards the north-east coast, over against Blefuscu, where, lying down behind a hillock, I took out my small perspective glass, and viewed the enemy’s fleet at anchor, consisting of about fifty men of war, and a great number of transports: I then came back to my house, and gave orders (for which I had a warrant) for a great quantity of the strongest cable and bars of iron.
The cable was about as thick as packthread and the bars of the length and size of a knitting-needle.
I trebled the cable to make it stronger, and for the same reason I twisted three of the iron bars together, bending the extremities into a hook.
Having thus fixed fifty hooks to as many cables, I went back to the north-east coast, and putting off my coat, shoes, and stockings, walked into the sea, in my leathern jerkin, about half an hour before high water.
The enemy was so frightened when they saw me, that they leaped out of their ships, and swam to shore, where there could not be fewer than thirty thousand souls.
I then took my tackling, and, fastening a hook to the hole at the prow of each, I tied all the cords together at the end.
While I was thus employed, the enemy discharged several thousand arrows, many of which stuck in my hands and face, and, beside the excessive smart, gave me much disturbance in my work.
My greatest apprehension was for my eyes, which I should have infallibly lost, if I had not suddenly thought of an expedient.
I kept, among other little necessaries, a pair of spectacles in a private pocket, which, as I observed before, had escaped the emperor’s searchers.
These I took out and fastened as strongly as I could upon my nose, and thus armed, went on boldly with my work, in spite of the enemy’s arrows, many of which struck against the glasses of my spectacles, but without any other effect, further than a little to discompose them.
I had now fastened all the hooks, and, taking the knot in my hand, began to pull; but not a ship would stir, for they were all too fast held by their anchors, so that the boldest part of my enterprise remained.
I therefore let go the cord, and leaving the hooks fixed to the ships, I resolutely cut with my knife the cables that fastened the anchors, receiving about two hundred shots in my face and hands; then I took up the knotted end of the cables, to which my hooks were tied, and with great ease drew fifty of the enemy’s largest men of war after me.
The Blefuscudians, who had not the least imagination of what I intended, were at first confounded with astonishment.
They had seen me cut the cables, and thought my design was only to let the ships run adrift or fall foul on each other: but when they perceived the whole fleet moving in order, and saw me pulling at the end, they set up such a scream of grief and despair as it is almost impossible to describe or conceive.
When I had got out of danger, I stopped awhile to pick out the arrows that stuck in my hands and face; and rubbed on some of the same ointment that was given me at my first arrival, as I have formerly mentioned.
I then took off my spectacles, and waiting about an hour, till the tide was a little fallen, I waded through the middle with my cargo, and arrived safe at the royal port of Lilliput.
The emperor and his whole court stood on the shore, expecting the issue of this great adventure.
When I advanced to the middle of the channel, they were yet more in pain, because I was under water to my neck.
His majesty desired I would take some other opportunity of bringing all the rest of his enemy’s ships into his ports.
And so unmeasureable is the ambition of princes, that he seemed to think of nothing less than reducing the whole empire of Blefuscu into a province, and governing it, by a viceroy; of destroying the Big-endian exiles, and compelling that people to break the smaller end of their eggs, by which he would remain the sole monarch of the whole world.
But I endeavoured to divert him from this design, by many arguments drawn from the topics of policy as well as justice; and I plainly protested, “that I would never be an instrument of bringing a free and brave people into slavery.” And, when the matter was debated in council, the wisest part of the ministry were of my opinion.
This open bold declaration of mine was so opposite to the schemes and politics of his imperial majesty, that he could never forgive me.
He mentioned it in a very artful manner at council, where I was told that some of the wisest appeared, at least by their silence, to be of my opinion; but others, who were my secret enemies, could not forbear some expressions which, by a side-wind, reflected on me.
And from this time began an intrigue between his majesty and a junto of ministers, maliciously bent against me, which broke out in less than two months, and had like to have ended in my utter destruction.
Of so little weight are the greatest services to princes, when put into the balance with a refusal to gratify their passions.
About three weeks after this exploit, there arrived a solemn embassy from Blefuscu, with humble offers of a peace, which was soon concluded, upon conditions very advantageous to our emperor, wherewith I shall not trouble the reader.
There were six ambassadors, with a train of about five hundred persons, and their entry was very magnificent, suitable to the grandeur of their master, and the importance of their business.
When their treaty was finished, wherein I did them several good offices by the credit I now had, or at least appeared to have, at court, their excellencies, who were privately told how much I had been their friend, made me a visit in form.
They began with many compliments upon my valour and generosity, invited me to that kingdom in the emperor their master’s name, and desired me to show them some proofs of my prodigious strength, of which they had heard so many wonders; wherein I readily obliged them, but shall not trouble the reader with the particulars.
When I had for some time entertained their excellencies, to their infinite satisfaction and surprise, I desired they would do me the honour to present my most humble respects to the emperor their master, the renown of whose virtues had so justly filled the whole world with admiration, and whose royal person I resolved to attend, before I returned to my own country.
And this was the first time I began to conceive some imperfect idea of courts and ministers.
The reader may remember, that when I signed those articles upon which I recovered my liberty, there were some which I disliked, upon account of their being too servile; neither could anything but an extreme necessity have forced me to submit.
But being now a _nardac_ of the highest rank in that empire, such offices were looked upon as below my dignity, and the emperor (to do him justice), never once mentioned them to me.
However, it was not long before I had an opportunity of doing his majesty, at least as I then thought, a most signal service.
I was alarmed at midnight with the cries of many hundred people at my door; by which, being suddenly awaked, I was in some kind of terror.
I heard the word _Burglum_ repeated incessantly: several of the emperor’s court, making their way through the crowd, entreated me to come immediately to the palace, where her imperial majesty’s apartment was on fire, by the carelessness of a maid of honour, who fell asleep while she was reading a romance.
I got up in an instant; and orders being given to clear the way before me, and it being likewise a moonshine night, I made a shift to get to the palace without trampling on any of the people.
I found they had already applied ladders to the walls of the apartment, and were well provided with buckets, but the water was at some distance.
These buckets were about the size of large thimbles, and the poor people supplied me with them as fast as they could: but the flame was so violent that they did little good.
I might easily have stifled it with my coat, which I unfortunately left behind me for haste, and came away only in my leathern jerkin.
The case seemed wholly desperate and deplorable; and this magnificent palace would have infallibly been burnt down to the ground, if, by a presence of mind unusual to me, I had not suddenly thought of an expedient.
I had, the evening before, drunk plentifully of a most delicious wine called _glimigrim_, (the Blefuscudians call it _flunec_, but ours is esteemed the better sort,) which is very diuretic.
By the luckiest chance in the world, I had not discharged myself of any part of it.
The heat I had contracted by coming very near the flames, and by labouring to quench them, made the wine begin to operate by urine; which I voided in such a quantity, and applied so well to the proper places, that in three minutes the fire was wholly extinguished, and the rest of that noble pile, which had cost so many ages in erecting, preserved from destruction.
It was now day-light, and I returned to my house without waiting to congratulate with the emperor: because, although I had done a very eminent piece of service, yet I could not tell how his majesty might resent the manner by which I had performed it: for, by the fundamental laws of the realm, it is capital in any person, of what quality soever, to make water within the precincts of the palace.
Of the inhabitants of Lilliput; their learning, laws, and customs; the manner of educating their children.
His vindication of a great lady.
Although I intend to leave the description of this empire to a particular treatise, yet, in the mean time, I am content to gratify the curious reader with some general ideas.
And, to show the sharpness of their sight towards objects that are near, I have been much pleased with observing a cook pulling a lark, which was not so large as a common fly; and a young girl threading an invisible needle with invisible silk.
Their tallest trees are about seven feet high: I mean some of those in the great royal park, the tops whereof I could but just reach with my fist clenched.
The other vegetables are in the same proportion; but this I leave to the reader’s imagination.
I shall say but little at present of their learning, which, for many ages, has flourished in all its branches among them: but their manner of writing is very peculiar, being neither from the left to the right, like the Europeans, nor from the right to the left, like the Arabians, nor from up to down, like the Chinese, but aslant, from one corner of the paper to the other, like ladies in England.
They bury their dead with their heads directly downward, because they hold an opinion, that in eleven thousand moons they are all to rise again; in which period the earth (which they conceive to be flat) will turn upside down, and by this means they shall, at their resurrection, be found ready standing on their feet.
The learned among them confess the absurdity of this doctrine; but the practice still continues, in compliance to the vulgar.
There are some laws and customs in this empire very peculiar; and if they were not so directly contrary to those of my own dear country, I should be tempted to say a little in their justification.
It is only to be wished they were as well executed.
The first I shall mention, relates to informers.
The emperor also confers on him some public mark of his favour, and proclamation is made of his innocence through the whole city.
And these people thought it a prodigious defect of policy among us, when I told them that our laws were enforced only by penalties, without any mention of reward.
It is upon this account that the image of Justice, in their courts of judicature, is formed with six eyes, two before, as many behind, and on each side one, to signify circumspection; with a bag of gold open in her right hand, and a sword sheathed in her left, to show she is more disposed to reward than to punish.
In like manner, the disbelief of a Divine Providence renders a man incapable of holding any public station; for, since kings avow themselves to be the deputies of Providence, the Lilliputians think nothing can be more absurd than for a prince to employ such men as disown the authority under which he acts.
In relating these and the following laws, I would only be understood to mean the original institutions, and not the most scandalous corruptions, into which these people are fallen by the degenerate nature of man.
For, as to that infamous practice of acquiring great employments by dancing on the ropes, or badges of favour and distinction by leaping over sticks and creeping under them, the reader is to observe, that they were first introduced by the grandfather of the emperor now reigning, and grew to the present height by the gradual increase of party and faction.
Ingratitude is among them a capital crime, as we read it to have been in some other countries: for they reason thus; that whoever makes ill returns to his benefactor, must needs be a common enemy to the rest of mankind, from whom he has received no obligation, and therefore such a man is not fit to live.
Their notions relating to the duties of parents and children differ extremely from ours.
These schools are of several kinds, suited to different qualities, and both sexes.
They have certain professors well skilled in preparing children for such a condition of life as befits the rank of their parents, and their own capacities, as well as inclinations.
I shall first say something of the male nurseries, and then of the female.
The nurseries for males of noble or eminent birth, are provided with grave and learned professors, and their several deputies.
The clothes and food of the children are plain and simple.
They are bred up in the principles of honour, justice, courage, modesty, clemency, religion, and love of their country; they are always employed in some business, except in the times of eating and sleeping, which are very short, and two hours for diversions consisting of bodily exercises.
They are dressed by men till four years of age, and then are obliged to dress themselves, although their quality be ever so great; and the women attendant, who are aged proportionably to ours at fifty, perform only the most menial offices.
They are never suffered to converse with servants, but go together in smaller or greater numbers to take their diversions, and always in the presence of a professor, or one of his deputies; whereby they avoid those early bad impressions of folly and vice, to which our children are subject.
Their parents are suffered to see them only twice a year; the visit is to last but an hour; they are allowed to kiss the child at meeting and parting; but a professor, who always stands by on those occasions, will not suffer them to whisper, or use any fondling expressions, or bring any presents of toys, sweetmeats, and the like.
The pension from each family for the education and entertainment of a child, upon failure of due payment, is levied by the emperor’s officers.
The nurseries for children of ordinary gentlemen, merchants, traders, and handicrafts, are managed proportionably after the same manner; only those designed for trades are put out apprentices at eleven years old, whereas those of persons of quality continue in their exercises till fifteen, which answers to twenty-one with us: but the confinement is gradually lessened for the last three years.
In the female nurseries, the young girls of quality are educated much like the males, only they are dressed by orderly servants of their own sex; but always in the presence of a professor or deputy, till they come to dress themselves, which is at five years old.
And if it be found that these nurses ever presume to entertain the girls with frightful or foolish stories, or the common follies practised by chambermaids among us, they are publicly whipped thrice about the city, imprisoned for a year, and banished for life to the most desolate part of the country.
When the girls are twelve years old, which among them is the marriageable age, their parents or guardians take them home, with great expressions of gratitude to the professors, and seldom without tears of the young lady and her companions.
In the nurseries of females of the meaner sort, the children are instructed in all kinds of works proper for their sex, and their several degrees: those intended for apprentices are dismissed at seven years old, the rest are kept to eleven.
The meaner families who have children at these nurseries, are obliged, besides their annual pension, which is as low as possible, to return to the steward of the nursery a small monthly share of their gettings, to be a portion for the child; and therefore all parents are limited in their expenses by the law.
For the Lilliputians think nothing can be more unjust, than for people, in subservience to their own appetites, to bring children into the world, and leave the burthen of supporting them on the public.
As to persons of quality, they give security to appropriate a certain sum for each child, suitable to their condition; and these funds are always managed with good husbandry and the most exact justice.
The cottagers and labourers keep their children at home, their business being only to till and cultivate the earth, and therefore their education is of little consequence to the public: but the old and diseased among them are supported by hospitals; for begging is a trade unknown in this empire.
And here it may, perhaps, divert the curious reader, to give some account of my domestics, and my manner of living in this country, during a residence of nine months, and thirteen days.
Having a head mechanically turned, and being likewise forced by necessity, I had made for myself a table and chair convenient enough, out of the largest trees in the royal park.
Two hundred sempstresses were employed to make me shirts, and linen for my bed and table, all of the strongest and coarsest kind they could get; which, however, they were forced to quilt together in several folds, for the thickest was some degrees finer than lawn.
The sempstresses took my measure as I lay on the ground, one standing at my neck, and another at my mid-leg, with a strong cord extended, that each held by the end, while a third measured the length of the cord with a rule of an inch long.
Then they measured my right thumb, and desired no more; for by a mathematical computation, that twice round the thumb is once round the wrist, and so on to the neck and the waist, and by the help of my old shirt, which I displayed on the ground before them for a pattern, they fitted me exactly.
Three hundred tailors were employed in the same manner to make me clothes; but they had another contrivance for taking my measure.
I kneeled down, and they raised a ladder from the ground to my neck; upon this ladder one of them mounted, and let fall a plumb-line from my collar to the floor, which just answered the length of my coat: but my waist and arms I measured myself.
When my clothes were finished, which was done in my house (for the largest of theirs would not have been able to hold them), they looked like the patch-work made by the ladies in England, only that mine were all of a colour.
I had three hundred cooks to dress my victuals, in little convenient huts built about my house, where they and their families lived, and prepared me two dishes a-piece.
I took up twenty waiters in my hand, and placed them on the table: a hundred more attended below on the ground, some with dishes of meat, and some with barrels of wine and other liquors slung on their shoulders; all which the waiters above drew up, as I wanted, in a very ingenious manner, by certain cords, as we draw the bucket up a well in Europe.
A dish of their meat was a good mouthful, and a barrel of their liquor a reasonable draught.
Their mutton yields to ours, but their beef is excellent.
My servants were astonished to see me eat it, bones and all, as in our country we do the leg of a lark.
Their geese and turkeys I usually ate at a mouthful, and I confess they far exceed ours.
One day his imperial majesty, being informed of my way of living, desired “that himself and his royal consort, with the young princes of the blood of both sexes, might have the happiness,” as he was pleased to call it, “of dining with me.” They came accordingly, and I placed them in chairs of state, upon my table, just over against me, with their guards about them.
Flimnap, the lord high treasurer, attended there likewise with his white staff; and I observed he often looked on me with a sour countenance, which I would not seem to regard, but ate more than usual, in honour to my dear country, as well as to fill the court with admiration.
I have some private reasons to believe, that this visit from his majesty gave Flimnap an opportunity of doing me ill offices to his master.
That minister had always been my secret enemy, though he outwardly caressed me more than was usual to the moroseness of his nature.
The treasurer took a fancy to be jealous of his wife, from the malice of some evil tongues, who informed him that her grace had taken a violent affection for my person; and the court scandal ran for some time, that she once came privately to my lodging.
This I solemnly declare to be a most infamous falsehood, without any grounds, further than that her grace was pleased to treat me with all innocent marks of freedom and friendship.
I own she came often to my house, but always publicly, nor ever without three more in the coach, who were usually her sister and young daughter, and some particular acquaintance; but this was common to many other ladies of the court.
And I still appeal to my servants round, whether they at any time saw a coach at my door, without knowing what persons were in it.
On those occasions, when a servant had given me notice, my custom was to go immediately to the door, and, after paying my respects, to take up the coach and two horses very carefully in my hands (for, if there were six horses, the postillion always unharnessed four,) and place them on a table, where I had fixed a movable rim quite round, of five inches high, to prevent accidents.
And I have often had four coaches and horses at once on my table, full of company, while I sat in my chair, leaning my face towards them; and when I was engaged with one set, the coachmen would gently drive the others round my table.
I have passed many an afternoon very agreeably in these conversations.
But I defy the treasurer, or his two informers (I will name them, and let them make the best of it) Clustril and Drunlo, to prove that any person ever came to me _incognito_, except the secretary Reldresal, who was sent by express command of his imperial majesty, as I have before related.
The author, being informed of a design to accuse him of high-treason, makes his escape to Blefuscu.
His reception there.
Before I proceed to give an account of my leaving this kingdom, it may be proper to inform the reader of a private intrigue which had been for two months forming against me.
I had been hitherto, all my life, a stranger to courts, for which I was unqualified by the meanness of my condition.
I had indeed heard and read enough of the dispositions of great princes and ministers, but never expected to have found such terrible effects of them, in so remote a country, governed, as I thought, by very different maxims from those in Europe.
When I was just preparing to pay my attendance on the emperor of Blefuscu, a considerable person at court (to whom I had been very serviceable, at a time when he lay under the highest displeasure of his imperial majesty) came to my house very privately at night, in a close chair, and, without sending his name, desired admittance.
The chairmen were dismissed; I put the chair, with his lordship in it, into my coat-pocket: and, giving orders to a trusty servant, to say I was indisposed and gone to sleep, I fastened the door of my house, placed the chair on the table, according to my usual custom, and sat down by it.
“You are very sensible that Skyresh Bolgolam” (_galbet_, or high-admiral) “has been your mortal enemy, almost ever since your arrival.
His original reasons I know not; but his hatred is increased since your great success against Blefuscu, by which his glory as admiral is much obscured.
“‘_Articles of Impeachment against_ QUINBUS FLESTRIN, (_the Man-Mountain_.) Article I.
“‘That, whereas certain ambassadors arrived from the Court of Blefuscu, to sue for peace in his majesty’s court, he, the said Flestrin, did, like a false traitor, aid, abet, comfort, and divert, the said ambassadors, although he knew them to be servants to a prince who was lately an open enemy to his imperial majesty, and in an open war against his said majesty.
“In the several debates upon this impeachment, it must be confessed that his majesty gave many marks of his great lenity; often urging the services you had done him, and endeavouring to extenuate your crimes.
The treasurer and admiral insisted that you should be put to the most painful and ignominious death, by setting fire to your house at night, and the general was to attend with twenty thousand men, armed with poisoned arrows, to shoot you on the face and hands.
Some of your servants were to have private orders to strew a poisonous juice on your shirts and sheets, which would soon make you tear your own flesh, and die in the utmost torture.
The general came into the same opinion; so that for a long time there was a majority against you; but his majesty resolving, if possible, to spare your life, at last brought off the chamberlain.
“Upon this incident, Reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs, who always approved himself your true friend, was commanded by the emperor to deliver his opinion, which he accordingly did; and therein justified the good thoughts you have of him.
He allowed your crimes to be great, but that still there was room for mercy, the most commendable virtue in a prince, and for which his majesty was so justly celebrated.
He said, the friendship between you and him was so well known to the world, that perhaps the most honourable board might think him partial; however, in obedience to the command he had received, he would freely offer his sentiments.
“This proposal was received with the utmost disapprobation by the whole board.
“But his imperial majesty, fully determined against capital punishment, was graciously pleased to say, that since the council thought the loss of your eyes too easy a censure, some other way may be inflicted hereafter.
“Thus, by the great friendship of the secretary, the whole affair was compromised.
“I leave to your prudence what measures you will take; and to avoid suspicion, I must immediately return in as private a manner as I came.” His lordship did so; and I remained alone, under many doubts and perplexities of mind.
This speech was immediately published throughout the kingdom; nor did any thing terrify the people so much as those encomiums on his majesty’s mercy; because it was observed, that the more these praises were enlarged and insisted on, the more inhuman was the punishment, and the sufferer more innocent.
Yet, as to myself, I must confess, having never been designed for a courtier, either by my birth or education, I was so ill a judge of things, that I could not discover the lenity and favour of this sentence, but conceived it (perhaps erroneously) rather to be rigorous than gentle.
I sometimes thought of standing my trial, for, although I could not deny the facts alleged in the several articles, yet I hoped they would admit of some extenuation.
But having in my life perused many state-trials, which I ever observed to terminate as the judges thought fit to direct, I durst not rely on so dangerous a decision, in so critical a juncture, and against such powerful enemies.
Once I was strongly bent upon resistance, for, while I had liberty the whole strength of that empire could hardly subdue me, and I might easily with stones pelt the metropolis to pieces; but I soon rejected that project with horror, by remembering the oath I had made to the emperor, the favours I received from him, and the high title of _nardac_ he conferred upon me.
Neither had I so soon learned the gratitude of courtiers, to persuade myself, that his majesty’s present severities acquitted me of all past obligations.
I held them in my hands, till I came within two hundred yards of the gate, and desired them “to signify my arrival to one of the secretaries, and let him know, I there waited his majesty’s command.” I had an answer in about an hour, “that his majesty, attended by the royal family, and great officers of the court, was coming out to receive me.” I advanced a hundred yards.
The emperor and his train alighted from their horses, the empress and ladies from their coaches, and I did not perceive they were in any fright or concern.
I shall not trouble the reader with the particular account of my reception at this court, which was suitable to the generosity of so great a prince; nor of the difficulties I was in for want of a house and bed, being forced to lie on the ground, wrapped up in my coverlet.
The author, by a lucky accident, finds means to leave Blefuscu; and, after some difficulties, returns safe to his native country.
Three days after my arrival, walking out of curiosity to the north-east coast of the island, I observed, about half a league off in the sea, somewhat that looked like a boat overturned.
I pulled off my shoes and stockings, and, wading two or three hundred yards, I found the object to approach nearer by force of the tide; and then plainly saw it to be a real boat, which I supposed might by some tempest have been driven from a ship.
Whereupon, I returned immediately towards the city, and desired his imperial majesty to lend me twenty of the tallest vessels he had left, after the loss of his fleet, and three thousand seamen, under the command of his vice-admiral.
This fleet sailed round, while I went back the shortest way to the coast, where I first discovered the boat.
The seamen were all provided with cordage, which I had beforehand twisted to a sufficient strength.
When the ships came up, I stripped myself, and waded till I came within a hundred yards of the boat, after which I was forced to swim till I got up to it.
The seamen threw me the end of the cord, which I fastened to a hole in the fore-part of the boat, and the other end to a man of war; but I found all my labour to little purpose; for, being out of my depth, I was not able to work.
In this necessity I was forced to swim behind, and push the boat forward, as often as I could, with one of my hands; and the tide favouring me, I advanced so far that I could just hold up my chin and feel the ground.
I shall not trouble the reader with the difficulties I was under, by the help of certain paddles, which cost me ten days making, to get my boat to the royal port of Blefuscu, where a mighty concourse of people appeared upon my arrival, full of wonder at the sight of so prodigious a vessel.
I told the emperor “that my good fortune had thrown this boat in my way, to carry me to some place whence I might return into my native country; and begged his majesty’s orders for getting materials to fit it up, together with his license to depart;” which, after some kind expostulations, he was pleased to grant.
I did very much wonder, in all this time, not to have heard of any express relating to me from our emperor to the court of Blefuscu.
But I was afterward given privately to understand, that his imperial majesty, never imagining I had the least notice of his designs, believed I was only gone to Blefuscu in performance of my promise, according to the license he had given me, which was well known at our court, and would return in a few days, when the ceremony was ended.
But he was at last in pain at my long absence; and after consulting with the treasurer and the rest of that cabal, a person of quality was dispatched with the copy of the articles against me.
He said, “that as for sending me bound, his brother knew it was impossible; that, although I had deprived him of his fleet, yet he owed great obligations to me for many good offices I had done him in making the peace.
I told him, “that since fortune, whether good or evil, had thrown a vessel in my way, I was resolved to venture myself on the ocean, rather than be an occasion of difference between two such mighty monarchs.” Neither did I find the emperor at all displeased; and I discovered, by a certain accident, that he was very glad of my resolution, and so were most of his ministers.
These considerations moved me to hasten my departure somewhat sooner than I intended; to which the court, impatient to have me gone, very readily contributed.
Five hundred workmen were employed to make two sails to my boat, according to my directions, by quilting thirteen folds of their strongest linen together.
I was at the pains of making ropes and cables, by twisting ten, twenty, or thirty of the thickest and strongest of theirs.
A great stone that I happened to find, after a long search, by the sea-shore, served me for an anchor.
I had the tallow of three hundred cows, for greasing my boat, and other uses.
I was at incredible pains in cutting down some of the largest timber-trees, for oars and masts, wherein I was, however, much assisted by his majesty’s ship-carpenters, who helped me in smoothing them, after I had done the rough work.
In about a month, when all was prepared, I sent to receive his majesty’s commands, and to take my leave.
The emperor and royal family came out of the palace; I lay down on my face to kiss his hand, which he very graciously gave me: so did the empress and young princes of the blood.
His majesty presented me with fifty purses of two hundred _sprugs_ a-piece, together with his picture at full length, which I put immediately into one of my gloves, to keep it from being hurt.
The ceremonies at my departure were too many to trouble the reader with at this time.
I stored the boat with the carcases of a hundred oxen, and three hundred sheep, with bread and drink proportionable, and as much meat ready dressed as four hundred cooks could provide.
I took with me six cows and two bulls alive, with as many ewes and rams, intending to carry them into my own country, and propagate the breed.
I advanced forward, and cast anchor on the lee-side of the island, which seemed to be uninhabited.
I then took some refreshment, and went to my rest.
I slept well, and as I conjectured at least six hours, for I found the day broke in two hours after I awaked.
I ate my breakfast before the sun was up; and heaving anchor, the wind being favourable, I steered the same course that I had done the day before, wherein I was directed by my pocket compass.
My intention was to reach, if possible, one of those islands which I had reason to believe lay to the north-east of Van Diemen’s Land.
I discovered nothing all that day; but upon the next, about three in the afternoon, when I had by my computation made twenty-four leagues from Blefuscu, I descried a sail steering to the south-east; my course was due east.
I hailed her, but could get no answer; yet I found I gained upon her, for the wind slackened.
I made all the sail I could, and in half an hour she spied me, then hung out her ancient, and discharged a gun.
It is not easy to express the joy I was in, upon the unexpected hope of once more seeing my beloved country, and the dear pledges I left in it.
The ship slackened her sails, and I came up with her between five and six in the evening, September 26th; but my heart leaped within me to see her English colours.
I put my cows and sheep into my coat-pockets, and got on board with all my little cargo of provisions.
The vessel was an English merchantman, returning from Japan by the North and South seas; the captain, Mr.
John Biddel, of Deptford, a very civil man, and an excellent sailor.
We were now in the latitude of 30 degrees south; there were about fifty men in the ship; and here I met an old comrade of mine, one Peter Williams, who gave me a good character to the captain.
This gentleman treated me with kindness, and desired I would let him know what place I came from last, and whither I was bound; which I did in a few words, but he thought I was raving, and that the dangers I underwent had disturbed my head; whereupon I took my black cattle and sheep out of my pocket, which, after great astonishment, clearly convinced him of my veracity.
I then showed him the gold given me by the emperor of Blefuscu, together with his majesty’s picture at full length, and some other rarities of that country.
I gave him two purses of two hundreds _sprugs_ each, and promised, when we arrived in England, to make him a present of a cow and a sheep big with young.
I shall not trouble the reader with a particular account of this voyage, which was very prosperous for the most part.
I had only one misfortune, that the rats on board carried away one of my sheep; I found her bones in a hole, picked clean from the flesh.
The rest of my cattle I got safe ashore, and set them a-grazing in a bowling-green at Greenwich, where the fineness of the grass made them feed very heartily, though I had always feared the contrary: neither could I possibly have preserved them in so long a voyage, if the captain had not allowed me some of his best biscuit, which, rubbed to powder, and mingled with water, was their constant food.
The short time I continued in England, I made a considerable profit by showing my cattle to many persons of quality and others: and before I began my second voyage, I sold them for six hundred pounds.
Since my last return I find the breed is considerably increased, especially the sheep, which I hope will prove much to the advantage of the woollen manufacture, by the fineness of the fleeces.
I stayed but two months with my wife and family, for my insatiable desire of seeing foreign countries, would suffer me to continue no longer.
My remaining stock I carried with me, part in money and part in goods, in hopes to improve my fortunes.
My son Johnny, named so after his uncle, was at the grammar school, and a towardly child.
My daughter Betty (who is now well married, and has children) was then at her needlework.
I took leave of my wife, and boy and girl, with tears on both sides, and went on board the Adventure, a merchant ship of three hundred tons, bound for Surat, captain John Nicholas, of Liverpool, commander.
But my account of this voyage must be referred to the Second Part of my Travels.
A great storm described; the long boat sent to fetch water; the author goes with it to discover the country.
His reception, with several accidents that happened there.
A description of the inhabitants.
Having been condemned, by nature and fortune, to active and restless life, in two months after my return, I again left my native country, and took shipping in the Downs, on the 20th day of June, 1702, in the Adventure, Captain John Nicholas, a Cornish man, commander, bound for Surat.
We had a very prosperous gale, till we arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, where we landed for fresh water; but discovering a leak, we unshipped our goods and wintered there; for the captain falling sick of an ague, we could not leave the Cape till the end of March.
But he, being a man well experienced in the navigation of those seas, bid us all prepare against a storm, which accordingly happened the day following: for the southern wind, called the southern monsoon, began to set in.
Finding it was likely to overblow, we took in our sprit-sail, and stood by to hand the fore-sail; but making foul weather, we looked the guns were all fast, and handed the mizen.
The ship lay very broad off, so we thought it better spooning before the sea, than trying or hulling.
It was a very fierce storm; the sea broke strange and dangerous.
We would not get down our topmast, but let all stand, because she scudded before the sea very well, and we knew that the top-mast being aloft, the ship was the wholesomer, and made better way through the sea, seeing we had sea-room.
We got the starboard tacks aboard, we cast off our weather-braces and lifts; we set in the lee-braces, and hauled forward by the weather-bowlings, and hauled them tight, and belayed them, and hauled over the mizen tack to windward, and kept her full and by as near as she would lie.
During this storm, which was followed by a strong wind west-south-west, we were carried, by my computation, about five hundred leagues to the east, so that the oldest sailor on board could not tell in what part of the world we were.
Our provisions held out well, our ship was staunch, and our crew all in good health; but we lay in the utmost distress for water.
We thought it best to hold on the same course, rather than turn more northerly, which might have brought us to the north-west part of Great Tartary, and into the Frozen Sea.
On the 16th day of June, 1703, a boy on the top-mast discovered land.
On the 17th, we came in full view of a great island, or continent (for we knew not whether;) on the south side whereof was a small neck of land jutting out into the sea, and a creek too shallow to hold a ship of above one hundred tons.
I desired his leave to go with them, that I might see the country, and make what discoveries I could.
When we came to land we saw no river or spring, nor any sign of inhabitants.
Our men therefore wandered on the shore to find out some fresh water near the sea, and I walked alone about a mile on the other side, where I observed the country all barren and rocky.
I now began to be weary, and seeing nothing to entertain my curiosity, I returned gently down towards the creek; and the sea being full in my view, I saw our men already got into the boat, and rowing for life to the ship.
I was going to holla after them, although it had been to little purpose, when I observed a huge creature walking after them in the sea, as fast as he could: he waded not much deeper than his knees, and took prodigious strides: but our men had the start of him half a league, and, the sea thereabouts being full of sharp-pointed rocks, the monster was not able to overtake the boat.
This I was afterwards told, for I durst not stay to see the issue of the adventure; but ran as fast as I could the way I first went, and then climbed up a steep hill, which gave me some prospect of the country.
I found it fully cultivated; but that which first surprised me was the length of the grass, which, in those grounds that seemed to be kept for hay, was about twenty feet high.
I fell into a high road, for so I took it to be, though it served to the inhabitants only as a foot-path through a field of barley.
I was an hour walking to the end of this field, which was fenced in with a hedge of at least one hundred and twenty feet high, and the trees so lofty that I could make no computation of their altitude.
It had four steps, and a stone to cross over when you came to the uppermost.
It was impossible for me to climb this stile, because every step was six-feet high, and the upper stone about twenty.
I was endeavouring to find some gap in the hedge, when I discovered one of the inhabitants in the next field, advancing towards the stile, of the same size with him whom I saw in the sea pursuing our boat.
He appeared as tall as an ordinary spire steeple, and took about ten yards at every stride, as near as I could guess.
I was struck with the utmost fear and astonishment, and ran to hide myself in the corn, whence I saw him at the top of the stile looking back into the next field on the right hand, and heard him call in a voice many degrees louder than a speaking-trumpet: but the noise was so high in the air, that at first I certainly thought it was thunder.
Whereupon seven monsters, like himself, came towards him with reaping-hooks in their hands, each hook about the largeness of six scythes.
These people were not so well clad as the first, whose servants or labourers they seemed to be; for, upon some words he spoke, they went to reap the corn in the field where I lay.
I kept from them at as great a distance as I could, but was forced to move with extreme difficulty, for the stalks of the corn were sometimes not above a foot distant, so that I could hardly squeeze my body betwixt them.
Here it was impossible for me to advance a step; for the stalks were so interwoven, that I could not creep through, and the beards of the fallen ears so strong and pointed, that they pierced through my clothes into my flesh.
Being quite dispirited with toil, and wholly overcome by grief and dispair, I lay down between two ridges, and heartily wished I might there end my days.
I bemoaned my desolate widow and fatherless children.
I lamented my own folly and wilfulness, in attempting a second voyage, against the advice of all my friends and relations.
In this terrible agitation of mind, I could not forbear thinking of Lilliput, whose inhabitants looked upon me as the greatest prodigy that ever appeared in the world; where I was able to draw an imperial fleet in my hand, and perform those other actions, which will be recorded for ever in the chronicles of that empire, while posterity shall hardly believe them, although attested by millions.
I reflected what a mortification it must prove to me, to appear as inconsiderable in this nation, as one single Lilliputian would be among us.
But this I conceived was to be the least of my misfortunes; for, as human creatures are observed to be more savage and cruel in proportion to their bulk, what could I expect but to be a morsel in the mouth of the first among these enormous barbarians that should happen to seize me?
Undoubtedly philosophers are in the right, when they tell us that nothing is great or little otherwise than by comparison.
It might have pleased fortune, to have let the Lilliputians find some nation, where the people were as diminutive with respect to them, as they were to me.
And who knows but that even this prodigious race of mortals might be equally overmatched in some distant part of the world, whereof we have yet no discovery.
Scared and confounded as I was, I could not forbear going on with these reflections, when one of the reapers, approaching within ten yards of the ridge where I lay, made me apprehend that with the next step I should be squashed to death under his foot, or cut in two with his reaping-hook.
And therefore, when he was again about to move, I screamed as loud as fear could make me: whereupon the huge creature trod short, and, looking round about under him for some time, at last espied me as I lay on the ground.
He considered awhile, with the caution of one who endeavours to lay hold on a small dangerous animal in such a manner that it shall not be able either to scratch or bite him, as I myself have sometimes done with a weasel in England.
At length he ventured to take me behind, by the middle, between his fore-finger and thumb, and brought me within three yards of his eyes, that he might behold my shape more perfectly.
I guessed his meaning, and my good fortune gave me so much presence of mind, that I resolved not to struggle in the least as he held me in the air above sixty feet from the ground, although he grievously pinched my sides, for fear I should slip through his fingers.
All I ventured was to raise my eyes towards the sun, and place my hands together in a supplicating posture, and to speak some words in a humble melancholy tone, suitable to the condition I then was in: for I apprehended every moment that he would dash me against the ground, as we usually do any little hateful animal, which we have a mind to destroy.
But my good star would have it, that he appeared pleased with my voice and gestures, and began to look upon me as a curiosity, much wondering to hear me pronounce articulate words, although he could not understand them.
In the mean time I was not able to forbear groaning and shedding tears, and turning my head towards my sides; letting him know, as well as I could, how cruelly I was hurt by the pressure of his thumb and finger.
He seemed to apprehend my meaning; for, lifting up the lappet of his coat, he put me gently into it, and immediately ran along with me to his master, who was a substantial farmer, and the same person I had first seen in the field.
The farmer having (as I suppose by their talk) received such an account of me as his servant could give him, took a piece of a small straw, about the size of a walking-staff, and therewith lifted up the lappets of my coat; which it seems he thought to be some kind of covering that nature had given me.
He called his hinds about him, and asked them, as I afterwards learned, whether they had ever seen in the fields any little creature that resembled me.
He then placed me softly on the ground upon all fours, but I got immediately up, and walked slowly backward and forward, to let those people see I had no intent to run away.
I fell on my knees, and lifted up my hands and eyes, and spoke several words as loud as I could: I took a purse of gold out of my pocket, and humbly presented it to him.
He received it on the palm of his hand, then applied it close to his eye to see what it was, and afterwards turned it several times with the point of a pin (which he took out of his sleeve,) but could make nothing of it.
Whereupon I made a sign that he should place his hand on the ground.
There were six Spanish pieces of four pistoles each, beside twenty or thirty smaller coins.
I saw him wet the tip of his little finger upon his tongue, and take up one of my largest pieces, and then another; but he seemed to be wholly ignorant what they were.
He made me a sign to put them again into my purse, and the purse again into my pocket, which, after offering it to him several times, I thought it best to do.
The farmer, by this time, was convinced I must be a rational creature.
He spoke often to me; but the sound of his voice pierced my ears like that of a water-mill, yet his words were articulate enough.
I answered as loud as I could in several languages, and he often laid his ear within two yards of me: but all in vain, for we were wholly unintelligible to each other.
He then sent his servants to their work, and taking his handkerchief out of his pocket, he doubled and spread it on his left hand, which he placed flat on the ground with the palm upward, making me a sign to step into it, as I could easily do, for it was not above a foot in thickness.
I thought it my part to obey, and, for fear of falling, laid myself at full length upon the handkerchief, with the remainder of which he lapped me up to the head for further security, and in this manner carried me home to his house.
There he called his wife, and showed me to her; but she screamed and ran back, as women in England do at the sight of a toad or a spider.
However, when she had a while seen my behaviour, and how well I observed the signs her husband made, she was soon reconciled, and by degrees grew extremely tender of me.
It was only one substantial dish of meat (fit for the plain condition of a husbandman,) in a dish of about four-and-twenty feet diameter.
The company were, the farmer and his wife, three children, and an old grandmother.
When they were sat down, the farmer placed me at some distance from him on the table, which was thirty feet high from the floor.
I was in a terrible fright, and kept as far as I could from the edge, for fear of falling.
The wife minced a bit of meat, then crumbled some bread on a trencher, and placed it before me.
I made her a low bow, took out my knife and fork, and fell to eat, which gave them exceeding delight.
The mistress sent her maid for a small dram cup, which held about two gallons, and filled it with drink; I took up the vessel with much difficulty in both hands, and in a most respectful manner drank to her ladyship’s health, expressing the words as loud as I could in English, which made the company laugh so heartily, that I was almost deafened with the noise.
This liquor tasted like a small cider, and was not unpleasant.
Then the master made me a sign to come to his trencher side; but as I walked on the table, being in great surprise all the time, as the indulgent reader will easily conceive and excuse, I happened to stumble against a crust, and fell flat on my face, but received no hurt.
I got up immediately, and observing the good people to be in much concern, I took my hat (which I held under my arm out of good manners,) and waving it over my head, made three huzzas, to show I had got no mischief by my fall.
But being afraid the boy might owe me a spite, and well remembering how mischievous all children among us naturally are to sparrows, rabbits, young kittens, and puppy dogs, I fell on my knees, and pointing to the boy, made my master to understand, as well as I could, that I desired his son might be pardoned.
The father complied, and the lad took his seat again, whereupon I went to him, and kissed his hand, which my master took, and made him stroke me gently with it.
In the midst of dinner, my mistress’s favourite cat leaped into her lap.
I heard a noise behind me like that of a dozen stocking-weavers at work; and turning my head, I found it proceeded from the purring of that animal, who seemed to be three times larger than an ox, as I computed by the view of her head, and one of her paws, while her mistress was feeding and stroking her.
The fierceness of this creature’s countenance altogether discomposed me; though I stood at the farther end of the table, above fifty feet off; and although my mistress held her fast, for fear she might give a spring, and seize me in her talons.
But it happened there was no danger, for the cat took not the least notice of me when my master placed me within three yards of her.
And as I have been always told, and found true by experience in my travels, that flying or discovering fear before a fierce animal, is a certain way to make it pursue or attack you, so I resolved, in this dangerous juncture, to show no manner of concern.
When dinner was almost done, the nurse came in with a child of a year old in her arms, who immediately spied me, and began a squall that you might have heard from London Bridge to Chelsea, after the usual oratory of infants, to get me for a plaything.
The mother, out of pure indulgence, took me up, and put me towards the child, who presently seized me by the middle, and got my head into his mouth, where I roared so loud that the urchin was frighted, and let me drop, and I should infallibly have broke my neck, if the mother had not held her apron under me.
The nurse, to quiet her babe, made use of a rattle which was a kind of hollow vessel filled with great stones, and fastened by a cable to the child’s waist: but all in vain; so that she was forced to apply the last remedy by giving it suck.
I must confess no object ever disgusted me so much as the sight of her monstrous breast, which I cannot tell what to compare with, so as to give the curious reader an idea of its bulk, shape, and colour.
It stood prominent six feet, and could not be less than sixteen in circumference.
The nipple was about half the bigness of my head, and the hue both of that and the dug, so varied with spots, pimples, and freckles, that nothing could appear more nauseous: for I had a near sight of her, she sitting down, the more conveniently to give suck, and I standing on the table.
This made me reflect upon the fair skins of our English ladies, who appear so beautiful to us, only because they are of our own size, and their defects not to be seen but through a magnifying glass; where we find by experiment that the smoothest and whitest skins look rough, and coarse, and ill-coloured.
He said, “he could discover great holes in my skin; that the stumps of my beard were ten times stronger than the bristles of a boar, and my complexion made up of several colours altogether disagreeable:” although I must beg leave to say for myself, that I am as fair as most of my sex and country, and very little sunburnt by all my travels.
On the other side, discoursing of the ladies in that emperor’s court, he used to tell me, “one had freckles; another too wide a mouth; a third too large a nose;” nothing of which I was able to distinguish.
I confess this reflection was obvious enough; which, however, I could not forbear, lest the reader might think those vast creatures were actually deformed: for I must do them the justice to say, they are a comely race of people, and particularly the features of my master’s countenance, although he was but a farmer, when I beheld him from the height of sixty feet, appeared very well proportioned.
When dinner was done, my master went out to his labourers, and, as I could discover by his voice and gesture, gave his wife strict charge to take care of me.
I was very much tired, and disposed to sleep, which my mistress perceiving, she put me on her own bed, and covered me with a clean white handkerchief, but larger and coarser than the mainsail of a man of war.
I slept about two hours, and dreamt I was at home with my wife and children, which aggravated my sorrows when I awaked, and found myself alone in a vast room, between two and three hundred feet wide, and above two hundred high, lying in a bed twenty yards wide.
My mistress was gone about her household affairs, and had locked me in.
Some natural necessities required me to get down; I durst not presume to call; and if I had, it would have been in vain, with such a voice as mine, at so great a distance from the room where I lay to the kitchen where the family kept.
While I was under these circumstances, two rats crept up the curtains, and ran smelling backwards and forwards on the bed.
One of them came up almost to my face, whereupon I rose in a fright, and drew out my hanger to defend myself.
These horrible animals had the boldness to attack me on both sides, and one of them held his forefeet at my collar; but I had the good fortune to rip up his belly before he could do me any mischief.
He fell down at my feet; and the other, seeing the fate of his comrade, made his escape, but not without one good wound on the back, which I gave him as he fled, and made the blood run trickling from him.
These creatures were of the size of a large mastiff, but infinitely more nimble and fierce; so that if I had taken off my belt before I went to sleep, I must have infallibly been torn to pieces and devoured.
I measured the tail of the dead rat, and found it to be two yards long, wanting an inch; but it went against my stomach to drag the carcass off the bed, where it lay still bleeding; I observed it had yet some life, but with a strong slash across the neck, I thoroughly despatched it.
Soon after my mistress came into the room, who seeing me all bloody, ran and took me up in her hand.
I pointed to the dead rat, smiling, and making other signs to show I was not hurt; whereat she was extremely rejoiced, calling the maid to take up the dead rat with a pair of tongs, and throw it out of the window.
Then she set me on a table, where I showed her my hanger all bloody, and wiping it on the lappet of my coat, returned it to the scabbard.
I was pressed to do more than one thing which another could not do for me, and therefore endeavoured to make my mistress understand, that I desired to be set down on the floor; which after she had done, my bashfulness would not suffer me to express myself farther, than by pointing to the door, and bowing several times.
The good woman, with much difficulty, at last perceived what I would be at, and taking me up again in her hand, walked into the garden, where she set me down.
I went on one side about two hundred yards, and beckoning to her not to look or to follow me, I hid myself between two leaves of sorrel, and there discharged the necessities of nature.
A description of the farmer’s daughter.
The author carried to a market-town, and then to the metropolis.
The particulars of his journey.
My mistress had a daughter of nine years old, a child of towardly parts for her age, very dexterous at her needle, and skilful in dressing her baby.
Her mother and she contrived to fit up the baby’s cradle for me against night: the cradle was put into a small drawer of a cabinet, and the drawer placed upon a hanging shelf for fear of the rats.
This was my bed all the time I staid with those people, though made more convenient by degrees, as I began to learn their language and make my wants known.
She made me seven shirts, and some other linen, of as fine cloth as could be got, which indeed was coarser than sackcloth; and these she constantly washed for me with her own hands.
She was likewise my school-mistress, to teach me the language: when I pointed to any thing, she told me the name of it in her own tongue, so that in a few days I was able to call for whatever I had a mind to.
She gave me the name of _Grildrig_, which the family took up, and afterwards the whole kingdom.
The word imports what the Latins call _nanunculus_, the Italians _homunceletino_, and the English _mannikin_.
Another farmer, who lived hard by, and was a particular friend of my master, came on a visit on purpose to inquire into the truth of this story.
I was immediately produced, and placed upon a table, where I walked as I was commanded, drew my hanger, put it up again, made my reverence to my master’s guest, asked him in his own language how he did, and told him _he was welcome_, just as my little nurse had instructed me.
This man, who was old and dim-sighted, put on his spectacles to behold me better; at which I could not forbear laughing very heartily, for his eyes appeared like the full moon shining into a chamber at two windows.
Our people, who discovered the cause of my mirth, bore me company in laughing, at which the old fellow was fool enough to be angry and out of countenance.
He had the character of a great miser; and, to my misfortune, he well deserved it, by the cursed advice he gave my master, to show me as a sight upon a market-day in the next town, which was half an hour’s riding, about two-and-twenty miles from our house.
I guessed there was some mischief when I observed my master and his friend whispering together, sometimes pointing at me; and my fears made me fancy that I overheard and understood some of their words.
But the next morning Glumdalclitch, my little nurse, told me the whole matter, which she had cunningly picked out from her mother.
She apprehended some mischief would happen to me from rude vulgar folks, who might squeeze me to death, or break one of my limbs by taking me in their hands.
She had also observed how modest I was in my nature, how nicely I regarded my honour, and what an indignity I should conceive it, to be exposed for money as a public spectacle, to the meanest of the people.
She said, her papa and mamma had promised that Grildrig should be hers; but now she found they meant to serve her as they did last year, when they pretended to give her a lamb, and yet, as soon as it was fat, sold it to a butcher.
For my own part, I may truly affirm, that I was less concerned than my nurse.
My master, pursuant to the advice of his friend, carried me in a box the next market-day to the neighbouring town, and took along with him his little daughter, my nurse, upon a pillion behind him.
However, I was terribly shaken and discomposed in this journey, though it was but of half an hour: for the horse went about forty feet at every step and trotted so high, that the agitation was equal to the rising and falling of a ship in a great storm, but much more frequent.
Our journey was somewhat farther than from London to St.
I walked about on the table as the girl commanded; she asked me questions, as far as she knew my understanding of the language reached, and I answered them as loud as I could.
I turned about several times to the company, paid my humble respects, said _they were welcome_, and used some other speeches I had been taught.
I took up a thimble filled with liquor, which Glumdalclitch had given me for a cup, and drank their health, I drew out my hanger, and flourished with it after the manner of fencers in England.
My nurse gave me a part of a straw, which I exercised as a pike, having learnt the art in my youth.
I was that day shown to twelve sets of company, and as often forced to act over again the same fopperies, till I was half dead with weariness and vexation; for those who had seen me made such wonderful reports, that the people were ready to break down the doors to come in.
My master, for his own interest, would not suffer any one to touch me except my nurse; and to prevent danger, benches were set round the table at such a distance as to put me out of every body’s reach.
However, an unlucky school-boy aimed a hazel nut directly at my head, which very narrowly missed me; otherwise it came with so much violence, that it would have infallibly knocked out my brains, for it was almost as large as a small pumpkin, but I had the satisfaction to see the young rogue well beaten, and turned out of the room.
My master gave public notice that he would show me again the next market-day; and in the meantime he prepared a convenient vehicle for me, which he had reason enough to do; for I was so tired with my first journey, and with entertaining company for eight hours together, that I could hardly stand upon my legs, or speak a word.
It was at least three days before I recovered my strength; and that I might have no rest at home, all the neighbouring gentlemen from a hundred miles round, hearing of my fame, came to see me at my master’s own house.
There could not be fewer than thirty persons with their wives and children (for the country is very populous;) and my master demanded the rate of a full room whenever he showed me at home, although it were only to a single family; so that for some time I had but little ease every day of the week (except Wednesday, which is their Sabbath,) although I were not carried to the town.
My master, finding how profitable I was likely to be, resolved to carry me to the most considerable cities of the kingdom.
Having therefore provided himself with all things necessary for a long journey, and settled his affairs at home, he took leave of his wife, and upon the 17th of August, 1703, about two months after my arrival, we set out for the metropolis, situated near the middle of that empire, and about three thousand miles distance from our house.
My master made his daughter Glumdalclitch ride behind him.
The girl had lined it on all sides with the softest cloth she could get, well quilted underneath, furnished it with her baby’s bed, provided me with linen and other necessaries, and made everything as convenient as she could.
We made easy journeys, of not above seven or eight score miles a day; for Glumdalclitch, on purpose to spare me, complained she was tired with the trotting of the horse.
We were ten weeks in our journey, and I was shown in eighteen large towns, besides many villages, and private families.
On the 26th day of October we arrived at the metropolis, called in their language _Lorbrulgrud_, or Pride of the Universe.
My master took a lodging in the principal street of the city, not far from the royal palace, and put out bills in the usual form, containing an exact description of my person and parts.
He provided a table sixty feet in diameter, upon which I was to act my part, and pallisadoed it round three feet from the edge, and as many high, to prevent my falling over.
I was shown ten times a day, to the wonder and satisfaction of all people.
I could now speak the language tolerably well, and perfectly understood every word, that was spoken to me.
Besides, I had learnt their alphabet, and could make a shift to explain a sentence here and there; for Glumdalclitch had been my instructor while we were at home, and at leisure hours during our journey.
She carried a little book in her pocket, not much larger than a Sanson’s Atlas; it was a common treatise for the use of young girls, giving a short account of their religion: out of this she taught me my letters, and interpreted the words.
The queen buys him of his master the farmer, and presents him to the king.
He disputes with his majesty’s great scholars.
An apartment at court provided for the author.
His quarrels with the queen’s dwarf.
The frequent labours I underwent every day, made, in a few weeks, a very considerable change in my health: the more my master got by me, the more insatiable he grew.
I had quite lost my stomach, and was almost reduced to a skeleton.
The farmer observed it, and concluding I must soon die, resolved to make as good a hand of me as he could.
While he was thus reasoning and resolving with himself, a _sardral_, or gentleman-usher, came from court, commanding my master to carry me immediately thither for the diversion of the queen and her ladies.
Some of the latter had already been to see me, and reported strange things of my beauty, behaviour, and good sense.
Her majesty, and those who attended her, were beyond measure delighted with my demeanour.
I fell on my knees, and begged the honour of kissing her imperial foot; but this gracious princess held out her little finger towards me, after I was set on the table, which I embraced in both my arms, and put the tip of it with the utmost respect to my lip.
She made me some general questions about my country and my travels, which I answered as distinctly, and in as few words as I could.
My late master withdrew, bidding me farewell, and saying he had left me in a good service; to which I replied not a word, only making him a slight bow.
The queen observed my coldness; and, when the farmer was gone out of the apartment, asked me the reason.
I made bold to tell her majesty, “that I owed no other obligation to my late master, than his not dashing out the brains of a poor harmless creature, found by chance in his fields: which obligation was amply recompensed, by the gain he had made in showing me through half the kingdom, and the price he had now sold me for.
That the life I had since led was laborious enough to kill an animal of ten times my strength.
That my health was much impaired, by the continual drudgery of entertaining the rabble every hour of the day; and that, if my master had not thought my life in danger, her majesty would not have got so cheap a bargain.
The latter part was altogether framed in the style peculiar to that people, whereof I learned some phrases from Glumdalclitch, while she was carrying me to court.
The queen, giving great allowance for my defectiveness in speaking, was, however, surprised at so much wit and good sense in so diminutive an animal.
His majesty, a prince of much gravity and austere countenance, not well observing my shape at first view, asked the queen after a cold manner “how long it was since she grew fond of a _splacnuck_?” for such it seems he took me to be, as I lay upon my breast in her majesty’s right hand.
But this princess, who has an infinite deal of wit and humour, set me gently on my feet upon the scrutoire, and commanded me to give his majesty an account of myself, which I did in a very few words: and Glumdalclitch who attended at the cabinet door, and could not endure I should be out of her sight, being admitted, confirmed all that had passed from my arrival at her father’s house.
The king, although he be as learned a person as any in his dominions, had been educated in the study of philosophy, and particularly mathematics; yet when he observed my shape exactly, and saw me walk erect, before I began to speak, conceived I might be a piece of clock-work (which is in that country arrived to a very great perfection) contrived by some ingenious artist.
But when he heard my voice, and found what I delivered to be regular and rational, he could not conceal his astonishment.
He was by no means satisfied with the relation I gave him of the manner I came into his kingdom, but thought it a story concerted between Glumdalclitch and her father, who had taught me a set of words to make me sell at a better price.
Upon this imagination, he put several other questions to me, and still received rational answers: no otherwise defective than by a foreign accent, and an imperfect knowledge in the language, with some rustic phrases which I had learned at the farmer’s house, and did not suit the polite style of a court.
His majesty sent for three great scholars, who were then in their weekly waiting, according to the custom in that country.
These gentlemen, after they had a while examined my shape with much nicety, were of different opinions concerning me.
They all agreed that I could not be produced according to the regular laws of nature, because I was not framed with a capacity of preserving my life, either by swiftness, or climbing of trees, or digging holes in the earth.
They observed by my teeth, which they viewed with great exactness, that I was a carnivorous animal; yet most quadrupeds being an overmatch for me, and field mice, with some others, too nimble, they could not imagine how I should be able to support myself, unless I fed upon snails and other insects, which they offered, by many learned arguments, to evince that I could not possibly do.
One of these virtuosi seemed to think that I might be an embryo, or abortive birth.
But this opinion was rejected by the other two, who observed my limbs to be perfect and finished; and that I had lived several years, as it was manifest from my beard, the stumps whereof they plainly discovered through a magnifying glass.
They would not allow me to be a dwarf, because my littleness was beyond all degrees of comparison; for the queen’s favourite dwarf, the smallest ever known in that kingdom, was near thirty feet high.
After this decisive conclusion, I entreated to be heard a word or two.
Having therefore first examined him privately, and then confronted him with me and the young girl, his majesty began to think that what we told him might possibly be true.
He desired the queen to order that a particular care should be taken of me; and was of opinion that Glumdalclitch should still continue in her office of tending me, because he observed we had a great affection for each other.
A convenient apartment was provided for her at court: she had a sort of governess appointed to take care of her education, a maid to dress her, and two other servants for menial offices; but the care of me was wholly appropriated to herself.
The queen commanded her own cabinet-maker to contrive a box, that might serve me for a bedchamber, after the model that Glumdalclitch and I should agree upon.
This man was a most ingenious artist, and according to my direction, in three weeks finished for me a wooden chamber of sixteen feet square, and twelve high, with sash-windows, a door, and two closets, like a London bed-chamber.
The board, that made the ceiling, was to be lifted up and down by two hinges, to put in a bed ready furnished by her majesty’s upholsterer, which Glumdalclitch took out every day to air, made it with her own hands, and letting it down at night, locked up the roof over me.
A nice workman, who was famous for little curiosities, undertook to make me two chairs, with backs and frames, of a substance not unlike ivory, and two tables, with a cabinet to put my things in.
The room was quilted on all sides, as well as the floor and the ceiling, to prevent any accident from the carelessness of those who carried me, and to break the force of a jolt, when I went in a coach.
The smith, after several attempts, made the smallest that ever was seen among them, for I have known a larger at the gate of a gentleman’s house in England.
I made a shift to keep the key in a pocket of my own, fearing Glumdalclitch might lose it.
The queen likewise ordered the thinnest silks that could be gotten, to make me clothes, not much thicker than an English blanket, very cumbersome till I was accustomed to them.
They were after the fashion of the kingdom, partly resembling the Persian, and partly the Chinese, and are a very grave and decent habit.
Glumdalclitch stood on a stool on the floor near my table, to assist and take care of me.
I had an entire set of silver dishes and plates, and other necessaries, which, in proportion to those of the queen, were not much bigger than what I have seen in a London toy-shop for the furniture of a baby-house: these my little nurse kept in her pocket in a silver box, and gave me at meals as I wanted them, always cleaning them herself.
No person dined with the queen but the two princesses royal, the eldest sixteen years old, and the younger at that time thirteen and a month.
Her majesty used to put a bit of meat upon one of my dishes, out of which I carved for myself, and her diversion was to see me eat in miniature: for the queen (who had indeed but a weak stomach) took up, at one mouthful, as much as a dozen English farmers could eat at a meal, which to me was for some time a very nauseous sight.
She would craunch the wing of a lark, bones and all, between her teeth, although it were nine times as large as that of a full-grown turkey; and put a bit of bread into her mouth as big as two twelve-penny loaves.
She drank out of a golden cup, above a hogshead at a draught.
Her knives were twice as long as a scythe, set straight upon the handle.
The spoons, forks, and other instruments, were all in the same proportion.
I remember when Glumdalclitch carried me, out of curiosity, to see some of the tables at court, where ten or a dozen of those enormous knives and forks were lifted up together, I thought I had never till then beheld so terrible a sight.
It is the custom, that every Wednesday (which, as I have observed, is their Sabbath) the king and queen, with the royal issue of both sexes, dine together in the apartment of his majesty, to whom I was now become a great favourite; and at these times, my little chair and table were placed at his left hand, before one of the salt-cellars.
This prince took a pleasure in conversing with me, inquiring into the manners, religion, laws, government, and learning of Europe; wherein I gave him the best account I was able.
His apprehension was so clear, and his judgment so exact, that he made very wise reflections and observations upon all I said.
But as I was not in a condition to resent injuries, so upon mature thoughts I began to doubt whether I was injured or no.
Neither, indeed, could I forbear smiling at myself, when the queen used to place me upon her hand towards a looking-glass, by which both our persons appeared before me in full view together; and there could be nothing more ridiculous than the comparison; so that I really began to imagine myself dwindled many degrees below my usual size.
One day, at dinner, this malicious little cub was so nettled with something I had said to him, that, raising himself upon the frame of her majesty’s chair, he took me up by the middle, as I was sitting down, not thinking any harm, and let me drop into a large silver bowl of cream, and then ran away as fast as he could.
I fell over head and ears, and, if I had not been a good swimmer, it might have gone very hard with me; for Glumdalclitch in that instant happened to be at the other end of the room, and the queen was in such a fright, that she wanted presence of mind to assist me.
But my little nurse ran to my relief, and took me out, after I had swallowed above a quart of cream.
I was put to bed: however, I received no other damage than the loss of a suit of clothes, which was utterly spoiled.
The dwarf was soundly whipt, and as a farther punishment, forced to drink up the bowl of cream into which he had thrown me: neither was he ever restored to favour; for soon after the queen bestowed him on a lady of high quality, so that I saw him no more, to my very great satisfaction; for I could not tell to what extremities such a malicious urchin might have carried his resentment.
He had before served me a scurvy trick, which set the queen a-laughing, although at the same time she was heartily vexed, and would have immediately cashiered him, if I had not been so generous as to intercede.
But, as princes seldom get their meat hot, my legs were not scalded, only my stockings and breeches in a sad condition.
The dwarf, at my entreaty, had no other punishment than a sound whipping.
I was frequently rallied by the queen upon account of my fearfulness; and she used to ask me whether the people of my country were as great cowards as myself?
The occasion was this: the kingdom is much pestered with flies in summer; and these odious insects, each of them as big as a Dunstable lark, hardly gave me any rest while I sat at dinner, with their continual humming and buzzing about mine ears.
They would sometimes alight upon my victuals, and leave their loathsome excrement, or spawn behind, which to me was very visible, though not to the natives of that country, whose large optics were not so acute as mine, in viewing smaller objects.
Sometimes they would fix upon my nose, or forehead, where they stung me to the quick, smelling very offensively; and I could easily trace that viscous matter, which, our naturalists tell us, enables those creatures to walk with their feet upwards upon a ceiling.
I had much ado to defend myself against these detestable animals, and could not forbear starting when they came on my face.
It was the common practice of the dwarf, to catch a number of these insects in his hand, as schoolboys do among us, and let them out suddenly under my nose, on purpose to frighten me, and divert the queen.
My remedy was to cut them in pieces with my knife, as they flew in the air, wherein my dexterity was much admired.
Some of them seized my cake, and carried it piecemeal away; others flew about my head and face, confounding me with the noise, and putting me in the utmost terror of their stings.
I dispatched four of them, but the rest got away, and I presently shut my window.
These insects were as large as partridges: I took out their stings, found them an inch and a half long, and as sharp as needles.
I carefully preserved them all; and having since shown them, with some other curiosities, in several parts of Europe, upon my return to England I gave three of them to Gresham College, and kept the fourth for myself.
The country described.
A proposal for correcting modern maps.
The king’s palace; and some account of the metropolis.
The author’s way of travelling.
The chief temple described.
I now intend to give the reader a short description of this country, as far as I travelled in it, which was not above two thousand miles round Lorbrulgrud, the metropolis.
For the queen, whom I always attended, never went farther when she accompanied the king in his progresses, and there staid till his majesty returned from viewing his frontiers.
The kingdom is a peninsula, terminated to the north-east by a ridge of mountains thirty miles high, which are altogether impassable, by reason of the volcanoes upon the tops: neither do the most learned know what sort of mortals inhabit beyond those mountains, or whether they be inhabited at all.
There is not one seaport in the whole kingdom: and those parts of the coasts into which the rivers issue, are so full of pointed rocks, and the sea generally so rough, that there is no venturing with the smallest of their boats; so that these people are wholly excluded from any commerce with the rest of the world.
However, now and then they take a whale that happens to be dashed against the rocks, which the common people feed on heartily.
These whales I have known so large, that a man could hardly carry one upon his shoulders; and sometimes, for curiosity, they are brought in hampers to Lorbrulgrud; I saw one of them in a dish at the king’s table, which passed for a rarity, but I did not observe he was fond of it; for I think, indeed, the bigness disgusted him, although I have seen one somewhat larger in Greenland.
The country is well inhabited, for it contains fifty-one cities, near a hundred walled towns, and a great number of villages.
To satisfy my curious reader, it may be sufficient to describe Lorbrulgrud.
It contains above eighty thousand houses, and about six hundred thousand inhabitants.
It is in length three _glomglungs_ (which make about fifty-four English miles,) and two and a half in breadth; as I measured it myself in the royal map made by the king’s order, which was laid on the ground on purpose for me, and extended a hundred feet: I paced the diameter and circumference several times barefoot, and, computing by the scale, measured it pretty exactly.
The king’s palace is no regular edifice, but a heap of buildings, about seven miles round: the chief rooms are generally two hundred and forty feet high, and broad and long in proportion.
A coach was allowed to Glumdalclitch and me, wherein her governess frequently took her out to see the town, or go among the shops; and I was always of the party, carried in my box; although the girl, at my own desire, would often take me out, and hold me in her hand, that I might more conveniently view the houses and the people, as we passed along the streets.
I reckoned our coach to be about a square of Westminster-hall, but not altogether so high: however, I cannot be very exact.
One day the governess ordered our coachman to stop at several shops, where the beggars, watching their opportunity, crowded to the sides of the coach, and gave me the most horrible spectacle that ever a European eye beheld.
There was a woman with a cancer in her breast, swelled to a monstrous size, full of holes, in two or three of which I could have easily crept, and covered my whole body.
But the most hateful sight of all, was the lice crawling on their clothes.
I could see distinctly the limbs of these vermin with my naked eye, much better than those of a European louse through a microscope, and their snouts with which they rooted like swine.
They were the first I had ever beheld, and I should have been curious enough to dissect one of them, if I had had proper instruments, which I unluckily left behind me in the ship, although, indeed, the sight was so nauseous, that it perfectly turned my stomach.
Besides the large box in which I was usually carried, the queen ordered a smaller one to be made for me, of about twelve feet square, and ten high, for the convenience of travelling; because the other was somewhat too large for Glumdalclitch’s lap, and cumbersome in the coach; it was made by the same artist, whom I directed in the whole contrivance.
This travelling-closet was an exact square, with a window in the middle of three of the squares, and each window was latticed with iron wire on the outside, to prevent accidents in long journeys.
On the fourth side, which had no window, two strong staples were fixed, through which the person that carried me, when I had a mind to be on horseback, put a leathern belt, and buckled it about his waist.
In journeys, when I was weary of the coach, a servant on horseback would buckle on my box, and place it upon a cushion before him; and there I had a full prospect of the country on three sides, from my three windows.
I had, in this closet, a field-bed and a hammock, hung from the ceiling, two chairs and a table, neatly screwed to the floor, to prevent being tossed about by the agitation of the horse or the coach.
And having been long used to sea-voyages, those motions, although sometimes very violent, did not much discompose me.
Whenever I had a mind to see the town, it was always in my travelling-closet; which Glumdalclitch held in her lap in a kind of open sedan, after the fashion of the country, borne by four men, and attended by two others in the queen’s livery.
The people, who had often heard of me, were very curious to crowd about the sedan, and the girl was complaisant enough to make the bearers stop, and to take me in her hand, that I might be more conveniently seen.
I was very desirous to see the chief temple, and particularly the tower belonging to it, which is reckoned the highest in the kingdom.
Accordingly one day my nurse carried me thither, but I may truly say I came back disappointed; for the height is not above three thousand feet, reckoning from the ground to the highest pinnacle top; which, allowing for the difference between the size of those people and us in Europe, is no great matter for admiration, nor at all equal in proportion (if I rightly remember) to Salisbury steeple.
I measured a little finger which had fallen down from one of these statues, and lay unperceived among some rubbish, and found it exactly four feet and an inch in length.
Glumdalclitch wrapped it up in her handkerchief, and carried it home in her pocket, to keep among other trinkets, of which the girl was very fond, as children at her age usually are.
The king’s kitchen is indeed a noble building, vaulted at top, and about six hundred feet high.
Paul’s: for I measured the latter on purpose, after my return.
But if I should describe the kitchen grate, the prodigious pots and kettles, the joints of meat turning on the spits, with many other particulars, perhaps I should be hardly believed; at least a severe critic would be apt to think I enlarged a little, as travellers are often suspected to do.
To avoid which censure I fear I have run too much into the other extreme; and that if this treatise should happen to be translated into the language of Brobdingnag (which is the general name of that kingdom,) and transmitted thither, the king and his people would have reason to complain that I had done them an injury, by a false and diminutive representation.
His majesty seldom keeps above six hundred horses in his stables: they are generally from fifty-four to sixty feet high.
But, when he goes abroad on solemn days, he is attended, for state, by a military guard of five hundred horse, which, indeed, I thought was the most splendid sight that could be ever beheld, till I saw part of his army in battalia, whereof I shall find another occasion to speak.
Several adventures that happened to the author.
The execution of a criminal.
The author shows his skill in navigation.
I should have lived happy enough in that country, if my littleness had not exposed me to several ridiculous and troublesome accidents; some of which I shall venture to relate.
Glumdalclitch often carried me into the gardens of the court in my smaller box, and would sometimes take me out of it, and hold me in her hand, or set me down to walk.
I remember, before the dwarf left the queen, he followed us one day into those gardens, and my nurse having set me down, he and I being close together, near some dwarf apple trees, I must needs show my wit, by a silly allusion between him and the trees, which happens to hold in their language as it does in ours.
Another day, Glumdalclitch left me on a smooth grass-plot to divert myself, while she walked at some distance with her governess.
Neither is this at all to be wondered at, because nature, in that country, observing the same proportion through all her operations, a hailstone is near eighteen hundred times as large as one in Europe; which I can assert upon experience, having been so curious as to weigh and measure them.
But a more dangerous accident happened to me in the same garden, when my little nurse, believing she had put me in a secure place (which I often entreated her to do, that I might enjoy my own thoughts,) and having left my box at home, to avoid the trouble of carrying it, went to another part of the garden with her governess and some ladies of her acquaintance.
While she was absent, and out of hearing, a small white spaniel that belonged to one of the chief gardeners, having got by accident into the garden, happened to range near the place where I lay: the dog, following the scent, came directly up, and taking me in his mouth, ran straight to his master wagging his tail, and set me gently on the ground.
But the poor gardener, who knew me well, and had a great kindness for me, was in a terrible fright: he gently took me up in both his hands, and asked me how I did? but I was so amazed and out of breath, that I could not speak a word.
In a few minutes I came to myself, and he carried me safe to my little nurse, who, by this time, had returned to the place where she left me, and was in cruel agonies when I did not appear, nor answer when she called.
She severely reprimanded the gardener on account of his dog.
But the thing was hushed up, and never known at court, for the girl was afraid of the queen’s anger; and truly, as to myself, I thought it would not be for my reputation, that such a story should go about.
This accident absolutely determined Glumdalclitch never to trust me abroad for the future out of her sight.
I had been long afraid of this resolution, and therefore concealed from her some little unlucky adventures, that happened in those times when I was left by myself.
Once a kite, hovering over the garden, made a stoop at me, and if I had not resolutely drawn my hanger, and run under a thick espalier, he would have certainly carried me away in his talons.
Another time, walking to the top of a fresh mole-hill, I fell to my neck in the hole, through which that animal had cast up the earth, and coined some lie, not worth remembering, to excuse myself for spoiling my clothes.
I likewise broke my right shin against the shell of a snail, which I happened to stumble over, as I was walking alone and thinking on poor England.
I cannot tell whether I were more pleased or mortified to observe, in those solitary walks, that the smaller birds did not appear to be at all afraid of me, but would hop about within a yard’s distance, looking for worms and other food, with as much indifference and security as if no creature at all were near them.
I remember, a thrush had the confidence to snatch out of my hand, with his bill, a piece of cake that Glumdalclitch had just given me for my breakfast.
When I attempted to catch any of these birds, they would boldly turn against me, endeavouring to peck my fingers, which I durst not venture within their reach; and then they would hop back unconcerned, to hunt for worms or snails, as they did before.
But one day, I took a thick cudgel, and threw it with all my strength so luckily, at a linnet, that I knocked him down, and seizing him by the neck with both my hands, ran with him in triumph to my nurse.
However, the bird, who had only been stunned, recovering himself gave me so many boxes with his wings, on both sides of my head and body, though I held him at arm’s length, and was out of the reach of his claws, that I was twenty times thinking to let him go.
But I was soon relieved by one of our servants, who wrung off the bird’s neck, and I had him next day for dinner, by the queen’s command.
This linnet, as near as I can remember, seemed to be somewhat larger than an English swan.
The maids of honour often invited Glumdalclitch to their apartments, and desired she would bring me along with her, on purpose to have the pleasure of seeing and touching me.
And, after all, I found their natural smell was much more supportable, than when they used perfumes, under which I immediately swooned away.
I cannot forget, that an intimate friend of mine in Lilliput, took the freedom in a warm day, when I had used a good deal of exercise, to complain of a strong smell about me, although I am as little faulty that way, as most of my sex: but I suppose his faculty of smelling was as nice with regard to me, as mine was to that of this people.
Upon this point, I cannot forbear doing justice to the queen my mistress, and Glumdalclitch my nurse, whose persons were as sweet as those of any lady in England.
Neither did they at all scruple, while I was by, to discharge what they had drank, to the quantity of at least two hogsheads, in a vessel that held above three tuns.
The handsomest among these maids of honour, a pleasant, frolicsome girl of sixteen, would sometimes set me astride upon one of her nipples, with many other tricks, wherein the reader will excuse me for not being over particular.
But I was so much displeased, that I entreated Glumdalclitch to contrive some excuse for not seeing that young lady any more.
One day, a young gentleman, who was nephew to my nurse’s governess, came and pressed them both to see an execution.
It was of a man, who had murdered one of that gentleman’s intimate acquaintance.
Glumdalclitch was prevailed on to be of the company, very much against her inclination, for she was naturally tender-hearted: and, as for myself, although I abhorred such kind of spectacles, yet my curiosity tempted me to see something that I thought must be extraordinary.
The malefactor was fixed in a chair upon a scaffold erected for that purpose, and his head cut off at one blow, with a sword of about forty feet long.
The veins and arteries spouted up such a prodigious quantity of blood, and so high in the air, that the great _jet d’eau_ at Versailles was not equal to it for the time it lasted: and the head, when it fell on the scaffold floor, gave such a bounce as made me start, although I was at least half an English mile distant.
The queen, who often used to hear me talk of my sea-voyages, and took all occasions to divert me when I was melancholy, asked me whether I understood how to handle a sail or an oar, and whether a little exercise of rowing might not be convenient for my health?
I answered, that I understood both very well: for although my proper employment had been to be surgeon or doctor to the ship, yet often, upon a pinch, I was forced to work like a common mariner.
But I could not see how this could be done in their country, where the smallest wherry was equal to a first-rate man of war among us; and such a boat as I could manage would never live in any of their rivers.
Her majesty said, if I would contrive a boat, her own joiner should make it, and she would provide a place for me to sail in.
The fellow was an ingenious workman, and by my instructions, in ten days, finished a pleasure-boat with all its tackling, able conveniently to hold eight Europeans.
When it was finished, the queen was so delighted, that she ran with it in her lap to the king, who ordered it to be put into a cistern full of water, with me in it, by way of trial, where I could not manage my two sculls, or little oars, for want of room.
But the queen had before contrived another project.
It had a cock near the bottom to let out the water, when it began to grow stale; and two servants could easily fill it in half an hour.
Here I often used to row for my own diversion, as well as that of the queen and her ladies, who thought themselves well entertained with my skill and agility.
Sometimes I would put up my sail, and then my business was only to steer, while the ladies gave me a gale with their fans; and, when they were weary, some of their pages would blow my sail forward with their breath, while I showed my art by steering starboard or larboard as I pleased.
When I had done, Glumdalclitch always carried back my boat into her closet, and hung it on a nail to dry.
Another time, one of the servants, whose office it was to fill my trough every third day with fresh water, was so careless as to let a huge frog (not perceiving it) slip out of his pail.
The frog lay concealed till I was put into my boat, but then, seeing a resting-place, climbed up, and made it lean so much on one side, that I was forced to balance it with all my weight on the other, to prevent overturning.
When the frog was got in, it hopped at once half the length of the boat, and then over my head, backward and forward, daubing my face and clothes with its odious slime.
The largeness of its features made it appear the most deformed animal that can be conceived.
However, I desired Glumdalclitch to let me deal with it alone.
But the greatest danger I ever underwent in that kingdom, was from a monkey, who belonged to one of the clerks of the kitchen.
Glumdalclitch had locked me up in her closet, while she went somewhere upon business, or a visit.
The weather being very warm, the closet-window was left open, as well as the windows and the door of my bigger box, in which I usually lived, because of its largeness and conveniency.
I retreated to the farther corner of my room; or box; but the monkey looking in at every side, put me in such a fright, that I wanted presence of mind to conceal myself under the bed, as I might easily have done.
After some time spent in peeping, grinning, and chattering, he at last espied me; and reaching one of his paws in at the door, as a cat does when she plays with a mouse, although I often shifted place to avoid him, he at length seized the lappet of my coat (which being made of that country silk, was very thick and strong), and dragged me out.
He took me up in his right fore-foot and held me as a nurse does a child she is going to suckle, just as I have seen the same sort of creature do with a kitten in Europe; and when I offered to struggle he squeezed me so hard, that I thought it more prudent to submit.
I have good reason to believe, that he took me for a young one of his own species, by his often stroking my face very gently with his other paw.
In these diversions he was interrupted by a noise at the closet door, as if somebody were opening it: whereupon he suddenly leaped up to the window at which he had come in, and thence upon the leads and gutters, walking upon three legs, and holding me in the fourth, till he clambered up to a roof that was next to ours.
I heard Glumdalclitch give a shriek at the moment he was carrying me out.
Some of the people threw up stones, hoping to drive the monkey down; but this was strictly forbidden, or else, very probably, my brains had been dashed out.
The ladders were now applied, and mounted by several men; which the monkey observing, and finding himself almost encompassed, not being able to make speed enough with his three legs, let me drop on a ridge tile, and made his escape.
Here I sat for some time, five hundred yards from the ground, expecting every moment to be blown down by the wind, or to fall by my own giddiness, and come tumbling over and over from the ridge to the eaves; but an honest lad, one of my nurse’s footmen, climbed up, and putting me into his breeches pocket, brought me down safe.
I was almost choked with the filthy stuff the monkey had crammed down my throat: but my dear little nurse picked it out of my mouth with a small needle, and then I fell a-vomiting, which gave me great relief.
Yet I was so weak and bruised in the sides with the squeezes given me by this odious animal, that I was forced to keep my bed a fortnight.
The king, queen, and all the court, sent every day to inquire after my health; and her majesty made me several visits during my sickness.
When I attended the king after my recovery, to return him thanks for his favours, he was pleased to rally me a good deal upon this adventure.
However, my speech produced nothing else beside a loud laughter, which all the respect due to his majesty from those about him could not make them contain.
This made me reflect, how vain an attempt it is for a man to endeavour to do himself honour among those who are out of all degree of equality or comparison with him.
And yet I have seen the moral of my own behaviour very frequent in England since my return; where a little contemptible varlet, without the least title to birth, person, wit, or common sense, shall presume to look with importance, and put himself upon a foot with the greatest persons of the kingdom.
I was every day furnishing the court with some ridiculous story: and Glumdalclitch, although she loved me to excess, yet was arch enough to inform the queen, whenever I committed any folly that she thought would be diverting to her majesty.
The girl, who had been out of order, was carried by her governess to take the air about an hour’s distance, or thirty miles from town.
They alighted out of the coach near a small foot-path in a field, and Glumdalclitch setting down my travelling box, I went out of it to walk.
There was a cow-dung in the path, and I must need try my activity by attempting to leap over it.
I took a run, but unfortunately jumped short, and found myself just in the middle up to my knees.
I waded through with some difficulty, and one of the footmen wiped me as clean as he could with his handkerchief, for I was filthily bemired; and my nurse confined me to my box, till we returned home; where the queen was soon informed of what had passed, and the footmen spread it about the court: so that all the mirth for some days was at my expense.
Several contrivances of the author to please the king and queen.
The king inquires into the state of England, which the author relates to him.
The king’s observations thereon.
I used to attend the king’s levee once or twice a week, and had often seen him under the barber’s hand, which indeed was at first very terrible to behold; for the razor was almost twice as long as an ordinary scythe.
His majesty, according to the custom of the country, was only shaved twice a week.
I once prevailed on the barber to give me some of the suds or lather, out of which I picked forty or fifty of the strongest stumps of hair.
I then took a piece of fine wood, and cut it like the back of a comb, making several holes in it at equal distances with as small a needle as I could get from Glumdalclitch.
I fixed in the stumps so artificially, scraping and sloping them with my knife toward the points, that I made a very tolerable comb; which was a seasonable supply, my own being so much broken in the teeth, that it was almost useless: neither did I know any artist in that country so nice and exact, as would undertake to make me another.
And this puts me in mind of an amusement, wherein I spent many of my leisure hours.
When they were finished, I made a present of them to her majesty; who kept them in her cabinet, and used to show them for curiosities, as indeed they were the wonder of every one that beheld them.
The queen would have me sit upon one of these chairs, but I absolutely refused to obey her, protesting I would rather die than place a dishonourable part of my body on those precious hairs, that once adorned her majesty’s head.
Of these hairs (as I had always a mechanical genius) I likewise made a neat little purse, about five feet long, with her majesty’s name deciphered in gold letters, which I gave to Glumdalclitch, by the queen’s consent.
To say the truth, it was more for show than use, being not of strength to bear the weight of the larger coins, and therefore she kept nothing in it but some little toys that girls are fond of.
The king, who delighted in music, had frequent concerts at court, to which I was sometimes carried, and set in my box on a table to hear them: but the noise was so great that I could hardly distinguish the tunes.
I am confident that all the drums and trumpets of a royal army, beating and sounding together just at your ears, could not equal it.
My practice was to have my box removed from the place where the performers sat, as far as I could, then to shut the doors and windows of it, and draw the window curtains; after which I found their music not disagreeable.
Glumdalclitch kept one in her chamber, and a master attended twice a week to teach her: I called it a spinet, because it somewhat resembled that instrument, and was played upon in the same manner.
A fancy came into my head, that I would entertain the king and queen with an English tune upon this instrument.
But this appeared extremely difficult: for the spinet was near sixty feet long, each key being almost a foot wide, so that with my arms extended I could not reach to above five keys, and to press them down required a good smart stroke with my fist, which would be too great a labour, and to no purpose.
The method I contrived was this: I prepared two round sticks, about the bigness of common cudgels; they were thicker at one end than the other, and I covered the thicker ends with pieces of a mouse’s skin, that by rapping on them I might neither damage the tops of the keys nor interrupt the sound.
The king, who, as I before observed, was a prince of excellent understanding, would frequently order that I should be brought in my box, and set upon the table in his closet: he would then command me to bring one of my chairs out of the box, and sit down within three yards distance upon the top of the cabinet, which brought me almost to a level with his face.
In this manner I had several conversations with him.
I began my discourse by informing his majesty, that our dominions consisted of two islands, which composed three mighty kingdoms, under one sovereign, beside our plantations in America.
I dwelt long upon the fertility of our soil, and the temperature of our climate.
I then spoke at large upon the constitution of an English parliament; partly made up of an illustrious body called the House of Peers; persons of the noblest blood, and of the most ancient and ample patrimonies.
I described that extraordinary care always taken of their education in arts and arms, to qualify them for being counsellors both to the king and kingdom; to have a share in the legislature; to be members of the highest court of judicature, whence there can be no appeal; and to be champions always ready for the defence of their prince and country, by their valour, conduct, and fidelity.
That these were the ornament and bulwark of the kingdom, worthy followers of their most renowned ancestors, whose honour had been the reward of their virtue, from which their posterity were never once known to degenerate.
To these were joined several holy persons, as part of that assembly, under the title of bishops, whose peculiar business is to take care of religion, and of those who instruct the people therein.
These were searched and sought out through the whole nation, by the prince and his wisest counsellors, among such of the priesthood as were most deservedly distinguished by the sanctity of their lives, and the depth of their erudition; who were indeed the spiritual fathers of the clergy and the people.
That the other part of the parliament consisted of an assembly called the House of Commons, who were all principal gentlemen, freely picked and culled out by the people themselves, for their great abilities and love of their country, to represent the wisdom of the whole nation.
And that these two bodies made up the most august assembly in Europe; to whom, in conjunction with the prince, the whole legislature is committed.
I then descended to the courts of justice; over which the judges, those venerable sages and interpreters of the law, presided, for determining the disputed rights and properties of men, as well as for the punishment of vice and protection of innocence.
I mentioned the prudent management of our treasury; the valour and achievements of our forces, by sea and land.
I computed the number of our people, by reckoning how many millions there might be of each religious sect, or political party among us.
I did not omit even our sports and pastimes, or any other particular which I thought might redound to the honour of my country.
And I finished all with a brief historical account of affairs and events in England for about a hundred years past.
This conversation was not ended under five audiences, each of several hours; and the king heard the whole with great attention, frequently taking notes of what I spoke, as well as memorandums of what questions he intended to ask me.
When I had put an end to these long discourses, his majesty, in a sixth audience, consulting his notes, proposed many doubts, queries, and objections, upon every article.
He asked, “What methods were used to cultivate the minds and bodies of our young nobility, and in what kind of business they commonly spent the first and teachable parts of their lives?
What course was taken to supply that assembly, when any noble family became extinct?
What qualifications were necessary in those who are to be created new lords: whether the humour of the prince, a sum of money to a court lady, or a design of strengthening a party opposite to the public interest, ever happened to be the motive in those advancements?
What share of knowledge these lords had in the laws of their country, and how they came by it, so as to enable them to decide the properties of their fellow-subjects in the last resort?
Whether they were always so free from avarice, partialities, or want, that a bribe, or some other sinister view, could have no place among them?
Upon what I said in relation to our courts of justice, his majesty desired to be satisfied in several points: and this I was the better able to do, having been formerly almost ruined by a long suit in chancery, which was decreed for me with costs.
He asked, “What time was usually spent in determining between right and wrong, and what degree of expense?
Whether advocates and orators had liberty to plead in causes manifestly known to be unjust, vexatious, or oppressive?
Whether party, in religion or politics, were observed to be of any weight in the scale of justice?
Whether those pleading orators were persons educated in the general knowledge of equity, or only in provincial, national, and other local customs?
Whether they or their judges had any part in penning those laws, which they assumed the liberty of interpreting, and glossing upon at their pleasure?
Whether they had ever, at different times, pleaded for and against the same cause, and cited precedents to prove contrary opinions?
Whether they were a rich or a poor corporation?
Whether they received any pecuniary reward for pleading, or delivering their opinions?
I observe among you some lines of an institution, which, in its original, might have been tolerable, but these half erased, and the rest wholly blurred and blotted by corruptions.
It does not appear, from all you have said, how any one perfection is required toward the procurement of any one station among you; much less, that men are ennobled on account of their virtue; that priests are advanced for their piety or learning; soldiers, for their conduct or valour; judges, for their integrity; senators, for the love of their country; or counsellors for their wisdom.
As for yourself,” continued the king, “who have spent the greatest part of your life in travelling, I am well disposed to hope you may hitherto have escaped many vices of your country.
But by what I have gathered from your own relation, and the answers I have with much pains wrung and extorted from you, I cannot but conclude the bulk of your natives to be the most pernicious race of little odious vermin that nature ever suffered to crawl upon the surface of the earth.” CHAPTER VII.
He makes a proposal of much advantage to the king, which is rejected.
The king’s great ignorance in politics.
The learning of that country very imperfect and confined.
The laws, and military affairs, and parties in the state.
Nothing but an extreme love of truth could have hindered me from concealing this part of my story.
It was in vain to discover my resentments, which were always turned into ridicule; and I was forced to rest with patience, while my noble and beloved country was so injuriously treated.
I am as heartily sorry as any of my readers can possibly be, that such an occasion was given: but this prince happened to be so curious and inquisitive upon every particular, that it could not consist either with gratitude or good manners, to refuse giving him what satisfaction I was able.
Yet thus much I may be allowed to say in my own vindication, that I artfully eluded many of his questions, and gave to every point a more favourable turn, by many degrees, than the strictness of truth would allow.
For I have always borne that laudable partiality to my own country, which Dionysius Halicarnassensis, with so much justice, recommends to an historian: I would hide the frailties and deformities of my political mother, and place her virtues and beauties in the most advantageous light.
This was my sincere endeavour in those many discourses I had with that monarch, although it unfortunately failed of success.
But great allowances should be given to a king, who lives wholly secluded from the rest of the world, and must therefore be altogether unacquainted with the manners and customs that most prevail in other nations: the want of which knowledge will ever produce many prejudices, and a certain narrowness of thinking, from which we, and the politer countries of Europe, are wholly exempted.
And it would be hard indeed, if so remote a prince’s notions of virtue and vice were to be offered as a standard for all mankind.
To confirm what I have now said, and further to show the miserable effects of a confined education, I shall here insert a passage, which will hardly obtain belief.
In hopes to ingratiate myself further into his majesty’s favour, I told him of “an invention, discovered between three and four hundred years ago, to make a certain powder, into a heap of which, the smallest spark of fire falling, would kindle the whole in a moment, although it were as big as a mountain, and make it all fly up in the air together, with a noise and agitation greater than thunder.
That a proper quantity of this powder rammed into a hollow tube of brass or iron, according to its bigness, would drive a ball of iron or lead, with such violence and speed, as nothing was able to sustain its force.
That the largest balls thus discharged, would not only destroy whole ranks of an army at once, but batter the strongest walls to the ground, sink down ships, with a thousand men in each, to the bottom of the sea, and when linked together by a chain, would cut through masts and rigging, divide hundreds of bodies in the middle, and lay all waste before them.
That we often put this powder into large hollow balls of iron, and discharged them by an engine into some city we were besieging, which would rip up the pavements, tear the houses to pieces, burst and throw splinters on every side, dashing out the brains of all who came near.
The king was struck with horror at the description I had given of those terrible engines, and the proposal I had made.
“He was amazed, how so impotent and grovelling an insect as I” (these were his expressions) “could entertain such inhuman ideas, and in so familiar a manner, as to appear wholly unmoved at all the scenes of blood and desolation which I had painted as the common effects of those destructive machines; whereof,” he said, “some evil genius, enemy to mankind, must have been the first contriver.
Neither do I say this, with the least intention to detract from the many virtues of that excellent king, whose character, I am sensible, will, on this account, be very much lessened in the opinion of an English reader: but I take this defect among them to have risen from their ignorance, by not having hitherto reduced politics into a science, as the more acute wits of Europe have done.
For, I remember very well, in a discourse one day with the king, when I happened to say, “there were several thousand books among us written upon the art of government,” it gave him (directly contrary to my intention) a very mean opinion of our understandings.
He professed both to abominate and despise all mystery, refinement, and intrigue, either in a prince or a minister.
He confined the knowledge of governing within very narrow bounds, to common sense and reason, to justice and lenity, to the speedy determination of civil and criminal causes; with some other obvious topics, which are not worth considering.
But the last of these is wholly applied to what may be useful in life, to the improvement of agriculture, and all mechanical arts; so that among us, it would be little esteemed.
And as to ideas, entities, abstractions, and transcendentals, I could never drive the least conception into their heads.
No law in that country must exceed in words the number of letters in their alphabet, which consists only of two and twenty.
They are expressed in the most plain and simple terms, wherein those people are not mercurial enough to discover above one interpretation: and to write a comment upon any law, is a capital crime.
As to the decision of civil causes, or proceedings against criminals, their precedents are so few, that they have little reason to boast of any extraordinary skill in either.
They have had the art of printing, as well as the Chinese, time out of mind: but their libraries are not very large; for that of the king, which is reckoned the largest, does not amount to above a thousand volumes, placed in a gallery of twelve hundred feet long, whence I had liberty to borrow what books I pleased.
The queen’s joiner had contrived in one of Glumdalclitch’s rooms, a kind of wooden machine five-and-twenty feet high, formed like a standing ladder; the steps were each fifty feet long.
It was indeed a moveable pair of stairs, the lowest end placed at ten feet distance from the wall of the chamber.
Their style is clear, masculine, and smooth, but not florid; for they avoid nothing more than multiplying unnecessary words, or using various expressions.
I have perused many of their books, especially those in history and morality.
Among the rest, I was much diverted with a little old treatise, which always lay in Glumdalclitch’s bed chamber, and belonged to her governess, a grave elderly gentlewoman, who dealt in writings of morality and devotion.
The book treats of the weakness of humankind, and is in little esteem, except among the women and the vulgar.
For my own part, I could not avoid reflecting how universally this talent was spread, of drawing lectures in morality, or indeed rather matter of discontent and repining, from the quarrels we raise with nature.
And I believe, upon a strict inquiry, those quarrels might be shown as ill-grounded among us as they are among that people.
As to their military affairs, they boast that the king’s army consists of a hundred and seventy-six thousand foot, and thirty-two thousand horse: if that may be called an army, which is made up of tradesmen in the several cities, and farmers in the country, whose commanders are only the nobility and gentry, without pay or reward.
They are indeed perfect enough in their exercises, and under very good discipline, wherein I saw no great merit; for how should it be otherwise, where every farmer is under the command of his own landlord, and every citizen under that of the principal men in his own city, chosen after the manner of Venice, by ballot?
I have often seen the militia of Lorbrulgrud drawn out to exercise, in a great field near the city of twenty miles square.
They were in all not above twenty-five thousand foot, and six thousand horse; but it was impossible for me to compute their number, considering the space of ground they took up.
A cavalier, mounted on a large steed, might be about ninety feet high.
I have seen this whole body of horse, upon a word of command, draw their swords at once, and brandish them in the air.
Imagination can figure nothing so grand, so surprising, and so astonishing!
It looked as if ten thousand flashes of lightning were darting at the same time from every quarter of the sky.
I was curious to know how this prince, to whose dominions there is no access from any other country, came to think of armies, or to teach his people the practice of military discipline.
But I was soon informed, both by conversation and reading their histories; for, in the course of many ages, they have been troubled with the same disease to which the whole race of mankind is subject; the nobility often contending for power, the people for liberty, and the king for absolute dominion.
All which, however happily tempered by the laws of that kingdom, have been sometimes violated by each of the three parties, and have more than once occasioned civil wars; the last whereof was happily put an end to by this prince’s grandfather, in a general composition; and the militia, then settled with common consent, has been ever since kept in the strictest duty.
The king and queen make a progress to the frontiers.
The manner in which he leaves the country very particularly related.
I had always a strong impulse that I should some time recover my liberty, though it was impossible to conjecture by what means, or to form any project with the least hope of succeeding.
The ship in which I sailed, was the first ever known to be driven within sight of that coast, and the king had given strict orders, that if at any time another appeared, it should be taken ashore, and with all its crew and passengers brought in a tumbril to Lorbrulgrud.
He was strongly bent to get me a woman of my own size, by whom I might propagate the breed: but I think I should rather have died than undergone the disgrace of leaving a posterity to be kept in cages, like tame canary-birds, and perhaps, in time, sold about the kingdom, to persons of quality, for curiosities.
I was indeed treated with much kindness: I was the favourite of a great king and queen, and the delight of the whole court; but it was upon such a foot as ill became the dignity of humankind.
I could never forget those domestic pledges I had left behind me.
I wanted to be among people, with whom I could converse upon even terms, and walk about the streets and fields without being afraid of being trod to death like a frog or a young puppy.
But my deliverance came sooner than I expected, and in a manner not very common; the whole story and circumstances of which I shall faithfully relate.
I had now been two years in this country; and about the beginning of the third, Glumdalclitch and I attended the king and queen, in a progress to the south coast of the kingdom.
I was carried, as usual, in my travelling-box, which as I have already described, was a very convenient closet, of twelve feet wide.
And I had ordered a hammock to be fixed, by silken ropes from the four corners at the top, to break the jolts, when a servant carried me before him on horseback, as I sometimes desired; and would often sleep in my hammock, while we were upon the road.
On the roof of my closet, not directly over the middle of the hammock, I ordered the joiner to cut out a hole of a foot square, to give me air in hot weather, as I slept; which hole I shut at pleasure with a board that drew backward and forward through a groove.
When we came to our journey’s end, the king thought proper to pass a few days at a palace he has near Flanflasnic, a city within eighteen English miles of the seaside.
Glumdalclitch and I were much fatigued: I had gotten a small cold, but the poor girl was so ill as to be confined to her chamber.
I pretended to be worse than I really was, and desired leave to take the fresh air of the sea, with a page, whom I was very fond of, and who had sometimes been trusted with me.
I shall never forget with what unwillingness Glumdalclitch consented, nor the strict charge she gave the page to be careful of me, bursting at the same time into a flood of tears, as if she had some forboding of what was to happen.
I ordered him to set me down, and lifting up one of my sashes, cast many a wistful melancholy look towards the sea.
I soon fell asleep, and all I can conjecture is, while I slept, the page, thinking no danger could happen, went among the rocks to look for birds’ eggs, having before observed him from my window searching about, and picking up one or two in the clefts.
Be that as it will, I found myself suddenly awaked with a violent pull upon the ring, which was fastened at the top of my box for the conveniency of carriage.
I felt my box raised very high in the air, and then borne forward with prodigious speed.
The first jolt had like to have shaken me out of my hammock, but afterward the motion was easy enough.
In a little time, I observed the noise and flutter of wings to increase very fast, and my box was tossed up and down, like a sign in a windy day.
I heard several bangs or buffets, as I thought given to the eagle (for such I am certain it must have been that held the ring of my box in his beak), and then, all on a sudden, felt myself falling perpendicularly down, for above a minute, but with such incredible swiftness, that I almost lost my breath.
My fall was stopped by a terrible squash, that sounded louder to my ears than the cataract of Niagara; after which, I was quite in the dark for another minute, and then my box began to rise so high, that I could see light from the tops of the windows.
I now perceived I was fallen into the sea.
My box, by the weight of my body, the goods that were in, and the broad plates of iron fixed for strength at the four corners of the top and bottom, floated about five feet deep in water.
I did then, and do now suppose, that the eagle which flew away with my box was pursued by two or three others, and forced to let me drop, while he defended himself against the rest, who hoped to share in the prey.
The plates of iron fastened at the bottom of the box (for those were the strongest) preserved the balance while it fell, and hindered it from being broken on the surface of the water.
I got with much difficulty out of my hammock, having first ventured to draw back the slip-board on the roof already mentioned, contrived on purpose to let in air, for want of which I found myself almost stifled.
How often did I then wish myself with my dear Glumdalclitch, from whom one single hour had so far divided me!
And I may say with truth, that in the midst of my own misfortunes I could not forbear lamenting my poor nurse, the grief she would suffer for my loss, the displeasure of the queen, and the ruin of her fortune.
Perhaps many travellers have not been under greater difficulties and distress than I was at this juncture, expecting every moment to see my box dashed to pieces, or at least overset by the first violent blast, or rising wave.
A breach in one single pane of glass would have been immediate death: nor could any thing have preserved the windows, but the strong lattice wires placed on the outside, against accidents in travelling.
I saw the water ooze in at several crannies, although the leaks were not considerable, and I endeavoured to stop them as well as I could.
I was not able to lift up the roof of my closet, which otherwise I certainly should have done, and sat on the top of it; where I might at least preserve myself some hours longer, than by being shut up (as I may call it) in the hold.
Or if I escaped these dangers for a day or two, what could I expect but a miserable death of cold and hunger?
I was four hours under these circumstances, expecting, and indeed wishing, every moment to be my last.
I have already told the reader that there were two strong staples fixed upon that side of my box which had no window, and into which the servant, who used to carry me on horseback, would put a leathern belt, and buckle it about his waist.
Being in this disconsolate state, I heard, or at least thought I heard, some kind of grating noise on that side of my box where the staples were fixed; and soon after I began to fancy that the box was pulled or towed along the sea; for I now and then felt a sort of tugging, which made the waves rise near the tops of my windows, leaving me almost in the dark.
This gave me some faint hopes of relief, although I was not able to imagine how it could be brought about.
I ventured to unscrew one of my chairs, which were always fastened to the floor; and having made a hard shift to screw it down again, directly under the slipping-board that I had lately opened, I mounted on the chair, and putting my mouth as near as I could to the hole, I called for help in a loud voice, and in all the languages I understood.
I then fastened my handkerchief to a stick I usually carried, and thrusting it up the hole, waved it several times in the air, that if any boat or ship were near, the seamen might conjecture some unhappy mortal to be shut up in the box.
I found no effect from all I could do, but plainly perceived my closet to be moved along; and in the space of an hour, or better, that side of the box where the staples were, and had no windows, struck against something that was hard.
I apprehended it to be a rock, and found myself tossed more than ever.
Whereupon I again thrust up my stick and handkerchief, calling for help till I was almost hoarse.
In return to which, I heard a great shout repeated three times, giving me such transports of joy as are not to be conceived but by those who feel them.
The carpenter came, and in a few minutes sawed a passage about four feet square, then let down a small ladder, upon which I mounted, and thence was taken into the ship in a very weak condition.
The sailors were all in amazement, and asked me a thousand questions, which I had no inclination to answer.
I was equally confounded at the sight of so many pigmies, for such I took them to be, after having so long accustomed my eyes to the monstrous objects I had left.
Thomas Wilcocks, an honest worthy Shropshire man, observing I was ready to faint, took me into his cabin, gave me a cordial to comfort me, and made me turn in upon his own bed, advising me to take a little rest, of which I had great need.
Before I went to sleep, I gave him to understand that I had some valuable furniture in my box, too good to be lost: a fine hammock, a handsome field-bed, two chairs, a table, and a cabinet; that my closet was hung on all sides, or rather quilted, with silk and cotton; that if he would let one of the crew bring my closet into his cabin, I would open it there before him, and show him my goods.
Then they knocked off some of the boards for the use of the ship, and when they had got all they had a mind for, let the hull drop into the sea, which by reason of many breaches made in the bottom and sides, sunk to rights.
And, indeed, I was glad not to have been a spectator of the havoc they made, because I am confident it would have sensibly touched me, by bringing former passages into my mind, which I would rather have forgot.
I slept some hours, but perpetually disturbed with dreams of the place I had left, and the dangers I had escaped.
However, upon waking, I found myself much recovered.
It was now about eight o’clock at night, and the captain ordered supper immediately, thinking I had already fasted too long.
He entertained me with great kindness, observing me not to look wildly, or talk inconsistently: and, when we were left alone, desired I would give him a relation of my travels, and by what accident I came to be set adrift, in that monstrous wooden chest.
He said “that about twelve o’clock at noon, as he was looking through his glass, he spied it at a distance, and thought it was a sail, which he had a mind to make, being not much out of his course, in hopes of buying some biscuit, his own beginning to fall short.
That upon coming nearer, and finding his error, he sent out his long-boat to discover what it was; that his men came back in a fright, swearing they had seen a swimming house.
That he laughed at their folly, and went himself in the boat, ordering his men to take a strong cable along with them.
That the weather being calm, he rowed round me several times, observed my windows and wire lattices that defended them.
That he discovered two staples upon one side, which was all of boards, without any passage for light.
He then commanded his men to row up to that side, and fastening a cable to one of the staples, ordered them to tow my chest, as they called it, toward the ship.
And, as truth always forces its way into rational minds, so this honest worthy gentleman, who had some tincture of learning, and very good sense, was immediately convinced of my candour and veracity.
But further to confirm all I had said, I entreated him to give order that my cabinet should be brought, of which I had the key in my pocket; for he had already informed me how the seamen disposed of my closet.
I opened it in his own presence, and showed him the small collection of rarities I made in the country from which I had been so strangely delivered.
There was the comb I had contrived out of the stumps of the king’s beard, and another of the same materials, but fixed into a paring of her majesty’s thumb-nail, which served for the back.
There was a collection of needles and pins, from a foot to half a yard long; four wasp stings, like joiner’s tacks; some combings of the queen’s hair; a gold ring, which one day she made me a present of, in a most obliging manner, taking it from her little finger, and throwing it over my head like a collar.
I desired the captain would please to accept this ring in return for his civilities; which he absolutely refused.
I showed him a corn that I had cut off with my own hand, from a maid of honour’s toe; it was about the bigness of Kentish pippin, and grown so hard, that when I returned to England, I got it hollowed into a cup, and set in silver.
Lastly, I desired him to see the breeches I had then on, which were made of a mouse’s skin.
I could force nothing on him but a footman’s tooth, which I observed him to examine with great curiosity, and found he had a fancy for it.
He received it with abundance of thanks, more than such a trifle could deserve.
It was drawn by an unskilful surgeon, in a mistake, from one of Glumdalclitch’s men, who was afflicted with the tooth-ache, but it was as sound as any in his head.
It was about a foot long, and four inches in diameter.
For, although the queen had ordered a little equipage of all things necessary for me, while I was in her service, yet my ideas were wholly taken up with what I saw on every side of me, and I winked at my own littleness, as people do at their own faults.
The captain having been at Tonquin, was, in his return to England, driven north-eastward to the latitude of 44 degrees, and longitude of 143.
But meeting a trade-wind two days after I came on board him, we sailed southward a long time, and coasting New Holland, kept our course west-south-west, and then south-south-west, till we doubled the Cape of Good Hope.
Our voyage was very prosperous, but I shall not trouble the reader with a journal of it.
The captain called in at one or two ports, and sent in his long-boat for provisions and fresh water; but I never went out of the ship till we came into the Downs, which was on the third day of June, 1706, about nine months after my escape.
I offered to leave my goods in security for payment of my freight: but the captain protested he would not receive one farthing.
I hired a horse and guide for five shillings, which I borrowed of the captain.
As I was on the road, observing the littleness of the houses, the trees, the cattle, and the people, I began to think myself in Lilliput.
I was afraid of trampling on every traveller I met, and often called aloud to have them stand out of the way, so that I had like to have gotten one or two broken heads for my impertinence.
When I came to my own house, for which I was forced to inquire, one of the servants opening the door, I bent down to go in, (like a goose under a gate,) for fear of striking my head.
My wife ran out to embrace me, but I stooped lower than her knees, thinking she could otherwise never be able to reach my mouth.
My daughter kneeled to ask my blessing, but I could not see her till she arose, having been so long used to stand with my head and eyes erect to above sixty feet; and then I went to take her up with one hand by the waist.
I looked down upon the servants, and one or two friends who were in the house, as if they had been pigmies and I a giant.
I told my wife, “she had been too thrifty, for I found she had starved herself and her daughter to nothing.” In short, I behaved myself so unaccountably, that they were all of the captain’s opinion when he first saw me, and concluded I had lost my wits.
This I mention as an instance of the great power of habit and prejudice.
In a little time, I and my family and friends came to a right understanding: but my wife protested “I should never go to sea any more;” although my evil destiny so ordered, that she had not power to hinder me, as the reader may know hereafter.
In the mean time, I here conclude the second part of my unfortunate voyages.
The malice of a Dutchman.
He is received into Laputa.
I had not been at home above ten days, when Captain William Robinson, a Cornish man, commander of the Hopewell, a stout ship of three hundred tons, came to my house.
I had formerly been surgeon of another ship where he was master, and a fourth part owner, in a voyage to the Levant.
He had always treated me more like a brother, than an inferior officer; and, hearing of my arrival, made me a visit, as I apprehended only out of friendship, for nothing passed more than what is usual after long absences.
The only difficulty that remained, was to persuade my wife, whose consent however I at last obtained, by the prospect of advantage she proposed to her children.
From thence we went to Tonquin, where the captain resolved to continue some time, because many of the goods he intended to buy were not ready, nor could he expect to be dispatched in several months.
Therefore, in hopes to defray some of the charges he must be at, he bought a sloop, loaded it with several sorts of goods, wherewith the Tonquinese usually trade to the neighbouring islands, and putting fourteen men on board, whereof three were of the country, he appointed me master of the sloop, and gave me power to traffic, while he transacted his affairs at Tonquin.
Upon the tenth day we were chased by two pirates, who soon overtook us; for my sloop was so deep laden, that she sailed very slow, neither were we in a condition to defend ourselves.
We were boarded about the same time by both the pirates, who entered furiously at the head of their men; but finding us all prostrate upon our faces (for so I gave order), they pinioned us with strong ropes, and setting guard upon us, went to search the sloop.
I observed among them a Dutchman, who seemed to be of some authority, though he was not commander of either ship.
He knew us by our countenances to be Englishmen, and jabbering to us in his own language, swore we should be tied back to back and thrown into the sea.
I spoke Dutch tolerably well; I told him who we were, and begged him, in consideration of our being Christians and Protestants, of neighbouring countries in strict alliance, that he would move the captains to take some pity on us.
This inflamed his rage; he repeated his threatenings, and turning to his companions, spoke with great vehemence in the Japanese language, as I suppose, often using the word _Christianos_.
The largest of the two pirate ships was commanded by a Japanese captain, who spoke a little Dutch, but very imperfectly.
My men were sent by an equal division into both the pirate ships, and my sloop new manned.
As to myself, it was determined that I should be set adrift in a small canoe, with paddles and a sail, and four days’ provisions; which last, the Japanese captain was so kind to double out of his own stores, and would permit no man to search me.
I got down into the canoe, while the Dutchman, standing upon the deck, loaded me with all the curses and injurious terms his language could afford.
About an hour before we saw the pirates I had taken an observation, and found we were in the latitude of 46 N. and longitude of 183.
When I was at some distance from the pirates, I discovered, by my pocket-glass, several islands to the south-east.
It was all rocky: however I got many birds’ eggs; and, striking fire, I kindled some heath and dry sea-weed, by which I roasted my eggs.
I ate no other supper, being resolved to spare my provisions as much as I could.
I passed the night under the shelter of a rock, strewing some heath under me, and slept pretty well.
The next day I sailed to another island, and thence to a third and fourth, sometimes using my sail, and sometimes my paddles.
But, not to trouble the reader with a particular account of my distresses, let it suffice, that on the fifth day I arrived at the last island in my sight, which lay south-south-east to the former.
This island was at a greater distance than I expected, and I did not reach it in less than five hours.
I encompassed it almost round, before I could find a convenient place to land in; which was a small creek, about three times the wideness of my canoe.
I found the island to be all rocky, only a little intermingled with tufts of grass, and sweet-smelling herbs.
I took out my small provisions and after having refreshed myself, I secured the remainder in a cave, whereof there were great numbers; I gathered plenty of eggs upon the rocks, and got a quantity of dry sea-weed, and parched grass, which I designed to kindle the next day, and roast my eggs as well as I could, for I had about me my flint, steel, match, and burning-glass.
I lay all night in the cave where I had lodged my provisions.
My bed was the same dry grass and sea-weed which I intended for fuel.
I slept very little, for the disquiets of my mind prevailed over my weariness, and kept me awake.
I considered how impossible it was to preserve my life in so desolate a place, and how miserable my end must be: yet found myself so listless and desponding, that I had not the heart to rise; and before I could get spirits enough to creep out of my cave, the day was far advanced.
I walked awhile among the rocks: the sky was perfectly clear, and the sun so hot, that I was forced to turn my face from it: when all on a sudden it became obscure, as I thought, in a manner very different from what happens by the interposition of a cloud.
I turned back, and perceived a vast opaque body between me and the sun moving forwards towards the island: it seemed to be about two miles high, and hid the sun six or seven minutes; but I did not observe the air to be much colder, or the sky more darkened, than if I had stood under the shade of a mountain.
As it approached nearer over the place where I was, it appeared to be a firm substance, the bottom flat, smooth, and shining very bright, from the reflection of the sea below.
I stood upon a height about two hundred yards from the shore, and saw this vast body descending almost to a parallel with me, at less than an English mile distance.
I took out my pocket perspective, and could plainly discover numbers of people moving up and down the sides of it, which appeared to be sloping; but what those people were doing I was not able to distinguish.
The natural love of life gave me some inward motion of joy, and I was ready to entertain a hope that this adventure might, some way or other, help to deliver me from the desolate place and condition I was in.
But at the same time the reader can hardly conceive my astonishment, to behold an island in the air, inhabited by men, who were able (as it should seem) to raise or sink, or put it into progressive motion, as they pleased.
But not being at that time in a disposition to philosophise upon this phenomenon, I rather chose to observe what course the island would take, because it seemed for a while to stand still.
Yet soon after, it advanced nearer, and I could see the sides of it encompassed with several gradations of galleries, and stairs, at certain intervals, to descend from one to the other.
I waved my cap (for my hat was long since worn out) and my handkerchief toward the island; and upon its nearer approach, I called and shouted with the utmost strength of my voice; and then looking circumspectly, I beheld a crowd gather to that side which was most in my view.
I found by their pointing towards me and to each other, that they plainly discovered me, although they made no return to my shouting.
But I could see four or five men running in great haste, up the stairs, to the top of the island, who then disappeared.
I happened rightly to conjecture, that these were sent for orders to some person in authority upon this occasion.
The number of people increased, and, in less than half an hour, the island was moved and raised in such a manner, that the lowest gallery appeared in a parallel of less than a hundred yards distance from the height where I stood.
I then put myself in the most supplicating posture, and spoke in the humblest accent, but received no answer.
Those who stood nearest over against me, seemed to be persons of distinction, as I supposed by their habit.
They conferred earnestly with each other, looking often upon me.
At length one of them called out in a clear, polite, smooth dialect, not unlike in sound to the Italian: and therefore I returned an answer in that language, hoping at least that the cadence might be more agreeable to his ears.
Although neither of us understood the other, yet my meaning was easily known, for the people saw the distress I was in.
They made signs for me to come down from the rock, and go towards the shore, which I accordingly did; and the flying island being raised to a convenient height, the verge directly over me, a chain was let down from the lowest gallery, with a seat fastened to the bottom, to which I fixed myself, and was drawn up by pulleys.
The humours and dispositions of the Laputians described.
An account of their learning.
The author’s reception there.
The inhabitants subject to fear and disquietudes.
At my alighting, I was surrounded with a crowd of people, but those who stood nearest seemed to be of better quality.
They beheld me with all the marks and circumstances of wonder; neither indeed was I much in their debt, having never till then seen a race of mortals so singular in their shapes, habits, and countenances.
Their heads were all reclined, either to the right, or the left; one of their eyes turned inward, and the other directly up to the zenith.
Their outward garments were adorned with the figures of suns, moons, and stars; interwoven with those of fiddles, flutes, harps, trumpets, guitars, harpsichords, and many other instruments of music, unknown to us in Europe.
I observed, here and there, many in the habit of servants, with a blown bladder, fastened like a flail to the end of a stick, which they carried in their hands.
In each bladder was a small quantity of dried peas, or little pebbles, as I was afterwards informed.
With these bladders, they now and then flapped the mouths and ears of those who stood near them, of which practice I could not then conceive the meaning.
And the business of this officer is, when two, three, or more persons are in company, gently to strike with his bladder the mouth of him who is to speak, and the right ear of him or them to whom the speaker addresses himself.
This flapper is likewise employed diligently to attend his master in his walks, and upon occasion to give him a soft flap on his eyes; because he is always so wrapped up in cogitation, that he is in manifest danger of falling down every precipice, and bouncing his head against every post; and in the streets, of justling others, or being justled himself into the kennel.
It was necessary to give the reader this information, without which he would be at the same loss with me to understand the proceedings of these people, as they conducted me up the stairs to the top of the island, and from thence to the royal palace.
While we were ascending, they forgot several times what they were about, and left me to myself, till their memories were again roused by their flappers; for they appeared altogether unmoved by the sight of my foreign habit and countenance, and by the shouts of the vulgar, whose thoughts and minds were more disengaged.
At last we entered the palace, and proceeded into the chamber of presence, where I saw the king seated on his throne, attended on each side by persons of prime quality.
Before the throne, was a large table filled with globes and spheres, and mathematical instruments of all kinds.
His majesty took not the least notice of us, although our entrance was not without sufficient noise, by the concourse of all persons belonging to the court.
But he was then deep in a problem; and we attended at least an hour, before he could solve it.
There stood by him, on each side, a young page with flaps in their hands, and when they saw he was at leisure, one of them gently struck his mouth, and the other his right ear; at which he startled like one awaked on the sudden, and looking towards me and the company I was in, recollected the occasion of our coming, whereof he had been informed before.
He spoke some words, whereupon immediately a young man with a flap came up to my side, and flapped me gently on the right ear; but I made signs, as well as I could, that I had no occasion for such an instrument; which, as I afterwards found, gave his majesty, and the whole court, a very mean opinion of my understanding.
The king, as far as I could conjecture, asked me several questions, and I addressed myself to him in all the languages I had.
When it was found I could neither understand nor be understood, I was conducted by his order to an apartment in his palace (this prince being distinguished above all his predecessors for his hospitality to strangers), where two servants were appointed to attend me.
My dinner was brought, and four persons of quality, whom I remembered to have seen very near the king’s person, did me the honour to dine with me.
In the first course, there was a shoulder of mutton cut into an equilateral triangle, a piece of beef into a rhomboides, and a pudding into a cycloid.
The second course was two ducks trussed up in the form of fiddles; sausages and puddings resembling flutes and hautboys, and a breast of veal in the shape of a harp.
The servants cut our bread into cones, cylinders, parallelograms, and several other mathematical figures.
While we were at dinner, I made bold to ask the names of several things in their language, and those noble persons, by the assistance of their flappers, delighted to give me answers, hoping to raise my admiration of their great abilities if I could be brought to converse with them.
I was soon able to call for bread and drink, or whatever else I wanted.
After dinner my company withdrew, and a person was sent to me by the king’s order, attended by a flapper.
He brought with him pen, ink, and paper, and three or four books, giving me to understand by signs, that he was sent to teach me the language.
We sat together four hours, in which time I wrote down a great number of words in columns, with the translations over against them; I likewise made a shift to learn several short sentences; for my tutor would order one of my servants to fetch something, to turn about, to make a bow, to sit, or to stand, or walk, and the like.
Then I took down the sentence in writing.
He showed me also, in one of his books, the figures of the sun, moon, and stars, the zodiac, the tropics, and polar circles, together with the denominations of many planes and solids.
He gave me the names and descriptions of all the musical instruments, and the general terms of art in playing on each of them.
After he had left me, I placed all my words, with their interpretations, in alphabetical order.
And thus, in a few days, by the help of a very faithful memory, I got some insight into their language.
The word, which I interpret the flying or floating island, is in the original _Laputa_, whereof I could never learn the true etymology. _Lap_, in the old obsolete language, signifies high; and _untuh_, a governor; from which they say, by corruption, was derived _Laputa_, from _Lapuntuh_.
But I do not approve of this derivation, which seems to be a little strained.
I ventured to offer to the learned among them a conjecture of my own, that Laputa was _quasi lap outed_; _lap_, signifying properly, the dancing of the sunbeams in the sea, and _outed_, a wing; which, however, I shall not obtrude, but submit to the judicious reader.
Those to whom the king had entrusted me, observing how ill I was clad, ordered a tailor to come next morning, and take measure for a suit of clothes.
This operator did his office after a different manner from those of his trade in Europe.
He first took my altitude by a quadrant, and then, with a rule and compasses, described the dimensions and outlines of my whole body, all which he entered upon paper; and in six days brought my clothes very ill made, and quite out of shape, by happening to mistake a figure in the calculation.
But my comfort was, that I observed such accidents very frequent, and little regarded.
During my confinement for want of clothes, and by an indisposition that held me some days longer, I much enlarged my dictionary; and when I went next to court, was able to understand many things the king spoke, and to return him some kind of answers.
His majesty had given orders, that the island should move north-east and by east, to the vertical point over Lagado, the metropolis of the whole kingdom below, upon the firm earth.
I was not in the least sensible of the progressive motion made in the air by the island.
On the second morning, about eleven o’clock, the king himself in person, attended by his nobility, courtiers, and officers, having prepared all their musical instruments, played on them for three hours without intermission, so that I was quite stunned with the noise; neither could I possibly guess the meaning, till my tutor informed me.
And to this purpose, several packthreads were let down, with small weights at the bottom.
On these packthreads the people strung their petitions, which mounted up directly, like the scraps of paper fastened by schoolboys at the end of the string that holds their kite.
Sometimes we received wine and victuals from below, which were drawn up by pulleys.
The knowledge I had in mathematics gave me great assistance in acquiring their phraseology, which depended much upon that science, and music; and in the latter I was not unskilled.
Their ideas are perpetually conversant in lines and figures.
If they would, for example, praise the beauty of a woman, or any other animal, they describe it by rhombs, circles, parallelograms, ellipses, and other geometrical terms, or by words of art drawn from music, needless here to repeat.
I observed in the king’s kitchen all sorts of mathematical and musical instruments, after the figures of which they cut up the joints that were served to his majesty’s table.
Their houses are very ill built, the walls bevel, without one right angle in any apartment; and this defect arises from the contempt they bear to practical geometry, which they despise as vulgar and mechanic; those instructions they give being too refined for the intellects of their workmen, which occasions perpetual mistakes.
And although they are dexterous enough upon a piece of paper, in the management of the rule, the pencil, and the divider, yet in the common actions and behaviour of life, I have not seen a more clumsy, awkward, and unhandy people, nor so slow and perplexed in their conceptions upon all other subjects, except those of mathematics and music.
They are very bad reasoners, and vehemently given to opposition, unless when they happen to be of the right opinion, which is seldom their case.
Imagination, fancy, and invention, they are wholly strangers to, nor have any words in their language, by which those ideas can be expressed; the whole compass of their thoughts and mind being shut up within the two forementioned sciences.
Most of them, and especially those who deal in the astronomical part, have great faith in judicial astrology, although they are ashamed to own it publicly.
But what I chiefly admired, and thought altogether unaccountable, was the strong disposition I observed in them towards news and politics, perpetually inquiring into public affairs, giving their judgments in matters of state, and passionately disputing every inch of a party opinion.
These people are under continual disquietudes, never enjoying a minute’s peace of mind; and their disturbances proceed from causes which very little affect the rest of mortals.
They are so perpetually alarmed with the apprehensions of these, and the like impending dangers, that they can neither sleep quietly in their beds, nor have any relish for the common pleasures and amusements of life.
When they meet an acquaintance in the morning, the first question is about the sun’s health, how he looked at his setting and rising, and what hopes they have to avoid the stroke of the approaching comet.
This conversation they are apt to run into with the same temper that boys discover in delighting to hear terrible stories of spirits and hobgoblins, which they greedily listen to, and dare not go to bed for fear.
The women of the island have abundance of vivacity: they contemn their husbands, and are exceedingly fond of strangers, whereof there is always a considerable number from the continent below, attending at court, either upon affairs of the several towns and corporations, or their own particular occasions, but are much despised, because they want the same endowments.
Among these the ladies choose their gallants: but the vexation is, that they act with too much ease and security; for the husband is always so rapt in speculation, that the mistress and lover may proceed to the greatest familiarities before his face, if he be but provided with paper and implements, and without his flapper at his side.
And although her husband received her with all possible kindness, and without the least reproach, she soon after contrived to steal down again, with all her jewels, to the same gallant, and has not been heard of since.
This may perhaps pass with the reader rather for an European or English story, than for one of a country so remote.
But he may please to consider, that the caprices of womankind are not limited by any climate or nation, and that they are much more uniform, than can be easily imagined.
In about a month’s time, I had made a tolerable proficiency in their language, and was able to answer most of the king’s questions, when I had the honour to attend him.
His majesty discovered not the least curiosity to inquire into the laws, government, history, religion, or manners of the countries where I had been; but confined his questions to the state of mathematics, and received the account I gave him with great contempt and indifference, though often roused by his flapper on each side.
A phenomenon solved by modern philosophy and astronomy.
The Laputians’ great improvements in the latter.
The king’s method of suppressing insurrections.
I desired leave of this prince to see the curiosities of the island, which he was graciously pleased to grant, and ordered my tutor to attend me.
I chiefly wanted to know, to what cause, in art or in nature, it owed its several motions, whereof I will now give a philosophical account to the reader.
The flying or floating island is exactly circular, its diameter 7837 yards, or about four miles and a half, and consequently contains ten thousand acres.
The bottom, or under surface, which appears to those who view it below, is one even regular plate of adamant, shooting up to the height of about two hundred yards.
Above it lie the several minerals in their usual order, and over all is a coat of rich mould, ten or twelve feet deep.
The declivity of the upper surface, from the circumference to the centre, is the natural cause why all the dews and rains, which fall upon the island, are conveyed in small rivulets toward the middle, where they are emptied into four large basins, each of about half a mile in circuit, and two hundred yards distant from the centre.
From these basins the water is continually exhaled by the sun in the daytime, which effectually prevents their overflowing.
Besides, as it is in the power of the monarch to raise the island above the region of clouds and vapours, he can prevent the falling of dews and rain whenever he pleases.
For the highest clouds cannot rise above two miles, as naturalists agree, at least they were never known to do so in that country.
At the centre of the island there is a chasm about fifty yards in diameter, whence the astronomers descend into a large dome, which is therefore called _flandona gagnole_, or the astronomer’s cave, situated at the depth of a hundred yards beneath the upper surface of the adamant.
In this cave are twenty lamps continually burning, which, from the reflection of the adamant, cast a strong light into every part.
The place is stored with great variety of sextants, quadrants, telescopes, astrolabes, and other astronomical instruments.
But the greatest curiosity, upon which the fate of the island depends, is a loadstone of a prodigious size, in shape resembling a weaver’s shuttle.
It is in length six yards, and in the thickest part at least three yards over.
This magnet is sustained by a very strong axle of adamant passing through its middle, upon which it plays, and is poised so exactly that the weakest hand can turn it.
It is hooped round with a hollow cylinder of adamant, four feet deep, as many thick, and twelve yards in diameter, placed horizontally, and supported by eight adamantine feet, each six yards high.
In the middle of the concave side, there is a groove twelve inches deep, in which the extremities of the axle are lodged, and turned round as there is occasion.
The stone cannot be removed from its place by any force, because the hoop and its feet are one continued piece with that body of adamant which constitutes the bottom of the island.
By means of this loadstone, the island is made to rise and fall, and move from one place to another.
For, with respect to that part of the earth over which the monarch presides, the stone is endued at one of its sides with an attractive power, and at the other with a repulsive.
Upon placing the magnet erect, with its attracting end towards the earth, the island descends; but when the repelling extremity points downwards, the island mounts directly upwards.
When the position of the stone is oblique, the motion of the island is so too.
For in this magnet, the forces always act in lines parallel to its direction.
By this oblique motion, the island is conveyed to different parts of the monarch’s dominions.
To explain the manner of its progress, let _A_ _B_ represent a line drawn across the dominions of Balnibarbi, let the line _c_ _d_ represent the loadstone, of which let _d_ be the repelling end, and _c_ the attracting end, the island being over _C_; let the stone be placed in the position _c_ _d_, with its repelling end downwards; then the island will be driven upwards obliquely towards _D_.
And thus, by changing the situation of the stone, as often as there is occasion, the island is made to rise and fall by turns in an oblique direction, and by those alternate risings and fallings (the obliquity being not considerable) is conveyed from one part of the dominions to the other.
But it must be observed, that this island cannot move beyond the extent of the dominions below, nor can it rise above the height of four miles.
When the stone is put parallel to the plane of the horizon, the island stands still; for in that case the extremities of it, being at equal distance from the earth, act with equal force, the one in drawing downwards, the other in pushing upwards, and consequently no motion can ensue.
This loadstone is under the care of certain astronomers, who, from time to time, give it such positions as the monarch directs.
They spend the greatest part of their lives in observing the celestial bodies, which they do by the assistance of glasses, far excelling ours in goodness.
For, although their largest telescopes do not exceed three feet, they magnify much more than those of a hundred with us, and show the stars with greater clearness.
This advantage has enabled them to extend their discoveries much further than our astronomers in Europe; for they have made a catalogue of ten thousand fixed stars, whereas the largest of ours do not contain above one third part of that number.
They have observed ninety-three different comets, and settled their periods with great exactness.
If this be true (and they affirm it with great confidence) it is much to be wished, that their observations were made public, whereby the theory of comets, which at present is very lame and defective, might be brought to the same perfection with other arts of astronomy.
The king would be the most absolute prince in the universe, if he could but prevail on a ministry to join with him; but these having their estates below on the continent, and considering that the office of a favourite has a very uncertain tenure, would never consent to the enslaving of their country.
If any town should engage in rebellion or mutiny, fall into violent factions, or refuse to pay the usual tribute, the king has two methods of reducing them to obedience.
The first and the mildest course is, by keeping the island hovering over such a town, and the lands about it, whereby he can deprive them of the benefit of the sun and the rain, and consequently afflict the inhabitants with dearth and diseases.
And if the crime deserve it, they are at the same time pelted from above with great stones, against which they have no defence but by creeping into cellars or caves, while the roofs of their houses are beaten to pieces.
But if they still continue obstinate, or offer to raise insurrections, he proceeds to the last remedy, by letting the island drop directly upon their heads, which makes a universal destruction both of houses and men.
However, this is an extremity to which the prince is seldom driven, neither indeed is he willing to put it in execution; nor dare his ministers advise him to an action, which, as it would render them odious to the people, so it would be a great damage to their own estates, which all lie below; for the island is the king’s demesne.
But there is still indeed a more weighty reason, why the kings of this country have been always averse from executing so terrible an action, unless upon the utmost necessity.
Of all this the people are well apprised, and understand how far to carry their obstinacy, where their liberty or property is concerned.
And the king, when he is highest provoked, and most determined to press a city to rubbish, orders the island to descend with great gentleness, out of a pretence of tenderness to his people, but, indeed, for fear of breaking the adamantine bottom; in which case, it is the opinion of all their philosophers, that the loadstone could no longer hold it up, and the whole mass would fall to the ground.
About three years before my arrival among them, while the king was in his progress over his dominions, there happened an extraordinary accident which had like to have put a period to the fate of that monarchy, at least as it is now instituted.
Lindalino, the second city in the kingdom, was the first his majesty visited in his progress.
Three days after his departure the inhabitants, who had often complained of great oppressions, shut the town gates, seized on the governor, and with incredible speed and labour erected four large towers, one at every corner of the city (which is an exact square), equal in height to a strong pointed rock that stands directly in the centre of the city.
Upon the top of each tower, as well as upon the rock, they fixed a great loadstone, and in case their design should fail, they had provided a vast quantity of the most combustible fuel, hoping to burst therewith the adamantine bottom of the island, if the loadstone project should miscarry.
It was eight months before the king had perfect notice that the Lindalinians were in rebellion.
He then commanded that the island should be wafted over the city.
The people were unanimous, and had laid in store of provisions, and a great river runs through the middle of the town.
He ordered many packthreads to be let down, yet not a person offered to send up a petition, but instead thereof very bold demands, the redress of all their grievances, great immunities, the choice of their own governor, and other the like exorbitances.
Upon which his majesty commanded all the inhabitants of the island to cast great stones from the lower gallery into the town; but the citizens had provided against this mischief by conveying their persons and effects into the four towers, and other strong buildings, and vaults underground.
The king being now determined to reduce this proud people, ordered that the island should descend gently within forty yards of the top of the towers and rock.
This was accordingly done; but the officers employed in that work found the descent much speedier than usual, and by turning the loadstone could not without great difficulty keep it in a firm position, but found the island inclining to fall.
They sent the king immediate intelligence of this astonishing event, and begged his majesty’s permission to raise the island higher; the king consented, a general council was called, and the officers of the loadstone ordered to attend.
The adamant was not descended four yards, before the officer felt it drawn so strongly downwards that he could hardly pull it back, he then threw down several small pieces of adamant, and observed that they were all violently attracted by the top of the tower.
The same experiment was made on the other three towers, and on the rock with the same effect.
This incident broke entirely the king’s measures, and (to dwell no longer on other circumstances) he was forced to give the town their own conditions.
I was assured by a great minister that if the island had descended so near the town as not to be able to raise itself, the citizens were determined to fix it for ever, to kill the king and all his servants, and entirely change the government.
By a fundamental law of this realm, neither the king, nor either of his two eldest sons, are permitted to leave the island; nor the queen, till she is past child-bearing.
The author leaves Laputa; is conveyed to Balnibarbi; arrives at the metropolis.
A description of the metropolis, and the country adjoining.
The author hospitably received by a great lord.
His conversation with that lord.
Although I cannot say that I was ill treated in this island, yet I must confess I thought myself too much neglected, not without some degree of contempt; for neither prince nor people appeared to be curious in any part of knowledge, except mathematics and music, wherein I was far their inferior, and upon that account very little regarded.
On the other side, after having seen all the curiosities of the island, I was very desirous to leave it, being heartily weary of those people.
They were indeed excellent in two sciences for which I have great esteem, and wherein I am not unversed; but, at the same time, so abstracted and involved in speculation, that I never met with such disagreeable companions.
I conversed only with women, tradesmen, flappers, and court-pages, during two months of my abode there; by which, at last, I rendered myself extremely contemptible; yet these were the only people from whom I could ever receive a reasonable answer.
I had obtained, by hard study, a good degree of knowledge in their language; I was weary of being confined to an island where I received so little countenance, and resolved to leave it with the first opportunity.
He was universally reckoned the most ignorant and stupid person among them.
He had performed many eminent services for the crown, had great natural and acquired parts, adorned with integrity and honour; but so ill an ear for music, that his detractors reported, “he had been often known to beat time in the wrong place;” neither could his tutors, without extreme difficulty, teach him to demonstrate the most easy proposition in the mathematics.
He was pleased to show me many marks of favour, often did me the honour of a visit, desired to be informed in the affairs of Europe, the laws and customs, the manners and learning of the several countries where I had travelled.
He listened to me with great attention, and made very wise observations on all I spoke.
He had two flappers attending him for state, but never made use of them, except at court and in visits of ceremony, and would always command them to withdraw, when we were alone together.
I entreated this illustrious person, to intercede in my behalf with his majesty, for leave to depart; which he accordingly did, as he was pleased to tell me, with regret: for indeed he had made me several offers very advantageous, which, however, I refused, with expressions of the highest acknowledgment.
On the 16th day of February I took leave of his majesty and the court.
The king made me a present to the value of about two hundred pounds English, and my protector, his kinsman, as much more, together with a letter of recommendation to a friend of his in Lagado, the metropolis.
The island being then hovering over a mountain about two miles from it, I was let down from the lowest gallery, in the same manner as I had been taken up.
The continent, as far as it is subject to the monarch of the flying island, passes under the general name of _Balnibarbi_; and the metropolis, as I said before, is called _Lagado_.
I felt some little satisfaction in finding myself on firm ground.
I walked to the city without any concern, being clad like one of the natives, and sufficiently instructed to converse with them.
I soon found out the person’s house to whom I was recommended, presented my letter from his friend the grandee in the island, and was received with much kindness.
This great lord, whose name was Munodi, ordered me an apartment in his own house, where I continued during my stay, and was entertained in a most hospitable manner.
The next morning after my arrival, he took me in his chariot to see the town, which is about half the bigness of London; but the houses very strangely built, and most of them out of repair.
The people in the streets walked fast, looked wild, their eyes fixed, and were generally in rags.
We passed through one of the town gates, and went about three miles into the country, where I saw many labourers working with several sorts of tools in the ground, but was not able to conjecture what they were about; neither did I observe any expectation either of corn or grass, although the soil appeared to be excellent.
This lord Munodi was a person of the first rank, and had been some years governor of Lagado; but, by a cabal of ministers, was discharged for insufficiency.
However, the king treated him with tenderness, as a well-meaning man, but of a low contemptible understanding.
When I gave that free censure of the country and its inhabitants, he made no further answer than by telling me, “that I had not been long enough among them to form a judgment; and that the different nations of the world had different customs;” with other common topics to the same purpose.
But, when we returned to his palace, he asked me “how I liked the building, what absurdities I observed, and what quarrel I had with the dress or looks of his domestics?” This he might safely do; because every thing about him was magnificent, regular, and polite.
During our journey he made me observe the several methods used by farmers in managing their lands, which to me were wholly unaccountable; for, except in some very few places, I could not discover one ear of corn or blade of grass.
But, in three hours travelling, the scene was wholly altered; we came into a most beautiful country; farmers’ houses, at small distances, neatly built; the fields enclosed, containing vineyards, corn-grounds, and meadows.
Neither do I remember to have seen a more delightful prospect.
The fountains, gardens, walks, avenues, and groves, were all disposed with exact judgment and taste.
To this end, they procured a royal patent for erecting an academy of projectors in Lagado; and the humour prevailed so strongly among the people, that there is not a town of any consequence in the kingdom without such an academy.
In these colleges the professors contrive new rules and methods of agriculture and building, and new instruments, and tools for all trades and manufactures; whereby, as they undertake, one man shall do the work of ten; a palace may be built in a week, of materials so durable as to last for ever without repairing.
All the fruits of the earth shall come to maturity at whatever season we think fit to choose, and increase a hundred fold more than they do at present; with innumerable other happy proposals.
The only inconvenience is, that none of these projects are yet brought to perfection; and in the mean time, the whole country lies miserably waste, the houses in ruins, and the people without food or clothes.
My lord was pleased to represent me as a great admirer of projects, and a person of much curiosity and easy belief; which, indeed, was not without truth; for I had myself been a sort of projector in my younger days.
The author permitted to see the grand academy of Lagado.
The academy largely described.
The arts wherein the professors employ themselves.
This academy is not an entire single building, but a continuation of several houses on both sides of a street, which growing waste, was purchased and applied to that use.
I was received very kindly by the warden, and went for many days to the academy.
Every room has in it one or more projectors; and I believe I could not be in fewer than five hundred rooms.
He had been eight years upon a project for extracting sunbeams out of cucumbers, which were to be put in phials hermetically sealed, and let out to warm the air in raw inclement summers.
I went into another chamber, but was ready to hasten back, being almost overcome with a horrible stink.
My conductor pressed me forward, conjuring me in a whisper “to give no offence, which would be highly resented;” and therefore I durst not so much as stop my nose.
The projector of this cell was the most ancient student of the academy; his face and beard were of a pale yellow; his hands and clothes daubed over with filth.
When I was presented to him, he gave me a close embrace, a compliment I could well have excused.
His employment, from his first coming into the academy, was an operation to reduce human excrement to its original food, by separating the several parts, removing the tincture which it receives from the gall, making the odour exhale, and scumming off the saliva.
He had a weekly allowance, from the society, of a vessel filled with human ordure, about the bigness of a Bristol barrel.
I saw another at work to calcine ice into gunpowder; who likewise showed me a treatise he had written concerning the malleability of fire, which he intended to publish.
There was a most ingenious architect, who had contrived a new method for building houses, by beginning at the roof, and working downward to the foundation; which he justified to me, by the like practice of those two prudent insects, the bee and the spider.
There was a man born blind, who had several apprentices in his own condition: their employment was to mix colours for painters, which their master taught them to distinguish by feeling and smelling.
It was indeed my misfortune to find them at that time not very perfect in their lessons, and the professor himself happened to be generally mistaken.
This artist is much encouraged and esteemed by the whole fraternity.
In another apartment I was highly pleased with a projector who had found a device of ploughing the ground with hogs, to save the charges of ploughs, cattle, and labour.
However it is not doubted, that this invention may be capable of great improvement.
I was complaining of a small fit of the colic, upon which my conductor led me into a room where a great physician resided, who was famous for curing that disease, by contrary operations from the same instrument.
This he conveyed eight inches up the anus, and drawing in the wind, he affirmed he could make the guts as lank as a dried bladder.
I saw him try both experiments upon a dog, but could not discern any effect from the former.
After the latter the animal was ready to burst, and made so violent a discharge as was very offensive to me and my companions.
The dog died on the spot, and we left the doctor endeavouring to recover him, by the same operation.
I visited many other apartments, but shall not trouble my reader with all the curiosities I observed, being studious of brevity.
Some were condensing air into a dry tangible substance, by extracting the nitre, and letting the aqueous or fluid particles percolate; others softening marble, for pillows and pin-cushions; others petrifying the hoofs of a living horse, to preserve them from foundering.
The artist himself was at that time busy upon two great designs; the first, to sow land with chaff, wherein he affirmed the true seminal virtue to be contained, as he demonstrated by several experiments, which I was not skilful enough to comprehend.
The other was, by a certain composition of gums, minerals, and vegetables, outwardly applied, to prevent the growth of wool upon two young lambs; and he hoped, in a reasonable time to propagate the breed of naked sheep, all over the kingdom.
We crossed a walk to the other part of the academy, where, as I have already said, the projectors in speculative learning resided.
The first professor I saw, was in a very large room, with forty pupils about him.
After salutation, observing me to look earnestly upon a frame, which took up the greatest part of both the length and breadth of the room, he said, “Perhaps I might wonder to see him employed in a project for improving speculative knowledge, by practical and mechanical operations.
But the world would soon be sensible of its usefulness; and he flattered himself, that a more noble, exalted thought never sprang in any other man’s head.
The superficies was composed of several bits of wood, about the bigness of a die, but some larger than others.
They were all linked together by slender wires.
These bits of wood were covered, on every square, with paper pasted on them; and on these papers were written all the words of their language, in their several moods, tenses, and declensions; but without any order.
The professor then desired me “to observe; for he was going to set his engine at work.” The pupils, at his command, took each of them hold of an iron handle, whereof there were forty fixed round the edges of the frame; and giving them a sudden turn, the whole disposition of the words was entirely changed.
He then commanded six-and-thirty of the lads, to read the several lines softly, as they appeared upon the frame; and where they found three or four words together that might make part of a sentence, they dictated to the four remaining boys, who were scribes.
This work was repeated three or four times, and at every turn, the engine was so contrived, that the words shifted into new places, as the square bits of wood moved upside down.
The first project was to shorten discourse by cutting polysyllables into one, and leaving out verbs and participles, because, in reality, all things imaginable are but nouns.
The other project was, a scheme for entirely abolishing all words whatsoever; and this was urged as a great advantage in point of health, as well as brevity.
For it is plain, that every word we speak is, in some degree, a diminution of our lungs by corrosion, and, consequently, contributes to the shortening of our lives.
However, many of the most learned and wise adhere to the new scheme of expressing themselves by things; which has only this inconvenience attending it, that if a man’s business be very great, and of various kinds, he must be obliged, in proportion, to carry a greater bundle of things upon his back, unless he can afford one or two strong servants to attend him.
I have often beheld two of those sages almost sinking under the weight of their packs, like pedlars among us, who, when they met in the street, would lay down their loads, open their sacks, and hold conversation for an hour together; then put up their implements, help each other to resume their burdens, and take their leave.
But for short conversations, a man may carry implements in his pockets, and under his arms, enough to supply him; and in his house, he cannot be at a loss.
Therefore the room where company meet who practise this art, is full of all things, ready at hand, requisite to furnish matter for this kind of artificial converse.
Another great advantage proposed by this invention was, that it would serve as a universal language, to be understood in all civilised nations, whose goods and utensils are generally of the same kind, or nearly resembling, so that their uses might easily be comprehended.
And thus ambassadors would be qualified to treat with foreign princes, or ministers of state, to whose tongues they were utter strangers.
I was at the mathematical school, where the master taught his pupils after a method scarce imaginable to us in Europe.
The proposition, and demonstration, were fairly written on a thin wafer, with ink composed of a cephalic tincture.
This, the student was to swallow upon a fasting stomach, and for three days following, eat nothing but bread and water.
As the wafer digested, the tincture mounted to his brain, bearing the proposition along with it.
But the success has not hitherto been answerable, partly by some error in the _quantum_ or composition, and partly by the perverseness of lads, to whom this bolus is so nauseous, that they generally steal aside, and discharge it upwards, before it can operate; neither have they been yet persuaded to use so long an abstinence, as the prescription requires.
The author proposes some improvements, which are honourably received.
In the school of political projectors, I was but ill entertained; the professors appearing, in my judgment, wholly out of their senses, which is a scene that never fails to make me melancholy.
There was a most ingenious doctor, who seemed to be perfectly versed in the whole nature and system of government.
This illustrious person had very usefully employed his studies, in finding out effectual remedies for all diseases and corruptions to which the several kinds of public administration are subject, by the vices or infirmities of those who govern, as well as by the licentiousness of those who are to obey.
For instance: whereas all writers and reasoners have agreed, that there is a strict universal resemblance between the natural and the political body; can there be any thing more evident, than that the health of both must be preserved, and the diseases cured, by the same prescriptions?
The method is this: You take a hundred leaders of each party; you dispose them into couples of such whose heads are nearest of a size; then let two nice operators saw off the occiput of each couple at the same time, in such a manner that the brain may be equally divided.
Let the occiputs, thus cut off, be interchanged, applying each to the head of his opposite party-man.
Wit, valour, and politeness, were likewise proposed to be largely taxed, and collected in the same manner, by every person’s giving his own word for the quantum of what he possessed.
But as to honour, justice, wisdom, and learning, they should not be taxed at all; because they are qualifications of so singular a kind, that no man will either allow them in his neighbour or value them in himself.
The women were proposed to be taxed according to their beauty and skill in dressing, wherein they had the same privilege with the men, to be determined by their own judgment.
But constancy, chastity, good sense, and good nature, were not rated, because they would not bear the charge of collecting.
To keep senators in the interest of the crown, it was proposed that the members should raffle for employments; every man first taking an oath, and giving security, that he would vote for the court, whether he won or not; after which, the losers had, in their turn, the liberty of raffling upon the next vacancy.
Thus, hope and expectation would be kept alive; none would complain of broken promises, but impute their disappointments wholly to fortune, whose shoulders are broader and stronger than those of a ministry.
Another professor showed me a large paper of instructions for discovering plots and conspiracies against the government.
The whole discourse was written with great acuteness, containing many observations, both curious and useful for politicians; but, as I conceived, not altogether complete.
This I ventured to tell the author, and offered, if he pleased, to supply him with some additions.
The plots, in that kingdom, are usually the workmanship of those persons who desire to raise their own characters of profound politicians; to restore new vigour to a crazy administration; to stifle or divert general discontents; to fill their coffers with forfeitures; and raise, or sink the opinion of public credit, as either shall best answer their private advantage.
It is first agreed and settled among them, what suspected persons shall be accused of a plot; then, effectual care is taken to secure all their letters and papers, and put the owners in chains.
First, they can decipher all initial letters into political meanings.
Thus _N_. shall signify a plot; _B_. a regiment of horse; _L_. a fleet at sea; or, secondly, by transposing the letters of the alphabet in any suspected paper, they can lay open the deepest designs of a discontented party.
I saw nothing in this country that could invite me to a longer continuance, and began to think of returning home to England.
The author leaves Lagado: arrives at Maldonada.
He takes a short voyage to Glubbdubdrib.
His reception by the governor.
This island of Luggnagg stands south-eastward of Japan, about a hundred leagues distant.
There is a strict alliance between the Japanese emperor and the king of Luggnagg; which affords frequent opportunities of sailing from one island to the other.
I determined therefore to direct my course this way, in order to direct my return to Europe.
I took leave of my noble protector, who had shown me so much favour, and made me a generous present at my departure.
My journey was without any accident or adventure worth relating.
When I arrived at the port of Maldonada (for so it is called) there was no ship in the harbour bound for Luggnagg, nor likely to be in some time.
The town is about as large as Portsmouth.
I soon fell into some acquaintance, and was very hospitably received.
A gentleman of distinction said to me, “that since the ships bound for Luggnagg could not be ready in less than a month, it might be no disagreeable amusement for me to take a trip to the little island of Glubbdubdrib, about five leagues off to the south-west.” He offered himself and a friend to accompany me, and that I should be provided with a small convenient bark for the voyage.
Glubbdubdrib, as nearly as I can interpret the word, signifies the island of sorcerers or magicians.
It is about one third as large as the Isle of Wight, and extremely fruitful: it is governed by the head of a certain tribe, who are all magicians.
This tribe marries only among each other, and the eldest in succession is prince or governor.
He has a noble palace, and a park of about three thousand acres, surrounded by a wall of hewn stone twenty feet high.
In this park are several small enclosures for cattle, corn, and gardening.
The governor and his family are served and attended by domestics of a kind somewhat unusual.
By his skill in necromancy he has a power of calling whom he pleases from the dead, and commanding their service for twenty-four hours, but no longer; nor can he call the same persons up again in less than three months, except upon very extraordinary occasions.
When we arrived at the island, which was about eleven in the morning, one of the gentlemen who accompanied me went to the governor, and desired admittance for a stranger, who came on purpose to have the honour of attending on his highness.
This was immediately granted, and we all three entered the gate of the palace between two rows of guards, armed and dressed after a very antic manner, and with something in their countenances that made my flesh creep with a horror I cannot express.
We passed through several apartments, between servants of the same sort, ranked on each side as before, till we came to the chamber of presence; where, after three profound obeisances, and a few general questions, we were permitted to sit on three stools, near the lowest step of his highness’s throne.
He understood the language of Balnibarbi, although it was different from that of this island.
He desired me to give him some account of my travels; and, to let me see that I should be treated without ceremony, he dismissed all his attendants with a turn of his finger; at which, to my great astonishment, they vanished in an instant, like visions in a dream when we awake on a sudden.
I had the honour to dine with the governor, where a new set of ghosts served up the meat, and waited at table.
I now observed myself to be less terrified than I had been in the morning.
I stayed till sunset, but humbly desired his highness to excuse me for not accepting his invitation of lodging in the palace.
My two friends and I lay at a private house in the town adjoining, which is the capital of this little island; and the next morning we returned to pay our duty to the governor, as he was pleased to command us.
After this manner we continued in the island for ten days, most part of every day with the governor, and at night in our lodging.
I soon grew so familiarized to the sight of spirits, that after the third or fourth time they gave me no emotion at all: or, if I had any apprehensions left, my curiosity prevailed over them.
For his highness the governor ordered me “to call up whatever persons I would choose to name, and in whatever numbers, among all the dead from the beginning of the world to the present time, and command them to answer any questions I should think fit to ask; with this condition, that my questions must be confined within the compass of the times they lived in.
And one thing I might depend upon, that they would certainly tell me the truth, for lying was a talent of no use in the lower world.” I made my humble acknowledgments to his highness for so great a favour.
We were in a chamber, from whence there was a fair prospect into the park.
And because my first inclination was to be entertained with scenes of pomp and magnificence, I desired to see Alexander the Great at the head of his army, just after the battle of Arbela: which, upon a motion of the governor’s finger, immediately appeared in a large field, under the window where we stood.
Alexander was called up into the room: it was with great difficulty that I understood his Greek, and had but little of my own.
He assured me upon his honour “that he was not poisoned, but died of a bad fever by excessive drinking.” Next, I saw Hannibal passing the Alps, who told me “he had not a drop of vinegar in his camp.” I saw Cæsar and Pompey at the head of their troops, just ready to engage.
I desired that the senate of Rome might appear before me, in one large chamber, and an assembly of somewhat a later age in counterview, in another.
The first seemed to be an assembly of heroes and demigods; the other, a knot of pedlars, pick-pockets, highwaymen, and bullies.
The governor, at my request, gave the sign for Cæsar and Brutus to advance towards us.
I was struck with a profound veneration at the sight of Brutus, and could easily discover the most consummate virtue, the greatest intrepidity and firmness of mind, the truest love of his country, and general benevolence for mankind, in every lineament of his countenance.
It would be tedious to trouble the reader with relating what vast numbers of illustrious persons were called up to gratify that insatiable desire I had to see the world in every period of antiquity placed before me.
I chiefly fed my eyes with beholding the destroyers of tyrants and usurpers, and the restorers of liberty to oppressed and injured nations.
But it is impossible to express the satisfaction I received in my own mind, after such a manner as to make it a suitable entertainment to the reader.
A further account of Glubbdubdrib.
Ancient and modern history corrected.
Having a desire to see those ancients who were most renowned for wit and learning, I set apart one day on purpose.
I proposed that Homer and Aristotle might appear at the head of all their commentators; but these were so numerous, that some hundreds were forced to attend in the court, and outward rooms of the palace.
I knew, and could distinguish those two heroes, at first sight, not only from the crowd, but from each other.
Homer was the taller and comelier person of the two, walked very erect for one of his age, and his eyes were the most quick and piercing I ever beheld.
Aristotle stooped much, and made use of a staff.
But Aristotle was out of all patience with the account I gave him of Scotus and Ramus, as I presented them to him; and he asked them, “whether the rest of the tribe were as great dunces as themselves?” I then desired the governor to call up Descartes and Gassendi, with whom I prevailed to explain their systems to Aristotle.
This great philosopher freely acknowledged his own mistakes in natural philosophy, because he proceeded in many things upon conjecture, as all men must do; and he found that Gassendi, who had made the doctrine of Epicurus as palatable as he could, and the _vortices_ of Descartes, were equally to be exploded.
He predicted the same fate to _attraction_, whereof the present learned are such zealous asserters.
He said, “that new systems of nature were but new fashions, which would vary in every age; and even those, who pretend to demonstrate them from mathematical principles, would flourish but a short period of time, and be out of vogue when that was determined.” I spent five days in conversing with many others of the ancient learned.
I saw most of the first Roman emperors.
I prevailed on the governor to call up Heliogabalus’s cooks to dress us a dinner, but they could not show us much of their skill, for want of materials.
A helot of Agesilaus made us a dish of Spartan broth, but I was not able to get down a second spoonful.
But my disappointment was grievous and unexpected.
For, instead of a long train with royal diadems, I saw in one family two fiddlers, three spruce courtiers, and an Italian prelate.
In another, a barber, an abbot, and two cardinals.
I have too great a veneration for crowned heads, to dwell any longer on so nice a subject.
But as to counts, marquises, dukes, earls, and the like, I was not so scrupulous.
And I confess, it was not without some pleasure, that I found myself able to trace the particular features, by which certain families are distinguished, up to their originals.
Neither could I wonder at all this, when I saw such an interruption of lineages, by pages, lackeys, valets, coachmen, gamesters, fiddlers, players, captains, and pickpockets.
I was chiefly disgusted with modern history.
How low an opinion I had of human wisdom and integrity, when I was truly informed of the springs and motives of great enterprises and revolutions in the world, and of the contemptible accidents to which they owed their success.
Here I discovered the roguery and ignorance of those who pretend to write anecdotes, or secret history; who send so many kings to their graves with a cup of poison; will repeat the discourse between a prince and chief minister, where no witness was by; unlock the thoughts and cabinets of ambassadors and secretaries of state; and have the perpetual misfortune to be mistaken.
Here I discovered the true causes of many great events that have surprised the world; how a whore can govern the back-stairs, the back-stairs a council, and the council a senate.
Perjury, oppression, subornation, fraud, pandarism, and the like infirmities, were among the most excusable arts they had to mention; and for these I gave, as it was reasonable, great allowance.
I had often read of some great services done to princes and states, and desired to see the persons by whom those services were performed.
Upon inquiry I was told, “that their names were to be found on no record, except a few of them, whom history has represented as the vilest of rogues and traitors.” As to the rest, I had never once heard of them.
They all appeared with dejected looks, and in the meanest habit; most of them telling me, “they died in poverty and disgrace, and the rest on a scaffold or a gibbet.” Among others, there was one person, whose case appeared a little singular.
He had a youth about eighteen years old standing by his side.
Returning back to his own vessel, he was charged with neglect of duty, and the ship given to a favourite page of Publicola, the vice-admiral; whereupon he retired to a poor farm at a great distance from Rome, and there ended his life.” I was so curious to know the truth of this story, that I desired Agrippa might be called, who was admiral in that fight.
He appeared, and confirmed the whole account: but with much more advantage to the captain, whose modesty had extenuated or concealed a great part of his merit.
I was surprised to find corruption grown so high and so quick in that empire, by the force of luxury so lately introduced; which made me less wonder at many parallel cases in other countries, where vices of all kinds have reigned so much longer, and where the whole praise, as well as pillage, has been engrossed by the chief commander, who perhaps had the least title to either.
I descended so low, as to desire some English yeoman of the old stamp might be summoned to appear; once so famous for the simplicity of their manners, diet, and dress; for justice in their dealings; for their true spirit of liberty; for their valour, and love of their country.
Neither could I be wholly unmoved, after comparing the living with the dead, when I considered how all these pure native virtues were prostituted for a piece of money by their grand-children; who, in selling their votes and managing at elections, have acquired every vice and corruption that can possibly be learned in a court.
The author returns to Maldonada.
Sails to the kingdom of Luggnagg.
The author confined.
The manner of his admittance.
The king’s great lenity to his subjects.
The day of our departure being come, I took leave of his highness, the Governor of Glubbdubdrib, and returned with my two companions to Maldonada, where, after a fortnight’s waiting, a ship was ready to sail for Luggnagg.
The two gentlemen, and some others, were so generous and kind as to furnish me with provisions, and see me on board.
We had one violent storm, and were under a necessity of steering westward to get into the trade wind, which holds for above sixty leagues.
On the 21st of April, 1708, we sailed into the river of Clumegnig, which is a seaport town, at the south-east point of Luggnagg.
Two of them came on board in less than half an hour, by whom we were guided between certain shoals and rocks, which are very dangerous in the passage, to a large basin, where a fleet may ride in safety within a cable’s length of the town-wall.
Some of our sailors, whether out of treachery or inadvertence, had informed the pilots “that I was a stranger, and great traveller;” whereof these gave notice to a custom-house officer, by whom I was examined very strictly upon my landing.
This officer spoke to me in the language of Balnibarbi, which, by the force of much commerce, is generally understood in that town, especially by seamen and those employed in the customs.
I gave him a short account of some particulars, and made my story as plausible and consistent as I could; but I thought it necessary to disguise my country, and call myself a Hollander; because my intentions were for Japan, and I knew the Dutch were the only Europeans permitted to enter into that kingdom.
I was invited by several persons, chiefly out of curiosity, because it was reported that I came from countries very remote, of which they had never heard.
I hired a young man, who came in the same ship, to be an interpreter; he was a native of Luggnagg, but had lived some years at Maldonada, and was a perfect master of both languages.
By his assistance, I was able to hold a conversation with those who came to visit me; but this consisted only of their questions, and my answers.
The despatch came from court about the time we expected.
It contained a warrant for conducting me and my retinue to _Traldragdubh_, or _Trildrogdrib_ (for it is pronounced both ways as near as I can remember), by a party of ten horse.
All my retinue was that poor lad for an interpreter, whom I persuaded into my service, and, at my humble request, we had each of us a mule to ride on.
However, this was a peculiar grace, not allowed to any but persons of the highest rank, when they desire an admittance.
Nay, sometimes the floor is strewed with dust on purpose, when the person to be admitted happens to have powerful enemies at court; and I have seen a great lord with his mouth so crammed, that when he had crept to the proper distance from the throne; he was not able to speak a word.
Neither is there any remedy; because it is capital for those who receive an audience to spit or wipe their mouths in his majesty’s presence.
There is indeed another custom, which I cannot altogether approve of: when the king has a mind to put any of his nobles to death in a gentle indulgent manner, he commands the floor to be strewed with a certain brown powder of a deadly composition, which being licked up, infallibly kills him in twenty-four hours.
I myself heard him give directions, that one of his pages should be whipped, whose turn it was to give notice about washing the floor after an execution, but maliciously had omitted it; by which neglect a young lord of great hopes, coming to an audience, was unfortunately poisoned, although the king at that time had no design against his life.
But this good prince was so gracious as to forgive the poor page his whipping, upon promise that he would do so no more, without special orders.
To return from this digression.
When I had crept within four yards of the throne, I raised myself gently upon my knees, and then striking my forehead seven times against the ground, I pronounced the following words, as they had been taught me the night before, _Ickpling gloffthrobb squutserumm blhiop mlashnalt zwin tnodbalkguffh slhiophad gurdlubh asht_.
This is the compliment, established by the laws of the land, for all persons admitted to the king’s presence.
I spoke in the Balnibarbian tongue, and my interpreter delivered my meaning in that of Luggnagg.
The king was much delighted with my company, and ordered his _bliffmarklub_, or high-chamberlain, to appoint a lodging in the court for me and my interpreter; with a daily allowance for my table, and a large purse of gold for my common expenses.
I staid three months in this country, out of perfect obedience to his majesty; who was pleased highly to favour me, and made me very honourable offers.
But I thought it more consistent with prudence and justice to pass the remainder of my days with my wife and family.
The Luggnaggians commended.
A particular description of the Struldbrugs, with many conversations between the author and some eminent persons upon that subject.
The Luggnaggians are a polite and generous people; and although they are not without some share of that pride which is peculiar to all Eastern countries, yet they show themselves courteous to strangers, especially such who are countenanced by the court.
I had many acquaintance, and among persons of the best fashion; and being always attended by my interpreter, the conversation we had was not disagreeable.
I cried out, as in a rapture, “Happy nation, where every child hath at least a chance for being immortal!
Yet perhaps the virtue of those reverend sages was too strict for the corrupt and libertine manners of a court: and we often find by experience, that young men are too opinionated and volatile to be guided by the sober dictates of their seniors.
“That, if it had been my good fortune to come into the world a _struldbrug_, as soon as I could discover my own happiness, by understanding the difference between life and death, I would first resolve, by all arts and methods, whatsoever, to procure myself riches.
In the pursuit of which, by thrift and management, I might reasonably expect, in about two hundred years, to be the wealthiest man in the kingdom.
In the second place, I would, from my earliest youth, apply myself to the study of arts and sciences, by which I should arrive in time to excel all others in learning.
Lastly, I would carefully record every action and event of consequence, that happened in the public, impartially draw the characters of the several successions of princes and great ministers of state, with my own observations on every point.
I would exactly set down the several changes in customs, language, fashions of dress, diet, and diversions.
By all which acquirements, I should be a living treasure of knowledge and wisdom, and certainly become the oracle of the nation.
“I would never marry after threescore, but live in a hospitable manner, yet still on the saving side.
I would entertain myself in forming and directing the minds of hopeful young men, by convincing them, from my own remembrance, experience, and observation, fortified by numerous examples, of the usefulness of virtue in public and private life.
But my choice and constant companions should be a set of my own immortal brotherhood; among whom, I would elect a dozen from the most ancient, down to my own contemporaries.
I should then see the discovery of the longitude, the perpetual motion, the universal medicine, and many other great inventions, brought to the utmost perfection.
“What wonderful discoveries should we make in astronomy, by outliving and confirming our own predictions; by observing the progress and return of comets, with the changes of motion in the sun, moon, and stars!” I enlarged upon many other topics, which the natural desire of endless life, and sublunary happiness, could easily furnish me with.
When I had ended, and the sum of my discourse had been interpreted, as before, to the rest of the company, there was a good deal of talk among them in the language of the country, not without some laughter at my expense.
At last, the same gentleman who had been my interpreter, said, “he was desired by the rest to set me right in a few mistakes, which I had fallen into through the common imbecility of human nature, and upon that allowance was less answerable for them.
That in the two kingdoms above mentioned, where, during his residence, he had conversed very much, he observed long life to be the universal desire and wish of mankind.
That whoever had one foot in the grave was sure to hold back the other as strongly as he could.
That the oldest had still hopes of living one day longer, and looked on death as the greatest evil, from which nature always prompted him to retreat.
Only in this island of Luggnagg the appetite for living was not so eager, from the continual example of the _struldbrugs_ before their eyes.
“That the system of living contrived by me, was unreasonable and unjust; because it supposed a perpetuity of youth, health, and vigour, which no man could be so foolish to hope, however extravagant he may be in his wishes.
That the question therefore was not, whether a man would choose to be always in the prime of youth, attended with prosperity and health; but how he would pass a perpetual life under all the usual disadvantages which old age brings along with it.
For although few men will avow their desires of being immortal, upon such hard conditions, yet in the two kingdoms before mentioned, of Balnibarbi and Japan, he observed that every man desired to put off death some time longer, let it approach ever so late: and he rarely heard of any man who died willingly, except he were incited by the extremity of grief or torture.
And he appealed to me, whether in those countries I had travelled, as well as my own, I had not observed the same general disposition.” After this preface, he gave me a particular account of the _struldbrugs_ among them.
He said, “they commonly acted like mortals till about thirty years old; after which, by degrees, they grew melancholy and dejected, increasing in both till they came to fourscore.
This he learned from their own confession: for otherwise, there not being above two or three of that species born in an age, they were too few to form a general observation by.
When they came to fourscore years, which is reckoned the extremity of living in this country, they had not only all the follies and infirmities of other old men, but many more which arose from the dreadful prospect of never dying.
They were not only opinionative, peevish, covetous, morose, vain, talkative, but incapable of friendship, and dead to all natural affection, which never descended below their grandchildren.
Envy and impotent desires are their prevailing passions.
But those objects against which their envy seems principally directed, are the vices of the younger sort and the deaths of the old.
By reflecting on the former, they find themselves cut off from all possibility of pleasure; and whenever they see a funeral, they lament and repine that others have gone to a harbour of rest to which they themselves never can hope to arrive.
They have no remembrance of anything but what they learned and observed in their youth and middle-age, and even that is very imperfect; and for the truth or particulars of any fact, it is safer to depend on common tradition, than upon their best recollections.
The least miserable among them appear to be those who turn to dotage, and entirely lose their memories; these meet with more pity and assistance, because they want many bad qualities which abound in others.
“If a _struldbrug_ happen to marry one of his own kind, the marriage is dissolved of course, by the courtesy of the kingdom, as soon as the younger of the two comes to be fourscore; for the law thinks it a reasonable indulgence, that those who are condemned, without any fault of their own, to a perpetual continuance in the world, should not have their misery doubled by the load of a wife.
“As soon as they have completed the term of eighty years, they are looked on as dead in law; their heirs immediately succeed to their estates; only a small pittance is reserved for their support; and the poor ones are maintained at the public charge.
After that period, they are held incapable of any employment of trust or profit; they cannot purchase lands, or take leases; neither are they allowed to be witnesses in any cause, either civil or criminal, not even for the decision of meers and bounds.
“At ninety, they lose their teeth and hair; they have at that age no distinction of taste, but eat and drink whatever they can get, without relish or appetite.
The diseases they were subject to still continue, without increasing or diminishing.
In talking, they forget the common appellation of things, and the names of persons, even of those who are their nearest friends and relations.
For the same reason, they never can amuse themselves with reading, because their memory will not serve to carry them from the beginning of a sentence to the end; and by this defect, they are deprived of the only entertainment whereof they might otherwise be capable.
They are despised and hated by all sorts of people.
When one of them is born, it is reckoned ominous, and their birth is recorded very particularly so that you may know their age by consulting the register, which, however, has not been kept above a thousand years past, or at least has been destroyed by time or public disturbances.
But the usual way of computing how old they are, is by asking them what kings or great persons they can remember, and then consulting history; for infallibly the last prince in their mind did not begin his reign after they were fourscore years old.
They were the most mortifying sight I ever beheld; and the women more horrible than the men.
Besides the usual deformities in extreme old age, they acquired an additional ghastliness, in proportion to their number of years, which is not to be described; and among half a dozen, I soon distinguished which was the eldest, although there was not above a century or two between them.
The reader will easily believe, that from what I had heard and seen, my keen appetite for perpetuity of life was much abated.
I grew heartily ashamed of the pleasing visions I had formed; and thought no tyrant could invent a death into which I would not run with pleasure, from such a life.
The king heard of all that had passed between me and my friends upon this occasion, and rallied me very pleasantly; wishing I could send a couple of _struldbrugs_ to my own country, to arm our people against the fear of death; but this, it seems, is forbidden by the fundamental laws of the kingdom, or else I should have been well content with the trouble and expense of transporting them.
I could not but agree, that the laws of this kingdom relative to the _struldbrugs_ were founded upon the strongest reasons, and such as any other country would be under the necessity of enacting, in the like circumstances.
Otherwise, as avarice is the necessary consequence of old age, those immortals would in time become proprietors of the whole nation, and engross the civil power, which, for want of abilities to manage, must end in the ruin of the public.
The author leaves Luggnagg, and sails to Japan.
From thence he returns in a Dutch ship to Amsterdam, and from Amsterdam to England.
There is indeed a perpetual commerce between this kingdom and the great empire of Japan; and it is very probable, that the Japanese authors may have given some account of the _struldbrugs_; but my stay in Japan was so short, and I was so entirely a stranger to the language, that I was not qualified to make any inquiries.
His majesty having often pressed me to accept some employment in his court, and finding me absolutely determined to return to my native country, was pleased to give me his license to depart; and honoured me with a letter of recommendation, under his own hand, to the Emperor of Japan.
He likewise presented me with four hundred and forty-four large pieces of gold (this nation delighting in even numbers), and a red diamond, which I sold in England for eleven hundred pounds.
This prince was so gracious as to order a guard to conduct me to Glanguenstald, which is a royal port to the south-west part of the island.
We landed at a small port-town called Xamoschi, situated on the south-east part of Japan; the town lies on the western point, where there is a narrow strait leading northward into a long arm of the sea, upon the north-west part of which, Yedo, the metropolis, stands.
At landing, I showed the custom-house officers my letter from the king of Luggnagg to his imperial majesty.
They knew the seal perfectly well; it was as broad as the palm of my hand.
The impression was, _A king lifting up a lame beggar from the earth_.
The magistrates of the town, hearing of my letter, received me as a public minister.
He soon conjectured, by my countenance, that I was a European, and therefore repeated his majesty’s commands in Low Dutch, which he spoke perfectly well.
However, for the reasons I had offered, but chiefly to gratify the king of Luggnagg by an uncommon mark of his favour, he would comply with the singularity of my humour; but the affair must be managed with dexterity, and his officers should be commanded to let me pass, as it were by forgetfulness.
For he assured me, that if the secret should be discovered by my countrymen the Dutch, they would cut my throat in the voyage.” I returned my thanks, by the interpreter, for so unusual a favour; and some troops being at that time on their march to Nangasac, the commanding officer had orders to convey me safe thither, with particular instructions about the business of the crucifix.
On the 9th day of June, 1709, I arrived at Nangasac, after a very long and troublesome journey.
I soon fell into the company of some Dutch sailors belonging to the Amboyna, of Amsterdam, a stout ship of 450 tons.
I had lived long in Holland, pursuing my studies at Leyden, and I spoke Dutch well.
I made up a story as short and probable as I could, but concealed the greatest part.
I was able to invent names for my parents, whom I pretended to be obscure people in the province of Gelderland.
I would have given the captain (one Theodorus Vangrult) what he pleased to ask for my voyage to Holland; but understanding I was a surgeon, he was contented to take half the usual rate, on condition that I would serve him in the way of my calling.
Before we took shipping, I was often asked by some of the crew, whether I had performed the ceremony above mentioned.
Nothing happened worth mentioning in this voyage.
On the 10th of April, 1710, we arrived safe at Amsterdam, having lost only three men by sickness in the voyage, and a fourth, who fell from the foremast into the sea, not far from the coast of Guinea.
From Amsterdam I soon after set sail for England, in a small vessel belonging to that city.
I landed next morning, and saw once more my native country, after an absence of five years and six months complete.
I went straight to Redriff, where I arrived the same day at two in the afternoon, and found my wife and family in good health.
His men conspire against him, confine him a long time to his cabin, and set him on shore in an unknown land.
The Yahoos, a strange sort of animal, described.
The author meets two Houyhnhnms.
I continued at home with my wife and children about five months in a very happy condition, if I could have learned the lesson of knowing when I was well.
I left my poor wife big with child, and accepted an advantageous offer made me to be captain of the Adventurer, a stout merchantman of 350 tons: for I understood navigation well, and being grown weary of a surgeon’s employment at sea, which, however, I could exercise upon occasion, I took a skilful young man of that calling, one Robert Purefoy, into my ship.
We set sail from Portsmouth upon the 7th day of August, 1710; on the 14th we met with Captain Pocock, of Bristol, at Teneriffe, who was going to the bay of Campechy to cut logwood.
On the 16th, he was parted from us by a storm; I heard since my return, that his ship foundered, and none escaped but one cabin boy.
He was an honest man, and a good sailor, but a little too positive in his own opinions, which was the cause of his destruction, as it has been with several others; for if he had followed my advice, he might have been safe at home with his family at this time, as well as myself.
I had several men who died in my ship of calentures, so that I was forced to get recruits out of Barbadoes and the Leeward Islands, where I touched, by the direction of the merchants who employed me; which I had soon too much cause to repent: for I found afterwards, that most of them had been buccaneers.
I had fifty hands on board; and my orders were, that I should trade with the Indians in the South-Sea, and make what discoveries I could.
These rogues, whom I had picked up, debauched my other men, and they all formed a conspiracy to seize the ship, and secure me; which they did one morning, rushing into my cabin, and binding me hand and foot, threatening to throw me overboard, if I offered to stir.
I told them, “I was their prisoner, and would submit.” This they made me swear to do, and then they unbound me, only fastening one of my legs with a chain, near my bed, and placed a sentry at my door with his piece charged, who was commanded to shoot me dead if I attempted my liberty.
They sent me down victuals and drink, and took the government of the ship to themselves.
Their design was to turn pirates, and plunder the Spaniards, which they could not do till they got more men.
But first they resolved to sell the goods in the ship, and then go to Madagascar for recruits, several among them having died since my confinement.
They sailed many weeks, and traded with the Indians; but I knew not what course they took, being kept a close prisoner in my cabin, and expecting nothing less than to be murdered, as they often threatened me.
Upon the 9th day of May, 1711, one James Welch came down to my cabin, and said, “he had orders from the captain to set me ashore.” I expostulated with him, but in vain; neither would he so much as tell me who their new captain was.
They forced me into the long-boat, letting me put on my best suit of clothes, which were as good as new, and take a small bundle of linen, but no arms, except my hanger; and they were so civil as not to search my pockets, into which I conveyed what money I had, with some other little necessaries.
They all swore, “they knew no more than myself;” but said, “that the captain” (as they called him) “was resolved, after they had sold the lading, to get rid of me in the first place where they could discover land.” They pushed off immediately, advising me to make haste for fear of being overtaken by the tide, and so bade me farewell.
In this desolate condition I advanced forward, and soon got upon firm ground, where I sat down on a bank to rest myself, and consider what I had best do.
When I was a little refreshed, I went up into the country, resolving to deliver myself to the first savages I should meet, and purchase my life from them by some bracelets, glass rings, and other toys, which sailors usually provide themselves with in those voyages, and whereof I had some about me.
The land was divided by long rows of trees, not regularly planted, but naturally growing; there was great plenty of grass, and several fields of oats.
I walked very circumspectly, for fear of being surprised, or suddenly shot with an arrow from behind, or on either side.
Their shape was very singular and deformed, which a little discomposed me, so that I lay down behind a thicket to observe them better.
Some of them coming forward near the place where I lay, gave me an opportunity of distinctly marking their form.
Their heads and breasts were covered with a thick hair, some frizzled, and others lank; they had beards like goats, and a long ridge of hair down their backs, and the fore parts of their legs and feet; but the rest of their bodies was bare, so that I might see their skins, which were of a brown buff colour.
They had no tails, nor any hair at all on their buttocks, except about the anus, which, I presume, nature had placed there to defend them as they sat on the ground, for this posture they used, as well as lying down, and often stood on their hind feet.
They climbed high trees as nimbly as a squirrel, for they had strong extended claws before and behind, terminating in sharp points, and hooked.
They would often spring, and bound, and leap, with prodigious agility.
The dugs hung between their forefeet, and often reached almost to the ground as they walked.
Upon the whole, I never beheld, in all my travels, so disagreeable an animal, or one against which I naturally conceived so strong an antipathy.
So that, thinking I had seen enough, full of contempt and aversion, I got up, and pursued the beaten road, hoping it might direct me to the cabin of some Indian.
I had not got far, when I met one of these creatures full in my way, and coming up directly to me.
When the beast felt the smart, he drew back, and roared so loud, that a herd of at least forty came flocking about me from the next field, howling and making odious faces; but I ran to the body of a tree, and leaning my back against it, kept them off by waving my hanger.
Several of this cursed brood, getting hold of the branches behind, leaped up into the tree, whence they began to discharge their excrements on my head; however, I escaped pretty well by sticking close to the stem of the tree, but was almost stifled with the filth, which fell about me on every side.
In the midst of this distress, I observed them all to run away on a sudden as fast as they could; at which I ventured to leave the tree and pursue the road, wondering what it was that could put them into this fright.
But looking on my left hand, I saw a horse walking softly in the field; which my persecutors having sooner discovered, was the cause of their flight.
The horse started a little, when he came near me, but soon recovering himself, looked full in my face with manifest tokens of wonder; he viewed my hands and feet, walking round me several times.
I would have pursued my journey, but he placed himself directly in the way, yet looking with a very mild aspect, never offering the least violence.
We stood gazing at each other for some time; at last I took the boldness to reach my hand towards his neck with a design to stroke it, using the common style and whistle of jockeys, when they are going to handle a strange horse.
But this animal seemed to receive my civilities with disdain, shook his head, and bent his brows, softly raising up his right fore-foot to remove my hand.
Then he neighed three or four times, but in so different a cadence, that I almost began to think he was speaking to himself, in some language of his own.
While he and I were thus employed, another horse came up; who applying himself to the first in a very formal manner, they gently struck each other’s right hoof before, neighing several times by turns, and varying the sound, which seemed to be almost articulate.
They went some paces off, as if it were to confer together, walking side by side, backward and forward, like persons deliberating upon some affair of weight, but often turning their eyes towards me, as it were to watch that I might not escape.
I was amazed to see such actions and behaviour in brute beasts; and concluded with myself, that if the inhabitants of this country were endued with a proportionable degree of reason, they must needs be the wisest people upon earth.
This thought gave me so much comfort, that I resolved to go forward, until I could discover some house or village, or meet with any of the natives, leaving the two horses to discourse together as they pleased.
The two horses came up close to me, looking with great earnestness upon my face and hands.
The gray steed rubbed my hat all round with his right fore-hoof, and discomposed it so much that I was forced to adjust it better by taking it off and settling it again; whereat, both he and his companion (who was a brown bay) appeared to be much surprised: the latter felt the lappet of my coat, and finding it to hang loose about me, they both looked with new signs of wonder.
He stroked my right hand, seeming to admire the softness and colour; but he squeezed it so hard between his hoof and his pastern, that I was forced to roar; after which they both touched me with all possible tenderness.
They were under great perplexity about my shoes and stockings, which they felt very often, neighing to each other, and using various gestures, not unlike those of a philosopher, when he would attempt to solve some new and difficult phenomenon.
In return of which favour, I will make you a present of this knife and bracelet,” taking them out of my pocket.
The two creatures stood silent while I spoke, seeming to listen with great attention, and when I had ended, they neighed frequently towards each other, as if they were engaged in serious conversation.
I plainly observed that their language expressed the passions very well, and the words might, with little pains, be resolved into an alphabet more easily than the Chinese.
Then the bay tried me with a second word, much harder to be pronounced; but reducing it to the English orthography, may be spelt thus, _Houyhnhnm_.
I did not succeed in this so well as in the former; but after two or three farther trials, I had better fortune; and they both appeared amazed at my capacity.
After some further discourse, which I then conjectured might relate to me, the two friends took their leaves, with the same compliment of striking each other’s hoof; and the gray made me signs that I should walk before him; wherein I thought it prudent to comply, till I could find a better director.
When I offered to slacken my pace, he would cry _hhuun hhuun_: I guessed his meaning, and gave him to understand, as well as I could, “that I was weary, and not able to walk faster;” upon which he would stand a while to let me rest.
The author conducted by a Houyhnhnm to his house.
The house described.
The author’s reception.
The food of the Houyhnhnms.
The author in distress for want of meat, is at last relieved.
Having travelled about three miles, we came to a long kind of building, made of timber stuck in the ground, and wattled across; the roof was low and covered with straw.
I now began to be a little comforted; and took out some toys, which travellers usually carry for presents to the savage Indians of America, and other parts, in hopes the people of the house would be thereby encouraged to receive me kindly.
The horse made me a sign to go in first; it was a large room with a smooth clay floor, and a rack and manger, extending the whole length on one side.
There were three nags and two mares, not eating, but some of them sitting down upon their hams, which I very much wondered at; but wondered more to see the rest employed in domestic business; these seemed but ordinary cattle.
However, this confirmed my first opinion, that a people who could so far civilize brute animals, must needs excel in wisdom all the nations of the world.
The gray came in just after, and thereby prevented any ill treatment which the others might have given me.
He neighed to them several times in a style of authority, and received answers.
Beyond this room there were three others, reaching the length of the house, to which you passed through three doors, opposite to each other, in the manner of a vista.
Here the gray walked in first, beckoning me to attend: I waited in the second room, and got ready my presents for the master and mistress of the house; they were two knives, three bracelets of false pearls, a small looking-glass, and a bead necklace.
The horse neighed three or four times, and I waited to hear some answers in a human voice, but I heard no other returns than in the same dialect, only one or two a little shriller than his.
I began to think that this house must belong to some person of great note among them, because there appeared so much ceremony before I could gain admittance.
But, that a man of quality should be served all by horses, was beyond my comprehension.
I feared my brain was disturbed by my sufferings and misfortunes.
I roused myself, and looked about me in the room where I was left alone: this was furnished like the first, only after a more elegant manner.
I rubbed my eyes often, but the same objects still occurred.
I then absolutely concluded, that all these appearances could be nothing else but necromancy and magic.
But I had no time to pursue these reflections; for the gray horse came to the door, and made me a sign to follow him into the third room where I saw a very comely mare, together with a colt and foal, sitting on their haunches upon mats of straw, not unartfully made, and perfectly neat and clean.
The mare soon after my entrance rose from her mat, and coming up close, after having nicely observed my hands and face, gave me a most contemptuous look; and turning to the horse, I heard the word _Yahoo_ often repeated betwixt them; the meaning of which word I could not then comprehend, although it was the first I had learned to pronounce.
But I was soon better informed, to my everlasting mortification; for the horse, beckoning to me with his head, and repeating the _hhuun_, _hhuun_, as he did upon the road, which I understood was to attend him, led me out into a kind of court, where was another building, at some distance from the house.
Here we entered, and I saw three of those detestable creatures, which I first met after my landing, feeding upon roots, and the flesh of some animals, which I afterwards found to be that of asses and dogs, and now and then a cow, dead by accident or disease.
They were all tied by the neck with strong withes, fastened to a beam; they held their food between the claws of their forefeet, and tore it with their teeth.
The master horse ordered a sorrel nag, one of his servants, to untie the largest of these animals, and take him into the yard.
The beast and I were brought close together, and by our countenances diligently compared both by master and servant, who thereupon repeated several times the word _Yahoo_.
The forefeet of the _Yahoo_ differed from my hands in nothing else but the length of the nails, the coarseness and brownness of the palms, and the hairiness on the backs.
There was the same resemblance between our feet, with the same differences; which I knew very well, though the horses did not, because of my shoes and stockings; the same in every part of our bodies except as to hairiness and colour, which I have already described.
The great difficulty that seemed to stick with the two horses, was to see the rest of my body so very different from that of a _Yahoo_, for which I was obliged to my clothes, whereof they had no conception.
The sorrel nag offered me a root, which he held (after their manner, as we shall describe in its proper place) between his hoof and pastern; I took it in my hand, and, having smelt it, returned it to him again as civilly as I could.
He brought out of the _Yahoos_’ kennel a piece of ass’s flesh; but it smelt so offensively that I turned from it with loathing: he then threw it to the _Yahoo_, by whom it was greedily devoured.
He afterwards showed me a wisp of hay, and a fetlock full of oats; but I shook my head, to signify that neither of these were food for me.
And indeed I now apprehended that I must absolutely starve, if I did not get to some of my own species; for as to those filthy _Yahoos_, although there were few greater lovers of mankind at that time than myself, yet I confess I never saw any sensitive being so detestable on all accounts; and the more I came near them the more hateful they grew, while I stayed in that country.
This the master horse observed by my behaviour, and therefore sent the _Yahoo_ back to his kennel.
He then put his fore-hoof to his mouth, at which I was much surprised, although he did it with ease, and with a motion that appeared perfectly natural, and made other signs, to know what I would eat; but I could not return him such an answer as he was able to apprehend; and if he had understood me, I did not see how it was possible to contrive any way for finding myself nourishment.
While we were thus engaged, I observed a cow passing by, whereupon I pointed to her, and expressed a desire to go and milk her.
She gave me a large bowlful, of which I drank very heartily, and found myself well refreshed.
There was in it an old steed, who seemed to be of quality; he alighted with his hind-feet forward, having by accident got a hurt in his left fore-foot.
He came to dine with our horse, who received him with great civility.
Their mangers were placed circular in the middle of the room, and divided into several partitions, round which they sat on their haunches, upon bosses of straw.
In the middle was a large rack, with angles answering to every partition of the manger; so that each horse and mare ate their own hay, and their own mash of oats and milk, with much decency and regularity.
The behaviour of the young colt and foal appeared very modest, and that of the master and mistress extremely cheerful and complaisant to their guest.
The gray ordered me to stand by him; and much discourse passed between him and his friend concerning me, as I found by the stranger’s often looking on me, and the frequent repetition of the word _Yahoo_.
I happened to wear my gloves, which the master gray observing, seemed perplexed, discovering signs of wonder what I had done to my forefeet.
He put his hoof three or four times to them, as if he would signify, that I should reduce them to their former shape, which I presently did, pulling off both my gloves, and putting them into my pocket.
This occasioned farther talk; and I saw the company was pleased with my behaviour, whereof I soon found the good effects.
I was ordered to speak the few words I understood; and while they were at dinner, the master taught me the names for oats, milk, fire, water, and some others, which I could readily pronounce after him, having from my youth a great facility in learning languages.
When dinner was done, the master horse took me aside, and by signs and words made me understand the concern he was in that I had nothing to eat.
This word I pronounced two or three times; for although I had refused them at first, yet, upon second thoughts, I considered that I could contrive to make of them a kind of bread, which might be sufficient, with milk, to keep me alive, till I could make my escape to some other country, and to creatures of my own species.
The horse immediately ordered a white mare servant of his family to bring me a good quantity of oats in a sort of wooden tray.
It was at first a very insipid diet, though common enough in many parts of Europe, but grew tolerable by time; and having been often reduced to hard fare in my life, this was not the first experiment I had made how easily nature is satisfied.
And I cannot but observe, that I never had one hour’s sickness while I stayed in this island.
It is true, I sometimes made a shift to catch a rabbit, or bird, by springs made of _Yahoo’s_ hairs; and I often gathered wholesome herbs, which I boiled, and ate as salads with my bread; and now and then, for a rarity, I made a little butter, and drank the whey.
This is enough to say upon the subject of my diet, wherewith other travellers fill their books, as if the readers were personally concerned whether we fare well or ill.
However, it was necessary to mention this matter, lest the world should think it impossible that I could find sustenance for three years in such a country, and among such inhabitants.
When it grew towards evening, the master horse ordered a place for me to lodge in; it was but six yards from the house and separated from the stable of the _Yahoos_.
Here I got some straw, and covering myself with my own clothes, slept very sound.
But I was in a short time better accommodated, as the reader shall know hereafter, when I come to treat more particularly about my way of living.
The author studies to learn the language.
The Houyhnhnm, his master, assists in teaching him.
The language described.
Several Houyhnhnms of quality come out of curiosity to see the author.
My principal endeavour was to learn the language, which my master (for so I shall henceforth call him), and his children, and every servant of his house, were desirous to teach me; for they looked upon it as a prodigy, that a brute animal should discover such marks of a rational creature.
I pointed to every thing, and inquired the name of it, which I wrote down in my journal-book when I was alone, and corrected my bad accent by desiring those of the family to pronounce it often.
In this employment, a sorrel nag, one of the under-servants, was very ready to assist me.
In speaking, they pronounced through the nose and throat, and their language approaches nearest to the High-Dutch, or German, of any I know in Europe; but is much more graceful and significant.
The emperor Charles V. made almost the same observation, when he said “that if he were to speak to his horse, it should be in High-Dutch.” The curiosity and impatience of my master were so great, that he spent many hours of his leisure to instruct me.
He was convinced (as he afterwards told me) that I must be a _Yahoo_; but my teachableness, civility, and cleanliness, astonished him; which were qualities altogether opposite to those animals.
He was most perplexed about my clothes, reasoning sometimes with himself, whether they were a part of my body: for I never pulled them off till the family were asleep, and got them on before they waked in the morning.
This last, after some time, I ventured to do in my master’s presence.
It cost me much trouble to explain to him what I was doing; for the inhabitants have not the least idea of books or literature.
In about ten weeks time, I was able to understand most of his questions; and in three months, could give him some tolerable answers.
He replied, “that I must needs be mistaken, or that I said the thing which was not;” for they have no word in their language to express lying or falsehood.
“He knew it was impossible that there could be a country beyond the sea, or that a parcel of brutes could move a wooden vessel whither they pleased upon water.
He was sure no _Houyhnhnm_ alive could make such a vessel, nor would trust _Yahoos_ to manage it.” The word _Houyhnhnm_, in their tongue, signifies a _horse_, and, in its etymology, the _perfection of nature_.
I told my master, “that I was at a loss for expression, but would improve as fast as I could; and hoped, in a short time, I should be able to tell him wonders.” He was pleased to direct his own mare, his colt, and foal, and the servants of the family, to take all opportunities of instructing me; and every day, for two or three hours, he was at the same pains himself.
Several horses and mares of quality in the neighbourhood came often to our house, upon the report spread of “a wonderful _Yahoo_, that could speak like a _Houyhnhnm_, and seemed, in his words and actions, to discover some glimmerings of reason.” These delighted to converse with me: they put many questions, and received such answers as I was able to return.
By all these advantages I made so great a progress, that, in five months from my arrival I understood whatever was spoken, and could express myself tolerably well.
The _Houyhnhnms_, who came to visit my master out of a design of seeing and talking with me, could hardly believe me to be a right _Yahoo_, because my body had a different covering from others of my kind.
They were astonished to observe me without the usual hair or skin, except on my head, face, and hands; but I discovered that secret to my master upon an accident which happened about a fortnight before.
It happened, one morning early, that my master sent for me by the sorrel nag, who was his valet.
I awaked at the noise he made, and observed him to deliver his message in some disorder; after which he went to my master, and in a great fright gave him a very confused account of what he had seen.
Besides, I considered that my clothes and shoes would soon wear out, which already were in a declining condition, and must be supplied by some contrivance from the hides of _Yahoos_, or other brutes; whereby the whole secret would be known.
I did the same with my waistcoat.
I drew off my shoes, stockings, and breeches.
I let my shirt down to my waist, and drew up the bottom; fastening it like a girdle about my middle, to hide my nakedness.
My master observed the whole performance with great signs of curiosity and admiration.
He desired to see no more; and gave me leave to put on my clothes again, for I was shuddering with cold.
I expressed my uneasiness at his giving me so often the appellation of _Yahoo_, an odious animal, for which I had so utter a hatred and contempt: I begged he would forbear applying that word to me, and make the same order in his family and among his friends whom he suffered to see me.
I described the ship to him in the best terms I could, and explained, by the help of my handkerchief displayed, how it was driven forward by the wind.
The Houyhnhnms’ notion of truth and falsehood.
The author’s discourse disapproved by his master.
The author gives a more particular account of himself, and the accidents of his voyage.
My master heard me with great appearances of uneasiness in his countenance; because _doubting_, or not believing, are so little known in this country, that the inhabitants cannot tell how to behave themselves under such circumstances.
And I remember, in frequent discourses with my master concerning the nature of manhood in other parts of the world, having occasion to talk of _lying_ and _false representation_, it was with much difficulty that he comprehended what I meant, although he had otherwise a most acute judgment.
But the common race of horses had not so good fortune, being kept by farmers and carriers, and other mean people, who put them to greater labour, and fed them worse.” I described, as well as I could, our way of riding; the shape and use of a bridle, a saddle, a spur, and a whip; of harness and wheels.
But it is impossible to express his noble resentment at our savage treatment of the _Houyhnhnm_ race; particularly after I had explained the manner and use of castrating horses among us, to hinder them from propagating their kind, and to render them more servile.
He said, “if it were possible there could be any country where _Yahoos_ alone were endued with reason, they certainly must be the governing animal; because reason in time will always prevail against brutal strength.
So that, supposing us to have the gift of reason, he could not see how it were possible to cure that natural antipathy, which every creature discovered against us; nor consequently how we could tame and render them serviceable.
I had made use of many circumlocutions in describing to him the nature of the several crimes for which most of our crew had been forced to fly their country.
This labour took up several days’ conversation, before he was able to comprehend me.
He was wholly at a loss to know what could be the use or necessity of practising those vices.
To clear up which, I endeavoured to give some ideas of the desire of power and riches; of the terrible effects of lust, intemperance, malice, and envy.
All this I was forced to define and describe by putting cases and making suppositions.
After which, like one whose imagination was struck with something never seen or heard of before, he would lift up his eyes with amazement and indignation.
Power, government, war, law, punishment, and a thousand other things, had no terms wherein that language could express them, which made the difficulty almost insuperable, to give my master any conception of what I meant.
But being of an excellent understanding, much improved by contemplation and converse, he at last arrived at a competent knowledge of what human nature, in our parts of the world, is capable to perform, and desired I would give him some particular account of that land which we call Europe, but especially of my own country.
The author begins to explain the English constitution.
The reader may please to observe, that the following extract of many conversations I had with my master, contains a summary of the most material points which were discoursed at several times for above two years; his honour often desiring fuller satisfaction, as I farther improved in the _Houyhnhnm_ tongue.
I laid before him, as well as I could, the whole state of Europe; I discoursed of trade and manufactures, of arts and sciences; and the answers I gave to all the questions he made, as they arose upon several subjects, were a fund of conversation not to be exhausted.
But I shall here only set down the substance of what passed between us concerning my own country, reducing it in order as well as I can, without any regard to time or other circumstances, while I strictly adhere to truth.
My only concern is, that I shall hardly be able to do justice to my master’s arguments and expressions, which must needs suffer by my want of capacity, as well as by a translation into our barbarous English.
Sometimes the ambition of princes, who never think they have land or people enough to govern; sometimes the corruption of ministers, who engage their master in a war, in order to stifle or divert the clamour of the subjects against their evil administration.
Neither are any wars so furious and bloody, or of so long a continuance, as those occasioned by difference in opinion, especially if it be in things indifferent.
“Sometimes the quarrel between two princes is to decide which of them shall dispossess a third of his dominions, where neither of them pretend to any right.
Sometimes one prince quarrels with another for fear the other should quarrel with him.
Sometimes a war is entered upon, because the enemy is too strong; and sometimes, because he is too weak.
Sometimes our neighbours want the things which we have, or have the things which we want, and we both fight, till they take ours, or give us theirs.
It is a very justifiable cause of a war, to invade a country after the people have been wasted by famine, destroyed by pestilence, or embroiled by factions among themselves.
It is justifiable to enter into war against our nearest ally, when one of his towns lies convenient for us, or a territory of land, that would render our dominions round and complete.
If a prince sends forces into a nation, where the people are poor and ignorant, he may lawfully put half of them to death, and make slaves of the rest, in order to civilize and reduce them from their barbarous way of living.
It is a very kingly, honourable, and frequent practice, when one prince desires the assistance of another, to secure him against an invasion, that the assistant, when he has driven out the invader, should seize on the dominions himself, and kill, imprison, or banish, the prince he came to relieve.
Alliance by blood, or marriage, is a frequent cause of war between princes; and the nearer the kindred is, the greater their disposition to quarrel; poor nations are hungry, and rich nations are proud; and pride and hunger will ever be at variance.
For these reasons, the trade of a soldier is held the most honourable of all others; because a soldier is a _Yahoo_ hired to kill, in cold blood, as many of his own species, who have never offended him, as possibly he can.
And therefore, in recounting the numbers of those who have been killed in battle, I cannot but think you have said the thing which is not.” I could not forbear shaking my head, and smiling a little at his ignorance.
And to set forth the valour of my own dear countrymen, I assured him, “that I had seen them blow up a hundred enemies at once in a siege, and as many in a ship, and beheld the dead bodies drop down in pieces from the clouds, to the great diversion of the spectators.” I was going on to more particulars, when my master commanded me silence.
He said, “whoever understood the nature of _Yahoos_, might easily believe it possible for so vile an animal to be capable of every action I had named, if their strength and cunning equalled their malice.
But as my discourse had increased his abhorrence of the whole species, so he found it gave him a disturbance in his mind to which he was wholly a stranger before.
He thought his ears, being used to such abominable words, might, by degrees, admit them with less detestation: that although he hated the _Yahoos_ of this country, yet he no more blamed them for their odious qualities, than he did a _gnnayh_ (a bird of prey) for its cruelty, or a sharp stone for cutting his hoof.
But when a creature pretending to reason could be capable of such enormities, he dreaded lest the corruption of that faculty might be worse than brutality itself.
He seemed therefore confident, that, instead of reason we were only possessed of some quality fitted to increase our natural vices; as the reflection from a troubled stream returns the image of an ill-shapen body, not only larger but more distorted.” He added, “that he had heard too much upon the subject of war, both in this and some former discourses.
There was another point, which a little perplexed him at present.
I had informed him, that some of our crew left their country on account of being ruined by law; that I had already explained the meaning of the word; but he was at a loss how it should come to pass, that the law, which was intended for every man’s preservation, should be any man’s ruin.
For example, if my neighbour has a mind to my cow, he has a lawyer to prove that he ought to have my cow from me.
Now, in this case, I, who am the right owner, lie under two great disadvantages: first, my lawyer, being practised almost from his cradle in defending falsehood, is quite out of his element when he would be an advocate for justice, which is an unnatural office he always attempts with great awkwardness, if not with ill-will.
The second disadvantage is, that my lawyer must proceed with great caution, or else he will be reprimanded by the judges, and abhorred by his brethren, as one that would lessen the practice of the law.
And therefore I have but two methods to preserve my cow.
The first is, to gain over my adversary’s lawyer with a double fee, who will then betray his client by insinuating that he hath justice on his side.
The second way is for my lawyer to make my cause appear as unjust as he can, by allowing the cow to belong to my adversary: and this, if it be skilfully done, will certainly bespeak the favour of the bench.
“It is a maxim among these lawyers that whatever has been done before, may legally be done again: and therefore they take special care to record all the decisions formerly made against common justice, and the general reason of mankind.
These, under the name of precedents, they produce as authorities to justify the most iniquitous opinions; and the judges never fail of directing accordingly.
“In pleading, they studiously avoid entering into the merits of the cause; but are loud, violent, and tedious, in dwelling upon all circumstances which are not to the purpose.
A continuation of the state of England under Queen Anne.
The character of a first minister of state in European courts.
My master was yet wholly at a loss to understand what motives could incite this race of lawyers to perplex, disquiet, and weary themselves, and engage in a confederacy of injustice, merely for the sake of injuring their fellow-animals; neither could he comprehend what I meant in saying, they did it for hire.
Whereupon I was at much pains to describe to him the use of money, the materials it was made of, and the value of the metals; “that when a _Yahoo_ had got a great store of this precious substance, he was able to purchase whatever he had a mind to; the finest clothing, the noblest houses, great tracts of land, the most costly meats and drinks, and have his choice of the most beautiful females.
Therefore he desired I would let him know, “what these costly meats were, and how any of us happened to want them?” Whereupon I enumerated as many sorts as came into my head, with the various methods of dressing them, which could not be done without sending vessels by sea to every part of the world, as well for liquors to drink as for sauces and innumerable other conveniences.
I assured him “that this whole globe of earth must be at least three times gone round before one of our better female _Yahoos_ could get her breakfast, or a cup to put it in.” He said “that must needs be a miserable country which cannot furnish food for its own inhabitants.
But, in order to feed the luxury and intemperance of the males, and the vanity of the females, we sent away the greatest part of our necessary things to other countries, whence, in return, we brought the materials of diseases, folly, and vice, to spend among ourselves.
“But beside all this, the bulk of our people supported themselves by furnishing the necessities or conveniences of life to the rich and to each other.
But here it was with the utmost difficulty that I brought him to apprehend what I meant.
To remedy which, there was a sort of people bred up among us in the profession, or pretence, of curing the sick.
And because I had some skill in the faculty, I would, in gratitude to his honour, let him know the whole mystery and method by which they proceed.
“Their fundamental is, that all diseases arise from repletion; whence they conclude, that a great evacuation of the body is necessary, either through the natural passage or upwards at the mouth.
“But, besides real diseases, we are subject to many that are only imaginary, for which the physicians have invented imaginary cures; these have their several names, and so have the drugs that are proper for them; and with these our female _Yahoos_ are always infested.
“They are likewise of special use to husbands and wives who are grown weary of their mates; to eldest sons, to great ministers of state, and often to princes.” I had formerly, upon occasion, discoursed with my master upon the nature of government in general, and particularly of our own excellent constitution, deservedly the wonder and envy of the whole world.
The worst mark you can receive is a promise, especially when it is confirmed with an oath; after which, every wise man retires, and gives over all hopes.
“There are three methods, by which a man may rise to be chief minister.
The first is, by knowing how, with prudence, to dispose of a wife, a daughter, or a sister; the second, by betraying or undermining his predecessor; and the third is, by a furious zeal, in public assemblies, against the corruptions of the court.
But a wise prince would rather choose to employ those who practise the last of these methods; because such zealots prove always the most obsequious and subservient to the will and passions of their master.
That these ministers, having all employments at their disposal, preserve themselves in power, by bribing the majority of a senate or great council; and at last, by an expedient, called an act of indemnity” (whereof I described the nature to him), “they secure themselves from after-reckonings, and retire from the public laden with the spoils of the nation.
“The palace of a chief minister is a seminary to breed up others in his own trade: the pages, lackeys, and porters, by imitating their master, become ministers of state in their several districts, and learn to excel in the three principal ingredients, of insolence, lying, and bribery.
Accordingly, they have a subaltern court paid to them by persons of the best rank; and sometimes by the force of dexterity and impudence, arrive, through several gradations, to be successors to their lord.
That the productions of such marriages are generally scrofulous, rickety, or deformed children; by which means the family seldom continues above three generations, unless the wife takes care to provide a healthy father, among her neighbours or domestics, in order to improve and continue the breed.
That a weak diseased body, a meagre countenance, and sallow complexion, are the true marks of noble blood; and a healthy robust appearance is so disgraceful in a man of quality, that the world concludes his real father to have been a groom or a coachman.
The imperfections of his mind run parallel with those of his body, being a composition of spleen, dullness, ignorance, caprice, sensuality, and pride.
“Without the consent of this illustrious body, no law can be enacted, repealed, or altered: and these nobles have likewise the decision of all our possessions, without appeal.” [514] CHAPTER VII.
His master’s observations upon the constitution and administration of England, as described by the author, with parallel cases and comparisons.
His master’s observations upon human nature.
The reader may be disposed to wonder how I could prevail on myself to give so free a representation of my own species, among a race of mortals who are already too apt to conceive the vilest opinion of humankind, from that entire congruity between me and their _Yahoos_.
I had likewise learned, from his example, an utter detestation of all falsehood or disguise; and truth appeared so amiable to me, that I determined upon sacrificing every thing to it.
Let me deal so candidly with the reader as to confess that there was yet a much stronger motive for the freedom I took in my representation of things.
I had not yet been a year in this country before I contracted such a love and veneration for the inhabitants, that I entered on a firm resolution never to return to humankind, but to pass the rest of my life among these admirable _Houyhnhnms_, in the contemplation and practice of every virtue, where I could have no example or incitement to vice.
But it was decreed by fortune, my perpetual enemy, that so great a felicity should not fall to my share.
However, it is now some comfort to reflect, that in what I said of my countrymen, I extenuated their faults as much as I durst before so strict an examiner; and upon every article gave as favourable a turn as the matter would bear.
For, indeed, who is there alive that will not be swayed by his bias and partiality to the place of his birth?
I have related the substance of several conversations I had with my master during the greatest part of the time I had the honour to be in his service; but have, indeed, for brevity sake, omitted much more than is here set down.
When I had answered all his questions, and his curiosity seemed to be fully satisfied, he sent for me one morning early, and commanded me to sit down at some distance (an honour which he had never before conferred upon me).
He had therefore begun to think it not unwise in us to cover our bodies, and by that invention conceal many of our deformities from each other, which would else be hardly supportable.
But he now found he had been mistaken, and that the dissensions of those brutes in his country were owing to the same cause with ours, as I had described them.
At other times, the like battles have been fought between the _Yahoos_ of several neighbourhoods, without any visible cause; those of one district watching all opportunities to surprise the next, before they are prepared.
But if they find their project has miscarried, they return home, and, for want of enemies, engage in what I call a civil war among themselves.
If their prey held out, they would eat till they were ready to burst; after which, nature had pointed out to them a certain root that gave them a general evacuation.
“There was also another kind of root, very juicy, but somewhat rare and difficult to be found, which the _Yahoos_ sought for with much eagerness, and would suck it with great delight; it produced in them the same effects that wine has upon us.
Neither has their language any more than a general appellation for those maladies, which is borrowed from the name of the beast, and called _hnea-yahoo_, or _Yahoo’s evil_; and the cure prescribed is a mixture of their own dung and urine, forcibly put down the _Yahoo’s_ throat.
“As to learning, government, arts, manufactures, and the like,” my master confessed, “he could find little or no resemblance between the _Yahoos_ of that country and those in ours; for he only meant to observe what parity there was in our natures.
This favourite is hated by the whole herd, and therefore, to protect himself, keeps always near the person of his leader.
He usually continues in office till a worse can be found; but the very moment he is discarded, his successor, at the head of all the _Yahoos_ in that district, young and old, male and female, come in a body, and discharge their excrements upon him from head to foot.
But how far this might be applicable to our courts, and favourites, and ministers of state, my master said I could best determine.” I durst make no return to this malicious insinuation, which debased human understanding below the sagacity of a common hound, who has judgment enough to distinguish and follow the cry of the ablest dog in the pack, without being ever mistaken.
“Another thing he wondered at in the _Yahoos_, was their strange disposition to nastiness and dirt; whereas there appears to be a natural love of cleanliness in all other animals.” As to the two former accusations, I was glad to let them pass without any reply, because I had not a word to offer upon them in defence of my species, which otherwise I certainly had done from my own inclinations.
My master likewise mentioned another quality which his servants had discovered in several Yahoos, and to him was wholly unaccountable.
He said, “a fancy would sometimes take a _Yahoo_ to retire into a corner, to lie down, and howl, and groan, and spurn away all that came near him, although he were young and fat, wanted neither food nor water, nor did the servant imagine what could possibly ail him.
And the only remedy they found was, to set him to hard work, after which he would infallibly come to himself.” To this I was silent out of partiality to my own kind; yet here I could plainly discover the true seeds of spleen, which only seizes on the lazy, the luxurious, and the rich; who, if they were forced to undergo the same regimen, I would undertake for the cure.
I expected every moment that my master would accuse the _Yahoos_ of those unnatural appetites in both sexes, so common among us.
But nature, it seems, has not been so expert a school-mistress; and these politer pleasures are entirely the productions of art and reason on our side of the globe.
The author relates several particulars of the _Yahoos_.
The great virtues of the _Houyhnhnms_.
The education and exercise of their youth.
Their general assembly.
As I ought to have understood human nature much better than I supposed it possible for my master to do, so it was easy to apply the character he gave of the _Yahoos_ to myself and my countrymen; and I believed I could yet make further discoveries, from my own observation.
For I have already told the reader how much I was pestered by these odious animals, upon my first arrival; and I afterwards failed very narrowly, three or four times, of falling into their clutches, when I happened to stray at any distance without my hanger.
And I have reason to believe they had some imagination that I was of their own species, which I often assisted myself by stripping up my sleeves, and showing my naked arms and breast in their sight, when my protector was with me.
At which times they would approach as near as they durst, and imitate my actions after the manner of monkeys, but ever with great signs of hatred; as a tame jackdaw with cap and stockings is always persecuted by the wild ones, when he happens to be got among them.
They are prodigiously nimble from their infancy.
I observed the young animal’s flesh to smell very rank, and the stink was somewhat between a weasel and a fox, but much more disagreeable.
By what I could discover, the _Yahoos_ appear to be the most unteachable of all animals, their capacity never reaching higher than to draw or carry burdens.
Yet I am of opinion this defect arises chiefly from a perverse, restive disposition; for they are cunning, malicious, treacherous, and revengeful.
They are strong and hardy, but of a cowardly spirit, and, by consequence, insolent, abject, and cruel.
It is observed, that the red haired of both sexes are more libidinous and mischievous than the rest, whom yet they much exceed in strength and activity.
The _Houyhnhnms_ keep the _Yahoos_ for present use in huts not far from the house; but the rest are sent abroad to certain fields, where they dig up roots, eat several kinds of herbs, and search about for carrion, or sometimes catch weasels and _luhimuhs_ (a sort of wild rat), which they greedily devour.
Nature has taught them to dig deep holes with their nails on the side of a rising ground, wherein they lie by themselves; only the kennels of the females are larger, sufficient to hold two or three cubs.
They swim from their infancy like frogs, and are able to continue long under water, where they often take fish, which the females carry home to their young.
And, upon this occasion, I hope the reader will pardon my relating an odd adventure.
Being one day abroad with my protector the sorrel nag, and the weather exceeding hot, I entreated him to let me bathe in a river that was near.
He consented, and I immediately stripped myself stark naked, and went down softly into the stream.
It happened that a young female _Yahoo_, standing behind a bank, saw the whole proceeding, and inflamed by desire, as the nag and I conjectured, came running with all speed, and leaped into the water, within five yards of the place where I bathed.
I was never in my life so terribly frightened.
The nag was grazing at some distance, not suspecting any harm.
She embraced me after a most fulsome manner.
I roared as loud as I could, and the nag came galloping towards me, whereupon she quitted her grasp, with the utmost reluctancy, and leaped upon the opposite bank, where she stood gazing and howling all the time I was putting on my clothes.
This was a matter of diversion to my master and his family, as well as of mortification to myself.
For now I could no longer deny that I was a real _Yahoo_ in every limb and feature, since the females had a natural propensity to me, as one of their own species.
Neither was the hair of this brute of a red colour (which might have been some excuse for an appetite a little irregular), but black as a sloe, and her countenance did not make an appearance altogether so hideous as the rest of her kind; for I think she could not be above eleven years old.
Having lived three years in this country, the reader, I suppose, will expect that I should, like other travellers, give him some account of the manners and customs of its inhabitants, which it was indeed my principal study to learn.
As these noble _Houyhnhnms_ are endowed by nature with a general disposition to all virtues, and have no conceptions or ideas of what is evil in a rational creature, so their grand maxim is, to cultivate reason, and to be wholly governed by it.
Neither is reason among them a point problematical, as with us, where men can argue with plausibility on both sides of the question, but strikes you with immediate conviction; as it must needs do, where it is not mingled, obscured, or discoloured, by passion and interest.
I remember it was with extreme difficulty that I could bring my master to understand the meaning of the word opinion, or how a point could be disputable; because reason taught us to affirm or deny only where we are certain; and beyond our knowledge we cannot do either.
So that controversies, wranglings, disputes, and positiveness, in false or dubious propositions, are evils unknown among the _Houyhnhnms_.
I have often since reflected, what destruction such doctrine would make in the libraries of Europe; and how many paths of fame would be then shut up in the learned world.
Friendship and benevolence are the two principal virtues among the _Houyhnhnms_; and these not confined to particular objects, but universal to the whole race; for a stranger from the remotest part is equally treated with the nearest neighbour, and wherever he goes, looks upon himself as at home.
They preserve decency and civility in the highest degrees, but are altogether ignorant of ceremony.
They have no fondness for their colts or foals, but the care they take in educating them proceeds entirely from the dictates of reason.
And I observed my master to show the same affection to his neighbour’s issue, that he had for his own.
They will have it that nature teaches them to love the whole species, and it is reason only that makes a distinction of persons, where there is a superior degree of virtue.
This caution is necessary, to prevent the country from being overburdened with numbers.
But the race of inferior _Houyhnhnms_, bred up to be servants, is not so strictly limited upon this article: these are allowed to produce three of each sex, to be domestics in the noble families.
In their marriages, they are exactly careful to choose such colours as will not make any disagreeable mixture in the breed.
Strength is chiefly valued in the male, and comeliness in the female; not upon the account of love, but to preserve the race from degenerating; for where a female happens to excel in strength, a consort is chosen, with regard to comeliness.
Courtship, love, presents, jointures, settlements have no place in their thoughts, or terms whereby to express them in their language.
The young couple meet, and are joined, merely because it is the determination of their parents and friends; it is what they see done every day, and they look upon it as one of the necessary actions of a reasonable being.
But the violation of marriage, or any other unchastity, was never heard of; and the married pair pass their lives with the same friendship and mutual benevolence, that they bear to all others of the same species who come in their way, without jealousy, fondness, quarrelling, or discontent.
In educating the youth of both sexes, their method is admirable, and highly deserves our imitation.
But the _Houyhnhnms_ train up their youth to strength, speed, and hardiness, by exercising them in running races up and down steep hills, and over hard stony grounds; and when they are all in a sweat, they are ordered to leap over head and ears into a pond or river.
Four times a year the youth of a certain district meet to show their proficiency in running and leaping, and other feats of strength and agility; where the victor is rewarded with a song in his or her praise.
On this festival, the servants drive a herd of _Yahoos_ into the field, laden with hay, and oats, and milk, for a repast to the _Houyhnhnms_; after which, these brutes are immediately driven back again, for fear of being noisome to the assembly.
Every fourth year, at the vernal equinox, there is a representative council of the whole nation, which meets in a plain about twenty miles from our house, and continues about five or six days.
Here they inquire into the state and condition of the several districts; whether they abound or be deficient in hay or oats, or cows, or _Yahoos_; and wherever there is any want (which is but seldom) it is immediately supplied by unanimous consent and contribution.
Here likewise the regulation of children is settled: as for instance, if a _Houyhnhnm_ has two males, he changes one of them with another that has two females; and when a child has been lost by any casualty, where the mother is past breeding, it is determined what family in the district shall breed another to supply the loss.
A grand debate at the general assembly of the _Houyhnhnms_, and how it was determined.
The learning of the _Houyhnhnms_.
The defectiveness of their language.
One of these grand assemblies was held in my time, about three months before my departure, whither my master went as the representative of our district.
In this council was resumed their old debate, and indeed the only debate that ever happened in their country; whereof my master, after his return, gave me a very particular account.
The reason of this assertion was, that he had now in his possession a certain wonderful _Yahoo_ (meaning myself) which most of them had heard of, and many of them had seen.
But he was pleased to conceal one particular, which related personally to myself, whereof I soon felt the unhappy effect, as the reader will know in its proper place, and whence I date all the succeeding misfortunes of my life.
The _Houyhnhnms_ have no letters, and consequently their knowledge is all traditional.
But there happening few events of any moment among a people so well united, naturally disposed to every virtue, wholly governed by reason, and cut off from all commerce with other nations, the historical part is easily preserved without burdening their memories.
I have already observed that they are subject to no diseases, and therefore can have no need of physicians.
However, they have excellent medicines, composed of herbs, to cure accidental bruises and cuts in the pastern or frog of the foot, by sharp stones, as well as other maims and hurts in the several parts of the body.
They calculate the year by the revolution of the sun and moon, but use no subdivisions into weeks.
They are well enough acquainted with the motions of those two luminaries, and understand the nature of eclipses; and this is the utmost progress of their astronomy.
In poetry, they must be allowed to excel all other mortals; wherein the justness of their similes, and the minuteness as well as exactness of their descriptions, are indeed inimitable.
Their verses abound very much in both of these, and usually contain either some exalted notions of friendship and benevolence or the praises of those who were victors in races and other bodily exercises.
Their buildings, although very rude and simple, are not inconvenient, but well contrived to defend them from all injuries of cold and heat.
They have a kind of tree, which at forty years old loosens in the root, and falls with the first storm: it grows very straight, and being pointed like stakes with a sharp stone (for the _Houyhnhnms_ know not the use of iron), they stick them erect in the ground, about ten inches asunder, and then weave in oat straw, or sometimes wattles, between them.
The _Houyhnhnms_ use the hollow part, between the pastern and the hoof of their fore-foot, as we do our hands, and this with greater dexterity than I could at first imagine.
They milk their cows, reap their oats, and do all the work which requires hands, in the same manner.
They have a kind of hard flints, which, by grinding against other stones, they form into instruments, that serve instead of wedges, axes, and hammers.
With tools made of these flints, they likewise cut their hay, and reap their oats, which there grow naturally in several fields; the _Yahoos_ draw home the sheaves in carriages, and the servants tread them in certain covered huts to get out the grain, which is kept in stores.
If they can avoid casualties, they die only of old age, and are buried in the obscurest places that can be found, their friends and relations expressing neither joy nor grief at their departure; nor does the dying person discover the least regret that he is leaving the world, any more than if he were upon returning home from a visit to one of his neighbours.
I remember my master having once made an appointment with a friend and his family to come to his house, upon some affair of importance: on the day fixed, the mistress and her two children came very late; she made two excuses, first for her husband, who, as she said, happened that very morning to _shnuwnh_.
The word is strongly expressive in their language, but not easily rendered into English; it signifies, “to retire to his first mother.” Her excuse for not coming sooner, was, that her husband dying late in the morning, she was a good while consulting her servants about a convenient place where his body should be laid; and I observed, she behaved herself at our house as cheerfully as the rest.
They live generally to seventy, or seventy-five years, very seldom to fourscore.
During this time they are much visited by their friends, because they cannot go abroad with their usual ease and satisfaction.
I know not whether it may be worth observing, that the _Houyhnhnms_ have no word in their language to express any thing that is evil, except what they borrow from the deformities or ill qualities of the _Yahoos_.
Thus they denote the folly of a servant, an omission of a child, a stone that cuts their feet, a continuance of foul or unseasonable weather, and the like, by adding to each the epithet of _Yahoo_.
For instance, _hhnm Yahoo_; _whnaholm Yahoo_, _ynlhmndwihlma Yahoo_, and an ill-contrived house _ynholmhnmrohlnw Yahoo_.
I could, with great pleasure, enlarge further upon the manners and virtues of this excellent people; but intending in a short time to publish a volume by itself, expressly upon that subject, I refer the reader thither; and, in the mean time, proceed to relate my own sad catastrophe.
The author’s economy, and happy life among the Houyhnhnms.
His great improvement in virtue by conversing with them.
Their conversations.
He contrives and finishes a canoe by the help of a fellow-servant, and puts to sea at a venture.
My master had ordered a room to be made for me, after their manner, about six yards from the house: the sides and floors of which I plastered with clay, and covered with rush-mats of my own contriving.
I had beaten hemp, which there grows wild, and made of it a sort of ticking; this I filled with the feathers of several birds I had taken with springes made of _Yahoos’_ hairs, and were excellent food.
I had worked two chairs with my knife, the sorrel nag helping me in the grosser and more laborious part.
When my clothes were worn to rags, I made myself others with the skins of rabbits, and of a certain beautiful animal, about the same size, called _nnuhnoh_, the skin of which is covered with a fine down.
Of these I also made very tolerable stockings.
I soled my shoes with wood, which I cut from a tree, and fitted to the upper-leather; and when this was worn out, I supplied it with the skins of _Yahoos_ dried in the sun.
No man could more verify the truth of these two maxims, “That nature is very easily satisfied;” and, “That necessity is the mother of invention.” I enjoyed perfect health of body, and tranquillity of mind; I did not feel the treachery or inconstancy of a friend, nor the injuries of a secret or open enemy.
I had the favour of being admitted to several _Houyhnhnms_, who came to visit or dine with my master; where his honour graciously suffered me to wait in the room, and listen to their discourse.
Both he and his company would often descend to ask me questions, and receive my answers.
I had also sometimes the honour of attending my master in his visits to others.
They have a notion, that when people are met together, a short silence does much improve conversation: this I found to be true; for during those little intermissions of talk, new ideas would arise in their minds, which very much enlivened the discourse.
Their subjects are generally on friendship and benevolence, on order and economy; sometimes upon the visible operations of nature, or ancient traditions; upon the bounds and limits of virtue; upon the unerring rules of reason, or upon some determinations to be taken at the next great assembly: and often upon the various excellences of poetry.
I admired the strength, comeliness, and speed of the inhabitants; and such a constellation of virtues, in such amiable persons, produced in me the highest veneration.
At first, indeed, I did not feel that natural awe, which the _Yahoos_ and all other animals bear toward them; but it grew upon me by degrees, much sooner than I imagined, and was mingled with a respectful love and gratitude, that they would condescend to distinguish me from the rest of my species.
When I thought of my family, my friends, my countrymen, or the human race in general, I considered them, as they really were, _Yahoos_ in shape and disposition, perhaps a little more civilized, and qualified with the gift of speech; but making no other use of reason, than to improve and multiply those vices whereof their brethren in this country had only the share that nature allotted them.
When I happened to behold the reflection of my own form in a lake or fountain, I turned away my face in horror and detestation of myself, and could better endure the sight of a common _Yahoo_ than of my own person.
By conversing with the _Houyhnhnms_, and looking upon them with delight, I fell to imitate their gait and gesture, which is now grown into a habit; and my friends often tell me, in a blunt way, “that I trot like a horse;” which, however, I take for a great compliment.
Neither shall I disown, that in speaking I am apt to fall into the voice and manner of the _Houyhnhnms_, and hear myself ridiculed on that account, without the least mortification.
In the midst of all this happiness, and when I looked upon myself to be fully settled for life, my master sent for me one morning a little earlier than his usual hour.
I observed by his countenance that he was in some perplexity, and at a loss how to begin what he had to speak.
I was struck with the utmost grief and despair at my master’s discourse; and being unable to support the agonies I was under, I fell into a swoon at his feet.
When I came to myself, he told me “that he concluded I had been dead;” for these people are subject to no such imbecilities of nature.
I took out my pocket glass, and could then clearly distinguish it above five leagues off, as I computed; but it appeared to the sorrel nag to be only a blue cloud: for as he had no conception of any country beside his own, so he could not be as expert in distinguishing remote objects at sea, as we who so much converse in that element.
After I had discovered this island, I considered no further; but resolved it should, if possible, be the first place of my banishment, leaving the consequence to fortune.
I returned home, and consulting with the sorrel nag, we went into a copse at some distance, where I with my knife, and he with a sharp flint, fastened very artificially after their manner, to a wooden handle, cut down several oak wattles, about the thickness of a walking-staff, and some larger pieces.
But I shall not trouble the reader with a particular description of my own mechanics; let it suffice to say, that in six weeks time with the help of the sorrel nag, who performed the parts that required most labour, I finished a sort of Indian canoe, but much larger, covering it with the skins of _Yahoos_, well stitched together with hempen threads of my own making.
My sail was likewise composed of the skins of the same animal; but I made use of the youngest I could get, the older being too tough and thick; and I likewise provided myself with four paddles.
I tried my canoe in a large pond, near my master’s house, and then corrected in it what was amiss; stopping all the chinks with _Yahoos’_ tallow, till I found it staunch, and able to bear me and my freight; and, when it was as complete as I could possibly make it, I had it drawn on a carriage very gently by _Yahoos_ to the sea-side, under the conduct of the sorrel nag and another servant.
When all was ready, and the day came for my departure, I took leave of my master and lady and the whole family, my eyes flowing with tears, and my heart quite sunk with grief.
But his honour, out of curiosity, and, perhaps, (if I may speak without vanity,) partly out of kindness, was determined to see me in my canoe, and got several of his neighbouring friends to accompany him.
I was forced to wait above an hour for the tide; and then observing the wind very fortunately bearing toward the island to which I intended to steer my course, I took a second leave of my master; but as I was going to prostrate myself to kiss his hoof, he did me the honour to raise it gently to my mouth.
I am not ignorant how much I have been censured for mentioning this last particular.
Detractors are pleased to think it improbable, that so illustrious a person should descend to give so great a mark of distinction to a creature so inferior as I.
Neither have I forgotten how apt some travellers are to boast of extraordinary favours they have received.
But, if these censurers were better acquainted with the noble and courteous disposition of the _Houyhnhnms_, they would soon change their opinion.
I paid my respects to the rest of the _Houyhnhnms_ in his honour’s company; then getting into my canoe, I pushed off from shore.
The author’s dangerous voyage.
Is seized and carried by force into a Portuguese ship.
The great civilities of the captain.
I began this desperate voyage on February 15, 1714–15, at nine o’clock in the morning.
The wind was very favourable; however, I made use at first only of my paddles; but considering I should soon be weary, and that the wind might chop about, I ventured to set up my little sail; and thus, with the help of the tide, I went at the rate of a league and a half an hour, as near as I could guess.
For in such a solitude as I desired, I could at least enjoy my own thoughts, and reflect with delight on the virtues of those inimitable _Houyhnhnms_, without an opportunity of degenerating into the vices and corruptions of my own species.
And although this were little better than conjecture, yet I resolved to steer my course eastward, hoping to reach the south-west coast of New Holland, and perhaps some such island as I desired lying westward of it.
The wind was full west, and by six in the evening I computed I had gone eastward at least eighteen leagues; when I spied a very small island about half a league off, which I soon reached.
It was nothing but a rock, with one creek naturally arched by the force of tempests.
Here I put in my canoe, and climbing a part of the rock, I could plainly discover land to the east, extending from south to north.
I lay all night in my canoe; and repeating my voyage early in the morning, I arrived in seven hours to the south-east point of New Holland.
This confirmed me in the opinion I have long entertained, that the maps and charts place this country at least three degrees more to the east than it really is; which thought I communicated many years ago to my worthy friend, Mr.
Herman Moll, and gave him my reasons for it, although he has rather chosen to follow other authors.
I saw no inhabitants in the place where I landed, and being unarmed, I was afraid of venturing far into the country.
I found some shellfish on the shore, and ate them raw, not daring to kindle a fire, for fear of being discovered by the natives.
I continued three days feeding on oysters and limpets, to save my own provisions; and I fortunately found a brook of excellent water, which gave me great relief.
On the fourth day, venturing out early a little too far, I saw twenty or thirty natives upon a height not above five hundred yards from me.
They were stark naked, men, women, and children, round a fire, as I could discover by the smoke.
One of them spied me, and gave notice to the rest; five of them advanced toward me, leaving the women and children at the fire.
I made what haste I could to the shore, and, getting into my canoe, shoved off: the savages, observing me retreat, ran after me; and before I could get far enough into the sea, discharged an arrow which wounded me deeply on the inside of my left knee: I shall carry the mark to my grave.
I apprehended the arrow might be poisoned, and paddling out of the reach of their darts (being a calm day), I made a shift to suck the wound, and dress it as well as I could.
I drew up my canoe as close as I could to the shore, and hid myself behind a stone by the little brook, which, as I have already said, was excellent water.
The seamen at their landing observed my canoe, and rummaging it all over, easily conjectured that the owner could not be far off.
Four of them, well armed, searched every cranny and lurking-hole, till at last they found me flat on my face behind the stone.
They gazed awhile in admiration at my strange uncouth dress; my coat made of skins, my wooden-soled shoes, and my furred stockings; whence, however, they concluded, I was not a native of the place, who all go naked.
One of the seamen, in Portuguese, bid me rise, and asked who I was.
I trembled all the while betwixt fear and hatred.
I again desired leave to depart, and was gently moving to my canoe; but they laid hold of me, desiring to know, “what country I was of? whence I came?” with many other questions.
I therefore hoped they would not treat me as an enemy, since I meant them no harm, but was a poor _Yahoo_ seeking some desolate place where to pass the remainder of his unfortunate life.” When they began to talk, I thought I never heard or saw any thing more unnatural; for it appeared to me as monstrous as if a dog or a cow should speak in England, or a _Yahoo_ in _Houyhnhnmland_.
The honest Portuguese were equally amazed at my strange dress, and the odd manner of delivering my words, which, however, they understood very well.
They spoke to me with great humanity, and said, “they were sure the captain would carry me _gratis_ to Lisbon, whence I might return to my own country; that two of the seamen would go back to the ship, inform the captain of what they had seen, and receive his orders; in the mean time, unless I would give my solemn oath not to fly, they would secure me by force.
I thought it best to comply with their proposal.
They were very curious to know my story, but I gave them very little satisfaction, and they all conjectured that my misfortunes had impaired my reason.
In two hours the boat, which went laden with vessels of water, returned, with the captain’s command to fetch me on board.
I fell on my knees to preserve my liberty; but all was in vain; and the men, having tied me with cords, heaved me into the boat, whence I was taken into the ship, and thence into the captain’s cabin.
His name was Pedro de Mendez; he was a very courteous and generous person.
He entreated me to give some account of myself, and desired to know what I would eat or drink; said, “I should be used as well as himself;” and spoke so many obliging things, that I wondered to find such civilities from a _Yahoo_.
However, I remained silent and sullen; I was ready to faint at the very smell of him and his men.
At last I desired something to eat out of my own canoe; but he ordered me a chicken, and some excellent wine, and then directed that I should be put to bed in a very clean cabin.
I would not undress myself, but lay on the bed-clothes, and in half an hour stole out, when I thought the crew was at dinner, and getting to the side of the ship, was going to leap into the sea, and swim for my life, rather than continue among _Yahoos_.
But one of the seamen prevented me, and having informed the captain, I was chained to my cabin.
After dinner, Don Pedro came to me, and desired to know my reason for so desperate an attempt; assured me, “he only meant to do me all the service he was able;” and spoke so very movingly, that at last I descended to treat him like an animal which had some little portion of reason.
I gave him a very short relation of my voyage; of the conspiracy against me by my own men; of the country where they set me on shore, and of my five years residence there.
All which he looked upon as if it were a dream or a vision; whereat I took great offence; for I had quite forgot the faculty of lying, so peculiar to _Yahoos_, in all countries where they preside, and, consequently, their disposition of suspecting truth in others of their own species.
In gratitude to the captain, I sometimes sat with him, at his earnest request, and strove to conceal my antipathy against humankind, although it often broke out; which he suffered to pass without observation.
But the greatest part of the day I confined myself to my cabin, to avoid seeing any of the crew.
The captain had often entreated me to strip myself of my savage dress, and offered to lend me the best suit of clothes he had.
This I would not be prevailed on to accept, abhorring to cover myself with any thing that had been on the back of a _Yahoo_.
I only desired he would lend me two clean shirts, which, having been washed since he wore them, I believed would not so much defile me.
At our landing, the captain forced me to cover myself with his cloak, to prevent the rabble from crowding about me.
I was conveyed to his own house; and at my earnest request he led me up to the highest room backwards.
He accoutred me with other necessaries, all new, which I aired for twenty-four hours before I would use them.
The captain had no wife, nor above three servants, none of which were suffered to attend at meals; and his whole deportment was so obliging, added to very good human understanding, that I really began to tolerate his company.
He gained so far upon me, that I ventured to look out of the back window.
I found my terror gradually lessened, but my hatred and contempt seemed to increase.
I was at last bold enough to walk the street in his company, but kept my nose well stopped with rue, or sometimes with tobacco.
He said, “it was altogether impossible to find such a solitary island as I desired to live in; but I might command in my own house, and pass my time in a manner as recluse as I pleased.” I complied at last, finding I could not do better.
I left Lisbon the 24th day of November, in an English merchantman, but who was the master I never inquired.
Don Pedro accompanied me to the ship, and lent me twenty pounds.
He took kind leave of me, and embraced me at parting, which I bore as well as I could.
During this last voyage I had no commerce with the master or any of his men; but, pretending I was sick, kept close in my cabin.
For although, since my unfortunate exile from the _Houyhnhnm_ country, I had compelled myself to tolerate the sight of _Yahoos_, and to converse with Don Pedro de Mendez, yet my memory and imagination were perpetually filled with the virtues and ideas of those exalted _Houyhnhnms_.
And when I began to consider that, by copulating with one of the _Yahoo_ species I had become a parent of more, it struck me with the utmost shame, confusion, and horror.
During the first year, I could not endure my wife or children in my presence; the very smell of them was intolerable; much less could I suffer them to eat in the same room.
The first money I laid out was to buy two young stone-horses, which I keep in a good stable; and next to them, the groom is my greatest favourite, for I feel my spirits revived by the smell he contracts in the stable.
My horses understand me tolerably well; I converse with them at least four hours every day.
They are strangers to bridle or saddle; they live in great amity with me and friendship to each other.
The author’s veracity.
His design in publishing this work.
His censure of those travellers who swerve from the truth.
The author clears himself from any sinister ends in writing.
An objection answered.
The method of planting colonies.
His native country commended.
The right of the crown to those countries described by the author is justified.
The difficulty of conquering them.
The author takes his last leave of the reader; proposes his manner of living for the future; gives good advice, and concludes.
Thus, gentle reader, I have given thee a faithful history of my travels for sixteen years and above seven months: wherein I have not been so studious of ornament as of truth.
I could, perhaps, like others, have astonished thee with strange improbable tales; but I rather chose to relate plain matter of fact, in the simplest manner and style; because my principal design was to inform, and not to amuse thee.
It is easy for us who travel into remote countries, which are seldom visited by Englishmen or other Europeans, to form descriptions of wonderful animals both at sea and land.
Whereas a traveller’s chief aim should be to make men wiser and better, and to improve their minds by the bad, as well as good, example of what they deliver concerning foreign places.
I have perused several books of travels with great delight in my younger days; but having since gone over most parts of the globe, and been able to contradict many fabulous accounts from my own observation, it has given me a great disgust against this part of reading, and some indignation to see the credulity of mankind so impudently abused.
I know very well, how little reputation is to be got by writings which require neither genius nor learning, nor indeed any other talent, except a good memory, or an exact journal.
I know likewise, that writers of travels, like dictionary-makers, are sunk into oblivion by the weight and bulk of those who come last, and therefore lie uppermost.
And it is highly probable, that such travellers, who shall hereafter visit the countries described in this work of mine, may, by detecting my errors (if there be any), and adding many new discoveries of their own, jostle me out of vogue, and stand in my place, making the world forget that ever I was an author.
This indeed would be too great a mortification, if I wrote for fame: but as my sole intention was the public good, I cannot be altogether disappointed.
For who can read of the virtues I have mentioned in the glorious _Houyhnhnms_, without being ashamed of his own vices, when he considers himself as the reasoning, governing animal of his country?
I shall say nothing of those remote nations where _Yahoos_ preside; among which the least corrupted are the _Brobdingnagians_; whose wise maxims in morality and government it would be our happiness to observe.
But I forbear descanting further, and rather leave the judicious reader to his own remarks and application.
I am not a little pleased that this work of mine can possibly meet with no censurers: for what objections can be made against a writer, who relates only plain facts, that happened in such distant countries, where we have not the least interest, with respect either to trade or negotiations?
I have carefully avoided every fault with which common writers of travels are often too justly charged.
Besides, I meddle not the least with any party, but write without passion, prejudice, or ill-will against any man, or number of men, whatsoever.
I write for the noblest end, to inform and instruct mankind; over whom I may, without breach of modesty, pretend to some superiority, from the advantages I received by conversing so long among the most accomplished _Houyhnhnms_.
I never suffer a word to pass that may look like reflection, or possibly give the least offence, even to those who are most ready to take it.
So that I hope I may with justice pronounce myself an author perfectly blameless; against whom the tribes of Answerers, Considerers, Observers, Reflectors, Detectors, Remarkers, will never be able to find matter for exercising their talents.
I confess, it was whispered to me, “that I was bound in duty, as a subject of England, to have given in a memorial to a secretary of state at my first coming over; because, whatever lands are discovered by a subject belong to the crown.” But I doubt whether our conquests in the countries I treat of would be as easy as those of Ferdinando Cortez over the naked Americans.
The _Lilliputians_, I think, are hardly worth the charge of a fleet and army to reduce them; and I question whether it might be prudent or safe to attempt the _Brobdingnagians_; or whether an English army would be much at their ease with the Flying Island over their heads.
The _Houyhnhnms_ indeed appear not to be so well prepared for war, a science to which they are perfect strangers, and especially against missive weapons.
However, supposing myself to be a minister of state, I could never give my advice for invading them.
Their prudence, unanimity, unacquaintedness with fear, and their love of their country, would amply supply all defects in the military art.
Imagine twenty thousand of them breaking into the midst of an European army, confounding the ranks, overturning the carriages, battering the warriors’ faces into mummy by terrible yerks from their hinder hoofs.
For they would well deserve the character given to Augustus, _Recalcitrat undique tutus_.
But, instead of proposals for conquering that magnanimous nation, I rather wish they were in a capacity, or disposition, to send a sufficient number of their inhabitants for civilizing Europe, by teaching us the first principles of honour, justice, truth, temperance, public spirit, fortitude, chastity, friendship, benevolence, and fidelity.
The names of all which virtues are still retained among us in most languages, and are to be met with in modern, as well as ancient authors; which I am able to assert from my own small reading.
But I had another reason, which made me less forward to enlarge his majesty’s dominions by my discoveries.
To say the truth, I had conceived a few scruples with relation to the distributive justice of princes upon those occasions.
Here commences a new dominion acquired with a title by divine right.
Ships are sent with the first opportunity; the natives driven out or destroyed; their princes tortured to discover their gold; a free license given to all acts of inhumanity and lust, the earth reeking with the blood of its inhabitants: and this execrable crew of butchers, employed in so pious an expedition, is a modern colony, sent to convert and civilize an idolatrous and barbarous people!
But as those countries which I have described do not appear to have any desire of being conquered and enslaved, murdered or driven out by colonies, nor abound either in gold, silver, sugar, or tobacco, I did humbly conceive, they were by no means proper objects of our zeal, our valour, or our interest.
However, if those whom it more concerns think fit to be of another opinion, I am ready to depose, when I shall be lawfully called, that no European did ever visit those countries before me.
But, as to the formality of taking possession in my sovereign’s name, it never came once into my thoughts; and if it had, yet, as my affairs then stood, I should perhaps, in point of prudence and self-preservation, have put it off to a better opportunity.
I began last week to permit my wife to sit at dinner with me, at the farthest end of a long table; and to answer (but with the utmost brevity) the few questions I asked her.
Yet, the smell of a _Yahoo_ continuing very offensive, I always keep my nose well stopped with rue, lavender, or tobacco leaves.
And, although it be hard for a man late in life to remove old habits, I am not altogether out of hopes, in some time, to suffer a neighbour _Yahoo_ in my company, without the apprehensions I am yet under of his teeth or his claws.
My reconcilement to the _Yahoo_-kind in general might not be so difficult, if they would be content with those vices and follies only which nature has entitled them to.
But I, who had more experience, could plainly observe some rudiments of it among the wild _Yahoos_.
But the _Houyhnhnms_, who live under the government of reason, are no more proud of the good qualities they possess, than I should be for not wanting a leg or an arm; which no man in his wits would boast of, although he must be miserable without them.
I dwell the longer upon this subject from the desire I have to make the society of an English _Yahoo_ by any means not insupportable; and therefore I here entreat those who have any tincture of this absurd vice, that they will not presume to come in my sight.
FOOTNOTES: [301] A stang is a pole or perch; sixteen feet and a half. [330] An act of parliament has been since passed by which some breaches of trust have been made capital. [454a] Britannia.—_Sir W.
The above paragraph in the original editions (1726) takes another form, commencing:—“I told him that should I happen to live in a kingdom where lots were in vogue,” &c.
The names Tribnia and Langden are not mentioned, and the “close stool” and its signification do not occur. [514] This paragraph is not in the original editions. [546] The original editions and Hawksworth’s have Rotherhith here, though earlier in the work, Redriff is said to have been Gulliver’s home in England.
Algernon Moncrieff Rev.
Canon Chasuble, D.D.
Merriman, Butler Lane, Manservant Lady Bracknell Hon.
Gwendolen Fairfax Cecily Cardew Miss Prism, Governess THE SCENES OF THE PLAY ACT I.
Algernon Moncrieff’s Flat in Half-Moon Street, W.
George Alexander February 14th, 1895 * * * * * John Worthing, J.P.: Mr.
Algernon Moncrieff: Mr.
Canon Chasuble, D.D.: Mr.
Lady Bracknell: Miss Rose Leclercq.
Gwendolen Fairfax: Miss Irene Vanbrugh.
FIRST ACT SCENE Morning-room in Algernon’s flat in Half-Moon Street.
The room is luxuriously and artistically furnished.
The sound of a piano is heard in the adjoining room. [Lane is arranging afternoon tea on the table, and after the music has ceased, Algernon enters.] ALGERNON.
I don’t play accurately—any one can play accurately—but I play with wonderful expression.
As far as the piano is concerned, sentiment is my forte.
And, speaking of the science of Life, have you got the cucumber sandwiches cut for Lady Bracknell?
Yes, sir. [Hands them on a salver.] ALGERNON. [Inspects them, takes two, and sits down on the sofa.] Oh! . . . by the way, Lane, I see from your book that on Thursday night, when Lord Shoreman and Mr.
Worthing were dining with me, eight bottles of champagne are entered as having been consumed.
Why is it that at a bachelor’s establishment the servants invariably drink the champagne?
I ask merely for information.
I attribute it to the superior quality of the wine, sir.
I have often observed that in married households the champagne is rarely of a first-rate brand.
Is marriage so demoralising as that?
I believe it _is_ a very pleasant state, sir.
I have had very little experience of it myself up to the present.
That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between myself and a young person.
ALGERNON. [Languidly_._] I don’t know that I am much interested in your family life, Lane.
No, sir; it is not a very interesting subject.
Thank you, sir. [Lane goes out.] ALGERNON.
Lane’s views on marriage seem somewhat lax.
They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral responsibility. [Enter Lane.] LANE.
Ernest Worthing. [Enter Jack.] [Lane goes out_._] ALGERNON.
Oh, pleasure, pleasure!
What else should bring one anywhere?
ALGERNON. [Stiffly_._] I believe it is customary in good society to take some slight refreshment at five o’clock.
Where have you been since last Thursday?
It is excessively boring.
JACK. [Airily_._] Oh, neighbours, neighbours.
Got nice neighbours in your part of Shropshire?
How immensely you must amuse them! [Goes over and takes sandwich.] By the way, Shropshire is your county, is it not?
Why cucumber sandwiches?
Why such reckless extravagance in one so young?
Oh! merely Aunt Augusta and Gwendolen.
How perfectly delightful!
My dear fellow, the way you flirt with Gwendolen is perfectly disgraceful.
It is almost as bad as the way Gwendolen flirts with you.
I am in love with Gwendolen.
I have come up to town expressly to propose to her.
I thought you had come up for pleasure? . . .
I call that business.
How utterly unromantic you are!
I really don’t see anything romantic in proposing.
It is very romantic to be in love.
But there is nothing romantic about a definite proposal.
Why, one may be accepted.
Then the excitement is all over.
The very essence of romance is uncertainty.
If ever I get married, I’ll certainly try to forget the fact.
The Divorce Court was specially invented for people whose memories are so curiously constituted.
Oh! there is no use speculating on that subject.
Divorces are made in Heaven—[Jack puts out his hand to take a sandwich.
Algernon at once interferes.] Please don’t touch the cucumber sandwiches.
They are ordered specially for Aunt Augusta. [Takes one and eats it.] JACK.
That is quite a different matter.
The bread and butter is for Gwendolen.
Gwendolen is devoted to bread and butter.
JACK. [Advancing to table and helping himself.] And very good bread and butter it is too.
Oh, that is nonsense!
It accounts for the extraordinary number of bachelors that one sees all over the place.
My dear fellow, Gwendolen is my first cousin.
And before I allow you to marry her, you will have to clear up the whole question of Cecily. [Rings bell.] JACK.
I don’t know any one of the name of Cecily. [Enter Lane.] ALGERNON.
Bring me that cigarette case Mr.
Worthing left in the smoking-room the last time he dined here.
Do you mean to say you have had my cigarette case all this time?
I wish to goodness you had let me know.
I have been writing frantic letters to Scotland Yard about it.
I was very nearly offering a large reward.
There is no good offering a large reward now that the thing is found. [Enter Lane with the cigarette case on a salver.
Algernon takes it at once.
Lane goes out.] ALGERNON.
I think that is rather mean of you, Ernest, I must say. [Opens case and examines it.] However, it makes no matter, for, now that I look at the inscription inside, I find that the thing isn’t yours after all.
Of course it’s mine. [Moving to him.] You have seen me with it a hundred times, and you have no right whatsoever to read what is written inside.
It is a very ungentlemanly thing to read a private cigarette case.
I simply want my cigarette case back.
Yes; but this isn’t your cigarette case.
This cigarette case is a present from some one of the name of Cecily, and you said you didn’t know any one of that name.
Charming old lady she is, too.
Lives at Tunbridge Wells.
ALGERNON. [Retreating to back of sofa.] But why does she call herself little Cecily if she is your aunt and lives at Tunbridge Wells? [Reading.] ‘From little Cecily with her fondest love.’ JACK. [Moving to sofa and kneeling upon it.] My dear fellow, what on earth is there in that?
For Heaven’s sake give me back my cigarette case. [Follows Algernon round the room.] ALGERNON.
‘From little Cecily, with her fondest love to her dear Uncle Jack.’ There is no objection, I admit, to an aunt being a small aunt, but why an aunt, no matter what her size may be, should call her own nephew her uncle, I can’t quite make out.
I have introduced you to every one as Ernest.
It is perfectly absurd your saying that your name isn’t Ernest.
Ernest Worthing, B. 4, The Albany.’ I’ll keep this as a proof that your name is Ernest if ever you attempt to deny it to me, or to Gwendolen, or to any one else. [Puts the card in his pocket.] JACK.
Well, my name is Ernest in town and Jack in the country, and the cigarette case was given to me in the country.
Yes, but that does not account for the fact that your small Aunt Cecily, who lives at Tunbridge Wells, calls you her dear uncle.
It produces a false impression.
Well, that is exactly what dentists always do.
I may mention that I have always suspected you of being a confirmed and secret Bunburyist; and I am quite sure of it now.
What on earth do you mean by a Bunburyist?
I’ll reveal to you the meaning of that incomparable expression as soon as you are kind enough to inform me why you are Ernest in town and Jack in the country.
Well, produce my cigarette case first.
Here it is. [Hands cigarette case.] Now produce your explanation, and pray make it improbable. [Sits on sofa.] JACK.
My dear fellow, there is nothing improbable about my explanation at all.
In fact it’s perfectly ordinary.
Thomas Cardew, who adopted me when I was a little boy, made me in his will guardian to his grand-daughter, Miss Cecily Cardew.
Cecily, who addresses me as her uncle from motives of respect that you could not possibly appreciate, lives at my place in the country under the charge of her admirable governess, Miss Prism.
I may tell you candidly that the place is not in Shropshire.
I suspected that, my dear fellow!
I have Bunburyed all over Shropshire on two separate occasions.
My dear Algy, I don’t know whether you will be able to understand my real motives.
When one is placed in the position of guardian, one has to adopt a very high moral tone on all subjects.
And as a high moral tone can hardly be said to conduce very much to either one’s health or one’s happiness, in order to get up to town I have always pretended to have a younger brother of the name of Ernest, who lives in the Albany, and gets into the most dreadful scrapes.
Modern life would be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete impossibility!
Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow.
You should leave that to people who haven’t been at a University.
What you really are is a Bunburyist.
I was quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist.
You are one of the most advanced Bunburyists I know.
You have invented a very useful younger brother called Ernest, in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like.
I have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.
Bunbury is perfectly invaluable.
If it wasn’t for Bunbury’s extraordinary bad health, for instance, I wouldn’t be able to dine with you at Willis’s to-night, for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a week.
I haven’t asked you to dine with me anywhere to-night.
You are absurdly careless about sending out invitations.
Nothing annoys people so much as not receiving invitations.
I haven’t the smallest intention of doing anything of the kind.
To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite enough to dine with one’s own relations.
In the second place, whenever I do dine there I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent down with either no woman at all, or two.
In the third place, I know perfectly well whom she will place me next to, to-night.
She will place me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts with her own husband across the dinner-table.
That is not very pleasant.
Indeed, it is not even decent . . . and that sort of thing is enormously on the increase.
The amount of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is perfectly scandalous.
Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed Bunburyist I naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying.
I’m not a Bunburyist at all.
If Gwendolen accepts me, I am going to kill my brother, indeed I think I’ll kill him in any case.
Cecily is a little too much interested in him.
And I strongly advise you to do the same with Mr. . . . with your invalid friend who has the absurd name.
Nothing will induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you ever get married, which seems to me extremely problematic, you will be very glad to know Bunbury.
If I marry a charming girl like Gwendolen, and she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I certainly won’t want to know Bunbury.
JACK. [Sententiously.] That, my dear young friend, is the theory that the corrupt French Drama has been propounding for the last fifty years.
It’s perfectly easy to be cynical.
My dear fellow, it isn’t easy to be anything nowadays.
There’s such a lot of beastly competition about. [The sound of an electric bell is heard.] Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta.
Only relatives, or creditors, ever ring in that Wagnerian manner.
Now, if I get her out of the way for ten minutes, so that you can have an opportunity for proposing to Gwendolen, may I dine with you to-night at Willis’s?
Lady Bracknell and Miss Fairfax. [Algernon goes forward to meet them.
Enter Lady Bracknell and Gwendolen.] LADY BRACKNELL.
Good afternoon, dear Algernon, I hope you are behaving very well.
In fact the two things rarely go together. [Sees Jack and bows to him with icy coldness.] ALGERNON. [To Gwendolen.] Dear me, you are smart!
It would leave no room for developments, and I intend to develop in many directions. [Gwendolen and Jack sit down together in the corner.] LADY BRACKNELL.
I’m sorry if we are a little late, Algernon, but I was obliged to call on dear Lady Harbury.
And now I’ll have a cup of tea, and one of those nice cucumber sandwiches you promised me.
Certainly, Aunt Augusta. [Goes over to tea-table.] LADY BRACKNELL.
Won’t you come and sit here, Gwendolen?
Thanks, mamma, I’m quite comfortable where I am.
ALGERNON. [Picking up empty plate in horror.] Good heavens!
Why are there no cucumber sandwiches?
I ordered them specially.
LANE. [Gravely.] There were no cucumbers in the market this morning, sir.
Thank you, sir. [Goes out.] ALGERNON.
I am greatly distressed, Aunt Augusta, about there being no cucumbers, not even for ready money.
It really makes no matter, Algernon.
I had some crumpets with Lady Harbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for pleasure now.
It certainly has changed its colour.
From what cause I, of course, cannot say. [Algernon crosses and hands tea.] Thank you.
I’ve quite a treat for you to-night, Algernon.
I am going to send you down with Mary Farquhar.
She is such a nice woman, and so attentive to her husband.
It’s delightful to watch them.
I am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall have to give up the pleasure of dining with you to-night after all.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Frowning.] I hope not, Algernon.
It would put my table completely out.
Your uncle would have to dine upstairs.
Fortunately he is accustomed to that.
It is a great bore, and, I need hardly say, a terrible disappointment to me, but the fact is I have just had a telegram to say that my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again. [Exchanges glances with Jack.] They seem to think I should be with him.
Bunbury seems to suffer from curiously bad health.
Yes; poor Bunbury is a dreadful invalid.
Well, I must say, Algernon, that I think it is high time that Mr.
This shilly-shallying with the question is absurd.
Nor do I in any way approve of the modern sympathy with invalids.
I consider it morbid.
Illness of any kind is hardly a thing to be encouraged in others.
I am always telling that to your poor uncle, but he never seems to take much notice . . . as far as any improvement in his ailment goes.
Bunbury, from me, to be kind enough not to have a relapse on Saturday, for I rely on you to arrange my music for me.
It is my last reception, and one wants something that will encourage conversation, particularly at the end of the season when every one has practically said whatever they had to say, which, in most cases, was probably not much.
I’ll speak to Bunbury, Aunt Augusta, if he is still conscious, and I think I can promise you he’ll be all right by Saturday.
Of course the music is a great difficulty.
But I’ll run over the programme I’ve drawn out, if you will kindly come into the next room for a moment.
Thank you, Algernon.
It is very thoughtful of you. [Rising, and following Algernon.] I’m sure the programme will be delightful, after a few expurgations.
French songs I cannot possibly allow.
People always seem to think that they are improper, and either look shocked, which is vulgar, or laugh, which is worse.
But German sounds a thoroughly respectable language, and indeed, I believe is so.
Gwendolen, you will accompany me.
Certainly, mamma. [Lady Bracknell and Algernon go into the music-room, Gwendolen remains behind.] JACK.
Charming day it has been, Miss Fairfax.
Whenever people talk to me about the weather, I always feel quite certain that they mean something else.
I _do_ mean something else.
And I would like to be allowed to take advantage of Lady Bracknell’s temporary absence . . .
I would certainly advise you to do so.
Mamma has a way of coming back suddenly into a room that I have often had to speak to her about.
JACK. [Nervously.] Miss Fairfax, ever since I met you I have admired you more than any girl . . .
And I often wish that in public, at any rate, you had been more demonstrative.
For me you have always had an irresistible fascination.
Even before I met you I was far from indifferent to you. [Jack looks at her in amazement.] We live, as I hope you know, Mr.
Worthing, in an age of ideals.
The fact is constantly mentioned in the more expensive monthly magazines, and has reached the provincial pulpits, I am told; and my ideal has always been to love some one of the name of Ernest.
There is something in that name that inspires absolute confidence.
The moment Algernon first mentioned to me that he had a friend called Ernest, I knew I was destined to love you.
You really love me, Gwendolen?
But supposing it was something else?
GWENDOLEN. [Glibly.] Ah! that is clearly a metaphysical speculation, and like most metaphysical speculations has very little reference at all to the actual facts of real life, as we know them.
Personally, darling, to speak quite candidly, I don’t much care about the name of Ernest . . .
It suits you perfectly.
It produces vibrations.
Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I think there are lots of other much nicer names.
I think Jack, for instance, a charming name.
It produces absolutely no vibrations . . .
I have known several Jacks, and they all, without exception, were more than usually plain.
Besides, Jack is a notorious domesticity for John!
She would probably never be allowed to know the entrancing pleasure of a single moment’s solitude.
Gwendolen, I must get christened at once—I mean we must get married at once.
JACK. [Astounded.] Well . . . surely.
You know that I love you, and you led me to believe, Miss Fairfax, that you were not absolutely indifferent to me.
But you haven’t proposed to me yet.
Nothing has been said at all about marriage.
I think it would be an admirable opportunity.
And to spare you any possible disappointment, Mr.
Worthing, I think it only fair to tell you quite frankly before-hand that I am fully determined to accept you.
Worthing, what have you got to say to me?
Gwendolen, will you marry me? [Goes on his knees.] GWENDOLEN.
I am afraid you have had very little experience in how to propose.
Yes, but men often propose for practice.
What wonderfully blue eyes you have, Ernest!
I hope you will always look at me just like that, especially when there are other people present. [Enter Lady Bracknell.] LADY BRACKNELL.
Rise, sir, from this semi-recumbent posture.
It is most indecorous.
Mamma! [He tries to rise; she restrains him.] I must beg you to retire.
Worthing has not quite finished yet.
Finished what, may I ask?
Worthing, mamma. [They rise together.] LADY BRACKNELL.
An engagement should come on a young girl as a surprise, pleasant or unpleasant, as the case may be.
And now I have a few questions to put to you, Mr.
While I am making these inquiries, you, Gwendolen, will wait for me below in the carriage.
GWENDOLEN. [Reproachfully.] Mamma!
In the carriage, Gwendolen! [Gwendolen goes to the door.
She and Jack blow kisses to each other behind Lady Bracknell’s back.
Lady Bracknell looks vaguely about as if she could not understand what the noise was.
Finally turns round.] Gwendolen, the carriage!
Yes, mamma. [Goes out, looking back at Jack.] LADY BRACKNELL. [Sitting down.] You can take a seat, Mr.
Worthing. [Looks in her pocket for note-book and pencil.] JACK.
Thank you, Lady Bracknell, I prefer standing.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Pencil and note-book in hand.] I feel bound to tell you that you are not down on my list of eligible young men, although I have the same list as the dear Duchess of Bolton has.
We work together, in fact.
However, I am quite ready to enter your name, should your answers be what a really affectionate mother requires.
A man should always have an occupation of some kind.
I have always been of opinion that a man who desires to get married should know either everything or nothing.
JACK. [After some hesitation.] I know nothing, Lady Bracknell.
I do not approve of anything that tampers with natural ignorance.
Ignorance is like a delicate exotic fruit; touch it and the bloom is gone.
The whole theory of modern education is radically unsound.
Fortunately in England, at any rate, education produces no effect whatsoever.
If it did, it would prove a serious danger to the upper classes, and probably lead to acts of violence in Grosvenor Square.
Between seven and eight thousand a year.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Makes a note in her book.] In land, or in investments?
In investments, chiefly.
That is satisfactory.
What between the duties expected of one during one’s lifetime, and the duties exacted from one after one’s death, land has ceased to be either a profit or a pleasure.
It gives one position, and prevents one from keeping it up.
I have a country house with some land, of course, attached to it, about fifteen hundred acres, I believe; but I don’t depend on that for my real income.
In fact, as far as I can make out, the poachers are the only people who make anything out of it.
Well, that point can be cleared up afterwards.
A girl with a simple, unspoiled nature, like Gwendolen, could hardly be expected to reside in the country.
Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square, but it is let by the year to Lady Bloxham.
Of course, I can get it back whenever I like, at six months’ notice.
She is a lady considerably advanced in years.
Ah, nowadays that is no guarantee of respectability of character.
What number in Belgrave Square?
LADY BRACKNELL. [Shaking her head.] The unfashionable side.
I thought there was something.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Sternly.] Both, if necessary, I presume.
What are your politics?
I am a Liberal Unionist.
Worthing, may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness.
He was evidently a man of some wealth.
Was he born in what the Radical papers call the purple of commerce, or did he rise from the ranks of the aristocracy?
The fact is, Lady Bracknell, I said I had lost my parents.
I don’t actually know who I am by birth.
Thomas Cardew, an old gentleman of a very charitable and kindly disposition, found me, and gave me the name of Worthing, because he happened to have a first-class ticket for Worthing in his pocket at the time.
Worthing is a place in Sussex.
Where did the charitable gentleman who had a first-class ticket for this seaside resort find you?
JACK. [Very seriously.] Yes, Lady Bracknell.
I was in a hand-bag—a somewhat large, black leather hand-bag, with handles to it—an ordinary hand-bag in fact.
In what locality did this Mr.
James, or Thomas, Cardew come across this ordinary hand-bag?
In the cloak-room at Victoria Station.
The cloak-room at Victoria Station?
The line is immaterial.
Worthing, I confess I feel somewhat bewildered by what you have just told me.
To be born, or at any rate bred, in a hand-bag, whether it had handles or not, seems to me to display a contempt for the ordinary decencies of family life that reminds one of the worst excesses of the French Revolution.
And I presume you know what that unfortunate movement led to?
As for the particular locality in which the hand-bag was found, a cloak-room at a railway station might serve to conceal a social indiscretion—has probably, indeed, been used for that purpose before now—but it could hardly be regarded as an assured basis for a recognised position in good society.
I need hardly say I would do anything in the world to ensure Gwendolen’s happiness.
I would strongly advise you, Mr.
Worthing, to try and acquire some relations as soon as possible, and to make a definite effort to produce at any rate one parent, of either sex, before the season is quite over.
Well, I don’t see how I could possibly manage to do that.
It is in my dressing-room at home.
I really think that should satisfy you, Lady Bracknell.
You can hardly imagine that I and Lord Bracknell would dream of allowing our only daughter—a girl brought up with the utmost care—to marry into a cloak-room, and form an alliance with a parcel?
Worthing! [Lady Bracknell sweeps out in majestic indignation.] JACK.
Good morning! [Algernon, from the other room, strikes up the Wedding March.
Jack looks perfectly furious, and goes to the door.] For goodness’ sake don’t play that ghastly tune, Algy.
How idiotic you are! [The music stops and Algernon enters cheerily.] ALGERNON.
You don’t mean to say Gwendolen refused you?
She is always refusing people.
Oh, Gwendolen is as right as a trivet.
As far as she is concerned, we are engaged.
Her mother is perfectly unbearable.
I don’t really know what a Gorgon is like, but I am quite sure that Lady Bracknell is one.
My dear boy, I love hearing my relations abused.
Relations are simply a tedious pack of people, who haven’t got the remotest knowledge of how to live, nor the smallest instinct about when to die.
That is exactly what things were originally made for.
Upon my word, if I thought that, I’d shoot myself . . . [A pause.] You don’t think there is any chance of Gwendolen becoming like her mother in about a hundred and fifty years, do you, Algy?
It is perfectly phrased! and quite as true as any observation in civilised life should be.
I am sick to death of cleverness.
Everybody is clever nowadays.
You can’t go anywhere without meeting clever people.
The thing has become an absolute public nuisance.
I wish to goodness we had a few fools left.
I should extremely like to meet them.
By the way, did you tell Gwendolen the truth about your being Ernest in town, and Jack in the country?
JACK. [In a very patronising manner.] My dear fellow, the truth isn’t quite the sort of thing one tells to a nice, sweet, refined girl.
What extraordinary ideas you have about the way to behave to a woman!
Oh, that is nonsense.
What about the profligate Ernest?
I’ll say he died in Paris of apoplexy.
Lots of people die of apoplexy, quite suddenly, don’t they?
Yes, but it’s hereditary, my dear fellow.
It’s a sort of thing that runs in families.
You are sure a severe chill isn’t hereditary, or anything of that kind?
My poor brother Ernest is carried off suddenly, in Paris, by a severe chill.
Miss Cardew was a little too much interested in your poor brother Ernest?
Cecily is not a silly romantic girl, I am glad to say.
She has got a capital appetite, goes long walks, and pays no attention at all to her lessons.
She is excessively pretty, and she is only just eighteen.
Have you told Gwendolen yet that you have an excessively pretty ward who is only just eighteen?
Cecily and Gwendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends.
I’ll bet you anything you like that half an hour after they have met, they will be calling each other sister.
JACK. [Irritably.] Oh!
However, I don’t mind hard work where there is no definite object of any kind. [Enter Lane.] LANE.
Miss Fairfax. [Enter Gwendolen.
Gwendolen, upon my word!
I have something very particular to say to Mr.
Really, Gwendolen, I don’t think I can allow this at all.
Algy, you always adopt a strictly immoral attitude towards life.
You are not quite old enough to do that. [Algernon retires to the fireplace.] JACK.
From the expression on mamma’s face I fear we never shall.
Few parents nowadays pay any regard to what their children say to them.
The old-fashioned respect for the young is fast dying out.
Whatever influence I ever had over mamma, I lost at the age of three.
But although she may prevent us from becoming man and wife, and I may marry some one else, and marry often, nothing that she can possibly do can alter my eternal devotion to you.
The story of your romantic origin, as related to me by mamma, with unpleasing comments, has naturally stirred the deeper fibres of my nature.
Your Christian name has an irresistible fascination.
The simplicity of your character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible to me.
The Manor House, Woolton, Hertfordshire. [Algernon, who has been carefully listening, smiles to himself, and writes the address on his shirt-cuff.
Then picks up the Railway Guide.] GWENDOLEN.
It may be necessary to do something desperate.
That of course will require serious consideration.
I will communicate with you daily.
You will let me see you to your carriage, my own darling?
Yes, sir. [Jack and Gwendolen go off.] [Lane presents several letters on a salver to Algernon.
It is to be surmised that they are bills, as Algernon, after looking at the envelopes, tears them up.] ALGERNON.
To-morrow, Lane, I’m going Bunburying.
I shall probably not be back till Monday.
Yes, sir. [Handing sherry.] ALGERNON.
Lane, you’re a perfect pessimist.
I do my best to give satisfaction, sir. [Enter Jack.
There’s a sensible, intellectual girl! the only girl I ever cared for in my life. [Algernon is laughing immoderately.] What on earth are you so amused at?
Oh, that’s nonsense, Algy.
You never talk anything but nonsense.
Nobody ever does. [Jack looks indignantly at him, and leaves the room.
Algernon lights a cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff, and smiles.] ACT DROP SECOND ACT SCENE Garden at the Manor House.
The garden, an old-fashioned one, full of roses.
Basket chairs, and a table covered with books, are set under a large yew-tree. [Miss Prism discovered seated at the table.
Cecily is at the back watering flowers.] MISS PRISM. [Calling.] Cecily, Cecily!
Surely such a utilitarian occupation as the watering of flowers is rather Moulton’s duty than yours?
Especially at a moment when intellectual pleasures await you.
We will repeat yesterday’s lesson.
It isn’t at all a becoming language.
I know perfectly well that I look quite plain after my German lesson.
Child, you know how anxious your guardian is that you should improve yourself in every way.
He laid particular stress on your German, as he was leaving for town yesterday.
Sometimes he is so serious that I think he cannot be quite well.
MISS PRISM. [Drawing herself up.] Your guardian enjoys the best of health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commended in one so comparatively young as he is.
I know no one who has a higher sense of duty and responsibility.
I suppose that is why he often looks a little bored when we three are together.
I am surprised at you.
Worthing has many troubles in his life.
Idle merriment and triviality would be out of place in his conversation.
You must remember his constant anxiety about that unfortunate young man his brother.
I wish Uncle Jack would allow that unfortunate young man, his brother, to come down here sometimes.
We might have a good influence over him, Miss Prism.
I am sure you certainly would.
You know German, and geology, and things of that kind influence a man very much. [Cecily begins to write in her diary.] MISS PRISM. [Shaking her head.] I do not think that even I could produce any effect on a character that according to his own brother’s admission is irretrievably weak and vacillating.
I keep a diary in order to enter the wonderful secrets of my life.
If I didn’t write them down, I should probably forget all about them.
Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never happened, and couldn’t possibly have happened.
I believe that Memory is responsible for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends us.
Do not speak slightingly of the three-volume novel, Cecily.
How wonderfully clever you are!
The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily.
And was your novel ever published?
The manuscript unfortunately was abandoned. [Cecily starts.] I use the word in the sense of lost or mislaid.
To your work, child, these speculations are profitless.
Chasuble coming up through the garden.
MISS PRISM. [Rising and advancing.] Dr.
This is indeed a pleasure. [Enter Canon Chasuble.] CHASUBLE.
Miss Prism has just been complaining of a slight headache.
Cecily, I have not mentioned anything about a headache.
No, dear Miss Prism, I know that, but I felt instinctively that you had a headache.
Indeed I was thinking about that, and not about my German lesson, when the Rector came in.
I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive.
Were I fortunate enough to be Miss Prism’s pupil, I would hang upon her lips. [Miss Prism glares.] I spoke metaphorically.—My metaphor was drawn from bees.
Worthing, I suppose, has not returned from town yet?
We do not expect him till Monday afternoon.
He is not one of those whose sole aim is enjoyment, as, by all accounts, that unfortunate young man his brother seems to be.
CHASUBLE. [Bowing.] A classical allusion merely, drawn from the Pagan authors.
I shall see you both no doubt at Evensong?
I find I have a headache after all, and a walk might do it good.
With pleasure, Miss Prism, with pleasure.
That would be delightful.
Cecily, you will read your Political Economy in my absence.
It is somewhat too sensational.
Even these metallic problems have their melodramatic side. [Goes down the garden with Dr.
Chasuble.] CECILY. [Picks up books and throws them back on table.] Horrid Political Economy!
Horrid, horrid German! [Enter Merriman with a card on a salver.] MERRIMAN.
Ernest Worthing has just driven over from the station.
Ernest Worthing, B. 4, The Albany, W.’ Uncle Jack’s brother!
Worthing was in town?
He seemed very much disappointed.
I mentioned that you and Miss Prism were in the garden.
He said he was anxious to speak to you privately for a moment.
Ernest Worthing to come here.
I suppose you had better talk to the housekeeper about a room for him.
Yes, Miss. [Merriman goes off.] CECILY.
I feel rather frightened.
I am so afraid he will look just like every one else. [Enter Algernon, very gay and debonnair.] He does!
ALGERNON. [Raising his hat.] You are my little cousin Cecily, I’m sure.
In fact, I believe I am more than usually tall for my age. [Algernon is rather taken aback.] But I am your cousin Cecily.
If you are not, then you have certainly been deceiving us all in a very inexcusable manner.
I hope you have not been leading a double life, pretending to be wicked and being really good all the time.
That would be hypocrisy.
ALGERNON. [Looks at her in amazement.] Oh!
Of course I have been rather reckless.
I don’t think you should be so proud of that, though I am sure it must have been very pleasant.
It is much pleasanter being here with you.
I can’t understand how you are here at all.
Uncle Jack won’t be back till Monday afternoon.
That is a great disappointment.
I have a business appointment that I am anxious . . . to miss?
Couldn’t you miss it anywhere but in London?
No: the appointment is in London.
Well, I know, of course, how important it is not to keep a business engagement, if one wants to retain any sense of the beauty of life, but still I think you had better wait till Uncle Jack arrives.
I know he wants to speak to you about your emigrating.
I certainly wouldn’t let Jack buy my outfit.
He has no taste in neckties at all.
I don’t think you will require neckties.
Uncle Jack is sending you to Australia.
Well, he said at dinner on Wednesday night, that you would have to choose between this world, the next world, and Australia.
The accounts I have received of Australia and the next world, are not particularly encouraging.
I’m afraid I’ve no time, this afternoon.
Well, would you mind my reforming myself this afternoon?
It is rather Quixotic of you.
How thoughtless of me.
I should have remembered that when one is going to lead an entirely new life, one requires regular and wholesome meals.
Might I have a buttonhole first?
I never have any appetite unless I have a buttonhole first.
A Marechal Niel? [Picks up scissors.] ALGERNON.
Why? [Cuts a flower.] ALGERNON.
Then Miss Prism is a short-sighted old lady. [Cecily puts the rose in his buttonhole.] You are the prettiest girl I ever saw.
They are a snare that every sensible man would like to be caught in.
Oh, I don’t think I would care to catch a sensible man.
Chasuble return.] MISS PRISM.
A misanthrope I can understand—a womanthrope, never!
CHASUBLE. [With a scholar’s shudder.] Believe me, I do not deserve so neologistic a phrase.
The precept as well as the practice of the Primitive Church was distinctly against matrimony.
MISS PRISM. [Sententiously.] That is obviously the reason why the Primitive Church has not lasted up to the present day.
And you do not seem to realise, dear Doctor, that by persistently remaining single, a man converts himself into a permanent public temptation.
Men should be more careful; this very celibacy leads weaker vessels astray.
But is a man not equally attractive when married?
No married man is ever attractive except to his wife.
That depends on the intellectual sympathies of the woman.
Maturity can always be depended on.
Ripeness can be trusted.
Chasuble starts.] I spoke horticulturally.
My metaphor was drawn from fruits.
Perhaps she followed us to the schools. [Enter Jack slowly from the back of the garden.
He is dressed in the deepest mourning, with crape hatband and black gloves.] MISS PRISM.
This is indeed a surprise.
We did not look for you till Monday afternoon.
JACK. [Shakes Miss Prism’s hand in a tragic manner.] I have returned sooner than I expected.
Chasuble, I hope you are well?
Worthing, I trust this garb of woe does not betoken some terrible calamity?
More shameful debts and extravagance?
Still leading his life of pleasure?
Worthing, I offer you my sincere condolence.
You have at least the consolation of knowing that you were always the most generous and forgiving of brothers.
I had a telegram last night from the manager of the Grand Hotel.
Was the cause of death mentioned?
CHASUBLE. [Raising his hand.] Charity, dear Miss Prism, charity!
I myself am peculiarly susceptible to draughts.
Will the interment take place here?
He seems to have expressed a desire to be buried in Paris.
The last time I delivered it was in the Cathedral, as a charity sermon on behalf of the Society for the Prevention of Discontent among the Upper Orders.
The Bishop, who was present, was much struck by some of the analogies I drew.
Ah! that reminds me, you mentioned christenings I think, Dr.
I suppose you know how to christen all right? [Dr.
Chasuble looks astounded.] I mean, of course, you are continually christening, aren’t you?
It is, I regret to say, one of the Rector’s most constant duties in this parish.
But is there any particular infant in whom you are interested, Mr.
Your brother was, I believe, unmarried, was he not?
MISS PRISM. [Bitterly.] People who live entirely for pleasure usually are.
I am very fond of children.
No! the fact is, I would like to be christened myself, this afternoon, if you have nothing better to do.
Worthing, you have been christened already?
I don’t remember anything about it.
I certainly intend to have.
The sprinkling, and, indeed, the immersion of adults is a perfectly canonical practice.
You need have no apprehensions.
Sprinkling is all that is necessary, or indeed I think advisable.
Our weather is so changeable.
At what hour would you wish the ceremony performed?
Perfectly, perfectly!
In fact I have two similar ceremonies to perform at that time.
A case of twins that occurred recently in one of the outlying cottages on your own estate.
I don’t see much fun in being christened along with other babies.
It would be childish.
Admirably! [Takes out watch.] And now, dear Mr.
Worthing, I will not intrude any longer into a house of sorrow.
What seem to us bitter trials are often blessings in disguise.
This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind. [Enter Cecily from the house.] CECILY.
My child! my child! [Cecily goes towards Jack; he kisses her brow in a melancholy manner.] CECILY.
You look as if you had toothache, and I have got such a surprise for you.
You couldn’t be so heartless as to disown him.
And you will shake hands with him, won’t you, Uncle Jack? [Runs back into the house.] CHASUBLE.
After we had all been resigned to his loss, his sudden return seems to me peculiarly distressing.
I think it is perfectly absurd. [Enter Algernon and Cecily hand in hand.
Good heavens! [Motions Algernon away.] ALGERNON.
I think his coming down here disgraceful.
He knows perfectly well why.
And surely there must be much good in one who is kind to an invalid, and leaves the pleasures of London to sit by a bed of pain.
Bunbury, and his terrible state of health.
Well, I won’t have him talk to you about Bunbury or about anything else.
It is enough to drive one perfectly frantic.
But I must say that I think that Brother John’s coldness to me is peculiarly painful.
I expected a more enthusiastic welcome, especially considering it is the first time I have come here.
Well, this is the last time I shall ever do it. [Shakes with Algernon and glares.] CHASUBLE.
It’s pleasant, is it not, to see so perfect a reconciliation?
I think we might leave the two brothers together.
Certainly, Miss Prism.
My little task of reconciliation is over.
You have done a beautiful action to-day, dear child.
We must not be premature in our judgments.
I feel very happy. [They all go off except Jack and Algernon.] JACK.
You young scoundrel, Algy, you must get out of this place as soon as possible.
I don’t allow any Bunburying here. [Enter Merriman.] MERRIMAN.
I have unpacked it and put it in the room next to your own.
Three portmanteaus, a dressing-case, two hat-boxes, and a large luncheon-basket.
Merriman, order the dog-cart at once.
Ernest has been suddenly called back to town.
Yes, sir. [Goes back into the house.] ALGERNON.
Your duty as a gentleman calls you back.
My duty as a gentleman has never interfered with my pleasures in the smallest degree.
I can quite understand that.
You look perfectly ridiculous in them.
It is perfectly childish to be in deep mourning for a man who is actually staying for a whole week with you in your house as a guest.
I call it grotesque.
You are certainly not staying with me for a whole week as a guest or anything else.
I certainly won’t leave you so long as you are in mourning.
It would be most unfriendly.
If I were in mourning you would stay with me, I suppose.
If I am occasionally a little over-dressed, I make up for it by being always immensely over-educated.
Your vanity is ridiculous, your conduct an outrage, and your presence in my garden utterly absurd.
However, you have got to catch the four-five, and I hope you will have a pleasant journey back to town.
This Bunburying, as you call it, has not been a great success for you. [Goes into the house.] ALGERNON.
I’m in love with Cecily, and that is everything. [Enter Cecily at the back of the garden.
She picks up the can and begins to water the flowers.] But I must see her before I go, and make arrangements for another Bunbury.
The absence of old friends one can endure with equanimity.
But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one has just been introduced is almost unbearable.
Thank you. [Enter Merriman.] MERRIMAN.
The dog-cart is at the door, sir. [Algernon looks appealingly at Cecily.] CECILY.
It can wait, Merriman for . . . five minutes.
Yes, Miss. [Exit Merriman.] ALGERNON.
I hope, Cecily, I shall not offend you if I state quite frankly and openly that you seem to me to be in every way the visible personification of absolute perfection.
I think your frankness does you great credit, Ernest.
If you will allow me, I will copy your remarks into my diary. [Goes over to table and begins writing in diary.] ALGERNON.
I’d give anything to look at it.
Oh no. [Puts her hand over it.] You see, it is simply a very young girl’s record of her own thoughts and impressions, and consequently meant for publication.
I delight in taking down from dictation.
I have reached ‘absolute perfection’.
ALGERNON. [Somewhat taken aback.] Ahem!
When one is dictating one should speak fluently and not cough.
Besides, I don’t know how to spell a cough. [Writes as Algernon speaks.] ALGERNON. [Speaking very rapidly.] Cecily, ever since I first looked upon your wonderful and incomparable beauty, I have dared to love you wildly, passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.
I don’t think that you should tell me that you love me wildly, passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.
Hopelessly doesn’t seem to make much sense, does it?
Cecily! [Enter Merriman.] MERRIMAN.
MERRIMAN. [Looks at Cecily, who makes no sign.] Yes, sir. [Merriman retires.] CECILY.
Yes, it will be exactly three months on Thursday.
Well, ever since dear Uncle Jack first confessed to us that he had a younger brother who was very wicked and bad, you of course have formed the chief topic of conversation between myself and Miss Prism.
And of course a man who is much talked about is always very attractive.
One feels there must be something in him, after all.
And when was the engagement actually settled?
On the 14th of February last.
Worn out by your entire ignorance of my existence, I determined to end the matter one way or the other, and after a long struggle with myself I accepted you under this dear old tree here.
The next day I bought this little ring in your name, and this is the little bangle with the true lover’s knot I promised you always to wear.
Yes, you’ve wonderfully good taste, Ernest.
And this is the box in which I keep all your dear letters. [Kneels at table, opens box, and produces letters tied up with blue ribbon.] ALGERNON.
I remember only too well that I was forced to write your letters for you.
I wrote always three times a week, and sometimes oftener.
Oh, I couldn’t possibly.
They would make you far too conceited. [Replaces box.] The three you wrote me after I had broken off the engagement are so beautiful, and so badly spelled, that even now I can hardly read them without crying a little.
But was our engagement ever broken off?
You can see the entry if you like. [Shows diary.] ‘To-day I broke off my engagement with Ernest.
The weather still continues charming.’ ALGERNON.
Particularly when the weather was so charming.
It would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it hadn’t been broken off at least once.
ALGERNON. [Crossing to her, and kneeling.] What a perfect angel you are, Cecily.
You dear romantic boy. [He kisses her, she puts her fingers through his hair.] I hope your hair curls naturally, does it?
You’ll never break off our engagement again, Cecily?
I don’t think I could break it off now that I have actually met you.
Besides, of course, there is the question of your name.
Yes, of course. [Nervously.] CECILY.
You must not laugh at me, darling, but it had always been a girlish dream of mine to love some one whose name was Ernest. [Algernon rises, Cecily also.] There is something in that name that seems to inspire absolute confidence.
Oh, any name you like—Algernon—for instance . . .
But I don’t like the name of Algernon.
Well, my own dear, sweet, loving little darling, I really can’t see why you should object to the name of Algernon.
In fact, it is rather an aristocratic name.
Half of the chaps who get into the Bankruptcy Court are called Algernon.
But seriously, Cecily . . . [Moving to her] . . . if my name was Algy, couldn’t you love me?
CECILY. [Rising.] I might respect you, Ernest, I might admire your character, but I fear that I should not be able to give you my undivided attention.
Cecily! [Picking up hat.] Your Rector here is, I suppose, thoroughly experienced in the practice of all the rites and ceremonials of the Church?
Chasuble is a most learned man.
I must see him at once on a most important christening—I mean on most important business.
Considering that we have been engaged since February the 14th, and that I only met you to-day for the first time, I think it is rather hard that you should leave me for so long a period as half an hour.
What an impetuous boy he is!
I must enter his proposal in my diary. [Enter Merriman.] MERRIMAN.
On very important business, Miss Fairfax states.
Worthing in his library?
Worthing went over in the direction of the Rectory some time ago.
Worthing is sure to be back soon.
I suppose one of the many good elderly women who are associated with Uncle Jack in some of his philanthropic work in London.
I don’t quite like women who are interested in philanthropic work.
I think it is so forward of them. [Enter Merriman.] MERRIMAN.
Miss Fairfax. [Enter Gwendolen.] [Exit Merriman.] CECILY. [Advancing to meet her.] Pray let me introduce myself to you.
Something tells me that we are going to be great friends.
My first impressions of people are never wrong.
How nice of you to like me so much after we have known each other such a comparatively short time.
GWENDOLEN. [Still standing up.] I may call you Cecily, may I not?
And you will always call me Gwendolen, won’t you?
They both sit down together.] GWENDOLEN.
Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my mentioning who I am.
My father is Lord Bracknell.
Outside the family circle, papa, I am glad to say, is entirely unknown.
And certainly once a man begins to neglect his domestic duties he becomes painfully effeminate, does he not?
It makes men so very attractive.
Cecily, mamma, whose views on education are remarkably strict, has brought me up to be extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so do you mind my looking at you through my glasses?
Oh! not at all, Gwendolen.
GWENDOLEN. [After examining Cecily carefully through a lorgnette.] You are here on a short visit, I suppose.
GWENDOLEN. [Severely.] Really?
Your mother, no doubt, or some female relative of advanced years, resides here also?
I have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.
My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the arduous task of looking after me.
It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a ward.
How secretive of him!
He grows more interesting hourly.
I am not sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed delight. [Rising and going to her.] I am very fond of you, Cecily; I have liked you ever since I met you!
Worthing’s ward, I cannot help expressing a wish you were—well, just a little older than you seem to be—and not quite so very alluring in appearance.
In fact, if I may speak candidly— CECILY.
I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to say, one should always be quite candid.
Disloyalty would be as impossible to him as deception.
But even men of the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the influence of the physical charms of others.
Modern, no less than Ancient History, supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to.
If it were not so, indeed, History would be quite unreadable.
I beg your pardon, Gwendolen, did you say Ernest?
Ernest Worthing who is my guardian.
GWENDOLEN. [Sitting down again.] Ernest never mentioned to me that he had a brother.
Ah! that accounts for it.
The subject seems distasteful to most men.
It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across a friendship like ours, would it not?
Ernest Worthing who is your guardian?
GWENDOLEN. [Inquiringly.] I beg your pardon?
CECILY. [Rather shy and confidingly.] Dearest Gwendolen, there is no reason why I should make a secret of it to you.
Our little county newspaper is sure to chronicle the fact next week.
Ernest Worthing and I are engaged to be married.
GWENDOLEN. [Quite politely, rising.] My darling Cecily, I think there must be some slight error.
Ernest Worthing is engaged to me.
The announcement will appear in the _Morning Post_ on Saturday at the latest.
CECILY. [Very politely, rising.] I am afraid you must be under some misconception.
Ernest proposed to me exactly ten minutes ago. [Shows diary.] GWENDOLEN. [Examines diary through her lorgnettte carefully.] It is certainly very curious, for he asked me to be his wife yesterday afternoon at 5.30.
If you would care to verify the incident, pray do so. [Produces diary of her own.] I never travel without my diary.
One should always have something sensational to read in the train.
I am so sorry, dear Cecily, if it is any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I have the prior claim.
It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen, if it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to point out that since Ernest proposed to you he clearly has changed his mind.
GWENDOLEN. [Meditatively.] If the poor fellow has been entrapped into any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once, and with a firm hand.
CECILY. [Thoughtfully and sadly.] Whatever unfortunate entanglement my dear boy may have got into, I will never reproach him with it after we are married.
Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement?
You are presumptuous.
On an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a moral duty to speak one’s mind.
It becomes a pleasure.
Do you suggest, Miss Fairfax, that I entrapped Ernest into an engagement?
GWENDOLEN. [Satirically.] I am glad to say that I have never seen a spade.
It is obvious that our social spheres have been widely different. [Enter Merriman, followed by the footman.
The presence of the servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls chafe.] MERRIMAN.
CECILY. [Sternly, in a calm voice.] Yes, as usual. [Merriman begins to clear table and lay cloth.
Cecily and Gwendolen glare at each other.] GWENDOLEN.
Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss Cardew?
From the top of one of the hills quite close one can see five counties.
CECILY. [Sweetly.] I suppose that is why you live in town? [Gwendolen bites her lip, and beats her foot nervously with her parasol.] GWENDOLEN. [Looking round.] Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss Cardew.
Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist in the country, if anybody who is anybody does.
This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression, is it not?
I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it just at present.
It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been told.
GWENDOLEN. [With elaborate politeness.] Thank you. [Aside.] Detestable girl!
GWENDOLEN. [Superciliously.] No, thank you.
Sugar is not fashionable any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up the tongs and puts four lumps of sugar into the cup.] CECILY. [Severely.] Cake or bread and butter?
GWENDOLEN. [In a bored manner.] Bread and butter, please.
Cake is rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.
CECILY. [Cuts a very large slice of cake, and puts it on the tray.] Hand that to Miss Fairfax. [Merriman does so, and goes out with footman.
Gwendolen drinks the tea and makes a grimace.
Rises in indignation.] GWENDOLEN.
You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake.
I am known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.
CECILY. [Rising.] To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not go.
From the moment I saw you I distrusted you.
I felt that you were false and deceitful.
I am never deceived in such matters.
My first impressions of people are invariably right.
It seems to me, Miss Fairfax, that I am trespassing on your valuable time.
No doubt you have many other calls of a similar character to make in the neighbourhood. [Enter Jack.] GWENDOLEN. [Catching sight of him.] Ernest!
Darling! [Offers to kiss her.] GWENDOLEN. [Draws back.] A moment!
May I ask if you are engaged to be married to this young lady? [Points to Cecily.] JACK. [Laughing.] To dear little Cecily!
You may! [Offers her cheek.] CECILY. [Very sweetly.] I knew there must be some misunderstanding, Miss Fairfax.
The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is my guardian, Mr.
GWENDOLEN. [Receding.] Jack!
Oh! [Enter Algernon.] CECILY.
ALGERNON. [Goes straight over to Cecily without noticing any one else.] My own love! [Offers to kiss her.] CECILY. [Drawing back.] A moment, Ernest!
ALGERNON. [Looking round.] To what young lady?
Yes! to good heavens, Gwendolen, I mean to Gwendolen.
ALGERNON. [Laughing.] Of course not!
Thank you. [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.] You may. [Algernon kisses her.] GWENDOLEN.
The gentleman who is now embracing you is my cousin, Mr.
CECILY. [Breaking away from Algernon.] Algernon Moncrieff!
Oh! [The two girls move towards each other and put their arms round each other’s waists as if for protection.] CECILY.
Are you called Algernon?
JACK. [Standing rather proudly.] I could deny it if I liked.
I could deny anything if I liked.
But my name certainly is John.
CECILY. [To Gwendolen.] A gross deception has been practised on both of us.
My sweet wronged Gwendolen!
GWENDOLEN. [Slowly and seriously.] You will call me sister, will you not? [They embrace.
Jack and Algernon groan and walk up and down.] CECILY. [Rather brightly.] There is just one question I would like to be allowed to ask my guardian.
Worthing, there is just one question I would like to be permitted to put to you.
We are both engaged to be married to your brother Ernest, so it is a matter of some importance to us to know where your brother Ernest is at present.
JACK. [Slowly and hesitatingly.] Gwendolen—Cecily—it is very painful for me to be forced to speak the truth.
It is the first time in my life that I have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really quite inexperienced in doing anything of the kind.
I never had a brother in my life, and I certainly have not the smallest intention of ever having one in the future.
CECILY. [Surprised.] No brother at all?
JACK. [Cheerily.] None!
GWENDOLEN. [Severely.] Had you never a brother of any kind?
JACK. [Pleasantly.] Never.
It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to find herself in.
No, men are so cowardly, aren’t they? [They retire into the house with scornful looks.] JACK.
This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I suppose?
Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is.
The most wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.
Well, you’ve no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.
One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one chooses.
Every serious Bunburyist knows that.
Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to have any amusement in life.
I happen to be serious about Bunburying.
What on earth you are serious about I haven’t got the remotest idea.
About everything, I should fancy.
You have such an absolutely trivial nature.
Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded.
You won’t be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked custom was.
As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable.
I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss Fairfax.
I wanted to be engaged to Gwendolen, that is all.
There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.
I don’t think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss Fairfax being united.
Well, that is no business of yours.
If it was my business, I wouldn’t talk about it. [Begins to eat muffins.] It is very vulgar to talk about one’s business.
How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this horrible trouble, I can’t make out.
You seem to me to be perfectly heartless.
Well, I can’t eat muffins in an agitated manner.
The butter would probably get on my cuffs.
I say it’s perfectly heartless your eating muffins at all, under the circumstances.
When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles me.
Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.
Besides, I am particularly fond of muffins. [Rising.] JACK. [Rising.] Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in that greedy way. [Takes muffins from Algernon.] ALGERNON. [Offering tea-cake.] I wish you would have tea-cake instead.
But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat muffins.
I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances.
That is a very different thing.
Algy, I wish to goodness you would go.
You can’t possibly ask me to go without having some dinner.
No one ever does, except vegetarians and people like that.
Besides I have just made arrangements with Dr.
Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of Ernest.
My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better.
I made arrangements this morning with Dr.
Chasuble to be christened myself at 5.30, and I naturally will take the name of Ernest.
Gwendolen would wish it.
We can’t both be christened Ernest.
Besides, I have a perfect right to be christened if I like.
There is no evidence at all that I have ever been christened by anybody.
I should think it extremely probable I never was, and so does Dr.
It is entirely different in your case.
You have been christened already.
Yes, but I have not been christened for years.
Yes, but you have been christened.
That is the important thing.
So I know my constitution can stand it.
If you are not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think it rather dangerous your venturing on it now.
You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a severe chill.
Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.
Science is always making wonderful improvements in things.
JACK. [Picking up the muffin-dish.] Oh, that is nonsense; you are always talking nonsense.
There are only two left. [Takes them.] I told you I was particularly fond of muffins.
What ideas you have of hospitality!
I haven’t quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one muffin left. [Jack groans, and sinks into a chair.
Algernon still continues eating.] ACT DROP THIRD ACT SCENE Morning-room at the Manor House. [Gwendolen and Cecily are at the window, looking out into the garden.] GWENDOLEN.
That looks like repentance.
GWENDOLEN. [After a pause.] They don’t seem to notice us at all.
They’re approaching.
Let us preserve a dignified silence.
It’s the only thing to do now. [Enter Jack followed by Algernon.
They whistle some dreadful popular air from a British Opera.] GWENDOLEN.
This dignified silence seems to produce an unpleasant effect.
A most distasteful one.
Worthing, I have something very particular to ask you.
Gwendolen, your common sense is invaluable.
Moncrieff, kindly answer me the following question.
Why did you pretend to be my guardian’s brother?
In order that I might have an opportunity of meeting you.
CECILY. [To Gwendolen.] That certainly seems a satisfactory explanation, does it not?
But that does not affect the wonderful beauty of his answer.
In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity is the vital thing.
Worthing, what explanation can you offer to me for pretending to have a brother?
Was it in order that you might have an opportunity of coming up to town to see me as often as possible?
This is not the moment for German scepticism. [Moving to Cecily.] Their explanations appear to be quite satisfactory, especially Mr.
His voice alone inspires one with absolute credulity.
There are principles at stake that one cannot surrender.
The task is not a pleasant one.
Certainly. [Gwendolen beats time with uplifted finger.] GWENDOLEN and CECILY [Speaking together.] Your Christian names are still an insuperable barrier.
JACK and ALGERNON [Speaking together.] Our Christian names!
But we are going to be christened this afternoon.
GWENDOLEN. [To Jack.] For my sake you are prepared to do this terrible thing?
CECILY. [To Algernon.] To please me you are ready to face this fearful ordeal?
How absurd to talk of the equality of the sexes!
Where questions of self-sacrifice are concerned, men are infinitely beyond us.
We are. [Clasps hands with Algernon.] CECILY.
They have moments of physical courage of which we women know absolutely nothing.
GWENDOLEN. [To Jack.] Darling!
ALGERNON. [To Cecily.] Darling! [They fall into each other’s arms.] [Enter Merriman.
When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.] MERRIMAN.
Good heavens! [Enter Lady Bracknell.
The couples separate in alarm.
Exit Merriman.] LADY BRACKNELL.
Sit down immediately.
Hesitation of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of physical weakness in the old. [Turns to Jack.] Apprised, sir, of my daughter’s sudden flight by her trusty maid, whose confidence I purchased by means of a small coin, I followed her at once by a luggage train.
Her unhappy father is, I am glad to say, under the impression that she is attending a more than usually lengthy lecture by the University Extension Scheme on the Influence of a permanent income on Thought.
I do not propose to undeceive him.
Indeed I have never undeceived him on any question.
I would consider it wrong.
But of course, you will clearly understand that all communication between yourself and my daughter must cease immediately from this moment.
I am engaged to be married to Gwendolen, Lady Bracknell!
And now, as regards Algernon! . . .
ALGERNON. [Stammering.] Oh!
Bunbury is somewhere else at present.
His death must have been extremely sudden.
ALGERNON. [Airily.] Oh!
I killed Bunbury this afternoon.
I mean poor Bunbury died this afternoon.
Oh, he was quite exploded.
Was he the victim of a revolutionary outrage?
Bunbury was interested in social legislation.
If so, he is well punished for his morbidity.
He seems to have had great confidence in the opinion of his physicians.
I am glad, however, that he made up his mind at the last to some definite course of action, and acted under proper medical advice.
Worthing, who is that young person whose hand my nephew Algernon is now holding in what seems to me a peculiarly unnecessary manner?
That lady is Miss Cecily Cardew, my ward. [Lady Bracknell bows coldly to Cecily.] ALGERNON.
Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell.
LADY BRACKNELL. [With a shiver, crossing to the sofa and sitting down.] I do not know whether there is anything peculiarly exciting in the air of this particular part of Hertfordshire, but the number of engagements that go on seems to me considerably above the proper average that statistics have laid down for our guidance.
I think some preliminary inquiry on my part would not be out of place.
Worthing, is Miss Cardew at all connected with any of the larger railway stations in London?
I merely desire information.
Until yesterday I had no idea that there were any families or persons whose origin was a Terminus. [Jack looks perfectly furious, but restrains himself.] JACK. [In a clear, cold voice.] Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of the late Mr.
Thomas Cardew of 149 Belgrave Square, S.W.; Gervase Park, Dorking, Surrey; and the Sporran, Fifeshire, N.B.
That sounds not unsatisfactory.
Three addresses always inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.
But what proof have I of their authenticity?
I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period.
They are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Grimly.] I have known strange errors in that publication.
Miss Cardew’s family solicitors are Messrs.
A firm of the very highest position in their profession.
Markby’s is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties.
So far I am satisfied.
JACK. [Very irritably.] How extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell!
I have also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of Miss Cardew’s birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination, confirmation, and the measles; both the German and the English variety.
A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps somewhat too exciting for a young girl.
I am not myself in favour of premature experiences. [Rises, looks at her watch.] Gwendolen! the time approaches for our departure.
Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little fortune?
Oh! about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the Funds.
Goodbye, Lady Bracknell.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Sitting down again.] A moment, Mr.
A hundred and thirty thousand pounds!
Miss Cardew seems to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her.
Few girls of the present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qualities that last, and improve with time.
We live, I regret to say, in an age of surfaces. [To Cecily.] Come over here, dear. [Cecily goes across.] Pretty child! your dress is sadly simple, and your hair seems almost as Nature might have left it.
A thoroughly experienced French maid produces a really marvellous result in a very brief space of time.
I remember recommending one to young Lady Lancing, and after three months her own husband did not know her.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Glares at Jack for a few moments.
Then bends, with a practised smile, to Cecily.] Kindly turn round, sweet child. [Cecily turns completely round.] No, the side view is what I want. [Cecily presents her profile.] Yes, quite as I expected.
There are distinct social possibilities in your profile.
The two weak points in our age are its want of principle and its want of profile.
There are distinct social possibilities in Miss Cardew’s profile.
Cecily is the sweetest, dearest, prettiest girl in the whole world.
And I don’t care twopence about social possibilities.
Never speak disrespectfully of Society, Algernon.
Only people who can’t get into it do that. [To Cecily.] Dear child, of course you know that Algernon has nothing but his debts to depend upon.
But I do not approve of mercenary marriages.
When I married Lord Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind.
But I never dreamed for a moment of allowing that to stand in my way.
CECILY. [Kisses her.] Thank you, Lady Bracknell.
The marriage, I think, had better take place quite soon.
To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long engagements.
They give people the opportunity of finding out each other’s character before marriage, which I think is never advisable.
I beg your pardon for interrupting you, Lady Bracknell, but this engagement is quite out of the question.
I am Miss Cardew’s guardian, and she cannot marry without my consent until she comes of age.
That consent I absolutely decline to give.
Algernon is an extremely, I may almost say an ostentatiously, eligible young man.
He has nothing, but he looks everything.
It pains me very much to have to speak frankly to you, Lady Bracknell, about your nephew, but the fact is that I do not approve at all of his moral character.
I suspect him of being untruthful. [Algernon and Cecily look at him in indignant amazement.] LADY BRACKNELL.
I fear there can be no possible doubt about the matter.
This afternoon during my temporary absence in London on an important question of romance, he obtained admission to my house by means of the false pretence of being my brother.
Under an assumed name he drank, I’ve just been informed by my butler, an entire pint bottle of my Perrier-Jouet, Brut, ’89; wine I was specially reserving for myself.
Continuing his disgraceful deception, he succeeded in the course of the afternoon in alienating the affections of my only ward.
He subsequently stayed to tea, and devoured every single muffin.
And what makes his conduct all the more heartless is, that he was perfectly well aware from the first that I have no brother, that I never had a brother, and that I don’t intend to have a brother, not even of any kind.
I distinctly told him so myself yesterday afternoon.
Worthing, after careful consideration I have decided entirely to overlook my nephew’s conduct to you.
That is very generous of you, Lady Bracknell.
My own decision, however, is unalterable.
LADY BRACKNELL. [To Cecily.] Come here, sweet child. [Cecily goes over.] How old are you, dear?
Well, I am really only eighteen, but I always admit to twenty when I go to evening parties.
You are perfectly right in making some slight alteration.
Indeed, no woman should ever be quite accurate about her age.
It looks so calculating . . . [In a meditative manner.] Eighteen, but admitting to twenty at evening parties.
Well, it will not be very long before you are of age and free from the restraints of tutelage.
So I don’t think your guardian’s consent is, after all, a matter of any importance.
Pray excuse me, Lady Bracknell, for interrupting you again, but it is only fair to tell you that according to the terms of her grandfather’s will Miss Cardew does not come legally of age till she is thirty-five.
That does not seem to me to be a grave objection.
Thirty-five is a very attractive age.
London society is full of women of the very highest birth who have, of their own free choice, remained thirty-five for years.
Lady Dumbleton is an instance in point.
To my own knowledge she has been thirty-five ever since she arrived at the age of forty, which was many years ago now.
I see no reason why our dear Cecily should not be even still more attractive at the age you mention than she is at present.
There will be a large accumulation of property.
Yes, I felt it instinctively, but I couldn’t wait all that time.
I am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like punctuality in others, and waiting, even to be married, is quite out of the question.
Worthing, as Miss Cardew states positively that she cannot wait till she is thirty-five—a remark which I am bound to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature—I would beg of you to reconsider your decision.
But my dear Lady Bracknell, the matter is entirely in your own hands.
The moment you consent to my marriage with Gwendolen, I will most gladly allow your nephew to form an alliance with my ward.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Rising and drawing herself up.] You must be quite aware that what you propose is out of the question.
Then a passionate celibacy is all that any of us can look forward to.
That is not the destiny I propose for Gwendolen.
Algernon, of course, can choose for himself. [Pulls out her watch.] Come, dear, [Gwendolen rises] we have already missed five, if not six, trains.
To miss any more might expose us to comment on the platform. [Enter Dr.
Chasuble.] CHASUBLE.
Everything is quite ready for the christenings.
The christenings, sir!
Is not that somewhat premature?
CHASUBLE. [Looking rather puzzled, and pointing to Jack and Algernon.] Both these gentlemen have expressed a desire for immediate baptism.
The idea is grotesque and irreligious!
Algernon, I forbid you to be baptized.
I will not hear of such excesses.
Lord Bracknell would be highly displeased if he learned that that was the way in which you wasted your time and money.
Am I to understand then that there are to be no christenings at all this afternoon?
I don’t think that, as things are now, it would be of much practical value to either of us, Dr.
I am grieved to hear such sentiments from you, Mr.
They savour of the heretical views of the Anabaptists, views that I have completely refuted in four of my unpublished sermons.
However, as your present mood seems to be one peculiarly secular, I will return to the church at once.
Indeed, I have just been informed by the pew-opener that for the last hour and a half Miss Prism has been waiting for me in the vestry.
LADY BRACKNELL. [Starting.] Miss Prism!
Yes, Lady Bracknell.
This matter may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and myself.
Is this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected with education?
CHASUBLE. [Somewhat indignantly.] She is the most cultivated of ladies, and the very picture of respectability.
It is obviously the same person.
May I ask what position she holds in your household?
CHASUBLE. [Severely.] I am a celibate, madam.
JACK. [Interposing.] Miss Prism, Lady Bracknell, has been for the last three years Miss Cardew’s esteemed governess and valued companion.
CHASUBLE. [Looking off.] She approaches; she is nigh. [Enter Miss Prism hurriedly.] MISS PRISM.
I was told you expected me in the vestry, dear Canon.
I have been waiting for you there for an hour and three-quarters. [Catches sight of Lady Bracknell, who has fixed her with a stony glare.
She looks anxiously round as if desirous to escape.] LADY BRACKNELL. [In a severe, judicial voice.] Prism! [Miss Prism bows her head in shame.] Come here, Prism! [Miss Prism approaches in a humble manner.] Prism!
Where is that baby? [General consternation.
Algernon and Jack pretend to be anxious to shield Cecily and Gwendolen from hearing the details of a terrible public scandal.] Twenty-eight years ago, Prism, you left Lord Bracknell’s house, Number 104, Upper Grosvenor Street, in charge of a perambulator that contained a baby of the male sex.
A few weeks later, through the elaborate investigations of the Metropolitan police, the perambulator was discovered at midnight, standing by itself in a remote corner of Bayswater.
It contained the manuscript of a three-volume novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality. [Miss Prism starts in involuntary indignation.] But the baby was not there! [Every one looks at Miss Prism.] Prism!
Lady Bracknell, I admit with shame that I do not know.
On the morning of the day you mention, a day that is for ever branded on my memory, I prepared as usual to take the baby out in its perambulator.
I had also with me a somewhat old, but capacious hand-bag in which I had intended to place the manuscript of a work of fiction that I had written during my few unoccupied hours.
In a moment of mental abstraction, for which I never can forgive myself, I deposited the manuscript in the basinette, and placed the baby in the hand-bag.
JACK. [Who has been listening attentively.] But where did you deposit the hand-bag?
Miss Prism, this is a matter of no small importance to me.
I insist on knowing where you deposited the hand-bag that contained that infant.
I left it in the cloak-room of one of the larger railway stations in London.
MISS PRISM. [Quite crushed.] Victoria.
The Brighton line. [Sinks into a chair.] JACK.
Gwendolen, wait here for me.
If you are not too long, I will wait here for you all my life. [Exit Jack in great excitement.] CHASUBLE.
What do you think this means, Lady Bracknell?
I need hardly tell you that in families of high position strange coincidences are not supposed to occur.
They are hardly considered the thing. [Noises heard overhead as if some one was throwing trunks about.
Uncle Jack seems strangely agitated.
Your guardian has a very emotional nature.
This noise is extremely unpleasant.
It sounds as if he was having an argument.
I dislike arguments of any kind.
They are always vulgar, and often convincing.
CHASUBLE. [Looking up.] It has stopped now. [The noise is redoubled.] LADY BRACKNELL.
I wish he would arrive at some conclusion.
This suspense is terrible.
Examine it carefully before you speak.
The happiness of more than one life depends on your answer.
Yes, here is the injury it received through the upsetting of a Gower Street omnibus in younger and happier days.
Here is the stain on the lining caused by the explosion of a temperance beverage, an incident that occurred at Leamington.
And here, on the lock, are my initials.
I had forgotten that in an extravagant mood I had had them placed there.
The bag is undoubtedly mine.
I am delighted to have it so unexpectedly restored to me.
It has been a great inconvenience being without it all these years.
JACK. [In a pathetic voice.] Miss Prism, more is restored to you than this hand-bag.
JACK. [Embracing her.] Yes . . . mother!
MISS PRISM. [Recoiling in indignant astonishment.] Mr.
But after all, who has the right to cast a stone against one who has suffered?
Cannot repentance wipe out an act of folly?
Mother, I forgive you. [Tries to embrace her again.] MISS PRISM. [Still more indignant.] Mr.
Worthing, there is some error. [Pointing to Lady Bracknell.] There is the lady who can tell you who you really are.
JACK. [After a pause.] Lady Bracknell, I hate to seem inquisitive, but would you kindly inform me who I am?
I am afraid that the news I have to give you will not altogether please you.
Moncrieff, and consequently Algernon’s elder brother.
Cecily,—how could you have ever doubted that I had a brother? [Seizes hold of Algernon.] Dr.
Chasuble, my unfortunate brother.
Miss Prism, my unfortunate brother.
Gwendolen, my unfortunate brother.
Algy, you young scoundrel, you will have to treat me with more respect in the future.
I did my best, however, though I was out of practice. [Shakes hands.] GWENDOLEN. [To Jack.] My own!
What is your Christian name, now that you have become some one else?
I had quite forgotten that point.
Your decision on the subject of my name is irrevocable, I suppose?
I never change, except in my affections.
What a noble nature you have, Gwendolen!
Then the question had better be cleared up at once.
At the time when Miss Prism left me in the hand-bag, had I been christened already?
Every luxury that money could buy, including christening, had been lavished on you by your fond and doting parents.
Then I was christened!
Being the eldest son you were naturally christened after your father.
JACK. [Irritably.] Yes, but what was my father’s Christian name?
LADY BRACKNELL. [Meditatively.] I cannot at the present moment recall what the General’s Christian name was.
He was eccentric, I admit.
And that was the result of the Indian climate, and marriage, and indigestion, and other things of that kind.
Can’t you recollect what our father’s Christian name was?
My dear boy, we were never even on speaking terms.
The General was essentially a man of peace, except in his domestic life.
But I have no doubt his name would appear in any military directory.
These delightful records should have been my constant study. [Rushes to bookcase and tears the books out.] M.
Mallam, Maxbohm, Magley, what ghastly names they have—Markby, Migsby, Mobbs, Moncrieff!
Lieutenant 1840, Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel, General 1869, Christian names, Ernest John. [Puts book very quietly down and speaks quite calmly.] I always told you, Gwendolen, my name was Ernest, didn’t I?
I mean it naturally is Ernest.
Yes, I remember now that the General was called Ernest, I knew I had some particular reason for disliking the name.
Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth.
CHASUBLE. [To Miss Prism.] Lætitia! [Embraces her] MISS PRISM. [Enthusiastically.] Frederick!
Cecily! [Embraces her.] At last!
Gwendolen! [Embraces her.] At last!
My nephew, you seem to be displaying signs of triviality.
On the contrary, Aunt Augusta, I’ve now realised for the first time in my life the vital Importance of Being Earnest.
Clark, illustrated by Gustave Doré.
Clark in his edition states that, “The English text of ‘Don Quixote’ adopted in this edition is that of Jarvis, with occasional corrections from Motteaux.” See in the introduction below John Ormsby’s critique of both the Jarvis and Motteaux translations.
The detail of many of the Doré engravings can be fully appreciated only by utilizing the “Full Size” button to expand them to their original dimensions.
Ormsby in his Preface has criticized the fanciful nature of Doré’s illustrations; others feel these woodcuts and steel engravings well match Quixote’s dreams.
There are some—and I confess myself to be one—for whom Shelton’s racy old version, with all its defects, has a charm that no modern translation, however skilful or correct, could possess.
Shelton had the inestimable advantage of belonging to the same generation as Cervantes; “Don Quixote” had to him a vitality that only a contemporary could feel; it cost him no dramatic effort to see things as Cervantes saw them; there is no anachronism in his language; he put the Spanish of Cervantes into the English of Shakespeare.
Shakespeare himself most likely knew the book; he may have carried it home with him in his saddle-bags to Stratford on one of his last journeys, and under the mulberry tree at New Place joined hands with a kindred genius in its pages.
But it was soon made plain to me that to hope for even a moderate popularity for Shelton was vain.
His fine old crusted English would, no doubt, be relished by a minority, but it would be only by a minority.
His warmest admirers must admit that he is not a satisfactory representative of Cervantes.
His translation of the First Part was very hastily made and was never revised by him.
It has all the freshness and vigour, but also a full measure of the faults, of a hasty production.
It is often very literal—barbarously literal frequently—but just as often very loose.
He had evidently a good colloquial knowledge of Spanish, but apparently not much more.
It never seems to occur to him that the same translation of a word will not suit in every case.
It is often said that we have no satisfactory translation of “Don Quixote.” To those who are familiar with the original, it savours of truism or platitude to say so, for in truth there can be no thoroughly satisfactory translation of “Don Quixote” into English or any other language.
It is not that the Spanish idioms are so utterly unmanageable, or that the untranslatable words, numerous enough no doubt, are so superabundant, but rather that the sententious terseness to which the humour of the book owes its flavour is peculiar to Spanish, and can at best be only distantly imitated in any other tongue.
The history of our English translations of “Don Quixote” is instructive.
Shelton’s, the first in any language, was made, apparently, about 1608, but not published till 1612.
On the other hand, it is closer and more literal, the style is the same, the very same translations, or mistranslations, occur in it, and it is extremely unlikely that a new translator would, by suppressing his name, have allowed Shelton to carry off the credit.
In 1687 John Phillips, Milton’s nephew, produced a “Don Quixote” “made English,” he says, “according to the humour of our modern language.” His “Quixote” is not so much a translation as a travesty, and a travesty that for coarseness, vulgarity, and buffoonery is almost unexampled even in the literature of that day.
Ned Ward’s “Life and Notable Adventures of Don Quixote, merrily translated into Hudibrastic Verse” (1700), can scarcely be reckoned a translation, but it serves to show the light in which “Don Quixote” was regarded at the time.
A further illustration may be found in the version published in 1712 by Peter Motteux, who had then recently combined tea-dealing with literature.
It is described as “translated from the original by several hands,” but if so all Spanish flavour has entirely evaporated under the manipulation of the several hands.
The flavour that it has, on the other hand, is distinctly Franco-cockney.
Anyone who compares it carefully with the original will have little doubt that it is a concoction from Shelton and the French of Filleau de Saint Martin, eked out by borrowings from Phillips, whose mode of treatment it adopts.
It is, to be sure, more decent and decorous, but it treats “Don Quixote” in the same fashion as a comic book that cannot be made too comic.
It had the effect, however, of bringing out a translation undertaken and executed in a very different spirit, that of Charles Jervas, the portrait painter, and friend of Pope, Swift, Arbuthnot, and Gay.
It was not published until after his death, and the printers gave the name according to the current pronunciation of the day.
It has been the most freely used and the most freely abused of all the translations.
It has seen far more editions than any other, it is admitted on all hands to be by far the most faithful, and yet nobody seems to have a good word to say for it or for its author.
Jervas no doubt prejudiced readers against himself in his preface, where among many true words about Shelton, Stevens, and Motteux, he rashly and unjustly charges Shelton with having translated not from the Spanish, but from the Italian version of Franciosini, which did not appear until ten years after Shelton’s first volume.
A suspicion of incompetence, too, seems to have attached to him because he was by profession a painter and a mediocre one (though he has given us the best portrait we have of Swift), and this may have been strengthened by Pope’s remark that he “translated ‘Don Quixote’ without understanding Spanish.” He has been also charged with borrowing from Shelton, whom he disparaged.
It is true that in a few difficult or obscure passages he has followed Shelton, and gone astray with him; but for one case of this sort, there are fifty where he is right and Shelton wrong.
As for Pope’s dictum, anyone who examines Jervas’s version carefully, side by side with the original, will see that he was a sound Spanish scholar, incomparably a better one than Shelton, except perhaps in mere colloquial Spanish.
He was, in fact, an honest, faithful, and painstaking translator, and he has left a version which, whatever its shortcomings may be, is singularly free from errors and mistranslations.
The charge against it is that it is stiff, dry—“wooden” in a word,—and no one can deny that there is a foundation for it.
But it may be pleaded for Jervas that a good deal of this rigidity is due to his abhorrence of the light, flippant, jocose style of his predecessors.
In most modern editions, it should be observed, his style has been smoothed and smartened, but without any reference to the original Spanish, so that if he has been made to read more agreeably he has also been robbed of his chief merit of fidelity.
Smollett’s version, published in 1755, may be almost counted as one of these.
At any rate it is plain that in its construction Jervas’s translation was very freely drawn upon, and very little or probably no heed given to the original Spanish.
The later translations may be dismissed in a few words.
Duffield’s, it would be in every sense of the word impertinent in me to offer an opinion here.
I had not even seen it when the present undertaking was proposed to me, and since then I may say vidi tantum, having for obvious reasons resisted the temptation which Mr.
Duffield’s reputation and comely volumes hold out to every lover of Cervantes.
From the foregoing history of our translations of “Don Quixote,” it will be seen that there are a good many people who, provided they get the mere narrative with its full complement of facts, incidents, and adventures served up to them in a form that amuses them, care very little whether that form is the one in which Cervantes originally shaped his ideas.
On the other hand, it is clear that there are many who desire to have not merely the story he tells, but the story as he tells it, so far at least as differences of idiom and circumstances permit, and who will give a preference to the conscientious translator, even though he may have acquitted himself somewhat awkwardly.
But after all there is no real antagonism between the two classes; there is no reason why what pleases the one should not please the other, or why a translator who makes it his aim to treat “Don Quixote” with the respect due to a great classic, should not be as acceptable even to the careless reader as the one who treats it as a famous old jest-book.
It is not a question of caviare to the general, or, if it is, the fault rests with him who makes so.
The method by which Cervantes won the ear of the Spanish people ought, mutatis mutandis, to be equally effective with the great majority of English readers.
At any rate, even if there are readers to whom it is a matter of indifference, fidelity to the method is as much a part of the translator’s duty as fidelity to the matter.
If he can please all parties, so much the better; but his first duty is to those who look to him for as faithful a representation of his author as it is in his power to give them, faithful to the letter so long as fidelity is practicable, faithful to the spirit so far as he can make it.
My purpose here is not to dogmatise on the rules of translation, but to indicate those I have followed, or at least tried to the best of my ability to follow, in the present instance.
One which, it seems to me, cannot be too rigidly followed in translating “Don Quixote,” is to avoid everything that savours of affectation.
The book itself is, indeed, in one sense a protest against it, and no man abhorred it more than Cervantes.
For this reason, I think, any temptation to use antiquated or obsolete language should be resisted.
It is after all an affectation, and one for which there is no warrant or excuse.
Spanish has probably undergone less change since the seventeenth century than any language in Europe, and by far the greater and certainly the best part of “Don Quixote” differs but little in language from the colloquial Spanish of the present day.
Except in the tales and Don Quixote’s speeches, the translator who uses the simplest and plainest everyday language will almost always be the one who approaches nearest to the original.
Seeing that the story of “Don Quixote” and all its characters and incidents have now been for more than two centuries and a half familiar as household words in English mouths, it seems to me that the old familiar names and phrases should not be changed without good reason.
Of course a translator who holds that “Don Quixote” should receive the treatment a great classic deserves, will feel himself bound by the injunction laid upon the Morisco in Chap.
IX not to omit or add anything.
CERVANTES Four generations had laughed over “Don Quixote” before it occurred to anyone to ask, who and what manner of man was this Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra whose name is on the title-page; and it was too late for a satisfactory answer to the question when it was proposed to add a life of the author to the London edition published at Lord Carteret’s instance in 1738.
All traces of the personality of Cervantes had by that time disappeared.
Any floating traditions that may once have existed, transmitted from men who had known him, had long since died out, and of other record there was none; for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were incurious as to “the men of the time,” a reproach against which the nineteenth has, at any rate, secured itself, if it has produced no Shakespeare or Cervantes.
All that Mayans y Siscar, to whom the task was entrusted, or any of those who followed him, Rios, Pellicer, or Navarrete, could do was to eke out the few allusions Cervantes makes to himself in his various prefaces with such pieces of documentary evidence bearing upon his life as they could find.
This, however, has been done by the last-named biographer to such good purpose that he has superseded all predecessors.
Thoroughness is the chief characteristic of Navarrete’s work.
Besides sifting, testing, and methodising with rare patience and judgment what had been previously brought to light, he left, as the saying is, no stone unturned under which anything to illustrate his subject might possibly be found.
Navarrete has done all that industry and acumen could do, and it is no fault of his if he has not given us what we want.
All that I propose to do here is to separate what is matter of fact from what is matter of conjecture, and leave it to the reader’s judgment to decide whether the data justify the inference or not.
The men whose names by common consent stand in the front rank of Spanish literature, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Quevedo, Calderon, Garcilaso de la Vega, the Mendozas, Gongora, were all men of ancient families, and, curiously, all, except the last, of families that traced their origin to the same mountain district in the North of Spain.
The family of Cervantes is commonly said to have been of Galician origin, and unquestionably it was in possession of lands in Galicia at a very early date; but I think the balance of the evidence tends to show that the “solar,” the original site of the family, was at Cervatos in the north-west corner of Old Castile, close to the junction of Castile, Leon, and the Asturias.
The origin of the name Cervantes is curious.
Nuno Alfonso was almost as distinguished in the struggle against the Moors in the reign of Alfonso VII as the Cid had been half a century before in that of Alfonso VI, and was rewarded by divers grants of land in the neighbourhood of Toledo.
On one of his acquisitions, about two leagues from the city, he built himself a castle which he called Cervatos, because “he was lord of the solar of Cervatos in the Montana,” as the mountain region extending from the Basque Provinces to Leon was always called.
At his death in battle in 1143, the castle passed by his will to his son Alfonso Munio, who, as territorial or local surnames were then coming into vogue in place of the simple patronymic, took the additional name of Cervatos.
His eldest son Pedro succeeded him in the possession of the castle, and followed his example in adopting the name, an assumption at which the younger son, Gonzalo, seems to have taken umbrage.
Everyone who has paid even a flying visit to Toledo will remember the ruined castle that crowns the hill above the spot where the bridge of Alcántara spans the gorge of the Tagus, and with its broken outline and crumbling walls makes such an admirable pendant to the square solid Alcazar towering over the city roofs on the opposite side.
In this instance, however, he is in error.
It has everything to do with the author of “Don Quixote,” for it is in fact these old walls that have given to Spain the name she is proudest of to-day.
Both brothers founded families.
The Cervantes branch had more tenacity; it sent offshoots in various directions, Andalusia, Estremadura, Galicia, and Portugal, and produced a goodly line of men distinguished in the service of Church and State.
The pedigree of Cervantes is not without its bearing on “Don Quixote.” A man who could look back upon an ancestry of genuine knights-errant extending from well-nigh the time of Pelayo to the siege of Granada was likely to have a strong feeling on the subject of the sham chivalry of the romances.
It gives a point, too, to what he says in more than one place about families that have once been great and have tapered away until they have come to nothing, like a pyramid.
He was born at Alcalá de Henares and baptised in the church of Santa Maria Mayor on the 9th of October, 1547.
Of his boyhood and youth we know nothing, unless it be from the glimpse he gives us in the preface to his “Comedies” of himself as a boy looking on with delight while Lope de Rueda and his company set up their rude plank stage in the plaza and acted the rustic farces which he himself afterwards took as the model of his interludes.
This first glimpse, however, is a significant one, for it shows the early development of that love of the drama which exercised such an influence on his life and seems to have grown stronger as he grew older, and of which this very preface, written only a few months before his death, is such a striking proof.
Other things besides the drama were in their infancy when Cervantes was a boy.
The period of his boyhood was in every way a transition period for Spain.
The old chivalrous Spain had passed away.
The new Spain was the mightiest power the world had seen since the Roman Empire and it had not yet been called upon to pay the price of its greatness.
By the policy of Ferdinand and Ximenez the sovereign had been made absolute, and the Church and Inquisition adroitly adjusted to keep him so.
The nobles, who had always resisted absolutism as strenuously as they had fought the Moors, had been divested of all political power, a like fate had befallen the cities, the free constitutions of Castile and Aragon had been swept away, and the only function that remained to the Cortés was that of granting money at the King’s dictation.
The transition extended to literature.
Men who, like Garcilaso de la Vega and Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, followed the Italian wars, had brought back from Italy the products of the post-Renaissance literature, which took root and flourished and even threatened to extinguish the native growths.
Damon and Thyrsis, Phyllis and Chloe had been fairly naturalised in Spain, together with all the devices of pastoral poetry for investing with an air of novelty the idea of a dispairing shepherd and inflexible shepherdess.
As a set-off against this, the old historical and traditional ballads, and the true pastorals, the songs and ballads of peasant life, were being collected assiduously and printed in the cancioneros that succeeded one another with increasing rapidity.
But the most notable consequence, perhaps, of the spread of printing was the flood of romances of chivalry that had continued to pour from the press ever since Garci Ordoñez de Montalvo had resuscitated “Amadis of Gaul” at the beginning of the century.
For a youth fond of reading, solid or light, there could have been no better spot in Spain than Alcalá de Henares in the middle of the sixteenth century.
It was then a busy, populous university town, something more than the enterprising rival of Salamanca, and altogether a very different place from the melancholy, silent, deserted Alcalá the traveller sees now as he goes from Madrid to Saragossa.
Theology and medicine may have been the strong points of the university, but the town itself seems to have inclined rather to the humanities and light literature, and as a producer of books Alcalá was already beginning to compete with the older presses of Toledo, Burgos, Salamanca and Seville.
If the boy was the father of the man, the sense of the incongruous that was strong at fifty was lively at ten, and some such reflections as these may have been the true genesis of “Don Quixote.” For his more solid education, we are told, he went to Salamanca.
But why Rodrigo de Cervantes, who was very poor, should have sent his son to a university a hundred and fifty miles away when he had one at his own door, would be a puzzle, if we had any reason for supposing that he did so.
The only evidence is a vague statement by Professor Tomas Gonzalez, that he once saw an old entry of the matriculation of a Miguel de Cervantes.
This does not appear to have been ever seen again; but even if it had, and if the date corresponded, it would prove nothing, as there were at least two other Miguels born about the middle of the century; one of them, moreover, a Cervantes Saavedra, a cousin, no doubt, who was a source of great embarrassment to the biographers.
That he was a student neither at Salamanca nor at Alcalá is best proved by his own works.
No man drew more largely upon experience than he did, and he has nowhere left a single reminiscence of student life—for the “Tia Fingida,” if it be his, is not one—nothing, not even “a college joke,” to show that he remembered days that most men remember best.
It is only by a rare chance that a “Lycidas” finds its way into a volume of this sort, and Cervantes was no Milton.
By the time the book appeared he had left Spain, and, as fate ordered it, for twelve years, the most eventful ones of his life.
Giulio, afterwards Cardinal, Acquaviva had been sent at the end of 1568 to Philip II. by the Pope on a mission, partly of condolence, partly political, and on his return to Rome, which was somewhat brusquely expedited by the King, he took Cervantes with him as his camarero (chamberlain), the office he himself held in the Pope’s household.
The post would no doubt have led to advancement at the Papal Court had Cervantes retained it, but in the summer of 1570 he resigned it and enlisted as a private soldier in Captain Diego Urbina’s company, belonging to Don Miguel de Moncada’s regiment, but at that time forming a part of the command of Marc Antony Colonna.
What impelled him to this step we know not, whether it was distaste for the career before him, or purely military enthusiasm.
It may well have been the latter, for it was a stirring time; the events, however, which led to the alliance between Spain, Venice, and the Pope, against the common enemy, the Porte, and to the victory of the combined fleets at Lepanto, belong rather to the history of Europe than to the life of Cervantes.
He was one of those that sailed from Messina, in September 1571, under the command of Don John of Austria; but on the morning of the 7th of October, when the Turkish fleet was sighted, he was lying below ill with fever.
At the news that the enemy was in sight he rose, and, in spite of the remonstrances of his comrades and superiors, insisted on taking his post, saying he preferred death in the service of God and the King to health.
His galley, the _Marquesa_, was in the thick of the fight, and before it was over he had received three gunshot wounds, two in the breast and one in the left hand or arm.
On the morning after the battle, according to Navarrete, he had an interview with the commander-in-chief, Don John, who was making a personal inspection of the wounded, one result of which was an addition of three crowns to his pay, and another, apparently, the friendship of his general.
How severely Cervantes was wounded may be inferred from the fact, that with youth, a vigorous frame, and as cheerful and buoyant a temperament as ever invalid had, he was seven months in hospital at Messina before he was discharged.
He came out with his left hand permanently disabled; he had lost the use of it, as Mercury told him in the “Viaje del Parnaso” for the greater glory of the right.
This, however, did not absolutely unfit him for service, and in April 1572 he joined Manuel Ponce de Leon’s company of Lope de Figueroa’s regiment, in which, it seems probable, his brother Rodrigo was serving, and shared in the operations of the next three years, including the capture of the Goletta and Tunis.
On the 26th they fell in with a squadron of Algerine galleys, and after a stout resistance were overpowered and carried into Algiers.
By means of a ransomed fellow-captive the brothers contrived to inform their family of their condition, and the poor people at Alcalá at once strove to raise the ransom money, the father disposing of all he possessed, and the two sisters giving up their marriage portions.
But Dali Mami had found on Cervantes the letters addressed to the King by Don John and the Duke of Sesa, and, concluding that his prize must be a person of great consequence, when the money came he refused it scornfully as being altogether insufficient.
The owner of Rodrigo, however, was more easily satisfied; ransom was accepted in his case, and it was arranged between the brothers that he should return to Spain and procure a vessel in which he was to come back to Algiers and take off Miguel and as many of their comrades as possible.
This was not the first attempt to escape that Cervantes had made.
Soon after the commencement of his captivity he induced several of his companions to join him in trying to reach Oran, then a Spanish post, on foot; but after the first day’s journey, the Moor who had agreed to act as their guide deserted them, and they had no choice but to return.
The second attempt was more disastrous.
Wild as the project may appear, it was very nearly successful.
The vessel procured by Rodrigo made its appearance off the coast, and under cover of night was proceeding to take off the refugees, when the crew were alarmed by a passing fishing boat, and beat a hasty retreat.
On renewing the attempt shortly afterwards, they, or a portion of them at least, were taken prisoners, and just as the poor fellows in the garden were exulting in the thought that in a few moments more freedom would be within their grasp, they found themselves surrounded by Turkish troops, horse and foot.
The Dorador had revealed the whole scheme to the Dey Hassan.
When Cervantes saw what had befallen them, he charged his companions to lay all the blame upon him, and as they were being bound he declared aloud that the whole plot was of his contriving, and that nobody else had any share in it.
He was threatened with impalement and with torture; and as cutting off ears and noses were playful freaks with the Algerines, it may be conceived what their tortures were like; but nothing could make him swerve from his original statement that he and he alone was responsible.
The upshot was that the unhappy gardener was hanged by his master, and the prisoners taken possession of by the Dey, who, however, afterwards restored most of them to their masters, but kept Cervantes, paying Dali Mami 500 crowns for him.
He felt, no doubt, that a man of such resource, energy, and daring, was too dangerous a piece of property to be left in private hands; and he had him heavily ironed and lodged in his own prison.
After this he seems to have been kept in still closer confinement than before, for nearly two years passed before he made another attempt.
This time his plan was to purchase, by the aid of a Spanish renegade and two Valencian merchants resident in Algiers, an armed vessel in which he and about sixty of the leading captives were to make their escape; but just as they were about to put it into execution one Doctor Juan Blanco de Paz, an ecclesiastic and a compatriot, informed the Dey of the plot.
Cervantes by force of character, by his self-devotion, by his untiring energy and his exertions to lighten the lot of his companions in misery, had endeared himself to all, and become the leading spirit in the captive colony, and, incredible as it may seem, jealousy of his influence and the esteem in which he was held, moved this man to compass his destruction by a cruel death.
The merchants finding that the Dey knew all, and fearing that Cervantes under torture might make disclosures that would imperil their own lives, tried to persuade him to slip away on board a vessel that was on the point of sailing for Spain; but he told them they had nothing to fear, for no tortures would make him compromise anybody, and he went at once and gave himself up to the Dey.
As before, the Dey tried to force him to name his accomplices.
Everything was made ready for his immediate execution; the halter was put round his neck and his hands tied behind him, but all that could be got from him was that he himself, with the help of four gentlemen who had since left Algiers, had arranged the whole, and that the sixty who were to accompany him were not to know anything of it until the last moment.
The poverty-stricken Cervantes family had been all this time trying once more to raise the ransom money, and at last a sum of three hundred ducats was got together and entrusted to the Redemptorist Father Juan Gil, who was about to sail for Algiers.
The Dey, however, demanded more than double the sum offered, and as his term of office had expired and he was about to sail for Constantinople, taking all his slaves with him, the case of Cervantes was critical.
He was already on board heavily ironed, when the Dey at length agreed to reduce his demand by one-half, and Father Gil by borrowing was able to make up the amount, and on September 19, 1580, after a captivity of five years all but a week, Cervantes was at last set free.
Before long he discovered that Blanco de Paz, who claimed to be an officer of the Inquisition, was now concocting on false evidence a charge of misconduct to be brought against him on his return to Spain.
To checkmate him Cervantes drew up a series of twenty-five questions, covering the whole period of his captivity, upon which he requested Father Gil to take the depositions of credible witnesses before a notary.
Eleven witnesses taken from among the principal captives in Algiers deposed to all the facts above stated and to a great deal more besides.
The sole foundation for all this is that in 1605 there certainly was living in the family of Cervantes a Doña Isabel de Saavedra, who is described in an official document as his natural daughter, and then twenty years of age.
With his crippled left hand promotion in the army was hopeless, now that Don John was dead and he had no one to press his claims and services, and for a man drawing on to forty life in the ranks was a dismal prospect; he had already a certain reputation as a poet; he made up his mind, therefore, to cast his lot with literature, and for a first venture committed his “Galatea” to the press.
It was published, as Salva y Mallen shows conclusively, at Alcalá, his own birth-place, in 1585 and no doubt helped to make his name more widely known, but certainly did not do him much good in any other way.
While it was going through the press, he married Doña Catalina de Palacios Salazar y Vozmediano, a lady of Esquivias near Madrid, and apparently a friend of the family, who brought him a fortune which may possibly have served to keep the wolf from the door, but if so, that was all.
The drama had by this time outgrown market-place stages and strolling companies, and with his old love for it he naturally turned to it for a congenial employment.
In about three years he wrote twenty or thirty plays, which he tells us were performed without any throwing of cucumbers or other missiles, and ran their course without any hisses, outcries, or disturbance.
Only two of them have been preserved, but as they happen to be two of the seven or eight he mentions with complacency, we may assume they are favourable specimens, and no one who reads the “Numancia” and the “Trato de Argel” will feel any surprise that they failed as acting dramas.
Whatever merits they may have, whatever occasional they may show, they are, as regards construction, incurably clumsy.
How completely they failed is manifest from the fact that with all his sanguine temperament and indomitable perseverance he was unable to maintain the struggle to gain a livelihood as a dramatist for more than three years; nor was the rising popularity of Lope the cause, as is often said, notwithstanding his own words to the contrary.
When Lope began to write for the stage is uncertain, but it was certainly after Cervantes went to Seville.
Among the “Nuevos Documentos” printed by Señor Asensio y Toledo is one dated 1592, and curiously characteristic of Cervantes.
It is an agreement with one Rodrigo Osorio, a manager, who was to accept six comedies at fifty ducats (about 6l.) apiece, not to be paid in any case unless it appeared on representation that the said comedy was one of the best that had ever been represented in Spain.
The test does not seem to have been ever applied; perhaps it was sufficiently apparent to Rodrigo Osorio that the comedies were not among the best that had ever been represented.
Among the correspondence of Cervantes there might have been found, no doubt, more than one letter like that we see in the “Rake’s Progress,” “Sir, I have read your play, and it will not doo.” He was more successful in a literary contest at Saragossa in 1595 in honour of the canonisation of St.
Jacinto, when his composition won the first prize, three silver spoons.
The year before this he had been appointed a collector of revenues for the kingdom of Granada.
In order to remit the money he had collected more conveniently to the treasury, he entrusted it to a merchant, who failed and absconded; and as the bankrupt’s assets were insufficient to cover the whole, he was sent to prison at Seville in September 1597.
The balance against him, however, was a small one, about 26l., and on giving security for it he was released at the end of the year.
Nay, it may well be that on those journeys into remote regions he came across now and then a specimen of the pauper gentleman, with his lean hack and his greyhound and his books of chivalry, dreaming away his life in happy ignorance that the world had changed since his great-grandfather’s old helmet was new.
But it was in Seville that he found out his true vocation, though he himself would not by any means have admitted it to be so.
It was there, in Triana, that he was first tempted to try his hand at drawing from life, and first brought his humour into play in the exquisite little sketch of “Rinconete y Cortadillo,” the germ, in more ways than one, of “Don Quixote.” Where and when that was written, we cannot tell.
After his imprisonment all trace of Cervantes in his official capacity disappears, from which it may be inferred that he was not reinstated.
That he was still in Seville in November 1598 appears from a satirical sonnet of his on the elaborate catafalque erected to testify the grief of the city at the death of Philip II, but from this up to 1603 we have no clue to his movements.
The words in the preface to the First Part of “Don Quixote” are generally held to be conclusive that he conceived the idea of the book, and wrote the beginning of it at least, in a prison, and that he may have done so is extremely likely.
The printing was finished in December, and the book came out with the new year, 1605.
It is often said that “Don Quixote” was at first received coldly.
The facts show just the contrary.
No sooner was it in the hands of the public than preparations were made to issue pirated editions at Lisbon and Valencia, and to bring out a second edition with the additional copyrights for Aragon and Portugal, which he secured in February.
No doubt it was received with something more than coldness by certain sections of the community.
Men of wit, taste, and discrimination among the aristocracy gave it a hearty welcome, but the aristocracy in general were not likely to relish a book that turned their favourite reading into ridicule and laughed at so many of their favourite ideas.
The dramatists who gathered round Lope as their leader regarded Cervantes as their common enemy, and it is plain that he was equally obnoxious to the other clique, the culto poets who had Gongora for their chief.
Navarrete, who knew nothing of the letter above mentioned, tries hard to show that the relations between Cervantes and Lope were of a very friendly sort, as indeed they were until “Don Quixote” was written.
In 1601 Valladolid was made the seat of the Court, and at the beginning of 1603 Cervantes had been summoned thither in connection with the balance due by him to the Treasury, which was still outstanding.
He remained at Valladolid, apparently supporting himself by agencies and scrivener’s work of some sort; probably drafting petitions and drawing up statements of claims to be presented to the Council, and the like.
So, at least, we gather from the depositions taken on the occasion of the death of a gentleman, the victim of a street brawl, who had been carried into the house in which he lived.
In these he himself is described as a man who wrote and transacted business, and it appears that his household then consisted of his wife, the natural daughter Isabel de Saavedra already mentioned, his sister Andrea, now a widow, her daughter Constanza, a mysterious Magdalena de Sotomayor calling herself his sister, for whom his biographers cannot account, and a servant-maid.
Meanwhile “Don Quixote” had been growing in favour, and its author’s name was now known beyond the Pyrenees.
In 1607 an edition was printed at Brussels.
Robles, the Madrid publisher, found it necessary to meet the demand by a third edition, the seventh in all, in 1608.
The popularity of the book in Italy was such that a Milan bookseller was led to bring out an edition in 1610; and another was called for in Brussels in 1611.
It might naturally have been expected that, with such proofs before him that he had hit the taste of the public, Cervantes would have at once set about redeeming his rather vague promise of a second volume.
But, to all appearance, nothing was farther from his thoughts.
He had still by him one or two short tales of the same vintage as those he had inserted in “Don Quixote” and instead of continuing the adventures of Don Quixote, he set to work to write more of these “Novelas Exemplares” as he afterwards called them, with a view to making a book of them.
The novels were published in the summer of 1613, with a dedication to the Conde de Lemos, the Maecenas of the day, and with one of those chatty confidential prefaces Cervantes was so fond of.
In this, eight years and a half after the First Part of “Don Quixote” had appeared, we get the first hint of a forthcoming Second Part.
“You shall see shortly,” he says, “the further exploits of Don Quixote and humours of Sancho Panza.” His idea of “shortly” was a somewhat elastic one, for, as we know by the date to Sancho’s letter, he had barely one-half of the book completed that time twelvemonth.
But more than poems, or pastorals, or novels, it was his dramatic ambition that engrossed his thoughts.
The same indomitable spirit that kept him from despair in the bagnios of Algiers, and prompted him to attempt the escape of himself and his comrades again and again, made him persevere in spite of failure and discouragement in his efforts to win the ear of the public as a dramatist.
The temperament of Cervantes was essentially sanguine.
The portrait he draws in the preface to the novels, with the aquiline features, chestnut hair, smooth untroubled forehead, and bright cheerful eyes, is the very portrait of a sanguine man.
Nothing that the managers might say could persuade him that the merits of his plays would not be recognised at last if they were only given a fair chance.
The old soldier of the Spanish Salamis was bent on being the Aeschylus of Spain.
All this he was to do, could he once get a hearing: there was the initial difficulty.
He shows plainly enough, too, that “Don Quixote” and the demolition of the chivalry romances was not the work that lay next his heart.
He was, indeed, as he says himself in his preface, more a stepfather than a father to “Don Quixote.” Never was great work so neglected by its author.
That it was written carelessly, hastily, and by fits and starts, was not always his fault, but it seems clear he never read what he sent to the press.
He knew how the printers had blundered, but he never took the trouble to correct them when the third edition was in progress, as a man who really cared for the child of his brain would have done.
He appears to have regarded the book as little more than a mere libro de entretenimiento, an amusing book, a thing, as he says in the “Viaje,” “to divert the melancholy moody heart at any time or season.” No doubt he had an affection for his hero, and was very proud of Sancho Panza.
It would have been strange indeed if he had not been proud of the most humorous creation in all fiction.
He was proud, too, of the popularity and success of the book, and beyond measure delightful is the naivete with which he shows his pride in a dozen passages in the Second Part.
In all probability he would have given all the success of “Don Quixote,” nay, would have seen every copy of “Don Quixote” burned in the Plaza Mayor, for one such success as Lope de Vega was enjoying on an average once a week.
At sixty-eight he was as full of life and hope and plans for the future as a boy of eighteen.
Had Avellaneda, in fact, been content with merely bringing out a continuation to “Don Quixote,” Cervantes would have had no reasonable grievance.
His own intentions were expressed in the very vaguest language at the end of the book; nay, in his last words, “forse altro cantera con miglior plettro,” he seems actually to invite someone else to continue the work, and he made no sign until eight years and a half had gone by; by which time Avellaneda’s volume was no doubt written.
In fact Cervantes had no case, or a very bad one, as far as the mere continuation was concerned.
But Avellaneda chose to write a preface to it, full of such coarse personal abuse as only an ill-conditioned man could pour out.
He taunts Cervantes with being old, with having lost his hand, with having been in prison, with being poor, with being friendless, accuses him of envy of Lope’s success, of petulance and querulousness, and so on; and it was in this that the sting lay.
Avellaneda’s reason for this personal attack is obvious enough.
Whoever he may have been, it is clear that he was one of the dramatists of Lope’s school, for he has the impudence to charge Cervantes with attacking him as well as Lope in his criticism on the drama.
His identification has exercised the best critics and baffled all the ingenuity and research that has been brought to bear on it.
Navarrete and Ticknor both incline to the belief that Cervantes knew who he was; but I must say I think the anger he shows suggests an invisible assailant; it is like the irritation of a man stung by a mosquito in the dark.
Cervantes from certain solecisms of language pronounces him to be an Aragonese, and Pellicer, an Aragonese himself, supports this view and believes him, moreover, to have been an ecclesiastic, a Dominican probably.
Any merit Avellaneda has is reflected from Cervantes, and he is too dull to reflect much.
“Dull and dirty” will always be, I imagine, the verdict of the vast majority of unprejudiced readers.
But whatever Avellaneda and his book may be, we must not forget the debt we owe them.
But for them, there can be no doubt, “Don Quixote” would have come to us a mere torso instead of a complete work.
Even if Cervantes had finished the volume he had in hand, most assuredly he would have left off with a promise of a Third Part, giving the further adventures of Don Quixote and humours of Sancho Panza as shepherds.
It is plain that he had at one time an intention of dealing with the pastoral romances as he had dealt with the books of chivalry, and but for Avellaneda he would have tried to carry it out.
But it is more likely that, with his plans, and projects, and hopefulness, the volume would have remained unfinished till his death, and that we should have never made the acquaintance of the Duke and Duchess, or gone with Sancho to Barataria.
From the moment the book came into his hands he seems to have been haunted by the fear that there might be more Avellanedas in the field, and putting everything else aside, he set himself to finish off his task and protect Don Quixote in the only way he could, by killing him.
The conclusion is no doubt a hasty and in some places clumsy piece of work and the frequent repetition of the scolding administered to Avellaneda becomes in the end rather wearisome; but it is, at any rate, a conclusion and for that we must thank Avellaneda.
It is needless to say they were put forward by Cervantes in all good faith and full confidence in their merits.
The reader, however, was not to suppose they were his last word or final effort in the drama, for he had in hand a comedy called “Engano a los ojos,” about which, if he mistook not, there would be no question.
Of this dramatic masterpiece the world has no opportunity of judging; his health had been failing for some time, and he died, apparently of dropsy, on the 23rd of April, 1616, the day on which England lost Shakespeare, nominally at least, for the English calendar had not yet been reformed.
He died as he had lived, accepting his lot bravely and cheerfully.
Was it an unhappy life, that of Cervantes?
His biographers all tell us that it was; but I must say I doubt it.
It was a hard life, a life of poverty, of incessant struggle, of toil ill paid, of disappointment, but Cervantes carried within himself the antidote to all these evils.
His was not one of those light natures that rise above adversity merely by virtue of their own buoyancy; it was in the fortitude of a high spirit that he was proof against it.
It is impossible to conceive Cervantes giving way to despondency or prostrated by dejection.
He who could take Cervantes’ distresses together with his apparatus for enduring them would not make so bad a bargain, perhaps, as far as happiness in life is concerned.
Of his burial-place nothing is known except that he was buried, in accordance with his will, in the neighbouring convent of Trinitarian nuns, of which it is supposed his daughter, Isabel de Saavedra, was an inmate, and that a few years afterwards the nuns removed to another convent, carrying their dead with them.
But whether the remains of Cervantes were included in the removal or not no one knows, and the clue to their resting-place is now lost beyond all hope.
This furnishes perhaps the least defensible of the items in the charge of neglect brought against his contemporaries.
In some of the others there is a good deal of exaggeration.
To listen to most of his biographers one would suppose that all Spain was in league not only against the man but against his memory, or at least that it was insensible to his merits, and left him to live in misery and die of want.
To talk of his hard life and unworthy employments in Andalusia is absurd.
What had he done to distinguish him from thousands of other struggling men earning a precarious livelihood?
True, he was a gallant soldier, who had been wounded and had undergone captivity and suffering in his country’s cause, but there were hundreds of others in the same case.
He had written a mediocre specimen of an insipid class of romance, and some plays which manifestly did not comply with the primary condition of pleasing: were the playgoers to patronise plays that did not amuse them, because the author was to produce “Don Quixote” twenty years afterwards?
The scramble for copies which, as we have seen, followed immediately on the appearance of the book, does not look like general insensibility to its merits.
No doubt it was received coldly by some, but if a man writes a book in ridicule of periwigs he must make his account with being coldly received by the periwig wearers and hated by the whole tribe of wigmakers.
It did the best it could; it read his book and liked it and bought it, and encouraged the bookseller to pay him well for others.
It has been also made a reproach to Spain that she has erected no monument to the man she is proudest of; no monument, that is to say, of him; for the bronze statue in the little garden of the Plaza de las Cortés, a fair work of art no doubt, and unexceptionable had it been set up to the local poet in the market-place of some provincial town, is not worthy of Cervantes or of Madrid.
But what need has Cervantes of “such weak witness of his name;” or what could a monument do in his case except testify to the self-glorification of those who had put it up?
Si monumentum quoeris, circumspice.
The nearest bookseller’s shop will show what bathos there would be in a monument to the author of “Don Quixote.” ‘DON QUIXOTE’ Nine editions of the First Part of “Don Quixote” had already appeared before Cervantes died, thirty thousand copies in all, according to his own estimate, and a tenth was printed at Barcelona the year after his death.
So large a number naturally supplied the demand for some time, but by 1634 it appears to have been exhausted; and from that time down to the present day the stream of editions has continued to flow rapidly and regularly.
The translations show still more clearly in what request the book has been from the very outset.
In seven years from the completion of the work it had been translated into the four leading languages of Europe.
Except the Bible, in fact, no book has been so widely diffused as “Don Quixote.” The “Imitatio Christi” may have been translated into as many different languages, and perhaps “Robinson Crusoe” and the “Vicar of Wakefield” into nearly as many, but in multiplicity of translations and editions “Don Quixote” leaves them all far behind.
Still more remarkable is the character of this wide diffusion.
“Don Quixote” has been thoroughly naturalised among people whose ideas about knight-errantry, if they had any at all, were of the vaguest, who had never seen or heard of a book of chivalry, who could not possibly feel the humour of the burlesque or sympathise with the author’s purpose.
Another curious fact is that this, the most cosmopolitan book in the world, is one of the most intensely national.
“Manon Lescaut” is not more thoroughly French, “Tom Jones” not more English, “Rob Roy” not more Scotch, than “Don Quixote” is Spanish, in character, in ideas, in sentiment, in local colour, in everything.
What, then, is the secret of this unparalleled popularity, increasing year by year for well-nigh three centuries?
One explanation, no doubt, is that of all the books in the world, “Don Quixote” is the most catholic.
There is something in it for every sort of reader, young or old, sage or simple, high or low.
It was the attack upon the sheep, the battle with the wine-skins, Mambrino’s helmet, the balsam of Fierabras, Don Quixote knocked over by the sails of the windmill, Sancho tossed in the blanket, the mishaps and misadventures of master and man, that were originally the great attraction, and perhaps are so still to some extent with the majority of readers.
It is plain that “Don Quixote” was generally regarded at first, and indeed in Spain for a long time, as little more than a queer droll book, full of laughable incidents and absurd situations, very amusing, but not entitled to much consideration or care.
All the editions printed in Spain from 1637 to 1771, when the famous printer Ibarra took it up, were mere trade editions, badly and carelessly printed on vile paper and got up in the style of chap-books intended only for popular use, with, in most instances, uncouth illustrations and clap-trap additions by the publisher.
To England belongs the credit of having been the first country to recognise the right of “Don Quixote” to better treatment than this.
The London edition of 1738, commonly called Lord Carteret’s from having been suggested by him, was not a mere _édition de luxe_.
The zeal of publishers, editors, and annotators brought about a remarkable change of sentiment with regard to “Don Quixote.” A vast number of its admirers began to grow ashamed of laughing over it.
It became almost a crime to treat it as a humorous book.
The humour was not entirely denied, but, according to the new view, it was rated as an altogether secondary quality, a mere accessory, nothing more than the stalking-horse under the presentation of which Cervantes shot his philosophy or his satire, or whatever it was he meant to shoot; for on this point opinions varied.
All were agreed, however, that the object he aimed at was not the books of chivalry.
He said emphatically in the preface to the First Part and in the last sentence of the Second, that he had no other object in view than to discredit these books, and this, to advanced criticism, made it clear that his object must have been something else.
One theory was that the book was a kind of allegory, setting forth the eternal struggle between the ideal and the real, between the spirit of poetry and the spirit of prose; and perhaps German philosophy never evolved a more ungainly or unlikely camel out of the depths of its inner consciousness.
Something of the antagonism, no doubt, is to be found in “Don Quixote,” because it is to be found everywhere in life, and Cervantes drew from life.
It is difficult to imagine a community in which the never-ceasing game of cross-purposes between Sancho Panza and Don Quixote would not be recognised as true to nature.
In the stone age, among the lake dwellers, among the cave men, there were Don Quixotes and Sancho Panzas; there must have been the troglodyte who never could see the facts before his eyes, and the troglodyte who could see nothing else.
But to suppose Cervantes deliberately setting himself to expound any such idea in two stout quarto volumes is to suppose something not only very unlike the age in which he lived, but altogether unlike Cervantes himself, who would have been the first to laugh at an attempt of the sort made by anyone else.
The extraordinary influence of the romances of chivalry in his day is quite enough to account for the genesis of the book.
Some idea of the prodigious development of this branch of literature in the sixteenth century may be obtained from the scrutiny of Chapter VII, if the reader bears in mind that only a portion of the romances belonging to by far the largest group are enumerated.
As to its effect upon the nation, there is abundant evidence.
From the time when the Amadises and Palmerins began to grow popular down to the very end of the century, there is a steady stream of invective, from men whose character and position lend weight to their words, against the romances of chivalry and the infatuation of their readers.
Ridicule was the only besom to sweep away that dust.
That this was the task Cervantes set himself, and that he had ample provocation to urge him to it, will be sufficiently clear to those who look into the evidence; as it will be also that it was not chivalry itself that he attacked and swept away.
Of all the absurdities that, thanks to poetry, will be repeated to the end of time, there is no greater one than saying that “Cervantes smiled Spain’s chivalry away.” In the first place there was no chivalry for him to smile away.
Spain’s chivalry had been dead for more than a century.
Its work was done when Granada fell, and as chivalry was essentially republican in its nature, it could not live under the rule that Ferdinand substituted for the free institutions of mediaeval Spain.
What he did smile away was not chivalry but a degrading mockery of it.
There were seen so many cavaliers prancing and curvetting before the windows of their mistresses, that a stranger would have imagined the whole nation to have been nothing less than a race of knight-errants.
But after the world became a little acquainted with that notable history, the man that was seen in that once celebrated drapery was pointed at as a Don Quixote, and found himself the jest of high and low.
And I verily believe that to this, and this only, we owe that dampness and poverty of spirit which has run through all our councils for a century past, so little agreeable to those nobler actions of our famous ancestors.” To call “Don Quixote” a sad book, preaching a pessimist view of life, argues a total misconception of its drift.
It would be so if its moral were that, in this world, true enthusiasm naturally leads to ridicule and discomfiture.
But it preaches nothing of the sort; its moral, so far as it can be said to have one, is that the spurious enthusiasm that is born of vanity and self-conceit, that is made an end in itself, not a means to an end, that acts on mere impulse, regardless of circumstances and consequences, is mischievous to its owner, and a very considerable nuisance to the community at large.
A very slight examination of the structure of “Don Quixote” will suffice to show that Cervantes had no deep design or elaborate plan in his mind when he began the book.
When he wrote those lines in which “with a few strokes of a great master he sets before us the pauper gentleman,” he had no idea of the goal to which his imagination was leading him.
There can be little doubt that all he contemplated was a short tale to range with those he had already written, a tale setting forth the ludicrous results that might be expected to follow the attempt of a crazy gentleman to act the part of a knight-errant in modern life.
It is plain, for one thing, that Sancho Panza did not enter into the original scheme, for had Cervantes thought of him he certainly would not have omitted him in his hero’s outfit, which he obviously meant to be complete.
Him we owe to the landlord’s chance remark in Chapter III that knights seldom travelled without squires.
To try to think of a Don Quixote without Sancho Panza is like trying to think of a one-bladed pair of scissors.
The story was written at first, like the others, without any division and without the intervention of Cid Hamete Benengeli; and it seems not unlikely that Cervantes had some intention of bringing Dulcinea, or Aldonza Lorenzo, on the scene in person.
It was probably the ransacking of the Don’s library and the discussion on the books of chivalry that first suggested it to him that his idea was capable of development.
What, if instead of a mere string of farcical misadventures, he were to make his tale a burlesque of one of these books, caricaturing their style, incidents, and spirit?
In pursuance of this change of plan, he hastily and somewhat clumsily divided what he had written into chapters on the model of “Amadis,” invented the fable of a mysterious Arabic manuscript, and set up Cid Hamete Benengeli in imitation of the almost invariable practice of the chivalry-romance authors, who were fond of tracing their books to some recondite source.
Indeed, the keynote, not only to Sancho’s part, but to the whole book, is struck in the first words Sancho utters when he announces his intention of taking his ass with him.
“About the ass,” we are told, “Don Quixote hesitated a little, trying whether he could call to mind any knight-errant taking with him an esquire mounted on ass-back; but no instance occurred to his memory.” We can see the whole scene at a glance, the stolid unconsciousness of Sancho and the perplexity of his master, upon whose perception the incongruity has just forced itself.
This is Sancho’s mission throughout the book; he is an unconscious Mephistopheles, always unwittingly making mockery of his master’s aspirations, always exposing the fallacy of his ideas by some unintentional ad absurdum, always bringing him back to the world of fact and commonplace by force of sheer stolidity.
By the time Cervantes had got his volume of novels off his hands, and summoned up resolution enough to set about the Second Part in earnest, the case was very much altered.
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza had not merely found favour, but had already become, what they have never since ceased to be, veritable entities to the popular imagination.
There was no occasion for him now to interpolate extraneous matter; nay, his readers told him plainly that what they wanted of him was more Don Quixote and more Sancho Panza, and not novels, tales, or digressions.
To himself, too, his creations had become realities, and he had become proud of them, especially of Sancho.
He began the Second Part, therefore, under very different conditions, and the difference makes itself manifest at once.
Even in translation the style will be seen to be far easier, more flowing, more natural, and more like that of a man sure of himself and of his audience.
In the First Part, Don Quixote has no character or individuality whatever.
He is nothing more than a crazy representative of the sentiments of the chivalry romances.
In all that he says and does he is simply repeating the lesson he has learned from his books; and therefore, it is absurd to speak of him in the gushing strain of the sentimental critics when they dilate upon his nobleness, disinterestedness, dauntless courage, and so forth.
It was the business of a knight-errant to right wrongs, redress injuries, and succour the distressed, and this, as a matter of course, he makes his business when he takes up the part; a knight-errant was bound to be intrepid, and so he feels bound to cast fear aside.
Of all Byron’s melodious nonsense about Don Quixote, the most nonsensical statement is that “’tis his virtue makes him mad!” The exact opposite is the truth; it is his madness makes him virtuous.
In the Second Part, Cervantes repeatedly reminds the reader, as if it was a point upon which he was anxious there should be no mistake, that his hero’s madness is strictly confined to delusions on the subject of chivalry, and that on every other subject he is discreto, one, in fact, whose faculty of discernment is in perfect order.
The advantage of this is that he is enabled to make use of Don Quixote as a mouthpiece for his own reflections, and so, without seeming to digress, allow himself the relief of digression when he requires it, as freely as in a commonplace book.
It is true the amount of individuality bestowed upon Don Quixote is not very great.
There are some natural touches of character about him, such as his mixture of irascibility and placability, and his curious affection for Sancho together with his impatience of the squire’s loquacity and impertinence; but in the main, apart from his craze, he is little more than a thoughtful, cultured gentleman, with instinctive good taste and a great deal of shrewdness and originality of mind.
As to Sancho, it is plain, from the concluding words of the preface to the First Part, that he was a favourite with his creator even before he had been taken into favour by the public.
An inferior genius, taking him in hand a second time, would very likely have tried to improve him by making him more comical, clever, amiable, or virtuous.
But Cervantes was too true an artist to spoil his work in this way.
He is a much more important and prominent figure in the Second Part than in the First; indeed, it is his matchless mendacity about Dulcinea that to a great extent supplies the action of the story.
His development in this respect is as remarkable as in any other.
In the First Part he displays a great natural gift of lying.
His lies are not of the highly imaginative sort that liars in fiction commonly indulge in; like Falstaff’s, they resemble the father that begets them; they are simple, homely, plump lies; plain working lies, in short.
But in the service of such a master as Don Quixote he develops rapidly, as we see when he comes to palm off the three country wenches as Dulcinea and her ladies in waiting.
It is worth noticing how, flushed by his success in this instance, he is tempted afterwards to try a flight beyond his powers in his account of the journey on Clavileño.
In the Second Part it is the spirit rather than the incidents of the chivalry romances that is the subject of the burlesque.
Enchantments of the sort travestied in those of Dulcinea and the Trifaldi and the cave of Montesinos play a leading part in the later and inferior romances, and another distinguishing feature is caricatured in Don Quixote’s blind adoration of Dulcinea.
In the romances of chivalry love is either a mere animalism or a fantastic idolatry.
Only a coarse-minded man would care to make merry with the former, but to one of Cervantes’ humour the latter was naturally an attractive subject for ridicule.
Like everything else in these romances, it is a gross exaggeration of the real sentiment of chivalry, but its peculiar extravagance is probably due to the influence of those masters of hyperbole, the Provencal poets.
This is what Cervantes deals with in Don Quixote’s passion for Dulcinea, and in no instance has he carried out the burlesque more happily.
By keeping Dulcinea in the background, and making her a vague shadowy being of whose very existence we are left in doubt, he invests Don Quixote’s worship of her virtues and charms with an additional extravagance, and gives still more point to the caricature of the sentiment and language of the romances.
One of the great merits of “Don Quixote,” and one of the qualities that have secured its acceptance by all classes of readers and made it the most cosmopolitan of books, is its simplicity.
There are, of course, points obvious enough to a Spanish seventeenth century audience which do not immediately strike a reader now-a-days, and Cervantes often takes it for granted that an allusion will be generally understood which is only intelligible to a few.
For example, on many of his readers in Spain, and most of his readers out of it, the significance of his choice of a country for his hero is completely lost.
It would be going too far to say that no one can thoroughly comprehend “Don Quixote” without having seen La Mancha, but undoubtedly even a glimpse of La Mancha will give an insight into the meaning of Cervantes such as no commentator can give.
Of all the dull central plateau of the Peninsula it is the dullest tract.
There is something impressive about the grim solitudes of Estremadura; and if the plains of Leon and Old Castile are bald and dreary, they are studded with old cities renowned in history and rich in relics of the past.
La Mancha as the knight’s country and scene of his chivalries is of a piece with the pasteboard helmet, the farm-labourer on ass-back for a squire, knighthood conferred by a rascally ventero, convicts taken for victims of oppression, and the rest of the incongruities between Don Quixote’s world and the world he lived in, between things as he saw them and things as they were.
It is strange that this element of incongruity, underlying the whole humour and purpose of the book, should have been so little heeded by the majority of those who have undertaken to interpret “Don Quixote.” It has been completely overlooked, for example, by the illustrators.
To be sure, the great majority of the artists who illustrated “Don Quixote” knew nothing whatever of Spain.
To them a venta conveyed no idea but the abstract one of a roadside inn, and they could not therefore do full justice to the humour of Don Quixote’s misconception in taking it for a castle, or perceive the remoteness of all its realities from his ideal.
But even when better informed they seem to have no apprehension of the full force of the discrepancy.
Take, for instance, Gustave Doré’s drawing of Don Quixote watching his armour in the inn-yard.
Whether or not the Venta de Quesada on the Seville road is, as tradition maintains, the inn described in “Don Quixote,” beyond all question it was just such an inn-yard as the one behind it that Cervantes had in his mind’s eye, and it was on just such a rude stone trough as that beside the primitive draw-well in the corner that he meant Don Quixote to deposit his armour.
Gustave Doré makes it an elaborate fountain such as no arriero ever watered his mules at in the corral of any venta in Spain, and thereby entirely misses the point aimed at by Cervantes.
It is the mean, prosaic, commonplace character of all the surroundings and circumstances that gives a significance to Don Quixote’s vigil and the ceremony that follows.
Cervantes’ humour is for the most part of that broader and simpler sort, the strength of which lies in the perception of the incongruous.
It is the incongruity of Sancho in all his ways, words, and works, with the ideas and aims of his master, quite as much as the wonderful vitality and truth to nature of the character, that makes him the most humorous creation in the whole range of fiction.
That unsmiling gravity of which Cervantes was the first great master, “Cervantes’ serious air,” which sits naturally on Swift alone, perhaps, of later humourists, is essential to this kind of humour, and here again Cervantes has suffered at the hands of his interpreters.
Nothing, unless indeed the coarse buffoonery of Phillips, could be more out of place in an attempt to represent Cervantes, than a flippant, would-be facetious style, like that of Motteux’s version for example, or the sprightly, jaunty air, French translators sometimes adopt.
It is the grave matter-of-factness of the narrative, and the apparent unconsciousness of the author that he is saying anything ludicrous, anything but the merest commonplace, that give its peculiar flavour to the humour of Cervantes.
His, in fact, is the exact opposite of the humour of Sterne and the self-conscious humourists.
Even when Uncle Toby is at his best, you are always aware of “the man Sterne” behind him, watching you over his shoulder to see what effect he is producing.
Cervantes always leaves you alone with Don Quixote and Sancho.
He and Swift and the great humourists always keep themselves out of sight, or, more properly speaking, never think about themselves at all, unlike our latter-day school of humourists, who seem to have revived the old horse-collar method, and try to raise a laugh by some grotesque assumption of ignorance, imbecility, or bad taste.
It is true that to do full justice to Spanish humour in any other language is well-nigh an impossibility.
There is a natural gravity and a sonorous stateliness about Spanish, be it ever so colloquial, that make an absurdity doubly absurd, and give plausibility to the most preposterous statement.
This is what makes Sancho Panza’s drollery the despair of the conscientious translator.
Sancho’s curt comments can never fall flat, but they lose half their flavour when transferred from their native Castilian into any other medium.
But if foreigners have failed to do justice to the humour of Cervantes, they are no worse than his own countrymen.
Indeed, were it not for the Spanish peasant’s relish of “Don Quixote,” one might be tempted to think that the great humourist was not looked upon as a humourist at all in his own country.
The craze of Don Quixote seems, in some instances, to have communicated itself to his critics, making them see things that are not in the book and run full tilt at phantoms that have no existence save in their own imaginations.
Like a good many critics now-a-days, they forget that screams are not criticism, and that it is only vulgar tastes that are influenced by strings of superlatives, three-piled hyperboles, and pompous epithets.
But what strikes one as particularly strange is that while they deal in extravagant eulogies, and ascribe all manner of imaginary ideas and qualities to Cervantes, they show no perception of the quality that ninety-nine out of a hundred of his readers would rate highest in him, and hold to be the one that raises him above all rivalry.
To speak of “Don Quixote” as if it were merely a humorous book would be a manifest misdescription.
Cervantes at times makes it a kind of commonplace book for occasional essays and criticisms, or for the observations and reflections and gathered wisdom of a long and stirring life.
It is a mine of shrewd observation on mankind and human nature.
Among modern novels there may be, here and there, more elaborate studies of character, but there is no book richer in individualised character.
What Coleridge said of Shakespeare in minimis is true of Cervantes; he never, even for the most temporary purpose, puts forward a lay figure.
There is life and individuality in all his characters, however little they may have to do, or however short a time they may be before the reader.
Samson Carrasco, the curate, Teresa Panza, Altisidora, even the two students met on the road to the cave of Montesinos, all live and move and have their being; and it is characteristic of the broad humanity of Cervantes that there is not a hateful one among them all.
Even poor Maritornes, with her deplorable morals, has a kind heart of her own and “some faint and distant resemblance to a Christian about her;” and as for Sancho, though on dissection we fail to find a lovable trait in him, unless it be a sort of dog-like affection for his master, who is there that in his heart does not love him?
But it is, after all, the humour of “Don Quixote” that distinguishes it from all other books of the romance kind.
It is this that makes it, as one of the most judicial-minded of modern critics calls it, “the best novel in the world beyond all comparison.” It is its varied humour, ranging from broad farce to comedy as subtle as Shakespeare’s or Molière’s that has naturalised it in every country where there are readers, and made it a classic in every language that has a literature.
THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE Idle reader: thou mayest believe me without any oath that I would this book, as it is the child of my brain, were the fairest, gayest, and cleverest that could be imagined.
But I could not counteract Nature’s law that everything shall beget its like; and what, then, could this sterile, illtilled wit of mine beget but the story of a dry, shrivelled, whimsical offspring, full of thoughts of all sorts and such as never came into any other imagination—just what might be begotten in a prison, where every misery is lodged and every doleful sound makes its dwelling?
Tranquillity, a cheerful retreat, pleasant fields, bright skies, murmuring brooks, peace of mind, these are the things that go far to make even the most barren muses fertile, and bring into the world births that fill it with wonder and delight.
Sometimes when a father has an ugly, loutish son, the love he bears him so blindfolds his eyes that he does not see his defects, or, rather, takes them for gifts and charms of mind and body, and talks of them to his friends as wit and grace.
I, however—for though I pass for the father, I am but the stepfather to “Don Quixote”—have no desire to go with the current of custom, or to implore thee, dearest reader, almost with tears in my eyes, as others do, to pardon or excuse the defects thou wilt perceive in this child of mine.
My wish would be simply to present it to thee plain and unadorned, without any embellishment of preface or uncountable muster of customary sonnets, epigrams, and eulogies, such as are commonly put at the beginning of books.
For I can tell thee, though composing it cost me some labour, I found none greater than the making of this Preface thou art now reading.
And then, when they quote the Holy Scriptures!—anyone would say they are St.
Thomases or other doctors of the Church, observing as they do a decorum so ingenious that in one sentence they describe a distracted lover and in the next deliver a devout little sermon that it is a pleasure and a treat to hear and read.
Of all this there will be nothing in my book, for I have nothing to quote in the margin or to note at the end, and still less do I know what authors I follow in it, to place them at the beginning, as all do, under the letters A, B, C, beginning with Aristotle and ending with Xenophon, or Zoilus, or Zeuxis, though one was a slanderer and the other a painter.
Also my book must do without sonnets at the beginning, at least sonnets whose authors are dukes, marquises, counts, bishops, ladies, or famous poets.
Though if I were to ask two or three obliging friends, I know they would give me them, and such as the productions of those that have the highest reputation in our Spain could not equal.
Is it possible that things of so little moment and so easy to set right can occupy and perplex a ripe wit like yours, fit to break through and crush far greater obstacles?
By my faith, this comes, not of any want of ability, but of too much indolence and too little knowledge of life.
“With regard to adding annotations at the end of the book, you may safely do it in this way.
If you mention any giant in your book contrive that it shall be the giant Goliath, and with this alone, which will cost you almost nothing, you have a grand note, for you can put—_The giant Golias or Goliath was a Philistine whom the shepherd David slew by a mighty stone-cast in the Terebinth valley, as is related in the Book of Kings_—in the chapter where you find it written.
If you should deal with love, with two ounces you may know of Tuscan you can go to Leon the Hebrew, who will supply you to your heart’s content; or if you should not care to go to foreign countries you have at home Fonseca’s ‘Of the Love of God,’ in which is condensed all that you or the most imaginative mind can want on the subject.
In short, all you have to do is to manage to quote these names, or refer to these stories I have mentioned, and leave it to me to insert the annotations and quotations, and I swear by all that’s good to fill your margins and use up four sheets at the end of the book.
“Now let us come to those references to authors which other books have, and you want for yours.
At any rate, if it answers no other purpose, this long catalogue of authors will serve to give a surprising look of authority to your book.
Besides, no one will trouble himself to verify whether you have followed them or whether you have not, being no way concerned in it; especially as, if I mistake not, this book of yours has no need of any one of those things you say it wants, for it is, from beginning to end, an attack upon the books of chivalry, of which Aristotle never dreamt, nor St.
It has only to avail itself of truth to nature in its composition, and the more perfect the imitation the better the work will be.
Strive, too, that in reading your story the melancholy may be moved to laughter, and the merry made merrier still; that the simple shall not be wearied, that the judicious shall admire the invention, that the grave shall not despise it, nor the wise fail to praise it.
I have no desire to magnify the service I render thee in making thee acquainted with so renowned and honoured a knight, but I do desire thy thanks for the acquaintance thou wilt make with the famous Sancho Panza, his squire, in whom, to my thinking, I have given thee condensed all the squirely drolleries that are scattered through the swarm of the vain books of chivalry.
SOME COMMENDATORY VERSES URGANDA THE UNKNOWN To the book of Don Quixote of la Mancha If to be welcomed by the good, O Book! thou make thy steady aim, No empty chatterer will dare To question or dispute thy claim.
But if perchance thou hast a mind To win of idiots approbation, Lost labour will be thy reward, Though they’ll pretend appreciation.
They say a goodly shade he finds Who shelters ’neath a goodly tree; And such a one thy kindly star In Bejar bath provided thee: A royal tree whose spreading boughs A show of princely fruit display; A tree that bears a noble Duke, The Alexander of his day.
Of a Manchegan gentleman Thy purpose is to tell the story, Relating how he lost his wits O’er idle tales of love and glory, Of “ladies, arms, and cavaliers:” A new Orlando Furioso— Innamorato, rather—who Won Dulcinea del Toboso.
Put no vain emblems on thy shield; All figures—that is bragging play.
A modest dedication make, And give no scoffer room to say, “What! Álvaro de Luna here?
Or is it Hannibal again?
Or does King Francis at Madrid Once more of destiny complain?” Since Heaven it hath not pleased on thee Deep erudition to bestow, Or black Latino’s gift of tongues, No Latin let thy pages show.
Ape not philosophy or wit, Lest one who cannot comprehend, Make a wry face at thee and ask, “Why offer flowers to me, my friend?” Be not a meddler; no affair Of thine the life thy neighbours lead: Be prudent; oft the random jest Recoils upon the jester’s head.
Thy constant labour let it be To earn thyself an honest name, For fooleries preserved in print Are perpetuity of shame.
Win the attention of the wise, And give the thinker food for thought; Whoso indites frivolities, Will but by simpletons be sought.
So long as on the round of the fourth sphere The bright Apollo shall his coursers steer, In thy renown thou shalt remain secure, Thy country’s name in story shall endure, And thy sage author stand without a peer.
My mastery the Fickle Goddess owned, And even Chance, submitting to control, Grasped by the forelock, yielded to my will.
Yet—though above yon horned moon enthroned My fortune seems to sit—great Quixote, still Envy of thy achievements fills my soul.
THE LADY OF ORIANA To Dulcinea del Toboso SONNET Oh, fairest Dulcinea, could it be!
It were a pleasant fancy to suppose so— Could Miraflores change to El Toboso, And London’s town to that which shelters thee!
Oh, could mine but acquire that livery Of countless charms thy mind and body show so!
Oh, could I be released from Amadis By exercise of such coy chastity As led thee gentle Quixote to dismiss!
Then would my heavy sorrow turn to joy; None would I envy, all would envy me, And happiness be mine without alloy.
GANDALIN, SQUIRE OF AMADIS OF GAUL, To Sancho Panza, squire of Don Quixote SONNET All hail, illustrious man!
Fortune, when she Bound thee apprentice to the esquire trade, Her care and tenderness of thee displayed, Shaping thy course from misadventure free.
No longer now doth proud knight-errantry Regard with scorn the sickle and the spade; Of towering arrogance less count is made Than of plain esquire-like simplicity.
I envy thee thy Dapple, and thy name, And those alforjas thou wast wont to stuff With comforts that thy providence proclaim.
Excellent Sancho! hail to thee again!
ORLANDO FURIOSO To Don Quixote of La Mancha SONNET If thou art not a Peer, peer thou hast none; Among a thousand Peers thou art a peer; Nor is there room for one when thou art near, Unvanquished victor, great unconquered one!
Orlando, by Angelica undone, Am I; o’er distant seas condemned to steer, And to Fame’s altars as an offering bear Valour respected by Oblivion.
But, though the Scythian or the Moor to tame Was not thy lot, still thou dost rival me: Love binds us in a fellowship of woe.
THE KNIGHT OF PHŒBUS To Don Quixote of La Mancha My sword was not to be compared with thine Phœbus of Spain, marvel of courtesy, Nor with thy famous arm this hand of mine That smote from east to west as lightnings fly.
I scorned all empire, and that monarchy The rosy east held out did I resign For one glance of Claridiana’s eye, The bright Aurora for whose love I pine.
A miracle of constancy my love; And banished by her ruthless cruelty, This arm had might the rage of Hell to tame.
But, Gothic Quixote, happier thou dost prove, For thou dost live in Dulcinea’s name, And famous, honoured, wise, she lives in thee.
FROM SOLISDAN To Don Quixote of La Mancha SONNET Your fantasies, Sir Quixote, it is true, That crazy brain of yours have quite upset, But aught of base or mean hath never yet Been charged by any in reproach to you.
Your deeds are open proof in all men’s view; For you went forth injustice to abate, And for your pains sore drubbings did you get From many a rascally and ruffian crew.
If the fair Dulcinea, your heart’s queen, Be unrelenting in her cruelty, If still your woe be powerless to move her, In such hard case your comfort let it be That Sancho was a sorry go-between: A booby he, hard-hearted she, and you no lover.
DIALOGUE Between Babieca and Rocinante SONNET _B_.
“How comes it, Rocinante, you’re so lean?” _R_.
“I’m underfed, with overwork I’m worn.” _B_.
“Come, come, you show ill-breeding, sir, I ween; ’Tis like an ass your master thus to scorn.” _R_.
“You’re metaphysical.”—_R_.
I might indeed complain of him, I grant ye, But, squire or master, where’s the difference?
It is my earnest hope that Your Excellency’s good counsel in regard to my honourable purpose, will not disdain the littleness of so humble a service.
Miguel de Cervantes e00.jpg (24K) CHAPTER I.
WHICH TREATS OF THE CHARACTER AND PURSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTLEMAN DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA p007.jpg (150K) Full Size In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire to call to mind, there lived not long since one of those gentlemen that keep a lance in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack, and a greyhound for coursing.
An olla of rather more beef than mutton, a salad on most nights, scraps on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a pigeon or so extra on Sundays, made away with three-quarters of his income.
The rest of it went in a doublet of fine cloth and velvet breeches and shoes to match for holidays, while on week-days he made a brave figure in his best homespun.
He had in his house a housekeeper past forty, a niece under twenty, and a lad for the field and market-place, who used to saddle the hack as well as handle the bill-hook.
The age of this gentleman of ours was bordering on fifty; he was of a hardy habit, spare, gaunt-featured, a very early riser and a great sportsman.
They will have it his surname was Quixada or Quesada (for here there is some difference of opinion among the authors who write on the subject), although from reasonable conjectures it seems plain that he was called Quexana.
This, however, is of but little importance to our tale; it will be enough not to stray a hair’s breadth from the truth in the telling of it.
He was not at all easy about the wounds which Don Belianis gave and took, because it seemed to him that, great as were the surgeons who had cured him, he must have had his face and body covered all over with seams and scars.
He commended, however, the author’s way of ending his book with the promise of that interminable adventure, and many a time was he tempted to take up his pen and finish it properly as is there proposed, which no doubt he would have done, and made a successful piece of work of it too, had not greater and more absorbing thoughts prevented him.
Many an argument did he have with the curate of his village (a learned man, and a graduate of Siguenza) as to which had been the better knight, Palmerin of England or Amadis of Gaul.
Master Nicholas, the village barber, however, used to say that neither of them came up to the Knight of Phœbus, and that if there was any that could compare with _him_ it was Don Galaor, the brother of Amadis of Gaul, because he had a spirit that was equal to every occasion, and was no finikin knight, nor lachrymose like his brother, while in the matter of valour he was not a whit behind him.
In short, he became so absorbed in his books that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from dawn to dark, poring over them; and what with little sleep and much reading his brains got so dry that he lost his wits.
His fancy grew full of what he used to read about in his books, enchantments, quarrels, battles, challenges, wounds, wooings, loves, agonies, and all sorts of impossible nonsense; and it so possessed his mind that the whole fabric of invention and fancy he read of was true, that to him no history in the world had more reality in it.
He used to say the Cid Ruy Diaz was a very good knight, but that he was not to be compared with the Knight of the Burning Sword who with one back-stroke cut in half two fierce and monstrous giants.
He thought more of Bernardo del Carpio because at Roncesvalles he slew Roland in spite of enchantments, availing himself of the artifice of Hercules when he strangled Antæus the son of Terra in his arms.
He approved highly of the giant Morgante, because, although of the giant breed which is always arrogant and ill-conditioned, he alone was affable and well-bred.
But above all he admired Reinaldos of Montalban, especially when he saw him sallying forth from his castle and robbing everyone he met, and when beyond the seas he stole that image of Mahomet which, as his history says, was entirely of gold.
To have a bout of kicking at that traitor of a Ganelon he would have given his housekeeper, and his niece into the bargain.
Already the poor man saw himself crowned by the might of his arm Emperor of Trebizond at least; and so, led away by the intense enjoyment he found in these pleasant fancies, he set himself forthwith to put his scheme into execution.
The first thing he did was to clean up some armour that had belonged to his great-grandfather, and had been for ages lying forgotten in a corner eaten with rust and covered with mildew.
He scoured and polished it as best he could, but he perceived one great defect in it, that it had no closed helmet, nothing but a simple morion.
This deficiency, however, his ingenuity supplied, for he contrived a kind of half-helmet of pasteboard which, fitted on to the morion, looked like a whole one.
The ease with which he had knocked it to pieces disconcerted him somewhat, and to guard against that danger he set to work again, fixing bars of iron on the inside until he was satisfied with its strength; and then, not caring to try any more experiments with it, he passed it and adopted it as a helmet of the most perfect construction.
He next proceeded to inspect his hack, which, with more quartos than a real and more blemishes than the steed of Gonela, that “_tantum pellis et ossa fuit_,” surpassed in his eyes the Bucephalus of Alexander or the Babieca of the Cid.
And so, after having composed, struck out, rejected, added to, unmade, and remade a multitude of names out of his memory and fancy, he decided upon calling him Rocinante, a name, to his thinking, lofty, sonorous, and significant of his condition as a hack before he became what he now was, the first and foremost of all the hacks in the world.
Having got a name for his horse so much to his taste, he was anxious to get one for himself, and he was eight days more pondering over this point, till at last he made up his mind to call himself “Don Quixote,” whence, as has been already said, the authors of this veracious history have inferred that his name must have been beyond a doubt Quixada, and not Quesada as others would have it.
So then, his armour being furbished, his morion turned into a helmet, his hack christened, and he himself confirmed, he came to the conclusion that nothing more was needed now but to look out for a lady to be in love with; for a knight-errant without love was like a tree without leaves or fruit, or a body without a soul.
WHICH TREATS OF THE FIRST SALLY THE INGENIOUS DON QUIXOTE MADE FROM HOME p007c.jpg (97K) Full Size These preliminaries settled, he did not care to put off any longer the execution of his design, urged on to it by the thought of all the world was losing by his delay, seeing what wrongs he intended to right, grievances to redress, injustices to repair, abuses to remove, and duties to discharge.
But scarcely did he find himself upon the open plain, when a terrible thought struck him, one all but enough to make him abandon the enterprise at the very outset.
It occurred to him that he had not been dubbed a knight, and that according to the law of chivalry he neither could nor ought to bear arms against any knight; and that even if he had been, still he ought, as a novice knight, to wear white armour, without a device upon the shield until by his prowess he had earned one.
These reflections made him waver in his purpose, but his craze being stronger than any reasoning, he made up his mind to have himself dubbed a knight by the first one he came across, following the example of others in the same case, as he had read in the books that brought him to this pass.
As for white armour, he resolved, on the first opportunity, to scour his until it was whiter than an ermine; and so comforting himself he pursued his way, taking that which his horse chose, for in this he believed lay the essence of adventures.
Thus setting out, our new-fledged adventurer paced along, talking to himself and saying, “Who knows but that in time to come, when the veracious history of my famous deeds is made known, the sage who writes it, when he has to set forth my first sally in the early morning, will do it after this fashion?
“Happy the age, happy the time,” he continued, “in which shall be made known my deeds of fame, worthy to be moulded in brass, carved in marble, limned in pictures, for a memorial for ever.
To this inn, which to him seemed a castle, he advanced, and at a short distance from it he checked Rocinante, hoping that some dwarf would show himself upon the battlements, and by sound of trumpet give notice that a knight was approaching the castle.
But seeing that they were slow about it, and that Rocinante was in a hurry to reach the stable, he made for the inn door, and perceived the two gay damsels who were standing there, and who seemed to him to be two fair maidens or lovely ladies taking their ease at the castle gate.
The landlord eyed him over but did not find him as good as Don Quixote said, nor even half as good; and putting him up in the stable, he returned to see what might be wanted by his guest, whom the damsels, who had by this time made their peace with him, were now relieving of his armour.
They had taken off his breastplate and backpiece, but they neither knew nor saw how to open his gorget or remove his make-shift helmet, for he had fastened it with green ribbons, which, as there was no untying the knots, required to be cut.
A time, however, will come for your ladyships to command and me to obey, and then the might of my arm will show my desire to serve you.” The girls, who were not used to hearing rhetoric of this sort, had nothing to say in reply; they only asked him if he wanted anything to eat.
“If there be troutlets enough,” said Don Quixote, “they will be the same thing as a trout; for it is all one to me whether I am given eight reals in small change or a piece of eight; moreover, it may be that these troutlets are like veal, which is better than beef, or kid, which is better than goat.
But to give him anything to drink was impossible, or would have been so had not the landlord bored a reed, and putting one end in his mouth poured the wine into him through the other; all which he bore with patience rather than sever the ribbons of his helmet.
But still it distressed him to think he had not been dubbed a knight, for it was plain to him he could not lawfully engage in any adventure without receiving the order of knighthood. e02.jpg (39K) CHAPTER III.
He asked if he had any money with him, to which Don Quixote replied that he had not a farthing, as in the histories of knights-errant he had never read of any of them carrying any.
He therefore advised him (and, as his godson so soon to be, he might even command him) never from that time forth to travel without money and the usual requirements, and he would find the advantage of them when he least expected it.
The landlord told all the people who were in the inn about the craze of his guest, the watching of the armour, and the dubbing ceremony he contemplated.
At the noise all the people of the inn ran to the spot, and among them the landlord.
Seeing this, Don Quixote braced his buckler on his arm, and with his hand on his sword exclaimed, “O Lady of Beauty, strength and support of my faint heart, it is time for thee to turn the eyes of thy greatness on this thy captive knight on the brink of so mighty an adventure.” By this he felt himself so inspired that he would not have flinched if all the carriers in the world had assailed him.
The comrades of the wounded perceiving the plight they were in began from a distance to shower stones on Don Quixote, who screened himself as best he could with his buckler, not daring to quit the trough and leave his armour unprotected.
The landlord shouted to them to leave him alone, for he had already told them that he was mad, and as a madman he would not be accountable even if he killed them all.
Still louder shouted Don Quixote, calling them knaves and traitors, and the lord of the castle, who allowed knights-errant to be treated in this fashion, a villain and a low-born knight whom, had he received the order of knighthood, he would call to account for his treachery.
Don Quixote believed it all, and told him he stood there ready to obey him, and to make an end of it with as much despatch as possible; for, if he were again attacked, and felt himself to be dubbed knight, he would not, he thought, leave a soul alive in the castle, except such as out of respect he might spare at his bidding.
Thus warned and menaced, the castellan forthwith brought out a book in which he used to enter the straw and barley he served out to the carriers, and, with a lad carrying a candle-end, and the two damsels already mentioned, he returned to where Don Quixote stood, and bade him kneel down.
Then, reading from his account-book as if he were repeating some devout prayer, in the middle of his delivery he raised his hand and gave him a sturdy blow on the neck, and then, with his own sword, a smart slap on the shoulder, all the while muttering between his teeth as if he was saying his prayers.
Having done this, he directed one of the ladies to gird on his sword, which she did with great self-possession and gravity, and not a little was required to prevent a burst of laughter at each stage of the ceremony; but what they had already seen of the novice knight’s prowess kept their laughter within bounds.
On girding him with the sword the worthy lady said to him, “May God make your worship a very fortunate knight, and grant you success in battle.” Don Quixote asked her name in order that he might from that time forward know to whom he was beholden for the favour he had received, as he meant to confer upon her some portion of the honour he acquired by the might of his arm.
She answered with great humility that she was called La Tolosa, and that she was the daughter of a cobbler of Toledo who lived in the stalls of Sanchobienaya, and that wherever she might be she would serve and esteem him as her lord.
Don Quixote said in reply that she would do him a favour if thenceforward she assumed the “Don” and called herself Doña Tolosa.
She promised she would, and then the other buckled on his spur, and with her followed almost the same conversation as with the lady of the sword.
He asked her name, and she said it was La Molinera, and that she was the daughter of a respectable miller of Antequera; and of her likewise Don Quixote requested that she would adopt the “Don” and call herself Doña Molinera, making offers to her further services and favours.
The landlord, to get him out of the inn, replied with no less rhetoric though with shorter words, and without calling upon him to pay the reckoning let him go with a Godspeed. p017.jpg (54K) Full Size CHAPTER IV.
OF WHAT HAPPENED TO OUR KNIGHT WHEN HE LEFT THE INN p018.jpg (94K) Full Size Day was dawning when Don Quixote quitted the inn, so happy, so gay, so exhilarated at finding himself now dubbed a knight, that his joy was like to burst his horse-girths.
However, recalling the advice of his host as to the requisites he ought to carry with him, especially that referring to money and shirts, he determined to go home and provide himself with all, and also with a squire, for he reckoned upon securing a farm-labourer, a neighbour of his, a poor man with a family, but very well qualified for the office of squire to a knight.
With this object he turned his horse’s head towards his village, and Rocinante, thus reminded of his old quarters, stepped out so briskly that he hardly seemed to tread the earth.
He had not gone far, when out of a thicket on his right there seemed to come feeble cries as of someone in distress, and the instant he heard them he exclaimed, “Thanks be to heaven for the favour it accords me, that it so soon offers me an opportunity of fulfilling the obligation I have undertaken, and gathering the fruit of my ambition.
These cries, no doubt, come from some man or woman in want of help, and needing my aid and protection;” and wheeling, he turned Rocinante in the direction whence the cries seemed to proceed.
He had gone but a few paces into the wood, when he saw a mare tied to an oak, and tied to another, and stripped from the waist upwards, a youth of about fifteen years of age, from whom the cries came.
Pay him at once without another word; if not, by the God that rules us I will make an end of you, and annihilate you on the spot; release him instantly.” p019.jpg (339K) Full Size The farmer hung his head, and without a word untied his servant, of whom Don Quixote asked how much his master owed him.
Don Quixote added it up, found that it came to sixty-three reals, and told the farmer to pay it down immediately, if he did not want to die for it.
The trembling clown replied that as he lived and by the oath he had sworn (though he had not sworn any) it was not so much; for there were to be taken into account and deducted three pairs of shoes he had given him, and a real for two blood-lettings when he was sick.
And if you desire to know who it is lays this command upon you, that you be more firmly bound to obey it, know that I am the valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of wrongs and injustices; and so, God be with you, and keep in mind what you have promised and sworn under those penalties that have been already declared to you.” So saying, he gave Rocinante the spur and was soon out of reach.
“Now, Master Andres,” said the farmer, “call on the undoer of wrongs; you will find he won’t undo that, though I am not sure that I have quite done with you, for I have a good mind to flay you alive.” But at last he untied him, and gave him leave to go look for his judge in order to put the sentence pronounced into execution.
Andres went off rather down in the mouth, swearing he would go to look for the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha and tell him exactly what had happened, and that all would have to be repaid him sevenfold; but for all that, he went off weeping, while his master stood laughing.
In imitation of them he halted for a while, and after having deeply considered it, he gave Rocinante his head, submitting his own will to that of his hack, who followed out his first intention, which was to make straight for his own stable.
After he had gone about two miles Don Quixote perceived a large party of people, who, as afterwards appeared, were some Toledo traders, on their way to buy silk at Murcia.
There were six of them coming along under their sunshades, with four servants mounted, and three muleteers on foot.
Scarcely had Don Quixote descried them when the fancy possessed him that this must be some new adventure; and to help him to imitate as far as he could those passages he had read of in his books, here seemed to come one made on purpose, which he resolved to attempt.
At last the muleteer was tired, and the traders continued their journey, taking with them matter for talk about the poor fellow who had been cudgelled.
He when he found himself alone made another effort to rise; but if he was unable when whole and sound, how was he to rise after having been thrashed and well-nigh knocked to pieces?
And yet he esteemed himself fortunate, as it seemed to him that this was a regular knight-errant’s mishap, and entirely, he considered, the fault of his horse.
However, battered in body as he was, to rise was beyond his power. e04.jpg (28K) CHAPTER V.
This seemed to him to fit exactly the case in which he found himself, so, making a show of severe suffering, he began to roll on the ground and with feeble breath repeat the very words which the wounded knight of the wood is said to have uttered: Where art thou, lady mine, that thou My sorrow dost not rue?
Don Quixote was firmly persuaded that this was the Marquis of Mantua, his uncle, so the only answer he made was to go on with his ballad, in which he told the tale of his misfortune, and of the loves of the Emperor’s son and his wife all exactly as the ballad sings it.
Seeing this, the good man removed as well as he could his breastplate and backpiece to see if he had any wound, but he could perceive no blood nor any mark whatever.
I am certain of it, and it is as true as that I was born to die, that these accursed books of chivalry he has, and has got into the way of reading so constantly, have upset his reason; for now I remember having often heard him saying to himself that he would turn knight-errant and go all over the world in quest of adventures.
“Hold!” said he, “for I am badly wounded through my horse’s fault; carry me to bed, and if possible send for the wise Urganda to cure and see to my wounds.” “See there! plague on it!” cried the housekeeper at this: “did not my heart tell the truth as to which foot my master went lame of?
To bed with your worship at once, and we will contrive to cure you here without fetching that Hurgada.
A curse I say once more, and a hundred times more, on those books of chivalry that have brought your worship to such a pass.” They carried him to bed at once, and after searching for his wounds could find none, but he said they were all bruises from having had a severe fall with his horse Rocinante when in combat with ten giants, the biggest and the boldest to be found on earth.
By the sign of the Cross I will burn them to-morrow before the day is over.” They put a host of questions to Don Quixote, but his only answer to all was—give him something to eat, and leave him to sleep, for that was what he needed most.
They did so, and the curate questioned the peasant at great length as to how he had found Don Quixote.
He told him, and the nonsense he had talked when found and on the way home, all which made the licentiate the more eager to do what he did the next day, which was to summon his friend the barber, Master Nicholas, and go with him to Don Quixote’s house. p031.jpg (31K) CHAPTER VI.
OF THE DIVERTING AND IMPORTANT SCRUTINY WHICH THE CURATE AND THE BARBER MADE IN THE LIBRARY OF OUR INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN c06a.jpg (92K) Full Size He was still sleeping; so the curate asked the niece for the keys of the room where the books, the authors of all the mischief, were, and right willingly she gave them.
They all went in, the housekeeper with them, and found more than a hundred volumes of big books very well bound, and some other small ones.
Let us see that other which is next to it.” “It is,” said the barber, “the ‘Sergas de Esplandian,’ the lawful son of Amadis of Gaul.” “Then verily,” said the curate, “the merit of the father must not be put down to the account of the son.
Take it, mistress housekeeper; open the window and fling it into the yard and lay the foundation of the pile for the bonfire we are to make.” The housekeeper obeyed with great satisfaction, and the worthy “Esplandian” went flying into the yard to await with all patience the fire that was in store for him.
“In that case,” said the housekeeper, “here, into the yard with them!” They were handed to her, and as there were many of them, she spared herself the staircase, and flung them down out of the window.
“This,” said the barber, “is ‘Don Olivante de Laura.’” “The author of that book,” said the curate, “was the same that wrote ‘The Garden of Flowers,’ and truly there is no deciding which of the two books is the more truthful, or, to put it better, the less lying; all I can say is, send this one into the yard for a swaggering fool.” “This that follows is ‘Florismarte of Hircania,’” said the barber.
“Señor Florismarte here?” said the curate; “then by my faith he must take up his quarters in the yard, in spite of his marvellous birth and visionary adventures, for the stiffness and dryness of his style deserve nothing else; into the yard with him and the other, mistress housekeeper.” “With all my heart, señor,” said she, and executed the order with great delight.
“This,” said the barber, “is ‘The Knight Platir.’” “An old book that,” said the curate, “but I find no reason for clemency in it; send it after the others without appeal;” which was done.
He robbed him of a great deal of his natural force, and so do all those who try to turn books written in verse into another language, for, with all the pains they take and all the cleverness they show, they never can reach the level of the originals as they were first produced.
This book, gossip, is of authority for two reasons, first because it is very good, and secondly because it is said to have been written by a wise and witty king of Portugal.
All the adventures at the Castle of Miraguarda are excellent and of admirable contrivance, and the language is polished and clear, studying and observing the style befitting the speaker with propriety and judgment.
It was not said to one dull or deaf, but to one who enjoyed burning them more than weaving the broadest and finest web that could be; and seizing about eight at a time, she flung them out of the window.
In carrying so many together she let one fall at the feet of the barber, who took it up, curious to know whose it was, and found it said, “History of the Famous Knight, Tirante el Blanco.” “God bless me!” said the curate with a shout, “‘Tirante el Blanco’ here!
Hand it over, gossip, for in it I reckon I have found a treasury of enjoyment and a mine of recreation.
Here is Don Kyrieleison of Montalvan, a valiant knight, and his brother Thomas of Montalvan, and the knight Fonseca, with the battle the bold Tirante fought with the mastiff, and the witticisms of the damsel Placerdemivida, and the loves and wiles of the widow Reposada, and the empress in love with the squire Hipolito—in truth, gossip, by right of its style it is the best book in the world.
Nevertheless, I say he who wrote it, for deliberately composing such fooleries, deserves to be sent to the galleys for life.
To begin, then, with the ‘Diana’ of Montemayor.
But what book is that next it?” “The ‘Galatea’ of Miguel de Cervantes,” said the barber.
“That Cervantes has been for many years a great friend of mine, and to my knowledge he has had more experience in reverses than in verses.
When they reached Don Quixote he was already out of bed, and was still shouting and raving, and slashing and cutting all round, as wide awake as if he had never slept.
But I should not call myself Reinaldos of Montalvan did he not pay me for it in spite of all his enchantments as soon as I rise from this bed.
For the present let them bring me something to eat, for that, I feel, is what will be more to my purpose, and leave it to me to avenge myself.” They did as he wished; they gave him something to eat, and once more he fell asleep, leaving them marvelling at his madness.
That night the housekeeper burned to ashes all the books that were in the yard and in the whole house; and some must have been consumed that deserved preservation in everlasting archives, but their fate and the laziness of the examiner did not permit it, and so in them was verified the proverb that the innocent suffer for the guilty.
One of the remedies which the curate and the barber immediately applied to their friend’s disorder was to wall up and plaster the room where the books were, so that when he got up he should not find them (possibly the cause being removed the effect might cease), and they might say that a magician had carried them off, room and all; and this was done with all despatch.
Two days later Don Quixote got up, and the first thing he did was to go and look at his books, and not finding the room where he had left it, he wandered from side to side looking for it.
He came to the place where the door used to be, and tried it with his hands, and turned and twisted his eyes in every direction without saying a word; but after a good while he asked his housekeeper whereabouts was the room that held his books.
The housekeeper, who had been already well instructed in what she was to answer, said, “What room or what nothing is it that your worship is looking for?
In short, then, he remained at home fifteen days very quietly without showing any signs of a desire to take up with his former delusions, and during this time he held lively discussions with his two gossips, the curate and the barber, on the point he maintained, that knights-errant were what the world stood most in need of, and that in him was to be accomplished the revival of knight-errantry.
The curate sometimes contradicted him, sometimes agreed with him, for if he had not observed this precaution he would have been unable to bring him to reason.
Meanwhile Don Quixote worked upon a farm labourer, a neighbour of his, an honest man (if indeed that title can be given to him who is poor), but with very little wit in his pate.
In a word, he so talked him over, and with such persuasions and promises, that the poor clown made up his mind to sally forth with him and serve him as esquire.
Don Quixote, among other things, told him he ought to be ready to go with him gladly, because any moment an adventure might occur that might win an island in the twinkling of an eye and leave him governor of it.
On these and the like promises Sancho Panza (for so the labourer was called) left wife and children, and engaged himself as esquire to his neighbour. c07b.jpg (322K) Full Size Don Quixote next set about getting some money; and selling one thing and pawning another, and making a bad bargain in every case, he got together a fair sum.
He provided himself with a buckler, which he begged as a loan from a friend, and, restoring his battered helmet as best he could, he warned his squire Sancho of the day and hour he meant to set out, that he might provide himself with what he thought most needful.
Above all, he charged him to take alforjas with him.
About the ass, Don Quixote hesitated a little, trying whether he could call to mind any knight-errant taking with him an esquire mounted on ass-back, but no instance occurred to his memory.
For all that, however, he determined to take him, intending to furnish him with a more honourable mount when a chance of it presented itself, by appropriating the horse of the first discourteous knight he encountered.
Sancho rode on his ass like a patriarch, with his alforjas and bota, and longing to see himself soon governor of the island his master had promised him.
Don Quixote decided upon taking the same route and road he had taken on his first journey, that over the Campo de Montiel, which he travelled with less discomfort than on the last occasion, for, as it was early morning and the rays of the sun fell on them obliquely, the heat did not distress them.
“I doubt it,” replied Sancho Panza, “because for my part I am persuaded that though God should shower down kingdoms upon earth, not one of them would fit the head of Mari Gutierrez.
For my part, I confess I must complain however small the ache may be; unless this rule about not complaining extends to the squires of knights-errant also.” Don Quixote could not help laughing at his squire’s simplicity, and he assured him he might complain whenever and however he chose, just as he liked, for, so far, he had never read of anything to the contrary in the order of knighthood.
Sancho bade him remember it was dinner-time, to which his master answered that he wanted nothing himself just then, but that _he_ might eat when he had a mind.
All that night Don Quixote lay awake thinking of his lady Dulcinea, in order to conform to what he had read in his books, how many a night in the forests and deserts knights used to lie sleepless supported by the memory of their mistresses.
Not so did Sancho Panza spend it, for having his stomach full of something stronger than chicory water he made but one sleep of it, and, if his master had not called him, neither the rays of the sun beating on his face nor all the cheery notes of the birds welcoming the approach of day would have had power to waken him.
On getting up he tried the bota and found it somewhat less full than the night before, which grieved his heart because they did not seem to be on the way to remedy the deficiency readily.
Don Quixote did not care to break his fast, for, as has been already said, he confined himself to savoury recollections for nourishment.
They returned to the road they had set out with, leading to Puerto Lapice, and at three in the afternoon they came in sight of it.
Benedict, mounted on two dromedaries, for not less tall were the two mules they rode on.
They wore travelling spectacles and carried sunshades; and behind them came a coach attended by four or five persons on horseback and two muleteers on foot.
In the coach there was, as afterwards appeared, a Biscay lady on her way to Seville, where her husband was about to take passage for the Indies with an appointment of high honour.
Benedict, and the coach plainly belongs to some travellers: I tell you to mind well what you are about and don’t let the devil mislead you.” “I have told thee already, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote, “that on the subject of adventures thou knowest little.
Sancho Panza, when he saw the friar on the ground, dismounting briskly from his ass, rushed towards him and began to strip off his gown.
At that instant the friars’ muleteers came up and asked what he was stripping him for.
Sancho answered them that this fell to him lawfully as spoil of the battle which his lord Don Quixote had won.
The others strove to make peace between them, but could not, for the Biscayan declared in his disjointed phrase that if they did not let him finish his battle he would kill his mistress and everyone that strove to prevent him.
The lady in the coach, amazed and terrified at what she saw, ordered the coachman to draw aside a little, and set herself to watch this severe struggle, in the course of which the Biscayan smote Don Quixote a mighty stroke on the shoulder over the top of his buckler, which, given to one without armour, would have cleft him to the waist.
The Biscayan, seeing him come on in this way, was convinced of his courage by his spirited bearing, and resolved to follow his example, so he waited for him keeping well under cover of his cushion, being unable to execute any sort of manoeuvre with his mule, which, dead tired and never meant for this kind of game, could not stir a step.
But it spoils all, that at this point and crisis the author of the history leaves this battle impending, giving as excuse that he could find nothing more written about these achievements of Don Quixote than what has been already set forth.
This distressed me greatly, because the pleasure derived from having read such a small portion turned to vexation at the thought of the poor chance that presented itself of finding the large part that, so it seemed to me, was missing of such an interesting tale.
And so I could not bring myself to believe that such a gallant tale had been left maimed and mutilated, and I laid the blame on Time, the devourer and destroyer of all things, that had either concealed or consumed it.
On the other hand, it struck me that, inasmuch as among his books there had been found such modern ones as “The Enlightenment of Jealousy” and the “Nymphs and Shepherds of Henares,” his story must likewise be modern, and that though it might not be written, it might exist in the memory of the people of his village and of those in the neighbourhood.
The discovery of it occurred in this way.
In short, chance provided me with one, who when I told him what I wanted and put the book into his hands, opened it in the middle and after reading a little in it began to laugh.
I asked him what he was laughing at, and he replied that it was at something the book had written in the margin by way of a note.
I withdrew at once with the Morisco into the cloister of the cathedral, and begged him to turn all these pamphlets that related to Don Quixote into the Castilian tongue, without omitting or adding anything to them, offering him whatever payment he pleased.
He was satisfied with two arrobas of raisins and two bushels of wheat, and promised to translate them faithfully and with all despatch; but to make the matter easier, and not to let such a precious find out of my hands, I took him to my house, where in little more than a month and a half he translated the whole just as it is set down here.
In the first pamphlet the battle between Don Quixote and the Biscayan was drawn to the very life, they planted in the same attitude as the history describes, their swords raised, and the one protected by his buckler, the other by his cushion, and the Biscayan’s mule so true to nature that it could be seen to be a hired one a bowshot off.
Near him was Sancho Panza holding the halter of his ass, at whose feet was another label that said, “Sancho Zancas,” and according to the picture, he must have had a big belly, a short body, and long shanks, for which reason, no doubt, the names of Panza and Zancas were given him, for by these two surnames the history several times calls him.
Some other trifling particulars might be mentioned, but they are all of slight importance and have nothing to do with the true relation of the history; and no history can be bad so long as it is true.
If against the present one any objection be raised on the score of its truth, it can only be that its author was an Arab, as lying is a very common propensity with those of that nation; though, as they are such enemies of ours, it is conceivable that there were omissions rather than additions made in the course of it.
In this I know will be found all that can be desired in the pleasantest, and if it be wanting in any good quality, I maintain it is the fault of its hound of an author and not the fault of the subject.
To be brief, its Second Part, according to the translation, began in this way: With trenchant swords upraised and poised on high, it seemed as though the two valiant and wrathful combatants stood threatening heaven, and earth, and hell, with such resolution and determination did they bear themselves.
Who is there that could properly describe the rage that filled the heart of our Manchegan when he saw himself dealt with in this fashion?
Don Quixote stood looking on very calmly, and, when he saw him fall, leaped from his horse and with great briskness ran to him, and, presenting the point of his sword to his eyes, bade him surrender, or he would cut his head off.
“Then, on the faith of that promise,” said Don Quixote, “I shall do him no further harm, though he well deserves it of me.” c09e.jpg (61K) Full Size CHAPTER X.
Sancho followed him at his ass’s best trot, but Rocinante stepped out so that, seeing himself left behind, he was forced to call to his master to wait for him.
Is the oath to be observed in spite of all the inconvenience and discomfort it will be to sleep in your clothes, and not to sleep in a house, and a thousand other mortifications contained in the oath of that old fool the Marquis of Mantua, which your worship is now wanting to revive?
Round the skins six of the men belonging to the fold seated themselves, having first with rough politeness pressed Don Quixote to take a seat upon a trough which they placed for him upside down.
Don Quixote seated himself, and Sancho remained standing to serve the cup, which was made of horn.
And indeed, if the truth is to be told, what I eat in my corner without form or fuss has much more relish for me, even though it be bread and onions, than the turkeys of those other tables where I am forced to chew slowly, drink little, wipe my mouth every minute, and cannot sneeze or cough if I want or do other things that are the privileges of liberty and solitude.
The goatherds did not understand this jargon about squires and knights-errant, and all they did was to eat in silence and stare at their guests, who with great elegance and appetite were stowing away pieces as big as one’s fist.
The course of meat finished, they spread upon the sheepskins a great heap of parched acorns, and with them they put down a half cheese harder than if it had been made of mortar.
All this while the horn was not idle, for it went round so constantly, now full, now empty, like the bucket of a water-wheel, that it soon drained one of the two wine-skins that were in sight.
In that blessed age all things were in common; to win the daily food no labour was required of any save to stretch forth his hand and gather it from the sturdy oaks that stood generously inviting him with their sweet ripe fruit.
The clear streams and running brooks yielded their savoury limpid waters in noble abundance.
The busy and sagacious bees fixed their republic in the clefts of the rocks and hollows of the trees, offering without usance the plenteous produce of their fragrant toil to every hand.
The mighty cork trees, unenforced save of their own courtesy, shed the broad light bark that served at first to roof the houses supported by rude stakes, a protection against the inclemency of heaven alone.
Then all was peace, all friendship, all concord; as yet the dull share of the crooked plough had not dared to rend and pierce the tender bowels of our first mother that without compulsion yielded from every portion of her broad fertile bosom all that could satisfy, sustain, and delight the children that then possessed her.
Then was it that the innocent and fair young shepherdess roamed from vale to vale and hill to hill, with flowing locks, and no more garments than were needful modestly to cover what modesty seeks and ever sought to hide.
Nor were their ornaments like those in use to-day, set off by Tyrian purple, and silk tortured in endless fashions, but the wreathed leaves of the green dock and ivy, wherewith they went as bravely and becomingly decked as our Court dames with all the rare and far-fetched artifices that idle curiosity has taught them.
Then the love-thoughts of the heart clothed themselves simply and naturally as the heart conceived them, nor sought to commend themselves by forced and rambling verbiage.
Fraud, deceit, or malice had then not yet mingled with truth and sincerity.
Justice held her ground, undisturbed and unassailed by the efforts of favour and of interest, that now so much impair, pervert, and beset her.
Arbitrary law had not yet established itself in the mind of the judge, for then there was no cause to judge and no one to be judged.
Maidens and modesty, as I have said, wandered at will alone and unattended, without fear of insult from lawlessness or libertine assault, and if they were undone it was of their own will and pleasure.
But now in this hateful age of ours not one is safe, not though some new labyrinth like that of Crete conceal and surround her; even there the pestilence of gallantry will make its way to them through chinks or on the air by the zeal of its accursed importunity, and, despite of all seclusion, lead them to ruin.
In defence of these, as time advanced and wickedness increased, the order of knights-errant was instituted, to defend maidens, to protect widows and to succour the orphans and the needy.
Sancho likewise held his peace and ate acorns, and paid repeated visits to the second wine-skin, which they had hung up on a cork tree to keep the wine cool.
For I know my love thou knowest, Therefore thine to claim I dare: Once it ceases to be secret, Love need never feel despair.
True it is, Olalla, sometimes Thou hast all too plainly shown That thy heart is brass in hardness, And thy snowy bosom stone.
Lures to faith are they, those glimpses, And to faith in thee I hold; Kindness cannot make it stronger, Coldness cannot make it cold.
If it be that love is gentle, In thy gentleness I see Something holding out assurance To the hope of winning thee.
If it be that in devotion Lies a power hearts to move, That which every day I show thee, Helpful to my suit should prove.
Love’s eyes love to look on brightness; Love loves what is gaily drest; Sunday, Monday, all I care is Thou shouldst see me in my best.
No account I make of dances, Or of strains that pleased thee so, Keeping thee awake from midnight Till the cocks began to crow; Or of how I roundly swore it That there’s none so fair as thou; True it is, but as I said it, By the girls I’m hated now.
For Teresa of the hillside At my praise of thee was sore; Said, “You think you love an angel; It’s a monkey you adore; “Caught by all her glittering trinkets, And her borrowed braids of hair, And a host of made-up beauties That would Love himself ensnare.” ’Twas a lie, and so I told her, And her cousin at the word Gave me his defiance for it; And what followed thou hast heard.
Mine is no high-flown affection, Mine no passion _par amours_— As they call it—what I offer Is an honest love, and pure.
Else—and once for all I swear it By the saint of most renown— If I ever quit the mountains, ’Twill be in a friar’s gown.
OF WHAT A GOATHERD RELATED TO THOSE WITH DON QUIXOTE c12a.jpg (143K) Full Size Just then another young man, one of those who fetched their provisions from the village, came up and said, “Do you know what is going on in the village, comrades?” “How could we know it?” replied one of them.
“Well, then, you must know,” continued the young man, “this morning that famous student-shepherd called Chrysostom died, and it is rumoured that he died of love for that devil of a village girl the daughter of Guillermo the Rich, she that wanders about the wolds here in the dress of a shepherdess.” “You mean Marcela?” said one.
“Her I mean,” answered the goatherd; “and the best of it is, he has directed in his will that he is to be buried in the fields like a Moor, and at the foot of the rock where the Cork-tree spring is, because, as the story goes (and they say he himself said so), that was the place where he first saw her.
And he has also left other directions which the clergy of the village say should not and must not be obeyed because they savour of paganism.
Don Quixote asked Pedro to tell him who the dead man was and who the shepherdess, to which Pedro replied that all he knew was that the dead man was a wealthy gentleman belonging to a village in those mountains, who had been a student at Salamanca for many years, at the end of which he returned to his village with the reputation of being very learned and deeply read.
“Sterility or estility,” answered Pedro, “it is all the same in the end.
And I can tell you that by this his father and friends who believed him grew very rich because they did as he advised them, bidding them ‘sow barley this year, not wheat; this year you may sow pulse and not barley; the next there will be a full oil crop, and the three following not a drop will be got.’” “That science is called astrology,” said Don Quixote.
But, to make an end, not many months had passed after he returned from Salamanca, when one day he appeared dressed as a shepherd with his crook and sheepskin, having put off the long gown he wore as a scholar; and at the same time his great friend, Ambrosio by name, who had been his companion in his studies, took to the shepherd’s dress with him.
I forgot to say that Chrysostom, who is dead, was a great man for writing verses, so much so that he made carols for Christmas Eve, and plays for Corpus Christi, which the young men of our village acted, and all said they were excellent.
When the villagers saw the two scholars so unexpectedly appearing in shepherd’s dress, they were lost in wonder, and could not guess what had led them to make so extraordinary a change.
Presently it came to be known that he had changed his dress with no other object than to wander about these wastes after that shepherdess Marcela our lad mentioned a while ago, with whom the deceased Chrysostom had fallen in love.
And I must tell you now, for it is well you should know it, who this girl is; perhaps, and even without any perhaps, you will not have heard anything like it all the days of your life, though you should live more years than sarna.” “Say Sarra,” said Don Quixote, unable to endure the goatherd’s confusion of words.
Her husband Guillermo died of grief at the death of so good a wife, leaving his daughter Marcela, a child and rich, to the care of an uncle of hers, a priest and prebendary in our village.
The girl grew up with such beauty that it reminded us of her mother’s, which was very great, and yet it was thought that the daughter’s would exceed it; and so when she reached the age of fourteen to fifteen years nobody beheld her but blessed God that had made her so beautiful, and the greater number were in love with her past redemption.
Her uncle kept her in great seclusion and retirement, but for all that the fame of her great beauty spread so that, as well for it as for her great wealth, her uncle was asked, solicited, and importuned, to give her in marriage not only by those of our town but of those many leagues round, and by the persons of highest quality in them.
But he, being a good Christian man, though he desired to give her in marriage at once, seeing her to be old enough, was unwilling to do so without her consent, not that he had any eye to the gain and profit which the custody of the girl’s property brought him while he put off her marriage; and, faith, this was said in praise of the good priest in more than one set in the town.
At these, to all appearance, reasonable excuses that she made, her uncle ceased to urge her, and waited till she was somewhat more advanced in age and could mate herself to her own liking.
For, said he—and he said quite right—parents are not to settle children in life against their will.
But when one least looked for it, lo and behold! one day the demure Marcela makes her appearance turned shepherdess; and, in spite of her uncle and all those of the town that strove to dissuade her, took to going a-field with the other shepherd-lasses of the village, and tending her own flock.
And so, since she appeared in public, and her beauty came to be seen openly, I could not well tell you how many rich youths, gentlemen and peasants, have adopted the costume of Chrysostom, and go about these fields making love to her.
One of these, as has been already said, was our deceased friend, of whom they say that he did not love but adore her.
For although she does not avoid or shun the society and conversation of the shepherds, and treats them courteously and kindly, should any one of them come to declare his intention to her, though it be one as proper and holy as that of matrimony, she flings him from her like a catapult.
Not far from this there is a spot where there are a couple of dozen of tall beeches, and there is not one of them but has carved and written on its smooth bark the name of Marcela, and above some a crown carved on the same tree as though her lover would say more plainly that Marcela wore and deserved that of all human beauty.
Here one shepherd is sighing, there another is lamenting; there love songs are heard, here despairing elegies.
And all of us that know her are waiting to see what her pride will come to, and who is to be the happy man that will succeed in taming a nature so formidable and gaining possession of a beauty so supreme.
All that I have told you being such well-established truth, I am persuaded that what they say of the cause of Chrysostom’s death, as our lad told us, is the same.
He did so, and passed all the rest of the night in thinking of his lady Dulcinea, in imitation of the lovers of Marcela.
Sancho Panza settled himself between Rocinante and his ass, and slept, not like a lover who had been discarded, but like a man who had been soundly kicked. c12e.jpg (42K) CHAPTER XIII.
IN WHICH IS ENDED THE STORY OF THE SHEPHERDESS MARCELA, WITH OTHER INCIDENTS c13a.jpg (181K) Full Size But hardly had day begun to show itself through the balconies of the east, when five of the six goatherds came to rouse Don Quixote and tell him that if he was still of a mind to go and see the famous burial of Chrysostom they would bear him company.
Don Quixote, who desired nothing better, rose and ordered Sancho to saddle and pannel at once, which he did with all despatch, and with the same they all set out forthwith.
They had not gone a quarter of a league when at the meeting of two paths they saw coming towards them some six shepherds dressed in black sheepskins and with their heads crowned with garlands of cypress and bitter oleander.
Each of them carried a stout holly staff in his hand, and along with them there came two men of quality on horseback in handsome travelling dress, with three servants on foot accompanying them.
Courteous salutations were exchanged on meeting, and inquiring one of the other which way each party was going, they learned that all were bound for the scene of the burial, so they went on all together.
In short, he repeated all that Pedro had related to Don Quixote.
This conversation dropped, and another was commenced by him who was called Vivaldo asking Don Quixote what was the reason that led him to go armed in that fashion in a country so peaceful.
So he said to him, “It seems to me, Señor Knight-errant, that your worship has made choice of one of the most austere professions in the world, and I imagine even that of the Carthusian monks is not so austere.” “As austere it may perhaps be,” replied our Don Quixote, “but so necessary for the world I am very much inclined to doubt.
For, if the truth is to be told, the soldier who executes what his captain orders does no less than the captain himself who gives the order.
My meaning, is, that churchmen in peace and quiet pray to Heaven for the welfare of the world, but we soldiers and knights carry into effect what they pray for, defending it with the might of our arms and the edge of our swords, not under shelter but in the open air, a target for the intolerable rays of the sun in summer and the piercing frosts of winter.
Thus are we God’s ministers on earth and the arms by which his justice is done therein.
And as the business of war and all that relates and belongs to it cannot be conducted without exceeding great sweat, toil, and exertion, it follows that those who make it their profession have undoubtedly more labour than those who in tranquil peace and quiet are engaged in praying to God to help the weak.
Sancho Panza alone thought that what his master said was the truth, knowing who he was and having known him from his birth; and all that he felt any difficulty in believing was that about the fair Dulcinea del Toboso, because neither any such name nor any such princess had ever come to his knowledge though he lived so close to El Toboso.
They were going along conversing in this way, when they saw descending a gap between two high mountains some twenty shepherds, all clad in sheepskins of black wool, and crowned with garlands which, as afterwards appeared, were, some of them of yew, some of cypress.
They greeted each other courteously, and then Don Quixote and those who accompanied him turned to examine the bier, and on it, covered with flowers, they saw a dead body in the dress of a shepherd, to all appearance of one thirty years of age, and showing even in death that in life he had been of comely features and gallant bearing.
That is the body of Chrysostom, who was unrivalled in wit, unequalled in courtesy, unapproached in gentle bearing, a phœnix in friendship, generous without limit, grave without arrogance, gay without vulgarity, and, in short, first in all that constitutes goodness and second to none in all that makes up misfortune.
So that, Señor Ambrosio while you consign your friend’s body to the earth, you should not consign his writings to oblivion, for if he gave the order in bitterness of heart, it is not right that you should irrationally obey it.
Then listen, not to dulcet harmony, But to a discord wrung by mad despair Out of this bosom’s depths of bitterness, To ease my heart and plant a sting in thine.
No echoes of that discord shall be heard Where Father Tagus rolls, or on the banks Of olive-bordered Betis; to the rocks Or in deep caverns shall my plaint be told, And by a lifeless tongue in living words; Or in dark valleys or on lonely shores, Where neither foot of man nor sunbeam falls; Or in among the poison-breathing swarms Of monsters nourished by the sluggish Nile.
For, though it be to solitudes remote The hoarse vague echoes of my sorrows sound Thy matchless cruelty, my dismal fate Shall carry them to all the spacious world.
Disdain hath power to kill, and patience dies Slain by suspicion, be it false or true; And deadly is the force of jealousy; Long absence makes of life a dreary void; No hope of happiness can give repose To him that ever fears to be forgot; And death, inevitable, waits in hall.
But I, by some strange miracle, live on A prey to absence, jealousy, disdain; Racked by suspicion as by certainty; Forgotten, left to feed my flame alone.
And while I suffer thus, there comes no ray Of hope to gladden me athwart the gloom; Nor do I look for it in my despair; But rather clinging to a cureless woe, All hope do I abjure for evermore.
Ought I to shut mine eyes to jealousy, If through a thousand heart-wounds it appears?
Who would not give free access to distrust, Seeing disdain unveiled, and—bitter change!— All his suspicions turned to certainties, And the fair truth transformed into a lie?
Oh, thou fierce tyrant of the realms of love, Oh, Jealousy! put chains upon these hands, And bind me with thy strongest cord, Disdain.
But, woe is me! triumphant over all, My sufferings drown the memory of you.
And now I die, and since there is no hope Of happiness for me in life or death, Still to my fantasy I’ll fondly cling.
I’ll say that he is wise who loveth well, And that the soul most free is that most bound In thraldom to the ancient tyrant Love.
I’ll say that she who is mine enemy In that fair body hath as fair a mind, And that her coldness is but my desert, And that by virtue of the pain he sends Love rules his kingdom with a gentle sway.
Thus, self-deluding, and in bondage sore, And wearing out the wretched shred of life To which I am reduced by her disdain, I’ll give this soul and body to the winds, All hopeless of a crown of bliss in store.
Fool that I am to bid thee! well I know Thy glory gains by my untimely end.
And now it is the time; from Hell’s abyss Come thirsting Tantalus, come Sisyphus Heaving the cruel stone, come Tityus With vulture, and with wheel Ixion come, And come the sisters of the ceaseless toil; And all into this breast transfer their pains, And (if such tribute to despair be due) Chant in their deepest tones a doleful dirge Over a corse unworthy of a shroud.
Let the three-headed guardian of the gate, And all the monstrous progeny of hell, The doleful concert join: a lover dead Methinks can have no fitter obsequies.
Lay of despair, grieve not when thou art gone Forth from this sorrowing heart: my misery Brings fortune to the cause that gave thee birth; Then banish sadness even in the tomb.
Those who had never till then beheld her gazed upon her in wonder and silence, and those who were accustomed to see her were not less amazed than those who had never seen her before.
Heaven has made me, so you say, beautiful, and so much so that in spite of yourselves my beauty leads you to love me; and for the love you show me you say, and even urge, that I am bound to love you.
Nay—tell me—had Heaven made me ugly, as it has made me beautiful, could I with justice complain of you for not loving me?
Honour and virtue are the ornaments of the mind, without which the body, though it be so, has no right to pass for beautiful; but if modesty is one of the virtues that specially lend a grace and charm to mind and body, why should she who is loved for her beauty part with it to gratify one who for his pleasure alone strives with all his might and energy to rob her of it?
I was born free, and that I might live in freedom I chose the solitude of the fields; in the trees of the mountains I find society, the clear waters of the brooks are my mirrors, and to the trees and waters I make known my thoughts and charms.
If I had encouraged him, I should be false; if I had gratified him, I should have acted against my own better resolution and purpose.
He was persistent in spite of warning, he despaired without being hated.
Bethink you now if it be reasonable that his suffering should be laid to my charge.
Let him who has been deceived complain, let him give way to despair whose encouraged hopes have proved vain, let him flatter himself whom I shall entice, let him boast whom I shall receive; but let not him call me cruel or homicide to whom I make no promise, upon whom I practise no deception, whom I neither entice nor receive.
Let this general declaration serve for each of my suitors on his own account, and let it be understood from this time forth that if anyone dies for me it is not of jealousy or misery he dies, for she who loves no one can give no cause for jealousy to any, and candour is not to be confounded with scorn.
Let him who calls me wild beast and basilisk, leave me alone as something noxious and evil; let him who calls me ungrateful, withhold his service; who calls me wayward, seek not my acquaintance; who calls me cruel, pursue me not; for this wild beast, this basilisk, this ungrateful, cruel, wayward being has no kind of desire to seek, serve, know, or follow them.
If Chrysostom’s impatience and violent passion killed him, why should my modest behaviour and circumspection be blamed?
If I preserve my purity in the society of the trees, why should he who would have me preserve it among men, seek to rob me of it?
I have, as you know, wealth of my own, and I covet not that of others; my taste is for freedom, and I have no relish for constraint; I neither love nor hate anyone; I do not deceive this one or court that, or trifle with one or play with another.
They closed the grave with a heavy stone until a slab was ready which Ambrosio said he meant to have prepared, with an epitaph which was to be to this effect: Beneath the stone before your eyes The body of a lover lies; In life he was a shepherd swain, In death a victim to disdain.
Ungrateful, cruel, coy, and fair, Was she that drove him to despair, And Love hath made her his ally For spreading wide his tyranny.
They then strewed upon the grave a profusion of flowers and branches, and all expressing their condolence with his friend Ambrosio, took their leave.
Vivaldo and his companion did the same; and Don Quixote bade farewell to his hosts and to the travellers, who pressed him to come with them to Seville, as being such a convenient place for finding adventures, for they presented themselves in every street and round every corner oftener than anywhere else.
Don Quixote thanked them for their advice and for the disposition they showed to do him a favour, and said that for the present he would not, and must not go to Seville until he had cleared all these mountains of highwaymen and robbers, of whom report said they were full.
Seeing his good intention, the travellers were unwilling to press him further, and once more bidding him farewell, they left him and pursued their journey, in the course of which they did not fail to discuss the story of Marcela and Chrysostom as well as the madness of Don Quixote.
He, on his part, resolved to go in quest of the shepherdess Marcela, and make offer to her of all the service he could render her; but things did not fall out with him as he expected, according to what is related in the course of this veracious history, of which the Second Part ends here. c14e.jpg (31K) CHAPTER XV.
Chance, however, and the devil, who is not always asleep, so ordained it that feeding in this valley there was a drove of Galician ponies belonging to certain Yanguesan carriers, whose way it is to take their midday rest with their teams in places and spots where grass and water abound; and that where Don Quixote chanced to be suited the Yanguesans’ purpose very well.
Sancho was the first to come to, and finding himself close to his master he called to him in a weak and doleful voice, “Señor Don Quixote, ah, Señor Don Quixote!” “What wouldst thou, brother Sancho?” answered Don Quixote in the same feeble suffering tone as Sancho.
Come now, sinner, suppose the wind of fortune, hitherto so adverse, should turn in our favour, filling the sails of our desires so that safely and without impediment we put into port in some one of those islands I have promised thee, how would it be with thee if on winning it I made thee lord of it?
See if your worship can get up, and let us help Rocinante, though he does not deserve it, for he was the main cause of all this thrashing.
I never thought it of Rocinante, for I took him to be a virtuous person and as quiet as myself.
Sancho insisted that it was an inn, and his master that it was not one, but a castle, and the dispute lasted so long that before the point was settled they had time to reach it, and into it Sancho entered with all his team without any further controversy. c15e.jpg (31K) CHAPTER XVI.
OF WHAT HAPPENED TO THE INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN IN THE INN WHICH HE TOOK TO BE A CASTLE c16a.jpg (129K) Full Size The innkeeper, seeing Don Quixote slung across the ass, asked Sancho what was amiss with him.
Sancho answered that it was nothing, only that he had fallen down from a rock and had his ribs a little bruised.
The innkeeper had a wife whose disposition was not such as those of her calling commonly have, for she was by nature kind-hearted and felt for the sufferings of her neighbours, so she at once set about tending Don Quixote, and made her young daughter, a very comely girl, help her in taking care of her guest.
There was besides in the inn, as servant, an Asturian lass with a broad face, flat poll, and snub nose, blind of one eye and not very sound in the other.
The elegance of her shape, to be sure, made up for all her defects; she did not measure seven palms from head to foot, and her shoulders, which overweighted her somewhat, made her contemplate the ground more than she liked.
On this accursed bed Don Quixote stretched himself, and the hostess and her daughter soon covered him with plasters from top to toe, while Maritornes—for that was the name of the Asturian—held the light for them, and while plastering him, the hostess, observing how full of wheals Don Quixote was in some places, remarked that this had more the look of blows than of a fall.
It was not blows, Sancho said, but that the rock had many points and projections, and that each of them had left its mark.
“Don Quixote of La Mancha,” answered Sancho Panza, “and he is a knight-adventurer, and one of the best and stoutest that have been seen in the world this long time past.” “What is a knight-adventurer?” said the lass.
“Are you so new in the world as not to know?” answered Sancho Panza.
The carrier had made an arrangement with her for recreation that night, and she had given him her word that when the guests were quiet and the family asleep she would come in search of him and meet his wishes unreservedly.
And it is said of this good lass that she never made promises of the kind without fulfilling them, even though she made them in a forest and without any witness present, for she plumed herself greatly on being a lady and held it no disgrace to be in such an employment as servant in an inn, because, she said, misfortunes and ill-luck had brought her to that position.
The hard, narrow, wretched, rickety bed of Don Quixote stood first in the middle of this star-lit stable, and close beside it Sancho made his, which merely consisted of a rush mat and a blanket that looked as if it was of threadbare canvas rather than of wool.
A thousand blessings on the author of “Tablante de Ricamonte” and that of the other book in which the deeds of the Conde Tomillas are recounted; with what minuteness they describe everything!
To proceed, then: after having paid a visit to his team and given them their second feed, the carrier stretched himself on his pack-saddles and lay waiting for his conscientious Maritornes.
Sancho was by this time plastered and had lain down, and though he strove to sleep the pain of his ribs would not let him, while Don Quixote with the pain of his had his eyes as wide open as a hare’s. c16b.jpg (333K) Full Size The inn was all in silence, and in the whole of it there was no light except that given by a lantern that hung burning in the middle of the gateway.
The Asturian, who went all doubled up and in silence with her hands before her feeling for her lover, encountered the arms of Don Quixote, who grasped her tightly by the wrist, and drawing her towards him, while she dared not utter a word, made her sit down on the bed.
The bed which was somewhat crazy and not very firm on its feet, unable to support the additional weight of the carrier, came to the ground, and at the mighty crash of this the innkeeper awoke and at once concluded that it must be some brawl of Maritornes’, because after calling loudly to her he got no answer.
With this suspicion he got up, and lighting a lamp hastened to the quarter where he had heard the disturbance.
The wench, seeing that her master was coming and knowing that his temper was terrible, frightened and panic-stricken made for the bed of Sancho Panza, who still slept, and crouching upon it made a ball of herself.
The innkeeper came in exclaiming, “Where art thou, strumpet?
Of course this is some of thy work.” At this Sancho awoke, and feeling this mass almost on top of him fancied he had the nightmare and began to distribute fisticuffs all round, of which a certain share fell upon Maritornes, who, irritated by the pain and flinging modesty aside, paid back so many in return to Sancho that she woke him up in spite of himself.
He then, finding himself so handled, by whom he knew not, raising himself up as well as he could, grappled with Maritornes, and he and she between them began the bitterest and drollest scrimmage in the world.
The carrier, however, perceiving by the light of the innkeeper candle how it fared with his ladylove, quitting Don Quixote, ran to bring her the help she needed; and the innkeeper did the same but with a different intention, for his was to chastise the lass, as he believed that beyond a doubt she alone was the cause of all the harmony.
It so happened that there was lodging that night in the inn a caudrillero of what they call the Old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo, who, also hearing the extraordinary noise of the conflict, seized his staff and the tin case with his warrants, and made his way in the dark into the room crying: “Hold! in the name of the Jurisdiction!
The innkeeper retreated to his room, the carrier to his pack-saddles, the lass to her crib; the unlucky Don Quixote and Sancho alone were unable to move from where they were.
The cuadrillero on this let go Don Quixote’s beard, and went out to look for a light to search for and apprehend the culprits; but not finding one, as the innkeeper had purposely extinguished the lantern on retreating to his room, he was compelled to have recourse to the hearth, where after much time and trouble he lit another lamp. c16e.jpg (32K) CHAPTER XVII.
What I could tell thee of the charms of her person! of her lively wit! of other secret matters which, to preserve the fealty I owe to my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, I shall pass over unnoticed and in silence!
But tell me, señor, what do you call this excellent and rare adventure that has left us as we are left now?
Though your worship was not so badly off, having in your arms that incomparable beauty you spoke of; but I, what did I have, except the heaviest whacks I think I had in all my life?
Unlucky me and the mother that bore me! for I am not a knight-errant and never expect to be one, and of all the mishaps, the greater part falls to my share.” “Then thou hast been thrashed too?” said Don Quixote.
The host furnished him with what he required, and Sancho brought it to Don Quixote, who, with his hand to his head, was bewailing the pain of the blow of the lamp, which had done him no more harm than raising a couple of rather large lumps, and what he fancied blood was only the sweat that flowed from him in his sufferings during the late storm.
To be brief, he took the materials, of which he made a compound, mixing them all and boiling them a good while until it seemed to him they had come to perfection.
They did so, and he lay sleeping more than three hours, at the end of which he awoke and felt very great bodily relief and so much ease from his bruises that he thought himself quite cured, and verily believed he had hit upon the balsam of Fierabras; and that with this remedy he might thenceforward, without any fear, face any kind of destruction, battle, or combat, however perilous it might be.
Sancho Panza, who also regarded the amendment of his master as miraculous, begged him to give him what was left in the pigskin, which was no small quantity.
Don Quixote consented, and he, taking it with both hands, in good faith and with a better will, gulped down and drained off very little less than his master.
But the fact is, that the stomach of poor Sancho was of necessity not so delicate as that of his master, and so, before vomiting, he was seized with such gripings and retchings, and such sweats and faintness, that verily and truly he believed his last hour had come, and finding himself so racked and tormented he cursed the balsam and the thief that had given it to him.
He sweated and perspired with such paroxysms and convulsions that not only he himself but all present thought his end had come.
This tempest and tribulation lasted about two hours, at the end of which he was left, not like his master, but so weak and exhausted that he could not stand.
“And a very respectable one,” said the innkeeper.
The innkeeper when he saw him go without paying him ran to get payment of Sancho, who said that as his master would not pay neither would he, because, being as he was squire to a knight-errant, the same rule and reason held good for him as for his master with regard to not paying anything in inns and hostelries.
At this the innkeeper waxed very wroth, and threatened if he did not pay to compel him in a way that he would not like.
To which Sancho made answer that by the law of chivalry his master had received he would not pay a rap, though it cost him his life; for the excellent and ancient usage of knights-errant was not going to be violated by him, nor should the squires of such as were yet to come into the world ever complain of him or reproach him with breaking so just a privilege.
Wheeling about he came up to the inn with a laborious gallop, and finding it shut went round it to see if he could find some way of getting in; but as soon as he came to the wall of the yard, which was not very high, he discovered the game that was being played with his squire.
He saw him rising and falling in the air with such grace and nimbleness that, had his rage allowed him, it is my belief he would have laughed.
They then brought him his ass, and mounting him on top of it they put his jacket round him; and the compassionate Maritornes, seeing him so exhausted, thought fit to refresh him with a jug of water, and that it might be all the cooler she fetched it from the well.
When Sancho had done drinking he dug his heels into his ass, and the gate of the inn being thrown open he passed out very well pleased at having paid nothing and carried his point, though it had been at the expense of his usual sureties, his shoulders.
It is true that the innkeeper detained his alforjas in payment of what was owing to him, but Sancho took his departure in such a flurry that he never missed them.
The innkeeper, as soon as he saw him off, wanted to bar the gate close, but the blanketers would not agree to it, for they were fellows who would not have cared two farthings for Don Quixote, even had he been really one of the knights-errant of the Round Table. c17e.jpg (47K) CHAPTER XVIII.
IN WHICH IS RELATED THE DISCOURSE SANCHO PANZA HELD WITH HIS MASTER, DON QUIXOTE, AND OTHER ADVENTURES WORTH RELATING c18a.jpg (79K) Full Size Sancho reached his master so limp and faint that he could not urge on his beast.
Sancho shouted after him, crying, “Come back, Señor Don Quixote; I vow to God they are sheep and ewes you are charging!
Look, there is no giant, nor knight, nor cats, nor arms, nor shields quartered or whole, nor vair azure or bedevilled.
The shepherds and drovers accompanying the flock shouted to him to desist; seeing it was no use, they ungirt their slings and began to salute his ears with stones as big as one’s fist.
Don Quixote gave no heed to the stones, but, letting drive right and left kept saying: “Where art thou, proud Alifanfaron?
Come before me; I am a single knight who would fain prove thy prowess hand to hand, and make thee yield thy life a penalty for the wrong thou dost to the valiant Pentapolin Garamanta.” Here came a sugar-plum from the brook that struck him on the side and buried a couple of ribs in his body.
Such was the force of the first blow and of the second, that the poor knight in spite of himself came down backwards off his horse.
The shepherds came up, and felt sure they had killed him; so in all haste they collected their flock together, took up the dead beasts, of which there were more than seven, and made off without waiting to ascertain anything further.
All this time Sancho stood on the hill watching the crazy feats his master was performing, and tearing his beard and cursing the hour and the occasion when fortune had made him acquainted with him.
At any rate, do this much, I beg of thee, Sancho, to undeceive thyself, and see that what I say is true; mount thy ass and follow them quietly, and thou shalt see that when they have gone some little distance from this they will return to their original shape and, ceasing to be sheep, become men in all respects as I described them to thee at first.
“Holy Mary!” cried Sancho, “what is this that has happened me?
Sancho ran to his ass to get something wherewith to clean himself, and relieve his master, out of his alforjas; but not finding them, he well-nigh took leave of his senses, and cursed himself anew, and in his heart resolved to quit his master and return home, even though he forfeited the wages of his service and all hopes of the promised island.
Don Quixote now rose, and putting his left hand to his mouth to keep his teeth from falling out altogether, with the other he laid hold of the bridle of Rocinante, who had never stirred from his master’s side—so loyal and well-behaved was he—and betook himself to where the squire stood leaning over his ass with his hand to his cheek, like one in deep dejection.
“Yes, they are missing,” answered Sancho.
Mount, friend, and lead the way, and I will follow thee at whatever pace thou wilt.” Sancho did as he bade him, and proceeded in the direction in which he thought he might find refuge without quitting the high road, which was there very much frequented.
As they went along, then, at a slow pace—for the pain in Don Quixote’s jaws kept him uneasy and ill-disposed for speed—Sancho thought it well to amuse and divert him by talk of some kind, and among the things he said to him was that which will be told in the following chapter. c18e.jpg (44K) CHAPTER XIX.
It so happened that the night closed in somewhat darkly, but for all that they pushed on, Sancho feeling sure that as the road was the king’s highway they might reasonably expect to find some inn within a league or two.
Going along, then, in this way, the night dark, the squire hungry, the master sharp-set, they saw coming towards them on the road they were travelling a great number of lights which looked exactly like stars in motion.
And as the encamisados came along they muttered to themselves in a low plaintive tone.
This strange spectacle at such an hour and in such a solitary place was quite enough to strike terror into Sancho’s heart, and even into his master’s; and (save in Don Quixote’s case) did so, for all Sancho’s resolution had now broken down.
It was just the opposite with his master, whose imagination immediately conjured up all this to him vividly as one of the adventures of his books.
Don Quixote was mightily provoked by this answer, and seizing the mule by the bridle he said, “Halt, and be more mannerly, and render an account of what I have asked of you; else, take my defiance to combat, all of you.” The mule was shy, and was so frightened at her bridle being seized that rearing up she flung her rider to the ground over her haunches.
The encamisados were all timid folk and unarmed, so they speedily made their escape from the fray and set off at a run across the plain with their lighted torches, looking exactly like maskers running on some gala or festival night.
The mourners, too, enveloped and swathed in their skirts and gowns, were unable to bestir themselves, and so with entire safety to himself Don Quixote belaboured them all and drove them off against their will, for they all thought it was no man but a devil from hell come to carry away the dead body they had in the litter.
“God, by means of a malignant fever that took him,” answered the bachelor.
And said Sancho, “If by chance these gentlemen should want to know who was the hero that served them so, your worship may tell them that he is the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of the Rueful Countenance.” The bachelor then took his departure.
But another piece of ill-luck befell them, which Sancho held the worst of all, and that was that they had no wine to drink, nor even water to moisten their lips; and as thirst tormented them, Sancho, observing that the meadow where they were was full of green and tender grass, said what will be told in the following chapter.
The sound cheered them greatly; but halting to make out by listening from what quarter it came they heard unseasonably another noise which spoiled the satisfaction the sound of the water gave them, especially for Sancho, who was by nature timid and faint-hearted.
They heard, I say, strokes falling with a measured beat, and a certain rattling of iron and chains that, together with the furious din of the water, would have struck terror into any heart but Don Quixote’s.
“Am I, thinkest thou, one of those knights that take their rest in the presence of danger?
Don Quixote bade him tell some story to amuse him as he had proposed, to which Sancho replied that he would if his dread of what he heard would let him; “Still,” said he, “I will strive to tell a story which, if I can manage to relate it, and nobody interferes with the telling, is the best of stories, and let your worship give me your attention, for here I begin.
The fisherman got into the boat and carried one goat over; he came back and carried another over; he came back again, and again brought over another—let your worship keep count of the goats the fisherman is taking across, for if one escapes the memory there will be an end of the story, and it will be impossible to tell another word of it.
“In truth,” said Don Quixote, “thou hast told one of the rarest stories, tales, or histories, that anyone in the world could have imagined, and such a way of telling it and ending it was never seen nor will be in a lifetime; though I expected nothing else from thy excellent understanding.
With this and other talk of the same sort master and man passed the night, till Sancho, perceiving that daybreak was coming on apace, very cautiously untied Rocinante and tied up his breeches.
As soon as Rocinante found himself free, though by nature he was not at all mettlesome, he seemed to feel lively and began pawing—for as to capering, begging his pardon, he knew not what it meant.
Don Quixote, then, observing that Rocinante could move, took it as a good sign and a signal that he should attempt the dread adventure.
Sancho began to weep afresh on again hearing the affecting words of his good master, and resolved to stay with him until the final issue and end of the business.
Sancho followed him on foot, leading by the halter, as his custom was, his ass, his constant comrade in prosperity or adversity; and advancing some distance through the shady chestnut trees they came upon a little meadow at the foot of some high rocks, down which a mighty rush of water flung itself.
At the foot of the rocks were some rudely constructed houses looking more like ruins than houses, from among which came, they perceived, the din and clatter of blows, which still continued without intermission.
Rocinante took fright at the noise of the water and of the blows, but quieting him Don Quixote advanced step by step towards the houses, commending himself with all his heart to his lady, imploring her support in that dread pass and enterprise, and on the way commending himself to God, too, not to forget him.
Sancho who never quitted his side, stretched his neck as far as he could and peered between the legs of Rocinante to see if he could now discover what it was that caused him such fear and apprehension.
When Don Quixote perceived what it was, he was struck dumb and rigid from head to foot.
Don Quixote, then, seeing that Sancho was turning him into ridicule, was so mortified and vexed that he lifted up his pike and smote him two such blows that if, instead of catching them on his shoulders, he had caught them on his head there would have been no wages to pay, unless indeed to his heirs.
Sancho seeing that he was getting an awkward return in earnest for his jest, and fearing his master might carry it still further, said to him very humbly, “Calm yourself, sir, for by God I am only joking.” “Well, then, if you are joking I am not,” replied Don Quixote.
“Look here, my lively gentleman, if these, instead of being fulling hammers, had been some perilous adventure, have I not, think you, shown the courage required for the attempt and achievement?
Am I, perchance, being, as I am, a gentleman, bound to know and distinguish sounds and tell whether they come from fulling mills or not; and that, when perhaps, as is the case, I have never in my life seen any as you have, low boor as you are, that have been born and bred among them?
But turn me these six hammers into six giants, and bring them to beard me, one by one or all together, and if I do not knock them head over heels, then make what mockery you like of me.” “No more of that, señor,” returned Sancho; “I own I went a little too far with the joke.
There was Gandalin, the squire of Amadis of Gaul, that was Count of the Insula Firme, and we read of him that he always addressed his lord with his cap in his hand, his head bowed down and his body bent double, more turquesco.
And then, what shall we say of Gasabal, the squire of Galaor, who was so silent that in order to indicate to us the greatness of his marvellous taciturnity his name is only once mentioned in the whole of that history, as long as it is truthful?
From all I have said thou wilt gather, Sancho, that there must be a difference between master and man, between lord and lackey, between knight and squire: so that from this day forward in our intercourse we must observe more respect and take less liberties, for in whatever way I may be provoked with you it will be bad for the pitcher.
He left the basin on the ground, with which Don Quixote contented himself, saying that the pagan had shown his discretion and imitated the beaver, which finding itself pressed by the hunters bites and cuts off with its teeth that for which, by its natural instinct, it knows it is pursued.
“What art thou laughing at, Sancho?” said Don Quixote.
Straightway it will come to pass that she will fix her eyes upon the knight and he his upon her, and each will seem to the other something more divine than human, and, without knowing how or why they will be taken and entangled in the inextricable toils of love, and sorely distressed in their hearts not to see any way of making their pains and sufferings known by speech.
Thence they will lead him, no doubt, to some richly adorned chamber of the palace, where, having removed his armour, they will bring him a rich mantle of scarlet wherewith to robe himself, and if he looked noble in his armour he will look still more so in a doublet.
When night comes he will sup with the king, queen, and princess; and all the time he will never take his eyes off her, stealing stealthy glances, unnoticed by those present, and she will do the same, and with equal cautiousness, being, as I have said, a damsel of great discretion.
The tables being removed, suddenly through the door of the hall there will enter a hideous and diminutive dwarf followed by a fair dame, between two giants, who comes with a certain adventure, the work of an ancient sage; and he who shall achieve it shall be deemed the best knight in the world.
“The king will then command all those present to essay it, and none will bring it to an end and conclusion save the stranger knight, to the great enhancement of his fame, whereat the princess will be overjoyed and will esteem herself happy and fortunate in having fixed and placed her thoughts so high.
And the best of it is that this king, or prince, or whatever he is, is engaged in a very bitter war with another as powerful as himself, and the stranger knight, after having been some days at his court, requests leave from him to go and serve him in the said war.
The king will grant it very readily, and the knight will courteously kiss his hands for the favour done to him; and that night he will take leave of his lady the princess at the grating of the chamber where she sleeps, which looks upon a garden, and at which he has already many times conversed with her, the go-between and confidante in the matter being a damsel much trusted by the princess.
He will sigh, she will swoon, the damsel will fetch water, much distressed because morning approaches, and for the honour of her lady he would not that they were discovered; at last the princess will come to herself and will present her white hands through the grating to the knight, who will kiss them a thousand and a thousand times, bathing them with his tears.
It will be arranged between them how they are to inform each other of their good or evil fortunes, and the princess will entreat him to make his absence as short as possible, which he will promise to do with many oaths; once more he kisses her hands, and takes his leave in such grief that he is well-nigh ready to die.
The father dies, the princess inherits, and in two words the knight becomes king.
And here comes in at once the bestowal of rewards upon his squire and all who have aided him in rising to so exalted a rank.
He marries his squire to a damsel of the princess’s, who will be, no doubt, the one who was confidante in their amour, and is daughter of a very great duke.” “That’s what I want, and no mistake about it!” said Sancho.
“Title thou shouldst say, not tittle,” said his master.
“So be it,” answered Sancho.
“I say I will know how to behave, for once in my life I was beadle of a brotherhood, and the beadle’s gown sat so well on me that all said I looked as if I was to be steward of the same brotherhood.
“I will tell you,” answered Sancho.
“Years ago I was for a month at the capital and there I saw taking the air a very small gentleman who they said was a very great man, and a man following him on horseback in every turn he took, just as if he was his tail.
“Gurapas are galleys,” answered the galley slave, who was a young man of about four-and-twenty, and said he was a native of Piedrahita.
Don Quixote went on and asked another what his crime was, and the man answered with no less but rather much more sprightliness than the last one.
If you, sir, have anything wherewith to help the poor, God will repay it to you in heaven, and we on earth will take care in our petitions to him to pray for the life and health of your worship, that they may be as long and as good as your amiable appearance deserves.” This one was in the dress of a student, and one of the guards said he was a great talker and a very elegant Latin scholar.
Behind all these there came a man of thirty, a very personable fellow, except that when he looked, his eyes turned in a little one towards the other.
The guard replied that it was because he alone had committed more crimes than all the rest put together, and was so daring and such a villain, that though they marched him in that fashion they did not feel sure of him, but were in dread of his making his escape.
“They do,” returned Gines, “but I will make them give over calling me so, or I will be shaved, where, I only say behind my teeth.
“So good is it,” replied Gines, “that a fig for ‘Lazarillo de Tormes,’ and all of that kind that have been written, or shall be written compared with it: all I will say about it is that it deals with facts, and facts so neat and diverting that no lies could match them.” “And how is the book entitled?” asked Don Quixote.
“The ‘Life of Gines de Pasamonte,’” replied the subject of it.
“And is it finished?” asked Don Quixote.
“How can it be finished,” said the other, “when my life is not yet finished?
“And an unfortunate one,” replied Gines, “for misfortune always persecutes good wit.” “It persecutes rogues,” said the commissary.
All which presents itself now to my mind, urging, persuading, and even compelling me to demonstrate in your case the purpose for which Heaven sent me into the world and caused me to make profession of the order of chivalry to which I belong, and the vow I took therein to give aid to those in need and under the oppression of the strong.
But as I know that it is a mark of prudence not to do by foul means what may be done by fair, I will ask these gentlemen, the guards and commissary, to be so good as to release you and let you go in peace, as there will be no lack of others to serve the king under more favourable circumstances; for it seems to me a hard case to make slaves of those whom God and nature have made free.
Moreover, sirs of the guard,” added Don Quixote, “these poor fellows have done nothing to you; let each answer for his own sins yonder; there is a God in Heaven who will not forget to punish the wicked or reward the good; and it is not fitting that honest men should be the instruments of punishment to others, they being therein no way concerned.
This request I make thus gently and quietly, that, if you comply with it, I may have reason for thanking you; and, if you will not voluntarily, this lance and sword together with the might of my arm shall compel you to comply with it by force.” “Nice nonsense!” said the commissary; “a fine piece of pleasantry he has come out with at last!
He wants us to let the king’s prisoners go, as if we had any authority to release them, or he to order us to do so!
Such was the confusion, that the guards, now rushing at the galley slaves who were breaking loose, now to attack Don Quixote who was waiting for them, did nothing at all that was of any use.
Sancho was greatly grieved at the affair, because he anticipated that those who had fled would report the matter to the Holy Brotherhood, who at the summons of the alarm-bell would at once sally forth in quest of the offenders; and he said so to his master, and entreated him to leave the place at once, and go into hiding in the sierra that was close by.
Sancho planted himself behind his ass, and with him sheltered himself from the hailstorm that poured on both of them.
Don Quixote was unable to shield himself so well but that more pebbles than I could count struck him full on the body with such force that they brought him to the ground; and the instant he fell the student pounced upon him, snatched the basin from his head, and with it struck three or four blows on his shoulders, and as many more on the ground, knocking it almost to pieces.
They then stripped him of a jacket that he wore over his armour, and they would have stripped off his stockings if his greaves had not prevented them.
From Sancho they took his coat, leaving him in his shirt-sleeves; and dividing among themselves the remaining spoils of the battle, they went each one his own way, more solicitous about keeping clear of the Holy Brotherhood they dreaded, than about burdening themselves with the chain, or going to present themselves before the lady Dulcinea del Toboso.
OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE IN THE SIERRA MORENA, WHICH WAS ONE OF THE RAREST ADVENTURES RELATED IN THIS VERACIOUS HISTORY c23a.jpg (148K) Full Size Seeing himself served in this way, Don Quixote said to his squire, “I have always heard it said, Sancho, that to do good to boors is to throw water into the sea.
Sancho took comfort at this, dried his tears, suppressed his sobs, and returned thanks for the kindness shown him by Don Quixote.
He on his part was rejoiced to the heart on entering the mountains, as they seemed to him to be just the place for the adventures he was in quest of.
Sancho kissed his hands for the favour, and cleared the valise of its linen, which he stowed away in the provision sack.
But if Love be a God, it follows thence That he knows all, and certain it remains No God loves cruelty; then who ordains This penance that enthrals while it torments?
It were a falsehood, Chloe, thee to name; Such evil with such goodness cannot live; And against Heaven I dare not charge the blame, I only know it is my fate to die.
“Then let your worship read it aloud,” said Sancho, “for I am very fond of love matters.” “With all my heart,” said Don Quixote, and reading it aloud as Sancho had requested him, he found it ran thus: Thy false promise and my sure misfortune carry me to a place whence the news of my death will reach thy ears before the words of my complaint.
Ungrateful one, thou hast rejected me for one more wealthy, but not more worthy; but if virtue were esteemed wealth I should neither envy the fortunes of others nor weep for misfortunes of my own.
What thy beauty raised up thy deeds have laid low; by it I believed thee to be an angel, by them I know thou art a woman.
As he went along, then, occupied with these thoughts, he perceived on the summit of a height that rose before their eyes a man who went springing from rock to rock and from tussock to tussock with marvellous agility.
He asked us what part of this sierra was the most rugged and retired; we told him that it was where we now are; and so in truth it is, for if you push on half a league farther, perhaps you will not be able to find your way out; and I am wondering how you have managed to come here, for there is no road or path that leads to this spot.
When some of us goatherds learned this we went in search of him for about two days through the most remote portion of this sierra, at the end of which we found him lodged in the hollow of a large thick cork tree.
He came out to meet us with great gentleness, with his dress now torn and his face so disfigured and burned by the sun, that we hardly recognised him but that his clothes, though torn, convinced us, from the recollection we had of them, that he was the person we were looking for.
He saluted us courteously, and in a few well-spoken words he told us not to wonder at seeing him going about in this guise, as it was binding upon him in order that he might work out a penance which for his many sins had been imposed upon him.
We asked him to tell us who he was, but we were never able to find out from him: we begged of him too, when he was in want of food, which he could not do without, to tell us where we should find him, as we would bring it to him with all good-will and readiness; or if this were not to his taste, at least to come and ask it of us and not take it by force from the shepherds.
He thanked us for the offer, begged pardon for the late assault, and promised for the future to ask it in God’s name without offering violence to anybody.
But chance arranged matters better than he expected or hoped, for at that very moment, in a gorge on the mountain that opened where they stood, the youth he wished to find made his appearance, coming along talking to himself in a way that would have been unintelligible near at hand, much more at a distance.
His garb was what has been described, save that as he drew near, Don Quixote perceived that a tattered doublet which he wore was amber-tanned, from which he concluded that one who wore such garments could not be of very low rank.
Approaching them, the youth greeted them in a harsh and hoarse voice but with great courtesy.
Don Quixote returned his salutation with equal politeness, and dismounting from Rocinante advanced with well-bred bearing and grace to embrace him, and held him for some time close in his arms as if he had known him for a long time.
The other, whom we may call the Ragged One of the Sorry Countenance, as Don Quixote was of the Rueful, after submitting to the embrace pushed him back a little and, placing his hands on Don Quixote’s shoulders, stood gazing at him as if seeking to see whether he knew him, not less amazed, perhaps, at the sight of the face, figure, and armour of Don Quixote than Don Quixote was at the sight of him.
To be brief, the first to speak after embracing was the Ragged One, and he said what will be told farther on. c23i.jpg (53K) Full Size CHAPTER XXIV.
And if your misfortune should prove to be one of those that refuse admission to any sort of consolation, it was my purpose to join you in lamenting and mourning over it, so far as I could; for it is still some comfort in misfortune to find one who can feel for it.
In that same country there was a heaven in which love had placed all the glory I could desire; such was the beauty of Luscinda, a damsel as noble and as rich as I, but of happier fortunes, and of less firmness than was due to so worthy a passion as mine.
This Luscinda I loved, worshipped, and adored from my earliest and tenderest years, and she loved me in all the innocence and sincerity of childhood.
Our parents were aware of our feelings, and were not sorry to perceive them, for they saw clearly that as they ripened they must lead at last to a marriage between us, a thing that seemed almost prearranged by the equality of our families and wealth.
Ah heavens! how many letters did I write her, and how many dainty modest replies did I receive! how many ditties and love-songs did I compose in which my heart declared and made known its feelings, described its ardent longings, revelled in its recollections and dallied with its desires!
At length growing impatient and feeling my heart languishing with longing to see her, I resolved to put into execution and carry out what seemed to me the best mode of winning my desired and merited reward, to ask her of her father for my lawful wife, which I did.
To this his answer was that he thanked me for the disposition I showed to do honour to him and to regard myself as honoured by the bestowal of his treasure; but that as my father was alive it was his by right to make this demand, for if it were not in accordance with his full will and pleasure, Luscinda was not to be taken or given by stealth.
I thanked him for his kindness, reflecting that there was reason in what he said, and that my father would assent to it as soon as I should tell him, and with that view I went the very same instant to let him know what my desires were.
When I entered the room where he was I found him with an open letter in his hand, which, before I could utter a word, he gave me, saying, ‘By this letter thou wilt see, Cardenio, the disposition the Duke Ricardo has to serve thee.’ This Duke Ricardo, as you, sirs, probably know already, is a grandee of Spain who has his seat in the best part of this Andalusia.
On reading the letter my voice failed me, and still more when I heard my father say, ‘Two days hence thou wilt depart, Cardenio, in accordance with the duke’s wish, and give thanks to God who is opening a road to thee by which thou mayest attain what I know thou dost deserve; and to these words he added others of fatherly counsel.
The time for my departure arrived; I spoke one night to Luscinda, I told her all that had occurred, as I did also to her father, entreating him to allow some delay, and to defer the disposal of her hand until I should see what the Duke Ricardo sought of me: he gave me the promise, and she confirmed it with vows and swoonings unnumbered.
Finally, I presented myself to the duke, and was received and treated by him so kindly that very soon envy began to do its work, the old servants growing envious of me, and regarding the duke’s inclination to show me favour as an injury to themselves.
But the one to whom my arrival gave the greatest pleasure was the duke’s second son, Fernando by name, a gallant youth, of noble, generous, and amorous disposition, who very soon made so intimate a friend of me that it was remarked by everybody; for though the elder was attached to me, and showed me kindness, he did not carry his affectionate treatment to the same length as Don Fernando.
It so happened, then, that as between friends no secret remains unshared, and as the favour I enjoyed with Don Fernando had grown into friendship, he made all his thoughts known to me, and in particular a love affair which troubled his mind a little.
He was deeply in love with a peasant girl, a vassal of his father’s, the daughter of wealthy parents, and herself so beautiful, modest, discreet, and virtuous, that no one who knew her was able to decide in which of these respects she was most highly gifted or most excelled.
The attractions of the fair peasant raised the passion of Don Fernando to such a point that, in order to gain his object and overcome her virtuous resolutions, he determined to pledge his word to her to become her husband, for to attempt it in any other way was to attempt an impossibility.
When I heard him say so, even if his resolution had not been so good a one I should have hailed it as one of the happiest that could be imagined, prompted by my affection, seeing what a favourable chance and opportunity it offered me of returning to see my Luscinda.
With this thought and wish I commended his idea and encouraged his design, advising him to put it into execution as quickly as possible, as, in truth, absence produced its effect in spite of the most deeply rooted feelings.
But, as afterwards appeared, when he said this to me he had already enjoyed the peasant girl under the title of husband, and was waiting for an opportunity of making it known with safety to himself, being in dread of what his father the duke would do when he came to know of his folly.
“The duke gave him permission, and ordered me to accompany him; we arrived at my city, and my father gave him the reception due to his rank; I saw Luscinda without delay, and, though it had not been dead or deadened, my love gathered fresh life.
To my sorrow I told the story of it to Don Fernando, for I thought that in virtue of the great friendship he bore me I was bound to conceal nothing from him.
I extolled her beauty, her gaiety, her wit, so warmly, that my praises excited in him a desire to see a damsel adorned by such attractions.
To my misfortune I yielded to it, showing her to him one night by the light of a taper at a window where we used to talk to one another.
Don Fernando contrived always to read the letters I sent to Luscinda and her answers to me, under the pretence that he enjoyed the wit and sense of both.
Strange to say, he stood up for her as if she were in earnest his veritable born lady; to such a pass had his unholy books brought him.
Cardenio, then, being, as I said, now mad, when he heard himself given the lie, and called a scoundrel and other insulting names, not relishing the jest, snatched up a stone that he found near him, and with it delivered such a blow on Don Quixote’s breast that he laid him on his back.
Sancho rose, and with the rage he felt at finding himself so belaboured without deserving it, ran to take vengeance on the goatherd, accusing him of not giving them warning that this man was at times taken with a mad fit, for if they had known it they would have been on their guard to protect themselves.
The goatherd replied that he had said so, and that if he had not heard him, that was no fault of his.
Sancho retorted, and the goatherd rejoined, and the altercation ended in their seizing each other by the beard, and exchanging such fisticuffs that if Don Quixote had not made peace between them, they would have knocked one another to pieces.
The goatherd told him, as he had told him before, that there was no knowing of a certainty where his lair was; but that if he wandered about much in that neighbourhood he could not fail to fall in with him either in or out of his senses. c24e.jpg (69K) Full Size CHAPTER XXV.
WHICH TREATS OF THE STRANGE THINGS THAT HAPPENED TO THE STOUT KNIGHT OF LA MANCHA IN THE SIERRA MORENA, AND OF HIS IMITATION OF THE PENANCE OF BELTENEBROS c25a.jpg (168K) Full Size Don Quixote took leave of the goatherd, and once more mounting Rocinante bade Sancho follow him, which he having no ass, did very discontentedly.
But as it is not right to keep thee any longer in suspense, waiting to see what comes of my words, I would have thee know, Sancho, that the famous Amadis of Gaul was one of the most perfect knights-errant—I am wrong to say he was one; he stood alone, the first, the only one, the lord of all that were in the world in his time.
A fig for Don Belianis, and for all who say he equalled him in any respect, for, my oath upon it, they are deceiving themselves!
In the same way Amadis was the polestar, day-star, sun of valiant and devoted knights, whom all we who fight under the banner of love and chivalry are bound to imitate.
This, then, being so, I consider, friend Sancho, that the knight-errant who shall imitate him most closely will come nearest to reaching the perfection of chivalry.
Now one of the instances in which this knight most conspicuously showed his prudence, worth, valour, endurance, fortitude, and love, was when he withdrew, rejected by the Lady Oriana, to do penance upon the Peña Pobre, changing his name into that of Beltenebros, a name assuredly significant and appropriate to the life which he had voluntarily adopted.
I have the basin in my sack all dinted, and I am taking it home to have it mended, to trim my beard in it, if, by God’s grace, I am allowed to see my wife and children some day or other.” “Look here, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “by him thou didst swear by just now I swear thou hast the most limited understanding that any squire in the world has or ever had.
Is it possible that all this time thou hast been going about with me thou hast never found out that all things belonging to knights-errant seem to be illusions and nonsense and ravings, and to go always by contraries?
Keep it safe, my friend, for just now I have no need of it; indeed, I shall have to take off all this armour and remain as naked as I was born, if I have a mind to follow Roland rather than Amadis in my penance.” Thus talking they reached the foot of a high mountain which stood like an isolated peak among the others that surrounded it.
Past its base there flowed a gentle brook, all around it spread a meadow so green and luxuriant that it was a delight to the eyes to look upon it, and forest trees in abundance, and shrubs and flowers, added to the charms of the spot.
Oh, ye rural deities, whoever ye be that haunt this lone spot, give ear to the complaint of a wretched lover whom long absence and brooding jealousy have driven to bewail his fate among these wilds and complain of the hard heart of that fair and ungrateful one, the end and limit of all human beauty!
Oh, ye wood nymphs and dryads, that dwell in the thickets of the forest, so may the nimble wanton satyrs by whom ye are vainly wooed never disturb your sweet repose, help me to lament my hard fate or at least weary not at listening to it!
Oh, Dulcinea del Toboso, day of my night, glory of my pain, guide of my path, star of my fortune, so may Heaven grant thee in full all thou seekest of it, bethink thee of the place and condition to which absence from thee has brought me, and make that return in kindness that is due to my fidelity!
Oh, lonely trees, that from this day forward shall bear me company in my solitude, give me some sign by the gentle movement of your boughs that my presence is not distasteful to you!
“All shall be included,” said Don Quixote; “and as there is no paper, it would be well done to write it on the leaves of trees, as the ancients did, or on tablets of wax; though that would be as hard to find just now as paper.
Giver of all good! but she is a brave lass, and a right and stout one, and fit to be helpmate to any knight-errant that is or is to be, who may make her his lady: the whoreson wench, what sting she has and what a voice!
But all things considered, what good can it do the lady Aldonza Lorenzo, I mean the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, to have the vanquished your worship sends or will send coming to her and going down on their knees before her?
It is not to be supposed that all those poets who sang the praises of ladies under the fancy names they give them, had any such mistresses.
Thinkest thou that the Amarillises, the Phillises, the Sylvias, the Dianas, the Galateas, the Fílidas, and all the rest of them, that the books, the ballads, the barber’s shops, the theatres are full of, were really and truly ladies of flesh and blood, and mistresses of those that glorify and have glorified them?
If thy beauty despises me, if thy worth is not for me, if thy scorn is my affliction, though I be sufficiently long-suffering, hardly shall I endure this anxiety, which, besides being oppressive, is protracted.
My good squire Sancho will relate to thee in full, fair ingrate, dear enemy, the condition to which I am reduced on thy account: if it be thy pleasure to give me relief, I am thine; if not, do as may be pleasing to thee; for by ending my life I shall satisfy thy cruelty and my desire.
“Thine till death, “The Knight of the Rueful Countenance.” “By the life of my father,” said Sancho, when he heard the letter, “it is the loftiest thing I ever heard.
Body of me! how your worship says everything as you like in it!
And how well you fit in ‘The Knight of the Rueful Countenance’ into the signature.
I declare your worship is indeed the very devil, and there is nothing you don’t know.” “Everything is needed for the calling I follow,” said Don Quixote.
If not, let the lady Dulcinea look to it; if she does not answer reasonably, I swear as solemnly as I can that I will fetch a fair answer out of her stomach with kicks and cuffs; for why should it be borne that a knight-errant as famous as your worship should go mad without rhyme or reason for a—?
Though cunning devices did not avail him against Bernardo del Carpio, who knew all about them, and strangled him in his arms at Roncesvalles.
But putting the question of his valour aside, let us come to his losing his wits, for certain it is that he did lose them in consequence of the proofs he discovered at the fountain, and the intelligence the shepherd gave him of Angelica having slept more than two siestas with Medoro, a little curly-headed Moor, and page to Agramante.
If he was persuaded that this was true, and that his lady had wronged him, it is no wonder that he should have gone mad; but I, how am I to imitate him in his madness, unless I can imitate him in the cause of it?
For my Dulcinea, I will venture to swear, never saw a Moor in her life, as he is, in his proper costume, and she is this day as the mother that bore her, and I should plainly be doing her a wrong if, fancying anything else, I were to go mad with the same kind of madness as Roland the Furious.
And if this be true, as it is, why should I now take the trouble to strip stark naked, or do mischief to these trees which have done me no harm, or why am I to disturb the clear waters of these brooks which will give me to drink whenever I have a mind?
Long live the memory of Amadis and let him be imitated so far as is possible by Don Quixote of La Mancha, of whom it will be said, as was said of the other, that if he did not achieve great things, he died in attempting them; and if I am not repulsed or rejected by my Dulcinea, it is enough for me, as I have said, to be absent from her.
And so, now to business; come to my memory ye deeds of Amadis, and show me how I am to begin to imitate you.
If it disturb you, and I owe Some reparation, it may be a Defence for me to let you know Don Quixote’s tears are on the flow, And all for distant Dulcinea Del Toboso.
The lealest lover time can show, Doomed for a lady-love to languish, Among these solitudes doth go, A prey to every kind of anguish.
Why Love should like a spiteful foe Thus use him, he hath no idea, But hogsheads full—this doth he know— Don Quixote’s tears are on the flow, And all for distant Dulcinea Del Toboso.
Adventure-seeking doth he go Up rugged heights, down rocky valleys, But hill or dale, or high or low, Mishap attendeth all his sallies: Love still pursues him to and fro, And plies his cruel scourge—ah me! a Relentless fate, an endless woe; Don Quixote’s tears are on the flow, And all for distant Dulcinea Del Toboso.
The addition of “Del Toboso” to Dulcinea’s name gave rise to no little laughter among those who found the above lines, for they suspected Don Quixote must have fancied that unless he added “del Toboso” when he introduced the name of Dulcinea the verse would be unintelligible; which was indeed the fact, as he himself afterwards admitted.
He wrote many more, but, as has been said, these three verses were all that could be plainly and perfectly deciphered.
As for him, coming out upon the high road, he made for El Toboso, and the next day reached the inn where the mishap of the blanket had befallen him.
As soon as he recognised it he felt as if he were once more living through the air, and he could not bring himself to enter it though it was an hour when he might well have done so, for it was dinner-time, and he longed to taste something hot as it had been all cold fare with him for many days past.
They then asked Sancho Panza to show them the letter he was carrying to the lady Dulcinea del Toboso.
When Sancho discovered he could not find the book his face grew deadly pale, and in great haste he again felt his body all over, and seeing plainly it was not to be found, without more ado he seized his beard with both hands and plucked away half of it, and then, as quick as he could and without stopping, gave himself half a dozen cuffs on the face and nose till they were bathed in blood.
Seeing this, the curate and the barber asked him what had happened him that he gave himself such rough treatment.
Sancho comforted himself with this, and said if that were so the loss of Dulcinea’s letter did not trouble him much, for he had it almost by heart, and it could be taken down from him wherever and whenever they liked.
Sancho repeated it three times, and as he did, uttered three thousand more absurdities; then he told them more about his master but he never said a word about the blanketing that had befallen himself in that inn, into which he refused to enter.
All this Sancho delivered with so much composure—wiping his nose from time to time—and with so little common-sense that his two hearers were again filled with wonder at the force of Don Quixote’s madness that could run away with this poor man’s reason.
They left him and went in, and presently the barber brought him out something to eat.
And he had no doubt that Don Quixote would comply with any request made in these terms, and that in this way they might remove him and take him to his own village, where they would endeavour to find out if his extraordinary madness admitted of any kind of remedy. c26e.jpg (48K) CHAPTER XXVII.
OF HOW THE CURATE AND THE BARBER PROCEEDED WITH THEIR SCHEME; TOGETHER WITH OTHER MATTERS WORTHY OF RECORD IN THIS GREAT HISTORY c27a.jpg (169K) Full Size The curate’s plan did not seem a bad one to the barber, but on the contrary so good that they immediately set about putting it in execution.
They begged a petticoat and hood of the landlady, leaving her in pledge a new cassock of the curate’s; and the barber made a beard out of a grey-brown or red ox-tail in which the landlord used to stick his comb.
The landlady asked them what they wanted these things for, and the curate told her in a few words about the madness of Don Quixote, and how this disguise was intended to get him away from the mountain where he then was.
The landlord and landlady immediately came to the conclusion that the madman was their guest, the balsam man and master of the blanketed squire, and they told the curate all that had passed between him and them, not omitting what Sancho had been so silent about.
Finally the landlady dressed up the curate in a style that left nothing to be desired; she put on him a cloth petticoat with black velvet stripes a palm broad, all slashed, and a bodice of green velvet set off by a binding of white satin, which as well as the petticoat must have been made in the time of king Wamba.
The curate would not let them hood him, but put on his head a little quilted linen cap which he used for a night-cap, and bound his forehead with a strip of black silk, while with another he made a mask with which he concealed his beard and face very well.
He then put on his hat, which was broad enough to serve him for an umbrella, and enveloping himself in his cloak seated himself woman-fashion on his mule, while the barber mounted his with a beard down to the waist of mingled red and white, for it was, as has been said, the tail of a clay-red ox.
They took leave of all, and of the good Maritornes, who, sinner as she was, promised to pray a rosary of prayers that God might grant them success in such an arduous and Christian undertaking as that they had in hand.
Just at this moment Sancho came up, and on seeing the pair in such a costume he was unable to restrain his laughter; the barber, however, agreed to do as the curate wished, and, altering their plan, the curate went on to instruct him how to play his part and what to say to Don Quixote to induce and compel him to come with them and give up his fancy for the place he had chosen for his idle penance.
All this Sancho listened to and fixed it well in his memory, and thanked them heartily for intending to recommend his master to be an emperor instead of an archbishop, for he felt sure that in the way of bestowing rewards on their squires emperors could do more than archbishops-errant.
They approved of what Sancho proposed, and resolved to wait for him until he brought back word of having found his master.
Sancho pushed on into the glens of the Sierra, leaving them in one through which there flowed a little gentle rivulet, and where the rocks and trees afforded a cool and grateful shade.
It was an August day with all the heat of one, and the heat in those parts is intense, and the hour was three in the afternoon, all which made the spot the more inviting and tempted them to wait there for Sancho’s return, which they did.
And still more surprised were they when they perceived that what they heard sung were the verses not of rustic shepherds, but of the polished wits of the city; and so it proved, for the verses they heard were these: What makes my quest of happiness seem vain?
What holds my heart in anguish of suspense?
If that be so, then for my grief Where shall I turn to seek relief, When hope on every side lies slain By Absence, Jealousies, Disdain?
Whence is permission to afflict me given?
If that be so, I but await The stroke of a resistless fate, Since, working for my woe, these three, Love, Chance and Heaven, in league I see.
If that be so, it is but folly To seek a cure for melancholy: Ask where it lies; the answer saith In Change, in Madness, or in Death.
Friendship, return to us, or force the cheat That wears it now, thy livery to restore, By aid whereof sincerity is slain.
If thou wilt not unmask thy counterfeit, This earth will be the prey of strife once more, As when primæval discord held its reign.
He, showing no astonishment when he saw them, stood still with his head bent down upon his breast like one in deep thought, without raising his eyes to look at them after the first glance when they suddenly came upon him.
The curate, who was aware of his misfortune and recognised him by the description, being a man of good address, approached him and in a few sensible words entreated and urged him to quit a life of such misery, lest he should end it there, which would be the greatest of all misfortunes.
In short, I told him I did not venture to mention it to my father, as well on account of that difficulty, as of many others that discouraged me though I knew not well what they were, only that it seemed to me that what I desired was never to come to pass.
To all this Don Fernando answered that he would take it upon himself to speak to my father, and persuade him to speak to Luscinda’s father.
O, ambitious Marius!
O, perfidious Ganelon!
O, treacherous Vellido!
O, vindictive Julian!
Traitor, cruel, vindictive, and perfidious, wherein had this poor wretch failed in his fidelity, who with such frankness showed thee the secrets and the joys of his heart?
What words did I utter, or what counsels did I give that had not the furtherance of thy honour and welfare for their aim?
But, woe is me, wherefore do I complain? for sure it is that when misfortunes spring from the stars, descending from on high they fall upon us with such fury and violence that no power on earth can check their course nor human device stay their coming.
Who could have thought that Don Fernando, a highborn gentleman, intelligent, bound to me by gratitude for my services, one that could win the object of his love wherever he might set his affections, could have become so obdurate, as they say, as to rob me of my one ewe lamb that was not even yet in my possession?
But laying aside these useless and unavailing reflections, let us take up the broken thread of my unhappy story.
Could I have anticipated this treachery?
Could I by any chance have suspected it?
Nay; so far from that, I offered with the greatest pleasure to go at once, in my satisfaction at the good bargain that had been made.
That night I spoke with Luscinda, and told her what had been agreed upon with Don Fernando, and how I had strong hopes of our fair and reasonable wishes being realised.
She, as unsuspicious as I was of the treachery of Don Fernando, bade me try to return speedily, as she believed the fulfilment of our desires would be delayed only so long as my father put off speaking to hers.
I know not why it was that on saying this to me her eyes filled with tears, and there came a lump in her throat that prevented her from uttering a word of many more that it seemed to me she was striving to say to me.
But the night before the unhappy day of my departure she wept, she moaned, she sighed, and she withdrew leaving me filled with perplexity and amazement, overwhelmed at the sight of such strange and affecting signs of grief and sorrow in Luscinda; but not to dash my hopes I ascribed it all to the depth of her love for me and the pain that separation gives those who love tenderly.
At last I took my departure, sad and dejected, my heart filled with fancies and suspicions, but not knowing well what it was I suspected or fancied; plain omens pointing to the sad event and misfortune that was awaiting me.
“The command was one that exposed me to the temptation of disobeying it, as it seemed to me impossible to endure life for so many days separated from Luscinda, especially after leaving her in the sorrowful mood I have described to you; nevertheless as a dutiful servant I obeyed, though I felt it would be at the cost of my well-being.
But four days later there came a man in quest of me with a letter which he gave me, and which by the address I perceived to be from Luscinda, as the writing was hers.
I opened it with fear and trepidation, persuaded that it must be something serious that had impelled her to write to me when at a distance, as she seldom did so when I was near.
However, I opened the letter and read these words: The promise Don Fernando gave you to urge your father to speak to mine, he has fulfilled much more to his own satisfaction than to your advantage.
I have to tell you, señor, that he has demanded me for a wife, and my father, led away by what he considers Don Fernando’s superiority over you, has favoured his suit so cordially, that in two days hence the betrothal is to take place with such secrecy and so privately that the only witnesses are to be the Heavens above and a few of the household.
Picture to yourself the state I am in; judge if it be urgent for you to come; the issue of the affair will show you whether I love you or not.
“Such, in brief, were the words of the letter, words that made me set out at once without waiting any longer for reply or money; for I now saw clearly that it was not the purchase of horses but of his own pleasure that had made Don Fernando send me to his brother.
The exasperation I felt against Don Fernando, joined with the fear of losing the prize I had won by so many years of love and devotion, lent me wings; so that almost flying I reached home the same day, by the hour which served for speaking with Luscinda.
I arrived unobserved, and left the mule on which I had come at the house of the worthy man who had brought me the letter, and fortune was pleased to be for once so kind that I found Luscinda at the grating that was the witness of our loves.
She recognised me at once, and I her, but not as she ought to have recognised me, or I her.
But who is there in the world that can boast of having fathomed or understood the wavering mind and unstable nature of a woman?
To proceed: as soon as Luscinda saw me she said, ‘Cardenio, I am in my bridal dress, and the treacherous Don Fernando and my covetous father are waiting for me in the hall with the other witnesses, who shall be the witnesses of my death before they witness my betrothal.
Now the night of my sorrow set in, the sun of my happiness went down, I felt my eyes bereft of sight, my mind of reason.
Who could describe the agitation of heart I suffered as I stood there—the thoughts that came to me—the reflections that passed through my mind?
Suffice it to say that the bridegroom entered the hall in his usual dress, without ornament of any kind; as groomsman he had with him a cousin of Luscinda’s and except the servants of the house there was no one else in the chamber.
Soon afterwards Luscinda came out from an antechamber, attended by her mother and two of her damsels, arrayed and adorned as became her rank and beauty, and in full festival and ceremonial attire.
Oh memory, mortal foe of my peace! why bring before me now the incomparable beauty of that adored enemy of mine?
Were it not better, cruel memory, to remind me and recall what she then did, that stirred by a wrong so glaring I may seek, if not vengeance now, at least to rid myself of life?
Oh, that I had but dared at that moment to rush forward crying aloud, ‘Luscinda, Luscinda! have a care what thou dost; remember what thou owest me; bethink thee thou art mine and canst not be another’s; reflect that thy utterance of “Yes” and the end of my life will come at the same instant.
O, treacherous Don Fernando! robber of my glory, death of my life!
“The priest stood waiting for the answer of Luscinda, who for a long time withheld it; and just as I thought she was taking out the dagger to save her honour, or struggling for words to make some declaration of the truth on my behalf, I heard her say in a faint and feeble voice, ‘I will:’ Don Fernando said the same, and giving her the ring they stood linked by a knot that could never be loosed.
The bridegroom then approached to embrace his bride; and she, pressing her hand upon her heart, fell fainting in her mother’s arms.
It only remains now for me to tell you the state I was in when in that consent that I heard I saw all my hopes mocked, the words and promises of Luscinda proved falsehoods, and the recovery of the prize I had that instant lost rendered impossible for ever.
I stood stupefied, wholly abandoned, it seemed, by Heaven, declared the enemy of the earth that bore me, the air refusing me breath for my sighs, the water moisture for my tears; it was only the fire that gathered strength so that my whole frame glowed with rage and jealousy.
They were all thrown into confusion by Luscinda’s fainting, and as her mother was unlacing her to give her air a sealed paper was discovered in her bosom which Don Fernando seized at once and began to read by the light of one of the torches.
As soon as he had read it he seated himself in a chair, leaning his cheek on his hand in the attitude of one deep in thought, without taking any part in the efforts that were being made to recover his bride from her fainting fit.
“Seeing all the household in confusion, I ventured to come out regardless whether I were seen or not, and determined, if I were, to do some frenzied deed that would prove to all the world the righteous indignation of my breast in the punishment of the treacherous Don Fernando, and even in that of the fickle fainting traitress.
I called her cruel, ungrateful, false, thankless, but above all covetous, since the wealth of my enemy had blinded the eyes of her affection, and turned it from me to transfer it to one to whom fortune had been more generous and liberal.
In short, I came to the conclusion that feeble love, little reflection, great ambition, and a craving for rank, had made her forget the words with which she had deceived me, encouraged and supported by my firm hopes and honourable passion.
“Thus soliloquising and agitated, I journeyed onward for the remainder of the night, and by daybreak I reached one of the passes of these mountains, among which I wandered for three days more without taking any path or road, until I came to some meadows lying on I know not which side of the mountains, and there I inquired of some herdsmen in what direction the most rugged part of the range lay.
They told me that it was in this quarter, and I at once directed my course hither, intending to end my life here; but as I was making my way among these crags, my mule dropped dead through fatigue and hunger, or, as I think more likely, in order to have done with such a worthless burden as it bore in me.
At other times, so they tell me when they find me in a rational mood, I sally out upon the road, and though they would gladly give it me, I snatch food by force from the shepherds bringing it from the village to their huts.
“Such, sirs, is the dismal story of my misfortune: say if it be one that can be told with less emotion than you have seen in me; and do not trouble yourselves with urging or pressing upon me what reason suggests as likely to serve for my relief, for it will avail me as much as the medicine prescribed by a wise physician avails the sick man who will not take it.
I have no wish for health without Luscinda; and since it is her pleasure to be another’s, when she is or should be mine, let it be mine to be a prey to misery when I might have enjoyed happiness.
They approached so silently that he did not perceive them, being fully occupied in bathing his feet, which were so fair that they looked like two pieces of shining crystal brought forth among the other stones of the brook.
The long auburn tresses not only covered her shoulders, but such was their length and abundance, concealed her all round beneath their masses, so that except the feet nothing of her form was visible.
She now used her hands as a comb, and if her feet had seemed like bits of crystal in the water, her hands looked like pieces of driven snow among her locks; all which increased not only the admiration of the three beholders, but their anxiety to learn who she was.
This being so, I say I thank you, sirs, for the offer you have made me, which places me under the obligation of complying with the request you have made of me; though I fear the account I shall give you of my misfortunes will excite in you as much concern as compassion, for you will be unable to suggest anything to remedy them or any consolation to alleviate them.
This nobleman has two sons, the elder heir to his dignity and apparently to his good qualities; the younger heir to I know not what, unless it be the treachery of Vellido and the falsehood of Ganelon.
My parents are this lord’s vassals, lowly in origin, but so wealthy that if birth had conferred as much on them as fortune, they would have had nothing left to desire, nor should I have had reason to fear trouble like that in which I find myself now; for it may be that my ill fortune came of theirs in not having been nobly born.
It is true they are not so low that they have any reason to be ashamed of their condition, but neither are they so high as to remove from my mind the impression that my mishap comes of their humble birth.
“I was the mirror in which they beheld themselves, the staff of their old age, and the object in which, with submission to Heaven, all their wishes centred, and mine were in accordance with theirs, for I knew their worth; and as I was mistress of their hearts, so was I also of their possessions.
Such was the life I led in my parents’ house and if I have depicted it thus minutely, it is not out of ostentation, or to let you know that I am rich, but that you may see how, without any fault of mine, I have fallen from the happy condition I have described, to the misery I am in at present.
She, however, without noticing the excitement of Cardenio, continuing her story, went on to say: “And they had hardly discovered me, when, as he owned afterwards, he was smitten with a violent love for me, as the manner in which it displayed itself plainly showed.
But to shorten the long recital of my woes, I will pass over in silence all the artifices employed by Don Fernando for declaring his passion for me.
At length he learned that my parents were contemplating marriage for me in order to put an end to his hopes of obtaining possession of me, or at least to secure additional protectors to watch over me, and this intelligence or suspicion made him act as you shall hear.
I have heard of another of the same name who can perhaps match your misfortunes.
“All this that I have now repeated I said to him, and much more which I cannot recollect; but it had no effect in inducing him to forego his purpose; he who has no intention of paying does not trouble himself about difficulties when he is striking the bargain.
At the same time I argued the matter briefly in my own mind, saying to myself, ‘I shall not be the first who has risen through marriage from a lowly to a lofty station, nor will Don Fernando be the first whom beauty or, as is more likely, a blind attachment, has led to mate himself below his rank.
Then, since I am introducing no new usage or practice, I may as well avail myself of the honour that chance offers me, for even though his inclination for me should not outlast the attainment of his wishes, I shall be, after all, his wife before God.
“The day which followed the night of my misfortune did not come so quickly, I imagine, as Don Fernando wished, for when desire has attained its object, the greatest pleasure is to fly from the scene of pleasure.
But all this was suddenly brought to an end, for the time came when all such considerations were disregarded, and there was no further question of honour, when my patience gave way and the secret of my heart became known abroad.
He, though he remonstrated with me for my boldness, and condemned my resolution, when he saw me bent upon my purpose, offered to bear me company, as he said, to the end of the world.
I reached my destination in two days and a half, and on entering the city inquired for the house of Luscinda’s parents.
The first person I asked gave me more in reply than I sought to know; he showed me the house, and told me all that had occurred at the betrothal of the daughter of the family, an affair of such notoriety in the city that it was the talk of every knot of idlers in the street.
In short, he said, the words of the paper made it clear she meant to kill herself on the completion of the betrothal, and gave her reasons for putting an end to herself all which was confirmed, it was said, by a dagger they found somewhere in her clothes.
On seeing this, Don Fernando, persuaded that Luscinda had befooled, slighted, and trifled with him, assailed her before she had recovered from her swoon, and tried to stab her with the dagger that had been found, and would have succeeded had not her parents and those who were present prevented him.
It was said, moreover, that Don Fernando went away at once, and that Luscinda did not recover from her prostration until the next day, when she told her parents how she was really the bride of that Cardenio I have mentioned.
I learned besides that Cardenio, according to report, had been present at the betrothal; and that upon seeing her betrothed contrary to his expectation, he had quitted the city in despair, leaving behind him a letter declaring the wrong Luscinda had done him, and his intention of going where no one should ever see him again.
All this was a matter of notoriety in the city, and everyone spoke of it; especially when it became known that Luscinda was missing from her father’s house and from the city, for she was not to be found anywhere, to the distraction of her parents, who knew not what steps to take to recover her.
All this passed through my mind, and I strove to comfort myself without comfort, indulging in faint and distant hopes of cherishing that life that I now abhor.
The instant I heard the notice I quitted the city with my servant, who now began to show signs of wavering in his fidelity to me, and the same night, for fear of discovery, we entered the most thickly wooded part of these mountains.
It is now I know not how many months since with this object I came here, where I met a herdsman who engaged me as his servant at a place in the heart of this Sierra, and all this time I have been serving him as herd, striving to keep always afield to hide these locks which have now unexpectedly betrayed me.
So, as I say, once more I went into hiding to seek for some place where I might with sighs and tears implore Heaven to have pity on my misery, and grant me help and strength to escape from it, or let me die among the solitudes, leaving no trace of an unhappy being who, by no fault of hers, has furnished matter for talk and scandal at home and abroad.” c28f.jpg (42K) CHAPTER XXIX.
Cardenio and Dorothea thanked him, and accepted the kind offer he made them; and the barber, who had been listening to all attentively and in silence, on his part some kindly words also, and with no less good-will than the curate offered his services in any way that might be of use to them.
He also explained to them in a few words the object that had brought them there, and the strange nature of Don Quixote’s madness, and how they were waiting for his squire, who had gone in search of him.
Like the recollection of a dream, the quarrel he had had with Don Quixote came back to Cardenio’s memory, and he described it to the others; but he was unable to say what the dispute was about. c29b.jpg (351K) Full Size At this moment they heard a shout, and recognised it as coming from Sancho Panza, who, not finding them where he had left them, was calling aloud to them.
The licentiate in reply told him not to be uneasy, for they would fetch him away in spite of himself.
All this, and more, she said, she had taken from home in case of need, but that until then she had had no occasion to make use of it.
They were all highly delighted with her grace, air, and beauty, and declared Don Fernando to be a man of very little taste when he rejected such charms.
But the one who admired her most was Sancho Panza, for it seemed to him (what indeed was true) that in all the days of his life he had never seen such a lovely creature; and he asked the curate with great eagerness who this beautiful lady was, and what she wanted in these out-of-the-way quarters.
Don Quixote then mounted Rocinante, and the barber settled himself on his beast, Sancho being left to go on foot, which made him feel anew the loss of his Dapple, finding the want of him now.
But he bore all with cheerfulness, being persuaded that his master had now fairly started and was just on the point of becoming an emperor; for he felt no doubt at all that he would marry this princess, and be king of Micomicon at least.
The only thing that troubled him was the reflection that this kingdom was in the land of the blacks, and that the people they would give him for vassals would be all black; but for this he soon found a remedy in his fancy, and said he to himself, “What is it to me if my vassals are blacks?
Not unless you go to sleep and haven’t the wit or skill to turn things to account and sell three, six, or ten thousand vassals while you would be talking about it!
Come, come, what a fool I am!” And so he jogged on, so occupied with his thoughts and easy in his mind that he forgot all about the hardship of travelling on foot.
Having effected this, although the others had gone on ahead while they were disguising themselves, they easily came out on the high road before them, for the brambles and awkward places they encountered did not allow those on horseback to go as fast as those on foot.
He, astonished at the stranger’s words and behaviour, looked at him attentively, and at length recognised him, very much surprised to see him there, and made great efforts to dismount.
As it was, they so took him by surprise that he came to the ground, giving so little heed to his beard that it fell off, and all he could do when he found himself without it was to cover his face hastily with both his hands and moan that his teeth were knocked out.
“And so it is,” said the curate, and he promised to teach it to him on the first opportunity.
Three then being mounted, that is to say, Don Quixote, the princess, and the curate, and three on foot, Cardenio, the barber, and Sancho Panza, Don Quixote said to the damsel: “Let your highness, lady, lead on whithersoever is most pleasing to you;” but before she could answer the licentiate said: c29d.jpg (345K) Full Size “Towards what kingdom would your ladyship direct our course?
Is it perchance towards that of Micomicon?
“These, then,” said the curate, “were they who robbed us; and God in his mercy pardon him who would not let them go to the punishment they deserved.” c29f.jpg (53K) Full Size CHAPTER XXX.
It only concerns them to aid them as persons in need of help, having regard to their sufferings and not to their rascalities.
The king my father, who was called Tinacrio the Sapient, was very learned in what they call magic arts, and became aware by his craft that my mother, who was called Queen Jaramilla, was to die before he did, and that soon after he too was to depart this life, and I was to be left an orphan without father or mother.
“To see if I have that mole your father spoke of,” answered Don Quixote.
See how we have already got a kingdom to govern and a queen to marry!” “On my oath it is so,” said Sancho; “and foul fortune to him who won’t marry after slitting Señor Pandahilado’s windpipe!
And then, how illfavoured the queen is!
I wish the fleas in my bed were that sort!” And so saying he cut a couple of capers in the air with every sign of extreme satisfaction, and then ran to seize the bridle of Dorothea’s mule, and checking it fell on his knees before her, begging her to give him her hand to kiss in token of his acknowledgment of her as his queen and mistress.
Which of the bystanders could have helped laughing to see the madness of the master and the simplicity of the servant?
Dorothea therefore gave her hand, and promised to make him a great lord in her kingdom, when Heaven should be so good as to permit her to recover and enjoy it, for which Sancho returned thanks in words that set them all laughing again.
Is my lady Dulcinea fairer, perchance?
A poor chance I have of getting that county I am waiting for if your worship goes looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea.
“Do you think,” he said to him after a pause, “you scurvy clown, that you are to be always interfering with me, and that you are to be always offending and I always pardoning?
Don’t fancy it, impious scoundrel, for that beyond a doubt thou art, since thou hast set thy tongue going against the peerless Dulcinea.
Know you not, lout, vagabond, beggar, that were it not for the might that she infuses into my arm I should not have strength enough to kill a flea?
Say, scoffer with a viper’s tongue, what think you has won this kingdom and cut off this giant’s head and made you a marquis (for all this I count as already accomplished and decided), but the might of Dulcinea, employing my arm as the instrument of her achievements?
She fights in me and conquers in me, and I live and breathe in her, and owe my life and being to her.
That is what I complain of.
Let your worship at any rate marry this queen, now that we have got her here as if showered down from heaven, and afterwards you may go back to my lady Dulcinea; for there must have been kings in the world who kept mistresses.
Sancho hastened to his Dapple, and embracing him he said, “How hast thou fared, my blessing, Dapple of my eyes, my comrade?” all the while kissing him and caressing him as if he were a human being.
The ass held his peace, and let himself be kissed and caressed by Sancho without answering a single word.
They all came up and congratulated him on having found Dapple, Don Quixote especially, who told him that notwithstanding this he would not cancel the order for the three ass-colts, for which Sancho thanked him.
While the two had been going along conversing in this fashion, the curate observed to Dorothea that she had shown great cleverness, as well in the story itself as in its conciseness, and the resemblance it bore to those of the books of chivalry.
She said that she had many times amused herself reading them; but that she did not know the situation of the provinces or seaports, and so she had said at haphazard that she had landed at Osuna.
OF THE DELECTABLE DISCUSSION BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO PANZA, HIS SQUIRE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS c31a.jpg (151K) Full Size “All that is not unsatisfactory to me,” said Don Quixote.
“Then I promise thee,” said Don Quixote, “that, winnowed by her hands, beyond a doubt the bread it made was of the whitest; but go on; when thou gavest her my letter, did she kiss it?
Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “didst thou measure with her?” “I measured in this way,” said Sancho; “going to help her to put a sack of wheat on the back of an ass, we came so close together that I could see she stood more than a good palm over me.” “Well!” said Don Quixote, “and doth she not of a truth accompany and adorn this greatness with a thousand million charms of mind!
But putting this aside, what thinkest thou I ought to do about my lady’s command to go and see her?
“Tell me, señor, do you mean to travel all that way for nothing, and to let slip and lose so rich and great a match as this where they give as a portion a kingdom that in sober truth I have heard say is more than twenty thousand leagues round about, and abounds with all things necessary to support human life, and is bigger than Portugal and Castile put together?
And as those who go must perforce kneel before her and say they come from your worship to submit themselves to her, how can the thoughts of both of you be hid?” “O, how silly and simple thou art!” said Don Quixote; “seest thou not, Sancho, that this tends to her greater exaltation?
One would think thou hadst studied.” “In faith, then, I cannot even read.” Master Nicholas here called out to them to wait a while, as they wanted to halt and drink at a little spring there was there.
Don Quixote drew up, not a little to the satisfaction of Sancho, for he was by this time weary of telling so many lies, and in dread of his master catching him tripping, for though he knew that Dulcinea was a peasant girl of El Toboso, he had never seen her in all his life.
Cardenio had now put on the clothes which Dorothea was wearing when they found her, and though they were not very good, they were far better than those he put off.
They dismounted together by the side of the spring, and with what the curate had provided himself with at the inn they appeased, though not very well, the keen appetite they all of them brought with them.
While they were so employed there happened to come by a youth passing on his way, who stopping to examine the party at the spring, the next moment ran to Don Quixote and clasping him round the legs, began to weep freely, saying, “O, señor, do you not know me?
He was, I say, tied to an oak, naked from the waist up, and a clown, whom I afterwards found to be his master, was scarifying him by lashes with the reins of his mare.
As soon as I saw him I asked the reason of so cruel a flagellation.
The boor replied that he was flogging him because he was his servant and because of carelessness that proceeded rather from dishonesty than stupidity; on which this boy said, ‘Señor, he flogs me only because I ask for my wages.’ The master made I know not what speeches and explanations, which, though I listened to them, I did not accept.
In short, I compelled the clown to unbind him, and to swear he would take him with him, and pay him real by real, and perfumed into the bargain.
Didst thou not mark with what authority I commanded him, and with what humility he promised to do all I enjoined, specified, and required of him?
Dorothea asked him what he meant to do.
He replied that he meant to go in search of this clown and chastise him for such iniquitous conduct, and see Andres paid to the last maravedi, despite and in the teeth of all the clowns in the world.
To which she replied that he must remember that in accordance with his promise he could not engage in any enterprise until he had concluded hers; and that as he knew this better than anyone, he should restrain his ardour until his return from her kingdom.
WHICH TREATS OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE’S PARTY AT THE INN c32a.jpg (132K) Full Size Their dainty repast being finished, they saddled at once, and without any adventure worth mentioning they reached next day the inn, the object of Sancho Panza’s fear and dread; but though he would have rather not entered it, there was no help for it.
The landlady, the landlord, their daughter, and Maritornes, when they saw Don Quixote and Sancho coming, went out to welcome them with signs of hearty satisfaction, which Don Quixote received with dignity and gravity, and bade them make up a better bed for him than the last time: to which the landlady replied that if he paid better than he did the last time she would give him one fit for a prince.
Don Quixote said he would, so they made up a tolerable one for him in the same garret as before; and he lay down at once, being sorely shaken and in want of sleep.
On this the barber cheerfully restored the tail to the landlady, and at the same time they returned all the accessories they had borrowed to effect Don Quixote’s deliverance.
All the people of the inn were struck with astonishment at the beauty of Dorothea, and even at the comely figure of the shepherd Cardenio.
The curate made them get ready such fare as there was in the inn, and the landlord, in hope of better payment, served them up a tolerably good dinner.
All this time Don Quixote was asleep, and they thought it best not to waken him, as sleeping would now do him more good than eating.
“I don’t know what I should do,” said the girl; “I only know that there are some of those ladies so cruel that they call their knights tigers and lions and a thousand other foul names: and Jesus!
I don’t know what sort of folk they can be, so unfeeling and heartless, that rather than bestow a glance upon a worthy man they leave him to die or go mad.
That’s all they want.” “Hush, child,” said the landlady; “it seems to me thou knowest a great deal about these things, and it is not fit for girls to know or talk so much.” “As the gentleman asked me, I could not help answering him,” said the girl.
“Well then,” said the curate, “bring me these books, señor landlord, for I should like to see them.” “With all my heart,” said he, and going into his own room he brought out an old valise secured with a little chain, on opening which the curate found in it three large books and some manuscripts written in a very good hand.
“Only these two,” said the curate, “Don Cirongilio, and Felixmarte.” “Are my books, then, heretics or phlegmatics that you want to burn them?” said the landlord.
“There’s a thing to be astonished at!
Stopping a mill-wheel!
While they were talking Cardenio had taken up the novel and begun to read it, and forming the same opinion of it as the curate, he begged him to read it so that they might all hear it.
But where is such a friend to be found as Lothario would have, so judicious, so loyal, and so true?
For though his integrity and reputation might bridle slanderous tongues, still he was unwilling to hazard either his own good name or that of his friend; and for this reason most of the days agreed upon he devoted to some other business which he pretended was unavoidable; so that a great portion of the day was taken up with complaints on one side and excuses on the other.
It happened, however, that on one occasion when the two were strolling together outside the city, Anselmo addressed the following words to Lothario.
And if the result be the contrary of what I expect, in the satisfaction of knowing that I have been right in my opinion, I shall bear without complaint the pain which my so dearly bought experience will naturally cause me.
True friends will prove their friends and make use of them, as a poet has said, _usque ad aras;_ whereby he meant that they will not make use of their friendship in things that are contrary to God’s will.
If this, then, was a heathen’s feeling about friendship, how much more should it be a Christian’s, who knows that the divine must not be forfeited for the sake of any human friendship?
And if a friend should go so far as to put aside his duty to Heaven to fulfil his duty to his friend, it should not be in matters that are trifling or of little moment, but in such as affect the friend’s life and honour.
Now tell me, Anselmo, in which of these two art thou imperilled, that I should hazard myself to gratify thee, and do a thing so detestable as that thou seekest of me?
And that thou mayest clearly see this, say, Anselmo, hast thou not told me that I must force my suit upon a modest woman, decoy one that is virtuous, make overtures to one that is pure-minded, pay court to one that is prudent?
Then, if thou knowest that thou hast a wife, modest, virtuous, pure-minded and prudent, what is it that thou seekest?
And if thou believest that she will come forth victorious from all my attacks—as doubtless she would—what higher titles than those she possesses now dost thou think thou canst bestow upon her then, or in what will she be better then than she is now?
If thou dost not hold her to be what thou sayest, why dost thou seek to prove her instead of treating her as guilty in the way that may seem best to thee? but if she be as virtuous as thou believest, it is an uncalled-for proceeding to make trial of truth itself, for, after trial, it will but be in the same estimation as before.
Thus, then, it is conclusive that to attempt things from which harm rather than advantage may come to us is the part of unreasoning and reckless minds, more especially when they are things which we are not forced or compelled to attempt, and which show from afar that it is plainly madness to attempt them.
Moreover by what I am about to say to thee thou wilt be led to see the great error thou wouldst commit.
And if thou didst, and if the stone should resist so silly a test, that would add nothing to its value or reputation; and if it were broken, as it might be, would not all be lost?
Undoubtedly it would, leaving its owner to be rated as a fool in the opinion of all.
Remember there is no jewel in the world so precious as a chaste and virtuous woman, and that the whole honour of women consists in reputation; and since thy wife’s is of that high excellence that thou knowest, wherefore shouldst thou seek to call that truth in question?
Remember, my friend, that woman is an imperfect animal, and that impediments are not to be placed in her way to make her trip and fall, but that they should be removed, and her path left clear of all obstacles, so that without hindrance she may run her course freely to attain the desired perfection, which consists in being virtuous.
Naturalists tell us that the ermine is a little animal which has a fur of purest white, and that when the hunters wish to take it, they make use of this artifice.
Having ascertained the places which it frequents and passes, they stop the way to them with mud, and then rousing it, drive it towards the spot, and as soon as the ermine comes to the mud it halts, and allows itself to be taken captive rather than pass through the mire, and spoil and sully its whiteness, which it values more than life and liberty.
A virtuous woman, too, is like a mirror, of clear shining crystal, liable to be tarnished and dimmed by every breath that touches it.
She must be protected and prized as one protects and prizes a fair garden full of roses and flowers, the owner of which allows no one to trespass or pluck a blossom; enough for others that from afar and through the iron grating they may enjoy its fragrance and its beauty.
Finally let me repeat to thee some verses that come to my mind; I heard them in a modern comedy, and it seems to me they bear upon the point we are discussing.
A prudent old man was giving advice to another, the father of a young girl, to lock her up, watch over her and keep her in seclusion, and among other arguments he used these: Woman is a thing of glass; But her brittleness ’tis best Not too curiously to test: Who knows what may come to pass?
Breaking is an easy matter, And it’s folly to expose What you cannot mend to blows; What you can’t make whole to shatter.
“All that I have said to thee so far, Anselmo, has had reference to what concerns thee; now it is right that I should say something of what regards myself; and if I be prolix, pardon me, for the labyrinth into which thou hast entered and from which thou wouldst have me extricate thee makes it necessary.
“Thou dost reckon me thy friend, and thou wouldst rob me of honour, a thing wholly inconsistent with friendship; and not only dost thou aim at this, but thou wouldst have me rob thee of it also.
That thou wouldst rob me of it is clear, for when Camilla sees that I pay court to her as thou requirest, she will certainly regard me as a man without honour or right feeling, since I attempt and do a thing so much opposed to what I owe to my own position and thy friendship.
But I will tell thee why with good reason dishonour attaches to the husband of the unchaste wife, though he know not that she is so, nor be to blame, nor have done anything, or given any provocation to make her so; and be not weary with listening to me, for it will be for thy good.
And such is the force and virtue of this miraculous sacrament that it makes two different persons one and the same flesh; and even more than this when the virtuous are married; for though they have two souls they have but one will.
See, then, Anselmo, the peril thou art encountering in seeking to disturb the peace of thy virtuous consort; see for what an empty and ill-advised curiosity thou wouldst rouse up passions that now repose in quiet in the breast of thy chaste wife; reflect that what thou art staking all to win is little, and what thou wilt lose so much that I leave it undescribed, not having the words to express it.
Anselmo embraced him warmly and affectionately, and thanked him for his offer as if he had bestowed some great favour upon him; and it was agreed between them to set about it the next day, Anselmo affording opportunity and time to Lothario to converse alone with Camilla, and furnishing him with money and jewels to offer and present to her.
He suggested, too, that he should treat her to music, and write verses in her praise, and if he was unwilling to take the trouble of composing them, he offered to do it himself.
Lothario agreed to all with an intention very different from what Anselmo supposed, and with this understanding they returned to Anselmo’s house, where they found Camilla awaiting her husband anxiously and uneasily, for he was later than usual in returning that day.
Lothario repaired to his own house, and Anselmo remained in his, as well satisfied as Lothario was troubled in mind; for he could see no satisfactory way out of this ill-advised business.
The next day he went to dine with his friend, and was welcomed by Camilla, who received and treated him with great cordiality, knowing the affection her husband felt for him.
When dinner was over and the cloth removed, Anselmo told Lothario to stay there with Camilla while he attended to some pressing business, as he would return in an hour and a half.
Camilla begged him not to go, and Lothario offered to accompany him, but nothing could persuade Anselmo, who on the contrary pressed Lothario to remain waiting for him as he had a matter of great importance to discuss with him.
At the same time he bade Camilla not to leave Lothario alone until he came back.
In short he contrived to put so good a face on the reason, or the folly, of his absence that no one could have suspected it was a pretence.
Anselmo took his departure, and Camilla and Lothario were left alone at the table, for the rest of the household had gone to dinner.
All this gave great satisfaction to Anselmo, and he said he would afford the same opportunity every day, but without leaving the house, for he would find things to do at home so that Camilla should not detect the plot.
Thus, then, several days went by, and Lothario, without uttering a word to Camilla, reported to Anselmo that he had talked with her and that he had never been able to draw from her the slightest indication of consent to anything dishonourable, nor even a sign or shadow of hope; on the contrary, he said she would inform her husband of it.
“So far well,” said Anselmo; “Camilla has thus far resisted words; we must now see how she will resist deeds.
The next day he received the four thousand crowns, and with them four thousand perplexities, for he knew not what to say by way of a new falsehood; but in the end he made up his mind to tell him that Camilla stood as firm against gifts and promises as against words, and that there was no use in taking any further trouble, for the time was all spent to no purpose.
Lothario replied that he was not disposed to go on with the business, for she had answered him so angrily and harshly that he had no heart to say anything more to her.
“Ah, Lothario, Lothario,” said Anselmo, “how ill dost thou meet thy obligations to me, and the great confidence I repose in thee!
Anselmo believed him, and to afford him an opportunity more free and less liable to surprise, he resolved to absent himself from his house for eight days, betaking himself to that of a friend of his who lived in a village not far from the city; and, the better to account for his departure to Camilla, he so arranged it that the friend should send him a very pressing invitation.
Unhappy, shortsighted Anselmo, what art thou doing, what art thou plotting, what art thou devising?
Bethink thee thou art working against thyself, plotting thine own dishonour, devising thine own ruin.
Thy wife Camilla is virtuous, thou dost possess her in peace and quietness, no one assails thy happiness, her thoughts wander not beyond the walls of thy house, thou art her heaven on earth, the object of her wishes, the fulfilment of her desires, the measure wherewith she measures her will, making it conform in all things to thine and Heaven’s.
If, then, the mine of her honour, beauty, virtue, and modesty yields thee without labour all the wealth it contains and thou canst wish for, why wilt thou dig the earth in search of fresh veins, of new unknown treasure, risking the collapse of all, since it but rests on the feeble props of her weak nature?
Bethink thee that from him who seeks impossibilities that which is possible may with justice be withheld, as was better expressed by a poet who said: ’Tis mine to seek for life in death, Health in disease seek I, I seek in prison freedom’s breath, In traitors loyalty.
The next day Anselmo took his departure for the village, leaving instructions with Camilla that during his absence Lothario would come to look after his house and to dine with her, and that she was to treat him as she would himself.
Anselmo replied that it was his pleasure to have it so, and that she had only to submit and obey.
The first three days Lothario did not speak to her, though he might have done so when they removed the cloth and the servants retired to dine hastily; for such were Camilla’s orders; nay more, Leonela had directions to dine earlier than Camilla and never to leave her side.
She, however, having her thoughts fixed upon other things more to her taste, and wanting that time and opportunity for her own pleasures, did not always obey her mistress’s commands, but on the contrary left them alone, as if they had ordered her to do so; but the modest bearing of Camilla, the calmness of her countenance, the composure of her aspect were enough to bridle the tongue of Lothario.
But the influence which the many virtues of Camilla exerted in imposing silence on Lothario’s tongue proved mischievous for both of them, for if his tongue was silent his thoughts were busy, and could dwell at leisure upon the perfections of Camilla’s goodness and beauty one by one, charms enough to warm with love a marble statue, not to say a heart of flesh.
Lothario gazed upon her when he might have been speaking to her, and thought how worthy of being loved she was; and thus reflection began little by little to assail his allegiance to Anselmo, and a thousand times he thought of withdrawing from the city and going where Anselmo should never see him nor he see Camilla.
But already the delight he found in gazing on her interposed and held him fast.
IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE NOVEL OF “THE ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY” “It is commonly said that an army looks ill without its general and a castle without its castellan, and I say that a young married woman looks still worse without her husband unless there are very good reasons for it.
Camilla was astonished at Anselmo’s reply, which placed her in greater perplexity than before, for she neither dared to remain in her own house, nor yet to go to her parents’; for in remaining her virtue was imperilled, and in going she was opposing her husband’s commands.
With these resolutions, more honourable than judicious or effectual, she remained the next day listening to Lothario, who pressed his suit so strenuously that Camilla’s firmness began to waver, and her virtue had enough to do to come to the rescue of her eyes and keep them from showing signs of a certain tender compassion which the tears and appeals of Lothario had awakened in her bosom.
Lothario observed all this, and it inflamed him all the more.
In short he felt that while Anselmo’s absence afforded time and opportunity he must press the siege of the fortress, and so he assailed her self-esteem with praises of her beauty, for there is nothing that more quickly reduces and levels the castle towers of fair women’s vanity than vanity itself upon the tongue of flattery.
In fact with the utmost assiduity he undermined the rock of her purity with such engines that had Camilla been of brass she must have fallen.
He wept, he entreated, he promised, he flattered, he importuned, he pretended with so much feeling and apparent sincerity, that he overthrew the virtuous resolves of Camilla and won the triumph he least expected and most longed for.
Camilla yielded, Camilla fell; but what wonder if the friendship of Lothario could not stand firm?
A clear proof to us that the passion of love is to be conquered only by flying from it, and that no one should engage in a struggle with an enemy so mighty; for divine strength is needed to overcome his human power.
Leonela alone knew of her mistress’s weakness, for the two false friends and new lovers were unable to conceal it.
Lothario did not care to tell Camilla the object Anselmo had in view, nor that he had afforded him the opportunity of attaining such a result, lest she should undervalue his love and think that it was by chance and without intending it and not of his own accord that he had made love to her.
A few days later Anselmo returned to his house and did not perceive what it had lost, that which he so lightly treated and so highly prized.
He went at once to see Lothario, and found him at home; they embraced each other, and Anselmo asked for the tidings of his life or his death.
“The tidings I have to give thee, Anselmo my friend,” said Lothario, “are that thou dost possess a wife that is worthy to be the pattern and crown of all good wives.
The words that I have addressed to her were borne away on the wind, my promises have been despised, my presents have been refused, such feigned tears as I shed have been turned into open ridicule.
In short, as Camilla is the essence of all beauty, so is she the treasure-house where purity dwells, and gentleness and modesty abide with all the virtues that can confer praise, honour, and happiness upon a woman.
Take back thy money, my friend; here it is, and I have had no need to touch it, for the chastity of Camilla yields not to things so base as gifts or promises.
“That will not be necessary,” said Lothario, “for the muses are not such enemies of mine but that they visit me now and then in the course of the year.
Camilla replied that it had seemed to her that Lothario looked at her somewhat more freely than when he had been at home; but that now she was undeceived and believed it to have been only her own imagination, for Lothario now avoided seeing her, or being alone with her.
Anselmo told her she might be quite easy on the score of that suspicion, for he knew that Lothario was in love with a damsel of rank in the city whom he celebrated under the name of Chloris, and that even if he were not, his fidelity and their great friendship left no room for fear.
Had not Camilla, however, been informed beforehand by Lothario that this love for Chloris was a pretence, and that he himself had told Anselmo of it in order to be able sometimes to give utterance to the praises of Camilla herself, no doubt she would have fallen into the despairing toils of jealousy; but being forewarned she received the startling news without uneasiness.
The next day as the three were at table Anselmo asked Lothario to recite something of what he had composed for his mistress Chloris; for as Camilla did not know her, he might safely say what he liked.
And when the light of day returning dyes The portals of the east with tints of rose, With undiminished force my sorrow flows In broken accents and in burning sighs.
Yet ever in my agony it seems To me that neither Heaven nor Chloris hears.” The sonnet pleased Camilla, and still more Anselmo, for he praised it and said the lady was excessively cruel who made no return for sincerity so manifest.
“I do,” replied Lothario, “but I do not think it as good as the first one, or, more correctly speaking, less bad; but you can easily judge, for it is this.
SONNET I know that I am doomed; death is to me As certain as that thou, ungrateful fair, Dead at thy feet shouldst see me lying, ere My heart repented of its love for thee.
If buried in oblivion I should be, Bereft of life, fame, favour, even there It would be found that I thy image bear Deep graven in my breast for all to see.
It so happened that finding herself on one occasion alone with her maid, Camilla said to her, “I am ashamed to think, my dear Leonela, how lightly I have valued myself that I did not compel Lothario to purchase by at least some expenditure of time that full possession of me that I so quickly yielded him of my own free will.
All this I know well myself, more by experience than by hearsay, and some day, señora, I will enlighten you on the subject, for I am of your flesh and blood too.
Moreover, lady Camilla, you did not surrender yourself or yield so quickly but that first you saw Lothario’s whole soul in his eyes, in his sighs, in his words, his promises and his gifts, and by it and his good qualities perceived how worthy he was of your love.
Camilla was uneasy at this, dreading lest it might prove the means of endangering her honour, and asked whether her intrigue had gone beyond words, and she with little shame and much effrontery said it had; for certain it is that ladies’ imprudences make servants shameless, who, when they see their mistresses make a false step, think nothing of going astray themselves, or of its being known.
All that Camilla could do was to entreat Leonela to say nothing about her doings to him whom she called her lover, and to conduct her own affairs secretly lest they should come to the knowledge of Anselmo or of Lothario.
Know that Camilla’s fortress has surrendered and is ready to submit to my will; and if I have been slow to reveal this fact to thee, it was in order to see if it were some light caprice of hers, or if she sought to try me and ascertain if the love I began to make to her with thy permission was made with a serious intention.
He cursed his want of sense, condemned his hasty resolution, and knew not what course to take to undo the mischief or find some ready escape from it.
Lothario pressed her to explain her intention fully, so that he might with more certainty and precaution take care to do what he saw to be needful.
“I tell you,” said Camilla, “there is nothing to take care of except to answer me what I shall ask you;” for she did not wish to explain to him beforehand what she meant to do, fearing lest he should be unwilling to follow out an idea which seemed to her such a good one, and should try or devise some other less practicable plan.
But no; there is no reason why I should suffer the punishment of another’s fault.
I will first know what it is that the bold licentious eyes of Lothario have seen in me that could have encouraged him to reveal to me a design so base as that which he has disclosed regardless of his friend and of my honour.
Go to the window, Leonela, and call him, for no doubt he is in the street waiting to carry out his vile project; but mine, cruel it may be, but honourable, shall be carried out first.” “Ah, señora,” said the crafty Leonela, who knew her part, “what is it you want to do with this dagger?
Can it be that you mean to take your own life, or Lothario’s? for whichever you mean to do, it will lead to the loss of your reputation and good name.
It is better to dissemble your wrong and not give this wicked man the chance of entering the house now and finding us alone; consider, señora, we are weak women and he is a man, and determined, and as he comes with such a base purpose, blind and urged by passion, perhaps before you can put yours into execution he may do what will be worse for you than taking your life.
Ill betide my master, Anselmo, for giving such authority in his house to this shameless fellow!
And supposing you kill him, señora, as I suspect you mean to do, what shall we do with him when he is dead?” “What, my friend?” replied Camilla, “we shall leave him for Anselmo to bury him; for in reason it will be to him a light labour to hide his own infamy under ground.
Camilla was not long in recovering from her fainting fit and on coming to herself she said, “Why do you not go, Leonela, to call hither that friend, the falsest to his friend the sun ever shone upon or night concealed?
No doubt it would have been better; but I should not be avenged, nor the honour of my husband vindicated, should he find so clear and easy an escape from the strait into which his depravity has led him.
Let the traitor pay with his life for the temerity of his wanton wishes, and let the world know (if haply it shall ever come to know) that Camilla not only preserved her allegiance to her husband, but avenged him of the man who dared to wrong him.
Still, I think it might be better to disclose this to Anselmo.
Does a bold determination stand in need of arguments?
Then traitors avaunt!
Vengeance to my aid!
Let the false one come, approach, advance, die, yield up his life, and then befall what may.
First, I desire thee to tell me, Lothario, if thou knowest my husband Anselmo, and in what light thou regardest him; and secondly I desire to know if thou knowest me too.
But, woe is me, I now comprehend what has made thee give so little heed to what thou owest to thyself; it must have been some freedom of mine, for I will not call it immodesty, as it did not proceed from any deliberate intention, but from some heedlessness such as women are guilty of through inadvertence when they think they have no occasion for reserve.
But tell me, traitor, when did I by word or sign give a reply to thy prayers that could awaken in thee a shadow of hope of attaining thy base wishes?
When were not thy professions of love sternly and scornfully rejected and rebuked?
When were thy frequent pledges and still more frequent gifts believed or accepted?
But as I am persuaded that no one can long persevere in the attempt to win love unsustained by some hope, I am willing to attribute to myself the blame of thy assurance, for no doubt some thoughtlessness of mine has all this time fostered thy hopes; and therefore will I punish myself and inflict upon myself the penalty thy guilt deserves.
Leonela and Lothario stood amazed and astounded at the catastrophe, and seeing Camilla stretched on the ground and bathed in her blood they were still uncertain as to the true nature of the act.
Leonela took her up in her arms and laid her on the bed, entreating Lothario to go in quest of someone to attend to her wound in secret, and at the same time asking his advice and opinion as to what they should say to Anselmo about his lady’s wound if he should chance to return before it was healed.
He reflected how convinced Anselmo would be that he had a second Portia for a wife, and he looked forward anxiously to meeting him in order to rejoice together over falsehood and truth the most craftily veiled that could be imagined.
Leonela, as he told her, stanched her lady’s blood, which was no more than sufficed to support her deception; and washing the wound with a little wine she bound it up to the best of her skill, talking all the time she was tending her in a strain that, even if nothing else had been said before, would have been enough to assure Anselmo that he had in Camilla a model of purity.
To Leonela’s words Camilla added her own, calling herself cowardly and wanting in spirit, since she had not enough at the time she had most need of it to rid herself of the life she so much loathed.
Camilla replied that she believed she was right and that she would follow her advice, but at any rate it would be well to consider how she was to explain the wound to Anselmo, for he could not help seeing it; to which Leonela answered that she did not know how to tell a lie even in jest.
“How then can I know, my dear?” said Camilla, “for I should not dare to forge or keep up a falsehood if my life depended on it.
He longed for night and an opportunity of escaping from the house to go and see his good friend Lothario, and with him give vent to his joy over the precious pearl he had gained in having established his wife’s purity.
Lothario commended his purpose, and promised on his own part to aid him in raising a monument so glorious.
And so Anselmo was left the most charmingly hoodwinked man there could be in the world.
He himself, persuaded he was conducting the instrument of his glory, led home by the hand of him who had been the utter destruction of his good name; whom Camilla received with averted countenance, though with smiles in her heart.
The deception was carried on for some time, until at the end of a few months Fortune turned her wheel and the guilt which had been until then so skilfully concealed was published abroad, and Anselmo paid with his life the penalty of his ill-advised curiosity.
By the living God he has given the giant, the enemy of my lady the Princess Micomicona, such a slash that he has sliced his head clean off as if it were a turnip.” “What are you talking about, brother?” said the curate, pausing as he was about to read the remainder of the novel.
How the devil can it be as you say, when the giant is two thousand leagues away?” Here they heard a loud noise in the chamber, and Don Quixote shouting out, “Stand, thief, brigand, villain; now I have got thee, and thy scimitar shall not avail thee!” And then it seemed as though he were slashing vigorously at the wall.
For his imagination was so wrought upon by the adventure he was going to accomplish, that it made him dream he had already reached the kingdom of Micomicon, and was engaged in combat with his enemy; and believing he was laying on the giant, he had given so many sword cuts to the skins that the whole room was full of wine.
On seeing this the landlord was so enraged that he fell on Don Quixote, and with his clenched fist began to pummel him in such a way, that if Cardenio and the curate had not dragged him off, he would have brought the war of the giant to an end.
But in spite of all the poor gentleman never woke until the barber brought a great pot of cold water from the well and flung it with one dash all over his body, on which Don Quixote woke up, but not so completely as to understand what was the matter.
Dorothea, seeing how short and slight his attire was, would not go in to witness the battle between her champion and her opponent.
The landlord was beside himself at the coolness of the squire and the mischievous doings of the master, and swore it should not be like the last time when they went without paying; and that their privileges of chivalry should not hold good this time to let one or other of them off without paying, even to the cost of the plugs that would have to be put to the damaged wine-skins.
“You see I wasn’t drunk; there you see my master has already salted the giant; there’s no doubt about the bulls; my county is all right!” Who could have helped laughing at the absurdities of the pair, master and man?
And laugh they did, all except the landlord, who cursed himself; but at length the barber, Cardenio, and the curate contrived with no small trouble to get Don Quixote on the bed, and he fell asleep with every appearance of excessive weariness.
But let him not deceive himself, for, by the bones of my father and the shade of my mother, they shall pay me down every quarto; or my name is not what it is, and I am not my father’s daughter.” All this and more to the same effect the landlady delivered with great irritation, and her good maid Maritornes backed her up, while the daughter held her peace and smiled from time to time.
The curate smoothed matters by promising to make good all losses to the best of his power, not only as regarded the wine-skins but also the wine, and above all the depreciation of the tail which they set such store by.
Dorothea comforted Sancho, telling him that she pledged herself, as soon as it should appear certain that his master had decapitated the giant, and she found herself peacefully established in her kingdom, to bestow upon him the best county there was in it.
With this Sancho consoled himself, and assured the princess she might rely upon it that he had seen the head of the giant, and more by token it had a beard that reached to the girdle, and that if it was not to be seen now it was because everything that happened in that house went by enchantment, as he himself had proved the last time he had lodged there.
Dorothea said she fully believed it, and that he need not be uneasy, for all would go well and turn out as he wished.
All therefore being appeased, the curate was anxious to go on with the novel, as he saw there was but little more left to read.
But the befooled Anselmo said he would on no account allow such a thing, and so in a thousand ways he became the author of his own dishonour, while he believed he was insuring his happiness.
Meanwhile the satisfaction with which Leonela saw herself empowered to carry on her amour reached such a height that, regardless of everything else, she followed her inclinations unrestrainedly, feeling confident that her mistress would screen her, and even show her how to manage it safely.
At last one night Anselmo heard footsteps in Leonela’s room, and on trying to enter to see who it was, he found that the door was held against him, which made him all the more determined to open it; and exerting his strength he forced it open, and entered the room in time to see a man leaping through the window into the street.
She, in her fear, not knowing what she was saying, exclaimed, “Do not kill me, señor, for I can tell you things more important than any you can imagine.” “Tell me then at once or thou diest,” said Anselmo.
He went at once to see Camilla, and tell her, as he did, all that had passed between him and her handmaid, and the promise she had given him to inform him matters of serious importance.
The state of perplexity to which Camilla reduced Lothario was such that he was unable to utter a word in reply, still less to decide upon what he should do.
At length he resolved to conduct her to a convent of which a sister of his was prioress; Camilla agreed to this, and with the speed which the circumstances demanded, Lothario took her to the convent and left her there, and then himself quitted the city without letting anyone know of his departure.
As soon as daylight came Anselmo, without missing Camilla from his side, rose eager to learn what Leonela had to tell him, and hastened to the room where he had locked her in.
He returned, uneasy, to tell Camilla, but not finding her in bed or anywhere in the house he was lost in amazement.
He asked the servants of the house about her, but none of them could give him any explanation.
He knew not what to think, or say, or do, and his reason seemed to be deserting him little by little.
He reviewed his position, and saw himself in a moment left without wife, friend, or servants, abandoned, he felt, by the heaven above him, and more than all robbed of his honour, for in Camilla’s disappearance he saw his own ruin.
After long reflection he resolved at last to go to his friend’s village, where he had been staying when he afforded opportunities for the contrivance of this complication of misfortune.
The citizen replied, “The strangest that have been heard for many a day; for it is reported abroad that Lothario, the great friend of the wealthy Anselmo, who lived at San Giovanni, carried off last night Camilla, the wife of Anselmo, who also has disappeared.
All this has been told by a maid-servant of Camilla’s, whom the governor found last night lowering herself by a sheet from the windows of Anselmo’s house.
This disastrous intelligence almost robbed Anselmo not only of his senses but of his life.
He got up as well as he was able and reached the house of his friend, who as yet knew nothing of his misfortune, but seeing him come pale, worn, and haggard, perceived that he was suffering some heavy affliction.
Anselmo at once begged to be allowed to retire to rest, and to be given writing materials.
His wish was complied with and he was left lying down and alone, for he desired this, and even that the door should be locked.
Finding himself alone he so took to heart the thought of his misfortune that by the signs of death he felt within him he knew well his life was drawing to a close, and therefore he resolved to leave behind him a declaration of the cause of his strange end.
He began to write, but before he had put down all he meant to say, his breath failed him and he yielded up his life, a victim to the suffering which his ill-advised curiosity had entailed upon him.
The master of the house observing that it was now late and that Anselmo did not call, determined to go in and ascertain if his indisposition was increasing, and found him lying on his face, his body partly in the bed, partly on the writing-table, on which he lay with the written paper open and the pen still in his hand.
Having first called to him without receiving any answer, his host approached him, and taking him by the hand, found that it was cold, and saw that he was dead.
Greatly surprised and distressed he summoned the household to witness the sad fate which had befallen Anselmo; and then he read the paper, the handwriting of which he recognised as his, and which contained these words: “A foolish and ill-advised desire has robbed me of life.
If the news of my death should reach the ears of Camilla, let her know that I forgive her, for she was not bound to perform miracles, nor ought I to have required her to perform them; and since I have been the author of my own dishonour, there is no reason why—” So far Anselmo had written, and thus it was plain that at this point, before he could finish what he had to say, his life came to an end.
The next day his friend sent intelligence of his death to his relatives, who had already ascertained his misfortune, as well as the convent where Camilla lay almost on the point of accompanying her husband on that inevitable journey, not on account of the tidings of his death, but because of those she received of her lover’s departure.
Although she saw herself a widow, it is said she refused either to quit the convent or take the veil, until, not long afterwards, intelligence reached her that Lothario had been killed in a battle in which M. de Lautrec had been recently engaged with the Great Captain Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordova in the kingdom of Naples, whither her too late repentant lover had repaired.
On learning this Camilla took the veil, and shortly afterwards died, worn out by grief and melancholy.
This was the end of all three, an end that came of a thoughtless beginning.
“I like this novel,” said the curate; “but I cannot persuade myself of its truth; and if it has been invented, the author’s invention is faulty, for it is impossible to imagine any husband so foolish as to try such a costly experiment as Anselmo’s.
If it had been represented as occurring between a gallant and his mistress it might pass; but between husband and wife there is something of an impossibility about it.
WHICH TREATS OF MORE CURIOUS INCIDENTS THAT OCCURRED AT THE INN c36a.jpg (124K) Full Size Just at that instant the landlord, who was standing at the gate of the inn, exclaimed, “Here comes a fine troop of guests; if they stop here we may say _gaudeamus_.” “What are they?” said Cardenio.
“Four men,” said the landlord, “riding _à la jineta_, with lances and bucklers, and all with black veils, and with them there is a woman in white on a side-saddle, whose face is also veiled, and two attendants on foot.” “Are they very near?” said the curate.
The attendants on foot then led the horses away to the stable.
Observing this the curate, curious to know who these people in such a dress and preserving such silence were, went to where the servants were standing and put the question to one of them, who answered him.
“Faith, sir, I cannot tell you who they are, I only know they seem to be people of distinction, particularly he who advanced to take the lady you saw in his arms; and I say so because all the rest show him respect, and nothing is done except what he directs and orders.” “And the lady, who is she?” asked the curate.
What voice is this that has reached my ears?” Startled at the voice the lady turned her head; and not seeing the speaker she stood up and attempted to enter the room; observing which the gentleman held her back, preventing her from moving a step.
The gentleman grasped her firmly by the shoulders, and being so fully occupied with holding her back, he was unable to put a hand to his veil which was falling off, as it did at length entirely, and Dorothea, who was holding the lady in her arms, raising her eyes saw that he who likewise held her was her husband, Don Fernando.
The instant she recognised him, with a prolonged plaintive cry drawn from the depths of her heart, she fell backwards fainting, and but for the barber being close by to catch her in his arms, she would have fallen completely to the ground.
The curate at once hastened to uncover her face and throw water on it, and as he did so Don Fernando, for he it was who held the other in his arms, recognised her and stood as if death-stricken by the sight; not, however, relaxing his grasp of Luscinda, for it was she that was struggling to release herself from his hold, having recognised Cardenio by his voice, as he had recognised her.
Cardenio also heard Dorothea’s cry as she fell fainting, and imagining that it came from his Luscinda burst forth in terror from the room, and the first thing he saw was Don Fernando with Luscinda in his arms.
Don Fernando, too, knew Cardenio at once; and all three, Luscinda, Cardenio, and Dorothea, stood in silent amazement scarcely knowing what had happened to them.
They gazed at one another without speaking, Dorothea at Don Fernando, Don Fernando at Cardenio, Cardenio at Luscinda, and Luscinda at Cardenio.
The first to break silence was Luscinda, who thus addressed Don Fernando: “Leave me, Señor Don Fernando, for the sake of what you owe to yourself; if no other reason will induce you, leave me to cling to the wall of which I am the ivy, to the support from which neither your importunities, nor your threats, nor your promises, nor your gifts have been able to detach me.
See how Heaven, by ways strange and hidden from our sight, has brought me face to face with my true husband; and well you know by dear-bought experience that death alone will be able to efface him from my memory.
Nevertheless, I would not have thee suppose that I have come here driven by my shame; it is only grief and sorrow at seeing myself forgotten by thee that have led me.
It was thy will to make me thine, and thou didst so follow thy will, that now, even though thou repentest, thou canst not help being mine.
Bethink thee, my lord, the unsurpassable affection I bear thee may compensate for the beauty and noble birth for which thou wouldst desert me.
Thou canst not be the fair Luscinda’s because thou art mine, nor can she be thine because she is Cardenio’s; and it will be easier, remember, to bend thy will to love one who adores thee, than to lead one to love thee who abhors thee now.
And if thou wilt not have me for what I am, thy true and lawful wife, at least take and accept me as thy slave, for so long as I am thine I will count myself happy and fortunate.
Don Fernando listened to her without replying, until, ceasing to speak, she gave way to such sobs and sighs that it must have been a heart of brass that was not softened by the sight of so great sorrow.
Luscinda stood regarding her with no less compassion for her sufferings than admiration for her intelligence and beauty, and would have gone to her to say some words of comfort to her, but was prevented by Don Fernando’s grasp which held her fast.
He bade him, too, turn his eyes upon the beauty of Dorothea and he would see that few if any could equal much less excel her; while to that beauty should be added her modesty and the surpassing love she bore him.
Not so Luscinda, and Cardenio, and almost all the others, for they shed so many tears, some in their own happiness, some at that of the others, that one would have supposed a heavy calamity had fallen upon them all.
Even Sancho Panza was weeping; though afterwards he said he only wept because he saw that Dorothea was not as he fancied the queen Micomicona, of whom he expected such great favours.
Their wonder as well as their weeping lasted some time, and then Cardenio and Luscinda went and fell on their knees before Don Fernando, returning him thanks for the favour he had rendered them in language so grateful that he knew not how to answer them, and raising them up embraced them with every mark of affection and courtesy.
He then asked Dorothea how she had managed to reach a place so far removed from her own home, and she in a few fitting words told all that she had previously related to Cardenio, with which Don Fernando and his companions were so delighted that they wished the story had been longer; so charmingly did Dorothea describe her misadventures.
When she had finished Don Fernando recounted what had befallen him in the city after he had found in Luscinda’s bosom the paper in which she declared that she was Cardenio’s wife, and never could be his.
He said he meant to kill her, and would have done so had he not been prevented by her parents, and that he quitted the house full of rage and shame, and resolved to avenge himself when a more convenient opportunity should offer.
The next day he learned that Luscinda had disappeared from her father’s house, and that no one could tell whither she had gone.
He added that when Luscinda found herself in his power she lost all consciousness, and after returning to herself did nothing but weep and sigh without speaking a word; and thus in silence and tears they reached that inn, which for him was reaching heaven where all the mischances of earth are over and at an end. c36b.jpg (319K) Full Size c36e.jpg (36K) CHAPTER XXXVII.
Dorothea was unable to persuade herself that her present happiness was not all a dream; Cardenio was in a similar state of mind, and Luscinda’s thoughts ran in the same direction.
Don Fernando gave thanks to Heaven for the favour shown to him and for having been rescued from the intricate labyrinth in which he had been brought so near the destruction of his good name and of his soul; and in short everybody in the inn was full of contentment and satisfaction at the happy issue of such a complicated and hopeless business.
The curate as a sensible man made sound reflections upon the whole affair, and congratulated each upon his good fortune; but the one that was in the highest spirits and good humour was the landlady, because of the promise Cardenio and the curate had given her to pay for all the losses and damage she had sustained through Don Quixote’s means.
He described to them also nearly all the adventures that Sancho had mentioned, at which they marvelled and laughed not a little, thinking it, as all did, the strangest form of madness a crazy intellect could be capable of.
But now, the curate said, that the lady Dorothea’s good fortune prevented her from proceeding with their purpose, it would be necessary to devise or discover some other way of getting him home.
Cardenio proposed to carry out the scheme they had begun, and suggested that Luscinda would act and support Dorothea’s part sufficiently well.
“No,” said Don Fernando, “that must not be, for I want Dorothea to follow out this idea of hers; and if the worthy gentleman’s village is not very far off, I shall be happy if I can do anything for his relief.” “It is not more than two days’ journey from this,” said the curate.
“Even if it were more,” said Don Fernando, “I would gladly travel so far for the sake of doing so good a work.” At this moment Don Quixote came out in full panoply, with Mambrino’s helmet, all dinted as it was, on his head, his buckler on his arm, and leaning on his staff or pike.
The strange figure he presented filled Don Fernando and the rest with amazement as they contemplated his lean yellow face half a league long, his armour of all sorts, and the solemnity of his deportment.
They stood silent waiting to see what he would say, and he, fixing his eyes on the fair Dorothea, addressed her with great gravity and composure: “I am informed, fair lady, by my squire here that your greatness has been annihilated and your being abolished, since, from a queen and lady of high degree as you used to be, you have been turned into a private maiden.
It is true that certain strokes of good fortune, that have given me more than I could have hoped for, have made some alteration in me; but I have not therefore ceased to be what I was before, or to entertain the same desire I have had all through of availing myself of the might of your valiant and invincible arm.
All that remains is to set out on our journey to-morrow, for to-day we could not make much way; and for the rest of the happy result I am looking forward to, I trust to God and the valour of your heart.” So said the sprightly Dorothea, and on hearing her Don Quixote turned to Sancho, and said to him, with an angry air, “I declare now, little Sancho, thou art the greatest little villain in Spain.
Say, thief and vagabond, hast thou not just now told me that this princess had been turned into a maiden called Dorothea, and that the head which I am persuaded I cut off from a giant was the bitch that bore thee, and other nonsense that put me in the greatest perplexity I have ever been in all my life?
Behind him, mounted upon an ass, there came a woman dressed in Moorish fashion, with her face veiled and a scarf on her head, and wearing a little brocaded cap, and a mantle that covered her from her shoulders to her feet.
The man was of a robust and well-proportioned frame, in age a little over forty, rather swarthy in complexion, with long moustaches and a full beard, and, in short, his appearance was such that if he had been well dressed he would have been taken for a person of quality and good birth.
On entering he asked for a room, and when they told him there was none in the inn he seemed distressed, and approaching her who by her dress seemed to be a Moor, he took her down from the saddle in his arms.
From her silence they concluded that she must be a Moor and unable to speak a Christian tongue.
Dorothea took the Moorish lady by the hand and leading her to a seat beside herself, requested her to remove her veil.
And as it is the privilege and charm of beauty to win the heart and secure good-will, all forthwith became eager to show kindness and attention to the lovely Moor.
Luscinda embraced her affectionately, saying, “Yes, yes, Maria, Maria,” to which the Moor replied, “Yes, yes, Maria; Zoraida macange,” which means “not Zoraida.” Night was now approaching, and by the orders of those who accompanied Don Fernando the landlord had taken care and pains to prepare for them the best supper that was in his power.
The hour therefore having arrived they all took their seats at a long table like a refectory one, for round or square table there was none in the inn, and the seat of honour at the head of it, though he was for refusing it, they assigned to Don Quixote, who desired the lady Micomicona to place herself by his side, as he was her protector.
Luscinda and Zoraida took their places next her, opposite to them were Don Fernando and Cardenio, and next the captive and the other gentlemen, and by the side of the ladies, the curate and the barber.
And so they supped in high enjoyment, which was increased when they observed Don Quixote leave off eating, and, moved by an impulse like that which made him deliver himself at such length when he supped with the goatherds, begin to address them: “Verily, gentlemen, if we reflect upon it, great and marvellous are the things they see, who make profession of the order of knight-errantry.
Say, what being is there in this world, who entering the gate of this castle at this moment, and seeing us as we are here, would suppose or imagine us to be what we are?
Who would say that this lady who is beside me was the great queen that we all know her to be, or that I am that Knight of the Rueful Countenance, trumpeted far and wide by the mouth of Fame?
Now, there can be no doubt that this art and calling surpasses all those that mankind has invented, and is the more deserving of being held in honour in proportion as it is the more exposed to peril.
Away with those who assert that letters have the preeminence over arms; I will tell them, whosoever they may be, that they know not what they say.
Nay; see whether by bodily strength it be possible to learn or divine the intentions of the enemy, his plans, stratagems, or obstacles, or to ward off impending mischief; for all these are the work of the mind, and in them the body has no share whatever.
Since, therefore, arms have need of the mind, as much as letters, let us see now which of the two minds, that of the man of letters or that of the warrior, has most to do; and this will be seen by the end and goal that each seeks to attain; for that purpose is the more estimable which has for its aim the nobler object.
I will not go into other particulars, as for example want of shirts, and no superabundance of shoes, thin and threadbare garments, and gorging themselves to surfeit in their voracity when good luck has treated them to a banquet of some sort.
To be sure he looks forward to the approach of night to make up for all these discomforts on the bed that awaits him, which, unless by some fault of his, never sins by being over narrow, for he can easily measure out on the ground as he likes, and roll himself about in it to his heart’s content without any fear of the sheets slipping away from him.
Then, after all this, suppose the day and hour for taking his degree in his calling to have come; suppose the day of battle to have arrived, when they invest him with the doctor’s cap made of lint, to mend some bullet-hole, perhaps, that has gone through his temples, or left him with a crippled arm or leg.
Or if this does not happen, and merciful Heaven watches over him and keeps him safe and sound, it may be he will be in the same poverty he was in before, and he must go through more engagements and more battles, and come victorious out of all before he betters himself; but miracles of that sort are seldom seen.
For tell me, sirs, if you have ever reflected upon it, by how much do those who have gained by war fall short of the number of those who have perished in it?
No doubt you will reply that there can be no comparison, that the dead cannot be numbered, while the living who have been rewarded may be summed up with three figures.
But against all this it may be urged that it is easier to reward two thousand soldiers, for the former may be remunerated by giving them places, which must perforce be conferred upon men of their calling, while the latter can only be recompensed out of the very property of the master they serve; but this impossibility only strengthens my argument.
And then it is plain that whatever costs most is valued and deserves to be valued most.
To attain to eminence in letters costs a man time, watching, hunger, nakedness, headaches, indigestions, and other things of the sort, some of which I have already referred to.
But for a man to come in the ordinary course of things to be a good soldier costs him all the student suffers, and in an incomparably higher degree, for at every step he runs the risk of losing his life.
For what dread of want or poverty that can reach or harass the student can compare with what the soldier feels, who finds himself beleaguered in some stronghold mounting guard in some ravelin or cavalier, knows that the enemy is pushing a mine towards the post where he is stationed, and cannot under any circumstances retire or fly from the imminent danger that threatens him?
All he can do is to inform his captain of what is going on so that he may try to remedy it by a counter-mine, and then stand his ground in fear and expectation of the moment when he will fly up to the clouds without wings and descend into the deep against his will.
And what is still more marvellous, no sooner has one gone down into the depths he will never rise from till the end of the world, than another takes his place; and if he too falls into the sea that waits for him like an enemy, another and another will succeed him without a moment’s pause between their deaths: courage and daring the greatest that all the chances of war can show.
It excited fresh pity in those who had heard him to see a man of apparently sound sense, and with rational views on every subject he discussed, so hopelessly wanting in all, when his wretched unlucky chivalry was in question.
The curate told him he was quite right in all he had said in favour of arms, and that he himself, though a man of letters and a graduate, was of the same opinion.
To this the captive replied that he would very willingly yield to his request, only he feared his tale would not give them as much pleasure as he wished; nevertheless, not to be wanting in compliance, he would tell it.
This tendency of his to be liberal and profuse he had acquired from having been a soldier in his youth, for the soldier’s life is a school in which the niggard becomes free-handed and the free-handed prodigal; and if any soldiers are to be found who are misers, they are monsters of rare occurrence.
My father went beyond liberality and bordered on prodigality, a disposition by no means advantageous to a married man who has children to succeed to his name and position.
My father had three, all sons, and all of sufficient age to make choice of a profession.
But I wish each of you on taking possession of the share that falls to him to follow one of the paths I shall indicate.
Eight days hence I will give you your full shares in money, without defrauding you of a farthing, as you will see in the end.
My second brother having made the same proposal, decided upon going to the Indies, embarking the portion that fell to him in trade.
The youngest, and in my opinion the wisest, said he would rather follow the church, or go to complete his studies at Salamanca.
My two brothers, moved by my example, gave him each a thousand ducats, so that there was left for my father four thousand ducats in money, besides three thousand, the value of the portion that fell to him which he preferred to retain in land instead of selling it.
Finally, as I said, we took leave of him, and of our uncle whom I have mentioned, not without sorrow and tears on both sides, they charging us to let them know whenever an opportunity offered how we fared, whether well or ill.
We promised to do so, and when he had embraced us and given us his blessing, one set out for Salamanca, the other for Seville, and I for Alicante, where I had heard there was a Genoese vessel taking in a cargo of wool for Genoa.
It is now some twenty-two years since I left my father’s house, and all that time, though I have written several letters, I have had no news whatever of him or of my brothers; my own adventures during that period I will now relate briefly.
I embarked at Alicante, reached Genoa after a prosperous voyage, and proceeded thence to Milan, where I provided myself with arms and a few soldier’s accoutrements; thence it was my intention to go and take service in Piedmont, but as I was already on the road to Alessandria della Paglia, I learned that the great Duke of Alva was on his way to Flanders.
I changed my plans, joined him, served under him in the campaigns he made, was present at the deaths of the Counts Egmont and Horn, and was promoted to be ensign under a famous captain of Guadalajara, Diego de Urbina by name.
Some time after my arrival in Flanders news came of the league that his Holiness Pope Pius V. of happy memory, had made with Venice and Spain against the common enemy, the Turk, who had just then with his fleet taken the famous island of Cyprus, which belonged to the Venetians, a loss deplorable and disastrous.
They carried me to Constantinople, where the Grand Turk, Selim, made my master general at sea for having done his duty in the battle and carried off as evidence of his bravery the standard of the Order of Malta.
The following year, which was the year seventy-two, I found myself at Navarino rowing in the leading galley with the three lanterns.
There I saw and observed how the opportunity of capturing the whole Turkish fleet in harbour was lost; for all the marines and janizzaries that belonged to it made sure that they were about to be attacked inside the very harbour, and had their kits and pasamaques, or shoes, ready to flee at once on shore without waiting to be assailed, in so great fear did they stand of our fleet.
But Heaven ordered it otherwise, not for any fault or neglect of the general who commanded on our side, but for the sins of Christendom, and because it was God’s will and pleasure that we should always have instruments of punishment to chastise us.
As it was, El Uchali took refuge at Modon, which is an island near Navarino, and landing forces fortified the mouth of the harbour and waited quietly until Don John retired.
On this expedition was taken the galley called the Prize, whose captain was a son of the famous corsair Barbarossa.
It was taken by the chief Neapolitan galley called the She-wolf, commanded by that thunderbolt of war, that father of his men, that successful and unconquered captain Don Álvaro de Bazan, Marquis of Santa Cruz; and I cannot help telling you what took place at the capture of the Prize.
We returned to Constantinople, and the following year, seventy-three, it became known that Don John had seized Tunis and taken the kingdom from the Turks, and placed Muley Hamet in possession, putting an end to the hopes which Muley Hamida, the cruelest and bravest Moor in the world, entertained of returning to reign there.
The Grand Turk took the loss greatly to heart, and with the cunning which all his race possess, he made peace with the Venetians (who were much more eager for it than he was), and the following year, seventy-four, he attacked the Goletta and the fort which Don John had left half built near Tunis.
While all these events were occurring, I was labouring at the oar without any hope of freedom; at least I had no hope of obtaining it by ransom, for I was firmly resolved not to write to my father telling him of my misfortunes.
At length the Goletta fell, and the fort fell, before which places there were seventy-five thousand regular Turkish soldiers, and more than four hundred thousand Moors and Arabs from all parts of Africa, and in the train of all this great host such munitions and engines of war, and so many pioneers that with their hands they might have covered the Goletta and the fort with handfuls of earth.
And how is it possible to help losing a stronghold that is not relieved, above all when surrounded by a host of determined enemies in their own country?
The fort also fell; but the Turks had to win it inch by inch, for the soldiers who defended it fought so gallantly and stoutly that the number of the enemy killed in twenty-two general assaults exceeded twenty-five thousand.
Of three hundred that remained alive not one was taken unwounded, a clear and manifest proof of their gallantry and resolution, and how sturdily they had defended themselves and held their post.
A small fort or tower which was in the middle of the lagoon under the command of Don Juan Zanoguera, a Valencian gentleman and a famous soldier, capitulated upon terms.
They took prisoner Don Pedro Puertocarrero, commandant of the Goletta, who had done all in his power to defend his fortress, and took the loss of it so much to heart that he died of grief on the way to Constantinople, where they were carrying him a prisoner.
They also took the commandant of the fort, Gabrio Cerbellon by name, a Milanese gentleman, a great engineer and a very brave soldier.
In these two fortresses perished many persons of note, among whom was Pagano Doria, knight of the Order of St.
I say so because his fate brought him to my galley and to my bench, and made him a slave to the same master; and before we left the port this gentleman composed two sonnets by way of epitaphs, one on the Goletta and the other on the fort; indeed, I may as well repeat them, for I have them by heart, and I think they will be liked rather than disliked.
Though vanquished, yet ye earned the victor’s crown: Though mourned, yet still triumphant was your fall For there ye won, between the sword and wall, In Heaven glory and on earth renown.” “That is it exactly, according to my recollection,” said the captive.
“Well then, that on the fort,” said the gentleman, “if my memory serves me, goes thus: SONNET “Up from this wasted soil, this shattered shell, Whose walls and towers here in ruin lie, Three thousand soldier souls took wing on high, In the bright mansions of the blest to dwell.
The onslaught of the foeman to repel By might of arm all vainly did they try, And when at length ’twas left them but to die, Wearied and few the last defenders fell.
And this same arid soil hath ever been A haunt of countless mournful memories, As well in our day as in days of yore.
He was a Calabrian by birth, and a worthy man morally, and he treated his slaves with great humanity.
He had three thousand of them, and after his death they were divided, as he directed by his will, between the Grand Signor (who is heir of all who die and shares with the children of the deceased) and his renegades.
I fell to the lot of a Venetian renegade who, when a cabin boy on board a ship, had been taken by Uchali and was so much beloved by him that he became one of his most favoured youths.
He came to be the most cruel renegade I ever saw: his name was Hassan Aga, and he grew very rich and became king of Algiers.
To these baños, as I have said, some private individuals of the town are in the habit of bringing their captives, especially when they are to be ransomed; because there they can keep them in safety and comfort until their ransom arrives.
The king’s captives also, that are on ransom, do not go out to work with the rest of the crew, unless when their ransom is delayed; for then, to make them write for it more pressingly, they compel them to work and go for wood, which is no light labour.
I, however, was one of those on ransom, for when it was discovered that I was a captain, although I declared my scanty means and want of fortune, nothing could dissuade them from including me among the gentlemen and those waiting to be ransomed.
Every day he hanged a man, impaled one, cut off the ears of another; and all with so little provocation, or so entirely without any, that the Turks acknowledged he did it merely for the sake of doing it, and because he was by nature murderously disposed towards the whole human race.
To go on with my story; the courtyard of our prison was overlooked by the windows of the house belonging to a wealthy Moor of high position; and these, as is usual in Moorish houses, were rather loopholes than windows, and besides were covered with thick and close lattice-work.
The Christian came back, and it was again lowered, making the same movements as before.
Another of my comrades went, and with him the same happened as with the first, and then the third went forward, but with the same result as the first and second.
I hastened to untie the cloth, in which I perceived a knot, and in this were ten cianis, which are coins of base gold, current among the Moors, and each worth ten reals of our money.
It is needless to say I rejoiced over this godsend, and my joy was not less than my wonder as I strove to imagine how this good fortune could have come to us, but to me specially; for the evident unwillingness to drop the reed for any but me showed that it was for me the favour was intended.
I took my welcome money, broke the reed, and returned to the terrace, and looking up at the window, I saw a very white hand put out that opened and shut very quickly.
From this we gathered or fancied that it must be some woman living in that house that had done us this kindness, and to show that we were grateful for it, we made salaams after the fashion of the Moors, bowing the head, bending the body, and crossing the arms on the breast.
Shortly afterwards at the same window a small cross made of reeds was put out and immediately withdrawn.
I kissed the cross, took the crowns and returned to the terrace, and we all made our salaams; again the hand appeared, I made signs that I would read the paper, and then the window was closed.
We were all puzzled, though filled with joy at what had taken place; and as none of us understood Arabic, great was our curiosity to know what the paper contained, and still greater the difficulty of finding someone to read it.
Some obtain these testimonials with good intentions, others put them to a cunning use; for when they go to pillage on Christian territory, if they chance to be cast away, or taken prisoners, they produce their certificates and say that from these papers may be seen the object they came for, which was to remain on Christian ground, and that it was to this end they joined the Turks in their foray.
In this way they escape the consequences of the first outburst and make their peace with the Church before it does them any harm, and then when they have the chance they return to Barbary to become what they were before.
Others, however, there are who procure these papers and make use of them honestly, and remain on Christian soil.
This friend of mine, then, was one of these renegades that I have described; he had certificates from all our comrades, in which we testified in his favour as strongly as we could; and if the Moors had found the papers they would have burned him alive.
I knew that he understood Arabic very well, and could not only speak but also write it; but before I disclosed the whole matter to him, I asked him to read for me this paper which I had found by accident in a hole in my cell.
He opened it and remained some time examining it and muttering to himself as he translated it.
I asked him if he understood it, and he told me he did perfectly well, and that if I wished him to tell me its meaning word for word, I must give him pen and ink that he might do it more satisfactorily.
The Christian died, and I know that she did not go to the fire, but to Allah, because since then I have seen her twice, and she told me to go to the land of the Christians to see Lela Marien, who had great love for me.
I have seen many Christians, but except thyself none has seemed to me to be a gentleman.
I am young and beautiful, and have plenty of money to take with me.
See if thou canst contrive how we may go, and if thou wilt thou shalt be my husband there, and if thou wilt not it will not distress me, for Lela Marien will find me someone to marry me.
I myself have written this: have a care to whom thou givest it to read: trust no Moor, for they are all perfidious.
I am greatly troubled on this account, for I would not have thee confide in anyone, because if my father knew it he would at once fling me down a well and cover me with stones.
I will put a thread to the reed; tie the answer to it, and if thou hast no one to write for thee in Arabic, tell it to me by signs, for Lela Marien will make me understand thee.
The renegade said this with so many tears and such signs of repentance, that with one consent we all agreed to tell him the whole truth of the matter, and so we gave him a full account of all, without hiding anything from him.
We pointed out to him the window at which the reed appeared, and he by that means took note of the house, and resolved to ascertain with particular care who lived in it.
We agreed also that it would be advisable to answer the Moorish lady’s letter, and the renegade without a moment’s delay took down the words I dictated to him, which were exactly what I shall tell you, for nothing of importance that took place in this affair has escaped my memory, or ever will while life lasts.
This, then, was the answer returned to the Moorish lady: “The true Allah protect thee, Lady, and that blessed Marien who is the true mother of God, and who has put it into thy heart to go to the land of the Christians, because she loves thee.
Entreat her that she be pleased to show thee how thou canst execute the command she gives thee, for she will, such is her goodness.
On my own part, and on that of all these Christians who are with me, I promise to do all that we can for thee, even to death.
Fail not to write to me and inform me what thou dost mean to do, and I will always answer thee; for the great Allah has given us a Christian captive who can speak and write thy language well, as thou mayest see by this paper; without fear, therefore, thou canst inform us of all thou wouldst.
As to what thou sayest, that if thou dost reach the land of the Christians thou wilt be my wife, I give thee my promise upon it as a good Christian; and know that the Christians keep their promises better than the Moors.
Allah and Marien his mother watch over thee, my Lady.” The paper being written and folded I waited two days until the baño was empty as before, and immediately repaired to the usual walk on the terrace to see if there were any sign of the reed, which was not long in making its appearance.
As soon as I saw it, although I could not distinguish who put it out, I showed the paper as a sign to attach the thread, but it was already fixed to the reed, and to it I tied the paper; and shortly afterwards our star once more made its appearance with the white flag of peace, the little bundle.
It was dropped, and I picked it up, and found in the cloth, in gold and silver coins of all sorts, more than fifty crowns, which fifty times more strengthened our joy and doubled our hope of gaining our liberty.
When we had decided upon this the renegade told us not to be uneasy, for he would lose his life or restore us to liberty.
For four days the baño was filled with people, for which reason the reed delayed its appearance for four days, but at the end of that time, when the baño was, as it generally was, empty, it appeared with the cloth so bulky that it promised a happy birth.
The renegade was present, and in our cell we gave him the paper to read, which was to this effect: “I cannot think of a plan, señor, for our going to Spain, nor has Lela Marien shown me one, though I have asked her.
With it ransom yourself and your friends, and let one of you go to the land of the Christians, and there buy a vessel and come back for the others; and he will find me in my father’s garden, which is at the Babazon gate near the seashore, where I shall be all this summer with my father and my servants.
And remember thou art to be my husband, else I will pray to Marien to punish thee.
If thou canst not trust anyone to go for the vessel, ransom thyself and do thou go, for I know thou wilt return more surely than any other, as thou art a gentleman and a Christian.
Endeavour to make thyself acquainted with the garden; and when I see thee walking yonder I shall know that the baño is empty and I will give thee abundance of money.
And to prove the truth of what he said, he told us briefly what had happened to a certain Christian gentleman almost at that very time, the strangest case that had ever occurred even there, where astonishing and marvellous things are happening every instant.
This however he could get over by arranging with a Tagarin Moor to go shares with him in the purchase of the vessel, and in the profit on the cargo; and under cover of this he could become master of the vessel, in which case he looked upon all the rest as accomplished.
But though to me and my comrades it had seemed a better plan to send to Majorca for the vessel, as the Moorish lady suggested, we did not dare to oppose him, fearing that if we did not do as he said he would denounce us, and place us in danger of losing all our lives if he were to disclose our dealings with Zoraida, for whose life we would have all given our own.
We therefore resolved to put ourselves in the hands of God and in the renegade’s; and at the same time an answer was given to Zoraida, telling her that we would do all she recommended, for she had given as good advice as if Lela Marien had delivered it, and that it depended on her alone whether we were to defer the business or put it in execution at once.
In fact my master was so difficult to deal with that I dared not on any account pay down the money at once.
The Thursday before the Friday on which the fair Zoraida was to go to the garden she gave us a thousand crowns more, and warned us of her departure, begging me, if I were ransomed, to find out her father’s garden at once, and by all means to seek an opportunity of going there to see her.
I answered in a few words that I would do so, and that she must remember to commend us to Lela Marien with all the prayers the captive had taught her.
Two or three times he made this voyage in company with the Tagarin already mentioned.
The Moors of Aragon are called Tagarins in Barbary, and those of Granada Mudéjares; but in the Kingdom of Fez they call the Mudéjares Elches, and they are the people the king chiefly employs in war.
To proceed: every time he passed with his vessel he anchored in a cove that was not two crossbow shots from the garden where Zoraida was waiting; and there the renegade, together with the two Moorish lads that rowed, used purposely to station himself, either going through his prayers, or else practising as a part what he meant to perform in earnest.
But for my part I should have been sorry if he had spoken to her, for perhaps it might have alarmed her to find her affairs talked of by renegades.
To these men I said nothing more than that the next Friday in the evening they were to come out stealthily one by one and hang about Hadji Morato’s garden, waiting for me there until I came.
These directions I gave each one separately, with orders that if they saw any other Christians there they were not to say anything to them except that I had directed them to wait at that spot.
This preliminary having been settled, another still more necessary step had to be taken, which was to let Zoraida know how matters stood that she might be prepared and forewarned, so as not to be taken by surprise if we were suddenly to seize upon her before she thought the Christians’ vessel could have returned.
I determined, therefore, to go to the garden and try if I could speak to her; and the day before my departure I went there under the pretence of gathering herbs.
The first person I met was her father, who addressed me in the language that all over Barbary and even in Constantinople is the medium between captives and Moors, and is neither Morisco nor Castilian, nor of any other nation, but a mixture of all languages, by means of which we can all understand one another.
In this sort of language, I say, he asked me what I wanted in his garden, and to whom I belonged.
I replied that I was a slave of the Arnaut Mami (for I knew as a certainty that he was a very great friend of his), and that I wanted some herbs to make a salad.
He asked me then whether I were on ransom or not, and what my master demanded for me.
It would be beyond my power now to describe to you the great beauty, the high-bred air, the brilliant attire of my beloved Zoraida as she presented herself before my eyes.
On her ankles, which as is customary were bare, she had carcajes (for so bracelets or anklets are called in Morisco) of the purest gold, set with so many diamonds that she told me afterwards her father valued them at ten thousand doubloons, and those she had on her wrists were worth as much more.
The pearls were in profusion and very fine, for the highest display and adornment of the Moorish women is decking themselves with rich pearls and seed-pearls; and of these there are therefore more among the Moors than among any other people.
Zoraida’s father had to the reputation of possessing a great number, and the purest in all Algiers, and of possessing also more than two hundred thousand Spanish crowns; and she, who is now mistress of me only, was mistress of all this.
In a word she presented herself before me that day attired with the utmost splendour, and supremely beautiful; at any rate, she seemed to me the most beautiful object I had ever seen; and when, besides, I thought of all I owed to her I felt as though I had before me some heavenly being come to earth to bring me relief and happiness.
As she approached her father told her in his own language that I was a captive belonging to his friend the Arnaut Mami, and that I had come for salad.
She took up the conversation, and in that mixture of tongues I have spoken of she asked me if I was a gentleman, and why I was not ransomed.
While we were still engaged in this conversation, a Moor came running up, exclaiming that four Turks had leaped over the fence or wall of the garden, and were gathering the fruit though it was not yet ripe.
The old man was alarmed and Zoraida too, for the Moors commonly, and, so to speak, instinctively have a dread of the Turks, but particularly of the soldiers, who are so insolent and domineering to the Moors who are under their power that they treat them worse than if they were their slaves.
The Christians who were to row were ready and in hiding in different places round about, all waiting for me, anxious and elated, and eager to attack the vessel they had before their eyes; for they did not know the renegade’s plan, but expected that they were to gain their liberty by force of arms and by killing the Moors who were on board the vessel.
As soon, then, as I and my comrades made our appearance, all those that were in hiding seeing us came and joined us.
When we were collected together we debated whether it would be better first to go for Zoraida, or to make prisoners of the Moorish rowers who rowed in the vessel; but while we were still uncertain our renegade came up asking us what kept us, as it was now the time, and all the Moors were off their guard and most of them asleep.
We told him why we hesitated, but he said it was of more importance first to secure the vessel, which could be done with the greatest ease and without any danger, and then we could go for Zoraida.
This having been accomplished, and half of our party being left to keep guard over them, the rest of us, again taking the renegade as our guide, hastened towards Hadji Morato’s garden, and as good luck would have it, on trying the gate it opened as easily as if it had not been locked; and so, quite quietly and in silence, we reached the house without being perceived by anybody.
The lovely Zoraida was watching for us at a window, and as soon as she perceived that there were people there, she asked in a low voice if we were “Nizarani,” as much as to say or ask if we were Christians.
I answered that we were, and begged her to come down.
As soon as she recognised me she did not delay an instant, but without answering a word came down immediately, opened the door and presented herself before us all, so beautiful and so richly attired that I cannot attempt to describe her.
The moment I saw her I took her hand and kissed it, and the renegade and my two comrades did the same; and the rest, who knew nothing of the circumstances, did as they saw us do, for it only seemed as if we were returning thanks to her, and recognising her as the giver of our liberty.
The renegade asked her in the Morisco language if her father was in the house.
I asked the renegade what had passed between them, and when he told me, I declared that nothing should be done except in accordance with the wishes of Zoraida, who now came back with a little trunk so full of gold crowns that she could scarcely carry it.
To be brief, those who had gone upstairs acted so promptly that in an instant they came down, carrying Hadji Morato with his hands bound and a napkin tied over his mouth, which prevented him from uttering a word, warning him at the same time that to attempt to speak would cost him his life.
When his daughter caught sight of him she covered her eyes so as not to see him, and her father was horror-stricken, not knowing how willingly she had placed herself in our hands.
But it was now most essential for us to be on the move, and carefully and quickly we regained the vessel, where those who had remained on board were waiting for us in apprehension of some mishap having befallen us.
It was barely two hours after night set in when we were all on board the vessel, where the cords were removed from the hands of Zoraida’s father, and the napkin from his mouth; but the renegade once more told him not to utter a word, or they would take his life.
He, when he saw his daughter there, began to sigh piteously, and still more when he perceived that I held her closely embraced and that she lay quiet without resisting or complaining, or showing any reluctance; nevertheless he remained silent lest they should carry into effect the repeated threats the renegade had addressed to him.
On this point we all agreed; and Zoraida, to whom it was explained, together with the reasons that prevented us from doing at once what she desired, was satisfied likewise; and then in glad silence and with cheerful alacrity each of our stout rowers took his oar, and commending ourselves to God with all our hearts, we began to shape our course for the island of Majorca, the nearest Christian land.
Owing, however, to the Tramontana rising a little, and the sea growing somewhat rough, it was impossible for us to keep a straight course for Majorca, and we were compelled to coast in the direction of Oran, not without great uneasiness on our part lest we should be observed from the town of Shershel, which lies on that coast, not more than sixty miles from Algiers.
Moreover we were afraid of meeting on that course one of the galliots that usually come with goods from Tetuan; although each of us for himself and all of us together felt confident that, if we were to meet a merchant galliot, so that it were not a cruiser, not only should we not be lost, but that we should take a vessel in which we could more safely accomplish our voyage.
As we pursued our course Zoraida kept her head between my hands so as not to see her father, and I felt that she was praying to Lela Marien to help us. c41d.jpg (266K) Full Size We might have made about thirty miles when daybreak found us some three musket-shots off the land, which seemed to us deserted, and without anyone to see us.
For all that, however, by hard rowing we put out a little to sea, for it was now somewhat calmer, and having gained about two leagues the word was given to row by batches, while we ate something, for the vessel was well provided; but the rowers said it was not a time to take any rest; let food be served out to those who were not rowing, but they would not leave their oars on any account.
This was done, but now a stiff breeze began to blow, which obliged us to leave off rowing and make sail at once and steer for Oran, as it was impossible to make any other course.
All this was done very promptly, and under sail we ran more than eight miles an hour without any fear, except that of coming across some vessel out on a roving expedition.
We gave the Moorish rowers some food, and the renegade comforted them by telling them that they were not held as captives, as we should set them free on the first opportunity.
But when her father saw her in full dress and with all her jewels about her, he said to her in his own language, “What means this, my daughter?
Last night, before this terrible misfortune in which we are plunged befell us, I saw thee in thy everyday and indoor garments; and now, without having had time to attire thyself, and without my bringing thee any joyful tidings to furnish an occasion for adorning and bedecking thyself, I see thee arrayed in the finest attire it would be in my power to give thee when fortune was most kind to us.
Answer me this; for it causes me greater anxiety and surprise than even this misfortune itself.” The renegade interpreted to us what the Moor said to his daughter; she, however, returned him no answer.
But when he observed in one corner of the vessel the little trunk in which she used to keep her jewels, which he well knew he had left in Algiers and had not brought to the garden, he was still more amazed, and asked her how that trunk had come into our hands, and what there was in it.
To which the renegade, without waiting for Zoraida to reply, made answer, “Do not trouble thyself by asking thy daughter Zoraida so many questions, señor, for the one answer I will give thee will serve for all; I would have thee know that she is a Christian, and that it is she who has been the file for our chains and our deliverer from captivity.
She is here of her own free will, as glad, I imagine, to find herself in this position as he who escapes from darkness into the light, from death to life, and from suffering to glory.” “Daughter, is this true, what he says?” cried the Moor.
“That thou art in truth a Christian,” said the old man, “and that thou hast given thy father into the power of his enemies?” To which Zoraida made answer, “A Christian I am, but it is not I who have placed thee in this position, for it never was my wish to leave thee or do thee harm, but only to do good to myself.” “And what good hast thou done thyself, daughter?” said he.
“Ask thou that,” said she, “of Lela Marien, for she can tell thee better than I.” The Moor had hardly heard these words when with marvellous quickness he flung himself headforemost into the sea, where no doubt he would have been drowned had not the long and full dress he wore held him up for a little on the surface of the water.
Zoraida cried aloud to us to save him, and we all hastened to help, and seizing him by his robe we drew him in half drowned and insensible, at which Zoraida was in such distress that she wept over him as piteously and bitterly as though he were already dead.
We turned him upon his face and he voided a great quantity of water, and at the end of two hours came to himself.
We posted a look-out on shore, and never let the oars out of our hands, and ate of the stores the renegade had laid in, imploring God and Our Lady with all our hearts to help and protect us, that we might give a happy ending to a beginning so prosperous.
At the entreaty of Zoraida orders were given to set on shore her father and the other Moors who were still bound, for she could not endure, nor could her tender heart bear to see her father in bonds and her fellow-countrymen prisoners before her eyes.
We promised her to do this at the moment of departure, for as it was uninhabited we ran no risk in releasing them at that place.
Our prayers were not so far in vain as to be unheard by Heaven, for after a while the wind changed in our favour, and made the sea calm, inviting us once more to resume our voyage with a good heart.
Seeing this we unbound the Moors, and one by one put them on shore, at which they were filled with amazement; but when we came to land Zoraida’s father, who had now completely recovered his senses, he said: “Why is it, think ye, Christians, that this wicked woman is rejoiced at your giving me my liberty?
Think ye it is because of the affection she bears me?
Nay verily, it is only because of the hindrance my presence offers to the execution of her base designs.
We, however, finding ourselves sinking began to shout for help and call upon those in the ship to pick us up as we were beginning to fill.
They then lay to, and lowering a skiff or boat, as many as a dozen Frenchmen, well armed with match-locks, and their matches burning, got into it and came alongside; and seeing how few we were, and that our vessel was going down, they took us in, telling us that this had come to us through our incivility in not giving them an answer.
Our renegade took the trunk containing Zoraida’s wealth and dropped it into the sea without anyone perceiving what he did.
The desires, however, of those people do not go beyond money, but of that their covetousness is insatiable, and on this occasion it was carried to such a pitch that they would have taken even the clothes we wore as captives if they had been worth anything to them.
So they agreed by common consent to give us the skiff belonging to their ship and all we required for the short voyage that remained to us, and this they did the next day on coming in sight of the Spanish coast, with which, and the joy we felt, all our sufferings and miseries were as completely forgotten as if they had never been endured by us, such is the delight of recovering lost liberty.
It may have been about mid-day when they placed us in the boat, giving us two kegs of water and some biscuit; and the captain, moved by I know not what compassion, as the lovely Zoraida was about to embark, gave her some forty gold crowns, and would not permit his men to take from her those same garments which she has on now.
We got into the boat, returning them thanks for their kindness to us, and showing ourselves grateful rather than indignant.
They stood out to sea, steering for the straits; we, without looking to any compass save the land we had before us, set ourselves to row with such energy that by sunset we were so near that we might easily, we thought, land before the night was far advanced.
But of the conflicting counsels the one which was adopted was that we should approach gradually, and land where we could if the sea were calm enough to permit us.
This was done, and a little before midnight we drew near to the foot of a huge and lofty mountain, not so close to the sea but that it left a narrow space on which to land conveniently.
We ran our boat up on the sand, and all sprang out and kissed the ground, and with tears of joyful satisfaction returned thanks to God our Lord for all his incomparable goodness to us on our voyage.
We took out of the boat the provisions it contained, and drew it up on the shore, and then climbed a long way up the mountain, for even there we could not feel easy in our hearts, or persuade ourselves that it was Christian soil that was now under our feet.
The dawn came, more slowly, I think, than we could have wished; we completed the ascent in order to see if from the summit any habitation or any shepherds’ huts could be discovered, but strain our eyes as we might, neither dwelling, nor human being, nor path nor road could we perceive.
However, we determined to push on farther, as it could not but be that ere long we must see someone who could tell us where we were.
But what distressed me most was to see Zoraida going on foot over that rough ground; for though I once carried her on my shoulders, she was more wearied by my weariness than rested by the rest; and so she would never again allow me to undergo the exertion, and went on very patiently and cheerfully, while I led her by the hand.
We had gone rather less than a quarter of a league when the sound of a little bell fell on our ears, a clear proof that there were flocks hard by, and looking about carefully to see if any were within view, we observed a young shepherd tranquilly and unsuspiciously trimming a stick with his knife at the foot of a cork tree.
Nor did our expectation deceive us, for two hours had not passed when, coming out of the brushwood into the open ground, we perceived some fifty mounted men swiftly approaching us at a hand-gallop.
As soon as we saw them we stood still, waiting for them; but as they came close and, instead of the Moors they were in quest of, saw a set of poor Christians, they were taken aback, and one of them asked if it could be we who were the cause of the shepherd having raised the call to arms.
I recognise thee now; and long have I mourned thee as dead, I, and my sister, thy mother, and all thy kin that are still alive, and whom God has been pleased to preserve that they may enjoy the happiness of seeing thee.
We went straight to the church to return thanks to God for the mercies we had received, and when Zoraida entered it she said there were faces there like Lela Marien’s.
We told her they were her images; and as well as he could the renegade explained to her what they meant, that she might adore them as if each of them were the very same Lela Marien that had spoken to her; and she, having great intelligence and a quick and clear instinct, understood at once all he said to her about them.
Thence they took us away and distributed us all in different houses in the town; but as for the renegade, Zoraida, and myself, the Christian who came with us brought us to the house of his parents, who had a fair share of the gifts of fortune, and treated us with as much kindness as they did their own son.
We remained six days in Velez, at the end of which the renegade, having informed himself of all that was requisite for him to do, set out for the city of Granada to restore himself to the sacred bosom of the Church through the medium of the Holy Inquisition.
I have no more of my story to tell you, gentlemen; whether it be an interesting or a curious one let your better judgments decide; all I can say is I would gladly have told it to you more briefly; although my fear of wearying you has made me leave out more than one circumstance. c41g.jpg (33K) CHAPTER XLII.
WHICH TREATS OF WHAT FURTHER TOOK PLACE IN THE INN, AND OF SEVERAL OTHER THINGS WORTH KNOWING c42a.jpg (139K) Full Size With these words the captive held his peace, and Don Fernando said to him, “In truth, captain, the manner in which you have related this remarkable adventure has been such as befitted the novelty and strangeness of the matter.
In particular Don Fernando offered, if he would go back with him, to get his brother the marquis to become godfather at the baptism of Zoraida, and on his own part to provide him with the means of making his appearance in his own country with the credit and comfort he was entitled to.
For all this the captive returned thanks very courteously, although he would not accept any of their generous offers.
By this time night closed in, and as it did, there came up to the inn a coach attended by some men on horseback, who demanded accommodation; to which the landlady replied that there was not a hand’s breadth of the whole inn unoccupied.
He led by the hand a young girl in a travelling dress, apparently about sixteen years of age, and of such a high-bred air, so beautiful and so graceful, that all were filled with admiration when she made her appearance, and but for having seen Dorothea, Luscinda, and Zoraida, who were there in the inn, they would have fancied that a beauty like that of this maiden’s would have been hard to find.
In short, the Judge made his entrance in a state of bewilderment, as well with what he saw as what he heard, and the fair ladies of the inn gave the fair damsel a cordial welcome.
The captive, whose heart had leaped within him the instant he saw the Judge, telling him somehow that this was his brother, asked one of the servants who accompanied him what his name was, and whether he knew from what part of the country he came.
The servant replied that he was called the Licentiate Juan Perez de Viedma, and that he had heard it said he came from a village in the mountains of Leon.
From this statement, and what he himself had seen, he felt convinced that this was his brother who had adopted letters by his father’s advice; and excited and rejoiced, he called Don Fernando and Cardenio and the curate aside, and told them how the matter stood, assuring them that the judge was his brother.
The servant had further informed him that he was now going to the Indies with the appointment of Judge of the Supreme Court of Mexico; and he had learned, likewise, that the young lady was his daughter, whose mother had died in giving birth to her, and that he was very rich in consequence of the dowry left to him with the daughter.
He asked their advice as to what means he should adopt to make himself known, or to ascertain beforehand whether, when he had made himself known, his brother, seeing him so poor, would be ashamed of him, or would receive him with a warm heart.
In the middle of supper the curate said: “I had a comrade of your worship’s name, Señor Judge, in Constantinople, where I was a captive for several years, and that same comrade was one of the stoutest soldiers and captains in the whole Spanish infantry; but he had as large a share of misfortune as he had of gallantry and courage.” “And how was the captain called, señor?” asked the Judge.
I lost mine at the Goletta, and after a variety of adventures we found ourselves comrades at Constantinople.
Thence he went to Algiers, where he met with one of the most extraordinary adventures that ever befell anyone in the world.” Here the curate went on to relate briefly his brother’s adventure with Zoraida; to all which the Judge gave such an attentive hearing that he never before had been so much of a hearer.
The curate, however, only went so far as to describe how the Frenchmen plundered those who were in the boat, and the poverty and distress in which his comrade and the fair Moor were left, of whom he said he had not been able to learn what became of them, or whether they had reached Spain, or been carried to France by the Frenchmen.
That brave captain that you speak of is my eldest brother, who, being of a bolder and loftier mind than my other brother or myself, chose the honourable and worthy calling of arms, which was one of the three careers our father proposed to us, as your comrade mentioned in that fable you thought he was telling you.
I followed that of letters, in which God and my own exertions have raised me to the position in which you see me.
My second brother is in Peru, so wealthy that with what he has sent to my father and to me he has fully repaid the portion he took with him, and has even furnished my father’s hands with the means of gratifying his natural generosity, while I too have been enabled to pursue my studies in a more becoming and creditable fashion, and so to attain my present standing.
All this will make me continue my journey, not with the satisfaction in which I began it, but in the deepest melancholy and sadness.
Oh dear brother! that I only knew where thou art now, and I would hasten to seek thee out and deliver thee from thy sufferings, though it were to cost me suffering myself!
Oh beautiful and generous Zoraida, that I could repay thy goodness to a brother!
That I could be present at the new birth of thy soul, and at thy bridal that would give us all such happiness!” All this and more the Judge uttered with such deep emotion at the news he had received of his brother that all who heard him shared in it, showing their sympathy with his sorrow.
The curate, seeing, then, how well he had succeeded in carrying out his purpose and the captain’s wishes, had no desire to keep them unhappy any longer, so he rose from the table and going into the room where Zoraida was he took her by the hand, Luscinda, Dorothea, and the Judge’s daughter following her.
The captain was waiting to see what the curate would do, when the latter, taking him with the other hand, advanced with both of them to where the Judge and the other gentlemen were and said, “Let your tears cease to flow, Señor Judge, and the wish of your heart be gratified as fully as you could desire, for you have before you your worthy brother and your good sister-in-law.
The words the brothers exchanged, the emotion they showed can scarcely be imagined, I fancy, much less put down in writing.
They told each other in a few words the events of their lives; they showed the true affection of brothers in all its strength; then the judge embraced Zoraida, putting all he possessed at her disposal; then he made his daughter embrace her, and the fair Christian and the lovely Moor drew fresh tears from every eye.
And there was Don Quixote observing all these strange proceedings attentively without uttering a word, and attributing the whole to chimeras of knight-errantry.
In short, everybody was well pleased and glad at the captive’s good fortune; and as now almost two-thirds of the night were past, they resolved to retire to rest for the remainder of it.
Don Quixote offered to mount guard over the castle lest they should be attacked by some giant or other malevolent scoundrel, covetous of the great treasure of beauty the castle contained.
Those who understood him returned him thanks for this service, and they gave the Judge an account of his extraordinary humour, with which he was not a little amused.
Sancho Panza alone was fuming at the lateness of the hour for retiring to rest; and he of all was the one that made himself most comfortable, as he stretched himself on the trappings of his ass, which, as will be told farther on, cost him so dear.
The ladies, then, having retired to their chamber, and the others having disposed themselves with as little discomfort as they could, Don Quixote sallied out of the inn to act as sentinel of the castle as he had promised.
It happened, however, that a little before the approach of dawn a voice so musical and sweet reached the ears of the ladies that it forced them all to listen attentively, but especially Dorothea, who had been awake, and by whose side Doña Clara de Viedma, for so the Judge’s daughter was called, lay sleeping.
No one could imagine who it was that sang so sweetly, and the voice was unaccompanied by any instrument.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE PLEASANT STORY OF THE MULETEER, TOGETHER WITH OTHER STRANGE THINGS THAT CAME TO PASS IN THE INN c43a.jpg (127K) Full Size Ah me, Love’s mariner am I On Love’s deep ocean sailing; I know not where the haven lies, I dare not hope to gain it.
One solitary distant star Is all I have to guide me, A brighter orb than those of old That Palinurus lighted.
And vaguely drifting am I borne, I know not where it leads me; I fix my gaze on it alone, Of all beside it heedless.
But over-cautious prudery, And coyness cold and cruel, When most I need it, these, like clouds, Its longed-for light refuse me.
Bright star, goal of my yearning eyes As thou above me beamest, When thou shalt hide thee from my sight I’ll know that death is near me.
The greatest kindness fortune could do me now would be to close my eyes and ears so as neither to see or hear that unhappy musician.” “What art thou talking about, child?” said Dorothea.
No victory, No joy of triumph doth the faint heart know; Unblest is he That a bold front to Fortune dares not show, But soul and sense In bondage yieldeth up to indolence.
If Love his wares Do dearly sell, his right must be contest; What gold compares With that whereon his stamp he hath imprest?
Love resolute Knows not the word “impossibility;” And though my suit Beset by endless obstacles I see, Yet no despair Shall hold me bound to earth while heaven is there.
Here the voice ceased and Clara’s sobs began afresh, all which excited Dorothea’s curiosity to know what could be the cause of singing so sweet and weeping so bitter, so she again asked her what it was she was going to say before.
Meanwhile the time for my father’s departure arrived, which he became aware of, but not from me, for I had never been able to tell him of it.
He fell sick, of grief I believe, and so the day we were going away I could not see him to take farewell of him, were it only with the eyes.
But after we had been two days on the road, on entering the posada of a village a day’s journey from this, I saw him at the inn door in the dress of a muleteer, and so well disguised, that if I did not carry his image graven on my heart it would have been impossible for me to recognise him.
But I knew him, and I was surprised, and glad; he watched me, unsuspected by my father, from whom he always hides himself when he crosses my path on the road, or in the posadas where we halt; and, as I know what he is, and reflect that for love of me he makes this journey on foot in all this hardship, I am ready to die of sorrow; and where he sets foot there I set my eyes.
I know not with what object he has come; or how he could have got away from his father, who loves him beyond measure, having no other heir, and because he deserves it, as you will perceive when you see him.
And moreover, I can tell you, all that he sings is out of his own head; for I have heard them say he is a great scholar and poet; and what is more, every time I see him or hear him sing I tremble all over, and am terrified lest my father should recognise him and come to know of our loves.
And as to marrying without the knowledge of my father, I would not do it for all the world.
I would not ask anything more than that this youth should go back and leave me; perhaps with not seeing him, and the long distance we shall have to travel, the pain I suffer now may become easier; though I daresay the remedy I propose will do me very little good.
I don’t know how the devil this has come about, or how this love I have for him got in; I such a young girl, and he such a mere boy; for I verily believe we are both of an age, and I am not sixteen yet; for I will be sixteen Michaelmas Day, next, my father says.” Dorothea could not help laughing to hear how like a child Doña Clara spoke.
“Let us go to sleep now, señora,” said she, “for the little of the night that I fancy is left to us: God will soon send us daylight, and we will set all to rights, or it will go hard with me.” With this they fell asleep, and deep silence reigned all through the inn.
The only persons not asleep were the landlady’s daughter and her servant Maritornes, who, knowing the weak point of Don Quixote’s humour, and that he was outside the inn mounting guard in armour and on horseback, resolved, the pair of them, to play some trick upon him, or at any rate to amuse themselves for a while by listening to his nonsense.
As it so happened there was not a window in the whole inn that looked outwards except a hole in the wall of a straw-loft through which they used to throw out the straw.
Art thou, perchance, mindful of thy enslaved knight who of his own free will hath exposed himself to so great perils, and all to serve thee?
Give me tidings of her, oh luminary of the three faces!
“What then, discreet dame, is it that your mistress wants?” replied Don Quixote.
Nevertheless he pulled his arm to see if he could release himself, but it had been made so fast that all his efforts were in vain.
It is true he pulled it gently lest Rocinante should move, but try as he might to seat himself in the saddle, he had nothing for it but to stand upright or pull his hand off.
But he was very much deceived in this conclusion, for daylight had hardly begun to appear when there came up to the inn four men on horseback, well equipped and accoutred, with firelocks across their saddle-bows.
Withdraw to a distance, and wait till it is broad daylight, and then we shall see whether it will be proper or not to open to you.” “What the devil fortress or castle is this,” said one, “to make us stand on such ceremony?
If you are the innkeeper bid them open to us; we are travellers who only want to feed our horses and go on, for we are in haste.” “Do you think, gentlemen, that I look like an innkeeper?” said Don Quixote.
It happened at this moment that one of the horses of the four who were seeking admittance went to smell Rocinante, who melancholy, dejected, and with drooping ears stood motionless, supporting his sorely stretched master; and as he was, after all, flesh, though he looked as if he were made of wood, he could not help giving way and in return smelling the one who had come to offer him attentions.
IN WHICH ARE CONTINUED THE UNHEARD-OF ADVENTURES OF THE INN c44a.jpg (144K) Full Size So loud, in fact, were the shouts of Don Quixote, that the landlord opening the gate of the inn in all haste, came out in dismay, and ran to see who was uttering such cries, and those who were outside joined him.
Maritornes, who had been by this time roused up by the same outcry, suspecting what it was, ran to the loft and, without anyone seeing her, untied the halter by which Don Quixote was suspended, and down he came to the ground in the sight of the landlord and the travellers, who approaching asked him what was the matter with him that he shouted so.
They then asked the landlord if by any chance a youth of about fifteen years of age had come to that inn, one dressed like a muleteer, and of such and such an appearance, describing that of Doña Clara’s lover.
It was by this time broad daylight; and for that reason, as well as in consequence of the noise Don Quixote had made, everybody was awake and up, but particularly Doña Clara and Dorothea; for they had been able to sleep but badly that night, the one from agitation at having her lover so near her, the other from curiosity to see him.
With this, and what they already knew of the rare voice that heaven had bestowed upon him, they all felt very anxious to know more particularly who he was, and even to help him if it was attempted to employ force against him; so they hastened to where he was still talking and arguing with his servant.
Cardenio then bade Dorothea return to her room, as he would endeavour to make the whole matter right, and they did as he desired.
All the four who had come in quest of Don Luis had now come into the inn and surrounded him, urging him to return and console his father at once and without a moment’s delay.
He replied that he could not do so on any account until he had concluded some business in which his life, honour, and heart were at stake.
The servants pressed him, saying that most certainly they would not return without him, and that they would take him away whether he liked it or not.
“You shall not do that,” replied Don Luis, “unless you take me dead; though however you take me, it will be without life.” By this time most of those in the inn had been attracted by the dispute, but particularly Cardenio, Don Fernando, his companions, the Judge, the curate, the barber, and Don Quixote; for he now considered there was no necessity for mounting guard over the castle any longer.
Cardenio being already acquainted with the young man’s story, asked the men who wanted to take him away, what object they had in seeking to carry off this youth against his will.
The princess granted it graciously, and he at once, bracing his buckler on his arm and drawing his sword, hastened to the inn-gate, where the two guests were still handling the landlord roughly; but as soon as he reached the spot he stopped short and stood still, though Maritornes and the landlady asked him why he hesitated to help their master and husband.
But let us leave him there; for he will surely find someone to help him, and if not, let him suffer and hold his tongue who attempts more than his strength allows him to do; and let us go back fifty paces to see what Don Luis said in reply to the Judge whom we left questioning him privately as to his reasons for coming on foot and so meanly dressed.
For her I left my father’s house, and for her I assumed this disguise, to follow her whithersoever she may go, as the arrow seeks its mark or the sailor the pole-star.
She knows nothing more of my passion than what she may have learned from having sometimes seen from a distance that my eyes were filled with tears.
All the answer, therefore, he gave him was to bid him to make his mind easy for the present, and arrange with his servants not to take him back that day, so that there might be time to consider what was best for all parties.
The barber, however, was not so ready to relinquish the prize he had made in the pack-saddle; on the contrary, he raised such an outcry that everyone in the inn came running to know what the noise and quarrel meant.
“God bless me!” exclaimed their butt the barber at this; “is it possible that such an honourable company can say that this is not a basin but a helmet?
Why, this is a thing that would astonish a whole university, however wise it might be!
The first time, an enchanted Moor that there is in it gave me sore trouble, nor did Sancho fare well among certain followers of his; and last night I was kept hanging by this arm for nearly two hours, without knowing how or why I came by such a mishap.
So that now, for me to come forward to give an opinion in such a puzzling matter, would be to risk a rash decision.
As regards the assertion that this is a basin and not a helmet I have already given an answer; but as to the question whether this is a pack-saddle or a caparison I will not venture to give a positive opinion, but will leave it to your worships’ better judgment.
The pike was shivered in pieces against the ground, and the rest of the officers, seeing their comrade assaulted, raised a shout, calling for help for the Holy Brotherhood.
In proof whereof I call upon you to behold with your own eyes how the discord of Agramante’s camp has come hither, and been transferred into the midst of us.
See how they fight, there for the sword, here for the horse, on that side for the eagle, on this for the helmet; we are all fighting, and all at cross purposes.
The landlord alone insisted upon it that they must punish the insolence of this madman, who at every turn raised a disturbance in the inn; but at length the uproar was stilled for the present; the pack-saddle remained a caparison till the day of judgment, and the basin a helmet and the inn a castle in Don Quixote’s imagination.
All having been now pacified and made friends by the persuasion of the Judge and the curate, the servants of Don Luis began again to urge him to return with them at once; and while he was discussing the matter with them, the Judge took counsel with Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the curate as to what he ought to do in the case, telling them how it stood, and what Don Luis had said to him.
On learning the rank of Don Fernando and the resolution of Don Luis the four then settled it between themselves that three of them should return to tell his father how matters stood, and that the other should remain to wait upon Don Luis, and not leave him until they came back for him, or his father’s orders were known.
Thus by the authority of Agramante and the wisdom of King Sobrino all this complication of disputes was arranged; but the enemy of concord and hater of peace, feeling himself slighted and made a fool of, and seeing how little he had gained after having involved them all in such an elaborate entanglement, resolved to try his hand once more by stirring up fresh quarrels and disturbances.
The landlord, who had perforce to support his brother officers, ran at once to aid them.
Don Quixote smiled when he heard these words, and said very calmly, “Come now, base, ill-born brood; call ye it highway robbery to give freedom to those in bondage, to release the captives, to succour the miserable, to raise up the fallen, to relieve the needy?
Infamous beings, who by your vile grovelling intellects deserve that heaven should not make known to you the virtue that lies in knight-errantry, or show you the sin and ignorance in which ye lie when ye refuse to respect the shadow, not to say the presence, of any knight-errant!
Come now; band, not of officers, but of thieves; footpads with the licence of the Holy Brotherhood; tell me who was the ignoramus who signed a warrant of arrest against such a knight as I am?
Who was he that did not know that knights-errant are independent of all jurisdictions, that their law is their sword, their charter their prowess, and their edicts their will?
Who, I say again, was the fool that knows not that there are no letters patent of nobility that confer such privileges or exemptions as a knight-errant acquires the day he is dubbed a knight, and devotes himself to the arduous calling of chivalry?
What castellan that received him in his castle ever made him pay his shot?
What damsel was not enamoured of him and did not yield herself up wholly to his will and pleasure?
And, lastly, what knight-errant has there been, is there, or will there ever be in the world, not bold enough to give, single-handed, four hundred cudgellings to four hundred officers of the Holy Brotherhood if they come in his way?” CHAPTER XLVI.
Zoraida, though she did not fully comprehend all she saw, was grave or gay without knowing why, as she watched and studied the various countenances, but particularly her Spaniard’s, whom she followed with her eyes and clung to with her soul.
The gift and compensation which the curate gave the barber had not escaped the landlord’s notice, and he demanded Don Quixote’s reckoning, together with the amount of the damage to his wine-skins, and the loss of his wine, swearing that neither Rocinante nor Sancho’s ass should leave the inn until he had been paid to the very last farthing.
So great was it, that in a voice inarticulate with rage, with a stammering tongue, and eyes that flashed living fire, he exclaimed, “Rascally clown, boorish, insolent, and ignorant, ill-spoken, foul-mouthed, impudent backbiter and slanderer!
Hast thou dared to utter such words in my presence and in that of these illustrious ladies?
Hast thou dared to harbour such gross and shameless thoughts in thy muddled imagination?
Begone from my presence, thou born monster, storehouse of lies, hoard of untruths, garner of knaveries, inventor of scandals, publisher of absurdities, enemy of the respect due to royal personages!
But the ready-witted Dorothea, who by this time so well understood Don Quixote’s humour, said, to mollify his wrath, “Be not irritated at the absurdities your good squire has uttered, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, for perhaps he did not utter them without cause, and from his good sense and Christian conscience it is not likely that he would bear false witness against anyone.
For all that his simplicity never reached so high a pitch that he could persuade himself it was not the plain and simple truth, without any deception whatever about it, that he had been blanketed by beings of flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms, as his master believed and protested.
And from this marvellous union shall come forth to the light of the world brave whelps that shall rival the ravening claws of their valiant father; and this shall come to pass ere the pursuer of the flying nymph shall in his swift natural course have twice visited the starry signs.
But perhaps the chivalry and enchantments of our day take a different course from that of those in days gone by; and it may be, too, that as I am a new knight in the world, and the first to revive the already forgotten calling of knight-adventurers, they may have newly invented other kinds of enchantments and other modes of carrying off the enchanted.
What thinkest thou of the matter, Sancho my son?” c47b.jpg (357K) Full Size “I don’t know what to think,” answered Sancho, “not being as well read as your worship in errant writings; but for all that I venture to say and swear that these apparitions that are about us are not quite catholic.” “Catholic!” said Don Quixote.
“Father of me! how can they be Catholic when they are all devils that have taken fantastic shapes to come and do this, and bring me to this condition?
In the meantime the curate had made an arrangement with the officers that they should bear them company as far as his village, he paying them so much a day.
Nevertheless, virtue is of herself so mighty, that, in spite of all the magic that Zoroaster its first inventor knew, she will come victorious out of every trial, and shed her light upon the earth as the sun does upon the heavens.
The curate promised to comply with his request carefully, and they embraced once more, and renewed their promises.
The landlord approached the curate and handed him some papers, saying he had discovered them in the lining of the valise in which the novel of “The Ill-advised Curiosity” had been found, and that he might take them all away with him as their owner had not since returned; for, as he could not read, he did not want them himself.
The curate thanked him, and opening them he saw at the beginning of the manuscript the words, “Novel of Rinconete and Cortadillo,” by which he perceived that it was a novel, and as that of “The Ill-advised Curiosity” had been good he concluded this would be so too, as they were both probably by the same author; so he kept it, intending to read it when he had an opportunity.
He then mounted and his friend the barber did the same, both masked, so as not to be recognised by Don Quixote, and set out following in the rear of the cart.
Don Quixote was seated in the cage, with his hands tied and his feet stretched out, leaning against the bars as silent and as patient as if he were a stone statue and not a man of flesh.
Just at that moment the curate, looking back, saw coming on behind them six or seven mounted men, well found and equipped, who soon overtook them, for they were travelling, not at the sluggish, deliberate pace of oxen, but like men who rode canons’ mules, and in haste to take their noontide rest as soon as possible at the inn which was in sight not a league off.
One of the officers to whom he had put the question, replied, “Let the gentleman himself tell you the meaning of his going this way, señor, for we do not know.” Don Quixote overheard the conversation and said, “Haply, gentlemen, you are versed and learned in matters of errant chivalry?
Because if you are I will tell you my misfortunes; if not, there is no good in my giving myself the trouble of relating them;” but here the curate and the barber, seeing that the travellers were engaged in conversation with Don Quixote, came forward, in order to answer in such a way as to save their stratagem from being discovered.
At this point Sancho Panza, who had drawn near to hear the conversation, said, in order to make everything plain, “Well, sirs, you may like or dislike what I am going to say, but the fact of the matter is, my master, Don Quixote, is just as much enchanted as my mother.
He is in his full senses, he eats and he drinks, and he has his calls like other men and as he had yesterday, before they caged him.
And if that’s the case, what do they mean by wanting me to believe that he is enchanted?
For I have heard many a one say that enchanted people neither eat, nor sleep, nor talk; and my master, if you don’t stop him, will talk more than thirty lawyers.” Then turning to the curate he exclaimed, “Ah, señor curate, señor curate! do you think I don’t know you?
Do you think I don’t guess and see the drift of these new enchantments?
After all, where envy reigns virtue cannot live, and where there is niggardliness there can be no liberality.
Ill betide the devil! if it had not been for your worship my master would be married to the Princess Micomicona this minute, and I should be a count at least; for no less was to be expected, as well from the goodness of my master, him of the Rueful Countenance, as from the greatness of my services.
But I see now how true it is what they say in these parts, that the wheel of fortune turns faster than a mill-wheel, and that those who were up yesterday are down to-day.
I am sorry for my wife and children, for when they might fairly and reasonably expect to see their father return to them a governor or viceroy of some island or kingdom, they will see him come back a horse-boy.
I have said all this, señor curate, only to urge your paternity to lay to your conscience your ill-treatment of my master; and have a care that God does not call you to account in another life for making a prisoner of him in this way, and charge against you all the succours and good deeds that my lord Don Quixote leaves undone while he is shut up.
“Trim those lamps there!” exclaimed the barber at this; “so you are of the same fraternity as your master, too, Sancho?
By God, I begin to see that you will have to keep him company in the cage, and be enchanted like him for having caught some of his humour and chivalry.
It was an evil hour when you let yourself be got with child by his promises, and that island you long so much for found its way into your head.” “I am not with child by anyone,” returned Sancho, “nor am I a man to let myself be got with child, if it was by the King himself.
Though I am poor I am an old Christian, and I owe nothing to nobody, and if I long for an island, other people long for worse.
Each of us is the son of his own works; and being a man I may come to be pope, not to say governor of an island, especially as my master may win so many that he will not know whom to give them to.
Mind how you talk, master barber; for shaving is not everything, and there is some difference between Peter and Peter.
And in my opinion this sort of writing and composition is of the same species as the fables they call the Milesian, nonsensical tales that aim solely at giving amusement and not instruction, exactly the opposite of the apologue fables which amuse and instruct at the same time.
And though it may be the chief object of such books to amuse, I do not know how they can succeed, when they are so full of such monstrous nonsense.
For the enjoyment the mind feels must come from the beauty and harmony which it perceives or contemplates in the things that the eye or the imagination brings before it; and nothing that has any ugliness or disproportion about it can give any pleasure.
What beauty, then, or what proportion of the parts to the whole, or of the whole to the parts, can there be in a book or fable where a lad of sixteen cuts down a giant as tall as a tower and makes two halves of him as if he was an almond cake?
And when they want to give us a picture of a battle, after having told us that there are a million of combatants on the side of the enemy, let the hero of the book be opposed to them, and we have perforce to believe, whether we like it or not, that the said knight wins the victory by the single might of his strong arm.
And then, what shall we say of the facility with which a born queen or empress will give herself over into the arms of some unknown wandering knight?
What mind, that is not wholly barbarous and uncultured, can find pleasure in reading of how a great tower full of knights sails away across the sea like a ship with a fair wind, and will be to-night in Lombardy and to-morrow morning in the land of Prester John of the Indies, or some other that Ptolemy never described nor Marco Polo saw?
And if, in answer to this, I am told that the authors of books of the kind write them as fiction, and therefore are not bound to regard niceties of truth, I would reply that fiction is all the better the more it looks like truth, and gives the more pleasure the more probability and possibility there is about it.
I have never yet seen any book of chivalry that puts together a connected plot complete in all its numbers, so that the middle agrees with the beginning, and the end with the beginning and middle; on the contrary, they construct them with such a multitude of members that it seems as though they meant to produce a chimera or monster rather than a well-proportioned figure.
“Or again,” said he, “the author may show himself to be an astronomer, or a skilled cosmographer, or musician, or one versed in affairs of state, and sometimes he will have a chance of coming forward as a magician if he likes.
For what greater nonsense can there be in connection with what we are now discussing than for an infant to appear in swaddling clothes in the first scene of the first act, and in the second a grown-up bearded man?
Or what greater absurdity can there be than putting before us an old man as a swashbuckler, a young man as a poltroon, a lackey using fine language, a page giving sage advice, a king plying as a porter, a princess who is a kitchen-maid?
And then what shall I say of their attention to the time in which the action they represent may or can take place, save that I have seen a play where the first act began in Europe, the second in Asia, the third finished in Africa, and no doubt, had it been in four acts, the fourth would have ended in America, and so it would have been laid in all four quarters of the globe?
And the worst of it is, there are ignorant people who say that this is perfection, and that anything beyond this is affected refinement.
And then if we turn to sacred dramas—what miracles they invent in them!
What apocryphal, ill-devised incidents, attributing to one saint the miracles of another!
And even in secular plays they venture to introduce miracles without any reason or object except that they think some such miracle, or transformation as they call it, will come in well to astonish stupid people and draw them to the play.
All this tends to the prejudice of the truth and the corruption of history, nay more, to the reproach of the wits of Spain; for foreigners who scrupulously observe the laws of the drama look upon us as barbarous and ignorant, when they see the absurdity and nonsense of the plays we produce.
Others write plays with such heedlessness that, after they have been acted, the actors have to fly and abscond, afraid of being punished, as they often have been, for having acted something offensive to some king or other, or insulting to some noble family.
All which evils, and many more that I say nothing of, would be removed if there were some intelligent and sensible person at the capital to examine all plays before they were acted, not only those produced in the capital itself, but all that were intended to be acted in Spain; without whose approval, seal, and signature, no local magistracy should allow any play to be acted.
And to prove this I want to ask you one thing; and if you answer me as I believe you will answer, you will be able to lay your finger on the trick, and you will see that you are not enchanted but gone wrong in your wits.” “Ask what thou wilt, Sancho my son,” returned Don Quixote, “for I will satisfy thee and answer all thou requirest.
But as it is so, I will prove plainly to you that you are not enchanted.
Why, the schoolboys know that from the time they were babes.
Well then, you must know I mean have you had any desire to do what cannot be avoided?” “Ah! now I understand thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “yes, often, and even this minute; get me out of this strait, or all will not go right.” c48e.jpg (32K) CHAPTER XLIX.
WHICH TREATS OF THE SHREWD CONVERSATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HELD WITH HIS MASTER DON QUIXOTE c49a.jpg (181K) Full Size “Aha, I have caught you,” said Sancho; “this is what in my heart and soul I was longing to know.
Come now, señor, can you deny what is commonly said around us, when a person is out of humour, ‘I don’t know what ails so-and-so, that he neither eats, nor drinks, nor sleeps, nor gives a proper answer to any question; one would think he was enchanted’?
The curate understood him, and said he would very gladly comply with his request, only that he feared his master, finding himself at liberty, would take to his old courses and make off where nobody could ever find him again.
The canon took his hand, tied together as they both were, and on his word and promise they unbound him, and rejoiced beyond measure he was to find himself out of the cage.
The canon gazed at him, wondering at the extraordinary nature of his madness, and that in all his remarks and replies he should show such excellent sense, and only lose his stirrups, as has been already said, when the subject of chivalry was broached.
And so, moved by compassion, he said to him, as they all sat on the green grass awaiting the arrival of the provisions: “Is it possible, gentle sir, that the nauseous and idle reading of books of chivalry can have had such an effect on your worship as to upset your reason so that you fancy yourself enchanted, and the like, all as far from the truth as falsehood itself is?
And such is their audacity, they even dare to unsettle the wits of gentlemen of birth and intelligence, as is shown plainly by the way they have served your worship, when they have brought you to such a pass that you have to be shut up in a cage and carried on an ox-cart as one would carry a lion or a tiger from place to place to make money by showing it.
Come, Señor Don Quixote, have some compassion for yourself, return to the bosom of common sense, and make use of the liberal share of it that heaven has been pleased to bestow upon you, employing your abundant gifts of mind in some other reading that may serve to benefit your conscience and add to your honour.
And if, still led away by your natural bent, you desire to read books of achievements and of chivalry, read the Book of Judges in the Holy Scriptures, for there you will find grand reality, and deeds as true as they are heroic.
Lusitania had a Viriatus, Rome a Cæsar, Carthage a Hannibal, Greece an Alexander, Castile a Count Fernan Gonzalez, Valencia a Cid, Andalusia a Gonzalo Fernandez, Estremadura a Diego García de Paredes, Jerez a Garci Perez de Vargas, Toledo a Garcilaso, Seville a Don Manuel de Leon, to read of whose valiant deeds will entertain and instruct the loftiest minds and fill them with delight and wonder.
“Well then,” returned Don Quixote, “to my mind it is you who are the one that is out of his wits and enchanted, as you have ventured to utter such blasphemies against a thing so universally acknowledged and accepted as true that whoever denies it, as you do, deserves the same punishment which you say you inflict on the books that irritate you when you read them.
For to try to persuade anybody that Amadis, and all the other knights-adventurers with whom the books are filled, never existed, would be like trying to persuade him that the sun does not yield light, or ice cold, or earth nourishment.
What wit in the world can persuade another that the story of the Princess Floripes and Guy of Burgundy is not true, or that of Fierabras and the bridge of Mantible, which happened in the time of Charlemagne?
For by all that is good it is as true as that it is daylight now; and if it be a lie, it must be a lie too that there was a Hector, or Achilles, or Trojan war, or Twelve Peers of France, or Arthur of England, who still lives changed into a raven, and is unceasingly looked for in his kingdom.
One might just as well try to make out that the history of Guarino Mezquino, or of the quest of the Holy Grail, is false, or that the loves of Tristram and the Queen Yseult are apocryphal, as well as those of Guinevere and Lancelot, when there are persons who can almost remember having seen the Dame Quintañona, who was the best cupbearer in Great Britain.
And so true is this, that I recollect a grandmother of mine on the father’s side, whenever she saw any dame in a venerable hood, used to say to me, ‘Grandson, that one is like Dame Quintañona,’ from which I conclude that she must have known her, or at least had managed to see some portrait of her.
Then who can deny that the story of Pierres and the fair Magalona is true, when even to this day may be seen in the king’s armoury the pin with which the valiant Pierres guided the wooden horse he rode through the air, and it is a trifle bigger than the pole of a cart?
And alongside of the pin is Babieca’s saddle, and at Roncesvalles there is Roland’s horn, as large as a large beam; whence we may infer that there were Twelve Peers, and a Pierres, and a Cid, and other knights like them, of the sort people commonly call adventurers.
I shall be told, too, that Don Fernando de Guevara did not go in quest of adventures to Germany, where he engaged in combat with Micer George, a knight of the house of the Duke of Austria.
John, or of Alcántara, they used to say then a Knight of the Twelve Peers, because twelve equals were chosen for that military order.
That there was a Cid, as well as a Bernardo del Carpio, there can be no doubt; but that they did the deeds people say they did, I hold to be very doubtful.
OF THE SHREWD CONTROVERSY WHICH DON QUIXOTE AND THE CANON HELD, TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS c50a.jpg (160K) Full Size “A good joke, that!” returned Don Quixote.
“Books that have been printed with the king’s licence, and with the approbation of those to whom they have been submitted, and read with universal delight, and extolled by great and small, rich and poor, learned and ignorant, gentle and simple, in a word by people of every sort, of whatever rank or condition they may be—that these should be lies!
And above all when they carry such an appearance of truth with them; for they tell us the father, mother, country, kindred, age, place, and the achievements, step by step, and day by day, performed by such a knight or knights!
Hush, sir; utter not such blasphemy; trust me I am advising you now to act as a sensible man should; only read them, and you will see the pleasure you will derive from them.
By this time the canon’s servants, who had gone to the inn to fetch the sumpter mule, had returned, and making a carpet and the green grass of the meadow serve as a table, they seated themselves in the shade of some trees and made their repast there, that the carter might not be deprived of the advantage of the spot, as has been already said.
As they were eating they suddenly heard a loud noise and the sound of a bell that seemed to come from among some brambles and thick bushes that were close by, and the same instant they observed a beautiful goat, spotted all over black, white, and brown, spring out of the thicket with a goatherd after it, calling to it and uttering the usual cries to make it stop or turn back to the fold.
The fugitive goat, scared and frightened, ran towards the company as if seeking their protection and then stood still, and the goatherd coming up seized it by the horns and began to talk to it as if it were possessed of reason and understanding: “Ah wanderer, wanderer, Spotty, Spotty; how have you gone limping all this time?
What wolves have frightened you, my daughter?
Take this morsel and drink a sup, and that will soothe your irritation, and in the meantime the goat will rest herself,” and so saying, he handed him the loins of a cold rabbit on a fork.
The goatherd took it with thanks, and drank and calmed himself, and then said, “I should be sorry if your worships were to take me for a simpleton for having spoken so seriously as I did to this animal; but the truth is there is a certain mystery in the words I used.
But what made him still more fortunate, as he said himself, was having a daughter of such exceeding beauty, rare intelligence, gracefulness, and virtue, that everyone who knew her and beheld her marvelled at the extraordinary gifts with which heaven and nature had endowed her.
As a child she was beautiful, she continued to grow in beauty, and at the age of sixteen she was most lovely.
The fame of her beauty began to spread abroad through all the villages around—but why do I say the villages around, merely, when it spread to distant cities, and even made its way into the halls of royalty and reached the ears of people of every class, who came from all sides to see her as if to see something rare and curious, or some wonder-working image?
The wealth of the father and the beauty of the daughter led many neighbours as well as strangers to seek her for a wife; but he, as one might well be who had the disposal of so rich a jewel, was perplexed and unable to make up his mind to which of her countless suitors he should entrust her.
I was one among the many who felt a desire so natural, and, as her father knew who I was, and I was of the same town, of pure blood, in the bloom of life, and very rich in possessions, I had great hopes of success.
I do not mean that they ought to leave them to make a choice of what is contemptible and bad, but that they should place before them what is good and then allow them to make a good choice as they please.
I do not know which Leandra chose; I only know her father put us both off with the tender age of his daughter and vague words that neither bound him nor dismissed us.
My rival is called Anselmo and I myself Eugenio—that you may know the names of the personages that figure in this tragedy, the end of which is still in suspense, though it is plain to see it must be disastrous.
About this time there arrived in our town one Vicente de la Roca, the son of a poor peasant of the same town, the said Vicente having returned from service as a soldier in Italy and divers other parts.
A captain who chanced to pass that way with his company had carried him off from our village when he was a boy of about twelve years, and now twelve years later the young man came back in a soldier’s uniform, arrayed in a thousand colours, and all over glass trinkets and fine steel chains.
To-day he would appear in one gay dress, to-morrow in another; but all flimsy and gaudy, of little substance and less worth.
Do not look upon all this that I am telling you about the clothes as uncalled for or spun out, for they have a great deal to do with the story.
He used to seat himself on a bench under the great poplar in our plaza, and there he would keep us all hanging open-mouthed on the stories he told us of his exploits.
There was no country on the face of the globe he had not seen, nor battle he had not been engaged in; he had killed more Moors than there are in Morocco and Tunis, and fought more single combats, according to his own account, than Garcilaso, Diego García de Paredes and a thousand others he named, and out of all he had come victorious without losing a drop of blood.
On the other hand he showed marks of wounds, which, though they could not be made out, he said were gunshot wounds received in divers encounters and actions.
Lastly, with monstrous impudence he used to say “you” to his equals and even those who knew what he was, and declare that his arm was his father and his deeds his pedigree, and that being a soldier he was as good as the king himself.
All the village and all who heard of it were amazed at the affair; I was aghast, Anselmo thunderstruck, her father full of grief, her relations indignant, the authorities all in a ferment, the officers of the Brotherhood in arms.
She said, moreover, that the soldier, without robbing her of her honour, had taken from her everything she had, and made off, leaving her in the cave, a thing that still further surprised everybody.
It was not easy for us to credit the young man’s continence, but she asserted it with such earnestness that it helped to console her distressed father, who thought nothing of what had been taken since the jewel that once lost can never be recovered had been left to his daughter.
The same day that Leandra made her appearance her father removed her from our sight and took her away to shut her up in a convent in a town near this, in the hope that time may wear away some of the disgrace she has incurred.
Leandra’s youth furnished an excuse for her fault, at least with those to whom it was of no consequence whether she was good or bad; but those who knew her shrewdness and intelligence did not attribute her misdemeanour to ignorance but to wantonness and the natural disposition of women, which is for the most part flighty and ill-regulated.
Leandra withdrawn from sight, Anselmo’s eyes grew blind, or at any rate found nothing to look at that gave them any pleasure, and mine were in darkness without a ray of light to direct them to anything enjoyable while Leandra was away.
Our melancholy grew greater, our patience grew less; we cursed the soldier’s finery and railed at the carelessness of Leandra’s father.
At last Anselmo and I agreed to leave the village and come to this valley; and, he feeding a great flock of sheep of his own, and I a large herd of goats of mine, we pass our life among the trees, giving vent to our sorrows, together singing the fair Leandra’s praises, or upbraiding her, or else sighing alone, and to heaven pouring forth our complaints in solitude.
Following our example, many more of Leandra’s lovers have come to these rude mountains and adopted our mode of life, and they are so numerous that one would fancy the place had been turned into the pastoral Arcadia, so full is it of shepherds and sheep-folds; nor is there a spot in it where the name of the fair Leandra is not heard.
There is no nook among the rocks, no brookside, no shade beneath the trees that is not haunted by some shepherd telling his woes to the breezes; wherever there is an echo it repeats the name of Leandra; the mountains ring with “Leandra,” “Leandra” murmur the brooks, and Leandra keeps us all bewildered and bewitched, hoping without hope and fearing without knowing what we fear.
Of all this silly set the one that shows the least and also the most sense is my rival Anselmo, for having so many other things to complain of, he only complains of separation, and to the accompaniment of a rebeck, which he plays admirably, he sings his complaints in verses that show his ingenuity.
I follow another, easier, and to my mind wiser course, and that is to rail at the frivolity of women, at their inconstancy, their double dealing, their broken promises, their unkept pledges, and in short the want of reflection they show in fixing their affections and inclinations.
This, sirs, was the reason of words and expressions I made use of to this goat when I came up just now; for as she is a female I have a contempt for her, though she is the best in all my fold.
This is the story I promised to tell you, and if I have been tedious in telling it, I will not be slow to serve you; my hut is close by, and I have fresh milk and dainty cheese there, as well as a variety of toothsome fruit, no less pleasing to the eye than to the palate. c51e.jpg (14K) CHAPTER LII.
Don Quixote, finding himself free, strove to get on top of the goatherd, who, with his face covered with blood, and soundly kicked by Sancho, was on all fours feeling about for one of the table-knives to take a bloody revenge with.
The canon and the curate, however, prevented him, but the barber so contrived it that he got Don Quixote under him, and rained down upon him such a shower of fisticuffs that the poor knight’s face streamed with blood as freely as his own.
The canon and the curate were bursting with laughter, the officers were capering with delight, and both the one and the other hissed them on as they do dogs that are worrying one another in a fight.
The fact was that the clouds had that year withheld their moisture from the earth, and in all the villages of the district they were organising processions, rogations, and penances, imploring God to open the hands of his mercy and send the rain; and to this end the people of a village that was hard by were going in procession to a holy hermitage there was on one side of that valley.
What devils have possessed you to set you on against our Catholic faith?
Plague take me! mind, that is a procession of penitents, and the lady they are carrying on that stand there is the blessed image of the immaculate Virgin.
Take care what you are doing, señor, for this time it may be safely said you don’t know what you are about.” Sancho laboured in vain, for his master was so bent on coming to quarters with these sheeted figures and releasing the lady in black that he did not hear a word; and even had he heard, he would not have turned back if the king had ordered him.
Fortune, however, arranged the matter better than they expected, for all Sancho did was to fling himself on his master’s body, raising over him the most doleful and laughable lamentation that ever was heard, for he believed he was dead.
Oh pride of thy race, honour and glory of all La Mancha, nay, of all the world, that for want of thee will be full of evil-doers, no longer in fear of punishment for their misdeeds!
Oh thou, generous above all the Alexanders, since for only eight months of service thou hast given me the best island the sea girds or surrounds!
The carter yoked his oxen and made Don Quixote comfortable on a truss of hay, and at his usual deliberate pace took the road the curate directed, and at the end of six days they reached Don Quixote’s village, and entered it about the middle of the day, which it so happened was a Sunday, and the people were all in the plaza, through which Don Quixote’s cart passed.
They all flocked to see what was in the cart, and when they recognised their townsman they were filled with amazement, and a boy ran off to bring the news to his housekeeper and his niece that their master and uncle had come back all lean and yellow and stretched on a truss of hay on an ox-cart.
It was piteous to hear the cries the two good ladies raised, how they beat their breasts and poured out fresh maledictions on those accursed books of chivalry; all which was renewed when they saw Don Quixote coming in at the gate.
“Thanks be to God,” said she, “for being so good to me; but now tell me, my friend, what have you made by your squirings?
But I may tell you this much by the way, that there is nothing in the world more delightful than to be a person of consideration, squire to a knight-errant, and a seeker of adventures.
To be sure most of those one finds do not end as pleasantly as one could wish, for out of a hundred, ninety-nine will turn out cross and contrary.
I know it by experience, for out of some I came blanketed, and out of others belaboured.
Still, for all that, it is a fine thing to be on the look-out for what may happen, crossing mountains, searching woods, climbing rocks, visiting castles, putting up at inns, all at free quarters, and devil take the maravedi to pay.” While this conversation passed between Sancho Panza and his wife, Don Quixote’s housekeeper and niece took him in and undressed him and laid him in his old bed.
The curate charged his niece to be very careful to make her uncle comfortable and to keep a watch over him lest he should make his escape from them again, telling her what they had been obliged to do to bring him home.
On this the pair once more lifted up their voices and renewed their maledictions upon the books of chivalry, and implored heaven to plunge the authors of such lies and nonsense into the midst of the bottomless pit.
They were, in short, kept in anxiety and dread lest their uncle and master should give them the slip the moment he found himself somewhat better, and as they feared so it fell out.
PANIAGUADO, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, IN LAUDEM DULCINEAE DEL TOBOSO SONNET She, whose full features may be here descried, High-bosomed, with a bearing of disdain, Is Dulcinea, she for whom in vain The great Don Quixote of La Mancha sighed.
For her, Toboso’s queen, from side to side He traversed the grim sierra, the champaign Of Aranjuez, and Montiel’s famous plain: On Rocinante oft a weary ride.
Malignant planets, cruel destiny, Pursued them both, the fair Manchegan dame, And the unconquered star of chivalry.
Nor youth nor beauty saved her from the claim Of death; he paid love’s bitter penalty, And left the marble to preserve his name.
CAPRICHOSO, A MOST ACUTE ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, IN PRAISE OF ROCINANTE, STEED OF DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA SONNET On that proud throne of diamantine sheen, Which the blood-reeking feet of Mars degrade, The mad Manchegan’s banner now hath been By him in all its bravery displayed.
There hath he hung his arms and trenchant blade Wherewith, achieving deeds till now unseen, He slays, lays low, cleaves, hews; but art hath made A novel style for our new paladin.
Nor ends his glory here, for his good steed Doth Brillador and Bayard far exceed; As mettled steeds compared with Rocinante, The reputation they have won is scanty.
BURLADOR, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, ON SANCHO PANZA SONNET The worthy Sancho Panza here you see; A great soul once was in that body small, Nor was there squire upon this earthly ball So plain and simple, or of guile so free.
Within an ace of being Count was he, And would have been but for the spite and gall Of this vile age, mean and illiberal, That cannot even let a donkey be.
For mounted on an ass (excuse the word), By Rocinante’s side this gentle squire Was wont his wandering master to attend.
Delusive hopes that lure the common herd With promises of ease, the heart’s desire, In shadows, dreams, and smoke ye always end.
CACHIDIABLO, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, ON THE TOMB OF DON QUIXOTE EPITAPH The knight lies here below, Ill-errant and bruised sore, Whom Rocinante bore In his wanderings to and fro.
TIQUITOC, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, ON THE TOMB OF DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO EPITAPH Here Dulcinea lies.
These were all the verses that could be deciphered; the rest, the writing being worm-eaten, were handed over to one of the Academicians to make out their meaning conjecturally.
We have been informed that at the cost of many sleepless nights and much toil he has succeeded, and that he means to publish them in hopes of Don Quixote’s third sally. _“Forse altro cantera con miglior plettro.”_ c52e.jpg (54K) Volume II p003.jpg (307K) Full Size DEDICATION OF VOLUME II.
TO THE COUNT OF LEMOS: These days past, when sending Your Excellency my plays, that had appeared in print before being shown on the stage, I said, if I remember well, that Don Quixote was putting on his spurs to go and render homage to Your Excellency.
Now I say that “with his spurs, he is on his way.” Should he reach destination methinks I shall have rendered some service to Your Excellency, as from many parts I am urged to send him off, so as to dispel the loathing and disgust caused by another Don Quixote who, under the name of Second Part, has run masquerading through the whole world.
And he who has shown the greatest longing for him has been the great Emperor of China, who wrote me a letter in Chinese a month ago and sent it by a special courier.
He asked me, or to be truthful, he begged me to send him Don Quixote, for he intended to found a college where the Spanish tongue would be taught, and it was his wish that the book to be read should be the History of Don Quixote.
I asked the bearer if His Majesty had afforded a sum in aid of my travel expenses.
May Your Excellency return in such health that is wished you; Persiles will be ready to kiss your hand and I your feet, being as I am, Your Excellency’s most humble servant.
From Madrid, this last day of October of the year one thousand six hundred and fifteen.
Well then, the truth is, I am not going to give thee that satisfaction; for, though injuries stir up anger in humbler breasts, in mine the rule must admit of an exception.
Thou wouldst have me call him ass, fool, and malapert, but I have no such intention; let his offence be his punishment, with his bread let him eat it, and there’s an end of it.
What I cannot help taking amiss is that he charges me with being old and one-handed, as if it had been in my power to keep time from passing over me, or as if the loss of my hand had been brought about in some tavern, and not on the grandest occasion the past or present has seen, or the future can hope to see.
Those the soldier shows on his face and breast are stars that direct others to the heaven of honour and ambition of merited praise; and moreover it is to be observed that it is not with grey hairs that one writes, but with the understanding, and that commonly improves with years.
I take it amiss, too, that he calls me envious, and explains to me, as if I were ignorant, what envy is; for really and truly, of the two kinds there are, I only know that which is holy, noble, and high-minded; and if that be so, as it is, I am not likely to attack a priest, above all if, in addition, he holds the rank of familiar of the Holy Office.
And if he said what he did on account of him on whose behalf it seems he spoke, he is entirely mistaken; for I worship the genius of that person, and admire his works and his unceasing and strenuous industry.
After all, I am grateful to this gentleman, the author, for saying that my novels are more satirical than exemplary, but that they are good; for they could not be that unless there was a little of everything in them.
There was a madman in Seville who took to one of the drollest absurdities and vagaries that ever madman in the world gave way to.
And if this story does not suit him, you may, dear reader, tell him this one, which is likewise of a madman and a dog.
In Cordova there was another madman, whose way it was to carry a piece of marble slab or a stone, not of the lightest, on his head, and when he came upon any unwary dog he used to draw close to him and let the weight fall right on top of him; on which the dog in a rage, barking and howling, would run three streets without stopping.
It so happened, however, that one of the dogs he discharged his load upon was a cap-maker’s dog, of which his master was very fond.
The stone came down hitting it on the head, the dog raised a yell at the blow, the master saw the affair and was wroth, and snatching up a measuring-yard rushed out at the madman and did not leave a sound bone in his body, and at every stroke he gave him he said, “You dog, you thief! my lurcher!
Don’t you see, you brute, that my dog is a lurcher?” and so, repeating the word “lurcher” again and again, he sent the madman away beaten to a jelly.
The madman took the lesson to heart, and vanished, and for more than a month never once showed himself in public; but after that he came out again with his old trick and a heavier load than ever.
He came up to where there was a dog, and examining it very carefully without venturing to let the stone fall, he said: “This is a lurcher; ware!” In short, all the dogs he came across, be they mastiffs or terriers, he said were lurchers; and he discharged no more stones.
Maybe it will be the same with this historian; that he will not venture another time to discharge the weight of his wit in books, which, being bad, are harder than stones.
These two princes, unsought by any adulation or flattery of mine, of their own goodness alone, have taken it upon them to show me kindness and protect me, and in this I consider myself happier and richer than if Fortune had raised me to her greatest height in the ordinary way.
The poor man may retain honour, but not the vicious; poverty may cast a cloud over nobility, but cannot hide it altogether; and as virtue of itself sheds a certain light, even though it be through the straits and chinks of penury, it wins the esteem of lofty and noble spirits, and in consequence their protection.
I was forgetting to tell thee that thou mayest expect the “Persiles,” which I am now finishing, and also the Second Part of “Galatea.” part2e.jpg (37K) CHAPTER I.
OF THE INTERVIEW THE CURATE AND THE BARBER HAD WITH DON QUIXOTE ABOUT HIS MALADY p01a.jpg (156K) Full Size Cide Hamete Benengeli, in the Second Part of this history, and third sally of Don Quixote, says that the curate and the barber remained nearly a month without seeing him, lest they should recall or bring back to his recollection what had taken place.
They did not, however, omit to visit his niece and housekeeper, and charge them to be careful to treat him with attention, and give him comforting things to eat, and such as were good for the heart and the brain, whence, it was plain to see, all his misfortune proceeded.
The niece and housekeeper replied that they did so, and meant to do so with all possible care and assiduity, for they could perceive that their master was now and then beginning to show signs of being in his right mind.
This gave great satisfaction to the curate and the barber, for they concluded they had taken the right course in carrying him off enchanted on the ox-cart, as has been described in the First Part of this great as well as accurate history, in the last chapter thereof.
So they resolved to pay him a visit and test the improvement in his condition, although they thought it almost impossible that there could be any; and they agreed not to touch upon any point connected with knight-errantry so as not to run the risk of reopening wounds which were still so tender.
They came to see him consequently, and found him sitting up in bed in a green baize waistcoat and a red Toledo cap, and so withered and dried up that he looked as if he had been turned into a mummy.
They were very cordially received by him; they asked him after his health, and he talked to them about himself very naturally and in very well-chosen language.
Give me your attention and follow me.
Is it, pray, any new thing for a single knight-errant to demolish an army of two hundred thousand men, as if they all had but one throat or were made of sugar paste?
Nay, tell me, how many histories are there filled with these marvels?
If only (in an evil hour for me: I don’t speak for anyone else) the famous Don Belianis were alive now, or anyone of the innumerable progeny of Amadis of Gaul!
He was a graduate of Osuna in canon law; but even if he had been of Salamanca, it was the opinion of most people that he would have been mad all the same.
The Archbishop, moved by repeated sensible, well-written letters, directed one of his chaplains to make inquiry of the madhouse as to the truth of the licentiate’s statements, and to have an interview with the madman himself, and, if it should appear that he was in his senses, to take him out and restore him to liberty.
The chaplain did so, and the governor assured him that the man was still mad, and that though he often spoke like a highly intelligent person, he would in the end break out into nonsense that in quantity and quality counterbalanced all the sensible things he had said before, as might be easily tested by talking to him.
The chaplain resolved to try the experiment, and obtaining access to the madman conversed with him for an hour or more, during the whole of which time he never uttered a word that was incoherent or absurd, but, on the contrary, spoke so rationally that the chaplain was compelled to believe him to be sane.
Among other things, he said the governor was against him, not to lose the presents his relations made him for reporting him still mad but with lucid intervals; and that the worst foe he had in his misfortune was his large property; for in order to enjoy it his enemies disparaged and threw doubts upon the mercy our Lord had shown him in turning him from a brute beast into a man.
In short, he spoke in such a way that he cast suspicion on the governor, and made his relations appear covetous and heartless, and himself so rational that the chaplain determined to take him away with him that the Archbishop might see him, and ascertain for himself the truth of the matter.
Yielding to this conviction, the worthy chaplain begged the governor to have the clothes in which the licentiate had entered the house given to him.
The governor again bade him beware of what he was doing, as the licentiate was beyond a doubt still mad; but all his cautions and warnings were unavailing to dissuade the chaplain from taking him away.
The governor, seeing that it was the order of the Archbishop, obeyed, and they dressed the licentiate in his own clothes, which were new and decent.
He, as soon as he saw himself clothed like one in his senses, and divested of the appearance of a madman, entreated the chaplain to permit him in charity to go and take leave of his comrades the madmen.
The chaplain said he would go with him to see what madmen there were in the house; so they went upstairs, and with them some of those who were present.
Approaching a cage in which there was a furious madman, though just at that moment calm and quiet, the licentiate said to him, ‘Brother, think if you have any commands for me, for I am going home, as God has been pleased, in his infinite goodness and mercy, without any merit of mine, to restore me my reason.
I am now cured and in my senses, for with God’s power nothing is impossible.
Have strong hope and trust in him, for as he has restored me to my original condition, so likewise he will restore you if you trust in him.
I will take care to send you some good things to eat; and be sure you eat them; for I would have you know I am convinced, as one who has gone through it, that all this madness of ours comes of having the stomach empty and the brains full of wind.
Take courage! take courage! for despondency in misfortune breaks down health and brings on death.’ “To all these words of the licentiate another madman in a cage opposite that of the furious one was listening; and raising himself up from an old mat on which he lay stark naked, he asked in a loud voice who it was that was going away cured and in his senses.
The licentiate answered, ‘It is I, brother, who am going; I have now no need to remain here any longer, for which I return infinite thanks to Heaven that has had so great mercy upon me.’ “‘Mind what you are saying, licentiate; don’t let the devil deceive you,’ replied the madman.
Dost thou not know, thou miserable little licentiate, that I can do it, being, as I say, Jupiter the Thunderer, who hold in my hands the fiery bolts with which I am able and am wont to threaten and lay waste the world?
But in one way only will I punish this ignorant town, and that is by not raining upon it, nor on any part of its district or territory, for three whole years, to be reckoned from the day and moment when this threat is pronounced.
Thou free, thou cured, thou in thy senses! and I mad, I disordered, I bound!
Is it possible that you do not know that comparisons of wit with wit, valour with valour, beauty with beauty, birth with birth, are always odious and unwelcome?
My only endeavour is to convince the world of the mistake it makes in not reviving in itself the happy time when the order of knight-errantry was in the field.
But our depraved age does not deserve to enjoy such a blessing as those ages enjoyed when knights-errant took upon their shoulders the defence of kingdoms, the protection of damsels, the succour of orphans and minors, the chastisement of the proud, and the recompense of the humble.
But now sloth triumphs over energy, indolence over exertion, vice over virtue, arrogance over courage, and theory over practice in arms, which flourished and shone only in the golden ages and in knights-errant.
For tell me, who was more virtuous and more valiant than the famous Amadis of Gaul?
Who more discreet than Palmerin of England?
Who more gracious and easy than Tirante el Blanco?
Who more courtly than Lisuarte of Greece?
Who more slashed or slashing than Don Belianis?
Who more intrepid than Perion of Gaul?
Who more ready to face danger than Felixmarte of Hircania?
Who more sincere than Esplandian?
Who more impetuous than Don Cirongilio of Thrace?
Who more bold than Rodamonte?
Who more daring than Reinaldos?
Who more invincible than Roland? and who more gallant and courteous than Ruggiero, from whom the dukes of Ferrara of the present day are descended, according to Turpin in his ‘Cosmography.’ All these knights, and many more that I could name, señor curate, were knights-errant, the light and glory of chivalry.
And so I will stay where I am, as the chaplain does not take me away; and if Jupiter, as the barber has told us, will not send rain, here am I, and I will rain when I please.
“With regard to giants,” replied Don Quixote, “opinions differ as to whether there ever were any or not in the world; but the Holy Scripture, which cannot err by a jot from the truth, shows us that there were, when it gives us the history of that big Philistine, Goliath, who was seven cubits and a half in height, which is a huge size.
Likewise, in the island of Sicily, there have been found leg-bones and arm-bones so large that their size makes it plain that their owners were giants, and as tall as great towers; geometry puts this fact beyond a doubt.
“As for Reinaldos,” replied Don Quixote, “I venture to say that he was broad-faced, of ruddy complexion, with roguish and somewhat prominent eyes, excessively punctilious and touchy, and given to the society of thieves and scapegraces.
She treated with scorn a thousand gentlemen, men of valour and wisdom, and took up with a smooth-faced sprig of a page, without fortune or fame, except such reputation for gratitude as the affection he bore his friend got for him.
Be off to your own, brother, for it is you, and no one else, that delude my master, and lead him astray, and take him tramping about the country.” To which Sancho replied, “Devil’s own housekeeper! it is I who am deluded, and led astray, and taken tramping about the country, and not thy master!
He has carried me all over the world, and you are mightily mistaken.
He enticed me away from home by a trick, promising me an island, which I am still waiting for.” “May evil islands choke thee, thou detestable Sancho,” said the niece; “What are islands?
But let us put that aside for the present, for we shall have opportunities enough for considering and settling the point; tell me, Sancho my friend, what do they say about me in the village here?
What do the hidalgos?
What do the caballeros?
What do they say of my valour; of my achievements; of my courtesy?
How do they treat the task I have undertaken in reviving and restoring to the world the now forgotten order of chivalry?
In short, Sancho, I would have thee tell me all that has come to thine ears on this subject; and thou art to tell me, without adding anything to the good or taking away anything from the bad; for it is the duty of loyal vassals to tell the truth to their lords just as it is and in its proper shape, not allowing flattery to add to it or any idle deference to lessen it.
And I would have thee know, Sancho, that if the naked truth, undisguised by flattery, came to the ears of princes, times would be different, and other ages would be reckoned iron ages more than ours, which I hold to be the golden of these latter days.
The hidalgos say that, not keeping within the bounds of your quality of gentleman, you have assumed the ‘Don,’ and made a knight of yourself at a jump, with four vine-stocks and a couple of acres of land, and never a shirt to your back.
Some say, ‘mad but droll;’ others, ‘valiant but unlucky;’ others, ‘courteous but meddling,’ and then they go into such a number of things that they don’t leave a whole bone either in your worship or in myself.” “Recollect, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that wherever virtue exists in an eminent degree it is persecuted.
Few or none of the famous men that have lived escaped being calumniated by malice.
Julius Cæsar, the boldest, wisest, and bravest of captains, was charged with being ambitious, and not particularly cleanly in his dress, or pure in his morals.
Of Alexander, whose deeds won him the name of Great, they say that he was somewhat of a drunkard.
Of Hercules, him of the many labours, it is said that he was lewd and luxurious.
Of Don Galaor, the brother of Amadis of Gaul, it was whispered that he was over-quarrelsome, and of his brother that he was lachrymose.
So that, O Sancho, amongst all these calumnies against good men, mine may be let pass, since they are no more than thou hast said.” “That’s just where it is, body of my father!” “Is there more, then?” asked Don Quixote.
Why, the bachelor Samson Carrasco (that is the name of him I spoke of) says the author of the history is called Cide Hamete Berengena.” “That is a Moorish name,” said Don Quixote.
“May be so,” replied Sancho; “for I have heard say that the Moors are mostly great lovers of berengenas.” “Thou must have mistaken the surname of this ‘Cide’—which means in Arabic ‘Lord’—Sancho,” observed Don Quixote.
If, however, it were the fact that such a history were in existence, it must necessarily, being the story of a knight-errant, be grandiloquent, lofty, imposing, grand and true.
With this he comforted himself somewhat, though it made him uncomfortable to think that the author was a Moor, judging by the title of “Cide;” and that no truth was to be looked for from Moors, as they are all impostors, cheats, and schemers.
He was afraid he might have dealt with his love affairs in some indecorous fashion, that might tend to the discredit and prejudice of the purity of his lady Dulcinea del Toboso; he would have had him set forth the fidelity and respect he had always observed towards her, spurning queens, empresses, and damsels of all sorts, and keeping in check the impetuosity of his natural impulses.
Absorbed and wrapped up in these and divers other cogitations, he was found by Sancho and Carrasco, whom Don Quixote received with great courtesy.
In fact, the conclusion I arrive at, señor bachelor, is, that to write histories, or books of any kind, there is need of great judgment and a ripe understanding.
To give expression to humour, and write in a strain of graceful pleasantry, is the gift of great geniuses.
The cleverest character in comedy is the clown, for he who would make people take him for a fool, must not be one.
History is in a measure a sacred thing, for it should be true, and where the truth is, there God is; but notwithstanding this, there are some who write and fling books broadcast on the world as if they were fritters.” “There is no book so bad but it has something good in it,” said the bachelor.
I have it at home, and my old woman is waiting for me; after dinner I’ll come back, and will answer you and all the world every question you may choose to ask, as well about the loss of the ass as about the spending of the hundred crowns;” and without another word or waiting for a reply he made off home.
Don Quixote begged and entreated the bachelor to stay and do penance with him.
The bachelor accepted the invitation and remained, a couple of young pigeons were added to the ordinary fare, at dinner they talked chivalry, Carrasco fell in with his host’s humour, the banquet came to an end, they took their afternoon sleep, Sancho returned, and their conversation was resumed. p03e.jpg (49K) CHAPTER IV.
“No doubt there is,” replied he; “but not anything that will be of the same importance as those I have mentioned.” “Does the author promise a second part at all?” said Don Quixote.
“What?” replied Samson; “why, as soon as he has found the history which he is now searching for with extraordinary diligence, he will at once give it to the press, moved more by the profit that may accrue to him from doing so than by any thought of praise.” Whereat Sancho observed, “The author looks for money and profit, does he?
It will be a wonder if he succeeds, for it will be only hurry, hurry, with him, like the tailor on Easter Eve; and works done in a hurry are never finished as perfectly as they ought to be.
Let master Moor, or whatever he is, pay attention to what he is doing, and I and my master will give him as much grouting ready to his hand, in the way of adventures and accidents of all sorts, as would make up not only one second part, but a hundred.
All I say is, that if my master would take my advice, we would be now afield, redressing outrages and righting wrongs, as is the use and custom of good knights-errant.” Sancho had hardly uttered these words when the neighing of Rocinante fell upon their ears, which neighing Don Quixote accepted as a happy omen, and he resolved to make another sally in three or four days from that time.
Announcing his intention to the bachelor, he asked his advice as to the quarter in which he ought to commence his expedition, and the bachelor replied that in his opinion he ought to go to the kingdom of Aragon, and the city of Saragossa, where there were to be certain solemn joustings at the festival of St.
He commended his very praiseworthy and gallant resolution, but admonished him to proceed with greater caution in encountering dangers, because his life did not belong to him, but to all those who had need of him to protect and aid them in their misfortunes.
“There’s where it is, what I abominate, Señor Samson,” said Sancho here; “my master will attack a hundred armed men as a greedy boy would half a dozen melons.
But, above all things, I warn my master that if he is to take me with him it must be on the condition that he is to do all the fighting, and that I am not to be called upon to do anything except what concerns keeping him clean and comfortable; in this I will dance attendance on him readily; but to expect me to draw sword, even against rascally churls of the hatchet and hood, is idle.
“It must be, by some means or other,” said Don Quixote, “for unless the name stands there plain and manifest, no woman would believe the verses were made for her.” They agreed upon this, and that the departure should take place in three days from that time.
Don Quixote charged the bachelor to keep it a secret, especially from the curate and Master Nicholas, and from his niece and the housekeeper, lest they should prevent the execution of his praiseworthy and valiant purpose.
Carrasco promised all, and then took his leave, charging Don Quixote to inform him of his good or evil fortunes whenever he had an opportunity; and thus they bade each other farewell, and Sancho went away to make the necessary preparations for their expedition. p04e.jpg (55K) CHAPTER V.
How many there are in the world who live without a government, and continue to live all the same, and are reckoned in the number of the people.
But mind, Sancho, if by good luck you should find yourself with some government, don’t forget me and your children.
Remember that Sanchico is now full fifteen, and it is right he should go to school, if his uncle the abbot has a mind to have him trained for the Church.
I have not been bringing up my daughter for that all this time, I can tell you, husband.
“Don’t you see, you animal,” continued Sancho, “that it will be well for me to drop into some profitable government that will lift us out of the mire, and marry Mari-Sancha to whom I like; and you yourself will find yourself called ‘Doña Teresa Panza,’ and sitting in church on a fine carpet and cushions and draperies, in spite and in defiance of all the born ladies of the town?
No, stay as you are, growing neither greater nor less, like a tapestry figure—Let us say no more about it, for Sanchica shall be a countess, say what you will.” “Are you sure of all you say, husband?” replied Teresa.
“Well, for all that, I am afraid this rank of countess for my daughter will be her ruin.
You do as you like, make a duchess or a princess of her, but I can tell you it will not be with my will and consent.
I was always a lover of equality, brother, and I can’t bear to see people give themselves airs without any right.
I don’t know, I’m sure, who fixed the ‘Don’ to him, what neither his father nor grandfather ever had.” “I declare thou hast a devil of some sort in thy body!” said Sancho.
“God help thee, what a lot of things thou hast strung together, one after the other, without head or tail!
What have Cascajo, and the broaches and the proverbs and the airs, to do with what I say?
“The day that I see her a countess,” replied Teresa, “it will be the same to me as if I was burying her; but once more I say do as you please, for we women are born to this burden of being obedient to our husbands, though they be dogs;” and with this she began to weep in earnest, as if she already saw Sanchica dead and buried.
Sancho consoled her by saying that though he must make her a countess, he would put it off as long as possible.
Here their conversation came to an end, and Sancho went back to see Don Quixote, and make arrangements for their departure. p05e.jpg (49K) Full Size CHAPTER VI.
They strove by all the means in their power to divert him from such an unlucky scheme; but it was all preaching in the desert and hammering cold iron.
And you must know besides, that the true knight-errant, though he may see ten giants, that not only touch the clouds with their heads but pierce them, and that go, each of them, on two tall towers by way of legs, and whose arms are like the masts of mighty ships, and each eye like a great mill-wheel, and glowing brighter than a glass furnace, must not on any account be dismayed by them.
On the contrary, he must attack and fall upon them with a gallant bearing and a fearless heart, and, if possible, vanquish and destroy them, even though they have for armour the shells of a certain fish, that they say are harder than diamonds, and in place of swords wield trenchant blades of Damascus steel, or clubs studded with spikes also of steel, such as I have more than once seen.
What! can it be that a young hussy that hardly knows how to handle a dozen lace-bobbins dares to wag her tongue and criticise the histories of knights-errant?
Of the first, those that had an humble origin and rose to the greatness they still preserve, the Ottoman house may serve as an example, which from an humble and lowly shepherd, its founder, has reached the height at which we now see it.
For examples of the second sort of lineage, that began with greatness and maintains it still without adding to it, there are the many princes who have inherited the dignity, and maintain themselves in their inheritance, without increasing or diminishing it, keeping peacefully within the limits of their states.
Of plebeian lineages I have nothing to say, save that they merely serve to swell the number of those that live, without any eminence to entitle them to any fame or praise beyond this.
From all I have said I would have you gather, my poor innocents, that great is the confusion among lineages, and that only those are seen to be great and illustrious that show themselves so by the virtue, wealth, and generosity of their possessors.
I have said virtue, wealth, and generosity, because a great man who is vicious will be a great example of vice, and a rich man who is not generous will be merely a miserly beggar; for the possessor of wealth is not made happy by possessing it, but by spending it, and not by spending as he pleases, but by knowing how to spend it well.
There are two roads, my daughters, by which men may reach wealth and honours; one is that of letters, the other that of arms.
I have more of arms than of letters in my composition, and, judging by my inclination to arms, was born under the influence of the planet Mars.
The instant the housekeeper knew who it was, she ran to hide herself so as not to see him; in such abhorrence did she hold him.
The niece let him in, and his master Don Quixote came forward to receive him with open arms, and the pair shut themselves up in his room, where they had another conversation not inferior to the previous one. p06e.jpg (19K) CHAPTER VII.
She found him pacing the patio of his house, and, perspiring and flurried, she fell at his feet the moment she saw him.
Carrasco, seeing how distressed and overcome she was, said to her, “What is this, mistress housekeeper?
What has happened to you?
In short then, mistress housekeeper, that is all, and there is nothing the matter, except what it is feared Don Quixote may do?” “No, señor,” said she.
“Well then,” returned the bachelor, “don’t be uneasy, but go home in peace; get me ready something hot for breakfast, and while you are on the way say the prayer of Santa Apollonia, that is if you know it; for I will come presently and you will see miracles.” “Woe is me,” cried the housekeeper, “is it the prayer of Santa Apollonia you would have me say?
While Don Quixote and Sancho were shut up together, they had a discussion which the history records with great precision and scrupulous exactness.
“I understand thee still less now,” said Don Quixote.
In short, I would like to know what I am to get, be it much or little; for the hen will lay on one egg, and many littles make a much, and so long as one gains something there is nothing lost.
If with these hopes and additional inducements you, Sancho, please to return to my service, well and good; but to suppose that I am going to disturb or unhinge the ancient usage of knight-errantry, is all nonsense.
And so, my Sancho, get you back to your house and explain my intentions to your Teresa, and if she likes and you like to be on reward with me, _bene quidem;_ if not, we remain friends; for if the pigeon-house does not lack food, it will not lack pigeons; and bear in mind, my son, that a good hope is better than a bad holding, and a good grievance better than a bad compensation.
The arch wag Samson came forward, and embracing him as he had done before, said with a loud voice, “O flower of knight-errantry!
See now who offers to become one; no less than the illustrious bachelor Samson Carrasco, the perpetual joy and delight of the courts of the Salamancan schools, sound in body, discreet, patient under heat or cold, hunger or thirst, with all the qualifications requisite to make a knight-errant’s squire!
But heaven forbid that, to gratify my own inclination, I should shake or shatter this pillar of letters and vessel of the sciences, and cut down this towering palm of the fair and liberal arts.
In fine, Don Quixote and Sancho embraced one another and made friends, and by the advice and with the approval of the great Carrasco, who was now their oracle, it was arranged that their departure should take place three days thence, by which time they could have all that was requisite for the journey ready, and procure a closed helmet, which Don Quixote said he must by all means take.
Samson offered him one, as he knew a friend of his who had it would not refuse it to him, though it was more dingy with rust and mildew than bright and clean like burnished steel.
The curses which both housekeeper and niece poured out on the bachelor were past counting; they tore their hair, they clawed their faces, and in the style of the hired mourners that were once in fashion, they raised a lamentation over the departure of their master and uncle, as if it had been his death.
Samson’s intention in persuading him to sally forth once more was to do what the history relates farther on; all by the advice of the curate and barber, with whom he had previously discussed the subject.
Samson embraced him, and entreated him to let him hear of his good or evil fortunes, so that he might rejoice over the former or condole with him over the latter, as the laws of friendship required.
Don Quixote promised him he would do so, and Samson returned to the village, and the other two took the road for the great city of El Toboso. p07e.jpg (24K) CHAPTER VIII.
O envy, root of all countless evils, and cankerworm of the virtues!
All the vices, Sancho, bring some kind of pleasure with them; but envy brings nothing but irritation, bitterness, and rage.” “So I say too,” replied Sancho; “and I suspect in that legend or history of us that the bachelor Samson Carrasco told us he saw, my honour goes dragged in the dirt, knocked about, up and down, sweeping the streets, as they say.
She, seeing she was not in the list of the poet, asked him what he had seen in her that he did not include her in the number of the others, telling him he must add to his satire and put her in the new part, or else look out for the consequences.
The poet did as she bade him, and left her without a shred of reputation, and she was satisfied by getting fame though it was infamy.
And something of the same sort is what happened in the case of the great emperor Charles V. and a gentleman in Rome.
The emperor was anxious to see that famous temple of the Rotunda, called in ancient times the temple ‘of all the gods,’ but now-a-days, by a better nomenclature, ‘of all the saints,’ which is the best preserved building of all those of pagan construction in Rome, and the one which best sustains the reputation of mighty works and magnificence of its founders.
It is in the form of a half orange, of enormous dimensions, and well lighted, though no light penetrates it save that which is admitted by a window, or rather round skylight, at the top; and it was from this that the emperor examined the building.
My meaning is, Sancho, that the desire of acquiring fame is a very powerful motive.
What, thinkest thou, was it that flung Horatius in full armour down from the bridge into the depths of the Tiber?
What impelled Curtius to plunge into the deep burning gulf that opened in the midst of Rome?
What, in opposition to all the omens that declared against him, made Julius Cæsar cross the Rubicon?
And to come to more modern examples, what scuttled the ships, and left stranded and cut off the gallant Spaniards under the command of the most courteous Cortés in the New World?
So that, O Sancho, in what we do we must not overpass the bounds which the Christian religion we profess has assigned to us.
Or what are they ornamented with?” To which Don Quixote made answer: “The tombs of the heathens were generally sumptuous temples; the ashes of Julius Cæsar’s body were placed on the top of a stone pyramid of vast size, which they now call in Rome Saint Peter’s needle.
“Then this fame, these favours, these privileges, or whatever you call it,” said Sancho, “belong to the bodies and relics of the saints who, with the approbation and permission of our holy mother Church, have lamps, tapers, winding-sheets, crutches, pictures, eyes and legs, by means of which they increase devotion and add to their own Christian reputation.
Kings carry the bodies or relics of saints on their shoulders, and kiss bits of their bones, and enrich and adorn their oratories and favourite altars with them.” “What wouldst thou have me infer from all thou hast said, Sancho?” asked Don Quixote.
In the end, Don Quixote made up his mind to enter the city at nightfall, and they waited until the time came among some oak trees that were near El Toboso; and when the moment they had agreed upon arrived, they made their entrance into the city, where something happened them that may fairly be called something. p08e.jpg (49K) Full Size CHAPTER IX.
WHEREIN IS RELATED WHAT WILL BE SEEN THERE p09a.jpg (79K) Full Size ’Twas at the very midnight hour—more or less—when Don Quixote and Sancho quitted the wood and entered El Toboso.
The town was in deep silence, for all the inhabitants were asleep, and stretched on the broad of their backs, as the saying is.
The night was darkish, though Sancho would have been glad had it been quite dark, so as to find in the darkness an excuse for his blundering.
All over the place nothing was to be heard except the barking of dogs, which deafened the ears of Don Quixote and troubled the heart of Sancho.
He came along singing the ballad that says- Ill did ye fare, ye men of France, In Roncesvalles chase— “May I die, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, when he heard him, “if any good will come to us to-night!
Dost thou not hear what that clown is singing?” “I do,” said Sancho, “but what has Roncesvalles chase to do with what we have in hand?
“May be so,” replied the lad; “God be with you, for here comes the daylight;” and without waiting for any more of his questions, he whipped on his mules.
Sancho undertook to execute the task according to the instructions, and to bring back an answer as good as the one he brought back before.
I am going to look for a princess, that’s all; and in her for the sun of beauty and the whole heaven at once.
And does it strike you that it would be just and right if the El Toboso people, finding out that you were here with the intention of going to tamper with their princesses and trouble their ladies, were to come and cudgel your ribs, and not leave a whole bone in you?
They would, indeed, have very good reason, if they did not see that I am under orders, and that ‘you are a messenger, my friend, no blame belongs to you.’ Don’t you trust to that, Sancho, for the Manchegan folk are as hot-tempered as they are honest, and won’t put up with liberties from anybody.
Be off, you scoundrel!
Why should I go looking for three feet on a cat, to please another man; and what is more, when looking for Dulcinea will be looking for Marica in Ravena, or the bachelor in Salamanca?
The devil, the devil and nobody else, has mixed me up in this business!” Such was the soliloquy Sancho held with himself, and all the conclusion he could come to was to say to himself again, “Well, there’s remedy for everything except death, under whose yoke we have all to pass, whether we like it or not, when life’s finished.
To be brief, the instant Sancho saw the peasant girls, he returned full speed to seek his master, and found him sighing and uttering a thousand passionate lamentations.
When Don Quixote saw him he exclaimed, “What news, Sancho, my friend?
Am I to mark this day with a white stone or a black?” “Your worship,” replied Sancho, “had better mark it with ruddle, like the inscriptions on the walls of class rooms, that those who see it may see it plain.” “Then thou bringest good news,” said Don Quixote.
“So good,” replied Sancho, “that your worship has only to spur Rocinante and get out into the open field to see the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, who, with two others, damsels of hers, is coming to see your worship.” “Holy God! what art thou saying, Sancho, my friend?” exclaimed Don Quixote.
“Take care thou art not deceiving me, or seeking by false joy to cheer my real sadness.” “What could I get by deceiving your worship,” returned Sancho, “especially when it will so soon be shown whether I tell the truth or not?
Come, señor, push on, and you will see the princess our mistress coming, robed and adorned—in fact, like what she is.
Her damsels and she are all one glow of gold, all bunches of pearls, all diamonds, all rubies, all cloth of brocade of more than ten borders; with their hair loose on their shoulders like so many sunbeams playing with the wind; and moreover, they come mounted on three piebald cackneys, the finest sight ever you saw.” “Hackneys, you mean, Sancho,” said Don Quixote.
Don Quixote looked all along the road to El Toboso, and as he could see nobody except the three peasant girls, he was completely puzzled, and asked Sancho if it was outside the city he had left them.
“How outside the city?” returned Sancho.
The country girls, at the same time, were astonished to see these two men, so different in appearance, on their knees, preventing their companion from going on.
See how the lordlings come to make game of the village girls now, as if we here could not chaff as well as themselves.
Go your own way, and let us go ours, and it will be better for you.” “Get up, Sancho,” said Don Quixote at this; “I see that fortune, ‘with evil done to me unsated still,’ has taken possession of all the roads by which any comfort may reach ‘this wretched soul’ that I carry in my flesh.
My grandfather!” cried the girl, “much I care for your love-making!
The instant the village lass who had done duty for Dulcinea found herself free, prodding her “cackney” with a spike she had at the end of a stick, she set off at full speed across the field.
The she-ass, however, feeling the point more acutely than usual, began cutting such capers, that it flung the lady Dulcinea to the ground; seeing which, Don Quixote ran to raise her up, and Sancho to fix and girth the pack-saddle, which also had slipped under the ass’s belly.
Don Quixote followed them with his eyes, and when they were no longer in sight, he turned to Sancho and said, “How now, Sancho? thou seest how I am hated by enchanters!
And see to what a length the malice and spite they bear me go, when they seek to deprive me of the happiness it would give me to see my lady in her own proper form.
The fact is I was born to be an example of misfortune, and the target and mark at which the arrows of adversity are aimed and directed.
For I must tell thee, Sancho, that when I approached to put Dulcinea upon her hackney (as thou sayest it was, though to me it appeared a she-ass), she gave me a whiff of raw garlic that made my head reel, and poisoned my very heart.” “O scum of the earth!” cried Sancho at this, “O miserable, spiteful enchanters!
O that I could see you all strung by the gills, like sardines on a twig!
“I believe it, my friend,” returned Don Quixote; “for nature bestowed nothing on Dulcinea that was not perfect and well-finished; and so, if she had a hundred moles like the one thou hast described, in her they would not be moles, but moons and shining stars.
Sancho recalled him from his reverie.
“Melancholy, señor,” said he, “was made, not for beasts, but for men; but if men give way to it overmuch they turn to beasts; control yourself, your worship; be yourself again; gather up Rocinante’s reins; cheer up, rouse yourself and show that gallant spirit that knights-errant ought to have.
What weakness is this?
But one thing, señor, troubles me more than all the rest, and that is thinking what is to be done when your worship conquers some giant, or some other knight, and orders him to go and present himself before the beauty of the lady Dulcinea.
Where is this poor giant, or this poor wretch of a vanquished knight, to find her?
He who led the mules and acted as carter was a hideous demon; the cart was open to the sky, without a tilt or cane roof, and the first figure that presented itself to Don Quixote’s eyes was that of Death itself with a human face; next to it was an angel with large painted wings, and at one side an emperor, with a crown, to all appearance of gold, on his head.
At the feet of Death was the god called Cupid, without his bandage, but with his bow, quiver, and arrows; there was also a knight in full armour, except that he had no morion or helmet, but only a hat decked with plumes of divers colours; and along with these there were others with a variety of costumes and faces.
That lad there appears as Death, that other as an angel, that woman, the manager’s wife, plays the queen, this one the soldier, that the emperor, and I the devil; and I am one of the principal characters of the play, for in this company I take the leading parts.
If you want to know anything more about us, ask me and I will answer with the utmost exactitude, for as I am a devil I am up to everything.” “By the faith of a knight-errant,” replied Don Quixote, “when I saw this cart I fancied some great adventure was presenting itself to me; but I declare one must touch with the hand what appears to the eye, if illusions are to be avoided.
But the moment Sancho quitted his beast to go and help Don Quixote, the dancing devil with the bladders jumped up on Dapple, and beating him with them, more by the fright and the noise than by the pain of the blows, made him fly across the fields towards the village where they were going to hold their festival.
In this trouble and perplexity he came to where Don Quixote lay in a far sorrier plight than he liked, and having helped him to mount Rocinante, he said to him, “Señor, the devil has carried off my Dapple.” “What devil?” asked Don Quixote.
“The one with the bladders,” said Sancho.
“Then I will recover him,” said Don Quixote, “even if he be shut up with him in the deepest and darkest dungeons of hell.
Don Quixote, when he saw them drawn up in such a gallant array with uplifted arms ready for a mighty discharge of stones, checked Rocinante and began to consider in what way he could attack them with the least danger to himself.
Come, tell me, hast thou not seen a play acted in which kings, emperors, pontiffs, knights, ladies, and divers other personages were introduced?
One plays the villain, another the knave, this one the merchant, that the soldier, one the sharp-witted fool, another the foolish lover; and when the play is over, and they have put off the dresses they wore in it, all the actors become equal.” “Yes, I have seen that,” said Sancho.
He did not remove Rocinante’s saddle, as his master’s express orders were, that so long as they were in the field or not sleeping under a roof Rocinante was not to be stripped—the ancient usage established and observed by knights-errant being to take off the bridle and hang it on the saddle-bow, but to remove the saddle from the horse—never!
I may add that they say the author left it on record that he likened their friendship to that of Nisus and Euryalus, and Pylades and Orestes; and if that be so, it may be perceived, to the admiration of mankind, how firm the friendship must have been between these two peaceful animals, shaming men, who preserve friendships with one another so badly.
The unison of opposites to prove, Of the soft wax and diamond hard am I; But still, obedient to the laws of love, Here, hard or soft, I offer you my breast, Whate’er you grave or stamp thereon shall rest Indelible for all eternity.
With an “Ah me!” that seemed to be drawn from the inmost recesses of his heart, the Knight of the Grove brought his lay to an end, and shortly afterwards exclaimed in a melancholy and piteous voice, “O fairest and most ungrateful woman on earth!
What! can it be, most serene Casildea de Vandalia, that thou wilt suffer this thy captive knight to waste away and perish in ceaseless wanderings and rude and arduous toils?
But let us listen, perhaps he will tell us more about himself.” “That he will,” returned Sancho, “for he seems in a mood to bewail himself for a month at a stretch.” But this was not the case, for the Knight of the Grove, hearing voices near him, instead of continuing his lamentation, stood up and exclaimed in a distinct but courteous tone, “Who goes there?
Do you belong to the number of the happy or of the miserable?” “Of the miserable,” answered Don Quixote.
“Then come to me,” said he of the Grove, “and rest assured that it is to woe itself and affliction itself you come.” Don Quixote, finding himself answered in such a soft and courteous manner, went over to him, and so did Sancho.
From what you have just now sung I gather that yours spring from love, I mean from the love you bear that fair ingrate you named in your lament.” In the meantime, they had seated themselves together on the hard ground peaceably and sociably, just as if, as soon as day broke, they were not going to break one another’s heads.
“Are you, sir knight, in love perchance?” asked he of the Grove of Don Quixote.
“By mischance I am,” replied Don Quixote; “though the ills arising from well-bestowed affections should be esteemed favours rather than misfortunes.” “That is true,” returned he of the Grove, “if scorn did not unsettle our reason and understanding, for if it be excessive it looks like revenge.” “I was never scorned by my lady,” said Don Quixote.
“Certainly not,” said Sancho, who stood close by, “for my lady is as a lamb, and softer than a roll of butter.” “Is this your squire?” asked he of the Grove.
“What! don’t you know that when a horseman delivers a good lance thrust at the bull in the plaza, or when anyone does anything very well, the people are wont to say, ‘Ha, whoreson rip! how well he has done it!’ and that what seems to be abuse in the expression is high praise?
What would you say, sir squire, to my having such a great natural instinct in judging wines that you have only to let me smell one and I can tell positively its country, its kind, its flavour and soundness, the changes it will undergo, and everything that appertains to a wine?
But it is no wonder, for I have had in my family, on my father’s side, the two best wine-tasters that have been known in La Mancha for many a long year, and to prove it I’ll tell you now a thing that happened them.
They gave the two of them some wine out of a cask, to try, asking their opinion as to the condition, quality, goodness or badness of the wine.
The first said the wine had a flavour of iron, the second said it had a stronger flavour of cordovan.
Nevertheless, these two great wine-tasters held to what they had said.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GROVE p14a.jpg (120K) Full Size Among the things that passed between Don Quixote and the Knight of the Wood, the history tells us he of the Grove said to Don Quixote, “In fine, sir knight, I would have you know that my destiny, or, more properly speaking, my choice led me to fall in love with the peerless Casildea de Vandalia.
I call her peerless because she has no peer, whether it be in bodily stature or in the supremacy of rank and beauty.
On one occasion she bade me go and challenge the famous giantess of Seville, La Giralda by name, who is as mighty and strong as if made of brass, and though never stirring from one spot, is the most restless and changeable woman in the world.
I came, I saw, I conquered, and I made her stay quiet and behave herself, for nothing but north winds blew for more than a week.
Another time I was ordered to lift those ancient stones, the mighty bulls of Guisando, an enterprise that might more fitly be entrusted to porters than to knights.
Again, she bade me fling myself into the cavern of Cabra—an unparalleled and awful peril—and bring her a minute account of all that is concealed in those gloomy depths.
I stopped the motion of the Giralda, I lifted the bulls of Guisando, I flung myself into the cavern and brought to light the secrets of its abyss; and my hopes are as dead as dead can be, and her scorn and her commands as lively as ever.
If all these tokens are not enough to vindicate the truth of what I say, here is my sword, that will compel incredulity itself to give credence to it.” “Calm yourself, sir knight,” said Don Quixote, “and give ear to what I am about to say to you.
I would have you know that this Don Quixote you speak of is the greatest friend I have in the world; so much so that I may say I regard him in the same light as my own person; and from the precise and clear indications you have given I cannot but think that he must be the very one you have vanquished.
But hardly had the light of day made it possible to see and distinguish things, when the first object that presented itself to the eyes of Sancho Panza was the squire of the Grove’s nose, which was so big that it almost overshadowed his whole body.
Don Quixote examined his adversary, and found that he already had his helmet on and visor lowered, so that he could not see his face; he observed, however, that he was a sturdily built man, but not very tall in stature.
At this moment the extraordinary nose of the squire presented itself to Don Quixote’s view, and he was no less amazed than Sancho at the sight; insomuch that he set him down as a monster of some kind, or a human being of some new species or unearthly breed.
At this lucky moment and crisis, Don Quixote came upon his adversary, in trouble with his horse, and embarrassed with his lance, which he either could not manage, or had no time to lay in rest.
Don Quixote, however, paid no attention to these difficulties, and in perfect safety to himself and without any risk encountered him of the Mirrors with such force that he brought him to the ground in spite of himself over the haunches of his horse, and with so heavy a fall that he lay to all appearance dead, not stirring hand or foot.
The instant Sancho saw him fall he slid down from the cork tree, and made all haste to where his master was, who, dismounting from Rocinante, went and stood over him of the Mirrors, and unlacing his helmet to see if he was dead, and to give him air if he should happen to be alive, he saw—who can say what he saw, without filling all who hear it with astonishment, wonder, and awe?
He saw, the history says, the very countenance, the very face, the very look, the very physiognomy, the very effigy, the very image of the bachelor Samson Carrasco!
As soon as he saw it he called out in a loud voice, “Make haste here, Sancho, and behold what thou art to see but not to believe; quick, my son, and learn what magic can do, and wizards and enchanters are capable of.” Sancho came up, and when he saw the countenance of the bachelor Carrasco, he fell to crossing himself a thousand times, and blessing himself as many more.
In fine, both master and man remained under the delusion; and, down in the mouth, and out of luck, he of the Mirrors and his squire parted from Don Quixote and Sancho, he meaning to go look for some village where he could plaster and strap his ribs.
Don Quixote and Sancho resumed their journey to Saragossa, and on it the history leaves them in order that it may tell who the Knight of the Mirrors and his long-nosed squire were. p14e.jpg (56K) CHAPTER XV.
But Don Quixote was of one mind, he of the Mirrors of another, for he just then had no thought of anything but finding some village where he could plaster himself, as has been said already.
Carrasco undertook the task, and Tom Cecial, a gossip and neighbour of Sancho Panza’s, a lively, feather-headed fellow, offered himself as his squire.
Tom Cecial, seeing how ill they had succeeded, and what a sorry end their expedition had come to, said to the bachelor, “Sure enough, Señor Samson Carrasco, we are served right; it is easy enough to plan and set about an enterprise, but it is often a difficult matter to come well out of it.
Don Quixote a madman, and we sane; he goes off laughing, safe, and sound, and you are left sore and sorry!
Tom Cecial left him and went home, while he stayed behind meditating vengeance; and the history will return to him again at the proper time, so as not to omit making merry with Don Quixote now. p15e.jpg (17K) CHAPTER XVI.
OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE WITH A DISCREET GENTLEMAN OF LA MANCHA p16a.jpg (85K) Full Size Don Quixote pursued his journey in the high spirits, satisfaction, and self-complacency already described, fancying himself the most valorous knight-errant of the age in the world because of his late victory.
“Come now, by what process of thinking can it be supposed that the bachelor Samson Carrasco would come as a knight-errant, in arms offensive and defensive, to fight with me?
Have I ever given him any occasion to owe me a grudge?
Am I his rival, or does he profess arms, that he should envy the fame I have acquired in them?” “Well, but what are we to say, señor,” returned Sancho, “about that knight, whoever he is, being so like the bachelor Carrasco, and his squire so like my gossip, Tom Cecial?
As they were engaged in this conversation they were overtaken by a man who was following the same road behind them, mounted on a very handsome flea-bitten mare, and dressed in a gaban of fine green cloth, with tawny velvet facings, and a montera of the same velvet.
The trappings of the mare were of the field and jineta fashion, and of mulberry colour and green.
He carried a Moorish cutlass hanging from a broad green and gold baldric; the buskins were of the same make as the baldric; the spurs were not gilt, but lacquered green, and so brightly polished that, matching as they did the rest of his apparel, they looked better than if they had been of pure gold.
In appearance he was about fifty years of age, with but few grey hairs, an aquiline cast of features, and an expression between grave and gay; and his dress and accoutrements showed him to be a man of good condition.
What he in green thought of Don Quixote of La Mancha was that a man of that sort and shape he had never yet seen; he marvelled at the length of his hair, his lofty stature, the lankness and sallowness of his countenance, his armour, his bearing and his gravity—a figure and picture such as had not been seen in those regions for many a long day.
I have left my home, I have mortgaged my estate, I have given up my comforts, and committed myself to the arms of Fortune, to bear me whithersoever she may please.
Thirty thousand volumes of my history have been printed, and it is on the high-road to be printed thirty thousand thousands of times, if heaven does not put a stop to it.
In short, to sum up all in a few words, or in a single one, I may tell you I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called ‘The Knight of the Rueful Countenance;’ for though self-praise is degrading, I must perforce sound my own sometimes, that is to say, when there is no one at hand to do it for me.
What! is it possible that there are knights-errant in the world in these days, and histories of real chivalry printed?
I cannot realise the fact that there can be anyone on earth now-a-days who aids widows, or protects maidens, or defends wives, or succours orphans; nor should I believe it had I not seen it in your worship with my own eyes.
To this, he in the green gaban replied “I, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, am a gentleman by birth, native of the village where, please God, we are going to dine to-day; I am more than fairly well off, and my name is Don Diego de Miranda.
Sometimes I dine with my neighbours and friends, and often invite them; my entertainments are neat and well served without stint of anything.
I have no taste for tattle, nor do I allow tattling in my presence; I pry not into my neighbours’ lives, nor have I lynx-eyes for what others do.
I hear mass every day; I share my substance with the poor, making no display of good works, lest I let hypocrisy and vainglory, those enemies that subtly take possession of the most watchful heart, find an entrance into mine.
Seeing this the gentleman asked him, “What are you about, brother?
Don Quixote then asked him how many children he had, and observed that one of the things wherein the ancient philosophers, who were without the true knowledge of God, placed the _summum bonum_ was in the gifts of nature, in those of fortune, in having many friends, and many and good children.
“I, Señor Don Quixote,” answered the gentleman, “have one son, without whom, perhaps, I should count myself happier than I am, not because he is a bad son, but because he is not so good as I could wish.
He is eighteen years of age; he has been for six at Salamanca studying Latin and Greek, and when I wished him to turn to the study of other sciences I found him so wrapped up in that of poetry (if that can be called a science) that there is no getting him to take kindly to the law, which I wished him to study, or to theology, the queen of them all.
I would like him to be an honour to his family, as we live in days when our kings liberally reward learning that is virtuous and worthy; for learning without virtue is a pearl on a dunghill.
Poetry, gentle sir, is, as I take it, like a tender young maiden of supreme beauty, to array, bedeck, and adorn whom is the task of several other maidens, who are all the rest of the sciences; and she must avail herself of the help of all, and all derive their lustre from her.
She is the product of an Alchemy of such virtue that he who is able to practise it, will turn her into pure gold of inestimable worth.
He that possesses her must keep her within bounds, not permitting her to break out in ribald satires or soulless sonnets.
She must on no account be offered for sale, unless, indeed, it be in heroic poems, moving tragedies, or sprightly and ingenious comedies.
She must not be touched by the buffoons, nor by the ignorant vulgar, incapable of comprehending or appreciating her hidden treasures.
And do not suppose, señor, that I apply the term vulgar here merely to plebeians and the lower orders; for everyone who is ignorant, be he lord or prince, may and should be included among the vulgar.
He, then, who shall embrace and cultivate poetry under the conditions I have named, shall become famous, and his name honoured throughout all the civilised nations of the earth.
At the same time, I say that the poet by nature who calls in art to his aid will be a far better poet, and will surpass him who tries to be one relying upon his knowledge of art alone.
The reason is, that art does not surpass nature, but only brings it to perfection; and thus, nature combined with art, and art with nature, will produce a perfect poet.
If the poet be pure in his morals, he will be pure in his verses too; the pen is the tongue of the mind, and as the thought engendered there, so will be the things that it writes down.
Sancho, hearing himself called, quitted the shepherds, and, prodding Dapple vigorously, came up to his master, to whom there fell a terrific and desperate adventure. p16e.jpg (49K) CHAPTER XVII.
Don Quixote took it, and without perceiving what was in it thrust it down in hot haste upon his head; but as the curds were pressed and squeezed the whey began to run all over his face and beard, whereat he was so startled that he cried out to Sancho: “Sancho, what’s this?
I think my head is softening, or my brains are melting, or I am sweating from head to foot!
If I am sweating it is not indeed from fear.
I am convinced beyond a doubt that the adventure which is about to befall me is a terrible one.
Give me something to wipe myself with, if thou hast it, for this profuse sweat is blinding me.” Sancho held his tongue, and gave him a cloth, and gave thanks to God at the same time that his master had not found out what was the matter.
You have guessed the offender finely!
Faith, sir, by the light God gives me, it seems I must have enchanters too, that persecute me as a creature and limb of your worship, and they must have put that nastiness there in order to provoke your patience to anger, and make you baste my ribs as you are wont to do.
Well, this time, indeed, they have missed their aim, for I trust to my master’s good sense to see that I have got no curds or milk, or anything of the sort; and that if I had it is in my stomach I would put it and not in the helmet.” “May be so,” said Don Quixote.
Don Quixote planted himself before it and said, “Whither are you going, brothers?
What flags are those?” To this the carter replied, “The cart is mine; what is in it is a pair of wild caged lions, which the governor of Oran is sending to court as a present to his Majesty; and the flags are our lord the King’s, to show that what is here is his property.” “And are the lions large?” asked Don Quixote.
They are male and female; the male is in that first cage and the female in the one behind, and they are hungry now, for they have eaten nothing to-day, so let your worship stand aside, for we must make haste to the place where we are to feed them.” Hereupon, smiling slightly, Don Quixote exclaimed, “Lion-whelps to me! to me whelps of lions, and at such a time!
Then, by God! those gentlemen who send them here shall see if I am a man to be frightened by lions.
You, gentlemen, place yourselves in safety before I open, for I know they will do me no harm.” Once more the gentleman strove to persuade Don Quixote not to do such a mad thing, as it was tempting God to engage in such a piece of folly.
The gentleman in return entreated him to reflect, for he knew he was under a delusion.
“Look ye, señor,” said Sancho, “there’s no enchantment here, nor anything of the sort, for between the bars and chinks of the cage I have seen the paw of a real lion, and judging by that I reckon the lion such a paw could belong to must be bigger than a mountain.” “Fear at any rate,” replied Don Quixote, “will make him look bigger to thee than half the world.
Retire, Sancho, and leave me; and if I die here thou knowest our old compact; thou wilt repair to Dulcinea—I say no more.” To these he added some further words that banished all hope of his giving up his insane project.
Sancho was weeping over his master’s death, for this time he firmly believed it was in store for him from the claws of the lions; and he cursed his fate and called it an unlucky hour when he thought of taking service with him again; but with all his tears and lamentations he did not forget to thrash Dapple so as to put a good space between himself and the cart.
The keeper, seeing that the fugitives were now some distance off, once more entreated and warned him as before; but he replied that he heard him, and that he need not trouble himself with any further warnings or entreaties, as they would be fruitless, and bade him make haste.
It is to be observed, that on coming to this passage, the author of this veracious history breaks out into exclamations.
“O doughty Don Quixote! high-mettled past extolling!
Mirror, wherein all the heroes of the world may see themselves!
Second modern Don Manuel de Leon, once the glory and honour of Spanish knighthood!
In what words shall I describe this dread exploit, by what language shall I make it credible to ages to come, what eulogies are there unmeet for thee, though they be hyperboles piled on hyperboles!
On foot, alone, undaunted, high-souled, with but a simple sword, and that no trenchant blade of the Perrillo brand, a shield, but no bright polished steel one, there stoodst thou, biding and awaiting the two fiercest lions that Africa’s forests ever bred!
Don Quixote merely observed him steadily, longing for him to leap from the cart and come to close quarters with him, when he hoped to hew him in pieces.
So far did his unparalleled madness go; but the noble lion, more courteous than arrogant, not troubling himself about silly bravado, after having looked all round, as has been said, turned about and presented his hind-quarters to Don Quixote, and very coolly and tranquilly lay down again in the cage.
Be satisfied, sir knight, with what you have done, which leaves nothing more to be said on the score of courage, and do not seek to tempt fortune a second time.
I am not bound to do more; enchantments avaunt, and God uphold the right, the truth, and true chivalry!
Sancho, however, happening to observe the signal of the white cloth, exclaimed, “May I die, if my master has not overcome the wild beasts, for he is calling to us.” They all stopped, and perceived that it was Don Quixote who was making signals, and shaking off their fears to some extent, they approached slowly until they were near enough to hear distinctly Don Quixote’s voice calling to them.
They returned at length to the cart, and as they came up, Don Quixote said to the carter, “Put your mules to once more, brother, and continue your journey; and do thou, Sancho, give him two gold crowns for himself and the keeper, to compensate for the delay they have incurred through me.” “That will I give with all my heart,” said Sancho; “but what has become of the lions?
“Are there any enchantments that can prevail against true valour?
The enchanters may be able to rob me of good fortune, but of fortitude and courage they cannot.” Sancho paid the crowns, the carter put to, the keeper kissed Don Quixote’s hands for the bounty bestowed upon him, and promised to give an account of the valiant exploit to the King himself, as soon as he saw him at court.
All this time, Don Diego de Miranda had not spoken a word, being entirely taken up with observing and noting all that Don Quixote did and said, and the opinion he formed was that he was a man of brains gone mad, and a madman on the verge of rationality.
To greater advantage, I maintain, does the knight-errant show bringing aid to some widow in some lonely waste, than the court knight dallying with some city damsel.
Almost the same civilities were exchanged between him and the student, who listening to Don Quixote, took him to be a sensible, clear-headed person.
They led Don Quixote into a room, and Sancho removed his armour, leaving him in loose Walloon breeches and chamois-leather doublet, all stained with the rust of his armour; his collar was a falling one of scholastic cut, without starch or lace, his buskins buff-coloured, and his shoes polished.
He wore his good sword, which hung in a baldric of sea-wolf’s skin, for he had suffered for many years, they say, from an ailment of the kidneys; and over all he threw a long cloak of good grey cloth.
But first of all, with five or six buckets of water (for as regard the number of buckets there is some dispute), he washed his head and face, and still the water remained whey-coloured, thanks to Sancho’s greediness and purchase of those unlucky curds that turned his master so white.
Thus arrayed, and with an easy, sprightly, and gallant air, Don Quixote passed out into another room, where the student was waiting to entertain him while the table was being laid; for on the arrival of so distinguished a guest, Doña Christina was anxious to show that she knew how and was able to give a becoming reception to those who came to her house.
While Don Quixote was taking off his armour, Don Lorenzo (for so Don Diego’s son was called) took the opportunity to say to his father, “What are we to make of this gentleman you have brought home to us, sir?
For his name, his appearance, and your describing him as a knight-errant have completely puzzled my mother and me.” “I don’t know what to say, my son,” replied.
He must be a theologian, so as to be able to give a clear and distinctive reason for the Christian faith he professes, wherever it may be asked of him.
He must be a physician, and above all a herbalist, so as in wastes and solitudes to know the herbs that have the property of healing wounds, for a knight-errant must not go looking for someone to cure him at every step.
He must be an astronomer, so as to know by the stars how many hours of the night have passed, and what clime and quarter of the world he is in.
No other prize I seek to gain, No triumph, glory, or success, Only the long-lost happiness, The memory whereof is pain.
One taste, methinks, of bygone bliss The heart-consuming fire might stay; And, so it come without delay, Then would I ask no more than this.
That time should ever be, and then Come back to us, and be again, No power on earth can bring to pass; For fleet of foot is he, I wis, And idly, therefore, do we pray That what for aye hath left us may Become for us the time that is.
Perplexed, uncertain, to remain ’Twixt hope and fear, is death, not life; ’Twere better, sure, to end the strife, And dying, seek release from pain.
Heaven grant that the judges who rob you of the first prize—that Phœbus may pierce them with his arrows, and the Muses never cross the thresholds of their doors.
Repeat me some of your long-measure verses, señor, if you will be so good, for I want thoroughly to feel the pulse of your rare genius.” Is there any need to say that Don Lorenzo enjoyed hearing himself praised by Don Quixote, albeit he looked upon him as a madman? power of flattery, how far-reaching art thou, and how wide are the bounds of thy pleasant jurisdiction!
Don Lorenzo gave a proof of it, for he complied with Don Quixote’s request and entreaty, and repeated to him this sonnet on the fable or story of Pyramus and Thisbe.
SONNET The lovely maid, she pierces now the wall; Heart-pierced by her young Pyramus doth lie; And Love spreads wing from Cyprus isle to fly, A chink to view so wondrous great and small.
There silence speaketh, for no voice at all Can pass so strait a strait; but love will ply Where to all other power ’twere vain to try; For love will find a way whate’er befall.
Impatient of delay, with reckless pace The rash maid wins the fatal spot where she Sinks not in lover’s arms but death’s embrace.
So runs the strange tale, how the lovers twain One sword, one sepulchre, one memory, Slays, and entombs, and brings to life again.
Don Diego and his son commended his laudable resolution, and bade him furnish himself with all he wanted from their house and belongings, as they would most gladly be of service to him; which, indeed, his personal worth and his honourable profession made incumbent upon them.
The day of his departure came at length, as welcome to Don Quixote as it was sad and sorrowful to Sancho Panza, who was very well satisfied with the abundance of Don Diego’s house, and objected to return to the starvation of the woods and wilds and the short-commons of his ill-stocked alforjas; these, however, he filled and packed with what he considered needful.
There was a renewal of offers of service and civilities, and then, with the gracious permission of the lady of the castle, they took their departure, Don Quixote on Rocinante, and Sancho on Dapple. p18e.jpg (18K) CHAPTER XIX.
IN WHICH IS RELATED THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENAMOURED SHEPHERD, TOGETHER WITH OTHER TRULY DROLL INCIDENTS p19a.jpg (131K) Full Size Don Quixote had gone but a short distance beyond Don Diego’s village, when he fell in with a couple of either priests or students, and a couple of peasants, mounted on four beasts of the ass kind.
One of the students carried, wrapped up in a piece of green buckram by way of a portmanteau, what seemed to be a little linen and a couple of pairs of ribbed stockings; the other carried nothing but a pair of new fencing-foils with buttons.
The peasants carried divers articles that showed they were on their way from some large town where they had bought them, and were taking them home to their village; and both students and peasants were struck with the same amazement that everybody felt who saw Don Quixote for the first time, and were dying to know who this man, so different from ordinary men, could be.
He informed them that his own name was Don Quixote of La Mancha, and that he was called, by way of surname, the Knight of the Lions.
“Not at all,” said the student; “it is the wedding of a farmer and a farmer’s daughter, he the richest in all this country, and she the fairest mortal ever set eyes on.
The display with which it is to be attended will be something rare and out of the common, for it will be celebrated in a meadow adjoining the town of the bride, who is called, _par excellence_, Quiteria the fair, as the bridegroom is called Camacho the rich.
She is eighteen, and he twenty-two, and they are fairly matched, though some knowing ones, who have all the pedigrees in the world by heart, will have it that the family of the fair Quiteria is better than Camacho’s; but no one minds that now-a-days, for wealth can solder a great many flaws.
At any rate, Camacho is free-handed, and it is his fancy to screen the whole meadow with boughs and cover it in overhead, so that the sun will have hard work if he tries to get in to reach the grass that covers the soil.
He has provided dancers too, not only sword but also bell-dancers, for in his own town there are those who ring the changes and jingle the bells to perfection; of shoe-dancers I say nothing, for of them he has engaged a host.
But none of these things, nor of the many others I have omitted to mention, will do more to make this a memorable wedding than the part which I suspect the despairing Basilio will play in it.
He who has to make a long journey, will, if he is wise, look out for some trusty and pleasant companion to accompany him before he sets out.
Why, then, should not he do the same who has to make the whole journey of life down to the final halting-place of death, more especially when the companion has to be his companion in bed, at board, and everywhere, as the wife is to her husband?
The companionship of one’s wife is no article of merchandise, that, after it has been bought, may be returned, or bartered, or changed; for it is an inseparable accident that lasts as long as life lasts; it is a noose that, once you put it round your neck, turns into a Gordian knot, which, if the scythe of Death does not cut it, there is no untying.
Sometimes he gazes at the sky, at other times he fixes his eyes on the earth in such an abstracted way that he might be taken for a clothed statue, with its drapery stirred by the wind.
God bless me, it’s not fair to force a Sayago-man to speak like a Toledan; maybe there are Toledans who do not hit it off when it comes to polished talk.” “That is true,” said the licentiate, “for those who have been bred up in the Tanneries and the Zocodover cannot talk like those who are almost all day pacing the cathedral cloisters, and yet they are all Toledans.
Pure, correct, elegant and lucid language will be met with in men of courtly breeding and discrimination, though they may have been born in Majalahonda; I say of discrimination, because there are many who are not so, and discrimination is the grammar of good language, if it be accompanied by practice.
The other two of the company, the peasants, without dismounting from their asses, served as spectators of the mortal tragedy.
The cuts, thrusts, down strokes, back strokes and doubles, that Corchuelo delivered were past counting, and came thicker than hops or hail.
He attacked like an angry lion, but he was met by a tap on the mouth from the button of the licentiate’s sword that checked him in the midst of his furious onset, and made him kiss it as if it were a relic, though not as devoutly as relics are and ought to be kissed.
During the remainder of the journey the licentiate held forth to them on the excellences of the sword, with such conclusive arguments, and such figures and mathematical proofs, that all were convinced of the value of the science, and Corchuelo cured of his dogmatism.
It grew dark; but before they reached the town it seemed to them all as if there was a heaven full of countless glittering stars in front of it.
They heard, too, the pleasant mingled notes of a variety of instruments, flutes, drums, psalteries, pipes, tabors, and timbrels, and as they drew near they perceived that the trees of a leafy arcade that had been constructed at the entrance of the town were filled with lights unaffected by the wind, for the breeze at the time was so gentle that it had not power to stir the leaves on the trees.
The musicians were the life of the wedding, wandering through the pleasant grounds in separate bands, some dancing, others singing, others playing the various instruments already mentioned.
In short, it seemed as though mirth and gaiety were frisking and gambolling all over the meadow.
Several other persons were engaged in erecting raised benches from which people might conveniently see the plays and dances that were to be performed the next day on the spot dedicated to the celebration of the marriage of Camacho the rich and the obsequies of Basilio.
Sleep, I say, and will say a hundred times, without any jealous thoughts of thy mistress to make thee keep ceaseless vigils, or any cares as to how thou art to pay the debts thou owest, or find to-morrow’s food for thyself and thy needy little family, to interfere with thy repose.
Ambition breaks not thy rest, nor doth this world’s empty pomp disturb thee, for the utmost reach of thy anxiety is to provide for thy ass, since upon my shoulders thou hast laid the support of thyself, the counterpoise and burden that nature and custom have imposed upon masters.
The servant sleeps and the master lies awake thinking how he is to feed him, advance him, and reward him.
To make a grand match for himself, and he without a farthing; is there nothing else?
Faith, señor, it’s my opinion the poor man should be content with what he can get, and not go looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea.
I will bet my arm that Camacho could bury Basilio in reals; and if that be so, as no doubt it is, what a fool Quiteria would be to refuse the fine dresses and jewels Camacho must have given her and will give her, and take Basilio’s bar-throwing and sword-play.
Talents and accomplishments that can’t be turned into money, let Count Dirlos have them; but when such gifts fall to one that has hard cash, I wish my condition of life was as becoming as they are.
Countless were the hares ready skinned and the plucked fowls that hung on the trees for burial in the pots, numberless the wildfowl and game of various sorts suspended from the branches that the air might keep them cool.
Sancho counted more than sixty wine skins of over six gallons each, and all filled, as it proved afterwards, with generous wines.
There were, besides, piles of the whitest bread, like the heaps of corn one sees on the threshing-floors.
There was a wall made of cheeses arranged like open brick-work, and two cauldrons full of oil, bigger than those of a dyer’s shop, served for cooking fritters, which when fried were taken out with two mighty shovels, and plunged into another cauldron of prepared honey that stood close by.
In the capacious belly of the ox were a dozen soft little sucking-pigs, which, sewn up there, served to give it tenderness and flavour.
The spices of different kinds did not seem to have been bought by the pound but by the quarter, and all lay open to view in a great chest.
In short, all the preparations made for the wedding were in rustic style, but abundant enough to feed an army. p20c.jpg (415K) Full Size Sancho observed all, contemplated all, and everything won his heart.
“Wait a bit,” said the cook; “sinner that I am! how particular and bashful you are!” and so saying, he seized a bucket and plunging it into one of the half jars took up three hens and a couple of geese, and said to Sancho, “Fall to, friend, and take the edge off your appetite with these skimmings until dinner-time comes.” p20d.jpg (351K) Full Size “I have nothing to put them in,” said Sancho.
“As yet, thank God, no one has been wounded,” said he, “we are all safe and sound;” and he at once began to execute complicated figures with the rest of his comrades, with so many turns and so great dexterity, that although Don Quixote was well used to see dances of the same kind, he thought he had never seen any so good as this.
He also admired another that came in composed of fair young maidens, none of whom seemed to be under fourteen or over eighteen years of age, all clad in green stuff, with their locks partly braided, partly flowing loose, but all of such bright gold as to vie with the sunbeams, and over them they wore garlands of jessamine, roses, amaranth, and honeysuckle.
At their head were a venerable old man and an ancient dame, more brisk and active, however, than might have been expected from their years.
The nymphs that followed Love bore their names written on white parchment in large letters on their backs.
Those that followed Interest were distinguished in the same way; the badge of the first announced “Liberality,” that of the second “Largess,” the third “Treasure,” and the fourth “Peaceful Possession.” In front of them all came a wooden castle drawn by four wild men, all clad in ivy and hemp stained green, and looking so natural that they nearly terrified Sancho.
The heavens above us own me; nay, The shades below acknowledge me.
I know not fear, I have my will, Whate’er my whim or fancy be; For me there’s no impossible, I order, bind, forbid, set free.
Having concluded the stanza he discharged an arrow at the top of the castle, and went back to his place.
Interest then came forward and went through two more figures, and as soon as the tabors ceased, he said: But mightier than Love am I, Though Love it be that leads me on, Than mine no lineage is more high, Or older, underneath the sun.
To use me rightly few know how, To act without me fewer still, For I am Interest, and I vow For evermore to do thy will.
Interest retired, and Poetry came forward, and when she had gone through her figures like the others, fixing her eyes on the damsel of the castle, she said: With many a fanciful conceit, Fair Lady, winsome Poesy Her soul, an offering at thy feet, Presents in sonnets unto thee.
Poetry withdrew, and on the side of Interest Liberality advanced, and after having gone through her figures, said: To give, while shunning each extreme, The sparing hand, the over-free, Therein consists, so wise men deem, The virtue Liberality.
But thee, fair lady, to enrich, Myself a prodigal I’ll prove, A vice not wholly shameful, which May find its fair excuse in love.
In the same manner all the characters of the two bands advanced and retired, and each executed its figures, and delivered its verses, some of them graceful, some burlesque, but Don Quixote’s memory (though he had an excellent one) only carried away those that have been just quoted.
All then mingled together, forming chains and breaking off again with graceful, unconstrained gaiety; and whenever Love passed in front of the castle he shot his arrows up at it, while Interest broke gilded pellets against it.
At length, after they had danced a good while, Interest drew out a great purse, made of the skin of a large brindled cat and to all appearance full of money, and flung it at the castle, and with the force of the blow the boards fell asunder and tumbled down, leaving the damsel exposed and unprotected.
Interest and the characters of his band advanced, and throwing a great chain of gold over her neck pretended to take her and lead her away captive, on seeing which, Love and his supporters made as though they would release her, the whole action being to the accompaniment of the tabors and in the form of a regular dance.
The wild men made peace between them, and with great dexterity readjusted and fixed the boards of the castle, and the damsel once more ensconced herself within; and with this the dance wound up, to the great enjoyment of the beholders.
Don Quixote asked one of the nymphs who it was that had composed and arranged it.
She replied that it was a beneficiary of the town who had a nice taste in devising things of the sort.
As a grandmother of mine used to say, there are only two families in the world, the Haves and the Haven’ts; and she stuck to the Haves; and to this day, Señor Don Quixote, people would sooner feel the pulse of ‘Have,’ than of ‘Know;’ an ass covered with gold looks better than a horse with a pack-saddle.
So once more I say I stick to Camacho, the bountiful skimmings of whose pots are geese and hens, hares and rabbits; but of Basilio’s, if any ever come to hand, or even to foot, they’ll be only rinsings.” “Hast thou finished thy harangue, Sancho?” said Don Quixote.
“Of course I have finished it,” replied Sancho, “because I see your worship takes offence at it; but if it was not for that, there was work enough cut out for three days.” “God grant I may see thee dumb before I die, Sancho,” said Don Quixote.
That lady is more mighty than dainty, she is in no way squeamish, she devours all and is ready for all, and fills her alforjas with people of all sorts, ages, and ranks.
When Sancho saw the bride, he exclaimed, “By my faith, she is not dressed like a country girl, but like some fine court lady; egad, as well as I can make out, the patena she wears rich coral, and her green Cuenca stuff is thirty-pile velvet; and then the white linen trimming—by my oath, but it’s satin!
Whoreson baggage, what hair she has! if it’s not a wig, I never saw longer or fairer all the days of my life.
Wouldn’t you say she was like a walking palm tree loaded with clusters of dates? for the trinkets she has hanging from her hair and neck look just like them.
I swear in my heart she is a brave lass, and fit ‘to pass over the banks of Flanders.’” Don Quixote laughed at Sancho’s boorish eulogies and thought that, saving his lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he had never seen a more beautiful woman.
The fair Quiteria appeared somewhat pale, which was, no doubt, because of the bad night brides always pass dressing themselves out for their wedding on the morrow.
He was crowned (as was presently seen) with a crown of gloomy cypress, and in his hand he held a long staff.
As he approached he was recognised by everyone as the gay Basilio, and all waited anxiously to see what would come of his words, in dread of some catastrophe in consequence of his appearance at such a moment.
His friends at once ran to his aid, filled with grief at his misery and sad fate, and Don Quixote, dismounting from Rocinante, hastened to support him, and took him in his arms, and found he had not yet ceased to breathe.
They were about to draw out the rapier, but the priest who was standing by objected to its being withdrawn before he had confessed him, as the instant of its withdrawal would be that of this death.
Don Quixote hearing the wounded man’s entreaty, exclaimed aloud that what Basilio asked was just and reasonable, and moreover a request that might be easily complied with; and that it would be as much to Señor Camacho’s honour to receive the lady Quiteria as the widow of the brave Basilio as if he received her direct from her father.
Quiteria approached him, and kneeling, demanded his hand by signs without speaking.
Basilio opened his eyes and gazing fixedly at her, said, “O Quiteria, why hast thou turned compassionate at a moment when thy compassion will serve as a dagger to rob me of life, for I have not now the strength left either to bear the happiness thou givest me in accepting me as thine, or to suppress the pain that is rapidly drawing the dread shadow of death over my eyes?
Sancho, who never found any pleasure or enjoyment in such doings, retreated to the wine-jars from which he had taken his delectable skimmings, considering that, as a holy place, that spot would be respected.
Quiteria belonged to Basilio and Basilio to Quiteria by the just and beneficent disposal of heaven.
Camacho is rich, and can purchase his pleasure when, where, and as it pleases him.
Basilio has but this ewe-lamb, and no one, however powerful he may be, shall take her from him; these two whom God hath joined man cannot separate; and he who attempts it must first pass the point of this lance;” and so saying he brandished it so stoutly and dexterously that he overawed all who did not know him.
Camacho and those of his following, therefore, being consoled and pacified, those on Basilio’s side were appeased; and the rich Camacho, to show that he felt no resentment for the trick, and did not care about it, desired the festival to go on just as if he were married in reality.
Neither Basilio, however, nor his bride, nor their followers would take any part in it, and they withdrew to Basilio’s village; for the poor, if they are persons of virtue and good sense, have those who follow, honour, and uphold them, just as the rich have those who flatter and dance attendance on them.
With them they carried Don Quixote, regarding him as a man of worth and a stout one.
And so, vexed and dejected though not hungry, without dismounting from Dapple he followed in the footsteps of Rocinante. p21c.jpg (417K) Full Size p21e.jpg (49K) CHAPTER XXII.
The fair woman who is a woman of honour, and whose husband is poor, deserves to be crowned with the laurels and crowns of victory and triumph.
Beauty by itself attracts the desires of all who behold it, and the royal eagles and birds of towering flight stoop on it as on a dainty lure; but if beauty be accompanied by want and penury, then the ravens and the kites and other birds of prey assail it, and she who stands firm against such attacks well deserves to be called the crown of her husband.
“Remember, O prudent Basilio,” added Don Quixote, “it was the opinion of a certain sage, I know not whom, that there was not more than one good woman in the whole world; and his advice was that each one should think and believe that this one good woman was his own wife, and in this way he would live happy.
I myself am not married, nor, so far, has it ever entered my thoughts to be so; nevertheless I would venture to give advice to anyone who might ask it, as to the mode in which he should seek a wife such as he would be content to marry.
The first thing I would recommend him, would be to look to good name rather than to wealth, for a good woman does not win a good name merely by being good, but by letting it be seen that she is so, and open looseness and freedom do much more damage to a woman’s honour than secret depravity.
Don Quixote begged the fencing licentiate to find him a guide to show him the way to the cave of Montesinos, as he had a great desire to enter it and see with his own eyes if the wonderful tales that were told of it all over the country were true.
The cousin arrived at last, leading an ass in foal, with a pack-saddle covered with a parti-coloured carpet or sackcloth; Sancho saddled Rocinante, got Dapple ready, and stocked his alforjas, along with which went those of the cousin, likewise well filled; and so, commending themselves to God and bidding farewell to all, they set out, taking the road for the famous cave of Montesinos.
On the way Don Quixote asked the cousin of what sort and character his pursuits, avocations, and studies were, to which he replied that he was by profession a humanist, and that his pursuits and studies were making books for the press, all of great utility and no less entertainment to the nation.
Another book I have which I call ‘The Supplement to Polydore Vergil,’ which treats of the invention of things, and is a work of great erudition and research, for I establish and elucidate elegantly some things of great importance which Polydore omitted to mention.
Don Quixote said that even if it reached to the bottomless pit he meant to see where it went to; so they bought about a hundred fathoms of rope, and next day at two in the afternoon they arrived at the cave, the mouth of which is spacious and wide, but full of thorn and wild-fig bushes and brambles and briars, so thick and matted that they completely close it up and cover it over.
Now indeed do I know that all the pleasures of this life pass away like a shadow and a dream, or fade like the flower of the field.
O ill-fated Montesinos!
O sore-wounded Durandarte!
O tearful Guadiana, and ye O hapless daughters of Ruidera who show in your waves the tears that flowed from your beauteous eyes!” p22d.jpg (318K) Full Size The cousin and Sancho Panza listened with deep attention to the words of Don Quixote, who uttered them as though with immense pain he drew them up from his very bowels.
“Hell do you call it?” said Don Quixote; “call it by no such name, for it does not deserve it, as ye shall soon see.” He then begged them to give him something to eat, as he was very hungry.
They spread the cousin’s sackcloth on the grass, and put the stores of the alforjas into requisition, and all three sitting down lovingly and sociably, they made a luncheon and a supper of it all in one; and when the sackcloth was removed, Don Quixote of La Mancha said, “Let no one rise, and attend to me, my sons, both of you.” p22e.jpg (48K) CHAPTER XXIII.
A little light reaches it through some chinks or crevices, communicating with it and open to the surface of the earth.
This recess or space I perceived when I was already growing weary and disgusted at finding myself hanging suspended by the rope, travelling downwards into that dark region without any certainty or knowledge of where I was going, so I resolved to enter it and rest myself for a while.
I opened my eyes, I rubbed them, and found I was not asleep but thoroughly awake.
Nevertheless, I felt my head and breast to satisfy myself whether it was I myself who was there or some empty delusive phantom; but touch, feeling, the collected thoughts that passed through my mind, all convinced me that I was the same then and there that I am this moment.
Next there presented itself to my sight a stately royal palace or castle, with walls that seemed built of clear transparent crystal; and through two great doors that opened wide therein, I saw coming forth and advancing towards me a venerable old man, clad in a long gown of mulberry-coloured serge that trailed upon the ground.
On his shoulders and breast he had a green satin collegiate hood, and covering his head a black Milanese bonnet, and his snow-white beard fell below his girdle.
He carried no arms whatever, nothing but a rosary of beads bigger than fair-sized filberts, each tenth bead being like a moderate ostrich egg; his bearing, his gait, his dignity and imposing presence held me spellbound and wondering.
He said in reply that they spoke the truth in every respect except as to the dagger, for it was not a dagger, nor little, but a burnished poniard sharper than an awl.” “That poniard must have been made by Ramon de Hoces the Sevillian,” said Sancho.
His right hand (which seemed to me somewhat hairy and sinewy, a sign of great strength in its owner) lay on the side of his heart; but before I could put any question to Montesinos, he, seeing me gazing at the tomb in amazement, said to me, ‘This is my friend Durandarte, flower and mirror of the true lovers and valiant knights of his time.
He is held enchanted here, as I myself and many others are, by that French enchanter Merlin, who, they say, was the devil’s son; but my belief is, not that he was the devil’s son, but that he knew, as the saying is, a point more than the devil.
How or why he enchanted us, no one knows, but time will tell, and I suspect that time is not far off.
What I marvel at is, that I know it to be as sure as that it is now day, that Durandarte ended his life in my arms, and that, after his death, I took out his heart with my own hands; and indeed it must have weighed more than two pounds, for, according to naturalists, he who has a large heart is more largely endowed with valour than he who has a small one.
The seven daughters belong to the kings of Spain and the two nieces to the knights of a very holy order called the Order of St.
Guadiana your squire, likewise bewailing your fate, was changed into a river of his own name, but when he came to the surface and beheld the sun of another heaven, so great was his grief at finding he was leaving you, that he plunged into the bowels of the earth; however, as he cannot help following his natural course, he from time to time comes forth and shows himself to the sun and the world.
The lakes aforesaid send him their waters, and with these, and others that come to him, he makes a grand and imposing entrance into Portugal; but for all that, go where he may, he shows his melancholy and sadness, and takes no pride in breeding dainty choice fish, only coarse and tasteless sorts, very different from those of the golden Tagus.
I have now news to give you, which, if it serves not to alleviate your sufferings, will not in any wise increase them.
I looked round, and through the crystal wall I saw passing through another chamber a procession of two lines of fair damsels all clad in mourning, and with white turbans of Turkish fashion on their heads.
Her turban was twice as large as the largest of any of the others; her eyebrows met, her nose was rather flat, her mouth was large but with ruddy lips, and her teeth, of which at times she allowed a glimpse, were seen to be sparse and ill-set, though as white as peeled almonds.
“And did your worship eat anything all that time, señor?” asked the cousin.
“I never touched a morsel,” answered Don Quixote, “nor did I feel hunger, or think of it.” “And do the enchanted eat?” said the cousin.
“They neither eat,” said Don Quixote; “nor are they subject to the greater excrements, though it is thought that their nails, beards, and hair grow.” “And do the enchanted sleep, now, señor?” asked Sancho.
But forgive me, señor, if I say that of all this you have told us now, may God take me—I was just going to say the devil—if I believe a single particle.” “What!” said the cousin, “has Señor Don Quixote, then, been lying?
Why, even if he wished it he has not had time to imagine and put together such a host of lies.” “I don’t believe my master lies,” said Sancho.
But tell me, while we are still at peace, how or by what did you recognise the lady our mistress; and if you spoke to her, what did you say, and what did she answer?” “I recognised her,” said Don Quixote, “by her wearing the same garments she wore when thou didst point her out to me.
I spoke to her, but she did not utter a word in reply; on the contrary, she turned her back on me and took to flight, at such a pace that crossbow bolt could not have overtaken her.
I wished to follow her, and would have done so had not Montesinos recommended me not to take the trouble as it would be useless, particularly as the time was drawing near when it would be necessary for me to quit the cavern.
He told me, moreover, that in course of time he would let me know how he and Belerma, and Durandarte, and all who were there, were to be disenchanted.
For me to believe that Don Quixote could lie, he being the most truthful gentleman and the noblest knight of his time, is impossible; he would not have told a lie though he were shot to death with arrows.
On the other hand, I reflect that he related and told the story with all the circumstances detailed, and that he could not in so short a space have fabricated such a vast complication of absurdities; if, then, this adventure seems apocryphal, it is no fault of mine; and so, without affirming its falsehood or its truth, I write it down.
And this demonstration is just the thing for me for that other book I am writing, the ‘Supplement to Polydore Vergil on the Invention of Antiquities;’ for I believe he never thought of inserting that of cards in his book, as I mean to do in mine, and it will be a matter of great importance, particularly when I can cite so grave and veracious an authority as Señor Durandarte.
And the fourth thing is, that I have ascertained the source of the river Guadiana, heretofore unknown to mankind.” “You are right,” said Don Quixote; “but I should like to know, if by God’s favour they grant you a licence to print those books of yours—which I doubt—to whom do you mean to dedicate them?” “There are lords and grandees in Spain to whom they can be dedicated,” said the cousin.
“Not many,” said Don Quixote; “not that they are unworthy of it, but because they do not care to accept books and incur the obligation of making the return that seems due to the author’s labour and courtesy.
Close to the hermitage he has a small house which he built at his own cost, but though small it is large enough for the reception of guests.” “Has this hermit any hens, do you think?” asked Sancho.
“Few hermits are without them,” said Don Quixote; “for those we see now-a-days are not like the hermits of the Egyptian deserts who were clad in palm-leaves, and lived on the roots of the earth.
When he came up to them, he saluted them and passed on without stopping.
Don Quixote called to him, “Stay, good fellow; you seem to be making more haste than suits that mule.” “I cannot stop, señor,” answered the man; “for the arms you see I carry here are to be used to-morrow, so I must not delay; God be with you.
Accordingly they mounted and all three took the direct road for the inn, which they reached a little before nightfall.
On the road the cousin proposed they should go up to the hermitage to drink a sup.
The instant Sancho heard this he steered his Dapple towards it, and Don Quixote and the cousin did the same; but it seems Sancho’s bad luck so ordered it that the hermit was not at home, for so a sub-hermit they found in the hermitage told them.
She replied that her master had none, but that if they liked cheap water she would give it with great pleasure.
Ah, Camacho’s wedding, and plentiful house of Don Diego, how often do I miss you!” Leaving the hermitage, they pushed on towards the inn, and a little farther they came upon a youth who was pacing along in front of them at no great speed, so that they overtook him.
He carried a sword over his shoulder, and slung on it a budget or bundle of his clothes apparently, probably his breeches or pantaloons, and his cloak and a shirt or two; for he had on a short jacket of velvet with a gloss like satin on it in places, and had his shirt out; his stockings were of silk, and his shoes square-toed as they wear them at court.
His age might have been eighteen or nineteen; he was of a merry countenance, and to all appearance of an active habit, and he went along singing seguidillas to beguile the wearisomeness of the road.
As they came up with him he was just finishing one, which the cousin got by heart and they say ran thus— I’m off to the wars For the want of pence, Oh, had I but money I’d show more sense.
“If I had been in the service of some grandee of Spain or personage of distinction,” replied the youth, “I should have been safe to get it; for that is the advantage of serving good masters, that out of the servants’ hall men come to be ancients or captains, or get a good pension.
He answered, that which is unexpected, which comes suddenly and unforeseen; and though he answered like a pagan, and one without the knowledge of the true God, yet, as far as sparing our feelings is concerned, he was right; for suppose you are killed in the first engagement or skirmish, whether by a cannon ball or blown up by mine, what matters it?
It is only dying, and all is over; and according to Terence, a soldier shows better dead in battle, than alive and safe in flight; and the good soldier wins fame in proportion as he is obedient to his captains and those in command over him.
Well, well, we shall see.” And now, just as night was falling, they reached the inn, and it was not without satisfaction that Sancho perceived his master took it for a real inn, and not for a castle as usual.
The instant they entered Don Quixote asked the landlord after the man with the lances and halberds, and was told that he was in the stable seeing to his mule; which was what Sancho and the cousin proceeded to do for their beasts, giving the best manger and the best place in the stable to Rocinante. p24e.jpg (61K) CHAPTER XXV.
WHEREIN IS SET DOWN THE BRAYING ADVENTURE, AND THE DROLL ONE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHER WITH THE MEMORABLE DIVINATIONS OF THE DIVINING APE p25a.jpg (154K) Full Size Don Quixote’s bread would not bake, as the common saying is, until he had heard and learned the curious things promised by the man who carried the arms.
He went to seek him where the innkeeper said he was and having found him, bade him say now at any rate what he had to say in answer to the question he had asked him on the road.
I tried to drive him before me and bring him to you, but he is already so wild and shy that when I went near him he made off into the thickest part of the forest.
If you have a mind that we two should go back and look for him, let me put up this she-ass at my house and I’ll be back at once.’ ‘You will be doing me a great kindness,’ said the owner of the ass, ‘and I’ll try to pay it back in the same coin.’ It is with all these circumstances, and in the very same way I am telling it now, that those who know all about the matter tell the story.
Well then, the two regidors set off on foot, arm in arm, for the forest, and coming to the place where they hoped to find the ass they could not find him, nor was he to be seen anywhere about, search as they might.
Seeing, then, that there was no sign of him, the regidor who had seen him said to the other, ‘Look here, gossip; a plan has occurred to me, by which, beyond a doubt, we shall manage to discover the animal, even if he is stowed away in the bowels of the earth, not to say the forest.
When they came in sight of one another, said the loser, ‘Is it possible, gossip, that it was not my ass that brayed?’ ‘No, it was I,’ said the other.
In this way, doubling the brays at every step, they made the complete circuit of the forest, but the lost ass never gave them an answer or even the sign of one.
How could the poor ill-starred brute have answered, when, in the thickest part of the forest, they found him devoured by wolves?
To-morrow or the day after, I believe, the men of my town, that is, of the braying town, are going to take the field against another village two leagues away from ours, one of those that persecute us most; and that we may turn out well prepared I have bought these lances and halberds you have seen.
Just at this moment there came in at the gate of the inn a man entirely clad in chamois leather, hose, breeches, and doublet, who said in a loud voice, “Señor host, have you room?
Here’s the divining ape and the show of the Release of Melisendra just coming.” “Ods body!” said the landlord, “why, it’s Master Pedro!
We’re in for a grand night!” I forgot to mention that the said Master Pedro had his left eye and nearly half his cheek covered with a patch of green taffety, showing that something ailed all that side.
He gets two reals for every question if the ape answers; I mean if his master answers for him after he has whispered into his ear; and so it is believed that this same Master Pedro is very rich.
He is a ‘gallant man’ as they say in Italy, and good company, and leads the finest life in the world; talks more than six, drinks more than a dozen, and all by his tongue, and his ape, and his show.” Master Pedro now came back, and in a cart followed the show and the ape—a big one, without a tail and with buttocks as bare as felt, but not vicious-looking.
Be of good cheer, for thy good wife Teresa is well, and she is at this moment hackling a pound of flax; and more by token she has at her left hand a jug with a broken spout that holds a good drop of wine, with which she solaces herself at her work.” “That I can well believe,” said Sancho.
“She is a lucky one, and if it was not for her jealousy I would not change her for the giantess Andandona, who by my master’s account was a very clever and worthy woman; my Teresa is one of those that won’t let themselves want for anything, though their heirs may have to pay for it.” “Now I declare,” said Don Quixote, “he who reads much and travels much sees and knows a great deal.
I say so because what amount of persuasion could have persuaded me that there are apes in the world that can divine as I have seen now with my own eyes?
And now, because I have promised it, and to afford him pleasure, I will set up my show and offer entertainment to all who are in the inn, without any charge whatever.” As soon as he heard this, the landlord, delighted beyond measure, pointed out a place where the show might be fixed, which was done at once.
I know of a lady who asked one of these figure schemers whether her little lap-dog would be in pup and would breed, and how many and of what colour the little pups would be.
Don Quixote explained his wish, and begged him to ask his ape at once to tell him whether certain things which had happened to him in the cave of Montesinos were dreams or realities, for to him they appeared to partake of both.
When they came to it Master Pedro ensconced himself inside it, for it was he who had to work the puppets, and a boy, a servant of his, posted himself outside to act as showman and explain the mysteries of the exhibition, having a wand in his hand to point to the figures as they came out.
And so, all who were in the inn being arranged in front of the show, some of them standing, and Don Quixote, Sancho, the page, and cousin, accommodated with the best places, the interpreter began to say what he will hear or see who reads or hears the next chapter. p25e.jpg (28K) CHAPTER XXVI.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE DROLL ADVENTURE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS IN TRUTH RIGHT GOOD p26a.jpg (157K) Full Size All were silent, Tyrians and Trojans; I mean all who were watching the show were hanging on the lips of the interpreter of its wonders, when drums and trumpets were heard to sound inside it and cannon to go off.
The noise was soon over, and then the boy lifted up his voice and said, “This true story which is here represented to your worships is taken word for word from the French chronicles and from the Spanish ballads that are in everybody’s mouth, and in the mouth of the boys about the streets.
Its subject is the release by Señor Don Gaiferos of his wife Melisendra, when a captive in Spain at the hands of the Moors in the city of Sansueña, for so they called then what is now called Saragossa; and there you may see how Don Gaiferos is playing at the tables, just as they sing it— At tables playing Don Gaiferos sits, For Melisendra is forgotten now.
Observe, too, a new incident which now occurs, such as, perhaps, never was seen.
Do you not see that Moor, who silently and stealthily, with his finger on his lip, approaches Melisendra from behind?
But ah! unhappy lady, the edge of her petticoat has caught on one of the bars of the balcony and she is left hanging in the air, unable to reach the ground.
You see, too, how the neighing of the horse shows his satisfaction with the gallant and beautiful burden he bears in his lord and lady.
You see how they wheel round and quit the city, and in joy and gladness take the road to Paris.
Go in peace, O peerless pair of true lovers!
May you reach your longed-for fatherland in safety, and may fortune interpose no impediment to your prosperous journey; may the eyes of your friends and kinsmen behold you enjoying in peace and tranquillity the remaining days of your life—and that they may be as many as those of Nestor!” Here Master Pedro called out again and said, “Simplicity, boy!
Are there not almost every day a thousand comedies represented all round us full of thousands of inaccuracies and absurdities, and, for all that, they have a successful run, and are listened to not only with applause, but with admiration and all the rest of it?
Master Pedro kept shouting, “Hold hard!
Señor Don Quixote! can’t you see they’re not real Moors you’re knocking down and killing and destroying, but only little pasteboard figures!
The whole audience was thrown into confusion, the ape fled to the roof of the inn, the cousin was frightened, and even Sancho Panza himself was in mighty fear, for, as he swore after the storm was over, he had never seen his master in such a furious passion.
The complete destruction of the show being thus accomplished, Don Quixote became a little calmer, said, “I wish I had here before me now all those who do not or will not believe how useful knights-errant are in the world; just think, if I had not been here present, what would have become of the brave Don Gaiferos and the fair Melisendra!
Depend upon it, by this time those dogs would have overtaken them and inflicted some outrage upon them.
So, then, long live knight-errantry beyond everything living on earth this day!” “Let it live, and welcome,” said Master Pedro at this in a feeble voice, “and let me die, for I am so unfortunate that I can say with King Don Rodrigo— Yesterday was I lord of Spain To-day I’ve not a turret left That I may call mine own.
And whose were the bodies they belonged to but mine?
And what did I get my living by but by them?” “Now am I fully convinced,” said Don Quixote, “of what I had many a time before believed; that the enchanters who persecute me do nothing more than put figures like these before my eyes, and then change and turn them into what they please.
In truth and earnest, I assure you gentlemen who now hear me, that to me everything that has taken place here seemed to take place literally, that Melisendra was Melisendra, Don Gaiferos Don Gaiferos, Marsilio Marsilio, and Charlemagne Charlemagne.
That was why my anger was roused; and to be faithful to my calling as a knight-errant I sought to give aid and protection to those who fled, and with this good intention I did what you have seen.
“Well then, for this cleavage from top to bottom,” continued Master Pedro, taking up the split Emperor Charlemagne, “it would not be much if I were to ask five reals and a quarter.” “It’s not little,” said Sancho.
Before it was daylight the man with the lances and halberds took his departure, and soon after daybreak the cousin and the page came to bid Don Quixote farewell, the former returning home, the latter resuming his journey, towards which, to help him, Don Quixote gave him twelve reals.
Master Pedro did not care to engage in any more palaver with Don Quixote, whom he knew right well; so he rose before the sun, and having got together the remains of his show and caught his ape, he too went off to seek his adventures.
The landlord, who did not know Don Quixote, was as much astonished at his mad freaks as at his generosity.
To conclude, Sancho, by his master’s orders, paid him very liberally, and taking leave of him they quitted the inn at about eight in the morning and took to the road, where we will leave them to pursue their journey, for this is necessary in order to allow certain other matters to be set forth, which are required to clear up this famous history. p26e.jpg (34K) CHAPTER XXVII.
He says, then, that he who has read the First Part of this history will remember well enough the Gines de Pasamonte whom, with other galley slaves, Don Quixote set free in the Sierra Morena: a kindness for which he afterwards got poor thanks and worse payment from that evil-minded, ill-conditioned set.
This Gines de Pasamonte—Don Ginesillo de Parapilla, Don Quixote called him—it was that stole Dapple from Sancho Panza; which, because by the fault of the printers neither the how nor the when was stated in the First Part, has been a puzzle to a good many people, who attribute to the bad memory of the author what was the error of the press.
In fact, however, Gines stole him while Sancho Panza was asleep on his back, adopting the plan and device that Brunello had recourse to when he stole Sacripante’s horse from between his legs at the siege of Albracca; and, as has been told, Sancho afterwards recovered him.
From some released Christians returning from Barbary, it so happened, he bought the ape, which he taught to mount upon his shoulder on his making a certain sign, and to whisper, or seem to do so, in his ear.
As soon as the exhibition was over he brought forward the accomplishments of his ape, assuring the public that he divined all the past and the present, but as to the future he had no skill.
In this way he acquired a prodigious name and all ran after him; on other occasions, being very crafty, he would answer in such a way that the answers suited the questions; and as no one cross-questioned him or pressed him to tell how his ape divined, he made fools of them all and filled his pouch.
The instant he entered the inn he knew Don Quixote and Sancho, and with that knowledge it was easy for him to astonish them and all who were there; but it would have cost him dear had Don Quixote brought down his hand a little lower when he cut off King Marsilio’s head and destroyed all his horsemen, as related in the preceeding chapter.
After he had left the inn he determined to visit, first of all, the banks of the Ebro and that neighbourhood, before entering the city of Saragossa, for the ample time there was still to spare before the jousts left him enough for all.
With this object in view he followed the road and travelled along it for two days, without meeting any adventure worth committing to writing until on the third day, as he was ascending a hill, he heard a great noise of drums, trumpets, and musket-shots.
At first he imagined some regiment of soldiers was passing that way, and to see them he spurred Rocinante and mounted the hill.
On reaching the top he saw at the foot of it over two hundred men, as it seemed to him, armed with weapons of various sorts, lances, crossbows, partisans, halberds, and pikes, and a few muskets and a great many bucklers.
From this device Don Quixote concluded that these people must be from the braying town, and he said so to Sancho, explaining to him what was written on the standard.
At the same time be observed that the man who had told them about the matter was wrong in saying that the two who brayed were regidors, for according to the lines of the standard they were alcaldes.
Don Quixote proceeded to join them, not a little to Sancho’s uneasiness, for he never relished mixing himself up in expeditions of that sort.
The members of the troop received him into the midst of them, taking him to be someone who was on their side.
Don Quixote, putting up his visor, advanced with an easy bearing and demeanour to the standard with the ass, and all the chief men of the army gathered round him to look at him, staring at him with the usual amazement that everybody felt on seeing him for the first time.
The case being, then, that no one person can insult a kingdom, province, city, state, or entire community, it is clear there is no reason for going out to avenge the defiance of such an insult, inasmuch as it is not one.
A fine thing it would be if the people of the clock town were to be at loggerheads every moment with everyone who called them by that name,—or the Cazoleros, Berengeneros, Ballenatos, Jaboneros, or the bearers of all the other names and titles that are always in the mouth of the boys and common people!
It would be a nice business indeed if all these illustrious cities were to take huff and revenge themselves and go about perpetually making trombones of their swords in every petty quarrel!
There are four things for which sensible men and well-ordered States ought to take up arms, draw their swords, and risk their persons, lives, and properties.
The first is to defend the Catholic faith; the second, to defend one’s life, which is in accordance with natural and divine law; the third, in defence of one’s honour, family, and property; the fourth, in the service of one’s king in a just war; and if to these we choose to add a fifth (which may be included in the second), in defence of one’s country.
To these five, as it were capital causes, there may be added some others that may be just and reasonable, and make it a duty to take up arms; but to take them up for trifles and things to laugh at and be amused by rather than offended, looks as though he who did so was altogether wanting in common sense.
One of those, however, that stood near him, fancying he was mocking them, lifted up a long staff he had in his hand and smote him such a blow with it that Sancho dropped helpless to the ground.
Don Quixote, seeing him so roughly handled, attacked the man who had struck him lance in hand, but so many thrust themselves between them that he could not avenge him.
The members of the band, however, were satisfied with seeing him take to flight, and did not fire on him.
They put up Sancho, scarcely restored to his senses, on his ass, and let him go after his master; not that he was sufficiently in his wits to guide the beast, but Dapple followed the footsteps of Rocinante, from whom he could not remain a moment separated.
Don Quixote having got some way off looked back, and seeing Sancho coming, waited for him, as he perceived that no one followed him.
The men of the troop stood their ground till night, and as the enemy did not come out to battle, they returned to their town exulting; and had they been aware of the ancient custom of the Greeks, they would have erected a trophy on the spot. p27e.jpg (47K) Full Size CHAPTER XXVIII.
OF MATTERS THAT BENENGELI SAYS HE WHO READS THEM WILL KNOW, IF HE READS THEM WITH ATTENTION p28a.jpg (111K) Full Size When the brave man flees, treachery is manifest and it is for wise men to reserve themselves for better occasions.
This proved to be the case with Don Quixote, who, giving way before the fury of the townsfolk and the hostile intentions of the angry troop, took to flight and, without a thought of Sancho or the danger in which he was leaving him, retreated to such a distance as he thought made him safe.
Sancho, lying across his ass, followed him, as has been said, and at length came up, having by this time recovered his senses, and on joining him let himself drop off Dapple at Rocinante’s feet, sore, bruised, and belaboured.
Don Quixote dismounted to examine his wounds, but finding him whole from head to foot, he said to him, angrily enough, “In an evil hour didst thou take to braying, Sancho!
To the music of brays what harmonies couldst thou expect to get but cudgels?
Every now and then Sancho gave vent to deep sighs and dismal groans, and on Don Quixote asking him what caused such acute suffering, he replied that, from the end of his back-bone up to the nape of his neck, he was so sore that it nearly drove him out of his senses.
“The cause of that soreness,” said Don Quixote, “will be, no doubt, that the staff wherewith they smote thee being a very long one, it caught thee all down the back, where all the parts that are sore are situated, and had it reached any further thou wouldst be sorer still.” “By God,” said Sancho, “your worship has relieved me of a great doubt, and cleared up the point for me in elegant style!
Body o’ me! is the cause of my soreness such a mystery that there’s any need to tell me I am sore everywhere the staff hit me?
If it was my ankles that pained me there might be something in going divining why they did, but it is not much to divine that I’m sore where they thrashed me.
I would do a great deal better (if I was not an ignorant brute that will never do any good all my life), I would do a great deal better, I say, to go home to my wife and children and support them and bring them up on what God may please to give me, instead of following your worship along roads that lead nowhere and paths that are none at all, with little to drink and less to eat.
And then when it comes to sleeping!
Measure out seven feet on the earth, brother squire, and if that’s not enough for you, take as many more, for you may have it all your own way and stretch yourself to your heart’s content.
Oh that I could see burnt and turned to ashes the first man that meddled with knight-errantry or at any rate the first who chose to be squire to such fools as all the knights-errant of past times must have been!
“If I remember rightly,” said Sancho, “it must be over twenty years, three days more or less.” Don Quixote gave himself a great slap on the forehead and began to laugh heartily, and said he, “Why, I have not been wandering, either in the Sierra Morena or in the whole course of our sallies, but barely two months, and thou sayest, Sancho, that it is twenty years since I promised thee the island.
If so, and if that be thy pleasure, I give it to thee now, once and for all, and much good may it do thee, for so long as I see myself rid of such a good-for-nothing squire I’ll be glad to be left a pauper without a rap.
But tell me, thou perverter of the squirely rules of knight-errantry, where hast thou ever seen or read that any knight-errant’s squire made terms with his lord, ‘you must give me so much a month for serving you’?
Plunge, scoundrel, rogue, monster—for such I take thee to be—plunge, I say, into the _mare magnum_ of their histories; and if thou shalt find that any squire ever said or thought what thou hast said now, I will let thee nail it on my forehead, and give me, over and above, four sound slaps in the face.
O bread thanklessly received!
O promises ill-bestowed!
Now, when I was about to raise thee to such a position, that, in spite of thy wife, they would call thee ‘my lord,’ thou art leaving me?
Thou art going now when I had a firm and fixed intention of making thee lord of the best island in the world?
Forgive me and have pity on my folly, and remember I know but little, and, if I talk much, it’s more from infirmity than malice; but he who sins and mends commends himself to God.” “I should have been surprised, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “if thou hadst not introduced some bit of a proverb into thy speech.
Well, well, I forgive thee, provided thou dost mend and not show thyself in future so fond of thine own interest, but try to be of good cheer and take heart, and encourage thyself to look forward to the fulfillment of my promises, which, by being delayed, does not become impossible.” Sancho said he would do so, and keep up his heart as best he could.
Don Quixote passed it in his never-failing meditations; but, for all that, they had some winks of sleep, and with the appearance of daylight they pursued their journey in quest of the banks of the famous Ebro, where that befell them which will be told in the following chapter. p28e.jpg (36K) CHAPTER XXIX.
Above all, he dwelt upon what he had seen in the cave of Montesinos; for though Master Pedro’s ape had told him that of those things part was true, part false, he clung more to their truth than to their falsehood, the very reverse of Sancho, who held them all to be downright lies.
As they were thus proceeding, then, they discovered a small boat, without oars or any other gear, that lay at the water’s edge tied to the stem of a tree growing on the bank.
Don Quixote looked all round, and seeing nobody, at once, without more ado, dismounted from Rocinante and bade Sancho get down from Dapple and tie both beasts securely to the trunk of a poplar or willow that stood there.
Sancho asked him the reason of this sudden dismounting and tying.
Don Quixote made answer, “Thou must know, Sancho, that this bark is plainly, and without the possibility of any alternative, calling and inviting me to enter it, and in it go to give aid to some knight or other person of distinction in need of it, who is no doubt in some sore strait; for this is the way of the books of chivalry and of the enchanters who figure and speak in them.
But when Sancho saw himself somewhere about two yards out in the river, he began to tremble and give himself up for lost; but nothing distressed him more than hearing Dapple bray and seeing Rocinante struggling to get loose, and said he to his master, “Dapple is braying in grief at our leaving him, and Rocinante is trying to escape and plunge in after us.
O dear friends, peace be with you, and may this madness that is taking us away from you, turned into sober sense, bring us back to you.” And with this he fell weeping so bitterly, that Don Quixote said to him, sharply and angrily, “What art thou afraid of, cowardly creature?
What dost thou want, unsatisfied in the very heart of abundance?
Art thou, perchance, tramping barefoot over the Riphaean mountains, instead of being seated on a bench like an archduke on the tranquil stream of this pleasant river, from which in a short space we shall come out upon the broad sea?
The millers belonging to the mills, when they saw the boat coming down the river, and on the point of being sucked in by the draught of the wheels, ran out in haste, several of them, with long poles to stop it, and being all mealy, with faces and garments covered with flour, they presented a sinister appearance.
Do you want to drown yourselves, or dash yourselves to pieces among these wheels?” “Did I not tell thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote at this, “that we had reached the place where I am to show what the might of my arm can do?
See what ruffians and villains come out against me; see what monsters oppose me; see what hideous countenances come to frighten us!
As soon as, more drenched than thirsty, they were landed, Sancho went down on his knees and with clasped hands and eyes raised to heaven, prayed a long and fervent prayer to God to deliver him evermore from the rash projects and attempts of his master.
Art thou for carrying off the people who come to grind corn in these mills?” “That’s enough,” said Don Quixote to himself, “it would be preaching in the desert to attempt by entreaties to induce this rabble to do any virtuous action.
In this adventure two mighty enchanters must have encountered one another, and one frustrates what the other attempts; one provided the bark for me, and the other upset me; God help us, this world is all machinations and schemes at cross purposes one with the other.
Don Quixote and Sancho returned to their beasts, and to their life of beasts, and so ended the adventure of the enchanted bark. p29e.jpg (54K) CHAPTER XXX.
OF DON QUIXOTE’S ADVENTURE WITH A FAIR HUNTRESS p30a.jpg (134K) Full Size They reached their beasts in low spirits and bad humour enough, knight and squire, Sancho particularly, for with him what touched the stock of money touched his heart, and when any was taken from him he felt as if he was robbed of the apples of his eyes.
Fortune, however, ordered matters after a fashion very much the opposite of what he contemplated.
It so happened that the next day towards sunset, on coming out of a wood, Don Quixote cast his eyes over a green meadow, and at the far end of it observed some people, and as he drew nearer saw that it was a hawking party.
Coming closer, he distinguished among them a lady of graceful mien, on a pure white palfrey or hackney caparisoned with green trappings and a silver-mounted side-saddle.
The lady was also in green, and so richly and splendidly dressed that splendour itself seemed personified in her.
Don Quixote now came up with his visor raised, and as he seemed about to dismount Sancho made haste to go and hold his stirrup for him; but in getting down off Dapple he was so unlucky as to hitch his foot in one of the ropes of the pack-saddle in such a way that he was unable to free it, and was left hanging by it with his face and breast on the ground.
The duke ordered his huntsmen to go to the help of knight and squire, and they raised Don Quixote, sorely shaken by his fall; and he, limping, advanced as best he could to kneel before the noble pair.
The duchess desired Sancho to come to her side, for she found infinite enjoyment in listening to his shrewd remarks.
Sancho required no pressing, but pushed himself in between them and the duke, who thought it rare good fortune to receive such a knight-errant and such a homely squire in their castle. p30e.jpg (54K) CHAPTER XXXI.
They asked him to let himself be stripped that they might put a shirt on him, but he would not on any account, saying that modesty became knights-errant just as much as valour.
However, he said they might give the shirt to Sancho; and shutting himself in with him in a room where there was a sumptuous bed, he undressed and put on the shirt; and then, finding himself alone with Sancho, he said to him, “Tell me, thou new-fledged buffoon and old booby, dost thou think it right to offend and insult a duenna so deserving of reverence and respect as that one just now?
Was that a time to bethink thee of thy Dapple, or are these noble personages likely to let the beasts fare badly when they treat their owners in such elegant style?
For God’s sake, Sancho, restrain thyself, and don’t show the thread so as to let them see what a coarse, boorish texture thou art of.
Remember, sinner that thou art, the master is the more esteemed the more respectable and well-bred his servants are; and that one of the greatest advantages that princes have over other men is that they have servants as good as themselves to wait on them.
Dost thou not see—shortsighted being that thou art, and unlucky mortal that I am!—that if they perceive thee to be a coarse clown or a dull blockhead, they will suspect me to be some impostor or swindler?
Then came twelve pages, together with the seneschal, to lead him to dinner, as his hosts were already waiting for him.
They placed him in the midst of them, and with much pomp and stateliness they conducted him into another room, where there was a sumptuous table laid with but four covers.
One of this sort, I say, must have been the grave churchman who came out with the duke and duchess to receive Don Quixote.
A vast number of polite speeches were exchanged, and at length, taking Don Quixote between them, they proceeded to sit down to table.
The duke pressed Don Quixote to take the head of the table, and, though he refused, the entreaties of the duke were so urgent that he had to accept it.
The ecclesiastic took his seat opposite to him, and the duke and duchess those at the sides.
To which Don Quixote replied, “Señora, my misfortunes, though they had a beginning, will never have an end.
“What, seen her!” said Sancho; “why, who the devil was it but myself that first thought of the enchantment business?
This Don Quixote, or Don Simpleton, or whatever his name is, cannot, I imagine, be such a blockhead as your excellence would have him, holding out encouragement to him to go on with his vagaries and follies.” Then turning to address Don Quixote he said, “And you, num-skull, who put it into your head that you are a knight-errant, and vanquish giants and capture miscreants?
Go home and bring up your children if you have any, and attend to your business, and give over going wandering about the world, gaping and making a laughing-stock of yourself to all who know you and all who don’t.
Where, in heaven’s name, have you discovered that there are or ever were knights-errant?
Pious, well-meant reproof requires a different demeanour and arguments of another sort; at any rate, to have reproved me in public, and so roughly, exceeds the bounds of proper reproof, for that comes better with gentleness than with rudeness; and it is not seemly to call the sinner roundly blockhead and booby, without knowing anything of the sin that is reproved.
Come, tell me, for which of the stupidities you have observed in me do you condemn and abuse me, and bid me go home and look after my house and wife and children, without knowing whether I have any?
Is nothing more needed than to get a footing, by hook or by crook, in other people’s houses to rule over the masters (and that, perhaps, after having been brought up in all the straitness of some seminary, and without having ever seen more of the world than may lie within twenty or thirty leagues round), to fit one to lay down the law rashly for chivalry, and pass judgment on knights-errant?
Is it, haply, an idle occupation, or is the time ill-spent that is spent in roaming the world in quest, not of its enjoyments, but of those arduous toils whereby the good mount upwards to the abodes of everlasting life?
If gentlemen, great lords, nobles, men of high birth, were to rate me as a fool I should take it as an irreparable insult; but I care not a farthing if clerks who have never entered upon or trod the paths of chivalry should think me foolish.
Knight I am, and knight I will die, if such be the pleasure of the Most High.
Some take the broad road of overweening ambition; others that of mean and servile flattery; others that of deceitful hypocrisy, and some that of true religion; but I, led by my star, follow the narrow path of knight-errantry, and in pursuit of that calling I despise wealth, but not honour.
I have redressed injuries, righted wrongs, punished insolences, vanquished giants, and crushed monsters; I am in love, for no other reason than that it is incumbent on knights-errant to be so; but though I am, I am no carnal-minded lover, but one of the chaste, platonic sort.
No wonder they are mad, when people who are in their senses sanction their madness!
Women, children, and ecclesiastics, as they cannot defend themselves, though they may receive offence cannot be insulted, because between the offence and the insult there is, as your excellence very well knows, this difference: the insult comes from one who is capable of offering it, and does so, and maintains it; the offence may come from any quarter without carrying insult.
To take an example: a man is standing unsuspectingly in the street and ten others come up armed and beat him; he draws his sword and quits himself like a man, but the number of his antagonists makes it impossible for him to effect his purpose and avenge himself; this man suffers an offence but not an insult.
Another example will make the same thing plain: a man is standing with his back turned, another comes up and strikes him, and after striking him takes to flight, without waiting an instant, and the other pursues him but does not overtake him; he who received the blow received an offence, but not an insult, because an insult must be maintained.
If he who struck him, though he did so sneakingly and treacherously, had drawn his sword and stood and faced him, then he who had been struck would have received offence and insult at the same time; offence because he was struck treacherously, insult because he who struck him maintained what he had done, standing his ground without taking to flight.
Don Quixote finally grew calm, and dinner came to an end, and as the cloth was removed four damsels came in, one of them with a silver basin, another with a jug also of silver, a third with two fine white towels on her shoulder, and the fourth with her arms bared to the elbows, and in her white hands (for white they certainly were) a round ball of Naples soap.
The duke and duchess, who had not known anything about this, waited to see what came of this strange washing.
The barber damsel, when she had him a hand’s breadth deep in lather, pretended that there was no more water, and bade the one with the jug go and fetch some, while Señor Don Quixote waited.
She did so, and Don Quixote was left the strangest and most ludicrous figure that could be imagined.
All those present, and there were a good many, were watching him, and as they saw him there with half a yard of neck, and that uncommonly brown, his eyes shut, and his beard full of soap, it was a great wonder, and only by great discretion, that they were able to restrain their laughter.
The damsels, the concocters of the joke, kept their eyes down, not daring to look at their master and mistress; and as for them, laughter and anger struggled within them, and they knew not what to do, whether to punish the audacity of the girls, or to reward them for the amusement they had received from seeing Don Quixote in such a plight.
It appeared afterwards that the duke had sworn that if they had not washed him as they had Don Quixote he would have punished them for their impudence, which they adroitly atoned for by soaping him as well.
Sancho observed the ceremony of the washing very attentively, and said to himself, “God bless me, if it were only the custom in this country to wash squires’ beards too as well as knights’.
For by God and upon my soul I want it badly; and if they gave me a scrape of the razor besides I’d take it as a still greater kindness.” “What are you saying to yourself, Sancho?” asked the duchess.
The duchess begged Don Quixote, as he seemed to have a retentive memory, to describe and portray to her the beauty and features of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, for, judging by what fame trumpeted abroad of her beauty, she felt sure she must be the fairest creature in the world, nay, in all La Mancha.
Don Quixote sighed on hearing the duchess’s request, and said, “If I could pluck out my heart, and lay it on a plate on this table here before your highness’s eyes, it would spare my tongue the pain of telling what can hardly be thought of, for in it your excellence would see her portrayed in full.
Enchanters have persecuted me, enchanters persecute me still, and enchanters will continue to persecute me until they have sunk me and my lofty chivalry in the deep abyss of oblivion; and they injure and wound me where they know I feel it most.
And so, as I am not and, so far as one can judge, cannot be enchanted, she it is that is enchanted, that is smitten, that is altered, changed, and transformed; in her have my enemies revenged themselves upon me, and for her shall I live in ceaseless tears, until I see her in her pristine state.
I have mentioned this lest anybody should mind what Sancho said about Dulcinea’s winnowing or sifting; for, as they changed her to me, it is no wonder if they changed her to him.
Dulcinea is illustrious and well-born, and of one of the gentle families of El Toboso, which are many, ancient, and good.
Therein, most assuredly, not small is the share of the peerless Dulcinea, through whom her town will be famous and celebrated in ages to come, as Troy was through Helen, and Spain through La Cava, though with a better title and tradition.
The main point is that they should have good intentions and be desirous of doing right in all things, for they will never be at a loss for persons to advise and direct them in what they have to do, like those knight-governors who, being no lawyers, pronounce sentences with the aid of an assessor.
The one with the trough pursued him and followed him everywhere he went, endeavouring with the utmost persistence to thrust it under his chin, while another kitchen-boy seemed anxious to wash his beard.
“What is all this, brothers?” asked the duchess.
The customs of countries and princes’ palaces are only good so long as they give no annoyance; but the way of washing they have here is worse than doing penance.
Fair be the fortunes of such a master and such a servant, the one the cynosure of knight-errantry, the other the star of squirely fidelity!
Sancho replied that, though he certainly had the habit of sleeping four or five hours in the heat of the day in summer, to serve her excellence he would try with all his might not to sleep even one that day, and that he would come in obedience to her command, and with that he went off.
The duke gave fresh orders with respect to treating Don Quixote as a knight-errant, without departing even in smallest particular from the style in which, as the stories tell us, they used to treat the knights of old. p32e.jpg (16K) CHAPTER XXXIII.
Sancho shrugged his shoulders, obeyed, and sat down, and all the duchess’s damsels and duennas gathered round him, waiting in profound silence to hear what he would say.
It was the duchess, however, who spoke first, saying: “Now that we are alone, and that there is nobody here to overhear us, I should be glad if the señor governor would relieve me of certain doubts I have, rising out of the history of the great Don Quixote that is now in print.
And the first thing I have got to say is, that for my own part I hold my master Don Quixote to be stark mad, though sometimes he says things that, to my mind, and indeed everybody’s that listens to him, are so wise, and run in such a straight furrow, that Satan himself could not have said them better; but for all that, really, and beyond all question, it’s my firm belief he is cracked.
And if your highness does not like to give me the government you promised, God made me without it, and maybe your not giving it to me will be all the better for my conscience, for fool as I am I know the proverb ‘to her hurt the ant got wings,’ and it may be that Sancho the squire will get to heaven sooner than Sancho the governor.
“Why, there’s a ballad that says they put King Rodrigo alive into a tomb full of toads, and adders, and lizards, and that two days afterwards the king, in a plaintive, feeble voice, cried out from within the tomb- They gnaw me now, they gnaw me now, There where I most did sin.
My lord and husband the duke, though not one of the errant sort, is none the less a knight for that reason, and will keep his word about the promised island, in spite of the envy and malice of the world.
Let Sancho be of good cheer; for when he least expects it he will find himself seated on the throne of his island and seat of dignity, and will take possession of his government that he may discard it for another of three-bordered brocade.
And it seems to me that, in governments, to make a beginning is everything; and maybe, after having been governor a fortnight, I’ll take kindly to the work and know more about it than the field labour I have been brought up to.” “You are right, Sancho,” said the duchess, “for no one is born ready taught, and the bishops are made out of men and not out of stones.
For in truth and earnest, I know from good authority that the coarse country wench who jumped up on the ass was and is Dulcinea del Toboso, and that worthy Sancho, though he fancies himself the deceiver, is the one that is deceived; and that there is no more reason to doubt the truth of this, than of anything else we never saw.
It must be all exactly the other way, as your ladyship says; because it is impossible to suppose that out of my poor wit such a cunning trick could be concocted in a moment, nor do I think my master is so mad that by my weak and feeble persuasion he could be made to believe a thing so out of all reason.
But, señora, your excellence must not therefore think me ill-disposed, for a dolt like me is not bound to see into the thoughts and plots of those vile enchanters.
The truth is that the one I saw was a country wench, and I set her down to be a country wench; and if that was Dulcinea it must not be laid at my door, nor should I be called to answer for it or take the consequences.
“My ass,” said Sancho, “which, not to mention him by that name, I’m accustomed to call Dapple; I begged this lady duenna here to take care of him when I came into the castle, and she got as angry as if I had said she was ugly or old, though it ought to be more natural and proper for duennas to feed asses than to ornament chambers.
But what the duchess marvelled at above all was that Sancho’s simplicity could be so great as to make him believe as absolute truth that Dulcinea had been enchanted, when it was he himself who had been the enchanter and trickster in the business.
Having, therefore, instructed their servants in everything they were to do, six days afterwards they took him out to hunt, with as great a retinue of huntsmen and beaters as a crowned king.
They presented Don Quixote with a hunting suit, and Sancho with another of the finest green cloth; but Don Quixote declined to put his on, saying that he must soon return to the hard pursuit of arms, and could not carry wardrobes or stores with him.
Sancho, however, took what they gave him, meaning to sell it at the first opportunity.
The appointed day having arrived, Don Quixote armed himself, and Sancho arrayed himself, and mounted on his Dapple (for he would not give him up though they offered him a horse), he placed himself in the midst of the troop of huntsmen.
The duchess dismounted, and with a sharp boar-spear in her hand posted herself where she knew the wild boars were in the habit of passing.
The duke and Don Quixote likewise dismounted and placed themselves one at each side of her.
Sancho took up a position in the rear of all without dismounting from Dapple, whom he dared not desert lest some mischief should befall him.
Scarcely had they taken their stand in a line with several of their servants, when they saw a huge boar, closely pressed by the hounds and followed by the huntsmen, making towards them, grinding his teeth and tusks, and scattering foam from his mouth.
As soon as he saw him Don Quixote, bracing his shield on his arm, and drawing his sword, advanced to meet him; the duke with boar-spear did the same; but the duchess would have gone in front of them all had not the duke prevented her.
Sancho alone, deserting Dapple at the sight of the mighty beast, took to his heels as hard as he could and strove in vain to mount a tall oak.
As he was clinging to a branch, however, half-way up in his struggle to reach the top, the bough, such was his ill-luck and hard fate, gave way, and caught in his fall by a broken limb of the oak, he hung suspended in the air unable to reach the ground.
Finding himself in this position, and that the green coat was beginning to tear, and reflecting that if the fierce animal came that way he might be able to get at him, he began to utter such cries, and call for help so earnestly, that all who heard him and did not see him felt sure he must be in the teeth of some wild beast.
Don Quixote went over and unhooked Sancho, who, as soon as he found himself on the ground, looked at the rent in his huntingcoat and was grieved to the heart, for he thought he had got a patrimonial estate in that suit.
Sancho, as he showed the rents in his torn suit to the duchess, observed, “If we had been hunting hares, or after small birds, my coat would have been safe from being in the plight it’s in; I don’t know what pleasure one can find in lying in wait for an animal that may take your life with his tusk if he gets at you.
Nay, let them only put a finger in my mouth, and they’ll see whether I can bite or not.” “The curse of God and all his saints upon thee, thou accursed Sancho!” exclaimed Don Quixote; “when will the day come—as I have often said to thee—when I shall hear thee make one single coherent, rational remark without proverbs?
The blaze of the fire and the noise of the warlike instruments almost blinded the eyes and deafened the ears of those that stood by, and indeed of all who were in the wood.
Then there were heard repeated lelilies after the fashion of the Moors when they rush to battle; trumpets and clarions brayed, drums beat, fifes played, so unceasingly and so fast that he could not have had any senses who did not lose them with the confused din of so many instruments.
The duke was astounded, the duchess amazed, Don Quixote wondering, Sancho Panza trembling, and indeed, even they who were aware of the cause were frightened.
In their fear, silence fell upon them, and a postillion, in the guise of a demon, passed in front of them, blowing, in lieu of a bugle, a huge hollow horn that gave out a horrible hoarse note.
This was done, and he came to himself by the time that one of the carts with the creaking wheels reached the spot.
Leading it were two hideous demons, also clad in buckram, with countenances so frightful that Sancho, having once seen them, shut his eyes so as not to see them again.
As soon as the cart came opposite the spot the old man rose from his lofty seat, and standing up said in a loud voice, “I am the sage Lirgandeo,” and without another word the cart then passed on.
Behind it came another of the same form, with another aged man enthroned, who, stopping the cart, said in a voice no less solemn than that of the first, “I am the sage Alquife, the great friend of Urganda the Unknown,” and passed on.
Then another cart came by at the same pace, but the occupant of the throne was not old like the others, but a man stalwart and robust, and of a forbidding countenance, who as he came up said in a voice far hoarser and more devilish, “I am the enchanter Archelaus, the mortal enemy of Amadis of Gaul and all his kindred,” and then passed on.
She had her face covered with thin transparent sendal, the texture of which did not prevent the fair features of a maiden from being distinguished, while the numerous lights made it possible to judge of her beauty and of her years, which seemed to be not less than seventeen but not to have yet reached twenty.
Beside her was a figure in a robe of state, as they call it, reaching to the feet, while the head was covered with a black veil.
Having risen to its feet, this living death, in a sleepy voice and with a tongue hardly awake, held forth as follows: p35b.jpg (232K) Full Size I am that Merlin who the legends say The devil had for father, and the lie Hath gathered credence with the lapse of time.
Of magic prince, of Zoroastric lore Monarch and treasurer, with jealous eye I view the efforts of the age to hide The gallant deeds of doughty errant knights, Who are, and ever have been, dear to me.
Enchanters and magicians and their kind Are mostly hard of heart; not so am I; For mine is tender, soft, compassionate, And its delight is doing good to all.
In the dim caverns of the gloomy Dis, Where, tracing mystic lines and characters, My soul abideth now, there came to me The sorrow-laden plaint of her, the fair, The peerless Dulcinea del Toboso.
I knew of her enchantment and her fate, From high-born dame to peasant wench transformed And touched with pity, first I turned the leaves Of countless volumes of my devilish craft, And then, in this grim grisly skeleton Myself encasing, hither have I come To show where lies the fitting remedy To give relief in such a piteous case.
O thou, the pride and pink of all that I wear The adamantine steel!
O shining light, O beacon, polestar, path and guide of all Who, scorning slumber and the lazy down, Adopt the toilsome life of bloodstained arms!
To thee, great hero who all praise transcends, La Mancha’s lustre and Iberia’s star, Don Quixote, wise as brave, to thee I say— For peerless Dulcinea del Toboso Her pristine form and beauty to regain, ’Tis needful that thy esquire Sancho shall, On his own sturdy buttocks bared to heaven, Three thousand and three hundred lashes lay, And that they smart and sting and hurt him well.
Thus have the authors of her woe resolved.
And this is, gentles, wherefore I have come.
“By all that’s good,” exclaimed Sancho at this, “I’ll just as soon give myself three stabs with a dagger as three, not to say three thousand, lashes.
The devil take such a way of disenchanting!
I don’t see what my backside has got to do with enchantments.
“Was it I that gave birth to the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, that my backside is to pay for the sins of her eyes?
My master, indeed, that’s a part of her—for, he’s always calling her ‘my life’ and ‘my soul,’ and his stay and prop—may and ought to whip himself for her and take all the trouble required for her disenchantment.
But to make a piece of work about three thousand three hundred lashes, what every poor little charity-boy gets every month—it is enough to amaze, astonish, astound the compassionate bowels of all who hear it, nay, all who come to hear it in the course of time.
Turn, O miserable, hard-hearted animal, turn, I say, those timorous owl’s eyes upon these of mine that are compared to radiant stars, and thou wilt see them weeping trickling streams and rills, and tracing furrows, tracks, and paths over the fair fields of my cheeks.
Lay on to that hide of thine, thou great untamed brute, rouse up thy lusty vigour that only urges thee to eat and eat, and set free the softness of my flesh, the gentleness of my nature, and the fairness of my face.
“I say, señora,” returned Sancho, “what I said before; as for the lashes, abernuncio!” “Abrenuncio, you should say, Sancho, and not as you do,” said the duke.
“Let me alone, your highness,” said Sancho.
“I’m not in a humour now to look into niceties or a letter more or less, for these lashes that are to be given me, or I’m to give myself, have so upset me, that I don’t know what I’m saying or doing.
But I’d like to know of this lady, my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, where she learned this way she has of asking favours.
Is my flesh brass? or is it anything to me whether she is enchanted or not?
Does she bring with her a basket of fair linen, shirts, kerchiefs, socks—not that I wear any—to coax me?
These tender-hearted gentry should consider that it’s not merely a squire, but a governor they are asking to whip himself; just as if it was ‘drink with cherries.’ Let them learn, plague take them, the right way to ask, and beg, and behave themselves; for all times are not alike, nor are people always in good humour.
I’m now ready to burst with grief at seeing my green coat torn, and they come to ask me to whip myself of my own free will, I having as little fancy for it as for turning cacique.” “Well then, the fact is, friend Sancho,” said the duke, “that unless you become softer than a ripe fig, you shall not get hold of the government.
It would be a nice thing for me to send my islanders a cruel governor with flinty bowels, who won’t yield to the tears of afflicted damsels or to the prayers of wise, magisterial, ancient enchanters and sages.
It must be a condition, too, that I am not to be bound to draw blood with the scourge, and that if any of the lashes happen to be fly-flappers they are to count.
The duke and duchess, pleased with their hunt and at having carried out their plans so cleverly and successfully, returned to their castle resolved to follow up their joke; for to them there was no reality that could afford them more amusement. p35e.jpg (10K) CHAPTER XXXVI.
The duchess asked Sancho the next day if he had made a beginning with his penance task which he had to perform for the disenchantment of Dulcinea.
He said he had, and had given himself five lashes overnight.
“Who should have dictated but myself, sinner as I am?” said Sancho.
“And did you write it yourself?” said the duchess.
Thou wilt not understand this just now, my Teresa; by-and-by thou wilt know what it means.
I may tell thee, Teresa, I mean thee to go in a coach, for that is a matter of importance, because every other way of going is going on all-fours.
Thou art a governor’s wife; take care that nobody speaks evil of thee behind thy back.
I send thee here a green hunting suit that my lady the duchess gave me; alter it so as to make a petticoat and bodice for our daughter.
Don Quixote, my master, if I am to believe what I hear in these parts, is a madman of some sense, and a droll blockhead, and I am in no way behind him.
We have been in the cave of Montesinos, and the sage Merlin has laid hold of me for the disenchantment of Dulcinea del Toboso, her that is called Aldonza Lorenzo over there.
With three thousand three hundred lashes, less five, that I’m to give myself, she will be left as entirely disenchanted as the mother that bore her.
I shall leave this in a few days for my government, to which I am going with a mighty great desire to make money, for they tell me all new governors set out with the same desire; I will feel the pulse of it and will let thee know if thou art to come and live with me or not.
Dapple is well and sends many remembrances to thee; I am not going to leave him behind though they took me away to be Grand Turk.
My lady the duchess kisses thy hands a thousand times; do thou make a return with two thousand, for as my master says, nothing costs less or is cheaper than civility.
They dined, and after the cloth had been removed and they had amused themselves for a while with Sancho’s rich conversation, the melancholy sound of a fife and harsh discordant drum made itself heard.
All seemed somewhat put out by this dull, confused, martial harmony, especially Don Quixote, who could not keep his seat from pure disquietude; as to Sancho, it is needless to say that fear drove him to his usual refuge, the side or the skirts of the duchess; and indeed and in truth the sound they heard was a most doleful and melancholy one.
While they were still in uncertainty they saw advancing towards them through the garden two men clad in mourning robes so long and flowing that they trailed upon the ground.
As they marched they beat two great drums which were likewise draped in black, and beside them came the fife player, black and sombre like the others.
Following these came a personage of gigantic stature enveloped rather than clad in a gown of the deepest black, the skirt of which was of prodigious dimensions.
Over the gown, girdling or crossing his figure, he had a broad baldric which was also black, and from which hung a huge scimitar with a black scabbard and furniture.
He had his face covered with a transparent black veil, through which might be descried a very long beard as white as snow.
He came on keeping step to the sound of the drums with great gravity and dignity; and, in short, his stature, his gait, the sombreness of his appearance and his following might well have struck with astonishment, as they did, all who beheld him without knowing who he was.
With this measured pace and in this guise he advanced to kneel before the duke, who, with the others, awaited him standing.
I have spoken.” And with that he coughed, and stroked down his beard with both his hands, and stood very tranquilly waiting for the response of the duke, which was to this effect: “Many days ago, worthy squire Trifaldin of the White Beard, we heard of the misfortune of my lady the Countess Trifaldi, whom the enchanters have caused to be called the Distressed Duenna.
Turning to Don Quixote, the duke said, “After all, renowned knight, the mists of malice and ignorance are unable to hide or obscure the light of valour and virtue.
Relief in distress, help in need, protection for damsels, consolation for widows, are to be found in no sort of persons better than in knights-errant; and I give unceasing thanks to heaven that I am one, and regard any misfortune or suffering that may befall me in the pursuit of so honourable a calling as endured to good purpose.
Let this duenna come and ask what she will, for I will effect her relief by the might of my arm and the dauntless resolution of my bold heart.” p36e.jpg (22K) CHAPTER XXXVII.
God bless me, how he hated them, that same apothecary!
But I can tell these walking blocks that we will live in spite of them, and in great houses too, though we die of hunger and cover our flesh, be it delicate or not, with widow’s weeds, as one covers or hides a dunghill on a procession day.
The duchess asked the duke if it would be proper to go out to receive her, as she was a countess and a person of rank.
“In respect of her being a countess,” said Sancho, before the duke could reply, “I am for your highnesses going out to receive her; but in respect of her being a duenna, it is my opinion you should not stir a step.” “Who bade thee meddle in this, Sancho?” said Don Quixote.
WHEREIN IS TOLD THE DISTRESSED DUENNA’S TALE OF HER MISFORTUNES p38a.jpg (54K) Full Size Following the melancholy musicians there filed into the garden as many as twelve duennas, in two lines, all dressed in ample mourning robes apparently of milled serge, with hoods of fine white gauze so long that they allowed only the border of the robe to be seen.
The twelve duennas and the lady came on at procession pace, their faces being covered with black veils, not transparent ones like Trifaldin’s, but so close that they allowed nothing to be seen through them.
As soon as the band of duennas was fully in sight, the duke, the duchess, and Don Quixote stood up, as well as all who were watching the slow-moving procession.
The twelve duennas halted and formed a lane, along which the Distressed One advanced, Trifaldin still holding her hand.
Don Quixote remained silent, while Sancho was dying to see the features of Trifaldi and one or two of her many duennas; but there was no possibility of it until they themselves displayed them of their own accord and free will.
She was the widow of King Archipiela, her lord and husband, and of their marriage they had issue the Princess Antonomasia, heiress of the kingdom; which Princess Antonomasia was reared and brought up under my care and direction, I being the oldest and highest in rank of her mother’s duennas.
Time passed, and the young Antonomasia reached the age of fourteen, and such a perfection of beauty, that nature could not raise it higher.
Then, it must not be supposed her intelligence was childish; she was as intelligent as she was fair, and she was fairer than all the world; and is so still, unless the envious fates and hard-hearted sisters three have cut for her the thread of life.
But that they have not, for Heaven will not suffer so great a wrong to Earth, as it would be to pluck unripe the grapes of the fairest vineyard on its surface.
But all his gallantry, wit, and gaiety, all his graces and accomplishments, would have been of little or no avail towards gaining the fortress of my pupil, had not the impudent thief taken the precaution of gaining me over first.
First, the villain and heartless vagabond sought to win my good-will and purchase my compliance, so as to get me, like a treacherous warder, to deliver up to him the keys of the fortress I had in charge.
Another time he sang: Come Death, so subtly veiled that I Thy coming know not, how or when, Lest it should give me life again To find how sweet it is to die. —and other verses and burdens of the same sort, such as enchant when sung and fascinate when written.
And then, when they condescend to compose a sort of verse that was at that time in vogue in Kandy, which they call seguidillas!
Then it is that hearts leap and laughter breaks forth, and the body grows restless and all the senses turn quicksilver.
And so I say, sirs, that these troubadours richly deserve to be banished to the isles of the lizards.
And then when they promise the Phœnix of Arabia, the crown of Ariadne, the horses of the Sun, the pearls of the South, the gold of Tibar, and the balsam of Panchaia!
Then it is they give a loose to their pens, for it costs them little to make promises they have no intention or power of fulfilling.
But where am I wandering to?
Woe is me, unfortunate being!
No, no, not that; marriage must come first in any business of this sort that I take in hand.
But there was one hitch in this case, which was that of inequality of rank, Don Clavijo being a private gentleman, and the Princess Antonomasia, as I said, heiress to the kingdom.
The necessary steps were taken; the Vicar saw the agreement, and took the lady’s confession; she confessed everything in full, and he ordered her into the custody of a very worthy alguacil of the court.” “Are there alguacils of the court in Kandy, too,” said Sancho at this, “and poets, and seguidillas?
But make haste, Señora Trifaldi; for it is late, and I am dying to know the end of this long story.” “I will,” replied the countess. p38e.jpg (22K) CHAPTER XXXIX.
IN WHICH THE TRIFALDI CONTINUES HER MARVELLOUS AND MEMORABLE STORY p39a.jpg (96K) Full Size By every word that Sancho uttered, the duchess was as much delighted as Don Quixote was driven to desperation.
If the lady had married some page of hers, or some other servant of the house, as many another has done, so I have heard say, then the mischief would have been past curing.
But let señora the Distressed One proceed; for I suspect she has got yet to tell us the bitter part of this so far sweet story.” “The bitter is indeed to come,” said the countess; “and such bitter that colocynth is sweet and oleander toothsome in comparison.
I was terror-stricken, my voice stuck in my throat, and I was in the deepest distress; nevertheless I summoned up my strength as well as I could, and in a trembling and piteous voice I addressed such words to him as induced him to stay the infliction of a punishment so severe.
We at once put our hands up to our faces and found ourselves in the state you now see.” Here the Distressed One and the other duennas raised the veils with which they were covered, and disclosed countenances all bristling with beards, some red, some black, some white, and some grizzled, at which spectacle the duke and duchess made a show of being filled with wonder.
Don Quixote and Sancho were overwhelmed with amazement, and the bystanders lost in astonishment, while the Trifaldi went on to say: “Thus did that malevolent villain Malambruno punish us, covering the tenderness and softness of our faces with these rough bristles!
Would to heaven that he had swept off our heads with his enormous scimitar instead of obscuring the light of our countenances with these wool-combings that cover us!
For if we look into the matter, sirs (and what I am now going to say I would say with eyes flowing like fountains, only that the thought of our misfortune and the oceans they have already wept, keep them as dry as barley spears, and so I say it without tears), where, I ask, can a duenna with a beard go to?
For, if even when she has a smooth skin, and a face tortured by a thousand kinds of washes and cosmetics, she can hardly get anybody to love her, what will she do when she shows a countenance turned into a thicket?
Oh duennas, companions mine! it was an unlucky moment when we were born and an ill-starred hour when our fathers begot us!” And as she said this she showed signs of being about to faint. p39e.jpg (27K) CHAPTER XL.
He portrays the thoughts, he reveals the fancies, he answers implied questions, clears up doubts, sets objections at rest, and, in a word, makes plain the smallest points the most inquisitive can desire to know.
All and each, may ye live countless ages for the delight and amusement of the dwellers on earth!
The history goes on to say that when Sancho saw the Distressed One faint he exclaimed: “I swear by the faith of an honest man and the shades of all my ancestors the Panzas, that never I did see or hear of, nor has my master related or conceived in his mind, such an adventure as this.
A thousand devils—not to curse thee—take thee, Malambruno, for an enchanter and a giant!
Couldst thou find no other sort of punishment for these sinners but bearding them?
Would it not have been better—it would have been better for them—to have taken off half their noses from the middle upwards, even though they’d have snuffled when they spoke, than to have put beards on them?
I’ll bet they have not the means of paying anybody to shave them.” “That is the truth, señor,” said one of the twelve; “we have not the money to get ourselves shaved, and so we have, some of us, taken to using sticking-plasters by way of an economical remedy, for by applying them to our faces and plucking them off with a jerk we are left as bare and smooth as the bottom of a stone mortar.
“Bethink you, señora, of what I must do, for my heart is most eager to serve you.” “The fact is,” replied the Distressed One, “it is five thousand leagues, a couple more or less, from this to the kingdom of Kandy, if you go by land; but if you go through the air and in a straight line, it is three thousand two hundred and twenty-seven.
This horse, according to ancient tradition, was made by Merlin.
I can hardly keep my seat upon Dapple, and on a pack-saddle softer than silk itself, and here they’d have me hold on upon haunches of plank without pad or cushion of any sort!
I’d sooner see them all bearded, from the highest to the lowest, and from the most prudish to the most affected.” “You are very hard on duennas, Sancho my friend,” said the duchess; “you incline very much to the opinion of the Toledo apothecary.
Unfortunate beings that we are, we duennas!
Though we may be descended in the direct male line from Hector of Troy himself, our mistresses never fail to address us as ‘you’ if they think it makes queens of them.
O giant Malambruno, though thou art an enchanter, thou art true to thy promises.
But lo! suddenly there came into the garden four wild-men all clad in green ivy bearing on their shoulders a great wooden horse.
What would my islanders say when they heard their governor was going, strolling about on the winds?
This is like the common saying, ‘You see me with child, and you want me a virgin.’ Just as I’m about to go sitting on a bare board, your worship would have me score my backside!
Indeed, your worship is not reasonable.
On this the Trifaldi observed that Clavileño would not bear any kind of harness or trappings, and that his best plan would be to sit sideways like a woman, as in that way he would not feel the hardness so much.
Sancho did so, and, bidding them farewell, allowed his eyes to be bandaged, but immediately afterwards uncovered them again, and looking tenderly and tearfully on those in the garden, bade them help him in his present strait with plenty of Paternosters and Ave Marias, that God might provide someone to say as many for them, whenever they found themselves in a similar emergency.
At this Don Quixote exclaimed, “Art thou on the gallows, thief, or at thy last moment, to use pitiful entreaties of that sort?
Cowardly, spiritless creature, art thou not in the very place the fair Magalona occupied, and from which she descended, not into the grave, but to become Queen of France; unless the histories lie?
God be with thee, intrepid squire!
Now, now ye go cleaving the air more swiftly than an arrow!
Now ye begin to amaze and astonish all who are gazing at you from the earth!
By this time the bearded band of duennas, the Trifaldi and all, had vanished from the garden, and those that remained lay stretched on the ground as if in a swoon.
The duke read the placard with half-shut eyes, and then ran to embrace Don Quixote with open arms, declaring him to be the best knight that had ever been seen in any age.
Sancho kept looking about for the Distressed One, to see what her face was like without the beard, and if she was as fair as her elegant person promised; but they told him that, the instant Clavileño descended flaming through the air and came to the ground, the whole band of duennas with the Trifaldi vanished, and that they were already shaved and without a stump left.
And it so happened we came by where the seven goats are, and by God and upon my soul, as in my youth I was a goatherd in my own country, as soon as I saw them I felt a longing to be among them for a little, and if I had not given way to it I think I’d have burst.
So having laid their plans and given instructions to their servants and vassals how to behave to Sancho in his government of the promised island, the next day, that following Clavileño’s flight, the duke told Sancho to prepare and get ready to go and be governor, for his islanders were already looking out for him as for the showers of May.
If your lordship would be so good as to give me ever so small a bit of heaven, were it no more than half a league, I’d rather have it than the best island in the world.” “Recollect, Sancho,” said the duke, “I cannot give a bit of heaven, no not so much as the breadth of my nail, to anyone; rewards and favours of that sort are reserved for God alone.
You, Sancho, shall go partly as a lawyer, partly as a captain, for, in the island I am giving you, arms are needed as much as letters, and letters as much as arms.” “Of letters I know but little,” said Sancho, “for I don’t even know the A B C; but it is enough for me to have the Christus in my memory to be a good governor.
As soon as they had entered the chamber he closed the door after him, and almost by force made Sancho sit down beside him, and in a quiet tone thus addressed him: “I give infinite thanks to heaven, friend Sancho, that, before I have met with any good luck, fortune has come forward to meet thee.
I who counted upon my good fortune to discharge the recompense of thy services, find myself still waiting for advancement, while thou, before the time, and contrary to all reasonable expectation, seest thyself blessed in the fulfillment of thy desires.
Some will bribe, beg, solicit, rise early, entreat, persist, without attaining the object of their suit; while another comes, and without knowing why or wherefore, finds himself invested with the place or office so many have sued for; and here it is that the common saying, ‘There is good luck as well as bad luck in suits,’ applies.
Thou, who, to my thinking, art beyond all doubt a dullard, without early rising or night watching or taking any trouble, with the mere breath of knight-errantry that has breathed upon thee, seest thyself without more ado governor of an island, as though it were a mere matter of course.
This I say, Sancho, that thou attribute not the favour thou hast received to thine own merits, but give thanks to heaven that disposes matters beneficently, and secondly thanks to the great power the profession of knight-errantry contains in itself.
With a heart, then, inclined to believe what I have said to thee, attend, my son, to thy Cato here who would counsel thee and be thy polestar and guide to direct and pilot thee to a safe haven out of this stormy sea wherein thou art about to ingulf thyself; for offices and great trusts are nothing else but a mighty gulf of troubles.
“Secondly, thou must keep in view what thou art, striving to know thyself, the most difficult thing to know that the mind can imagine.
But to my thinking that has nothing to do with it; for all who are governors don’t come of a kingly stock.” “True,” said Don Quixote, “and for that reason those who are not of noble origin should take care that the dignity of the office they hold be accompanied by a gentle suavity, which wisely managed will save them from the sneers of malice that no station escapes.
Countless are they who, born of mean parentage, have risen to the highest dignities, pontifical and imperial, and of the truth of this I could give thee instances enough to weary thee.
“Remember, Sancho, if thou make virtue thy aim, and take a pride in doing virtuous actions, thou wilt have no cause to envy those who have princely and lordly ones, for blood is an inheritance, but virtue an acquisition, and virtue has in itself alone a worth that blood does not possess.
“This being so, if perchance anyone of thy kinsfolk should come to see thee when thou art in thine island, thou art not to repel or slight him, but on the contrary to welcome him, entertain him, and make much of him; for in so doing thou wilt be approved of heaven (which is not pleased that any should despise what it hath made), and wilt comply with the laws of well-ordered nature.
“If thou carriest thy wife with thee (and it is not well for those that administer governments to be long without their wives), teach and instruct her, and strive to smooth down her natural roughness; for all that may be gained by a wise governor may be lost and wasted by a boorish stupid wife.
“Never go by arbitrary law, which is so much favoured by ignorant men who plume themselves on cleverness.
“Let the tears of the poor man find with thee more compassion, but not more justice, than the pleadings of the rich.
“Strive to lay bare the truth, as well amid the promises and presents of the rich man, as amid the sobs and entreaties of the poor.
“When equity may and should be brought into play, press not the utmost rigour of the law against the guilty; for the reputation of the stern judge stands not higher than that of the compassionate.
“If perchance thou permittest the staff of justice to swerve, let it be not by the weight of a gift, but by that of mercy.
“If it should happen to thee to give judgment in the cause of one who is thine enemy, turn thy thoughts away from thy injury and fix them on the justice of the case.
“Let not thine own passion blind thee in another man’s cause; for the errors thou wilt thus commit will be most frequently irremediable; or if not, only to be remedied at the expense of thy good name and even of thy fortune.
“If any handsome woman come to seek justice of thee, turn away thine eyes from her tears and thine ears from her lamentations, and consider deliberately the merits of her demand, if thou wouldst not have thy reason swept away by her weeping, and thy rectitude by her sighs.
“Abuse not by word him whom thou hast to punish in deed, for the pain of punishment is enough for the unfortunate without the addition of thine objurgations.
“Bear in mind that the culprit who comes under thy jurisdiction is but a miserable man subject to all the propensities of our depraved nature, and so far as may be in thy power show thyself lenient and forbearing; for though the attributes of God are all equal, to our eyes that of mercy is brighter and loftier than that of justice.
“What I have thus far addressed to thee are instructions for the adornment of thy mind; listen now to those which tend to that of the body.” p42e.jpg (17K) CHAPTER XLIII.
OF THE SECOND SET OF COUNSELS DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA p43a.jpg (129K) Full Size Who, hearing the foregoing discourse of Don Quixote, would not have set him down for a person of great good sense and greater rectitude of purpose?
Sancho listened to him with the deepest attention, and endeavoured to fix his counsels in his memory, like one who meant to follow them and by their means bring the full promise of his government to a happy issue.
“Go not ungirt and loose, Sancho; for disordered attire is a sign of an unstable mind, unless indeed the slovenliness and slackness is to be set down to craft, as was the common opinion in the case of Julius Cæsar.
“Eat not garlic nor onions, lest they find out thy boorish origin by the smell; walk slowly and speak deliberately, but not in such a way as to make it seem thou art listening to thyself, for all affectation is bad.
“Dine sparingly and sup more sparingly still; for the health of the whole body is forged in the workshop of the stomach.
“Be temperate in drinking, bearing in mind that wine in excess keeps neither secrets nor promises.
“Eruct, I shall say henceforth, and I swear not to forget it,” said Sancho.
But I’ll take care henceforward to use such as befit the dignity of my office; for ‘in a house where there’s plenty, supper is soon cooked,’ and ‘he who binds does not wrangle,’ and ‘the bell-ringer’s in a safe berth,’ and ‘giving and keeping require brains.’” “That’s it, Sancho!” said Don Quixote; “pack, tack, string proverbs together; nobody is hindering thee!
‘My mother beats me, and I go on with my tricks.’ I am bidding thee avoid proverbs, and here in a second thou hast shot out a whole litany of them, which have as much to do with what we are talking about as ‘over the hills of Úbeda.’ Mind, Sancho, I do not say that a proverb aptly brought in is objectionable; but to pile up and string together proverbs at random makes conversation dull and vulgar.
“When thou ridest on horseback, do not go lolling with thy body on the back of the saddle, nor carry thy legs stiff or sticking out from the horse’s belly, nor yet sit so loosely that one would suppose thou wert on Dapple; for the seat on a horse makes gentlemen of some and grooms of others.
“Be moderate in thy sleep; for he who does not rise early does not get the benefit of the day; and remember, Sancho, diligence is the mother of good fortune, and indolence, its opposite, never yet attained the object of an honest ambition.
“Thy attire shall be hose of full length, a long jerkin, and a cloak a trifle longer; loose breeches by no means, for they are becoming neither for gentlemen nor for governors.
“For the present, Sancho, this is all that has occurred to me to advise thee; as time goes by and occasions arise my instructions shall follow, if thou take care to let me know how thou art circumstanced.” “Señor,” said Sancho, “I see well enough that all these things your worship has said to me are good, holy, and profitable; but what use will they be to me if I don’t remember one of them?
It is a great defect that thou labourest under, and therefore I would have thee learn at any rate to sign thy name.” “I can sign my name well enough,” said Sancho, “for when I was steward of the brotherhood in my village I learned to make certain letters, like the marks on bales of goods, which they told me made out my name.
Besides I can pretend my right hand is disabled and make someone else sign for me, for ‘there’s a remedy for everything except death;’ and as I shall be in command and hold the staff, I can do as I like; moreover, ‘he who has the alcalde for his father—,’ and I’ll be governor, and that’s higher than alcalde.
Let them make light of me and abuse me; ‘they’ll come for wool and go back shorn;’ ‘whom God loves, his house is known to Him;’ ‘the silly sayings of the rich pass for saws in the world;’ and as I’ll be rich, being a governor, and at the same time generous, as I mean to be, no fault will be seen in me.
‘Only make yourself honey and the flies will suck you;’ ‘as much as thou hast so much art thou worth,’ as my grandmother used to say; and ‘thou canst have no revenge of a man of substance.’” “Oh, God’s curse upon thee, Sancho!” here exclaimed Don Quixote; “sixty thousand devils fly away with thee and thy proverbs!
For the last hour thou hast been stringing them together and inflicting the pangs of torture on me with every one of them.
Those proverbs will bring thee to the gallows one day, I promise thee; thy subjects will take the government from thee, or there will be revolts among them.
How dost thou apply them, thou blockhead?
For with me, to utter one and make it apply properly, I have to sweat and labour as if I were digging.” “By God, master mine,” said Sancho, “your worship is making a fuss about very little.
He also thought, he says, that many, engrossed by the interest attaching to the exploits of Don Quixote, would take none in the novels, and pass them over hastily or impatiently without noticing the elegance and art of their composition, which would be very manifest were they published by themselves and not as mere adjuncts to the crazes of Don Quixote or the simplicities of Sancho.
And so he goes on with his story, saying that the day Don Quixote gave the counsels to Sancho, the same afternoon after dinner he handed them to him in writing so that he might get someone to read them to him.
They had scarcely, however, been given to him when he let them drop, and they fell into the hands of the duke, who showed them to the duchess and they were both amazed afresh at the madness and wit of Don Quixote.
To carry on the joke, then, the same evening they despatched Sancho with a large following to the village that was to serve him for an island.
Believe me, my friend, we must pray earnestly to our Lord that he deliver us both from wicked wizards and enchanters.” “It is no joke, señor,” said Sancho, “for before this I heard him speak, and it seemed exactly as if the voice of the Trifaldi was sounding in my ears.
Well, I’ll hold my peace; but I’ll take care to be on the look-out henceforth for any sign that may be seen to confirm or do away with this suspicion.” “Thou wilt do well, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “and thou wilt let me know all thou discoverest, and all that befalls thee in thy government.” Sancho at last set out attended by a great number of people.
He was dressed in the garb of a lawyer, with a gaban of tawny watered camlet over all and a montera cap of the same material, and mounted a la gineta upon a mule.
Behind him, in accordance with the duke’s orders, followed Dapple with brand new ass-trappings and ornaments of silk, and from time to time Sancho turned round to look at his ass, so well pleased to have him with him that he would not have changed places with the emperor of Germany.
On taking leave he kissed the hands of the duke and duchess and got his master’s blessing, which Don Quixote gave him with tears, and he received blubbering. p44b.jpg (341K) Full Size Let worthy Sancho go in peace, and good luck to him, Gentle Reader; and look out for two bushels of laughter, which the account of how he behaved himself in office will give thee.
In the meantime turn thy attention to what happened his master the same night, and if thou dost not laugh thereat, at any rate thou wilt stretch thy mouth with a grin; for Don Quixote’s adventures must be honoured either with wonder or with laughter.
It is recorded, then, that as soon as Sancho had gone, Don Quixote felt his loneliness, and had it been possible for him to revoke the mandate and take away the government from him he would have done so.
The duchess observed his dejection and asked him why he was melancholy; because, she said, if it was for the loss of Sancho, there were squires, duennas, and damsels in her house who would wait upon him to his full satisfaction.
They, or anything like them, shall as soon enter my chamber as fly.
I am not the one to undermine the propriety of Señor Don Quixote, for it strikes me that among his many virtues the one that is pre-eminent is that of modesty.
Your worship may undress and dress in private and in your own way, as you please and when you please, for there will be no one to hinder you; and in your chamber you will find all the utensils requisite to supply the wants of one who sleeps with his door locked, to the end that no natural needs compel you to open it.
He locked the door behind him, and by the light of two wax candles undressed himself, but as he was taking off his stockings—O disaster unworthy of such a personage!—there came a burst, not of sighs, or anything belying his delicacy or good breeding, but of some two dozen stitches in one of his stockings, that made it look like a window-lattice.
The worthy gentleman was beyond measure distressed, and at that moment he would have given an ounce of silver to have had half a drachm of green silk there; I say green silk, because the stockings were green.
Here Cide Hamete exclaimed as he was writing, “O poverty, poverty!
But thou, that other poverty—for it is of thee I am speaking now—why dost thou love to fall out with gentlemen and men of good birth more than with other people?
At last he went to bed, out of spirits and heavy at heart, as much because he missed Sancho as because of the irreparable disaster to his stockings, the stitches of which he would have even taken up with silk of another colour, which is one of the greatest signs of poverty a gentleman can show in the course of his never-failing embarrassments.
He put out the candles; but the night was warm and he could not sleep; he rose from his bed and opened slightly a grated window that looked out on a beautiful garden, and as he did so he perceived and heard people walking and talking in the garden.
As he listened to all this Don Quixote was in a state of breathless amazement, for immediately the countless adventures like this, with windows, gratings, gardens, serenades, lovemakings, and languishings, that he had read of in his trashy books of chivalry, came to his mind.
He at once concluded that some damsel of the duchess’s was in love with him, and that her modesty forced her to keep her passion secret.
He trembled lest he should fall, and made an inward resolution not to yield; and commending himself with all his might and soul to his lady Dulcinea he made up his mind to listen to the music; and to let them know he was there he gave a pretended sneeze, at which the damsels were not a little delighted, for all they wanted was that Don Quixote should hear them.
Adventures seeking thou dost rove, To others bringing woe; Thou scatterest wounds, but, ah, the balm To heal them dost withhold!
Say, valiant youth, and so may God Thy enterprises speed, Didst thou the light mid Libya’s sands Or Jaca’s rocks first see?
Did scaly serpents give thee suck?
Wert cradled in the forest rude, Or gloomy mountain cave?
O Dulcinea may be proud, That plump and lusty maid; For she alone hath had the power A tiger fierce to tame.
And she for this shall famous be From Tagus to Jarama, From Manzanares to Genil, From Duero to Arlanza.
Fain would I change with her, and give A petticoat to boot, The best and bravest that I have, All trimmed with gold galloon.
I rave,—to favours such as these Unworthy to aspire; Thy feet to tickle were enough For one so mean as I.
What caps, what slippers silver-laced, Would I on thee bestow!
What damask breeches make for thee; What fine long holland cloaks!
And I would give thee pearls that should As big as oak-galls show; So matchless big that each might well Be called the great “Alone.” Manchegan Nero, look not down From thy Tarpeian Rock Upon this burning heart, nor add The fuel of thy wrath.
A virgin soft and young am I, Not yet fifteen years old; (I’m only three months past fourteen, I swear upon my soul).
I hobble not nor do I limp, All blemish I’m without, And as I walk my lily locks Are trailing on the ground.
Thou knowest that my voice is sweet, That is if thou dost hear; And I am moulded in a form Somewhat below the mean.
O that the peerless Dulcinea should be so unfortunate that they cannot let her enjoy my incomparable constancy in peace!
Why do ye persecute her, ye empresses?
Why ye pursue her, ye virgins of from fourteen to fifteen?
Leave the unhappy being to triumph, rejoice and glory in the lot love has been pleased to bestow upon her in surrendering my heart and yielding up my soul to her.
Ye love-smitten host, know that to Dulcinea only I am dough and sugar-paste, flint to all others; for her I am honey, for you aloes.
For me Dulcinea alone is beautiful, wise, virtuous, graceful, and high-bred, and all others are ill-favoured, foolish, light, and low-born.
OF HOW THE GREAT SANCHO PANZA TOOK POSSESSION OF HIS ISLAND, AND OF HOW HE MADE A BEGINNING IN GOVERNING p45a.jpg (141K) Full Size O perpetual discoverer of the antipodes, torch of the world, eye of heaven, sweet stimulator of the water-coolers!
Thimbraeus here, Phœbus there, now archer, now physician, father of poetry, inventor of music; thou that always risest and, notwithstanding appearances, never settest!
To thee, O Sun, by whose aid man begetteth man, to thee I appeal to help me and lighten the darkness of my wit that I may be able to proceed with scrupulous exactitude in giving an account of the great Sancho Panza’s government; for without thee I feel myself weak, feeble, and uncertain.
To come to the point, then—Sancho with all his attendants arrived at a village of some thousand inhabitants, and one of the largest the duke possessed.
They informed him that it was called the island of Barataria, either because the name of the village was Baratario, or because of the joke by way of which the government had been conferred upon him.
The costume, the beard, and the fat squat figure of the new governor astonished all those who were not in on the secret, and even all who were, and they were not a few.
The answer was, “Señor, there is written and recorded the day on which your lordship took possession of this island, and the inscription says, ‘This day, the so-and-so of such-and-such a month and year, Señor Don Sancho Panza took possession of this island; many years may he enjoy it.’” “And whom do they call Don Sancho Panza?” asked Sancho.
Seeing this the great governor asked the creditor what answer he had to make to what his opponent said.
He said that no doubt his debtor had told the truth, for he believed him to be an honest man and a good Christian, and he himself must have forgotten when and how he had given him back the crowns; and that from that time forth he would make no further demand upon him.
Observing this, and how, without another word, he made off, and observing too the resignation of the plaintiff, Sancho buried his head in his bosom and remained for a short space in deep thought, with the forefinger of his right hand on his brow and nose; then he raised his head and bade them call back the old man with the stick, for he had already taken his departure.
They brought him back, and as soon as Sancho saw him he said, “Honest man, give me that stick, for I want it.” “Willingly,” said the old man; “here it is señor,” and he put it into his hand.
All were filled with amazement, and looked upon their governor as another Solomon.
To conclude, the old men went off, one crestfallen, and the other in high contentment, all who were present were astonished, and he who was recording the words, deeds, and movements of Sancho could not make up his mind whether he was to look upon him and set him down as a fool or as a man of sense.
As soon as this case was disposed of, there came into court a woman holding on with a tight grip to a man dressed like a well-to-do cattle dealer, and she came forward making a great outcry and exclaiming, “Justice, señor governor, justice! and if I don’t get it on earth I’ll go look for it in heaven.
He all in confusion made answer, “Sirs, I am a poor pig dealer, and this morning I left the village to sell (saving your presence) four pigs, and between dues and cribbings they got out of me little less than the worth of them.
As I was returning to my village I fell in on the road with this good dame, and the devil who makes a coil and a mess out of everything, yoked us together.
I paid her fairly, but she not contented laid hold of me and never let go until she brought me here; she says I forced her, but she lies by the oath I swear or am ready to swear; and this is the whole truth and every particle of it.” The governor on this asked him if he had any money in silver about him; he said he had about twenty ducats in a leather purse in his bosom.
As soon as she was gone Sancho said to the cattle dealer, whose tears were already starting and whose eyes and heart were following his purse, “Good fellow, go after that woman and take the purse from her, by force even, and come back with it here;” and he did not say it to one who was a fool or deaf, for the man was off like a flash of lightning, and ran to do as he was bid.
Pincers and hammers, mallets and chisels would not get it out of my grip; no, nor lions’ claws; the soul from out of my body first!” “She is right,” said the man; “I own myself beaten and powerless; I confess I haven’t the strength to take it from her;” and he let go his hold of her.
He probably suspected—as I supposed, and I supposed right—that I wanted to steal some of the cloth, led to think so by his own roguery and the bad opinion people have of tailors; and he told me to see if there would be enough for two.
I guessed what he would be at, and I said ‘yes.’ He, still following up his original unworthy notion, went on adding cap after cap, and I ‘yes’ after ‘yes,’ until we got as far as five.
He has just this moment come for them; I gave them to him, but he won’t pay me for the making; on the contrary, he calls upon me to pay him, or else return his cloth.” “Is all this true, brother?” said Sancho.
All this, having been taken down by his chronicler, was at once despatched to the duke, who was looking out for it with great eagerness; and here let us leave the good Sancho; for his master, sorely troubled in mind by Altisidora’s music, has pressing claims upon us now. p45e.jpg (11K) CHAPTER XLVI.
OF THE TERRIBLE BELL AND CAT FRIGHT THAT DON QUIXOTE GOT IN THE COURSE OF THE ENAMOURED ALTISIDORA’S WOOING p46a.jpg (58K) Full Size We left Don Quixote wrapped up in the reflections which the music of the enamourned maid Altisidora had given rise to.
He went to bed with them, and just like fleas they would not let him sleep or get a moment’s rest, and the broken stitches of his stockings helped them.
But as Time is fleet and no obstacle can stay his course, he came riding on the hours, and morning very soon arrived.
Seeing which Don Quixote quitted the soft down, and, nowise slothful, dressed himself in his chamois suit and put on his travelling boots to hide the disaster to his stockings.
He threw over him his scarlet mantle, put on his head a montera of green velvet trimmed with silver edging, flung across his shoulder the baldric with his good trenchant sword, took up a large rosary that he always carried with him, and with great solemnity and precision of gait proceeded to the antechamber where the duke and duchess were already dressed and waiting for him.
But as he passed through a gallery, Altisidora and the other damsel, her friend, were lying in wait for him, and the instant Altisidora saw him she pretended to faint, while her friend caught her in her lap, and began hastily unlacing the bosom of her dress.
Don Quixote observed it, and approaching them said, “I know very well what this seizure arises from.” “I know not from what,” replied the friend, “for Altisidora is the healthiest damsel in all this house, and I have never heard her complain all the time I have known her.
A plague on all the knights-errant in the world, if they be all ungrateful!
Sewing, stitching, any labour, Having always work to do, To the poison Love instilleth Is the antidote most sure.
And to proper-minded maidens Who desire the matron’s name Modesty’s a marriage portion, Modesty their highest praise.
Men of prudence and discretion, Courtiers gay and gallant knights, With the wanton damsels dally, But the modest take to wife.
There are passions, transient, fleeting, Loves in hostelries declar’d, Sunrise loves, with sunset ended, When the guest hath gone his way.
Painting that is laid on painting Maketh no display or show; Where one beauty’s in possession There no other can take hold.
Dulcinea del Toboso Painted on my heart I wear; Never from its tablets, never, Can her image be eras’d.
The quality of all in lovers Most esteemed is constancy; ’Tis by this that love works wonders, This exalts them to the skies.
They extinguished the candles that were burning in the room, and rushed about seeking some way of escape; the cord with the large bells never ceased rising and falling; and most of the people of the castle, not knowing what was really the matter, were at their wits’ end with astonishment.
Don Quixote sprang to his feet, and drawing his sword, began making passes at the grating, shouting out, “Avaunt, malignant enchanters! avaunt, ye witchcraft-working rabble!
I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, against whom your evil machinations avail not nor have any power.” And turning upon the cats that were running about the room, he made several cuts at them.
The duke and duchess hearing this, and guessing what it was, ran with all haste to his room, and as the poor gentleman was striving with all his might to detach the cat from his face, they opened the door with a master-key and went in with lights and witnessed the unequal combat.
The duke ran forward to part the combatants, but Don Quixote cried out aloud, “Let no one take him from me; leave me hand to hand with this demon, this wizard, this enchanter; I will teach him, I myself, who Don Quixote of La Mancha is.” The cat, however, never minding these threats, snarled and held on; but at last the duke pulled it off and flung it out of the window.
Don Quixote was left with a face as full of holes as a sieve and a nose not in very good condition, and greatly vexed that they did not let him finish the battle he had been so stoutly fighting with that villain of an enchanter.
They sent for some oil of John’s wort, and Altisidora herself with her own fair hands bandaged all the wounded parts; and as she did so she said to him in a low voice.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ACCOUNT OF HOW SANCHO PANZA CONDUCTED HIMSELF IN HIS GOVERNMENT p47a.jpg (139K) Full Size The history says that from the justice court they carried Sancho to a sumptuous palace, where in a spacious chamber there was a table laid out with royal magnificence.
The clarions sounded as Sancho entered the room, and four pages came forward to present him with water for his hands, which Sancho received with great dignity.
A personage, who it appeared afterwards was a physician, placed himself standing by his side with a whalebone wand in his hand.
They then lifted up a fine white cloth covering fruit and a great variety of dishes of different sorts; one who looked like a student said grace, and a page put a laced bib on Sancho, while another who played the part of head carver placed a dish of fruit before him.
But hardly had he tasted a morsel when the man with the wand touched the plate with it, and they took it away from before him with the utmost celerity.
The carver, however, brought him another dish, and Sancho proceeded to try it; but before he could get at it, not to say taste it, already the wand had touched it and a page had carried it off with the same promptitude as the fruit.
Sancho seeing this was puzzled, and looking from one to another asked if this dinner was to be eaten after the fashion of a jugglery trick.
To this he with the wand replied, “It is not to be eaten, señor governor, except as is usual and customary in other islands where there are governors.
I, señor, am a physician, and I am paid a salary in this island to serve its governors as such, and I have a much greater regard for their health than for my own, studying day and night and making myself acquainted with the governor’s constitution, in order to be able to cure him when he falls sick.
But what I am of opinion the governor should eat now in order to preserve and fortify his health is a hundred or so of wafer cakes and a few thin slices of conserve of quinces, which will settle his stomach and help his digestion.” Sancho on hearing this threw himself back in his chair and surveyed the doctor steadily, and in a solemn tone asked him what his name was and where he had studied.
And if they call me to account for it, I’ll clear myself by saying I served God in killing a bad doctor—a general executioner.
Sancho ordered the chamber to be cleared, the majordomo and the carver only remaining; so the doctor and the others withdrew, and then the secretary read the letter, which was as follows: It has come to my knowledge, Señor Don Sancho Panza, that certain enemies of mine and of the island are about to make a furious attack upon it some night, I know not when.
It behoves you to be on the alert and keep watch, that they surprise you not.
I also know by trustworthy spies that four persons have entered the town in disguise in order to take your life, because they stand in dread of your great capacity; keep your eyes open and take heed who approaches you to address you, and eat nothing that is presented to you.
I will take care to send you aid if you find yourself in difficulty, but in all things you will act as may be expected of your judgment.
From this place, the Sixteenth of August, at four in the morning.
We who govern and we who are judges—are we not men of flesh and blood, and are we not to be allowed the time required for taking rest, unless they’d have us made of marble?
By God and on my conscience, if the government remains in my hands (which I have a notion it won’t), I’ll bring more than one man on business to order.
The farmer now came in, a well-favoured man that one might see a thousand leagues off was an honest fellow and a good soul.
The first thing he said was, “Which is the lord governor here?” “Which should it be,” said the secretary, “but he who is seated in the chair?” “Then I humble myself before him,” said the farmer; and going on his knees he asked for his hand, to kiss it.
“No, señor, certainly not,” said the farmer.
She is so cleanly that not to soil her face she carries her nose turned up, as they say, so that one would fancy it was running away from her mouth; and with all this she looks extremely well, for she has a wide mouth; and but for wanting ten or a dozen teeth and grinders she might compare and compete with the comeliest.
The moment he said this the governor started to his feet, and seizing the chair he had been sitting on exclaimed, “By all that’s good, you ill-bred, boorish Don Bumpkin, if you don’t get out of this at once and hide yourself from my sight, I’ll lay your head open with this chair.
You whoreson rascal, you devil’s own painter, and is it at this hour you come to ask me for six hundred ducats!
How should I have them, you stinking brute?
And why should I give them to you if I had them, you knave and blockhead?
What have I to do with Miguelturra or the whole family of the Perlerines?
You’re not from Miguelturra, but some knave sent here from hell to tempt me.
Why, you villain, I have not yet had the government half a day, and you want me to have six hundred ducats already!” The carver made signs to the farmer to leave the room, which he did with his head down, and to all appearance in terror lest the governor should carry his threats into effect, for the rogue knew very well how to play his part.
He stood up on the bed wrapped from head to foot in a yellow satin coverlet, with a cap on his head, and his face and his moustaches tied up, his face because of the scratches, and his moustaches to keep them from drooping and falling down, in which trim he looked the most extraordinary scarecrow that could be conceived.
He kept his eyes fixed on the door, and just as he was expecting to see the love-smitten and unhappy Altisidora make her appearance, he saw coming in a most venerable duenna, in a long white-bordered veil that covered and enveloped her from head to foot.
Between the fingers of her left hand she held a short lighted candle, while with her right she shaded it to keep the light from her eyes, which were covered by spectacles of great size, and she advanced with noiseless steps, treading very softly.
Don Quixote kept an eye upon her from his watchtower, and observing her costume and noting her silence, he concluded that it must be some witch or sorceress that was coming in such a guise to work him some mischief, and he began crossing himself at a great rate.
Because I must tell you I am not available for anybody’s purpose, thanks to the peerless beauty of my lady Dulcinea del Toboso.
In short, Señora Doña Rodriguez, if you will leave out and put aside all love messages, you may go and light your candle and come back, and we will discuss all the commands you have for me and whatever you wish, saving only, as I said, all seductive communications.” “I carry nobody’s messages, señor,” said the duenna; “little you know me.
Nay, I’m not far enough advanced in years to take to any such childish tricks.
God be praised I have a soul in my body still, and all my teeth and grinders in my mouth, except one or two that the colds, so common in this Aragon country, have robbed me of.
But wait a little, while I go and light my candle, and I will return immediately and lay my sorrows before you as before one who relieves those of all the world;” and without staying for an answer she quitted the room and left Don Quixote tranquilly meditating while he waited for her.
Many a time have I heard it said by many a man of sense that he will sooner offer you a flat-nosed wench than a roman-nosed one; and who knows but this privacy, this opportunity, this silence, may awaken my sleeping desires, and lead me in these my latter years to fall where I have never tripped?
But I must be out of my senses to think and utter such nonsense; for it is impossible that a long, white-hooded spectacled duenna could stir up or excite a wanton thought in the most graceless bosom in the world.
Is there a duenna in the world that escapes being ill-tempered, wrinkled, and prudish?
Avaunt, then, ye duenna crew, undelightful to all mankind.
“Of you and against you I ask it,” said Don Quixote; “for I am not marble, nor are you brass, nor is it now ten o’clock in the morning, but midnight, or a trifle past it I fancy, and we are in a room more secluded and retired than the cave could have been where the treacherous and daring Æneas enjoyed the fair soft-hearted Dido.
But give me your hand, señora; I require no better protection than my own continence, and my own sense of propriety; as well as that which is inspired by that venerable head-dress;” and so saying he kissed her right hand and took it in his own, she yielding it to him with equal ceremoniousness.
And here Cide Hamete inserts a parenthesis in which he says that to have seen the pair marching from the door to the bed, linked hand in hand in this way, he would have given the best of the two tunics he had.
Don Quixote finally got into bed, and Doña Rodriguez took her seat on a chair at some little distance from his couch, without taking off her spectacles or putting aside the candle.
My parents left me in service and returned to their own country, and a few years later went, no doubt, to heaven, for they were excellent good Catholic Christians.
I was left an orphan with nothing but the miserable wages and trifling presents that are given to servants of my sort in palaces; but about this time, without any encouragement on my part, one of the esquires of the household fell in love with me, a man somewhat advanced in years, full-bearded and personable, and above all as good a gentleman as the king himself, for he came of a mountain stock.
This much at least I cannot help telling you, that you may observe the good breeding and punctiliousness of my worthy husband.
As he was turning into the Calle de Santiago in Madrid, which is rather narrow, one of the alcaldes of the Court, with two alguacils before him, was coming out of it, and as soon as my good squire saw him he wheeled his mule about and made as if he would turn and accompany him.
My lady, who was riding behind him, said to him in a low voice, ‘What are you about, you sneak, don’t you see that I am here?’ The alcalde like a polite man pulled up his horse and said to him, ‘Proceed, señor, for it is I, rather, who ought to accompany my lady Doña Casilda’—for that was my mistress’s name.
Still my husband, cap in hand, persisted in trying to accompany the alcalde, and seeing this my lady, filled with rage and vexation, pulled out a big pin, or, I rather think, a bodkin, out of her needle-case and drove it into his back with such force that my husband gave a loud yell, and writhing fell to the ground with his lady.
Her two lacqueys ran to rise her up, and the alcalde and the alguacils did the same; the Guadalajara gate was all in commotion—I mean the idlers congregated there; my mistress came back on foot, and my husband hurried away to a barber’s shop protesting that he was run right through the guts.
The courtesy of my husband was noised abroad to such an extent, that the boys gave him no peace in the street; and on this account, and because he was somewhat shortsighted, my lady dismissed him; and it was chagrin at this I am convinced beyond a doubt that brought on his death.
To come to the point, the son of a very rich farmer, living in a village of my lord the duke’s not very far from here, fell in love with this girl of mine; and in short, how I know not, they came together, and under the promise of marrying her he made a fool of my daughter, and will not keep his word.
Now, señor, I want your worship to take it upon yourself to redress this wrong either by entreaty or by arms; for by what all the world says you came into it to redress grievances and right wrongs and help the unfortunate.
“Adjured in that way,” replied the duenna, “I cannot help answering the question and telling the whole truth.
Señor Don Quixote, have you observed the comeliness of my lady the duchess, that smooth complexion of hers like a burnished polished sword, those two cheeks of milk and carmine, that gay lively step with which she treads or rather seems to spurn the earth, so that one would fancy she went radiating health wherever she passed?
Well then, let me tell you she may thank, first of all God, for this, and next, two issues that she has, one in each leg, by which all the evil humours, of which the doctors say she is full, are discharged.” “Blessed Virgin!” exclaimed Don Quixote; “and is it possible that my lady the duchess has drains of that sort?
I would not have believed it if the barefoot friars had told it me; but as the lady Doña Rodriguez says so, it must be so.
But surely such issues, and in such places, do not discharge humours, but liquid amber.
Verily, I do believe now that this practice of opening issues is a very important matter for the health.” Don Quixote had hardly said this, when the chamber door flew open with a loud bang, and with the start the noise gave her Doña Rodriguez let the candle fall from her hand, and the room was left as dark as a wolf’s mouth, as the saying is.
Nor was the apprehension an idle one; for leaving the duenna (who did not dare to cry out) well basted, the silent executioners fell upon Don Quixote, and stripping him of the sheet and the coverlet, they pinched him so fast and so hard that he was driven to defend himself with his fists, and all this in marvellous silence.
At last Doctor Pedro Recio Agilers of Tirteafuera promised to let him have supper that night though it might be in contravention of all the aphorisms of Hippocrates.
With this the governor was satisfied and looked forward to the approach of night and supper-time with great anxiety; and though time, to his mind, stood still and made no progress, nevertheless the hour he so longed for came, and they gave him a beef salad with onions and some boiled calves’ feet rather far gone.
What the head-carver had best do is to serve me with what they call ollas podridas (and the rottener they are the better they smell); and he can put whatever he likes into them, so long as it is good to eat, and I’ll be obliged to him, and will requite him some day.
But let nobody play pranks on me, for either we are or we are not; let us live and eat in peace and good-fellowship, for when God sends the dawn, he sends it for all.
I mean to govern this island without giving up a right or taking a bribe; let everyone keep his eye open, and look out for the arrow; for I can tell them ‘the devil’s in Cantillana,’ and if they drive me to it they’ll see something that will astonish them.
I mean to protect the husbandman, to preserve to the gentleman his privileges, to reward the virtuous, and above all to respect religion and honour its ministers.
Every day we see something new in this world; jokes become realities, and the jokers find the tables turned upon them.” Night came, and with the permission of Doctor Pedro Recio, the governor had supper.
They then got ready to go the rounds, and he started with the majordomo, the secretary, the head-carver, the chronicler charged with recording his deeds, and alguacils and notaries enough to form a fair-sized squadron.
In the midst marched Sancho with his staff, as fine a sight as one could wish to see, and but a few streets of the town had been traversed when they heard a noise as of a clashing of swords.
They hastened to the spot, and found that the combatants were but two, who seeing the authorities approaching stood still, and one of them exclaimed, “Help, in the name of God and the king!
Are men to be allowed to rob in the middle of this town, and rush out and attack people in the very streets?” “Be calm, my good man,” said Sancho, “and tell me what the cause of this quarrel is; for I am the governor.” Said the other combatant, “Señor governor, I will tell you in a very few words.
Your worship must know that this gentleman has just now won more than a thousand reals in that gambling house opposite, and God knows how.
I was there, and gave more than one doubtful point in his favour, very much against what my conscience told me.
He made off with his winnings, and when I made sure he was going to give me a crown or so at least by way of a present, as it is usual and customary to give men of quality of my sort who stand by to see fair or foul play, and back up swindles, and prevent quarrels, he pocketed his money and left the house.
But by my faith if you had not come up I’d have made him disgorge his winnings, and he’d have learned what the range of the steel-yard was.” “What say you to this?” asked Sancho.
And now a tipstaff came up with a young man in his grasp, and said, “Señor governor, this youth was coming towards us, and as soon as he saw the officers of justice he turned about and ran like a deer, a sure proof that he must be some evil-doer; I ran after him, and had it not been that he stumbled and fell, I should never have caught him.” “What did you run for, fellow?” said Sancho.
To which the young man replied, “Señor, it was to avoid answering all the questions officers of justice put.” “What are you by trade?” “A weaver.” “And what do you weave?” “Lance heads, with your worship’s good leave.” “You’re facetious with me!
You plume yourself on being a wag?
Sancho was fascinated by the girl’s beauty, and he asked her who she was, where she was going, and what had induced her to dress herself in that garb.
“The fact is, sirs,” said she, “that my father has kept me shut up these ten years, for so long is it since the earth received my mother.
This seclusion and the restrictions laid upon my going out, were it only to church, have been keeping me unhappy for many a day and month past; I longed to see the world, or at least the town where I was born, and it did not seem to me that this wish was inconsistent with the respect maidens of good quality should have for themselves.
When I heard them talking of bull-fights taking place, and of javelin games, and of acting plays, I asked my brother, who is a year younger than myself, to tell me what sort of things these were, and many more that I had never seen; he explained them to me as well as he could, but the only effect was to kindle in me a still stronger desire to see them.
At last, to cut short the story of my ruin, I begged and entreated my brother—O that I had never made such an entreaty—” And once more she gave way to a burst of weeping.
The governor was losing patience at the length of time the girl was taking to tell her story, and told her not to keep them waiting any longer; for it was late, and there still remained a good deal of the town to be gone over.
He had nothing on but a rich petticoat and a short blue damask cloak with fine gold lace, and his head was uncovered and adorned only with its own hair, which looked like rings of gold, so bright and curly was it.
On reaching it the youth threw a pebble up at a grating, and immediately a woman-servant who was waiting for them came down and opened the door to them, and they went in, leaving the party marvelling as much at their grace and beauty as at the fancy they had for seeing the world by night and without quitting the village; which, however, they set down to their youth.
And so the night’s round came to an end, and a couple of days later the government, whereby all his plans were overthrown and swept away, as will be seen farther on. p49e.jpg (55K) CHAPTER L.
The duchess told the duke, and asked him to let her and Altisidora go and see what the said duenna wanted with Don Quixote.
The duke gave them leave, and the pair cautiously and quietly crept to the door of the room and posted themselves so close to it that they could hear all that was said inside.
Now the history says this page was very sharp and quick-witted; and eager to serve his lord and lady he set off very willingly for Sancho’s village.
Before he entered it he observed a number of women washing in a brook, and asked them if they could tell him whether there lived there a woman of the name of Teresa Panza, wife of one Sancho Panza, squire to a knight called Don Quixote of La Mancha.
She was not very old, though plainly past forty, strong, healthy, vigorous, and sun-dried; and seeing her daughter and the page on horseback, she exclaimed, “What’s this, child?
I am told he governs like a gerfalcon, of which I am very glad, and my lord the duke, of course, also; and I am very thankful to heaven that I have not made a mistake in choosing him for that same government; for I would have Señora Teresa know that a good governor is hard to find in this world and may God make me as good as Sancho’s way of governing.
Herewith I send you, my dear, a string of coral beads with gold clasps; I wish they were Oriental pearls; but “he who gives thee a bone does not wish to see thee dead;” a time will come when we shall become acquainted and meet one another, but God knows the future.
Commend me to your daughter Sanchica, and tell her from me to hold herself in readiness, for I mean to make a high match for her when she least expects it.
They tell me there are big acorns in your village; send me a couple of dozen or so, and I shall value them greatly as coming from your hand; and write to me at length to assure me of your health and well-being; and if there be anything you stand in need of, it is but to open your mouth, and that shall be the measure; and so God keep you.
“Ah, what a good, plain, lowly lady!” said Teresa when she heard the letter; “that I may be buried with ladies of that sort, and not the gentlewomen we have in this town, that fancy because they are gentlewomen the wind must not touch them, and go to church with as much airs as if they were queens, no less, and seem to think they are disgraced if they look at a farmer’s wife!
And as for the acorns, señor, I’ll send her ladyship a peck and such big ones that one might come to see them as a show and a wonder.
We’ve got a little government!
The curate read them out for Samson Carrasco to hear, and Samson and he regarded one another with looks of astonishment at what they had read, and the bachelor asked who had brought the letters.
Teresa in reply bade them come with her to her house and they would see the messenger, a most elegant youth, who had brought another present which was worth as much more.
They found the page sifting a little barley for his horse, and Sanchica cutting a rasher of bacon to be paved with eggs for his dinner.
It happened, however, that one man, when they came to take his declaration, swore and said that by the oath he took he was going to die upon that gallows that stood there, and nothing else.
The judges held a consultation over the oath, and they said, ‘If we let this man pass free he has sworn falsely, and by the law he ought to die; but if we hang him, as he swore he was going to die on that gallows, and therefore swore the truth, by the same law he ought to go free.’ It is asked of your worship, señor governor, what are the judges to do with this man?
It came to pass, then, that after he had dined that day, in opposition to the rules and aphorisms of Doctor Tirteafuera, as they were taking away the cloth there came a courier with a letter from Don Quixote for the governor.
Sancho ordered the secretary to read it to himself, and if there was nothing in it that demanded secrecy to read it aloud.
The secretary did so, and after he had skimmed the contents he said, “It may well be read aloud, for what Señor Don Quixote writes to your worship deserves to be printed or written in letters of gold, and it is as follows.” DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA’S LETTER TO SANCHO PANZA, GOVERNOR OF THE ISLAND OF BARATARIA.
When I was expecting to hear of thy stupidities and blunders, friend Sancho, I have received intelligence of thy displays of good sense, for which I give special thanks to heaven that can raise the poor from the dunghill and of fools to make wise men.
They tell me thou dost govern as if thou wert a man, and art a man as if thou wert a beast, so great is the humility wherewith thou dost comport thyself.
But I would have thee bear in mind, Sancho, that very often it is fitting and necessary for the authority of office to resist the humility of the heart; for the seemly array of one who is invested with grave duties should be such as they require and not measured by what his own humble tastes may lead him to prefer.
Dress well; a stick dressed up does not look like a stick; I do not say thou shouldst wear trinkets or fine raiment, or that being a judge thou shouldst dress like a soldier, but that thou shouldst array thyself in the apparel thy office requires, and that at the same time it be neat and handsome.
To win the good-will of the people thou governest there are two things, among others, that thou must do; one is to be civil to all (this, however, I told thee before), and the other to take care that food be abundant, for there is nothing that vexes the heart of the poor more than hunger and high prices.
Be a father to virtue and a stepfather to vice.
Be not always strict, nor yet always lenient, but observe a mean between these two extremes, for in that is the aim of wisdom.
Visit the gaols, the slaughter-houses, and the market-places; for the presence of the governor is of great importance in such places; it comforts the prisoners who are in hopes of a speedy release, it is the bugbear of the butchers who have then to give just weight, and it is the terror of the market-women for the same reason.
Let it not be seen that thou art (even if perchance thou art, which I do not believe) covetous, a follower of women, or a glutton; for when the people and those that have dealings with thee become aware of thy special weakness they will bring their batteries to bear upon thee in that quarter, till they have brought thee down to the depths of perdition.
Consider and reconsider, con and con over again the advices and the instructions I gave thee before thy departure hence to thy government, and thou wilt see that in them, if thou dost follow them, thou hast a help at hand that will lighten for thee the troubles and difficulties that beset governors at every step.
Write to thy lord and lady and show thyself grateful to them, for ingratitude is the daughter of pride, and one of the greatest sins we know of; and he who is grateful to those who have been good to him shows that he will be so to God also who has bestowed and still bestows so many blessings upon him.
My lady the duchess sent off a messenger with thy suit and another present to thy wife Teresa Panza; we expect the answer every moment.
I have been a little indisposed through a certain scratching I came in for, not very much to the benefit of my nose; but it was nothing; for if there are enchanters who maltreat me, there are also some who defend me.
Let me know if the majordomo who is with thee had any share in the Trifaldi performance, as thou didst suspect; and keep me informed of everything that happens thee, as the distance is so short; all the more as I am thinking of giving over very shortly this idle life I am now leading, for I was not born for it.
A thing has occurred to me which I am inclined to think will put me out of favour with the duke and duchess; but though I am sorry for it I do not care, for after all I must obey my calling rather than their pleasure, in accordance with the common saying, _amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas_.
I quote this Latin to thee because I conclude that since thou hast been a governor thou wilt have learned it.
The pressure of business is so great upon me that I have no time to scratch my head or even to cut my nails; and I have them so long—God send a remedy for it.
I say this, master of my soul, that you may not be surprised if I have not until now sent you word of how I fare, well or ill, in this government, in which I am suffering more hunger than when we two were wandering through the woods and wastes.
My lord the duke wrote to me the other day to warn me that certain spies had got into this island to kill me; but up to the present I have not found out any except a certain doctor who receives a salary in this town for killing all the governors that come here; he is called Doctor Pedro Recio, and is from Tirteafuera; so you see what a name he has to make me dread dying under his hands.
This doctor says of himself that he does not cure diseases when there are any, but prevents them coming, and the medicines he uses are diet and more diet until he brings one down to bare bones; as if leanness was not worse than fever.
In short he is killing me with hunger, and I am dying myself of vexation; for when I thought I was coming to this government to get my meat hot and my drink cool, and take my ease between holland sheets on feather beds, I find I have come to do penance as if I was a hermit; and as I don’t do it willingly I suspect that in the end the devil will carry me off.
So far I have not handled any dues or taken any bribes, and I don’t know what to think of it; for here they tell me that the governors that come to this island, before entering it have plenty of money either given to them or lent to them by the people of the town, and that this is the usual custom not only here but with all who enter upon governments.
I can tell your worship it is commonly said in this town that there are no people worse than the market-women, for they are all barefaced, unconscionable, and impudent, and I can well believe it from what I have seen of them in other towns.
I am very glad my lady the duchess has written to my wife Teresa Panza and sent her the present your worship speaks of; and I will strive to show myself grateful when the time comes; kiss her hands for me, and tell her I say she has not thrown it into a sack with a hole in it, as she will see in the end.
I should not like your worship to have any difference with my lord and lady; for if you fall out with them it is plain it must do me harm; and as you give me advice to be grateful it will not do for your worship not to be so yourself to those who have shown you such kindness, and by whom you have been treated so hospitably in their castle.
That about the scratching I don’t understand; but I suppose it must be one of the ill-turns the wicked enchanters are always doing your worship; when we meet I shall know all about it.
I wish I could send your worship something; but I don’t know what to send, unless it be some very curious clyster pipes, to work with bladders, that they make in this island; but if the office remains with me I’ll find out something to send, one way or another.
If my wife Teresa Panza writes to me, pay the postage and send me the letter, for I have a very great desire to hear how my house and wife and children are going on.
And so, may God deliver your worship from evil-minded enchanters, and bring me well and peacefully out of this government, which I doubt, for I expect to take leave of it and my life together, from the way Doctor Pedro Recio treats me.
Your worship’s servant SANCHO PANZA THE GOVERNOR.
The secretary sealed the letter, and immediately dismissed the courier; and those who were carrying on the joke against Sancho putting their heads together arranged how he was to be dismissed from the government.
He reduced the prices of all manner of shoes, boots, and stockings, but of shoes in particular, as they seemed to him to run extravagantly high.
He established a fixed rate for servants’ wages, which were becoming recklessly exorbitant.
He laid extremely heavy penalties upon those who sang lewd or loose songs either by day or night.
He decreed that no blind man should sing of any miracle in verse, unless he could produce authentic evidence that it was true, for it was his opinion that most of those the blind men sing are trumped up, to the detriment of the true ones.
He established and created an alguacil of the poor, not to harass them, but to examine them and see whether they really were so; for many a sturdy thief or drunkard goes about under cover of a make-believe crippled limb or a sham sore.
In a word, he made so many good rules that to this day they are preserved there, and are called _The constitutions of the great governor Sancho Panza_. p51e.jpg (32K) CHAPTER LII.
She complied and disclosed what no one could have ever anticipated, for she disclosed the countenance of Doña Rodriguez, the duenna of the house; the other female in mourning being her daughter, who had been made a fool of by the rich farmer’s son.
All who knew her were filled with astonishment, and the duke and duchess more than any; for though they thought her a simpleton and a weak creature, they did not think her capable of crazy pranks.
“But first of all,” he said, “it is requisite that this worthy duenna and unworthy damsel should place their claim for justice in the hands of Don Quixote; for otherwise nothing can be done, nor can the said challenge be brought to a lawful issue.” “I do so place it,” replied the duenna.
“And I too,” added her daughter, all in tears and covered with shame and confusion.
One bore by way of address, _Letter for my lady the Duchess So-and-so, of I don’t know where; and the other To my husband Sancho Panza, governor of the island of Barataria, whom God prosper longer than me_.
The letter your highness wrote me, my lady, gave me great pleasure, for indeed I found it very welcome.
God grant it, and direct him according as he sees his children stand in need of it.
Let not your high mightiness forget to write to me; and I will take care to answer, and let you know how I am, and whatever news there may be in this place, where I remain, praying our Lord to have your highness in his keeping and not to forget me.
Sancha my daughter, and my son, kiss your worship’s hands.
She who would rather see your ladyship than write to you, Your servant, TERESA PANZA.
All were greatly amused by Teresa Panza’s letter, but particularly the duke and duchess; and the duchess asked Don Quixote’s opinion whether they might open the letter that had come for the governor, which she suspected must be very good.
I got thy letter, Sancho of my soul, and I promise thee and swear as a Catholic Christian that I was within two fingers’ breadth of going mad I was so happy.
I can tell thee, brother, when I came to hear that thou wert a governor I thought I should have dropped dead with pure joy; and thou knowest they say sudden joy kills as well as great sorrow; and as for Sanchica thy daughter, she leaked from sheer happiness.
I had before me the suit thou didst send me, and the coral beads my lady the duchess sent me round my neck, and the letters in my hands, and there was the bearer of them standing by, and in spite of all this I verily believed and thought that what I saw and handled was all a dream; for who could have thought that a goatherd would come to be a governor of islands?
Thou knowest, my friend, what my mother used to say, that one must live long to see much; I say it because I expect to see more if I live longer; for I don’t expect to stop until I see thee a farmer of taxes or a collector of revenue, which are offices where, though the devil carries off those who make a bad use of them, still they make and handle money.
My lady the duchess will tell thee the desire I have to go to the Court; consider the matter and let me know thy pleasure; I will try to do honour to thee by going in a coach.
Here is the news of the village; La Berrueca has married her daughter to a good-for-nothing painter, who came here to paint anything that might turn up.
Pedro Lobo’s son has received the first orders and tonsure, with the intention of becoming a priest.
Minguilla, Mingo Silvato’s granddaughter, found it out, and has gone to law with him on the score of having given her promise of marriage.
A company of soldiers passed through here; when they left they took away with them three of the girls of the village; I will not tell thee who they are; perhaps they will come back, and they will be sure to find those who will take them for wives with all their blemishes, good or bad.
Sanchica is making bonelace; she earns eight maravedis a day clear, which she puts into a moneybox as a help towards house furnishing; but now that she is a governor’s daughter thou wilt give her a portion without her working for it.
The fountain in the plaza has run dry.
A flash of lightning struck the gibbet, and I wish they all lit there.
The letters were applauded, laughed over, relished, and admired; and then, as if to put the seal to the business, the courier arrived, bringing the one Sancho sent to Don Quixote, and this, too, was read out, and it raised some doubts as to the governor’s simplicity.
The duchess withdrew to hear from the page about his adventures in Sancho’s village, which he narrated at full length without leaving a single circumstance unmentioned.
He gave her the acorns, and also a cheese which Teresa had given him as being particularly good and superior to those of Tronchon.
The duchess received it with greatest delight, in which we will leave her, to describe the end of the government of the great Sancho Panza, flower and mirror of all governors of islands. p52e.jpg (13K) CHAPTER LIII.
OF THE TROUBLOUS END AND TERMINATION SANCHO PANZA’S GOVERNMENT CAME TO p53a.jpg (109K) Full Size To fancy that in this life anything belonging to it will remain for ever in the same state is an idle fancy; on the contrary, in it everything seems to go in a circle, I mean round and round.
The spring succeeds the summer, the summer the fall, the fall the autumn, the autumn the winter, and the winter the spring, and so time rolls with never-ceasing wheel.
Man’s life alone, swifter than time, speeds onward to its end without any hope of renewal, save it be in that other life which is endless and boundless.
For as he lay in bed on the night of the seventh day of his government, sated, not with bread and wine, but with delivering judgments and giving opinions and making laws and proclamations, just as sleep, in spite of hunger, was beginning to close his eyelids, he heard such a noise of bell-ringing and shouting that one would have fancied the whole island was going to the bottom.
“What do I know about arms or supports?
Better leave all that to my master Don Quixote, who will settle it and make all safe in a trice; for I, sinner that I am, God help me, don’t understand these scuffles.” “Ah, señor governor,” said another, “what slackness of mettle this is!
Some stumbled over him, others fell upon him, and one there was who took up a position on top of him for some time, and from thence as if from a watchtower issued orders to the troops, shouting out, “Here, our side!
Here the enemy is thickest!
Barricade those ladders!
The enemy retreats beaten!
Come, señor governor, get up, and come and enjoy the victory, and divide the spoils that have been won from the foe by the might of that invincible arm.” “Lift me up,” said the wretched Sancho in a woebegone voice.
Those who had been concerned in the joke were now sorry they had pushed it so far; however, the anxiety his fainting away had caused them was relieved by his returning to himself.
He asked what o’clock it was; they told him it was just daybreak.
Then having Dapple saddled, he, with great pain and difficulty, got up on him, and addressing himself to the majordomo, the secretary, the head-carver, and Pedro Recio the doctor and several others who stood by, he said, “Make way, gentlemen, and let me go back to my old freedom; let me go look for my past life, and raise myself up from this present death.
I was not born to be a governor or protect islands or cities from the enemies that choose to attack them.
Ploughing and digging, vinedressing and pruning, are more in my way than defending provinces or kingdoms.
Saint Peter is very well at Rome; I mean each of us is best following the trade he was born to.
A reaping-hook fits my hand better than a governor’s sceptre; I’d rather have my fill of gazpacho than be subject to the misery of a meddling doctor who kills me with hunger, and I’d rather lie in summer under the shade of an oak, and in winter wrap myself in a double sheepskin jacket in freedom, than go to bed between holland sheets and dress in sables under the restraint of a government.
God be with your worships, and tell my lord the duke that ‘naked I was born, naked I find myself, I neither lose nor gain;’ I mean that without a farthing I came into this government, and without a farthing I go out of it, very different from the way governors commonly leave other islands.
By God I’d as soon remain in this government, or take another, even if it was offered me between two plates, as fly to heaven without wings.
I am of the breed of the Panzas, and they are every one of them obstinate, and if they once say ‘odds,’ odds it must be, no matter if it is evens, in spite of all the world.
Sancho said he did not want anything more than a little barley for Dapple, and half a cheese and half a loaf for himself; for the distance being so short there was no occasion for any better or bulkier provant.
They all embraced him, and he with tears embraced all of them, and left them filled with admiration not only at his remarks but at his firm and sensible resolution. p53e.jpg (56K) CHAPTER LIV.
Two days later the duke told Don Quixote that in four days from that time his opponent would present himself on the field of battle armed as a knight, and would maintain that the damsel lied by half a beard, nay a whole beard, if she affirmed that he had given her a promise of marriage.
Let us leave them to pass as we do other things, and go and bear Sancho company, as mounted on Dapple, half glad, half sad, he paced along on his road to join his master, in whose society he was happier than in being governor of all the islands in the world.
They received them very gladly, but exclaimed, “Geld!
Geld!” “I don’t understand what you want of me, good people,” said Sancho.
On this one of them took a purse out of his bosom and showed it to Sancho, by which he comprehended they were asking for money, and putting his thumb to his throat and spreading his hand upwards he gave them to understand that he had not the sign of a coin about him, and urging Dapple forward he broke through them.
But as he was passing, one of them who had been examining him very closely rushed towards him, and flinging his arms round him exclaimed in a loud voice and good Spanish, “God bless me!
Is it possible that I hold in my arms my dear friend, my good neighbour Sancho Panza?
They threw down their staves, took off their pilgrim’s cloaks and remained in their under-clothing; they were all good-looking young fellows, except Ricote, who was a man somewhat advanced in years.
They carried alforjas all of them, and all apparently well filled, at least with things provocative of thirst, such as would summon it from two leagues off.
They stretched themselves on the ground, and making a tablecloth of the grass they spread upon it bread, salt, knives, walnut, scraps of cheese, and well-picked ham-bones which if they were past gnawing were not past sucking.
Nor was there any lack of olives, dry, it is true, and without any seasoning, but for all that toothsome and pleasant.
But what made the best show in the field of the banquet was half a dozen botas of wine, for each of them produced his own from his alforjas; even the good Ricote, who from a Morisco had transformed himself into a German or Dutchman, took out his, which in size might have vied with the five others.
Sancho beheld all, “and nothing gave him pain;” so far from that, acting on the proverb he knew so well, “when thou art at Rome do as thou seest,” he asked Ricote for his bota and took aim like the rest of them, and with not less enjoyment.
Four times did the botas bear being uplifted, but the fifth it was all in vain, for they were drier and more sapless than a rush by that time, which made the jollity that had been kept up so far begin to flag.
Every now and then someone of them would grasp Sancho’s right hand in his own saying, “Español y Tudesqui tuto uno: bon compaño;” and Sancho would answer, “Bon compaño, jur a Di!” and then go off into a fit of laughter that lasted an hour, without a thought for the moment of anything that had befallen him in his government; for cares have very little sway over us while we are eating and drinking.
At length, the wine having come to an end with them, drowsiness began to come over them, and they dropped asleep on their very table and tablecloth.
In short it was with just cause that we were visited with the penalty of banishment, a mild and lenient one in the eyes of some, but to us the most terrible that could be inflicted upon us.
Wherever we are we weep for Spain; for after all we were born there and it is our natural fatherland.
Nowhere do we find the reception our unhappy condition needs; and in Barbary and all the parts of Africa where we counted upon being received, succoured, and welcomed, it is there they insult and ill-treat us most.
We knew not our good fortune until we lost it; and such is the longing we almost all of us have to return to Spain, that most of those who like myself know the language, and there are many who do, come back to it and leave their wives and children forsaken yonder, so great is their love for it; and now I know by experience the meaning of the saying, sweet is the love of one’s country.
“I left our village, as I said, and went to France, but though they gave us a kind reception there I was anxious to see all I could.
I crossed into Italy, and reached Germany, and there it seemed to me we might live with more freedom, as the inhabitants do not pay any attention to trifling points; everyone lives as he likes, for in most parts they enjoy liberty of conscience.
I took a house in a town near Augsburg, and then joined these pilgrims, who are in the habit of coming to Spain in great numbers every year to visit the shrines there, which they look upon as their Indies and a sure and certain source of gain.
“I have given up being governor of an island,” said Sancho, “and such a one, faith, as you won’t find the like of easily.” “And where is this island?” said Ricote.
“Where?” said Sancho; “two leagues from here, and it is called the island of Barataria.” “Nonsense!
Sancho,” said Ricote; “islands are away out in the sea; there are no islands on the mainland.” “What?
No islands!” said Sancho; “I tell thee, friend Ricote, I left it this morning, and yesterday I was governing there as I pleased like a sagittarius; but for all that I gave it up, for it seemed to me a dangerous office, a governor’s.” “And what hast thou gained by the government?” asked Ricote.
Is there any scarcity in the world of cleverer men than thou art for governors?
OF WHAT BEFELL SANCHO ON THE ROAD, AND OTHER THINGS THAT CANNOT BE SURPASSED p55a.jpg (126K) Full Size The length of time he delayed with Ricote prevented Sancho from reaching the duke’s castle that day, though he was within half a league of it when night, somewhat dark and cloudy, overtook him.
This, however, as it was summer time, did not give him much uneasiness, and he turned aside out of the road intending to wait for morning; but his ill luck and hard fate so willed it that as he was searching about for a place to make himself as comfortable as possible, he and Dapple fell into a deep dark hole that lay among some very old buildings.
As he fell he commended himself with all his heart to God, fancying he was not going to stop until he reached the depths of the bottomless pit; but it did not turn out so, for at little more than thrice a man’s height Dapple touched bottom, and he found himself sitting on him without having received any hurt or damage whatever.
He felt himself all over and held his breath to try whether he was quite sound or had a hole made in him anywhere, and finding himself all right and whole and in perfect health he was profuse in his thanks to God our Lord for the mercy that had been shown him, for he made sure he had been broken into a thousand pieces.
“Alas,” said Sancho, “what unexpected accidents happen at every step to those who live in this miserable world!
Who would have said that one who saw himself yesterday sitting on a throne, governor of an island, giving orders to his servants and his vassals, would see himself to-day buried in a pit without a soul to help him, or servant or vassal to come to his relief?
Here must we perish with hunger, my ass and myself, if indeed we don’t die first, he of his bruises and injuries, and I of grief and sorrow.
At any rate I’ll not be as lucky as my master Don Quixote of La Mancha, when he went down into the cave of that enchanted Montesinos, where he found people to make more of him than if he had been in his own house; for it seems he came in for a table laid out and a bed ready made.
There he saw fair and pleasant visions, but here I’ll see, I imagine, toads and adders.
They’ll take up my bones out of this, when it is heaven’s will that I’m found, picked clean, white and polished, and my good Dapple’s with them, and by that, perhaps, it will be found out who we are, at least by such as have heard that Sancho Panza never separated from his ass, nor his ass from Sancho Panza.
Unlucky wretches, I say again, that our hard fate should not let us die in our own country and among our own people, where if there was no help for our misfortune, at any rate there would be someone to grieve for it and to close our eyes as we passed away!
O comrade and friend, how ill have I repaid thy faithful services!
Sancho made for it, and entered it by creeping, and found it wide and spacious on the inside, which he was able to see as a ray of sunlight that penetrated what might be called the roof showed it all plainly.
He observed too that it opened and widened out into another spacious cavity; seeing which he made his way back to where the ass was, and with a stone began to pick away the clay from the hole until in a short time he had made room for the beast to pass easily, and this accomplished, taking him by the halter, he proceeded to traverse the cavern to see if there was any outlet at the other end.
He advanced, sometimes in the dark, sometimes without light, but never without fear; “God Almighty help me!” said he to himself; “this that is a misadventure to me would make a good adventure for my master Don Quixote.
Here Cide Hamete leaves him, and returns to Don Quixote, who in high spirits and satisfaction was looking forward to the day fixed for the battle he was to fight with him who had robbed Doña Rodriguez’s daughter of her honour, for whom he hoped to obtain satisfaction for the wrong and injury shamefully done to her.
“Famous testimony!” exclaimed Don Quixote; “I know that bray as well as if I was its mother, and thy voice too, my Sancho.
To be brief, they fetched ropes and tackle, as the saying is, and by dint of many hands and much labour they drew up Dapple and Sancho Panza out of the darkness into the light of day.
I have answered questions, I have decided causes, and always dying of hunger, for Doctor Pedro Recio of Tirteafuera, the island and governor doctor, would have it so.
Enemies attacked us by night and put us in a great quandary, but the people of the island say they came off safe and victorious by the might of my arm; and may God give them as much health as there’s truth in what they say.
The duke embraced Sancho and told him he was heartily sorry he had given up the government so soon, but that he would see that he was provided with some other post on his estate less onerous and more profitable.
The duchess also embraced him, and gave orders that he should be taken good care of, as it was plain to see he had been badly treated and worse bruised. p55e.jpg (18K) CHAPTER LVI.
Don Quixote bade his excellence arrange all matters connected with the affair as he pleased, as on his part he would obey him in everything.
The dread day, then, having arrived, and the duke having ordered a spacious stand to be erected facing the court of the castle for the judges of the field and the appellant duennas, mother and daughter, vast crowds flocked from all the villages and hamlets of the neighbourhood to see the novel spectacle of the battle; nobody, dead or alive, in those parts having ever seen or heard of such a one.
Shortly afterwards, accompanied by several trumpets and mounted on a powerful steed that threatened to crush the whole place, the great lacquey Tosilos made his appearance on one side of the courtyard with his visor down and stiffly cased in a suit of stout shining armour.
The horse was a manifest Frieslander, broad-backed and flea-bitten, and with half a hundred of wool hanging to each of his fetlocks.
The gallant combatant came well primed by his master the duke as to how he was to bear himself against the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha; being warned that he must on no account slay him, but strive to shirk the first encounter so as to avoid the risk of killing him, as he was sure to do if he met him full tilt.
He crossed the courtyard at a walk, and coming to where the duennas were placed stopped to look at her who demanded him for a husband; the marshal of the field summoned Don Quixote, who had already presented himself in the courtyard, and standing by the side of Tosilos he addressed the duennas, and asked them if they consented that Don Quixote of La Mancha should do battle for their right.
They said they did, and that whatever he should do in that behalf they declared rightly done, final and valid.
By this time the duke and duchess had taken their places in a gallery commanding the enclosure, which was filled to overflowing with a multitude of people eager to see this perilous and unparalleled encounter.
The conditions of the combat were that if Don Quixote proved the victor his antagonist was to marry the daughter of Doña Rodriguez; but if he should be vanquished his opponent was released from the promise that was claimed against him and from all obligations to give satisfaction.
The master of the ceremonies apportioned the sun to them, and stationed them, each on the spot where he was to stand.
Our lacquey, however, was thinking of something very different; he only thought of what I am now going to mention.
The duke could not make out the reason why the battle did not go on; but the marshal of the field hastened to him to let him know what Tosilos said, and he was amazed and extremely angry at it.
“And he does well,” said Sancho, “for what thou hast to give to the mouse, give to the cat, and it will save thee all trouble.” Tosilos meanwhile was trying to unlace his helmet, and he begged them to come to his help at once, as his power of breathing was failing him, and he could not remain so long shut up in that confined space.
They removed it in all haste, and his lacquey features were revealed to public gaze.
At this sight Doña Rodriguez and her daughter raised a mighty outcry, exclaiming, “This is a trick!
All hailed Don Quixote as victor, but the greater number were vexed and disappointed at finding that the combatants they had been so anxiously waiting for had not battered one another to pieces, just as the boys are disappointed when the man they are waiting to see hanged does not come out, because the prosecution or the court has pardoned him.
The people dispersed, the duke and Don Quixote returned to the castle, they locked up Tosilos, Doña Rodriguez and her daughter remained perfectly contented when they saw that any way the affair must end in marriage, and Tosilos wanted nothing else. p56e.jpg (46K) CHAPTER LVII.
Still I’m glad to see my Teresa behaved as she ought in sending the acorns, for if she had not sent them I’d have been sorry, and she’d have shown herself ungrateful.
It is a comfort to me that they can’t call that present a bribe; for I had got the government already when she sent them, and it’s but reasonable that those who have had a good turn done them should show their gratitude, if it’s only with a trifle.
The whole household of the castle were watching him from the corridors, and the duke and duchess, too, came out to see him.
Sancho was mounted on his Dapple, with his alforjas, valise, and proven supremely happy because the duke’s majordomo, the same that had acted the part of the Trifaldi, had given him a little purse with two hundred gold crowns to meet the necessary expenses of the road, but of this Don Quixote knew nothing as yet.
While all were, as has been said, observing him, suddenly from among the duennas and handmaidens the impudent and witty Altisidora lifted up her voice and said in pathetic tones: Give ear, cruel knight; Draw rein; where’s the need Of spurring the flanks Of that ill-broken steed?
Barabbas go with thee!
In thy claws, ruthless robber, Thou bearest away The heart of a meek Loving maid for thy prey, Three kerchiefs thou stealest, And garters a pair, From legs than the whitest Of marble more fair; And the sighs that pursue thee Would burn to the ground Two thousand Troy Towns, If so many were found.
May no bowels of mercy To Sancho be granted, And thy Dulcinea Be left still enchanted, May thy falsehood to me Find its punishment in her, For in my land the just Often pays for the sinner.
May thy grandest adventures Discomfitures prove, May thy joys be all dreams, And forgotten thy love.
May thy name be abhorred For thy conduct to ladies, From London to England, From Seville to Cadiz; May thy cards be unlucky, Thy hands contain ne’er a King, seven, or ace When thou playest primera; When thy corns are cut May it be to the quick; When thy grinders are drawn May the roots of them stick.
The duke had a mind to keep up the sport, so he said, “It does not seem to me well done in you, sir knight, that after having received the hospitality that has been offered you in this very castle, you should have ventured to carry off even three kerchiefs, not to say my handmaid’s garters.
It shows a bad heart and does not tally with your reputation.
Restore her garters, or else I defy you to mortal combat, for I am not afraid of rascally enchanters changing or altering my features as they changed his who encountered you into those of my lacquey, Tosilos.” “God forbid,” said Don Quixote, “that I should draw my sword against your illustrious person from which I have received such great favours.
The kerchiefs I will restore, as Sancho says he has them; as to the garters that is impossible, for I have not got them, neither has he; and if your handmaiden here will look in her hiding-places, depend upon it she will find them.
Why if I wanted to deal in them, opportunities came ready enough to me in my government.” Don Quixote bowed his head, and saluted the duke and duchess and all the bystanders, and wheeling Rocinante round, Sancho following him on Dapple, he rode out of the castle, shaping his course for Saragossa. p57e.jpg (71K) CHAPTER LVIII.
They had beside them what seemed to be white sheets concealing some objects under them, standing upright or lying flat, and arranged at intervals.
Don Quixote approached the diners, and, saluting them courteously first, he asked them what it was those cloths covered.
On seeing it Don Quixote said, “That knight was one of the best knights-errant the army of heaven ever owned; he was called Don Saint George, and he was moreover a defender of maidens.
Let us see this next one.” The man uncovered it, and it was seen to be that of Saint Martin on his horse, dividing his cloak with the beggar.
This one is called Don Saint James the Moorslayer, one of the bravest saints and knights the world ever had or heaven has now.” They then raised another cloth which it appeared covered Saint Paul falling from his horse, with all the details that are usually given in representations of his conversion.
They won heaven by force of arms, for heaven suffereth violence; and I, so far, know not what I have won by dint of my sufferings; but if my Dulcinea del Toboso were to be released from hers, perhaps with mended fortunes and a mind restored to itself I might direct my steps in a better path than I am following at present.” “May God hear and sin be deaf,” said Sancho to this.
The men were filled with wonder, as well at the figure as at the words of Don Quixote, though they did not understand one half of what he meant by them.
They finished their dinner, took their images on their backs, and bidding farewell to Don Quixote resumed their journey.
One of these believers in omens will get up of a morning, leave his house, and meet a friar of the order of the blessed Saint Francis, and, as if he had met a griffin, he will turn about and go home.
With another Mendoza the salt is spilt on his table, and gloom is spilt over his heart, as if nature was obliged to give warning of coming misfortunes by means of such trivial things as these.
The wise man and the Christian should not trifle with what it may please heaven to do.
I can only say for myself that the very smallest loving word of hers would have subdued me and made a slave of me.
But I can’t imagine what it is that this damsel saw in your worship that could have conquered and captivated her so.
What gallant figure was it, what bold bearing, what sprightly grace, what comeliness of feature, which of these things by itself, or what all together, could have made her fall in love with you?
May I die if the enchanters that persecute me are not trying to entangle me in them and delay my journey, by way of revenge for my obduracy towards Altisidora.
One of the shepherdesses, at length, was the first to speak and said to Don Quixote, “Hold, sir knight, and do not break these nets; for they are not spread here to do you any harm, but only for our amusement; and as I know you will ask why they have been put up, and who we are, I will tell you in a few words.
We have prepared two eclogues, one by the famous poet Garcilasso, the other by the most excellent Camoens, in its own Portuguese tongue, but we have not as yet acted them.
Yesterday was the first day of our coming here; we have a few of what they say are called field-tents pitched among the trees on the bank of an ample brook that fertilises all these meadows; last night we spread these nets in the trees here to snare the silly little birds that startled by the noise we make may fly into them.
If you please to be our guest, señor, you will be welcomed heartily and courteously, for here just now neither care nor sorrow shall enter.” She held her peace and said no more, and Don Quixote made answer, “Of a truth, fairest lady, Actaeon when he unexpectedly beheld Diana bathing in the stream could not have been more fascinated and wonderstruck than I at the sight of your beauty.
Seest thou this gentleman we have before us?
Well then let me tell thee he is the most valiant and the most devoted and the most courteous gentleman in all the world, unless a history of his achievements that has been printed and I have read is telling lies and deceiving us.
But spare yourselves the trouble, ladies, of pressing me to stay, for the urgent calls of my profession do not allow me to take rest under any circumstances.” At this instant there came up to the spot where the four stood a brother of one of the two shepherdesses, like them in shepherd costume, and as richly and gaily dressed as they were.
They told him that their companion was the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha, and the other Sancho his squire, of whom he knew already from having read their history.
The gay shepherd offered him his services and begged that he would accompany him to their tents, and Don Quixote had to give way and comply.
And now the game was started, and the nets were filled with a variety of birds that deceived by the colour fell into the danger they were flying from.
Upwards of thirty persons, all gaily attired as shepherds and shepherdesses, assembled on the spot, and were at once informed who Don Quixote and his squire were, whereat they were not a little delighted, as they knew of him already through his history.
They repaired to the tents, where they found tables laid out, and choicely, plentifully, and neatly furnished.
They treated Don Quixote as a person of distinction, giving him the place of honour, and all observed him, and were full of astonishment at the spectacle.
At last the cloth being removed, Don Quixote with great composure lifted up his voice and said: “One of the greatest sins that men are guilty of is—some will say pride—but I say ingratitude, going by the common saying that hell is full of ingrates.
Thus, God is superior to all because he is the supreme giver, and the offerings of man fall short by an infinite distance of being a full return for the gifts of God; but gratitude in some degree makes up for this deficiency and shortcoming.
Who asked thee to meddle in my affairs, or to inquire whether I am a wise man or a blockhead?
Sancho followed on Dapple, together with all the members of the pastoral gathering, eager to see what would be the upshot of his vainglorious and extraordinary proposal.
Don Quixote, then, having, as has been said, planted himself in the middle of the road, made the welkin ring with words to this effect: “Ho ye travellers and wayfarers, knights, squires, folk on foot or on horseback, who pass this way or shall pass in the course of the next two days!
Know that Don Quixote of La Mancha, knight-errant, is posted here to maintain by arms that the beauty and courtesy enshrined in the nymphs that dwell in these meadows and groves surpass all upon earth, putting aside the lady of my heart, Dulcinea del Toboso.
No sooner had those who were with Don Quixote seen them than they turned about and withdrew to some distance from the road, for they knew that if they stayed some harm might come to them; but Don Quixote with intrepid heart stood his ground, and Sancho Panza shielded himself with Rocinante’s hind-quarters.
The troop of lancers came up, and one of them who was in advance began shouting to Don Quixote, “Get out of the way, you son of the devil, or these bulls will knock you to pieces!” “Rabble!” returned Don Quixote, “I care nothing for bulls, be they the fiercest Jarama breeds on its banks.
Weariness brought Don Quixote to a halt, and more enraged than avenged he sat down on the road to wait until Sancho, Rocinante and Dapple came up.
When they reached him master and man mounted once more, and without going back to bid farewell to the mock or imitation Arcadia, and more in humiliation than contentment, they continued their journey. p58e.jpg (68K) Full Size CHAPTER LIX.
Sancho had recourse to the larder of his alforjas and took out of them what he called the prog; Don Quixote rinsed his mouth and bathed his face, by which cooling process his flagging energies were revived.
Out of pure vexation he remained without eating, and out of pure politeness Sancho did not venture to touch a morsel of what was before him, but waited for his master to act as taster.
Let me tell your worship that for a man to whip himself in cold blood is a hard thing, especially if the stripes fall upon an ill-nourished and worse-fed body.
They woke up rather late, mounted once more and resumed their journey, pushing on to reach an inn which was in sight, apparently a league off.
I say an inn, because Don Quixote called it so, contrary to his usual practice of calling all inns castles.
They reached it, and asked the landlord if they could put up there.
He said yes, with as much comfort and as good fare as they could find in Saragossa.
They dismounted, and Sancho stowed away his larder in a room of which the landlord gave him the key.
Supper-time came, and they repaired to their room, and Sancho asked the landlord what he had to give them for supper.
To this the landlord replied that his mouth should be the measure; he had only to ask what he would; for that inn was provided with the birds of the air and the fowls of the earth and the fish of the sea.
“There’s no need of all that,” said Sancho; “if they’ll roast us a couple of chickens we’ll be satisfied, for my master is delicate and eats little, and I’m not over and above gluttonous.” The landlord replied he had no chickens, for the kites had stolen them.
“Well then,” said Sancho, “let señor landlord tell them to roast a pullet, so that it is a tender one.” “Pullet!
Supper-time having come, then, Don Quixote betook himself to his room, the landlord brought in the stew-pan just as it was, and he sat himself down to sup very resolutely.
Sancho stayed behind with the stew. and invested with plenary delegated authority seated himself at the head of the table, and the landlord sat down with him, for he was no less fond of cow-heel and calves’ feet than Sancho was.
While at supper Don Juan asked Don Quixote what news he had of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, was she married, had she been brought to bed, or was she with child, or did she in maidenhood, still preserving her modesty and delicacy, cherish the remembrance of the tender passion of Señor Don Quixote?
Exceedingly great was the amusement the two gentlemen derived from hearing Don Quixote recount the strange incidents of his history; and if they were amazed by his absurdities they were equally amazed by the elegant style in which he delivered them.
On the one hand they regarded him as a man of wit and sense, and on the other he seemed to them a maundering blockhead, and they could not make up their minds whereabouts between wisdom and folly they ought to place him.
He replied, to Saragossa, to take part in the harness jousts which were held in that city every year.
Don Juan told him that the new history described how Don Quixote, let him be who he might, took part there in a tilting at the ring, utterly devoid of invention, poor in mottoes, very poor in costume, though rich in sillinesses.
Don Quixote rose betimes, and bade adieu to his hosts by knocking at the partition of the other room.
Sancho paid the landlord magnificently, and recommended him either to say less about the providing of his inn or to keep it better provided. p59e.jpg (48K) CHAPTER LX.
OF WHAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO BARCELONA p60a.jpg (129K) Full Size It was a fresh morning giving promise of a cool day as Don Quixote quitted the inn, first of all taking care to ascertain the most direct road to Barcelona without touching upon Saragossa; so anxious was he to make out this new historian, who they said abused him so, to be a liar.
Well, as it fell out, nothing worthy of being recorded happened him for six days, at the end of which, having turned aside out of the road, he was overtaken by night in a thicket of oak or cork trees; for on this point Cide Hamete is not as precise as he usually is on other matters.
Master and man dismounted from their beasts, and as soon as they had settled themselves at the foot of the trees, Sancho, who had had a good noontide meal that day, let himself, without more ado, pass the gates of sleep.
But Don Quixote, whom his thoughts, far more than hunger, kept awake, could not close an eye, and roamed in fancy to and fro through all sorts of places.
At one moment it seemed to him that he was in the cave of Montesinos and saw Dulcinea, transformed into a country wench, skipping and mounting upon her she-ass; again that the words of the sage Merlin were sounding in his ears, setting forth the conditions to be observed and the exertions to be made for the disenchantment of Dulcinea.
He lost all patience when he considered the laziness and want of charity of his squire Sancho; for to the best of his belief he had only given himself five lashes, a number paltry and disproportioned to the vast number required.
Who is touching me and untrussing me?” “It is I,” said Don Quixote, “and I come to make good thy shortcomings and relieve my own distresses; I come to whip thee, Sancho, and wipe off some portion of the debt thou hast undertaken.
Seeing this Sancho got up, and grappling with his master he gripped him with all his might in his arms, giving him a trip with the heel stretched him on the ground on his back, and pressing his right knee on his chest held his hands in his own so that he could neither move nor breathe.
“How now, traitor!” exclaimed Don Quixote.
He trembled with fear and made for another tree, where the very same thing happened to him, and he fell a-shouting, calling upon Don Quixote to come and protect him.
Don Quixote did so, and asked him what had happened to him, and what he was afraid of.
And now day dawned; and if the dead freebooters had scared them, their hearts were no less troubled by upwards of forty living ones, who all of a sudden surrounded them, and in the Catalan tongue bade them stand and wait until their captain came up.
Don Quixote was on foot with his horse unbridled and his lance leaning against a tree, and in short completely defenceless; he thought it best therefore to fold his arms and bow his head and reserve himself for a more favourable occasion and opportunity.
He was mounted upon a powerful horse, and had on a coat of mail, with four of the pistols they call petronels in that country at his waist.
Thou knowest that this Torrellas has a son who is called, or at least was not two hours since, Don Vicente Torrellas.
Well, to cut short the tale of my misfortune, I will tell thee in a few words what this youth has brought upon me.
He saw me, he paid court to me, I listened to him, and, unknown to my father, I loved him; for there is no woman, however secluded she may live or close she may be kept, who will not have opportunities and to spare for following her headlong impulses.
In a word, he pledged himself to be mine, and I promised to be his, without carrying matters any further.
They reached the spot where Claudia met him, but found nothing there save freshly spilt blood; looking all round, however, they descried some people on the slope of a hill above them, and concluded, as indeed it proved to be, that it was Don Vicente, whom either dead or alive his servants were removing to attend to his wounds or to bury him.
They made haste to overtake them, which, as the party moved slowly, they were able to do with ease.
They found Don Vicente in the arms of his servants, whom he was entreating in a broken feeble voice to leave him there to die, as the pain of his wounds would not suffer him to go any farther.
Roque was in perplexity and knew not what to do; the servants ran to fetch water to sprinkle their faces, and brought some and bathed them with it.
Claudia recovered from her fainting fit, but not so Don Vicente from the paroxysm that had overtaken him, for his life had come to an end.
On perceiving this, Claudia, when she had convinced herself that her beloved husband was no more, rent the air with her sighs and made the heavens ring with her lamentations; she tore her hair and scattered it to the winds, she beat her face with her hands and showed all the signs of grief and sorrow that could be conceived to come from an afflicted heart.
“Cruel, reckless woman!” she cried, “how easily wert thou moved to carry out a thought so wicked!
O furious force of jealousy, to what desperate lengths dost thou lead those that give thee lodging in their bosoms!
O husband, whose unhappy fate in being mine hath borne thee from the marriage bed to the grave!” So vehement and so piteous were the lamentations of Claudia that they drew tears from Roque’s eyes, unused as they were to shed them on any occasion.
The servants wept, Claudia swooned away again and again, and the whole place seemed a field of sorrow and an abode of misfortune.
In the end Roque Guinart directed Don Vicente’s servants to carry his body to his father’s village, which was close by, for burial.
Claudia told him she meant to go to a monastery of which an aunt of hers was abbess, where she intended to pass her life with a better and everlasting spouse.
He applauded her pious resolution, and offered to accompany her whithersoever she wished, and to protect her father against the kinsmen of Don Vicente and all the world, should they seek to injure him.
Claudia would not on any account allow him to accompany her; and thanking him for his offers as well as she could, took leave of him in tears.
Roque on coming up asked Sancho if his men had returned and restored to him the treasures and jewels they had stripped off Dapple.
Sancho said they had, but that three kerchiefs that were worth three cities were missing.
Sancho was frightened out of his wits, and vowed not to open his lips so long as he was in the company of these people.
What led me into it was a certain thirst for vengeance, which is strong enough to disturb the quietest hearts.
And now the squires despatched to make the prize came up, bringing with them two gentlemen on horseback, two pilgrims on foot, and a coach full of women with some six servants on foot and on horseback in attendance on them, and a couple of muleteers whom the gentlemen had with them.
The squires made a ring round them, both victors and vanquished maintaining profound silence, waiting for the great Roque Guinart to speak.
Señora Doña Guiomar de Quiñones wanted to throw herself out of the coach to kiss the feet and hands of the great Roque, but he would not suffer it on any account; so far from that, he begged her pardon for the wrong he had done her under pressure of the inexorable necessities of his unfortunate calling.
The regent’s lady ordered one of her servants to give the eighty crowns that had been assessed as her share at once, for the captains had already paid down their sixty.
He wished, he said, his enemies the Cadells could be deprived of this pleasure; but that was impossible, because the crazes and shrewd sayings of Don Quixote and the humours of his squire Sancho Panza could not help giving general pleasure to all the world.
He despatched the letter by one of his squires, who, exchanging the costume of a highwayman for that of a peasant, made his way into Barcelona and gave it to the person to whom it was directed. p60g.jpg (42K) CHAPTER LXI.
OF WHAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE ON ENTERING BARCELONA, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MATTERS THAT PARTAKE OF THE TRUE RATHER THAN OF THE INGENIOUS p61a.jpg (143K) Full Size Don Quixote passed three days and three nights with Roque, and had he passed three hundred years he would have found enough to observe and wonder at in his mode of life.
At daybreak they were in one spot, at dinner-time in another; sometimes they fled without knowing from whom, at other times they lay in wait, not knowing for what.
They slept standing, breaking their slumbers to shift from place to place.
There was nothing but sending out spies and scouts, posting sentinels and blowing the matches of harquebusses, though they carried but few, for almost all used flintlocks.
Roque passed his nights in some place or other apart from his men, that they might not know where he was, for the many proclamations the viceroy of Barcelona had issued against his life kept him in fear and uneasiness, and he did not venture to trust anyone, afraid that even his own men would kill him or deliver him up to the authorities; of a truth, a weary miserable life!
At length, by unfrequented roads, short cuts, and secret paths, Roque, Don Quixote, and Sancho, together with six squires, set out for Barcelona.
They reached the strand on Saint John’s Eve during the night; and Roque, after embracing Don Quixote and Sancho (to whom he presented the ten crowns he had promised but had not until then given), left them with many expressions of good-will on both sides.
They saw the galleys along the beach, which, lowering their awnings, displayed themselves decked with streamers and pennons that trembled in the breeze and kissed and swept the water, while on board the bugles, trumpets, and clarions were sounding and filling the air far and near with melodious warlike notes.
Then they began to move and execute a kind of skirmish upon the calm water, while a vast number of horsemen on fine horses and in showy liveries, issuing from the city, engaged on their side in a somewhat similar movement.
The soldiers on board the galleys kept up a ceaseless fire, which they on the walls and forts of the city returned, and the heavy cannon rent the air with the tremendous noise they made, to which the gangway guns of the galleys replied.
The bright sea, the smiling earth, the clear air—though at times darkened by the smoke of the guns—all seemed to fill the whole multitude with unexpected delight.
And now the horsemen in livery came galloping up with shouts and outlandish cries and cheers to where Don Quixote stood amazed and wondering; and one of them, he to whom Roque had sent word, addressing him exclaimed, “Welcome to our city, mirror, beacon, star and cynosure of all knight-errantry in its widest extent!
As they were entering it, the wicked one, who is the author of all mischief, and the boys who are wickeder than the wicked one, contrived that a couple of these audacious irrepressible urchins should force their way through the crowd, and lifting up, one of them Dapple’s tail and the other Rocinante’s, insert a bunch of furze under each.
The poor beasts felt the strange spurs and added to their anguish by pressing their tails tight, so much so that, cutting a multitude of capers, they flung their masters to the ground.
Don Quixote, covered with shame and out of countenance, ran to pluck the plume from his poor jade’s tail, while Sancho did the same for Dapple.
His conductors tried to punish the audacity of the boys, but there was no possibility of doing so, for they hid themselves among the hundreds of others that were following them.
Don Quixote and Sancho mounted once more, and with the same music and acclamations reached their conductor’s house, which was large and stately, that of a rich gentleman, in short; and there for the present we will leave them, for such is Cide Hamete’s pleasure. p61e.jpg (32K) CHAPTER LXII.
The first thing he did was to make Don Quixote take off his armour, and lead him, in that tight chamois suit we have already described and depicted more than once, out on a balcony overhanging one of the chief streets of the city, in full view of the crowd and of the boys, who gazed at him as they would at a monkey.
The cavaliers in livery careered before him again as though it were for him alone, and not to enliven the festival of the day, that they wore it, and Sancho was in high delight, for it seemed to him that, how he knew not, he had fallen upon another Camacho’s wedding, another house like Don Diego de Miranda’s, another castle like the duke’s.
Some of Don Antonio’s friends dined with him that day, and all showed honour to Don Quixote and treated him as a knight-errant, and he becoming puffed up and exalted in consequence could not contain himself for satisfaction.
Such were the drolleries of Sancho that all the servants of the house, and all who heard him, were kept hanging upon his lips.
On the cloth being removed Don Antonio, taking Don Quixote by the hand, passed with him into a distant room in which there was nothing in the way of furniture except a table, apparently of jasper, resting on a pedestal of the same, upon which was set up, after the fashion of the busts of the Roman emperors, a head which seemed to be of bronze.
He was here in my house, and for a consideration of a thousand crowns that I gave him he constructed this head, which has the property and virtue of answering whatever questions are put to its ear.
He observed the points of the compass, he traced figures, he studied the stars, he watched favourable moments, and at length brought it to the perfection we shall see to-morrow, for on Fridays it is mute, and this being Friday we must wait till the next day.
They then quitted the room, Don Antonio locked the door, and they repaired to the chamber where the rest of the gentlemen were assembled.
In the meantime Sancho had recounted to them several of the adventures and accidents that had happened his master.
That afternoon they took Don Quixote out for a stroll, not in his armour but in street costume, with a surcoat of tawny cloth upon him, that at that season would have made ice itself sweat.
Orders were left with the servants to entertain Sancho so as not to let him leave the house.
Don Quixote was mounted, not on Rocinante, but upon a tall mule of easy pace and handsomely caparisoned.
What! art thou here, and not dead of the countless drubbings that have fallen on thy ribs?
Thou art mad; and if thou wert so by thyself, and kept thyself within thy madness, it would not be so bad; but thou hast the gift of making fools and blockheads of all who have anything to do with thee or say to thee.
Why, look at these gentlemen bearing thee company!
Get thee home, blockhead, and see after thy affairs, and thy wife and children, and give over these fooleries that are sapping thy brains and skimming away thy wits.” “Go your own way, brother,” said Don Antonio, “and don’t offer advice to those who don’t ask you for it.
Several of them came, they supped sumptuously, the dance began at about ten o’clock.
Among the ladies were two of a mischievous and frolicsome turn, and, though perfectly modest, somewhat free in playing tricks for harmless diversion’s sake.
These two were so indefatigable in taking Don Quixote out to dance that they tired him down, not only in body but in spirit.
Don Antonio directed him to be taken up bodily and carried to bed, and the first that laid hold of him was Sancho, saying as he did so, “In an evil hour you took to dancing, master mine; do you fancy all mighty men of valour are dancers, and all knights-errant given to capering?
If you do, I can tell you you are mistaken; there’s many a man would rather undertake to kill a giant than cut a caper.
If it had been the shoe-fling you were at I could take your place, for I can do the shoe-fling like a gerfalcon; but I’m no good at dancing.” With these and other observations Sancho set the whole ball-room laughing, and then put his master to bed, covering him up well so that he might sweat out any chill caught after his dancing.
The next day Don Antonio thought he might as well make trial of the enchanted head, and with Don Quixote, Sancho, and two others, friends of his, besides the two ladies that had tired out Don Quixote at the ball, who had remained for the night with Don Antonio’s wife, he locked himself up in the chamber where the head was.
Let someone else go and put what question he likes to it.” And as women are commonly impulsive and inquisitive, the first to come forward was one of the two friends of Don Antonio’s wife, and her question was, “Tell me, Head, what shall I do to be very beautiful?” and the answer she got was, “Be very modest.” “I question thee no further,” said the fair querist.
“That is not what I ask thee,” said the gentleman, “but to tell me if thou knowest me.” “Yes, I know thee, thou art Don Pedro Noriz,” was the reply.
Will Sancho’s whipping be accomplished without fail?
Will the disenchantment of Dulcinea be brought about?” p62d.jpg (391K) Full Size “As to the question of the cave,” was the reply, “there is much to be said; there is something of both in it.
Sancho’s whipping will proceed leisurely.
The disenchantment of Dulcinea will attain its due consummation.” “I seek to know no more,” said Don Quixote; “let me but see Dulcinea disenchanted, and I will consider that all the good fortune I could wish for has come upon me all at once.” The last questioner was Sancho, and his questions were, “Head, shall I by any chance have another government?
This Cide Hamete Benengeli thought fit to reveal at once, not to keep the world in suspense, fancying that the head had some strange magical mystery in it.
He says, therefore, that on the model of another head, the work of an image maker, which he had seen at Madrid, Don Antonio made this one at home for his own amusement and to astonish ignorant people; and its mechanism was as follows.
The table was of wood painted and varnished to imitate jasper, and the pedestal on which it stood was of the same material, with four eagles’ claws projecting from it to support the weight more steadily.
The head, which resembled a bust or figure of a Roman emperor, and was coloured like bronze, was hollow throughout, as was the table, into which it was fitted so exactly that no trace of the joining was visible.
The pedestal of the table was also hollow and communicated with the throat and neck of the head, and the whole was in communication with another room underneath the chamber in which the head stood.
Through the entire cavity in the pedestal, table, throat and neck of the bust or figure, there passed a tube of tin carefully adjusted and concealed from sight.
In the room below corresponding to the one above was placed the person who was to answer, with his mouth to the tube, and the voice, as in an ear-trumpet, passed from above downwards, and from below upwards, the words coming clearly and distinctly; it was impossible, thus, to detect the trick.
A nephew of Don Antonio’s, a smart sharp-witted student, was the answerer, and as he had been told beforehand by his uncle who the persons were that would come with him that day into the chamber where the head was, it was an easy matter for him to answer the first question at once and correctly; the others he answered by guess-work, and, being clever, cleverly.
By Don Quixote, however, and by Sancho the head was still held to be an enchanted one, and capable of answering questions, though more to Don Quixote’s satisfaction than Sancho’s.
The gentlemen of the city, to gratify Don Antonio and also to do the honours to Don Quixote, and give him an opportunity of displaying his folly, made arrangements for a tilting at the ring in six days from that time, which, however, for reason that will be mentioned hereafter, did not take place.
Don Quixote took a fancy to stroll about the city quietly and on foot, for he feared that if he went on horseback the boys would follow him; so he and Sancho and two servants that Don Antonio gave him set out for a walk.
Thus it came to pass that going along one of the streets Don Quixote lifted up his eyes and saw written in very large letters over a door, “Books printed here,” at which he was vastly pleased, for until then he had never seen a printing office, and he was curious to know what it was like.
He entered with all his following, and saw them drawing sheets in one place, correcting in another, setting up type here, revising there; in short all the work that is to be seen in great printing offices.
He approached one man, among others, and asked him what he was doing.
“And how do you render that in Spanish?” “How should I render it,” returned the author, “but by _olla_?” “Body o’ me,” exclaimed Don Quixote, “what a proficient you are in the Italian language!
What worth left neglected!
But I do not mean by this to draw the inference that no credit is to be allowed for the work of translating, for a man may employ himself in ways worse and less profitable to himself.
This estimate does not include two famous translators, Doctor Cristóbal de Figueroa, in his _Pastor Fido_, and Don Juan de Jáuregui, in his _Aminta_, wherein by their felicity they leave it in doubt which is the translation and which the original.
I promise you when you find yourself saddled with two thousand copies you will feel so sore that it will astonish you, particularly if the book is a little out of the common and not in any way highly spiced.” “What!” said the author, “would your worship, then, have me give it to a bookseller who will give three maravedis for the copyright and think he is doing me a favour?
That same day Don Antonio arranged to take him to see the galleys that lay at the beach, whereat Sancho was in high delight, as he had never seen any all his life.
Don Antonio sent word to the commandant of the galleys that he intended to bring his guest, the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, of whom the commandant and all the citizens had already heard, that afternoon to see them; and what happened on board of them will be told in the next chapter. p62e.jpg (18K) CHAPTER LXIII.
OF THE MISHAP THAT BEFELL SANCHO PANZA THROUGH THE VISIT TO THE GALLEYS, AND THE STRANGE ADVENTURE OF THE FAIR MORISCO p63a.jpg (151K) Full Size Profound were Don Quixote’s reflections on the reply of the enchanted head, not one of them, however, hitting on the secret of the trick, but all concentrated on the promise, which he regarded as a certainty, of Dulcinea’s disenchantment.
This he turned over in his mind again and again with great satisfaction, fully persuaded that he would shortly see its fulfillment; and as for Sancho, though, as has been said, he hated being a governor, still he had a longing to be giving orders and finding himself obeyed once more; this is the misfortune that being in authority, even in jest, brings with it.
To resume; that afternoon their host Don Antonio Moreno and his two friends, with Don Quixote and Sancho, went to the galleys.
The commandant had been already made aware of his good fortune in seeing two such famous persons as Don Quixote and Sancho, and the instant they came to the shore all the galleys struck their awnings and the clarions rang out.
All then proceeded to the poop, which was very handsomely decorated, and seated themselves on the bulwark benches; the boatswain passed along the gangway and piped all hands to strip, which they did in an instant.
Sancho, seeing such a number of men stripped to the skin, was taken aback, and still more when he saw them spread the awning so briskly that it seemed to him as if all the devils were at work at it; but all this was cakes and fancy bread to what I am going to tell now.
Sancho was seated on the captain’s stage, close to the aftermost rower on the right-hand side.
At this instant they struck the awning and lowered the yard with a prodigious rattle.
Sancho thought heaven was coming off its hinges and going to fall on his head, and full of terror he ducked it and buried it between his knees; nor were Don Quixote’s knees altogether under control, for he too shook a little, squeezed his shoulders together and lost colour.
The crew then hoisted the yard with the same rapidity and clatter as when they lowered it, all the while keeping silence as though they had neither voice nor breath.
The boatswain gave the signal to weigh anchor, and leaping upon the middle of the gangway began to lay on to the shoulders of the crew with his courbash or whip, and to haul out gradually to sea.
When Sancho saw so many red feet (for such he took the oars to be) moving all together, he said to himself, “It’s these that are the real chanted things, and not the ones my master talks of.
What can those wretches have done to be so whipped; and how does that one man who goes along there whistling dare to whip so many?
I declare this is hell, or at least purgatory!” Don Quixote, observing how attentively Sancho regarded what was going on, said to him, “Ah, Sancho my friend, how quickly and cheaply might you finish off the disenchantment of Dulcinea, if you would strip to the waist and take your place among those gentlemen!
It must be some Algerine corsair brigantine that the watchtower signals to us.” The three others immediately came alongside the chief galley to receive their orders.
The crews plied the oars driving the galleys so furiously that they seemed to fly.
The two that had put out to sea, after a couple of miles sighted a vessel which, so far as they could make out, they judged to be one of fourteen or fifteen banks, and so she proved.
But chance, directing things otherwise, so ordered it that just as the chief galley came close enough for those on board the vessel to hear the shouts from her calling on them to surrender, two Toraquis, that is to say two Turks, both drunken, that with a dozen more were on board the brigantine, discharged their muskets, killing two of the soldiers that lined the sides of our vessel.
Seeing this the general swore he would not leave one of those he found on board the vessel alive, but as he bore down furiously upon her she slipped away from him underneath the oars.
The other two galleys now joined company and all four returned with the prize to the beach, where a vast multitude stood waiting for them, eager to see what they brought back.
The general anchored close in, and perceived that the viceroy of the city was on the shore.
He ordered the skiff to push off to fetch him, and the yard to be lowered for the purpose of hanging forthwith the rais and the rest of the men taken on board the vessel, about six-and-thirty in number, all smart fellows and most of them Turkish musketeers.
He asked which was the rais of the brigantine, and was answered in Spanish by one of the prisoners (who afterwards proved to be a Spanish renegade), “This young man, señor, that you see here is our rais,” and he pointed to one of the handsomest and most gallant-looking youths that could be imagined.
“Tell me, dog,” said the general, “what led thee to kill my soldiers, when thou sawest it was impossible for thee to escape?
Knowest thou not that rashness is not valour?
Faint prospects of success should make men bold, but not rash.” The rais was about to reply, but the general could not at that moment listen to him, as he had to hasten to receive the viceroy, who was now coming on board the galley, and with him certain of his attendants and some of the people.
“Your excellency shall soon see how good, by the game strung up to this yard,” replied the general.
“How so?” returned the viceroy.
“Because,” said the general, “against all law, reason, and usages of war they have killed on my hands two of the best soldiers on board these galleys, and I have sworn to hang every man that I have taken, but above all this youth who is the rais of the brigantine,” and he pointed to him as he stood with his hands already bound and the rope round his neck, ready for death.
The viceroy looked at him, and seeing him so well-favoured, so graceful, and so submissive, he felt a desire to spare his life, the comeliness of the youth furnishing him at once with a letter of recommendation.
He therefore questioned him, saying, “Tell me, rais, art thou Turk, Moor, or renegade?” To which the youth replied, also in Spanish, “I am neither Turk, nor Moor, nor renegade.” “What art thou, then?” said the viceroy.
“A Christian woman,” replied the youth.
“A woman and a Christian, in such a dress and in such circumstances!
It is more marvellous than credible,” said the viceroy.
“Suspend the execution of the sentence,” said the youth; “your vengeance will not lose much by waiting while I tell you the story of my life.” What heart could be so hard as not to be softened by these words, at any rate so far as to listen to what the unhappy youth had to say?
The general bade him say what he pleased, but not to expect pardon for his flagrant offence.
With this permission the youth began in these words.
In the course of our misfortune I was carried to Barbary by two uncles of mine, for it was in vain that I declared I was a Christian, as in fact I am, and not a mere pretended one, or outwardly, but a true Catholic Christian.
It availed me nothing with those charged with our sad expatriation to protest this, nor would my uncles believe it; on the contrary, they treated it as an untruth and a subterfuge set up to enable me to remain behind in the land of my birth; and so, more by force than of my own will, they took me with them.
I had a Christian mother, and a father who was a man of sound sense and a Christian too; I imbibed the Catholic faith with my mother’s milk, I was well brought up, and neither in word nor in deed did I, I think, show any sign of being a Morisco.
To accompany these virtues, for such I hold them, my beauty, if I possess any, grew with my growth; and great as was the seclusion in which I lived it was not so great but that a young gentleman, Don Gaspar Gregorio by name, eldest son of a gentleman who is lord of a village near ours, contrived to find opportunities of seeing me.
How he saw me, how we met, how his heart was lost to me, and mine not kept from him, would take too long to tell, especially at a moment when I am in dread of the cruel cord that threatens me interposing between tongue and throat; I will only say, therefore, that Don Gregorio chose to accompany me in our banishment.
He joined company with the Moriscoes who were going forth from other villages, for he knew their language very well, and on the voyage he struck up a friendship with my two uncles who were carrying me with them; for my father, like a wise and far-sighted man, as soon as he heard the first edict for our expulsion, quitted the village and departed in quest of some refuge for us abroad.
He left hidden and buried, at a spot of which I alone have knowledge, a large quantity of pearls and precious stones of great value, together with a sum of money in gold cruzadoes and doubloons.
He charged me on no account to touch the treasure, if by any chance they expelled us before his return.
I obeyed him, and with my uncles, as I have said, and others of our kindred and neighbours, passed over to Barbary, and the place where we took up our abode was Algiers, much the same as if we had taken it up in hell itself.
The king heard of my beauty, and report told him of my wealth, which was in some degree fortunate for me.
He summoned me before him, and asked me what part of Spain I came from, and what money and jewels I had.
I mentioned the place, and told him the jewels and money were buried there; but that they might easily be recovered if I myself went back for them.
All this I told him, in dread lest my beauty and not his own covetousness should influence him.
While he was engaged in conversation with me, they brought him word that in company with me was one of the handsomest and most graceful youths that could be imagined.
I knew at once that they were speaking of Don Gaspar Gregorio, whose comeliness surpasses the most highly vaunted beauty.
I was troubled when I thought of the danger he was in, for among those barbarous Turks a fair youth is more esteemed than a woman, be she ever so beautiful.
The king immediately ordered him to be brought before him that he might see him, and asked me if what they said about the youth was true.
I then, almost as if inspired by heaven, told him it was, but that I would have him to know it was not a man, but a woman like myself, and I entreated him to allow me to go and dress her in the attire proper to her, so that her beauty might be seen to perfection, and that she might present herself before him with less embarrassment.
He bade me go by all means, and said that the next day we should discuss the plan to be adopted for my return to Spain to carry away the hidden treasure.
What we both suffered (for I cannot deny that I love him) may be left to the imagination of those who are separated if they love one another dearly.
The king then arranged that I should return to Spain in this brigantine, and that two Turks, those who killed your soldiers, should accompany me.
There also came with me this Spanish renegade”—and here she pointed to him who had first spoken—“whom I know to be secretly a Christian, and to be more desirous of being left in Spain than of returning to Barbary.
The rest of the crew of the brigantine are Moors and Turks, who merely serve as rowers.
We sighted this shore last night, and knowing nothing of these galleys, we were discovered, and the result was what you have seen.
To sum up, there is Don Gregorio in woman’s dress, among women, in imminent danger of his life; and here am I, with hands bound, in expectation, or rather in dread, of losing my life, of which I am already weary.
Here, sirs, ends my sad story, as true as it is unhappy; all I ask of you is to allow me to die like a Christian, for, as I have already said, I am not to be charged with the offence of which those of my nation are guilty;” and she stood silent, her eyes filled with moving tears, accompanied by plenty from the bystanders.
The viceroy, touched with compassion, went up to her without speaking and untied the cord that bound the hands of the Moorish girl.
She being now unbound embraced her father, mingling her tears with his, while he addressing the general and the viceroy said, “This, sirs, is my daughter, more unhappy in her adventures than in her name.
She is Ana Felix, surnamed Ricote, celebrated as much for her own beauty as for my wealth.
I quitted my native land in search of some shelter or refuge for us abroad, and having found one in Germany I returned in this pilgrim’s dress, in the company of some other German pilgrims, to seek my daughter and take up a large quantity of treasure I had left buried.
My daughter I did not find, the treasure I found and have with me; and now, in this strange roundabout way you have seen, I find the treasure that more than all makes me rich, my beloved daughter.
The viceroy, however, begged him earnestly not to hang them, as their behaviour savoured rather of madness than of bravado.
They then tried to devise some scheme for rescuing Don Gaspar Gregorio from the danger in which he had been left.
The general and the viceroy had some hesitation about placing confidence in the renegade and entrusting him with the Christians who were to row, but Ana Felix said she could answer for him, and her father offered to go and pay the ransom of the Christians if by any chance they should not be forthcoming.
TREATING OF THE ADVENTURE WHICH GAVE DON QUIXOTE MORE UNHAPPINESS THAN ALL THAT HAD HITHERTO BEFALLEN HIM p64a.jpg (80K) Full Size The wife of Don Antonio Moreno, so the history says, was extremely happy to see Ana Felix in her house.
She welcomed her with great kindness, charmed as well by her beauty as by her intelligence; for in both respects the fair Morisco was richly endowed, and all the people of the city flocked to see her as though they had been summoned by the ringing of the bells.
Don Quixote told Don Antonio that the plan adopted for releasing Don Gregorio was not a good one, for its risks were greater than its advantages, and that it would be better to land himself with his arms and horse in Barbary; for he would carry him off in spite of the whole Moorish host, as Don Gaiferos carried off his wife Melisendra.
Two days afterwards the renegade put to sea in a light vessel of six oars a-side manned by a stout crew, and two days later the galleys made sail eastward, the general having begged the viceroy to let him know all about the release of Don Gregorio and about Ana Felix, and the viceroy promised to do as he requested.
I come to do battle with thee and prove the might of thy arm, to the end that I make thee acknowledge and confess that my lady, let her be who she may, is incomparably fairer than thy Dulcinea del Toboso.
Take, therefore, the side of the field you choose, and I will do the same; and to whom God shall give it may Saint Peter add his blessing.” The Knight of the White Moon had been seen from the city, and it was told the viceroy how he was in conversation with Don Quixote.
The viceroy, fancying it must be some fresh adventure got up by Don Antonio Moreno or some other gentleman of the city, hurried out at once to the beach accompanied by Don Antonio and several other gentlemen, just as Don Quixote was wheeling Rocinante round in order to take up the necessary distance.
The viceroy upon this, seeing that the pair of them were evidently preparing to come to the charge, put himself between them, asking them what it was that led them to engage in combat all of a sudden in this way.
The Knight of the White Moon replied that it was a question of precedence of beauty; and briefly told him what he had said to Don Quixote, and how the conditions of the defiance agreed upon on both sides had been accepted.
Don Antonio replied that he neither knew who he was nor whether the defiance was in joke or in earnest.
The engagement given, he of the White Moon wheeled about, and making obeisance to the viceroy with a movement of the head, rode away into the city at a half gallop.
They raised Don Quixote up and uncovered his face, and found him pale and bathed with sweat. p64b.jpg (344K) Full Size Rocinante from the mere hard measure he had received lay unable to stir for the present.
Sancho, wholly dejected and woebegone, knew not what to say or do.
He fancied that all was a dream, that the whole business was a piece of enchantment.
Here was his master defeated, and bound not to take up arms for a year.
He saw the light of the glory of his achievements obscured; the hopes of the promises lately made him swept away like smoke before the wind; Rocinante, he feared, was crippled for life, and his master’s bones out of joint; for if he were only shaken out of his madness it would be no small luck.
In the end they carried him into the city in a hand-chair which the viceroy sent for, and thither the viceroy himself returned, eager to ascertain who this Knight of the White Moon was who had left Don Quixote in such a sad plight. p64e.jpg (44K) Full Size CHAPTER LXV.
WHEREIN IS MADE KNOWN WHO THE KNIGHT OF THE WHITE MOON WAS; LIKEWISE DON GREGORIO’S RELEASE, AND OTHER EVENTS p65a.jpg (149K) Full Size Don Antonio Moreno followed the Knight of the White Moon, and a number of boys followed him too, nay pursued him, until they had him fairly housed in a hostel in the heart of the city.
Don Antonio, eager to make his acquaintance, entered also; a squire came out to meet him and remove his armour, and he shut himself into a lower room, still attended by Don Antonio, whose bread would not bake until he had found out who he was.
He of the White Moon, seeing then that the gentleman would not leave him, said, “I know very well, señor, what you have come for; it is to find out who I am; and as there is no reason why I should conceal it from you, while my servant here is taking off my armour I will tell you the true state of the case, without leaving out anything.
You must know, señor, that I am called the bachelor Samson Carrasco.
I am of the same village as Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose craze and folly make all of us who know him feel pity for him, and I am one of those who have felt it most; and persuaded that his chance of recovery lay in quiet and keeping at home and in his own house, I hit upon a device for keeping him there.
Three months ago, therefore, I went out to meet him as a knight-errant, under the assumed name of the Knight of the Mirrors, intending to engage him in combat and overcome him without hurting him, making it the condition of our combat that the vanquished should be at the disposal of the victor.
What I meant to demand of him (for I regarded him as vanquished already) was that he should return to his own village, and not leave it for a whole year, by which time he might be cured.
But fate ordered it otherwise, for he vanquished me and unhorsed me, and so my plan failed.
He went his way, and I came back conquered, covered with shame, and sorely bruised by my fall, which was a particularly dangerous one.
But this did not quench my desire to meet him again and overcome him, as you have seen to-day.
And as he is so scrupulous in his observance of the laws of knight-errantry, he will, no doubt, in order to keep his word, obey the injunction I have laid upon him.
I implore of you not to betray me, or tell Don Quixote who I am; so that my honest endeavours may be successful, and that a man of excellent wits—were he only rid of the fooleries of chivalry—may get them back again.” “O señor,” said Don Antonio, “may God forgive you the wrong you have done the whole world in trying to bring the most amusing madman in it back to his senses.
Do you not see, señor, that the gain by Don Quixote’s sanity can never equal the enjoyment his crazes give?
But my belief is that all the señor bachelor’s pains will be of no avail to bring a man so hopelessly cracked to his senses again; and if it were not uncharitable, I would say may Don Quixote never be cured, for by his recovery we lose not only his own drolleries, but his squire Sancho Panza’s too, any one of which is enough to turn melancholy itself into merriment.
Don Antonio reported to the viceroy what Carrasco told him, and the viceroy was not very well pleased to hear it, for with Don Quixote’s retirement there was an end to the amusement of all who knew anything of his mad doings.
Six days did Don Quixote keep his bed, dejected, melancholy, moody and out of sorts, brooding over the unhappy event of his defeat.
Let us go home, and give over going about in search of adventures in strange lands and places; rightly looked at, it is I that am the greater loser, though it is your worship that has had the worse usage.
Don Gregorio and the renegade who went for him have come ashore—ashore do I say?
But what am I saying, miserable being that I am?
Am I not he that has been conquered?
Am I not he that has been overthrown?
When they carried him away from Algiers he was in woman’s dress; on board the vessel, however, he exchanged it for that of a captive who escaped with him; but in whatever dress he might be he looked like one to be loved and served and esteemed, for he was surpassingly well-favoured, and to judge by appearances some seventeen or eighteen years of age.
Ricote and his daughter came out to welcome him, the father with tears, the daughter with bashfulness.
They did not embrace each other, for where there is deep love there will never be overmuch boldness.
Seen side by side, the comeliness of Don Gregorio and the beauty of Ana Felix were the admiration of all who were present.
It was silence that spoke for the lovers at that moment, and their eyes were the tongues that declared their pure and happy feelings.
The renegade explained the measures and means he had adopted to rescue Don Gregorio, and Don Gregorio at no great length, but in a few words, in which he showed that his intelligence was in advance of his years, described the peril and embarrassment he found himself in among the women with whom he had sojourned.
To conclude, Ricote liberally recompensed and rewarded as well the renegade as the men who had rowed; and the renegade effected his readmission into the body of the Church and was reconciled with it, and from a rotten limb became by penance and repentance a clean and sound one.
Two days later the viceroy discussed with Don Antonio the steps they should take to enable Ana Felix and her father to stay in Spain, for it seemed to them there could be no objection to a daughter who was so good a Christian and a father to all appearance so well disposed remaining there.
Don Antonio offered to arrange the matter at the capital, whither he was compelled to go on some other business, hinting that many a difficult affair was settled there with the help of favour and bribes.
Ana Felix remained with Don Antonio’s wife, and Ricote in the viceroy’s house.
The day for Don Antonio’s departure came; and two days later that for Don Quixote’s and Sancho’s, for Don Quixote’s fall did not suffer him to take the road sooner.
There were tears and sighs, swoonings and sobs, at the parting between Don Gregorio and Ana Felix.
Ricote offered Don Gregorio a thousand crowns if he would have them, but he would not take any save five which Don Antonio lent him and he promised to repay at the capital.
So the two of them took their departure, and Don Quixote and Sancho afterwards, as has been already said, Don Quixote without his armour and in travelling gear, and Sancho on foot, Dapple being loaded with the armour. p65e.jpg (43K) CHAPTER LXVI.
WHICH TREATS OF WHAT HE WHO READS WILL SEE, OR WHAT HE WHO HAS IT READ TO HIM WILL HEAR p66a.jpg (125K) Full Size As he left Barcelona, Don Quixote turned gaze upon the spot where he had fallen.
In a word, I ventured it, I did my best, I was overthrown, but though I lost my honour I did not lose nor can I lose the virtue of keeping my word.
When I was a knight-errant, daring and valiant, I supported my achievements by hand and deed, and now that I am a humble squire I will support my words by keeping the promise I have given.
Forward then, Sancho my friend, let us go to keep the year of the novitiate in our own country, and in that seclusion we shall pick up fresh strength to return to the by me never-forgotten calling of arms.” “Señor,” returned Sancho, “travelling on foot is not such a pleasant thing that it makes me feel disposed or tempted to make long marches.
Said Tosilos to Sancho, “Beyond a doubt, Sancho my friend, this master of thine ought to be a madman.” “Ought!” said Sancho; “he owes no man anything; he pays for everything, particularly when the coin is madness.
OF THE RESOLUTION DON QUIXOTE FORMED TO TURN SHEPHERD AND TAKE TO A LIFE IN THE FIELDS WHILE THE YEAR FOR WHICH HE HAD GIVEN HIS WORD WAS RUNNING ITS COURSE; WITH OTHER EVENTS TRULY DELECTABLE AND HAPPY p67a.jpg (145K) Full Size If a multitude of reflections used to harass Don Quixote before he had been overthrown, a great many more harassed him since his fall.
He was under the shade of a tree, as has been said, and there, like flies on honey, thoughts came crowding upon him and stinging him.
Some of them turned upon the disenchantment of Dulcinea, others upon the life he was about to lead in his enforced retirement.
Sancho came up and spoke in high praise of the generous disposition of the lacquey Tosilos.
“Is it possible, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that thou dost still think that he yonder is a real lacquey?
Apparently it has escaped thy memory that thou hast seen Dulcinea turned and transformed into a peasant wench, and the Knight of the Mirrors into the bachelor Carrasco; all the work of the enchanters that persecute me.
But tell me now, didst thou ask this Tosilos, as thou callest him, what has become of Altisidora, did she weep over my absence, or has she already consigned to oblivion the love thoughts that used to afflict her when I was present?” “The thoughts that I had,” said Sancho, “were not such as to leave time for asking fool’s questions.
Body o’ me, señor! is your worship in a condition now to inquire into other people’s thoughts, above all love thoughts?” “Look ye, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “there is a great difference between what is done out of love and what is done out of gratitude.
A knight may very possibly be proof against love; but it is impossible, strictly speaking, for him to be ungrateful.
Altisidora, to all appearance, loved me truly; she gave me the three kerchiefs thou knowest of; she wept at my departure, she cursed me, she abused me, casting shame to the winds she bewailed herself in public; all signs that she adored me; for the wrath of lovers always ends in curses.
Don Quixote recognised it, and said he to Sancho, “This is the meadow where we came upon those gay shepherdesses and gallant shepherds who were trying to revive and imitate the pastoral Arcadia there, an idea as novel as it was happy, in emulation whereof, if so be thou dost approve of it, Sancho, I would have ourselves turn shepherds, at any rate for the time I have to live in retirement.
I will buy some ewes and everything else requisite for the pastoral calling; and, I under the name of the shepherd Quixotize and thou as the shepherd Panzino, we will roam the woods and groves and meadows singing songs here, lamenting in elegies there, drinking of the crystal waters of the springs or limpid brooks or flowing rivers.
It won’t do for the curate to have a shepherdess, for the sake of good example; and if the bachelor chooses to have one, that is his look-out.” “God bless me, Sancho my friend!” said Don Quixote, “what a life we shall lead!
What hautboys and Zamora bagpipes we shall hear, what tabors, timbrels, and rebecks!
The word albogue is Morisco, as are all those in our Spanish tongue that begin with _al;_ for example, _almohaza, almorzar, alhombra, alguacil, alhucema, almacen, alcancia_, and others of the same sort, of which there are not many more; our language has only three that are Morisco and end in _i_, which are _borceguí, zaquizamí_, and _maravedí.
Alhelí_ and _alfaquí_ are seen to be Arabic, as well by the _al_ at the beginning as by the _í_ they end with.
I mention this incidentally, the chance allusion to albogues having reminded me of it; and it will be of great assistance to us in the perfect practice of this calling that I am something of a poet, as thou knowest, and that besides the bachelor Samson Carrasco is an accomplished one.
Of the curate I say nothing; but I will wager he has some spice of the poet in him, and no doubt Master Nicholas too, for all barbers, or most of them, are guitar players and stringers of verses.
I will bewail my separation; thou shalt glorify thyself as a constant lover; the shepherd Carrascon will figure as a rejected one, and the curate Curiambro as whatever may please him best; and so all will go as gaily as heart could wish.” To this Sancho made answer, “I am so unlucky, señor, that I’m afraid the day will never come when I’ll see myself at such a calling.
O what neat spoons I’ll make when I’m a shepherd!
What messes, creams, garlands, pastoral odds and ends!
And if they don’t get me a name for wisdom, they’ll not fail to get me one for ingenuity.
My daughter Sanchica will bring us our dinner to the pasture.
OF THE BRISTLY ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE p68a.jpg (119K) Full Size The night was somewhat dark, for though there was a moon in the sky it was not in a quarter where she could be seen; for sometimes the lady Diana goes on a stroll to the antipodes, and leaves the mountains all black and the valleys in darkness.
Don Quixote obeyed nature so far as to sleep his first sleep, but did not give way to the second, very different from Sancho, who never had any second, because with him sleep lasted from night till morning, wherein he showed what a sound constitution and few cares he had.
Don Quixote’s cares kept him restless, so much so that he awoke Sancho and said to him, “I am amazed, Sancho, at the unconcern of thy temperament.
I believe thou art made of marble or hard brass, incapable of any emotion or feeling whatever.
I lie awake while thou sleepest, I weep while thou singest, I am faint with fasting while thou art sluggish and torpid from pure repletion.
It is the duty of good servants to share the sufferings and feel the sorrows of their masters, if it be only for the sake of appearances.
See the calmness of the night, the solitude of the spot, inviting us to break our slumbers by a vigil of some sort.
Rise as thou livest, and retire a little distance, and with a good heart and cheerful courage give thyself three or four hundred lashes on account of Dulcinea’s disenchantment score; and this I entreat of thee, making it a request, for I have no desire to come to grips with thee a second time, as I know thou hast a heavy hand.
Will your worship let me sleep, and not worry me about whipping myself? or you’ll make me swear never to touch a hair of my doublet, not to say my flesh.” “O hard heart!” said Don Quixote, “O pitiless squire!
O bread ill-bestowed and favours ill-acknowledged, both those I have done thee and those I mean to do thee!
Don Quixote stood up and laid his hand upon his sword, and Sancho ensconced himself under Dapple and put the bundle of armour on one side of him and the ass’s pack-saddle on the other, in fear and trembling as great as Don Quixote’s perturbation.
Each instant the noise increased and came nearer to the two terrified men, or at least to one, for as to the other, his courage is known to all.
The fact of the matter was that some men were taking above six hundred pigs to sell at a fair, and were on their way with them at that hour, and so great was the noise they made and their grunting and blowing, that they deafened the ears of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, and they could not make out what it was.
Sancho got up as well as he could and begged his master to give him his sword, saying he wanted to kill half a dozen of those dirty unmannerly pigs, for he had by this time found out that that was what they were.
“Let them be, my friend,” said Don Quixote; “this insult is the penalty of my sin; and it is the righteous chastisement of heaven that jackals should devour a vanquished knight, and wasps sting him and pigs trample him under foot.” “I suppose it is the chastisement of heaven, too,” said Sancho, “that flies should prick the squires of vanquished knights, and lice eat them, and hunger assail them.
If we squires were the sons of the knights we serve, or their very near relations, it would be no wonder if the penalty of their misdeeds overtook us, even to the fourth generation.
But what have the Panzas to do with the Quixotes?
Don Quixote, propped up against the trunk of a beech or a cork tree—for Cide Hamete does not specify what kind of tree it was—sang in this strain to the accompaniment of his own sighs: When in my mind I muse, O Love, upon thy cruelty, To death I flee, In hope therein the end of all to find.
Thus life doth slay, And death again to life restoreth me; Strange destiny, That deals with life and death as with a play!
He accompanied each verse with many sighs and not a few tears, just like one whose heart was pierced with grief at his defeat and his separation from Dulcinea.
And now daylight came, and the sun smote Sancho on the eyes with his beams.
He awoke, roused himself up, shook himself and stretched his lazy limbs, and seeing the havoc the pigs had made with his stores he cursed the drove, and more besides.
Then the pair resumed their journey, and as evening closed in they saw coming towards them some ten men on horseback and four or five on foot.
Don Quixote’s heart beat quick and Sancho’s quailed with fear, for the persons approaching them carried lances and bucklers, and were in very warlike guise.
One of those on foot, putting his finger to his lips as a sign to him to be silent, seized Rocinante’s bridle and drew him out of the road, and the others driving Sancho and Dapple before them, and all maintaining a strange silence, followed in the steps of the one who led Don Quixote.
The latter two or three times attempted to ask where they were taking him to and what they wanted, but the instant he began to open his lips they threatened to close them with the points of their lances; and Sancho fared the same way, for the moment he seemed about to speak one of those on foot punched him with a goad, and Dapple likewise, as if he too wanted to talk.
Sancho went along saying to himself, “We, tortolites, barbers, animals!
And now, about an hour after midnight, they reached a castle which Don Quixote saw at once was the duke’s, where they had been but a short time before.
“God bless me!” said he, as he recognised the mansion, “what does this mean?
It is all courtesy and politeness in this house; but with the vanquished good turns into evil, and evil into worse.” They entered the chief court of the castle and found it prepared and fitted up in a style that added to their amazement and doubled their fears, as will be seen in the following chapter. p68e.jpg (49K) CHAPTER LXIX.
In the middle of the court was a catafalque, raised about two yards above the ground and covered completely by an immense canopy of black velvet, and on the steps all round it white wax tapers burned in more than a hundred silver candlesticks.
Upon the catafalque was seen the dead body of a damsel so lovely that by her beauty she made death itself look beautiful.
She lay with her head resting upon a cushion of brocade and crowned with a garland of sweet-smelling flowers of divers sorts, her hands crossed upon her bosom, and between them a branch of yellow palm of victory.
On one side of the court was erected a stage, where upon two chairs were seated two persons who from having crowns on their heads and sceptres in their hands appeared to be kings of some sort, whether real or mock ones.
By the side of this stage, which was reached by steps, were two other chairs on which the men carrying the prisoners seated Don Quixote and Sancho, all in silence, and by signs giving them to understand that they too were to be silent; which, however, they would have been without any signs, for their amazement at all they saw held them tongue-tied.
And now two persons of distinction, who were at once recognised by Don Quixote as his hosts the duke and duchess, ascended the stage attended by a numerous suite, and seated themselves on two gorgeous chairs close to the two kings, as they seemed to be.
Nor was this all, for Don Quixote had perceived that the dead body on the catafalque was that of the fair Altisidora.
As the duke and duchess mounted the stage Don Quixote and Sancho rose and made them a profound obeisance, which they returned by bowing their heads slightly.
At this moment an official crossed over, and approaching Sancho threw over him a robe of black buckram painted all over with flames of fire, and taking off his cap put upon his head a mitre such as those undergoing the sentence of the Holy Office wear; and whispered in his ear that he must not open his lips, or they would put a gag upon him, or take his life.
Sancho surveyed himself from head to foot and saw himself all ablaze with flames; but as they did not burn him, he did not care two farthings for them.
He took off the mitre and seeing it painted with devils he put it on again, saying to himself, “Well, so far those don’t burn me nor do these carry me off.” Don Quixote surveyed him too, and though fear had got the better of his faculties, he could not help smiling to see the figure Sancho presented.
And now from underneath the catafalque, so it seemed, there rose a low sweet sound of flutes, which, coming unbroken by human voice (for there silence itself kept silence), had a soft and languishing effect.
But not in life alone, methinks, to me Belongs the office; Lady, when my tongue Is cold in death, believe me, unto thee My voice shall raise its tributary song.
My soul, from this strait prison-house set free, As o’er the Stygian lake it floats along, Thy praises singing still shall hold its way, And make the waters of oblivion stay.
At this point one of the two that looked like kings exclaimed, “Enough, enough, divine singer!
It would be an endless task to put before us now the death and the charms of the peerless Altisidora, not dead as the ignorant world imagines, but living in the voice of fame and in the penance which Sancho Panza, here present, has to undergo to restore her to the long-lost light.
What has handling my face got to do with the resurrection of this damsel?
‘The old woman took kindly to the blits;’ they enchant Dulcinea, and whip me in order to disenchant her; Altisidora dies of ailments God was pleased to send her, and to bring her to life again they must give me four-and-twenty smacks, and prick holes in my body with pins, and raise weals on my arms with pinches!
Ho, I say, officials, obey my orders; or by the word of an honest man, ye shall see what ye were born for.” At this some six duennas, advancing across the court, made their appearance in procession, one after the other, four of them with spectacles, and all with their right hands uplifted, showing four fingers of wrist to make their hands look longer, as is the fashion now-a-days.
No sooner had Sancho caught sight of them than, bellowing like a bull, he exclaimed, “I might let myself be handled by all the world; but allow duennas to touch me—not a bit of it!
Altisidora lives!” Rhadamanthus bade Sancho put away his wrath, as the object they had in view was now attained.
When Don Quixote saw Altisidora move, he went on his knees to Sancho saying to him, “Now is the time, son of my bowels, not to call thee my squire, for thee to give thyself some of those lashes thou art bound to lay on for the disenchantment of Dulcinea.
Now, I say, is the time when the virtue that is in thee is ripe, and endowed with efficacy to work the good that is looked for from thee.” To which Sancho made answer, “That’s trick upon trick, I think, and not honey upon pancakes; a nice thing it would be for a whipping to come now, on the top of pinches, smacks, and pin-proddings!
You had better take a big stone and tie it round my neck, and pitch me into a well; I should not mind it much, if I’m to be always made the cow of the wedding for the cure of other people’s ailments.
From this day forth, friend Sancho, count as thine six smocks of mine which I bestow upon thee, to make as many shirts for thyself, and if they are not all quite whole, at any rate they are all clean.” Sancho kissed her hands in gratitude, kneeling, and with the mitre in his hand.
Sancho begged the duke to let them leave him the robe and mitre; as he wanted to take them home for a token and memento of that unexampled adventure.
The duke then gave orders that the court should be cleared, and that all should retire to their chambers, and that Don Quixote and Sancho should be conducted to their old quarters. p69e.jpg (60K) CHAPTER LXX.
And so well founded did his apprehension prove, and so correct was his anticipation, that scarcely had his master got into bed when he said, “What dost thou think of to-night’s adventure, Sancho?
I don’t know nor can I imagine how the recovery of Altisidora, a damsel more fanciful than wise, can have, as I have said before, anything to do with the sufferings of Sancho Panza.
They fell asleep, both of them, and Cide Hamete, the author of this great history, took this opportunity to record and relate what it was that induced the duke and duchess to get up the elaborate plot that has been described.
He came to the duke’s castle, and the duke informed him of the road and route Don Quixote had taken with the intention of being present at the jousts at Saragossa.
The duke begged of him if he found him (whether he overcame him or not) to return that way and let him know the result.
This the bachelor did; he set out in quest of Don Quixote, and not finding him at Saragossa, he went on, and how he fared has been already told.
Thereupon the duke seized the opportunity of practising this mystification upon him; so much did he enjoy everything connected with Sancho and Don Quixote.
He had the roads about the castle far and near, everywhere he thought Don Quixote was likely to pass on his return, occupied by large numbers of his servants on foot and on horseback, who were to bring him to the castle, by fair means or foul, if they met him.
They did meet him, and sent word to the duke, who, having already settled what was to be done, as soon as he heard of his arrival, ordered the torches and lamps in the court to be lit and Altisidora to be placed on the catafalque with all the pomp and ceremony that has been described, the whole affair being so well arranged and acted that it differed but little from reality.
And Cide Hamete says, moreover, that for his part he considers the concocters of the joke as crazy as the victims of it, and that the duke and duchess were not two fingers’ breadth removed from being something like fools themselves when they took such pains to make game of a pair of fools.
As for the latter, one was sleeping soundly and the other lying awake occupied with his desultory thoughts, when daylight came to them bringing with it the desire to rise; for the lazy down was never a delight to Don Quixote, victor or vanquished.
Altisidora, come back from death to life as Don Quixote fancied, following up the freak of her lord and lady, entered the chamber, crowned with the garland she had worn on the catafalque and in a robe of white taffeta embroidered with gold flowers, her hair flowing loose over her shoulders, and leaning upon a staff of fine black ebony.
Don Quixote, disconcerted and in confusion at her appearance, huddled himself up and well-nigh covered himself altogether with the sheets and counterpane of the bed, tongue-tied, and unable to offer her any civility.
Altisidora seated herself on a chair at the head of the bed, and, after a deep sigh, said to him in a feeble, soft voice, “When women of rank and modest maidens trample honour under foot, and give a loose to the tongue that breaks through every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of their hearts, they are reduced to sore extremities.
Such a one am I, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, crushed, conquered, love-smitten, but yet patient under suffering and virtuous, and so much so that my heart broke with grief and I lost my life.
“But tell me, señora—and may heaven send you a tenderer lover than my master—what did you see in the other world?
For of course that’s where one who dies in despair is bound for.” “To tell you the truth,” said Altisidora, “I cannot have died outright, for I did not go into hell; had I gone in, it is very certain I should never have come out again, do what I might.
To one of them, a brand-new, well-bound one, they gave such a stroke that they knocked the guts out of it and scattered the leaves about.
‘Look what book that is,’ said one devil to another, and the other replied, ‘It is the “Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha,” not by Cide Hamete, the original author, but by an Aragonese who by his own account is of Tordesillas.’ ‘Out of this with it,’ said the first, ‘and into the depths of hell with it out of my sight.’ ‘Is it so bad?’ said the other.
I am not disturbed by hearing that I am wandering in a fantastic shape in the darkness of the pit or in the daylight above, for I am not the one that history treats of.
I was born to belong to Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fates, if there are any, dedicated me to her; and to suppose that any other beauty can take the place she occupies in my heart is to suppose an impossibility.
This frank declaration should suffice to make you retire within the bounds of your modesty, for no one can bind himself to do impossibilities.” Hearing this, Altisidora, with a show of anger and agitation, exclaimed, “God’s life!
Don Stockfish, soul of a mortar, stone of a date, more obstinate and obdurate than a clown asked a favour when he has his mind made up, if I fall upon you I’ll tear your eyes out!
Do you fancy, Don Vanquished, Don Cudgelled, that I died for your sake?
Don Quixote begged their permission to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a vanquished knight like himself it was fitter he should live in a pig-sty than in a royal palace.
They gave it very readily, and the duchess asked him if Altisidora was in his good graces.
He replied, “Señora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel’s ailment comes entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and constant employment.
Altisidora then, pretending to wipe away her tears with a handkerchief, made an obeisance to her master and mistress and quitted the room.
Thou hast fallen in with a soul as dry as a rush and a heart as hard as oak; had it been me, i’faith ‘another cock would have crowed to thee.’” So the conversation came to an end, and Don Quixote dressed himself and dined with the duke and duchess, and set out the same evening. p70e.jpg (73K) Full Size CHAPTER LXXI.
OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE SANCHO ON THE WAY TO THEIR VILLAGE p71a.jpg (82K) Full Size The vanquished and afflicted Don Quixote went along very downcast in one respect and very happy in another.
His sadness arose from his defeat, and his satisfaction from the thought of the virtue that lay in Sancho, as had been proved by the resurrection of Altisidora; though it was with difficulty he could persuade himself that the love-smitten damsel had been really dead.
I am not sure, however, whether payment will comport with the cure, and I would not have the reward interfere with the medicine.
Let your worship say how much you will pay me for each lash I give myself.” “If Sancho,” replied Don Quixote, “I were to requite thee as the importance and nature of the cure deserves, the treasures of Venice, the mines of Potosi, would be insufficient to pay thee.
These I will stop out of what I have belonging to your worship, and I’ll return home rich and content, though well whipped, for ‘there’s no taking trout’—but I say no more.” “O blessed Sancho!
O dear Sancho!” said Don Quixote; “how we shall be bound to serve thee, Dulcinea and I, all the days of our lives that heaven may grant us!
If she returns to her lost shape (and it cannot be but that she will) her misfortune will have been good fortune, and my defeat a most happy triumph.
But look here, Sancho; when wilt thou begin the scourging?
May heaven help thee as thy good intention deserves.” “‘Pledges don’t distress a good payer,’” said Sancho; “I mean to lay on in such a way as without killing myself to hurt myself, for in that, no doubt, lies the essence of this miracle.” He then stripped himself from the waist upwards, and snatching up the rope he began to lay on and Don Quixote to count the lashes.
“Go on, Sancho my friend, and be not disheartened,” said Don Quixote; “for I double the stakes as to price.” “In that case,” said Sancho, “in God’s hand be it, and let it rain lashes.” But the rogue no longer laid them on his shoulders, but laid on to the trees, with such groans every now and then, that one would have thought at each of them his soul was being plucked up by the roots.
They dismounted at a hostelry which Don Quixote recognised as such and did not take to be a castle with moat, turrets, portcullis, and drawbridge; for ever since he had been vanquished he talked more rationally about everything, as will be shown presently.
They quartered him in a room on the ground floor, where in place of leather hangings there were pieces of painted serge such as they commonly use in villages.
On one of them was painted by some very poor hand the Rape of Helen, when the bold guest carried her off from Menelaus, and on the other was the story of Dido and Æneas, she on a high tower, as though she were making signals with a half sheet to her fugitive guest who was out at sea flying in a frigate or brigantine.
He noticed in the two stories that Helen did not go very reluctantly, for she was laughing slyly and roguishly; but the fair Dido was shown dropping tears the size of walnuts from her eyes.
Don Quixote as he looked at them observed, “Those two ladies were very unfortunate not to have been born in this age, and I unfortunate above all men not to have been born in theirs.
OF HOW DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO REACHED THEIR VILLAGE p72a.jpg (155K) Full Size All that day Don Quixote and Sancho remained in the village and inn waiting for night, the one to finish off his task of scourging in the open country, the other to see it accomplished, for therein lay the accomplishment of his wishes.
He was more greedy than well-spoken, and more dull than droll; and I am convinced that the enchanters who persecute Don Quixote the Good have been trying to persecute me with Don Quixote the Bad.
And though the adventures that befell me there are not by any means matters of enjoyment, but rather of regret, I do not regret them, simply because I have seen it.
In a word, Señor Don Álvaro Tarfe, I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, the one that fame speaks of, and not the unlucky one that has attempted to usurp my name and deck himself out in my ideas.
Sancho replied that it was a long story to tell, but he would tell him if they happened to be going the same road.
By this dinner-time arrived, and Don Quixote and Don Álvaro dined together.
Many civilities and offers of service were exchanged by Don Álvaro and Don Quixote, in the course of which the great Manchegan displayed such good taste that he disabused Don Álvaro of the error he was under; and he, on his part, felt convinced he must have been enchanted, now that he had been brought in contact with two such opposite Don Quixotes.
Evening came, they set out from the village, and after about half a league two roads branched off, one leading to Don Quixote’s village, the other the road Don Álvaro was to follow.
In this short interval Don Quixote told him of his unfortunate defeat, and of Dulcinea’s enchantment and the remedy, all which threw Don Álvaro into fresh amazement, and embracing Don Quixote and Sancho, he went his way, and Don Quixote went his.
That night he passed among trees again in order to give Sancho an opportunity of working out his penance, which he did in the same fashion as the night before, at the expense of the bark of the beech trees much more than of his back, of which he took such good care that the lashes would not have knocked off a fly had there been one there.
The duped Don Quixote did not miss a single stroke of the count, and he found that together with those of the night before they made up three thousand and twenty-nine.
The sun apparently had got up early to witness the sacrifice, and with his light they resumed their journey, discussing the deception practised on Don Álvaro, and saying how well done it was to have taken his declaration before a magistrate in such an unimpeachable form.
That day and night they travelled on, nor did anything worth mention happen to them, unless it was that in the course of the night Sancho finished off his task, whereat Don Quixote was beyond measure joyful.
He watched for daylight, to see if along the road he should fall in with his already disenchanted lady Dulcinea; and as he pursued his journey there was no woman he met that he did not go up to, to see if she was Dulcinea del Toboso, as he held it absolutely certain that Merlin’s promises could not lie.
Full of these thoughts and anxieties, they ascended a rising ground wherefrom they descried their own village, at the sight of which Sancho fell on his knees exclaiming, “Open thine eyes, longed-for home, and see how thy son Sancho Panza comes back to thee, if not very rich, very well whipped!
Open thine arms and receive, too, thy son Don Quixote, who, if he comes vanquished by the arm of another, comes victor over himself, which, as he himself has told me, is the greatest victory anyone can desire.
He was answered by the one who had said, “Thou shalt never see it again as long as thou livest,” that he had taken a cage full of crickets from the other boy, and did not mean to give it back to him as long as he lived.
They then went on, and upon the green at the entrance of the town they came upon the curate and the bachelor Samson Carrasco busy with their breviaries.
It should be mentioned that Sancho had thrown, by way of a sumpter-cloth, over Dapple and over the bundle of armour, the buckram robe painted with flames which they had put upon him at the duke’s castle the night Altisidora came back to life.
He had also fixed the mitre on Dapple’s head, the oddest transformation and decoration that ever ass in the world underwent.
They were at once recognised by both the curate and the bachelor, who came towards them with open arms.
It had been brought to Teresa Panza, Sancho’s wife, as well, and she with her hair all loose and half naked, dragging Sanchica her daughter by the hand, ran out to meet her husband; but seeing him coming in by no means as good case as she thought a governor ought to be, she said to him, “How is it you come this way, husband?
It seems to me you come tramping and footsore, and looking more like a disorderly vagabond than a governor.” “Hold your tongue, Teresa,” said Sancho; “often ‘where there are pegs there are no flitches;’ let’s go into the house and there you’ll hear strange things.
Don Quixote replied that he himself was to be called the shepherd Quixotize and the bachelor the shepherd Carrascon, and the curate the shepherd Curambro, and Sancho Panza the shepherd Pancino.
Both were astounded at Don Quixote’s new craze; however, lest he should once more make off out of the village from them in pursuit of his chivalry, they trusting that in the course of the year he might be cured, fell in with his new project, applauded his crazy idea as a bright one, and offered to share the life with him.
“And what’s more,” said Samson Carrasco, “I am, as all the world knows, a very famous poet, and I’ll be always making verses, pastoral, or courtly, or as it may come into my head, to pass away our time in those secluded regions where we shall be roaming.
And so they took their leave of him, recommending and beseeching him to take care of his health and treat himself to a suitable diet.
It so happened his niece and the housekeeper overheard all the three of them said; and as soon as they were gone they both of them came in to Don Quixote, and said the niece, “What’s this, uncle?
Not you; for that’s a life and a business for hardy men, bred and seasoned to such work almost from the time they were in swaddling-clothes.
Why, to make choice of evils, it’s better to be a knight-errant than a shepherd!
OF HOW DON QUIXOTE FELL SICK, AND OF THE WILL HE MADE, AND HOW HE DIED p74a.jpg (96K) Full Size As nothing that is man’s can last for ever, but all tends ever downwards from its beginning to its end, and above all man’s life, and as Don Quixote’s enjoyed no special dispensation from heaven to stay its course, its end and close came when he least looked for it.
For—whether it was of the dejection the thought of his defeat produced, or of heaven’s will that so ordered it—a fever settled upon him and kept him in his bed for six days, during which he was often visited by his friends the curate, the bachelor, and the barber, while his good squire Sancho Panza never quitted his bedside.
His friends called in the doctor, who felt his pulse and was not very well satisfied with it, and said that in any case it would be well for him to attend to the health of his soul, as that of his body was in a bad way.
Don Quixote heard this calmly; but not so his housekeeper, his niece, and his squire, who fell weeping bitterly, as if they had him lying dead before them.
The doctor’s opinion was that melancholy and depression were bringing him to his end.
They obeyed, and he slept at one stretch, as the saying is, more than six hours, so that the housekeeper and niece thought he was going to sleep for ever.
But at the end of that time he woke up, and in a loud voice exclaimed, “Blessed be Almighty God, who has shown me such goodness.
In truth his mercies are boundless, and the sins of men can neither limit them nor keep them back!” The niece listened with attention to her uncle’s words, and they struck her as more coherent than what usually fell from him, at least during his illness, so she asked, “What are you saying, señor?
Has anything strange occurred?
What mercies or what sins of men are you talking of?” “The mercies, niece,” said Don Quixote, “are those that God has this moment shown me, and with him, as I said, my sins are no impediment to them.
My reason is now free and clear, rid of the dark shadows of ignorance that my unhappy constant study of those detestable books of chivalry cast over it.
Now I see through their absurdities and deceptions, and it only grieves me that this destruction of my illusions has come so late that it leaves me no time to make some amends by reading other books that might be a light to my soul.
Call in to me, my dear, my good friends the curate, the bachelor Samson Carrasco, and Master Nicholas the barber, for I wish to confess and make my will.” But his niece was saved the trouble by the entrance of the three.
The instant Don Quixote saw them he exclaimed, “Good news for you, good sirs, that I am no longer Don Quixote of La Mancha, but Alonso Quixano, whose way of life won for him the name of Good.
Now that we have intelligence of the lady Dulcinea being disenchanted, are you taking this line; now, just as we are on the point of becoming shepherds, to pass our lives singing, like princes, are you thinking of turning hermit?
Hush, for heaven’s sake, be rational and let’s have no more nonsense.” “All that nonsense,” said Don Quixote, “that until now has been a reality to my hurt, my death will, with heaven’s help, turn to my good.
The curate turned them all out, and left alone with him confessed him.
The bachelor went for the notary and returned shortly afterwards with him and with Sancho, who, having already learned from the bachelor the condition his master was in, and finding the housekeeper and niece weeping, began to blubber and shed tears.
Come, don’t be lazy, but get up from your bed and let us take to the fields in shepherd’s trim as we agreed.
Perhaps behind some bush we shall find the lady Dulcinea disenchanted, as fine as fine can be.
“Item, I leave all my property absolutely to Antonia Quixana my niece, here present, after all has been deducted from the most available portion of it that may be required to satisfy the bequests I have made.
And the first disbursement I desire to be made is the payment of the wages I owe for the time my housekeeper has served me, with twenty ducats, over and above, for a gown.
The curate and the bachelor Samson Carrasco, now present, I appoint my executors.
The notary was there at the time, and he said that in no book of chivalry had he ever read of any knight-errant dying in his bed so calmly and so like a Christian as Don Quixote, who amid the tears and lamentations of all present yielded up his spirit, that is to say died.
Such was the end of the Ingenious Gentleman of La Mancha, whose village Cide Hamete would not indicate precisely, in order to leave all the towns and villages of La Mancha to contend among themselves for the right to adopt him and claim him as a son, as the seven cities of Greece contended for Homer.
The lamentations of Sancho and the niece and housekeeper are omitted here, as well as the new epitaphs upon his tomb; Samson Carrasco, however, put the following lines: A doughty gentleman lies here; A stranger all his life to fear; Nor in his death could Death prevail, In that last hour, to make him quail.
And said most sage Cide Hamete to his pen, “Rest here, hung up by this brass wire, upon this shelf, O my pen, whether of skilful make or clumsy cut I know not; here shalt thou remain long ages hence, unless presumptuous or malignant story-tellers take thee down to profane thee.
But ere they touch thee warn them, and, as best thou canst, say to them: Hold off! ye weaklings; hold your hands!
Adventure it let none, For this emprise, my lord the king, Was meant for me alone.
And I shall remain satisfied, and proud to have been the first who has ever enjoyed the fruit of his writings as fully as he could desire; for my desire has been no other than to deliver over to the detestation of mankind the false and foolish tales of the books of chivalry, which, thanks to that of my true Don Quixote, are even now tottering, and doubtless doomed to fall for ever.
Farewell.” p74e.jpg (49K) Full Size
